GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA
ARCH/EOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA
CENTRAL
ARCHEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
ACCESSION  NO
CALL  No.
*1135
GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA
ARCHEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA
ARCHEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
—
accession  no.  3  3 -
CALL  No.  plo.  4 0951/  E±f.  CT-
Further
DIALOGUES  OF  THE,
BUDDHA-
TRANSLATEV  FROM  THE  P ALLOT
THE  MAJJHIMA-NIKATA
LORD  CHALMERS
G.C.B.
SOMETIME  GOVERNOR  OR  CEYLON
*RC/v4
IN  TWO  VOLUMES
"VOL.  I.
iiSm  GEWER4E
- -  “'LONDON’
Ck*»  HUMPHREY  MILFORD  ;*
V ;
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C.
'1926*
Wissenschaftliche  Ergebnisse  <■
der
EXPEDITION  FILCHNER
nach

CHINA  und-TI-BET

•  *

1903-1905

V.  BAND

•  *

Erganzungsband  zum  Kartenwerk  Nordost-Tibet

—  Bilder  und  Karten -


Herausgegeben  von

Dr.  Wilhelm  Filchner

Obcrleulnnnt  im  Kgt.  B»y«r.  I.  InUnteri*- Regiment  ..Ktfn.j"
Korntnandiert  nn  K*l.  Freufliichen  GroO*n  G«n»ral«lah


gio  -jjoVjL


BERLIN  1913

Ernst  Siegfried  Mittler  und  Sohn

KonigUchc  Hofbuchhandlung
Kochstr  ((W  68-71


CENTRAL  ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARYjNEW  DELHI.

Aod.  No . .

r&m  9(6-


rM. . ., .


A  lie  Krebto  m  dem  GrtrUi-  vom  x*  Junt  *90*

taw ir*  iLn  I'licrwrtxtxngwrrcht  ««•!  toihchaltm.


CONJUGI

D.  D.  D.

CONJUNX  SUPERSTES


[(Library  Reff


)§.


Vorwort


//  V

[Library  W  fi°


Die  in  diesem  Baudc  verdffentlichten  Bilder  sind  in  Xordost- Tibet
von  Obcrleutnant  Dr.  WILHELM  FlLCHNER  aufgenommen  worden,
zuni  groben  Teil  unter  den  schwierigsten  Yerhaltnissen.  Unsichtigcs
Wetter  verhinderte  oft  tagelang  jeden  Yersuch.  zu  photographieren :  nament-
lich  batten  die  Aufnahmen  im  Gebiete  Schara-kuto— TossonnOr,  larger  I
bis  XIX,  schr  daruntcr  zu  leiden,  so  dab  einige  wichtige  Ansichten  durch
Zeichnungen  nach  den  nieht  vervvendbaren  Negativen  wiedergegeben
werden  muBten.  Manche  Panommaaufnahme  land  ihren  vorzeitigen  Ab-
schlub  durch  plblz  licit  init  elementarer  Gewalt  einsetzende  Gewitterstiirme,
und  einzelne  Bilder  geschlossener  Panoramcn  warden  durch  die  unver-
mcidliche  Gegenlichtaufnahme  von  vornherein  ungiinstig  betroffen.

Von  den  467  einzelnen  Tibet-Aufnahmen  sind  nur  die  zuni  Studium
der  Gelandeformen  erforderlichen  Bilder  veriiffentlicht  worden.

Der  Uinstand,  dab  die  Kopien,  die  zu  der  autotypischen  Reproduktion
benutzt  wurden,  erst  jetzt,  nach  erfolgtcr  Yerarbeitung  der  Films  und
Flatten  zu  photogra m metri schen  Zwecken,  von  diesen  genommen  worden
sind,  beeintr.ichtigtc  erheblich  die  Wiedergabe  der  Originalaufnahmen.

Aus  diesem  Grunde  sowie  durch  die  notwendig  gewordenc  Yerkleinc-
rung  der  Bilder  verschwinden  namentlich  die  schemcnhalten  Ketten  und
Bergsilhouetten  dcs  Hintergrundes  last  ganz  oder  verschmelzen  mit  dem
1  lorizont.  Die  Yerkleinerung  der  Bilder  ist  zicmlich  bedeutend,  denn  das
Format  13X  18cm  tier  Aufnahme  mubte  auf  7x11  cm  bei  dcr  Reproduktion
von  Einzel  bilder  n,  und  auf  5,6x8,2cm  bei  Panoramcn  reduziert  werden.


IV


Vorwort.


Trotzdem  wird  der  Hofi'nung  Ausdruck  gcgeben,  daC  sich  der  Beschauer
an  der  Hand  dieser  Bildserien  und  des  Kartenwerkes  in  die  Eigenart  des
tibetischen  Hochlandes  hineinzulcben  vennag  und  in  der  Lage  ist,  den
Gelandeaufbau  der  von  Dr.  \V.  FlLCHNER  bercistcn  Gebiete  zu  rekonstruieren.

Der  Einteilung  ties  Kartenwerkes  entsprcchend  sind  die  Bilder  in
vier  Gruppen  geordnet.  Jedes  einzelne  Bild  oder  Panorama  ist  orientiert :
roh  nacb  der  Himinelsrichtung  und  eingehend  nach  wichtigen  Zielpunkten.
deren  Bezeichnung  mit  Hobenzahlen  oder  mit  Buchstaben  untl  Namcn  die
gleiche  ist  wie  in  tier  Karte.

Die  Bilder  sind,  soweit  es  geboten  crschien,  im  IV.  Baml  der  Wissen-
schaftlichen  Ergebnisse-,  Abschnitt:  Kartographischc  Beglcitworte,  im  Zu-
sammenbang  mit  dem  Gelandeentwurf  besprochen  worden,  tlic  Verwendung
tier  Aufnahmen  aut  photogram metrischer  Basis,  als  wichtige  Grundlage
zuni  Kartenentwurf,  wird  in  demselben  Band  (Abschnitt:  PhotOgraphien]
eingeheml  erortert.

Berlin.  Januar  UJ13.

O.  WAND.


PREFACE.


A  quarter  of  a  century  ago  I  began  a  translation
of  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  after  editing  the  second  half
of  the  Pali  text.  On  retirement  from  the  public
service,  I  resumed  the  task,  and  spent  much  time  not
only  on  the  study  of  Buddhaghosa’s  commentary
(now  happily  available  in  print  in  the  Siamese  edition),
but  also  on  detailed  collation  with  other  books  of  the
Pali  canon,  till  the  annotations  exceeded  in  length  the
translation  proper,  and  four  volumes  would  have  been
needed  instead  of  two.  Very  deliberately  I  have
excised  practically  all  the  notes  and  nearly  all  the
copious  repetitions, — in  the  sure  belief  that  what  is
immediately  needed  is  the  presentment  in  an  English
dress  of  the  152  philosophico-psychological  chapters
of  this  fundamental  (and  biographical)  Buddhist  scrip¬
ture,  without  tacking  on  an  exposition  of  Buddhism.

With  the  late  Professor  Rhys  Davids,  I  believe  that
substantially  the  Dlgha  and  the  Majjhima  Nikayas
form  one  book,  and  together  present  the  essentials
of  early  Buddhism  in  their  oldest  extant  form.  I  take
leave  to  add  that,  before  the  illuminating  labours
of  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  in  interpreting  philosophical
terms  and  ideas,  no  adequate  translation  of  this  difficult
book  was  possible.

In  my  Introduction  I  have  essayed  briefly  to  outline
the  main  ideas  of  Gotama’s  forerunners,  as  a  back-

f round  to  the  study  of  Gotama’s  own  teachings  in  the
)Igha  and  the  Majjhima.

The  second  volume  will  conclude  with  an  index  to
both  volumes  of  this  translation.

C.

Peterhouse  Lodge,

Cambridge,

December  31,  1925.


vii


Inhaltsverzeichnis


Vorwort


Seitc  III


Bilder  zum  I.  Tcil  des  Kartenwerkes  Xordost  -Tibet  .  .  .

II.  Tcil  des  Kartenwerkes  Xordost -Tibet  .  .

III.  Toil  des  Kartenwerkes  Nordost-Tibet  .  .  .

IV.  u.  IVa.  Tcil  des  Kartenwerkes  Xordost  Tibet


Xr.  I —  JO
Xr.  li—  30
Xr.  31 —  69
Xr.  70—1 13


Karten:  Abrill  I

Abril!  II  u.  Ill
Abrill  IV


MaGstab  1  :  5U0000


r>^n


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I.


PAGE

Introduction . xv

A.  MGla-pannAsa.

(The  first  fifty  Suttas,  in  five  Vaggas  or  sections  of  ten.)

I.  Mula-pariyaya  Vagga.

SUTTA

1.  MOla-pariyAya . I

How  states  of  consciousness  originate.

2.  Sabb-Asava . 4

Coping  with  Cankers.

3.  Dhamma-dAyAda . 9

Unworldly  goods.

4.  Bhaya-bherava . 12

Of  braving  fears.

5.  Anangaisa . 18

Of  blemishes.

6.  Akankheyya . 23

Of  yearnings.  \

7.  VatthOpama . 26

On  fulling.

8.  Sallekha . 29

Of  expunging.

9.  Samma-ditthi . 33

Right  ideas.

10.  Sati-patthana . .41

Of  mindfulness.

ix


*v


Bilder  Nr.  1—10

Aufgenomnien  zwischen

Schara-kuto  und  Tosson-nor


Zum  I.  Teil  des  Kartenwerkes

NORDOST-TIBET


X


FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.


II.  Sthanada  Vaggc

SOTTA

I  I.  COLA-SIHANADA  .

The  short  challenge.

12.  Maha-sIhanada  .

The  long  challenge.

13.  MahA-dukkha-kkhandha  .

The  longer  story  of  Ill.

14.  Co^a-dukkha-kkhandha  .

The  brief  story  of  Ill.

15.  Anumana  .  .  .  .

Reflection.

16.  Ceto-khila  .

The  heart’s  fallows  and  bondages.

17.  Vana-pattha  .

Ubi  bene —

18.  MADHU-ritfDIKA

Honeyed  lore.

19.  Dvedha-vitakka

On  counter-irritants.

20.  Vitakka-santi/Ana

The  governance  of  thoughts.

III.  ( Opamma )  Vagga.

21.  Kakacupama  ....

The  parable  of  the  saw.

22.  AlagaddOpama  .

The  venomous  snake.

23.  VammTka .

The  smouldering  ant-hill.

24.  Ratha-vinita  .

On  relays.


CONTENTS  OF

VOLUME  I.

xi

SUTTA

25.  NivApa

Gins  and  snares.

•  •  •

PAGB

.  108

26.  Ariya-pariyesana

The  noble  quest.

•  #  •

•  n3

27.  C0^-HATTHI-PADOPAMA
The  short  trail.

•  •  •

•  125

28.  MahA-hatthi-padopama

The  long  trail.

•  •  •

•  133

29.  Maha-sAropama  .

Timber :  or  Discoveries.

•

•  138

30.  COla-sAropama  .

More  about  Timber.

•

•  M3

IV.  Mahd-yamaka  Vagga.


3 1.  COla-gosinga .

In  Gosinga  Wood.

00

Tf

H

32.  Maha-gosinga  .....

The  shining  light.

•  153

33.  MahA-gopAlaka  .

Pastoral  duties.

•  157

34.  C0t.A-GOPALAKA .

Pastors,  good  and  bad.

•  *59

35.  Cula-Saccaka .

Saccaka’s  onslaught.

.  162

36.  MahA-Saccaka .

Saccaka  again.

.  170

3 7.  Cula-tanha-sankhaya

Deliverance  from  cravings

H

00

0

38.  M ahA-tan hA-sa nkh ya

Consciousness  a  process  only.

00

Os>

39.  MahA-Assapura  ....

The  ideal  recluse,

.  191

Bild  !


p


Blick  auf  den  Gungga-nor  und  die  Gungga-nor-Ebeno.

Aufgenommcn  v.  Lager  VII.  Blau  4.


Bild  2

+  J«M


Umgegend  von  Lab-tse.

Atifgenoinmen  v.  9»» — to*0.  Blau  5.


Tji-Iii


FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.


sirrTA

40.  Cula-Assapura .

The  recluse’s  regimen.

*

V.  Ciila-yamaka  Vagga.

4 1 .  Saleyyaka .

•

Our  weird.

42.  VeraS jaka .

•

Our  weird.

t:

43.  MahA-vedalla .

»

«*.-

.  "V-

The  long  miscellany.

ft'*  ■■  ■

tfj  *

44.  Cuua-vedalla  .  .  .  .

•  4

The  short  miscellany.

45.  Cula-dhamma-samAdAna

.  2

§

On  living  up  to  professions— I.

-

46.  Maha-dhamma-samAdAna  .

.

On  living  up  to  professions — II.

H*r/

47-  VlMAMSAKA .

.

mti'*

Study  of  the  Truth-finder.

48.  Kosambiya .

.

Amity  and  its  root.

49.  Brahma-nimantanika

.  2

P

Brahma's  appeal.

50.  Mara-tajjaniya .

.  2

The  rebuke  to  Mara.

•>  ■

B.  Majjhima-pannAsa.

.ri;;:'

(The  second  fifty  Suttas,  in  five  Vaggas  or  sections  of  ten.)

I.  Gahapati  Vagga.

•

51.  Kandaraka .

.  2

jfe

Against  asceticism.

Ej$£gv
- '  -

V?&S>T,>  •*  -  .

52.  Atthaka-nAgara  ....

The  portals  of  Nirvana.

.  2

wT. -OlT  .

CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I,


Xlll


SUIT  A

53.  Sekha  ....

How  to  become  an  adept.

54.  PoTALIYA  ....

True  retirement.

55.  JlVAKA  ....

Lawful  and  unlawful  meats.

56.  UpALI  ....

A  Jain’s  conversion.

57.  Kukkura-vatika

Of  emulating  dogs.

58.  Abhaya-rajakumAra  .

Of  choosing  one's  words.

59.  Bahu-vedaniya  .

Pleasant  and  unpleasant.

60.  Apannaka  ....

The  sound  doctrine.

II.  Bhikkhu  Vagga.

61.  AmbalatjhikA-Rahul-ovAda

Against  lying.

62.  MahA-Rahul-ovada  .

Breathing  exercises.

63.  Cula-MalunkyA

Of  the  irrelevant.

64.  Maha-Malunkya

Of  bursting  bonds  asunder.

65.  BhaddAli  ....

Of  obedience.

66.  Latukikopama  .

The  parable  of  the  quail.

67.  CATUMA  ...  .

Of  land  sharks.


FACE

•  254

•  259

.  264

.  267

.  278

.  282

.  286

.  289

.  297

.  300


•  304

•  308
•  31 1.


•  324


T«4>Hun-i*ui  h


!.»!>-<««


Bild


s\v


Umgegend  von  Lab-tse.

Aufgcnommcn  v.  9”  10**.  Blatt  5.


Bilil  4

Sa-yong


X\V


Aufgenommcn  v  — 1  *>.  BUR  6.


XIV  FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.

SUTTA  PAGE

68.  NalakapAna . 329

The  stimulus  of  example.

69.  Gulissani . 332

Of  rusticity.

70.  KitAgiri  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  334

Implicit  obedience.

III.  Paribbajaka  Vagga.

7 1.  Tevijja-Vacchagotta  ...»  339

The  true  three-fold  lore.

72.  Aggi-Vacchagotta . 341

Of  fuel.

73.  MahA-Vacchagotta . 345

The  meed  of  sendee.

74.  DlGHANAKHA . 351

Consistency  in  outlook.

75.  Magandiya . 353

Of  keeping  watch  and  ward.

76.  SANDAKA . 362

Of  false  guides.


*


INTRODUCTION.


A  late-comer  in  the  Indian  renascence,  Gotama
the  Buddha  restated — and  enlarged — the  current  re¬
ligious  thought  of  India  some  six  centuries  b.c.  For
the  purpose  of  approaching  the  Majjhima  Nikaya,  or
indeed  any  treatise  of  canonical  Buddhism,  it  is  first
of  all  necessary  to  take  cognisance  of  the  main  lines
on  which,  in  Gotama's  day,  India’s  current  thought  was
developing  out  of  early  brahminism.  It  would  require
at  the  least  a  separate  volume  adequately  to  trace  that
development ;  and  for  this  the  full  facts  are  not  as  yet
definitely  ascertained.  The  more  restricted  aim  of
this  Introduction  is  to  sketch  what  Gotama  found
awaiting  him  ;  and  this  may  conveniently  be  considered
under  the  two  heads  of  (i)  physical  asceticism  and
(ii)  intellectual  tenets.

I.  Asceticism.

Not  long  before  Gotama’s  day,  the  passionate  search
for  something  to  supplement  the  mantras  and  sacri¬
ficial  rites  of  formal  brahminism,  had  found  its  primary
inspiration  in  a  faith  in  a  Supreme  Self — embracing
and  including  all  human  personality — whereby  the
road  to  Deliverance  from  all  mortal  ills  was  opened
up  to  mankind.  In  India,  as  elsewhere,  the  ascetic
life  made  an  irresistible  appeal  to  dawning  aspiration,
and  had  grown,  long  before  Gotama’s  day,  to  be  the
accepted  mode  of  religious  culture.  It  was  thus  to  a
public  opinion  convinced  that  present  discomfort  is  the
pathway  to  bliss  hereafter,  and  convinced  too  that
austerities  are  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  holiness
within,  that  Indian  reformers  and  teachers  had  perforce
to  make  their  appeal.  Without  the  credentials  of  asceti¬
cism,  no  new  doctrine  or  speculation  could  hope  to  win
acceptance  or  indeed  a  respectful  hearing.


Bild


s\v

Tschassora-Tal.

Aufgenommen  v.  Lager  XIII.  Blau  7.


Bild  6

i  hamotic-Ketic

1


Tschassora-Tal.


Aufgenommen  v.  Lager  XIII.  Blatt  7.


Ol


V


XVi  FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.

As  an  ascetic,  Gotama  always  claimed  that,  though
he  had  been  reared  in  luxury  (vide  Sutta  75),  yet,
when  the  call  came  to  him  to  go  forth  from  home
to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim  of  the  Higher  Life,  he
had  gone  further  with  austerity  than  the  most  fanatical
of  devotees.  The  catalogue  of  his  *  fourfold  ’  austeri¬
ties  in  our  12th  Sutta,  even  if  it  be  too  highly  coloured
for  historic  fact,  yet  presents  in  1  grisly  ’  synopsis  con¬
temporary  ideals  of  mortification  of  the  flesh.  In  that
synopsis  there  are  included,  so  far  as  can  be  judged
from  the  older  books  of  the  Buddhist  Canon,  the
salient  practices  of  all  schools  of  recognized  austerity,
from  the  orthodox  Jatila  to  the  Jain.  Over  and  above
these,  there  were  the  ‘freak’  practices  (Sutta  57)  of
those  naked  devotees  who,  in  the  words  of  Gibbon,
"aspired  to  reduce  themselves  to  the  rude  and  miserable
state  in  which  the  human  brute  is  scarcely  distinguished
above  his  kindred  animals  "  and  (e.g.)  as  '  bovines  ’
anticipated  by  a  thousand  years  those  fio<ricol  or
Christian  anchorites  who  "derived  their  name  from
their  humble  practice  of  grazing  in  the  fields  of  Meso¬
potamia  with  the  common  herd.”

Gotama  tried  it  all  and  found  it  wanting.  The  con¬
secrated  life,  as  he  says  in  our  40th  Sutta,  is  not  a
matter  of  raiment,  or  of  going  naked,  or  of  dirt,  or  of
bathing,  or  of  living  under  a  tree  or  in  the  open,  or  of
never  sitting  down,  or  of  chanting  mantras  like  a
brahmin  hermit,  or  of  wearing  matted  hair  like  the
Jatila.  As  the  declared  enemy  of  self-torture,  no  less
than  of  the  torture  of  others,  Gotama  pronounced
bodily  austerities  as  such  to  be  not  only  futile  but
positively  hurtful.  The  only  sane  thing  for  a  man  to
•  do  was  to  school  the  mind  to  *  live  greatly  ’ — with  the
body  as  the  mind’s  obedient  servant.  Gotama’s  own
distinctive  contribution  to  the  religious  practice  of  his
day  was  that,  in  lieu  of  asceticism,  he  preached  the
simple  life  of  studied  and  purposeful  temperance  in  all
mere  bodily  matters.  In  the  words  of  his  own  first
sermon  ( S.B.E .  xiii,  94)  :  “  There  are  two  extremes,

O  Almsmen,  which  he  who  has  given  up  the  world


INTRODUCTION.


XVU


ought  to  avoid.  What  are  those  two  extremes  ? — A
life  given  to  pleasures,  devoted  to  pleasures  and  lusts  ;
this  is  degrading,  sensual,  vulgar,  ignoble  and  profit¬
less.  And  a  life  given  to  mortifications  ;  this  is  pain¬
ful,  ignoble  and  profitless.  By  avoiding  these  two
extremes,  the  Truth-finder  has  gained  the  knowledge
of  the  Middle  Path  which  leads  to  insight,  which  leads
to  wisdom,  which  conduces  to  calm,  to  knowledge,  to
Enlightenment,  to  Nirvana.”

Although  Gotama  incurred  censure  from  his  con¬
temporary  rdligieux  for  dangerous  laxity,  it  would  be
an  anachronism  to  interpret  by  modern  European  ideas
Gotama’s  standard  of  temperate  living  for  his  Con¬
fraternity.  For,  the  religious  life,  as  every  Almsman
was  to  be  told,  after  his  Confirmation  (Vin.  I,  58),
had  the  following  ‘  Four  Endeavours’  to  inspire  it : —

1.  "In  the  matter  of  food,  the  Pilgrim’s  life  is  based
on  alms-scraps.  Thus  you  must  endeavour  to  live
all  your  life. — Meals  given  to  the  Confraternity,  to
individuals,  invitations,  food  distributed  by  ticket,
meals  given  each  sabbath  .  .  .  are  extras."

2.  “In  the  matter  of  raiment,  the  Pilgrim’s  life  is
based  on  rags  taken  from  a  dustheap.  Thus  you  must
endeavour  to  live -all  your  life. — Linen,  cotton,  silk,
woollen  garments,  and  cloth  are  extras.”

3.  “In  the  matter  of  housing,  the  Pilgrim's  life  is
based  on  dwelling  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.  Thus  you
must  endeavour  to  live  all  your  life. — Cells,  houses,
mansions  and  huts  are  extras.”

4.  “In  the  matter  of  medicaments,  the  Pilgrim’s
life  is  based  on  decomposing  urine  (see  infra,  p.  226).
Thus  you  must  endeavour  to  live  all  your  life. — Ghee,
butter,  oil,  honey  and  molasses  are  extras.”

Clearly,  these  extra  allowances  were  later  conces¬
sions.  Indeed,  the  whole  Vinaya  teems  with  departures
from  primitive  simplicity — so  much  so  that  a  perplexed
disciple  asked  (in  our  65th  Sutta)  why  it  was  that,  in  the
beginning,  with  fewer  rules  there  were  more  saints,
and  now  fewer  saints  but  more  rules !  The  explana¬
tion  attributed  to  Gotama  was  that  rules  are  not

b


Bild  7


Tnlu»»ora*ral  Ji


O


Blick  vom  Unglucks-Pals  nach  O.

Aufgenommen  v.  1 1  »*  -  j  ®.  Hiatt  7.


Bild  8


Blick  vom  UnglUcks-Pafs  nach  N-\V.

Aufgenommen  v.  1 1  — 2®.  Hiatt  7.


XViii  FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.

prescribed  till  they  prove  necessary,  and  that  they
become  necessary  when,  pari  passu  with  corporate
success  in  the  world,  later  recruits  introduce  repre¬
hensible  tendencies.  The  Vinaya  furnishes  abundant
evidence  of  unworthy  recruits.  Among  them  was
(e.g.)  a  brahmin  who  joined  because  "the  precepts
which  these  Sakyaputtiya  samanas  keep  and  the  life
they  live  are  commodious  ;  they  have  good  meals  and
lie  on  beds  protected  from  the  wind.  But,  when  it
came  to  going  round  for  alms,  he  flatly  refused.  If
food  was  supplied,  so  well  and  good ;  otherwise,  he
would  go  back  to  the  world  which  avowedly  he  had
only  renounced  for  his  belly’s  sake.  Others  joined
(temporarily)  to  get  cured  of  leprosy,  boils,  consumption
and  fits  by  the  honorary  physician  of  the  Confraternity;
and,  to  escape  active  service,  “many  distinguished
warriors  ”  took  Orders,  as  did  fugitives  from  justice,
debtors,  runaway  slaves  and  impecunious  old.  gentle¬
men.  "This  will  not  do,  O  Almsmen  (said  the
sagacious  Gotama),  for  converting  the  unconverted
and  for  augmenting  the  number  of  the  converted ; —
it  will  result  in  the  unconverted  being  repelled  and  in
many  of  the  converted  being  estranged.”

Estrangement  from  within  did  actually  come,  and
that  in  the  shape  of  the  most  serious  revolt  against  his
authority  which  Gotama  had  to  face.  For  (as  is  re¬
lated  in  detail  at  S.B.E.  xx,  252-271),  his  cousin
Devadatta  headed  a  schismatic  movement — doubtless
stimulated  by  the  austerer  practice  of  the  rival  Jains,
with  whom  he  had  relations — to  restore  pristine  sim¬
plicity  by  positive  and  specific  enactment  of  '  Five
Points,’ — three  of  which  were  identical  with  the  first
three  of  the  ‘  Four  Resources’  enumerated  above.

“No,  Devadatta,”  was  Gotama’s  answer, —

"(i)  Whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  dwell  in  the
forest ; — whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  dwell  in
the  neighbourhood  of  a  village.

(ii)  Whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  live  by
alms ; — whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  accept
invitations  from  the  laity.


INTRODUCTION.


XIX


(iii)  Whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  dress  in
rags  ; — whosoever  wishes  to  do  so,  let  him  receive  gifts
of  robes  from  laymen.

(iv)  Sleeping  under  trees  has  been  allowed  by  me,
Devadatta,  for  eight  months  in  the  year,  and

(v)  the  eating  of  fish  that  is  pure  in  the  three  points
—  to  wit,  that  the  eater  has  not  seen,  or  heard,  or
suspected  that  it  has  been  caught  for  his  eating.”

As  will  be  seen  from  (e.g.)  the  77th  Sutta  infra,  this
measure  of  liberty  was  retained ;  and  each  individual
was  left  free,  within  generous  limits,  to  choose  the
mode  of  living  which  suited  his  own  particular  needs,
— even  if  it  included  austerities  which  Gotama  neither
recommended  to  others  nor  practised  in  his  own
person.  Thus  in  Buddhism  asceticism  was  admissum
but  not  permissum,  a  domestic  settlement  of  a  vexed
question  which  was  at  once  expedient  and  wise  in  its
broad  .tolerance, — though  it  did  not  silence  outside
criticism.


II.  Tenets.


For  present  purposes,  and  particularly  with  a  view
to  avoiding  as  far  as  possible  the  anachronism  of
jumbling  together  later  developments  with  primitive
conceptions,  the  current  thought  of  Gotama’s  day  is
here  deduced,  for  the  specific  purpose  of  interpreting
the  Majjhima  Nikaya,  from  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  itself,
— supplemented,  where  necessary,  from  the  (probably)
contemporary  Digha  Nikaya  and  the  Vinaya.

Naturally,  current  brahmin  tenets  (their  ceremonial
and  even  their  arrogant  pretensions  are  not  relevant
here)  are  the  first  matter  to  set  out.  The  brahmins’
fivefold  code  for  achieving  the  ideal  (by  brahmins)  is
formulated  in  our  99th  Sutta  as  consisting  of —

1.  The  Truth  (sacca).

•  2.  Austerities  (tapasj.

3.  Chastity  (brahmacariya).

4.  Study  (of  Vedic  lore),  and

5.  Munificence  (caga) — i.e.,  to  brahmins.

These  five  avenues  to  the  higher  life,  Gotama


I.  Will.  y.  1 1.  lull


I  >'■  li:i^lun-i>cliadyn


Ku


I'lk  Bu


Bild  9
ff


I  Hi


Src


Sian;f-s-.pt*I

T£  l'<  l


ru  N


Runiipanorama  im  Siang-st-pei'.

.\uf”c-itomiiicii  von  Ku.  *r  in*  .  Blatt  **.


Ala»dia-Brr}{c


Mlick  auf  clitr  Tosson-nor-Ebene.


Aufgciiuiimicu  i  l-uyci  \l.\  lll.itt  it.


XX  FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.

scouted  as  being  merely  the  heart’s  apprenticeship
and  propaedeutic,  serving  only  to  purge  men  from  wrath
and  malevolence.  So,  when  the  conversation  turns
(as  it  very  often  does  turn,  with  brahmin  interlocutors)
on  how  to  attain  ‘union  with  Brahma,’1  Gotama
affirms  that  this,  rightly  understood,  is  approached  not
by  the  foregoing  five  avenues,  but  through  the  moral
virtues  of  universal  goodwill  and  pity,  compassion
and  equanimity.  ‘Union  with  Brahma’  is  really  a
poor  thing,  based  on  groundless  assumptions  con¬
cerning  ‘God’  and  the  divine  governance  of  the
universe,  and  wholly  unsatisfying  to  the  thinking  mind,
though  helpful  possibly  as  a  stepping-stone  for  weaker
brethren  (Sutta  97).

-  The  like  criticisms  apply  also  to  the  Jatilas,  who
were  orthodox  brahmin  ascetics,  tending  the  sacred
fire  and  bathing  thrice  a  day  in  order  to  wash  away  the
evil  within  (Vin.  I,  31  et  seqq).

Among  sects  not  exclusively  brahmin  the  pioneers
were  the  Paribbajakas,  or  ‘Wanderers’  (of  both
sexes),  whose  creed  is  formulated — e.g.  in  the  78th
and  79th  Suttas  of  the  Majjhima  Nikaya — as  a  belief
in  perfect  bliss  hereafter  for  the  purged  self,  and  as  a
conviction  that  this  bliss  can  be  won  in  the  ‘  peerless  ’
life,  by  freedom  from  all  evil  in  (i)  acts,  (ii)  words,
(iii)aims  and  (iv)  mode  of  livelihood  (Majjhima  II,  24).  .
All  these  four  standards  of  conduct  were  incorporated
bodily  in  Gotama’s  Noble  Eightfold  Path ;  and  the
last  of  the  four  gave  to  the  separate  sect  of  the
Ajivakas  (‘  Mendicants’)  their  specific  name.  As  will
be  seen  from  (e.g.)  our  nth  and  13th  Suttas,  the
Wanderers  claimed  to  be  identical  with  Buddhists  in
tenets  and  teaching.  Gotama’s  rejection  of  their
claim  is  indicated  at  Vin.  I,  39,  in  connection  with  the

1  Brahmanam  sahavyataya  tnaggo  (Majjhima  II.  195),  lit.

‘  path  to  union  with  Brahmas.’  In  contradistinction  to  the
Upanishads,  the  Buddhist  Niktyas  (see  Dialogues  I.  298)  ignore
the  neuter  and  impersonal  brahman ,  here  substituting  the  mas¬
culine  and  personal  Brahm&.  (Cf.  M.  III.  xoi : — Brahmuno
sahavyatam  uppajjeyyain.)


INTRODUCTION.


XXI


conversion  of  the  brahmins  Sariputta  and  Moggallana,
who  were  Wanderers  under  Sanjaya  and  aimed  at  the
goal  of  Deathlessness  (amata), — which  to  them  then
probably  meant  the  Brahma  heavens.  Their  con¬
version  followed  on  the  recognition  that  Gotama  dealt
not  with  effects  but  with  causes,  and  that  he  went  to
the  root  of  the  matter  by  teaching  how  causal  states  of
consciousness  arose  and  could  be  banished  for  ever.

Throughout  the  Nikuyas,  Gotama’s  polemic  is
focussed  (outside  Wanderers  and  brahminism)  on
six  non-orthodox  sects, — the  heads  of  which  were

(i)  Purana  Kassapa,  (ii)  Makkhali  Gosala  (the  Ajivaka),
(iii)  Ajita  KesakambalT,  (iv)  Pakudha  Kaccayana,
(v)  Niitaputta  the  Nigantha  or  Jain,  and  (vi)  Safijaya
Belatthiputta.  Their  respective  tenets — which  are  set
out,  but  without  names,  in  (e.g.)  our  76th  Sutta — are
most  conveniently  studied  in  detail  in  the  Sumafina-
phala  Sutta  of  the  Dlgha  Nikiiya  {Dial.  I,  66-75).
The  names  are  there  given  in  each  case  with  the
following  (Buddhist)  summaries  of  their  views  : —

(i)  Purana  Kassapa  taught  that  it  did  not  matter
whether  actions  were  good  or  bad.

(ii)  Makkhali  the  Ajivaka  taught  “purification  through
transmigration,”  i.e.  pain  ends  only  when  the  allotted
term  of  successive  existences  has  been  completed.

(iii)  Ajita  held  the  theory  of  “annihilation”  of  the
individual  at  his  physical  death.

(iv)  Pakudha  held  the  theory  of  “seven  elementary
substances”  (earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ease,  pain,  and  the
soul),  which  are  eternal  and  aloof,  so  that  “  there  is
neither  slayer  nor  causer  of  slaying,  hearer  nor  speaker,
knower  nor  explainer.”

(v)  Nataputta  the  Jain  held  the  theory  of  “the  four¬
fold  bond”  of  self-restraint  whereby  evil  is  washed
away  and  kept  at  bay.  As  elaborated  in  (e.g.)  our
101st  Sutta,  the  Jains  held  that  each  individual's  lot
follows  from  his  former  actions.  Hence,  by  expiation
and  purge  of  former  misdeeds  and  by  not  committing
fresh  misdeeds,  nothing  accrues  for  the  future ;  and
as  nothing  accrues  for  the  future,  former  misdeeds


Bilder  Nr.  11—30


Aufgenommen  zwischen  deni

Tosson-nor  und  Oring-nor


Zum  II.  Teil  des  Kartenwerkes

NORDOST-TIBET


xxii  further  dialogues  of  thebuddha.

die  away,  ancT7o~~eventually  all  Ill  passes  away.

(Cf.  Sutta  56.)  .  .  „

V  (vi)  Safljaya  showed  "his  manner  of  prevarication

by  committing  himself  to  nothing,  i.e.  he  was  an

agnostic  pure  and  simple.  .  .  ,  .

Gotama  s  attitude  to  rival  creeds  is  indicated  by
the  rules  laid  down  for  admitting  converts.  1  he
general  rule,  as  enunciated  in  (e.g.)  our  73rd  Sutta,
was  to  require  a  probation  of  four  months  before
enrolling  as  a  Buddhist  bhikkhu  or  ‘Almsman’  a
proselyte  from  another  sect.  But  an  exception  was
made  (see  Vin.  I,  71  =S.B.E.  xiii,  190)  in  favour  of
converted  Jatilas.  These  ascetic  brahmimcal  fire
worshippers  ’  were  to  be  enrolled  as  Almsmen  forth¬
with,  without  probation,— on  the  express  ground  that
they  “hold  the  doctrine  that  actions  receive  their
reward,  and  that  our  deeds  have  their  result.”  This
exception  was  extended — perhaps  later — to  all  brah¬
mins,  as  will  be  seen  from  Suttas  7  and  92.  Mental,
and  therefore  moral  (D.  I,  124),  responsibility  was  the
« keystone  to  Gotama  s  position  ;  nor  did  he  ever  hold
parley  with  any  who  denied  this  fundamental  principle
of  his  teaching.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  the  71st  Sutta,
Gotama,  in  affirming  the  spiritual  barrenness  of  the
primarily  ascetic  Ajlvakas  (to  whom  in  all  probability
he  had  originally  attached  himself  in  his  early^ascetic
days),  could  not  ‘  call  to  mind  ’  a  single  Ajlvaka
throughout  the  aeons  who  had  risen  to  Arahatship,  and
only  one  solitary  individual  who  even  *  got  to  heaven,’
— that  solitary  individual  being,  like  the  orthodox
Jatilas,  a  kamtna-vadin  and  kiriya-vadm.

_  For  Gotama  (p.  304,  etc.)  teleology  and  philosophic
speculation  had  no  message.  On  this  side,  he  was
avowedly  an  agnostic,  refusing  to  waste  his  time  on  things
irrelevant  to  the  “  grand  business  ”  of  right  living,  based
on  right  thinking;  the  good  life  was  the  only  thing
that  mattered.  Mortal  Ills  were  the  dominant  fact  of
life  ;  and  his  claim  for  himself  (infra,  p.  99)  was  that
from  the  outset  he  had  consistently  preached  his  own
original  doctrine,  known  as  the  Four  Noble  Truths  of


INTRODUCTION.


xxm


(i)  Ill,  (ii)  the  uprising  of  Ill,  (iii)  the  ending  of  Ill,  and
(iv)  the  course  by  which  Ill  could  be  ended  here  and
now.  That  course  was  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path, —
(i)  right  outlook,  (ii)  right  aims,  (iii)  right  speech,
(iv)  right  action,  (v)  right  mode  of  livelihood,  (vi)  right
effort,  (vii)  right  mindfulness,  and  (viii)  right  concen¬
tration.  Of  these  the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth,
as  has  been  seen,  were  borrowed  from  the  Wanderers
en  bloc.  The  significant  departure  is  in  the  first  of
Gotama’s  categories  —  right  outlook,  —  deliberately
placed  in  the  forefront  in  order  to  affirm  the
sovereignty  of  mind  and  thought.  Right  thinking
was  the  preface  and  the  key  to  everything  else  in  the
higher  life,  and  ignorance,  or  lack  of  understanding,
was  the  root  of  all  evil.  The  first  duty  of  man  was
to  comprehend  and  see  all  phenomena  of  life  as  a
process  of  causal  law  (pp.  187-8)  : — If  this  is,  that
comes  about ;  if  this  arises — or  passes  away — so  does
that  too.  The  Deliverance  for  which  men  yearned  in
a  hereafter  was  to  be  won  here  and  now,  through  the
mind,  by  right  thinking,  by  ‘seeing  and  knowing’
phenomena  aright,  by  those  right  states  of  conscious¬
ness  which  are  the  theme  of  the  first  Sutta  of  this
book.  And  in  the  forefront  here  came  the  extirpation
of  the  asavas,  or  '  Cankers  ’  (see  infra ,  p.  2  note  4  and
p.  15,  note  1).  Originally  three  in  number  in  early
Buddhism,  the  *  Cankers  ’ — sensuous  pleasure,  belief
in  personal  immortality,  and  blank  ignorance  of  the
causal  truth  of  things — forbade  all  possibility  of
newness  of  mental  life,  as  being  not  cr^ccrci?  but  deadly
With  their  extirpation  right  conduct  followed
almost  as  a  corollary,  with  Arahatship  as  the  crown  of
a  strenuous  life  of  mental  and  moral  culture.

One  other  matter  requires  mention,  and  it  is  a
matter  of  significance.  While  the  term  asava  (but
not  its  connotation)  may  well  have  been  borrowed
from  or  through  the  Jains,  the  inclusion  in  Buddhism
of  metta  (  =  caritas,  or  active  goodwill  towards
mankind  and  all  creation)  cannot  be  assigned  with
probability  to  a  pre-Buddhist  source,  but  marks  an


« i|ns4i8*GcK


Bild  n


Blick  auf  die  Tosson-nor-Ebene.

Aufgenommcn  v.  Lager  XIX.  Blatt  it.


Bild  12

C  !<«■


Blick  auf  das  Rna-tschu-nargyn-Tal.

Aufgenomnicn  v.  Lager  XIX  Watt  to.


XXIV


FURTHER  DIALOGUES  OF  THE  BUDDHA.


original  and  independent  contribution  to  the  evolution
of  India’s  religious  thought.  Unlike  the  early  rishis
of  Majjhima  I.  378  and  II.  155,  whose  psychic  powers
might  be  exercised  in  anger  to  blast  a  country-side  or
to  burn  to  a  cinder  an  unwelcome  visitor,  the  Buddhist
Almsman  was  trained — as  a  condition  precedent  to
attaining  Arahatship — to  embrace  the  whole  universe
in  radiant  thoughts  of  goodwill  and  of  pity  and  com¬
passion, — an  ideal  stedfastly  to  be  maintained  even
during  death  by  torture,  as  in  the  striking  *  Parable  of
the  Saw’  at  p.  90  infra.  The  significance,  present
and  future,  of  this  spirit  of  altruism  in  Buddhism  has
been  set  forth  with  much  cogency  in  Dr.  K.  T.
Saunders’  Epocks  of  Buddhism.

Remote  as  is  this  doctrine  from  either  formal  brah-
minism,  with  its  ritual  of  worship  of  Brahma,  or  from
the  Wanderers’  passion  for  union  with  a  Supreme  Self
in  bliss  everlasting,  Gotama  (or  his  followers  for  him)
did  not  hesitate  to  appropriate  to  his  teachings  the
nomenclature  of  his  forerunners.  With  practical
sagacity,  he  (or  they)  appropriated  current  terms  and
familiar  nomenclature.  Thus,  while  retaining  the  ac¬
cepted  doctrines  of  transmigration  and  of  ‘gods,’  he  was
the  true '  brahmin  ’  and  master  of  the  ‘  threefold  lore  ’ ;  he
was  the  true  ‘  superman  ’  (maha-purisa),  the  true  victor
(jina),  the  true  saint  (arahant),  and  the  veritable  Truth-
finder  (tath&gata).  He  borrowed  from  brahminism  the
title  of  Almsman  (bhikkhu)  for  his  enrolled  followers,
and  called  their  enrolment  (pabbajjti)  after  the  parib-
bajakas  (Wanderers).  But  in  each  instance  he  altered
the  connotation  of  the  familiar  terms  which  he  retained
from  the  past,  while  importing  into  them  his  own  novel
content  of  meaning.  The  old  labels  were  reassuring,
even  though  the  wine  was  a  new  brand.


I.  MULA-PARIYAYA-SUTTA.

HOW  STATES  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS  ORIGINATE.

[1]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Ukkattha,  in  the  Subhaga  grove  under  the
great  sal-tree,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying  : —
Almsmen !  Lord,  said  they  in  answer.  Then  said
the  Lord  : — I  will  expound  to  you  how  all  states  of
consciousness  originate;  listen  with  attention  and  I
will  speak.  Yes,  sir,  said  they  in  response  to  the
Lord,  who  then  spoke  as  follows  : —

Take  the  case  of  an  uninstructed  every-day  man,  who
takes  no  count  of  the  Noble  and  is  unversed  and  un¬
trained  in  Noble  Doctrine  ;  who  takes  no  count  of  the
Excellent 1  and  is  unversed  and  untrained  in  Excellent
Doctrine.  Such  a  man  (simply)  perceives  earth  as
earth  and,  so  perceiving  it,  conceives  ideas  of  earth,
ideas  of — in  earth,  from  earth,  my  earth ;  and  is  content
with  ‘  earth.’  And  why  ? — I  say  it  is  because  he  does
not  comprehend  it.

So  too  he  perceives  water  as  water,  and,  so  per¬
ceiving  it,  conceives  ideas  of  water,  ideas  of — in  water,
from  water,  my  water; — and  is  content  with  ‘water.’
And  why? — I  say  it  is  because  he  does  not  com¬
prehend  it.

In  just  the  same  way  originate  his  ideas  about —

( i )  fire,  (2)  air,  [2^(3)  creatures,  (4)  gods,  (5)  PajSpati,2 * 4
(6)  Brahm§.,  (7)  Abhassara  deities,  (8)  Subhakinpa
deities,  (9)  Vehapphala  deities,  (10)  Abhibha,  [8](n)
the  Realm  of  Infinite  Space,  (12)  the  Realm  of  Infinite


1  The  Noble  and  the  Excellent  (synonymous  terms  according  to

Buddhaghosa)  are  simply  Arahats  ( M.  I,  280,  402,  etc.),  and  are
not  to  be  restricted  (as  Bu.)  to  Buddhas,  Pacceka  Buddhas,  and

the  (chief)  disciples  of  Buddhas.

4  Identified  by  Bu.  as  Mara.  For  the  following  classes  of
beings,  see  the  33rd  Sutta  of  the  Digha  Nikaya,  and  cf.  Sutta
No.  49  infra.


llsc-Krttf  tf  Ikhiclnn-tirhafivi)


"  "'111  I XX  J  V  ii..uiuk.uj8jiiv  •.))fjjj|-|J-3nQ

OKS


1  Interpreted  as  representing  the  three  other  senses  of  smell,
taste  and  touch.  Cf.  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha  III,  137,  «.  2.

5  I.eti,  grasped  by  the  mind  (m  a  n  a  s  I)  as  a  sixth  sense.

*  Lit.  worshipful.  See  Dial.  Ill,  3,  et  seq.,  for  the  history
of  this  word, — used  of  non-Buddhists  in  Sutta  84  (II.  86).  Cf.
infra  p.  175.

‘  For  the  four  asavas  (of  pleasure,  continuing  existence,  and
ignorance,  with  error  superadded),  see  e.g.  D.  II,  84.  (In  our
2nd  Sutta,  as  at  the  end  of  Suttas  Nos.  4  and  9,  the  asavas  are
three  in  number,  i.e.  without  the  outlook  of  error  superadded.)

The  Ssavas,  so  called  (says  Bu.)  because  they  flow,  would  seem
to  be  running  sores,  or  neoplasms  of  character,  with  their  metas-
of  evil,  like  physical  cancers.  I  have  called  them  *  cankers,'
of  the  metaphorical  connotation  which  attaches  to  this
though  not  to  ‘  cancer.’


Mind  (13)  the  Realm  of  Naught,  (14)  the  Realm
of  neither  perception  nor  non-perception,  (15)  what  is
seen  (16)  what  is  heard,  (17)  what  is  sensed,1
(18)  what  is  discerned,2  (19)  unity,  (20)  multiplicity,
(a  1)  universality,  and  (22)  Nirvana.

[4]  Then  too  there  is  the  Almsman  who  is  still
under  training  and  has  not  yet  won  Arahatship,  but
Eves  in  earnest  yearning  for  utter  immunity  from
the  four  Attachments.  He  recognizes  earth  as
earth  ;  but,  having  so  recognized  it,— ah  !  let  him
not  conceive  ideas  of  earth,  ideas  of— in  earth,
from  earth,  my  earth;  let  him  not  rest  content  with
‘earth.’  And  why? — I  say  it  is  because  he  must  bring
himself  to  comprehend  it

[Here  follow  similar  paragraphs  about  water,  fire,
air  .  .  .  etc. .  .  .>  and  (22)  Nirvana.]

Then  there  is  the  Almsman  who  is  an  Arahat,3  in
whom  the  Cankers4  are  no  more,  who  has  greatly
lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  has  shed  his  burthens
and  has  won  his  weal,  whose  bonds  to  life  are  now
no  more,  who  by  utter  knowledge  has  found  final
Deliverance.  He  too  recognizes  earth  as  earth  ;  but,
having  so  recognized  it,  he  conceives  no  ideas  of
earth,  in  earth,  from  earth,  my  earth;  nor  does  he
rest  content  with  ‘earth.’  And  why? — I  say  it  is
because  he  has  come  to  comprehend  it.

So  too  he  recognizes  water  and  the  rest  of  these


mOla-pariyaya-sutta.


M.  i.  5.


STATES  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS.


3


things ;  he  recognizes  Nirvana  as  Nirvana,  but,
having  so  recognized  it,  he  conceives  no  ideas  of
Nirvana,  no  ideas  of — in  Nirvana,  from  Nirvana,
my  Nirvana  ;  nor  does  he  rest  content  with  ‘  Nirvana.’
And  why  ? — I  say  it  is  because  he  has  come  to  com¬
prehend  it.

The  Almsman  who  is  an  Arahat,  in  whom  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  preceding  paragraph,  down  to)  .  .  .  {-Sj'nos
does  he  rest  content  with  ‘earth,’  or  ‘  water  ’  and  so  forth.
And  why  ? — Because,  say  I,  by  the  extirpation  of  lusts
he  is  freed  from  lusts  ;  because  by  the  extirpation  of  hate
he  is  freed  from  hate  ;  because  by  the  extirpation  of
delusion  he  is  freed  from  delusion.

The  Truth-finder1  too,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened,
also  recognizes  earth  as  earth ;  but,  having  so  recognized
it,  he  conceives  no  ideas  of  earth,  no  ideas  of — in  earth
— from  earth — my  earth ;  nor  is  he  content  with
‘  earth,’  or  with  ‘  water  ’  and  so  forth.  [6]  And  why  ?
• — Because,  say  I,  he  has  comprehended  it  to  the  full.*

The  Truth-finder  too  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  preceding
paragraph,  down  to)  .  .  .  And  why? — Because,  having
seen  pleasure  to  be  the  root  of  Ill,  he  sees  how
continuing  existence  entails  rebirths  and  that  what¬
ever  has  continuing  existence  is  dogged  by  decay
and  death.  Therefore  it  is,  say  I,  that  by  extirpating
all  cravings,  by  lusting  not  after  them,  but  by
destroying  and  abandoning  and  renouncing  them  all,
the  Truth-finder  has  become  all-enlightened,  with  utter
enlightenment.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


1  For  this  rendering  of  tathagata  seeJ.R.A.S.,  1898,  Bud¬
dhist  Psychological  Ethics  (2nd  edit.,  p.  270,  *.  6),  and  Dialogues
I,  40,  263,  etc.  Just  as  J  i  n  a  is  a  title  of  the  Buddha,  so  t  at  h  5-
gata  is  a  synonym  of  the  Jain  titthakara,  or  ford-maker
(S.B.E.  XLV,  p.  320), — both  terms  being  pre-buddhistic,  like
arahant,  bhagavant,  etc.

At  e.g.  M.  I,  140  tathagata  is  used  as  a  synonym  of
arahat.  Cf.  D.  I,  27  (hoti  tathSgato  param  marapS),
on  which  Bu.  says  :satiotath5gatotiadhippeto.
s  Reading  parinnat-antam,  with  Bu.  (M.A.  I,  52).


Illick  auf  das  Dug-iiani-scr-|>o-Tal.  Auf|{i'Uomm«n  v.  Pall  Iku,  )i>  5",  lilalt  1 1


M.  i.  8.


COPING  WITH  CANKERS.


5


those  states  by  the  entertainment  of  which  the  Cankers
— of  sensuous  pleasure  or  of  continuing  existence  or  of
ignorance — either  arise  where  they  had  not  arisen
before  or  grow  apace  where  they  had  arisen  already.
What,  now,  are  the  mental  states  which  he  does  not
entertain  though  he  should  ? — Why,  those  states  by
the  entertainment  of  which  those  three  Cankers  either
arise  where  they  had  not  arisen  before  or  grow  apace
where  they  had  arisen  already.  Thus,  [8]  by  enter¬
taining  mental  states  which  he  should  not  entertain  and
by  not  entertaining  those  which  he  should,  not  only  do
fresh  Cankers  arise  but  also  the  old  ones  grow  apace.
In  his  wrong-headedness,  he  asks  himself — (i.)  Was  I
in  ages  past  ?  (ii.)  Was  I  not  in  ages  past  ?  (iii.)  What
was  I  then?  (iv.)  How  was  I  then?  (v.)  From  what
did  I  pass  to  what  ?  (vi.)  Shall  I  be  in  ages  to  come  ?
(vii.)  Shall  I  not  be  in  ages  to  come?  (viii.)  What
shall  I  then  be  ?  (ix.)  How  shall  I  then  be  ?  (x.)  From
what  shall  I  pass  to  what  ?  Or,  again,  it  is  Self  to-day
about  which  he  is  in  doubt,  asking  himself — (i.)  Am  I  ?
(ii.)  Am  I  not  ?  (iii.)  What  am  I  ?  (iv.)  How  am  I  ?
(v.)  Whence  came  my  being  ?  (vi.)  Whither  will  it
pass?  In  his  wrong-headed  ness  one  or  other  of  six
wrong  outlooks  emerges  as  true  and  trustworthy : —
(i.)  I  have  a  Self,  (ii.)  I  have  not  a  Self,  (iii.)  By
Self  I  perceive  Self,  (iv.)  By  Self  I  perceive  non-self,
(v.)  By  non-self  I  perceive  Self,  (vi.)  Or  his  error  is
to  hold  that  this  speaking  and  sentient  Self  of  his —
which  is  experiencing  the  fruits  of  good  and  of  bad
conduct  in  this  or  that  earlier  existence — has  always
been,  and  will  always  be,  an  everlasting  and  changeless
Self,  which  will  stand  fast  so  long  as  heaven  and  earth
stand  fast.  This  is  called  perversion  to  error,  seizure
by  error,  the  jungle  of  error,  the  schism  of  error,  the
writhing  in  error,  the  bondage  of  error.  While  he  is
fast  in  the  bondage  of  error,  I  say  that  the  uninstructed
everyday  man  is  never  freed  from  birth,  decay,  and
death,  from  sorrow,  lamentation  and  tribulation,  is
never  freed  from  Ill.  Now  the  instructed  disciple  of
the  Noble,  who  has  vision  of  the  Noble  and  Excellent


Inri


BiM  17


—  4640  hfl  Iko  K.i*


X


Blick  auf  die  Dug-ri-Berge  und  das  Dug-nam-ser-po-Tal.

Aufgenommen  v.  Zult,  1  2° — *>.  Blatt  15.


BiKl  18


Blick  auf  das  Amne-maltschin-Gebirge  (Rta-mtschog-ngrki).

Aufgcnommett  v.  Zult,  12°  Blatt  15.


6  JL  sabb-Asava-sutta.  M.  i.  9.


and  is  versed  and  well-trained  in  their  Doctrine,  under¬
stands  what  mental  states  his  mind  should  entertain
and  what  states  it  should  not  entertain  ;  and  accord-
ingly  [9]  he  does  not  entertain  those  states  he  should
not  entertain  but  does  entertain  those  he  should.
Now,  what  are  the  mental  states  which  he  should  not,
and  does  not,  entertain  ? — Why,  those  states  by  enter¬
tainment  of  which  the  Cankers  of  sensual  pleasure,
continuing  existence  or  of  ignorance  either  arise  where
they  had  not  arisen  before  or  grow  apace  where  they
had  already  arisen.  And  what  are  the  mental  states
he  should,  and  does,  entertain  ? — Why,  those  states  by
entertainment  of  which  those  same  Cankers  either  do
not  arise  if  they  have  not  arisen  before  or,  having  arisen
before,  now  pass  away.  If  he  entertains  not  the  mental
states  which  he  should  not  entertain  but  does  entertain
those  he  should,  then  not  only  will  the  Cankers  which
have  not  arisen  before  not  arise  now,  but  also  those
which  had  before  arisen  now  pass  away.  His  mind  is
engaged  aright  with  entertaining  the  Four  Noble
Truths,  namely  : — This  is  Ill ;  this  is  the  origin  of  Ill ;
this  is  the  cessation  of  Ill ;  this  is  the  way  that  leads  to
the  cessation  of  Ill.  He  rids  himself  of  the  three
Bonds — of  individuality,  doubt  and  the  virus  of  ‘  good
works.’  These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are  to  be
got  rid  of  by  scrutiny.

2.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by
restraint? — Take  the  case  of  a  Brother  who  has  got
his  eye  under  restraint.  Whereas  lack  of  restraint  of
the  eye  would  entail  the  arising  of  Cankers  that
destroy  and  consume,  no  such  Cankers  arise  for  him
who  has  his  eye  under  restraint.  [Similar  sentences
follow  about  hearing,  smell,  taste,  touch  and  mind.]
[10]  These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are  to  be
got  rid  of  by  restraint.

3.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by  use  ?
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  duly  and  advisedly,
exercises  the  use  of  robes — only  to  keep  off  cold,  heat,
gadflies,  mosquitoes,  scorching  winds,  and  contact  with
creeping  things,  and  to  veil  the  parts  of  shame.  Duly


M.  i.  ii.


COPING  WITH  CANKERS.


7


and  advisedly  he  exercises  the  use  of  alms  received—
neither  for  pleasure  nor  for  delight,  neither  for  ostenta¬
tion  nor  for  display,  but  only  to  support  and  sustain
his  body,  to  save  it  from  hurt  and  to  foster  the  higher
life,  thereby  putting  from  him  the  old  feelings  and
not  breeding  new  feelings,  but  ensuring  progress
and  the  blameless  lot  and  well-being.  Duly  and
advisedly  he  exercises  the  use  of  lodging — only  to
keep  off  cold,  heat,  gadflies,  mosquitoes,  scorching
winds  and  contact  with  creeping  things,  to  dispel  the
dangers  which  the  seasons  bring,  and  to  enjoy
seclusion.  Duly  and  advisedly  he  exercises  the  use
of  medical  comforts  and  of  his  supply  of  medicaments —
only  to  keep  off  pain  felt  and  to  minimize  harm.
Whereas  shortcomings  in  use  would  entail  the  arising
of  Cankers  that  destroy  and  consume,  no  such  Cankers
arise  for  him  whose  use  is  in  the  right.  These  are
called  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by  use.

4.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by
endurance  ? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  duly
and  advisedly,  has  grown  patient  of  cold  and  heat,  of
hunger  and  thirst,  patient  of  gadflies,  mosquitoes,
scorching  winds  and  contact  with  creeping  things,
patient  of  abusive  and  hurtful  language,  inured  to
endurance  of  the  advent  of  all  those  bodily  feelings
which  are  painful,  acute,  sharp,  severe,  wretched,
miserable,  or  deadly.  Whereas  lack  of  endurance
would  entail  the  arising  of  Cankers  that  destroy  and
consume,  no  such  Cankers  arise  for  him  who  has
endurance.  These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are
to  be  got  rid  of  by  endurance.

5.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by  avoid¬
ance  ? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  duly  and
advisedly,  avoids  a  savage  elephant  or  horse  or  steer
or  dog,  or  avoids  a  snake,  the  stump  of  a  tree,  a  briar
patch,  [11]  a  tank,  a  precipice,  a  refuse-pool  or  rubbish
shoot.  Duly  and  advisedly,  he  avoids  either  sitting  in
such  unseemly  places,  or  frequenting  such  unseemly
resorts,  or  cultivating  such  bad  friends  as  would  lead
the  discreet  among  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  to  con-


Bild  19


-  *'»oo


■\niae»tnalt>chia«Gc^nrgf

—  4*40  ^  *°°°


Blick  auf  das  Dug-nam-ser-po-Tal.

Aufgcnomnu,n  v.  Zult  is°-,r‘.  Blait  15.

Bild  20

a

48**  +  4<t*o  +  495®  -t  5°°°  T  5®*»


Blick  auf  das  Amne-maltschin-Gebirge  (Rta-mtschog-ngrki).

Aufgenommcn  v.  I-ager  XXII.  Blau  15.


8


II.  sabb-Asava-sutta.


M.  i.  12.


elude  he  had  gone  astray.  Whereas  failure  to  avoid
would  entail  the  arising  of  Cankers  that  destroy  and
consume,  no  such  Cankers  arise  for  him  who  knows
how  to  avoid.  These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are
to  be  got  rid  of  by  avoidance.

6.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by  removal  ?
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  duly  and  advisedly,
rejects,  discards,  dispels,  extinguishes  and  annihilates
all  those  thoughts  of  sensual  pleasure,  malevolence  and
malice  that  have  already  arisen  ;  who  rejects,  dis¬
cards,  dispels,  extinguishes  and  annihilates  all  evil  and
wrong  mental  states  which  have  not  yet  arisen  within
him.  Whereas  failure  to  remove  these  would  entail
the  arising  of  Cankers  that  destroy  and  consume,  no
such  Cankers  arise  for  him  who  knows  how  to  remove
them.  These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are  to  be
got  rid  of  by  removal.

7.  What  are  the  Cankers  to  be  got  rid  of  by  culture  ?
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  duly  and  advisedly,
cultivates  the  factors  of  enlightenment — to  wit,  self¬
collectedness,  study  of  the  Doctrine,  strenuous  effort,
zest,  tranquillity,  rapt  concentration,  and  poised
equanimity — based  each  and  all  on  aloofness,  passion¬
lessness  and  cessation,  with  renunciation  as  the  crown.
Whereas  failure  to  cultivate  these  things  would  entail
the  arising  of  Cankers  that  destroy  and  consume,  no
such  Cankers  arise  for  him  who  cultivates  them  aright.
These  are  called  the  Cankers  which  are  to  be  got  rid
of  by  culture.

The  Almsman  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  gone  which
are  severally  to  be  got  rid  of  by  scrutiny,  by  restraint,
by  use,  by  endurance,  by  avoidance,  [12]  by  removal
and  by  culture — he  it  is  who  is  said  to  have  all  the
Cankers  in  restraint ;  he  has  cut  off  craving,  shed  his
bonds,  and,  by  fathoming  false  pride,  has  made  an  end
of  Ill.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  i.  13.


UNWORLDLY  GOODS.


9


III.  DHAMMA-DAYADA-SUTTA.

UNWORLDLY  GOODS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  attentive  Almsmen  as
follows : —

Seek  to  be  partakers,  Almsmen,  not  of  the  world’s
goods  but  of  my  Doctrine  ;  in  my  compassion  for  you,
I  am  anxious  to  ensure  this.  Should  you  be  partakers
of  the  world’s  goods  and  not  of  my  Doctrine,  then  not
only  will  you,  my  disciples,  be  blamed  for  so  doing,  but
also  I,  as  your  teacher,  shall  be  blamed  on  your
account  If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  partake  of  my
Doctrine  and  not  of  the  world’s  goods,  then  not  only
will  you,  my  disciples,  escape  blame  for  so  doing,  but  also
I,  as  your  teacher,  shall  escape  blame  too.  Therefore,
be  partakers  of  my  Doctrine  and  not  of  the  world’s
goods ;  out  of  compassion  for  them,  I  would  have  all
my  disciples  partake  of  my  Doctrine  and  not  of  the
world’s  goods.

Suppose  my  meal  is  over  and  that  I  have  finished
and  ended,  after  having  had  my  fill  and  enough  ;  and
assume  that  of  my  alms  there  is  some  over,  to  be
thrown  away,  when  there  arrive  two  Almsmen,  [13]
half  dead  with  hunger  and  exhaustion,  to  whom  I
say  that  I  have  finished  my  own  meal  and  do  not  want
any  more,  but  that  of  my  alms  there  is  some  over,  to
be  thrown  away ;  that  they  can  eat  it  if  they  like,  but
that,  if  they  do  not,  I  shall  either  throw  it  away  where
no  grass  grows  or  fling  it  into  water  where  no  living
things  dwell.1  Suppose  now  one  Almsman  thinks  :
The  Lord  has  finished  eating  all  he  wants  but  has  left
some  food  which,  if  we  do  not  eat  it,  he  will  now  throw
away.  Now  the  Lord  has  told  us  to  partake  of  his
Doctrine  and  not  of  the  world’s  goods — of  which  alms


1  I.e.  so  as  not  to  harm  life  in  any  form.  See  S.B.E.  XX,  319,
and  cf.  Jainism.


Hernab-Krtte


Bild  22


L

i


■+■  «<>•**
I


I’oflilkol  Re*


a  —  iota


Blick  auf  das  Amne-maltschin-Gebirge  und  die  Dug-yung-Ebene.

Aufgenommcn  v.  A  u'l  —  m.  Blatt  16.


Bild  23

I  A

»  —  ;o»


O


Ma-la-dun-Passe.

Aufgcnommcn  v.  Pall  II,  io»* — ill4.  Blatt  16.


Blick  auf  die  Dug-yung-Ebene.

Aul'genommen  v.  Lager  XXU.  Blatt  15.


io  in.  dhamma-dAyada-sutta.  M.  i.  14.

is  one ;  and  I  had  better  not  eat  but  fast  on  till  the
morrow,  notwithstanding  my  hunger  and  exhaustion.
Suppose  then  that,  not  partaking  of  the  alms  over,  this
first  Almsman  patiently  fasts  on  till  the  morrow  comes.
But  suppose  the  second  Almsman  thinks  :  The  Lord
has  had  his  own  meal  but  there  remains  food  over
which  he  will  only  throw  away  if  we  do  not  eat  it.
Why  should  not  I,  by  eating  thereof,  pass  the  night
and  next  morning  in  relief  from  my  hunger  and  ex¬
haustion  ?  Assume,  now,  that  this  second  Almsman
does  eat,  and  so  relieves  his  hunger  and  exhaustion
before  the  morrow  comes.  Albeit  he  does  so  and  re¬
lieves  his  necessity,  yet  I  should  hold  the  first
Almsman  in  greater  honour  and  esteem.  And  why  ? —
Because  the  first  Almsman’s  abstention  will  long  con¬
duce  to  curtailment  of  wants,  to  contentment,  to  pur¬
gation  of  evil,  to  virtuous  satisfaction  and  to  the
strenuous  life.  Therefore,  Almsmen,  be  ye  partakers
not  of  the  world’s  goods  but  of  my  Doctrine  ;  in  my
compassion  for  you  all,  I  am  anxious  to  ensure  this.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord,  who  thereupon  rose  and
passed  to  his  own  cell.

The  Lord  had  not  long  been  gone  when  the
reverend  Sariputta  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying :
Your  reverences.  Reverend  sir,  [14]  said  they  in
response.  Then  said  Sariputta :  In  what  respects,
while  their  teacher  leads  the  Life  Apart,  do  his  disciples
either  cultivate,  or  not  cultivate,  the  same  detachment
of  the  inner  life  ?

We  would  have  travelled  from  afar  to  learn  the
meaning  of  this  from  Sariputta’s  lips.  Pray,  vouchsafe
to  explain  it,  and  we  will  treasure  up  your  words.

Then,  reverend  sirs,  hearken  and  pay  attention  and
I  will  speak.

Yes,  reverend  sir,  said  they  in  response  to  Sari¬
putta,  who  went  on  to  speak  as  follows  : —

Take  the  case  that,  while  their  teacher  leads  the  life
apart,  his  disciples  fail  to  cultivate  the  same  aloofness
of  the  inner  life,  do  not  put  from  them  those  states
of  mind  which  their  teacher  has  bidden  them  put


M.  i.  15.


UNWORLDLY  GOODS.


I  I


from  them,  but  are  luxurious  and  have  but  a  loose
grip  of  the  truth,  are  foremost  in  backsliding,  and  in¬
tolerant  of  Renunciation's  yoke.  Herein,  first  the
seniors  are  trebly  blameworthy, — first,  that,  while
their  teacher  leads  the  life  apart,  his  disciples  do  not
cultivate  the  same  detachment  in  the  inner  life ;
secondly,  that  they  do  not  put  from  them  those  states
of  mind  which  their  teacher  has  bidden  them  put  from
them ;  and  thirdly,  that  they  are  luxurious  and  have
only  a  loose  grip  of  truth,  are  to  the  forefront  in  back¬
sliding  and  intolerant  of  Renunciation’s  yoke.  Blame
attaches  to  the  seniors  in  these  three  ways.  And  the  like
threefold  blame  attaches  also  to  those  of  middle  standing
and  to  the  juniors.  These  are  the  respects  in  which,
while  their  teacher  leads  the  life  apart,  his  disciples  do
not  cultivate  the  same  aloofness  of  the  inner  life.

Next,  what  are  the  respects  in  which,  while  their
teacher  leads  the  life  apart,  his  disciples  [15]  cultivate
the  like  aloofness  of  the  inner  life  ? — Take  the  case
that,  while  their  teacher  leads  the  life  apart,  his  disciples
also  cultivate  aloofness  in  the  inner  life,  put  from  them
those  states  of  mind  which  their  teacher  bids  them  put
from  them,  are  not  luxurious,  have  no  loose  grip  of  the
truth,  are  intolerant  only  of  backsliding  and  are  fore¬
most  in  Renunciation.  Herein,  first  the  seniors  are
trebly  praiseworthy, — firstly,  that  while  their  teacher
leads  the  life  apart,  they  cultivate  the  same  aloofness  in
the  inner  life  ;  secondly,  that  they  put  from  them  those
states  of  mind  which  their  teacher  has  bidden  them  put
from  them  ;  and  thirdly,  that  they  are  not  luxurious,
have  no  looseness  of  grip  on  the  truth,  are  intolerant
only  of  backsliding,  but  are  to  the  forefront  in  Re¬
nunciation.  Praise  attaches  to  the  seniors  in  these
three  ways.  And  the  like  threefold  praise  attaches
also  to  those  of  middle  standing  and  to  the  juniors.
These  are  the  respects  in  which,  while  their  teacher
leads  the  life  apart,  his  disciples  cultivate  the  like
aloofness  of  the  inner  life.

Yes,  sirs,  greed  is  vile,  and  vile  is  resentment.
To  shed  this  greed  and  this  resentment,  there  is


I


Bild  24

Ab


Blick  auf  das  Ma-tschu  Tal.

Aufgcnommen  v.  PaO  II  *  4610.  Blau  it>.


Ku  —  4550
tal9


I


Ka  -r  4*so
tjB  0


Bild


T

I5S°
lonic-ka


T>o-j


Ma-tschu.  unterhalb  Grenard’s  Cbergang.

Aufgenommen  v.  Lager  XXVI.  Blatt  21.


12


III.  DHAMMA-DAYADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  16.


the  Middle  Way  which  gives  us  eyes  to  see  and
makes  us  know,  leading  us  on  to  peace,  insight,
enlightenment  and  Nirvana.  What  is  this  Middle
Way? — Why,  it  is  naught  but  the  Noble  Eightfold
Path  of  right  outlook,  right  aims,  right  speech,
right  action,  right  means  of  livelihood,  right  effort,
right  mindfulness,  and  right  concentration ;  this,
Almsmen,  is  the  Middle  Way.  Yes,  sirs  ;  anger  is  vile
and  malevolence  is  vile,  envy  and  jealousy  are  vile,
niggardliness  and  avarice  are  vile,  hypocrisy  and  deceit
.  are  vile,  imperviousness  [16]  and  temper  are  vile,  pride
and  arrogance  are  vile,  inflation  is  vile,  and  indolence
is  vile ;  for  the  shedding  of  inflation  and  indolence
there  is  the  Middle  Way — giving  us  eyes  to  see,
making  us  know,  and  leading  us  on  to  peace,  insight,
enlightenment  and  Nirvana — which  is  naught  but  that
Noble  Eightfold  Path.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Sariputta.  Glad  at  heart,
those  Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  he  had  said.


IV.  BHAYA-BHERAVA-SUTTA.

OF  BRAVING  FEARS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove,  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  there  came  to  him  the  brahmin  Janussoni
who,  after  due  exchange  of  the  greetings  and  compli¬
ments  of  politeness  and  courtesy,  seated  himself  to  one
side  and  said  : —

These  young  men  who,  following  the  reverend
Gotama  and  believing  in  him,  have  gone  forth  as
Pilgrims  from  home  to  homelessness, — all  of  them
have  him  as  their  leader,  warden  and  guide  ?  And  the
whole  company  of  them  are  adherents  of  his  tenets  ?

Quite  so,  brahmin  ;  quite  so  ;  it  is  just  as  you  say.

It  is  hard,  Gotama,  to  brave  life  in  the  wilds  and
depths  of  the  forest,  far  from  the  haunts  of  men;
solitude  is  hard  to  endure ;  to  live  alone  is  joyless ;


M.  i.  17.


OF  BRAVING  FEARS


3


and  methinks*  forests  are  killing  to  the  mind  of  an
Almsman  who  does  not  attain  to  rapt  concentration.

[17]  Quite,  so,  brahmin  ;  quite  so  ;  it  is  just  as  you
say.  I  myself  thought  the  very  same  thing  in
the  days  before  my  full  Enlightenment  when  as  yet  I
was  not  fully  enlightened  but  was  only  a  Bodhisatta.
But,  even  so,  I  bethought  me  that:  Recluses  and
brahmins  who  without  purity — of  act — of  word —
of  thought — or  of  livelihood — take  to  living  in  the
wilds,  all  of  them,  by  reason  of  their  impurity  and  its
attendant  corruption,  evoke  fear  and  dread  from  within
themselves.  But  it  is  not  in  impurity  but  in  purity
that  I  take  to  a  life  of  solitude  in  the  wilds  ;  I  am  one
of  the  Noble  Brotherhood  who  in  purity  enter  on  such
life.  This  consciousness  of  purity  within,  brahmin,
braced  me  with  confidence  to  live  in  the  wilds.

I  bethought  me  that :  Recluses  and  brahmins  living
in  the  wilds  are  beset  with  fear  and  dread  if  they  are
covetous  and  pleasure-loving,  and  accordingly  corrupt
— [18]]  or  malevolent  and  malignant,  and  corrupt
accordingly — or  are  corrupt  either  by  being  given
over  to  sloth  and  torpor,  or  by  being  puffed-up  and
disordered  in  mind,  or  by  harbouring  perplexity  and
doubts,  or  by  [19]  exalting  themselves  and  disparaging
others,  or  by  being  aghast  and  affrighted,  or  by
acquisitiveness  and  love  of  distinction,  or  by  being
indolent  and  slack,  [20]  or  by  being  bewildered  and
flustered,  or  by  being  unstable  and  wandering,  or  wit¬
less  and  drivelling.  With  me  it  is  not  so ;  none  of
these  defects  are  mine  as  I  take  to  a  life  of  solitude  in
the  wilds  ;  I  am  one  of  the  Noble  Brotherhood  who,
without  any  one  of  these  defects  and  without  their
attendant  corruption,  enter  on  the  solitary  life  in  the
wilds  and  depths  of  the  forest,  far  from  the  haunts  of
men.  This  consciousness  braced  me  with  confidence
to  live  in  the  wilds.

There  came  to  me  the  thought  that,  on  the  special  and
outstanding  nights  of  each  fortnight,  I  would  seek  out
haunted  shrines  and  altars  in  woodland  or  forest  or
under  tutelary  trees  and  there  abide,  in  those  awesome


Bild  26


+  44'°


§o«|!


oog-ka


Hang  SL»


»i  >


Ma-tschu,  unterhalb  Grenard's  Cbergang.

Aufgcnommen  v.  Lager  XX\’I.  Hiatt  21.


Mu-i»«.liu*Artn


Ami


CaroUneo-Kettc


AAjijo  An  +


Bil.l  27


MV

Blick  auf  die  Ma-tschu-Ebene.

Aulgenommcn  v.  Lager  XXVII.  Hiatt  17.


14


IV.  BHAYA-BHERAVA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  21.


and  grisly  scenes, — perchance  there  to  discover  fear
and  dread.  So,  in  due  season,  on  such  nights,  I  took
up  my  abode  in  those  awesome  and  grisly  scenes.  As
I  abode  there,  either  an  animal  passed  along,  or  a
peacock  [21]  knocked  off  a  branch,  or  the  wind  rustled
the  fallen  leaves,  so  that  I  thought  this  must  surely  be
fear  and  dread  coming.  Thought  I : — Wherefore  am
I  doing  nothing  but  await  the  coming  of  fear  and
dread  ?  Come  as  they  may,  I,  just  as  they  find  me,
will  even  so  overcome  them,  without  changing  my
posture  for  them.  I  was  pacing  to  and  fro  when  fear
and  dread  came  upon  me  ;  1  continued  to  pace  to  and
fro  till  I  had  overcome  them,  neither  standing  still  nor
sitting  nor  lying  down.  If  I  was  standing  still  when
fear  and  dread  came  upon  me,  I  continued  to  stand
still,  and  neither  paced  to  and  fro  nor  sat  nor  lay
down,  until  I  had  overcome  them.  If  I  was  seated
when  they  came  upon  me,  sitting  I  remained  till  I  had
overcome  them,  neither  lying  down  nor  standing  still
nor  pacing  to  and  fro.  If  I  was  lying  down  when  fear
and  dread  came  upon  me,  lying  down  I  remained  till  I
had  overcome  them, — neither  sitting  down  nor  stand¬
ing  still  nor  pacing  to  and  fro.

Now,  brahmin,  there  are  some  recluses  and  brahmins
who  say  night  is  day  and  day  is  night  but  I  say  this
shews  the  delusion  in  which  they  live.  Night  to  me  is
night,  and  day  is  day.  Of  me,  if  of  anyone,  it  can
truly  be  affirmed  that,  in  me,  a  being  without  delusions
has  arisen  in  the  world,  for  the  weal  and  welfare  of
many,  out  of  compassion  towards  the  world,  for  the
good,  the  weal,  and  the  welfare  of  gods  and  men.

Strenuous  effort  won  for  me  perseverance  that  never
flagged  ;  there  arose  in  me  mindfulness  that  knew  no
distraction,  perfect  tranquillity  of  body,  stedfastness  of
mind  that  never  wavered.  Divested  of  pleasures  of
sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  I
entered  on,  and  abode  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its
zest  and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness


1  I.e.  by  Kasina  meditations  on  white  and  black,  respectively.
Cf.  Sutta  No.  77, — M.  II,  14-1 5.


M.  i.  22.


OF  BRAVING  FEARS


15


but  not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  As
I  rose  above  reasoning  and  reflection,  1  entered  on,
and  abode  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy  [22]  with  all  its  zest
and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  rapt  concentration,
above  all  observation  and  reflection,  a  state  whereby
the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity  reigns  within.
By  shedding  the  emotion  of  zest,  I  entered  on,  and
abode  in,  the  Third  Ecstasy,  with  its  poised  equanimity,
mindful  and  self-possessed,  feeling  in  my  frame  the
satisfaction  of  which  the  Noble  say  that  poise  and
mindfulness  bring  abiding  satisfaction.  By  putting
from  me  both  satisfaction  and  dissatisfaction,  and  by
shedding  the  joys  and  sorrows  I  used  to  feel,  I  entered
on,  and  abode  in,  the  Fourth  Ecstasy, — the  state  that,
knowingneithersatisfaction  nor  dissatisfaction, is  thecon-
summate  purity  of  poised  equanimity  and  mindfulness.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified,
clean  and  cleansed  of  things  impure,  tempered  and  apt
to  serve,  stablished  and  immutable, — it  was  thus  that  I
applied  my  heart  to  the  knowledge  which  recalled  my
earlier  existences.  I  called  to  mind  my  divers  exist¬
ences  in  the  past, — a  single  birth,  then  two  .  .  .
[ and  so  on  lo]  ...  a  hundred  thousand  births,
many  an  teon  of  disintegration  of  the  world,  many
an  aeon  of  its  redintegration,  and  again  many  an
aeon  both  of  its  disintegration  and  of  its  redintegration.
In  this  or  that  former  existence,  I  remembered,
such  and  such  was  my  name,  my  sept,  my  class,  my
diet,  my  joys  and  sorrows,  and  my  term  of  life.
When  I  passed  thence,  I  came  by  such  and  such
subsequent  existence,  wherein  such  and  such  was  my
name  and  so  forth.  Thence  I  passed  to  my  life  here.
Thus  did  I  call  to  mind  my  divers  existences  of  the
past  in  all  their  details  and  features. — This,  brahmin,
was  the  first  knowledge  attained  by  me,  in  the  first
watch  of  that  night,1 — ignorance  dispelled  and  know-

1  According  to  the  Vinaya  version  (S.B.E.  XIII,  75),  only  the
Chain  of  Causation  occupied  the  Buddha’s  mind  during  all  three
watches  of  the  seventh  night  after  attaining  Buadhahood.
According,  however,  to  the  (later)  Jataka  (I,  75),  this  night  was


i6


IV.  BHAYA-BHERAVA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  23.


ledge  won,  darkness  dispelled  and  illumination  won,  as
befitted  my  strenuous  and  ardent  life,  purged  of  self.

That  same  stedfast  heart  I  now  applied  to  knowledge
of  the  passage  hence,  and  re-appearance  elsewhere,  of
other  beings.  With  the  Eye  Celestial,  which  is  pure
and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  I  saw  beings  in  the
act  of  passing  hence  and  of  re-appearing  elsewhere,—
beings  high  and  low,  fair  or  foul  to  view,  in  bliss  or
woe  ;  I  saw  them  all  faring  according  to  their  past.
Here  were  beings  given  over  to  evil  in  act  word  and
thought,  who  decried  the  Noble  and  had  a  wrong
outlook  and  became  what  results  from  such  wrong  out¬
look  ; — these,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,
made  their  appearance  in  states  of  suffering,  misery
and  tribulation  and  in  purgatory.  Here  again  were
beings  given  to  good  in  act  [23]  word  and  thought,
who  did  not  decry  the  Noble,  who  had  the  right  out¬
look  and  became  what  results  from  right  outlook  ;—
these,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  made  their
appearance  in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven.  All  this  did
I  see  with  the  Eye  Celestial ;  and  this,  brahmin,  was  the
second  knowledge  attained  by  me,  in  the  second  watch
of  that  night, — ignorance  dispelled  and  knowledge
won,  darkness  dispelled  and  illumination  won,  as  be¬
fitted  my  strenuous  and  ardent  life,  purged  of  self.

That  same  stedfast  heart  I  next  applied  to  know¬
ledge  of  the  eradication  of  Cankers.  I  comprehended,
aright  and  to  the  full,  Ill,  the  origin  of  Ill,  the  cessation
of  Ill,  and  the  course  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  Ill.
I  comprehended,  aright  and  to  the  full,  what  the
Cankers  were,  with  their  origin,  cessation,  and  the
course  that  leads  to  their  cessation.  When  I  knew
this  and  when  I  saw  this,  then  my  heart  was  delivered


the  actual'  night  of  attaining  Buddhahood  and  the  first  two
watches  of  this  night  were  absorbed  (as  in  this  Sutta)  by  the
p  u b b e-n i  v a s a-h ana  and  the  d i b b a-c a k k h u-h ana  of  this
and  the  next  paragraph.  In  the  Jataka  version  the  third  watch
alone  is  reserved  for  the  Chain  of  Causation, — here  replaced  (as
at  I  Dlgha  93)  by  the  Four  Noble  Truths  and  by  a  parallel
series  of  four  truths  concerning  the  three  Cankers.


llild


Bild  2y


Blick  auf  das  Amne-kor-Gebirge.

Aufgcnommcn  von  «\  744—  Blatt  17.


Akin


1  A  44S0


1


Blick  auf  das  S.O.-Ende  des  Oring-nor.

Aufgenommen  v.  I.agcr  XXXIII.  Blatt  33.


I'aB  A  uSa


Ok

I


Ar


Bild  30


Blick  auf  das  S.O-  Hnde  des  Oring-nOr.

Aufgenommcn  v.  B.  S«-ih.  Blatt  «.


M.  i.  24.


OF  BRAVING  FEARS


from  the  Canker  of  sensuous  pleasure,  from  the  Canker
of  continuing  existence,  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignor¬
ance  ;  and  to  me  thus  delivered  came  the  knowledge
of  my  Deliverance  in  the  conviction  —  Rebirth  is  no
more  ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  my  task  is  done  ;
and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.
This,  Brahmin,  was  the  third  knowledge  attained  by  me,
in  the  third  watch  of  that  night. — ignorance  dispelled
and  knowledge  won,  darkness  dispelled  and  illumina¬
tion  won,  as  befitted  my  strenuous  and  ardent  life,
purged  of  self.

Yet  it  may  be,  brahmin,  that  you  imagine  that  even
to-day  the  recluse  Gotama  is  not  void  of  passion,  hate
and  delusion,  and  therefore  takes  to  living  in  the  wilds
and  depths  of  the  forest,  far  from  the  haunts  of  men.
Not  so.  I  live  the  solitary  life  because  therein  I  see
a  twofold  good ; — I  see  my  own  well-being  here  and
now,  and  I  have  compassion  on  them  that  come  after.

Compassion  indeed,  Gotama,  for  them  that  come
after, — [24]  befitting  the  Arahat  all-enlightened!
Excellent,  Gotama  ;  excellent!  It  is  just  as  if  a  man
should  set  upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or
reveal  what  was  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had

fone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp  into
arkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see  the
things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a  figure,  has  the
reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine  clear.  I  come  to
Gotama  as  my  refuge  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his
Confraternity  ;  I  ask  him  to  accept  me  as  a  follower
who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this  day  on¬
ward  while  life  shall  last.


2


Bilder  Nr.  31 — 69

Aufgenommcn  zwischcn  dem

Kiang-tschu  und  Yach-tschu


Zum  III.  Teil  des  Kartenwerkes

NORDOST-TIBET


V.  ANANGANA-SUTTA.

OF  BLEMISHES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  $5riputta  addressed  the
Almsmen  as  follows  : —

There  are  four  types  of  individuals  in  the  world  : —
(i.)  The  blemished  man  who  does  not  realize  aright  the
blemish  within  him  ;  (ii.)  the  blemished  man  who  does
realize  it  aright ;  (iii.)  the  unblemished  man  who  does
not  realize  aright  that  he  is  unblemished  within  ;  and
(iv.)  the  unblemished  man  who  does  realize  it  aright.
In  the  first  pair — of  the  blemished— the  second  ranks
high  and  the  first  low  ;  and  similarly  [25]  in  the  second
pair  the  second  ranks  high  and  the  first  low.

Hereupon  the  reverend  Maha-Moggallana  asked
Sariputta  what  was  the  cause  and  what  were  the  con¬
ditions  whereby  one  of  the  two  with  blemishes,  and
one  of  the  two  without  blemishes,  was  ranked  high
and  the  other  low.

Reverend  sir,  answered  SSriputta,  it  is  to  be  expected
of  the  man  who  is  blemished  but  does  not  realize  it,
that  he  will  not  develop  will-power,  will  not  exert  him¬
self  nor  work  to  shed  his  blemishes ;  he  will  die  with
heart  corrupt  and  with  his  blemishes  still  upon  him,  a
prey  to  passion,  hate  and  delusion.  It  is  just  like  a  brass
bowl  brought  home  from  bazaar  or  stithy  covered
with  dust  and  dirt,  never  to  be  used  or  scoured  by  its
owners,  but  just  flung  aside  among  the  dust.  Pray,
would  such  a  bowl  grow  fouler  and  fouler  till  it  became
filthy  ? — Yes,  sir. — -Just  in  the  same  way  the  man  with
blemishes  which  he  does  not  realize  aright,  may  be
expected  not  to  develop  will-power  .  .  .  delusion.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  expected  of  the  man
with  blemishes  which  he  does  realize  aright,  that  he
will  develop  will-power,  will  exert  himself,  will  work  to

18


M.  i.  26.


OF  BLEMISHES.


19


shed  his  blemishes,  and  will  die  with  heart  uncorrupt
and  without  blemish,  quit  of  passion,  hate  and  delusion.
It  is  just  like  a  brass  bowl  brought  home  from  bazaar
or  stithy  covered  with  dust  and  dirt,  to  be  used  and
scoured  by  its  owners  and  not  to  be  flung  aside  among
the  dust.  [26]  Pray,  would  such  a  bowl  grow  cleaner
and  cleaner  till  it  became  spotless  ? — Yes,  sir. — Just  in
the  same  way  the  man  with  blemishes  which  he  realizes
aright,  may  be  expected  to  develop  will-power  .  .  .
quit  of  passion,  hate  and  delusion.

Of  the  man  who  is  without  blemish  but  does  not
realize  it  aright,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  his  mind  will
dwell  on  seductive  ideas  and  that  in  consequence
passion  will  degrade  his  heart ;  he  will  die  with  heart
corrupt  and  with  his  blemishes  still  upon  him,  a  prey  to
passion,  hate  and  delusion.  It  is  just  like  a  brass
bowl  brought  home  from  bazaar  or  stithy  clean  and
bright,  never  to  be  used  or  scoured  by  its  owners  but
just  flung  aside  among  the  dust.  Pray,  would  such  a
bowl  grow  fouler  and  fouler  till  it  became  filthy  ? —
Yes,  sir. — Just  in  the  same  way  the  man  who  is  with¬
out  blemish  but  does  not  recognize  it  aright,  may  be
expected  to  let  his  mind  dwell  on  seductive  ideas  and
in  consequence  to  have  his  heart  degraded  by  passion,
so  that  he  will  die  with  heart  corrupt  and  with  his
blemishes  still  upon  him,  a  prey  to  passion,  hate  and
delusion.

Lastly,  it  is  to  be  expected  of  the  man  without
blemish  who  realizes  it  aright,  that  his  mind  will  not
dwell  on  seductive  ideas,  and  therefore  that  passion
will  not  degrade  his  heart,  and  that  he  will  die  with
heart  uncorrupt  and  without  blemish,  quit  of  passion,
hate,  and  delusion.  1 1  is  just  like  a  brass  bowl  brought
home  from  bazaar  or  stithy  clean  and  bright,  to  be  used
and  scoured  by  its  owners  and  not  to  be  flung  aside
among  the  dust.  Pray,  would  such  a  bowl  grow
cleaner  and  cleaner  till  it  became  spotless  ? — Yes,  sir.
— Just  in  the  same  way  it  is  to  be  expected  of  the  man
without  blemish  who  realizes  it  aright,  that  his  mind
will  not  dwell  .  .  .  quit  of  passion,  hate,  and  delusion.


20


V.  ANANGAIjJA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  27.


This,  reverend  Moggallana,  [27]  is  the  cause  and
these  are  the  conditions  whereby  one  of  the  two  with
blemishes,  and  one  of  the  two  without  blemishes,  is
ranked  high  and  the  other  low.

Blemish  is  simply  called  blemish,  reverend  sir  (said
Moggallana).  What  does  the  term  connote  ?

Blemish,  reverend  sir,  connotes  the  domain  of  bad
and  wrong  desires.  The  case  may  arise  of  an  Alms¬
man  who  conceives  the  desire  that,  should  he  commit
an  offence,  his  fellows  should  not  know  of  it ;  and  who,
when  they  do  come  to  know  of  it,  waxes  angry  and
wroth  at  their  knowing  it.  This  anger  and  dissatisfac¬
tion  are  both  blemishes.

Or  he  may  conceive  the  desire  that,  should  he
commit  an  offence,  his  fellows  should  reprove  him  in
private  and  not  in  conclave  ;  and  when  they  reprove
him  in  conclave,  he  waxes  angry  and  wroth  at  their
doing  so.  This  anger  and  dissatisfaction  are  both
blemishes.

Or  he  may  conceive  the  idea  that,  should  he  commit
an  offence,  he  may  be  reproved  by  an  equal  and  not  by
one  on  an  inequality  with  him ;  and  when  reproof  comes
from  one  not  his  equal,  he  waxes  angry  and  wroth.
This  anger  and  dissatisfaction  are  both  blemishes.

Or  he  may  conceive  the  desire  that  the  Master
should  expound  the  Doctrine  to  the  Confraternity
through  a  series  of  questions  addressed  to  him  alone  and
to  no  other  Almsman  ;  and,  if  the  questions  are  ad¬
dressed  not  to  him  but  to  another,  [28]  he  waxes  angry
and  wroth  at  being  passed  over.  This  anger  and  dis¬
satisfaction  are  both  blemishes.

Blemishes  too  are  his  anger  and  dissatisfaction  if  he
is  disappointed  in  the  desire —

to  be  the  centre  figure — he  and  no  other — to
lead  a  train  of  Almsmen  into  the  village  for  alms ;

to  be  given,  after  the  meal,  the  principal  seat,
the  water  first  (to  handsel  the  donation,  as  senior),
and  the  best  of  everything  going  ;
to  return  thanks  after  the  meal ;
to  be  the  preacher  in  the  pleasaunce  to  the


Mohke-Cjcbirje


Bild  31


*u  Bild  3t


IhnnA  it  1-Krllt


Blick  auf  das  Kaisej-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgcnommcn  von  T-'  9“— 11”.  Blatt  32.


M.  i.  29.


OF  BLEMISHES.


21


Almsmen,  [29]  or  to  the  Almswomen,  or  to  the
laymen,  or  to  the  lay-women  ;

to  be  the  sole  recipient — he  and  no  other — of
the  other  Almsmen’s  respect  and  reverence,  de¬
votion  and  worship ;

to  have  to  himself  the  pick  of  robes,  [30]  alms,
lodging,  and  medicaments.

—  Blemish,  reverend  sir,  connotes  the  domain  of
all  these  bad  and  wrong  desires.  If  they  are  seen,
and  heard,  to  be  immanent,  in  an  Almsman,  then —
albeit  his  abode  be  in  the  depths  of  the  forest,  albeit
he  begs  his  food  from  door  to  door  just  as  the  houses
come,  and  is  coarsely  clad  in  rags  from  the  dust-heap
— not  unto  him  do  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  shew
respect  and  reverence,  devotion  and  worship.  And
why  ? — Because  bad  and  wrong  desires  are  seen  and
heard  to  be  immanent  in  him.  It  is  just  as  if  a  brass
bowl,  clean  and  bright,  were  brought  home  from
bazaar  or  stithy  and  were  first  filled  by  its  owners  with
a  dead  snake  or  a  dead  dog  or  human  carrion,  and
then  taken  back  to  the  bazaar  enclosed  within  a  second
bowl,  making  people  wonder  what  wonderful  treasure
was  here,  until,  on  opening  it  and  looking  in,  they
were  filled  at  the  sight  with  such  repugnance  and
loathing  and  disgust  as  to  banish  appetite  from  the
hungry,  let  alone  from  those  who  had  already  fed  ;
even  so,  sir,  if  these  bad  and  wrong  desires  are  seen,  or
heard,  to  be  immanent  in  a  Brother,  then — albeit  .  .  .
[81]  immanent  in  him.

But  if  these  bad  and  wrong  desires  are  seen,  and
heard,  to  have  been  put  from  him  by  an  Almsman,
then — albeit  he  lives  on  the  outskirts  of  a  village  and
accepts  invitations  to  meals  and  is  clad  in  lay  attire —
yet  unto  him  do  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  shew
respect  and  reverence,  devotion  and  worship.  And
why  ? — Because  he  has  put  from  him  bad  and  wrong
desires.  It  is  just  as  if  a  brass  bowl,  clean  and  bright,
were  brought  home  from  bazaar  or  stithy,  and  its
owners  were  first  to  fill  it  with  the  choicest  boiled  rice
of  picked  varieties  together  with  divers  sauces  and


22


V.  ANANGANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  32.


curries,  and  were  then  to  hie  back  to  the  bazaar  with  it
enclosed  within  a  second  bowl,  making  people  wonder
what  wonderful  treasure  was  here,  until,  on  opening  it
and  looking  in,  they  were  filled  at  the  sight  with  such
pleasure  and  delight  as  to  give  appetite  to  those  who
had  already  fed,  let  alone  the  hungry; — even  so,  sir,  if
these  bad  and  wrong  desires  are  seen,  and  heard,  to
have  been  put  from  him  by  an  Almsman,  then — albeit
he  lives  .  .  .  and  wrong  desires.

At  this  point  the  reverend  Mahil-Moggallana
remarked  to  Sariputta  that  an  illustration  had
occurred  to  him  and,  on  being  invited  to  cite  it,
said: — Early  one  morning,  when  I  was  staying
once  on  the  heights  that  encircle  Rajagaha,  I  went
for  alms  into  the  city,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in
hand,  at  a  time  when  Samiti,  the  waggon-builder,
was  shaping  a  felloe ;  and  by  him  there  was
standing  Pandu-putta  the  Mendicant  (Sjlvika) — him¬
self  come  of  a  waggon-building  stock  in  bygone  days
— in  whom  arose  the  wish  that  Samiti  might  shape  the
felloe  without  crook  or  twist  or  blemish,  so  that,  free
from  crook,  twist  and  blemish,  the  felloe  might  turn
out  clean  and  of  the  best ;  [32]  and  while  this  thought
was  passing  through  the  mind  of  Pandu-putta,  the  old
waggon-builder,  all  the  time  Samiti  was  shaping  away
crook,  twist  and  blemish.  At  last  Pandu-putta  in  his
joy  burst  out  with  the  joyous  cry — His  heart,  me-
thinks,  knows  my  heart,  as  he  shapes  that  felloe!
Even  so  is  it  here.  First,  take  first  those  persons
who,  not  for  their  belief  but  for  a  livelihood  and  with¬
out  believing,  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as
Pilgrims, — cunning  and  deceitful  tricksters,  vain  and
puffed-up,  raucous  babblers  who  keep  no  watch  over
the  portals  of  sense,  intemperate  in  their  eating,  devoid
of  vigilance,  taking  no  thought  of  their  vocation  nor
keen  for  its  discipline,  acquisitive  and  with  only  a  loose
grip  of  truth,  foremost  in  backsliding  and  intolerant  of
Renunciation’s  yoke,  indolent  and  slack,  bewildered  and
flustered,  unstable  and  wandering,  witless  and  drivel¬
ling.— Sariputta’s  heart,  methinks,  knows  the  heart  of


Bild  32

Ko  Am  Ilivan-kifa-Kwtc


In  der  Kalanam-nor-Ebene.

Aufycnommen  v.  Layer  XXXVI.  Blau  32.


Bild  33


Aufstieg  zum  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgenomraen  v.  939 — *».  Blau  32.


M.  i.  33.


OF  BLEMISHES.


23


all  these  persons  and  is  at  work  in  his  exposition  to
shape  them  aright.  Take  next  those  young  men
who,  for  beliefs  sake,  go  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness  as  Pilgrims, — in  whom  these  shortcomings  find  no
place  but  only  their  counterparts  in  virtue — ,  these,  as
they  hear  the  reverend  Sariputta’s  exposition  drink  it
in,  methinks,  and  feed  upon  it,  methinks,  with  words
of  thanksgiving  from  grateful  hearts.  Right  well  has
Sariputta  raised  up  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  from
what  is  wrong  and  established  them  in  what  is  right.
It  is  just  as  if,  after  the  bath,  a  woman  or  a  lad  young
and  fond  of  finery  were  to  be  given  a  chaplet  of  lotuses
or  jasmine  or  other  blossoms  and  were  to  clutch  it
eagerly  with  both  hands  and  set  it  gladly  on  the  brow,
— even  so  do  these  young  men  who,  for  beliefs  sake,
go  forth  .  .  .  established  them  in  what  is  right.

In  such  wise  did  that  noble  pair  of  Arahats  rejoice
together  in  what  each  had  heard  the  other  say  so  well.


VI.  AKANKHEYYA-SUTTA.

OF  YEARNINGS.

[33]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove,  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows  : —

Let  your  lives  conform  to  the  codes  of  Virtue  and  of
Obligations ;  let  your  lives  be  restrained  by  the
restraint  of  the  Obligations  and  ordered  on  the  plane
of  right  behaviour;  be  scrupulous  in  observing  the
precepts  of  conduct,  seeing  peril  in  small  offendings.

Should  an  Almsman  yearn  to  be  dear  to  his  fellows
in  the  higher  life  and  beloved  by  them,  revered  and
famed  among  them, — let  him  fulfil  the  whole  code  of
virtue,  calm  his  heart  within  him,  cultivating  the
Ecstasies,  fostering  Insight,  and  perfecting  himself  in
inward  detachment.  Let  him  do  this  too,  if  his  yearn¬
ing  is  either  that  he  may  be  given  robes,  food,  lodging
and  medicaments ; — or  that  the  donors  of  such  gifts  to


24


VI.  AKANKHEYYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  34-


him  may  reap  a  rich  reward  and  blessing  therefrom  ; —
or  that  such  of  his  own  kith  and  kin  departed  in  the
faith  who  keep  him  in  mind,  may  reap  a  rich  reward
and  blessing  therefrom  ; — or  that  he  may  overcome,
and  not  be  overcome  by,  discontent  and  sensuality,  and
fear  and  dread ; — or  that,  without  toil  and  travail,  he
may  have  fruition  of  the  Four  Ecstasies  with  their
illumination  and  the  satisfaction  they  bring  here  and
now  ; — or  that  he  may  enter  on  and  abide  in  physical
experience  of  those  excellent  Deliverances1  which
transcend  visible  form  and  are  formless  ;  [84] — or  that,
by  destroying  the  (first)  three  Bonds,  he  may  enter  on
conversion’s  first  stage,  secure  thenceforth  against
rebirth  in  any  state  of  woe  and  assured  of  ultimate
Enlightenment ; — or  that,  by  destroying  the  three  Bonds
and  reducing  _to  small  dimensions  passion,  hate  and
delusion,  he  may  enter  on  conversion’s  second  stage
and  have  to  return  but  once  more  to  this  world  in
order  to  make  an  end  of  Ill; — or  that,  by  destroying
all  five  Bonds  which  bind  him  to  this  lower  world,  he
may  be  translated  elsewhere  (to  the  higher  Brahma
world),  there  to  pass  utterly  away  without  any  return
thence  ; — or  that  it  may  be  his  to  enjoy  in  turn  each  and
every  form  of  psychic  power, — from  being  one  to
become  manifold,  from  being  manifold  to  become  one,
to  be  visible  or  invisible,  to  pass  at  will  through  wall
or  fence  or  hill  as  if  through  air  ;  to  pass  in  and  out  of
the  solid  earth  as  if  it  were  water,  to  walk  on  the
water’s  unbroken  surface  as  if  it  were  the  solid  earth,
to  glide  in  state  through  the  air  like  a  bird  on  the
wing,  to  touch  and  to  handle  the  moon  and  sun  in
their  power  and  might,  and  to  extend  the  sovereignty
of  his  body  right  up  to  the  Brahma  world ; — or  that,
with  the  Ear  Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses
the  ear  of  men,  he  may  hear  both  heavenly  and  human
sounds,  sounds  near  and  sounds  afar ; — or  that  he  may
comprehend  with  his  own  heart  the  hearts  of  other
creatures  and  of  other  men  so  as  to  know  them  for  just


1  See  Dialogues  II,  119.


M.  i.  35.


OF  YEARNINGS.


25


what  they  are, — filled  with  passion  or  free  from  passion,
hating  or  free  from  hate,  filled  with  delusion  or  free
therefrom,  focussed  or  wandering,  large-minded  or
small-minded,  inferior  or  superior,  stedfast  [35]  or
unstedfast,  Delivered  or  lacking  Deliverance ; — or
that  he  may  recall  to  mind  his  divers  existences  in  the
past, — a  single  birth,  then  two  .  .  .  [and  so  on  to]  .  .  .
a  hundred  thousand  births,  many  an  aeon  of  disintegra¬
tion  of  the  world,  many  an  aeon  of  its  redintegration,
and  again  many  an  aeon  both  of  its  disintegration  and
of  its  redintegration, — remembering,  in  every  detail
and  feature,  that  in  this  or  that  former  existence  such
and  such  was  his  name,  his  sept,  his  class,  his  diet,  his
joys  and  sorrows,  and  his  term  of  life,  ere,  passing
thence,  he  came  by  such  and  such  subsequent  exist¬
ence,  wherein  such  and  such  was  his  name  and  so
forth,  right  up  to  the  time  when  he  passed  to  his  present
life  here ; — or  that  with  the  Eye  Celestial,  which
is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  he  may  see
creatures  in  the  act  of  passing  hence  and  re-appearing
elsewhere, — creatures  high  and  low,  fair  or  foul  to
view,  in  bliss  or  woe,  all  faring  according  to  their  past
(etc.  as  in  Suita  No.  4)  ; — or  that,  by  eradicating  the
Cankers,  he.  may — here  and  now,  of  and  by  himself —
comprehend,  realize,  enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the
Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  which  knows  no
Cankers.

[36]  It  was  to  this  intent  that  I  have  said : — '  Let
your  lives  conform  to  the  codes  of  Virtue  and  of  Obliga¬
tions  ;  let  your  lives  be  restrained  by  the  restraint  of
the  Obligations  and  ordered  on  the  plane  of  right
behaviour  ;  be  scrupulous  in  observing  tne  precepts  of
conduct,  seeing  peril  in  small  ofiendings.’

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


Bild  34


Im  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgenommen  v.  Am  *  4900.  tots — t2*>.  Blatt  32.


BiKt  36


Im  Kaiser -Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Absticg  von  Am  *  4900-  Hiatt  32.


Bild  33


Im  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgenommcn  v.  Am  »  4900.  »os‘  12”  Blatt  32.


xa  -r  §OC©


Bild  37

xv  Ko


Im  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge  (Blick  auf  Pals  E.

Aufgenomtncn  v.  Lager  XXW'II.  Blau  32.


26


VII.  vatthOpama-sutta.


M.  i.  37.


VII.  VATTHUPAMA-SUTTA.

ON  FULLING.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatthl  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows  : —

Even  as  a  foul  and  dirty  piece  of  cloth,  if  dipped  by
the  fuller  in  blue,  yellow,  red,  or  pink  dye,  would  take
the  dye  badly  and  not  come  out  a  good  colour,  and
that  because  of  the  cloth's  impurity, — even  so,
Brethren,  when  a  man’s  heart  is  impure,  woe  must  be
expected  to  ensue  ;  and,  conversely,  just  as  cloth  in  the
fuller’s  hands  takes  the  dye  well  if  it  be  pure  and  clean,
so,  when  a  man’s  heart  is  pure,  bliss  may  be  expected
to  ensue.

Now,  what  are  the  heart’s  impurities  ? — They  are
avarice  and  covetise,  malevolence,  anger,  malice,
rivalry,  jealousy,  grudging,  envy,  hypocrisy,  deceit,
imperviousness,  outcry,  pride,  arrogance,  inflation,  and
[37]  indolence.  Recognizing  that  each  in  turn  of  these
is  an  impurity  of  the  heart,  an  Almsman  puts  them
from  him ;  and  when  at  last  he  has  put  them  all  from
him,  he  comes  to  full  belief  in  the  Enlightened  One
and  to  recognition  of  him  as  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  walking  by  knowledge,  blessed,  under¬
standing  all  worlds,  the  matchless  tamer  of  the  human
heart,  teacher  of  gods  and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlighten¬
ment  ;  he  comes  to  full  belief  in  the  Doctrine  and  to
recognition  of  it  as  having  been  excellently  expounded
by  the  Lord,  as  being  here  and  now  and  immediate,
with  a  welcome  to  all  and  with  salvation  for  all,  to  be
comprehended  of  each  man  of  understanding;  he
comes  to  belief  in  the  Lord’s  Confraternity  and  to
recognition  of  it  as  schooled  aright  and  as  walking  up¬
rightly,  trained  in  all  propriety  and  in  duty,  the
Brotherhood  of  the  conversion  with  its  four  pairs
making  up  the  eight  classes  of  the  converted,1  right

1  The  Confraternity — which,  of  course,  does  not  include  the
laity — is  here  divided  into  eight  classes,  each  of  the  Four  Paths


M.  i.  38.


ON  FULLING.


27


worthy  to  receive  alms,  hospitality,  oblations  and
reverence,  unrivalled  throughout  the  world  as  the  field
for  garnering  merit.  To  the  uttermost,  every  form  of
self-seeking  is  renounced,  spewed  out,  discharged,  dis¬
carded  and  abandoned.  Realizing  that  he  has  come
to  full  belief  in  the  Enlightened  One — and  in  his
Doctrine — and  in  his  Confraternity, — the  Brother
reaches  fruition  of  spiritual  welfare  and  of  its  causes
together  with  the  gladness  attendant  thereon  ;  from
such  gladness  is  born  zest,  bringing  tranquillity  to  the
body ;  with  his  body  now  tranquil,  he  experiences
satisfaction,  wherein  he  finds  peace  for  his  heart.
[38]  An  Almsman  who  has  reached  this  pitch  in  virtue,
character  and  lore,  may,  without  harm  or  hurt,  indulge
in  the  choicest  rice  with  all  manner  of  sauces  and  curries.
Just  as  a  foul  and  filthy  cloth,  if  plunged  in  clearwater,
becomes  pure  and  clean ;  and  just  as  silver,  if  passed
through  the  furnace,  becomes  pure  and  clean ; — even
so  can  such  an  Almsman  eat  as  he  will  without  harm
or  hurt.

With  radiant  thoughts  of  love — of  compassion — of
sympathy — and  of  poise — his  mind  pervades  each
of  the  world’s  four  quarters, — above,  below,  across,
everywhere  ;  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  wide
world  is  pervaded  by  the  radiant  thoughts  of  a  mind
all-embracing,  vast,  and  boundless,  in  which  no  hate
dwells  nor  ill-will.

Thus  much  is  so,  says  he  to  himself ;  there  is  a
lower  and  there  is  yet  a  higher  stage ;  Deliverance1
lies  beyond  this  realm  of  consciousness.  When  he
knows  and  sees  this,  his  heart  is  delivered  from  the
Cankers  of  sensuous  pleasure,  of  continuing  existence,
of  ignorance ;  and  to  him  thus  Delivered  comes  know¬
ledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction  : —  Rebirth


in  conversion  being  subdivided  into  entrants  and  adepts  (magga
and  phala).

1  Bu.  interprets  these  four  stages  as  the  recognition  succes¬
sively  of  the  Four  Noble  Truths.  In  a  separate  category,  ex¬
tirpation  of  the  Cankers — for  the  Arahat  here,  as  for  the  Buddha
himself  in  Sutta  No.  4— precedes  triumphant  Deliverance.


28


VII.  VATTHUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  .  39


is  no  more ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my  task  is
done ;  there  is  now  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.
[89] — Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to  be  inly  washen.

Now  at  this  time  there  was  sitting  close  by  the
brahmin  Sundarika-Bharadvaja  who  asked  whether
the  Lord  went  to  the  river  Bahuka  to  bathe.

What  boots  the  river  Bahuka,  brahmin  ?  What  can
it  do  ?

It  is  reputed  to  cleanse1  and  give  merit ;  many  have
their  burthen  of  evil  borne  away  in  its  waters.

Thereupon,  the  Lord  addressed  the  brahmin  in
these  lines : —

In  Bahuka ,2  at  Adhikdkka  s  ghat,

Gaya,  Sund&rika ,  Sardssati,

Bahumati,  Payaga , — there  the  fool

may  bathe  and  bathe ,  yet  never  Cleanse  his  Heart.

Of  what  avail  are  all  these  ghdts  and  streams  ?

— They  cleanse  not  heart  or  hand  of  guilt.

For  him  whose  heart  is  Cleansed,  each  day  is  blest,
each  day  is  hallowed ;  pure  of  heart  and  mind,
he  hallows  each  new  day  with  vows  renewed.

So  hither,  brahmin ,  come  and  Bathe  as  I:

Love  all  that  lives,  speak  truth ,  slay  not  nor  steal,
no  niggard  be  but  dwell  in  faith,  and  then —
why  seek  Gaya  ? — Your  well  at  home  's  Gaya!

Hereupon  the  brahmin  said  to  the  Lord  : — Excellent,
Gotama;  excellent!  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  should  set
upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or  reveal  what
had  been  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had  gone
astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp  into  dark¬
ness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see  the
things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a  figure,  has  the
reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine  clear.  I  come  to
Gotama  as  my  refuge  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his


1  Reading  lokbyas0,  with  Bu.

2  Bu.  remarks  that,  while  BahukS,  Sundirika,  Sdrassati,  and
Bahumati  are  rivers,  the  rest  are  t  i  1 1  h  a  s  only,  or  ghats,  on  the
Ganges.


—  3«*e


AnMirgt.il


Bild  59


Ko  Ova4a

A  *?}"  SdiAll«5


A.


Am


lm  Kaiser-W  ilhelm-Gebirge.
Aufgenommen  v.  *  4 *»J5.  *»°  «*'  Ulan


BiUl  ,;S


lm  Kaiser-W  ilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgenommen  oberhfll^  ^  ^XX\  II,  Btiti  3-


M.  i.  40.


ON  FULLING.


29


Confraternity.  I  ask  him  to  admit  me  as  a  Pilgrim  in
his  train  and  to  confirm  me  therein  !

Admitted  and  confirmed  accordingly,  the  reverend
BhSradvaja  was  not  long  [40]  before,  dwelling  alone
and  aloof,  strenuous,  ardent  and  purged  of  self,  he  won
the  prize  in  quest  of  which  young  men1  go  forth  from
home  to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims,  that  prize  of  prizes
which  crowns  the  highest  life, — even  this  did  he  think
out  and  realize  for  himself,  enter  on,  and  abide  in,  here
and  now  ;  and  to  him  came  the  conviction  that  for  him
rebirth  was  now  no  more  ;  that  he  had  lived  the
highest  life  ;  that  his  task  was  done ;  and  that  now  for
him  there  was  no  more  of  what  he  had  been.  Thus
the  reverend  Bharadvilja  too  was  numbered  among
the  Arahats.


VIII.  SALLEKHA-SUTTA.

OF  EXPUNGING.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in.  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Maha-Cunda,  rising  towards
evening  from  his  meditations,  came  to  the  Lord,
saluted  him,  and  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  saying —
In  order  to  get  quit  and  rid  of  the  various  false  views
current  about  self  and  the  universe,8  should  an  Alms¬
man  start  by  taking  thought  of  them  ?

The  way,  Cunda,  to  get  quit  and  rid  of  those  false
views  and  of  the  domains  in  which  they  arise  and  crop  up
and  obtain,  is  by  seeing  with  right  comprehension  that
there  is  no  '  mine,’  no  ‘  this  is  I,’  no  ‘  this  is  my  self.’

The  case  may  arise  of  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of
pleasures  of  sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  con-

1  Kulaputta  (translated  sts.  as  clansmen)  are  of  two  kinds,
according  to  Bu. — scions  of  noble  families  and  those  who  behave
and  act  as  such.  The  latter  are  doubtless  grafted  on  to  the
earlier  brahminical  idea.

*  For  a  detailed  list  of  these  speculative  views  see  Dialogues
I,  26  and  III,  129.


3°


VIII.  SALLEKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  41.


sciousness,  has  entered  on,  and  abides  in,  the  First
Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of
inward  solitude  but  not  divorced  from  observation  and
reflection.  He  may  think  that  expunging  is  his.  But,
in  the  Rule  of  him  that  is  Noble,  the  Ecstasies  are  called
not  expungings  but  states  of  satisfaction  here  and  now.

[41]  The  case  may  arise  of  an  Almsman  who,
rising  above  observation  and  reasoning,  has  entered
on,  and  abides  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest
and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  rapt  concentration
above  all  observation  and  reflection,  a  state  whereby
the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity  reigns  within.
He  may  think  .  .  .  here  and  now.  The  case  may
arise  of  an  Almsman  who,  by  shedding  the  emotion  of
zest,  has  entered  on,  and  abides  in,  the  Third  Ecstasy,
with  its  poised  equanimity,  mindful  and  alive  to  every¬
thing,  feeling  in  his  frame  the  satisfaction  of  which  the
Noble  say  that  poise  and  mindfulness  bring  abiding
satisfaction.  He  may  think  .  .  .  here  and  now.  The
case  may  arise  of  an  Almsman  who,  putting  from  him
both  satisfaction  and  dissatisfaction,  and  by  shedding
the  joys  and  sorrows  he  used  to  feel,  has  entered  on,
and  abides  in,  the  Fourth  Ecstasy, — the  state  that
knows  neither  the  pleasant  nor  the  unpleasant,  the
clarity  that  comes  of  poised  equanimity  and  alert  mind¬
fulness.  He  may  think  .  .  .  here  and  now.  The
case  may  arise  of  a  Brother  who — by  passing  alto¬
gether  beyond  perception  of  things  visible  and  by
ceasing  to  perceive  sense-reactions  and  by  not  taking
thought  of  distinctions — has  attained  to  the  idea  of
Infinity  of  Space  and  has  entered  on  and  abides  in
that  plane  of  thought.  He  may  think  .  .  .  here  and
now.  The  like  thought  may  come  too  at  each  stage  to
the  Almsman  who,  passing  altogether  beyond  that
plane,  has  successively  come  to  the  ideas  of  Infinity
of  Mind — of  Naught — of  Neither -perception -nor
imperception ;  he  may  successively  think  that  ex¬
punging  is  now  his.  [42]  But,  in  the  Rule  of  him  that
is  Noble,  each  of  these  planes  is  called  not  an  ex¬
punging  but  an  excellent  state.


Bild  40


Kf  /r  4- 4830  Kt&ni>t*ehu  Zu  —  Kuskj-r.ilS  A  I  52x0  Ark

I  III  I  I


Blick  auf  das  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgcnommen  v.  Lager  XXXVIII.  Blau  32.


Bild  41


1  i  1 1  A  5>l"


4-  «&»“

•  5110  I  -fstjo

I  IT


l'i  -  y)io


+  wjo  l’»#  E

I


II

Kiang-uchu  —  5*>9®  £

I  I  I


Blick  auf  das  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge.

Aufgcnommen  v.  Ark,  3"?.  Blau  31.


M.  i.  43.


OF  EXPUNGING.


Here  is  the  way  to  expunge. — You  are  to  expunge
by  resolving  that,  though  others  may  be  harmful,  you
will  be  harmless ;  that,  though  others  may  kill,  you
will  never  kill ;  that,  though  others  may  steal,  you
will  not ;  that,  though  others  may  not  lead  the  higher
life,  you  will ;  that,  though  others  may  lie,  traduce,
denounce,  or  prattle,  you  will  not ;  that,  though  others
may  be  covetous,  you  will  covet  not ;  that,  though
others  may  be  malignant,  you  will  be  benignant,  that,
though  others  may  be  given  over  to  wrong  views,
wrong  aims,  wrong  speech,  wrong  actions,  wrong
modes  of  livelihood,  wrong  effort,  wrong  mindfulness,
and  wrong  concentration,  you  must  follow  (the  Noble
Eightfold  Path  in)  right  outlook,  right  aims,  right
speech,  right  actions,  right  mode  of  livelihood,  right
effort,  right  mindfulness  and  right  concentration ;
that,  though  others  are  wrong  about  the  truth  and
wrong  about  Deliverance,  you  will  be  right  about
truth  and  right  about  Deliverance ;  that,  though
others  may  be  possessed  by  sloth  and  torpor,  you  will
free  yourselves  therefrom  ;  that,  though  others  may
be  puffed  up,  you  will  be  humble-minded ;  that,
though  others  may  be  perplexed  by  doubts,  you  will
be  free  from  them  ;  that,  though  others  may  harbour
wrath,  malevolence,  [43]  envy,  jealousy,  niggardliness,
avarice,  hypocrisy,  deceit,  imperviousness,  arrogance,
frowardness,  association  with  bad  friends,  slackness,  un¬
belief,  shamelessness,  unscrupulousness,  lack  of  instruc¬
tion,  inertness,  bewilderment,  and  unwisdom, — you
will  be  the  reverse  of  all  these  things  ;  and  that,
though  others  may  clutch  at  and  hug  the  temporal
nor  loose  their  hold  thereon,  you  will  clutch  and  hug
the  things  that  are  not  temporal,  and  will  ensue  Re¬
nunciation. — That  is  the  way  to  expunge.

I  say  it  is  the  development  of  the  will  which  is  so
efficacious  for  right  states  of  consciousness,  not  to  speak
of  act  and  speech.  And  therefore,  Cunda,  there  must
be  developed  the  will  to  all  the  foregoing  resolves  I
have  detailed.

It  is  just  as  if  there  were  both  a  rough,  uneven


I  I


Kai^t-Wtlhglta^'.cbirgg  t  llav*s-k..xra>R>:tf  i


t  -i-  501a


<  iO  —  5060  Zt


•Ucin


7

I


▲  »


Kalanjun-nOt


Mo>tk»T»ebi:gc

P*  A  47«*


Bild  42


x


Mollkf-Orbirgr


Met  -r  5"'°  ,JO*  +  S°°“


Ue  (Til)  —  «*»»


Ill  on  lift  foli-itcim  (Hi-u  in^l


_ KaUff-WilbcIm-Gttmtt  I'Bayap-km-Krttr

'  'r  -  «>ro  1 1*  —  4.I7J  **<  k  +  }'°°  —  W!


Rundpanorama  auf  der  Wasserscheide  zwischen  Kiang-tschu  und  Ri-tschi:.

Aufgenommcn  v.  *  4770.  nahe  I.ager  XXXIX.  Mail  35.


>  ••  1-  «»?5


I  A  iV'J


Bild  43


32


VIII.  SALLEKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  44.


road  and  also  a  smooth,  level  road  as  an  alternative
route ;  or  as  if  there  were  the  choice  of  a  rough  and  a
smooth  ford ; — [44]  even  so  the  harmful  man  has
harmlessness  as  his  alternative,  he  who  kills  has  his
alternative  in  innocence  of  blood,  he  who  steals  has
his  alternative  in  honesty  [and  so  forth  through  the
whole  of  the  foregoing  list].

As  all  wrong  states  of  consciousness  must  lead
downwards  and  all  right  states  must  lead  upwards,  so
the  harmful  man  has  harmlessness  for  the  higher
state,  the  man  who  kills  has  innocence  of  blood  for
the  higher  state  [and  so  forth  through  the  whole  of
the  foregoing  list].

[45]  Now  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  who  is  bogged,
himself  to  extricate  another  who  is  bogged  too  ;  but  it
is  possible  for  a  man  who  is  himself  not  bogged,  to
extricate  another  who  is.  It  is  impossible  for  a  man
who  is  himself  not  broken-in,  schooled  and  emanci¬
pated  to  break-in,  school  and  emancipate  another.
But  the  converse  is  possible. — So  the  hurtful  indi¬
vidual  has  harmlessness  for  his  emancipation,  he  who
slays  has  innocence  of  blood  for  his  emancipation,  the
thief  has  honesty  [and  so  forth  through  the  whole  of
the  foregoing  list].

[46]  So  I  have  taught  how  to  expunge,  how  to
develop  the  will,  how  to  effect  the  alternative
approach,  how  to  rise  upwards,  and  how  to  find
emancipation.  All  that  a  fond  and  compassionate
teacher  can  do  for  his  disciples  in  his  compassion,  that
have  I  done  for  you.  Here,  Cunda,  are  trees  under
which  to  lodge ;  here  are  solitude’s  abodes ;  plunge
into  deepest  thought  and  never  flag ;  lay  not  up  for
yourself  remorse  hereafter ; — this  is  my  injunction
to  you.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Maha-Cunda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  i.  47.


RIGHT  IDEAS.


33


IX.  SAMMA-DITTHI-SUTTA.

RIGHT  IDEAS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Sariputta  addressed*  the
Almsmen  as  follows : —

The  man  of  right  ideas  is  hailed  as  such.  Now,  in
what  respects  does  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  become
right  in  his  ideas  ?  In  what  respects  are  his  ideas
impeccable  ?  In  what  respects  has  he  gained  absolute
clarity  in  the  doctrine  and  mastered  its  truth  ?

We  would  have  journeyed  from  afar,  reverend  sir,
to  learn  the  meaning  of  this  utterance  from  the
reverend  Sariputta's  lips.  Pray,  vouchsafe  to  set  forth
its  meaning  for  us  to  treasure  up  in  our  memories.

Then  listen,  reverend  sirs,  and  pay  attention  ;  and  I
will  speak.

Yes,  reverend  sir,  said  they  in  response,  and  Sari¬
putta  spoke  as  follows : —

When  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  comprehends  that
which  is  wrong  and  the  root  from  which  it  springs,
when  he  comprehends  that  which  is  right  and  the  root
from  which  it  springs,  [47]  thereby  he  becomes  right
in  his  ideas,  his  ideas  are  impeccable,  he  has  gained
absolute  clarity  in  the  Doctrine  and  mastered  its
truth.

Now  what  is  the  wrong  and  the  right  ?  and  what
are  their  respective  roots  ?

Killing  is  wrong,  theft  is  wrong,  sensuality  is
wrong,  lying  is  wrong,  calumny  is  wrong,  reviling  is
wrong,  chattering  is  wrong,  covetise  is  wrong,  harm¬
fulness  is  wrong,  and  wrong  ideas  are  wrong. — All
this  is  called  that  which  is  wrong ;  and  its  roots  are —
greed,  hate  and  delusion.

And  what  is  that  which  is  right? — To  keep  from
killing,  theft,  sensuality,  lying,  calumny,  reviling,
and  chattering ;  to  be  void  of  covetise  and  harmful-

3


34


IX.  SAMMA-DITTHI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  48.


ness,  and  to  hold  right  views. — This  is  what  is  called
right ;  and  its  roots  are  freedom  from  greed,  freedom
from  hate,  and  freedom  from  delusion.

When  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  has  this  under¬
standing  of  what  is  wrong  and  of  what  is  right,  and
of  their  respective  roots,  then — by  putting  from  him
every  tendency  to  passion,  by  dispelling  every  tendency
to  repugnance,  by  venting  every  tendency  to  the  idea
and  conceit  ‘  I  am,’  by  shedding  ignorance,  and  by
developing  knowledge — he  makes  an  end  of  Ill  here
and  now. — That  is  now  he  is  right  in  his  ideas,  that
is  how  his  ideas  are  impeccable,  that  is  how  he  gains
absolute  clarity  in  the  Doctrine  and  masters  its
truth.

After  expressing  their  satisfaction  and  gratitude  to
Sariputta,  those  Almsmen  put  to  him  the  further
question  whether  there  was  yet  another  way  by  which
the  disciple  became  right  in  his  ideas.

Yes,  answered  Sariputta. — When  he  understands
Sustenance,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  its  cessation.  ("48]  Now  what  are
these  ? — There  are  four  Sustenances  which  either
maintain  existing  creatures  or  help  those  yet  to  be.
First  of  these  is  material  sustenance,  coarse  or  delicate  ;
contact  is  the  second ;  intention  is  the  third ;  and  the
fourth  is  consciousness.  From  the  rise  of  craving
comes  the  rise  of  Sustenance,  and  with  the  cessation  of
craving  comes  also  the  cessation  of  Sustenance,  the
course  to  which  is  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path, — namely
right  outlook,  right  aims,  right  speech,  right  action,
right  mode  of  livelihood,  right  effort,  right  mindfulness
and  right  concentration.  When  the  disciple  thus
understands  Sustenance,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and
the  course  which  leads  to  its  cessation,  then  ...  its
truth.

After  expressing  their  satisfaction  and  gratitude  to
Sariputta,  those  Almsmen  put  to  him  the  further
question  whether  there  was  yet  another  way  by  which
the  disciple  became  right  in  his  ideas.

Yes,  answered  Sariputta. — When  he  understands


Bild  44


-


Iter  —  ins  Ri.tnJtu

A  I  I


Kit* hll


Met

I


Itc  4-  «M»

I


/oiibi.iti

A  -

A  *4 TO  I


ti»  —  rr

L


T-  iunn-k

(Pati  CL  K'vltlir  )


k  n  »ri  ,\\  .Ihi’.ro  •  «  »«■'  (  Wo  1iiTa»i!rh


>e«j;-diuw\-t*chu


-r  *J7J


H«r  -!j  407"


5015


Mj  *4*  4800


«1  !  a  490)  Go  -r  !*0o


zu  Bild  44


Got  4-


000

A


In  den  Vorbergen  des  Kaiser -Wilhelm -Gebirges.


Aufgcnommen  von  ho  *  4640.  lil.itt  .u.


M.  i.  49-


RIGHT  IDEAS.


35


Ill,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads
to  its  cessation.  Now  what  are  these  ? — Ill  is  birth,
decay,  sickness,  and  death  ;  sorrow,  wailing,  depres¬
sion  of  body  and  mind  ;  also  not  getting  what  one
desires ;  together  with,  in  brief,  the  fivefold  attach¬
ments  to  existence.  That  is  what  Ill  is.  Now,  first,
what  is  the  origin  of  111  ? — This  denotes  every  craving
that  leads  to  rebirth,  that  has  to  do  with  delight  and
passion,  delighting  now  in  this  object  and  now  in  that,
— namely,  cravings  for  pleasures  of  sense,  for  continu¬
ing  existence,  or  [49]  for  annihilation.  Next,  what
is  the  cessation  of  Ill? — This  denotes  the  absolute
and  passionless  cessation  of  the  self-same  cravings,
their  abandonment  and  renunciation,  deliverance  from
them,  and  aversion  for  them.  Lastly,  what  is  the
course  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  Ill  ? — It  is  pre¬
cisely  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path,  namely,  right  outlook,
right  aims  .  .  .  right  concentration.  When  the  disciple
thus  understands  Ill,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the
course  which  leads  to  the  cessation  of  Ill,  then  .  .  .
its  truth.

After  expressing  their  satisfaction  and  gratitude  to
Sariputta,  those  Almsmen  put  to  him  the  further  ques¬
tion  whether  there  was  yet  a  further  way  by  which  the
disciple  became  right  in  his  ideas.

Yes,  answered  Sariputta.  When  the  disciple  under¬
stands  decay  and  death,  their  origin,  their  cessation,  and
the  course  that  leads  to  their  cessation.  Now  what  are'
these  ?  Decay  is  when  in  any  creature  in  its  class  decay
and  decadence  set  in  with  broken  teeth,  grey  hair,  and
wrinkles,  when  the  term  of  life  is  drawing  to  a  close
and  the  faculties  are  spent.  Death  is  when  any
creature  deceases  from  its  class,  goes  hence,  breaks  up,
departs,  expires  and  dies,  when  the  elements  break  up
and  the  corpse  is  buried.  From  the  arising  of  birtn
comes  the  arising  of  decay  and  death ;  from  the  cessation
of  birth  comes  the  cessation  of  decay  and  death,  the
course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path, —
namely,  right  ideas,  right  aims  .  . .  right  concentration.
When  the  disciple  thus  understands  decay  and  death,


36


rx.  sammA-dittw-sutta.


M.  i.  50.


their  origin,  their  cessation,  and  the  course  that  leads
to  their  cessation,  then, — by  putting  from  him  every
tendency  ...  its  truth.

After  expressing  .  .  .  further .  .  .  right  in  his  ideas.

[50]  Yes,  answered  Sariputta.  When  the  disciple
understands  birth,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the
course  that  leads  to  its  cessation.  Now  what  are
these? — Birth  is  when  any  creature  comes  to  be  born1
or  produced,  to  issue  or  appear  in  this  or  that  class,
when  the  factors  of  existence  make  their  appearance
and  senses  are  acquired.  From  the  arising  of  exist¬
ence  comes  the  arising  of  birth  ;  from  the  cessation  of
existence  comes  the  cessation  of  birth  ;  and  the  course
which  leads  to  the  cessation  of  birth  is  precisely  the
Noble  Eightfold  Path,  namely,  right  outlook  .  .  .
right  concentration.  When  the  disciple  thus  under¬
stands  birth,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  its  cessation,  then  ...  its  truth.

After  expressing  .  .  .  further  .  .  .  right  in  his  ideas.

Yes,  answered  Sariputta.  When  the  disciple  under¬
stands  existence,  its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the
course  which  leads  to  its  cessation.  Now  what  are
these  ?  —  There  are  three  planes  of  existence,  —
sensuous,  corporeal,  and  incorporeal.  It  is  from  the
arising  of  attachment2  that  their  existence  takes  its  rise,
and  from  attachment’s  cessation  comes  the  cessation  of
existence,  the  course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eight¬
fold  Path, — namely,  right  ideas  .  .  .  right  concentra¬
tion.  When  the  disciple  thus  understands  existence,
its  origin,  its  cessation  and  the  course  which  leads  to
its  cessation,  then  ...  its  truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way? — Yes,  answered  Sari¬
putta  ;  when  the  disciple  understands  attachment,  its
origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to  its
cessation.  Now  what  are  these  ? — There  are  four


1  Bu.  takes  jati  here  as  conception  and  the  next  term
(s  an  jati)  as  parturition  ;  he  limits  issue  to  emerging  from  egg
and  womb,  and  understands  *  appear  ’  as  birth  either  from  moisture
(s  a  m  s  e  d  a  -  y  o  n  i)  or  without  ostensible  parents  (opapatika-
yoni).  See  Dialogues  I,  201,  II,  338.  J  Upadana.


Bilci  4;


Am  Ri-tschu.

Aufgcnommen  v.  74!  n.  15  la  it  53.


•it

t


Bild  46


W

Am  Ri-tschu.

Aufjjcnommen  v.  I.rt^cr  Blatt  33.


M.  L  si.


RIGHT  IDEAS.


37


[51]  attachments, — to  sensuous  pleasure,  to  speculative
ideas,  to  ‘good  works,’  and  to  soul-theories.  It  is  from
the  arising  of  craving  that  attachment  takes  its  rise,  and
from  the  cessation  of  craving  comes  the  cessation  of
attachment,  the  course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble
Eightfold  Path.  When  the  disciple  thus  understands
attachment  ...  its  truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way  ? — Yes,  answered  Sari-
putta;  when  the  disciple  understands  craving,  its
origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to  its
cessation.  Now  what  are  these?  —  There  are  six
kinds  of  craving, — for  forms,  sounds,  smells,  tastes,
touch,  and  mental  objects.  It  is  from  the  arising  of
feeling  that  craving  takes  its  rise,  and  from  feeling's
cessation  comes  the  cessation  of  craving,  the  course
whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.  When  the
disciple  thus  understands  craving  .  .  .  and  masters  its
truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way  ? — Yes,  answered  Sari-
putta  ;  when  the  disciple  understands  feeling,  its  origin,
its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to  its  cessa¬
tion.  Now  what  are  these  ? — There  are  six  kinds  of
feelings, — ocular,  auditory,  olfactory,  gustatory,  tactile,
and  mental.  It  is  from  the  arising  of  contact  that
feelings  take  their  rise,  and  from  contact’s  cessation
that  there  comes  the  cessation  of  feeling,  the  course
whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.  [52]  When
the  disciple  thus  understands  feelings  ...  its  truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way  ? — Yes,  answered  Sari-
putta;  when  the  disciple  understands  contact,  its
origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to  its
cessation.  Now,  what  are  these  ? — There  are  six
kinds  of  contact, — ocular,  auditory,  olfactory,  gustatory,
tactile,  and  mental.  It  is  from  the  arising  of  the  six
spheres  of  sense  that  contact  arises  and  from  their
cessation  that  there  comes  the  cessation  of  contact,  the
course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.
When  the  disciple  thus  understands  contact  ...  its
truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way  ? — Yes,  answered  Sari-


38


IX.  SAMMA-DITTHI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  S3-


putta ;  when  the  disciple  understands  the  six  spheres
of  sense,  their  origin,  their  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  their  cessation.  Now,  what  are  these  ?
— There  are  six  spheres,— vision,  hearing,  smell,  taste,
touch,  and  cognition.  It  is  from  the  arising  of  name-
and-shape  that  these  six  spheres  arise  and  from  the
cessation  of  name-and-shape  that  there  comes  the
cessation  of  the  six  spheres,  the  course  whereto  is  just
the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.  When  the  disciple  thus
understands  the  six  spheres  ...  its  truth.

[58]  Was  there  yet  another  way? — Yes,  answered
Sariputta  ;  when  the  disciple  understands  name-and-
shape,  their  origin,  their  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  their  cessation.  Now,  what  are  these  ?
— Name  denotes  feeling,  perception,  volition,  contact,
and  attention ;  shape  denotes  the  four  great  elements
and  any  material  form  derived  therefrom  ;  and  name-
and-shape  is  these  two  together.  It  is  from  the
arising  of  consciousness  that  name-and-shape  arise,
and  from  the  cessation  of  consciousness  that  there
comes  the  cessation  of  name-and-shape,  the  course
whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.  When  the
disciple  thus  understands  name-and-shape  ...  its
truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way? — Yes,  answered  Sari¬
putta  ;  when  the  disciple  understands  consciousness,
its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to
its  cessation.  Now,  what  are  these  ? — There  are  six
kinds  of  consciousness, — ocular,  auditory,  olfactory,
gustatory,  tactile,  and  mental.  It  is  from  the  arising
of  the  plastic  forces  (sankhara)1  that  consciousness

1  On  this  ‘elusive’  term  sankhara  (variously  rendered  syn¬
theses,  conditions,  confections  and  conditions  precedent  in  the
Dialoguts ;  and  elsewhere  as  activities  and  synergies),  see
Buddhist  Psych.  Ethics,  2nd  edition,  p.  x.  Bu.  here  observes  as
follows:  —  a b  hisan k h a r an  a- lak  k h an o  sankharo.  At
Dtgha  III,  2 1 1,  occurs  the  passage:  sabbe  satta  ahara-
tthitika,  sabbe  satta  sankhtra-tthitika, — on  which
Bu.  observes:  imasmim  pi  visajjane  hettha  vutta-
paccayo  va  attano  phalassa  sankharanato  san-


-■


Kui-t  r -\V Im-Gghirqr*  I  Wfrlorudc- 1

/usintmur.iluB  *om


lira  4-  «Mj  Ri-tichu  sail  SerjfOtlui  Zack  +  jioo


1  't  1-

I  I


Muiike^lcbir^f

i**  •«»»


K»


Gli  +  <771 I W-  3»)


T


'


43*>

I


45M


Bild  47


►  Mri


In  der  Koslow-Ebene.  Aufgcnommcn  von  Vcs  a  4410  BUut  33.


V  jltWcM  Jebirgr


lg»‘Jild«4  «t»bjr^r


Bild  48


1  A


Blick  auf  das  Mo!tke*Gcbirge.  Aufgcnommcn  von  Kii  a  4JJO.  Blatt  30.


M.  i.  54.


RIGHT  IDEAS.


39


arises,  and  from  their  cessation  comes  the  cessation  of
consciousness,  the  course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble
Eightfold  Path.  When  the  disciple  thus  understands
consciousness  ...  its  truth.

[54]  Was  there  yet  another  way  ? — Yes,  answered
Sariputta ;  when  the  disciple  understands  the  plastic
forces,  their  origin,  their  cessation,  and  the  course
which  leads  to  their  cessation.  Now,  what  are  these  ?
— There  are  three  kinds  of  plastic  forces, — namely,  of
the  body,  of  speech,  and  of  the  heart.  It  is  from  the
arising  of  ignorance  that  these  forces  arise,  and  from
the  cessation  of  ignorance  that  there  comes  the  cessa¬
tion  of  plastic  forces,  the  course  whereto  is  just  the
Noble  Eightfold  Path.  When  the  disciple  thus  under¬
stands  plastic  forces  ...  its  truth.

Was  there  yet  another  way?  Yes,  answered  Sari¬
putta;  when  the  disciple  understands  ignorance,  its
origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  which  leads  to  its
cessation.  Now  what  are  these  ? — Ignorance  denotes
lack  of  knowledge  of  Ill,  of  its  origin,  its  cessation,
and  of  the  course  which  leads  to  its  cessation.  It  is
from  the  arising  of  the  Cankers  that  ignorance  arises,
and  from  their  cessation  comes  the  cessation  of  ignor¬
ance,  the  course  whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold
Path.  When  the  disciple  thus  understands  ignorance
.  .  .  its  truth.

Was  there  yet  another  [55]  way  ? — Yes,  answered
Sariputta  ;  when  the  disciple  understands  a  Canker,
its  origin,  its  cessation,  and  the  course  leading  to  its
cessation.  Now  what  are  these  ? — There  are  three
Cankers, — the  Canker  of  sensuous  pleasure,  the  Canker
of  continuing  existence,  and  the  Canker  of  ignorance.


idha  sankhara-paccayo  ti  ayam  ettha  hetthimato
vise  so;  hettha  nippariy&y-Sharo  g a hi to,  idha
pariy  ay-  £h  Sro  ti  e  vam  gahito  (i.e.  the  second  clause  in
the  Digha  quotation  is  a  particularized  version  of  the  preceding
general  expression  that  all  creatures  persist  through  food).  I  take
sankhara  therefore  to  be  the  subsequent  elaboration  or  digestion
of  the  Sustenance  till  it  becomes  an  integral  part  of  the  organism  ;
by  metabolism,  occasioned  by  plastic  forces.


40


IX.  SAMMA-DITTHI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  55.


It  is  from  the  arising  of  ignorance  that  Cankers  arise,
and  from  its  cessation  comes  their  cessation,  the  course
whereto  is  just  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path.  When  the
disciple  of  the  Noble  has  this  understanding  of  Cankers,
of  their  origin,  of  their  cessation,  and  of  the  course
which  leads  to  their  cessation,  then — by  putting  from
him  every  tendency  to  passion,  by  dispelling  every
tendency  to  repugnance,  by  venting  every  tendency  to
the  idea  and  conceit  '  I  am,’  by  shedding  ignorance,  and
by  developing  knowledge — he  makes  an  end  of  Ill
here  and  now.  That  is  how  the  disciple  is  right  in  his
ideas,  that  is  how  his  ideas  are  impeccable,  that  is  how
he  gains  absolute  clarity  in  the  Doctrine  and  masters
its  truth.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Sariputta.  Glad  at  heart,
those  Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  he  had  said.


Note. — On  this  scholastic  compilation,  here  at¬
tributed  to  Sariputta,  see  the  14th  and  15th  Suttas
(attributed  to  Gotama  himself)  of  the  Dlgha  Nikaya
and  the  Introductions  to  the  translations  of  those
Suttas  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  volume  of  the
Dialogues.  It  will  be  noted  that  avijjS.  figures  both
as  a  cause  and  as  a  result  of  the  asavas  ;  according  to
Bu.  it  is  equivalent  to  moha  (or  illusion)  supra,  where
it  is  defined  as  lack  of  knowledge.


Glo


Bdd  50


Gil

I


Am  Ri-tschu.

Aufgcnommen  von  95'  —  **.  bci  Kli.  Ulatt  30.


Bild  51

Kli  -  45*°


Am  Ri-tschu.

Aufgcnommen  von  In-i  Kii.  lil.nt  30.


M.  i.  56-63.


MINDFULNESS.


4*


X.  SATI-PATTHANA-SUTTA.

OF  MINDFULNESS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Kurus — a  township  of  theirs  is
called  Kammassadhamma — ,  he  addressed  the  Alms¬
men  as  follows  : —

There  is  but  one  way.  Almsmen,  to  purify  creatures
[56]  to  pass  beyond  sorrow  and  lamentation,  to  shed
ills  of  body  and  of  mind,  to  find  the  right  way,  and  to
realize  Nirvana ; — it  is  by  the  fourfold  mustering  of
mindfulness,  .  .  .  _

[For  the  remainder  of  this  Sutta,  see  (at  Dialogues  II,
327  et  seqq.)  the  translation  of  the  22nd  Sutta  of  the
Dlgha  Nikaya,  which  is  identical  with  this  Majjhima
Sutta,  except  that  towards  the  end  it  interpolates
paragraphs — which  in  the  Majjhima  Nik&ya  form  our
separate  Sutta  No.  141 — explaining  in  detail  the  Four
Noble  Truths,  and  accordingly  is  distinguished  from
ours  here  as  ‘the  Long’or^/a^a-sati-pa^hana-sutta«/a:.


XI.  COLA-STHANADA-SUTTA.

THE  SHORT  CHALLENGE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapin<Jika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows

We  have  in  our  very  midst  a  recluse,  yes  and  a
second,  third,  and  fourth  recluse  who  are  empty  and
heretical  [64] — no  true  recluses  1 — in  these  words  let
your  indictment  ring  out  like  a  lion’s  roar.

If  now  it  happens  that  Wanderers  (paribbajaka)  of
other  sects  than  yours  ask  you  by  what  inspiration  and
on  what  authority  you  say  this,  then  your  answer  to
such  should  be  this : — Unto  us,  reverend  sirs,  the  Lord
who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all- enlightened,  has
revealed  four  states  of  mind  which  we  have  realized
and  therefore  speak  thus ;  and  those  four  states  of
mind  are  that  we  (i)  believe  in  our  Teacher,  (ii)  believe
in  his  Doctrine,  (iii)  have  fulfilled  the  code  of  virtue,
and  (iv)  love  all  our  dear  fellow- believers,  be  they
lay  or  be  they  Pilgrims.  These  four  states  we  have
realized,  and  that  is  why  we  speak  thus.

If  now  the  Wanderers  of  other  sects  were  to  rejoin
that,  in  like  manner,  they  believed  in  a  teacher  of  their
own  and  in  his  doctrine,  had  fulfilled  their  own  code  of
virtue,  and  loved  their  own  dear  fellow-believers ;  and
if  they  went  on  to  ask  you  what  was  the  distinction  or
divergence  or  difference  between  them  and  you  ; — then,
you  should  ask  them  whether  the  Goal1  was  one  or
many.  If  they  answer  aright,  they  will  say  the  Goal


1  Nittha.  Bu.  observes  that,  while  all  alike  professed  *  Arahat-
ship’  as  their  goal,  brahmins  aimed  at  the  brahmaloka,  tapas
ascetics  at  the  abhassara  heaven,  paribbajakas  at  the
subhakinna  heaven,  the  Sjivikas  at  the  heaven  of  Infinity

42


lm  Lewald-Gebirge  (Tschimurtach).

Aufgetiominen  vwn  do  a  459".  Bl.itt  zb,  51


I  in  Lewald-Gebirge  (Tschimurtach).

Aufgenotnmen  v.  Glo  *  4590.  Biatt  ’6.  31.


Am  Ri-tschu.

Aufgi'iiommcn  v.  L.igcr  XLV.  Blatt  51


M.  i.  6s-


THE  SHORT  CHALLENGE.


43


is  one  and  not  many.  Is  it,  you  will  ask,  the  Goal  of
the  man  with,  or  of  the  man  without,  passion— hate —
illusion  ?  If  they  answer  aright,  they  will  say  it  is  the
Goal  of  the  man  without  passion,  hate,  or  illusion,- — as
they  will  also  say,  in  answer  to  your  further  questions,
that  it  is  the  Goal  of  the  man  without  cravings,  [65]
without  attachments,  of  the  man  who  is  without
fractiousness  and  without  a  combative  spirit,  and
who  is  free  from  obsessions.

There  are  the  two  speculative  ideas, — of  eternalism
and  of  annihilationism.  Every  recluse  or  brahmin
who  is  attached,  devoted,  and  given  over  to  the  first
view  is  an  opponent  of  the  other ;  and  vice  versa.
Recluses  or  brahmins  who  know  not  the  real  nature  of
the  rise  and  wane  of  these  two  speculative  ideas,  who
know  not  their  lure,  their  perils,  and  their  outcome, —
harbour  passion,  hate,  illusion,  cravings  and  attach¬
ments,  are  empty  of  lore,  are  foes  to  peace,  take
pleasure  and  delight  in  obsessions,  nor  do  they  win
deliverance  from  birth,  decay,  death,  sorrow,  lamenta¬
tion,  depression  of  body  and  mind,  or  from  tribulation  ;
— they  win,  say  I,  no  deliverance  from  Ill.  Whereas,
all  recluses  and  brahmins  who  do  know  the  real  nature
of  the  rise  and  wane  of  these  two  speculative  ideas,
their  lure,  perils  and  outcome, — are  void  of  passion,
hate  and  illusion,  void  of  cravings  and  attachments,  are
rich  in  lore,  combat  not  the  unpeaceful,  take  no
pleasure  or  delight  in  obsessions,  and  win  Deliverance
from  birth,  decay,  death,  sorrow,  lamentation,  depres¬
sion  of  body  and  mind,  and  from  tribulation  ;  these
win,  say  I,  Deliverance  from  Ill.

[66]  There  are  four  attachments,— to  sensuous
pleasure,  to  speculative  ideas,  to  works,  and  to  soul-
theories.  Some  recluses  and  brahmins  profess  to
understand  them  all,  but  fail  to  show  understanding  of
the  whole  set  of  four ;  for  example,  they  show  an


of  mind.  Really,  they  all  wanted  some  (unconscious)  /«/««  (cf.
Digha  1, 28,  and  Dialogues  I,  41,  n.  2),  whereas  in  Buddhism  the
goal  is  Arabatship  pure  and  simple,  with  no  after-life.


44


XI.  CULA-SlHANADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  67.


understanding  of  attachment  to  sensuous  pleasures,  but
not  of  the  other  attachments.  And  why  ? — Because
these  good  people  do  not  understand  aright  what  the
others  are.  In  such  a  creed  and  rule  as  theirs,  it  is
clear  their  belief  in  their  teacher  is  not  perfect,  or  their
belief  in  his  plan,  or  fulfilment  of  the  code  of  virtue,  or
love  for  their  fellow-believers.  And  why  ? — Because
this  must  be  so  [67]  in  any  creed  and  rule  which  has
been  wrongly  revealed  and  wrongly  preached,  which
does  not  bring  salvation  and  peace,  which  has  not  been
preached  by  the  All-enlightened.

Now  the  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  not
only  professes  to  understand  all  attachments  but  also
communicates  to  others  his  understanding  of  all  four.  In
such  a  creed  and  rule  as  ours,  Almsmen,  it  is  clear  that
belief  in  the  Master  is  perfect,  as  belief  in  his  Doctrine
is  perfect,  and  as  fulfilment  of  the  code  of  virtue  and  love
for  fellow-believers  are  perfect  And  why  ? — Because
this  must  be  so  in  a  creed  and  rule  which  has  been
rightly  revealed  and  rightly  preached,  which  brings
salvation  and  peace,  which  has  been  preached  by  the
All- Enlightened

Now  whence  come  the  four  attachments  ?  What  is
their  origin  ?  What  is  their  parentage  ?  How  are
they  produced? — They  come  from  craving;  they
originate  in  craving ;  they  are  born  of  craving ;  and
by  craving  they  are  produced.  Craving  in  its  turn
comes  from  feeling ;  it  originates  in  feeling ;  it  is  born
of  feeling;  and  by  feeling  it  is  produced.  Similarly,
feeling  comes  from  contact,  contact  from  the  six  spheres
of  sense,  these  six  spheres  from  name-and-shape,  name-
and-shape  from  perception,  perception  from  plastic
forces,  plastic  forces  from  ignorance.  When  ignorance
has  passed  away  and  when  knowledge  (of  the  true
goal)  has  arisen  in  an  Almsman,  then,  with  this  purg¬
ing  of  ignorance  and  the  uprising  of  knowledge,  he
attaches  himself  no  longer  to  sensuous  pleasure,  or  to
speculative  ideas,  or  to  works,  or  to  soul-theories  ;
being  void  of  attachment,  he  trembles  not ;  trembling
not,  he  wins  Nirvana  for  himself, — sure  in  his  convic-


Bild  54


Blick  atif  das  Deggedombu-Gobirge.  Aufgcnommcn  von  Tet  *  4343.  Blnn  :j.


Am  Ma*tsehu.  Aufccnofnmvn  von  Vel  a  4550  Blatt  55.


Al  -  <$go


Yel


Sl>  I-  «JOO


I  U^grit«>m1«q’bert;r

—  47«o


Onif|Mr  grl


Bild  56

kcmat»diat><  h^c.Hgf^e

t  wJv*n*nfli  1  «l  It  St  4-  4O90  XaX  400


Das  Ma-tschu-'l  al.  Aufgeoommen  von  Ert  a  4300.  Ulatt  ,;o.


M.  i.  68.


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


45


tion  that  for  him  rebirth  is  no  more,  that  he  has  lived
the  highest  life,  that  his  task  is  done,  and  that  now  for
him  what  he  was  is  no  more.

[68]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those
Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XII.  MAHA-SIHANADA-SUTTA.

THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  Vesali,  outside  the  town  in  the  dense  forest
to  the  west,  Sunakkhatta  the  Licchavi,  who  had
recently  left  this  creed  and  rule,  was  telling  people
there  was  nothing  superhuman  about  the  recluse
Gotama’s  ennobling  gifts  of  knowledge  and  insight,
that  it  was  Gotama’s  own  reasoning  which  had  ham¬
mered  out  a  Doctrine  of  his  own  evolving  and  of  his
personal  invention,  such  that  whoso  hears  it  preached
for  his  good  has  only  to  act  up  to  it  to  be  guided  to  the
utter  ending  of  Ill.

Now  in  the  morning  early  the  reverend  Sariputta,
duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went  for  alms  into  Vesali,
where  he  heard  Sunakkhatta  saying  this.  On  his
return  after  his  meal,  Sariputta  came  to  the  Lord  and
with  due  obeisance  took  a  seat  aside,  telling  the  Lord
what  Sunakkhatta  was  saying.  Sunakkhatta — was  the
Lord's  reply — is  a  man  of  wrath  and  folly  ;  wrath
prompted  his  remarks ;  yet,  though  dispraise  is  his
object,  the  foolish  person  is  actually  singing  the  Truth-
finder’s  praises.  [69]  For,  praise  it  is  when  a  man
says :  Whoso  hears  it  preached  for  his  good  has
only  to  act  up  to  it  to  be  guided  to  the  utter  ending
of  Ill.

Never,  Sariputta,  will  this  foolish  person  attain  to
the  Doctrine’s  teaching  about  myself  that — He  is  the
Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  walking  by  knowledge,
blessed,  knowing  all  worlds,  the  matchless  tamer  of  the
human  heart,  teacher  of  gods  and  men,  the  Lord  of


46


XII.  MAHA-SlHANADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  70.


enlightenment.  Never  will  this  foolish  person  attain  to
the  Doctrine’s  teaching  about  myself  that — He  is  the
Lord  in  whom  reside  all  psychic  powers :  from  being
one  to  become  manifold,  from  being  manifold  to
become  one,  to  be  visible  or  invisible,  to  pass  at  will
through  wall  or  fence  or  hill  as  if  through  air,  to  pass
in  and  out  of  the  solid  earth  as  if  it  were  water,  to  walk
on  the  water’s  unbroken  surface  as  if  it  were  the  solid
earth,  to  glide  in  state  through  the  air  like  a  bird  on  the
wing,  to  touch  and  to  handle  the  moon  and  sun  in
their  power  and  might,  and  to  extend  the  sovereignty
of  his  body  right  up  to  the  Brahma  world.  Never  will
this  foolish  person  attain  to  the  Doctrine’s  teaching
about  myself  that — He  is  the  Lord  who,  with  the  Ear
Celestial,  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human
ear,  hears  both  heavenly  and  human  sounds.  Never
will  this  foolish  person  attain  to  the  Doctrine's  teaching
about  myself  that — He  is  the  Lord  who  with  his
own  heart  comprehends  the  heart  of  other  creatures
and  of  other  men  so  as  to.  know  them  for  just  what
they  are, — filled  with  passion  or  free  from  passion,  .  .  .
focussed  or  wandering,  large-minded  or  small-minded,
inferior  or  superior,  stedfast  or  unstedfast,  Delivered
or  lacking  Deliverance.

Ten  in  number,  Sariputta,  are  a  Truth-finder’s
powers,  whereby  he  knows  his  precedence  as  leader  of
the  herd,  issues  his  lion-like  challenges  in  public
assemblies1  and  sets  a-rolling  the  excellent  Wheel  of
Truth.  And  the  ten  powers  are  these  :

(i)  The  Truth-finder  knows  precisely  both  what

is  and  what  is  not  a  specific  cause  ;

(ii)  [70]  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  the  conse¬

quences  that  must  inevitably  result  from
everything  done  in  the  past,  present  and
future  ;


*  From  D.  I,  175,  it  will  be  seen  that  Gotama  had  been
unjustly  criticized  for  roaring  like  a  lion  only  in  safe  privacy,
where  he  could  not  be  answered.


Bild  57


Am  Tsodyara-nor  1.


I  ic£gc4owbtt.tlcrf  «■


I’e  -


1  —  IAKI


Un|i|>«  u*l


lloo  A  s**«


£i»He»e  —  «**oo  Ok


>p  —  «j°®


V  (tic)


Tao.U-U


I*  A  **7»,


.U-U  I  St  -4-

I  I  I


<•»>


Aufgcnommen  v,  VI  k  a  44  jo.  Blatt  29.


Bild  58


V  (lie)


»  ffrjo  Ki


Hob  a  jolo


Tsodyara-nor  1  u.  II.

Aufgenommen  v.  B  a  4470.  Blau  29.


■Vmcf -nuh^v  hin«C  »c1iiyc«*


♦79"


t  »e^-r ■twtnbq-Hcrisr


(ifuppir  gel


IV  •  480*


V


M.  i.  71.


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


47


(iii)  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  the  future  to

which  every  course  leads ;

(iv)  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  the  manifold

and  diverse  physical  factors  which  make  up
the  world  ;

(v)  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  each  creature's

particular  bent ;

(vi)  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  all  that  is  going

on  in  the  hearts  of  others  ;

(vii)  he  knows  the  precise  nature  of  the  imperfec¬

tions,  the  specific  stage,  or  the  uprising  of
the  several  achievements  of  Ecstasy,  De¬
liverance,  and  Rapt  Concentration ;

(viii)  he  recalls  to  mind  his  divers  existences  in  the
past, — a  single  birth  .  .  .  (etc.  as  in  Sutta
No.  4)  right  up  to  the  time  when  he  passed
to  his  present  life  here ;

(ix)  he  sees — with  the  Eye  Celestial,  which  is  pure
and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye — creatures
in  the  act  of  passing  hence  and  re-appearing
elsewhere,  creatures  high  and  low  .  .  .  (etc.
as  in  Sutta  No.  4) ;

(x)  [71]  by  eradicating  the  Cankers,  he — here
and  now,  of  and  by  himself — comprehends,
realizes,  enters  on,  and  abides  in  the  De¬
liverance  of  heart  and  mind  which  knows  no
Cankers.

Such  are  the  Truth-finder’s  ten  powers,  whereby  he
knows  his  precedence  as  leader  of  the  herd,  issues  his
lion-like  challenge  in  public  assemblies  and  sets  a-roll-
ing  the  excellent  Wheel  of  Truth.  Now,  if  of  me  who
know  and  see  all  this  anyone  were  to  say  that  there
is  nothing  superhuman  about  the  recluse  Gotama’s
ennobling  gifts  or  his  knowledge  and  insight,  and  that
it  is  Gotama’s  own  reasoning  which  has  hammered  out
a  Doctrine  of  his  own  evolving  and  personal  invention,
— if  such  a  one  does  not  recant  these  words  of  his,
change  his  heart,  and  renounce  his  view,  he  will  find
himself  hauled  off  to  purgatory.  Just  as  an  Almsman


48  XII.  MAHA-SlHANADA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  7Z.

who  is  equipped  with  virtue,  concentration,  and  insight
will  here  and  now  come  to  (the  Arahat’s)  plenitude  of
knowledge,  so  this  other  equipment — if  the  man  does
not  recant  his  words,  change  his  heart,  and  renounce
his  view — will  end  in  his  being  hauled  off  to  purga¬
tory.

Four  in  number  are  a  Truth-finder’s  assurances
whereby  he  knows  his  precedence  as  leader  of  the
herd,  issues  his  lion-like  challenge  in  public  assemblies,
and  sets  a-rolling  the  Excellent  Wheel  of  Truth  ;  and
the  four  are  these  : —

(i)  I  see  nothing  to  indicate  that  anyone — be  he
recluse  or  brahmin  or  god  or  Mara  or  Brahma  or  any¬
one  else  in  the  wide  world — [72]  will,  with  justice,
charge  me  with  lacking  enlightenment  on  those  states  of
mind  on  which  I  profess  to  be  all-enlightened.  And,
as  I  see  nothing  to  indicate  this,  my  state  is  one  of
tranquillity,  fearlessness,  and  assurance.

(ii)  1  see  nothing  to  indicate  that  anyone  .  .  .  will,
with  justice,  charge  me  with  not  having  extirpated  the
Cankers  as  I  profess.  And,  as  I  see  nothing  to
indicate  this,  my  state  is  one  of  tranquillity,  fearless¬
ness,  and  assurance

(iii)  I  see  nothing  to  indicate  that  anyone  .  .  .  will,
with  justice,  charge  it  against  me  that  the  states  of
mind  which  I  have  declared  to  be  stumbling-blocks,
are  not  such  at  all,  to  him  who  indulges  in  them.  And,
as  I  see  nothing  to  indicate  this,  my  state  is  one
of  tranquillity,  fearlessness,  and  assurance.

(iv)  1  see  nothing  to  indicate  that  anyone  .  .  .  will,
with  justice,  charge  it  against  me  that  the  Doctrine  I
have  preached  for  the  profit  of  whomsoever  it  be,  fails,
if  he  acts  up  to  it,  to  guide  him  to  the  utter  ending  of
Ill.  And,  as  I  see  nothing  to  indicate  this,  my  state  is
one  of  tranquillity,  fearlessness,  and  assurance.

Such  are  the  Truth-finder’s  four  assurances  whereby
he  knows  his  precedence  as  leader  of  the  herd,  issues
his  lion-like  challenge  in  public  assemblies,  and  sets
a-rolling  the  excellent  Wheel  of  Truth.  Now,  if  of  me
who  know  and  see  all  this  anyone  were  to  say  there  is


M.  i.  73.


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


49


nothing  superhuman  about  the  recluse  Gotama  .  .  .
will  end  in  his  being  hauled  off  to  purgatory.

Eight  in  number  are  the  assemblies,  namely  the
assemblies  of  nobles,  brahmins,  heads  of  houses,  re¬
cluses,  the  four  Great  Regents,  the  Thirty-three  gods,
Mara  and  Brahma.  Strong  in  the  aforesaid  four
assurances,  I  have  experience  of  going  to  some  hun¬
dreds  of  each  of  these  eight  assemblies,  sitting  and
talking  with  them  and  holding  converse.  Yet  never  did
I  see  anything  to  indicate  that  fear  or  nervousness  would
come  upon  me.  And,  as  I  saw  nothing  to  indicate
this,  my  state  is  one  of  tranquillity,  fearlessness,  and
assurance.  [78]  Now,  if  of  me  who  know  and  see  all
r this  anyone  were  to  say  that  there  is  nothing  super¬
human  about  the  recluse  Gotama  .  .  .  will  end  in  his
being  hauled  off  to  purgatory.

Four  in  number  are  the  modes  in  which  life  is
engendered,  —  from  the  egg,  from  the  womb,  from
moisture,  and  by  translation.  From  the  egg  are  those
creatures  said  to  be  born  who  at  birth  break  the
shell  that  contains  them.  From  the  womb  are  those
creatures  said  to  be  born  who  at  birth  break  the  womb.
From  moisture  are  those  creatures  said  to  be  born  who
are  born  in  putrid  fish,  corpses,  or  rice,  or  in  refuse-
pools  or  rubbish-shoots.  By  translation  come  gods,
denizens  of  purgatory,  some  human  beings  and  some
dwellers  in  the  four  states  of  woe.  Now,  if  of  me  .
who  know  and  see  all  this  anyone  were  to  say  that
there  is  nothing  superhuman  about  the  recluse  Gotama
.  .  .  will  end  in  his  being  hauled  off  to  purgatory.

Five  in  number  are  the  destinies  after  life,— in
purgatory,  as  an  animal,  as  a  ghost,  as  a  human  being,
and  as  a  god.  Purgatory  I  know,  the  road  thereto,
the  courses  that  lead  to  it,  and  what  courses  a  man
pursues  to  pass,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,
to  rebirth  in  some  unhappy  state  of  misery  or  woe  or
purgatory.  The  animal  world  I  know,  and  the  worlds
of  ghosts  and  men,  together  with  the  roads  to  each,
the  courses  that  lead  to  each  and  what  courses  a  man
pursues  to  pass  to  each,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after

4


TtainaM


U  A  -m?o


Kvtaanchaucbarfrbrrgr


VII  A  4iJ

I


l  tt


Tsodyara-nor  I.

Aufgcnoinmen  von  Ok  —  4350.  Blatt  49.


IteSjiMlomhB-Hrrcc


I>rvsraUki-l(efij<*


zu  BiUl  59


Tsodyara-nor  II.

Aufgenoaunen  von  Ok  -f  4330.  Wait  49.


50


XII.  MAHA-SIHANADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  74.


death.  Gods  I  know,  the  road  thereto,  and  the
courses  that  lead  to  their  world,  and  what  courses
a  man  pursues  to  pass,  at  the  body’s  dissolution
after  death,  to  a  state  of  blessedness  in  heaven.  I
know  too  Nirvana,  the  road  leading  thereto,  the
courses  that  lead  to  it,  [74]  and  what  courses  a  man
pursues  to  dwell — here  and  now — by  the  extirpation
of  the  Cankers,  in  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind
which  knows  no  Cankers,  a  Deliverance  which  he  has,
for  and  by  himself,  thought  out  and  realized,  so  as  to
enter  and  to  abide  therein.

Suppose  that  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  the  heart  of
a  given  man  tells  me  that  his  courses  and  behaviour
and  the  road  he  has  taken  are  such  as  will  bring  him
at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  to  a  state  of  suffer¬
ing  and  woe  or  purgatory.  Later  on,  with  the  Eye
Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,
I  duly  see  him,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  in
some  state  of  suffering  and  woe  or  purgatory,  there
experiencing  violent,  acute  and  racking  pain.  It  is
just  as  if  there  were  a  pit,  over  a  man’s  height
deep,  filled  with  embers  showing  neither  flame  nor
smoke  ;  and  if  there  drew  near  a  man  overcome  and
overpowered  by  the  midsummer  heat,  exhausted  and
beside  himself  with  thirst,  making  straight  for  the
ember-pit  ahead  of  him  ;  and  if  a  man  with  eyes  to
discern  were  to  observe  him  and  say  his  course  and
behaviour  and  the  road  he  was  taking  would  surely
bring  him  to  that  very  pit  of  embers  ;  and  if  later  that
observer  were  to  see  the  wayfarer  fallen  into  the  pit  of
embers,  there  experiencing  violent,  acute  and  racking
pain ; — even  so  does  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  the
heart  of  a  given  man  tell  me  that  his  courses  and
behaviour  .  .  .  and  racking  pain.

Suppose,  again,  that  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  the
heart  of  a  given  man  tells  me  that  his  courses  and
behaviour  and  the  road  he  has  taken  are  such  as  will
bring  him  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death  to
rebirth  as  an  animal.  Later  on,  with  the  Eye  Celestial
which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  I  duly


M.  i.  75-


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


51


see  him,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  reborn
as  an  animal  and  experiencing,  as  such,  violent,  acute
and  racking  pain.  It  is  just  as  if  there  were  a
jakes,  a  man’s  height  deep,  full  up  with  ordure,  and  if
there  drew  near  a  man  overcome  [75]  and  overpowered
by  the  midsummer  heat  .  .  .  (etc.  as  in  previous  para¬
graph,  substituting  ordure  for  embers)  .  .  .  racking
pain.

Or,  suppose  that  my  heart's  knowledge  of  .  .  .
reborn  as  a  ghost,  there  experiencing,  as  such,  violent,
acute  and  racking  pain.  It  is  just  as  if  on  rugged
ground  there  grew  a  tree  with  but  the  tiniest  leaves
and  foliage  and  with  but  meagre  strips  of  shade
beneath  ;  and  if  there  drew  near  a  man  overcome  and
overpowered  by  the  midsummer  heat,  exhausted  and
beside  himself  with  thirst,  making  straight  for  the  tree
ahead  of  him ;  and  if  a  man  with  eyes  to  discern  were
to  observe  him  and  to  say  that  his  course  and  behaviour
and  the  road  he  was  taking  would  surely  bring  him  to
that  very  tree  ;  and  if  later  that  observer  were  to  see
the  wayfarer  seated  or  lying  under  that  tree’s  shade,
experiencing  violent,  acute  and  racking  pain; — even
so  does  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  the  heart  of  a  given
man  tell  me  that  his  courses  and  behaviour  and  the
road  he  has  taken  are  such  as  to  bring  him,  at  the
body’s  dissolution  after  death,  to  rebirth  as  a  ghost,
there  to  experience  violent,  acute  and  racking  pain.

Or,  suppose  that  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  .  .  .
reborn  as  a  man,  there  experiencing  much  felicity.
It  is  just  as  if  on  level  ground  there  grew  a  tree  with
thick  luxuriant  foliage  and  with  dense  shade  beneath  ;
and  if  there  drew  near  a  man  overcome  .  .  .  (etc.  as
in  previous  paragraph)  .  .  .  see  the  wayfarer  seated
or  lying  in  the  shade  of  the  tree,  there  experiencing
much  felicity ; — even  so  does  my  heart’s  knowledge
of  the  heart  of  a  given  man  tell  me  that  his  courses
and  behaviour  and  the  road  he  has  taken  are  such  as
to  bring  him,  at  the  body's  dissolution  after  death,
to  rebirth  among  mankind,  there  to  experience  much
felicity.


9_35


I.e*  aM-Gf  H  i:


I

Tb  IAui


Bild  60


C«i


Ktip  (Bj


l»


Km  ^  II"


Vdi  •*■  4^u  Ki*


Am


Das  Diinengelande  des  Ma-tschu.  Aufgenommen  von  Ri-f-4j8o.  Blau  39.


s

huckblick  zum  1  sodyara-nor  II.  Aufgrnoinmrn  von  Ri-j-4380.  Blau  39.


Im  Diincnl.md  ties  Ma-tschu.  Aufgenommen  von  Ri> 433s  Blatti9.


Bild  61


Riickblick  zum  Tsodyara-nor  II.

Aufgenommen  von  Rii  -j-  4355-  Blau  39.


52


XII.  MAHA-SlHANADA-SUTTA.


M.  L  76-


[76]  Or,  fourthly,  suppose  that  my  heart’s  knowledge
of  .  .  .  reborn  in  bliss  in  heaven,  there  experiencing
exceedingly  great  felicity.  It  is  just  as  if  there  were
a  palace  and  in  it  a  gabled  pavilion,  plastered  within
and  without,  sheltered  from  winds,  complete  with  well-
barred  doors,  and  windows  that  fasten;  and  if  within  this
pavilion  there  were  a  divan,  spread  with  white  cover¬
lets  of  fleecy  wool  embroidered  with  flowers,  strewn
over  with  rare  antelope-skins  as  rugs,  and  furnished
with  counterpanes  and  a  red  cushion  at  either  end ;
and  if  there  drew  near  a  man  overcome  .  .  .  see  the
wayfarer  seated  or  lying  on  that  divan  in  exceedingly
great  felicity  ; — even  so  does  my  heart’s  knowledge
.  .  .  there  to  experience  exceedingly  great  felicity.

Or,  lastly,  suppose  that  my  heart’s  knowledge  of  the
heart  of  a  given  man  tells  me  that  his  courses  and
behaviour  and  the  road  he  has  taken  are  such  as  will,
by  the  extirpation  of  the  Cankers,  ensure  his  dwelling
— here  and  now — in  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  which  knows  no  Cankers,  a  Deliverance  which
he  has,  for  and  by  himself,  thought  out  and  realized,
so  as  to  enter  and  abide  therein.  Later  on,  with  the
Eye  Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the
human  eye,  I  duly  see  him  with  his  Deliverance
achieved,  experiencing  exceedingly  great  felicity.  It
is  just  as  if  there  were  a  lotus-pond  of  clear  pleasant
cool  gleaming  water  with  firm  banks  and  in  every  way
delightful,  with  a  dense  wood  hard  by  ;  and  if  there
drew  near  a  man  overcome  .  .  .  see  the  wayfarer —
after  going  down  to  the  pond  and  there  bathing  and
drinking  and  easing  his  weary  frame  of  all  its  fatigue
and  distress — come  out  of  the  water  and  sit  or  [77]  lie
down  in  the  dense  wood  in  exceedingly  great  felicity ;
— even  so  does  my  heart’s  knowledge  .  .  .  with  his
Deliverance  achieved,  experiencing  exceedingly  great
felicity.

Such  are  the  five  destinies  hereafter.  Now,  if  of
me  who  know  and  see  all  this  anyone  were  to  say  that
there  is  nothing  superhuman  about  the  recluse  Gotama's
ennobling  gifts  or  his  knowledge  and  insight,  and  that


M.  i.  78.


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


53


it  is  Gotama’s  own  reasoning  which  has  hammered  out
a  Doctrine  of  his  own  evolving  and  personal  invention,
— if  such  a  one  does  not  recant  these  words  of  his,
change  his  heart,  and  renounce  his  view,  he  will  find
himself  hauled  off  to  purgatory.  Just  as  a  Brother
who  is  equipped  with  virtue,  concentration,  and  insight
will — here  and  now — come  to  the  (Arahat’s)  plenitude
of  knowledge,  so  this  other  equipment — if  the  man
does  not  recant  his  words,  change  his  heart,  and
renounce  his  view — will  end  in  his  being  hauled  off  to
purgatory.

Aye,  Sariputta,  I  have  lived  the  fourfold  higher
life  ; — I  have  been  an  ascetic  of  ascetics ;  loathly  have
I  been,  foremost  in  loathliness ;  scrupulous  have  I
been,  foremost  in  scrupulosity ;  solitary  have  I  been,
foremost  in  solitude.

(i.)  To  such  a  pitch  of  asceticism  have  I  gone  that1
naked  was  I,  flouting  life’s  decencies,  licking  my  hands
after  meals,  never  heeding  when  folk  called  to  me  to
come  or  to  stop,  never  accepting  food  brought  to  me
before  my  rounds  or  cooked  expressly  for  me,  never
accepting  an  invitation,  never  receiving  food  direct
from  pot  or  pan  or  within  the  threshold  or  among  the
faggots  or  pestles,  never  from  (one  only  of)  two  people
messing  together,  never  from  a  pregnant  woman  or  a
nursing  mother  or  a  woman  in  coitu ,  never  from
gleanings  (in  time  of  famine)  nor  from  where  a  dog  is
ready  at  hand  or  where  (hungry)  flies  congregate,
never  touching  flesh  or  fish  or  spirits  or  strong  drink
or  brews  of  grain.  I  have  visited  only  one  house  a  day
and  there  taken  only  one  morsel ;  [78]  or  I  have
visited  but  two  or  (up  to  not  more  than)  seven  houses
a  day  and  taken  at  each  only  two  or  (up  to  not  more
than)  seven  morsels ;  I  have  lived  on  a  single  saucer
of  food  a  day,  or  on  two,  or  (up  to)  seven  saucers ;  I
have  had  but  one  meal  a  day,  or  one  every  two  days,
or  (so  on,  up  to)  every  seven  days,  or  only  once  a  fort-

1  Cf.  infra  Suttas  No.  36,  45,  51,  etc. ;  and  see  Dialogues  1, 227,
for  these — and  one  or  two  more — ascetic  practices  (of  Ajivakas)
and  their  interpretation  (by  Buddhists).


Hi  Id  62


A


«  I


In  dem  Diinenland  des  Ma-tschu.

Aufeenummcn  von  Kup  -j-  4410  Hiatt  49.


Biid  63


01


Amne


»ckfa-<


pine


I  lor.


r

Tit.


DrvitalHn-Her;;.. _

T*.  t>r


Bild  64


Die  Dunenlandschaft  des  Ma-tschu.


Auft'cmnninen  von  Tat  a  4345.  Blatt  44


54


XII.  MAIIA-S  Hi  A  NA.DA-S  UTTA.


M.  i.  79.


night,  on  a  rigid  scale  of  rationing.  My  sole  diet  has
been  herbs  gathered  green,  or  the  grain  of  wild  millets
and  paddy,  or  snippets  of  hide,  or  water-plants,  or  the
red  powder  round  rice-grains  within  the  husk,  or  the
discarded  scum  of  rice  on  the  boil,  or  the  flour  of  oil¬
seeds,  or  grass,  or  cow-dung.  I  have  lived  on  wild
roots  and  fruit,  or  on  windfalls  only.  My  raiment  has
been  of  hemp  or  of  hempen  mixture,  of  cerements,  of
rags  from  the  dust-heap,  of  bark,  of  the  black  antelope’s
pelt  either  whole  or  split  down  the  middle,  of  grass,  of
strips  of  bark  or  wood,  of  hair  of  men  or  animals  woven
into  a  blanket,  or  of  owls’  wings.  In  fulfilment  of  my
vows,  I  have  plucked  out  the  hair  of  my  head  and  the
hair  of  my  beard,  have  never  quitted  the  upright  for
the  sitting  posture,1  have  squatted  and  never  risen  up,
moving  only  a-squat,  have  couched  on  thorns,  have
gone  down  to  the  water  punctually  thrice  before  night¬
fall  to'  wash  (away  the  evil  within).  After  this  wise,
in  divers  fashions,  have  I  lived  to  torment  and  to
torture  my  body ; — to  such  a  length  in  asceticism  have
I  gone.

(ii.)  To  such  a  length  have  I  gone  in  loathliness  that
on  my  body  I  have  accumulated  the  dirt  and  filth  of
years  till  it  dropped  off  of  itself, — even  as  the  rank
growths  of  years  fall  away  from  the  stump  of  a
Tinduka-tree.  But  never  once  came  the  thought  to
me  to  clean  it  off  with  my  own  hands  or  to  get  others
to  clean  it  off  for  me  ; — to  such  a  length  in  loathliness
have  I  gone.

(iii.)  To  such  a  length  in  scrupulosity  have  I  gone
that  my  footsteps  out  and  in  were  always  attended  by
a  mindfulness  so  vigilant  as  to  awake  compassion
within  me  over  even  a  drop  of  water  lest  I  might  harm
tiny  creatures  in  crevices ; — to  such  a  length  have  I
gone  in  scrupulosity.

(iv.)  To  such  a  length  have  I  gone  as  a  solitary
that,  [79]  when  my  abode  was  in  the  depths  of  the  forest,
the  mere  glimpse  of  a  cowherd  or  neatherd  or  grass-


1  Jain  practices,  see  Sutta  No.  14.


M.  i.  79-


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


55


cutter,  or  of  a  man  gathering  firewood  or  edible  roots
in  the  forest,  was  enough  to  make  me  dart  from  wood
to  wood,  from  thicket  to  thicket,  from  dale  to  dale,  and
from  hill  to  hill,— in  order  that  they  might  not  see  me
or  I  them.  As  a  deer  at  the  sight  of  man  darts  away
over  hill  and  dale,  even  so  did  I  dart  away  at  the  mere
glimpse  of  cowherd,  neatherd,  or  what  not,  in  order  that
they  might  not  see  me  or  I  them ; — to  such  a  length

have  I  gone  as  a  solitary.  r  ,

When  the  cowherds  had  driven  their  herds  forth
from  the  byres,  up  I  came  on  all  fours  to  find  a  sub-
sistence  on  the  droppings  of  the  young  milch-cows.  So
long  as  my  own  dung  and  urine  held  out,  on  that  1
have  subsisted.  So  foul  a  filth-eater  was  l.1

I  took  up  my  abode  in  the  awesome  depths  of  the
forest,  depths  so  awesome  that  it  was  reputed  that  none
but  the  passion-less  could  venture  in  without  his  hair
standing  on  end.  When  the  cold  season  brought  chil
wintry  nights,  then  it  was  that,  in  the  dark  half  of  the
months  when  snow  was  falling,  I  dwelt  by  night  in  the
open  air  and  in  the  dank  thicket  by  day.  But  when
there  came  the  last  broiling  month  of  summer  before  the
rains,  I  made  my  dwelling  under  the  baking  sun  by  day
and  in  the  stifling  thicket  by  night.  Then  there  flashed
on  me  these  verses,  never  till  then  uttered  by  any .


Now  scorched,  now  frore ,  tn  forest  dread,  alone,
naked  and  fireless,  set  upon  his  quest,
the  hermit  battles  purity  to  win.

In  a  charnel  ground  I  lay  me  down  with  charred
bones  for  pillow.  When  the  cowherds  boys  came
along,  they  spat  and  staled  upon  me,  pelted  me  with
dirt,  and  stuck  bits  of  wood  into  my  ears.  Yet  1
declare  that  never  did  I  let  an  evil  mood  against  them
arise  within  me.— So  poised  in  equanimity  was  I. _

*  Less  detail  is  given  at  Dialogues  I,  232  (note  i\ ,  and ithe
Q, th  lataka  (which  contains  the  verses  following,  with  a  com-
mental  which  is  fuller  and-I  think-later  than  Buddhaghosas

commentary  on  them  in  this  Sutta).  v,  .  «  t

“ThU  bojjhanga  addition  (see  Sutta  No.  2)  does  not

appear  in  the  Digha  catalogue  of  asceticisms.


Der  Ma-tschu  am  Tulse  tier  DrA'galski-Berge.


Aufgenoinmen  von  Mm  a  4345  Matt  44.


Aufgctiommin  von  lo>;  5«  Blatt  43


«u  Zul


Bild  67


I  let-


tfl

I


o

Am  Ma-tschu.

Aufgcnommcti  von  Lager  LIU.  IHalt  iS


56


xn.  maha-sIhanAda-sutta.


M.  i.  80.


[80]  Some  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who  say
and  hold  that  purity  cometh  by  way  of  food,  and  ac¬
cordingly  proclaim  that  they  live  exclusively  on  jujube-
fruits,  which,  in  one  form  or  other,  constitute  their  sole
meat  and  drink.  Now  I  can  claim  to  have  lived  on  a
single  jujube-fruit  a  day.  If  this  leads  you  to  think
that  this  fruit  was  larger  in  those  days,  you  would  err  ;
for,  it  was  precisely  the  same  size  then  that  it  is  to-day.
When  I  was  living  on  a  single  fruit  a  day,  my  body
grew  emaciated  in  the  extreme ;  because  I  ate  so  little,
my  members,  great  and  small,  grew  like  the  knotted
joints  of  withered  creepers  ;  like  a  buffalo’s  hoof  were
my  shrunken  buttocks ;  like  the  twists  in  a  rope  were
my  spinal  vertebrae  ;  like  the  crazy  rafters  of  a  tumble-
down  roof,  that  start  askew  and  aslant,  were  my
gaunt  ribs ;  like  the  starry  gleams  on  water  deep
down  and  afar  in  the  depths  of  a  well,  shone  my
gleaming  eyes  deep  down  and  afar  in  the  depths
of  their  sockets ;  and  as  the  rind  of  a  cut  gourd
shrinks  and  shrivels  in  the  heat,  so  shrank  and
shrivelled  the  scalp  of  my  head, — and  all  because  I
ate  so  little.  If  I  sought  to  feel  my  belly,  it  was  my
backbone  which  I  found  in  my  grasp ;  if  I  sought  to
feel  my  backbone,  I  found  myself  grasping  my  belly,
so  closely  did  my  belly  cleave  to  my  backbone  ; — and
all  because  I  ate  so  little.  When  I  wanted  to  retire
for  the  calls  of  nature,  down  I  fell  on  my  face ; — and
all  because  I  ate  so  little.  If  for  ease  of  body  I  chafed
my  limbs,  the  hairs  of  my  body  fell  away  under  my
hand,  rotted  at  their  roots  ; — and  all  because  I  ate
so  little.

Other  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who,  saying
and  holding  that  purity  cometh  by  way  of  food,
proclaim  that  they  live  exclusively  on  beans — or
sesamum — or  rice — as  their  sole  meat  and  drink.  [81]
Now  I  can  claim  to  have  lived  on  a  single  bean  a  day
— on  a  single  sesamum  seed  a  day — or  a  single  grain
of  rice  a  day  ;  and  [the  result  was  still  the  same].
Never  did  this  practice  or  these  courses  or  these  dire
austerities  bring  me  to  the  ennobling  gifts  of  super-


Per  Ma-tschu  in  der  Yach-yung-Ebene.

Aufgrnominrn  von  s-  9t?.  Hiatt  j8.


Der  Ma-tschu  aus  den  Drygalski-IJergen  gesehen.


Aufgcnommrn  von  Ha  *4480.  Hiatt  jS


M.  i.  82.


THE  LONG  CHALLENGE.


57


human  knowledge  and  insight.  And  why  ? — Because
none  of  them  lead  to  that  noble  understanding  which,
when  won,  leads  on  to  Deliverance  and  guides  him
who  lives  up  to  it  onward  to  the  utter  extinction  of
all  Ill.

Again,  there  are  other  recluses  and  brahmins  who
say  and  hold  that  purity  cometh  by  way  of  successive
transmigrations,  [82] — or  of  a  particular  rebirth — or
particular  abode.  Now,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find
the  transmigration  or  rebirth  or  abode  that  has  not
been  mine  in  all  this  long  past  of  mine, — save  and
except  the  heaven  of  the  pure  abode.1  And  even  if  I
were  to  transmigrate  to — or  be  reborn  in — or  abide
among  the  gods  of  that  particular  heaven,  I  could
never  more  return  to  earth.

Again,  there  are  recluses  and  brahmins  who  say  and
hold  that  purity  cometh  by  sacrificing  or  by  fire-ritual.
Now  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  either  the  sacrifice
which  I  have  not  offered  or  the  fire-ritual  which  I  have
not  performed, — whether  as  a  king  anointed  as  such
from  among  the  nobles,  or  as  a  brahmin  magnate.

Lastly,  there  are  recluses  and  brahmins  who  say  and
hold  that,  as  long  as  a  man  is  in  the  prime  of  his  youth
and  early  manhood,  with  a  wealth  of  coal-black  hair
untouched  by  grey,  and  in  all  the  beauty  of  his  prime,
— so  long  only  are  the  powers  of  his  mind  at  their
best ;  but  that  when  he  has  grown  broken  and  old,
aged  and  stricken  in  years,  and  draws  to  his  life’s  close,
then  the  powers  of  his  mind  are  in  decay.  This  is
not  so.  I  myself  am  now  broken  and  old,  aged  and
stricken  in  years  and  at  the  close  of  my  life,  being  now
round  about  eighty.  Imagine  now  that  I  had  four
disciples — each  living  to  be  a  full  hundred,  each  of
perfect  alertness,  resolve,  and  power  to  reproduce
and  expound,  —  four  disciples  as  perfect  in  their


1  This  heaven  is  deliberately  ignored  in  Sutta  No.  X.  At
Digha  II,  50  (v.  Dialogues  II,  39,  note  2),  Gotama  paid  a  visit  of
curiosity  to  this  heaven,  which  is  only  dragged  in  here  per
contumeliam,  to  pour  contempt  on  all  the  pride  of  brahmins  in
their  purity  and  its  apotheosis.


5«


XII.  MAHA-SlHANADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  83.


scope  as  a  mighty  archer  of  renown,  so  skilled  and
dexterous  with  his  bow  and  so  schooled  in  its  use  that
he  can  with  ease  shoot  even  a  feather-weight  shaft
right  over  a  towering  palm.  [83]  Imagine  further
that  these  four  gifted  disciples  ply  me  with  questions
(say)  about  mustering-up  mindfulness,  receive  my
answers,  take  in  my  exposition  as  expounded  to  them,
never  put  to  me  a  single  subsidiary  question,  and  never
pause  in  their  questioning  except  for  meals,  for  the
calls  of  nature,  and  for  necessary  repose. — Still  uncom¬
pleted  withal  would  be  the  Truth-finder’s  teaching,  still
uncompleted  would  be  his  exposition  of  the  Sayings,  still
uncompleted  would  be  his  answers  to  their  questions ;
but  meantime  my  four  disciples  would  have  lived  out
their  allotted  century  and  would  have  expired.  If  you
have  to  carry  me  about  on  a  litter,  Sariputta,  yet  will
my  mind  still  retain  its  powers.

Of  me,  if  of  anyone,  it  may  truly  be  said  that  in  me
a  being  without  delusions  has  appeared  in  the  world
for  the  welfare  and  good  of  many,  out  of  compassion
towards  the  world,  for  the  profit,  welfare  and  good  of
gods  and  men.

At  the  time  the  venerable  Nagasamala  was  standing
behind  the  Lord,  fanning  him  ;  and  he  said  to  the
Lord  : — Wonderful,  sir  ;  marvellous  !  As  I  listened  to
this  discourse,  the  hairs  of  my  body  stood  on  end.
What  is  the  title  of  this  discourse  ?

Well,  then,  Nagasamala,  treasure  it  up  in  your
memory  as  ‘the  Grisly  discourse.’1

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Nagasamala  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.

1  As  this  MahS-sihanSda-sutta  is  also  thus  styled  the
Lomahathsa-pariyaya,  so  the  Sigal-ovada-sutta  of
the  Dlgha  was  also  (Dialogues  III,  171)  known  as  the  layman’s
Vinaya.  So  the  An um  ana-sutta  (infra,  No.  15)  was  known
as  the  Bhikkhu-pStimokkha;  and  the  Ariya-pariyesana-
sutta  (infra.  No.  26)  is  alternatively  styled  by  Bu.  Pasarasi-
sutta.  See  also  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  Sutta  No.  115
for  five  alternative  titles,  all  attributed  to  Gotama  himself.


M.  i.  84.


THE  LONGER  STORY  OF  ILL.


59


XIII.  MAHA-DUKKHA-ICKHANDHA-
SUTTA.

THE  LONGER  STORY  OF  ILL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  a  number  of  Almsmen,  duly  robed  and
bowl  in  hand,  went  early  in  the  day  [84]  into  the  city
for  alms.  But,  thinking  it  somewhat  early  for  this,
they  thought  they  would  go  to  the  (neighbouring)
pleasaunce  assigned  to  the  Wanderers  of  other  creeds.
Arrived  there  and  seating  themselves  after  due
exchange  of  civil  greetings,  they  were  addressed  as
follows  by  these  sectaries : — Reverend  sirs,  the  recluse
Gotama  teaches  how  to  transcend  pleasures  of  sense  ; —
so  do  we.  H  e  teaches  how  to  transcend  visible  forms ; —
so  do  we.  He  teaches  how  to  transcend  feelings ; —
so  do  we.  Where  then  is  the  distinction,  divergence
or  difference  between  him  and  us  in  tenets  or  teaching  ?

The  Almsmen  who  had  listened  to  this,  neither
applauded  nor  objected,  but  simply  rose  up  without  a
word  and  departed,  to  hear  the  truth  on  the  matter
from  the  Lord’s  lips.  So,  when  they  had  gone  their
rounds  for  alms  and  had  got  back  after  their  meal,  they
went  to  him  and,  seating  themselves  after  due  saluta¬
tions,  related  what  had  passed.

[85]  Sectaries  who  say  that  should  be  asked  what
satisfaction,  what  perils,  and  what  Deliverance  attend
pleasures  of  sense,  or  visible  forms,  or  feelings,  respec¬
tively.  To  this  they  will  not  succeed  in  replying,  and  will
be  annoyed  to  boot.  And  why  ? — Because  it  is  beyond
their  scope.  I  see  no  one  in  the  whole  universe — with
all  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,  recluses  and  brahmins,
gods  and  men — who  can  win  hearts  with  his  answer  to
these  questions,  save  only  a  Truth-finder,  or  a  disciple  of
the  Truth-finder,  or  one  who  has  been  told  by  them.

What  is  the  satisfaction  that  attends  pleasures  of
sense  ?  Fivefold  are  pleasures  of  sense  : — (i.)  forms


Bilder  Nr.  70 — 115

Aufgenommcn  zwischen

Yach-tschu  und  Sung  p'an-t’ing


Zum  IV.  und  IVa.  Teil  des  Kartenwerkes

NORDOST-TIBET


6o  XIII.  MAHA-DUKKHA-KKHANDHA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  86.


perceived  by  the  eye,  (ii.)  sounds  perceived  by  the  ear,
(iii.)  odours  perceived  by  the  nose,  (iv.)  tastes  perceived
by  the  tongue,  and  (v.)  touch  perceived  by  the
body, — all  of  them  desirable,  agreeable,  pleasant,  and
attractive,  all  of  them  pleasurable  and  exciting  to
passion.  The  satisfaction  that  attends  pleasures  of
sense  is  the  gratification  and  contentment  which  arises
from  these  fivefold  pleasures.

What  are  the  perils  which  attend  pleasures  of  sense  ?
— Take  the  case  of  a  respectable  young  man  who
makes  his  living  by  being  clerk  of  the  signet,  clerk
of  accompt,  computer,  estate-agent,  purveyor,  herd-
manager,  archer,  member  of  the  royal  household,  or  in
some  other  calling, — therein  braving  heat  and  cold,
harassed  by  gnats,  mosquitoes,  wind,  blazing  sun,  and
contact  with  snakes,  and  tormented  to  death  by  hunger
and  thirst. — These  are  among  the  perils  that  attend
pleasures  of  sense,  here  and  now,  with  all  that  makes  up
the  sum  of  Ill, — all  because  of  pleasure,  from  pleasure,
by  reason  of  pleasure,  verily  [86]  with  pleasure,  and
pleasure  only,  as  the  cause.

If,  now,  active,  energetic  and  pushing  though  he  be,
this  respectable  young  man  fails  to  make  his  fortune,
he  grieves  and  laments  and  weeps,  beats  his  breast
and  is  distracted  that  his  efforts  have  been  in  vain  and
his  activities  fruitless. — These  are  among  the  perils
that  attend  .  .  .  the  cause.

If  on  the  other  hand  success  attends  his  efforts  and
he  does  make  his  fortune,  he  is  beset  by  anxiety  and
tribulation  to  retain  it, — always  wondering  whether
kings  or  thieves  will  despoil  him,  or  whether  he  will  be
stripped  by  fire  or  flood  or  by  heirs  he  detests.  And
if,  despite  all  his  watch  and  ward,  one  or  other  of  these
calamities  befalls  him,  then  he  grieves  and  laments
.  .  .  the  cause.

It  is  equally  because  of  pleasure — from  pleasure,  by
reason  of  pleasure,  verily  with  pleasure,  and  pleasure
only,  as  the  originating  cause — that  kings  contend  with
kings,  nobles  with  nobles,  brahmins  with  brahmins,
citizens  with  citizens,  mother  with  son,  son  with  mother,


l.amis>  ha-ciM*


 ,  •  t  '•  •  -  i


Bild  70


l!i«r{rie-j6od


lm  Lamascha-rich.

Aufgcnointncil  von  Tt  a  4345  Blatt  36


-  40tc


Ut  -  47**1


.  <u  Uild  70

I

|jiauwh»-fiih


Kichi?»ofr»firl»itjgr

-  4930  Kux  •  4*75


1

KLiux-


M.  i.  87.


THE  LONGER  STORY  OF  ILL.


6l


father  with  son,  son  with  father,  brother  with  brother,
brother  with  sister,  sister  with  brother,  friend  with
friend,  till,  in  their  quarrels,  contentions  and  strife,
they  fall  on  one  another  with  fists,  clods,  cudgels,  and
knives,  whereby  they  come  by  their  death  or  deadly
hurt — These  are  among  the  perils  that  attend  .  .  .
the  cause.

It  is  equally  because  of  pleasure  that,  girding  on
sword  and  buckler,  bow  and  sheaf  of  arrows,  men
charge  in  battle  array,  while  arrows  and  javelins  hurtle
through  the  air  and  swords  flash  and  hack ;  with  arrows
and  spear  they  deal  wounds,  with  their  swords  they
hew  off  heads,  so  that  men  come  by  their  deaths  or
deadly  hurt. — These  are  among  the  perils  that  attend
.  .  .  the  cause.

It  is  equally  because  of  pleasure  that,  girding  on
sword  and  buckler,  bow  and  sheaf  of  arrows,  men
charge  up  slippery  bastions,  while  arrows  and  javelins
hurtle  through  the  air  [87]  and  swords  flash  and  hack  ;
with  arrows  and  spear  they  deal  wounds ;  (the
besieged)  pour  down  blazing  embers  (on  their  besiegers)
and  crush  them  with  the  falling  portcullis  ;  heads  are
hewn  off  by  swords  ;  so  that  men  come  by  their  deaths
or  deadly  hurt. — These  are  among  the  perils  .  .  .
the  cause.

It  is  equally  because  of  pleasure  that  men  turn  into
burglars,  robbers,  brigands,  highwaymen,  or  adulterers.
On  arrest,  these  are  punished  by  the  authorities  in
divers  ways, — by  flogging,  by  bastinado,  by  bludgeon¬
ing  ;  by  cutting  off  hands  or  feet,  hands  and  feet,  ears
or  nose,  ears  and  nose ;  or  they  are  subjected  to  the
tortures  of  the  saucepan,1  the  chank-shave,  or  the
lanthorn,2  the  wreath  of  fire,3  the  fiery  hand,  the  hay-


1  The  skull  was  first  trepanned  and  then  a  red-hot  ball  of  iron
was  dropped  in,  so  that  the  brains  boiled  over  like  porridge.  For
this  and  other  tortures  see  S.B.E.,  XXXV,  276.

s  The  mouth  was  fixed  open  with  a  skewer  and  a  lighted  lamp
put  inside.  This  torture  was  called  the  mouth  of  Rabu  because
Rahu,  the  Asura,  was  supposed,  at  an  eclipse,  to  swallow  the  sun.

3  Bu.  says  that  the  whole  body  was  oiled  before  ignition  ;  but


62  XIII.  MAHA-DUKKHA-KKHANDHA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  87.


band,1  the  bark-robe,  the  black  hart,2  the  meat-hooks,8
the  pennies,4  the  pickle,6  bolting  the  door,6  or  the
palliasse  ;7  or  they  are  sprayed  with  boiling  oil,  or  are
given  to  starved  dogs  to  devour,  or  are  impaled  alive,
or  have  their  heads  chopped  off;  so  that  men  come  by
their  deaths  or  deadly  hurt. — These  are  among  the
perils  .  .  .  the  cause.

Lastly,  it  is  equally  because  of  pleasure — from
pleasure,  by  reason  of  pleasure,  verily  with  pleasure,
and  pleasure  only,  as  the  cause — that  men  go  astray
in  act  word  and  thought ;  and  thereby,  at  the
body's  dissolution  after  death,  they  pass  to  states  of
suffering,  woe  and  tribulation  and  to  purgatory. —
These  are  the  perils  that — in  the  hereafter — dog
pleasures  of  sense  with  all  that  makes  up  Ill, — all
because  of  pleasure,  from  pleasure,  by  reason  of
pleasure,  verily  with  pleasure,  and  pleasure  only,  as  the
cause.

Next,  what  is  the  deliverance  from  pleasures  of
sense  ? — To  subdue  and  to  shed  all  desire  and  appetite
for  them,  this  is  deliverance  from  pleasures  of  sense.

Almsmen,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  lack  this  real
knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the  satisfaction  and
perils  of,  and  of  deliverance  from,  pleasures  of  sense,
they  cannot  possibly  either  comprehend  such  pleasures


mall  suggests  a  coronal  of  flames,  just  as  the  next  torture  is
localized  to  the  hands.

1  From  the  neck  downwards,  the  skin  was  flayed  into  strips
not  severed  at  the  ankles  but  there  plaited  like  a  hay-band  to
suspend  him  till  he  fell  by  his  own  weight.  In  the  next  torture
the  strips  formed  a  kilt

*  The  victim  was  skewered  to  the  ground  through  elbows  and
knees,  with  a  fire  lighted  all  round  him  so  as  to  char  his  flesh.

3  The  victims  were  slung  up  by  double  hooks  through  flesh
and  tendons.

4  With  a  razor  little  discs  of  flesh  were  shaved  off  all  over  the
body.

6  Into  gashes  salt  or  alkali  was  rubbed, — with  combs.

*  The  head  was  nailed  to  the  ground  by  a  skewer  through  both
ear-holes.

T  The  skin  being  left  intact,  the  bones  and  inwards  were
pounded  till  the  whole  flame  was  as  soft  as  a  straw  mattress.


M.  i.  88.


THE  LONGER  STORY  OF  ILL.


63


for  themselves  or  instruct  another  by  what  course  to
comprehend  the  truth  about  them.  Only  those  can
possibly  do  this  who  [88]  know  pleasures  of  sense  for
what  they  truly  are.

Take  (the  particular  case  of)  visible  forms.  What
is  the  satisfaction  they  give  ? — It  is  as  if  there  were  a
maiden  of  a  noble  or  brahmin  or  citizen  family,  between
fifteen  and  sixteen  years  old,  not  too  tall  and  not  too
short,  not  too  plump  and  not  too  thin,  not  too  dark  and
not  too  pale  ; — is  she  then  in  the  flower  of  her  charm
and  beauty  ?

Yes,  sir.

Well,  anything  agreeable  and  pleasurable  that  arises
from  charm  and  beauty  is  the  satisfaction  that  visible
forms  give.

Next,  what  are  the  perils  of  visible  forms  ? — Suppose
that,  later  on,  one  saw  that  same  lady  when  she  was
eighty  or  ninety  or  a  hundred  years  old,  a  crone  bent
double  and  propping  her  bowed  frame  with  a  staff  as
she  totters  along,  decrepit,  with  her  youth  gone  and
her  teeth  broken,  with  hair  grey  or  scanty  or  none,  all
wrinkly  or  blotchy ; — what  think  you  ?  Has  the  flower
of  her  charm  and  beauty  gone  and  calamity  set  in  ?

Yes,  sir.

Well,  this  is  among  the  perils  which  dog  visible
forms.

Now  suppose  one  saw  that  same  lady  sick  and
suffering  and  very  ill,  lying  in  her  own  ordure  and
urine,  dependent  on  others  to  lift  and  dress  her  ; —
what  think  you,  Brethren?  Has  the  flower  of  her
charm  and  beauty  gone  and  calamity  set  in  ?

Yes,  sir.

Well,  this  too  is  among  the  perils  which  dog  visible
forms.

Lastly,  suppose  that,  after  that  same  lady’s  body  has
been  cast  into  the  charnel-ground,  one  saw  it  either
lying  there  bloated  and  black  and  festering  after
one  to  three  days'  exposure  there, — or  being  de¬
voured  by  crows  or  hawks  or  vultures  or  dogs  or
jackals  or  divers  worms — or  [89]  showing  as  a  chain


Bild  71

Bile!  72

M

X

1- 11

I

su  lit

1

Bile!  73


Ini  Ma-tschu-Tal.

AufKCnomincn  von  il  Blatt  40.


64  XIII.  MAHA-DUKKHA-KKHANDHA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  90.


of  bones,  either  still  with  flesh  and  blood  and  sinews  to
hold  them  together,  or  with  only  smears  of  flesh  and
blood  left  with  the  bones  and  sinews,  or  with  sinews
gone  and  only  the  bare  bones  left  scattered  about,  here
a  hand  and  there  a  foot,  here  a  leg  and  there  an  arm,
here  the  pelvis,  there  the  spine,  and  there  the  skull —
or  with  the  bones  whitening  like  sea-shells,  or  piled  in
a  heap  as  years  roll  by,  or  crumbled  to  dust; — what
think  you  ?  Has  the  flower  of  her  charm  and  beauty
gone  and  calamity  set  in  ?

Yes,  sir.

Well,  these  things  too  are  among  the  perils  which
dog  visible  forms.

Next,  what  is  the  deliverance  from  visible  forms  ? —
To  subdue  and  shed  all  desire  and  appetite  for  them, —
this  is  deliverance  from  visible  forms.

Almsmen,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  lack  this  real
knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the  satisfactions  and
perils  of,  and  deliverance  from,  visible  forms,  they
cannot  possibly  either  comprehend  visible  forms  for
themselves  or  instruct  another  by  what  course  to
comprehend  the  truth  about  them.  Only  those  can
possibly  do  this  who  know  visible  forms  for  what  they
truly  are.

What  are  the  satisfactions  that  feelings  bring? — Take
the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of  pleasures  of
sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  has
entered  on  and  abides  in  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its
zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness
but  not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.
When  it  is  thus  with  him,  harm  is  not  in  his  heart,
either  towards  himself  or  to  others  or  towards  both
together ;  [90]  he  experiences  the  feeling  of  harbouring
no  harm  at  all.  This  perfect  innocence  of  harm  I
count  as  the  true  satisfaction  which  feelings  bring.
When  he  has  risen  above  reasoning  and  reflection,
he  enters  into  and  abides  in  the  Second  Ecstasy,  with
all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  rapt  con¬
centration,  above  all  reasoning  and  reflection,  a  state
whereby  the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity  reigns


M.  i.  90.


THE  LONGER  STORY  OF  ILL.


65


within.  And  so  he  passes  to  the  Third  and  the  Fourth
Ecstasy  ;  and  when,  by  putting  from  him  both  satisfac¬
tion  and  dissatisfaction,  and  by  shedding  the  joys  and
sorrows  he  used  to  feel,  that  Almsman  enters  into  and
abides  in  that  Fourth  Ecstasy — the  state  that  knows
neither  the  pleasant  nor  the  unpleasant,  the  clarity
that  comes  of  poised  equanimity  and  alert  mindful¬
ness, — harm  is  not  in  his  heart,  either  towards  him¬
self  or  to  others  or  to  both  together ;  he  experiences
the  feeling  of  harbouring  no  harm  at  all.  This
sense  of  perfect  innocence  of  harm  I  count  as  the  true
satisfaction  which  feelings  bring.

What  are  the  perils  which  feelings  entail  ? — Inas¬
much  as  feelings  are  transitory,  fraught  with  Ill,  and
the  creatures  of  change, — these  are  the  perils  which
dog  them.

What  is  the  deliverance  from  feelings? — To  subdue
and  to  shed  all  desire  and  appetite  for  them, — this  is
deliverance  from  feelings.

Almsmen,  if  recluses  or  brahmins  lack  this  real
knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the  satisfactions  and
perils  of,  and  deliverance  from,  feelings,  they  cannot
possibly  either  comprehend  feelings  for  themselves  or
instruct  another  by  what  course  to  comprehend  the
truth  about  them.  Only  those  can  possibly  do  this
who  know  feelings  for  what  they  really  are.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those
Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


5


XIV.  COLA-DUKKJdA-KKHANDHASUTTA.

THE  BRIEF  STORY  OF  ILL.

[91]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Sakyans  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the
Banyan  pleasaunce,  there  came  to  him  (his  elder
cousin)  MahanSma  the  Sakyan  who,  after  salutations,
seated  himself  to  one  side  and  spoke  as  follows : —
Though  I  have  long  understood  the  Lord’s  teaching  that
greed,  hate  and  illusion  were  vices  that  beset  the  heart,
yet  at  times  each  of  these  vices  invades  my  heart  and
takes  up  its  abode  there,  so  that  I  wonder  what
undiscarded  state  of  consciousness  it  is  that  causes  this
invasion.

Yes,  Mah5n5ma,  it  is  an  undiscarded  state  of  con¬
sciousness  which  causes  the  trouble  ;  and  this  would
be  dislodged  from  within  you,  if  you  were  to  quit  house
and  home  and  renounce  all  pleasures  of  sense.  It  is
because  this  state  of  mind  persists  in  you,  that  you
keep  living  on  at  home  in  comfort.  If,  though  a
disciple  of  the  Noble  has  a  sound  and  true  grasp  and
comprehension  of  the  truth  that  pleasures  of  the  sense,
while  yielding  little  satisfaction  but  much  Ill  and  much
tribulation,  are  dogged  by  perils  greater  still,  he  yet
fails  to  find  zest  and  satisfaction — or  something  Higher
than  that — without  pleasures  of  sense  and  without
wrong  states  of  consciousness, — then  he  is  in  pleasure’s
snares.  But  if  to  that  grasp  and  comprehension  he
adds  this  zest  and  satisfaction — or  something  Higher —
without  pleasures  of  sense  and  without  wrong  states,
then  he  is  not  ensnared  by  pleasure.

I  myself,  [92]  Mahanama,  in  the  days  before  my
Enlightenment,  when  I  was  still  but  a  Bodhisatta  not
yet  fully  enlightened,  although  I  had  a  sound  and  true
grasp  and  comprehension  of  the  truth  about  pleasures  of

66


r


Unnu-4.»m>


Bild  74


Kub<!


“I

Kl-iutc


Ma-u.  hu


An  der  Milndungf  des  Knku-usu.

o

Aufgcnommcii  von  H  1 1*°— u”.  Ulan  40.


411"


Bild  75

I.  l«n


Ke*n


let  47S9


Bild  76

I'll


Ma-tschu-Tal.

AiiffitMiiinmnii  von  11  in  I3M.


111. ill  40


Ma-tschu-Tal.

Aiil);i’n<immi'ii  von  Kr.  Itl.m  411,


M.  i.  93.


THE  BRIEF  STORY  OF  ILL.


67


sense,  yet  I  failed  to  find  zest  and  satisfaction,  or  some¬
thing  Higher,  without  pleasures  of  sense  and  wrong  dis¬
positions;  and  I  was  conscious  that  I  was  still  in  pleasure’s
snares.  But  when  to  grasp  and  comprehension  t  added  a
zest  and  satisfaction,  and  something  Higher,  into  which
pleasure  and  wrong  dispositions  did  not  enter,  then  I  be¬
came  conscious  of  being  no  longer  ensnared  by  pleasure.

What  is  the  satisfaction  that  attends  pleasures  of
sense  ?  Fivefold  .  .  .  (etc.  as  in  preceding  Sutta)

.  .  .  Verily  with  pleasure,  and  pleasure  only,  as  the
cause.

Once  on  a  time,  when  I  was  staying  at  Rajagaha  on
the  Vultures’  Peak,  there  were  a  number  of  Niganthas
at  Blackrock  on  the  slopes  of  Mt.  Isigili, — upright  men
who  would  never  sit  down,  and  were  undergoing
paroxysms  of  acute  pain  and  agony.  Arising  towards
evening  from  my  meditations,  I  went  to  Blackrock  and
asked  those  Niganthas  why  it  was  they  subjected
themselves  to  all  these  pains  by  maintaining  the
upright  posture  and  never  sitting  down.  Their  answer
to  me  was  that  Nataputta  the  Nigantha — ‘who  was  all¬
knowing  and  all-seeing,  with  nothing  beyond  his  ken
and  vision,  and  who  claimed  that,  whether  he  was
walking  or  standing  still,  sleeping  or  [93]  awake,
continuous  and  unruffled  ken  and  vision  were  always
his’ — had  taught  them  as  follows: — Niganthas,  you.
have  done  evil  in  the  past ; — extirpate  it  by  these
severe  austerities.  Every  present  restraint  on  body,  •
speech  and  mind  will  hereafter  undo  the  evildoings  of
the  past  Hence,  by  expelling  through  penance  all
past  misdeeds,  and  by  not  committing  fresh  misdeeds,
the  future  becomes  cleared  ;  with  the  future  cleared,
the  past  is  wiped  out;  with  the  past  wiped  out,  Ill  is
no  more;  with  Ill  no  more,  (painful)  feelings  are  no
more  ;  and,  with  painful  feelings  now  no  more,  all  Ill
will  be  outworn. — This  teaching  commends  and
approves  itself  to  us,  and  we  rejoice  in  it.

Thereupon,  I  said  to  those  Niganthas : — Do  you
know,  reverend  sirs,  whether  you  had  an  existence
before  this  and  were  not  non-existent  ?


68  XIV.  CULA-DUKKHA-KKHANDHA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  94-

No,  sir.

Do  you  know  that,  in  a  former  existence,  you  were
guilty,  and  not  guiltless,  of  misdeeds  ?

No.

Do  you  know  that  (in  that  former  existence)  you
were  guilty,  and  not  guiltless,  of  this  or  that  specifi
misdeed  ?

No.

Do  you  know  that  a  precise  amount  of  Ill  has  already
been  outworn,  or  that  a  precise  amount  of  Ill  has  to  be
outworn,  or  that,  when  a  precise  amount  of  Ill  has  been
outworn,  all  Ill  has  become  outworn  ?

No.

Do  you  know  how,  here  and  now,  to  shed  wrong
dispositions  and  to  acquire  right  dispositions  ?

No.

So  I  gather,  sirs,  that  you  Niganthas  have  no  know¬
ledge  whether  you  had  an  existence  before  this ;
whether  you  were  guilty  of  misdeeds,  either  generally
or  specifically  ;  how  much  III  is  already  outworn  or  how
much  has  still  to  be  outworn  or  how  much  has  to  be
outworn  before  all  Ill  has  become  outworn ;  nor  how,
here  and  now,  to  shed  >yrong  dispositions  and  to
acquire  right  dispositions.  This  being  so,  pray,  do
those  who,  having  been  reborn  as  men,  are  hunters  or
have  hands  stained  with  blood  or  cruelty,  flock  to  be
Pilgrims  with  the  Niganthas?

True  weal,  Gotama,  must  be  won  not  by  weal
and  comfort  but  by  woe.  If  weal  [94]  were  the  means
to  win  weal,  then  the  King  of  Magadha,  Seniya
Bimbisara,  would  win  weal,  for  there  is  more  weal  in
his  life  than  in  the  reverend  Gotama’s.

Surely  this  is  a  somewhat  hasty  remark.  It  is  I  who
ought  to  be  asked  which  of  the  two  of  us  enjoys  the
greater  weal, — the  King  or  I.

Yes,  it  was  somewhat  hasty  ;  but  let  that  pass,  and
let  us  now  put  to  you  the  question  whether  it  is  the
King  or  you  who  enjoys  the  greater  weal  in  his  life.

Then,  sirs,  I  will  ask  you  a  question  in  return,  to
be  answered  by  you  as  you  see  fit: — Can  the  King


Bild  77


Bild  78


HI


Fern


Xei


IV


X<-  -  «JJJ


1:


A


I<!  At


Ern  A  ,j;o


Ma-tschu-Tal.

Aufgetioinnn-n  von  S«* — 917.  Blatt  40.


SO

Am  Ma-tschu -Ufer.

Aufgcnoinmrn  von  rt.  ton — «>.  Blatt  40.


Bild  79


K1au«-


4*9"


Kal  tot.  Wilhelm.  Ofbirxf


A  4  "  A  44  -


Il-re^oj


't  fit)  -


IVn.hatehiigr


—  47*1


!“•  •  4710


Xei  —  ii>i


Blick  auf  das  Penck-Gebirge.

Aufgenommen  von  Alt  a  4300  ini  Richthofen- Grbirgc.  Blatt  40


M.  i.  95.


THE  BRIEF  STORY  OF  ILL.


69


rest  motionless  and  not  utter  a  word  for  seven  days  and
nights  on  end,  and  yet  abide  in  Weal  beyond
compare  ?


No.


Can  he  do  so  for  six  days  and  nights, — or  for  five,
four,  three,  two  days  and  nights,  or  for  just  one  single
night  and  day  ?

No.


Well,  sirs,  I  can  rest  motionless  and  not  speak  a
word  for  a  night  and  a  day  and  yet  abide  all  the  time
in  Weal  beyond  compare.  I  can  do  so  for  two  nights
and  days, — for  three,  four,  five,  six  and  seven  nights
and  days  on  end.  What  think  you,  Niganthas? — On
this  shewing,  who  enjoys  the  greater  Weal  in  his  life,
King  Seniya  Bimbisara  of  Magadha,  or  I  ?

On  this  showing,  it  is  the  reverend  [95]  Gotama
who  enjoys  greater  Weal  in  his  life  than  the  King  does.

So  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  Mahanama  the
Sakyan  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XV.  ANUMANA-SUTTA.1

REFLECTION.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  venerable
Maha-Moggallana  was  staying  in  the  Bhagga  country
at  Crocodile  Peak  in  the  Bhesakala  wood,  in  the  deer-
park  there,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen  as  follows  : —

If,  despite  his  invitation  to  his  seniors  to  teach  him
and  despite  his  professed  anxiety  to  learn,  an  Almsman
proves  unruly  and  obstreperous  in  temper,  fractious
and  unreceptive  of  instruction, — then  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life  deem  him  unfit  to  be  taught  or  instructed  or
trusted.  Now  what  are  the  states  of  mind  that  make
a  man  obstreperous  in  temper  ? — Take  the  case  of  an
Almsman  who  is  evilly  inclined  and  is  the  thrall  of  evil

‘  Bu.  records  that  this  Sutta  was  known  to  the  Ancients  as  the
Bhikkhu-pHtimokkha,  and  adds  that  this  self-examination
should  take  place  three  times  each  day.


70


XV.  ANUMANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  96.


inclinations  ; — or  who  lauds  himself  and  runs  down
others ; — or  who  is  wrathful  and  the  slave  of  wrath  ; —
or  who  is  wrathful  and  because  of  his  wrath  bears
grudges  ; — or  who  is  wrathful  and  because  of  his  wrath
takes  offence  ; — or  who  is  wrathful  and  because  of  his
wrath  utters  words  of  unbridled  wrath  ; — or  who,  being
reproved,  argues  with  his  reprover ; — or  who,  being
reproved,  resents  the  reproof; — [96]  or  who,  being
reproved,  retorts  with  charges  against  his  reprover ; —
or  who,  being  reproved,  wraps  one  thing  up  in  another,
turns  the  talk  off  to  something  irrelevant,  displaying
ill-temper,  malice,  and  distrust ;  —  or  who,  being
reproved,  fails  to  explain  his  proceedings or  who  is
a  hypocrite  and  impostor ; — or  who  harbours  envy  and
jealousy  ; — or  who  is  full  of  guile  and  deceit ; — or  who
is  stubborn  and  arrogant ; — or  who  hugs  the  temporal,
nor  looses  his  grip  and  hold  thereon ; — all  these  are
states  of  mind  that  make  a  man  obstreperous  in
temper.

But  if  an  Almsman  who  invites  his  seniors  to  teach
him  and  professes  anxiety  to  learn,  proves  humble  and
meek,  docile  and  receptive, — then  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life  deem  him  fit  to  be  taught  and  instructed  and
trusted.  Now,  what  are  the  states  of  mind  that  make
for  meekness  ? — Almsmen,  they  are  [point  for  point  the
precise  opposites  of  the  foregoing  list].

[97]  In  connection  with  the  foregoing  states  of
mind,  an  Almsman  ought  to  argue  about  himself  as
follows : — The  man  of  evil  inclinations  is  displeasing
and  disagreeable  to  me  ;  and  if  I  incline  to  evil,  others
will  regard  me  likewise  as  displeasing  and  disagreeable.
Realizing  this,  he  must  school  his  heart  never  to  give
way  to  evil  inclinations.  Similarly,  realizing  that,  just
as  he  dislikes  each  of  the  other  shortcomings  in  others,
so  their  presence  in  himself  will  make  him  disliked
likewise,  the  Almsman  must  school  his  heart  never  to
give  way  to  any  single  one  of  them.

[98]  He  ought  to  reflect  within  himself  whether
he  is  evilly  inclined  and  so  forth.  If  this  reflection
tells  him  that  he  has  got  evil  inclinations  and


I ‘cry  k*Gr>»ir^


tV’).


Bild  So


Ki


I


ilUrltu


Kt  +« 47«o


A  4  4r  *  -


II  4*  I9CS


M>tului


Blick  auf  das  Hahn-  und  Richthofi-n-Gebirge.  Aufucnommen  vou  *  44"5  iu.«t:  41


M.  i.  ioo.


REFLECTION.


71


so  forth,  then  he  must  strive  to  get  rid  of  them.
But,  if  reflection  tells  him  he  has  not  got  evil  in¬
clinations  or  the  other  evil  states  of  mind,  then  let  his
life  be  filled  with  zest  and  holy  joy  as  he  trains  himself
by  day  and  by  night  in  right  states  of  mind.

[100]  If  his  reflection  tells  him  that  each  and
every  one  of  these  evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind
persists  within  him,  he  must  strive  to  get  rid  of  them
all.  But,  if  reflection  tells  him  he  has  got  rid  of  them
all,  then  let  his  life  be  filled  with  zest  and  holy  joy  as
he  trains  himself  by  day  and  by  night  in  right  states  of
mind.

Sirs,  it  is  just  like  a  woman  or  man  or  lad  young  and
dressy,  to  whom  the  reflection  of  their  features  in  a  bright
clean  mirror  or  in  a  bowl  of  clear  water  reveals  a  smut
or  pimple,  so  that  they  strive  to  get  rid  of  it ;  but  if
the  reflection  revealed  nothing  of  the  kind,  they  rejoice
that  all  is  right  and  that  their  faces  are  clean  and  clear ;
— even  so  is  it  with  an  Almsman  ;  if  reflection  tells
him  that  these  evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind  persist
within  him,  he  must  strive  to  get  rid  of  them  all ;  but
if  he  is  conscious  of  having  got  rid  of  all  of  them,  then
let  his  life  be  filled  with  zest  and  holy  joy  as  he  trains
himself  by  day  and  by  night  in  right  states  of  mind.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Maha- Moggallana.  Glad
at  heart,  those  Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  he  had  said.

XVI.  CETO-KHILA-SUTTA.

THE  HEART’S  FALLOWS  AND  BONDAGES.

[101]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Savatthl  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anatha-
pindika’s  pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening
Almsmen  as  follows  : — While  the  five  Fallows  of  his
heart  are  left  untilled  and  its  five  Bondages  are  un¬
shattered,  no  Almsman  can  possibly  shew  growth,
increase  and  progress  in  this  Doctrine  and  Rule.

What  are  the  five  Fallows  he  leaves  untilled  ? —
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  feels  doubts  and


llild  82


/.n  liild  S;


4?»-


Im  Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gebirge  (Rheinbaben-Kette).

Aufgi'nomincii  von  Sch  II  *  4930.  Blau  43.


ni+4j4»


Uuhn-Kciu-


*‘5«


r«  H-  »V»J


KUrie*-  Ma-liilm

+


Kt  •  4775


4ft.  lift


72


XVI.  CETO-KHILA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  102.


misgivings  about  the  Master,  without  either  certainty
or  conviction,  so  that  in  this  frame  of  mind,  his  heart
has  no  bent  towards  ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,  and
exertion  ;  this  marks  the  first  Fallow  untilled.  Or
suppose  he  feels  these  same  doubts  and  misgivings
about  the  Doctrine — or  the  Confraternity — or  his
course  of  training,  with  the  same  lack  of  bent  towards
ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,  and  exertion  ; — this  marks
the  second — the  third — and  the  fourth  Fallow  untilled.
The  fifth  is  when  he  is  angry  with  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life,  is  displeased  with  them,  is  upset  about  them,
and  fallow — as  it  were — in  his  relations  to  them,  so
that  he  has  no  bent  towards  ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,
and  exertion.

What  are  the  five  Bondages  he  leaves  unshattered  ?
— Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  in  the  matter  of
sensuous  pleasure,  is  not  void  of  passion  and  appetite,
fondness  and  yearning,  thirsting,  feverish  longings  and
craving ;  in  this  frame  of  mind,  his  heart  has  no  bent
towards  ardour  and  so  forth.  This  marks  the  first
Bondage  unshattered.  If  he  is  in  like  case  in  the
matter  of  the  body — or  of  visible  forms, — this  marks
the  second  [102]  and  the  third,  respectively,  of  the
heart’s  Bondages  unshattered.  Or,  again,  if  after
eating  as  much  as  ever  his  belly  will  hold,  an  Almsman
is  fond  of  his  chair  or  bed  or  of  slumber,  then  his
heart’s  bent  is  not  towards  ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,
and  exertion ;  and  this  marks  the  fourth  Bondage  un¬
shattered.  Or,  lastly,  an  Almsman’s  ambition  in  the
higher  life  may  be  for  some  particular  order  of  gods  ;
and  so  his  virtue,  conversation,  austerities  and  higher
life  aim  at  ensuring  his  becoming  a  god,  or  some  par¬
ticular  god.  If  such  be  his  aims  and  ambition,  then
his  heart’s  bent  is  not  to  ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,
and  exertion  ;  and  this  marks  the  fifth  Bondage  un¬
shattered.

If,  Almsmen,  these  five  Fallows  of  his  heart  are  left
untilled,  and  if  these  five  Bondages  are  unshattered,  no
Almsman  can  possibly  shew  growth,  increase  and  pro¬
gress  in  this  Doctrine  and  Rule.


M.  i.  103.  THE  HEART’S  FALLOWS  AND  BONDAGES.  73


If,  on  the  other  hand,  an  Almsman  has  the  five
Fallows  of  his  heart  tilled  and  its  five  Bondages
shattered,  then  it  is  quite  possible  for  him  to  shew
growth,  increase  and  progress  in  the  Doctrine  and
Rule.

What  are  the  five  tilled  Fallows  of  the  heart? —
Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  feels  no  doubts  or
misgivings  about  the  Master  but  feels  certainty  and
conviction,  so  that  his  heart  is  bent  on  ardour,  zeal,
perseverance,  and  exertion, — this  marks  the  first
Fallow  tilled.  If  he  feels  no  doubts  or  misgivings
about  the  Doctrine — or  about  the  Confraternity — or
about  his  course  of  training, — and  if  his  heart  is  bent
on  ardour,  zeal,  perseverance,  and  exertion, — this
marks  the  second — the  third — and  the  fourth  Fallow
tilled.  The  fifth  is  when  he  is  not  angered  against  his
fellows,  is  not  displeased  or  upset  by  them,  nor  is  he
fallow — as  it  were — in  his  relations  to  them  ;  [103] —
this  marks  the  heart’s  fifth  and  last  Fallow  tilled.

And  similarly  with  shattering  the  heart’s  five
Bondages.

He  develops  the  four  bases  of  psychic  power,  in
which  purpose,  will,  thought,  and  study  respectively
inspire  what  moulds  and  fashions  vigorous  concentra¬
tion.  Strenuousness  itself  is  a  fifth.

The  Almsman  who  is  equipped  with  these  fifteen1
factors  of  the  strenuous  character  [104J  has  the  capacity
for  breaking  through,  the  capacity  for  full  Enlighten¬
ment,  and  the  capacity  for  the  Peace  beyond  compare.

It  is  like  a  hen  with  a  clutch  of  eight  or  ten  or  a
dozen  eggs,  on  which  she  has  sat  closely,  keeping  them
as  warm  as  may  be  with  all  her  pains  and  care ;  albeit
the  wish  may  arise  within  her  that  her  chicks  with
claw  or  beak  would  break  through  the  shell  and  win
forth,  yet  that  hen’s  chicks  are  capable  of  breaking
the  shell  and  winning  forth  quite  safely  ; — even  so,  the


1  I.e.  the  five  tilled  Fallows  plus  the  five  shattered  Bondages
plus  the  four  psychic  bases ;  with  strenuousness  itself  added  on
to  the  latter  as  a  fifth  (Bu.).


74


XVII.  VANA-PATTHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  105.


Almsman  who  is  equipped  with  these  fifteen  factors  of
the  strenuous  character  is  capable  of  breaking  through,
is  capable  of  full  Enlightenment,  and  is  capable  of  the
Peace  beyond  compare.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XVII.  VANA-PATTHA-SUTTA.

UBI  BENE

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SavatthI  in  J  eta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying: — I
will  expound  to  you  the  principles  of  the  forest  life.
Give  ear  and  pay  attention,  and  I  will  speak. — Yes,
Lord,  was  their  response  to  the  Lord,  who  then  went
on  to  speak  as  follows  : —

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  dwelling  in  the
forest,  finds  that  the  mindfulness  which  was  not  his
before  is  still  not  his,  that  the  stedfastness  of  heart
which  was  not  his  before  is  still  not  his,  that  the
Cankers  which  had  not  passed  before  are  not  passing
away  from  him  now,  that  the  Peace  beyond  compare
which  he  had  not  won  before  is  still  to  win,  and  that  in
the  forest  it  is  hard  to  satisfy  a  Pilgrim’s  needs  in  the
matter  of  clothing,  food,  bed,  and  medicaments.  In
such  case,  the  Brother  [105]  should  ponder  this  over
and — be  it  by  night  or  be  it  by  day — should  quit  that
forest  and  reside  there  no  longer.

Next,  take  an  Almsman  who,  dwelling  in  the  forest,
has  just  the  same  experiences  except  that  he  has  no
difficulty  there  in  satisfying  a  Pilgrim’s  needs.  He  too
should  ponder  this  over  and  reflect  that  it  was  not  for
clothing  and  the  like  that  he  went  forth  from  home  to
homelessness  but  that  here  he  is  acquiring  neither
mindfulness  nor  stedfastness  of  heart,  is  not  getting  rid
of  the  Cankers  nor  winning  the  Peace  beyond  com-


I


Ha!in-Kem-


1


/«>


Pstf


Bild  S3


/o»

I


Im  Lager  LX,  8.  9.Sept.  BUm  41.


Bild  „S4

*Ijo  Jlol  -  4I90


W

Im  Do-tschu-  I  aL  Aufgenommcn  von  S' 5  Blurt  43


M.  i.  106.


UBI  BENE.


75


pare.  Realizing  this,  he  should  quit  that  forest  and
reside  there  no  longer.

Take  now  an  Almsman  who,  dwelling  in  the  forest,
finds  that  the  mindfulness  which  was  not  his  before  is
now  his,  that  the  stedfastness  of  heart  which  was  not
his  before  is  now  his,  that  the  Cankers  which  had  not
passed  away  before  have  now  passed  away  from  him,
and  that  he  is  now  winning  that  Peace  beyond  compare
which  he  had  not  won  before, — but  that  he  finds  it  hard
there  to  satisfy  a  Pilgrim’s  needs  in  the  matter  of
clothing,  food,  bed,  and  medicaments.  Pondering  over
this,  he  should  reflect  [106]  that  it  was  not  for  these
latter  things  that  he  went  forth  from  home  to  homeless¬
ness  but  that  by  residing  in  that  forest  the  mindfulness
which  was  not  his  before  is  now  his  .  .  .  not  won
before.  Realizing  this,  he  should  dwell  on  in  that
forest  and  not  quit  it.

Lastly,  if,  in  addition  to  growth  in  mindfulness  and
so  forth,  he  finds  no  difficulty  there  in  satisfying  a
Pilgrim’s  needs,  he  should  similarly  dwell  on  in  that
forest  and  not  quit  it.

(The  same  considerations  should  guide  him)  if  his
abode  is  near  a  village,  a  township,  a  city,  a  country,
[107-8]  or  an  individual.  ...  If  all  goes  well  with  his
growth  Within,  he  will  cleave  to  that  individual  while
life  lasts  ;  he  will  not  quit  him,  although  hounded  away.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.

»


XVIII.  MADHU-PINDIKA-SUTTA.

HONEYED  LORE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Sakyans  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the
Banyan  pleasaunce,  he  went,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in
hand,  into  the  city  for  alms.  At  the  end  of  his  round,
when  his  meal  was  over  and  he  was  on  his  way  back,
he  came  to  Great  Wood  and  entering  it  seated


«¥*»


'» -r  t9»


sk  <690


Hild  S6


iiol


so


lm  Do-tschu-Tal.

Aufgenonumcn  von  7$ —*».  Blatt  43


N


lm  Do-tschu-Tal.

Aufgenommrn  von  75-  '* .  Bl.itt  43


76


XVIIL  MADHU-PINDIKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  109.


himself  for  the  noontide  at  the  foot  of  a  young  Vilva
tree.  So  too  Dandapani  the  Sakyan,  who  was  on  his
wanderings  and  peregrinations  afoot  in  the  forest,  came
also  to  Great  Wood  and,  entering  it,  drew  near  to  the
Lord  under  his  tree,  and,  after  exchange  of  civil
greetings,  stood  to  one  side  with  his  hands  leaning  on
his  staff,  to  ask : — What  are  your  tenets,  recluse  ?
What  is  your  gospel  ?

Tenets,  sir,  whereby  not  only  is  a  man  at  strife  with
no  world  whatsoever  throughout  the  whole  universe —
with  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,  recluses  and  brahmins,
embracing  all  gods  and  mankind, —  but  also  he  as  (a
true)  Brahmin  dwells  above  all  pleasures  of  sense,
without  perplexities  and  with  a  clear  conscience,
without  any  cravings  to  be  reborn  either  here  or
there,  immune  from  assaults  of  the  perceptions. —
These,  sir,  are  my  tenets  ;  and  this  is  my  gospel.

At  these  words  Dandapani  shook  his  head,  [109]
waggled  his  tongue  and  departed,  still  leaning  on  his
staff,  with  his  brow  puckered  into  three  wrinkles.

Towards  evening,  arising  from  his  meditations,  the
Lord  made  his  way  to  the  Banyan  pleasaunce.  There,
seating  himself  on  the  seat  set  for  him,  he  told  the
Almsmen  the  incident  in  full  detail.  When  he  had
done  so,  a  certain  Almsman  asked  what  precisely  were
the  tenets  whereby  the  Lord  was  at  strife  with  no
world  and  how  he  as  the  true  Brahmin  dwelt  above  all
pleasures  of  sense  without  perplexities  .  .  .  assaults  of
the  perceptions.

Whatever  be  the  origin,  Almsman,  of  the  severaf
obsessions,  bred  of  perceptions,  which  beset  a  man’s
path,  yet,  if  they  find  neither  approval  nor  welcome
nor  adherence,  then  here  at  once  is  an  end  of  all  pro¬
pensities  to  passion,  to  resentment,  [110]  to  specu¬
lative  ideas,  to  doubts,  to  pride,  to  passion  for  con¬
tinuing  existence,  and  to  ignorance ;  it  is  the  end  of
taking  up  cudgel  or  knife,  of  quarrels,  of  contentions,
of  strife,  of  wrangling,  slander,  and  lies. — Herein,  all
these  evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind  are  quelled  and
pass  away  entirely.


M.  i.  in.  HONEYED  LORE.  77

So  spoke  the  Lord.  Then,  getting  up  from  his
seat,  the  Blessed  One  went  to  his  cell.

He  had  not  been  gone  long  when  those  Almsmen
bethought  them  how  tersely  and  without  detailed
exposition  the  Lord  had  propounded  this  theme  ere
withdrawing  to  his  cell ;  and  they  were  wondering  who
would  expound  to  them  the  meaning  of  the  Lord’s
pregnant  utterance,  when  the  idea  came  to  them  that
the  reverend  Maha-Kaccana,  who  was  praised  by  the
Master  and  was  held  in  high  honour  among  the  most
able  of  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life,  could  give  them
that  detailed  exposition.  So  to  Maha-Kaccana  they
went,  laid  the  whole  matter  before  him,  and  asked  him
to  expound  accordingly.

[Ill]  Really,  sirs,  said  he,  it  is  as  if  a  man  who  was
in  need  and  search  and  quest  of  choice  timber  were  to
come  on  just  the  fine  upstanding  tree  for  his  purpose
but  were  to  disregard  its  root  and  trunk  and  to  imagine
he  could  find  his  choice  timber  among  the  branches
and  foliage.  For,  this  is  just  what  your  reverences
have  come  to,  in  that,  with  the  Master  there  in  front  of
you,  you  have  ignored  him  and  come  to  ask  me  what
he  meant.  Sirs,  the  Lord  knows  with  all  knowing  and
sees  with  all  seeing, — being  the  embodiment  of  vision,
insight,  the  Doctrine,  and  all  excellence ;  he  is  the
propounder  and  expounder  and  unfolder  of  meanings,
the  giver  of  Nirvana’s  ambrosia,  lord  of  the  Doctrine,
the  Truth-finder.  Then  was  the  time  to  address  your
questions  to  the  Lord  in  person,  in  order  to  treasure  up
what  he  might  reveal.

Admitting  all  this,  the  Almsmen  still  pressed  Maha-
Kaccana  to  consent  to  expound  and  elucidate  it  for
them.  And  he,  consenting,  spoke  as  follows  : — I  take,
sirs,  the  detailed  meaning  of  the  Lord’s  pregnant
utterance  to  be  this. — It  is  because  of  the  eye  and  of
visible  forms  that  visual  consciousness  arises ;  the
meeting  of  these  three  things  is  contact ;  contact  con¬
ditions  feeling  ;  what  a  man  feels,  he  perceives;  [112]
what  he  perceives,  he  reasons  about ;  what  he  reasons
about,  he  is  obsessed  by  ;  from  what  obsesses  him


Tel  «r»


Bil.l  89


In  Topa-Do-yung.

Allfgcnommen  von  Si*— 9°*.  Hiatt  4  5


BiUl  90

k  +•  «**•  to  Trl


O


Bild  91


TO  Tel  to  b


•J


Topa-Du-yung.

Aul'gcnoinmen  von  9,,j  ion.  Ulatt  44


T  opa-Do-yung.

Aufgenotnmcn  von  9"1  to'«.  Bl.itt  45.


78


XVIII.  MADHU-PINDIKA-SUTTA.


M.  j.  1 13.


originate  the  several  obsessions,  bred  of  perceptions,
which  beset  a  man’s  path  in  respect  of  visible  forms,
past  present  or  future,  which  are  cognizable  by  the  eye.
So  too,  it  is  because  of  ear  and  sounds  that  auditory
consciousness  arises  ; — because  of  nose  and  odours
that  olfactory  consciousness  arises ; — because  of  tongue
and  tastes  that  gustatory  consciousness  arises  ;  because
of  body  and  tangible  things  that  there  arises  tactile  con¬
sciousness  ; — because  of  mind  and  mental  objects  that
there  arises  mental  consciousness  ;  the  meeting  of  these
three  things  is  contact ;  contact  conditions  feeling  .  .  .
mental  objects,  past,  present  or  future,  which  are
cognizable  by  the  mind/  Where  eye  and  visible  form
are  present  with  visual  consciousness,  there  a  man  may
recognize  the  manifestation  of  contact ;  where  there  is
the  manifestation  of  contact,  there  a  man  may  recognize
the  manifestation  of  feeling — and  so  of  perception,
reasoning,  and  obsession.  But  the  three  factors  must
all  be  present  together,  or  there  can  be  no  manifesta¬
tion  to  recognize.  And  the  like  holds  good  of  each  of
the  other  senses,  including  mind. — This,  sirs,  [113]  is
what  I  take  to  be  the  detailed  meaning  of  the  Lord's
pregnant  utterance.  But,  should  your  reverences  so
desire,  you  can  go  to  the  Lord  himself  and  address
your  questions  to  him  in  person,  in  order  to  treasure  up
what  he  may  reveal.

After  expressing  their  gratification  and  gratitude  to
the  reverend  Maha-Kaccana,  those  Almsmen  rose  and
went  to  the  Lord,  to  whom  they  explained  at  length
how,  to  get  a  detailed  interpretation  of  his  pregnant
utterance,  they  had  betaken  themselves  to  the  reverend
Maha-Kaccana  [114]  and  how  in  what  sentences  and
words  he  had  expounded  the  meaning  to  them.

Maha-Kaccana,  said  the  Lord,  has  learning  and


*  Here,  as  infra  at  M.  Ill,  223,  this  scholastic  formula  is
attributed,  not  to  Gotama  but  to  Kaccana,  as,  in  the  28th  and
43rd  Suttas,  it  is  attributed  to  Sariputta.

See  M.  I,  295,  for  Sariputta’s  dictum  that,  while  the  first  five
(ordinary)  senses  have  domains  separate  and  distinct  from  one
another,  mind  enters  into  the  domain  of  each  of  them.


M.  i.  115.


HONEYED  LORE.


79


great  insight.  If  you  were  to  put  your  question  tome,
my  explanation  would  tally  with  his ;  for  this  is  the
right  meaning  and  you  should  so  treasure  it  up.

Hereupon,  the  venerable  Ananda  said  to  the
Lord:— just  as  a  man  who,  being  half-dead  with
hunger  and  exhaustion,  should  come  on  a  honeyed
cake,  each  bit  he  tastes  bringing  in  on  him  more  and
more  its  sweet  delicious  savour, — even  so,  the  further
the  mind  of  a  competent  Almsman  penetrates  into  the
import  of  the  lore  of  the  exposition  of  the  Doctrine,
the  greater  grows  his  gratification  and  gladness  of
heart.  What,  sir,  is  the  name  of  this  exposition  ?

Well,  Ananda,  let  it  be  known  as  the  exposition  of
‘the  honeyed  cake.’

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XIX.  DVEDHA-VITAKKA-SUTTA.

ON  COUNTER-IRRITANTS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anatbapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows  : —

In  the  days  before  my  full  enlightenment,  when  I
was  as  yet  only  a  Bodhisatta  and  not  yet  all-enlightened,
the  idea  came  to  me  to  sort  out  my  thoughts  into  two
separate  and  distinct  groups.  Into  one  category  I  put
thoughts  about  pleasures  of  sense,  about  harm,  and
about  hurt ;  and  in  a  second  category  came  thoughts
about  Renunciation,  about  hurting  not  nor  harming.
When,  in  my  life  of  strenuous  earnestness  purged  of
self,  [115]  there  arose  within  me  a  thought  about
pleasures  of  sense,  I  recognized  that  it  had  arisen  and
that  it  conduced  to  harm — harm  to  myself,  to  others,
and  both  to  myself  and  to  others — as  being  subversive
of  insight,  allied  to  overthrow,  and  no  help  towards
Nirvana.  The  reflection  that  they  conduced  to  harm


I:'l  -  455®


1  opa-Po-v  ung


zu  BiUl  92

*>  +  4S3,»


Beim  ^rofsen  Obo.

Aufgenommen  iin  I-agcr  I.XII.  Blau  43


8o


XIX.  DVEDHA-VITAKKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  1 1 6.


— to  myself  or  to  others  or  to  both — caused  thoughts
about  pleasures  of  sense  to  vanish  away,  as  did
reflections  that  these  thoughts  were  subversive  of
insight,  allied  to  overthrow,  and  no  help  towards
Nirvana.  As  each  such  thought  severally  arose,  I
drove  it  away,  discarded  it,  and  rooted  it  out.  And  in
just  the  same  way  I  dealt  with  each  thought  of  harm
and  hurt.

Now,  whatsoever  an  Almsman  thinks  much  about
and  dwells  on,  gradually  moulds  his  mind.  If  he
thinks  much  about  pleasures  of  sense  and  dwells
thereon,  he  has  thereby  driven  away  thoughts  of
Renunciation,  has  fostered  the  growth  of  thoughts  on
pleasure,  and  has  applied  his  heart  to  thoughts  on
pleasure.  And  the  same  thing  happens  with  thoughts
of  harm  and  of  hurt.  Just  as  in  the  last  month  of  the
monsoon  towards  autumn,  when  the  crops  stand  thick
on  the  ground,  a  cowherd  looks  sharply  after  his  cattle,
beating  them  off  here  with  his  stick,  heading  them  off
there,  checking  them  at  this  point  and  blocking  their
way  at  that  point, — because  he  dreads  stripes  or
imprisonment  or  mulcts  or  censure  to  himself ; —
even  so  did  I  see  the  perils,  fatuity,  and  defilement
arising  from  wrong  states  of  mind,  and  the  blessings
of  Renunciation,  with  sanctification  as  their  ally,  which
flow  from  right  states  of  mind.

[116]  When,  in  my  life  of  strenuous  earnestness
purged  of  self,  there  arose  within  me  a  thought  of
Renunciation,  I  recognized  that  it  had  arisen  and  that
it  conduced  to  no  harm,  either  to  myself  or  to  others
or  to  both,  seeing  that  it  fostered  insight,  was  arrayed
against  overthrow,  and  helped  on  towards  Nirvana
If  by  night — or  by  day — or  by  night  and  by  day
continuously — I  thought  much  about  Renunciation  and
dwelt  thereon,  never  did  I  discern  anything  to  breed
fear.  But,  if  I  were  to  go  on  thinking  these  thoughts
too  long,  would  my  body  grow  weary  ?  With  bodily
weariness,  would  my  heart'  be  defiled  ?  With  its
defilement,  would  my  heart  be  sundered  from  con¬
centration?  At  this  thought,  I  stilled  and  composed

05*1(5°


M.  i.  117.  ON  COUNTER-IRRITANTS.  8 1

my  heart  within,  focussed  and  concentrated  it, — lest
haply  it  should  become  defiled.  And  as  with  thoughts
of  Renunciation,  so  did  I  deal  with  thoughts  of  good¬
will  and  of  benignity.  Now,  Brethren,  whatsoever  a
Brother  thinks  much  about  and  dwells  on,  gradually
moulds  his  mind.  If  he  thinks  and  dwells  much  on
thoughts  of  Renunciation — or  goodwill — or  benignity,
— he  has  thereby  driven  away  thoughts  about  pleasures
of  sense  and  about  harm  and  about  hurt.  J  ust  as  in
the  last  month  of  the  hot  season,  when  all  the  crops
have  been  carried  and  are  garnered  on  the  confines  of
the  village,  the  cowherd  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties
[117]  has  only  to  see — from  beneath  a  tree’s  shade  or
in  the  open — that  his  cows  are  all  there, — even  so,
Almsmen,  all  that  I  had  to  see  was  that  all  (right)
states  of  mind  were  there.

Strenuous  effort  won  for  me  perseverance  that  never
flagged  ;  there  arose  in  me  mindfulness  that  knew  no
distraction,  perfect  tranquillity  of  body,  stedfastness
of  mind  that  never  wavered.  Divested  of  pleasures
of  sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  mind,  I  entered
on,  and  abode  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  .  .  .  {etc.,  as  in
Sutta  No.  4).  .  .  .  This  was  the  third  knowledge
attained  by  me,  in  the  third  watch  of  that  night, —
ignorance  dispelled  and  knowledge  won,  darkness  dis¬
pelled  and  illumination  won,  as  befitted  my  strenuous
and  ardent  life,  purged  of  self.

It  is  just  as  if  in  the  heart  of  the  jungle  there  was  a
great  pond  in  a  valley,  with  a  large  herd  of  deer
living  there,  and  there  should  come  along  a  man  bent
on  their  harm,  with  no  kind  thought  for  them  and  with
no  regard  for  their  well-being.  If  now  he  were  to
block  up  the  peaceful,  safe,  and  happy  road,  to  open  up
a  treacherous  way,  to  plant  a  decoy,1  and  to  tether
there  a  tame  hind  as  a  lure, — that  great  herd  of  deer
would  thus  in  time  come  to  dire  calamity  and  dwindle

1  Okacar  o  (home-pasture,  cf.  gocaro)  seems  to  be  a  decoy
in  the  sense  in  which  we  speak  of  a  duck-decoy,  and  okacarika
to  be  its  lure.  (Cf.  Jat  VI,  416,  okacar  enSti  okacarikaya,
with  no  suggestion  of  a  tame  stag — as  Bu.  here — as  an  added
attraction.)


Bild  93

r  *  ~r  4^  ••


Im  Da-tschu-Tal.

Aufgcnommcn  von  in  -'*  Hiatt  45.


n  f+  *500


Bild  94


X

1m  Da-tschu-Tal.

Aufgcnommen  von  134*— 1«.  Hiatt  43.


Im  Da-tschu-Tal.

Aufgcnommen  von  I2«*—  |o>.  Hiatt  43.


82


XIX.  dvedhA-vitakka-sutta.


M.  i.  1 1 8.


away.  But,  if  another  man  appeared,  who  meant  well
by  the  herd  and  was  kindly  towards  them  and  had  re¬
gard  to  their  well-being,  he  would  open  up  that  peaceful,
safe  and  happy  road,  close  the  treacherous  way,  break
up  the  decoy,  get  rid  of  the  hind, — whereby  the  herd
later  on  would  grow  and  increase  and  multiply.

This,  Almsmen,  is  a  similitude  framed  by  me  for
your  edification ;  [118]  and  here  is  its  meaning  : — The
great  pond  in  the  valley  is  another  name  for  pleasures
of  sense ;  mankind  is  the  herd  of  deer ;  the  first  man
stands  for  Mara  the  Evil  One  ;  the  treacherous  way  is
the  evil  eightfold  path — of  wrong  outlook,  wrong  aims
and  so  forth  ;  the  decoy  represents  sensual  passion
and  the  hind  ignorance.  The  second  man — he  of  the
good-will  and  kind  heart,  who  had  regard  to  the  deers’
well-being — stands  for  the  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-
enlightened.  What  was  styled  the  peaceful,  safe  and
happy  road,  is  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path  of  right  out¬
look,  right  aims,  right  speech,  right  action,  right  mode
of  life,  right  effort,  and  right  concentration.  Yes,
Brethren,  1  have  opened  up  the  peaceful,  safe  and  happy
road,  closed  the  treacherous  way,  broken  up  the  decoy,
and  got  rid  of  the  lure  of  the  hind.  All  that  a  teacher
can  do  for  his  disciples  out  of  his  love  and  compassion,
that,  for  compassion’s  sake,  have  I  done  for  you.  Here
are  trees  under  which  to  lodge  ;  here  are  solitude’s
abodes  ;  plunge  into  deepest  thought  and  never  flag  ;
lay  not  up  for  yourselves  remorse  hereafter  ; — this  is
my  injunction  to  you.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  these  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XX.  VITAKKA-SANTHANA-SUTTA.

THE  GOVERNANCE  OF  THOUGHTS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows  : —


M.  i.  1 19.


THE  GOVERNANCE  OF  THOUGHTS.


&•

[119]  An  Almsman  who  applies  himself  to  the
higher  thought  should  pass  in  review  from  time  to  time
five  phases  of  mind  ;  and  these  are  they  : —

(i.)  When,  by  reason  of  a  phase  of  mind,  there  arise
in  a  Brother  bad  and  wrong  thoughts  associated  with
appetite,  hatred  and  delusion,  then  he  should  divert
his  mind  from  that  to  another  phase  associated  with
what  is  right;  and,  by  his  doing  so,  those  bad  and
wrong  thoughts  pass  away  and  disappear,  so  that  his
heart  stands  firm,  is  stedfast,  is  focussed  and  concen¬
trated.  Just  as  a  skilled  artizan  or  his  apprentice  will
with  a  little  peg  knock  and  drive  out  and  expel  a  big
peg,  so,  when,  by  reason  of  a  phase  of  mind,  there  arise
in  an  Almsman  bad  and  wrong  thoughts  .  .  .  focussed
and  concentrated.

(ii.)  If,  though  the  Almsman  diverts  his  mind  from
the  former  to  the  latter  phase,  there  still  arise  in  him
the  same  bad  and  wrong  thoughts  as  before,  then  he
should  study  the  perils  these  entail,  marking  how
wrong  and  depraved  such  thoughts  are  and  how  they
ripen  unto  Ill.  As  he  studies  them,  these  bad  and
wrong  thoughts  pass  away  and  disappear,  so  that  his
heart  stands  firm,  is  stedfast,  is  focussed  and  concen¬
trated.  Just  as  a  woman  or  man  or  dressy  lad,  [120]
if  the  carcase  of  snake  or  dog  or  human  being  be  slung
round  their  necks,  are  filled  with  horror,  loathing  and
disgust, — even  so  is  it  with  this  Almsman  in  his
scrutiny.

(iii.)  If,  for  all  his  scrutiny  of  their  perils,  these  bad
and  wrong  thoughts  still  keep  on  arising,  then  he
should  ignore  them  and  not  let  his  mind  dwell  on
them.  As  he  ignores  them,  they  will  pass  away  and
disappear,  so  that  his  heart  stands  firm,  is  steadfast,  is
focussed  and  concentrated.  Just  as  a  man  with  eyes  to
see,  will,  if  he  does  not  want  to  view  visible  forms  that
come  within  his  field  of  vision,  close  his  eyes  or  look
another  way, — even  so  is  it  with  the  Almsman  in  his
ignoring  of  bad  and  wrong  thoughts.

(iv.)  If,  for  all  his  ignoring  of  them,  these  bad  and
wrong  thoughts  still  keep  on  arising,  then  he  must


84


XX.  V1TAKKA-SANTHANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  12 1,


bethink  him  how  to  allay  all  that  moulds  and  fashions
thoughts.  As  he  does  so,  these  thoughts  will  pass
away  and  disappear,  so  that  his  heart  stands  firm,  is
stedfast,  is  focussed  and  concentrated.  J  ust  as  a  man
who  is  running  fast,  may  decide  to  walk  slowly — or
stand  still — or  sit  down — or  lie  down — and  thereby
passes  from  the  more  violent  to  the  easier  posture, —
even  so  is  it  with  this  Almsman  in  his  allaying  of  all
that  moulds  and  fashions  thoughts.

(v.)  But,  if,  allay  as  he  may,  these  thoughts  continue
to  arise,  then,  with  his  teeth  clenched  and  with  his
tongue  pressed  against  his  palate,  he  should,  by  sheer
force  of  mind,  restrain,  coerce  and  dominate  his  heart.
[121]  As  he  does  so,  these  thoughts  will  pass  away
and  disappear,  so  that  his  heart  stands  firm,  is  sted¬
fast,  is  focussed  and  concentrated.  Just  as  a  strong
man,  taking  a  weaker  man  by  the  head  or  shoulders,
restrains  and  coerces  and  dominates  him, — even  so,  if,
allay  as  he  may,  these  thoughts  .  .  .  focussed  and
concentrated.

When  at  last,  whether  (i.)  by  diverting  his  mind
elsewhere  or  (ii.)  by  scrutiny  of  the  perilous  con¬
sequences  or  (iii.)  by  ignoring  bad  and  wrong  thoughts
or  (iv.)  by  allaying  what  moulds  them  or  (v.)  by  sub¬
duing  them,  the  Almsman  is  victorious  over  bad  and
wrong  thoughts  associated  with  appetite,  hatred  and
delusion,  so  that  they  pass  away  and  disappear  and  his
heart  stands  firm  and  is  stedfast,  is  focussed  and  con¬
centrated,— [122]  then  indeed  has  he  earned  the  style
of  master  of  the  ordering  of  his  thoughts,  for,  he  will
think  only  such  thoughts  as  he  wishes  and  not  those  he
wishes  not  to  think ;  he  has  hewn  away  cravings,  has
shed  his  fetters,  and — by  fathoming  propensities  to
pride — has  made  an  end  of  Ill.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


*.flo  *t»  4J0J


I


tu  Bilii  96


Hild  96

:u  -f  460c


ru  4ftoo


/u  Hild  96


Im  Lager  LXII1,  12.  13.  Sept.  BUtt  4j.


M.  i.  123.


XXI.  KAKACUPAMA-SUTTA.

THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SAW.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  SSvatthT  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  AnSthapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Moliya  -  Phagguna  was
always  in  the  society  of  the  Almswomen,  so  much  so
indeed  that,  if  in  his  presence  any  Almsmen  ever  said
a  word  against  those  Almswomen,  he  was  annoyed  and
displeased  and  made  a  fuss  about  it.  With  the  Alms¬
women  it  was  just  the  same ; — they  were  annoyed  and
displeased  and  made  a  fuss,  if  in  their  presence  any
Almsman  ever  said  a  word  against  him.  Such  were  the
terms  he  was  on  with  the  Almswomen.

Now,  a  certain  Almsman  reported  all  this  to  the
Lord,  who  bade  an  Almsman  [128]  summon  Moliya-
Phagguna  to  his  presence.  In  obedience  to  the
summons,  the  Elder  came,  with  due  obeisance  took
his  seat  to  one  side,  and,  being  questioned  about  the
report  concerning  him  and  the  Almswomen,  admitted
its  truth.

Was  it  not  for  faith’s  sake,  Phagguna,  that  you  went
forth  from  a  comfortable  home  to  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim  ?

Yes,  sir.

Then  it  becomes  you  not,  having  so  gone  forth  on
Pilgrimage,  to  associate  so  much  with  Almswomen.
Even  if  you  hear  things  said  in  your  presence  against
them,  you  should  put  from  you  every  mundane
impulse  and  thought,  schooling  yourself  never  to  let
your  heart  be  led  away,  never  to  let  wicked  words  pass
your  lips,  but  always  to  be  kindly  and  compassionate,
with  your  heart  full  of  love  and  void  of  enmity.  You
should  be  the  same,  if  in  your  presence  anyone  were

85


it:  I  >


/•■Itc


II  *r  4433


Bilcl  97


N


Topa-Gabibatschtin.

Auftfeiiommen  von  8°J  Hl-itt  41.


Bild  98


Topa-Gabibatschun.

Aufgcnommcn  von  9’* — HUnt  41.


86


XXI.  KAKACUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  124.


to  strike  those  Almswomen  with  fist,  clod,  cudgel  or
knife.  You  should  school  yourself  to  be  the  same,  too,
if  you  yourself  were  reviled  [124]  or  struck.

Turning  to  the  Almsmen,  the  Lord  said  : — I  was
much  pleased  with  the  Almsmen  once,  when  I  told
them  how,  personally,  I  only  sat  down  to  food  once  a
day  and  found  that  on  this  regimen  I  was  healthful  and
well,  buoyant,  bale,  and  hearty.  1  urged  them  to  do
likewise  and  they  would  benefit  therefrom  as  I  had.  I
had  no  need  to  instruct  them  in  this  ;  all  I  had  to  do
was  to  draw  their  attention  to  it.1  It  was  just  like  a
carriage — with  thoroughbreds  harnessed  to  it  and  with
the  goad  lying  ready  to  hand,  on  level  ground  at  the
crossroads, — into  which  there  mounts  a  skilled  driver
who  knows  how  to  manage  horses  ;  he  takes  the  reins
in  his  left  hand  and  the  goad  in  his  right,  and  away  he
drives,  up  and  down,  where  he  likes  and  as  he  likes  ; —
even  so,  I  had  no  need  to  instruct  those  Almsmen  in
this  ;  all  I  had  to  do  was  to  draw  their  attention  to  it.

So  put  from  you  what  is  wrong  and  yoke  yourselves
to  right  states  of  mind,  because  thereby  you  will
develop  and  grow  and  increase  in  this  Doctrine  and
Rule.  It  is  just  like  a  great  grove  of  Sal-trees  near
a  village  or  township,  which  is  overgrown  with  creepers,
and  to  which  there  comes  a  man  who  wants  the  grove
to  thrive  and  flourish  and  has  amiable  and  kindly
feeling  towards  it ;  he  cuts  out  and  carries  off  all
crooked  and  hurtful  growths  so  that  the  grove  is
cleaned  and  clean  within  ;  he  tends  with  every  care
whatever  wood  grows  straight  and  fair,  so  that  later  on
the  grove  may  develop  and  grow  and  increase. — Even
so  should  you  put  from  you  what  is  wrong  and  yoke
yourselves  to  right  states  of  mind,  because  [125]
thereby  you  will  develop  and  grow  and  increase  in
this  Doctrine  and  Rule.

'“'Once  on  a  time  in  this  same  Savatthi  there  was  a
lady  named  Videhika,  who  was  reputed  gentle,  and


1  But  in  the  65th  Sutta  he  had  trouble  with  Bhaddali  on
this.


M.  i.  126.


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SAW.


87


meek,  and  mild.  She  had  a  maid-servant  named
Darkie,  a  bright  girl,  an  early  riser  and  a  good  worker.
I  wonder,  thought  Darkie,  whether  my  mistress,  who
is  so  well  spoken  of,  has  really  got  a  temper  of  her
own  which  she  does  not  show  or  whether  she  has  got
no  temper  at  all  ?  Or  do  I  do  my  work  so  well  that,
though  she  has  got  a  temper,  she  does  not  show  it  ?
I  will  try  her.

So  next  morning  she  got  up  late.  Darkie !
Darkie ! — cried  the  mistress. — Yes,  madam,  answered
the  girl. — Why  did  you  get  up  so  late  ? — Oh,  that’s
nothing,  madam. — Nothing,  indeed,  the  naughty
girl !  thought  the  mistress,  frowning  with  anger  and
displeasure.

So  she  has  got  a  temper,  though  she  does  not  show
it,  thought  the  maid  ;  it  is  because  I  do  my  work  so
well  that  she  does  not  show  it ;  I  will  try  her  further.
So  she  got  up  later  next  morning.  Darkie !  Darkie !
cried  the  mistress. — Yes  madam,  answered  the  girl. —
Why  did  you  get  up  so  late? — Oh,  that’s  nothing,
madam. — Nothing,  indeed,  you  naughty  girl !  ex¬
claimed  the  mistress,  giving  vent  in  words  to  her
anger  and  displeasure.

Yes,  thought  the  maid  ;  she  has  got  a  temper,  though
she  does  not  show  it  because  I  do  my  work  so  well ;  1
will  try  her  yet  further.  So  next  morning  she
got  up  later  still.  [126]  Darkie!  Darkie!  cried  her
mistress. — Yes,  madam,  answered  the  girl. — Why  did
you  get  up  so  late  ? — Oh,  that’s  nothing,  madam. —
Nothing  indeed,  you  naughty  girl,  to  get  up  so  late!
exclaimed  the  mistress;  and  in  her  anger  and  dis¬
pleasure  she  snatched  up  the  lynch-pin  and  struck  the
girl  on  the  head  with  it,  drawing  blood.  With  her
broken  head  streaming  with  blood,  Darkie  roused  the
neighbourhood  with  shrieks  of — See,  lady,  what  the
gentle  one  has  done !  See,  lady,  what  the  meek  one
has  done !  See,  lady,  what  the  mild  one  has  done !
What  for  ?  J  ust  because  her  only  maid  got  up  late,  she
was  so  angry  and  displeased  that  she  must  up  with  the
lynch-pin  to  strike  her  on  the  head  and  break  it.


>  +  •5f


tu  Biiti  99


2U  Biltl  oo


I  M-i«hu


Ini  Da-tschu-Tal.

Aufgcnomincii  von  I,  ioi» — n«i.  Matt  41.


88


XXI.  KAKACUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  127.


In  the  result  the  lady  Videhika  got  the  repute  of
being  violent  and  anything  but  meek  and  mild,  x

— In  like  manner  an  Almsman  may  be  gentle,  and
meek,  and  mild  enough  so  long  as  nothing  unpleasant
is  said  against  him.  It  is  only  when  unpleasant  things
are  said  against  him  that  you  can  begin  to  dub  him
gentle,  and  meek,  and  mild.  I  do  not  call  that  Alms¬
man  docile  who  is  docile  and  evinces  docility  only  to
get  clothes  and  food  and  so  forth.  For,  if  he  fails
to  get  these  things,  he  is  not  docile  and  evinces  no
docility.  Him  only  do  I  call  docile  whose  docility
springs  from  honouring  and  venerating  and  revering
the  Doctrine.  Be  it  your  task,  Almsmen,  to  become
docile  and  to  evince  docility  by  honouring  and  venerat¬
ing  and  revering  the  Doctrine.

There  are  five  ways  in  which  you  may  be  ad¬
dressed, — (i.)  in  or  out  of  season,  (ii.)  truthfully  or  un¬
truthfully,  (iii.)  mildly  or  harshly,  (iv.)  profitably  or
unprofitable  and  (v.)  in  love  or  in  hate ;  people  may
speak  to  you  from  time  to  time  in  each  of  these  ways.
[127]  Your  task  should  be  to  preserve  your  hearts  un¬
moved,  never  to  allow  an  ill  word  to  pass  your  lips,
but  always  to  abide  in  compassion  and  goodwill,
with  no  hate  in  your  hearts,  enfolding  in  radiant
thoughts  of  love  the  person  addressing  you  and  pro¬
ceeding  thence  to  enfold  the  whole  world  in  your
radiant  thoughts  of  love, — thoughts  like  the  solid  earth
beneath  thoughts  great,  vast  and  beyond  measure,  in
which  no  hatred  is  or  thought  of  harm.

It  is  like  a  man  who  comes  with  basket  and  shovel
to  do  away  with  the  solid  earth !  So  here  he  digs  and
there  he  digs  ;  dumps  it  down  here  and  dumps  it  down
there ;  spits  here  and  stales  there  ; — confident  that  the
earth  is  being  got  rid  of  bit  by  bit !  Do  you  think  he
will  succeed  in  doing  away  with  the  earth  ?

No,  sir  ; — because  the  solid  earth  is  so  deep  and  so
measureless,  that  it  will  not  readily  cease  to  exist
before  the  man  is  tired  out  and  worn  out  himself.

— Even  so  (futile)  are  the  five  ways  in  which  others
may  address  you, —  .  .  .  thoughts  of  love, — thoughts


M.  i.  128.  THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SAW.  89

like  the  solid  earth,  great,  vast  and  beyond  measure,
in  which  no  hatred  is  or  thought  of  harm.

It  is  like  a  man  who  comes  with  lac  and  colours,
yellow  or  blue  or  madder,  to  paint  pictures  on  the  air.
Do  you  think  he  could  do  so  ?

No,  sir  ;  because  the  air  is  void  of  form  and
attributes,  so  that  pictures  will  not  readily  be  painted
on  it  before  the  man  himself  is  [128]  tired  out  and
worn  out.

— Even  so  (futile)  are  the  five  ways  in  which  others
may  address  you  .  .  .  thoughts  of  love,  thoughts  like
the  air  above,  great,  vast  and  beyond  measure,  in  which
no  hatred  is  or  thought  of  harm.

It  is  like  a  man  who  comes  with  a  blaming  wisp  of
bracken  to  set  the  river  Ganges  on  fire  and  burn  it  all
up.  Do  you  think  he  could  do  so  ?

No,  sir;  because  the  Ganges  is  so  deep  and  so
measureless  that  it  will  not  readily  be  fired  and  burnt
up  by  wisps  of  bracken  before  the  man  himself  is
tired  out  and  worn  out.

— Even  so  (futile)  are  the  five  ways  in  which  others
may  address  you  .  .  .  thoughts  of  love,  thoughts  like
the  Ganges,  great,  vast  and  beyond  measure,  in  which
no  hatred  is  or  thought  of  harm.

It  is  like  a  wallet  of  cat’s  skin  that  has  been  rubbed
and  scrubbed  until  it  is  as  supple  as  supple  can  be,
and  as  soft  now  as  gossamer,  with  never  a  purr  or
a  hiss  left  in  it ;  and  if  there  came  along  a  man
with  a  chip  of  wood  or  a  potsherd,  professing  therewith
to  start  it  purring  and  hissing  again  ; — do  you  think
he  could  succeed  ?

No,  sir ;  because  that  cat’s  skin  has  been  rubbed  and
scrubbed  till  it  is  as  supple  as  supple  can  be,  and  as
soft  now  as  gossamer,  with  never  a  purr  or  a  hiss
left  in  it ;  so  mat  it  will  not  readily  be  started  purring
and  hissing  again,  with  his  chip  or  potsherd,  before  the
man  himself  is  tired  out  and  worn  out.

— Even  so  (futile)  are  the  five  ways  in  which
others  may  address  you  .  .  .  [129]  thoughts  of  love,
thoughts  like  that  supple  and  tempered  wallet  of  cat’s


Bild  IOO


K  m**r  AVilktlm  -  •  ••Mrnf


->  W’ju  •


V  »J*t4  » >!•  4*^

i  I


y*  I'tirixc


iu  Bild  ion


Im  Friederichsen-Gebirge.


Aufgenommen  von  *•!'»  -f-  4565  Bl.iti  39.


90


XXI.  KAKACUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  130.


skin,  thoughts  great,  vast  and  beyond  measure,  in  which
no  hatred  is  or  thought  of  harm.1

If  villainous  banaits  were  to  carve  you  limb  from
limb  with  a  two-handled  saw,  even  then  the  man  that
should  give  way  to  anger  would  not  be  obeying  my
teaching.  Even  then  be  it  your  task  to  preserve  your
hearts  unmoved,  never  to  allow  an  ill  word  to  pass
your  lips,  but  always  to  abide  in  compassion  and  good¬
will,  with  no  hate  in  your  hearts,  enfolding  in  radiant
thoughts  of  love  the  bandit  (who  tortures  you)  and  pro¬
ceeding  thence  to  enfold  the  whole  world  in  your
radiant  thoughts  of  love,  thoughts  great,  vast  and
beyond  measure,  in  which  no  hatred  is  or  thought
of  harm.

If,  Almsmen,  you  were  to  ponder  again  and  again
over  this  parable  of  the  saw,  do  you  perceive  anything,
great  or  small,  which  you  could  not  endure  to  have
said  to  you  ? — No,  sir. — Then,  Almsmen,  ponder  again
and  again  on  this  parable  of  the  saw  ;  it  will  make  for
your  abiding  good  and  welfare.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXII.  ALAGADDUPAMA-SUTTA.

THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE.

[180]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  SfivatthI  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anatha-
pindika’s  pleasaunce,  an  Almsman  named  Arittha  who
had  originally  been  a  vulture-catcher  had  come  to  hold
the  pernicious  heresy  that,  as  he  understood  the
Lord  s  exposition  of  the  Doctrine,  the  states  of  mind
declared  by  the  Lord  to  be  the  stumbling-blocks  are
not  such  at  all  to  him  who  indulges  in  them.2

1  As  the  cat  cannot  be  brought  back  to  life,  nor  can  its  dressed
skin  rustle  or  crackle  when  handled,  so  is  the  Arahat  who
‘  answers  not  again.'

*  Cf.  I,  72.  The  whole  Arittha  episode  occurs  verbatim  in
Vinaya  Texts,  II,  377.  See  Vinaya  Texts,  I,  47  for  the  penalty


M.  i.  131.  THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE.  9  r

As  soon  as  this  reached  their  ears,  a  number  of
Almsmen  went  to  ask  Arittha  whether  he  was  correctly
reported  as  holding  a  heresy  so  pernicious ;  and,  on
learning  from  him  that  he  undoubtedly  did  hold  it,
they  sought  to  wean  him  from  it  by  enquiry,  expostu¬
lation,  and  remonstrance.  Do  not,  said  they,  mis¬
represent  the  Lord  ;  it  is  not  right  to  impute  this  to
him,  for  he  would  not  say  so ;  (on  the  contrary)  it  has
been  by  the  Lord  laid  down  in  many  a  figure  that  the
states  of  mind  declared  by  him  to  be  stumbling-blocks
are  veritable  stumbling-blocks  to  him  who  indulges  in
them.  Pleasures  of  sense  he  has  described  as  giving
little  satisfaction,  much  Ill  and  much  tribulation,  and  as
being  dogged  by  perils  greater  still.  He  has  described
these  pleasures  of  sense  in  the  (ten)  Parables,1 — of  the
bare  bone,  the  lump  of  carrion,  the  hay-torch,  the  pit
of  embers,  the  dream,  the  loan,  the  hanging  fruit,  the
slaughter-house,  the  impaling  stake,  the  snake’s  head, —
always  as  giving  little  satisfaction,  much  Ill,  and  much
tribulation,  and  always  as  being  dogged  by  perils
greater  still.  But  say  what  they  might,  Arittha  would
not  yield  to  their  expostulations  but  stoutly  maintained
and  upheld  his  pernicious  heresy.  So,  when  Arittha
could  not  [131]  be  got  to  recede  from  his  position,
those  Almsmen  went  to  the  Lord  and  recounted  all
that  passed  ;  and  he  sent  an  Almsman  to  summon
Arittha  to  his  presence.

[132]  When  Arittha  had  obediently  come  and  had
taken  his  seat  to  one  side  after  due  obeisance,  the  Lord
asked  him  whether  he  was  correctly  reported  as  having
come  to  hold  that,  as  he  understood  the  Doctrine
taught  by  the  Lord,  the  states  of  mind  declared  to  be
stumbling-blocks  were  not  such  at  all  to  him' who  in¬
dulged  in  them. — Yes,  he  undoubtedly  did  so  hold. —
Then  said  the  Lord : — To  whom,  foolish  man,  do  you
aver  that  I  ever  so  taught  the  Doctrine?  Have  I  not,

of  excommunication  for  maintaining  that  a  Saint  cannot  fall  from
grace.  It  will  be  noted  that  here,  as  in  Sutta  38,  the  recalcitrant
is  branded  as  belonging  by  origin  to  a  murderous  calling.

1  See  Sutta  No.  54  for  the  first  seven  of  these  in  detail.


92


XXII.  alagaddCpama-sutta.


M.  i.  133.


foolish  man,  laid  it  down  in  many  a  figure  that  the
states  of  mind  declared  by  me  to  be  stumbling-blocks
are  veritable  stumbling-blocks  to  him  who  indulges  in
them  ?  Pleasures  of  sense  I  have  described  as  giving
little  satisfaction,  much  Ill,  and  much  tribulation,  and
as  being  dogged  by  perils  greater  still ;  I  have  so
described  pleasures  of  sense  in  ten  Parables.  Yet  you,
foolish  man,  employ  what  you  yourself  misunderstand
not  only  to  misrepresent  me  but  also  to  undermine
yourself  and  to  lay  up  a  store  of  demerit, — to  your
lasting  hurt  and  harm.

Turning  then  to  the  Almsmen,  the  Lord  said  : — Do
you  think  this  Brother  Arittha,  the  vulture-catcher  of
the  past,  has  got  even  a  spark  of  illumination  in  this
Doctrine  and  Rule  ?

How  could  he,  sir  ?  For,  it  is  not  the  fact.

Hereat,  Ariftha  sat  silent  and  glum,  with  his
shoulders  hunched  up  and  eyes  downcast,  much
exercised  in  his  mind  but  finding  no  words  to  utter.
Marking  his  plight,  the  Lord  said  : — And  now,  foolish
man,  you  shall  be  shewn  up  in  respect  of  this  pernicious
view  ;  I  will  question  the  Almsmen  on  the  point.

Accordingly  the  Lord  addressed  the  Almsmen  as
follows  : — [133]  Now  do  you  too,  Almsmen,  understand
me  to  have  taught  the  Doctrine  in  the  fashion  in  which
Arittha  here,  this  whilom  vulture-catcher,  employs
what  he  himself  misunderstands,  not  only  to  misrepre¬
sent  me  but  also  to  undermine  himself  and  to  lay  up  a
store  of  demerit  ?

No,  sir ;  for,  in  many  a  figure  we  have  heard  from
the  Lord  that  the  states  of  mind  declared  by  him  to  be
stumbling-blocks  are  veritable  stumbling-blocks  to  him
who  indulges  in  them ;  pleasures  of  sense  the  Lord
has  described  as  giving  little  satisfaction,  much  Ill,
and  much  tribulation,  and  as  being  dogged  by  perils
greater  still.

Quite  right,  Almsmen ;  you  rightly  understand  my
teaching ;  for,  indeed,  I  have,  as  you  say,  so  taught  in
many  a  figure  and  parable.  Yet  here  is  this  former
vulture-catcher,  Arittha,  employing  what  he  himself


zu  Bild  lot  Bill!  101


Im  Ma-tschu-Tal.

AufjfcnommrH  von  iz*r  •*>  BLiti


Bild  102


Am  Ma-tschu.

Am’gcuonunen  von  ««.  Hiatt  3S.


M.  i.  134.


THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE.


93


misunderstands,  not  only  to  misrepresent  me  but  also
to  undermine  himself  and  to  lay  up  a  store  of  demerit,
— to  his  lasting  hurt  and  Ill.  No  one  can  possibly
indulge  in  pleasures  of  sense  without  harbouring
sensuality  within  himself  or  without  perceiving  it  and
thinking  about  it

Take  the  case  of  some  foolish  persons  who  have
learned  by  heart  the  Doctrine, — the  Suttas1  in  prose  or
in  prose  and  verse,  with  the  Poems  and  the  Triumphant
Utterances  and  the  Quotations  and  the  Ja.ta.kas  and
the  Miracles  and  the  Miscellanies, — yet  though  they
have  learned  it  all  by  heart,  fail  to  study  its  import  for
the  comprehension  of  all  it  embodies,  and  consequendy
find  no  joy  in  it,  profiting  by  their  learning  by  rote
solely  for  strictures  on  others  or  for  bandying  verbal
quotations,  and  quite  missing  the  real  object  of  their
memorizing;  so  that  these  divers  aspects  of  the
Doctrine  which  they  have  failed  to  grasp  conduce  to
their  lasting  hurt  and  Ill.  And  why  ? — Because  they
have  grasped  it  all  wrong.

It  is  just  like  a  man  who  is  in  quest  of  a  serpent  for
his  needs  and  who  in  the  course  of  his  searching  finds
a  big  serpent,  which  he  seizes  by  its  coils  or  tail,  with
the  result  that  it  turns  on  him  and  bites  him  on  hand
or  arm  or  elsewhere  on  his  body,  so  that  he  [134]
comes  thereby  by  his  death  or  deadly  hurt.  And
why? — Because  he  has  wrongly  grasped  his  snake.
And  it  is  just  the  same  with  those  foolish  persons  who
have  learned  by  heart  .  .  .  wrongly  grasped  them.

Take  now  the  case  of  young  men  who  have  likewise
learned  the  Doctrine  by  heart  in  all  its  aspects  but
study  its  import  for  the  comprehension  of  all  it
embodies,  and  consequently  find  joy  in  it, — learning  it

1  In  this  stock  passage — here  naively  put  into  the  mouth  of  the
still  living  and  preaching  Buddha  by  later  recensionists — Bu.
interprets  Sutta  as  including  the  Vinaya  and  Abhidhamma,  and
therefore  as  signifying  the  Pitakas  at  large, — not  being  either
exclusively  in  verse  (like  the  Dhammapada  and  the  Thera-  and
Theri-githSs)  or  purely  expository  (like  Sutta  No.  9  above  or  the
Vedalla  Suttas  Nos.  43  and  44  infra)  or  florilegia  (like  the
Udana).


Bild  103


u


I m  Ma-tschu-Tal.

Aufjjetiommon  von  ios* — 1 1  Blatt  .is.


Bitd  l<»4


Im  Ma-tschu-Tal.

AufKrnom,nen  von  g‘"  *'■  IMatt  jS.


94


XXII.  ALAGADDUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  135.


by  heart  not  for  strictures  on  others  or  for  bandying
verbal  quotations,  but  for  securing  the  real  object  of  their
memorizing,  so  that  the  divers  aspects  of  the  Doctrine
which  they  have  succeeded  in  mastering  conduce  to
their  lasting  good  and  welfare.  And  why  ? — Because
they  have  grasped  it  all  aright.

It  is  just  like  a  man  who  is  in  quest  of  a  serpent  for
his  needs  and  who  in  the  course  of  his  searching  finds
a  big  serpent  which  he  pins  securely  down  with  a
forked  stick  before  grasping  it  tightly  by  its  neck.
Coil  itself  as  the  serpent  may  round  his  hand  or  arm  or
other  part  of  his  body,  the  man  does  not  come  thereby
by  his  death  or  deadly  hurt.  And  why  ? — Because  he
has  grasped  it  aright  And  it  is  just  the  same  with
those  young  men  who  have  likewise  learned  by
heart  .  .  .  grasped  it  all  aright.

Therefore,  Almsmen,  when  you  understand  the
import  of  what  I  say,  so  treasure  it  up  in  your
memories ;  but  if  you  fail  to  understand,  then  ask  me
or  some  outstanding  Almsmen.

By  the  parable  of  the  raft  I  will  teach  how  to
abandon  and  not  to  retain.  Listen  and  pay  attention ;
and  I  will  speak.  Yes,  sir,  said  they  in  response ;
and  the  Lord  began : — It  is  like  a  man  who  after
travelling  a  long  way  finds  the  floods  out,  with  danger
and  peril  on  the  hither  side  and  with  security  and
safety  on  the  further  side,  but  with  no  ferry  or  suspen¬
sion-bridge  ;  and  to  him  comes  the  thought  [185]  to
win  his  way  across  the  floods  to  safety  from  the  perils
which  encompass  him  by  collecting  grass  and  sticks
and  branches  and  boughs  wherewith  to  fashion  a  raft
on  which  to  paddle  himself  safely  across  with  his  hands
and  feet ;  and  to  him,  when  he  has  done  all  this  and
has  paddled  himself  safely  across,  the  thought  comes
that  the  raft  had  been  so  useful  that  he  might  do  well
to  take  it  along  with  him  packed  on  his  head  or
shoulders.  Think  you  he  would  be  doing  the  right
thing  with  the  raft  ? — No,  sir. — How  should  he  act  so
as  to  do  the  right  thing  with  his  raft  ?  Well,  suppose
that,  when  he  was  safely  over,  he,  recognizing  how


M.  i.  136.


THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE.


95


useful  the  raft  had  been,  were  to  deem  it  well,  before
going  on  his  way,  either  to  beach  it  or  to  leave  it
afloat ; — clearly  thus  he  would  be  doing  the  right  thing
with  his  raft.  In  this  wise  I  have  taught  you  by  the
parable  of  the  raft  how  to  abandon  and  not  to  retain.
I  f  you  understand  this  parable  of  the  raft,  you  have  to
discard  good  things,  and  d  fortiori  bad  things.

Speculative  tenets  are  sixfold.  Take  the  case  of  an
uninstructed  everyday  man  who  takes  no  count  of  the
Noble,  who  is  unversed  and  untrained  in  the  Doctrine
of  the  Noble,  who  takes  no  count  of  the  Excellent, —
who  is  unversed  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Excellent, —
who  regards  as  ‘  mine  or  *  I  am  this  *  or  *  this  is  my
Self,’  either  (i)  visible  form, — or  (ii)  feeling — or  (iii)
perception — or  (iv)  the  plastic  forces — or  (v)  whatso¬
ever  he  sees,  hears,  touches,  is  aware  of,  or  by  the
mind  attains,  seeks  out,  and  reflects  on, —  or  (vi)  the
speculative  tenet  that  ‘the  world  around  me  is  the
Self  which  I  shall  hereafter  become, — eternal  and
permanent,  everlasting  and  unchangeable,  [136]  stand¬
ing  fast  like  heaven  and  earth.’

But  the  instructed  man,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble
who  does  take  count  of  the  Noble  and  is  both  versed
and  trained  in  their  Doctrine,  who  does  take  count  of
the  Excellent  and  is  both  versed  and  trained  in  their
Doctrine, — he  refuses  to  regard  visible  form — or  the
rest  of  the  six — as  mine  or  I  am  this,  or  this  is
my  Self.  Refusing  so  to  regard  these  things,  he  is
not  worried  over  the  non-existent.

At  this  point  an  Almsman  asked  whether  there  could
be  worry  over  the  externally  non-existent.

Yes,  answered  the  Lord.  Suppose  a  Brother  thinks
he  once  had  something  which  he  now  has  not  got,  or
that  he  would  like  to  have  something  he  cannot  get ;
he  grieves  and  mourns  and  laments,  he  beats  his  breast
and  is  distraught.— That  is  how  there  comes  worry
over  the  externally  non-existent.

Being  asked  further  if  there  could  be  an  absence  of
worry  over  the  externally  non-existent,  the  Lord
said  : — Yes  ;  suppose  an  Almsman  never  thinks  that


96


XXII.  ALAGADDUPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  137.


he  once  had  something  which  he  now  has  not  got,  or
that  he  would  like  to  have  something  he  cannot  get  ;
he  does  not  grieve  and  mourn  and  lament,  he  does  not
beat  his  breast  nor  is  he  distraught. — That  is  how  there
is  an  absence  of  worry  over  the  externally  non-existent.

Being  asked  further  if  there  could  be  worry  over  the
internally  non-existent,  the  Lord  said : — Yes ;  as  for
instance  in  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  comes  to  hold
the  speculative  idea  that  the  world  around  me  is  the
Self,  which  I  shall  hereafter  become, — eternal  and
permanent,  everlasting  and  unchangeable,  standing  fast
like  heaven  and  earth.  From  the  Truth-finder  or  a
disciple  of  his  he  hears  preached  the  Doctrine  to
remove  all  tendency,  inclination,  and  bias  towards
speculative  tenets,  to  still  all  plastic  forces,  to  discard
all  the  material  of  rebirth,  to  extirpate  cravings,  in  the
passionless  calm  of  Nirvana.  Thinks  he  to  himself:
[137]  ‘  Then  I  shall  be  cut  off  and  perish  utterly,  there
will  be  an  end  of  me  for  ever and  at  the  thought  he
grieves  and  mourns  and  laments,  beats  his  breast,  and
is  distraught — That  is  how  there  is  worry  over  the
internally  non-existent.

Being  asked  further  whether  there  could  be  an
absence  of  worry  over  the  internally  non-existent,  the
Lord  : — Yes ;  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  an  Alms¬
man  who,  holding  no  speculative  idea  that  the  world
around  him  is  the  Self,  into  which  he  will  hereafter
merge  for  ever  and  ever,  hears  the  Doctrine  preached  by
the  Truth-finder  or  a  disciple  of  his,  without  a  thought
that  this  means  he  will  be  cut  off  and  perish  utterly
and  be  ended  for  ever ;  so  he  does  not  grieve  and
mourn  and  lament,  he  does  not  beat  his  breast  nor  is
he  distraught. — That  is  how  there  is  an  absence  of
worry  over  the  internally  non-existent.

You  would  like  to  possess  something  that  was
eternal  and  permanent,  everlasting  and  unchangeable,
standing  fast  like  heaven  and  earth  ; — but,  can  you  see
any  such  possession  ?

No,  sir.

Quite  right,  Almsmen  ; — nor  do  I.


M.  i.  138.


THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE.


97


You  would  like  to  have  a  grip  on  personal  immor¬
tality  such  that  thereby  you  would  escape  all  grief,
lamentation,  sorrow,  woe  and  tribulation; — but,  can
you  see  any  such  grip  ?

No,  sir.

Quite  right,  Almsmen  ; — nor  do  I.

You  would  like  a  foundation  for  speculative  beliefs
so  sure  that  thereby  you  would  escape  all  grief,  lamen¬
tation,  sorrow,  woe,  and  tribulation  ; — but,  can  you  see
any  such  foundation  ?

No,  sir.

Quite  right,  Almsmen  ; — nor  do  I.

[138]  If  there  were  a  Self,  would  there  be  something
of  the  nature  of  a  *  Self  of  mine  ’  ?

Yes,  sir.

And  if  there  were  something  of  the  nature  of  a  Self
of  mine,  would  there  be  a  ‘  my-self  ’  ?

Yes,  sir.


But,  if  really  and  truly  there  is  to  be  found  neither
Self  nor  anything  of  the  nature  of  Self,  is  it  not  mere
absolute  folly  to  hold  the  speculative  view  that  the
world  around  me  is  ‘the  Self’,  into  which  I  shall  pass
hereafter, — eternal  and  permanent,  everlasting  and
unchangeable,  standing  fast  like  heaven  and  earth  ?

How,  sir,  could  it  not  be  mere  absolute  folly?

What  do  you  think,  Almsmen?  Is  visible  form  per¬
manent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent,  sir.

And  is  the  impermanent  a  weal  or  a  woe  ?

A  woe,  sir.

But  can  a  woe  that  is  impermanent  and  changeable
properly  be  regarded  as  mine,  or  as  I  am  this,  or  as
this  is  my  Self?

No,  sir.

[And  the  same  argument  applies  also  to  feelings,
perception,  plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.]

From  which  it  results,  Almsmen,  that  all  visible
forms — or  feelings — or  perceptions — or  plastic  forces —
or  consciousness — all  this,  whether  past,  present,  or
future,  whether  internal  or  external,  [189]  whether


7


\f


NW


Pli  -7-4900


KK  —  4^3


K04-453

I


Bild  105

Ia-i-4300

I


Am  Ma-tschu.

Aufgenommen  von  K.  11'  -u'"-.  Hiatt  3.N.


Bilil  106


Klu  -  445*  T»-|||  Kf +  41*0  Ne+44<»


S.  I


Am  Ma-tschu.

Aufgenommen  von  t<*  — *4.  Blatt  37.


98


XXII.  ALAGADDtjPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  140.


gross  or  subtle,  high  or  low,  far  or  near,  have  all  to  be
viewed — if  their  real  nature  is  comprehended  aright —
as  *  not  mine  as  ‘  I  am  not  this  ’,  and  as  *  this  is  no
Self  of  mine

So  viewing  all  these  things,  the  instructed  disciple  of
the  Noble  grows  aweary  of  visible  forms  and  the  rest  of
them ;  weariness  leads  him  to  passionlessness,  and
passionlessness  to  Deliverance,  wherein  he  comes  to
know  his  Deliverance  in  the  sure  conviction  :  Rebirth
is  no  more ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life ;  my  task  is
done  ;  and  now  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.
Such  an  Almsman  is  known  as  one  who  is  quit  of  bolt
and  bar,  has  filled  in  his  moat,  has  got  rid  of  the  itch  of
wanting,  is  cribbed  and  cabined  no  more ;  he  is  known
as  the  Noble  who  has  flung  away  pride’s  banner,  has
cast  off  his  burthen,  and  is  emancipate.

Now,  how  is  he  quit  of  bolt  and  bar? — When
ignorance  has  passed  away,  grubbed  up  by  the  roots,
like  the  cleared  site  where  once  a  palm-tree  grew,  a
thing  that  once  has  been  and  now  can  be  no  more.

How  does  he  fill  in  his  moat  ? — When  the  round  of
birth  and  rebirth  has  passed  away  ...  no  more.

How  does  he  get  rid  of  the  itch  of  wanting? — When
craving  has  passed  away  ...  no  more.

How'  is  he  cribbed  and  cabined  no  more  ? — When
the  five  worldly  bonds  have  passed  away  ...  no  more.

How  is  he  the  Noble  who  has  flung  away  pride’s
banner,  has  cast  off  his  burthen,  and  is  emancipate  ?
— When  the  pride  in  an  Ego1  has  passed  away
.  .  .  no  more.

[140]  When  his  heart  is  thus  Delivered,  not  Indra
or  Brahma  or  Pajapatl,  with  all  their  trains  of  gods,
can  succeed  in  tracking  down  aught  on  which  depends
a  truth-finder’s  consciousness.  And  why  ? — Because,  say
I,  already,  here  and  now,  the  truth-finder2  is  untrace-


1  So  in  the  earliest  days  of  his  Buddhahood,  Gotama  (Vinaya
Texts,  I,  81)  preached  that  supreme  bliss  came  from  the  putting
away  of  the  conceit  which  comes  from  the  thought  *  I  am.’

*  Here,  clearly,  tathagata  means  not  a  Buddha  but  simply
an  arahat.


M.  i.  141.


THE  VENOMOUS  SNAKE,


99


able.  Though  this  is  what  I  affirm  and  what  I  preach,
yet  some  recluses  and  brahmins — wrongly,  erroneously,
and  falsely — charge  me,  in  defiance  of  facts,  with  being
an  annihilationist  and  with  preaching  the  disintegration,
destruction  and  extirpation  of  existing  creatures.  It
is  just  what  I  am  not,  and  what  I  do  not  affirm,  that  is
wrongly,  erroneously,  and  falsely  charged  against  me
by  these  good  people  who  would  make  me  out  to  be
an  annihilationist.  Both  in  the  past  and  to-day,  I  have
consistently  preached  Ill  and  the  ending  of  111.  If
therein  people  denounce  and  abuse  and  revile  the  truth-
finder, — this  begets  in  him  no  resentment  or  annoyance
or  dissatisfaction.  Nor,  again,  if  people  shew  the
truth-finder  honour  and  reverence,  devotion  and
worship, — does  that  bring  him  pleasure,  satisfaction  or
elation  ;  he  only  thinks  that  such  homage  is  consequent
on  the  truth  he  mastered  long  ago.  Therefore,  if
people  denounce  and  abuse  and  revile  you  too,  let  this
breed  in  you  no  resentment  or  annoyance  or  dissatis¬
faction.  Nor,  if  people  shew  you  too  honour  and
reverence,  devotion  or  worship,  let  that  not  bring  you
pleasure,  satisfaction,  or  elation  ;  let  your  sole  thought
be  that  such  homage  is  consequent  on  the  truth  you
mastered  long  ago.

Put  from  you  then  what  is  not  yours ;  and  thereby  1
you  will  come  to  lasting  weal  and  well-being.  Now
what,  Almsmen,  is  that  which  is  not  yours  ? — Visible
forms  are  not  yours ;  and  so  put  them  from  you  and
ensure  thereby  your  lasting  weal  and  well-being.
Similarly,  put  from  you  feelings,  [141]  perceptions,  the
plastic  forces,  and  consciousness ;  and  ensure  thereby
your  lasting  weal  and  well-being.  What  think  you  ?
If  a  man  were  to  collect  or  burn  or  otherwise  do  what
he  liked  with  the  grass,  sticks,  branches  and  foliage  in
this  grove  of  J  eta’s, — would  it  occur  to  you  that  it  was
you  whom  he  was  collecting  or  burning  or  otherwise
doing  what  he  liked  with  ?

No,  sir  ;  and  why? — Because  nothing  of  all  this  is
either  our  Self  or  anything  of  the  nature  of  a  Self
of  ours.


IOO


XXII.  alagaddOpama-sutta.


M.  i.  142.


Just  in  the  same  way  put  from  you  what  is  not
yours, — visible  forms,  feelings,  and  the  rest ;  and
ensure  thereby  your  lasting  weal  and  well-being.

In  this  wise  has  the  Doctrine  been  by  me  set  forth
aright,  the  Doctrine  which  is  clear,  open,  luminous,
and  flawless,  wherein  and  whereby —

there  is  no  tracing  of  the  course  of  those  Almsmen
who  are  Arahats,  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  no  more,
who  have  greatly  lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  have
cast  off  their  burthens,  who  have  won  their  weal,  and
who  by  utter  knowledge  have  won  deliverance  ;

all  those  who  have  thrown  off  the  five  fetters  of  this
world,  will  all  be  translated  to  realms  above,  from
which  they  will  never  return  to  earth  ;

all  those  who  have  thrown  off  the  three  fetters  and
have  also  reduced  passion,  hate  and  folly  to  a  minimum
will  return  only  once  more  to  this  world  and  will  then
make  an  end  of  Ill ;

all  those  who  have  simply  thrown  off  three  fetters,
have  entered  the  stream  of  sanctification,  will  escape  all
future  states  of  misery,  [142],  have  their  future  assured,
and  are  destined  to  win  the  fullest  enlightenment  ;

all  those  whose  life  accords  with  the  Doctrine  and
with  faith,  are  all  destined  to  win  the  fullest  enlighten¬
ment  ;  and

all  who  have  but  faith  in  me  and  love  for  me,  have
heaven  as  their  destiny.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXIII.  VAMM1KA-SUTTA.

THE  SMOULDERING  ANT-HILL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Kumara-Kassapa  was
staying  in  the  Andha-vana,  to  whom  towards  dawn
there  came  a  deity  of  dazzling  beauty,  flooding  the
whole  woodland  with  radiance.  Standing  to  one  side,


XU  Ro


IV


Bild  107


o

Am  Ma-tschu.

Autgenommcn  von  9'*— jt,  Blau  57.


Blick  aut  Artschung-Dunang-Gukur.  Am  Ma-tschu.

Aufgenommen  von  759— 81*.  Blatt  37.  Aufgcuommen  von  9**—  «o»*.  Blatt  37.


M.  i.  143-  THE  SMOULDERING  ANT-HILL.  101


the  deity  said  : — Almsman,  Almsman  ! — There’s  an
ant-hill  which  smokes  by  day  and  flames  up  at  night.
The  brahmin  said  : — Take  your  tool,  sage,1  and  dig.
The  sage  dug  away  till  he  found  a  bar  and  cried :
Here's  a  bar,  Lord.  Said  the  brahmin :  Cast  it  out,
sage,  and  dig  on.  As  the  sage  dug  on,  he  came  on  a
frog.  Cast  it  out,  sage,  and  dig  on,  said  the  brahmin.
As  the  sage  dug,  he  came  on  a  passage  which  forked.
Said  the  brahmin  :  Cast  it  out,  sage,  and  dig  on.  As
he  dug  on,  he  came  successively  on — a  strainer— [143]
a  tortoise — a  cleaver — and  a  joint  of  meat ;  all  of
which  he  was  successively  told  to  cast  out  and  dig  on.
At  last  he  came  on  a  cobra.2  Sage,  leave  the  cobra
alone,  said  the  brahmin  ;  do  not  harm  the  cobra ;  pay
homage  to  the  cobra.

Now,  Almsman,  take  these  questions  to  the  Lord
and  treasure  up  his  explanations.  I  see  no  one  in  the
whole  universe — with  all  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,
with  its  recluses  and  brahmins,  and  all  gods  and  man¬
kind — whose  interpretation  of  these  questions  can
prove  convincing,  save  only  the  Truth-finder  or  a
disciple  of  the  Truth-finder  or  from  someone  who  has
been  told  by  him  or  them.

With  these  words  the  deity  vanished  from  sight.

When  the  night  was  at  an  end,  the  reverend
Kumara-Kassapa  came  to  the  Lord  and  after  saluta¬
tions  sat  down  to  one  side,  there  to  relate  the  whole
story  and  to  end  with  the  following  questions  : — What
is  the  ant-hill  ? — What  is  the  smoking  by  night  ? —
What  is  the  flaming  by  day  ? — Who  is  the  brahmin  ?
— Who  is  the  sage  ? — What  is  his  tool  ? — What  is  his
digging  ? — What  is  the  bar  ? — What  is  the  frog  ? —
What  is  the  passage  which  forked  ? — What  is  the
strainer? — What  is  the  tortoise  ? — What  is  the  cleaver  ?
— What  is  the  joint  of  meat  ? — What  is  the  cobra  ?


1  The  title  Su-medha,  here  used  of  an  Almsman,  is  given  by
Brahma  to  the  Buddha  in  Sutta  26  (infra  p.  1 19).

2  Cobras  (says  Bu.)  guard  buried  treasure  for  seven  genera¬
tions,  a  belief  which  perhaps  dictated  the  story  here  turned  into
an  allegory.


102


XXIII.  VAMMlKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  144.


[144]  The  ant-hill,  Almsman,  typifies  the  body,
which  is  made  up  of  the  four  elements,  starts  from  a
mother  and  father,  is  sustained  by  rice  and  other  foods,
and  is  impermanent,  being  subject  to  attrition,  abrasion,
erasion,  decay,  and  dispersal.

The  smoking  by  night  is  what  by  night  a  man  thinks
about,  and  ponders  on,  with  reference  to  the  day’s  doings.

The  flames  by  day  are  what,  after  thinking  and
pondering  by  night,  a  man  executes  by  day,  with  body,
voice,  or  mind.

The  brahmin  typifies  the  Truth-finder,  the  Arahat
all-enlightened.

The  sage  is  an  Almsman  under  training.

His  tool  is  noble  wisdom.

His  digging  is  perseverance  in  effort.

The  bar  signifies  ignorance,  which  he  is  bidden  to
cast  out  and  fling  away.

The  frog  is  the  emblem  of  the  unrest  arising  from
wrath,  which  he  is  bidden  to  cast  out  and  fling  away.

The  passage  which  forked  typifies  doubting,  which
he  is  bidden  to  cast  out  and  fling  away.

The  strain  represents  the  five  hindrances, — of  pas¬
sion,  ill-will,  torpor,  worry,  and  doubting.

The  tortoise  means  the  five-fold  grip  on  continuing
existence — through  visible  forms,  feelings,  perceptions,
plastic  forces,  and  consciousness — which  he  is  bidden
to  cast  out  and  fling  away.

The  cleaver  indicates  the  five  pleasures  of  sense —
proceeding  from  sights,  sounds,  odours,  tastes,  and
touch,  all  of  them  pleasant,  agreeable  and  delightful,
all  of  them  bound  up  with  passion  and  lust — which  he
is  bidden  to  cast  out  and  fling  away.

[145]  The  joint  typifies  passion’s  delights,  which  he
is  bidden  to  cast  out  and  fling  away.

Lastly,  the  cobra  is  the  symbol  of  the  Almsman  in
whom  the  Cankers  are  no  more.  Leave  him  alone,
harm  him  not,  pay  him  homage.1

1  Cf.  the  end  of  the  next  Sutta  and  of  Sutta  No.  5  for  styling
an  Arahat  nag  a  (cobra  or  elephant);  and  cf.  the  designation  of
manussa-niga  for  Maha-Kassapa  at  Vinaya  Texts  I,  121.


M.  i.  146.


ON  RELAYS.


103


Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Kumara-Kassapa  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had
said.


XXIV.  RATHA-VINITA-SUTTA.

ON  RELAYS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
,  staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  fed,  there  came  to  the  Lord  many
Almsmen  of  the  locality  who  had  been  passing  the
rainy  season  there ;  and  these,  after  due  obeisance,
seated  themselves  to  one  side,  and  were  thus  addressed
by  the  Lord  : — Who  among  the  Almsmen  from  here¬
abouts  is  by  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  who  come
also  from  here,  esteemed — as  wanting  little  himself
and  as  urging  Almsmen  too  to  want  but  little  ;  as  being
contented  in  himself  and  also  preaching  contentment
to  Almsmen  ;  as  living  aloof  in  the  inner  life  himself
and  also  preaching  it  to  Almsmen  ;  as  eschewing
mundane  society  and  also  urging  Almsmen  to  eschew
it ;  as  being  strenuous  himself  and  also  inciting  Alms¬
men  to  be  strenuous ;  as  leading  a  virtuous  life  himself
and  also  inciting  Almsmen  to  virtue ;  as  having  won
rapt  concentration  for  himself  and  also  exhorting
Almsmen  thereto  ;  as  having  won  wisdom  for  himself
and  also  exhorting  Almsmen  thereto  ;  as  having  found
Deliverance  for  himself  and  also  encouraging  Alms¬
men  thereto ;  as  having  himself  attained  to  the  full
Vision  of  Deliverance  and  also  urging  Almsmen
thereto ;  as  one  who  exhorts,  informs,  instructs,  en¬
lightens,  [146]  cheers  onward,  and  helps  forward  his
fellows  on  the  Higher  life  ?

Punna,  sir,  was  the  answer ;  the  venerable  Punna
Mantani-putta ; — he  is  esteemed  as  being  all  this  by
his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  who  come,  like  him,  from
round  here.

Now,  at  that  time,  near  the  Lord  there  was  sitting  the
reverend  Sariputta,  to  whom  the  thought  came  how


Bild  no

+ ms


s

Blick  auf  Wriser-Diina-Ranganda.

Aufjjcnommen  von  i“* — «®.  Watt  3*.


Bild  1 1  I


Bild  1 1 2

Mi  ?  XU  +  44JO


Ma- tschu  -  Durchhruch.

Auf^ciioiniiH'ii  von  go  l»t*i  t.ngcr  I.W.  Watt  ;;


Ma-tschu-Durchliruch.

Atifgcnoniinen  vnm  l-ngor  LXX.  Watt  37.


104


XXIV.  RATHA-VINlTA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  147.


great  a  thing,  how  very  great  a  thing,  it  was  for  the
reverend  Punna  Mant&ni-putta  that,  in  the  presence
of  the  Master,  his  well-informed  fellows  in  the  higher
life  should  thus  extol  him,  point  after  point,  and  that
the  Master  should  so  appreciate  him  ;  it  would  be  good
to  meet  Punna  somewhere  some  day  and  have  a  talk
with  him.

When  the  Lord  had  stayed  at  Rajagaha  as  long  as
he  wished  to,  he  set  out  on  an  alms-pilgrimage  for
Savatthi  and,  arriving  there  in  due  course,  stayed  in
Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s  pleasaunce.  Hearing
of  the  Lord’s  movements,  Punna  packed  away  his
bedding,  took  his  bowl  and  robes,  and  set  out  on  an
alms-pilgrimage  for  Savatthi,  and  in  the  pleasaunce
found  the  Lord,  by  whom  he  seated  himself  after  due
obeisance.  As  he  sat  there,  the  Lord  discoursed  to
him  on  the  Doctrine,  informing,  enlightening,  cheering
him  forward  and  helping  him  onwards,  after  which
Punna,  rejoicing  greatly  in  what  he  had  heard  from
the  Lord,  rose  up  and  with  deep  obeisance  withdrew  to
Andha  grove,  there  to  stay  during  the  noontide  heat.

Hereupon,  an  Almsman  went  and  told  Sariputta
that  Punna  Mantani-putta,  of  whom  he  was  always
speaking  so  highly,  had  [147]  just  left  the  Lord  after  a
heartening  discourse  on  the  Doctrine  and  was  off  to
Andha  grove  there  to  stay  during  the  noontide  heat.
Snatching  up  his  mat  hurriedly,  Sariputta  followed
Punna  up  closely  from  behind,  never  letting  him  get
out  of  sight.  Entering  the  grove,  Punna  sat  down
under  a  tree  for  the  noontide ;  and  Sariputta  found  a
tree  for  himself.  When  at  even  Sariputta  rose  up
from  his  meditations,  he  moved  towards  Punna  and
after  exchange  of  greetings  took  his  seat  to  one  side,
saying — Do  you,  reverend  sir,  lead  the  higher  life  with
our  Lord? — Yes,  reverend  sir. — Is  this  in  order  to
purify  your  life  ? — No,  sir. — Is  it  to  purify  your  heart?
— No,  sir. — Is  it  to  purify  your  views  ? — No,  sir. — Is
it  to  ensure  purity  by  dispelling  doubts  ? — No,  sir. — Is
it  to  ensure  purity  by  fullest  insight  into  paths  right
and  wrong  ? — No,  sir. — Is  it  to  ensure  by  fullest  insight


ON  RELAYS.


M.  i.  148.


105


into  the  way  by  which  to  walk  ? — No,  sir. — What  is  it
for  then,  as  you  answer  no  to  all  these  questions  ?

[148]  To  attain  absolute  Nirvana,  sir.

Is  that  purity  of  life  ? — No,  sir. — Is  it  purity  of*
heart? — No,  sir.— Is  it  purity  of  view  ? — No,  sir. — Is
it  the  purity  which  comes  from  dispelling  doubts  ? —
No,  sir. — Is  it  the  purity  which  comes  from  fullest
insight  into  paths  right  and  wrong? — No,  sir. — Is  it
the  purity  which  comes  from  fullest  insight  into  the
way  by  which  to  walk  ? — No,  sir. — Is  it  the  purity
which  insight  gives? — No,  sir. — Does  absolute  Nirvana
lack  these  states  of  mind  ? — No,  sir. — As  you  answer
no  to  all  these  questions,  pray  how  is  the  meaning  of
your  words  to  be  understood  ?

If,  sir,  the  Lord  were  to  explain  absolute  Nirvana  as
purity  of  life  or  as  any  other  of  the  purities  you  name,
then  he  would  make  it  contingent  and  not  absolute ;
and  if  absolute  Nirvana  simply  meant  the  lack  of  those
states  of  mind,  then  the  ordinary  man  would  have
Nirvana, — for,  he  has  none  of  those  states  of  mind.

Consequently,  sir,  I  will  give  you  an  illustration ; —
by  an  illustration  some  men  of  understanding  apprehend
the  meaning  of  a  statement.  It  is  just  as  if,  while
King  Pasenadi  of  Kosala  was  in  residence  here  in
Savatthl,  [149]  some  emergency  were  to  arise  in
Saketa  and  his  people  were  to  arrange  seven  carriages
for  him  in  relays  along  the  road  between  Savatthl  and
Saketa.  Suppose  now  the  King  were  to  get  into  the
first  carriage  at  the  palace  door  and  to  drive  along  in
it  till  he  came  to  the  second  carriage,  and  were  then  to
dismiss  the  first  and  get  into  the  second  carriage,  and
so  on  until  the  seventh  carriage  brought  him  to  the
door  of  his  palace  in  Saketa ;  and  suppose  within  the
palace  he  were  asked  by  his  entourage  and  kinsfolk
whether  it  was  in  that  last  relay  he  had  come  from
Savatthl  to  the  door  of  his  palace  in  Saketa, — what
would  be  the  correct  answer  for  his  majesty  to  give  ?

His  correct  answer  would  be  that,  on  an  emergency
requiring  him  to  leave  for  Saketa,  his  people  arranged
seven  carriages  in  relays  for  him  along  the  road  ;  that


io6


XXIV.  RATHA-VINlTA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  15a


at  the  door  of  his  palace  in  Savatthi  he  got  into  the
first  carriage,  in  which  he  drove  along  till  he  came  to
the  second  carriage  into  which  he  changed,  and  so  on
till  at  last  the  seventh  carriage  brought  him  to  the  door
of  his  palace  in  Saketa.

In  just  the  same  way,  sir,  purity  of  life  takes  a  man
as  far  as  purity  of  heart  and  no  further ;  purity  of  heart
takes  him  only  up  to  purity  of  views  ;  [150]  and  so  on
till  fullest  insight  carries  him  on  to  absolute  Nirvana, —
for  which  it  is  that  I  lead  the  higher  life  with  the
Lord.

•  Hereupon,  the  reverend  Sari-putta  said  to  the
reverend  Punna  Mantani-putta : — What  is  your
reverence’s  name,  and  how  are  you  known  to  your
fellows  in  the  higher  life  ?

Punna,  reverend  sir,  is  my  name  ;  and  as  Mantani-
putta  (son  of  the  brahmin  lady,  MantanI)  am  I  known
to  my  fellows  in  the  higher  life.

Wonderful,  sir!  Marvellous,  sir!  How  like  a  well-
instructed  disciple  who  understands  the  Master’s  teach¬
ing  to  the  full,  has  the  reverend  Punna  Mantani-putta
answered,  point  by  point,  questions  deep  and  profound !
It  is  a  great  thing,  a  very  great  thing,  that  his  fellows
in  the  higher  life  have  the  reverend  Puijna  to  see  and
to  consort  with.  Yes,  it  would  be  a  great  thing  for
them,  a  very  great  thing,  to  see  and  to  consort  with
him,  even  if  they  had  to  carry  him  about  upon  a
cushion  on  their  heads.  A  great  thing  too,  a  very
great  thing,  is  it  for  me  that  it  has  been  mine  to  see
and  to  consort  with  the  reverend  Punna  Mantani-
putta.

Thereupon,  the  reverend  Punna  Mantani-putta  said
to  the  reverend  Siriputta : — What  is  your  reverence’s
name,  and  how  are  you  known  to  your  fellows  in  the
higher  life  ?

Upatissa,  reverend  sir,  is  my  name;  and  as  Sari-
putta  (son  of  the  brahmin  lady  Sari)  am  I  known  to
my  fellows  in  the  higher  life.

And  here  have  I  been  talking,  without  knowing  it
was  Sariputta,  to  the  disciple  whom  men  liken  to  the


h— 4»lo  ttOIfchno-uoroS*


-4IOO


Bild  1 1 5


:U  (He)  a-^4‘00


I-


x\v

Ma-tschu-Durchbnich.


I


Aut'genommcn  vom  Lag  or  LXXl.  Blau  57.

mmkIiu  Bild  114

I


Ma-tschu-Durchbruch.  Aufgenoinmcn  von  PaO  *  4105.  Blatt  .47.


<a  S»


S'VNonlMte.  .  a.  —  tooo  m


Bild  115


\\  asc*r.  Aufgcnomtnen  im  Lager  1.XXU  .  Blatt  44


M.  i.  151.


ON  RELAYS.


107


Master  himself!  Had  I  but  known  it  was  Sariputta,
I  should  certainly  not  have  presumed  to  answer  him
at  such  length.  Wonderful,  sir!  Marvellous,  sir!
How  like  a  well-instructed  disciple  who  understands
the  Master’s  teaching  to  the  full,  has  the  reverend
Sariputta,  point  by  point,  put  questions  deep  and
profound !  It  is  a  great  thing,  a  very  great  thing,  that
his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  have  the  reverend
Sariputta  to  see  and  consort  with.  Yes,  it  would  be  a
great  thing  for  them,  a  very  great  thing,  to  see  and  to
consort  with  him,  even  if  they  had  to  carry  him  about
on  a  cushion  on  their  heads.  [151]  A  great  thing  too,
a  very  great  thing,  is  it  for  me  that  it  has  been  mine  to
see  and  to  consort  with  the  reverend  Sariputta.

In  such  wise  did  each  of  that  noble  pair  of  Arahats
(maha-naga)  applaud  what  the  other  had  said  so  well.


XXV.  NIVIPA-SUTTA.

GINS  AND  SNARES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows :  It  is  with  no  idea  of  providing  deer  with  a
crop  grown  solely  to  keep  them  in  good  condition  for
many  a  long  day,  that  the  trapper  sows  his  crop  ;  no,  it
is  with  the  quite  different  object  that,  with  an  in¬
fatuated  inrush  on  the  crop,  the  deer  will  browse  on
the  fodder,  and  that,  as  they  browse,  they  will  lose
their  heads  and  thereby  get  off  their  guard,  so  that
being  off  their  guard,  they  can  be  dealt  with  as  he
pleases  amid  the  crop.

And  this  is  just  what  a  first  herd  of  deer  did,
so  that  they  escaped  not  from  the  trapper’s  mastery
of  craft.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  herd  [152]  had  met
their  doom,  a  second  herd  concluded  to  keep  quite
clear  of  the  crop  and  to  retire  to  the  depths  of  the
jungle,  leaving  that  fearsome  pasturage  untouched.
This  they  did,  until,  with  the  coming  of  the  last  month
of  the  hot  season,  grass  and  water  gave  out  and  their
bodies  grew  emaciated  in  the  extreme,  so  that  their
hearts  and  spirits  failed  them, — and  back  they  came  to
the  crop  the  trapper  had  sown.  With  an  infatuated
inrush,  they  fell  to  browsing  on  the  fodder,  and,  as
they  browsed,  lost  their  heads  and  got  off  their  guard,
so  that,  being  off  their  guard,  they  could  be  dealt  with
by  the  trapper  as  he  pleased  amid  the  crop.  That  is
how  the  second  herd  too  escaped  not  from  the  trapper’s
mastery  of  craft.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  and  second  herds
had  come  to  their  doom,  a  third  herd  of  deer  resolved

108


KflRTE  ZUR  GESCHICHTE

DER  KAISER

•y/io.  SHUNu.'ya


EiUflulERunq


(ieseljlccljh
and.  s««


fl.  WEDEMEYER

und  G.  Haloan.

MaBsfab:


lebenklKAnschluS  an  Hauptk

TSflNG  WU  u.Pi


!•!«!»!•  j,>t  6hen


NebenkarteTT


Die  im  9u-kung  erwahnfen  Gewasser  -

Transportwege  . .  und  die  9  Berg

straSen  des  a<i _ smd  blau  gezeichner

itoa-Bergnamen  HO-KflK  fU.TSin-svii*  moderne  Orts-
narnen.  *.  Tempel  des  Sao  t  Tempel  des  Shun
t  Tempel  des  9ti

. . Grenzen  der  gegenwarttgen  Provinzen.


Grtutei^  3er  Cf  Q  o.u  S O)  at t  t  n


l  Cljo«)


*»•*«*  «


Si -Mini  W


;  JW-


tnOu-fi?


Nebenkartel:  Die  Reichsmitte  (Ki-nei)

•  VermuH.  Grenzen  d  Tan  Chu  nach  d.Tode  d  Jiao
— —  »  •  •  Shun  •  •  "  *  •

-  ■>  *  m  Hjj  »  *  ■  Shun


nin-oioo


Mifinc-renG


oml-nui


CHTJ  oteuj


nu-nnn


Uirmwi


tn  „-i

avI

Ijil

If

I

r\  I*t  T

U'-*oCOOA>

<  **««5

***.«•'

-  *• ■*  1 .  * .

IP

I  i  -

•:  m


>  V  •

I  -•  *

•  V  -


»


- 1  nmi


i;


*


*  K


M.  i.  153.


GINS  AND  SNARES.


109


instead  to  [158]  take  up  their  abode  hard  by  the
standing  crop,  but,  making  no  mad  rush  in,  to  browse
on  it  with  circumspection  and  without  losing  their
heads  and  without  getting  off  their  guard, — so  as  not
to  be  at  the  trapper’s  mercy  amid  the  crop.  And  this
they  did,  thereby  escaping  him.

Hereupon,  the  trapper  and  his  people  thought  to
themselves : — This  third  herd  is  guileful  and  wily,
diabolically  clever  and  outlandish  ;  they  graze  on  our
crop,  but  we  know  nothing  of  their  comings  or  of  their
goings  ;  it  would  be  well  to  put  high  stake-nets  round
the  whole  crop,  to  see  if  we  can  find  out  what  lair  they
disappear  to.  So  they  staked  in  the  whole  crop  all
round  about,  till  they  discovered  the  lair  the  deer
disappeared  to.  And  that  is  how  the  third  herd  too
escaped  not  from  the  trapper’s  mastery  of  craft.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  three  herds  had
respectively  come  to  their  doom,  [154]  a  fourth  herd
resolved  to  make  their  lair  where  the  trapper  and  his
people  could  not  penetrate,  and,  from  this  security,
making  no  mad  rush  in,  to  browse  on  the  crop  with
circumspection  and  without  losing  their  heads  and  with¬
out  getting  off  their  guard,  and  so  [155]  not  to  be  at
the  trapper’s  mercy  amid  the  crop.  And  this  they  did,
thereby  escaping  him.

Hereupon,  the  trapper  and  his  people  thought  to
themselves : — This  fourth  herd  is  guileful  and  wily,
diabolically  clever  and  outlandish ;  they  graze  on  our
crop,  but  we  know  nothing  of  their  comings  or  of  their
goings  ;  it  would  be  well  to  put  high  stake  nets  round
the  whole  crop,  to  see  if  we  can  find  out  what  lair  they
disappear  to.  So  they  staked  in  the  whole  crop  all
round  about, — but  failed  to  discover  the  lair  the  deer
disappeared  to.  Then  the  trapper  and  his  people
thought  to  themselves: — If  we  upset  this  fourth  herd,
they  in  turn  will  upset  their  neighbours  and  so  on  all
along  the  line,  so  that  no  deer  at  all  will  ever  come  near
our  crop ;  we  had  better  take  no  notice  of  them  at  all.
So  they  took  no  notice  of  that  fourth  herd, — which  thus
succeeded  in  escaping  the  trapper’s  mastery  in  craft.


WJHirlm  KHrlimn-: 'iW'nsrtaftl. Er)fr>ir.i-.v i Kxp«MH*"«i  '  *<+.  Hutu  uTfl*-t  tKI-WRV


<5>


a


H


Konstrukt  io n s  - . Vbril ’»  D  ilDI .


Gt’bipi.:  Tosson-nSr-Baitg-techiv-Yadi-lschu.
Blau  u-3s

Mntfstnh  I  SOOOOO.

t - —  -  z - -  -  — a*.


4


Zeictopn-  Krklamn?

ImMra  tMiM*  A  --■

O  Han/tt/tfuM ^tenmm  I*  '  O  •  •

O  O — * —


-  •  *  rtntntif


ifJ&WiM r  OUrMkt


£


5


VbtiifS/Vvthi  S*T?r--faS«^  UJ


I  IO


XXV.  NIVAPA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  156.


This  is  an  allegory,  Almsmen,  framed  by  me  to
illustrate  my  meaning,  which  is  as  follows  : — The  crop
typifies  the  five  pleasures  of  sense  ;  the  trapper  stands
for  Mara,  the  Evil  One ;  the  trapper’s  people  are
Mara’s  train ;  and  the  deer  represent  recluses  and
brahmins.

Here,  a  first  set  of  recluses  and  brahmins,  wildly
rushing  in  on  the  crop  Mara  had  sown  and  on  what  the
world  can  bestow,  [156]  have  taken  their  fill  thereof,
thereby  losing  their  heads  and  thus  getting  off  their
guard,  so  that,  being  off  their  guard,  they  can  be  dealt
with  by  Mara  as  he  pleases  amid  the  crop  he  has  sown
and  amid  what  the  world  can  bestow.  And  this  is  how
the  first  set  of  recluses  and  brahmins  failed  to  escape
from  Mara’s  mastery  of  craft ; — they,  say  I,  are  like
the  first  herd  of  deer.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  set  of  recluses  and
brahmins  came  by  their  fate,  a  second  set  resolved  to
keep  quite  clear  of  the  lure  of  what  the  world  could
bestow,  leaving  untouched  so  fearsome  a  diet,  and  to
retire  to  the  forest,  there  to  subsist  on  green  herbs,  the
grain  of  wild  millets  and  paddy,  snippets  of  hides,
water-plants,  the  red  dust  that  lines  the  rice  husk,  the
discarded  scum  of  boiling  rice,  the  flour  of  oil-seeds,
grass,  cowdung,  wild  roots  and  fruits,  or  on  windfalls
alone.  This  they  did  until,  with  the  coming  of  the
last  month  of  the  hot  season,  when  grass  and  water
gave  out  and  their  bodies  grew  emaciated  in  the
extreme,  their  heart’s  Deliverance  failed,  and  back
they  came  to  the  crop  Mara  had  sown  and  what  the
world  can  bestow.  With  an  infatuated  inrush,  they
took  their  fill,  thereby  losing  their  heads  and  getting
off  their  guard,  so  that,  being  off  their  guard,  they
could  be  dealt  with  by  Mara  as  he  pleased  amid  the
crop  he  had  sown  and  amid  what  the  world  had  to
bestow.  That  is  how  the  second  set  of  recluses  and
brahmins  failed  [157]  to  escape  from  Mara’s  mastery
of  craft; — they,  say  I,  are  like  the  second  herd  of
deer.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  and  second  sets  of


s#-


'  •  &  .  .  • "


%


'r


-  *

,


3-


M.  i.  158.


GINS  AND  SNARES.


Ill


recluses  and  brahmins  had  come  by  their  fate,  a  third
set  resolved  instead  to  take  up  their  abode  hard  by
the  crop  Mara  had  sown  and  what  the  world  could
bestow,  but,  making  no  mad  rush  in,  to  partake  thereof
with  circumspection  and  without  losing  their  heads
and  without  getting  off  their  guard,  so  as  not  to  be  at
Mara’s  mercy  amid  the  crop  he  had  sown  and  amid
what  the  world  could  bestow.  This  they  did.  But
they  came  to  entertain  such  speculative  views  as  the
following: — The  world  is  everlasting, — the  w-orld  is
not  everlasting, — the  world  is  finite, — the  world  is  in¬
finite,  the  body  is  the  life  (jiva), — the  body  is  one
thing  and  the  life  another, — a  truth-finder  exists  after
death, — a  truth-finder  does  not  exist  after  death, —
he  both  exists  and  does  not  exist  after  death, — he
neither  exists  nor  does  not  exist  after  death.  [158]
That  is  how  the  third  set  of  recluses  and  brahmins
failed  to  escape  from  Mara’s  mastery  of  craft ; — they,
say  I,  are  like  the  third  herd  of  deer.

Realizing  precisely  how  the  first  three  sets  of
recluses  and  brahmins  had  respectively  come  by  their
fate,  a  fourth  set  resolved  instead  to  take  up  their  abode
where  Mara  and  his  train  could  not  penetrate,  and,
from  this  security,  making  no  mad  rush  in,  to  partake
of  Mara’s  crop  and  what  the  world  could  bestow,  but
with  circumspection  and  without  losing  their  heads  and
without  getting  off  their  guard,  so  as  not  to  be  at
Mara’s  mercy  amid  the  crop  he  had  sown  and  what
the  world  had  to  bestow.  This  they  did.  [159]  And
that  is  how  the  fourth  set  of  recluses  and  brahmins
succeeded  in  escaping  Mara’s  mastery  of  craft ; — they,
say  I,  are  like  the  fourth  herd  of  deer.

But,  how  find  a  retreat  where  Miira  and  his  train
cannot  penetrate  ?

Take  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of  pleasures  of
sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  mind,  has  entered
on,  and  abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest
and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but
not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  Such  a
Brother  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  Mara  and  to  have


WllliFlm  FilrhntT:  fl'iiwattrtani  ErjjrbiitSs*  d  m  iiacIi  Qrnia  «  TlM  (KO-Jwr.V


imf  IUMi  iumtt  t  iUlrJ»to  i


Konslruklions-AbriB  IV.

Goblet  lYarh-tsi  hu  -  Gotschim^ombii .

RLatt  36  S3


MLilktab  1500000

s - t~


Mil  p


O0K


r  M


tn Ichpn- Erkttrung:

txwtct#

imt-r  <y-  -  ~  -Q  theta  At/u*f*n


ftnwvry  OtortAc/JkMiTfuur*


^U|Wuk-  !>Jkjr^U»  Vklaio  UB


I  12


XXV.  nivApa-sutta.


M.  i.  160.


put  Mara’s  sight  out  of  gear,  so  as  to  have  passed  oyt
of  range  of  vision  of  the  Evil  One. — Further,  by  rising
above  observation  and  reflection  the  Almsman  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest
and  satisfaction,— a  state  bred  of  rapt  concentration,
above  all  observation  and  reflection,  a  state  whereby
the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity  reigns  within.
Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  .  .  .
the  Evil  One. — Further,  by  shedding  the  emotions  of
zest  and  satisfaction,  the  Almsman  enters  on,  and
abides  in,  the  Third  Ecstasy  with  its  poised  equani¬
mity,  mindful  and  alive  to  everything,^  feeling  in  his
frame  the  satisfaction  of  which  the  Noble  say  that
poise  and  mindfulness  bring  abiding  satisfaction.  Such
an  Almsman  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  ...  the
Evil  One. — Further,  by  putting  from  him  both  satis¬
faction  and  dissatisfaction,  and  by  shedding  the  joys
and  sorrows  he  used  to  feel,  the  Almsman  enters  on,
and  abides  in,  the  Fourth  Ecstasy, — the  state  that
knows  neither  the  pleasant  nor  the  unpleasant,  the
clarity  that  comes  of  poised  equanimity  and  alert  mind¬
fulness.  Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to  have  hood¬
winked  ...  the  Evil  One.— Further,  by  passing
altogether  beyond  perception  of  visible  forms,  by
ceasing  from  perception  of  sense-reactions,  by  not
heeding  perception  of  diversified  impressions,  he  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  the  plane  of  infinity  of  space.  Such
an  Almsman  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  .  .  .  the
Evil  One. — Further,  bypassing  altogether  beyond  the
plane  of  infinity  of  space,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,
the  plane  of  infinity  of  consciousness.  Such  an  Alms¬
man  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  .  .  .  the  Evil  One.
— Further,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  the  plane  of
infinity  of  consciousness,  [160]  he  enters  on,  and
abides  in,  the  plane  of  Naught.  Such  an  Almsman  is
said  to  have  hoodwinked  .  .  .  the  Evil  One. — Further,
by  passing  altogether  beyond  the  plane  of  Naught,  he
enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  plane  of  neither  percep¬
tion  nor  non-perception.  Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to
have  hoodwinked  .  .  .  the  Evil  One. — Further,  by


*  .

*


'


••  •


M.  i.  161.  THE  NOBLE  QUEST.  II3

passing  altogether  beyond  the  plane  of  neither  percep¬
tion  nor  non-perception,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,
the  plane  where  feeling  and  perception  cease,  and
where,  because  wisdom  gives  him  vision,  the  Cankers
become  eradicated.  Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to  have
hoodwinked  Mara  and  to  have  put  Mara’s  sight  out  of
gear,  so  as  to  have  passed  out  of  range  of  vision  of
the  Evil  One  and  to  have  passed — here  and  now —
beyond  desires.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXVI.  ARIYA-PARIYESANA-SUTTA.

THE  NOBLE  QUEST.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once,  when  staying  at  Savatthl
in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s  pleasaunce,  the  Lord,
early  in  the  morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,
went  into  the  city  for  alms.  To  the  reverend  Ananda
there  came  a  number  of  Almsmen  to  represent  that  it
was  a  long  time  since  they  had  heard  a  discourse  on  the
Doctrine  from  the  Lord  and  that  they  would  like  to
listen  to  one  from  his  own  lips.  In  reply,  Ananda  told
them  to  repair  to  the  hermitage  of  the  brahmin
Rammaka,  where  their  wishes  might  perhaps  be
gratified  ;  and  to  this  they  assented.

Having  gone  his  round  for  alms  in  Savatthl,  the
Lord,  on  his  return  after  his  meal,  said  to  Ananda  that
they  would  go  to  the  Eastern  pleasaunce  and  the
mansion  of  (Visakha)  the  Mother  of  Migilra.  Yes,
sir,  said  Ananda  in  assent.  [161]  So  thither  the  Lord
went  with  Ananda  to  pass  the  noontide.

Rising  towards  evening  from  his  meditations,  the
Lord  told  Ananda  they  would  now  go  to  the  Eastern
bath  to  bathe.  Ananda  assenting,  they  went  there ;
and,  after  bathing,  the  Lord  came  out  of  the  water  and
stood  in  a  single  garment  to  dry  himself.  Then  said
Ananda  : — The  hermitage  of  the  brahmin  Rammaka  is


0Lt*a  e


M*>CUhiM»S


WMiUH ISJtair  niia  »r.


XXVI.  ARIYA-PARIYESANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  162.


114


hard  by ;  and  a  pleasant,  agreeable  place  it  is.  Pray,
sir,  be  pleased  to  proceed  thither.  Silently  consenting,
the  Lord  went  to  the  hermitage,  in  which  a  number  of
Almsmen  were  then  seated,  discoursing  of  the  Doc¬
trine.  Standing  outside  the  door  till  he  knew  their
discourse  was  at  an  end,  the  Lord  coughed  and  tapped
on  the  bar  of  the  door.  They  opened  unto  him,  and
he  went  in,  seating  himself  on  the  seat  set  for  him.
Being  seated,  he  asked  them  what  had  been  their  theme
and  what  was  the  topic  of  their  previous  talk.  They
answered  that  it  was  on  the  Lord  himself  that  their
discourse  about  the  Doctrine  had  centred, — when  he
arrived  in  person.

Quite  right,  Almsmen,  said  he  ;  it  is  meet  that  you
young  men  who  have  gone  forth  on  Pilgrimage  from
home  to  homelessness  for  faith’s  sake  should  sit  talking
of  the  Doctrine.  When  you  meet  together,  you  have
the  choice  of  two  things, — either  to  talk  about  the
Doctrine  or  else  to  preserve  a  noble  silence.

There  are  two  quests,  Almsmen, — the  noble  and  the
ignoble.  First,  what  is  the  ignoble  quest  ? — Take  the
case  of  a  man  who,  being  in  himself  subject  to  rebirth,
pursues  what  is  no  less  subject  thereto  ;  who  being  in
himself  subject  to  decay,  [162]  pursues  what  is  no  less
subject  thereto ;  who,  being  himself  subject  thereto,
pursues  what  is  subject  to  disease — death — sorrow —
and  impurity.  What,  you  ask,  is  subject  to  the
round  of  rebirth  ? — Why,  wives  and  children,  bondmen
and  bondwomen,  goats  and  sheep,  fowls  and  swine,
elephants,  cattle,  horses  and  mares,  together  with  gold
and  coins  of  silver.  Although  subjection  to  birth
marks  all  these  ties,  yet  a  man — himself  subject  to
birth — pursues  these  things  with  blind  and  avid
appetite.

[The  same  applies  (i),  in  full,  to  decay  and  impurity
and  also  (ii)  to  disease,  death  and  sorrow,  with  the
exception  of  inanimate  gold  and  coins  of  silver.]

Secondly,  what  is  the  noble  quest? — Take  the  case
of  a  man  who,  being  himself  subject  to  the  round  of  re¬
birth — decay — disease — death — sorrow — and  impurity,


*:


*


•

t  •*


*


_


—


M.  i.  163.  THE  NOBLE  QUEST.  1 1  5

sees  peril  in  what  is  subject  thereto,  and  so  [163]
pursues  after  the  consummate  peace  of  N  irvana,  which
knows  neither  rebirth  nor  decay,  neither  disease
nor  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  impurity. — This  is  the
Noble  Quest.

Yes,  I  myself  too,  in  the  days  before  my  full
enlightenment,  when  I  was  but  a  Bodhisatta,  and  not
yet  fully  enlightened, — I  too,  being  subject  in  myself  to
rebirth,  decay  and  the  rest  of  it,  pursued  what  was  no  less
subject  thereto.  But  the  thought  came  to  me  : — Why
do  I  pursue  what,  like  myself,  is  subject  to  rebirth  and
the  rest  ?  Why,  being  myself  subject  thereto,  should
I  not,  with  my  eyes  open  to  the  perils  which  these
things  entail,  pursue  instead  the  consummate  peace  of
Nirvana, — which  knows  neither  rebirth  nor  decay,
neither  disease  nor  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  impurity  ?

1  There  came  a  time  when  I,  being  quite  young,
with  a  wealth  of  coal-black  hair  untouched  by  grey  and
in  all  the  beauty  of  my  early  prime — despite  the  wishes
of  my  parents,  who  wept  and  lamented — cut  off  my
hair  and  beard,  donned  the  yellow  robes  and  went
forth  from  home  to  homelessness  on  Pilgrimage.  A
pilgrim  now,  in  search  of  the  right,  and  in  quest  of  the
excellent  road  to  peace  beyond  compare,  I  came  to
Alara  Kalama  and  said  : — It  is  my  wish,  reverend
Kalama,  to  lead  the  higher  life  in  this  your  Doctrine
and  Rule.  Stay  with  us,  venerable  sir,  was  his
answer ;  my  Doctrine  is  such  that  ere  long  an
intelligent  man  [164]  can  for  himself  discern,  realize,
enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the  full  scope  of  his  master’s
teaching.  Before  long,  indeed  very  soon,  I  had  his
Doctrine  by  heart.  So  far  as  regards  mere  lip-recital
and  oral  repetition,  I  could  say  off  the  (founder’s)
original  message  and  the  elders’  exposition  of  it,  and


1  Cf.  also  Suttas  Nos.  36, 85,  and  100  for  this  biographical  record,
which — as  is  noted  at  page  118  infra — is  in  part  repeated  in  the
Vinaya  and  Digha.  The  austerities  of  our  12th  Sutta  presumably
preceded  his  study  under  AjSra  K5l5.ma  and  Uddaka  Ramaputta ;
but  they  may  be  the  austerities  practised  at  Uruvela  with  the
pive  Brethren  (see  infra,  p.  122).


Il6  XXVI.  ARIYA-PAR1YESANA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  165.

could  profess,  with  others,  that  I  knew  and  saw  it  to
the  full.  Then  it  struck  me  that  it  was  no  Doctrine
merely  accepted  by  him  on  trust  that  Alara  Kalama,
preached,  but  one  which  he  professed  to  have  entered
on  and  to  abide  in  after  having  discerned  and  realized  it
for  himself;  and  assuredly  he  had  real  knowledge  and
vision  thereof.  So  I  went  to  him  and  asked  him  up  to
what  point  he  had  for  himself  discerned  and  realized
the  Doctrine  he  had  entered  on  and  now  abode  in.

Up  to  the  plane  of  Naught,  answered  he.

Hereupon,  I  reflected  that  Ajara  Kalama  was  not
alone  in  possessing  faith,  perseverance,  mindfulness,
rapt  concentration,  and  intellectual  insight;  for,  all
these  were  mine  too.  Why,  I  asked  myself,  should  not
I  strive  to  realize  the  Doctrine  which  he  claims  to
have  entered  on  and  to  abide  in  after  discerning  and
realizing  it  for  himself?  Before  long,  indeed  very
soon,  I  had  discerned  and  realized  his  Doctrine  for
myself  and  had  entered  on  it  and  abode  therein.
Then  I  went  to  him  and  asked  him  whether  this  was
the  point  up  to  which  he  had  discerned  and  realized  for
himself  the  Doctrine  which  he  professed.  He  said
yes ;  and  I  said  that  I  had  reached  the  same  point  for
myself.  It  is  a  great  thing,  said  he,  a  very  great
thing  for  us,  that  in  you,  reverend  sir,  we  find  such  a
fellow  in  the  higher  life.  That  same  Doctrine  which  I
for  myself  have  discerned,  realized,  entered  on,  and
profess,  —  that  have  you  for  yourself  discerned,
realized,  entered  on  and  abide  in  ;  and  that  same  [165]
Doctrine  which  you  have  for  yourself  discerned,
realized,  entered  on  and  profess, — that  have  I  for
myself  discerned,  realized,  entered  on,  and  profess.
The  Doctrine  which  I  know,  you  too  know  ;  and  the
Doctrine  which  you  know,  I  too  know.  As  I  am,  so
are  you  ;  and  as  you  are,  so  am  I.  Pray,  sir,  let  us  be
joint  wardens  of  this  company!  In  such  wise  did
Alara  Kalama,  being  my  master,  set  me,  his  pupil,  on
precisely  the  same  footing  as  himself  and  show  me
great  worship.  But,  as  I  bethought  me  that  his
Doctrine  merely  led  to  attaining  the  plane  of  Naught


M.  i.  1 66.


THE  NOBLE  QUEST.


117


and  not  to  Renunciation,  passionlessness,  cessation,
peace,  discernment,  enlightenment  and  Nirvana,— I
was  not  taken  with  his  Doctrine  but  turned  away  from
it  to  go  my  way.

Still  in  search  of  the  right,  and  in  quest  of  the
excellent  road  to  peace  beyond  compare,  I  came  to
Uddaka  Ramaputta  and  said  : — It  is  my  wish,  reverend
sir,  to  lead  the  higher  life  in  this  your  Doctrine  and
Rule.  Stay  with  us,  .  .  .  vision  thereof.  So  I  went
to  Uddaka  Ramaputta  and  asked  him  up  to  what  point
he  had  for  himself  discerned  and  realized  the  Doctrine
he  had  entered  on  and  now  abode  in.

Up  to  the  plane  of  neither  perception  nor  non¬
perception,  answered  he.

Hereupon,  1  reflected  that  Uddaka  Ramaputta  was
not  alone  in  possessing  faith  T166J  .  .  .  show  me  great
worship.  But,  as  I  bethought  me  that  his  Doctrine
merely  led  to  attaining  the  plane  of  neither  perception
nor  non-perception,  and  not  to  Renunciation,  passion¬
lessness,  cessation,  peace,  discernment,  enlightenment
and  Nirvana, — I  was  not  taken  with  his  Doctrine
but  turned  away  from  it  to  go  my  way.

Still  in  search  of  the  right,  and  in  quest  of  the  excel¬
lent  road  to  peace  beyond  compare,  I  came,  in  the
course  of  an  alms-pilgrimage  through  Magadha,  to  the
Camp  township  at  Uruvela  and  there  took  up  my
abode.  Said  I  to  myself  on  surveying  the  place  : —
Truly  a  delightful  spot,  with  its  goodly  groves  and
clear  flowing  river  with  ghits  and  amenities,  hard  by
a  village  for  sustenance.  What  more  for  his  striving
can  a  young  man  need  whose  heart  is  set  on  striving  ?
So  there  I  sat  me  down,  needing  nothing  further  for
my  striving.

Subject  in  myself  to  rebirth — decay — disease —
death— sorrow — and  impurity,  and  seeing  peril  in  what
is  subject  thereto,  I  sought  after  the  consummate
peace  of  Nirvana,  which  knows  neither  rebirth  nor
decay,  neither  disease  nor  death,  neither  sorrow  nor
impurity  ; — this  I  pursued,  and  this  I  won  ;  and  there
arose  within  me  the  conviction,  the  insight,  that  now


h  y.  i  "  ■■

V  '-  *rv  •  ■  '


ft-  «  v  v9

-.?•  ~  r:  :-v-


-  v.y  »

- .  •  -  .  *  *  ■  * •  «  i


XXVI.  ariya-pariyesana-sutta.


M.  i.  1 68.


1 18


my  Deliverance  was  assured,  that  this  was  my  last
birth,  nor  should  1  ever  be  reborn  again.

XI  have  attained,  thought  I,  to  this  Doctrine  pro¬
found,  recondite,  hard  to  comprehend,  serene,  excel¬
lent,  beyond  dialectic,  abstruse,  and  only  to  be
perceived  by  the  learned.  But  mankind  delights,  takes
delight,  and  is  happy  in  what  it  clings  on  to,  so  that
for  it,  being  thus  minded,  it  is  hard  to  understand
casual  relations  and  the  chain  of  causation, — hard  to
understand  the  stilling  of  all  plastic  forces,  or  the  re¬
nunciation  of  all  worldly  ties,  the  extirpation  of  craving,
passionlessness,  peace,  and  Nirvana.  [168]  Were  I  to
preach  the  Doctrine,  and  were  others  not  to  under¬
stand  it,  that  would  be  labour  and  annoyance  to  me !
Yes,  and  on  the  instant  there  flashed  across  my  mind
these  verses,  which  no  man  had  heard  before  : —

Must  I  now  preach  what  I  so  hardly  won  ?

Men  sunk  in  sin  and  lusts  would  find  it  hard
to  plumb  this  Doctrine , — up  stream  all  the  way,
abstruse,  profound,  most  subtle,  hard  to  grasp.
Dear  lusts  will  blirui  them  that  they  shall  not  see ,
— in  densest  mists  of  ignorance  befogged.

As  thus  I  pondered,  my  heart  inclined  to  rest  quiet
and  not  to  preach  my  Doctrine.  But,  Brahma
Sahampati’s*  mind  came  to  know  what  thoughts  were
passing  within  my  mind,  and  he  thought  to  himself : —
The  world  is  undone,  quite  undone,  inasmuch1 * 3  as  the
heart  of  the  Truth-finder4  inclines  to  rest  quiet  and  not

1  Here  the  Vinaya  (I,  4,  translated  at  S.B.E.  XIII,  £4)  and  the
Digha  NikSya  (II,  36,  translated  at  Dialogues  II,  29)  have
versions  practically  identical  with  this.  All  agree,  as  do  later
compilations  like  the  Introduction  to  the  Jatakas,  in  recording  the
initial  reluctance  of  Gotama  to  preach  his  new  gospel  to  others.

*  The  Digha  speaks  merely  of  one  of  the  Great  BrahmSs, —
the  specific  reference  to  Sahampati  being  regarded  as  a  later
gloss  by  Rhys  Davids  (Dialogues  II,  70),  though  there  is  no
justification  for  assigning  seniority  here  to  the  Digha  over  the
Majjhima  and  Vinaya  versions.

*  Bu.  understands  yatra  hi  nama  as  yasmiih  nama
loke.

4  This,  the  first  use  of  the  term  Tathigata  in  the  Buddha’s


M.  i.  169.  THE  NOBLE  QUEST.  II9

to  preach  his  Doctrine !  Hereupon,  as  swiftly  as  a
strong  man  might  stretch  out  his  arm  or  might  draw
back  his  outstretched  arm,  Brahma  Sahampati  vanished
from  the  Brahma- world  and  appeared  before  me.  To¬
wards  me  he  came  with  his  right  shoulder  bared,  and
with  his  clasped  hands  stretched  out  to  me  in  reverence,
saying : — May  it  please  the  Lord,  may  it  please  the
Blessed  One,  to  preach  his  doctrine!  Beings  there
ace  whose  vision  is  but  little  dimmed,  who  are  perishing
because  they  do  not  hear  the  Doctrine ; — these  will
understand  it!  And  Brahma  Sahampati  went  on
to  say  :

lAn  unclean  Doctrine  reigns  in  Magadka,
by  impure  man  devised.  Ope  thou  the  door
of  Deathless  truth.  Let  all  the  Doctrine  hear
from  his  pure  lips  who  first  conceived  its  thought.

As  from  a  mountains  rocky  pinnacle
the  folk  around  are  clear  to  view,  so,  Sage,
from  thy  truths  palace,  from  its  topmost  height,
survey  with  eye  all-seeing  folk  beneath,

— poor  thralls  of  birth  and  swift  decay,  whose  doom
is  that  same  sorrow  thou  no  more  wilt  know.

[169]  So  up,  great  hero,  victor  in  the  fight  /

Thy  debt  is  paid.  Lead  on  thy  Pilgrim  train
through  all  the  world.  Thy  Doctrine  preach  ;

— among  thy  hearers  some  will  understand.

Thereupon,  Almsmen,  heeding  Brahma’s  entreaties
and  moved  by  compassion  for  all  beings,  I  surveyed
the  world  with  the  eye  of  Enlightenment  and  therewith
saw  beings  with  vision  dimmed  little  or  much,  beings
with  acute  or  dull  faculties,  beings  of  dispositions  good
or  bad,  beings  docile  or  indocile,  with  some  among


life-history,  follows  immediately  on  his  attaining  Buddhahood
and  is  designedly  put  into  the  mouth  of  Mah5-Brahma  himself,
the  supreme  deity  of  the  superseded  cosmology.

1  These  verses  axe  somewhat  differently  arranged  in  D.  II,  39,
and  Vin.  I,  5, — the  DIgha  version  omitting  the  first  four  lines.
In  the  DIgha  and  Vinaya  versions,  Brahma  thrice  repeats  his
entreaties,  in  stereotyped  fashion.


I  20


XXVI.  ARIYA-PARIYESANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  170.


them  alive  to  the  terrors  hereafter,  of  present  wrong¬
doing.  As  in  a  pond  of  lotuses,  blue  or  red  or  white,
some  lotuses  of  each  kind  are  born  and  grow  in  the
water,  never  rising  above  the  surface  but  flourishing
underneath;  while  others,  born  and  growing  in  the
water,  either  rise  level  with  the  surface  or  stand  right
out  of  the  water  and  are  not  wetted  by  it ; — even  so
with  the  eye  of  Enlightenment  did  I  see  beings  with
vision  dimmed  .  .  .  wrong-doing  now.  Thereon,  I
made  answer  to  Brahma  Sahampati  in  these  verses  :

Nirvanas  doors  stand  open  wide  to  all
■with  ears  to  hear.  Discard  your  outworn  creeds  l
The  weary  task  ahead  made  me  forbear
to  preach  to  men  my  Doctrine's  virtues  rare.

Mine  has  it  been  to  secure  from  the  Lord  the
preaching  of  the  Doctrine!  said  Brahma  Sahampati,
and,  so  saying,  with  due  obeisance  and  reverently
keeping  his  right  side  towards  me  as  he  passed,  he
vanished  there  and  then.

I  now  asked  myself  to  whom  first  I  should  preach
the  Doctrine,  and  who  would  understand  it  quickly.
The  thought  came  to  me  that  there  was  Alara  Kiilama,
who  was  learned,  able,  and  intelligent,  whose  vision
had  long  been  but  little  dimmed ;  suppose  I  chose  him
[170]  to  be  my  first  hearer,  for  he  would  be  quick  to
understand?  Word,  however,  was  brought  to  me  by
deities  that  he  had  died  seven  days  before,  and  insight
assured  me  this  was  so.  Great  nobility,  thought  I,
was  his !  Had  he  heard  my  Doctrine,  he  would  have
understood  it  quickly.

Again  I  asked  myself  to  whom  first  I  should  preach
the  Doctrine,  and  who  would  understand  it  quickly.
The  thought  came  to  me  that  there  was  Uddaka
Ramaputta,  who  was  learned  .  .  .  Word,  however,
was  brought  me  by  deities  that  he  had  died  yesterday
at  midnight,  and  insight  .  .  .  understood  it  quickly.

Again  I  asked  myself  to  whom  first  I  should  preach
the  Doctrine  and  who  would  understand  it  quickly.
The  thought  came  to  me  that  there  were  the  five


M.  i.  171.


THE  NOBLE  QUEST.


121  •


Almsmen  who  had  served  me  so  well  in  my  struggles
to  purge  myself  of  self ;  suppose  I  chose  them  to
be  my  first  hearers?  Wondering  where  they  were
dwelling  now,  I  saw  with  the  Eye  Celestial — which  is
pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human  eye — those  Five
Almsmen  dwelling  at  Benares  in  the  Isipatana  deer-
park.  So,  when  I  had  stayed  as  long  as  pleased  me
at  Uruvela,  I  set  out  on  an  alms -pilgrimage  for
Benares.

On  the  highway  from  the  Bo-tree  to  Gaya,  Upaka  the
Mendicant  (ajivika)  saw  me  and  said : — Reverend  sir,
your  faculties  are  under  control,  and  your  complexion  is
clear  and  bright.  To  follow  whom  have  you  gone
forth  on  pilgrimage  ?  Or  who  is  your  teacher  ?  Or
whose  Doctrine  [171]  do  you  profess?  Him  I
answered  in  these  verses  : —

All-vanquishing,  all- knowing,  lo  !  am  /,
from  all  wrong  thinking  wholly  purged  and  free.

All  things  discarded,  cravings  rooted  out,

— whom  should  /  follow  ? — I  have  found  out  all.

No  teacher 's  mine,  no  equal.  Counterpart

to  me  there  's  none  throughout  the  whole  wide  world.

The  Arahat  am  I,  teacher  supreme,

utter  Enlightenment  is  mine  alone  ;

unfever  d  calm  is  mine,  Nirvana's  peace.

I  seek  the  Kasis’  city,  there  to  staid
my  Doctrine's  wheel,  a  world  purblind  to  save,
sounding  the  tocsins  call  to  Deatklessness.

According  to  your  claim,  sir,  said  Upaka,  you  should
be  the  Universal  Conqueror.

Like  me,  those  conquer  who  the  Cankers  quell ;  <

— by  conquering  bad  thoughts,  Tm  Conqueror.  -

When  I  had  thus  answered,  Upaka  the  Mendicant
said :  Mebbe,1  sir,  and,  shaking  his  head,  took  a
different  road  and  went  his  way.

In  the  course  of  my  alms-pilgrimage,  I  came  at  last


1  Huveyya  is  a  dialectical  form  for  bhaveyya.


122


XXVI.  ARIYA-PARIYESANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  172.


to  Benares  and  the  deerpark  of  Isipatana,  in  which
were  the  Five  Almsmen.  From  afar  the  five  saw  me
coming  and  agreed  among  themselves  as  follows : —
Here  come  the  recluse  Gotama,  the  man  of  surfeits,
who  has  abandoned  the  struggle  and  reverted  to
surfeiting.  We  must  not  welcome  him,  nor  rise  to
receive  him,  nor  relieve  him  of  bowl  and  robes.  Yet
let  us  put  out  a  seat ;  he  can  sit  on  it  if  he  wants  to.
But,  as  I  drew  nearer  and  nearer,  those  Five  Almsmen
proved  less  and  less  able  to  abide  by  their  compact ; —
some  came  forward  to  relieve  me  of  my  bowl  and
robes ;  others  indicated  my  seat ;  while  others  brought
water  for  me  to  wash  my  feet  But  they  addressed  me
by  my  name  and  by  the  style  of  reverend.  So  I  said
to  the  Five  Almsmen :  Almsmen,  do  not  address  the
Truth-finder  by  his  name  or  by  the  style  of  reverend.
Arahat  all  enlightened  is  the  Truth-finder.  [172]
Hearken  to  me,  Almsmen.  The  Deathless  has  been
won ;  I  teach  it ;  I  preach  the  Doctrine.  Live  up  to
what  I  enjoin,  and  in  no  long  time  you  will  come — of
yourselves,  here  and  now — to  discern  and  realize,  to
enter  on  and  to  abide  in,  that  supreme  goal  of  the
higher  life,  for  the  sake  of  which  young  men  go  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  on  Pilgrimage.

Said  the  Five  Almsmen : — Reverend  Gotama,  the
life  you  led,  the  path  you  trod,  and  the  austerities  you
practised, — all  failed  to  make  you  transcend  ordinary
human  scope  and  rise  to  special  heights  of  discernment
of  the  truly  Noble  Knowledge.  How  now  shall  you
rise  to  those  heights  when  you  surfeit,  abandon  the
struggle>  a°d  revert  to  surfeiting  ?  To  which  I  made
answer  : — Arahat  all  enlightened  is  the  Truth-finder.
Hearken  to  me,  Almsmen.  The  Deathless  has  been
won  ;  I  teach  it ;  I  preach  the  Doctrine.  Live  up  to
what  I  enjoin,  and  in  no  long  time  you  will  come — of
yourselves,  here  and  now — to  discern  and  realize,  to
enter  on  and  to  abide  in,  that  supreme  goal  of  the
higher  life,  for  the  sake  of  which  young  men  go  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  on  Pilgrimage.

A  second  time  did  the  Five  Brethren  repeat  their


M.  i.  173.


THE  NOBLE  QUEST.


I23


words  to  me  ;  and  a  second  time  did  I  return  them  the
same  answer..  But  when  they  repeated  their  words
yet  a  third  time,  I  asked  these  Five  whether  they
agreed  that  I  had  never  heretofore  spoken  like  that  ;
and  they  admitted  that  I  had  not.

Arahat  all  enlightened — repeated  I — is  the  Truth-
finder.  Hearken  .  .  .  homelessness  on  Pilgrimage.

[173]  I  succeeded  in  convincing  the  Five.  I  in¬
structed  two  of  their  number,  while  the  three  others
went  abroad  for  alms ;  and  what  those  three  brought
back  from  their  round,  maintained  all  six  of  us.  Or,  I
instructed  three,  while  two  went  abroad  for  alms  ;  and
what  those  two  brought  back  from  their  round,  main¬
tained  all  six  of  us.

In  the  course  of  receiving  this  teaching  and  instruc¬
tion  from  me,  those  Five  Almsmen — being  themselves
subject  to  rebirth,  decay,  disease,  death,  sorrow,  and
impurity — saw  peril  in  what  is  thereto  subject,  and
so  sought  after  the  consummate  peace  of  Nirvana,
which  knows  neither  rebirth  nor  decay,  neither  disease
nor  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  impurity  ;  and  there
arose  within  them  the  conviction,  the  insight,  that  their
Deliverance  was  now  assured,  that  this  was  their  last
birth,  nor  would  they  ever  be  reborn  again.

Fivefold  are  the  pleasures  'of  sense,  Almsmen,
namely,  visible  shapes  apparent  to  the  eye,  sounds
apparent  to  the  ear,  odours  apparent  to  the  nostrils,
tastes  apparent  to  the  tongue,  touch  apparent  to  the
body  ; — all  of  them  pleasant,  agreeable,  and  delightful,
all  of  them  bound  up  with  passion  and  lusts.  All
recluses  or  brahmins  who  partake  of  these  pleasures
with  avid  greed  and  blind  appetite,  without  seeing  the
perils  which  dog  them  and  without  realizing  that  they
afford  no  refuge, — all  such  people  are  to  be  conceived
of  as  having  fallen  into  misery  and  into  calamity,  and
as  being  at  the  mercy  of  the  Evil  One.  Even  as  a
deer  of  the  forest  in  the  toils  of  the  baited  trap  it  has
found,  would  be  conceived  of  as  having  fallen  into
misery  and  into  calamity,  as  being  at  the  trapper’s
mercy,  and  as  being  unable  to  escape  at  will  when  the


124


XXVI.  ARIYA-PARIYESANA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  174.


trapper  comes, — even  so  are  all  recluses  or  brahmins
who  .  .  .  mercy  of  the  Evil  One.  But  all  those  other
recluses  or  brahmins  who  partake  of  the  fivefold
pleasures  of  sense  without  avid  greed  and  blind  ap¬
petite,  but  with  discernment  of  the  perils  which  dog
them  and  [174]  with  a  realization  that  these  things
afford  no  refuge, — all  these  are  to  be  conceived  of  as
not  having  fallen  into  misery  or  into  calamity  and  as
not  being  at  the  mercy  of  the  Evil  One.  Even  as  a
deer  of  tne  forest  which  is  not  in  the  toils  of  the  baited
trap  it  has  found,  would  be  conceived  of  as  having
fallen  into  no  misery  or  calamity,  and  as  not  being  at
the  trapper’s  mercy,  but  as  being  able  to  escape  at  will
when  the  trapper  comes; — even  so  all  these  other
recluses  or  brahmins  who  .  .  .  and  as  not  being  at
the  mercy  of  the  Evil  One.

Even  as  a  deer  of  the  forest  roaming  the  forest’s
fastnesses  is  confident  and  secure  as  it  walks  or
stands,  reclines  or  slumbers, — because  the  trapper
cannot  get  to  it,  even  so,  divested  of  pleasures  of
sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  mind,  an  Almsman
enters  on  and  abides  in  the  First  Ecstasy,  with  all  its
zest  and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness
but  not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.
Such  an  Almsman  is  said  to  have  hoodwinked  Mara
.  .  .  (etc.,  as  at  pp.  r  1 1  -3  of  Sutta  25)  .  .  .  [175]  the
Cankers  become  eradicated.  Such  an  Almsman  is
said  to  have  hoodwinked  Mara  and  to  have  put  Mara's
eyes  out  of  gear,  so  as  to  have  passed  out  of  range  of
vision  of  the  Evil  One  and  to  have  passed — here  and
now — beyond  desires.  He  is  confident  and  secure  as
he  walks  or  stands,  sits  or  slumbers, — because  the
Evil  One  cannot  get  to  him.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  i.  176.


THE  SHORT  TRAIL.


125


XXVII.  CULA-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.

THE  SHORT  TRAIL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthl  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  brahmin  J&nussoni  was  coming  out  of
the  city  early  in  the  day  in  a  carriage  which  was
all  white  and  was  drawn  by  four  white  mares,  when  at
a  distance  he  espied  the  Wanderer  Pilotika  returning
to  the  city  and  asked :  —  Whence,  pray,  comes
Vacch&yana  so  early  in  the  day  ?

I  am  on  my  way  back  from  the  recluse  Gotama.

And  what  is  your  view  of  him,  Vacchayana  ?  Has
he  got  depth  of  thought  ?  Is  he  learned,  do  you  think  ?

Who,  who  am  I  to  comprehend  the  depth  of  the
recluse  Gotama’s  thought  ?  Only  his  peer  could  com¬
prehend  that

It  is  lofty  praise  indeed  that  you  accord  him.

Who,  who  am  I  to  praise  him  ?  Naught  but  praise
upon  praise  is  his,  that  foremost  among  gods  and  men.

What  rich  blessing  did  you  find  in  the  recluse
Gotama  to  make  you  so  ardent  an  adherent  of  his  ?

It  is  as  if  to  an  elephant  forest  there  came  an  expert
elephant-tracker,  who  should  see  there  [176]  a  long
and  broad  footprint  of  an  elephant  and  should  conclude
it  indicated  a  really  big  elephant.  Even  so,  when  I
saw  the  four  footprints  of  the  recluse  Gotama,  I  con¬
cluded  that  the  Lord  was  all-enlightened,  that  he  had
well  and  truly  revealed  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Con¬
fraternity  walked  aright.

What  are  his  four  footprints  ?

From  the  class  of  learned  Nobles  there  have  come,
as  I  have  seen,  keen  and  tried  disputants,  verbal
archers  skilled  in  hair-splitting,  and  journeying  about
to  split  in  twain  by  their  lore,  methinks,  any  views
propounded.  These,  hearing  that  the  recluse  Gotama
would  be  at  this  or  that  village  or  township,  frame  a
question  to  ask  him,  calculating  to  confute  him  one
way  if  his  answer  be  in  this  sense,  and  another  way  if


126  XXVII.  CC^A-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  177.


his  answer  be  in  that  sense.  When  they  hear  that  he
has  come,  they  go  to  him  ;  and  then,  he,  by  a  discourse
on  his  Doctrine,  so  informs  and  enlightens  them,  so
cheers  them  forward  and  helps  them  onwards,  that  in
the  end  they  never  put  their  question  at  all,  much  less
do  they  confute  him,  but  actually  become  Gotama’s
disciples. — When  I  saw  this  first  footprint  of  the
recluse  Gotama,  I  concluded  that  the  Lord  was  all-
enlightened,  that  he  had  well  and  truly  revealed  his
Doctrine,  and  that  his  Confraternity  walked  aright

From  the  class  too  of  learned  brahmins  there  have
come  .  .  .  become  Gotama’s  disciples. — When  I  saw
this  second  footprint  .  .  .  walked  aright.

From  the  class  of  learned  heads  of  houses  there  have
come  .  .  .  become  Gotama’s  disciples. — When  I  saw
this  third  footprint  .  .  .  walked  aright.

From  the  class  of  learned  recluses  there  have  come
•  •  •  [177]  much  less  do  they  confute  him,  but  have
actually  begged  him  to  let  them  leave  home  for  home¬
lessness  as  Pilgrims;  and  he  has  admitted  them  as
such.  So  admitted,  and  dwelling  alone  and  aloof,
strenuous,  ardent,  and  purged  of  self,  they,  after  no
great  while,  come — of  themselves,  here  and  now — to
discern  and  realize,  to  enter  on  and  abide  in,  that
supreme  goal  of  the  higher  life,  for  the  sake  of  which
young  men  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  on
Pilgrimage.  Say  they :  We  were  near  to  being
undone,  quite  undone !  For,  we  that  before  were  no
true  recluses,  now  know  we  are  recluses  indeed ;  we
that  before  were  no  true  brahmins,  now  know  we  are
brahrrtins  indeed;  we  that  before  were  ‘un-worthy’  (an-
arahants)  now  know  we  have  ‘Worth*  indeed  (are
Arahats).  To-day  we  are  in  very  truth  recluses  and
brahmins  of  real  Worth. — When  I  saw  this  fourth
footprint  of  the  recluse  Gotama,  I  concluded  that
the  Lord  was  all-enlightened,  that  he  had  well  and
truly  revealed  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Confraternity
walked  aright.

Such  were  the  four  footprints  of  the  recluse  Gotama,
the  sight  of  which  led  me  to  this  conclusion.


M.  i.  178.


THE  SHORT  TRAIL.


127


Thereupon,  the  brahmin  Janussoni  alighted  from  his
carriage  so  white,  and,  with  right  shoulder  reverently
bared  and  with  clasped  hands  stretched  out  towards
the  Lord,  thrice  burst  forth  with  this  utterance :
‘Homage  to  the  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened!
Homage  to  the  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened!
Homage  to  the  Lord,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened !
May  it  be  mine  some  day  [178]  and  somewhere  to
meet  the  reverend  Gotama  and  to  have  speech  with
him !’

Then  the  brahmin  proceeded  to  the  Lord  and,  after
friendly  greetings,  related  the  talk  he  had  had  with  the
Wanderer  Pilotika.

Said  the  Lord  : — At  this  point,  brahmin,  the  allegory
of  the  elephant’s  footprint  is  not  complete  in  all  its
details.  Give  ear  and  hearken,  and  I  will  tell  you
what  will  complete  it.  Certainly,  sir,  said  the
brahmin  in  assent ;  and  the  Lord  spoke  as  follows  : —

It  is  as  if  to  an  elephant  forest  there  came  an
elephant-tracker,  who  should  see  there  long  and  broad
footprints  of  an  elephant,  but,  being  an  expert  in  track¬
ing  elephants,  should  not  conclude  that  this  indicated  a
really  big  elephant.  And  why  ? — Because  in  an
elephant  forest  there  are  stunted  cow-elephants  who
have  large  feet ;  and  it  might  also  be  their  footprints.
So  on  he  goes  till  he  comes  on  long  and  broad  foot¬
prints  making  a  deep  lane  through  the  underwood.
Still  the  expert  tracker  does  not  conclude  that  this
indicates  a  really  big  elephant.  And  why  ? — Because
in  an  elephant  forest  there  are  cow-elephants  with
tushes,  who  have  large  feet ;  and  it  might  be  one  of
these.  So  on  he  goes  till  he  comes  on  long  and  broad
footprints  making  a  deep  lane  through  the  underwood
and  with  marks  of  slashing  tusks  high  up.  Still  he
does  not  conclude  that  this  indicates  a  really  big
elephant.  And  why?— Because  in  an  elephant  forest
there  are  cow-elephants  with  stumpy  tusks,  who  have
large  feet ;  and  it  might  be  one  of  these.  So  on  he
goes  till  he  comes  on  long  and  broad  footprints  making
a  deep  lane  through  the  underwood  and  with  marks  of


1 28  XXVII.  CUJ^A-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  179.


slashing  tusks  high  up  and  also  with  high  branches
torn  off ;  and  there  he  espies  that  elephant  beneath  a
tree  or  in  the  open,  walking  or  standing  still,  couch¬
ing  or  reclining.  Then  at  last  he  concludes  that  here  is
his  big  elephant.

Even  so,  [179]  brahmin,  there  arises  in  the  world
here  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  walking
by  knowledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the
matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of  gods
and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment.  This  universe —
with  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,  recluses  and  brahmins,
embracing  all  gods  and  mankind, — all  this  he  has  dis¬
cerned  and  realized  for  himself,  and  makes  known  to
others.  He  preaches  his  Doctrine,  which  is  so  fair  in
its  outset,  its  middle,  and  its  close,  w’ith  both  text  and
import ;  he  propounds  a  higher  life  that  is  wholly
complete  and  pure.  This  Doctrine  is  heard  by  the
head  of  a  house  or  his  son  or  by  one  of  other  birth,  who
hearing  it  puts  his  trust  in  the  Truth-finder,  and  in
this  trust  bethinks  him  that — A  hole  and  corner  life
is  all  a  home  can  give,  whereas  Pilgrimage  is  in  the
open ;  it  is  hard  for  a  home-keeping  man  to  live
the  higher  life  in  all  its  full  completeness  and  full  purity
and  perfection ;  what  if  I  were  to  cut  off  hair  and
beard,  don  the  yellow  robes,  and  go  forth  from  home  to
homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim  ?  Later,  parting  from  his
substance,  be  it  small  or  great,  parting  too  from  the
circle  of  his  kinsfolk,  be  they  few  or  many,  he  cuts  off
hair  and  beard,  dons  the  yellow  robes,  and  goes  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim.

•/  A  Pilgrim  now,  schooled  in  the  Almsmen’s  precepts
and  way  of  life,  he  puts  from  him  all  killing  and
abstains  from  killing  anything.  Laying  aside  cudgel
and  sword,  he  lives  a  life  of  innocence  and  mercy,  full
of  kindliness  and  compassion  for  everything  that  lives.
Theft  he  puts  from  him  and  eschews ;  taking  only
what  is  given  to  him  by  others,  and  waiting  till  it  is
given,  he  lives  an  honest  and  clean  life.  Putting  from
him  all  that  does  not  belong  to  the  higher  life,  he  leads
the  higher  life  in  virtue,  abstaining  from  low  sensuality.


M.  i.  180.


THE  SHORT  TRAIL.


129


Putting  from  him  and  abstaining  from  all  lying,  he
speaks  the  truth,  cleaves  to  the  truth,  and  is  staunch
and  leal,  never  deceiving  the  world  with  his  lips.
Calumny  he  puts  from  him  and  eschews,  not  repeating
elsewhere  to  the  harm  of  people  here  what  he  hears
there,  nor  repeating  here  to  the  harm  of  people  else¬
where  what  he  hears  elsewhere  ;  thus  he  heals  divisions
and  cements  friendship,  seeking  peace  and  ensuing  it ;
for  in  peace  is  his  delight  and  his  words  are  ever
the  words  of  a  peacemaker.  Reviling  he  puts  from
him,  and  abstains  from  reviling  people;  his  words
are  without  gall,  pleasant,  friendly,  going  home  to  the
heart,  courteous,  agreeable  and  welcome  to  all.  [180]
Tattle  he  puts  from  him  and  abstains  therefrom,  he
speaks,  in  season  and  according  to  the  facts,  words  of
help  concerning  the  Doctrine  and  the  Rule,  words  to
be  stored  in  the  heart,  words  duly  illustrated,  fraught
with  purpose,  and  pithy.  He  sedulously  avoids  hurt¬
ing  the  seeds  or  plants  of  a  village.  He  takes  but  one
meal  a  day,  never  eating  at  night  or  after  hours.  He
refrains  from  looking  on  at  shows  of  dancing,  singing,
and  music  He  eschews  all  use  and  employment  of
smart  garlands,  scents  and  perfumes.  He  sleeps  on  no
tall  or  broad  beds.  He  refuses  to  accept  gold  or  coins
of  silver, — uncooked  grain  or  meat, — women  or  girls,
— bondwomen  or  bondmen, — sheep  or  goats, — fowls
or  swine, — elephants  or  cattle  or  horses  or  mares, —
fields  or  land.  He  refrains  from  the  practice  of  send-
ing  or  going  on  messages.  He  neither  buys  nor  sells.
He  never  cheats  with  weights,  coins,  or  measures.
He  takes  no  part  in  bribery,  cozening,  cheating,  or
other  crooked  ways.  He  never  joins  in  wounding,
murdering,  and  manacling,  or  in  highway  robbery,
brigandage,  and  fraud.  Contented  is  he  with  what¬
ever  robes  are  given  him  as  clothing,  and  with  what¬
ever  alms  are  given  for  his  belly’s  needs.  Wheresoever
he  goes,  he  takes  all  his  belongings  with  him.  J  ust  as
a  winged  bird,  wheresoever  it  goes,  carries  with  it  its
feathers  and  all, — so,  wheresoever  he  goes,  he  takes
all  his  belongings  with  him.'


9


1 30  XXVII.  CUJ^A-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  181.


A  master  of  this  noble  code  of  virtue,  he  enjoys  un¬
sullied  well-being  within.— When  with  his  eye  he  sees
a  visible  shape,  he  is  not  absorbed  by  either  its  general
appearance  or  its  details;  but,  since  the  eye  uncon¬
trolled  might  lead  to  covetousness  and  discontent,  to
evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind,  he  schools  himself  to
control  it,  to  keep  watch  and  ward  over  it,  and
to  establish  control  And  he  does  the  like  with  his
five  other  faculties  of  sense.

[181]  A  master  of  this  noble  control  over  his
faculties,  he  enjoys  unalloyed  well-being  within.  Pur¬
poseful  is  he  in  all  his  doings,— whether  in  coming  in
or  going  out,  in  looking  ahead  or  around,  in  stretching
out  his  arm  or  in  drawing  it  back,  in  wearing  his
clothes  or  carrying  his  bowl,  in  eating  or  drinking,  in
chewing  or  savouring  food,  in  attending  to  the  calls  of
nature,  in  walking  or  standing  or  sitting,  in  sleeping  or
waking,  in  speech  or  in  silence ;— he  is  always  pur¬
poseful  in  all  he  does.

A  master  of  this  noble  code  of  virtue,  a  master  of
this  noble  code  of  control  of  his  faculties  of  sense,  and
a  master  of  noble  mindfulness  and  purpose  in  all  he
does,  he  resorts  to  a  lonely  lodging, — in  the  forest
under  a  tree,  in  the  wilds  in  cave  or  grot,  in  a  charnel-
ground,  in  a  thicket,  or  on  bracken  in  the  open.  After
his  meal,  when  he  is  back  from  his  round  for  alms,  he
seats  himself  cross-legged  and  with  body  erect,  with
his  heart  set  on  mindfulness.  His  life  is  purged  (i.)  of
appetite  for  things  of  the  world,  for  he  has  put  from
him  all  appetite  therefor  ; — (ii.)  of  all  spiteful  thoughts,
/for  he  is  filled  only  with  loving-kindness  and  compas¬
sion  for  all  that  lives  ; — (iii.)  of  all  torpor,  for  all  torpor
has  left  him,  driven  out  by  clarity  of  vision,  by  mind¬
fulness,  and  by  purpose  in  all  he  does ; — (iv.)  of  all
flurry  and  worry,  for  he  is  serene,  and  his  heart  within
is  at  peace  and  quit  of  all  worries ; — and  (v.)  of  all
doubts,  for  his  life  is  unclouded  by  doubt,  he  is
troubled  by  no  questionings,  right  states  of  mind  have
purged  his  heart  of  all  doubting.  When  he  has  put
from  him  these  Five  Hindrances,  those  defilements  of


M.  i.  182.  THE  SHORT  TRAIL.  I3I

the  heart  which  weaken  a  man’s  insight,  then,  divested
of  pleasures  of  sense  and  divested  of  wrong  states  of
consciousness,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  First
Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred
of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observation
and  reflection.

This,  brahmin,  is  known  as  the  Truth-finder’s  foot¬
print,  the  Truth-finder’s  track,  the  Truth-finder’s  slash.

But  it  is  not  yet  that  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  [182]
concludes  that  the  Lord  is  all-enlightened,  that  he  has
well  and  truly  revealed  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Con¬
fraternity  walks  aright.

Nor  does  he  so  conclude  as  he  successively  attains
to  the  three  other  Ecstasies, — each  of  which  is  called
the  Truth-finder’s  footprint,  the  Truth-finder’s  track,
the  Truth-finder’s  slash.

With  heart  thus  stedfast  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta
No.  4)  .  .  .  divers  existences  of  the  past  in  all
their  details  and  features.  This  too  is  called  the
Truth-finder’s  footprint,  the  Truth-finder's  track,  the
Truth-finder’s  slash.  But  not  yet  does  he  conclude
that  the  Lord  is  all-enlightened,  that  he  has  well  and
truly  revealed  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Confraternity
walks  aright.

[188]  That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies
.  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  4)  .  .  .  appeared  after  death
in  states  of  bliss  and  in  heaven.  This  too  is  called  the
Truth-finder’s  footprint  .  .  .  walks  aright

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  the  eradication  of  the  Cankers  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Sutta  4)  .  .  .  course  that  leads  to  their
cessation.  This  too  is  called  .  .  .  walks  aright

When  he  knows  this  and  sees  this,  his  heart  is  [184]
delivered  from  the  Canker  of  sensuous  pleasure,  from
the  Canker  of  continuing  existence,  and  from  the
Canker  of  ignorance  ;  and  to  him  thus  delivered  comes
the  knowledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction —
Rebirth  is  no  more  ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my
task  is  done ;  and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of
what  I  have  been.


132  XXVII.  CUI.A-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  184.


This  is  known  as  the  Truth-finder’s  footprint,  the
Truth-finder’s  track,  the  Truth-finder’s  slash.  And
now  at  last  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  concludes  that
the  Lord  is  all-enlightened,  that  he  has  well  and  truly
revealed  his  Doctrine,  and  that  his  Confraternity  walks
aright.

And  now  at  last,  brahmin,  the  allegory  of  the  ele¬
phant’s  footprints  has  been  completed  in  all  its  details.

Thereupon,  the  brahmin  Janussoni  said  to  the
Lord  : — Excellent,  Gotama  1  most  excellent!  Just  as
if  a  man  should  set  upright  again  what  had  been  cast
down,  or  reveal  what  was  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man
who  had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a
lamp  into  darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might
see  the  things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a  figure,
has  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine  clear.  I  come  to  the
reverend  Gotama  as  my  refuge,  and  to  his  Doctrine,
and  to  his  Confraternity.  May  the  reverend  Gotama
accept  me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an  abiding
refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.


XXVIII.  MAHA-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-
SUTTA.

THE  LONG  TRAIL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  S&vatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Sariputta  addressed  the
Almsmen,  saying,  Reverend  sirs!  Yes,  reverend  sir,
said  they  in  response.  The  reverend  Sariputta  spoke
as  follows : — Just  as  the  foot  of  every  creature  that
walks  the  earth  will  go  into  the  elephant’s  footprint,
which  is  pre-eminent  for  size, — even  so,  sirs,  are  all
right  states  of  mind  comprised  within  the  Four  Noble
Truths, — which  are  the  Noble  Truth  of  Ill,  [185]  the
Noble  Truth  of  the  origin  of  Ill,  the  Noble  Truth  ot
the  cessation  of  Ill,  and  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  way
that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  Ill.

This  is  the  Noble  Truth  of  Ill : — Ill  is  birth,  Ill  is
decay,  death,  sorrow,  lamentation,  depression  of  body
and  of  mind,  failure  to  get  what  one  desires, —
together,  in  brief,  with  all  that  makes  up  the  Five
Attachments  to  existence,  namely,  the  Attachments  of
visible  shapes,  of  feeling,  of  perception,  of  the  plastic
forces,  and  of  consciousness.

What  makes  up  the  Attachment  of  visible  shapes  ?
— The  four  principal  elements  (i.e.  earth,  water,  fire,
and  air)  and  whatever  visible  shapes  are  derivative
therefrom.

Now,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  earth-element;  it  is
either  personal  or  external.  If  personal,  it  embraces
everything  personal  and  referable  to  an  individual
which  is  hard  or  solid  or  derived  therefrom, — such  as
the  hair  of  the  head  or  body,  nails,  teeth,  skin,  flesh,
sinews,  bones,  marrow,  kidneys,  heart,  liver,  pleura,

i33


(34  XXVIII.  MAHA-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  186.


spleen,  lungs,  inwards,  bowels,  stomach,  faeces,  to¬
gether  with  everything  else  personal  and  referable  to
an  individual  which  is  hard  or  solid  or  derived  there¬
from.  All  this  is  called  the  personal  earth-element,
and,  in  combination  with  the  external  earth-element,
makes  up  the  totality  of  the  earth-element.  The  right
way  to  regard  this  as  it  really  is,  and  to  comprehend  it
aright,  is  to  say  :  This  is  not  mine,  This  is  not  I,
This  is  no  self  of  mine.  So  regarding  and  so  compre¬
hending  it,  a  man  turns  from  it  in  disgust  and  loathing
of  heart.  There  comes  a  time  when  the  external
water-element  is  wroth  and  the  external  earth-element
disappears  before  it.  Then  will  this  external  earth-
element,  ancient  though  it  be,  reveal  how  transient  is
its  nature,  how  subject  to  dissolution  and  decay,  how
mutable !  And  what  of  this  short-lived  body,  bred  of
cravings?  No  ‘I’  is  here,  no  ‘mine,’  no  ‘I  am,’ —
nothing  at  all.  Therefore,  if  others  revile  or  defame,
assail  or  harry  an  Almsman,  he  knows  well  that  it  is
through  his  sense  of  hearing  that  he  has  experienced
these  painful  feelings,  and  that  they  come  to  him  as
effects,  with  a  cause  behind  them  [186], — which  cause
is  Contact.  He  is  clear  that  Contact  is  transient.  Soare
feelings  ;  so  are  perceptions  ;  so  are  the  plastic  forces  ;
and  so  is  consciousness  This  relativity  of  the  elements
attracts  and  satisfies  him  ;  he  takes  his  stand  on  it
and  holds  to  it.  If  others  act  harshly,  unpleasantly,
and  disagreeably  towards  an  Almsman,  if  they  deal
him  blows  with  fist  or  clod  or  cudgel  or  sword,  he  is
clear  that  the  nature  of  this  body  of  his  is  such  that  it
is  affected  by  such  blows.  He  remembers  that  in  the
Saw  Homily  (Sutta  21)  the  Lord  taught  that,  even  if
villainous  bandits  were  to  carve  us  limb  from  limb
with  a  two-handled  saw,  even  then  the  mind  that
should  harbour  enmity  would  not  be  obedient  to  his
teaching.  He  resolves,  therefore,  that  indomitable
and  unflagging  shall  his  resolution  be,  with  a  steady
mindfulness  that  knows  no  distraction,  with  a  tranquil
body  that  has  found  rest,  and  with  a  stedfast  heart
that  never  wavers; — let  them  deal  their  blows,  if  they


M.  i.  187.  THE  LONG  TRAIL.  135

will,  with  fist,  clod,  cudgel,  or  sword  ;  the  command¬
ments  of  the  Buddhas  are  being  fulfilled !  If,  with
this  present  remembrance  of  the  Buddha1  and  his
Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity,  there  is  not  strong
within  him  the  equanimity  which  is  founded  on  the
right,  then  is  he  deeply  moved  and  in  his  emotion  he
cries : — Failure  is  mine,  instead  of  success ;  I  have
failed  and  not  succeeded,  in  that,  with  this  present  re¬
membrance  of  the  Buddha  and  his  Doctrine  and  his
Confraternity,  equanimity  is  not  strong  within  me.
Just  as  a  young  wife  is  deeply  moved  in  the  presence
of  her  husband’s  father,  so  if,  with  the  present
remembrance  .  .  .  not  strong  within  me.  But  if,  with
that  same  present  remembrance  of  the  Buddha  and  his
Doctrine  and  his  Confraternity,  there  is  strong  within
him  the  equanimity  which  is  founded  on  the  right,
then  [187]  he  rejoices  thereat.  At  this  stage  the
Almsman  has  achieved  much.

Next  as  to  the  nature  of  the  water-element,  which
may  be  either  personal  or  external.  If  personal,  it
embraces  everything  personal  and  referable  to  an
individual  which  is  water  or  watery  or  derived  there¬
from, — such  as  bile,  phlegm,  pus,  blood,  sweat,  fat,
tears,  serum,  saliva,  mucus,  synovial  fluid  and  urine,
together  with  everything  else  personal  and  referable  to
an  individual,  which  is  water  or  watery  or  derived
therefrom.  All  this  is  called  the  personal  water-
element,  and,  in  combination  with  the  external  water-
element,  makes  up  the  totality  of  the  water-element.
The  right  way  to  regard  this  as  it  really  is,  and  to  com¬
prehend  it  aright,  is  to  say :  This  is  not  mine,  This
is  not  I,  This  is  no  self  of  mine.  So  regarding  and
so  comprehending  it,  a  man  turns  from  it  in  disgust
and  loathing  of  heart.  There  comes  a  time  when  the
external  water-element  is  wroth,  sweeping  away  village,
township  and  city,  countries  and  whole  continents.


1  Here,  it  will  be  noted,  the  style  of  ‘  Buddha  ’  is  used  by  Sari-
putta  of  his  master  (who  does  not  use  it  of  himself)  in  lieu  of
Tathagata,  etc.  (See  Dialogues  II,  6.)  The  plural  is  used
in  the  line  immediately  above.


136  XXViri.  MAHA-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  188.

There  comes  a  time  when  the  ocean  will  be  a  hundred
leagues  deep,  yea,  two,  three  .  .  .  seven  hundreds  of
leagues  deep.  There  comes  a  time  when  the  depth  of
ocean’s  waters  will  equal  only  seven,  six  .  .  .  two
palmyra-trees’  height,  or  a  single  tree.  There  comes
a  time  when  the  depth  of  ocean’s  waters  will  equal  only
seven,  six  .  .  .  two  men’s  height,  or  the  height  of  but
one  man.  There  comes  a  time  when  ocean’s  waters
will  reach  only  to  a  man’s  waist,  then  only  to  his  loins,
then  only  to  his  knees,  then  only  to  his  ankles.  There
comes  a  time  when  ocean’s  waters  will  not  cover  a
single  joint  of  a  man’s  finger.  Then  will  this  external
water-element,  ancient  though  it  be,  [188]  reveal  how
transient  is  its  nature,  how  subject  to  dissolution  and
decay  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  above)  ...  he  rejoices  thereat.
At  this  stage  too  the  Brother  has  achieved  much.

Next  as  to  the  nature  of  the  fire-element,  which  may
be  personal  or  external.  If  personal,  it  embraces
everything  personal  and  referable  to  an  individual
which  is  fire  or  fiery  or  is  derived  therefrom, — such  as
whatever  heats,  consumes  or  burns  up,  or  whatever
wholly  transmutes  food  and  drink  in  digestion ;
together  with  everything  else  that,  being  personal  and
referable  to  an  individual,  is  fire  or  fiery  or  is  derived
therefrom.  All  this  is  called  the  personal  fire-element,
and,  in  combination  with  the  external  fire-element,
makes  up  the  totality  of  the  fire-element.  The  right
way  to  regard  this  as  it  really  is,  and  to  comprehend  it
aright,  is  to  say:  This  is  not  mine,  This  is  not  I,
This  is  no  self  of  mine.  So  regarding  and  so  compre¬
hending  it,  a  man  turns  from  it  in  disgust  and  loathing
of  heart.  There  comes  a  time  when  the  external  fire-
element  is  wroth  and  burns  up  village,  township  and
city,  countries  and  whole  continents ;  nor  will  it  stop
till,  spreading  tc  green  growths  or  roads  or  rocks  or
water  or  verdant  scenes,  it  fails  for  lack  ,  of  sustenance.
There  comes  a  time  when  people  try  to  light  fires  with
fowls’  feathers  or  snippets  of  sinews  and  shrivelled
hide.  Then  will  the  external  fire-element,  ancient
though  it  be,  reveal  how  transient  ...  he  rejoices


THE  LONG  TRAIU


M.  i.  189.


137


thereat.  At  this  stage  too  the  Almsman  has  achieved
much.

Next  as  to  the  nature  of  the  air-element,  which  may
be  either  personal  or  external.  If  personal,  it  embraces
everything  personal  and  referable  to  an  individual
which  is  air  or  airy  or  derived  therefrom, — such  as
wind  discharged  upwards  or  downwards,  wind  in  the
abdomen  or  belly,  vapours  that  traverse  the  several
members,  inhalings  and  exhalings  of  breath,  together
with  everything  else  that,  being  personal  and  referable
to  an  individual,  is  air  or  airy  or  derived  therefrom.
All  this  is  called  the  personal  air-element,  and,  in  com¬
bination  with  the  external  air-element,  makes  up  the
totality  of  the  air-element.  The  right  way  to  regard
this  as  it  really  is,  and  to  comprehend  it  aright,  is  to
say :  This  is  not  mine,  This  is  not  I,  This  is  no
self  of  mine.  So  regarding  and  so  comprehending  it,
a  man  turns  from  it  in  disgust  and  with  loathing
of  heart.  [189]  There  comes  a  time  when  the
external  air-element  is  wroth  and  sweeps  away  before
it  village,  township,  and  city,  countries  and  whole
continents.  There  comes  a  time  when,  in  the  last
month  of  the  hot  season  before  the  rains  break,  men
try  to  create  a  current  of  air  with  fans  and  the  like,  nor
do  they  now  look  to  see  grass  growing  even  on  the
thatch.  Then  will  the  air-element,  ancient  though  it
be,  reveal  how  transient  .  .  .  [190]  he  rejoices
thereat.  At  this  stage  too  an  Almsman  has  achieved
much.

Just  as  it  is  by  and  because  of  wattle  and  withies,
grass  and  clay,  that  a  space  is  enclosed  which  is  called
a  house,  so  it  is  by  and  because  of  bones  and  sinews,
flesh  and  skin  that  a  space  is  enclosed  which  is  called
a  visible  shape.  If  the  eye  within  is  intact  but  if
visible  shapes  external  to  it  do  not  come  to  focus  and
there  is  developed  no  pertinent  material  to  sustain  it,
then  there  is  developed  no  manifestation  of  the
pertinent  section  of  consciousness.  If  the  eye  within
is  intact  and  visible  shapes  external  to  it  do  come  to
focus,  but  if  there  is  developed  no  pertinent  material  to


138  XXVIII.  MAHA-HATTHI-PADOPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  191.


sustain  it,  again  there  is  developed  no  manifestation  of
the  pertinent  section  of  consciousness.  But  when
the  eye  within  is  intact  and  visible  shapes  external  to
it  do  come  to  focus,  and  when  there  is  developed
pertinent  material  to  sustain  it,  then  there  is  developed
a  manifestation  of  the  pertinent  section  of  conscious¬
ness.  Any  visible  shape  that  appertains  to  a  man  so
conscious,  unites  with  all  that  goes  to  make  up  the
Attachment  of  Form  ;  feelings  unite  with  all  that  goes
to  make  up  the  Attachment  to  feelings;  and  so  too
with  perceptions,  plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.

And  what  is  true  of  visible  objects,  is  equally  true  of
sounds,  smells,  tastes,  touch,  and  mind.

Thus  the  Almsman  recognizes  that : — This  is  how
all  that  makes  up  the  Five  Attachments  is  collected,
assembled,  and  brought  together.  Now,  the  Lord  has
laid  it  down  that  whoso  sees  the  Chain  of  Causation
[191]  sees  the  Doctrine,  and  whoso  sees  the  Doctrine
sees  the  Chain  of  Causation.  It  is  the  Chain  of
Causation  which  entails  all  that  makes  up  these  Five
Attachments.  The  origin  of  Ill  is  the  yearning  for,
and  the  resort  to,  these  Five,  the  appetite  for  them
and  the  cleaving  to  them.  And  the  cessation  of  111
is  the  avoidance  and  the  rejection  of  all  such  yearn¬
ings  and  appetites.  At  this  stage  too  the  Almsman  has
achieved  much.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Sariputta.  Glad  at
heart,  those  Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  reverend
Sariputta  had  said.


XXIX.  MAHA-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.

TIMBER:  OR  DISCOVERIES

[192]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rajagaba  on  the  heights  of  the  Vulture’s
Peak,  not  long  after  Devadatta’s  secession,1  he
addressed  the  Almsmen  on  the  subject  of  Devadatta  :


1  See  Vinaya  Texts  III,  238  et  seqq.


M.  i.  193.


TIMBER  :  OR  DISCOVERIES.


>39


Take  the  case,  Almsmen,  of  a  young  man  who  for
faith’s  sake  goes  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  on
Pilgrimage, — feeling  himself  beset  by  birth  and  decay
and  death,  by  sorrow  and  lamentation,  by  ills  of  body
and  of  mind,  and  by  tribulation  ;  feeling  himself  beset
by  ills,  spent  with  ills  ;  and  asking  to  be  shewn  how  to
make  an  end  of  all  that  makes  up  Ill.  A  Pilgrim  now,
he  finds  himself  the  recipient  of  presents,  esteem,  and
repute,  all  of  which  things  so  rejoice  him  and  so  satisfy
his  aspirations  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and
disparages  others.  It  is  I,  says  he  to  himself,  who  get
things  given  to  me  and  who  am  thought  so  much  of,
while  these  other  Almsmen  are  little  known  and  rank
nobodies.  Intoxicated,  very  much  intoxicated,  with  the
presents,  esteem,  and  repute  which  he  enjoys,  he  grows
remiss  and,  having  become  remiss,  lives  a  prey  to  Ill.

It  is  just  as  if  a  man  who  was  in  need,  search,  and
quest  of  the  best  of  wood,  were  to  come  on  just  the
fine  upstanding  tree  for  his  purpose,  but  were  to  dis¬
regard  not  only  the  best  but  also  the  poorer  timber  and
the  bark  and  the  wood  that  had  fallen  to  the  ground,
and  were  to  cut  the  leafy  foliage  and  go  off  with  that  in
the  belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood.  At
the  sight,  an  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  this
good  man  understood  nothing  about  grades  of  wood
and  had  gone  off  with  the  twiggage  to  the  disregard
of  all  the  rest, — in  the  vain  belief  that  he  had  got  the
pick  of  the  wood  ; — nor  would  what  he  had  got  ever  be
any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was  needed.
— Just  the  same  is  it  with  our  Pilgrim  who  finds  him¬
self  the  recipient  ....  [193]  a  prey  to  Ill.  Of  such
an  Almsman  it  is  said  that  he  has  got  the  twiggage  of
the  higher  life  and  has  ended  there.

Take  now  the  case  of  a  young  man  who  for  faith's
sake  goes  forth  .  .  .  that  makes  up  Ill.  A  Pilgrim
now,  he  finds  himself  the  recipient  of  presents,  esteem,
and  repute,  none  of  which  things  either  rejoices  his
heart  or  satisfies  his  aspirations,  or  makes  him  puffed-up
to  the  disparagement  of  others  ;  nor  is  he  so  intoxicated
therewith  as  to  grow  remiss  ;  with  unremitting  zeal  he


140  XXIX.  MAHA-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  194.

succeeds  in  living  the  life  of  virtue.  This  success  in
living  the  life  of  virtue  so  rejoices  him  and  so  satisfies
his  aspirations  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and
disparages  others,  saying — I  am  the  man  of  virtue,  I
am  the  man  of  fine  character,  while  these  other  Alms¬
men  lack  virtue  and  are  of  evil  character.  Intoxicated,
very  much  intoxicated,  with  his  success  in  the  life  of
virtue,  he  grows  remiss,  and,  having  become  remiss,
lives  a  prey  to  Ill.

It  is  just  as  if  a  man  who  was  in  need,  search,  and
quest  .  .  .  and  the  bark,  and  were  to  cut  up  the  wood
that  had  fallen  to  the  ground  and  were  to  go  off  with
this  in  the  belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood.
At  the  sight,  an  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say
that  the  good  man  knew  nothing  about  grades  of  wood
and  had  gone  off  with  the  fallen  wood  to  the  disregard
of  all  the  rest,  in  the  vain  belief  that  he  had  got  the
pick  of  the  wood  ; — nor  would  what  he  had  got  ever  be
of  any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was  needed.
— Just  the  same  is  it  with  our  second  Pilgrim  who  for
faith’s  sake  .  .  .  intoxicated  with  his  success  in  the
life  of  virtue,  he  grows  remiss,  and,  having  become
remiss,  lives  a  prey  to  Ill.  [194]  Of  such  an  Almsman
it  is  said  that  he  has  got  the  windfalls  of  the  higher  life
and  has  ended  there.

Take  next  the  case  of  a  young  man  who  for  faith’s
sake  goes  forth  .  .  .  succeeds  in  living  the  life  of
virtue.  This  success  in  living  the  life  of  virtue  does
not  so  rejoice  him  and  so  satisfy  his  aspirations  as  to
make  him  puffed-up  to  the  disparagement  of  others,
nor  is  he  so  intoxicated  therewith  as  to  grow  remiss  ;
with  unremitting  zeal  he  succeeds  in  winning  rapt  con¬
centration.  This  success  so  rejoices  him  and  so  satis¬
fies  his  aspirations  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up
and  disparages  others,  saying — I  am  the  man  of  sted-
fastness,  I  am  the  man  with  focussed  heart,  while  these
other  Almsmen  are  not  stedfast  but  all  in  a  whirl.
Intoxicated,  very  much  intoxicated,  with  winning  rapt
concentration,  he  grows  remiss,  and,  having  become
remiss,  lives  a  prey  to  Ill.


M.  i.  I9S-  timber:  or  discoveries.  14 1

It  is  just  as  if  a  man  who  was  in  need,  search,  and
quest  .  .  .  but  also  the  poorer  timber,  and  were  to  cut
off  the  bark  and  go  off  with  this  in  the  belief  that  he
had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood.  At  the  sight,  an
observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  the  good  man
knew  nothing  about  grades  of  wood  and  had  gone  off
with  the  bark  in  the  belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick  of
the  wood ;  nor  would  what  he  had  got  ever  be  any
good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was  needed.  J  ust
the  same  is  it  with  our  third  Pilgrim  who  for  faith’s
sake  .  .  .  intoxicated  with  winning  rapt  concentra¬
tion,  he  grows  remiss,  and,  having  become  remiss,
lives  a  prey  to  Ill.  Of  such  [195]  an  Almsman  it  is
said  that  he  has  got  the  bark  of  the  higher  life  and  has
ended  there.

Take  next  the  case  of  a  young  man  who  for  faith’s
sake  .  .  .  succeeds  in  winning  rapt  concentration.
This  success  rejoices  him  but  does  not  so  satisfy  his
aspirations  as  to  make  him  puffed-up  to  the  disparage¬
ment  of  others,  nor  is  he  so  intoxicated  therewith  as  to
grow  remiss ;  with  unremitting  zeal  he  succeeds  in
winning  Mystic  Insight.1  This  success  so  rejoices  his
heart  and  so  satisfies  his  aspirations  that  thereby  he
becomes  puffed-up  and  disparages  others,  saying — I
know  and  see,  while  these  other  Brethren  neither  know
nor  see.  Intoxicated,  very  much  intoxicated,  with
winning  this  Insight,  he  grows  remiss,  and,  having
become  remiss,  lives  a  prey  to  Ill.  It  is  just  as  if  a
man  who  was  in  need,  search,  and  quest  .  .  .  were  to
disregard  the  best  timber,  and  were  to  cut  out  the
poorer  timber  and  go  off  with  this  in  the  belief  that  he
had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood.  At  the  sight,  an  ob¬
server  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  the  good  man  knew
nothing  about  grades  of  wood  and  had  gone  off  with
the  poorer  timber  in  the  belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick

1  Bu.  explains  nana-dassana  in  this  Sutta as  meaning  the
Eye  Celestial  of  Sutta  6,  i.e.  the  highest  of  the  five  Psychic
Powers,  of  which  (alone)  Devadatta  was  master.  See  Vinaya
Texts  III,  230  for  the  ignoble  iddhi  of  Devadatta;  and  cf.
Dialogues  I,  56-64.


142


XXIX.  MAHA-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  196.


of  the  wood  ;  nor  would  what  he  had  got  ever  be  any
good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was  wanted.  [196J
Just  the  same  is  it  with  our  fourth  Pilgrim  who  for  faith’s
sake  .  .  .  intoxicated  with  winning  Mystic  Insight,
grows  remiss,  and,  having  become  remiss,  lives  a  prey
to  Ill.  Of  such  an  Almsman  it  is  said  that  he  has  got
the  poorer  timber  of  the  higher  life  and  has  ended
there.

Next,  take  the  case  of  the  young  man  who  for  faith’s
sake  .  .  .  succeeds  in  winning  Mystic  Insight.  This
success  rejoices  him  but  does  not  so  satisfy  his  aspira¬
tions  as  to  make  him  puffed-up  to  the  disparagement  of
others,  nor  is  he  so  intoxicated  therewith  as  to  grow
remiss  ;  with  unremitting  zeal  he  succeeds  in  attaining
Temporary1  Deliverance.  But  it  is  possible  he  may
fall  from  this  Temporary  Deliverance.  It  is  just  as  if
a  man  who  was  in  need,  search,  and  quest  of  the  best
of  timber  were  to  come  on  just  the  fine  upstanding
tree  for  his  purpose  and  were  to  cut  out  the  heart  of
the  timber  and  to  go  off  with  this  in  the  sure  knowledge
that  he  had  got  the  heart  of  the  timber.  At  the  sight,
an  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  that  this  good
man  knew  quite  well  what  was  the  heart  of  the  timber,
what  was  the  poorer  timber,  what  was  the  bark,  what
was  fallen  wood,  and  what  was  leafy  foliage ;  that,
being  in  need,  search,  and  quest  of  the  heart  of  timber,
[197]  he  had  cut  out  only  the  choicest  timber  and  had
gone  off  with  that,  in  the  full  knowledge  it  was  the
really  best ;  and  that  what  he  had  got  would  be  of
good  to  him  where  the  best  of  timber  was  needed.
Just  the  same  is  it  with  the  young  man  who  goes  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  on  Pilgrimage, — feeling
himself  beset  by  birth  and  decay  and  death,  by  sorrow
and  lamentation,  by  ills  of  body  and  of  mind,  and  by


1  This,  according  to  Bu.,  consists  of  the  Four  Ecstasies  and
the  four  (other)  arupa-sam£pattis.of  the  next  Sutta.  The
Four  Noble  Paths  and  the  four  fruits  of  the  life  of  the  recluse
(see  and  Dlgha  Sutta),  together  with  Nirvana,  make  the  nine
constituents  of  the  timeless  or  Eternal  Deliverance  mentioned
infra.  See  Dialogues  I,  56-64.


M.  i.  198.


timber:  or  discoveries.


143


tribulation  ;  feeling  himself  beset  by  ills  and  spent  with
ills  ;  and  asking  to  be  shewn  how  to  make  an  end  of
all  that  makes  up  Ill.  A  Pilgrim  now,  he  finds  himself
the  recipient  of  presents,  esteem,  and  repute,  none  of
which  so  rejoices  his  heart  and  so  satisfies  his  aspira¬
tions  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and  disparages
others.  Not  intoxicated  with  his  presents,  esteem,  and
repute,  he  grows  not  remiss  but  with  unremitting  zeal
wins  success  first  in  the  life  of  virtue,  next  in  rapt  con¬
centration,  and  then  in  Mystic  Insight ;  but  his  success
herein,  while  it  rejoices  his  heart,  does  not  satisfy  his
aspirations  or  puff  him  up  or  lead  him  to  disparage
others  ;  it  does  not  intoxicate  him  or  make  him  remiss  ;
with  unremitting  zeal  he  succeeds  in  winning  the  De¬
liverance  which  is  Eternal.  Now  it  is  wholly  impossible
that  he  should  fall  from  Eternal  Deliverance.

Therefore,  Brethren,  the  guerdon  of  the  higher  life
is  not  to  be  found  in  presents,  esteem,  and  repute,  nor
in  a  life  of  virtue,  nor  in  rapt  concentration,  nor  in
Mystic  Insight.  It  is  immutable  Deliverance  which  is
the  prize  and  the  heart  and  the  goal  of  the  higher  life.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXX.  CU^A-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.

MORE  ABOUT  TIMBER.

[198]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  SavatthI  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapin-
dika’s  pleasaunce,  there  came  to  him  the  brahmin
Pingala-Koccha,  who,  after  exchange  of  courteous
greetings,  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  saying  : — As
touching  those  recluses  and  brahmins  with  Confrater¬
nities  and  followings,  who  are  known  and  famous
teachers  of  followers,  and  are  founders  of  sects1  of  wide-

1  Tittha-karo  (explained  by  Bu.  here,  as  at  Sum.  Vil.  I,
143,  by  1  a  d  d  h  i  -  k  a  r  o  or  tenet-maker)  literally  means  one  who
makes  a  ford  across  a  stream ;  the  figurative  sense  is  set  out  in


144


XXX.  cu^a-saropama-sutta.


M.  i.  199,


spread  renown, — such  as  Parana  Kassapa,  Makkhali
Gosala,  Ajita  Kesa-Kambali,  Pakudha  Kaccayana,
Sanjaya  Belatthi-putta  and  Nata-putta  the  Nigantha, —
is  it  by  reason  of  their  own  professed  creed  that  all  of
them  have,  or  have  not,  discerned  truth,  or  that  some
have  discerned  it,  while  others  have  not  ?

Let  be,  brahmin  ;  let  that  question  pass.  I  will  ex¬
pound  the  Doctrine  to  you.  Hearken  and  pay  atten¬
tion,  and  I  will  speak.  Then  to  the  listening  brahmin
the  Lord  spoke  as  follows : —

It  is  just  as  if  a  man  in  need,  search,  and  quest  of
the  best  of  wood,  were  to  come  on  just  the  fine  up¬
standing  tree  for  his  purpose,  but  were  to  disregard  not
only  the  best  but  also  the  poorer  timber  and  the  bark
and  the  wood  that  had  fallen  to  the  ground,  and  were
to  cut  the  leafy  foliage  and  go  off  with  that  in  the
belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood.  At  the
sight,  an  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  the  good
man  understood  nothing  about  grades  of  wood  and
had  gone  off  with  the  twiggage  to  the  disregard  of  all
the  rest, — in  the  vain  belief  that  he  had  got  the  pick
of  the  wood  ;  nor  would  what  he  had  got  ever  be  any
good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was  needed.

And  the  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  pass  the
same  judgment  if  he  saw  the  man  going  off  [199]
either  with  fallen  wood — or  with  the  bark — or
with  the  poorer  timber, — in  the  vain  belief  that  he
had  secured  the  pick  of  the  wood; — nor  would  the
observer  say  that  what  the  man  had  got  could  ever
be  any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  wood  was
needed.

But  if  the  man  were  to  go  off  with  the  best  of  the
wood,  in  the  knowledge  that  it  was  really  the  best,
then  the  observer  with  eyes  to  see  would  say  the  good


eg-  the  34th Sutta infra.  To  the  Jain,  tittha-kara  is  equiva¬
lent  to  t  a  t  h  S  g  a  t  a  in  Buddhism.

For  these  six  contemporary  teachers  and  their  respective
tenets,  see  the  Introduction,  and  the  second  Sutta  of  the  Digha  at
Dialogues  I,  58-64.  Here  Bu.  simply  reproduces  verbatim  what
he  says  about  these  six  teachers  at  Sum.  Vil.  I,  142-4.


M.  i.  200.  MORE  ABOUT  TIMBER.  1 45

man  really  understood  about  grades  of  wood  and  had
[200]  gone  off  with  the  choicest  timber,  in  the  know¬
ledge  that  it  was  really  the  best ; — and  what  he  had
got  would  be  of  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  timber
was  needed.

Even  so,  brahmin,  is  the  case  of  an  individual  who
for  faith's  sake  goes  forth  from  home  to  homelessness
on  Pilgrimage, — feeling  himself  beset  by  birth  and
decay  and  death,  by  sorrow  and  lamentation,  by  ills  of
body  and  of  mind,  and  by  tribulation ;  feeling  himself
beset  by  ills,  spent  with  ills,  and  asking  to  be  shewn
how  to  make  an  end  of  all  that  makes  up  Ill.  A
Pilgrim  now,  he  finds  himself  the  recipient  of  presents,
esteem,  and  repute,  all  of  which  things  so  rejoice  him
and  so  satisfy  his  aspirations  that  thereby  he  becomes
puffed-up  and  disparages  others.  It  is  I,  says  he  to
himself,  who  get  things  given  to  me  and  who  am
thought  so  much  of,  while  these  other  Brethren  are
little  known  and  rank  as  nobodies.  Consequently,  he
fails  to  develop  either  desire  for,  or  effort  to  realize,
those  other  states  of  mind  which  are  higher  and  more
excellent  than  mere  presents  and  esteem  and  repute ; —
he  grows  reprobate  and  slack.  He  is  like  the  man  who
— being  in  need,  search,  and  quest  of  the  best  of  wood,
and  coming  on  just  the  fine  upstanding  tree  for  his
purpose — disregarded  not  only  the  best  but  also  the
poorer  timber  and  the  bark  and  the  fallen  wood,  but  cut
the  leafy  foliage  and  went  off  with  that  in  the  belief
that  he  had  got  the  pick  of  the  wood,  though  what  he
had  got  could  never  be  any  good  to  him  where  the
best  of  timber  was  needed. — That,  brahmin,  is  my
similitude  for  this  first  individual.

Take  next  the  case  of  an  individual  who  for  faith’s
sake  goes  forth  .  .  .  presents,  esteem,  and  repute,  none
of  which  things  either  rejoices  his  heart  or  satisfies
his  aspirations.  He  develops  desire  for,  and  effort  to
realize,  those  other  states  of  mind  which  are  higher
and  more  excellent  than  mere  presents  and  esteem  and
repute; — he  does  not  grow  reprobate  or  slack.  He
succeeds  in  living  the  life  of  virtue,  and  his  success

10


146  XXX.  COLA-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  201.

therein  so  rejoices  his  heart  and  so  satisfies  his  aspira¬
tions  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and  disparages
others,  saying — 1  am  the  man  of  virtue,  I  am  the  man
of  fine  character,  while  these  other  Almsmen  lack  virtue
and  are  of  evil  character.  So  here  he  fails  to  develop
desire  for,  and  effort  to  realize,  those  other  [201]  states
of  mind  which  are  higher  and  more  excellent  than  a
life  of  virtue ; — and  here  he  grows  reprobate  and  slack.
He  is  like  the  man  who  went  off  with  wood  that  had
fallen  down,  though  what  he  had  got  could  never  be
any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  timber  was  needed.
— That,  brahmin,  is  my  similitude  for  this  second
individual.

Now  take  the  individual  who,  though  rejoiced  at
heart  by  his  success  in  the  life  of  virtue,  is  not  thereby
satisfied  in  his  aspirations  but  still  presses  onward  till
he  succeeds  in  attaining  rapt  concentration,  and  his
success  therein  so  rejoices  his  heart  and  so  satisfies  his
aspirations  that  thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and
disparages  others,  saying — I  am  the  man  of  sted-
fastness,  I  am  the  man  with  focussed  heart,  while  these
other  Almsmen  are  not  stedfast  but  are  all  in  a  whirl.
So  here  he  fails  to  develop  desire  for,  and  effort  to
realize,  those  other  states  of  mind  which  are  higher
and  more  excellent  than  rapt  concentration  ; — and  here
he  grows  reprobate  and  slack.  He  is  like  the  man
who  went  off  with  the  bark,  though  what  he  had  got
could  never  be  any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of
timber  was  needed. — That,  brahmin,  is  my  similitude
for  this  third  individual.

Take  now  the  individual  who,  [202]  though  rejoiced
at  heart  by  his  success  in  rapt  concentration,  is  not
thereby  satisfied  but  still  presses  onward  till  he  succeeds
in  winning  Mystic  Insight,  and  his  success  therein  so
rejoices  his  heart  and  so  satisfies  his  aspirations  that
thereby  he  becomes  puffed-up  and  disparages  others,
saying — I  know  and  see,  while  these  other  Almsmen
neither  know  nor  see.  So  here  he  fails  to  develop
desire  for,  and  effort  to  realize,  those  other  states  of
mind  which  are  higher  and  more  excellent  than  Mystic


M.  i.  203.


MORE  ABOUT  TIMBER.


147


/


\


Insight.  He  is  like  the  man  who  went  off  with  the
poorer  timber,  though  what  he  had  got  could  never  be
any  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  timber  was  needed.
— That,  brahmin,  is  my  similitude  for  this  fourth
individual.

Lastly,  take  the  individual  [203]  who,  though
rejoiced  at  heart  by  his  success  in  winning  Mystic
Insight,  is  not  thereby  satisfied  in  his  aspirations,  nor
does  it  puff  him  up  and  make  him  disparage  others.
He  develops  desire  for,  and  effort  to  realize,  those
other  states  of  mind  which  are  higher  and  more
excellent  than  Mystic  Insight;  he  is  neither  reprobate
nor  slack.

Now,  what  are  the  states  of  mind  which  are  higher
and  more  excellent  than  Mystic  Insight?

Take  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of  pleasures  of
sense,  divested  of  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy — and  then  the
Second — and  then  the  Third— [204]  and  lastly  the
Fourth  Ecstasy. — Each  of  these  four  states  of  mind
is  higher  and  more  excellent  than  Mystic  Insight.
Or,  again,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  perceptions
of  material  objects,  and  by  ceasing  from  perceptions  of
sense-reactions,  and  by  withdrawing  attention  from
multiplicity,  the  Almsman  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the
plane  of  infinity  of  space,  or,  successively,  the  planes
of  infinity  of  mind  —  or  of  Naught  —  or  of  neither
perception  nor  non-perception. — Each  of  these  planes
too  represents  a  state  of  mind  higher  and  more  excellent
than  Mystic  Insight.  Or,  lastly,  by  passing  altogether
beyond  the  plane  of  neither  perception  nor  non-percep¬
tion,  the  Almsman  enters  on,  and  dwells  in,  the  cessa¬
tion  of  all  perception  of  things  felt.  Plenitude  of
knowledge  gives  him  vision,  and  the  Cankers  within
him  are  extirpated. — This  too  is  a  state  of  mind  higher
and  more  excellent  than  Mystic  I  nsight.

Such  are  the  states  of  mind  which  are  higher  and
more  excellent  than  Mystic  Insight.

He  is  like  the  man  who,  being  in  need,  search,  and
quest  of  the  best  of  timber,  came  on  just  the  fine  up-


148


XXX.  CU^A-SAROPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  205.


standing  tree  for  his  purpose  and  cut  out  the  heart  of
the  timber,  going  off  with  this  in  the  sure  knowledge
that  he  had  got  the  heart  of  the  timber  ;  and  what  he
had  got  would  be  of  good  to  him  where  the  best  of  timber
was  needed. — That,  brahmin,  is  my  similitude  for  this
fifth  individual.

Therefore,  brahmin,  the  guerdon  of  the  higher  life
is  not  to  be  found  in  presents,  esteem,  and  repute,  nor
in  a  life  of  virtue,  nor  in  rapt  concentration,  nor  in
Mystic  Insight.  It  is  [205]  immutable  Deliverance
which  is  the  prize  and  the  heart  and  the  goal  of  the
higher  life.

Thereupon  the  brahmin  Pingala-Koccha  said  to  the
Lord  : — Excellent,  Gotama ;  most  excellent !  J  ust  as  if
a  man  should  set  upright  again  what  had  been  cast
down,  or  reveal  what  was  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man
who  had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a
lamp  into  darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might
see  the  things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a  figure,
has  the  reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine  clear !  I
come  to  Gotama  as  my  refuge,  and  to  his  Doctrine,
and  to  his  Confraternity.  I  ask  the  reverend  Gotama
to  accept  me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an  abiding
refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.


XXXI.  COEA-GOSINGA-SUTTA.

IN  GOSINGA  WOOD.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  the  Gifljak-avasatha  (brick-hall)  at  Nadika,
the  reverend  Anuruddha,  Nandiya,  and  Kimbila1
were  staying  in  Gosinga  wood  where  the  sal-trees
stand.  At  eventide  the  Lord,  rising  up  from  his
meditations,  went  to  Gosinga,  but  the  keeper,  seeing


1  These  three  were  living  together  (elsewhere)  at  III,  155.
See  also  I,  462  and  the  Vinaya  account  (S.B.E.  XX,  228)  of
Gotama’s  six  early  converts  (including  his  cousins  Ananda  and
Devadatta)  from  his  own  clan.


M.  i.  206.


IN  GOSINGA  WOOD.


149


him  approaching  at  a  distance,  said  to  the  Lord :
Don’t  go  into  this  wood,  recluse.  Three  young  men
are  living  there  for  their  souls’  good.  Do  not  disturb
them.  Hearing  the  keeper  cautioning  the  Lord,
Anuruddha  said  :  Good  keeper,  do  not  warn  off  the
Lord.  It  is  the  Lord,  our  master,  who  has  come !
Then  Anuruddha  went  and  told  the  two  others  to
come  along,  for  their  master,  the  Lord,  [206]  had  come.
So  all  three  advanced  to  meet  him, — one  relieving  him
of  his  bowl  and  robe,  while  another  set  a  seat  for  him,
and  the  third  brought  water  for  his  feet.  Sitting  down
on  the  seat  set  for  him,  the  Lord  bathed  his  feet ;
and  when,  after  due  obeisance,  the  three  had  taken
their  seats  to  one  side,  the  Lord  spoke  thus  to  the
reverend  Anuruddha : — Pray,  is  all  well  with  you
three  ?  Are  you  getting  on  all  right  ?  Is  there  no
shortage  of  alms  ?

Yes,  Lord  ;  all  is  well  with  us  ;  we  are  getting  on
all  right ;  there  is  no  shortage  of  alms.

Pray,  do  you  all  live  together  in  concord  and  amity,
without  quarrels,  in  harmony  and  unison,  viewing  one
another  with  eyes  of  affection  ?

Yes,  sir,  we  do.

How  ?

I  feel,  sir,  that  it  is  a  great  thing  for  me,  a  very  great
thing,  to  have  such  fellows  in  the  higher  life.  I
minister  to  my  two  reverend  associates — both  openly
and  in  secret — with  acts  of  love,  with  words  of  love,  and
with  thoughts  of  love.  My  yearning — and  indeed  my
practice,  too — is  to  surrender  my  own  will  and  to  live
according  to  the  will  of  my  reverend  associates.  We
have  more  than  one  body  but  only  one  will,  methinks.

And  the  venerable  Nandiya  and  the  venerable
Kimbila  answered  the  Lord’s  question  in  precisely
the  same  words.

[207]  Good,  very  good,  said  the  Lord  to  the  three,
— going  on  to  ask  whether  their  lives  were  strenuous
and  ardent  and  purged  of  self.

Yes,  sir,  was  their  answer.

How  ?


>5°


XXXI.  CULA-GOSINGA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  208.


1  Among  us,  the  first  back  from  collecting  alms  in
the  village  sets  the  seats  ready,  and  gets  water  to  drink
and  to  wash  up  with,  together  with  the  bowl  for  the
pieces.  Should  he  find  any  rice  over,  the  last  back
eats  it  if  he  wants  to,  or,  if  he  does  not  want  to,  throws  it
away  where  no  grass  grows  or  in  water  where  there  are
no  living  creatures.  He  puts  away  the  seats  and  the
water  and  the  bowl  for  the  pieces,  and  sweeps  the
refectory.  Whoso  sees  empty  the  vessels  for  water
to  drink,  or  to  wash  up  with,  or  for  ablution  after  an
occasion,  sees  to  filling  them  ;  but  if  the  weight  is  too
heavy  for  him  alone,  we  sign  with  our  hands  for  another
to  help,  without  uttering  a  word  for  this  purpose. —
This  is  how  our  lives  are  strenuous,  ardent,  and  purged
of  self.

Good,  very  good,  said  the  Lord  to  the  three.  But,
tell  me,  he  added,  in  living  lives  thus  strenuous,  ardent,
and  purged  of  self,  have  you  risen  beyond  the  ordinary
to  any  wholly  noble  excellence  of  well-being  ?

How,  sir,  could  it  be  otherwise  with  us?  For  as
long  as  we  will,  it  is  ours,  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense
and  divested  of  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  to  enter
on,  and  abide  in,  the  First — [208]  the  Second — the
Third — and  the  Fourth  Ecstasy. — Each  of  these  is,
beyond  the  ordinary,  a  wholly  noble  excellence  of  well¬
being,  each  in  turn  superior  to  its  forerunner.

Pressed  further  by  question  after  question,  the  three
told  how,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  perceptions  of
material  objects,  and  by  ceasing  from  perceptions  of
sense-reactions,  and  by  withdrawing  attention  from
multiplicity,  it  was  theirs,  for  as  long  as  they  would,  to
enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the  plane  of  infinity  of  space,
[209]  or,  successively,  the  planes  of  infinity  of  mind
— or  of  Naught — or  of  neither  perception  nor  non¬
perception  ; — or,  lastly,  by  passing  altogether  beyond
the  plane  of  neither  perception  nor  non-perception,  to
enter  on,  and  abide  in,  the  cessation  of  all  perception  of

1  For  this  paragraph,  see  S.B.E.  XIII,  325,  where  the  slightly
-  fuller  account  in  the  Vinaya  of  procedure  during  the  rainy  season
is  given.


M.  i.  210.


IN  GOSINGA  WOOD.


5


things  felt,  plenitude  of  knowledge  giving  them  vision
and  the  Cankers  within  them  being  extirpated. — Each
of  these,  said  they,  is,  beyond  the  ordinary,  a  wholly
noble  excellence  of  well-being,  each  in  turn  superior  to
its  forerunner.  But  beyond  the  last  we  discern  no
other  stage  of  well-being  higher  or  more  excellent.

Good,  very  good,  said  the  Lord  ; — higher  stage  there
is  none.  Then  he  proceeded  by  homily  to  instruct,
inform,  help  onward,  and  cheer  forward  those  three, —
after  which  he  arose  and  went  his  way.  After  they
had  escorted  the  Lord  on  his  way  and  had  come  back
again,  Nandiya[210]  and  Kimbila  said  to  Anuruddha: —
Have  we  ever  told  the  reverend  Anuruddha  of  our
reaching  this  or  that  attainment,  that  he  represented
all  this  to  the  Lord  up  to  the  extirpation  of  the
Cankers  ?

No  ;  you  never  told  me  of  your  attainments,  but  my
heart  read  the  secrets  of  your  hearts  and  saw  that  it
was  so.  Moreover,  deities  reported  it  to  me.  So  I
announced  the  fact  to  the  Lord,  when  questioned  by
him.

There  came  to  the  Lord  the  outlandish  fairy  named
Digha,1  who,  after  due  obeisance,  stood  to  one  side,
saying : — It  is  a  great  thing  for  the  Vajjians,  a  very
great  thing  for  the  Vajjian  race,  to  have  dwelling  (in
their  country)  the  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened,
and  these  three  young  men,  the  venerable  Anuruddha,
Nandiya,  and  Kimbila!  These  words  of  his  were
taken  up  in  turn  and  shouted  aloud  by  the  gods  of
earth,  by  the  gods  of  the  Four  Great  Regents,  by  the
gods  of  the  Thirty-three,  by  the  gods  of  Yama,  by  the
Tusita  gods,  by  the  Nimmiina-rati  gods,  by  the  Para-
nimmita-Vasavatti  gods,  and  lastly  by  the  train  of  gods
in  the  world  of  Brahma.2

Thus,  in  that  single  moment,  in  that  very  instant,

1  Or  perhaps  Digha  (i.e.  long)  means  a  snake.  Bu.  thinks
para-jana  (outlandish)  was  the  yakkha's  name.  The
rendering  fairy  for  yakkha  is  borrowed  from  Dialogues  III,
1 88,  note  6.

*  See  Dialogues  I,  280  for  this  list.


152


XXXI.  CULA-  GOSINGA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  21  f.


these  three  reverend  men  became  known  right  up  to
the  world  of  BrahmS.

Quite  so,  Digha;  quite  so.  If  the  family  from
which  they  went  forth  from  home  to  homelessness,  will
remember  these  three  with  believing  hearts,  then  long
will  that  family  too  enjoy  weal  and  welfare, — as  also
will  their  group  of  families,  [211]  their  village,  their
township,  their  city,  and  their  country  ;  yea,  also  the
whole  of  the  Nobles,  and  of  the  brahmins,  and  of  the
middle-classes  (vessa),  and  of  the  peasantry  (sudda) ;
yea,  the  whole  universe  with  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,
recluses  and  brahmins,  embracing  all  gods  and  man¬
kind.  See,  Digha,  how,  walking  for  the  weal  and
welfare  of  folk  and  in  compassion  for  the  world,  these
three  young  men  enure  to  the  good  and  weal  and
welfare  of  gods  and  men.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  outlandish
fairy  named  Digha  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXXII.  MAHA-GOSINGA-SUTTA.

THE  SHINING  LIGHT.

[212]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was
staying  in  Gosinga  wood  where  the  sal-trees  stand,  in
the  company  of  the  reverend  S&riputta,  the  reverend
Maha-Moggallana,  the  reverend  Maha-Kassapa,  the
reverend  Anuruddha,  the  reverend  Revata,  the
reverend  Ananda,  and  many  other  Elders  and  disciples
of  eminence.  Rising  up  at  eventide  from  his  medita¬
tions,  Maha-Moggallana  went  to  Maha-Kassapa  with
the  suggestion  that  they  should  go  to  hear  Sariputta
expound.  Accordingly,  with  Anuruddha,  these  went
off ;  and  Ananda,  seeing  their  reverences  start  off,
got  Revata  to  follow  with  him  to  hear  Sariputta.
Seeing  Ananda  and  Revata  approaching  at  a  distance,
Sariputta  bade  Ananda  draw  near,  welcoming  him  as
the  Lord’s  attendant  and  companion,  and  saying  : — Fair
is  Gosinga  wood  in  the  clear  moonlight,  with  the  sal-
trees  loaded  with  blossom,  with  heaven’s  perfumes,
methinks,  wafted  around !  What  type  of  Almsman
would  illumine  Gosinga  wood  ?

Take  [218]  an  Almsman,  answered  Ananda,  who
has  been  taught  much,  who  treasures  and  hoards  what
he  has  been  taught,  who  learns  and  knows  by  heart
the  ideas  which,  beginning  aright  and  proceeding
aright  and  ending  aright,  both  in  letter  and  in  spirit,
declare  the  higher  life  in  all  its  perfection  and  purity,
who  with  his  lips  repeats  these  ideas,  scrutinizes  them
with  his  mind,  plumbs  them  with  his  philosophy,  and
preaches  them  both  to  Almsmen  and  Almswomen  and
to  the  faithful  laity  of  both  sexes  with  an  exposition
which  is  at  once  comprehensive,  precise,  and  fluent,  so
as  to  eradicate  propensities.  —  Such  an  Almsman,
reverend  Sariputta,  would  illumine  Gosinga  wood.

i53


i54


XXXII.  maiiA-gosinga-sutta.


M.  i.  214.


Hereupon,  Sariputta  said  to  Revata  : — Ananda  has
expressed  his  view  ;  what  would  be  your  answer  to  my
question  ?

Take  an  Almsman,  answered  Revata,  who  delights
in  meditation  and  whose  delight  is  therein,  who  is
set  on  tranquillizing  his  heart  within  him,  who  scorns
not  the  Ecstasies,  who  is  endowed  with  discernment,
and  has  his  habitation  in  the  abodes  of  solitude; —
such  an  Almsman,  reverend  Sariputta,  would  illumine
Gosinga  wood.

With  the  same  question  put  to  him,  Anuruddha
made  this  answer  : — Take  an  Almsman  who  with  the
Eye  Celestial,  which  is  pure  and  excels  the  human
eye,  surveys  a  thousand  worlds,  even  as  a  man  with
eyes  to  see  might  mount  to  the  topmost  height  of
a  palace  and  survey  thence  a  thousand  concentric
distances  girdling  him  round ;  —  such  an  Alms¬
man,  reverend  Sariputta,  would  illumine  Gosinga
wood.

In  his  turn,  Mahfi-Kassapa  made  this  answer : —
[214]  Take  an  Almsman  who,  himself  living  in  the
forest,  commends  the  forest  life  to  others  ;  who,  himself
subsisting  on  alms  begged,  commends  subsistence  on
alms  to  others ;  who,  himself  clad  in  rags  from  the
dust-heap,  commends  to  others  the  wearing  of  such
rags ;  who,  himself  owning  but  three  garments,  com¬
mends  the  like  limitation  to  others ;  who,  himself
having  few  wants,  commends  the  like  temperance  to
others  ;  who,  contented  himself,  commends  content¬
ment  to  others  ;  who,  a  solitary  himself,  commends
solitude  to  others  ;  who,  himself  shunning  lay  society,
commends  the  like  reserve  to  others ;  who,  strenuous
himself,  commends  the  strenuous  life  to  others  ;  who,
virtuous  himself,  commends  the  life  of  virtue  to  others  ;
who,  having  won  rapt  concentration  for  himself,  ex¬
horts  others  to  win  it  too ;  who,  having  won  wisdom
for  himself,  exhorts  others  to  win  it  too  ;  who,  having
won  Deliverance  for  himself,  exhorts  others  to  win  it
too ;  who,  having  himself  won  the  knowledge  and  the
vision  which  Deliverance  gives,  exhorts  others  to  win


THE  SHINING  LIGHT.


155


M.  i.  215.

the  same. — Such  an  Almsman,  reverend  Sariputta,
would  illumine  Gosinga  wood.

Lastly,  turning  to  Maha-Moggallana,  Sariputta  put
the  same  question  to  him,  and  he  made  this  answer  : —
Take  two  Almsmen  who  hold  discourse  on  quintes¬
sential  Doctrine  (abhidhamma) ;  they  put  questions  one
to  the  other,  furnishing  answers  and  not  collapsing,  but
gaining  edification  by  their  talk  on  doctrine ; — such
an  Almsman,  reverend  Sariputta,  would  illumine
Gosinga  wood.

Moggallflna  added  that,  now  all  of  them  had  ex¬
pressed  their  views,  they  would  like  to  hear  Sariputta’s.

Moggallana,  said  he,  let  us  take  an  Almsman  who  is
master  of  his  heart  and  is  not  under  its  mastery.  He
chooses  the  plane  of  thought  in  which  he  wishes  [215]
to  dwell  in  the  morning,  and  in  that  precise  plane  in
the  morning  he  dwells ; — and  so  for  the  midday  and
for  the  eventide.  It  is  just  as  if  a  King  or  great  noble,
with  a  clothes-chest  filled  with  clothes  of  divers
colours,  were  in  the  morning  to  wear  the  suit  he  had
selected  for  morning  wear  ;  at  midday  to  wear  the  suit
he  had  selected  for  midday  wear ;  and  at  eventide  to
wear  the  suit  he  had  chosen  for  the  evening ; — in  just
the  same  way  the  Almsman  is  master  of  his  heart  .  .  .
for  the  eventide. — Such  an  Almsman,  reverend  Mog¬
gallana,  would  illumine  Gosinga  wood.

Now  that  we  have  all  of  us  expressed  our  views,
added  Sariputta,  let  us  go  to  the  Lord  and  lay  the
matter  before  him,  treasuring  up  as  final  what  he  may
declare.  The  others  assenting,  to  the  Lord  they  went
and  after  due  obeisance  took  their  seats  to  one  side,
while  Sariputta  described  the  visit  of  the  others  to  hear
him  expound,  and  [216]  repeated  his  question  to
Ananda  as  to  the  Brother  who  would  illumine  Gosinga
wood,  together  with  Ananda’ s  answer.

Good,  Sariputta,  very  good.  _  Ananda  has  given  the
best  answer  he  could.  For,  Ananda  is  one  who  has
been  taught  much,  who  treasures  ...  to  eradicate
propensities.

Then  Sariputta  gave  Revata’s  answer,  and  the  Lord


XXXII.  MAHA-GOSINGA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  217.


*56


said  : — Good,  S&riputta,  very  good.  Revata  has  given
the  best  answer  he  could.  For,  Revata  is  one  who  de¬
lights  in  meditation  .  .  .  abodes  of  solitude.

[217]  Next,  S&riputta  gave  Anuruddha's  answer,
and  the  Lord  said  : — Good,  Sariputta,  very  good.
Anuruddha  has  given  the  best  answer  he  could.  For,
Anuruddha  is  one  who  with  the  Eye  Celestial  .  .  .
girdling  him  round.

Hereupon,  Sariputta  gave  Maha-Kassapa’s  answer,
and  the  Lord  said  : — [218]  Good,  Sariputta,  very  good.
Kassapa  has  given  the  best  answer  he  could.  For,
Kassapa  is  one  who,  himself  living  in  the  forest,  .  .  .
exhorts  others  to  win  the  same.

Lastly,  Sariputta  gave  Maha-Moggallana’s  answer,
and  the  Lord  said : — Good,  Sariputta,  very  good.
Moggallana  has  given  the  best  answer  he  could.  For,
Moggall&na  expounds  doctrine.

Then  MahS- Moggallana  related  to  the  Lord  how,
when  they  had  all  expressed  their  several  views,  they
had  asked  Sariputta  for  his  own  answer;  and  he  re¬
peated  to  the  Lord  the  answer  Sariputta  had  given.
Said  the  Lord  : — Good,  Moggallana,  very  good.
Sariputta  has  given  the  best  answer  he  could.  For,
Sariputta  is  master  of  his  heart  .  .  .  [219]  for  the
eventide.

At  this  point  the  venerable  Sariputta  asked  who  had
spoken  well.

All  of  you,  said  the  Lord,  have  spoken  well,  each  in
his  turn.  Now  hear  from  me  what  type  of  Almsman
would  illumine  Gosinga  wood.  Take  an  Almsman
who,  after  his  meal  on  return  from  his  round  for  alms,
seats  himself,  with  legs  crossed,  with  body  upright,
with  mindfulness  on  the  alert,  and  with  the  resolve  not
to  leave  his  seat  till,  by  starving  them  of  subsistence,
his  heart  is  Delivered  from  Cankers. — Such  an  Alms¬
man,  Sariputta,  would  illumine  Gosinga  wood.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  these  reverend
ones  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  i.  220.


PASTORAL  DUTIES.


157


XXXIII.  MAHA-GOPALAKA-SUTTA.

PASTORAL  DUTIES.

[220]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once,  when  staying  at
SavatthI  in  Jeta's  grove  in  Anathapindika’s  pleasaunce,
the  Lord  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as  follows : —
Eleven  qualities  disable  a  herdsman  from  looking
after  his  herd  and  from  promoting  its  increase ;  and
here  are  the  eleven : — A  herdsman  (i)  is  ignorant  of
form,  (ii)  has  no  eye  for  marks,  (iii)  does  not  get  out
ticks,  (iv)  does  not  dress  sores,  (v)  does  not  smoke
out  (the  lairs),  (vi)  knows  nothing  either  of  fords  or
(vii)  watering-places  or  (viii)  roads  or  (ix)  pastures,
(x)  milks  dry,  and  (xi)  fails  to  tend  with  special
attention  the  bulls  that  are  the  sires  and  leaders  of
the  herd.

So  too  eleven  qualities  disable  an  Almsman  from
shewing  growth,  increase,  and  progress  in  this  Doctrine
and  Rule ;  and  here  are  the  eleven  : — An  Almsman
(i)  is  ignorant  of  form,  (ii)  .  •  .  (xi)  fails  to  tend  with
special  attention  those  of  the  Brotherhood  who  are
experienced  and  senior  Elders,  the  sires  and  leaders
of  the  Confraternity.

How  is  an  Almsman  ignorant  of  form  ? — Why,  by
not  really  comprehending  that  each  and  every  form
consists  of  the  four  prime  elements  or  is  derivative
therefrom.

How  has  an  Almsman  no  eye  for  marks  r — Why,  by
not  really  comprehending  what  marks  the  doings  of
the  fool  and  the  doings  of  the  wise.

How  does  an  Almsman  not  get  out  ticks  ?— Why,
either  by  giving  in  to  a  thought  that  has  arisen  about
sensuous  pleasures — or  about  hurt — or  about  cruelty,
or  by  giving  in  to  evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind,  as
they  arise  from  time  to  time,  [221]  instead  of  putting
them  from  him,  instead  of  discarding  and  destroying
them  so  as  to  make  them  cease  to  exist.

How  does  an  Almsman  not  dress  sores  ?— Why,
when,  seeing  with  his  eye  a  visible  shape,  he  is  taken


158  XXXIII.  MAHA-GOPALAKA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  222.

up  with  its  detailed  characteristics  and  marks,  and —
albeit,  if  he  lives  with  eye  uncontrolled,  appetite  and
depression,  together  with  evil  and  wrong  states  of  mind,
might  stream  in  upon  him — he  yet  lives  not  to  con¬
trol  his  faculty  of  sight,  keeps  no  watch  and  ward  over
it,  and  fails  to  develop  control  over  his  faculty  of
sight.  [And  so  likewise  with  the  other  five  senses.]

How  does  he  not  smoke  out  the  lairs? — Why,  by
not  expounding  to  others  the  Doctrine  which  he  has
himself  heard  and  learned.

How  does  he  know  nothing  of  fords  ? — Why,  by  not
going  from  time  to  time  to  learned  Almsmen — the
channels  of  the  word  and  the  repositories  of  the
Doctrine  and  Rule  and  text — to  ask  and  enquire  of
them  how  this  is,  or  what  that  means.  In  conse¬
quence,  they  do  not  open  up  what  is  closed  to  him,  do
not  clear  up  for  him  what  was  not  clear,  nor  remove
his  doubts  in  divers  ideas  of  perplexity.

How  does  he  know  nothing  of  watering-places  ? —
Why,  by  failing,  when  there  is  preaching  of  the  Truth-
finder’s  Doctrine  and  Rule,  to  take  in  knowledge  of
welfare  and  of  the  Doctrine,  or  to  get  the  gladness
which  the  Doctrine  brings.

How  does  he  know  nothing  of  roads  ?■


How  does  he  know  nothing  of  pastures  ? — Why,  by
having  no  real  comprehension  of  the  fourfold  muster¬
ing  up  of  mindfulness.

[222]  How  does  he  milk  dry  ? — Why,  when  believ¬
ing  householders  bring  out  and  offer  him  robes  and
the  other  requisites,  he  knows  no  bounds  in  what  he
takes.

How  does  he  fail  to  tend  with  special  attention  those
of  the  Brotherhood  who  are  experienced  and  senior
Elders,  the  sires  and  leaders  of  the  Confraternity  ? —
Why,  by  not  ministering  to  them — both  openly  and  in
secret — with  acts  of  love,  with  words  of  love,  and  with
thoughts  of  love.

Eleven  qualities  bring  the  herdsman  success  in


having  no  real  comprehension  of  the  Noble
Path.


-Why,  by
Eightfold


M.  i.  223.


PASTORAL  DUTIES.


159


looking  after  his  herd  and  in  promoting  its  increase ;
and  here  are  the  eleven  : — A  herdsman  (i)  has  know¬
ledge  of  form  (ii)  has  an  eye  for  marks,  (iii)  gets  out
ticks,  (iv)  dresses  sores,  (v)  smokes  out  the  lairs,  (vi)
knows  about  fords  and  (vii)  watering-places  and  (viii)
roads  and  (ix)  pastures,  (x)  does  not  milk  dry,  and
(xi)  tends  with  special  attention  the  bulls  that  are  the
sires  and  leaders  of  the  herd.

So  too  eleven  qualities  enable  an  Almsman  to  shew
growth,  increase,  and  progress  in  the  Doctrine  and
Rites  ;  and  here  are  the  eleven  : — An  Almsman  (i)  has
[228]  knowledge  of  form,  (ii) .  .  .  (xi)  tends  with  special
attention  those  of  the  Brotherhood  who  are  experienced
and  senior  Elders,  the  sires  and  leaders  of  the  Confra¬
ternity.  [In  each  and  every  one  of  these  respects  he  is,
and  does,  the  precise  opposite  of  the  foregoing  Brother.]

[224]  Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those
Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXXIV.  CO^A-GOPALAKA-SUTTA.

PASTORS,  GOOD  AND  BAD.

[225]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  among  the  Vajjians  at  Ukka-cela  on  the
banks  of  the  Ganges,  he  addressed  the  listening
Almsmen  as  follows  : —

In  bygone  days  an  incompetent  herdsman  of
Magadha,  in  autumn  when  it  was  the  very  last  month
of  the  rainy  season,  without  considering  either  the
hither  or  the  further  shore  of  the  Ganges,  started —
from  where  there  was  no  ford  at  all — to  drive  his
cattle  across  to  the  Videha  side.  Huddled  together  in
midstream,  they  came  there  to  trouble  and  disaster, —
all  because  of  this  incompetence  of  the  herdsman.  It
is  just  the  same  with  any  recluses  and  brahmins  who
are  wrong  about  this  world  and  the  hereafter,  wrong
about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm  of  Mara,
wrong  about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm  of


1 60  XXXIV.  CULA-GOPALAKA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  226.

Death ; — all  who  imagine  they  ought  to  hearken  to,
and  trust  in,  such  recluses  and  brahmins,  will  long
suffer  and  smart  for  it.

In  bygone  days,  a  competent  herdsman  of  Magadha,
in  autumn  when  it  was  the  very  last  month  of  the
rainy  season,  after  due  scrutiny  of  both  the  hither  and
the  further  shores  of  the  Ganges,  started — from  where
there  was  a  ford — to  drive  his  cattle  across  to  the
Videha  side.  First  of  all  he  drove  over  the  bulls,  the
sires  and  leaders  of  the  herd,  who  crossed  the  stream
to  the  further  shore  in  safety.  Next  he  drove  over  the
sturdy  steers  and  cows,  who  also  crossed  the  stream  to
the  further  shore  in  safety.  Then  he  drove  over  the
half-grown  bull-calves  and  heifers,  who  also  crossed
the  stream  to  the  further  shore  in  safety.  Then  he
drove  over  the  weaker  calves,  who  also  crossed  the
stream  to  the  further  shore  in  safety.  In  those
bygone  days  there  was  a  tiny  new-born  bull-calf,
which,  helped  along  by  the  lowing  of  its  mother,  also
crossed  the  stream  to  the  further  shore  in  safety.
And  why  ? — Because  that  [226]  competent  herdsman
of  Magadha  had  carefully  considered  both  banks  before
he  drove  his  herd  across  the  stream  of  the  Ganges.  It
is  just  the  same  with  any  recluses  or  brahmins  who
are  right  about  this  world  and  about  the  hereafter,
right  about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm  of  Mara,
right  about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm  of  Death  ;
— all  who  imagine  they  ought  to  hearken  to,  and  trust
in,  these  recluses  and  brahmins,  will  long  enjoy  weal
and  welfare.

Just  as  those  bulls,  sires  and  leaders  of  the  herd,
crossed  the  stream  of  the  Ganges  to  the  further  shore
in  safety,  so  too  those  Almsmen  who  are  Arahats,  in
whom  the  Cankers  are  no  more,  who  have  greatly
lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  have  cast  off  their
burthens,  who  have  won  their  weal,  and  who,  fettered
no  more  to  existence,  have  by  utter  knowledge  won
Deliverance, — these  have  crossed  the  stream  of  Mara
to  the  further  shore  in  safety.  Just  too  as  those  sturdy
steers  and  cows  crossed  the  stream  of  the  Ganges  in


M.  i.  227.


PASTORS,  GOOD  AND  BAD.


l6l


safety,  so  also  those  Almsmen  who,  having  destroyed
the  Five  Fetters  of  this  world,  will  be  translated  here¬
after  to  realms  from  which  they  will  never  be  reborn
to  earth, — these  too  will  cross  the  stream  of  Mara  to
the  further  shore  in  safety.  J  ust  too  as  the  half-grown
bull-calves  and  heifers  crossed  the  stream  of  the  Ganges
to  the  further  shore  in  safety,  so  also  those  Almsmen
who,  having  destroyed  the  Three  Fetters  and  having
reduced  passion,  hate  and  folly  to  a  minimum,  will
return  but  once  more  to  this  world  and  then  will  make
an  end  of  Ill ; — these  too  will  cross  the  stream  of  Mara
to  the  further  shore  in  safety.  Just  too  as  those  weaker
calves  crossed  the  stream  of  the  Ganges  to  the  further
shore  in  safety,  so  also  those  Almsmen  who,  having
destroyed  the  Three  Fetters  and  entered  the  stream,
will  escape  all  future  states  of  misery,  possess  an
assured  future,  and  are  destined  to  win  Enlightenment ;
— these  too  will  cross  the  stream  of  Mara  to  the
further  shore  in  safety.  Just  too  as  that  tiny  new-born
bull-calf,  helped  along  by  the  lowing  of  its  mother,
crossed  the  stream  of  the  Ganges  to  the  further  shore
in  safety,  so  also  those  Almsmen  who  live  in  accord
with  the  Doctrine  and  trust  therein, — these  too  will
cross  the  stream  of  Mara  to  the  further  shore  in  safety.

It  is  I,  Almsmen,  [227]  who  am  right  about  this
world  and  about  the  hereafter,  it  is  I  who  am  right
about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm  of  Mara,  it  is
I  who  am  right  about  what  is  and  what  is  not  the  realm
of  Death.  All  who  imagine  they  ought  to  hearken  to,
and  trust  in,  me,  will  long  enjoy  weal  and  welfare.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord ;  and  when  the  Blessed  One
had  thus  spoken  he  went  on,  as  the  Master,  to  say
this : —

This  world  and  worlds  beyond,  where  Mara  reigns
and  where  Death  comes  not , — this  I  knew  and preached  ;
in  utter  knowledge  and  Enlightenment,

I  oped  Nirvana's  door  of  deathless  peace.

At  last  o' er  Mara s  stream,  death's  roots  up  tom,

— rejoice  /  rejoice  /  Nirvana's  peace  is  won  !


M.  i.  228.


162  XXXV.  CU^A-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


XXXV.  COLA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.

SACCAKA’S  ONSLAUGHT.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Vesali  in  the  Gabled  Hall  in  Great  Wood,
there  was  living  in  that  city  Saccaka,  son  of  the  Jain
(woman),  a  great  controversialist,  who  gave  himself
out  as  learned  and  was  held  in  high  popular  repute.
He  used  to  go  about  Vesali,  saying  to  people  there : —
I  see  no  recluse  or  brahmin — founder  of  a  Confraternity
or  following,  with  followers  to  teach,  even  though  he
be  hailed  as  ‘  A rahat  all-enlightened’ — who,  when  taken
in  hand  by  me  point  by  point,  would  not  fall  a-
trembling  and  be  all  of  a  tremble,  and  quake,  with  the
sweat  streaming  from  his  arm  pits.  Why,  if  I  were
to  take  in  hand,  point  by  point,  an  insensate  post,
even  that  would  fall  a- trembling  and  be  all  of  a  tremble
and  quake, — let  alone  a  human  being.

Now  early  one  morning  the  reverend  Assaji,  duly
robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went  into  Vesali  for  alms.
Seeing  him  coming  some  way  off,  Saccaka,  who  was
wandering  up  and  down  the  city,  [228]  went  up  to  him
and,  after  exchange  of  civil  greetings,  stood  to  one  side,
saying  : — How  does  the  recluse  Gotama  train  his
disciples  ?  In  what  divisions  does  his  teaching  mostly
run  ?

After  this  wise  and  in  the  following  divisions,
Aggivessana1 : — Visible  shape,  Almsmen,  is  imper¬
manent  ;  feeling  is  impermanent ;  perception  is  imper¬
manent  ;  the  plastic  forces  are  impermanent ;  and
consciousness  is  impermanent.  There  is  no  Self  in
visible  shapes,  feelings,  perceptions,  plastic  forces,  or

1  The  Agnivesyayanas  were  a  brahmin  gotra ;  and  Kshatriyas
who  were  so  styled  doubtless  took  the  name  from  their  brahmin
purohitas.  Cf.  Suttas  Nos.  74  and  125  and  Anguttara  II,  180
(Aggivessa).  This  Saccaka,  who  boasts  of  success  in  controversy
with  the  great  Jain,  Ndta-putta  himself,  was  of  Jain  parentage
on  both  sides  according  to  Bu.  The  vJ.  Niganthi-putta  (the
lectio  difficilior)  indicates  that  his  mother  was  a  Jain.


M.i.  229.  SACCAKA’S  ONSLAUGHT.  1 63

consciousness.  All  plastic  forces  are  impermanent,
and  there  is  no  Self  in  any  mental  states. — After  this
wise  and  in  those  divisions  does  the  Lord’s  teaching
mostly  run.1

I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  the  recluse  Gotama  holds
this.  Perhaps,  some  time  or  other,  I  may  meet  your
worthy  Gotama  and  have  a  talk  with  him ;  I  might
wean  him  from  those  wrong  views  of  his.

Just  then  five  hundred  of  the  Licchavis  were  met
together  in  their  moot-house  on  some  business  or
other,  and  to  them  came  Saccaka,  saying : — Come
along,  good  Licchavis  ;  come  along  with  me !  To-day
I  am  going  to  have  a  talk  with  the  recluse  Gotama.  If
he  takes  up  his  stand  against  me  on  the  lines  taken  up
by  his  well-known  follower,  the  Almsman  Assaji, —
why,  point  by  point,  I  will  shake  him  to  and  fro  and
haul  him  about  even  as  a  lusty  fellow  would  tug  and
haul  about  a  fleecy  ram  he  had  got  by  its  fleece  ;  or,  as
a  lusty  brewer,  with  his  crate  plunged  into  a  deep
pool  of  water,  would  take  it  by  its  handles  and  shake
it  to  and  fro  as  he  hauled  it  about ;  or,  as  a  brewer’s
lusty  varlet  [229],  holding  his  rinser  by  its  handle,
would  shake  it  up  and  down  and  toss  it  about ; — even
so,  point  by  point,  will  I  shake  up  and  down  and  toss
about  the  recluse  Gotama  ;  or,  as  in  a  deep  tank  a  full-
grown  elephant  in  his  prime  disports  himself  as  with
what  is  called  ‘  the  merry  washing  day’,  so  will  I  disport
myself  with  the  recluse  Gotama.  So  come  along,  good
Licchavis,  come  along  with  me!  To-day  I  am  going
to  have  a  talk  with  the  recluse  Gotama.

Some  Licchavis  said  Saccaka  was  bound  to  win  ;  but
others  said  the  Lord  would  triumph  over  the  inflated
Saccaka.  So,  with  a  following  of  five  hundred
Licchavis,  Saccaka  came  to  the  Gabled  Hall  in  Great
Wood,  and,  finding  a  number  of  the  Almsmen  pacing
up  and  down  in  the  open  air,  went  up  to  them,  asking
— Where  is  the  reverend  Gotama  at  the  present  time  ?
We  should  like  to  see  him.

1  Cf.  S.B.E.  XIII,  ioo  for  this  doctrine  as  preached  to
Gotama's  first  five  converts, — of  whom  Assaji  was  one.


164


XXXV.  CULA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  230.


The  Lord,  was  the  answer,  is  in  Great  Wood,
sitting  under  a  tree  during  the  heat  of  the  day,
Aggivessana.

1  hereupon  Saccaka,  with  his  great  train  of  Licchavis,
went  into  Great  Wood  to  the  Lord,  and,  after  exchange
of  civil  greetings,  took  a  seat  to  one  side, — as  also  did
the  Licchavis,  some  after  obeisance,  some  after  greet¬
ings,  some  with  joined  palms  outstretched  in  salutation,
some  with  mention  of  their  names  and  clans,  and  others
again  in  silence.

From  his  seat  Saccaka  said  to  the  Lord  : — There  is
a  small  point  on  which  I  should  like  to  question  the
reverend  Gotama,  if  he  will  allow  me.

Ask,  Aggivessana,  [230]  whatever  you  will.

How,  then,  does  the  reverend  Gotama  train  his
disciples  ?  In  what  divisions  does  his  teaching  mostly
run?

After  this  wise  and  in  the  following  divisions,
Aggivessana :  Visible  shape,  Almsmen,  is  imper¬
manent  ;  feeling  is  impermanent ;  perception  is  imper¬
manent  ;  the  plastic  forces  are  impermanent ;  and
consciousness  is  impermanent.  There  is  no  Self  in
visible  shapes,  feelings,  perceptions,  plastic  forces,  or
consciousness.  All  plastic  forces  are  impermanent,
and  there  is  no  Self  in  any  mental  states. — After  this
wise  and  in  those  divisions  my  teaching  mostly  runs.

A  comparison  occurs  to  me,  Gotama.

Pray  let  us  hear  it,  Aggivessana.

Just  as  the  growth,  increase,  and  development  of
every  seed  and  of  all  vegetation  depends  always  on  the
earth  and  is  based  on  the  earth  ;  just  as  the  accom¬
plishment  of  all  tasks  involving  strength  depends
always  on  the  earth  and  is  based  on  the  earth  ; — just
the  same  is  it  with  an  individual’s  material  Self  (rup-
att&)  which,  because  it  is  based  on  matter,  produces
merit  or  demerit ;  and  the  same  applies  to  the  individual
Self  of  feeling,  of  perception,  of  the  plastic  forces,  and
of  consciousness.

Do  you  not  affirm;  Aggivessana,  that  your  material
shape  is  your  Self,  that  your  feelings  are  your  Self,  that


M.  i.  231.  SACCAKA’S  ONSLAUGHT.  165

your  perceptions  are  your  Self,  that  your  plastic  forces
are  your  Self,  and  that  your  consciousness  is  your
Self?

Yes,  that  is  precisely  what  I  do  affirm  ; — and  so  does
this  great  gathering.

What  will  1  this  great  gathering  ’  avail  ?  Pray,  Aggi-
vessana,  confine  yourself  to  your  own  argument.

I  affirm  that  my  material  shape  is  my  Self,  that  my
feelings  are  my  Self,  that  my  perceptions  are  my  Self,
that  my  plastic  forces  are  my  Self,  and  that  my
consciousness  is  my  Self.

Then,  Aggivessana,  I  will  here  ask  you  a  return
question,  to  which  you  will  make  such  answer  as  seems
good  to  you.  What  say  you  ? — [281]  Would  a  Noble,
being  an  anointed  King,  like  King  Pasenadi  of  Kosala
or  like  King  Ajiltasattu  of  Magadha,  the  son  of  the
Videha  lady,  have  power — within  his  own  realm — to
put  to  death  or  to  mulct  or  to  exile  those  of  his  own
subjects  who  deserve  those  respective  punishments  ?

Yes,  he  would.  Why,  even  confederations  and
federations  such  as  the  Vajjians  or  Mallians  possess
this  power — within  their  own  realms —  ;  and  of  course
a  monarch  like  King  Pasenadi  or  King  Ajatasattu,
possesses  it ;  he  would  have  this  power  and  ought  to
have  it.

What  say  you,  Aggivessana  ? — When  you  say  your
material  shape  is  your  Self,  have  you  the  power  to
make  it  become,  or  not  become,  what  you  order?1

On  this  Saccaka  became  silent.

A  second  time  the  Lord  asked  the  question,  but  still
Saccaka  was  silent.

Answer,  said  the  Lord  ;  this  is  no  time  to  be  silent.
If  thrice  a  person  is  asked  a  doctrinal  question  by  the
Truth-finder  and  answers  not,  his  skull  is  then  and
there  cloven  into  seven  pieces.

At  that  moment  (Sakka)  the  fairy  of  the  thunderbolt.


1  Cf.  Second  Sermon  to  the  Five  Brethren  at  Vinaya  Texts,
and  see  Old  Creeds  and  New  Needs  (1923),  by  Mrs.  Rhys
Davids.


1 66  XXXV.  CULA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  232.

grasping  his  iron  thunderbolt  all  afire,  all  a-glow,  all
a-blaze,  took  his  stand  in  the  air  over  Saccaka,  to
cleave  his  head  into  seven  pieces  if  he  failed  the  third
time  to  return  an  answer  to  the  Lord’s  question.  And
this  fairy  of  the  thunderbolt  was  visible  to  the
Lord  and  to  Saccaka.  In  dread  and  dismay,  with
every  hair  on  his  body  standing  erect,  Saccaka  [282] —
now  seeking  protection  and  shelter  and  refuge  with
the  Lord  ! — said  : — Let  the  reverend  Gotama  put  his
question  to  me,  and  I  will  answer  it.

What  say  you,  Aggivessana  ? — When  you  say  your
material  shape  is  your  Self,  have  you  the  power  to
make  it  become,  or  not  become,  what  you  order  ?

No.

Think  before  you  answer,  Aggivessana ;  for  your
former  utterance  does  not  accord  with  your  last,  nor
your  last  with  the  former.

[Similar  paragraphs  about  feelings,  perceptions,  the
plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.]

What  say  you,  Aggivessana  ? — Is  material  shape
permanent  or  impermanent  ?

Impermanent.

Is  that  which  is  impermanent  an  Ill  or  the  reverse  ?

An  Ill.

Is  it  proper  to  regard  what  is  impermanent  and  an
Ill  and  the  creature  of  change,  as  being  mine,  or  I,
[288]  or  my  Self?

No.

[Similar  paragraphs  about  feelings  and  the  rest.]

What  say  you,  Aggivessana? — Can  a  man  who  so
clings  to  Ill,  who  has  so  gone  over  to  Ill,  and  who  so
cleaves  to  Ill,  that  he  regards  Ill  as  mine,  I,  my  Self, —
can  he  either  of  himself  fathom  Ill  or  cast  it  out  of
his  life  ?

How  could  that  be  ?  It  is  not  the  fact.

It  is  just  like,  Aggivessana,  a  man  in  need,  search
and  quest  of  the  best  of  timber,  who  should  go  with  a
keen  axe  into  the  forest  and  there,  seeing  a  great
banana-tree,  straight  and  young  and  towering  aloft,
should  cut  its  roots  through,  chop  off  its  head,  and  then


M.  i.  234.


saccaica’s  onslaught.


167


proceed  to  unroll  the  ensheathing  leaves,  yet  should
never  come  on  even  second-rate  timber,  much  less  on
the  best  of  timber ; — just  in  the  same  way,  when  ex¬
amined  and  pressed  and  interrogated  on  your  own
statements,  you  are  found  empty  and  vain  and  faulty.
What  you  said  to  people  in  Vesali  was  this  : — I  see  no
recluse  or  brahmin — founder  of  a  Confraternity  or  fol¬
lowing,  with  followers  to  teach,  even  though  he  be
hailed  as  *  Arahat  all-enlightened’ — who,  when  taken  in
hand  by  me  point  by  point,  would  not  fall  a-trembling
and  be  all  of  a  tremble  and  quake,  with  the  sweat
streaming  from  his  arm-pits.  Why,  (you  went  on  to
observe)  if  I  were  to  take  in  hand,  point  by  point,  an
insensate  post,  even  that  would  fall  a-trembling  and  be
all  of  a  tremble  and  quake, — let  alone  a  human  being.
It  is  from  your  brow  that  the  sweat  has  streamed
down  your  robe  on  to  the  ground ;  while  I  have  no
sweat  at  all  on  my  body.  And  so  saying  the  Lord
bared  his  golden  body  to  the  gaze  of  the  assemblage.

[234]  At  these  words  Saccaka  sat  silent  and  upset,
with  his  shoulders  hunched  up  and  with  his  eyes  down¬
cast,  much  exercised  in  his  mind  but  finding  no  words
to  utter.

Seeing  Saccaka’s  sorry  plight,  the  Licchavi  Dum-
mukha  said  to  the  Lord  that  a  comparison  occurred  to
him,  and,  being  bidden  to  state  it,  said  : — It  is  just  like
a  crab  in  a  pond  near  a  village  or  township,  which  is
fished  out  on  to  dry  land  by  the  neighbouring  boys  or
girls  who  with  sticks  and  stones  break  and  smash  and
pound  each  successive  claw  that  the  crab  thrusts  forth
in  turn,  until,  when  all  his  claws  have  been  broken,
smashed  and  pounded,  the  crab  is  unable  to  get  to  his
pond  as  he  used.  Just  in  the  same  way  the  Lord  has
broken,  smashed  and  pounded  Saccaka’s  every  succes¬
sive  trick,  wriggle,  and  squirm  until  Saccaka  can  never
again  come  to  the  Lord  as  a  controversialist.

Go  away,  Dummukha !  go  away !  I  am  conferring
with  Gotama,  not  with  you,  said  Saccaka, — who  went
on  to  say  to  the  Lord  : — Let  us  pass  from  what  I,  with
many  other  recluses  and  brahmins,  have  said  on  these


i68


XXXV.  CU^A-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  235.


lines, — all  so  much  idle  chatter,  methinks.  In  what
respects,  now,  does  a  disciple  of  yours  carry  out  your
doctrines  and  practise  your  teaching,  living  by  the
Doctrine  of  his  master  and  of  no  one  else,  beyond
doubts  and  perplexities,  in  confident  assurance  ?

Take  the  case,  Aggivessana,  of  a  disciple  of  mine
who  sees  in  the  plenitude  of  knowledge  and  reality
that  no  material  shape  whatsoever, — past,  present,  or
future,  internal  or  external,  gross  or  delicate,  lowly  or
choice,  far  or  near — is  mine,  or  I,  or  my  Self ;  and
[285]  who  sees  the  like  concerning  feelings — percep¬
tions — the  plastic  forces — and  consciousness.  These
are  the  respects  in  which  a  disciple  of  mine  carries  out
my  doctrines  and  practises  my  teaching,  living  by  the
Doctrine  of  his  master  and  of  no  one  else,  beyond
doubts  and  perplexities,  in  confident  assurance.

In  what  respects  does  an  Almsman  become  an
Arahat, — in  whom  the  Cankers  are  no  more,  who  has
greatly  lived,  who  has  shed  his  burthen  and  won  his
weal,  who  is  no  longer  fettered  to  existence,  and  who
by  utter  knowledge  nas  won  Deliverance?

Take  the  case  of  a  Brother  who,  from  seeing,  in  the
plenitude  of  knowledge  and  reality,  that  no  material
shape — or  feeling  and  so  forth — is  mine  or  I,  or  my
Self,  becomes  Delivered  in  absolute  emancipation. —
These  are  the  respects  in  which  an  Almsman  becomes
an  Arahat  .  .  .  has  won  Deliverance.  The  Almsman
whose  heart  is  thus  Delivered  possesses  three  excel¬
lences,— excellence  in  vision,  excellence  in  practice,
excellence  in  Deliverance.  So  Delivered,  he  pays  to
the  Truth-finder  alone  honour  and  reverence,  devotion
and  worship,  saying  : — Enlightened  himself,  the  Lord
preaches  the  doctrine  for  enlightenment.  Self-con¬
trolled  himself,  the  Lord  preaches  the  doctrine  for  self-
control.  At  peace  himself,  the  Lord  preaches  the
doctrine  for  finding  peace.  Having  crossed  the  flood
himself,  he  preaches  the  doctrine  for  crossing.  Winner
of  Nirvana  for  himself,  he  preaches  to  others  the
doctrine  for  winning  Nirvana.

This  said,  Saccaka  said  to  the  Lord  : — [236]  I  was


M.  L  237.


saccaka’s  onslaught.


169


arrogant  and  presumptuous  to  imagine  that,  point  by
point,  I  could  cope  with  the  reverend  Gotama.  A  man
might  perhaps  face  with  impunity  a  rutting  elephant, —
but  not  the  reverend  Gotama.  With  impunity  perhaps
a  man  might  face  a  blazing  conflagration, — but  not  the
reverend  Gotama.  With  impunity  perhaps  a  man
might  face  a  deadly  venomous  snake, — but  not  the
reverend  Gotama.  Yes ;  I  was  arrogant  and  pre¬
sumptuous  to  imagine  that,  point  by  point,  I  could
cope  with  the  reverend  Gotama, — who,  I  beg,  will,  with
the  Confraternity,  take  his  meal  with  me  to-morrow.

By  his  silence  the  Lord  intimated  his  assent,  where¬
upon  Saccaka  informed  the  Licchavis  and  asked  them
to  make  due  provision.  Accordingly,  when  night  had
passed  away,  they  furnished  him  with  five  hundred
cauldrons  of  boiled  rice  as  a  gift ;  and  Saccaka  made
ready  in  his  pleasaunce  an  excellent  meal  of  food  both
hard  and  soft,  and  sent  word  to  the  Lord  that  the
repast  was  now  ready.  Thither  in  the  morning  came
the  Lord,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  and  sat  down
on  the  seat  set  for  him,  he  and  the  Confraternity.
Then  with  his  own  hands  Saccaka  served  the  Confra¬
ternity,  headed  by  the  Buddha,  with  that  excellent
meal  without  stint  till  all  had  eaten  their  fill,  after
which  he  sat  himself  down  on  a  lower  seat  to  one  side
of  the  Lord,  saying  : — May  the  merit  of  this  gift,  and  of
this  field  for  reaping  merit,  bring  welfare  to  the  donors!

Unto  them,  Aggivessana,  shall  accrue  whatsoever
merit  attaches  to  a  recipient  of  gifts  like  yourself —
not  free  from  passion,  hate,  and  delusion.  [287]
Unto  thee  shall  accrue  whatsoever  merit  attaches  to  a
recipient  like  myself  who  am  free  from  passion,  hate,
and  delusion.


170


XXXVI.  MAHA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  238


XXXVI.  MAHA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.

SACCAKA  AGAIN.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Vesali  in  the  Gabled  Hall  in  Great  Wood,
he  had  dressed  himself  early  and  was  minded  to  go,
duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  into  the  city  for  alms,
when  Saccaka,  son  of  the  Jain  (woman),  came,  in  the
course  of  his  wanderings,  to  the  Gabled  Hall  in  Great
Wood.  Having  seen  him  coming  some  way  off,  the-
venerable  Ananda  had  said  to  the  Lord : — Sir,  here
comes  Saccaka,  son  of  the  Jain  (woman),  that  great
controversialist,  who  gives  himself  out  as  learned  and
is  held  in  high  popular  repute  ;  his  aim  is  to  discredit
the  Buddha  and  the  Doctrine  and  the  Confraternity.
Pray,  sir,  be  so  good  as  to  be  seated  awhile.  The
Lord  sat  down  on  the  seat  set  for  him,  and  up  came
Saccaka,  who,  after  civil  greetings,  took  his  seat  to  one
side,  saying  to  the  Lord : — There  are  some  recluses
and  brahmins,  Gotama,  who  are  always  schooling  their
bodies,  but  not  their  minds,— experiencing  feelings  of
bodily  pain,  which  may  paralyse  the  legs,  or  burst  the
heart,  or  make  warm  blood  gush  from  the  mouth,  or
render  men  demented  and  distraught.  Here  we  have
the  mind  conforming  to  the  body  and  being  dominated
by  the  body.  And  why  ? — [238]  Because  the  mind  is
left  unschooled.  Or  again  tnere  are  some  recluses  and
brahmins  who  are  always  schooling  their  minds,  but
not  their  bodies, — experiencing  feelings  of  mental
pain,  which  may  paralyse  .  .  .  and  distraught.  Here
we  have  the  body  conforming  to  the  mind  and  being
dominated  by  the  mind.  And  why  ? — Because  the
body  is  left  unschooled.  My  belief  is  that  the  reverend
Gotama’s  disciples  are  always  schooling  their  minds,
but  not  their  bodies.

W’hat  have  you  heard  about  schooling  the  body  ?

For  example,  Nanda  Vaccha,  Kisa  Sankicca,  and
Makkhali  Gosala; — all  the  three  of  them  go  naked,
flout  life’s  decencies,  lick  their  hands  after  meals,  never


M.i.  239.  SACCAKA  AGAIN.  17I

heed  when  folk  call  to  them  to  come  or  to  stop,  never
accept  food  brought  to  them  before  their  rounds  or
cooked  expressly  for  them,  never  accept  an  invitation,
never  receive  food  direct  from  pot  or  pan  or  within  the
threshold  or  among  the  faggots  or  pestles,  never  from
(one  only)  of  two  people  messing  together,  never  from
a  pregnant  woman  or  a  nursing  motner  or  a  woman  in
coitu,  never  from  gleanings  (in  time  of  famine)  nor
from  where  a  dog  is  ready  at  hand  or  where  (hungry)
flies  congregate,  never  touch  flesh  or  fish  or  spirits  or
strong  drink  or  brews  of  grain  ;  or  they  either  visit
only  one  house  a  day  and  there  take  only  one  morsel ;
or  they  visit  but  two  or  (up  to  not  more  than)  seven
houses  a  day,  and  take  at  each  only  two  or  (up  to  not
more  than)  seven  morsels ;  or  they  live  on  a  single
saucer  of  food  a  day,  or  on  two,  or  on  (up  to  not  more
than)  seven  saucers ;  or  they  have  but  one  meal  a  day,
or  one  every  two  days,  or  (so  on,  up  to)  every  seven
days,  or  only  once  a  fortnight, — on  a  rigid  scale  of
rationing.

And  do  they  get  along  on  it,  Aggivessana  ?

No,  Gotama.  At  times  they  partake  of  very  good
food  both  hard  and  soft,  with  very  good  curries  and
very  good  drinks,  which  strengthen  their  bodies  and
build  them  up  and  put  fat  on  them.

So  they  revert  subsequently  to  what  they  had
eschewed  before,  and  so  there  is  this  ebb  and  flow  in
bulk.  What  have  you  heard  about  schooling  the
mind  ?

But  concerning  schooling  of  the  mind  [239]  Saccaka
did  not  succeed  in  answering  the  Lord’s  question.

Then  said  the  Lord  to  Saccaka : — The  schooling  of
the  body  to  which  you  referred  just  now,  is  no  school¬
ing  of  the  body  according  to  doctrine  in  the  Rule  of
the  Noble.  You  did  not  understand  the  schooling  of
the  body  ;  much  less  can  you  know  the  schooling  of  the
mind.  Hear  now  how  body  and  mind,  respectively,
either  go  unschooled,  or  are  schooled.  Pay  attention
and  1  will  speak.  Then  to  the  assenting  Saccaka  the
Lord  spoke  as  follows  :


172


XXXVI.  MAHA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  240.


First,  as  to  the  unschooled  body  and  mind.  Take
an  ordinary  uninstructed  man  who  has  a  pleasant
feeling,  so  that  he  gets  a  passion  for  things  pleasant
and  is  passionately  attached  to  them.  Later,  that
pleasant  feeling  passes  ;  and  with  its  passing  there
arises  an  unpleasant  feeling,  at  the  advent  of  which  he
grieves,  mourns,  laments,  beats  his  breast  and  gets
distraught.  The  pleasant  feeling  takes  possession  of
his  mind,  because  his  body  is  not  schooled ;  it  is
because  his  mind  is  not  schooled  that  the  unpleasant
feeling  takes  possession  of  it ; — and  the  man  to  whom
both  these  things  happen  is  neither  schooled  in  body
nor  schooled  in  mind.

Next,  as  to  the  schooled  body  and  mind.  Take  an
instructed  disciple  of  the  Noble  who  has  a  pleasant
feeling  but  gets  therefrom  no  passion  for  things
pleasant  nor  is  passionately  attached  to  them.  Later,
that  pleasant  feeling  passes  ;  and  with  its  passing  there
arises  an  unpleasant  feeling,  but  at  its  advent  he  does
not  grieve,  mourn,  lament,  beat  his  breast,  or  get  dis¬
traught.  It  is  because  his  body  is  schooled  that  the
pleasant  feeling  does  not  take  possession  of  his  mind  ;
it  is  because  his  mind  is  schooled  that  the  unpleasant
feeling  does  not  take  possession  of  it  ; — and  the  man
to  whom  these  two  things  happen  [240]  is  both
schooled  in  body  and  schooled  in  mind.

The  reverend  Gotama,  I  feel  sure,  is  schooled  both
in  body  and  in  mind.

Offensive  though  your  insinuation  undoubtedly  is,
Aggivessana,  nevertheless  I  will  give  you  an  answer. —
From  the  day  I  cut  off  my  hair  and  beard  and  donned
the  yellow  robes  to  pass  from  home  to  homelessness
as  a  Pilgrim,  it  is  simply  not  the  fact  that  either  any
pleasant  or  any  unpleasant  feeling  could  take  possession
of  my  mind.

Could  it  perhaps  be  that  you  have  never  had  feelings,
either  pleasant  or  unpleasant,  which  were  such  as  to
take  possession  of  your  mind  ?

How  could  there  be  no  such  feelings  ?  In  the  days
before  my  Enlightenment,  when  as  yet  I  was  but  a


M.  i.  241.


SACCAKA  AGAIN.


173


Bodhisatta  without  fullest  Enlightenment,  I  bethought
me  that — A  hole-and-corner  life  is  all  a  home  can  give,
whereas  Pilgrimage  is  in  the  open  ;  it  is  hard  for  a
home-keeping  man  to  live  the  higher  life  in  all  its  full
completeness  and  full  purity  and  perfection  ;  what  if  I
were  to  cut  off  hair  and  beard,  don  the  yellow  robes,
and  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim  ?
Then  came  a  time  when  I — being  quite  young,  with  a
wealth  of  coal-black  hair  untouched  by  grey  .  .  .  (etc.,
as  in  Sutta  26)  .  .  .  needing  nothing  further  for  my
striving.

Howbeit,  there  flashed  in  on  me  spontaneously  three
allegories,  unknown  till  then  : —

It  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  green  sappy  stick  in  the
water,  and  a  man  came  along  with  his  drill-stick,  set
on  lighting  a  fire  and  making  a  blaze.  Do  you  think
he  could  succeed  by  rubbing  with  his  drill-stick  that
green  sappy  stick  from  the  water  ?

[241]  Toil  and  moil  as  he  may,  he  couldn’t; —
because  the  stick  is  green  and  sappy  in  itself,  and
moreover  had  been  in  the  water.

It  is  just  the  same  with  all  recluses  or  brahmins
whose  life  is  not  lived  aloof  from  pleasures  of  sense  in
the  matter  of  their  bodies,  and  who  have  not  inwardly
discarded  and  rightly  quelled  the  appetite,  taste,  in¬
fatuation,  thirst,  and  feverish  longing  for  pleasures  of
sense; — they  are  alike  incapable  of  understanding,
vision,  and  the  plenitude  of  Enlightenment,  whether
or  not  paroxysms  of  unpleasant,  acute,  and  painful
feelings  assail  them.  This  was  the  first  allegory,  un¬
known  till  then,  which  flashed  in  on  me.

The  second  allegory  was  of  a  green  sappy  stick
lying  on  dry  land.  Do  you  think  the  man  could  light
his  fire  with  that  ?

Toil  and  moil  as  he  may,  he  couldn’t; — because,
though  the  stick  had  been  thrown  not  into  the
water  but  on  dry  land,  yet  it  is  green  and  sappy  in
itself.

It  is  just  the  same  with  all  recluses  or  brahmins
whose  life  is  not  lived  aloof  .  .  .  painful  feelings  assail


174  xxxvi.  maha-saccaka-sutta.  M.i.  24:

them.  This  was  the  second  allegory,  till  then  un¬
known,  which  flashed  in  on  me.

The  third  allegory  was  [242]  of  a  dry  stick,  with  the
sap  out  of  it,  lying  on  dry  ground,  with  a  man  coming
along  with  his  drill-stick,  bent  on  lighting  a  fire  and
making  a  blaze.  Do  you  think  he  could  light  his  fire
with  that  dry  stick  ?

Yes,  he  could  ; — because  the  stick  is  dry  and  sapless
in  itself  and  moreover  had  not  been  in  the  water  but
was  lying  on  dry  ground.

It  is  just  the  same  with  all  recluses  or  brahmins
whose  life  is  lived  aloof  from  pleasures  of  sense  in  the
matter  of  their  bodies,  and  who  have  inwardly  dis¬
carded  and  rightly  quelled  the  appetite,  taste,  infatua¬
tion,  thirst,  and  feverish  longing  for  pleasures  of
sense; — they  are  alike  capable  of  understanding,  vision,
and  the  plenitude  of  Enlightenment,  whether  or  not
paroxysms  of  unpleasant,  acute  and  painful  feelings
assail  them.  This  was  the  third  and  last  of  the  three
allegories,  till  then  unknown,  which  flashed  in  on  me.

Thought  I  then  to  myself : — Come,  let  me,  with
teeth  clenched  and  with  tongue  pressed  against  my
palate,  by  sheer  force  of  mind  restrain,  coerce,  and
dominate  my  heart.  And  this  I  did,  till  the  sweat
streamed  from  my  armpits.  Just  as  a  strong  man,
taking  a  weaker  man  by  the  head  or  shoulders,  re¬
strains  and  coerces  and  dominates  him,  even  so  did  I,
with  teeth  clenched  and  with  tongue  pressed  against
my  palate,  by  sheer  force  of  mind  restrain,  coerce,  and
dominate  my  heart,  till  the  sweat  streamed  from  my
armpits.  Resolute  grew  my  perseverance  which  never
quailed ;  there  was  established  in  me  a  mindfulness
which  knew  no  distraction, — though  my  body  was
[243]  sore  distressed  and  afflicted,  because  I  was
harassed  by  these  struggles  as  I  painfully  struggled
on. — Yet  even  such  unpleasant  feelings  as  then  arose
did  not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

Thought  1  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  pursue  the
Ecstasy  that  comes  from  not  breathing.  So  I  stopped
breathing,  in  or  out,  through  mouth  and  nose  ;  and


M.  i.  244.


SACCAKA  AGAIN.


175


then  great  was  the  noise  of  the  air  as  it  passed  through
my  ear-holes,  like  the  blast  from  a  smith’s  bellows.
Resolute  grew  my  perseverance  .  .  .  did  not  take
possession  of  my  mind.

Thought  I  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  pursue  further
the  Ecstasy  that  comes  from  not  breathing.  So  I
,  stopped  breathing,  in  or  out,  through  mouth  and  nose
and  ears ;  and  then  violent  winds  wracked  my  head,
as  though  a  strong  man  were  boring  into  my  skull
with  the  point  of  a  sword.  Resolute  grew  my  perse¬
verance  .  .  .  did  not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

Thought  I  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  pursue  still
further  the  Ecstasy  that  comes  from  not  breathing.  So
I  kept  on  stopping  all  breathing,  in  or  out,  through
mouth  and  nose  and  ears ;  and  then  violent  pains
attacked  my  head,  as  though  a  strong  man  [244]  had
twisted  a  leather  thong  round  my  head.  Resolute  grew
my  perseverance  . . .  did  not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

Thought  I  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  go  on  pursuing
the  Ecstasy  that  comes  from  not  breathing.  So  I  kept
on  stopping  breathing,  in  or  out,  through  mouth  and
nose  and  ears  ;  and  then  violent  winds  pierced  my  in¬
wards  through  and  through, — as  though  an  expert
butcher  or  his  man  were  hacking  my  inwards  with
sharp  cleavers.  Resolute  grew  my  perseverance  .  .  .
did  not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

Thought  I  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  still  go  on
pursuing  the  Ecstasy  that  comes  from  not  breathing.
So  I  kept  on  stopping  all  breathing,  in  or  out,  through
mouth  and  nose  and  ears  ;  and  then  there  was  a  violent
burning  within  me, — as  though  two  strong  men,  taking
a  weaker  man  by  both  arms,  were  to  roast  and  burn
him  up  in  a  fiery  furnace.  Resolute  grew  my  perse¬
verance  .  .  .  did  not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

[245]  At  the  sight  of  me,  some  gods  said  I  was
dead ;  others  said  I  was  not  dead  but  dying ;  while
others  again  said  that  I  was  an  Arahat  and  that
Arahats1  lived  like  that !

1  Sec  p.  2  (n.)  and  Dial.  Ill,  3-6  for  the  history  and  use  of  this  pre-
Buddhist  term,  adopted  with  changed  connotation  by  Gotarna


176


XXXVI.  MAHA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  246-


Thought  I  to  myself : — Come,  let  me  proceed  to  cut
off  food  altogether.  Hereupon,  gods  came  to  me
begging  me  not  so  to  do,  or  else  they  would  feed  me
through  the  pores  with  heavenly  essences  which  would
keep  me  alive  If,  thought  I  to  myself,  while  I  profess
to  be  dispensing  with  all  food  whatsoever,  these  gods
should  feed  me  all  the  time  through  the  pores  with
heavenly  essences  which  keep  me  alive,  that  would  be
imposture  on  my  part.  So  I  rejected  their  offers,
peremptorily.

Thought  I  to  myself  : — Come,  let  me  restrict  myself
to  little  tiny  morsels  of  food  at  a  time,  namely  the
liquor  in  which  beans  or  vetches,  peas  or  pulse,  have
been  boiled.  I  rationed  myself  accordingly,  and  my
body  grew  emaciated  in  the  extreme.  My  members,
great  and  small,  grew  like  the  knotted  joints  of  withered
creepers  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  12)  .  .  .  [246]  rotted
at  their  roots  ;  and  all  because  I  ate  so  little.

At  the  sight  of  me,  some  men  said  I  was  black  ;
others  said  I  was  brown  ;  while  others  again  said  I  was
neither  black  nor  brown,  but  dusky  like  a  fish.  To
such  a  sorry  pass  had  my  pure  clear  complexion  been
reduced, — all  because  I  ate  so  little.

Thought  I  to  myself : — Of  all  the  spasms  of  acute
and  severe  pain  that  have  been  undergone  through  the
ages  past — or  will  be  undergone  through  the  ages  to
come — or  are  now  being  undergone — by  recluses  or
brahmins,  mine  are  pre-eminent ;  nor  is  there  aught
worse  beyond.  Yet,  with  all  these  severe  austerities,
I  fail  to  transcend  ordinary  human  limits  and  to  rise  to
the  heights  of  noblest  understanding  and  vision.
Could  there  be  another  path  to  Enlightenment  ?

A  memory  came  to  me  of  how  once,  seated  in  the
cool  shade  of  a  rose-apple  tree  on  the  lands  of  my
father  the  Sakyan,1  I,  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense


(cf.  Suttas  26  and  27).  The  passage  here  is  a  significant  instance
of  the  vogue  of  the  term,  before  Buddhism,  to  indicate  a  man  of
worth,  and  therefore  an  ascetic  Saint.

1  The  amplified  legend  of  the  infant  Gotama’s  Ecstasy  will  be
found  at  Jataka  I,  57.


M.  i.  247.


SACCAKA  AGAIN.


177


and  of  wrong  states  of  mind,  entered  upon,  and  abode
in,  the  First  Ecstasy,  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction, —
a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from
observation  and  reflection.  Could  this  be  the  path  to
Enlightenment  ?  In  prompt  response  to  this  memory,
my  consciousness  told  me  that  here  lay  the  true  path
to  Enlightenment.

Thought  I  to  myself :  —[247]  Am  1  afraid  of  a  bliss
which  eschews  pleasures  of  sense  and  wrong  states  of
mind  ? — And  my  heart  told  me  I  was  not  afraid.

Thought  I  to  myself : — It  is  no  easy  matter  to  attain
that  bliss  with  a  body  so  emaciated.  Come,  let  me
take  some  solid  food,  rice  and  junket ;  and  this  I  ate
accordingly.

With  me  at  the  time  there  were  the  Five  Almsmen,
looking  for  me  to  announce  to  them  what  truth  I
attained ;  but  when  I  took  the  rice  and  junket,  they
left  me  in  disgust,  saying  that  luxuriousness  had
claimed  me  and  that,  abandoning  the  struggle,  I  had
reverted  to  luxuriousness.1

Having  thus  eaten  solid  food  and  regained  strength,
I  entered  on,  and  abode  in,  the  First  Ecstasy. — Yet,
such  pleasant  feelings  as  then  arose  in  me  did  not  take
possession  of  my  mind  ;  nor  did  they  as  I  successively
entered  on,  and  abode  in,  the  Second,  Third,  and
Fourth  Ecstasies.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified,
clean  and  cleansed  of  things  impure,  tempered  and  apt
to  serve,  stedfast  and  immutable,— [248]  it  was  thus
that  I  applied  my  heart  to  the  knowledge  which  re¬
called  my  earlier  existences.  I  called  to  mind  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Sutta  4)  .  .  .  purged  of  Self. — Yet,  such
pleasant  feelings  as  then  arose  within  me  did  not  take
possession  of  my  mind.

That  same  stedfast  heart  I  now  applied  to  know¬
ledge  of  the  passage  hence  and  re-appearance  else-

*  Here,  as  against  Sutta  26,  the  Five  Brethren  pass  their
stricture  on  Gotama  (and  indeed  here  actually  quit  him  in
disgust),  not  after  his  attainment  of  Buddhahood,  but  before  the
Four  Ecstasies.


12


i  ;8


XXXVI.  MAHA-SACCAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  249.


where  of  other  creatures.  With  the  Eye  Celestial  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Suita  4)  .  .  .  [249]  purged  of  Self. — Yet,
such  pleasant  feelings  as  then  arose  within  me  did  not
take  possession  of  my  mind.

That  same  stedfast  heart  I  next  applied  to  know¬
ledge  of  the  eradication  of  Cankers.  I  comprehended
.  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Suita  4)  .  .  .  purged  of  Self. —
Yet,  such  pleasant  feelings  as  then  arose  within  me  did
not  take  possession  of  my  mind.

I  am  aware,  Aggivessana,  that,  when  I  preach  the
Doctrine  to  some  hundreds  of  people,  each  individual
imagines  I  am  preaching  for  his  separate  behoof.  But
that  is  not  the  way  to  look  at  it,  when  the  Truth-
finder  is  preaching  the  Doctrine  to  people  for  general
edification.  At  the  close  of  my  discourse,  I  still  and
compose  my  heart,  focus  and  concentrate  it,  with  all
the  marks  of  that  precedent  rapture  of  concentration  in
which  I  always  dwell,  unceasingly.

That  may  be  believed  for  the  recluse  Gotama,  as  an
Arahat  all-enlightened.  But,  does  he  admit  that  he
ever  sleeps  in  the  daytime  ?

1  am  aware  that,  in  the  last  month  of  the  hot  season,
before  the  rains  set  in,  when,  after  my  meal,  I  am
back  from  my  round  for  alms,  my  robe  is  folded  in  four
for  me  and  I,  lying  on  my  right  side,  pass  into
slumber, — but  in  full  mindfulness,  and  fully  alive  to
what  I  am  doing.

This  is  what  some  recluses  and  brahmins  call  stupor.

[250]  So  far,  Aggivessana.  stupor  is  neither  present
nor  absent.  Now  hear  how  there  is,  and  how  there  is
not,  real  stupor.  Give  me  your  attention  and  I  will
speak.

Certainly,  said  Saccaka  in  assent.

The  Lord  said : — The  man  who  has  not  put  from
him  the  Cankers— which  are  of  impurity,  lead  to  re¬
birth,  entail  suffering,  ripen  unto  sorrow,  and  leave  a
heritage  of  birth,  decay,  and  death, — this  is  the  man
who  is  in  a  real  stupor ;  for  his  stupor  comes  from  not
being  quit  of  the  Cankers.  But  the  man  who  is  quit
of  them,  is  in  no  stupor,  because  he  is  beyond  stupor


M.  i.  251.


SACCAKA  AGAIN.


179


by  being  quit  of  the  Cankers.  In  the  Truth-finder,
Aggivessana,  all  these  Cankers  have  been  put  away,
have  been  grubbed  up  by  the  roots,  like  a  bare  cleared
site  where  once  a  palm-tree  grew,  things  that  once
have  been  and  now  can  be  no  more.  Just  as  a  palm
with  its  head  chopped  off  is  incapable  of  growing,  so
in  the  Truth-finder  all  the  Cankers — which  are  of  im¬
purity,  lead  to  re-birth,  entail  suffering,  ripen  unto
sorrow,  and  leave  a  heritage  of  birth,  decay,  and  death —
have  been  grubbed  up  by  the  roots,  like  a  bare  cleared
site  where  once  a  palm-tree  grew,  things  that  once
have  been  and  now  can  be  no  more.

After  these  words,  Saccaka,  son  of  the  Jain  (woman),
said  to  the  Lord  : — It  is  wonderful,  it  is  marvellous,
how,  while  you  were  being  spoken  to  so  offensively
and  with  such  insinuations,  you  have  not  changed
colour  nor  has  your  countenance  altered  ; — quite  like
an  Arahat  all-enlightened.  I  am  aware,  Gotama,  that
I  have  taken  in  hand,  point  by  point,  Makkhali
Gosala,  Ajita  Kesambala,  Pakudha  Kaccayana,  Safijaya
Belat$hi-putta,  and  Nata-putta  the  Jain ;  and  each  in
turn,  being  taken  in  hand  by  me  point  by  point,  [251]
wandered  off  from  one  thing  to  another,  switching  the
discussion  on  to  something  else,  exhibiting  annoyance,
bad  temper,  and  resentment.  But  the  reverend
Gotama,  while  he  was  being  spoken  to  so  offensively
and  with  such  insinuations,  never  changed  colour  nor
did  his  countenance  alter ; — quite  like  an  Arahat  all-
enlightened.

And  now,  he  added,  I  ought  to  go ;  for,  I  have
much  to  do  and  attend  to.

At  your  good  pleasure,  Aggivessana.

Having  expressed  his  gratification  and  thanks  for
what  he  had  heard,  Saccaka  got  up  and  went
his  way.


XXXVII.  COLA-TANHA-SANKHAYA-
SUTTA.

DELIVERANCE  FROM  CRAVINGS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SSvatthl  in  the  Old  Pleasaunce  in  the
palace  of  Migara’s  Mother,  there  came  to  him  Sakka,
king  of  gods,  who,  taking  a  seat  to  one  side  after
salutations,  asked  how,  briefly,  an  Almsman  became
Delivered  by  the  extirpation  of  cravings,  so  as  to
become  consummate  in  perfection,  consummate  in  his
union  with  peace,  consummate  in  the  higher  life,  con¬
summate  in  his  bourne,1  foremost  among  gods  and
men.

Take  the  case,  king  of  gods,  of  an  Almsman  who
has  been  taught  that  there  should  never  be  any  in¬
clination  towards  any  mental  state  whatsoever.  So
taught,  he  apprehends  all  such  mental  states,  and,  by
apprehending,  comprehends  them,  and,  by  compre¬
hending,  views  every  feeling  which  he  experiences — be
it  pleasant,  or  unpleasant  or  neither — with  a  sense  of  its
impermanence,  without  passion  for  them,  with  an  eye
to  their  cessation,  and  with  an  eye  to  renouncing  them
all,  so  that,  in  the  result,  he  clings  on  to  nothing  in  the
world  and  thereby  is  undismayed,  and,  being  undis¬
mayed,  individually  wins  Nirvana  for  himself  [252] —
with  the  conviction  that  for  him  re-birth  is  no  more ;
that  he  has  greatly  lived  ;  that  his  task  is  done ;  and
that  there  is  no  more  of  what  he  has  been.

That,  king  of  gods,  is  how,  briefly,  an  Almsman


1  Cf.  Digba  II,  283  for  the  like  question  by  Sakka,  amplified  at
Saftyutta  III,  13  by  the  five  words  which  conclude  this  sentence
(words  usually  reserved  to  describe  the  TathSgata,  or  Truth-
finder  as  a  supreme  Buddha).

180


M.  L  253.


DELIVERANCE  FROM  CRAVINGS.


l8l


becomes  Delivered  .  .  .  foremost  among  gods  and
men.

Hereupon,  expressing  satisfaction  and  gratitude  for
what  he  had  heard,  Sakka,  king  of  gods,  saluted  the
Lord  with  deep  reverence  and  vanished  then  and
there.

The  reverend  Maha-Moggallana,  who  at  the  time
was  seated  near  the  Lord,  inwardly  wondered  whether
or  not  that  fairy,  in  expressing  gratitude,  had  really

f rasped  what  the  Lord  had  told  him,  and  resolved  to
nd  out.  Swiftly  as  a  strong  man  might  stretch  out
his  arm  or  draw  back  his  outstretched  arm,  Moggallana
vanished  from  the  palace  of  Mig&ra’s  Mother  and
appeared  among  the  Thirty-Three  gods.  Sakka,  who
•at  the  moment  was  taking  his  pleasure  in  the  Lotus
Pleasaunce  with  five  hundred  instruments  discoursing
heavenly  music  around  him,  no  sooner  saw  the
reverend  Maha-Moggallana  in  the  distance  than  he
stopped  the  music  and  going  towards  him  said  : —
Approach,  Your  Excellency ;  welcome  to  Your  Excel¬
lency  ;  it  is  a  long  time  since  Your  Excellency
managed  to  come  here;  pray  be  seated,  Your  Excel¬
lency  ;  here  is  a  seat  set  for  you.  Moggallfina  took
his  seat  accordingly,  and  then  Sakka,  king  of  gods,
seated  himself  on  a  lower  seat  to  one  side.

When  they  were  thus  seated,  Moggall&na  said  to
Sakka  : — How  did  the  Lord,  Kosiya,1  briefly  expound
to  you  Deliverance  by  the  extirpation  of  cravings?
Pray  let  me  too  share  in  that  discourse  so  that  I  may
hear  it.

1  have  much  to  do  and  attend  to,  Your  Excellency,
both  on  my  own  account  and  on  that  of  the  Thirty-
Three.  I  duly  heard  it  all  and  took  it  in  ;  [253J  1
duly  pondered  it  over  and  stored  it  up  in  my  memory  ;
nor  will  it  soon  fade  away.  Time  was,  Your  Excel¬
lency,  when  war  arose  between  the  gods  and  the


1  For  this  (?  tribal)  designation  of  Sakka  see  Dialogues  II,  296
and  305 ;  the  word  also  means  an  owl.  Bu.  adds  a  long  account
of  the  vicissitudes  in  the  conflict  of  the  Devas  with  the  Asuras.


1 82  XXXVII.  cula-tanhA-sankhaya-sutta.  M.  i.  254.


Asuras  (titans) ;  and  in  the  conflict  the  gods  won,
and  the  Asuras  were  worsted.  On  my  triumphant
return  from  that  conflict,  I  called  into  being  the  Palace
of  Victory  (Vejayanta),— which  has  a  hundred  towers,
each  seven  hundred  stories  high,  and  in  each  story
there  are  seven  nymphs,  each  with  her  seven  attend¬
ants.— Would  not  Your  Excellency  like  to  see  the
delights  of  the  Palace  of  Victory  ?

Moggallana  having  expressed  assent  by  silence,
Sakka,  king  of  gods,  and  King  Vessavana,1  preceded
by  Moggallana,  proceeded  to  the  Palace  of  Victory.
At  the  sight  of  Moggallana  in  the  distance,  Sakka’s
handmaidens  fled  in  fear  and  shame  each  to  her  own
apartment, — just  as  a  young  wife  is  filled  with  fear
and  shame  at  the  sight  of  her  husband’s  father.
Then  Sakka  and  Vessavana  conducted  Moggallana
through  the  palace  and  walked  him  all  over  it,  point¬
ing  out  its  successive  delights  to  His  Excellency.

Yes,  said  Moggallana,  it  is  as  splendid  as  it  should
be,  in  view  of  the  venerable  Kosiya’s  merit  in  the  past.
Mortals,  too,  jubilantly  exclaim,  at  sight  of  anything
delightful,  that  it  is  as  splendid  as  the  Thirty-Three  ;
and  this  is  as  splendid  as  it  should  be,  in  view  of  the
venerable  Kosiya’s  merit  in  the  past.

Then  thought  Moggallana: — This  fairy  is  inflated
(about  his  palace) ;  I  had  better  give  him  a  shock.  So
he  wrought  a  work  of  magic  whereby  his  big  toe  set
the  Palace  of  Victory  shaking  and  quaking  and  rock¬
ing.  [254]  At  this,  Sakka,  King  of  gods,  and  King
Vessavana,  and  all  the  gods  of  the  heaven  of  the
Thirty-Three,  wondered  and  marvelled,  saying : — A
wonder  and  a  marvel  indeed  is  the  magic  power  and
potency  of  this  recluse,  who  with  his  big  toe  can  set
this  heavenly  mansion  shaking  and  quaking  and
rocking.

Marking  how  agitated  Sakka  was  and  how  his  hair
was  standing  on  end,  Moggallana  said  : — Now  how  did


1  Cf.  Digha  II,  220  and  257,  and  III,  194  for  this  Regent  of
the  North,  Kuvera,  the  ruler  over  yakkhas  or  fairies.


M.  i.  255.


DELIVERANCE  FROM  CRAVINGS.


183


the  Lord,  Kosiya,  briefly  expound  to  you  Deliverance
by  the  extirpation  of  cravings  ?  Pray  let  me  too
share  in  that  discourse  so  that  I  may  hear  it.

Then,  at  last,  Sakka,  king  of  gods,  told — word  for
word — how  he  had  gone  to  question  the  Lord  and
what  answer  had  been  given  him.  Hereupon,  the
reverend  Maha- Moggallana  [255],  after  expressing
his  satisfaction  and  thanks  to  Sakka,  vanished  away
to  reappear  in  the  Old  Pleasaunce  in  the  palace  of
Migara’s  Mother, — as  readily  as  a  strong  man  might
stretch  out  his  arm  or  draw  back  his  outstretched  arm.

Soon  after  Moggallana  had  gone,  Sakka’s  hand¬
maidens  asked  the  king  of  gods,  whether  that  was  the
Lord,  his  master.

No,  he  replied ;  it  was  one  who  is  a  fellow  with  me
in  the  higher  life.

It  is  a  great  thing,  Your  Excellency,  to  have  in  the
higher  life  a  fellow-seeker  of  such  magical  power  and
potency.  Ah  !  what  a  Master  you  have  in  the  Lord  !

Approaching  and  saluting  the  Lord,  Moggallana
took  his  seat  to  one  side,  asking  whether  the  Lord  was
aware  of  having  briefly  expounded  lately  to  a  fairy  of
distinction  Deliverance  by  the  extirpation  of  cravings.
Yes,  the  Lord  remembered  it  quite  well;  and  ...  re¬
counted — word  for  word — to  Moggallana  Sakka’s
question  and  the  answer  he  had  himself  given — to  shew
how,  briefly,  an  Almsman  becomes  Delivered  .  .  .
[256]  foremost  among  gods  and  men.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
M aha- Moggallana  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XXXVIII.  MAHA-TANHA-SANKHYA-
SUTTA.

CONSCIOUSNESS  A  PROCESS  ONLY.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SavatthT  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  an  Almsman  named  Sati,  a  fisherman’s  son.


184  XXXVIII.  MAHA-TA^HX-SANKHYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  257.


came  to  entertain  the  pernicious  view  that,  as  he
understood  the  Lord’s  teaching  of  the  Doctrine,  our
consciousness  runs  on  and  continues  without  break  of
identity.

Hearing  of  this,  a  number  of  Almsmen  went  to  ask
Sati  whether  he  was  correctly  reported  as  entertaining
a  view  so  pernicious.  Certainly  he  did,  was  his
avowal.  Then  those  Almsmen  plied  Sati  with  ques¬
tion,  enquiry,  and  argument  so  as  to  wean  him  from
his  error.  Do  not,  they  said,  do  not  say  this ;  do  not
misrepresent  the  Lord  ;  there  are  no  grounds  whatever
for  such  a  charge ;  the  Lord  would  not  say  such  a
thing.  (On  the  contrary),  in  many  a  figure  has  it  been
laid  down  by  the  Lord  that  consciousness  only  arises
by  causation  and  that,  [257]  without  assignable  condi¬
tions,  consciousness  does  not  come  about.  But,  say
what  they  would,  Sati  would  not  yield  to  their  expostu¬
lations  but  stoutly  held  and  clung  to  his  pernicious
view  that,  as  he  understood  the  Lord’s  teaching  of  the
Doctrine,  our  consciousness  ran  on  and  continued
without  break  of  identity.

So  when  they  had  failed  to  wean  Sati  from  his  error,
the  Almsmen  went  to  the  Lord  and  laid  the  whole  of
the  facts  before  him  ;  and  he  sent  an  Almsman  [258]
to  summon  Sati  to  his  presence.

When  Sati  had  duly  come  and  had  taken  his  seat  to
one  side  after  due  obeisance,  the  Lord  asked  him
whether  he  was  correctly  reported  as  entertaining  this
pernicious  view.  Yes,  Sati  certainly  did  hold  it.
Said  the  Lord  : — What,  Sati,  is  the  nature  of  this  con¬
sciousness  ?

Sir,  it  is  that  speaking  and  sentient  (Self)  which
experiences  the  ripened  fruits  of  good  and  bad  conduct
in  this  or  that  earlier  existence.

Pray,  to  whom,  foolish  man,  do  you  aver  that  I  ever
so  taught  the  Doctrine  ?  Have  I  not,  foolish  man,
laid  it  down  in  many  a  figure  that  consciousness  only
arises  by  causation  and  that,  without  assignable  condi¬
tions,  consciousness  does  not  come  about  ?  And  yet
you,  foolish  man,  employ  what  you  have  misunderstood


M.  i.  259.  CONSCIOUSNESS  A  PROCESS  ONLY.  1 85

not  only  to  misrepresent  me  but  also  to  undermine
yourself  and  breed  for  yourself  a  store  of  demerit, — to
your  lasting  hurt  and  harm.

Turning  then  to  the  Almsmen,  the  Lord  said : —
What  think  you  ?  Has  this  Sati,  the  fisherman’s  son,
got  even  a  spark  of  illumination  in  this  Doctrine  and
Rule?

How  could  he,  sir  ?  For,  it  is  not  the  fact.

Hereat,  Sati  sat  silent  and  glum,  with  his  shoulders
hunched  up  and  eyes  downcast,  much  exercised  in  his
mind  but  finding  no  words  to  utter.  Seeing  him  in
this  plight,  the  Lord  said  to  him  : — And  now,  foolish
man,  you  shall  be  shewn  up  in  respect  of  this  pernicious
view  of  yours  ;  I  will  question  the  Almsmen.

Accordingly,  the  Lord  said  to  them : — Do  you
understand  me  ever  to  have  preached  the  Doctrine  in
the  sense  of  this  Almsman  Sati,  [259]  who  employs
what  he  has  misunderstood  not  only  to  misrepresent
me  but  also  to  undermine  himself  and  to  breed  for
himself  a  store  of  demerit, — to  his  lasting  hurt  and
harm  ?

No,  sir.  For  in  many  a  figure  has  the  Lord  taught
us  that  consciousness  only  arises  by  causation  and  that,
without  assignable  conditions,  consciousness  does  not
come  about.

Quite  right ;  you  rightly  understand  my  teaching ;
for,  indeed,  I  have,  as  you  say,  so  taught  in  many  a
figure.  Yet  here  is  this  Sati,  the  fisherman’s  son,
who  employs  .  .  .  hurt  and  harm.

Whatsoever  form  of  consciousness  arises  from  an
assignable  condition,  is  known  by  that  condition’s
name. — If  the  eye  and  visible  shapes  condition  con¬
sciousness,  that  is  called  visual  consciousness ;  and  so
on  with  the  senses  and  objects  of  hearing,  smelling,
tasting,  and  touch,  and  of  mind  with  its  mental  objects.
It  is  just  like  a  fire,  where  that  which  makes  the  fire
burn  gives  the  fire  its  name.  Wood  makes  a  wood-fire,
sticks  a  stick-fire,  grass  a  grass-fire,  cowdung  a  cow-
dung-fire,  husks  a  husk-fire,  and  rubbish  a  rubbish-fire.
In  just  the  same  way,  every  form  of  consciousness


1 86  XXXVIII.  maha-takhA-sankhya-sutta.  M.  i.  260.


arising  from  an  assignable  cause  is  known  by  that
condition’s  name.

[260]  Do  you  recognize,  Almsmen,  an  organism  as
such  ?

Yes,  sir.

Do  you  recognize  it  as  the  product  of  a  particular
sustenance  ?

Yes,  sir.

Do  you  recognize  that,  by  the  cessation  of  its
particular  sustenance,  the  organism’s  nature  makes  for
cessation  ?

Yes,  sir.

Does  doubt  of  the  fact  of  each  of  these  three  points
lead  to  perplexity  thereon  ?

Yes,  sir.

Does  recognition  of  the  fact  as  it  really  is,  in  the
fulness  of  knowledge,  dispel  that  perplexity  in  each  case?

Yes,  sir.

In  each  of  the  three  cases,  is  there  right  recognition,
if  it  be  in  the  fulness  of  knowledge  of  the  fact  as  it
really  is  ?

Yes,  sir.

If  you  insist  on  hugging  and  cherishing  this  pure
and  undefiled  conception  and  if  you  refuse  to  relinquish
or  part  with  it, — could  you  realize  a  state  of  conscious¬
ness  to  cross  with,  but  not  to  keep,  as  ( Sutta  22)  in
the  Allegory  of  the  Raft  ?

No,  sir.

Could  you  realize  that  Allegory,  if,  while  hugging
and  cherishing  your  conception,  you  were  yet  ready  to
relinquish  and  part  with  it  ?

[261]  Yes,  sir.

There  are  four  Sustenances  which  either  maintain
existing  organisms  or  help  those  yet  to  be.  First  of
these  is  material  sustenance,  coarse  or  delicate ;  Con¬
tact  is  the  second  ;  cogitation  is  the  third  ;  and  percep¬
tion  is  the  fourth.  The  derivation,  origin,  birth,  and
production  of  all  four  Sustenances  alike  is  Craving.
Craving  in  its  turn  arises  from  feeling,  feeling  from
Contact,  Contact  from  the  sensory  domains,  sensory


M.  i.  262.  CONSCIOUSNESS  A  PROCESS  ONLY.  187

domains  from  Name  and  Form,  Name  and  Form  from
consciousness,  consciousness  from  plastic  forces,  and
these  latter  from  ignorance.  Thus,  ignorance  condi¬
tions  plastic  forces,  which  condition  consciousness,
which  conditions  Name  and  Form,  which  condition  the
sensory  domains,  which  condition  Contact,  which
conditions  feeling,  which  conditions  Craving,  which
conditions  dependence,  which  conditions  becoming,
which  conditions  birth,  which  conditions  decay  and
death,  with  the  distractions  of  grief,  tribulation,  and
pain  of  body  and  mind. — This  is  the  uprising  of  all
that  makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.

I  have  said  that  birth  conditions  decay  and  death.
Does  it,  or  does  it  not,  condition  them  ?  Or  how
stands  the  matter  ?

Birth,  sir,  does  condition  decay  and  death  ;  and  that
is  how  the  matter  stands.

I  have  said  that  becoming  conditions  birth.  Does
it,  or  does  it  not  ?  Or  how  stands  the  matter  ?

[262]  Becoming,  sir,  does  condition  birth  ;  and  that
is  how  the  matter  stands.

[Similar  paragraphs  for  dependence,  etc.,  down  to
ignorance.]  Good,  Almsmen ;  very  good.  You  and
I  then  agree  in  affirming  that : — 1  This  being  so,  that
comes  about ;  [263]  if  this  arises,  so  does  that ; — thus,
ignorance  conditions  plastic  force  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  above)
.  .  .  the  sum  of  Ill.

So  too  it  is  by  the  entire  and  passionless  cessation
of  ignorance  that  the  plastic  forces  cease  .  .  .  (etc.,  for
the  successive  links  in  the  chain,  down  to)  .  .  .  the  dis¬
tractions  of  grief,  tribulation,  and  pain  of  body  and
mind. — This  is  the  cessation  of  all  that  makes  up  the
sum  of  Ill.

I  have  said  that  by  the  cessation  of  birth,  decay  and
death  cease.  Do  they,  or  do  they  not  ?  Or  how
stands  the  matter  ?

1  There  is  perhaps  no  more  succinct  statement  than  this  of  the
fundamental  Buddhist  doctrine  of  the  process  of  things.  Cf.  II,  32
and  AssajI's  stanza  (which  converted  Sariputta  and  Moggallana)  at
S.B.E.  XIII,  146.


1 88  XXXVIII.  MAHA-TANHA-SANKHYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  264.


By  the  cessation  of  birth,  decay  and  death  also
cease,  sir ;  and  that  is  how  the  matter  stands.

[Similar  paragraphs  for  becoming,  etc.,  down  to
ignorance.]  [264]  Good  ;  very  good.  You  and  I  then
agree  in  affirming  that  : — This  not  being  so,  that  comes
not  about ;  if  this  ceases,  so  does  that ; — thus  with  the
cessation  of  ignorance  the  plastic  forces  cease  .  .  .
(etc.,  for  the  successive  links  in  the  chain,  down  to)  .  .  .
cessation  of  all  that  makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.

Now,  Almsmen,  would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all
this,  [265]  hark  back  to  the  past,  wondering  (i)  whether
you  were,  or  whether  you  were  not,  in  existence  during
bygone  ages,  (ii)  what  you  were  in  those  ages,  (iii)  how
you  fared  then,  and  (iv)  from  what  you  passed  on  to
what  else  ?

No,  sir.

Or,  would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,  hark  for¬
ward  to  the  future,  wondering  (i)  whether  you  will,  or
whether  you  will  not,  be  in  existence  during  the  ages
to  come,  (ii)  what  you  will  be  in  those  ages,  (iii)  how
you  will  fare  then,  and  (iv)  from  what  you  will  pass  on
to  what  else  ?

No,  sir.

Or,  again,  would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,
be  perplexed  in  the  present  about  whether  or  not
you  exist,  what  and  how  you  are,  whence  your  being
came,  and  whither  it  will  go  ?

No,  sir.

Would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,  say  : — We
revere  our  teacher,  and  it  is  because  of  our  reverence
for  him  that  we  affirm  this  ?

No,  sir.

Would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,  say  : — Oh,
we  were  told  this  by  a  recluse  or  recluses ;  we  do  not
affirm  it  ourselves  ?

No,  sir.

Would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,  look  out  for
another  teacher  ?

No,  sir.

Would  you,  knowing  and  seeing  all  this,  frequent


M.  i.  266.


CONSCIOUSNESS  A  PROCESS  ONLY.


189


the  ritual  and  shows  and  functions  of  the  ordinary  run
of  recluses  and  brahmins  as  being1  of  the  essence  P

No,  sir.

Do  you  not  affirm  only  what  you  have  of  yourselves
known,  seen,  and  discerned  ?

Yes,  sir.

Quite  right,  Almsmen.  You  have  by  me  been  intro¬
duced  to  this  Doctrine,  which  is  immediate  in  its  gifts
here  and  now,  which  is  open  to  all,  which  is  a  guide
Onwards,  which  can  be  mastered  for  himself  by  every
intelligent  man.  All  I  have  said  was  to  bring  out  that
this  Doctrine  was  immediate  in  its  gifts  here  and  now,
open  to  all,  a  guide  Onwards  to  be  mastered  for  him¬
self  by  every  intelligent  man.

It  is  by  the  conjunction  of  three  things  that  concep¬
tion  comes  about.  If  there  is  coitus  of  parents  but
if  that  is  not  the  mother’s  period  and  if  there  is  no
presiding  deity  of  generation  (gandhabba)  present, —
then  [266]  no  conception  takes  place.  Or  if  there  be
coitus  of  parents  at  the  mother’s  period  but  with  no
presiding  deity  present, — again  there  is  no  conception.
But  if  there  be  a  conjunction  of  all  three  factors,  then
and  only  then  does  conception  take  place.  For  nine
or  ten  months  the  mother  carries  the  heavy  burden  of
the  foetus  in  her  womb  with  great  anxiety ;  and
with  great  anxiety  does  she  at  the  end  of  her  time
bring  forth  her  child.  When  it  is  bom,  she  feeds  it
with  her  life-blood, — as  a  mother’s  milk  is  termed  in
the  Rule  of  the  Noble.  As  the  boy  grows  and
develops  his  faculties,  he  plays  childish  games — such
as  toy  ploughs,  tip-cat,  head-over-heels,  windmills,
pannets,  little  carts,  and  toy  bows.1  As  he  grows
older  and  as  his  faculties  develop,  pleasures  of  sense
take  hold  and  possession  of  him,  visible  shapes
through  the  eye,  sounds  through  the  ear,  and  so  on
for  odours,  tastes,  and  touch, — all  of  them  desirable,
agreeable,  pleasing  and  attractive.  The  sight  of


1  Cf.  D.  I,  6  and  D.A.  I,  86  for  these  (and  other)  games
(Dial.  I,  9-1 1).


190  XXXVIII.  MAH A-TA^J HA-SANKH Y A-SUTTA.  M.  i.  267.


shapes  awakens  a  passion  for  attractive  shapes  and  a
repugnance  to  the  unattractive ;  his  life  has  no
collectedness  as  regards  the  body,  and  mental  poverty
is  his  ;  he  knows  not  that  real  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  whereby  evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness
cease.  A  prey  thus  to  fascinations  and  to  dislikes,  he
rejoices  in,  and  welcomes,  and  cleaves  to,  every  feeling
— pleasant,  unpleasant,  or  indifferent — which  he
experiences,  so  that  feelings  bring  delight ;  delight
brings  dependence  ;  dependence  conditions  becoming  ;
becoming  conditions  birth  ;  birth  conditions  decay  and
death,  with  the  distractions  of  grief,  tribulation,  and
pain  of  body  and  mind. — This  is  the  uprising  of  all  that
makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.

And  as  with  visible  shapes,  so  too  .  .  .  with  sounds,
odours,  tastes,  touch  and  mental  objects.

[267]  Take  the  case,  Almsmen,  that  here  in  the
world  there  appears  a  Truth-finder,  Arahat  all-en¬
lightened,  .  .  .  [268-9]  .  .  .  {etc.  as  in  Sutta  27,  down
to)  .  .  .  right  states  of  consciousness  have  purged  his
heart  of  all  doubting.

[270]  When  he  has  put  from  him  the  Five
Hindrances,  those  defilements  of  the  heart  which
weaken  a  man’s  insight,  then,  divested  of  pleasures  of
sense  and  divested  of  wrong  states  of  mind,  he  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest
and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but
not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  And  in
succession  he  wins  the  Second,  the  Third,  and  the
Fourth  Ecstasies.

No  shapes,  or  sounds,  or  odours,  or  tastes,  or  touch,
or  mental  objects  now  awaken  in  him  either  likes  or  dis¬
likes  ;  he  neither  rejoices  in,  nor  welcomes,  nor  cleaves
to  any  feeling — pleasant,  unpleasant,  or  indifferent —
which  he  experiences,  so  that  feelings  cease  to  delight
him  and  consequently  all  dependence  ceases  and  there
ceases  the  whole  succession  of  becoming,  birth,  decay,
and  death,  with  the  distractions  of  grief,  tribulation,
and  pain  of  body  and  mind. — This  is  the  cessation  of  all
that  makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.


M.  i.  271.


THE  IDEAL  RECLUSE.


191


Treasure  in  your  memories,  Almsmen,  this  succinct
account  of  Deliverance  by  the  Extirpation  of  Craving,
— and  also  Sati,  [271]  the  fisherman’s  son,  fast  in  Crav¬
ing’s  meshes  and  in  the  doom  which  Craving  entails.


XXXIX.  MAHA-ASSAPURA-SUTTA.

THE  IDEAL  RECLUSE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  the  Angas’  country,  where  they  have  a
township  named  Assapura,  he  addressed  the  listening
Almsmen  as  follows  : —

Recluses  1  Recluses ! — that  is  the  name  by  which
people  know  you  and  by  which  you  would  describe
yourselves,  if  asked  who  you  were.  Such  being  your
vocation  and  profession  as  recluses,  you  must  train
yourselves  to  embrace  and  shew  forth  in  your  lives  the
states  of  consciousness  which  really  make  the  recluse
and  brahmin — so  as  to  prove  your  vocation  true  and
your  profession  a  reality,  and  to  see  to  it  that  the  charity
you  enjoy  in  the  shape  of  clothing  and  food  and  other
requisites  enures  to  fruit  andprofit  in  yourselves,  making
your  Pilgrimage  not  barren  but  fruitful  unto  its  harvest.

What  are  the  states  of  consciousness  which  really
make  the  recluse  and  the  brahmin  ? — Train  yourselves
to  be  conscientious  and  scrupulous.  It  may  be  that,
feeling  yourselves  to  be  conscientious  and  scrupulous,
you  may  rest  content  in  the  idea  that  this  is  enough,
that  you  have  done  enough,  that  you  have  realized  the
recluse’s  ideal,  and  that  you  have  nothing  still  ahead  of
you  to  accomplish.  But  I  say  unto  you,  and  rejoin,
that  in  your  quest  for  recluse-ship,  you  must  not  fall
short  of  the  recluse’s  ideal,  while  there  is  something
still  ahead.

What  is  ahead  of  you  ? — You  must  train  yourselves
[272]  in  deed — in  word — in  thought — and  in  mode  of
livelihood — to  be  pure  and  frank  and  open,  without
flaw  and  without  reserve,  yet  not  so  as  to  be  puffed  up


192


xxxix.  mahA-assapura-sutta.


M.  i.  173.


and  to  run  down  others.  It  may  be  that,  feeling  your¬
selves  to  be  thus  trained,  as  well  as  conscientious  and
scrupulous,  you  may  rest  content  in  the  idea  that  each
successive  stage  [273]  is  enough,  that  you  have  done
enough,  .  .  .  something  still  anead.

VVnat  is  ahead  ? — You  must  train  yourselves  to
guard  the  portals  of  the  senses.  When  with  the  eye
you  see  a  visible  shape,  you  must  resolve  not  to  be
taken  with  its  detailed  marks  and  signs,  since,  uncon¬
trolled,  the  eye  might  lead  to  appetite  and  distress,
and  to  evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness ;  your
resolve  will  be  to  control  the  sense  of  sight,  to  keep
watch  and  ward  over  it,  and  to  bring  the  eye  under
control.  .  .  .  And  similarly  with  all  the  other
senses.  ...  It  may  be  that,  with  each  fresh  achieve¬
ment  in  turn,  you  may  rest  content, — in  the  idea  that
each  successive  stage  is  enough,  that  you  have  done
enough,  .  .  .  something  still  ahead.

What  is  ahead? — You  must  train  yourselves  to
moderation  in  food,  taking  food  with  deliberate  pur¬
posefulness,  not  for  pleasure  or  delight,  not  for  ostenta¬
tion  or  display,  but  only  to  the  extent  required  to
support  and  maintain  the  body,  to  shield  it  from  hurt,
and  to  foster  the  higher  life, — with  the  resolve  on  your
part  to  destroy  the  old  feelings  and  not  to  allow  any
new  feelings  to  arise,  to  the  end  that  the  blameless  lot
may  be  yours  and  well-being.  It  may  be  that — feel¬
ing  you  are  conscientious  and  scrupulous,  pure  in  deed,
word,  thought  and  mode  of  livelihood,  and  moderate  in
food, — you  may  rest  content  in  the  idea  that  this  is
enough,  that  you  have  done  enough  .  .  .  something
still  ahead.

What  is  ahead? — You  must  train  yourselves  to
vigilance.  Purge  your  hearts  of  besetting  states  of
consciousness, — by  day  as  you  either  pace  to  and  fro
or  are  seated, — in  the  first  watch  of  the  night  [274]  as
you  either  pace  to  and  fro  or  are  seated  ;  in  the  middle  *
watch  of  the  night  as  you  lie  couched  lion-like  on  your
right  side,  foot  resting  on  foot,  mindful  and  self-
possessed,  with  your  thoughts  set  on  the  appointed


M.  i.  275.


THE  IDEAL  RECLUSE.


193


time  to  get  up ;  or,  again,  during  the  last  watch  of  the
night  when  you  have  risen  and  either  pace  to  and  fro
or  are  seated.  It  may  be  that — feeling  you  are  con¬
scientious  and  scrupulous,  pure  in  deed,  word,  thought,
and  mode  of  livelihood,  moderate  in  food,  and  resolute
in  vigilance — you  may  rest  content  in  the  idea  that  this
is  enough,  that  you  have  done  enough  .  .  .  something
still  ahead.

What  is  ahead  ? — You  must  train  yourselves  to  be
mindful  and  self-possessed, — in  going  out  or  coming
back,  in  looking  ahead  or  around  you,  in  stretching  out
your  arm  or  in  drawing  it  back,  in  wearing  your  robes
or  carrying  your  bowls,  in  eating  or  drinking,  in  chew¬
ing  or  savouring,  in  attending  to  nature’s  wants,  in
walking  or  standing  or  sitting,  asleep  or  awake,  in
speech  or  in  silence.  It  may  be  that — feeling  you  are
conscientious  and  scrupulous,  pure  in  deed,  word,
thought,  and  mode  of  livelihood,  moderate  in  food,
resolute  in  vigilance,  and  also  mindful  and  alert — you
may  rest  content  in  the  idea  that  this  is  enough,  that
you  have  done  enough,  that  you  have  realized  the
recluse’s  ideal,  and  that  you  have  nothing  still  ahead
of  you  to  accomplish.  But  I  say  unto  you,  and  rejoin,
that,  in  your  quest  for  recluse-ship,  you  must  not  fall
short  of  the  recluse’s  ideal,  while  there  is  something
still  ahead.

AVhat  is  still  ahead  ? — Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman
who  chooses  him  a  lonely  lodging — in  the  forest  under
a  tree,  in  the  wilds  in  cave  or  grot,  in  a  charnel-
ground,  in  a  thicket  or  on  bracken  in  the  open.  When
he  is  back  from  his  round  for  alms,  he  seats  himself,
after  his  meal,  cross-legged  and  with  body  erect,  alert
in  mindfulness.  Putting  appetite  from  him,  he  lives
without  appetite  for  things  of  the  world  and  purges  his
heart  of  appetite.  Putting  from  him  all  malice,  he
lives  without  a  thought  of  malice,  [275]  purging  him¬
self  of  malice  by  good-will  and  compassion  for  all  that
lives.  All  torpor  has  he  put  from  him  ;  all  torpor  has
gone  out  of  his  life  ;  by  clarity  of  vision,  mindfulness,
and  self-possession,  he  purges  his  heart  of  torpor.

(  *3


194


XXXIX.  MAHA-ASSAPURA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  276.


Worry  is  his  no  longer,  for  he  has  put  worry  out
of  his  life  and  his  heart  within  is  serene,  with  all  worry
purged  away.  Doubt  he  has  shed  and  outgrown  ;  no
question  arises  now  as  to  what  are  right  states  of  con¬
sciousness  ;  he  has  purged  his  heart  of  all  doubt.

It  is  like  a  man  who  borrows  money  to  start  a
business, — in  which  he  is  so  successful  that  he  can  not
only  wipe  out  the  original  debt  but  have  enough  over
to  keep  a  wife.  Reviewing  his  success,  he  would
rejoice  and  be  glad  of  heart.

Or,  it  is  like  a  man  who  falls  sick  and  becomes  very
ill  and  in  grievous  pain,  taking  no  pleasure  in  his
food,  and  with  no  strength  left  in  his  body  ;  but  who
subsequently  gets  over  nis  illness,  takes  pleasure  in  his
food  and  regains  his  strength.  He  too,  reviewing  his
recovery,  would  rejoice  and  be  glad  of  heart.

Or,  it  is  like  a  man  who  is  in  bonds  in  prison  but  is
subsequently  set  at  liberty,  safe  and  sound  and  un¬
mulcted  in  estate.  He  too,  reviewing  his  release  from
durance,  would  rejoice  and  be  glad  of  heart.

Or,  again,  it  is  like  a  slave,  not  independent  but  de¬
pendent  on  a  master,  and  with  no  liberty  to  go
where  he  liked,  who  should  subsequently  be  set  free
and  become  his  own  master  with  full  liberty  now  to  go
wherever  he  liked.  He  too,  reviewing  his  gain  of
freedom,  would  rejoice  and  be  glad  of  heart.  y

[276]  Or,  again,  it  is  like  a  rich  and  wealthy  man  on
a  long  journey  through  the  wilds  who  should  eventually
emerge  safe  and  sound,  without  loss  of  goods.  He
too,  reviewing  his  safe  passage,  would  rejoice  and  be
glad  of  heart.

Just  in  the  selfsame  way  an  Almsman  views  the
foregoing  Five  Hindrances,  while  they  persist  in
him,  as  tantamount  to  the  debt,  the  disease,  the
prison,  the  slavery,  and  the  journey  through  the
wilds.  But,  when  he  has  put  from  him  those  Five
Hindrances,  he  views  them  as  tantamount  to  freedom
from  debt,  disease,  prison,  slavery,  and  as  tantamount
to  the  traveller’s  bourne.

When  he  has  put  from  him  the  Five  Hindrances


M.  L  277.


THE  IDEAL  RECLUSE.


195


which  defile  the  heart  and  weaken  insight,  then,
divested  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  of  wrong  states  of
consciousness,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  First
Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred
of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observa¬
tion  and  reflection.  His  very  body  does  he  so  sluice
and  drench  and  permeate  and  suffuse  with  the  zest  and
satisfaction  bred  of  aloofness,  that  there  is  no  part  of
his  body  which  is  not  suffused  thereby.  Just  as  an
expert  bath-attendant  or  his  apprentice  will  sprinkle
soap-powder  on  a  metal  slab  and  knead  it  up  with  the
water  which  he  keeps  on  sprinkling  over  it,  until  the
whole  of  the  soap-powder  is  one  mass  of  lather,
permeated  by  the  lather  both  in  and  out,  with  not
a  trickle  of  moisture  left ; — in  just  the  same  way  does
the  Almsman  so  sluice  and  drench  and  permeate  and
suffuse  his  very  body  with  the  zest  and  satisfaction  bred
of  aloofness,  that  there  is  no  part  of  his  body  which  is
not  suffused  thereby.

Further,  rising  above  observation  and  reflection,  he
enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy  with  all'
its  zest  and  satisfaction — a  state  bred  of  rapt  concen¬
tration,  above  all  observation  and  reflection,  a  state
whereby  the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity  reigns
within.  His  very  body  does  he  so  sluice  and  drench
and  permeate  and  suffuse  with  the  zest  and  satisfaction
bred  of  rapt  concentration,  that  there  is  no  part  of  his
body  which  is  not  suffused  thereby.  It  is  like  a  lake  fed
from  below  by  a  spring,  [277]  with  no  other  influx  of
water  from  east  or  west  or  north  or  south,  a  lake  on
which  the  heavens  should  send  no  showers  from
time  to  time ;  yet  from  the  spring  below  there  would
well  up  cool  waters  into  the  lake,  so  sluicing  and
drenching  and  permeating  and  suffusing  that  lake  that
there  is  no  part  of  that  lake  which  is  not  suffused
thereby  ; — in  just  the  same  way  does  this  Almsman  so
sluice  and  drench  and  permeate  and  suffuse  his  very
body  with  the  zest  and  satisfaction  bred  of  rapt
concentration,  that  there  is  no  part  of  his  body  which
js  not  suffused  thereby.


196


XXXIX.  maha-assapura-sutta.


M.  i.  278.


Further,  by  shedding  the  emotion  of  zest,  he  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  the  Third  Ecstasy,  with  its  poised
equanimity,  mindful  and  self-possessed,  feeling  in  his
frame  that  satisfaction  of  which  the  Noble  say  that
poise  and  mindfulness  bring  abiding  satisfaction.  His
very  body  does  he  so  sluice  and  drench  and  permeate
and  suffuse  with  satisfaction,  without  zest,  that  there  is
no  part  of  his  body  which  is  not  suffused  by  this  satis¬
faction  without  zest.  Just  as  in  a  pond  of  lotuses,  blue
or  red  or  white,  some  lotuses  of  each  kind  are  born
and  grow  in  the  water,  never  rising  above  the  surface
but  nourishing  beneath  it ;  and  these  from  root  to  tip
are  so  sluiced  and  drenched  and  permeated  and  suffused
by  the  cool  waters  that  there  is  not  a  lotus,  blue  or  red
or  white,  which  is  not  suffused  from  root  to  tip  by  the
cool  waters  : — in  just  the  same  way  does  the  Almsman  so
sluice  and  drench  and  permeate  and  suffuse  his  very
body  with  satisfaction  without  zest,  that  there  is  no
part  of  his  body  which  is  not  suffused  thereby.

Further,  by  putting  from  him  both  satisfaction  and
dissatisfaction  and  by  shedding  the  joys  and  sorrows
he  used  to  feel,  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  Fourth
Ecstasy, — the  state  that,  knowing  neither  satisfaction
nor  dissatisfaction,  is  the  consummate  purity  of  poised
equanimity  and  mindfulness.  His  very  body  does  he  so
suffuse  with  a  heart  made  pure  and  clean  that,  as  he
sits,  there  is  no  single  part  of  his  body  which  is  not
suffused  by  his  pure  and  clean  heart.  Just  as  if  a  man
were  sitting  wrapped  head  and  all  in  a  garment  of
white,  with  not  a  single  part  [278]  of  his  body  not
wrapped  in  it, — in  just  the  same  way  does  the  Alms¬
man  so  suffuse  his  very  body  with  a  heart  made  pure
and  clean  that,  as  he  sits,  there  is  no  single  part  of  his
body  which  is  not  suffused  by  his  pure  and  clean  heart.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified,

.  .  .  the  Almsman  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  4,  down  to)

.  .  .  his  divers  existences  of  the  past  in  all  their
details  and  features.  Just  as  if  a  man  who  had  passed
from  his  own  village  to  a  second  and  thence  to  a  third
and  finally  back  to  his  own  village,  might  think  how  in


M.  i.  279.


THE  IDEAL  RECLUSE.


197


his  absence  from  home  he  had  visited  these  other
villages  and  how  in  each  he  had  stood,  sat,  spoken,
been  silent ; — in  just  the  same  way  does  the  Almsman
call  to  mind  his  former  existences  ...  his  divers
existences  of  the  past  in  all  their  details  and  features.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies  .  .  .  {etc.,
as  in  Sutta  4,  down  to)  .  .  .  [279]  in  states  of  bliss
and  in  heaven.  Just  as  if  there  were  two  houses  with
doors  and  a  man  with  eyes  to  see  were  to  stand
between  those  two  houses  and  observe  men  going  in
and  out  and  passing  to  and  fro  ; — in  just  the  same  way,
with  the  Eye  Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses
the  human  eye,  does  the  Almsman  see  creatures  in  act
of  passing  hence  and  re-appearing  elsewhere,  creatures
eitner  lowly  or  debonair,  fair  or  foul  to  view,  happy  or
unhappy  ;  and  he  is  aware  that  they  fare  according  to
their  deserts.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to  know¬
ledge  of  the  eradication  of  Cankers  .  .  .  {etc.,  as  in
Sutta  4,  down  to)  .  .  .  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of
what  I  have  been.  Just  as  if  on  the  heights  there  were  a
lake  with  clear  pellucid  waters  as  of  crystal,  and  a  man
with  eyes  to  see  should  espy  from  the  bank  where  he  was
standing  oysters  and  other  shells,  gravel  and  pebbles,
together  with  shoals  of  fish  swimming  about  or  lying  up  ;
— just  as  such  a  man  would  recognize  all  that  was  before
his  eyes,  [280]  in  just  the  same  manner  does  the  Alms¬
man  comprehend,  aright  and  to  the  full,  Ill,  the  origin
of  Ill,  .  .  .  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.

Such  an  Almsman  is  styled  (1)  recluse,  (2)  brahmin,
(3)  washen  (nahataka),  (4)  versed  (vedagO),  (5)  purged
(sottiyo),  (6)  noble  (ariya),  and  (7)  saintly  (arahant).

(i)  How  does  an  Almsman  become  a  recluse  ? — By
excluding  evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness  which
are  depraved  and  tend  to  re-birth,  which  are  burthen-
some  and  ripen  unto  Ill,  and  which  will  hereafter
entail  birth,  decay,  and  death.  That  is  how  he  becomes
a  recluse.

(ii)  He  becomes  a  brahmin  by  precluding  evil  and
wrong  states.


198


XXXIX.  MAHA-ASSAPURA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  280.


(iii)  He  becomes  washen  by  washing  away  evil  and
wrong  states.

(iv)  He  becomes  versed  by  being  versed  in  all  about
evil  and  wrong  states.

(v)  He  becomes  purged  because  he  is  purged  of  evil
and  wrong  states.

(vi)  He  becomes  noble,  and  (vii)  saintly,  because  he
keeps  at  bay  evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness
which  are  depraved  and  tend  to  re-birth,  which  are
burthensome  and  ripen  unto  Ill,  and  which  will  here¬
after  entail  birth,  decay,  and  death.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XL.  CULA-ASSAPURA-SUTTA.


THE  RECLUSE’S  REGIMEN.

[281]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  in  the  Angas’  country,  where  they  have  a
township  named  Assapura,  he  addressed  the  listening
Almsmen  as  follows  :

Recluses  I — that  is  the  name  by  which  people  know
you  and  by  which  you  would  describe  yourselves,  if
asked  who  you  were.  Such  being  your  vocation  and
profession  as  recluses,  you  must  train  yourselves  to
embrace  and  shew  forth  in  your  lives  the  recluse’s  path
of  duty,  so  as  to  prove  your  vocation  true  and  your
profession  a  reality,  and  to  see  to  it  that  the  charity
you  enjoy  in  the  shape  of  clothing  and  food  and
other  requisites  enures  to  fruit  and  profit  in  yourselves,
making  your  Pilgrimage  not  barren  but  fruitful  unto  its
harvest.

How  does  an  Almsman  not  tread  the  recluse’s  path
of  duty  ? — The  Almsman  who  is  greedy  and  has  not
put  greed  from  him,  or  who  is  malicious  of  heart  and
has  not  put  malice  from  him,  or  who  is  wrathful  and
has  not  put  wrath  from  him,  or  who  is  revengeful
and  has  not  put  revenge  from  him,  or  who  is  a
hypocrite  and  has  not  put  hypocrisy  from  him,  or  is
fraudulent  and  has  not  put  fraud  from  him,  or  who  is
jealous  and  has  not  put  jealousy  from  him,  or  who  is  a
niggard  and  has  not  put  niggardliness  from  him,  or
who  is  treacherous  and  has  not  put  treachery  from  him,
or  who  is  deceitful  and  has  not  put  deceit  from  him,  or
whose  desires  are  evil  nor  has  he  put  evil  desires  from
him,  or  who  is  wrong  in  his  outlook  and  has  not  put
wrong  outlooks  from  him, — of  such  an  Almsman  I  say
that  he  fails  to  tread  the  recluse’s  path  of  duty,  because

199


200  XL.  CU  LA-ASSAPURA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  282.

he  has  not  put  from  him  these  dispositions  which  are
blots  and  blemishes  and  defects  in  a  recluse,  leading  to
woe  hereafter  and  to  a  doom  of  pain.  It  is  just  as  if,
hidden  away  and  concealed  beneath  his  robes,  the
Brother  had  got  a  deadly  stiletto,  two-edged  and
whetted  keen ; — unto  this  do  I  liken  that  Almsman’s
Pilgrimage.

I  say  it  is  not  the  robe  which  makes  the  recluse,  nor
nakedness,  nor  dust  and  dirt,  nor  bathing  thrice  a  day,
nor  living  under  a  tree,  [282]  nor  living  in  the  open,
nor  never  sitting  down,  nor  punctilio  in  regimen,  nor
intoning  texts,  nor  a  shock  head  of  matted  hair.  If
the  mere  wearing  of  the  robe  could  banish  greed,  malice,
and  so  forth,  then,  as  soon  as  a  child  was  born,  his
friends  and  kinsfolk  would  make  him  wear  the  robe  and
would  press  him  to  wear  it,  saying : — Come,  thou
favoured  of  fortune !  Come,  wear  the  robe ;  for,  by  the
mere  wearing  of  it,  the  greedy  will  put  from  them  their
greed,  the  malicious  their  malice,  .  .  .  and  those  of
wrong  outlook  will  put  from  them  their  wrong  out¬
look. — It  is  because  I  see  robe -wearers  who  are
greedy  and  malicious  .  .  .  and  wrong  in  their  outlook,
that  I  say  the  mere  wearing  of  the  robe  does  not  make
the  recluse.

[Similar  paragraphs  about  nakedness,  dust  and  dirt
.  .  .  shock  head  of  matted  hair.]

[288]  How,  on  the  other  hand,  does  an  Almsman
tread  the  recluse’s  path  of  duty  ? — The  Almsman  who
is  not  greedy  but  has  put  greed  from  him,  who  is  not
malicious  but  has  put  medice  from  him  .  .  .  who  is
not  wrong  in  outlook  but  has  put  wrong  outlooks  from
him, — of  such  an  Almsman  I  say  that  he  succeeds  in
treading  the  recluse’s  path  of  duty,  because  he  has  put
from  him  those  dispositions  which  are  blots  and
blemishes  and  defects  in  a  recluse,  leading  to  woe
hereafter  and  a  doom  of  pain.  Such  an  Almsman
realizes  that  he  is  cleansed  and  Delivered  from  all  those
evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness;  when  he
realizes  this,  there  is  bred  in  him  gladness  of  heart,
which  in  turn  breeds  zest,  which  brings  tranquillity  to


M.  i.  284.


THE  RECLUSE’S  REGIMEN.


201


the  body,  which  inspires  those  feelings  of  satisfaction
whereby  the  heart  wins  rapt  concentration.  He  dwells
with  radiant  thoughts  of  good-will  pervading  first  one
quarter  of  the  world — then  the  second — then  the  third

and  then  the  fourth  quarter  ;  he  dwells  with  radiant
good-will  pervading  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of
the  world,  above,  below,  around,  and  everywhere, —
with  radiant  good-will  all-embracing,  vast,  boundless,
wherein  no  hate  or  malice  finds  a  place.  And  as
with  good-will,  so,  in  turn,  with  radiant  compassion,
sympathy,  and  poised  equanimity,  does  he  pervade
the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world.  It  is  just
as  if  there  were  a  lake  of  clear  bright  water,  limpid,
easy  to  get  down  to,  and  in  every  way  delightful ;  [284]
and  as  if  from  the  east — or  the  west— or  from  the  north
— or  from  the  south — there  should  come  a  man  over¬
come  and  overpowered  with  the  blazing  heat  of
summer,  exhausted  and  beside  himself  with  thirst,
who  should  quench  in  that  lake’s  waters  the  thirst  and
the  fever  which  parched  his  frame ; — just  in  the  same
way,  if  a  noble — or  a  brahmin — or  a  middle-class  man
— or  a  peasant — leaving  his  home  for  homelessness
as  a  Pilgrim  and  coming  to  the  Doctrine  and  Rule
preached  by  the  Truth-finder,  so  develops  good-will,
compassion,  sympathy  and  poised  equanimity  as  to  win
inward  peace,  then,  by  reason  of  his  winning  such
inward  peace,  he — say  I — treads  the  recluse’s  path  of
duty.

If  a  noble — or  a  brahmin— or  a  middle- class  man —
or  a  peasant — leaves  home  for  homelessness  as  a
Pilgrim  and  if  he,  by  extirpating  the  Cankers,  enters
on,  and  abides  in,  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind,
from  Cankers  free,  which  he  has  of  and  for  himself
discerned  and  realized  here  and  now, — then  he  be¬
comes  a  recluse  by  the  extirpation  of  the  Cankers.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those
Almsmen  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


202


XLI  SiLEYYAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  285.


XLI.  sAleyyaka-sutta.

our  WEIRD.

[285]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  on  an  alms-pilgrimage  in  Kosala,  with  a  great
train  of  Almsmen,  he  came  to  a  brahmin  village  of  the
Kosalans  named  Sala.

It  came  to  the  ears  of  the  brahmin  heads  of  families
in  Sala  that  the  recluse  Gotama,  a  Sakyan  who  had
gone  forth  as  a  Pilgrim  from  a  Sakyan  family,  had
come  to  their  village  in  the  course  of  an  alms-
pilgrimage  in  Kosala,  with  a  great  train  of  Almsmen.
Such,  they  heard,  was  the  high  repute  noised  abroad
concerning  the  reverend  Gotama  that  he  was  said  to
be — The  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  walking  by
knowledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the
matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of  gods
and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment.  This  universe
— with  its  gods,  Maras,  Brahmas,  recluses  and
brahmins,  embracing  all  gods  and  mankind — ,  all  this
he  has  discerned  and  realized  for  himself  and  makes
known  to  others.  He  preaches  a  Doctrine,  which  is
so  fair  in  its  outset,  its  middle,  and  its  close,  with  both
text  and  import;  he  propounds  a  higher  life  that  is
wholly  complete  and  pure.  It  is  good  to  go  and  visit
Arahats  like  him.  So  the  brahmins  of  Sala  went  to
the  Lord  and,  after  exchanging  civil  greetings,  took
their  seats  to  one  side, — some  after  salutations,  some
after  greetings,  some  with  joined  palms  respectfully
outstretched,  some  after  mention  of  their  names  and
family,  and  others  again  in  silence.  Being  seated,
they  put  this  question  to  the  Lord  : — Why  and  where¬
fore  is  it  that,  after  death,  at  the  body’s  dissolution,
some  creatures  come  to  re-birth  in  states  of  suffering  or
woe  or  purgatory,  while  others  are  reborn  in  some
happy  state  or  heaven  ?


M.  i.  286.


OUR  WEIRD.


203


Because,  householders,  they  walk  not  in  righteous¬
ness  but  in  wickedness,  some  creatures  pass  to  states
of  suffering;  others  because  they  walk  in  righteous¬
ness  and  in  goodness,  are  reborn  in  happy  states  in
heaven.

[286]  This  utterance  is  too  condensed  for  us  to  take
it  in  without  explanation.  Would  the  reverend
Gotama  be  so  good  as  to  expand  his  utterance  and
bring  out  its  meaning  for  us  ?

Listen  then,  sirs,  and  pay  attention  ;  I  will  speak.

So  to  the  attentive  brahmins  the  Lord  began  : —
There  are  three  forms  of  unrighteousness  and  wicked¬
ness  for  the  body ;  four  for  speech ;  and  three  for
thoughts.

As  regards  bodily  unrighteousness,  a  man  (i)  may
take  life, — as  a  hunter  with  hands  bathed  in  blood,
given  to  killing  and  slaying,  merciless  to  living
creatures ;  or  (ii)  may  take  what  is  not  his, — by
appropriating  to  himself  in  thievish  fashion  the
belongings  of  other  people  in  village  and  jungle;
or  (iii)  may  be  a  fornicator,  having  intercourse
with  girls  under  the  charge  of  mother  or  father  or
brother  or  sister  or  relations,  yes,  with  girls  affianced
and  plighted,  and  even  wearing  the  very  garlands  of
betrothal.

As  regards  unrighteousness  of  speech,  a  man  (i)  may
be  a  liar  ;  —  when  cited  to  give  testimony  before
assembly  or  village-meeting  or  family  council  or  royal
household  or  his  guild,  he  may  say  that  he  knows
when  he  does  not  know,  or  that  he  does  not  know
when  he  does  know,  or  that  he  saw  when  he  did  not
see,  or  that  he  did  not  see  when  he  did  see,— de¬
liberately  lying  in  the  interests  either  of  himself  or  of
other  people  or  for  some  trifling  gain.  Or  (ii)  he  may
be  a  slanderer; — repeating  here  what  he  has  heard
elsewhere  so  as  to  set  one  set  of  people  by  the  ears,
and  repeating  elsewhere  what  he  has  heard  here  so  as
to  set  another  set  of  people  by  the  ears ;  he  is  a
dissolver  of  harmony  and  a  fomenter  of  strife  ;  discord
prompts  his  utterances,  discord  being  his  pleasure,  his


204


XLI.  SA.LEYYAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  287.


joy,  and  his  delight.  Or  (iii)  he  may  be  bitter  of
tongue  ; — what  he  says  is  rough  and  harsh,  hurtful  and
wounding  to  others,  provocative  of  anger,  and  leading  to
distraction.  [287]  Or  (iv)  he  may  be  a  tattler, —
talking  out  of  season,  without  heed  to  fact,  always
talking  of  the  unprofitable,  never  of  the  Doctrine,
never  of  the  Rule,  but  ever  of  the  trivial,  of  the  ill-
timed,  of  the  frivolous,  of  things  leading  nowhere,
and  unprofitable.

As  regards  unrighteousness  of  thought,  a  man  (i)  may
be  covetous,  coveting  other  people's  gear  with  the
yearning  that  it  were  all  his  own.  Or  (ii)  he  may  be
malevolent  and  wicked  of  heart, — wishing  that  creatures
around  him  might  be  killed,  destroyed,  annihilated,  or
cease  to  be.  Or  (iii)  he  may  be  wrong  in  outlook  and
erroneous  in  his  conceptions, — holding  that  there  are
no  such  things  as  alms  or  sacrifice  or  oblations,  that
there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  fruit  and  harvest  of  deeds
good  and  bad,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  this  world
or  any  other,  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  either
parents  or  translation  elsewhere,  that  there  are  no  such
things  in  the  world  as  recluses  and  brahmins  who,
having  trodden  the  right  path  and  walked  aright,
have,  of  and  by  themselves,  comprehended  and  realized
this  and  other  worlds  and  made  it  all  known  to
others  too.

Yes,  it  is  because  some  creatures  walk  thus  not  ih
righteousness  but  in  wickedness  that  they  pass  after
death  at  the  body’s  dissolution  to  re- birth  in  states  of
suffering  or  woe  or  purgatory.

Contrariwise,  there  are  three  forms  of  righteousness
and  goodness  for  the  body ;  four  for  speech  ;  and  three
for  thoughts.

As  regards  bodily  righteousness,  a  man  (i)  puts  from
him  all  killing  and  abstains  from  killing  anything;
laying  aside  cudgel  and  sword,  he  lives  a  life  of
innocence  and  mercy,  full  of  kindliness  and  compassion
for  everything  that  lives,  (ii)  Theft  he  puts  from  him
and  eschews  ;  taking  from  others  only  what  is  given  to
him  by  them,  he  lives  an  honest  life,  (iii)  Putting


M.  i.  258.


OUR  WEIRD.


205


from  him  all  sensual  misconduct,  he  abstains  from
fornication  ;  he  has  no  intercourse  with  girls  under  the
charge  of  mother  or  father  or  brother  or  sister  or
relations,  no  intercourse  with  girls  affianced  and
plighted  and  with  the  garlands  of  betrothal  upon
them.

[288]  As  regards  righteousness  in  speech,  (i)  a  man
puts  lying  from  him  and  abstains  from  lies  ;  when  cited
to  give  testimony  before  assembly  or  village-meeting
or  family  council  or  royal  household  or  his  guild  he
says  that  he  does  not  know  when  he  does  not,  and  that
he  does  know  when  he  does,  says  that  he  did  not  see
when  he  did  not  see  and  that  he  saw  when  he  did  see,
— never  deliberately  lying  in  the  interests  of  himself  or
of  other  people  or  for  some  trifling  gain,  (ii)  All
slander  he  puts  from  him  and  from  slandering  he  ab¬
stains  ;  what  he  hears  here  he  does  not  repeat  elsewhere
so  as  to  set  one  set  of  people  by  the  ears,  nor  does  he
repeat  here  what  he  hears  elsewhere  so  as  to  set
another  set  of  people  by  the  ears  ;  he  is  a  promoter  of
harmony  and  a  restorer  of  amity,  for  concord  is  his
pleasure,  his  joy,  and  his  delight,  (iii)  There  is  no
bitterness  in  his  tongue  and  he  abstains  from  bitter
speech  ;  what  he  says  is  without  gall,  pleasant,  friendly,
hearty,  urbane,  agreeable,  and  welcome  to  all.  (iv)  No
tattler,  he  abstains  from  tattle,  speaking  in  season,
according  to  fact,  always  of  the  profitable,  of  the
Doctrine  and  Rule,  in  speech  which  is  seasonable  and
memorable,  illuminating,  well-marshalled,  and  of  great
profit.

As  regards  righteousness  in  thoughts,  (i)  a  man  is
devoid  of  covetousness,  never  coveting  other  people’s
gear  with  the  yearning  that  it  were  all  his  own.  (ii)  He
harbours  no  malevolence  or  wickedness  of  thought ;
his  wish  is  that  creatures  around  him  may  live  on  in
peace  and  happiness,  safe  from  all  enmity  and  oppres¬
sion.  (iii)  He  is  right  in  outlook  and  correct  in  his
conceptions;  he  affirms  that  there  are  indeed  such
things  as  alms,  sacrifice,  and  oblations, — as  the  fruit
and  harvest  of  deeds  good  and  bad, — as  this  and  other


206


XLI.  SALEYYAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  289.


worlds, — as  parents  and  translation  elsewhere — as
recluses  and  brahmins  who,  having  trodden  the  right
path  and  walked  aright,  have,  of  and  by  themselves,
comprehended  and  realized  this  and  other  worlds  and
made  it  all  known  to  others  too.

It  is  because  some  creatures  walk  thus  in  righteous¬
ness  and  goodness  that  they  pass  after  death  at  the
body’s  dissolution  to  re- birth  in  some  happy  state  in
heaven.

[289]  If  the  desire  of  a  righteous  and  good  man  be
to  be  reborn  after  death  at  the  body’s  dissolution  as  a
great  noble,  this  may  very  well  come  to  pass, — because
of  his  righteousness  and  goodness  here.  Or,  if  such
be  his  desire,  he  might  become  a  magnate  among
brahmins  or  heads  of  houses, — because  of  his  righteous¬
ness  and  goodness  here.  Or,  again,  if  such  be  his
desire,  he  might  be  reborn  among  the  Four  Regents,
or  the  Thirty-three  gods,  or  the  YSmas,  or  the  Tusitas,
or  the  Nimmanaratis,  or  the  Paranimmita-vasavattis,
the  Corporeal  Brahmas,  the  Abhas,  the  Paritt-abhas,
the  Appamana-subhas,  the  Subha-kinnas,  the  Vehap-
phalas,  the  Avihas,  the  Atappas,  the  Sudassas,  the
Sudassis,  the  Akanitthas,  the  gods  of  Infinity  of  Space,
the  gods  of  Infinity  of  Mind,  the  gods  of  the  Realm  of
Naught,  the  gods  of  the  Realm  of  Neither  Perception
nor  Non-perception.  Or,  again,  if  it  be  the  righteous
and  good  man’s  desire,  by  extirpating  the  Cankers,  here
and  now  to  enter  on,  and  abide  in,  Deliverance  of  heart
and  mind  where  no  Cankers  are,  a  Deliverance  which
he,  of  and  by  himself,  has  comprehended  and  realized, —
then  it  may  well  be  that  to  such  Deliverance  he  will
come ;  and  all  because  of  his  righteousness  and  good¬
ness  here.

[290]  At  the  close  of  this  discourse,  the  brahmin
householders  of  Sala  said  to  the  Lord : — Excellent,
Gotama ;  most  excellent !  It  is  just  as  if  a  man
should  set  upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or
reveal  what  had  been  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who
had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp
into  darkness,  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might


M.  i.  291.


OUR  WEIRD.


207


discern  the  things  about  them ; — even  so,  in  many  a
figure,  has  the  reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine
clear.  We  come  to  him  as  our  refuge,  and  to  his
Doctrine,  and  to  his  Confraternity.  We  ask  the
reverend  Gotama  to  accept  us  as  followers  who  have
found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onward  while
life  lasts.


XLII.  VERANJAKA-SUTTA.

OUR  WEIRD.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SfivatthI  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
plcasaunce,  there  were  brahmins  from  Veranja  who
were  stopping  in  Savatthi  on  some  business  or  other ;
and  it  came  to  their  ears  that  the  recluse  Gotama,  a
Sakyan  who  had  gone  forth  as  a  Pilgrim  .  .  .  [291]
{etc.,  as  in  the  foregoing  Suita ,  to  the  end).


XLIII.  MAHA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.

THE  LONG  MISCELLANY.

[292]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Savatthl  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anatha¬
pindika’s  pleasaunce,  the  reverend  Maha-Kotthita,
rising  up  at  eventide  from  his  meditations,  went  to  the
reverend  Sariputta  and,  after  greetings,  took  his  seat
to  one  side  and  spoke  thus  : — We  speak  of  a  man  as
lacking  understanding.  Now,  in  what  respects  does
he  lack  understanding  ?

It  is  because  he  does  not  understand,  that  he  is  said
to  lack  understanding. — He  does  not  understand  what
Ill  is,  or  its  origin,  or  its  cessation,  or  the  way  that
leads  to  its  cessation.  That  is  why  he  is  said  to  lack


208


XLIII.  MAHA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  293.


understanding, — because  he  does  not  understand  these
things.

With  an  expression  of  his  grateful  thanks  to
Sariputta,  Maha-Kotthita  put  this  further  question  : —
We  speak  of  a  man  as  having  understanding  (pafina).
Now,  in  what  respects  has  he  got  understanding  ?

1 1  is  because  he  understands,  that  he  is  said  to  have
got  understanding. —  He  understands  what  Ill  is,  and
its  origin,  and  its  cessation,  and  the  way  that  leads
to  its  cessation.  That  is  why  he  is  said  to  have
got  understanding, — because  he  understands  these
things.

We  speak  of  consciousness  (vinnana).  Why  is  it  so
called  ?

It  is  because  he  is  conscious,  that  we  speak  of  con-
sciousness. — He  is  conscious  that  a  thing  is  pleasant,  or
unpleasant,  or  neither.  It  is  because  he  is  conscious,
that  consciousness  is  so  called.

Are  understanding  and  consciousness  associated  or
dissociated  ?  Can  a  differentia  between  the  two  states
be  shewn  by  persistent  analysis  ?

They  are  associated,  not  dissociated ;  a  differentia
between  them  cannot  be  shewn  by  persistent  analysis.
For,  what  a  man  understands,  he  is  conscious  of ;  and
what  he  is  conscious  of,  he  understands.  [293]  There¬
fore  these  two  states  are  associated,  not  dissociated ;
analysis  cannot  shew  their  differentia.

What  is  the  differentia  ?

In  understanding  we  have  to  develop  ;  in  conscious¬
ness  we  have  to  apprehend  ; — that  is  what  differentiates
them.

We  speak  of  feeling. — In  what  sense?

A  man  feels  and  therefore  it  is  called  feeling, — of  the
pleasant  or  unpleasant  or  indifferent.

We  speak  of  perception. — In  what  sense  ?

He  perceives  and  therefore  it  is  called  perception, —
of  blue,  or  yellow,  or  red,  or  white.

Are  feeling,  perception,  and  consciousness  associ¬
ated  or  dissociated  ?  Can  a  differentia  between  these
states  be  shewn  by  persistent  analysis  r


M.  i.  294.


THE  LONG  MISCELLANY.


209


They  are  associated,  not  dissociated  ;  a  differentia
between  them  cannot  be  shewn  by  persistent  analysis.
What  is  felt  is  perceived,  and  there  is  consciousness
of  what  is  perceived  ;  consequently  these  states  are
associated,  not  dissociated  ;  analysis  cannot  shew  their
differentia.

What  is  knowable  by  pure  mental  consciousness
(mano-vinfiana),  isolated  from  the  five  faculties  of  bodily
sense  ?

The  ideas  of  Infinity  of  Space,  of  Infinity  of  Mind,
and  of  the  Realm  of  Naught,  are  knowable  by  pure
mental  consciousness,  isolated  from  the  five  faculties  of
bodily  sense.

By  what  are  these  knowable  ideas  known  ?

By  the  eye  of  understanding  (paMa-cakkhu).

What  does  understanding  promote  ?

The  higher  and  precise  knowledges  and  Renuncia¬
tion.

[294]  How  many  conditions  are  required  to  create  a
right  outlook  ?

Two,  —  instruction  imparted,  and  systematized
thought.

How  many  factors  help  a  right  outlook  to  win  the
fruit,  and  the  guerdon  of  the  fruit,  of  Deliverance  alike
of  heart  and  mind  ?

Five, — virtue,  study,  converse,  tranquillization,  and
discernment.

How  many  types  of  re-birth  are  there?

Three, — sensuous,  corporeal,  and  incorporeal.

How  does  re- birth  come  to  pass  hereafter  in  a  sub¬
sequent  existence  ?

By  creatures — hampered  by  ignorance  and  clogged
by  cravings — revelling  now  in  this  object,  now  in  that.

And  how  does  re-birth  not  come  to  pass  ?

By  the  disappearance  of  the  passion  that  Ignorance
brings,  by  the  uprising  of  knowledge,  and  by  the
cessation  of  cravings.

What  is  the  First  Ecstasy  ?

When,  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense,  divested  of
wrong  states  of  mind,  an  Almsman  enters  on,  and  abides

1+


210


XLIII.  MAHA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  395.


in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction, —
a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from
observation  and  reflection, — that  is  called  the  First
Ecstasy.

How  many  factors  are  there  in  it  ?

Five, — observation,  reflection,  zest,  satisfaction,  and
a  focussed  heart.

How  many  factors  has  the  First  Ecstasy  put  from
it,  and  how  many  does  it  retain  ?

Five  of  each.  Gone  are  lusts,  malevolence,  torpor,
worry,  [295]  and  doubt.  Observation,  reflection,  zest,
satisfaction,  and  a  focussed  heart  persist.

Take  the  five  senses  of  sight,  sound,  smell,  taste,
and  touch, — each  with  its  own  particular  province  and
range  of  function  separate  and  mutually  distinct.
What  ultimate  base  have  they  ?  Who  enjoys  all  their
five  provinces  and  ranges  ?

Mind  (mano).1

On  what  do  these  five  faculties  of  sense  depend  ?

On  vitality.

On  what  does  vitality  depend  ?

On  heat.

On  what  does  heat  depend  ?

On  vitality.

You  say  that  vitality  depends  on  heat ;  you  say  that
heat  depends  on  vitality.  What  precisely  is  the
meaning  to  be  attached  to  this  ?

I  will  give  you  an  illustration  ;  an  illustration  often¬
times  serves  to  bring  home  the  meaning  of  a  remark  to
persons  of  intelligence.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  a  lighted
lamp  the  light  reveals  the  flame  and  the  flame  the
light,  —  so  vitality  depends  on  heat  and  heat  on
vitality.

Now,  as  to  plastic  forces  of  vitality, — are  they  simply
objects  of  sense  ?  Or  are  they  different  from  them  ?

They  are  not  sensible  objects.  [296]  Were  they
sensible,  then  the  emergence  of  an  Almsman  who  had


1  See  hereon  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids’  Buddhist  Psychology,  pp.
68-73.


M.  i.  297.


THE  LONG  MISCELLANY.


21 1


passed  into  trance  without  perception  and  without
feeling,  could  never  be  witnessed  ;  it  can  be  witnessed
just  because  the  plastic  forces  of  vitality  are  different
from  sensible  objects.

How  many  things  must  quit  the  body  before  it  is
flung  aside  and  cast  away  like  a  senseless  log  ?

Three, — vitality,  heat,  and  consciousness.

What  is  the  difference  between  a  lifeless  corpse  and
an  Almsman  in  trance,  in  whom  perception  and  feeling
are  stilled  ?

In  the  corpse  not  only  are  the  plastic  forces  of  the
body  and  speech  and  mind1  stilled  and  quiescent  but
also  vitality  is  exhausted,  heat  is  quenched,  and  the
faculties  of  sense  broken  up ; — whereas  in  the  Almsman
in  trance  vitality  persists,  heat  abides,  and  the  faculties
are  clear,  although  respiration,  observation  and  percep¬
tion  are  stilled  and  quiescent.

How  many  conditions  are  needed  to  produce  that
ecstatic  state  of  the  heart’s  Deliverance  wherein  there
is  neither  satisfaction  nor  dissatisfaction  ?

Four. — By  putting  from  him  both  satisfaction  and
dissatisfaction,  and  by  shedding  the  joys  and  sorrows
he  used  to  feel,  the  Almsman  enters  on,  and  abides  in,
the  Fourth  Ecstasy, — the  state  that,  knowing  neither
satisfaction  nor  dissatisfaction,  is  the  consummate
purity  of  poised  equanimity  and  mindfulness.

How  many  conditions  are  needed  for  that  ecstatic
state  of  the  heart’s  Deliverance  which  is  void  of
phenomenal  relations  ?

Two, — (1)  Keeping  the  mind  off  all  that  is  phe¬
nomenal,  and  (2)  fixing  it  on  what  is  not  phenomenal.

How  many  conditions  make  this  Deliverance
persist  ?

Three, — [297]  (i)  Keeping  the  mind  off  all  that  is
phenomenal,  (2)  fixing  it  on  what  is  not  phenomenal,
and  (3)  precedent  preparation.

How  many  conditions  are  needed  for  emerging  from
this  Deliverance?


1  Defined  in  the  next  Sutta  as  respiration,  etc.


2  12


XLIII.  MAHA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  298.


Two, — (1)  fixing  the  mind  on  the  phenomenal  and
(2)  keeping  the  mind  off  the  non*phenomenal.

As  touching  those  Deliverances  of  the  heart  which
are  boundless  (appamana),  Naught  (akificaftfla),
emptied  (sufifiata),  and  non-phenomenal  (animitta), —
do  all  these  states  of  consciousness  differ  both  in  con¬
notation  and  in  denotation,  or  are  they  identical  in
connotation  while  differing  in  denotation  ?

In  one  sense  their  connotation  is  different,  in  another
sense  identical.

In  what  sense  do  these  four  states  of  consciousness
differ  in  connotation  as  well  as  in  denotation  ?

It  is  called  boundless  Deliverance  of  heart  when  an
Almsman  dwells  with  radiant  good-will  pervading  first
one  quarter  of  the  world — then  the  second — then  the
third — and  then  the  fourth  quarter ;  when  he  dwells
with  radiant  good-will  pervading  the  whole  length  and
breadth  of  the  world,  above,  below,  around,  and  every¬
where,  with  radiant  good-will  all-embracing,  vast,
boundless,  wherein  no  hate  or  malice  finds  a  place.
And  as  with  good-will,  so,  in  turn,  with  radiant  com¬
passion,  and  sympathy,  and  poised  equanimity  does  he
pervade  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world.

It  is  called  Naught  Deliverance  when,  wholly
transcending  the  realm  of  consciousness,  the  Almsman
enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  Realm  of  Naught.

It  is  called  emptied  Deliverance  when,  in  the  wilds
or  under  a  tree  or  in  an  empty  dwelling,  he  reflects
that  Emptiness  is  here, — no  Self  nor  anything  apper¬
taining  to  a  Self.

[298]  It  is  called  non-phenomenal  Deliverance
when  by  keeping  his  mind  off  all  that  is  phenomenal,
an  Almsman  enters  on,  and  dwells  in,  the  serenity  of
heart  which  is  beyond  the  phenomenal.

The  foregoing  is  the  sense  in  which  both  the
connotation  and  the  denotation  of  these  several
Deliverances  differ  from  one  another.  In  what  sense,
now,  is  their  connotation  identical  while  their  denota¬
tion  differs  ?

It  is  passion,  it  is  malevolence,  it  is  illusion,  which


M.  i.  299.


THE  SHORT  MISCELLANY.


213


impose  bounds ;  in  the  Arahat  who  has  extirpated  the
Cankers  these  three  have  been  put  away,  have  been
grubbed  and  stubbed,  like  the  bare  cleared  site  where
once  a  palm-tree  grew, — they  have  been  and  now  can
be  no  more.  In  so  far  as  boundless  Deliverances  are
sure,  the  Deliverance  they  bring  is  unsurpassed, — sure
because  empty  of  passion,  of  malevolence,  and  of
illusion.

It  is  passion,  it  is  malevolence,  it  is  illusion,  which
harbour  aught  which  clogs ;  in  the  Arahat  who  .  .  .
be  no  more.  In  so  far  as  Naught  Deliverances  are
sure  .  .  .  and  of  illusion.

It  is  passion,  it  is  malevolence,  it  is  illusion,  which
create  the  phenomenal ;  in  the  Arahat  ...  be  no  more.
In  so  far  as  non-phenomenal  Deliverances  are  sure,  the
Deliverance  they  bring  is  unsurpassed, — sure  because
void  of  passion,  of  malevolence,  and  of  illusion.

This  is  the  sense  in  which  these  several  Deliverances
are  identical  in  their  connotation,  while  differing  in
denotation.

Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Sariputta.  Glad  at  heart,
the  reverend  Maha-Kotthita  rejoiced  in  what  the
reverend  Sariputta  had  said.


XLIV.  CULA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.

THE  SHORT  MISCELLANY.

[299]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where
the  squirrels  were  fed,  the  lay-disciple  Visakha  came  to
the  Almswoman  Dhammadinna1 — and  after  saluta¬
tions  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  saying: — As  regards
what  is  known  as  personality  (sakkaya),  madam,  how
has  the  Lord  described  its  nature  ?


1  They  had  been  husband  and  wife  before  his  conversion,  which
was  followed  by  hers.  For  her  story  see  Psalms  of  the  Sisters,
p.  16.


214


XLIV.  CULA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  300.


He  has  described  it,  sir,  as  the  Five  Attachments  to
existence, — namely,  visible  shape,  feeling,  perception,
plastic  forces,  and  consciousness.

After  thanking  her,  Visakha  put  to  her  this  further
question : — And  what,  madam,  does  the  Lord  say  of
the  origin  of  personality  ?

He  says,  sir,  that  the  origin  of  personality  is  from
cravings, — craving  for  pleasures  of  sense,  craving  for
continued  existence,  craving  for  annihilation, — all
entailing  re-birth,  all  imbued  with  passion’s  delights,
all  seeking  pleasure  here  or  there.

And  what,  madam,  does  the  Lord  say  of  the  cessa¬
tion  of  personality  ?

He  says,  sir,  that  its  cessation  is  the  complete  and
passionless  cessation  of  just  this  selfsame  craving, — its
discarding,  its  abandonment,  its  dismissal,  and  its
ejection.

And  what  does  he  say  about  the  way  that  leads  to
such  cessation  of  personality  ?

He  says,  sir,  that  the  way  is  the  Noble  Eightfold
Path, — namely,  right  outlook,  right  aims,  ri^ht  speech,
right  action,  right  means  of  livelihood,  right  effort,
right  mindfulness,  and  right  rapture  of  concentration.

Does  attachment  consist  of  just  the  Five  Attach¬
ments  you  have  particularized,  madam  ?  Or  is  there
attachment  apart  from  them  ?

Attachment,  sir,  does  not  consist  solely  of  those
five ;  [800]  nor  yet  is  there  attachment  wholly  apart
from  them ; — the  desire  and  passion  that  dwells  in  the
Five  Attachments  is  attachment.

How,  madam,  does  the  personality  theory  arise  ?

Take,  sir,  the  case  of  an  uninstructed  everyday  man,
who  has  no  regard  for  the  Noble  and  is  unversed  and
untrained  in  their  Doctrine,  and  who  pays  no  regard
to  the  Excellent  and  is  unversed  and  untrained  in  their
Doctrine  ; — he  views  material  Form  as  Self,  or  Self  as
having  Form,  or  Form  as  in  Self,  or  Self  as  in  Form.
And  these  views  concerning  Form  he  extends  equally
to  feelings,  perceptions,  the  plastic .  forces,  and  con¬
sciousness. — That  is  how  the  personality  theory  arises^


M.  i.  301.


THE  SHORT  MISCELLANY.


215


And  how,  madam,  does  the  personality  theory  not
arise  ?

Take,  sir,  the  case  of  an  instructed  disciple  who  has
got  regard  for  the  Noble  and  is  versed  and  trained
in  their  Doctrine,  and  who  has  got  regard  for  the
Excellent  and  is  versed  and  trained  in  their  Doctrine ;
— he  does  not  view  material  Form  as  Self,  or  Self  as
having  Form,  or  Form  as  in  Self,  or  Self  as  in  Form  ;
nor  does  he  so  view  feelings,  perceptions,  and  the  like.
— That  is  how  the  personality  theory  does  not  arise.

What,  madam,  is  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path  ?

Just  this,  sir, — right  outlook,  right  aims,  right  speech,
right  action,  right  means  of  livelihood,  right  effort,
right  mindfulness,  and  right  rapture  of  concentration.

Is  the  Noble  Eightfold  Path  create  or  uncreate  ?

It  is  create.

[301]  Are  three  groups  included  in  the  Noble  Eight¬
fold  Path,  or  is  the  Path  included  in  the  groups  ?

They  are  not  included  in  it ;  it  is  included  in  them.
Right  speech,  right  action,  and  right  means  of  liveli¬
hood  are  included  in  the  virtue-group ;  right  effort,
right  mindfulness,  and  right  rapture  of  concentration
are  included  in  the  concentration-group ;  while  right
outlook  and  right  aims  are  Included  in  the  knowledge-
group.

What  is  rapt  concentration  ?  Whatare  its  phenomena?
What  are  its  requisites  ?  What  cultivates  it  ?

Rapt  concentration  is  the  focussing  of  the  heart ;
its  phenomena  are  the  fourfold  mustering  of  mindful¬
ness  ;  its  requisites  are  the  four  right  exertions ;  and
the  practice  and  cultivation  and  increase  of  these  states
of  consciousness  cultivate  rapt  concentration.

How  many  plastic  forces  are  there  ?

Three, — those  of  the  body,  of  speech,  and  of  the
mind.

What  are  these,  severally  ?

Respiration  in  the  case  of  the  body,  observation  and
reflection  for  speech,  and  for  the  mind  perception  and
feeling.

How  is  this,  in  each  of  the  three  cases  ?


216


XLIV.  CULA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  302.


Respiration  is  a  bodily  thing  bound  up  with  the  body
and  therefore  is  the  plastic  force  for  the  body.  It  is
because  observation  and  reflection  precede  subsequent
utterance  that  they  are  the  plastic  forces  of  speech.
Perception  and  feeling  are  mental  things  bound  up
with  the  mind  and  therefore  are  the  plastic  forces  of
the  mind.

How  comes  the  ecstatic  state  wherein  perception
and  feeling  cease  ?

It  is  not  while  an  Almsman  is  passing  into  this
ecstatic  state  that  the  thought  comes  to  him  that  he  will
pass  into  it,  or  that  he  is  passing  into  it,  or  that  he  has
passed  into  it.  No ;  ere  that,  he  has  so  cultivated  his
mind  that  it  leads  him  to  this  result.

While  he  is  [302]  passing  into  this  ecstatic  state,
what  plastic  forces  cease  first, — those  of  the  body  or  of
speech  or  of  mind  ?

Those  of  speech  first,  then  those  of  the  body,  and
lastly  those  of  the  mind.

How  does  he  emerge  from  this  ecstatic  state  ?

It  is  not  while  he  is  emerging  therefrom  that  the
thought  comes  to  him  that  he  will  emerge,  or  is
emerging,  or  has  emerged  from  this  ecstatic  state.
No;  ere  that,  he  has  so  cultivated  his  mind  that  it
leads  him  to  this  result.

While  he  is  so  emerging,  what  plastic  forces  revive
first  ?

Those  of  the  mind  first,  then  those  of  the  body,  and
lastly  those  of  speech.

When  he  has  emerged  from  this  ecstatic  state,  how
many  Contacts  affect  him  ?

Three, — the  emptied,  the  non-characterized,  and  the
unsought  (appanihita).

When  he  has  emerged,  towards  what  is  the  inclina¬
tion,  bent  and  trend  of  his  mind  ?

Towards  inward  aloofness.

How  many  kinds  of  feelings  are  there  ?

Three, — pleasant,  unpleasant,  and  neutral.

What  are  they,  respectively  ?

Whatever  either  mind  or  body  has  felt  as  pleasant


M.  i.  303.


THE  SHORT  MISCELLANY.


217


and  agreeable,  is  a  pleasant  feeling  ;  whatever  either
mind  or  body  has  felt  as  unpleasant  and  disagreeable,
is  an  unpleasant  feeling  ;  and  whatever  either  mind  or
body  has  felt  as  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant,  neither
agreeable  nor  disagreeable,  is  [808]  neutral  feeling.

What  kind  of  pleasantness  or  unpleasantness  is  there
in  each  of  the  three  ?

A  pleasant  feeling  is  pleasant  while  it  lasts  and  un¬
pleasant  when  it  passes.  An  unpleasant  feeling  is
unpleasant  while  it  lasts  and  pleasant  when  it  passes.
A  neutral  feeling  is  pleasant  if  comprehended,  un¬
pleasant  if  not  comprehended.

What  propensity  lurks  in  each  of  the  three  kinds  of
feeling  ?

Passion  in  pleasant  feelings,  repugnance  in  un¬
pleasant  feelings,  and  ignorance  in  neutral  feelings.

Do  these  several  propensities  always  lurk  in  every
instance  of  their  respective  feelings  ?

In  these  several  feelings,  what  should  be  shed,
respectively  ?

In  pleasant  feelings,  the  propensity  to  passion;  in
unpleasant  feelings,  the  propensity  to  repugnance ;
and  in  neutral  feelings,  the  propensity  to  ignorance.

Have  these  several  propensities  always  to  be  shed
in  every  instance  of  their  respective  feelings  ?

Not  in  every  instance.  Take  the  case  of  an  Alms¬
man  who,  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  divested
of  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  has  entered  on,  and
abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satis¬
faction, — a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not
divorced  from  observation  and  reflection.  Thereby
he  sheds  passion  ;  and  here  there  exists  no  lurking
propensity  to  passion.  When,  oh  when,  asks  he  of
himself,  shall  I  enter  on,  and  abide  in,  that  region
where  the  Noble1  are  even  now  abiding?  He
develops  such  a  yearning  for  utter  Deliverance  [804]
that  by  reason  thereof  he  is  distressed.  Thereby  he


1  I.e.  Arahats.  See  p.  1,  n.  1


2  1 8


XLIV.  CfTLA-VEDALLA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  305.


sheds  repugnance ;  and  here  there  exists  no  lurking
propensity  to  repugnance.  Or,  take  the  case  of  an
Almsman  who,  by  putting  from  him  both  satisfaction
and  dissatisfaction,  and  by  shedding  the  joys  and
sorrows  he  used  to  feel,  has  entered  on,  and  abides  in,
the  Fourth  Ecstasy, — the  state  that,  knowing  neither
satisfaction  nor  dissatisfaction,  is  the  consummate
purity  of  poised  equanimity  and  mindfulness.  Thereby
he  sheds  ignorance  ;  and  here  there  exists  no  lurking
propensity  to  ignorance.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  pleasant  feelings  ?

Unpleasant  feelings.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  unpleasant  feelings  ?

Pleasant  feelings.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  neutral  feelings  ?

Ignorance.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  ignorance  ?

Knowledge.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  knowledge  ?

Deliverance.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  Deliverance  ?

Nirvana.

What  is  the  counterpart  to  Nirvana,  madam  ?

You  push  your  question  too  far,  sir ;  you  can  never
get  to  an  end  of  your  questionings.  For,  in  Nirvana
the  higher  life  merges  to  find  its  goal  and  its  con¬
summation. — If  you  so  desire,  sir,  seek  out  the  Lord
and  ask  him,  treasuring  up  the  answer  he  gives.

With  grateful  thanks  to  the  Almswoman  Dhamma-
dinna,  Visakha,  the  lay-disciple,  rose  up,  took  his  leave
of  her  with  salutations  and  profound  homage.  Coming
to  the  Lord  and  taking  his  seat  to  one  side  after  due  salu¬
tation,  he  related  the  whole  of  the  talk  he  had  had  with
the  Almswoman  DhammadinnlL  Hereupon,  the  Lord
said  to  him  : — Learning  and  great  knowledge  dwell  in
Dhammadinna.  Had  you  asked  me,  I  should  make
answer  precisely  [805]  as  she  did.  Her  answer  was
correct,  and  you  should  treasure  it  up  accordingly.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  Visakha,  the
lay-disciple,  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


M.  i.  306.


ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS — I.


219


XLV.  CULA-DHAMMA-SAMADANA-SUTTA

ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS-I.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Sftvatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapin^ika's
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows  : —

There  are  four  ways  to  profess  a  Doctrine.  The
first  is  pleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  pain
thereafter  ;  the  second  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being
and  ripens  to  pain  thereafter ;  the  third  is  unpleasant
for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter  ;
and  the  fourth  is  not  only  pleasant  for  the  time  being
but  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.

As  touching  the  first  of  the  four,  there  are  some
recluses  and  brahmins  who  maintain  and  hold  that —
There  is  nothing  wrong  in  pleasures  of  sense.
So  they  give  way  to  indulgence  in  pleasures  of
sense ;  they  disport  themselves  with  top-knotted  girl-
Wanderers;1  and  they  say  : — Why  is  it  that  recluses
and  brahmins,  detecting  future  peril  from  pleasures  of
sense,  call  on  people  to  eschew  them,  and  insist  on
their  real  nature  ?  Pleasant  are  the  tender,  young,
downy  arms  of  my  girl- Wanderer  !  So  they  give  way
to  indulgence  in  pleasures  of  sense,  with  the  result  that,
after  death  at  the  body’s  dissolution,  they  pass  to  states
of  woe  and  suffering  or  to  purgatory,  where  they  ex¬
perience  anguish  and  torment.  Here  they  realize  why
recluses  and  brahmins,  detecting  future  peril  from
pleasures  of  sense,  called  on  people  to  eschew  them,
and  insisted  on  their  real  nature  1  For,  here  they  find
themselves  [806]  experiencing  feelings  of  anguish  and
torment, — solely  because,  and  by  reason,  of  these
pleasures  of  sense.

It  is  just  as  if,  in  the  last  month  of  the  hot  season  of


1  Acc.  to  Bu.,  these  were  non-buddhist  *  ascetic  (tapasa)  women-
paribbajikas  who  tied  up  their  hair  like  the  top-knot  ’  (of  brahmin
ascetics).


220  XLV.  CULA-DHAMMA-SAMADANA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  307.


the  year,  a  creeper’s  seed-pod  should  burst  open  and
one  of  the  seeds  should  fall  at  the  foot  of  a  sal-tree, —
to  the  great  alarm  and  consternation  of  the  deity
residing  in  the  tree  ;  and  just  as  if  that  deity’s  friends
and  kinsfolk — deities  resident  in  pleasaunce  and  grove,
in  trees  and  medicinal  herbs  and  woodlands — should
gather  together  and  assemble  to  allay  that  deity’s
alarm  with  cheerful  hopes  that  no  doubt  the  creeper’s
seed  would  be  pecked  up  by  a  peacock,  or  munched  by
a  deer,  or  consumed  by  a  forest  fire,  or  be  taken  away
by  woodmen,  or  eaten  by  white  ants, — or  perhaps
might  never  germinate.  Suppose  now  that  none  of
these  things  happened  to  that  seed,  and  suppose  that
it  did  germinate,  and  that  the  monsoon  made  it  grow
apace,  so  that  a  creeper  sprouted — tender,  young,
downy,  and  clinging — which  fastened  on  to  that  sal-
tree.  Why,  the  resident  deity  might  then  think,  did
my  friends  and  kinsfolk  assemble  to  allay  my  alarm
with  cheerful  .  .  .  might  never  germinate  ?  Pleasant
indeed  are  the  embraces  of  this  tender,  young,  downy,
and  clinging  creeper  1  Suppose  now  that  creeper
should  enfold  the  tree,  growing  into  a  canopy  over  the
top  and  into  a  dense  growth  beneath,  till  it  had
strangled  every  mighty  branch  and  stem.  Well  might
that  deity  then  think  that  this  was  what  prompted  his
friends  and  kinsfolk  to  assemble  to  allay  his  alarm
with  their  cheerful  hopes  that  .  .  .  [307]  might  never
germinate.  For,  here  the  tree  would  find  itself  ex¬
periencing  anguish  and  torment,  all  because  of  that
creeper’s  seed.

It  is  just  the  same  with  those  recluses  and  brahmins
who  maintain  and  hold  .  .  .  because  and  by  reason  of
these  pleasures  of  sense. — This  is  the  first  way  of  pro¬
fessing  a  Doctrine, — the  way  which  is  pleasant  for
the  time  being  but  ripens  unto  Ill  thereafter.

As  touching  the  second  way  of  professing  a
Doctrine,  the  way  which  is  unpleasant  both  now  and
hereafter,  take  the  case  of  a  devotee,  naked,  flouting
the  decencies  of  life  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  12)  .  .  .
[308]  down  to  the  water  punctually  thrice  before  night-


M.  i.  309.  ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS— I.


221


fall  to  wash  (away  the  evil  within).  After  this  wise,  in
divers  fashions,  does  the  devotee  live  to  torment  and
to  torture  his  body  ;  and  after  death  at  the  body’s  dis¬
solution  he  passes  to  states  of  woe  and  suffering  or  to
purgatory,  where  he  experiences  anguish  and  torment.
— This  is  the  second  way  of  professing  a  Doctrine,
the  way  which  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  and
ripens  to  pain  thereafter.

As  touching  the  third  way,  take  the  case  of  a  man
by  nature  prone  to  passion — to  wrath — to  delusion — ,
who  time  after  time  suffers  the  pains  of  body  and  mind
which  each  of  these  three  things  continually  breeds,
but  yet — albeit  with  pain  of  body  and  mind,  albeit  with
tears  and  wailing — lives  the  higher  life  in  all  its  con¬
summate  purity.  Such  a  man,  after  death,  at  the
body's  dissolution,  passes  to  a  happy  state  in  heaven.
— This  is  the  third  way  of  professing  a  Doctrine,  the
way  which  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripens
to  be  pleasant  thereafter.

Lastly,  take  a  man  who  is  by  nature  not  prone  to
passion  or  wrath  or  delusion  and  who  suffers  there*
from  no  pains  of  body  or  mind,  [309]  but,  divested  of
pleasures  of  sense,  and  divested  of  wrong  states  of
consciousness,  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  First
Ecstasy  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Suita  4)  .  .  .  the  Fourth
Ecstasy,  the  state  that,  knowing  neither  satisfaction
nor  dissatisfaction,  is  the  consummate  purity  of  poised
equanimity  and  mindfulness.  Such  a  man,  after  death,
at  the  body’s  dissolution,  passes  to  a  happy  state  in
heaven. — This  is  the  fourth  way  of  professing  a
Doctrine,  the  way  which  is  both  pleasant  for  the  time
being  and  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.

These,  Brethren,  are  the  four  ways  to  profess  a
Doctrine.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


xlvi.  mahA-dhamma-samAdana-

SUTTA.

ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS— II.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows  : —

In  general,  people’s  wishes  and  desires  and  aims
are  for  a  decrease  in  what  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,
and  unpleasant,  and  for  an  increase  in  what  is  desirable,
agreeable,  and  pleasant.  In  people  with  such  aims
that  which  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,  and  unpleasant
waxes  apace,  while  that  which  is  desirable,  agreeable
and  pleasant  wanes. — What  do  you  take  to  be  the  cause
of  this  ?

[810]  The  Lord  is  the  root  and  the  guide  and  the
basis  of  all  our  ideas.  We  beg  that  the  Lord  may  be
moved  to  expound  the  meaning  of  his  utterance,  so
that  we  may  treasure  up  what  we  hear  from  him.

Then  listen  and  pay  attention,  and  I  will  speak,  said
the  Lord,  who  then  went  on  to  address  the  listening
Almsmen  as  follows : —

Take  the  case  of  an  uninstructed  everyday  man,  who
takes  no  count  of  the  Noble  and  is  unversed  and
untrained  in  Noble  doctrine ;  who  takes  no  count
of  the  Excellent  and  is  unversed  and  untrained  in
Excellent  doctrine ; — such  a  one  does  not  know  what
to  cultivate  and  what  not  to  cultivate ;  he  does  not
know  what  to  foster  and  what  not  to  foster ;  he
cultivates  and  fosters  what  he  should  not,  and  fails  to
cultivate  and  foster  what  he  ought  to  cultivate  and
foster, — with  the  result  that,  within  him,  that  which  is
undesirable,  disagreeable,  and  unpleasant  waxes  apace,
while  that  which  is  desirable,  agreeable,  and  pleasant

222


M.  i.  311.  ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS — II.  223

wanes.  And  why  ? — Because  this  is  what  happens  to
one  who  comprehends  not.

Take  now  an  instructed  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who
does  take  count  of  the  Noble  and  is  trained  and  versed
in  Noble  doctrine,  who  does  take  count  of  the  Excellent
and  is  trained  and  versed  in  Excellent  doctrine  ; — such
a  one  knows  what  to  cultivate  and  what  not  to
cultivate ;  he  knows  what  to  foster  and  what  not  to
foster  ;  and  so  he  does  not  cultivate  and  foster  what  he
should  not,  but  cultivates  and  fosters  what  he  ought  to
cultivate  and  foster, — with  the  result  that,  within  him,
that  which  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,  and  unpleasant
wanes,  while  that  which  is  desirable,  agreeable,  and
pleasant  waxes  apace.  And  why? — Because  this  is
what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends.

There  are  four  ways  of  professing  a  Doctrine.
The  first  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  and  also
ripens  to  pain  thereafter  ;  [811]  the  second  is  pleasant
for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  pain  thereafter ;  the
third  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  be
pleasant  thereafter;  and  the  fourth  both  is  pleasant
for  the  time  being  and  also  ripens  to  be  pleasant
thereafter.

In  the  first  case,  a  man  knows  it  not,  has  no
knowledge  of  it,  and  fails  to  discern  its  real  nature  as
unpleasant  for  the  time  being  and  ripening  to  pain
thereafter ;  he  cultivates  it,  and  does  not  shun  it  The
result  is  that  what  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,  and
unpleasant  waxes  apace,  while  what  is  desirable,
agreeable,  and  pleasant  wanes.  And  why  ? — Because
this  is  what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends  not.

[And  the  like  is  the  case  too  with  regard  to  the
second  profession,  where  what  is  pleasant  for  the  time
being  ripens  to  pain  thereafter.]  And  why? — Because
this  is  what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends  not.

In  the  third  case,  the  man  knows  it  not,  has  no  know¬
ledge  of  it,  and  fails  to  discern  its  real  nature  as  un¬
pleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripening  to  be  pleasant
thereafter  ;  he  does  not  cultivate  it  but  shuns  it.  The
result  is  that  what  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,  and


224  XL. VI.  MAHA-DHAMMA-SAMADANA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  312.


unpleasant  waxes  apace,  while  what  is  desirable,
agreeable,  and  pleasant  wanes.  And  why  ? — Because
this  is  what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends  not.

[And  the  like  happens  with  regard  to  the  fourth
profession,  where  what  is  pleasant  for  the  time  being
also  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.]  [812]  And
why  ? — Because  this  is  what  happens  to  one  who
comprehends  not.

To  return  to  the  first  profession.  If  a  man  knows
it,  has  knowledge  of  it,  and  discerns  its  real  nature  as
being  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  and  ripening  to
pain  thereafter ;  and  if  he  accordingly  does  not
cultivate  it  but  shuns  it ; — the  result  is  that  what  is
desirable,  agreeable,  and  pleasant  waxes  apace,  while
what  is  undesirable,  disagreeable,  and  unpleasant
wanes.  And  why? — Because  this  is  what  happens  to
one  who  comprehends.

[And  the  foregoing  is  the  case  too  with  regard  to  the
second  profession,  where  what  is  pleasant  for  the  time
being  ripens  to  pain  thereafter.]  And  why  ? — Because
this  is  what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends.

As  regards  the  third  profession,  if  a  man  knows  it,  has
knowledge  of  it,  and  discerns  its  real  nature  as  being
unpleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripening  to  be  pleasant
thereafter  ;  and  if  he  cultivates  it  and  does  not  shun  it ;
— the  result  is  that  what  is  desirable,  agreeable,  and
pleasant  waxes  apace,  while  what  is  undesirable,
disagreeable,  and  unpleasant  wanes.  And  why  ? —
Because  this  is  what  happens  to  one  who  comprehends.

[And  the  foregoing  is  the  case  too  with  regard  to
the  fourth  profession,  where  what  is  pleasant  for  the
time  being  also  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.]  And
why  ? — Because  this  is  what  happens  to  one  who
comprehends.

[313]  What  is  the  nature  of  the  first  profession? —
Take  the  case  of  a  man  who,  to  the  accompaniment  of
pain  alike  of  body  and  of  mind,  slays,  and,  as  a  con¬
sequence  of  slaying,  experiences  pain  alike  of  body
and  of  mind  ;  or  who  steals — or  fornicates — or  lies —
or  slanders — or  reviles — or  tattles — or  covets — or  is


M.  i.  314-  ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS — II.


225


malignant  of  heart — or  who,  to  the  accompaniment  of
pain  alike  of  body  and  of  mind,  has  a  wrong  outlook,
and,  as  a  consequence  of  his  wrong  outlook,  ex¬
periences  pain  alike  of  body  and  mind.  Such  a  man,
after  death  at  the  body’s  dissolution,  passes  to  a  state
of  woe  and  misery  or  to  purgatory. — Such  is  what
is  called  the  profession  of  the  Doctrine  which  is
unpleasant  for  the  time  being  and  ripens  to  pain
thereafter.

What  is  the  nature  of  the  second  profession  ? — Take
the  case  of  a  man  who,  to  the  accompaniment  of  pleasure
alike  of  body  and  of  mind,  slays,  and,  as  a  consequence
of  his  slaughter,  experiences  pleasure  alike  of  body
and  mind  ;  or  who  steals  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  the  preceding
paragraph)  .  .  .  [314]  purgatory. — Such  is  what  is  called
the  profession  of  the  Doctrine  where  what  is  pleasant
for  the  time  being  ripens  to  pain  thereafter.

What  is  the  nature  of  the  third  profession  ? — Take
a  man  who,  to  the  accompaniment  of  pain  alike  of  body
and  of  mind,  refrains  from  slaying  and,  as  a  result  of
his  abstinence,  experiences  pain  alike  of  body  and
of  mind ;  or  who  refrains  from  stealing  .  .  .  [315]  or
who,  to  the  accompaniment  of  pain  alike  of  body  and
of  mind,  gets  a  right  outlook,  and,  as  a  consequence  of
that  right  outlook,  experiences  pain  alike  of  body  and
of  mind.  Such  a  man,  after  death  at  the  body’s
dissolution,  passes  to  a  happy  state  or  to  heaven. —
Such  is  what  is  called  the  profession  of  the  Doctrine
which  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  be
pleasant  thereafter.

What  is  the  nature  of  the  fourth  profession? —
Take  the  case  of  a  man  who,  to  the  accompaniment  of
pleasure  of  body  and  of  mind,  refrains  from  slaying  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  the  preceding  paragraph)  ...  a  happy  state
or  to  heaven. — Such  is  what  is  called  the  profession
of  the  Doctrine  which  is  both  pleasant  for  the  time
being  and  also  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.

Such,  Almsmen,  are  the  four  ways  of  professing  the
Doctrine.

It  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  bitter  gourd  with  poison

15


226  xlvi.  mahA-dhamma-samadana-sutta.  M.  i.  316.

in  it,  and  a  man  came  along  who  wanted  to  live  and  not
to  die,  who  wanted  to  be  comfortable  and  disliked
pain ;  and  if  people  were  to  say  to  him : — There  is
poison  in  this  bitter  gourd,  my  good  man.  Drink  it  if
you  will ;  [816]  but,  in  drinking  it,  you  won’t  like  its
colour  and  odour  and  taste,  and,  when  you  have  drunk
it,  you  will  come  by  your  death  or  deadly  pain.
Suppose  now  that  heedlessly  he  drank  it  and  did  not
turn  away  from  it,  disliking  its  colour,  odour,  and  taste
while  he  was  drinking  it,  and  coming  by  his  death  or
deadly  pain  when  he  had  drunk  it  down. — Unto  this
do  I  liken  the  first  profession,  which  is  unpleasant  for
the  time  being  and  ripens  to  pain  thereafter.

Again,  it  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  goblet  of  liquor,
all  right  in  colour,  odour,  and  taste,  but  with  poison  in
it,  and  a  man  should  come  along  who  wanted  to  live
and  not  to  die,  who  wanted  to  be  comfortable  and  dis¬
liked  pain ;  and  if  people  were  to  say  to  him  : — This
goblet  of  liquor  is  all  right  in  colour,  odour,  and  taste,
but  has  poison  in  it.  Drink  it  if  you  will  ...  or
deadly  pain.  Suppose  now  that  heedlessly  he  drank  it
and  did  not  turn  away  from  it,  liking  its  colour,  odour,
and  taste  while  he  was  drinking  it,  but  coming  by  his
death  or  deadly  pain  when  he  had  drunk  it  down. —
Unto  this  do  I  liken  the  second  profession,  which  is
pleasant  for  the  time  being  but  ripens  to  pain  there¬
after.

Again,  it  is  just  as  if  there  were  decomposing  urine1
with  divers  medicaments  in  it,  and  a  man  with  jaundice
should  come  along ;  and  if  people  were  to  say  to
him  : — This  is  decomposing  urine  with  divers  medica¬
ments  in  it.  Drink  it  if  you  will ;  but,  in  drinking  it,
you  won’t  like  its  colour  or  odour  or  taste,  but,  when
you  have  drunk  it,  you  will  get  well.  Suppose  now
that,  heedfully  and  without  turning  away  from  it,  he
were  to  drink  it,  disliking  its  colour  and  odour  and
taste  while  he  was  drinking  it,  but  getting  well  after  he

1  Cf.  Vinaya  Texts  (S.B.E:  XIII,  174),  and  see  Introduction
supra,  p.  xvii.


M.  i.  317.  ON  LIVING  UP  TO  PROFESSIONS — II,


227


had  drunk  it  down. — Unto  this  do  I  liken  the  third
profession,  which  is  unpleasant  for  the  time  being  but
ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.

Lastly,  it  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  mixture  of  curds
and  honey  and  ghee,  and  a  man  with  dysentery  should
come  along,  and  people  were  to  say  to  him  : — [317]
Here  is  a  mixture  of  curds  and  honey  and  ghee.
Drink  it  if  you  will ;  and,  in  drinking  it,  you  will  like  its
colour  and  odour  and  taste,  and,  when  you  have  drunk
it,  you  will  get  well. — Unto  this  do  I  liken  the  fourth
profession,  which  both  is  pleasant  for  the  time  being
and  also  ripens  to  be  pleasant  thereafter.  Just  as,
at  harvest  time  at  the  close  of  the  rainy  season,  the
sun  shines  forth  and  blazes  in  full  glory,  scattering
and  putting  to  flight  the  clouds  of  the  air  as  he  rises
high  in  the  heavens  and  drives  before  him  all  murk
and  gloom  from  the  skies, — even  so,  Almsmen,  does
this  last  profession  of  the  Doctrine,  which  blesses  both
the  present  and  the  future,  shine  forth  and  blaze  in  full
glory  as  it  overpowers  the  wrangles  of  the  warring
hosts  of  recluses  and  brahmins.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XLVII.  ViMANiSAKA-SUTTA.

STUDY  OF  THE  TRUTH-FINDER.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
follows : — The  enquiring  Almsman  who  searches  the
hearts  of  others,  ought  to  study  the  truth-finder.

The  Lord  is  the  root  and  the  guide  and  the  basis  of
all  our  ideas.  We  beg  that  the  Lord  may  be  moved
to  expound  the  meaning  of  his  utterance,  so  that  we
may  treasure  up  what  we  hear  from  him.

Then  listen  and  pay  attention,  [318]  and  I  will


228


XLVII.  VlMAMSAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  319-


speak,  said  the  Lord,  who  then  went  on  to  address  the
listening  Almsmen,  as  follows  : — The  enquiring  Alms¬
man  who  searches  the  hearts  of  others  ought  to  study
the  truth-finder  in  respect  of  the  two  states  of  con¬
sciousness  which  come  through  eye  and  ear,  so  as  to
ascertain  whether  in  the  truth-finder  they  occur  in  a
corrupt  form  or  not.  As  he  studies,  he  comes  to  know
that  no  corrupt  forms  of  these  occur.  Pursuing  his
study,  he  comes  to  know  that  in  the  truth-finder
such  states  do  not  occur  in  a  mixed  form.  By  pursuing
his  study  still  further,  he  comes  to  know  that  in  the
truth-finder  these  states  of  consciousness  alone  occur
which  are  wholly  pure.  He  proceeds  to  examine
whether  this  reverend  man1  has  risen  long  since  or
only  recently  to  this  excellence  ;  and  he  comes  to  know
that  he  rose  thereto  long  ago.  Thence  he  goes  on  to
examine  whether  this  reverend  man  has  grown
popular  and  is  famous,  and  whether  certain  perils  beset
him. — For,  Almsmen,  such  perils  do  not  beset  an
Almsman,  so  long  as  he  has  not  grown  popular  and  so
long  as  he  is  not  famous ;  they  beset  him  only  after
he  has  grown  popular  and  is  famous. — Examination
shows  that  this  reverend  man  is  popular  and  famous,
but  that  these  perils  do  not  beset  him.  [319]  Then
comes  the  further  examination  to  settle  whether  the
reverend  man  refrains  in  fearlessness  or  through  fear,
or  whether  it  is  solely  by  reason  of  passionlessness
that  he  eschews  pleasures  of  sense,  having  eradicated
all  passion ;  and  this  examination  shows  that  the
eradication  of  passion  is  the  reason  why  he  eschews
pleasures  of  sense.  Should  the  enquiring  Almsman
be  asked  by  others  what  facts  and  evidence  lead  him
to  aver  that  this  reverend  man  eschews  pleasures  of
'  sense  in  fearlessness  and  not  from  motives  of  fear,  but
because  of  the  eradication  of  passion,  then  he  would
give  the  right  answer  by  replying  that,  whether  living

1  It  will  be  noted  that  the  general  style  of  ay  asm  a  is  here
given  to  him  who  has  previously  been  recognized  astathagata,
but  is  subsequently  referred  to  as  merely  a  b  h  i  k  k  h  u—  i.e.  to
an  Arahat.  Cf.  supra,  p.  98.


M.  i.  320.


STUDY  OF  THE  TRUTH-FINDER.


229


in  the  Confraternity  or  alone,  this  reverend  man —
alike  in  dealing  with  rich  and  poor,  with  teachers  of
confraternities,  with  those  patently  covetous  or  with
those  by  covetise  undefiled — never  looks  down  on  a
man  for  that.  Face  to  face,  and  from  the  Lord's  own
lips,  have  I  been  assured  that  he  refrains  in  fearlessness,
and  not  through  fears,  and  that  it  is  solely  by  reason
of  passionlessness  that  he  eschews  pleasures  of  sense,
having  eradicated  all  passion.

Moreover,  the  truth-finder  himself  should  be  asked
the  direct  questions  whether  in  him  the  states  of  con¬
sciousness  which  come  through  sight  and  hearing
occur  (a)  in  a  corrupt  form,  (t>)  in  a  mixed  form,  or
(r)  in  entire  purity.  And,  answering  aright,  the  truth-
finder  will  answer  that  these  states  occur  never  in  a
corrupt  or  mixed  form  but  always  in  entire  purity  ; —
this  is  the  track  I  tread,  this  is  the  realm  in  which  I
move,  and  therewithal  1  harbour  no  cravings.

When  such  are  a  teacher’s  words,  a  disciple  is  right
to  go  to  him  for  instruction  in  his  Doctrine.  That
teacher  expounds  the  Doctrine, — more  and  more,
higher  still  and  higher,  until  at  last  it  embraces  all
that  is  foul  and  all  that  is  fair,  with  all  their  mutual
antagonism.  And  as  the  teacher  gradually  thus  ex¬
pounds  the  Doctrine,  so  gradually  therein  does  that
Almsman,  by  insight  into  this  or  that  state  of  conscious¬
ness,  [320]  reach  perfection  in  them  all,  and  win  the
belief  in  his  teacher  that — the  Lord  is  all-enlightened  ;
right  well  has  he  made  his  Doctrine  known  ;  his  Con¬
fraternity  walks  in  righteousness.  If  others  should
ask  him  on  what  facts  and  evidence  he  bases  this
belief,  then,  if  he  gives  the  right  answer,  he  would
reply  that,  as  the  teacher  gradually  expounded  the
Doctrine,  so  gradually  therein  had  he,  by  insight  into
this  or  that  state  of  consciousness,  reached  perfection
in  them  all  and  won  the  belief  in  his  teacher  which
made  him  say  that  the  Lord  was  all-enlightened,  that,
right  well  had  he  made  his  Doctrine  known,  and  that
his  Confraternity  walked  in  righteousness.  If  any
man’s  faith  in  the  truth-finder  is  planted,  rooted,  and


230


XLVin.  KOSAMBIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  321.


established  by  the  foregoing  researches  and  in  the
foregoing  sentences  and  in  the  foregoing  words,  then
such  faith  is  styled  reasoned,  based  on  insight,
assured, — impregnable  to  recluse  or  brahmin,  god,
Mara,  Brahmii  or  anyone  else  in  the  universe.

This,  Almsmen,  is  the  way  to  study  a  truth-finder's
states  of  consciousness ;  and  it  is  thus  that  the  truth-
finder  is  studied  aright  in  the  laws  of  his  being.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XLVIII.  KOSAMBIYA-SUTTA.

AMITY  AND  ITS  ROOT.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once,  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  KosambI  in  the  Ghosita  pleasaunce,  dis¬
putes  were  rife  in  KosambI  among  the  Almsmen,  who
were  living  in  a  state  of  uproar  and  contention,  hurling
taunts  at  one  another ; — they  could  not  win  one
another  over,  nor  would  they  themselves  be  won  over,
to  accord  and  agreement.  This  having  been  [321]
reported  by  an  Almsman  to  the  Lord,  he  bade  an
Almsman  summon  those  Almsmen  in  his  name  to
his  presence.  When  they  had  duly  come  and  had
taken  their  seats  to  one  side  after  due  salutation,  he
asked  them  whether  the  report  of  their  disputes  was
true ;  and,  on  their  admitting  it,  he  said  : — While  you
are  thus  disputing,  are  you  instant — both  overtly  and
privily — in  acts  and  in  words  and  in  thoughts  of  good¬
will  towards  your  fellows  in  the  higher  life  ?

No,  sir.

So  it  comes  to  this :  that  disputes  are  rife  among
you  ;  that  you  are  living  in  a  state  of  uproar  and  con¬
tention,  hurling  taunts  at  one  another ;  and  that,  mean¬
while,  you  are  not  instant — both  overtly  and  privily —
in  acts  or  words  or  thoughts  of  goodwill  towards  your
fellows  in  the  higher  life.  What,  oh  what,  can  you
know  and  see,  you  foolish  people,  that  you  dispute  like


M.  i.  322.


AMITY  AND  ITS  ROOT.


231


this  and  [322]  never  come  to  accord  and  agreement  ?
Long  will  this  enure  to  your  hurt  and  harm.

Almsmen,  there  are  six  states  of  consciousness — the
Lord  went  on  to  say — which,  being  in  themselves
endearing,  friendly,  and  respectful,  conduce  to  accord,
harmony,  concord,  and  unity.

(i)  If  an  Almsman  is  instant  in  acts  of  goodwill —
both  overtly  and  privily — towards  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life, — this  is  a  state,  in  itself  endearing,  friendly,
and  respectful,  which  conduces  to  accord,  harmony,
concord  and  unity.

(ii)  If  he  is  instant  in  words  of  goodwill  .  .  .  and
unity.

(iii)  If  he  is  instant  in  thoughts  of  goodwill  .  .  .
and  unity.

(iv)  If  he  shares  equally  and  without  favour  among
all  his  virtuous  fellows  in  the  higher  life  everything
given  him  that  is  lawful  and  lawfully  received,  down  to
the  last  crumb  in  his  bowl, — this  too  is  a  state,  in
itself  endearing,  friendly,  and  respectful,  which  con¬
duces  to  accord,  harmony,  concord,  and  unity.

(v)  If,  both  overtly  and  privily,  an  Almsman  lives
among  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life  in  the  exercise  of
these  virtues,  in  their  unbroken  entirety,  and  without
flaw,  spot,  or  blemish,  virtues  which  bestow  freedom,
are  lauded  by  sages,  are  unmarred  (by  unworthy
motives),  and  conduce  to  rapt  concentration, — this  too
is  a  state,  in  itself  endearing,  friendly,  and  respectful,
which  conduces  to  accord,  harmony,  concord,  and
unity.

(vi)  If — both  overtly  and  privily — an  Almsman
lives,  among  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life,  seized  of
the  noble  and  saving  creed  which  guides  him  who  lives
up  to  it  unto  the  utter  destruction  of  all  Ill, — this  too
is  a  state,  in  itself  endearing,  friendly,  and  respectful,
which  conduces  to  accord,  harmony,  concord,  and
unity.

1  Cf.  Sutta  No.  128  (infra) ;  and  see  Vinaya  I,  341  and  II,  1
(et  seqq.)  for  sterner  disciplinary  measures  against  refractory
Almsmen.


232  XLVTII.  KOSAMBIYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  323.

Such  are  the  six  states  of  consciousness  which,  being
in  themselves  endearing,  friendly,  and  respectful,  con¬
duce  to  accord,  harmony,  concord,  and  unity  ;  and  of
the  six  the  roof-tie  which  on  high  knits  the  six  together
is  the  possession  of  the  noble  and  saving  creed  which
guides  him  who  lives  up  to  it  unto  the  utter  destruction
of  all  Ill.

Just  as  in  a  gabled  palace  the  gable  is  the  roof-tie
on  high  which  knits  the  whole  structure  together,
— so  [823]  of  these  six  states  of  consciousness  the
roof-tie  which  on  high  knits  them  all  together  is  the
possession  of  this  noble  and  saving  creed  which
guides  him  who  lives  up  to  it  unto  the  destruction  of
all  Ill.

How  does  that  noble  idea  affect  this  ? — Take  the
case  of  an  Almsman  who — in  jungle  or  beneath  a  tree
or  in  a  home  of  solitude — examines  himself  to  see
whether  he  harbours  any  still  lurking  predisposition
which  can  so  predispose  his  heart  as  to  debar  him
from  knowing  and  discerning  things  as  they  really  are.
His  heart  is  so  predisposed,  if  he  harbours  a  predis¬
position  to  a  passion  for  pleasure — to  malevolence — to
sloth  and  torpor — to  worry — to  doubt — to  centring  his
thoughts  on  this  or  on  other  worlds— or  to  living  in  a
state  of  disputes  and  uproar,  contention  and  the  hurling
of  taunts.  He  emerges  convinced  not  only  that  he
harbours  no  such  predisposition  as  would  debar  him
from  knowing  and  discerning  things  as  they  really  are,
but  also  that  his  mind  is  on  the  right  lines  for  enlighten¬
ment  in  the  (Four)  Truths. — This  is  the  first  know¬
ledge  he  wins, — a  knowledge  noble  and  transcendental,
not  shared  by  the  vulgar.

Further,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  himself
whether,  by  fostering  and  developing  and  enlarging
this  noble  and  saving  creed,  he  is  gaining  for  himself
calm  and  gaining  peace.  Yes,  he  answers ;  I  am. —
This  is  the  second  knowledge  .  .  .  the  vulgar.

Further,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  himself
whether — outside — there  is  found  any  recluse  or
brahmin  who  has  got  the  noble  and  saving  creed  he


M.  i.  324.


AMITY  AND  ITS  ROOT


233

has.  No,  he  answers;  not  one.— [324]  This  is  the
third  knowledge  .  .  .  the  vulgar.

Further,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  himself
whether  he  comports  himself  like  one  who  is  seized
of  that  noble  creed.  Now,  one  seized  thereof,  should
he  be  guilty  of  an  offence  which  obviously  has  occurred,
straightway  declares  it  and  lays  it  open  and  bare  to
his  master  or  to  sage  comrades  in  the  higher  life  ;  and,
having  so  confessed  his  offence,  keeps  a  watch  on
himself  thereafter.  Just  as  a  tiny  babe  that  lies  help¬
less  on  its  back  needs  but  to  touch  a  live  ember  with
foot  or  hand  in  order  straightway  to  draw  back  the
limb, — even  so  one  seized  of  the  noble  and  saving
creed,  should  he  be  guilty  .  .  .  watch  on  himself
thereafter.  Thus  he  comes  to  know  that  he  does
comport  himself  like  one  who  is  seized  of  that  noble
creed. — This  is  the  fourth  knowledge  .  .  .  the  vulgar.

Further,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  himself
(anew)  whether  he  comports  himself  like  one  who  is
seized  of  the  noble  and  saving  creed.  Now,  one
seized  thereof,  while  zealous  in  the  discharge  of  his
several  duties — great  and  small — towards  his  comrades
in  the  higher  life,  also  has  a  keen  yearning  to  master
the  higher  virtues,  the  higher  thinking,  and  the  higher
love.  J  ust  as  a  cow  with  a  calf  always  has  her  eye
on  her  calf  as  she  browses, — even  so  one  seized  of
the  noble  creed,  while  zealous  .  .  .  higher  love.
Thus  he  comes  to  know  that  he  does  comport  himself
like  one  who  is  seized  of  that  noble  creed. — This  is  the
fifth  knowledge  ...  the  vulgar.

[325]  Further,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  him¬
self  whether  his  is  the  strength  of  one  seized  of  the
noble  creed.  Now  the  strength  of  one  seized  thereof
consists  in  recognizing  and  appreciating,  when  the
truth-finder’s  Doctrine  and  Law  are  being  preached,
the  import  and  the  significance  of  the  Doctrine,  with
his  whole  heart  and  ears  absorbed  in  drinking  in  what
he  hears.  Thus  he  comes  to  know  that  he  has  got  the
strength  of  one  seized  of  the  noble  creed. — This  is  the
sixth  knowledge  .  .  .  the  vulgar.


234  XL vra.  KOSAMBIYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  326.

Again,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  asks  himself
whether  his  is  the  strength  of  one  seized  of  the  noble
creed.  Now  the  strength  of  one  seized  thereof  con¬
sists  in  this  that,  when  the  truth-finder’s  Doctrine  and
Law  are  being  preached,  he  takes  in  knowledge  of
welfare  and  of  the  Doctrine  and  gets  the  gladness
which  the  Doctrine  brings.  Thus  he  comes  to  know
that  he  has  got  the  strength  of  one  seized  of  the  noble
creed. — This  is  the  seventh  knowledge  .  .  .  the
vulgar.

In  this  way  is  due  examination  made  of  the  de¬
meanour  of  a  disciple  of  the  Noble  with  his  sevenfold
endowment,  for  the  realizing  of  conversion's  fruits ;
and  those  fruits  appertain  to  a  disciple  of  the  Noble
with  his  sevenfold  endowment.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


XLIX.  BRAHMA-NIMANTANIKA-SUTTA.

BRAHMA’S  APPEAL.

[326]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anatha-
phidika’s  pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Alms¬
men  as  follows : — 1  While  I  was  staying  once  at
Ukkattha  in  the  Subhaga  grove  under  the  great  sal-
tree,  Baka  the  Brahma  conceived  the  pernicious  view
that  his  world  was  everlasting,  permanent,  eternal,
complete  in  itself,  with  no  rebirth  thence  ;  that  in  his
world  there  was  no  birth,  decay,  death,  rebirth  thence,
or  further  existences,  nor  was  there  any  other  salvation
beyond  it.  Reading  his  thoughts,  I  vanished  from
beneath  that  sal-tree  to  reappear  in  his  particular
Brahma-world, — as  readily  as  a  strong  man  might
stretch  forth  his  bent  arm  or  draw  back  his  outstretched

1  Cf.  Samyutta  1, 142  for  the  beginning  of  this  Sutta  (translated
in  Vol.  I,  179-182  of  Kindred  Sayings).  See  also  Dialogues  I,  30
and  III,  26.


M.  i.  327.


brahma's  appeal.


235


arm.  Seeing  me  coming  some  distance  off,  Baka
said — Come,  your  Excellency ;  your  Excellency  is
welcome  indeed ;  it  is  a  long  time  since  your  Excel¬
lency  managed  to  come  here.  This  world  is  ever¬
lasting,  permanent  .  .  .  salvation  beyond  it

In  answer  I  said  : — The  worthy  Baka  the  Brahma  is
in  error,  quite  in  error,  should  he  affirm  that  the
transitory  is  everlasting,  that  the  impermanent  has  per¬
manence,  that  the  temporal  is  eternal,  that  the  incom¬
plete  is  complete ;  that  here  is  no  birth,  decay,  death,
rebirth  hence,  or  further  existences, — when  the  exact
opposite  is  the  case  ;  or  should  he  affirm  that  there  is
no  other  salvation  beyond  this, — when  there  is  another
salvation  beyond  it.

Hereon  Mara  the  Evil  One  entered  into  one  of  the
Brahma  conclave  and  said  to  me  : — Almsman  !  Alms¬
man  !  forbear ;  forbear ;  for  this  Brahma  is  the  Great
Brahma,  [327]  vanquisher  and  unvanquished,  all-
seeing  and  all-subduing  lord,  paramount  disposer  of
life,  abiding  for  ever,  father  of  all  creatures  that  are  or
are  to  be!  Before  your  time,  Almsman,  the  world
has  seen  recluses  and  brahmins  who  have  scorned  and
contemned  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  creatures,  gods,
Pajapati,  and  Brahma ; — and  these,  at  the  body’s  dis¬
solution,  when  their  lives  were  cut  off,  have  passed
thereafter  to  mean  existences.  Before  your  time.
Almsman,  the  world  has  seen  recluses  and  brahmins
who  have  lauded  and  revelled  in  earth  .  .  .  Brahma  ; —
and  these,  at  the  body’s  dissolution,  when  their  lives
were  cut  off,  have  passed  thereafter  to  excellent
existences.  Therefore,  I  advise  you  to  conform  to
what  Brahma  has  told  you  and  not  to  be  recalcitrant.
Should  you  be  recalcitrant,  it  will  fare  with  you  as  with
a  man  who  with  a  stick  tries  to  beat  back  the  radiance
which  is  enveloping  him,  or  who  strains  at  the  earth
for  a  foothold  or  handhold  as  he  is  in  act  to  fall  into
hell’s  maw.  Conform  to  everything  Brahma  has  said,
and  do  not  be  recalcitrant.  See  you  not,  Almsman,
his  hosts  seated  around  ?

I  rejoined  : — I  know  you,  Evil  One  ;  do  not  imagine


236  XLIX.  BRAHMA-NIMANTANIKA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  328.

that  I  know  you  not.  You  are  Mara,  the  Evil  One;
you  have  got  into  your  grasp  and  into  your  power
Brahma  and  Brahma’s  host  and  Brahma’s  conclave  ;
and  you  think  to  get  me  too  into  your  grasp  and  into
your  power  ; — but  I  am  not  in  your  grasp,  Evil  One  ;
I  am  not  in  your  power.

Hereupon,  Baka  the  Brahma  said  to  me  : — I,  your
Excellency,  affirm  that  the  everlasting  is  everlasting,
[328]  that  the  permanent  is  permanent,  that  the  eternal
is  eternal,  that  the  complete  is  complete,  that  freedom
from  rebirth  hence  is  freedom  from  rebirth  hence;  I
affirm  that  a  realm  exists  where  there  is  no  birth,
decay,  death,  rebirth  thence,  or  further  existences, —
for,  here  is  no  birth,  decay,  rebirth  hence,  or  further
existences ;  and  I  affirm  that,  there  being  not  any
other  salvation  beyond  this,  no  other  salvation  exists.
Before  your  time,  Almsman,  the  world  has  seen
recluses  and  brahmins  who — for  a  term  as  long  as  the
whole  of  your  life — have  devoted  themselves  to
austerities ;  and  they  would  know  whether  or  not  there
was  another  salvation  beyond  this.  Therefore,  Alms¬
man,  I  tell  you  that,  toil  and  moil  as  long  as  ever  you
will,  you  will  never  find  any  other  salvation  beyond  this.
If  you  will  recognize  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  creatures,
gods,  Pajapati,  and  Brahma,  then  will  you  become  mine
own,  reposing  on  me,  to  do  as  I  will,  and  to  be  my  elect;

I  too  know,  Brahma,  said  I,  that  by  recognizing
earth,  water,  and  the  rest,  I  should  be  yours  as  you
say.  Yes,  and  also  I  know  full  well  how  you  have
progressed  to  your  pomp  and  state  as  the  mighty,
powerful,  and  sovereign  Baka  the  Brahma.

What  knowledge  has  your  Excellency  of  this  ?

The  realms  of  sun  and  moon ,  where'er  their  rays
illumine, — yea,  a  thousand  worlds  thy  sway
acknowledge.  But , — is' t  thine  to  know  the  lot
of  beings  good  and  bad,  their  whence  and  where  ?

—  I  have  this  knowledge,  Brahma,  of  your  progress  to
your  pomp  and  state  as  the  mighty,  [829]  powerful,
and  sovereign  Baka  the  Brahma.


M.  i.  329.


brahma’s  appeal.


237


Now,  there  are  three  other  planes  of  existence,
Brahma,  which  you  do  not  know  or  discern, — though  I
do.  First,  there  is  the  Abhassara  plane,  from  which
you  came  hither,  though  your  long  residence  here  has
made  you  forget  it  so  that  you  do  not  know  or  discern
it, — as  I  do.  Consequently,  in  higher  knowledge,  I
am  not  on  a  mere  equality  with  you,  much  less  at  a
disadvantage ; — I  have  the  advantage  of  you.  Then
there  is  the  Subha-Kirma  plane  and  the  Vehapphala
plane,  neither  of  which  you  know  or  discern, — though
1  do.  Here  again,  in  higher  knowledge,  I  am  not
on  a  mere  equality  with  you,  much  less  at  a  dis¬
advantage  ; — I  have  the  advantage  of  you.

Because,  Brahma,  I  have  realized  the  earth  to  be
the  earth  it  really  is  and  have  realized  that  something
else  which  is  in  no  wise  reached  by  earth’s  earthi¬
ness  ; — no  ideas  occur  of  earth,  in  the  earth,  from  the
earth,  my  earth  ;  nor  do  I  pay  homage  to  earth.  Here
again  .  .  .  advantage  of  you.  And  the  like  .  .  .
applies  to  water,  fire,  air,  creatures,  gods,  Pajapati,
Brahma,  the  Abhassaras,  the  Subhakinnas,  the  Vehap-
phalas,  the  Vanquisher,  the  All ; — no  such  ideas  about
them  occur,  nor  do  I  pay  homage  to  any  of  them.
Here  again  .  .  .  advantage  of  you.

If  that  something  else  of  your  Excellency’s  is  in  no
wise  reached  by  the  all-ness  of  the  All,  take  heed  it
prove  not  merely  empty  and  vain. — Consciousness,  for
instance,  which  is  invisible  and  boundless  and  all-
illumined,  is  not  reached  by  earth’s  earthiness,  or  by
water’s  wateriness,  or  by  anything  else  in  your  list ! —
And  now  I  vanish  from  your  Excellency’s  view.

Vanish  if  you  can,  Brahma.

But,  for  all  his  protestations,  Baka  could  not  vanish  !

Hereupon,  I  told  him  that  I  would  vanish  from  his
sight.

Vanish,  if  you  can, — said  he.

Then,  Almsmen,  by  the  exercise  of  such  magical
powers  as  would  let  Brahma  and  his  host  and  conclave
hear  me  without  seeing  me,  I  disappeared,  repeating
these  lines : —


238  XLIX.  BRAHMA-NIMANTAN1KA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  330.


Marking  what  dangers  life  beset ,  how  life
still  dogs  the  nihilist ,  no  further  court
paid  I  to  life  nor  craved  for  life  on  life.

Astounded  at  the  marvel  and  wonder,  Brahma  with
his  host  and  conclave  exclaimed  : — Marvellous  and
•wonderful  is  the  magic  power  and  might  of  the  recluse
Gotama!  Never  before  was  seen  or  reported  any
other  recluse  or  brahmin  of  such  power  and  might  as
Gotama,  the  Sakyan  who  left  his  Sakyan  home  to  be  a
Pilgrim.  A  generation  that  delights  in  living  and  is
given  over  to  delighting  and  revelling  in  living,  has
seen  him  grub  and  stub  up  existence  by  the  roots !

Entering  now  into  one  of  Brahma’s  conclave,  MSra,
the  Evil  One,  said  to  me : — If  your  Excellency  has
come  to  this  knowledge  and  to  this  enlightenment,  do
not  communicate  it  to  followers  or  Pilgrims  ;  do  not
expound  your  Doctrine  to  them ;  yearn  not  for  fol¬
lowers  or  Pilgrims.  Before  you,  there  have  been
recluses  and  brahmins  in  the  world  who,  professing  to
be  Arahats  all-enlightened,  communicated  and  ex¬
pounded  their  Doctrine  to  the  followers  and  Pilgrims
for  whom  they  yearned  ;  and  the  result  of  this  has  been
that,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  when  their  life  was  cut
off,  they  passed  thereafter  to  mean  existences.  Before
you,  there  have  been  recluses  and  brahmins  in  the
world  who,  professing  to  be  Arahats  all-enlightened,
[381]  refused  to  communicate  and  expound  their
Doctrine  to  followers  and  Pilgrims,  for  whom  they  had
no  yearning ;  and  the  result  of  this  has  been  that,  at
the  body’s  dissolution  when  their  life  was  cut  off,  they
passed  thereafter  to  excellent  existences.  Therefore,
Almsman,  I  advise  you  not  to  trouble  but  to  live  com¬
fortably  here  and  now.  Silence  is  best ;  do  not  preach
to  others.

I  rejoined  : — I  know  you,  Evil  One  ;  do  not  imagine
that  I  know  you  not.  You  are  Mara,  the  Evil  One.
It  is  out  of  no  goodwill,  but  out  of  ill-will,  that  you
give  me  this  advice, — because  you  think  that  those  to
whom  I  preach  my  gospel  will  pass  out  of  your  range.


M.  i.  332.


THE  REBUKE  TO  MARA.


239


Though  they  professed  to  be  all-enlightened,  those
recluses  and  brahmins  of  yours  were  not  so ; — I  pro¬
fess  to  be  all-enlightened, — and  am.  Evil  One,  the
truth-finder  is  one  and  the  same,  whether  preaching
his  Doctrine  to  followers  or  not,  whether  communi¬
cating  it  or  not.  And  why  ? — Because  in  the  truth-
finder  all  those  Cankers  which  are  of  impurity,  which
lead  to  re-birth,  entail  suffering,  ripen  unto  sorrow,
leaving  behind  a  heritage  of  birth,  decay,  and  death, —
all  these  have  been  grubbed  up  by  the  roots,  like  a
bare  cleared  site  where  once  a  palm-tree  grew,  things
which  once  have  been  and  now  can  be  no  more.

Such,  Almsmen,  was  Mara’s  failure  to  cajole  me  and
Brahma’s  appeal.  So  this  homily’s  title  is  Brahma’s
appeal.


L.  mAra-tajjaniya-sutta.

THE  REBUKE  TO  MARA.

[832]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  while  the  vener¬
able  Maha  Moggallana  was  staying  in  the  Bhagga
country  at  Sumsumara-gira  in  Bhesakala  wood  in  the
deer-park,  he  was  pacing  to  and  fro  in  the  open  when
Mara,  the  Evil  One,  entered  his  belly  and  got  into  his
stomach.  Wondering  to  himself  why  his  belly  should
feel  as  heavy  as  if  he  had  had  a  meal  of  beans,
MoggallAna,  his  walk  over,  went  to  his  cell  and  sat
down  to  think  it  out  by  himself.  Detecting  Mara’s
presence  in  his  inside,  he  exclaimed : — Begone,  Evil
Mara ;  begone !  Do  not  annoy  a  truth-finder  or  a
truth-finder’s  disciple,  lest  you  lay  up  for  yourself
enduring  hurt  and  harm.

Thought  Mara  to  himself : — This  recluse  says  all
this  without  knowing  or  discerning  that  it  is  I.  Why,
even  his  master  would  take  time  to  know  it  was  I ;  and
how  should  this  disciple  know  ?

Hereon,  Moggallana  said : — Yes,  1  know  you,  Evil
One.  Imagine  not  that  I  do  not.  You  are  Mara,
Evil  One ;  and  you  are  thinking  that  it  was  without


240


L.  mara-tajjaniya-sutta


M.  i.  333.


knowing  or  discerning  that  it  was  you,  that  I  bade  you
begone  and  not  annoy  a  truth-finder  or  a  truth-
finder’s  disciple,  lest  you  should  lay  up  for  yourself
enduring  hurt  and  harm  ;  but  you  imagine  that  even
my  master  would  take  time  to  know  it  was  you ;  and
how  should  a  disciple  know  ?

So  this  recluse  really  does  know  and  discern  that  it
is  I,  thought  Mira ;  and  he  [338]  issued  from  Mog-
gallana’s  mouth  and  perched  on  the  crutch  to  hold  the
door-bar.  Seeing  him  perched  there,  and  informing
him  that  there  too  his  presence  was  detected,  Mog-
gallana  said  : — In  bygone  days,  Evil  One,  I  myself
was  a  Mara,  DOsi  by  name  ;  Kaji  was  my  sister’s
name  ;  you  were  her  son  and  so  my  nephew.  Now  in
those  days  Kakusandha  had  appeared  in  the  world  as
the  Arahat  all-enlightened, — with  Vidhura  and  Sanjiva
as  his  two  chief  disciples,  a  noble  pair.  Among  all
Kakusandha’s  disciples  there  were  none  who  could
compare  with  the  reverend  Vidhura  as  a  preacher  of
the  Doctrine  ;  and  so  he  got  his  name  of  Vidhura  (the
peerless).  The  reverend  Sanjiva,  on  the  other  hand,
dwelling  in  the  wilds  or  beneath  trees  or  in  the  homes
of  solitude,  attained  without  difficulty  to  cessation  of
feelings  and  perception,  and  in  this  ecstatic  state  was
sitting  under  a  tree.  Here,  as  he  sat  without  feelings
or  perception,  he  was  seen  by  neatherds,  goatherds,
ploughmen,  and  wayfarers,  who  marvelled  exceedingly
at  the  sight  of  the  recluse — sitting  there  dead,  as  they
deemed — and  set  about  burning  the  body.  So  they
collected  bracken  and  sticks  and  dry  cowdung  which
they  heaped  over  Sanjiva’s  body,  lit  the  pile,  and  went
their  way.  Rising  from  his  trance  when  night  had
passed  away,  Sanjiva  shook  his  raiment  and  in  the
morning  early,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went  into
the  village  for  alms.  At  the  sight  of  him  on  his
rounds,  tne  neatherds,  goatherds,  ploughmen,  and  way¬
farers  marvelled  exceedingly  to  see  the  recluse  whom
they  had  deemed  to  be  sitting  there  dead,  now  alive
again  and  quick  once  more  ;  [834]  and  thus  he  got  the
name  of  Sanjiva  (Quick).


M.  i.  335.


THE  REBUKE  TO  MARA.


24I


Thought  Dosi  the  Mara : — I  know  neither  the
whence  nor  the  whither  of  these  virtuous  and  good
Almsmen.  Come,  let  me  enter  into  the  brahmin-
householders  and  incite  them  to  denounce,  abuse,
revile,  and  harry  these  virtuous  and  good  Almsmen  so
that,  being  thus  despitefully  treated,  they  may  haply
change  to  another  frame  of  mind  and  thus  give  me  my
opening.  So  DusT  the  Mara  entered  into  those
brahmin-householders  and  incited  them  accordingly;
and  they  then  proceeded  to  denounce,  abuse,  revile,
and  harry  those  virtuous  and  good  Brethren  in  these
terms :  These  shavelings  of  recluses — who  are  only
black  riff-raff,  sprung  from  the  feet  of  our  kinsman
Brahma — while  professing  to  be  plunged  in  ecstasies,
hunch  up  their  shoulders  and  cast  down  their  gaze  in
their  befuddlement  as  they  trance  and  en-trance  and
un-trance  and  de-trance.  Yes!  they  trance  away  like
the  owl  in  trance  on  a  bough — on  the  look-out  for  a
mouse ;  or  like  the  jackal  in  trance  on  the  river’s
bank — on  the  look-out  for  fish  ;  or  like  the  cat  in
trance  by  scrap-heap  or  midden — on  the  look-out  for  a
mouse ;  or  like  the  donkey,  when  at  last  his  yoke  is
off,  in  trance  by  the  side  of  scrap-heap  or  midden.
That’s  the  way  these  shavelings  trance  and  en-trance
and  un- trance  and  de- trance.

Evil  One,  the  people  who  die  in  such  a  belief,  all  of
them,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  pass  to
re-birth  in  a  doom  of  suffering  and  woe  or  purgatory.

[335]  Then  Kakusandha  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying  : — It  is
DusI  the  Mara  who  has  entered  into  the  brahmin-
householders  to  incite  them  to  denounce,  abuse,  revile,
and  harry  virtuous  and  good  Almsmen  so  that,  being
thus  despitefully  treated,  they  may  haply  change  to
another  frame  of  mind  and  thus  give  him  his  opening.
Be  it  yours  to  dwell  with  radiant  good-will  pervading
first  one  quarter  of  the  world — then  the  second — then
the  third— and  then  the  fourth  quarter — yea,  pervading
the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world,  above,
below,  around,  everywhere,  with  radiant  good-will  all-


242  L.  MARA-TA/JANIYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  336.

embracing,  vast,  boundless,  wherein  no  hate  or  malice
finds  a  place.  And,  as  with  good-will,  so,  in  turn,  be
it  yours  to  pervade  with  radiant  pity,  and  sympathy,
and  poised  equanimity  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of
the  world.

Thus  exhorted  and  instructed  by  Kakusandha  the
Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  those  Almsmen,  Evil
One,  retired  to  the  wilds  or  under  trees  or  to  homes  of
solitude  there  to  dwell  with  radiant  good-will  pervading
.  .  .  poised  equanimity  the  whole  length  and  breadth
of  the  world.

Thought  Dus!  the  Mara  now  : — I  still  know  naught
of  the  whence  or  the  whither  of  these  virtuous  and  good
Almsmen.  Come,  let  me  enter  into  the  brahmin-
householders  and  incite  them  to  pay  these  Almsmen
honour  and  reverence,  devotion  and  [836]  worship,  so
that,  being  thus  exalted,  they  may  haply  change  to
another  frame  of  mind  and  thus  give  me  my  opening.
And  this  he  did.  When  now  he  had  entered  into  the
brahmin-householders  accordingly,  they  paid  those
virtuous  and  good  Brethren  honour  and  reverence,
devotion  and  worship.

Evil  One,  the  people  who  die  in  such  a  belief,  all
of  them,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  pass  to
re-birth  in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven.

Then  Kakusandha  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,
addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying  : — It  is  DiisI  the  MSra
who  has  entered  into  the  brahmin-householders  to  incite
them  to  pay  virtuous  and  good  Almsmen  honour  and
reverence,  devotion  and  worship,  so  that,  being  thus
exalted,  they  may  haply  change  to  another  frame  of
mind  and  thus  give  him  his  opening.  Yours  be  it  to
realize  the  foulness  of  the  body,  and  to  perceive  how
disgusting  a  thing  food  is,  how’  empty  of  delight
the  world  is,  and  how  fleeting  and  transitory  all
things  are.

Early  in  the  day,  Kakusandha  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  went  into
the  village  for  alms,  followed  by  the  reverend  Vidhura
as  his  Almsman  in  attendance.  Entering  into  a


M.  i.  337.


THE  REBUKE  TO  MARA.


2  43


brahmin  lad,  DusI  the  Mara  flung  a  potsherd  which
hit  Vidhura’s  head  and  broke  it.  Albeit  with  broken
head  streaming  with  blood,  the  reverend  Vidhura
[337]  still  kept  following  steadily  on  in  Kakusandha’s
wake.  Turning  full  round,  as  an  elephant  turns  to
.gaze,  Kakusandha  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,
exclaimed — This  Mara  Dusi  knows  no  bounds  1

Even  as  he  gazed,  Dusi  passed  out  of  that  existence
and  was  reborn  in  Great  Purgatory.

Evil  One,  Great  Purgatory  bears  three  names, —
Sixfold  Contact,  Meeting  Spikes,  and  Pang-upon-
pang.  Said  the  wardens  of  Purgatory  to  me  :  When
barb  meets  barb  inside  your  heart,  then  your  Excel¬
lency  will  know  you  have  been  in  torment  for  a
thousand  years.  Tormented  was  I,  Evil  One,  in  Great
Purgatory  for  many  a  long  year, — for  many  hundreds
of  years  and  thousands  of  years ;  for  ten  thousand
years  was  I  tormented  in  the  heart  of  Great  Purgatory,
suffering  pangs  that  grew  and  grew.  My  body
was  like  a  man’s,  but  my  head  was  like  the  head
of  a  fish.

1  You  ask  what  hell \  what  torment ,  Dusi  knew,
who  durst  assail  disciple  Vidhura
and  holy  Kdkusdndha,  brahmin  true  ?

A  hundred  barbs  of  steel  it  had,  and  each
wrought  its  own  griding  agony  of  pain  ;

— such  hell,  such  torment,  Dusi  came  to  know,
who  durst  assail  disciple  Vidhura
and  holy  Kdkusdndha,  brahmin  true.

— For  thine  assault  on  me,  who  know  so  much ,
who  Buddha's  leal  disciple  am,  there  waits,
foul  fiend  of  darkness,  vengeance  dire  and  sure.

I  know  where,  ageless,  through  the  ages  stand
gods'  jewelld  mansions,  in  mid-ocean  set ,
shining ,  resplendent,  bright  with  dancing  nymphs.

— For  thine  assault  .  .  .  vengeance  dire  and  sure.


1  These  lines  occur  also  at  Theragdtlm,  p.  106  (transd.  at  p.  391
of  Psalms  of  the  Early  Buddhists).


244


l.  mAra-tajjaniya-sutta.


M.  i.  338.


At  His  command,  while  Almsmen  watched  around,
my  toe  Visakha's  palace  rudely  shook. 1
— For  thine  assault  ,  .  .  vengeance  dire  and  sure.
[338]  By  magic  might ,  while  godlings  quaked  with
dread ,

my  toe  the  Vcjayanta  palace  rocked 2
— For  thine  assault  .  .  .  vengeance  dire  and  sure.

In  Vejayanta  palace  Sakha's  self
I  straitly  question'd:  Undcrstandeth  thou
how  Cravings  quelled  Deliver  heart  of  man  ?

A  nd  he,  proud  Sakka,  answer  humbly  made.

— For  thine  assault  .  .  .  vengeance  dire  and  sure.

I  know  who,  face  to  face  in  Brahma's  halls}
thus  straitly  question'd  BrahmU  :  Holdest  thou
today  thy  former  views  ?  Or  see'st  thou  now
how  all  thy  heaven! s  glories  fade  away  ?

And  he,  great  Brahma,  answer  humbly  made
that  he  stick  views  no  longer  held,  but  saw
how  all  his  heavens  glories  fade  and  pass,
and  how  he  erred,  erred  grievously,  of  old,
to  claim  eternal,  everlasting  life.

— For  thine  assault  .  .  .  vettgeance  dire  and  sure.

/  know  who  Merits  summit  won  in  trance 4
and  saw  the  four  great  continents  of  earth  5 6
with  all  the  peoples  that  on  earth  do  dwell.

— For  thine  assault  .  .  .  vettgeance  dire  and  sure.

No  malice  yet  drove  fire  to  bum  a  fool ;

'lis  still  the  fool  who  first  assails  the  fire
and  feeds  the  flames  his  folly  first  provoked.

So,  Mara,  thou  who  durst  assail  a  Saint }
shalt  burn  thyself  like  fools  who  play  with  fire.


1  Cf.  Therdgatha,  p.  105  (trans.  at  p.  392  of  Psalms  of  the  Early

Buddhists).

3  See  Sutta  37.  3  See  Sutta  49.

*  Bu.  refers  to  the  NandSpanatida-damana  (see  Jataka  V,  65).

6  See  Dlgha,  Sutta  No.  32,  transd.  at  Dialogues  III,  188  et  seqq.

6  Bu.  is  here  silent  on  the  meaning  in  the  text  oftathagata
— “  here  clearly,  and  in  the  Commentary  [of  DhammapSla  on  the
Theragatha]  explicitly,  applied  to  a  Thera  Arahant  ”  ( Psalms ,
P-  393,  n-  4)-!


M.  i.  338.


THE  REBUKE  TO  MARA.


245


Evil  thou  didst  wko  durst  assail  a  Saint,
imagining — how  fondly  ! — evil's  curse  to  flee.
Thitte  evil-doing  garner'd  stands  ;  and  woe,

0  Death,  through  ages  shall  thy  portion  be  !  •
Leave  then  the  Buddha ;  let  his  Almsmen  be  !


Thus  in  those  woodlands  did  that  Alms/nan  rate
fell  Mara,  till  the  cowed  and  abject  fiend ,
quitting  the  contest,  vanished  out  of  sight.


LI.  KANDARAKA-SUTTA.

AGAINST  ASCETICISM.

[339]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Campa  by  the  banks  of  the  lake  (of  Queen)
Gaggara  with  a  great  following  of  Almsmen,  there
came  to  him  Pessa,  the  elephant  trainer’s  son,  and
Kandaraka  the  Wanderer.  Saluting  the  Lord,  Pessa
took  a  seat  to  one  side,  while  Kandaraka,  after  ex¬
changing  courteous  greetings,  remained  standing.
Marking  the  universal  silence  of  the  Confraternity  as
he  stood  there,  Kandaraka  said : — It  is  wonderful,
Gotama,  it  is  marvellous,  how  you  have  schooled  your
Confraternity, — even  to  that  perfection  which  Arahats
all-enlightened  reached  of  yore  and  Arahats  all-
enlightened  will  reach  in  ages  to  come.

Yes,  Kandaraka;  as  it  is  now,  so  it  has  been  of  yore
and  so  it  will  be  in  ages  to  come.  For,  in  this  Con¬
fraternity  there  are  Almsmen  who  are  Arahats, — in
whom  the  Cankers  are  eradicated,  who  have  greatly
lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  have  cast  off  their
burthens,  who  have  won  their  weal,  whose  bonds  are
no  more,  who  by  utter  knowledge  have  found  Deliver¬
ance.  Here  too  there  are  Almsmen  still  under  training,
uniformly  virtuous  and  uniformly  good  in  their  lives,
men  of  understanding,  with  understanding  shown  forth
in  their  lives,  whose  hearts  are  stablished  in  the  four
applications  of  mindfulness,  as  in  the  case  [340]  of  an
Almsman  who — realizing  (i)  body,  (ii)  feelings,
(iii)  heart,  and  (iv)  states  of  consciousness  to  be  just
what  they  respectively  are — lives  the  strenuous  life,
purposeful  and  mindful,  quelling  all  worldly  hankerings
and  frets.

v'  Hereupon  Pessa  said: — It  is  wonderful,  it  is

246


M.  i.  341.


AGAINST  ASCETICISM.


247


marvellous  how  well  the  Lord  has  indicated  the  four
applications  of  mindfulness  so  as  to  cleanse  men’s  hearts,
to  raise  them  above  sorrow  and  lamentation,  to
annihilate  pain  of  body  and  of  mind,  to  achieve  the
system,  and  to  realize  Nirvana.  Even  we  who  live  in
houses  and  wear  the  white  clothes  of  the  layman,  even
we  from  time  to  time  have  our  hearts  stablished  in  the
four  applications  of  mindfulness  and — realizing  body,
feelings,  heart,  and  states  of  consciousness  to  be  just
what  they  respectively  are — live  the  strenuous  life,
purposeful  and  mindful,  quelling  all  worldly  hanker¬
ings  and  frets.  Yes,  it  is  wonderful  and  marvellous
how — in  this  human  tangle  with  all  its  bitterness  and
guile — the  Lord  knows  man’s  weal  and  woe.  For  men
are  indeed  a  tangle,  whereas  animals  are  a  simple
matter.  I  myself  can  train  a  young  elephant  to
remember,  whensoever  he  is  going  in  or  out  of  Campa,
to  display  every  naughty  and  roguish  trick  he  possibly
can.  But  those  that  are  styled  our  slaves  and
messengers  and  servants  do  one  thing,  say  another,
and  think  a  third.  Yes,  it  is  wonderful  and  marvellous
.  .  .  animals  are  a  simple  matter,  y

Quite  right,  Pessa  [841].  Men  are  indeed  a  tangle,
whereas  animals  are  a  simple  matter.  There  are  four
types  of  individuals  to  be  found  in  the  world. — One
torments  himself  and  is  given  to  self-torment ;  a  second
torments  others  and  is  given  to  tormenting  others ;  a
third  torments  himself  and  others,  and  is  given  to
tormenting  both ;  while  the  fourth  torments  neither,
and  is  given  to  tormenting  neither, — dwelling,  here  and
now,  beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  in
bliss,  and  in  holiness.  Now  which  of  the  four,  Pessa,
commends  himself  most  to  you  ?

I  am  not  drawn,  sir,  either  to  the  self-tormenter  or
to  the  tormenter  of  others  ;  nor  can  I  commend  him
who  does  both.  The  individual  who  commends  himself
most  to  me  out  of  the  four  is  the  fourth,  the  man  who
neither  torments  himself  nor  others,  who  dwells,  here
and  now,  beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  in
bliss,  and  in  holiness.


248


LI.  KANDARAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  342.


And  why,  Pessa,  do  you  not  approve  of  the  first
three  ?

I  do  not  approve  of  the  first,  sir,  because  he  torments
and  tortures  himself,  despite  his  yearnings  for  pleasure
and  despite  his  repugnance  to  pain  ;  nor  do  I  approve
of  the  second,  because  he  torments  and  tortures  others,
despite  their  yearnings  for  pleasure  and  repugnance  to
pain  ;  nor  of  the  third,  because  he  torments  and  tortures
both  himself  and  others,  despite  his  and  their  yearnings
for  pleasure  and  repugnance  to  pain.  But  [342]  I  do
approve  of  the  fourth,  because,  tormenting  and  torturing
neither  himself  nor  others,  he  dwells,  here  and  now,
beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  in  bliss,  and
in  holiness. — And  now,  sir,  I  must  be  going,  for  I
have  much  to  do  and  attend  to.

Do  not  let  me  detain  you,  Pessa.

So,  with  grateful  thanks  to  the  Lord  for  what  he
had  heard,  Pessa,  the  elephant  trainer’s  son,  rose  up,
saluted,  and  withdrew  with  deep  veneration.

Pessa  had  not  been  gone  long  when  the  Lord  said : —
Pessa,  Almsmen,  is  informed  and  has  great  under¬
standing.  Had  he  but  sat  on  a  little  longer,  while  I
set  out  in  detail  the  distinctions  between  the  four  types
of  individual,  he  would  have  carried  away  with  him
what  would  have  profited  him  greatly.

Now,  Lord,  is  the  time  for  that ;  now  is  the  time.
Blessed  One  ;  the  Almsmen  will  treasure  up  the  Lord’s
utterance.

Then  the  Lord  proceeded  to  address  the  listening
Almsmen,  as  follows :

What  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  torments  himself
and  is  given  to  self-torment? — Take  the  case  of  an
individual  who,  naked,  flouting  the  decencies  of  life,  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  12)  .  .  .  [343]  to  wash'  (away
the  evil  within). — Such  are  the  divers  ways  in  which  he
is  given  to  tormenting  his  body.  Such  a  man  is  said
to  torment  himself  and  to  be  given  to  self-torment.

What  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  torments  others
and  is  given  to  tormenting  others  ? — Take  the  case  of
the  individual  who  butchers  sheep  or  sticks  pigs,  or


M.  i.  344.


AGAINST  ASCETICISM.


249


who  is  a  fowler,  deer-stalker,  hunter,  fisherman,  robber,
cut-throat,  or  gaoler,  or  who  follows  any  other  cruel
trade. — Such  a  man  is  said  to  torment  others  and  to
be  given  to  tormenting  others.

What  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  torments  himself
and  others  too  ? —

1  Take  the  case  of  an  individual  who  becomes  an
anointed  king  of  Noble  race,  or  a  brahmin  magnate.
East  of  the  town,  he  orders  the  building  of  a  new
sacrificial  hall,  into  which — after  first  cutting  off  his
hair  and  beard  and  donning  the  rough  pelt  of  a  black
antelope — he  goes  with  his  queen-consort  and  his
brahmin  chaplain,  with  his  body  anointed  with  ghee
and  oil,  and  scratching  his  itching  back  with  an
antler.  His  bed  is  grass  and  leaves  strewn  on  the
bare  ground.  For  the  whole  party,  there  is  only  one
solitary  cow,  with  a  calf  by  her  side,  which  must  be
coloured  precisely  like  its  mother ;  and  on  this  solitary
cow’s  milk  [344]  the  king  has  the  first  call,  the  queen-
consort  takes  the  second  turn,  the  brahmin  the  third,
the  fourth  makes  the  fire-oblation,  while  the  calf  has
to  get  along  on  what  is  left.  Says  the  king  :

Let  there  be  slain  for  the  sacrifice  so  many  bulls,  so
many  steers,  heifers,  goats,  and  rams.  Let  there  be
felled  so  many  trees  for  sacrificial  posts.  Let  so  much
kusa  grass  be  cut  to  strew  round  the  sacrificial  spot.
And  all  persons  known  as  slaves,  messengers,  and
servants,  harried  by  stripes  and  fear,  then  set  about
the  preparations  with  tearful  faces  and  voices  of
lamentation. — Such  a  man  is  said  to  torment  himself
and  others,  and  to  be  given  to  tormenting  both.  v

Lastly,  what  kind  of  individual  is  he  who,  tormenting
neither  himself  nor  others,  dwells,  here  and  now,
beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  in  bliss,
and  in  holiness? — Take  the  case  that  there  appears
here  in  the  world  a  truth-finder,  Arahat  all-en-

1  This  Buddhist  satire  depicts,  not  unfaithfully,  the  brahmin
ritual  enjoined  for  a  yajamdna  who  wishes  to  perform  Soma-
sacrifices, — as  described  by  Hillebrandt  in  his  Ritual-litteratur
(in  Bflhler’s  Qrundriss)  p.  125  fif.


250


LI.  KANDARAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  345.


lightened  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  2 7)  .  .  .  [345-7]
enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its
zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness
but  not  divorced  from  observation  and  reflection  ; — and
he  successively  attains  to  the  Second,  Third,  and
Fourth  Ecstasies.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  purified,
clean  and  cleansed  of  things  impure,  tempered  and  apt
to  serve,  stablished  and  immutable, — it  is  thus  that  he
applies  his  heart  to  the  knowledge  which  recalls  his
own  earlier  existences.  He  calls  to  mind  his  divers
existences  in  the  past, — a  single  birth,  and  then  two
.  .  .  (and  so  on  to)  a  hundred  thousand  births,  many
an  aeon  of  disintegration  of  the  world,  many  an  aeon  of
its  redintegration,  and  again  many  an  aeon  both  of  its
disintegration  and  of  its  redintegration.  In  this  or  that
existence,  he  remembers,  such  and  such  was  his  name,
his  clan,  his  class,  his  diet,  his  joys  and  sorrows,  and
his  term  of  life.  When  he  passed  thence,  he  came  by
such  and  such  subsequent  existence,  wherein  such  and
such  was  his  name  and  so  forth  ;  [848]  and  thence  he
passed  to  his  life  here. — Thus  does  he  call  to  mind  his
divers  existences  of  the  past  in  all  their  details  and
features.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies  to  know¬
ledge  of  the  passage  hence,  and  re-appearance  else¬
where,  of  other  beings.  With  the  Eye  Celestial  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  .  .  .  made  their  appearance  in
states  of  bliss  in  heaven.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  the  extirpation  of  Cankers.  He  com¬
prehends,  aright  and  to  the  full,  Ill,  the  origin  of  Ill,
the  cessation  of  Ill,  and  the  course  that  leads  to  the
cessation  of  Ill ;  he  comprehends,  aright  and  to  the  full,
which  the  Cankers  are,  with  their  origin,  cessation,  and
the  course  that  leads  to  their  cessation.  When  he
knows  this  and  when  he  sees  this,  then  his  heart  is
Delivered  from  the  Canker  of  sensuous  pleasure,  from
the  Canker  of  continuing  existence,  and  from  the
Canker  of  ignorance  ;  and  to  him  thus  Delivered  comes


M.  i.  349-


THE  PORTALS  OF  NIRVANA.


251


the  knowledge  of  his  Deliverance  in  the  conviction —
Rebirth  is  no  more  ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my
task  is  done  ;  and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what
I  have  been. — Such  a  man  is  said  to  torment  neither
himself  nor  others,  and  not  to  he  given  [349]  to
tormenting  either  himself  or  others,  but  to  dwell,  here
and  now,  beyond  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  in
bliss  and  in  holiness.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LI  1.  atthaka-nAgara  SUTTA.1
•  ■

THE  PORTALS  OF  NIRVANA.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  reverend
Ananda  was  staying  at  Vesali  in  the  hamlet  of  Beluva,
the  householder  Dasama  of  Atthaka  Town,  who  had
gone  to  Pataliputta  on  some  business  or  other,  came
to  an  Almsman  in  the  Kukkutapleasaunce  and,  seating
himself  after  salutations,  asked  where  Ananda  was
staying,  as  he  would  like  to  see  him.  Being  informed
that  Ananda  was  staying  at  Vesali  in  the  hamlet  of
Beluva,  Dasama,  after  finishing  his  business  at  P&tali-
putta,  proceeded  to  Vesali  and  the  hamlet  of  Beluva,
where  he  found  Ananda.  Seating  himself  after  saluta¬
tions,  Dasama  asked  Ananda  this  question  : — Has  the
Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened,
indicated  one  particular  state  of  consciousness  whereby
an  Almsman  who  lives  the  strenuous  life  purged  of
self,  either  finds  Deliverance  for  his  prisoned  heart,  or
sees  the  extirpation  of  Cankers  hitherto  rampant,  or
wins  at  last  that  utter  peace  which  was  not  his  before  ?

Yes,  he  has.

[350]  What  is  it  ?

Take  the  case,  householder,  of  an  Almsman  who,
divested  of  pleasures  of  sense,  and  divested  of  wrong


1  Identical  with  the  Sutta  at  Anguttara  V,  3+2-7.


252


LII.  ATTHAKA-NAGARA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  35 1.


states  of  consciousness,  enters  on,  and  dwells  in,  the
First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state
bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  obser¬
vation  and  reflection.  Reflecting  that  this  First
Ecstasy  is  only  a  product,  evolved  by  thought,  he
comes  to  know  that  all  products  evolved  by  thought
are  fleeting  and  must  cease.  Taking  his  stand  on  this,
he  attains  to  extirpation  of  Cankers,  or,  if  he  does  not
attain  this,  then  by  his  passion  for  righteousness  and
by  his  delight  in  righteousness  he  destroys  the  Five
Fetters  which  entail  re-birth  and  is  translated  hereafter
to  realms  above,  from  which  he  will  never  return  again
to  earth  but  will  there  win  his  Nirvana. — This  is  a
state  of  consciousness  indicated  by  the  Lord  who
knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all-enlightened,  whereby
an  Almsman  who  lives  the  strenuous  life  purged  of
self  both  finds  Deliverance  for  his  prisoned  heart,  and
sees  the  extirpation  of  Cankers  hitherto  rampant,  and
wins  at  last  that  utter  peace  which  was  not  his  before.

Further,  an  Almsman,  rising  above  observation  and
reasoning,  successively  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the
Second — the  Third — and  the  Fourth  Ecstasies.  Re¬
flecting  that  each  of  these  also  is  only  a  product,
evolved  by  thought,  he  comes  to  know  that  all  pro¬
ducts  .  .  .  utter  peace  which  was  not  his  before.

[351]  Further,  an  Almsman  dwells  with  radiant
good-will  pervading  one  quarter  of  the  world — a  second
— a  third — and  then  the  fourth  quarter,  pervading  the
whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world — above,  below,
around,  everywhere — with  radiant  good-will,  all-em¬
bracing,  vast,  boundless,  wherein  no  hate  or  malice
finds  a  place.  And,  as  with  good-will,  so  in  turn  he
pervades  with  radiant  pity — and  sympathy — and  poised
equanimity  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world.
Reflecting  that  each  of  these  four  also  is  only  a  pro¬
duct,  evolved  by  thought,  he  comes  to  know  that  all
products  .  .  .  [352]  utter  peace  which  was  not  his
before.

Further,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  perception  of
material  objects,  by  ceasing  from  perception  of  sense-


M.  i.  353-


THE  PORTALS  OF  NIRVANA.


253


reactions,  and  by  not  heeding  perception  of  differences,
an  Almsman  comes  to  hold  space  to  be  infinite  and  so
enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  plane  of  infinity  of  space.
Or,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  this  plane,  the
Almsman  comes  to  hold  consciousness  to  be  infinite
and  so  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  plane  of  infinity  of
consciousness.  Or,  by  passing  altogether  beyond  this
plane,  the  Almsman  comes  to  hold  that  Naught  is
and  so  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  plane  of  Naught.
Reflecting  that  each  of  these  three  planes  also  is  only
a  product,  evolved  by  thought,  he  comes  to  know  that
all  products  .  .  .  utter  peace  which  was  not  his  before.

At  the  close  of  these  words,  the  householder  Dasama
from  Atthaka  Town  said  to  Ananda: — Just  as  a  man
who,  being  in  quest  of  a  single  treasure-trove,  should
at  one  haul  find  eleven,  [858]  even  so  have  I,  in  my
quest  for  a  single  portal  to  Nirvana,  been  told  of
eleven  portals.  Just  as  a  man  with  an  eleven-doored
house,  could,  if  a  fire  broke  out,  escape  to  safety  by  any
single  one  of  those  eleven  doors,  even  so  shall  I  be
able  to  escape  to  safety  by  any  single  one  of  these
eleven  portals  of  Nirvana.  Those  of  other  creeds  will
always  look  for  a  fee  for  the  teacher ;  so  why  should
not  I  show  worship  to  the  reverend  Ananda  ?

So,  assembling  together  the  Almsmen  from  Pfitali-
putta  and  Vesall,  Dasama  provided  them  with  an  excel¬
lent  meal  of  food  both  hard  and  soft,  which  he  served
to  them  with  his  own  hands,  till  all  had  had  their
fill.  Moreover,  he  presented  two  lengths  of  cloth  to
each  Almsman  for  apparel,  but  a  suit  of  three  robes  to
the  reverend  Ananda,  for  whom  further  he  caused  a
cell  to  be  built  at  a  cost  of  five  hundred  pieces.


254


LIII.  SEKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  3S4-


LIII.  SEKHA-SUTTA.

HOW  TO  BECOME  AN  ADEPT.

xTiius  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Sakyans  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the
Banyan  pleasaunce,  the  Sakyans  of  that  city,  who  had
got  a  new  hall,  never  occupied  so  far  by  recluse  or
brahmin  or  any  human  being,  came  to  the  Lord,  and,
after  salutations,  took  their  seats  to  one  side,  telling
him  of  their  brand-new  hall  and  inviting  him  to  use  it
first,  and  then  they  would  use  it  afterwards  themselves  ;
if  he  would  only  consent,  that  would  long  enure  to
their  [354]  weal  and  welfare.  By  silence  the  Lord
consented  ;  and,  on  his  consenting,  those  Sakyans  rose
and  with  deep  obeisance  withdrew  to  complete  pre¬
paring  the  hall  for  occupation, — setting  out  seats,
planting  tubs  of  water  about,  and  getting  lamps  and
oil  ready.  When  they  had  finished,  they  came  and
stood  by  him  to  tell  the  Lord  they  awaited  his  pleasure.
Duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  the  Lord,  with  the  Con¬
fraternity,  proceeded  to  the  hall,  bathed  his  feet,  went
in,  and  took  his  seat  by  the  centre-post  with  his  face
towards  the  East.  He  was  followed  by  the  Confra¬
ternity  who,  entering  the  hall  after  bathing  their  feet,
seated  themselves  by  the  western  wall,  facing  east  and
with  the  Lord  in  front  of  them.  Then  came  the
Sakyans  who,  entering  the  hall  after  bathing  their  feet,
seated  themselves  by  the  eastern  wall,  facing  west  and
with  the  Lord  in  front  of  them.  Far  into  the  night  the
Lord  by  homily  instructed,  informed,  helped  onward,
and  cheered  forward  those  Sakyans  of  Kapilavatthu,
till  at  last  he  said  to  Ananda :  Tell  them,  please,
about  him  who  is  in  training  to  become  an  adept,  and
the  path  he  treads.  Ananda  assenting,  the  Lord  had
his  robe  folded  in  four  and  lay  down  on  it  on  his

1  The  preamble  of  this  Sutta  occurs  also  verbatim  at  Samyutta
IV,  182, — ending  before  Ananda’s  lecture  to  the  Sakyans,  and
continuing  instead  with  an  address  to  the  Almsmen  by  Moggal-
ISna.


M.  i.  355-


HOW  TO  BECOME  AN  ADEPT.


255


right  side  in  the  lion-posture,  foot  resting  on  foot,
mindful  and  self-possessed,  awaiting  the  moment  ap¬
pointed  for  his  arising.

Addressing  MahanSma  the  Sakyan,  Ananda  said  : —
Take  the  case  of  a  disciple  of  the  Noble,  who  is
virtuous,  who  keeps  watch  and  ward  over  the  portals
of  sense,  is  temperate  in  eating,  vigilant,  established
in  the  seven  virtuous  qualities,  and  is  able  at  will —
without  difficulty  or  trouble  —  to  induce  the  Four
Ecstasies  which  transcend  thought  and  confer  well¬
being  here  and  now.

How,  Mahanama,  [355]  does  the  disciple  of  the
Noble  become  virtuous  ? — Why,  by  following  virtue’s
code,  by  controlling  himself  by  the  control  of  the
public  confession  of  transgressions,  by  keeping  to  the
plane  of  right  behaviour,  by  viewing  even  trifling
■offences  as  perilous,  and  by  embracing  and  training
himself  in  the  (ten)  moral  precepts. — That  is  how  he
becomes  virtuous.

How,  Mahanama,  does  the  disciple  of  the  Noble
keep  watch  and  ward  over  the  portals  of  sense? —
Why,  by  refusing,  when  he  sees  with  the  eye  a  visible
shape,  to  be  led  away  by  its  general  appearance  or
particular  marks,  inasmuch  as  lack  of  control  over
sight  might  let  in  appetites  and  frets,  with  evil  and
wrong  states  of  consciousness ;  and  therefore  he  schools
himsdf  to  keep  the  sense  of  sight  under  control  and
under  guard,  and  develops  his  control  of  it.  And  he
•does  the  like  with  the  five  other  senses. — That  is  how
he  keeps  watch  and  ward  over  the  portals  of  sense.

How  is  he  temperate  in  eating  ? — Why,  by  taking
his  food  duly  and  advisedly,  not  for  pleasure  or  delight,
nor  for  ostentation  or  display,  but  only  to  the  extent
necessary  to  support  and  sustain  his  physical  frame,  in
order  to  shield  it  from  hurt  and  to  further  the  higher
life,  resolving  to  put  from  him  the  old  feelings  and  not
to  let  any  new  feelings  arise,  to  the  end  that  the  blame¬
less  lot  may  be  his  and  well-being. — That  is  how  he  is
temperate  in  eating.

How  is  he  vigilant? — Why,  by  purging  his  heart  of


256


LIU.  SEKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  356.


besetting  tendencies, — whether  by  day  as  he  paces  to
and  fro  or  sits  down,  or  during  the  first  watch  of  the
night  as  he  paces  to  and  fro  or  sits  down,  or  during
the  middle  watch  of  the  night  as  he  lies  couched  lion-
like  on  his  right  side,  foot  resting  on  foot,  mindful  and
self-possessed,  awaiting  the  moment  appointed  for  his
arising.

How  is  he  [356]  established  in  the  seven  virtuous
qualities  ? — Why,  (i)  by  faith,  by  that  faith  in  the
Truth-finder’s  enlightenment  whereby  he  avers  that
this  is  indeed  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  walking
by  knowledge,  blessed,  understanding  all  worlds,  the
matchless  tamer  of  the  human  heart,  teacher  of  gods
and  men,  the  Lord  of  Enlightenment!  (ii)  Shame¬
faced  is  he, — inwardly  ashamed  of  wrongful  acts  or
words  or  thoughts,  inwardly  ashamed  of  harbouring
evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  (iii)  Sensitive
is  he  to  reproach  from  without, — dreading  reproach
for  wrongful  acts  or  words  or  thoughts  or  for  harbour¬
ing  evil  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness,  (iv)  Well-
informed  is  he,  a  repository  and  a  treasury  of  all  he
hears  ;  all  doctrines — beginning  aright,  proceeding
aright,  and  ending  aright — which  in  letter  and  in  spirit
proclaim  the  higher  life  in  all  its  perfection  and  purity,
all  these  he  learns  and  knows  by  heart ;  his  lips
repeat  them  ;  his  mind  examines  them  ;  his  gaze  pene¬
trates  them  through  and  through,  (v)  Strenuous  is  he
to  put  away  wrong  states  of  consciousness  and  to
develop  such  states  as  are  right, — always  striving,
always  sturdy  in  endeavour,  always  resolute  in  states
of  consciousness  which  are  right,  (vi)  Retentive  of
rriemory  is  he,  with  a  richly  stored  memory  that  recol¬
lects  and  recalls  both  the  doings  and  the  sayings  of
long  ago.  (vii)  Lore  is  his,  the  lore  which  embraces,
life’s  ebb  and  flow,  the  noble,  penetrating  lore  which
leads  on  to  the  utter  cessation  of  all  Ill. — That  is  how
he  is  established  in  the  seven  virtuous  qualities.

And  how  is  he  able  at  will  to  induce  the  Four
Ecstasies  ? — Why,  by  divesting  himself  of  pleasures  of
sense,  by  divesting  himself  of  wrong  states  of  con-


M.  i.  357.


HOW  TO  BECOME  AN  ADEPT.


257


sciousness,  so  that  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the
First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state
bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  obser¬
vation  and  reflection  ;  by  rising  above  observation  and
reflection,  so  that  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the
Second  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a
state  bred  of  rapt  concentration — above  all  observation
and  reflection — whereby  the  heart  is  focussed  and
tranquillity  reigns  within.  And  so  on  to  the  Third
and  Fourth  Ecstasies. — That  is  how  the  disciple  of
the  Noble  is  able  at  will — without  difficulty  or  trouble
— to  induce  the  Four  Ecstasies  which  transcend  thought
and  confer  well-being  here  and  now.

The  disciple  of  the  Noble  who  has  achieved  this
much  [357]  is  said  to  be  in  training  to  become  an
adept  whose  development  is  assured,  who  is  able  to
win  forth,  able  to  reach  enlightenment,  able  to  attain
to  the  peace  beyond  compare.  It  is  just  like  a  hen
with  a  clutch  of  eight,  ten,  or  a  dozen  eggs,  on  which
she  sits  closely  to  keep  them  warm  and  hatch  them
out.  Even  though  no  wish  arises  within  her  that  her
chicks  with  beak  or  claw  may  break  through  the  shell
and  come-  out  all  right,  yet  they  are  quite  able  to  break
through  their  shells  and  win  forth  all  right.  Even  so
the  disciple  of  the  Noble  who  has  achieved  .  .  .  peace
beyond  compare.

Having  won  that  perfection  of  poise  and  mindfulness
(which  the  Fourth  Ecstasy  brings),  the  disciple  of  the
Noble  calls  to  mind  his  previous  existences — a  single
birth,  then  two  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  ...  in
all  their  details  and  features. — This  is  the  first  way  in
which,  like  the  chick  from  the  shell,  he  wins  forth.

Having  won  that  perfection  of  poise  and  mindfulness
(which  the  Fourth  Ecstasy  brings),  the  disciple  of  the
Noble,  with  the  Eye  Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far
surpasses  the  human  eye,  sees  beings  in  the  act  of
passing  hence  and  re-appearing  elsewhere  .  .  .  (etc.,  as
in  Sutta  No.  4)  .  .  .  in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven. — This
is  the  second  way  in  which,  like  the  chick  from  the
shell,  he  wins  forth.


17


LIII.  SEKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  358.


258


Having  won  that  perfection  of  poise  and  mindfulness
(which  the  Fourth  Ecstasy  brings),  the  disciple  of  the
Noble,  by  eradicating  the  Cankers,  comes  to  the
Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  in  which  no  Cankers
are ;  here  and  now  he  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  a
Deliverance  which  of  and  by  himself  he  has  discerned
and  realized.  [858] — This  is  the  third  way  in  which,
like  the  chick  from  the  shell,  he  wins  forth.

His  conduct  shows  that  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  is
virtuous,  keeps  watch  and  ward  over  the  portals  of
sense,  is  temperate  in  eating,  is  vigilant,  is  established
in  the  seven  virtuous  qualities,  and  is  able  at  will —
— without  difficulty  or  trouble — to  induce  the  Four
Ecstasies  which  transcend  thought  and  confer  well¬
being  here  and  now.

His  lore  shows  that  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  can
recall  to  mind  his  own  previous  existences,  can  read
with  the  Eye  Celestial  the  future  destinies  of  beings  in
act  to  pass  hence  and  re-appear  elsewhere,  and  has  won
for  himself  Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  by  eradicating
the  Cankers.

A  disciple  of  the  Noble  who  has  achieved  all  this
is  said  to  be  endowed  with  lore,  with  conduct,  and
with  the  conduct  that  flows  from  lore.

It  was  a  Brahma  named  the  Ever-young1  who  was
the  author  of  these  lines —

With  suck  as  prize  descent,  the  Nobleman
stands  first ;  first  place  'mong  gods  and  men  is  his
who  walks  in  virtue  and  excels  in  lore.

Now  these  lines,  Mahanama,  were  rightly  and  not
wrongly  sung  and  uttered  by  that  Brahma  the  Ever-
young  ;  full  of  meaning  and  not  empty  are  they ;  and
the  Lord  has  approved  them.

Here,  the  Lord  rose  and  commended  what  Ananda


1  For  SanankumSra  (interpreted  here  by  Bu.  as  por-
anaka,  of  old)  see  Dialogius  I,  121  and  III,  93.  In  the  verses
(which  occur  in  each  of  the  three  other  Nikayas)  the  possible
substitution  of  khattiyo  for  brahmano  would  account  for
this  reversion  of  normal  brahminical  doctrine  and  g  a  t  h  a  s .


TRUE  RETIREMENT.


M.  i.  359-


259


bad  told  these  Sakyans  of  Kapilavatthu  concerning
training.

[359]  Thus  spoke  the  reverend  Ananda  with  the
Master's  approval.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Sakyans  of
Kapilavatthu  rejoiced  in  what  Ananda  had  said.


LIV.  POTALIYA-SUTTA.

TRUE  RETIREMENT.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  the  Anga  country  across  the  river  where
there  is  a  township  named  Apana,  he  went  early  in
the  day,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  into  town  for
alms  ;  and,  after  his  meal,  on  his  way  back  from  his
round,  went  into  a  wood  to  rest  under  a  tree  during
the  heat  of  the  day.  Thither  too,  in  the  course  of  his
walk,  came  the  householder  Potaliya,  in  full  attire  of
long  tunic  and  long  cloak,  with  umbrella  and  sandals  ;
and  after  courteous  greetings  stood  to  one  side.  As
he  stood  there,  the  Lord  said  to  him  There  is  sitting
room,  householder;  be  seated,  if  you  will.  Indignant
and  angry  at  being  styled  a  householder,  Potaliya
made  no  answer ;  nor  did  he  answer  when  the  Lord
repeated  his  invitation.  But  when  so  invited  by  the
Lord  for  the  third  time,  the  indignant  and  angry  Pota¬
liya  rejoined  that  [360]  it  was  neither  seemly  nor
proper  to  address  him  thus.

Well,  householder,  you  have  all  the  indications  and
characteristics  and  marks  of  a  householder.

But,  Gotama,  I  have  retired  and  given  over.

How  have  you  managed  that,  householder?

Why,  I  have  handed  over  to  my  sons  as  their
inheritance  all  my  wealth  and  substance,  all  my  gold
and  coins  of  silver, — in  connexion  with  which  I  no
longer  issue  orders  what  to  do  and  what  not  to  do,  but
get  just  my  food  and  clothing.  That  is  how  I  have
retired  and  given  over.

There  is  a  difference,  householder,  between  what


26o


LIV.  POTALIVA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  361.


you  call  giving  over  and  the  giving-up  under  the  Law
of  the  Noble.

What,  pray,  is  that  giving-up  ? — Will  the  Lord  be
so  good  as  to  expound  it  to  me  ?

Hearken,  then,  householder,  and  pay  attention  ;  and
I  will  tell  you, — said  the  Lord,  who  then  spoke  as
follows  to  the  listening  Potaliya  : —

In  the  Law  of  the  Noble,  there  are  eight  states  of
consciousness  which  conduce  to  giving  up  according  to
the  Law  of  the  -Noble;  and  these  are  the  eight: —
All  killing  should  be  banned  by  holding  life  sacred  ;
theft  should  be  banned  by  never  taking  what  is  not  a
free  gift ;  lying  should  be  banned  by  strict  adherence
to  truthfulness  ;  calumny  should  be  banned  by  never
stooping  to  calumniate  ;  covetise  should  be  banned  by
uncovetousness ;  taunts  should  be  banned  by  never
taunting  ;  angry  rage  should  be  banned  by  placidity  ;
and  arrogance  should  be  banned  by  humility.  Such,
briefly  and  without  detailed  exposition,  are  the  eight
states  conducing  to  this  giving  up.

Would  you,  sir,  be  so  good  as  to  expound  these  in
detail  ?

Hearken  then,  householder,  and  pay  attention  ;  and
I  will  tell  you, — said  the  Lord,  who  then  spoke  as
follows  to  the  listening  Potaliya  : —

[361]  When  I  said  that  all  killing  should  be  banned
by  holding  life  sacred,  I  meant  this,  namely  that  the
disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that,  as  his  life  now  aims
at  putting  from  him  and  renouncing  those  Fetters
which  might  lead  him  to  take  away  life,  he  would
— were  he  now  to  take  life — not  only  stand  self-
condemned  but  would  be  censured  by  men  of  intelli-

§ence,  and  must  also,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after
eath,  look  to  pass  hereafter  to  a  state  of  woe  for  his
guilt.  Killing  is  a  Fetter  ;  killing  is  an  Obstacle  ;  but
he  whose  hands  are  innocent  of  blood,  thereby  escapes
all  the  destroying  and  consuming  Cankers  which  blood-
guilt  would  entail. — That  is  what  I  meant  by  saying
all  killing  should  be  banned  by  holding  life  sacred.
And  what  is  true  of  innocence  of  blood  is  likewise  true


M.  362.


TRUE  RETIREMENT.


261


in  all  respects  of  the  other  seven  states  of  conscious¬
ness  [362/81

[864]  These  then,  householder,  are,  in  detailed
exposition,  the  eight  states  of  consciousness,  at  first
only  briefly  indicated  by  me,  which,  in  the  Law  of  the
Noble,  conduce  to  giving  up.  But,  in  themselves  alone
they  do  not  make  up  the  plenitude  of  universal  giving-
up,  according  to  the  Law  of  the  Noble.

What  does  make  up  that  plenitude  of  universal
giving-up  according  to  the  Law  of  the  Noble  ?  Would
the  Lord  please  explain  this  ?

Hearken  then,  householder,  and  pay  attention;  and
I  will  tell  you, — said  the  Lord,  who  then  spoke  as
follows  to  the  listening  Potaliya : —

1.  It  is  just  as  if  a  famished,  starveling  dog  were  to
make  his  way  to  a  slaughter-house  and  the  butcher
were  there  to  fling  him  a  bare  bone, — scraped  and
scraped  till  it  was  quite  clean,  without  a  scrap  of  meat
on  it  and  with  only  the  merest  trace  of  blood  left.
Would  that  dog  be  able  therewith  to  allay  the  pangs
of  his  hunger  ? — No.  sir ;  not  with  a  bare  bone  like
that,  toil  and  moil  as  he  may. — Just  in  the  same  way
the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  to  a  bare  bone
his  Lord  has  likened  pleasures  of  sense  with  all  their
present  discomforts  and  tribulation  and  with  worse  to
follow.  When  he  has  seen  and  realized  this  in  its  full
truth,  then  he  sheds  any  equanimity  which  is  scattered
and  diffused  and  develops  only  that  real  poise  which
is  one-centred  and  concentrated,  wherein  all  attach¬
ments  to  material  things  of  the  world  cease  for  ever
and  none  remain.

2.  It  is  just  as  if  a  vulture  or  heron  or  kite  were  to
fly  up  with  a  lump  of  meat  and  other  vultures  and
herons  and  kites  were  to  keep  on  attacking  it  to  tear
and  rend  it.  How  think  you,  householder?  If  the
bird  does  not  promptly  let  go  the  meat,  will  it  not  be
the  death  of  him  or  deadly  hurt  to  him  ? — Yes,  sir. —
Just  in  the  same  way  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects
that  to  a  lump  of  meat  his  Lord  has  likened  pleasures
of  sense  .  .  .  [865]  and  none  remain.


262


LIV.  POTALIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  366.


3.  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  were  to  carry  a  blazing  hay-
torch  against  the  wind.  How  think  you,  householder  ?
If  he  does  not  very  quickly  drop  it,  will  the  flame  not
burn  either  his  hand  or  his  arm  or  one  of  his  members
and  so  bring  him  death  or  deadly  hurt  ? — Yes,  sir. —
Just  in  the  same  way  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects
that  to  a  hay-torch  his  Lord  has  likened  pleasures  of
sense  .  .  .  and  none  remain.

4.  It  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  pit,  a  man’s  height
deep,  filled  with  white-hot  embers  showing  neither
flame  nor  smoke ;  and  a  man  came  along  who  was  fond
of  life  and  did  not  want  to  die,  being  fond  of  pleasure
and  averse  from  pain  ;  and  as  if  two  stalwart  men  each
took  him  by  an  arm  and  dragged  him  towards  the
embers.  How  think  you,  householder?  Would  not
the  man  twist  and  turn  his  body  now  this  way,  now
that  ? — Yes,  sir  ;  because  he  would  realize  he  would  be
cast  into  the  pit  of  embers  and  there  would  come  by
his  death  or  deadly  hurt. — Just  in  the  same  way  the
disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  to  a  pit  of  embers
his  Lord  has  likened  pleasures  of  sense  .  .  .  and  none
remain.

5-  It  is  just  as  if  in  a  dream  a  man  were  to  behold
delightful  pleasaunces,  delightful  woodlands,  delightful
prospects,  and  delightful  lakes,  none  of  which  he  could
see  when  he  awoke.  Just  in  the  same  way  the  disciple
of  the  Noble  reflects  that  to  a  dream  his  Lord  has
likened  pleasures  of  sense  .  .  .  and  none  remain.

6.  It  is  just  as  if,  having  besought  the  loan  of  other
people’s  wealth — [366]  a  smart  carriage  and  rare  jewels
and  ear-rings — ,  a  man  were  to  appear  in  all  this  bor¬
rowed  splendour  and  bravery  in  the  bazaar,  making  folk
say  he  must  be  a  wealthy  man,  for  wealthy  men  employ
their  wealth  like  that ;  and  then  the  veritable  owners
were  to  take  back  their  property  from  him  when  and
where  they  met  him.  How  think  you,  householder  ?
Would  the  fellow  have  had  enough  of  change  of  state  ?
— Yes,  sir;  for  the  owners  would  have  taken  their
property  away  from  him. — Just  in  the  same  way
the  disciple  of  the  Noble  reflects  that  to  a  loan  his


M.  i.  367.  TRUE  RETIREMENT.  261

Lord  has  likened  pleasures  of  sense  .  .  .  and  none
remain.

7.  1 1  is  just  as  if  there  were  a  wood  near  a  village
or  township  and  in  it  a  tree  laden  with  ripe  and  ripen¬
ing  fruit  but  with  no  fallen  fruit  on  the  ground
beneath ;  and  a  man  came  along  who,  being  in  need,
search,  and  quest  of  fruit,  should  enter  the  wood,
and  see  that  loaded  tree  with  no  fruit  on  the  ground
beneath,  and  bethink  him  that  he  could  climb  trees
and  so  might  eat  his  fill  and  also  stuff  his  pouch ;  and
if,  when  he  had  done  so,  a  second  man,  coming  on  a
like  errand  to  the  same  tree  with  a  sharp  axe,  were  to
bethink  him  that,  though  he  could  not  climb,  he  might
fell  the  tree  and  so  eat  his  fill  and  also  stuff  his  pouch.
How  think  you,  householder?  Would  the  man  up
the  tree  climb  down  very  quickly  lest  in  its  fall  the  tree
should  crush  his  hand  or  foot  or  other  member,  with
[867]  consequent  death  to  him  or  deadly  hurt? — Yes,
sir. — Just  in  the  same  way  the  disciple  of  the  Noble
reflects  that  to  fruit  hanging  on  a  tree  his  Lord  has
likened  pleasures  of  sense  .  .  .  and  none  remain.

Arrived  now  at  this  perfection  of  mindfulness  and
poise,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble  recalls  to  mind  his
divers  existences  in  the  past, — a  single  birth,  then  two
.  .  .  (etc.  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  ...  in  all  their  details
and  features.

Arrived  now  at  this  perfection  of  mindfulness  and
poise,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble,  with  the  Eye  Celestial
which  far  surpasses  the  human  eye,  sees  beings  in  the
act  of  passing  hence  and  re-appearing  elsewhere  .  .  .
(etc.  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  ...  in  states  of  bliss  in  heaven.

Arrived  now  at  this  perfection  of  mindfulness  and
poise,  the  disciple  of  the  Noble,  by  eradicating  the
Cankers,  here  and  now,  enters  into,  and  abides  in,  the
Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind,  which  knows  no
Cankers,  and  which,  for  and  by  himself,  he  has
discerned  and  realized.

And  thus,  householder,  there  comes  about  the  pleni¬
tude  of  universal  giving-up,  according  to  the  Law  of
the  Noble. — Do  you  detect  this  in  your  own  case  ?


264


UV.  POTALIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  368.


Who  am  I,  sir,  by  the  side  of  this  plenitude  of
universal  giving-up,  according  to  the  Law  of  the
Noble?  Far,  far  am  I  from  that!  Hitherto,  sir,  I
had  imagined  that  the  Wanderers  of  other  creeds,
inferior  though  they  are,  were  superior ;  I  fed  them,
inferior  though  they  are,  on  superior  food ;  and  set
them,  inferior  though  they  are,  in  the  superior  place.
Hitherto,  I  had  imagined  that  the  superiors  were
inferior  ;  fed  them,  superior  though  they  are,  on  inferior
food ;  and  set  them,  superior  though  they  are,  in  the
inferior  place.  But  now,  sir,  I  shall  recognize  [868]
that  the  Wanderers  of  other  creeds  are  the  inferiors
which  they  are ;  I  will  feed  them,  as  being  inferiors,
on  inferior  food  ;  and  I  will  set  them,  as  being  inferiors,
in  the  inferior  place.  The  Almsmen,  on  the  other
hand,  I  shall  now  recognize  as  the  superiors  which  they
are  ;  I  will  feed  them,  as  superiors,  on  superior  food  ;
and  I  will  set  them,  as  superiors,  in  the  superior  place.
The  Lord  has  inspired  me  with  love  for  the  Recluses,
with  belief  in  the  Recluses,  and  with  reverence  for  the
Recluses.  Excellent,  sir;  excellent!  Just  as  a  man
might  set  upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or
reveal  what  was  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had
gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp  into
darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see  the
things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a  figure,  has  the
Lord  made  his  Doctrine  clear.  I  come  to  the  Lord  as
my  refuge,  and  to  his  Doctrine,  and  to  his  Confra¬
ternity.  I  ask  the  Lord  to  accept  me  as  a  follower
who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onward
while  life  lasts.


jIVAKA-SUTTA.

LAWFUL  AND  UNLAWFUL  MEATS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  stay¬
ing  at  Rajagaha  in  the  mango-grove  of  Jlvaka
Komarabhacca,  Jivaka  came  to  the  Lord  and,  after
salutations,  took  his  seat  at  one  side,  saying : — I  hear


M.  i.  369.


LAWFUL  AND  UNLAWFUL  MEATS.


265


it  is  being  said,  sir,  that  people  slay  animals  expressly
for  the  recluse  Gotama,  who  wittingly  eats  meat
expressly  meant  for  him  and  deliberately  provided  for
him.  Now,  in  so  saying,  are  people  accurately  quoting
the  Lord’s  own  words  and  not  misrepresenting  him  ?
Are  they  stating  what  is  congruent  with  the  Doctrine  ?
And  is  there  no  plausible  version  of  your  utterance
which  provokes  criticism  ?

[369]  Those  who  talk  like  that  are  not  accurately
quoting  words  of  mine,  Jlvaka,  but  are  wrongfully
misrepresenting  me  in  defiance  of  fact.  I  forbid  the
eating  of  meat  in  three  cases, — if  there  is  the  evidence
either  of  your  eyes  or  of  your  ears  or  if  there  are
grounds  of  suspicion.  And  in  three  cases  I  allow  it, —
if  there  is  no  evidence  either  of  your  eyes  or  of  your
ears  and  if  there  be  no  grounds  of  suspicion.

Take  the  case,  Jlvaka,  of  an  Almsman,  supported
by  a  village  or  a  township,  who  dwells  with  radiant
goodwill  pervading  one  quarter  of  the  world — a  second
— a  third — and  then  the  fourth  quarter,  pervading  the
whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  world — above,  below,
around,  everywhere  —  with  radiant  goodwill  all-
embracing,  vast,  boundless,  wherein  no  hate  or  malice
finds  a  place.  To  this  Almsman  comes  a  householder
or  his  son  with  an  invitation  to  to-morrow’s  meal.  If
he  so  desires,  the  Almsman  accepts,  and  next  morning,
when  the  night  is  over,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,
he  makes  his  way  to  the  house,  takes  the  seat  set  for
him,  and  is  served  with  an  excellent  meal.  No
thought  comes  to  him  that  he  could  have  wished  his
host  either  to  desist  now,  or  to  desist  in  future,  from
furnishing  so  excellent  a  meal  ;  he  eats  his  food  with¬
out  greed  or  blind  desire  but  with  a  full  consciousness
of  the  dangers  it  involves  and  with  full  knowledge  that
it  affords  no  refuge.  Do  you  think  that  at  such  a  time
that  Almsman’s  thoughts  are  set  on  hurting  himself,  or
others,  or  both  ?

No,  sir.

Is  not  that  Almsman  then  eating  food  to  which  no
blame  attaches  ?


266


LV.  JIVAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  370.


Yes,  sir.  I  had  heard  that  Brahmas  state  is  one
of  good-will,  and  now  I  have  direct  testimony  of  my
own  ; — for  the  Lord’s  state  is  one  of  good-will.

In  the  truth-finder  all  passion,  [370]  all  hatred,  and
all  delusion  that  could  breed  hurtfulness  have  all  been
grubbed  up  by  the  roots,  like  the  cleared  site  where
once  a  palm-tree  grew,  a  thing  that  once  has  been  and
now  can  be  no  more.  If  this  was  the  purport  of  your
remark,  Jivaka,  I  agree.

Yes,  sir ;  that  was  what  I  meant.

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman,  supported  by  a  village
or  a  township,  who  dwells  with  radiant  pity — sympathy
— poised  equanimity — pervading  one  quarter  of  the
world — a  second —  .  .  .  food  to  which  no  blame
attaches  ?

Yes,  sir.  I  have  heard  that  Brahmas  state  is  one  of
poise.  I  have  the  testimony  of  my  own  eyes  for  the
Lord  that  his  state  is  one  of  poise.

In  the  truth-finder  all  passion,  all  hatred,  and  all
delusion  which  could  breed  annoyance  or  dislikes  or
aversions  have  all  been  grubbed  up  .  .  .  I  agree.

[371]  Yes,  sir ;  that  was  what  I  meant.

Whoso  takes  life  expressly  for  the  truth-finder  or
for  a  disciple  of  his,  is  storing  up  much  demerit  for
himself  in  five  respects.  First,  in  that  he  orders  a
particular  living  creature  to  be  fetched.  Secondly,  in
that  this  living  creature,  by  being  fetched,  experiences
pain  of  mind  and  body.  Thirdly,  in  that  he  orders  it
to  be  killed.  Fourthly,  in  that,  in  being  killed,  that
living  creature  experiences  pain  of  mind  and  body.
And  fifthly,  in  that  he  offends  the  truth-finder  or
a  disciple  of  his  by  offering  him  what  is  improper.

Hereupon,  Jivaka  Komarabhacca  said :  It  is  won¬
derful,  sir ;  it  is  marvellous  !  Strictly  correct  is  the
Almsman’s  eating,  strictly  correct  and  blameless.
Excellent,  sir ;  excellent !  Just  as  a  man  might  set
upright  again  what  had  been  cast  down  ...  I  ask
the  Lord  to  accept  me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an
abiding  refuge  from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.


LVI.  UPALI-SUTTA.

A  JAIN’S  CONVERSION.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  N&Janda  in  Pavarika’s  mango-grove,  Nata-
putta  the  Nigantha  was  at  Najanda  with  a  great  fol¬
lowing  of  Niganthas.

After  his  round  for  alms  in  the  city,  the  Nigantha
Digha  Tapassi,  having  finished  his  meal,  betook  him
to  the  grove  where  the  Lord  was,  [372]  and  there
after  courteous  greetings  stood  to  one  side.  As  he
stood,  the  Lord  said  to  him  : — There  is  sitting  room,
Tapassi;  be  seated,  if  you  will.  So  the  Nigantha
sat  down  on  a  low  seat  and  was  addressed  by  the  Lord
as  follows  : —

How  many  kinds  of  acts,  Tapassi,  effect  and  start
Demerit,  according  to  Nataputta  the  Nigantha?

It  is  not  his  usage,  Gotama,  to  employ  the  term
acts  ;  he  speaks  of  inflictions  (danda1).

How  many  kinds  of  inflictions,  according  to  him,
effect  and  start  Demerit  ?

Three,  Gotama, — those  of  deed,  word,  and  mind.

Are  these  three  distinct  each  from  the  other  two  ?

Yes.

Which  of  the  three  kinds  in  this  classification  does
Nataputta  declare  to  be  the  most  criminal  in  effecting
and  starting  Demerit  ?

Those  of  deed, — the  other  two  being  less  criminal.

Those  of  deed  you  say,  Tapassi  ? — Yes.

Those  of  deed  you  say  ? — Yes.

Those  of  deed  you  say  ? — Yes.


1  Lit  stick,  and  so  penalty.  At  S.B.E.  XLV,  pp.  xvi-xvii,

iacobi  suggests  sins,  while  Jaini  at  p.  xxxi  of  Outlines  speaks  of
lurtful  acts.  Bu.  here  says  the  Jain  idea  was  that  citta  (the  mano-
danda)  did  not  come  into  bodily  acts  or  into  words, — which  were
irresponsible  and  mechanical,  like  the  stirring  and  soughing  of
boughs  in  the  wind.

267


268


LVI.  UPALI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  373.


In  this  wise  did  the  Lord  three  times  pin  the
Nigantha  down  to  the  issue.

[878]  At  this  point  Dlgha  TapassI  the  Nigantha
said  to  the  Lord  : — And  how  many  kinds  of  inflictions,
according  to  you,  Gotama,  effect  and  start  Demerit  ?

It  is  not  the  Truth-finder’s  usage,  TapassI,  to  em¬
ploy  the  term  inflictions  ;  he  speaks  of  acts.

How  many  kinds  of  acts,  according  to  you,  effect
and  start  Demerit  ?

Three,  7  apassi, — those  of  deed,  word,  and  mind.

Are  these  three  distinct  each  from  the  other  two  ?

Yes.

W  hich  of  the  three  kinds  in  this  classification  do  you
declare  to  be  the  most  criminal,  Gotama,  in  effecting
and  starting  Demerit  ?

Those  of  mind, — the  other  two  being  less  criminal.

Those  of  mind  you  say,  Gotama  ? — Yes.

Those  of  mind  you  say  ? — Yes.

Those  of  mind  you  say  ? — Yes.

In  this  wise  did  Dlgha  TapassI  the  Nigantha  pin  the
Lord  down  to  the  issue.  Then  he  rose  up  and  went
off  to  Niitaputta  the  Nigantha,  who  was  sitting  among
a  large  gathering  of  lay-folk  from  the  village  of  Balaka
(noodle)  with  Upali  at  their  head.  When  Nataputta
saw  Dlgha  TapassI  a  little  way  off,  he  asked  where  he
had  come  from  in  the  heat  of  the  day  and  was  told
he  had  been  with  the  recluse  Gotama.  Asking  next
whether  he  had  had  a  talk  with  him,  [874] and  learning
that  he  had,  Nataputta  enquired  what  had  been  their
topic.  On  being  told  the  whole  conversation,  Nata¬
putta  said : — Quite  right,  TapassI  ;  quite  right.  You
answered  Gotama  like  a  well-informed  disciple  who
understands  his  master’s  teachings.  For,  what  show
can  mind  s  infliction  make  as  compared  with  the
stupendous  inflictions  of  deed  ?  Yes  ;  the  inflictions
of  deed  are  the  most  criminal  in  effecting  and  starting
Demerit,  those  of  word  and  mind  being  less  criminal  I
Said  the  householder  Upali  at  this  point Quite
right,  TapassI ;  quite  right.  You  answered  Gotama
like  a  well-informed  disciple  .  .  .  less  criminal.  And


M.  i.  37S-


A  jain’s  CONVERSION.


269


now  I  am  off  to  refute  Gotama  on  this  issue.  If  he
takes  his  stand  with  me  on  the  lines  taken  up  by  him
with  the  right  reverend  TapassI,  then,  point  by  point,
will  I  shake  him  to  and  fro  and  haul  him  about  .  .  .
(etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  35)  .  .  .  [875]  so  will  I  disport
myself  with  the  recluse  Gotama.  I  am  off  to  refute
him  on  this  issue.  .*■

Go  then,  householder,  and  refute  him  on  the  issue.
— I  or  Dlgha  TapassI  or  you  can  do  that.

Said  TapassI  at  this  point : — I  do  not  like  Upali’s
going  to  refute  Gotama,  who  is  a  cozening  person,
expert  in  seducing  others’  disciples  over  to  himself.

It  is  quite  impossible  and  inconceivable,  TapassI,
that  UpSli  should  go  over  to  be  a  disciple  of  Gotama  ;
what  is  possible  is  that  Gotama  will  come  over  to  be  a
disciple  of  U  pali !  Go  then,  householder,  and  refute
him  on  the  issue. — I  or  Dlgha  TapassI  or  you  can  do
that.

A  second  time,  and  even  a  third  time  did  TapassI
remonstrate, — only  to  be  met  by  the  same  rejoinder
from  Nataputta.

Yes,  sir,  I  will  go  and  refute  him,  said  the  house¬
holder  Upali,  as  he  rose  from  his  seat,  with  salutations
and  profound  obeisance  to  Nataputta  the  Nigantha,  to
betake  himself  to  the  Lord  in  Pavarika’s  mango-grove.
[376]  Arrived  there,  he  made  his  salutations  to  the
Lord  and  took  his  seat  to  one  side,  enquiring  whether
Dlgha  TapassI  the  Nigantha  had  been  there,  and
whether  he  had  had  a  talk,  and  what  it  had  been
about.  Having  been  told  by  the  Lord  all  that  had
passed  between  them,  Upali  said  : — TapassI,  sir,
was  right,  quite  right.  His  answer  to  the  Lord  was
that  of  a  well-informed  disciple  who  understands  his
master’s  teachings.  For,  what  show  can  mind’s
infliction  make  as  compared  with  the  stupendous  in¬
flictions  of  deed  ?  Yes  ;  the  inflictions  of  deed  are  the
most  criminal  in  effecting  and  starting  Demerit, — those
of  word  and  mind  being  less  criminal !

If,  householder,  you  were  to  speak  as  one  grounded
in  the  Truth,  we  might  have  a  talk  about  it.


270


LVI.  UPAU-SUTTA.


M.  i.  377-


I  will  speak  as  one  grounded  in  the  Truth,  sir ;  let  us
have  a  talk  about  it.

What  think  you,  householder?  Take  the  case  of
a  Nigantha  who,  being  sick  and  ill,  very  ill  indeed,
refuses  cold  water1  and  will  only  take  warm  water,  so
that  he  dies  in  the  act  of  refusing  to  touch  cold  water.
Where,  according  to  Nataputta  the  Nigantha,  will  he
be  reborn  next  ?

There  are  gods,  sir,  called  Mind’s  devotees  ;  and  it
is  among  these  that  he  is  reborn.  And  why  ? —
Because  he  dies  in  devotion  to  an  idea.

Householder!  householder!  Take  heed  what  you
are  saying.  What  went  before  does  not  tally  with
what  comes  later,  nor  does  what  comes  later  tally  with
what  went  before.  And  yet  you  represented  you  could
speak  as  one  grounded  in  the  Truth  and  able  to  dis¬
cuss  it.

Albeit  the  Lord  says  this,  yet  the  inflictions  of  deed
are  the  most  criminal  in  effecting  and  starting
Demerit, — those  of  word  and  mind  being  less  criminal.

What  think  you,  [877]  householder  ? — Take  the  case
of  a  Nigantha  who,  being  restrained  with  the  restraint
of  the  fourfold  check,  resists  evil  with  every  form  of
resistance,  is  absorbed  in  resisting  evil,  has  shaken  off
evil  by  resistance,  and  is  instinct  with  the  spirit  of
resistance  to  evil.  Suppose  now  that,  in  going  out  or
in  coming  in,  he  destroys  the  lives  of  numerous  tiny
creatures.  What,  according  to  Nataputta,  is  the  result
to  which  this  ripens  ?

He  says  it  is  unintentional  and  therefore  not  criminal.

But  if  it  be  intentional  ?

Then  it  is  criminal  indeed.

Where  does  Nataputta  classify  intention  ?

In  inflictions  of  mind.

Householder!  Householder!  .  .  .  being  less  criminal.


1  The  Jains  do  not  drink  cold  water  because  of  the  jlvas,  or
souls  in  it.  See  Dial.  I,  74-5  for  this  and  for  what  follows.  Bu.
explains  sabba-v&ri-v£rito  here  not  only  with  reference
to  cold  water,  but  also  (alternatively)  as  sabbena  papa-
varanena,  which  is  adopted  in  the  translation  infra.


M.  i.  378.


A  jain’s  conversion.


271


What  think  you,  householder  ? — Is  this  city  of
Nalanda  rich  and  wealthy,  populous  and  crowded  with
folk  ?

Yes,  sir,  it  is.

What  think  you,  householder  ?  Suppose  there  came
a  man  with  a  drawn  sword  who  declared  that  he  would
— in  an  instant,  in  a  second — make  all  NSjanda’s
living  beings  into  one  heap  and  one  mass  of  flesh.
Could  he  do  it  ?

Why,  ten,  or  twenty,  or  thirty,  or  forty,  or  fifty  men
could  not  do  it.  What  kind  of  a  show  could  one  sorry
individual  make  alone  ?

What  think  you,  householder  ?  Suppose  there  came
along  a  recluse  or  brahmin  of  super-normal  powers  and
psychic  attainments  who  said  he  would  make  Nalanda
into  a  cinder  by  a  single  paroxysm  of  mental  wrath.
Could  he  do  it  ?

[378]  Yes,  —  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  or  fifty
Nalandas.  What  kind  of  a  show  could  one  sorry
Nalanda  make  alone?

Householder!  Householder! .  .  .  being  less  criminal.

What  think  you,  householder?  Have  you  ever
heard  tell  who  made  the  wildernesses  of  Dandaka  and
Kalinga  and  Mejjha  and  Matanga  ?

I  have  heard  it  was  done  by  sages’  paroxysms  of
mental  wrath.

Householder!  Householder!  Take  heed  what  you
are  saying.  What  went  before  does  not  tally  with
what  comes  later,  nor  does  what  comes  later  tally  with
what  went  before.  And  yet  you  represented  you  could
speak  as  one  grounded  in  the  Truth  and  able  to  dis¬
cuss  it.

I  was  pleased  and  won  over  by  the  very  first  of  the
Lord’s  illustrations ;  it  was  only  because  I  wanted  to
listen  to  his  nimble  versatility  in  questioning  that  I
thought  I  must  maintain  a  hostile  attitude.  Wonderful,
sir  ;  wonderful !  Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again
what  had  been  cast  down  .  .  .  [879]  while  life  lasts.

Proceed  circumspectly,  householder ;  it  behoves
well-known  men  like  yourself  to  be  circumspect.


272


LVI.  UPALI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  380.


Still  more  am  I  pleased  and  won  over  by  the  Lord’s
last  remark.  For,  if  those  of  other  creeds  had  secured
me  as  an  adherent,  they  would  keep  on  parading  their
banner  round  Nalanda  to  announce  that  I  had  joined
them.  But  all  the  Lord  does  is  to  counsel  me  to
proceed  circumspectly,  as  it  behoves  well-known  men
like  myself  to  be  circumspect!  For  the  second  time  I
betake  myself  to  the  Lord  as  my  refuge  and  to  his
Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity,  asking  him  to  accept
me  as  a  follower  who  has  found  an  abiding  refuge
from  this  day  onward  while  life  lasts.

For  a  long  time,  householder,  your  family  has  been
an  unfailing  well-spring  for  Niganthas;  you  will  bethink
you  to  continue  your  alms  to  them  when  they  come  to
your  doors.

Still  more  am  I  pleased  and  won  over  by  the  Lord’s
last  remark.  What  I  had  heard  was  that  you  had  laid
it  down  that  gifts  were  to  be  given  exclusively  to  you
and  your  disciples  but  never  to  others  and  their
disciples,  and  that,  while  there  was  an  abundant  blessing
on  what  was  bestowed  on  you  and  yours,  no  blessing
on  what  was  bestowed  elsewhere.  Yet,  now  the  Lord
is  urging  me  to  include  the  Niganthas  as  well  in  my
bounty, — a  matter  in  which  I  shall  observe  the  proper
occasion.  For  the  third  time  I  betake  myself  .  .  .
while  life  lasts.

Then  the  Lord  delivered  a  progressive  discourse  to
UpSli,  namely,  on  giving,  on  virtue,  on  heaven,  on  the
perils  of  vanity  and  foulness  of  pleasures  of  sense,  and
on  the  gains  to  be  won  by  renouncing  worldly  things.
As  soon  as  the  Lord  recognized  Upali’s  heart  to  have
become  [880]  sound  and  malleable  and  free  from  the
Hindrances,  uplifted  and  believing,  then  he  unfolded
the  exposition  of  the  Doctrine  which  only  the  En¬
lightened  have  elaborated,— -regarding  Ill  and  its
origin  and  its  cessation  and  the  Path.  J  ust  as  spotless
cloth  without  speck  or  stain  will  readily  take  the  dye,
even  so,  while  he  was  sitting  there,  did  the  house¬
holder  Upali  come  by  the  pure  and  spotless  Eye  of
Truth  so  that  he  realized  how  whatsoever  has  a


M.  i.  381.  A  JAIN’S  CONVERSION.  273

beginning  must  have  an  end.  When  that  he  had  thus
seen,  won,  grasped,  and  penetrated  the  Doctrine,  when
he  had  passed  beyond  all  doubt  and  had  left  all
questionings  behind  him,  when  certitude  was  his  and
a  direct  personal  conviction  in  the  Master’s  teachings,
— Upali  said  to  the  Lord  that  now  he  must  be  going,  as
he  had  much  to  do  and  attend  to.

At  your  own  good  time,  answered  the  Lord.

^Then  with  grateful  thanks  to  the  Lord,  Upali  rose,
saluted  him,  and  with  profound  obeisance  betook  him¬
self  to  his  own  abode.  Arrived  there,  he  said  to  the
porter : — From  to-day  onward  I  close  my  doors  to
male  and  female  Niganthas ;  they  are  open  only  to
men  and  women  who  are  the  Lord’s  disciples  or  lay-
followers.  If  any  Nigantha  comes  here,  stop  him  and
don’t  let  him  in,  but  tell  him  that  I  have  from  to-day
gone  over  to  be  a  follower  of  the  recluse  Gotama ;
that  I  have  closed  my  doors  to  male  and  female
Niganthas  ;  that  my  doors  are  open  only  to  men  and
women  who  are  the  Lord’s  disciples  or  lay-followers ;
and  that,  if  he  wants  alms,  he  should  stop  where  he  is
and  it  will  be  brought  to  him.

Very  good,  sir,  replied  the  porter  to  his  master

Upali.

When  it  reached  the  ears  of  the  Nigantha  Digha
TapassI  that  Upali  had  gone  over  to  be  a  follower  of
the  recluse  Gotama,  away  he  went  to  Nataputta  with
the  news.

It  is  quite  impossible,  TapassI,  said  Nataputta,  that
this  could  happen  ;  what  is  possible  is  for  the  recluse
Gotama  to  go  over  to  be  a  disciple  of  the  householder
Upali.

[381]  A  second  time,  and  yet  a  third  time,  did
TapassI  report  the  fact,  only  to  be  scouted  as  before
by  Nataputta.  Shall  I  go,  sir,  said  TapassI,  and
ascertain  for  myself  whether  or  no  Upali  has  gone  over  ?

Yes,  do,  said  Nataputta.

So  TapassI  betook  him  to  Upali’s  abode.  Seeing
him  coming  some  way  off,  Upali’s  porter  stopped  him
and  would  not  let  him  in,  telling  that  his  master  had

18


274


LVT.  UPALI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  382.


from  to  day  gone  over  to  be  a  follower  of  the  recluse
Gotama ;  that  he  had  closed  his  doors  to  male  and
female  Niganthas;  that  his  doors  were  open  only  to
men  and  women  who  were  the  Lord’s  disciples  or  lay-
followers  ;  but  that,  if  Tapassi  wanted  alms,  he  should
stop  where  he  was  and  food  would  be  brought  to  himy

No,  sir ;  I  do  not  want  alms,  rejoined  Tapassi,  who
then  turned  back  to  Nataputta  and  reported  that  as
follows  : — It  is  quite  true,  sir,  that  Upali  has  gone
over  to  Gotama.  I  told  you  I  did  not  like  the  idea  of
Upali’s  going  to  refute  Gotama— who  is  a  cozening
person,  expert  in  seducing  others’  disciples  over  to
himself,  and  has  indeed  succeeded  with  Upali.

It  is  quite  impossible  and  inconceivable,  Tapassi,
that  Upali  should  go  over  to  be  a  disciple  of  Gotama  ;
what  is  possible  is  that  Gotama  will  come  over  to  be
a  disciple  of  Upali.

A  second  time,  and  yet  a  third  time,  did  Tapassi
repeat  his  statement,  only  to  be  answered  as  before  by
Nataputta,  [382] — who  at  last  added  that  he  would  go
and  ascertain  for  himself  whether  or  no  Upali  had
gone  over.

Hereupon,  Nataputta  betook  him  with  a  large  train
of  Niganthas  to  Upali’s  abode.  Seeing  him  coming
some  way  off,  Upali’s  porter  .  .  .  food  would  be
brought  him.

My  good  porter,  go  to  the  householder  Upali  and
tell  him  that  Nataputta  the  Nigantha  with  a  large
train  of  Niganthas  is  standing  in  the  gateway  to  see
him.

Yes,  sir,  said  the  porter  and  took  the  message  to  his
master,  who  directed  him  to  put  seats  in  the  hall  by
the  middle  door  of  the  house.  When  this  had  been
duly  done  and  reported  to  him,  Upali  [888]  proceeded
to  that  hall  and  sat  himself  on  the  finest,  best,  and
choicest  seat  there,  telling  the  porter  now  to  tell  N  §,ta-
putta  he  could  come  in  if  he  wanted  to.  This  message
having  been  faithfully  conveyed  to  him,  Nataputta
made  his  way  into  the  hall  with  his  large  train  of
Niganthas.  As  he  saw  Nataputta  advancing,  the


M.  i.  384.


A  jain’s  conversion


275


householder  Upali  went  to  meet  him  and  invite  him  to
be  seated,  ostentatiously  dusting  with  his  robe  the
finest,  best,  and  choicest  seat,  and  then  promptly  sitting
down  on  it  himself — as  he  said  to  Nataputta  :  There
are  seats  available,  sir  ;  be  seated,  if  you  will.

Hereon  Nataputta  said  to  Upali: — You  are  a  dolt
and  a  dullard,  householder.  After  proclaiming  that
you  would  go  and  refute  the  recluse  Gotama,  you
retired  from  the  encounter  in  great  discomfiture.
When  you  sallied  forth  you  were  going  to  refute
Gotama  and  to  return  triumphant  like  a  gelder  who
successfully  returns  with  a  pair  of  testicles  removed  or
the  gouger  who  returns  with  a  pair  of  eyeballs  excised  ;
— instead  of  which  you  retire  from  the  encounter  in
great  discomfiture  yourself,  cozened  by  Gotama’s
wizardry.

Excellent,  sir,  and  lovely  is  that  wizardry  of  his!
Were  my  dear  kith  and  kin  but  cozened  by  that  same
wizardry,  it  would  be  to  their  abiding  weal  and  welfare
too!  If  all  Nobles  were  so  cozened,  it  would  be  to
their  abiding  [384]  weal  and  welfare  too, — as  also  it
would  be  for  all  brahmins  and  middle-class  men  and
peasants  too,  yea  for  all  the  world,  with  its  gods,
Maras,  Brahm&s,  recluses  and  brahmins,  embracing  all
gods  and  mankind  I  Accordingly,  I  will  give  you  an
illustration  ;  for,  an  illustration  often  helps  an  intelligent
person  to  understand  the  meaning  of  what  is  said.

Once  on  a  time,  sir,  there  was  an  old  and  aged
brahmin,  well  advanced  in  years,  who  had  a  young
brahmin  wife  who  was  with  child  and  nearing  her
confinement.  She  besought  her  husband  to  buy  in  the
bazaar,  and  bring  home,  a  young  monkey  to  amuse
her  child.  .

You  had  better  wait,  my  dear,  replied  the  brahmin,
till  your  baby  has  been  born.  Then,  if  it  is  a  boy,  I
will  buy  you  a  young  male  monkey  for  him  to  play
with,  or  a  young  female  monkey,  if  you  have  a  girl.

A  second  time  the  wife  pressed  her  request  and  a
second  time  got  the  same  answer  from  her  husband.
But  when  she  asked  him  a  third  time,  he,  because  of


276


LVI.  UPX.LI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  385.


his  passion  for  his  young  wife,  went  away  to  the
bazaar  and  bought  a  young  male  monkey  which  [885]
he  presented  to  his  wife  for  her  baby  boy  to  play  with.

Now  go,  said  she,  to  Ratta-pani  the  dyer  and  tell
him  you  want  this  young  monkey  dyed  a  bright  yellow,
thoroughly  pressed  all  over,  and  suppled  both  inside
and  out.

Because  of  his  passion  for  his  young  wife,  the
brahmin  took  the  monkey  to  the  dyer’s  and  asked  that
all  this  should  be  done, — only  to  receive  the  answer
that,  though  the  monkey  could  be  dyed,  it  could  not
stand  being  pressed  and  suppled. — It  is  just  the  same,
sir,  with  the  doctrine  of  the  foolish  Niganthas,  which
will  take  colour  from  fools  though  not  from  the  wise,
but  will  not  stand  practice  or  suppling. — Later  on,  sir,
that  same  brahmin  came  to  that  dyer  with  a  couple  of
lengths  of  new  cloth  to  be  dyed  a  bright  yellow,
thoroughly  pressed  all  over,  and  suppled  both  inside
and  out.  And  the  dyer  told  him  that  his  new  cloth
could  not  only  be  dyed  but  also  pressed  and  suppled
inside  and  out. — It  is  just  the  same,  sir,  with  the
Doctrine  of  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-enlightened,  which
will  not  only  take  colour — from  the  wise,  though  not
from  fools — but  will  also  stand  practice  and  suppling.

Householder,  this  gathering,  including  the  rulers
present,  was  under  the  impression  you  were  a  follower
of  N&taputta  the  Nigaptha.  Whose  follower  are  we
to  consider  you  ?

At  these  words  the  householder  Upali  arose  from
his  seat  and,  with  his  outer  robe  over  one  shoulder  and
the  other  bared,  [886]  stretched  forth  folded  palms  of
obeisance  in  the  direction  where  the  Lord  was,  and
said  to  Nataputta  the  Nigantha  : — Hear  then  whose
follower  1  am  1

/  follow  hint,  high  Wisdoms  faultless  lord,
whose  mind  is  till’d,  triumphant  o'er  his  foes,
purged  of  besetting  III,  stedfasl  in  poise,
in  virtue  stablished,  wisest  of  the  wise,
trampling  down  passion,  Lord  immaculate.


M.  i.  386.


A  JAIN’S  CONVERSION.


2  77


I  follow  him,  whose  tranquil  mind  serene,
by  doubts  untroubled ,  earthly  joys  disdains,
saintly  and  sainted,  human,  made  like  men,
yet  peerless,  Lord  of  utter  purity.

I  follow  him,  the  certain  guide  and  sure ,
foremost  of  teachers,  matchless  charioteer ,
pride's  potent  queller,  Victor ,  Lord  of  all.

1  follow  him  of  boundless  might,  profound
in  insight,  bringing  peace,  in  lore  adept ,
self -master  d,  freedoms  Lord  emancipate,

/  follow  him,  who  lives  aloof,  alone,
whose  bonds  are  broken,  who  in  freedom  dwells ,
error's  refuter ,  spotless,  meek,  unstained
by  passion ,  Lord  of  high  self-mastery.

/  follow  him,  of  seven  Sages  last}

Being  consummate ,  versed  in  threefold  lore,
thought's  school'd  accomplished  master  absolute,
the  potent  Lord  who  storms  the  citadel }

I  follow  him  whose  noble  culture  won
perfection,  truth's  exponent,  quick  to  see
and  store, — eschewing  pleasure,  not  its  thrall,
the  Lord  beyond  all  cravings,  passion-free.

/  folbw  him,  the  blameless,  rapt  in  thought,
whose  undefiled  heart  no  trammels  knows
nor  bondage,  void  of  littleness,  detach'd,
consummate  Lord  zuho  o'er  the  Flood  has  passed
and  pilots  in  his  train  mankind  across.

I  follow  him,  th'  unshackled \  infinite
in  wisdom,  covetous  of  naught,  who  comes
to  bless,  Truth-finder  without  peer,  the  sole
and  peerless.  Lord  of  subtle  mind  abstruse.

/  follow  him  of  all- enlighten  d  mind,
from  cravings  cleansed ,  unclouded,  clear,  undimmed,

1  See  list  of  the  seven  Buddhas  in  the  14th  Sutta  of  the  Digha
Nikaya  (Dial.  II,  2-7).  This  pioneer  list  was  amplified  later
fjataka  I,  44)  by  inventing  eighteen  extra  predecessors  for
Gotama,  so  that  he  became  the  twenty-fifth.  The  Jain  Mahavira
had  twenty-three  predecessors.

s  I.e.  Indra  or  Sakka.  The  Buddhist  commy.  interprets  this
as  Sakka  who  gave  gifts  in  one  earlier  existence  after  another.
Cf.  Burlinghame’s  Buddhist  Legends,  Part  I,  p.  314.


27B


LVII.  KUKKURA-VATIKA-SUTTA.


M.i.  387-


of  meet  oblations  worthy j  chief  of  men,
t/i  unequall'd  Lord  of  majesty  supreme.

Pray,  when,  householder,  did  you  compose  this
eulogy  of  the  recluse  Gotama  ?

Like  [387]  a  vast  heap  of  divers  flowers,  sir,  from
which  a  skilled  garland-maker  or  his  apprentice  might
weave  a  garland  manifold, — even  so  in  the  Lord  there  is
full  many  a  beauty,  yes,  many  hundreds  of  beauties,
to  praise.  Who  will  refuse  praise  where  praise  is  due  ?

Then  and  there,  from  the  mouth  of  Nataputta  the
Nigantha,  who  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  Lord  ex¬
tolled, — there  gushed  hot  blood.1 2 3


LVII.  KUKKURA-VATIKA-SUTTA.

OF  EMULATING  DOGS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  among  the  Kojiyas — Halidda-vasana  is  the
name  of  a  township  of  theirs — there  came  to  him
Punna  Koliyaputta  who  was  a  Bovine,®  and  Seniya,  a
naked  ascetic  (acela)  who  was  a  Canine.  Punna,  after
saluting  the  Lord,  took  a  seat  to  one  side,  while
Seniya,  after  greetings  of  courtesy  and  civility,
squatted  down  like  a  dog.  Said  Punna  to  the  Lord  :
— this  naked  ascetic  Seniya  the  Canine  has  set  himself
an  austere  task  ;  he  subsists  by  scavenging,  and  has
for  a  long  time  punctually  discharged  the  vows  of  his


1  Lit*  a  yakkha  (or  fairy)  worthy  to  receive  oblations, — the
term  yakkha  being  applied  to  Gotama  here  as  it  is  applied  to
the  great  S±jd<a  in  Sutta  No.  37.

2  Here,  asVdsewhere,  the  Buddhist  Canon  makes  Nataputta
pre  decease  Gotama.  These  symptoms,  like  those  of  the  equally
ascetic  Devadattaw  suggest  rupture  of  the  pulmonary  blood¬
vessels.  Bu.  says  H^re  that  Nataputta  was  carried  away  on  a
litter  to  Pava,  where  Ihe  died  shortly  afterwards.

3  To  support  his  txivine  character,  says  Bu.,  he  wore  horns

and  a  tail  and  affected!  to  browse  on  grass.  See  Dhammasangani
translation,  p.  261.  ’


M.  i.  388.


OF  EMULATING  DOGS.


279


Canine  vocation.  What  future  state  and  what  destiny
await  him  ?

Stop,  Punna;  proceed  no  further;  question  me  not
hereon.

A  second  time  and  yet  a  third  time  Punna  repeated
his  enquiry,  receiving  the  third  time  this  answer  from
the  Lord  : — Though  I  told  you  I  disapproved  and
asked  you  to  stop  and  proceed  no  further  with  your
enquiry,  yet  I  will  tell  you  the  answer.  If,  Punna,  a
man  fully  and  completely  develops  the  dog’s  habits,
the  dog’s  principles  of  conduct,  the  dog’s  mind  and
[888]  the  dog’s  behaviour,  then  at  the  body’s  dissolu¬
tion  after  death  he  will  pass  to  be  with  dogs  thereafter.
But,  if  he  holds  the  view  that  by  such  principles  or
practices  or  austerities  or  higher  life  he  will  become  a
greater  or  a  lesser  god,  then  he  holds  a  false  view :
and  I  say  that  the  man  of  false  views  has  before  him
one  of  two  future  states, — namely  purgatory  or  rebirth
as  an  animal.  If  he  is  lucky,  he  becomes  a  dog  ;  if  he
is  unlucky,  he  goes  to  purgatory.

At  these  words  Seniya,  the  naked  ascetic  who  was  a
Canine,  burst  into  tears  and  wept.  Then  said  the
Lord  to  Punna : — I  told  you  to  stop  and  proceed  no
further  with  your  enquiries.

Said  Seniya  : — It  is  not  because  the  Lord  spoke  as
he  did  concerning  me  that  I  weep.  But  oh  !  I  have
so  long  and  so  punctually  discharged  the  vows  of  my
Canine  vocation !  Punna  here,  the  Bovine,  has
for  a  long  time  punctually  discharged  his  Bovine
vows.  What  future  state  and  what  destiny  await
him  P

Said  the  Lord: — Stop,  Seniya;  proceed  no  further;
question  me  not  hereon.

A  second  time  and  yet  a  third  time  Seniya  repeated
his  enquiry,  receiving  the  third  time  this  answer  from
the  Lord  : — Though  I  told  you  I  disapproved  and
asked  you  to  proceed  no  further  with  your  enquiry,  yet
I  will  tell  you  the  answer.  If,  Seniya,  a  man  fully  and
completely  develops  the  habits  of  kine,  the  principles
of  conduct  of  kine,  the  mind  of  kine  and  the  behaviour


s8o


LVII.  KUKKURA-VATIKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  389.


of  kine,  then  at  the  body’s  dissolution.  .  .  .  [389]
kine,  if  he  is  unlucky,  he  goes  to  purgatory.

At  these  words  Punpa  Kojiyaputta  the  Bovine
burst  into  tears  and  wept.  Then  said  the  Lord  to
Seniya : — I  told  you  to  stop  and  proceed  no  further
with  your  enquiries.

Said  Punna: — It  is  not  because  the  Lord  spoke  as
he  did  concerning  me  that  I  weep.  But  oh !  I  have
so  long  and  so  punctually  discharged  the  vows  of  my
Bovine  vocation !  I  have  faith  in  the  Lord  that  he
can  so  preach  the  Doctrine  that  I  shall  renounce  my
bovine  practices  and  Seniya  his  canine  practices.

Give  ear  then,  Punna,  and  hearken ;  and  I  will
speak.  Then  to  the  listening  Punna  the  Lord
began : —

I  affirm  four  kinds  of  actions  (kamma)  which  I
have  independently  discovered  and  proved.  What
are  the  four? — There  are  (i)  actions  which  are  black,
with  black  outcome,  (ii)  actions  which  are  bright,  with
bright  outcome,  (iii)  actions  which  are  both  black  and
bright,  with  both  a  black  and  a  bright  outcome,  and
(iv)  actions  which  are  neither  black  nor  bright,  with
an  outcome  neither  black  nor  bright,  conducing  to  the
destruction  of  karma  (kamma).

(i)  What  action  is  black,  with  black  outcome  ? —
Take  a  man  who  evolves  a  harmful  complex  of  body,
speech  or  thought  and  passes  in  consequence  to  a
harmful  realm  where  harmful  impressions  beset  him,
so  that  he  experiences  feelings  of  harm  which  are
painful  in  the  extreme, — as  do  beings  [390]  in
purgatory.  Thus,  from  the  creature  proceeds  its  own
future  state ;  what  it  does  determines  what  it  passes

I  to,  and  the  impressions  which  then  beset  it.  So  I  say
creatures  are  the  heirs  of  their  own  actions. — This  is
action  which  is  black,  with  black  outcome.

(ii)  What  action  is  bright,  with  bright  outcome  ? —
Take  a  man  who  evolves  a  harmless  complex  of  body,
speech  or  thought  and  passes  in  consequence  to  a
harmless  realm  where  harmless  impressions  beset  him,
so  that  he  experiences  feelings  devoid  of  harm  which


M.  i.  391.


OF  EMULATING  DOGS.


281


are  pleasant  in  the  extreme, — as  do  the  Subha-Kinna
gods.  Thus  from  the  creature  proceeds  .  .  .  heirs  of
their  own  actions. — This  is  action  which  is  bright,  with
bright  outcome.

(iii)  What  action  is  both  black  and  bright,  with  both
a  black  and  a  bright  outcome  ? — Take  a  man  who
evolves  complexes  of  body,  speech,  and  thought  which
are  both  harmful  and  harmless,  and  passes  in  con¬
sequence  to  a  realm  at  once  harmful  and  harmless,
where  both  harmful  and  harmless  impressions  beset
him,  so  that  he  experiences  mixed  feelings,  some
harmful  and  some  harmless, — as  do  human  beings,
some  gods  and  some  whose  lot  embraces  suffering.1
Thus  from  the  creature  proceeds  .  .  .  heirs  of  their
own  actions. — This  is  action  which  is  both  black  and
bright,  with  both  a  black  and  a  bright  outcome.

(iv)  [891]  Lastly,  what  action  is  neither  black  nor
bright,  with  an  outcome  which  is  neither  black  nor
bright,  conducing  to  the  destruction  of  Karma  ? — In
this  case,  it  is  the  mental  resolve  to  discard  all  action
of  the  three  foregoing  types  which  is  called  action
which  is  neither  black  nor  bright,  with  an  outcome
which  is  neither  black  nor  bright,  conducing  to  the
destruction  of  Karma.

Such,  Punna,  are  the  four  types  of  action  affirmed
by  me,  which  I  have  independently  discerned  and
proved.

Hereupon,  Punna  the  Bovine  said  to  the  Lord : —
Wonderful,  sir;  wonderful!  Just  as  .  .  .  etc.  down
to  .  .  .  may  the  Lord  accept  me  as  a  disciple  from  this
day  forth  while  life  lasts.

And  Seniya,  the  naked  ascetic  who  was  a  Canine,
said  the  same  but  ended  by  saying : — I  come  to  the
Lord  as  my  refuge  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his
confraternity.  Be  it  mine  to  receive  admission  and
confirmation  as  an  Almsman  with  the  Lord.


1  Bu.  explains  that  the  devas  here  referred  to  are  earth’s
devatis,  and  that  the  vinipatikas  in  question  are  the  vemanika-
petas.


282


LVII.  KUKKURA-VATIKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  392.


A  former  sectary  of  another  school,  Seniya,  who
seeks  admission  and  confirmation  in  this  Doctrine  and
Rule,  first  resides  for  four  months,  at  the  end  of  which
four  months  proved  Almsmen  admit  and  confirm  him
as  an  Almsman.  This  is  the  distinction  between
persons  which  I  recognize.

If,  sir,  former  sectaries  of  other  schools  have  first  to
undergo  this  four  months’  probation  before  their  admis¬
sion  here,  then  I  will  reside  for  four  months,  at  the  end
of  which  period  let  proved  Almsmen  admit  and  confirm
me  as  an  Almsman.

So  the  naked  ascetic  Seniya  the  Canine  was
admitted  and  confirmed  as  an  Almsman  of  the  Lord.
And  not  long  after  his  confirmation  the  reverend
Seniya,  dwelling  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous,  [892]
ardent  and  purged  of  self,  after  no  long  time  won  that
prize  in  quest  of  which  young  men  go  forth  from  home
to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims,  that  prize  of  prizes  which
crowns  the  higher  life,—  even  this  did  he  think  out  for
himself,  realize  and  attain,  and  in  this  did  he  dwell,
convinced  that  for  him  rebirth  was  no  more,  that  he
had  lived  the  highest  life,  that  his  task  was  done,  and
that  now  for  him  there  was  no  more  of  what  he  had
been.  So  the  reverend  Seniya  was  numbered  among
the  Arahats.


LVIII.  ABHAYA-RAJAKUMARA-SUTTA.

OF  CHOOSING  ONE’S  WORDS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo-grove  where  the
squirrels  are  fed,  Prince  Abhaya  went  to  Nataputta
the  Nigantha  and  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one
side  and  was  thus  addressed  by  Nataputta: — Go,
prince,  and  confute  the  recluse  Gotama ;  it  will
greatly  redound  to  your  credit  and  repute  when  people
say  that  Prince  Abhaya  has  confuted  him,  despite  all
his  power  and  might.


M.  i.  393.  OF  CHOOSING  ONE’S  WORDS.  283

But  how  am  I  to  do  it  ?

Go  to  him,  prince,  and  ask  him  this  question : —
Would  a  truth-finder  say  anything  which  would  be
displeasing  and  disagreeable  to  others  ?  I  f,  on  the
one  hand,  he  says  yes,  ask  him  how  then  he  differs
from  the  ordinary  man, — who  does  say  what  is  dis¬
pleasing  and  disagreeable  to  others.  But  if  he  says
no,  [898]  then  ask  him  how  then  it  was  that  he  declared
Devadatta  to  be  a  reprobate,  a  child  of  perdition,
doomed  to  purgatory  for  ages,1  and  beyond  all  hope
of  redemption, — words  which  angered  and  upset
Devadatta.  This  two-edged  question  which  you  will
put  to  him,  prince,  is  more  than  he  will  be  able  either
to  spew  out  or  to  swallow  down.  Just  like  a  bar  of
iron  fastened  on  a  man’s  neck  which  he  can  neither
spew  out  nor  swallow  down,  even  so  will  this  two-edged
question  prove  to  the  recluse  Gotama  ;  he  will  not  be
able  either  to  spew  or  to  swallow  it.

Yes,  sir,  said  Prince  Abhaya  obediently.  Then,
rising  from  his  seat  he  took  his  leave  reverently  of
Niitaputta  and  betook  him  to  the  Lord,  whom  he
saluted  before  taking  his  seat  to  one  side.  But  when
he  was  seated,  a  glance  at  the  sun  suggested  to  the
prince  that  the  hour  was  not  well-timed  for  achieving
his  purpose  that  day  and  that  he  had  better  defer
confuting  the  recluse  Gotama  till  the  morrow  and
under  his  own  roof.  So  he  invited  the  Lord  with
three  others  to  a  meal  next  day ;  and  when  by  his
silence  the  Lord  intimated  his  consent,  the  prince  rose
up  and  departed  with  a  reverent  leave-taking.  At
that  night’s  close  the  Lord,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in
hand,  made  his  way  early  to  the  prince’s  abode  and
sat  down  on  the  seat  set  for  him.  The  prince  provided
an  excellent  meal  of  food  both  solid  and  soft,  which  he
served  with  his  own  hands  till  the  Lord  had  had  his
fill.  The  Lord’s  meal  over  and  done,  Prince  Abhaya
seated  himself  to  one  side  on  a  lower  seat  and  said  : —
Would  a  truth-finder,  sir,  say  anything  which  would  be
displeasing  and  disagreeable  to  others  ?


*  Cf.  Vinaya  Texts  III,  254.


284  LVIII.  ABHAYA-RAJAKUMARA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  394.

This  needs  qualification,  prince.

Then,  sir,  the  Niganthas  would  be  at  fault.1

Why  do  you  say  that  ?

[894]  Well,  sir,  when  I  was  sitting  with  Nataputta
the  Nigan^ha,  he  said  to  me  : — Go,  prince,  and  confute
the  recluse  Gotama  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  above)  .  .  .  Gotama
will  not  be  able  either  to  spew  or  to  swallow  it.

Now  at  that  time  the  prince  was  nursing  his  little
boy,  a  babe  who  could  not  -yet  stand.  Said  the
Lord: — What  [895]  think  you,  prince?  If,  from  in¬
attention  on  your  part  or  his  nurse’s,  he  were  to  get  a
stick  or  a  pebble  into  his  mouth,  what  would  you  do
with  him  ?

I  should  remove  it  from  him,  sir.  If  I  could  not  get  it
away  at  once,  I  should  grasp  his  head  with  my  left
hand,  crook  a  finger  of  my  right  hand  and  pull  it  out,
— even  if  blood  flowed.  And  why  ?— Out  of  pity  for
the  child.

Precisely  in  the  same  spirit,  prince,  the  truth-finder
never  says  anything  which  he  knows  to  be  false,
untrue  and  unprofitable,  and  also  displeasing  and  dis¬
agreeable  to  others ;  never  says  anything  which  he
knows  to  be  a  fact  and  true,  but  unprofitable  and  also
displeasing  and  disagreeable  to  others  ;  but,  should  it
be  a  fact  and  true  and  profitable,  but  also  displeasing
and  disagreeable  to  others,  then  the  truth-finder  knows
the  due  season  to  state  it.  He  never  says  anything
which  he  knows  to  be  false,  untrue  and  unprofitable,
albeit  pleasing  and  agreeable  to  others  to  hear  ;  never
says  anything  which  he  knows  to  be  a  fact  and  true
but  unprofitable,  albeit  pleasing  and  agreeable  to  others
to  hear ;  but,  if  it  be  a  fact  and  true  and  profitable,
while  pleasing  and  agreeable  to  others  to  hear,  then  the
truth-finder  knows  the  due  season  when  to  state  it.
And  why  ? — Out  of  pity  for  creatures.

When,  sir,  learned  scholars — who  are  Nobles  or
brahmins  or  heads  of  houses  or  recluses — come  to  the


1  So  Bu.  (nattha  Nigantha).  But  the  P.T.S.  Diet,  derives
anassurfi  (see  sub  v.)  from  anusQyati,  in  which  case  the
meaning  would  be.:  That  is  what  I  heard  from  the  Nigantha.


M  i.  396.


OF  CHOOSING  ONE’S  WORDS.


285

truth-finder  with  a  question  which  they  have
elaborated,  has  the  Lord  previously  reflected  what
their  question  will  be  and  what  his  answer  will  be  ?
Or  does  he  answer  offhand  ?

Then,  prince,  I  will  ask  you  a  question  in  reply,  for
such  answer  as  you  may  see  fit  to  give.  What  think
you  ?  Do  you  know  all  about  the  several  parts  of  a
chariot  ?

Yes,  sir;  I  know  all  about  that.

What  think  you,  prince  ?  If  people  come  to  ask  you
what  a  particular  part  is,  have  you  previously  reflected
[896]  what  their  question  and  your  answer  will  be  ?
Or  would  you  answer  offhand  ?

As  a  charioteer  of  repute,  1  am  versed  in  all  the
parts  of  a  chariot,  and  my  answer  would  come  to  me  off¬
hand.

Just  in  the  same  way,  prince,  when  learned  scholars
come  to  the  truth-finder  with  a  question  which  they
have  elaborated,  his  answer  comes  to  him  offhand.
And  why  ?  Because,  prince,  I  have  plumbed  that
particular  constituent  of  the  Doctrine  and  because  my
answer  therefore  comes  to  me  offhand.

Hereupon,  Prince  Abhaya  said  to  the  Lord : —
Wonderful,  sir!  wonderful!  Just  as  a  man  might  set
upright  again  what  has  been  cast  down,  or  reveal  what
had  been  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had  gone
astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp  into  dark¬
ness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see  the
things  about  them,— even  so,  in  many  a  figure,  has  the
Lord  made  his  Doctrine  clear.  I  come  to  the  Lord  as
my  refuge  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity.
I  ask  the  Lord  to  accept  me  as  a  disciple  who  has
found  his  refuge  from  this  day  forth  while  life  lasts.


286


LIX.  BAHU-VEDANIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  397.


LIX.  BAHU-VEDANIYA-SUTTA.1

PLEASANT  AND  UNPLEASANT.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  Pancakanga  the  carpenter  came  to  the
reverend  Udayi,  and,  having  seated  himself  after  saluta¬
tions,  asked,  How  many  classes  of  feelings  does  the
Lord  specify  ?

Three,  sir, — pleasant,  unpleasant  and  indifferent.

[897]  No,  Ud5yi,  he  specifies  not  three  but  only  two
classes  of  feelings, — the  pleasant  and  the  unpleasant ; —
the  indifferent  he  accounts  as  the  supremely  pleasant
in  the  case  of  him  who  has  found  peace.  For  the
second  and  for  a  third  time  Udayi  affirmed  there  were
the  three  classes ;  and  a  second  and  a  third  time  the
carpenter  insisted  there  were  only  two ;  neither  could
convince  the  other.

Their  talk  was  heard  by  the  reverend  Ananda,  who
went  off  to  the  Lord  and,  seating  himself  after  saluta¬
tions,  related  the  whole  of  the  talk  Udayi  and  the
carpenter  had  had  together.  Said  the  Lord  to
Ananda: — It  was  a  quite  correct  statement  by  Udayi
which  the  carpenter  rejected,  and  it  was  a  quite  correct
statement  by  the  carpenter  which  Udayi  rejected.  I
have  specified  two  classes  of  feelings  ;  [898]  I  have
specified  three,  five,  six,  eighteen,  thirty-six  and  a
hundred  and  eight.  I  have  so  enuntiated  the  Doctrine.
Those  who  refuse  to  accept,  receive  and  welcome  from
others  correct  statements  of  it  as  enuntiated  by  me,
must  be  expected  to  come  to  live  together  in  quarrels,
strife  and  contentions,  assailing  one  another  with
shafts  of  wounding  speech  ;  whereas  those  who  accept,
receive  and  welcome  from  others  correct  and  accurate
statements  of  it  as  I  have  enuntiated  it,  may  be
expected  to  live  together  in  amity,  harmony  and  con¬
cord,  without  quarrelling,  in  happy  union,  viewing  one
another  with  eyes  of  affection.


1  Reproduced  verbatim  in  the  Samyutta  Nikaya,  IV,  223-8.


M.  i.  399-


PLEASANT  AND  UNPLEASANT.


287


Five  in  number,  Ananda,  are  the  pleasures  of  sense,
namely,  material  shapes  apparent  to  the  eye,  sounds,
smells,  taste  and  touch, — all  of  them  pleasant  and
agreeable  and  delightful,  all  of  them  bound  up  with
passion  and  lust.  Every  pleasant  gratification  which
arises  from  these  five  pleasures  of  sense  is  called
sensual  pleasure.

But,  I  do  not  agree  with  him  who  should  say  this  is
the  highest  pleasure  creatures  can  experience.  Why
do  I  not  agree  ? — Because,  beyond  this,  there  is  a
pleasure  far  choicer  and  more  excellent, — which  comes
when,  divested  of  lusts  and  of  wrong  dispositions,  an
Almsman  enters  on  and  dwells  in  the  First  Ecstasy  in
all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred  of  inward
aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observation  and
reflection.

Nor  do  I  agree  with  him  who  should  say  that  this
latter  is  the  highest  pleasure.  [899]  Why  not  ? —
Because,  beyond  this,  there  is  a  pleasure  far  choicer
and  more  excellent, — which  comes  when  an  Almsman,
rising  above  observation  and  reasoning,  enters  on  and
dwells  in  the  Second  Ecstasy.  .  .  .

...  in  the  Third  Ecstasy.  .  .  .

...  in  the  Fourth  Ecstasy,  the  state  that  knows
naught  pleasant  or  unpleasant,  the  clarity  that  comes  of
poise  and  collectedness.

Nor  do  I  agree  with  him  who  should  say  that  this
last  is  the  highest  pleasure.  Why  not  ? — Because,
beyond  this,  there  is  a  pleasure  far  choicer  and  more
excellent, — which  comes  when,  by  passing  altogether
beyond  perception  of  material  objects,  by  ceasing  from
perception  of  sense-reactions,  and  by  not  heeding  per¬
ception  of  differences,  an  Almsman  comes  to  hold  space
to  be  infinite  and  so  enters  on  and  dwells  in  the  plane
of  infinity  and  space.

.  .  .  plane  of  infinity  of  consciousness.

.  .  .  plane  of  Naught.

[400]  .  .  .  plane  of  neither  consciousness  nor  un¬
consciousness.

Nor  yet  do  I  agree  with  him  who  should  say  this


288


LIX.  BAH  U -VEDAN I YA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  400.


last  is  the  highest  pleasure.  Why  not  ? — Because,
beyond  this,  there  is  a  pleasure  far  choicer  and  more
excellent, — which  comes  when,  by  passing  altogether
beyond  the  plane  of  neither  consciousness  nor  uncon¬
sciousness,  an  Almsman  enters  on  and  dwells  in  the
state  in  which  feelings  and  perceptions  are  stilled  and
laid  to  rest  for  ever.

It  may  be,  Ananda,  that  Wanderers  belonging  to
other  schools  will  say  : — The  recluse  Gotama  speaks  of
the  stilling  of  feelings  and  perceptions,  and  accounts
this  pleasure.  Why  ?  and  how  ?  Your  answer  to  such
should  be  that  the  Lord  does  not  restrict  pleasure  to
pleasant  feelings  only ;  the  truth-finder  ranks  under
pleasure  all  that  is  pleasant  wheresoever  he  descries  it.

Thus  spake  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LX.  APANNAKA-SUTTA.

THE  SOUND  DOCTRINE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  on
an  alms-pilgrimage  in  Kosala  with  a  great  company  of
Almsmen,  he  came  to  a  brahmin  village  of  the  Kosalans
named  Sala.  It  came  to  the  ears  of  the  heads  of
houses  there  that  the  recluse  Gotama  [401]  .  .  .  (etc.,
as  in  Sutta  No.  41)  .  .  .  and  others  again  in  silence.

When  they  were  seated,  the  Lord  asked  these
brahmins  whether  they  had  got  a  favourite  teacher  in
whom  they  had  confidence.

No,  sir,  was  their  answer.

Well,  as  you  have  not  got  a  favourite  teacher  of
your  own,  you  should  embrace  and  fulfil  the  Sound
Doctrine,  to  your  lasting  happiness  and  welfare  And
in  what  does  it  consist  ?

Among  recluses  and  brahmins  some  there  are  who
hold  and  affirm  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  alms  or
sacrifice  or  oblations  ;  no  such  thing  as  the  fruit  and
harvest  of  actions  good  or  bad  ;  no  such  thing  as  this
world  or  the  next ;  no  such  thing  as  either  parents  or
spontaneous  generation ;  no  such  thing  in  this  world
as  recluses  and  brahmins  who  have  achieved  success
and  walk  aright,  who  have,  of  and  by  themselves,
apprehended  and  realized  this  world  and  the  next  and
make  it  all  known  to  others.  Others  again  [402]
maintain  that  there  are  indeed  such  things  as  these.

What  think  you,  sirs  ?  Are  not  these  two  schools
of  recluses  and  brahmins  diametrically  opposed,  one  to
the  other  ?

Yes,  sir.

Of  those  who  hold  and  affirm  that  there  are  no  such
things  as  the  foregoing,  it  may  be  predicated  that,
scouting  the  three  right  principles  of  good  behaviour
jn  body,  word  and  thought  they  will  embrace  and  follow
the  three  wrong  principles  of  bad  behaviour  in  body,

289  19


290


LX.  APANNAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  403.


word  and  thought.  And  why  ? — Because  such  recluses
and  brahmins  see  neither  the  peril,  vanity  and  foulness
of  the  wrong  qualities  nor  the  blessing  which  comes  of
Renunciation  allied  to  sanctity.  Although  there  is  in¬
deed  a  next  world,  he  holds  the  view  there  is  not,  and
this  is  his  wrong  view ;  he  resolves  there  is  not,  and
this  is  his  wrong  resolve  ;  he  says  there  is  not,  and  this
is  his  wrong  speech  ;  he  insists  there  is  not,  and  therein
goes  counter  to  Arahats  who  are  versed  in  worlds
beyond  this  ;  he  persuades  others  there  is  no  next
world,  and  so  diffuses  false  doctrine  ;  and  in  diffusing  it
he  exalts  himself  and  disparages  others.  Consequently,
his  earlier  virtues  are  shed  and  vices  are  now  installed  ;
and  this  wrong  view,  this  wrong  resolve,  this  wrong
speech,  this  antagonism  to  the  Noble,1  this  diffusion  of
false  doctrine,  this  self- exaltation  and  this  disparage¬
ment  of  others, — all  these  several  bad  and  wrong
principles  thrive  apace  because  of  his  wrong  views.

[403]  In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  him¬
self  that,  if  there  be  no  world  to  come,  then  this  in¬
dividual,  at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  will  fare
well ;  but,  if  there  be  a  world  to  come,  will  pass  to  a
doom  of  tribulation  and  woe  or  to  purgatory.  If,  how¬
ever,  it  be  granted  that  there  is  no  other  world  and  if
it  be  assumed  that  the  negative  view  is  true,  then  the
individual  stands  condemned  here  and  now  by  men  of
intelligence  as  a  bad  liver,  a  holder  of  wrong  views  and
an  apostle  of  vanity.  But,  if  there  is  another  world,
then  this  individual  loses  both  ways,  first  by  being —
here  and  now— condemned  by  men  of  intelligence  and
secondly  by  passing  at  death  to  a  doom  of  tribulation
and  woe  or  to  purgatory;  so  the  sound  doctrine  is
not  embraced  and  followed  by  him  ;  he  is  one-sided ;
he  misses  the  right  conclusion.

Of  those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  hold  and  affirm
that  there  are  indeed  such  things  as  the  foregoing,  it
may  be  predicated  that,  scouting  the  three  wrong


1  Here  clearly  the  plural  Ariy&  is  a  synonym  for  the  Arahats
supra.


M.  i.  404.


THE  SOUND  DOCTRINE.


291


principles  of  bad  behaviour  in  body,  word  and  thought,
they  will  embrace  and  follow  the  three  right  principles
of  good  behaviour  in  body,  word  and  thought  And
why  P — Because  such  recluses  and  brahmins  see  both
the  peril,  vanity  and  foulness  of  the  Wrong  principles
and  the  blessing  which  comes  of  Renunciation  allied  to
sanctity.  There  being  a  next  world,  he  holds  the
view  that  there  is,  and  this  is  his  right  view ;  he
resolves  that  there  is,  and  this  is  his  right  resolve ;  he
insists  that  there  is,  and  therein  goes  not  counter  to
Arahats  who  are  versed  in  worlds  beyond  this;  he
[404]  persuades  others  that  there  is  a  next  world,  and
so  diffuses  right  doctrine,  and  in  diffusing  it  neither
exalts  himself  nor  disparages  others.  Consequently,
his  earlier  vices  are  shed  and  virtue  is  now  installed  ;
and  this  right  view,  this  right  resolve,  this  right
speech,  this  unison  with  the  Noble,  this  diffusion  of
right  doctrine,  this  absence  alike  of  self-exaltation  and
of  disparagement  of  others, — all  these  several  right
principles  thrive  apace  because  of  his  right  views.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that,  if  there  is  a  world  to  come,  then  this  individual,
at  the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  will  pass  to  a
happy  state  or  to  heaven.  If,  however,  it  be  granted
that  there  is  no  other  world  and  if  it  be  assumed  that
the  negative  view  is  true,  then  the  individual  is  here
and  now  extolled  by  men  of  intelligence  as  living  a
good  life,  holding  right  views,  and  preaching  what  is  .
salutary.  But,  should  there  be  a  world  to  come,  then
this  individual  gains  both  ways,  first  by  being  here  and
now  extolled  by  the  intelligent,  and  secondly  by
passing  at  death  to  a  happy  state  or  to  heaven  ;  so
the  sound  doctrine  is  embraced  and  followed  by  him  ;
he  is  two-sided ;  he  seizes  on  the  right  conclusion.

Other  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who  hold
and  affirm  that  no  evil  is  wrrought  by  him  who  either
himself  acts  or  causes  another  to  act,  who  maims  or
causes  another  to  maim,  who  causes  grief  or  misery,
who  tortures  or  causes  another  to  torture,  who  sets
folk  quaking,  or  causes  another  to  do  so,  who  slays.


292


LX.  APA3S1XAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  405.


who  steals,  who  is  a  burglar  or  a  dacoit  or  a  house¬
breaker  or  a  foot-pad  or  an  adulterer  or  a  liar.  If,  say
they,  with  a  cleaver  as  sharp  as  a  razor  he  were  to
make  a  single  heap  and  mound  of  flesh  out  of  all  that
lives  on  earth,  no  guilt  proceeds  therefrom  and  no
consequence  of  guilt  ensues ;  nor  does  guilt  proceed  or
ensue  if  he  were  to  march  to  the  southern  bank  of  the
Ganges  killing  and  slaughtering,  maiming  and  causing
to  be  maimed,  torturing  and  causing  to  be  tortured.  Nor
again,  say  they,  if  he  were  to  march  to  the  northern
bank  of  the  Ganges  distributing  alms  and  causing
alms  to  be  distributed,  offering  sacrifices  and  causing
sacrifices  to  be  offered, — no  virtue  proceeds  therefrom
and  no  consequence  of  virtue  ensues ;  no  virtue  pro¬
ceeds  or  ensues  from  alms-giving  or  self-control  or
temperance  or  from  speaking  truth.

Other  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who  hold  and
affirm  [405]  on  the  contrary  that  guilt  does  proceed  in
the  former  case  and  virtue  in  the  latter.

What  think  you,  sirs  ?  Are  not  these  two  schools
of  recluses  and  brahmins  diametrically  opposed  one  to
the  other  ?

Yes,  sir.

Of  those  who  hold  and  affirm  that  neither  guilt  nor
virtue  proceeds  from  what  1  have  described,  it  may  be
predicated  that  scouting  the  three  right  principles.

.  .  .  Renunciation  allied  to  sanctity.  Although  there
is  indeed  an  after-effect,  he  holds  the  view  there  is  not,
and  this  is  his  wrong  view;  .  .  .  [406]  all  these
several  bad  principles  thrive  apace  because  of  his
wrong  views.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that,  if  there  be  no  after-effect,  then  this  individual,  at
the  body’s  dissolution  after  death,  will  fare  well ;  but
if  .  .  .  misses  the  right  conclusion.

Of  those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  hold  and  affirm
that  there  are  indeed  such  things  as  after-effects,  it
may  be  predicated  .  .  .  [407]  all  these  several  right
principles  thrive  apace  because  of  his  right  views.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself


M.  i.  407.


THE  SOUND  DOCTRINE.


293


that,  if  after-effects  there  are,  then  this  individual  .  .  .
seizes  on  the  right  conclusion.

Other  recluses  and  brahmins,  again,  there  are  who
hold  and  affirm  that  there  is  neither  cause  nor  reason
either  for  the  depravity  or  for  the  purity  of  creatures  ;
that  it  is  without  reason  or  cause  that  they  grow
depraved  or  pure ;  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as
strength  or  will,  no  human  courage  or  stedfastness ;
all  creatures,  all  beings,  all  that  has  life, — they  are  all
impotent  weaklings  with  no  power  of  will,  they  are
engendered  as  what  fate  dictates,  encountering  pleasure
or  pain  within  one  or  other  of  life’s  Six  Environments.1


1  See  Charpentier  on  ‘The  Lesyi-theory  of  the  Jainas  and
Ajlvikas’  in  the  Sartryk  in  honour  of  K.  J.  Johannson  (Goteborg,
1910).  But  the  Jain  ‘colours’  arose  as  the  direct  product  of
Kama,  which  Makkhali  is  here  represented  as  flouting.  At
D.  Ill,  250  only  two  a bh  ij.lt is  are  particularized  as  colours
(the  ‘black’  and  the  ‘  white'),  but  at  D.A.  I,  162  Bu.  completes
the  six  (as  colours)  by  adding  blue,  red,  yellow  and  very  white.
The  Cy.  (here)  goes  on  to  explain  that — in  an  ascending  scale — the
black  or  lowest  are  bird-fowlers,  pig-stickers,  fishermen,  robbers,
robbers’  executioners,  and  all  others  who  follow  cruel  callings.
Buddhist  almsmen  are  ‘blue.’ — It  is  said  that  these,  putting
*  thorns  ’  in  the  Four  Requisites  (of  an  Almsman),  cat  them,  and
so  an  Almsman  is  a  ‘thorn-liver,’  this  being  their  creed;  or
‘thorn-livers’  are  certain  Pilgrims  (pabbajita),  for,  in  their
belief,  recluses  (samanas)  are  ‘thorn-livers.’ — The  ‘red’  are
Nigarithas  who  wear  one  garment,  and  are  reputed  to  be  whiter
than  the  foregoing  two  classes.  The  ‘  yellow  ’  are  lay  folk  who  are
followers  of  the  unclad  (gihi-acela-savaka);  thus  they
make  their  own  donors  of  requisites  higher  than  the  Niganthas.
Nanda  Vaccha  and  Sankicca  are  classed  as  ‘  white,’  being  spoken
of  as  whiter  than  the  foregoing  four  classes.  The  Ailvakas  are
spoken  of  as  ‘  whitest  of  all,’  Being  reputed  whiter  than  all  the
others.

On  our  Majjbima  passage,  Bu.  concludes  his  exegesis  by
saying  that: — first  of  all  (pathamaih)  all  people  are  bird-
fowlers  etc.  In  the  successive  stages  of  being  purified  (tato
visujjhamana)they become Sakya Recluses;  then  Niganthas,
then  disciples  of  the  Ajivakas ;  then  Nanda  etc. ;  and  then
Ajlvakas.  Such  is  the  doctrine  held.  The  ‘white’  class  is  to
be  explained  as  the  converse  to  what  has  been  said  (of  the  other
classes).

In  the  Sumangala-Vil5sinf  version  (I,  162),  apart  from  minor
differences,  Makkhali  Gosala  is  added  to  Nanda  Vaccha  and


294


LX.  APANNAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  408.


Other  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who  hold  and
affirm  on  the  contrary  that  there  is  a  cause  and  a
reason  for  depravity  and  for  purity  and  that  creatures
are  not  impotent  weaklings  without  power  of  will,
dominated  by  fate  and  bound  by  life’s  hard  and  fast
environment.

What  think  you,  sirs  ?  [408]  Are  not  these  two
schools  diametrically  opposed  one  to  the  other  ?

Yes,  sir?

Of  those  who  hold  and  affirm  the  hard  and  fast
barriers  of  environment,  it  may  be  predicated  that,
scouting  the  three  right  principles.  .  .  .  Renuncia¬
tion  allied  to  sanctity.  Although  there  is  indeed  a  cause
and  a  reason  for  depravity  and  for  purity,  he  holds  the
view  that  there  is  not,  and  this  is  his  wrong  view ;
.  .  .  all  these  several  bad  principles  thrive  apace
because  of  his  wrong  views.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that,  if  there  be  no  cause  or  reason,  then  this
individual,  at  the  body's  dissolution  after  death,  will
fare  well ;  but  if  .  .  .  [409]  misses  the  right  conclusion.

Of  those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  hold  and  affirm
that  a  cause  and  a  reason  exists  alike  for  depravity
and  purity,  it  may  be  predicated  ...  all  these  several
right  principles  thrive  apace  because  of  his  right  views.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that  if  there  be  a  cause,  then  this  individual  .  .  .  [410]
seizes  on  the  right  conclusion.  .  .  .

Some  recluses  and  brahmins,  moreover,  hold  and


[Kisa]  Sankicca, — the  trio  being  raised  from  the  white  category
to  the  whitest  of  all,  while  ajlvakas  [and  female  ajlviniyo]
descend  to  the  merely  *  white  and  there  is  no  specific  mention
of  Samaijas  (as  above)  in  connection  with  bhikkhus.

In  adopting  the  two  colours,  black  and  white,  Buddhism
characteristically  adopts  also  the  familiar  number  of  six  a  b  h  i-
jatis  (D.  Ill,  250-1),  but  transmutes  their  meaning  ethically.
Thus,  a  man  bom  into  a  black  (or  dark)  environment  may
evolve  therein  (i)  a  black  character  and  life  or  (ii)  a  white
character  and  life  or  (iii)  Nirvana.  And  so  also  threefold
possibilities  lie  before  the  man  born  into  a  white  (or  bright)
environment


M.  i.  41 J.


THE  SOUND  DOCTRINE.


295


affirm  that  there  exist  no  Incorporeal  Brahma-realms  at
all,  while  others  assert  the  contrary.

What  think  you,  sirs  ?  Are  not  these  two  schools
diametrically  opposed  one  to  the  other  ?

Yes,  sir.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that  he  personally  has  neither  seen  what  those  affirm
who  deny  the  existence  of  Incorporeal  Realms,  nor
discovered  what  those  others  affirm  who  preach  the
existence  of  such  Realms ;  nor  does  he  feel  it  proper,
without  knowing  or  seeing  for  himself,  definitely  to
commit  himself  to  one  side  or  the  other  as  representing
the  absolute  truth  while  all  else  is  error.  If,  he  says,
those  speak  truly  who  deny  the  existence  of  Incorporeal
Realms,  it  may  be  that  I  shall  surely  get  hereafter  to  the
Corporeal  Gods  who  are  the  product  of  mentality  (mano-
maya) ;  whereas  if  the  exponents  of  Incorporeal  Realms
speak  truly,  it  may  be  that  I  shall  surely  get  to  the
Incorporeal  Gods  who  are  the  product  of  perception
(saMa-maya) ;  at  any  rate  we  see  that  the  Corporeal
results  in  assaults  with  clubs  and  swords,  in  wrangles,
strife,  contentions  and  quarrels,  and  in  slander  and
lies,  whereas  nothing  of  the  kind  occurs  with  the  In¬
corporeal.  Led  by  these  reflections,  he  sets  his  course
towards  viewing  the  Corporeal  without  interest  and
without  zest,  and  towards  stilling  it  for  ever.

Some  recluses  and  brahmins  there  are  who  hold  and
affirm  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  stilling  of
continuing  existence,  while  others  again  assert  the
contrary.

[411]  What  think  you,  sirs  ?  Are  not  these  two
schools  diametrically  opposed  one  to  the  other  ?

Yes  sir.

In  this  case  a  man  of  intelligence  says  to  himself
that  he  personally  has  neither  seen  what  those  affirm
who  deny  that  existence  can  be  stilled,  nor  discovered
what  those  others  affirm  who  assert  that  it  can  ;  nor
does  he  feel  it  proper,  without  knowing  or  seeing  for
himself,  definitely  to  commit  himself  to  one  side  or  the
other  as  representing  the  absolute  truth  while  all  else


296


LX.  APAJjHiJAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  412.


is  error.  If,  he  says,  those  speak  truly  who  deny  that
existence  can  be  stilled,  I  shall  surely  get  to  the  Incor¬
poreal  Gods  who  are  the  product  of  perception ;  whereas,
if  those  are  right  who  say  existence  can  be  stilled  for
ever,  I  may  win  Nirvana  here  and  now  ;  as  regards
the  negative  view,  it  is  the  neighbour  of  passion,
attachment,  of  cherished  delight,  of  cleaving  and
clinging  to  things  ;  while  the  positive  view  has  the
precise  opposites  of  all  these  things  for  its  neighbours.
Led  by  these  reflections,  he  sets  his  course  towards
viewing  all  continuing  existence  without  interest  and
without  zest,  and  towards  stilling  it  for  ever.

There  are  four  types  of  individuals  to  be  found  in
the  world. — First,  there  is  he  who  tortures  himself  and
is  given  up  to  self-torture.  Then  there  is  he  who
tortures  others  and  is  set  on  torturing  them.  Next,
there  is  he  who  tortures  both  himself  and  others  ;  while,
lastly,  there  is  the  man  who  tortures  neither  himself
nor  others.  And  this  [412]  last  individual,  who
tortures  neither  himself  nor  others,  dwells — here  and
now — beyond  all  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,
blissful  and  perfected.

Now,  what  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  tortures  him¬
self  and  is  given  up  to  self-torture? — Take  the  case  of
the  individual  who  goes  naked  and  flouts  the  decencies
of  life  .  .  .  etc.,  as  in  the  Kandaraka-Sutta  (No.  51).
Such  are  the  various  ways  in  which  he  tortures  his  own
body ;  and  such  a  man  is  called  a  self-torturer,  given
up  to  self-torture.

What  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  tortures  others
and  is  given  up  to  torturing  them  ? — Take  the  case  of
the  individual  who  butchers  sheep  or  swine  .  .  .  (etc.,
as  in  No.  51)  .  .  .  other  cruel  trade.  Such  a  man  is
called  a  torturer  of  others,  given  up  to  torturing  them.

What  kind  of  individual  is  he  who  tortures  both
himself  and  others  too  ? — Take  the  case  of  the  indi¬
vidual  who  is  an  anointed  king  of  the  race  of  Nobles
.  .  .  (etc.  as  in  No.  5 1)  .  .  .  and  voices  of  lamentation.
Such  a  man  is  called  a  torturer  both  of  himself  and  of
others.


M.  i.  413.


THE  SOUND  DOCTRINE.


297


Lastly,  what  kind  of  individual  is  he  who,  torturing
neither  himself  nor  others,  and  given  to  torturing
neither  himself  nor  them,  dwells — here  and  now —
beyond  all  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  blissful
and  perfected  ?

There  appears  in  the  world  here  a  Truth-finder,
A rahat  all-enlightened  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  No.  51)  .  .  .
[413]  and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have
been !  Such  a  man  is  called  one  who  tortures  neither
himself  nor  others  and  is  given  to  torturing  neither
himself  nor  them,  but  lives — here  and  now — beyond
all  appetites,  consummate,  unfevered,  blissful  and
perfected.

At  the  close  of  these  words,  the  brahmins  of  Sfila
said  to  the  Lord: — Wonderful,  Gotama ;  wonderful!
Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again  what  had  been
cast  down,  or  reveal  what  had  been  hidden  away,  or
tell  a  man  who  had  gone  astray  which  was  his  way,  or
bring  a  lamp  into  darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to
see  might  see  things  about  them, — even  so,  in  many  a
figure,  has  the  reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine
clear.  To  him  as  our  refuge  we  come  and  to  his
Doctrine  and  to  his  Confraternity.  We  ask  him  to
accept  us  as  his  followers  from  this  day  forth  while
life  lasts.


lxi.  ambalatthikA-rAhul-ovAda-
SUTTA.1

AGAINST  LYING.

[414]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo-grove  where
the  squirrels  were  fed,  and  the  reverend  Rahula  was
staying  at  Ambalatthika,  the  Lord,  arising  towards
eventide  from  his  meditations,  went  over  to  Rahula,
who,  seeing  the  Lord  some  way  off,  set  a  seat  for  him

1  This  is  doubtless  the  Sutta  which  Asoka  commends  in  the
Bhabra  Edict.


298  lxi.  ambalatthika-rAhul-ovada.


M.  i.  4x5.


and  water  to  wash  his  feet.  Seating  himself  on  the
seat  set  for  him,  the  Lord  poured  water  over  his  feet,
while  Rahula  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  side.

Having  still  a  minute  drain  of  water  in  the  water-
jar,  the  Lord  said  to  Rahula : — Do  you  see  this  minute
drain  of  water  ?

Yes,  sir.

Minute,  likewise,  is  the  recluse-ship  of  those  who
shrink  not  from  deliberate  lying.

Then  throwing  away  the  water,  the  Lord  said  to
Rahula  : — Do  you  see  this  minute  drain  of  water  now
thrown  away  ?

Yes,  sir.

Thrown  away,  likewise,  is  the  recluse-ship  of  those
who  shrink  not  from  deliberate  lying.

Upsetting  the  jar,  the  Lord  said  to  Rahula: — Do
you  see  this  jar  upset  ?

Yes,  sir.

Upset,  likewise,  is  the  recluse-ship  of  those  who
shrink  not  from  deliberate  lying.

Setting  the  jar  upright  again,  the  Lord  said  to
Rahula  : — Do  you  see  this  jar  empty  and  void  ?

Yes,  sir.

Empty  and  void,  likewise,  is  the  recluse-ship  of
those  who  shrink  not  from  deliberate  lying.

It  is  like,  Rahula,  a  king’s  elephant  with  tusks  as
long  as  the  pole  of  a  plough,  a  vast  beast  of  noble
lineage,  which  has  seen  many  battles  and,  when  it
comes  into  battle,  goes  to  work  with  its  fore  feet  and
its  hind  feet,  with  its  fore-quarters  and  its  hind-quarters,
with  its  head  and  its  ears  and  its  tail, — but  [415]  keeps
its  trunk  out  of  danger.  Noting  this,  the  mahout  feels
the  elephant’s  life  is  not  lost.  But  when  the  elephant
goes  to  work  with  its  trunk  too,  then  the  mahout  feels
the  elephant’s  life  is  lost,  for  it  has  left  undone  nothing
it  could  do. — Just  in  the  same  way,  Rahula,  he  who
does  not  shrink  from  deliberate  lying  has  not — say  I —
left  undone  any  evil  thing  which  he  could  do.  There¬
fore,  you  must  school  yourself  never  to  lie  even  in  jest.

What  think  you,  Rapula  ?  What  is  a  mirror  for  ?


M.  i.  416.


AGAINST  LYING.


299


To  reflect,  sir,

In  just  the  same  way  you  must  reflect  again  and
again  in  doing  every  act,  in  speaking  every  word  and
in  thinking  every  thought.  When  you  want  to  do
anything,  you  must  reflect  whether  it  would  conduce
to  your  or  others’  harm  or  to  both,  and  so  is  a  wrong
act,  productive  of  woe  and  ripening  unto  woe.  If
reflection  tells  you  this  is  the  nature  of  that  contem¬
plated  fact,  assuredly  you  should  not  do  it  [41 6 J.  But
if  reflection  assures  you  there  is  not  harm  but  good  in
it,  then  you  may  do  it.  If  while  you  are  doing  that
act,  reflection  tells  you  it  is  harmful  to  you  or  to  others
or  to  both  and  is  a  wrong  act  productive  of  woe  and
ripening  unto  woe,  abandon  it.  But  if  reflection
assures  you  there  is  not  harm  but  good  in  it,  then  you
may  go  forward  with  it.  If  when  you  have  done  that
act,  reflection  assures  you  that  it  has  conduced  to  your
or  others’  harm  or  to  both  and  is  a  wrong  act  pro¬
ductive  of  woe  and  ripening  unto  woe,  then  you  should
declare  and  disclose  and  unfold  it  to  your  master  or  to
the  discreet  among  your  fellows  in  the  higher  life,  and
you  should  henceforth  develop  self-control  [417].
But  if  reflection  assures  you  there  is  not  harm  but  good
in  it,  then  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  yours  as  you  school
yourself  by  day  and  by  night  in  the  things  that  are
right.

And  the  same  holds  good  for  speech  and  [418-9]
for  thoughts  also.

[420]  All  recluses  and  brahmins,  Rahula,  who  in
past  ages  were  pure  in  deed,  word  and  thought,  won
that  purity  by  constant  reflection.  So  in  ages  to  come
will  their  successors  win  their  purity,  even  as  it  is  won
by  recluses  and  brahmins  to-day.  Therefore,  school
yourselves  by  constant  reflection  to  win  purity  in
deed,  word  and  thought.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Rahula  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


300


LXII.  MAUA-RAHUL-OVADA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  421.


LXII.  MAHA-RAHUL-OVADA-SUTTA.

BREATHING  EXERCISES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  One  morning  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  Grove  in  Anatha-
pindika’s  pleasaunce,  he  went,  duly  robed  and  bowl
in  hand,  into  the  city  for  alms.  Behind  followed  the
reverend  Rahula,  [421]  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand.
Without  looking  round,  the  Lord  addressed  Rahula  as
follows  : — All  matter  (rupa) — past  present  or  future,
within  or  without,  gross  or  subtile,  high  or  low,  far  or
near — should  be  regarded  with  full  comprehension  that
‘  this  is  not  mine  ’ — ‘  not  I  ’ — ‘  no  self  of  mine.’

Matter  only,  Lord  ?  Only  matter,  Blessed  One  ?

Not  only  matter,  Rahula,  but  also  feeling,  percep¬
tion,  the  constituents  and  consciousness.

Who  possibly,  said  Rahula,  could  go  to  the  village  for
alms  on  the  day  he  has  heard  an  exhortation  from  the
Lord’s  own  lips  ?  And  thereupon  he  turned  back  and
seated  himself  under  a  tree,  cross  legged  and  with  body
erect,  alert  in  mindfulness.  Seeing  him  so  seated,  the
reverend  Sariputta  addressed  him,  saying — Aim,
Rahula,  at  developing  the  mindfulness  which  comes
from  inhaling  and  exhaling,  for  this,  if  developed  and
fostered,  yields  a  rich  harvest  and  proves  of  great  avail.
Rising  up  towards  evening  from  his  meditations,
Rahula  sought  out  the  Lord  and  after  salutations  took
a  seat  to  one  side,  asking  how  that  mindfulness  which
comes  from  inhaling  and  exhaling  was  produced  and
fostered  so  as  to  yield  a  rich  harvest  and  prove  of  great
avail.

Rahula,  everything  personal  and  referable  to  an
individual  which  is  hard  or  solid  or  derived  therefrom
— such  as  the  hair  of  the  head  or  body,  nails,  teeth,
skin,  flesh,  sinews,  bones,  marrow,  kidneys,  heart,  liver,
pleura,  spleen,  lungs,  inwards,  bowels,  stomach,  faeces,
together  with  everything  else  personal  and  referable  to
an  individual  which  is  hard  or  solid  or  derived  there¬
from — all  this  makes  up  what  is  called  the  personal


M.  i.  422.


BREATHING  EXERCISES.


301


earth-element,  and,  in  combination  with  the  external
earth-element  makes  up  the  totality  of  the  earth-
element.  The  right  way  to  regard  this  as  it  really  is
and  to  comprehend  it  aright,  is  to  say — This  is  not
mine,  This  is  not  I,  This  is  no  self  of  mine.  [422]  So
regarding  and  comprehending  it,  a  man  turns  from  the
earth-element  in  disgust  and  loathing  of  heart.

What  next  is  the  water -element  ?  It  may  be  either
personal  or  external.  If  personal  and  referable  to  an
individual,  it  embraces  everything  which  is  water  or
watery  or  derived  therefrom — such  as  bile,  phlegm,
pus,  blood,  sweat,  fat,  tears,  serum,  saliva,  mucus,
synovial  fluid  and  urine,  together  with  everything  else
personal  and  referable  to  an  individual,  which  is  water
or  watery  or  derived  therefrom.  All  this  makes  up
what  is  called  the  personal  water-element,  and,  in
combination  with  the  external  water-element,  makes
up  the  totality  of  the  water-element.  The  right  way
to  regard  this  as  it  really  is  and  to  comprehend  it
aright  is  to  say — This  is  not  mine,  This  is  not  I,  This
is  no  self  of  mine.  So  regarding  and  comprehending
it,  a  man  turns  from  the  water-element  in  disgust  and
loathing  of  heart

The  fire-element  similarly  is  either  personal  or
external.  If  personal,  it  embraces  everything  which  is
fire  or  fiery  or  derived  therefrom, — such  as  whatever
heats,  consumes  or  burns  up,  or  whatever  wholly
transmutes  food  and  drink  in  digestion,  or  anything
else  which,  being  personal  and  referable  to  an
individual,  is  fire  or  fiery  or  is  derived  therefrom.  All
this  is  called  the  personal  fire-element,  and,  in  com¬
bination  with  the  external  fire-element,  makes  up  the
totality  of  the  fire-element.  The  right  way  to  regard
.  .  .  loathing  of  heart.

Likewise,  the  air-element  is  either  personal  or
external.  If  personal,  it  embraces  everything  personal
and  referable  to  an  individual  which  is  air  or  airy  or
derived  therefrom, — such  as  wind  discharged  upwards
or  downwards,  wind  in  the  abdomen  or  belly,  vapours
that  traverse  the  several  members,  inhalings  and


302


LXII.  MAHA-RAHUL-OVADA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  423.


exhalings  of  breath,  together  with  everything  else
which,  being  personal  and  referable  to  an  individual,  is
air  or  airy  or  derived  therefrom.  All  this  is  called  the
personal  air-element,  and,  in  combination  with  the
external  air-element,  makes  up  the  totality  of  the  air-
element.  The  right  way  to  regard  .  .  .  [423]  loathing
of  heart.

Lastly,  there  is  the  space-element,1  which  is  also
personal  or  external.  If  personal,  it  is  either  space  or
spacious  or  derived  therefrom, — such  as  the  auditory
or  nasal  orifices,  or  the  portals  of  the  mouth,  or  the
channels  by  which  victuals  and  drink  are  either
swallowed  or  repose  or  pass  out  of  the  body  lower
down,  or  aught  else,  that,  being  personal  and  referable
to  an  individual,  is  space  or  spacious  or  derived  there¬
from.  All  this  is  called  the  personal  space-element,
and,  in  combination  with  the  external  space-element,
makes  up  the  totality  of  the  space  element.  The  right
way  to  regard  .  .  .  loathing  of  heart.

Grow  like  unto  the  earth,  Rahula  ;  for,  as  you  do  so,
no  sensory  impressions,  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  will
grip  hold  of  your  heart  and  stick  there.  J  ust  as  men
cast  on  the  earth’s  surface  things  clean  and  things
unclean,  ordure,  urine,  spittle,  pus  and  gore,  and  yet
the  earth  is  not  troubled  thereby  nor  moved  to  disgust
and  loathing, — even  so  should  you  grow  like  unto  the
earth  ;  for,  as  you  do  so,  no  sensory  impressions,  agree¬
able  or  disagreeable,  will  lay  hold  of  your  heart  and
stick  there.

Grow  like  unto  water ;  for,  as  you  do  so  .  .  .  stick
there.  Just  as  men  cast  into  water  things  clean  and
things  unclean  .  .  .  [424]  and  stick  there.

Grow  like  unto  fire ;  for,  as  you  do  .  .  .  and  stick
there.

Grow  like  the  wind  ;  for,  as  you  do,  no  sensory
impressions,  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  will  grip  hold

1  This  does  not  occur  in  Sutta  No.  28,  which  gives  only  the  pre¬
ceding  four  elements  (cattari  mah  a-b  h  u  t  a).  Infra,  in  Suttas
Nos.  112,  115  and  140  (cf.  D.  111,247,  A.  I,  175  and  A.  III.  290)
v  i  n  n  a  n  a-d  h  a  t  u  is  added  to  the  five  elements  here  specified.


M.  i.  425.


BREATHING  EXERCISES.


303


of  your  heart  and  stick  there.  J  ust  as  the  wind  blows
away  things  clean  and  unclean,  ordure,  urine,  spittle,
pus  and  gore,  and  yet  the  wind  is  not  troubled  thereby
nor  moved  to  disgust  and  loathing, — even  so  should
you  grow  like  unto  the  wind  ;  for,  as  you  do  so,  no
sensory  impressions,  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  will  grip
hold  of  your  heart  and  stick  there.

Grow  like  space;  for,  as  you  do  so,  no  sensory
impressions,  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  will  grip  hold  of
your  mind  and  stick  there.  For,  just  as  space  abides
nowhere,  even  so  should  you  grow  like  space ;  for,  as
you  do  so,  no  sensory  impressions,  agreeable  or  dis¬
agreeable,  will  grip  hold  of  your  mind  and  stick  there.

Grow  in  loving-kindness ;  for,  as  you  do  so,  male¬
volence  will  pass  away.

Grow  in  compassion  ;  for,  as  you  do  so,  vexation  will
pass  away.

Grow  in  gladness  over  others’  welfare ;  for,  as  you
do  so,  aversions  will  pass  away.

Grow  in  poised  equanimity ;  for,  as  you  do  so,  all
repugnance  will  pass  away.

Grow  in  contemplation  of  the  body’s  corruption  ;  for,
as  you  do  so,  passion  will  pass  away.

Grow  in  perception  of  the  fleeting  nature  of  things;
[425]  for,  as  you  do,  the  pride  of  self  will  pass  away.

Grow  in  the  mindfulness  which  comes  from  ordered
breathing ;  for,  this,  if  developed  and  fostered,  yields  a
rich  harvest  and  proves  of  great  avail. — Take  the  case
of  an  Almsman  who,  betaking  himself  to  the  jungle  or
the  foot  of  a  tree  or  to  some  abode  of  solitude,  there
sits  cross-legged  and  with  body  erect,  alert  in  mindful¬
ness.  Mindfully  he  inhales,  and  mindfully  he  exhales
his  breath.  When  exhaling  a  deep  breath,  he  knows
precisely  what  he  is  doing,  as  he  does  too  when  inhal¬
ing  a  deep  breath,  or  when  exhaling  or  inhaling  a
shallow  breath.  In  the  process  of  drawing  his  breath
either  in  or  out,  he  schools  himself  either  to  be  alive  to
all  bodily  impressions — or  to  still  the  several  factors  of
body — or  to  take  zest  therein — or  to  have  a  sense  of
well-being  ;  he  schools  himself  either  to  be  alive  to  the


304


LXIII.  cula-mAlunkya-sutta.


M.  i.  426.


heart’s  several  factors — or  to  still  them — or  to  be  alive
to  the  heart  (as  a  whole) — or  to  still  the  heart — or  to
give  it  full  play — or  to  calm  it — or  to  bring  it  Deliver¬
ance  ;  he  schools  himself  in  breathing  to  dwell  on  the
impermanence  of  things,  or  on  passionlessness,  or  on
elimination,  or  on  Renunciation. — This,  Rahula,  is  how
mindfulness  in  ordered  breathing  is  fostered  and
developed  so  as  to  yield  a  rich  harvest  and  to  prove  of
great  avail.  With  mindfulness  in  breathing  so  fostered
[426]  and  developed,  a  man  breathes  his  last  wittingly
and  not  unwittingly.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Rahula  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXIII.  CULA-MALUNKYA-SUTTA.

OF  THE  IRRELEVANT.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  staying  at
SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s  pleasaunce.
To  the  reverend  Malunkya-putta,  in  the  course  of
his  private  meditations,  there  came  the  follow¬
ing  reflection : — The  Lord  does  not  expound  to  me
the  views — which  he  has  left  unexpounded,  omitted
and  dismissed  without  answer — such  as  :  The  world  is
eternal, — The  world  is  not  eternal — The  world  is
finite — The  world  is  infinite — Life  and  the  body  are
one  and  the  same  thing — Life  and  the  body  are  dis¬
tinct  entities — A  truth-finder1  passes  to  another  ex¬
istence  after  death — A  truth-finder  passes  to  no  further
existence  after  death — A  truth-finder  both  passes  and
does  not  pass  to  a  further  existence  after  death — A
truth-finder  neither  passes  nor  does  not  pass  to  a  further
existence  after  death.  I  do  not  like  his  not  expounding
these  things  to  me ;  I  resent  it ;  I  will  go  to  him  and


1  Tathagato  ti  satto,  says  Bu. ;  i.e.  here  ‘  tathSgata  means
simply  creature.’  I  have  however  retained  my  ordinary  trans¬
lation  of  the  word,  to  connote  all  Arahats,  whether  Buddhas
or  not.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


469


beautiful  bnt  now  time-worn  images  and  fi gores.
This  admiration  was  all  the  more  remarkable  as  Akbar
missed  no  opportunity  of  having  a  fling  at  the  heretical
aud  western  tendencies  of  the  new  generation.  It  is
the  considered  opinion  of  many  competent  critics  that
Akbar  will  be  remembered  hereafter  chiefly  as  a
satirist.  At  a  cursory  glance  we  find  in  his  verses
Knglish  words  such  ns  Civil  Snrgeou,  Police,  Com¬
mittee,  Science,  Darwin,  Relation,  College,  Convoca¬
tion,  Thank  Yon,  Force,  Coarse,  Philosophy,  Council,
Graduate,  Photo.  Perhaps  these  words  do  not  contri¬
bute  to  make  the  poetry  very  great,  but  it  certainly
l»ccomcs  very  effective.  The  poet’s  son,  Syed  Ishrat
Husain,  a  Deputy  Collector,  deserves  the  warmest
gratitude  of  all  lovers  of  Urdu  poetry,  for  publishing
in  three  well-printed  volumes,  the  poems  of  his  father.
We  shall  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  fourth
volume  which  we  arc  promised  before  long.


1.  Marasi-Anis  3  VoLs.  (Nizami  Press.  Itudaou)
1914.

2.  Diwan-Dard'l'rdu.  (Nizami  Press,  Budnon)  1933.

3.  Lithography.  By  M.  Altiduddin  (Nizami  Press,
Budaon)  1924.

Maulvi  Xiramuddin  Husain  of  Budaon  has  been
rendering  valuable  service  to  the  cause  of  Urdu
Literature  by  publishing  at  the  Nizami  Press  his
exceedingly  w.-ll-got  up  and  correctly  printed  series  of
Urdu  poems.  We  noticed  in  an  earlier  number  of  the
Hindustan  Review  the  Intakhabi-Zanin.  edited  by  Mr.
Syed  Ross  Masood,  and  his  edition  of  Ghalib’s  Divan
is  admittedly  the  best  in  tlie  market.  Thanks  to  the
well  placed  generosity  of  the  Nizam’s  Government,  we
are  now  promised  a  series  of  uniformly  got-up  volumes
of  Urdu  classics.  This  will  meet  a  great  want,  and  we
are  confident  that  the  Urdu-rcading  public  will  heartily
greet  these  publications.  Of  all  the  poets  who  have
attempted  the  Marsia  form  of  poetry,  Alices  stands
unique  and  unrivalled,  for  in  wealth  of  imagery,  in  the
power  of  vivid  portraiture,  in  mastery  over  the  subtle
music  of  the  verse,  he  is  unsurpassed.  But  of  his
Marsias  so  far  the  only  edition  worth  mention  was  the
cue  printed  in  four  volumes  by  the  Newal  Kishore
I*rcss  of  Lucknow.  We  now  welcome  this  edition
neatly  printed  on  beautiful,  thick  glazed  paper.

Among  the  earlier  Urdu  poets,  Hard  occupies  a  high
place.  Khwaja  Mir.  to  give  him  his  full  name,
belonged  to  a  family  that  had  produced  a  large  number
of  poets,  and  was. born  in  A.  H.  1133,  and  died  in
A.  H.  1199.  He  was  a  voluminous  writer  and  con¬
sidering  that  he  wrote  while  Urdu  as  a  distinct


language  was  yet  in  its  infancy,  ranch  praise  must  be
bestowed  on  the  quality  of  his  verse.  But  it  is  a  pity
that  his  Divan  had  never  before  been  correctly
printed ;  the  various  editions  available  in  the  market
arc  full  of  misprints  and  corrupt  readings.  The
present  edition  is  based  however  on  a  collation  and
comparison  of  several  manuscripts  and  may  therefore
be  accepted  as  definitive.  Lovers  of  Dard  will  no
doubt  1*  very  glad  to  possess  n  copy  of  this  excellent
edition  -

M.  Ahiduddin  of  Budaon  has  written  a  valuable  took
on  Lithography, — the  first  liook  on  the  subject  in  Urdu.
It  deals  with  subjects  like  Litho  material,  Handpress,
Use  of  Chemicals,  Black  and  Colour  Printing,  Trans¬
posing  Instructions  to  machinemcn  and  so  on.  It  is
enriched  by  numerous  diagrams  and  will  be  of  great
use  to  printers  and  press-managers  for  whom  it  is
specially  intended.  The  author  has  succeeded  in
making  his  subject  intelligible  to  the  ordinary  printers
as  well  as  to  the  general  reader.  As  a  pioneer  work
in  Hindustani  it  deserves  acknowledgment  and
encouragement  at  the  hands  of  those  interested  in
litho-printing  in  this  country.

A  Dictionary  of  the  Hindi  Language.  By  J.  D  BaiS
(Indian  Press,  Allahabad)  1934.

Of  Hindi-Bllglish  dictionaries.  Bate's  is  the  best.
Bnt  this  well-known  Dictionary  had  long  been  out  of
print,  and  the  publishers  have  rendered  a  useful  public
service  by  reprinting  it.  It  is  different  from  the  earlier
dictionaries  inasmuch  a*  the  words  are  arranged  in  the
order  of  the  Devanagaii  Alphabet.  It  has  now  been
issued  at  the  very  moderate  price  of  Rs.  6,  and  should
therefore  be  within  the  reach  of  all.  We  hope  the
Dictionary  will  become  as  popular  as  it  is  useful  to  that
large  section  of  our  students  who  have  to  study  Hindi.


Gita  yogapradiparyabhaahya  By  Pandit  Aryamani
(Devadatta  Sliarma,  Karnavas,  Distt.  Bulaudshahr)
1924-

I’andit  Arvamuni’s  commentary  and  translation  of
the  Bhagwadgita — of  which  the  sixth  edition  has  now
been  published — strikes  a  new  line  of  thought  and  for
comprehensiveness  and  clarity  of  argument,  it  is  one
of  the  best  of  those  written  in  Hindi.  There  is  a
scholarly  introduction,  a  clear  analysis  of  the  contents
and  a  full  index  to  the  first  line  of  each  verse.  The
translation  is  reliable.  We  hope  the  book  will  meet
with  the  same  encouragement  which  it  has  hitherto
had.


M.  i.  427.


OF  THE  IRRELEVANT.


305


question  him  hereon.  If  he  definitely  either  accepts  or
rejects  any  of  these  propositions,  I  will  follow  the
higher  life  under  the  Lord  ;  but  if  he  fails  to  expound,
then  I  will  throw  up  my  training  as  an  Almsman  and
will  revert  to  the  lower  plane  of  a  layman.

[427]  Rising  up  towards  evening  from  his  medita¬
tions,  the  reverend  Malunkya-putta  betook  him  to  the
Lord,  saluted  him,  seated  himself,  related  his  reflec¬
tions  and  the  decision  he  had  reached,  ending  up  by
saying  : — If  the  Lord  knows  that  the  world  is  eternal,
let  him  tell  me  so.  If  the  Lord  knows  that  the  world
is  not  eternal,  let  him  tell  me  so.  If  the  Lord  does  not
know  whether  the  world  is  eternal  or  not,  then  the  only
straightforward  thing  for  one  who  knows  not  nor  dis¬
cerns  is  to  avow  that  he  knows  not  nor  discerns.

(And  he  dealt  similarly  with  each  of  the  other
problems  above  enumerated.)

[428]  Did  I  ever  promise  you,  Malunkya-putta,
that,  if  you  followed  the  higher  life  under  me,  I  would
tell  you  whether  the  world  was  eternal,  and  all  the  rest
of  it?

No,  sir.

Or  did  you  on  your  part  stipulate  that,  if  you
followed  the  higher  life  under  me,  then  I  should  tell
you  all  this  ?

No,  sir.

It  comes  to  this  then  that  I  never  promised,  nor  did
you  stipulate,  that,  as  a  condition  of  your  following  the
higher  life  under  me,  I  should  expound  these  matters
to  you.  This  being  so,  who  are  you — to  reject  whom  ?

If,  Malunkya-putta,  a  man  were  to  say  he  would  not
follow  the  higher  life  under  the  Lord  until  the  Lord
had  answered  all  the  questions  you  enumerate,  [429]
he  would  get  no  answer  from  the  Truth-finder  before
death  overtook  him.  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  were  trans¬
fixed  by  an  arrow  heavily  coated  with  poison,  and  his
friends  and  kinsfolk  were  to  get  him  a  leech  expert  in
dealing  with  arrow-wounds,  but  the  man  were  to  declare
he  would  not  have  the  arrow  taken  out  until  he  knew
whether  the  archer  who  had  shot  him  was  a  Noble  or

20


306


LXIII.  CULA-MALUNKYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  430.


a  brahmin  or  a  middle-class  man  or  a  peasant, — what
the  archer’s  name  and  lineage  was — whether  he  was
tall  or  short  or  of  medium  height — whether  he  was
black  or  dark  or  fair — what  particular  village  or  town¬
ship  or  city  he  hailed  from — whether  his  bow  was  a
long-bow  or  a  cross-bow — whether  his  bow-string  was
made  from  swallow-wort  or  bamboo  or  sinew  or  hemp
or  the  leaves  of  Calotropis  gigantea — whether  the  shaft
of  the  arrow  was  a  wild  reed  or  a  planted  shoot —
whether  the  shaft  was  feathered  with  the  plumage  of  a
vulture  or  a  heron  or  a  falcon  or  a  peacock  or  other
fowl — whether  the  gut  binding  that  shaft  came  from  an
ox  or  a  buffalo  or  a  hart  or  a  monkey — whether  the
arrow  was  a  plain  arrow  or  was  barbed  with  horn  or
iron  or  a  calfs  tooth  or  with  an  oleander  thorn.  [430]
The  man  would  never  get  to  know  all  this  before  death
overtook  him.  And  just  in  the  same  way,  if  a  man
were  to  say  he  would  not  follow  the  higher  life  under
the  Lord  until  the  Lord  had  answered  this  pack  of
questions,  he  would  get  no  answer  from  the  Truth-
finder  before  death  overtook  him.

The  higher  life  is  not  contingent  on  the  truth  of  any
thesis  that  the  world  either  is  or  is  not  eternal.  In
either  case,  as  in  each  of  the  other  theses  you  adduce,
there  still  abides  the  fact  of  birth,  decay  and  death  ;
there  still  abide  the  facts  of  grief  and  tribulation,  of  ill,
sorrow  and  distraction  ; — of  all  of  which  I  proclaim
the  extirpation  here  and  now.

[431]  Take  therefore  what  I  have  not  taught  as
being  left  untaught  by  me,  and  take  as  my  teaching
what  I  have  specifically  taught.

What  have  I  left  untaught  ? — I  have  not  taught  that
the  world  either  is  or  is  not  eternal ;  that  it  is  finite  or
infinite ;  that  life  and  the  body  are  either  identical  or
distinct ;  that  after  death  a  truth-finder  either  passes
or  does  not  pass  to  a  further  existence,  or  does  both  or
neither.  And  why  have  I  left  these  things  untaught  ? —
Because  they  are  unprofitable  and  not  fundamental  to
the  higher  life  ;  because  they  do  not  conduce  to  weari¬
ness  with  mundane  things,  to  passionlessness,  to  purga-


470


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


BOOKS  OB  REFERENCE.

The  World  Almanac  and  Book  oi  Facts  1924.  Edited
by  R.  H.  Lyman.  (Pultizcr  Building,  53 — 63  Park  Row,
New  York,  U.S.A.)  1924.

/'lie  ll'orld  Almanac  amt  Book  of  Facts — which  is
edited  with  skill  and  knowledge  by  Mr.  Lyman— is
now  in  the  thirty-ninth  year  of  publication.  It  is  a
most  important  annual  appanage  to  one  of  the  leading
American  papers,  the  New  York  World,  from  the  office
of  which  it  is  issued.  It  is  such  a  book  as  would  have
delighted  Mr.  Thomas  Gradgrind — “a  man  of  realities,
a  man  of  facts  and  calculations” — depicted  by-
Dickens  in  his  Hard  Times.  That  imaginary  character
— who  represents  the  type  called  ‘‘eminently  practi¬
cal" — was  of  opinion  that  "facts  alone  arc  wanted  in
life,”  and  it  would  have  done  his  heart  good  could  he
but  have  access  in  his  days  to  Mr.  Lyman’s  comprehen¬
sive  and  exhaustive  work  of  reference,  which  is  a  most
marvellously  well-digested  compendium  of  facts  and
figures  relating  almost  to  the  whole  world.  Of  the
many  books  of  reference,  annually  issued,  it  is
perhaps  the  most  notable  covering  within  its  nearly
one  thousand  pages  facts  and  statistical  data  about
the  various  political  entities  of  the  earth.  Though
mainly  intended  for  use  in  America,  it  would  be  found
highly  useful  throughout  the  English-knowing  world.

The  Constitutional  Year-Book  1924.  iNationa!
1'nionist  Association,  Palace  Chambers,  Bridge  Street,
Loudon,  S.  W.  1)  1924.

The  Constitutional  Year-Book  is  to  the  British
Conservative  what  the  Liberal  Year-Book  is  to  the
British  Progressive.  For  the  object  it  desires  to  serve,
the  Constitutional — which  is  now  in  the  thirty-eighth
year  of  publication — is  an  almost  ideal  work  of
reference.  Its  scope  i*  chiefly  political  and  it  offers
a  cheap  and  handy  reference-book  of  facts  and  statistics
bearing  on  topics  of  current  interest  to  the  conserva¬
tives  in  particular  and  publicists  in  general.  It  is
carefully  revised  and  brought  up-to-date  and  its  pages
may  be  trusted  to  supply  useful  and  accurate  informa¬
tion  on  questions  of  public  interest.  A  publicist  who
desires  to  be  in  touch  with  the  movements  and  develop¬
ments  of  the  three  leading  political  parties  in  Great
Britain  should  keep  on  his  liookshclf  the  annual
editions  of  the  Labour  Year-Book,  the  Liberal  I  ear¬
hook  and  the  Constitutional  Year-Book,  each  of  which
is  highly  useful.

The  Norway  Year-Book  1924.  Edited  by  S.  C.
Hammer,  M.A.  (Sverre  Mortensen  Bokhandcl,
Christiania,  Norway)  1914.


The  Swedish  Year-Book  1924.  (Almoqvist  and
Wiksells  &  Co.,  Boktrvckeri — A.  B.  Stockholm,
Sweden)  1924.

The  two  new  year-books  to  the  principal
Scandinavian  countries — Norway  and  Sweden — are
highly  creditable  performances.  They  arc  both
published  in  English.  That  dealing  with  Norway  is
compiled  by  the  Christiania  correspondent  of  the
Times,  while  that  with  Sweden  is  the  result  of  colla¬
boration  on  the  part  of  public  authorities  of  that
country.  They  are,  to  our  knowledge,  the  only  works
of  their  class  in  English  relating  to  these  two
countries.  Each  of  them  is  well-planned,  well-com¬
piled  and  well-edited.  Mr.  Hammer’s  book  dealing
with  Norway  is  the  more  ambitious  of  the  two,  as  it
aspires  to  fulfil  the  purposes  of  an  anuual  cyclopoedia.
But  the  Swedish  book,  though  not  so  comprehensive,
is  quite  adequate  in  its  scope.  Both  deal  with
geography,  history,  administration,  finance,  education,
literature,  trade,  industries,  shipping  and  various  other
important  subjects  of  interest  relating  to  Norway  and
Sweden  respectively.  Both  arc  thoroughly  up-to-date
and  accurate  in  tlicir  statements.  While  intended
primarily  for  publicists  and  businessmen,  the  works
are  so  planned  as  to  subserve  the  objects  of  readers
interested  in  the  history,  culture,  and  the  economic,
social  and  political  development  and  progress  of
Scandinavia.  By  reason  of  their  intrinsic  merits,  both
these  highly  meritorious  works  of  reference  deserve  u
large  circulation  throughout  the  English-knowing
world.


The  Spas  of  Britain.  (The  British  Spa  Federation,

London)  1924.

A  Guide  to  London  and  the  British  Isles,  1921

(Foster,  Groom  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  15  Charing  Cross,  London,
S.  W.  1)  1924.

Dr.  R.  F.  Fox  introduces  to  the  public  the  very
useful  compilation  called  the  Spat  of  Britain — which
has  been  put  together  as  the  official  handbook  of  the
British  Spa  Federation.  Compiled  from  the  reports
sent  in  by  the  local  medical  committees,  it  deals  with
the  principal  places  in  England,  Wales  and  Scotland,
wbirh  are  famous  for  their  springs  possessing
medicinal  properties  for  the  cure  of  various  diseases.
Of  these  Bath,  Buxton,  Cheltenham  and  Harrogate  are
the  l>est  known.  Full  information  is  given  about  all
of  them — not  only  medical  information,  but  also  practi¬
cal  information  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  may
resort  to  them.  The  British  watering-places  liavc
lieen,  of  late,  neglected  in  favour  of  Continental  ones,
and  this  look  will  have  served  a  useful  purpose  if  it


M.  i.  432.


OF  THE  IRRELEVANT.


3°7


tion,  to  tranquillity,  to  insight,  to  full  enlightenment,
and  to  Nirvana.

What  have  I  specifically  taught  ? — I  have  taught  of
Ill,  of  its  origin,  of  its  cessation,  and  of  the  path  that
leads  to  its  cessation.  And  why  have  I  taught  this? —
Because  this  is  profitable  and  fundamental  to  the  higher
life ;  because  this  does  conduce  to  weariness  with
mundane  things  .  .  .  Nirvana.

Wherefore,  Malunkya-putta,  [432]  take  what  I  have
not  taught  as  being  left  untaught  by  me,  and  take  as
my  teaching  what  I  have  specifically  taught.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
MalunkyS-putta  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


47i


succeeds  in  drawing  attention  to  the  former.  It  is  an
excellent  little  reference-book.

Mr.  Alwyn  Pride's  Overseas  Visitor's  i-uidc  to
London  and  the  British  Isles  is  now  in  the  third  year
of  publication.  Its  previous  annual  editions  have  been
appreciatively  noticed  in  the  Hindustan  Review.  The
1914  edition  has  been  thoroughly  overhauled  and  is
fully  abreast  of  the  latest  changes,  and  the  autlvor  has
covered  ground  concerning  nearly  everything  of
interest  to  the  visitor.  There  is,  of  course,  a  detailed
description  of  the  British  Umpire  Exhibition  at
Wembley.  Altogether  Mr.  Pride’s  Guide  is  deserving
of  acknowledgment  as  a  reference-work  which  is
equally  interesting,  accurate  and  up-to-date.

A  Reference  Book.  (McDongall's  Educational  Co  .
Ltd.,  8  Farringdon  Avenue,  London,  E.  C.  4)  1924-

Banks  and  Public  Holidays  Throughout  the  World
1924.  (Guaranty  Trust  Company,  31,  Lombard  Street,
Ixmdon)  19x4.

A  Reference  Book  of  Tables  and  General  Informa¬
tion — to  give  the  booklet  its  full  designation — is  a
wonderful  little  compendium  of  much  valuable
knowledge  not  readily  accessible  to  the  average
publicist  or  businessman.  Within  the  covers  of  a
booklet  of  64  pages  of  small  sire,  the  printing  of  which
is  exceptionally  neat  and  eminently  readable,  is
brought  together,  carefully  anil  systematically
arranged,  a  mass  of  highly  useful  information  dealing
with  astronomical,  economic,  and  political  data  and
statistics.  We  commend  this  capital  little  pockit-
cotnpanion  as  a  handy  and  compact  reference  digest.

Banks  and  Bank  Holidays  is  an  American  work  of
reference  which  will  be  found  useful  by  businessmen
engaged  throughout  the  banking  world.  It  is  a  com¬
prehensive  list  of  leading  hanks  and  furnishes  reliable
information  about  bank  holidays.  If  kept  up-to-date
and  annually  re-issued,  it  will  meet  with  a  long-felt
want.


NEW  EDITIONS  AND  REPRINTS.

Ras  Mala.  By  Alexander  K.  Forbes  (2  Vols.  Oxford
University  Press,  London)  19*4.

This  is  a  reprint  of  the  well-known  translation  by
Forbes  of  the  Hindu  annals  of  Gujrat.  The  editor  is
ITofessor  Rawlinson  whose  previous  works— both
literary  and  historical— have  won  well-merited  apprecia¬
tion  from  scholars.  We  notice  that  the  editor's  note
is  dated  1916;  there  has  thus  been  an  interval  of  eight
years  between  the  revision  nnd  the  publication.
Perhaps  the  war  was  the  chief  cause  of  this  delay ;  but
we  are  in  any  case  glad  to  see  this  classic  so  well  and


so  correctly  reprinted,  with  a  full  biographical  memoir
of  Forbes  and  enriched  with  a  large  amount  of  fresh
information  upon  Gujrat.  Of  the  merits  of  Porbea’
translation  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  anything ;  Prof.
Rawlinson  has  performed  bis  task  with  great  ability.
A  work  like  this  is  sure  to  meet  with  a  warm  welcome
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  Western  India.
The  Oxford  University  Press  deserve  very  great  credit
for  their  laudable  effort  in  popularizing  old  Anglo-
Indian  literature  by  publishing  well-edited  and  care¬
fully-annotated  texts  of  many  of  the  famous  classics  of
Anglo-India.  These  Oxford  reprints  deserve  a  very-
wide  appreciation  and  large  circulation.


The  Oxford  History  of  India.  By  Vincent  A.  mith ;
revised  by  S.  M.  Edwards  (Oxford,  Clarendon  Press)

1923-

Mr.  Vincent  Smith's  Oxford  History  of  India  is  by-
common  consent  the  best  complete  text-book  on  Indian
History.  Written  in  a  clear,  lucid  style,  enriched  with
numerous  attractive  illustrations,  thoroughly  reliable
in  its  facts,  the  book  has  met  with  a  warm  reception
from  the  public,  and  the  publishers  have  now  brought
out  a  second  edition,  ‘revised  and  continued  to  1921.*
But  we  must  confess  that  we  arc  keenly  disappointed
with  the  work  of  revision.  The  bibliographies  have  not
ticen  brought  up-to-date ;  the  original  misprints  have
been  allowed  to  continue ;  and  though  Mr.  Williams
Crookes’  excellent  edition  of  Tod's  Rafastlian  appeared
about  two  years  ago,  the  original  note  about  its  being
“held  up  by  war  conditions’’  still  appears  on  p.  xxiv.
The  only  addition  of  any  length  than  we  can  sec  is  a
page  of  scrappy  and  ill-conceived  addition  about  the
Reforms — with  which  Mr.  Edwards  is  evidently  by  no
means  in  sympathy.  Making  allowance  for  the  faults
of  omission  and  commission  in  the  work  of  revision
by  the  editor,  the  new  edition  of  the  late  Dr.  Vincent
Smith’s  Oxford  History  of  India  may  justly  be  regarded
as  a  standard  work.


Kautilya's  Arthasastra.  Translated  by  Dr.  R
Shamasastrv  (Wesleyan  Mission  Press,  Mysore)  1923.

This  is  the  second  edition  of  Dr.  Shamasostry’s
monumental  work  on  Kautilya's  Arthashastra.  It  con¬
tains  a  prefatory  note  by  the  late  Dr.  J.  P.  Fleet  who
well  remarks  that  “we  shall  always  remain  under  a
great  obligation  to  Mr.  Shamasastry  for  a  most
important  addition  to  our  means  of  studying  the
general  history  of  ancient  India.”  The  generally
accepted  view  with  regard  to  the  date  of  the  Artha¬
sastra  is  that  it  was  written  before  321 — 296  B.  C.  by


LX1V.  maha-mAlunkya-sutta.

OF  BURSTING  BONDS  ASUNDER.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  J eta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  Almsmen,  saying: — Do
you  know  the  Five  Bonds  which  chain  men  to  the
lower  life  here,  as  taught  by  me  ?

Yes,  I  do,  said  the  reverend  Malunkya-putta.

And  what  is  your  knowledge  of  them  ?

One  is  views  on  personality ;  another  is  doubt ;
another  is  attachment  to  observances ;  fourth  come
lusts  of  the  flesh  ;  and  the  fifth  is  malevolence.

To  whom  do  you  hear  that  1  so  taught  the  Five
Bonds?  Would  not  Wanderers  who  profess  other
creeds  confute  you  with  the  illustration  from  infancy  ?
For,  a  new-born  babe,  helpless  on  its  back,  is  not
conscious  of  personality  at  all,  [433]  much  less  can  it
hold  views  on  personality,  its  propensity  to  views  on
personality  being  latent  only.  Such  an  infant  is  not
conscious  of  doctrines,  much  less  can  it  have  doubts
about  them,  its  propensity  to  doubt  being  latent  only.
Such  an  infant  is  not  conscious  of  rules  of  conduct,
much  less  can  it  be  attached  to  observances,  its
propensity  to  such  attachment  being  latent  onlv.
Such  an  infant  is  not  conscious  of  lusts  of  the  flesh,
much  less  can  passion  arise .  within  it,  its  sensual
propensities  being  latent  only.  Such  an  infant  is  not
conscious  of  fellow-creatures,  much  less  can  it  harbour
malevolence  towards  them,  its  malevolent  propensities
being  latent  only.  Would  not  Wanderers  who  profess
other  creeds  confute  you,  Malunkya-putta,  with  this
illustration  from  infancy  ?

At  this  point  the  reverend  Ananda  exclaimed  : —
Now  is  the  time  for  this,  Lord  ;  now  is  the  time.
Blessed  One,  for  the  Lord  to  impart  teaching  about

308


472


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Kaulilya,  also  called  Chanakya,  who  was  chiefly  instru¬
mental  in  placing  Chamlragupta  on  the  throne,  flat
doubts  have  recently  been  expressed  by  Dr.  Jolly  with
regard  to  the  correctness  of  this  date  and  he  is
inclined  to  place  the  book  so  late  as  the  third  century
A.  D.  I)r.  Wintcrnitz — a  translation  of  whose  History
of  Indian  Literature,  we  note  with  pleasure,  is  shortly
to  be  published  in  the  Punjab  Sanskrit  Series — is  also
not  inclined  to  acknowledge  its  remote  antiquity.  We
hod  expected  that  in  this  new  edition  Dr.  Sostrv  would
discuss  the  question  of  the  date  at  some  length,  bat
we  are  disappointed  to  find  that  the  subject  is  not  dealt
with  at  all.  We  hope  this  omission  will  be  rectified
in  the  next  edition ;  meanwhile  we  accord  a  hearty
welcome  to  the  present  work,  which — whether  written
in  the  third  century  before  or  after  Christ — will  retain
its  great  value  as  a  picture  of  ancient  Indian  polity.


A  forgotten  Empire-  By  Robert  Sewell  (George
Allen  and  Unwin,  bid.,  40  Museum  Street,  London,
W.  C.  1)  1024-

Mr.  Sewell’s  A  Forgotten  Empire  is  a  well-known
history  of  the  kingdom  of  Vijavnagar  which  has  been
recognised  as  an  authority  since  its  first  publication
in  1900.  The  book  is  hased  on  some  valuable  and
interesting  chronicles  of  the  sixteenth  century,  which
prcscut  a  graphic  and  detailed  account  of  the  condition
of  the  great  city,  at  the  time  of  its  highest  grandeur,
written  on  the  spot  by  Portuguese  merchants.  But
since  the  book  was  first  printed,  much  new  and  impor¬
tant  material  bearing  on  the  subject  has  become
available,  and  the  publishers  would  have  done  well  to
entrust  the  task  of  revision  to  a  scholar  like  Prof.
Krishnaswamy  Iyengar  who  has  made  this  subject  his
own.  All  the  same,  the  repuhlication  of  this  important
work  which  has  long  been  out  of  print  will  be  a  source
of  great  pleasure  to  all  who  arc  interested  in  the  story
of  the  sudden  rise,  the  amazing  grandeur,  and  the
complete  disappearance  of  the  Hindu  kingdom  of
Vijavnagar,  the  history  of  which  will  always  possess
fascination  for  the  student  of  the  mediaeval  history  of
India.


Modern  English  Literature.  By  Edmund  Gos.w.
Tenth  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  (William
Heinemnnn,  btd.,  Henrietta  Street,  Izmdon)  1924.

Mr.  Edmund  Gosse  is  among  living  critics  one  of
the  most  eminent,  and  his  Modem  English  Literature
has  long  been  recognised  as  one  of  the  best  books  of
its  kind.  In  this  new  edition,  the  book  has  been
brought  up-to-date.  We  ltave  no  doubt  that  all


students  of  English  liicrature  will  be  glad  to  possess
copies  of  this  book  which,  since  its  original  publication
in  1897,  has  continued  to  enjoy  unbroken  popularity.


OUR  I.IBRARY  TABLE.  MISCELLANEOUS
LITERATURE.

The  Stage  Favourite's  Cook  Book,  compiled  and
edited  by  Elizabeth  Craig  (Mrs.  Mann)  and  issued  by
Messrs.  Hutchinson  &  Co.)  Paternoster  Row,  London)
is  a  wonderfully  good  collection  of  recipes  contributed
by  four  hundred  British,  Continental,  and  American
actresses.  Each  recipe,  which  bears  the  name  of  some
well-known  actress,  has  been  tested  and  approved  by
the  editor,  who  is  lielieved  to  be  probably  the  best-
known  woman  expert  on  the  subject  of  cookery  in  Great
Britain  at  the  present  day.  The  result  is  a  work
containing  appetising  and  attractive  menus,  which  are
also  practical  and  suited  to  the  requirements  of  small
households.  But  surely  Mrs.  Mann  could  have  easily-
put  together  a  cookery  book  of  her  own,  without
bothering  four  hundred  actresses  from  Europe  and
America !


The  literature  of  journalism  is  now  fairly  large—
both  in  Britain  and  America  and  yet  we  can  not  say
that  Mr  Michael  Joseph’s  Journalism  tor  Pro'C
(Hutchinson  &  Co.  Paternoster  Row,  London)  is  n
superfluous  work.  It  is  a  practical  treatise  and  covers
the  entire  ground  of  modern  free  lance  journalism,  as
well  as  a  profession.  Sir  Philip  Gibbs  (in  a  foreword)
commends  the  book  to  journalistic  aspirants  as  a  guide
which  will  be  enormously  useful  to  them.  We  readily
endorsc  this  view.  Mr.  Joseph  has  evidentlv
specialised  in  the  various  phases  of  contemporary
journalism  and  Is  quite  familiar  with  the  ups  and
downs  of  a  journalist’s  life.  His  book  is  full  of
shrewd  hints  and  is  replete  w-ith  useful  information
and  should  be  found  invaluable  by  journalistic-
aspirants.  In  the  next  edition  the  section  dealing  with
the  journalist's  library  of  reference  work*  may  be
enlarged  and  a  bibliography  appended.

The  Daily  Lite  ol  the  Greeks  and  (the?)  Romans

-issued  by  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  at  New
Vork,  U.S.A.— has  been  compiled  by  Dr.  Helen  McClees
and  is  intended  to  utilize  for  illustration  the  various
classical  collection*  in  that  well-equipped  museum
It  is  profusely  illustrated  with  excellent  photographic
reproductions  of  the  various  objects  in  the  museum


OF  BURSTING  BONDS  ASUNDER.


309


M.  i.  434.


the  Five  Bonds,  to  be  treasured  up  from  his  lips  by
the  Almsmen.

Give  ear  then,  Ananda,  and  listen,  said  the  Lord ;
and  I  will  speak.  Then  to  the  listening  Ananda  the
Lord  began  : —

Take  an  uninstructed  everyday  man,  who  has  no
vision  of  the  Noble  and  is  unversed  and  untrained  in
their  noble  doctrine,  who  has  no  vision  of  the
Excellent  and  is  unversed  and  untrained  in  their
excellent  doctrine.  Such  a  man’s  mind  is  beset  and
obsessed  by  delusions  about  personality;  he  knows
no  real  escape  therefrom  ;  and  these  delusions  about
personality,  if  left  to  grow  in  strength,  are  a  Bond  to
chain  him  to  this  lower  life  here.  Just  the  same,  too,
happens  with  doubt — with  attachment  to  rites — with
sensuality — [434]  and  with  malevolence  ;  all  of  which
are  likewise  Bonds  to  chain  him  to  this  lower  life  here.

On  the  other  hand,  the  instructed  disciple  of  the
Noble — who  has  vision  of  the  Noble  and  Excellent
and  is  versed  and  trained  in  noble  and  excellent
doctrine — has  a  mind  beset  and  obsessed  by  no
delusions  about  personality  and  the  rest  of  the  Five
Bonds ;  he  knows  the  real  escape  therefrom ;  he
discards  each  and  all  of  them,  with  all  propensities
thereto.

Without  first  treading  the  path  and  the  course  for
getting  rid  of  these  Five  Bonds,  it  is  quite  impossible
for  a  man  to  know  or  discern  or  to  get  rid  of  them, —
any  more  than  it  is  possible,  without  first  cutting  away
bark  and  foliage,  to  cut  the  choice  timber  of  a  fine
upstanding  timber-tree.

But,  if  he  has  first  trodden  the  path  and  the  course
for  getting  rid  of  these  Five  Bonds,  [435]  it  is  possible
for  a  man  to  know  and  discern  and  get  rid  of  them,
— just  as  it  is  possible,  after  first  cutting  away  bark
and  foliage,  to  cut  the  choice  timber  of  the  tree.

Just  as  a  weakling,  coming  to  the  Ganges  in  spate,
and  thinking  his  arms  can  bear  him  across  in  safety
to  the  further  shore,  would  fail  in  the  attempt, — in  just
the  same  case  is  whosoever  fails,  when  the  doctrine  of


473


RliVlKWS  AN  1>  NUTICUS


In  fact  the  letter-press  plays  but  the  subordinate  part
of  explanatory  comments  on  the  pictures.  Taken  as
a  whole,  the  handbook,  while  not  treating  the  subject
exhaustively,  provides  within  the  covers  of  a  small
volume,  such  explanation  and  commentary  as  will  be
helpful  towards  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  classi¬
cal  antiquities.  Dr.  McClecs’  book  would  be  found
useful  both  for  the  purposes  of  study  and  reference.
It  should  also  be  prized  for  its  numerous  exceedingly
well-reproduced  illustrations,

Wc  have  noticed  in  terms  of  appreciation  the  first
four  volumes  of  the  “Itulia  of  To-day”  scries,  edited
by  Dr.  Kushbrook  Williams  and  issued  by  the  Indian
branches  of  the  Oxford  University  Press  (Garstin
Place,  Calcutta  &c.).  The  fifth  and  latest  volume
called  Indian  Emigration  is  the  work  of  one  who  con¬
ceals  his  identity  under  the  appropriate  pseudonym  of
"Emigrant."  It  worthily  sustains  the  high  reputation
of  the  series  for  accurate  and  impartial  works  on  the
various  aspects  of  the  Indian  problem.  Within
the  compass  of  13.J  pages,  the  book  offers  an  excellent
sketch  of  the  subject  from  the  abolition  of  slavery
till  the  present  day.  The  last  two  chapters  deal  with
the  question  of  the  status  of  Indian  emigrants  in  the
Dominions  of  the  Crown.  These  are  particularly
instructive.  Wc  commend  this  little  book  to  all
students  of  the  subject  as  a  highly  useful  compendium
of  sound  information  and  criticism  on  one  of  the  most
crucial  phases  of  the  many-sided  problem  of  modern
India.


time,  the  author  has  brought  to  licar  on  her  work  a
breadth  of  view  and  sanity  which  raise  it  much  above
the  level  of  books  of  its  class  and  kind.  We  feel
sure  that  the  Book  of  Etiquette  will  justly  come  to  be
regarded  as  the  standard  work  on  the  subject.

We  have  lying  before  us  three  instructive  books
dealing  with  various  phases  of  the  same  important
subject.  These  are  How  to  Make  the  Best  of  Life  by-
Mr.  Arnold  Bennett  (H  odder  &  Stoughton  Ltd.,
London),  Success  in  Life  by  Mr.  K.  J.  Dastur
(Thacker  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  Bombay)  and  What  it  Means  to
Live  by  Mr.  N.  N.  Wliisken  (C.  W.  Daniel  Co.,  Tudor
Street,  London).  Of  these  Mr.  Bennett’s  book  is  the
most  thoughtful  and  comprehensive,  Mr.  Dastur's  the
most  inspiring  and  Mr.  Whiskcn’a  the  most  sugges¬
tive.  Taken  together  they  complement  and  supple¬
ment  one  another.  Broadly  speaking,  they  deal  with
education,  habits,  manners,  conduct  anil  other  traits
in  human  life,  and  they  all  offer  useful  and  valuable
contributions  to  the  development  of  sell-culture  and
the  formation  of  character.  A  striking  feature  of  Mr.
Dastur’s  Success  in  l.ifc,  which  is  rightly  described  as
"an  inspirational  l*x>k  for  all  men  and  women,  alas!
that  “all  men  and  women  call  not  read  English ! — is
the  selection  of  opposite  mottoes  from  a  wide  range  of
literature.  It  should  be  found  particularly  suitable
for  study  by  Indian  Youth.  Mr.  Bennett’s  book  and
Mr.  Whiskcu’s  booklet  would  lie  invaluable  adjuncts
to  Mr.  Dastur’s  work  on  complete  living.

Two  books  oil  science — perhaps  so  nominally  and
technically — but  poles  asunder  in  their  scope  and  object
arc  Mr.  E.  C.  M.  Shepherd's  Motor  Car  Mechanism
and  Management  Simplified  (Crosby  Lockwood  &  Son,
Stationer’s  Hall  Court,  Ludgate  Hill,  Loudon  E.  C.  4)
and  Mr.  Knight  Hallowes*  Poem*  of  Science:  Pages
of  Indian  Earth  History  (Erskinc  Macdonald,  London).
The  former  which  is  intended  for  owners  and  drivers
of  and  dealers  in  motor  cars  explains  lucidly  their  con¬
struction  and  operation  and  tells  how  to  drive  and
keep  a  car  in  running  order  and  how  to  carry  out  way-
side  repairs  and  periodic  overhauls.  It  is  perhaps  the
most  popular  work  on  the  mechanism  and  manage¬
ment  of  motor  cars.  Mr.  Hallowes’  Poems  of  Science
are  intended  to  illustrate  the  intimate  relations  between
Science  and  Poetry.  His  short  Introduction  is  a  lumi¬
nous  sketch  of  the  subject.  In  it  he  also  tells  us  that
the  poems  brought  together  have  resulted  from  direct
observation  of  Nature  during  the  author's  seventeen
years  of  scientific  travel  as  an  officer  of  the  Geological
Survey  among  the  mountains  and  forests  of  the  Indian
Empire.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  poems  are
interesting.


There  are  many  works  in  English — good,  bad  and
indifferent— on  the  subject  ol  etiquette,  generally
written  by  women,  Mrs.  This  or  Miss  That.  But  very
few  of  them  are  either  sufficiently  comprehensive  or
arc  marked  by  sanity.  Most  of  them  repeat  the  con¬
ventional  platitudes  without  any  attempt  at  breadth
of  view.  It  is,  therefore,  with  singular  pleasure  that
we  welcome  an  excellent  American  work  called  Book
of  Etiquette  in  two  handy  and  exceedingly  well  got-
up  volumes,  written  by  Lillian  Richler  and  issued  by-
Messrs.  Doublcday,  Inc.  (Garden  City,  New  York,
U.S.A.).  It  is  excellent  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the
term — excellently  written  and  excellently  got-up.  For
one  thing  it  is,  to  our  knowledge,  about  the  most  com¬
prehensive  work  on  etiquette  as  it  prevails  at  present
in  America  and  may  be  said  to  fairly  exhaust  the
subject.  It  deals,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
ctiquettarian,  with  every  phase  of  human  life,  from
the  cradle  to  the  grave,  and  nothing  escapes  the
vigilance  of  the  author  which  would  enable  one  to
behave  with  propriety  on  all  occasions,  at  all  places,
and  in  all  spheres  of  human  activity.  At  the  same


3io


LXIV.  MAHA-MALUNKYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  436.


stilling  personality  is  being  preached,  to  embrace  it,
welcome  it,  cleave  to  it,  and  stand  fast  therein.  This
is  the  case  of  such  men.

But  just  as  a  strong  man,  coming  to  the  Ganges  in
spate  and  thinking  his  arms  can  bear  him  across  in
safety  to  the  further  shore,  would  succeed  in  the
attempt, — in  just  the  same  case  is  whosoever  succeeds,
when  the  doctrine  of  stilling  personality  is  being
preached,  in  embracing  it,  welcoming  it,  cleaving
to  it,  and  standing  fast  therein.  This  is  the  case  of
such  men.

Now,  what  is  the  path  and  what  is  the  course  unto
riddance  of  these  Five  Bonds  which  chain  men  to  this
lower  world  here  ? — Take  an  Almsman  who,  by  aloof¬
ness  from  all  ties,  by  eschewing  wrong  states  of  con¬
sciousness,  and  by  quelling  all  lewdness  of  body,
becomes  divested  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  of  wrong
states  of  consciousness  so  that  he  develops  and  dwells
in  the  First  Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,
— a  state  bred  of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced
from  observation  and  reflection.  Whatsoever  occurs
as  a  visible  shape,  or  feeling,  or  perception,  or  factors
of  being, — all  such  mental  phenomena  he  regards  as
transitory,  as  III,  as  disease,  as  pustulences,  as  pangs,
as  anguish,  as  maladies,  as  extraneous,  as  fleeting,  as
hollow,  as  non-self.  He  purges  his  mind  of  all  such
mental  phenomena  and  [486]  applies  it,  so  purged,  to
the  state  which  is  deathless,  confident  that  what  is
really  good  and  really  excellent  is  the  stilling  of  all
factors  of  being,  riddance  from  all  ties,  destruction  of
cravings,  passionlessness,  peace,  Nirvana.  From  this
platform  he  attains  to  the  extirpation  of  the  Cankers ;
or,  if  he  does  not  attain  to  their  definite  extirpation,
yet  by  his  very  passion  for  righteousness  and  by  his
very  delight  therein,  he  destroys  the  Five  Bonds
which  chain  him  to  this  lower  world  here  so  that  he
will  be  translated  hereafter  to  realms  above,  from
which  he  will  never  return  to  earth. — Such  is  the  path
and  such  is  the  course  unto  riddance  of  these  Five
Bonds.


474


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Mr.  \V.  C.  Loosmorc  is  well-known  to  the  reading
public  as  the  author  of  Senes  and  the  Man,  which  is
a  popular  psychological  and  constructive  study  of
nervous  breakdown,  and  the  Coin  of  Personality
which  also  is  an  equally  popular  psychological  state¬
ment  of  the  practical  values  of  human  personality,
in  his  latest  work  called  the  Art  of  Talking  (John
Murray,  Albemarle  Street,  London,  \V.'— which  is  tire
third  volume  in  Mr.  I/xismore’s  series  of  studies  in
practical  psychology,  he  reveals  with  lucidity  the
means  of  self-expression  in  conversation  and  in  public
speech.  A  glance  at  the  chapter  headings  gives  n  clue
to  the  wide  rauge  of  his  subject — What  to  say — How
t»  say  it — Anecdote  and  g«*csip — The  question  of  slang
-On  being  silent  and  timid— Talk  and  general  know-
ledge— Table  talk  and  dinner  talk— Selling  and  business
talk— Listening  and  interruptions.  Kaeh  of  these
topics  is  handled  with  knowledge  and  skill  in  the  light
if  considerable  experience  of  the  realities  of  life,  with
the  result  that  the  -Irf  of  Talking  is  both  un  informing
and  un  instructive  work,  deserving  of  appreciation.


An  Eastern  Library.  By  Mr.  V.  C.  Scott-0 ‘Connor
(Robert  Maclchousc  8;  Co.,  Ltd.,  Glasgow)  is  an
excellent  sliort  sketch  of  a  great  subject.  In
its  own  way,  the  Khuda  Baksh  Oriental  Library
at  Patna  i»  a  national  treasure  of  which  India  may  well
be  proud.  The  story  of  its  foundation,  how  priceless
manuscripts  were  obtaiued,  the  numerous  arts  of
cajolery  and  threat  and  bribery  and — be  it  slowly
whispered,  even— theft  that  were  employed  for  the
purpose,  forms  an  account  as  romantic  as  some  old
tale  from  far-distant  ages  and  ‘fairy-lands  forlorn.
No  one  better  fitted  than  Mr.  Scult-0‘Connor  could
have  been  found  to  write  this  account.  He  has  a  fine
appreciation  of  the  music  of  words;  he  possesses  a
warm  imagination ;  and  he  is  able  to  speak  with  an
enthusiasm  and  rest  which  must  l>e  very  similar  to  the
joy  with  which  the  Renaissance  scholars  gazed  at  the
numerous  tomes  newly  brought  to  light.  The  Silken
East  and  the  Charm  of  Kashmir  have  already
established  for  Mr.  Scott-O’Connor  a  reputation  as  an
excellent  word-painter  of  landscape  :  we  have  him
here  in  this  book  as  a  connoisseur  of  old  Persian  and
Arabic  manuscripts.  Mr.  Khuda  Baksh,  the  founder
of  the  Library,  spent  a  large  fortune  over  their
acquisition  Jehangir.  Shah  Johan.  Auraugzebe,  arc
present  in  the  Library  in  the  form  of  their  autographs  ,
rare  illuminated  paintings,  miniatures  and  drawings
adorn  niauv  ol  the  manuscripts;  l'mlausi,  Jami,  Hafir,
Sodi  and  many  others  ore  adequately  represented.
Mr.  Scott- O’Connor '»  i»  a  fine  book  about  u  fine  library.


In  The  Historical  Novel  by  Mr.  H.  Butterfield
(Cambridge  University  Press)  we  arc  presented  with  a
work  practically  breaking  new  ground.  This  essay
was  awarded  the  Le  Bas  Prize  for  1923  and  is  an
attempt  to  find  some  relation  between  historical  novels
on  the  one  hand  and  history  treated  as  a  study  on  the
other;  and  also  to  work  out  a  method  of  critical
approach.  After  un  interesting  discussion  dealing  with
historical  novels  of  several  European  languages,  Mr.
Butterfield  sums  up  his  conclusion  thus  :  "Given  an
event  the  historian  will  seek  to  estimate  its  ultimate
significance  and  to  trace  out  its  influence,  the  novelist
will  seek  merely  to  recapture  the  fleeting  moment,  to
see  the  thing  happening,  to  turn  it  into  a  picture  or  a
‘situation.’  With  a  set  of  facts  about  the  social  con¬
ditions  of  England  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  historian
will  seek  to  make  a  generalisation,  to  find  a  formula;
the  novelist  will  seek  a  different  sort  of  syuthesis  and
will  try  to  reconstruct  a  world,  to  particularise,  to
catch  a  glimpse  of  human  nature.  To  the  historian
the  past  is  the  whole  process  of  development  that  leads
up  to  the  present  :  to  the  novelist  it  is  a  straugc  world
to  tell  talcs  about."  It  is  a  notable  book  which  will  be
much  appreciated  by  the  scholars  who  seek  to  study
the  technique  of  the  historical  novel.  The  author  has
specialized  in  the  subject  he  writes  about  and  his  work  y
is  marked  by  scholarship  and  critical  acumen.

Bhai  Parmanand  was  one  of  the  first  victims  of  the
repression  which  cowed  the  soul  of  the  Punjab  under
the  blood-nnd-irou  rule  of  Sir  Micliael  O’Dwyer.  Ilis
was  a  saintly  life  devoted  to  truth  and  conscience,  a  life
dclilicrately  given  to  the  cause  of  education.  He  had
vowed  to  work  on  a  bare  pittance  his  entire  life  in  the
Lahore  D.  A.  V.  College.  But  his  crime  consisted  in
his  teachings — he  was  reputed  to  have  prepared  for
the  use  of  his  students  a  history  of  India  wherein  he
bad  attempted,  with  success,  to  nail  the  lie  of  the
Black  Hole  incident  and  proved  it  to  be  a  mere  myth,
a  figment  of  overwrought  imagination.  Horrible  crime
to  have  travestied  the  British  historians  1  The  man
must  be  truitorous,  and  DORA  clapped  him  into  prison
and  later  sent  him  into  exile.  The  story  of  his
lanishinent,  his  sordid  surroundings  in  the  Andamans,
bis  sufferings  and  anguish  is  now  told  by  himself  in
the  Hindi  diction,  which  is  presented  by  Messrs
Ganesh  &  Co.,  of  Madras,  in  an  English  rendering  in
The  Story  of  My  Life  (1924— Rs.  > /8).  Read  the  book
for  yourself  and  you  will  begin  to  understand  the
stuff  of  which  martyrs  arc  made  and  incidentally  gather
some  ideas  about  the  panic-psychology  of  an  Imperial
race.

Bhai  Paramanand's  indomitable  courage  gleams
through  the  pages  of  his  story ;  his  ideals  and  principles


M.  i.  437-  OF  BURSTING  BONDS  ASUNDER.  3 1 1

Rising  above  observation  and  reflection,  the  Alms¬
man  enters  on,  and  abides  in,  the  Second  Ecstasy  with
all  its  zest  and  satisfaction, — a  state  bred  of  rapt
concentration,  above  all  observation  and  reflection,  a
state  whereby  the  heart  is  focussed  and  tranquillity
reigns  within.  And  then  follow  the  Third  and  Fourth
Ecstasies.  Whatsoever  occurs  as  a  visible  shape  .  ,  .
riddance  of  these  Five  Bonds.

Rising  next  altogether  beyond  perception  of  the
visible,  by  ceasing  to  perceive  sense-reactions,  and  by
not  heeding  perception  of  differences,  the  Almsman
reaches  the  idea  of  infinite  space  and  so  develops,  and
abides  in,  the  plane  of  infinite  space,  and,  in  succession,
the  plane  of  infinite  mind.  Whatsoever  occurs  as  a
visible  shape  .  .  .  [437]  riddance  of  these  Five  Bonds
which  chain  men  to  the  lower  life  here.

If  this,  sir,  be  the  path  and  the  course  unto  riddance
of  these  Five  Bonds,  how  comes  it  that  Deliverance  is
found  by  some  through  the  heart  and  by  others  through
the  intellect  ?*

I  say  it  results  from  difference  in  their  respective
faculties.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Ananda  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXV.  BHADDALI-SUTTA.

OF  OBEDIENCE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Savatthi  in  Jeta’s  grove  in  Anathapindika’s
pleasaunce,  he  addressed  the  listening  Almsmen  as
•follows  : — I  have  only  one  meal  each  morning  and  find
that  on  this  regimen  I  am  healthy  and  well,  buoyant,
hale  and  hearty.  Do  like  me  and  you  too  will  benefit
in  the  same  way.

1  Cf.  Dial.  II,  70  (note).  The  Commy.  says  that  S  a  r  i  p  u  1 1  a
was  an  instance  of  the  former,  and  M  a  h  a- M  oggallan  a  of
the  latter,  mode  of  Deliverance.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


475


arc  outlined  in  a  snccint  manner  in  the  Hindi  work
Hindu  Sangalli.ni  (Aknshvani  Pustkalava,  Mohanlal
Road,  Lahore,  19:4,  Re.  1/-).  He  enter*  here  a  forcible
and  eloquent  plea  for  developing  the  man-force  of
Young  Hinduism,  and  significantly  points  out  the
weaknesses  which  have  flown  from  the  enervated
quiescence  of  the  Hindu  mind.  A  book  well  worth
perusal,

L.  Kannoo  Mai,  M.A.,  an  occasional  contributor  to
our  pages,  bn*-  brought  together  within  the  brief  covers
of  hare  50  pages  each  the  most  notable  Sayings  of
Kabir  and  of  Tulsidas,  and  the  Aphorisms  of  Narada.
The  three  volumes  arc  published  by  S.  Ganesan,  Madras
(1924,  annas  eight  each),  and  each  is  prefaced  by  a
short  introduction  descriptive  of  the  savants'  place  in
Indian  literature.  The  books  succeed  in  giving  us  a
comprehensive  glimpse  of  the  writers’  thoughts  and
should  prove  useful  for  casual  reference  and  for  juvenile
readings.

Mr.  Aurobindo  Ghost’s  name  is  a  revered  one  in
Indian  cultural  circles.  Anything  coming  from  his  pen
demands  and  deserves  to  be  read  with  serious  atten¬
tion.  In  The  need  in  Nationalism  (S.  Ganesan.  Madras,

1923,  Annas  eight)  are  grouped  together  five  of  his
most  thoughtful  essays  which  furnish  the  reader  with
the  psychological  bases  of  the  ideal  principle  in  politics.
Mr.  Ghose’s  plea  is  ns  usual  keyed  in  a  high  and  noble
tune.  His  message  is  an  eloquent  brief  for  spiritualised
politics  and  here  he  takes  us  carefully  through  the
fundaments  of  human  values  to  show’  us  the  genesis  of
ancient  Indian  tradition.  A  fine  and  instructive  read¬
ing,  written  bv  n  scholar  and  a  saint  and  provocative
of  fruitful  discussion  and  argument  on  the  practical
aspect  of  modem  Indian  politics.

In  Food.  Mind,  and  Health  (S.  Ganesan,  Madras,

1924,  Annas  8)  Mr.  Bernard  Houghton,  the  well-known
British  Civilian  sympathiser  of  Indian  political  aspira¬
tions,  tells  us  of  the  formula  of  simple  and  healthy
living.  lie  gives  us  a  synopsis  of  the  ideas  promulgated
by  Mr.  Aird  in  England  and  Mr.  F.hret  in  America  in
favour  of  a  greater  use  of  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables
in  the  daily  dictcry  of  man.  The  author  emphasises
the  value  of  faith  and  confidence  in  the  nourishing
power  of  uncooked  food  after  the  fashion  of  Coue,  and
exhort*  the  render  to  simplify  his  routine  of  eating.
The  argument  in  favour  of  the  natural  diet  is  forcibly
put  and  Mr.  Houghton’s  little  hook  should  give  fresh
food  for  thought  to  those  who  arc  fond  of  gourtnandcrie
end  the  spires  of  delicate  cuisine.

No  branch  of  ancient  Indian  history  possesses  a
greater  fascination  for  research  than  the  chronicles  of


Indian  colonies  abroad.  The  introduction  and  spread  of
buddhism  in  China  and  Japan  furnish  an  interesting
period  in  the  history  of  India,  aiul  the  epoch  remains
to  a  considerable  degree  unexplored.  We  know  very
little  of  the  Indian  missionerics  and  ernsaders  who
carried  the  gentle  doctrine  of  Buddha  across  to  lands
which  even  to-day  hafflc  the  well-equipped  modem
tourist.  Mr.  Plianindranath  Bose  deserves  to  be  com¬
plimented  on  his  instructive  little  book  The  Indian
Teachers  in  China  (S.  Ganesan,  Madras,  19S3).  The
treatise  supplies  a  rigidly  catalogued  description  of
Indian  monks  and  preachers  who  went  to  China,  Java
and  other  lands.  The  interesting  commentary  which
the  author  furnishes  links  the  narrative  and  makes
the  book  a  connected  reading.  Mr.  Bose's  industry  ami
research  is  to  be  commended.  He  has  given  here  a
valuable  introduction  to  the  cultural  history  of  the
Greater  India  which  has  so  deeply  influenced  the
thought  and  religion  of  China  and  other  far-off  lands,

Gancsh  &  Co.  of  Madras  have  done  well  in  collect¬
ing  in  book  form  the  philosophical  contributions  of
M.  Paul  Richard  to  the  pages  of  the  A rya  (1914-15)
and  which  subsequently  appeared  in  a  French  edition.
The  English  translation  has  been  done  by  Sri  Aurobindo
Chose  which  in  itself  is  a  warranty  of  true  and  correct
interpretation.  >1.  Faul  Richard  is  well-known  for  his
spiritualised  writings  and  his  love  of  Indian  Philosophy.
His  disqnisilions  on  the  Origin  of  Being  and  its
attributes  form  a  subtle  blend  between  the  scientific
mysticism  of  the  West  and  the  psychological  substratum
of  Vedanta  philosophy.  The  speculations  in  The
Wherefore  ol  The  Worlds  (1923)  arc  discursive  to  a
certain  degree  but  a  central  core  of  thought  runs
through  the  entire  volume.  It  is  a  real  contribution
to  philosophic  literature,  exceedingly  instructive  and
thought-provoking.  We  can  not  do  better  than
commend  to  the  reader  the  opening  lines  of  M.
Richard’s  hook:  "Night,  there  is  none,  no  night  except
the  veil  which  we  create  for  ourselves,  no  other
obscurity  than  the  darkness  in  whirli  our  eyes
indulge.’’


Auction  Bridge  for  Beginners  by  V  C.  B.  (Manley
Paul  &  Co.,  London,  1924,  25.  fid.)  is  a  good  example  of
what  a  little  book  of  knowledge  ought  to  be.  Easy-
reading,  excellent  examples  and  instructive  advic:
which  does  not  pall— and  the  beginner  is  at  once  attract¬
ed  to  the  game  which  forms  the  theme  of  the  hook.
And  isn’t  this  the  real  test  of  the  success  of  a  ltook
of  this  kind?  The  1924  rules  as  revised  and  adopted
by  the  Portland  Clnb  are  given  in  full  as  an  appendix.
The  glossa-v  of  Bridge  terms  should  also  prove  useful


312  LXV.  BHADDALI-SUTTA.  M.  i.  438;

Hereupon,  the  reverend  Bhaddali  told  the  Lord  he
could  not  do  this,  because,  in  so  eating,  he  would  be  a
prey  to  scruples  and  misgivings.1

Well  then,  Bhaddali,  eat  a  portion  only  at  your  place
of  entertainment  and  take  a  portion  away  with  you  to
eat  later  on.  Eating  on  this  plan,  [438]  you  will  get
along  all  right.

No,  sir,  I  could  not  do  this,  because  here  too  1
should  be  a  prey  to  scruples  and  misgivings.

So,  while  the  Lord  was  laying  down  a  rule  of
conduct  and  the  Confraternity  was  vowing  obedience,
the  reverend  Bhaddali  protested  his  inability  and  for
three  whole  months  never  came  near  the  Lord,  as  one
who  was  not  conducting  himself  according  to  the
Master’s  teaching.

At  the  end  of  the  time  a  number  of  Almsmen  were
busied  on  making  up  robes  for  the  Lord,  expecting
that,  when  his  robes  were  ready  at  the  end  of  the  three
months,  the  Lord  would  set  out  on  an  alms-pilgrimage.
To  them  came  Bhaddali  and  seated  himself  after  greet¬
ings,  to  learn  from  them  their  expectation  and  to  be
urged  by  them  to  lay  the  Lord’s  monition  to  heart  lest
worse  should  befall  him  hereafter.  Accepting  their
advice,  Bhaddali  betook  him  to  the  Lord  and  after
due  salutation  took  a  seat  to  one  side,  saying  : — I
confess  my  fault,  sir ; — foolish  and  misguided  and
wrong  that  I  was  to  protest  my  inability  to  conform
while  the  Lord  was  laying  down  a  rule  of  conduct  and
the  Confraternity  was  vowing  obedience  thereto.  1
ask  the  Lord  to  pardon  my  transgression  as  such,  with
a  view  to  my  keeping  watch  and  ward  in  future.

Yes,  Bhaddali ;  you  did  transgress,  foolish  and  mis¬
guided  and  wrong  that  you  were  in  protesting  your  in¬
ability  to  conform  while  I  was  laying  down  a  rule
of  conduct  and  the  Brotherhood  was  vowing  obedience
thereto.


1  Apparently  he  was  afraid  of  not  finishing  his  meal  within  the
prescribed  hours,  and  so  of  eating  at  the  wrong  time,  i.e.  after
the  meridian.  (Cf.  Vinaya  Texts  I,  40.)


4/6


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Mrs.  Snclialatlia  Sen  was  among  the  first  of  the
cultured  ladies  of  Bengal  to  attract  the  notice  of  a
wider,  English  knowing  public.  Her  stories  in  the
Bengalee  language  had  earned  for  her  meritorious
recognition  hut  she  was  unknown  outside  Bengal  until
an  English  version  of  a  tale  of  hers  appeared  in  the
English  journal  The  Idler  in  1911.  The  enterprising
publisher  of  Madras,  S.  Ganesnn,  has  now  collected
her  short  stories  and  in  Nebal  The  Musician  (1933,
Rs.  3/4)  they  present  to  us  in  English  the  work  of  a
gifted  artist  endowed  with  the  art  of  picturesque  word-
tnakitig.  The  tale*  are  full  of  a  wild,  fascinating
charm  and  told  in  a  quaint  and  weird  style  they
impress  upon  the  reader  the  fanciful  reality  of  the
sketches.  The  talcs  demand  attention  by  the  witch¬
craft  of  imagery  anil  reveal,  although  clothed  in  an
alien  garb,  the  power  and  skill  of  the  writer.  A  delight-
fnl  rending  and  n  pleasant  diversion.

The  Future  of  Indian  Fiscal  Policy  (S.  Ganesan,
Madras,  1933,  Annas  13)  is  an  elaboration  of  a  lecture
delivered  by  Mr.  D.  V.  Divekar,  and  is  therefore
circumscribed  in  its  content.  Mr.  Divekar  records  a
forcible  plea  in  favour  of  a  full  protective  policy  for
India.  He  accnscs  the  Tariff  Commissioners  of  halting
and  doubtfnl  recommendations.  The  case  for  Protec¬
tion  in  India  is  enforced  by  illustrations  derived  from
tlie  experiences  of  other  protective  countries.

In  Elements  ol  Indian  Astrology  (The  Author.
Cuttuck,  1932,  Rs.  3/-)  llnbu  Sinheshwar  Prasad  has
briefly  sketched  in  a  convenient  form  the  mundane
influences  of  stars  and  planets  as  they  affect  the  life
of  a  |>erson  born  under  their  aegis.  Appropriately
enough  he  tells  us  how  to  cast  a  horoscope  and  after
defining  in  detail  what  signs  rule  at  the  birth  of  an
infant  we  ore  led  on  to  detect  the  predominating  factors
which  will  control  its  earthly  movements.  Hindu
Astrology  is  not  a  mere  myth,  but  has  been  proved
to  he  based  upon  scientific  calculations.  If  Babu
Sinheshwar  Prasad  succeeds  in  introducing  a  difficult
subject  for  purposes  of  further  research  his  efforts
would  be  well  rewarded.

Mr.  Puran  Singh’s  more  ambitious  efforts  in  |>orti<-
diction  were  noticed  by  us  in  an  earlier  issue.  Ilis
Sisters  of  the  Spinning  fl'heet  revealed  him  to  be  a
writer  of  delicate  imagination  and  of  a  deeply  medita¬
tive  tum  ol  mind.  The  form  he  chose  for  self-
expression  was  essentially  suited  for  his  purpose.  In
his  two  little  books  An  Afternoon  with  Self  and  At  His
Feet  he  turns  to  the  devotional  theme.  The  intensitv
of  his  religious  emotions  sustains  the  high  tone  of
the  prose  poems.  It  is  of  apt  significance  to  be
reminded  of  the  appeal  which  the  teachings  of  the
Gam*  carry  to  the  heart  of  a  cultured  Sikh  at  a  time


when  the  entire  community  is  stirred  by  the  un¬
precedented  deeds  of  self-abnegation  and  martyrdom
of  the  Akali  Jathas.

Mr.  T.  C.  K.  Kurup’s  Gandhi  and  Indian  Regenera

lion  (New  Herald  Office,  G.  T.,  Madras,  1933,  Rs.  2/-)
will  well  repay  a  second  reading  in  the  present  state
of  flux  and  transition  in  Indian  politics. The  book
was  originally  written  in  1922  and  focussed  a  reasoned
criticism  of  the  "Back  to  Vedas”  ideal  sketched  out
by  Mr.  Gaudlii  and  which  formed  the  apparent  objec¬
tive  of  the  Non-co-operation  movement.  Mr.  Kurup
writes  with  grace  and  in  an  easy,  lucid  style.  lie  has
attempted  to  present  his  thesis  in  a  clear,  well-defined
form  of  a  conflict  of  ideals.  He  does  not  forget  the
social  aspect  of  Mr.  Gandhi’s  crusade.  We  confess
however  that  his  arguments  will  not  be  convincing  to
the  majority  of  his  readers  in  so  far  as  he  defends
the  materialities  of  the  ‘progressive’  Western  civilisa¬
tion  and  denies  that  the  process  of  subjection  and  the
particular  brand  of  Western  education  in  India  has
tended  to  infiltrate  the  Indian  mind  with  slavish  and
cowardly  attitude.  Nevertheless  the  book  is  of  com¬
manding  interest  and  should  receive  close  attention.

In  Thomas  llobbcs  (Basil  Blackwell,  Oxford,  1923,
3*.).  Mr.  George  E.  G.  Catlin  presents  a  learned  study
of  the  author  of  Leviathan  which  had  such  a  tremend¬
ous  influence  in  shaping  the  jiolitical  destiny  of
England  and  of  linking  up  the  medieval  theories  of
political  sovereignty  with  the  spirit  and  thoughts  oi
the  times.  Mr.  Catlin  claims  for  Hobbes  a  greater
recognition  than  has  been  accorded  to  him— the  recogni¬
tion  os  a  man  of  letters,  os  a  philosopher,  and  as  a
publicist  of  no  mean  calibre.  Our  author’s  disquisition
is  very  interestingly  framed  and  will  prove  convincing
to  the  scholar  familiar  with  Hobbes’  entire  literary
output.  To  the  reader  who  knows  Holjbcs  only  as  the
author  of  the  "wild,  brute  theory  of  Man",  Mr.  Catlin's
book  will  appear  difficult  and  uncomprehending.  But
the  author  has  contrived  to  include  an  extraordinarily
large  amount  of  material  bearing  upon  his  claim  and
his  industry  deserves  commendation.

Within  a  small  compass  of  100  pages  Babu
Mahendra  Nath  Dutt  has  succeeded  in  presenting  in
a  conspectivc  form  the  ideal  of  Hindu  womanhood.
His  Reflections  on  Woman  (Seva  Series  Publishing
House,  Calcutta,  1933)  is  avowedly  written  from  an
’•entirely  psychological  point  of  view”,  but  as  Is  but
natural  his  discourse  touches  upon  many  practical
aspects  of  the  sex  problem,  nc  has  many  wise  words
to  say  in  regard  to  the  hasty  impatience  whicu
prescribes  a  regimen  of  Western  dispensing  for  the
uplift  of  woman  in  India.  True  to  his  instincts  Mr


OF  OBEDIENCE.


3 1 3


M.  i.  439-


You  failed  too  to  realize  the  circumstances,  Bhaddali.
You  failed  to  realize,  firstly,  that  the  Lord  was  in  resi¬
dence  at  Savatthi  and  would  know  you  were  not  con¬
ducting  yourself  according  to  the  Master's  teachings  ;
secondly,  that  a  number  of  [489]  Almsmen — and  of
Almswomen  too — were  spending  the  rainy  season  in
the  city  and  would  also  know  it ;  thirdly,  that  in  the  city
there  were  living  a  number  of  lay  disciples — both  men
and  women — who  would  also  know  it ;  and,  fourthly,
that  there  were  a  number  of  recluses  and  brahmins  of
divers  schools  also  spending  the  rainy  season  in  the
city,  all  of  whom  would  know  that  the  Almsman
Bhaddali,  a  senior  disciple  of  the  recluse  Gotama,  was
not  conducting  himself  according  to  the  Master’s
teachings.

I  confess  my  fault,  sir  ; — foolish  and  misguided  .  .  .
vowing  obedience  thereto.

What  do  you  think,  Bhaddali  ?  Take  the  case  of  an
Almsman  who  has  found  the  twofold  Deliverance,  both
through  the  heart  and  the  intellect.  If  I  bid  him  make
himself  a  bridge  for  me  across  the  mire,  would  he  do
so  ?  Or  would  he  turn  in  a  different  direction,  or  flatly
refuse  to  do  my  bidding  ?

He  would  not  refuse,  sir.

Take  the  case  of  Almsmen  who  have  found  De¬
liverance  through  the  intellect — or  by  comprehending
the  body — or  by  sheer  vision — or  by  trust — or  by
living  up  to  the  Doctrine — or  by  living  up  to  their
trust.  If  I  bid  any  one  of  these  six  make  himself
a  bridge  for  me  across  the  mire,  would  he  do  so  ?
Or  would  he  turn  in  a  different  direction,  or  flatly
refuse  to  do  my  bidding  ?

He  would  not  refuse,  sir.

What  do  you  think,  Bhaddali  ?  When  this  happened,
had  you  found  the  two-fold  Deliverance  [440]  or  any
of  the  six  other  forms  of  Deliverance  ?

No,  sir.

Were  you  not  at  the  time  empty  and  vain  and
blameworthy  ?

Yes,  sir. — I  confess  my  fault,  sir ;  foolish  and  mis-


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


477


Dutt  repudiates  the  alien  touch  and  points  out  that  the
only  practicable  ideal  for  womanhood  in  India  is  the
ideal  of  the  Devi,  the  guardian  deity  of  the  Home.
We  recommend  this  little  book  as  full  of  instructive
reflections,  containing  much  that  is  sound  and  useful
for  students  of  social  reform.  The  sale  proceeds  of
the  book  will  be  devoted  to  the  Girl  School  attached
to  the  Sri  Sri  Saradeswari  Ashram.

Arpana  by  M.  Sriramamurtv  (The  Author,  Vi/iana-
gram,  1923,  Re.  1/)  is  a  small  book  of  hymns  and
prayers  replete  with  sincere  meditations  and  reflective
comments  on  the  mundane  affairs  of  human  life
Students  of  a  religious  turn  of  mind  will  find  it  useful
and  inspiring.

The  French  physician,  M.  Cone’,  provided  a  sensa¬
tion  when  he  claimed  to  have  cured  a  malignant  malady
by  self-suggestion.  ‘A  student  of  Psychology’  tells  us
in  Auto-suggestion  (Jarrolds  Publishers,  Loudon,  1923,
it.)  what  it  is  and  how  to  practise  it.  A  dear  and
well- written  pamphlet  designed  to  introduce  the  idea
to  the  layman ;  it  contains  sufficient  information  to
enable  anyone  to  begin  the  practice  for  himself.

In  Leprosy  in  India  (Tagore  &  Co.,  Madra-,  1923.
f  Annas  8)  Mr.  T.  S.  Krishnamurthi  Iver  has  collected
together  the  various  contributions  which  the  autlior
made  to  the  pages  of  the  Social  Service  Quarterly  and
the  Hindu.  The  articles  deserved  a  permanent  form
as  the  author  has  many  useful  tilings  to  say  regarding
the  serious  socio-economic  questions  raised  by  leprosy.
He  also  treats  of  the  legal  and  remedial  aspects  of  the
problem.  Social  reformers  and  charitable  organisations
should  direct  their  attention  to  this  ill  spot  in  the
society.  Mr.  Iyer  has  helped  us  to  view  the  problem
sanely  and  informatively.

The  National  Being:  some  Thoughts  on  an  Irish
Polity.  By  A  I?.  (S.  Gancsnn,  Madras,  1923,  Re.  1  (-)
is  an  Indian  reprint  of  the  famous  book  by  the  great
Irish  man  of  letters  which  at  its  first  appearance  drew
the  serious  attention  of  statesmen  and  econ  imists.
A.  E.  is  one  of  the  foremost  literatteurs  of  Ireland  and
his  brilliant  association  with  Sir  Horace  Plunkett  in
the  reform  of  the  Irish  Agriculture  will  ever  remain
a  bright  page  in  the  troublous  history  of  Ireland.  In
the  National  Being  he  gives  us  a  fascinating  picture
of  the  Co-operative  Commonwealth  that  is  his  ideal,
yet  he  is  a  serious  and  practical  visionery,  and
acknowledges  and  faces  boldly  the  great  impediments
that  stand  in  the  way  of  the  attainment  of  the  economic
ideal.  A  book  well  worth  study  and  inward  digestion
for  the  rising  young  Indian  politicians  and  economic
ideologists.


Khan  Sahib  Khaja  Khan  earned  a  well-deserved
name  for  penetrative  insight  by  his  publication  of  the
Philosophy  of  Islam.  His  second  look  Studies  in
Tasawwuf  (Hogarth  Press,  Madras;  Theosophical
Publishing  House,  Adyar,  Madras,  1923)  is  in  a  sense
complementary  to  his  first  work,  for  the  philosophy
of  religions  can  not  be  completely  comprehended  with¬
out  a  detailed  exposition  of  the  csotericisms,  symbolic
mysticisms  and  implied  connotations  of  the  funda¬
mental  thoughts  In-hind  them.  In  Tasawwuf  the  author
has  given  us  a  series  of  metaphysical  speculations  on
the  esoteric  side  of  Islam,  which  according  to  Un¬
distinguished  writer  of  the  Foreword,  N'avvab  A.  Hydari,
"is  its  core  and  centre,  which  really  gives  life  and
vitality  to  its  outward  forms  and  activities,  and  which
most  can  appeal  to  followers  of  other  faiths  owing  to
the  universal  character  of  its  content.”  The  author
has  interpreted  the  doctrine  of  Tasawwuf  (popularly-
known  as  Sufi-isml  in  a  clear  and  lucid  manner,  and
his  discourse  is  as  full  of  instructive  knowledge  as  of
brilliant  interpretation  of  some  of  the  most  difficult
passages  in  the  writings  of  Sufi  Saints.

Mr.  N.  V.  Sarnia's  A  Call  for  National  Reunion

(National  Book  Depot,  Bombay,  1923,  Annas  8)  is  an
eloquent  plea  for  the  deletion  of  the  Council-Boycott
item  from  the  programme  of  the  National  Congress.
Iti  his  real  and  enthusiasm  Air.  Sarnia  has  called  hnrd
names  to  his  opponents  which  can  hardly  bear  justi¬
fication.  His  plea  is,  however,  forcibly  put.  Mr.
Kelkar’s  Foreword  is  characteristic.

Mr.  Wilfred  Wellock  is  a  sincere  believer  in  the
gospel  of  international  peace  and  goodwill.  He  suffered
imprisonment  for  his  convictions  daring  war  time.  In
Ahlinsa  am)  World  Peace  (S.  Ganesan,  Madras.  1923,
Rs.  i/8)  he  submits  his  case  for  non-violence.  To
Indian  readers  his  arguments  do  not  sound  strange,
but  the  doctrine  coming  from  a  Western  pen  is  refresh¬
ing.  Mr.  Wellock  believes  in  the  innate  good  in  man.
He  says  indeed  that  the  "whole  case  for  .1  hlmsa  rests
on  the  recognition  that  human  nature  is  worthy  of

bust, . Human  nature  is  neither  inherently  selfish

nor  opposed  to  reason ;  it  is  against  its  highest  interests
to  be  such.”  The  author  cites  numerous  illustrations
in  support  of  his  main  thesis.  His  eloquent  plea  is
timely.  Only  in  the  present  temper  of  the  world  it
sounds  like  another  cry  in  the  wilderness.  Yet  it  is
all  the  better  that  the  cry  has  been  raised.

The  story  of  Khama  by  J.  C.  Harris  (Livingstone
Tress,  London,  1922,  i5.)  reads  like  a  romance  lifted
out  of  the  chronicles  of  a  medixval  courtier.  The
zealous  missioneries  of  the  Christian  Church  who
carry  the  gospel  of  their  Lord  unto  'heathens  and
backward’  people  never  had  a  stiffer  struggle  than  what


3H  LXV.  BHADDALI-SUTTA.  M.  i.  441.

guided  and  wrong  that  I  was  to  protest  my  inability  to
conform  when  the  Lord  was  laying  down  a  rule  of  con¬
duct  and  the  Almsmen  were  vowing  obedience  thereto.

Yes,  Bhaddali ;  you  did  transgress,  foolish  and  mis¬
guided  and  wrong  that  you  were  to  protest  your  in¬
ability  .  .  .  obedience  thereto.  But,  inasmuch  as  you
see  your  transgression  as  such  and  duly  atone,  we
pardon  it  unto  you.  It  marks  progress  in  the  Rule  of
the  Noble  when  a  man,  seeing  his  transgression  as
such,  atones  and  keeps  watch  and  ward  over  himself
for  the  future.

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman,  Bhaddali,  who  does
not  conduct  himself  according  to  the  Master’s  teachings.
To  him  comes  the  yearning  to  resort  to  some  solitary
habitation — in  the  forest  under  a  tree,  in  the  wilds,  in
cave  or  grot,  in  a  charnel-ground,  in  a  thicket,  or  on
bracken  in  the  open — in  the  hope  of  realizing  some
height  of  noblest  knowledge  or  vision  transcending  the
ordinary.  So  to  the  solitary  habitation  of  his  choice
he  betakes  himself  and  dwells  aloof  and  alone  there, —
contemned  by  his  Master,  contemned  by  the  judgment
of  the  discreet  among  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life,
contemned  by  the  local  sprites,  and  contemned  by  him¬
self.  Thus  universally  contemned,  he  fails  to  realize
knowledge  or  vision  transcending  the  ordinary.  And
why? — Because  this  is  what  comes  to  all  who  do
not  conduct  themselves  according  to  the  Master's
teachings.

Take  now  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  does  con¬
duct  himself  according  to  the  Master’s  teachings,  to
whom  comes  the  same  yearning  to  resort  to  solitude
[441]  with  the  same  hopes.  Dwelling  aloof  there,  he
is  contemned  neither  by  his  Master,  nor  by  his  fellows,
nor  by  the  local  sprites,  nor  by  himself.  Not  con¬
temned  of  anyone,  he  succeeds  in  realizing  a  height  of
noble  knowledge  and  vision  transcending  the  ordinary.
Divested  of  pleasures  of  sense  and  wrong  states  of
consciousness,  he  develops  and  dwells  in  the  First
Ecstasy,  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred
of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observation


4“S


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Uicv  encountered  in  Mack  Africa.  The  majority  of  the
shepherds  have  carried  their  proslvtising  crusade  ac¬
cording  to  the  conventional  methods  of  persuasion
backed  by  force  and  the  gin-bottle.  But  there  have
been  few  sinning  exceptions,  the  selfless  and  the
sacrificing  apostles  of  God ;  and  Khania's  country  was
tortunate  in  attracting  crusaders  of  the  type  of
Mackenzie  and  Hepburn.  The  Bcchuanaland  Protector¬
ate  is  no  different  from  the  other  innumerable  colonics
in  Africa  alisorbcd  by  the  Western  nations.  Bnt
Khama,  the  son  of  the  chief,  embraced  the  Gospel  m
his  early  youth  and  his  life  story  is  one  persistent
fight  for  righteousness  and  moral  living.  Christian
missions  can  not  boast  of  a  finer  convert,  and  Khama
reveals  the  sterling  worth  of  a  chief  among  men,  a
leader  of  fearless,  albeit  superstitons  tribe,  gradually
weaning  away  his  flock  from  evils  that  have  despoiled
his  people  and  his  land.

The  Principle*  of  Hindu  Ethics  by  M.  A.  Buch
(The  Author,  Baroda,  1922,  Rs.  6/4)  is  a  comprehensive
compilation  systematically  arranged  and  covering  al¬
most  tlic  entire  field  of  Hindu  morality.  The  author
has  not  attempted  to  write  a  critical  treatise ;  he
presents  a  descriptive  sketch  of  the  rules  and  regula¬
tions  laid  down  in  the  old  Hindu  Slmstras  regarding
human  conduct  and  intercourse.  The  survey  is  interest¬
ing,  even  though  of  necessity  it  merely  groups  together
innumerable  excerpts  from  the  Iliudu  Scriptures.  The
author  lias  handled  his  intricate  subject  with  industrious
skill  and  patience .  lie  has  been  almost  too  strenuous
In  his  zeal  to  link  up  the  law  with  the  letter  and  his
enthusiasm  outran  his  discretion  when,  eg..  he  holds
up  a  Shastric  injunction  open  to  varied  interpretations
as  a  rigid  rule,  cf.  for  instance  Mr.  Bach's  discussion
of  sex  relations  and  the  criteria  of  what  is  good  for
the  individual  and  for  the  state.  The  book  is,  however,
a  mine  of  information  and  we  commend  it  as  the  first
exhaustive  attempt  in  the  English  language  to  define
Hindu  ethical  standards.

The  jig-saw  puzzle  of  Western  Euro|<  remains  an
insoluble  probtem.  Conflicting  report*  of  the  condi¬
tions  of  mid-Europe  form  the  stock  sensation  of  the
European  press  every  other  week.  There  i»  no  motive
more  impelling  than  self,  and  where  self-aggrandise¬
ment  and  economic  fear  rule,  the  discernment  become*
blurred.  There  is  a  British  view  of  the  Ruhr  occupa¬
tion  and  there  are  the  Trench  and  the  German  views.
But  such  opinions  are  much  too  vague  for  concrete
expression  into  well-defined  proposals  for  getting  out
of  the  mess.  Mr.  J.  n.  Morgan  who  had  an  exceptional
opportunity  to  study  the  real  German  conditions  during
hi*  four  years'  stay  in  the  country  as  a  member  of  the
Inter-AUicd  Military  Commission  of  Control  has  right  1 '


sounded  a  note  of  alarm  on  the  efforts  that  arc  being
sedulously  made  to  crush  the  soul  of  Germany,  which
he  shows  to  he  an  imjiossibility.  His  Present  State  of
Germans’  (l'niver>ity  of  London  Press,  1924,  2*.  6d.)
contains  the  substance  of  a  lecture  lie  delivered  in
the  University  of  London,  and  together  with  the  valu¬
able  introduction  prefacing  the  lecture  his  survey  is
perhaps  the  most  impartial  and  dis-intcrested  analysis,
hitherto  published,  so  far  as  a  foreigner  can  see  it,  of
the  political,  economic  and  social  condition  of
Germany.  Mr.  Morgan  warns  the  European  statesmen
of  the  folly  of  the  attempt  to  kill  the  soul  that  is
Germany,  and  forecasts  the  resurgence  of  a  new
national  consciousness  which,  under  severe  repression,
will  develop  all  the  potentialities  of  another
Armegeddon.  Altogether  a  very  lucid  and  temperate
statement  on  a  subject  tliat  bristles  with  numerous
difficulties.  Mr.  Morgan's  survey  should  carry  the
weight  it  deserves,  coming  as  it  docs  from  the  pen  of  a
distinguished  military  officer  and  a  lawyer  of  reputation.

Mr.  A.  R.  Lord  is  a  professor  of  political  philosophy
in  a  South  African  University.  In  his  lectures  to  the
students  he  experienced  the  common  difficulty  of
recommending  suitable  texts  for  the  students.  And
like  all  professors  he  set  about  compiling  an  easy  book
formed  ont  of  lecture  notes.  The  Principles  ol  Politics
(Oxford  University  Press,  London  &  Calcutta)  is  the
eminently  satisfactory  results.  The  author’s  claim  that
this  book  will  help  the  student  in  understanding  and
grasping  the  full  import  of  more  difficult  works  like
Bosanquet's  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  Stale,  is  fully
borne  ont  by  the  reading.  Mr.  I/*rd  has  done  his  work
extremely  well.  The  language  is  clear  and  lucid,  tli ;
argument  never  forced  and  the  facts  clearly  marshalled
The  book  should  serve  a  larger  purpose  than  in  a
lecture  room.  It  is  of  considerable  interest  to  the
rising  young  politician  who  desires  to  enforce  his  views
on  the  political  problems  of  the  hour  by  an  appeal  to
theoretic  justice.

Mr.  G.  Lowes  Dickinson  is  well-known  for  the  purity
of  his  style  and  the  excellence  of  his  diction.  In  The
Magic  Flute  (George  Alien  &  Unwin,  Ltd.,  London,
1922,  Si.)  he  has  chosen  a  theme  that  would  haffle
the  skill  of  a  literary  craftsman  who  is  not  endowed
with  a  refined  and  delicate  imagination.  He  terms  it
*  “Fantasia"  and  throughout  its  pages  we  find  Mr.
Dickinson  revelling  in  the  interplay  of  fanciful  imagin¬
ings  and  the  burden  of  the  practicable  problems  of  the
hour.  The  result  is  wholly  one  of  delight.  He  has
successfully  contrived  to  weave  together  in  a  playfal
humour  his  serious  views  on  Truth  and  Christ  and
Mnn.  We  commend  Mr.  Dickinson's  Fantasia  to
lovers  of  literature.


INDEX  TO  BOOKS  REVIEWED


470


INDEX  TO  BOOKS  REVIEWED.


PACK

A  C.  B.,  Auction  Bridge  for  Beginners  ...  475

A.  R.,  The  National  Being  .  ...  477

Agaruala,  C.  M.,  Workmen's  Compensation  Act  453
Ahiduddin,  M.t  Lithography  ...  4^9

Alliert,  H.,  A  History  of  English  Literature  ...  463
"AH  About  Tilak"  ...  ...  ...  4B6

Ambcdkar,  B.  R.,  The  Problem  of  the  Rupee  ...  457
Archer,  William,  The  Old  Prarna  and  the  Scut  ...  461
Ary  am  uni,  Ft.,  Gitayogapradlparyablioshya  ...  469
‘•.4  Reference  Book"  ...  ...  ...  47»

Athalye,  D.  V„  Life  of  Tilak  ...  460

Athalye,  D.  V.,  Life  of  Mahatama  (.andlil  ...  466

"Auto-Suggestion"  ...  ...  ...  477

Baker,  H.  I*.,  .4  New  I'tac  and  Life  of

Shakespeare  ...  ...  ...  40°

"Banerfee,  Sir  Curudas  :  .4  Life-sketch “  ...  46S

"Banks  and  Public  Holidays  1934"  ...  •••  471

Bate,  J.  D.,  .4  Dictionary  of  Hindi  Language  ...  469
Beehbofer,  C.  E.,  Literary  Renaisanee  in  America  464
Bcnnct,  Arnold,  H out  to  make  the  best  of  Life  473
Bogus,  Theodore  H.,  International  Trade  Balance  460
"Bose.  Sit  Jagadisli  :  A  Life-sketch"  ...  467

Bose,  Phatiindranath,  Indian  Teachers  in  China  475
Bowen-Row  lands,  Ernest,  Seventy  Two  Tears  at

the  Bar  ...  ...  ...  ...  453

Bowlcy,  Arthur,  Measurement  of  Social  phenomena  459
Bach,  M.A.,  Principles  of  Hindu  Ethics  ...  47S
Bury,  J.  B.,  History  of  the  Later  Roman  Empire  454
Bury,  J.  B.,  &  Others,  Hellenistic  Age  ...  456

Butterfield.  H.,  The  Historical  Novel  ...  474

"Cambridge  Ancient  History  Vat.  I"  ...  •••  454

Carthill,  AL,  The  Lost  Dominion  394—6

Cntlin,  George  E.  G.,  Thomas  Hobbes  ...  47**

C hatter jee,  N.,  K.  M.  Chatlcrjec  and  his  Times  46S
"Concerning  Money"  ...  •••  459

" Constitutional  Year  Book  1904"  ...  ...  47“

Craig,  Elisabeth,  The  Stage  Favourites'  Cook

Book  ...  ...  •••  •••  473

Cuulitte,  J.  W.,  English  Literature  during  last  half

century  ...  ...  •••  •••  4^3

Dale,  Hylton  B.,  Landmarks  in  Armenian  History  457
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  The  Magic  Flute  478

Divckar,  D.  V.,  Future  of  Indian  Fiscal  Policy  476
"Divan  Dard  Urdu"  ...  .  ■■■  4^9

Duffin.  H.  C.,  Quintessence  of  Bernard  Shaw  463
Dnstur.  K.  J.,  Success  In  Life  473

Putt,  M.  X.,  Reflections  on  H’omen  ...  476

Eichlcr,  Lillian,  The  Book  of  Etiquette  473

Etcanore,  Sister  M.,  The  Literary  Essay  in  English  464
Ewcns,  \V.  T.,  Thirty  Years  at  Bow  Street  Police

Court  ...  ...  •••  —  453


PACK

b'itz-Geimld,  S.  J.  Adair,  The  Story  of  the  Savoy


Opera  ...  ...  ...  ...  463

Forbes,  Alexander  K.,  Ras  Mala  ...  ...  471

Gayley,  Ch.  M.,  &  B.  I*.  Kurtz,  Methods  and

Materials  of  Lit.  Criticism  ...  464

Ghosh,  Aurobindo,  The  Seed  in  Nationalism  ...  475
(Tossc,  Edmund,  Modern  FSngllsh  Literature  ...  473
Gray,  R.  M.,  &  N.  C.  Farckh,  Maltatama  Gandhi  466
"Guide  to  Britain  and  British  Isles"  ...  ...  470

Ilaldar,  Sukumar,  .1  Mill- 1  Ictorhjn  Hindu  ...  4<>S
Hallow cs,  Knight,  Poems  of  Science  ...  ...  473

Hammer,  S.  C.,  Norway  Year  Book  19J4  ...  470

Harris,  J.  C.,  Khama  ...  ...  ...  477

Hare,  W.  L.,  Mysticism  of  East  and  West  451 — 3
Hearnshaw,  P.  J.  C.,  Meditcval  Contributions  to

Civilisation  ...  ...  ...  456

Hearnshaw,  F.  J.  C.,  Social  and  Political  Ideas  of

Middle  Ages  ...  ...  ...  457

Houghton,  Bernard,  Food.  Mind  ami  Health  ...  473

llubltcll,  J.  B.,  &  J.  O.  Bcatv,  Introduction  lo

Poetry  ...  ...  ...  ...  464

Husain,  Khan  Bahadur  Sycd  Akbar,  Kullat-i-Akbar  468
“ Indian  Emigration"  ...  ...  473

Iyer,  T.  S.  Krishnamurty,  l.cprosy  in  India  ...  477
Iyer,  R.  Narayanswamy,  Annual  Part  of  Yearly

Digest  1913  ...  ...  ...  45a

James,  H.  R.,  Our  Hellenic  Heritage  ...  456

Joseph,  Michael,  Journalism  for  Profit  ...  473

Kannoo  Mai,  Sayings  of  Kablr  ...  ...  475

Kannoo  Mai,  Sayings  of  Tulsidas  ...  ...  475

Kannoo  Mai,  Aphorisms  of  Narada  ...  ...  475

Keynes,  J.  M.,  .4  Tract  on  Monetary  Reforms  413 — 6


Kliaja  Khan,  Khun  Sahib,  Studies  in  Tarawa/  477
Khan,  Sycd  Sirdar  Ali,  Life  of  Lord  Motley  ...  465
Kingston,  Charles,  Dramatic  Days  at  the  Old

Bailey  ...  ...  ...  ...  453

Kurup,  T.  C.  K.,  Gandhi  and  Indian  Regeneration  476
Louse  more,  W.  C.,  The  Art  of  Talking  ...  474

Lord,  A.  R.,  Principles  of  Politics  ...  ...  478

Lucas,  E.  L.,  Seneca  and  the  Elizabethan  Tragedy  460
Lyman,  R.  H.,  Il'orld  Almanac  and  the  Book  of
Fads  1914  ...  ...  ...  ...  470

"Marasi-e-Anis  ...  469

McCkcs,  I)r.  Helen,  Daily  Life  of  the  Greeks  and

Romans  ...  ...  ...  ...  472

Moreland,  W.  H.,  From  Akbar  to  Aurangzcb  449—50
Morgan,  J.  H.,  The  Present  State  of  Germany  ...  478
Xicoll,  Allardvce,  Introduction  to  Dramatic

Theory  ...  ...  ...  ...  461

O'Counor,  V.  C.  Scott,  ,4n  Eastern  Libtaty  474


M.  i.  442.


OF  OBEDIENCE.


315


and  reflection.  And  why  ?  —  Because  this  is  what
comes  to  all  who  conduct  themselves  according  to  the
Master’s  teachings.  And  so  in  succession,  and  for  the
same  reason,  he  develops  and  dwells  in  the  Second,
Third  and  Fourth  Ecstasies.

With  his  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  puri¬
fied,  clean  and  cleansed  of  things  impure,  tempered  and
apt  to  serve,  stablished  and  immutable, — it  is  thus  that
he  applies  his  heart  to  the  knowledge  which  recalls
his  earlier  existences.  He  calls  to  mind  his  divers
existences  in  the  past, — a  single  existence,  then  two
.  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  ...  in  all  their  details
and  features.  And  why  ? —  Because  this  is  what  [442]
comes  to  one  who  conducts  himself  according  to  the
Master’s  teachings.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  the  passing  and  re-appearance  of  other
creatures.  With  the  Celestial  Eye  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in
Sutta  No.  4)  .  .  .  and  heaven.  And  why  ? — Because
this  is  what  comes  to  one  who  conducts  himself  accord¬
ing  to  the  Master’s  teachings.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  nowr  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  destroying  the  Cankers.  He  has  absolute
comprehension  of  Ill,  the  origin  of  Ill,  the  cessation  of
Ill,  and  the  course  that  leads  to  the  cessation  of  Ill ;  he
has  the  like  absolute  comprehension  of  the  Cankers.
When  he  knows  and  discerns  this,  his  heart  is  delivered
from  the  Canker  of  sensuality,  from  the  Canker  of
continuing  existence,  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignorance;
and  to  him  thus  delivered  comes  the  knowledge  of  his
deliverance  in  the  confidence  that  he  has  lived  the
highest  life,  that  his  task  is  done,  and  that  now  for  him
there  is  no  more  of  what  he  once  was.  And  why  ? —
Because  this  is  what  comes  to  one  who  conducts  him¬
self  according  to  the  Master’s  teachings.

Hereupon  Bhaddali  asked  the  Lord  what  was  the
cause  and  reason  why  the  Almsmen  prolong  proceed¬
ings  against  one  Almsman  longer  than  against  another.

Take  the  case,  answered  the  Lord,  of  a  frequent  and
habitual  offender  who,  when  spoken  to  by  his  brethren,


316  LXV.  BHADDALI-SUTTA.  M.  i.  443.

skips  off  to  something  irrelevant,  changes  the  subject,
evinces  rage  and  hatred  and  resentment,  does  not  take
it  well,  bristles  with  indignation,  fails  to  atone,  and
does  not  declare  himself  willing  to  do  what  the  Confra¬
ternity  pleases.  In  such  a  case  his  brethren,  who  have
duly  noted  all  this,  [443]  deem  it  well  to  conduct  such
an  enquiry  into  his  case  as  to  preclude  any  speedy
settlement  of  it.

Take  now  the  case  of  another  frequent  and  habitual
offender  who,  when  spoken  to  by  his  brethren,  does  not
skip  off  to  something  irrelevant,  does  not  change  the
subject,  does  not  evince  rage  and  hatred  and  resent¬
ment,  but  takes  it  well,  is  humble,  atones,  and  declares
himself  willing  to  do  what  the  Confraternity  pleases.
In  such  a  case,  his  brethren,  who  have  duly  noted  all
this,  deem  it  well  so  to  restrict  their  enquiry  into  his
case  as  to  ensure  a  speedy  settlement.

Next  take  the  case  of  a  casual  and  not  habitual
offender,  who,  when  spoken  to  by  his  brethren,  skips
off  to  something  irrelevant  .  .  .  [444]  preclude  any
speedy  settlement  of  it.

Next  take  the  case  of  a  casual  and  not  habitual
offender,  who,  when  spoken  to  by  his  brethren,  does
not  skip  off  to  something  irrelevant  .  .  .  ensure  a
speedy  settlement.

Lastly,  take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  gets  along
just  by  trust  and  affection.  Recognizing  this,  his
brethren  deem  it  well  not  to  protract  the  proceedings
lest  he  lose  even  his  trust  and  affection.  Just  as  if  a
man  possessed  only  a  single  eye  and  his  friends  and
kinsfolk  guarded  that  one  eye  of  his  lest  he  should  lose
even  that  too, — even  so  do  the  Almsmen  take  heed
lest  he  should  lose  even  his  trust  and  affection.

Such,  Bhaddali,  is  the  cause  and  the  reason  why  the
Almsmen  prolong  proceedings  against  one  Almsman
longer  than  against  another.

What,  sir,  is  the  cause  and  the  reason  why  in  bygone
days  [445]  there  were  fewer  rules  of  conduct  and  more
Arahats,  whereas  nowadays  there  are  more  rules  and
fewer  Arahats  ?


480


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


PACK

Ogata,  Kivoshi,  The  Co-operative  Movement  In
Japan  ...  ...  ...  459

Pnnnanand,  llhai.  Story  of  my  Exile  ...  474

Parmanand,  Bliai,  Hindu  Sangatlian  ...  474

Parry,  His  Honour  Judge,  Prama  of  the  Law  453
lYasad,  Sinbeswar,  Elements  of  Indian  Astrology  476
I“uran  Singh,  An  After-noon  trflfc  Self  ...  476

Puran  Singh,  .41  His  Feet  ...  •••  47^

Kntdiffc,  S.  K.,  Sir  William  Wedderbum  ■  ■■  465
Richards,  Paul,  The  Wherefore  of  the  Worlds  ...  475
Rolland,  Rotnain,  Mahatama  Gandhi  ...  ...  -!&>

Ronaldshay,  Lord,  India  :  A  Bird’s  Eye  View  446—9
Roy,  Rai  Bahadur  G.  K.,  Indian  Arms  Act  Manual  452
Roy,  Rai  Bahadur  G.  K.,  Copy  Right  Act  and

Registration  of  Books  .4rl  ...  •••  45*

Russel,  Frances  Theresa,  Satire  In  the  Victorian

Novel  ...  ...  ...  •••  463

Sanders,  E.  &  Rev.  R.  Judah,  Sundar  Slngli  46S

Sarnia,  X.  V.,  Call  for  National  Reunion  477

Sen,  Mrs.  Snchlatha,  Nlhal  the  Musician  ...  476


PACK

Sewell,  Robert,  .4  Forgotten  Empire  ...  ...  47*

Shamnsastry,  Dr.  R.,  Kautilya's  Artliashastra  47*
Shepherd,  B.  C.  M.,  Motor  Car  Mechanism  and

Management  ...  ...  •••  473

Smith,  G.  Elliot,  Ancient  Egyptians  ...  ...  455

Smith,  Vincent  A.,  Oxford  History  of  India  ...  471
-Spas  of  Britain”  ...  ...  —  47°

Srirainamurty,  M.,  Arpana  ...  ...  477

"Swedish  Year  Book  1924"  ...  —  47°

Taylor,  Hugh,  Conditions  of  National  Success  ...  459
Taylor,  Rachel  A.,  Aspects  of  Italian  Ren ahance  457
Thompson,  B.  J..  Rabindranath  Tagore  467

Tilley,  Arthur,  Moliere  ...  ...  •••  4<>J

Ure,  1*.  X.,  Origin  of  Tyranny  ...  455

Viallate,  Prof.  Achille,  Economic  Imperialism  and

International  Relations  ...  ...  ...  45$

Wnley,  Arthur,  The  No  Plays  of  Japan  ...  462

Wellock,  Wilfred,  Ahimsa  and  the  World  Peace  477
Whisken,  H.  X.,  IPhat  it  means  to  live  ...  473

Winslow,  J.  C.,  Narayan  Vaman  Tilak  ...  46S


M.  i.  446.


OF  OBEDIENCE.


3  1  7


It  is  because,  when  men  fall  away  and  the  truth
wanes,  rules  are  multiplied  and  there  are  fewer  Arahats.
The  Master  does  not  prescribe  rules  for  his  disciples
so  long  as  there  is  no  sign  in  the  Confraternity  of
states  of  consciousness  bred  of  the  Cankers.  But  as
soon  as  he  sees  signs  of  this,  he  prescribes  rules  to
combat  those  states  of  consciousness.  Such  states
occur  only  when  the  Confraternity  has  grown  big,  and
then  it  is  that  rules  against  them  must  be  prescribed.
They  do  not  appear  till  the  Confraternity  has  risen
to  wealth,  fame,  learning,  and  standing  ;  but,  when  it
has  got  standing,  then  there  occur  states  of  conscious¬
ness  bred  of  the  Cankers  and  the  Master  prescribes
rules  to  combat  them.

Few  were  ye  when  I  preached  the  homily  with  the
parable  of  the  thorough-bred  Colt.  Do  you  remember
it,  Bhaddali  ?

No,  sir.

To  what  cause  do  you  attribute  that?

I  have  not  been  conducting  myself  according  to  the
Master's  teachings  for  a  long  time.

That  is  not  the  cause  or  the  reason.  For  some  time
past  my  heart  has  been  fathoming  yours,  seeing  how,
while  I  was  expounding  the  Doctrine,  you,  in  your
folly,  were  not  listening  intently,  with  grip  and  grasp
and  whole-hearted  apprehension.  Well,  I  will  tell  you
that  homily  with  the  parable  of  the  Colt.  Hearken
and  give  ear  [446]  and  I  will  speak.  Then  to  the
attentive  Bhaddali  the  Lord  began  thus  : —

Just  as  an  expert  horse-breaker,  when  a  fine  thorough¬
bred  is  put  in  his  hands,  first  schools  it  to  the  bit,  and
during  the  process  the  colt  exhibits  every  twist,  wriggle
and  contortion  you  would  expect  from  one  constrained
to  do  something  wholly  novel,  until  he  is  perfected  by
constant  use  and  gradual  practice  therein.  After  the
bit  comes  the  yoke  and  in  this  process  too  the  colt
exhibits  .  .  .  practice  herein.  Next  the  colt  is  schooled
successively  to  the  ring,  to  being  clipped,  to  gallop,  to
neigh  (defiance),  to  bear  himself  like  a  royal  charger  of
birth  and  breeding,  peerless  in  speed,  in  points,  and  in


FOUNDED

1900


BY

Sachdiidananda  Sinha.


Cbt  Hindustan  R m


Vol.  XLV111  ]


OCTOBER,  1924


[  No.  282


THE  CENSUS  OF  INDIA,  1921  :  A  SURVEY.

By  Mr.  Thakorelal  M.  Desai.


It  is  the  general  belief  that  to  a  reader,  who
is  not  sufficiently  interested  in  the  statistical  side
of  sociology  and  who  is  not  an  avowed
politician,  the  Census  Reports  are  apt  to  be
dull  reading.  This  is  to  my  mind  an  erroneous
belief  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  to  any  reader
with  just  sufficient  general  interest  in  the  fate
of  his  country  and  the  collective  march  of  his
countrymen,  the  report  is  bound  to  reveal  some
feature  that  will  appeal  to  him,  even  though  he
may  not  be  able  to  appreciate  that  mysterious
romance  of  numbers.  The  reason  for  this  is,  to
my  mind,  the  greater  effort  at  completeness  in
the  interpretation  and  the  significance  of  figures
in  the  Census  Re[>orts,  provincial  or  Indian,
than  in  those  of  the  other  countries.  This
feature  is  very  necessary  here,  as  expert  statisti¬
cians  are  few,  who  can  solve  for  the  public,  the
mystery  of  figures.  And  yet,  one  must  confess
one’s  surprise  at  the  comparative  brevity  with
which  Mr.  Marten,  the  Census  Commissioner,  has
achieved  this  completeness.  He  has  eschewed
the  rather  long-winded  statement  about  the
|  general  conditions  of  India,  that  used  to  figure
in  the  previous  reports  and  has  thus  utilised
considerable  amount  of  space  for  more  valuable
work.

The  total  population  of  India,  as  enumerated
in  this  Census,  was  a  little  short  of  three  hundred
and  nineteen  millions,  or  to  be  more  exact
318,942,480.  This  compared  to  the  figure  of
1911,  shows  an  increase  of  about  four  millions
or  1.2  per  cent.  If  we  take  the  figures  for  all


the  six  censuses,  the  rise  during  this  last  decade
from  1911  to  1921  is  the  smallest  ever  recorded.
During  the  nine  years  preceding  18S1,  the  rise
of  the  population  was  by  23.2  per  cent.,  while
the  following  census  in  1891  recorded  a  rise  of
13.20.  The  census  at  the  begining  of  this
century  showed  a  rise  of  only  2.5,  while  in  1911,
the  figure  again  went  up  to  7.1.  Even  after
making  allowances  for  the  fact  that  during  the
previous  censuses,  the  area  and  the  population
handled  were  not  the  same  and  that  in  each
successive  decade  the  machinery  of  enumeration
was  more  accurately  adjusted,  and  if  we  take
the  rgal  increase  per  cent.,  as  apart  from  the
actual  figures  of  increase,  we  must  admit  that
the  real  rate  of  increase  which  duriug  the  years
1901  to  1911  had  gone  up  to  6.4  per  cent.,  has
suddenly  been  arrested.

This  sudden  drop  in  the  rate  of  increase  of
the  population  is  not  difficult  to  explain.  The
direct  and  indirect  effects  of  the  War  of  1914-18
on  the  growth  of  population  in  India  were
considerable,  but  compared  to  the  havoc  caused
by  the  influenza  epidemic  in  1918-19,  they  were
negligible.  There  is  no  direct  source  from  which
one  can  get  the  approximate  figures  for  the
number  of  deaths  caused  by  the  epidemic.
Mr.  Marten  has  been  at  great  pains  to  arrive  at
a  reasonably  accurate  estimate  after  taking  into
consideration  figures  from  several  sources,  and
from  bold  deductions  from  the  facts  available.
He  places  the  figure  for  total  mortality  during
the  influenza  period  somewhere  between  twelve


3 1 8  LXV.  BHADDALI-SUTTA.  M.  i.  447-

manners  ;  and  in  this  process  too  the  colt  exhibits  .  .  .
practice  herein.  Lastly,  the  horse-breaker  grooms  and
braids  the  colt  to  perfection  and  so  it  becomes  with  its
ten  points  a  charger  for  a  king  to  be  proud  of,  and  is
styled  a  royal  treasure.

Just  in  the  same  way  an  Almsman  who  has  his  ten
points  grows  worthy  of  oblations  and  offerings  and
gifts  and  homage  and  is  the  richest  field  in  which  to
sow  the  seed  of  merit.  What  are  these  ten  points  ? —
His  are  the  Arahat’s  right  views,  the  Arahat’s  right
aspirations,  the  Arahat’s  right  speech,  the  Arahat’s
right  action,  the  Arahat’s  right  mode  of  livelihood,  the
Arahat’s  right  effort,  the  Arahat’s  [447]  right  mindful¬
ness,  the  Arahat’s  right  rapture  of  concentration,
together  with  the  Arahat’s  right  knowledge  and  right
Deliverance.  The  Almsman,  Bhaddali,  who  has  these
ten  points  is  worthy  of  oblations  and  offerings  and
gifts  and  is  the  richest  field  in  which  to  sow  the  seed
of  merit.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Bhaddali  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXVI.  LATUKIKOPAMA-SUTTA.

THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  QUAIL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  staying  in
the  Anga  country,  where  there  is  a  township  named
Apana.  In  the  morning  early,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in
hand,  he  went  into  town  for  alms  and,  after  his  meal,
on  his  way  back  from  his  round,  went  into  a  wood  to
rest  during  the  heat  of  the  day  and  seated  himself  at
the  foot  of  a  tree.  Likewise,  the  reverend  Udayi  had
been  into  town  for  alms  and  on  his  way  back  had  gone
into  that  same  wood  to  rest  during  the  heat  of  the  day,
and  was  sitting  under  a  tree  in  solitary  meditation
when  there  came  to  him  the  reflection  that  their  Lord
had  dispelled  many  an  unhappy  state  of  consciousness
and  had  implanted  many  a  happy  one,  had  dispelled


2


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


to  thirteen  millions,  and  working  to  his  reason¬
ing,  one  must  admit  that  the  figure,  if  at  all  it
errs,  errs  on  the  side  of  under-estimate.  And
the  worst  of  it  is  that  these  twelve  to  thirteen
million  deaths  do  not  comprise  the  only  toll  that
we  have  paid  to  the  fell  disease.  As  Mr.  Marten
observes,  “The  number  of  deaths,  however,  is
not,  of  course,  the  measure  of  the  loss  of  life
from  the  epidemic.  The  case  mortality  has
been  put  roughly  at  about  io  per  cent,  and  on
this  basis  the  total  number  of  persons  affected
by  the  disease  was  about  125  millions  or  two
fifths  of  the  total  population  of  India.  The
effect  on  the  general  wealth  of  the  people  is
shown  by  the  reaction  on  the  birth-rate,  which
dropped  below  the  death  rate  in  1918  and  1919
and  only  gave  a  slight  excess  in  India  in  1920."
lhus,  though  the  influenza  has  vitiated  the
figures  for  1921  to  a  great  extent  and  deducted
much  from  their  value  as  a  guide  to  the  general
progress  of  the  community,  the  worst,  in  my
opinion,  is  yet  to  come,  because  of  the  sacrifice
of  a  large  number  of  married  women  of  child¬
bearing  age.  One  may  expect  a  great  dispropor¬
tion  in  the  various  age  groups  for  the  next
census.

No  student  of  sociology  can  help  asking
hims.lf,  whether  we  arc  doing  anything  to  check
such  whole.-ale  mortality  due  to  epidemics,  when
we  are  all  united  in  shouting  at  the  ton  of  our
voice  for  the  abolition  of  war  and  the  establish¬
ment  of  peace.  After  all  wars  have  some
saving  graces,  some  physical  and  moral  values,
but  one  would  fain  like  to  hear  anything  in
connection  with  this  epidemic  which  might  l>e
taken  as  some  sort  of  a  compensation ;  except
perhaps  the  cynical  observation  that  it  checks
over-population.  And  yet  while  six  years  after
the  termination  of  the  War  the  world  is  striving
hard  to  avoid  another  such  catastrophe,  we  have
for  all  practical  purposes,  placidly  accepted  the
influenza  epidemic  and  beyond  some  temporary
organisations  for  relief  at  the  moment,  we  arc
behaving  as  if  the  epidemic  has  never  been  there.

The  mention  of  a  Census  Report  is  bound
to  raise  the  bogey  of  over-population.  Manv
writers  on  economics  and  the  population
problems  as  well  as  several  provincial  Census
Superintendents  envisage  the  dangers  of  over¬
population.  Mr.  Wattal,  by  far  the  l>cst  known
writer  on  the  growth  of  population  in  India  is
perhaps  the  most  pessimistic  of  the  whole  group.
And  yet  one  cannot  imagine  that  either  of
these  writers  can  with  confidence  give  us  a


figure  where  over-populatipn  begins,  for  reasons
which  are  obvious.  There  is  little  reason  to
believe  that  in  the  so-called  golden  age,  when
the  population  of  India  was,  say,  one  third  of
what  it  is  now  or  even  less,  the  squalor,
the  misery.’,  the  wretchedness  and  sacrifice
demanded  of  those  living  in  those  days  so  that
the  population  be  maintained  was  in  any  way
less  than  what  it  is  uow.  The  fact  is  that  the
question  of  social  misery  and  degradation,
though  it  dpes  turn  upon  the  productive  capacity
of  the  country,  rests  more  on  the  forms  of  social
organisation  and  the  conceptions  of  social
justice.  The  quantitative  methods  of  the
present  day  economists  arc  mainly  responsible
for  thus  clouding  the  issue  and  for  the  general
prevalence  of  the  belief  that  there  is  no  other
remedy  except  increase  in  the  productive
capacity  of  the  country  or  the  reduction  of
population.  When  so  many  of  us  alarmed  by
the  theories  of  the  economists  hasten  to  agree
with  this  belief,  we  forget  that  in  the  first  place,
no  end  of  increase  in  the  productive  capacity  of
the  country  will  add  an  appreciable  amount  of
happiness  and  comfort  to  the  people,  unless  the
methods  of  participation  in  that  increase .  are
changed, and  in  the  second,  that  even  with  our
Present  capacity  of  production ;  we  could  do
much  to  rule  out  a  great  amount  of  misery  from
the  life  of  the  people,  if  we  all  agree  to  principles
of  distribution  of  wealth,  more  in  accordance
with  the  demands  of  social  justice.  Of  course,  I  do
not  mean  to  suggest  that  senseless  multiplica¬
tion  of  the  species  is  in  any  way  desirable  or  to
l>c  encouraged.  All  I  want  to  point  out  is  that
the  remedy  for  the  alxtlition  of  misery  and
sacrifice  lies  not  so  much  in  the  direction  of  the
t eduction  in  birth-rate  as  in  a  more  fair  and
equitable  distribution  of  wealth.

The  question  whether  India  as  a  whole  is
over-populated  or  not  depends  not  merely  on  the
productive,  capacity  of  the  country,  both  agri¬
cultural  and  industrial,  but  also  oil  the  possibi¬
lity  of  military  and  economic  invasion  from  the
neighbouring  countries  on  both  sides,  the
standard  of  living  that  we  agree  upon  .is  the
necessary  minimum  for  the  climatic  and  physical
conditions  of  India  and  on  the  present  and  pros¬
pective  outlets  for  emigration.  This  question,
moreover,  has  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rela¬
tive  density  and  over-population  in  certain  areas
as  compared  with  others.  To  the  minds  of
many  in  India,  the  present  distribution  of  popu-
ation  in  various  provinces  and  even  within  the


3


THE  CENSUS  OF  INDIA,  1921  :  A  SUR\  E\


territories  of  one  province  is  not  very
satisfactory.

The  question  of  the  standard  of  living  is  very
intimately  connected  with  the  problems  of  popu¬
lation  in  any  country  and  all  the  more  so  in
India  where  neither  the  population  nor  their
concepts  of  comforts  are  wholely  homogeneous
The  census  authorities  have,  however,  decided
that  the  task  of  ascertaining  the  statistical
measure  of  the  standard  of  living  of  the  people
of  India  is  almost  an  impossible  task  for  the
machinery  of  the  census  and  we  are  left  without
any  definite  measure.  In  the  first  place,  Mr.
Marten  doubts  if  the  economic  position  of  a
family  has  much  to  do  with  the  manner  of  its
living  and  he  believes  that  tradition  limited  by
ignorance  plays  a  much  more  effective  part  in
the  standard  of  life  of  any  given  family.  This
was  no  doubt  true  even  twenty  years  ago  and
may  still  be  true  to  some  extent  amongst  some-
aristocratic  families,  but  the  conditions  have
changed  ^considerably  since  the  war  and  the
conformity  in  the  standard  of  life  of  a  particular
family  and  its  economic  position  is  much  greater
to-day  than  ever  before  and  a  serious  and  well-
guided  effort  at  some  statistical  measure  of  the
standard  of  living  will  give  useful  results.
These  results,  however,  will  not  be  useful  in
gauging  the  chances  of  rise  or  fall  of  population,
because  the  average  Indian  peasant  with  his
temperamental  resignation  will  sooner  think
of  giving  up  comforts  and  even  necessaries
rather  than  even  dream  of  checking  the  increase
in  his  family,  when  his  standard  of  living  is
threatened.  But  any  results  obtained  with
regard  to  the  statistical  measure  of  the  standard
of  life  in  India  will  be  useful  in  other  ways.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  work,  if  it  ever  could
be  done,  could  best  be  done  by  the  census
organisations,  because  the  operations  of  the
Labour  Offices  do  not  cover  the  whole  of  India.

An  interesting  but  erroneous  belief  almost
universally  held  in  India  is  that  the  population
is  being  drained  from  the  villages  into  towns
atid  cities  We  often  hear  even  educated  men
and  also  the  popular  leaders  of  a  certain  type
getting  eloquent  about  the  dangers  of  this  drain
and  lamenting  the  loss  to  the  villages.  Apart
from  the  question  of  merits  of  the  emigration
from  villages  into  towns  and  cities,  which  in
itself  is  controversial,  the  reality  of  this  drain
is  hardly  ever  questioned.  But  the  census
figures  prove  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt
that  “the  progress  of  urbanization  in  India,  if


there  is  any  progress  at  all,  has  been  very  slow
during  the  last  thirty  years.”  Out  of  a  total
population  of  319  millions  only  32$  million
persons  were  found  in  2313  cities  and  towns  of
all  classes.  The  Bombay  Presidency  has  the
highest  percentage  of  urban  population
amounting  to  23,  while  Assam  conies  lowest
with  only  three  per  cent,  of  its  l>opulation
residing  to  towns.  In  England,  while  79  per
cent,  of  the  people  are  classified  as  urban,  India
has  only  10J  per  cent,  of  its  inhabitants  living
in  towns.  But  perhaps,  it  may  be  contended
that  though  the  percentage  of  the  urban  popula¬
tion  is  about  one  tenth  to-day,  it  must  have  been
much  smaller  lx- fore.  The  fact  is  that  the
whole  increase  in  the  last  thirty  years  in  the
projxjrtion  of  the  urban  population  is  less  than
one  per  cent.  Even  this  one  per  cent,  is  not
the  real  rate  of  increase  in  the  sense  of  emigra¬
tion  into  towns  from  the  villages.  Because  it
must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  population  of  the
towns  also  increases  naturally  apart  from
immigration  and  that  some  larger  villages,  with
the  gradual  growth  of  their  natural  population
came  in  course  of  time  to  be  classified  as  towns.
When  we  have  accounted  for  these  two  causes
of  natural  increase,  the  real  increase  reduces
itself  to  a  very  small  figure  and  even  that,  as
Mr.  Marten  slipws,  is  not  a  loss  to  the  villages
but  to  the  small-sized  towns.  The  tendency
during  the  last  three  decades  has  been  for  the
population  to  congregate  in  ever  increasing  pro¬
portions  in  cities  and  towns  with  more  than
twenty  thousand  souls  at  the  expense  of  the
smaller-sized  towns.  The  census  figures  reveal
that  the  towns  above  fifty  thousand  have  in¬
creased  by  16  per  cent.  ;  the  population  of  the
towns  between  ten  and  twenty  thousand  do  not
show  even  the  average  general  increase  in  the
population  of  the  whole  country.  Thus  even
though  the  talk  about  the  growing  scarcity  of
agricultural  labour  be  true,  we  have  to  look  for
the  causes  of  it  somewhere  else.  Again,  it  will
be  an  excellent  subject  for  sociological  and
economic  research  to  try  and  gauge  the  exact
significance  to  the  country  both  at  present  and
in  the  future  of  this  gradual  decay  of  the  smaller-
sized  country  towns.

Religion  is  an  important  principle  of  classifi¬
cation  of  the  population  and  yet  we  owe  our
thanks  to  Mr.  Marten  for  rigorously  cutting  out
from  his  Report,  those  long  polemics  on  religi¬
ous  tenets  and  ceremonial  observances,  that
used  to  lx?  a  feature  of  the  earlier  reports


M.  i.  448.  THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  QUAIL.  319

many  a  wrong  state  and  implanted  many  a  right  one.
Arising  towards  evening  from  his  meditations,  Udiiyl
betook  him  to  the  Lord  and,  taking  [448]  his  seat  to
one  side  after  due  salutations,  first  related  how  there
had  come  to  him  the  foregoing  reflection  and  then
went  on  to  say  : — In  former  times,  sir,  we  had  meals
in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning  and  in  the  afternoon,
in  contravention  of  all  proper  hours.  Time  came  when
the  Lord  bade  Almsmen  give  up  having  meals  out  of
hours  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  personally  I  felt  it  a
painful  wrench,  when  the  faithful  laity  came  with
excellent  meals  in  the  afternoon  out  of  hours,  to  realize
that  by  our  Lord’s  bidding  they  were  to  be  rejected  and
by  our  Blessed  One’s  bidding  to  be  renounced.  Well,
sir,  out  of  our  love  and  veneration  for  the  Lord  and  in
our  sense  of  duty  and  obligation,  we  gave  up  these
afternoon  meals,  out  of  hours  ;  and  we  ate  morning
and  evening.  Then  came  a  time  when  the  Lord  bade
Almsmen  give  up  eating  at  night,  out  of  hours.  Here
again  it  was  a  painful  wrench  to  realize  that  by  our
Lord’s  bidding  the  better  meal  of  the  two  was  to  be
rejected  and  by  our  Blessed  One’s  bidding  to  be
renounced.  The  old  custom  had  been,  when  a  man
was  given  curry  in  the  afternoon,  for  him  to  say :
Carry  it  away  and  wc  will  have  it  for  supper  together.
For,  dainty  dishes,  sir,  all  come  at  night, — rarely  by
day.  Well,  out  of  our  love  and  veneration  for  the
Lord  and  in  our  sense  of  duty  and  obligation,  we  gave
up  eating  at  night,  out  of  hours.  Time  was  when,
going  in  quest  of  alms  when  it  was  too  dark  to  see,
Almsmen  used  to  walk  straight  into  the  village-pond
or  the  cesspool,  or  stray  into  a  hedge,  or  blunder  over
a  cow  asleep,  or  associate  with  young  fellows  before
or  after  crimes,  or  were  solicited  by  women.  1
remember  once  being  out  for  alms  after  dark  when  a
woman  espied  me  for  a  flash  as  she  was  scouring  a  pot
and  screamed  out :  Woe  is  me !  A  goblin  is  after  me!
I  told  her  I  was  not  a  goblin  but  an  Almsman  [449]
standing  there  for  alms.  Then  you  must  be  a  poor
orphan  with  no  father  or  mother  left  alive ;  you  would


4


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Whatever  their  value  in  those  days,  they  would
undoubtedly  be  useless  to-day,  in  view  of  the
many  independent  publications  concerning  such
questions,  and  also  because  of  the  fact  that
questions  of  doctrine  remain  more  or  less  the
same.  And  yet  we  cannot  agree  with  Mr.
Marten,  in  his  decision  not  to  insist  upon  sect
statistics.  One  might  agree  with  him  that
“caste  is  too  complex,  too  local  and  too  con¬
troversial  a  factor  to  form  a  basis  for  a  social
and  economic  division  even  of  the  Hindu
Society,"  but  merely  knowing  the  number  of
Hindus  is  not  of  much  importance  and  a  census
of  India  which  does  not  go  into  the  question  of
sects  would  be  if  not  meaningless,  at  least
incomplete,  so  far  as  the  classification  by  reli¬
gion  is  concerned.  To  do  him  justice,  how¬
ever,  I  must  admit  that  the  decision  was  taken
not  by  him  in  the  first  instance  but  by  his
predecessor  Sir  Edward  Cait,  which  he  merely
endorsed.  The  general  distribution  by  religion
of  the  population,  varies  little  from  one  census
to  another  and  dcqicnds  very  largely  on  historical
factors.  The  tendencies  towards  change  and
evolution  in  Hinduism  are  visible  only  through
the  rise  or  fall  in  the  numbers  of  various  sects,
and  not  through  the  total  number  of  i>eople
registered  as  Hindus.

The  chapter  on  the  distribution  of  the  popu¬
lation  by  age  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  ones
in  the  whole  report  and  in  the  minds  of  many
one  of  the  most  important  ones.  It  is  not  so
much  the  total  population  of  a  country,  or  th.?
distribution  of  population  by  religion,  sex  or
even  occupation  that  helps  the  student  to
decide  whether  a  country  is  progressive,
stationary  or  regressive,  as  the  distribution  by
age.  And  vet  it  is  this  chapter  that  is  the  great
bug-bear  of  the  census  authorities  not  only  in
India  but  in  many  other  more  advanced
countries.  No  other  returns  are  liable  to  lie
more  inaccurate  than  those  concerning  the  age
of  the  people.  Mr.  Marten  analyses  the  causes
of  this  inaccuracy  and  he  has  corrected  and
graduated  them  by  some  wellknown  standards.

It  is  the  comparative  strength  of  each  age
group  that  affords  the  l>est  comparison  with  the
past  figures  and  makes  it  possible  to  follow  each
batch  of  the  population  as  it  progresses  over  each
successive  decades  from  infancy  to  age  and  also
to  ffaibtc  'the  effects  upon  it  of  mortality  and
migration  at  each  successive  census.  The  figures
of  age  distribution  of  this  census  compared  to
those  of  the  preceding  one  show  a  decrease  in


the  proportions  in  the  groups  0-5  aud  15-35  and
increase  in  the  group  5-15  and  those  above  forty.
Thus  “the  decade  has  seen  a  reduction  in  the
proportions  of  young  children  and  the  younger
adults  and  an  increase  of  the  proportion  of  the
adolescent  and  of  the  elder  adult  population."
Mr.  Marten  attributes  this  to  the  influence  of
famine  and  plague  in  the  past,  the  fall  of  the
birth-rate  at  the  end  of  the  decade  owing  to
influenza  and  the  special  partiality  shown  by
influenza  for  the  younger  adult  age  group.

The  statistics  with  regard  to  the  proportion
of  children  under  ten  at  any  given  time  to
hundred  adults  between  15-40  aud  also  to
hundred  married  wromen  in  that  group  are  of
considerable  importance.  But  the  dangers  of
drawing  any  conclusions  regarding  comparative
fertility  from  these  proportions  have  to  be
guarded  against  and'  one  has  to  take  a  much
more  comprehensive  view  of  the  underlying
factors  that  affect  this  proportion.  To  support
this  Mr.  Marten  shows  that  the  rise  in  the  rates
of  children  in  this  census  is  due  not  to  any
increase  in  fertility  but  because  of  the  loss  of  the
adult  categories,  especially  of  the  numbers  of
married  women.  "What  has  actually  happened
is  not  that  the  babies  have  multiplied  but  that
the  number  of  parents  has  been  suddenly
reduced,  at  the  end  of  the  decade."

One  of  the  most  important  subjects,  bound
up  with  the  growth  of  populations  is  that  of
infant  mortality.  But  apart  from  census  opera¬
tions,  that  subject  is  now  being  studied  much
more  scientifically  and  with  much  greater  details
by  various  health  organisations  and  experts.
Mr.  Marten  rightly  confines  his  discussion  of
this  important  subject  to  the  statistics  of  infant
mortality  in  various  countries  and  the  relation
between  the  rate  of  this  mortality  and  the  size
of  families.  The  latter  is  controlled  by  the
general  health  of  the  mother  and  of  the
economic  conditions  of  the  family.  The  average
rate  of  infant  mortality  in  India  is  410  per  1000
children  born,  i.c.  410  out  of  every  thousand
children  born  have  to  die  before  they  reach  the
age  of  one  year.  The  rate  is  as  high  as  500  in
large  cities  like  Bombay  and  during  the  influenza
epidemic,  the  rate  for  the  whole  of  India  went
)ip  to  534.  Amongst  the  provinces  the  highest
infant  mortality  rate  is  in  C.  P.  and  Berar,  the
next  is  Upper  Burma  and  U.  P.  comes  third.
n  9'  t*le  >nfant  mortality  during  1918  went
as  high  as  800  per  thousand.  These  appalling
figures  need  no  comment,  all  the  more  as  when


320


I.XVI.  LATUKIKOPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  450-


do  better  to  cut  your  belly  out  once  for  all  than  to  let
it  drive  you  to  prowl  about  for  alms  in  the  dark  like
this.  When  I  remember  this,  sir,  the  reflection  comes
to  me  that  our  Lord  has  dispelled  many  an  unhappy
state  of  consciousness  and  has  implanted  many  a  happy
one,  has  dispelled  many  a  wrong  state  and  implanted
many  a  right  one !

Yet,  in  their  folly,  Udayf,  there  are  silly  people  who,
when  told  by  me  to  give  something  up,  think  that  it  is
an  insignificant  matter  of  no  moment  and  that  I  am
too  particular, — with  the  result  that  they  do  not  give
it  up  but  grow  dissatisfied  with  me  and  with  the  Alms¬
men  who  desire  to  be  trained.  This  insignificant
thing  grows  into  a  bond  strong  enough  to  hold  them
fast,  a  stout  and  solid  bond,  a  bond  that  rots  not  away,
a  massive  log  round  their  necks.  It  is  like  a  quail
caught  in  a  springe,  there  to  abide  slaughter  or  captivity
or  death.  Would  it  be  correct  to  say  that  to  the  bird
in  this  plight  the  withy  which  holds  it  is  a  bond  without
strength  or  might,  a  bond  that  is  flimsy  and  unsub¬
stantial.

No,  sir ;  to  the  quail  it  is  a  bond  strong  enough  to
hold  her  fast,  a  stout  and  solid  bond  to  her,  a  bond  that
rots  not  away,  a  very  log  round  her  neck.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Udfiyi,  there  are  silly  people
...  a  log  round  their  necks.

Take  now  the  case  of  young  men  who,  when  told
by  me  to  give  something  up,  [450]  think  that  in  itself
it  is  an  insignificant  matter  of  no  moment,  but  that
their  Lord,  the  Blessed  One,  has  bidden  them  to  give
it  up  and  renounce  it.  So  they  give  it  up,  without
growing  dissatisfied  with  me  or  with  the  Almsmen  who
wish  to  be  trained ;  and  the  result  is  that,  unruffled,
they  live  in  meekness  and  contentment,  with  hearts  as
free  as  wild  things.  Unto  these  the  bonds  prove  to
be  without  strength  or  might,  flimsy  and  unsubstantial.
It  is  like  a  king’s  elephant — with  tusks  like  the  stilts
of  a  plough,  the  huge  scion  of  a  noble  race,  the  hero  of
many  a  battle — who  may  be  bound  with  stout  straps  and
thongs,  but  has  only  to  give  quite  a  little  heave  of  his


5


THE  CENSUS  OF  INDIA,  1921 :  A  SURVEY


more  than  half  of  these  deaths  are  due  to  avoid¬
able  causes.

The  statistical  study  of  sex  and  civil  condi¬
tions  is  fascinating  and  it  is  this  subject,  which
still  leaves  much  scope  for  original  work  to
writers  of  census  reports.  Several  provincial
superintendents  have  taken  advantage  of  this
fact.  As  time  goes  on,  it  is  quite  possible  that
the  tables  dealing  with  records  of  sex  and  civil
conditions  will  get  more  intricate  and  will  make
much  more  information  available  than  what  is
possible  to-day.  Mr.  Marten’s  own  report  of  the
Central  Provinces  Census  in  1911  is  indeed  a
proof  of  this.  But  promotion  has  its  own
drawbacks  and  the  comparative  liberty  which  the


to  100  or  1,000  males)  has  fallen  in  the  last
twenty  years  throughout  India.  The  statistics
of  birth  suggest  that  the  proportions  of  females
bom  has,  if  anything,  declined  during  this
period,  and  in  any  case  there  has  been  a  marked
decline  in  the  last  five  years  of  the  last  decade
in  most  provinces.”  The  chapter  on  civil
conditions  of  the  population  lends  itself  easily  as
a  subject  matter  of  discussion  and  speculation,  „
but  one  could  do  it  justice  only  in  an  independent
article  on  the  subject  and  so  I  propose  merely
to  transcribe  the  results  of  the  discussion  by
Mr.  Marten :

(1)  Marriage  is  almost  universal  both  for  men
and  women.


provincial’  superintendents  enjoy,  is  sometimes
denied  to  the  Census  Commissioner,  in  as  much
as  special  materials  gathered  at  special  places  is
not  of  much  use  to  him.  He  can  generally
make  use  of  the  materials  which  are  uniformally
common  to  the  whole  of  India.

The  first  thing  one  notices  about  the  discus¬
sion  on  Sex  in  the  Census  Report,  is  the  laying  at
rest  of  the  furious  controversy  that  raged  round
the  question  of  the  accuracy  of  Indian  sex
figures,  especially  those  dealing  with  the  number
of  women.  Unlike  most  of  the  countries  in
Europe,  each  successive  Indian  census  has
returned  an  excess  of  males  over  females.  There
■were  some  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  in
the  charge  of  inaccuracy  levelled  by  the  Western
critics,  because  of  the  characteristic  attitude  a
large  number  of  our  countrymen  have  towards
women.  The  Census  of  1911.  however,  did  this
signal  service  of  disposing  of  this  allegation  by
a  close  analysis  of  the  materials.  Mr.  Marten
reviews  in  brief  the  arguments  from  both
sides  of  this  controversy  and  assures  us  in  the
end  “that  the  return  of  sex  is  on  the  whole
accurate  and  that  the  proportions  given  represent
the  existing  facts  within  the  margin  of  error
applicable  to  the  enumeration  in  general.”

Mr.  Marten  combines  the  statistics  of  sex
with  those  for  age,  religion  and  civil  conditions
on  the  one  hand,  and  caste,  tribe  or  race  on  the
other,  and  arrives  at  some  interesting  conclu¬
sions.  The  sex  ratio  in  the  actual  and  natural
populations  also  supplies  a  good  index  for
ascertaining  the  extent  of  migration  or  at  any
rate  for  checking  the  conclusions  with  regard
to  migration.  The  most  important  conclusion
which  Mr.  Marten  arrives  at  and  which  is  of
considerable  importance  to  the  sociologists  is
that  “the  sex  ratio  (the  proportion  of  females


(2)  The  proportion  of  the  married  has  decreased

owing  to  (a)  the  change  in  the  age
constitution  of  the  population  and  the
decrease  in  the  proportion  of  the  adult
population ;  (b)  the  mortality  of  the

influenza  epidemic,  which  specially  selected
married  women  and  converted  their
husbands  into  widowers  and  (c)  the  adverse
economic  conditions  at  the  end  of  the
decade.

(3)  Infant  and  child  marriage  is  still  prevalent,

but  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  the  age
of  marriage  is  increasing  especially  in  the
case  of  males.  Only  in  the  most  advanced
classes  is  there  any  tendency  for  the  age  of
marriage  after  puberty  to  increase.  Eco¬
nomic  and  educational  classes  are  largely
responsible  for  any  tendency  of  this  kind.

(4)  The  proportion  of  the  widowed,  and  especial¬

ly  of  widowers,  has  increased  owing  to
high  selective  mortality  and  possibly,  in
the  case  of  widows,  partly  owing  to  the
increasing  orthodoxy  of  the  lower  castes
and  tribes.

Literacy  for  the  Census  Report  means  the
ability  to  wTite  a  letter  to  a  friend  and  to  read
the  answer  to  it :  It  has  ruled  out  all  complica¬
tions  with  regard  to  the  degree  of  education.
The  average  number  of  people,  who  are  literate
according  to  this  definition  in  India,  per
thousand  of  those  above  five  years  is  82.139
males  and  21  females  per  thousand  having  been
recorded  as  literate.  If  we  take  the  figures  of
literacy  by  age-groups,  the  proportion  is  the
highest  between  15  and  20.  Effective  literacy,
however,  begins  at  twenty,  because  the  pheno¬
menon  of  lost  literacy  once  acquired  is  not  un¬
known  to  educationists.  The  figure  of  literacy


M.  i.  45 1.


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  QUAIL.


321


body  in  order  to  burst  his  bonds  asunder  and  go  forth
where  he  lists.  Would  it  be  correct  to  say  that  to  the
elephant  his  bonds  are  strong  enough  to  hold  him  fast,
— stout,  solid  bonds  that  rot  not  away,  a  massive  log
round  his  neck  ?

No,  sir ;  to  such  an  elephant  these  bonds  which  he
can  burst  asunder  by  a  slight  heave  of  his  body,  are  to
him  without  strength  or  might,  flimsy  and  unsubstantial.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Udayi,  the  young  men  who,
when  told  by  me  to  give  something  up,  .  .  .  flimsy
and  unsubstantial.

It  is  like  a  poor  wretch  with  just  a  single  crazy
hovel  open  to  the  crows  and  squalid  to  view,  with  just
a  single  crazy  pallet  squalid  to  view,  [451]  with  no
store  of  grain  beyond  just  his  sorry  seed-corn  in  a
solitary  crock,  and  with  just  his  one  ill-favoured  wife.
If  such  a  poor  wretch  sees  an  Almsman  from  a  pleas-
aunce  with  clean  hands  and  feet  seated  after  a  good
dinner  meditating  in  the  cool  shade,  he  might  think  it
a  pleasant  and  healthful  thing  to  be  a  recluse  and  might
like  to  become  a  Pilgrim  too,  cutting  off  his  hair  and
beard,  donning  the  yellow  robe  and  going  forth  from
home  to  homelessness.  But  suppose  he  could  not
bring  himself,  as  the  first  step  to  becoming  a  Pilgrim,
to  give  up  his  poor  hovel  and  pallet,  his  poor  crock  of
seed-corn  and  wife.  Would  it  be  correct  to  say  of
him  that  the  bonds  which  keep  him  from  giving  up  his
sorry  belongings  in  order  to  become  a  Pilgrim,  are  to
him  weak  bonds,  without  strength  or  might,  flimsy  and
unsubstantial  ?

No,  sir;  to  him  they  are  bonds  strong  enough  to
hold  him  fast,  stout,  solid  bonds  that  rot  not  away,  a
massive  log  round  his  neck.

It  is  just  the  same,  Udayi,  with  those  silly  people
who,  when  told  by  me  to  give  something  up,  think
that  it  is  an  insignificant  matter  of  no  moment  and  that
I  am  too  particular, — with  the  result  that  they  do  not
give  it  up  but  grow  dissatisfied  with  me  and  with  the
Almsmen  who  desire  to  be  trained.  This  insignificant
thing  grows  into  a  bond  strong  enough-  to  hold  them

21


322


LXVI.  LATUKIKOPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  452.


fast,  a  stout,  solid  bond,  a  bond  that  rots  not  away,  a
massive  log  round  their  necks.

S Or  it  is  Tike  a  rich  man,  or  his  son,  [452]  of  great
wealth  and  possessions,  with  abounding  treasure  and
substance  and  lands  and  raiment  and  wives  and  slaves
both  male  and  female.  If  he,  likewise,  sees  an  Alms¬
man  from  a  pleasaunce  with  clean  hands  and  feet  seated
after  a  good  dinner  meditating  in  the  cool  shade,  he
too  might  think  it  a  pleasant  and  a  healthful  thing  to
be  a  recluse  and  might  like  to  become  a  Pilgrim  too,
cutting  off  his  hair  and  beard,  donning  the  yellow  robe
and  going  forth  from  home  to  homelessness.  And
suppose  he  could  bring  himself,  as  the  first  step  to
becoming  a  Pilgrim,  to  give  up  all  these  riches  and  to
go  forth  from  home  to.  homelessness.  Would  it  be
correct  to  say  of  him  that  his  bonds  were  strong  enough
to  hold  him  fast,  stout  solid  bonds  that  rot  not  away,
a  massive  log  round  his  neck  ?

No,  sir;  to  him  they  are  flimsy  and  unsubstantial.

It  is  just  the  same  with  those  young  men  who,  when
told  by  me  to  give  something  up,  think  that  in  itself  it
is  an  insignificant  matter  of  no  moment  but  that  their
Lord  .  .  .  [453]  flimsy  and  unsubstantial.-*'

There  are  four  types  of  individuals  to  be  found  in
the  world,  Udayi.

The  first  is  progressing  towards  giving  up  ties  and
renouncing  them,  but  in  his  progress  is  assailed  by
thoughts  and  ideas  into  which  ties  enter ;  he  gives  in
to  them,  does  not  give  them  up,  does  not  dispel  and
eject  them,  does  not  annihilate  them.  Him  I  call  not
detached  but  attached.  And  why  ? — Because  I  have
gauged  his  individuality.

The  second  is  similarly  progressing  and  is  similarly
assailed,  but  does  not  give  in  to  such  thoughts  and
ideas,  he  gives  them  up ;  he  dispels,  ejects  and
annihilates  them.  Him  too  do  I  call  not  detached
but  attached.  And  why  ? — Because  I  have  gauged
his  individuality.

The  third  is  similarly  progressing  but  in  his  progress
is  from  time  to  time  assailed  by  distraction  in  mindful-


6


Till-  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


for  the  age  group  20  and  over,  is  lower  in  this
census  unlike  the  previous  ones,  but  this  is  due
not  so  much  to  lost  literacy  as  to  the  higher
mortality  due  to  influenza  in  this  group.  Com¬
paring  the  figures  with  those  of  the  previous
census,  India  has  to-day  four  million  more
literate  persons  than  in  1911.  Mr.  Marten
observes  that  this  increase  in  the  number  of
literate  males  and  females  is  shared  by  every
province  and  state,  but  the  statement  is  open
to  one  correction.  The  premier  state  of
Hyderabad  is  the  one  exception  where  the
proportion  of  literate  males  to  thousand  has
gone  down  from  67  to  65,  while  in  Kashmir,
which  has  the  lowest  literacy  record,  the  increase
is  nominal  and  may  quite  possibly  be  due  to  a
greater  number  of  temporary  visitors.  If  we
exclude  Burma,  where  the  conditions  are
exceptional  because  of  its  religion,  the  first  three
places  are  occupied  by  three  Indian  states  of
Travancore,  Cochin  and  Boroda,  but  the  pride
due  to  this  will  be  only  short-lived,  when  we
find  that  the  three  last  places  arc  also  occupied
by  the  three  important  states  of  Gwalior,
Hyderabad  and  Kashmir.

Mr.  Marten  concludes  his  chapter  on
languages  with  a  brief  discussion  on  the
standardisation  of  languages  and  observes  that :
"The  combined  speakers  of  Eastern  and  Western
Hindi  considerably  exceed  in  number  the
strength  of  any  other  individual  language  in
India,  and  if  we  add  to  these  two  languages
Bihari  and  Rajasthani,  which  so  resemble  Hindi
as  to  be  frequently  returned  under  that  name  in
the  census  schedules,  we  get  well  over  100
millions  of  speakers  of  tongues  which  have
considerable  affinities  and  cover  a  very  large
area  of  northern  and  central  India.”  Mr.  S.  V.
Mukerjea,  the  Census  Superintendent  of  Baroda.
who  has  been  quoted  by  Mr.  Marten,  also
believes  that  "Hindi  does  exercise  (even  in
Western  India  about  which  he  writes)  a  consider
able  influence  on  the  educated  sections  of  the

people . Its  claim  to  be  the  lingua  franca

are  beginning  to  be  increasingly-  pressed ;  there
is  a  general  desire  also  to  include  Hindi  as  a
second  language  in  the  school ;  much  of  the  old
bitterness  of  the  Hindi-Urdu  controversy  has
softened  down  with  the  growing  cordiality
between  educated  Hindus  and  Musalmans.”

The  last  but  by  no  means  the  least  is  the
discussion  on  occupation.  Mr.  Marten  has
reserved  not  only  a  great  amount  of  space  for
this  subject  but  a  still  greater  amount  of  atten¬


tion.  He  himself  writes  that  “in  point  of  interest
and  importance  the  statistics  of  occupations  are
perhaps  the  most  valuable  of  all  those  obtained
at  a  periodical  census.”  The  classification
scheme  is  highly  complex  and  takes  a  good  deal
of  explanation.  It  is  practically  the  same  as  in
IQ!  i  with  a  few  modifications.  The  occupational
statistics  collect  cel  are  much  more  limited  in
scope  than  would  be  necessary  for  a  complete
industrial  census,  but  an  effort  was  made  to
supplement  the  general  information  by  issuing  a
special  schedule  to  be  filled  in  by  managers  of
industrial  establishments.

As  is  well  known  Agriculture  and  land  in
India  supports  a  very  large  part  of  the  popula¬
tion,  amounting  to  nearly  73  per  cent,  o:  the
total  population.  But  it  is  not  equally  well  known
that  this  percentage  is  increasing.  It  has
increased  by  1.8  during  the  last  ten  years,  while
the  proportion  of  the  people  supported  by
industry  (non-agrieultural,  of  coursel  has  gone
down,  during  the  same  period  by  six  per  cent.
The  pressure  on  the  land  is  thus  enormous,  and
even  if  the  percentage  were  not  to  increase,  the
increase  in  the  total  population  of  the  country
would  within  a  very  short  time  make  this  a  first
class  problent.  With  both  the  total  population
and  the  percentage  going  up,  the  problem  will
assume  alarming  proportion.  One  of  the  direct
results  of  this  is  the  excessive  sub-division  of  the
agricultural  holdings,  but  though  Mr.  Marten
discusses  the  question  of  acres  cultivated  per
100  ordinary  cultivators,  he  does  not  go  into  the
question  of  the  most  predominant  size  of  hold¬
ings  in  every  province.  It  is  not  the  average
holding  that  really  matters  but  the  size  of  hold¬
ing  which  predominates  over  others.  The
question  of  the  gradual  decrease  in  the  size  of
holdings  is  engaging  serious  attention  in  the
Bombay  Presidency  and  the  Baroda  State,  where
after  all,  one  can  see  from  the  figures,  that  the
situation  is  the  best,  these  being  1215  acres  per
100  ordinary  cultivators.  One  could  very  well
imagine  what  it  must  be  in  Bihar  and  Bengal
with  309  and  312  acres  respectively  for  every
100  cultivators,  inspite  of  the  superior  quality
of  the  soil  there.  Mr.  Marten  quotes  Mr
Thompson,  the  Census  Superintendent  of  Bengal
at  great  length  on  this  subject,  but  one  cannot
very  well  agree  with  the  remedy  that  the  latter
suggests.  Mr.  Thompson  observes  that  "In
Bengal,  the  holdings  have  been  so  minutely
subdivided  that  there  is  not  enough  work  for
the  cultivators”  and  he  proposes  that  some


THE  CENSUS  OF  INDIA,  igai  :  A  SURVEY


7


industrial  concerns  should  be  started  to  give
them  work  in  their  spare  time.  No  organised
industry  could  flourish  on  such  casual  labour,
and  the  only  remedy  for  the  evil  is  to  introduce
legislation  both  to  prevent  further  fragmenta¬
tion  and  gradually  to  consolidate  the  present
holdings.  The  necessary  social  and  economic
adjustments  will  naturally  take  some  time  and
a  few  would  suffer  in  the  process,  but  it  is  much
better  that  a  few  should  suffer  for  a  little  while
than  that  a  country’s  whole  peasantry,  which  is
after  all  its  greatest  pride,  should  continue  to
live  in  abject  and  degrading  poverty.  Some  such
step  will  also  tend  to  remove  the  common  charge
against  the  government  that  it  does  not  desire
a  bold  peasantry.

Mr.  Marten’s  discussion  not  only  includes  the
various  industries,  the  numbers  they  employ,
their  organisation,  but  trade  and  trade  organisa¬
tions  in  various  provinces,  the  nature  of
industrial  concerns,  the  ownership,  their
distribution  by  provinces,  the  work  of  women
and  children  in  industries  and  the  kind  of  power
used.  He  has  introduced  special  sections
dealing  with  handlooms,  lalxmr  and  occupation
of  women.

There  are  eight  api>endices  to  the  Report ,  two
of  which  are  of  special  importance.  One  is  an
extract  from  the  Baroda  Census  Report,  by
Mr.  S.  V.  Mukerjea,  on  the  present  day
tendencies  in  the  religious  sphere  and  the  other
is  a  summary  of  the  special  inquiry  undertaken
in  some  provinces  and  states  regarding  the  size
and  sex  constitution  of  the  average  family  an  1
the  fertility  of  marriage  life.

Mr.  Marten's  Report  is  a  triumph  of  judicious
and  wise  selection  and  in  many  respects  it  is  a
departure  from  the  previous  reports,  not  perhaps
in  the  structure  and  form  so  much  as  in  the  scope
and  selection  of  the  subjects  included.  There
is  little  doubt  that  it  will  be  a  model  for
several  more  reports.  Mr.  Marten  has  vigorous¬
ly  turned  his  back  on  the  highly  technical  and
scholarly  discourse  on  many  subjects,  such  as
language,  castes,  tribes,  religion,  and  has
established  a  finer  proportion,  which  adds  to  the
practical  value  of  the  census.  The  day  is  passed
even  if  the  materials  be  not  exhausted,  when  the
writers  of  Census  Reports  could  afford  to  dabble
in  research  work  on  these  subjects,  partly
because  separate  linguistic  and  similar  other
surveys  have  been  undertaken  by  the  Govern¬


ment  and  by  the  learned  societies,  and  it  is  better
that  such  discussion  is  confined  to  the  special
reports  of  such  surveys  and  to  the  journals  of
these  societies  or  other  highbrow  journals.  In
future  the  Census  Reports  will  have  to  devote
their  pages  to  the  elucidation  of  much  more
practical  problems.  Mr.  Marten  has  brought  to
boar  on  the  materials  before  him  a  keen  analytic
mind  and  the  conclusions  he  arrives  at  are  #
characterised  by  extreme  caution.

Mr.  Marten  complains  that  the  public  were
generally  indifferent  to  the  census.  He  is  really
thankful  for  it  at  heart  because  they  stopped
short  with  indifference  and  were  not  positively
hostile.  The  fact  is  that  the  general  public  or
even  the  literate  portion  of  it  for  the  matter  of
that,  knows  precious  little  about  the  census
operations  beyond  the  fact  that  it  is  for  calculat¬
ing  the  population  of  the  country.  It  has  no
proper  appreciation  of  the  wealth  of  materials
thus  collected  and  seeing  that  the  Census  Reports
l»oth  of  the  provinces  and  states  and  of  India
are  published  in  English  and  find  their  destination
in  Government  offices  and  the  reference  shelves
of  the  public  libraries,  this  want  of  appreciation
and  the  attitude  of  indifference  arc  not  at  all  to
be  surprised  at.  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that
the  Reports  should  be  published  in  the  various
Vernaculars,  but  why  could  not  the  various
Governments  make  arrangements  to  get  abridged
editions  in  the  Vernaculars  of  the  province,  which
might  exclude  all  purely  technical  matters  and
many  tables,  and  which  would  appeal  to  the  man
in  the  street  at  general  reading.  I  have  before
me  one  such  small  but  excellent  volume  in
Gujarati,  prepared  at  the  instance  of  the  Govern¬
ment  of  Baroda.  In  this  volume,  in  two  hundred
odd  octavo  pages,  the  translator  has  summarised
in  Gujarati  the  standard  English  Report  taking
up  more  than  four  hundred  foolscap  pages,  in  a
very  homely  style.  The  volume  is  priced  Rs.  2/-
and  is  calculated  to  have  a  much  wider  publicity
than  the  standard  report.  The  experiment  was
first  made  in  ion  and  it  was  found  so  successful
that  it  was  repeated  in  1021.  I  do  not  know  if
any  other  local  government  issue  such  abridged
editions  in  the  Vernaculars,  but  if  they  do  not,
they  might  take  a  leaf  from  the  policy  of  the
Baroda  Government,  and  so  might  the  Govern¬
ment  of  India.  It  will  help  much  towards  effect¬
ing  the  desired  change  in  the  attitude  of  the
pcopV


M.  i.  454.


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  QUAIL.


323


ness.  Mindfulness  is  slow  of  growth,  but  he  is  quick
to  give  up  such  distraction,  quick  to  dispel,  eject  and
annihilate  it.  It  is  like  a  man  who  lets  fall  two  or
three  drops  of  water  into  an  iron  pot  heated  all  day
long  ;  the  drops  of  water  are  slow  in  falling  but  quick
to  disappear  and  vanish.  And  it  is  just  the  same  with
this  third  man  who  is  progressing  .  .  .  and  annihilate
it.  Him  also  do  I  call  not  detached  but  attached.
[454]  And  why? — Because  I  have  gauged  his
individuality.

Last  comes  the  man  who,  recognizing  that  ties  are
a  root  of  Ill,  frees  himself  from  ties  and  is  Delivered
by  destroying  ties.  Him  do  I  call  detached  and  not
attached.  And  why  ? — Because  I  have  gauged  his
individuality.

Five  in  number  are  the  pleasures  of  sense,  namely,
visible  shapes,  sounds,  odours,  tastes,  and  touch, — all
of  them  pleasant,  agreeable  and  delightful,  all  of  them
bound  up  with  passion  and  lusts.  The  satisfaction  and
the  gratification  derived  from  these  five  pleasures  of
sense  is  called  sensual  pleasure,  filthy  pleasure,  vulgar
pleasure,  ignoble  pleasure,  not  to  be  practised,  not  to
be  developed,  not  to  be  fostered,  but  to  be  dreaded,
say  I.

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who,  divested  of
pleasures  of  sense  and  of  wrong  states  of  conscious¬
ness,  develops  and  dwells  in  the  First  Ecstasy  .  .  .
and  successively  in  the  Third  and  Fourth  Ecstasies.
This  is  called  the  pleasure  of  renunciation,  the
pleasure  of  solitude,  the  pleasure  of  tranquillity,  the
pleasure  of  utter  enlightenment,1 — to  be  practised,  to
be  developed,  to  be  fostered,  and  not  to  be  dreaded,
say  I.

Take  the  case  of  an  Almsman  who  has  developed  and
dwells  in  the  First  Ecstasy.  Here  there  is  no  fixity, —
in  that  observation  and  reflection  are  not  yet  stilled.
Nor  is  there  fixity  in  the  Second  Ecstasy, — in  that


1  Sambodha-sukha , — a  term  ordinarily  restricted  to  the
Buddha,  but  here  used  of  Arahats  in  general.


324


LXVI.  LATUKIKOPAMA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  455-


zest  and  satisfaction  are  not  yet  stilled.  Nor  again  is
there  fixity  in  the  Third  Ecstasy, — in  that  [455]  the
bliss  of  rapt  concentration  survives.  But  when  the
Brother  has  developed  and  dwells  in  the  Fourth
Ecstasy,  then  I  say  there  is  fixity.

Of  the  First  Ecstasy  I  say  that  it  sufficeth  not ;  I
tell  you  to  give  it  up  and  pass  beyond  it, — to  the
Second  Ecstasy.  Of  the  Second  Ecstasy  I  say  that
it  sufficeth  not ;  I  tell  you  to  give  it  up  and  pass
beyond  it, — to  the  Third  Ecstasy.  Of  the  Third
Ecstasy  I  say  that  it  sufficeth  not ;  I  tell  you  to  give
it  up  and  pass  beyond  it, — to  the  Fourth  Ecstasy.  Of
the  Fourth  Ecstasy  I  say  that  it  sufficeth  not ;  I  tell
you  to  give  it  up  and  pass  beyond  it — to  the  plane  of
Infinity  and  Space — by  passing  beyond  all  perception
of  things  material,  by  eliminating  perception  of  sense-
reactions,  and  by  not  heeding  perception  of  differences.
This  too  sufficeth  not  and  you  must  give  it  up  and
pass  beyond  it, — to  the  plane  of  Infinity  of  Conscious¬
ness  and  thence  successively  to  the  planes  of  Naught
and  of  Neither-perception-nor-non-perception,  [456]
till  at  last  the  Almsman  develops  and  dwells  in  the
state  where  perceptions  and  sensations  cease  to  be

Can  you  point,  UdSyl,  to  any  bond,  big  or  small,
which  I  have  omitted  to  order  to  be  given  up  ?

No,  sir.

Thus  spake  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Udayl  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXVII.  CATUMA-SUTTA.

OF  LAND  SHARKS.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Catuma  in  the  myrobalan  wood,  there
came  to  visit  him  five  hundred  Almsmen  headed  by
Sariputta  and  Moggallana.  These  newcomers,  while
they  were  being  greeted  by  the  resident  Almsmen  and
were  being  shown  their  billets  and  while  they  were


8


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNI N.
By  Mr  M.  Habib,  b.a.,  (Oxo n.)  m.r.a.s.
Professor  of  History,  Aligarh.


I :  Muslim  World  in  the  Tenth  Century.

“Almost  all  ethical  doctrines  and  religious
creeds,”  says  John  Stuart  Mill,  “are  full  of
meaning  and  vitality  to  those  who  originate
them  and  to  the  direct  disciples  of  the  originators.
Their  meaning  continues  to  be  felt  in  undiminish¬
ed  strength,  and  is  perhaps  brought  out  into
fuller  consciousness,  so  long  as  the  struggle  lasts
to  give  the  doctrine  or  creed  an  ascendency  over
other  creeds.  At  last  it  either  prevails,  and
becomes  the  general  opinion,  or  its  progress
stops;  it  keeps  possession  of  the  ground  it  has
gained,  but  ceases  to  spread  further.  From  this
time  may  be  usually  dated  the  decline  in  the
living  power  of  the  doctrine.  For  when  it  has
beebme  a  hereditary’  creed,  and  to  be  received
passively,  not  actively — when  the  mind  is  no
longer  compelled,  in  the  same  degree  as  at  first,
to  exercise  its  vital  powers  on  the  questions  which
its  beliefs  present  to  it,  there  is  a  progressive
tendency  to  forget  all  of  the  belief  except  the
formularies,  or  to  give  it  a  dull  and  torpid  assent,
as  if  accepting  it  on  trust  dispensed  with  the
necessity  of  realising  it  in  consciousness.”

This  weakening  of  spiritual  zeal  has  shown
itself  in  all  religions  at  various  stages,  and  is
painfully  obvious  in  the  history  of  Islam  from
the  decline  of  the  Abhosid  Caliphate  in  the  ninth
century  to  the  Mongol  Conquest  of  Muslim  Asia
and  the  growth  of  mysticism  in  the  thirteenth.
It  was  a  period  of  great  achievements  in  science,
literature  and  art,  and  the  area  of  human  know¬
ledge  was  enlarged  by  scholars  trained  in  the
philosophy  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.  It  was  a
period  of  feverish  political  activity ;  empires  were
established  and  pulled  down ;  cities  were  founded
and  destroyed.  But  it  was  a  period  of  refinement
and  culture,  of  an  alluring,  materialistic  civilisa¬
tion — not  of  faith.  The  missionary  zeal  of  the
carl’.er  Muslims  had  evaporated  in  the  signal
success  it  had  achieved,  and  the  creed  that-had
come  into  the  world  for  the  elevation  of  the
lower  classes  was  being  used  as  a  bulwark  for


the  protection  of  vested  interests  and  the  conti¬
nuation  of  time-honoured  abuses.  Of  a  hair¬
splitting  theology’  there  was  enough  and  to
spare ;  and  the  sectarian  fanaticism  which  such
theology  excited  discolours  the  annals  of  many
generations,  during  which  ‘orthodox’  and
‘heretics’  persecuted  and  tortured  each  other
with  an  inhumanity  they’  never  display’cd  in  their
dealings  with  the  non-Muslims,  who  were
regarded  as  the  honourable  opponents  of  an
honourable  war.  Islam  had  become  a  matter  of
custom  and  tradition  and  a  means  for  procuring
the  salvation  of  the  individual  soul.  It  was  no
longer  a  world-wide  force  of  democratic  up¬
heaval.  People  prayed  and  fasted  and  read  the
Quran  with  devotion  ;  they  lived  according  to
what  they  considered  to  be  the  true  interpretation
of  the  law ;  but  the  vision  of  a  new  heaven  and
a  new  earth,  such  as  had  inspired  the  Saracenic
invaders  of  Persia,  was  totally  beyond  their
ken.  They  had  lost  their  proselytising  fervour
and  were  content  to  keep  their  creed  to  them¬
selves.  The  bounderies  of  the  Muslim  world
remained  where  the  Omayyad  Caliphs  had
left  them,  and  no  new  countries  or  peoples  were
brought  within  the  fold.  And  internally  also
the  political,  religious  and  racial  unity  of  the
Muslim  world  was  being  gradually  undermined
by  the  forces  of  disintegration.


The  idea  that  all  purely  Muslim  populations

(i>  Political  divi-  ^°U,d  ,  **  #  U"der„  ,th^
sions.  Decline  of  the  suzerainty  of  the  Caliph
Caliphate.  has  never  been  absent  from

Muslim  consciousness.
Nevertheless  the  lands  of  the  Caliphate  were  too
extensive  to  be  governed  from  a  single  centre,
and  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  centuries  the
political  and  administrative  power  of  the  Caliph
had  gradually  declined.  Local  princes  raised
their  heads  and  the  orders  of  Baghdad  ceased
to  command  the  implicit  obedience  that  had  been
y  ieldcd  to  them  in  the  good,  old  days  of  Harunur
Rashid.  Spain  had  become  independent;  an


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNTN :  A  STUDY


9


anti-Caliphatc  had  been  founded  by  the  Fatimids
of  F.gypt  ;  and  nearer  home  the  growth  of
a  number  of  'minor  dynasties’  paralysed  the


Caliph’s  power  in  Iraq,  Persia  and  Turkestan.
Yet  the  moral  prestige  of  the  Caliph  in  the  eyes
of  his  co-religionists  was  immense.  He  was  the
successor  of  the  Prophet  and  public  sentiment
regarded  him  with  deep  respect.  He  was  the
fountain-head  of  all  political  authority;  kings
and  tribal  chiefs  were  in  theory  subordinate  to
him,  and  his  sanction  alone  could  provide  a
legal  basis  for  their  power.  The  maddest  oi
political  adventurers  would  think  many  times
before  he  directly  defied  the  Caliph’s  authority.

Of  the  ‘minor  dynasties’  that  jostled  each

other  in  Persia  and
t_The  ‘minor  dynas-  Turkestan  the  nlost  im.

portant  and  powerful  was
the  House  of  Saman  founded  by  Amir  Ismail
Samani  in  91 1  A.D.  The  Samanids,  with  their
capital  at  Bokhara,  held  an  insecure  sway  over
Trans-Oxonia  (Afawaraun  Nahr)  and  Khorasan,
their  power  being  almost  constantly  defied  by  re¬
bellious  governors  and  insubordinate  officials.
Beyond  the  Jaxartes  the  unconverted  Turks  and
Tartars  were  ruled  by  their  tribal  chiefs,  the  most
powerful  of  whom  was  the  Khan  of  Kashghar.
In  Eastern  Persia  the  Shiaite  dynasty  cf  Buwaih.
with  its  capital  at  Ray,  was  founded  by  Rukn-
uddoulah  Davlami  in  933  and  gradually  expand¬
ed  its  power  in  Iraq  till  even  Baghdad  came
within  its  grasp.  The  Caliph  was  left  to  slumber
in  his  palace,  ‘a  venerable  phantom  J  while  the
Buwaihid  rulers  assumed  the  power  and  the  title
of  Commander-in-chief’  and  directed  the  secular
a  flairs  of  the  capital.  The  other  dynasties  are
too  many  and  too  unimportant  to  be  mentioned
here.  They  were  constantly  at  war  with  each
other.

As  if  this  division  of  political  power  was  not
enough  to  paralyse  the
(ii)  Religious  djvi-  energies  of  the  ‘Faithful’,
acute  differences  on  ques¬
tions  of  dogma  also  appear¬
ed  with  an  intensity  of  bitterness  which
Mussulmans  now  living  can  hardly  realise.  The
division  of  Mussulmans  into  Sunnis  and  Shias  had
come  very  early  The  Shias  claimed  that  the
Prophet’s  cousin  and  son-in-law,  Ali,  should  have
been  his  immediate  successor,  while  the  Sunnis
upheld  the  legality  of  the  actual  order  of
succession — Abu  Bakr,  Otnar,  Usman  and  Ali.
But  this  political  difference  slowly  developed  into
difference  of  a  more  fundamental  nature ;  and
2


siotl* — Sunnis,
anil  ‘heretics’.


Shias


Shiaism  became  the  Persian  interpretation,  as
against  Sunnism  or  the  Arab  interpretation,  of
the  Prophet’s  tcachings(i).  As  yet,  however,
the  difference  between  the  Sunnis  and  the  main
body  of  Shias  was  not  so  acute  as  it  afterwards
became;  one  sect  shaded  off  into  another  by
insensible  gradations ;  it  was  difficult  to  say
where  Sunnism  ended  and  Shiaism  began,  and
many  persons  then  living  would  have  found  it
hard  to  decide  to  w’hich  sect  they  really  belonged
But  the  most  bitter  animosity  prevailed  between
the  ‘orthodox’  Sunnis  and  the  extreme  wing  of
the  Shiaites,  who  believed  in  only  ‘seven’  out  of


(1)  The  point  requires  some  elucidation.  The
great  religions  of  the  world  may  be  divided  into  two
classes — the  Semitic  (Judaism,  Christianity  and  Islam)
and  the  Aryan  (Hinduism,  Jainism  and  Buddhism).
Broadly  shaking,  Semitic  religions  give  more
importance  to  the  ethical,  and  the  Aryan  religions  to
the  metaphysical,  aspect  of  faith.  Now  after  the  Arab
conquest  of  Persia,  the  Persians  naturally  interpreted
the  new  faith  in  the  light  of  their  already  existing
metaphysical  conceptions  which  they  largely  shared
with  the  Hindus.  1  me  of  the  most  important  of  these
was  the  idea  of  Incarnation,  the  appearance  of  the
Supreme  Being  in  a  human  form.  Every  religion  has
felt  the  necessity  of  finding  some  means  of  intercourse
between  the  real  and  the  sensible  world.  In  Islam  the
angel  Gabriel  brings  the  message  of  the  one  world  to
the  other.  Aryan  religions  explain  it  by  a  scries  of
incarnations  by  which  the  creator  comes  to  teach  the
law  to  the  created.  In  the  extreme  forms  of  Shiaism,
a  highly  Arvanised  interpretation  of  Islam,  the  rrophct>
and  the  Imams  liecome  Divine  Incarnations,  a  belief
which  the  orthodox  considered  to  be  identical  with
idolatry.  And  yet  a  priori  Shiaism  and  Sunnism  must
be  considered  equally  valid  interpretations  of  a  common
faith;  nor  is  it  possible  to  give  any  valid  reason  why
the  Arab  outlook  on  life  should  l>e  in  greater  consonance
with  Reality  than  the  Persian.  Another  IndoAryan
doctrine  was  ‘monism',  the  belief  which  regarded  all
existence  as  the  emanation  of  a  one  Being  and  all
change  as  the  evidence  of  a  Cosmic  Purpose.  To  the
Semitic  Conception  of  law  as  on  external  command,  the
Arvans  had  opposed  the  belief  that  law  was  an  inner
aspiration  of  the  soul  itself.  Whnt  is  known  as  Taiutraf
(Muslim  mysticism)  is  Islam  interpreted  in  the  light
of  Indo- Persian  Monism,  in  which  God  ceases  to  be  a
being  external  to  the  individual  and  law  is  no  longer
a  command  imposed  from  without.  Muslim  mystics
have  always  claimed  that  tlicir  doctrines  arc  based  on
the  Quran  and  rightly  so,  however  itnpalatable  such  a
confession  may  appear  to  those  who  imagine  that  a
religion  can  king  exist  without  developing  a  system  of
metaphysics.  But  the  contention  of  the  Muslim  mystics
is  quite  compatible  with  the  fact  that  the  devehipment
of  mystisiem  in  Islam  was  the  work  of  Persian  thinker*,
who  were  steeped  in  the  doctrine  of  Monism ;  and  that
in  its  mature  form  the  teachings  of  Tasuuaf  are  broadly
the  same  as  the  philosophy  of  the  Neo-Platonists  and
the  Vpanishads.  Thus  Islam  interpreted  in  the  light
of  the  Incarnation-idea  has  given  us  Shiaism,  which
in  its  orthodox  form  claims  that  Ali  should  have  been
the  first  Caliph  and  in  its  hcreticnl  phase  asserts  him
and  the  Imams  to  be  Divine  Incarnations,  while  inter¬
preted  in  the  light  of  Aryan  monism,  it  has  led  to
Tasu-waj.  the  finest  achievement  of  Indo-Persian  genius
in  the  realm  of  thought.


M.  i.  457-


OF  LAND  SHARKS.


325

putting  away  their  bowls  and  robes,  talked  loud  and
made  a  great  noise.  Said  the  Lord  to  the  reverend
Ananda:  Who  pray  are  these  loud-voiced  noisy  persons,
like  so  many  fishermen  over  their  catch  ?

There  have  come  to  visit  you,  sir,  five  hundred
Almsmen  headed  ...  a  great  noise.

Tell  them  from  me,  Ananda,  that  the  Master  desires
their  presence.

Ananda  having  duly  done  so,  those  Almsmen
obediently  [457]  came  to  the  Lord  and  with  proper
salutations  took  their  seats  to  one  side,  there  to  be
asked  why  there  was  all  this  clamour  and  noise,  as  of
so  many  fishermen  over  their  catch.

It  was  these  five  hundred  Almsmen,  sir,  headed  .  .  .
a  great  noise.

Depart,  Almsmen ;  I  bid  you  begone ;  you  cannot
dwell  near  me.

Yes,  sir,  said  they  obediently,  as,  rising  up  from
their  seats,  they  took  reverential  leave  of  the  Lord,
folded  up  their  bedding,  took  their  bowls  and  robes,
and  went  away.

At  that  time  the  Sakyans  of  Catuma  were  met
together  in  their  moot-hall  on  some  business  or  other ;
and,  when  from  a  distance  they  observed  these  Alms¬
men  going  away,  they  went  up  to  them  and  asked
where  they  were  going.

The  Lord,  sirs,  has  bidden  us  all  begone.

Sit  down  for  a  while,  reverend  sirs ;  we  may  be  able
to  mollify  the  Lord.

So  these  Almsmen  sat  down  while  the  Sakyans  of
Catuma  went  off  to  the  Lord  and,  seating  themselves
after  salutations,  spoke  thus: — Let  the  Lord  show
favour  to  the  Almsmen  and  extend  a  welcome  to  them.
As  in  the  past  the  Lord  has  been  kindly  to  the  Con¬
fraternity,  so  let  him  be  kindly  to  them  now.  Among
them,  sir,  are  young  recruits  that  have  but  recently
joined  and  are  fresn  to  this  Doctrine  and  Law  ;  to
these  it  would  be  a  shock  and  a  set-back,  if  they  fail  to
see  the  Lord, — just  as  drought  to  young  crops  [458]
or  as  losing  sight  of  its  mother  to  a  young  calf.  As  in


326  LXVII.  CATUMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  459*

the  past  the  Lord  has  been  kindly  to  them,  so  let  him
be  kindly  to  them  now, — showing  favour  to  the  Alms¬
men  and  extending  a  welcome  to  them.

Then  Brahma  Sahampati,  divining  with  his  own
heart  the  thoughts  of  the  Lord’s  heart,  vanished  from
out  of  his  heaven  to  re-appear  in  the  Lord’s  presence, —
as  easily  as  a  strong  man  might  stretch  out  his  arm  or
draw  back  his  outstretched  arm.  With  his  right
shoulder  respectfully  bared,  Brahma  stretched  forth
folded  palms  in  homage  towards  the  Lord,  saying,  as
the  Sakyans  had  said  : — Let  the  Lord  shew  favour
...  a  welcome  to  them.

[459]  Now  the  Sakyans  of  Catuma  and  Brahma,
Sahampati  by  their  illustrations  from  young  crops  and
the  young  calf  succeeded  in  mollifying  the  Lord.

Said  the  reverend  M  aha- Moggallana  to  those  Alms¬
men  : — Arise,  sirs,  and  take  up  your  bowls  and  robes ;
the  Sakyans  of  Catuma  and  Brahma  Sahampati  have
succeeded  in  mollifying  the  Lord  by  illustrations  from
young  crops  and  the  young  calf.  So  at  his  bidding
the  Almsmen  arose,  took  up  their  bowls  and  robes,
went  to  the  Lord,  saluted  him  and  took  their  sears  to
one  side.

Sariputta  was  sitting  hard  by,  and  the  Lord  asked
him  what  he  had  thought  when  those  Almsmen  were
sent  away.

I  thought,  said  Sariputta,  that  the  Lord  did  not
want  to  be  troubled  just  then  but  to  enjoy  present  bliss,
and  that  we  too  would  do  the  same.

Go  away,  Sariputta ;  go  away  and  never  let  such  an
idea  cross  your  mind  again.

Turning  to  Moggallana,  the  Lord  asked  him  the
same  question  and  received  the  answer  that  he  had
thought,  when  those  Almsmen  were  sent  away,  that
the  Lord  did  not  want  to  be  troubled  just  then  but  to
enjoy  present  bliss,  and  accordingly  that  he  and
Sariputta  would  look  after  the  Confraternity.

Quite  right,  Moggallana  ;  for,  either  I  or  you  two
must  look  after  the  Confraternity.

Then,  addressing  the  Almsmen,  the  Lord  said  : —


IO


THF.  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


the  ‘twelve’  Imams  of  Shiaism,  and  were  general¬
ly  known  as  the  ‘heretics’  ( mulahidah ).  This
extreme  wing,  though  divided  into  many  groups,
of  whom  the  Ismailis  of  Arabia  and  the
Carmathians  of  Multan  were  most  notorious,
was  unified  by  a  common  hatred  of  the  Sunnis
owing  to  the  punishment  which  the  latter  inflicted
on  "heretics’  in  general,  without  trying  to  dis¬
tinguish  between  one  kind  of  heresy  and  another.
Their  great  dogmatic  fault,  from  the  orthodox
view-point,  was  their  belief  in  the  Prophet’s
Family  as  a  Divine  Incarnation.  But  every
species  of  vice  was  attributed  to  them ;  and  it
was  their  supposed  moral  character  rather  than
their  actual  religious  beliefs  that  excited  the
frantic  intolerance  of  the  orthodox.  They  were
accused  of  permitting  incest  and  of  legalising
marriages  within  prohibited  degrees;  they  were
blamed,  and  with  more  truth,  for  resorting  to
assassination  as  a  political  weapon  and  of  trying
to  establish  a  heretical  hierarchy  in  place  of  the
secular  state.  A  ‘heretic’  was  slain  wherever  he
was  found;  but'  simple  death,  as  a  rule,  was
considered  too  mild  a  punishment,  and  the
‘heretic’  who  escaped  being  torn  to  pieces  by
infuriated  mobs,  was  put  to  death  by  the
Government  with  the  most  revolting  tortures
that  the  mind  of  man  could  invent.  To  this
insensate  persecution  the  ‘heretics’  replied  with
the  weapons  which  are  always  in  the  hands  of  a
determined  minority.  They  formed  secret
societies  which  could  not  be  unearthed  by  the
clumsy  spy-system  of  the  state  and  their  pro¬
pagandists  ( daiy )  in  various  disguises  penetrated
into  every  corner  of  the  Muslim  world.  Growing
yet  bolder  they  established  the  ‘anti-Caliphate’
of  Egypt,  captured  the  Holy  Places  and  removed
the  Black  Stone  from  the  sacred  temple  of
Mecca.  Finally,  they  seized  a  number  of  forts
in  Persia,  the  chief  of  which  was  Alamut
developed  murder  into  a  fine  art,  and  Sunni
kings,  statesmen  and  theologians  were  kept  in  a
I  perpetual  fear  of  death  by  the  unseen  dagger  of
the  assassinating  "heretic*.  It  was  a  mad  dance  •
but  none  the  less  it  continued  till  the  middle  of
the  thirteenth  century  when  ‘orthodox’  and
heretic  alike  were  compelled  to  lick  the  dust
under  the  Mongol  conqueror’s  iron  heel. (2)

M  A  detailed  study  of  the  Carmnthian.

and*')h.  doe*  "0t-  colne  W1,hin  onr  scope.  Their  ideal-
nil  revoTmionfa"1SatH>"  are  Cf|nn*’-V  interesting.  I,ikc


“And  this  is  my  last  advice  unto  you,’’  the
Prophet  said  in  his  last
■  (ln|  £aci?1  d\vj-  speech  at  Mecca,  “Ye  are
and  Turks.  of  one  brotherhood.”  And

there  is  no  social  principle
of  their  faith  to  which  the  Mussalmans  have  been
more  true  ;  religious  unity  has  always  over¬
ridden  all  tribal  and  racial  distinctions.  Never¬
theless  there  have  been  avowed,  though  futile,
attempts  at  racial  supremacy  ;  in  Muslim  lands,
as  elsewhere,  racial  pride  has  been  an  uncomfort¬
able  aspect  of  human  nature.  The  Omayvad
Caliphs  made  a  bold  attempt  to  convert  the
Empire  into  a  heritage  of  the  Arab  aristocracy  ;
the  Persian  Revolution,  wheih  overthrew  the
Omayyads  and  placed  the  Abbasids  on  the
throne  pf  the  Caliphate,  naturally  brought  the
Arab  regime  to  an  end  and  transferred  to  the
Persians  the  superiority  formerly  enjoyed  by  the
Arabs.  But  a  rival  race  soon  appeared  to  contest
the  prize  with  the  victorious  Persians.  From  the
marshes  of  Anatolia  in  the  west  to  the  shores  of
the  Pacific  Ocean  in  the  east,  there  extended
the  various  tribes  of  the  Mongolian  race— Turks,
I  artars,  1  urkomans,  Tibetans,  Chinese  and
Mongols— distinguished  by  some  very  marked
common  features.  They  had  allied  scripts— all
writing  from  top  to  bottom.  They  were  short
of  stature,  with  high  cheek-bones  and  small
eves,  but  remarkably  well-built  and  inured  to  the
hardships  of  war.  With  the  expansion  of  the
Muslim  frontier  to  the  north  and  west  of  Persia,
one  Turkish  tribe  after  another  was  brought
within  the  Islamic  pale,  and  the  Turks  surprised
their  conquerors  by  the  remarkable  courage  of
their  men  and  the  no  less  remarkable  beauty  of


wet,  founded  bv

i-  U  W,,  /  a  L’  T  before  the  Prophet,  and  continued
of  A  lam  at  <rLZ V '*7  cll*™  the  fortress

hrnce  hJ  -OU  >*s  '"’<**  paradise".  from

Kendoutld.  ,Man  °f  }hr  Moon  tains"  was  wont  to
The  -1  .  •  K  men  to  assassinate  his  opponents.

M  at  “XT'*  rr*  !rom  hashiih  ^mp>  with
being  taken  YoVhl  ‘1-  rami  wa*  drugged  hefo.*

•uich  an  infill  *  'w,ra'* 1.1*' /  *«*<**.  it  is  said,  had

found  no  rlst  Jn  .v,0"  ,,L'imaK\n*tion  that  his  soul
that  he  would  and  the  promise

of  a  heroic  ,1  *!  Para^ls*  oncc  by  the  performance
the  assassin's  knife”*  5T,/OOK*1 *  to  induce  him  to  wield
at  the  hand.  <  and  ^acc  the  inevitable  punishment
bv  JjJTn  ZZ  orth?,°*  The  fort  was  destroyed
the  snliiecf  ^nd;S°n  Chengi*.  For  literature  on
chanters  'on  It*'*?  ,h.e  *«!"»■*  Namnh"  see  the
"Tar>kh-i-rn»M*i?f  'n  "Rauzatus  Safa’  and

Malik  Tnw  '  c*?  ^!c,  *btrd  volume  of  Alnnddin  Ata

on  he  te  of  “  Jahn"  wan  written

ter.  puKed*  ‘he  A'amnt  ,ibrnrv'  11  ha*  not  ^


M.  i.  460.


OF  LAND  SHARKS.


327


Four  terrors  await  a  man  who  goes  into  the  water, —
namely  waves,  crocodiles,  whirlpools  and  sharks.  And
just  the  same  four  terrors  await  the  man  who  goes  forth
from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim.

[460]  First,  what  is  the  terror  from  waves  ? — Take
the  case  of  a  young  man  who  for  faith’s  sake  has  gone
forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  a  Pilgrim,  feeling
beset  by  birth,  decay  and  death,  by  grief,  lamentation,
ills,  woes  and  tribulation,  beset  by  ills  and  spent  with
ills,  and  asking  to  be  shown  how  to  make  an  end  of
all  that  makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.  When  enrolled  ac¬
cordingly  as  a  Pilgrim,  he  is  plied  by  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life  with  orders  and  with  directions, — how  to
approach  and  how  to  withdraw,  how  to  look  in  front  of
him  and  how  to  look  behind  him,  how  to  stretch  out
his  arm  and  how  to  draw  it  back,  and  how  to  carry  his
bowl  and  robes.  Thinks  he  to  himself: — In  the  old
days  before  I  left  home,  it  was  I  who  gave  orders  and
directions  to  others  ;  but  these  people  here  seem  to
think  they  must  order  me  about  and  direct  me  like  my
own  children  and  grandchildren.  So  he  throws  up  his
training  and  reverts  to  the  lower  state  of  a  layman. —
Such  a  man  is  said  to  be  so  terrified  by  waves  that  he
throws  up  his  training  and  reverts  to  the  lower  state.
Terror  of  waves  signifies  temper.

What  is  terror  of  crocodiles? — Take  the  case  of
a  young  man  .  .  .  sum  of  Ill.  When  enrolled  accord¬
ingly  as  a  Pilgrim,  he  is  plied  by  his  fellows  in  the
higher  life  with  orders  and  directions — to  eat  this  but
not  that,  to  touch  this  but  not  that,  to  drink  this  but
not  that,  and  each  according  to  rule  at  an  appointed
hour  only,  and  never  out  of  hours.  [461]  Thinks  he
to  himself : — In  the  old  days  before  I  left  home,  I  used
to  eat  and  drink  what  I  liked  and  not  to  eat  or  drink
what  I  did  not  like,  without  any  regard  to  rules  and
hours  at  all.  Nowadays,  however,  when  faith  moves
people  to  give  me  a  good  meal  to  eat  late  in  the  day
out  of  hours,  methinks  these  people  here  bolt  and  bar
my  mouth.  So  he  throws  up  his  training  and  reverts
to  the  lower  state  of  a  layman.  Such  a  man  is  said  to


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN  :  A  STUDY


ii


their  women.  Turkish  body-guards  were
appointed  to  watch  over  the  safety  of  kings,
Turkish  slave-girls  intrigued  in  royal  harems  ;
and  slowly,  but  surely,  Turkish  adventurers
shouldered  out  the  Persians  from  all  places  of
military  command.  By  the  middle  of  the  tenth
century  the  revolution  was  complete,  and  the
Turks  had  taken  up  among  the  Mussulmans  a
position  broadly  similiar  to  that  of  the
Kshattriyas  among  the  Hindus.  That  only  a
Turk  should  ride  a  Muslim  land  or  lead  its  armies
on  the  field  of  battle  was  considered  by  the
ordinary  citizen  an  immutable  precept  of  political
morality.  Of  the  dynasties  that  have  ruled
Muslim  Asia  from  the  tenth  to  the  eighteenth
century  an  over-whelming  majority  has  belonged
to  the  Turkish  stock  (3).  Administrative  posts
were  still  left  to  the  Persians  and  they  had  an
exclusive  monopoly  of  art  and  literature,  for
which  Turks  never  showed  any  aptitude.  A
Persian  was  not  regarded  as  a  sudra  or  treated
as  a  member  of  the  subject  race ;  his  function  in
the  state  was  different,  but  his  social  status  was
as  honourable  as  that  of  a  Turk.  Nevertheless
Turkish  military  predominence  had  its  darker
side ;  the  Government  of  even  the  most  tolerant
Turkish  rulers  seemed  to  keep  the  mailed  fist  in
reserve ;  and  Persian  genius,  compelled  to  occupy
a  secondary  place  in  politics,  found  an  outlet  for
its  energies  in  organising  religious  agitation
against  the  orthodox  Turks.

II:  CAREER  OF  SULTAN  MAHMUD.

In  962  A.D.  Alxlul  Malik,  the  Samanid  king
of  Bokhara,  died  and  his
brother  and  uncle  both
claifbcd  the  throne.  Alptigin,  the  governor  of
Khorasan  was  consulted  by  the  nobles  of  the
capital  and  advised  in  favour  of  the  uncle;  but
before  his  messenger  reached  Bokhara,  the
common  consult  of  the  nobles  had  raised  Mansur,
the  brother  of  the  deceased  monarch,  to  the
throne.  Realising  that  he  had  backed  the  wrong
horse,  Alptigin  acted  with  loyalty  and  discretion.

(3)  One  of  the  greatest  of  historical  errors  is
the  prevalent  opinion  that  the  kings  of  medieval  India
•fcrv  Pathans.  It  was  originated  by  General  Briggs,
the  tnad  stupid  of  translators  and  the  most  pedantic
of  historians.  Barring  the  non-dcscript  Khiljis,  all
dynasties  of  Delhi  came  from  the  Turkish  stock,  except
the  Syeds,  Ixxlhis  and  Suries.  The  Sultans  of  Ghaznin
and  Ghor,  the  slave  Kings,  the  Tnghlaks  and  the  Great
Moghuls  nil  belonged  to  the  TurkoMongoliaM  race.
An  Afghan  king  in  Afghanistan  even  would  have  been
an  anatnoly  before  the  days  of  Ahmad  Shah  Abdnli.


Leaving  Khorasan  lo  its  legitimate  ruler,  the
Samanid  king,  he  marched  to  Ghaznin  with  his
personal  retainers,  drove  out  its  ruler,  Abu  Bakr
Lawik,  and  frustrated  Mansur’s  attempts  to
dislodge  him  from  his  new  principality.  Alptigin
died  after  a  prosperous  reign  of  eight  years  (969)
during  which  his  general  Subuktigin  kept
tinkering  at  the  Indian  frontier.  He  was
succeeded  by  his  son,  Abu  Ishaqtte,  who  died
before  he  had  reigned  for  a  year.  After  him
three  of  Alptigin ’s  Turkish  generals  were  raised
one  after  another  to  the  throne. (4)  The  first
Dilkatigin  (969 — 977)  was  a  pious  and  brave  man,
but  his  successor  Pircy  (977)  turned  out  to  be
‘a  great  villain’  and  was  deposed  in  favour  of
the  famous  Subuktigin.

Antir  Nasintddin  Subuktigin  had  been  for

Subuktigin.  Several  >,cars  Ulc  m°st

prominent  man  in  the

kingdom  when  the  people,  ‘quite  sated  with  the
villainies  of  Pirey,’  placed  him  on  the  throne
in  977.  He  eradicated  the  foundations  of
tyranny  and  ‘spread  the  carpet  of  justice  and
mercy  on  the  land’.  What  was  no  less  important
he  kept  the  officers  in  hand  and  started  his
city-state  on  that  career  of  aggressive  conquests
which  brought  it  to  the  notice  of  the  eastern
world.  Soon  after  his  accession  he  annexed  the
territories  of  Bust  and  Qasdar,  and  marching
towards  the  Indian  frontier,  ‘captured  a  few  forts


(4)  Some  historians  have  ignored,  while  others
denied  the  existence  of  Rilkatigin  and  I’irey.  Their
reigns  are,  however,  proved  by  their  coins  and  the
most  reliable  chronicles  refer  to  them.  A  great
confusion  prevails  as  to  dates.  Colonel  Raverty,  after
an  unnecessarily  arrogant  criticism  of  M  inha  jus  Siraj,
gives  the  following  dates  of  the  Ilijri  Era:  Alptigin
(3J2-352)i  Abu  Ishape  (352-353).  Bilkatigin  I353-34 * 6*).
I’irey  (362-367).  All  authorities  are  agreed  in  declaring
367  as  the  year  of  Sabuktigin's  accession,  but  a  little
reflection  would  have  shown  the  cstecniablc  Colonel
that  his  other  dates  were  preposterous.  Alxlul  Malik
died  in  350,  and  Alptigin,  who  was  governor  of
Khorasan  in  the  reign  of  that  monarch  and  conquered
Ghazni  after  Abdul  Malik’s  death,  could  not  have
reigned  in  Ghaznin  from  322  to  353.  The  date  of  the
conquest  of  Ghaznin  is  3J1  according  to  the  joint
testimony  of  Minhajas  Siraj,  Ifamdullah  Mustawfl  and
Perishta.  The  question  remains — how  divide  the  years
351  to  367  between  the  four  reigns?  Hantdullah
Mnstawfi  and  Perishta  give  sixteen  years  to  Alptigin
and  one  to  Abu  Ishaquc.  But  they  ignore  Bilkatigin
and  Pircy  who  have  to  be  accommodated.  Inspite  of
the  criticism  of  his  translator,  Minhajas  Siraj  gives  the
most  rational  account — Alptigin,  8  years ;  Ishaque.  t
year;  Bilkatigin,  to  years;  and  Pircy,  t  year.  Prom

this  I  get  the  years  of  the  Christian  era  given  above.
The  corresponding  dates  for  the  Samanid  Kings,  on  the
testimony  of  Minhajas  Siraj  and  Hamdullah  Mustnwfi,
are :  Abdul  Malik  bin  Nuh  (3t3-35o),  Mansur  bin

Nuh  (350-363),  Nuh  bin  Mansnr  (365-387).


328  LXVII.  CATUMA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  462.

do  so  from  terror  of  crocodiles.  Terror  of  crocodiles
signifies  gluttony.

What  is  terror  of  whirlpools  ? — Take  the  case  of  a
young  man  .  .  .  sum  of  Ill.  When  enrolled  accord¬
ingly  as  a  Pilgrim,  he  goes  for  alms  in  the  morning,
duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  into  a  village  or  town¬
ship,  unguarded  of  body  and  speech,  without  having
mustered  up  mindfulness,  and  with  his  faculties  not
under  control.  There  he  sees  a  householder  or  his  son
indulging  in  the  five  pleasures  of  sense  to  which  they  arc
addicted  and  devoted ;  and  the  thought  comes  to  him
that  in  the  old  days  before  he  left  home  he  too  used  to
indulge  in  these  pleasures  to  which  he  was  likewise
addicted  and  devoted  and  that,  as  his  family  has  plenty
of  substance,  he  could  enjoy  that  substance  while  doing
good  works.  So  he  throws  up  his  training  and  reverts
to  the  lower  state  of  a  layman.  Such  a  man  is  said  to
do  so  from  terror  of  whirlpools.  Terror  of  whirlpools
signifies  the  five  pleasures  of  sense.

Lastly,  what  is  terror  of  sharks  ? — Take  the  case
[462]  of  a  young  man  .  .  .  sum  of  Ill.  When  enrolled
accordingly  as  a  Pilgrim,  he  goes  for  alms  in  the
morning,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  into  a  village
or  township,  unguarded  of  body  and  speech,  without
having  summoned  up  mindfulness,  and  with  his  facul¬
ties  not  under  control.  There  he  sees  a  woman
not  fully  dressed  and  attired,  at  the  sight  of  whom
passion  defiles  his  heart  so  that  he  throws  up  his  train¬
ing  and  reverts  to  the  lower  state  of  a  layman.  Such
a  man  is  said  to  do  so  from  terror  of  sharks.  Terror
of  sharks  signifies  women.

Such  are  the  four  terrors  which  await  those  who,  in
this  Doctrine  and  Rule,  go  forth  from  home  to  home¬
lessness  as  Pilgrims.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


13


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


First

Jaipal.


atul  built  some  mosques’  (978).  It  was  a  small
affair  but  had  important  consequences.

Afghanistan  till  the  eighth  century  had  been
politically  and  culturally  a
War  witii  cf  India,  and  its

Turkish  population  had
adopted  the  Buddhist  creed. (5)  But  the  frontiers
of  Islam  had  been  gradually  pushed  across  the
country  and  now  the  two  forces  stood  opposite
to  each  other  in  the  province  of  Lamaghan  on
the  southern  side  of  the  Kabul  river.  Rai  Jaipal
of  Lahore,  over-lord  of  the  Punjab,  was  driven
to  desperation  by  this  slow  diminution  of  his
ancestral  kingdom  ;  Subuktigin’s  repeated
invasions  had  made  his  life  uncomfortable ;  and
resolved  to  drive  matters  to  a  final  issue,  he
marched  to  the  valley  of  Lamaghan  with  ‘soldiers
black  as  night  and  impetuous  as  a  torrent’.
Subuktigin  and  his  son  Mahmud,  advanced  from
Ghaznin.  The  battle  raged  for  several  days,  but
the  victor  could  not  be  distinguished  from  the
vanquished.  Then  an  untimely  snow-storm
shattered  Jaipal's  calculation.  (6)  “All  at  once
the  sky  was  covered  with  clouds;  thunder  and


(5)  Some  time  before  the  Christian  era  the  Turk!
Shahi  <  Kuslian  1  dynasty  of  Scythian  Turks  founded
by  Karhntigin  began  a  career  of  conquest  till  under
its  greatest  monarch,  Kanishka,  a  large  part  of
Northern  India,  Afghanistan,  Turkestan  and  Muwaraun
Nahr  was  included  in  the  Kuslian  Empire.  The
Turks  were  quickly  assimilated  by  Indian  Civilisation,
but  the  result  was  not  altogether  fortunate.  For
Buddhism  instead  of  raising  the  barbarians  to  its  level
found  it  easier  to  1  winder  to  their  idolatorous  beliefs;
and  tliat  preposterous  mixture  of  rationalism  and
priestcraft,  known  as  Mahayana  Ruddhism,  in  which
the  philosophy  of  the  great  Teacher  is  reconciled  with
the  gods  of  every  locality,  liecame  the  creed  of  the
peoples  included  in  the  Knshan  Iinipirc.  Kanishka**
Capital,  Peshawar,  became  a  centre  for  disseminating
the  new  faith,  and  centuries  later  the  Mnssalmaus
found  the  wild  tribes  of  Afghanistan  worshipping  the
Buddha  in  the  form  of  the  lion  (Sakva  Sinha).  From
the  downfall  of  the  Kuslian  Umpire  till  the  Saracenic
invasion  of  Afghanistan  in  the  Eighth  Centnrv  all  is
dark.  Allierunt  states  that  the  Turk!  Sliahi  dynasty
of  Iiarluittv;in  included  no  less  Ilian  sixtv  kings,  the
last  of  whom,  Lagaturman,  was  deposed  bv  his
Rrahman  U’osfr,  Kajtur,  the  first  ruler  of  the  Hindu
.viiiJn  dynasty,  which  Subuktigin  found  ruling  over
the  Punjab.  Ihe  pedigree  of  the  kings  written  on
silk  was  preserved  in  the  fortress  of  Nagarkot  but
Albcruni  says  he  was  unable  to  see  it.  The  order  of
the  Hindu  Shahi  dynasty  is  given  by  him  as  follows  :
Kallur,  Simand,  Kamalu,  Bhim,  "jaipal,  Anandpal,
Tarajanpnl  (Triloeanapal)  and  Bhimpal.  {Albcruni.
Vol.  if,  p.  i3.)

(6)  The  snow-storm  is  said  to  have  been  caused
by  some  dirt  thrown  into  a  mysterious  pool  of  clear
water  by  Mahmud’s  order.  Similar  beliefs  were  widely
prevalent  among  the  Mongols  and  Turks.  It  is  obvious
that  the  Indian  army  would  suffer  more  than  the
enemy,  who  was  accustomed  to  the  climate.


lightning  appeared ;  the  light  of  day  was  changed
into  the  darkness  of  night ;  and  the  cold  became
so  severe  that  most  of  the  horses  and  beasts  of
burden  died,  and  the  blood  of  the  Hindus  froze
within  their  veins.”  There  was  uo  alternative
to  a  humiliating  surrender,  and  Jaipal  promised
a  million  dirhams  and  fifty  elephants  to  the
enemy  who  had  retained  his  activity  in  the
intense  cold.


Second  War  with
Jaipal— annexation  of
Lamaghan  and
Peshawar.


But  in  the  safety*  of  Lahore  Rai  Jaipal  forgot
the  promise  he  had  made,
and  Subuktigin’s  envoys,
instead  of  receiving  the
promised  tribute,  found
themselves  in  prison.  “1
will  not  release  these  men”,  Jaipal  declared,
"unless  Subuktigin  sets  free  the  hostages  he  has
taken  from  me”.  The  consequence  was  another
war.  Subuktigin  retaliated  by  plundering
Lamaghan  and  Jaipal  appealed  to  his  brother
Rais,  who  responded  to  the  call.  The  rulers  of


Delhi,  Ajroere,  Kannauj  and  Kalanjar  sent  him
men  and  money,  and  thus  stengtliened  he  once
more  marched  to  the  Lamaghan  valley  with  a
hundred  thousand  horse  and  fool  beyond  all
computation.  The  battle  which  followed
demonstrated  the  futility  of  an  unmanageable
crowd.  Subuktigin  wore  out  the  patience  of  the
Indians  by  attacking  tltem  with  picked  bodies  of
five  hundred  horse  ;  and  after  a  desperate  on¬
slaught  itt  which  ‘swords  could  not  be
distinguished  from  spears,  men  from  elephants
and  valiants  from  cowards’,  drove  them  pell-mell
back  to  the  Indus.  Lamaghan  and  Peshawacfcll
into  the  hands  of  the  victor.  Subuktl$iii
established  his  tax-collectors  over  the  conquered
territory  and  garrisoned  Peshawar  with  two
thousand  men.


Some  twelve  or  thirteen  years  after  these


Acquisition  of  events,  a.  rift  in  the

Khurasan.  Saittatnd  kingdom  opened

the  door  to  a  more  im¬
portant  acquisition.  Abu  Ali  Simjuri,  the
governor  of  Khorasan,  and  Faiq,  an  un¬
scrupulous  politician  experienced  in  sueh_
business,  rebelled  against  the  Samanid  king,
Amtr  Nnh,  a  respectable  nonentity;  and  Nub
appealed  to  Subuktigin  for  help.  The  latter
came  to  the  assistance  of  his  over-lord  w  ith  an
a  acrity  that  should  have  made  Amir  Xuh  pause.
Subuktigin  and  Mahmud  crushed  the  rebels  in
a  u.rcc  battle  before  Herat,  and  as  a  reward  for
t  lo\al  scmcc  Mahmud  was  appointed
governor  of  Khorasan  (994)  and  established


LXV1II.  NALAKAPANA-SUTTA.

THE  STIMULUS  OF  EXAMPLE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  Kosala  at  Najaka-pana  in  the  Butea  grove,
there  were  a  number  of  highly  distinguished  young
men  who  for  the  Lord’s  sake  through  faith  in  him  had
gone  from  home  to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims, — the
reverend  Anuruddha,  Nandiya,  Kimbila,  Bhagu,
Kundadhana,  Revata,  and  Ananda,  together  with  other
highly  distinguished  young  men.  At  the  time  the
Lord  {463],  sitting  in  the  open  air  in  the  midst  of  the
Confraternity,  asked  the  Almsmen  whether  those
young  men,  as  Almsmen,  found  joy  in  the  higher  life.
The  Almsmen  were  silent,  and  silent  they  remained
though  asked  the  same  question  a  second  and  a  third
time.  Then  it  occurred  to  the  Lord  to  put  the  ques¬
tion  direct  to  those  young  men  themselves,  and  he
asked  Anuruddha  whether  they  found  joy  in  the
higher  life.

Certainly  we  do,  was  the  answer.

Good,  very  good,  Anuruddha  and  the  others  of  you.
It  is  meet, and  right  that  you  should  do  so.  You  have
left  home  for  homelessness  as  Pilgrims  when  quite
young — with  black  hair  untouched  by  grey  and  in  all
the  beauty  of  your  early  prime — at  the  very  age  when
you  might  have  been  leading  a  life  of  pleasure.  It  was
under  no  stress  from  kings  or  robbers,  or  debt  or  fear,
or  poverty  that  you  left  your  homes  ; — did  you  not  in
faith  go  forth  as  Pilgrims  because — feeling  beset  by
birth,  decay  and  death,  by  grief,  lamentation,  ills,  woes
and  tribulation,  beset  by  ills  and  spent  with  ills, — you
were  asking  to  be  shown  how  to  make  an  end  of  all
that  makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill  ?

Yes,  sir.

And  what,  when  enrolled  as  a  Pilgrim,  has  that
young  man  to  do  ? — If,  on  the  one  hand,  he  attains  not

329


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHA2NIN :  A  STUDY


13


Amir  Ismail.


himself  at  Naishapur.  The  finest  province  of
Persia  thus  became  for  all  practical  purposes  a
part  of  the  kingdom  of  Ghaznin.  The  glory  of
the  victory  remained  with  Amir  Nuh;  its  fruits
with  his  allies.  It  was  not  Mahmud’s  principle
to  give  back  what  had  once  come  in  his  iron
grasp.

Amir  Subuktigin  died  in  Balkh  (997)  after  a
reign  of  twenty  years,  and
in  accordance  with  his
will  his  son,  Ismail,  was  placed  on  the  throne.
But  Mahmud  was  not  prepared  to  be  ousted  by
his  younger  brother  and  Ismail  was  unwilling
to  agree  to  a  reasonable  compromise.  The
consequence  was  civil  war.  Mahmud  marched
against  Ghaznin  from  Naishapur  while  Ismail
hurried  to  protect  it  from  Balkh.  The  two
brothers  met  near  the  capital.  Mahmud’s  charge
broke  Ismail's  centre  and  the  'iron-hearted  sword
wept  tears  of  blood  over  the  fate  of  warlike
men’.  Ismail  was  imprisoned  in  a  fort  of  Jurjan
and  provided  with  all  the  requisites  of  a
comfortable  existence.


Amir  Maliamtnl —
personality  and
character.

achievements  and


The  new  Amir,  who  ascended  the  throne  at
the  age  of  thirty,  was
destined  to  surprise  and
stagger  his  contemporaries
with  the  brilliancy  of  his
to  establish  a  short-lived
empire  extending  from  the  Punjab  to  the  Caspian
and  from  Samarkand  to  Ray.  Ever  since  the
decline  of  the  Abbasid  Caliphate  men  of  small
imaginations  and  small  means  had  been  striving
for^u  supremacy  totally  beyond  their  reach.  In
Mahmud  the  long  expected  hero  seemed  to  have
amved.  The  princes  pf  Persia  and  Turkestan
tffinblcd  at  his  name  and  Subuktigin’s  mystic
dream  of  a  tree  rising  out  of  his  fire-place  and
over-shadowing  the  world  was  realised.  But
contemporaries  were  too  dazzled  with  the  genius
of  the  man,  who  never  lost  a  battle  during  forty
years  of  ceaseless  war,  to  discover  the  im¬
permanence  of  his  work.  To  posterity  on  the
a  other  hand  Mahmud  became  a  legend  and  a
name.  Latter-day  fanatics  have  loved  to  portray
him  as  a  hero  after  their  own  hearts — the  ‘Holy
^Warrior’  in  the  ‘Path  of  the  Lord’  in  whose
fqpjh’tcps  all  pious  Muslim  kings  should  aspire
to  tread ;  and  moralists  of  a  different  type  have
held  him  up  as  an  example  not  of  righteousness
but  of  personal  greed,  of  the  avarice  that  clings
to  worldly  possessions,  ‘so  laboriously  won,  so
precariously  held,  so  inevitably  lost*.  Yet  the


astute,  wine-loving  Sultan  of  Ghaznin  was
neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  Far  from  being
a  missionary,  he  was  not  even  a  fanatic,  though
like  a  clever  man  with  a  clear  eye  to  his  own
profit,  he  fought  with  Hindus  and  Mussalmans
alike  for  the  extension  of  his  empire.  But  if  his
faith  never  rose  to  the  heights  of  a  sublime
passion,  neither  did  his  stinginess  amount  to  a
disease.  He  did  not  gloat  over  his  hoards  like
a  miser  but  kept  them  intact  for  the  financial
stability  of  his  Government.

The  gift  of  a  commanding  personality  had
been  denied  to  Mahmud.  He  was  a  man  of
medium  height  with  well-proportioned  limbs,
but  the  small-pox  marks  on  his  face  deprived
him  of  all  external  beauty  and  grace.  It  is  said  on
seeing  his  face  in  the  mirror  once  he  felt  very
dejected.  “Looking  at  the  face  of  kings  is
believed  to  stengthen  the  eye-sight  of  men”,  he
remarked  to  his  uazir,  “but  a  face  such  as  mine
will  probably  injure  the  onlooker’s  eye.”  “Not
one  in  a  thousand  sees  your  face,”  the  quick¬
witted  Wazir  replied,  “but  your  moral  qualities
affect  them  all.  Strive  in  the  path  of  virtue
and  you  will  be  loved  by  all.”  Mahmud  was
no  pahilwan,  feats  of  personal  prpxvess  were
Ix-yond  his  strength,  though  his  frame  bore  all
the  hardships  entailed  by  his  continuous
campaigns.  But  he  did  not  subject  himself  to
more  discomfort  on  his  campaigns  than  was
absolutely  necessary,  and  his  travelling  camp
surprised  his  subjects  by  its  splendour.  He  was
too  good  a  general  to  endanger  his  personal
safety  by  a  needless  heroism ;  nevertheless  when
the  occasion  required  he  mounted  an  elephant
and  plunged  bravely  into  the  thickest  of  the
enemy  lines.  His  unquestioned  supremacy  over
his  fellow-men  was  due  to  the  qualities  of  the
mind — the  acuteness  with  which  he  unravelled  a
complicated  situation  and  read  the  character  of
those  around  him,  the  restless  activity  of  a  man
determined  to  be  great,  combined  with  the
instinctive  beheviour  of  one  born  to  command.
A  king  had  to  be  reserved,  but  Mahmud  never
cast  off  his  veil  even  before  his  most  intimate
companions.  He  had  no  favourites  in  state-
affairs.  The  play-things  of  his  idle  hours  were
not  allowed  to  meddle  in  matters  too  high  for
their  understanding.  The  devotion  with  which
he  was  served  by  his  officers  did  not  evoke  an
equal  confidence  on  his  side.  Even  towards  his
all  but  indispensable  -wazir,  the  great  Kxvaja
Ahmad  Bin  Hasan  Maimandi,  his  attitude  was
one  of  distant  respect.  The  smaller  fry  were


330  LXVI1I.  NALAKAPANA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  464.

to  that  zest  and  satisfaction  which  is  divested  of
pleasures  of  sense  and  all  wrong  states  of  conscious¬
ness,  if  he  attains  not  to  this  or  to  something  higher
still,  his  heart  is  possessed  by  covetise,  malevolence,
torpor,  flurry  and  worry,  doubts,  [464]  dislikes  and
slackness.  But  if  he  does  attain  to  such  zest  and  satis¬
faction,  or  to  something  higher  still,  his  heart  is  not
possessed  by  any  of  these  things.  That  zest  and  that
satisfaction  are  his.

What  is  your  idea  about  myself?  As  touching  the
Cankers — which  are  depraved  and  entail  re-birth,
which  are  burthensome  and  ripen  unto  Ill,  with  birth,
decay  and  death  in  their  train — ,  do  you  think  that
these  have  not  been  put  away  from  him  by  the  Truth-
finder  and  that  this  is  why  he  knows  that  this  Canker
is  dealt  with  by  practice,  that  by  endurance,  this  by-
avoidance  and  that  by  removal  ?

No,  sir;  we  do  not  think  this.  What  we  think  is
that  the  Truth-finder  has  put  away  from  him  all
Cankers  and  that  this  is  why  he  knows  how  Cankers
are  severally  to  be  dealt  with.

Right,  quite  right.  The  Truth-finder  has  indeed
put  from  him  all  these  evil  Cankers,  has  grubbed  and
stubbed  them,  like  a  palm-tree  that  has  been  rooted
out  from  where  it  stood,  a  thing  that  once  has  been
and  now  can  be  no  more.  Just  as  a  palm  with  its
crown  lopped  off  can  never  grow  again,  even  so  have
all  these  evil  Cankers  been  grubbed  and  stubbed,  like
a  palm  that  has  been  rooted  out  from  where  it  stood,  a
thing  that  once  has  been  and  now  can  be  no  more.
And  therefore  it  is  that  the  Truth-finder  knows  how
Cankers  are  severally  to  be  dealt  with.  What  think
ye  ? — With  what  end  in  view  does  the  Truth-finder
indicate  the  states  hereafter  of  his  disciples  dead  and
gone,  declaring  that  this  one  has  passed  to  one,  and
that  one  to  an  other  future  state?

[465]  All  our  ideas  are  derived  from  the  Lord,
guided  by  him  and  fortified  by  him.  We  pray  that  the
Lord  may  be  pleased  to  explain  what  he  has  said,  so
that  the  Almsmen  may  treasure  up  his  words.


saw*


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


14

mere  pawns  on  the  chess-board  whom  the  master¬
mind  moved  hither  and  thither  at  will.

The  Sultan’s  personal  faith,  as  distinct  from
the  policy  of  his  Government,  is  a  matter  of
interesting  speculation.  Contemporary  gossip
credited  him  with  a  disbelief  in  the  Day  of
Judgment  and  in  the  Tradition  (Hadis)  dear  to
the  Muslim  priests  of  all  ages,  ‘that  the  scholars
( ulamas )  are  the  successors  of  the  Propbcts.”(7)
The  appearance  of  the  Prophet  in  a  dream  was
said  to  have  put  his  mind  at  rest ;  and  Mahmud,
like  most  Muslim  kings,  never  failed  to  pay  a
visit  to  saints  of  renown,  though  with  (the
exception  of  Shaikh  Abul  Hasan  Kharqani  none
seems  to  have  influenced  him  deeply.  But  his
outlook  on  life  was  essentially  secular,  and  he
was  too  conscious  of  his  position  as  the  head
of  the  state  to  allow  priesthood  to  become
supreme.  His  persecution  of  the  ‘heretics,’  apart
from  the  pressing  demand  of  the  ’orthodox’,  may
have  been  due  to  his  conviction  that  their
immoral  doctrines  would  shake  the  foundations
on  which  Muslim  Society  was  based,  and  greed
for  money  and  power,  not'  an  enlightened  desire
for  the  spread  of  Islam,  was  the  motive  of  his
Indian  campaigns.  A  deep  and  inspiring  faith
in  the  one  and  the  unseen  God  Mahmud  certainly
had  and  it  brought  him  the  consolation  he  needed.
Apart  from  that,  it  would  be  safe  to  assume  that
he  shared  the  rationalistic  tendencies  of  his
friend,  Ahmad  Husain  bin  Mikal  (Hasnak),  who
refused  to  believe  in  any  mystifying  nonsense,
and  the  firmness  with  which  he  protected  Hasnak
from  the  Caliph’s  wrath  confirms  this  view.  Idle
private  life  of  the  Sultan  certainly  shows  him  to
be  anything  but  the  paragon  of  virtue  idolised
by  Muslim  fanatics.  He  was  morally  neither
I  letter  nor  worse  than  most  of  the  princes  who
preceded  and  followed  him.  He  shared  their
fondness  for  war  and  wine  and  women  as  well
as  their  appreciation  of  poetry  and  music.  He
was  not  above  quarrelling  with  his  officers  for  the
possession  of  Turkish  slaves,  and  scandal,  which
may  or  may  not  be  true,  credited  him  with
illegitimate  children. (8)  But  the  prime  concern


(7)  His  mint]  was  also  clouded  by  a  dark  suspicion
that  Subuktigin  was  not  his  real  father.  White  return¬
ing  to  hts  palace  one  night  the  Sultan  ordered  bis
golden  lamp  to  be  given  to  a  poor  student,  whom  he
saw  reading  in  the  light  of  a  shop.  ' Son  of
Subuktigin.'  the  Prophet  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream
that  night,  “May  God  honour  thee  in' both  the  worlds
as  thou  hast  honoured  my  successor"  l  The  Sultan's
three  doubts  were  thus  removed.

(8)  Ahmad  Kialtigin,  Cnmmandcr-in-Chief  of


of  the  historian  is  not  the  private  life  of  Mahmud
but  the  character  and  value  of  his  work.


Amir  Nuh  of  Bokhara  died  in  the  same  year
as  Subuktigin.  His  son,
Mansur,  appointed  one
Begtuzun  governor  of
Khorasan  and  while  Mahmud  was  fighting  with


End  of  the  Satuanid
Kingdom.


Ismail,  Begtuzun  established  himself  at  Naisha-
pur.  Mahmud’s  protests  were  disregarded  and
when  he  marched  on  Naishapur  Mansur  hastened
to  defend  it.  Mahmud  was  more  than  a  match
for  the  Siiiuanid  king  but  he  refrained  from
pushing  matters  to  extremes,  on  account  of  the
blame  that  would  attach  to  him  for  defying  his
overlord.  But  as  fate  would  have  it,  Begtuzun,
joined  by  the  ever-mischievous  Faiq,  captured
and  blinded  Mansur  and  placed  his  brother,
Abdul  Malik,  a  boy  of  tender  years,  on  the
Samanid  throne.  Mahmud's  hands  were  now
free.  He  cleared  Khorasan  of  the  enemy  and
Abdul  Malik  fled  to  Bokhara.  But  I-lak  Khan
of  Kashghar,  who  had  been  watching  the  course
of  events  from  beyond  the  Jaxartes,  marched  on
Bokhara  and  put  the  Samanid  kingdom  to  an  end
(999h  I-lak  Khan  and  Mahmud  congratulated
each  other  and  divided  the  Samanid  Kingdom
l>etween  themselves  with  the  Oxus  as  the
boundary  line.  The  political  alliance  was
cemented  by  a  family  alliance  and  the  inter¬
course  of  the  two  kingdoms  resulted  in  the
con  version  of  a  large  number  of  Tartars  to  Islam.

1  owards  the  end  of  year  999  Mahmud,  the
first  Muslim  ruler  to  assume  the  title  of  Sultan,
received  a  robe  of  honour  from  the  Caliph  with
the  title  of  ‘Aminul  Millat’  and  ‘Yamin^^
doulah.  He  now  stood  in  the  place  of  the
Samauids,  his  former  over-lords,  in  direct  sub¬
ordination  to  the  Caliph,  and  recognised  the
duties  of  his  new  position  by  taking  a  vow  to
wage  a  Holy  War’  against  the  Hindus  every
year.  Though  he  invaded  India  only  seventeen
times  in  the  thirty  years  of  life  yet  left  to  him,
it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  vow  was  ful¬
filled  in  the  spirit  in  which  it  was  made.

(1)  In  1000  A.D,  Mahmud  crossed  thc^^


The  Indian  invasions.

(i I  Frontier  towns
(1.000).


Indian  frontier  but  retreat¬
ed  after  capturing  a  few
forts.  W  •


Lahore  in  Masud's  reign  was  considered  to  be»  an
illegitimate  son  of  Mahmud.  “People  used  to  tell
stones  about  his  birth,  his  mother  and  Amir  Mahmud.
22*  w?s  "rtaudy  »  friendly  relation  between  the
/*25 Ltnd  h’s  "’"O'CT.-bot  God  knows  the  truth."
(Pathakf).  E  &  r>,  l  ol.  U.  p.  iti.


S


b


M.  i.  466.


THE  STIMULUS  OF  EXAMPLE.


33'


My  end  in  view  is  not  to  cajole  or  delude  folk,  nor
is  it  to  get  for  myself  gains  or  repute  or  fame  or  profit,
nor  is  it  to  advertise  myself  as  revealing  the  respective
states  hereafter  of  my  disciples  dead  and  gone.  No  ;
it  is  because  there  are  young  men  who  believe  and
are  filled  with  enthusiasm  and  with  gladness,  who,  on
hearing  this  revelation,  concentrate  their  whole  hearts
on  imitating  it  all, — to  their  own  abiding  good  and
welfare.

An  Almsman  hears  that  such  and  such  an  Almsman
has  died  and  has  been  declared  by  the  Lord  to  have
been  stablished  in  knowledge.  From  personal  observa¬
tion  or  from  hearsay  he  knows  what  was  this  departed
Almsman’s  conduct,  peace  of  heart,  lore,  life,  and
Deliverance ;  and  when  he  recalls  the  faith,  virtue,
learning,  renunciation  and  lore  of  the  departed,  he
concentrates  his  whole  heart  on  becoming  like  him,
so  that  his  life  is  blessed.

Or  the  Almsman  hears  the  Lord  has  declared  that,
by  having  burst  asunder  the  Five  Bonds  which  bound
him  to  the  world,  the  Almsman  departed  has  been
translated  to  a  heaven  never  to  come  back  thence  to
earth.  From  personal  observation  .  .  .  life  is  blessed.

Or  he  hears  the  Lord  has  declared  that,  by  having
burst  asunder  the  Three  Bonds,  and  by  also  reducing
passion,  hatred  and  delusion  to  a  minimum,  the  Alms¬
man  departed  will  come  back  only  once  more  to  earth,
and  will,  when  he  comes  back  that  last  time,  make  an
end  of  Ill.  From  personal  observation  .  .  .  [466]  life
is  blessed.

Or  he  hears  the  Lord  has  declared  that,  by  having
simply  burst  asunder  the  Three  Bonds,  the  Almsman
departed  has  embarked  on  the  stream  of  salvation,  is
safe  from  future  states  of  punishment,  is  sure  of  his
future  and  destined  to  win  full  enlightenment.  From
his  personal  observation  .  .  .  life  is  blessed.

Similarly,  an  Almswoman  hears  the  Lord  has  de¬
clared  that  such  and  such  an  Almswoman  has  died
and  has  been  declared  by  the  Lord  (etc.,  as  in  all  the
four  foregoing  cases  of  the  Almsman  departed).


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN  :  A  STUDY


15


(2)  Next  year  (1001 — 1002)  he  moved  again

and  pitched  his  tents
and  before  Peshawar  with  ten
1,002)?  1,001  thousand  horse  while  Rai

Jaipal  inarched  against
him  with  twelve  thousand  horse,  thirty  thousand
foot  and  three  hundred  elephants.  O11  28th
November,  1001,(9)  the  armies  fell  on  each  other
and  ‘did  justice  to  their  traditions  of  warlike
courage.’  But  Rai  Jaipal  w’as  captured  with
fifteen  royal  princes  and  five  thousand  Hindus
died  on  the  battle  field.  Mahmud  marched  on
and  captured  Waihind.(io)  where  some  Hindus
lial  collected  together  for  a  second  battle.
Jaipal  and  other  prisoners  were  released  on  pay¬
ment  of  tribute,  but  the  defeated  Rai,  in
conformity  with  the  custom  of  his  people,
transferred  his  kingdom  to  Anandpal  and  ended
his  life  on  a  pyre.

(3)  During  the  next  two  years  Mahmud  was
(3)  Biji  Rai  of  Bhcra  busy  with  the  western

(1006—1007).  affairs  of  his  kingdom  and

the  conquest  of  Sistan.  In  the  autumn  of  1006
A.D.  lie  crossed  the  Indus  for  the  first  time  and
appeared  before  Bhera  on  the  bank  of  the  Jhelilm.
Biji  Rai  of  Bhera,  who  possessed  ‘elephants
headstrong  as  Satan’  and  had  never  cared  to  pay-
homage  to  Subuktigin  or  Jaipal,  came  out  of
the  fort  and  offered  battle.  The  struggle
continued  desperately  for  three  days  and  the
condition  of  the  Muslim  army  became  critical.
But  on  the  fourth  day  after  the  battle  had  raged
indecisively'  from  morning  to  noon,  a  desperate
charge  led  by  Mahmud  in  person  broke  the
Hindu  centre  and  Biji  Rai  fled  to  the  fort  with
his  broken  columns.  Mahmud  sat  down  to
besiege  it.  The  Rai,  ‘a  prey  to  perplexity  and
fffr,’  fled  from  the  fort  at  night,  but  was
surrounded  by'  a  number  of  Mahmud’s  soldiers
and  escaped  an  inglorious  captivity-  by  plunging
the  dagger  into  his  breast.  The  city  of  Bhera(i  1)


(9)  Winter  is  the  campaigning  season  in  India
Mahmud  generally  left  Ghaxnin  in  autumn  (i.c.  the
end  of  the  rainy  season),  and  after  spending  the  winter

.  in  India,  returned  to  Ghaznin  by  the  beginning  of  the
|  summer.  His  campaigns,  consequently,  have  to  be
indicated  by  two  years  of  the  Christian  era.

(10)  ‘‘It  is  a  place  of  considerable  importance  on
the  western  hank  of  the  Indus,  about  fifteen  miles

^bure  Attock,  on  the  old  high-road  front  Lahore  to
T‘epfinwar,  and  only  three  marches  from  the  latter.”
II  and  D,  Vol.  ii.  p.  438.

(11)  "Bhera  lies  on  the  west  hank  of  the  Jticlnm,
under  the  Salt  Range.  It  liears  evident  marks  of  great
antiquity,  and  has  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river
the  extensive  ruins  of  Burarie,  above  Ahmadnbad.
which  strike  every  beholder  with  astonishment.”  (E
&  D,  Vol.  H,  p.  440).


of  Multan  (1004 —

1005).


and  its  dependent  territory  was  annexed  to  the
Ghaznevide  empire  and  Mahmud  returned  with
two  ‘hundred  and  eighty  elephants  and  other
spoils.

(4)  The  province  of  Sindh,  conquered  by
Mohammad  bin  Qasim  in
M  '",v’ns'.otl  the  beginning  of  the  eighth

century,  had  been  convert¬
ed  to  the  Carmathian
heresy  about  a  century  before  Mahmud.  Accord¬
ing  to  the  ideas  of  the  age  ‘heretics’  were  as
worthy  an  object  of  Holy  War  as  ‘unbelievers’.
Shaikh  Hamid  Lodi,  ruler  of  the  Upper  Sindh,
had  kept  Subuktigin  pleased  with  occasional
presents  but  his  grand-son,  Abul  Fath  Daud,  left
the  cautious  policy  of  his  predecessor.  Fearing
that  the  fall  of  Bhera  would  leave  Multan  open
to  Mahmud's  attack,  he  made  an  ineffectual
attempt  to  come  to  Biji  Rai’s  assistance — ‘an  act
totally  beyond  the  bounds  of  propriety  and
reason’.  Mahmud  connived  at  it  for  the  time
but  next  year  (1005-1006)  he  marched  on  a  holy
campaign  against  the  Carmathian  Daud.  Daud
in  desperation  appealed  to  Anandpal,  son  of
Jaipal,  and  Anandpal  made  a  bold  attempt  to
block  Mahmud’s  progress.  But  Mahmud,  not
unwillling  to  obtain  ‘two  paradises’,  turned
aside  to  fight  out  the  Hindu  before  he  struck  at
the  ‘heretic’.  Anandpal’s  officers  were  driven
back,  the  Rai  himself  was  pursued  over  ‘hill
and  dale’  up  to  the  Chenab,  and  the  path  to
Multan  was  cleared.  Daud,  who  was  in  no
condition  to  fight  an  open  battle,  shut  himself  up
in  the  fort,  and  after  a  siege  of  seven  days
promised  to  recant  from  his  heresy  to  the
religious  law  (Shariat)  of  the  orthodox  and  to
pay  an  annual  tribute  of  20,000  dirhams.  But
the  treaty  was  hardly  concluded  when  Mahmud
heard  of  the  danger  threatening  his  capital  and
marched  back  in  desperate  haste  to  protect  the
home-lands  of  his  empire  from  the  Chinese
Turks.

I-lak  Khan  and  Mahmud  had  made  an  alliance
in  999  A.D.  on  the  basis

I-lak  Khan’s  mva-  0f  an  equitable  division  of
sion  of  Khornsan—  ,  ,  '  . ,  ...  ,

Battle  of  Balkh.  °*  die  Samamd  Kingdom.

But  this  did  not  prevent
the  Khan  from  casting  longing  looks  on  the
fertile  lands  on  the  other  side  of  the  Oxus.  In
1004 — 1005  when  Mahmud  was  away  at  Multan,
I-lak  Khan  found  his  opportunity.  He  over-ran
Khorasan  and  Balkh,  and  Arsalan  Hajib,
Mahmud’s  governor  of  Herat,  was  forced  to
withdraw  to  Ghaznin.  But  the  simple-minded


332


lxviii.  na^akapAna-sutta.


M.  i.  467.


[467]  Similarly  a  lay-follower — man  or  woman — hears
that  such  and  such  a  lay-follower  has  died  and  that  the
Lord  has  declared  that,  by  having  burst  asunder  the
Five  Bonds  which  bound  him — or  her — to  the  world,
the  departed  has  been  translated  to  a  heaven  never  to
come  back  thence  to  earth  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  the  2nd.,
3rd.  and  4th.  cases  of  the  Almsman  departed)  .  .  .

[468]  his— or  her — whole  heart  is  concentrated  on
becoming  like  him — or  her — ,  so  that  his — or  her — life
is  blessed.

Thus  the  Truth-finder’s  end  in  view  is  not  to  cajole
or  delude  folk,  nor  is  it  to  get  for  himself  gains  or  repute
or  fame  or  profit,  nor  is  it  to  advertise  himself  as  re¬
vealing  the  respective  states  hereafter  of  his  disciples
dead  and  gone.  No ;  it  is  because  there  are  young
men  who  believe  and  are  filled  with  enthusiasm  and
gladness,  who,  on  hearing  this  revelation,  concentrate
their  whole  hearts  on  becoming  like  these, — to  their
own  abiding  good  and  welfare.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  reverend
Anuruddha  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXIX.  GULISSANI-SUTTA.

OF  RUSTICITY.

[469]  Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord
was  staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where
the  squirrels  are  fed,  there  appeared  among  the  Con¬
fraternity  on  some  business  or  other  an  uncouth  Alms¬
man  from  the  wilds,  named  Gulissani,  concerning
whom  the  reverend  Sariputta  held  forth  to  the  Alms¬
men  as  follows: —

An  Almsman  who  comes  in  from  the  wilds  to  the
Confraternity  and  lives  with  them  should  show  respect
and  consideration  to  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life.  If
he  does  not,  there  will  be  talk  of  what  to  do  with  his
reverence  from  the  wilds,  who  has  lived  alone  in  his
wilds  and  done  what  he  liked  there,  and  shows  no  respect


i6


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Chinese  had  calculated  without  the  host.
Mahmud  reappeared  at  Ghaznin  long  before  he
was  expected ;  his  boundless  energy  revived  the
failing  courage  of  his  officers;  the  army  was  re¬
organised  with  remarkable  speed;  and  Mahmud
faced  the  invader  with  a  powerful  force  near
Balkh.  The  careful  way  in  which  Mahmud
attended  to  the  disposition  of  his  columns  shows
the  terror  his  opj*oncnt  inspired.  At  first  the
Turkish  attack  seemed  to  earn'  all  liefore  it,  hut
in  the  end  the  Ghaznavidcs,  led  hy  the  Sultan  in
person,  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  away.
Mahmud  pursued  the  flying  enemy  for  two
stages,  but  the  severity  of  the  winter  made  a
campaign  in  the  desolate  region  of  Trans-Oxonia
impossible,  while  an  unexpected  revolt  drew  his
attention  to  India  once  more.

(5)  Bhcra  was  the  only  territory  Mahmud
possessed  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Indus.

,  While  returning  from
(5)  Sukhpal  (,005).  MuUan  hc  had

the  governorship  of  Ilhera  to  Sukhpal  (Newasa
Shah),  a  son  of  Anandpal  who  had  been  con¬
verted  to  Islam.  Seeing  Mahmud  absorbed  in  a
deadly  struggle  with  the  Turks,  Sukhpal
returned  to  the  faith  of  his  ancestors  and  drove
away  Mahmud’s  officers.  The  Sultan  started  for
Bhera  after  the  battle  of  Balkh  but  before  he
could  reach  the  scene  of  action,  the  frontier
Amirs  captured  Sukhpal  and  brought  him
captive  to  the  royal  camp.  Hc  was  forced  to
give  up  the  400,000  dirhams  he  had  accumulated
and  was  imprisoned  for  life.

(6)  The  strategical  importance  of  Bhera
explains  the  rebellion  of  Sukhpal  as  well  as

Mahmud’s  anxiety  to  re¬
capture  it  before  it  could
Ik-  garrisoned  by  a  strong
Indian  force.  From  his
footing  on  the  Jhelum  hc
could  strike  either  at
Multan  in  the  south  or  at
Anandpal  in  the  east.  Multan  was  lying  prost¬
rate  at  his  feet  but  not  much  was  to  be  got  out
of  the  poor  and  harrassed  kingdom.  The  gates
of  Hindustan  were  in  Anandpal’s  possession.
Mahmud’s  relation  with  that  prince  were  already
strained.  Anandpal  charished  the  ‘bitterest
hatred’  towards  the  Mussalmans  ever  since  the
capture  of  his  son,  Sukhpal,  at  Peshawar
(1001-1002).  His  attempt  to  prevent  Mahmud’s
march  on  Multan  had  furnished  the  latter  with  a
technical  cause  for  declaring  war,  but  when
Mahmud  was  fighting  with  his  back  to  the  wall


(6)  Anandpal  and
the  Hindu  Confe¬
deracy — Second  battle
of  Waihind:  Nagarkot
(1008—1009).


against  the  Kashghar  army,  Anandpal  sent  him
a  heroic  offer  of  assistance  in  a  spirit  which  won
the  approbation  of  the  philosopher,  Alberuni.

"I  have  learned”  ran  Anandpal’s  letter,  "that
the  Turks  have  rebelled  against  ypu  and  are
spreading  in  Khorasan.  If  you  wish,  I  shall
come  to  you  with  5,000  horsemen,  10,000  foot  •
soldiers,  and  100  elephants,  or,  if  you  wish,  I
shall  send  you  my  spn  with  double  the  number.

In  acting  thus,  I  do  not  speculate  on  the  impres¬
sion  this  will  make  pn  you.  I  have  been  con¬
quered  by  you  and  therefore  I  do  not  wish  that
another  man  shpuld  conquer  you.”  The
impression  created  by  the  letter  may,  none  the
less,  have  had  a  share  in  maintaining  peace  for
the  next  three  years.  But  so  long  as  Anandpal
remained  strong  and  independent,  a  permanent
peace  between  him  and  Mahmud  was  impossible.
This  Sultan  had  as  yet  only  touched  the  fringe
of  a  continental  country,  and  the  spoils  he  had
obtained  were  insignificant.  Beyond  the  Sutlej
lay  the  temples  to  which  generations  of  pious
Hindus  had  dedicated  their  wealth.  It  was
necessary  for  Mahmud  to  strike  down  Anandpal,
if  he  was  ever  to  possess  himself  of  the  treasures
of  the  Punjab  and  the  prosperous  Trans-Gangctic
plain.  Conversely  the  Rais  of  Hindustan  could
not  fail  to  recognise  the  importance  of  Anandpal
as  a  buffer  between  them  and  the  aggressive
kingdom  of  Ghaznin.  So  long  as  the  struggle
had  been  waged  beyond  the  Indus,  they  could
afford  to  look  on  unconcerned  and  leave  the  Rai
of  Lahore  to  protect  his  Turkish  subjects.  The
arrogance  of  Biji  Rai  made  them  indifferent  to
his  fate,  nor  did  anyone,  save  Anandpal,  few  It
his  duty  to  come  to  the  help  of  the  Multan
‘heretics.’  But  now  the  deluge  that  ‘tookjjo
account  of  heights  and  depths’  had  reached  their
sacred  frontiers  and  was  threatening  to  put  an
end  to  their  fratricidal  warfare,  their  local
independence  and  their  somnolent  ease.

The  importance  of  the  struggle  was  well
understood  on  both  sides  when  Mahmud  marched
against  Anandpal  as  the  end  of  the  rainy  season,
1008  A.D.  Anandpal  appealed  to  the  other  Rais 0
and  their  response  certainly  showed  that  the W
national  spirit  of  the  country  though  dis¬
organised  was  not  dead.  The  rulers  of  Ujiaiu*
Gwalior,  Kalanjar,  Kannauj,  Delhi  and  Ajitieile,'
marched  to  the  Punjab  with  their  troops.  *  Help
came  from  every  side.  Even  ‘the  infidel
Gakkhars’  crowded  under  Anandpal’s  Ixinner.

A  patriotic  breeze  swept  pver  the  towns  and
hamlets  of  Hindustan  calling  its  men  to  arms.


M.  i.  470.


OF  RUSTICITY.


333


or  consideration  here  for  his  fellows  in  the  higher  life.
That  is  what  will  be  said.  And  therefore  an  Almsman
from  the  wilds,  when  he  comes  in  to  the  Confraternity
and  lives  with  them,  should  show  respect  and  considera¬
tion  to  his  fellows.

Such  an  Almsman  from  the  wilds  should  be  correct
in  the  matter  of  seats,  punctilious  neither  to  displace
seniors  nor  to  oust  juniors.  If  he  shows  himself  the
reverse,  there  will  be  talk  of  what  to  do  with  this
Almsman  from  the  wilds  who  is  deficient  even  in  the
common  decencies  which  the  Doctrine  prescribes.
That  is  what  will  be  said.  And  therefore  an  Almsman
from  the  wilds  when  he  comes  in  to  the  Confraternity
and  lives  with  them,  should  be  correct  in  the  matter  of
seats.

Similarly,  and  for  the  like  reasons,  an  Almsman  from
the  wilds  should  not  visit  the  village  for  alms  at  too
early  an  hour,  nor  return  ahead  of  the  others  ;  he
ought  not  to  call  on  families  [470]  either  before  or
after  the  midday  meal  ;  he  ought  to  be  composed  and
sedate  ;  he  ought  to  be  reserved  and  not  loquacious  ;
he  ought  to  be  pleasant  spoken  and  amiable  ;  he  ought
to  keep  watch  and  ward  over  his  faculties ;  [471]  he
should  be  moderate  in  his  eating,  ever  vigilant,  strenu¬
ous,  mindful,  stedfast,  and  profound  in  goodwill ;
[472]  he  should  be  a  zealous  student  of  the  higher
branches  of  the  Doctrine  and  the  Law.  He  will  be
asked  questions  thereon,  and  if  he  can  find  nothing  to
say,  there  will  be  talk  of  what  is  to  be  done  with  this
Almsman  from  the  wilds,  where  he  lived  alone  and  did
what  he  pleased,  who,  on  being  asked  questions  about
the  higher  branches  of  the  Doctrine  and  the  Law,  can
find  nothing  to  say.  That  is  what  will  be  said.  And
therefore  an  Almsman  from  the  wilds  ought  to  be  a
zealous  student  of  the  higher  branches  of  the  Doctrine
and  the  Law.

For  like  reasons,  he  ought  to  be  a  zealous  student
too  both  of  those  excellent  Deliverances  which
transcend  the  visible  and  are  incorporeal,  and  also  of
transcendental  states  of  consciousness,  lest  it  be  said  of


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNI N :  A  STUDY


17


'Hindu  women  sold  their  jewels  and  sent  the
money  from  distant  parts  to  be  used  against  the
Mussulmans.’  Their  poorer  sisters,  who  had  no
jewels  to  sell,  worked  feverishly  at  the  ‘spinning-
wheel  or  as  hired  labourers  to  be  able  to  send
something  to  the  meu  of  the  army.’  All  that
excites  a  nation  to  heroic  deeds  was  there — the
preservation  of  an  ancient  and  ever-living
civilisation,  the  sacred  temple  and  the  no  less
sacred  hearth.  Yet  the  patriotic  spirit  of  the
people  was  paralysed  by  suspicions  created  by
years  of  civil  war  ;  the  Rais  were  doubtful  of
each  other’s  intentions  and  their  followers  shared
their  doubts.  Anaiulpal  was  important  enough
to  take  precedence  but  not  strong  enough
to  order  ;  and  the  Indian  army  was
directed  by  no  single  commander  on  the  field  of
battle.  But  discipline  reigned  supreme  in  the
camp  of  the  w'arrior-statesman  of  Ghazuin.  His
troops,  more  racially  heterogenous  than  the
citizen-mob  opposed  to  them,  had  been  welded
into  one  by  years  of  continuous  campaigning  »
and  unlike  their  Rajput  opponents,  they  knew
their  master  aud  were  not  liable  to  panic.  Even
as  such  the  scale  hang  evenly.

Anandpal  marched  bravely  to  W  aihind  with
the  largest  Indian  army  Mahmud  was  ever
destined  to  face.  The  Sultan  whose  extra¬
ordinary  intuition  never  played  him  false,  saw
that  the  Indians  would  ‘fight  with  devotion’  and
was  more  cautious  than  usual.  He  dug  a  trench
on  both  sides  of  his  camp,  and  reluctant  to  begin
the  engagement,  sat  facing  the  enemy  for  forty
days.  But  hourly  the  strength  of  the  Indian
■irmy  increased  with  new  reinforcements,  and
Mahmud,  afraid  lest  further  delay  should  enable
Anandpal  to  overpower  the  Ghaznavide  veterans
through  sheer  force  of  numbers,  sent  forward  a
thousand  archers  to  cpmmeuee  the  engagement.
But  almost  immediately  his  calculations  were
thrown  into  disorder  by  thirty  thousand
Gakkliars,  ‘who  with  bare  heads  and  feet,
crossed  the  trenches  in  the  first  attack,  broke
into  the  camp  from  bptli  sides,  and  falling  on
^tlic  Muslim  cavalry  with  desperate  courage,  cut
down  man  and  horse,  so  that  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye  three  or  four  thousand  Mussalmans
had  tasted  the  wine  of  martyrdom.’  Mahmud
was  desperately  trying  to  clear  his  camp  of  the
Gakkliars  when  a  whim  of  the  god  of  battles
decided  the  struggle  in  his  favour.  Anandpal ’s
elephant,  frightened  by  the  explosions  of  naphtha,
fled  away  from  the  field  of  battle  and  the  Indian
soldiers  concluded  this  to  be  a  base  desertion  of
3


their  cause  by  the  ‘premier  king  of  Hindustan.’

A  general  rout  ensued,  and  the  Ghaznavidcs
pursued  the  flying  enemy  for  two  days  ami
nights.  The  Iudiau  losses  were  not  more  than
eight  thousand,  but  the  phenomenon  of  a
multitudinous  army  breaking  up  from  sheer  lack
of  internal  cohesion  and  flying  away  before  an
enemy  not  strong  enough  to  meet  it  in  the  open
field  was  thoroughly  demoralising.  The  only
national  opposition  ever  offered  to  Mahmud
ended  in  a  storm  of  mutual  recriminations.
Henceforth  he  had  no  Indian  confederacy  to
fear,  and  the  Rais  were  one  after  another  over¬
powered  and  deprived  of  all  their  valuables  in  a
struggle  which  the  superior  generalship  of  the
Ghaznavide  never  left  in  doubt.

Mahmud  took  advantage  of  the  disorganisa¬
tion  of  his  opponents  to  make  a  dash  for  the
temple  of  Nagarkot(iz)  (Kangra),  known  as  the
Fort  of  Bhim,  situated  on  the  top  of  a  hill  on
the  upper  Bias.  He  had  already  penetrated  as
far  as  the  Clienab  and  the  new  expedition  only
took  him  twelve  marches  further.  The  Rajputs
of  the  place  had  gone  to  fight  at  W  aihind  and
the  quickness  of  Mahmud’s  movements  left  them
behind.  The  Brahmans,  who  alone  were  left,
opened  their  gatss  after  a  siege  of  seven  days  and
allowed  Mahmud  to  visit  the  fort  with  a  few'
companions.  The  temple  contained  more  wealth
than  existed  in  the  treasury'  of  any  king  and  the
fine  exacted  bv  the  Sultan  from  the  helpless
Brahmans  was  immense — '700,000  gold  dinars,
700  maunds  of  gold  and  silver  vessels,  200
maunds  of  pure  gold,  2000  maunds  pf  unpurified
silver  and  20  maunds  of  various  jewels  which
had  been  collected  together  from  the  time  of
Bhim.’  It  was  the  Sultan’s  first  great  find  and
naturally  whetted  his  appetite  for  more.

(7)  Anandpal  had  lost  his  reputation  but  not
his  power  at  the  second  battle  of  W  aihind  and

the  Sultan’s  next  move

(7)  Demonstration  (1009-1010)  was  a  demons-

sr&a&sr**  trati°n  rnther  than  a  cam‘

paign.  He  is  said  to  have
marched  in  the  direction  of  Gujrat,  but  his  real

(n)  "That  Nagarkot  is  the  same  as  K«>t  Kangra
can  admit  of  no  doubt,  for  the  name  Nagarkot  is  stdl
used.  The  impassable  waters  which  surround  it  are
the  Ban-ganga  and  the  Riyah  (Bias).  The  town  of
Ithim,  which  is  a  mile  from  the  fort,  is  now  on  a  spot
called  Bhawan.  which  means  a  temple  raised  to  n
Snkti  or  female  deity,  and  Blum  is  probably  a  mistake
arising  from  its  presumed  foundation  bv  the  heroic
Bhim ‘‘  (E  <5r  f>.  I ’*>1.  ii.  f.  +15).  Moat  medieval
temples  were  fortified  and  so  were  most  towns  and
villages.


334


LXX.  KITAGIRI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  473.


him  that  he  knows  nothing  of  that  for  which  he  became
a  Pilgrim.

Hereupon,  the  reverend  Maha-Mogallana  asked  the
reverend  Sariputta  whether  these  states  of  conscious¬
ness  were  incumbent  only  on  an  Almsman  from  the
wilds  or  [478]  whether  they  were  the  business  also  of
an  Almsman  from  the  confines  of  a  village.

They  are  incumbent  on  the  Almsman  from  the  wilds,
sir,  and  still  more  are  they  the  business  of  an  Almsman
from  the  confines  of  a  village.


LXX.  KljAGIRI-SUTTA.

OF  IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was  on
an  alms-pilgrimage  in  Kasi  with  a  large  train  of  Alms¬
men,  he  addressed  them  as  follows  : — I  go  without  a
meal  at  night  and  find  that  on  this  regimen1  I  am
healthy  and  well,  buoyant,  hale  and  hearty.  Do  like
me,  and  you  too  will  benefit  in  the  same  way.

Yes,  sir,  said  those  Almsmen  dutifully.

In  the  course  of  that  alms-pilgrimage  through  Kasi,
the  Lord  came  to  a  township  of  theirs  called  Kitagiri,
where  he  stayed.  Resident  there,  were  two  Almsmen
Assaji  and  Punabbasuka,2  to  whom  there  came  a
number  of  Almsmen  to  say  that  the  Lord  himself  ate
no  meal  at  night  and  that  the  Confraternity  were  doing
the  same  and  were  hale  and  well  on  it ;  and  they  urged
the  two  to  conform  to  a  regimen  which  would  suit
them  too.

[474]  Thereupon  Assaji  and  Punabbasuka  made
answer  that  they  took  meals  in  the  evening  and  early
in  the  morning  and  at  noon,  outside  prescribed  hours,
and  found  that  on  this  regimen  they  were  healthy  and


1  Cf.  Suttas  No.  21  and  65.

3  Two  leaders,  says  the  Commentator,  of  the  six  recalcitrants
of  the  Vinaya.


iS


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


object  was  to  terrorise  Anandpai  into  receding
from  the  brittle  alliance  in  which  his  position
was  already  uncomfortable.  The  Sultan  ‘urged
his  horses  over  ground,  hard  and  soft,  put  to
the  sword  the  vagabonds  of  the  country  and  with
delay  and  circumspection  proceeded  to  accom¬
plish  his  design.’  The  friends  of  God  ‘did  not
fail  of  their  object  after  having  committed
slaughter  in  every  hill  and  valley  ;  for
Anandpal’s  messengers  waited  on  the  Sultan  at
Ghazni  with  offers  of  peace  and  ‘tlieir  best
wishes  for  his  future  prosperity.'  The  Rai’s
mind  was  made  up.  He  ‘had  witnessed  the
calamities  which  had  inflicted  ruin  on  his
country  and  subjects  in  consequence  of  his
contests  with  the  Sultan’  and  decided  to  desert
the  confederacy  which  had  left  him  to  his  fate.
Peace  was  rapidly  concluded.  Anandpai  pro¬
mised  an  annual  tribute  of  thirty  elephants  and
offered  two  thousand  men  for  service  at  the
Sultan’s  court.  The  way  to  the  heart  of  India
was  now  open.  Mahmud  could  march  over  the
friendly  territory  of  Anandpai  and  strike  at  the
Rais  beyond.  (13)

Mahmud  utilised  the  summer  of  1010  A.D.
for  bringing  the  presumptuous  inhabitants  of
Ghor  to  a  sense  of
(1010).  their  insignificance.  The

Ghorians,  ten  thousand  in
number,  dug  a  trench  round  their  camp  and
fought  bravely  from  morning  till  noon.  But  the
stouthearted  hill-men  were  no  match  for  the
greatest  military  genius  of  the  age.  Mahmud
lured  the  simple  folks  out  of  their  safe  position
by  a  feigned  retreat  and  annihilated  them  in  the
plain  below.  Mohammad  bin  Stiri,  the  ruler  of
Ghor,  was  so  heart-broken  that  he  sucked  a
poisoned  jewel  when  brought  a  captive  to
Mahmud’s  court  and  died  immediately  after.
I  he  princes  of  Ghor  remained  subordinate  to
Ghaznin  till  the  time  of  Alauddin  Jahansoz.

(8)  Next  winter  (1010- ion)  Mahmud
marched  against  the  Kingdom  of  Multan  which

,R.  „ _  ,  .  .  had  been  long  waiting  for

(8)  Second  invasion  j  c  T  ■  ■

of  Multan  (ioio-ioii).  the  daV  of  its  extinction.

The  city  was  captured
‘through  terror  and  force’  and  Mahmud  pleased

(13)  Utbi  s  account  of  the  campaign  is  obscure
m  its  geographical  references.  The  real  object
nn<^,ttl|!^f<  V.'  Was  to  frighten  Anandpai  into  an  alliance’
nuL*' .11 °f  Mahmi,d's  intention  hanuo!

•  rhf  tr?ty  d«*cribed  bv  Utbi  later.  The

t  ..ishes  for  the  Saltan’s  ‘future  Prosperity'
apparently  implied  a  willingness  to  allow  him  to
march  across  the  Punjab.  *


the  ‘orthodox’  by  slaying  a  large  number  oi
Carmathian  ‘heretics'  and  cutting  off  the  hands
and  feet  of  many  others.  Daud  ended  his  life  as
a  prisoner  in  a  Ghorian  fort.

(9)  In  1011-1012  Mahmud,  who  had  heard
that  Thaneswar,  owing  to  its  idol,  Cakravasmin,

(9)  Thaneswar  (ion-  was  as  holy  in  the  eyes  of
the  Hindus  as  Mecca  in  the
eves  of  the  Mussulmans,  marched  thither  for  the
treasures  a  place  so  ancient  was  sure  to
possess. (14)  Anandpai  in  consonance  with  the
treaty  provided  all  the  ‘requisites  of  hospitality’
by  ordering  his  merchants  and  shopkeepers  to
look  after  the  needs  of  the  commissariat  and  his
brother  accompanied  the  Sultan  with  two
thousand  men.  Mahmud  refrained  from
injuring  the  Rai’s(i5)  territory  but  refused  his
tribute  should  be  accepted  from  the  people  of
Thaneswar,  because  ‘my  royal  wish  is  to  remove
the  practice  of  idolatory  totally  from  all  the
lands  of  Hindustan.’  Too  late  in  the  day  the
Rai  of  I  haneswar  reflected  on  the  necessity  of
an  Indian  Confederacy.  “If  we  do  not  raise  a
dam  to  keep  off  this  deluge,’’  he  wrote  to  his
brother  Rais,  “it  will  soon  spread  over  the  whole
plain  and  submerge  all  kingdoms,  great  and
small.”  This  was  true  enough.  But  Mahmud  f
reached  1  haneswar  before  the  clumsy  machinery
of  the  confederation  could  stir  and  the  Rai  fled
in  despair.  Mahmud  collected  the  treasures
and  broke  the  idols  of  the  undefended  city  at
leisure.  He  wished  to  march  further  east,  but
as  such  a  movement  would  have  left  him  entirely
at  Anandpal’s  mercy,  he  accepted  the  advice
of  his  officers  and  turned  back  with  a  fabiflJtis
number  of  ‘servants  and  slaves.’  Mahmud’s
army,  like  the  army  of  most  Asiatic  conquerors
was  essentially  a  cosmopolitan  institution,  kept
intact  by  its  e spirit  de  corps  and  loyalty  to  its
master  s  person.  Mahmud  took  good  military
men  into  his  service  wherever  he  found  them.
Indians,  who  were  mostly  non-Muslims,  were
freely  enrolled,  and  at  a  later  stage  were  formed


1*4)  Utbi  places  the  Thaneswar  campaign  after  «
the  N’nrdin  (Ninduna)  expedition,  and  Elliot  follows W
him  in  the  error.  This  is  clearlv  wrong.  The
Thaneswar  campaign  was  undertaken  during  the  life
of  Anandpai;  consequently  the  Ninduna  campaign
which  was  directed  against  his  son,  Trilocanral,  coult
not  have  preceded  it.  Ferishta  adheres  to  the  correct
order.

(15)  The  Cakravasmin  was  a  bronze  image  of
,  1  ,na-  which  held  the  weapon,  Cakra.  in  one  of  its
hands.  It  was  taken  to  Ohaznin  and  thrown  into  the
hippodrome  of  the  city.  (Alberuni).

suggestion  that  an  indemnity  and  a  yearly


M.  i.  475.


OF  IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE.


335


well,  buoyant,  hale  and  hearty.  Why  should  they
sacrifice  to-day  for  hereafter?  They  would  continue  to
take  meals  in  the  evening  and  early  in  the  morning  and
at  noon  outside  prescribed  hours.

Failing  to  win  the  two  over,  the  Almsmen  went  to
the  Lord  and  after  salutations  took  their  seats  to  one
side,  narrated  all  that  had  passed,  ending  up  by  saying
that,  as  they  could  not  prevail  with  the  two,  they  had
come  to  inform  the  Lord.  He  thereupon  bade  an
Almsman  to  go  to  the  two  with  the  message  that  the
Lord  desired  their  presence.  On  receipt  of  this
message,  the  two  dutifully  appeared  and  after  saluta¬
tions  took  their  seats  to  one  side,  to  be  asked  by  him

[475]  whether  what  was  reported  to  him  was  true.

Quite  true,  sir  ;  was  their  answer.

Is  it  in  your  knowledge,  Almsmen,  that  I  ever  taught
that — no  matter  what  the  feelings  a  man  experiences,
whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable  or  neutral — his
wrong  states  of  consciousness  wane  while  his  right
states  wax  apace  ?

No,  sir.

Is  it  not  in  your  knowledge  that  my  teaching  has  been
that  right  and  wrong  states  of  consciousness  depend
on  the  particular  feeling  experienced ;  that  according
to  the  nature  of  the  specific  feelings — be  they  agreeable
or  disagreeable  or  neutral — wrong  states  of  conscious¬
ness  wax  apace  while  right  states  wane,  or  vice  versd  ?

Yes,  sir.

Quite  right.  If  I  had  not  known,  seen,  discerned,
realized,  and  apprehended  by  comprehension  that,  with
a  given  agreeable  feeling  experienced  by  a  man,  wrong
states  of  consciousness  wax  apace  and  right  states
wane, — if  I  had  not  this  knowledge,  should  I  say,
would  it  beseem  me  to  say,  that  you  should  eschew
that  agreeable  feeling  ?

No,  sir.

It  is  just  because  I  have  that  knowledge  that  I

[476]  bid  you  eschew  it.

Also,  if  I  had  not  known,  seen,  discerned,  realized  and
apprehended  by  comprehension  that,  with  a  given


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN  :  A  STUDY


i9


into  a  separate  regiment  commanded  by  Hindu
general  who  enjoyed  a  very  high  status  among
his  fellow  officers.

In  1012-1013  Mahmud’s  pfficers  conquered
Gharjistan,  aud  the  Sultan  compelled  the  Caliph,
A1  Qadir  Billah,  to  hand
Mahmud  aud  the  over  t0  him  the  districts

a  'P  of  Khorasan  which  were

still  in  his  hands.  But  the  Caliph  stoutly
refused  Mahmud's  further  demand  that  he
should  be  given  Samarkand  also.  “I  will  do  no
such  thing,”  he  replied,  “and  if  you  take
possession  of  Samarkand  without  my  permission,

1  will  disgrace  you  before  the  whole  world.”
Mahmud  was  furious,  “Do  you  wish  me  to  come
to  the  capital  of  the  Caliphate  with  a  thousand
elephants,”  he  threatened  the  Caliph’s
ambassador,  “in  order  to  lay  it  waste  and  bring
its  earth  on  the  backs  of  my  elephants  to
Ghaznin?”  But  the  policy  of  plundering  the
centres  of  Muslim  and  Hindu  civilisation  simul¬
taneously  was  too  bold  even  for  Mahmud,  and
he  had  to  apologise  humbly  to  the  power  which
even  in  its  hour  of  weakness  could  have
shattered  the  moral  foundations  of  the
Ghaznavide  kingdom.  But  none  the  less  he
established  his  power  over  Samarkand.

(10)  Meanwhile  Anandpal’s  death  had  upset
Mahmud's  calculations  in  India.  The  new  Rai,

,  ,  „  ,  ,  Trilocanpal,  unlike  his

lihitupal— Ninduna  father,  was  well  inclined

(1013-1014).  towards  the  Mussalmans,

but  he  seems  to  have  been  a  weak  man  and  the
direction  of  affairs  came  into  the  hands  of  his
soff,  known  to  contemporaries  as  the  ‘Nidar*
(Fearless)  Bhim,  who  stoutly  reversed  the  policy
of  his  grand-father  aud  put  an  end  to  the
Ghaznavide  alliance.  Mahmud  was  once  more
forced  to  fight  the  kingdom  of  Lahore  in  order
to  keep  the  road  to  Hindustan  open.  He  started
from  Ghaznin  in  the  autumn  of  1013  but  snow
began  to  fall  before  he  reached  the  Indian
frontier,  and  it  was  found  necessary  to  go  into
winter  quarters.  With  the  spring  the
Ghaznavides  moved  forward  once  more,
‘ascending  the  hills  like  mountain-gpats  and
descending  them  like  torrents  of  water.’  Nidar
Bhim  fortified  himself  in  the  Margala  Pass, (16)


(16)  *Tlic  action  which  preceded  the  capture  of
Ninduna  appears  to  have  been  fought  at  the  Margala
Pass,  which  answers  well  to  the  description  given
of  it  by  t'tbi.  The  hill  of  Balanath  is  a  conspicuous
mountain  over-hanging  the  Jheluni  and  now  generally
called  Tilln,  which  means  a  hill.  It  is  still  occasionally
called  Balanath,  and  there  is  a  famous  fogi  estahlisli-


which  was  narrow,  precipitous  and  steep,  but  on
the  arrival  of  his  vassels  he  came  down  and
offered  battle.  The  Ghaznavides  won  after  a
severe  contest.  Bhim  threw  a  garrison  into  the
fort  of  Ninduna  on  the  hill  of  Balanath  and  fled
to  the  Pass  of  Kashmir.  Mahmud,  who  now
seems  to  have  made  up  his  mind  to  annex  the
Punjab,  reduced  Ninduna  and  after  placing  a
garrison  in  it,  pushed  pu  in  pursuit  of  Bhim.
But  the  elusive  hero  could  not  be  captured  and
the  Sultan  turned  back  from  the  foot  of  the
Kashmir  hills.

(n)  Next  year  (1013-1016)  the  Sultan  again
attempted  to  force  his  way  through  the  Kashmir
Pass.  But  the  fortress  of
(n)  The  Kashmir  Lplikot  defied  all  his
10,5  efforts.  Reinforcements
reached  the  garrison  from
Kashmir  ;  snow  began  to  fall  ;  and  for  the  first
time  Mahmud  retired  discomfited  from  before  an
Indian  fort.  While  retreating  he  lost  a  large
number  of  his  men  in  the  floods  of  the  Jhclum,
extricated  himself  with  difficulty  from  the  watery
peril,  and  returned  to  Ghaznin  ‘without  having
achieved  anything.’

This  failure  in  the  east  was  compensated  by
an  acquisition  in  the  west.  Mahmud’s  sister  had
been  married  to  Abul

Annexation  of  Abbas  Mamun,  the  ruler

Khwarazm  (1016).  ..  ’  .  ,  .,

Khwarazm.  But  the  bride

had  hardly  been  in  her  new  home  for  a  year

when  Abul  Abbas  was  slain  by  rebels.  Mahmud

marched  forth  to  revenge  his  brother-in-law’s

death,  defeated  the  rebel  army  before  the  famous

fortress  of  Ilazar  Asp  and  appointed  his  general,

Altuntash,  governor  of  the  newly  conquered

territory-  with  the  title  of  ‘Khwarazm  Shah.’

(12)  Towards  the  end  of  the  rainy  season,
1018,  Mahmud  at  last  started  fpr  that  expedition
to  the  Trans-Gangctic
(13)  The  Ik>nb  (101S-  plain  of  which  lie  had

Mahaban*1^ in  "  becn  doming  f°r  years.

His  regular  army  of  one
hundred  thousand  was  strengthened  by  twenty
thousand  volunteers  from  Khorasan  and
Turkestan.  The  omens  were  favourable.  The
Hindu  Confederacy  had  disappeared  and  none
of  the  Rais  was  strong  enough  to  oppose
Mahmud  single-handed.  He  had  established  a
reputation  for  generalship  which  none  could
question  and  everyone  knew  that  his  methods

ment  on  its  highest  summit,  of  great  repute  and
resorted  to  bv  members  of  that  fraternity  from  the
most  distant  parts  of  India.”  (E  &D).


20


The  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


were  thorough.  Trilocanpal  and  Nidar  Bhim,
though  still  eluding  their  pursuers,  were  driven
beyond  the  Punjab,  while  Sabli,  Rai  of  Kashmir,
made  peace  with  the  Sultan  and  led  the  van  of
the  invading  troops.  The  Ghaznavidcs  marched
through  forests  in  which  ‘even  winds  lose  their
wav,’  forded  the  five  rivers  pf  the  Punjab,  and
crossing  the  Jamna  on  December  2nd,  moved
against  Barron  (Rulandshahr)  ‘like  the  waves  of
the  sea.’  But  Rai  Hardat  solved  the  problem
by  coming  put  of  his  city  with  ten  thousand
men,  who  either  from  policy  or  conviction  pro¬
claimed  ‘their  anxiety  for  conversion  and  their
rejection  of  id.ols.li")  The  conversion  saver!  the
citizens  and  Mahmud  marched  down  the  Jamna
to  Mahaban.  Its  ruler,  Rai  Kulehand,  who  had
established  a  reputation  for  invincibility  in  local
warfare,  drew  up  his  army  in  the  midst  of  a
thick  forest.  But  Mahmud  penetrated  the  forest
‘like  a  comb  through  a  head  pf  hair*  and
scattered  the  Mahaban  army.  Many  of  the
fugitives  were  drowned  in  the  attempt  to  cross
the  Jatnna,  and  the  valiant  Kulehand  escaped
the  disgrace  of  captivity  by  slaying  his  wife  and
son  and  then  plunging  the  dagger  into  his  own
breast.

On  the  other  side  of  the  Jainna  lay  the  ancient
and  famous  city  of  Mathura,  the  birth-place  of
Mathura.  Krishna-Basdeo.  ‘The  wall

of  the  city  was  constructed
of  hard  stone,  and  two  gates,  which  opened  upon
the  river  flowing  under  the  city,  were  erected
on  strong  and  lofty  foundations,  to  protect  them
against  the  floods  of  the  river  and  rains.  On
both  sides  of  the  city  there  were  a  thousand
houses,  to  which  idol  temples  were  attached,  all
strengthened  from  tpp  to  bottom  by  rivets  of
iron,  and  all  made  of  masonary  work,  and
opposite  to  them  were  other  buildings,  supported
on  broad  wooden  pillars  to  give  them  strength.
In  the  middle  of  the  city  there  was  a  temple
larger  and  firmer  than  the  rest,  which  can  neither
be  described  nor  painted  ;  the  inhabitants  said
it  had  been  built  not  by  men  but  bv  genii.’  ‘In
population  and  splendid  edifices  the  city  of
Mathura  was  unrivalled  ;  human  tongue  cannot
describe  the  wonderful  things  it  contained.’


(17)  Xizamuddin  and  Eerishta  bv  mistake  attribute

t0c"\e  Rai  0f  Kanni,»'j.  Which  thcV  also
describe  a*  the  firM  city  attacked  bv  Mahmud.  Thev

*,hC  linC  °f  march  anil

make  him  cross  and  recross  the  Jumna  manv  time*
over.  I  have  followed  ft  hi1*  contemporary  account
writers 'S  *”*  fr°m  lhe  KeoKraPhi<'»l  Wonders  of  Inter


But  no  attempt  was  made  to  defend  the
inimitable  monument  of  Hindu  art  when
Mahmud  crossed  the  Jamna,  and  the  inhabitants,
anxious  to  save  their  skins,  left  him  to  work
havoc  with  their  sacred  inheritance.  ‘The
Sultan  gave  orders  that  all  the  temples  should
be  burnt  with  naphtha  and  fire  and  levelled  with
the  ground.’  Envy  rather  than  fanaticism
seems  to  have  been  the  predomiuent  motive  in
Mahmud’s  artistic  mind.  “In  this  city,”  he
wrote  to  the  nobles  of  Ghaznin  in  praise  pf  what
his  vandalism  had  destroyed,  "there  are  a
thousand  towering  places,  most  of  them  con¬
structed  of  huge  stones.  The  temples  are  more
than  can  be  counted.  Anyone  wishing  to  con¬
struct  the  like  will  have  to  spend  a  hundred
thousand  thousand  dinars  and  employ  the  best
skilled  workmen  for  two  hundred  years.”  As  a
financial  venture  the  ex|>edition  succeeded
beyong  all  expectation — 98,300  tnisqals  of  gold
were  obtained  frpm  idols  of  that  metal  ;  the
silver  idols,  two  hundred  in  number,  could  not
be  weighed  ‘without  being  broken  and  put  into
scales two  rubies  valued  at  5000  dinars,  a
sapphire  weighing  450  misqals,  and  in  addition
such  other  spoils  as  a  rich  and  prosperous  city
could  not  fail  to  yield.  A  few  miles  from
Mathura  is  the  historic  town  of  Bindraban  where
seven  proud  forts  raised  their  heads  to  the  sky
by  the  riverside.  The  owner  of  the  forts  fled  at
Mahmud’s  approach  and  he  took  from  them  all
they  contained. (18)


Kannauj,  Asnl  and
Sharwa.


1  lie  Sultan  then  left  behind  him  the  greMer
part  of  his  army,  which
was  too  large  for  the  rapid
movements  he  desired  and
proceeded  against  Kannauj  with  his  best
veterans.  The  ancient  city  had  risen  to  pro¬
minence  as  the  capital  of  Harsha  Vardhana ;  it
was  defended  by  seven  forts  washed  by  the
Ganges  and  contained  about  ten  thousand
temples,  great  and  small.  The  Rais  of  Kannauj
had  not  been  slow*  in  helping  Jaipal  and  Anandpal


(18)  The  situation  of  Mathura  by  the  side  of  the
Jumna  is  charming  beyond  description,  and  walking
t>>  the  river  side  on  a  summer  evening  under  the
,en<Ii"fr  citi«n.  Pandit  Radhn  Krishna,
V  ,nSt-  a, drcnrn  of  "hat  the  place  mi-lit

nin  1  rn  ,th*  dava  of  il*  *»«y.  The  road  to
nnndaban,  so  famous  in  the  legend  of  Lord  Krishna,

vU;.  ICta,"f.  ,ts  P°ct,e  associations.  Even  to-dav  a
wsitor,  with  eyes  that  can  see.  will  find  much  to
<  aptivate  him  in  the  work  of  later  artists— and  the

Mahatd Jurat*  hcaU,'ful  “  il  was>  in  days  of  the


336


I.XX.  KiTAGIRI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  477.


agreeable  feeling  experienced  by  a  man,  wrong  states
wane  and  right  states  wax  apace, — if  I  had  not  this
knowledge,  should  I  say,  would  it  beseem  me  to  say,
that  you  should  develop  and  abide  in  that  agreeable
feeling  ?

No,  sir.

It  is  just  because  I  have  that  knowledge  that  I  bid
you  develop  it  and  abide  therein.

[Similar  paragraphs  about  (a)  disagreeable  and
(/})  neutral  feelings.]

[477]  I  do  not  aver  that  all  Almsmen  alike  need  to
toil  on  with  diligence  ;  nor  do  I  aver  that  all  Almsmen
alike  have  no  such  need.  Those  Almsmen  who  are
Arahats,  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  dead,  who  have
greatly  lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  have  shed  their
burthen,  who  have  won  their  weal,  whose  bonds  are
no  more,  who  by  utter  knowledge  have  won  Deliver¬
ance, — of  such  Almsmen  as  these  I  do  not  aver  that
they  need  to  toil  on  with  diligence.  And  why? —
Because  they  have  already  achieved  all  that  toil  can
achieve  and  now  are  incapable  of  slackness.  But  of
those  Almsmen  who  are  still  under  training  and  have
not  won  their  hearts’  desire  but  live  in  earnest
yearning  for  that  utter  peace, — of  such  Almsmen  as
these  I  do  aver  that  they  need  to  toil  on  with  dili¬
gence.  And  why  ? — I  do  so  because  the  fruit  of
diligence  which  I  can  see  for  such  Almsmen  is  that — ,
in  suitable  surroundings,  with  a  picked  circle  of  good
friends,  and  with  faculties  duly  regulated — they  will
surely  win  that  for  the  sake  of  which  young  men  go
forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as  Pilgrims  and  will
surely  reach  the  goal  of  the  higher  life,  discerning  it  of
and  by  themselves  here  and  now,  realizing  it,  de¬
veloping  it  and  abiding  therein.

Here  are  seven  types  found  in  the  world  : — (1)  he
that  is  Delivered  both  ways,  (2)  he  that  is  Delivered
by  intellect,  (3)  he  that  has  fathomed  the  corporeal,
(4)  he  that  has  come  to  see,  (5)  he  that  is  Delivered  by
faith,  (6)  he  that  lives  up  to  tne  Doctrine,  and  (7)  he
that  lives  up  to  faith.


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN  :  A  STUDY


21


against  the  aggression  of  Gliazuin,  but  the  reign¬
ing  prince,  Rajyapala,  (19)  fled  away  on
Mahmud’s  approach.  Most  of  the  citizens
followed  the  example  of  their  Rai  and  Kannnuj
repeated  the  story  of  Mathura.  Mahmud
captured  the  seven  forts  in  a  single  day  and
plundered  the  undefended  city.  Further  down
the  Ganges,  near  the  modern  Fathehpur,  was
Rai  Chandal  Ehor’s  fort  of  Asni.  Chandal  Bhor,
who  had  been  busy  in  fighting  the  Rai  of
Kannauj,  also  fled  and  Asni  was  plundered.
Then  proceeding  southwards  Mahmud  came
across  the  fort  of  Munj(i9a.)  (Mujhavan)  the
garrison  of  which,  ‘independent  as  head-strong
camels,’  fought  like  ‘obstinate  satans,’  and  when
all  hope  had  disappeared  threw  the  women  and
children  into  the  fire  and  died  fighting  to  the
last  man.  The  next  objective  was  Chand  Rai  of
Sharwafigb.)  who  had  been  harassing  the  un¬
fortunate  Trilocanpal  of  Lahore  in  the  east  while
Mahmud  was  pressing  him  so  hard  on  the  other
side.  To  prevent  the  suicidal  strife,  Trilocanpal
had  even  sought  his  enemy’s  daughter  in
marriage  for  his  son,  but  ‘Nidar’  Bliim  was
imprisoned  by  his  father-in-law  when  he  went
to  bring  his  bride  and  the  strife  continued.  As
Mahmud  marched  eastwards,  Trilocanpal  fled
before  him  and  found  a  refuge  with  Chandal
Bhor  of  Asni.  Common  misfortune  at  last
created  some  sympathy  between  the  dynasties  of
Lahore  and  Sharwa,  and  ‘Nidar’  Bhim,  who
seems  to  have  regained  his  freedom,  sent  Chand
Rai  a  piece  of  friendly  advice.  “Sultan  Mahmud
is  not  like  the  rulers  of  Hind.  He  is  not  a  leader


(19)  Utbi  calls  him  Rai  Jaipal  which  is  equivalent
to  Rajyapala  hut  he  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the
Rni  Jaipal  of  I.nliorc  who  hod  been  dead  for  years.
Itut  further  on  Utbi  speaks  of  I*ur-i  Jaipal’s  war  with
Chand  Rai.  Pnr-i-  Jaipal  is  not  Anandpal  but  Trilocan-
pal,  whom  Albcruni  calls  ’Tarojanpal  for  which  Pur-t
Jaipal  (JuipaUs  son)  is  a  natural  misreading.  Much
confusion  has,  however,  been  caused  by  later  historians.
Fcrishtn  gives  the  name  of  Korah  to  the  Rai  of
Kannauj.  V.  A.  Smith  transfers  the  name  of  Tnlocan-
pnl  to  Raj v.-ipol's  son.  It  is  useless  to  mention  what
mess  of  names  and  places  other  scholars  have  been
responsible  for.  Rut  the  list  of  the  Hindu  Shaln
dynasty  given  by  Allieruni,  and  enumerated  in  a  fore¬
going  note,  settles  the  question  definitely.  The  other
difficulties  will  be  removed  if  the  Pnr-i  jaipal  of  l  tbi
is  read  as  Trilocanpal,  and  not  as  Jaipal'*  son.

(190)  Utbi  colls  Munj  ‘the  fort  of  Brahmans’  nud
places  it  licfore  the  capture  of  Asni.  This  seems  htgh-
fv  improbable  as  Mahmud  would  come  across  the  fort
while  marching  against  Sharwa.  Utbi  would  seem  to
take  him  to  Ilundclkhand  twice.


(19b)  Richer  Seunra  on  the  Ken  between
Kalnnjar  and  Banda.  or  Sriivagarh  on  the
Pahonj,  not  far  from  Kunch  (E  &  D,  Vol.  if.  P-  659).


of  black  meu.  Armies  fly  away  before  the  very
name  of  him  and  his  father.  I  regard  his  bridle
as  much  stronger  than  ypurs,  for  he  never  con¬
tents  himself  with  one  blow  of  the  sword,  nor
does  his  army  content  itself  with  one  hill  out  of
a  whole  range.  If  you  wish  for  your  own
safety,  you  will  remain  in  concealment."  The
suggestion  was  adopted.  Chand  Rai  fled  to  the
hills  with  his  elephants  and  treasures.  But
Mahmud  captured  Sharwa  and  then  hastened
after  the  flying  Rai,  whom  he  managed  to  dis¬
cover  and  defeat  on  the  night  of  January  b,  1019.
The  campaign  beyond  Kannauj  had  npt  taken
more  than  seventeen  days  when  Mahmud  turned
back  with  Chand  Rai’s  much  coveted  elephants.

Mahmud’s  exploit  could  not  fail  to  captivate
the  imagination  of  his  co-religionists.  Neither
Alexander,  the  Great,  nor  the  heroes  of  the  Shah
Namah  had  anything  so  romantic  to  their  credit.

A  mysterious  wonder  land  had  been  explored.
Beyond  the  thick  and  impenetrable  frontier
forest,  beyond  the  five  great-  rivers  of  the  Punjab,
the  Muizzin's  call  to  prayer  had  resounded  over
many  a  desolate  wilderness  and  amidst  the  con¬
flagrations  of  many  a  hamlet  and  town.  I  he
success  was  duly  celebrated.  The  Caliph
summoned  a  special  durbar  to  receive  Mahmud  s
message  of  victory’.  Accounts  of  the  exi>editiou
were  read  out  from  the  pulpits  and  pious
Mussulmans  fondly  imagined  that  ‘what  the
Companions  of  the  Blessed  Prophet  had  done  in
Arabia,  Persia,  Syria  and  Iraq,  Mahmud  has
achieved  in  Hindustan*.  Nothing  could  be
further  from  truth.  He  had  rolled  in  immense
riches  but  had  only  disgusted  the  Indians  with
his  faith.  The  plundered  people  were  not  likely
to  think  well  of  Islam  when  it  came  to  them  in
the  shajie  of  the  Ghaznavide  conqueror  and  left
Ix-hind  it  an  everlasting  story  of  plundered
temples,  desolated  cities  and  trampled  crops.  As
a  faith  Islam  had  been  morally  disgraced,  not
elevated,  by  the  Ghaznavide's  achievement.  The
booty  ampunted  to  3,000,000  dirhams.  "The
number  of  prisoners  may  lie  conceived  from  the
fact  that  each  was  sold  from  two  to  three  dirhams.
These  were  afterwards  taken  to  Glinznin  and
merchants  came  from  distant  cities  to  purchase
them,  so  that  the  countries  of  Mawarun  Nahr,
Iraq  and  Khorasan  were  filled  with  them,  and
the  fair  and  the  dark,  the  rich  and  the  poor,
were  commingled  in  one  common  slavery’."  It
was  pe  rhaps  the  rememberance  of  Mathura  which
led  Mahmud  to  build  a  Juma  mosque  and  a
college  in  Ghaznin  after  his  return.  The  amirs


M.  1 478.


OF  IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE.


337


(i)  Delivered  both  ways  is  he  who  (a)  has  reached
through  the  med.um  of  his  physical  senses  those
tranquil  Deliverances  which  are  immaterial  and  tran¬
scend  all  that  is  material,  and  (6)  has  destroyed
Cankers  through  intellectual  vision.  Of  such  an
Almsman  I  do  not  say  that  he  needs  still  to  toil  on
with  diligence,— because  he  has  already  achieved  all

1  Crn  ach‘®ve  and  nowis  incapable  of  slackness.

(11)  Delivered  by  the  intellect  is  he  who,  though  he
has  not  reached  through  the  medium  of  his  physical
senses  those  tranquil  Deliverances  which  are  im¬
material  and  transcend  all  that  is  material,  has  destroyed
Cankers  through  intellectual  vision.  [478]  Of  such  an
Almsman,  too,  I  do  not  say  that  he  needs  still  .  .  .
incapable  of  slackness.

has  fathomed  the  corporeal  who  (a)  has
reached  through  the  medium  of  his  physical  senses
those  tranquil  Deliverances  which  are  immaterial  and
transcend  all  that  is  material,  and  (6)  has  destroyed
some  Cankers  by  intellectual  vision.  Of  such  an
Almsman  I  do  say  that  he  needs  still  to  toil  on  with
diligence,— -because  the  fruit  of  diligence  which  I  can
see  for  such  an  Almsman  is  that,  in  suitable  surround¬
ings  with  a  picked  circle  of  good  friends,  and  with
faculPes  duly  regulated,  he  will  surely  win  .  .  .  and
abiding  therein.

(iv)  He  has  come  to  see  who,  not  having  reached
these  Deliverances  through  the  medium  of  his  physical
senses,  has  destroyed  some  Cankers  by  intellectual
vision,  and  by  intellect  has  plumbed  and  fathomed
those  states  of  consciousness  which  the  Truth-finder
has  preached.  Of  such  an  Almsman,  too,  I  do  aver
that  he  needs  still  to  toil  on  .  .  .  and  abiding  therein.

(v)  Delivered  by  faith  is  he  who,  not  having  reached
these  Deliverances  through  the  medium  of  his  physical
senses,  has  destroyed  some  Cankers  by  intellectual
vision,  but  has  his  faith  in  the  Truth-finder  fixed,
rooted  and  stablished.  Of  such  an  Almsman,  too,  I  do
theV™1  he  needs  still  to  toil  on  .  .  .  [479]  and  abiding


22


22


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


followed  his  example  and  Ghazuin  was  soon
adorned  with  palatial  buildings.

(13)  Two  distant  storm-centres  still  troubled

Mahmud’s  mind.  Trilocan-
(13)  rriloeanpaland  paj  aiuj  i,js  son  ‘Nidar’
ban  da — the  Rahib  ...  .  ,  .  .  .  -  .  ,

(1019-1020).  Bhun,  had  been  defeated

but  not  crushed  and  were
still  in  the  Doab.  In  Bundelkhand  Rai  Nandafzo)
of  Kalanjar  had  also  adopted  a  hostile  attitude.
After  Mahmud’s  withdrawal  from  the  country  he
had  inarched  with  the  Kai  of  Gwalior  against
Rajyapala,  and  either  as  a  punishment  for  the
latter’s  cowardly  altitude  towards  Mahmud,  or
on  account  of  some  other  forgotten  grievance,
put  him  to  death.  An  alliance  between
Trilocanpal  and  Nanda  was  natural.  But  it  was
not  Mahmud's  principle  to  let  the  grass  grow
under  his  feet.  He  determined  to  crush  the
possibility  of  another  Hindu  Confederacy,  and
in  the  winter  of  1019-20  again  crossed  ‘the  five
and  the  two  rivers.  Trilocanpal  withdrew  beyond
the  lower  Rahib  (Ramganga)  but  Mahmud’s
officers  forced  their  passage  across  the  river  by
swimming  on  inflated  skins  (mashaks)  ;  and  after
scattering  Trilocanpal’s  army  plundered  the
newly  built  town  of  Bari(2i),  which  Rajyapala  had
built  after  the  destruction  of  Kanuauj.  Whether
to  help  Trilocanpal,  or  with  the  intention  of
fighting  the  invader  single-handed,  Nanda  had
already  started  from  Kalanjar  with  36,000  horse,
40,000  or  50,000  foot  and  640  elephants.  The
Sultan  also  moved  forward.  It  is  difficult  to  say
where  the  two  met,  but  on  surveying  the  enemy
troops  from  an  eminence,  the  Sultan  regretted
the  dangerous  expedition  he  had  undertaken.
The  Rai  was  even  more  afraid,  for  that  very
night  a  great  terror  took  possession  of  his  mind
and  lie  left  all  his  baggage  and  fled.  Mahmud,
after  making  sure  that  the  Hindus  had  not
attempted  an  ambush,  plundered  the  deserted
camp.  Five  hundred  and  eighty  elephants,  in
addition  to  the  two  hundred  and  seventy  obtained
from  Trilocanpal  fell  into  his  hands.  But  the
Punjab  was  still  unsubdued.  Mahmud’s  position


(10)  V.  A.  Smith  call*  him  'Ganda.'

(21)  'Kanoj  ties  to  the  west  of  the  Ganges,  a  very
targe  town,  but  most  of  it  is  now  in  ruins  since  the
capital  has  been  transferred  thence  to  the  city  of  Pari,
east  of  the  Ganges.  Between  the  two  towns  is  a
distance  of  three  to  four  day*'  marches."  (Albervni,
vol.  i.  p.  199).  The  battle  most  have  token  place  not
far  from  where  the  Ramganga  falls  into  the  Ganges.
V.  A.  Smith’s  identification  of  the  defeated  prince
with  the  son  of  Rajvapal  is  a  mistake.  I'tbi’s  account
leaves  no  doubt  that  l'rilocanpal,  son  of  Annndpal,  is
meant.


in  a  far  off  territory  with  the  armies  of  Nanda
yet  undefeated  was  extremely  critical,  and  afraid
lest  his  retreat  should  be  cut  off,  he  marched
back  rapidly  to  Gliaznin.

(14)  The  conquest  of  India  was  not
Mahmud’s  aim.  Neverthe-
(14)  Annexation  of  iess  the  Doab  compaigns
1022) .  had  brought  him  far  from

his  base,  and  he  saw  that
if  his  armies  were  to  peneterate  to  such  distant
territories  as  Bundelkhand,  he  must  at  least
have  the  Punjab  under  his  complete  control.  In
1021  he  started  from  Ghaznin  with  ‘a  large
number  of  carpenters,  blacksmiths  and  stone¬
cutters  with  the  definite  intention  of  establishing
a  regular  Government  over  the  Punjab.  The
first  objective  were  the  frontier  tribes  of  Swat,
Bajaur  and  Kafiristan,  who  had  ‘not  yet  put
the  yoke  of  Islam  rpund  their  neck,’  and
worshipped  the  Buddha  in  the  form  of  the  lion
(Sakva  Sinlia).  The  inhabitants  were  subdued
and  converted  and  a  fort  was  built  in  their
territory. (22)  Marching  further  Mahmud
repeated  his  former  attempt,  and  tasted  again
the  bitterness  of  his  former  failure,  at  the  foot
of  I.ohkot,  the  impregnable  fortress  of  the
Kashmir  Pass.  But  the  Punjab  wras  cleared.
Mahmud  forsook  plundering  and  established  a
regular  administration.  A  reliable  Amir  was
placed  at  Lahore,  the  rest  of  the  province  was
assigned  to  various  officers  and  garrisons  were
established  at  important  points.  Trilocanpal
had  died  soon  after  the  battle  of  the  Rahib
|Nidar’  Bhim  fled  to  the  Rai  of  Ajmere  and  died
in  1026.  W  ith  him  the  House  of  Kallur  came
to  an  end.  A  contemporary  Muslim  scholar,  un¬
touched  by  the  |>assions  and  prejudices  of  those
around  him,  supplied  a  befitting  epitaph  to  the
dynasty  that  had  ended  in  such  a  hero :  "They
were  men  of  noble  sentiment  and  noble  bearing.
In  all  their  grandeur,  they  never  slackened  in
the  desire  of  doing  what  is  good  and  right.”
(22a).


The  Persian  chronicles  speak  of  Qirat  and
Nardtn  (or  Nur),  which  Elliot,  on  the  authontv  of
Albernni  identifies  with  the  Kuner  and  the  l.andqe
t,,la.1.  fal*  »*«>  the  river  Kabul.  Doubtless  the
Iron ner  tnbes  arc  meant.  Plenty  of  Buddhist  remains
surme  to  explain  the  worship  of  lion*.  (E  and  P.
t '  “".P-  d4l)-  On  breaking  a  great  temple  situated
there  the  ornamented  figure  of  a  lion  came  out  of  it,
which  according  to  the  belief  of  the  Hindus  was  four
{fry?,,  M  "  (FertshU).  The  carpenters,

blacksmiths  and  stone-cutters  were  brought  for  the

°f  ,fori?  at  tl,e  strategic  points  on  the
frontier  and  tn  the  Punjab.

(22«)  Albernni.


338


LXX.  KlTAGIRI-SUTTA.


M.  i.  480.


(vi)  He  lives  up  to  the  Doctrine  who,  having
neither  reached  these  Deliverances  through  the  medium
of  his  physical  senses  nor  destroyed  the  Cankers,  has
through  the  intellect  a  message  of  delight  in  the  states
of  consciousness  which  the  Truth-finder  preaches, —
possessing  faith,  effort,  mindfulness,  rapt  concentration
and  understanding.  Of  such  an  Almsman,  too,  I  do  aver
that  he  needs  still  to  toil  on  .  .  .  and  abiding  therein.

(vii)  Lastly,  he  lives  up  to  faith  who,  having  neither
reached  these  states  of  Deliverance  through  the
medium  of  his  physical  senses  nor  destroyed  the
Cankers,  just  reposes  faith  and  affection  in  the  Truth-
finder, — possessing  faith,  effort,  mindfulness,  rapt  con¬
centration  and  .understanding.  Of  such  an  Almsman,
too,  I  do  aver  that  he  needs  still  to  toil  on  .  .  .  and
abiding  therein.

I  do  not  say  that  the  plenitude  of  knowledge  comes
straightaway  ; — it  comes  by  gradual  training,  by  gradual
attainment  and  by  gradual  progress.  [480]— Take
the  case  of  a  man  with  faith  who  first  draws  near,
then  attends  constantly,  then  pays  attention,  then
hears  the  Doctrine,  then  carries  it  away  with  him,  then
examines  the  import  of  the  ideas  he  has  carried  away,
then  is  in  an  ecstasy  of  delight  over  those  ideas,  then
grows  to  ardour,  is  emboldened  by  his  ardour,  be¬
coming  emboldened,  weighs  it  all,  and,  weighing  it,
strives,  till,  void  of  self,  he,  through  the  medium  of  his
bodily  senses,  realizes  the  truth  sublime  and  by  his
intellect  penetrates  it  and  sees  it  clear.  Had  that  faith
not  been  there,  he  would  not  have  drawn  near,  nor
come  again,  nor  would  any  of  the  other  things
have  happened,  nor  would  he  have  striven  at  all.

Almsmen,  ye  have  gone  far  astray ;  ye  have
erred  grievously.  Ah,  how  very  far  have  these
foolish  persons  departed  from  this  Doctrine  and
Rule  !

There  is  a  fourfold  exposition,  the  import  of  which,
when  it  is  propounded,  can  speedily  be  mastered  by
the  intellect  of  a  man  of  intelligence.  This  I  will  pro¬
pound  to  you  and  you  shall  understand  it  from  me.


M.  i.  481.


OF  IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE.


339


Who,  sir,  are  we  ?  And  who  are  they  who  know
the  Doctrine  ?

Why,  Almsmen,  even  a  master  who  put  store  on
things  material  who  made  them  his  heritage  and
cherished  them, — even  he  is  not  met  by  higgling  and
haggling  stipulations  that,  if  they  like  a  thing,  his  fol¬
lowers  will  do  it,  but  will  not  do  it  if  they  do  not  like
it.  How  can  this  chaffering  beseem  the  Truth-finder
who  dwells  wholly  apart  from  things  material  ?  To
the  follower  with  faith  and  in  unison  with  his  Master’s
teachings,  it  is  a  principle  that  the  Lord  is  his  Master,
and  he  his  disciple  ,-  that  the  Lord  knows  and  he  does
not.  To  the  follower  with  faith,  in  unison  with  his
Master’s  teachings,  those  teachings  impart  strength
and  affection.  To  the  follower  with  faith,  in  unison
with  his  Master’s  teachings,  [481]  it  is  a  principle  that
— let  only  skin  and  sinews  and  bone  persist  and  let
flesh  and  blood  dry  up,  there  still  shall  be  no  slackening
of  effort  till  what  a  man’s  strength  and  a  man’s  per¬
severance  and  a  man’s  energy  can  win  for  him,  has
been  won.

From  the  follower  with  faith,  in  unison  with  his
Master’s  teachings,  one  of  two  fruits  may  be  looked
for, — either  Knowledge  here  and  now  or — if  the  stuff
of  life  be  not  wholly  spent — no  return  to  life  on  earth.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXXI.  TEVIJJA-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.

THE  TRUE  THREE-FOLD  LORE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  staying
at  Vesa.ll  in  the  Great  Wood  in  the  Gabled  Hall,  and
at  the  same  time  the  Wanderer  Vaccha-gotta  was
resident  in  the  Wanderers’  Pleasaunce  where  the
White  Mango  stands  alone.  Early  in  the  morning,
duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  the  Lord  came  into
Vesall  for  alms,  but,  reflecting  that  it  was  too  early  yet.


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNTN :  A  STUDY


23


(15)  Gwalior  and
Kalanjar  (10*2-1023).


(15)  Next  year  (1022-1023)  Mahmud  once
more  marched  by  way  of
Lahore  against  Nanda.
But  he  had  taken  all  that
was  best  from  the  lands  in  the  direction  of  his
march  and  was  not  inclined  to  push  matters  to
extreme.  Gwalior  was  invested  but  the  Rai
obtained  peace  by  a  present  of  thirty-five
elephants.  Even  Nanda,  when  besieged  in
Kalanjar,  found  the  Sultan  reasonable.  A
present  of  three  hundred  elephants,  whom  the
Rai  turned  unceremoniously  out  of  the  fort  for
the  Turks  to  ‘capture  and  ride  on’,  served  to
create  a  good  will,  which  was  further  strengthen¬
ed  by  some  Hindi  verses  written  by  the  Rai  in
the  Sultan’s  praise.  All  the  Scholars  of  Hind,
Persia  and  Arabia  present  in  Mahmud’s  camp
applauded  Nanda’s  composition  and  Mahmud
sent  him  at  order  ( firman)  confirming  him  in  the
possession  of  his  fifteen  forts.  Nanda  acknow¬
ledged  the  favour  by  a  present  of  money  and
costly  jewels  and  the  Sultan  turned  back  from
the  most  eastern  point  he  was  ever  destined  to
reach.

On  returning  to  Ghaznin  the  Sultan  held  a
muster  of  his  forces.

Mahmud  in  Trans-  Apart  from  the  troops
stationed  in  the  provinces,
the  royal  army  at  Ghaznin  amounted  to  54.000
horse  and  1,300  clephants(23)  and  with  this
lie  crossed  the  Oxus  and  proceeded  to  over¬
awe  the  chiefs  of  Trans-Oxonia.  Ali  Tigin,
the  recalcitrant  ruler  of  Samarkand  was  brought
in  chains  before  the  Sultan  and  sent  a  prisoner
to  India.  The  smaller  chiefs  crowded  to  offer
their  allegiance.  Even  Yusuf  Qadr  Khan,
brother  of  the  late  I-lak  Khnn<24)  came  to  meet
him  and  requested  him  to  transport  the  Seljuqs
across  the  Oxus  intj
Khorasan.  This  body  of
pastoral  and  barbaric  Turkomans,  destined  to
an  unexpect ed  but  not  undeserved  greatness,
had  long  been  a  source  of  trouble  to  its  neigh¬
bours.  During  the  reign  of  the  Satnanid  kings
they  had  migrated  from  Turkestan,  and  crossing


(23)  The  total  number  of  elephants  possessed  by
Mahmud  is  said  to  have  been  2,500.

(24)  ‘I-lnk  Khan’  was  the  title  of  the  Khans  of
Kashghar.  Mir  Khond,  Fcrishta  and  Hamdnllah
Mustawfi  greatlv  differ  in  their  account  of  Qadir  Khan;
the  ‘Rahatus  Sudur’  of  Mohammad  ibn-i  Ali  ibtt-i
Sulaiman  Ac.  Rawandi  (edited  bv  Dr.  M.  Iqlial)  calls
him  T-lak  Khan.  The  question  is  of  the  remotest
interest  to  the  student  of  Indian  history.  It  will  be
remembered  that  the  Caliph  had  refused  to  transfer
Samarkand  to  Mahmud.


the  Jaxartes,  had  settled  in  Nur  of  Bukhara  from
which  they  used  to  migrate  to  Darghan  of
Khwarazm.  Their  leader,  Israil,  son  of  Seljuq,
the  chief  after  whom  the  tribe  came  to  be  named,
was  a  perpetual  terror  to  the  maliks  of  Turkestan
and  Trans-Oxonia.  'He  was  wont  to  enter  the
chase  or  the  conflict’  like  a  whirlwind  and  a
thunder-cloud  and  vanquished  every  one  who
ventured  into  a  personal  contest  with  him.  Not
a  bird  in  the  air  and  not  a  deer  in  the  forest
escaped  his  arrow.  ”(25)  Like  others  he  came
riding  at  the  head  of  his  Turkomans  to  offer  his
allegiance  to  Mahmud,  ‘with  a  cap  placed
jauntily  on  one  side  of  his  head  and  bestriding
a  horse  like  the  spur  of  a  mountain’.  The  astute
Sultan  looked  suspiciously  at  the  ambitious
young  chief  and  asked  him  how  many  men  he
could  bring  to  the  army.  “If  you  send  one  of
these  arrows  into  our  camp,*’  Israel  replied,
“fifty  thousand  of  your  servants  will  mount  on
horse  back.”  “And  if  that  number”  continued
Israel,  "be  not  sufficient,  send  the  second
arrow  to  the  horde  of  Balik  (Bilkhan  Koh) ,
and  you  will  find  fifty  thousand  more.”
“But,”  said  the  Ghaznavide  dissembling  his
anxiety,  "if  I  should  stand  in  need  of  the  whole
force  of  your  kindred  tribes?”  “Despatch  my
bow,”  was  the  last  reply  of  Israel,  "and  as  it
is  circulated  around,  the  summons  will  be
obeyed  by  two  hundred  thousand  horse. ”(26)
Mahmud  made  up  his  mind  to  crush  the  Seljuqs
before  it  was  too  late.  An  order  was  served  on
Israel  commanding  him  to-  remain  within  his
tent  while  four  thousand  Seljuq  families  with
their  goods  and  chattels  were  transported  acros.
the  Oxus  under  the  eve  of  the  Ghaznavide  army.
The  Sultan’s  chamberlain,  Arsalan  Hajib,
suggested  that  the  barbarians  should  be  drowned
while  crossing  the  river.  “Destiny  cannot  be
averted  by  perfidy  any  more  than  by  valour,”
Mahmud  remarked,  and  refused  to  break  his
promise.  (27)  Israel  with  his  two  sons  was
despatched  to  the  distant  fortress  of  Kalanjar


(2O  Tabaqat-I  .Vaifrf.

(26)  Gibbon,  Vol.  vi.  I  have  adopted  the  great
historian’a  version  of  the  famous  conversation.  Rahatus
Sudur  is  more  particular  :  the  first  arrow  would  raise
1,00,000  horse  from  Israel’s  own  followers,  the  second
arrow  50,000  from  the  Turkomans  settled  in  Trans-
Oxonia  while  his  tow  would  bring  2,00,000  from  the
Turkomans  still  in  Turkestan.

(27)  Tabaaat-t  Nasirl.  The  Raltatus  Sudur  savs
th-  Seljnks  were  allowed  to  cross  to  Oxus  at  their
re-west  nfter  the  imprisonment  of  Israel  which
Mahmud  allowed  inspite  of  Arsalan’s  advice  to  the
contrary.


24


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


where  he  died  after  seven  years.  (28)  The
exiled  families  were  allotted  grazing  grounds  in
the  districts  of  north  west  Khorasan  and  placed
under  the  guardianship  of  the  Kliorasnni  nobles
who  were  ordered  to  disarm  them.  But  it  was
easier  to  bring  the  Seljuqs  into  the  more  fertile
tracts  of  Persia  than  to  keep  them  in  subjection.
The  migration  once  l>egun  could  not  be  stopped
and  the  Ghaznavidc  empire  was  ultimately  con¬
verted  into  a  Seljuq  pasture-land. (29)  These
troubles,  however,  lay  in  the  womb  of  the  future.
For  the  present  Mahmud  was  supreme,  and  the
fall  of  Israel,  whatever  its  future  effects,  served
as  an  example  to  all  Turkoman  chiefs.

(16)  Northern  India  had  ceased  to  attract
Mahmud  for  the  spoils  of
,$)  (,":5~  its  most  wealthy  temples

were  already  in  his
treasury.  But  the  rich  and  prosperous  province
of  Gitjrat  was  still  untouched,  and  on  Octobe-
18,  1020,  he  started  from  Ghaznin  with  his
regular  troops  and  thirty  thousand  volunteer
horsemen  for  the  temple  of  Somnath,  situated  at
the  distance  of  a  bow-shot  from  the  mouth  of  the
Saraswati,  by  the  side  of  which  the  earthly  t>odv
of  Lord  Krishna  had  breathed  its  last. (30)

“The  people  of  Hind,’’  says  Ferishta  follow-
ing  Ibn-i  Asir,  "believed
Somnath"1'1  ' '  that  souls  after  separating
from  their  bodies  came  to
Somnath,  and  the  god  assigned  to  each  soul,  by
way  of  transmigration,  such  new  body  as  it
deserved.  They  thought  the  tide  rose  and  fell
in  order  to  worship  the  idol.  The  Brahmans
said  that  as  the  god  was  angry  with  the  idols
Mahmud  hail  broken,  he  did  not  come  to  their
help;  otherwise  he  could  destroy  anyone  he
wanted  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  Somnath
was  the  king  while  other  idols  were  merely  his
door-keepers  and  chamberlains.  A  hundred
thousand  people  used  to  collect  together  in  the

(28)  He  escaped  out  of  prison  once  hut  lost  his
way  and  was  recaptured.

(29)  Ferishta,  Kantalus  Sofa,  Raltatus  Sudur  and
T ahaqat-i  Xaslri  greatly  differ  in  their  account  of  the
earlier  events  that  brought  the  Seljuqs  into  prominence.
Tin*  matter  cannot  he  discussed  here  in  greater  detail
and  1  must  content  myself  with  giving  what  appears  to
me  to  lie  the  most  rational  account.  Sec  also  art.
‘Seljuq.’  F.ncy.  Frit,  by  Prof.  Houtoma.

(30)  The  Somnath  expedition  is  not  described  by
l  tbi,  whose  chronicle  closes  after  the  defeat  of
Trilocanpal  on  the  Rnhib.  The  earliest  authority
seems  to  he  the  Kamllut  Tau-arikli  of  the  Arab
historian.  Ibn-i  Asir.  Ferishta  gives  a  detailed  account
but  lie  lias  included  later  accretions  which  require  a
critical  examination.


temple  at  the  time  of  the  solar  and  lunar  eclipses.
Presents  came  to  it  from  distant  parts.  The
princes  of  Hindustan  had  endowed  it  with
about  ten  thousand  villages.  (31)  A  thousand
Brahmaus  worshipped  the  idol  continuously :
and  every  night  it  was  washed  with  fresh  water
from  the  Ganges,  although  the  Gauges  is  six
hundred  karohs  from  there. (3 2)  A  chain  of  gold,
weighing  two  hundred  mans,  with  bells  fastened
to  it,  was  hung  in  a  corner  of  the  temple;  it  was
shaken  at  the  api>ointed  hours  to  inform  the
Brahmans  that  the  lime  for  prayer  had  arrived.
Five  hundred  singing  and  dancing  girls  and  two
hundred  musicians  were  in  the  service  of  the
temple,  and  all  their  requisites  were  provided
out  of  the  endowments  and  offerings.  Three
hundred  barbers  were  employed  to  shave  the
heads  and  beards  of  the  pilgrims.  Many  Rajas
of  Hindustan  dedicated  their  daughters  to  Som¬
nath  and  sent  them  there.  The  temple  was  a
spacious  edifice  and  its  roof  was  supported  by
fiftv-six  ornamented  columns.  The  idol  was
cut  out  of  stone ;  it  was  five  yards  long,  of  which
two  yards  were  below,  and  three  above,
the  ground.  The  'Tarikh-i  Z.ainul  Ma-asir1  says
that  the  inner  chamber  of  the  temple,  in  which
the  idol  was  placed,  was  dark,  the  requisite
light  being  supplied  by  the  rays  of  fine  jems
attached  to  the  hanging  lamps. (33)

(31)  I  have  corrected  the  figures  in  this  paragraph
from  Ibu-i  Asir.

(32)  Albcruni  says  they  also  brought  a  basket  of
flowers  from  Kashmir.

(33)  The  legend  to  which  Somnath  owed  its
origin  is  thus  described  by  Albcruni  :“Thc  Moon  l>cing
married  to  the  daughters  (lunar  stations)  of
Prajapati  (llrahman- First  Cause)  preferred  one  of
them,  Rohini,  to  all  others,  and  Prajapti,  unable  to
induce  hi*  son-in-law  to  do  justice  to  all  his  wives,
cursed  him  so  that  he  became  leprous.  The  Moon
repented,  but  Prajapati  curse  was  beyond  recall.  He
however,  promised  to  cover  the  Moon’s  shame  for  half
the  month  and  advised  him  to  raise  a  linga  of  Mahadco
to  wipe  off  the  trace  of  his  sin.  “This  the  Moon  did.
The  linga  he  raised  was  the  idol  of  Somnath,  for
Soma  means  the  moon  and  nath  means  the  master.
so  that  the  whole  word  means  the  master  of  the  moon.
The  image  was  destroyed  by  I*rince  Mahmud  in  416
A.H.  He  ordered  the  upper  part  to  be  broken  and  the
remainder  to  l>e  transported  to  his  residence.  Ghnrnin,
with  all  its  coverings  and  trappings  of  gold,  jewels
and  embroidered  garments.  Part  of  it  has  been  thrown
into  the  hippodrome  of  the  town,  together  with  the
Cakravasniln,  an  idol  of  bronze,  that  had  been  brought
from  Thnneswar.  Another  part  of  the  idol  of  Somnath
lies  before  the  door  of  the  mosque  of  Gharnin,  on  which
people  rub  their  feet  to  clean  them  from  dirt  and  wet.
The  reason  why  Somnath,  in  particular,  has
become  so  fnmons  is  that  it  was  a  liarbour  for  sea¬
faring  people.  The  fortress  which  contained  the  idol
and  its  treasures  was  not  ancient  but  was  built  only
a  hundred  years  ago."  The  original  position  of  the


340


LXXI.  TEVIJJA-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  482.


settled  to  go  to  the  Wanderers’  Pleasaunce  and  visit
Vaccha-gotta, — as  he  did.  From  some  way  off  the
Wanderer  saw  the  Lord  coming  and  said : — Sir,  let
the  Lord  be  pleased  to  draw  near ;  the  Lord  is  right
welcome;  it  is  a  very  long  time  since  the  Lord
managed  to  come  here.  Let  the  Lord  be  seated ;  here
is  a  seat  set  for  him.  The  Lord  having  seated  himself
accordingly,  Vaccha-gotta  the  Wanderer  [482]  took  a
low  seat  for  himself  to  one  side  and  thus  began  : —

I  have  heard  it  said  that  the  recluse  Gotama1  is  all¬
knowing  and  all-seeing,  with  nothing  outside  his  ken
and  vision,  and  that  he  claims  that,  whether  he  is
walking  or  standing  still,  whether  he  is  asleep  or
awake,  his  ken  and  vision  stand  ready,  aye  ready.
Pray,  sir,  is  this  witness  true,  not  misrepresenting  the
Lord  and  not  mis-stating  the  gist  of  his  Doctrine  f

The  witness,  Vaccha,  is  not  true;  it  imputes  to  me
what  is  false  and  untrue.

Well,  sir,  what  account  ought  we  to  give  of  the
Lord,  so  as  not  to  misrepresent  him  or  misinterpret
the  gist  of  his  Doctrine  or  entail  the  censure  of  an
orthodox  expositor  thereof  ?

He  would  bear  true  witness,  neither  misrepresenting
me  nor  misinterpreting  the  gist  of  my  Doctrine  nor
entailing  the  censure  of  an  orthodox  expositor  thereof, —
who  should  say  : — The  recluse  Gotama  has  the  three¬
fold  lore  (te-vijja).  For,  Vaccha,  (i)  as  long  as  I
please,  I  can  call  to  mind  all  my  own  past  existences,
from  a  single  one  onwards,  in  all  their  details  and
features,  (ii)  As  long  as  I  please,  I  can  see — with  the
Eye  Celestial,  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  eye
of  man — creatures  in  act  to  pass  hence  and  re-appear
elsewhere  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4).  (iii)  By  destroying
the  Cankers,  I  have  won  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  in  which  no  Cankers  are ;  here  and  now  have  I
entered  on  and  abide  in  this  Deliverance,  which  of  and
by  myself  I  have  discerned  and  realized.  So  it  would


1  This  is  the  claim  of  the  Jain  Nathaputta  in  (e.g.)  the  14th
Sutta.  Cf.  Sutta  No.  76


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN :  A  STUDY


25


The  Somnath  expedition  is  the  one  by  which
Mahmud  is  most  remem-
Ra^utna*”*  throU811  bered.  It  was  the  finest
achievement  of  his  military
genius.  His  marches  into  Hindustan  had  been
through  a  fertile  country  and  he  was  never  in
danger  of  starvation.  In  moving  southwards
Mahmud  for  the  first  and  last  time  threw  his
caution  aside,  defied  the  inclemencies  of  nature
as  well  as  the  spears  of  his  opponents  and
ventured  into  a  territory  where  the  slightest
mishap  would  have  meant  complete  ruin.
Multan  was  reached  by  the  middle  of  Ramazan
(November)  and  Mahmud  made  careful  prepara¬
tions  for  crossing  the  extensive  desert  of  Raj-
putana.  Every  man  in  the  army  was  ordered  to
carry  enough  water  ami  corn  for  several  days
and  thirty  thousand  camels  were  loaded  as  a
further  precaution.  The  Rai  of  Ajmere  fled  at
the  approach  of  invader.  Mahmud  plundered
the  city  but  refused  to  delay  his  march  by
investing  the  fort.  A  general  panic  seems  to
have  deprived  the  garrisons  on  the  line  of  his
advance  of  all  power  of  resistance.  Even  Anhil-
wara,  the  capital  of  Gujrat,  was  left  undefended,
and  Mahmud  after  taking  from  the  city  the  pro¬
visions  he  required,  moved  down  the  Saraswati
and  reached  the  famous  temple  in  the  second
week  of  January.  ‘The  fort  of  Somnath  raised
its  towers  to  the  sky ;  the  waves  of  the  sea
washed  its  feet’.  The  Hindus  had  climbed  the
ramparts  to  witness  the  arrival  of  the  besiegers.
“Our  god,  Somnath,”  they  shouted  to  the
Mussalmans,  “has  brought  you  here  to  destroy
you  at  one  blow  for  the  idols  you  have  broken
in  Hindustan.”


Battle  of  Somnath.


Next  morning,  which  was  Friday,  the
struggle  commenced.  The
Ghaznivides  succeeded  in
scaling  the  city-walls  and  the  Hindus  made  a
desperate  attempt  to  dislodge  them.  But  night
came  on  before  the  battle  on  the  ramparts  could
end  and  the  besiegers  withdrew  to  their  camp.
On  Saturday  Mahmud  captured  the  ramparts  and
entered  the  city.  The  Hindus,  driven  out  of
their  houses,  collected  round  the  temple  for  a
last  despairing  struggle.  Band  after  band  prayed
fervently  to  the  idol  and  after  bidding  it  farewell


dreadful  slaughter  followed  at  the  gate  of  the
temple  and  few  were  left  alive'.  But  once  more
the  darkness  of  night  stopped  Mahmud's  hands
while  the  intervention  of  a  new  factor  reminded
him  of  the  fickleness  of  fate.

The  Sultan’s  march  had  been  too  rapid  to
allow  the  Rais  of  Gujrat  to  collect  their  forces
for  the  defence  of  the  temple.  But  the  desperate
resistance  of  the  besieged  gave  them  the  time
required  ;  their  clumsy  military  machine  began  to
work  with  feverish  haste  ;  and  on  the  morning  of
the  third  day  Mahmud  found  his  camp  being
encircled  by  an  Indian  force  sent  by  the
neighbouring  Rais  for  the  relief  of  the  garrison.
Mahmud  left  a  part  of  his  army  to  continue  the
siege  and  advanced  to  meet  the  new  comers  with
the  rest.  ‘Both  sides  fought  with  indescribable
courage  and  valour,  and  the  field  of  battle  was
set  aflame  with  their  anger  and  their  hate.’  But
the  Indian  army  was  constantly  strengthened  by
new  reinforcements  and  the  Ghaznavides  were
brought  to  the  verge  of  an  irretrievable  disaster.
Mahmud’s  position  was  extremely  critical.
Defeat  would  have  meant  annihilation  and
further  delay  would  have  entailed  defeat.  So
after  a  fervent  prayer  to  the  Almighty  with  the
cloak  of  Shaikh  Abul  Hasan  Kharqani  in  his
hands,  he  led  his  army  to  a  hist  attack,  and  with
the  good  fortune  that  never  permanently
deserted  him,  succeeded  in  breaking  the  enemy
ranks.  The  defeat  of  the  relieving  force  decided
the  fate  of  Somnath,  and  the  garrison  overcome
by  panic  and  fear  offered  no  further  resistance.

Mahmud  entered  the  temple  and  possessed
himself  of  its  fabulous  wealth.  ‘Not  a  hundredth
part  of  the  gold  and  precious  stones  he  obtained
from  Somnath  were  to  be  found  in  the  treasury
of  any  king  of  Hindustan’.  Later  historians
have  related  how  Mahmud  refuser!  the  enormous
ransom  offered  by  the  Brahmans,  and  preferring
the  title  of  ‘Idol-breaker’  ( Bul-shikan )  to  that  of
‘Idol-seller’  ( But-farosh )  struck  the  idol  with  his
mace,  his  piety  being  instantly  rewarded  by  the
precious  stones  that  came  out  of  its  belly.  Tin's
is  an  impossible  storv(34).  Apart  from  the  fact
that  it  lacks  all  contemporary  confirmation,  the
Somnath  idol  was  a  solid  unsculptured  linga,
not  a  statue,  and  stones  could  not  come  out  of
its  belly.  That  the  idol  was  broken  is  un¬


idol  was  three  miles  from  the  month  of  the  Saraswati
at  a  spot  which  was  uncovered  when  the  tide  receded ;
hence  the  legend  of  the  Moon  worshipping  the  linga.
I.nter  on  the  temple  was  built  a  bow-shot  from  the
month  of  the  river.  (Albernnl,  Vol.  il.  f.  101).
in  ‘sorrow  and  tears’,  sallied  forth  to  fight.  ‘A
4


(yj)  It  is  not  found  in  the  Kamllut  Tmrarikli.  The
earliest  authority  seems  to  have  been  the  Tarikh-I
Alfi,  written  six  hundred  years  after  Mahmad.  The
story  could  have  been  invented  (and  believed)  only  by
those  who  were  ignorant  of  the  true  structure  of  the
Somnath  idol.


M.  i.  483.


THE  TRUE  THREE-FOLD  LORE.


341


be  a  true  witness,  Vaccha,  to  say  that  I  have  the  three¬
fold  lore.

[488]  At  this  point  Vaccha-gotta  the  Wanderer  put
this  question  :  Is  there  any  layman,  Gotama,  who,
without  shedding  the  trammels  of  house  and  home,
has,  at  the  body’s  dissolution,  made  an  end  of  Ill  ?

Not  one,  Vaccha.

Is  there  any  layman  who,  without  shedding  the
shackles  of  house  and  home,  has,  at  the  body’s  disso¬
lution,  got  to  heaven  ?

Not  one  hundred,  not  two  or  three  or  four  or  five
hundred,  have  achieved  this ;  there  are  many  more
laymen  than  that  who,  without  discarding  the  trammels
of  house  and  home,  have,  at  the  body’s  dissolution,
got  to  heaven.

Has  any  Mendicant  (ailvaka)  at  death  ever  made  an
end  of  Ill  ?

Not  one.

Has  any  Mendicant  at  death  got  to  heaven  ?

Going  back  in  memory  for  ninety  -  one  aeons,  I
can  only  recall  one  single  Mendicant  who  did  ; — and
he  preached  a  gospel  of  Karma  and  the  after-con¬
sequences  of  actions.

On  this  showing,  Gotama,  that  school’s  efficacy  is
wholly  impotent  to  get  a  man  even  to  heaven.

Yes,  Vaccha  ;  it  is  so.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  the  Wanderer
Vaccha-gotta  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


LXXII.  AGGI-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.

OF  FUEL.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  SavatthI  in  Jeta’s  wood  in  the  pleasaunce  of
Anathapindika,  there  came  to  him  the  Wanderer
Vaccha-gotta,  who,  [484]  after  salutations,  took  his
seat  to  one  side  and  thus  began  : —

Do  you  hold,  Gotama,  that  the  world  is  eternal,  and


26


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


fortunately  true  enough,  but  the  offer  of  the
Brahmans,  and  Mahmud’s  rejection  of  the  offer,
is  a  fable  of  later  days.

From  Somnath  Mahmud  advanced  against
Mahmud  at  Anhil-  Param  Deo,  Rai  of
wara.  Anhiltvara,  who  seems  to

have  been  mainly  responsible  for  the  relieving
force  that  had  pushed  the  Ghaznavides  so  hard.
The  Rai  took  refuge  in  the  fort  of  Khandah,  forty
farsakhs  from  Somnath,  which  was  surrounded
by  the  sea.  But  when  Mahmud  forded  the  sea
at  low  tide,  the  Rai  fled  away,  leaving  the  fort
and  its  treasures  to  the  Sultan.  On  returning  to
Anhilwara  Mahmud  for  the  first  and  last  time
seems  to  have  harboured  the  desire  of  establish¬
ing  himself  in  India.  He  wanted  to  make
Anhilwara  his  capital  while  assigning  Ghaznin
to  Masml.  The  climate  of  Gujrat,  'the  beauty  of
its  inhabitants,  its  alluring  gardens,  flowing
rivers  and  productive  soil’  attracted  him,  and
his  cupidity  was  further  excited  by  the  treasure
to  be  obtained  from  Southern  India  and  the
islands  beyond  the  sea.  But  his  officers  would
have  none  of  it.  “To  leave  the  country  of
Kliorasan, ”  they  protested,  “for  which  we  have
sacrificed  the  finest  of  gems — our  own  lives — and
to  make  Gujrat  our  capital,  is  far  from  political
wisdom.”  Mahmud  had  to  yield.  He  assigned
the  governorship  of  Gujrat  to  Dalishilim
(Devasarum),  an  ascetic  of  Somnath,  and  started
for  Ghaznin.  Dalishilim  loyally  sent  the  tribute
due  to  the  Sultan  for  some  time,  but  his  nower
failed  to  take  root  and  he  was  over-thrown  by  his
enemies.  (35)

The  Rais  of  Rajputana,  who  had  been  taken
unawares  by  Mahmud’s  march  through  their
country,  now  prepared  to  contest  his  return.
But  the  Sultan's  army  was  loaded  with  spoils.
He  had  no  stomach  for  campaigns  in  a  wilderness
where  nothing  was  to  be  had  save  hard  blows
and  preferred  to  march  to  Multan  through  the
Sindh  desert.  Even  this  route  was  full  of
dangers.  First  a  Hindu  devotee  of  Somnath
undertook  to  guide  the  army,  and  after  marching
it  for  a  day  and  a  night  confessed  that  he  had
intentionally  led  them  on  a  path  where  no  water
could  be  found.  Mahmud  slew  the  guide  and
a  ‘mysterious  light’  that  appeared  in  the  horizon
in  response  to  his  prayers  led  the  Mussalmans  to
fresh  water.  After  crossing  the  desert  the  army

(35)  Feriuhta's  detailed  account  of  the  two
Dahshitim.s  seems  to  have  no  better  foundation  than
the  Anuur-i  Suliailc.  It  is  difficult  to  say  what
element  of  trnth  it  contains.


was  harrassed  by  the  Jats,  but  in  spite  of  many
hardships,  it  succeeded  in  reaching  Ghaznin.

(17)  Mahmud’s  last  invasion  (1027)  was
intended  to  punish  the  Jats
(17)  The  Jats  (,o27).  who  ha<1  ^  wantonly

insulted  his  army  while  returning  from  Somnath.
lie  constructed  a  flotilla  of  fourteen  hundred
boats  at  Multan,  and  placing  twenty  men  armed
with  bows,  arrows  and  flasks  of  naphtha  in
every  boat,  proceeded  against  the  recalcitrant
tribe.  The  Jats  collected  together  four  thousand
boats  and  offered  a  stout  resistance  ;  but  they
were  defeated  in  the  naval  battle  owing  to  the
superior  construction  of  the  Sultan’s  boats,
which  had  been  provided  with  one  pointed  iron
spike  in  front  and  one  on  each  side,  and  the
havoc  wrought  by  explosions  of  naphtha.  Many
of  the  Jats  were  drowned  and  their  families,
which  they  had  removed  to  the  Islands  of  the
Indus  for  safety,  were  captured.

The  Sultan’s  remaining  years  were  ex-
clusively  absorbed  in
I*fAal'"nXa,Vd  Ray°f  western  affairs.  The  Seljuq
trouble  increased  day  by
day.  His  generals  were  unable  to  subdue  them
and  appealed  to  him  to  come  in  person.  He  did
so.  The  Seljuqs  were  defeated  and  dispersed,
but  their  pastoral  bands  parted  only  to  unite
again.  Meanwhile  his  officers  had  overthrown
the  Buwaihid  kingdom  of  Ray  and  the  Sultan
marched  thither  to  establish  his  Government
over  the  newly  conquered  territory.  His  hand
fell  heavily  on  the  ‘heretics’  and  Carmathians
who  had  multiplied  under  the  protection  of  the
Shia  dynasty,  and  every  one,  against  whom
heresy  could  l>e  proved,  was  put  to  death.  But
the  Sultan’s  days  numbered,  and  the  first
symptoms  of  pthisis  (si/)  had  already  appeared
when  in  the  autumn  of  1029  he  assigned  the
Government  of  Isfalien  and  Ray  to  Masud  and
returned  to  Balkh.  Here  his  condition  grew
worse,  though  'he  bore  up  bravely  in  the  eyes
of  the  people*.  I11  the  spring  he  moved  to
Ghaznin,  where  on  the  30th  April,  1030  A.D.
after  forty  years  of  ceaseless  activity  he  was
called  hack  to  the  land  of  everlasting  rest  at  the
age  of  sixtv-three.

“The  world  grips  hard  on  the  hard-striving,”
Hafiz  has  said;  and  tradi¬


The  lost  campaign.


tion  will  have  us  believe


that  two  days  before  his  death  the  great  Sultan,
unable  to  reconcile  himself  to  the  loss  of  a  world
that  was  slipping  out  of  his  grasp,  ordered  the
precious  stones  of  his  treasury  to  be  brought  and


342


LXXII.  aggi-vacchagotta-sutta.


M.  i.  485.


that  this  is  the  only  true  view,  all  other  views  being
false  ?

No,  Vaccha.

Well  then,  do  you  hold  that  the  world  is  non-eternal,
and  that  that  is  the  only  true  view,  all  other  views
being  false  ?

No,  Vaccha.

Do  you  hold  that  the  world  is  finite,  and  that  this  is
the  only  true  view,  all  other  views  being  false  ?

No,  Vaccha.

Do  you  hold,  then,  that  the  world  is  non-finite,  and
that  that  is  the  only  true  view,  all  other  views  being
false  ?

No,  Vaccha.

[Similar  questions  and  answers  follow  about — Life
and  the  body  are  identical,  Life  and  the  body  are  dis¬
tinct;  The  truth-finder  passes  to  another  existence
after  death  here,  The  truth-finder  does  not  pass  to
another  existence  after  death  here,  The  truth-finder
both  does  and  does  not  pass  to  another  existence  after
his  death  here,  [485]  The  truth-finder  neither  passes
nor  does  not  pass  to  another  existence  after  his
death  here.]

To  each  and  all  of  ray  questions,  Gotama,  you  have
answered  in  the  negative.  What,  pray,  is  the  danger
you  discern  in  these  views  which  makes  you  scout
them  all  ?

To  hold  that  the  world  is  eternal — or  to  hold  that  it
is  not,  or  to  agree  to  any  other  [486]  of  the  propositions
you  adduce,  Vaccha, — is  the  thicket  of  theorizing,  the
wilderness  of  theorizing,  the  tangle  of  theorizing,  the
bondage  and  the  shackles  of  theorizing,  attended  by
Ill,  distress,  perturbation  and  fever  ;  it  conduces  not
to  aversion,  passionlessness,  tranquillity,  peace,  illu¬
mination  and  Nirvana.  This  is  the  danger  I  discern  in
these  views,  which  makes  me  scout  them  all.

Is  there  any  view  which  you  have  adopted,  Gotama  ?

The  adoption  of  views  is  a  term  discarded  for  the
truth-finder,  who  has  had  actual  vision  of  the  nature,
orgin  and  cessation  of  things  material — of  feelings — of


SL'LTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZXIX  :  A  STUDY


27


displayed  in  the  court-yard  of  his  palace.  He
gazed  at  them  yearningly  and  with  weeping  eyes
ordered  them  to  be  locked  tip  again,  without
finding  it  in  his  heart  to  give  any  thing  in
charity.  Next  day  he  got  into  his  litter  and
reviewed  his  horses,  elephants  and  camels,  and
still  more  overcome  burst  into  loud  and  helpless
sobs. (36)  But  it  would  be  unbecoming  to  pause
over  the  last  moments  of  a  strong  and  powerful
mind.  Perhaps  the  slow  and  wasting  disease
had  so  bereft  him  of  his  strength,  that  at  the
door  of  death  he  was  no  longer  able  to  hold  over
his  face  the  veil  with  which  he  was  wont  to
conceal  his  human  frailties!  Perhaps  his
rationalistic  mind,  too  critical  for  the  common¬
place  orthodoxy  of  the  day  and  not  profound
enough  for  the  deeper  convictions  of  the
philosopher  and  the  mystic,  trembled  at  the
mysterious  laud  before  him  as  he  saw  it  approach¬
ing  nearer  hour  by  hour,  and  was  unable  to
embark  on  his  last  campaign  with  that  confident
courage  with  which  he  had  plunged  into  the
forests  of  Hindustan  !  It  is  by  the  manner  of  his
life,  not  the  mode  of  his  death,  that  a  man  is  to
be  judged.  The  invincible  hero  of  thirty
campaigns  had  disappeared  weeks  before  his
officers  buried  his  emaciated  body  in  the  I'erozali
Palace  of  Chaznin.

HI:  The  Character  and  value  of
Mahmud's  work.


Four  epochs
Muslim  History.


of


All  men  are  more  or  less  the  product  of  their
environment,  and  a  rational  criticism  of
Mahmud’s  work  must  begin  with  an  examination
of  the  spirit  of  his  age.

Most  Mussalmans  imagine  that  their  faith  has
always  been  what  it  is
to-day,  or  in  the  alterna¬
tive  they  deplore  that  it
has  since  the  time  of  the  Pious  Caliphs  been
subject  to  a  slow  but  continuous  decline.  This
is,  of  course,  absurd.  Islam,  like  all  other
religions,  has  had  its  recurring  periods  of
spiritual  rise  and  fall ;  it  has  been  differently
conceived  by  different  people  at  different  times;
like  all  things  really  and  truly  human,  it  is
always  changing  and  never  permanently  the
same.  We  are  here  only  concerned  with  the


(36)  This  account  is  found  in  Fcrishta,  who  says
that  Mahmud  died  with  •much  reluctance  and  regret,’
and  all  later  historians  repeat  the  incident.  Its  origin
is  hard  to  discover.  It  tnav  have  been  token  from  the
lost  portion  of  Uoihaki.  There  is  nothing  improbable
in  the  story.  Consumptive  diseases  have  such  effects.


broadest  changes  in  the  Muslim  world,  and  these
from  the  rise  of  Islam  to  the  conquest  of  Muslim
Asia  by  Chengiz  Khan,  may  be  divided  into  four
parts.  (1)  The  first  Period  of  Expansion  (622-748)
which  includes  the  conquest  of  Arabia,  Iraq,
Syria,  Persia,  and  Northern  Africa  under  the
Pious  Caliphs  and  their  Omayyad  successors.  It
is  an  epoch  characterised  by  fervent  religious
zeal,  and  owing  to  the  captivating  appeal  Islam
made  to  the  depressed  classes,  the  conquered
peoples  were  converted  to  the  new  faith.
(2)  The  Period  of  the  Abbaside  Caliphate
(74S-900)  is  a  period  of  prosperity  and
peace  with  no  conquest  to  its  record.  It  is
characterised  by  a  cosmopolitan  civilisation  in
which  Arabic  became  the  language  of  the
educated  classes  of  all  countries,  while  a  centralis¬
ed  administration  kept  the  Muslim  world
together.  (3)  The  Period  of  ‘Minor  Dynasties'
(900-1000)  is  essentially  a  period  of  transition
in  which  the  administration  of  the  Caliph  dis¬
appears  and  a  number  of  small  principalities  rise
on  its  ruins.  Its  most  prominent  feature  is  the
Persian  Renaissance,  which  made  Persian  the
language  of  literary  classes  and  brought  a  new
imperialistic  idea  to  the  fore-front  in  place  of
cosmopolitan  Caliphate  of  the  Abbasides.  (4)
The  Period  of  the  Turco-Persian  Empires  (1000-
1220)  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  political  expression
of  Persian  ideals  and  includes  the  reign  of  the
Ghaznavide,  the  Seljuq  and  the  Khwarazmiau
dynasties.

Mahmud  was  the  last  of  the  ‘Minor  Kings’
and  the  first  of  the  great  Turco-Persian
Emperors.  The  inspiring  motive  of  his  life  and
the  lives  of  his  contemporaries  was  not  Islam
but  the  spirit  of  the  Persian  Renaissance.

The  age  of  Mahmud  of  Chaznin  was  devoid  of
the  higher  spirit  of  faith  ;
R cm! issa Persian  and  theological  discus¬
sions,  which  prosper  most
when  religion  is  dead,  diverted  such  zeals  as
existed  towards  a  war  of  sects.  When  men  find
it  difficult  to  believe  in  God,  they  try  to  prove
Him ;  when  they  cease  to  love  their  neighbour,
they  attempt  to  convince  themselves  that  hating
him  is  a  moral  duty.  The  conversion  of  the  non-
Muslim  was  given  up  in  favour  of  the  more
entertaining  game  of  exterminating  the  ‘heretic’.
From  east  to  west  the  Muslim  world  was  torn  by
sectarian  feuds  and  the  strong  arm  of  the
persecutor  was  called  in  vain  to  heal  the  troubles
of  a  people  weltering  in  fanaticism  but  innocent
of  faith.  From  this  war  of  hair-splitting


M.  i.  487.


OF  FUEL.


343  •


perception — of  plastic  forces — and  of  consciousness.
Therefore  it  is  that,  by  destroying,  stilling,  suppressing,
discarding  and  renouncing  all  supposings,  all  imagin¬
ings,  and  all  tendencies  to  the  pride  of  saying  1  or
mine,  the  truth-finder  is  Delivered  because  no  fuel  is
left  to  keep  such  things  going.

When  his  heart  is  thus  Delivered,  Gotama,  where  is
an  Almsman1  reborn  hereafter?

Reborn  does  not  apply  to  him.

Then  he  is  not  reborn.

Not  reborn  does  not  apply.

Then  he  is  both  reborn  and  not  reborn.

Reborn  and  not  reborn  does  not  apply.

Then  he  is  neither  reborn  nor  not-reborn.

•  Neither  reborn  nor  not-reborn  does  not  apply
to  him.

To  each  and  all  of  my  questions,  Gotama,  you  have
replied  in  the  negative.  [487]  I  am  at  a  loss  and  be¬
wildered  ;  the  measure  of  confidence  you  inspired  by
our  former  talk  has  disappeared.

You  ought  to  be  at  a  loss  and  bewildered,  Vaccha.
For,  this  Doctrine  is  profound,  recondite,  hard  to  com¬
prehend,  rare,  excellent,  beyond  dialectic,  subtle,  only
to  be  understanded  of  the  wise.  To  you  it  is  difficult, —
who  hold  other  views  and  belong  to  another  faith  and
objective,  with  a  different  allegiance  and  a  different
master.  So  I  in  turn  will  question  you,  for  such
answer  as  you  see  fit  to  give.  What  think  you,
Vaccha  ? — If  there  were  a  fire  blazing  in  front  of  you,
would  you  know  it  ?

Yes.

If  you  were  asked  what  made  that  fire  blaze,  could
you  give  an  answer  ?

I  should  answer  that  what  made  it  blaze  was  the  fuel
consisting  of  bracken  and  sticks.

If  the  fire  went  out,  would  you  know  it  had  gone  out  ?

Yes.


1  The  interlocutor,  it  will  be  noted,  assumes  that,  here,  ta  t  h  a  -
g  a  t  a  means  not  the  Buddha  but  a  Saint,  or  Arahat  in  general.


2S


THE  HINDUSTAN*  REVIEW


theologians  the  finer  minds  of  Persia  turned  with
a  sense  of  relief  to  the  resusscitation  of  their
national  culture  and  the  minor  dynasties  that
had  grown  on  the  decay  of  the  Caliphate  gave
them  the  protection  and  patronage  they  needed.
Every  provincial  court  became  the  centre  of  a
revivalist  movement.  Ancient  Persian  legends
were  rediscovered  and  popularised.  The  Persian
language,  which  had  licen  cast  aside  as  the
vernacular  of  the  common  people,  assumed  the
dignity  of  a  national  tongue.  Every  one,  who
could,  began  to  turn  out  verses  in  a  language
singularly  capable  of  conforming  to  the  hardest
tules  of  metre  and  rhyme,  and  even  poets  of
mediocre  abilities  could  be  sure  of  a  good  career.
Moreover  the  glories  of  the  Kiani  and  the
Sassani  Empires,  alluring  with  the  dream  of  a
half-forgotten  greatness,  exercised  on  more  im¬
aginative  minds  a  fascination  which  slowly  but
definitely  drew  them  away  from  the  Path  of  the
Prophet.  The  change  was,  of  course,  un¬
conscious.  Like  the  school-men  of  medieval
Europe,  who  talked  as  if  the  philosophy  of
Aristotle  was  a  commentary  on  the  ‘Ten
Commandments,  the  contemporaries  of  Mahmud
were  aware  of  no  difference  between  the  lessons
of  the  ‘Shall  Nama’  and  the  principles  of  the
Quran.  Faridun  and  Jamshed,  Kai-Kaus  and
Kai-Khusrau,  the  heroic  Rustam  and  the
Macedonian  Alexander  won  from  the  rising
generation  the  homage  which  all  true
Mussulmans  should  have  paid  to  the  Prophet  and
his  Companions.  Now  while  the  Prophet  and
his  Companions  stood  for  certain  principles  to  be
established  at  all  costs  and  had  resorted  to  war
as  a  means  for  their  promulgation,  the  legendary
heroes  of  Persia  only  evoked  in  their  devotees
an  ambition  for  greatness  and  ruthless  imperial¬
ism  without  the  sense  of  a  moral  mission,  and
instilled  them  with  precepts  of  worldly  wisdom,
such  as  Polonious  bequeathed  to  Laertes  and  such
as  Sadi’s  ‘Gulistan*  has  taught  to  the  children  of
later  generations— a  wisdom  essentially  selfish  in
its  out-look  and  superbly  unconscious  of  all
higher  aims.

Thus  the  new  spirit  on  one  hand  helped  the

Advent  of  Mahmud.  evo,ution  of  a  ncw  culture
and  brought  an  atmosphere
of  refinement  and  polish  in  the  court  and  the
camp,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  heralded  in  an
era  of  futile  and  purposeless  wars  through  which
provincial  kings,  rebellious  governors,  tribal
chiefs  and  even  daring  robbers,  expected  to  reach
the  insecure  eminence  of  Alexander,  the  Great.


Fighting  was  looked  upon,  thanks  to  the  militant
spirit  of  the  Turks,  as  a  sport  and  an  attribute  of
manliness,  a  good  tiling  to  be  sought  for  itself —
not  as  a  painful  process  for  the  attainment  of
peace.  For  a  century  before  Mahmud  princes  of
the  ‘minor  dynasties’  had  been  acting  Jamshed
and  Kai-Khusrau,  and  their  court-poets,  richly
paid  for  the  work  had  proclaimed  their  greatness
in  panegyrics  of  which  men  less  lost  in  ambition
would  have  felt  ashamed.  Then  came  the  great
Mahmud  to  achieve  that  for  which  others  had
fought  and  died  in  vain,  and  kings  and  princes
licked  the  dust  humbly  before  the  figure  of  a
new  Alexander.  But  the  giant  for  all  his
grandeur  was  made  of  the  same  moral  stuff  as
the  dwarfs  that  had  gone  before.  It  was  his
abilities,  not  his  character,  that  raised  him  to  an
unquestioned  pre-eminence.

The  Literary  Renaissance  of  Persia  found  in
Patron  of  arts.  Mahmud  its  most  magni¬

ficent,  if  not  its  most  dis¬
criminating  patron.  Four  hundred  poets,  with
Unsari,  the  poet-laureate,  at  their  head,  were
in  constant  attendance  on  the  Sultan’s  court.
Their  official  duty  was  tp  sing  his  praise,  and
the  Sultan,  in  spite  of  the  stinginess  attributed
to  him,  seems  to  have  been  extremely  generous.
Ghazari  Razi,  a  poet  from  Ray,  was  awarded
fourteen  thousand  dirhams  for  a  qasida  that
pleased  the  Sultan,  while  the  poet-laureate’s
mouth  was  thrice  filled  with  pearls  for  an  un¬
premeditated  qita.  Among  others  who  came
flocking  from  far  and  near,  Farruklii,  the  author
of  a  qasida  remarkable  for  its  captivating
rhythm,  Minuchihri,  who  specialised  in  the  cult
of  vine,  and  Asjadi,  who  is  responsible  for  the
following  well-known  quatrain,  are  most
famous.  (37)

“I  do  repent  of  wine  and  talk  of  wine,

‘‘Of  idols  fair  with  chins  like  silver  fine.

"A  lip-repentance  and  a  lustful  heart —

“O  God,  forgive  this  penitence  of  mine!”

But  it  is  obvious  that  the  Sultan’s  patronage,
while  stimulating  men  of  decent  merit  to  do

.  (37)  The  details  of  the  lives  of  the  poets  cannot  be
given  here  nor  an  examination  of  their  work  attempted.
Prof.  Tirowne's  “Literary  Historv  of  Persia,”  Vof.  II.
Clmp.  II  and  Maulana  Shibli  Romani's  “Shirul-Ajam."
Vot.  I,  have  put  in  a  modern  form  all  that  is  found  in
old  razkirahs.  Sec  also  Hadi,  “Studies  in  Persian
Literature"  published  by  the  National  University,
Aligarh.  The  Firdausi  legend  lias  been  subjected  to  a
trenchant  criticism  bv  the  journal  'Urdu'  edited  by
Maulvi  Abdul  Haq  Sahib,  which  has  robbed  the  time-
honoured  story  of  all  its  charm.


344


LXXII.  AGGI-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.


If  now  you  were  asked  in  what  direction  the  fire  had
gone,  whether  to  cast,  west,  north  or  south,  could  you
give  an  answer  ?  1

The  question  does  not  apply.  Since  the  fire  was
kept  alight  by  bracken  and  sticks,  and  since  it  had  con¬
sumed  its  supply  of  fuel  and  had  received  no  fresh  sup¬
plies,  it  is  said  to  have  gone  out  for  lack  of  fuel  to
sustain  it.


r a  ioiSt  tfhe1.Same  *ay-  Vaccha,  all  things  material
[488J  all  feelings— all  perception— all  plastic  forces—
ail  consciousness — everything  by  which  the  truth-finder
might  be  denoted  has  passed  away  for  him, — grubbed
and  stubbed,  leaving  only  the  bare  cleared  site  where
once  a  palm-tree  towered,— a  thing  that  once  has
been  and  now  can  be  no  more.  Profound,  measure¬
less  unfathomable,  is  the  truth-finder  even  as  the
mighty  ocean  ;  reborn  does  not  apply  to  him  nor  not-
reborn  nor  any  combination  of  such  terms  ;  everything
by  which  the  truth-finder  might  be  denoted,  has  passed
away  for  him,  utterly  and  for  ever.

At  the  close  of  these  words,  the  Wanderer  Vaccha-
gotta  said  to  the  Lord  : — It  is  like  a  giant  Sal-tree  on
the  outskirts  of  a  village  or  township  which,  by  the
course  oi  change,  loses  its  leaves  and  foliage,  sheds  its
bark  and  rotten  stuff  and  poorer  wood,  so  that  in  time,
when  all  that  is  gone,  it  stands  in  the  clean  strength  of
its  choice  timber  alone.  Wonderful,  Gotama  .  quite
wonderful!  Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright  again
what  had  been  cast  down,  or  reveal  what  had  been
hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had  gone  astray  which
was  his  way,  or  [489]  bring  a  lamp  into  darkness  so
that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see  the  things  about
thern^— even  so,  m  many  a  figure,  has  Gotama  made
his  Doctrine  clear.  To  the  reverend  Gotama  I  come
as  my  refuge,  and  to  his  Doctrine  and  to  his  Confra¬
ternity.  I  ask  him  to  accept  me  as  a  disciple  from  this
day  forth  while  life  lasts.


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  CHAZNIX  :  A  STUDY


ag


tlieir  best,  would  fail  to  reach  the  highest  genius,
which  in  every  country  and  every  age  has  scorned
to  bow  its  knees  to  democracies  and  kings.  For
this  Mahmud  is  in  no  way  to  blame.  Mankind
has  yet  to  discover  a  method  for  dealing  with  its
finest  product.  Whatever  be  the  element  of
truth  in  the  famous  Firdausi  legend,  the  tradition
that  represents  the  great  poet,  in  whom  Persian
nationalism  amounted  to  a  religion,  as  flying  from
an  Emperor  of  Airasiyab’s  (Turkish)  race,
certainly  gives  us  an  idea  of  the  gloom  that  sat
oppressively  on  the  most  sensitive  Persian  minds.
Two  persons  of  a  radically  different  stamp  were
destined  to  share  Firdausi’s  fate.  The  great
physician  and  biologist,  Shaikh  Bu  Ali  Sina
(Avicenna) ,  refused  to  come  to  the  court  of  a
king  to  whom  the  scientist’s  views  and  his  sense
of  personal  independence  would  have  been  equal¬
ly  unpalatable,  and  after  flying  from  town  to
town  before  the  agents  of  Malmiud’s  wrath,  at
last  found  a  safe  asylum  with  the  Buwaihid  ruler
of  Ray.  His  friend,  the  mathematician-scholar
Abu  Rihan  Al-Biruni,  whose  appreciative  study
of  Hindu  philosophy  stands  in  such  pleasant
contrast  with  the  prejudices  of  a  stormy  time,
was  less  fortunate.  Brought  a  prisoner  from  his
native  Klnvarazm,  he  was  thrown  into  prison  aud
thence  exiled  to  India  on  that  life  of  wandering
to  which  we  owe  the  immortal  ‘Tarikhul
Hind’.(3S)

The  poetry  of  Mahmud’s  age  reflects  the
spirit  of  the  time.  It  is  brilliant  but  not  deep.
Mystic  ideas  had  not  yet  become  current  coin,
and  the  gltazal,  the  grand  vehicle  of  mystic
emotion,  had  not  yet  been  discovered.  Qasidas
(panegyric  odes)  in  praise  of  generous  patrons
were  the  poets’  principal  occupation.  The  genius
of  Firdausi  brought  the  masnavi  (romance)  into
vogue,  while  his  master,  Asadi,  is  credited  with
the  not  very  commendable  invention  of  the
Munazriah  or  ‘strife-poem’ — a  composition  which
leaves  little  room  for  poetic  thoughts.  Qilas
(fragments)  and  rubais  (quatrains)  served  to
express  the  poets’  lighter  moods.  Yet  the
Ghaznavide  poets,  for  all  their  short-comings,
have  a  certain  freshness  which  succeeding  ages
have  lacked.  There  is  no  artificiality  about
them.  They  had  tasted  the  joy  of  material
prosperity  and  loved  to  praise  the  beauty  of


(jS)  Some  very  interesting  anecdotes  ntiont  Altiemni
nnd  Bn  Ali  Sina  will  be  found  in  the  ‘Chahnr  Maqnla’
of  Nizami -til  Aruzi-tu  Samarqandi  (Gibb’s  Memorial
Series).  A  short  biography  of  Bn  Ali  Sina  is  given
in  the  TTabibus  Siyar.


women  of  flesh  and  blood  and  the  alluring  intoxi¬
cation  of  wine.  The  reality  of  their  human
emotions  prevented  them  from  falling  into  the
meaningless  verbosity  of  later  ages;  and  if  they
lack  the  deeper  meaning  of  their  mystic
successors,  whose  songs  begin  and  end  with  a
symbolic  representation  of  the  absolute,  their
poetry  is  at  least  in  touch  with  life.  The  poet
sang  of  what  his  audience  knew  and  felt — the
clash  of  arms  on  the  field  of  strife,  the  joys  of
companionship  in  the  warrior's  camp,  the  in¬
numerable  emotions  of  men  and  women  whom  an
artificial  culture  had  not  yet  deprived  of  their
native  intensity  of  feelings,  and  above  all  the
glories  and  sorrows  of  their  much  loved  Iran.
The  thoughts  and  emotions  of  the  educated  men
of  the  day  were  not  the  unbecoming  theme  of  the
poet’s  verse.  The  great  period  of  Persian  poetry,
that  begins  with  Sadi  and  ends  with  Jami,  was
yet  to  come.  Nevertheless  the  constructive
genius  of  the  poet  won  victories  more  solid  than
warrior’s  futile  campaigns.  The  empire  of
Mahmud  crumbled  to  dust  nine  years  after  the
Sultan’s  death.  The  ‘Shalmama’  lives  for  ever.

Mahmud’s  work  in  India  is  reserved  for  a
separate  discussion  but  the  Sultan  was  essentially
a  central  Asiatic  prince.  The  historic  soil  of
Ajam  was  the  garden  and  the  grave  of  the
Ghaznavide  hopes.  The  cosmopolitan  administra¬
tion  of  the  Caliphate  had  been  shattered  beyond
the  possibility  of  reconstruction,  and  the  “new
imperialism”  with  its  secular  and  Persian  out¬
look  had  been  in  the  air  for  some  generations
past.  Now  ’imperialism’  meant  two  things — first,
a  conquest  of  the  smaller  principalities  that  would
bring  all  Muslim  peoples,  who  had  been  infused
with  the  spirit  of  Persian  civilisation  within  the
fold  of  a  single  state ;  and  secondly,  the  erection
of  a  just  and  lieneficient  administration  that
would  reconcile  every  section  of  the  subjects  to
their  common  Government  by  an  era  of  prosperity
and  peace.  Mahmud’s  performance  of  the  first
part  of  his  work  is  as  remarkable  as  his  failure  to
perform  the  second.  The  rise  of  the  Ghaznavide
Empire  struck  contemporaries  with  wonder;  but
they  were  no  less  surprised  with  the  rapidity  of
its  fall.

A  man  of  refinement  and  culture  with  an
instinctive  admiration  for  everything  beautiful  in
literature  and  art,  it  was  in  generalship  that
Mahmud  excelled.  War  was  the  prevailing
madness,  but  never  since  the  fall  of  the  Sassani-
an  Empire  before  the  armies  of  the  Second  Caliph


M.  i.  490.


THE  MEED  OF  SERVICE.


345


LXXIII.  MAHA-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.

THE  MEED  OF  SERVICE.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  at  Rajagaha  in  the  Bamboo  grove  where  the
squirrels  were  fed,  the  Wanderer  Vaccha-gotta  came
to  him  and  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  side,
saying  It  is  a  longtime  since  I  have  had  a  talk  with
the  reverend  Gotama.  I  should  like  him  briefly  to
expound  right  and  wrong  to  me.

I  could  expound  them  either  in  brief  or  at  large,
Vaccha,  but  will  confine  myself  here  to  an  exposition
in  brief.  Hearken  and  pay  attention,  and  I  will  speak.
Then  to  the  attentive  Wanderer  the  Lord  began  : —

Greed  is  wrong  ;  freedom  from  greed  is  right.
Hatred  is  wrong  ;  not  to  hate  is  right.  Delusion  is
wrong ;  to  be  free  from  delusion  is  right. — The  one
triad  is  wrong,  the  other  right.

To  take  life  is  wrong;  to  refrain  from  taking  life  is
right.  Theft  is  wrong  ;  to  shun  theft  is  right.  In¬
dulgence  in  pleasures  of  sense  is  wrong ;  to  refrain
from  such  indulgence  is  right.  Lying  is  wrong  ;  to
refrain  from  lies  is  right.  Slander  [490]  is  wrong ;  to
refrain  from  slandering  is  right.  Reviling  is  wrong ;
not  to  revile  is  right.  Idle  chatter  is  wrong  ;  to  refrain
therefrom  is  right.  To  covet  is  wrong;  not  to  covet
is  right.  To  be  malevolent  is  wrong  ;  not  to  be  male¬
volent  is  right.  Erroneous  views  are  wrong;  sound
views  are  right. — The  one  set  of  ten  is  right,  the  other
set  is  wrong.

So  soon  as  Craving  is  eliminated — grubbed  up  by
the  roots,  leaving  only  the  bare  cleared  site  where  once
a  palm-tree  towered,  a  thing  that  once  has  been  and
now  can  be  no  more — then  that  Almsman  becomes  an
Arahat,  in  whom  the  Cankers  are  dead,  who  has
greatly  lived,  whose  task  is  done,  who  has  shed  his
burthen,  who  has  won  his  weal,  whose  bonds  to


30


Tim  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


had  an  invader  so  invincible  appeared  on  Persian
soil.  The  exploits  of  Alexander  in  the  East  were
rivalled,  and  in  fact  surpassed.  The  Tartar
barbarians  of  the  north  were  driven  pell-mell
beyond  the  Jaxartes.  The  ‘minor  dynasties’  of
Persia  were  crushed  to  death.  From  Isfahan  to
Dundelkhand  and  from  Samarkand  to  Gujrat,  the
Ghaznavide  subdued  every  opponent  and  struck
down  every  rival.  The  conquered  people  were
no  cowards.  They  fought  bravely  and  were  as
willing  to  die  as  their  Ghaznavide  opponents.  It
was  Mahmud's  scientific  imagination  that  made
the  difference.  Against  the  clumsy  organisation
of  the  Rajputs  and  their  childish  trust  in  mere
numbers  he  brought  into  the  field  an  army  that
had  been  trained  to  obey  the  commands  of  a
single  will.  The  thick-headed  Tartars  found  to
their  cost  that  mere  courage  and  a  confidence  in
fate,  was  no  match  for  the  fierce  onslaught  of
disciplined  ranks.  But  strategy  rather  than
tactics  was  Mahmud’s  strong  point.  From  his
throne  at  Ghaznin  his  “eagle-eye”  surveyed
everything  in  east  and  west.  He  knew  where
to  strike  and  he  always  struck  hard.  The
rapidity  of  his  marches  surprised  and  bewildered
his  opponents.  The  man  who,  in  the  course  of
a  single  winter,  over-awed  the  Carmathians  of
Multan,  defeated  the  Tartars  at  Balkli  and  yet
found  time  enough  to  capture  a  rebellious
governor  on  the  hanks  of  the  Jhelum,  could  not
fail  to  create  a  havoc  among  his  stout-hearted
but  slow-moving  contemporaries.  And  yet
Mahmud,  for  all  his  daring,  was  the  most
cautious  of  men.  He  never  attacked  an  enemy
he  was  not  strong  enough  to  over-ppwer.  He
never  failed  in  what  he  undertook  because  he
undertook  nothing  impossible.  The  Indian
invasions,  in  which  his  military  genius  shows
itself  at  its  best,  are  a  marvellous  mixture  of
boldness  with  caution.

Administrative  questions,  on  the  other  hand,
never  interested  Mahmud,  and  while  taking  up
the  command  of  the  army  in  person,  lie  left  the
prosaic  task  of  carrying  on  the  government  to
his  ministers.  His  civil  officers  had  the  efficiency
he  required ;  they  were  strict  and  heavy-handed
and  worked  their  machinery  with  the  same
discipline  and  order  as  their  military  colleagues.
But  they  lacked  the  breadth  of  vision  which
would  have  enabled  them  to  supplement  the
conquests  of  their  master  by  a  far-sighted  states¬
manship  and  construct  a  machinery  of  imperial
administration  on  permanent  and  durable  founda¬
tions.  His  icazirs  were  certainly  clever  and


thorough  in  their  methods,  but  like  all  adminis¬
trative  experts  they  were  devoid  of  idealism,
and  an  empire  without  ideals  is  an  edifice  on
quick-sands.  For  the  first  two  years  of  his  reign
his  father’s  wtuir,  Abul  Abbas  Fasih  Ahmed
bin  Isfarieni,  continued  at  his  post.  Abul  Abbas
was  ignorant  of  Arabic  and  made  Persian  the
official  language — an  innovation  abolished  by  his
fatuous  successor.  But  if  lacking  in  education,
he  had  that  extensive  knowledge  of  affairs  which
was  to  lie  expected  of  one  who  had  risen  to  be
the  second  greatest  man  in  the  kingdom  from
the  humble  position  of  a  clerk,  and  ‘worked
marvels  in  the  administration  of  the  state  and
the  army.’  The  Sultan,  however,  quarrelled  with
him  over  the  possession  of  a  Turkish  slave,  and
the  fallen  U'aeir  was  tortured  to  death  by  the
nobles  who  wished  to  deprive  him  of  all  his
wealth.  Abul  Abbas’  successor,  the  great
Khwaja  Ahmad  bin  Ilasan  Maimandi,  left  on
his  contenq>oraries  an  impression  second  only  to
that  of  Mahmud.  A  foster  brother  and  class¬
mate  of  the  Sultan,  Khwaja  Ahmad  was  dis¬
tinguished  throughout  his  life  by  an  unimpeach¬
able  loyalty  to  the  House  of  Ghaznin,  which  it*,
no  way  interfered  with  the  exacting  obedience
he  demanded  of  his  subordinates  for  himself.
His  father,  Hasan  Maimandi,  collector  of  revenue
at  Bust,  was  hanged  by  Subuktigin  on  a  charge
of  peculation,  but  the  sad  event  had  no  effect  on
the  son’s  career.  It  would  have  been  difficult,
if  not  impossible,  for  the  Sultan  to  embark  on
his  conquering  career  without  the  organising
capacity  of  his  minister  to  support  him.  An
excellent  scholar,  an  intriguer  of  the  highest
order  and  a  stern  man  of  business,  Ahmad
directed  the  affairs  of  the  Government  for
eighteen  years  with  an  efficiency  none  could
deny.  But  a  strong  teazir  and  a  strong  Sultan
were  really  incompatible  ;  the  Khwaja’s  soft
tojvgue  and  effusive  loyalty  delayed,  but  could
not  finally  prevent,  the  inevitable  rupture.  His
extraordinary  ascendancy  was  painful  to  many,
and  a  strong  party,  headed  by  the  Sultan’s  son-
in-law,  Amir  Ali,  and  the  great  general,
Altuntash,  was  formed  against  him.  The  Sultan
made  up  his  mind  to  prove  that  the  Khwaja  was
not  indispensable  and  imprisoned  him  in  an
Indian  fort.  As  if  to  show  that  the  office  could
be  abolished,  if  necessary,  Mahmud  refrained
from  appointing  a  vam  for  some  time.  His
choice  ultimately  fell  on  Ahmad  Husain  bin
Mikal,  generally  known  as  Hasnak.  The  new
vazir,  a  close  personal  friend  of  the  Sultan,  was


346  lxxiii.  mahA-vacchagotta-sutta.  m.  i.  491-


life  are  no  more,  who  by  utter  Knowledge  has  won
Deliverance.

Apart  from  the  reverend  Gotama, — is  there  a  single
Almsman  in  his  following  who  has  entered  on  and
dwells  here  and  now  in  that  Deliverance  of  heart  and
mind  which  is  without  Cankers  because  Cankers  are
eradicated,  a  Deliverance  which  of  and  by  himself  he
has  apprehended  and  realized  ?

Not  a  mere  hundred  of  my  followers,  not  two  or
three  or  four  or  five  hundred,  but  many  more  than  that
have  achieved  this.

Apart  from  the  reverend  Gotama  and  the  Alms¬
men, — is  there  a  single  Almswoman  in  his  following
who  has  achieved  this  ?  •

Not  a  mere  hundred  of  my  women  followers,  not  two
or  three  or  four  or  five  hundred  of  them,  but  many
more  than  that  have  achieved  this.

Apart  from  the  reverend  Gotama  and  the  Almsmen
and  the  Almswomen, — is  there  a  single  white-robed
layman  of  his  following  in  the  higher  life  who,  by
destruction  of  the  Five  Fetters  that  bind  people  to  this
world,  has  been  translated  to  higher  realms,  never  to
revert  thence  to  this  world  ?

Not  a  mere  hundred  of  my  laymen,  not  two  or  three
or  four  or  five  hundred  of  them,  but  many  more  than
that  have  [491]  achieved  this.

Apart  from  the  reverend  Gotama  and  the  Almsmen
and  the  Almswomen  and  the  laymen  of  the  higher
life, — is  there  a  single  layman  who,  though  not  denying
himself  pleasures  of  sense,  conforms  and  practises
what  he  is  taught,  without  any  doubtings  or  search¬
ings  of  heart,  and  in  absolute  confidence  and  personal
conviction  livefs  by  his  Master’s  teaching  ?

Not  a  mere  hundred  such  laymen,  not  two  or  three
or  four  or  five  hundred  of  them,  but  many  more  than
that  have  achieved  this.

Apart  from  the  reverend  Gotama  and  the  Almsmen
and  the  Almswomen  and  the  laymen  whether  of  the
higher  life  or  of  the  world  still,  can  you  say  as  much  of
lay-women  both  in  the  higher  life  and  in  the  world  ?


SULTAN  MAHMUD  <  >F  GHAZNIN  :  A  STUDY


3i


remarkable  for  his  ‘conversational  powers,’  and
unfortunately  also  for  ‘the  impetuosity  of  his
temperameut’,  which  impelled  him  to  take  the
wrong  side  on  the  succession  question  that  arose
towards  the  end  of  Mahmud’s  reign.

An  extensive  empire  had  been  established  over
the  ruins  of  many  governments.  What  for?
We  arc  not  told  that  Mahmud’s  administration
was  better  than  what  had  existed  before,  while
the  collection  of  revenue  was  certainly  more
strict.  Everybody  complained  that  the  Sultan
went  on  conquering  without  being  able  to
establish  peace  and  order  in  the  conquered  lands.
The  condition  of  the  Punjab  was  chaotic  and
other  provinces  fared  no  better.  Caravan  routes
were  unsafe  and  the  occasional  efforts  of  the
Government  to  provide  for  the  safety  of  its
merchants  display  its  weakness  rather  thau  its
strength.  “He  is  a  stupid  fellow",  a  Muslim
mystic  is  said  to  have  remarked  of  him,  ‘‘Unabl  *
to  administer  what  he  already  possesses,  he  yet
goes  out  to  conquer  new  countries.”  A  strong
sense  of  justice  Mahmud  certainly  had,  and  many
stories  and  anecdotes  arc  told  about  him,  but  he
never  went  beyond  deciding  with  acuteness  and
wisdom  the  few  cases  that  came  before  him.  No
general  effort  was  made  to  suppress  the  robber-
chiefs  whose  castles  prevented  all  inter-communi¬
cation  between  the  various  parts  of  the  empire.
No  imperial  police  system  was  organised  to
perform  the  work  which  smaller  princes  present
on  the  spot  had  done  before.  The  armed  and
organised  populations  of  medieval  cities  and
towns  required  but  little  help  from  the  stnte
to  stand  up  against  the  forces  of  disorder,  but
even  that  little  was  not  forthcoming.  We  have
only  to  contrast  the  Ghaznavidc  Government
with  the  Empires  of  the  Seljuqs  and  the  Sultan —
Emperors  of  Delhi — to  see  the  element  Mahmud
woefully  lacked.  No  laws,  good  or  bad,  stand  to
his  name.  No  administrative  measure  of
importance  emanated  from  his  acute  mind,  which
failed  to  see  anything  greater  or  nobler  than  an
ever-expanding  field  of  military  glory.  The

peoples  forcibly  brought  within  the  Empire -

Indians,  Afghans,  Turks,  Tartars  and  Persians —
were  joined  together  by  no  bond  except  their
subordination  to  a  common  monarch !  A  wise,
firm  and  benefieient  administration  would  have
reconciled  them  to  the  loss  of  their  local  liberties,
hut  that  is  just  what  Mahmud  failed  to  provide.
The  Sultan  and  his  officers  alone  were  interested
in  the  continuation  of  the  empire;  and  when
nine  years  after  Mahmud’s  death,  the  Seljuqs


knocked  down  the  purposeless  structure,  no  one
cared  to  weep  over  its  fate.

These  observations  will  enable  us  to  assign
Maluuud  his  projier  place  in  eastern  history  He
was  essentially  the  pioneer  of  the  ‘new  imperial¬
ism’  brought  into  vogue  by  the  Persian  Renaiss¬
ance.  The  era  of  the  ‘Universal  Muslim
Caliphate’  had  gone,  never  to  return  and  the
Successor  of  the  Prophet  was  no  more  the
administrative  head  of  the  Faithful.  The  ‘minor
dynasties’  had  proved  themselves  a  pest  by  their
unceasing  intrigues  and  purposeless  wars.  The
only  possible  alternative  was  a  ‘secular  empire* ,
or  'sallanat'  as  Mahmud  called  it,  which  would
unite  the  Muslim  world  together  and  give  it
the  peace  and  strength  it  longed  for.  Islam  had
neither  contemplated  nor  sanctioned  the  moral
foundations  of  the  new  institution,  which  drew
its  inspiration  from  ancient  Persia,  and  breathed
its  pagan  spirit  ;  and  the  shariat,  in  spite  of  its
democratic  outlook,  was  gradually  twisted  to
suit  the  requirements  of  the  time  and  ended  by
preaching  submission  to  the  monarch,  who
assumed,  under  the  pretence  of  being  the  ‘shadow
of  God’  ( Zileullah ),  the  airs  of  the  ‘divine’
Sassanian  emperors.  The  result  was  both  gool
and  bad.  The  democratic  feeling,  which  has
persisted  in  the  social  life  of  the  Mussalmans
in  spite  of  all  opposing  forces,  was  eliminated
from  politics,  and  political  subservience,  from
being  a  postulate  of  necessity  and  prudence,  was
elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a  religious  duty.
“Obedience  to  Kings,"  says  Abul  Fazl,  summing
up  the  wisdom  and  the  folly  of  six  hundred
years,  "is  a  kind  of  divine  worship."  At  the
same  time  the  monarchical  idea  and  the
secularisation  of  politics  led  to  much  that  was
undoubtedly  beneficial.  The  peoples  of  Ajam
were  welded  together  by  their  loyalty  to  a
common  king  in  spite  of  their  racial  differences
and  sectarian  strifes.  Moreover  it  became
possible  for  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  to  live
together  when  religion  was  considered  as  a  private
affair  of  the  king  and  the  sphere  of  Government
was  restricted  to  the  secular  affairs  of  the
subjects.

To  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin  belongs  the  credit
of  being  the  first  Muslim  Emperor,  and  to  him
more  than  to  any  one  else  the  rise  of  ‘monarchy’
among  the  Mussalmans  is  due.  It  does  not
detract  from  his  merit  that  he  was  followed  by
statesmen  abler  than  himself  and  by  dynasties
more  permanent  than  his  own.  The  Scijuqs  of
Persia  and  the  Emperor-Sultans  of  Delhi  surpass-


M.  i.  492.


THE  MEED  OF  SERVICE.


347


Not  a  mere  hundred  lay-women,  not  two  or  three  or
four  or  five  hundred  of  them,  but  many  more  than  that
have  achieved  these  results.

Had  the  reverend  Gotama  alone  achieved  success  in
the  Doctrine,  without  the  Almsmen,  [492]  this  higher
life  of  his  founding  would  have  been  incomplete  by  this
constituent.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  not  only  he  but
the  Almsmen  too  have  succeeded,  this  constituent  is
not  lacking.  Had  success  come  only  to  him  and  the
Almsmen,  without  the  Almswomen,  the  latter  con¬
stituent  would  have  been  wanting, — as  it  is  not.  Had
success  come  only  to  him  and  the  Almsmen  and  the
Almswomen,  without  laymen  of  the  higher  life — or
laymen  of  the  world  still — or  lay-women  of  the  higher
life — or  lay-women  of  the  world  still — ,  in  each  case
this  higher  life  of  his  founding  would  have  been  incom¬
plete  by  that  particular  constituent.  [498]  Inasmuch,
however,  as  success  has  come  to  each  and  all  of  these
classes,  not  a  single  one  of  these  constituents  of  com¬
pleteness  is  lacking.

Even  as  the  river  Ganges  streams  and  flows  to  the
ocean  as  its  bourne  and  finds  repose  only  in  the  ocean,
so  does  Gotama’s  whole  congregation,  laity  as  well  as
Pilgrims,  stream  and  flow  to  Nirvana  as  its  bourne,
finding  repose  only  in  Nirvana.  Wonderful,  Gotama;
quite  wonderful !  Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright
again  what  had  been  cast  down,  or  reveal  what
had  been  hidden  away,  or  tell  a  man  who  had  gone
astray  which  was  his  way,  or  bring  a  lamp  into
darkness  so  that  those  with  eyes  to  see  might  see
the  things  about  them,  even  so  in  many  a  figure
has  the  reverend  Gotama  made  his  Doctrine  clear.
To  the  reverend  Gotama  I  come  as  my  refuge,  and
to  his  Doctrine,  and  to  his  Confraternity.  1  ask  to
be  admitted  as  a  Pilgrim  under  him,  with  confirmation
therein.

[494]  Vaccha,  a  former  adherent  of  another  sect  who
desires  admission  to,  and  confirmation  in,  this  Doctrine
and  Rule,  has  first  to  reside  for  four  months,  at  the  end
of  which  period  discreet  Almsmen  admit  and  confirm


32


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


ed  him  as  administrators,  and  Chengiz  and  Timur
in  conquering  might.  A  pioneer  is  bound  to
have  his  shortcomings.  His  Central  Asiatic
policy  was  devoid  of  statesmanship  while  his
work  in  India  was  even  more  deplorable.

Though  India  took  up  much  of  Mahmud’s
time,  she  had  no  place  in  his  dreams.  His  real
aim  was  the  establishment  of  a  Turko-Persian
Empire  and  the  Indian  exi>editions  were  a  means
to  that  end.  They  gave  him  the  prestige  of  a
Holy  Warrior,  which  was  required  to  raise  him
head  and  shoulders  above  the  basket-full  of
Ajami  princes,  every  one  of  whom  was
determined  to  be  great,  while  the  wealth  of  the
temples  made  the  financial  position  of  his
kingdom  secure  and  enabled  him  to  organise  an
army  which  the  minor  princes  were  in  no  position
to  resist.  Beyond  this  Mahmud,  who  knew  the
limitations  of  his  power,  did  not  try  to  go.  No
conquest  was  intended  tiecause  no  conquest  was
possible.  A  Muslim  Government  over  the
country  was  beyond  the  region  of  practical
politics  without  a  native  Muslim  population  to
support  it.  Mahmiul  was  no  missionary  ,
conversion  was  not  his  object ;  and  he  had  too
much  of  good  sense  to  waste  away  his  army  in  a
futile  attempt  to  keep  down  a  hostile  population
bv  armed  garrisons.  He  took  at  a  sweep-stake
all  that  centuries  of  Indian  industry  had  ac¬
cumulated,  and  then  left  the  Indians  to  rebuild,
as  well  as  they  could,  the  ruined  fortifications
of  their  cities  and  fallen  altars  of  their  gods.
He  obtained  the  gold  and  the  prestige  he  needed
and  he  had  aspired  for  nothing  else.  Except  for
a  passing  moot!  at  Anhilwara  he  never  thought
of  establishing  his  power  over  the  country.
Annexation  was  not  his  object.  The  addition  of
the  Punjab  to  his  kingdom  so  late  as  1021-22
proves,  rather  than  disproves,  his  non-territorial
ambitions.  He  had  at  first  expected  his  alliance
with  Anandpal  to  enable  him  to  penetrate  to
the  trans-Gangetic  plain.  That  alliance  failed
owing  to  the  latter’s  death  and  Mahmud  felt  the
necessity  of  having  his  footing  somewhere  in
the  country.  Even  then  he  seems  to  have  looked
on  Lahore  and  Multan  simply  as  robbers’
perches,  from  where  he  could  plunge  into
Hindustan  and  Gujrat  at  will.  His  western
campaigns,  on  the  other  hand,  give  evidence  of
a  different  policy’.  They  always  led  to  annexa¬
tions,  and  very  often  Mahmud  personally  super¬
vised  the  establishment  of  his  Government  over
the  conquered  territory.

The  Indian  campaigns  arc  one  of  the  finest


achievements  of  military  genius.  Mahmud  was
venturing  into  an  unknown  country  of  large
rivers,  thick  forests  and  a  bitterly  hostile  people
of  whose  language  and  customs  he  was  ignorant.
To  another  man  it  would  have  been  a  leap  in
the  dark  but  Mahmud,  unwilling  to  take  any
risk,  proceeded  warily,  advancing  from  point  to
point,  with  a  mixture  of  boldness  and  caution
which  is  as  admirable  as  the  fearless  and  dashing
courage  of  his  subordinates.  A  false  step  would
have  meant  disaster ;  the  loss  of  a  single  battle
would  have  left  his  disorganised  forces  at  the
mercy  of  the  population.  At  first  he  never
ventured  more  than  ten  or  twelve  marches  from
his  base  and  his  acquisition  of  Bhera  enabled  him
to  strike  safely  at  the  enemy.  But  caution
brought  success,  success  brought  prestige,  and
Mahmud,  finding  that  his  mere  name  had  grown
powerful  enough  to  overawe  his  enemies,
plunged  thrice  into  the  trans-Gangetic  plain  and
a  fourth  time  into  Gujrat.  The  campaigns  look
like  triumphal  marches  but  wrere  really  full  of
danger.  Even  an  indecisive  battle  would  have
revived  the  spirit  of  the  much  harrassed  Indians
and  brought  unexpected  forces  into  the  field.
Mahtnud  trembled  when  in  1019-20,  after  an
uncontested  march  of  three  months  from  his
capital,  he  at  last  came  across  the  Rai  of  Kalinjar,
who  could  show  a  good  fight;  yet  the  flight  of
the  Rai  at  night  shows  the  terror  the  Sultan
inspired.  Still  if  Mahmud  was  to  possess  him¬
self  of  the  treasures  of  the  temple,  the  risk  had
to  be  undertaken ;  for  a  piecemeal  annexation  of
the  country  was  beyond  his  strength.  The  issue
showed  that  he  had  not  miscalculated  any  im¬
portant  factor  of  the  situation.

The  Sultan’s  great  advantage  over  his  Indian
Organised  anarchy  of  opponents  was  the  unitary'
the  Rajputs.  organisation  of  his  state.

The  resources  of  Ghaznin  were  at  the  disposal
of  a  single  mind ;  the  strength  of  Hindustan
was  divided  among  a  multitude  of  factious  Rais,
sub  -Rais,  local  chiefs  and  village-headmen,
between  whom  anything  like  sensible  co-opera¬
tion  was  impossible.  The  feudal  organisation
of  the  Rajputs,  with  its  divided  allegiance,
clannish  spirit  and  love  of  local  independence,
left  them  helpless  before  an  enemy  to  whom
feudalism  and  clannish  feeling  was  alike  un¬
known.  The  Ghaznavides  knew  and  obeyed
their  master;  the  Rajputs  had  no  master  to  obey.
The  power  of  the  Rai  of  Lahore  was  defied  by
the  Rais  subordinate  to  him,  who  refused  to  be
relegated  to  the  position  of  mere  governors ;  and


348  LXXIIL  MAHA-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  49S.


him  as  a  member  of  the  Confraternity.  This  is  the
qualification  I  have  recognized.

If  this  is  so,  sir,  I  will  reside  for  the  probationary
four  months  accordingly  with  a  view  to  membership  of
the  Confraternity.

In  due  course,  the  Wanderer  Vaccha-gotta  was  ad¬
mitted  and  confirmed  of  the  Lord’s  following.

Soon  after  his  confirmation,  indeed  within  a  fort¬
night’s  time,  the  reverend  Vaccha-gotta  came  to  the
Lord  and  after  salutations  took  his  seat  to  one  side,
saying — I  have  attained  all  that  is  to  be  attained  by  a
non-Arahat’s  understanding  and  a  non-Arahat’s  know¬
ledge.  I  ask  the  Lord  to  expound  the  Doctrine  to  me
further.

Then,  Vaccha,  develop  further  two  frames  of  mind,
calm  and  insight,  the  development  of  which  will  help
you  to  fathom  various  elements  of  sense-consciousness.

To  the  full  of  your  desire  to  have  at  command  the
divers  types  of  psychic  power — from  being  one  to
become  manifold,  from  being  manifold  to  become  one,
to  pass  at  will  through  wall  or  fence  or  hill  as  if  it  were
air,  to  pass  in  and  out  of  the  solid  earth  as  if  it  were
water,  to  walk  on  the  water’s  unbroken  surface  as  if
it  were  the  solid  earth,  to  glide,  as  you  sit  serene,
through  the  air,  like  a  winged  bird,  to  touch  and  to
handle  the  sun  and  moon  in  their  power  and  might,
and  to  extend  the  sway  of  your  body  right  up  to  the
heavens  of  Brahma — each  and  all  of  these  manifesta¬
tions  of  psychic  power  shall  be  yours  to  experience  as
your  mind  shall  dictate.

To  the  full  of  your  desire  to  hear,  with  the  Ear
Celestial,  [495]  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the
human  ear,  twofold  sounds — both  the  celestial  and  the
human,  sounds  both  far  and  near, — all  this  shall  be
yours  to  experience  as  your  mind  shall  dictate.

To  the  full  of  your  desire,  that  your  heart  should
read  the  hearts  of  others, — knowing  the  heart  where
passion  dwells  as  passionate,  and  the  passionless  heart
as  passionless,  the  unkind  heart  as  unkind,  and  the
kind  heart  as  kind,  the  deluded  heart  as  deluded,  and


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZXIN:  A  STUDY


33


instead  of  meeting  the  enemy  as  the  loyal
generals  of  the  chief  whom  his  position  and  pre¬
eminence  alike  seemed  to  mark  off  for  a  national
hero,  they  preferred  to  be  defeated  by  the
Ghaznavide  one  by  one.  An  internal  revolution,
which  would  place  the  defensive  power  of  the
country  in  the  hands  of  a  central  power,  was
absolutely  necessary  if  the  newly-aisen  enemy
was  to  be  resisted  with  success.  But  the  hand
of  the  reformer  was  numbered  by  the  time-
honoured  customs  of  ages;  and  the  tribal  feuds
of  the  Rajputs,  their  complicated  system  of
military  tenure  and  local  rights,  prevented  them
from  mustering  in  full  force  on  the  field  of  battle.
The  result  was  defeat,  disgrace,  disaster.  Temple
after  temple  was  plundered ;  the  centres  of  Indian
civilisation  were  ruined ;  and  neither  the  wisdom
of  the  Brahman,  nor  the  heroism  of  the  Rajput,
nor  the  pious  adoration  of  silent  millions  could
prevent  their  idols  of  gold  and  silver  from  being
melted  into  Ghaznavide  coin.  The  Indians  did
not  lack  fighting  spirit,  and  they  had  a  country
and  a  religion  fully  worthy  of  their  devotion.
The  carnage  round  the  Somnath  temple,  the
courage  with  which  the  garrison  of  many  an  un¬
known  fort  died  to  the  last  man  before  the  un¬
wavering  Ghaznavide  ranks,  showed  what  better
leadership  might  have  achieved, — proved,  if
proof  was  needed,  that  even  in  the  hour  of  deep¬
est  gloom  the  Indians  had  not  forgotten  how  to
die.  But  their  social  and  political  customs
paralysed  them;  for  with  us,  unfortunately,
custom  is  not  an  accident  but  the  essence  of
faith.

The  great  Sultan  did  not  fail  to  take
advantage  of  this  ‘organised  anarchy’  once  he
had  discovered  its  real  nature.  His  first  steps
were  tentative,  but  the  spectacle  of  an  army,
innumerable  as  ants  and  locusts,  flying  away
from  Waihind  (1008)  before  even  the  battle  had
become  warm,  convinced  him  that  the  Indian
confederacy  was  a  soul-less  ghost  before  which
he  had  needlessly  trembled.  With  ceaseless  care
he  and  his  father  had  forged  a  terrible  machine
which  could  be  now  used  to  good  purpose.  The
Ghaznavide  army  was  composed  of  heterogenous
material,  but  strict  discipline,  years  of  comrade¬
ship  in  arms,  the  memory  of  past  victories  and
hope  of  future  spoliation  and  plunder,  had
welded  Indians,  Afghans,  Turks  and  Persians
together.  Training  had  created  confidence  and
confidence  led  to  success.  Above  all  the  sub¬
ordination  of  everything  to  the  penetrative
intellect  aTid  commanding  will  of  the  Sultan  gave
5


it  an  irresistible  momentum  against  its  faction-
ridden  opponents.  Mahmud  flashed  like  a
lightning  across  the  path  of  the  bewildered
Rais,  thrust  himself  between  them  before  they
could  unite,  drove  them  away  from  one  another
and  defeated  them  in  detail.  There  was  no
resisting  his  might.  'Vini,  vidi,  r ici.’  A  dark-
fear  began  to  oppress  the  Indian  mind.  It  was
imagined  that  the  Mussalmans  would  be  always
victorious,  that  a  new  race  of  Huns  would  hold
the  sacred  soil  of  Aryavarta  in  perpetual  terror¬
ism.  Nothing  could  be  farther  from  truth.  The
Ghaznavide  had  not  come  to  stay.


The  non-religious  character  of  the  expeditions
will  be  obvious  to  the

of  ^theDfnvasions°*1VeS  critic  who  has  gasped  the
salient  features  of  the
spirit  of  the  age.  They  were  not  crusades  but
secular  exploits  waged  for  the  greed  of  glory  and
gold.  It  is  impossible  to  read  a  religious  motive
into  them.  The  Ghaznavide  army  was  not  a
host  of  holy  warriors  resolved  to  live  and  die
for  the  faith ;  it  was  an  enlisted  and  paid  army
of  trained  veterans  accustomed  to  fight  Hindus
and  Mussalmans  alike.  Only  in  two  of  the  later
campaigns  were  any  volunteers  present ;  and
insignificant  as  was  their  proportion  to  the  regular
troops,  Mahmud  found  them  unfit  for  the  rapid
and  disciplined  movements  he  desired.  The
Sultan  was  too  little  of  a  democratic  hero  to
have  marshalled  the  forces  of  a  triumphant
fanaticism  and  he  never  essayed  the  task.  (39)
The  missionary  spirit,  that  might  have  wept  over
the  fate  of  so  many  souls  ‘lost  to  paradise*  or
seen  in  India  a  fertijc  soil  for  implanting  the
Prophet's  Faith,  was  denied  to  him.  His  object
was  lower  and  more  realisable.  Content  to
deprive  the  ‘unbelievers’  of  their  worldly  goods
he  never  forced  them  to  change  their  faith  and
left  India  the  non-Muslim  land  he  found  it.

For  time  out  of  mind  the  exports  of  India
„  ,  ,  ,  ,  had  been  in  excess  of  her

temple*.  imports  and  precious

metals  had  been  slowly
drawn  into  the  country.  Mines  were  also  being
worked  in  various  provinces.  The  natural
consequence  was  an  ever  accumulating  mass  of
gold  and  silver,  which  won  for  India  a  reputa¬
tion  for  fabulous  riches,  and  by  the  time  of
Mahmud  had  become  a  serious  national  danger.


(39)  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  Mahmud  seldom,  if
ever,  shared  the  hard  life  of  his  soldiers.  Such  a
thing  would  have  been  below  the  dignity  of  the  new
monarchy.’


M.  i.  496.


THE  MEED  OF  SERVICE.


349


the  undeludcd  heart  as  undeluded,  the  focussed  heart
as  focussed,  and  the  unfocussed  heart  as  unfocussed,
the  great  heart  as  great,  and  the  little  heart  as  little,
the  inferior  heart  as  inferior,  and  the  superior  heart  as
superior,  the  stedfast  heart  as  stedfast,  and  the  un-
stedfast  heart  as  unstedfast,  the  heart  Delivered  as  De¬
livered,  and  the  heart  undelivered  as  undelivered — all
this  shall  be  yours  to  experience  as  your  mind  shall
dictate.

To  the  full  of  your  desire  to  recall  your  divers  ex¬
istences  in  the  past — a  single  birth,  then  two  .  .  .
right  up  to  your  rebirth  here, — all  this  shall  be  yours  to
experience  as  your  mind  shall  dictate.

[496J  To  the  full  of  your  desire  to  see,  with  the  Eye
Celestial  which  is  pure  and  far  surpasses  the  human
eye,  creatures  in  act  to  pass  hence,  in  act  to  reappear
elsewhere,  creatures  either  lowly  or  debonair  ...  in
states  of  bliss  and  in  heaven, — all  this  shall  be  yours  to
experience  as  your  mind  shall  dictate.

To  the  full  of  your  desire — here  and  now,  and  of  and
by  yourself — to  know,  realize,  enter  on,  and  abide  in
Deliverance  of  heart  and  mind  which  is  without
Cankers  because  Cankers  have  been  eradicated, — all
this  shall  be  yours  to  experience  as  your  mind  shall
dictate.

Thereupon  the  venerable  Vaccha-gotta,  glad  and
grateful  to  the  Lord  for  his  words,  arose  and  with
salutations  and  deep  reverence  withdrew.  Nor  was  it
long  before  he,  dwelling  alone  and  aloof,  strenuous,
ardent  and  purged  of  self,  won  the  prize  in  quest  of  which
young  men  go  forth  from  home  to  homelessness  as
Pilgrims,  that  prize  of  prizes  which  crowns  the  highest
life ; — even  this  did  he  think  out  and  realize  of  and  by
himself,  entering  on  it  and  dwelling  therein  here  and
now ;  and  to  him  came  the  knowledge  clear  that  for
him  rebirth  was  no  more  ;  that  he  had  lived  the  highest
life;jhat  his  task  was  done;  and  that  now  for  him
there  was  no  more  of  what  he  had  been.  The  reverend
Vaccha-gotta  was  numbered  among  the  Arahats.

At  that  time  a  large  number  of  Almsmen  were  on


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Add  to  it,  generations  of  pious  Hindus  had
gradually  transferred  the  wealth  of  the  country
to  the  temples,  which,  unlike  the  peasants’  purse
and  the  Rai's  treasury,  never  lost  what  they  had
once  gained.  It  was  impossible  that  the  Indian
temples,  like  the  Catholic  Church  in  Europe,
should  not  sooner  or  later  tempt  some  one  strong
and  unscrupulous  enough  for  the  impious  deed.
Nor  was  it  to  be  expected  that  a  man  of
Mahmud’s  character  would  allow  the  tolerance
Islam  inculcates  to  restrain  him  from  taking
possession  of  the  gold,  to  which  his  heart  turned
as  a  magnet  turns  towards  iron,  when  the
Indians  themselves  had  simplified  his  work  by
concentrating  the  wealth  of  their  country  at  a
few  selected  places.  Plundering  an  enemy’s
place  of  worship  was  regarded  by  contemporaries
as  a  legitimate  act  of  war — the  unavoidable  conse¬
quence  of  a  defeat.  His  Hindu  opponents  were
infuriated,  but  not  surprised,  at  what  he  did,
they  knew  his  motives  were  economic,  not
religious,  and  provided  a  sufficient  indemnity
was  offered,  he  was  not  unwilling  to  spare  their
idols.  He  took  away  the  gold  they  would  have
loved  to  retain  but  never  compelled  them  to  join
a  creed  in  which  they  did  not  believe.  His
Indian  soldiers  were  free  to  blow  their  Sanlch  and
bow  before  their  idols  in  Imperial  Ghaznin.  He
accepted  the  principle  of  toleration  in  the
restricted  form  in  which  his  age  understood  it  ;
and  it  would  l>c  futile  to  blame  him  for  not  rising
to  the  moral  height  of  the  generations  that
followed  and  the  generations  that  had  gone
before.


No  honest  historian  should  seek  to  hide,  and
no  Mussalman  acquainted
"■ith  >>ia  "ill  try  .»
justify,  the  wanton
destruction  of  temples  that  followed  in  the  wake
of  the  Ghaznavide  army.  Contemporary  as  well
as  later  historians  do  not  attempt  to  veil  the
nefarious  acts  but  relate  them  with  pride.  It  is
easy  to  twist  one’s  conscience;  and  we  know
only  too  well  how  easy  it  is  to  find  a  religious
justification  for  what  people  wish  to  do  from
worldly  motives.  Islam  sanctioned  neither  the
vandalism  nor  the  plundering  motives  of  the
invader  ;  no  principle  known  to  the  Shariat
justified  the  uncalled  for  attack  on  Hindu  princes
who  had  done  Mahmud  and  his  subjects  no
harm ;  the  shameless  destruction  of  places  of
worship  is  condemned  by  the  law  of  every  creed.
And  yet  Islam,  though  it  was  not  an  inspiring
motive,  could  be  utilised  as  an  a  posteriori


justification  of  what  had  been  done.  It  was  not
difficult  to  identify  the  spoliation  of  non-Muslim
populations  as  a  service  to  Islam,  and  persons
to  whom  the  argument  was  addressed  found  it
too  much  in  consonance  with  the  promptings  of
their  own  passions  to  examine  it  critically.  Sj
the  precepts  of  the  Quran  were  misinterpreted
or  ignored  and  the  tolerant  policy  of  the  Second
Caliph  was  cast  aside,  in  order  that  Mahmud  and
his  myrmidons  may  be  able  to  plunder  Hindu
temples  with  a  clear  and  untroubled  conscience.

It  is  a  situation  to  make  one  pause.  With  a
new  faith  everything  depends  on  its  method  of
presentation.  It  will  be  welcomed  if  it  appears
as  a  message  of  hope,  and  hated  if  it  wears  the
mask  of  a  brutal  terrorism.  Islam  as  a  world-force
is  to  by  judged  by  the  life  of  the  Prophet  and
the  policy  of  the  Second  Caliph.  Its  early
successes  were  really  due  to  its  character  as  a
revolutionary  force  against  religions  that  had  lost
their  hold  on  the  minds  of  the  people  and  against
social  and  political  systems  that  were  grinding
down  the  lower  classes.  Under  such  circums¬
tances  the  victory  of  Islam  was  considered  by  the
conquered  population  as  something  intrinsically
desirable;  it  ended  the  regime  of  an  aristocratic
priesthood  and  a  decrepit  monarchy,  while  the
doctrine  of  equality,  first  preached  in  the  eastern
world,  opened  a  career  to  the  talent  of  the
depressed  masses  and  resulted  in  a  wholesale
conversion  of  the  populations  of  Arabia,  Syria,
Persia  and  Iraq.  Now  Hinduism  with  its
intense  and  living  faith  was  something  quite  un¬
like  the  Zorastrianism  of  Persia  and  the
Christianity  of  Asia  Minor,  which  had  so  easily
succumbed  before  the  invader;  it  suffered  from
no  deep  seated  internal  disease  and,  a  peculiarity
of  the  national  character  of  the  Hindus,  ‘deeply
seated  in  them  and  manifest  to  everybody,’  was
their  intense  satisfaction  and  pride  in  their
customs.  “They  believe’’,  says  Alberuni,  “that
there  is  no  country  but  theirs,  no  nation  like
theirs,  no  king  like  theirs,  no  religion  like  theirs,
no  science  like  theirs.  They  are  haughty,
foolishly  vain,  self-conceited  and  stolid.  Accord¬
ing  to  their  belief,  there  is  no  country  on  earth
but  theirs,  no  other  race  of  men  but  theirs,  and
no  created  beings  besides  them  have  any  know¬
ledge  or  science  whatsoever.  Their  haughtiness
is  such  that,  if  you  tell  them  of  any  science  or
scholars  in  Khorasan  and  Persia,  they  will  think
you  both  an  ignoramus  and  a  liar."  People  with
this  insularity  of  outlook  were  not  likely  to  lend
their  ears  to  a  new  message.  But  the  policy  of


350  LXXIII.  MAHA-VACCHAGOTTA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  497-


their  way  to  visit  the  Lord.  Seeing  them  some  way
off,  Vaccha-gotta  went  up  to  them,  [497]  and,  on
learning  their  intention  to  visit  the  Lord,  asked  them
to  bow  down  at  the  Lord’s  feet  on  his  behalf  and  in  his
name  to  say  : — The  Lord  has  been  served  ;  the  Blessed
One  has  been  served.  Accordingly  those  Almsmen
conveyed  his  message  faithfully  to  the  Lord,  who
remarked  that  already  his  own  heart  had  read  Vaccha-
gotta’s  heart  and  that  this  Almsman  had  won  the
threefold  lore  and  had  come  to  great  powers  and
might.  Also,  deities  (he  added)  had  brought  him  the
same  tidings.

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  Glad  at  heart,  those  Alms¬
men  rejoiced  in  what  the  Lord  had  said.


SULTAN’  MAHMUD

Mahmud  secured  the  rejection  of  Islam  without  a
hearing.

A  religion  is  naturally  judged  by  the  character
of  those  who  believe  in  it ;  their  faults  and  their
virtues  are  supposed  to  be  the  effect  of  their
creed.  It  was  inevitable  that  the  Hindus  should
consider  Islam  a  deviation  from  truth  when  its
followers  deviated  so  deplorably  from  the  path  of
rectitude  and  justice.  A  people  is  not  conciliat¬
ed  bv  being  robbed  of  all  it  holds  most  dear,
nor  will  it  love  a  faith  that  comes  to  it  in  the
guise  of  plundering  armies  and  leaves  devastated
fields  and  ruined  cities  as  monuments  of  its
victorious  method  for  reforming  the  morals  of  a
prosperous  but  erratic  world.  “They  came,
burnt,  killed,  plundered,  captured — and  went
away”  was  a  Persian’s  description  of  the  Mongol
invasion  of  his  country ;  it  would  not  be  an  in¬
appropriate  summary  of  Mahmud’s  achievement
in  Hindustan.  It  was  not  thus  that  the  Prophet
had  preached  Islam  in  Arabia ;  and  no  one  need
be  surprised  that  the  career  of  the  conquering
Ghaznavide  created  a  burning  hatred  for  the  new
faith  in  the  Hindu  mind  and  blocked  its  progress
more  effectually  than  armies  and  forts.
“Mahmud,"  says  the  observant  Alberuni,
"utterly  ruined  the  prosperity  of  the  country,
and  performed  those  wonderful  exploits,  by
which  the  Hindus  became  like  atoms  of  dust
scattered  in  all  directions  and  like  a  tale  of  old
in  the  mouth  of  the  people.  Their  scattered
remains  cherish,  of  course,  the  most  inveterate
hatred  of  all  Muslims.  This  is  the  reason,  too,
why  Hindu  sciences  have  retired  far  away  from
those  parts  of  the  country  conquered  by  us,  and
have  fled  to  places  where  our  hand  cannot  yet
reach,  to  Kashmir,  Benares  and  other  places.
And  there  the  antagonism  between  them  and  all
foreigners  receive  more  and  more  nourishment
both  from  political  and  religious  and  other
causes.’’

’The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them;  the
good  is  often  buried  with  their  bones !’  Mahmud’s
work,  whatever  it  might  have  been,  was  swept
off  fifteen  years  after  his  death  by  the  Hindu
Revival.  ‘Those  who  had  taken  up  the  sword
perished  by  the  sword’.  East  of  Lahore  no  trace
of  the  Mussalmans  remained;  and  Mahmud’s
victories  while  they  failed  to  shake  the  moral
confidence  of  Hinduism,  won  an  everlasting
infamy  for  his  faith.  Two  centuries  later  men,
who  differed  from  Mahmud  as  widely  as  two
human  beings  can  possibly  differ,  once  more
brought  Islam  into  the  land.  But  times  had


OF  GHAZNIN :  A  STUDY  35

changed.  The  arrogance  of  the  Mussalmans  had
disappeared  with  the  conquest  of  Ajam  by  the
Mongolian  hordes.  The  spirit  of  the  Persian
Renaissance  had  blossomed  and  died,  and  the
new  mysticism,  with  its  cosmopolitan  tendencies
and  with  doctrines  which  did  not  essentially
differ  from  what  the  Hindu  rishis  had  taught  in
ancient  days,  made  possible  that  exchange  of
ideas  between  men  of  the  two  creeds  which
Alberuni  had  longed  for  in  vain.  Instead  of  the
veterans  who  had  crossed  the  frontier  in  search
of  their  winter  spoils  there  came  a  host  of
refugees  from  the  burning  villages  of  Central
Asia  longing  for  a  sj>ot  where  they  could  lay
their  heads  in  peace  and  casting  aside  all  hopes
of  returning  to  the  land  of  their  birth.  The
serpent  had  reappeared  but  without  his  poison¬
ous  fangs.  The  intellectual  history  of  medieval
India  begins  with  the  advent  of  Shaikh  Moinud-
din  of  Ajmere  and  its  political  history'  with  the
accession  of  Sultan  Alauddin  Khilji;  the  two
featured  which  distinguish  it  from  preceding
generations  are  the  mystic  propaganda  started
by  the  Chishti  Saint  and  the  administrative  and
economic  measures  inaugurated  by  the  revolu¬
tionary  Emperor.  With  the  proper  history  of
our  country  Mahmud  has  nothing  to  do.  But
we  have  inherited  from  him  the  most  bitter  drop
in  our  cup.  To  later  generation  Mahmud
became  the  Arch-fanatic  he  never  was;  and  in
that  ‘incarnation’  he  is  still  worshipped  by  such
Indian  Mussalmans  as  have  cast  off  the  teaching
of  Lord  Krishna  in  their  devotion  to  minor  gods.
Tslam’s  worst  enemies  have  ever  been  its  own
fanatical  followers.

IV :  Fall  of  the  Ghaznavide  Empire.

Sultan  Mahmud’s  two  eldest  sons,  Masud  and

Mohammad,  were  born  on

The  question  of  [he  same  day  and  it  was
succession.  ,  ,  . ,

difficult  to  decide  the

question  of  precedence  between  them.  But
Mohammad,  a  virtuous  and  educated  prince  who
composed  verses  in  Arabic,  had  neither  the
energy  nor  the  strength  necessary'  for  wielding  a
sceptre,  and  the  eyes  of  all  men  w’ere  naturally
turned  towards  his  brother,  who  had  the  phy’sique
and  personality’  of  a  Rustum.  No  one  could  lift
Masud’s  mace  with  one  hand  from  the  ground
and  his  arrow'  pierced  through  a  plate  of  steel.
But  the  Sultan,  somewhat  envious  of  the  feats
totally  beyond  his  own  strength,  made  a  will  in
favour  of  Mohammad  and  obtained  a  firman  con-


LXXIV.  DlGHANAKHA-SUTTA.1

CONSISTENCY  IN  OUTLOOK.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  when  the  Lord  was
staying  in  Boar’s  Cave  on  Vulture  Peak  at  Rajagaha,
the  Wanderer  Digha-nakha  came  to  him  and  after
salutations  took  his  stand  to  one  side,  saying  : — All2
fails  to  satisfy  me  ;  that  is  what  I  say,  and  that  is  the
view  I  hold.

When  you  say,  Aggivessana,  that  all  fails  to  satisfy
you,  does  your  own  view  as  just  expressed  also  fail  to
satisfy  you  ?

If  it  did  satisfy  me,  then  all  else  would  follow  suit.

[498]  In  one  class,  there  are  very  many  people  in
the  world  who,  admitting  that  all  else  should  follow
suit,  yet  refuse  to  discard  their  old  view  while  adopt¬
ing  another.  In  another  class,  there  are  very  few
who,  admitting  that  all  else  should  follow  suit,  discard
their  old  view  and  do  not  tack  on  another.

There  are  some  recluses  and  brahmins,  Aggivessana,
who  affirm  and  hold  that  all  satisfies  them,  while  others
take  the  contrary  view,  and  others  again  partly  take
the  former  and  partly  the  latter  view.

Those  who  are  satisfied  with  all,  hold  a  view  which
is  allied  to  passion,  to  bondage,  to  pleasure,  to  attach¬
ments  and  to  all  that  sustains  continuing  existence.

Those  who  are  dissatisfied  with  all,  hold  a  view
which  is  allied  to  passionfessness  and  freedom,  aloof
from  pleasure  and  attachments,  and  with  nothing  to
keep  existence  continuing.


1  This  Sutta  is  referred  to  as  Vedana-pariggaha-suttanta  at
p.  96  of  the  first  volume  of  the  Commentary  on  the  Dhamma-
pada  (P.  T.  S.  1906).

*  Bu.  explains  sabbam  (all,  everything)  as  meaning  rebirth
and  transmigration,  in  the  mouth  of  Dighanakha,  who,  subse¬
quently  perceiving  that  Gotama  is  using  the  word  in  its  literal
sense,  tries  to  safeguard  his  original  contention.

35 1


36


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


firming  it  from  the  Caliph.  The  wazir,  Hasnak,
also  worked  for  Mohammad  and  a  brittle  alliance
of  the  nobles  was  formed  in  his  favour.  Masud
refused  to  submit.  ‘The  Sword  is  a  truer
authority  than  any  writing,’  he  stoutly  declared;
and  the  Sultan,  to  whom  his  son’s  answer  was
conveyed,  felt  it  to  be  painfully  true.


Stiltan  Mohammad.


The  conquests  in  Eastern  Persia  during  the

last  years  of  Mahmud’s

reign  had  been  mostly  due

to  Masud,  and  when  returning  from  Ray  to
Balkh  in  1029,  the  Sultan  had  left  him  in  charge
of  Khorasan  and  the  newly  conquered  territories.
It  was,  consequently,  easier  for  Mohammad’s
supporters  to  obtain  control  of  the  capital  on  his
father’s  death.  They  summoned  him  from

Gorkan  and  placed  him  on  the  throne.  The  new
Sultan  distributed  large  sums  to  make  himilf
popular.  His  subjects  and  soldiers  thanked  him
for  the  kindness  but  refused  to  take  him  seriously.
Every  one  expected  Masud  would  come  and  over¬
throw  the  rickctty  Government.  Less  than  two
months  after  his  accession  the  famous  Abun


Najm  Ahmad  Ayaz,  Ali  Dayah  and  a  body  of
slaves  took  horses  from  the  royal  stables  in  broad
daylight  and  started  for  Bust.  They  were  over¬
taken  by  Soyand  Rai,  the  commander  of  the
Hindus,  and  in  the  battle  that  followed  most  of
the  slaves  were  slain.  But  Soyand  Rai  himself
was  killed,  and  Ayaz  and  Ali  Dayah  succeeded
in  reaching  Masud’s  camp  at  Naishapur.


Masud  had  offered  to  remain  content  with

Masnd’s  advance.  Kh°rasan  Iraq  pro¬

vided  his  name  was  given
precedence  in  the  Kliutba,  but  on  receiving  a
harsh  reply  from  his  brother  he  decided  to  march
on  Ghaznin.  Mohammad  on  his  side  advanced
from  the  capital  to  Takinabad,  where  he  passed
the  month  of  Ramazan.  But  his  strongest
supporters,  Yusuf  bin  Subaktigin,  a  brother  of
the  late  Sultan,  Amir  Ali  Khcshawand  and  the
Wazir  Hasnak,  decided  to  make  a  belated  attempt
to  please  Masud  by  a  betrayal  of  their  own
candidate.  Two  days  after  Eid,  on  the  night  of
October  3,  they  dragged  him  out  of  his  tent  and
sent  him  to  a  fort  of  Kandhar,  and  advanced  to
welcome  his  brother  at  Herat.  Masud,  however,
refused  to  overlook  the  fault  of  those  who  had
conspired  against  him  for  years.  Mohammad  was
blinded  by  his  brother’s  order.  Amir  Ali
Khcshawand  was  put  to  death  and  Yusuf  bit:
Subuktigin  was  thrown  into  prison  where  lie
died.


Hasnak  was  reserved  for  the  disgrace  of  a
public  execution  at  Balkh.
Masud  recalled  his  father’s


Fall  of  Hasuok.


famous  wazir,  Khwaja  Ahmad  bin  Hasan
Maimandi,  from  his  Indian  prison  and  entrusted
him  with  the  office  he  had  held  for  eighteen
years  with  such  dignity  and  power.  The  fate
of  the  fallen  Wazir,  so  graphically  described  by
Baihaki,  won  the  sympathy  of  all  hearts.  After
weeks  of  hard  and  degrading  imprisonment
Hasnak  was  summoned  to  the  divan  where  the
great  Khwaja  behaved  with  extraordinary  polite¬
ness.  He  was  asked  to  sign  a  bond  giving  up
all  his  property  to  the  Sultan  and  the  two
wazirs  parted  with  a  touching  forgiveness  and
affection.  “In  the  time  of  Sultan  Mahmud,’’
Hasnak  apologized,  “and  by  his  orders,  I
ridiculed  the  Khwaja  ;  it  was  a  fault  but  I  had
no  help  but  to  obey.  The  post  of  wazir  was
given  to  me,  though  it  was  no  place  for  me.
Still  I  formed  no  design  against  the  Khwaja  and
I  always  favoured  his  people.  I  am  weary  of
life  but  some  care  ought  to  be  taken  of  my
children  and  my  family  and  the  Khwaja  must
forgive  me”.  He  burst  into  tears  and  the
Khwaja ’s  eyes  were  filled  with  tears  also.
“You  are  forgiven,”  he  replied,  “but  you  must
not  be  so  dejected  for  happiness  is  still  possible.
I  have  considered  and  accept  it  of  the  Almighty
— I  will  take  care  of  your  family  if  you  are
doomed”.  But  the  Sultan  had  made  up  his
mind  and  the  intrigues  of  Ba  Sahl  Zauzni,  the
minister  of  war,  left  the  issue  in  no  doubt.
While  passing  through  Syria  on  his  return
journey  from  Mecca  during  the  reign  of  Sultan
Mahmud,  Hasnak  had  received  a  robe  of  honour
from  the  anti-Caliph  of  Egypt,  and  this  had
laid  him  open  to  the  charge  of  being  a
Carmathian.  The  Caliph  of  Bagdad  had  pro¬
tested  but  Mahmud,  who  knew  Hasnak's
rationalistic  beliefs,  would  not  allpw  him  to  be
punished  fer  an  imputation  so  baseless.


\\  rite  to  this  doting  old  Caliph”,  Mahmud
had  ordered  his  secretary,  “  that  for  the  sake
of  the  Abbasides  I  have  meddled  with  all  the


world.  I  am  hunting  for  Carmathians,  and
whenever  one  is  found  who  is  proved  to  be  so,
he  is  impaled.  If  it  was  proved  that  Hasnak
is  a  Carmathian,  the  Commander  of  the  Faith¬
ful  would  soon  learn  what  had  happened  to
him.  But  I  have  brought  him  up  and  he
stands  on  an  equality  with  my  sons  and  my
brothers.  If  he  is  a  Carmathian,  so  am  I  also.”
The  old  charge  was  now  revived.  Two  men


352


LX  XIV.  DlGHANAKHA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  500.


Here  Dlghanakha  intervened  to  say: — The  reverend
Gotama  is  complimentary,  most  complimentary  to  the
view  I  hold  !

Lastly,  the  Lord  went  on  to  say,  those  who  are
partly  satisfied  and  partly  dissatisfied,  hold  a  view
which,  so  far  as  it  is  one  of  satisfaction,  is  allied  to
passion  and  so  forth,  while,  so  far  as  it  is  one  of
dissatisfaction,  is  allied  to  passionlessness  and  so  forth.

In  these  circumstances  an  intelligent  person  would
say  that,  if  he  whole-heartedly  stuck  to  and  dis¬
seminated  the  satisfied  view  as  wholly  and  exclusively
true,  he  would  be  at  issue  with  both  the  other  camps,
which  would  lead  to  disputes,  and  so  to  vexation  and
so  to  trouble.  Consequently,  he  discards  this  view  and
takes  up  with  no  other.  And  the  same  happens  to  an
intelligent  person  with  regard  to  both  the  dissatisfied
and  the  partly-satisfied  views,  so  that  in  all  three  cases
alike  there  is  a  discarding  and  a  renouncing  of  these
views  by  the  intelligent.

[500]  This  body — which  has  visible  shape,  which  is
made  up  of  the  four  primary  elements,  starts  from
parents,  is  sustained  by  victuals,  is  transitory  and
subject  to  attrition,  abrasion,  dissolution  and  dispersal
— ,  this  body  is  to  be  regarded  as  transitory,  as  Ill,  as
a  disease,  as  a  pustulence,  as  a  pang,  as  anguish,  as  a
malady,  as  alien,  as  a  flux,  as  void,  as  non-self ;  and
he  who  so  regards  the  body,  loses  thereby  all  liking
and  affection  for  a  body,  all  subordination  to  a  body.

There  are  the  following  three  classes  of  feelings, —
pleasant,  unpleasant,  and  neutral.  While  a  man  is
experiencing  a  pleasant  feeling,  he  does  not  con¬
comitantly  experience  the  unpleasant  or  the  neutral,
but  the  pleasant  alone.  Similarly,  an  unpleasant  or  a
neutral  feeling  is  not  concomitant  with  either  of  the
two  other  classes.  All  three  classes  alike  have  this  in
common  that  they  are  transitory,  that  they  are  products
and  effects,  that  they  are  perishable  and  evanescent,
and  that  they  can  be  purged  of  passion  and  stilled.
When  he  sees  this  clearly,  a  well-informed  disciple  of
the  Noble,  grows  aweary  of  all  feelings — pleasant,


M.  i.  501.


CONSISTENCY  IN  OUTLOOK.


353


unpleasant  and  neutral— and,  being  aweary,  purges
himself  of  passion  and  by  passionlessness  finds  Deliver¬
ance,  so  that,  being  Delivered,  he  comes  to  realize  his
Deliverance  in  the  conviction  that— Rebirth  is  no
more;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my  task  is  done  ;
and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been.
An  Almsman  whose  heart  is  Delivered  thus,  neither
concurs  nor  disputes  with  anyone;  he  employs  the

ideas'11  p^raseo^°^  worId  without  accepting  its

At  this  point  there  came  to  the  reverend  Sariputta,
who  was  [501]  standing  behind  the  Lord  fanning  him,
the  thought : — These  then  are  fche  several  states  of
consciousness  which  the  Lord  has  bidden  us  realize
and  discard,  which  the  Blessed  One  has  bidden  us
renounce.  And  even  as  Sariputta  so  reflected,  his
heart  was  Delivered  from  Cankers  by  leaving  nothing
to  sustain  them  in  being.

In  the  Wanderer  Dighanakha,  on  the  other  hand,
there  arose  the  pure  and  stainless  Eye  of  Truth,
whereby  he  saw  that  in  whatsoever  has  a  beginning,
cessation  is  also  inherent.  Seeing  and  grasping
the  Doctrine,  comprehending  and  fathoming  it,
Dighanakha— with  doubts  all  gone,  freed  from  all
questionings  of  heart,  strong  now  in  confidence,  per¬
sonally  and  independently  assured  of  the  Master’s
gospel— said  to  the  Lord Wonderful,  Gotama;
quite  wonderful  !  Just  as  a  man  might  set  upright
again  .  .  .  (etc.  as  at  end  of  Sutta  No.  72)  ...  as  a
disciple  from  this  day  forth  while  life  lasts.


LXXV.  MAGANDIYA-SUTTA.

OF  KEEPING  WATCH  AND  WARD.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  the  Lord  was  staying  in
the  Kuru  country — Kammassadhamma  is  the  name  of
a  township  of  theirs— in  the  fire-hut  of  the  brahmin
Bharadvaja-gotta,  in  which  a  grass  mat  was  laid.  In

23


SULTAN  MAHMUD  <>F  GHA2NIN:  A  STUDY


37


were  dressed  up  as  messengers  from  the  Caliph
demanding  Hasnak’s  death  as  a  Camathian,
and  Masud,  with  pretended  reluctance,  acceded
to  the  Caliph’s  demand.  But  everybody  knew
the  truth.  "If  Masud  mounts  the  throne,  let
me  be  hanged,"  Hasnak  had  declared  in  the
days  of  his  arrogant  power  ;  and  Masud  having
succeeded,  Hasnak  had  to  mount  'the  steed  he
had  never  ridden  before’.

At  the  foot  of  the  scaffold  Hasnak  threw  off
A  Ghaxnavide  his  coat  and  shirt.  ‘His
execution.  body  was  white  as  silver

and  his  face  like  hundreds  of  thousands  of
pictures.’  All  men  were  crying  with  grief.
He  replied  neither  to  the  insults  of  his  enemies
nor  to  the  questions  asked,  but  his  lips  were
seen  moving  in  some  silent  prayer.  He  was
made  to  wear  a  helmet  and  vizor  lest  his  head,
which  was  to  be  sent  to  the  Caliph,  should  be
battered  beyond  recognition  by  the  stones  the
public  was  expected  to  throw.  But  the  public,
barring  a  few  vagabonds  hired  by  the  govern¬
ment,  threw  no  stones.  A  great  uproar  would
have  arisen  if  the  royal  horsemen  had  not
prevented  it.  His  fellow-citizens,  the  Naisha-
purians,  wept  bitterly  when  the  hangman  cast  a
rope  round  his  neck  and  suffocated  him.  For
seven  years  Hasnak  hung  from  the  gibbet.  His
corpse  dried  up  ;  the  bones  of  his  feet  dropped
off,  and  ‘not  a  remnant  of  him  was  left  to  be
taken  down  and  buried  in  the  usual  way — no
one  knew  where  his  head  was  or  where  his
body.’  A  last  touch  to  the  tragedy  was  given
by  Hasnak’s  mother  who  refused  to  weep  as
women  weep ;  but  a  deep  cry  of  anguish  burst
from  her  lips  when  she  was  told  of  his  death.
"What  a  fortune  was  my  son’s!”  Site
exclaimed,  "A  king  like  Mahmud  gave  him  this
world,  and  one  like  Masud  the  next."

Masud  now  seemed  as  secure  as  his  father
had  ever  been.  He  had
a  commanding  personality
and  a  strpng  and  unbend¬
ing  resolution.  He  was  surrounded  by  a  body
of  efficient  and  loyal  officers  who  had  served  his
father  for  years.  He  had  no  rival  to  fear.  The
Government  appeared  strong  in  the  extent  of
its  territory,  its  armies,  its  revenue  and  its  mass
of  hoarded  wealth.  Nevertheless  a  careful
observer  would  have  found  the  forces  of  decay
everywhere  at  work.  It  was  not  easy  to  wield
Mahmud’s  sceptre.  Masud  was  unheeding  and
self-confidence  gave  way  to  a  senseless  panic  in
advice  of  his  wisest  counsellors.  His  superb


Mastnl  aud
difficulties.


his


self-confidence  gave  way  to  a  senseless  panic  in
the  hour  of  danger  and  showed  him  to  be  totally
lacking  in  that  calmness  of  nerve  which  comes
through  the  strength  of  the  intellect  rather  than
power  of  muscle  and  bone.  He  struck  thought¬
lessly  and  in  the  wrong  quarter  with  a  total
incapacity  to  distinguish  the  most  dangerous  of
his  enemies  from  the  most  contemptible  of  his
foes.  The  firmness  with  which  he  wielded  his
axe  and  his  spear  in  the  field  of  battle  shone  in
tragic  contrast  with  the  folly  with  which  he
directed  his  campaigns  and  destroyed  the  morale
of  his  troops  before  the  enemy  could  fall  upon
them.  Equally  lacking  in  the  gifts  of  a
statesman  and  a  general,  Masud  would  have
done  well  to  rely  on  the  judgment  pf  a  wiser
man.  Khwaja  Hasan  Maimandi  restored  to
more  than  his  former  glory  directed  the  govern¬
ment  with  efficiency  so  far  as  civil  affairs  were
concerned  but  the  Khwaja  never  meddled  in
military  matters,  and  his  death  in  1030  left
Masud  free  to  mismanage  things  to  his  heart’s
content  ;  and  within  ten  years  of  his  father’s
death  he  had  lost  his  army  and  his  empire  and
was  flying  a  helpless  fugitive  to  an  inhospitable
land.

The  two  dangers  Masud  had  to  fear  were  the
Rais  of  Hindustan  in  the  cast  and  the  Seljuqs
in  the  west.  The  former,  terrorised  rather  than
subdued  by  Mahmud,  were  sure  to  wake  up
when  the  invincible  conqueror  was  no  more.
But  they  were  a  lethargic  people  and  would  in
any  case  remain  on  the  defensive.  Masud’s
obvious  plan  should  have  been  to  crush  the
Seljuqs  before  it  was  too  late  and  leave  the  Rais
for  a  more  favourable  season.  But  while  the
Seljuq  peril  was  growing  apace,  he  preferred
to  divert  his  strength  towards  Hindustan  in  a
useless  emulation  of  his  father’s  achievements,
who,  with  a  wisdom  and  a  generalship  denied  to
his  son,  had  struck  simultaneously  in  east  and
west.  \\  e  will  first  describe  the  comparatively
prosaic  events  of  the  Punjab.

The  peculiar  position  of  the  Indian  province
....  had  induced  Mahmud  to

the  Punjab.  take  1116  extraordinary

step  of  separating  its  civil
and  military’  authorities.  All  administrative
affairs  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  Abul  Hasan
Ali,  known  as  Qazi  Shirazi,  a  man  of  common¬
place  capacity  whom  the  Sultan  in  one  of  his
humours  had  thought  of  pitting  against  the
august  dignity  of  the  great  Khwaja,  while  Ali
Ariyaruk,  a  Turkish  general  of  remarkable  dash


354


LXXV.  MAGAND1YA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  502.


the  morning  early,  duly  robed  and  bowl  in  hand,  the
Lord  went  into  the  township  for  alms  and  was  on  his
way  back  after  his  meal  when  he  came  to  a  wood  into
which  he  went  to  spend  the  noontide,  seating  himself
under  a  tree  for  the  heat  of  the  day.

[502]  Now  the  Wanderer  Magandiya,  in  the  course
of  his  roamings  and  peregrinations  afoot,  came  to  this
fire-hut  and,  seeing  the  grass  mat  laid,  asked  the
brahmin  whom  it  was  for,  observing  that  it  suggested
the  pallet  of  a  recluse.

It  has  been  laid,  Magandiya,  for  the  recluse  Gotama,
the  Sakyan,  who  has  gone  forth  from  a  Sakyan  home
on  Pilgrimage.  Such  is  the  high  repute  noised  abroad
concerning  him  that  he  is  styled  the  Lord,  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  walking  by  knowledge,  blessed,  under¬
standing  all  worlds,  the  matchless  tamer  of  the
human  heart,  teacher  of  gods  and  men,  the  Lord  of
Enlightenment.

It  is  an  annoyance  to  set  eyes  on  the  pallet  of
Gotama,  that  rigid  repressionist.1

Take  care  what  you  say,  Magandiya;  take  care
what  you  say  ;  for,  many  are  the  sages  among  Nobles,
brahmins,  householders  and  recluses  who  are  earnest
believers  in  him  and  trained  in  Noble  knowledge,  in
the  Doctrine,  and  in  what  is  right.

If  I  could  see  him  face  to  face,  I  would  tell  him  to
his  face,  Bharadvaja,  that  he  is  a  repressionist, —
because  our  Scriptures  say  so.

If  you  do  not  mind  my  doing  so,  I  will  tell  this  to
the  recluse  Gotama.

Pray  do  not  scruple  to  tell  him  what  you  have
been  told.


1  Bhunahu  (an  archaic  word  purposely  put  into  the  mouth  of
this  paribbSjaka.as  huveyya  was  put  into  the  mouth  of  Upaka
the  ajivaka  at  I.,  p.  1 71,  vide  supra,  p.121),  is  here  interpreted  by
Bu.  as  hata-vaddhin  and  mariy&da-karaka,  i.e.  “ re¬
pressing  growth  and  regulation-making.’’  He  explains  that,
whereas  the  Buddha  prescribed  watch  and  ward  over  the  senses,
this  Wanderer  believed  in  giving  them  full  scope,  advocating  not
‘a  cloistered  virtue’  but  complete  experience  (‘tout  savoir’)  as
a  stage  to  ultimate  mastery.


38


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


and  courage,  was  appointed  Commander-in-
chief.  The  Qazi  and  the  general  were  indepen¬
dent  of  each  other  and  in  direct  subordination
to  Ghaznin.  To  keep  them  both  in  check  Bui
Kasim  bul  Hakam  was  appointed  superintendent
of  the  news-carriers  and  his  duty  was  tp  report
everything  important  to  Ghaznin.  This  division
of  power  was  intended  to  keep  the  province  in
check  by  preventing  the  concentration  of
authority  in  a  single  hand,  while  by  the  appoint¬
ment  of  a  commander,  whose  sole  business  was
to  wage  war  against  the  Thakurs  ;Rais)
Mahmud  sought  to  make  the  plunder  of
Hindustan  a  permanent  affair.  The  plan
miscarried.  Ariyaruk  bore  down  all  opposition
and  made  himself  supreme  ;  the  Qazi  in  retalia¬
tion  dressed  himself  in  military  clothes  but  was
relegated  to  a  secondary  position.  The  soft
words  of  the  Khwaja,  however,  succeeded  in
alluring  Ariyaruk  to  Balkh  where  he  was
arrested  and  thrown  into  prison  (March  1031).

The  instructions  of  the  Khwaja  to  the  new

..  ,  v„  ...  .  Commander-in-chief,  Ahmad

Ahmad  Nialtigin.  . .  ,  ,  '  ,  .

Nialtigin,  could  leave  him

in  no  doubt  that  cordial  co-operation  between
him  and  the  Qazi  would  be  looked  upon  with
suspicion  at  Ghaznin.  “This  self-sufficient
fellow  of  Shiraz  wishes  the  generals  to  be  under
his  command.  You  must  not  say  anything  to
any  person  respecting  revenue  or  political
matters,  but  you  must  perfprm  all  the  duties  of
a  commander,  so  that  the  fellow  may  not  be
able  to  put  his  liand  on  your  sinews  and  drag
you  down.”  On  Nialtigin’s  arrival  at  Lahore
the  strife  between  the  civil  and  military
authorities  recommenced.  The  Qazi  complained
of  the  semi-regal  state  which  Nialtigiu  was

keeping  up,  of  his  Turkoman  slaves  and  his
possible  designs.  But  the  Khwaja  supported
Nialtigin,  and  the  general  in  high  spirits  led  a
campaign  into  Hindustan.  Marching  with  the

„  rapidity  he  had  learnt

Itcnare.  *  ,  .  .  ,

from  his  master,  he

crossed  the  Jumna  and  the  Ganges  and  appeared
unexpectedly  before  Benares.  It  would  have

been  dangerous  to  remain  long  in  the  city,  but
he  succeeded  in  holding  it  from  morning  to  mid¬
day  during  which  short  interval  the  markets  of
drapers,  jewellers  and  perfumers  were  plun¬
dered,  'though  it  was  impossible  to  do  more.’
The  Qazi  found  his  opportunity.  He  sent  con¬
fidential  reports  to  Gliaznin  of  the  immense
wealth  Nialtigin  had  obtained  and  withheld
from  the  Sultan.  "What  his  intentions  are


nobody  knows  but  he  calls  himself  a  son  of
Mahmud.”  Fear  or  ambition  actually  incited
Nialtigin  to  treason,  and  on  returning  to  Lahore
he  besieged  the  Qazi  in  the  fort  of  Mandkakar.
It  was  a  bid  for  independence.  The  Sultan
consulted  his  high  officers  but  none  of  them  was
inclined  to  lead  a  campaign  to  India  in  the  heat
and  the  rain  (July  1033).  “When  one  runs
away  from  Ahmad  Nialtigin  there  cannot  be
much  honour  left,”  the  minister  of  war
remarked,  “but  the  general  sent  against  him
will  have  enough  to  do  for  there  is  a  strong  force
at  Lahore.”  Ashamed  of  the  pusillanimity  of
his  colleagues  a  Hindu  general  stepped  forward
and  offered  his  sen-ices.  They  were  gratefully
accepted  by  the  Sultan.

The  career  of  Tilak,  the  Hindu,  shows
_..  ...  .  the  rapidity  with  which

Hindus  and  Mussalmans
were  both  forgetting  their  religious  differences
in  the  service  of  a  common  king  and  the
superbly  oriental  feeling  of  loyalty  to  the  salt.
Though  the  son  of  a  barber,  he  was  of  hand¬
some  appearance,  had  studied  ‘dissimulation,
amours  and  witchcraft’  in  Kashmir  and  wrote
excellent  Hindi  and  Persian.  He  had  first
entered  the  service  of  Qazi  Shirazi  but  left  it
for  the  better  prospects  offered  by  the  Khwaja,
to  whom  he  acted  as  a  secretary  and  interpreter
and  was  entrusted  with  the  most  delicate  affairs.
Even  the  Khwaja’s  fall  did  him  no  harm,  for
Mahmud  wanted  clever  and  energetic  young
men  and  Tilak's  fortune  kept  on  improving
Soyaiul  Rai,  the  general  of  the  Indian  troops,
took  the  wrong  side  on  the  succession  question,
and  when  he  was  slain  in  the  skirmish  against
Ayaz,  Masud  appointed  Tilak  to  the  vacant
post.  Thus  he  obtained  the  name  of  a  man.
“Kettle-drums  were  beaten  in  his  quarters
according  to  the  custom  of  Hindu  chiefs  and
banners  with  gilded  tops  were  granted.”  He
had  an  army  under  his  command,  the  tent  and
umbrella  of  a  Ghaznavide  general,  and  sat  in
the  charmed  circle  of  the  Sultan’s  confidential
officers.  “Wise  men  do  not  wonder  at  such
facts,”  says  the  reflective  Baihaki,  “because
nobody  is  born  great — men  became  such."
This  Tilak  had  excellent  qualities  and  all  the
time  he  lived  he  sustained  no  injury  on  account
of  being  the  son  of  a  barber.

Tilak  drew  up  the  plan  of  his  campaign,  and
as  soon  as  it  was  sanctioned  by  the  Sultan,
hastened  against  the  rebel.  Nialtigin  was
unable  to  hold  Lahore  and  fled  towards  the


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN :  A  STUDY


39


desert  and  Tilak  followed  close  on  his  heels
with  an  army  consisting  mostly  of  Hindus.
He  set  a  price  of  500,000  dirhams  on  Nialtigin’s
head,  cut  off  the  right  of  his  Mussalman
supporters  whenever  they  fell  into  his  clutches
and  promised  a  pardon  to  all  who  would  desert
him.  The  policy  had  the  result  desired.
Xialtigin  was  defeated  in  battle  and  his
Turkoman  soldiers  came  over  to  Tilak  in  a
body.  ‘The  span  of  Ahmad’s  life  was  narrowed,
his  men  deserted  and  at  last  matters  reached  so
far  that  the  Jats  and  every  kind  of  infidel  joined
in  the  pursuit.’  He  was  ultimately  slain  by  the
Jats  while  attempting  to  cross  the  Indus.  Masud
abolished  the  plan  of  two  independent  jurisdic¬
tions  in  the  Punjab  and  assigned  the  govern¬
ment  to  his  son.  Prince  Majdud,  with  supreme
command  of  civil  as  well  as  military  affairs.
Nevertheless  the  province  remained  in  a  state  of
turmoil  and  disorder.  Ghaznavide  garrisons
held  the  towns :  Hinduism  and  freedom
reigned  supreme  on  the  country  side.  Nothing
else  was  possible  when  the  government  was  so
incompatible  with  the  spirit  of  the  people.

In  the  winter  of  1037  Masud  decided  on  an
expedition  against  Hansi.
tioTnhC,o“ansi  RXpCdi*  The  condition  of  the
Punjab  was  no  dpubt  un¬
satisfactory  but  the  capture  of  another  Hindu
fort  could  not  make  the  government  stable.
Tlie  Seljuqs  were  becoming  more  powerful
every  day  and  the  Khwaja  advised  him  to  post¬
pone  the  Indian  venture  till  he  had  subdued  his
western  enemies.  “If  my  lord  should  not  go  to
Khorasan,  if  the  Turkomans  should  conquer  a
province,  or  if  they  should  conquer  even  a
village,  and  do  that  which  they  are  accustomed
to  do,  namely,  mutilate,  slaughter  and  burn,
ten  ’holy  wars’  at  Hansi  would  not  com¬
pensate.’’  But  Masud  was  deaf  to  all  advice.
He  said  he  had  made  a  vow  and  must  fulfil  it.
He  marched  by  way  of  Kabul  to  the  bank  of  the
Jhelum  where  an  illness,  owing  to  which  he
gave  up  drinking  for  a  time,  prevented  him
from  moving  further  for  a  fortnight.  Another
march  of  three  weeks  brought  him  to  the  virgin
fort  of  Hansi.  The  garrison  made  a  desperate
defence  and  relaxed  no  effort,  but  the  fort  was
stormed  after  a  siege  of  ten  days  and  its
treasure  divided  among  the  army.  Masud  next
marched  against  Sonpat,  but  its  Rai,  Dipal
Hari,  fled  away  and  his  city  was  annexed  to
the  Punjab.  Another  chief,  named  Ram,  sent
treasures  to  the  invader  but  apologised  that  he


Rise  of  the  Seljuqs.


could  not  come  in  person  owing  to  old  age  and
weakness.

On  returning  to  Ghazniu  the  Sultan  dis¬
covered  that  during  his  absence  the  Seljuqs  had
plundered  Taligan  and  Fariyab  and  were
besieging  Ray.  He  felt  ashamed  of  his  Indian
expedition  and  promised  to  advance  against
them  in  the  coming  summer.  The  Ghaznin-
Seljuq  contest  was  repidly  drawing  to  a  head.

“The  rustic,  perhaps  the  wisest,  portion  of
the  Turkomans,’’  says
Gibbon,  “continued  to
dwell  in  the  tents  of  their  ancestors,  while  the
Turks  of  the  court  and  the  city  were  refined  by
business  and  softened  by  pleasure.’’  No  love
existed  between  the  two  sections  of  the  race.
The  civilised  Turkish  imputation  of  the  great
cities  of  Turkestan  and  the  Turkish  peasants,
who  had  learnt  the  value  of  agriculture,  found
the  ways  of  their  untamed  brethren  intoler¬
able.  For  two  centuries  the  chiefs  of
Maw’araun  Nahr  had  acted  as  the  frontier
outposts  against  the  barbaric  Tartars.  But  the
rise  of  the  Ghaznavide  empire  had  greatly
weakened  their  strength  and  it  was  impossible
for  them  to  discharge  their  former  function  with
efficiency.  The  remnant  of  the  Seljuq  tribes
left  in  Mawaraun  Nahr  was  intensely  hated  by
the  neighbouring  chiefs,  whose  territories  they
constantly  raided.  The  sons  of  Ali  Tigin,  who
had  re-established  the  power  of  their  family  over
Samarkand  and  Bokhara,  refused  to  tolerate-
them,  and  the  ruler  of  Jund,  named  Shah,  for
whom  they  had  an  innate  enmity,  made  a
sudden  raid  on  their  wandering  camp,  and  with
a  double  portion  of  their  vindictive  animosity
slew  eight  thousand  of  their  males  at  a  single
stroke  while  seven  hundred  men,  who  escaped
his  wrath,  fled  to  other  side  of  the  Oxus.  But
in  1031  Yusuf  Qadr  Khan  of  Kasllghar  died  and
in  the  following  year  Altuntash,  the  Ghaznavide
general  whom  Mahmud  had  appointed  governor
of  Khwarazm,  was  ordered  by  Masud  to  advance
against  Ali  Tigin’s  sons  and  in  a  fierce  battle,
which  cost  him  his  life,  he  crushed  their  army
and  deprived  them  of  Bokhara.  Altuntash’s
son,  Harun,  whom  Masud  appointed  to  his
father’s  post  repaid  the  kindness  by  treason  and
soon  met  his  punishment.  The  result  of  these
events  was  to  remove  every  power  that  might
have  prevented  the  march  of  Tartar  tribes  from
eastern  Turkestan  across  Mawaraun  Nahr  to
the  tempting  fields  of  Persia.  The  officers  of
the  empire  proved  totally  incapable  of  either


M'  '•  5°3'  0K  keeping  watch  and  ward.  •  355

pa^Ve^  Ear  Celestuia,'r  which  is  Pure  and  far  sur-

CJn  the  "two^ thC  L°rd  Heard  thG  COnversa« :io"

T  ^SKg.Uf>,  t0LWar^S  evening  from  his  meditations,  the
Lord  betook  him  to  the  brahmin’s  fire-hut  and  sat

°i  grauS  ma,t  Iaid  °ut  for  him-  To  him  came
the  brahmin,  who,  after  salutations,  took  his  seat  to
one  side  and  was  thus  by  the  Lord  addressed  .-—There

wf  rm\ialk’  Jtaradvija,  between  you  and  the
Vanderer  Magandiya  [508]  as  touching  this  same  mat.

uru  " v- ^.surPr,sed  and  startled,  the  brahmin  said  •_
U  hy  that  is  precisely  what  I  was  about  to  tell  you  sir
when  you  anticipated  me!  7  *

,,7Tl\eir  tolk  ,was  interrupted  by  the  return  of  the
Wanderer  to  the  hut,  who,  after  salutations,  sat  down

to  one  side,  to  be  thus  addressed  by  the  Lord  : _ The

eye,  Magandiya — of  which  visible  shapes  are  the
domain  and  the  delight  and  the  satisfaction— has  been
subjugated,  shielded,  safe-guarded  and  kept  under
watch  and  ward  by  the  Truth-finder,  who  preaches  the
Doctrine  of  its  watch  and  ward.  Was  it  with  reference
to  the  eye  that  you  said  the  recluse  Gotama  is  a  rigid
repressions  ?  *


Yes,  it  was  ; — because  our  Scriptures  say  so.

Was  your  remark  made  with  reference  to  the
ear— -which  has  sounds  for  its  domain—,  to  smell—

which  has  odours  for  its  domain — ,  to  the  tongue _

which  has  tastes  for  its  domain — ,  to  the  body _ which

has  touch  for  its  domain — ,  to  consciousness — which
has  states  of  mind  for  its  domain?  Was  it  with
reference  to  these  all  of  which  have  been  subjugated
by  the  Truth-finder,  who  preaches  the  Doctrine  for
their  watch  and  ward— that  you  said  the  recluse
Gotama  is  a  rigid  repressionist  ?

Yes,  it  was; — because  it  is  on  these  lines  that  you
criticize  our  tenets.


What  do  you  think  of  this,  Magandiya  ?— Take  a
man  who  [504]  aforetime  revelled  in  the  visible  shapes
of  which  the  eye  takes  cognizance, — shapes  which  are
desirable,  agreeable,  pleasant  and  attractive,  bound  up


40


TIIIv  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


exterminating  or  subduing  the  migratory  hordes
that  had  crossed  the  Oxus.  They  had  no
settled  habitation  and  it  was  impossible  to  crush
them  in  a  battle.  They  dispersed  and  reunited
with  remarkable  case.  And  yet  it  is  easy  to
imagine  what  the  unexpected  raid  of  the  Tartar
shepherds,  who  came  burning  and  plundering,
meant  to  a  population  accustomed  to  law  and
order.

The  leadership  of  the  immigrants  naturally
fell  to  the  Seljuqs,  and  in  1036  three  chiefs  of
the  tribe,  tired  of  a  continuous  conflict  and  hard-
pressed  for  land,  sent  a  petition  to  the  Sultan
asking  for  the  districts  of  Nisa  and  Far  aw  ah,
the  land  between  the  mountains  on  the  north¬
west  of  Khorasan,  the  Oxus  and  the  desert  of
Kara-Kum,  to  be  granted  to  them  as  pasture.
The  humble  petition  signed  by  Beghu,  brother
of  Izrail  bin  Seljuq,  and  Beghu’s  two  nephews,
Tughril  and  Daud,  concluded  with  a  desperate
threat,  ‘because  they  had  no  place  on  earth  and
none  remained  to  them.’  Masud  bitterly
complained  of  his  father’s  bringing  the  camel-
drivers  into  the  empire,  and  while  beguiling  the
Seljuqs  with  soft  words  sent  a  force  of  15000
against  them.  Bagtaghdi,  the  Ghaznavide
general,  defeated  the  Seljuqs  after  a  stubborn
battle,  but  when  his  men  had  dispersed  in  search
of  plunder,  they  returned  from  the  mountain
defiles  and  practically  annihilated  his  army.
There  was  no  alternative  but  to  concede  the
Seljuq  demands;  but  their  ambitions  expanded
with  their  success,  and  they  began  to  aspire  for
the  cities  of  Merv  and  Sarakhs  situated  on  the
frontier  of  their  territory  and  even  for  the  whole
of  Khorasan.  But  Masud,  when  he  should  have
concentrated  his  forces  on  the  southern  side  of
the  Khorasan  hills,  preferred  the  Pyrrhic
victories  over  the  Hindus  of  Hansi ;  and  during
his  absence  in  1036-37  the  plunder  of  Taliqan
and  Fariyab  enabled  the  Seljuqs  to  organise  their
strength,  and  placed  them  in  a  position  to
challenge  Masud’s  power  in  northern  Persia.

In  the  spring  of  1037  Subashi,  governor  of
Khorasan,  was  ordered  by  Mahmud  to  proceed
against  the  Seljuqs.  He  protested  that  he  was
too  weak,  but  the  Sultan  insisted  on  his  order
being  obeyed,  and  the  reluctant  governor  led
his  troops  to  the  expected  defeat.  At  one  blow
Sarakhs,  Merv  ami  the  whole  of  Persia  came
into  the  hands  of  the  Seljuqs.  Tughril  was
crowned  king  at  Naishapur.  A  permanent
peace  between  Masud  and  the  Seljuqs  was  now
impossible  and  a  victory  gained  by  Masud  at


Sarakhs  in  the  following  year  only  delayed  the
last  stage  of  the  contest.

In  the  summer  of  1040  the  Seljuqs  collected
arpund  Sarakhs,  and
The  campaign  of  ^lasud,  though  he  had
made  no  preparations,
resolved  to  march  against  them.  A  terrible
famine  was  raging  and  his  advisers  requested
him  to  postpone  the  campaign.  Masud  refused
to  listen.  'Hie  Seljuqs  retreated  as  he  advanced
and  concentrated  their  forces  at  Merv.  But
Masud’s  army  became  more  disorganised  at
every  stage.  Grain  had  to  be  brought  from
distant  places  ;  the  heat  was  unbearable  ;  the
enemy  had  filled  up  the  wells  and  harrassed  the
Gliaznavidcs  on  every  side.  Most  of  the  men
were  unhorsed  ;  no  discipline  or  order  remained  ;
and  finally  at  Daudaniqan,  near  Merv,  Masud
was  surrounded  by  the  Seljuqs  and  had  to  offer
battle.  His  generals  disgraced  themselves  by
treason  and  flight  and  the  men  followed  the
example  of  their  officers.  "The  Turkish  troops
went  one  way,  and  the  Indians  another,  and
neither  Arabs  nor  Kurds  could  be  distinguished.’
Only  the  royal  body-guard  remained  round  the
Sultan  who  surprised  friend  and  foe  by  his
valour  and  strength,  and  spear  in  hand  struck
down  all  who  came  within  the  reach  of  his
arms.  But  the  field  was  irretrievably  lost.  "I
saw  Prince  Maudud  son  of  the  Sultan”  says  the
historian,  "galloping  here  and  there,  and
endeavouring  to  rally  his  men,  but  no  one  gave
ear  to  him  for  every  one  was  for  himself.”
The  Sultan  managed  to  extricate  himself  and
reached  his  capital  fearfully  shaken  and
terrorised.  The  Empire  of  Ghaznin  was  no
more.

The  officers  who  had  deserted  the  Sultan  on
the  battlefield  were
Mai  ml  °f  Su,tan  imprisoned.  Prince
Maudud  was  despatched
with  an  army  to  Balkh  but  Masud  himself  was
so  afraid  of  the  Seljuqs  that  he  dared  not  remain
at  Ghazniii.  He  sent  Majdud  to  Multan  and
ordered  Prince  Izad-var  to  hold  the  Afghans  in
check,  and  then  with  the  royal  liarcm  and  the
choicest  treasures  of  Sultan  Mahmud  loaded  on
three  hundred  camels,  he  started  for  Lahore.
Every  one  advised  the  Sultan  against  the  step.
His  desertion  of  the  capital  would  throw  every
thing  into  anarchy  and  disorder.  The  journey
itself  was  full  of  danger.  "I  have  no  very  high
opinion  of  the  fidelity  of  the  Hindus,”  the
H’fl-ir  Khwaja  Mohammad  bin  Abdus  Samad


356


LXXV.  MAGANDIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  505.


with  pleasures  of  sense,  and  exciting.  Suppose  that
later  on,  through  coming  to  know  them  for  what  they
really  are — through  coming  to  know  their  origin  and
cessation,  the  satisfaction  and  the  troubles  they  entail,
and  their  final  outcome — ,  he  discards  all  craving  for
them,  dispels  the  fever  they  bring,  loses  all  appetite  for
them,  so  that  he  dwells  with  his  heart  at  peace  within
him.  What  have  you  to  lay  to  his  charge?

Nothing,  Gotama.

Or  take  the  case  of  a  man  who  similarly  discards
sounds,  odours,  tastes,  or  touch.  What  have  you  to
lay  to  his  charge  ?

Nothing.

Now,  I  myself,  Miigandiya,  in  those  days  when  I  had
a  home,  was  lapped  in  the  pleasures  of  the  five  senses
and  revelled  in  sights,  sounds,  odours,  tastes  and
touch, — which  are  desirable,  agreeable,  pleasant  and
attractive,  bound  up  with  pleasures  of  sense,  and  ex¬
citing.  Three  palaces  were  mine,  one  for  the  rainy
season,  another  for  the  winter,  and  another  for  the
summer.  In  the  palace  for  the  rainy  reason  I  lived
during  the  four  months  of  the  rains,  ministered  to  by
bands  of  women  musicians,  never  coming  down  to  the
lower  floors.  Later  on,  through  coming  to  know  these
pleasures  for  what  they  really  are — through  coming  to
know  their  origin  and  cessation,  the  satisfaction  and
the  troubles  they  entail,  and  their  final  outcome — ,  I
discarded  all  craving  for  them,  dispelled  the  fever  they
bring,  lost  all  appetite  for  them,  so  that  I  dwelt  with
my  heart  at  peace  within  me.  I  observed  others  still
held  by  pleasure  in  passion’s  meshes,  still  the  prey  of
pleasure,  still  afire  with  the  fever  of  pleasure,  still  the
votaries  of  pleasure ;  I  envied  them  not  nor  took
delight  in  such  things.  And  why  ? — Because  there  is  a
delight  which  is  aloof  from  pleasures  of  sense  and  from
things  which  are  wrong  and  is  based  on  the  attainment
of  bliss  Celestial  j  [505]  and  it  was  in  the  enjoyment  of
this  delight  that  I  neither  envied  the  lower  nor  took
delight  therein.

It  is  like  a  wealthy  householder  or  his  son,  of  great


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNI N :  A  STUDY


41


has  inv  lord  in  his  other  servants,  that  he  should
show  his  treasures  to  them  in  the  desert  ?”  But
misfortune  had  only  increased  Masud’s
obstinacy,  and  he  caustically  accused  his  officers
of  treason.  At  the  pass  of  Marigalah  the
H’azir’s  ominous  words  were  fulfilled.  A
number  of  Turkish  and  Hindu  slaves  plundered
a  |>art  of  the  royal  treasure;  and  seeing  that
their  crime  would  not  be  pardoned  by  Masud,
they  besieged  him  in  the  inn  where  he  was
staying  and  placed  his  brother,  the  blind
Mohammad,  on  the  throne.  Masud  was
captured  and  sent  to  the  fort  of  Giri  where  he
was  soon  after  put  to  death.


Placed  on  the  throne  after  nine  years  of
Maudnd  imprisonment,  the  blind

Mohammad  contented
himself  with  dry  bread  while  the  affairs  were
directed  by  his  son,  Ahmad,  who  was  reputed
to  be  mad.  But  Maudud  gave  short  shrift  to
his  father's  murderers.  He  hurried  from  Balkh
to  Ghaznin  and  thence  marched  towards  the
Indus.  Mohammad’s  army,  which  had  marched
to  meet  him,  was  defeated  at  Nagrahar,  and
Mohammad  and  his  sons  were  captured  and
slain  on  the  spot  (1041).  Maudud  built  an  inn
and  a  village  on  the  site  of  liis  victory,  which
he  named  Fathabad,  and  returned  to  Ghaznin
with  his  father’s  coffin.  But  the  battle  of
Nagrahar  had  not  placed  the  Punjab  in  his
hands.  His  brother,  Majdud,  whom  the  late
Sultan  had  appointed  governor  of  Multan,  lost
no  time  in  consolidating  his  power  ;  and  with
the  help  of  the  famous  Ayaz,  he  captured
Lahore  and  established  his  government  from  the
Indus  to  Ilansi  and  Thanesewar.  Maudud
marched  on  Lahore  in  1042  but  Majdud  arrived
just  in  time  to  save  it.  A  critical  battle  was
imminent  and  Maudud’s  amirs  began  to  waver.
But  on  the  morning  of  the  Eid  of  Sacrifice
Majdud  was  found  dead  in  his  tent  ;  a  few  days
later  Ayaz  also  died  :  and  the  Punjab  passed
into  Maudud’s  hands  without  a  battle.  But
further  troubles  were  yet  in  store.


It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  the  Hindu
Rais  would  fail  to  take
llJn,VlW.^wVarVal:  advantagc  of  the  troubles
Nagarkot  &  Lahore.  of  their  enemy,  now  that
the  Scljuqs  had  made
their  task  so  easy.  The  Empire  of  Ghaznin,
shrunk  to  the  dimensions  of  a  little  kingdom,
was  torn  by  civil  dissensions  and  in  a  perpetual
danger  of  being  swallowed  up  by  its  western
6


neighbours.  Maudud  was  in  no  condition  to
defend  his  Indian  possessions  ;  and  the  Rais  of
the  Punjab  and  other  lands,  ’whom  fear  of  the
Mussalmans  had  driven  like  foxes  to  the  forest,
again  raised  their  heads  with  confident  courage.’
'Flic  tide  turned  rapidly.  A  Hindu  confederacy
headed  by  the  Rai  of  Delhi  captured  Hansi  and
Thanesewar  ;  Ghaznavide  officers  were  driven
off  from  town  and  country  ;  the  oppresive  des¬
pondency  that  had  taken  possession  of  the
Hindu  nand  disappeared  ;  and  the  Rais  deter¬
mined  to  crush  the  prestige  of  the  invader  by  a
victory  that  would  bring  joy  to  every  village
of  Hindustan.  Of  the  sacred  places  of
Hinduism  which  Sultan  Mahmud  had  con¬
quered,  Nagarkot  was  the  only  one  he  had
kept  in  hand.  To  the  average  Hindu  mind  the
Muslim  possession  of  Nagarkot  symbolised  the
conquest  of  rcligon  by  brute  force,  and  it  was
the  first  duty  of  the  confederates  to  put  an  end
to  this  standing  insult  to  their  creed.  The
army  of  triumphant  Hinduism  marched  to  the
foot  of  the  fort  and  laid  seige  to  it  with  all  the
sincerity  of  faith.  The  Muslim  garrison  pre¬
pared  for  resistance,  but  its  appeals  for  help  to
the  Amirs  of  Lahore  went  unheeded  and  it  had
no  alternative  but  to  capitulate  on  terms  that
saved  its  life  and  honour.  The  temple  was
rebuilt.  A  new  idol  was  placed  on  the  throne.
The  news  spread  through  all  Hindustan.
Hindu  pilgrims  were  jubilant  and  once  more
came  to  visit  it  in  crowds.  The  market  of
idolatory  was  busier  than  ever.  Islam  had
become  a  losing  cause  and  it  seemed  as  if
another  decisive  blow  would  drive  it  off  from
the  land.  The  Ghaznavide  amirs  of  Lahore,
busy  in  fighting  each  other,  had  forgotten  their
allegiance  to  Maudud  and  turned  a  deaf  ear  to
the  prayers  of  the  garrison  of  Nagarkot.  But
when  they  heard  that  ten  thousand  Hindu
cavalry  supported  by  a  large  infantry  was
marching  against  them,  they  at  last  awoke  to
the  insecurity  of  their  position,  and  taking  an
oath  of  loyalty  to  Maudud,  collected  their  forces
with  a  determination  to  defend  their  city  to  the
last.  Tlie  Hindu  army  retired  without  pressing
the  siege.  Thus  Lahore  and  the  large  towns
west  of  the  Ravi  were  saved.  Over  the  rest  of
the  country  Hinduism  soon  forgot  the
Mussalmans.  Such  traces  of  Islam  as  Mahmud
may  have  left  in  India  were  simply  sw’ept  off.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Hindus  learnt  no  lessons
from  their  adversity.  No  national  government
arose  to  end  the  civil  wars  of  Arynvarta  and


M.  i.  506.


OF  KEEPING  WATCH  AND  WARD.


357


treasures  and  substance,  who,  while  living  a  life  lapped
in  these  divers  pleasures  of  the  five  senses  that  are  so
desirable,  agreeable,  .  .  .  and  exciting,  lives  aright  in
deed,  word  and  thought  so  that  at  his  body’s  dissolution
after  death  he  passes  to  bliss  celestial  to  consort  with
the  Thirty-three  ^ods,  and  there,  surrounded  by  a
throng  of  nymphs  in  the  Grove  of  Gladness,  is  lapped
in  every  celestial  pleasure  of  the  five  senses.  Sup¬
posing  now  that  he  sees  a  householder  or  his  son  on
earth  lapped  in  divers  pleasures  of  sense.  What  do
you  think,  Magandiya  ?  Would  that  new  deity,  who
lives  surrounded  by  a  throng  of  nymphs  in  the  Grove
of  Gladness,  lapped  in  every  celestial  pleasure  of  the
five  senses, — would  he  envy  that  earthly  householder
or  his  son  or  their  earthly  pleasures  ?  Would  he  turn
again  to  earthly  pleasure  ?

No,  Gotama ;  he  would  not; — because  celestial
pleasures  are  choicer  and  more  excellent  than  human
pleasures.

It  was  just  the  same  with  me  who  in  bygone  days,
Magandiya,  when  I  had  a  home,  was  lapped  in  the
pleasures  of  the  five  senses  but  later  on,  through
coming  to  know.  .  .  .  [506]  I  neither  envied  the

lower  nor  took  delight  therein.

It  is  like  a  leper  who,  with  his  limbs  all  sores  and
rottenness,  is  being  eaten  alive  by  worms  and  tears  his
open  wounds  with  his  nails  and  scorches  his  frame
over  a  pit  of  hot  embers.  Suppose  now  his  friends
and  kinsfolk  bring  him  a  leech  who  makes  him  up  a
medicine  whereby  he  is  cured  of  his  leprosy  and  is  hale
and  well,  able  to  get  about  and  go  where  he  will.  If
now  he  sees  another  leper  in  the  selfsame  plight, — do
you  think  he  would  envy  that  leper  either  his  pit  of
embers  or  his  course  of  medicine  ?

No, — because  medicines  are  wanted  not  in  health
but  in  illness.

It  was  just  the  same  with  me,  Magandiya,  who,  in
those  days  when  I  had  a  home,  was  lapped  in  all
pleasures  of  the  five  senses  and  revelled  in  desirable
and  agreeable  sights,  but  later  on,  through  coming  to


42


THU  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


after  a  century  and  a  half  Shababuddin  Ghori
found  the  Hindu  Rais  as  disunited  as  ever.

The  later  history  pf  the  kingdom  of  Ghaznin
need  not  detain  us  for
KSSH'y&iS:  !<»«.  Its  petty  princes
were  content  to  eke  out  a
humble  existence  under  the  Shadow  of  the
Seljuq  Empire  ;  its  unending  palace  intrigues
were  a  source  of  derision  to  its  enemies  and  of
despair  to  its  friends.  Sultan  Maudud  died  in
December  1049  and  his  son,  Masud  n,  a  child
of  four  years,  was  overthrown  by  Maudud’s
brother,  Abul  Hasan  Ali,  who  in  his  turn  was
defeated  by  Abdur  Rashid,  a  son  of  Sultan
Mahmud,  in  1051.  In  1054  Abdur  Rashid  was
put  to  death  by  his  general  Tughril,  the  traitor,
but  the  usurper  was  slain  before  he  had  occupied
the  throne  for  forty  days.  Next  Farrukhzad,
son  of  Masud,  was  brought  out  of  prison  and
reigned  for  seven  years  (1052-1059),  while  his
brother  and  successor  Sultan  Raziuddin  Ibrahim,
a  pious  king,  was  blessed  with  a  long  reign  of
over  forty  years  which  came  to  an  end  in  1099.
He  was  blessed  also  with  thirty  six  sons  and
forty  daughters,  and  the  latter  for  want  of  suit¬
able  princes,  were  married  to  Saiyids  and  pious
scholars.  Sultan  Ibrahim  is  credited  with  two
Indian  expeditions  of  which  he  led  the  second
in  person  (1079-10S0).  Ajodhan,  the  present
Patan  of  Shaikh  Farid  of  Shakarganj,  was
reached  and  marching  thence  the  Sultan  captured
the  fort  of  Rupar,  situated  on  a  hill  with  a  river
on  one  side  and  a  thorny  forest  full  of  snakes
on  the  other.  Still  more  poetic  was  the  con¬
quest  of  Darah,  a  town  of  Khorasan  colonists,
exiled  from  Persia  to  India  by  the  Afrasiyab  of
Shahnamah.  '‘They  worshipped  idols  and
passed  their  lives  in  sin,"  but  their  city  was  con¬
sidered  impregnable  and  consequently  the  Rais
of  India  never  succeeded  in  plundering  the
foreigners  in  their  midst.  But  Ibrahim  cut  his
way  through  the  thick  forest  that  surrounded
Darah  and  reduced  it  by  force.  Apart  from  this
somewhat  mythic  exploit,  Sultan  Ibrahim  was
a  sane  and  sensible  man,  who  never  forgot  the
serious  limitations  of  his  power  and  secured  for
his  subjects  a  long  period  of  uninterrupted


peace.

Ibrahim’s  son,  Alauddin  Masud,  married  a
sister  of  the  Seljuq  Emperor,  Sultan  Sanjar,  and
died  after  a  peaceful  reign  of  sixteen  years  in
1115.  His  son,  Arsalan  Shah,  signalised  his
accession  by  putting  his  brothers  to  death.
Only  one  of  them,  Bahram  Shah,  succeeded  in


escaping  to  his  uncle  Sanjar,  who  drove  out
Arsalan  and  placed  Bahram  on  the  throne.  But
Arsalan  returned  and  beseiged  Bahram  and
Sanjar  once  more  marched  to  Ghaznin  (1 1 17) .
Arsalan  was  captured  and  a  year  later  put  to
death.  Mirizzuddin  Bahram  Shah  was  a  magni¬
ficent  king.  He  twice  defeated  the  governor
of  the  Punjab,  Mohammad  Balialim.  Shaikh
Nizami  dedicated  the  ‘Makhzanul  Asrar’  to
him  and  the  'Kalila  and  Dimna’  was  trans¬
lated  from  Arabic  into  Persian  during  his  reign.
But  a  quarrel  with  the  chiefs  of  Glior  lead  to  the
sack  of  Ghaznin  and  Sultan  Bahrain’s  reign  of
forty  one  years  ended  in  disgrace  and  ruin

(1152)-

Meanwhile  like  all  things  mortal  the  Empire
of  the  Seljuqs  had  been

Simian  Tnphril^,"‘>'Te’  P"*™***  trough  its
career  of  expansion,  con¬
solidation  and  decay.  The  battle  of  Dandaniqan
had  placed  the  Persian  provinces  of  the
Ohaznavide  Empire  in  their  hands.  Sultan
Tughril  (1039-1063),  the  first  Emperor  of  the
dynasty,  fixed  his  capital  at  Ray  and  assigned
Khurasan  to  his  brother  Daud  Jafar  (Chaghri)
Beg.  The  ease  with  which  the  conquered
people  reconciled  themselves  to  the  new  dynasty
is  a  credit  at  once  to  the  moral  character  of  the
House  of  Seljuq  and  the  captivating  power  of
civilization.  The  new  rulers  threw  off  their
barbaric  ways  and  conformed  to  time-honoured
traditions  of  the  Persian  monarchy  ;  the
military  vigour  of  the  Turk  combined  with  the
administrative  genius  of  the  Persian  to  establish
an  empire  that  came  into  contact  and  conflict
with  the  anti-Caliphs  of  Egypt  and  the
Byzantine  Empire  in  the  west  and  the  infidels
of  Cathay  in  the  cast  ;  and  in  the  century  of
peace  that  followed  no  one  regretted  the  fall  of
the  Ohaznavide  administration.  "It  would  be
superfluous”  says  Gibbon,  “to  praise  the  valour

a  Turk,  and  the  ambition  of  Tughril  was
equal  to  his  valour.  In  his  own  dominions
Tughril  was  the  father  of  his  soldiers  and
people  ;  by  a  firm  and  equal  administration
Persia  was  relieved  from  the  evils  of  anarchy;
and  the  same  hands  which  had  been  embrued
in  blood  became  the  guardians  of  justice  and  the
public  peace.”  The  kings  of  Ghaznin  were
allowed  to  eke  out  their  years  of  inglorious
existence  but  the  Mussalmans  and  Christians  of
Iraq  and  Asia  Minor  felt  the  hand  of  ‘the
Conquering  Turk.’  Azarbaijan  was  annexed  to
the  Empire  ;  the  power  of  the  Buwaihids,


358


I.XXV.  MAGANDIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  507


know  those  pleasures  for  what  they  really  are  ...  I
neither  envied  the  lower  nor  took  delight  therein.

[507]  It  is  like  a  leper  who,  with  his  limbs  all  sores
.  .  .  able  to  get  about  and  go  where  he  will.  Suppose
now  two  strong  men  dragged  him  along  by  the  arms
towards  a  pit  of  embers, — do  you  suppose  he  would
struggle  and  resist  ?

Yes,  Gotama; — because  the  fire  and  contact  with  it
would  greatly  torture  and  scorch  him.

Is  this  something  new,  or  was  it  all  there  before?

The  fire  and  the  contact  and  the  scorching  are
no  different  now  to  what  they  were.  The  difference
is  that,  in  the  former  instance  the  leper, — when  his
limbs  were  all  sores  and  rottenness,  and  when  he  was
being  eaten  alive  by  worms  and  was  tearing  his  open
wounds  with  his  nails  and  was  beside  himself — actually
found  in  the  pain  of  contact  with  the  fire  a  change  of
sensation  to  what  seemed  bliss.

Precisely  in  the  same  way,  M&gandiya,  pleasures  of
sense  always  have  been,  always  will  be,  and  always  are
painful  in  contact,  always  torturing  and  scorching.
And  those  who  are  held  by  pleasure  in  passion’s
meshes,  who  are  still  the  prey  of  pleasure,  still  afire
with  the  fever  of  pleasure,  still  the  votaries  of  pleasure
and  beside  themselves, — all  these  actually  find  in  the
pain  of  contact  with  pleasures  of  sense  a  change  of
sensation  to  what  to  them  seems  bliss.

It  is  like  a  leper  who,  with  his  limbs  all  sores  and
rottenness,  while  he  is  being  eaten  alive  by  worms,  and
while  he  tears  his  open  wounds  with  his  nails,  scorches
his  frame  over  a  pit  of  embers.  The  more  that  leper
does  so,  the  more  do  his  open  sores  [508]  stink  with
the  noisome  stench  of  putrefaction,  and  he  finds  but
sorry  relief  and  satisfaction  from  scratching  their
itching  surface.  It  is  just  the  same  with  those  who,
being  held  by  pleasure  in  passion’s  meshes,  who,  being
still  the  prey  of  pleasure,  still  afire  with  the  fever  of
pleasure,  and  still  the  votaries  of  pleasure,  continue  on
with  pleasures  of  sense ; — the  longer  they  go  on,  the
stronger  grows  their  craving  for  passion,  and  the  hotter


M.  i.  509.


OF  KEEPING  WATCH  AND  WARD.


359


rages  the  fever  of  passion  within  them,  and  they  find
but  sorry  relief  and  satisfaction  from  their  indulgences.

Have  you  either  seen  or  heard  of  a  prince  or  great
lord  who,  being  lapped  in  pleasure,  has  ever  lived — or
is  now  living — or  indeed  will  ever  live — with  his  heart
at  peace  within  him,  unless  he  has  first  discarded  all
craving  for  sensuous  pleasures,  has  dispelled  the  fever
they  bring,  and  has  lost  all  appetite  for  them  ?

No,  Gotama.

Quite  right,  Magandiya ; — nor  have  I.  But  all
recluses  and  brahmins  who  have  been — or  now  are —
or  hereafter  will  be — triumphant  over  pleasures  of
sense,  with  their  hearts  at  peace  within  them, — all,  all,
achieve  their  triumph  through  realizing  how  pleasure
originates  and  how  it  ends,  and  what  are  its  satisfac¬
tions,  perils  and  vanity.

This  was  the  occasion  of  the  Lord’s  solemn
utterance : —

Chief  boon  is  Health  ;  Nirvana's  bliss  stands  first ;

Of  Deathless  Paths  the  Eightfold  leads  to  Peace.

Hereupon,  Mfigandiya  said  to  the  Lord  : — It  is
wonderful,  Gotama,  it  is  marvellous  how  truly  you
say  that —

[509]  Chief  boon  is  Health  ;  Nirvana's  bliss  comes  first.

I  myself  have  also  heard  it  said  by  the  Wanderers  of
old,  teachers  themselves  and  the  teachers  of  teachers,
that —

Chief  boon  is  Health  ;  Nirvana's  bliss  stands  first.

There  is  complete  accord  here,  Gotama.

An  this  line  which  you  have  heard  from  the  Wan¬
derers  of  old,  Magandiya,  what  is  Health  ?  and  what  is
Nirvana?

Here  the  Wanderer  stroked  his  own  limbs  and
said  : — This  is  Health,  Gotama ;  this  is  Nirvana.
For,  at  the  present  time  I  am  in  health  and  well-being,
without  any  ailments  at  all.

It  is  just  like  a  man  blind  from  birth,  Magandiya,  who


SULTAN  MAHMUD  OF  GHAZNIN:  A  STUDY


43


which  Mahmud  had  crushed  in  Isfahan  and
Ray,  was  finally  annihilated  in  Baghdad  and  the
Commander  of  the  Faithful,  relieved  from  the
vexations  to  which  he  had  been  exposed  by  the
presence  and  poverty  of  the  Persian  dynasty,
bestowed  on  Tughril  the  titles  of  ‘Sultanud
Doulah’  and  'Yamini  Amirul  Moininin.’  A
Seljuq  general,  I-tsiz,  over-ran  Syria  and  even
reached  the  Nile,  while  the  Byzantine  Empire
felt  the  vigour  of  the  Turkish  troops  across  a
frontier  of  six  hundred  miles  from  Tauras  to
Erzrum.  The  contest  was,  hpwever,  undecided
when  Tughril  died  at  the  age  of  seventy-two.

Alp  Arsalan  (1063-1072),  son  of  Daud,  who
Alp  Arsalan.  succeed  to  the  empire  of

his  uncle  after  a  brief
period  of  civil  wars,  continued  the  eastern  con¬
quests  of  Tughril.  Armenia  and  Georgia  were
annexed  and  three  years  (1068-1071)  of  war
decided  the  fate  of  the  Asiatic  possessions  of
Constantinople.  The  initiative  was  taken  by
the  Emperor,  Romanus  Diogenese,  who  advanced
with  a  hundred  thousand  soldiers  and  an
auxiliary  force  of  disorderly  allies.  After  three
well  fought  campaigns  the  Turks  were  driven
beyond  the  Euphrates  and  when  the  Sultan
advanced  against  him  with  forty  thousand  men,
the  Exnperpr  contemptuously  ordered  the
barbarian  to  cede  the  palace  and  city  of  Ray  as
the  condition  of  peace.  But  the  Sultan’s  “rapid
mid  skilful  evolutions  distressed  and  dismayed
the  superior  numbers  of  the  Greeks,”  and  at  the
battle  of  Mulazgird  (Madikerb)  the  Turkish
veterans  crushed  the  power  of  their  vain  and
disorganised  opponents  beyond  the  possibility
of  redemption.  Romanus  Diogenese  brought  a
captive  to  the  court,  was  treated  with  that
superb  generosity  which  Alp  Arsalan  showed
his  fallen  enemies.  Having  accomplished  his
western  mission,  the  Sultan  marched  eastward
for  the  conquest  of  Mawarun  Nahr.  But  an
assassin’s  dagger  cut  short  the  Sultan’s  life  after
he  had  crossed  the  Oxus  and  brought  his  con¬
quering  career  to  an  untimely  end  after  a  reign
of  nine  years  and  a  half.

Tlic  reign  of  Alp  Arsalan’s  son,  Malik  Shah,
Malik  Shah.  (1072-1092)  was  a  period  of

prosperity  and  peace,  and
shows  the  Seljuq  Empire  at  its  best.  The  un¬
realised  scheme  of  his  father  was  accomplished
by  the  conquest  of  Mawarun  Nahr  and  Malik
Shah’s  Khulba  was  read  beyond  the  Jaxartcs  at
Kashghar.  But  during  the  rest  of  his  reign  the


Sultan  kept  perambulating  his  extensive  empire
and  supervising  its  civil  administration  so  that
“few  departed  from  his  diu'an  without  reward
and  none  without  justice.”  The  calendar  which
had  fallen  into  disorder  was  reformed  by  a
committee  of  mathematicians  (including  the
astronomer-poet,  Omar  Khayyam),  who  inaugu¬
rated  the  Jalali  era  of  Malik  Shah,  ‘a  computa¬
tion  of  time,  which  surpasses  the  Julian,  and
approaches  the  accuracy  of  the  Gregorian  style.’
With  the  name  of  Alp- Arsalan  and  Malik  Shah
is  intimately  associated  the  name  of  their  great
minister,  Nizamul  Mulk,  author  of  the  ‘Siyasat
N amah, (40)  and  one  of  the  most  famous  uazirs  of
the  East.  Deeply  learned  in  all  the  political
wisdom  of  the  day,  a  patron  of  literature  and
art  to  whom  the  ‘Nizamiah’  University  of
Bagdad  owed  its  establishment,  Nizamul  Mulk
served  the  Seljuq  dynasty  with  zeal  and  devo¬
tion  for  thirty  years  and  won  for  it  the  loyalty
of  its  subjects  and  the  grateful  rememberance
of  posterity.  But  the  influence  of  the  queen,
Turkan  Khatun,  who  wished  to  secure  the
succession  of  her  son,  Mahmud,  alienated  the
Sultan’s  mind  from  him,  and  at  the  age  of
ninety  three  years  the  venerable  statesman  was
dismissed  by  his  master,  accused  by  his  enemies,
and  murdered  by  a  fanatic.  Malik  Shah  him¬
self  died  in  tha  following  month.

Malik  Shah’s  two  sous,  Barkiyaruk  (1092-
1104)  and  Mohammad  (1104-1117),  were
succeeded  by  their  brother,  Sanjar  (1117-1157),
‘a  great,  dignified  and  mighty  monarch,’  under
whom  affairs  again  came  back  to  ‘the  highway
of  legality  and  the  beaten  track  of  equity  and
justice,'  from  which  they  had  been  unhappily
deflected  during  the  reigns  of  his  predecessors.
Irak,  Khurasan  and  Mawarauu  Nahr  increased
in  population  and  prosperity  ;  the  empire  was
more  extensive  than  it  had  been  ever  before.
Nevertheless  Sanjar 's  long  reign  was  a  period
of  disintegration  and  decay.  Provincial  gover¬
nors  (atahaks)  began  to  aspire  for  independence ;
a  new  race  of  Turkomans  poured  across  the
Jaxartcs  ;  and  by  slow  degrees  the  foundations
of  the  Empire  were  sapped.  Sanjar  struggled
valiantly  against  the  rising  deluge  and  won
seventeen  out  of  the  nineteen  great  battles  he  is
said  to  have  fought.  But  he  did  not  know  how
to  take  advantage  of  his  successes,  and  his

(40)  The  Siyasat  Santa  It  is  sometimes  supposed  to
be  a  treatise  on  political  science,  bnt  it  is  really  a  book
on  political  trickery  and  a  violent  pamphlet  against
the  ‘heretics.’  Its  historical  value  is  very  great.


360  LXXV.  MAGANDIYA-SUTTA.  M.  i.  5 10.

cannot  see  dark  and  light  things,  or  blue  or  yellow
or  red  or  pink  things ;  who  cannot  see  level  or  rough
ground,  the  stars,  or  the  sun  and  moon.  Suppose,  on
hearing  a  man  with  sight  say  that  a  goodly  white  robe
without  blemish  was  a  fine  thing  to  possess,  this  blind
man  were  to  sally  forth  to  get  one  for  himself,  only  to
be  fobbed  off  with  greasy,  grimy,  trashy  stuff  which
was  vouched  for  as  all  right.  Suppose  now  he  took  it,
put  it  on,  and  expressed  his  delight  by  saying  that
a  goodly  white  robe  without  blemish  was  a  fine  thing
to  possess.  Do  you  suppose  that,  if  the  man  blind  from
birth  had  had  knowledge  and  vision,  he  would  have
taken  that  greasy,  grimy,  trashy  stuff  and  have  been
so  pleased  with  it  ?  Or  did  he  take  it  on  trust  from
the  man  who  could  see  ?

Only  from  lack  of  knowledge  and  vision,  and  out  of
trust  in  him  who  could  see,  would  the  blind  man  have
been  deluded  like  that.

[510]  Just  in  the  same  way  non-conformist  Wan¬
derers,  being  blind  and  without  eyes,  lacking  know¬
ledge  of  Health  and  Vision  of  Nirvana,  yet  utter  the
verse —

Chief  boon  is  Health  ;  Nirvana's  bliss  stands  first.

It  was  the  Arahats  all-enlightened  of  old  who  uttered
the  verses —

Chief  boon  is  Health  ;  Nirvana's  bliss  stands  first ;

Of  Deathless  Paths  the  Eightfold  leads  to  Peace.

By  degrees  it  has  now  filtered  down  to  the  everyday
man.  Though  this  body,  Magandiya,  is  a  disease,  a
pustulence,  a  pang,  an  anguish,  an  ailment,  you  say
that  here  is  Health  and  Nirvana.  For,  you  have  not
that  Noble  Eye  wherewith  to  know  Health  and  to
have  vision  of  Nirvana.

I  believe  the  reverend  Gotama  can  teach  me  how  to
know  Health  and  have  vision  of  Nirvana.

It  is  just  like  a  man  blind  from  birth,  Magandiya,
unable  to  see  dark  and  light  things  ...  or  the  sun
and  moon,  to  whom  his  friends  and  kinsfolk  bring  a


44


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


defeats  were,  consequently,  more  important  than
lib  victories.  In  1141  a  member  of  Kara-
Khata-i  tribes,  who  had  migrated  into
Mawaraun  Nahr,  rebelled  against  the  Empire.
Sanjar  was  defeated  near  Samarkand  and  the
whole  of  Mawaraun  Nahr  passed  into  infidel
hands.  Another  body  of  emigrants,  the  Gliazz
Turks,  defeated  and  captured  the  Sultan  in  1153
and  carried  him  about  as  a  captive  in  their  camp
for  three  years.  When  the  Sultan  at  last
escaped  to  his  capital,  the  empire  had  ceased  to
exist.  Khorasnn  had  been  devastated  by  the
Ghazz  ;  the  atabaks  had  thrown  off  their
allegiance  to  the  central  power;  and  the  last  of


the  “Great  Seljuqs”  closed  his  eyes  after  a
strenuous  life  of  seventy  two  years  spent  in  an
unsuccessful  defence  of  the  work  of  his  ances¬
tors  and  the  civilisation  they  had  inherited.

Under  the  protection  of  the  Scljuq  Dynasty
Persian  civilisation  reached  a  height  which  it
has  never  since  attained.  The  middle  of  the
twelfth  century  witnessed  the  final  extinction  of
the  kingdom  of  Ghaznin  and  the  collapse  of  the
Scljuqian  empire.  The  kingdoms  of  Kliwarzm
and  Ghor  rose  on  the  ground  thus  left  vacant,
but  neither  had  grown  to  its  full  stature  when
the  Muslim  world  was  over-whelmed  by  the
Mongol  barbarians.


GANDHI  CAP  :  A  STUDY.
By  Mr.  A.  S.  Wadia,  m.a.


“The  gentle  man  in  Ktmddnr,

Happy  and  care-free,

With  nothing  heavy  on  his  head,

Except  a  Gandhi  Cap."

When  long  ago  Kipling  spoke  of — “East  is
East  and  West  is  West,”  and  of  the  twain  never
meeting  he  was  saying  a  truism  that  is  seldom
true.  For,  from  the  dim  past  of  civilisation  the
East  and  tlic  West  have  ever  met  and,  with  the
increasing  means  of  communication  and  easier
exchange  of  ideas,  shall  continue  to  meet
increasingly  on  the  lower  rungs  of  material
wants  and  desires  as  on  the  higher  planes  of
spiritual  hope  and  moral  idealism.  Roads  and
railways,  beggars  and  daggers  arc  much  the
same  go  East,  go  West.  And  in  their  elemental
loves  and  hates  as  in  their  highest  art  and
philosophy,  there  is  no  real  cleavage  between  the
two,  even  though  clever  writers  may  set  about
creating  one.

Rut  there  is  one  matter  in  which  the  East  is
East  and  the  West  is  West.  There  is  one  point
on  which  the  pair  have  for  all  time  agreed  to
disagree.  And  it  is  in  respect  of  the  covering
for  the  head.  In  the  West  the  headgear  is  only
an  item  of  a  man's  attire,  in  the  East  it  is  its
crest  and  crown.  “The  changeless  East”  has


changed  in  many  aspects,  even  in  the  matter  of
its  dress,  but  it  has  not  changed  in  the  matter
of  its  head-dress.  A  Raja  or  a  Maharaja  may
cast  off  his  jewelled  court-dress  to  don  the  simple
khaki  tunic  of  a  British  General,  but  he  would
never  cast  off  his  turban  to  wear  the  forage-cap
or  the  regulation  helmet.  An  Iudian  political
gentleman  may  appear  in  the  Council-Chamber
decked  out  in  frock-coat  and  striped  trousers,
but  his  head  will  with  rare  exception  be  crowned
by  his  own  national  headgear.

This  contrast  between  the  East  and  the  West
is  never  more  sharply  brought  out  than  in  the
way  the  headgear  is  treated  at  ceremonial
functions.  On  such  occasions  the  Westerner
reverently  takes  off  hb  hat,  while  the  Eastern
religiously  keeps  it  on.  Thb  is  because  with  the
Eastern  the  headgear  is  a  living  thing — almost
a  part  of  him.  To  treat  it  slightingly  would  be
tantamount  to  treating  its  owner  slightingly.
One  may,  so  to  say,  knock  sparks  off  a  typical
Oriental  without  much  fear  of  rousing  his  temper
or  ruffling  hb  placidity.  But  let  his  headgear  be
jestingly  knocked  off  or  even  accidentally  dis¬
placed  and  on  the  instant  the  long  slumbering
embers  of  his  wrath  would  flare  up  and  one
should  count  oneself  distinctly  lucky,  if  one
emerged  from  tlb  contretemps  safely  without


M.  i.  511.  OF  KEEPING  WATCH  AND  WARD.  361

leech  who  makes  him  up  a  medicine  whereby  he  fails
to  give  him  eyes  or  to  clarify  them.  Do  you  not
suppose  the  leech  will  have  taken  a  lot  of  toil  and
trouble  over  it  ?

Yes,  Gotama.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Magandiya,  I  might  teach  you
what  Health  and  Nirvana  are,  but  you  would  not
either  know  Health  or  have  vision  of  Nirvana; — but  I
should  have  trouble  and  travail.

[511]  I  believe  the  reverend  Gotama  can  teach  me
how  to  know  Health  and  have  vision  of  Nirvana.

It  is  just  like  a  man  blind  from  birth,  Magandiya,
unable  to  see  anything,  who  hears  a  man  with  sight
say  that  a  goodly  white  robe  without  blemish  .  .  .
vouched  for  as  all  right.  Suppose  now  that  he  takes
it  and  puts  it  on  ;  and  suppose  further  that  his  friends
and  kinsfolk  bring  him  a  leech,  who  makes  him  up  a
medicament  for  application  above  and  beneath,  and
solvents,  and  cooling  ointments,  and  nasal  injections,
so  that  he  gives  the  blind  man  his  eyes  and  clarifies
them, — with  the  consequence  that  he  quite  loses  his
passion  for  that  grimy,  greasy,  trash  and  regards  the
fellow  who  sold  it  him  as  no  friend  but  as  an  enemy
who  ought  to  be  put  to  death  for  having  cheated,
tricked  and  deluded  him  by  saying  that  greasy,  grimy
trash  was  a  goodly  white  robe  without  blemish.

Just  in  the  same  way,  Miigandiya,  if  I  were  to  teach
you  what  Health  is  and  what  Nirvana  is,  and  if  you
came  to  knowledge  and  vision  of  them,  then,  so  soon
as  you  got  eyes  to  see  with,  you  would  quite  discard
your  passion  for  what  breeds  the  five-fold  maintenance
of  existence,  and  your  thought  would  then  be  : — Long
have  I  been  cheated,  tricked  and  deluded  by  this  heart
of  mine  ;  for,  I  was  for  ever  engaged  in  encouraging
things  material,  feelings,  perceptions,  plastic  forces,
and  consciousness,  so  that  this  encouragement  led  to
existence,  which  led  to  birth,  which  led  to  decay  and
death  with  sorrow  and  lamentation,  Ill  and  tribulation.
— [512]  Thus  originates  all  that  makes  up  the  sum
of  Ill.


GANDHI  CAP:  A  STUDY


45


attracting  a  large  crowd  or  being  run  in  for
“assault  and  battery.”

This  strange  reverence  for  his  headgear  and
the  extraordinary  caution  the  Oriental  displays
fpr  its  safety  find  a  queer  echo  in  India  in  the
invocation  the  mendicants  send  up  in  the  streets,
— an  invocation  which  provides  that  work-free
class  with  a  never-failing  man  tram  of  at  once
tickling  the  ingrained  vanity  of  the  passer-by
and  of  preying  upon  his  superstitious  fears.  To
the  beggar  who  first  originated  the  phrase —
gaddi-topi-salamat ,* — the  mendicant  brotherhood
of  Western  India  owe  a  statue  of  gold  because  of
this  magic  phrase  of  his  invention,  thousands  of
his  confreres  all  over  the  Presidency  owe  their
bread  and — their  wealth.

It  is  not  so  much  for  the  honorific  use  that  it
is  put  to  as  for  its  representative  character  that
the  headgear  of  an  Eastern  is  remarkable.  Each
particular  headgear  represents  some  particular
caste,  class  or  creed — or  more  truly  its  division
and  sub-divison.  But  there  is  one  exception  to
this  fixed  rule.  This  exception  represents
neither  caste,  nor  class,  nor  creed,  but  stands,
on  the  contrary,  for  the  sinking  of  all  caste
prejudices,  class  divisions,  and  credal  differences
into  the  great  melting-pot  of  Indian  unity  and
International  solidarity.  And  that  exception  is
the  Gandhi  Cap.  In  this  commendable  effort  to
do  away  with  all  manner  of  differences  and
divisons  among  a  great  mass  of  humanity,  it  is
immensely  and  immediately  helped  by  the  fact
that  it  is  made  of  a  material  that  is  atoncc  plain
and  appealing  and  capable  of  being  produced
anywhere  and  of  being  worn  by  anyone  and  is
designed  after  a  headgear  that  is  pre-eminently
chaste  in  form  and  unquestionably  the  most
ancient  in  existence.  In  perhaps  the  oldest
rock-sculpture  of  the  world,  namely  the  Persian
bas-reliefs  of  Bchistan,  the  cap  which  the  winged
figure  above  that  of  Darius  wears  is  the  original
inspirer  and  unconscious  designer  of  the  Gandhi
Cap.  Thus  taking  after  the  most  ancient  cover¬
ing  for  the  head  known  to  men,  its  shape  and
form  have  of  long  sunk  deep  in  the  heart  of
humanity  and,  in  the  case  of  India,  promise  to
outlive  those  of  the  oldest  headgear  at  present
in  existence  there.  Add  to  these  basic  advantages
ot  age  and  design,  the  simplicity  and  inexpensive-
ness  of  the  material  of  which  it  is  made,  and  it
would  not  be  difficult  to  account  for  its  wide

•Mny  your  throne  (the  source  of  voor  power)  and
yonr  cap  (the  insignia  of  vour  honour)  be  kept  safe
for  you.


I>opularity  among  the  great  surging  masses  and
numerous  cultured  classes  of  modern  India.
But  amid  all  its  many  advantages  and  present
popularity  there  is  one  drawback,  and  it  is  a
serious  drawback,  in  as  much  as  it  touches  a
vital  point  in  human  psychology.

Of  all  the  gifts  of  God  to  man,  there  is  none
so  worthy  of  his  wonder  and  gratitude  as  the
gift  of  colour.  Imagine  what  the  world  and  our
own  existence  would  be  if  the  element  of  colour
were  wiped  out  of  them !  If,  for  instance,
the  blue  were  taken  from  the  sky  and  the  gold
from  the  sunshine,  the  green  from  the  leaves
and  the  crimson  from  the  blood !  How  cold  and
ghastly  would  the  world  and  we  look  in  such  a
horrible  contingency?  If  we  could  but  envisage
for  an  instant  leprous  white  creatures  living  in
a  chalky  white  world  under  a  snow  white  sky
flooded  with  an  incjandcscent  white  sunshine,
we  would  soon  realise  what  we  owe  to  this
greatest  of  God's  gifts  to  the  sight  of  man.  And
yet  the  Gandhi  Cap  deliberately  turns  its  back
on  it  and  stands  in  fact  in  open  opposition, —
challenging,  as  it  were,  its  utility  and  its
necessity.  But  for  a  design  or  a  project,
formed  in  the  brain  of  man,  to  challenge
the  utility  or  question  the  necessity  of  another
planned  in  the  laboratory  of  nature,  is  to  sow
the  seed  of  its  own  undoing  and  hasten  the  day
of  its  own  extinction.  That  is  the  great  danger
ahead  of  the  Gandhi  Cap.

In  its  perfervid  passion  for  simplicity  and
chasteness,  it  thwarts  one  of  the  elemental  crav¬
ings  of  human  nature  and  drives  those  fine
virtues  themselves  to  the  borderline  of  affecta¬
tion  and  insipidity.  Let,  threforc,  a  few  streaks
of  colour  be  added  to  the  Cap  to  liven  up  its
Otherwise  dead  white  dulness  and  satisfy  the
irrepressible  thirst  of  human  kind  for  colour.

And  what  streaks  of  colour  could  set  it  off
so  well  as  red  and  blue  arranged  after  a  certain
well-known  design  and  blended  appropriately
with  a  cross  of  its  own  pure  white.  These
colours  of  St.  George  and  St.  Andrew  with  the
white  cross  of  St.  Patrick  liave  on  the  whole
served  the  native  land  of  Gandhi  Cap  and  its
people  well  and  faithfully  for  well-nigh  two
centuries  and  might  justly  be  expected  to  serve
them  equally  well  and  faithfully  for  a  long  time
to  come.  A  small  diamond-shaped  badge  of
those  colours  sewn  on  one  Side  of  the  Cap  won’t
affect  its  inherent  integrity  nor  mar  its  evident
simplicity,  but  help,  on  the  contrary,  to  sef  off


362


LXXV.  MAGANDIYA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  513.


I  believe  the  reverend  Gotama  can  teach  me  how  I
shall  be  blind  no  more  when  I  rise  from  this  seat.

Then,  Magandiya,  consort  with  the  good.  Con¬
sorting  with  the  good,  you  will  hear  sound  doctrine,
and  so  will  walk  in  accordance  with  the  Doctrine,  and
thereby  will  come — of  and  by  yourself — to  know  and
to  see  that  these  things  are  diseases,  pustulences
and  pangs  ;  that  here  they  are  stilled  for  ever  ;  that  to
still  the  stuff  that  makes  them  leads  on  for  you  to  the
stilling  of  continued  existence,  which  in  turn  leads  on
to  the  stilling  of  birth  and  so  of  decay  with  sorrow  and
lamentation,  Ill  and  tribulation. — Thus  ends  all  that
makes  up  the  sum  of  Ill.

Hereupon,  the  Wanderer  Magandiya  said  to  the
Lord: — Marvellous,  Gotama;  quite  marvellous.  Just
as  a  man  might  set  upright  again  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in
Sutta  No.  73)  .  .  .  [513]  was  admitted  and  confirmed
of  the  Lord’s  following.  Nor  was  it  long  before  the
reverend  Magandiya,  dwelling  alone  and  aloof,  .  .  .
(etc,  as  in  Sutta  No.  73)  .  .  .  was  numbered  among
the  Arahats.


LXXVI.  SANDAKA-SUTTA.

OF  FALSE  GUIDES.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  while  the  Lord  was
staying  at  KosambI  in  the  Ghosita  pleasaunce,  the
Wanderer  Sandaka  was  living  at  Pilakkha-guha  with
a  great  company  of  Wanderers,  some  five  hundred
in  number.  Rising  from  his  meditations  towards
evening,  the  reverend  Ananda  proposed  to  the  Alms¬
men  to  go  to  Deva-Ka^a  Pool  to  visit  the  cavern.
They  agreeing,  Ananda  took  a  number  of  them  there
with  him.  At  the  time,  Sandaka  was  sitting  with  his
great  company  of  Wanderers,  who  were  making  a
great  noise  with  their  voices  raised  and  loud  in  all
manner  of  low  and  beastly  talk, — about  princes,  bandits,
great  lords’  armies,  terrors,  battles,  meats  and  drinks,
clothes,  beds,  garlands,  perfumes,  relations,  villages,


46


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


those  virtues  and  make  the  Cap  acceptable  to
millions  more  who  find  it  impossible  to  take  to  it
in  its  present  dull  dead  plainness.  That  little
coloured  diamond  will  besides  save  Gandhi  Cap
from  degenerating,  as  it  is  fast  doing,  into  a
purely  sectional  rag  and  convert  it  into  a  truly


national  emblem  which  will  for  once  mark  the
falsehood  of  Kipling’s  short-sighted  saying  and
prove  for  ever  the  truth  of  Tennyson’s  larger-
visioned  hope  that  “East  and  West  ,  like  life  and
death,  can  mix  their  dim  lights  to  broaden  into
boundless  day.”


AUTHORS  AND  THEIR  BOOKS  :
Bv  Mr.  R.  L.  Megroz.*


The  British  Premier.

Looking  back  o\tr  my  reading  since  last
Spring,  I  find  first  a  book  published  early  in  the
year — The  Man  of  To-morrow  by  "Iconoclast”
(Parsons  8/6).  As  “The  Man  of  Tomorrow”  is
James  Ramsay  Macdonald,  the  present  Prime
Minister  of  Great  Britain,  it  is  worthy  of  attention
from  intelligent  readers.  Mr.  Macdonald’s
romantic  career  reminded  me  of  a  book  which
my  mother  presented  to  me  on  my  twelfth  birth¬
day,  a  fat  green  volume  entitled  :  “The  Story  of
Self-Made  Men ;  or,  Industry,  Perseverance,
Application  and  Enterprise  Exemplified  in  Real
Life”.  The  author,  R.  G.  Hcdderwick,  M.A.,
explained  in  a  preface  that  his  examples  liad  been
selected  in  order  “that  the  volume  may  be  pure¬
ly  and  entirely  devoted  to  instance  of  continued
hard  work”.

I  am  afraid  the  last  clause  would  have  damned
Mr.  W.  H.  Davies,  our  deservedly  famous  living
poet,  who  was  by  turns,  shop  boy,  farm  labourer,
tramp,  super-tramp,  and  first-rate  poet;  but  the
man  we  are  considering  as  author  as  well  as
Prime  Minister  would  certainly  have  been  taken
to  the  capacious  bosom  of  Mr.  Hedderwick.

“The  Story  of  Self-Made  Men”,  rather
battered,  full  of  idle  pencil  sketches  of  my  boy
friends,  lies  now  beside  my  typewriter.  The
frontispiece  shows  Bernard  Palissy,  "Glass
Painter,  Salt  Surveyor,  and  Enamel  Discoverer”
sitting  "in  contemplation”,  an  attitude  which  he
seems  rarely  to  have  found  time  for.  There  is

•Author  of  "Personal  poems”;  “Walter  de  l-a  Mare,
a  Biographical  and  Critical  Study "  ;  "Poetry  and  the
SexuaJ  impulse",  etc.


a  picture  of  Robert  Bloomfield,  “Farm  Boy,
Shoemaker,  Seal  Office  Official,  Harp  Maker,  and
Poet”  at  work  in  the  shoemaker’s  shop.  Other
texts  for  the  lesson  of  "Industry,  Perseverance
and  Enterprise”  are  William  Hutton,  "Weaver
Bookbinder,  Bookseller,  Paper  Merchant,  and
Author”;  William  Cobbett,  "Farm  Boy,
Gardener,  Clerk,  Soldier,  Teacher,  Newspaper
Proprietor,  M.  I\  and  Reformer”;  William
Gifford,  “Sailor,  Shoemaker,  Tutor,  Translator,
and  Editor”;  Christopher  Columbus;  Robert
Burns ;  John  Dollands,  Sir  Richard  Arkwright ;
and  Daniel  Defoe,  "Butcher's  son.  Soldier,  Stock¬
ing  Dealer,  Merchant,  Tiletnaker,  Reformer,  and
Author”.  One  of  uhe  pictures  I  have  always
remembered  shows  James  Ferguson,  “Farm  Boy,
Miller’s  Apprentice,  Mechanist,  Miniature
Painter,  and  Astronomer”,  engaged  in  his  “First
Studies  in  Astronomy.”  Ferguson  was  bom  in
1710,  a  few  miles  from  Keith,  a  village  in
Banffshire,  in  the  north  of  Scotland.  While  still
a  farm-boy  he  began  to  study  the  midnight
heavens.  The  picture  shows  him  lying  on  his
back  in  a  field,  holding  at  arm’s  length  a  stretched
thread  with  beads  on  it,  and  measuring  the  starry
angles.

*  *  *  *

James  Ramsay  Macdonald,  Blacksmith’s  Son,
I 'arm  Boy,  Pupil  Teacher,  Science  Student,
Political  Agent,  Invoice  Clerk,  Private  Secretary,
Reformer,  Journalist,  Author,  M.  P.,  and  now
Prime  Minister,  was  born  in  Morayshire,  close
to  the  Grampians,  at  the  little  fishing  village  of
Lossiemouth.  But  he  was  bom  there  in  1866,
rather  too  late  for  inclusion  in  the  worthy  Mr.
Ileddcrwiek’s  book.


M.  i.  514.


OF  FALSE  GUIDES.


363


townships,  cities,  countries,  women,  warriors,  roads,
wells,  kinsfolk  departed,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  with
chatter  about  world  and  ocean,  and  [514]  about  being
and  not-being.

When  from  some  way  off  Sandaka  saw  Ananda
coming,  he  hushed  his  company  by  saying: — Be  quiet,
sirs ;  do  not  make  a  noise ;  here  comes  the  recluse
Ananda,  the  disciple  of  the  recluse  Gotama.  All  the
time  disciples  of  Gotama  have  been  staying  at  the
Kosambi,  Ananda  has  been  one  of  them.  These
recluses  are  lovers  of  quiet,  are  trained  to  quiet,  and
commend  the  quiet ;  if  he  observes  quiet  reigning  in
this  gathering,  he  may  decide  to  approach.  So  they
became  quiet,  and  Ananda  came  up.  Said  Sandaka  :
— I  beg  the  reverend  Ananda  to  join  us  ;  he  is  truly
welcome;  it  is  a  long  time  since  last  he  managed  to
get  here.  Pray  be  seated ;  here  is  a  seat  for  your
reverence.

Ananda  sat  down  accordingly,  asking  Sandaka,  who
took  a  low  seat  to  one  side,  what  had  been  their  theme
and  what  was  the  discussion  which  had  been  inter¬
rupted.  Let  that  pass  for  the  moment,  answered
Sandaka ;  you  can  easily  gather  that  later  on.  What
I  should  like,  would  be  if  you  would  think  of  some
discourse  on  your  own  teacher’s  tenets.

Well  then,  Sandaka,  listen  and  pay  attention,  and  I
will  speak.  Certainly,  answered  Sandaka;  and  Ananda
began : —

The  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat  all-
enlightened,  has  specified  four  antitheses  to  the  higher
life,  and  four  comfortless  vocations,  wherein  a  man  of
intelligence  will  assuredly  not  follow  the  higher  life,  or,
if  he  does  follow  it  there,  will  not  advance  to  knowledge,
the  Doctrine,  and  what  is  right.

What  are  the  four  antitheses,  Ananda  ?

[515]  First,1  there  is  the  teacher  who  affirms  and
holds  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  alms,  or  sacrifice,
or  oblations ;  no  such  things  as  the  fruit  and  harvest  of


1  Cl.  Saleyyaka-sutta  (No.  4)  for  these  heresies.


AUTHORS  AND  THEIR  BOOKS


47


Many,  but  not  nearly  enough,  of  the  inspiring
details  of  Macdonald’s  upward  struggle  are  told
in  this  interesting  book.  The  Man  of  To¬
morrow.  Several  generations  of  his  family  had
been  blacksmiths  at  Lossiemouth.  He  attended
the  village  school,  and  attracted  the  attention  of
his  master,  the  “dominie”,  at  whose  invitation
he  put  in  an  hour’s  extra  work  under  him  every
morning  before  the  arrival  of  the  other  pupils.
He  was  still  a  boy  when  he  left  school,  and  was
about  to  become  a  fisherman  from  sheer  necessity,
when  his  old  dominie  interfered  and  secured  him
as  a  pupil  teacher.  Besides  reading  all  the  books
in  Lossiemouth,  he  developed  a  passion  for
science,  and,  says,  “Iconoclast”,  (the  author  of
The  Man  of  To-morrow),  “through  the
numbers  of  Cassell’s  ‘Popular  Educator’  and
‘Science  for  All’ — which  he  was  afterwards  to
describe  as  his  university — he  came  into  touch
with  the  revolutionary  discoveries  which  gave  to
the  second  half  of  the  19th  century  its  determin¬
ing  character,  and  to  his  mind  its  scientific
bent.”

Apropos  of  his  old  dominie,  Mr.  Macdonald
has  written  :  "The  simple  kindness  of  the  teacher
is  perhaps  the  most  precious  gift  he  can  give  his
scholars.”  And  “one  of  the  dominie’s  generalisa¬
tions  was :  ‘You  must  master;  that  is  education ;
when  you  have  mastered  one  thing  you  are  well
on  the  way  to  master  all  things’.”

At  this  time  Hugh  Miller's  “Schools  and
School-masters”  was  among  the  first  books  that
Macdonald  bought  with  his  limited  pocket
money,  and  a  Lossiemouth  watchmaker  lent  him
Scott,  Dickens,  and  Samuel  Smiles’  “Life  of  a
Scottish  Naturalist”.  Arduous  years  were  to
pass  before  he  could  buy  hooks  with  any  freedom.
He  came  to  London  like  a  new  Dick  Whittington,
and  after  weeks  of  unemployment,  found  some
work  addressing  envelopes.  Then  he  became  an
invoice  clerk  at  12/6  a  week ;  but  the  Guildhall
Library  was  near  by  for  reading  during  lunch
hour.  Evening  classes  in  the  London  Council
schools  were  attended  and  correspondence  lessons
were  taken,  and,  having  passed  his  science  ex¬
aminations  at  South  Kensington,  he  was  about
to  sit  for  a  scholarship  when  his  overstrained
strength  gave  way.  This  was  why,  instead  of
becoming  a  scientist,  he  became  in  1888  Private
Secretary  to  Mr.  Thomas  Lough,  a  Gladstonian
candidate  and  subsequently  member  of  Parlia¬
ment.  Thus  Mr.  Macdonald  set  out  definitely
upon  the  path  of  a  political  and  journalistic
career.  But  he  found  a  rich  consolation  for  one


frustrated  ambition,  for  he  married  Margaret
Ethel  Gladstone,  a  daughter  of  Dr.  Gladstone,
(distinguished  chemist)  and  niece  of  Lord  Kelvin.
That  was  in  1896.

He  worked  for  several  famous  newspapers,
and  contributed  to  the  “National  Dictionary  of
Biography”  about  this  time.  His  first  book,
“What  I  Saw  in  South  Africa”,  was  published
in  1902  as  the  result  of  a  personal  visit  to  that
country.  Needless  to  say,  it  caused  an  uproar
in  political  circles.  Mr.  Macdonald  has  indeed
travelled  much,  and  I  expect  there  is  no  need
to  remind  readers  that  few  British  politicians
know  so  much  as  he  about  Indian  problems.  In
his  writings  he  has  constantly  shown  the  instinct
of  the  born  word-smith,  and  most  of  his  experi¬
ences  have  become  material  for  his  quickly
moving  pen.  He  cannot  write  a  book  on  Social¬
ism  without  touching  beauty  and  raising  issues
much  deeper  than  party  politics,  for  lie  has  an
imagination,  this  fine  and  typical  Scot.  If  he
visits  Palestine  and  writes  a  tract  on  the  problem
of  Zionism  for  the  Labour  Publishing  Company,
he  cannot  help  letting  his  words  glow  in  describ¬
ing  the  exotic  beauties  of  sea  and  land.  He  may
go  to  Constantinople  to  study  a  political  situation ,
but  beauty  arrests  him.  He  will  stop  suddenly
opposite  St.  Sofia,  for  instance : —

“When  you  venture  to  look  at  its  wonders  of
marble,  precious  stones  and  colour,  you  sec,  like
a  hovering  shadow  through  the  wash  and  the
inscriptions  put  on  by  hands  doing  homage  to
Allah  and  Mohammed,  the  benignant  face  and
symbols  of  Christ  put  there  first  of  all  by  hands
doing  homage  to  God  and  His  son.  This  is
indeed  St.  Sofia.  It  is  a  temple  of  the  universal
worship,  neither  church  nor  mosque,  but  some¬
thing  embracing  both,  and  more  spiritual  than
both.  In  Palestine,  one  has  to  escape  from
church  and  shrine  and  get  out  upon  the  hills  of
Judea,  the  road  to  Jericho,  the  waysides  of
Samaria,  to  feel  the  presence.  It  dwells  in
St.  Sofia.”

It  is  not  generally  known  that  in  past  years
Mr.  Macdonald’s  pen  has  strayed  from  economics
and  political  history  into  fiction,  and  many  of
his  short  stories  have  appeared,  signed  "James
Ramsay”.  But  perhaps  his  finest  piece  of
literary  work — one  of  the  best  examples  of  bio¬
graphy  in  English — is  "Margaret  Ethel  Mac¬
donald”,  a  book  that  might  be  described  as  the
fruit  of  love  and  sorrow,  for  it  is  his  monument
to  the  wife  who  was  everything  to  him,  and  who
died  in  1911  and  left  him  with  five  children  and


3^4


LX  XVI.  SANDAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  516.


deeds  good  or  bad  ;  no  such  thing  as  this  world  or  the
next ;  no  such  thing  as  parents,  or  beings  translated  to
another  sphere  ;  no  such  thing  in  this  world  as  a  recluse
or  brahmin  who  has  triumphantly  walked  aright,  so
that,  of  and  by  himself,  he  has  comprehended  this
world  and  the  next  and  makes  them  known  to  others.
A  man — he  avers — is  composed  of  the  four  Elements.
At  his  death  the  earth  resumes  and  absorbs  his  earthy
elements,  water  his  watery  elements,  fire  his  fiery
elements,  and  space  his  faculties.  A  bier  and  four
bearers  go  off  with  the  dead  man,  whose  remains  are
visible  as  far  as  the  charnel-ground  where  his  bones
whiten  and  bleach.  Oblations  arc  words  and  nothing
more ;  alms-giving  is  nonsense  ; — it  is  a  sham  and  a
lie  and  idle  chatter  to  assert  the  contrary.  At  the
body’s  dissolution  sages  and  fools  alike  are  cut  off  and
perish,  without  any  future  after  death.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  pronouncement
awakens  the  following  reflections  : — If  all  this  teacher
says  is  true,  then,  without  my  doing  a  stroke,  my  task  is
done,  and  I  have  lived  the  higher  life  without  essaying  it
at  all.  The  pair  of  us  are  on  precisely  the  same  level  of
recluse-ship, — though  for  my  part  I  do  not  aver  that  at
the  body’s  dissolution  we  shall  both  be  cut  off  and
perish,  with  no  future  after  death.  It  is  all  superero¬
gation  for  this  reverend  teacher  to  go  naked,  to  shave
his  head,  to  hop  about  a-squat,  and  to  pluck  out  his
hair  and  beard  by  the  roots ;  while  I, — living  with  a
host  of  sons  around  me,  revelling  in  sanaal  from
Kasi,  decked  out  with  garlands  and  scents  and  per¬
fumes,  not  refusing  gold  and  silver — shall  yet  fare
hereafter  no  whit  worse  than  he.  What  do  I  see  or
know  in  this  teacher  that  I  should  follow  the  higher  life
under  him  ? — And,  when  it  is  recognized  that  this  is  an
antithesis  to  the  higher  life,  off  goes  the  man  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  first  antithesis  to  the  higher  life,  as
specified  by  the  Lord.

[516]  Secondly,  there  is  the  teacher  who  affirms  and
holds  that  no  evil  is  done  by  him  who  either  acts  him¬
self  or  causes  another  to  act,  who  mutilates  or  causes


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


48


harder  political  efforts  in  front  of  him  than  even
Ins  past  could  boast.  In  "Margaret  Ethel
Macdonald”  the  author’s  severely  scientific  mind
is  unusually  moved  by  emotion,  and  if  his  natural
reticence  and  impersonality  is  scarcely  weakened,
even  here,  the  imaginative  fervour  breaks  out  in
eloquent  recollections  of  past  schemes.  The
countrysides  of  England  and  Scotland  share  his
grateful  memories  with  the  noble  woman  who
knew  and  loved  them.

Yes,  Mr.  Macdonald  counts  as  a  prose  writer ;
he  will  inevitably  find  his  way  into  any  compre¬
hensive  history  of  English  prose  in  the  future.
His  style  is  always  simple  and  well  charged  with
matter;  concise  but  clear;  forceful  but  never
ornate.  His  compeers,  or  let  us  say  his  close
relatives,  in  style  are  Defoe,  Addison  and
Cobbctt.

"Iconoclast”,  the  author  of  this  first  book  on
Mr.  Macdonald  (if  a  French  pamphlet  written
before  the  war  be  excepted)  is  Mrs.  Mary  Agnes
Hamilton,  the  well-known  novelist  and  historian,
who  stood  unsuccessfully  at  the  last  general
election  in  England  as  Labour  candidate  for
Chatham.  I  think  a  fair  comment  on  Mr.  Mac¬
donald's  strenuous  career  is  afforded  by  Goethe’s
remark :

"He  who  does  nothing  for  others  docs  nothing
tor  himself.”

•  *  •  •

Is  Science  Divine  or  Diabolical?

This  question  occurs  to  me  by  reason  of  the
appearance  of  several  interesting  books.  To
begin  with  there  is  the  translation  of  reflections
on  religion  by  Sadhu  Sundar  Singh,  published
under  the  title  Reality  and  Religion  :  Medita¬
tions  on  God,  Man,  and  Nature  (Macmillan
2/6)  to  which  Canon  Streeter  writes  an  informa¬
tive  introduction  about  this  attractive  religious
teacher.  The  Sadhu,  as  might  be  expected,
approaches  the  central  problems  of  existence  by
a  direct  route  which  very  largely  ignores  the
activities  of  science,  upon  which  the  West  has
set  so  much  store  since  the  Middle  Ages.  His
golden  keys  arc  Faith  and  Intuition,  terms
capable  of  varying  interpretation  and  not
necessarily  excluding  the  spade-work  of  science.
Sundar  Singh  himself  is  by  no  means  disposed  to
ignore  the  usefulness  of  an  efficient  mind,  though
his  road  towards  it  may  be  more  difficult  for  some
people  than  it  is  for  the  spiritual  teacher.

"The  brain”,  he  says,  "is  a  very  subtle  and
sensitive  instrument  furnished  with  many  fine


senses  which,  in  meditation,  receive  messages
from  the  unseen  world  and  stimulate  ideas  far
above  normal  human  thought.  The  brain  docs
not  produce  these  ideas,  but  receives  them  from
the  spiritual,  invisible  world  above  and  interprets
them  in  terms  of  the  conditions  and  circumstances
familiar  to  men.”

He  goes  on  to  trace  these  messages  in  the
work  of  poets  and  painters  ;  which  reminds  me
powerfully  of  a  series  of  lectures  delivered  at  the
London  Queen’s  Hall  during  June  by  that  stal¬
wart  light-bringer,  Annie  Besant.  Her  theme
was  "Civilisation’s  Deadlocks  and  the  Keys”.
The  lectures  were  I  believe  ignored  by  the  press
with  the  notable  exception  of  that  courageous
little  weekly  paper  The  Clarion,  which  is  still
edited  by  the  veteran  socialist  Robert  Blatchford.
The  Clarion  published  the  five  lectures  in  full,
and  from  those  reports  I  gather  that  Mrs.  Besant’s
"Keys”  to  the  deadlocks  of  civilisation  are
Religion,  Education,  Science  and  Art.  As  usual
in  her  public  speeches  she  pleaded  for  Indian
development  on  an  extended  basis  of  self-govern¬
ment  while  admitting  that  Great  Britain  remained
in  many  respects  the  chief  hope  of  the  salvation
of  world  civilisation.  But  the  reason  for  my
reference  to  her  lectures  is  that  she  was  very
severe  with  the  science  which  continually  pro¬
duces  more  deadly  means  of  destruction  and  so
arms  more  efficiently  the  powers  of  evil  in  the
world.  It  is  of  course  a  most  troublesome
problem.

*  *  *  •

Science  is  the  outcome  of  human  curiosity
just  as  poetry  is  the  outcome  of  wonder,  and
religion  of  aspiration.  Nothing  could  be  more
natural  to  man  than  scientific  thought — it  is  the
putting  of  two  and  two  together.  By  a  universal
process,  science  has  been  separated  from  other
mental  activities  during  the  many  centuries  of  its
development  and  specialisation.  No  educated
person  today  would  confuse  it  with  religion,  art,
or  philosophy.  So  clearly  is  the  autonomous
character  of  science  now  realised  that  it  is
becoming  quite  difficult  for  bellicose  enthusiasts
in  one  department  to  work  up  an  antagonism
such  as  existed  in  Victorian  England  between
science  and  religion.  The  scientist,  not  less  than
the  ecclesiastics  and  the  philosophers  and  the
artists,  have  passed  through  periods  of  over¬
weening  self-conceit,  during  which  they  believed
that  their  own  message  held  all  that  was  good
and  true  and  reliable.  But  when  we  brush  aside
these  disputes  and  secondary  purposes  which


M.  i.  517.


OF  FALSE  GUIDES.


365


another  to  mutilate,  who  punishes  or  causes  another  to
punish,  who  is  the  author  of  grief  or  torment  or  terror,
or  causes  another  to  terrify,  who  takes  life,  steals,  is  a
burglar,  robber,  house-breaker,  footpad,  adulterer  or
liar.  If  with  a  cleaver  as  sharp  as  a  razor  he  were  to
slay  earth’s  living  creatures  and  pile  up  their  corpses  in
a  single  heap  and  mound  of  flesh,  no  guilt  proceeds
and  no  result  of  guilt  ensues.  If  he  were  to  make  his
way  up  to  the  southern  bank  of  the  Ganges  killing
and  wounding,  maiming  and  causing  to  be  maimed,
punishing  and  causing  to  be  punished, — no  guilt  pro¬
ceeds  nor  any  result  of  guilt  ensue.  If  he  were  to
make  his  way  up  to  the  northern  bank  of  the  Ganges
distributing  alms  and  causing  alms  to  be  distributed,
offering  sacrifices  and  causing  sacrifices  to  be  offered, —
no  virtue  proceeds  and  no  result  of  virtue  ensues.  No
merit  proceeds  nor  does  any  result  of  virtue  ensue  from
alms-givingor  temperance  or  self-control  ortruthfulness.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  pronouncement
awakens  the  following  reflections  : — If  all  this  teacher
says  is  true,  then,  without  my  doing  a  stroke,  my  task
is  done,  and  I  have  lived  the  higher  life  without  essay¬
ing  it  at  all.  The  pair  of  us  are  on  precisely  the  same
level  of  recluse-ship, — though  for  my  part  I  do  not
aver  that  the  actions  of  the  two  of  us  work  no  evil.  It
is  all  supererogation  ...  off  goes  the  man  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  second  antithesis  to  the  higher  life,  as
specified  by  the  Lord.

Thirdly,  there  is  the  teacher  who  affirms  and  holds
that  there  is  no  cause  or  reason  for  either  depravity  or
purity  ; — it  is  without  either  cause  or  reason  that  some
are  depraved  and  some  pure.  There  is  no  such  thing
as  intrinsic  strength  or  energy  or  human  [517]  might
or  human  endeavour.  All  creatures,  all  living  things,
all  beings,  all  that  has  life, — all  are  devoid  of  power,
strength  and  energy ;  all  are  under  the  compulsion  of
the  individual  nature  to  which  they  are  linked  by
destiny ;  and  it  is  solely  by  virtue  of  what  they  are
born  as  in  the  six  environments  that  they  experience
their  pleasure  or  pain.


AUTHORS  AND  THEIR  BOOKS


49


litter  the  roads  of  liutnau  progress,  \vc  discover
at  least  one  unique  and  uncontrovertible
characteristic  of  science.  It  gives  to  man  power
over  material ;  it  subdues  natural  forces  to  human
intelligence.  In  doing  so  it  transforms  the  face
of  society.  Science  is  responsible  for  nearly  all
the  social  changes  in  Europe  since  the  Middle-
Ages,  beginning  with  the  substitution  of  gun¬
powder  for  knightly  armour  and  ending  with  the
introduction  of  machinery.

It  is  true  that  the  most  obvious  changes
wrought  in  the  Western  world  by  science  during
the  Christian  era  have  been  purely  physical,  and
it  is  an  important  fact  that  the  unifying  effect  on
society  of  a  European  religion  was  necessary  to
that  development.  Scientists  often  speak  as  if
civlisation  had  only  one  parent ;  but  if  science  is
the  father  of  civilisation,  religion  is  the  mother
without  which  the  fructifying  germs  of  know¬
ledge  could  never  have  found  the  shelter  of  a
stable  society  in  which  to  develop.

Now  the  Sir  William  Dunn  Reader  in  Bio-
Chemistry  at  Cambridge,  Mr.  J.  B.  S.  Haldane,
is  a  brilliant  young  scientist  with  the  gift  of
inspiring  vision  which  is  the  fruit  of  a  wide  educa¬
tion  and  a  fine  imagination.  And  yet  he  too  is
so  excited  by  the  progress  of  science  that  he  clean
forgets  the  predestinate  mate  without  whom  its
virility  can  lead  to  no  permanent  creation.  He
read  an  inspiring  paper  to  the  Cambridge
"Heretics”  which  is  now*  revised  and  printed
under  the  title  Daedalus,  or  .Science  and  t)ie
Future  (Kegan  Paul,  2/6).

Mr.  Haldane  sets  out  to  anticipate  the
conquests  of  science  during  this  century.  Among
the  imminent  gifts  of  science,  he  says,  are  un¬
limited  electric  power  and  chemically  produced
foodstuffs  that  "will  substitute  the  flower-garden
and  the  factory  for  the  dunghill  and  the  slaughter¬
house  and  make  the  city  at  last  self-sufficient,”
besides  increasing  our  energy  and  efficiency.

Biological  invention  which  "tends  to  begin
as  a  perversion  and  end  as  a  ritual  supported  by
unquestioned  beliefs  and  prejudices”  (in  other
words,  to  be  preserved  by  religion  when  it  is
proved  beneficial)  will  give  us  shock  after  shock
of  the  kind  that  Darwin  gave  to  Victorian  society.
Quoting  from  a  mythical  essay  "on  the  influence
of  Biology  on  History,  during  the  20th  century,
which  will  (it  is  hoped)  be  read  by  a  rather  stupid
undergraduate  member  of  this  university  to  his
supervisor  during  his  first  term  150  years  hence”.
Mr.  Haldane  tells  us  that  the  eugenic  movement
will  have  failed,  both  by  its  own  limitations  and


the  violence  of  the  opposition  to  human  stud¬
farming.  But  following  up  Morgan's  location  of
Meudelian  factors  in  the  nucleus  of  Drosophila
in  1912,  by  which  he  modified  its  sex-ratio  and
Brachhet’s  experiment  of  1913,  by  which  he  grew
rabbit  embryos  in  serum,  biology  progressed  until
in  1951  :  “Dupont  and  Schwarts  produced  the
first  ectogenetic  child.  As  early  as  1901  he
transferred  embryo  rabbits  from  one  female  to
another ;  in  1925  Haldane  had  grown  embryonic
rats  in  serum  for  ten  days,  but  had  failed  to
carry  the  process  to  its  conclusion,  and  it  was
not  till  1940  that  Clark  succeeded  with  the  pig.”

When  the  news  of  the  first  incubated  child
was  published,  it  caused,  says  Mr.  Haldane’s
mythical  student  (and  we  may  well  believe  it)
an  “unprecedented  sensation",  for  the  birth-rate
was  in  most  civilised  countries  less  than  the  death-
rate.  “France  was  the  first  country  to  adopt
cctogenesis  officially,  and  by  196S  was  producing
60,000  children  annually  by  this  method.”

“In  most  countries”,  Mr.  Haldane  continues
with  a  touch  of  characteristic  humour,  “the
opposition  was  far  stronger,  and  was  intensified
by  the  Papal  bull  ‘nunquam  prius  audito’  and
the  similar  fetwa  of  the  Klialif,  both  of  which
appeared  in  i960."

It  appears  that  150  years  hence  cctogenesis
will  be  universal.  Mr.  Haldane  has,  however,
grave  doubts  as  to  the  balance  of  benefit  result¬
ing  from  the  separation  of  sexual  love  and  re¬
production,  but  the  “effects  of  selection  will
prove  a  great  compensation  in  eradicating
disease  and  degeneracy.”

All  his  startling  forecasts,  Mr.  Haldane
declares,  are  no  less  moderate  than  Mr.  H.  G.
Wells’s  prophecies  in  “Anticipations”,  and  these
have  of  course  been  proved  by  less  than  a  quarter
of  a  century’s  progress  to  be  well  within  the
bounds  of  truth.

•  *  •  *

Mr.  Haldane  seems  to  have  little  fear  that
science  can  be  other  than  a  mighty  benefactor  to
mankind.  And  yet  in  conclusion  he  admits  that
the  use  we  shall  make  of  scientific  conquests  "is
essentially  a  question  for  religion  and  aesthetic.”
This  is  the  only  reference  he  makes  to  religion
that  is  not  contemptuous  or  inimical.  But  what
a  tremendous  admission !  A  less  optimistic  out¬
look  might  well  discover  grave  dangers  in  the
advance  of  science.  Science  itself  is  existing
and  flourishing  on  the  moral  capital  of  mankind
and  that  does  not  seem  to  increase  in  proportion


366


LXXVI.  SANDAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  517.


In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  pronouncement
awakens  the  following  reflections  : — If  all  this  teacher
says  is  true,  then,  without  my  doing  a  stroke,  my  task
is  done,  and  I  have  lived  the  higher  life  without
essaying  it  at  all.  The  pair  of  us  are  on  precisely
the  same  level  of  recluse-ship, — though  for  my  part  I
do  not  aver  that  both  of  us  will  become  pure  without
cause  or  reason.  It  is  all  supererogation  ...  off  goes
the  man  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  third  antithesis  to  the  higher  life,  as
specified  by  the  Lord.

Lastly,  there  is  the  teacher  who  affirms  and  holds
that, — There  are  seven  substances  which  are  neither
made  nor  commanded  to  be  made,  neither  created  nor
commanded  to  be  created,  engendering  nothing,  im¬
movable  as  mountain-peaks  or  massive  columns  ;  they
neither  budge  nor  change;  they  neither  molest  one
another  nor  can  they  impart  to  one  another  either
pleasure  or  pain  or  both.  These  seven  substances  are
earth,  water,  fire,  air,  pleasure,  pain,  and  life.  With
them  there  is  neither  killer  nor  slayer,  neither  teller
nor  told,  neither  teacher  nor  taught.  No  one1  who
with  a  keen  blade  chops  a  head  in  twain,  thereby  robs
anyone  of  life  ;  all  that  happens  is  that  in  its  descent
the  blade  has  opened  up  a  passage  between  just  these
seven  substances.  Of  principal  forms  of  life  there  are
fourteen  hundred  thousand,  with  another  three  score
hundreds,  and  a  further  six  hundred  to  boot ;  actions
(kammuno)  are  five  hundred  in  number  ;  there  are
five  acts  and  another  three  acts ;  and  there  are  activities
and  half  activities  ;a  there  are  three  score  and  two
paths  to  tread  ;  three  score  and  two  aeons  of  time  ;  six
environments  ;8  eight  Ages  of  Man  ;4  nine  and  forty

1  There  are  traces  of  archaic  dialect  throughout  this  con¬
temptuous  synopsis,  with  its  sneer  at  kamma  (in  three  declen¬
sions,  tentatively  indicated  by  actions,  acts,  and  activities).

s  Some  (says  Bu.)  assigned  one  kamma  to  each  of  the  five
senses.  He  indicates  that  the  three  acts  represent  the  triad  of
deed,  word,  and  thought,  though  some  ranked  thought  as  only
half  a  K  a  m  m  o.

3  See  hereon  note  at  p.  293  supra.

4  See  note  2  at  Dial.  I,  72.


5<>


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


to  man’s  growing  control  over  natural  forces.
So  we  have  in  reply  to  “Daedalus”  another  little
book,  Icarus,  or  the  Tuture  of  Science  by
that  fine  thinker  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell  (Kcgan
Paul  2/6).  Mr.  Russell’s  book  is  much  more
startling  than  Mr.  Haldane’s.  Not  less  a  scientist
and  a  severer  logician,  Mr.  Russell  set  out  the
elements  of  the  case  for  the  destruction  and
salvation  of  society  in  the  near  future.  His
ultimate  conclusion  is  that  world  domination  by
one  power  can  alone  save  civilisation.  Mr.
Russell’s  case  is  that  while  science  has  increased
man’s  control  over  nature,  men  are  “bundles  of
passions  and  instincts”,  and:

"an  animal  species  in  a  stable  environment
if  it  does  not  die  out  acquires  an  equilibrium
between  its  passions  and  the  conditions  of  its
life.  If  the  conditions  are  suddenly  altered  the
equilibrium  is  upset.  Wolves  in  a  state  of  nature
have  difficulty  in  getting  foot!  and  therefore  need
the  stimulus  of  a  very  insistent  hunger.  The
result  is  that  their  descendents,  domestic  dogs
overeat  if  they  are  allowed  to  do  so... The  human
instincts  of  power  and  rivalry,  like  the  dog’s
wolfish  appetite,  will  need  to  be  artificially  curbed
if  industrialism  is  to  succeed.”

This  is  coming  down  to  tintacks.  Free  food
and  ectogenesis  seem  slightly  irrelevant  unless
we  can  prevent  civilisation  committing  suicide.
Mr.  Russell  is  deeply  impressed  by  the  power  of
organisation  over  the  individual  in  politics
education,  daily  work  and  even  in  private
morality.  This  organisation  gains  a  dangerous
power  when  instead  of  party  politics  or  trading
combinations  and  rivalries  it  extends  to  national
rivalries  so  that  the  instincts  of  loyalty  to  the
group  can  be  exploited  in  murderous  wars.  "The
harm  that  is  being  done  by  science  and  industrial¬
ism,”  he  says,  “is  almost  wholly  due  to  the  fact
that  while  they  have  proved  strong  enough  to
produce  a  national  organisation  of  economic
forces  they  have  not  proved  strong  enough  to
produce  an  international  organisation.”  He  sees
organisation  developed  in  the  future  with  the  aid
of  science  to  an  extent  almost  inconceivable  now.
Governments  will  become  more  powerful  and
after  several  world  upheavals  power  will  be
centralised  in  one  group  of  economic  and  political
interests.  He  is  very  doubtful  of  the  advantage
of  governments  obtaining,  as  they  will,  the  power
to  sterilise  those  not  considered  fit  for  parents.
“Probably  in  time  opposition  to  the  Government
will  be  taken  to  prove  imbecility.”  He  thinks
the  average  intelligence  may  in  the  long  run  be


increased,  but  he  reminds  us  that  scientific  possi¬
bilities  may  fcc  controlled  by  people  who  have
only  average  intelligence  and  ethical  standards,
and  if  Bishops  and  Prime  Ministers  were
considered  models  for  the  next  g.-ncration  the
ultimate  effects  of  an  idealistic  movement  like
that  of  eugenics  might  be  rather  depressing.  His
most  startling  anticipation  however  is  the  scienti¬
fic  possibility  of  controlling  emotional  life
through  the  secretions  of  ductless  glands.  “It
will  be  possible  to  make  people  choleric,  or  timid,
strongly  or  weekly  sexed,  and  so  on,  as  may  be
desired.”  When  physiology  has  found  out  how
to  control  emotion,  a  power  of  human  regenera¬
tion  or  degeneration  will  be  in  the  hands  of
science  surpassing  all  the  dreams  of  all  the  Popes
and  all  the  Emperors!

But  the  prospect  is  no  less  alarming  than  it
is  inspiring.  “Science  is  no  substitute  for
virtue”,  as  Mr.  Russell  warns  us.  Only  kind¬
ness  of  heart  can  save  humanity  from  destruction
by  the  scientific  Frankenstein  it  has  made.  “The
heart  is  as  necessary  to  a  good  life  as  the  head.’*

The  answer  to  our  question  is  therefore  that
science  is  just  as  divine  and  just  as  diabolical  as
human  nature.  I  think  we  may  retain  our  faith
in  the  divinity  when  the  analogical  progress  of
religion  from  beastliness  and  cruelty  is  consider¬
ed.  Mr.  II.  G.  Wells  better  than  any  other
contemporary  has  pictured  the  alternatives  of  the
future  in  “The  Time  Machine”  I  pessimistic)  and
“Men  Like  Gods”  (optimistic)

*  •  •  *

Mr.  H.  G.  Wells  and  Mr.  Shaw-

Speaking  of  Mr.  II.  G.  Wells  reminds  me  that
in  the  period  under  review  we  have  had  from  him
a  successor  to  “Men  Like  Gods”  in  The  Dream
(Jonathan  Cape  7/6),  a  book  characteristic  of  his
two  literary  egos,  the  social  prophet  and  the
almost  Dickensian  lover  of  human  beings
Mr.  Wells  remains  very  popular.  He  is  now  a
friendly  and  familiar  portion  of  our  twentieth
century*.  In  the  days  of  “The  Time  Machine”
and  “Anticipations”  he  appeared  to  be  a  romantic
scientist.  “Kipps”  and  “Tono-Bungay”  showed
him  in  the  warm  human  light  that  has  never
since  left  him,  not  even  in  “God  the  Invisible
King”,  that  amazing  sequel  to  “Mr.  Britling
Sees  it  Through”  and  anticipation  of  “The
Undying  Fire.”  Sometimes,  as  in  “The  Secret
Places  of  the  Heart”,  Mr.  Wells’s  profuse  strains
of  egotism  were  rather  too  human.  But  with
“Men  Like  Gods"  he  made  a  magnificent  gesture,


M.  i.  518.


OF  FALSE  GUIDES.


367


hundreds  of  livelihoods  (ijiva),  and  as  many  classes  of
Wanderers  (paribbaja)  [518]  and  of  abodes  of  Nagas ;
a  score  of  hundreds  of  faculties  (indriya),  ‘thrutty’
hundreds  of  purgatories  ;  six  and  thirty  homes  of  filth ;
seven  types  of  a  conscious  foetus,1  seven  of  an  uncon¬
scious  foetus,2  and  seven  propagations  by  striking
slips;8  seven  kinds  of  gods,  of  men,  and  of  goblins;
seven  Great  Lakes  ;  seven  Sages  ;4  seven  major  Pre¬
cipices,  and  seven  hundred  other  Precipices  ;  seven
major  dreams  and  seven  hundred  other  dreams;
eighty-four  hundreds  of  thousands  of  aeons  through
which,  birth  by  birth,  wise  and  simple  alike  must  pass
in  transmigration  before  they  make  an  end  of  Ill.
Herein,  there  is  no  chance,  whether  by  virtue  or
observances  or  austerities  or  the  higher  life,  of  ripening
unripe  karma  or  of  getting  rid  of  ripened  karma  by
continually  interfering  with  it.  Pleasure  and  pain  are
meted  out  in  full  measure ;  there  is  nothing  over,  no
more  or  less,  when  transmigration  ends.  Just  as  a  ball
of  twine,  when  hurled  from  you,  continues  on  its
course  as  long  as  there  is  string  to  unwind,  even  so
will  wise  and  simple  make  an  end  of  Ill  only  when  they
have  dreed  their  weird  of  transmigrations.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  pronouncement
awakens  the  following  reflections: — If  all  this  teacher
says  is  true,  then,  without  my  doing  a  stroke,  my  task
is  done  and  I  have  lived  the  higher  life  without  essay¬
ing  it  at  all.  The  pair  of  us  are  on  precisely  the  same
level  of  recluse-ship, — though  for  my  part  I  do  not
aver  that  the  pair  of  us  have  only  to  transmigrate  in
order  to  end  Ill.  1 1  is  all  supererogation  .  .  .  off  goes
the  man  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  fourth  antithesis  to  the  higher  life,  as
■specified  by  the  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat
all-enlightened.

1  E.g.  cattle  (Bu.l.  ’  1  E.g.  cereals  (Bu.).

3  E.g.  canes  (Bu.).

*  On  pavuta  Dbammarama’s  Colombo  edition  of  the  Com¬
mentary  adds  the  note: — Pamuti  ti  paliyam  pabuta  ti  pandita
B.  PavutS  ti  niganthi  ka  Ai.  M.3,


AUTHORS  AND  THEIR  BOOKS


5i


Waving  off  his  nigh  60  years,  and  striding  back
to  scientific  imagination  of  his  youthful  days,  but
carrying  with  him  the  mellow  humanity  of  Mr.
Britling.  His  latest  book,  The  Dream  shows
that  the  warm  humanity  of  this  mucky,  stupid
world  will  persist  in  entering  Mr.  Wells’s  clean
and  spacious  future,  for  The  Dream  is  a
story  of  human  lives  of  today  dreamed  by  Sarnac,
a  Utopian,  2,000  years  hence.  The  first  chapter
immerses  the  reader  in  that  splendid  world  where
men  answer  to  Mr.  Wells’s  conception  of  gods.
The  last  chapter  is  an  illuminating  and  Wellsian
"epilogue”,  in  which  the  Utopians  discuss  the
dream  that  Sarnac  has  told  them  of  his  previous
life.

“It  was  a  life”,  Sarnac  said,  "and  it  was  a
dream,  a  dream  within  this  life;  and  this  life,
too,  is  a  dream.  Dreams  within  dreams,  dreams
containing  dreams,  until  we  come  at  last,  may  be,
to  the  Dreamer  of  all  dreams,  the  Being  who  is
all  beings.  Nothing  is  too  wonderful  for  life,
and  nothing  is  too  beautiful.”

If  this  is  not  a  case  of  West  meeting  East,
then  I  have  never  come  across  one.

I  hope  Mr.  Wells  will  tell  us  more  stories  of
the  marvellous  world  of  the  future  which  has
become  a  constant  and  inspiring  vision  to  him.  I
have  no  hesitation  in  hoping  for  more  books  from
him,  although  the  list  of  his  works  given  on  a
fly  leaf  of  The  Dream  credits  him  with  18
novels,  13  fantastic  and  imaginative  romances,
four  volumes  of  short  stories,  1 2  books  on  social,
religious  and  political  questions,  and  two  books
about  children’s  games.  And  following  the
enumeration  of  titles : —

“All  these  are  in  print  and  on  sale,  whatever
a  lazy  bookseller  may  say  to  the  contrary.”

Truly  an  astonishing  record.  Mr.  Wells’s
life  indeed  has  been  as  romantic  as  Mr.  Ramsay
Macdonald’s.  His  father,  Joseph  Wells,  was  a
tradesman  in  the  Kentish  town  of  Bromley  and
had  been  a  professional  cricketecr  who  was  a
member  of  the  first  British  cricket  team  to  go  to
Australia.  That  was  in  1861.  Joseph  Wells  had,
I  believe,  already  retired  from  professional  cricket
when  Herbert  George  made  his  momentous
appearance  in  1S66.  It  is  well-known  now
that  much  of  his  early  struggle  is  reflected  in
"Kipps”,  but  I  have  discovered  an  excellent  testi¬
mony  to  the  autobiographical  truth  of  that  book
in  an  introduction  which  Mr.  Wells  wrote  in  1912
to  "Shop  Slavery  and  Emancipation”,  a  political
pamphlet  by  William  Paine.


“When  I  was  15  I  ran  away  one  Sunday
morning  to  my  mother,  and  told  her  I  would
rather  die  than  go  on  being  a  draper”  he  wrote.

Referring  to  the  author’s  descriptions  of
actual  conditions,  Mr.  Wells  declares  that  he
"paints  the  dismal  miseries  of  the  living-in  shop
assistant  none  too  dismally ;  to  that  I  can  bear
witness.  For  a  wretched  couple  of  years  in  my
boyhood  I  slept  in  one  of  the  abominable
dormitories  he  describes,  ate  the  insufficient  food
supplied,  and  drudged  in  the  shop.”

He  had  to  tramp  17  miles  to  his  mother,  and
“felt  then  most  desperately  wicked,  and  now  I
know  that  it  was  the  best  thing  I  ever  did  in  my
life.  All  the  brotherhood  of  man  fled  with  me
that  morning  out  of  the  house  of  mean  bondage
to  life  and  opportunity.  But  such  a  lot  of  us
before  it  is  too  late  will  not  ‘rather  die’,  and
there  you  have  the  secret  of  all  the  tale  of  pitiful
degradation  that  Mr.  Paine  recounts  so
bitterly...”

The  film  version  of  "Kipps”  is,  I  hope,
familiar  to  many  of  my  reader,  for  Mr.  Wells
himself  supervised  the  making  of  it.  Not  the
least  attractive  feature  of  the  non-Utopian  story
in  The  Dream  is  the  truthful  fun  and  the
keen  satire  directed  against  social  evils  of  today.
Mr.  Wells  makes  them  look  the  stupid  things
they  are  by  placing  them  in  the  narration  of  the
strong,  healthy,  free  Utopian.

There  is  a  good  story,  by  the  way,  that  after
Mr.  Wells  had  become  famous  he  was  met  one
day  on  the  steps  of  his  club  by  an  "ex-comrade
of  the  ribbons  and  lace  department.”

“They  tell  me  you’ve  got  on  fine,  Mr.  Wells,
since  you  left  us”  remarked  the  friend  of  his
shop  days.

“Thank  you,  I’m  not  doing  so  badly”  was
the  modest  reply.

"Yes”,  said  the  former  fellow  apprentice,
“they  tell  me  you’re  at  Harrod’s  (a  big  depart¬
ment  store  in  London)  now!”

The  story  is  in  Mr.  Reginald  Auberon’s  "The
Nineteen  Hundreds.”

•  *  •  *

It  is  very  interesting  to  compare  Mr.  Wells’s
vision  of  Utopia,  especially  in  "Men  Like  Gods”,
not  only  with  the  scientific  Mr.  Haldane’s  pro¬
phecies  already  referred  to,  but  also  with  the
anticipations  of  Mr.  Bernard  Shaw  in  “Back  to
Mcthusalch.”  Mr.  Wells  is  less  mystical,  more
human,  and  his  manlike  gods  offer  a  strange
contrast  to  Mr.  Shaw’s  children  bom  out  of  eggs
in  adolescence  and  developing  rapidly  into  love-


52


THU  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


less  sages  wrapped  in  ecstatic  contemplation
(another  rapprochement,  surely,  with  the  East).
But  of  course  Mr.  Shaw  was  looking  forward
30,000  years !

Had  there  not  been  so  many  things  to  use  up
my  space  this  time,  I  ought  certainly  to  have  had
more  to  say  about  Mr.  Bernard  Shaw  and  his
brilliant  new  play,  "St.  Joan”,  but  this  is  a  thing
that  will  not  be  out  of  date  in  a  few  months  later.

*  *  •

In  another  field,  Mr.  T.  Earle  Wclby’s  ex¬
cellent  little  book  A  Popular  History  of  English
Poetry  (A.  M.  Pliilpot  5/-)  gave  me  much
pleasure.  Mr.  Wclby  defies  our  more  supercilious
critics  in  producing  not  only  the  first  one-volume
history  of  English  poetry,  but  the  first  that  does
not  bewilder  a  general  reader.  You  can  never
understand  English  literature  without  some
knowledge  of  the  wonderful  career  of  English
poetry.  All  critics  (being  but  human,  surprising
as  this  may  seem)  have  a  bee  of  some  sort  in  their
bonnet,  and  I  would  not  say  that  I  always  agreed
with  Mr.  Welby’s  generalisations.  But  certainly
the  bees  in  his  bonnet  buzz  much  less  bewilder-
ingly  than  those  busy  insects  which  rush  round
the  capacious  bonnet  of  even  a  great  critic  like
Mr.  George  Saintsburv.  Mr.  Saintsbury’s
history  of  English  prosody  is  a  thing  to  marvel
at,  to  rejoice  for,  and  to  lose  oneself  in— com¬
pletely  to  lose  oneself  in  I

*  *  *  »

It  is  only  a  step  from  this  survey  of  English
poetry  to  the  useful  annual  collection  entitled
"The  Best  Poems”,  compiled  by  Mr.  Thomas
Moult,  the  critic,  and  author  of  two  charming
and  very  promising  novels,  "Snow  Over  Eldon"
and  "The  Comely  Lass”  (both  from  Heinemaun)
In  The  Best  Poems  of  1923  (Cape  6/-)  Mr.
Moult  presents  a  selection  of  verse  from  the
United  States  as  well  as  England,  and  a  very
interesting  collection  of  contemporary  work
results.  Not  the  least  of  my  reasons  "for  wel¬
coming  this  experiment  (if  not  the  title)  is  ray
feeling  that  the  anthologist  has  at  least  backed
his  own  honest  opinions,  and  has  not  liecn  servile
to  any  literary  coterie.  There  is  less  of  the
eccentric,  less  of  the  merely  pretty,  and  less  of
the  merely  pretentious  in  this  collection  than
there  would  certainly  have  been  had  any  but  a
few  of  our  younger  critics  compiled  the  book.

The  subject  of  poetry  brings  me  to  a  valuable
little  book,  Milton  Agonistes :  A  Metaphysical
Criticism  by  E.  H.  Viziak  (Philpot  3/6).  Until


I  read  Mr.  Viziak’s  study  I  did  not  suspect  that
hatred  of  Milton  was  a  prevalent  disease  of
modern  mentality.  I  had  feared  something  far
worse,  a  prevalent  indifference,  and  therefore  I
was  accordingly  cheered  to  read  :

"The  Milton-hatcrs  of  today  consist  of  two
classes;  one  of  which  may  be  styled  neo-Catholics
and  (although  Milton  was  not  a  Puritan  in  the
sterile  sense)  anti-Puritans.  The  mpre  militant
and  literary  members  of  this  class  are  under  the
spell  of  the  Middle  Ages,  which  they  conceive,
or  rather  misconceive,  in  a  glamour.  The  other
class  (which  merit  respectful  sympathy)  comprise
that  remnant  of  Jacobites  who  continue  to  cherish
the  memory  of  their  ‘martyred’  Charles,  whose
statue  at  the  last  anniversary  of  his  execution
was  wreathed  with  flowers.  It  is  no  wonder  the
author  of  the  Eikonoklasles  is  obnoxious  to  them,
so  that,  in  an  angry  mood,  they  might  have
applauded  Judge  Jefferies’  question  at  Chalfont
St.  Giles  Do  you  not  consider  the  loss  of  your
sight  a  judgment  from  heaven  for  your  treatment
of  the  King?’— but  scarcely  Milton’s  rejoinder:
Is  not  the  loss  of  his  head  a  still  greater  judgment
on  the  King?’  ”

.  W  ^r-  V  iziak  analyses  the  operation  of
Milton’s  genius  as  “inverted  power"  in  the
“Paradise  Lost”  is  most  suggestive,  though  it  is
a  pity  that  he  uses  terms  like  ’’supraconscious"
and  ’  subconscious”  without  a  little  more  regard
for  the  reader  who  may  not  have  read  W.  H.
Myers’  great  work  on  "Human  Personality  and
its  Survival  After  Bodily  Death”.  His  assurance
is  also  timely  that  "Paradise  Lost”  was  originally
intended  to  take  the  shape  of  an  Athenian
tragedy.  But  above  all  I  am  grateful  to  the
author  of  Milton  Agonistes  for  his  exposition
of  Milton’s  sublimity,  and  his  martyrdom  of
spirit  and  unbending  intolerance  of  the  religious
and  patriotic  shams  of  contemporary  society.  Sir
Thomas  Browne  gave  voice  to  the  more  ordinary
temperament  that  "would  not  perish  upon  a
ceremony,  politik  i>oints,  or  indifferency”.  But
the  gallic  spirit  of  Anatole  France  has  gone  far
beyond  this.  Sir  Thomas  Browne  could  praise
Socrates  "that  suffered  on  a  fundamental  point
of  religion”,  but  the  author  of  "Notes  on  Life
and  Letters'  can  praise  Rabelais  on  grounds  that
might  have  surprised  even  Rabelais,  because  lie
"maintained  his  opinions,  but  not  up  to  the
burning  point,  reckoning  in  advance  of  and  with
*  lontaigne,  that  to  die  for  an  idea  is  to  put  a  very

high  value  on  one’s  opinions . Martyrs  are

lacking  in  irony...”


368


LXXVI.  SANDAKA-SUTTA.


M.  i.  519.


[519]  Wonderful,  Ananda,  marvellous,  how  the
Lord  has  specified  these  four  antitheses.  What  now
are  those  four  comfortless  vocations  he  speaks  of?

Take  the  case  of  a  teacher  who  is  '  all-knowing  and
all-seeing,  with  nothing  outside  his  ken  and  vision,
who  claims  that,  whether  he  is  walking  or  standing
still,  whether  he  is  asleep  or  awake,  his  ken  and  vision
stand  ready,  aye  ready.’  This  teacher  goes  to  a  house
which  is  empty  and  gets  no  alms  given  him  ;  is  bitten
by  a  dog ;  encounters  a  violent  elephant  or  horse  or
bullock ;  asks  a  man  or  woman  their  name  and  clan ;
or  needs  to  ask  the  name  of,  or  the  way  to,  a  village  or
township.  When  asked  how  he  explains  this,  he
answers  that  he  had  to  do  each  of  these  things  and
was  constrained  to  do  as  he  did.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  pronouncement
awakens  the  following  reflections : — All-knowing  and
all-seeing  though  he  is,  this  reverend  teacher  yet  does
all  these  things  and  must !  So,  observing  this  to  be  a
comfortless  form  of  the  higher  life,  off  he  goes  in
disgust.

Such,  Sandaka,  is  the  first  comfortless  vocation  which
the  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  Arahat  all-enlightened,
has  indicated  as  one  [520]  wherein  a  man  of  intelligence
will  not  follow  the  higher  life,  or,  if  he  does  follow  it,
will  not  advance  to  knowledge,  the  doctrine,  and  what
is  right.

Then,  there  is  the  teacher  who  derives  from  tradi¬
tion  and  holds  by  traditional  truth,  preaching  a  doc¬
trine  which  is  traditional,  which  has  been  handed  down
the  line,  and  is  scriptural.  Now  traditional  orthodoxy
is  partly  sound  and  partly  unsound,  right  here  and
wrong  there.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  awakens  the  reflec¬
tions  that  it  is  all  hearsay,  and  a  comfortless  vocation  ;
and  off  he  goes  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  second  comfortless  vocation  indicated  by
the  Lord.

Next  there  is  the  teacher  who  is  a  rationalist  of  pure
reason  and  criticism,  preaching  a  doctrine  of  his  own


M.  i.  521.


OF  FALSE  GUIDES.


36  9


devising  evolved  for  him  by  his  own  reasoning.  Now
your  rationalist  teacher  reasons  sometimes  well  and
sometimes  badly,  being  right  here  and  wrong  there.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  awakens  the  reflec¬
tion  that  it  is  individual  speculation,  partly  right  and
partly  wrong,  and  a  comfortless  vocation  ;  and  off  he
goes  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  third  comfortless  vocation  indicated  by
the  Lord.

Lastly,  there  is  the  teacher  who  is  stupid  and  defi¬
cient,  so  that  he  [521]  meets  this  or  that  question  by
equivocation  and  tortuosity, — saying:  I  do  not  affirm
this,  I  do  not  affirm  that,  I  do  not  affirm  other¬
wise,  I  do  not  affirm  the  negative,  nor  do  I  deny  the
negative.

In  a  hearer  of  intelligence,  this  awakens  the  reflec¬
tions  that  the  teacher  is  stupid  and  deficient,  that  he  is
sitting  on  the  fence,  that  this  is  a  comfortless  vocation  ;
and  so  off  he  goes  in  disgust.

Such  is  the  fourth  of  the  comfortless  vocations  in¬
dicated  by  the  Lord  who  knows  and  sees,  the  Arahat
all-enlightened,  as  those  wherein  a  man  of  intelligence
will  assuredly  not  follow  the  higher  life,  or,  if  he  does
follow  it  there,  will  not  advance  to  knowledge,  the
Doctrine,  and  what  is  right.

It  is  wonderful  and  marvellous,  Ananda,  how  the
Lord  has  exposed  the  futility  of  these  four  comfortless
vocations.  Tell  me  now  his  own  gospel  of  the  higher
life  and  of  the  advance  to  knowledge,  the  Doctrine,
and  what  is  right.

There  appears  in  the  world  here,  Sandaka,  a  Truth-
finder,  Arahat  all-enlightened — and  so  forth  as  in  the
Kandaraka  Sutta  (No.  51) — dwells  in  the  First
Ecstasy  with  all  its  zest  and  satisfaction,  a  state  bred
of  inward  aloofness  but  not  divorced  from  observation
and  reflection.  Under  whatever  teacher  a  disciple
attains  to  this  degree  of  excellence,  [522]  there  indeed
will  a  man  of  intelligence  follow  the  higher  life,  and,  if
he  does,  there  will  he  advance  to  knowledge,  to  the
Doctrine  and  what  is  right.


24


AUTHORS  AND  THEIR  BOOKS


53


Irony  in  this  sense,  “which  refuses  to  receive
anything  seriously  and  laughs  away  sublime
verities,  is  an  intellectual  martyrdom,”  says
Mr.  Viziak,  “a  voluntary  confinement  in  a  mock
monastery...  ‘Charity’  was  Milton’s  corrective,
as  ‘Wisdom’  was  that  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne...
religion  was  no  Puritannieal  system  of  inhibitions
to  Milton  any  more  than  it  was  to  Sir  Thomas
Browne,  who  was  constitutionally  a  Catholic.”

It  is  a  valuable  privilege  to  be  able  to  go  back
to  a  fresh  study  of  a  great  genius  like  Milton,  and
to  do  so  for  pleasure  instead  of  as  a  task  will
increase  our  discoveries.  College  students  are
especially  apt  to  get  together  a  few  hasty  im¬
pressions  of  these  master-minds  of  literature  in
order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  an  examina¬
tion.  The  “pass”  being  secured,  there’s  an  end
on’t  as  far  as  most  of  them  are  concerned  ;  which
is  a  pity,  for  it  means  that  education  has  closed,
instead  of  flinging  wide  open,  the  gates  of  litera¬
ture.  There  are  excuses  for  the  busy  students
who  have  time  only  to  skirmish  hastily  through
some  easily-read  book  about  the  author  they
ought  to  read ;  but  there  is  little  good  to  be  said
for  the  universal  system  which  replaces  genuine
culture  with  smartness  in  the  examination-room.
The  problem  of  competitive  education  is,  of
course,  a  very  troublesome  one  (there  seems  to
be  a  glut  of  troublesome  problems  in  my  first
Causerie  for  the  Hindustan  Review !)  but  until
it  is  solved  in  favour  of  study  for  pleasure,  we
who  have  left  college  days  behind  may  always,  if
we  will,  return  to  the  treasures  that  we  once
passed  so  lightly  on  one  side.

*  *  •  •

Mr.  Arnold  Bennett.

About  the  time  this  appears  in  print  a  new
novel  from  Mr.  Arnold  Bennett  will  be  published.
This  is  to  be  a  continuation  of  his  last  one,
“Riceyman  Steps”,  a  study  of  a  miser  and  his
household  living  in  the  slum  area  of  Clerkenwell
in  North  London.  “Riceyman  Steps”  was  one
of  the  big  literary  events  of  last  autumn  and
caused  no  little  astonishment  once  more  at  this
author’s  versatility.

Enoch  Arnold  Bennett  was  born  56  years  ago,
and  lived  his  early  youth  in  the  potteries  region
of  Staffordshire,  “the  Black  Country”  as  it  is
appropriately  called  on  account  of  its  endlessly
smoking  furnaces.  Mr.  Bennett  is  a  complex
personality.  His  temperament  as  well  as  his
work  have  inspired  the  most  divergent  opinions.
I  confess  that  I  believed  him  to  be  a  somewhat


cynical  and  hard  man  until,  for  the  first  time,  I
saw  him  in  the  flesh.  The  occasion  was  a  West-
End  theatre  “first-night.”  He  sat  in  the  stalls
immediately  in  front  of  me.  He  was  waving
gently  an  unlit  cigar  to  the  tune  of  the  music
played  in  the  entr’acte.  He  turned  to  a  friend
beside  him  and  began  speaking,  and  I  heard  a
soft,  shy  voice.  The  air  of  sharp  concentration
which  is  a  characteristic  of  his  features  had  given
way  to  a  smiling  amusement,  smoothing  his  brow,
and  making  humorous  little  creases  about  his
eyes  and  mouth.  I  happened  to  be  acting  as  a
deputy  that  night  to  a  dramatic  critic.  Mr.
Bennett  himself  at  the  outset  of  his  career  attend
ed  “first  nights”  as  a  dramatic  critic  for  about  five
years.  He  has  described  (in  "The  Truth  About
an  Author”)  his  feeling  of  isolation  sitting  among
the  stalls  in  a  dress-suit  which  looked  too  obvious¬
ly  cheap  for  his  comfort  of  mind.  But  that  was
before  the  war,  and  we  are  a  little  less  ceremoni¬
ous  now.

This  little  aside,  however,  helps  to  explain
the  assumed  self-confidence — justified  by  events
— which  has  marked  Mr.  Bennett’s  career.  He
has  never  made  any  bones  about  the  importance
to  his  own  happiness  of  money.  Money,  he  has
explained,  means  culture  as  well  as  pleasure;
we  may  not  agree,  but  the  candour  was  impres¬
sive.

In  his  teens  he  fancied  himself  (like  Mr.  G.  K.
Chesterton)  as  an  artist,  and  wasted  a  lot  of
good  paint  imitating  Turner's  skies.  Sketching
with  a  brush  is  still  his  hobby  when  yachting,  a
recreation  in  which  he  delights.  He  has  quite  an
enviable  skill  as  a  yachtsman,  and  his  brush  has
pleasantly  illustrated  an  account  of  a  cruise  in
Holland.  You  never  know  where,  and  in  what
guise  Mr.  Bennett  is  going  to  appear  next  before
the  public.  "Riceyman  Steps”  was  by  no  means
the  first  big  surprise  he  has  sprung  upon  his  very
mixed  public.  Ilis  career  has  been  astonishing
to  everybody  except,  perhaps,  himself.  Novelist,
playwright  pocket-philosopher,  journalist,  and
essayist,  he  is;  but  these  terms  do  not  exhaust
his  infinite  variety  because  the  novels,  plays  and
miscellaneous  writings  range  over  nearly  the
whole  gamut  of  literary  tones.  He  steps  from
the  cheapest  sensationalism  to  art  of  enduring
excellence  with  the  superb  insouciance  of  a  fault¬
less  prestidigitateur.

The  man  who  could  write  a  successful  shocker
like  "The  Grand  Babylon  Hotel”  in  IQ02.  turns
out  “Riceyman  Steps”,  which  puts  him  in  the


370


LXXVI.  SANDAKA-SUTTA


M.  i.  523.


And  so  too  in  succession  with  the  Second,  Third
and  Fourth  Ecstasies.

With  heart  thus  stedfast,  thus  clarified  and  puri¬
fied,  clean  and  cleansed  of  things  impure,  tempered
and  apt  to  serve,  stedfast  and  immutable, — it  is  thus
that  he  now  applies  his  heart  to  the  knowledge  of  re¬
calling  his  former  existences;  he  calls  to  mind  his  divers
existences  in  the  past  .  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)
.  .  .  in  all  their  details  and  features.  Under  whatever
teacher  .  .  .  and  what  is  right.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  now  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  the  passing  hence,  and  the  reappearance
elsewhere,  of  other  creatures.  With  the  Eye  Celestial
.  .  .  (etc.,  as  in  Sutta  No.  4)  .  .  .  states  of  happiness
in  heaven.  Under  whatever  teacher  .  .  .  and  what
is  right.

That  same  stedfast  heart  he  next  applies  to  the
knowledge  of  the  eradication  of  Cankers.  He  comes
to  know  as  what  they  really  are — Ill,  the  origin  of  Ill,
the  cessation  of  Ill,  and  the  path  which  leads  to  the
cessation  of  Ill ;  he  comes  to  know  for  what  they  really
are — Cankers,  the  origin  of  Cankers,  the  cessation  of
Cankers,  and  the  path  which  leads  to  the  cessation  of
Cankers.  When  he  knows  and  sees  this,  his  heart  is
delivered  from  the  Canker  of  lusts,  from  the  Canker  of
continuing  existence,  and  from  the  Canker  of  ignorance  ;
and  to  him  thus  Delivered  comes  the  knowledge  of  his
Deliverance  in  the  conviction  that — Rebirth  is  no
more  ;  I  have  lived  the  highest  life  ;  my  task  is  done  ;
and  now  for  me  there  is  no  more  of  what  I  have  been  !
At  the  feet  of  whatever  teacher  a  disciple  attains  to  this
degree  of  excellence,  there  indeed  will  a  man  of  intel¬
ligence  follow  the  higher  life,  and,  if  he  does,  there
will  he  advance  to  knowledge,  the  Doctrine,  and  what
is  right.

Would  the  Almsman,  Ananda,  who  is  an  Arahat — in
whom  Cankers  are  dead,  who  has  greatly  lived,  whose
task  is  done,  who  has  cast  off  his  burthen,  who  has
won  his  weal,  whose  bonds  are  no  more,  and  who  by
utter  knowledge  has  been  entirely  Delivered — ,  would
he  [528]  indulge  in  pleasures  of  sense  ?


54


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVII-W


literary  company  of  the  Balzac  of  “Pore  Goriot”
and  “Eugenie  Grandet”.  The  fact  is  he  has
always  been  a  good  craftsman,  even  at  his
inexcusable  levels.  That  Beau  Brummel  of
criticism,  Mr.  Ford  Madox  Hueffer,  in  "Thus  to
Revisit”  speaks  of  his  technique  with  the  utmost
respect,  even  when  the  theme  is  Mr.  Bennett's
“commercial  employment  of  his  pen”.  Mr.
Hueffer  has  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Bennett  “very
obviously  acquired  an  immense  knowledge  of
‘technique’  during  years  spent  in  Paris.”  But
there  is  no  necessary  connection  between  Paris
and  the  craftmanship  of  a  writer  who  has  practis¬
ed  assiduously  for  over  30  years.  Yet  it  is  true
that  Mr.  Bennett  has  admired  and  studied  the
French  so-called  “realists"  of  the  late  nineteenth
century.

He  began  as  a  writer  when  that  first  fever  of
painting  had  subsided,  supplying  a  local  paper
with  paragraphs.  This  phase  came  to  an  end  and
he  left  the  Black  Country  to  become  a  solicitor’s
clerk  in  London.  On  Sundays  he  would  go  in
for  prize-story  competitions— and  win.  Of  course
he  would  win.  He  had  reached  the  comparative
opulence  of  £200  a  year  as  clerk  when  once  more
he  burnt  his  boats  after  careful  deliberation,  and
accepted  .£150  a  year  as  a  sub-editor  of  a  woman’s
paper.  Besides  social  gossip  and  captions  for
illustrations,  he  contributed  a  weekly  column  of
literary  criticism,  signed  "Barbara”.  This
caught  the  approving  eye  of  a  lady  who  was  then


president  of  the  Society  of  Women  Journalists.

She  wrote  to  him  a  letter  saying  :  “Here  at  last
is  a  woman  who  does  not  write  like  other
women.0

Mr.  Bennett’s  fiction,  like  Balzac’s  is  general¬
ly  and  crudely  classified  as  “photographic”,  but
this  is  partly  his  own  fault.  He  once  declared
that  fiction  should  be  photographic  or  nothing.

He  has  spared  no  pains  to  get  a  photographic
accuracy  in  his  descriptions,  whether  of  the  Five
Towns,  or  of  highways  and  byeways,  shops  and
business  offices  in  metropolitan  London.  His
last  novel  was  not  only  a  sensitive  and  subtle
study  of  Earlfoward,  the  second-hand  book¬
seller  and  rich  miser  who  starved  his  wife  and
himself  to  death.  It  is  also  a  wonderful  picture
of  the  locality  of  “the  gentle,  broad  acclivity  of
Ricevman  Steps,  which  lead  from  King’s  Cross
Road  up  to  Riceyman  Square,  in  the  great  metro¬
politan  industrial  district  of  Clerkenwell.”  This
conscientious  attention  to  appearances  and  facts
is  doubtless  due  to  Mr.  Bennett’s  almost  lifelong
practice  of  jotting  down  in  notebooks  every
night  the  things  seen  and  heard  which  have
struck  his  mind  during  the  day.  But  his  best
work  cannot  be  explained  by  note-taking  alone.

It  is  imbued  with  a  personal  vision;  it  has  that  1
quality  of  mind  called  genius,  which  transforms
a  piece  of  craftsmanship  into  the  living  organism
that  is  a  work  of  art.

•  •  *


THE  PAST  AND  THE  PRESENT.  A  PLEA  FOR
A  RATIONAL  SOCIAL  THEORY.

By  Mr.  K.  M.  Panikkar,  m.a.,  Oxon.


Ideas  like  currency  have  a  habit  of  becoming
inflated.  The  national  feeling  which  is  prolong¬
ed  backwards  in  attempting  to  see  in  the  past
a  golden  age  is  such  an  inflation  of  the  ideal  of
nationalism.  We  attribute  to  the  past  an
increased  meaning  in  relation  to  the  present  and
put  a  value  on  it  which  is  fiduciary  and  fictitious
and  passes  current  only  by  what  the  students  of
primitive  culture  characterise  as  Representation
Colleciif.  The  confessional  ideas  of  to-day  are


traced  Ixack  to  the  past.  For  our  weaknesses  *
of  the  present  we  satisfy  ourselves  that  the  past
was  a  glorious  one.  The  attempt  to  trace  back
into  Indian  history  the  existence  of  a  well
developed  system  of  representative  institutions  is
.111  instance  in  point.  There  is  no  doubt  that
representative  institutions  of  a  type  did  exist  in
ancient  India  but  they  were  crude,  primitive  and
tnhal.  Their  existence  two  thousands  years  age
has  no  more  than  a  historical  value  to  us.  Still


THE  PAST  AND  THE  PRESENT


55


the  false  sense  of  exaggerated  nationalism  which
tickles  our  pride  to  see  the  germs  of  everything
imbedded  in  our  past  makes  us  seriously  claim
it  as  a  source  of  present  day  political  inspiration.

The  fact  is  that  this  dependence  on  the  past
is  a  sign  of  our  decay.  For  a  living  nation  tile
present  is  more  important  than  the  past.  The
past  has  no  value  to  them  except  in  so  far  as  the
present  is  its  result.  It  is  when  rejuvenation
has  come  to  a  deadstop  that  nations  cast  their
eyes  backwards.  Nations  like  organisms  live
only  in  growth  and  this  implies  that  a  slow
process  of  change  operates  on  the  collective  mind
of  the  group  which  while  leaving  the  relation
of  the  past  with  the  present  indisputable,  gives
it  new  ideas,  a  new  shape  and  a  new  outlook.
This  constant  rejuvenation  is  of  the  very  essence
of  national  life.  It  is  the  greatest  indictment
against  the  British  rule  that  for  India  as  a  whole
this  movement  has  at  least  for  the  time  stopped
completely,  as  a  result  of  forces  generated  by  the
inevitable  evils  of  a  foreign  Government.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  pre-British  period  in
India  when  states  and  dynasties  were  fighting
for  ascendency  was  not'  so  ‘civilised’  a  place  as
the  India  of  to-day.  But  during  the  whole
period  of  history  when  Islam  came  to  be  the
tilling  power  in  Hindustan  Indian  national  life
continued  to  live  and  grow-.  The  great  religious
awakening  of  the  Hindus  from  Ramanuja  to
Guru  Govind  which  embraces  the  whole  Bhakti
movement,  the  rise  of  Sikhism  and  the  elabora¬
tion  of  Vnislinava  Philosophy — the  development
of  the  great  systems  of  Hindu  law,  the  grow’th
of  a  distinctive  school  in  painting,  architecture
and  music  and  what  is  more  the  recurring  mani¬
festations  of  natioual  spirit  in  all  parts  of  India
clearly  showed  that  the  Hindus  far  from  being
an  inert  mass  were  during  all  the  six  centuries  of
Muslim  contact  very  much  alive  socially  and
politically.  There  was  strictly  speaking  no
Muslim  conquest  of  India  and  no  Muslim  period
of  Indian  history.  Except  the  Punjab,  the
Ganges  Valley,  Gujerat  and  Bengal  no  portion
of  India  acknowledged  for  any  length  of  time
the  supremacy  of  the  Mussalmans.  Rajputana
even  in  the  days  of  the  Moghuls  had  to  be  left
unconquered.  Muslim  rule  never  effectively
extended  to  Bundelkand  and  Central  India ;  and
in  the  south  the  great  empire  of  Vijayanagar
was  broken  up  only  in  1565,  a  hundred  and
twenty  years  before  the  Coronation  of  Sivaji  as
the  Chattrapati  of  the  Maliarattas.  The  Bahmini
states  had  been  completely  Hinduised.  The


Mahomiucdau  conquest  was  never  really  effec¬
tive  except  in  the  Punjab,  in  the  domains
immediately  surrounding  Delhi  and  Agra  and  in
Sindh.  The  local  dynasties  of  Bengal  and
Gujerat  liad  become  national.  <  >ne  has  only  to
glance  at  the  architecture  of  Ahctnadabad  to
know  how  in  Gujerat  the  Muslim  kings  had
contributed  to  the  growth  of  a  new  spirit  of
Iiindu-Muslim  unity.

The  traditional  methods  of  oriental  govern¬
ments  which  left  local  institutions  undisturbed,
the  central  authority  being  a  mere  super-imposed
structure,  was  the  greatest  factor  which  helped
to  keep  alive  the  national  spirit.  The  actual
administration  fell  a  great  deal  on  the  local
Zamiudars  and  chiefs  who  so  long  as  they  paid
their  quota  to  the  Imperial  treasury  were  left
unmolested.  That  is  why  Muslim  rule  even  in
areas  where  it  became  more  or  less  a  permanent
factor  never  became  a  foreign  rule.  Except
during  the  comparatively  short  time  when  the
Grand  Moghuls  held  sway,  there  was  no  attempt
of  any  kind  to  rule  through  a  bureaucracy,
through  Imperial  Officers  who  considered  it  their
business  to  interfere  in  everything.  The  result
was  that  though  the  rulers  of  the  major  portion
of  India  were  foreign  by  birth,  the  current  of
national  life  flowed  in  a  placid  stream  without
any  attempt  at  being  dammed  or  being  irrigated.
Both  Hindus  and  Mussalmans  lived  their  lives
without  the  State  trying  to  influence  their
thoughts  or  trying  to  spiritually  mould  them.

The  continual  rejuvenation  of  life  from  inside
went  on.  Worn  out  ideas  were  rejected,  new
impulses  and  new  doctrines  took  their  place  with
vast  groups.  The  rise  of  the  Sikhs  and  the
impulse  behind  the  Maharatta  power  arc  ex¬
amples  of  this.  There  was  no  fear  then  of  reject¬
ing  old  ideas  merely  because  they  were  old.
The  Brahmo-Samaj  was  the  last  light  of  that
period  of  mental  growth.  But  with  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  modern  bureaucratic  state  which
considers  itself  morally  bound  to  interfere  in
every  aspect  of  our  national  life  this  growth  has
virtually  come  to  a  stop.  The  development  of  a
system  of  exotic  education  aits  us  off  from  our
moral  inheritance.  We  began  to  accept  ideas  to
which  we  could  lay  no  intellectual  claim.  The
result  was  a  moral  bankruptcy  which  did  not
show  sufficient  courage  to  reject  what  honestly
we  have  come  to  think  to  be  the  dead  weight  of
past  tradition.  We  cling  to  worn  out  ideas  and
to  institutions  from  which  life  has  flown  many
centuries  ago.  We  live  in  the  past,  without


M.  i.  524.


OF  FALSE  GUIDES.


371


There  are  five  things,  Sandaka,  which  the  Arahat
of  entire  Deliverance  is  incapable  of  having  truck
with  ; — he  is  incapable  of  taking  life  wittingly,  of
stealing,  of  fornication,  of  deliberate  lying,  or  of
revelling  in  pleasures  of  sense  as  in  the  days  when  he
still  had  a  home.

In  the  Almsman  of  Entire  Deliverance — whether  he
is  walking  or  standing  still,  asleep  or  awake — is  his
ken  and  vision  ready,  aye  ready,  to  assure  him  that  his
Cankers  are  extirpated  ?

I  will  give  you  an  illustration, — which  often  helps  a
man  of  intelligence  to  comprehend.  It  is  just  like  a
man  whose  hands  and  feet  have  been  cut  off ;  whether
walking  or  standing  still,  whether  asleep  or  awake,  his
hands  and  feet  remain  always  off, — as  observation
assures  him.  It  is  just  the  same  with  that  Arahat  of
Entire  Deliverance ;  whether  walking  or  standing  still,
whether  asleep  or  awake,  his  Cankers  remain  always
extirpated, — as  observation  assures  him.

How  many  such  shining  lights  are  there  in  this
Doctrine  and  Rule,  Ananda  ?

Not  a  mere  hundred;  not  two,  three,  four  or  five
hundreds  ;  we  have  many  more  of  them  than  that.

Wonderful  and  marvellous,  Ananda!  And  there¬
withal  no  extolling  of  fellow-believers,  no  disparaging
of  non-believers!  Let  the  scope  of  the  teaching  but
be  example  enough,  f524]  and  there  will  appear  many
a  shining  light !  As  for  these  Mendicants,  they  are
children  of  a  childless  mother;  they  extol  themselves
and  disparage  others,  yet  have  only  produced  three
shining  lights,  to  wit  Nanda  Vaccha,  Kisa  Sankicca,
and  Makkhali  Gosala.  Addressing  then  his  own  follow¬
ing,  Sandaka  said  : — Come,  sirs  ;  our  higher  life  is  with
the  recluse  Gotama,  though  it  is  no  light  matter  for  us  to
abandon  presents,  repute  and  fame.  With  these  words
the  Wanderer  Sandaka  counselled  his  followers  to  lead
the  higher  life  with  the  Lord.


END  OF  VOLUME  I.


56


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


courage  to  reject  it  and  renew  our  life  by  the
acceptance  of  new  ideas.  The  real  reason  for
this  deplorable  state  is  that  we  have  not  sufficient
faith  in  the  new  ideas  by  which  wc  want  to  re¬
place  the  old.  They  did  not  come  to  us  as  truth.
They  were  taught  us  by  our  foreign  masters.
Hence  when  the  renewal  of  life  impetus  has
stopped  we  have  begun  to  look  backwards  to  see
in  the  past  all  that  English  education  claims  to
teach  us.  But  this  is  dangerous  process;  for  the
wont  out  ideas  of  one  age  as  Dr.  Schweitzer  says
often  become  like  rejected  products  of  metabolism
and  act  as  poisons.  This  is  the  poison  that  has
enervated  us.  It  is  this  that  interferes  with  the
free  circulation  of  our  blood.  We  have  been
afraid  to  question ;  wc  have  been  afraid  to  reject.
Instead  of  purposive  activity  and  genuine  social
thought  a  kind  of  dynamic  orthodoxy  took  up
cudgels  in  favour  of  everything  that  existed.
The  painted  past  in  which  we  live  has  almost
suffocated  us.  Wc  have  resisted  the  acceptance
of  new  ideas  from  an  entirely  false  sense  of
national  prestige  arising  out  of  the  inflation  of
the  doctrine  of  nationalism.

What  India  requires  now  is  a  principle  of  re¬
juvenation.  The  non-co-operation  movement
tried  something  of  the  kind  but  it  was  too  limited
in  its  social  activities.  What  we  have  to  do  is
to  attempt  an  extensive  cleaning  up  of  the  whole
range  of  national  life,  accepting  nothing  whose
utility  or  compelling  basis  is  not  proved  to
us.  Such  a  philosophical  examination  of  the  basis
of  our  national  life — for  that  is  what  is  required —
will  throw  much  that  we  now  unreasoningly  hold
sacred  into  the  dust  heap.  The  only  attempt
that  was  made  in  this  direction  was  by  Raja
Rammolian  Roy.  He  wanted  to  remodel  society ;
he  wanted  a  complete  purging  of  worn  out  ideas
but  the  time  unfortunately  was  not  ripe.  Ortho¬
doxy  had  armed  itself  and  a  movement  which
had  in  it  the  germs  of  a  great  national  regenera¬
tion  sank  into  the  creed  of  an  enlightened  sect.
It  is  one  of  the  greatest  tragedies  of  modern
India,  for  Rammohan  Roy’s  ideas  were  genuinely
revolutionary  in  social  matters  and  if  accepted
would  have  given  an  impetus  to  national  re¬
juvenation.  He  began  by  questioning  the  very
philosophy  behind  our  social  system.  His  object
was  nothing  less  than  the  breakdown  of  caste  and
the  Savghatan  of  the  whole  Hindu  Community.
He  attacked  the  basis  of  the  Hindu  joint  family
system  with  its  early  marriage  and  group  life.
He  began  the  reclamation  of  the  submerged
classes.  He  undermined  and  set  to  work  to  blow


up  the  Varnashrama  Dhartna.  He  introduced
new  ideas.  But  alas,  moral  bankruptcy  had
already  overtaken  the  Hindus  and  his  effort
magnificent  as  it  was  succeeded  only  very
partially.  We  have  to  take  up  where  he  left  and
continue  the  attack  the  plan  of  which  lie  drew
up  if  Indian  society  is  to  be  united  into  a  pur¬
posive  organism  for  human  good.

The  first  essential  requisite  for  this  is  a  new
social  philosophy.  Indian  life  is  being  choked
in  the  mortmain  of  the  Varnashrama  Dharnia
philosophy.  It  must  be  replaced  by  a  social
theory  which  is  rational,  synthetic  and  non-
tlicological.  Society,  after  all,  is  the  collective
organisation  of  individuals  in  a  geographical
unit  for  the  purposes  of  common  life,  through
which  alone  man  attains  his  highest  stature.
A  systematisation  of  various  activities  into
ashramas  and  Varnas  may  be  alright  for  theore¬
tical  purposes  but  it  has  never  approximated  in
the  least  to  facts.  The  Brahmins  were  never
a  wholly  priestly  class  and  the  Khshatrias  were
not  all  given  to  the  profession  of  arms.
Varnashrama  Dbarma  is  a  purely  imaginary
division  without  even  the  merit  of  providing  a
tolerable  explanation  for  existing  facts.  It  is  a
social  theory  which  is  neither  in  accordance
with  actualities,  nor  inspiring  as  an  ideal.  Its
replacement  by  a  philosophy  which  will  provide
a  compelling  ethical  basis  for  the  majority  of  our
people  is  the  first  essential  for  the  renovation  of
Indian  life.

Is  it  not  because  of  the  lack  of  this  elementary
but  guiding  factor  that  wc  cannot  satisfactorily
solve  the  problem  of  the  untouchables?  The
Hindu  efforts  at  the  reclamation  of  the  sub¬
merged  classes  have  not  so  far  been  successful
because  there  was  no  consistent  theory  behind
them.  The  Panchamas  simply  don’t  fit  into  the
four  corners  of  the  Varnashrama  Dharma  theory
and  we  have  not  so  far  accepted  any  other  prin¬
ciple  for  our  social  organisation.  So  to  my
mind  both  these  questions  are  intertwined.
The  elevation  of  the  depressed  classes  and  their
assimilation  into  the  general  body  of  Hindu
society  is  certainly  the  largest  problem  in  India.
A  question  which  affects  the  human  rights  and
development  of  60  million  souls  is  certainly  a
matter  of  the  widest  import  to  the  world  in
general.  Its  magnitude  is  bewildering  but  with¬
out  its  solution  the  Indian  can  claim  no  justice
anywhere,  and  its  solution  cannot  be  successfully
undertaken  except  on  the  basis  of  a  universally
accepted  and  morally  compelling  social  theory.


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL'S  GLARE  IN  THE  DARK


57


Another  matter  in  which  Indian  life  would
have  to  renovate  the  basis  and  change  the  direc¬
tion  of  development  is  the  joint  family  system.
There  is  no  doubt  that  our  present  system  is
bad  for  the  race  and  worse  for  the  society.  It
may  be  an  easy  solution  of  housing  and  poor
law  difficulties  but  the  method  of  bringing  up
children  in  herds  cannot  react  satisfactorily  on
the  health  of  the  nation.  From  the  point  of
view  of  the  community,  the  creation  of  a  new
loyalty  between  the  individual  and  the  wider
society'  of  which  he  is  a  member  can  only  result
in  disorganisation.  That  is  in  fact  what  we  see
in  India.  There  is  no  doubt  that  if  progress  on
a  wide  scale  is  to  be  achieved  then  the  whole
family  system  must  be  reconstructed.  Here  also
the  Brahmo  Samaj  tried  to  introduce  the  indivi¬
dualistic  basis.

The  time  has  come  when  we  must  set  our
hearts  to  the  disagreeable  but  not  the  less
necessary  operation  of  removing  the  decayed
ideas  from  our  body  politic.  No  society  was
reformed  and  no  community  saved  by
merely  continuing  in  the  old  grooves  of  settled
tradition.  What  is  required  for  it  primarily  is  a
clear  understanding  of  the  relation  between  the
past  and  the  present.  The  true  perspective  in
which  any  living  nation  will  look  upon  its  past
is  merely  as  being  continuous  and  alive
through  its  results,  in  the  present  day.
The  past  is  not  to  be  worshipped  because
it  is  past,  and  is  not  to  be  accepted  without
question  of  its  utility  and  justice  for  the  mere
reason  that  it  once  was.  In  India  at  the  present
time  for  this  reasonable  and  normal  relationship


between  the  present  and  the  past  we  have
enthroned  the  idea  of  the  greatness  of  an
imaginary  golden  age.  Our  histories  arc  written
with  that  view.  Our  common  modes  of  thought
take  it  for  granted.  This  unreal  and  fallacious
doctrine  must  be  replaced  by  a  belief  in  the
possibilities  of  shaping  the  present  and  of  direct¬
ing  the  future  if  India  is  to  attain  greatness.
There  is  no  use  in  legitimising  our  claims  to
greatness  as  a  nation  by  appealing  to  a  past
which  exists  only  in  our  imagination.  If  we  are
to  be  accepted  as  a  community  which  contri¬
butes  its  quota  to  the  well  being  of  humanity
and  is  thus  entitled  to  respect  then  we  must
depend  upon  our  present,  on  our  ideals  and
achievements  of  to-day.  That  is  possible  only
when  we  have  dropped  the  beautified  mask  of
the  past  which  we  have  put  on  to  hide  our
ugliness.  An  ugly  man  alive  if  he  is  animated
by  noble  ideals  and  is  devoted  to  service  is  of
greater  value  to  humanity  than  the  most  beauti¬
ful  man  who  is  dead.  The  question  must  be
frankly  and  squarely  faced.  It  would  indeed
have  been  an  easy  matter  if  the  cause  of  truth
and  reason  won  merely  on  its  inherent  strength.
But  the  walls  of  Jericho  do  not  fall  by  them¬
selves  and  truth  and  justice  triumph  only  when
the  hand  and  mind  of  man  actively  work  for  it.
That  is  what  is  required  in  India  now.  The
false  gods  of  a  dead  social  theory  must  be
dethroned,  and  in  their  place  we  must  plant  the
banner  of  a  rational  social  theory  which  while
taking  its  inspiration  from  the  past  looks  to  the
present  and  the  future  and  is  not  content  to
worship  the  Golden  calf  of  a  byegone  age.


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL’S  GLARE  IN  THE  DARK— III.


By  Mr.  K.  C.  Sen.


Elucidation  of  the  Curse  of  Adam.

The  Curse  of  Adam  stands  recorded  in  the
Book  of  Genesis  thus  r — “Thou  Shalt  Eat  bread
in  the  sweat  of  thy  face”.  The  curse  does  not
mean  that  the  process  of  eating  or  consuming
bread  is  accompanied  by  sweating.  On  the  other
hand,  as  experience  shows,  the  process  of  eating
is  a  pleasant  fact ;  and  is  more  calculated  to  dry
8


up  drops  of  sweat  if  they  arc  already  in  the  face.
Eating  implies  producing.  “The  curse  implies
that  to  eat  bread  a  man  must  produce  it,  that  is,
he  that  eats  bread  produces  it,  or  conversely,  that
he  that  produces  bread  cats  it;  he  is  at  least
entitled  to  cat  it.  Negatively,  no  man  should
eat  bread  without  producing  it.  Here  lies  the
foundation  of  socialism.


THE  HINDUS  TAN  REVIEW


58


The  next  point  is,  did  God  intend  the  curse
to  be  hereditary  ?  It  is  generally  understood  and
believed  that  He  did  so  intend.  The  law  of
heredity  shows  that  the  offspring  inherits  the
evil  as  well  as  the  good  in  the  nature  of  the
progenitor.  Biological  Science  has  confirmed
this  primitive  interpretation  and  belief.

In  the  third  place,  the  curse  implies  that  there
is  a  constant  ratio  between  the  quantity  of  bread
eaten  and  the  quantity  of  sweat  shed  through  the
pores  of  the  skin  and  as  eating  is  identified
with  producing,  the  curse  implies  the  law  of
constant  ratio  between  the  value  of  the  commo¬
dity  produced  and  the  cost  of  producing  it.  The
curse  of  Cain  made  the  curse  of  Adam  more
severe  by  ordaining  that  this  rat  o  between  pro¬
duction  and  its  cost  was  variable  and  that  if  the
unit  of  labour  produces  the  unit  of  commodity
two  units  of  labour  will  not  produce  two  units
of  commodity  but  less — This  is  the  law  of
‘diminishing  return.’

The  curses  did  not  indicate  what  quantity  of
bread  each  man  should  eat,  and  whether  to  obtain
relief  from  excessive  inspiration  a  man  might
reduce  his  consumption  of  bread  without  detri¬
ment  to  his  health.  It  has  been  believed  for  long
ages,  and  it  is  still  believed  by  most  people  that
the  more  bread  a  man  eats  the  better  he  is,  that
though  perspiring  is  painful,  eating  is  compara¬
tively  more  pleasant,  and  it  is  better  to  perspire
more  in  order  to  eat  more  than  to  perspire  less
with  the  prospect  of  eating  less.

Misapplication  of  the  law  pf  conservation  of
mechanical  energy  has  for  long  supported  the
idea  that  the  more  a  man  eats  the  stronger  he
grows.  But  food  is  not  by  itself  energy.  It  is
not  the  quantity  of  comestibles  eaten,  not  even
the  quantity  digested,  but  the  quantity  assimi¬
lated  that  constitutes  physiological  energy.  The
relation  between  nervous  energy  and  muscular
energy  is  still  obscure,  and  it  will  be  a  long  time
yet  before  science  can  determine  the  natnre  and
quantity  of  food  a  particular  man  should  consume
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  and  retaining  the
maximum  energy.  The  general  idea  on  the  sub¬
ject  so  far  has  been  that  every  man  has  a  fixed
power  of  assimilation  and  that  it  is  better  for  him
to  make  available  to  that  power  more  substance
than  it  can  assimilate  than  to  present  less  to  it,
it  being  understood  that  the  rejected  substance
would  pass  out  of  the  system  without  leaving  any
harmful  trace  behind.  But  this  idea  is  gradually


changing,  and  it  is  now  being  increasingly  held
that  a  comparatively  small  quantity  of  food  con¬
sumed  is  better  than  a  comparatively  large
quantity,  the  standard  being  the  unknown
quantity  which  taxes  the  power  of  assimilation
to  the  best  advantage.  Fasting  is  better  than
surfeit.  Deficit  is  better  than  excess  ;  modera¬
tion  is  better  than  intemperance  and  gluttony.
The  problem  however  is  in  the  experimental
stage.

The  ratio  between  the  quantify  of  bread  con¬
sumed  and  the  quantity  of  sweat  exuded  being
fixed,  the  pain  of  sweating  might  be  partially
evaded  by  reducing  the  pleasure  of  eating.  But
man,  as  a  rule,  is  so  ardent  in  his  desire  for  this
pleasure  that  he  is  prepared  to  submit  to  the  paiu
of  sweating  for  the  purpose  of  enjoying  it.
This  desire  was  created  while  man  was  yet  in
paradtse  where  food  was  like  manna.  Among
the  robust  Western  people,  the  most  civilized
of  modem  times,  the  best  thing  in  life  is
a  good  dinner.  The  "good  th:ngs  of  life"  are
laid  on  the  table  every  evening.  Johnson  said
not  very  long  ago  that  "a  man  may  travel  all
over  the  world  without  finding  any  thing  better
than  dinners.”

The  western  people  are  to  be  congratulated
even  for  being  able  to  imagine  that  any  thing
better  than  dinner  can  be  found  in  this  world
But  so  far  their  nomadism  on  land  and  water
has  been  almost  invariably  inspired  by  the
prospect  of  good  dinner  and  its  continuance
through  life.  They  work  hard  in  fields  and
factories  for  dinner.  They  wage  war  against
neighbours  for  dinner.  They  depopulate
countries  and  continents  for  dinner.  They
enslave  people  wholesale  for  dinner.  They  send
their  children  to- school  that  they  may  have  dinner
when  they  grow  old.  Education  for  the  sake  of
knowledge  is  now  sincerely  repudiated  as  camou¬
flage.  When  it  is  said  that  man  does  not  live
by  bread  alone,  no  spiritual  idea  is  necessarily
intended  to  Ik-  conveyed ;  for  a  man  can  live  by
cake  also,  if  lie  is  shrewd  enough.  When  the
King  of  France  said,  “if  they  have  no  bread
why  don’t  they  eat  cake?”  he  probably  had  this
idea  of  the  life-supporting  value  of  cake  in  his
mind.

Another  implication  of  the  curse  of  Adam  is
that  the  perspiration  caused  by  the  exertion  to
produce  food  should  be  still  present  when  it  is
eaten,  that  is  to  say,  that  man  shall  consume
immediately  what  he  produces,  which  has  for  its
corollary  that  he  shall  save  nothing.  The  habit


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL’S  GLARE  IN  THE  DARK


59


of  saving  and  of  creating  capital,  it  will  appear,
has  been  the  most  potent  factor,  first,  in  disturb¬
ing  the  ratio  between  the  bread  consumed  and
the  sweat  exuded,  and  then  in  completely
divorcing  the  pleasure  of  consumption  from  the
pain  of  production,  and  lastly  in  creating  a
hereditary  class  of  parasites.

Lastly,  it  may  be  mentioned  here  as  a  relevant
fact  that  the  prayer,  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily
bread,”  standing  in  the  face  of  the  curse  of
Adam,  by  persons  who  have  accumulated  enough
wealth  for  themselves  and  their  progen y  sounds
like  a  piece  of  unredeemed  irreverence.  This
prayer  was  probably  intended  for  the  time,
subsequent  to  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom
of  God  on  Earth.  But  that  kingdom  was  not
established  by  Christ  in  his  first  advent,  and  the
second  advent  is  still  waited  far.  The  prayer
virtually  asks  God  to  withdraw  the  Curse  of
Adam,  and  cleverly  reminds  Him  that  it  has
failed  and  is  therefore  unworthy  of  being  retained
in  the  Bible.  But  probably  Christ  meant  the
prayer  not  for  the  rich,  but  for  the  poor,  who
sweated  for  finding  food  for  others  while  they
themsdves  starved  Lettered  by  them  the  prayer
contains  a  request  for  retributive  justice  without
any  vindictive  implications.  The  labourers  of
the  present  day  however  do  not  appeal  to  God
for  help,  but  assert  themselves  in  strikes  and  in
other  ways,  and  compel  their  parasitic  oppressors
to  part  with  a  fraction  of  their  profits  to  be
converted  into  wages.  The  iron  law  of  wage*
has  made  the  law  of  profits  soft  and  plastic  by
its  heated  blows.  But  after  all  the  conflict
between  capital  and  labour  is  a  conflict  for
dinner,  and  has  no  high  spiritual  inspiration
behind  it.

Evasion  of  the  Curse  of  Adam.

A  very  important  implication  of  the  curse  of
Adam  is  that  it  has  no  application  to  the  pro-
cultural  stages  of  life  ;  for  bread  is  made  of
wheat,  and  wheat  is  produced  by  agriculture.
An  astute  rich  man  living  in  the  West  in  modern
times  might  perhaps,  lawyer-like  cleverly  argue
that  he  is  not,  except  in  a  small  measure,  subject
to  the  curse,  because  though  society  has
advanced  to  the  industrial,  often  having  success¬
fully  passed  through  the  agricultural,  stage  of
human  life,  bread  forms  only  an  insignificant
part  of  his  food,  most  of  which  belongs  to  the
pastoral  and  hunting  stages  of  progress.

The  change  from  the  pastoral  to  the  agri¬
cultural  mode  of  life  is  accompanied  by  a


corresponding  change  in  the  character  of  food  ;
surely  our  ancestors  did  not  sweat  in  the  fields
for  mere  aesthetic  gratification.  It  is  not
known  that  in  any  civilization  in  the  past  the
food  of  pastoral  life  has  been  entirely  supplanted
by  that  of  agricultural  life,  but  the  tendency
has  always  been  towards  that  consummation.
Instead  of  eating  the  flesh  of  the  cow  man  has
resorted  to  milk  and  its  products,  possibly  out
of  growing  reverence  for  life.  But  with  the
progress  of  western  civilization  animal  food  is
growingly  reasserting  itself,  and  the  con¬
sumption  of  wheat  in  all  its  variety  of  forms
is  gradually  dwindling  among  the  richer,  that
is  to  say,  among  the  more  advanced  sections  of
society.  Wheat  forms  a  mere  supplement  in  the
good  things  of  life  with  which  the  rich  man’s
table  is  loaded.  Poor  people  sweat  in  the  field
and  live  mainly  on  bread.  They  do  not  draw
for  their  food  upon  the  slaughter  houses
of  Chicago  ;  and  as  to  Smithficld,  it  is  all  but
inaccessible  to  them.  In  India  the  consumption
of  animal  food  is  nominal.  It  is  almost,  absent
among  the  higher  castes  of  Hindus  ;  and  the
Mussulmans,  inspite  of  the  reported  cases  of
fighting  with  the  Hindus  on  fcstivcl  occasions,
do  not  consume  much  cow's  flesh.  Cow
slaughter  in  India  is  chiefly  intended  for  the
Christian  ruling  classes,  who  keep  the  memory
of  their  home  traditions  green.  Irreverence  for
life  is  characteristic  of  western  civilization  with
all  its  implications  of  lack  of  genuine  sympathy
and  compunction,  and  the  historian  has  no
difficulty  in  perceiving  that  this  irreverence  is
the  prime  factor  in  the  progress  of  that  civilisa¬
tion.  It  has  rendered  exploitation  easy,  and  has
kept  the  ape  and  tiger  quality  in  man  in  sound
and  efficient  condition.  It  has  enabled  him  to
evade  the  Curse  of  Adam  more  effectively  than
the  highest  achievements  of  science.

Evasion  of  the  curse  is  possible  in  two  ways,
namely,  (i)  by  the  power  of  science  designed  to
enable  man  to  produce  much  with  little  labour,
arid  (2)  by  the  power  of  systematically  con¬
suming  what  others  produce.  'Flic  first  power
is  intellectual  and  the  second  moral.  The  two
powers  are  mutually  helpful  in  western  civiliza¬
tion.  They  are  so  blended  in  actual  operation
that  they  look  like  a  single  undivided  and
indivisible  faculty.  There  is  a  third  method  of
evading  the  curse,  which  proved  partially
successful  in  India  in  the  past,  but  which  under
the  pressure  of  foreign  culture  is  being
increasingly  abandoned.  To  avoid  the  pain  of


Central  Archaeological  Library,

NEW  DELHI.

_  HI  35


Call  No.


&  3


Author —  L-cfld-


Title—  L  t<


cj'ScJJchAxLX


- r y— -

Borrower  No.

Date  of  Issue

1  Date  of  Return

.£r)'fJo<n.

Lillis

artll'fi

v  1  '

W??

f  f  ->

fL:  s ;

\o>  \L\  r.

.  rVv-c-'2-

^TTi

1  1  '

r

i

K  ■

tki


^  that  is  shut  is  but  a  block


c^aeoloC/

^  .X-;

-V  V


lease  help  ns  to  keep  the  book
clean  and  moving.


60


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


sweating  Indian  sages  suggested,  from  a  high
spiritual  point  of  view,  abstention  from  the
pleasure  of  eating  bread.  Of  course  no  man  can
live  without  eating  food  for  any  length  of  time.
At  the  same  time  excessive  eating,  which  implies
excessive  sweating  is  now  scientifically  regarded
as  injurious  to  life.  The  minimum  quantity  of
food  required  for  maintaining  health,  if  it  could
be  found,  would  be  the  most  important  dis¬
covery  in  hygiene  and  most  beneficial  to
mankind.  But  it  will  be  a  long  time  before
that  discovery  can  be  made.  Besides  a  general
formula  will  perhaps  be  futile.  And  so  long  as
that  discovery  is  not  made  the  struggle  between
work  and  wages  will  go  on  and  ever>’  man  will
try  to  work  less  and  to  consume  more.

The  history  of  the  evasion  of  the  Curse  of
Adam  is  virtually  the  history  of  exploitation.
Exploitation  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Exploitation
of  Nature  and  Exploitation  of  Neighbour.  The
Exploitation  of  Nature  is  primarily  intellectual
in  character  and  seems  to  be  morally  colourless.
In  truth,  however,  this  exploitation  is  open  to
criticism  from  two  points  of  view.  In  the
first  place  exploitation  of  Nature  on  a  large
scale  is  impossible  without  exploitatipn  of
Neighbours  of  tire  present  generation.  In  the
second  place  it  cannot  be  carried  on  indefinitely
without  injuring  future  generations,  who  will
find  the  earth  either  completely  exhausted  or  so
drained  that  the  proportion  pf  wage  to  work
will  perceptibly  decrease.  After  the  great  war
the  miners  complained  that  the  ores  were  too
deep  to  permit  the  old  unit  of  labour  to  bring  to
the  surface  the  old  unit  of  raw  material.  The
exploitable  volume  of  the  earth’s  crust  is  limited.
Its  depth  cannpt  exceed  five  miles,  and  probably
it  does  not  exceed  one  mile.  The  deeper  the
exploiter  goes  the  more  difficult  he  finds  his
work,  and  the  sweating  is  out  of  proportion  to
the  bread  obtained.  However  this  kind  of
exploitation,  thovgh  morally  objectionable  is
by  no  means  very  reprehensible,  for  it  may  be
argued  that  science  wall  possibly  open  ways  of
utilizing  natural  resources  without  much  addi¬
tional  cost  in  labour.  But  the  burden  of  proving
that  science  admits  of  indefinite  progress  lies  on
the  exploiters  of  the  present  generation,  and  so
long  as  they  depend  upon  mere  chance  or
possibility  they  cannot  claim  the  right  of
indefinite  exploitation,  against  the  interests  of
persons  yet  unborn  and  therefore  unable  to
assert  themselves  openly.  It  is  generally
affirmed  that  western  civilization  is  accumulating


wealth,  instead  of  spending  it  lavishly,  because
of  its  solicitude  for  the  interests  of  future
generations.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is
accumulating  wealth,  which  may  be  available  to
future  generations,  but  it  can  not  be  asserted  that
the  interests  of  tbe  future  generations  openly  or
directly  enter  into  the  consciousness  of  the  final
cause  of  the  accumulation.  Professor  Keynes
seems  to  regard  the  accumulative  instinct  as  the
result  of  a  deep-seated  superstition  or  illusion.
He  says : —

“The  capitalist  classes  were  allowed  to  call
the  best  part  of  the  cake  (accumulated  wealth)
theirs  and  were  theoretically  forced  to  consume
it,  on  the  tacit  underlying  condition  that  they
consumed  very  little  of  it  in  practice.  The  duty
of  saving  became  nine-tenths  of  virtue  and  the
growth  of  the  cake  the  object  of  true  religion.
There  grew  round  the  non-consumption  of  the
cake  all  those  instincts  of  puritanism  which  in
other  ages  has  withdrawn  itself  from  the  world
and  has  neglected  the  arts  pf  production  as  well
as  those  of  enjoyment.  And  so  the  cake
increased  ;  but  to  what  end  was  not  clearly  con¬
templated.  Individuals  would  be  exhorted  not
so  much  to  abstain  as  to  defer,  and  to  cultivate
the  pleasures  of  security  and  anticipation.”

Thus  it  will  appear  that  excessive  exploita¬
tion  pf  nature  is  not  morally  defensible,  though
its  rcprehcnsibleness  is  not  easily  detected  and
constitutes  a  delicate  problem  in  casuistry.  It
is  remarkable  that  the  principle  of  optimism
being  the  cult  of  western  civilization  any  thing
calculated  to  give  rise  to  pessimistic  prognostica¬
tion  should  be  avoided.  Pessimists  of  a  cultured
type  are,  however,  already  springing  up  by
hundreds.  Should  the  spirit  of  unbelief  in  the
principle  of  optimism,  to  say  nothing  of  the
spirit  of  pessimism,  come  to  dominate  the  heart
of  the  majority  of  the  cultured  people,  the
bottom  of  western  civilization  will  be  knocked
out  of  it  like  the  spangled  head  of  the  snake,
which  in  the  mind  of  the  uncultivated  Hindu
supports  the  earth  in  the  void  of  infinite  space.
The  principle  of  optimism  is  that  though  men
do  come  and  men  do  go  society  lives  for  ever,
and  progressively.  Its  ideal,  as  a  cult,  is  that
society  is  approaching  to  a  state  of  perfection
when  wage  will  bear  no  proportion  to  work,  and
all  men  will  eat  bread  and  also  cake  without
sweating ;  when  the  law  of  conservation  of
energy  will  be  completely  relaxed  in  favour  of
man.  Excessive  exploitation  of  nature  on  the
other  hand  will  make  that  law  run  in  the


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL’S  CLARE  IN  THE  DARK


61


opposite  direction  and  make  man’s  life
extremely  miserable.  It  invites,  in  short,  the
destruction  of  western  civilization,  and  is  there¬
fore  open  to  moral  animadversion.  'The  history
ot  this  type  of  exploitation  is  quite  modern  and
does  not  extend  beyond  one  hundred  and  fifty
years.  But  within  this  short  period  it  has  per¬
formed  stupendous  Harikari  in  the  bowels  of
the  earth,  and  has  rendered  the  comforts  and
conveniences  of  life  more  costly  than  before.
No  doubt  the  great  war  is  largely  responsible  for
this,  but  great  wars  are  inseparable  accidents  of
western  civilization,  and  can  no  more  be
eliminated  from  it  than  hydrogen  can  be
eliminated  from  water.

As  to  exploitation  of  neighbour  the  theory  is
quite  sound  while  men  believe  in  its  necessity  and
righteousness.  It  becomes  shaky  and  unstable
when  the  belief  begins  to  oscillate.  The  fight
between  cosmic  necessity  and  sentimental
morality  obstructs  human  progress,  upward  as
well  as  downward,  by  its  indecisive  results.
The  history  of  western  civilization  exhibits
periods  of  decisive  victories  gained  by  cosmic
necessity,  and  it  is  by  the  results  of  these
victories  that  western  civilization  stands  erect,
though  the  victories  themselves  are  condemned
by  historians  as  inhuman.  It  is  like  denouncing
robbery  which  fattens  on  stolen  property,
that  is,  property  stolen  by  ancestors,  near  or
remote,  better  if  remote.

Midway  between  the  two  kinds  of  exploita¬
tion  mentioned  above  lies  the  exploitation  of
animal  energy.  God  gave  man  "dominion  over
the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,
and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and
over  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the
earth”.  This  dominion  did  not  explicitly  extend
to  the  privilege  of  eating  the  flesh  of  the  animals.
Herbs  and  fruits  were  his  meat  in  paradise,  and
when  expelled  from  it  man  at  once  took  to  the
habit  of  eating  mutton,  beef  and  bread.  We
afterwards  learnt  to  use  cattle  as  carriers  and
drawers.  He  was  privileged  to  so  use  them.  The
cattle  drew  his  plough  and  carried  his  crops
home  and  to  the  market,  and  when  wheels  were
discovered  the  exploitation  of  cattle  as  drawers
was  much  enlarged.  Cruelty  to  animals  was
largely  practised.  But  the  term  had  a  limited
signification.  Merely  making  the  animals  work
against  their  will  was  not  cruelty,  for  this  was
covered  by  the  term  ’dominion’.  Cruelty  meant
only  such  torture  as  was  practised  for  its  own
sake,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  exploitation.


Slaughter  of  cattle  is  not  an  offence,  but  the
causing  of  unnecessary  pain  in  the  process  is
sinful.  The  exploitation  of  cattle,  except  for
purjHJses  of  eating  their  flesh,  is  being  substitut¬
ed  by  the  exploitation  of  inanimate  nature  and
ploughs  and  vehicles  are  now  drawn  by  steam
and  electricity.  This  substitution  is  not  the
result  of  kindness  and  compunction,  but  is  due
to  the  fact  that  the  exploitation  of  animal  energy
is  less  efficient  and  more  costly.  There  is  likeness
between  this  substitution  and  that  of  free  labour
for  slave  labour.  The  abolition  of  slavery  has  no
moral  significance.  All  its  value  lies  in  the  sphere
of  economics.  The  credit  for  the  abolition
belongs  not  to  the  advancing  morality  of  man,
but  to  his  intellectuality.  The  partial  abolition
ot  the  exploitation  of  animal  energy  does  not
proclaim  the  triumph  of  Christian  morality,  but
of  the  science  of  civilization.

The  slaughter  of  cattle  goes  on  increasing
with  the  progress  of  western  civilization.  Ter.
thousand  heads  are  killed  every  day  at  Chicago,
and  the  flesh  distributed  over  the  world  in  tin
cans  and  Chicago  is  one  of  many  slaughtering
places.  In  India  there  was  a  king  who  killed
250  heads  daily  for  the  use  of  his  guests.  But
Chicago  caters  for  the  entire  world,  for  countless
paying  guests.

A  refined  form  of  exploitation  is  practised  in
the  shape  of  milcliing.  The  milk  is  transformed
in  numerous  ways  for  final  consumption.  Curd,
butter,  cheese,  ghee,  chhana,  ghol,  etc.  are  some
of  the  names  of  the  forms  in  which  milk  is
consumed.  The  calf  is  given  enough  to  live
upon.  It  is  sometimes  killed  to  supply  meat,
while  the  milking  is  carried  on  by  painful
processes.

Towns  which  consume  most  milk  and  meat
keep  an  organization  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty
to  animals ;  and  much  cruelty  is  practised  in  the
name  of  prevention  of  cruelty.  Mysterious  are
the  ways  of  civilization.  Nothing  is  done  in  a
straight-forward  way.  Complicity  and  camou¬
flage  add  relish  to  civilization.

The  curse,  as  it  stands  recorded  in  the  Book
of  Genesis,  and  as  interpreted  above,  condemns
all  men  and  women  and  their  children  and
children’s  children  to  sweating  toil  on  penalty
of  death  to  the  end  of  time.  This  curse  stands
as  a  divinely  ordained  law,  or  as  a  law  of  Nature,
as  we  now  designate  such  ordinances  in  science.
The  laws  cf  Nature  are  ordinarily  supposetl  to  be
perpetual  and  inexorable.  But  scientific  men
who  are  also  philosophers  do  not  consider  it


62


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


impossible  that  they  are  subject  to  modification
or  termination,  though  practically  and  for  all
human  purposes  they  are  immutable.  It  cannot
be  said  that  the  curse,  once  passed,  limited
the  power  of  God  to  change  it  or  to  put  an  end
to  its  further  operation.  God  afterwards  promised
that  he  would  send  his  son  to  put  an  end  to  it
after  man  had  been  disciplined  enough  to  receive
the  boon.  God  also  in  his  infinite  wisdom
endowed  man  with  freedom  of  choice  subject  of
course  to  limitations  specifically  imposed  by
Him.  It  was  open  to  man  to  try  to  eat  bread
without  sweat  in  his  face,  and  his  success
depended  on  the  condition  that  he  would  respect
the  commandments,  and  one  of  these  command¬
ments  was  that  every  man  should  love  his
neighbour  as  himself.  Any  act  or  behaviour
showing  that  he  loved  himself  more  than  his
neighbour  world  eventually  defeat  his  en¬
deavour,  whatever  success  he  might  attain
temporarily  The  evasion  of  the  curse  during
the  last  five  thousand  years  has  been  effected  by
a  more  or  less  violent  disobedience  of  the  above
commandment.  Tins  disobedience  has  been
most  pronounced  and  emphatic  during  the  last
four  hundred  years,  that  is  to  say,  since  the  in¬
auguration  of  what  is  known  as — western  civili¬
zation,  and  among  people  who  rhetorically  call
themselves  Christians,  or  devoted  followers  of
the  son  of  God  to  make  the  disobedience  shine
more  brightly  in  the  blazing  success  of  their
evasive  operations.  But  their  success  has  lasted
for  some  generations,  and  most  of  them  believe
that  it  will  not  only  last  for  ever,  but  will  show
increasing  brightness.  There  are  perceptible,
however,  quickly  growing  signs  that  the
success  will  terminate  in  disastrous  failure.

A  small  difference  of  brain  and  brawn  gave
one  brother  an  advantage  over  another  which  he
utilized  for  the  purpose  of  evading  the  Curse  of
Adam.  The  second  sweated  for  the  first.  As
this  spread  over  a  large  area,  public  opinion
became  reconciled  to  it,  aud  what  was  an  in¬
fringement  of  the  moral  order  came  to  be
regarded  as  an  instance  of  the  natural  order.
Small  natural  differences  were  exaggerated  and
perpetuated  by  art.  Natural  superiority  was
reinforced  by  conventional  superiority,  and  the
divergence  between  the  superior  and  the  inferior
grew  in  mass  and  strength  till  the  superior
became  slaves.  Slowly  the  very  psychology  of
the  society  changed  so  as  to  turn  mere
acquiescence  into  acceptance,  and  acceptance
into  conviction.  The  difference  was  perpetuated


by  the  conventional  law  of  inheritance  and
succession  confused  with  the  natural  law  of
heredity.  The  conventional  difference  was  at
first  proportionately  larger  than  the  natural
difference,  and  in  course  of  time  intensified  the
latter.  Natural  difference  was  either  accidental
and  ephemeral  or  fixed  for  life.  It  might  be
caused  by  fortuitous  incident  or  by  remediable
disease.  To  take  advantage  of  such  difference
was  not  only  cruel  but  cowardly.  The  machine
of  convention  grinded  slowly  and  surely,  and
once  declared  inferior,  a  man  had  very  great
difficulty  in  washing  out  the  stigma.  In  some
societies  it  became  indelible.

Fortuitous,  temporary  differences  between
race  and  race,  between  nation  and  nation  often
lead  to  marvellous  results.  Victory  in  war  is  a
matter  of  luck ;  but  a  decisive  victory  once  gained
makes  one  nation  slave  for  another  for  a  long
time,  if  not  for  ever.  In  a  moment  of  weakness
in  the  Indian  nation  the  British  found  an
advantage  which  has  given  them  an  Empire, —
an  illimitable  field  for  exploitation  and  adminis¬
tration, — which  has  been  utilized  to  widen  the
divergence  so  as  to  make  the  weak  still  weaker,
and  the  strong  still  stronger.  Compare  the
position  of  England  under  James  I.  and  of  India
under  Jchangir,  and  compare  the  position  of  the
two  countries  in  the  present  year  of  grace  1924,
and  the  power  of  accidents  on  national  condition
wall  be  at  once  obvious.  India  now  sweats  and
starves,  while  she  produces  bread  and  cake, —
bread  buttered  on  both  sides  and  cake  filled  with
apples — for  the  enjoyment  of  Englishmen.  She
has  been  given  a  corresponding  psychology  to
keep  her  contented,  peacefully  and  complacently
living  on  crumbs  thrown  from  the  exploiters’
table.

Germany  is  now  slaving  to  pay  reparations  to
England  and  France,  though  she  was  admittedly
considered  superior  for  half  a  century.  Empires
have  risen  and  fallen ;  Nations  have  eaten  bread
in  the  sweat  of  other  nations’  faces,  and  the
history  of  the  evasion  of  the  Curse  of  Adam
constitutes  the  most  interesting  branch  in  the
history  of  mankind.  At  present  the  majority  of
mankind  eat  bread  in  the  sweat  of  their  faces,
and  only  a  small  minority  eat  it  unsoaked  in  salt
water .  Every  nation  suffers  sweating,  and
national  progress  bears  an  inverse  ratio  to  the
quantity  of  sweat  exuded  from  the  bodies  of
nien.  The  object  of  civilization  seems  to  be  to
defeat  the  curse  or  law  of  God.  But  the  success
of  civilization  so  far  has  not  been  considerable.


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL’S  GLARE  IN  THE  DARK


63


The  revolt  of  the  minority  of  mankind  against
the  curse  of  Adam  would  have  been  futile  but  for
the  curse  of  Eve,  which  in  the  first  place  made
woman  a  dependant  of  man,  and  in  the  second,
filled  the  world  with  more  men  than  there  was
bread.  The  curse  of  Cain  helped  the  minority
by  making  the  majority  mere  vagabonds  and
fugitives  on  earth.  They  were  like  the  Jews  of
the  middle  ages  who,  scattered  over  Europe,
accumulated  wealth  for  the  benefit  of  the  rich
among  the  settled  population.  The  several
curses  united  to  produce  the  same  result.  God’s
curse  is  another  name  for  the  Devil’s  blessing.
The  supreme  being  has  two  sides.  The  Devil
represents  the  dark  side,  and  what  is  ordinarily
known  as  God  is  the  bright  side  of  that  Being.
The  anthropomorphic  God  can  never  be  identifi¬
ed  with  the  absolute.  Mankind  became  divided
into  exploiters  and  exploited.  The  exploited
bore  the  curses,  and  the  exploiters  remained  as
near  to  paradise  as  Adam  and  Eve  before  the  fall,
with  the  important  difference  that  they  have  the
tree  of  knowledge  in  their  possession,  and  can
eat  its  fruits  without  further  mole-tatiou.  Indeed
they  have  been  eating  it  for  a  long  time  in  the
past,  and  arc  expecting  to  cat  it  for  a  long  time
in  the  future,  though  Bolshevism  is  threatening
them.

The  history  of  pre-social  life  is  not  accurately
known  to  man.  He  has  discovered  no  reliable
record  of  any  kind,  in  stone  or  bone,  to  enlighten
him  on  the  subject  under  discussion.  Shortly
after  the  expulsion  of  Adam  and  Eve  from
paradise  the  entire  population,  albeit  infinitesimal
in  number  was  reduced  to  hard  labour.  We
know  Cain  became  a  cultivator,  while  Abel  lived
a  pastoral  life.  Spencer  thinks  they  were  chiefs
of  agricultural  and  pastoral  communities
respectively.  Abel  was  not  cursed  like  Cain.
He  lived  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  as  he  did  not
eat  bread,  he  had  no  sweat  dripping  from  his
face.  But  how  long  his  offsprings  continued  to
live  the  pastoral  life  is  not  known.  His  family
have  cither  disappeared  or  changed  their  mode
of  living.

At  the  present  moment  out  of  seventeen
hundred  million  people  about  sixteen  hundred
million  toil  and  moil  for  their  daily  bread  under
precarious  conditions  which  compel  them,  ac¬
cording  to  Christian  doctrines,  daily  to  look  for
the  mercy  of  God,  and  to  appeal  to  Him  every
morning  with  the  object  of  inducing  Him  not  to
withhold  from  them  the  daily  ration  soaked  in
salt  water.  For  this  alone  can  be  the  meaning


of  the  daily  prayer,  "Give  us  this  day’
our  daily  bread.”  The  other  hundred  million
souls  having  secured  enough  bread  coated  with
butter,  with  cake  added  unto  it,  have  gradually
ceased  to  say  their  morning  prayer  as  an  unprofit¬
able  waste  of  time  and  thought.

During  the  last  hundred  and  fifty  years  the
total  population  of  the  world  inspitc  of  wars,  and
massacres,  famines  and  pestilences,  cyclones  and
earthquakes,  cannibalism  and  infanticide,  to  say
nothing  of  less  impressive  forms  of  death,  has
increased  five  fold,  i.e.  from  about  three  hundred
million  to  seventeen  hundred  million.  This
increase  is  enormous,  having  regard  to  the  fact
that  what  man  had  failed  to  accomplish  in  a
hundred  thousand  years  he  has  accomplished  in
one  hundred  and  fifty.  This  is  the  period
covered  by  the  mechanical  and  industrial  revolu¬
tion.  The  supply  of  subsistence  also  lias  no
doubt  increased.  But  it  is  inconceivable  that  it
has  increased  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  population,
for  though  much  virgin  soil  has  been  brought
under  cultivation,  at  the  same  time  that  the
methods  of  cultivation  have  improved,  yet  it  is
hard  to  believe  that  the  total  quantity  of  food
crops  has  kept  pace  with  the  geometrically
increasing  population,  specially  in  those  parts  of
the  world  where  the  population  has  been  dense
for  many  hundred  years.  The  most  advanced
countries  in  the  old  world  now  live  upon  food
largely  imported  from  the  new  world.  England
is  unable  to  produce  more  than  a  fourth  part  of
tire  food  grains  consumed  by  her  people.  If  the
above  rate  of  progress  of  populatipn  be  maintain¬
ed  during  the  next  hundred  and  fifty  years  the
total  population  of  the  world  will  be  more  than  a
billion  by  the  end  of  the  twenty  second  century-
Further  progress  will  make  the  world  over
crowded  in  the  sense  that  the  average  individual
will  not  have  more  than  twTelve  square  feet  of
ground,  the  area  required  for  his  burial.  The
density  of  population  threatens  in  the  near
future  to  exceed  the  final  limit  fixed  by  the  laws
of  economics  and  of  hygiene.  We  are  thus
passing  through  an  interesting  period  in  human
history  to  its  final  crisis.  This  crisis  is  not  likely
to  be  put  off  by  schemes  of  disarmament  and
compulsory  cessation  of  war.  Some  scheme  of
world-wide  importance  must  be  found  to  arrest
the  surging  tide  of  growing  population,  or  Nature
will  be  constrained  to  exercise  unutterably
monstrous  cruelties  to  prevent  the  world  from
bursting,  or  running  into  utter  Chaos, — cruelties
compared  with  which  Japanese  earthquakes,


64


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Bengal  cyclones,  Madras  famines  or  Chinese
floods  will  look  like  child’s  play.  Man  expected
some  final  solution  of  the  crucial  problem  from
the  great  world  war.  That  war  seems  to  have
been  designed  by  providence  to  serve  the  same
purpose  as  the  advent  of  John  the  Baptist  was
designed  in  connection  with  the  redemptive
scheme  designated  as  Christianity.  That  war
has  terminated  for  the  time  being  but  the  heat
generated  has  not  been  dissipated  into  infinite
space,  but  has  sunk  beneath  the  surface  in  the
heart  of  man  transfigured  from  the  kinetic  to
the  potential  form  of  energy.  Either  man  must
reduce  population,  or  Nature  will  reduce  it  for
him.  Man  may  do  the  work  silently,  but  Nature
will  do  it  tumultuously  and  spectacularly.  The
dismal  devil  finds  more  pleasure  in  torture  than
in  slaughter.

The  problem  of  population  has  become
insistent  for  a  definite  solution.  The  glare  of
the  dismal  devil  has  developed  an  unprecedented
degree  of  ferocity  and  terrific  monstrosity  by
his  catastrophic  fascination,  producing  pheno¬
menal  stupefaction  in  the  most  advanced  races  of
mankind.  These  races,  under  the  generic  name
of  the  ‘white  man’  have  suddenly  developed  a
tremendous  reproductive  energy  aided  by  a
stupendous  productive  ingenuity,  nourished  as
much  by  the  exploitation  of  nature  as  by  that  of
neighbour.  The  whiteman  is  now  ubiquitous.
He  is  found  in  the  tropics  and  the  poles,  and  has
permanently  occupied  nearly  the  whole  of  the
temperate  zone  on  both  sides  of  the  equator.  He
circumnavigates  the  world  with  a  thermometer
in  his  hand,  and  wherever  he  finds  the  thermal
readings  favourable  he  squats  and  settles,  be  it
in  the  heights  of  the  Himalayas  or  in  the  depths
of  Columbian  forests.  Elsewhere  he  docs  not
settle,  but  visits  and  exploits  from  an  outpost,
which  he  uses  as  a  base  of  operation.  The
Himalayas  form  the  outpost  for  the  exploitation
of  India.

As  to  the  problem  of  population  among  the
black,  brown  and  yellow  races  he  follows  a
double  policy.  In  the  temperate  halts  where
he  settles  he  exterminates  the  original  popula¬
tion,  after  calling  them  the  aboriginal  people.
In  the  hotter  regions  he  encourages  the  abori¬
gines  to  multiply  themselves — where  he  extermi¬
nates  he  fills  the  land  with  a  rapidly  growing
white  population.  Thus  the  total  population  of
the  world  grows  with  tremendous  rapidity.
The  double  polict’  is  designed  to  facilitate  ex¬
ploitation  of  the  natural  resources  of  the  world.


Its  effect  is  to  exhaust  those  resources  more
quickly  than  nature  intended,  and  to  bring  on
the  end  with  catastrophic  quickness.  That  end
will  come  much  earlier  than  the  complete
exhaustion  of  the  resources.  It  will  certainly
not  wait  for  the  cooling  of  the  sun.  The
dismal  devil  is  preparing  the  world  for  a
spectacular  destructive  demonstration  transcend¬
ing  the  power  of  the  most  comprehensive
imagination  to  anticipate  and  compass.  The
devil  has  his  own  ways  of  dealing  with  popula¬
tion.  The  Malthusian  law  does  not  imply  that
the  ratio  between  population  and  subsistence  is
constant.  Sometimes  a  large  population  is
maintained  on  small  rations,  it  may  be  on
reduced  health.  But  the  problem  is  obscured
by  the  subjective  clement  in  the  quantity  of
food  required  for  healthy  life.  At  all  events
the  balance  between  food  supply  and  population
may  remain  disturbed  for  a  long  time,  after
which  a  sudden  disaster  comes  unawares  and
causes  havoc  on  a  shocking  scale.

For  the  purpose  of  effectively  evading  the
curse  of  Adam  man  has  divided  himself  into
three  primary  selves,  viz.,  the  personal  self,  the
group  self  and  the  human  self.  The  first  self
takes  care  of  his  personal  interests,  the  second
those  of  the  group  to  which  he  belongs  or
attaches  himself  by  choice,  and  the  third  takes
care  of  the  interests  of  humanity  as  a  whole.
The  three  selves  have  three  different  standards
of  Ethics  or  Moral  life,  and  they  assert  them¬
selves  sometimes  severally  and  sometimes  jointly
and  confusedly.  Occasionally  one  of  the  selves,
cither  by  the  power  of  impulse  or  by  the  strong
urge  of  reason,  triumphs  over  the  other  two  and
controls  the  activities  of  the  personal  organism.
As  a  rule  in  the  routine  course  of  life  the  per¬
sonal  self  stands  supreme,  and  the  interests  of
the  other  two  selves  are  taken  into  account  only
so  far  as  they  are  conducive  to  the  interests  of
the  personal  self.  On  rare  occasions  the  group
self  dictates  to  the  other  two  selves,  and  calls
on  them  to  make  sacrifices  great  or  small.  This
is  specially  observed  in  time  of  war,  w'hen  men
rush  to  the  front  regardless  of  discomforts  and
risks.  The  third  self  is  the  weakest  in  the
organism  of  selves,  so  far  as  the  past  history  of
man  discloses  their  relative  strength.  Idealists
hope  that  in  the  remote  future  this  self  will
reign  supreme  in  peace  and  perpetuity,  the  other
two  selves  surrendering  themselves  to  its
dictates.  But  if  the  past  is  the  prophet  of  the
future  in  any  sense  the  optimism  of  Idealism


THE  DISMAL  DEVIL'S  GLARE  IX  THE  DARK


65


seems  to  be  unsubstantial.  The  different  races
arc  knowing  one  another  more  intimately  than
before,  but  instead  of  loving,  the  more  they
know  the  more  they  hate.  One  race  hugs
another  with  the  lpve  of  Dhrilarastra  who
reduced  Ultima's  iron  image  to  mere  pulp.

The  group  self  is  subdivided  chiefly  into  the
family  self,  the  class  or  communal  self,  the
national  self  and  the  racial  self.  These  are
other  forms  of  group  self  already  in  existence
and  more  may  be  invented  hereafter  for  the
purpose  of  evading  god’s  curse  respecting  the
relation  between  cost  and  compensation  in  self
and  race  conservation.

Every  man  is  consciously  or  subconsciously
trying  to  imi>osc  upon  others  his  share  of  the
sweat  that  the  curse  of  Adam  demands.  Every
group  of  men  is  trying  to  impose  upon  other
groups  the  sweat  required  of  it.  Among  the
groups  the  nation  is  the  most  powerful  and
widespread.  Every  nation  tries  to  exploit  other
nations,  directly  by  force,  or  diplomatically  by
fraud.  Exploitation  means  that  the  exploited
nation  should  place  its  services  at  the  disposal
of  the  exploiting  nation  without  demanding
adequate  remuneration.  Force  and  fraud  are
both  at  the  back  of  exploitation.  Sometimes
force  and  sometimes  fraud  plays  the  supreme
part,  but  as  a  rule  they  play  together.  After  all
force  and  fraud  are  not  such  monstrosities  as
we  suppose  them  to  be.  They  have  made  the
world  what  it  is.  They  have  civilized  it.  It  is
inconsistent  to  denounce  them  and  at  the  same
time  to  praise  civilization,  particularly  the
Western  variety  of  it.  Some  people  think  they
can  retain  civilization  as  an  accomplished  fact,
and  send  the  means  by  which  it  has  been
attained  to  the  gallows,  as  if  they  were  like  a
ladder  which  might  be  kicked  down  when  the
roof  had  been  reached.

A  group  of  men  instead  of  making  the
interest  of  humanity  the  guiding  principle  of
conduct  follow  the  shorter  and  smoother  line
suggested  by  the  interest  of  the  group  to  which
they  belong  ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  group
interest  is  wider  and  nobler  than  the  interest  of
the  individual  ;  and  that  one  group  succeeds  in
exploiting  another  in  proportion  as  its  members
subordinate  the  personal  self  to  the  group  self.
This  subordination  sometimes  extends  to
conscious  annihilation,  as  an  extremely  probable
fact,  of  the  personal  self.  The  reward  of  the
hero  lies  in  posthumous  applause.  Whether
imperative  impulse  or  calculating  reason  forms
9


the  real  urge  of  the  suicidal  jump,  the  hero  is
esteemed  all  over  the  world  for  the  bare  fact
that  the  group  self  has  subordinated  his  person¬
al  self.  Sometimes  it  is  even  suspected  that  the
human  self  of  the  hero  has  for  the  moment
triumphed  over  his  personal  self,  and  when  this
genuinely  occurs  the  hero  really  deserves  the
highest  praise.  In  him  for  the  time  being
the  lower  selves  have  sacrificed  themselves  at
the  altar  of  the  highest  ;  true  love  has  displaced
hatred  of  neighbour  ;  the  love  of  God  has  dis¬
placed  the  love  of  life  ;  reality  has  annihilated
illusion.

Some  people  think  the  group  self  is  higher
than  the  personal  self  and  that  to  reach  the
human  self  the  personal  self  must  part  through
it.  The  human  self  is  perhaps  not  an  aggrega¬
tion  of  personal  selves  or  of  group  selves  and
neither  philanthropy  nor  federalism  can  truly
make  man  human.

Exploitation  has  made  such  a  big  jump
during  the  last  century  and  a  half  that  we  are
apt  to  suppose  that  it  is  an  invention  of  Modern
times,  and  especially  of  Western  civilization.
The  truth  is  that  exploitation  had  its  origin  in
the  desire  to  eat  bread  without  sweat  in  the
face,  in  the  desire  to  evade  the  curse  of  Adam.
It  has  received  statutory  sanction  from  the
original  compact  by  which  society  was  formed,
and  it  has  ever  since  been  developing  with  a
growing  rate  of  progress  until  now  its  intensive¬
ness  as  well  as  its  extensiveness  has  nearly
reached  the  climax.  This  double  progress  is
due  not  merely  to  the  growing  debauchment  of
the  moral  sentiment,  but  to  a  greater  extent  to
the  development  of  the  inventive  genius  of  man.
The  glamour  of  intellectuality  obscures  the
black  spots  of  restless  morality  quivering  behind
it.  The  power  of  applied  science  backed  by  the
subtleties  of  a  meandering  morality,  which
challenges  criticism  by  its  dimensionless  mass¬
iveness,  while  its  perfection  of  continuity  has
raised  Western  civilization  to  the  top  of  the
world,  which  is  ceaselessly  scheming  to  evade
God’s  curse,  i.e.,  to  defeat  his  law.

In  the  midst  of  conflict  of  opinion  as  to  the
circumstances  in  which  society  was  formed,  and
as  to  the  exact  nature  of  the  object  aimed  at,
viz.,  as  to  whether  it  was  mere  preservation  or
amelioration  of  human  condition,  one  fact  stands
out  conspicuously,  viz.,  that  some  individuals
obtained  the  privilege  of  commanding  while  the
duty  of  the  rest  was  to  obey  them  unquestion-
ingiy,  subject  to  certain  undefined  limits.


66


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Power  was  organized  and  concentrated  in  a
definite  group  while  the  duty  of  submission  was
paid  by  or  exacted  from  scattered  masses
severally,  i.e.,  from  each  individual  separately
Tax  was  gathered  from  every  man  and  put  into
a  common  purse,  commanded  by  one  man  or
a  small  group  of  men.  There  was  thus  esta¬
blished  the  Empire  of  the  minority  over  the
majority,  which  was  gradually  transformed  into
a  parasitic  oligarchy.  The  new  arrangement
did  not  excite  revolt  so  long  as  it  did  not
violently  interfere  with  the  common  liberties  of
every  day  life,  and  proved  successful  wherever
the  rulers  were  moderate  in  their  demands  on
the  patience  and  tolerance  of  the  people.  In
course  of  time  the  psychology  of  submission,
started  by  acquiescence,  was  consolidated  and
stabilized  into  custom.  Custom  again  was
slowly  changed  until  the  moral  sentiment  of  the
people  was  sufficiently  transformed  to  convert
the  consciousness  of  wrong  from  a  sense  of
toleration  to  that  of  open  approbation.  Free
criticism  of  the  ruling  class  was  condemned  by
public  opinion,  and  combination  for  any  dis¬
loyal  purjxKe  was  prevented  by  law,  which
received  the  sanctity  of  divine  commandment
from  State  propaganda.  Thus  the  difference
between  the  ruler  and  ruled,  the  powerful  and
the  weak,  the  superior  and  the  inferior,  grew  in
width  and  depth  increasingly  facilitating  ex¬
ploitation,  which  was  ramified  in  diverse  direc¬
tions.  Free  barter  of  service  or  commodity
made  room  for  contract  executed  on  the  part
of  the  weak  with  the  sword  of  hunger  hanging
over  them,  and  the  result  was  that  pinched  by
the  necessity  pf  immediate  relief  they  feared  to
press  for  terms  without  which  their  future
would  become  worse,  and  their  faces  suffused
with  a  thicker  layer  of  perspiration,  while
sitt'ng  with  their  wives  and  children  down  to
dinner.  The  weak  became  weaker,  and  the
strong  grew  stronger  until  the  relationship  of
Master  and  Slave  was  established  between  them.
This  was  the  lowest  depth  to  which  exploitation
could  mprally  descend.  Exploitation  next  took
a  backward  turn  because  there  was  no  lower
depth  to  descend  to  ;  and  after  a  thousand  years
it  was  also  discovered  that  slavery  did  not
symbolise  an  economically  profitable  form  of
exploitation.  The  natural  result  was  that
slavery  was  raised  to  serfdom,  and  in  course  of
time  serfdom  was  transformed  into  villienage.
A  further  advance  found  the  villiens  turned  into


yeomen,  and  yeomen  became  middle  class
gentlemen,  leaving  a  large  residue  of  landless
labourers  to  carry  on  the  menial  part  of  the
productive  work  for  the  upkeep  of  society.  The
descendants  pf  these  landless  labourers  form  the
proletariat  pf  the  present  day,  simultaneously
impoverished  and  vitalized  by  the  mcclianical
revolution  of  the  last  years  of  the  Eighteenth
Century.  They  were  huddled  up  in  factories
and  tenements,  where  physical  conglomeration
slowly  led  to  political  combination,  against
which  the  statutory  privileges  of  parasites  and
capitalists  proved  unavailing  after  a  prolonged
struggle  which  lasted  for  nearly  a  century.

The  backbone  of  parasitism  has  been  broken
by  the  power  of  political  combination,  whose
utility  was  suggested  by  the  power  pf  economic
combination  invented  by  the  capitalists  for  their
own  benefits,  illustrating  the  conflict  between
immediate  and  remote  good  as  the  guide  of
activity.  Irrigation  which  brings  prosperity  is
ultimately  followed  by  Malaria  which  causes
depopulation.  Imperialism  is  followed  by  rc-
barbarisation.  Ascent  and  descent  follow  the
course  of  the  trajectory.  Life  is  a  Sisyphean
struggle.  Trade-unionism,  the  symbol  of  cota-
bination,  has  been  instrumental  in  teaching  the
proletariat  the  value  of  temporary  sacrifice
reaped  in  permanent  benefit,  which  the  Christian
priesthood  had  failed  to  impress  upon  mankind
by  their  teachings  extending  over  two  thousand
years.  The  benefit  has  now  been  dazzlingly
visualized  by  the  fact  that  in  half  of  Europe
the  representatives  of  the  proletariat  hold  the
reins  of  government  in  their  hands,  while  in  the
other  half  they  have  a  distinctly  audible  voice
in  the  framing  of  the  ideals  of  governance,  and
in  formulating  the  methods  for  their  attainment.

The  creation  of  a  third  class  between  the
commanding  and  the  obeying  sections  has  given
a  character  of  complexity  to  the  process  of
exploitation.  This  third  class  combined  the
traits  of  the  exploiting  and  the  exploited  classes.
It  is  a  hermaphrodite  class  that  largely  blurred
the  conceptual  distinction  between  the  two  main
groups  of  society,  while  it  has  made  the  con¬
dition  of  the  lowest  class  worse  by  the  multipli¬
cation  of  new  modes  of  exploitation,  and  making
the  evasion  of  the  old  modes  difficult."  Sambo
and  Quimbo,  two  famous  personalities  in  H.  B.
Stowe’s  I'ncle  Tom’s  Cabin,  belong  to  this
third  class,  which  has  now  ramified  into  diverse
sub-classes,  as  service-holders,  professionals  and


IS  INDIA  LIGHTLY  TAXED?


67


vocational.  They  are  tnulattocs  by  descent  and
character.  They  are  like  bats,  birds  or  beasts
at  convenience.  They  are  liberals  in  possession
of  the  borderland  between  labour  and  conser¬
vatives.  They  sometimes  keep  the  balance
between  the  two  parties,  but  generally  obstruct


the  progress  of  society  towards  equality,  liberty
and  fraternity.  In  England  at  the  present
moment,  as  a  political  class,  they  are  in  a  sad
plight.

(to  be  continued).


IS  INDIA  LIGHTLY  TAXED?
By  Mr.  A.  S.  Vkxkataramax.


“India  is  lightly  taxed”  is  a  facile  remark
oft-repeated  and  oft-quoted,  rapidly  gaining
currency  among  people,  who  without  caring  to
examine  all  about  it,  not  only  satisfy  themselves
but  also  sedulously  propagandise  and  win
neophytes  whose  zeal  becomes  proverbial.  As
is  often  the  case,  such  statements,  whose  truth  it
is  often  difficult  to  probe,  are  readily  believed  in
and  acted  upon  so  much  so,  that  after  a  time,
truth  finds  itself  overgrown  with  a  thick  layer
of  shrubs  and  thorns  that  the  search  after  it,
however  assiduous,  becomes  a  lost  endeavour.
Leaving  aside  the  globe-trotter  wiio  airs  forth
bis  views  on  the  Indian  political  situation  and
India’s  economic  condition,  statesmen  whose
knowledge  of  Indian  affairs,  if  well  used,  is  sure
to  bring  credit,  going  home,  lose  that  imagina¬
tive  sympathy,  quite  essential  for  the  proper
understanding  of  the  needs  and  conditions  of  an
alien  country.  Strachey  need  not  be  classed
among  these  statesmen  but  certainly  his  remarks
“There  is  certainly  no  country  in  the  world
possessing  a  civilized  government  in  which  the
public  burdens  are  so  light,”  cannot  withstand
close  scrutiny  while  the  further  remark  “In
England  taxation  supplies  5/6  and  in  India  not
much  more  than  %  of  the  public  income,”  must
be  more  fully  gone  into.

The  Indian  government  derives  its  revenue
from  three  different  sources  such  as  (1)  Property,
(2)  Commercial  undertakings,  (3)  Contributions
from  the  people.  The  first  category  includes
the  income  from  lands,  forests,  railways  leased
out  to  and  managed  by  companies,  while  state-
managed  railways,  posts,  telegraphs,  canals,
monopolies  of  sale,  etc.,  constitute  the  com¬


mercial  undertakings  of  the  State.  Lastly  the
contributions  from  the  people  embrace  direct
and  indirect  taxes,  the  first  comprising  land  tax
Income-tax,  the  second  comprising  customs,
excise,  stamp  and  registration  duties.  The
railways,  a  decided  liability  for  50  years  at  the
rate  of  a  crore  of  rupees  per  year,  have  become
since  1904  a  valuable  asset  and  just  at  this  time
the  separation  of  railway  from  general  finance
has  been  sanctioned.  They  come  under  two
categories,  as  they  are  managed  by  the  company
or  by  the  state  itself,  all  of  them  being  owned  by
the  state.  The  railways  under  company
management  give  a  share  of  their  profits.
People  obsessed  with  a  desire  for  logical  division
and  exactitude,  are  tempted  to  adopt  the
principle  of  division  by  dichotomy  in  classifying
revenue  into  tax  revenue  (revenue  from  taxes)
and  non-tax  revenue.  Non-tax  revenue  com¬
prises  revenue  from  forests,  opium  sales,  rail-
w'ays,  irrigation  works,  post  office  and  telegraph
and  other  minor  items  as  departmental  receipts
aud  fees  for  services  rendered  to  the  public.
Opium  revenue  once  considerable,  is  now
declining  owing  to  the  agreement  with  China
and  may  dwindle  into  a  vanishing  quantity.
The  steady  increase  in  the  income  from  forests
depends  upon  the  utilization  of  forest  products
for  industrial  purposes.  The  management  of
public  utilities  like  posts  and  telegraphs  by  the
state  has  proved  immensely  useful  to  the  people.
The  place  of  the  English  income-tax  as  a  single
tax  making  a  large  contribution  to  the  revenues
of  the  country,  is  in  India  occupied  by  the  Land
Revenue  and  the  difference  is,  while  the  English
Income-tax  is  capable  of  adjustment  year  after


68


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


year  bv  being  raised  in  times  of  stress  and
lowered  in  times  of  prosperity’,  the  land  revenue
is  subject  to  a  periodical  assessment  of  30  years
in  areas  other  than  permanently  settled.  In
this  latter  respect,  namely,  annual  adjustment,
that  which  marks  an  approach  to  the  English
Income-tax  is  the  Indian  Salt  Tax,  which  by
reason  of  its  reaching  down  even  the  small
incomes,  easy  collection  with  little  change  in
machinery,  offers  an  irresistible  temptation  to  a
financier  confronted  with  deficits.  One  may
wonder  what  is  the  place  of  the  income-tax  in  the
scheme  of  Indian  taxation  at  present.  At  pre¬
sent  its  yield  is  not  promising  and  a  fear  is  even
entertained  in  some  quarters,  that  by  reason  of
India  being  a  country  where  agricultural
economics  still  holds  the  field,  anti  by'  reason  of
the  comparative  slowness  of  development  of
credit  and  exchange  transactions,  the  levy’  of
income-tax  may  act  as  a  handicap  on  India’s
industrialisation.  Whatever  it  may  be,  Indians
ma.v  be  fed  on  the  assurance  that  the  taxes  of
the  future  are  customs,  excise  and  income-tax,
while  land  tax  may  fast  be  taken  back  to  the
ante-chamber.

So  much  in  general  about  Indian  taxation.
We  shall  now  consider  what  after  all  is  the  sub¬
stratum  of  truth  in  the  remark  that  India  is
lightly  taxed.  Putting  it  aside  as  an  entirely  in¬
supportable  proposition  is  the  better  part  of  gross
ignorance  or  wilful  misrepresentation.  The
remark,  as  I  consider  it,  is  based  on  the  assump¬
tion  that  land  revenue  is  a  rent.  Here  we  need
not  enter  into  that  unedifying  and  unprofitable
controversy  whether  the  land  revenue  is  a  tax  or
not.  For  our  purposes  it  may  be  taken  as  a  tax
since  it  is  a  portion  of  wealth  taken  by  the
government  inspitc  of  its  utter  disregard  of  the
principles  of  progression  or  equality  or  equity  of
incidence  and  since  it  is  primarily  a  tax  on  agri¬
cultural  incomes  or  wages  earned  by  agricultural
labourers  (as  often  the  cultivators  are)  though
properly  speaking  they  should  be  exempted  from
taxes,  just  as  the  artisans,  shop-keepers  and
petty  merchants  are.  Well,  it  is  this  assumption
of  land  revenue  being  a  rent  that  occasioned  the
remark  of  the  lightness  of  taxes.  Another
thing  too  might  have  provoked  the  remark.  We
need  only  run  our  eyes  through  the  Indian  and
English  income-tax  figures  to  detect  the  dis¬
parity’  in  the  rates.  The  income-tax  in  indus¬
trial  countries,  is  an  important  tax  capable  of
indefinite  expansion  and  limitation  and  is  a
reserve  of  financial  power  in  the  hands  of


financiers  and  eyes  accustomed  to  revel  in  high
income-tax  figures,  find  it  difficult  to  accom¬
modate  their  vision  to  Indian  figures.  We  all
know  why  the  comparison  falters.  Again  the
remark  may  be  explained  away,  if  not  justified.
"The  land  tax  may  be  included  and  yet  the
taxation  is  lighter  than  in  Englaud,”  is  the
objection  raised  by’  some.  The  succeeding  part
of  this  article  attempts  an  answer.  At  the
same  time  one  important  point  must  be  noticed
and  assessed  at  its  true  value.  England  is  a
country  where  industrial  economy  reigns
supreme  and  India  is  still  a  country  where  agri¬
cultural  economy  has  not  ceased  to  hold  her
sway,  and  need  we  add,  any  comparison  between
the  two  is  out  of  court !  When  India  becomes
industrialised  the  taxes  full  of  promise  are-
customs,  income-tax  and  inheritance  duties,
while  land  revenue  which  is  facile  princess  now,
may  go  down.

Apart  from  the  unsuitability  of  the  compari¬
son,  from  the  economic  point  of  view,  as  indi¬
cated,  we  still  proceed  on  the  assumption — the
temptation  being  so  irresistible — that  such  a
comparison  may,  somehow,  be  instituted.  Here
we  encounter  difficulties.  There  are  certain
postulates  of  Indian  taxation.  India’s  poverty
is  one  of  them.  Even  eminent  statesmen  and
financiers  subscribe  to  this  proposition.  '1  he
following  figures  given  by  Sir  Viswesvaraya  in
his  address  in  the  economic  conference,  are
eloquent  by  reason  of  their  silence:  —


Average
wcjlth  or
property
per  bead.

Annual

per

capita

income

Trad«

pw

head.

Death
rate  per
i.ooa

Average
expecta¬
tion  of
life  in
year*.

Ki.

K*.

Rs.

United  Kingdom

6.000

7*0

640

Below  14

45

Canada

4.400

&50

510

*.  14

India

1B0

53

23

Over  30

24

These  figures  while  speaking  for  themselves
reveal  in  lurid  colours  some  millions  starving  for
want  of  a  meal  a  day  while  others  have  only’  one,
the  low  average  wealth  and  income  (2%  annas  a
day !)  the  poorest  trade,  the  lowest  expectation
of  life  and  the  highest  rate  of  mortality.  No
wonder  that  in  the  face  of  these  figures,  the
standard  of  living  is  low,  the  efficiency  of  Indian
labour  is  poor  and  the  death  rate  appalling.

The  second  postulate  is  that  the  administra¬
tion  is  costly.  No  less  an  authority’  than
Mr.  Fisher  recognises  in  his  book  on  "Stcwes


~o


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Now  for  purposes  of  comi>arison  with
England  the  following  figures  for  1917  are
furnished  :  —


Population

Earnings

Taxes


United  Kingdom.

45  Millions
^2,250  Millions
jCijo  Millions


Indus.

250  Millions
Xooo  Millions
.£45  Millions


In  these  calculations,  non-tax  revenue  has  been
excluded,  while  land  revenue  has  been  included
and  local  rates  for  England  and  India  have  been
omitted.  If  they  are  added,  the  rates  arc
enhanced  by  an  equal  percentage.  Without
them  the  percentage  of  taxation  on  income  (i.e.
the  relation  between  per  capita  income  and
taxation)  is  7%  both  for  England  and  India  and
what  is  the  inference  we  have  to  draw?  No
doubt  the  per  head  taxation  is  smaller  in  India,
but  certainly  not  lighter.  When  we  speak  of
light  or  heavy  taxes  we  have  always  in  our  minds
the  capacity  of  the  people  to  bear  the  burden.
Let  us  only  turn  once  more  to  the  figures
furnished  by  Sir  Visweswaraya  and  we  find
therein  that  from  every  point  of  view,  average
income  or  wealth  or  trade,  not  to  speak  of


other  things,  India  takes  an  unenviable  place
as  compared  with  the  United  Kingdom  and
Canada.  One  principle  we  have  to  remember
is  that  the  smaller  the  income,  the  greater  the
sacrifice  and  the  heavier  the  burden.  The
sacrifice  of  Rs.  6-8-0  for  a  man  who  has  an
income  of  Rs.  53/-  is  certainly  greater  than  that
of  Rs.  88/-  for  a  person  having  an  income  of
Rs.  720/-.  Another  equally  important  principle
that  must  never  be  lost  sight  of  is  that  the
smaller  the  wealth,  the  heavier  the  burden,
even  though  the  taxation  figures  arc  lower.
The  average  wealth  of  an  Indian  is  Rs.  180/-
and  that  is  nothing  beside  a  sum  of  Rs.  6,000/-.
A  comparison  between  the  two  is  not  even
approached  by  the  disparity  in  size  between  a
giant  and  a  pigmy  !

To  conclude,  the  remark  that  India  is  lightly
taxed  is  not  warranted  by  the  facts  behind  the
figures,  even  supposing  that  a  comparison
between  Industrial  Eugland  and  agricultural
India  can  be  instituted.  In  theory  and  practice,
that  proposition  is  untenable  and  from  the  point
of  view  of  economics,  the  remark  is  as  perverted
as  it  is  uncalled  for  from  the  political  point  of
view.


THE  FIGHT  FOR  FREEDOM  OF  INDIA.

WHERE  DOES  IT  LEAD  US?

By  Dr.  Bhupendranath  Durr,  m.a.,  ph.D.


The  radically  minded  leaders  of  India  being
dissatisfied  with  the  “Montagu-Chelmsford
Reforms”  inaugurated  the  non-co-operation
movement  to  bring  down  the  Government
to  its  knees  compelling  it  to  grant  “ Swaraj."
It  has  been  said  that  Swaraj  is  their  desideratum
or  the  ultimate  end,  they  have  been  fighting
for.  But  the  meaning  of  the  term  Swaraj  has
been  left  undefined,  or  an  ambiguous  meaning
has  been  put  u|>on  it.  The  people  are  being
asked  to  sacrifice  themselves  to  a  vague  indefi¬
nite  ideal.  Therefore  it  is  just  pertinent  to  ask
the  question,  "what  do  they  want?”


I  he  country  is  divided  in  its  opinion  regard¬
ing  the  ideal.  Those  who  have  accepted  the
reforms  believe  in  “Home  rule”  for  India  at
some  future  date,  while  the  radicals  demand  it
immediately,  but  failing  to  get  it  (though  pro¬
mised  by  the  Government  during  the  war',  they
have  inaugurated  the  non-co-ojieration  movement
with  Swaraj  '  as  its  end  and  have  invited  the
co-operation  of  all  classes  of  society  for  its  reali¬
sation.  As  a  subsidiary’  help,  the  agitation
against  the  dismemberment  of  Turkey,  otherwise
known  as  the  " (alipliat ”  movement,  has  also
f*vn  made  an  adjunct  to  the  non-co-operation


THE  FIGHT  FOR  FREEDOM  OF  INDIA


movement.  Religious  enthusiasm  and  national
feelings  have  persistently  been  sought  to  be
aroused,  the  emotion  of  the  masses  have  been
lashed  up  in  various  ways  for  the  same  end,  and
as  a  result  heroic  sacrifices  have  been  made  by
the  people.  But  these  efforts  however  heroic
have  been  checkmated  by  the  Government  by
stern  repressive  measures.  This  is  the  gist  of
the  situation  in  India.

Present-day  India  is  in  the  midst  of  cross
currents  of  different  political  id?as.  Different
social  classes  and  parties  are  pulling  the  strings
from  behind  and  trying  to  influence  public  opi¬
nion  in  their  own  favour,  and  fish,  out  of  the
troubled  waters,  their  individual  interests.  But  if
an  analysis  be  made  of  this  medley  of  class — and
part}' — interests  we  may  find  the  following
salient  facts :  The  failure  of  the  first  war  of
independence,  miscalled  the  Sepoy  mutiny  of
tS57*59»  scaled  the  fate  of  the  Indian  feudal
aristocracy.  The  power  of  the  feudal  princes
who  had  so  long  been  the  ruling  section  of  the
Indian  Society  got  a  death  blow  after  the  dis¬
comfiture  of  1857.  Then  began  a  new  chapter
in  the  History  of  India — the  rise  of  democracy.
A  new  social  class  has  come  to  power  in  India,
namely,  the  Bourgeoisie.  The  Indian  liberal
Bourgeoisie  bom  of  modem  education  is  to-day
the  dominant  class  in  India.  It  is  equal  in
power  and  intelligence  to  even  the  British
Bourgeoisie,  which  is  now  ruling  the  British
Empire.  It  is  also  the  rival  of  the  British  ruling
class  in  India  and  is  challenging  the  British
supremacy  in  the  land.  But  not  being  able  to
cope  alone  with  it,  the  radical  section  of  the
Indian  Liberal  Bourgeoisie  is  asking  the  co¬
operation  of  the  masses  which  is  the  third  and
the  most  important  factor  in  Indian  politics.
The  masses  so  long  dumb  and  traditionally
oppressed  by  the  upper  social  classes  arc  raising
their  heads.  They  are  becoming  articulate  and
demanding  their  rights  and  recognition  of  their
claims.  As  a  result,  a  big  mass  movement  is  in
the  process  of  formation,  which  is  expected  to
play  a  most  important  and  determinate  part  in
future.  And  upon  these  masses  the  vague  ideal
of  a  Swaraj  has  been  thrust.  But  what  is  Swaraj  ?
It  is  generally  said  that  by  Swaraj  we  are  to
mean  national  freedom  which  will  place  the
destiny  of  India  in  our  hands.  But  that  does
not  enlighten  us  about  the  true  nature  of  Swaraj;
moreover,  in  the  present-dav-world-politirs  the
word  "national”  itself  is  becoming  ambiguous
and  the  oppressed  and  exploited  classes  in  the


world  arc  challenging  the  validity  of  that
expression.

Hence  a  negative  hatred  of  industrialism  and
of  everything  foreign,  together  with  a  vague
idea  of  Swaraj  cannot  be  the  goal  of  the  Indian
masses.  A  “national  freedom”  does  not  really
emancipate  the  masses.  The  ultimate  salvation
of  the  Indian  masses  can  but  lie  in  the  social  and
economic  freedom.  It  is  a  fact  that  India’s
misery  is  not  due  to  foreign  domination  alone,
but  also  to  a  corrupt  ami  effete  social-polity
under  which  it  has  been  labouring  for  centuries.
Therefore,  what  we  want  should  be  clearly
defined.

Young  India  speaks  in  terms  of  “nation”
and  dreams  of  national  freedom  or  independence.
It  tries  to  make  a  solid  front  composed  of  differ¬
ent  social  classes  against  the  common  enemy.
So  in  this  matter,  Young  India  is  still  under  the
influence  of  the  political  philosophy  of  the  iSth
century  which  ended  with  Joseph  Mazzini.  In
our  youthful  days  Joseph  Mazzini  was  our  pro¬
phet  and  his  autobiography,  our  Bible.  We
spoke  of  ourselves  as  a  “nation”  and  we  dreamt
of  national  liberation  from  foreign  yoke  We
shut  our  eyes  to  the  discrepancies  that  existed
in  Indian  Society.  We  disregarded  or  tried  to
deny  the  cleavages  that  existed  in  the  Indian
body-politics  in  the  shape  of  castes,  creeds,
languages,  sects,  provincial  differences,  etc.  We
laid  all  the  faults  that  existed  growing  like
cancers  on  the  body  of  the  Indian  social-polity
at  the  door  of  the  foreigners,  and  thought  only
of  shipping  off  the  foreigners  that  we  might  be
able  to  rejuvenate  our  society.  With  this  ideal
in  view  we  tried  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  all
the  social  classes.  It  is  true  that  here  and
there  wc  got  the  sympathy  from  a  few  of  the
upper  “fourhundred”,  but  we  failed  to  lodge
our  ideal  amongst  the  masses.  And  until  the
non-co-operation  movement  was  inaugurated  the
masses  had  never  been  won  over  to  the  popular
cause.  This  was  the  reason  why  so  long  the
cause  of  freedom  never  found  a  universal  res¬
ponse.  In  our  days  what  we  few  spoke  in
w  hispers,  is  to-day  spoken  by  the  masses  in
public.  To-day  the  masses  arc  aroused  and  it
is  they  who  are  the  mainstay  of  the  non-co-
operation  movement,  which  is  committed  to  the
policy  of  non-violence,  non-resistance  and  other
passive  means.

It  is  said  that  this  policy  is  the  onlv  one  that
is  left  for  the  Indians  to  resort  to  and  India  being
a  country  which  has  peculiarity  in  even,’  thing


IS  INDIA  LIGHTLY  TAXED?


69


in  History  and  Politics”  that  "The  British
administration  in  India  is  the  costliest  in  the
World  and  a  not  unnatural  mark  for  Indian
critics  who  complain  of  the  heavy  financial  drain
which  it  involves  and  in  particular  of  the  large
sums  devoted  to  the  payment  of  pensions.”  We
can  try  and  make  a  case  for  enhanced  salaries
for  people  leaving  their  homes  and  serving  in
other  lands  ;  but  at  the  same  time  even  the
worst  enemy  of  Indian  aspirations  will  have  to
admit  that  the  Indian  Civil  Service  is  the
costliest  service.  The  Prime  Minister  in  Eng¬
land — though  as  such  he  is  entitled  to  no  salary,
as  the  office  is  unknown  to  the  constitution —
gets  only  £5,000/-  only  per  annum.  He  is  the
highest  officer  and  gets  the  salary  of  a  High
Court  Judge  in  our  country.  The  Provincial
Governor  is  paid  twice  as  much,  while  the
Governor-General’s  salary  is  fourfold.  Corres¬
pondingly  the  officers  in  the  Indian  Civil  Service,
not  to  speak  of  other  Imperial  Services,  Forests,
Education,  Police,  Engineering,  Finance,  and
Medicine,  etc.,  are  paid,  and  their  prospects  arc
likely  to  be  made  more  princely  as  a  result  of
the  Lee  Commission  labours.  The  third
postulate  relates  to  the  voice  of  the  people  in
the  affairs  of  the  country.  Without  hesitation
it  must  be  admitted  that  a  measure  of  responsible
government  had  been  granted  and  that  India
stands  to  profit  by  it.  Unfortunately  however
the  system  of  Government,  vis.,  dyarchy,  has
has  been  found  wanting  and  even  responsible
statesmen  have  pronounced  an  unfavourable
verdict.  It  is  perhaps  rather  hard  to  speculate —
happily  it  is  not  our  province — what  the  course
the  events  would  have  taken  if  there  had  been
no  Reforms  Act.  What  we  notice  now  is  that
responsible  public  opinion  has  declared  dyarchy
to  be  a  failure  and  is  almost  unanimously
insistent  on  making  it  go.  Expenditure  and
taxation  are  not  subject  to  effective  popular  con¬
trol,  and  no  scrutiny  of  the  existing  scale  of


taxation.  The  figure  for  earnings  divided  by  the
population  yields  the  per  capita  taxation.  As
regards  the  revenue  opinions  are  divided  with
regard  to  the  items  that  must  go  in.  English
critics  harping  on  the  lightness  of  taxation
proceed  on  the  assumption  that  the  land  revenue
is  rent.  Some  Indian  economists  of  repute  are
for  deducting  the  11011-tax  revenue  while  they
treat  the  land  revenue  as  a  tax.  Again  there
are  others  who  while  including  the  commercial
undertakings,  delete  opium  ami  forests.  Opium
is  fast  diminishing  by  reason  of  agreement  with
China  and  it  is  difficult  to  find  what  portion  of
the  opium  revenue  is  taxation,  seeing  that  in  the
absence  of  government  monopoly  the  profits  of
cultivators  and  merchants  are  yet  to  be
calculated  on  a  sound  basis.  The  forest  receipts
must  also  be  excluded  as  they  are  uncertain  and
as  they  depend  for  their  increase  on  the  utilisa¬
tion  of  the  products  for  industrial  purposes.  To
that  extent  we  wall  be  erring  on  the  safe  side.
Similarly  interest,  receipts  by  civil  department,
military  receipt  miscellaneous,  other  public
works  must  also  be  excluded.  They  all  form
fees  or  receipts  on  account  of  services  rendered
directly.  The  question  whether  a  particular
charge  is  heavy  or  light  is  beside  the  point.
When  the  above  are  omitted,  the  items  that
enter  into  our  basis  of  calculation  arc  land
revenue,  salt,  stamp,  excise,  provincial  rates,
customs,  income-tax,  registration,  railways,
post  and  telegraph,  mint  and  irrigation.  The
total  figures  are  given  below’  for  the  following
years —

1911  ...  ...  £50,321,000

1913  •••  £55.410, 000

1920  ...  ...  £86,832,600

These  figures  divided  by  the  population  give  the
per  capita  tax  in  the  respective  years  as  shown
in  this  table  which  speaks  for  itself.

Incidence  of  taxation  in  British  India.


exjtcnditure  so  as  to  bring  about  economy  is
possible.

With  these  postulates  we  shall  proceed

Year

Taxation
per  head.

Average
annual
Income  per
capita

Percentage  of
Taxation  on
average
income

further.  Behind  the  low  Indian  rates  some
thing  is  lurking.  Truth  is  there,  i.e.,  the  right

1871

R$.
...  1

A.  P.

>3  9

Rs.

20

9

way  of  testing  the  burden  of  taxation  ;  for  the

18S1

...  3

3  3

27

8

figures  may  be  high  and  the  burden  may  not  be

>891

...  3

3  n

...

...

heavy  while  the  burden  may  still  be  heavy  in

igot

2

JO  2

30

88

spite  of  the  low  taxation  figures,  as  will  be  seen

1911

...  3

13  «t

S»

5’7

presently.  The  right  principle  in  arriving  at

*9*3

...  3

1  6

...

...

the  incidence  of  taxation,  is  to  discover  the

1920

...  5

0  it

...

...

relation  between  per  capita  income  and  per  capita

1922

...  6

7  7

53

8  a

72


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


would  evolve  a  new  method  of  acquiring  free¬
dom,  possibly  some  form  of  bloodless  revolution.
All  these  are  plausible  enough.  15ut  before  we
strive  and  sacrifice  ourselves  to  an  ideal  we  must
first  clearly  understand  what  is  our  ideal.  The
masses  cannot  be  asked  to  sacrifice  themselves
to  a  vague  and  indefinable  ideal.  It  is  easy  to
arouse  the  religious  fanaticism  in  an  Oriental
mob  and  the  so-called  ‘‘national”  spirit,  which
through  a  psycho-analysis  will  be  found  to  lie
1  rased  on  race  hatred.  But  the  enthusiasm  en-
dengered  by  fanaticism  on  other  kinds  of
frenzies,  religious  or  political,  will  not  avail  in
the  long  run  in  the  twentieth  century.  Rather
it  will  recoil  on  itself.  What  now  seems  to  be
helpful  will  prove  destructive  in  the  end.  The
basis  of  unity  of  the  people  or  peoples  lies  else¬
where.  The  Economic  Interpretation  of  History
is  at  the  bottom  of  every  human  motive.  We
must  never  lose  sight  of  that  fact.  In  a  country
like  India  religion  cannot  be  the  binding  force.
The  bond  of  union  must  be  sought  elsewhere.
Therefore  before  the  mas-es  are  asked  to  sacrifice
themselves  for  a  Swaraj,  one  has  the  right  to
ask  the  nature  of  it.  A  clear  ideal  together  with
a  programme  of  systematic  action  must  be  put
before  the  masses.

Present-day  India  is  making  heroic  efforts  for
the  ‘‘national  freedom”.  But  we  must  know
clearly  what  we  mean  by  it.  Unfortunately  for
us  our  leaders  have  set  up  an  ideal,  of  which  the
nature  is  still  unknown ;  on  the  contrary  a
spiritual  interpretation  is  now  being  given  to  it.
We  are  groping  in  the  dark.  The  methods  and
means  have  been  mixed  up  with  the  end  and  aim ;
and  we  are  only  led  by  emotion.  It  is  easy  to
arouse  the  emotional  Panjabi  and  the  nervous
Bengali  and  we  glory  in  them  when  they  are
worked  up  to  frenzy.  But  their  effects  are
momentary.  The  movement  for  the  freedom  of
India  must  be  put  on  a  more  solid  and  permanent
basis.

The  Indian  peoples  suffer  from  a  plethora  of
injustice,  and  Hindu  Society  is  based  on
inequalities.  The  opression  and  exploitation  of
the  Indian  masses  have  been  going  on  for  thou¬
sands  of  years.  Empires  and  dynasties  have
risen  and  fallen,  hundreds  of  foreign  invasions
have  swept  over  the  land,  races  after  races  have
conquered  and  settled  in  the  country,  religions
have  changed  but  the  condition  of  the  Indian
masses  lias  remained  always  the  same.  Political ,
social,  religious  oppressions  and  exploitations
have  been  their  lot.  It  has  been  their  destinv


to  remain  as  helots.  And  these  masses  are  now
asked  to  sacrifice  themselves  at  the  altar  of  a
mysterious  god — Swaraj.

Now,  what  is  Swaraj,  and  intended  for
whom  ?  A  Swaraj  where  the  upper  social  classes
dominate,  cannot  have  any  interest  in  uplifting
the  masses.  However  philanthropic  and  pious
the  upper  ten  thousand  may  try  to  become,  the
cleavage  of  class  interests  will  remain  just  the
same.  Benevolence,  philanthropy,  abolition  of
Untouehability  will  never  elevate  the  Indian
masses.  From  the  time  of  Buddha  down  to
Keshub  Chandra  Sen,  attempts  have  been  made
to  put  the  Indians  on  the  basis  of  social  equality
through  religion,  but  to  no  effect.

Human  society  is  dynamic,  the  different
social  classes  have  different  interests  and  stand
in  opposition  to  each  other.  The  most  powerful
classes  dominate  over  the  weaker  ones.  There¬
fore,  social  equality  can  never  bring  men  on  the
same  footing.  It  is  only  economic  equality  that
can  put  man  on  equal  social  basis.  As  has
already  been  said,  economic  interest  is  the  great¬
est  motive  power  in  society.  And  we  must  not
forget  it  in  the  case  of  India  and  its  present
struggle  for  freedom.  The  history  of  Indian
society  has  not  evolved  in  a  way  different  from
that  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  The  Historic
Determinist  finds  the  same  motive  forces  in
Indian  history  as  elsewhere.  The  history  of
India  has  also  been  the  history  of  class  struggle,
and  this  struggle  is  still  going  on,  however
much  we  may  befog  it  under  the  name  of
“Nationalism.”  The  struggle  to-day  is  between
the  Indian  and  the  ruling  British  Bourgeoisie.  It
is  true  that  the  political  cleavage  between  the
Indian  bourgeoisie  and  the  masses  is  not  now
much  perceptible  and  that  they  have  a  common
political  goal,  viz.,  political  freedom,  as  long  as
they  have  a  common  enemy.  But  the  difference
in  social  and  economic  interests  will  always
remain  the  same.  For  a  day  will  come  when  the
common  barrier  will  be  removed  and  the  different
social  classes  will  stand  apart  in  juxtaposition  to
each  other.

The  Demos.

To-day  the  Indian  masses — the  Demos — are
not  yet  class  conscious.  Long  years  of  servitude
have  dehumanised  them.  They  have  been  bereft
of  all  rights.  It  will  therefore  take  time  to  make
them  self-conscious.  But  the  time  will  come
when  they  will  be  class  conscious  and  demand


THE  FIGHT  FOR  FREEDOM  OF  INDIA


73


their  rights  and  their  proper  position  in  society
They  cannot  be  kept  down  for  ever.  They  will
demand  a  new  order  of  things.  In  the  Indian
and  especially  the  Hindu  social-polity  the  “lowly”
have  no  place.  Indian  society  is  still  feudalistic
and  is  based  on  social  inequalities.  There  is  a
huge  landless  agrarian  population,  besides  the
“submerged  tenth”  who  have  gone  down  with¬
out  redemption.  Besides  the  economic  exploita¬
tion  there  is  religious  exploitation  by  the  priest¬
craft.  As  a  result  of  all  these  exploitations  and
social  injustice  the  Indian  masses  have  sunk  down
to  the  position  where  they  are  to-day.  Specially
the  case  of  the  Hindu  Is  the  most  pathetic  in  the
whole  world.  From  birth  to  death  the  Hindu
is  a  slave,  rights  he  lias  none,  but  only  orders
to  obey.  There  is  no  social  polity  in  the  world
which  keeps  the  man  so  bound  down  as  entirely
to  hamper  his  development,  as  the  Hindu  social-
polity.

Thus  we  see  that  in  the  Indian  body  politic
the  masses  do  no  enjoy  any  right  or  liberty  and
as  it  happens  every where,  a  handful  of  men
forming  the  upper  classes  of  the  society  rule  the
others  and  enjoy  all  the  benefits.  Yet  in  full
view  of  these  facts  these  masses  are  asked  to
sacrifice  themselves  for  what  is  called  “national
freedom.”  This  no  doubt  provides  food  for
reflection  for  the  Indian  sociological  thinkers
and  leaders.  Granting  of  only  a  concession  here
and  a  few  rights  there  can  never  remedy
the  disease  which  is  rotting  the  whole
Indian  social-polity.  A  radical  change  is
necessary.  A  new  social-polity  has  to  be  intro¬
duced  in  the  Indian  society.  Truth  is  always
unpleasant,  but  it  must  be  said,  the  solution  of
the  Indian  problem  cannot  be  found  merely  by
getting  rid  of  the  foreigners.  It  may  leave  the
administration  to  the  hands  of  the  Indian
Bourgeoisie  but  it  cannot  help  the  masses  to
attain  the  maximum  development  of  manhood.
Hence  a  new  “watch  word”  should  be  found  for
the  masses,  a  new  world  view  should  be  given  to
them.  A  new'  ideal  must  be  held  up  to  them  by
which  they  can  realise  true  manhood.  A  posi¬
tive  and  concrete  program  dealing  with  the  vital
interests  of  the  masses  must  be  put  forward.  It
is  of  no  use  shutting  over  eyes  to  the  conditions
as  they  exist  in  Indian  society.  We  must  face
the  facts  broadly  and  try  our  best  to  find  out
a  solution  of  the  problem.  The  masses  are  being
asked  to  fight  the  battle  of  freedom,  but  what
benefits  arc  they  going  to  get  thereby?  They
are  asked  to  make  a  solid  national  front  against


the  enemy,  but  nothing  as  yet  has  been  set  on
foot  to  bring  the  different  classes  on  the  same
social  level.  After  the  struggle  for  freedom  of
1857,  the  feudal  aristrocats  went  out  of  the
arena,  after  playing  out  their  role.  Next  came
the  Liberal  bourgeoisie  to  play  its  part.  At
present  the  third  and  most  important  factor,  the
masses — are  going  to  play  their  role,  and  the
future  of  the  movement  lies  in  their  hands.  In
this  matter  the  same  historic  process  of  develop¬
ment  is  going  on  in  India  as  has  taken  place  in
other  oppressed  countries  of  the  world.  Only  in
this  following  respect  India  is  lagging  behind
the  other  civilised  countries.  In  India  the  Third
Estate  is  trying  to  assert  itself,  while  in  the  other
civilised  lands  the  Fourth  Estate  is  now  trying  to
do  the  same.  Unfortunately  the  Indians  living,
as  they  do,  within  the  narrow’  limits  of  their
own  country  appear  to  be  amazingly  ignorant
of  the  outside  world.  The  political,  social  and
economic  conditions  as  they  exist  in  other  parts
of  the  world  find  no  place  in  the  Indian  mind.
The  isolation  of  India  from  the  outside  world
had  been  a  curse  to  her  in  the  past  and  it  is
continuing  the  same  even  to-day.  The  leaders
of  the  Indian  masses  have  built  a  Chinese  Wall
around  the  country,  and  lead  by  preaching  emo¬
tional  hatred  against  everything  English.  But
the  world’s  prosperity  is  built  on  mutual  aid  and
co-operation.  The  educated  Indian  mind  fed
with  the  Spencerian  doctrine  can  not  see  the
truth  in  the  principle  of  co-operation.  India
is  a  part  of  the  world  and  as  it  contains  one-fifth
of  the  population  of  tire  world  she  can  never
remain  aloof.  The  various  world  problems  must
find  echoes  in  the  Indian  mind,  and  the  move¬
ment  of  the  Indian  masses  must  be  a  part  of  the
world  movement,  otherwise,  their  salvation  will
not  be  easy  of  access.  India  must  take  part  in
the  working  out  of  the  world  problems  and
contribute  her  quota  to  it.

It  is  said  that  no  foreign  people  will  help
India  in  her  struggle.  True  it  is  that  no  foreign
people  or  political  party’  will  actually  come  to
free  the  Indian  people  from  their  sufferings.
But  the  world’s  sympathy  and  with  it  the  recog¬
nition  of  India’s  claims  are  not  to  be  trifled  with.
So,  in  order  to  establish  relations  with  the  outside
world  the  Indian  public  must  have  a  new
program  of  work  before  them  and  must  rise  to
the  new’  demand.  India  must  organise  her  own
forces  within  her  own  borders  and  at  the  same
time  collaborate  with  the  outside  world.

On  this  account  the  Indian  mass  movement


74


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


should  be  put  along  the  same  line  with  the  world
mass  movement.  India  is  a  world  problem  ;  and
as  the  key  to  the  world  situation  lies  in  India,
the  suffering  working  masses  of  the  world  arc
looking  towards  India  with  high  hope.  For  this
reason  the  movement  in  India  for  independence
must  be  looked  at  from  a  different  angle  of
vision.  The  Indjan  question  is  not  merely  one
of  foreign  or  indigenous  rule,  but  is  a  question
of  exploitation  of  one-fifth  of  the  humanity  by  a
handful  of  exploiters.  It  is  the  exploitation  of
the  Indian  masses  that  is  mainly  keeping  the
British  bourgeoisie  in  power,  and  it  is  again  the
strength  generating  out  of  this  exploitation  that
enables  the  British  Bourgeoisie  to  dominate  the
world.  Hence  it  is  that  the  world -suffering
humanity  are  looking  towards  India  with  high
hopes  for  a  solution  of  their  own  problem.

India  contains  a  vast  impoverished  imputa¬
tion,  therefore,  labour  is  cheap.  The
capitalist  class  of  the  world  will  always  find  there
a  huge  industrial  reserve  army  at  their  command.
Therefore  nothing  will  prevent  India  from  pass¬
ing  through  a  high  capitalistic  period  and  an
exploitation  of  her  resources.  A  negative  hatred
against  modern  Industrialism  and  the  introduc¬
tion  of  Charka  can  not  prevent  it.  The  inevit¬
able  taws  of  economics  must  find  its  fulfilment  in
the  Indian  history.  For,  how  can  the  enslave¬
ment  and  the  exploitation  of  one-fifth  of
humanity  alter,  parri  passu,  the  conditions  of
the  toiling  masses  of  the  w'orld?  Nay,  rather
it  will  crush  them.  Hence  the  workers  and  the
exploited  population  of  the  world  hope  that  the
little  cloud  that  is  gathering  in  the  Indian
horizon  if  it  drifts  aright  may  bring  their  salva¬
tion.  This  is  not  a  mere  speculation  but  is
actually  passing  through  the  minds  of  many
revolutionary  labour  leaders.  For  this  reason  the
Indian  movement  must  collaborate  with  the
world  movement.  The  days  of  Mazzini  arc
gone.  The  world  is  now  being  treated  to  a  new
philosophy — the  philosophy  of  Karl  Marx.  As
has  been  said  before,  we  must  look  at  the  Indian
problem  from  a  different  standpoint.  We  must
analyse  it  from  the  stand  point  of  Marxian
doctrines.  In  future  it  will  be  the  Fourth-
Estate — the  proletariat  which  will  fight  the  battle
of  freedom.  And  when  it  will  become  class-
conscious,  the  class-struggle  will  become  inevit¬
able.  It  is  said  that  the  movement  will  be
hinderd  if  the  proletariat  be  organised  and  class-
struggle  begun  at  once.  But  then  it  is  only  the
dictum  of  the  class  which  has  vested  interest  at


stake.  True  class-struggle  may  not  take  place
until  the  horizon  be  cleared  of  the  threatening
cloud  that  hangs  like  a  pall  on  the  head  of  all
the  social  classes.  But  for  the  sake  of  humanity
and  of  civilisation  the  huge  traditionally  oppress¬
ed  and  exploited  masses  of  India,  have  to  be
awakened.  The  sociological  and  economic  forces
are  acting  towards  it.  The  electric  shocks
generating  out  of  political,  social  and  economic
stresses  which  are  arousing  the  world  proletariat
will  also  rouse  the  sleeping  Indian  leviathau
And  when  they  will  be  awakened  will  they  be
satisfied  writh  such  a  Swaraj — theocratic  or
plutocratic  or  bourgeoisie  democratic?

The  world  is  striving  towards  democracy.
The  toiling  part  of  humanity  is  always  restless
under  the  oppression  of  the  privileged  classes.
The  masses  of  the  world  arc  no  longer  satisfied
with  hearing  the  theory  of  the  leisured  classes
but  are  interesting  themselves  in  the  theory  of
the  working  classes.  The  masses  have  found  out
that  true  democracy  is  yet  to  be  evolved.
Hitherto  the  socallcd  “democratic”  experiments
have  not  been  successful.  The  third  estate  in
France  established  a  democracy,  but  it  was  a
class  democracy.  The  fourth  estate  in  Europe
is  trying  to  evolve  a  democracy  not  based  on
class  interests,  but  on  economic  justice.  This
makes  the  fourth  estate  hated  everywhere  in  the
world.  But  true  democracy  does  not  know  any
class  interest.  In  the  new  social-polity  there  will
be  no  class  interest.  True  it  is  that  from  Plato
downwards  to  H.  G.  Wells  lots  of  Panaceas  have
been  prescribed  for  the  betterment  of  the  world.
But  we  are  not  interested  in  any  Utopian  cure
— all  are  mere  Panaceas.  We  will  have  to  look
the  cold  facts  in  the  face.  We  must  seek  out
the  hiost  effective  means  for  the  uplift  of  the
Indian  masses.

Uplifting  the  Masses.

The  true  means  of  uplifting  the  Indian
masses  lies  in  a  new  social-polity.  There  cannot
be  a  flourishing  civilisation  and  development  of
true  manhood  in  India  unless  and  until  a  rational
social-policy  be  made  the  foundation  of  the
Indian  society.  Naturally  enough  it  will  have
conflict  with  the  existing  prejudices,  interests,
etc.,  but  wherever  nationality  and  rationality
conflict,  nationality  must  give  way.  We  must
not  shrink  from  it.  If  Asia  is  ever  to  rise  in  the
scale  of  civilisation  and  her  teeming  millions  are
to  be  redeemed  from  abject  degradation,  it  must
be  through  the  destruction  of  feudalism  and  the


THU  FIGHT  FOR  FRHFDOM  OF  INDIA


75


establishment  of  democracy  on  economic  basis
and  tlie  introduction  of  rationality — and  that
again  is  possible  only  through  a  social  revolution.

These  are  hard  and  unpleasant  things  to  say
and  sound  Utopian.  The  interest  of  the  privileged
classes  has  befogged  their  eyes  from  seeing  the
truth,  but  the  truth  must  be  said  and  talked.
The  sooner  the  Indian  leaders  and  social  thinkers
discern  it  the  better.  To-day  the  non-co-
operation  movement  is  in  swing.  But  the
repression  has  already  been  set  on  foot  to  crush
it.  It  may  be  crushed,  and  the  movement  may
turn  into  a  Scin  Fein  movement.  As  a  result  the
authorities  may  be  obliged  to  grant  some  sort  of
self-government  at  a  future  date.  But,  will  that
elevate  the  Indian  masses  who  compose  the
majority  of  the  population?  I  suppose  that  com¬
plete  independence  is  achieved ;  will  then  the
Indian  ruling  authorities  establish  true  demo¬
cracy  or  will  it  be  a  class  rule  again  ?

Hence  it  behooves  the  Indian  thinkers  to  look
forward  and  analyse  the  social  conditions.
Those  who  have  no  prejudices  or  interests  to
warp  their  judgment  will  discern  that  the
struggle  for  freedom  does  not  end  with  getting
self-government — swaraja — “within  or  without
the  British  Empire.”  That  this  kind  of  qualified
freedom  may  better  the  conditions  of  the  privileg¬
ed  classes  but  will  not  bring  the  masses  up  to  a
higher  level  of  civilisation  and  manhood.

Swaraj  to  be  Defined.

What  they  need  is  an  all  round  egalitarianism,
political,  social,  and  economic.  The  term
Swaraj  therefore  must  be  defined.  The  masses
must  know  what  they  are  going  to  get  as  it  is
on  them  that  the  brunt  of  the  fight  is  going  to
fall  in  future.  A  patched-up  truce  can  never
put  off  the  inevitable.

The  Asiatics  as  a  rule  are  individualists,
especially  the  Hindus.  But  it  is  not  the  indivi¬
dualism  according  to  the  Spencerian  sense  but
the  selfish  habit  which  is  the  outcome  of  slavery.
It  is  "every  one  for  himself  the  devil  take  care
of  the  rest”  principle  engendered  by  thousands
of  years  of  political,  social,  religious  and  economic
oppression  and  exploitation.  Collective  principle
and  co-operation  are  unknown  to  them,
particularly  to  the  Hindus.  Nowhere  in  the
affairs  of  life  can  the  Hindus  co-operate  with  one
another.  As  a  result  of  this  slavish  instinct
mutual  aid  and  co-operation  arc  unknown  to  the
Indians;  but  the  world  is  built  on  mutual  aid.


The  biological  principles  do  not  controvert  this
fact.  In  an  inter-racial  group,  individual  com¬
petition  is  not  necessary  for  its  development,  and
the  principles  of  economics  show  that  society  is
based  on  collectivism.  The  old  individualist
doctrine  emanating  from  the  principles  of  the
Physioeratic  School  and  developed  later  on  by
Adam  Smith  and  ending  with  Spencer’s  Laissez
Fairs  theory,  does  not  hold  good  any  longer
except  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  need  of  it
for  selfish  ends.  Commuuality  on  social  and
economical  lines  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the
uplift  of  the  Asiatics.  The  principle  of  natural
selection  does  not  imply  the  cut-throat  principle
euphemistically  called  individualism.  In  an
inter-racial  group,  natural  selection  plays  but  a
small  part  as  Karl  Pearson  says,  “All  the
evidences,  however,  that  I  have  been  individually
able  to  gather  from  a  naturally  limited  examina¬
tion  of  Anthropometric  Statistics  and  anthro¬
pological  facts,  distinctly  point  to  the  very  small
part  played  by  intragroup  selections  in  the  case  of
civilised  man.  If  this  be  so,  then  the  manu¬
facture  of  Biological  bogies  for  socialists  is  idle,
being  an  occupation  like  that  process  of  planting
economic  scarecrows  round  the  field  of  social
reform,  by  which  the  Manchester  school  strove
for  a  time  to  delay  their  political  bankruptcy”.
(Chances  of  Death  Page  13S — 139).

Thus  communality  on  social  and  economic
lines  is  what  is  wanted  for  India.  But  what  we
need  for  India  is  not  a  blind  imitation  of  the  old
Fnglish  systems,  but  a  sound  rational  socio¬
political  system,  which  has  to  be  evolved  in
India.  Unfortunately,  we  have  not  as  yet
developed  any  political  philosophy  of  our  own,
only  we  are  led  by  emotion  and  try  to  assert
ourselves  in  the  world  only  by  sentimentalism
No  movement  for  freedom  has  been  so  poor  in
Philosophy  as  the  one  in  India.  A  positive
hatred  towards  the  British,  and  a  negative  idea
of  getting  freedom,  will  lead  us  no  where.  The
thing  wanted  is  that  our  leaders  and  thinkers
should  study  what  is  going  on  all  over  the  world,
and  try  in  the  light  of  that  to  uplift  the  Indian
masses  to  their  fullest  capacity.  .

To  get  rid  of  Class  Rule.

The  exploited  classes  of  the  world  arc  trying
to  get  rid  of  class  rules  and  apply  the  principles
of  social  democracy  based  on  economic  equality
or  communism.  We  cannot  lag  behind  the  other
nations  of  the  world  for  ever.  Now  that  a
movement  for  freedom  has  been  started  we  must


76


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


try  to  conduct  it  on  rational  lines.  For  this
reason  what  \vc  want  should  be  clearly  defined.
The  masses  must  know  where  the  movement  is
leading  to.  By  appealing  to  sentiments  or
arousing  enthusiasm  only  we  cannot  achieve
much.  The  masses  cannot  be  made  the  food  of
the  cannon,  unless  they  regain  by  it  what  they
have  lost.  For  this  reason,  before  the  masses  are
asked  to  die  the  moot  questions  regarding  the
reconstruction  of  the  Indian  society  must  lie
grappled  and  solved.  A  country  means  the
Iieople  inhabiting  a  given  geographical  area.
These  people  or  the  individual  “.Socius”  collec¬
tively,  form  tlie  society.  It  is  the  welfare  or
development  of  the  "Socius”  and  its  collective
organ— the  society  that  mankind  strives  for.
Therefore,  the  philosophy  underlying  the  present
struggle  in  India  is  nothing  but  an  attempt  of
the  people  to  create  an  environment  where  they
can  realise  themselves  to  fullness.  This  being
the  case,  the  thing  which  hinders  the  develop¬
ment  of  the  socius  in  his  entirety  has  to  be
detected  and  remedied.

But  the  present  struggle  for  freedom  tries  to
deny  or  postpone  for  the  present  all  the  vital


problems  affecting  the  exploited  social  classes  or
the  Indian  social  polity.  In  to-day’s  fight  for
freedom,  the  exploiting  and  the  exploited  classes
are  being  asked  to  cooperate  and  form  a  single
"national’’  body.  The  leaders  try  to  ignore  the
cleavages  of  interests  that  exist  between  the
landlords  and  the  peasants,  between  the  capitalist
and  the  labourer,  between  the  Brahmin  and  the
Sudras,  and  are  trying  to  unite  them  on
"national”  basis,  which  in  the  long  run  is  bound
to  be  a  failure.

The  masses  of  the  world  are  already  detect¬
ing  the  trick  of  "nationalism"  played  by  the
interested  classes.  And  in  India  also  the
oppressed  and  exploited  classes  will  sooner  or
later  detect  it  when  their  class-consciousness  will
be  aroused.  On  this  account  the  sooner  the  solu¬
tion  is  found,  the  better  for  the  Indian  people.
An  Indian  fight  for  freedom,  instead  of  dwelling
in  the  morass  of  impossibilities,  contrarities  and
platitudes  which  are  characteristic  of  Indian
mentality  should  be  conducted  on  a  concrete  and
clear  socio-political  plan  of  action  setting  forth
the  various  means  of  reconstruction  of  the  Indian
society.


SPINOZA  AND  VEDANTA:


Among  the  idealistic  systems  of  philosophy
developed  in  the  West  Spinoza’s  is  one  of  the
most  important.  Besides  it  is  one  of  the  most
thorough  idealistic  monisms  there.  In  the  East,
at  any  rate  in  India,  we  know  no  better  idealistic
system  than  that  developed  by  Sankara.  Some
people  may  demur  to  call  him  the  greatest
idealistic  philosopher  of  the  world  hut  none  can
deny  him  a  very  high  place  among  such  men.
A  comparative  study  of  the  two  thinkers  will
therefore  be  of  very  great  use  to  a  proper  under¬
standing  of  idealism  besides  being  pf  absorbing
interest  in  itself.

It  will  be  better  to  recapitulate  the  two
systems  before  proceeding  to  compare  them.
Spinoza  starts  with  the  cartasinn  principle  that
substance  has,  as  nature,  independence  of  every¬
thing  else  for  its  existence.  It  is  unconditioned,
unlimited  and  infinite.  Its  existence  is  spontane¬
ous.  A  plurality  of  substances  is  therefore  im¬


possible  aud  a  contradiction  in  terms.  There  is
only  one  substance.  But  what  is  its  nature?
How  about  its  positive  characteristics?  This
question  is  inqiossible  to  answer  for  a  definition
means  limitation  and  substance  is  unlimited.
I  his  is  the  reason  why  Spinoza  speaks  of  it  only
m  negatives  as  that  it'  is  not  this  and  not  that.
The  next  main  conception  is  that  of  attributes.
Substance  has  two  of  these :  mind  and  matter.  It
appears  either  as  a  mental  phenomenon  or  as  a
material  one.  It  cannot  appear  as  any  other.
Hut  its  limitation  in  this  manner  is  not  due  to
anything  inherent  in  itself  but  to  the  finite  nature
of  man  which  cannot  comprehend  it  in  any  other
form.  The  limitation  is  in  man  and  not  in
substance  which  is  by  nature  unlimited.  These
attributes  are  mutually  exclusive ;  a  mental  thing
ecoming  by  no  possibility  a  material  one  and
v,Ce  versa.  But  in  so  far  as  they  are  both  the
aspects  of  the  same  thing,  they  arc  not  so.  The


SPINOZA  AND  VEDANTA


77


third  important  idea  of  Spinoza  is  that  of  modes.
The  various  individual  things  seen  under  the
aspect  of  mind  or  of  matter  are  so  many  mani
festations  of  the  substance  and  they  are  all
conditioned  by  necessity.

As  to  his  practical  philosophy  man  being  only
a  modus  he  can  have  no  free  will.  Good  and
bad  are  not  things  which  are  true  in  themselves
but  exist  only  in  our  minds.  Where  everything
is  substance  there  cannot  be  anything  bad  in
itself.  But  we  call  that  bad  which  does  not  fall
in  with  our  scheme  of  right  and  wrong.  Only
that  however  can  be  called  truly  good  which  leads
us  to  a  knowledge  of  God.

The  Vedanta  system  is  not  as  easy  to
summarise.  It  starts  with  pramanas  pr  measures
of  truth  and  recognises  three  of  them.  One  is
the  pratyaksha  pramana  or  the  standard  of
sensuous  perception  ;  a  second  is  anumatta
pramana  or  the  method  of  getting  at  truth  by
means  of  inference  as  when  we  know  the
existence  of  fire  by  the  perception  of  smoke ;  the
third  is  sabda  pramana  or  the  criterion  of
authority.  This  consists  for  the  Vedantists  only
of  the  Vedas.  Next  comes  a  long  argument  at
the  end  of  which  it  is  established  that  subject
and  object  are  mutually  exclusive  and  that  the
common  of  the  world  consists  in  translating  one
to  the  other  as  when  we  say  “We  are  strong  or
we  are  right.”  In  this  way  is  established  the
illusory  character  of  the  connection  between  the
Ego  and  the  non-ego  and  the  sole  reality  of  only
the  former.  The  seeming  nature  of  the  connec¬
tion  however  is  due  to  Maga  or  ignorance  which
is  not  individual  but  universal.  Truly,  it  is  only
the  Ego  that  exists.  Though  this  is  the  truth,
we  must  grant  the  reality  for  all  practical  pur
poses,  Vyavaharartham  as  Sankara  says,  of  the
universe  as  it  appears  to  us  from  day  to  day.
We  have  thus  two  kinds  of  realities,  the  real  and
only  Reality  and  the  Phenomenal  one.  Corres¬
ponding  to  this  duplication  of  reality  we  have
knowledge  also  divided  as  higher  and  lower,  the
first  consisting  in  the  way  of  freeing  the  Self
from  its  illusion  as  to  its  connection  with  the
Universe  for  all  eternity  and  the  second  being  the
way  in  which  man  by  doing  works  and  worship-
ping  Brahman  attains  liberation.  The  former
emphasises  knowledge,  the  latter  action.  Two
Brahmans  are  also  given,  the  Nirguna  Braluuan,
the  qualityless  Brahman  and  the  Saguna
Brahman,  the  “quality-ed"  Brahman.  The
former  is  of  course  the  true  Brahman,  the  latter


being  meant  only  for  phenomenal  purposes.  For
such  purposes  also  the  doctrine  of  Karma  is
introduced.  It  only  carries  beyond  one  life  the
law  of  cause  and  effect  and  applies  it  to  moral
relations  as  well  as  to  material  ones.  It  explains
why  there  arc  the  existing  differences  in  the
world  and  indicates  what  the  way  is  to  improve
oneself  in  coming  lives.  In  fine  we  may  say  the
Vedanta  teaches  the  truth  of  the  Brahman  and
the  unreality  of  the  universe.  The  ego  can  not
be  anything  else  than  that  Brahman.  But  for
practical  purposes  the  world  shall  be  real,  mau
shall  do  good  actions  and  worship  a  Brahman  as
living,  as  human  as  he  himself.  The  position  of
this  school  has  been  very  beautifully  put  in  the
three  words  “That  thwam  asi”.  “'Hiat,  thou
art”.  Now  for  a  comparative  review  of  the  two
systems.  And  first  to  the  criteria  of  truth,  the
sources  of  knowledge.  The  Vedanta,  as  we
have  seen  recognises  three  of  them,  the
pratyaksha  pramana,  the  anumana  pramana  and
the  sabda  pramana,  that  is,  sensuous  perception
inference  and  authority.  For  the  purpose  in  hand,
we  shall  say  that  the  first  two  are  dependent
only  on  reason  so  that  the  Vedanta  might  be
said  to  count  upon  only  two  things  as  sources
of  knowledge,  reason  and  authority.  Spinoza
however  takes  only  one  of  these  reasons  as  his
criterion  and  indeed  we  could  not  expect  any¬
thing  else  from  a  lineal  descendant  of  Dascartes
who  started  Modern  Philosophy  in  Europe  after
rigorously  eliminating  all  prejudices  and  writing
on  the  clean  slate,  as  his  first  point  of  speculation
“Cogito  ergo  sum”  "I  think,  therefore,  I  am.”
In  a  sense  we  may  say  that  Descartes  rejected  all
authority  but  we  must  be  careful  of  what  we
mean  by  that  term.  If  it  implies  such  a  thing
as  was  used  to  stifle  rational  inquiry  in  the
Middle  Ages  then  certainly  it  must  be  set  aside.
But  if  it  refers  to  authority’,  not  on  account  of
reason  but  on  that  of  a  faculty  higher  than
reason,  it  is  but  right  that  reason  should  submit.
In  fine  the  Vedanta  recognises,  as  means  of
knowledge  both  reason  and  a  higher  faculty  in
man  than  that,  whatever  we  might  call  it,  intui¬
tion  or  anything  else  while  Descartes  and  like
him  Spinoza  both  recognise  only  reason.  To
the  very  pertinent  enquiry  as  to  whether  such  a
faculty  exists  one  should  think  that  it  is  too  late
in  the  day,  with  Bergson  staring  in  the  face,  to
give  an  elaborate  answer.  In  any  case,  Indian
philosophy  assumes  such  a  faculty  and  is  prepared
to  justify  the  assumption.  It  rests  on  those  who
deny  it  to  substantiate  their  position.


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


r*

Both  the  systems  arrive  at  the  sole  existence
of  only  one  Reality  but  they  do  so  in  different
ways.  Spinoza  starts  with  the  Cartesian
principle  that'  Substance  is  the  thing  which  does
not  depend  on  anything  else  for  its  existence.
But  while  Descartes  very  inconsistently  assumed
two  such  substances  mind  and  matter,  Spinoza
rightly  came  to  the  conclusion  that  plurality  must
mean  dependence  in  some  way  or  other  and  real
independence  can  be  posited  of  only  one.  Sankara
who  also  holds  that  only  one  exists  comes  to  his
position  in  a  different  way.  He  starts  with  the
diametrical  apposition  of  subject  and  object,  Ego
and  the  non-ego  and  with  the  natural  corollary
that  one  cannot  be  attributed  of  the  other.  Of
the  two  things  it  is  self-evident  that  the  Ego  is
real  egp,  the  non-ego  is  unreal.  But  the  real  is
unlimited,  independent  and  unconditioned.  The
"I”  therefore  is  the  Real,  the  whole  world  is  un¬
real.  Thus  we  reach  the  same  destination  by
both  the  paths.

Moreover  l>oth  the  philosophers  decline  to
describe  the  nature  of  the  Reality  in  any  definite
and  positive  manner  and  for  the  same  reason.
The  attribution  of  i»ositivc  qualities  implies  the
negation  of  their  opposites  and  negation  is  limita¬
tion,  a  thing  which  is  opposed  to  the  nature  of
Substance.  Spinoza  says  that  it  is  not  finite,  it
is  not  limited  and  so  on  while  Sankara  summarily
says,  it  is  Nirguna  Brahman,  the  qualityless
Brahman.  He  is  afraid  of  saying  that  It  is  one
lest  his  statement  might  be  construed  to  mean  It
is  not  two.  He  merely  says  It  is  adwaitam,  not
two.  After  all,  the  true  explanation  of  Its  nature
seems  to  be  that  given  by  the  ancient  Rishi  who
when  asked  what  the  nature  of  Atmam  was,  did
not  reply  but  kept  silence.  He  was  asked  the
same  question  a  second  time  but  did  not  reply
then  also.  The  increasingly  anxious  pupil  put
the  same  question  a  third  time  when  he  got  the
reply  from  the  Rishi.  "My  son,  I  answered  you
twice  but  you  did  not  understand  me.  Yon  want
more  preparation  to  do  so”.  Brahman  is  not  a
matter  for  words  but  one  for  experience.

Sankara  says  that  though  in  reality  Brahman
alone  is  existing,  we  see  so  many  things  in  the
world  because  of  ignorance  which  is  not  indivi¬
dual  but  generic.  That  ignorant  is  Maga.  In
short,  he  holds  that  appearances  are  desistful.
At  the  same  time  however,  he  discerns  that  as
Brahman  is  infinite,  those  appearances  also  can
not  be  devoid  of  reality.  He  grants  them  there¬
fore  what  we  might  call  phenomenal  reality.


Spinoza  also  holds  the  same  doctrine  of  Maga  in
a  way.  Of  course  he  never  called  it  by  the  Indian
name  and  might  not  have  even  thought  of  it  as
such.  But  his  position  regarding  the  appearance
is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Vedantin,  for  he  says
that  man  by  his  finite  nature  is  constrained  to  get
a  view  of  substance  only  in  two  aspects,  mental
and  moral.  There  must  be,  there  are,  he  admits
various  other  aspects  in  which  substance  can  be
seen  but  the  nature  of  man  incapacitates  him  to
do  so.  That  is,  the  nature  of  man  limits  his
vision.  At  least  in  so  far  as  this  limitation  goes,
have  we  not  a  distant  echo  of  the  doctrine  of
Maga?

A  difference  however  soon  crops  up  between
the  two  philosophies.  For  Sankara,  the  world  as
we  see  it.  is  only  phenomenally  real,  that  is  the
true  and  only  reality  is  Brahman  who  is  beyond
and  above  the  appearances  we  sec  in  experience,
and  those  appearances  are  deceitful  and  to  be
taken  as  true  only  so  long  and  so  far  as  the  Reality
is  not  reached.  They  are  real  only  for  the  purpose
of  every  day  life  not  for  that  of  truth.

Spinoza  however  holds  that  his  modes  are
really  real.  There  is  no  phenomenal  reality  or
real  reality  for  him.  He  has  only  one  kind  of
it.  We  may  shortly  put  the  difference  between
him  and  Sankara  on  this  point  thus.  Appearance
for  him  has  for  him  reality  while  for  Sankara  it
has  not.

W'e  have  seen  the  two  kinds  of  realities  the
Indian  philosophar  arrives  at.  His  distinction
necessitated  a  division  of  knowledge  also  into
Higher  and  Lower.  The  former  helps  a  man  to
know  the  nature  of  Brahman  in  its  true  form.
It  aids  him  in  gaining  freedom  for  the  Self  from
all  the  Upadhis  and  to  do  so  for  all  eternity,  not
tor  this  life  only.  Tire  latter  also  helps  him  to
gain,  the  same  object'  but  in  a  different  way.  It
enjoins  on  him  the  worship  of  the  phenomenal
Brahman,  the  Saguna  Brahman  as  distinguished
from  the  real  one,  the  Nirguna  one,  the  dis¬
charge  of  worldly  duties  in  a  strictly  moral  wav
and  to  do  other  good  things  in  life  as  though  the
world  with  its  appearances  is  the  real  one.
Spinoza  of  course  has  nothing  of  this  kind.

I  be  psychology  of  the  Indian  is  much  deeper
than  that  of  the  Jew.  Whereas  the  latter
recognises,  in  all  probability,  only  three  states  of
consciousness,  the  former  speaks  of  four.  For
Spinoza,  they  are  conscious  stage,  subconscious
one  and  the  dreaming  one.  But  for  Sankara  there
ire  the  conscious  one,  the  dreaming  one,  the
stage  of  deep  dreamless  sleep  and  what  is  merely


THE  NEW  SCHOOLMASTER


79


called  the  turiya  stage,  or  the  fourth  ouc.  In  the
first  the  Self  is  perceiving  with  the  aid  of  Manas
and  the  Indrivas;  in  the  second,  the  Indriyas
cease  to  work  hut  the  mind  does  not ;  in  the  third
mind  also  ceases  to  work  and  the  Atman  is
separated  from  it ;  and  in  the  last  stage  the  Self
goes  out  of  the  material  body  with  the  Sukma-
Sariram.

Coming  to  practical  philosophy,  the  two
systems  are  quite  opposed  in  the  matter  of  free¬
will.  According  to  Sankara  our  actions  are
determined  by  Karma,  that  is,  by  what  we  do,
we  are  bound.  Here  it  is  wise  to  clear  an  existing
confusion.

Karma  does  not  inculcate  fatalism.  The
latter  by  binding  an  individual  hand  and  foot
denies  to  him  all  initiative  and  makes  him
dispirited  and  worthless  but  Karma  far  from
doing  any  of  these  things  gives  him  hope  for  the
future.  "Do  not  be  discouraged  by  your  plight
now,"  it  says,  "but  do  good  actions  and  you  will
be  better,  if  not  in  this  life,  certainly  in  the  lives
to  come."  This  is  anything  but  make  a  man
useless  and  implies  free-will  on  his  part.
According  however  to  Spinoza,  modes  being  all
determined  and  an  individual  soul  being  a  mode,
it  and  free-will  are  antipodes.  It  is  the  same
with  the  notions  of  good  and  bad.  The  Jewish
philosopher  deriving  everything  from  Substance
cannot  consistently  say  that  some  things  are
good  and  some  are  bad  for  everything  is
Substance.  Such  conceptions  are  only  in  the
mind  of  man  who  as  soon  as  he  sees  some  object
which  does  not  square  with  his  preconceived
scheme  of  things  at  once  classifies  it  as  bad,  other¬


wise  calling  it  good.  According  to  the  Vedantiii
however,  it  is  clear  that  what  contributes  to  the
freedom  of  the  soul  is  good  and  what  does  not
bad.  But  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the
realisation  of  God  is  the  end  of  man  according
to  both.

One  word  about  the  criticism  levelled  at
Spinoza  that  his  God  is  all  devouring.  He  is  a
negative  gulf,  a  lion’s  den  lo  which  there  arc
many  steps  but  from  which  none.  This  is
essentially  just  in  his  case  for  he  has  failed  to
bring  experience  in  its  fullness  out  of  his  abstract
substance  which  he  has  taken  all  pains  to  sub¬
sume  under  it.  In  the  case  of  Sankara  such  a
criticism  is  obviated  for  plurality  is  derived  from
Oneness  by  means  of  Maga.

On  the  whole  we  can  see  that  their  abstract
monism  is  the  central  point  in  both  the  systems.
“There  is  no  reality  but  God  and  Substance  is
his  name"  Spinoza  would  say.  “There  is  no
reality  but  God  and  Brahman  in  his  name”  would
say  Sankara.  Both  are  God  intoxicated.
Schwegler  says  that  Spinoza’s  system  is  the  most
abstract  monism  that  can  possibly  be  conceived
and  such  a  conception  is  a  consequence  of  his
nationality,  an  echo  of  the  East.  May  not
the  same  be  said  of  Sankara  and  his  nationality  ?
And  in  praise  of  the  Upanishads,  Schopenhauer
says  "In  the  whole  world  there  is  no  study  except
that  of  the  original  (of  the  Upanishads)  so
beneficial  and  so  elevating  as  that  of  the  Oupnc-
khat  (Persian  translation  of  the  Upanishads)
It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  life,  it  will  be  the
solace  of  my  death”.  And  may  not  the  same  be
said  of  Spinoza  and  his  system?


THE  NEW  SCHOOLMASTER.
Mr.  N.  K.  Vknxataswaran,  b.a.


The  schoolmaster  is  not  quite  a  happy
individual.  He  is  often  positively  discontented.
But  he  puts  a  good  face  on  things  and  seldom
complains.  This  is  particularly  so  in  India  where
there  is  so  little  of  the  spirit  to  oppose  and  hit
out.  The  schoolmaster  lias  patiently  borne  no
end  of  negligence,  disrespect  and  obloquy.  Tlve


public  pay  him  slight  attention  or  at  best  pat  him
occasionally  on  the  back  with  patronizing
condescension.  Altogether  his  position  is  not
enviable.

But  he  has  to  thank  himself  for  all  that.  He
has  been  too  meek  and  seldom  got  out  of  his
shell.  He  has  always  been  willing  to  put  up


to


THE  HINDUS  TAX  REVIEW


with  any  amount  of  annoyance  and  overwork
himself.  He  has  been  content  to  live  in  the
illusion  of  claptraps  and  if  anybody  eve'
suggested  that  his  w’as  the  noblest  of  professions,
he  straightaway  mounted  the  high  horse  and
felicitated  himself  to  the  immense  amusement  of
less  simple  folk.  No  wonder  people  often  carry
about  them  a  smile,  however  slight,  of  pity  if  not
of  contempt  for  the  schoolmaster.

There  is,  however,  an  end  to  everything  in  the
world.  It  is  nature’s  inexorable  law.  Therefore
the  school-master  has  become  dimly  aware  that
his  proverbial  patience  is  not  for  aye  and  that
already  past*  are  its  halcyon  days.  Indeed  the
urge  of  restlessness  has  begun  to  haunt  his  breast
and  latterly  his  snug  vocabulary  has  been  rudely
stirred  by  the  irruption  of  such  disturbers  of
peace  as  Messrs.  Whys  and  Wherefores.  The
newcomers  do  not  allow  him  now-a-days  to  show
the  other  cheek  to  his  enemy  or  to  plod  along
with  unquestioning  obedience.  He  has  nearly
turned  a  new  leaf  and  entered  a  new  existence.

His  discontent  has  broken  its  shackles  and
found  its  voice.  He  is  no  longer  of  that  sagely
fraternity  known  as  dumb,  driven  cattle.  He  has
begun  to  feel  the  joy  of  thinking  and  doing,  of
asking  questions  and  solving  them.  He  looks
about  him  and  says  “The  world  is  in  a  precious
mess  and  bankrupt  statesmanship  is  of  little  avail.
Is  there  no  way  out?  Cries  Bernard  Shaw,
“There  is  no  way  out  through  the  school¬
master.”  He  thinks  otherwise,  positively  other¬
wise.  “The  only  way  out  is  through  the  school¬
master!”  Education  and  Education  of  the  right
sort,  he  believes,  is  the  only  remedy  for  the
chronic  convulsions  of  a  suffering  humankind.
The  school-master  alone  can  pour  oil  on  the
troubled  waters.  In  him  lies  the  sublime  duty  of
evangelizing  future  generations  to  the  gospel  of
peace  and  goodwill  and  he  will  do  it  if  his  hands
are  not  tied.

If  a  decade  ago,  the  schoolmaster  had  sug¬
gested  that  his  art  had  any  such  potentialities
or  claimed  to  have  at  least  a  finger  in  the  pie,
his  so-called  betters  would  have  pelted  him  with
their  jeers  and  sternly  commanded  him  to  hold
his  tongue  and  keep  his  head  cool.  But  to-day
the  jaded  world  is  pathetically  looking  about  for
some  means  of  relief  and  in  certain  quarters  the
schoolmaster  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a
jxjssible  physician.  Yes,  the  call  of  a  new  Edu¬
cation  is  heard  in  the  distance  and  humanity  is
straining  its  ears  to  hearken  to  it  as  the  call  of


hoi>e.  Really  arc  great  things  in  store  for  the

schoolmaster.

But  what  is  this  new  Education  and  its
missionary  the  new  schoolmaster  like?  This  is
a  question  well  worth  answering.

Current  ideas  about  Education  are  funda¬
mentally  wrong.  People  usually  equate

Education  with  knowledge  and  knowledge

with  information.  Education  is  not  know¬

ledge  and  knowledge  is  not  what  is  stowed
away  in  memory.  Education  is  a  process
co-extcnsive  with  life.  It  gives  life  its  harmony
and  equilibrium.  It  makes  it  mellow  and  sweet.
It  liberates  its  potentialities  and  develops  them.
It  unfolds  personality  and  enriches  it.  It
purifies  it,  spiritualises  it  and  makes  it  as  near
as  possible  to  the  life  of  Him  in  whose  image  we
are  created.  Education,  in  a  word,  is  the
sublimation  and  exaltation  of  life  or  at  least  it
ought  to  be.

Knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  is  only  a
product  of  Education,  but  not  its  sole  nor  even
its  most  important  product.  Knowledge  is
experience.  It  guides  us  in  our  efforts  to  make
the  best  of  our  talents  and  to  live  our  lives  fully
and  happily.  Knowledge  is  the  ability  to  think,
to  decide,  to  do.  Education  is  an  inspiration
and  knowledge  an  achievement  accomplished
under  the  spell  of  that  inspiration.  Education
is  the  source  and  knowledge  is  the  stream.

But  more  pathetic  than  the  identification  of
Education  with  knowledge  is  the  identification  of
knowledge  with  what  are  called  facts  or  informa¬
tion.  The  mistake  is  serious  because  it,  more
than  any  other,  is  responsible  for  making  Edu¬
cation  a  tragic  failure  of  high  purposes.  If  there
is  anything  that  we  can  boldly  assert  is  not
Education  it  is  our  present-day  schooling  which
givt-s  our  boys  a  snippety  smattering  cf  the
subjects  in  the  curriculum.  We  give  them,  of
course,  some  rudiments  of  reading,  writing  and
ciphering,  a  few  rules  of  grammar,  a  few  names
and  dates  in  history,  a  few’  geographical  terms,
chemical  formulae  and  things  pf  that  kind  and
we  put  all  that  together  and  call  the  motlev  crew
an  Education.  That  is  why  our  “schooling”  is
so  indisputably  removed  from  life  and  that  is
why  it  is  so  unreal,  mechanical,  false  and
injurious.

This  tragic  translation  of  Education  into
practice  has  produced  an  amputated  humanity
with  unnatural  cravings.  Obsessions  and  manias
have  preyed  on  it  at  will.  It  has  produced  an
educated  class  steeped  in  superstition  and  ignor-


THE  NEW  SCHOOLMASTER


Si


ance.  It  has  given  them  power  and  the  capacity
to  make  that  power  monstrous.  It  has  giver,
them  a  thousand  giants’  strength  and  ten
thousand  giants’  unscrupulousness  to  use  it  like
giants.  It  has  furnished  old  Adam  with  liquid
fire,  poison  gas  and  all  the  rest  of  it.  It  has
released  primitive  passions  and  jealousies  and
made  man  the  greatest  enemy  of  mankind.

The  supreme  thing  in  this  spurious  Educa¬
tion  is  the  cramming  in  of  facts.  Things  that
really  matter  are  left  alone.  Cliaracter  shifts  for
itself.  Instincts  and  emotions  are  smothered
tinder  a  heavy  avalanche  of  information.  Per¬
sonality  goes  under.  “The  training  for  citizen¬
ship”  is  a  worn  platitude  fit  only  to  be  consigned
to  the  limbo  of  oblivion.  All  real  Education
goes  by  the  board  and  only  one  thing  remains
and  that  is  the  tyranny  of  facts.

Nor  is  this  all.  There  is  the  other  thing — the
natural  sequence  to  this  veneration  of  a  Murnbo-
Jumbo.  That  is  the  examination  system.  Wc
not  only  hammer  into  these  young  heads  all  this
stuff  and  nonsense  passing  for  knowledge,  wc
also  want  to  find  out  exactly  the  amount  of  such
false  knowledge  that  we  have  been  able  to  put
into  them.  The  examination  is  the  time-honored
machinery  to  weigh  out  the  amount.  Of  late
the  patient  toil  of  disinterested  workers  has
brought  tp  life  certain  palpable  absurdities  of  the
examination  system.  The  human  psychology
is  so  complex  and  varies  so  much  from  indivi¬
dual  to  individual  that  examinees  and  examiners
respond  to  it  with  the  most  unequal  stimuli.
Say,  A  and  B  are  of  equal  abilities  in
most  things  that  matter.  A  and  B  sit
for  the  examination.  A  docs  ill  and  is
ploughed.  B  does  well  and  gets  a  first  class.
Agaiu,  say,  A  and  B  are  of  equal  abilities  an. I
answer  their  examination  papers  equally  well.
X,  the  examiner,  marks  A’s  paper  and  passes
him ;  Y  marks  B’s  paper  and  plucks  him.  If
both  A  and  B  are  to  get  their  desires,  they  must
•  equally  be  apt  at  examinations  and  their  answer
papers  must  be  marked  by  the  same  examiner  or
examiners  having  the  same  mind.  This  is  a
combination  of  circumstances  that  fall  to  the  lot
of  only  those  who  are  born  under  exceptionally
lucky  stars,  but  unfortunately  such  stars  are  few
in  the  heavens  and  there  is  a  close  scramble  for
their  patronage.  With  the  result  that  examina¬
tions  often  prove  the  ruin  of  many  an  ambition
and  ability,  if  occasionally  also  the  exaltation  of
mediocrity,  of  even  of  unworthiness.
ii


Here  is  a  classical  story  which,  although  has
nearly  become  a  chestnut  by  constant  repetition,
may  perhaps  bear  re-telling  yet  once  more.

P.  B.  Ballard  relates  it  in  his  book,  The  New
Examiner.  It  refers  to  an  examination  in
history  in  an  American  University.  The  passing
mark  was  60.  There  were  six  examiners.
Papers  that  secured  less  than  60  were  handed  on
to  the  other  examiners  so  that  examinees  on  the
borderliue  might  be  given  full  justice.  One
pious  examiner  with  a  rather  disturbing  “still
small  voice”  within  prepared  a  model  answer  to
each  question  before  setting  out  to  marx  the
papers.  Mischance  always  on  the  look-out  to
play  its  pretty  pranks  got  the  good  Professor’s
model  answers  mixed  up  with  the  pa[iers  which
he  forwarded  for  the  perusal  of  his  colleagues.
It  was  valued  by  them  as  a  bond  fide  paper  and,
as  with  die  others,  met  with  different  fortunes
at  different  hands,  the  marks  it  received  ranging
between  40  and  So.  The  Professor  came  to  the
very  verge  of  failure  on  his  own  examination.

And  this  is  not  a  solitary  instance.  Examina¬
tions  therefore  stand  self-condemned ;  but  the
schools  of  to-day  are  not  jxast  the  totem-stage  yet.
They  still  venerate  facts  and  allow  themselves  to
be  dominated  by  examinations.  That  is  why  the
present  Education  is  justly  stigmatized  as  l>eing
unpractical.  Indeed,  it  is  so  completely  divorced
from  every-day  life.

And  what  are  the  practical  results  of  this
divorce  between  life  and  Education?  It  is  un¬
doubtedly  one  of  the  causes  of  the  general  dis¬
contentment  on  the  part  of  pupils  and  teachers
alike.  The  former,  living  as  they  have  been  on
this  kind  of  chaff,  crave  for  something  better.
The  latter  tired  of  vending  this  niggardly  nutri¬
tion  are  anxious  to  offer  something  richer  and
more  abundant.  Dissatisfaction  smoulders  under
a  false  discipline.  Given  an  opportunity  youth
would  break  the  bondage  of  despotic  Government
which  a  hostile  fraternity  of  school-masters  has
imposed  on  them.  Given  an  opportunity  school¬
masters  themselves  would  rebel  against  their  own
despotism.  A  couple  of  years  ago  the  Travancore
school-boys  went  out  on  strike,  breaking  all  the
tics  of  age-old  conventions.  The  underlying
causes  of  this  open  defiance  lie  in  the  galling
defects  of  School  Education.  The  immediate
cause,  whatever  that  is,  served  only  to  open  the
sluices  of  accumulated  disquiets  and  dissatisfac¬
tions.  The  strikes  have  come  and  gone  and
school-masters  are  where  they  were.


S2


TIIE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Non-co-operation  and  Education.

When  the  evangel  of  Non-co-operation  sancti¬
fied  by  tlie  breath  of  one  of  the  purest  and
sincerest  souls  that  ever  lived,  came  with  its
exhortations  to  youth  to  leave  the  schools  of  a
“satanic  Government”,  ardent  adolescence
hearing  with  its  impetuosities  gave  it  a  response
which  continues  to  shake  the  foundations  of
discipline  to  this  day.  Our  boys  live  in  an
electrified  atmosphere  of  restlessness  and  it
requires  stout  hearts  and  lusty  hands  to  stand
sentinel  to  their  safety.  Rut  alas !  the  influence
of  teachers  is  waning  with  tragic  rapidity  just
at  the  time  when  it  ought  to  grow  from  more  to
more.  Any  wandering  tub-thumpers  are  able  to
attract  their  wards  and  set  them  adrift  on  the
unsteady  waters  of  impassioned  eloquence  No,
they  must  not  have  them  to  their  tender  mercies.
They  must  win  them  by  their  affection,  open  the
portals  of  their  confidence  by  the  golden  key  of
love,  touch  and  elevate  them  by  the  magic  wand
of  personality  and  broaden  their  minds  with  the
sweet  intimations  of  mellowed  culture.  They
must  no  more  be  mere  fact  mongers  or  axemen
at  the  examination  block.  Theirs  is  a  glorious
mission  and  they  must  rise  to  the  occasion  or  they
will  be  unworthy  of  themselves  and  the  great
profession  they  represent.  Be  not  satisfied  with
daily  injections  of  dozes  of  English,  Mathematics
and  all  the  rest  of  it.

The  Function  of  the  School-Master.

Dr.  T.  P.  Nunn  of  the  University  of  London
tells  us:  “They  now  regarded  school  as  a
real  society  in  which  free  persons  mingled
together,  not  necessarily  on  the  same  level  but
free  from  prohibitions  and  having  room  for  give
and  take.  That  change  had  been  the  most
blessed  thing  they  had  seen  in  the  field  of  educa¬
tion  in  the  last  half  century,  and  it  promised
more  in  the  way  of  training  in  citizenship  than
anything  else.

The  teacher  should  be  the  interpreter
between  the  greater  society  of  the  outside  world
and  the  smaller  microcosm  of  the  school.
Citizenship  should  mean  a  consciousness  of
belonging  to  a  gTeat  historical  community  which
had  contributed  great  things  to  the  world’s
spiritual  wealth.  It  was  in  this  consciousness  of
those  great  spiritual  traditions  that  our  schools
had  hitherto  been  unduly  weak.

“One  of  the  great  needs  of  the  day  was  to
introduce  in  the  school  a  consciousness  of  great


human  movements  that  made  up  the  glory  of
civilization.  The  quality  of  the  citizenship
would  be  greatly  raised  if  our  teachers  were  men
and  women  of  culture  acutely  conscious  of  those
great  human  movements,  keeping  in  touch  with
the  springs  of  knowledge  and  duty.”

That  is  a  fine  picture  and  gives  a  glimpse  of
what  the  new  school-master  will  be  like.  He
must  give  them  life,  more  life  and  still  more  life.
He  must  give  them  freedom,  more  freedom  and
still  more  freedom.  He  must  inspire  them  and
guide  them  to  lead  their  lives  in  amity  and  good¬
will  with  all  the  world.  "Teaching  is  lighting  a
lamp  and  not  filling  a  bucket.”  This  is  the
greatest  secret  of  the  school -master’s  art.  Let
them  make  it  their  gospel  and  live  up  to  it  with
courage  and  faith  unfathomable.

The  message  of  Dean  Inge,  one  of  the  greatest
thinkers  of  the  day,  a  person  who  has  seen  the
ups  and  downs  of  a  long  experience  is  wortn  their
perusal.  In  one  of  his  recent  sermons  he  said
“that  the  whole  object  of  a  good  teacher  was  to
make  himself  unnecessary.  He  unlocked  the
outer  gate  of  the  treasure-house  of  knowledge ;
he  imbued  his  pupils  with  a  lively  faith  in  the
riches  within,  and  with  a  keen  desire  to  make
them  their  own.  And  then  he  put  the  bunch  of
keys  in  his  pupils’  hands  and  bade  them  go  in
and  explore  for  themselves.  It  was  not  the
quantity  of  knowledge  imparted  that  tested  the
teacher  s  fitness.  It  was  the  intellectual  love
that  he  had  nurtured,  the  spiritual  longings  he
hail  fostered.  In  the  higher  walks  of  education
the  greatest  school-masters  that  his  country
produced  in  the  last  century  were  men  who
possessed  this  gift  in  a  pre-eminent  degree.  Thev
sometimes  had  nearly  every  other  fault  a  school¬
master  could  have.  .Some  were  bad  disci¬
plinarians,  very  hoti-tempcred,  and  unmethodical,
but  they  kindled  enthusiasm,  and  their  pupils
many  of  whom  became  famous  distinguished
their  memory.”

Scrap  All  That.

But  few  school-masters  set  their  eyes  on  such
an  ideal  and  fewer  still  strive  to  reach  it.  The
fault  is  partly  the  school-master’s,  and  partly  of
the  system  within  whose  tentacles  they  have,
perhaps  unwittingly,  fallen.  But  the  rising  tide
of  discontent  docs,  in  many  cases,  prove  an  eye-
opener  and  straightaway  they  start  to  put  their
houses  in  order.  The  defects  of  the  system,
however  are  deep-rooted.  The  gateways  of  ihe


THE  NEW  SCHOOLMASTER


83


bastille  can  be  rushed  only  by  a  well-organized
and  persistant  propaganda.  Evil  outlives  itself
with  the  die-hardest  of  obstinacies.  When  a
storm  lashes  the  sea  into  fury  and  the  good  ship
is  in  distress,  you  jettison  cargo  overboard.  The
Ship  of  Education  is  in  imminent  danger.  Heavy
trucks  of  fact,  unrelated  heaps  of  dry-as-dust  that
cluster  thick  in  unfrequented  haunts  far  removed
from  life,  these  have  no  place  on  the  deck  at
such  an  hour.  Jettison  them.  Nor  can  the
crushing  weight  of  examination*  be  allowed  to
add  to  the  peril.

Instead  of  the  dead  weight  of  mere  facts,  give
them  the  joy  of  abundant  knowledge.  Instead
of  these  essay-examinations  which  have  won  our
University  the  unsavoury  reputation  of  being  a
cracker  of  young  bones,  test  them  by  the  rational
method  of  the  new-examination  into  which  none
may  dip  with  the  hope  of  snatching  something
\aluablc.  In  the  field  of  Education,  lucky-bag
methods,  indeed,  have  no  place.  The  New  Ex¬
amination  would  test  the  real  knowledge  of  the
candidates  which  is  assumed  to  be  large.  Scarce¬
ly  any  writing  will  be  demanded  of  them.  The
Truc-and-Falsc  Test,  for  example,  asks  the
candidates  to  indicate  by  simple  marks  which  of
a  number  of  statements  on  a  certain  subject  are
true  or  false.  Thus  the  candidates'  mental
depth  is  measured  by  the  unerring  plummet  of
truth.  In  a  short  paper  like  the  present,  it  is
not  possible  to  exhaust  this  branch  of  the  subject
which  alone  is  enough  to  fill  a  volume.  Dr.
P.  B.  Ballard  in  his  New  Examiner  has  treated  it
with  illuminative  insight.

But  scrapping  the  present-day  examination-
system  and  the  cult  of  facts  is  not  enough.
Teachers  cannot  halloo  yet.  They  are  still  in  the
wood.  The  teacher  cannot  cast  aside  his  old
inertia  and  evolve  a  new  outlook  or  imbue  his
personality  with  the  fascination  of  real  and  ripe
culture  or  browse  leisurely — hurry  is  impossible
in  such  matters — on  the  pastures  of  luscious
literature  so  lie  might  make  his  contact  with  his
pupils  fruitful  and  inspiring  unless  he  has  a  far
lesser  amount  of  work  to  do  and  a  far  greater
amount  of  time  which  he  might  call  his  own.
Now-a-days  a  teacher  usually  works  between  18
and  28  periods  a  week,  of  50  minutes  each.
Good  teaching  is  impossible  wherever  such  a
volume  of  output  is  enforced.  Trashy,  shoddy
teaching,  however  big  in  quantity,  is  of  no  good
and  those  on  whose  shoulders  the  burden  of  such
sweated  work  rests  are  no  better  than  day-


lalxmrers.  They  cannot  lay  the  foundations  of
the  future  of  humanity — no,  not  in  the  least.
One  thing  alone  they  do.  They  earn  their  bread
under  the  sweat  of  their  brows.  But  their  efforts
wither  away  in  tragic  futility  and  bear  no  fruit.
Reduce  his  work  by  one  half  at  any  rate  and
the  turbid  stream  of  wasted  energy  may  be  turned
to  fertilize  the  lovely,  tender  little  plants  growing
in  the  garden  of  Life.

It  must  be  remembered  that  teachers  whose
lot  it  is  to  live  in  the  closest  intimacy  with
immature  minds  must,  by  way  of  compensation,
be  given  the  widest  scope  to  move  in  society  and
to  keep  themselves  abreast  of  all  the  progressive
movements  and  the  trends  of  the  best  thought.
They  must  on  occasion  be  afforded  opportunities
of  travel  in  foreign  lands  and  strengthen  their
minds  with  the  surge  of  new  ideas.  They  must
for  ever  be  drinking  at  the  fountain  of  knowledge
and  slaking  an  unquenchable  thirst.  They  must,
they  must ;  for  otherwise  they  go  to  the  wall — and
with  them  humanity !

A  Glimpse  of  the  Future.

Such  in  brief  are  the  conditions  for  the  coming
of  the  New  School-master.  But  when  he  comes
— and  he  is  coming  as  certain  as  tomorrow — he
will  assuredly  change  the  face  of  things  and  ac¬
complish  the  greatest  task  of  all,  to  get  man  to
love  his  kind.  For,  when  this  is  done  the
millennium  of  which  lie  has  been  trying  to  catch
a  glimpse  through  the  endless  vistas  of  bleak
centuries,  shall  have  come  and  our  present-day
blustering  jingo  nationalisms  shall  have  broken
into  the  sweetest  flowers  of  love  for  the  whole  of
human  kind  sojourning  in  this  wonderful  Earth
of  God.

For,  he  the  coming  one,  will  bring  a  race  of
manly,  benevolent,  happy,  aspiring,  hopeful
citizens  who  will  forge  ahead  with  heart  within
and  God  overhead,  who  will  make  their  voice
heard  in  the  councils  of  the  world  and  who  will
have  their  rightful  seats  in  the  galaxy  of  nations,
true  and  worthy  sons  of  mother  earth  able  to
guard  her  honour  in  her  old  age  and  make  her
young  in  the  holy  ashes  of  voluntary  action.
Yes,  he  will  bring  up  a  race  who  shall  eschew  an
education  that  docs  not  impart  to  them  imperish¬
able  lessons  on  the  sanctity  of  existence  and
oneness  of  humanity,  on  virtue’s  eight-fold  ijath,
on  the  wickedness  of  war  that  never  conquers,  on
the  sublimity  of  love  that  ever  conquers  and  on
the  vileness  of  passions,  communal  rivalries  and


84


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


clannish  prejudices.  They  will  never  forget  this
supreme  lesson  that  History  has  taught  ns  and
is  still  teaching  us  that  empires  carved  and  kept
by  the  sword  have  come  and  gone.  Your  Caesars
and  Alexanders  are  dead.  The  empires  of  the
mind  acquired  by  the  unconquerable  weapon  of
love  and  liound  together  by  its  elastic  cords  still
continue  to  flourish.  The  Buddhas  and  Jesuses,


Mahaviras  aud  Zoarasters  live.  They  cannot
die.

Such  is  the  future  of  the  profession  and  there
is  none  but  proud  of  it.  Let  not  teachers  there¬
fore  strangle  education  in  striving  to  educate.
Be  free  and  let  education  live.  Be  bold  and  let
education  thrive.  Be  great  and  let  our  children
grow.


INDIAN  MUSIC.


By  Mr.  M.  S.  Ramaswami  Aiyar,  b.a.,  b.l.,  l.t.


X

SARGAM  NOTATION.

1.  The  Notation  of  European  Music  is  of

two  kinds,  viz.,  Tonic  Solfa  and  Staff.  But  that
of  Indian  Music  is  of  only  one  kind,  viz.,
Sargam.  I  venture  to  name  the  Indian  Nota¬
tion . “Sargam  Notation” . because

the  uniform  basis  thereof  is  the  Sapthaswaras
and  the  word  ‘Sargam’  is  nothing  else  than  an
abbreviated  form  of  the  first  four  letters  of  those
Sapthaswaras,  viz.,  Sa— Ri — Ga — Ma.

2.  Notation  is  to  music  what  alphabet  is  to
language.  Ram  Doss  is  said  to  have  composed
12,000  songs.  Where  arc  they  heard  now  sung?
They  arc  lost  for  want  of  Notation.  The
Prabandhas  of  Gilagovindam  cannot  now  be
sung  in  the  manner  of  Jayadeva;  nor  can  the
masterpieces,  collected  by  Krishnananda  Vyas
in  his  Sangi thardgakalpadruma,  be  sung  in  the
manner  of  their  authors.  “When  I”,  wrote  Sir
William  Jones  in  his  Musical  Mode  of  the
Hindoos,  “read  the  songs  of  Jayadeva  who  has
prefixed  to  each  of  them  names  of  modes  in
which  it  was  anciently  sung,  I  had  hopes  of
procuring  the  original  music.  But  the  Pundits
of  the  South  referred  me  to  those  of  the  West
and  the  Brahmins  of  the  West  would  have  sent
me  to  those  of  the  North.  While  they,  I  mean
those  of  Nepal  and  Kashmir,  declared  they  had


no  ancient  music  but  imagined  that  the  notes  of
(■ttagovindam  must  exist,  if  anywhere,  in  one
of  the  Southern  provinces  where  the  poet  was
born.”  Is  this  not  quaint,  especially  when  we
know  as  a  historical  fact  that  Jayadeva  was  born
and  flourished  in  Bengal  near  Dr.  Tagore’s
Shanthimkethan  and  had  nothing  to  dp  whatso¬
ever  with  South  India  ?  Be  that  as  it  may,  if
Sir  \\  .  Jones  had  been  driven  from  one  comer  to
another,  he  would  have  to  thank  himself  for  it
For,  how  could  he  “hope”  to  procure  the
original  music  of  Gilagovindam,  merely  with
the  help  of  modes,  prefixed  to  each  of  its
Prabandhas?*  The  truth  is  that  there  was
neither  the  Notation  to  record  the  songs  of  Jaya¬
deva  nor  any  scientific  treatment  in  his  book
whereby  to  teach  or  even  suggest  the  methods
of  singing  them.

3*  Again,  Tanscn  is  said  to  have  electrified
his  audience  with  his  enrapturing  music.  Mira
Bai  is  said  to  have  bewitched  her  audience  with
her  soul-stirring  music.  Maha  Vylhinathicr,  Peria
\  ythi  and  Shadkala  Govindan  are  all  said  to  have
spell-bound  their  respective  audiences  with  their
inimitable  performances.  But  where  arc  they
heard  now  sung?  They  are  all  lost  for  want  of
notation.  The  four  remarkable  Oratorios  of
South  India,  viz.,  (i)  Arunachala  Kavi’s  Rdma
Sdtakam,  (2)  Gopalakrishna  Bharathi's  Nandan


foot-note  Section  III,


INDIAN  MUSIC


S5


C  harilhram,  (3)  Kavi  Kunjara's  Skdnda  Purana
Kirthanas,  and  (4)  Kamaswnmi  Aiyar’s  Peria
Purdna  Kirthanas — arc  every  moment  running
the  risk  of  getting  into  oblivion.  Why?  For
want  of  notation.  The  learning  process  of  a
pupil  takes  an  unduly  long  time.  Why?  Again
for  want  of  notation.  Krithis  and  Kirthanas
are  nowadays  sung  in  different  ways  by  different
men  in  different  places  ;  and  some  pf  them  are
slowly  getting  out  of  use.  Why  ?  Once  again
for  want  of  notation.

4.  Cau  we  drift  in  this  way  any  longer  ?  Can
we,  who  see  unmistakable  signs  of  progress  in
all  other  directions,  suffer  ourselves  to  be  blind¬
folded  in  the  matter  of  preserving  music  for
ages  ?  Surely  not.  We  must  therefore  leave  no
stone  unturned  to  fiud  out  the  ways  and  means
whereby  to  record  the  superior  airs,  whenceso¬
ever  they  may  come,  and  transmit  them  over  to
our  contemporaries  and  down  to  our  succes¬
sors  too.

5.  But  tp  find  out  a  uniform  Notation  for
Indian  Music  is  no  easy  task.  Mr.  V.  N.
Bhatkhandc  wrote  to  me  on  28th  September,
1921  : — "Tlie  Girl-Schools  of  Bombay  follow  my
Notation.’’  Mr.  Digambar  of  Bombay  Gandharva
Mahavidyalaya  si>eaks  of  his  notation.  Mr.
Snbkarama  Dikshithar  contemplated  a  third  kind
of  notation.  Mr.  K.  V.  Sriuivasa  Aiyangar
employs  a  fourth  kind.  Quite  recently  Mr.


Abdul  Karim  put  into  my  hands  his  own  inusic-
bpok,  wherein  I  noted  a  fifth  kind  of  notation.
Hence  to  make  the  whole  country  of  India  recog¬
nise  and  acknowledge  one  particular  kind  of
notation  as  a  uniform  and  even  national  one — is
certainly  no  smooth  sailing.

6.  The  foreigners  take  advantage  of  our
differences  and  move  heaven  and  earth  to  foist
their  Staff  Notation  into  our  System.  Thus  the
problem  of  Notation  has  been  made  doubly  diffi¬
cult.  In  addition  to  the  task  of  settling  our
own  differences,  wc  have  been  confronted  with
another  new  problem  as  to  whether  the  Notation
for  Indian  Music  should  be  the  European  Staff
or  the  Indian  Sargam.

7.  Let  me  first  consider  the  arguments
adduced  by  the  advocates  of  the  Staff  and  dis¬
pose  of  them  one  by  one:  —

I.  "The  Staff  Notation  is  more  economical
of  space  than  an  elaborate  Sa— Ri —
Ga — Ma — method  of  writing.”

As  against  this  contention,  I  submit  that  in
an  article,  with  the  spirit  of  which  I  fully  concur,
in  the  Hindu,  dated  5th  November,  1921,  the
following  remarks  were  found  : — "The  Staff
music  is  uneconomical  to  lie  used,  for  it  occu¬
pies  much  space  and  it-,  printing  costly.”  Now,
put  both  the  systems  of  writing  a  scale  in
juxtaposition ;  and  you  will  see  which  of  the
two  is  more  economical  of  space.


86


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


II.  “The  Indian  Notation  has  now  begun
to  borrow  some  of  the  European
signs.  See,  for  instance,  Subhararaa
Diksliithar’s  Notation.”

Such  borrowing  is  to  be  attributed  to  indivi¬
dual  idiosvncracics  but  certainly  not  to  any  in¬
dispensable  necessity.  The  late  Subharnma
Dikshithar  of  Ettiapuram  borrowed  European
signs,  because  he  was  in  the  grip  of  the  late
Chinnaswami  Mudaliar,  possessed  with  Staff
mania.  But  the  mere  act  of  borrowing  is  no
argument  why  the  European  notation  should  dis¬
place  our  Sargam  Notation  altogether.  Can  a
creditor  be  permitted  to  kill  the  debtor,  because
the  latter  happened  to  borrow  money  from  the
former  ?  Assuming  without  admitting  that
Indian  music  has  to  borrow  some  signs  from  the
Staff  Notation,  the  principle  that  should  guide
a  reformer  must  be  what  was  chalked  out  by
Lully  (1633 — 1687)  the  Founder  of  French  music.
Seignior  Baptist  Lully  found  the  French  music
extremely  defective  and  very  often  barbarous.
However,  knowing  the  genius  of  the  people,  the
humour  of  their  language  and  the  prejudiced
cars  lie  had  to  deal  with,  he  did  not  pretend  to
extirpate  the  French  music  and  plant  the
Italian  in  its  stead  but  only  to  cultivate  and
civilise  it  with  innumerable  graces  and  modula¬
tions,  which  he  borrowed  from  the  Italian.  But
the  question  of  questions,  in  this  connection,  is  :
“Has  the  Sargam  Notation  anything  to  t>orrow
from  the  Staff  Notation?”  I  shall  presently
show  that  it  has  not.

III.  “The  Staff  Notation  has  the  advan¬
tage  of  a  simple  ‘visual’  method  of  in¬
dicating  uniformly  relative  pitch  and
relative  time-value  of  notes.”

The  Sargam  Notation  has  an  equal  advantage
of  a  very  simple  ‘visuo-aural’  method  of  indicat¬
ing  pitch  and  time.  For  instance,  dots  above
and  below  the  notes  indicate  Pitch.

IV.  “But  the  dots  are  liable  to  misprint.”

So,  the  semibreves,  minims,  crotchets  and

other  varieties  of  time-value  notes  are  as  much
liable  to  be  placed  on  wrong  lines  and  wrong
spaces  of  the  stave.  Due  care  and  attention  in
either  case  will  set  the  matter  aright.  As  for
the  time-value  of  the  staff-written  notes,  the
scope  thereof  is  very  limited  from  the  Indian
point  of  view.  Indeed  the  European  and  Indian
systems  of  Time-measure  arc  as  poles  asunder.
The  Indian  Thdla  is  derived  from  song,  while
the  European  Thdla  is  derived  from  dance  or
march.  Though  both  arc  based  pn  the  number


2  and  3,  the  Indian  system  adds,  while  the
European  system  multiplies,  in  order  to  form
combination  of  these.  While,  again,  the  syllables
in  a  European  verse  are  marked  by  accent,  those
in  an  Indian  verse  are  marked  by  mdthras.
Is  there  any  time-signature  in  the  Staff  to
correctly  indicate  the  Sankirana  Jdthi  of  Dhruva-
tlidl  or  even  the  common  Kanta  Jathi  of  Atathdl,
or  at  any  rate,  Chowthal  of  the  North  Indian
System  ?

V.  “The  European  Notation  has  signs  to
indicate  which  note  is  sharp  and
which  note  is  flat.  Much  confusion
is  created  in  the  Indian  Notation  for
want  of  such  signs.”

That,  in  the  Sargam  Notation,  such  or  similar
signs  are  not  made  use  of,  in  the  body  of  a
music-piece  while  writing  it,  is  at  once  admitted.
But  it  is  submitted  that  no  confusion  is  created
thereby.  An  average  student  of  Indian  Music
who  is  familiar  with  Venkatamakhi’s  Mila-
kartliacliakra  knows  which  notes  in  a  given  scale
or  raga  arc  sharp  and  which  flat.  You  will  have
merely  to  tell  him  “Melam — S”  ;  and  he  will
at  once  understand  it  to  be  Hanuniathodi
(Hindustani  Dhairavi)  and  sound  all  the  notes
flatly.  Or  tell  him  “Melam — 65”  ;  and  lie  will
forthwith  understand  it  tp  be  Mecliakalyani
(Hindustani  Yaman)  and  sound  all  the  notes
sharply.  At  the  head  of  each  music-piece,  the
names  of  the  Raga  and  Thfila  are  usually  given  ;
just  as  the  treble  or  bass  clef,  the  time-signature
and  the  signs  of  sharp  or  flat  notes  are  placed  at
the  beginning  of  the  stave.  Nowadays  the
number  of  the  Melam  is  also  added.  These
headings  alone  arc  more  than  enough  for  an
Indian  music-student  to  know  what  sharp  or
flat  notes  he  has  to  sound  in  a  given  piece.  If
desirable,  the  heading  of  a  music-picce,  say,
Niravad hisukada  may  be  as  follows  : —

Mela.  28  Janya  Raga — Ravi  Chnmlrifcn.

Harifcamboji  I  ThaJa— Adi.

^Hindustani  Jinjoti)  I  Kola — Madliyama.

Arohana : — Sa — Rij — Go*— Ma,— Dhaj — Nij  — Dbaj  Sa
Avnroliann  : — Sa — Nij — Dlia* — Maj — Ca» — Ria — Sa
In  the  body  of  the  music-piece,  it  is  enough
that  mere  swara  letters  are  written,  inasmuch
as  the  number  1  or  2,  indicating  respectively
the  flatness  or  sharpness  of  the  notes,  is  correctly
inserted  in  the  heading.  Be  it  noted  that  “Sa”

denotes  the  key-note  and  “Sa”  denotes  rts
octave  and  that  the  theory  of  flat  and  sharp


INDIAN  MUSIC


t>7


notes  applies  only  to  Ri — Ga — Ma — Dha — Ni  and
never  to  Sa — Pa.  Here  the  Huropean  Music
would  make  confusion.  We  call  the  first  black
key  in  a  Harmonium  ‘Flat  Ri’  ;  but  the
Europeans  would  call  it  C  Sharp  or  D  Flat.
Again  we  call  the  second  black  key  ‘Flat  Ga'  ;
but  the  Europeans  would  call  it  D  Sharp  or
E  Flat  and  so  forth.  Is  npt  our  clear  and  un¬
ambiguous  nomenclature  decidedly  better  than
the  confused  one  of  the  Europeans  ?

VI.  The  following  sixth  contention  was
raised  by  an  educated  Indian  lady
with  University  honors  in  a  letter
written  to  me  on  26-1  1-2 1.  To  be
fair  to  her,  I  shall  quote  her  letter  at
length :  “I  request  you  to  kindly
think  over  the  question  of  having  a
Staff  Notation  for  our  music.  With
the  Staff  Notation,  our  music  will  be
studied  and  appreciated  by  the
Americans,  the  English,  etc.  ;  and
there  is  the  chance  of  Indian  Music
becoming  universal  and  popular  and
still  Indian.  If  we  wish  to  be  recog¬
nised  as  a  nation,  we  must  make
others  see  the  greatness  and  the
superiority  of  all  that  we  possess.
How  did  our  great  religion  find  its
way  to  the  United  States  of  America  ?
It  was  through  the  common  medium
— English.  At  present,  the  western
people  make  fun  of  our  music  ;  and  a

few  like  Mrs. - ,  who  honestly

and  sincerely  wish  to  know  something
about  our  music,  are  handicapped  for
want  of  a  common  notation.  So  if
we  allow  our  music  to  be  written  in
the  Staff  Notation,  I  don’t  think  we
need  fear  of  its  becoming  corrupted.
On  the  other  hand,  I  think  it  will
become  rich  by  absorbing  the  western
music  and  yet  remaining  Indian.
The  time  has  now  come  when  we
should  no  longer  be  content  with  con¬
fining  ourselves  but  should  go  out
more  and  assert  to  the  world  that  we
are  a  nation.”

Which  reader  of  this  letter  will  fail  to
appreciate  the  noble  sentiment  of  patriotism  and
the  nobler  spirit  of  independence  that  run
throughout  it  ?  O !  how  I  wish  for  many  more
such  learned  ladies  in  our  country !

But  all  the  sahie  I  fear  the  writer  of  the  letter


under  reference  has  not  caught  my  point  and  all
her  arguments  have  therefore  overshot  the  real
issue.  My  contention  is,  and  shall  ever  be,  that
the  Indians  should  learn  and  practise  Indian
Notation  for  Indian  Music.  Her  main  conten¬
tion  seems  to  be  that  the  Indian  Music  should
be  reduced  to  the  Staff  Notation  for  a  twofold
purpose,  Ti2.,  (1)  for  the  benefit  of  the  Europeans
and  the  Americans  and  (2)  for  ourselves  going
out  auo  asserting  to  the  world  at  large  that  we
are  a  nation.  If  so,  1  hasten  to  agree  with  her.
Hut  is  the  Staff  necessary — I  earnestly  ask — for
the  Indians  themselves  to  study  and  appreciate
Indian  Music?  The  learned  lady  seems  to  say
yes’,  as  inferred  from  her  reference  to  the  Staff
as  a  ‘‘common”  notation  in  her  letter.  Evidently
she  wishes  that  the  staff  should  be  made  a  com¬
mon  notation  for  both  the  Europeans  and  the
Indians.  Here  I  agree  to  disagree  with  her.  If
a  European  or  American  wants  tp  study
\  almiki’s  Ramayanam  and  is  yet  unwilling  or
unable  to  learn  Sanskrit  ;  let  him  by  all  means
read  Griffith’s  translation  of  the  poem  and
appreciate  the  original  author  as  much  as  he
can.  But  would  he,  on  that  account,  be
justified  in  compelling  even  the  Sanskrit-
knowing  people  of  India  to  study  Griffith  and
forget  their  Sanskrit  ?  Similarly,  if  any
European  or  American  wants  to  study  Indian
Music  and  is  yet  unwilling  or  unable  to  learn
the  Sargam  Notation  ;  let  him  by  all  means
reduce  the  Indian  Music  into  his  own  Staff  and
appreciate  it  as  much  as  he  can.  But  would  he,
on  that  account,  be  justified  in  compelling  the
Indian  students  to  fprget  their  own  Sargam
Notation  in  favour  of  a  foreign  Staff?  True,
Swami  Vivekananda  employed  English  in  the
l  nited  States  of  America  to  assert  the  superiority
of  Indian  religion.  But  did  he  ever  ask  the
Indians  to  forget  their  own  Vernaculars  in
favour  of  English?  Again,  the  letter  speaks  of
a  few  Europeans  being  handicapped  for  want  of
a  common  (i.e.  Staff)  Notation.  How  many  of
those  "few  Europeans,”  I  ask,  availed  them¬
selves  of  Mr.  Chituiasami  Mudaliar’s  Oriental-
Music,  wherein  spine  of  Thiagaraja’s  Krithis
had  been  reduced  to  the  Staff  Notation?  For
ought  I  know,  the  Europeans  discarded  it,
because  there  was  the  Indian  Music  in  it  ;  and
the  Indians  equally  discarded  it,  because  there
was  the  Staff  in  it.  Nor  does  the  learned  lady’s
complaint,  viz.,  “the  V  estern  people  make  fun  of
our  music”,  frighten  us  into  adopting  the  Staff,
l  or  if  the  westerners  make  fun  of  our  music,


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


SS


they  really  make  full  of  themselves.  Fpr,  it  is
a  truism  that  different  races  possess  different
auditory  faculties  aud  hence  different  systems
of  music  came  rightly  into  existence.  The
Frenchman  cannot  enjoy  the  English  music,  nor
can  the  German  enjoy  the  French  music,  nor
can  even  the  Hindustani  Gavayi  eujoy  the
Karnatic  music.  Hon’ble  Sir  Charles  Turner,
Kt.  C.I.E.,*  observed  in  this  connection:  “the
Southern  Englishman  and  the  Scotch  are  within
400  miles  of  each  other  ;  and  yet  the  former  can-
uot  honestly  enjoy  the  latter’s  bagpipe.  This
difference  in  taste  is  due  tp  the  difference  ill  the
structure  of  the  ear  and  more  to  habits  and  other
circumstances  of  life.”  If  therefore  the  wester¬
ners  make  fun  of  our  music,  the  inference  is  that
the  funny  element  is,  not  in  our  music,  but  in
themselves.  Reduction  of  Indian  Music  into
the  Staff  Notation  cannot  be  a  remedy  to  such
"funny”  people.  They  must  be  prepared  to
have  their  tastes  changed  or  modified,  before
they  can  approach  our  music.

VII.  As  though  a  seventh  contention  were
raised,  a  European  friend  of  mine
wrote  to  me  on  7-9-1922  :  “I  have
now  got  a  native  musician,  quite
ignorant  of  English,  who  tells  me  that
it  is  not  impossible  for  him  to  reduce
all  the  Indian  airs  into  the  Staff
Notation.”

My  reply  was:  “Possible  or  impossible
— that's  a  different  question.  Inasmuch  as  the
mother’s  milk  of  the  Indian  (or  Sargam)  Nota¬
tion  is  plentiful  for  the  Indians,  why  should  a
foreign  Doctor  hoarsely  cry  and  unduly  praise
to  the  skies  the  unnecessary  Mellin’s  Food  of  the
Staff  Notation?”

VIII  "If  the  Staff  Notation  is  not  accepted,
why  should  not  the  Tonic  Solfa  Nota¬
tion  be  adopted,  inasmuch  as  it  has
been  advocated  by  no  less  a  person
than  Abbe  Dubois?"

1  don’t  know  whether  Abbe  Dubois  ever
advocated  the  Tonic  Solfa  ;  but  he  expressed
his  over-anxiety  to  give  the  whole  credit  of
inventing  the  music  scale  to  Guy  of  Arezzo.
The  French  Missionary  had,  however,  to  feel
surprised  to  find  that  the  Hindu  Music  had
also  the  same  scale.  Here  arc  his  owm  words :
“The  Hindu  Scale  bears  a  striking  resemblance


•Vide  Madras  Mail  u i  17-11-jtSiq.


to  ours,  being  composed  of  the  same  number  of
notes,  arranged  in  the  same  way,  as  follows  :  —
Do— Re— M  i— Fa— So— La— Si— Do
Sa— Ri— Ga— Ma— Pa—  Dha— Ni— Sa
Are  we  then  to  deny  the  merit  of  this  invention
to  Guy  of  Arezzo?”  My  answer  to  this  last
question  of  the  ill-informed  Missionary  is  an
emphatic  "yes.”

8.  Above  all,  the  Staff  Notes  are  meant
more  for  the  eye,  while  our  notes  are  meant  more
for  the  ear.  Mr.  Haw'is,  in  his  Musical  Memoirs,
gives  the  palm  to  the  ear  rather  than  the  eye.
If,  with  a  key  given,  an  Indian  note  Ga  is  written
on  a  piece  of  paper,  the  car — as  soon  as  the  eye
is  directed  to  the  note — rings  within  itself  the
sound  peculiar  to  Ga.  But  if  a  European
crotchet  is  written,  you  cannot  at  once  give  its
proper  sound,  even  with  the  help  of  the  keynote
given.  For  some  more  ceremony  has  to  be  per¬
formed  for  it,  viz.,  placing  it  on  the  correct
line  of  the  stave,  perhaps  Ii,  if  the  given  key
is  middle  C.  Indeed  the  European  Staff  is  seven
times  more  unnecessary,  more  difficult,  more
cumhrous,  more  uneconomical  and  more  costly,
in  addition  tp  its  being  quite  defective  from  the
Indian  standpoint.

9.  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  state  that  quite
an  array  of  my  friends  and  others  back  me  up
in  my  jiosition.  The  Maharaja  of  Travancore
wrote  on  29-6-1885  in  reply  to  Captain  Day’s
letter  :  “Captain  Day  has  to  some  extent  anti¬
cipated  the  difficulties  in  getting  the  Hindu  airs
written  out  according  to  the  Eurojiean  system  of
musical  notation.  There  are,  however,  far
greater  difficulties  than  that  of  finding  a  man
equally  conversant  with  the  two  systems.  The
two  systems  themselves  widely  differ  in  many
respects : —

(1)  In  the  Hindu  system  there  are  half
notes,  quarter  notes  and  infinite¬
simally  minute  and  delicate  shades,
as  in  a  painting  by  a  master  artist  ;

(2)  The  Vocalist  or  Instrumentalist  very

often  glides  over  a  whole  gamut  or
half  gamut,  backward  pr  forward,  in
an  unbroken  easy  flow.

(3)  In  European  Music,  there  is  no  such

thing  as  Raga,  w'hicli  in  the  Hindu
system  is  a  thing  permanently  and
scientifically  established  from  time
immemorial.

Any  man  possessing  the  most  ordinary  know¬
ledge  of  music  will  at  once  recognise  the
particular  RAga,  in  whatever  form  of  composi-


INDIAN  Ml ’SIC


89


tion  (and  there  are  innumerable  forms)  it  is  sung
to  him  ;  and  one  mis-placed  swara  will
immediately  jar  in  his  ears.  Indeed  with  all
deference  to  European  Music  and  appreciation
of  its  soul-stirring  effects,  I  must  say  that
Hindu  Music  is  far  more  scientific  and
systematic.  In  the  meanwhile  what  I  have  said
will  in  a  manner  indicate  the  great  inherent
difficulties  which  must  present  themselves  to
one  who  attempts  a  ‘translation’  as  it  were.”

10.  Mr.  V.  N.  Bhatkhaude  of  Bombay

wr.ote  to  me :  ‘‘I  am  strongly  opposed  to

making  the  Staff  Notation  the  sole  medium  of
instruction.  My  idea  is  that  an  Indian  notation
will  go  certainly,  if  not  further,  at  least  as  far
as  the  Staff  Notation,  with  prpper  signs  and
symbols.  If,  for  our  gamakas  and  grace  notes,
new  signs  would  be  necessary  even  in  the  Staff
Notation,  why  should  we  not  introduce  them  in
the  Indian  notation  and  make  it  serviceable?
An  Indian  notation  will  appeal  to  the  Indian
mind  much  more  easily.  I  leave  out  the
question  of  patriotism  and  base  ray  opinion  on
utilitarian  grounds.”  Mr.  H.  P.  Krishna  Row
of  Mysore  once  wrote  a  book  called  “First  steps
in  Hindu  Music  in  English  notation”  and,  by
sheer  force  of  experience,  changed  his  opiuiou
and  wrote  to  me  (35-9-21) :  “The  Staff  Notation
is  unnecessarily  difficult  for  our  music.  If  we
use  it,  we  are  likely  not  to  develop  our
swaragnanam.”  Mr.  P.  S.  Sundramier  of
lanjorc  wrote:  “nitre  is  already  a  notation
and  the  Staff  is  cumbrous  and  costly.”  Mr.
Govindasami  Pillay  of  Trichinopoly,  Mr.
Muthiah  Bhagarathar  of  Harikesanalloor  and
Mr.  Mysore  Krishniengar — these  Vidwans  told
me  they  were  quite  opposed  to  the  Staff  Notation
licitig  user!  for  Indian  Music.

11.  Sir  W.  W.  Hunter  wrote,  in  his  Indian
Empire :  “It  is  impossible  to  adequately
represent  the  Indian  system  by  the  Eurojiean
Notation.”  Sir  William  Ousley  remarks:
“Nor  arc  the  Hindu  airs  known  to  the  Europeans
from  the  impossibility  of  setting  them  according
to  the  European  system  of  notation.  The  fact
that  the  Hindus  have  quarter  tones  renders  it
still  more  difficult  to  express  their  music  by  the
European  system.”  Maharaja  Sir  P.  C.  Tagore
wrote  very  recently,  in  the  Statesman  :  “No
one  who  has  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Hindu
Music  will  venture  to  deny  that  it  is  impossible
to  accurately  represent  it  by  European  notation
or  express  it  by  European  instruments.  We

ia


have  already  become  too  denationalised  in  many
things.  But  for  Heaven’s  sake,  let  no  desecrat¬
ing  hand  be  laid  on  Hindu  music,  which  is
venerated  by  orthodox  Hindus  as  being  of  divine
origin.”  John  Curwcn,  a  European  musician,
observed :  “Even  in  Europe,  the  Staff  Notation
presents  discouraging  difficulties.  If  a  simpler
notation  be  used,  the  progress  will  be  quicker
and  far  more  solid.  7  he  Staff  was  never  de¬
signed  as  a  teaching  instrument  but  was  intended
to  give  a  picture  of  the  keyboard  of  the  piano¬
forte.  The  crotchets,  quavers,  clefs,  flats  and
sharps  of  the  Staff  are  too  abstruse  for  children
and  even  for  men.”

12.  While  thus  even  in  Europe  the  Staff
Notation  is  not  universally  accepted,  it  would  be
an  unpardonable  crime  and  sin  to  attempt  to
thrust  it  as  a  compulsory  notation  into  India,
where  there  has  been  from  time  immemorial  a
‘Sargam’  Notation  from  Mount  Kailas  to  Cape
Camorin.  By  all  means,  join  with  us  in  im¬
proving  our  Sargam  ;  but,  pray,  do  not  think  of
throwing  it  overboard.

13.  Enough,  I  believe,  has  been  said  to
convince  you  that  the  system  of  Notation,  most
suitable  to  Indian  music,  is  neither  the  Staff  nor
the  Tonic  Sol  fa  but  the  Sargam.  T  must  now
proceed  to  place  before  you  what  occurs  to  me
the  best  possible  uniform — and  I  may  even  say
“national”— system  of  Sargam  Notation  for  the
whole  of  India,  which  is  the  main,  if  not  the
sole,  way  to  resuscitate  our  fallen  music.

14-  But  a  preliminary  point  has  first  to  be
settled,  for  at  the  very  outset  we  are  confronted
with  the  question :  “At  what  stage  in  a  pupil’s
course  of  music  should  Notation  he  com¬
menced?  Doubtless  it  is  in  human  nature  that,
as  between  the  thing  and  its  symbol,  preference
is  given  to  the  former  rather  than  to  the  latter.  A
hungry  man  cannot  lie  satisfied  with  the  symbol
of  bread  but  wants  the  bread  itself.  In  educa¬
tion,  symbols  are  needed  and  employed  only
when  the  things  they  denote  are  not  available
or  procurable.  The  true  function  of  Notation,
which  is  but  a  symbol  of  music,  begins  only
when  the  sounding  material,  the  living  music
teacher,  is  not  available  or  procurable.  Hence
the  teaching  of  Notation  may  be  postponed  to  a
ater  stage,  when  the  chances  of  the  pupils’
leaving  the  school  and  of  being  away  from  the
living  teacher  become  greater  and  greater  and
may,  in  fact,  be  commenced  from  the  First
I-orm,  according  to  my  Syllabus.  The  pupils  of


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


the  Primary  classes  who  would  even  otherwise
have  to  encounter  the  difficulty  of  mastering  the
“notation,’'  so  to  speak,  of  the  language  (or
languages !)  they  have  to  learn,  need  not  be  en¬
cumbered  with  an  additional  burden  of  the
music-notation.  The  method  that  has  to  be
employed  in  the  earliest  stage  of  a  pupil  s  course
of  music  should  be  what  may  be  called  the
Imitation,  or  Lip-Ear  method.  That  is  the  time-
honored  methpd  too.  Further,  it  is  only  after
the  pupils’  minds  have  been  saturated  with  a  bit
of  SwaragnMiam  and  Thalagnanam  that  Notation
proper  could,  with  advantage,  be  commenced.
The  teaching  of  Swaras  and  ThMas  should  neces¬
sarily  precede  the  teaching  of  Notation.

15.  Is  Swara-teaching  after  all  necessary?
Can  it  not  be  altogether  avoided?  These  side-
issues  have  of  late  been  causing  much  anxiety
ir  the  music-world  of  South  India,  inasmuch  as
they  have  emanated  from  high  quarters  and
attempted  to  shake  the  very  foundation  of  Indian
Music.  I  must  answer  them.

16.  Most  managers  in  schools  and  most
parents  in  households  arc  obsessed  by  the  idea
that  every  music-piece  must,  at  every  stage,  be
capable  of — and  be  ready  for — show  and  display
to  casual  visitors  and  friends.  Surely  saralis,
alankaras  and  githas  arc  not  adapted  for  such
popular  show  but  are  intended  to  illustrate  the
principles  enunciated  in  Text-Books  on  Music.
The  idea  of  caring  for  the  visitors’  vapoury
satisfaction  must  not  be  allowed  to  prevail
against  the  substantial  and  necessarily  slow
development,  especially  at  the  initial  stage,  of
musical  knowledge  in  the  pupils.  “The  early
steps  of  any  art,”  observed  Florence  Wickins,
“are  and  must  be  slow  at  first ;  and  these  begin¬
nings  should  on  no  account  be  hurried  (or
avoided).  For  once  the  elementary  lessons  are
thoroughly  and  clearly  understood  and  grasped
by  the  pupil,  the  rest  of  the  teacher’s  work  is
easy.’’  It  is  those  that  are  impatient  of  the
necessarily  slow  progress  of  the  early  steps  of  the
art  who  would  generally  sympathise  with  the
objectors  of  Swara-teaching.

17.  The  truth  is,  just  as  a  man  with  a  mere
bone  frame  is  disagreeable,  but  a  man  with  flesh,
and  blood  is  agreeable,  to  look  at ;  the  songs
which  form  the  'flesh  and  blood’  of  music  are
agreeable  to  hear,  but  not  the  swaras  as  forming
the  mere  boneframe  thereof.  The  on-looker  may
be  satisfied  with  the  sight  of  the  flesh  and  blood ;
but  the  possessor  thereof  must  take  care  of  his


boneframe  as  well.  For,  the  stronger  the  bone-
frame,  the  healthier  the  flesh  and  blood.  How
can  ypu  have  a  strong  boneframe  without  attend¬
ing  to  its  growth  and  development?  And  how
can  you  attend  to  its  growth  and  development
without  knowing  the  component  parts  thereof
and  the  laws  of  their  growth?  In  Indian  music,
the  component  parts  of  the  boneframe  are  saralis,
alankaras,  githas,  varnas  and  other  "idioms’’  of
swaras.  A  learner  therefore  cannot  with  im¬
punity  dispense  with  them.  V  hoever  observes
“There  is  no  need  at  all  to  practise  Jantaswaras
and  other  gymnastic  exercises,”  may  as  well  say
that  there  is  no  need  at  all  to  practise,  under  the
modem  system  of  education,  gymnastics  and
other  physical  exercises.  I  would  however  agree
with  him, if  he  should  say  that  the  teacher  must
not  make  too  much  of  swaras  and  mistake  the
means  for  the  c-nd  itself.  Be  it  remembered  that
swara  teaching  has  been,  from  the  time  of  God
Parameswara,  the  right  royal  method  of  music¬
teaching  in  India,  inasmuch  as  Narada  said  and
Thiagaraja  repeated  in  his  famous  Krithi,
“Swararagasudharasa” — that  the  secrets  of
.‘vscardrnavam  had  been  first  taught  by  God
Parameswara  to  Goddess  Parvathi.  I  need
hardly  tell  you  that  “Swararnavam”  was  a  musi¬
cal  treatise  presented  by  Narada  to  Thiagaraga.
The  word  Swararnavam  literally  means  ‘Ocean
of  Swaras.’  Evidently  the  book  related,  as  the
name  indicates,  to  the  illimitable  permutations
and  combinations  of  Swaras.

18.  I  believe  you  will  have,  by  this  time,
been  convinced  of  the  truth  of  two  important
points,  viz.,  (1)  The  System  of  Notation,  most
suitable  to  Indian  Music,  is  Sargam  and
nothing  else ;  and  (2)  the  teaching  of  Sargam
Notation  should  be  preceded  by  the  teaching  of
Swaras  and  ThMas.

19.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  the  Notation
itself.

20.  Each  of  the  35  main  ThMas  of  South
India  and  of  the  25  main  ThMas  (according  to
Abhinavalhdlamanjari)  of  North  India — has,  on
ultimate  analysis,  three  essential  parts,  viz.,
clapping,  fingering  and  waving.  Note  that,
when  you  clap,  you  see  the  outer  part  of  your
hand  and,  when  you  wave,  you  see  the  inner
part  or  palm  of  it.  Is  not  the  palm  or  inner  part
of  a  hand  whiter  than  its  outer  part?  And  is
not  ‘the  outer  part’  blacker  than  the  palm  itself.
Hence  the  clapping  may  be  represented  by  a
black-sign  or  New-Moon  sign,  viz.,  •  and  the


INDIAN  MUSIC


9*


Waving  by  a  white  sign  or  Full-Moon  sign,
viz.,  o  .  The  Finger  looks  like  a  rod  and  hence
the  fingering  may  be  represented  by  a  rod-like
sign,  viz.,  |

21.  Now  the  most  popular  South  Indian
ThiUa  is  Adi.  It  has  3  clappings,  3  fingerings
and  2  wavings — in  all  8  beats,  which  may  be
represented  thus :  —


40  I  1  I  •  O  •  o


For  every  song  in  the  Adi  Thala,  the  follow¬
ing  heading  is  desirable  and  may,  with  advant¬
age,  be  adopted:  —


•

1

r

1

•

O

9

O

cT-Sfi

7?-^f

The  letters  n  w  (pronounced  Tha-ka)  in
the  heading  above  denote  the  mathras  or  Kalais,
the  slowness  or  quickness  whereof  depends  on
whether  the  KAla  or  time  is  vilambitha  (slow),
madhyama  (middling)  or  drutha  (quick).  “  n  "
denotes  one  m&thra  and  “  *  ’’  denotes  again  one
mfithra.  So  one  column  or  bar,  consisting  of
“  ’•  denotes  two  mAthras  which  come  to  one

beat.  The  letters  if.m  may  be  written  n-m
or  It  is  for  convenience  of  pronunciation

that  I  have  given  two  different  letters  fr-wr
But,  be  it  remembered,  that  each  of  the  two
letters  denotes  one  mAthra  and  both  together
represent  one  beat.  Again,  the  lines  of  the  bar
are  drawn  for  convenience  sake  and  have  no
significance  of  their  own,  except  the  last
perpendicular  double  line  which  denotes  the  end
of  an  Avartha.

22.  The  same  principles  may  be  applied  to
other  tli  Alas  as  well.  Take,  for  instance,
Chathusra  Roopaka.  It  consists  of  2  clappings,


3  fingerings  and

only

one

waving — in

all

beats,

which  may  be  represented  thus:—

•

O

#

1

1

1

U

O

U

b

b c

U

i

be

be

c

e

£

G

*£.

a

C3

be

p

*>

ea

s

'H.

5

3

U4

0

—

&

be

a

jj

•v

rs

O

5*

U

3

&

S

I  I  I  I  I  I

I  —  2  —  3  —  4  —  5  —  6


Take  again  a  North  Indian  ThAla,  Chowthal.
It  consists  of  4  clappings,  6  fingerings,  and  2
waving — in  all  12  beats,  which  may  be
represented  thus: —


•

M

1

1

1

•

1

1

1

•

O

•

0

5

b

O

be

W»

O

u

u

be

V

C

be

s

u

be

_=

te

a

2

be

c

2

be

be

53

be

be

Q

c

£

£

JJ

s

u*

Z

jj

c

’£.

c.

S

O

I

s

*/-r1

c.

u

0

w— 1

be

s

2

*5

I

a

a

JJ

3

1

te

e

5

!5

1

*>

$

a

c*

ca

>

?

I

1

I

1

-2-

1

-3

1

— 4

—  5  — 6 — 7 —  8  —

1

9  —

\

0

1

—  1 1

|

— 12

23.  As  the  student  learns  each  new  TliAla,
he  may  easily  get  it  analysed  into  clappings,
finger ngs  and  wavings  and  have  such  analysis
recorded  in  the  manner  indicated  above.  The
old  notation  of  |  to  denote  Laghu  and  o  to
denote  Drutha  has  a  deal  of  ambiguity  and
confusion  about  it,  especially  to  a  beginner.  For
instance,  the  Laghu-sign  I  stands  for  one
clapping  and  any  number  of  fingerings  ranging
from  2  to  8.  I  have  therefore  eschewed  the  old
notation  and  given  you  my  own.  So  much  for
the  Notation  of  ThAla.

24.  As  for  the  Notation  of  songs,  the
Sapthaswaras,  viz.,  Sa-Ri-Ga-Ma-Pa-Dha-Ni,
shall  invariably  form  its  fundamental  basis.  But
with  a  view  to  nationalise  the  Indian  (or  Sargam)
Notation  from  Mount  to  Cape,  those  Saptba-
swaras  shall  invariably  be  written  in  Nagari
characters.  The  Sahithyam  or  wording  of  songs
may  be  written  in  the  language  of  those  songs  or
in  any  other  language ;  but  the  Sargam  Notation
of  those  songs  must  he  uniformly  written  in
Nagari,  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of
India.  The  music  students  need  not  fear  that
they  have  to  learn,  for  this  purpose,  Sanskrit
Language.  I  assure  them  that  it  is  enough  for
them  to  learn  seven  letters — not  more  nor  less


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


ya

than  seven  letter — of  the  seven  notes  of  the
scale.  They  are  as  follows: —


1

Nagari  Letters

Same  Letters  but
Conjunct

Notes

Short

Long

Short

Long

Sa

*

w

qr

Ri

ft

tt

ft

tf

Ga

JT

m

Ma

*r

vn

wn

Pa

q

qr

<q

»qi

Dha

q

qT

*q

WIT

Ni

ftr

ft*

Cv

'srt

25.  With  the  sapthaswaras  written  in  Nagari
characters,  we  have  yet  to  learn  some  special
signs  to  denote  pitch,  time-vaulc,  commence¬
ment,  end,  repetition,  grouping,  rest,  and  so
forth.  Let  us  study  them  one  by  one.


26.  The  signs  of  Pitch  may  be  as  follows :  —


.  «

Pitch

Signs

Signs  Explained

x  ■£

w  £

CS

High  or  Thara

•

A  Dot  above

•

Sthayi

Middle  or  Ma-

Nil

Nil

VI

dhayam  a
Sthayi

Lower  or
Mandra  Sthayi

•

A  Dot  below

VI.

N.B. — Whatever  applies  to  q  applies  equally  to
each  of  the  other  six  swaras.


27.  The  signs  of  Time- Value  may  be  as  follows: —


Time  Value

Signs

Signs  Explained

Examples

Rkamathra

Nil

Nit

*

Ardhnmathra

—

A  Single  Horizontal  Line

*ft

below.

—

Chathurthamathra

—

A  Double  Horizontal  Line

*rfnra

below.

Ashtamamathra

A  Quadruple  Horizontal

Line  below.

- - — -

N.B. — Whatever  applies  to  q  applies  eqnally  to  Dcinisemiquaver  correspond  respectively  to  Rkomathn,

each  of  the  other  six  swam*,  ltc  it  noted  here  that  Ardhamattra,  Chathurthnmnttra  and  Ashtamamattro

the  linropean  signs.  Crotchet,  Quaver,  Semiquaver  and


INDIAN  MUSIC


93


Accent

Repetition

Portion  Repeated

Prolongation  of  the  previous
Vowel  sound.

Komala  •••

Thivra

Suddha  Gandhara
Shadsruthi  Rishabha  ...

Sudha  Nishada
Shadsruthi  Dhaivatba
Anuswara


This  will  occur  only  in
Sahitya  and  not  in  No¬
tation.

So  is  the  case  with  each


of


-See  infra


Ex  : —


(TO)


2Q.  At  the  commencement  of  a  song,  the  V — K — 't — fa  as  well.  Remember  again  that  the
Mela,  the  Rftga,  the  Thfda,  the  K&la,  the  Gathi,  theory  of  flat  and  sharp  notes  applies  only  to
the  Arohana  and  the  Avarflhana  should  be  clearly  fa — * — ** — * — fa  and  never  to  *f — v  Remember
given.  The  flat  or  sharp  notes  should  also  be  also  that  i  and  s,  indicating  flat  and  sharp  notes
pointed  out.  If  flat,  write,  for  example,  fai  ;  respectively,  will  be  tacked  on  to  any  of  the
if  sharp,  write  fas  -,  and  so  on  with  each  of  former  but  not  to  either  of  the  latter.


94


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


30.  At  this  stage,  I  may  be  confronted  with
a  query,  whether,  in  view  of  the  fact*  that
Venkata makhi  gave  16  names  to  12  swaras,  the
nomenclature  of  Komala  and  Thivra  and  their
respective  signs  1  and  2  cover  all  the  “16


•Vide  my  Theory  of  Music.


Swaras”  ;  and  whether,  if  not,  what  special  signs
have  been,  or  should  be,  given  to  the  four
special  swaras  of  the  Kamatic  System,  viz.,
Suddha  Gandhara,  Shadsruthi  Rishabha,  Suddha
Nishada,  and  Shadsruthi  Dhaivatba.

31.  In  the  following  Figure,


the  four  sidc-swaras,  so  to  speak,  marked  fr-r-M-
fa  belong  exclusively  to  the  Kamatic  System  and
arc  of  Venkatamakhi’s  creation,  for  all  practical
purposes ;  while,  the  twelve  Swaras,  marked
9— fti — frs— Hi— *2— *ti— *t3 — q— >ti— Hs— fill—
f*2  form  a  common  feature  of  both  the
Indian  (North  and  South)  and  the  European
systems.  Signs  like  fti — ft2 — ftato  indicate  res¬
pectively  Suddha  Rishabha,  Chathusruthi  Risha¬
bha  and  Shadsruthi  Rishabha,  will  not  only  clash
with  the  general  arrangement,  hitherto  followed,
but  also  prevent  us  from  arriving  at  a  notation
common  to  our  country  as  a  whole.  Reference  has
already  been  made  in  my  Theory  of  Music*  that
Suddha  Gandhara  and  Chathusruthi  Rishabha
sound  alike;  as  also  Sadharana  Gandhara  and
Shadsruthi  Rishabha,  Suddha  Nishada  and
Chathusruthi  Dhaivatba,  and  Kaisild  Nishada
and  Shadsruthi  Dhaivatba.  Hence  the  signs

(fxa> — (*i)— (*2)— (fti)

*  ft  ft  n

have  been  given  respectively  to  Suddha
Gandhara,  Shadsruthi  Rishabha,  Suddha  Nishada

•Vide  my  Theory  of  Music.


and  Shadsruthi  Dhaivatba.  Tin’s  arrangement,
it  is  believed,  will  sene  us  a  double  purpose,
in  so  much  as  it  avoids  clashing  with  the  arrange¬
ment  in  other  systems  of  music  and  indicates
the  true  nature  of  the  sounds  of  the  four  special
swaras  of  the  Kamatic  System.  The  Kanakangi
scale  may,  for  example,  be  written  thus:—

(fta)  (*2)

9— ftt— A— Hi— q— Hi— ft—*

32.  I  shall  bring  this  subject  of  Sargam
Notation  to  a  close  with  giving  you  a  few  typical
exercises  for  practice,  only  to  familiarise  you
with  all  the  signs  and  explanations  mentioned
above.

TYPICAL,  EXERCISES.

Caution— The  teacher  should  demonstrate  to
the  pupils  how  to  sound  *  (tha) —  «  (ka)  in
Vilambitha  (slow),  Madhyama  (middle)  and
Drutha  (quick)  Kfllas.  Later  on,  the  very
swara  letters  should  be  taught  to  be  sung ;  instead
of  11—*.  in  all  the  three  Kfilas.  Then  the
pupils  should  be  slowly  initiated  into  the  saralis
and  their  paraphernalia,  till  they  reach  the
classical  songs.


INDIAN  MUSIC


95


EXERCISE  I.


SOME  PHRASES  AND  IDIOMS.


'6


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


EXERCISE  H.


HEADING

Mala  28.  1  Janyaraga - Rxtricbaadiikfe

Haikamboji  |Tbala - Adi.

Kala  - Madhyma.

Gathi  - Chathasra.


Arohana— u— ft— X— x— ft— x— il
2  2  12  12


Aarohana — « — ft — x — w — x — ft — *r
12  12  2


SONG.

Pallavi.

Niravandhi  Sukhada,  Nirmalarupa,
Xirjithamunishapa.

An  u  pallavi.

Rharadhibandhana,  Nathasankrandana,
Sbankaradigivamana  Sadhumanasa  Susadana.

Charanam.

Maraava  Maragatha  Maninibha  dcha
Srinianilola  Srithajanapala
Bhimaparakrama,  bhimakararchitha
Thamasarajasamanavadoora  Thiagaraja

vinuthacbarana


INDIAN


MUSIC


97


I


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


INDIAN  MUSIC


<J9


EXERCISE  m.


Adapted  after  the  European  fashion.

C.  Major,  (Sankarabharanam).

Thala — Adi ;  Kala — Madhyama ;  Gathi — Thisra.
N.B. — Only  Notes  and  no  wording.


a-»a


I

a*-a


a.*. a


I

a-*-a


a.*  a


o

a  *a


a«.a


o

a-ai-a


q  a. a


v.a  a


q.a.q


fa.q.n


3-q-q


a-q-X


q.a.xfa


«j-.faM-qa


q-X-aq


X-wa-fta


a»-a  «w


Q.qM.fax


q-a-aq


xfa.af-s


lU.fi


afr-itfa.xfa


a-fa-a


fru.rax-faa


ft-a-ft


afrafaxfa


fra-fax-qa


aii.fr  a  af


n  a-aa'afit


afa-xqa


w.a.x


9fr.1ra.QM


faa  f»«-at


n  fr-arffra-


f»a-faM-qa


10O


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVII-W


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  QUARTER.


Waiter  l>c  La  Mare.  By  R.  L.  Megroz
( Hodder  &  Stoughton  Ltd.,  London)  1924.
7*.  6 d.


The  art  of  literary  criticism  has  not  yet  been
reduced  to  strait-laced  principles.  There  is
consequently  a  wide  latitude  for  the  critic  in  the
matter  of  form  and  method  of  criticism.  But
criticism  of  poetry  and  poets  has  always  sought
to  escape  rigidity  of  rules.  The  scope  for  the
critic  of  contemiKjrary  poetry  is  wider  still :  lie
has  almost  an  uncharted  field  to  roam  about  and
explore  ;  he  need  not  feel  the  handicap  of  pre¬
judiced  opinion  ;  lie  can  give  the  lead  whereas
in  case  of  old  i>octs  the  general  opinion  is  already
crystallised  and  the  modern  critic’s  function  is
limited  to  mere  elucidation  of  details.  And
yet  criticism  of  a  living  poet  is  a  very  ticklish
matter.  The  critical  faculty  must  be  extremely
alert  ;  it  must  approach  genuine  intuition  to
arrive  at  a  judicious  appraisement.  We
accordingly  welcome  with  great  pleasure  such  a
fine  work  of  criticism  as  Mr.  Megroz 's  study  of
Walter  de  la  Mare.  The  subject  is  a  living  poet
of  great  power  and  recognised  skill.  But
opinion  about  his  poetry  has  still  to  be  formed  ;
he  is  yet  to  be  placed.  Mr.  M6groz  undertook
the  task  of  disintegrating  the  man  and  his  poetry
with  eager  enthusiasm.  He  is  wildly  apprecia¬
tive  but  with  a  critical  discrimination.  If  the
author  on  occasions  becomes  over-enthusiastic  in
praise  of  his  favourite  poet  he  knows  and  feels
that  he  is  not  over-stating  his  case.  Poetic
appraisement  is  largely  subjective  and  with  this
criterion  the  critic  justifies  his  enthusiasm  for
Walter  de  la  Mare’s  poetry.

What  is  poetry?  It  is  defined  as  “sub¬
limated  imagination"  a  definition  as  good  as
any  other.  There  should  be  imagination  and
imagination  to  be  poetic  should  be  of  a  refined
and  exalted  nature.  Mr.  Walter  de  la  Mare’s
poetry  undoubtedly  satisfies  this  test.  Who  will
not  take  genuine  delight  in  the  exquisite  lyric :

“I  met  at  eve  the  Prince  of  sleep,

His  was  a  still  and  lovely  face,


He  wandered  through  a  valley  steep,
Lovely  in  a  lonely  place.”

We  feel  here  that  the  poet  has  achieved  a
delicacy  of  touch  and  a  pleasing  sequence  of
ideas  and  words.  The  lyric  is  undoubtedly
great  and  deserves  a  permanent  and  high  place
in  English  anthologies.  But  high  as  this
achievement  is  we  can  not  really  ignore  the
extreme  limitedness  of  Mr.  Walter  de  la  Mare’s
jx>etry.  He  surveys  a  narrow  field  but  with
almost  a  divine  vision.  He  has  confined  himself
to  few  subjects  but  he  has  achieved  a  masterly
excellence  in  what  he  has  done.  He  is  Par
excellence  the  poet  of  childhood  and  no  one  has
delineated  the  moods  and  instincts  of  children
with  more  exquisite  beauty  and  picturesqueness.
It  has  been  said  that  few  children  read  and  enjoy
his  verses.  We  think  it  is  not  a  correct  state¬
ment  as  indeed  Mr.  Mf-groz  explains  in  his  bopk.
The  i«sycliology  of  childhood  is  a  very  serious
psychology  ;  the  child  when  lie  plays  the  dragon
or  the  cavalier  is  extremely  serious  about  it  ;  he
genuinely  imagines  himself  to  be  the  centre  of
his  imaginary'  world.  He  draws  b's  inspiration
from  his  own  world  of  ideas  and  it  is  only  by
way  of  relaxation  that  he  turns  to  picture-books
and  nursery  rhymes,  laughing  all  the  t:me
perhaps  in  his  tiny  little  mind  at  the  stupidity
of  the  grown-ups  who  think  his  world  revolves
in  the  whimsical  manner  delineated  in  the
fantastic  picture-stories.  Walter  de  la  Marc’s
accomplishment  docs  not  lie  in  providing  the
child  with  amusement  in  the  hour  of  relaxation  ;
he  has  attempted  a  more  difficult  task :  he
interprets  for  the  adults  the  serious  moods  and
ideas  of  the  child  when  at  play.  He  has
succeeded  remarkably  well  in  this  interpretation.
His  .Songs  of  Childhood,  Peacock  Pie,  and
Dou'n-a-Doun  Derry  deserve  very  high  praise.
The  poet  himself  lias  written  that  “Children

. live  in  a  world  peculiarly  their  own,

so  much  so  that  it  is  doubtful  if  the  adult  can
do  more  than  very  fleetingly  re-oecupy  that  far¬
away  consciousness.”  How  astonishingly  well
he  has  recaptured  for  us  that  “far-away  con-
ciousness”  becomes  vividly  evident  from  a
l>erusal  of  his  songs  of  childhood.  Andrew  Lang


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  QUARTER


ioi


ill  an  appreciative  review  of  Walter  de  la  Mare’s
first  book  applied  Lamb’s  phrase  “A  fairy  way
of  writing"  to  his  poetry  and  children  all  over
the  world  love  fairies  and  gnomes,  the  eLfs  and
the  mopnlands.  Mr.  Mtfgroz’s  estimation  is  fair
'  mid  just :  "As  a  poet  of  childhood  he  can
remain  himself,  the  artist,  the  thinker  of
primitive  phantasy,  the  epicure  in  pleasing

imagery  and  wistful  inconsequence . the

rich  tajiestry  of  image  and  the  melodious  sweet¬
ness  of  the  song  respond  to  the  essentially
childish  desire  for  sensuous  beauty.”

The  second  chief  characteristic  of  Walter  de
la  Mare’s  poetry  is  its  dreamland  inspiration.
The  critic  devotes  two  valuable  chapters  to  the
consideration  of  dream  poetry  and  shows  that
while  inspiration  and  rational  thinking  combine
together  to  yield  a  poetic  npte,  the  character  of
the  tune  depends  upon  the  balance  preserved
between  dream  and  reality.  This  attitude  is
reminiscent  of  the  prosaic  mean  sought  to  be
achieved  between  romance  and  history.  If  we
differ  from  Mr.  M£-groz  in  his  estimate  of  poetic
inspirations  it  is  l>ecause  we  consider  poetry  to
be  outside  the  confines  of  nicely  calculated
balances.  Yeats  is  the  dream  poet  of  the  first
rank,  as  were  Blake  and  Coleridge,  but  a  com¬
parative  assay  of  their  work  does  not  leave  a
common  residue  in  the  shape  of  a  balanced
inspiration.  The  phrase  is  a  contradiction  in
terms.  Dream  and  reality  can  not  be  weighed
in  the  same  scale.  Mr.  Megroz’s  chapters  how¬
ever  are  very  interesting  ami  suggestive.
Perhaps  we  will  not  go  so  far  with  the  critic  as
to  say  that  Walter  de  la  Marc  is  of  the  same
rank  as  Shelley  and  Yeats  ;  but  it  is  to  be
admitted  that  whereas  Keats,  Shelley  and  Yeats
W’rotc  poetry  of  very  unequal  merits,  Walter  de
la  Mare  has  been  continuously  brilliant.  His
fame  rests  upon  work  pf  continued  and  sustained
excellence.

Mr.  M6groz  adds  a  chapter  on  the  poet’s
style  and  content  and  regards  him  in  the  rich
display  of  his  picturesque  elfland  as  the  lineal
descendent  of  the  pre-Raphaelitcs.  Mr.  Megroz
has  accomplished  his  work  with  commendable
industry  and  in  the  present  study  of  Walter  de
la  Mare  he  has  produced  a  work  of  high  literary
merit.  We  are  especially  pleased  to  commend
his  wwk  to  the  notice  of  lovers  of  modem  poetry
in  the  hope  that  they  will  appreciate  the  better
the  work  of  a  leading  English  poet.

W.


China:  Yesterday  and  To-day.  By  Professor

E.  T.  Williams  (Harrap  it  Co.,  15/-).


The  author  of  this  book  of  reference  lias
exceptional  claims  to  be  regarded  as  an  authority
on  this  interesting  and  little-known  kingdom.
Formerly  Vice-Consul  at  Shanghai  and  American
Charge  d’affaires  at  Pekin,  he  was  an  eye
witness  of  the  Boxer  insurrection  and  the  over¬
throw  of  the  Mancliu  dynasty.  He  was  in
charge  of  the  Division  of  far  Eastern  affairs  till
recently,  when  he  reverted  to  his  first
enthusiasms  as  Agassiz  Professor  of  Oriental
Languages  and  Literature  at  the  University  of
California.

The  Oriental  scholar  is  responsible  for  over
half  the  book,  which  forms  an  encyclopaedia
book  of  reference  on  the  origins  of  the  race  and
the  religious  cults  and  social  arrangements  of
to-day.  A1  though  somewhat  paragraphic  in
style,  this  portion  is  of  intense  interest  to  the
Asiatic  scholar.  One  looks  in  vain  for  a
reference  to  the  popular  belief  that  China  has
tried  out  and  discarded  all  the  inventions  of
modem  science.  The  age  of  her  civilisation  is
beyond  doubt.  The  heights  to  which  it  is  said
to  have  risen  seem  to  be  mythical.

The  next  few  chapters  are  written  by  the
nun  of  affairs  and  describe  the  impact  of
Western  Civilisation.  The  almost  bloodless
coup  d’etat  which  led  to  the  abdication  of  the
Mauchu  dynasty  marked  the  end  of  the  haughty
manner  of  dealing  with  ‘‘barbarian’’  envoys.

Then  came  the  war,  which  left  China  to  work
out  her  struggle  towards  democracy  for  three
years,  although  she  was  a  nominal  belligerent
for  some  fifteen  months.  The  interest  now  lies
in  the  efforts  of  Japan  to  gain  control  of  the
Shantung  railway.  The  secret  treaties  between
Japan  on  the  one  part,  and  Great  Britain,
France  and  Russia  on  the  other,  leave  a  nasty
taste  in  the  mouth.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Arabs
of  the  Hedjaz,  Great  Britaiu  had  to  pay  a  stiff
price  for  Japanese  assistance  during  the  sub¬
marine  crisis.  And  in  both  cases  an  aftermath
of  agreements  and  secret  treaties  has  been  left
which  makes  the  work  of  resettling  the  nations
more  difficult,  and  threatens  to  dot  the  world
with  a  number  of  Alsace-Lorraincs.

The  author,  as  an  American,  is  scrupulously
fair  in  his  account  of  British  activities.  Not  a


102


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


word  of  reproach  is  uttered  in  recounting  the
difficulties  that  arose  in  fighting  the  opium
traffic ;  now  diverted  into  Japanese  channels,
llut  one  cannot  read  these  latter  pages  without  a
feeling  that  Great  Britain  has  picked  up  an  ally
in  the  I'ar  East  that  may  prove  an  embarrass¬
ment.

Professor  \\  illiams  has  an  illuminating
chapter  on  Oriental  immigration,  and  the
difficulties  that  followed  the  Burlingame  agree¬
ment.  He  points  out  that  the  difference  in
treatment  accorded  to  China  and  Japan  simply
rests  on  the  latter’s  possession  of  armed  forces.
A  discouraging  but  important  thought  in  these
days  of  pacific  idealism,  Oriental  immigration  is
the  probable  cause  of  the  next  world  crisis.

A  lengthy  appendix  and  bibliography  round
off  this  comprehensive  book  of  reference.

H.  E.  H.  T.


The  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  its  Origin,  Develop¬
ment,  Theory  and  Practice.  By  A.  B.  Keith,
D.C.L.,  D.Litt. — Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.


Review.  By  Dr.  Ganganatha  Jha,  M.A.

It  is  a  wonder  to  most  of  us  how  Dr.  Keith
can  find  time  and  energy  to  write  so  many
!>ooks  of  the  right  kind.  His  latest  achievement
is  a  volume  of  nearly  400  pages,  dealing  with
Indian  Drama.  It  has  been  executed  with  Dr.
Keith's  usual  thoroughness.  He  has  examined
all  available  information  with  a  scrutiny  free
from  bias.  He  has  begun  with  the  Vedic
period  and  has  succeeded  in  showing  that  the
germ  of  the  drama  like  the  germ  of  every  other
branch  of  literature  is  to  be  found  iu  the  Vedas
and  Vedic  rituals.  He  then  carries  us  through
Post-Vedic  literature,  making  gleanings  from
the  epics  and  other  works  assigned  to  that
period.  Drama  in  its  real  form  is  found  to


appear  only  in  the  Buddhist  period.  It  is
refreshing  to  find  that  Dr.  Keith  has  accepted
after  all  the  genuineness  of  the  Bhasa-Dramas,
and  he  has  bubmitted  them  to  a  critical  study
worthy  of  himself.  His  comparison  of  Bhasa
with  Kalidasa  is  made  on  satisfactory  lines,
though  an  admirer  of  Kalidasa  cannot  help
feeling  that  Dr.  Keith  is  prejudiced  in  favour  of
the  earlier  writer.  This  prejudice  however  has  *
not  led  the  writer  in  any  way  to  lessen  his
attention  to  the  works  of  Kalidas,  whose
dramatic  art  lie  admires.  Later  on  the  Doctor
works  his  way  through  the  dramatists  of  the
mediaeval  period  till  he  comes  to  what  he  calls
the  period  of  the  decline  of  the  Sanskrit  Drama.

He  has  devoted  one  chapter  to  detailing  the
characteristics  and  achievements  of  the  Sanskrit
Drama  ;  more  than  60  pages  to  dramatic  theory
where  an  instructive  comparison  is  made
between  Aristotle  and  the  Indian  Theory’  of
Poetics.  The  last  chapter  deals  with  dramatic
practice  wherein  we  find  our  knowledge
carried  very  much  farther  than  that  obtainable
in  the  earlier  works  of  Wilson.

We  are  sorry  to  find  however  tlxat  certain
tyjjographical  errors  have  crept  into  a  book  so
neatly  got  up,  and  we  may  be  permitted  to  '
point  out  a  few  cases  of  what  we  consider
mistranslation.  Ifisdiu'  is  not  the  totus  but  its
root  (p.  109)  ;  ‘Cailatanaya’  is  not  ‘the  lady  of
the  mountain’  but  the  ‘daughter  of  the
mountain  (p.  170).  In  the  estimation  of  so

many  poets  there  will  always  be  divergence  of
opinion.  Hence  there  is  no  wonder  if  we  find
ourself  unable  to  agree  with  the  learned  Doctor
in  his  estimate  of  Bhavabhuti  and  some  other
dramatists.  It  is  the  virtue  of  poetry  that  it
appeals  to  different  natures  in  different  ways.

The  book  is  one  which  deserves  a  place  In
the  hands  of  every-  Sanskrit  scholar  ;  for  our
l mversity  students  it  is  indispensable  and  for
every  serious  student  of  Sanskrit  literature  a
I>erusal  of  the  book  will  prove  not  only  inter¬
esting  but  highly  instructive.  ,


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


:o3


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES.


DRAMA.

CONTEMPORARY  BRITISH  DRAMATISTS.

The  Filth  of  November  by  Howard  Peacey.  Volume
Five.

The  Dance  of  Life  by  Hcrrnon  Quid.  Volnmc  Six.

The  Fanatics  by  Miles  Mallcson.  Volume  Seven.

The  Three  Barrows  by  Charles  McEvoy.  ''’olume

Eight.

First  Blood  by  Allan  Monkhousc.  Volume  Nine.

Krishna  Kumarl  by  Edward  Thompson.  Volume
Ten.

(Published  by  Messrs.  Ernest  Bonn  Limited,
London,  1924)  5 s.  each  volume  cloth  and  3*.  6d.  each
volume  paptr.

We  have  on  a  previous  occasion  welcomed  the
series  of  modern  plays  which  the  enterprising  house
of  Benn  Brothers  have  placed  before  an  increasingly
appreciative  public.  It  is  a  welcome  sign  that  the
series  has  received  commendable  support  and  further
volumes  arc  in  course  of  preparation.  It  also  bespeaks
of  the  essentially  healthy  feature  in  modem  British
Drama.  The  selection  of  plat's  has  been  made  with  a
view  to  ]>opularise  the  modem  tendencies  in  dramatic
art  and  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  the  essentially  modem
habit  of  intellectual  snobbery  and  quizzincss  has  been
kept  in  the  back-ground.  We  noticed  the  first  four
volumes  in  our  issue  of  January,  1924,  and  have  now
before  n«r  further  six  volumes— each  is  singular  and
individual  in  conception  and  design,  yet  each  one  be
tokens  the  modem  spirit  and  has  an  important  relation
with  the  human  and  social  passions  which  sway  peoples’
minds  toslay.  We  look  forward  with  pleasure  to
further  issues  in  this  admirable  series.

Mr.  Howard  Peacey  has  built  his  story  of  The  Fifth
of  November  round  the  personality  of  Roberts  Catcsby
and  Father  Garnett  acts  as  the  villain  of  the  piece.
The  author  has  almost  ignored  Guy  Fawkes  who  is
popularly  connected  with  the  Gunpowder  Plot.  The
romantic  interest  in  the  drama  is  preserved  by  the  keen
analysis  the  play-wright  has  made  of  the  thoughts  and
feelings  which  impulsed  the  conspirators  and  their
women.  Mr.  Peacey  has  no  doubt  seized  the  historical
incident  and  carefully  kept  to  the  essential  details  of
the  plot;  but  he  has  not  been  content  with  mere
dramatisation.  It  seems  that  he  himself  set  out  on  a
dangerous  adventure  with  a  desperate  company  and


wrote  the  chronicle  of  their  exploits  out  of  deep  personal
experience.  The  story  as  unfolded  in  the  drama  is  9
creative  triumph  for  the  author.  The  characters  arc
well  drawn  and  remain  human;  the  language  is  lucid
and  simple  and  the  final  scene  well  conceived  and  finely
written.

Whimsical  is  possibly  the  aptest  description  of  Mr.
1  Icrmon  Ould's  The  Dance  of  Life.  A  young  man  of
twenty  three  bora  of  idle  and  prosperous  parents  finds
life  boring  and  living  too  dull  for  him ;  his  quest  after
the  whys  and  wherefores  of  life  embitters  him.  The
honest  intentions  of  his  parents  for  his  career  carrv  no
meaning  to  him.  Olga  Heath,  erstwhile  a  lady’s  maid,
in  love  with  this  young  man  provides  the  balance  and
later  the  justification  for  his  existence.  Young
Bcrcsford’s  search  for  the  human  light  does  not  provide
enough  dramatic  interest  for  the  playwright.  Neither
do  the  intervention  of  dream-scenes  improve  the  arti¬
ficial  make-up  of  the  play.  And  yet  the  problem  is  an
age-old  one  and  Mr.  Ould's  treatment  if  not  entirely
original  is  at  any  rate  novel  anil  full  of  surprising
twists  and  turns.

When  Mr.  Miles  Mnlleson  chose  the  motif  of  his
play  entitled  The  Fanatics  he  must  have  given
tremendous  thought  to  the  manner  and  method  of
treatment.  The  fanatic  is  one  who  "lives  by  what  he
believes,  which  is  difficult,"  but  then  "you  have  got
to  have  something  of  a  fanatic  in  yon  to  do  anything
worth  while  these  days.  The  thing  is  to  keep  one's
fanaticism  and  to  keep  one’s  humanity.”  Fine  idealism
this  but  possibly  too  deep  for  the  average  mortal.  We
will  appreciate  better  the  essential  truth  in  this  state¬
ment  if  we  ponder  for  a  while  on  the  social  and  indivi¬
dual  problems  which  face  mankind  to-day.  It  is  ac¬
cordingly  a  double  welcome  we  extend  to  Mr.  Malleson’s
clever  exposition  of  the  sex  problem.  He  has  tackled
the  most  insistent  social  question  of  the  day  in  a
manner  atonce  bold  and  courageous,  defiant  of  conven¬
tional  standards  and  unaffected  by  social  small-talk
If  the  dramatist  preaches  trial  marriage  and  ante¬
nuptial  intercourse  lie  does  so  with  a  profound  convic¬
tion  that  the  church-made  marriages  of  the  day  have
resulted  in  the  present  possible  mess  of  sex  warfare  and
disintegration  of  family  life.  Love  to  n  maid  is  an
untried  experience  and  happiness  in  love  is  the  only
test  for  tying  up  two  people  in  wedlock  for  life.  Mr
Mnlleson  has  not  become  the  preacher  at  the  expense
of  the  dramatist;  his  play  preserves  the  essential  unitv


104


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


of  dramatic  action.  The  diction  is  admirable  and
interest  of  the  reader  sustained  to  the  very  last  line.
We  do  not  remember  having  read  recently  any  play
with  such  powerful  appeal  to  reason  and  courageous
treatment  of  a  grave  social  problem  as  is  given
in  The  Fanatics.

The  Three  Barrows  like  the  Fanatics  deals  with  the
love  problem,  but  if  the  atmosphere  in  the  two  plays
is  different,  the  final  effect  is  entirely  depressing  in
contrast  to  the  joyous  climax  of  Mr.  Mallcson’s  play
Mr.  McEvoy  devotes  special  efforts  to  elaborate  the
effects  of  environments  on  a  man’s  most  intense  and
vital  feelings;  he  portrays  with  success  the  mentality
which  effaces  the  noblest  urge  at  the  call  of  luxury  and
social  convention.  Y’ictor  Mieux  remains  the  in¬
vertebrate,  supine  lover  of  a  heroic  soul.  His  struggle
appears  feeble  even  at  the  opening  of  the  play.  This
weakness  explains  why  the  reading  appears  verbose
and  painfully  long.  There  is  a  dramatic  unity  of  a
sort  in  the  plan  of  the  book,  but  the  final  effect  is  not
pleasant.  We  may  not  ignore  however  the  realism
which  touches  many  of  the  scenes.  The  dramatist  Itas
taken  the  average  product  of  present  day  social  conven¬
tions  nnd  portrayed  him  in  his  miserable  dependence
upon  surroundings.  Pity  describes  our  feelings  as  we
close  the  book.

Allan  Monkliouse  possesses  the  gift  of  realism  to  a
remarkable  degree.  In  The  Conquering  Hero,  the  second
volume  of  this  scries  lu-  laid  bare  ruthlessly  the  anguish
of  the  soldier's  soul.  In  First  Blood  he  reveals  with
almost  barbaric  bluntness  the  tragic  consequences  of
industrial  warfare.  A  strike  of  cotton  operatives  pro-
vidcs  him  the  plot  for  his  play.  A  peaceful  country¬
side  is  suddenly  divided  into  warring  factions  nnd  the
incidents  of  the  strike  present  the  basic  class  instincts
of  love  and  hatred  in  mortal  conflict.  The  dramatist
feels  the  realities  of  the  struggle  acutely  and  portrays
faithfully  the  sufferings  which  industrial  warfare
entails.  It  is  but  a  fitting  close  tliat  the  two  persons
who  viewed  the  struggle  from  a  humane  point  of  view
end  their  lives  under  tragic  circumstances.  A  play
intensely  human  and  modero.

Krlshna  Kumari  is  the  dramatised  version  of  an
historical  incident  related  in  Tod's  11  Annals  of
Rajpulana"  Mr.  Thompson  is  well  known  for  his
sympathetic  studies  of  Indian  customs  and  traditions.
He  has  sought  to  frame  for  us  in  the  heroic  self
sacrifice  of  Krishna  Kumari,  the  symbol  of  life  tltat  is
ungrudgingly  given  for  love  of  country  and  neighbour.
The  youthful  princess  of  Mewar  is  sought  after  by  two


powerful  princes  and  the  beautiful  Mewar  countryside
is  devastated  in  turn  by  the  rival  suitors.  Mr.  Thompson
lias  related  with  poignancy  the  final  resolve  of  Krishna
Kumari  to  drink  of  the  poisened  cup.  Inevitably  the
dialogues  arc  lengthy,  unsuitable  for  stage  elocution,
but  the  play  is  good  reading.  We  arc  not  quite  sure
whether  the  author  has  correctly  reproduced  the
incidents  leading  up  to  the  Itritish  Ambassador’s  inter¬
vention.  Close  historical  accuracy  may  not  however
be  looked  for  in  a  play  which  is  meant  to  carry
modern  appeal.


BRITISH  DRAMA  LEAGUE  LIBRARY.

Ay  nil  by  Laurence  Binyon.  Volntnc  5.

The  Prince  by  Gwen  John.  Volume  6.

Tile  Lilies  ot  the  Field  by  J.  Hastings  Turner
Volume  8.

(Published  bv  Basil  Blackwell,  Oxford,  19*4)  31.  6 d.
each  volume.

“No  real  renaisancc  of  drama  can  take  place  with¬
out  a  new  impulse  towards  the  writing  of  plays” —
this  is  from  the  prospectus  of  the  British  Drama
League,  which  is  doing  creditable  work  in  creating
enthusiasm  for  the  dramatic  art.  We  have  on  a
previous  occasion  commented  with  appreciation  on  the
first  four  plays  of  the  series.  The  welcome  which
the  first  volumes  received  hnvo  encouraged  the
publishers  to  place  further  volumes  before  the  public.
We  extend  a  cordial  welcome  to  the  enterprise  parti¬
cularly  as  it  is  meant  to  help  those  playwrights  who
have  unsuccessfully  knocked  nt  the  doors  of  com¬
mercial  publishers.

AyuU  is  a  delicate  phantasy  of  beautiful  imagery.
Mr.  Laurence  Binyon,  a  poet  of  rare  charm,  has  not
attempted  to  dramatise  one  sensational  incident,  as
is  the  usual  practice  with  playwrights.  This  explains
the  charge  of  a  lack  of  harmony  in  his  interesting  little
tale.  Ayuli,  the  l«dovcd  of  the  Son  of  Heaven,  is  the
embodiment  of  all  that  is  noble  and  pure  in  Beauty.
Love  is  her  joy,  as  it  turned  out  to  be  her  cross.  A
traitorous  conspiracy  raises  its  head  against  Ayuli  and
the  King  who  is  charged  with  having  forgotten  “the
merchant’s  welfare  in  a  woman.”  Ayuli  learns  of  the
rebels’  ilcmand  of  her  head  nnd  wonders:

"Oh,  why,  why  ?

Because  1  loved  so  much,  and  had  such  Joy?

Is  sorrow  part  of  the  world,  as  wonderful

As  Joy  was? . **

Mr.  Binyon  has  expressed  Love’s  sacrifice  in  exquisite
language  clothed  with  beauty  and  charm.  It  U


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


105


mistaken  to  find  fault  with  the  idealism  of  the  King;
he  is  not  the  central  figure  of  the  play,  but  only  a
proud  follower  of  Beauty,  who  reckons  no  cost  and
learns  no  obstacle  in  his  pursuit  of  Joy.

In  The  Prince  Miss  Gwen  John  has  attempted
to  sketch  in  eight  sliort  scenes  the  many-sided  facets
of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  personality.  The  interpretation
does  not  quite  succeed  for  although  the  play  gives  us
knowledge  of  what  Queen  Bess  thought  on  occasions,
we  donot  come  any  nearer  the  woman  and  the  queen.
Miss  John  feels  she  has  contribute!  toward  unfolding
the  mystery  which  enshrouded  the  Queen's  relations
with  the  Earl  of  Essex.  The  controversy  is  by  no
means  settled  and  Miss  John’s  elucidation  docs  not
help  in  understanding  the  conflict  of  passions  which
determined  Queen  Elizabeth's  attitude  towards  her
courtiers.  Perhaps  the  form  adopted  by  Miss  Johu
has  licen  unfortunate,  for  we  certainly  expect  better
workmanship  and  dramatic  skill  from  Miss  John.

Mr.  Turner’s  The  Ulies  of  the  Field  is  one  of  the
brightest  and  merriest  comedies  we  have  read  for  some
time.  The  gaiety  and  fun  which  bubble  over  almost
every  line  arc  skilfully  interwoven  with  serious  com¬
ment  on  modern  manners.  Mr.  Turner’s  art  is  here
seen  at  its  highest  and  most  accomplished  stage.
More  deft  hands  have  wTitten  gayer  comedies;  more-
imaginative  brains  have  evolved  cunning  motifs;  but
we  have  seldom  come  across  such  a  bright  instance
of  a  typically  apt  modern  comedy.  There  is  fun  in
plenty,  there  is  humour,  there  is  wit  and  brilliance.
The  crej>c-de-chenc  delicacy  of  touch  enlightens  and
vivifies  the  characters.  If  Betty  in  a  crinoline,  despite
being  a  anachronism,  successfully  outwits  her  twin
cinderulliT-likc  sister,  the  vicar  in  the  supreme  self
confidence  of  a  happy  nonentity  presents  a  delightful
comedy  in  conjugal  manners.  We  congratulate  Mr.
Turner  on  his  excellent  dramatic  work  and  will  look
forward  to  his  future  publications.  It  is  gratifying
to  note  that  the  Ulies  of  the  Field  lias  had  a  success¬
ful  run  at  the  Ambassador’s  theatre  in  London.


The  Monument  by  E.  H.  W.  Mcyerstcin  (Basil
Blackwell,  Oxford,  1924)  as.  6 d.

This  is  a  tragic  verse-stndy  in  swindling.  The
widow  and  daughter  of  an  artist,  reduced  to  penury,
suggest  the  scheme  of  a  monument  to  be  raised  to  the
memory  of  the  dead  genius.  The  game  is  obvious  from
the  beginning.  Mr.  Mcyerstcin  has  not  introduced  any
entre-seenes  to  lighten  the  hypocrisy  of  the  act.  The
14


deception  is  preserved  till  the  end  when  nemesis  over¬
takes  the  two  scheming  women.  A  gruesome  realistic
story,  rather  diffuse  and  long-worded.


Pundalik  by  llariiidranath  Chattopadhyaya  (The
Sbama'a  Publishing  House,  Madras,  192-1)  Kc.  1/-.

Mr.  Chattopadhyaya  continues  in  Pundalik  the
dramatisation  of  Hindu  mythological  legends.  He  tells
us  here  how  the  sacred  Panda rpur  came  to  be  founded
as  a  place  of  pilgrimage.  The  sceptic  Pundalik  insults
his  old  parents  and  sneers  at  God’s  worship.  A  period
of  spiritual  chaos  follows,  until  the  soul  of  Pundalik
sees  the  light.  The  spiritual  conflict  is  very  beauti¬
fully  rendered  by  the  poet.  Mr.  Chattopadhyayo’s
verse  has  gained  strength  and  power  and  his  muse
remains  as  delicate  and  charmingly  elusive  as  ever.


The  Famous  Tragedy  of  the  Queen  of  Cornwall  by

Thomas  Hardy  (Macmillan  &  Co.,  London,  1913)  6s.

Thomas  Hardy’s  new  play  for  mummers  reveals
the  master  in  the  fulness  and  maturity  of  his  powers.
Hardy  is  not  accepted  ns  a  true  poet  by  many  dis¬
criminating  critics  but  few  deny  his  genius  for  captur¬
ing  the  real  dramatic  iucidcnts.  The  present  play  has
licen  adapted  for  performance  repairing  no  theatre  or
scenery.  The  triumph  of  the  dramatist  lies  in  success¬
fully  presenting  this  old  Cornish  legend  in  an  atmos¬
phere  reminiscent  of  Love’s  golden  ngc.  The  great
story  of  Tristram  and  Iscult  has  seldom  been  relate  1
in  a  more  beautiful  language— with  a  restrained
simplicity  and  charm  characteristic  of  Hardy’s  best.

Plays  and  Controversies  by  W.  B.  Yeats  (Macmillan

&  Co.,  London,  1913)  tor.  6 d.

In  Ptays  and  Controversies  Sir.  Yeats  has  reprinted
bis  valuable  notes  on  the  Irish  Dramatic  Movement
together  with  six  of  his  plays.  The  essay  is  a  construc¬
tive  plea  for  the  rcnaisancc  of  the  Irish  Drama  and
reveals  the  struggles  of  the  great  Irish  poet  in  the
cause  of  dramatic  art.  It  will  remain  as  much  a
historical  document  of  great  interest  as  a  cogent  plea
for  a  National  Theatre.  The  dramatic  pieces  represent
Yeats  in  his  cliaracteristic  dreamland,  charming  an  l
elusive,  mystifying  the  reader  and  the  critic  alike.  At
the  end  of  the  book  appears  an  open  letter  to  Lady
Gregory,  written  in  1919,  which  sums  up  the  history  of
the  Irish  Theatre  and  Mr.  Yeats’  Itnpcs  for  it  in  the
future.


i  TIIE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW

INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY  AND  THEOLOGY.  and  Error;  Perception;  Inference  and  Comparison;

Logical  Errors;  The  Nature  and  Authority  of  Speech;
Indian  Logic  and  Atomism.  By  A.  Bcrriedalc  Keith  dialectical  Categories;  Ontology;  the  Philosophy


(Clarendon  Press,  Oxford)  iyJ-1.

Dr.  Keith  is  a  very  versatile  scholar.  Among  living
Western  Orientalists  there  is  perhaps  no  one  who  has
made  such  a  thorough  study  of  so  many  branches  of
Sanskrit  literature.  In  his  I'rdic  Index;  in  his
San khy a  System ;  in  his  Karma  Mlmansa  he  had
already  shown  his  complete  mastery  over  the  intricate
subjects  with  which  he  was  dealing,  and  also  a  gift  of
lucid  exposition  which  is  all  too  rare  in  scholars  whose
days  arc  past  amongst  ponderous  dusty  tomes.  ITof.
Keith  succeeds  in  enabling  the  layman  to  thoroughly
understand  subjects  which  he  had  originally  given  up
as  too  abstruse  and  difficult.  But  he  is  not  only  a
Sanskritist ;  but  also  a  recognised  authority  on  consti¬
tutional  law  and  history.  The  volume  under  notice
deals  with  the  Nyaya  and  Vaisbeshika  Systems  of
Hindu  Philosophy,  and  if  the  learned  author  can
manage  to  give  us  two  more  volumes  dealing  with
Vedanta  and  Sankhva,  we  shall  then  have  a  very
valuable  series  of  books  dealing  with  all  the  well-
known  six  systems  of  Hindoo  thought,  "e  have  just
received  a  copy  of  Dr.  Keith's  latest  work  7  he  Origin
of  the  Sanskrit  Pratna.  Of  that  we  shall  publish  a
detailed  review  in  a  subsequent  issue.

As  the  author  truly  points  out,  the  Nyaya  and
Vaisheshika,  the  Indian  systems  of  logic  and  realism,
have  attracted  hardly  a  tithe  of  the  interest  due  to
them  as  able  and  earnest  efforts  to  solve  the  problems
of  knowledge  and  being  on  the  basis  of  reasoned  argu¬
ment.  The  systems  are  indeed  orthodox,  and  admit
the  authority  of  the  sacred  scriptures,  but  they  attack
the  problems  of  existence  with  human  means,  and
scripture  serves  for  all  practical  purposes  but  to  lend
sanctity  to  results  which  arc  achieved  not  only  with¬
out  its  aid,  but  often  in  very  dubious  harmony  with
its  tenets.  There  are  many  good  works  dealing  with
the  other  systems,  but  of  Nyaya  the  only  general
expositions  in  English  are  the  Sadho  Lai  Lectures  of
Dr.  Jha  and  the  well-known  work  of  Prof.  Jacobi,  and
on  Vtticcscka,  the  recent  work  of  L.  Suali  is  the  most
exhaustive.  Dr.  Keith  handsomely  acknowledges  his
debt  to  the  works  of  tioth  these  scholars,  as  also  of
several  others.  But  it  is  no  disparagement  of  the
works  of  these  distinguished  scholars  to  say  that  for
the  general  reader  who  wants  to  get  a  clear  non-
dctailcd  knowledge  of  Nyaya  and  Vaiceaika,  Dr.
Keith's  book  is  the  most  suitable.  That  this  book  is
quite  exhaustive  will  be  clear  from  a  glance  at  the
chapter-headings :  The  origin  and  development  of
the  systems ;  the  Syncretism  of  the  Schools ;  Knowledge


of  Nature ;  the  Philosophy  of  Spirit ;  the  Existence  and
Nature  of  God.  The  author  i*  at  places  frankly
critical,  as  for  instance,  in  dealing  with  the  Naiya-
yika's  philosophy  of  spirit.  His  remarks  are  frequently
of  great  value ;  in  dealing  with  the  Nyaya- \  aicesika,
Vedanta  and  Sankhva  views  on  the  existence  and
nature  of  God,  he  says  :  “All  three  agree  in  denying
any  real  value  to  human  experience  and  endeavour,
and  stand  in  fundamental  contrast  with  the  tendency
of  recent  thought,  whether  thcistic  or  atheistic,  to  view
the  process  of  the  universe  as  real  and  to  insist  on
the  fact,  not  of  the  independence  and  self-sufficiency
of  the  individual,  but  of  the  necessity  of  the  com¬
munion  of  selves  as  the  basis  of  their  reality.’’  Ihcrc
are  several  points  on  which  it  is  difficult  to  agree  with
Dr.  Keith ;  this  brief  notice,  however,  is  not  the  place
for  discussing  them.  The  absence  of  a  full  bibliography
may  be  noticed ;  the  numerous  footnotes  are  helpful,
but  a  bibliography  slmuld  tie  added  in  a  subsequent
edition.  We  think  it  a  matter  for  congratulation  that
the  services  of  such  an  able  and  accomplished  scholar
should  be  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Sanskrit  learning.


Theism  in  Medieval  India.  By  J.  E.  Carpenter.

(Williams  and  Norgate.  14  Henrietta  Street,  London)
191).

The  various  Hibbert  Lectures  delivered  and
published  from  time  to  time  constitute  a  very  valuable
library  of  philosophical  literature.  It  is  high  praise
to  say  that  Dr.  Carpenter's  lectures  entitled  Theism
in  Medieval  India  are  fully  worthy  to  take  their  place
beside  the  earlier  volumes  of  the  scries.  By  reason
alike  of  depth  of  knowledge,  of  a  sympathetic  outlook
and  a  critical  standard,  the  present  volume  will  be
warmly  welcomed  by  the  ever-growing  body  of  readers
interested  in  the  subject.  Dr.  Carpenter  has  started
his  discussion  by  a  consideration — thorough  and  full —
of  the  interaction  and  mutual  influence  of  Buddhism
and  Hinduism  which  present  many  problems  of  great
subjects  dealt  with  are  Religious  I’hilosopby  in  the
great  epic;  the  Trimurti;  1'hilosophy  and  Religion  in
Shaivism;  Religion  and  Philosophy  in  Vaishnnvism ,
Hinduism  and  Islam.  Though  the  last  chapter  is  not
quite  so  well-informed  and  comprehensive  as  the  others,
we  confidently  commend  the  book  to  the  attention  of
the  thoughtful  scholars  as  an  honest,  unbiassed
account  of  a  subject  which  is  full  of  interest  and
importance.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


107


The  Buddha  and  His  Doctrine.  By  C.  T.  Strauss
(William  Rider  and  Son,  Limited,  8  Paternoster  Row,
London)  1923.

The  above  is  a  popular  account  of  the  Buddha's
life  and  doctrine  in  its  original  purity,  drawn  from
the  oldest  accessible  documents.  The  author  refutes
certain  errors  and  prejudices  which  exist  almost  uni¬
versally  with  regard  to  Buddhism  and  presents  a
clear,  straightforward  acconnt  of  Gautama's  teaching
and  philosophy.  The  author  has  wisely  chosen  to  go
straight  to  the  original  authorities,  the  Pali  Tipitaka.
The  work  appeared  originally  in  "the  international
language  Ido” ;  it  has  now  been  adopted  from  that
into  English.  In  five  chapters  of  more  or  less  interest
— dealing  with  the  Life  of  Bnddha,  the  Doctrine,  the
Ethics,  the  Brotherhood  and  a  Defence  of  Buddhism
— we  have  a  popular,  but  nonetheless  trustworthy
exposition  of  a  system  which  is  both  a  religion  and  a
philosophy,  inasmuch  as  it  satisfies  both  the  heart
and  the  mind  of  vast  sections  of  humanity.

The  Teaching  of  the  I'panishads.  By  Edward
Carpenter  (George  Allen  and  Unwin,  Ltd.,  40  Museum
Street,  London)  1933.

Mr.  Carpenter  is  a  keen  student  of  Indian  philo¬
sophy  and  we  have  in  the  present  little  pamphlet  the
substance  of  two  erf  his  popular  lectures  on  Rest  and
the  Nature  of  the  Self.  He  emphasises  the  impor¬
tance  of  the  former  by  saying  that  to  some,  in  the
present  whirlpool  of  life  and  affairs,  it  may  seem
almost  an  absurdity  to  talk  about  Rest.  For  long
enough  now-  rest  has  seemed  a  thing  far  off  and
unattainable.  With  the  posts  knocking  at  our  doors
ten  or  twelve  times  a  day,  with  telegrams  arriving
every  hour,  and  the  telephone  bell  constantly  ringing;
with  motors  rushing  wildly  aliout  the  streets,  and
aeroplanes  whizzing  overhtad,  with  work  speeded  up
in  every  direction,  and  the  drive  in  the  workshops
becoming  more  intolerable  every  day;  with  the  pace
of  the  walkers  and  the  pace  of  the  talkers  from  hour
to  hour  insanely  increasing — what  room,  it  may  well
I*  asked,  is  there  for  Rest  ?  lie  insists  with  much
force  that  modern  nations  must  learn  to  rest  even  in
the  very  midst  of  the  hurry  and  scurry.  This  seems
to  him  to  be  the  teaching  of  some  of  the  Upanishads
—the  value  of  rest,  c<r  repose,  which  latter  is  pro¬
bably'  an  aptvr  word.  On  the  nature  of  the  self,
Mr.  Carpenter  is  rather  disappointing  in  his  conclu¬
sion  that  while  we  can  and  do  become  even  more
vividly  conscious  of  our  true  self,  the  mental  state¬
ment  of  it  always  docs  and  probably  always  will  lie
beyond  us.  None  the  less  his  views  arc  alike  interest¬
ing  and  instructive.  .


Raja  Yoga.  By  Swami  Vivekananda  (Kcgan  Paul,
Trench,  TriibiK-r  it  Company,  Limited,  Carter  I.anc,
London)  1923.

Swami  Vivekananda  did  prohably  more  than  any
other  individual  to  popularise  in  the  West  the  various
systems  of  Yoga  philosophy.  Raja  Yaga  is  one  of
the  most  highly  developed  forms  of  Vedanta.  It
teaches  that  desires  and  wants  are  in  man,  that  the
power  of  supply  is  also  in  him ;  and  that  wherever  and
whenever  a  desire,  a  want,  a  prayer  has  been  ful¬
filled,  it  was  out  of  this  infinite  magazine  that  the
supply  came  and  not  from  any  supernatural  being.
It  is  needless  to  say  anything  of  Swami  Vivekananda’s
remarkable  powers  of  exposition ;  it  is  masterly.  But
the  translation  of  Patanjali’s  Sutras  is  not  always  as
correct  as  might  be  expected.  Despite  this,  the  book
will  receive  a  thoroughly  well-deserved  welcome  from
the  students  of  Hindu  philosophy.  It  is  a  valuable
addition  to  philosophical  literature.

Vedlc  Hymns.  By  E.  J.  Thomas,  1923.  Hindu
Gods  and  Heroes.  By  L.  D.  Barnett,  1922.  (“Wisdom
of  the  East”  Scries.  John  Murray,  Albemarle  Street,
London).

The  Wisdom  of  the  East  Series  is  a  useful  venture
which  deserves  encouragement.  The  get-up  and
printing  and  paper  arc  all  such  as  might  be  expected
from  the  firm  of  John  Murray.  The  Editors,  Messrs.
Cranmor-Byttg  and  Kapadia  have  succeeded  in
enlisting  the  active  support  and  co-operation  of  Com*
petent  scholars  whose  names  arc  a  sufficient  guarantee
that  the  books  will  he  reliable  and  well-written.  Dr.
Thomas'  Vedlc  Hymns  brings  together  in  a  handy
form  all  the  more  important  Vedic  hymns  which  shed
a  flood  of  light  on  the  social  and  religious  polity  of
early  India.  Dr.  Burnett  has  undertaken  in  his
Hindu  Cods  and  Heroes  a  popular  study  in  the  history
of  the  religion  of  India,  dealing  with  the  Vedic  age,
the  age  of  the  Brahmanas  and  the  Epics  and  later.
Both  these  are  useful  volumes  which  contain,  within
a  short  compass,  much  that  will  inspire  and  elevate.
They  fully  sustain  the  high  reputation  of  the  pre¬
vious  volumes  in  this  series.

Sind  and  Its  Sufis.  Bv  J.  p.  Gulraj  (Theosophical
Publishing  House,  Adyar,  Madras)  1934.

The  above  is  a  volume  in  the  well-known  "Asian
Library”  which  has.  already  attained  considerable
popularity.  The  Sind  thinkers  and  singers  have  so  far
l»ecn  singularly  neglected  by  the  English-knowing
public,  and  it  is  gratifying  that  Mr.  M.  M.  Gidwani's
excellent  monograph  on  Shah  Latif  should  now  be


io8


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


followed  by  Mr.  Gulraj’s  really  illuminating  and
instructive  Sind  and  its  Sufis.  Lai  Shahbaz  is  known
to  many  outside  Sind  at  least  by  name ;  in  this  volume
we  have  a  full  account  of  his  philosophy  of  life;  we
now  learn  the  thoughts  of  other  remarkable  Sufis,
Inayct,  Shall  Lntif,  and  Sachal,  some  of  whose  poems
have  been  translated  into  excellent  English.  This
valuable  l>ook  is  a  very  welcome  addition  to  our
scanty  knowledge  of  a  neglected  corner  of  the
country's  literature  and  philosophy.  It  is  also  a
notable  addition  to  the  literature  of  Sufism.

AmourUm.  By  R.  S.  Taki  (Kamatak  Press,
Thakurdwnrs,  Ik>mla>)  1914.

On  reading  the  manuscript  of  the  above  book  the
author's  friends  were  of  the  opinion  that  it  would  lie
very  useful  to  many  people  who  were  disgusted  with
the  woeful  results  of  the  misunderstanding  between
nations  and  nations,  rulers  and  ruled,  masters  and
servants,  kith  and  kin,  and  such  other  dualities  they
witnessed  every  day  around  them.  They  decided
therefore  to  have  the  book  published,  nor  can  we  lie
sorry  for  their  decision,  for  inspite  of  the  very
unsatisfactory*  title,  the  liook  is  a  notable  one.  It  is
thoughtful  and  thought-provoking.  But  we  should
have  preferred  it  to  lie  more  free  from  the  numerous
Sanskrit  terms  which  arc  apt  to  confuse  the  reader
who  is  ignorant  of  Sanskrit.  This  defect  may  lie
removed  in  a  second  edition.

l-.arly  History  of  Vaishnavlsm  in  South  India.  By

S.  Krishnaswami  Aiynngar  (Oxford  University  Press,
Madras)  1924.

Among  Indian  historians  of  early  India,  Professor
Krishnaswami  Aivangar  deservedly  holds  an  honoured
position.  In  the  volume  before  us  he  has  undertaken
a  task  which  was  first  indicated  by  the  publication,
some  vears  ago,  of  I'aishnavisnt.  Sa Ivi s tti ,  and  .Visor
Religion  by  that  doyen  among  Orientalists— happily
still  w*ith  us — Sir  Ramakrishna  Bhandarkar.  ITof.
Aiyangar's  History  is  a  valuable  contribution  to  the
subject.  He  has  strengthened  his  arguments  by
copious  quotations  from  original  sources,  and  his  con¬
clusions  arc  generally  well-seasoned  and  sound.  It
is  a  short  study  dealing  excellently  with  a  gTcat
subject,  but  the  exposition  of  the  subject  is  thoroughly
sound  and  interesting.

A  Study  in  Hindu  Social  Polity.  By  Chandra
Chakraberty.  (58  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta)  1923.

The  above  book  is  divided  into  seven  chapters —


dealing  with  the  Physical  Geography  of  India;  Ethnic
elements  in  Hindi  nationality;  Hindu  myths;  Hindi
languages;  Hindi  scripts;  Caste  and  Social  Organisa¬
tion.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  helpful  supplement  to
the  late  Mr.  R.  C.  Dutt's  Civilisafion  in  Ancient  India.
Several  new  important  data  have  been  included ;  and
a  very  useful  list  is  appended  to  show  the  close  con¬
nection  between  Sanskrit  and  the  Greek,  Latin,
Teutonic,  Slav  and  Celtic  languages.  We  would
suggest  the  change  of  the  word  "Hindi”  ns  it
definitely  indicates  now  the  North  Indian  Vernacular.
We  hope  too  that  the  get  up  of  the  book  will  he
improved  in  a  subsequent  edition.  The  book  merits
appreciation  as  an  excellent,  popular  study.


The  Hindu  Religious  Year.  By  M.  M.  Underbill

(Association  Press,  5  Russell  Street,  Calcutta).

The  Religious  Life  0/  India  scries  has  received  a
recent  addition  in  the  shape  of  Mr.  Underhill’s
excellent  book  on  the  Hindu  Religious  Year.  There
are,  nt  least,  two.  recent  books  on  Hindu  festivals, —
those  by  Gupte  and  Mukerji — but  Mr.  Underhill's  work
is  better  arranged  than  the  former  and  fuller  than  the
latter.  It  deals  with  Eras  and  other  divisions  of
lime ;  auspicious  and  inauspicious  seasons ;  solar  and
seasonal  festivals;  lunar  and  planetary  festivals;
Vishnu  and  Siva  festivals;  and  festivals  arising  from
animistic  sources.  We  liave  no  doubt  that  all  Hindus
and  those  non-llindns  who  are  interested  in  Hindu
observances  will  welcome  this  publication,  wliich  is
equally  useful  for  study  and  reference.


Vaisnava  Lyrics.  By  J.  A.  Chapman  (Humphrey
Milford,  Oxford  University  Press.  I,ondon)  1923.

The  early  Vaishnnva  Lyrics  of  Mithila  and  Bengal
have  recently  attracted  considerable  attentions,  thanks
mainly  to  the  publications  of  Rabindranath  Tagore  and
A.  K.  Coomaraswamy.  Mr.  Chapman,  the  gifted
Librarian  of  the  Calcutta  Imperial  Library,  has  put
together  in  this  slender  volume  a  number  of  the
exquisite  poems  of  Vidyapati,  Chandidas,  Govindadas
and  others.  The  test  feature  of  the  present  book  is
the  excellent  introduction  which  shows  that  the
writer  has  a  fine  appreciation  of  the  Lyrics,  indeed
he  is  himself  at  places  inclined  to  break  into  lyric.
The  translations  arc  very  free  but  they  fully  bring
out  the  fragrant  clurtn  of  the  originals.  The  printing
and  format  are  all  that  can  lie  desired.  Our  only
grievance  is  that  Mr.  Chapma  1  has  not  given  ns  more


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


109


of  his  bountiful  translations.  Wc  hope  he  will  add
to  them  in  a  second  edition  of  the  book.


The  Wisdom  of  the  Aryans  by  Allan  Bennett  (Ananda
>1)  (Kenan  1’aul,  Trench,  Trubner  &  Co.,  Ltd.,
London,  1923)  2 J.  6 d.

This  little  volume  is  of  interest  chiefly  because  it
is  written  by  an  English  Buddhist  who  spent  14  years
in  a  Buddhist  monastry  and  imbibed  the  divine
teachings  at  the  fountain-source,  so  to  say.  Air.
Bennett  does  not  subscribe  to  the  doctrines  for  which
Buddha  lived  and  died  without  critical  appreciation,
but  he  is  fully  convinced  that  the  salvation  of  the
riddle  of  egotism  in  extremis  as  at  present  confronts
the  West  lies  in  "the  direction  of  that  conquest  of
individualism  which  constitutes  the  central  feature  of
the  Bnddlta's  teaching.”  Perhaps  the  author  is  too
bold  in  claiming  that  Buddhism  alone  is  competent  to
bring  about  the  cure  of  the  present  malaise.  But  he
has  undoubtedly  put  in  a  strong  plea  for  the  recogni¬
tion  of  the  essential  values  in  the  supreme  ethical
code  of  Buddha.  The  seven  lectures  included  in  this
volume  traverse  the  important  principles  of  Buddhistic
teachings  and  their  statement  is  clearly  and  lucidly
put.  Mr.  Bennett  Is  very  interesting  in  his  exposition
•  the  doctrines  of  Nirvana  und  Re-birth.  Very
instructive  and  informative  the  book  is  well  worth  a
perusal.

Buddhism  in  the  Modern  World  by  K  J.  Saunders
(Society  for  Promoting  Christian  Knowledge,  London,
1923)  2*-

Mr.  Saunders'  book  is  different  in  conception  and
design  to  the  volume  noticed  immediately  above.
The  Christian  Missionary  in  the  zeal  of  his  crusade
omits  to  estimate  the  forces  which  bind  the  unchristian
to  forms  of  belief  which  appear,  in  his  opinion,  devoid
of  cognate  reasoning.  Mr.  Saunders  is  an  enthusiastic
Christian  hut  he  is  large-hearted.  He  believes  that
the  triumph  of  Christian  principles  can  be  secured
only  through  understanding  the  other  man's  point  of
view.  He  spent  over  ten  years  in  the  Buddhistic
world  and  has  collected  his  impressions  in  this  little
fiook.  He  saw  the  pagodas  and  the  monks,  a
Buddhist  festival  or  a  funeral — and  the  theme  pro¬
vided  him  to  construct  the  moral  influences  which
consciously  or  unconsciously  moulded  the  conduct.
The  result  is  a  lively  sketch-book,  and  if  the  exposi¬
tion  of  modern  Buddhism  is  not  quite  complete  or
correct  or  even  on  few  occasions  not  just,  it  is  full  of
interesting  reading.


INDIAN  HISTORICAL  BIOGRAPHIES.

THREE  LIVES  OF  SHIVAJI

1.  The  Life  of  Sbivaji  Maharaj.  By  N.  S.  Taka-

khav.  (Manoranjan  Press,  Bombay!.

2.  Siva  Chhatrapati.  By  Surendranath  Sen

(Calcutta  University  Press).

3.  Sivaji.  By  S.  V.  Kaddi  (Vadhavhar's  Hanglow,
Tirana).

“Kafir  jahannum  ba  raft"  was,  it  is  said,  the  excla¬
mation  of  An  rang/el)  when  the  news  w  as  communicated
to  him  that  the  ‘little  mountain  rat'  that  had  for  so
many  years  plagued  him  was  at  last  dead.  He  had
borne,  it  seemed,  a  charmed  life.  Accidents,  that
would  have  been  fatal,  left  him  unscathed;  disaster
and  misfortune  only  made  him  more  resolute  and
determined.  The  Mughal  Emperor  might  have  had  in
him  a  powerful  ally;  but  in  his  unwisdom  he  preferred
to  let  him  remain  a  dangerous  foe,  who  gave  him  no
rest  and  allowed  him  no  peace  while  he  lived.  A  long-
suffering  community,  groaning  under  the  yoke  of  a
foreign  tyranny,  hailed  him  as  the  saviour  of  Hindu
India,  and  for  a  while  it  appeared  as  though  the  dream
of  a  Hindu  Empire  was  at  last  to  be  realised.  Ifut,
as  so  frequently  happens,  Sbivaji  had  weak,  nerveless
successors,  bent  more  on  the  pleasures  of  the  senses
than  on  the  duties  of  administration,  and  the  dynasty
that  promised  so  fair  withered  and  remains  now  but
a  name.  But  the  memory  of  Shivaji  and  his  deeds  of
glory  serves  still  as  an  inspiration,  and  it  is  in  the
fitness  of  things  that  the  modern  Indian  Renaissance
should  witness  a  revival  in  his  honour,  and  we  have
now  before  us  three  biographies  of  him,  which
resemble  each  other  only  distantly.

Mr.  Takakhav’s  Shivaji  Maharaj  is  an  adaptation
from  the  original  Marathi  work  of  Mr.  K.  A.  Kcluskar.
It  is  a  striking  tribute  to  the  greatness  of  Shivaji’s
life  and  work ;  it  differs  in  certain  important  respects
from  the  conclusions  of  Professor  Jadunath  Sarkar’s
Shivaji  and  his  Times.  It  gives,  for  the  first  time,  in
English  a  complete  account  of  the  career  of  Shivaji;
it  clears  Shivaji  from  the  charge  of  murdering  Afzul
Khan;  it  examines  the  relations  between  Shivaji  and
Swami  Ramdas ;  and  it  gives  a  new  explanation  of
Shivaji’s  so-called  plundering  expeditions.  These
features  of  the  biography  indicate  how  full  of  interest
it  is,  and  what  laltorious  research  must  have  been
necessary  for  its  preparation.  A  measure  of  partiality
for  his  hero  may  surely  be  excused  in  a  Maratha
writer ,  but  on  the  whole  his  work  is  very  fair-minded
anil  just.  It  will  be,  for  the  present,  the  standard
biography  of  Shivaji,  in  spile  of  its  limitations.

Mr.  Surendranath  Sen’s  Shiva  Chhatrapati  is  a


no


THF.  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


translation  of  .Sub/iujaJ  liakliar,  with  extracts  from
Cliilnis  and  Sivadigvijaya.  It  is  the  first  of  a  series
intended  for  such  students  of  Maratha  history  as  arc
ignorant  of  Marathi.  Of  the  importance  of  the  ltakhar
chronicles  for  a  study  of  the  rise  and  growth  of
Mahratta  power  there  can  lie  no  donbt ;  their
historical  accuracy  is  not  always  unimpeachable.  But
all  interested  in  this  subject  will  feel  deeply  grateful
to  Mr.  Sen  and  the  Calcutta  University  for  making
their  study  possible  and  easy.

Shivajl  by  Mr.  Raddi  is  an  attempt  “to  write  the
life  of  the  national  hero  of  Maharashtra  as  to  show  to
the  world  that  he  was  the  real  maker  of  Maharashtra. ’*
The  author  bases  his  work  mainly  on  the  Bakhar  of
Sobhasad  Krishna)!  Anant,  written  in  i6$j,  but  he
acknowledges  his  indebtedness  also  to  the  works  of
Kincaid  and  Sarkar.  It  is  a  useful  publication,  well
deserving  every  encouragement.  But  it  can  not  be
treated  in  the  same  category  as  the  works  of  Mr.
Takakhav  or  Professor  Sarkar.


The  Life  and  Teaching  of  Tukaram.  By  the  late
J,  Nelson  Fraser,  and  the  Rev.  J.  F.  Edwards
(Christian  Literature  Society  for  India,  Madras).

In  the  well-weighed  words  of  the  late- lamented  Sir
Narsvan  Chandavarkar's  foreword,  the  present  book
is  a  valuable  addition  to  the  Knglish  literature  on
Tukaram,  inasmuch  as  it  goes  exhaustively  into  the
life  and  teachings  of  the  saint  and  analyses  with  care
the  different  stages  of  his  religious  faith  and  the  spell
be  has  held  over  the  mind  and  heart  of  Maharashtra.
It  is  a  valuable  book,  parked  with  information  and
teeming  with  points  of  great  interest.  Not  only  arc
Tukaram ’a  /I  bhang!  translated  and  analysed  but  their
interpretations  are  carefully  discussed.  A  full  account
of  his  life  is  given,  and  the  many  illustrations  add  to
the  usefulness  of  a  very  useful  volume,  which  deserves
wide  circulation.


Sankaracharv  a  the  Great  and  his  Successors  In
Kanchi.  Bv  N.  Venkatnraman  (Gancsh  &  Co.,  Madras)
«9»3-

The  recent  advent  of  priests  into  Indian  politics  and
the  incidents  at  Tarakeshwara  arc  bound  to  revive  an
interest  in  the  Mahants  and  Swatnis.  The  present
book  by  Mr.  Venkataraman  is  therefore  doubly
interesting ;  interesting  in  itself,  and  interesting
because  of  contemporary  events.  The  first  Shankar. i-
chary  a  was  not  merely  a  priest  :  his  services  to  the


cause  of  Hinduism,  both  religion  and  philosophy,  were
incalculable.  He  not  only  put  a  stop  to  the  proselytising
activities  of  Buddhism,  but  actually  succeeded  in
exterminating  it  from  the  land  of  its  birth.  Sankara
and  Ramanuja  are  the  twin  stars  of  Hindu  orthodoxy.
Mr.  Venkataraman  has  done  well  to  give  us  an  account
in  Knglish  not  only  of  the  great  Sankara,  but  of  his
successors  in  Kanchi  also.  It  is  a  book  which  should
be  carefully  studied  by  all  interested  in  Hinduism,
and  in  current  religious  problems  of  India.


Sri  Harslia  ol  Kanauj.  By  K.  M.  Panikkar  (D  B.

Taraporevala  Sons  &  Co.,  Hornby  Road,  Bombay).

Prof.  Panikkar  is  among  the  more  promising
scholars  of  the  younger  generation.  He  is  a  thought¬
ful  writer,  and  brings  much  study  to  bear  upon  the
subject  which  he  discusses.  In  the  present  volume  he
has  studied  the  history  of  India  in  the  first  half  of  the
7th  century  A.  D.  with  special  reference  to  the  life
and  work  of  Sri  Ilarsha  of  Kanauj.  He  has  divided  his
monograph  into  six  parts  dealing  with  the  Political
condition  of  India  in  the  6th  century;  the  Political
History  of  the  Reign  of  Harsha;  Ilarsha  the  King;
the  Social  condition  of  India  in  Harsha ’s  time;  and
Harsha  the  Poet.  There  is  evidence  throughout  of
considerable  research  and  historic  sense.  It  is  a
valuable  little  book  which  fills  a  wide  gap  in  Indian
historical  literature,  and  it  deserves  appreciation  for
the  scholarship  and  research  of  its  author.


Sher  Sliah.  By  Kalikaranjan  Qanungo  (Kar,
Majumdar  &  Co.,  t  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta).

Mr.  Qanungo  is  a  lecturer  in  History  at  the
Lucknow  University.  He  is  one  of  those  Indian
historians  who  have  gathered  inspiration  from  the
remarkable  works  of  Prof.  Jadunath  Sarkar.  Following
in  his  footsteps,  he  has  produced  a  critical  study  of
the  life  and  reign  of  Sher  Shah,  who  hail  almost
succeeded  in  wresting  the  Indian  Empire  entirely  from
the  hands  of  the  Mughals.  His  reign  has  been
neglected  because  of  the  contrast  with  that  of  Aktar
w1k>  followed  hint.  But  in  statecraft  ami  science  of
Kingship,  Slier  Shah’s  achievements  were  brilliant.
It  is  in  the  fitness  of  things,  therefore,  that  Mr.
Qanungo  should  have  attempted  the  history  of  his
reign.  He  has  eminently  succeeded  in  reconstructing
his  life-story  on  a  fresh,  original  and  exhaustive
basU,  and  for  a  long  time  to  tome  his  work  must
remain  our  authority  on  the  subject.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


1 1 1


•Maludji  Stadia.  By  M.  W.  Burway  (Published  by
the  Author,  Special  Branch,  Porcign  Office,  Indore).

Devi  Aliilyabai  Holkar.  By  M.  W.  Burway.

Mr.  Burway  is  an  earnest,  unostentatious  worker
in  the  cause  of  Indian  history.  We  have  in  earlier
issues  of  the  Hindustan  Review  referred  in  terms  of
appreciation  to  his  Marathas  and  Moghuls,  and  Life
of  Raja  Sir  Dlnkar  Rao.  He  has  now  followed  these
up  with  the  biographies  of  Mahadaji  Sindia  and
Ahilyabai,  the  greatest  of  the  Sindias  and  Holkars
respectively.  As  a  general  and  statesman  Mahadji
can  challenge  comparison  with  the  greatest  of  the
Western  heroes,  while  Ahilyabai  belongs  to  the  small
band  of  heroines  whose  examples  redeem  Hindu
womanhood  from  decay  and  serve  as  a  beacon.  Both
the  biographies  are  well-written  and  will  amply  repay
perusal.  We  wish  Mr.  Burway  all  success  in  his
patriotic  labours,  which  deserve  appreciation  and
recognition.

Hannnira.  By  liar  Bilas  Sarda  (Scottish  Mission
Industries  Co.,  I,td.,  Ajmer).

Mr.  Har  Bilas  Sorda’s  name  must  be  familiar  to
our  readers,  as  we  have  in  the  past  noticed  in  our
pages  several  of  his  important  publications.  In  the
present  monograph  he  has  written  the  life  of  the  last
g£eal  Chanlian  ruler.  It  is  an  inspiring  life  which
Mr.  Sarda  describes.  The  nobility,  the  faithfulness  to
his  plighted  word,  the  bravery  of  Ilammira  "have  been
often  sung  in  Sanskrit  and  Hindi  verse;  his  is  really
a  household  name.  Mr.  Sarda  has  done  well  to
familiarise  the  English-knowing  public  with  the
shining  achievements  and  noble  character  of  this
mediaeval  Rajput  monarch.


Schwartz  ol  Tanjore.  By  Jes-^e  Page  (Society  for
Promoting  Christian  Knowledge,  London).

The  above  is  a  volume  of  the  Ecclesiastic
Biographies  Scries.  The  author  says :  "The  pages
of  history  praise  the  great  achievements  of  Clive,
Warren  Hastings,  and  Cornwallis  as  the  fathers  of  our
Indian  rule,  but  surely  Schwartz  is  also  entitled  to  a
niche  of  honour  as  one  who  laid  the  foundation  of  that
reign  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  which  thousands  of
faithful  missionaries  are  promoting  throughout  the
Indian  Empire  to-day.”  The  book  is  illustrated  and
well  got-up,  and  it  will  prove  interesting  to  alt  who
care  to  know  how  the  early  Christian  Missionaries
worked  in  this  counrty.  Incidentally,  Indian  life  as
it  was  then  is  also  described,  and  the  contrast  between
that  sketched  out  in  the  book  and  that  witnessed  to¬
day  is  remarkably  brought  into  relief.


ESSAYS.

Last  Essays.  By  (the  late)  Maurice  Hewlett
(William  Heiueinann  Ltd.,  London)  1924.

A  melancholy  interest  attaches  to  the  almve
volume,  as  it  has  Itcen  published  since  the  premature
death  of  Mr.  Hewlett.  It  is  not  necessary  here  to  say
anything  of  the  high  standard  of  his  essays;  among
contemporary  writers  his  place  is  high;  whether  the
whirlgig  of  time  will  preserve  that  place  for  him  is  a
question  to  which  for  obvious  reasons  no  answer  can
be  given  yet.  But  there  Is  so  much  of  freshness  both
in  Mr.  Hewlett’s  style,  and  in  his  treatment  of  his
themes  that  it  will  be  long  before  his  essays  arc
forgotten.  The  variety  of  his  interests  will  be
apparent  at  a  glance  over  some  of  the  titles  of  his
essays  selected  at  random— The  Solitary  Reaper,  The
Curtains,  Suicide  of  the  Novel,  The  Iberian’s  House,
Mcrrie  England,  Couleur  dc  Rose,  Mr.  Pepys  his
Apple-Cart,  One  of  Mr.  Lamb's  Creditors.  It  may
truthfully  be  said  that  whatever  his  theme  Mr.
Hewlett  wrote  with  great  skill  and  charm.  There  is
humour  too,  plenty  of  it;  but  not  of  the  forced,
boisterous  variety  with  which  we  are  daily  iunundated.
The  last  essay  concludes  with  these  sentences
perhaps  the  last  written  by  the  author,  noble  in  their
simplicity  and  recalling  the  restraint  of  the  Greeks :
‘‘How  often  has  the  good  soul  whose  end  I  am
awaiting  now  stood  at  her  cottage  door  to  mark  the
lingering  of  the  light  ?  May  her  passing  lie  as  gentle
as  this  day’s  has  been  I”  Noble  words,  nobly  written
are  they.


Essays.  Ily  W.  It.  Yeats  (Macmillan  and  Co.,  Ltd.,
St.  Martin’s  Street,  London)  1924.

When  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Literature  was  awarded
last  year  to  \\  illiam  Butler  Yeats,  many  people  asked
what  he  had  written,  and  it  is  true  that  he  is  not  in
any  sense  a  popular  poet,  as  Kipling  or  Masefield
or  1  hotnas  Hardy  or  even  .V.  or  some  others  arc.  But
to  the  real  lover  of  English  poetry,  Mr.  Yeats’  name
has  long  l*en  known  and  his  poems  have  lingered  in
the  memory  for  many  a  day.  In  his  Dedication  of  this
volume  of  essays  he  says  to  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson:  —
"My  friends  and  I  loved  symbol*,  popular  belief*  and
old  scraps  of  verse  that  made  Ireland  romantic  to
herself."  The  same  remarks  apply  to  his  essays  which
w  ill  not  win  popularity.  Nor  need  that  be  regretted ;
it  is  at  best  but  a  doubtful  gain.  This  collection
brings  Mr.  Yeats'  essays  down  to  1917  and  contains
also  those  already  published  in  book  form  under  the
titles  I  he  Culling  of  an  Agate  and  Per  Arnica  Sllentia
Lunae.  All  the  pieces  bear  the  impress  of  original


113


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


thinking;  they  arc  not  like  gramophone  records;  they
are  “the  Master's  Voice"  itself.  Here  is  a  passage
from  the  essay  on  “Art  and  Ideas":  “We  are
becoming  interested  in  expression  in  its  first  phase  of
energy,  when  all  the  arts  play  like  children  about  the
one  chimney  and  turbulent  innocence  can  vet  amuse
those  brisk  and  active  men  who  have  paid  us  so
little  attention  of  recent  years.  Shall  we  be  rid  of
the  pride  of  intellect,  of  sedentary  meditation,  of
emotion  that  leaves  us  when  the  book  is  closed  or  the
picture  seen  no  more ;  and  live  amid  the  thoughts  that
can  go  with  us  by  steam-boat  and  railway  as  once
upon  horse-back  or  camel-back,  rediscovering,  by  our
re-integration  of  the  mind,  our  more  profound  Pre-
Raphnelitism,  the  old  abounding,  nonchalant  reverie  ?’*
The  book  is  full  of  stirring,  powerful  pieces  such  as
this,  and  to  all  that  look  to  literature  for  more  than
ephemeral  excitement  or  momentary  delight,  the
Essays  are  bound  to  make  a  strong  appeal.  Yeats  is
not  yet  widely-read  in  India.  His  Essays  should  help
to  make  bus  mote  known.

Some  Modern  Authors.  By  S.  P.  B.  Mais  (Grant
Richards  Ltd.,  St-  Martin's  Street,  London)  1923.

Yet  another  collection  of  studies  of  modern  authors.
Mr.  Mais  is  a  prolific  writer,  and  he  pays  the  inevit¬
able  price  of  prolific  writing— unequalness.  That  he
is  capable  of  high-class  literary  effort  must  be  quite
clear  to  all  who  have  read  his  English  Coarse  for
Everybody  and  Oh !  to  be  in  England;  but  he  is  not
unfrcqucntlv  slipshod  and  careless.  In  the  present
volume  we  have  a  collection  of  his  critical  reviews
of  the  works  of  more  than  forty  authors,  including
such  distinguished  names  as  Galsworthy,  Hugh
Walpole,  Lytton  Strnchey,  Walter  Raleigh,  Kdmund
Gosse,  Thomas  Hardy,  Barrie,  and  such  comparatively
insignificant  ones  as  Machcn,  Maugham,  MeFee,
O’Neill,  Bramah.  But  Mr.  Mats  possesses  the  gift  of
making  all  his  subjects  interesting,  and  we  have  found
hardly  one  dull  page  in  the  whole  book.  He  is
generally  content  to  let  his  author  speak  for  himself
— which  is  perhaps  after  all  the  most  satisfactory
form  of  interpretation.  For  acquaintance  with  the
leading  contemporary  writers  eve  know  of  no  book  to
lie  placed  on  the  same  level  with  Some  .Modem
Authors.

Essays  in  European  and  Oriental  Literature.  By

Lafeadio  Hearn  (William  Ilcincmann,  Ltd.,  London)
«9».V

The  West  prides  itself  on  its  intellectual  balance

and  reserve;  but  ever  and  anon,  we  find  new  idols


springing  up,  and  shining  awhile,  and  disappearing
like  the  spangles  of  a  rocket.  Cults  alioimd.  It  is
to-day  Francis  Thompson ;  then  Stephen  l'hillips ,
Rupert  Brooke  and  Flecker;  now'  it  is  Lafeadio  Hearn.
This  is  hero-worship  with  a  vengeance.  The  0  of
Giatto  might  have  been  perfect ;  not  everybody  is  a
Giatto.  .  We  have  before  us  the  Essays  fn  European
and  Oriental  Literature  believed  to  have  been  wTitten
by  Lacadio  Hearn  while  on  the  staff  of  an  American
newspaper.  The  Times-Democrat,  during  1882-18S7.
All  that  we  can  say  is  that  they  are  not  remarkable
in  any  way  and  hardly  distinguishable  from  shoals  of
literary  articles  in  other  newspapers.  liven  assuming
that  they  were  all  written  by  Hearn— and  this  is  not
quite  certain— it  is  no  kindness  to  his  memory  to
hunt  up  articles  written  against  time,  anonymously,
and  not  intended  for  publication  in  this  form.  M  e
arc  not  blind  to  the  merits  of  Hearn ;  we  consider  his
Interpretations  of  Literature  to  be  a  great  book.  But
we  certainly  deprecate  the  tendency  to  laud  to  the
seventh  heaven  every  scrap  or  fragment  which  he
wrote  for  the  press.  Most  of  the  essays  in
the  present  book  arc  slight  and  comnion-
place.  There  is  no  sparkling  wit,  no  striking  fresh¬
ness  of  outlook,  except  when  Hearn  treats  of  Japanese
literature,  and  there  he  is  at  his  best,  as  in  this
pas-age  on  Japanese  Poetry  :  “Aud  the  desire  of
the  Japanese  bride  for  a  last  look  at  her  husbatyj’s
face,  that  she  might  carry  a  p.-rfcct  memory  of  him
into  the  world  of  shadows,  is  surely  beautiful  as  the
old  Greek  Iipitaph  in  which  the  Ireloved  dead  is
her  ought  not  to  quaff  the  waters  of  Lethe,  lest  she
forget  her  love.  These  little  Japanese  verses  are  like
new  thoughts  spoken  aloud  at  long  intervals,  breaking
a  happy  and  dreamful  silence  between  friends—
Uttcrances  unfinished  yet  perfect— words  which  unlock
secret  chambers  of  feeling,— tendernesses  half  evolved,
only  that  they  may  be  in  turn  dreamfully  fondled  to
fullest  development  by  the  fancy  which  they  caressing¬
ly  create."  We  wish  we  had  more  passages  like  this,
but  alas,  they  arc  all  too  few,  and  the  general
impression  of  the  Iwok  is  one  of  disappointment.

Aspects  ol  Literature.  By  J.  Middleton  Murry
(W.  CoUins  &  Co..  Ltd.,  48  Pall  Mall,  London  S.  W.)

1923-

“Compulsion,"  wrote  Mr.  Middleton  Murrv  in  an
earlier  work,  “has  produced  far  more  good  literar>
work  than  the  unembarrassed  pursuit  of  an  artistic
ideal  has  ever  done.”  If  compulsion  be  the  inevitable
cause  of  good  literature,  and  if  ‘chill  penury’  docs
not  indeed  freeie  'noble  rage’;  we  may  be  thankful
for  compulsion.  To  say  that  Aspects  Of  Li(crJfM,‘


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


113


contains  some  excellent  essays  is  only  to  assert  that
Mr.  Murry’s  hand  has  not  lost  its  canning  and  that
the  early  promise  is  being  fulfilled.  The  pieces  on
1  he  I  unction  of  Criticism,'*  “The  Present  condition
of  English  Poetry,"  and  “Poetry  and  Criticism”  show
what  a  clear  grasp  the  author  has  of  the  principles  of
literary  criticism;  while  in  the  essays  entitled  “The
Religion  of  Rousseau,”  “The  Poetry  of  Thomas
Hardy,  “Samuel  Butler,”  we  find  a  new  theory  of
criticism  formulated,  and  a  new  standard  of  values
suggested.  The  book  provokes  thought  and  is  indeed
a  challenge  which  may  be  expressed  in  the  author’s
own  words  :  “The  function  of  true  criticism  is  to
establish  a  definite  hierarchy  among  the  great  artists
of  the  past,  as  well  as  to  test  the  production  of  the
present ;  by  the  combination  of  these  activities  it
asserts  the  organic  unity  of  all  art.  It  cannot  honestly
he  said  that  our  present  criticism  is  adequate  to  either
task.”  Of  Mr.  Murry’s  own  position  in  the  “definite
heirarchy”  of  critics  we  arc  in  no  doubt  :  it  is  a  high
one  amongst  contemporary  critics.  His  I  wok  deserves
attention  as  a  thoughtful  contribution  to  modern
criticism.


Literary  Portraits.  By  Charles  Whiblcy  (Macmillan
&  Co.,  Ltd.,  London)  1913.

Political  Portraits.  By  Charles  Whiblcy  (Macmillan
&  Co.,  Ltd.,  London)  1913.

The  volume  entitled  Literary  Portraits  appeared
first  in  I9<xj  and  has  now  been  reprinted  with  some
changes.  The  subjects  dealt  with  arc  of  varied
interest,  including  as  they  do  Rabelais,  Montaigne,  the
Library  of  an  Old  Scholar,  Robert  Burton,  Casanova.
These  arc  all  subjects  at  the  very  mention  of  which
students  of  literature  will  smack  their  lips  in  anticipa¬
tion  of  delicious  fare,  and  they  will  not  be  dis¬
appointed,  for  Mr.  Whiblcy  wields  an  exceedingly
facile  pen,  and  he  possesses  also  the  supreme  skill  of
going  straight  to  the  root  of  the  subject.

In  the  Political  Portraits,  the  figure  of  Disraeli
h  suits  large,  occupying  no  fewer  than  120  pages  of
the  book.  Here  Mr.  Whiblcy  has  "let  himself  go,”
and  his  partisanship  has  at  places  got  the  better  of
his  judgment.  He  has  not  one  grudging  good  word
to  pnt  in  for  Gladstone.  But  it  tnnst  be  admitted  that
there  is  a  subtle  charm  in  his  style,  which  Is  vivid
and  picturesque  and  lucid.  Bolingbrokc,  Castlcreagh.
Rousseau,  Napoleon  are  the  subjects  of  some  of  the
other  sketches.  Mr.  Whibley  has  presented  to  the
reader  a  fine  gallery  of  political  portraits,  in  which
the  faces  arc  not  always  attractive,  the  expression  on
a  few  of  them  being  actually  repelling,  but  in  all  of
which  there  is  strength  and  brilliance  and  fixity  of
IS


purpose.  On  the  whole,  his  gallery  of  political
portraits  is  attractive.

Literature  in  a  Changing  Age.  By  Professor

Ashley  H.  Thorndike  (The  Macmillan  Company,  New
York)  1923.

Professor  Thorndike’s  name  ought  to  be  familiar  to
all  students  of  English  Literature  as  the  Editor  of  the
excellent  “Tudor  Shakespeare”  and  the  author  of
“Shakespeare’s  Theatre."  In  the  present  volume  his
theme  is  that  literature  is  a  form  of  human  activity
that  is  continuous  but  ever  changing,  and  he  proceeds
to  consider  how*  it  has  been  changed  by  the  vast
developments  of  industry,  democracy  and  science,
what  lias  been  the  effect  of  the  increase  in  the  reading
public  and  in  the  production  of  reading  matter,  and
what  the  purposes  and  functions  of  literature  are  in
the  modern  civilisation.  It  is  a  book  to  set  one
thinking  and  we  welcome  it  as  an  endeavour  to
seriously  discuss  a  question  of  great  interest.

Suggestions.  By  E.  E.  Kellctt  (Cambridge  Uni¬
versity  Press,  1923)  7S.  6d.

A  volume  of  literary  essays  of  high  merit  and  skil¬
ful  craftsmanship.  Suggestions  derives  its  critical
inspiration  from  classical  readings.  Mr.  Kellctt  has
devoted  his  labours  to  immortal  figures  like  Shakes¬
peare  and  Shelley.  Exactly  half  the  number  of  essays
contained  in  this  book  is  devoted  to  Shakespearean
criticism.  On  this  time-worn  and  venerable  topic
Mr.  Kellct  has  brought  to  bear  a  forceful  and  active
mind  with  the  result  that  his  study  is  refreshing  in
outlook  and  alxtunding  in  instructive  analyses.  The
first  essay  on  Shakespeare’s  Amazons  is  a  delightful
piece  of  work.  Two  essays  are  devoted  to  Shelley  as
an  imaginative  poet  of  rare  gifts  and  as  an  exponent
of  a  profound  philosophy  of  Love.  Macaulay,  Dryden
and  Chaucer  occnpy  Mr.  Kcllctt’a  attention  for  a  little
while  and  he  rounds  off  his  little  dook  with  a  neat
epilogue  on  the  art  of  the  literary  detective,  the
art  of  locating  the  source  of  inspiration  of  a  writer.
No  genius  is  sacrosanct  to  Mr.  Kcllett,  and  Milton
comes  in  for  a  good  of  illustrative  work.  We  may
adapt  the  method  of  the  last  chapter  in  Suggestions
to  Mr.  Keltett’s  own  work  and  vet  conclude  that  he
has  written  a  well-informed  and  skilfnl  critique,  alike
able  and  instructive.

Yea  and  Nay  (Brentano’s  Limited,  London,  1923)

6s.

Last  year  an  admirable  series  of  lectures  and
counter-lectures  was  arranged  to  be  delivered  at  the


U4


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


London  SvIkxjI  of  Economics  in  aid  of  the  Hospitals.
Many  prominent  literary  men  lent  their  name  and
voice  to  the  programme.  Messrs.  Brentano's  are  to  l>e
congratulated  for  having  collected  the  lecture-notes
and  presented  in  Yea  and  Say  a  symposium  which  for
brightness,  wit  and  skilful  repartee  will  attract  the
attention  of  literary  people.  We  find  here  Mr.  11.  G.
Wells  discoursing  on  the  ideal  method  of  the  teaching
of  history;  the  whimsical  Miss  Sitwell,  authoritative
and  doctrinaire,  ventilating  her  notions  on  modern
poetry;  Mr.  Cochran  justifies  the  commercial  theatre
and  the  handsome  Miss  Rebecca  West  backs  her  wits
against  the  graceful  apologia  of  Miss  Sheila  Kaye
Smith — a  spectacle  only  to  be  compared  with  G.  K.  C.
roaring  at  the  evils  of  modern  journalism  and  the  mild
Mr.  McCurdy  attempting  to  soothe  the  shaken  nerves.
A  delightful  l>ook  is  Yea  and  Say.  a  pleasant  reading
and  full  of  suggestive  criticism.

Windfalls.  By  Alpha  of  the  Plough  (J.  M.  Dent  &
Sons,  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  2s.

To  their  admirable  “Wayfarers  Library”  of  useful
volumes  on  light  literature  Messrs.  J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons
have  added  the  collection  of  sketches  by  this  well-
known  essayist  of  the  Dal ly  Mall.  These  originally
appeared  in  book  form  in  1920  and  delighted  numerous
admirers  of  Alpha’s  literary  skill.  The  neat  little
essays  range  over  numerous  topics  and  arc  written  with
consummate  art  and  delightful  lucidity.  Alpha’s
work  always  provides  a  pleasant  reading  and  his  con¬
tributions  to  the  daily  press  deserved  a  permanent
form.  The  present  collection  will  while  away  cheer¬
fully  many  an  idle  hour.


MODERN  EUROPEAN  AND  AMERICAN  HISTORY

A  Short  History  ol  the  British  Commonwealth.  By

Ramsay  Muir,  Vol.  II  (George  Philip  &  Son,  Ltd.,
London)  1923.

We  noticed  last  year  in  terms  of  appreciation
Professor  Ramsay  Muir's  first  volume  of  A  Short
History  of  the  British  Commonwealth.  We  welcome
now  the  second  and  concluding  volume.  It  was  an
ambitious  task  which  Professor  Ramsay  Muir  set  out
to  perform,  and  it  will  be  generally  conceded  that
the  undertaking  has  been  a  successful  one.  He  is
the  first  to  write  the  history  of  the  British  Common¬
wealth  on  a  comprehensive  scale;  the  task  demanded
that  the  writer  should  see  things  steadily  and  sec
them  whole;  a  gift  of  brood  generalisation,  a  co¬
ordinating  mind,  a  sense  of  discrimination,  large


powers  of  interpretation  and  suggestion  were  called
for,  and  by  a  combination  of  all  these,  the  talented
author  lias  produced  what  may  well  be  called  an
authoritative  and  reliable  work.  That  the  under¬
taking  was  no  light  one  will  be  seen  from  the  list
of  the  six  main  heads  into  which  the  present  volume
is  divided  :  The  Disruption  of  the  Commonwealth  and
the  Birth  of  New  Forces  and  Ideas  (1760-1793) ;
Revolution  and  war :  the  growth  of  the  Second
Empire  (1789-1815) ;  National  and  Imperial  Recons¬
truction  and  the  Triumph  of  Industrialism  (1815-1852) ;
The  Era  of  British  complacency  and  the  Adolescence
of  the  Daughter  Nations  (1852-1880) ;  The  Age  of
Imperialism  and  the  Rivalry  of  World-Powers  (1880-
19105) ;  An  Epilogue :  the  Ordeal  of  the  Common¬
wealth  (1905-1919).  This  volume  consists  of  more
than  Soo  pages,  and  the  narrative  is  always  illumina¬
ting,  always  sustained ;  old,  well-known  events
revive ;  incidents  are  presented  in  fresh  lights,  and
the  whole  book  is  of  enthralling  interest.  There  arc
a  few  minor  details  where  it  is  possible  to  differ
from  the  view  expressed  by  the  author;  to  mention
one  small  inaccuracy — ‘honest  John’  became
Viscount  Morlev,  but  not  “Sir  John  Morlcv,”  as  the
index  refers  to  him.  But  this  and  other  similar
minor  inaccuracies  do  not  matter  much ;  in  a  first
edition  they  are  perhaps  inevitable.  We  arc  con¬
fident  that  the  specialist  as  well  as  the  general  reader
will  read  the  book,  and  profit  by  it,  and  enjoy  it,  for
it  is  both  interesting  and  instructive.

Spain  Since  ISIS.  By  Marques  Dc  Lcma

(Cambridge  University  Press)  1923.

His  excellency  the  Spanish  Minister  for  Foreign
Affairs  delivered  a  lecture  on  Spain  at  Cambridge  in
1921.  This  is  the  full  text  of  that  lecture.  Within
about  seventy  pages  the  lecturer  was  able  to  compress
the  most  salient  features  of  modern  Spanish  history.
It  is  a  subject  on  which  much  has  not  been  written  in
English.  The  present  volume  will  serve  as  a  useful
and  helpful  resume  of  the  modern  history  of  Spain.

An  Outline  ol  Modern  History  By  Edward  Mead

Earle.  (The  Macmillan  Company,  New  York,  U.S.A.)

1913-

This  little  book  compiled  by  Mr.  Earle,  who  is  a
lecturer  in  History  at  the  Columbia  University,  is
intended  to  be  a  companion  to  Prof.  J.  H.  Hayes’
Political  and  Social  History  of  Modern  Europe.  It  is
a  syllabus  which  attempts  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  the
study  of  modern  history,  and  to  furnish  to  teachers  a
useful  plan  for  collegiate  courses  in  history,  without


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


115


infringing  upon  the  individual's  ideas  o f  the  relative
importance  of  different  parts  of  the  work.  We  have
no  doubt  that  the  book  will  serve  the  purpose  tor
which  it  has  been  written.  It  will  be  found  bv
students  equally  useful  for  study  and  reference.

A  Survey  of  Modern  History.  By  H.  W.  Hodges
(Blackie  &  Son  Limited,  50  Old  Bailey,  Loudon)  1923.

Mr.  Hodges  has  written  a  helpful  text-book  which
will  be  welcomed  by  nil  students  of  Modem  History.
He  is  quite  right  in  saying  that  "modern  history  has
of  late  been  made  much  faster  than  it  can  be  written,"
and  that  simplification  and  condensation  arc  for  that
reason  difficult.  But  the  author  has  succeeded  in
producing  an  accurate  and  trustworthy  manual  which
will  be  warmly  welcomed  by  all  students.  An
excellent  feature  of  the  book  is  a  number  of  coloured
maps  showing  the  political  condition  of  the  countries
from  time  to  time.

Modern  and  Contemporary  European  Civilisation

By  II.  G.  I'lum,  G.  G.  Benjamin,  and  B.  L.  Pierce.
(J.  B.  Lippincott  Company,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.)  1923.

The  authors  of  this  book  deserve  the  grateful
thanks  of  all  students  of  history  for  having  produced
a  volume  of  surpassing  interest,  written  on  entirely
fresh  and  new  lines.  It  is  designed  to  meet  the  need
of  an  outline  of  the  nineteenth  century  history  that
should  bear  a  direct  relation  to  the  great  war  and  its
outcome.  The  authors  take  a  synthetic  view  of  history
and  have  attempted  so  to  arrange  the  materials  of
their  book  that  students  have  no  difficulty  in

recognising  the  factors  and  motives  of  the  great

struggle  going  back  all  the  way  through  the

nineteenth  century.  The  seven  parts  into  which  the
book  is  divided  deal  with  The  Treaty  of  Versailles;
The  Failure  of  European  Diplomacy ;  The  Near
Kastern  Question ;  Nationality  and  Democracy ;
Commerce  and  the  World-War ;  The  State  and
Industrial  Democracy;  The  United  States  and  the
War.  The  utility  of  the  book  has  been  further

enhanced  by  nine  maps  and  twenty-two  illustrations,
and  fairly  comprehensive  bibliographies  at  the  end
of  each  chapter.  It  is  an  excellent  conspectus  of
western  civilization  as  affected  by  the  great  war.

Europe  and  Beyond.  By  J.  A.  R.  Marriott,  M.P.
(Methuen  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  Essex  Street,  London)  1923.

Mr.  Marriott  needs  no  introduction  to  students  of
history  and  politics.  His  Remaking  of  Modern  Europe
and  English  Political  Institutions  arc  recognised


authorities,  and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  have  another  book
by  him.  The  present  volume  is  a  continuation  11870-
1920)  of  his  earlier  work  which  came  down  to  1871.
Mr.  Marriott  insists  that  the  last  half-century  has
not  vet  fallen  into  perspective,  and  that  the  time  for
writing  its  history  has  not,  therefore,  yet  arrived.
But  there  is  evident,  all  through  the  present  survey,
a  desire  to  be  fair,  to  hold  the  scales  even,  not  to  let
prejudice  triumph,  and  the  result  is  a  volume  of
supreme  interest,  and  of  great  value.  The  biblio¬
graphies  suffixed  to  each  chapter  will  be  found  parti¬
cularly  useful  both  by  teachers  and  by  the  general
readers.  The  book  thoroughly  maintains  Mr.
Marriott’s  well-deserved  repntation  for  accuracy  of
statement  and  lucidity  of  style,  and  can  be  safely
commended  to  students.

A  Short  History  of  the  Near  East.  By  W.  S.  Davis
(Macmillan  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  I,ondon)  1923.

"The  Near  East”  has  frequently  attracted  the
attention  of  historians;  it  is  near  and  remote  in
aspirations,  thoughts  and  ideals.  It  has  therefore  been
difficult  for  writers  of  “western  isles"  to  fully
appreciate  its  history  and  the  significations  thereof.
But  Professor  Davis  of  the  Minncosta  University  is
particularly  qualified  to  be  the  historian  of  the  Near
East  as  his  father  was  at  one  time  instructor  in  the
American  College  at  Constantinople,  and  he  himself
is  keenly  interested  in  "the  long  story  of  the  Levant."
He  has  succeeded  therefore  in  catching  and  imparting
the  unique  secret  of  the  near  eastern  problem  in  this
volume  which  relates  succintly  its  history  from  the
founding  of  Constantinople  in  330  A.  D.  to  the  Graeco-
Turkish  crisis  of  1922.  A  volume  covering  such  a  king
period  naturally  falls  into  three  parts— the  Christian
Constantinople ;  Early  Islam  and  the  Saracenic
Kalifales;  and  the  Intrusion  of  the  Turanian  Turks
into  nearer  Asia  and  next  into  Europe,  and  then
their  retreat  and  practical  expulsion  from  Europe.
All  these  periods  arc  fully  dealt  with  by  Prof.  Davis
in  a  masterly  manner ;  interest  is  sustained  through¬
out,  and  even  the  reader  that  has  no  particular  interest
ui  the  subject  is  glad  to  go  through  its  fascinating
pages.  Excellent  maps,  tables  and  other  appur¬
tenances  for  reference  enhance  the  value  of  the  book
lioth  for  purposes  of  study  and  reference.

History  and  Progress.  By  Hilda  D.  Ookclcy
(George  Allen  and  Unwin  Limited,  40  Museum  Street,
London)  1923.

Professor  Oakelev  has  here  collected  together  a
number  of  essays  and  addresses  which  she  has  written


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


116

during  the  past  twenty  years.  Two  or  three  of  these
relate  to  problems  suggested  by  the  war;  the  others
deal  with  such  subjects  as  Philosophy  and  Education;
Poetry  and  Freedom ;  The  Idea  of  a  general  will ;  Sir
Alfred  Lyall  and  Indian  Problems.  The  guiding  idea
of  the  book  is  the  search  for  the  true  relation  between
thought  and  practice.  The  essays  arc  thoughtful  and
thought-provoking,  though  there  is  at  times  a
tendency  to  be  too  sure  of  the  writer's  own  point  of
view.  On  the  whole,  however,  it  is  a  volume  which
will  be  read  with  pleasure  and  profit  by  the  many
who  arc  interested  in  the  momentous  problems  dis¬
cussed  by  the  author.  The  book  deserves  serious
consideration.


The  Greatest  Story  in  the  World.  By  Horace  G.
Ilutchioson  (John  Murray,  Albemarle  Street,  I<ondoti)
>9*3-

The  title  of  Mr.  Hutchinson’s  book  gives  no  idea
at  all  of  its  subject,  which  is  really  an  outline  of  the
most  important  facts  in  the  history  of  mankind  up  to
the  date  of  the  firm  establishment  of  the  Roman
Empire  and  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  It  is,
thus,  an  attempt  to  present  in  a  form  which  will
appeal  to  young  readers,  the  story  of  the  beginnings
of  W'cstcrn  History.  The  numerous  illustrations  make
the  narrative  all  the  more  interesting.  We  commend
the  book  as  a  useful  and  handy  manual,  containing  the
results  of  the  latest  researches  and  investigations,  and
describing  the  story  in  a  manner  which,  while
attempting  to  interest  the  general  reader,  makes  it
equally  helpful  to  the  professed  student  of  history.
The  Creates!  Story  In  the  world  is  thus  a  highly
instructive  sketch  of  ancient  European  history.


Three  Centuries  of  American  Democracy.  By

William  MacDonald  (John  Dane,  the  Bodley  Head
Limited,  London)  1923.

Dr.  MacDonald  wrote  some  years  ago  for  the  Home
University  Library  a  useful  little  volume  entitled
"From  Jefferson  to  Lincoln."  By  reason  of  the
obvious  limitations  then  imposed,  the  volume  was
rather  scrappy.  'The  author  has  now  given  us,  in  a
book  of  more  than  300  pages,  the  main  facts  and  the
formative  influences  in  the  growth  of  the  United
States  of  America  as  a  democratic  nation.  He  has
arranged  his  subject  very  carefully,  dividing  it  into
eleven  chapters  of  almost  uniform  length.  The
Centuries  of  Beginnings ;  Framing  a  National  Constitu¬
tion;  Democracy  and  Nationality;  The  Triumph  of
Nationality ;  Politics  and  the  American  Mind — are
among  the  more  important  and  interesting  of  the


chapters.  There  is  a  comprehensive  bibliography  of
about  ten  pages  and  a  full  index.  Prof.  MacDonald
is  an  optimist  and  he  concludes  his  book  on  a  note
almost  of  triumph  ;  "It  is  the  priceless  possession  of
the  American  nation  that  it  is  still  young,  that  it
still  has  material  battles  to  fight  and  conquests  of
tnind  to  gain,  and  that  in  a  world  which  has  not  yet
found  peace  its  spirit  ranges  generous,  buoyant,  and
free.”  The  book  is  altogether  a  highly  instructive
production  and  is  of  absorbing  interest.  It  is,  to  our
knowledge,  the  l»est  short  history  of  the  United  Slates
of  America.

The  Control  of  American  Foreign  Relations.  By

Quincy  Wright,  I’h.D.  (The  Macmillan  Company,  New
York,  1922).

In  the  present  state  of  international  relations  it
remains  a  debateable  point  whether  a  super-national
authority  ought  to  override  the  national  laws  in  order
to  achieve  international  harmony  and  uniformity.  The
emergence  of  the  League  of  Nations  has  brought  about
the  importance  of  the  subject  to  the  forefront  and  it  is
being  felt  acutely  by  all  the  governments  that  in  their
attempt  to  reconcile  the  national  with  international
laws  several  constitutional  drawbacks  intervene  and
prevent  the  carrying  out  of  their  honest  intentions.
The  Control  of  American  Foreign  Relations  is  a
typically  American  production  on  the  subject  in  its
exhaustive  treatment  and  its  ampte  and  lucid  illustra¬
tions.  Prof.  Wright  wrote  the  volume  originally  for  a
prize  essay  which  he  secured.  He  feels  that  while  the
foreign  office  has  its  responsibilities  defined  by  inter¬
national  law,  its  powers  arc  defined  by  the  law  of  the
constitution.  There  is  accordingly  a  lack  of  co-ordina¬
tion  between  powers  and  responsibilities  as  indeed  is
amply  evidenced  by  the  discussions  in  the  American
Senate  and  the  Congress  over  the  Versailles  Treaty.
Prof.  Wright  has  dealt  with  the  subject  with  industrious
scholarship.  He  consulted  all  the  available  documents
and  references  including  legal  decisions  on  the  subject
Tile  result  is  a  comprehensive  and  authoritative  work.
In  regard  to  future  lines  of  development  the  author  is
cautious  and  believes  in  the  gradual  expansion  of  the
law  of  the  constitution  and  its  approach  towards  inter¬
national  sanctions.  It  is  a  book  of  great  erudition  and
industry  and  useful  particularly  to  the  advanced  student
of  constitutional  law  and  history.


The  Ottoman  Empire  and  its  successors  1801-1922.
By  William  Miller,  M.A.  (Cambridge  University  Press,

1923)  12s.  6 d.


We  welcome  the  second  edition  of  this  well-known
""tk  on  Turkey.  The  text  1ms  been  considerably


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


enlarged  and  revised  and  the  chronicle  carried  forward
to  the  year  192.2,  thus  including  a  survey  of  the  fateful
years  of  the  Armegeddon  which  have  meant  so  much
to  New  Turkey  and  its  long  line  of  Othman  rulers.
The  history  of  the  eclipse  of  the  old  Empire  and  the
rise  of  Young  Turkey  is  still  to  be  impartially  written
Mr.  Miller's  sketch  is  short  and  superficial.  He  is
naturally  jubilant  over  the  end  of  the  Turkev-in-Europe
but  he  may  be  pardoned  his  bias  in  view  of  the  concise
and  admirable  history  he  has  written  of  the  Ottoman
Empire  during  the  19th  century.

The  Study  of  American  History.  By  (the  late'
Viscount  Bryce,  O.  M.  (Cambridge  University  Press,
Better  Lane,  London)  1923.

By  common  consent,  Lord  Bryce  was  acknowledged
to  be  the  moat  cncyclopicdic  of  contemporary  scholars.
In  the  modern  age  of  specialisation,  a  claim  such  as
Bacon's  "I  take  all  knowledge  as  my  province'*  is  of
course  impossible;  but  within  inevitable  limits,  Lord
Bryce  may  be  said  to  have  known  most  things  worth
knowing.  It  was  Mr.  A.  G.  Gardiner  who  once  said
that,  if  cast  on  a  desert  island,  the  one  companion  of
his  choice  would  be  Lord  Bryce,  foe  he  would  supply
both  the  bread  and  the  butter  of  conversation.  The
Holy  Roman  Empire,  the  American  Commonwealth,
and  Modem  Democracies,  will  remain  abiding  monu¬
ments  of  an  intellect  of  rare  richness  and  depth,  of  a
political  acumen  seldom  at  fault,  and  of  a  scholarship
that  was  versatile  without  being  shallow,  and  attrac¬
tive  without  being  pedantic.  The  volume  before  us
contains  the  full  text  of  the  inaugural  lecture  which
Viscount  Bryce  delivered  at  the  Mansion  House  with
the  Earl  Balfour  in  the  chair.  The  Watson  Chair  was
founded  by  a  gift  of  £30,000  from  Sir  W.  George
Watson,  to  the  Anglo-American  Society,  on  the
occasion  of  the  return  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  from  his
American  tour.  Lord  Balfour  in  introducing  Lord
Bryce  to  the  audience  well  remarked  that  Lord  Bryce
approached  questions  dealing  with  America  with  the
special  advantage  that  he  knew  the  subject  not  merely
from  books,  not  merely  from  the  sources  which
historians  ordinarily  drew  upon  in  order  to  complete
their  picture  of  the  past  :  he  had  in  addition  to  that
qualification,  which  he  possessed  in  the  fullest  measure,
the  practical  experience  which  residence  in  the  United
States  had  given  him.  Of  the  lecture  itself  it  need  only
l>c  said  that  it  was  worthy  of  the  subject  and  worthy
of  the  lecturer.  It  is  closely  packed  with  the  results
of  Lord  Bryce’s  keen  observation  and  vast  and  varied
experience;  it  is  a  valuable  introduction  to  the  study
of  American  history.  We  commend  it  alike  to  students
and  scholars.


ti?

A  Concise  History  of  Europe.  By  A.  II.  Forbes
(Herbert  Russell,  Temple  Chambers,  London)  1924.

Mr.  A.  H.  Forbes’  Concise  History  0/  Europe  is  a
new  edition— revised  and  enlarged — of  the  book  which
appeared  first  in  19 n6.  The  author’s  aim  is  to  present
an  account  of  the  main  stream  of  history,  of  which
English  history  is  hut  a  tributary.  In  a  short  compass,
the  book  meets  a  real  want  and  is  bound  to  be  of
great  use  to  the  young  student,  for  whom  it  mainly
caters.

English  History.  By  Arthur  Hassall  (Duckworth
&  Cm,  Henrietta  Street,  London)  1923.

This  account  of  English  History  from  499  to  1914
is  as  satisfactory  and  complete  as  a  booklet  of  sixty-
four  pages  can  be.  It  is  a  concise  and  bold  statement
of  events.  It  may  be  of  use  for  handy  reference.


INDIAN  HISTORY.

The  Commentary  of  Father  Monserrate.  Translated

by  J.  S.  Hoyland,  and  S.  N.  Bancrjec  (Oxford  Uni¬
versity  Press,  Madras)  1923.

A  notable  book  has  been  rendered  available  to  the
student  of  Indian  history.  Father  Monserrate
belonged  to  the  first  Jesuit  Mission  to  the  Court  of
Akbar,  and  he  wrote  a  Latin  Commentary  on  the
Mission.  The  original  was  published  some  years  ago
in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  under
the  editorship  of  Father  Hosten.  It  was  realised  then
by  historians  how  important  this  commentary  was  in
helping  them  to  understand  certain  details  of  Akbar's
administration  and  in  presenting  an  independent
narrative  of  the  Moghul  Court.  Prof.  Hoyland  of
Nagpur  and  Professor  Banerjee  of  Patiala  have
rendered  a  very  useful  service  to  history,  the  former
by  translating,  and  the  latter  by  annotating  this
commentary.  It  is  full  of  interesting  and  valuable
information  and  quaint  remarks  and  observations  and
it  wtH  be  of  great  use  to  future  historians  of  the
period.  It  is  replete  with  intensely  interesting  details
about  Akbar.

A  Short  History  of  India.  By  R.  B.  Havell

(Macmillan  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London)  1924.

Mr.  Havell,  the  distinguished  authority  on  Indian
Art,  appears  in  this  book  in  a  new  role,  that  of  an
historian.  We  have  no  hesitation  in  saving  that  there
are  few  books  which,  within  such  a  narrow  compass,
provide  so  much  well  arranged  information  about


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


118

India  as  docs  Mr.  Havcll’s  History.  Il  is.  as  hi  is
careful  to  impress,  not  a  propaganda  volume;  he  lets
facts  speak  for  themselves.  We  can  confidently
recommend  it  ns  a  fair  and  reliable  guide  which  ought
now  to  replace  the  worthless  stuff  on  which  young
bovs  are  fed  in  schools.  It  is  marked  alike  with
sympathy  and  knowledge  and  is  thus  an  almost  ideal
text-book.  Mr.  Havcll’s  works  on  Indian  Art  and
history— for  he  is  the  author  of  a  bigger  book  on
Indian  history— constitute  a  notable  achievement  of
which  he  may  well  be  proud,  and  India  is  under
obligation  to  him  for  his  sympathetic  interpretation
of  her  past.

Kings  ol  the  East.  B>  Khan  Bahadur  Maulvi
Mohammad  I'asihuddin.  (Zulqarnain  Press,  Budnun)
1923.

As  District  Officer  of  Jaunpur  Maulvi  Fasihuddin
had  many  favourable  opportunities  of  WTiting  the
pi  esc nt  brochure  which  is  a  useful  contribution  to  the
literature  on  that  district.  The  author  has  shown
commendable  enthusiasm  in  following  up  his  earlier
volume  on  the  Sharqi  Monuments.  He  lias  in  the
hook  before  us  given  a  systematic  explanation  of  the
singularities  of  Jaunpur  architecture  and  a  thorough
account  of  the  culture  of  the  Sharqi  Kings.  We  are
confident  the  book  will  be  warmly  received  by  the
public.  It  is  a  useful  acquisition  to  the  literature  of
Indian  history,  and  deserves  appreciation.

The  Drat  hi lan  Element  in  Indian  Culture.  By

Dr.  Gilbert  Slater  (Ernest  Bonn  Limited,  8  Bouvcrie
Street,  London)  1924.

Dr.  Slater’s  contribution  to  Indian  history  is  a
very  notable  contribution.  The  many-sidedness  of  a
modern  scholar’s  interests  cannot  Lie  better  illustrated
than  by  their  works  dealing  with  subjects  other  than
those  in  which  they  have  specialised.  Dr.  Gilbert
Slater  is,  as  our  readers  know,  an  eminent  economist,
but  the  I iook  before  us  shows  that  his  stay  in  India
has  not  been  fruitless  in  extra-economic  directions.
The  Pravidlan  Element  is  a  very  important  book.  If
its  conclusions — which  arc,  indeed,  startling  in  their
originality  and  revolutionary  in  their  character — are
eventually  accepted  by  the  scholars,  many  of  our  long-
cherished  notions  and  theories  will  have  to  be  dis¬
carded.  Dr.  Slater’s  thesis  is  that  the  Aryans  brought
into  India  little  but  their  language  and  they  merely
assimilated  the  culture  which  they  found  here.  The
spiritual  hierarchy,  the  caste  system,  the  doctrines
of  Karma  and  reincarnation — all  these,  which  are
believed  to  be  the  chief  features  of  Hindu  Culture,
ate  maintained  by  Dr.  Slater  to  be  llravidian  in  origin


rather  than  Aryan.  In  a  short  notice  like  this  we
cannot  follow  the  author  through  all  the  details  of  his
argument,  nor  can  we  examine  it  critically.  We  can
only  point  to  his  startling  theory  anti  await  the
verdict  of  competent  authorities  on  it.  It  will  in  any
event  remain  an  instance  of  hard  thinking,  clear
analysis  and  much  sound  scholarship,  which  are
tiound  to  command  a  hearing,  whatever  the  verdict  on
them.

South  India  and  her  Mohammadan  Invaders.  By

S.  Krishnasawami  Aivangar  (Oxford  University  Press)

1923.

Some  Contributions  ol  South  India  to  Indian

Culture.  By  S.  Krishnaswami  Aivangar  (Calcutta
Unirersity  Press)  1923.

Dr.  Krishnaswami  Aivangar  is  a  recognised
authority  on  South  Indian  history.  In  the  first  book
liefore  ns  he  has  investigated  the  condition  of  South
India  on  the  eve  of  the  Muhammadan  invasions— in
the  form  of  six  lectures  delivered  to  the  Madras  Uni¬
versity.  The  first  of  these  traces  the  decadence  of
the  Chola  Kingdom ;  the  second  deals  with  the
revival  of  the  Pandya  power.  The  first  invasions  of
the  Deccan  by  Alauddin  and  Malik  Kafur  form  the
subject  of  the  third;  the  others  are  concerned  with
the  invasions  of  South  India  under  the  Khiljis,  the
Tnghlnk  invasions,  and  Muhammadan  Kingdoms  in
the  Deccan.  There  are  several  helpful  appendices,
which  enhance  the  value  of  the  book.

In  the  Indian  Culture,  Professor  Aivangar  has
collected  together  his  lectures  delivered  before  the
Calcutta  University.  The  subjects  dealt  with  arc  of
far  reaching  importance  and  include  such  interesting
discussions  as  Brahmanism  in  the  Tamil  land,  the
School  of  Bhnkti,  the  history  of  the  I’allavas,  Shaivism,
the  Vijaynagar  Empire,  and  many  others  equally
interesting.  Dr.  Aiyangar's  works  deserve  to  he
widely  known ;  they  acquaint  us  with  so  much  fresh
material,  they  arc  so  carefully  planned,  their  argu¬
ments  arc  so  ably  put  forward  that  we  have  no
hesitation  in  including  him  in  the  foremost  ranks  of
Indian  historians.  The  two  works  under  consideration
fully  sustain  the  author’s  deservedly  high  reputation
for  scholarship,  critical  acumen  and  spirit  of  research,
and  deserve  warm  acknowledgment.

A  History  of  the  Maratha  People  Vol.  II.  By

C.  A.  Kincaid  and  D.  B.  Parasnis  (Oxford  University

I’ress)  1923.

The  first  volume  of  the  new  History  of  the  Maratha
People  was  noticed  in  terms  of  the  highest  apprecia-


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


119


tion  in  this  Review.  This  is  the  second  volume  of
the  History,  which  has  now  been  brought  down  from
the  death  of  Shivaji  to  the  death  of  Shaliu.  Of  the
merits  of  the  History  it  is  now  needless  to  say  any¬
thing  ;  it  has  already  become  a  classic.  The  present
volume  fully  upholds  the  reputation  of  the  earlier  one
for  scholarship,  research,  and  historical  accuracy.
When  completed  it  will  be  the  one  standard  history
of  the  Mahrattas  in  English  and  will  probably
supersede  Grant-Dufl’s.

Panhala  By  Kao  Bahadur  D.  B.  1‘arasnis.  (Lnkshmi
Art  Printing  Works,  Hvculla,  Bombay)  1923.

Rao  Bahadur  Parasnis  is  a  recognised  authority  on
Maratha  history  and  it  is  always  a  pleasure  to  read
his  books.  He  has,  in  the  present  beautifully  printed
and  illustrated  brochure,  given  an  account  of  Panhala,
the  hill  fort  which  has  been  described  as  "the  most
complete  both  by  nature  and  art”  of  all  the  forts  in
India.  The  ten  fine  illustrations  add  to  the  attractive¬
ness  of  the  book.  The  booklet — coming  as  it  does
from  the  pen  of  the  joint  author  of  .4  History  of  the
Maratha  People  noticed  above — may  well  be  regarded
as  a  useful  supplement  to  that  very  valuable  book.

Letters  Written  to  India  During  the  Indian  Mutlnv

By  Fred.  Roberts  (Macmillan  &•  Co.,  Ltd.,  London)
19^-

Lord  Roberts  died,  in  old  age,  after  returning  from
France  where  he  had  the  supreme  satisfaction  of
seeing  his  beloved  Indian  soldiers  in  action.  He
never  lost  his  faith  in  the  Indian  Army  and  he  was
probably  the  best  beloved  of  Indian  Commanders-in-
chief.  As  is  well-known  he  published  many  years  ago
a  volume  entitled  Forty-one  Years  in  India.  In  the
letters  now  published  we  have  the  opinions,  not
matured  and  modified  by  age  and  knowledge  and
experience,  but  fresh  and  free,  of  a  young  subaltern
who  brought  and  won  renown  during  the  Sepoy  rising
of  1857.  The  letters  arc  marked  by  a  simplicity  and
straightforwardness  which  make  them  eminently
readable.  They  should  find  numerous  readers  alike
by  reason  of  the  fame  of  the  writer  and  the  intrinsic
merits  of  the  letters  themselves.  The  maps  and
portraits  enhance  the  utility  of  the  volume.


RECENT  LEGAL  LITERATURE
Three  Criminal  Law  Reformers.  By  C.  Thillipson,
M.A.,  LL  D.,  Litt.D.  <J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons,  Ltd,
London)  1923.

Dr.  Coleman  Phjllipson,  Professor  of  Law  in  the
University  of  Adelaide,  is  well-known  as  the  author


of  a  number  of  important  law  books,  the  co-author  of
that  standard  biographical  work — in  the  literature  of
law— called  Great  Jurists  of  the  World,  and  the  editor
of  Wheaton’s  International  Law.  His  latest  contribu¬
tion  to  legal  literature  is  Three  Criminal  Law
Reformers  :  Beccaria,  Bentham  and  Romilly.  These
three  names  represent  the  greatest  law  reformers  of
modern  times,  in  their  assault  on  the  folly,  injustice
and  cruelty  of  the  then  existing  criminal  jurispru¬
dence,  in  their  trenchant  criticism  of  outworn  codes,
obscurantist  traditions,  blind  superstitions,  dogmatic
technicalities,  oppressive  fictions,  and  useless  relics
of  the  past,  in  their  proposal  of  rational  substitutes,
in  their  pointing  the  way  to  the  light  they  were
intimately  united.  The  epoch  dealt  with  represents  in
many  respects  a  turning-point  in  European  history,
and  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  development
of  modern  civilization.  There  is  no  need  to  explain
the  method  of  arrangement  and  of  exposition  adopted
in  this  book.  A  reference  to  the  analytical  contents
and  a  glance  at  the  book  itself,  will  perhaps  indicate
it  satisfactorily.  It  may,  however,  be  said  that  the
author  has  brought  to  bear  upon  the  subject  a  rich
and  rare  scholarship  and  a  spirit  of  fairness  which  are
alike  praiseworthy.  Beccaria’s  famous  work  (in
Italian)  called  the  Del  Delittl  e  delle  Pene,  issued  in
1764,  Benlham’s  numerous  works,  and  Romilly 's
Speeches  in  rarliament,  are  all  handled  in  a  masterly
way  and  their  effect  on  modern  civilization  analysed.
The  book  is  thus  a  notable  contribution  to  the
literature  of  criminal  jurisprudence  and  merits
attention.

The  Art  of  Cross-Examination.  By  Francis  L.
Wellman.  Third  edition.  (The  Macmillan  Company,
New  York,  U.  S.  A.).  1923.

Mr.  Francis  Wellman  is  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
New  York  Bar.  But  in  the  course  of  his  extensive
practice  he  managed  to  write  and  publish  two  well-
known  hooks  on  Advocacy,  called  The  Art  of  Cross-
Examination  and  Pay  in  Court.  The  former  was  first
issued  iti  191-13  and  at  once  took  its  rank  as  the
standard  work  on  the  subject.  Some  years  later  it
passed  through  a  second  edition,  and  now  appears
for  the  third  time  in  a  thoroughly  revised  and  consider¬
ably  enlarged  form.  The  success  of  the  two  earlier
editions  and  the  continued  demand  for  the  book  have
induced  the  author  to  prepare  the  new  edition.  Mr.
Wellman  has  thoroughly  overhauled  and  enriched  bis
material  with  many  added  examples  of  skill  in  cross-
examination  as  practised  by  the  leading  lawyers  of
America  and  Great  Britain,  including  such  successful
present-day  advocates  as  John  Stanchfield,  De  Lancey


120


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Nicoll,  Max  Steuer,  Samuel  Untermyer,  Martin  Little¬
ton,  and  Herbert  Smyth.  The  cases  and  illustrations
arc  all  real,  and  most  of  them  have  heretofore  been
unknown  to  the  profession  or  the  public.  In  its
present  form  Mr.  Wellman’s  Art  of  Cross-Examination
will  continue  to  hold  its  own  against  all  competitors,
as  the  most  comprehensive  work  on  the  most
important  branch  of  the  Art  of  Advocacy.

The  Law  of  Benami.  By  Radharomon  Mookerjcc,
11. L.  Second  edition.  (R.  Cambray  &  Co.,  9  Hastings
Street,  Calcutta)  1923.

On  its  first  appearance,  several  years  back,  Mr.
Radharomon  Mookcrjce’s  Law  of  Benami  justly  came
to  be  regarded  as  a  most  useful  work  on  the  subject
and  the  demand  for  it  has  naturally  persisted  in  the
Indian  legal  world  since  that  time.  We  are,  there¬
fore,  glad  that  the  author  has  been  able  to  bring  out
a  thoroughly  recast  and  completely  revised  edition
of  his  work,  fully  abreast  of  the  latest  case-law  on
the  subject  it  deals  with.  So  far  as  we  are  aware,  the
book  under  notice  is  the  only  one  of  its  class  in  the
domain  of  Anglo-Indian  law.  But  that  is  not  its  only
recommendation.  Its  merits  are  great  as  a  systematic
digest  and  exposition  of  the  law  relating  to  Benami
transactions,  and  its  second  edition  is  well  deserving
of  continued  support  and  appreciation  at  the  hands
of  the  Bench  and  the  Bar  alike.

The  Workmen's  Compensation  Act.  By  A.  G.

Clow,  I.C.S.  Second  edition,  (rionecr  Press,
Allahabad)  1924.

It  is  but  some  months  back  since  we  noticed  in
terms  of  appreciation  the  first  edition  of  Mr.  Clow's
Workmen's  Comf>ensation  Act.  and  we  have  now
liefore  us  the  second  edition — duly  enlarged,  over¬
hauled  and  revised.  The  earlier  edition  was  justly
acknowledged  as  a  very  useful  guide  to  the  new  Act;
the  second  which  (as  noted  above)  has  lieen  judicious¬
ly  enriched  with  a  large  amount  of  new  material,
including  the  rules  recently  issued  by  the  Government
of  India,  will  tic  found  invaluable  as  a  sound  exposi¬
tion  of  live  law  on  the  subject.


A  Digest  ol  Indian  Constitutional  Law.  By

T.  C.  K.  Kurup,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Barristcr-at-Law.
(Butterworth  &  Co.,  India,  Ltd.,  6  Hastings  Street,
Calcutta)  1924.

Mr.  Kurtip  has  projected  an  ambitious  work,  called
the  Lav  and  History  of  the  Indian  Constitution.  By


way  of  chips  from  his  workshop  he  has  put  together
"this  modest  booklet,”  made  up  of  the  notes  taken
by  him  for  his  larger  work.  Nonetheless  his  Digest
of  Indian  Constitutional  Law  is  a  useful  compendium
of  the  subject,  covering  as  it  docs  the  whole  ground
from  the  origin  of  the  Bast  India  Company  in  1600
down  to  date.


The  Story  of  our  Inns  of  Court.  By  the  Rt.  Hon.
Sir  Plunket  Barton,  Charles  Bcnham  and  Francis
Watt  (G.  T.  Foulis  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  91  Great  Russell
Street,  London)  192).

The  Inns  of  Court  in  1/mdon  constitute  the  most
famous  legal  university  in  the  British  Commonwealth
and  have  been  the  nursery  of  a  large  number  of  men
eminent  as  lawyers,  judges,  statesmen,  jioliticians,
publicists  and  public  men.  Many  of  our  leading
public  men  in  India  have  been  members  of  the  Hnglisli
Bar— from  W.  C.  Bonncrjce  (the  I ’resident  of  the  first
session  of  the  Indian  National  Congress)  to  Mr.
Gandhi  (the  President-elect  of  the  forthcoming
session  at  Belgaum  next  December).  In  the  circums¬
tances  the  co-operative  work  put  together  by  Sir
Plunket  Barton  and  Messrs.  Bcnham  and  Watt —
called  The  Story  of  our  Inns  of  Court — is  bound  to
appeal  to  a  large  section  of  the  reading  public
throughout  the  British  Btnpire.  The  book  is  beauti¬
fully  got  up,  its  format  and  mechanical  execution  arc
excellent ;  while  its  letterpress  is  well-written  and
the  many  illustrations  with  which  the  text  is
cmbclishcd  add  materially  to  its  attractions.  We  can
not  think  of  a  better  gift  from  one  liarristcr  to  another
than  the  Sfory  of  our  Inns  of  Court.


Famous  Crimes  and  Criminals  By  C.  L.  McCluer
Stevens  (Stanley  Paul  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  >924*
12s.  M.

The  story  of  the  Old  Bailey  provides  more  thrills  than
many  an  adventurous  exploit  which  form  the  motif
of  successful  works  of  fiction.  The  European  Old
Baileys  have  been  ransacked  by  Mr.  Stevens  for  the
nerve-gripping  tales  which  form  the  contents  of  famous
Crimes  and  Criminals.  Human  ingenuity*  displays  its
most  cunning  tricks  where  crime  is  concerned  nnd  the
thirty  eight  tales  in  this  volume  relate  the  inside  story
of  sensational  crimes.  Intensely  thrilling  as  these
life  dramas  are,  point  is  given  to  the  moral  by  the
many  realistic  and  human  touches  in  the  stories.  Mr.
Stevens  has  a  simple  and  lucid  style  and  his  book
deserves  to  be  read  by  lawyers  nnd  students  of
criminology.


REVIEWS  AND  X<  >TICES


J  21


Unsolved  Murder  Mysteries.  By  Charles  E.  Pearce
(Stanley  Paul  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  16s.

We  have  on  several  occasions  noticed  with  apprecia¬
tion  Mr.  Pearce's  works  on  biography  and  legal
anecdotes.  In  the  present  volume  he  presents  a  number
of  murder  cases  which  have  baffled  the  acutest  minds
at  the  Scotland  Yard.  Mainly  English  cases  are
recorded;  a  few  American  tragedies  are  related  which
possess  unusual  interest  for  the  detective  and  the
criminal  lawyer.  This  collection  of  gruesome  tales  to
the  annals  of  criminology  deserves  the  serious  attention
of  the  psychologists,  for  the  motives  that  swaytd  the
criminals  remain  incomprchcndiblc.  Human  intelligence
confesses  defeat,  yet  the  tragedies  were  the  outcome
of  human  passion  and  devilry.  The  arrangement  of  the
book  is  admirable  and  the  treatment  lucid  and  clear.
Lawyers  and  students  of  psychology  should  welcome
this  interesting  work.

BOOKS  OF  REFERENCE,

Official  Year-Book  of  the  Union  of  South  Africa.

No.  6.  Edited  by  C.  W.  Cousins,  Director  of  Census.
(Superintendent,  Government  Printing  and  Stationery
Office,  Pretoria  ;  South  Africa).  1924.

In  noticing  the  last  edition  (No.  5)  of  the  Official
Year-Book  of  the  Union  of  South  Africa,  we  commend¬
ed  it  as  a  most  valuable  compendium  of  statistical  data
relating  to  the  South  African  Commonwealth  and  as
a  model  book  of  reference.  The  new  issue  (No.  6,
dealing  mainly  with  the  year  1923)  gives,  for  purposes
of  collation  and  comparison,  the  figure*  for  the  years
1910  to  1922.  The  book  supplies  information — most¬
ly  of  a  statistical  character — on  history  and  descrip¬
tion  of  the  various  states  and  colonies,  constitution
ami  government,  population,  vital  statistics,  public
health  and  hospitals,  education,  labour  and  industrial
conditions,  prices  and  cost  of  living,  social  condition,
administration  of  justice,  police  and  protection,  elec¬
torate,  native  affairs,  land  survey,  tenure  and
occupation,  irrigation  and  water  conservation,  agri¬
culture  and  fisheries,  mines,  manufacturing  industries,
commerce,  harliours  and  shipping,  railways  and  land
transportation,  poets,  telegraphs  and  telephones,
finance  and  local  government.  These  are  but  the
major  headings — each  of  them  bciug  sub-divided  into
many  minor  ones.  The  contents  list  condensed  above
would  enable  the  reader  to  appreciate  better  the
comprehensive  scope  of  the  book,  than  any  descrip¬
tion  of  it.  Statistics  were  defined  by  an  irratc
politician  as  "d — d  lies,”  and  so  perhaps  they  are  as
often  as  not.  But  the  work  of  administration  in  these
days  of  storm  and  stress  cannot  be  carried  on  without

16


the  aid  of  statistics  and  in  its  application  to  the
South  African  Commonwealth,  the  Official  Year-Book,
issued  annually  by  the  Government  of  that  country,
is  a  monument  of  industry  and  public  spirit.  We
wish  there  were  an  equally  instructive  and  interest¬
ing  work  of  reference  dealing,  every  year,  with  India,
The  edition  under  notice  is  distinguished  from  ita
predecessors  by  various  changes,  necessitated  mainly
by  the  increased  scope  of  the  valuable  information
condensed  and  rendered  accessible.  Separate  chapters
are  now  assigned  to  the  treatment  of  forests,
fisheries,  currency,  banking  and  general  finance;  the
chapter  on  "Native  Affairs’’  has  been  rewritten  and
rearranged  and  various  other  features  of  interest  and
utility  have  been  introduced.  Altogether  the  Official
Year-Book  of  the  Union  of  South  Africa  is  a  work  of
reference  of  which  the  government  of  that  dominion
may  well  be  proud.  It  reflects  the  highest  credit  on
the  editor,  on  the  organization  of  the  statistical  depart¬
ment,  as  also  on  the  resources  of  the  Government
Press  at  Pretoria.

The  Madras  Year-Book  1924.  (Superintendent,
Government  Press,  Madras)  1914.

We  cordially  welcome  the  second  annualV|edition
of  the  Madras  Year-Book,  which  has  been  edited  by
the  Hon’blc  Diwan  Bahadur  L.  D.  Swamikannu
Pillai,  C.I.R.,  I.S.O.  The  Diwan  Bahadur  is  a  dis¬
tinguished  official  in  the  Southern  Presidency  and  is,
at  present.  President  of  the  Provincial  Legislative
Council.  But  besides  being  a  very  capable  adminis¬
trator,  he  also  justly  enjoys  the  reputation  of
possessing  scholarship  of  a  high  order  as  evidenced
by  bis  well-known  works  on  Indian  Astronomy.  And
although  the  Madras  Year-Book  purports  to  be
nothing  more  than  "an  official,  commercial  and
general  directory  of  the  Madras  presidency,"  never¬
theless  in  the  hands  of  its  cultured  and  scholarly
editor  it  has  become  an  exceedingly  useful  and  very
valuable  book  of  reference  dealing  with  things  South
Indian.  The  work  is  a  bulky  volume  of  t,27»  pages,
full  of  valuable,  accurate  and  up-to-date  information
about  a  variety  of  topics,  and  containing  memoranda
and  succinctly  written  notes  of  permanent  value.
There  is,  besides,  a  map  of  2t  sections,  and  a  useful
name  and  subject  index.  All  tl»c  information  found
in  the  ordinary  Directory  is  found  in  the  Year-Book,
and  the  Government  at  work  is  described  in  various
chapters.  The  Who’s  Who  ia  as  full  as  it  need  be,
the  alphabetical  list  of  principal  residents  in  Madras
ought  to  be  useful,  and  the  data  collected  under
almanac  and  astronomical  phenomena  are  specially
detailed  and  comprehensive.  We  congratulate  the


122


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


Dcwan  Bahadur  who,  in  addition  to  the  strenuous
duties  of  his  office,  has  found  time  to  edit  this
meritorious  compilation  and  bring  it  fully  up-to-date.

The  sections  relating  to  the  departmental  activities
of  government,  the  growth  of  industries  and  the
workings  of  provincial  finance  have  been  revised  and
enlarged,  and  new  sections  have  been  added  on  the
output  of  legislation  daring  the  term  of  the  Reformed
legislature,  a  description  of  the  health  resorts  and
sanatoria  of  Southern  India,  analytical  statistics  of
the  last  general  election  and  accounts  of  Service
Associations.  It  is  thus  a  most  excellent  work  of
reference  and  should  be  found  invaluable  in  South
India.

Reader's  Digest  of  Books.  By  Hcllen  Rex  Keller.
(George  Allen  &  Unwin,  Ltd.,  40  Museum  Street,
London,  W.C.I.)  1923.

The  Reader's  Digest  of  Books  bail*  from  America,
its  author  being  Instructor  in  Library  Economy  nt
Columbia  University.  Its  object  is  to  sketch  the  con¬
tents  of  the  famous  books  of  all  times,  all  ages  and
in  all  civilized  languages.  It  is  a  typical  American
work,  designed  equally  for  purposes  of  study  and
reference.  Arranged  in  alphabetical  order,  the
Reader's  Digest  is  a  highly  useful  and  comprehensive
work  summarising  concisely  the  plots  of  over  four
hundred  of  the  world's  best  books.  It  covers  a  very-
wide  range.  For  instance,  on  page  3  the  first  book
dealt  with  is  “Adam— a  dramatic  work  of  the  twelfth
century  by  an  unknown  author,”  while  the  last  book
mentioned  on  that  page  is  "Admirable  Crichton,  The,"
by  Sir  J.  M.  Barrie.  As  a  reference  book  it  should
prove  invaluable,  but  as  stated  above  it  may  be
utilized  equally  as  a  text-book  for  the  study  of  litera¬
ture.  Though  works  on  Art  and  Science  have  found
place  in  it,  the  vast  bulk  of  the  books  dealt  with
belong  to  that  branch  of  knowledge  which  may
rightly  be  designated  as  "the  literature  of  inspira¬
tion"— as  opposed  to  "the  literature  of  information."
The  characterizations  are  exceedingly*  well- written.
Though  a  number  of  purely  American  works  are
included— with  which  we  arc  not  familiar— the  vast
bulk  of  those  dealt  with  arc  6uch  as  are  called
classics,  and  the  book  as  a  handy  comparion  will  be
found  a  most  serviceable  introduction  to  Literature.

Journalism:  A  Bibliography.  Compiled  by  Carl
L.  Cannon.  (The  New  York  Public  Library,  New

York,  C.S.A.)  1924.

Mr.  Carl  Cannon’s  most  useful  work— called
Journalism  ;  A  Bibliography— is  a  production  on


which  we  unhesitatingly  congratulate  the  compiler,  as
also  the  autltoritics  of  the  great  public  library  of  the
commercial  capital  of  America.  To  begin  with,  it  is
a  pioneer  work  in  its  field,  it  being  (to  our  knowledge)
the  first  serious  bibliography  of  journalism,  in  the
English  language.  For  all  that  it  is  fairly  exhaustive
—though  we  gather  that  it  records  only  those  books,
pamphlets  and  periodicals  (containing  articles  on

journalism),  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  New  York
I*ublic  Library.  It  is,  howsoever,  so  comprehensive
that  it  may  be  taken  to  be  well-nigh  replete  with  all

books  and  articles  in  the  press,  on  the  subject.

Arranged  in  alphabetical  order — for  facility  of

reference — it  deals  with  works  on  journalism  in  the
widest  sense,  with  all  its  various  aspects  and  ramifica¬
tions,  and  no  branch  of  the  subject  (howsoever
seemingly  remote)  has  been  regarded  by  the  compiler
as  beyond  the  scope  of  the  book.  The  result  is  a
marvellously  accurate  and  useful  work  of  reference
-well-arranged,  systematic,  and  comprehensive  to  the
point  of  being  almost  exhaustive.  It  should  be
found  indispensable  ip  every  journalist’s  library.  If
a  next  edition  be  called  for,  it  would  be  well  to
separate  the  books  from  the  articles.


“The  Queen"  Book  of  Travel  1924-25.  Edited  by
M.  Hornsby,  F.R.G.S.  (The  Field  Press,  Ltd.,
Windsor  House,  Bream's  Buildings,  London,  E.  C.  4).

“ The  Queen"  Sevspaper  Book  of  Travel  2924-25—
which  is  now  in  its  seventeenth  year  of  publication
is  an  admirable  compendium  of  information  brought
together  by  Mr.  Hornsby,  the  Travel  Editor  of  that
famous  journal  for  women.  During  the  process  of
annual  revision  and  enlargement,  it  has  been  improved
from  year  to  year,  till  at  last  it  has  attained  a  per¬
fection  for  accuracy  and  usefulness,  which  is  remark¬
able  and  for  which  it  deserves  commendation.  The
scope  of  the  book  covers  practically  the  whole  of
Europe,  and  parts  of  America  and  Africa  arc  also
dealt  with.  The  famous  cities  and  towns  of  each
country,  as  also  its  health-resorts,  spaa,  and  other
interesting  places,  arc  described  (in  alphabetical  order)
and  detailed  practical  information  is  furnished  for
the  benefit  of  the  serious  tourist,  health-seeker,
sportsman,  globe-trotter  and  others  ft  hoc  genus  osnne.
No  one  planning  a  tour  can  do  without  it.  Its  bandy
size,  neat  get-np,  seventeen  well-drawn  maps  and
eighty-six  excellent  illustrations,  render  it  a  highly
useful  companion.  In  the  next  edition  Darlington  s
guide-books  should  be  included  in  the  otherwise
valuable  bibliography  appended  to  the  book.  This  i5
the  only  criticism  we  have  to  offer.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


123


Pictorial  Map  o(  I.omlon.  (G.  W.  Bacon  St  Co.,
Ltd.,  7-9  Norwich  Street,  Fetter  Lane,  London,

K.  C.  4)  19*4-

The  firm  of  Bacons  justly  enjoys  a  high  reputation
for  the  production  of  maps  and  its  Wembley  Inhibi¬
tion  Edition  Pictorial  Map  oj  London  is  a  wonderfully
good  effort  in  cartography.  It  shows  at  a  glance  the
principal  places  of  interest  and  the  shopping  centres
in  London.  Furnished  with  a  comprehensive  index,
a  sightseer’s  guide  and  a  route-map  to  the  British
Empire  Exhibition  at  Wembley,  it  is  a  most  useful
map-guide  to  the  various  scenes  and  sights  of  the
metropolis  of  the  commonwealth.


The  Anglo-American  Year-book  1921.  (American
Chambers  of  Commerce,  Aldwych  House,  Aldwych,
W,  C.  1,  London)  1924.

We  welcome  the  thirteenth  annual  edition,  for  the
current  year,  of  the  Anglo- A merican  Year-book — the
previous  issues  of  which  have  been  noticed  in  terms  of
appreciation  in  the  Hindustan  Review.  The  joint
editors — Messrs.  H.  R.  Atnory  and  B.  M.  Gardner —
have  done  their  work  of  selection,  omission  and  altera¬
tion  judiciously,  with  the  result  that  this  annual
publication  is  now-  a  most  useful  reference  book  and
deserves  wide  appreciation,  alike  for  its  excellent
arrangement  and  up-to-date  information  on  matters  of
interest  both  to  the  British  and  the  Americans.  The
information  about  British  trade  and  commerce — though
primarily  designed  for  Americans — will  be  found  no
less  useful  by  merchants  and  tradesmen  in  India,
interested  in  the  subject.  Altogether  a  capital  work
of  reference.


Cathedrals.  (General  Manager,  Great  Western
Railway.  Paddington  Station,  London)  1924.

The  General  Manager  of  the  Great  Western  Rail¬
way  has  done  well  to  publish  a  beautifully  illustrated
work  called  Cathedrals,  giving  descriptive  sketches,
interspersed  with  historical  information,  of  twenty-two
of  the  great  cathedrals  of  England  and  Wales,  which
can  be  easily  visited  from  stations  on  the  railway  he
administers.  Apart  from  the  well-written  letterpress,
the  superb  illustrations  make  this  book  something
more  than  a  railway  guide — a  thing  of  beauty  and  a
joy  for  ever.  The  General  Manager’s  venture  deserves
wide  appreciation.


Philip's  British  Empire  Atlas.  (George  Philip  &
Son,  Ltd.,  3a  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.  C.  4)  1924.

Philip's  British  Empire  Atlas  is  an  exceedingly
useful  reference  book  in  its  class  and  deserves  large
circulation.  It  includes  thirty-two  pages  of  well-
drawn  maps  and  diagrams  in  colour,  accompanied  by
full  descriptive  notes  and  an  index  of  over  four
thousand  names.  The  letter-press  and  illustrations  are
alike  commendable  and  the  atlas  is  a  marvel  of
cheapness  and  excellence  at  hah  a  crown.


The  Traveller's  Handbook  to  Palastinc,  Syria  and
Mesopotamia  (Iraq).  New  edition  revised  by  H.  C.
Luke,  M.A.  (Thomas  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London)  1924.

In  the  Hindustan  Review  of  January  last,  in  the
course  of  a  review  of  Messrs.  Cook's  Handbook  of
Constantinople  and  Asia  Minor,  we  expressed  in  terms
of  appreciation  our  view  of  the  scries  of  guide-books
issued  by  the  premier  firm  catering  for  the  needs  and
repirements  of  travellers  all  the  world  over — namely,
Messrs.  Thomas  Cook  8:  Son,  Ltd.  They  have  recently
issued  a  new  edition  of  their  Traveller’s  Handbook  for
Palestine,  Syria  and  Iraq  (Mesopotamia).  Revised  by-
Mr.  Harry  Luke — Assistant  Governor  of  Jerusalem —
and  enriched  with  an  appendix,  on  the  historical
interest  of  the  scenes,  sights  and  monuments  of
Palestine,  from  the  pen  of  Professor  Garstang—
Director  of  British  School  of  Archeology  located  at
Jerusalem  and  of  the  department  of  antiquities  in
Palestine — the  book  is  compact,  accurate,  up-to-date
and  replete  with  information — practical,  descriptive,
historical,  and  archeological.  The  well-drawn  maps
showing  railways,  roads  and  topographical  details
enhance  the  value  of  the  letter-press,  and  Cook’s  may
safely  be  declared  to  be  nt  present  the  best  guide  in
English  to  Palestine,  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  or  Iraq.

Guide  to  Rhodesia.  Second  edition.  (General
Manager  of  Bicra,  Mashotialand  and  Rhodesia  Rail¬
ways,  Itulways,  South  Rhodesia,  Africa)  1924.

The  first  edition  of  Guide  to  Rhodesia  was  issued
in  1914,  when  Southern  Rhodesia  was  a  protectorate
of  the  Crown  (under  the  administration  of  the  British
South  Africa  Company) ;  the  second  edition,  revised
and  brought  up-to-date,  appears  after  it  has  attained
the  status  of  a  colony  with  powers  of  self-government.
The  book  is  a  fairly  exhaustive  sketch  of  South
Rhodesia— its  topography,  history,  climatology,  health
condition,  natural  resources,  and  prospects  fex
investors,  farmers,  tourists,  and  sportsmen.  It


124


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


contains  a  wealth  of  information,  equally  interesting
and  trustworthy,  about  the  scenes  and  sights,  the  social
and  economic  conditions  of  the  latest  British  colony.
The  letter-press  is  well-written,  the  maps  are  well-
drawn  and  the  very  large  number  of  photographic
reproductions  well-executed.  Altogether  this  Guide
to  Rhodesia  is  an  example  of  highest  skill  in  bringing
together  a  large  mass  of  information  and  presenting
it  in  a  way  which  is  admirable.

A  Bibliography  of  Religion:  Mainly  AvesUn  and
Vedic.  By  J.  11.  Saklatwalla.  (Alan  Press,  Bombay)
»9»3.

Bibliography  as  a  science  or  art  is  yet  practically
unknown  in  India,  and  it  is,  therefore,  that  we  all  the
more  cordially  welcome  Mr.  J.  11.  Saklatwalla’s  very
useful  work — which  presents  alphabetically  a  clear
conspectus  of  literature  dealing  with  Avcstan  and
Vedic  studies.  It  is  comprehensive  and  well-arranged
and  will  be  found  serviceable.


FICTION.

The  Temptress.  By  Vicente  Blasco  Ibanez  (Thornton
Butter  worth,  I.td.,  London,  1914)  7*.  6 d.

It  is  not  difficult  to  place  a  work  like  The  Temptress
even  if  Ur-  name  of  its  famous  author  is  suppressed.
It  is  a  fascinating  book,  fascinating  in  the  originality
of  its  plot,  charming  in  characterisation,  charmingly
elusive  in  the  language,  which  even  in  translation
retains  the  haunting  sense  of  its  startling  candour.
Ibanez  has  received  the  highest  meed  for  his  beautiful
works.  His  story  of  the  Four  Horsemen  of  the
Apocalypse  is  known  all  the  world  over,  in  The
Temptress  he  presents  a  characteristic  study  uf  the
vampire  type  of  woman.  The  type  is  knowm  in  every
land,  and  Ibanez  with  the  sure  touch  of  a  master  has
delineated  just  those  traits  of  such  a  life  as  arc  common
knowledge.  The  vampire  is  usually  charming  in  body,
engaging  in  manners  and  with  an  obstinate  will  gains
her  object  against  all  ot»tacle».  Plena,  of  The
Temptress  occupies  the  stage  throughout  the  narrative.
We  condemn  her ;  wc  begin  to  hate  her  after  some  time
and  yet  wc  are  unable  to  get  away  Irum  her :  this
is  the  charm  of  the  vampire.  The  plot  of  Ibanez’s
story  is  laid  in  the  virgin  lauds  of  Patagonia  where
struggle  against  natnre  is  severe  enough  to  keep  men
away  from  petty  tyrannies  and  trifling  conflict  of
passions.  Into  the  desert  lands  sweeps  in  Elcua  and
amongst  the  rugged  men  of  Patagonian  wilds  slie  casts
•n  evil  charm  with  such  effect  that  in  the  end  she


leaves  behind  a  "legend  of  how  a  woman  had
come  to  that  desert  community  from  the  old  world,  a
woman  who,  beautiful  and  possessed  of  a  fatal  charm,
had  brought  ruin  and  death  to  all  those  who  had  fallen
under  her  spell."  The  Temptress  is  a  delightful  novel
with  a  purpose  which  never  intrudes.  Ibanez  has
shown  here  what  he  can  do  with  a  study  oil  modem
problems.  Altogether  a  capital  work  of  fiction  witil
interest  sustained  to  the  very  end.

Two  Women:  Clare  Margaret.  By  Two  Anonymous
Writers  (A.  M.  l’hilpot,  Ltd.,  London,  1914)  71.  6d.

Messrs.  Philpot  offered  in  1923  £250  Advance
royalties  for  the  best  true  autobiographical  life-story.
This  is  the  winning  book  and  contains  a  study  of  the
life  of  two  young  women  from  points  of  views  which
can  hardly  be  called  normal.  Indeed  the  publishers
themselves  define  Clare  and  Margaret  as  the  sub-normal
and  the  super-normal  woman.  We  admit  that  the
sketches  arc  very  cleverly  written  and  reveal  the  souls
of  two  contrasted  types  of  women.  Bnt  arc  these
life-stories  true  and  from  life  ?  If  so  the  world  must
be  full  of  strange  incidents  and  stranger  characters.
Wilbur,  half  man  half  beast ;  Margie,  the  devotee  at
the  shrine  of  passion ;  Clare,  the  cool-headed  and
reasoning  maid  ending  up  in  sentimental  impulse;
Mrs.  Graham,  the  inexplicable: — all  these  characters
move  and  give  life  to  the  interesting  pages  of  this
book.  We  wish  these  authors  were  to  write  up  a
comment  on  modem  life  as  it  is.  Clare’*  talc  is  full
of  adventnrons  turns  which  keep  onr  attention  rivetted
to  the  heroine’s  personal  career.  Margaret  is  a  study
in  eroticism;  yet  it  ruthlessly  tears  the  veil  from  the
heart  of  a  maid  and  reveals  it  cleft  by  contrary
instincts  no  doubt,  but  governed  by  the  larger,  all-
embracing  entity  which  is  commonly  known  as  passion.
Cleverly  written  stndies,  powerful  and  interesting.

Silbcrtnann.  By  Jacques  de  Lacrctcllc  (Ernest  Beun
Limited,  London,  1923)  6s.

An  English  version  of  the  famous  book  which  won
the  Prix  Femlna-Vie  Iteurcuse,  translated  by  Brian
Lunn.  M.  Lacrctcllc  has  suddenly  leaped  into  well-
deserved  fame  by  his  first  well-known  lax*.  It  is  a
powerful  psychological  study  in  racial  conflict.  Three
little  school  boys,  a  Jew,  a  Catholic  and  a  Protestant,
each  one  highly  sensitive  and  intellectual,  determine
in  their  scltool  life  the  course  of  Die  bigger  racial
question.  It  is  essentially  a  drama  of  conscience,  as
the  publishers  rlaim,  and  the  drama  is  very  powerfully
unfolded.  The  haired  of  the  Jews  forms  the  daily
psychology  of  the  average  Christian  in  the  West,  and
this  much  maligned  race  lias  developed  an  almost


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


uncanny  sensitiveness.  M.  Lacrctelle  deserves  congra¬
tulations  (or  this  highly  penetrative  study,  without
heat  or  anger,  unprejudiced  atjd  impartial,  and  yet
making  a  powerful  appeal  for  toleration  which  is  an
attribute  of  the  gods.


Ueirdrc.  By  James  Stephens  (Macmillan  &  Co.,
Ltd.,  London,  1933)  7 s.  6 d.

In  this  beautiful  talc  Mr.  Stephens  lias  presented
to  us  an  episode  of  an  old  Irish  talc  of  Kings.  Dicrdre,
the  Troubler,  was  bom  in  a  night  of  destiny.  The
King  Conachur  told  of  the  prophetic  evil  which  the
young  babe  was  to  bring  in  the  world  sought  to  keep
her  closely  watched  until  she  grew  up.  Lust  overcame
discretion  and  passion  and  sons  of  I'isncac  wrought
the  destruction  of  the  great  kingdom.  Irishmen  will
love  the  old  Irish  atmosphere  which  the  author  has
successfully  preserved  in  his  narrative.  The  conflict
of  primal  passions  is  finely  expressed  in  Mr.  Stephens’
best  style.  It  is  a  very  readable  talc  and  Irish
legendary  heroism  sustains  interest  in  the  narrative.


The  Rescue.  By  Joseph  Conrad  (J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons,
Ltd.,  London,  1934)  is.

This  fine  old  romance  of  the  Southern  seas  by  that
master  of  the  craft,  Joseph  Conrad,  whose  loss  tile
literary  world  mounts  Uwlny,  has  been  printed  in  the
popular  “Wayfarers  Library”.  This  tale  of  the  sea  will
carry  now  its  indelible  charm  and  its  inscrutable
message  to  thousands  of  households  and  boys  who  love
the  sea  will  feel  eternally  grateful  to  Conrad  for  having
depicted  in  Capt.  Lingard  the  man  after  their  own
heart.  The  old  sea  dog,  Jorgenson,  is  a  characteristic
picture.  The  Rescue  deserves  to  be  w  idely  read  for
its  bold  action,  hs  love  of  the  deep  seas,  its  powerful
appeal  and  heroic  exploits.  Now  that  it  is  available
in  a  cheap  edition  we  hope  more  people  will  get  ac¬
quainted  with  Conrad,  and  The  Rescue  will  not  be  a
bad  introduction.


►  Never  the  Twain  shall  meet.  By  Peter  B.  Kync

(Iloddcr  &  Stoughton  Ltd.,  London,  1934)  71.  6d.

Mr.  Kync  has  skilfully  planned  the  contents  o!  this
tale  of  the  Polvnesean  Seas.  European  traders  have
for  centuries  traded  in  these  islands  and  human  passion*
have  proved  too  overwhelming  for  racial  insularity.
Half  breeds  are  usually  looked  down  upon  with
contumely,  but  titer  have  no  control  over  their  births,
nor  over  the  choice  of  parents,  h  appeared  but  un¬
reasonable  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  should  be  visited


»25

upon  the  children.  Yet  such  fate  was  in  store  for
iamca,  the  fairest  flower  that  grew  in  Riva.  Her  fault
was  her  birth.  When  Love  was  given  to  her  she
possessed  not  the  power  to  retain  her  hold:  the  racial
differences  count  for  more  than  love  or  passion— this
is  the  burden  of  Mr.  Kvue’s  tale.  We  remain  un¬
convinced,  for  the  author  has  failed  to  advance  any
cogent  reasons  for  incompatibility.  However  the  plot
is  well  conceived  and  neatly  executed.  The  narrative
has  charm  and  certain  dignity  about  it,  and  despite
its  tragic  ending  the  story  is  not  depressing.


Last  and  West :  The  Confessions  of  a  Princess.

*>’■ - •  Jarrolds  Publishers,  Ltd.,  1934)  7 s.  6d.

This  is  supposed  to  represent  the  history  of  the  Irish
girl  who  married  a  Burmese  Prince.  Point  is  given
to  the  talc  by  the  evident  desire  to  paint  the  moral,
vet  we  arc  uul  quite  sure  if  it  has  the  desired  effect
Mindoou,  the  Prince  from  Burma,  has  no  illusions
about  him;  he  is  frankly  oriental  in  hia  habits  and
ideas.  He  makes  no  secret  of  his  belief  in  the  right
of  man  to  love  more  tliau  one  woman  at  a  time.  The
Irish  girl  on  the  other  hand  is  brought  up  to  observe
the  gospel  of  monogamy,  and  yet  breaks  her  conjugal
vows  at  the  first  temptation.  Where  docs  the  blame
rest  ?  And  the  cruel  part  of  it  was  the  confession
made  by  the  princess’s  mother  that  Mindoon  was  her
lover  before  he  became  her  daughter’s  husband  I
Perhaps  the  nasty  feeling  left  behind  such  revelation*
should  not  blind  us  to  the  motif  of  the  story,  which
is  well  told  am!  with  a  purpose.


Ltd.,  London,  1923)  55.

A  collection  of  short  stories  from  the  pen  of  two
famous  French  authors.  The  stories  sparkle  with  bright
wit  and  humour  and  are  touched  by  that  delightful
.remy  which  is  the  soul  of  short  stories.  The
French  have  undoubtedly  perfected  the  art  of  short
stoo  writing  and  in  Fischers  wc  find  a  clever  and
skilful  representation.  The  cryptic  statement  of
expenses  headed  ’’Estelle”  is  eloquent,  and  sums  np
the  plots  of  over  90%  of  the  modern  works  of  fiction
hstclle  forms  a  pleasant  reading.


c,  ,  ,  ,  .  •  ,-anc  v»rey  (iloddcr  &

Stoughton  I.td.,  London,  1934)  7s.

.  f" "?  GrcV  h9S  *chiwd  »"  almost  uncanny  success
with  his  novels  of  the  pioneer  country.  If  it  Ls  not

Anrona,  ,t  is  some  corner  of  the  wfld  Ytesi  where  the


126


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


scene  of  his  absorbing  tale  is  usually  laid.  In  the  Call
of  the  Canyon  the  scene  shifts  a  little,  but  the  pioneer¬
ing  and  the  wild,  piercing  breeze  is  still  there.  His
plots  arc  cleverly  designed  and  in  this  the  latest  story
the  author  has  put  in  his  best  work.  The  tale  grips
you  from  the  first  and  keeps  von  enthralled  until  the
very  last  page.  Carlcy  Burch  is  a  very  loveable
personality,  with  all  her  human  weaknesses  and  her
struggles  to  win  through  to  perfect  love.


Lossie  of  the  Mill.  By  E.  Everett-Green  (Stanley
Paul  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1924).

This  is  very  pretty  tale  of  love  and  adventure.
Mr.  Kvcrett-Green  has  not  attempted  to  depart  from
the  orthodox  type  of  the  story  which  is  laid  in  an
industrial  town.  The  son  of  the  boss  falls  in  love  with
a  null-hand  who  lias  had  a  good  breeding  but  through
reduced  circumstances  is  forced  to  work  in  the  mill
The  author  has  followed  the  conventional  route  in  the
matter  of  impediments  to  the  course  of  their  love.
The  strange  apparition  however  causes  a  tremor  as
you  read  the  story.  Lossie  is  a  pleasant  tale  with
plenty  of  incidents  and  thrills.


Innocence.  By  Cecil  II.  Bullivant  (Jarrolds
Publishers  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  7 s.  6d.

Ragged  Romance.  By  A.  Salroni-Middlcton  (Jarrolds
Publishers,  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  71.  6 d.

Both  pleasing  stories,  but  entirely  different  in
design  and  conception.  Innocence  is  the  talc  of  the
artists’  studio  and  the  love  of  an  innocent  model  who
believed  trustingly  and  found  out  too  late  tint  love
could  be  mistaken  for  passion.  The  ending  is  happy
as  through  the  vale  of  tears  and  sufferings  Loraine
attains  to  the  love  of  a  strong  and  good  man  The
talc  is  well  told  in  a  pleasing  style  and  the  narrative
never  lags.

Ragged  Romance  is  a  wonderful  romance,  tragic  no
doubt,  but  tragedy  of  a  great  type.  The  author,  a
musician  and  a  violinist  of  no  mean  achievement  was
lured  by  the  call  of  the  mysterious  Pacific  islands.  His
travels  and  studies  have  built  this  beautiful  talc  of  a
Maori  maiden  and  the  fierce  charm  of  the  land  of
Sun  blowers.  The  narration  is  charming,  clothed  in  a
poetic  language.  Mr.  Middleton  met  R.  L.  Stevenson
during  his  sojourns  in  Samoa  and  lias  introduced  him
as  a  character  in  tliis  book,  giving  a  very  vivid  picture
of  the  famous  author.


Silver  Star- Dust.  By  Cecil  Adair  (Stanley  Paul  &
Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  2 s.

This  is  the  love  story  of  Cosmo  and  Estelle,  both
children  of  the  stars,  whose  first  encounter  was  under
the  star-light  and  their  contact  ever  after  was  ini  used
with  that  tenderness  which  sensitive  souls  only  can
inspire.  Cecil  Adair  has  written  innumerable  novels,
but  in  Silver  Star-Dust  he  has  framed  a  story  without
much  plot  or  incident.  It  is  a  rhapsody  of  love  and
keeps  the  readers’  interest  by  the  many-sided  facets  of
love's  anguish,  its  struggles  and  final  triumph.


The  Golden  Temptress  By  Headon  Hill  (Herbert
Jenkins  Ltd.,  London,  1924)  3s.  6d.

A  story  full  of  thrills  and  hair-breadth  escapes.  A
millionaire  is  pursued  by  a  desperate  gang;  through
the  agency  and  active  help  of  a  beautiful  foster-daughter
who  has  been  imposed  upon  the  old  man  the  conspira¬
tors  hoj>e  to  bring  about  the  old  Man's  death  through
fright.  He  employs  an  adventurous  young  man  on  his
last  beans  for  protection,  and  from  this  moment  the
tale  runs  on  with  thrilling  rapidity.  It  is  well  written
and  cleverly  planned.  A  story  full  of  absorbing  interest
and  a  pleasing  end.


Sentimental  Education.  By  Gustave  l-'laubcrt
(Brcntano’s  Ltd.,  London,  1923)  5 s.

All  lovers  of  French  literature  and  of  Flaubert  in
particular  will  extend  a  hearty  welcome  to  this  admir¬
able  translation  which  the  publishers  have  issued  in
their  “World  Fiction  Library".  The  'story  of  a  young
man'  will  always  carry  a  special  charm  which  the
genius  of  Flaubert  invested  in  the  tale ;  and  it  is  sure
of  commanding  an  audience  among  any  country  and
at  all  times.


The  House  in  Charles  Street  Anonymous  (Brcutano's

Loudon,  1924)  7 4.  6d.

A  talc  of  the  war  lime  and  the  intriguing  question
of  the  German  spies  in  England.  An  American  girl
views  the  struggle  with  a  detachment  not  possible
for  a  combatant,  and  with  all  her  sympathies  for  the
Allies  she  is  helpful  in  laying  bare  many  a  plot
wherewith  information  leaked  out.


Beckoning  Trails.  By  Clarence  E.  Mulford  (Hcdder
&  Stoughton  Limited,  London,  1924)  7 s.  6d.

An  absorbing  tale  of  the  pioneering  community  and
Reel  Indians,  well  executed  and  planned.  The
characters  are  powerfully  drawn.


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


127


The  Justice  ol  the  Duke  By  Rafael  Sabatani
(Stanley  Paul  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1914)  3s.  6ii.

A  historical  romance  of  old  Italy  and  the  magni¬
ficence  of  the  Dukes  Cesaire  Borgia.  An  interesting
romance.


Cambria's  Fair  Daughter.  By  Edith  Nepean
'Stanley  Paul  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  London,  1923)  3 s.

A  charming  love  tale,  very  enjoyable  reading  and  a
novel  of  great  power  and  interest.


Blcke  The  Butler.  By  William  Le  Queux  (Jarrolds
Publishers  Ltd.,  London,  1934).

Another  thrilling  book  of  adventures  from  the  pen
of  tlie  most  prolific  writer  of  tflic  day.  Blekc  reveals
the  family  secrets  in  an  inimitable  manner.  His  life
story  is  of  thrilling  interest.


STANDARD  FICTION.

How  many  people  read  standard  fiction  in  preference
to  what  is  called  current  fiction  ?  And  this  not  because
the  former  is  easier  of  access.  We  have,  from  time
to  time,  brought  to  the  notice  of  our  readers  the
various  scries  of  cheap  reprints  of  British  and  con¬
tinental  fiction  and  need  not  rc-cnumcratc  them  here.
But  we  may  draw  attention  to  the  excellent  transla¬
tions  of  Tolstoy’s  works  into  English  that  are  being
rendered  accessible  in  the  famous  "World’s  Classics’’
series  (issued  by  the  Oxford  University  Press)  which
we  have  already  characterized  in  terms  of  apprecia¬
tion,  on  several  occasions.  These  are  by  Mr.  Aylmer
Maude — one  of  the  great  authorities  on  Tolstoy — and
may  be  justly  regarded  as  the  standard  translations  of
that  famous  Russian  novelist.  No  less  than  eight
great  works  of  Tolstoy  (including  fiction,  short  story,
plays,  essays  and  letters)  have  already  appeared  in
English,  in  this  scries,  in  eleven  volumes,  and  a  ninth
one  (in  the  twelfth  volume  in  this  collection)  is  soon  to
follow.  Amongst  the  fiction  already  available  are  three
of  Tolstoy’s  masterpieces — Resurrection,  in  one
volume,  Anna  Karenina  in  two  volumes,  and  H’ar  and
Peace  in  three.  We  hope  the  "World’s  Classics"  will
have  soon  offered  us  a  complete  English  translation  of
the  works  of  Tolstoy.

Many  of  the  masterpieces  in  fiction  of  the  same
author  are  also  to  be  had  in  very  good  English
versions  in  Messrs.  Thomas  Nelson  and  Sons’  reprints
of  standard  works — a  series  which  we  have  repeatedly
commended  to  our  readers,  alike  for  its  excellence  and
cheapness.  The  latest  additions  to  Messrs.  Nelson's


series  arc  Tolstoy’s  Anna  Karenina,  in  two  volumes,
and  Alexandre  Dumas’  The  Queen's  Necklace,  Sir
Walter  Scott’s  The  Pirate  and  Nathaniel  Howthorne’s
The  Scarlet  Letter.  The  convenient  size  of  the  books
in  both  these  series,  their  neat  printing,  their
mechanical  execution,  and  their  cheap  price,  render
them  mast  attractive  and  should  secure  for  them  a
very  large  circulation  in  circles  where  good  literature
is  appreciated.


RECENT  ANTHOLOGIES.

The  Golden  Book  ol  Modern  English  Poetry  1870-
1920.  Selected  and  arranged  by  Thomas  Caldwell,  with
an  Introduction  by  Lord  Dunsany.  Second,  revised
edition.  (J.  M.  Dent  &  Sons,  Ltd.,  London)  1923.

An  Anthology  of  English  Verse.  Edited  by  John
Drinkwater.  (William  Collins  Sons  &  Co.,  Ltd.,
4S  Pall,  Mall,  London,  W.)  1924.

A  Book  ol  Verse  for  Boys.  Edited  (with  occasional
notes)  by  C.  H.  Warren  (Grant  Richards  Ltd.,  St.
Martin’s  Street,  London)  1924.

A  Whin  of  Old  Times.  Collected  by  John  Wishart
(John  Wright  &  Sons,  Ltd.,  Bristol,  England)  1924.

Thoughts  ol  the  Great.  First  series.  Collected  by
G.  S.  Arnndalc  (Thcosophical  Publishing  House,
Advar,  Madras)  1924.

W  e  arc  living  in  an  age  of  compilation — anthologies,
selections,  collections,  reprints  et  hoc  genus  omne.
But  that  is  because  knowledge  is  now  sought  to  be
taken  in  tabloids  and  it  is  useless  to  grumble  against
l-'atc.  Of  the  five  anthologies  noted  above,  the  three
topmost  ones  arc  collections  of  verse  and  the  last  two
of  prose  nnd  verse.  Mr.  Caldwell’s  Golden  Book  0/
Modern  English  Poetry  is — in  its  revised  form — the
best  collection  of  English  verse  written  during  the
last  half  a  century  and  may  justly  claim  to  be  re¬
presentative  of  all  that  is  finest  and  most  inspiring  in
contemporary  English  poetry.  It  has  already  taken
its  rank  amongst  the  standard  anthologies  of  English
poetical  literature.  Mr.  John  Drinkwater’s  collection—
.In  Anthology  0/  English  Verse— coven  the  whole
field  of  English  poetry  from  Chaucer  downwards.
Selected  by  one  of  the  foremost  men  of  letters,  the
collection  is  judiciously  made  and  offers  infinite  riches
within  a  small  compass.  It  deserves  a  large  circula¬
tion.  Mr.  Henry  Warren’s  A  Book  of  Verse  for  Boys  is
an  anthology  ol  poems  that  those  for  whom  it  is
intended  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  appreciate.
Modern  poetry  has  been  largely  drawn  upon  and
the  collection  should  appeal  to  boys.  Dr.  Wishart’*
A  II  hiff  of  Old  Times  comprises  one  hundred  extracts


128


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


from  scientific  literature  .prior  to  1S50)  put  together
mainly  for  the  benefit  of  medical  practitioners,  hut
there  is  much  in  the  collection  to  appeal  to  the  general
reader.  Mr.  Aruudalc's  Thougllts  of  the  Great  (first
series)  covers  much  larger  ground — the  extracts
ranging  from  the  works  of  authors  of  all  ages  and
countries.  They  are  truly 'representative  of  some  of
the  best  and  greatest  thdught  and  the  collection  is
inspiring  to  a  degree.  iWc  earnestly  hope  Mr.
Arnndnle  will  be  encouraged  to  issue  a  second  series
of  his  Thoughts  of  the  Great,  for  which,  he  says,  lie
has  got  ample  materials  in  his  note-book.


REPRINTS  AND  TRANSLATIONS.

The  Go’den  Ass  of  Lucius  Apuleius:  In  the  traits
lation  ol  William  Adllngton.  Edited  by  F.  J.  Harvey
Darton  (The  Navarre  Society,  Ltd.,  London)  1924-
Sir  Richard  Fanshswe’s  Translation  of  the  Fourth
Book  of  Virgil's  Aeneid.  Edited  by  A.  L.  Irvine.
(Basil  Blackwell,  Broad  Street,  Oxford)  1924-

Goethe's  Faust.  (First  |>art).  Translated  by  John
Todliuntcr.  (Basil  Blackwell,  Ilroad  Street,  Oxford)
1924.

Rabindranath  Tagore’s  The  Curse  at  Farewell.
Translated  by  Edward  Thompson.  (George  Harrap
&  Co.,  Ltd.,  39— 4t  Barker  Street,  Kingsway,  London,
\V.  C.  2)  1924.

Selections  from  Borrow.  Edited  by  H.  S.  Milford.
(Oxford  University  Dress  Depot,  t  Garstin  Place,
Calcutta)  1924.

Adventures  in  Criticism.  By  Sir  A.  Quillcr-Couch
(Cambridge  University  Ifess  Depot,  Amen  Comer,
I/.ndon)  1924.

The  Martjrdom  of  Man.  By  (the  late)  Winwood
Readc.  (Watts  &  Co.,  Johnson's  Court,  Fleet  Street,
I^mdcm)  1924.

Buddhist  Psychology.  By  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids
Second  edition,  with  supplementary  chapters.  (Luzac
&  Co.,  46  Great  Russell  Street,  London,  E.  C.)  1924.

The  Philosophy  of  the  t'panisliads.  By  S.  Rndha
krishnan.  (George  Allen  &  Unwin,  40  Museum  Street,
London,  W.  C.  1)  1924.

The  Golden  .4*5  of  Lucins  Apuleius  is  a  well-
known  Latin  classic  and  its  translation  into  English  by
Adlington,  issued  In  1566,  is  itself  justly  regarded  as
n  classic  in  Elizahethan  literature.  We,  therefore,
welcome  the  elegant  and  wcll-got-up  edition  of  it
edited,  for  the  Navarre  Society,  by  Mr.  F.  J.  Harvey
Darton,  with  an  excellent  Introduction  and  with  illus¬
trations  and  decorations  by  Mr.  Philip  Hagrccn,  It


should  find  a  place  in  the  library  of  a  man  of  letters.
The  next  l»ook  in  uur  list  is  also  a  classic — both  in  its
original  and  translation.  Sir  Richard  Fanshawe  was
Milton's  successor  as  “Latin  Secretary'"  and  bis
rendering  of  the  fourth  book  of  Virgil's  Aeneid
appeared  in  1648.  Curiously  it  has  not  been  reprinted
since  the  seventeenth  century.  The  work  of  one  who
was  both  a  scholar  and  a  poet,  it  fully  deserved  a
reprint,  and  its  text  now  rendered  available  by  Mr.
A.  L.  Irvine,  elncidated  by  the  editor's  critical  re¬
marks,  should  secure  for  it  a  wide  appreciation.  Of
the  two  other  translations  in  our  list,  one  is  that  of
the  first  part  of  Goethe’s  Faust  and  the  other  of  a
work  of  Tagore's.  The  late  Dr.  Todhunter  is  already
well-known  as  a  translator  from  the  German  through
his  graceful  renderings  of  the  lyrics  of  Heine.  In  the
present  volume,  which  will  rank  as  the  best  modem
translation  of  Goethe's  masterpiece,  the  felicity  of  his
earlier  achievement  is  repeated.  It  is  a  verse  transla¬
tion,  retaining  the  metres  of  the  original,  and  uniting
a  scholarly  fidelity  with  a  distinction  of  phrasing  which
brings  ns  a  step  nearer  perfection.  An  illuminating
Introduction  from  the  pen  of  Professor  J.  G.  Robertson
enhances  the  value  and  usefulness  of  Dr.  Todhnntcr'tf
translation.  Rabindranath  Tagore’s  dramatic  poem
called  The  Curse  at  Farewell  is  well  rendered  into
Pnglish  by  Mr.  Edward  Thompson,  lecturer  in
Bengalee  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Mr.
Thompson’s  Introduction  gives  much  useful  informa¬
tion  about  the  works  of  Tagore.

The  next  batch  of  books  in  our  list  are  reprints  of
standard  works — either  in  whole  or  in  part.  As  a
sample  of  the  latter  class  we  have  the  Seleetlons  from
Borrow,  judiciously  put  together  with  notes  by  Mr.
H.  S.  Milford  os  a  volume  of  the  “Clarendon  Series
of  English  Literature”.  Its  usefulness  is  appreciably
increased  by  the  reprint  of  three  essays  on  Borrow
written  by  Richard  Ford,  Leslie  Stephen  and  George
Saintsbury.  There  can  he  no  better  introductory  text¬
book  to  the  study  of  Borrow  than  Mr.  Milford’s  well-
choscn  selection.  Sir  Arthur  Quiller-Couch’s  dd ven¬
tures  in  Criticism  is  a  reprint,  in  a  choice  pocket
edition,  of  a  collection -of  essays  originally  published  in
1896.  A  few  omissions  and  alterations  have  been  made,
but  the  text  is  substantially  that  of  the  eighteen-
nineties  or  thereabouts  and  naturally  possesses  the
buoyancy  of  youth.  The  volume  is  published  in  the
new  liandy  scries  of  Sir  Arthur’s  works,  in  which  the
reprints  are  very  welcome.  The  late  Mr.  Winwood
Rcade’s  Martyrdom  of  Man  is  a  classic  in  the  historical
literature  of  the  Victorian  era.  Readers  of  Mr.  H.  G.
Well’s  famous  historical  masterpiece — The  Outline  of
History — will  recall  his  testimony  to  Rcade's  book.  He
says  : — “Remarkably  few  sketches  of  universal  history


REVIEWS  AND  NOTICES


129


by  one  Millie  antlior  have  been  written.  One  book
thut  has  influenced  me  very  strongly  is  Win  wood
Keade’s  Martyrdom  o)  Man.  This  ‘dates'  os  people
say,  now-a-days,  and  it  lias  a  fine  gloom  at  its  own ;  but
it  is  still  an  extraordinarily  inspiring  presentation  of
human  history  as  one  consistent  process.”  We  agree,
and  the  reprint,  in  handy  sire,  enriched  with  an
illuminative  introduction  by  Mr.  F.  Legge  is  thus
doubly  welcome.  It  deserves  u  very  wide  appreciation
by  English-knowing  Indians.  The  last  two  books  in
our  list  deal  with  Buddhism  and  Hinduism.  Mrs.
Rhys  Davids'  Buddhist  Psychology  (first  issued  in
1914)  is  justly  regarded  as  a  standard  work  on  the
subject.  The  second  edition,  which  has  just  seen  the
light,  has  four  supplementary  chapters  and  an
epilogue,  which  are  very  important  and  increase
substantially  the  value  of  the  book.  In  its  present
form  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids'  Buddhist  Psychology  will
continue  to  be  the  sole  standard  treatise  on  the
subject  it  deals  with.  Professor  Radhakrishnan’s
Philosophy  o f  the  Upanlshads  is  a  verbatim  reprint
from  his  Indian  Philosophy  of  the  chapters  dealing
with  the  Upanishads.  The  reprint  should  cater  for
the  needs  of  students  of  the  earliest  philosophy  of
India.


OPR  LIBRARY  TABLE:  MISCELLANEOUS.

LITERATURE.

The  Voice  ol  Ireland  (John  Hevwood,  Ltd.,
Manchester)  is  a  bulky,  weighty,  composite  work-
edited  by  Mr.  William  Fitz-gcrald  and  contributed  by
the  foremost  leaders  of  Irish  public  opinion,  both  at
home  and  abroad.  It  is  a  survey  of  the  Irish  race  and
nation  from  nil  angles  and  is  intended  as  a  memorial
of  “freedom's  day"  marked  by  the  establishment  of
the  Irish  Free  Stale.  Except  for  ita  being  inconvenient
to  handle  owing  to  its  big  size  and  heavy  weight  (it
is  many  pounds),  it  is  a  splendid  example  of  colla¬
borative  work.  The  writers  arc  eminent  men  in
various  spheres  of  activities  and  many  walks  of  life
and  several  of  them  have  taken  an  active  and  pro¬
minent  part  in  the  settlement  of  the  Irish  problem.
The  letter-press  coming  from  the  pen  of  such  qualified
writers— mostly  experts  and  specialists — is  consequent¬
ly  trustworthy  and  instructive,  and  the  value  of  the
text  is  substantially  increased  by  reason  of  the  many
excellent  reproductions  of  photographs  with  which  the
book  is  embellished.  Thus  Mr.  FiU-gcvald's  compiln
tion  is  a  notable  instance  of  co-operative  work  of
high  order  and  great  merit  and  should  command  a
large  circulation  amongst  admirers  of  “Ould  Ireland”
and  her  children


Mr.  Eric  Parker— “Shooting  editor  oi  “The  Field,”
a  description  which  will  startle  the  average  Indian
editor — has  written  a  very  g"od  bcok  called  Elements
ol  Shooting  (The  Field  Press,  Windsor  House,
Bream’s  Buildings,  London,  E.  C.-4).  In  ita  scope
and  treatment  this  book  differs  other  books  on

shooting.  The  author  writes  as  an  older  companion
might  talk  to  a  young  shot  or  a  beginner,  not  only  of
the  actual  practice  of  sHfating,  but  of  the  habits  and
natural  history  of  the  grmc  birds  and  beasts  of  Great
Britain.  Distinguishing  features  of  the  book  are  the
coloured  illustrations  reproduced  from  the  author's
sketches,  which  arc  designed  to  show  the  beginner
what  he  would  naturally  learn  on  the  grouse  moor  or
the  stubbles,  e.g.,  how  to  tell  young  and  old  grouse
in  August,  the  difference  between  cock  and  hen
partridges,  and  so  on.  In  its  practical  advice,  and
with  its  original  method  of  illustration,  the  book  is
typically  the  gift  of  experinence  to  the  tyro.  On  the
whole,  a  capital  work.


The  London  ol  Charleg  Dickens  by  Mr.  E.  Bcrcsfonl
Chancellor  (Grant  Richards,  Ltd.,  St.  Martin’s  Street,
London)  will  appeal  not  only  to  the  lover  of  Dickens,
but  also  to  the  admirer  of  London.  The  anthor  who
has  written  about  a  dozen  good  books  about  the
topography  and  various  aspects  of  London,  published
some  time  back  the  l.ondon  of  Thackeray,  which
justly  received  wide  appreciation.  So  in  his  London  of
Charles  Dickens,  he  has  presented  an  account  of  the
haunts  of  his  characters  and  the  topographical  setting
of  his  novels.  Needless  to  say,  the  task  undertaken
by  Mr  Chancellor  is  exceedingly  well  performed  and
the  book  affords  most  interesting  reading  and  makes
a  useful  companion  to  the  novels  of  Dickens.  The
twenty-one  very  excellent  photographic  reproductions
euhance  the  attractions  of  his  very  good  book.


Women  Peace-Makers.  By  Hebe  Spaull  (George
Harrap  &  Co.,  39—41  Parker  Street,  Kingswav,
London,  W.  C.  i)  is  a  work  of  much  interest  at  the
present  time.  Thus  little  book  gives  an  account  of
seven  women  who  have  done  valuable  work  for  the
League  of  Satlons — Frokcn  Forchhammcr — Dame
Rachael  Crowdy— Frokcn  Jcppc — Fru  Kjelsberg —
Madame  Curie — Mrs.  Coombc  Tennant  and  Dame
Edith  Lyttelton.  The  sketches  arc  well-written  and  the
portraits  reproduced  from  photographs  add  to  the
interest  of  the  book,  which  should  appeal  alike  to  the
social  reformer  and  the  believer  in  peace-making.


TIIE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


130

Social  Life  in  Ancient  Egypt  from  the  pen  of  that
great  Egyptologist,  Dr.  W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie
(Constable  &  Co.,  I,td.,  London)  is  a  most  excellent
exposition  of  the  social  condition  of  the  ancient  Egyp¬
tian  based  on  the  latest  researches.  It  deals  with  the
frame-work  of  society,  administration,  rights  and
wrongs,  private  life,  supplies  and  commerce  and
constructions  and  defence.  Thus  within  the  compass  of
some  two  hundred  pages,  Dr.  Petrie  covers  a  large
ground  and  his  little  book  is  replete  with  sound  and
trustworthy  information  on  a  subject  of  very  great
interest.  We  are  glad  to  learn  that  the  book  under
notice  is  to  be  followed  by  another  by  the  same  author
called  Religious  Life  In  Egypt.  We  look  forward  with
interest  to  its  publication.

American  Journalism  in  its  methods  and  principles
has  become  so  divergent  from  British  that  a  text¬
book  of  the  subject — called  The  Principles  of
Journalism— by  Mr.  Casper  Yost  should  be  welcomed
(D.  Appleton  &  Co.,  New  York  and  London).  This
book,  written  by  one  of  the  leaders  of  American
journalism,  purposes  to  explain  those  fundamental
principles  which  underlie  the  practice  of  the  highest
type  of  modern  American  journalism.  Mr.  Yost  care¬
fully  examines  the  standards  by  which  his  profession
should  be  governed,  and  its  aims  and  ideals.  From
his  own  mature  experience  and  his  conception  of
general  experience  he  assembles  material  from  which
to  derive  concrete  expression  of  the  printary  principles
of  the  profession.  He  first  discusses  the  origins  and
purpose*  of  the  newspaper,  then  defines  the  character¬
istics  of  a  successful  one,  investigates  the  news
element  and  its  handling,  describes  the  editorial
expression  of  a  newspaper’s  personality  and  the  res¬
ponsibility  and  policy  of  the  editors.  The  "Freedom
of  the  Press”  occupies  a  chapter.  The  final  chapter
deals  with  the  ethics  of  journalism.  Thus  in  this
book  arc  formulated  and  defined  the  fundamental
principles  of  journalism.  The  work  is  the  result  of
the  author’s  conviction  that  there  is  a  growing  need
for  such  a  statement  and  definition.  Journalism  has
taken  its  place  among  the  great  professions  and  there
has  come  the  realization  that  there  is  a  call  for  a
larger  consideration  of  journalism  as  a  whole,  for
thought  about  it  as  a  profession,  for  understanding  of
what  arc  the  standards  by  which  it  should  be
governed,  of  what  are  its  obligations  in  relation  to
the  public,  and  what  its  aims  and  ideals.  This  book
brings  such  understanding,  in  so  far  as  American
Journalism  is  concerned.  It  deserves  careful  con¬
sideration  by  Journalists  in  other  countries,  who  may
desire  to  grasp  the  essential  principles  of  Journalism
as  it  otitains  In  the  United  States.


The  World’s  Living  Religions.  By  Dr.  R.  E.  Hume
(Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  New  York,  D.  S.  A.)  is  a
volume  of  Messrs.  Scribner’s  "Life  and  Religion”
scries  and  it  purports  to  be  an  historical  sketch  of
the  subject.  The  book  aims  to  lay  a  foundation  on
the  basis  of  which  a  thoughtful  reader  can  reach  a
real  understanding  of  the  essential  differences  between
the  extant  religious  of  the  world  and  an  adequate
knowledge  of  their  origin,  literature,  history,  and
values.  Dr.  Hume  has  thoroughly  mastered  the
subject,  and  sought  to  write  dispassionately  and  with
a  discerning  appreciation  of  each  religion.  He  has
stated  clearly  the  essential  facts  about  each,  basing
these  statements  in  every  case  upon  the  original
declarations  in  its  sacred  scriptures.  He  has  aimed
also  to  formulate  the  elements  of  strength  and  of
weakness  in  each  religion,  not  excepting  Christianity,
in  such  a  way  that  an  adherent  of  the  faith  thus
described  would  admit  its  fairness.  This  is  a  unique
and  interesting  feature  of  the  book.  The  author  has
spared  no  pains  to  present  in  this  volume  not  only
the  basic  facts  but  also  conclusions  which  grow  out
of  a  rich  and  varied  experience  interpreted  with  the
aid  of  unflagging  research  and  painstaking  study  and
teaching.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  result
is  a  volume  of  unusual  range  and  value,  and  it
deserves  a  wide  appreciation  alike  for  the  catholicity
of  its  author’s  views,  his  impartiality  in  dealing  with
controversial  topics  and  his  rich  and  rare  scholarship.
It  is  about  the  best  text-book  of  Comparative  Religion.

The  twenty-third  volume  of  "The  Pocket  Univer¬
sity”  (Doubleday,  Page  &  Co.,  New  York,  D.  S.  A.)
is  called  The  Guide  to  Reading.  It  includes  three
instructive  essays  :  on  “Books  for  Study  and  Reading"
by  Dr.  Lyman  Abbott,  "The  Purpose  of  Reading”  by-
Mr.  John  Macy— author  of  Guide  to  Reading— and
"How  to  get  the  Best  ont  of  Books" — by  Mr.  Richard
Lc  Gallienne.  These  are  followed  by  “The  Daily  Guide
to  Reading”  by  Asa  Don  Dickinson,  which  is  the
especial  feature  of  this  course  of  studies.  The  books
suggested  are  both  British  and  American.  On  the
whole  this  Guide  to  Reading  is  both  instructive  and
stimulating,  and  makes  a  useful  manual.

Dr.  Richard  Moulton — who  has  just  passed  away —
was  the  greatest  exponent  of  studying  the  Bible  as
literature  first  and  foremost,  quite  irrespective  of  its
theological  value.  In  pursuance  of  this  object  he
issued  in  twenty-one  separate  volumes  the  text  of  the
Bible  arranged  on  the  plan  advocated  by  him  called
the  "Modern  Reader’s  Bible”  and  the  entire  text  is
now  also  available  in  one  volume.  This  he  followed
up  by  the  publication  of  his  How  to  Read  the  Bible


»33


THE  HINDUSTAN  REVIEW


PACE

Dumas,  Alexander,  The  Queen's  Necklace  147

Marie,  K.  Meade,  An  Outline  0/  Modem  History  114
Marl  and  West:  Confessions  of  a  Princess  ...  125
Kverctt-Grccn,  E.,  Lossie  of  the  Milt  ...  136

Panshawe,  Sir  Richard,  Ytrgtl’s  Aeneid  ...  128

Fasihuddin,  K.  B.  Maulvic  M.,  Kings  of  the  East  ni>

Fischer,  Alex.  and  Max,  Estelle  ...  ...  125

Fitzgerald,  William,  The  Voice  of  Ireland  129

Flaubert,  Gustav,  Sentimental  Education  ...  136
Forbes,  A.  H.,  A  Concise  History  of  Europe  ...  117
Fraser,  J.  N.  &  J.  F.  Edwards,  Life  and  Teachings

of  Tukaram  ...  ...  ...  no

Grey,  Zaire,  The  Call  of  the  Canyon  ...  ...  125

Guide  to  Rhodesia  ...  ...  ...  123

Guide  to  Reading  ...  ...  ...  130

Gulraj,  J.  P.,  Aiini  and  Its  Sufis  ...  ...  107

Haldane,  J.  B.  S.,  Daedalus  or  Science  and  the

Future  ...  ...  ...  ...  49

Hardy,  Thomas,  The  famous  Tragedy  of  the

Queen  of  Cornwall  ...  ...  ...  103

Haasal,  Arthur,  English  History  ...  ...  117

Ilavcll,  E.  B.,  A  Short  History  of  India  ...  117
Hawthorn,  Nathaniel,  Scarlet  Letter  ...  127

Hcarne,  Lafcadio,  Essays  In  European  and
Oriental  Literature  ...  ...  ...  its

Hewlett,  Maurice,  Last  Essays  ...  ...  its

Hill,  Headon,  The  Golden  Temptress  ...  126

Hodges,  S.  W.,  A  Survey  of  Modem  History  ...  113
Hornsby,  M.,  The  Queen’s  Book  of  Travel  ...  122
Iloyland,  J.  S.  &  S.  N.  Bancrjcc,  The  Commentary
of  Father  Monserratc  ...  ...  ...  117

Hume,  R.  E.,  World’s  Living  Religions  ...  130  •

Hutchinson,  Horace  G.,  The  Greatest  Story  in
the  World  ...  ...  ...  ...  116

Ibanez,  Vicente  Blosco,  The  Temptress  ...  124

Iconoclast,  The  Man  of  Tomorrow  ...  ...  46

Jevons,  H.  S.,  The  Student’s  Friend  ...  131

John,  Gwen,  The  Prince  ...  104 — 5

Keith,  A.  B.,  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  its  Origin.

Development.  Theory  and  Practice  toa

Keith,  A.  B.,  Indian  Logic  and  Atomism  ...  »o6
Keller,  H.  Rex,  Readers’  Digest  of  Books  ...  112
Kellett,  E.  E.,  NuggciUons  ...  ...  113

Kincaid,  C.  A.  &  D.  B.  Farasuis,  A  History  of

the  Mahratta  People  ...  ...  ...  «8

Kyne,  Peter  B.,  Never  the  Twain  Shall  Meet  ...  125
Kurnp.  T.  C.  K.,  A  Digest  of  Indian  Constitu¬
tional  La  w  ...  •••  •••  *2°

Lenta,  Marques  de,  Spain  Since  181$  •••  114

I.uke,  H.  C..  T taveHers’  Handbook  to  Palestine.

Syria  ond  Mesopotamia  ...  ...  123


PACK

Macdonald,  William,  Three  Centuries  of  American

Democracy  ...  ...  ...  116

Madras  Year  Book  1924  ...  ...  ...  121

Mats,  S.  F.  B.,  Some  Modern  Authors  ...  112

Mallcaun,  Miles,  The  Fanatics  ...  ...  103

Marriott,  J.  A.  R.,  Europe  and  Beyond  ...  115

Marriott,  J.  W.,  One  Act  Plays  of  To-day  ...  131

McEvoy,  Charles,  The  Three  Barrows  103 — 4

l.cgroz,  R.  Is,  Roller  de  la  Mare  ...  100—1

Mcyersteiu,  E.  H.  W.,  The  Monument  ...  105

Milford,  H.  S.,  Selections  from  Borrow  ...  128

Miller,  William,  The  Ottomon  Empire  and  its
Successors  ...  ...  ...  ...  116

Monkhouse,  Allan,  First  Blood  ...  103—4

Mookerjce,  Radharomon,  The  Law  of  Batumi  ...  tao
Moult,  Thomas,  The  Best  Poems  of  1923  ...  53

Moulton,  Richard,  How  to  read  the  Bible  ...  130
Muir,  Ramsay,  zl  Short  History  of  British  Com¬
monwealth  ...  ...  ...  —  i»4

Mulford,  Clarence  E.,  Beckoning  Trails  ...  126

Murry,  J.  Middleton,  .-li/>rcls  of  Literature  ...  l»3

Mysore  Illustrated  ...  ...  ...  121

Nepean,  Edith,  Cambria’s  Fair  Daughter  ...  127
Oakley,  Hilda  D.,  History  and  Progress  ...  115

Ould,  llcrtuon,  The  Dance  of  Life  ...  ...  103

Page,  Jesse,  Schwarts  of  Tanjore  ...  ...  tn

Pannikar,  K.  M.,  Sri  Harslta  of  Kanauj  ...  110

Parker,  Eric,  Elements  of  Shooting  ...  ...  129

Parasnis,  Rao  D.  B.,  Panhala  ...  •••  iJ9

Peacey,  Howard,  The  Fifth  of  November  ...  103
Pearce,  Charles  E.,  Unsolved  Murder  Mysteries  121
Petrie,  Sir  W.  M.  Flinders,  Social  Life  In  Ancient

Egypt  ...  ...  —  •••  *3°

Philip's  British  Empire  Allas  ...  ...  123

Phillipson,  C.,  Three  Criminal’Law  Reformers  ...  119
Pictorial  Map  oj  London  ...  ...  ...  123

plum,  H.  G.,  and  Others,  Modern  and  Contem¬
porary  European  Civilisation  ...  ...  i*5

Oannngo,  Kalikaranjan,  Shcr  Shah  ...  ...  no

Quenx,  William  Le,  Bleke  the  Butler  ...  127

Ouillcr-Couch,  Sir  A.,  Adventures  In  Criticism  128
Raddi,  S.  V.,  Shiva ji  ...  ...  ...  109

Radhakrishnan,  S..  Philosophy  of  Upanlshadas  ...  12$
Reade,  Winwood,  Martyrdom  of  Matt  ...  ...  128

Roberts,  Frederick,  Letters  written  tn  India
during  Mutiny  ...  ...  ...  119

Russell,  Bertrand,  Icarus  or  Future  of  Science  ...  5°
Sal>atini,  Rafael,  The  Justice  of  the  Duke  ...  i»7
Safroni-Middleton,  A.,  Ragged  Romance  ...  126

Saklatvnln,  J.  E.,  A  Bibliography  of  Religion  ...  124
Snrda,  Harhilas,  Hammira  ...  ...  ...  Ut

Saunders.  K.  J.,  Buddhism  in  the  Modern  World  109


INDEX  TO  BOOKS  REVIEWED


FACE

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  The  Pirate  ...  ...  127

Sen,  Surcndranath,  Sivaji  Chltalrapati  ...  109

Singh,  Sunder,  Reality  and  Religion  ...  ...  48

Slater,  Gilbert,  The  Dravldlan  Element  in  Indian

Culture  ...  ...  ...  ...  118

Spaull,  Hebe,  The  Women  Peace-Makers  129

Stephen.',  Janie. s,  Dierdre  ...  ...  125

Stevens,  C.  L.  McClttre.  Famous  Crimes  and

Criminals  ...  ...  ...  ...  120

Srauss,  C.  T.,  liuddlia  and  his  Doctrine  ...  107

Takakhav,  N.  S.,  Life  of  Sivaji  Maharaj  ...  109

Taki,  R.  S.,  Amourism  ...  ...  ...  10S

Tagore  Rabiudianath,  The  Curse  at  Farewell  ...  128

The  House  In  Charles  Street  ...  ...  126

Thotuas,  E.  J.,  T'edic  Hymns  ...  ...  107

Thompson,  Edward,  Krishna  Kumari  *03—4

Thorndike,  Ashley  H.,  Literature  in  a  Changing

Age  ...  ...  ...  ...  113

Todhunter,  John,  Goethe's  Faust  ...  ...  12S

Tolstoy,  Leo,  Resurrection.  Anna  Karenina,  War
and  Peace  ...  ...  ...  ...  127

Turner,  J.  blastings,  The  Lilies  of  the  Field  104 — 5

Two  Women ;  Clare.  Margaret  ...  ...  124


iiS

FACE

Underhill,  M.  M.,  Hindu  Religious  Year  ...  108

Vcnkataraman,  X.,  Sankracharya  and  his

Successors  in  Kanchl  ...  ...  ...  no

Vivekananda,  Swami,  Raja  Yoga  ...  ...  107

Viziak,  K.  H.,  Milton  Agonistes  :  A  Metaphysi¬
cal  Criticism  ...  ...  ...  32

Warren,  C.  H.,  A  Hook  of  Terse  for  boys  ...  127
Wclby,  T.  Earle,  A  Popular  History  of  English

Poetry  ...  ...  ...  ...  51

Wells,  H.  G.,  The  Dream  ...  ...  ...  50

Wellman,  Francis  L.,  The  Art  of  Cross  Examina-

tion  ...  ...  ...  ...  119

Wbiblcy,  Charles,  Literary  Portraits  ...  ...  113

Whibley,  Charles,  Political  Portraits  ...  ...  113

Williams,  R.  T.,  China  Yesterday  and  To-day  101—2
Wishart,  John,  A  Whiff  of  Old  Timse  ...  127

Wright,  Quincey,  The  Control  of  American

Foreign  Relations  ...  ...  ...  116

Yea  and  Nay  ...  ...  ...  ...  1:3

Yeats,  W.  B.,  Plays  and  Controversies  ...  105

Yeats,  W.  B.,  Essays  ...  ...  ...  in

Yost,  Carper,  Principles  of  Journalism  ...  130


INDEX  TO  BOOKS  REVIEWED


(The  Macmillan  Company,  New  York,  C.S.A.)  which
offers  within  a  short  compass  what  he  called  “the
Bible  at  a  single  view"  as  a  conspectus  of  literature.
The  book  is  highly  instructive  and  should  appeal  both
to  the  student  of  comparative  literature  and  the  general
reader.

“The  Harrap  Library” — issued  by  Messrs.  George
llarrap  &  Co.  of  Parker  Street,  Kings  way,  London —
is  a  series  which  deserves  large  circulation.  Besides
containing  many  choice  reprints  of  the  classics,  it
comprises  some  excellent  anthologies.  Those  issued
so  far  are  the  Poetry  of  Earth,  Golden  Book  of  English
Sonnets,  Essays  of  To-day,  Short  Stories  of  To-day
and  the  latest  called  One-Act  Plays  of  To-day.  The
last,  selected  by  Mr.  J.  \V.  Marriott,  which  claims  to
be  the  first  anthology’  of  its  kind,  consists  of  eleven
short  plays  by  eminent  modem  British  and  Irish  play¬
wrights— ten  of  which  are  in  prose.  The  collection
includes  plays  ranging  from  light  comedy  to  fantasy
and  from  farce  to  tragedy.  Mr.  Marriott's  anthology
of  contemporary  one-act  plays  is  useful  and  interesting.


I3t

Professor  II.  Stanley  Jcvons  has  issued  (through
Mr.  Ram  Narain  Lai  of  Katra,  Allahabad)  his  book
called  The  Student's  Priend,  which  is  full  of  instruc¬
tive  advice  on  studying  carefully  with  a  view  to  passing
examinations  not  only  with  credit  but  with  advantage
to  the  examinees.  The  author  insists  that  “it  is  in
no  sense  a  guide  to  cramming.”  We  endorse  this
claim.  It  deals  lucidly  and  systematically  with  the
various  topics  with  which  an  examinee  is  concerned
and  imparts  to  him  sound  and  wholesome  advice  which
he  would  do  well  to  read,  mark,  learn  and  inwardly
digest.

The  Bangalore  Printing  and  Publishing  Company,
Ltd.  (Bangalore)  are  responsible  for  Mysore  Illustrated,
which  comprises  a  scries  of  excellent  and  well-executed
photographic  reproductions  of  the  views  of  the  scenes
and  sights  in  the  Mysore  State.  The  architectural
Glories  of  Mysore  deserve  to  be  better  known — His
Highness  the  Maharaja's  new  palace  is  the  greatest
and  most  successful  effort  of  Modern  Indian  art — and
this  compilation  will  tend  to  do  so,  as  it  itself  is  an
artistic  production.


INDEX  TO  BOOKS  REVIEWED.


PACE

Adair,  Cecil,  Stiver  Star-Dust  ...  ...  326

Adlington,  William,  The  Golden  Ass  of  Lucius
Apulelus  ...  ...  ...  ...  128

Aivangar,  S.  K.,  Early  History  of  Taishnai-ism  In
S.  India  ...  ...  ...  ...  10S

Aiyangar,  S.  K.,  Southern  India  and  her  Moham -

madan  Invaders  ...  ...  ...  ri8


Aiyangar,  S.  K.,  Some  Contributions  of  S.  India


to  Indian  Culture  ...  ...  ...  118

Alpha  of  the  Plough,  Windfalls  ...  ...  114

Anglo-American  Year  Book  1924  ...  ...  133

Arundalc,  G.  S.,  Thoughts  of  the  Great  ...  127

Barnett,  L.  D.,  Hindu  Gods  and  Heroes  ...  107


Barton,  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  P.,  and  Others.,  The  Story

of  our  Inns  of  Court  ...  ...  ...  120

Bennett,  Allan,  The  Wisdom  of  the  Aryans  ...  109

Binvon,  Laurence,  Ayuli  ...  ...  ...  104

British  Drama  League  Library  ...  104 — 3

Bryce,  Viscount,  Study  of  American  History  ...  117

Bullivant,  Cecil  H.,  Innocence  ...  ...  136

Bttrwav,  M.  W.,  Mahadfi  Slndia  ...  ...  m


PACK

Barway,  M.  W.,  Devi  Ahilyabai  Holkar  ...  tit

Caldwell,  Thomas,  The  Golden  Book  of  Modem

English  Poetry  ...  ...  ...  137

Cannon,  Carl  L.,  Journalism  :  A  Bibliography  133
Carpenter,  Edward,  Teachings  of  the  Upnasltids  107
Carpenter,  J.  R.,  Theism  In  Medeival  India  ...  106
Cathedrals  ...  ...  ...  ...  123

Chakraberty,  Chandra,  A  Study  in  Hindu  Social

Polity  ...  ...  ...  ...  tcS

Chancellor,  E.  B.,  The  London  of  Charles  Dickens  139
Chapman,  J.  A.,  Valsnava  Lyrics  ...  ...  to8

Chattopadhyaya,  H.,  Pundallk  ...  ...  305

Clow,  A.  G.,  Workmen's  Compensation  Act  ...  130
Conrad,  Joseph,  The  Rescue  ...  ...  125

Contemporary  British  Dramatists  ...  103 — 4

Cousins,  C.  W.,  Official  Year  Book  of  the  Union
of  s.  Africa  ...  ...  ...  tar

Davids,  Mrs.  Rhys,  Buddhist  Psychology  ...  13S
Davis,  W.  S.,  A  Short  History  of  the  Near  East  115
de  Lacrctelle,  Jacques,  Silbcrmann  ...  ...  124

Drinkwatcr,  John,  An  Anthology  of  English  Terse  127


*


Please  help  us  to  keep  the  book
clean  and  moving.


t.  M8.N.  OttHI.
