THE CHALDAEAN ORACLES OF ZOROASTER
Edited by William Wynn Westcott (as 'Sapere Aude'), 1895
From esotericarchives.com

## Chaldaean Oracles of Zoroaster (ed. Westcott)

# The Chaldæan Oracles of Zoroaster

Edited and revised by Sapere Aude.

With an introduction by L. O.

## THE CHALDÆAN ORACLES ATTRIBUTED TO ZOROASTER.

### PREFACE

By SAPERE AUDE.

THESE Oracles are considered to embody many of the principal features
of Chaldæan philosophy. They have come down to us through
Greek translations and were held in the greatest esteem throughout
antiquity, a sentiment which was shared alike by the early Christian
Fathers and the later Platonists. The doctrines contained therein
are attributed to Zoroaster, though to which particular Zoroaster
is not known; historians give notices of as many as six different
individuals all bearing that name, which was probably the title
of the Prince of the Magi, and a generic term. The word Zoroaster
is by various authorities differently derived: Kircher furnishes
one of the most interesting derivations when he seeks to show
that it comes from TzURA = a figure, and TzIUR = to fashion, ASh
= fire, and STR = hidden; from these he gets the words Zairaster
= fashioning images of hidden fire; -- or Tzuraster = the image
of secret things. Others derive it from Chaldee and Greek words
meaning "a contemplator of the Stars."

It is not, of course, pretended that this collection as it stands
is other than disjointed and fragmentary, and it is more than
probable that the true sense of many passages has been obscured,
and even in some cases hopelessly obliterated, by inadequate translation.

Where it has been possible to do so, an attempt has been made
to elucidate doubtful or ambiguous expressions, either by modifying
the existing translation from the Greek, where deemed permissible,
or by appending annotations.

It has been suggested by some that these Oracles are of Greek
invention, but it has already been pointed out by Stanley that
Picus de Mirandula [Giovanni Pico della Mirandula] assured Ficinus
[Marcilio Ficino] that he had the Chaldee Original in his
possession, in which those things which are faulty and defective
in the Greek are read perfect and entire," and Ficinus indeed
states that he found this MS. upon the death of Mirandula. In
addition to this, it should be noted that here and there in the
original Greek version, words occur which are not of Greek extracti6n
at all, but are Hellenised Chaldee.

Berosus is said to be the first who introduced the writings of
the Chaldæans concerning Astronomy and Philosophy among
the Greeks,[1] and it is certain that the traditions of Chaldea
very largely influenced Greek thought. Taylor considers that some
of these mystical utterances are the sources whence the sublime
conceptions of Plato were formed, and large commentaries were
written upon them by Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proclus, Pletho and
Psellus. That men of such great learning and sagacity should have
thought so highly of these Oracles, is a fact which in itself
should commend them to our attention.

[1. Josephus, contra Apion. I.]

The term "Oracles" was probably bestowed upon these
epigrammatic utterances in order to enforce the idea of their
profound and deeply mysterious nature. The Chaldæans, however,
had an Oracle, which they venerated as highly as the Greeks did
that at Delphi. [1]

[1. Stephanus, De Urbibus.]

We are indebted to both Psellus and Pletho, for comments at some
length upon the Chaldæan Oracles, and the collection adduced
by these writers has been considerably enlarged by Franciscus
Patricius, who made many additions from Proclus, Hermias, Simplicius,
Damascius, Synesius, Olympiodorus, Nicephorus and Arnobius; his
collection, which comprised some 324 oracles under general heads,
was published in Latin in 1593, and constitutes the groundwork
of the later classification arrived at by Taylor and Cory; all
of these editions have been utilised in producing the present
revise.

A certain portion of these Oracles collected by Psellus, appear
to be correctly attributed to a Chaldæan Zoroaster of very
early date, and are marked Z," following the method indicated
by Taylor, with one or two exceptions. Another portion is attributed
to a sect of philosophers named Theurgists, who flourished during
the reign of Marcus Antoninus, upon the authority of Proclus,[2]
and these are marked "T." Oracles additional to these
two series and of less definite source are marked "Z or T."
Other oracular passages from miscellaneous authors are indicated
by their names.

[2. Vide his Scholia on the Cratylus of Plato.]

The printed copies of the Oracles to be found in England are the
following: --

1. Oracula Magica, Ludovicus Tiletanus, Paris, 1563.

2. Zoroaster et ejus 320 oracula Chaldaica; by Franciscus
Patricius. . . . 1593.

3. Fred. Morellus; Zoroastris oracula, 1597. Supplies
about a hundred verses.

4. Otto Heurnius; Barbaricæ Philosophia antiquitatum
libri duo, 1600.

5. Johannes Opsopoeus; Oracula Magica Zoroastris 1599.
This includes the Commentaries of Pletho and of Psellus in
Latin.

6. Servatus Galloeus; Sibulliakoi Chresmoi, 1688. Contains
a version of the Oracles.

Thomas Stanley. The History of the Chaldaic Philosophy, 1701.
This treatise contains the Latin of Patricius, and the Commentaries
of Pletho and Psellus in English

Johannes Alb. Fabricius, Bibliotheca Greca, 1705-7. Quotes
the Oracles.

Jacobus Marthanus, 1689. This version contains the Commentary
of Gemistus Pletho.

Thomas Taylor, The Chaldæan Oracles, in the Monthly
Magazine, and published independently, 1806.

Bibliotheca Classica Latina; A. Lemaire, volume 124, Paris,
1823.

Isaac Preston Cory, Andent Fragments, London, 1828. (A
third edition of this work has been published, omitting the Oracles.)

Phoenix, New York, 1835. A collection of curious old tracts,
among which are the Oracles of Zoroaster, copied from Thomas Taylor
and I. P. Cory; with an essay by Edward Gibbon.

### INTRODUCTION

BY L. O.

It has been believed by many, and not without good reason, that
these terse and enigmatic utterances enshrine a profound system
of mystical philosophy, but that this system demands for its full
discernment a refinement of faculty, involving, as it does, a
discrete perception of immaterial essences.

It has been asserted that the Chaldæan Magi [1] preserved
their occult learning among their race by continual tradition
from Father to Son. Diodorus says: "They learn these things,
not after the same fashion as the Greeks: for amongst the Chaldæans,
philosophy is delivered by tradition in the family, the Son receiving
it from his Father, be mg exempted from all other employment;
and thus having their parents for their teachers, they learn all
things fully and abundantly, believing more firmly what is communicated
to them." [2]

[1. This powerful Guild was the guardian of Chaldæan philosophy,
which exceeded the bounds of their country, and diffused itself
into Persia and Arabia that borders upon it; for which reason
the learning of the Chaldæans, Persians and Arabians is
comprehended under the general title of Chaldæan.

2. Diodorus, lib. I.]

The remains then of this oral tradition seems to exist in these
Oracles, which should be studied in the light of the Kabalah and
of Egyptian Theology. Students are aware that the Kabalah [1]
is susceptible

of extraordinary interpretation with the aid of the Tarot, resuming
as the latter does, the very roots of Egyptian Theology. Had a
similar course been adopted by commentators in the past, the Chaldæan
system expounded in these Oracles would not have been distorted
in the way it has been.

[1. Vide Kabalah Denudata, by MacGregor Mathers.]

The foundation upon which the whole structure of the Hebrew Kabalah
rests is an exposition of ten deific powers successively emanated
by the Illimitable Light, which in their varying dispositions
are considered as the key of all things. This divine procession
in the form of Three Triads of Powers, synthesized in a tenth,
is said to be extended through four worlds, denominated respectively
Atziluth, Briah, Yetzirah and Assiah, a fourfold gradation from
the subtle to the gross. This proposition in its metaphysical
roots is pantheistic, though, if it may be so stated, mediately
theistic; while the ultimate noumenon of all phenomena is the
absolute Deity, whose ideation constitutes the objective Universe.

Now these observations apply strictly also to the Chaldæan
system.

The accompanying diagrams sufficiently indicate the harmony and
identity of the Chaldæan philosophy with the Hebrew Kabalah.
It will be seen that the First Mind and the Intelligible Triad,
Pater, Potentia, or Mater, and Mens, are allotted to the Intelligible
World of Supramundane Light: the "First Mind" represents
the archetypal intelligence as an entity in the bosom of the Paternal
Depth. This concentrates by reflection into the "Second Mind"
representative of the Divine Power in the Empyraean World which
is identified with the second great Triad of divine powers, known
as the Intelligible and at the same time Intellectual Triad:
the Aethereal World comprises the dual third Triad denominated
Intellectual: while the

fourth or Elementary World is governed by Hypezokos, or Flower
of Fire, the actual builder of the world.

#### CHALDÆAN SCHEME.

The Intelligibles
The Paternal Depth

World of Supra-mundane Light
The First Mind

-----

The Intelligible Triad

Pater: Mater or Potentia: Mens

The Second Mind
-----

Intelligibles and Intellectuals

in the

Empyræan World
Iynges

Synoches

Teletarchæ

(The Third Mind.)

Intellectuals

in the Ethereal World
Three Cosmagogi

(Intellectual guides inflexible.)

Three Amilicti

(Implacable thunders).

Elementary World

The Demiurgos of the

Material Universe
Hypezokos

(Flower of Fire)

Effable, Essential and

Elemental Orders

---

The Earth-Matter

#### KABALISTIC SCHEME.

World of Atziluth
or of God

The Boundless
The Illimitable
Light

Ain Suph.
Ain Suph Aur

A radiant triangle

World of Briah
Divine Forces

Kether
(crown)

Binah
(Intelligence)Chokmah
(Wisdom)

World of Yetzirah
or of Formation

GeburahChesed

Tiphereth

Hod Netzach.

Yesod

World of Assiah

Material Form.
Malkuth
Ruled by
Adonai Melekh

-----
The Earth-Matter.

#### CHALDÆAN SCHEME OF BEINGS.

Representatives of the previous classes guiding our universe.

I. Hyperarchii -- Archangels

II. Azonoei -- Unzoned gods

III. Zonoei -- Planetary Deities.

---

Higher demons: Angels

-----

Human Souls

-----

Lower demons, elementals

Fiery
Airy
Earthy
Watery

-----

Evil demons

Lucifugous; the kliphoth

Chaldæan Theology contemplated three great divisions of
supra-mundane things:-- the First was Eternal, without
beginning or end, being the "Paternal Depth," the bosom
of the Deity. The Second was conceived to be that mode of being
having beginning but no end; the Creative World or Empyræeum
falls under this head, abounding as it does in productions, but
its source remaining superior to these. The third and last order
of divine things had a beginning in time and will end, this is
the transitory Ethereal World. Seven spheres extended through
these three Worlds, viz., one in the Empyraeum or

verging from it, three in the Ethereal and three in the Elementary
Worlds, while the whole physical realm synthesized the foregoing.
These seven spheres are not to be confounded with the Seven material
Planets; although the latter are the physical representatives
of the former, which can only be said to be material in the metaphysical
sense of the term. Psellus professed to identify them but his
suggestions are inadequate as Stanley pointed out. But Stanley,
although disagreeing with Psellus, is nevertheless inconsistent
upon this point, for although he explains the four Worlds of the
Chaldæans as successively noumenal to the physical realm,
he obviously contradicts this in saying that one corporeal
world is in the Empyræum.

Prior to the supramundane Light lay the "Paternal Depth,"
the Absolute Deity, containing all things "in potentia"
and eternally immanent. This is analogous to the Ain Suph
Aur of the Kabalah, three words of three letters, expressing three
triads of Powers, which are subsequently translated into objectivity,
and constitute the great Triadic Law under the direction of the
Demiurgus, or artificer of the Universe.

In considering this schema, it must be remembered that the supramundane
Light was regarded as the primal radiation from the, Paternal
Depth and the archetypal noumenon of the Empyræum, a universal,
all-pervading -- and, to human comprehension -- ultimate essence.
The Empyræum again, is a somewhat grosser though still highly
subtilized Fire and creative source, in its turn the noumenon
of the Formative or Ethereal World, as the latter is the noumenon
of the Elementary World. Through these graduated media the conceptions
of the Paternal Mind are ultimately fulfilled in time and space.

In some respects it is probable that the Oriental mind today is
not much altered from what it was

thousands of years ago, and much that now appears to us curious
and phantastic in Eastern traditions, still finds responsive echo
in the hearts and minds of a vast portion of mankind. A large
number of thinkers and scientists in modern times have advocated
tenets which, while not exactly similar, are parallel to ancient
Chaldæan conceptions; this is exemplified in the notion
that the operation of natural law in the Universe is controlled
or operated by conscious and discriminating power which is co-ordinate
with intelligence. It is but one step further to admit that forces
are entities, to people the vast spaces of the Universe with the
children of phantasy. Thus history repeats itself, and the old
and the new alike reflect the multiform truth.

Without entering at length into the metaphysical aspect, it is
important to notice the supremacy attributed to the "Paternal
Mind." The intelligence of the Universe, poetically described
as "energising before energy," establishes on high the
primordial types or patterns of things which are to be, and, then
inscrutably latent, vests the development of these in the Rectores
Mundorum, the divine agents or powers already referred to.
As it is said, "Mind is with Him, power with them."

The word "Intelligible" is used in the Platonic sense,
to denote a mode of being, power or perception, transcending intellectual
comprehension, i.e., wholly distinct from, and superior
to, ratiocination. The Chaldæans recognised three modes
of perception, viz., the testimony of the various senses,
the ordinary processes of intellectual activity, and the intelligible
conceptions before referred to. Each of these operations is distinct
from the others, and, moreover, conducted in separate matrices,
or vehicula. The anatomy of the Soul was, however, carried much
farther than this, and, although in its ultimate radix

recognised as identical with the divinity, yet in manifested being
it was conceived to be highly complex. The Oracles speak of the
"Paths of the Soul," the tracings of inflexible fire
by which its essential parts are associated in integrity; while
its various "summits," "fountains," and "vehicula,"
are all traceable by analogy with universal principles. This latter
fact is, indeed, not the least remarkable feature of the Chaldæan
system. Like several of the ancient cosmogonies, the principal
characteristic of which seems to have been a certain adaptability
to introversion, Chaldæan metaphysics synthesize most clearly
in the human constitution.

In each of the Chaldæan Divine Worlds a trinity of divine
powers operated, which synthetically constituted a fourth term.
"In every World," says the Oracle, "a Triad shineth,
of which the Monad is the ruling principle." These "Monads"
are the divine Vice-gerents by which the Universe was conceived
to be administered. Each of the four Worlds, viz., the
Empyræan, Ethereal, Elementary and Material, was presided
over by a Supreme Power, itself in direct rapport with
"the Father" and "moved by unspeakable counsels."
These are clearly identical with the Kabalistic conception of
the presidential heads of the four letters composing the Deity
name in so many different languages. A parallel tenet is conveyed
in the Oracle which runs: "There is a Venerable Name projected
through the Worlds with a sleepless revolution." The Kabalah
again supplies the key to this utterance, by regarding the Four
Worlds as under the presidency of the four letters of the Venerable
Name, a certain letter of the four being allotted to each World,
as also was a special mode of writing the four-lettered name appropriate
thereto; and, indeed in that system it is taught that the order
of the Elements, both macrocosmic and microcosmic, on every plane,

is directly controlled by the "revolution of the name."
That Name is associated with the Æthers of the Elements
and is thus considered as a Universal Law; it is the power which
marshals the creative host, summed tip in the Demiurgus, Hypezokos,
or Flower of Fire.

Reference may here be made to the psychic anatomy of the human
being according to Plato. He places the intellect in the head;
the Soul endowed with some of the passions, such as fortitude,
in the heart; while another Soul, of which the appetites, desires
and grosser passions are its faculties, about the stomach and
the spleen.

So, the Chaldæan doctrine as recorded by Psellus, considered
man to be composed of three kinds of Souls, which may respectively
be called:

First, the Intelligible, or divine soul,

Second, the Intellect or rational soul, and

Third, the Irrational, or passional soul.

This latter was regarded as subject to mutation, to be dissolved
and perish at the death of the body.

Of the Intelligible, or divine soul, the Oracles teach that "It
is a bright fire, which, by the power of the Father, remaineth
immortal, and is Mistress of Life;" its power may be dimly
apprehended through regenerate phantasy and when the sphere of
the Intellect has ceased to respond to the images of the passional
nature.

Concerning the rational soul, the Chaldæans taught that
it was possible for it to assimilate itself unto the divinity
on the one hand, or the irrational soul on the other. "Things
divine," we read, "cannot be obtained by mortals whose
intellect is directed to the body alone, but those only who are
stripped of their garments, arrive at the summit,"

To the three Souls to which reference has been made, the Chaldæans
moreover allotted three distinct

vehicles: that of the divine Soul was immortal, that of, the rational
soul by approximation became so; while to the irrational soul
was allotted what was called "the image," that is. the
astral form of the physical body.

Physical life thus integrates three special modes of activity,
which upon the dissolution of the body are respectively involved
in the web of fate consequent upon incarnate energies
in three different destinies.

The Oracles urge men to devote themselves to things divine, and
not to give way to the promptings of the irrational soul, for,
to such as fail herein, it is significantly said, "Thy vessel
the beasts of the earth shall inhabit."

The Chaldæans assigned the place of the Image, the vehicle
of the irrational soul, to the Lunar Sphere; it is probable that
by the Lunar Sphere was meant something more than the orb of the
Moon, the whole sublunary region, of which the terrestrial earth
is, as it were, the centre. At death, the rational Soul rose above
the lunar influence, provided always the past permitted that happy
release. Great importance was attributed to the way in which the
physical life was passed during the sojourn of the Soul in the
tenement of flesh, and frequent are the, exhortations to rise
to communion with those Divine powers, to which nought but the
highest Theurgy can pretend.

"Let the immortal depth of your Soul lead you," says
an Oracle, "but earnestly raise your eyes upwards."
Taylor comments upon this in the following beautiful passage:
"By the eyes are to be understood all the gnostic powers
of the Soul, for when these are extended the Soul becomes replete
with a more excellent life and divine illumination; and is, as
it were, raised above itself."

Of the Chaldæan Magi it might be truly said that they "among
dreams did first discriminate the truthful

vision!" for they were certainly endowed with a far reaching
perception both mental and spiritual; attentive to images, and
fired with mystic fervours, they were something more than mere
theorists, but were also practical exemplars of the philosophy
they taught. Life on the plains of Chaldæa, with its mild
nights and jewelled skies, tended to foster the interior unfoldment;
in early life the disciples of the Magi learnt to resolve the
Bonds of proscription and enter the immeasurable region. One Oracle
assures us that, "The girders of the Soul, which give her
breathing, are easy to be unloosed," and elsewhere we read
of the "Melody of the Ether" and of the "Lunar
clashings" experiences which testify to the reality of their
occult methods.

The Oracles assert that the impressions of characters and other
divine visions appear in the Ether. The Chaldæan philosophy
recognized the ethers of the Elements as the subtil media through
which the operation of the grosser elements is effected -- by
the grosser elements I mean what we know as Earth, Air, Water,
and Fire - the principles of dryness and moisture, of heat and
cold. These subtil ethers are really the elements of the ancients,
and seem at an early period to have been connected with the Chaldæan
astrology, as the signs of the Zodiac were connected with them.
The twelve signs of the Zodiac are permutations of the ethers
of the elements - four elements with three variations each; and
according to the preponderance of one or another elemental condition
in the constitution of the individual, so were his natural inclinations
deduced therefrom. Thus when in the astrological jargon it was
said that a man had Aries rising, he was said to be of a fiery
nature, his natural tendencies being active, energetic, and fiery,
for in the constitution of such a one the fiery ether predominates.
And these ethers were

stimulated, or endowed with a certain kind of vibration, by their
Presidents, the Planets; these latter being thus. suspended in
orderly disposed zones. Unto the Planets, too, colour and sound
were also attributed ; the planetary colours are connected with
the ethers, and each of the Planetary forces was said to have
special dominion over, or affinity with, one or other of the Zodiacal
constellations. Communion with the hierarchies of these constellations
formed p art of the Chaldæan theurgy, and in a curious fragment
it is said: "If thou often invokest it" (the celestial
constellation called the Lion) "then when no longer is visible
unto thee the Vault of the Heavens, when the Stars have lost their
light the lamp of the Moon is veiled, the Earth abideth not, and
around thee darts the lightning flame, then all things will appear
to thee in the form of a Lion!" The Chaldæans like
the Egyptians, appear to have bad a highly developed appreciation
of colours, an evidence of their psychic susceptibility. The use
of bright colours engenders the recognition of subsisting variety
and stimulates that perception of the mind which energizes through
imagination, or the ,operation of images. The Chaldæan method
of contemplation app ears to have been to identify the self with
the object of contemplation; this is of course identical with
the process of Indian Yoga, and is an idea which appears replete
with suggestion; as it is written, "He assimilates the images
to himself, casting them around his own form." But we are
told, "All divine natures are incorporeal, but bodies are
bound in them for your sakes."

The subtil ethers, of which I have spoken, served in their turn
as it were for the garment of the divine Light; for the Oracles
teach that beyond these again "A solar world and endless
Light subsist!" This Divine Light was the object of all veneration.
Do not think

that what was intended thereby was the Solar Light we know: "The
inerratic sphere of the Starless above" is an unmistakable
expression and therein "the more true Sun" has place:
Theosophists will appreciate the significance of "the more
true Sun," for according to The Secret Doctrine the
Sun we see is but the physical vehicle of a more transcendent
splendour.

Some strong Souls were able to reach up to the Light by their
own power: "The mortal who approaches the fire shall have
Light from the divinity, and unto the persevering mortal the blessed
immortals are swift." But what of those of a lesser stature?
Were they, by inability, precluded from such illumination? "Others,"
we read, "even when asleep, He makes fruitful from his own
Strength." That is to say, some men acquire divine knowledge
through communion with Divinity in sleep. This idea has given
rise to some of the most magnificent contributions to later literature;
it has since been thoroughly elaborated by Porphyry and Synesius.
The eleventh Book of the Metamophoses of Apuleius and the
Vision of Scipio ably vindicate this; and, although no
doubt every Christian has heard that "He giveth unto his
beloved in sleep," few, indeed, realise the possibility underlying
that conception.

What, it may be asked, were the views of the Chaldæans with
respect to terrestrial life: Was it a spirit of pessimism,. which
led them to hold this in light esteem? Or, should we not rather
say that the keynote of their philosophy was an immense spiritual
optimism? It appears to me that the latter is the more true interpretation.
They realised that beyond the confines of matter lay a more perfect
existence, a truer realm of which terrestrial administration is
but a too often travestied reflection. They sought, as we seek
now, the Good, the Beautiful and the True, but

they did not hasten to the Outer in the thirst for sensation,
but with a finer perception realised the true Utopia to be within.

And the first step in that admirable progress was a return to
the simple life; hardly, indeed, a return, for most of the Magi
were thus brought up from birth. [1] The hardihood engendered
by the rugged life, coupled with that wisdom which directed their
association, rendered these children of Nature peculiarly receptive
of Nature's Truths. "Stoop not down," says the Oracle,
"to the darkly splendid World, For a precipice lieth beneath
the Earth, a descent of seven steps, and therein is established
the throne of an evil and fatal force. Stoop not down unto that
darkly splendid world, Defile not thy brilliant flame with the
earthly dross of matter, Stoop not down for its splendour is but
seeming, It is but the habitation of the Sons of the Unhappy."
No more beautiful formulation of the Great Truth that the exterior
and sensuous life is death to the highest energies of the Soul
could possibly have been uttered: but to such as by purification
and the practice of virtue rendered themselves worthy, encouragement
was given, for, we read, "The Higher powers build up the
body of the holy man."

The law of Karma was as much a feature of the Chaldæan philosophy
as it is of the Theosophy of today: from a passage in Ficinus,
we read, "The Soul perpetually runs and passes through
all things in a certain space of time, which being performed it
is presently compelled to pass back again through all things and
unfold a similar web of generation in the World, according to
Zoroaster, who thinks that as often as the same causes return,
the same effects will in like manner return."

[1. They renounced rich attire and the wearing of gold. Their
raiment was white upon occasion; their beds the ground, and their
food nothing but herbs, cheese and bread.]

This is of course the explanation of the proverb that "History
repeats itself," and is very far from the superstitious view
of fate. Here each one receives his deserts according to merit
or demerit, and these are the bonds of life; but the Oracles say,
"Enlarge not thy destiny," and they urge men to "Explore
the River of the Soul, so that although you have become a servant
to body, you may again rise to the Order from which you descended,
joining works to sacred reason!"

To this end we are commended to learn the Intelligible which exists
beyond the mind, that divine portion of the being which exists
beyond Intellect: and this it is only possible to grasp with the
flower of the mind. "Understand the intelligible with the
extended flame of an extended intellect." To Zoroaster also
was attributed the utterance "who knows himself knows all
things in himself;" while it is elsewhere suggested that
"The paternal Mind has sowed symbols in the Soul." But
such priceless knowledge was possible only to the Theurgists Who,
we are told, "fall not so as to be ranked with the herd that
are in subjection to fate." The divine light cannot radiate
in an imperfect microcosm, even as the Clouds obscure the Sun;
for of such as make ascent to the most divine of speculations
in a confused and disordered manner, with unhallowed lips, or
unwashed feet, the progressions are imperfect, the impulses are
vain and the paths are dark.

Although destiny, our destiny, may be "written in the Stars"
yet it was the mission of the divine Soul to raise the human Soul
above the circle of necessity, and the Oracles give Victory to
that Masterly Will, which

"Hews the wall with might of magic,

Breaks the palisade in pieces,

Hews to atoms seven pickets . . .

Speaks the Master words of knowledge!"

The means taken to that consummation consisted in the training
of the Will and the elevation of the imagination, a divine power
which controls consciousness. "Believe yourself to be above
body, and you are," says the Oracle; it might have added
"Then shall regenerate phantasy disclose the symbols of the
Soul."

But it is said "On beholding yourself fear! " i.e.,
the imperfect self.

Everything must be viewed as ideal by him who would understand
the ultimate perfection.

Will is the grand agent in the mystic progress its rule is all
potent over the nervous system. By Will the fleeting vision is
fixed on the treacherous waves of the astral Light; by Will the
consciousness is impelled to commune with the divinity: yet there
is not One Will, but three Wills -- the Wills, namely, of the
Divine, the Rational and Irrational Souls -- to harmonize these
is the difficulty.

It is selfishness which impedes the radiation of Thought, and
attaches to body. This is scientifically true and irrespective
of sentiment, the selfishness which reaches beyond the necessities
of body is pure vulgarity.

A picture which to the cultured eye beautifully portrays a given
subject, nevertheless appears to the savage a confused patchwork
of streaks, so the extended perceptions of a citizen of the Universe
are not grasped by those whose thoughts dwell within the sphere
of the personal life.

The road to the Summum Bonum lies therefore through self-sacrifice,
the sacrifice of the lower to the higher, for behind that Higher
Self lies the concealed form of the Ancient of Days, the synthetical
Being of Divine Humanity.

These things are grasped by Soul; the song of the Soul is alone
heard in the adytum of God-nourished Silence!

### THE ORACLES OF ZOROASTER.

CAUSE. GOD.

FATHER. MIND. FIRE.

MONAD. DYAD. TRIAD.

1. But God is He having the head of the Hawk. The same is the
first, incorruptible, eternal, unbegotten, indivisible, dissimilar:
the dispenser of all good; indestructible; the best of the good,
the Wisest of the wise; He is the Father of Equity and Justice,
self-taught, physical, perfect, and wise-He who inspires the Sacred
Philosophy.

- Eusebius. Praeparatio Evangelica, liber. I., chap. X

This Oracle does not appear in either of the ancient collections,
nor in the group of oracles given by any of the medieval occultists.
Cory seems to have been the first to discover it in the voluminous
writings of Eusebius, who attributes the authorship to the Persian
Zoroaster.

2. Theurgists assert that He is a God and celebrate him as both
older and younger, as a circulating and eternal God, as understanding
the whole number of all things moving in the World, and moreover
infinite through his power and energizing a spiral force.

- Proclus on the Timaeus of Plato, 244. Z. or T.

The Egyptian Pantheon had an Elder and a Younger Horus -- a
God -- son of Osiris and Isis. Taylor suggests that He refers
to Kronos, Time, or Chronos, as the later Platonists wrote the
name. Kronos, or Saturnus, of the Romans, was son of Uranos and
Gaia, husband of Rhea, lather of Zeus.

3. The God of the Universe, eternal, limitless, both young and
old, having a spiral force.

Cory includes this Oracle in his collection, but he gives no
authority for it.

Lobeck doubted its authenticity.

4. For the Eternal Æon [1] -- according to the Oracle --
is the cause of never failing life, of unwearied power and unsluggish
energy.

- Taylor. -- T.

[1. For the First Æon, the Eternal one," or as Taylor
gives, "Eternity."]

5. Hence the inscrutable God is called silent by the divine ones,
and is said to consent with Mind, and to be known to human souls
through the power of the Mind alone.

- Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 321. T.

Inscrutable. Taylor gives "stable;" perhaps "incomprehensible"
is better.

6. The Chaldæans call the God Dionysos (or Bacchus), Iao
in the Phoenician tongue (instead of

the Intelligible Light), and he is also called Sabaoth, [1] signifying
that he is above the Seven poles, that is the Demiurgos.

- Lydus, De Mensibus, 83. T.

[1. This word is Chaldee, TzBAUT, meaning hosts; but
there is also a word SHBOH, meaning The Seven.]

7. Containing all things in the one summit of his own Hyparxis,
He Himself subsists wholly beyond.

- Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 212. T.

Hyparxis, is generally deemed to mean "Subsistence."
Hupar is Reality as distinct from appearance; Huparche
is a Beginning.

8. Measuring and bounding all things.

- Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 386. T.

"Thus he speaks the words," is omitted by Taylor
and Cory, but present in the Greek.

9. For nothing imperfect emanates from the Paternal Principle,

- Psellus, 38; Pletho. Z.

This implies -- but only from a succedent emanation.

10. The Father effused not Fear, but He infused persuasion.

- Pletho. Z.

11. The Father hath apprehended Himself, and bath not restricted
his Fire to his own intellectual power.

- Psellus, 30; Pletho, 33. Z.

Taylor gives:- The Father hath hastily withdrawn Himself, but
hath not shut up his own Fire in his intellectual power.

The Greek text has no word "hastily," and as to "withdrawn
-- Arpazo means, grasp or snatch, but also "apprehend with
the mind."

12. Such is the Mind which is energized before energy, while yet
it had not gone forth, but abode in the Paternal Depth, and in
the Adytum of God nourished silence.

- Proc. in Tim., 167. T.

13. All things have issued from that one Fire. The Father perfected
all things, and delivered them over to the Second Mind, whom all
Nations of Men call the First.

- Psellus, 24; Pletho, 30. Z.

14. The Second Mind conducts the Empyrean World.

- Damascius, De Principiis. T.

15. What the Intelligible saith, it saith by understanding.

- Psellus, 35. Z.

16. Power is with them, but Mind is from Him.

- Proclus in Platonis Theologiam, 365. T.

17. The Mind of the Father riding on the subtle Guiders, which
glitter with the tracings of inflexible and relentless Fire.

- Proclus on the Cratylus of Plato. T.

18. . . . . After the Paternal Conception I the Soul reside, a
heat animating all things.

. . . . For he placed

The Intelligible in the Soul, and the Soul in dull body,

Even so the Father of Gods and Men placed them in us.

- Proclus in Tim. Plat, 124. Z. or T.

19. Natural works co-exist with the intellectual light of the
Father. For it is the Soul which adorned the vast Heaven, and
which adorneth it after the Father, but her dominion is established
on high.

- Proclus in Tim., 106. Z. or T.

Dominion, krata: some copies give kerata, horus.

20. The Soul, being a brilliant Fire, by the power of the Father
remaineth immortal, and is Mistress of Life, and filleth up the
many recesses of the bosom of the World.

- Psellus, 28; Pletho, 11. Z.

21. The channels being intermixed, therein she performeth the
works of incorruptible Fire.

- Proclus in Politica, p. 399. Z. or T.

22. For not in Matter did the Fire which is in the first beyond
enclose His active Power, but in Mind; for the framer of the Fiery
World is the Mind of Mind.

- Proclus in Theologiam, 333, and Tim., 157. T.

23. Who first sprang from Mind, clothing the one Fire with the
other Fire, binding them together, that he might mingle the fountainous
craters, while preserving unsullied the brilliance of His own
Fire.

- Proclus in Parm. Platonis. T.

24. And thence a Fiery Whirlwind drawing down the brilliance of
the flashing flame, penetrating the abysses of the Universe; for
from thence downwards do extend their wondrous rays.

- Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 171 and 172. T.

25. The Monad first existed, and the Paternal Monad still subsists.

- Proclus in Euclidem, 27. T.

26. When the Monad is extended, the Dyad is generated.

- Proclus in Euclidem, 27. T.

Note that "What the Pythagoreans signify by Monad, Dyad
and Triad, or Plato by Bound, Infinite and Mixed; that the Oracles
of the Gods intend by Hyparxis, Power and Energy."

- Damascius De Principiis. Taylor.

27. And beside Him is seated the Dyad which glitters with intellectual
sections, to govern all things and to order everything not ordered.

- Proclus in Platonis Theologiam, 376. T.

28. The Mind of the Father said that all things should be cut
into Three, whose Will assented, and immediately all things were
so divided.

- Proclus in Parmen. T.

29. The Mind of the Eternal Father said into Three, governing
all things by Mind.

- Proclus, Timaeus of Plato. T.

30. The Father mingled every Spirit from this Triad.

- Lydus, De Mensibus, 20. Taylor.

31. All things are supplied from the bosom of this Triad.

- Lydus, De Mensibus, 20. Taylor.

32. All things are governed and subsist in this Triad.

- Proclus in I. Alcibiades. T.

33. For thou must know that all things bow before the Three Supernals.

- Damascius, De Principiis. T.

34. From thence floweth forth the Form of the Triad, being preexistent;
not the first Essence, but that whereby all things are measured.

- Anon. Z. or T.

35. And there appeared in it Virtue and Wisdom, and multiscient
Truth.

- Anon. Z. or T.

36. For in each World shineth the Triad, over which the Monad
ruleth.

- Damascius in Parmenidem. T.

37. The First Course is Sacred, in the middle lace courses the
Sun, [1] in the third the Earth is heated by the internal fire.

- Anon. Z. or T.

[1. Jones gives Sun from Helios, but some Greek versions give
Herios, which Cory translates, air.]

38. Exalted upon High and animating Light, Fire Ether and Worlds.

- Simplicius in his Physica, 143. Z. or T.

### IDEAS.

#### INTELLIGIBLES, INTELLECTUALS, IYNGES, SYNOCHES,
TELETARCHAE, FOUNTAINS, PRINCIPLES, HECATE,
AND DAEMONS.

39. The Mind of the Father whirled forth in reechoing roar, comprehending
by invincible Will Ideas omniform ; which flying forth from that
one fountain issued; for from the Father alike. was the Will and
the End (by which are they connected with the Father according
to alternating life, through varying vehicles). But they were
divided asunder, being by Intellectual Fire distributed into other
Intellectuals. For the King of all previously placed before the
polymorphous World a Type, intellectual, incorruptible, the imprint
of whose form is sent forth through the World, by which the Universe
shone forth decked with Ideas all various, of which the foundation
is One, One and alone. From this the others rush forth distributed
and separated through the various bodies of the Universe, and
are borne in swarms through its vast abysses, ever whirling forth
in illimitable radiation.

They are intellectual conceptions from the Paternal Fountain partaking
abundantly of the brilliance of Fire in the culmination of unresting
Time.

But the primary self-perfect Fountain of the Father poured forth
these primogenial Ideas.

- Proclus in Parmenidem. .Z. or T.

40. These being many, descend flashingly upon the shining Worlds,
and in them are contained the Three Supernals.

- Damascius in Parmenidem. T.

41. They are the guardians of the works of the Father, and of
the One Mind, the Intelligible.

- Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 205. T.

42. All things subsist together in the Intelligible World.

- Damascius, De Principiis. T.

43. But all Intellect understandeth the Deity, for Intellect existeth
not without the Intelligible, neither apart from Intellect doth
the Intelligible subsist.

- Damascius. Z. or T.

44. For Intellect existeth not without the Intelligible; apart
from it, it subsisteth not.

- Proclus, Th. Pl., 172. Z. or T.

45. By Intellect He containeth the Intelligibles and introduceth
the Soul into the Worlds.

46. By Intellect he containeth the Intelligibles, and introduceth
Sense into the Worlds.

- Proclus in Crat. T.

47. For this Paternal Intellect, which comprehendeth the Intelligibles
and adorneth things ineffable, hath sowed symbols through the
World.

- Proclus in Cratylum. T.

48. This Order is the beginning of all section.

- Dam., De Prin. T.

49. The Intelligible is the principle of all section.

- Damascius, De Principiis. T.

50. The Intelligible is as food to that which understandeth.

- Dam., De Prin. T.

51. The oracles concerning the Orders exhibits It as prior to
the Heavens, as ineffable, and they add -- It hath Mystic Silence.

- Proclus in Cratylum. T.

52. The oracle calls the Intelligible causes Swift, and asserts
that, proceeding from the Father, they rush again unto Him.

- Proclus in Cratylum. T.

53. Those Natures are both Intellectual and Intelligible, which,
themselves possessing Intellection, are the objects of Intelligence
to others.

- Proclus, Theologiam Platonis. T.

The Second Order of the Platonist philosophy was the "Intelligible
and Intellectual Triad." Among the Chaldæans this order
includes the Iynges, Synoches and Teletarchs. The Intellectual
Triad of the later Platonists corresponds to the Fountains, Fontal
Fathers or Cosmagogi of the Chaldæans.

54. The Intelligible Iynges themselves understand from the Father;
by Ineffable counsels being moved so as to understand.

- Psellus, 41; Pletho, 31. Z.

55. Because it is the Operator, because it is the Giver of Life
Bearing Fire, because it filleth the Life-producing bosom of Hecate;
and it instilleth into the Synoches the enlivening strength of
Fire, endued with mighty Power.

- Proclus in Tim., 128. T.

56. He gave His own Whirlwinds to guard the Supernals, mingling
the proper force of His own strength in the Synoches.

- Dam.; De Prin. T.

57. But likewise as many as serve the material Synoches.

- T.

58. The Teletarchs are comprehended in the Synoches.

- Dam., De Prin. T.

59. Rhea, the Fountain and River of the Blessed Intellectuals,
having first received the powers of all things in Her Ineffable
Bosom, pours forth perpetual Generation upon all things.

- Proc. in Crat. T

60. For it is the bound of the Paternal Depth, and the Fountain
of the Intellectuals.

- Dam., De Prin. T.

61. For He is a Power of circumlucid strength, glittering with
Intellectual Sections.

- Dam. T.

62. He glittereth with Intellectual Sections, and hath filled
all things with love.

- Dam. T.

63. Unto the Intellectual Whirlings of Intellectual Fire, all
things are subservient, through the persuasive counsel of the
Father.

- Proc. in Parm. T.

64. O! how the World hath inflexible Intellectual Rulers.

65. The source of the Hecaté correspondeth with that of
the Fontal Fathers.

- T.

66. From Him leap forth the Amilicti, the all-relentless thunders,
and the whirlwind receiving

Bosoms of the all-splendid Strength of Hecaté Father-begotten;
and He who encircleth the Brilliance of Fire; And the Strong Spirit
of the Poles, all fiery beyond.

- Proc. in Crat. T.

67. There is another Fountain, which leadeth the Empyraean World.

- Proc. in Tim. Z. or T.

68. The Fountain of Fountains, and the boundary of all fountains.

- Dam., De Prin.

69. Under two Minds the Life-generating fountain of Souls is comprehended.

- Dam., De Prin. T.

70. Beneath them exists the Principal One of the Immaterials.

- Dam. in Parm. Z. or T.

Following the intellectual Triad was the Demiurgos, from whom
proceeded the Effable and Essential Orders including all sorts
of Dæmons, and the Elementary World.

71. Father begotten Light, which alone hath gathered from the
strength of the Father the Flower of mind, and hath the power
of understanding the Paternal mind, and doth instil into all Fountains
and Principles the power of understanding and the function of
ceaseless revolution.

- Proc. in Tim., 242.

72. All fountains and principles whirl round and always remain
in a ceaseless revolution.

- Proc. in Parm. Z. or T.

The Principles, which have understood the Intelligible works of
the Father, He hath clothed in sensible works and bodies, being
intermediate links existing to connect the Father with Matter,
rendering apparent the Images of unapparent Natures, and inscribing
the Unapparent in the Apparent frame of the World.

- Dam., De Prin. Z. or T.

74. Typhon, Echidna, and Python, being the progeny of Tartaros
and Gaia, who were united by Uranos, form, as it were, a certain
Chaldæan Triad, the Inspector and Guardian of all the disordered
fabrications.

- Olymp. in Phæd. T.

75. There are certain Irrational Demons (mindless elementals),
which. derive their subsistence from the Aërial Rulers; wherefore
the Oracle saith, Being the Charioteer of the Aërial, Terrestrial
and Aquatic Dogs.

- Olymp. in Phad. T.

76. The Aquatic when applied to Divine Natures signifies a Government
inseparable from Water, and hence the Oracle calls the Aquatic
Gods, Water Walkers.

- Proc. in Tim., 270. T.

77. There are certain Water Elementals whom Orpheus calls Nereides,
dwelling in the more elevated exhalations of Water, such as appear
in damp, cloudy Air, whose bodies are sometimes seen (as Zoroaster
taught) by more acute eyes, especially in Persia and Africa.

- Ficinus de Immortalilate Animæ, 123. T.

### PARTICULAR SOULS.

#### SOUL, LIFE, MAN.

78. The Father conceived ideas, and all mortal bodies were animated
by Him.

- Proc. in Tim., 336. T.

79. For the Father of Gods and men placed the Mind (nous) in the
Soul (psyche); and placed both in the (human) body.

80. The Paternal Mind hath sowed symbols in the Soul.

- Psell., 26; Pletho, 6. Z.

81. Having mingled the Vital Spark from two according substances,
Mind and Divine Spirit, as a third to these He added Holy Love,
the venerable Charioteer uniting all things.

- Lyd. De Men., 3.

82. Filling the Soul with profound Love.

- Proc. in Pl. Theol., 4. Z or T.

83. The Soul of man does in a manner clasp God to herself. Having
nothing mortal, she is wholly inebriated with God. For she glorieth
in the harmony under which the mortal body subsisteth.

- Psellus, 17; Pletho, 10. Z.

84. The more powerful Souls perceive Truth through themselves,
and are of a more inventive Nature. Such Souls are saved through
their own strength, according to the Oracle.

- Proclus in I. Alc. Z.

85. The Oracle saith that Ascending Souls sing a Pæan.

- Olymp. in Phæd. Z or T.

86. Of all Souls, those certainly are superlatively blessed, which
are poured forth from Heaven to Earth; and they are happy, and
have ineffable stamina, as many as proceed from Thy Splendid Self,
O King, or from Jove Himself, under the strong necessity of Mithus.

- Synes. De Insom, 153. Z or T.

Query Mithras.

87. The Souls of those who quit the body violently are most pure.

- Psellus, 27. Z.

88. The girders of the Soul, which give her breathing, are easy
to be unloosed.

- Psellus, 32; Pletho, 8. Z.

89. For when you see a Soul set free, the Father sendeth another,
that the number may be complete.

- Z. or T.

90. Understanding the works of the Father, they avoid the shameless
Wing of Fate; they are placed in God, drawing forth strong light-bearers,
descending from the Father, from whom as they descend, the Soul
gathereth of the empyræan fruits the soul-nourishing flower.

- Proc. in Tim., 321. Z. or T.

91. This Animastic Spirit which blessed men have called the Pneumatic
Soul, becometh a god, an all-various Dæmon, and an Image
(disembodied), and in this form of Soul suffereth her punishments
The

Oracles, too, accord with this account; for they assimilate the
employment of the Soul in Hades, to the delusive visions of a
dream.

- Synesius De Insom. Z. or T.

The word Dæmon in the original meaning of the term did
not necessarily mean a bad Spirit, and was as often applied to
pure spirits as to impure.

Compare the Eastern doctrine of Devachan, a stage of pleasing
illusion after death.

92. One life after another, from widely distributed sources. Passing
from above, through to the opposite art; through the Centre of
the Earth; and to the fifth middle, fiery centre, where the life-bearing
fire descendeth as far as the material world.

- Z. or T.

93. Water is a symbol of life; hence Plato and the gods before
Plato, call it (the Soul) at one time the whole water of vivification, and
at another time a certain fountain of it.

- Proc. in Tim., 318. Z.

94. O Man, of a daring nature, thou subtle production.

- Psell., 12; Pletho, 21. Z.

95. For thy vessel the beasts of the Earth shalt in habit.

- Psell., 36; Pletho, 7. Z.

Vessel is the body in which the Nous -- thou, dwellest for
a time.

96. Since the Soul perpetually runs and passes through many experiences
in a certain space of time;

which being performed, it is presently compelled to pass back
again through all things, and unfold a similar web of generation
in the World, according to Zoroaster, who thinketh that as often
as the same causes return, the same effects will in like manner
be sure to ensue.

- Ficin. De Im. An., 129. Z.

97. According to Zoroaster, in us the ethereal vestment of the
Soul perpetually revolves (reincarnates).

- Ficin. De Im. An., 129. Z.

98. The Oracles delivered by the Gods celebrate the essential
fountain of every Soul; the Empyrean, the Ethereal and the Material.
This fountain they separate from (Zoogonothea) the vivifying Goddess
(Rhea), from whom (suspending the whole of Fate) they make two
series or orders; the one animastic, or belonging to the Soul,
and the other belonging to Fate. They assert that the Soul is
derived from the animastic series, but that sometimes it becometh
subservient to Fate, when passing into an irrational condition
of being,: it becometh subject to Fate instead of to Providence.

- Proclus de Providentia apud Fabricium in Biblioth. Græca.,
vol.8, 486. Z. or T.

### MATTER.

#### THE WORLD -- AND NATURE.

99. The Matrix containing all things.

- T.

100. Wholly divisible, and yet indivisible.

101. Thence abundantly springeth forth the generations of multifarious
Matter.

- Proc. in Tim.. 118. T.

102. These frame atoms, sensible forms, corporeal bodies, and
things destined to matter.

- Dam, De Prin. T.

103. The Nymphs of the Fountains, and all the Water Spirits, and
terrestrial, aërial and astral forms, are the Lunar Riders
and Rulers of all Matter, the Celestial, the Starry, and that
which lieth in the Abysses.

- Lydus.,  p. 32.

104. According to the Oracles, Evil is more feeble than Non-entity.

- Proc. de Prov. Z or T.

105. We learn that Matter pervadeth the whole world, as the Gods
also assert.

- Proc., Tim., 142. Z. or T.

106. All Divine Natures are incorporeal, but bodies are bound
to them for your sakes. Bodies not being able to contain incorporeals,
by reason of the Corporeal Nature, in which ye are concentrated.

- Proc. in P1. Polit., 359. Z. or T.

107. For the paternal Self-begotten Mind, understanding His works
sowed in all, the fiery bonds of love, that all things might continue
loving for an infinite time. That the connected series of things
might intellectually remain in the Light of the Father; that the
elements of the World might continue their course in mutual attraction.

- Proc. in Tim.. 155. T.

108. The Maker of all things, self-operating, framed the World.
And there was a certain Mass of Fire: all these things Self-Operating
He produced, that the Body of the Universe might be conformed,
that the World might be manifest, and not appear membranous.

- Proc. in Tim., 154. Z. or T.

109. For He assimilateth the images to himself, casting them around
his own form.

110. For they are an imitation of his Mind, but that which is
fabricated hath something of Body.

- Proc. in Tim., 87. Z or. T.

111. There is a Venerable Name, with a sleepless revolution, leaping
forth into the worlds, through the rapid tones of the Father.

- Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.

112. The Ethers of the Elements therefore are there.

- Olympiodorus in Phæd. Z. or T.

113. The Oracles assert that the types of Characters, and of other
Divine visions appear in the Ether (or Astral Light).

- Simp. in Phys., 144. Z. or T.

114. In this the things without figure are figured.

- Simp. in Phys., 143. Z. or T.

115. The Ineffable and Effable impressions of the World.

116. The Light hating World, and the winding currents by which
many are drawn down.

- Proc. in Tim., 339. Z. or T.

117. He maketh the whole World of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth,
and of the all-nourishing Ether.

- Z. or T.

118. Placing Earth in the middle, but Water below the Earth, and
Air above both these.

- Z. or T.

119. He fixed a vast multitude of un-wandering Stars, not by a
strain laborious and hurtful, but with stability void of movement,
forcing Fire forward into Fire.

- Proc. in Tim., 280. Z. or T.

120. The Father congregated the Seven Firmaments of the Kosmos,
circumscribing the Heavens with convex form.

- Dam. in Parm. Z, or T.

121. He constituted a Septenary of wandering Existences (the Planetary
globes).

- Z. or T.

122. Suspending their disorder in Well-disposed Zones.

- Z. or T.

123. He made them six in number, and for the Seventh He cast into
the midst thereof the Fiery Sun.

- Proc. in Tim., 280. Z. or T.

124. The Centre from which all (lines) which way soever are equal.

- Proc. in Euclidem.

125. And that the Swift Sun doth pass as ever around a Centre.

- Proc. in Plat. Th., 317. Z. or T.

126. Eagerly urging itself towards that Centre of resounding Light.

- Proc. in Tim., 236. T.

127. The Vast Sun, and the Brilliant Moon.

128. As rays of Light his locks flow forth, ending in acute points.

- Proc. in P1. Pol. 387. T.

129. And of the Solar Circles, and of the Lunar, clashings, and
of the Aërial Recesses; the Melody of Ether, and of the Sun,
and of the phases of the Moon, and of the Air.

- Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.

130. The most mystic of discourses informs us that His wholeness
is in the Supra-mundane Orders for there a Solar World and Boundless
Light subsist, as the Oracles of the Chaldæans affirm.

- Proc. in Tim., 264. Z. or T.

131. The Sun more true measureth all things by time, being itself
the time of time, according to the Oracle of the Gods concerning
it.

- Proc. in Tim., 249. Z. or T.

132. The Disk (of the Sun) is borne in the Starless realm above
the Inerratic Sphere; and hence he is not in the midst of the
Planets; but of the Three Worlds, according to the telestic Hypothesis.

- Jul., Crat., 5, 334. Z. or T.

133. The Sun is a Fire, the Channel of Fire, and the dispenser
of Fire.

- Proc. in Tim., 141. Z. or T.

134. Hence Kronos, The Sun as Assessor beholds the true pole.

135. The Ethereal Course, and the vast motion of the Moon, and
the Aërial fluxes.

- Proclus in Tim., 257. Z. or T.

136. O Ether, Sun, and Spirit of the Moon, ye are the chiefs of
the Air.

- Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.

137. And the wide Air, and the Lunar Course, and the Pole of the
Sun.

- Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.

138. For the Goddess bringeth forth the Vast Sun, and the lucent
Moon.

139. She collecteth it, receiving the Melody of Ether, and of
the Sun, and of the Moon, and of whatsoever things are contained
in the Air.

140. Unwearied Nature ruleth over the Worlds and works, that the
Heavens drawing downward might run an eternal course, and that
the other periods of the Sun, Moon, Seasons, Night and Day; might
be accomplished.

- Proc. in Tim., 4, 323. Z. or T.

141. And above the shoulders of that Great Goddess, is Nature
in her vastness exalted.

- Proc. in Tim., 4, T.

142. The most celebrated of the Babylonians, together with Ostanes
and Zoroaster, very properly call the starry Spheres "Herds";
whether because these alone among corporeal magnitudes, are perfectly
carried about around a Centre, or in conformity to the Oracles,
because they are considered by them

as in a certain respect the bonds and collectors of physical reasons,
which they likewise call in their sacred discourse "Herds"
(agelous) and by the insertion of a gamma (aggelous) Angels. Wherefore
the Stars which preside over each of these herds are considered
to be Deities or Dæmons, similar to the Angels, and are
called Archangels; and they are seven in number.

- Anon. in Theologumenis Arithmeticis. Z.

Daimon in Greek meant "a Spirit" not "a bad
Spirit."

143. Zoroaster calls the congruities of material forms to the
ideals of the Soul of the World -- Divine Allurements.

- Ficinus, de Vit. Coel. Comp. Z.

### MAGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL PRECEPTS

144. Direct not thy mind to the vast surfaces of the Earth; for
the Plant of Truth grows not upon the ground. Nor measure the
motions of the Sun, collecting rules, for he is carded by the
Eternal Will of the Father,. and not for your sake alone. Dismiss
(from your mind) the impetuous course of the Moon, for she moveth
always by the power of necessity. The progression of the Stars
was not generated for your sake. The wide aërial flight of
birds gives no true knowledge nor the dissection of the entrails
of

victims; they are all mere toys, the basis of mercenary fraud:,
flee from these if you would enter the sacred paradise of piety,
where Virtue, Wisdom, and Equity are assembled.

- Psel., 4. Z.

145. Stoop not down unto the Darkly-Splendid World; wherein continually
lieth a faithless Depth, and Hades wrapped in clouds, delighting
in unintellible images, precipitous, winding, a black ever-rolling
Abyss; ever espousing a Body unluminous, formless and void.

- Synes., de Insom., 140. Z. or T.

146. Stoop not down, for a precipice lieth beneath the Earth,
reached by a descending Ladder which hath Seven Steps, and therein
is established the Throne of an evil and fatal force.

- Psell., 6; Pletho, 2. Z.

147. Stay not on the Precipice with the dross of Matter, for there
is a place for thy Image in a realm ever splendid.

- Psell., 1, 2; Pletho, 14; Synesius, 140. Z.

148. Invoke not the visible Image of the Soul of Nature.

- Psell., 15; Pletho, 23. Z.

149. Look not upon Nature, for her name is fatal.

- Proc. in P1at. Th., 143. Z.

150. It becometh you not to behold them before your body is initiated,
since by always alluring they seduce the souls from the sacred
mysteries.

- Proc. in I Alcib. Z. or T.

151. Bring her not forth, lest in departing she retain something.

- Psell., 3; Pletho, 15. Z.

Taylor says that "her" refers to the human soul.

152. Defile not the Spirit, nor deepen a superficies.

- Psell., 19; Pletho, 13. Z.

153. Enlarge not thy Destiny.

- Psell., 37; Pletho, 4.

154. Not hurling, according to the Oracle, a transcendent foot
towards piety.

- Dam. in Vitam Isidore. ap. Suidam Z. or T.

155. Change not the barbarous Names of Evocation for there are
sacred Names in every language which are given by God, having
in the Sacred Rites a Power Ineffable.

- Psell., 7. Nicephotus. Z. or T.

156. Go not forth when the Lictor passeth by.

- Picus de Mirandula, Concl. Z. [Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Conclusiones, 37.11.]

157. Let fiery hope nourish you upon the Angelic plane.

- Olymp. in Phæd. Proc. in Alcib. Z. or T.

158. The conception of the glowing Fire hath the first rank, for
the mortal who approacheth that Fire shall have Light from God;
and unto the persevering mortal the Blessed Immortals are swift.

- Proc. in Tim., 65. Z. or T.

159. The Gods exhort us to understand the radiating form of Light.

- Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.

160. It becometh you to hasten unto the Light, and to the Rays
of the Father, from whom was sent unto you a Soul (Psyche) endued
with much mind (Nous).

- Psell., 33. Pletho, 6. Z.

161. Seek Paradise.

- Psell., 41. Pletho, 27. Z.

162. Learn the Intelligible for it subsisteth beyond the Mind.

- Psell., 41. Pletho, 27. Z.

163. There is a certain Intelligible One. whom it becometh you
to understand with the Flower of Mind.

- Psell., 31. Pletho, 28. Z.

164. But the Paternal Mind accepteth not the aspiration of the
soul until she hath passed out of her oblivious state, and pronounceth
the Word; regaining the Memory of the pure paternal Symbol.

- Psell., 39. Pletho, 5. Z.

165. Unto some He gives the ability to receive the Knowledge of
Light; and others, even when asleep, he makes fruitful from His
own strength.

- Synes., de Insomn., 135. Z. or T.

166. It is not proper to understand that Intelligible One with
vehemence, but with the extended flame of far reaching Mind, measuring
all things except that Intelligible. But it is requisite to understand
this; for if thou inclinest thy Mind thou wilt understand it,
not earnestly; but it is becoming to bring with thee a pure and
enquiring sense, to extend the void mind of thy Soul to the Intelligible,
that thou mayest learn the Intelligible, because it subsisteth
beyond Mind.

- Dam. T.

167. Thou wilt not comprehend it, as when under-standing some
common thing.

- Damascius, de primis principiis. T.

168. Ye who. understand, know the Super-mundane Paternal Depth.

- Dam. Z. or T.

169. Things Divine are not attainable by mortals who understand
the body alone, but only by those who stripped of their garments
arrive at the summit.

- Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.

170. Having put on the completely armed-vigour of resounding Light,
with triple strength fortifying the Soul and the Mind, He must
put into the Mind the various Symbols, and not walk dispersedly
on the empyræan path, but with concentration.

171. For being furnished with every kind of Armour, and armed,
he is similar to the Goddess.

- Proc. in P1. Th., 324. T.

172. Explore the River of the Soul, whence, or in what order you
have come: so that although you have become a servant to the body,
you may again rise to the Order from which you descended, joining
works to sacred reason.

- Psell, 5. Pletho, 1. Z.

173. Every way unto the emancipated Soul extend the rays of Fire.

- Psell., 11. Pletho, 24. Z.

174. Let the immortal depth of your Soul lead you, but earnestly
raise your eyes upwards.

- Psell., 11. Pletho, 20.

175. Man, being an intelligent Mortal, must bridle his Soul that
she may not incur terrestrial infelicity, but be saved.

- Lyd., De Men., 2.

176. If thou extendeth the Fiery Mind to the work of piety, thou
wilt preserve the fluxible body.

- Psell., 22. Pletho, 16. Z.

177. The telestic life through Divine Fire removeth all the stains,
together with everything of a foreign and irrational nature, which
the spirit of the Soul has attracted from generation, as we are
taught by the Oracle to believe.

- Proc. in Tim., 331. Taylor.

178. The Oracles of the Gods declare, that through purifying ceremonies,
not the Soul only, but bodies themselves become Worth) of receiving
much assistance and health, for, say they, the mortal vestment
of coarse Matter will by these means be purified." And this,
the Gods, in an exhortatory manner, announce to the moat holy
of Theurgists.

- Jul., Crat. v., p.334. Z. or T.

179. We should flee, according to the Oracle, the multitude of
men going in a herd.

- Proc. in I Alc. Z. or T.

180. Who knoweth himself, knoweth all things in himself.

- I. Pic., p. 211. Z.

181. The Oracles often give victory to our own choice, and not
to the Order alone of the Mundane periods. As, for instance, when
they say, "On beholding thyself, fear!" And again, "Believe
thy-self to be above the Body, and thou art so." And,

still further, when they assert, "That our voluntary sorrows
germinate in us the growth of the particular life we lead."

- Proc., de Prov., p. 483. Z. or T.

182. But these are mysteries which I evolve in the profound Abyss
of the Mind.

183. As the Oracle thereforth saith: God is never so turned away
from man, and never so much sendeth him new paths, as when he
maketh ascent to divine speculations or works in a confused or
disordered manner, and as it adds, with unhallowed lips, or unwashed
feet. For of those who are thus negligent, the progress is imperfect,
the impulses are vain, and the paths are dark.

- Proc. in Parm. Z. or T.

184. Not knowing that every God is good, ye are fruitlessly vigilant.

- Proc. in Platonis Pol., 355. Z. or T.

185. Theurgists fall not so as to be ranked among the herd that
are in subjection to Fate.

- Lyd., De men. Taylor.

186. The number nine is divine, receives its completion from three
triads, and attains the summits of theology, according to the
Chaldaic philosophy as Porphyry informeth us.

- Lyd., p. 121.

187. In the left side of Hecate is a fountain of Virtue, which
remaineth entirely within her, not sending forth its virginity.

- Psell., 13; Pletho, 9. Z.

188. And the earth bewailed them, even unto their children.

- Psell., 21 ; Pletho, 3. Z.

189. The Furies are the Constrainers of Men.

- Psell., 26; Pletho, 19. Z.

190. Lest being baptized to the Furies of the Earth, and to the
necessities of nature (as some one of the Gods saith), you should
perish.

- Proc. in Theol., 297. Z. or T.

191. Nature persuadeth us that there are pure Dæmons, and
that evil germs of Matter may alike become useful and good.

- Psell., 16; Pletho, 18. Z.

192. For three days and no longer need ye sacrifice.

- Pic. Concl. Z.

193. So therefore first the Priest who governeth the works of
Fire, must sprinkle with the Water of the loud-resounding Sea.

- Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.

194. Labour thou around the Strophalos of Hecaté.

- Psell., 9. Nicephorus.

195. When thou shalt see a Terrestrial Dæmon approaching,
Cry aloud! and sacrifice the stone Mnizourin.

- Psell., 40. Z.

196. If thou often invokest thou shalt see all things growing
dark; and then when no longer is visible unto thee the High-arched
Vault of Heaven, when the Stars have lost their Light and the
Lamp of

the Moon is veiled, the Earth abideth not, and around thee darts
the Lightning Flame and all things appear amid thunders.

- Psell., 10; Pletho, 22. Z.

197. From the Cavities of the Earth leap forth the terrestrial
Dog-faced demons, showing no true sign unto mortal man.

- Psell, 23; Pletho, 10. Z.

198. A similar Fire flashingly extending through the rushings
of Air, or a Fire formless whence cometh the Image of a Voice,
or even a flashing Light abounding, revolving, whirling forth,
crying aloud. Also there is the vision of the fire-flashing Courser
of Light, or also a Child, borne aloft on the shoulders of the
Celestial Steed, fiery, or clothed with gold, or naked, or shooting
with the bow shafts of Light, and standing on the shoulders of
the horse; then if thy meditation prolongeth itself, thou shalt
unite all these Symbols into the Form of a Lion.

- Proc. in P1. Polit., 380; Stanley Hist. Philos. Z.
or T.

199. When thou shalt behold that holy and formless Fire shining
flashingly through the depths of the Universe: Hear thou the Voice
of Fire.

- Psell., 14; Pletho, 25. Z.

### ORACLES FROM PORPHYRY.

1. There is above the Celestial Lights an Incorruptible Flame
always sparkling; the Spring of Life, the Formation of all Beings,
the Original of all things! This Flame produceth all things, and

nothing perisheth but what it consumeth. It maketh Itself known
by Itself. This Fire cannot be contained in any Place, it is without
Body and without Matter. It encompasseth the Heavens. And there
goeth out from it little Sparks, which make all the Fires of the
Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars. Behold!
what I know of God! Strive not to know more of Him, for that is
beyond thy capacity, how wise soever thou art. As to the rest,
know that unjust and wicked Man cannot hide himself from the Presence
of God !

No subtilty nor excuse can disguise anything from His piercing
Eyes. All is full of God, and God is in All!

2. There is in God an Immense Profundity of Flame! Nevertheless,
the Heart should not fear to approach this Adorable Fire, or to
be touched by it; it will never be consumed by this sweet Fire,
whose mild and Tranquil Heat maketh the Binding, the Harmony,
and the. Duration of the World. Nothing subsisteth but by this
Fire, which is God Himself. No Person begat Him; He is without
Mother; He knoweth all things, and can be taught nothing.

He is Infallible in His designs, and His name is unspeakable,
Behold now, what God is! As for us who are His messengers, We
are but a Little Part of God.

TITLE: The Chaldæan Oracles of Zoroaster
Edited and revised by Sapere Aude. [William Wynn Westcott]
With an introduction by L. O. [Percy Bullock]
[1895]
