Testimony: Its Posture in the Scientific World (Robert Chambers, 1859)
======================================================================
Robert Chambers — The Vestiges author's spiritualist tract — Chambers' scientific case for spiritualism. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (testimonyitspost00cham) — 1859 first edition.

It    ■  ,  i:\i,^'':\. -'.'"' 

irf^j-y  "^c  ^    '!V'i/>'^i  -^K 

BT 
1105 
C53 
1859 

o 

w^  w^ '    rx^oUp^,  t^ 

TESTIMONY: 

ITS 

POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

TESTIMONY: 

ITS 

rOSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

The  study  of  natural  science,  during  the  eigliteentli  century, 
has  manifestly  given  a  turn  to  the  habits  of  mankind  in  regard  to 
matters  presented  for  their  belief.  Where  a  mathematical  demon- 
stration can  be  given,  or  a  described  experiment  can  be  readily 
repeated,  or  where  new  facts  can  be  shewn  in  relation  to  already 
acknowledged  natural  laws,  acceptance  is,  as  formerly,  certain 
and  immediate ;  but  where  an  alleged  phenomenon  is  only 
occasional,  not  liable  to  be  reproduced  at  will,  and  a  relation 
to  acknowledged  natural  laws  cannot  be  at  once  established,  then 
it  is  rejected,  notwithstanding  almost  any  amount  of  evidence  for 
its  external  reality.  The  physicist  reasons  thus  :  It  is  much  more 
likely  that  the  witness  has  been  deceived,  or  is  deceiving,  than  that 
the  fact  is  true ;  ergo,  I  do  not  feel  warranted  to  listen  to  it. 
The  result  is,  that  the  progress  of  knowledge  is  very  irregular, 
somewhat  resembling  the  movements  of  an  army,  of  which  some 
battalions  are  in  vigorous  health,  Avhile  others  are  sickly  or  over- 
burdened with  baggage.  The  experimental  marches  on  at  a  good 
pace ;  the  observational  proceeds  but  slowly  j  the  speculative  is 
left  far  in  the  rear. 

The  scientific  scepticism  of  our  age  professes  to  spring  from  a 
sense  of  the  extreme  fallaciousness  of  the  human  senses,  and  the 
liability  besetting  us  all  to  deceive  ourselves  into  a  belief  which 
gratifies  the  faculty  of  wonder.     It  is  held  as  a  rare  and  valuable 

2  TESTIMONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

gift  to  be  able  to  observe  a  fact  correctly.  We  are  pathetically 
told  that  what  a  man  thinks  he  saw,  is  often  a  mere  hypothesis  of 
his  imagination  as  to  what  he  saw,  and  may  be  wholly  wrong. 
Commonplaces  about  the  love  of  telling  something  wonderful,  and 
of  imposing  upon  the  credulity  of  our  fellow-creatures,  are  largely 
indulged  in.  It  is  confessed  that  the  physicists  themselves  daily 
find  reason  to  distrust  their  own  powers  of  observation  :  how  much 
more  is  it  necessary  to  exercise  caution  regarding  the  reports  of 
ordinary  and  iminstructed  men  !  It  thus  appears  justifiable  to 
the  man  of  science  that,  when  any  extraordinary  natural  fact  is 
laid  before  him,  he  should  admit  no  evidence  for  its  verity  which 
is  not  ^beyond  suspicion,  and  absolutely  incapable  of  being 
explained  away.'  *  If  he  can  presume  any  error  in  the  statement, 
arising  from  any  cause  whatever,  he  is  not  merely  entitled,  but 
bound  to  reject  it.  Practically,  accordingly,  all  such  facts  are 
rejected,  for  there  is  of  course  no  extraordinary  fact  resting  on 
testimony  only,  of  which  it  is  not  possible  to  presume  some  error 
in  the  observation  or  reporting,  if  we  be  set  upon  finding  one. 

Professor  Faraday,  defending  the  scepticism  of  his  class, 
endeavours  to  shew  that,  while  we  OAve  so  much  to  the  senses 
at  every  stage  of  life,  there  is  no  trusting  them  unless  the 
judgment  has  been  largely  cultivated  for  their  guidance.  '  Where 
this  instruction  is  imperfect,'  says  he,  '  it  is  astonishing  how  soon 
and  how  much  their  evidence  fails  us.'  Greater  mistakes  still 
take  place  when  we  proceed  to  deduce  from  the  impressions 
supplied  by  our  experience  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
There  is  then  no  safety  but  in  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of 
nature.  These,  being  of  unfailing  constancy,  he  considers 
to  be  '  the  foundation  of  our  knowledge  in  natural  things ' 
(Italics  his  own).  Whatever  is  inconsistent  with  them,  we 
ought  to  know  must  be  false,  be  the  nature  and  amount  of 
testimony  advanced  in  its  favour  what  they  may.  It  becomes 
necessary,  in  his  view,  that,  in  *  proceeding  to  consider  any 
question  involving  physical  principles,  we  should  set  out  with 
clear  ideas  of  the  naturally  possible  and  impossible.'  He  takes 
an  example.  To  create  force  is  impossible.  *  If  we  could  by  the 
fingers  draw  a  heavy  piece  of  wood  or  a  stone  upward  without 
eftbrt,  and  then  letting  it  sink,  could  produce  by  its  gravity  an 
efi^ect  equal  to  its  weight,  that  would  be  a  creation  of  force,  and 
cannot  be.'  The  learned  professor  adds  much  more  to  the  same 
general  conclusion — namely,  that  none  but  very  cultivated  persons 

*  MesrMrwn  True,  Mesmerism  False.    By  Sir  John  Forbes. 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  3 

can  oLserve  with  even  an  approach  to  accuracy,  and  that  a 
clear  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  will  alone  enable  us  to 
decide  on  the  truth  of  any  fact  presented  to  us.* 

The  difference  which  exists  between  this — the  physicist's  view 
of  facts  and  testimony — and  that  usually  presented  in  books  of 
mental  philosophy,  is  very  striking. 

Dr  Abercrombie,  in  his  well-kno'svn  work,  Inquiries  Respecting 
the  Intellectual  Poioers  and  the  Investigation  of  Truth,  considers  the 
reception  of  facts  on  testimony  as  ^  a  fundamental  principle  of  our 
nature,  to  be  acted  on  whenever  we  are  satisfied  that  the  testimony 
possesses  certain  characters  of  credibihty.  These,'  he  adds,  '  are 
chiefly  referrible  to  three  heads  :  that  the  individual  has  had 
sufficient  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  facts ;  that  we  have 
confidence  in  his  power  of  judging  of  their  accuracy ;  and  that 
we  have  no  suspicion  of  his  being  influenced  by  passion  or 
'prejudice  in  his  testimony,  or,  in  other  words,  that  we  believe  him 
to  be  an  honest  witness.  Our  confidence,'  says  Dr  Abercrombie, 
'is  fui'ther  strengthened  by  several  witnesses  concurring  in  the 
same  testimony,  each  of  whom  has  had  the  same  opportunities  of 
ascertaining  the  facts,  and  presents  the  same  characters  of  truth 
and  honesty.  On  such  testimony,  we  are  in  the  constant  habit 
of  receiving  statements  which  are  much  beyond  the  sphere  of  our 
personal  observation,  and  widely  at  variance  ^\ith.  our  experience. 
These  are  the  statements  which,  for  the  sake  of  a  name,  we  may 
call  marvellous.  In  regard  to  such,  the  foundation  of  incredulity 
....  is  generally  ignorance ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  trace  the 
principles  by  which  a  man  of  cultivated  mind  is  influenced,  in 
receiving  upon  testimony  statements  which  are  rejected  by  the 
"vulgar  as  totally  incredible. 

*  1.  He  is  influenced  by  the  recollection,  that  many  things  at 
one  time  appeared  to  him  marvellous,  which  he  now  knows  to  be 
true ;  and  he  thence  concludes  that  there  may  still  be  in  nature 
many  phenomena  and  many  principles  with  which  he  is  entirely 
unacquainted.  In  other  words,  he  has  learned  from  experience 
not  to  make  his  own  knowledge  his  test  of  probability. 

*2.  He  is  greatly  influenced  by  perceiving  in  the  statement 
some  element  of  probability,  or  any  kind  of  sequence  or  relation, 
by  ^vhich  the  alleged  fact  may  be  connected  with  principles  which 
are  kno^vn  to  him.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  freezing  of 
water,  which  was  rejected  by  the  king  of  Siam  as  an  incredible 

*  Observations  on  Mental  Education,  a  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution 
hefore  H.R.H.  Prince  Albert.  By  Professor  Faraday,  F.RS.,  May  6,  1854. 
London:  Parker. 

4  TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

falseliood,  might  have  appeared  credible  to  a  philosopher  who  had 
attended  to  the  properties  of  heat,  because  he  would  have 
perceived  in  the  statement  a  chain  of  relations  connecting  it  with 
facts  which  he  knew  to  be  true. 

*  3.  He  is  much  guided  by  his  power  of  discriminating  the 
credibility  of  testimony,  or  of  distinguishing  that  species  and  that 
amount  of  it  which  he  feels  to  be  unworthy  of  absolute  credit, 
from  that  on  which  he  relies  with  as  implicit  a  confidence  as 
on  the  uniformity  of  the  course  of  nature.* 

Here,  it  will  be  observed — while  a  relation  to  known  principles 
is  allowed  to  be  influential  in  inducing  belief — the  general 
receivableness  of  marvellous  facts,  upon  the  testimony  of  a 
number  of  honest,  unprejudiced  witnesses,  is  fully  and  unhesi- 
tatingly asserted.  The  incredulity  which  Mr  Faraday  spoke 
of  as  an  attribute  of  the  most  highly  cultivated  judgment,  is 
adverted  to  as  generally  a  result  of  ignorance.  It  is  here 
presumed  that,  with  more  light,  men  would  go  on  to  a  freer 
believing,  not  to  scepticism.  Experience  is  adduced  as  preparing 
us  rather  to  accept  marvellous  facts  than  to  receive  them  with 
doubt.  Even  miracles,  which  Dr  Abercrombie  defines  as  events 
*  directly  opposed  to  what  every  one  knows  to  be  the  established 
and  uniform  course  of  nature,'  are  not  beyond  the  powers  of 
testimony ;  they  only  require  a  high  kind  of  it,  a  kind  *  on  which 
we  rely  with  the  same  confidence  as  on  the  uniformity  of  the 
course  of  nature  itself  Here,  he  says,  '  we  have  two  amounts  of 
probability,  which  are  ecjually  balanced  against  each  other ; 
namely,  the  probability  that  such  testimony  should  not  deceive  us, 
and  the  probability  that  there  should  be  no  deviation  from  the 
course  of  nature.  The  concurring  evidence  of  numerous  credible 
tvitnesses  gives  a  decided  preponderance  to  the  testimony ;  and  upon 
a  certain  amount  of  testimony  we  might  receive  any  statement,  however 
improbable.^  There  might  still  remain  an  '  uncertainty,  in  regard 
to  any  judgment  which  we  could  form  respecting  it;'  but  a 
distinct  belief  might  be  fixed  if  the  event  could  be  referred  to  a 
power  capable  of  producing  it,  namely,  the  Deity,  and  if  we  could 
perceive  a  high  moral  object  in  his  presumed  interposition. 

It  so  happens  that  the  religion  which  the  most  enlightened 
nations  of  the  earth  have  received  and  profess,  rests  on  a 
series  of  occurrences  which  took  place  between  eighteen  and 
thirty-six  centuries  ago,  and  which  have  been  recorded  in  historical 
narratives.  Many  persons  having  doubted  these  alleged  facts,  a 
set  of  writers  well  aff*ected  to  the  Christian  religion  have  come 
forward  as  its  apologists  or  defenders  3  and  a  leading  part  of  their 

TESTIMONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  5 

works  on  the  subject  consists  in  a  treatment  of  the  laws  of 
evidence  as  to  facts,  resulting  in  a  conclusion  that  the  occurrences 
in  question,  though  of  a  nature  not  merely  extraordinary,  but 
apparently  supernatural,  being  vouched  for  by  a  sufficient  number 
of  credible  witnesses,  ought  to  be  implicitly  believed.  None  of 
these  apologists  stands  more  prominently  forth  than  the  late  Dr 
Chalmers,  nor  was  the  personal  faith  and  practice  of  any  more 
incontestable.  In  his  work,  The  Evidence  and  Authority  of  the 
Christian  Revelation,  while  not  overlooking  that  many  Christians 
have  all  they  require  in  the  truth  which  has  come  home  to  them 
*  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,'  he  deals  with  the 
unbeliever  entirely  on  the  ground  of  the  verity  of  the  historical 
facts  above  alluded  to.  Considering  the  gospel  as  a  message,  he 
inquires  if  we  know  enough  of  the  messengers  to  pronounce  upon 
their  credibility.  '  Had  they,'  says  he,  '  the  manner  and  physiog- 
nomy of  honest  men  %  Was  their  testimony  resisted,  and  did  they 
persevere  in  it  ?  Had  they  any  interest  in  fabricating  the  message, 
or  did  they  suffer  in  consequence  of  this  perseverance  ?  Did  they 
suffer  to  such  a  degree  as  to  constitute  a  satisfying  pledge  of  their 
integrity?  Was  there  more  than  one  messenger,  and  did  they 
agree  as  tg,the  substance  of  that  communication  which  they  made 
to  the  world  ?  Did  they  exhibit  any  special  mark  of  their  office 
as  the  messengers  of  God ;  such  a  mark  as  none  but  God  could 
give,  and  none  but  his  approved  messengers  could  obtain  the 
possession  of?  Was  this  mark  the  power  of  working  miracles; 
and  were  these  miracles  so  obviously  addressed  to  the  senses  as 
to  leave  no  suspicion  of  deceit  behind?'  'On  the  solution  of  these 
[points],'  he  adds,  '  do  we  rest  the  question  of  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  religion.' 

Dr  Chalmers  argues,  in  a  way  which  has  been  felt  by  a  large 
portion  of  the  pubhc  as  satisfactory,  that  the  alleged  facts  rest,  in 
these  respects,  upon  perfectly  good  evidence.  Even  in  their 
supernaturality  he  sees  no  true  objection.  The  supposition  that 
the  first  Christians  may  have  been  mistaken  as  to  the  subject  of 
their  testimony,  is,  according  to  him,  '  destroyed  by  the  nature*  of 
the  subject.  It  was  not  testimony  to  a  doctrine  which  might 
deceive  the  understanding.  It  was  something  more  than  testimony 
to  a  dream,  or  a  trance,  or  a  midnight  fancy,  which  might  deceive 
the  imagination.  It  was  testimony  to  a  multitude  and  a  succes- 
sion of  palpable  facts,  which  could  never  have  deceived  the  senses,  and 
which  preclude  all  possibility  of  mistake,  even  though  it  had  been 
the  testimony  of  only  one  individual.' 

Dr   Chalmers  professes,   in  this   discussion,  to  walk   by  the 

6  TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

Baconian  philosophy.  He  fully  acknowledges  that  knowledge 
can  alone  be  founded  on  observation,  and  that  we  learn  <  by- 
descending  to  the  sober  work  of  seeing,  and  feeling,  and  experi- 
menting.' He  professes  to  base  his  theology  purely  upon 
induction.  He  prefers  what  has  been  'seen  by  one  pair  of  eyes' 
to  all  reasoning  and  guessing.  In  his  essay,  however,  there  is  no 
laborious  attempt  to  shew  the  difficulty  of  correctly  observing  a 
fact.  We  have  nothing  from  him  about  the  aptitude  of  the 
senses  to  be  deceived,  and  our  liability  to  mistake  a  hypothesis  for 
a  simple  object  or  occurrence.  He  does  not  propose  that  we  only 
receive  the  marvellous  facts  of  Scripture  if  we  cannot  explain  them 
away.  Neither  does  he  call  for  a  test  being  appUed  to  supposed 
facts  before  we  proclaim  them  as  such.  He  does  not  ask  us  to 
start  with  a  clear  understanding  of  what  is  possible  or  impossible; 
he  does  not  demand  that  we  should  sternly  reject  anything  on  the 
gi'ound  of  its  being  inconsistent  with  the  law  of  gravitation  or  any 
other  law.  What  he  requires  of  us  *  on  entering  into  any  depart- 
ment of  inquiry,'  as  the  best  preparation,  is  a  very  different  thing 

namely,  '  that  docility  of  mind  which  is  founded  on  a  sense  of  our 

totalignorance  of  the  subject.'' 

No  contrast  could  well  be  more  complete.  In  the  one  case, 
testimony  regarding  assumedly  natural,  though  novel  facts  and 
occurrences,  is  treated  with  a  rigour  which  woidd  enable  us  to  battle 
off  anything  whatever  that  we  did  not  wish  to  receive,  if  it  could  not 
be  readily  subjected  to  experiment,  or  immediately  shewn  in  a 
fresh  instance — and  perhaps  even  then.  In  the  other,  the  power 
and  inclination  of  men  to  observe  correctly  any  palpable  fact,  and 
report  it  truly,  is  asserted  without  exception  or  reserve  ;  and,  on 
this  ground,  even  facts  assumed  to  be  miraculous,  or  beyond  the 
ordinary  routine  of  nature,  are  held  as  triumphantly  substantiated. 
It  is  plain  that  one  or  other  of  these  two  views  of  testimony 
must  be  wholly,  or,  in  a  great  degree,  erroneous,  as  they  are  quite 
at  issue  wdth  each  other.  It  becomes  of  importance,  both  with  a 
regard  to  our  progress  in  philosophy  and  our  code  of  religious 
beliefs,  to  ascertain  which  it  is  that  involves  the  greatest  amount 
of  truth.  The  scientific  view,  as  the  new  and  intruding  one, 
first  challenges  examination. 

In  considering  this  view  of  fact-observation  and  testimony,  we 
are  struck  at  the  very  outset  with  its  want  of  harmony  with  the 
ordinary  practices  of  men,  as  well  as  with  those  conceptions  of 
human  conduct  and  motive  which  the  experience  of  ages  has 
established.  Every  hour  of  our  lives,  we  place  reliance,  in  matters 
of  more  or  less  importance,  on  the  fidelity  of  our  senses,  and  an 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  7 

assumed  habit  in  ourselves  and  others  of  speaking  the  truth.  We 
know,  of  course,  that  a  person  who  has  an  interest  in  deceiving  us, 
whether  to  gain  an  advantage,  or  escape  a  loss  or  a  punishment,  or 
even  a  reproach,  will  perhaps  do  so.  We  know  that  there  is  such 
a  thing  as  weakness  of  perception  and  of  judgment,  and  a  tendency 
to  exaggeration,  either  of  which  will  occasionally  bring  us  reports 
in  some  degree  false.  Yet  we  constantly  act,  and  feel  justified  by 
experience,  in  acting,  as  under  a  belief  that  men  in  general  both 
observe  matters  of  fact  correctly  and  wish  to  speak  the  truth 
about  them,  and,  when  deranging  circumstances  are  excluded, 
actually  do  so.  Accordingly,  thousands  of  merchants  every 
morning  proceed  in  serious  affairs  upon  the  faith  of  their  corre- 
spondents. Life-assurance  companies  yearly  undertake  hundreds 
of  risks  on  lives,  resting  wholly  on  the  good  faith  of  the  evidence 
they  receive  from  the  medical  attendants  and  private  friends  of  the 
parties,  as  to  their  habits  of  life  and  present  state  of  health  ;  and 
so  much  is  this  matter  of  routine,  that  only  some  glaring  and 
singular  circumstances  would  cause  a  suspicion  to  be  entertained 
regarding  the  fidelity  of  any  of  the  persons  giving  such  testimony. 
Daily  do  hundreds  of  news-sheets  publish  multifarious  collections 
of  inteUigence,  much  of  it  of  an  extraordinary  and  unlooked-for 
character,  and  the  constant  wonder  is,  and  may  well  be,  how  little 
of  error,  particularly  of  wilful  error,  there  is  mixed  up  with  it. 
Even  courts  of  law,  while  feeling  a  peculiar  need  in  their  case  for 
guarding  against  interested  ■witness-ship,  do  yet  maintain  liberal 
views  of  human  testimony  in  general.  Sanity,  mature  age,  and  a 
presumable  absence  of  motive  for  concealment  and  misrepresenta- 
tion, are  their  requisites  for  receivable  witnesses :  we  never  hear 
from  them  any  complaints  of  that  bare  possibility  of  seeing  facts 
truly  which  gives  such  concern  to  Mr  Faraday. 

And,  obviously,  it  is  necessary  for  the  procedure  of  social  life 
and  the  advance  of  knowledge,  that  some  such  degree  of  faith 
should  be  attached  to  human  testimony.  Just  suppose  for  a 
moment  that  every  fact  reported  to  us  by  others  were  viewed  in 
the  light  of  the  sceptical  system,  as  to  the  fallaciousness  of  the 
senses  and  the  tendency  to  self-deception.  Should  we  not  from 
that  moment  be  at  a  stand-still  in  all  the  principal  movements  of 
our  lives  1  Could  a  banker  ever  discount  a  bill  ?  Could  a 
merchant  believe  in  a  market-report  ?  Could  the  politician  put 
any  trust  in  the  genealogy  of  the  monarch  1  Could  w^e  rest  with 
assurance  upon  any  legal  deed  or  document  heretofore  thought 
essential  to  the  maintenance  of  property  1  Could  evidence  for  the 
condemnation  of  the  most  audacious  and  dangerous  criminal  be 

8  TESTIMONY  I   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

obtained  1  Each  geologist  distrusting  his  neighbour  as  to  the 
actuaUty  of  the  find  of  fossils  in  certain  strata,  what  would  be 
the  progress  of  that  science  ?  Could  we,  with  any  face,  ask  the 
young  to  believe  in  a  single  fact  of  history,  or  geography,  or 
any  science  concerned  in  education?  What  could  be  more 
seriously  inconvenient  to  mortals,  short  of  the  withdrawal  of  the 
sun  fi-oni  the  firmament,  than  the  abstraction  of  this  simple 
principle  from  the  apparatus  of  social  life,  that  we  can  all  tolerably 
well  apprehend  the  nature  of  an  event  or  fact  presented  to  our 
senses,  and  give  a  fair  representation  of  it  in  words  afterwards  ? 

I  must  also  make  bold  to  say  that  the  sceptical  view  appears  to 
me  out  of  harmony  with  the  inductive  philosophy.  Bacon  gives  us 
many  warnings  against  preconceived  opinions  and  prejudices  ;  but 
he  does  not  bid  us  despair  of  ascertaining  facts  from  our  own 
senses  and  from  testimony.  He  laments  that  there  is  an  impedi- 
ment in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  the  sense  of  sight 
being  unable  to  penetrate  '  the  spiritual  operation  in  tangible 
bodies  ;'*  but  he  nowhere  tells  us  that  sight  is  so  fallacious  that 
we  require  a  corrective  power  to  assure  us  that  we  have  really  seen 
anything.  Bacon  may  be  said  negatively  to  assume  a  certain 
accuracy  in  perception  and  a  certain  fidelity  in  reporting,  as 
properties  of  human  nature  essential  to  the  carrying  out  of  his 
system.  What  is  of  still  more  consequence,  we  do  not  find  in 
Bacon  any  dogma  like  that  of  Mr  Faraday,  that  *  the  laws  of 
nature  are  the  foundation  of  our  knowledge  in  natural  things,'  and 
that  these  form  our  only  safe  test  for  any  new  fact  presented  to 
our  observation.  Bacon's  method  is  rather  the  contrary,  namely, 
that  facts  are  to  serve  as  the  foundation  of  the  laws  of  nature. 
When  Mr  Faraday  tells  us  to  set  out  with  clear  notions  of  what 
is  possible,  it  may  be  asked,  in  the  spirit  of  Bacon,  who  can  tell 
beforehand  what  is  possible  1  When  we  have  acquired  the  whole 
range  of  knowable  facts,  we  may  be  able  to  tell,  but  not  till  then. 
By  way  of  illustrating  his  dogma,  he  sets  forth  the  axiom  that 
to  create  force  is  impossible.  Well,  it  is  so.  When  Oersted 
discovered  magnetism  in  electricity,  and  by  seeking,  e  converso,  to 
draw  electricity  from  a  permanent  magnet,  seemed  to  have 
arranged  for  a  creation  of  force,  it  was  Mr  Faraday  who  shewed 
that  the  power  obtained  only  compensated  for  the  motion  required 
to  be  expended  in  the  magnets  producing  the  electric  currents, 
and  therefore  force  could  not  be  so  created.  We  fully  grant  the 
principle  of  which  he  has  furnished  so  interesting  an  illustration. 

*  If  ovum  Organvm,  Book  I.,  aphorism  50. 

I 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  9 

But  when  Mr  Faraday  proceeds  to  say  that  for  any  person 
to  draw  a  heavy  object  by  his  fingers,  would  be  creating  a  force, 
*  which  cannot  be/  he  clearly  goes  beyond  the  limits  of  his  axiom. 
Suppose  that  a  heavy  object  were  to  follow  the  fingers  of  an 
experimentalist,  the  cause  of  it  might  be  only  some  already 
existing,  though  unknown  and  mysterious  force — one  force  simply 
overcoming  another.  This  is  not  saying  that  any  such  force 
exists  in  the  fingers  of  the  human  subject  :  it  is  only  saying  that, 
if  any  sufficient  number  of  persons  allege  that  such  has  been  with 
them  matter  of  observation,  an  a  priori  objection,  to  the  efi'ect  that 
no  such  force  exists,  can  only  be  considered  as  a  pctitio  principii. 
That  there  are  recognised  forces  by  which  gravitation  can  be 
overcome,  and  these  of  a  sufficiently  mysterious  character  too,  is 
known  to  the  merest  tyro  that  ever  used  a  magnet  in  raising  a 
few  iron  filings ;  and,  it  may  be  reasonably  asked,  who  can  tell 
how  many  such  forces  there  may  be  ?  'In  the  world  around  us,' 
says  Dean  Trench  {On  Miracles)^ '  we  continually  behold  lower  laws 
held  in  restraint  by  higher,  mechanic  by  djniamic,  chemical  by 
vital,  physical  by  moral.'*  Instead  of  ignoring  this  obvnous  text, 
Mr  Faraday  would  need  to  supply  us  with  a  rule  by  which  we 
might  ascertain  that  the  alleged  new  facts  do  not  belong  to  a 
higher  law  than  any  now  recognised. 

In  short,  this  sceptical  method  consists  very  much  in  vicious 
circles.  You  cannot  know  whether  a  fact  be  a  fact  till  you  have 
ascertained  the  laws  of  nature  in  the  case,  and  you  cannot  know 
the  laws  of  nature  till  you  have  ascertained  facts.  You  must  not 
profess  to  have  learned  anything  till  you  have  ascertained  if  it  be 
possible,  and  this  you  cannot  ascertain  till  you  have  learned 
everything.  The  assumption  of  a  right  to  repudiate  any  extra- 
ordinary fact,  largely  attested,  if  weakness,  bias,  mendacity,  or 
any  other  supposition  can  explain  it  away,  in  truth  puts  theory 
virtually  before  and  above  fact,  as  far  as  testimony  is  concerned — 
indeed,  annihilates  testimony — and,  if  really  acted  on,  would  leave 

*  M.  Chabert,  the  Fire-king,  took  pnissic  acid  in  the  presence  of  the  company 
assembled  to  see  his  exhibitions.  '  To  some  uneducated  persons,  the  fact  that 
he  took  this  deadly  poison  into  his  stomach  without  harm  to  his  person,  would 
seem  supernatural  or  miraculous.  But  there  is  another  law  to  be  taken  into 
account.  The  chemist  knows  that  this  acid  has  a  strong  afl&nity  for  earths  and 
alkalies,  and  readily  combines  with  them ;  and  that,  when  in  combination  with 
some  other  substances,  it  becomes  perfectly  harmless.  M.  Chabert  took 
advantage  of  this  other  law.  He  guarded  the  surface  of  his  gullet  with  a 
coating,  and  took  lus  antidote  in  advance.  The  prussic  acid  was  not  allowed  to 
come  in  contact  vnih.  his  corporeal  system,  until  it  had  been  converted  into  a 
harmless  salt.' — Woodman's  Eeply  to  Divight,  Portland,  U.  S.,  1857,  p.  39. 

10  TESTIMONY  1   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

science  in  a  state  so  thoroughly  crippled,  that  it  could  scarcely 
afterwards  he  said  to  exist. 

And  such  is  really  the  operation  of  this  maxim,  as  far  as  it 
is  acted  on.  Science  is  continually  deprived  of  the  benefit  of 
fresh  facts  depending  on  human  testimony,  and  which  are  not 
readily  explicable  on  known  principles,  because  it  chooses  to 
be  quite  unsatisfiable  regarding  their  verity.  Its  history  is  full 
of  instances  of  such  matters  long  kept  out  of  the  temple  by  reason 
of  the  scepticism  of  the  priests,  and  which  have  only  been  forced 
in  at  last  against  their  will.  For  example,  the  fall  of  meteoric 
stones  was  occasionally  reported  by  good  witnesses  during  many 
ages.  But  science  did  not  understand  how  stones  should  be  formed 
in  or  beyond  the  atmosphere  ;  its  dignity  was  oflPended,  perhaps,  by 
the  vulgarity  of  some  of  the  surmises  on  the  subject,  as  that  the 
stones  fell  from  the  moon.  The  accounts  of  the  fall  of  meteoric 
stones  were  held  to  be  incompatible  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and 
specimens  which  had  been  seen  to  fall  by  hundreds  of  people  were 
preserved  in  cabinets  of  natural  history  as  ordinary  minerals,  ^  which 
the  credulous  and  superstitious  regarded  as  having  fallen  from  the 
clouds.'  A  committee  of  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences,  includ- 
ing the  celebrated  Lavoisier,  unanimously  rejected  an  account 
of  three  nearly  contemporary  descents  of  meteorolites  which 
reached  them  on  the  strongest  evidence.  After  two  thousand 
years  of  incredulity,  the  truth  in  this  matter  was  forced  upon  the 
scientific  world  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  There 
would  have  been  at  any  time,  of  course,  an  instant  cessation  of 
scepticism  if  any  one  could  have  shewn,  a  priori,  from  ascertained 
principles  in  connection  with  the  atmosphere,  how  stones  were 
to  be  expected  to  fall  from  the  sky.  But  what  is  this  but  to  say 
that  facts  by  themselves,  however  well  attested,  are  wholly  useless 
in  such  circumstances  to  the  cultivators  of  physical  science,  while 
any  kind  of  vague  hypothesis  can  be  brought  forward  in  opposition 
to  them  %  What  is  it  but  to  put  conjecture  or  prejudice  above 
fact,  and  indeed  utterly  to  repudiate  the  Baconian  method  % 

The  positive  harmfulness  of  the  sceptical  view  of  testimony  to 
the  interests  of  science,  and  by  consequence  the  interests  of  humanity, 
was  well  illustrated  a  few  years  ago,  when  it  was  announced 
from  India  that  many  operations  had  been  performed  upon  natives 
in  the  hospitals  there,  painlessly,  by  their  being  merely  thrown 
beforehand  into  what  was  called  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Though 
the  reporting  surgeons  were  most  respectable  men,  the  fact  was 
disbelieved,  and  the  profession  at  home  refused  to  attempt  its 
verification.     When  one  adventurous  surgeon  at  length  reported 

TESTIMONY  I   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  1 1 

to  the  Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  in  London,  that  he 
had  had  a  patient  in  the  Wellow  Hospital,  Nottinghamshire, 
thrown  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  by  a  gentleman,  a  barrister  of 
the  Middle  Temple,  and  that  he  had  then  amputated  the  man's 
leg,  without  producing  a  twitch  in  his  countenance,  the  patient 
declaring  at  the  end  that  he  had  felt  no  pain,  there  was  a  burst  of 
contemptuous  incredulity  as  to  the  facts,  nearly  the  whole  assembly 
preferring  to  believe  that  the  gentlemen  were  a  pair  of  impostors, 
or  that  the  patient  had  feigned  insensibility.  To  all  appearance, 
the  anaesthetic  condition  resulting  from  mesmeric  sleep  would  have 
been  permanently  denied  in  spite  of  all  evidence  on  the  subject, 
and  a  blessing  to  humanity  would  consequently  have  been  lost ; 
but  the  problem  was  interrupted  by  the  discovery  of  a  chemical 
means  of  producing  the  same  insensibility,  by  which  mesmerism 
in  such  cases  was  superseded.  Chloroform  being  in  obvious 
relation  to  other  toxicants,  no  difficulty  was  expressed  regarding 
it,  as  far  as  the  mere  fact  of  its  power  of  producing  insensibility 
was  concerned.  But  we  see  that,  in  the  other  case,  facts  coming 
forward  simply  on  human  testimony,  and  without  co-ordination 
with  some  recognised  principle,  met  only  a  scornful  rejection. 

The  w^hole  history  of  mesmerism  throws  an  interesting  light  on 
the  present  discussion,  for,  as  far  as  it  has  yet  been  accepted 
as  true — and  no  doubt  seems  now  entertained  regarding  the 
trance-sleep,  insensibility  to  pain,  subjection  to  the  will  of  another, 
and  some  others  of  the  phenomena — the  credit  has  been  due  wholly 
to  unscientific  persons.*  The  rdle  of  the  physicist,  during  a  course 
of  years,  while  the  matter  was  under  trial,  was  to  utter  derisive 

*  '  No  better  illustration  of  the  time  character  of  Mr  Hallam's  inind  could 
perhaps  be  offered  than  the  whole  of  his  conduct  and  language  through  life  on 
the  strange  but  important  subject  of  mesmerism.  He  used  to  tell  how  he  and 
Eogers  had,  long  years  before  anybody  in  England  had  revived  the  subject, 
seen  in  Paris,  and  carefully  tested  phenomena  wliich  covild  not  possibly  leave 
them  in  any  doubt  of  the  leading  facts  of  animal  magnetism.  He  used  to  tell 
that  they  were  so  insolently  and  rudely  treated,  at  friends'  tables,  on  their 
saying  what  they  had  seen,  that  there  was  no  course  to  take,  in  consideration 
for  the  host,  but  silence ;  and  then  that  as  fact  after  fact  came  out,  one  after 
another  became  convinced ;  tiU  at  last  even  physicians  grew  grave  and  silent. 
"  Eogers  and  I,"  he  used  to  say,  "  have  had  the  experience  which  is  too  rare 
to  be  had  so  often  as  once  in  a  century — ^that  of  witnessing  the  gradual  reception 
by  a  great  metropolis  of  a  great  new  fact  in  natural  science."  ....  Hi§ 
conclusion  was  at  the  service  of  all  who  asked  for  it.  His  words,  written 
and  spoken,  were  :  "On  the  whole,  there  remains  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that 
mesmerism  and  some  other  things,  that  are  not  mesmerism  so  called,  are 
fragmentary  parts  of  some  great  law  of  the  human  frame  which  we  are  on  the 
verge  of  discovering."  ^—Memoir  of  Hmry  Hallam,  Daily  News,  January  25, 
1859. 

12  TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

shouts,  to  proclaim  charlatanerie,  and  shew  the  inconsistency  of  the 
alleged  facts  Avith  the  laws  of  nature.  But  for  an  irregular  corps 
of  experimentalists,  who  were  not  to  be  awed  into  quiescence  by 
a  priori  objections  from  authoritative  sources,  this  interesting 
group  of  natural  truths,  for  anything  that  appears,  would  have 
remained  totally  undeveloped.  It  is  ever  so.  The  physicist, 
either  from  narrowness  of  mind  induced  by  the  pettiness  of  his 
special  studies,  or  from  a  fear  of  losing  what  reputation  he  may 
have  acquired,  or  from  the  vanity  of  appearing  incredulous  (for 
here  lies  a  temptation  very  besetting  to  human  nature),  sets 
himself  in  opposition  to  all  such  new  doctrines.  He  not  only  does 
nothing  for  their  advancement,  but  he  seeks  by  all  means  to  put 
them  down,  as  if — since  he  can  have  no  gain  by  them  in  any  way 
— he  felt  personally  aggiieved  by  the  notice  which  they  attract. 

When  the  physicist  is  driven  to  give  reasons  for  the  want  of  faith 
that  is  in  him,  we  usually  find  him  resorting  to  notorious  instances 
of  the  discrepancy,  the  error,  and  the  failure  of  testimony.  He 
cites  the  well-known  story  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  who,  hearing 
a  quarrel  take  place  below  his  windows,  and  receiving  from 
those  engaged  in  it  various  accounts  of  what  had  taken  place, 
exclaimed  :  '  What  dependence  can  I  have  on  the  alleged  events  of 
ancient  history,  when  I  find  such  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  truth 
regarding  a  matter  that  has  taken  place  only  a  few  minutes  ago,  and 
almost  in  my  own.  presence  !'  He  reminds  us  of  frauds,  impostures, 
and  matters  of  illusion  amply  certified,  and  of  many  things  unhesi- 
tatingly accepted  at  the  time,  which  we  know  to  be  impossible. 

Now,  it  is  quite  true  that,  in  a  matter  where  men's  passions 
and  interests  have  been  highly  excited,  they  will  give  discrepant 
reports,  as  they  did  in  the  case  noticed  by  Kaleigh.  It  is  also 
true,  that  in  any  complicated  affair,  as  a  battle  or  a  tumult,  where 
there  are  many  persons  concerned^  and  much  ground  covered,  each 
person  will  have  a  report  to  give  somewhat  different  from  his 
neighbour,  for  the  very  good  reason  that  each  has  actually  seen 
something  different  from  his  neighbour.  But  it  is  obvious  that 
all  such  variances  can  be  allowed  for,  and  we  may  still  have  a 
large  residuum  of  truth.  The  plain  and  palpable  facts  that  there 
was  a  battle  or  a  tumult,  that  certain  general  appearances  were 
presented,  and  certain  results  followed,  will  not  be  in  the  least 
invahdated  by  a  consideration  of  minor  differences  amongst 
the  reporters.  What  is  reasonable  here,  is  to  make  some 
allowances  for  particular  feelings  and  for  special  points  of  view, 
not  to  repudiate  the  whole  testimony. 

As  to  frauds,  impostures,  and  matters  of  illusion,  rashly  vouched 

TESTIMONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  13 

for,  it  may  be  said  that,  in  general,  there  never  was  any  necessary 
difficulty  in  detecting  the  falseness  of  the  testimony  from  the 
betrinning.  It  will  usually  be  found  that,  in  such  matters,  two 
thinf^s  wholly  different  were  vouched  for — namely,  something 
actually  seen,  and  a  presumptive  character  of  the  thing  seen,  or 
else  that  the  reporter  was  not  a  direct  witness,  but  only  spoke  on 
the  faith  of  general  rumour.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  a  Silesian 
child  was  alleged  to  have  a  tooth  of  gold,  and  many  testified  to 
having  seen  it.  They  were  right  as  to  their  having  seen  an  object 
which  was  called  and  bore  the  appearance  of  a  tooth  of  gold ; 
but  they  were  wrong  as  to  the  presumptive  character  of  the  object, 
which  was  only  a  common  tooth  covered  artificially  with  gold.  So, 
likewise,  as  to  that  modern  marvel,  the  sea-serpent.  There  is  an 
overwhelming  probabihty  that  no  such  creature  exists ;  but  it  is 
acknowledged  that  a  spar  covered  with  sea-weed  and  barnacles, 
and  a  certain  South-sea  seal  going  rapidly  through  the  water,  assume 
nearly  the  appearances  which  have  been  described  as  belonging 
to  the  sea-serpent  ;*  so  we  may  conclude  that  the  reporters  have 
faithfully  reported  an  object  seen,  and  only  erred  in  their  state- 
ment of  the  presumptive  character  of  what  they  saw.  We  read, 
in  the  books  of  medieval  travellers,  many  absurd  statements  as  to 
marvellous  things  existing  in  different  countries ;  but  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  they  are  nearly  all  matters  of  vulgar  rumour  :  what 
the  writer  speaks  of  from  personal  observation,  though  marvellous, 
and  disbelieved  at  first,  is  usually  found,  sooner  or  later,  to  be 
near  the  truth,  t  If  we  rightly  view,  then,  these  frauds,  impostures, 
and  matters  of  illusion,  we  shall  in  reality  see  ground  for  increas- 
ing our  faith  in  human  testimony,  for  we  shall  always  find  that 
a  '  palpable  fact,'  which  a  multitude  of  competent  witnesses  alleged 
they  saw,  wai  really  seen,  albeit  they  might  be  mistaken  as  to 
what  it  was. 

Regarding  things  once  unliesitatingly  vouched  for,  which  we 
now  know  to  be    'impossible,'  a   more   important   remark   may 

*  So  the  "writer  heard  stated  in  the  spring  of  1858  by  Professor  Owen,  in  a 
Icctm'e  at  the  Geological  Museum,  Jermyn  Street. 

f  "With  reference  to  the  Avorks  of  Marco  Polo  and  Sir  John  Mandeville,  a 
modem  writer  remarks  :  '  What  is  told  by  them  on  their  own  evidence  of 
inspection  or  information  on  the  spot,  is  commonly  perfectly  correct,  and 
judiciously  related.  The  bad  name  which  such  writers  have  unjustly  acquired, 
is  owing  to  the  same  causes  wliich  procured  them  the  equally  ill-judged  admir- 
ation of  the  readers  of  their  day;  namely,  the  amazing  credulity  of  their 
contemporaries,  and  the  little  pains  which  have  since  been  taken  to  separate 
the  matter  of  lightly  received  hearsay  from  that  of  experiment  and  personal 
observation :  which  are  blended  together  more  from  want  of  judgment,  than 
of  honesty  and  veracity.' — Retrospective  Review,  vol.  ui.  (1823),  p.  273. 

1 4  TESTIMONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

be  ventured  on.  Are  we  always  sure  that  these  things  are 
impossible  ?  Sixty  years  ago,  if  any  one  had  been  pleading  with 
Lavoisier  for  the  value  of  human  testimony,  the  latter  most 
probably  would  have  deemed  it  a  sufficient  answer  to  point  to 
the  many  well-authenticated  instances  of  that  impossibilitt/,  the  fall 
of  meteoric  stones!  Yet  meteoric  stones  have  proved  to  be  a 
verity,  and  not  an  impossibility.  About  the  same  time,  the  fact 
of  so  many  Gloucestershire  peasantry  having  attested  the  pre- 
vention of  small-pox  by  a  virus  from  the  teats  of  a  cow,  would 
have  been  deemed  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  same  pleading,  by 
nine  out  of  every  ten  of  the  best  educated  physicians  in  England. 
Jenner's  statue  in  Trafalgar  Square  tells  us  how  fallacious  the 
objection  would  have  been.  It  is  to  be  observed  regarding 
such  objections,  that  they  are  almost  invariably  gratuitous  and 
unproved.  Were  they  always  put  to  the  test  of  experiment, 
how  many  might  prove  like  meteorolites  and  vaccination  !  We 
may,  indeed,  set  it  down  as  an  absolute  certainty,  that  many 
things  are  erroneously  deemed  impossible ;  for,  till  we  know  all 
the  possible — and  how  far  we  are  from  that  need  not  be  insisted 
on — how  can  we  know  what  is  impossible  ?  Objectors  can  justly 
speak  of  a  highly  improbable  at  the  most,  and  then  the  question 
will  lie  between  this  improbability  and  their  owai  fallibility. 
Now  the  fact  is,  that  they  have  neglected  whole  fields  of  the 
universal  system  of  things,  because  of  the  inapplicableness  of  the 
experimental  method  there,  or  from  taste,  or  caprice ;  and,  for 
anything  they  can  tell,  hundreds  of  things  in  those  fields,  now 
pronounced  to  be  impossible,  may  yet  prove  to  be  truths. 

Let  us  here  suppose  a  case  by  no  means  unlikely  to  happen  in 
our  age.  A  steamer  passes  for  the  first  time  along  a  shore,  the 
people  of  which,  remote  from  the  world,  yet  not  without  intelli- 
gence, never  before  saw  such  a  vessel.  A  group  of  fishermen 
come  to  an  inland  town,  and  report  to  their  patriarch  or  ruler 
that  they  had  seen  a  ship  moving  along  against  the  wind,  with  no 
visible  means  by  which  it  was  impelled.  If  there  was  a  wary 
cultivator  of  science  present,  he  would  say  :  *  It  must  have  been 
a  mistake  of  your  senses,  which  are  extremely  liable  to  deception 
at  all  times,  but  particularly  so  when  anything  wonderful  is  in 
question.  To  have  been  able  to  report  justly  on  this  subject,  you 
should  have  all  had  your  senses  philosophically  trained  before- 
hand ;  in  which  case,  and  if  you  had  started  with  a  just  sense 
of  what  is  possible  in  navigation,  you  would  have  never  brought 
us  so  foolish  a  tale.*  When  the  master  of  the  steamer  afterwards 
landed,  and  explained  how  the  ship  was  moved,  this  incredulity 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  15 

would  of  course  vanish.  Now,  could  anything  be  more  prepos- 
terous than  either  the  rejection  of  the  testimony  of  a  number  of 
credible  persons  in  so  palpable  a  matter  of  fact,  on  the  ground 
that  scientific  mistakes  were  sometimes  made,  or  the  making  the 
receipt  of  the  testimony  of  a  number  of  honest  witnesses  depend 
on  the  accident  of  a  possible  immediate  explanation  of  the  fact 
witnessed  1  Yet  such  would  be  the  predicament  of  Mr  Faraday 
in  the  case,  if  he  were  to  carry  out  the  principle  he  has 
announced. 

Let  us  take  still  another  illustration  :  Not  many  years  ago,  it 
might  have  been  a  very  serviceable  argument  against  the  value 
of  human  testimony  for  extraordinary  facts,  that  there  was  such 
powerful  witness-ship  for  the  multitudes  of  confessors  whom 
Hunneric,  king  of  the  Vandals,  deprived  of  their  tongues,  and 
who  nevertheless  continued  to  speak  !  Victor,  bishop  of  Vite, 
iEneas  of  Gaza,  Procopius,  the  Emperor  Justinian,  Pope  Gregory 
— seven  writers  in  all,  six  of  them  contemporary,  and  three,  if 
not  four  of  them  eye-witnesses — assert  that  this  so-called  miracle 
took  place,  that  the  tongue  was  in  all  cases  excised  from  the  very 
root,  and  that  the  subsequent  speech  of  the  victims  was  perfect.* 
Yet  who  but  would  join  with  Gibbon  when  he  said  that  the 
statement  would  command  the  assent  of  those  alone  who  believe 
in  the  orthodoxy  of  the  sufferers  ?t  What  rational  person  of  our 
day  but  would  deem  the  whole  affair,  amply  attested  as  it  is,  a 
fable  1  Yet  it  fully  appears  that  the  only  error  or  fallacy  in  this 
case  lies  with  those  who  believe  it  possible  for  so  many  such 
witnesses  to  concur  in  attesting  a  fable.  That  persons  who  have 
had  their  tongues  cut  out  continue  to  be  able  to  speak,  is  certified 
by  Sir  John  Malcolm  in  his  SJcetches  of  Persia,  from  personal 
observation ;  and  the  testimony  has  been  corroborated  by  Sir 
John  M'Neill,  our  late  ambassador  in  that  country.  It  appears 
that  when  the  forepart  of  the  tongue  is  alone  cut  off,  speech  is 
lost ;  but  that  when  the  whole  loose  part  of  the  member  is 
excised,  the  sufferer  continues  to  talk  quite  intelligibly  to  his 
friends.  $ 

It  has  been  remarked  that  the  modem  physicist  professes  a 
peculiar  need  for  scepticism  where  the  alleged  new  fact  is  of  a 
marvellous  nature.  If  commonplace  and  uninteresting,  he  may 
allow  it  to  pass  3  but  if  it  gratify  the  feeling  of  wonder  in  simple 

*  Newman's  Essay  on  the  Miracles  recorded  in  the  Fcclmastical  History  of 
Early  Ages,  1843,  p.  208. 
f  Decline  and  Fall,  &c.,  chap,  xxxvii. 
X  Notes  and  Queries,  May  22, 1858. 

1 6  TESTIl^IONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

minds,  then  no  degree  of  rigour  is  too  raucli  for  it.  A  modern 
continental  -writer  lays  down  as  a  principle,  that  testimony 
becomes  uncertain  -whenever  man  passes  beyond  the  terra  Jirina 
of  the  natural.  Once  past  that  bound,  *his  discernment,  his 
self-possession,  his  common  sense  appear  to  abandon  him.' 
Now  this  principle,  as  it  has  been  called,  has  a  ruinous  petitio 
principii  at  its  basis.  It  is  assumed  that  the  bounds  of  the 
natural  are  known,  which  is  by  no  means  the  case.  The  scientific 
few  may,  indeed,  have  established  in  their  own  minds  certain 
points  or  lines  bounding  the  natural — in  reality,  a  boundary  that 
never  was  settled,  and  never  will  be  ;  but  with  the  great  bulk  of 
ordinary  people,  there  is  no  such  definition.  Any  external  fact 
presented  to  their  senses  they  usually  report  with  a  fidelity  which 
may  be  affected  to  some  degree  by  their  power  of  observing,  but 
is  seldom  seen  to  be  troubled  by  any  consideration  of  the  fact 
being  ultra-natural  or  ultra-scientific.  If  they  speak  of  a  matter 
which  has  been  under  their  direct  observation,  they  usually  give 
us  simply  their  own  impressions.  In  regard  to  these,  where  the 
usual  requisites  for  testimony  have  been  fulfilled — that  is,  where 
there  is  a  sufiicient  number  of  witnesses,  speaking  from  the 
reports  of  their  own  senses,  and  under  no  temptation  to  false- 
hood— we  certainly  have  an  abundance  of  cases  where  the  facts, 
doubted  at  first,  proved  afterwards  to  be  strictly  true,  how- 
ever partially  misunderstood.  Let  me  just  remind  the  reader  of 
one  or  two  examples.  Two  thousand  people  at  Milan  saw 
what  they  thought  an  angel  hovering  in  the  air;  and  after  a 
little  time  spent  in  wondering,  it  proved  to  be  the  reflection  of 
one  of  the  statues  of  a  neighbouring  church,  the  image  of  which 
had  been  caught  on  the  surface  of  a  cloud.  It  has  never  been 
insinuated  in  this  case,  that  the  object  was  in  any  degree  mis- 
represented by  the  people  before  its  character  was  ascertained. 
It  used  to  be  alleged  by  the  peasantry  at  Plausac,  near  Clermont 
in  France,  that,  whenever  thunder  was  near,  three  balls  of  fire 
were  seen  on  the  points  of  the  cross  surmounting  the  church. 
The  scientific  were  of  course  scornful  as  to  the  alleged  fact ;  and 
no  one  who  followed  Mr  Faraday's  rule  of  setting  out  with 
just  notions  of  the  possible,  could  then  be  otherwise.  In  1752, 
when  D'Abikird  repeated  Franklin's  experiments  at  Marly,  the 
philosophers  of  Paris  came  to  see  that  the  three  fire-balls  on 
Plausac  church  were  a  truth.  Neither  in  this  case  could  it  be 
said  that  the  people  had  indulged  in  any  exaggeration.  They 
had  represented  the  fact,  before  the  days  of  scientific  electricity, 
exactly   as    they   would    have   represented    it   afterwards ;    and 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  17 

indeed  it  could  never  have  well  been  represented  otherwise  than 
it  was. 

To  turn  to  the  old  historians  and  travellers,  ^lian  gives 
an  account  of  a  flame  constantly  sustained  without  fuel  on 
the  altar  of  Venus  at  Mount  Erycus  in  Sicily  :  Bayle  deemed 
it  a  fahle ;  but  we  now  know  that  copious  jets  of  carburetted 
hydrogen  gas  are  produced  in  many  places ;  so  that  Elian's 
statement  may  be,  and  in  all  probability  was,  a  truth.  A 
hundred  years  ago,  narrations  as  to  showers  of  blood  and  of 
nutritive  substances  were  discredited,  as  irreconcilable  with  nature  : 
they  are  now  accepted  as  intelligible  natural  phenomena.  In  all 
these  cases,  the  report  was  truthful  as  to  the  appearances  pre- 
sented, as  truthful  as  any  such  report  could  well  be  in  these  more 
enlijchtened  davs. 

'  Herodotus  asserted  that  there  was  a  certain  small  bird,  which, 
as  often  as  the  crocodiles  came  on  shore  from  the  river  Nile, 
flew  fearlessly  within  their  jaws,  and  relieved  them  of  a  peculiar 
kind  of  leeches  which  infested  their  throats.  This  ancient  histo- 
rian added  that,  although  other  birds  invariably  avoided  the 
crocodile,  it  never  did  this  bird  any  injury.  So  extraordinary  a 
story  was  treated  as  fabulous  by  the  naturalists.  It  is,  notwith- 
standing, strictly  true.  M.  Geoffroy  St  Hilaire,  an  eminent  and 
accurate  French  naturalist,  confirms  the  fact  beyond  doubt.  The 
bird  alluded  to  is  the  Egjrptian  plover  (Charadrius  Egi/ptiacus), 
which  sometimes  enters  the  mouth  of  the  crocodile,  attracted 
thither,  not,  according  to  his  account,  by  leeches,  but  by  a  small 
insect  like  a  gnat,  which  frequents  the  banks  of  the  Nile  in  great 
quantities.  When  the  crocodile  comes  on  shore  to  repose,  he  is 
assailed  by  swarms  of  these  gnats,  which  get  into  his  mouth  in 
such  numbers,  that  his  palate,  naturally  of  a  bright-yellow  colour, 
appears  covered  with  a  blackish-brown  crust.  Then  it  is  that  the 
little  plover,  which  lives  on  these  insects,  comes  to  the  aid  of  the 
half-choked  crocodile,  and  relieves  him  of  his  tormentors  ;  and 
this  without  any  risk,  as  the  crocodile,  before  shutting  his  mouth, 
takes  care,  by  a  preparatory  movement,  to  warn  the  bird  to  be  off*. 
This  singular  process  is,  moreover,  not  confined  to  the  crocodiles  of 
Egypt ;  it  has  been  noticed  in  those  of  the  West  Indies,  where, 
when  attacked  in  a  similar  manner  by  small  flies  called  marin- 
gouins,  a  little  bird  (Todus  viridis)  which  lives  chiefly  on  flies  and 
insects,  performs  the  same  kind  office.'  *  Here,  too,  it  is  seen 
that  the  original  account,  however  wonderful,  was  just  as  correctly 

*  Stanley's  Familiar  History  of  Birds. 
B 

18  TESTIMONY  '.    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

stated,  so  far  as  appearances  went,  as  it  could  now  be.  Herodotus, 
bj  the  way,  is  a  remarkable  example  of  an  author  who  fearlessly 
stated  things  likely  to  be,  through  ignorance,  disbelieved,  but 
which  subsequent  knowledge  has  yerified.  A  modern  author, 
thoroughly  drilled  on  Mr  Faraday's  principle,  would  have  with- 
held all  facts  of  a  wonderful  or  unaccountable  nature,  and  found 
it  temporarily  to  his  account  to  do  so.  But,  in  that  case,  it  is 
evident  we  should  have  lost  many  truths  which  otherwise  would 
have  come  to  us. 

The  truth  is,  when  the  continental  writer  in  question  spoke  of 
the  natural,  he  spoke  of  a  thing  purely  arbitrary — that  is,  his  own 
idea  of  what  constitutes  the  range  of  nature.  His  idea  of  the 
natural  would  be  found  to  coincide  with  no  other  man's.  He 
therefore  proceeds  upon  a  most  fallacious  principle  Vvhen  he 
insinuates  reasons  for  incredulity  on  any  such  grounds. 

It  is  of  course  to  be  fully  admitted  that  we  naturally  give  a 
more  ready  reception  to  facts  which  coincide  with  our  experience 
of  the  course  of  nature  than  to  others.  And  it  is  but  a  following 
out  of  the  same  principle  that,  when  new  facts  are  reported  which 
we  cannot  trace  into  connection  with  any  ascertained  natural  law, 
we  should  exercise  some  caution  about  them — inquire  into  them — 
look  to  the  character,  and  ask  further  evidence  of  the  reporters,  if 
it  seem  necessary  or  be  obtainable — and  try  particulars  in  this 
direction  and  in  that,  with  a  view  to  finding  out  some  relation  in 
them  to  things  already  admitted.  But  to  make  the  reception 
of  facts  depend  wholly  on  such  a  relation,  without  regard  to  the 
amount  or  nature  of  the  testimony  for  them,  is  absurd.  Previous 
to  the  appearance  of  Dr  Ferriar's  work  on  Apparitions,  the 
philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  turned  with  disdain  from  the 
numberless  recitals  spread  over  all  ages  regarding  such  alleged 
phenomena,  deeming  them  all  mere  fancies  or  impostures.  Dr 
Fcrriar,  followed  by  Dr  Hibbert,  explained  a  class  of  these 
appearances  as  real  impressions  of  the  brain  occurring  under 
certain  morbid  conditions ;  and  instantly  the  testimony  for  that 
class  of  cases,  now  called  *  spectral  illusions,'  acquired  a  respect 
which  had  been  wholly  denied  to  it  before.  Did  not  the  result  in 
this  ca.se  prove  that  the  rejection  of  so  much  testimony  merely  for 
want  of  some  philosophical  relation  into  which  to  place  the  facts, 
was  a  preposterous  error  ?  Some  simple  caution  as  to  what  the 
facts  and  the  testimony  pointed  to,  was  all  that  a  just  philosophy 
demanded. 

When,  a  few  years  ago,  persons  professing  what  was  called 
electro-biology  seemed  able  to  throw  certain  special  subjects  into  a 

TESTIMONY  :   ITS  POSTURE  IX  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WOULD.  1 9 

condition  in  which  they  were  forced  to  believe  anything  told  them, 
and  unable  to  make  any  movement  forbidden  to  them,  the  whole 
apparent  phenomena  were  proclaimed  to  be  a  system  of  imposture. 
Individuals  known  as  respectable  members  of  society  went  upon 
the  platform  professing  to  be  incredulous — appeared  to  be,  -unex- 
pectedly to  themselves,  subjected  to  the  will  of  the  experimenter 
— and  were  by  the  remainder  of  the  sceptical  believed  to  be  con- 
federates of  a  quack.  Hundreds  of  witnesses  were  insufficient  to 
prove  that  there  was  anything  true  in  electro-biology  ;  but  at 
length  a  scientific  writer  ventured  to  shew  that  there  might  be, 
after  all,  a  philosophical  explanation  of  the  mystery.  *  When  the 
attention  of  man  or  animal,'  said  he,  '  is  deeply  engrossed  or 
absorbed  by  a  given  idea  associated  with  movement,  a  current  of 
nervous  force  is  sent  into  the  muscles,  which  produces  a  corre- 
sponding motion,  not  only  without  any  conscious  effort  of  volition, 
but  even  in  opposition  to  volition,  in  many  instances  ....  the 
individual  is  so  completely  mono-ideised,  or  under  the  influence  of 
the  dominant  idea,  as  to  be  incapable  of  exerting  any  restraining 
or  opposing  power.'  The  condition  of  being  spell-bound  by 
danger,  and  the  fascination  exercised  by  sei-pents  over  birds,  were 
explained  on  the  same  mono-idea-dynamic  principle.  With  little, 
if  any,  examination  of  this  theory — satisfied,  apparently,  with  the 
mere  words,  '  dominant  idea,'  '  mono-ideised,'  and  '  mono-idea- 
dynamic  action ' — those  who  had  scouted  the  solemn  averments  of 
hundreds  of  respectable  persons  as  to  a  matter  of  simple  conscious- 
ness, about  which  they  could  not  be  deceived,  all  at  once  believed. 
It  was  as  much  as  to  say,  external  facts  are  in  certain  cases 
nothing,  and  a  scientific  theory  everything.  Science  is  bound  to 
view  a  mass  of  human  testimony  on  a  certain  class  of  subjects 
with  disdain ;  the  eyes,  the  touch,  the  whole  consciousness  of 
thousands,  are  to  be  held  as  vainly  reporting  their  experiences  : 
a  hypothesis  is  started,  connecting  the  facts  with  something 
already  admitted,  and  the  testimony  instantly  becomes  entitled 
to  credit.  The  impostors  of  yesterday  are  the  true  men  of 
to-day,  by  no  new-found  fidelity  in  them,  but  by  virtue  of  a  mere 
conjecture  on  the  part  of  somebody  else.  Nay,  such  a  hypothesis 
may  smile  upon  only  some  province  of  the  whole  cluster  of 
phenomena,  and  we  see  science  then,  with  the  nicest  discrimin- 
ation, sanctioning  a  corresponding  mass  of  the  testimony,  but 
leaving  the  rest  in  the  limbo  of  reprobation.  Now,  surely  this  is 
utterly  indefensible.  If  a  multitude  of  witnesses  for  an  outward 
fact,  or  an  experience  of  consciousness,  be  a  thing  of  any  validity 
in  the  frame  of  the  social  world,  its  value  must  depend  on  some- 

20  TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

tiling  in  itself,  or  in  its  own  character  :  things  external  to  it, 
though  they  may  be  in  harmony,  can  be  of  no  account  whatever. 
If  it  is  of  no  value,  how  is  the  occasional  confirmation  of  its 
reports  by  science,  or  so-called  science,  to  be  accounted  for  ?  How 
is  it  to  be  expected  beforehand,  that,  out  of  some  thousands  of 
witnesses,  or  some  hundreds  of  thousands  of  acts  of  witness-ship, 
about  some  class  of  phenomena,  only  some  special  number  are 
veracious,  who  and  which  coincide  with  some  conjecture  to  be 
afterwards  started  %  The  truth  is,  these  occasional  verifications  of 
universal  averments  form  an  overwhelming  proof  that  all  general 
testimonies  to  facts,  however  extraordinary  or  irrelative  to  ascer- 
tained law^s,  have  in  them  some  element  of  truth ;  in  other  words, 
universal  false  observation,  universal  false  consciousness,  and 
universal  false  reporting,  are  moral  impossibilities. 

All  must  see  that  the  verity  of  the  Christian  miracles — assuming 
these  to  be,  as  usually  heretofore  considered,  events  contrary  to 
the  course  of  nature — could  no  longer  be  sustained,  if  the  modern 
physicist's  view  of  testimony  were  to  be  accepted.  For,  if  simply 
extraordinary  facts,  which  the  observers  bring  forward  as  merely 
standing  a  little  out  from,  but  expected  in  time  to  come  within, 
the  frontier  of  the  ascertained  natural  laws,  are  to  be  in  every  case 
explained  away,  and  rejected  as  results  of  false  observation  and 
unfaithful  reporting,  much  more  must  we  apply  the  rule  to  alleged 
facts  professedly  beyond  the  limits  of  nature.  If  unexpected 
natural  phenomena,  which  thousands  of  living  persons  declare 
they  have  witnessed,  are  to  be  rejected  as  insufficiently  certified, 
we  cannot  save  from  a  worse  fate  miracles  which  are  only  reported 
to  us  as  having  happened  before  the  eyes  of  men  who  lived  many 
centuries  ago.  The  depreciators  of  testimony,  to  be  consistent, 
are  evidently  under  an  obligation  to  abandon  all  such  arguments 
as  those  of  Dr  Chalmers  for  the  verity  of  miracles.  Mr  Faraday 
has  foreseen  the  demand  that  would  be  made  upon  him,  and  he 
tries  to  evade  it.  He  tells  us  that  the  truth  of  a  future  life  ^  is 
made  known  to  [man]  by  other  teaching  than  his  own,  and  is 
received  through  simple  belief  of  the  testimony  given.^  There  is,  he 
alleges,  *  an  absolute  distinction  between  religious  and  ordinary  belief^ 
He  refuses,  in  short,  '■to  apply  those  mental  operations  which  I  think 
good  in  respect  of  high  things  [matters  of  science],  to  the  very  highest.'' 
I  shall  be  reproached,  he  adds,  with  this  as  a  weakness ;  but  '  I 
am  content  to  bear  the  reproach.'  Very  fortunate  he  is  so,  for 
that  a  reproach  must  be  borne,  in  the  eyes  of  all  w^ho  have  any 
reverence  for  human  reason,  is  undoubted.  On  the  principle 
advocated   by   the    learned    professor,    there    is    of    course    no 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  21 

heathenism  or  heresy  which  might  not  be  defended ;  no  tyranny  over 
men's  souls  which  might  not  be  legitimately  practised.  We  have 
often  heard  that  minds  which  profess  extreme  scepticism  and 
doubtfulness  in  matters  generally  received,  are  liable  to  great 
facility  in  certain  directions ;  and  assuredly  a  better  example  of 
that  frame  of  mind  could  not  be  desired.  Most  Christians  will 
probably  feel  that  it  is  better  to  hold  fast  by  the  doctrine  of  a 
general  validity  in  human  testimony,  and  in  this  defensible  position, 
guard  a  great  argument  for  the  verity  of  acts  and  events  on  which 
their  religion  in  part  is  founded,  than  give  up  that  argument  on  a 
speculative  ground  which  has  nothing  more  in  view,  at  the  best, 
than  to  save  human  science  from  occasionally  making  a  hasty 
conclusion. 

The  sceptical  doctrine  as  to  observation  and  testimony  is  pre- 
cisely identical  with  the  celebrated  argument  of  David  Hume 
against  miracles,  with  but  this  difference,  that  it  is  extended 
to  whatever  fact  we  may  be  unable  at  the  instant  to  co-ordinate 
with  ascertained  natural  laws.  The  philosopher  said  :  ^  A 
miracle  is  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  as  a  firm 
and  unalterable  experience  has  established  these  laws,  the  proof 
against  a  miracle  is  as  entire  as  any  argument  from  expe- 
rience can  possibly  be.'  To  establish  a  miracle,  says  he,  would 
require  an  amount  and  degree  of  testimony,  the  falsehood  of 
which  would  be  '  more  miraculous  than  the  fact  it  endeavours 
to  establish;'  no  such  testimony  can  be  had;  therefore,  miracles 
are  not  capable  of  proof  He  speaks  of  testimony  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  modern  physicists,  there  being  no  miracle 
attested,  he  says,  *  by  a  sufficient  number  of  men,  of  such 
unquestioned  good  sense,  education,  and  learning,  as  to  secure  us 
against  all  delusion  in  themselves  ;  of  such  undoubted  integrity, 
as  to  place  them  beyond  all  suspicion  of  a  design  to  deceive 
others ;  of  such  credit  and  reputation  in  the  eyes  of  mankind,  as 
to  have  a  great  deal  to  lose  in  case  of  their  being  detected  in  any 
falsehood ;  and  at  the  same  time  attesting  facts,  performed  in  such 
a  public  manner,  and  in  so  celebrated  a  part  of  the  world,  as  to 
render  the  detection  unavoidable  ;  all  which  circumstances  are 
requisite  to  give  us  a  full  assurance  in  the  testimony  of  man.' 
"Which  is  just  as  much  as  to  say,  if  we  choose  to  disbelieve  any 
alleged  fact,  we  can  never  be  at  a  loss  to  pick  out  some  imperfec- 
tion, real  or  supposed,  in  the  evidence  on  which  it  rests,  and  so 
get  quit  of  it.  Dr  Campbell,  as  most  people  are  aware,  met 
Hume's  argument  in  an  effective  manner.  It  was  assumed  that 
an  unalterable  experience  had  fixed  natui-e  in  a  particular  way, 

22  TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD. 

from  which  there  was  and  could  be  no  swerving,  whereas  the  very 
facts  which  Hume  repudiated  were  parts  of  our  experience, 
shewing  that  the  rule  is  not  fixed  :  Mr  Hume's  argument  was 
consequently  *  an  example  of  that  paralogism  called  begging  the 
question.'  In  all  the  sceptical  objections  to  testimony  on  simply 
extraordinary  matters,  there  is  in  like  manner  an  assumption  as 
to  some  code  of  truths  which  they  violate  or  stand  opposed  to, 
when  this  is  in  reality  the  very  point  requiring  to  be  proved. 

It  is  not  the  purpose  of  this  tract  to  inquire  into  the  nature 
of  miracles,  or  their  serviceableness  in  establishing  any  religious 
system.  All  that  is  meant  is — if  miracles  are  violations  or  inter- 
ruptions of  the  course  of  nature,  and  yet  can  be  proved  by  human 
testimony,  much  more  are  we  entitled  to  receive,  upon  human 
testimony,  facts  extraordinary,  but  not  supposed  to  be,  or  set  forth 
as,  discrepant  in  any  way  from  the  course  of  nature.  The  sole 
purpose  is  to  shew  that  the  reigning  views  of  physicists  on  this 
point  are  strict  beyond  what  is,  on  various  considerations, 
justifiable,  and  that,  consequently,  true  science  must  suffer. 

That  caution  should  ever  be  a  ruling  principle  with  scientific 
inquirers,  is  of  course  admitted.  But  caution  in  experimenting 
and  generalising  is  a  very  different  thing  from  raising  a  priori 
objections,  and  coming  to  adverse  conclusions  without  inquiry. 
There  we  can  only  see  a  salutary  and  useful  caution  run  mad ; 
a  reason  for  care  and  discrimination  converted  into  a  barrier 
against  the  progress  of  knowledge  in  one  large  section  of  the 
system  of  knowable  things.  The  primary  error  may  be  said 
to  arise  from  habits  of  mind  induced  by  exclusive  dealing  with  one 
class  of  facts.  Constantly  engaged  with  matters  which  can  be 
proved  either  by  mathematics  or  by  tangible  experiment,  the 
physicist  comes  to  disrespect  all  those  for  which  there  only  can  be 
that  approximation  to  proof  which  we  derive  from  the  occasional 
observance  of  occurrences  and  results.  Seeing  that  laborious  men 
of  science  sometimes  deceive  themselves  in  their  laboratories,  he 
thinks  how  much  more  likely  is  it  that  uninstructed  observers  of 
common  facts  are  mistaken.  In  reality,  there  is  a  great  distinctioii 
between  a  scientific  truth  and  one  of  the  class  of  facts  in  question. 
As  already  pointed  out,  there  is  both  the  thing  seen  and  our 
inference  as  to  what  we  saw.  A  scientific  truth  is  the  result  of  a 
mental  operation  (generalisation),  in  which  many  pieces  of  sense- 
witness-ship  are  combined  :  here  the  liability  to  mistake  is  neces- 
sarily very  great.  It  may  therefore  be  quite  true,  as  Mitscherlich 
has  said,  that  fourteen  years  is  little  enough  for  the  establishment 
of  a    trulli  in    chemistry ;    and   Baron   Cuvier   may   have   been 

TESTIMONY  :    ITS  POSTURE  IN  THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORLD.  23 

right  in  asking  a  young  student,  who  came  to  him  with  a 
new  organ  in  one  of  the  loAver  animals,  to  return  to  him 
with  the  same  discovery  in  six  months.  It  may  he  true,  as 
has  been  alleged,  that  very  few  men  of  science  have  the  good 
fortune  ever  to  discover  a  single  new  fact,  or  to  ^describe  with 
irreversible  fideHty  a  new  phenomenon  of  any  significance.'  *  But 
all  this  is  nothing  to  the  purpose,  when  we  come  to  judge  of 
what  Dr  Chalmers  calls  'plain  palpable  facts.'  "When  a  fact  is 
*  plain  and  palpable,'  as  the  perfonning  of  a  painless  surgical 
operation,  or  the  seeing  of  some  person  or  object  of  a  cognizable 
character,  or  the  hearing  of  some  sound,  and  when  many  testify  to 
a  uniform  purport  on  the  subject,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
as  far  as  the  report  of  the  senses  is  concerned,  whatever  there  may 
be  as  to  the  cause,  nature,  or  meaning  of  the  fact.  To  return 
to  the  example  of  the  steamer  passing  along  a  shore  Avhere  no 
such  vessel  had  ever  been  seen  or  heard  of.  It  miofht  well  be 
reported  of  by  the  eye-witnesses,  with  confident  but  false  allega- 
tions as  to  the  means  by  which  it  was  impelled  against  wind  and 
tide.  Most  unreasonable  it  would  be,  in  that  case,  to  doubt  the 
plain  and  palpable  fact,  that  a  vessel,  moving  against  wind  and 
tide,  had  been  seen,  however  novel  and  unaccountable  it  might  be, 
and  however  absurd  might  be  the  popular  suppositions  regarding 
the  motive  power.  All  that  is  necessary  in  such  a  case  is  to 
separate  the  sense-witness-ship  fiom  the  h>^othesis,  recei^ang  the 
former  under  certain  cautions  :  that  is  to  say,  taking  care  that  the 
witnesses  are  honest  and  intelligent  persons,  who  have  not  been 
under  any  extraordinary  excitement  on  the  occasion,  and  whose 
report  is  in  all  essential  particulars  uniform  and  self-consistent. 

The  final  conclusion  from  this  view  of  testimony  is,  that  the 
arguments  of  Chalmers,  Abercrombie,  and  other  Christian  apolo- 
gists, are  sound  :  miracles,  though  they  present  themselves  as 
independent  of,  or  contrary  to,  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature,  must 
be  received,  when  advanced  on  the  evidence  of  a  multitude  of 
honest,  unprejudiced  men,  presumably  able  to  take  just  cog- 
nizance of  the  external  facts.  And,  of  course,  if  such  arguments 
in  behalf  of  the  verity  of  miracles  are  good,  still  better  are  they 
in  favour  of  alleged  facts  which  are  only  of  an  extraordinary 
nature,  and  professedly  hopeful  as  the  possible  subjects  of  some 
unknown  natural  law  ;  if  such  arguments  substantiate  facts 
reported  by  ancient  writers  as  happening  in  a  distant  country, 
and  among  an  imeducated  people,  still  better  are  they  in  favour 

*  Lectures  on  the  Atomic  Theory y  &c.    By  Samuel  Brown.    2  vols.  1858. 

24       testimony:  its  posture  in  the  scientific  world. 

of  facts  reported  by  men  of  our  own  day,  as  happening  in  com- 
paratively enlightened  countries — facts  which  multitudes  tell  us 
we  may  see  for  ourselves,  if  we  will  take  the  trouble.  Not,  be 
it  strictly  observed,  that  the  Christian  miracles  are  to  be  con- 
sidered as  depending  solely  on  such  arguments :  most  men  feel 
that  they  have  other  recommendations.  But,  strictly,  as  far  as 
they  depend  on  human  testimony/,  the  rule  which  we  use  for  them 
we  must  use  for  other  things :  contrasted  with  all  inferior 
wonders,  we  must  regard  them  as  the  major  proposition,  qucs 
continet  in  se  minorem. 

If  I  have  here  given  a  true  view  of  human  testimony,  it  will 
follow  that,  amongst  the  vast  multitude  of  alleged  things  often 
heard  of  and  habitually  rejected,  there  are  many  entitled  to  more 
respect  than  they  ordinarily  receive.  It  is  a  strange  thought ; 
but  possibly  some  truths  may  have  been  knocking  at  the  door  of 
human  faith  for  thousands  of  years,  and  are  not  destined  to  be 
taken  in  for  many  yet  to  come — or,  at  the  utmost,  may  long 
receive  but  an  unhonouring  sanction  from  the  vulgar  and  obscure, 
all  owing  to  this  principle  of  scepticism,  that  facts  are  valueless 
without  an  obvious  relation  to  ascertained  law.  Should  the 
contrary  and  (as  I  think)  more  inductive  principle  be  ever  adopted, 
that  facts  rightly  testified  to  are  worthy  of  a  hearing,  with  a  view 
to  the  ascertaining  of  some  law  under  which  they  may  be  classed, 
a  liberal  retrospect  along  the  history  of  knowledge  will  probably 
shew  to  us  that,  even  amongst  what  have  been  considered  as 
the  superstitions  of  mankind,  there  are  some  valuable  realities. 
Wherever  there  is  a  perseverance  and  uniformity  of  report  on 
almost  any  subject,  however  heterodox  it  may  have  appeared, 
there  may  we  look  with  some  hopefulness  that  a  principle  or  law 
will  be  found,  if  duly  sought  for.  There  is  a  whole  class  of  alleged 
phenomena,  of  a  mystically  psychical  character,  mixing  with  the 
chronicles  of  false  religions  and  of  hagiology,  in  which  it  seems 
not  unlikely  that  we  might  discover  some  golden  grains.  Per- 
haps, nay,  proljably,  some  mystic  law,  centring  deep  in  our 
nature,  and  touching  far-distant  spheres  of  'untried  being,'  runs 
through  these  undefined  phenomena ;  which,  if  it  ever  be  ascer- 
tained, will  throw  not  a  little  light  upon  the  past  beliefs  and 
actions  of  mankind — perhaps  add  to  our  assurance  that  there  is 
an  immaterial  and  immortal  part  within  us,  and  a  world  of 
relation  beyond  that  now  pressing  upon  our  senses. 

3  9424  01205  5593 

University  of  British  Columbia  Library 

DUE  DATE 

4 

H
