Voyages of Samuel de Champlain, Vol. 3 (Samuel de Champlain (Charles P. Otis, trans.; Edmund F. Slafter, ed.), 1613)
==========================================================
Champlain's Voyages (1613-32) - the founder of New France's own account; the primary record of early Canada and the Great Lakes. The Prince Society translation (1878-82, 3 vols.). Vol. 3 of 3.

Champlain’s Voyages.

Boston:

PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
By John Wilson and Son.

1882.

TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY COPIES.

VOYAGES

OF

Samuel de Champlain.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH

By CHARLES POMEROY OTIS, Ph.D.

WITH HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATIONS,

AND A

MEMOIR

By the REV. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

Vol. III.

161 1-l6l8.

HELIOTYPE COPIES OF TEN MAPS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

Boston:

PUBLISHED BY THE PRINCE SOCIETY.

1882.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1882, by

EDMUND F, SLAFTER,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

SEDttor:

The REV. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

PREFACE.

prefent volume completes the work propofed
Ha jVl by the Prince Society of a tranflation into Eng-
ICM KG lifh of the Voyages of Champlain. It includes
the journals iffued in 1604, 1613, and 1619, and
covers fifteen years of his refidence and explorations in
New France.

At a later period, in 1632, Champlain publifhed, in a fingle
volume, an abridgment of the iffues above mentioned, con-
taining likewife a continuation of his journal down to 1631.
This continuation covers thirteen additional years. But it
is to be obferved that the events recorded in the journal of
thefe later years are immediately connected with the progrefs
and local interefts of the French colony at Quebec. This
laft work of the great explorer is of primary importance and
value as conftituting original material for the early hiftory
of Canada, and a tranflation of it into Englifh would doubt-
lefs be highly appreciated by the local hiftorian. A com-
plete narrative of thefe events, however, together with a large

amount

VI

Preface.

amount of interefting matter relating to the career of Cham-
plain derived from other fources, is given in the Memoir
contained in the firft volume of this work.

This Englifh tranflation contains not only the complete
narratives of all the perfonal explorations made by Cham-
plain into the then unbroken forefts of America, but the
whole of his minute, ample, and invaluable defcriptions of
the character and habits, mental, moral, and phyfical, of the
various favage tribes with which he came in contact. It will
furnifh, therefore, to the ftudent of hiftory and the ftudent
of ethnology mod valuable information, unfurpaffed in rich-
nefs and extent, and which cannot be obtained from any
other fource. To aid one or both of thefe two claffes in
their inveftigations, the work was undertaken and has now
been completed.

E. F. S.

Boston, 91 Boylston Street,

April j, 1882.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Voyage of Champlain in 1611 I_ 3 8

Dedication to Henri de Bourbon, Prince de Conde . . 4 2

Voyage made in 1613 43 _8 7

Dedication to the King 9 I- 93

Champlain’s Preface 95

Extract from the License of the King 97

Voyage made in 1615 99-188

Voyage made in 1618 189-218

Explanation of Two Geographical Maps of New France 219-228

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Le Grand Sault St. Louis 18

Dress of the Savages Il( ’

Fort of the Iroquois I 3 °

Deer Trap *39

Dress of the Savages *^7

Champlain’s Large Map of New France, 1612

Champlain’s Small Map of New France, 1613

Index

231

THE VOYAGES

OF SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

Of Saintonge, Captain in ordinary to the
King in the Marine ;

OR,

A MOST FAITHFUL JOURNAL OF OBSERVATIONS
made in the exploration of New France, describing not only the
countries, coasts, rivers, ports, and harbors, with their latitudes,
atid the various deflections of the Magnetic Needle, but likewise the
religious belief of the inhabitants, their superstitions, mode of life
and warfare ; furnished with numerous illustrations.

Together with two geographical maps : the first for the purposes of
navigation, adapted to the compass as used by mariners, which
deflects to the north-east ; the other in its true meridian, with
longitudes and latitudes, to which is added the Voyage to the
Strait north of Labrador, from the 53d to the 63d degree of lati-
tude, discovered in 1612 by the English when they were searching
for a northerly course to China.

PARIS.

Jean Berjon, Rue St. Jean de Beauvais, at the Flying Horse,
and at his store in the Palace, at the gallery
of the Prisoners.

M. DC. XIII.

WITH AUTHORITY OF THE KING.

THIRD VOYAGE

OF

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

IN THE YEAR 1611.

CHAPTER I.

Departure from France to return to New France. — The Dangers

AND OTHER EVENTS WHICH OCCURRED UP TO THE TIME OF ARRIVAL AT
the Settlement.

I E fet out from Honfleuron the firfl: day of March.
The wind was favorable until the eighth, when
we were oppofed by a wind fouth-fouthweft and
weft-northweft, driving us as far as latitude 42 0 ,
without our being able to make a fouthing, fo
as to fail ftraight forward on our courfe. Accordingly
after encountering feveral heavy winds, and being kept back
by bad weather, we neverthelefs, through great difficulty and
hardfhip, and by failing on different tacks, fucceeded in ar-
riving within eighty leagues of the Grand Bank, where the
frefh fifhery is carried on. Here we encountered ice thirty
or forty fathoms high, or more, which led us to confider
what courfe we ought to take, fearing that we might fall in

1 with

2

Voyages of

with more during the night, or that the wind changing would
drive us on to it. We alfo concluded that this would not be
the laft, fince we had fet out from France too early in the fea-
fon. We failed accordingly during that day with fhort fail,
as near the wind as we could. When night came, the fog
arofe fo thick and obfcure that we could fcarcely fee the
fhip’s length. About eleven o’clock at night, more ice was
feen, which alarmed us. But through the energy of the bail-
ors we avoided it. Suppofing that we had paffed all danger,
we met with ftill more ice, which the failors faw ahead of our
veffel, but not until we were almoft upon it. When all had
committed themfelves to God, having given up all hope of
avoiding collifion with this ice, which was already under our
bowfprit, they cried to the helmfman to bear off; and this ice
which was very extenfive drove in fuch a manner that it paffed
by without ftriking our veffel, which flopped fhort, and re-
mained as ftill as if it had never moved, to let it pafs. Although
the danger was over, our blood was not fo quickly cooled, fo
great had been our fear, and we praifed God for delivering
us from fo imminent a peril. This experience being over, we
paffed the fame night two or three other maffes of ice, not
lefs dangerous than the former ones. There was at the fame
time a dripping fog, and it was fo cold that we could fcarcely
get warm. The next day we met feveral other large and
veiy high maffes of ice, which, in the diftance, looked like
iflands. We, however, avoided them all, and reached the
Grand Bank, where we were detained by bad weather for the
fpace of fix days. The wind growing a little milder, and
very favorable, we left the banks in latitude 44° 3 o', which
was the farthefl fouth we could go. After failing fome fixty

leagues

3

Sieur de Champlain.

leagues weft-north weft, we faw a veffel coming down to make
us out, but which afterwards wore off to the eaft-northeaft, to
avoid a large bank of ice, which covered the entire extent of
our line of vifton. Concluding that there was a paffage
through the middle of this great floe, which was divided into
two parts, we entered, in purfuance of our courfe, between
the two, and failed fome ten leagues without feeing anything,
contrary to our conjecture of a fine paffage through, until
evening, when we found the floe doled up. This gave us
much anxiety as to what was to be done, the night being at
hand and there being no moon, which deprived us of all
means of returning to the point whence we had come. \ et,
after due deliberation, it was refolved to try to find again the
entrance by which we had come, which we fet about accom-
plifhing. But the night coming on with fog, rain, fnow, and
a wind fo violent that we could fcarcely carry our mainfail,
every trace of our way was loft. For, as we were expeding
to avoid the ice fo as to pafs out, the wind had already clofed
up the paffage, fo that we were obliged to return to the
other tack. We were unable to remain longer than a quar-
ter of an hour on one tack before taking another, in order to
avoid the numerous maffes of ice drifting about on all fides.

We thought more than twenty times that we should never
efcape with our lives. The entire night was fpent amid dif-
ficulties and hardfhips. Never was the watch better kept,
for nobody wifhed to reft, but to ftrive to efcape from the
ice and danger. The cold was fo great, that all the ropes of
the veffel were fo frozen and covered with large icicles that
the men could not work her nor flick to the deck. Thus
we ran, on this tack and that, awaiting with hope the day-

4

Voyages of

light. But when it came, attended by a fog, and we faw that
our labor and hardfhip could not avail us anything, we deter-
mined to go to a mafs of ice, where we fhould be fheltered
from the violent wind which was blowing ; to haul everything
down, and allow ourfelves to be driven along with the ice,
fo that when at fome diftance from the reft of the ice we
could make fail again, and go back to the above-mentioned
bank and manage as before, until the fog fhould pafs away,
when we might go out as quickly as poffible. Thus we con-
tinued the entire day until the morning of the next day,
when we fet fail, now on this tack now on that, finding our-
felves everywhere enclofed amid large floes of ice, as if in
lakes on the mainland. At evening we flighted a veffel on the
other fide of one of thefe banks of ice, which, I am fure, was
in no lefs anxiety than ourfelves. Thus we remained four
or five days, expofed to thefe rifks and extreme hardfhips,
until one morning on looking out in all directions, although
we could fee no opening, yet in one place it feemed as if the
ice was not thick, and that we could eafily pafs through.
We got under weigh, and paffed by a large number of bour-
guignons ; that is, pieces of ice feparated from the large banks
by the violence of the winds. Having reached this bank of
ice, the failors proceeded to provide themfelves with large
oars and pieces of wood, in order to keep off the blocks of
ice we met. In this way we paffed this bank, but not with-
out touching fome pieces of ice, which did no good to our
vetfel, although they inflicted no effential damage. Being
outfide, we praifed God for our deliverance. Continuing our
courfe on the next day, we encountered other pieces, in
which we became fo involved that we found ourfelves fur-

rounded

5

Sieur de Champlain.

rounded on all Tides, except where we had entered. It was
accordingly neceffary to turn back, and endeavor to double
the fouthern point. This we did not fucceed in doing until
the fecond day, paffing by feveral fmall pieces of ice, which
had been feparated from the main bank. This latter was in
latitude 44° 30'. We failed until the morning of the next
day, towards the northweft, north-north weft, when we met
another large ice bank, extending as far as we could fee eaft
and weft. This, in the diftance, feemed like land, for it was
fo level that it might properly be faid to have been made fo
on purpofe. It was more than eighteen feet high, extending
twice as far under water. We calculated that we were only
fome fifteen leagues from Cape Breton, it being the 26th
day of the month. Thefe numerous encounters with ice
troubled us greatly. We were alfo fearful that the paffage
between Capes Breton and Raye would be clofed, and that
we fhould be obliged to keep out to fea a long time before
being able to enter. Unable to do anything elfe, we were
obliged to run out to fea again fome four or five leagues, in
order to double another point of the above-mentioned grand
ice bank, which continued on our weft-fouthweft. After
turning on the other tack to the northweft, in order to double
this point, we failed some feven leagues, and then fleered to
the north-northweft fome three leagues, when we obferved
another ice bank. The night approached, and the fog came
on fo that we put to fea to pafs the remainder of the night,
purpofing at daybreak to return and reconnoitre the laft
mentioned ice. On the twenty-feventh day of the month, we
fighted land weft-northweft of us, feeing no ice on the north-
northeaft. We approached nearer for the fake of a better

obfervation,

6

Voyages of

obfervation, and found that it was Canfeau. This led us to
bear off to the north for Cape Breton Ifland ; but we had
fcarcely failed two leagues when we encountered an ice bank
on the northeaff. Night coming on, we were obliged to put
out to fea until the next day, when we failed northeaff, and
encountered more ice, bearing eaft, eaft-southeaft from us,
along which we coafted heading northeaff and north for
more than fifteen leagues. At laft we were obliged to fail
towards the weft, greatly to our regret, inafmuch as we could
find no paffage, and fhould be obliged to withdraw and fail
back on our track. Unfortunately for us we were overtaken
by a calm, fo that it feemed as if the fwell of the fea would
throw us upon the ice bank juft mentioned, and we got
ready to launch our little boat, to ufe in cafe of neceffity.
If we had taken refuge on the above-mentioned ice it would
only have been to languifh and die in mifery. While we
were deliberating whether to launch our boat, a frefh breeze
arofe to our- great delight, and thus we efcaped from the ice.
After we had failed two leagues, night came on, with a very
thick fog, caufing us to haul down our fail, as we could not
fee, and as there were feveral large pieces of ice in our way,
which we were afraid of ftriking. Thus we remained the
entire night until the next day, which was the twenty-ninth,
when the fog increafed to fuch an extent that we could
fcarcely fee the length of the veffel. There was alfo very
little wind. Yet we did not fail to fet fail, in order to avoid
the ice. But, although expecting to extricate ourfelves, we
found ourfelves fo involved in it that we could not tell on
which fide to tack. We were accordingly again compelled
to lower fail, and drift until the ice fhould allow us to make

fail.

7

Sieur de Champlain.

fail. We made a hundred tacks on one fide and the other,
feveral times fearing that we were loft. The moft felf-pof-
feffed would have loft all judgment in fuch a juncture; even
the greateft navigator in the world. What alarmed us ftill
more was the fhort diftance we could fee, and the fact that the
night was coming on, and that we could not make a drift of
a quarter of a league without finding a bank or fome ice, and
a great deal of floating ice, the fmalleft piece of which would
have been fufficient to caufe the lofs of any veffel whatever.
Now, while we were ftill failing along amid the ice, there
arofe fo ftrong a wind that in a ftrort time the fog broke
away, affording us a view, and fuddenly giving us a clear air
and fair fun. Looking around about us, we found that we
were ihut up in a little lake, not fo much as a league and a
half in circuit. On the north we perceived the idand of
Cape Breton, nearly four leagues diftant, and it feemed to us
that the paffage-way to Cape Breton was ftill clofed. W e
alfo faw a fmall ice bank aftern of our veffel, and the ocean
beyond that, which led us to refolve to go beyond the bank,
which was divided. This we fucceeded in accomplidring with-
out ftriking our veffel, putting out to fea for the night, and
palling to the foutheaft of the ice. Thinking now that we
could double this ice bank, we failed eaft-northeaft fome fifteen
leagues, perceiving only a little piece of ice. At night we
hauled down the fail until the next day, when we perceived
another ice bank to the north of us, extending as fai as we
could fee. We had drifted to within nearly half a league, of
it, w r hen we hoifted fail, continuing to coaft along this icc
in order to find the end of it. W hile failing along, we
fighted on the firft day of May a veffel amid the ice, which,

8

Voyages of

as well as ourfelves, had found it difficult to efcape from it.
We backed our fails in order to await the former, which
came full upon us, fince we were defirous of afcertaining
whether it had feen other ice. On its approach we faw that
it was the fon 1 of Sieur de Poutrincourt, on his way to vifit
his father at the fettlement of Port Royal. He had left
France three months before, not without much reludlance, I
think, and ftill they were nearly a hundred and forty leagues
from Port Royal, and well out of their true courfe. We told
them we had fighted the iflands of Canfeau, much to their
fatisfadlion, I think, as they had not as yet fighted any land,
and were fleering flraight between Cape St. Lawrence and
Cape Raye, in which direction they would not have found
Port Royal, except by going overland. After a brief confer-
ence with each other we feparated, each following his own
courfe. The next day we fighted the iflands of St. Pierre,
finding no ice. Continuing our courfe we fighted on the fol-
lowing day, the third of the month, Cape Raye, alfo without
finding ice. On the fourth we fighted the ifland of St. Paul,
and Cape St. Lawrence, being fome eight leagues north of
the latter. The next day we fighted Gafpe. On the feventh
we were oppofed by a northweft wind, which drove us out of
our courfe nearly thirty-five leagues, when the wind lulled,
and was in our favor as far as Tadouffac, which we reached
on the 13th day of May. 2 Here we difcharged a cannon to
notify the favages, in order to obtain news from our fettle-

1 This was Charles de Biencourt,
Sieur de Saint Juft. He was clofely
affociated with his father, Sieur de
Poutrincourt, in his colony at Port

Royal. Vide Vol. I. p. 122, note 77.

ment

2 They left Honfleur on the firfl day
of March, and were thus feventy-four
days in reaching Tadouffac. The voy-
age was ufually made in favorable
weather in thirty days.

9

Sieur de Champlain .

ment at Quebec. The country was ftill almoft entirely
covered with fnow. There came out to us fome canoes,
informing us that one of our pataches had been in the har-
bor for a month, and that three veffels had arrived eight days
before. We lowered our boat and vifited thefe favages, who
were in a very miferable condition, having only a few ar-
ticles to barter to fatisfy their immediate wants. Befides
they defired to wait until feveral veffels fhould meet, fo
that there might be a better market for their merchan-
dife. Therefore they are miftaken who expedt to gain an
advantage by coming firft, for thefe people are very faga-
cious and cunning.

On the 17th of the month I fet out from Tadouffac for
the great fall, 3 to meet the Algonquin favages and other
tribes, who had promifed the year before to go there with
my man, whom I had fent to them, that I might learn from
him what he might fee during the winter. Thofe at this
harbor who fufpedted where I was going, in accordance with
the promifes which I had made to the favages, as dated
above, began to build feveral fmall barques, that they might
follow me as foon as poffible. And feveral, as I learned
before fetting out from France, had fome fliips and pataches
fitted out in view of our voyage, hoping to return rich, as

from a voyage to the Indies.

Pont Grave remained at Tadouffac expeding, if he did
nothing there, to take a patache and meet me at the fall.
Between Tadouffac and Quebec our barque made much
water, which obliged me to flop at Quebec and repair the
leak. This was on the 21ft day of May. CHAPTER II.

8 The Falls of St. Louis, near Montreal, now more commonly known as the
La Chine Rapids.

IO

Voyages of

CHAPTER II.

Landing at Quebec to repair the Barque. — Departure from Quebec
for the Fall, to meet the Savages, and search out a Place
appropriate for a Settlement.

N going afhore I found Sieur du Parc, who had
fpent the winter at the fettlement. He and all
his companions were very well, and had not
differed any ficknefs. Game, both large and
fmall, had been abundant during the entire
winter, as they told me. I found there the Indian captain,
named Batifcan , and fome Algonquins, who faid they were
waiting for me, being unwilling to return to Tadouffac with-
out feeing me. I propofed to them to take one of our com-
pany to the Trois Rivi"eres to explore the place, but being
unable to obtain anything from them this year I put it off
until the next. Still I did not fail to inform myfelf particu-
larly regarding the origin of the people living there, of which
they told me with exadtnefs. I afked them for one of their
canoes, which they were unwilling to part with on any
terms, becaufe of their own need of it. For I had planned
to fend two or three men to explore the neighborhood of
the Trois Rivieres, and afcertain what there was there.
This, to my great regret, I was unable to accomplifh, and
poftponed the projedt to the firft opportunity that might
prefent itfelf.

Meanwhile I urged on the repairs to our barque. When
it was ready, a young man from La Rochelle, named Tre-
fart, afked me to permit him to accompany me to the above-

mentioned

Sieur de Champlain. 1 1

mentioned fall. This I refufed, replying that I had fpecial
plans of my own, and that I did not with to condudt any one
to my prejudice, adding that there were other companies
than mine there, and that I did not care to open up a way
and ferve as guide, and that he could make the voyage well
enough alone and without my help.

The fame day I fet out from Quebec, and arrived at the
great fall on the twenty-eighth of May. But I found none
of the favages who had promifed me to be there on this
day. I entered at once a poor canoe, together with the fav-
age I had taken to France and one of my own men. After
examining the two fhores, both in the woods and on the
river bank, in order to find a fpot favorable for the location
of a fettlement, and to get a place ready for building, I went
fome eight leagues by land along the great fall and through
the woods, which are very open, as far as a lake , 4 whither
our favage conducted me. Here I obferved the country very
carefully. But in all that I faw, I found no place more
favorable than a little fpot to which barques and fhallops
can eafily afcend, with the help of a ftrong wind or by taking
a winding courfe, in confequence of the ftrong current. But
above this place, which we named La Place Royale , at the
diftance of a league from Mont Royal, there are a great
many little rocks and fhoals, which are very dangerous.
Near Place Royale there is a little river, extending fome
diftance into the interior, along the entire length of which
there are more than fixty acres of land cleared up and like
meadows, where grain can be fown and gardens made. For-
merly

* This journey of eight leagues would take them as far as the Lake of Two
Mountains.

12

Voyages of

merly favages tilled thefe lands , 5 but they abandoned them on
account of their wars, in which they were conftantly engaged.
There is alfo a large number of other fine paftures, where
any number of cattle can graze. There are alfo the various
kinds of trees found in France, together with many vines,
nut and plum trees, cherries, ftrawberries, and other kinds of
good fruit. Among the reft there is a very excellent one,
with a fweet tafte like that of plantains, a fruit of the Indies,

as white as fnow, with a leaf

B This little river is mentioned by
Champlain in his Voyage of 1603,
Vol. I. p. 268. It is reprefented on
early maps as formed by two fmall
ftreams, flowing, one from the north or
northeaftern, and the other from the
fouthern fide of the mountain, in the
rear of the city of Montreal, which
unite fome diftance before they reach
the St. Lawrence, flowing into that
river at Point Callieires. Thefe little
brooks are laid down on Champlain’s
local map, Le Grand Sault St. Louis ,
on Charlevoix’s Carte de P LJle de Mont-
rdal , 1744, and on Beilin’s L’ IJle de
Montreal , 1764; but they have dif-
appeared on modern maps, and proba-
bly are either extindl: or are loft in the
fewerage of the city, of which they have
become a part. We have called the
ftream formed by thefe two brooks,
note 190, Vol. I., Riviere St. Pierre.
On Potherie’s map, the only ftream
coming from the interior is fo named.
Vide Hijtoire de Li A merique par
M. de Bacqueville de la Potherie, 1722,
p. 311. On a map in Greig’s Hoche-
laga Depifta, 1839, it is called St.
Peter’s River. The fame ftream on
Bouchette’s map, 1830, is denominated
Little River. It feems not unlikely
that a part of it was called, at one time,

■efembling that of nettles, and

which

Riviere St. Pierre, and another part
Petite Riviere.

It is plain that on this ftream was
fituated the fixty acres of cleared land
alluded to in the text as formerly occu-
pied by the favages.

It will be remembered that feven-
ty-fix years anterior to this, in 1535,
Jacques Cartier difcovered this place,
which was then the feat of a large and
flouriihing Indian town. It is to be
regretted that Champlain did not in-
form us more definitely as to the hiftory
of the former occupants of the foil.
Some important, and we think conclu-
five, reafons have been affigned for
fuppofing that they were a tribe of the
Iroquois. Among others may be men-
tioned the fimilarity in the conftruflion
of their towns and houfes or cabins,
the identity of their language as de-
termined by a collation of the words
found in Cartier’s journal with the lan-
guage of the Iroquois ; and to thefe
may be added the traditions obtained
by miffionaries and others, as cited by
Laverdifere, to which we muft not, how-
ever, attach too much value. Vide La-
verdiere in loco. While it feems proba-
ble that the former occupants were of
the Iroquois family, it is impoffible to
determine whether on retiring they

joined

13

Sieur de Champlain .

which creeps up the trees and along the ground like ivy. 8
Fifh are very abundant, including all the varieties we have in
France, and many very good ones which we do not have.
Game is alfo plenty, the birds being of various kinds. There
are flags, hinds, does, caribous, 7 rabbits, lynxes, 8 bears, bea-
vers, alfo other fmall animals, and all in fuch large numbers,
that' while we were at the fall we were abundantly fupplied

with them. .

After a careful examination, we found this place one of

the fineft on this river. I accordingly forthwith gave orders

to cut down and clear up the woods in the Place Royale, 9

fo

joined the Five Nations in the State of
New York, or merged themfelves with
the Hurons, who were likewife of Iro-
quois origin. _ .

6 I am unable to identify this plant.
Its climbing propenfity and the color of
its fruit fuggeft Rhus radicans, but in
other refpects the fimilarity fails.

7 Cerfs, Daims, Cheureuls, Caribous.
Champlain employs the names of the
different fpecies of the Cerf family as
ufed in Europe i but as our fpecies are
different, this ufe of names creates
fome confufion. There were in Canada,
the moofe, the caribou, the wapiti, and
the common red deer. Any enumera-
tion by the early writers mull include
thefe, under whatever names they may
be defcribed. One will be found ap-
plying a name to a given fpecies, while
another will apply the fame name to
quite a different fpecies. Charlevoix
mentions the orignal (moofe) caribou,
the hart, and the roebuck. Under the
name hart , he probably refers to the
wapiti, elaphus Cattadenfis , and roe-
buck , to the common red deer, Cervus
Virginianus. Vide Charlevoix' s Let-
ters to the Dutchefs of Lesdiguieres ,

1763, pp. 64-69, alfo Vol. I. of this
work, p. 265.

8 Lynxes, Loups-fentiers. The com-
pound word loup-cervier was fignificant,
and was applied originally to the animal
of which the flag was its natural prey,
qui attaque les cerfs. In Europe it
defcribed the lynx, a large powerful ani-
mal of the feline race, that might well
venture to attack the flag. But in
Canada this fpecies is not found. What
is known as the Canadian lynx, Felts
Cattadenfis, is only a large fpecies of
cat, which preys upon birds and the
fmaller quadrupeds. Champlain prob-
ably gives it the name loup-feryier for
the want of one more appropriate. It
is a little remarkable that he does not
in this lift mention the American wolf,
Lupus occidentalis, fo common in
every part of Canada, and which he
fubfequently refers to as the animal
efpecially dreaded by the deer. Vide
pojlea , pp. 139, 1 57-

8 The fite of Place Royale was on
Point Calibres, fo named in honor of
Chevalier Louis Hector de Calheres
Bonnevue, governor of Montreal in
1684.

H

fo as to level it and prepare it for building. The water can
ealily be made to flow around it, making of it a little ifland
fo that a habitation can be formed as one may wifh.

There is a little ifland fome twenty fathoms from Place
Royale, about a hundred paces long, where a good and ftrong
fettlement might be made. There are alfo many meadows,
containing very good and rich potter’s clay, as well adapted
for brick as for building purpofes, and confequently a very
uieful article. I had a portion of it worked up, from which
I made a wall four feet thick, three or four high, and ten
fathoms long, to fee how it would Hand during the winter,
when the frefhets came down, although I thought the water
would not reach up to it, the ground there being twelve feet
above the river, which was very high. In the middle of the
rivei there was an ifland about three-quarters of a league
around, where a good and ftrong town could be built. This
we named IJle de Sainte Helene™ This river at the fall is
hke a lake, containing two or three iflands, and bordered by
fine meadows.

On the firft day of J une, Pont Grave arrived at the fall,
having been unable to accomplifh anything at Tadouffac’
A numerous company attended and followed after him to
haie in the booty, without the hope of which they would
have been far in the rear.

on"" a 7 Iting the faVageS) 1 had two S ardens made,

deaid un "o T th / ? tHer 10 tHe W0 ° ds ’ Which 1 had
leared up. On the 2d of June I fowed fome feeds, all of

Of this iflMTTOs%g||fed h bV*VmM e TV H< ^ ne , Boull ^> ‘he year before,
nage whtch Champlain had contracted other

Sieur de Champlain. 15

which came up finely, and in a fhort time, attefting the
good quality of the foil.

We refolved to fend Savignon, our favage, together with
another, to meet his countrymen, fo as to haften their ar-
rival. They hefitated about going in our canoe, of which
they were diftruftful, it being a very poor one. They fet out
on the 5th. The next day four or five barques arrived as
an efcort for us, fince they could do nothing at Tadouffac.

On the 7th I went to explore a little river, along which
the favages fometimes go to war, and which flows into the
fall of the river of the Iroquois. 11 It is very pleafant, with
meadow land more than three leagues in circuit, and much
arable land. It is diftant a league from the great fall, and
a league and a half from Place Royale.

On the 9th our favage arrived. He had gone fomewhat
beyond the lake, which is ten leagues long, and which I had
feen before. 12 But he met no one, and they were unable to
go any farther, as their canoe gave out, which obliged them
to return. They reported that after palling the fall they
faw an ifland, where there was fuch a quantity of herons
that the air was completely filled with them. There was a
young man belonging to Sieur de Monts named Louis, who
was very fond of the chafe. Hearing this, he wifhed to go
and fatisfy his curiofity, earneftly entreating our favage. to
take him to the place. To this the favage confented, taking
alfo a captain of the Montagnais, a very refpe&able perfon,
whofe name was Outetoucos. On the following morning
Louis caufed the two favages to be called, and went with

them

11 Vide Vol. I. p. 268, note 191. 12 The Lake of the Two Mountains.

Walker and Miles's Atlas, map 186. Vide antea, note 4 -

i6

them in a canoe to the ifland of the herons. This ifland is in
the middle of the fall . 13 Here they captured as many herons
and other birds as they wanted, and embarked again in their
canoe. Outetoucos, contrary to the with of the other favage,
and againft his remonftrances, defired to pafs through a very
dangerous place, where the water fell more than three feet,
faying that he had formerly gone this way, which, however,
was falfe. He had a long difcuffion in oppofition to our
favage, who wiflied to take him on the fouth fide, along the
mainland , 14 where they ufually go. This, however, Outetou-
cos did not with, faying that there was no danger. Our
favage finding him obftinate yielded to his defire. But he
infilled that at leafl a part of the birds in the canoe fhould
be taken out, as it was overloaded, otherwife he faid it
would inevitably fill and be loft. But to this he would not
confent, faying that it would be time enough when they found
themfelves in the prefence of danger. They accordingly
permitted themfelves to be carried along by the current.
But when they reached the precipice, they wanted to throw
overboard their load in order to efcape. It was now, how-
ever, too late, for they were completely in the power of
the rapid water, and were flraightway fwallowed up in the
whirlpools of the fall, which turned them round a thoufand
times. For a long time they clung to the boat. Finally the
fwiftnefs of the water wearied them fo that this poor Louis,

who

18 On Champlain’s local map of the
Falls of St. Louis, the letter Q is want-
ing ; but the expreflion, cejie ijle eft au
milieu du faut , “ in the middle of the
fall,’ as fuggefted by LaverdRre, in-
dicates that the ifland defignated by

the letter R is Heron Ifland. Vide
fiojlea, R on map at p. 18.

14 Grand Tibie , fo in the original.
This is a typographical error for grand
terre. Vide Champlain, 1632, Quebec
ed., p. 842.

1 7

Sieur de Champlain.

who could not fwim at all, entirely loft his prefence of mind,
and, the canoe going down, he was obliged to abandon it.
As it returned to the furface, the two others who kept hold-
ing on to it, faw Louis no more, and thus he died a fad
death . 15 The two others continued to hold on to the canoe.
When, however, they were out of danger, this Outetoucos,
being naked and having confidence in his fwimming powers,
abandoned it in the expedation of reaching the fhore, al-
though the water ftill ran there with great rapidity. But he
was drowned, for he had been fo weakened and overcome by
his efforts that it was impoffible for him to fave himfelf after
abandoning the canoe. Our favage Savignon, underftand-
ing himfelf better, held firmly to the canoe until it reached
an eddy, whither the current had carried it. Here he man-
aged fo well that, notwithstanding his fuffering and wearinefs,
he approached the fhore gradually, when, after throwing the
water out of the canoe, he returned in great fear that they
would take vengeance upon him, as the favages do among
themfelves, and related to us this fad ftory, which caufed us
great forrow.

On the next day I went in another canoe to the fall,
together with the favage and another member of our com-
pany, to fee the place where they had met with their
accident, and find, if poffible, the remains. But when he
{howed me the fpot, I was horrified at beholding fuch a
terrible place, and aftonilhed that the deceafed fhould have

been

16 The death of this young man may
have fuggefted the name which was after-
ward given to the fall. He was, how-
ever, it is reafonable to fuppofe, hardly
equal in fandtity of character to the Saint

Louis of the French. Hitherto it had
been called Le Grand Sant. But foon
after this it began to be called Grand
Saut S. Louys. Vide pojlea, pp. 3 8 > 5 r >
59-

1 8 Voyages of

been fo lacking in judgment as to pafs through fuch a fear-
ful place, when they could have gone another way. For it
is impoffible to go along there, as there are feven or eight
defcents of water one after the other, the lowed: three feet
high, the Teething and boiling of the water being fearful. A
pait of the fall was all white with foam, indicating the word
fpot, the noife of which was like thunder, the air refoundin*
with the echo of the catarafts. After viewing and carefully
examining this place, and fearching along the river bank for
the dead bodies, another very light fhallop having proceeded

meanwhile on the other bank alfo, we returned without find-
ing anything.

CHAPTER III.

Champlain’s Explanation of the accompanying Map.

Le Grand Sault St. Louis.

T t PhCe V 1 had deared Up ' B - Sma11 P° nd - C - Small Met, where
I had a ftone wall made. D. Small brook, where the barques are kept. E.

feen ; °Tl S ^ raV3geS ^ when the y come t0 this region. F. Mountains

2ll f SmaP P on d. H. Mont Royal. /. Small brook. L. The

land a t V ° n the nort}l fide ’ w here the favages transfer their canoes by

rockviflet a ° ne ° f 0ur men and a fa vage were drowned. O. Small
E. Another ifU , a’ t where birds make their nefts - 2- Heron ifland.

Met half covered wbhwatV J A^h^m r - SmaI1 round Met ‘ ^-Another
y Meadow*; 7 q . ' Another lflet, where there are many river birds.

are bare Xen t w 7 T' 2 ‘ Very lai * e and fine Wands. 3 . Places which
a Me a water is low, where there are great eddies as at the main fall

4- Meadows covered with water c v», a. n , eaaies ’ as at tne maln IaI1 ’
7- Small rocks. 8. Ifland St H41X S ’ VeryfhalIow P laces - 6. Another little i/let.
connecting with the great fall ' 9 ‘ SmaU ' fland without trees ' 8 • Marfhes

Sieur de Champlain.

l 9

CHAPTER III.

Two Hundred Savages return the Frenchman who had been en-
trusted to them, and receive the Savage who had come back
from France. — Various Interviews on both Sides.

N the thirteenth day of the month 18 two hun-
dred Charioquois 17 favages, together with the
captains Ochateguin, Iroquet, and Tregouar-
oti, brother of our favage, brought back my
fervant . 18 We were greatly pleafed to fee them.
I went to meet them in a canoe with our favage. As
they were approaching flowly and in order, our men pre-
pared to falute them with a difcharge of arquebufes,
mufkets, and fmall pieces. When they were near at hand,
they all fet to fhouting together, and one of the chiefs
gave orders that they fhould make their harangue, in
which they greatly praifed us, commending us as truth-
ful, inafmuch as I had kept the promife to meet them at
this fall. After they had made three more fhouts, there
was a difcharge of mufketry twice from thirteen barques
or pataches that were there. This alarmed them fo, that
they begged me to affure them that there fhould be no
more firing, faying that the greater part of them had never
feen Chriftians, nor heard thunderings of that fort, and that

they

16 June 13th. 18 This was the young man that had

17 Charioquois. In the i(Tue of 1632, been fent to pafs the winter with the

p. 397, Champlain has Sauuages Hu- Indians, in exchange for the favage
rons. It is probable that Charioquois which had accompanied Champlain to
was only a chief of the Hurons. France. Vide antea, Vol. II. p. 246.

20

Voyages of

they were afraid of its harming them, but that they were
greatly pleafed to fee our favage in health, whom they fup-
pofed was dead, as had been reported by fome Algonquins,
who had heard fo from the Montagnais. The favage com-
mended the treatment I had fhown him in France, and the
remarkable objects he had feen, at which all wondered, and
went away quietly to their cabins, expecting that on the
next day I would fhow them the place where I wifhed to
have them dwell. I faw alfo my fervant, who was dreffed
in the coflume of the favages, who commended the treat-
ment he had received from them. He informed me of
all he had feen and learned during the winter, from the
favages.

The next day I fhowed them a fpot for their cabins, in
regard to which the elders and principal ones confulted
very privately. After their long confutation they fent for
me alone and my fervant, who had learned their language
very well. They told him they defired a clofe alliance with
me, and were forry to fee here all thefe fhallops, and that
our favage had told them he did not know them at all
nor their intentions, and that it was clear that they were
attradled only by their defire of gain and their avarice, and
that when their affiflance was needed they would refufe it,
and would not a6t as I did in offering to go with my com-
panions to their country and affifl them, of all of which I
had given them proofs in the path They praifed me for
the tieatment I had fhown our favage, which was that of
a bi other, and had put them under fuch obligations of good
will to me, that they faid they would endeavor to comply
with anything I might defire from them, but that they feared

that

21

Sieur de Champlain.

that the other boats would do them fome harm. I affured
them that they would not, and that we were all under one
king, whom our favage had feen, and belonged to the fame
nation, though matters of bufinefs were confined to indi-
viduals, and that they had no occafion to fear, but might
feel as much fecurity as if they were in their own country.
After confiderable converfation, they made me a prefent of
a hundred caftors. I gave them in exchange other kinds
of merchandife. They told me there were more than four
hundred favages of their country who had purpofed to come,
but had been prevented by the following reprefentations of
an Iroquois prifoner, who had belonged to me, but had es-
caped to his own country. He had reported, they faid, that
I had <dven him his liberty and fome merchandife, and that
I purpofed to go to the fall with fix hundred Iroquois to
meet the Algonquins and kill them all, adding that the fear
aroufed by this intelligence had alone prevented them from
coming. I replied that the prifoner in queftion had efcaped
without my leave, that our favage knew very well how he
went away, and that there was no thought of abandoning
their alliance, as they had heard, fince I had engaged in war
with them, and fent my fervant to their country to fofter
their friendfhip, which was ftill farther confirmed by my
keeping my promife to them in fo faithful a manner.

They replied that, fo far as they were concerned, they
had never thought of this; that they were well aware that
all this talk was far from the truth, and that if they had
believed the contrary they would not have come, but that
the others were afraid, never having feen a Frenchman
except my fervant. They told me alfo that three hundred

Algonquins

22

Voyages of

Algonquins would come in five or fix days, if we would wait
for them, to unite with themfelves in war againft the Iro-
quois; that, however, they would return without doing fo
unlefs I went. I talked a great deal with them about the
fource of the great river and their country, and they gave
me detailed information about their rivers, falls, lakes and
lands, as alfo about the tribes living there, and what is to be
found in the region. Four of them affured me that they
had feen a fea at a great diftance from their country, but
that it was difficult to go there, not only on account of the
wars, but of the intervening wildernefs. They told me alfo
that the winter before fome favages had come from the direc-
tion of Floiida, beyond the country of the Iroquois, who
lived near our ocean, and were in alliance with thefe favages.
In a word, they made me a very exad ftatement, indicating
by drawings all the places where they had been, and taking
pleafure in talking to me about them ; and for my part I
did not tire of liftening to them, as they confirmed points
in regard to which I had been before in doubt. After all
this converfation was concluded, I told them that we would
tiade for the few articles they had, which was done the next
day. Each one of the barques carried away its portion ; we
on our fide had all the hardfhip and venture ; the others,
who had not troubled themfelves about any explorations,
had the booty, the only thing that urges them to adivity,
in which they employ no capital and venture nothing.

he next day, after bartering what little they had, they
made a barricade about their dwelling, partly in the direction
of the wood, and partly in that of our pataches; and this
y faid hey dld for their Security, in order to avoid the

furprifes

23

Sieur de Champlain.

furprifes of their enemies, which we took for the truth. On
the coming night, they called our favage, who was fleeping
on my patache, and my fervant, who went to them. After
a great deal of converfation, about midnight they had me
called alfo. Entering their cabins, I found them all feated
in council. They had me fit down near them, faying that
when they met for the purpofe of confidering a matter,
it was their cuftom to do fo at night, that they might
not be diverted by anything from attention to the fub-
jedt in hand ; that at night one thought only of liftening,
while during the day the thoughts were diftradted by other
objects.

But in my opinion, confiding in me, they defired to tell me
privately their purpofe. Befides, they were afraid of the
other pataches, as they fubfequently gave me to underhand.
For they told me that they were uneafy at feeing fo many
Frenchmen, who were not efpecially united to one another,
and that they had defired to fee me alone; that fome of
them had been beaten; that they were as kindly difpofed
towards me as towards their own children, confiding fo
much in me that they would do whatever I told them to
do, but that they greatly miftrufted the others; that if I
returned I might take as many of their people as I wifhed, if
it were under the guidance of a chief ; and that they fent for
me to affure me anew of their friendfhip, which would never
be broken, and to exprefs the hope that I might never be ill
difpofed towards them ; and being aware that I had deter-
mined to vifit their country, they faid they would fhow it to
me at the rifk of their lives, giving me the affiftance of a
large number of men, who could go everywhere ; and that

24

Voyages of

in future we fhould expert fuch treatment from them as
they had received from us.

Straightway they brought fifty caftors and four firings of
beads, which they value as we do gold chains, faying that
I fhould fhare thefe with my brother, referring to Pont
Grave, we being prefent together ; that thefe prefents were
fent by other captains, who had never feen me ; that they
defired to continue friends to me ; that if any of the French
wifhed to go with them, they fhould be greatly pleafed to
have them do fo; and that they defired more than ever
to eftablifli a firm friendfhip. After much converfation with
them, I propofed that inafmuch as they were defirous to
have me vifit their country, I would petition His Majefty
to affift us to the extent of forty or fifty men, equipped
with what was neceffary for the journey, and that I would
embark with them on condition that they would furnifh us
the neceffary provifions for the journey, and that I would
take prefents for the chiefs of the country through which
we fhould pafs, when we would return to our fettlement to
fpend the winter ; that moreover, if I found their country
favorable and fertile, we would make many fettlements there,
by which means we fhould have frequent intercourse with
each other, living happily in the future in the fear of God,
whom we would make known to them. They were well
pleafed with this propofition, and begged me to fliake hands
upon rt faymg that they on their part would do all that was
n° X \a\ ° r ltS ^ u ^ ment 5 that, in regard to provifions, we
°V 4 -r ^ ^ WC ^ ^ u PPl* e d as they themfelves, affuring me
again that they would (how me what I defired to fee. There-
upon, I took leave of them at daybreak, thanking them for

their

Sieur de Champlain. 25

their willingnefs to carry out my wifhes, and entreating
them to continue to entertain the fame feelings.

On the next day, the 17th, they faid that they were going
caftor-hunting, and that they would all return. On the fol-
lowing morning they finifhed bartering what little they had,
when they embarked in their canoes, afking us not to take
any fleps towards taking down their dwellings, which we
promifed them. Then they feparated from each other, pre-
tending to go a hunting in different dire&ions. They left
our favage with me that we might have lefs diftruft in them.
But they had appointed themfelves a rendezvous above the
fall, where they knew well enough that we could not go
with our barques. Meanwhile, we awaited them in accord-
ance with what they had told us.

The next day there came two favages, one I roquet, the
other the brother of our Savignon. They came to get the
latter, and afk me in behalf of all their companions to go
alone with my fervant to where they were encamped, as
they had fomething of importance to tell me, which they
were unwilling to communicate to any Frenchmen. I
promifed them that I would go.

The following day I gave fome trifles to Savignon, who
fet out much pleafed, giving me to underftand that he was
about to live a very irkfome life in comparifon with that
which he had led in France. He expreffed much regret at
feparation, but I was very glad to be relieved of the care
of him. The two captains told me that on the morning of
the next day they would fend for me, which they did. I
embarked, accompanied by my fervant, with thofe who came.
Having arrived at the fall, we went fome eight leagues into

4 the

26

Voyages of

the woods, where they were encamped on the fhore of a
lake, where I had been before . 19 They were much pleated
at feeing me, and began to fhout after their cuftom. Our
Indian came out to meet me, and afk me to go to the cabin
of his brother, where he at once had fome meat and fifli
put on the fire for my entertainment. While I was there
a banquet was held, to which all the leading Indians were
invited. I was not forgotten, although I had already eaten
fufficiently ; but, in order not to violate the cuftom of the
country, I attended. After banqueting, they went into the
woods to hold their council, and meanwhile I amufed my-

felf in looking at the country round about, which is very
pleafant. 3

Some time after they called me, in order to communi-
cate to me what they had refolved upon. I proceeded
to them accordingly with my fervant. After I had feated
myfelf by their fide, they faid they were very glad to fee me,
and to find that I had not failed to keep my word in what
I had promifed them ; faying that they felt it an additional
proof of my affedion that I continued the alliance with
them, and. that before fetting out they defired to take leave
of me, as it would have been a very great difappointment to
t hem to go away without feeing me, thinking that I would
m that cafe have been ill difpofed towards them. They faid
alfo that what had led them to fay they were going a hunt-
ing, and build the barricade, was not the fear of their ene-
mies nor the defire of hunting, but their fear of all the other
pataches accompanying me, inafmuch as they had heard it

faid

19 This was doubtlefs on the Lake of Two Mountains.

27

Sieur de Champlain.

faid that on the night they fent for me they were all to be
killed, and that I fliould not be able to protect them from
the others who were much more numerous; fo that in order
to get away they made ufe of this rufe. But they faid if
there had been only our two pataches they would have
flayed fome days longer, and they begged that, when I re-
turned with my companions, I would not bring any others.
To this I replied that I did not bring thefe, but that they
followed without my invitation ; that in the future, however,
I would come in another manner ; at which explanation they
were much pleafed.

And now they began again to repeat what they had prom-
ifed me in regard to the exploration of the country, while
I promifed, with the help of God, to fulfil what I had told
them. They befought me again to give them a man, and I
replied that if there was any one among us who was willing
to go, I fhould be well pleafed.

They told me there was a merchant, named Bouyer, com-
mander of a patache, who had afked them to take a young
man, which requeft, however, they had been unwilling to
grant before afcertaining whether this was agreeable to me,
as they did not know whether we were friends, fince he had
come in my company to trade with them ; alfo that they were
in no wife under any obligations to him, but that he had
offered to make them large prefents.

I replied that we were in no wife enemies, and that they
had often feen us converting with each other; but that
in regard to traffic each did what he could, and that the
above-named Bouyer was perhaps defirous of fending this
young man as I had fent mine, hoping for fome return

28

Voyages of

in the future, which I could alfo lay claim to from them ;
that, however, they mufl judge towards whom they had the
greateft obligations, and from whom they were to expeft
the moft.

They faid there was no comparifon between the obliga-
tions in the two cafes, not only in view of the help I had
rendered them in their wars againft their enemies, but alfo
of the offer of my perfonal affiftance in the future, in all of
which they had found me faithful to the truth, adding that
all depended on my pleafure. They faid moreover that what
made them fpeak of the matter was the prefents he had
offered them, and that, if this young man fhould go with
them, it would not put them under fuch obligations to this
Bouyer as they were under to me, and that it would have
no influence upon the future, fince they only took him on
account of the prefents from Bouyer.

I replied that it was indifferent to me whether they took him
or not, and in fadt that if they took him for a fmall confider-
ation I fhould be difpleafed at it, but if in return for valu-
able prefents, I fhould be fatisfied, provided he flayed with
Iroquet ; which they promifed me. Then there was made
on both fldes a final ftatement of our agreements. They
had with them one who had three times been made prifoner
by the Iroquois, but had been fuccefsful in efcaping. This
one refolved to go, with nine others, to war, for the fake of re-
venge for the cruelties his enemies had caufed him to fuffer.
All the captains begged me to diffuade him if poffible, fince
he was very valiant, and they were afraid that, advancing
boldly towards the enemy, and fupported by a fmall force
only, he would never return. To fatisfy them I endeavored

to

2 9

Sieur de Champlain.

to do fo, and urged all the reafons I could, which, however,
availed little ; for he, fhowing me a portion of his fingers cut
off, alfo great cuts and burns on his body, as evidences of the
manner they had tortured him, faid that it was impoffible
for him to live without killing fome of his enemies and hav-
ing vengeance, and that his heart told him he mull fet out
as°foon as poffible, as he did, firmly refolved to behave well.

After concluding with them, I afked them to take me back
in our patache. To accomplifh this, they got ready eight
canoes in order to pafs the fall, dripping themfelves naked,
and directing me to go only in my fhirt. For it often happens
that fome are loft in paffing the fall. Confequently, they
keep clofe to each other, fo as to render afliftance at once, if
any canoe fhould happen to turn over. They faid to me,
If yours fhould unfortunately overturn, not knowing how
to fwim, you muft not think of abandoning it, and muft
cling to the little pieces in the middle of it, for we can eafily
refcue you. I am fure that even the moft felf-poffeffed
perfons in the world, who have not feen this place nor paffed
it in little boats fuch as they have, could not do fo without
the greateft apprehenfion. But thefe people are fo fkilful in
paffing falls, that it is an eafy matter for them. I paffed
with them, which I had never before done, nor any other
Chriftian, except my above-mentioned fervant. Then we
reached our barques, where I lodged a large number of them,
and had fome converfation with the before-mentioned Bouyer
in view of the fear he entertained that I fhould prevent his
fervant from going with the favages. They returned the
next day with the young man, who proved expenfive to his
matter who had expe&ed, in my opinion, to recover the

Ioffes

30

Voyages of

Ioffes of his voyage, which were very confiderable, like thofe
of many others.

One of our young men also determined to go with thefe
favages, who are Charioquois, living at a diftance of fome
one hundred and fifty leagues from the fall. He went with
the brother of Savignon, one of the captains, who promifed
me to fhow him all that could be feen. Bouyer’s man went
with the above-mentioned Iroquet, an Algonquin, who lives
fome eighty leagues from the fall. Both went off well
pleafed and contented.

After the departure of the favages, we awaited the three
hundred others who, as had been told us, were to come, in
accordance with the promife I had made them. Finding that
they did not come, all the pataches determined to induce
fome Algonquin favages, who had come from Tadouffac, to
go o meet, them, in view of a reward that would be given
em on their return, which was to be at the lateft not over
nine days from the time of their departure, fo that we might
to n t W , Whe ,J her ex P ed them or not, and be able to return

this purpofe they agreed t0 ' and a C “° e “ » ith

On the fifth of July a canoe arrived from the Algonquins
who were to come to the number of three hundred From
* hal canoe which had fet out tZ uf had
bv their i„ ,r 00 y ' and lhat their com panions, wearied
rive in fulfilme y ’t W r?u refting ' and that ‘hey would foon ar-
they would ioM P r0mife they had ™ d e ; that at mod

there would be only twent 3 ."! e ' Sht dayS behindhand ' hut that

tains and manv of . t. • y ' ° Ur canoes > as °ne of their cap-
many of their comrades had died of a fever that

had

3i

Sieur de Champlain.

had broken out among them. They alfo faid that they had
fent many to the war, which had hindered their progrefs.
We determined to wait for them.

But finding that this period had elapfed without their
arrival, Pont Grave fet out from the fall on the eleventh of
the month, to arrange fome matters at Tadouffac, while I
flayed to await the favages.

The fame day a patache arrived, bringing provifions for
the numerous barques of which our party confifted. For
our bread, wine, meat, and cider had given out fome days
before, obliging us to have recourfe to fifhing, the fine river
water, and fome radifhes which grow in great abundance in the
country ; otherwife we fhould have been obliged to return.
The fame day an Algonquin canoe arrived, affuring us that
on the next day the twenty-four canoes were to come, twelve
of them prepared for war.

On the twelfth the Algonquins arrived with fome little
merchandife. Before trafficking they made a prefent to a
Montagnais Indian, the fon of Anadabijou," 0 who had lately
died, in order to mitigate his grief at the death of his
father. Shortly after they refolved to make fome prefents
to all the captains of the pataches. They gave to each of
them ten caftors, faying they were very forry they had no
more, but that the war, to which moft of them were going,
was the reafon ; they begged, however, that what they offered
might be accepted in good part, faying that they were all
friends to us, and to me, who was feated near them, more
than to all the others, who were well difpofed towards

them

20 Champlain’s orthography is her z Aronadabigeau. Vide Vol. I. pp. 236, 291.

32

Voyages of

them only on account of their caftors, and had not always
affifted them like myfelf, whom they had never found double-
tongued like the reft.

I replied that all thofe whom they faw gathered together
were their friends ; that, in cafe an opportunity fliould prefent
itfelf, they would not fail to do their duty ; that we were all
friends ; that they fliould continue to be well difpofed
towards us ; that we would make them prefents in return
for thofe they gave us ; and that they fliould trade in peace.
This they did, and carried away what they could.

The next day they brought me privately forty caftors,
affuring me of their friendfliip, and that they were very glad
of the concluflon which I had reached with the favages who
had gone away, and that we fliould make a fettlement at
the fall, which I aflured them we would do, making them a
prefent in return.

After everything had been arranged, they determined to
go and obtain the body of Outetoucos, who was drowned
at the fall, as we have before mentioned. They went to
the fpot where he had been buried, difinterred him and
carried him to the ifland of St. Helene, where they per-
formed their ufual ceremony, which is to fing and dance
over the grave with feftivities and banquets following. I
afked them why they difinterred the body. They replied
t rat if their enemies fliould find the grave they would do
fo, and divide the body into feveral pieces, which they would
then hang to trees in order to offend them. For this reafon
they faid that they transferred it to a place off from the
road, and in the moft fecret manner poffible.

On the 15th there arrived fourteen canoes, the chief

over

33

Sieur de Champlain.

over which was named Tecouehata. Upon their arrival
all the other favages took up arms and performed fome
circular evolutions. After going around and dancing to
their fatisfaction, the others who were in their canoes
alfo began to dance, making various movements of the
body. After finifhing their fmging, they went on fhore
with a fmall quantity of furs, and made prefents fimilar to
thofe of the others. Thefe were reciprocated by fome of
equal value. The next day they trafficked in what little
they had, and prefented me personally with thirty caftors,
for which I made them an acknowledgment. They begged
me to continue my good will to them, which I promifed to
do. They fpoke with me very efpecially refpedting certain
explorations towards the north, which might prove advan-
tageous ; and faid, in reference to them, that if any one of
my company would like to go with them, they would ffiow
him what would pleafe me, and would treat him as one of
their own children. I promifed to give them a young man,
at which they were much pleafed. When he took leave of
me to go with them, I gave him a detailed memorandum of
what he was to obferve while with them. After they had
bartered what little they had, they feparated into three par-
ties ; one for the war, another for the great fall, another for
a little river which flows into that of the great fall. Thus
they fet out on the 1 8th day of the month, on which day
we alfo departed.

The fame day we made the thirty leagues from this fall to
the Trois Rivieres. On the 19th we arrived at Quebec, which
is alfo thirty leagues from the Trois Rivieres. I induced the
rnofl of thofe in each boat to ftay at the fettlement, when I
. S had

34

Voyages of

had fome repairs made and fome rofe-bufhes fet out. I had
alfo fome oak wood put on board to make trial of in France,
not only for marine wainscoting, but alfo for windows. The
next day, the 20th of July, I fet out. On the 23d I arrived
at Tadouffac, whence I refolved to return to France, in ac-
cordance with the advice of Pont Grave. After arranging
matters relating to our fettlement, according to the direc-
tions which Sieur de Monts had given me, I embarked in
the veffel of Captain Tibaut, of La Rochelle, on the nth
of Auguft. During our paffage we had an abundance of
fifh, fuch as orades, mackerel, and pilotes , the latter fimilar
to hei lings, and found about certain planks covered with
poujje-pieds, a kind of fhell-fifh attaching itfelf thereto, and
growing there gradually. Sometimes the number of thefe
little fifh is fo great that it is furprifing to behold. We
caught alfo fome porpoifes and other fpecies of fifh. The
weather was favorable as far as Belle Ifle, 21 where we were
overtaken by fogs, which continued three or four days. The
weather then becoming fair, we lighted Alvert, 22 and arrived
at La Rochelle on the 16th of September, 1611.

CHAPTER IV.

f 2 .', fi e - An ifland on the coaft
of Brittany in France

22 AlverL Arvert, a village near

Marennes, which they lighted as they
approached La Rochelle.

Sieur de Champlain .

35

CHAPTER IV.

Arrival at La Rochelle. — Dissolution of the Partnership between
Sieur de Monts and his Associates, the Sieurs Colier and le Gen-
dre of Rouen.— Jealousy of the French in regard to the New
Discoveries in New France.

PON my arrival at La Rochelle I proceeded to
vifit Sieur de Monts, at Pons 23 in Saintonge,
to inform him of all that had occurred during
the expedition, and of the promife which the
Ochateguins 24 and Algonquins had made me,
on condition that we would affift them in their wars, as I had
agreed. Sieur de Monts, after liftening to it all, determined
to go to the Court to arrange the matter. I flarted before
him to go there alfo. But on the way I was unfortunately
detained by the falling of a horfe upon me, which came near
killing me. This fall detained me fome time ; but as foon
as I had fufficiently recovered from its effedts I fet out again
to complete my journey and meet Sieur de Monts at Fon-
tainebleau, who, upon his return to Paris, had a conference
with his affociates. The latter were unwilling to continue
in the affociation, as there was no commifilon forbidding any
others from going to the new difcoveries and trading with
the inhabitants of the country. Sieur de Monts, feeing this,
bargained with them for what remained at the fettlement at

Quebec,

28 De Monts was governor of Pons, 24 Ochateguins. Vide VoT. III. Que-
a town fituated about ten miles fouth bee ed. p. 169. They were Hurons, and
of Saintes, in the prefent department Ochateguin is fuppofed to have been one
of Lower Charente. of their chiefs. Vide Vol. II. note 321.

36

Voyages of

Quebec, in confideration of a fum of money which he gave
them for their fhare. He fent alfo fome men to take care of
the fettlement, in the expectation of obtaining a commiffion
from His Majefty. But while he was engaged in the purfuit
of this object fome important matters demanded his atten-
tion, fo that he was obliged to abandon it, and he left me
the duty of taking the neceffary fteps for it. As I was about
arranging the matter, the veffels arrived from New France
with men from our fettlement, thofe whom I had fent into
the interior with the favages. They brought me very im-
portant information, faying that more than two hundred
favages had come, expecting to find me at the great fall
of St. Louis, where I had appointed a rendezvous, with the
intention of affifting them according to their requeft. But,
finding that I had not kept my promife, they were greatly
difpleafed. Our men, however, made fome apologies, which
were accepted, and affured them that they would not fail to
come the following year or never. The favages agreed to
this on their part. But feveral others left the old trading-
ftation of Tadouffac, and came to the fall with many fmall
baiques to fee if they could engage in traffic with thefe
people, whom they affured that I was dead, although our
men ftoutly declared the contrary. This fhows how jealoufy
agamft meritorious objects gets poffeffion of bad natures;
an all they want is that men fhould expofe themfelves to a
t loufand dangers, to difcover peoples and territories, that
tiey taemfelves may have the profit and others the hard-
up. t is not leafonable that one fhould capture the lamb
an anot er go off with the fleece. If they had been willing
participate in our difcoveries, ufe their means, and rifk

their

37

Sieur de Champlain.

their perfons, they would have given evidence of their honor
and noblenefs, but on the contrary they fhow clearly that
they are impelled by pure malice that they may enjoy the
fruit of our labors equally with our'felves.

On this fubjedl, and to fhow how many .perfons ftrive to
pervert praifeworthy enterprifes, I will inftance again the
people of St. Malo and others, who fay that the profit of
thefe difcoveries belongs to them, fmce Jacques Cartier,
who fir ft vifited Canada and the iflands of New Foundland,
was from their city ; as if that city had contributed to the
expenfes of thefe difcoveries of Jacques Cartier, who went
there by the order and at the expenfe of King Francis I.
in the years 1534 and 1535 to difcover thefe territories now
called New France. If then Cartier made any difcovery at
the expenfe of His Majefly, all his fubjefts have the fame
rights and liberties in them as the people of St. Malo, who
cannot prevent others who make farther difcoveries at their
own expenfe, as is fhown in the cafe of the difcoveries above
defcribed, from profiting by them in peace. Hence they
ought not to claim any rights if they themfelves make no
contributions, and their reafons for doing fo are weak and
foolifh.

To prove more conclufively that they who maintain this
pofition do fo without any foundation, let us fuppofe that
a Spaniard or other foreigner had difcovered lands and
wealth at the expenfe of the King of France. Could the
Spaniards or other foreigners claim thefe difcoveries and
this wealth on the ground that the difcoverer was a Spaniard
or foreigner? No! There would be no fenfe in doing fo,
and they would always belong to France. Hence the people

38

Voyages of Champlain.

of St. Malo cannot make thefe claims for the reafon which
they give, that Cartier was a citizen of their city ; and they
can only take cognizance of the fad that he was a citizen
of theirs, and render him accordingly the praife which is
his due.

Befides, Cartier in the voyage which he made never paffed
the great fall of St. Louis, and made no difcoveries north or
fouth of the river St. Lawrence. His narratives give no evi-
dence of it, in which he fpeaks only of the river Saguenay,
the Trois Rivieres and St. Croix, where he fpent the winter
in a fort near our fettlement. Had he done fo, he would not
have failed to mention it, any more than what he has men-
tioned, which fhows that he left all the upper part of the St.
Lawrence, from Tadouffac to the great fall, being a territory
difficult to explore, and that he was unwilling to expofe
himfelf or let his barques engage in the venture. So that
what he did has borne no fruit until four years ago, when we
made our fettlement at Quebec, after which I ventured to
pafs the fall to help the favages in their wars, and fend
among them men to make the acquaintance of the people,
o earn their mode of living, and the character and extent
o heir territory. After devoting ourfelves to labors which
lave een o fuccefsful, is it not juft that we fhould enjoy
h ei r fans, His Majefty not having contributed anything

, U . e W l ° have affumed the refponfibilities of thefe
ndeitakings up to the prefent time. I hope that God will

oln nine Tlr ‘ lim ‘° d ° '° mUch for His

new nionl r 16 , ^ ° f his fub ' eas - “ bring many

M em'ov the b T edge 0f OUr faith ' tha ‘ my l
ialt enjoy the heavenly kingdom.

NOTE.

Champlain here introduces an explanation of his two geographical maps of
New France, and likewife his method of determining a meridian line. For con-
venience of ufe the maps are placed at the end of this work, and for the fame
reafon thefe explanations are carried forward to p. 219, in immediate proximity
to the maps which they explain. — Editor.

FOURTH VOYAGE

OF

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

CAPTAIN IN ORDINARY TO. THE KING IN THE MARINE, AND
LIEUTENANT OF MONSEIGNEUR LE PRINCE DE
CONDfi IN NEW FRANCE,

MADE IN THE YEAR 1613.

To the very high, powerful, and excellent
Henri de Bourbon, Prince de Conde, Firft Prince
of the Blood, Firft Peer of France, Governor
and Lieutenant of His Majefty in Guienne.

Monfeigneur,

The Honor that I have received from your Highnefs in
being intrujled with the difcovery of New France has infpired
in me the defire to purfue with fiill greater pains and zeal
than ever the fearch for the North Sea. With this objeCl in
view I have made a voyage during the pafi year , 1613 , relying
on a man whom I had fent there and who affured me he had
feen it , as you will perceive in this brief narrative , which I
venture to prefent to your Excellence , and in which are par-
ticularly def embed all the toils and fufferings I have had in
the undertaking. But although I regret having lofl this year
fo far as the main object is concerned , yet my expectation, as
m the firft voyage , of obtaining more definite information
refpecling the fubject from the favages , has been fulfilled.
They have told me about various lakes and rivers in the
north, in view of which , afide from their affurance that thy
know of this fea , it feems to me eafy to conclude from the
maps that it cannot be far from the farthefi difeoveries I
have hitherto made. Awaiting a favorable time and op-
portunity to profecute my plans, and praying God to preferve
you, mofi happy Prince, in all profperity, wherein confifts my
highefi wifh for your greatnefs , I remain in the quality of
Your mofi humble and devoted fervant,

SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN.

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

!

CAPTAIN IN ORDINARY TO THE KING IN THE MARINE, AND
LIEUTENANT OF MONSEIGNEUR LE PRINCE DE
CONDfi IN NEW FRANCE,

MADE IN THE YEAR 1613.

.

«)

k

CHAPTER I.

What led me to seek for Terms of Regulation. — A Commission ob-
g tained. — Oppositions to the same. — Publication at last in all

jj the Ports of France.

HE defire which I have always had of making
new difcoveries in New France, for the good,
profit, and glory of the French name, and at the
fame time to lead the poor natives to the knowl-
edge of God, has led me to feek more and more
for the greater facility of this undertaking, which can only
be fecured by means of good regulations. For, fince indi-
viduals defire to gather the fruits of my labor without con-
tributing to the expenfes and great outlays requifite for the
fupport of the fettlements neceffary to a fuccefsful refult,

this

44

Voyages of

this branch of trade is ruined by the greedinefs of gain,
which is fo great that it caufes merchants to fet out prema-
turely in order to arrive firft in this country. By this means
they not only become involved in the ice, but alfo in their
own ruin, for, from trading with the favages in a fecret
manner and offering through rivalry with each other more
merchandife than is neceffary, they get the worft of the
bargain. Thus, while purpofing to deceive their affociates,
they generally deceive themfelves.

For this reafon, when I returned to France on the ioth
of September, i 6 u, I fpoke to Sieur de Monts about the
matter, who approved of my fuggeftions ; but his engage-
ments not allowing him to profecute the matter at court,
he left to me its whole management.

I then drew up a ftatement, which I prefented to Prefi-
dent Jeannin, who, being a man defirous of feeing good
undei takings profper, commended my projedf, and encour-
aged me in its profecution.

But feeling affured that thofe who love to fifh in troubled
waters would be vexed at fuch regulations and feek means
to thwart them, it feemed advifable to throw myfelf into the

hands of fome power whofe authority would prevail over
their jealoufy.

Now, knowing Monfeigneur le Comte de Soiffons 25 to be
a pnnce devout and well difpofed to all holy undertakings,

■u C1G j him through Sieur de Beaulieu, coun-

01, an a moner in ordinary to the King, and urged upon

him

b, p' 4 S ont So “ rons> ** Vo1 -

1. note 74; alio i

45

Sieur de Champlain.

him the importance of the matter, fetting forth the means
of regulating it, the harm which diforder had heretofore
produced, and the total ruin with which it was threatened,
to the great difhonor of the French name, unlefs God fliould
raife up fome one who would reanimate it and give promife
of fecuring for it fome day the fuccefs which had hitherto
been little anticipated. After he had been informed in re-
gard to all the details of the fcheme and feen the map of
the country which I had made, he promifed me, under the
fandtion of the King, to undertake the proteaorate of the
enterprife.

I immediately after prefented to His Majefty, and to the
gentlemen of his Council, a petition accompanied by ai tides,
to the end that it might pleafe him to iffue regulations for
the undertaking, without which, as I have faid, it would fail.
Accordingly his Majefty gave the diredion and control to
the before-mentioned Count, who then honored me with the
lieutenancy.

Now as I was preparing to publifh the commiflion 23 of
the King in all the ports and harbors of France, there
occurred the ficknefs and greatly lamented death of the
Count, which poftponed fomewhat the undertaking. But
his Majefty at once committed the direction to Monfeigneur
le Prince , 27 who proceeded in the execution of its duties,
and, having in like manner honored me with the lieuten-
ancy , 28 directed me to go on with the publication of the com-

miffton.

26 This Commiflion, dated Oftober 1 5,
1612, will be found in Champlain’s iflue
of 1632. Vide Quebec ed., p. 887.

27 Henry de Bourbon. Vide Vol. I.
p. 1 13, note 75.

2 » Champlain was appointed lieu-
tenant of the Prince de Condd on the
22d day of November, 1612. Vide iffue
of 1632, Quebec ed., p. 1072.

46 Voyages of

miffion. But as foon as this was done, fome marplots, who
had no intereft in the matter, importuned him to annul it,
reprefenting to him as they claimed the interefts of all the
merchants of France, who had no caufe for complaint, fince
all were received into the affociation and could not there-
fore juftly be aggrieved. Accordingly, their evil intention
being recognized, they were difmiffed, with permiffion only
to enter into the affociation.

During thefe altercations, it was impoffible for me, as the
time of my departure was very near at hand, to do any-
thing for the habitation at Quebec, for repairing and enlarg-
ing which I defired to take out fome workmen. It was
accordingly neceffary to go out this year without any farther
organization. The paffports of Monfeigneur le Prince were
made out for four veffels, which were already in readinefs
foi the voyage, viz. three from Rouen and one from La
Rochelle, on condition that each fhould furnifh four men for
my affiftance, not only in my difcoveries but in war, as I
defired to keep the promife which I had made to the Ocha-
taiguins 23 in the year 161 1, to affift them in their wars at the
time of my next voyage.

As I was preparing to fet out, I was informed that the
arhamentary Court of Rouen would not permit the publi-
cation of the commiffion of the King, becaufe his Majefty
f ' re Q^ed to himfelf and his Council the foie cognizance
of the differences which might arife in this matter; added to
which was the fa< 5 t that the merchants of St. Malo were alfo
oppo e to it. This greatly embarraffed me, and obliged

me

Ochateguins, or Hurons.

47

Sieur de Champlain.

me to make three journeys to Rouen, with orders of his
Majefty, in confideration of which the Court defifted from
their inhibition, and the affumptions of the opponents were
overruled. The commiffion was then publifhed in all the
ports of Normandy.

CHAPTER II.

Departure from France. — What took place up to our Arrival

at the Falls.

SET out from Rouen on the 5th of March for
Honfleur, accompanied by Sieur L’Ange, to
affift me in my explorations, and in war if occa-
fion fhould require.

On the next day, the 6th of the month, we
embarked in the veffel of Sieur de Pont Grave, immediately
fetting fail, with a favorable wind.

On the 10th of April we fighted the Grand Bank, where
we feveral times tried for fifh, but without succefs.

On the 15th we had a violent gale, accompanied by rain
and hail, which was followed by another, lafting foity-eight
hours, and fo violent as to caufe the lofs of feveral veffels on
the ifland of Cape Breton.

On the 2 1 ft we fighted the ifland and Cap de Raye. On
the 29th the Montagnais favages, perceiving us from All
Devils’ Point, 31 threw themfelves into their canoes and came

80 The ijland refers to New Found-
land. Cap de Raye, Hill known as
Cape Ray, was on the fouthweftern
angle of New Foundland.

to

81 Now called Point aux Vaches. It
was fometimes called All-Devils’ Point.
Vide note 136, Vol. I. p. 235.

4 8

Voyages of

to meet us, being fo thin and hideous-looking that I did not
recognize them. At once they began crying for bread, fay-
ing that they were dying of hunger. This led us to con-
clude that the winter had not been fevere, and confequently
the hunting poor, which matter we have alluded to in pre-
vious voyages.

Having arrived on board of our veffel they examined the
faces of all, and as I was not to be feen anywhere they afked
where Monfieur de Champlain was, and were anfwered that
I had remained in France. But this they would not think
of believing, and an old man among them came to me in a
corner where I was walking, not defiring to be recognized
as yet, and taking me by the ear, for he fufpedted who it
was, faw the fear of the arrow wound, which I received at
the defeat of the Iroquois. At this he cried out, and all the
others after him, with great demonftrations of joy, faying,
Your people are awaiting you at the harbor of Tadouffac.

The fame day we arrived at Tadouffac, and although we
had fet out laft, neverthelefs arrived firft, Sieur Boyer of
Rouen arriving with the fame tide. From this it is evident
that to fet out before the feafon is (imply rufhing into the
ice. When we had anchored, our friends came out to us,
and, after informing us how everything was at the habita-
tion, began to drefs three outardes 32 and two hares, which

82 they

tard?s, 1nfo>/ir/ tlm The W nl ten k ° U ' ? ri 2 ina,I y a PP Iie d by the fifhermen and
tardeorbuftard -a"' f , ur T aders at a much earlier period,
a land bird of Europe was doubtlefs on account of fome fancied

fpecies ofgoofe in Canadaata r e ^ eml ! Iaace which they faw to the

period. yearly lelier buitard or outarde, which was

The outarde is mentinno/i u n • a k° ut the fize of the Englifh pheafant.

in >535, and the name nray hLe be’en

49

Sieur de Champlain.

they had brought, throwing the entrails overboard, after
which the poor favages rufhed, and, like famifhed beafts,

devoured

Baron La Hontan, Potherie, and Charle-
voix mention the outarde in catalogues
of water-fowl in which ove, the goofe, is
likewife mentioned. They very clearly
diftinguifh it from the clafs which they
commonly confidered oyes, or geefe.
Cartier, for inflance, fays, II y a auffi
grand nombre d’oyfeaulx, fcauoir grues,
fignes, oltardes , oyes fiuuages , blanches ,
&> grifes. Others fpeak of outardes
et oyes. They do not generally de-
fcribe it with particularity. Champlain,
however, in defcribing the turkey, cocq
d’/nde, on the coaft of New England,
fays, auJJl gros qu'vne outarde , qui ejt
vne efpece d’oye. Father Pierre Biard
writes, et au me/me temps les outardes
arriuent du midy, qui font groffes Can-
nes au double des nojlres. From thefe
ftatements it is obvious that the outarde
was a fpecies of goofe, but was fo fmall
that it could well be defcribed as a large
duck. In New France there were at
leaft four fpecies of the goofe, which
might have come under the obfervation
of the early navigators and explorers.
We give them in the order of their fize,
as defcribed in Coues’ Key to North
American Birds.

1. Canada Goofe, Brant a Canaden/is,
Scopoli, 36 inches.

2. Snow Goofe, Anfer hyperboreus,
Linnaeus, 30 inches.

3. Am. White-fronted Goofe, Anfer
albifrons , Linnaeus, 27 inches.

4. Brant Goofe, Branta bernicla,
Scopoli. 24 inches.

Recurring to the ftatement of Cartier
above cited, it will be obferved that he
mentions, befides the outarde, wild geefe
white and gray. The firlt and largeft
of the four fpecies above mentioned, the
Canada goofe, Branta Canadenfis , is
gray, and the two next, the Snow goofe

and White-fronted, would be claffified
as white. This dilpofes of three of the
four mentioned. The outarde of Cartier
would therefore be the fourth fpecies in
the lift, viz. the Brant goofe. Branta ber-
nicla. This is the fmalleft fpecies found
on our northern coaft, and might natu-
rally be defcribed, as ftated by Father
Biard, as a large duck. It is obvious
that the good Father could not have
defcribed the Canada goofe, the largeft
of the four fpecies, as a large duck, and
the white geefe have never been fup-
pofed to be referred to under the name
of outarde. The Brant goofe, to which
all the evidence which we have been
able to find in the Canadian authorities
feems to point as the outarde of early
times, is common in our markets in its
feafon, but our market-men, unaccuf-
tomed to make fcientific diftinftions, are
puzzled to decide whether it fliould be
clafled as a goofe or a duck. It is not
improbable that the early voyagers to
our northern latitudes, unable to decide
to which of thefe clafies this water-fowl
properly belonged, and feeing in it a
fancied refemblance to the leiTer ou-
tarde, with which they were familiar,
gave it for fake of the diftinftion, but
neverthelefs inappropriately, the name of
outarde. The reader is referred to the
following authorities.

Vide Brief Recit par Jacques Cartier,
1545. D’Avezac ed., p. 33; Champlain ,
Quebec ed., p. 220 ; Jlfuile Relations,
1616, p. 10; Le Grand Voyage dv Pays
des Hurons , par Sagard, Paris, 1632,
p. 301 ; Dictionaire de la Langve Hv-
rone, par Sagard, Paris, 1632, oyfeaux ;
Letters to the Dutchefs of Lefdiguicres,
by Fr. Xa. de Charlevoix, London, 1 763,
p. 88 ; Le Jeune, Relations des fefuites,
1633, p. 4, 1636, p. 47 1 7 / if hire de
P Ameriquc

7

50

Voyages of

devoured them without drawing. They alfo fcraped off
with their nails the fat with which our veffel had been
coated, eating it gluttonoufly as if they had found fome
great delicacy.

The next day two veffels arrived from St. Malo, which
had fet out before the oppofitions had been fettled and the
commiffion been publifhed in Normandy. I proceeded on
board, accompanied by L’Ange. The Sieurs de la Moinerie
and la Tremblaye were in command, to whom I read the

commiffion of the King, and the prohibition againft violating
it on penalties attached to the fame. They replied that they
were fubjedis and faithful fervants of His Majefty, and that
they would obey his commands ; and I then had attached to

a poft in the port the arms and commiffion of His Majefty,
that no ground for ignorance might be claimed.

On the 2d of May, feeing two fhallops equipped to go
to the Falls, I embarked with the before-mentioned L’Ange
in one of them. We had very bad weather, fo that the
mails of our fhallop were broken, and had it not been for
the piel'erving hand of God we fhould have been loft, as was
befoie our eyes a fhallop from St. Malo, which was going
to the Ille d Orleans, thofe on board of which however
being faved.

On the 7th we arrived at Quebec, where we found in good
condition thofe who had wintered there, they not having
een lick, they told us that the winter had not been fevere,
an . that the river had not frozen. The trees alfo were

e^mmng to put foith leaves and the fields to be decked
with flowers.

, On

Potheri/ Parfs^i ? ar ' a I ^ 2 ’ 2I2 ' 3 ° 8 ; Lefcarbot, Hijloire de la
rotnene, nans, 1722, Vol. I. pp. 20, Nouvelle France, pp. 36c,, 582, 611.

5i

Sieur de Champlain.

On the 13th we fet out from Quebec for the Falls of St.
Louis, where we arrived on the 21ft, finding there one of
our barques which had fet out after us from Tadouffac, and
which had traded fome with a fmall troop of Algonquins,
who came from the war wdth the Iroquois, and had with
them two prifoners. Thofe in the barque gave them to
underftand that I had come with a number of men to affift
them in their wars, according to the promife I had made
them in previous years; alfo that I defired to go to their
country and enter into an alliance with all their friends, at
which they were greatly pleafed. And, inafmuch as they
were defirous of returning to their country to affure their
friends of their victory, fee their wives, and put to death
their prifoners in a feftive tabagie, they left us pledges of
their return, which they promifed fhould be before the
middle of the firft moon, according to their reckoning, their
fhields made of wood and elk leather, and a part of their
bows and arrow's. I regretted very much that I was not
prepared to go with them to their country.

Three days after, three canoes arrived with Algonquins,
who had come from the interior, with fome articles of mer-
chandife which they bartered. They told me that the bad
treatment which the favages had received the year before
had difcouraged them from coming any more, and that they
did not believe that I would ever return to their country on
account of the w r rong impreffions which thofe jealous of me
had given them refpedting me; wherefore twelve hundred
men had gone to the war, having no more hope from the
French, w r ho, they did not believe, would return again to
their country.

This

52

Voyages of

This intelligence greatly dilheartened the merchants, as
they had made a great purchafe of merchandife, with the
expectation that the favages would come, as they had been
accuftomed to. This led me to refolve, as I engaged in my
explorations, to pafs through their country, in order to en-
courage thofe who had flayed back, with an affurance of the
good treatment they would receive, and of the large amount
of good merchandife at the Fall, and alfo of the defire I had
to affift them in their war. For carrying out this purpofe
I requefted three canoes and three favages to guide us, but
after much difficulty obtained only two and one favage, and
this by means of fome prefents made them.

CHAPTER III.

Departure to discover the North Sea, on the Ground of the Re-
port MADE ME in REGARD TO IT. DESCRIPTION OF SEVERAL RlVERS,
Lakes and Islands ; the Falls of the ChaudiLre and other Falls.

O W, as I had only two canoes, I could take with
me but four men, among whom was one named
Nicholas de Vignau, the mofl impudent liar that
has been feen for a long time, as the fequel of this
narrative will fhow. He had formerly fpent the
winter with the favages, and I had fent him on explorations
the preceding years. He reported to me, on his return to
ans in 1612, that he had feen the North Sea; that the river
0 A1 g-q-ns came from a lake which emptied into it;
an tiat in feventeen days one could go from the Falls of
oms to this fea and back again ; that he had feen the
an ebris of an Englifh fhip that had been wrecked,

Sieur de Champlain . 53

on board of which were eighty men, who had efcaped to
the fhore, and whom the favages killed becaufe the Eng-
lifh endeavored to take from them by force their Indian corn
and other neceffaries of life ; and that he had feen the fcalps
which thefe favages had flayed off, according to their cuf-
tom, which they would fhow me, and that they would like-
wife give me a young Englifh boy whom they had kept for
me. This intelligence had greatly pleafed me, for I thought
that I had almoft found that for which I had for a long time
been fearching. Accordingly I enjoined upon him to tell me
the truth, in order that I might inform the King, and warned
him that if he gave utterance to a lie he was putting the
rope about his neck, affuring him on the other hand that,
if his narrative were true, he could be certain of being well
rewarded. He again affured me, with ftronger oaths than
ever; and in order to play his role better he gave me a
defcription of the country, which he faid he had made as
well as he was able. Accordingly the confidence which I
faw in him, his entire franknefs as it feemed, the defcription
which he had prepared, the wreck and debris of the {hip,
and the things above mentioned, had an appearance of prob-
ability, in connexion w r ith the voyage of the Englifh to
Labrador in 1612, where they found a ftrait, in which they
failed as far as the 63d degree of latitude and the 290th of
longitude, wintering at the 53d degree and lofing some vef-
fels, as their report proves. 33 Thefe circumftances inducing

me

88 Vide Vol. II. p. 171, note 297, for bears his name in the years 1610-11,
an account of Henry Hudfon, to whom out of which he fabricated the fine ftory
this ftatement refers. De Vignau had of his pretended difcovery. Longitude
undoubtedly heard rumors concerning at that time was reckoned from the
Hudfon’s expedition to the bay that illand of Ferro, one of the Canaries.

Proceeding

54

Voyages of

me to believe that what he faid was true, I made a report of
the fame to the Chancellor , 34 which I fhowed to Marfhal
de Briffac , 36 Prefident Jeannin , 38 and other Seigneurs of the
Court, who told me that I ought to vifit the place in perfon.
For this reafon I requefted Sieur Georges, a merchant of La
Rochelle, to give him a paffage in his fhip, which he will-
ingly did, and during the voyage he queftioned him as to
his objedt in making it ; and, fince it was not of any profit
to him, he afked if he expedited any pay, to which the young
man anfwered that he did not, that he did not expedt any-
thing from any one but the King, and that he undertook
the voyage only to fhow me the North Sea, which he had
feen. He made an affidavit of this at La Rochelle before
two notaries.

Now as I took leave on Whitfuntide , 87 of all the principal
men to whofe prayers I commended myfelf, and alfo to thofe
of all others, I faid to him in their prefence that if what he had

previoufly

86 Vide Vol. I. p. ri2, note 73. Pref-
ident Jeannin was a mod fuitable per-
fon to confult on this fubjeft, as he was
deeply interefted in the difcovery of
a northweft paffage to India. When
minifter at the Hague he addreffed a
letter bearing date January 21ft, 1609,
to Henry IV. of France, containing an
account of his indirect negotiations with
Henry Hudfon, for a voyage to difcover
a fhorter paffage to India. A copy of
this interefting letter, both in French
and Englilh, may be found in Henry
Hudfon the Navigator, by G. M. Afher,
LL.D., Hakluyt Society, London, i860,
p. 244.

s ' The feflival of W r hitfunday oc-
curred on the 26th May. Laverdiere
in loco.

1 roceeding from weft to eaft, the 200'
would pafs through Hudfon’s Bay, a:
may be feen by confulting any earh
French map. Vide Beilin’s Carte dl
Globe Terrejlre , 1764.

81 Nicholas Brulart de Sillery, whc
was born at Sillery, in France, in 1544
and died in the fame place in 1624. He
rendered fignal fervice to Henry IV
Among other public ads he negotiated
the peace of Vervins between France
and Spam in 1598. He was appointed
grand chancellor of France in 1607
Henry IV. faid of him, Avec mon chan-

nltJh? U1 m fa,t 5 as le latin et m °n con-
etable (Henri de Montmorency), qui

ne fait ni lire m ccrire, ie puis venir h

b °8 U 5 t w eS r ffairs les P lus difficiles.

R . r / or account of Marfhal de
Briffac, vide Vol. I. n. 1 7

55

Sieur de Champlain.

previoufly faid was not true he muft not give me the trouble
to undertake the journey, which involved many dangers.
Again he affirmed all that he had faid, on peril of his life.

Accordingly, our canoes being laden with fome provifions,
our arms, and a few articles of merchandife for making pref-
ents to the favages, I fet out on Monday the 27th of May
from Ille St. Helene with four Frenchmen and one favage,
a parting falute being given me with fome rounds from
fmall pieces. This day we went only to the Falls of St.
Louis, a league up the river, the bad weather not allowing
us to go any farther.

On the 29th we paffed the Falls, 38 partly by land, partly by
water, it being neceffary for us to carry our canoes, clothes,
viftuals, and arms on our fhoulders, no fmall matter for per-
fons not accuftomed to it. After going two leagues beyond
the Falls, we entered a lake, 39 about twelve leagues in circuit,
into which three rivers empty ; one coming from the weft,
from the direction of the Ochateguins, diftant from one
hundred and fifty to two hundred leagues from the great
Falls; 40 another from the fouth and the country of the
Iroquois, a like diftance off; 41 and the other from the north
and the country of the Algonquins and Nebicerini, alfo
about the fame diftance. 42 This river on the north, accord-
ing

88 The Falls of St. Louis. the weft. It was often called the River

89 Lake St. Louis. of the Algonquins. It approaches com-

40 Champlain is here fpeaking of the paratively near to Lake Nipiffing, the
river St. Lawrence, which flows into home of the Nipiflirini. The fources
Lake St. Louis flightly fouth of weft. of the Ottawa are northeaft of Lake

41 Riviere de Loup, now known as Nipiffing, a diftance of from one to three

the Chateauguay. hundred miles. The diftances here given

42 The River Ottawa or a branch of by Champlain are only general eftimates
it flows into Lake St. Louis from the gathered from the Indians, and are
north, although its courfe is rather from neceffarily inaccurate.

5 6 Voyages of

ing to the report of the favages, comes from a fource more
remote, and paffes by tribes unknown to them and about
three hundred leagues diftant.

This lake is filled with fine large iflands, containing only
pafturage land, where there is fine hunting, deer and fowl
being plenty. Fifh are abundant. The country bordering
the lake is covered with extenfive forefls. We proceeded
to pafs the night at the entrance to this lake, making barri-
cades againft the Iroquois, who roam in thefe regions in
order to lurprife their enemies ; and I am fure that if they
were to find us they would give us as good a welcome as
them, for which reafon we kept a good watch all night.
On the next day I took the altitude of the place, and found
it in latitude 45 0 18'. About three o’clock in the afternoon
we entered the river which comes from the north, and,
paffing a fmall fall 43 by land fo as to favor our canoes, we
proceeded to a little ifland, where we fpent the remainder of
the night.

On the laft day of May we paffed another lake, 44 feven
or eight leagues long and three broad, containing feveral
iflands. The neighboring country is very level, except in
fome places, where there are pine-covered hills. We paffed a
fall called by the inhabitants of the country Quenechouan, 45
which is filled with ftones and rocks, and where the water
runs with great velocity. We had to get into the water and
diag our canoes along the fliore with a rope. Half a

league

43 Rapide de Brufli, by which the river of Two Mountains. Vide Vol. I. p.
flows from the Lake of Two Mountains 294.

mto Lake St. Louis. « This is the firft of a feries of falls

Lac ae Sotjjons, now called Lake now known as the Long Fall.

57

Sieur de Champlain .

league from there we paffed another little fall by rowing,
which makes one fweat. Great fkill is required in paffmg
thefe falls, in order to avoid the eddies and furf, in which
they abound ; but the favages do this with the greateft pof-
fible dexterity, winding about and going by the eafiest places,
which they recognize at a glance.

On Saturday, the ift of June, we paffed two other falls;
the firft half a league long, the fecond a league, in which
we had much difficulty ; for the rapidity of the current is fo
great that it makes a frightful noife, and produces, as it de-
scends from ftage to ftage, fo white a foam everywhere that
the water cannot be feen at all. This fall is ftrewn with
rocks, and contains fome iflands here and there covered with
pines and white cedars. This was the place where we had
a hard time ; for, not being able to carry our canoes by land
on account of the denfity of the wood, we had to drag them
in the water with ropes, and in drawing mine I came near
lofing my life, as it croffed into one of the eddies, and if I
had not had the good fortune to fall between two rocks the
canoe would have dragged me in, inafmuch as I was unable
to undo quickly enough the rope which was wound around
my hand, and which hurt me feverely and came near cutting
it off. In this danger I cried to God and began to pull my
canoe, which was returned to me by the refluent water, fuch
as occurs in thefe falls. Having thus efcaped I thanked
God, begging Him to preferve us. Later our favage came to
help me, but I was out of danger. It is not ftrange that
I was defirous of preferving my canoe, for if it had been loft
it would have been neceffary to remain, or wait until fome
favages came that way, a poor hope for thofe who have

8 nothing

58

Voyages of

nothing to dine on, and who are not accuftomed to fuch
hardfhip. As for our Frenchmen, they did not have any
better luck, and feveral times came near lofing their lives;
but the Divine Goodnefs preferved us all. During the
remainder of the day we retted, having done enough.

The next day we fell in with fifteen canoes of favages
called Quenongebiny in a river, after we had patted a fmall
lake, four leagues long and two broad. They had been
informed of my coming by thofe who had patted the Falls
of St. Louis, on their way from the war with the Iroquois.
I was very glad to meet them, as were they alto to meet
me, but they were aftonifhed to fee me in this country with
fo few companions, and with only one favage. Accordingly,
after faluting each other after the manner of the country, I
defired them not to go any farther until I had informed
them of my plan. To this they affented, and we encamped
on an ifland.

The next day I explained to them that I was on my way
to their country to vifit them, and fulfil the promife I had
previoufly made them, and that if they had determined to
go to the war it would be very agreeable to me, inafmuch as
I had brought fome companions with this view, at which
they were greatly pleafed ; and having told them that I
wifhed to go farther in order to notify the other tribes, they
wanted to deter me, faying that the way was bad, and that
we had feen nothing up to this point. Wherefore I afked
them to give me one of their number to take charge of our

fecond

,. 4S < y ienon S e ^ ,ln - Laverdi&re makes tion fituated fouth of Allumette Ifland.
mns the lame as the Kinounchepirini Vide Jefuite Relations, Quebec ed.,
of Vimont. It was an Algonquin na- 1640, p 34.

59

Sieur de Champlain.

fecond canoe, and alfo to ferve us as guide, fince our con-
ductors were not acquainted any farther. This they did
willingly, and in return I made them a prefent and gave
them one of our Frenchmen, the leaft indifpenfable, whom I
fent back to the Falls with a leaf of my note-book, on which
for want of paper I made a report of myfelf.

Thus we parted, and continuing our courfe up the river
we found another one, very fair and broad, which comes
from a nation called Ouefcharini? who live north of it, a
diftance of four days’ journey from the mouth. This river
is very pleafant in confequence of the fine iflands it con-
tains, and the fair and open woods with which its fliores are
bordered. The land is very good for tillage.

On the fourth day we paffed near another river coming
from the north, where tribes called Algonquins live. This
river falls into the great river St. Lawrence, three leagues
below the Falls of St. Louis, forming a large ifland of nearly
forty leagues . 48 This river is not broad, but filled with a
countlefs number of falls, very hard to pafs. Sometimes
• thefe

47 Ouefcharini. Thefe people, called
Ouaouechkairini by Vimont, appear to
have dwelt on the ftream now known
as the Riviere de Petite Nation , rifing
in a fyftem of lakes, among which are
Lake Simon, Whitefifh Lake, Long
Lake, and Lake Des Ifles. Vide Jeftiite
Relations , 1640, p. 34. The tribe here
mentioned was fubfequently called the
Little Nation of the Algonquins: hence
the name of the river. Laverdi'ere.

48 This paflage is exceedingly obfcure.
Lnverdi&re fuppofes that part of a fen-
tence was left out by the printer. If fo
it is remarkable that Champlain did not
correct it in his edition of 1632. Laver-

diere thinks the river here fpoken of is
the Gatineau, and that the favages fol-
lowing up this ftream went by a port-
age to the St. Maurice, and pafiing down
reached the St. Lawrence thirty leagues,
and not three , below the Falls of Saint
Louis. The three rivers thus named
inclofe or form an ifland of about the
extent defcribed in the text. This ex-
planation is plauftble. The paflage
amended would read, “ This river ex-
tends near another which falls into the
great river St. Lawrence thirty leagues
below the falls of St. Louis.” We know
of no other way in which the paflage
can be rationally explained.

6o

Voyages of

thefe tribes go by way of this river in order to avoid en-
counters with their enemies, knowing that they will not try
to find them in places fo difficult of accefs.

Where this river has its debouchure is another coming from
the fouth , 49 at the mouth of which is a marvellous fall. For
it defcends a height of twenty or twenty-five fathoms 60 with
fuch impetuofity that it makes an arch nearly four hundred
paces broad. The favages take pleafure in paffing under it,
not wetting themfelves, except from the fpray that is thrown
off. There is an ifland in the middle of the river which, like
all the country round about, is covered with pines and white
cedars. When the favages defire to enter the river they
afcend the mountain, carrying their canoes, and go half a
league by land. The neighboring country is filled with all
forts of game, fo that the favages often make a flop here.
The Iroquois alfo go there fometimes and furprife them
while making the paffage.

We paffed a fall 51 a league from there, which is half a
league broad, and has a defcent of fix or feven fathoms.
There are many little iflands, which are, however, nothing
more than rough and dangerous rocks covered with a poor

fort

49 Rideau, at the mouth of which is
Green Ifland, referred to in the text
below.

60 The fall in the Rideau is thirty-
four feet, according to the Edinburgh
Gazetteer of the World. The eftimate
of Champlain is fo far out of the way
that it feems not unlikely that feet were
intended inftead of fathoms. Vide Vol
I. pp. 301, 302.

61 The Chaudifere Falls, juft above
the prefent city of Ottawa, the greateft

height of which is about forty feet.
“Arrayed in every imaginable variety
of form, in vaft dark maffes, in graceful
cafcades, or in tumbling fpray, they
have been well defcribed as a hundred
rivers ftruggling for a paffage. Not the
leaft interefting feature they prefent is
the Loft Chaudibre, where a large body
of water is quietly fucked down, and
difappears underground.” Vide Canada
by W. H. Smith. Vol. I. p. 120. Alfo
Vol. I. p. 120 of this work.

Sieur de Champlain. 61

%

fort of brufhwood. The water falls in one place with fuch
force upon a rock that it has hollowed out in courfe of time
a large and deep bafin, in which the water has a circular
motion and forms large eddies in the middle, fo that the
favages call it Afticou , which fignifies boiler. This cataract
produces fuch a noife in this bafin that it is heard for more
than two leagues. The favages when paffing here obferve
a ceremony which we fhall fpeak of in its place. We had
much trouble in afcending by rowing againft a ftrong cur-
rent, in order to reach the foot of the fall. Here the favages
took their canoes, my Frenchmen and myfelf our arms, pro-
vifions, and other neceffaries, and we paffed over the rough
rocks for the diftance of about a quarter of a league, the
extent of the fall. Then we embarked, being obliged after-
wards to land a fecond time and go about three hundred
paces through copfe-wood, after which we got into the water
in order to get our canoes over the fharp rocks, the trouble
attending which may be imagined. I took the altitude of
this place, which I found to be in latitude 45 0 38T 3

In the afternoon we entered a lake, 53 five leagues long and
two wide, in which there are very fine iflands covered with
vines, nut-trees, and other excellent kinds of trees. Ten or
twelve leagues above we paffed fome iflands covered with
pines. The land is fandy, and there is found here a root
which dyes a crimfon color, with w'hich the favages paint
their faces, as alfo little gewgaws after their manner. I here
is alfo a mountain range along this river, and the furround-
ing country feems to be very unpromifing. The reft of the
day we paffed on a very pleafant ifiand. qq-, e

62 The latitude of the Chaudifere Falls 53 Chaudiere Lake, which was only

is about 45 0 27'. an expanfion of the River Ottawa.

62

Voyages of

The next day we proceeded on our courfe to a great fall
nearly three leagues broad, in which the water falls a height
of ten or twelve fathoms in a flope, making a marvellous
noife . 54 It is filled with a vaft number of ifiands, covered
with pines and cedars. In order to pafs it we were obliged
to give up our maize or Indian corn, and fome few other
provifions we had, together with our leaft neceffary clothes,
retaining only our arms and lines, to afford us means of
fupport from hunting and fifhing as place and luck might
permit. Thus lightened we paffed, fometimes rowing, fome-
times carrying our canoes and arms by land, the fall, which
is a league and a half long , 50 and in which our favages, who
are indefatigable in this work and accuftomed to endure
fuch hardfhips, aided us greatly.

Continuing our courfe, we paffed two other falls, one by
land, the other with oar and poles flanding up. Then we
enteied a lake , 56 fix or feven leagues long, into which flows
a river coming from the fouth , 57 on which at a diftance of
five days journey from the other river 68 live a people called
Matou-ouefcarini . S9 The lands about the before-mentioned
lake are fandy and covered with pines, which have been
almoft entirely burned down by the favages. There are

fome

of the fall which was more difficult to
pais.

KA T i i >i.

61 Rapide des Chats. jjur

" This probably refers to that part 307.

thP Call Tarfiir'V. a*/-/' 1. . t _

Hurons , par Sagard, Paris, 1632, p.
3 ° 7 -

67 Madawafka River, an affluent of
the Ottawa, uniting with it at Fitz Roy.

Sieur de Champlain. 63

fome iflands, in one of which we refted ourfelves. Here we
faw a number of fine red cypreffes, 60 the firft I had feen in
this country, out of which I made a crofs, which I planted
at one end of the ifland, on an elevated and confpicuous
fpot, with the arms of France, as I had done in other places
where we had flopped. I called this ifland Sainte Croix.

On the 6th we fet out from this ifland of St. Croix, where
the river is a league and a half broad, and having made
eight or ten leagues we paffed a fmall fall by oar, and a
number of iflands of various fizes. Here our favages left
the lacks containing their provifions and their lefs neceffary
articles, in order to be lighter for going overland and avoid-
ing feveral falls which it was neceffary to pafs. There was
a great difpute between our favages and our impoftor, who
affirmed that there was no danger by way of the falls, and
that we ought to go that way. Our favages faid to him,
You are tired of living, and to me, that I ought not to
believe him, and that he did not tell the truth. Accordingly,
having feveral times obferved that he had no knowledge of
the places, I followed the advice of the favages, which was
fortunate for me, for he fought for dangers in order to ruin
me or to difgust me with the undertaking, as he has fince
confeffed, a ftatement of which will be given hereafter. We
croffed accordingly towards the weft the river, which ex-
tended northward. I took the altitude of this place and
found it in latitude 46° 4o'. G1 We had much difficulty in

going

80 Cypres , Red Cedar or Savin, Jutti- the Ottawa neareft to the fyftem of lakes
perus Virginiana. Vide Vol. II. note through which they were to pafs, and
168. where, as ftated in the text, the Ottawa,

01 They were now, perhaps, two miles making an angle, begins to flow direftly
below Portage du Fort, at the point on from the north. The latitude, as here

given,

6 4

Voyages of

going this diftance overland. I, for my part, was loaded only
with three arquebufes, as many oars, my cloak, and fome
fmall articles. I cheered on our men, who were fomewhat
more heavily loaded, but more troubled by the mofquitoes
than by their loads. Thus after paffing four fmall ponds and
having gone a diftance of two and a half leagues, we were
fo wearied that it was impoffible to go farther, not having
eaten for twenty-four hours anything but a little broiled fifli
without feafoning, for we had left our provifions behind, as I
mentioned before. Accordingly we refted on the border of
a pond, which was very pleafant, and made a fire to drive
away the mofquitoes, which annoyed us greatly, whofe per-
fiftency is fo marvellous that one cannot defcribe it. Here
we caft our lines to catch fome fifli.

The next day we paffed this pond, which was perhaps a
league long. Then we went by land three leagues through
a country worfe than we had yet feen, fince the winds had
blown down the pines on top of each other. This was no
flight inconvenience, as it was neceffary to go now over, now

under, thefe trees. In this
leagues long and two wide, 1

given, is even more than ufually incor-
rect, being too high by more than a
degree. The true latitude is about
45 37' ■ Vide Walker and Miles's Atlas
of Dominion of Canada. Note 62 will
explain the caufe of this inexaftnefs.

6 - Mulkrat Lake. On Champlain’s
map of 1632 will be feen laid down a fuc-
ceffion of lakes or ponds, together with
the larger one, now known as Muikrat
Lake, on the borders of which are figured
the dwellings of the favages referred to
in the text. The pond which they palled

way we reached a lake, fix

2 very abundant in fifli, the

neighboring

is the laft in the feries before reaching
Mulkrat Lake. On the direft route
between this pond and the lake, known
as the Mulkrat Portage road, the courfe
undoubtedly traverfed by Champlain,
there was found in 1867, in the townlhip
of Rofs, an altrolabe, an inllrument ufed
in taking latitudes, on which is the date,
1603. It is fuppofed to have been loft
by Champlain on his prefent expedition.
The reafons for this fuppofition have
been ftated in feveral brochures recently
ilfued, one by Mr. O. H. Marfhall of

Buffalo,

Sieur de Champlain. 65

neighboring people doing their fifhing there. Near this lake
is a fettlement of favages, who till the foil and gather har-

Buffalo, entitled Difcovery of an Aflro- plain in 1613, New York, 1879; reprinted
labe Juppofed to have been lojl by Cham- from th & Magazine of American Hif-

tory

9

66

Voyages of

vefts of maize. Their chief is named Nibachis, who came to
vifit us with his followers, aftonifhed that we could have

tory for March of that year. Another,
Champlain' s AJlrolabe lojl on the 7th
of June , 1613, and found in Augujl,
1867, by A. J. RufTell of Ottawa, Mon-
treal, 1879. And a third entitled The
AJlrolabe of Samuel Champlain and
Geoffrey Chaucer, by Henry Scadding,
D.D.,ofToronto, 1880. All of thefe writ-
ers agree in the opinion that the inftru-
ment was probably loft by Champlain
on his expedition up the Ottawa in 1613.
For the argument in extenfo the reader
is referred to the brochures above cited.

Mr. Ruffell, who examined the aftro-
labe thus found with great care and
had it photographed, defcribes it as a
circular plate having a diameter of five
inches and five eighths. “ It is of plate
brafs, very dark with age, one eighth of
an inch thick above, increafing to fix
fixteenths of an inch below, to give it
fteadinefs when fufpended, which ap-
parently was intended to be increafed
by hanging a weight on the little pro-
jecting ring at the bottom of it, in ufing
it on ihip-board. Its fufpending ring
is attached by a double hinge "of the
nature of a univerfal joint. I ts circle is
divided into fingle degrees, graduated
from its perpendicular of fufpenfion.
The double-bladed index, the pivot of
which paffes through the centre of the
aftrolabe, has flits and eyelets in the
projecting fights that are on it."

We give on the preceding page an en-
graving of this aftrolabe from a pho-
tograph, which prefents a fufficiently
accurate outline of the inftrument. The
plate was originally made to illuftrate
Mr. Marfhall’s article in the Magazine
of American Hiftory, and we are in-
debted to the courtefy of the proprietors
of the Magazine, Meffrs. A. S. Barnes
and Company of New York, for its ufe
for our prefent purpofe.

paffed

The aftrolabe, as an inftrument for
taking the altitude of the ftars or the
fun, had long been in ufe. Thomas
Blundevile, who wrote in 1622, fays he
had feen three kinds, and that the aftro-
labe of Stofflerus had then been in ufe a
hundred years. It had been improved
by Gemma Frifius. Mr. Blagrave had
likewife improved upon the laft-men-
tioned, and his inftrument was at that
time in general ufe in England. The
aftrolabe continued to be employed in
Great Britain in taking altitudes for
more than a century fubfequent to this,
certainly till Hadley’s Quadrant was in-
vented, which was firft announced in
1731 -

The aftrolabes which had the broad-
eft difks were more exaft, as they were
projected on a larger fcale, but as they
were eafily jollied by the wind or the
movement of the fhip at fea, they could
with difficulty be employed. But Mr.
Blundevile informs us that “the Span-
iards doe commonly make their aftro-
labes narrow and weighty, which for the
moft part are not much aboue fiue inches
broad, and yet doe weigh at the leaft
foure pound, & to that end the lower
part is made a great deale thicker then
the vpper part towards the ring or
handle.” Vide M. Blvndevile his Ex-
ercifes, London, 1622, pp. 595, 597.
This Spanith inftrument, it will be ob-
ferved, is very fimilar to that found on
the Old Portage road, and the latter may
have been of Spanifh make.

In order to take the latitude in Cham-
plain’s day, at leaft three diftinCt Heps
or precedes were neceflary, and the
following directions might have been
given.

I. Let the aftrolabe be fufpended fo
that it fhall hang plumb. DireCt the index
or diopter to the fun at noon, fo that the

fame

Sieur de Champlain. 67

paffed the falls and bad roads in order to reach them. After
offering us tobacco, according to their cuflom, he began to
addrefs his companions, faying, that we muft have fallen
from the clouds, for he knew not how we could have made
the journey, and that they who lived in the country had
much trouble in traverfing thefe bad ways: and he gave
them to underftand that I accomplifhed all that I fet my mind
upon ; in fhort, that he believed refpeding me all that the
other favages had told him. Aware that we were hungry,
he gave us fome fifli, which we ate, and after our meal I
explained to him, through Thomas, our interpreter, the
pleafure I had in meeting them, that I had come to this
country to affift them in their wars, and that I defired to go
ftill farther to fee fome other chiefs for the fame objeft,
at which they were glad and promifed me affiftance. They
fhowed me their gardens and the fields, where they had
maize. Their foil is fandy, for which reason they devote
themfelves more to hunting than to tillage, unlike the

Ochateguins.

fame ray of light may fhine through
both holes in the two tablets or pinules
on the diopter, and the diopter will point
to the degree of the fun’s meridian alti-
tude indicated on the outer rim of the
adrolabe.

II. Afcertain the exadt degree of the
fun’s declination for that day, by a table
calculated for that purpofe, which ac-
companies the adrolabe.

III. Subtradt the declination, fo
found, if it be northerly, from the me-
ridian altitude; or if the declination be
foutherly, add the declination to the
meridian altitude, and the refult, fub-
tradted from 90°, will give the latitude.

In thefe feveral proceffes of taking
the latitude there are numerous pofd-

bilities of inexadtness. It does not
appear that any corredtion was made
for refradtion of light, or the precelfion
of the equinoxes. But the mod im-
portant fource of inaccuracy was in the
ufe of the adrolabe whofe difk was fo
fmall that its dividons could not be
carried beyond degrees, and confe-
quently minutes were arrived at by dieer
edimation, and ufually when the work
was completed, the error was not lefs
than one fourth or one half of a degree,
and it was often much more.

This accounts fully for the inaccuracies
of Champlain’s latitudes from firft to lad
throughout his entire explorations, as
teded by the very exadt indruments and
tables now in ufe. No better method

of

68

Voyages of

Ochateguins . 63 When they with to make a piece of land
arable, they burn down the trees, which is very eafily done,
as they are all pines, and filled with rofin. The trees having
been burned, they dig up the ground a little, and plant their
maize kernel by kernel , 64 like thofe in Florida. At the time
I was there it was only four fingers high.

CHAPTER IV.

Continuation. — Arrival at the Abode of Tessouat, and his Favorable
Reception of me. — Character of their Cemeteries. — The Savages
promise me Four Canoes for continuing my Journey; which they
however shortly after refuse. — Address of the Savages to dis-
suade me from my Undertaking, in which they represent its
Difficulties. — My Reply to these Objections. — Tessouat accuses
my Guide of Lying, and of not having been where he said he had.
— The latter maintains his Veracity. — I urge them to give me
Canoes. — Several Refusals. — My Guide convicted of Falsehood,
and his Confession.

IBACHIS had two canoes fitted out, to con-
duct me to another chief, named Tejfouat ,®
who lived eight leagues from him, on the bor-
der of a great lake, through which flows the
river which we had left, and which extends
Accordingly we croffed the lake in a weft-north-
wefterly diredtion, a diftance of nearly feven leagues. Land-

of determining the latitude exifted at
that day, and confequently the hiftorian
is warned not to rely upon the latitude
alone as given by the early navigators
and explorers in identifying the exaft
localities which they vifited.

63 Subfequently called Hurons.

ing

64 Vide Vol. I. p. 49; Vol. II. note
219.

C5 It feems not improbable, as fug-
gefted by Laverdi£re, that this was the
lame chief that Champlain met at Ta-
douflac in 1603, then called Befouat.
Vide Vol. I. p. 242.

Sieur de Champlain.

ing there, we went a league towards the northeaft through
a very fine country, where are fmall beaten paths, along
which one can go eafily. Thus we arrived on the fliore of
the lake, 60 where the dwelling of Teffoiiat was. He was
accompanied by a neighboring chieftain, and was greatly
amazed to fee me, faying that he thought I was a dream, and
that he did not believe his eyes. Thence we croffed on to an
ifland, 67 where their cabins are, which are poorly conftrudted
out of the bark of trees. The ifland is covered with oaks,
pines, and elms, and is not fubjedt to inundations, like the
other illands in the lake.

This ifland is ftrongly fituated ; for at its two ends, and
where the river enters the lake, there are troublefome falls,
the roughnefs of which makes the ifland difficult of accefs.
They have accordingly taken up their abode here in order
to avoid the purfuit of their enemies. It is in latitude 47 0 , 68
as alfo the lake, which is twenty leagues long, 69 and three or
four wide. It abounds in fifh ; the hunting, however, is not
efpecially good.

On vifiting the ifland, I obfcrved their cemeteries, and

was

66 They crofled Mufkrat Lake, and
after a portage of a league, by general
eftimation, they reached Lake Allumette.
This lake is only the expanded current
of the river Ottawa on the foil them fide
of Allumette Ifland, which is formed by
the bifurcation of the Ottawa.

67 Allumette Ifland, often called, in
the Relations des jjfuites. Amply the
Ifland. Thefavages in occupation were
in the habit of exacting tribute from the
Ilurons and others, who palled along on
their war excurfions or their journeys
for trade with the French at Montreal.
They bartered their maize with other

tribes for Ikins with which they clothed
themfelves.

68 The true latitude here is about
45 0 47'. On the map of 1632 the lati-
tude correfponds with the llatement in
the text.

09 In his ifliie of 1632 Champlain cor-
rects his ftatement as to the length of
Allumette Ifland, and fays it is ten
leagues long, which is nearly correCb
Vide Quebec ed. p. 868. Of this ifland
Bouchette fays that in length it is about
fifteen miles, and on an average four
miles wide. Britijh Dominions in North
America, London, 1831, Vol. I. p. 187.

70 Voyages of

was ftruck with wonder as I faw fepulchres of a fhape like
fhrines, made of pieces of wood fixed in the ground at a dif-
tance of about three feet from each other, and interfering
at the upper end. On the interfedions above they place a
large piece of wood, and in front another upright piece,
on which is carved roughly, as would be expeded, the
figure of the male or female interred. If it is a man, they
add a fhield, a fword attached to a handle after their manner,
a mace, and bow and arrows. If it is a chief, there is a
plume on his head, and fome other matachia, or embellifh-
ment. If it is a child, they give it a bow and arrow; if a
woman or girl, a boiler, an earthen veffel, a wooden fpoon,
and an oar. The entire fepulchre is fix or feven feet long at
moft, and four wide ; others are fmaller. They are painted
yellow and red, with various ornaments as neatly done as the
carving. The deceafed is buried with his drefs of beaver or
other fkins which he wore when living, and they lay by his
fide all his poffeffions, as hatchets, knives, boilers, and awls,
fo that thefe things may ferve him in the land whither he
goes; for they believe in the immortality of the foul, as
I have elfewhere obferved. Thefe carved fepulchres are
only made for the warriors ; for in refped to others they
add no more than in the cafe of women, who are confidered
a ufelefs clafs, accordingly but little is added in their cafe.

Obferving the poor quality of the foil, I afked them what
pleafure they took in cultivating land fo unpromifing, fince
there was fome much better, which they left barren and
wafte, as at the Falls of St. Louis. They anfwered that they
were forced to do fo in order to dwell in fecurity, and that
the roughnefs of the locality ferved them as a defence againft

their

plj

7i

Sieur de Champlain.

their enemies. But they faid that if I would make a fettle-
ment of French at the Falls of St. Louis, as I had promifed,
they would leave their abode and go and live near us, confi-
dent that their enemies would do them no harm while we
were with them. I told them that we would this year col-
led wood and ftone in order the coming year to build a fort
and cultivate the land; upon hearing which they raifed a
great cry of applaufe. This conference having been fin-
ifhed, I afked all the chiefs and prominent men among
them to affemble the next day on the main land, at the
cabin of Teffouat, who purpofed to celebrate a tabagie in
my honor, adding that I would there tell them my plans.
This they promifed, and fent word to their neighbors to
convene at the appointed place.

The next day all the guefts came, each with his porringer
and wooden fpoon. They feated themfelves without order
or ceremony on the ground in the cabin of Teffouat, who
diftributed to them a kind of broth made of maize crufhed
between two ftones, together with meat and fifh which was
cut into little pieces, the whole being boiled together with-
out fait. They alfo had meat roafted on coals, and fifh
boiled apart, which he alfo diftributed. In refpedt to myfelf,
as I did not wifh any of their chowder, which they prepare
in a very dirty manner, I afked them for fome fifh and meat,
that I might prepare it in my own way, which they gave
me. For drink, we had fine clear water. Teffouat, who
gave the tabagie , entertained us without eating himfelf,
according to their cuftom.

The tabagie being over, the young men, who are not
prefent at the harangues and councils, and who during the

tabagies

72

Voyages of

tabagies remain at the door of the cabins, withdrew, when
all who remained began to fill their pipes, one and another
offering me one. We then fpent a full half-hour in this
occupation, not a word being fpoken, as is their cuftom.

After fmoking amply during fo long a period of filence,
I explained to them, through my interpreter, that the objedt
of my journey was none other than to affure them of my
friendfhip, and of the defire I had to affift them in their wars,
as I had before done ; that I had been prevented from com-
ing the preceding year, as I had promifed them, becaufe the
king had employed me in other wars, but that now he had
ordered me to vifit them and to fulfil my promifes, and
that for this purpofe I had a number of men at the Falls of
St. Louis. I told them that I was making an excurfion in
their territory to obferve the fertility of their foil, their lakes
and rivers, and the fea which they had told me was in their
country; and that I defired to fee a tribe diffant fix days'
journey from them, called the N ebicerini, in order to invite
them alfo to the war, and accordingly I afked them to give
me four canoes with eight favages to guide me to thefe
lands. And fince the Algonquins are not great friends of
the Nebicerini,' 0 they feemed to liften to me with greater
attention.

After I had finifhed my difcourfe, they began again to
fmoke, and to confer among themfelves in a very low voice
refpecting my propofitions. Then Teffoiiat in behalf of all the

reft

10 This tribe was fubfequently known
as the Nipiffings, who dwelt on the bor-
ders of Lake Nipiffing'. They were dif-
tinguilhed for their forceries, under the

cover of which they appear to have prac-
tifed impofitions which naturally enough
rendered other neighboring Algonquin
tribes hoftile to them.

Sieur de Champlain. 73

reft began and faid, that they had always regarded me more
friendly towards them than any Frenchman they had feen ;
that the proofs they had of this in the paft made their con-
fidence eafier for the future : moreover, that I had fhown my-
felf in reality their friend, by encountering fo many rifles in
coming to fee them and invite them to the war, and that
all thefe confiderations obliged them to feel as kindly dif-
pofed towards me as towards their own children. But they
laid that I had the preceding year broken my promife, that
two thoufand favages had gone to the Falls with the ex-
pedition of finding me ready to go to the war, and mak-
ing me prefents, but that they had not found me and were
greatly faddened, fuppofing that I was dead, as fome perfons
had told them. He faid alfo, that the French who were at
the Falls did not want to help them in their wars, that they
had been badly treated by certain ones, fo that they had
refolved among themfelves not to go to the Falls again, and
that this had caufed them, as they did not expeCt to fee
me again, to go alone to the war, and that in fa6t twelve
hundred of them had already gone. And fince the greater
part of their warriors were abfent, they begged me to poft-
pone the expedition to the following year, faying that they
would communicate the matter to all the people of their
country. In regard to the four canoes, which I afked for,
they granted them to me, but with great reluctance, telling
me that they were greatly difpleafed at the idea of fuch an
undertaking, in view of the hardfhips which I would endure;
that the people there were forcerers, that they had caufed the
death of many of their own tribe by charms and poifoning,
on which account they were not their friends : moreover they

faid

74

Voyages of

faid that, as it regards war, I was not to think of them, as
they were little-hearted. With thefe and many other confid-
erations they endeavored to deter me from my purpofe.

But my foie defire on the other hand was to fee this people,
and enter into friendfhip with them, fo that I might vifit
the North Sea. Accordingly, with a view to leffening the
force of their objections, I faid to them, that it was not far
to the country in queftion ; that the bad roads could not be
worfe than thofe I had already paffed ; that their witchcraft
would have no power to harm me, as my God would preferve
me from them ; that I was alfo acquainted with their herbs,
and would therefore beware of eating them ; that I defired to
make the two tribes mutual friends, and that I would to this
end make prefents to the other tribe, being affured that they
would do fomething for me. In view of thefe reafons they
granted me, as I have faid, four canoes, at which I was very
happy, forgetting all part hardfhips in the hope of feeing
this fea, as I fo much defired.

For the remainder of the day, I went out walking in their
gardens, which were filled with fquafhes, beans, and our
peas, which they were beginning to cultivate, when Thomas,
my interpreter, who underftands the language very well,
came to inform me that the favages, after I had left them,
had come to the conclufion, that if I were to undertake this
journey I fhould die and they alfo, and that they could not
furnifh the promifed canoes, as there was no one of them
who would guide me, but that they wifhed me to portpone
the journey until the next year, when they would conduct
me with a good train to protect me from that people, in cafe
they fhould attempt to harm me, as they are evil-difpofed.

This

Sieur de Champlain . 75

This intelligence greatly difturbed me, and I at once went
to them and told them, that up to this day I had regarded
them as men and truthful perfons, but that now they had
fhown themfelves children and liars, and that if they would
not fulfil their promifes, they would fail to fhow me their
friendlhip ; that, however, if they felt it an inconvenience to
give me four canoes they fhould only furnifh two and four
lavages.

They reprefented to me anew the difficulties attending the
journey, the number of the falls, the bad charadter of the
people, and that their reafon for refufing my requeft was
their fear of lofing me.

I replied that I was forry to have them fhow themfelves
to fo flight an extent my friends, and that I fhould never
have believed it; that I had a young man, fhowing them
my impoftor, who had been in their country, and had not
found all thefe difficulties which they reprefented, nor the
people in queftion fo bad as they afferted. Then they be-
gan to look at him, in particular Teffouat the old captain,
with whom he had paffed the winter, and calling him by
name he faid to him in his language : Nicholas, is it true
that you faid you were among the Nebicerini ? It was long
before he fpoke, when he faid to them in their language,
which he fpoke to a certain extent: Yes, I was there.
They immediately looked at him awry, and throwing them-
felves upon him, as if they would eat him up or tear him
in pieces, raifed loud cries, when Teffouat faid to him: You
are a downright liar, you know well that you flept at my
fide every night with my children, where you arofe every
morning ; if you were among the people mentioned, it was

while

76 Voyages of

while fleeping. How could you have been fo bold as to
lead your chief to believe lies, and fo wicked as to be willing
to expofe his life to fo many dangers ? Y ou are a worth-
lefs fellow, and he ought to put you to death more cruelly
than we do our enemies. I am not aftonifhed that he Ihould
fo importune us on the affurance of your words.

I at once told him that he muft reply to thefe people ;
and fince he had been in the regions indicated, that he muft
give me proofs of it, and free me from the fufpenfe in which
he had placed me. But he remained filent and greatly terri-
fied.

I immediately withdrew him from the favages, and con-
jured him to declare the truth of the matter, telling him
that, if he had feen the fea in queftion, I would give him
the reward which I had promifed him, and that, if he had
not feen it, he muft tell me fo without caufing me farther
trouble. Again he affirmed with oaths all he had before
faid, and that he would demonftrate to me the truth of it,
if the favages would give us canoes.

Upon this, Thomas came and informed me, that the
favages of the ifland had fecretly fent a canoe to the Nebi-
cerini, to notify them of my arrival. Thereupon, in order
to profit by the opportunity, I went to the favages to tell
them, that I had dreamed the paft night that they purpofed
to fend a canoe to the Nebicerini without notifying me of
it, at which I was greatly furprifed, fince they knew that I
was defirous of going there. Upon which they replied that
I did them a great wrong in trailing a liar, who wanted
to caufe my death, more than fo many brave chiefs, who
were my friends and who held my life dear. I replied that

my

77

Sieur de Champlain.

my man, meaning our impodor, had been in the aforefaid
country with one of the relatives of Teffouat and had feen
the fea, the wreck and ruins of an Englifh veffel, together
with eighty fcalps which the favages had in their poffeffion,
and a young Englifh boy whom they held as prifoner, and
whom they wifhed to give me as a prefent.

When they heard me fpeak of the fea, veffels, fcalps of
the Englifh, and the young prifoner, they cried out more
than before that he was a liar, and thus they afterwards
called him, as if it were the greated infult they could have
done him, and they all united in faying that he ought to be
put to death, or elfe that he fhould tell with whom he had
gone to the place indicated, and date the lakes, rivers, and
roads, by which he had gone. To this he replied with affur-
ance, that he had forgotten the name of the favage, although
he had dated to me his name more than twenty times, and
even on the previous day. In refpedl to the peculiarities of
the country, he had defcribed them in a paper which he had
handed me. Then I brought forward the map and had
it explained to the favages, who quedioned him in regard
to it. To this he made no reply, but rather manifeded by
his fullen filence his perverfe nature.

As my mind was wavering in uncertainty, I withdrew by
myfelf, and reflected upon the above-mentioned particulars
of the voyage of the Englifh, and how the reports of our liar
were quite in conformity with it, alfo that there was little
probability of this young man’s having invented all that, in
which cafe he would not have been willing to undertake the
journey, but that it was more probable that he had feen thefe
things, and that his ignorance did not permit him to reply to

78

Voyages of

the queftions of the favages. To the above is to be added
the fa< 5 t that, if the report of the Englifh be true, the North
Sea cannot be farther diftant from this region than a hundred
leagues in latitude, for I was in latitude 47 0 and in longitude
296 0 . 71 But it may be that the difficulties attending the
paffage of the falls, the roughnefs of the mountains covered
Avith fnows, is the reafon why this people have no knowledge
of the fea in queftion ; indeed they have always faid that
from the country of the Ochateguins it is a journey of thirty-
five or forty days to the fea, which they fee in three places,
a thing which they have again affured me of this year. But
no one has fpoken to me of this fea on the north, except
this liar, who had given me thereby great pleafure in view of
the fhortnefs of the journey.

Now, when this canoe was ready, I had him fummoned into
the prefence of his companions; and after laying before him
all that had tranfpired, I told him that any further diffimula-
tion was out of the queftion, and that he muft fay whether
he had feen thefe things or not; that I was defirous of im-
proving the opportunity that prefented itfelf; that I had
forgotten the paft; but that, if I went farther, I would have
him hung and ftrangled, which fhould be his foie reward.
After meditating by himfelf, he fell on his knees and alked
my pardon, declaring that all he had faid, both in France and

this

71 The true latitude, as we have ftated,
antea, note 61, is about 45 0 37' ; but on
Champlain’s map it corresponds with the
ftatement in the text, and a hundred
leagues north of where they then were,
as his map is conftructed, would carry
them to the place in the bay where

Iludfon wintered, as ftated by Cham-
plain, and as laid down on his fmall
map included in this volume ; but the
longitude is incorreft, Allumette Iiland
being two or three degrees eaft of longi-
tude 296°, as laid down on Champlain’s
map of 1632.

Sieur de Champlain. 79

this country, in refpedt to the fea in queftion was falfe ; that
he had never feen it, and that he had never gone farther
than the village of Teffoiiat; that he had faid thefe things
in order to return to Canada. Overcome with wrath at
this, I had him removed, being unable to endure him any
longer in my prefence, and giving orders to Thomas to
inquire into the whole matter in detail ; to whom he ftated,
that he did not believe that I would undertake the journey
on account of the dangers, thinking that fome difficulty
would prefent itfelf to prevent me from going on, as in the
cafe of thefe favages, who were not difpofed to lend me
canoes; and accordingly that the journey would be put off
until another year, when he being in France would be re-
warded for his difcovery ; but that, if I would leave him
in this country, he would go until he found the fea in quef-
tion, even if he fhould die in the attempt. Thefe were his
words as reported to me by Thomas, but they did not give
me much fatisfadfion, abounded as I was at the effrontery
and malicioufnefs of this liar : and I cannot imagine how
he could have devifed this impofition, unlefs that he had
heard of the above-mentioned voyage of the Englifh, and in
the hope of fome reward, as he faid, had the temerity to
venture on it.

Shortly after I proceeded to notify the favages, to my
great regret, of the malignity of this liar, dating that he had
confeffed the truth ; at which they were delighted, reproach-
ing me with the little confidence I put in them, who were
chiefs and my friends, and who always fpoke the truth ;
and who faid that this liar ought to be put to death, being
extremely malicious ; and they added, Do you not fee that he

meant

8o

Voyages of

meant to caufe your death. Give him to us, and we promife
you that he lhall not lie any more. And as they all went
after him fhouting, their children alfo fhouting hill more,
I forbade them to do him any harm, diredting them to keep
their children alfo from doing fo, inafmuch as I wilhed to
take him to the Falls to fhow him to the gentlemen there,
to whom he was to bring fome fait water ; and I faid that,
when I arrived there, I would confult as to what fhould be
done with him.

My journey having been in this manner terminated, and
without any hope of feeing the fea in this diredtion, except in
imagination, I felt a regret that I fhould not have employed
my time better, and that I fhould have had to endure the diffi-
culties and hardfhips, which however I was obliged patiently
to fubmit to. If I had gone in another diredtion, according
to the report of the favages, I fhould have made a beginning
in a thing which muft be poftponed to another time. At
prefent my only with being to return, I defired the favages
to go to the Falls of St. Louis, where there were four veffels
loaded with all kinds of merchandife, and where they would
be well treated. This they communicated to all their neigh-
bors. Before fetting out, I made a crofs of white cedar,
which I planted in a prominent place on the border of the
lake, with the arms of France, and I begged the favages to
have the kindnefs to preferve it, as alfo thofe which they
v'ould find along the ways we had paffed ; telling them
that, if they broke them, misfortune would befall them, but
that, if they preferved them, they would not be affaulted by
theii enemies. They promifed to do fo, and faid that I
fhould find them when I came to vifit them again.

CHAPTER V.

Sieur de Champlain. 81

CHAPTER V.

Our Return to the Falls. — False Alarm. — Ceremony at the Chau-

DifeRE Falls. — Confession of our Liar before all the Chief Men.

— Our Return to France.

N the ioth of June I took leave of Teffoiiat, a
good old captain, making him prefents, and
promifing him, if God preferved me in health,
to come the next year, prepared to go to
war. He in turn promifed to affemble a large
number by that time, declaring that I fhould fee nothing but
favages and arms which would pleafe me ; he alfo directed
his fon to go with me for the fake of company. Thus we fet
out with forty canoes, and paffed by way 72 of the river we
had left, which extends northward, and where we went on
fhore in order to crofs the lakes. On the way we met nine
large canoes of the Ouefcharini, with forty flrong and power-
ful men, who had come upon the news they had received ;
we alfo met others, making all together fixty canoes ; and
we overtook twenty others, who had fet out before us, each
heavily laden with merchandife.

We paffed fix or feven falls between the ifland of the
Algonquins 73 and the little fall , 74 where the country was very
unpleafant. I readily realized that, if we had gone in that

diredfion,

72 By the Ottawa, which they had left 78 Allumette Ifland.
a little below Portage du Fort, and not 74 Near Gould’s Landing, below or
by the fame way they had come, through fouth of Portage du Fort. — Vide Chani-
the fyftem of fmall lakes, of which plain's AJlrolabe, by A. J. Ruffell, Mont-
Mufkrat lake is one. Vide Carte de la real, 1879, p. 6.

Now elle France, 1632, Vol. I. p. 304.

82

Voyages of

diredion, we fhould have had much more trouble, and would
with difficulty have fucceeded in getting through: and it
was not without reafon that the favages oppofed our liar, as
his only objed was to caufe my ruin.

Continuing our courfe ten or twelve leagues below the
ifland of the Algonquins, we retted on a very pleafant
ifland, which was covered with vines and nut-trees, and
where we caught tome fine fiffi. About midnight, there
arrived two canoes, which had been fiffiing farther off, and
which reported that they had teen four canoes of their
enemies. At once three canoes were defpatched to recon-
noitre, but they returned without having feen anything.
With this affurance all gave themfelves up to deep, excepting
the women, who refolved to fpend the night in their canoes,
not feeling at eafe on land. An hour before daylight a
favage, having dreamed that the enemy were attacking them,
jumped up and ftarted on a run towards the water, in
order to efcape, fhouting, They are killing me. Thofe be-
longing to his band all awoke dumfounded and, fuppofing
that they were being purfued by their enemies, threw them-
felves into the water, as did alfo one of our Frenchmen,
who fuppofed that they were being overpowered. At this
great noife, the reft of us, who were at a diftance, were at
once awakened, and without making farther inveftigation ran
towards them : but as we faw them here and there in the
water, we were greatly furprifed, not feeing them purfued
by their enemies, nor in a ftate of defence, in cafe of neceffity,
but only ready to facrifice themfelves. After I had inquired
of our Frenchman about the caufe of this excitement, he
told me that a favage had had a dream, and that he with

the

Sieur de Champlain. 83

the reft had thrown themfelves into the water in order to
efcape, fuppoftng that they were being attacked. Accord-
ingly, the ftate of the cafe being afcertained, it all pafled off
in a laugh.

Continuing our way, we came to the Chaudiere Falls,
where the favages went through with the cuftomary ceremony,
which is as follows. After carrying their canoes to the foot
of the Fall, they affemble in one fpot, where one of them
takes up a collection with a wooden plate, into which each
one puts a bit of tobacco. The collection having been made,
the plate is placed in the midft of the troupe, and all dance
about it, finging after their ftyle. Then one of the captains
makes an harangue, fetting forth that for a long time they
have been accuftomed to make this offering, by which means
they are infured protection againft their enemies, that other-
wife misfortune would befall them, as they are convinced by
the evil fpirit; and they live on in this fuperftition, as in many
others, as we have faid in other places. This done, the
maker of the harangue takes the plate, and throws the to-
bacco into the midft of the caldron, whereupon they all
together raife a loud cry. Thefe poor people are fo fuperfti-
tious, that they would not believe it poffible for them to
make a profperous journey without obferving this ceremony
at this place, fince their enemies await them at this portage,
not venturing to go any farther on account of the difficulty
of the journey, whence they fay they furprife them there, as
they have fometimes done.

The next day we arrived at an ifland at the entrance to
a lake, and feven or eight leagues diftant from the great
Falls of St. Louis. Here while repofing at night we had

another

84 Voyages of

another alarm, the favages fuppofing that they had feen the
canoes of their enemies. This led them to make feveral
large fires, which I had them put out, reprefenting to them
the harm which might refult, namely, that inftead of con-
cealing they would difclofe themfelves.

On the 17th of June, we arrived at the Falls of St. Louis,
where I found L’Ange, who had come to meet me in a
canoe to inform me, that Sieur de Maifonneuve of St. Malo
had brought a paffport from the Prince for three veffels. In
order to arrange matters until I fhould fee him, I affembled
all the favages and informed them that I did not with them
to traffic in any merchandife until I had given them per-
miffion, and that I would furnifh them provifions as foon as
we fhould arrive ; which they promifed, faying that they were
my friends. Thus, continuing our courfe, we arrived at the
barques, where we were faluted by fome difcharges of cannon,
at which fome of our favages were delighted, and others
greatly aftoniflred, never having heard fuch mufic, After I
had landed, Maifonneuve came to me with the paffport of
the Prince. As foon as I had feen it, I allowed him and his
men to enjoy the benefits of it like the reft of us ; and I
fent word to the favages that they might trade on the next
day.

After feeing all the chief men and relating the particulars
of my journey and the malice of my liar, at which they were
greatly amazed, I begged them to affemble, in order that in
their prefence, and that of the favages and his companions,
he might make declaration of his malicioufnefs ; which
they gladly did. Being thus affembled, they fummoned him,
and afked him, why he had not fhown me the fea in the

north,

85

Sieur de Champlain .

north, as he had promifed me at his departure. He replied
that he had promifed fomething impoffible for him, fince he
had never feen this fea, and that the defire of making the
journey had led him to fay what he did, alfo that he did not
fuppofe that I would undertake it; and he begged them
to be pleafed to pardon him, as he alfo did me again, con-
feffing that he had greatly offended, and if I would leave
him in the country, he would by his efforts repair the offence,
and fee this fea, and bring back truftworthy intelligence
concerning it the following year; and in view of certain con-
fiderations I pardoned him on this condition.

After relating to them in detail the good treatment I had
received at the abodes of the favages, and how I had been
occupied each day, I inquired what they had done during
my abfence, and what had been the refult of their hunting
excurfions, and they faid they had had fuch fuccefs that they
generally brought home fix flags. Once on St. Barnabas’s
day, Sieur du Parc, having gone hunting with two others,
killed nine. Thefe flags are not at all like ours, and there
are different kinds of them, fome larger, others fmaller, which
refemble clofely our deer . 75 They had alfo a very large

number

75 At that time there were to be found Cervus elaphus, or Canadenfis. This
in Canada at lead; four fpecies of the is the largeft of the known deer except
Cervus Family. the preceding. The average weight is

1. The Moofe, Cervus alces, or dices probably lefs than fix hundred pounds.

A meric anus, ufually called by the ear- 3. The Woodland Caribou, Cervus
lied writers orignal or orignac. Vide tarandus. It is fmaller than the Wapiti.
Vol. I. pp. 264,265. This is the largeft Its range is now moftly in the northern
of all the deer family in this or in any regions of the continent, but fpecimens
other part of the world. The average are ftill found in Nova Scotia and New
weight has been placed at feven hundred Brunfwick. The female is armed with
pounds, while extraordinary fpecimens antlers as well as the male, though they
probably attain twice that weight. are fmaller.

2. The Wapiti, or American Elk, 4. The Common Deer, Cervus Vir-

ginia nus

86

Voyages of

number of pigeons, 76 and alfo fifh, fuch as pike, carp, fturgeon
fhad, barbel, turtles, bafs, and other kinds unknown to us!
on which they dined and fupped every day. They were alfo
all in better condition than myfelf, who was reduced from
work and the anxiety which I had experienced, not having
eaten more than once a day, and that of fifh badly cooked
and half broiled.

On the 2 2d of June, about 8 o’clock in the evening, the
favages founded an alarm becaufe one of them had dreamed
he had feen the Iroquois. In order to content them, all the
men took their arms, and fome were fent to their cabins
to reaffure them, and into the approaches to reconnoitre, fo
that, finding it was a falfe alarm, they were fatisfied with
the firing of fome two hundred mufket and arquebus fhots,
after which arms were laid down, the ordinary guard only
being left. This reaffured them greatly, and they w j ere very
glad to fee the French ready to help them.

After the favages had bartered their articles of merchan-
dife and had refolved to return, I afked them to take with
them two young men, to treat them in a friendly manner,
fhow them the country, and bind themfelves to bring them
back. But they ftrongly objected to this, reprefenting to me
the trouble our liar had given me, and fearing that they
would bring me falfe reports, as he had done. I replied that
they were men of probity and truth, and that if they would
not take them they were not my friends, whereupon they

refolved

gimanus. It has the wideft range of and Deer of America by John Dean
any of the deer family. It is Hill found Caton, LL.D., Bofton, 1877.
in e ^ e fy degree of latitude from Mexico 76 Palombes. The paifenger, or wild
o britilh Columbia. Vide Antelope pigeon, Ectopifles migratorius.

Sieur de Champlain . 87

refolved to do fo. As for our liar, none of the favages
wanted him, notwithftanding my requeft to them to take
him, and we left him to the mercy of God.

Finding that I had no further bufinefs in this country, I
refolved to crofs in the firft veffel that fhould return to
France. Sieur de Maifonneuve, having his ready, offered
me a paffage, which I accepted; and on the 27th of June I
fet out with Sieur L’Ange from the Falls, where we left the
other veffels, which were awaiting the return of the favages
who had gone to the war, and we arrived at Tadouffac on
the 6th of July.

On the 8th of Auguft 77 we were enabled by favorable
weather to fet fail. On the 18th we left Gafpe and Ifle
Percee. On the 28th we were on the Grand Bank, where
the green fifhery is carried on, and where we took as many
fifh as we wanted.

On the 26th of Auguft we arrived at St. Malo, where I
faw the merchants, to whom I reprefented the eafe of form-
ing a good affociation in the future, which they refolved to
do, as thofe of Rouen and La Rochelle had done, after
recognizing the necefiity of the regulations, without which
it is impoffible to hope for any profit from thefe lands. May
God by His grace caufe this undertaking to profper to His
honor and glory, the converfion of thefe poor benighted
ones, and to the welfare and honor of France.

77 Le 8 Aoujl. Laverdiere fuggefts July to the 8th of Auguft for favorable
with much plaufibility that this fhould weather to fail. If he had been de-
read “The 8th of July.” Champlain tained by any other caufe, it would
could hardly have found it neceffary to probably have been deemed of fufficient
remain at Tadouffac from the 6th of gravity to be fpecially mentioned.

VOYAGES

AND

DISCOVERIES IN NEW FRANCE,

From the year 1615 to the end of the year 1618.

BY

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

Captain in ordinary to the King in the Western Sea.

WHERE ARE DESCRIBED

THE MANNERS , CUSTOMS, DRESS, MODE OF WAR-
fuvc, hunting, dunces, festivals, and method of burial of various
savage peoples, with many remarkable experiences of the author
in this country, and an account of the beauty, fertility, and tem-
perature of the same.

PARIS.

Claude Collet, in the Palace, at the gallery of the Prisoners.

M. DC. XIX.

WITH AUTHORITY OF THE KING.

TO THE KING.

IRE,

This is a third volume containing a narrative
of what has tranfpired mojl' worthy of note
during the voyages I have made to New France ,
and its perufal will \ I think , afford your Majefly greater
pleafure than that of thofe preceding , which only defignate
the ports , harbors, filiations, declinations, and other particu-
lars, having more interefl for navigators and failors than for
other perfons. In this narrative you will be able to obferve
more efpecially the manners and mode of life of thefe peoples
both in particular and in general, their wars, ammunition,
method of attack and of defence, their expeditions and retreats
in various circumftances , matters about which thofe interefled
defire information. You will perceive alfo that they are not
favage to fuch an extent that they could not in courfe of time and
through affociation with others become civilized and cultivated.
You will likewife perceive how great hopes we cherifh from
the long and arduous labors we have for the pafi fifteen years
fuftamed, in order to plant in this country the fiandard of

the

9 2

To the King.

the crofs, and to teach the people the knowledge of God and the
glory of His holy name , it being our defre to cultivate a feel-
ing of charity towards His unfortunate creatures , which it
is our duty to praclife more patiently than any other thing
efpecially as there are many who have not entertained fuck
purpofes, but have been influenced only by the defre of gain.
Neverthelefs we may , I fuppofe , believe that thefe are the
means which God makes ufe of for the greater promotion of
the holy defire of others. As the fruits which the trees bear
are from God , the Lord of the foil \ who has planted , watered , ,
and nourifhed them with an efpecial care,fo your Majefty can
be called the legitimate lord of our labors , and the good refult-
ing from them , not only becaufe the land belongs to you , but
alfo becaufe you have protected us againfl fo many perfons ,
whofe only object has been by troubling us to prevent the fuc-
cefs of fo holy a determination , taking from us the power to
trade freely in a part of your country , and f riving to bring
everything into confufon , which would be , in a word , pre-
paring the way for the rum of everything to the injury of
your fate. To this end your fubjecls have employed every
conceivable artifice and all pofjfible means which they thought
could injure us. But all thefe efforts have been thwarted by
your Majefiy , ajfified by your prudent council ’ who have given
us the authority of your name , and fupported us by your de-
crees rendered in our favor. This is an occafion for increafing
in us our long-cherifhed defire to fend communities and col-
onies there, to teach the people the knowledge of God, and
inform them of the glory and triumphs of your Majefiy, fo
that together with the French language they may alfo acquire
a French heart and fpirit, which, next to the fear of God,

will

To the King ; 93

will be infpired with nothing fo ardently as the defire to ferve
you. Should our dejign fucceed ' the glory of it will be due ,
after God \ to your Majefly , who will receive a thoufand bene-
dictions from, Heaven for fo many fouls faved by your infiru-
mentality, and your name will be immortalized for carrying
the glory and fceptre of the French as far to the Occident as
your precurfors have extended it to the Orient , and over the
entire habitable earth. This will augment the quality of
Most Christian belonging to you above all the kings of the
earth , and Jhow that it is as much your due by merit as it is
your own of right , it having been tranfmitted to you by your
predeceffors, who acquired it by their virtues ; for you have
been pleafed , in addition to fo many other important affairs ,
to give your attention to this one ,fo ferioufly neglected hith-
erto, God's fpecial grace referving to your reign the publi-
cation of His gofpel, and the knowledge of His holy name
to fo many tribes who had never heard of it. And fome day
may God s grace lead them , as it does us, to pray to Him
without ceafeng to extend your empire, and to vouchfafe a
thoufand bleffings to your Majefly.

Sire,

Your mofl humble, mofl faithful ,

and mofl obedient fervant and fubjeCt ,

CHAMPLAIN.

■

I

PREFACE.

S in the various affairs of the world each thing
drives for its perfection and the prefervation of
its being, fo on the other hand does man in-
tereft himfelf in the different concerns of others
on fome account, either for the public good, or
to acquire, apart from the common intered, praife and repu-
tation with fome profit. Wherefore many have purfued this
courfe, but as for myfelf I have made choice of the moft
unpleafant and difficult one of the perilous navigation of the
feas; with the purpofe, however, not fo much of gaining
wealth, as the honor and glory of God in behalf of my King
and country, and contributing by my labors fomething ufeful
to the public good. And I make declaration that I have
not been tempted by any other ambition, as can be clearly
perceived, not only by my conduCt in the pad, but alfo by
the narratives of my voyages, made by the command of His
Majedy, in New France, contained in my drd and fecond
books, as may be feen in the fame.

Should God blefs our purpofe, which aims only for His
glory, and fhould any fruit refult from our difcoveries and
arduous labors, I will return thanks to Him, and for Your
Majedy ’s protection and affidance will continue my prayers
for the aggrandizement and prolongation of your reign.

EXTRACT FROM THE LICENSE OF THE KING.

Y favor and licenfe of the King, permiflion is
given to Claude Collet, merchant bookfeller
in our city of Paris, to print, or have printed
by fuch printer as fhall feem good to him, a
book entitled. Voyages and Difcoveries in New
France, from the Year 1615 to the End of the Year 1618.
By Sieur de Champlain , Captain in Ordinary to the King
in the Weflem Sea. All bookfellers and printers of our
kingdom are forbidden to print or have printed, to fell
wholefale or retail, faid book, except with the confent of
faid Collet, for the time and term of fix years, beginning
with the day when faid book is printed, on penalty of confif-
cation of the copies, and a fine of four hundred livres, a half
to go to us and a half to faid petitioner. It is our will,
moreover, that this Licenfe fhould be placed at the com-
mencement or end of faid book. This is our pleafure.

Given at Paris, the 18th day of May, 1619, and of our
reign the tenth.

By the Council,

•3

DE CESCAUD.

VOYAGE

OF

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN TO NEW FRANCE,

MADE IN THE YEAR 1615.

HE drong love, which I have always cherifhed
for the exploration of New France, has made
me defirous of extending more and more my
travels over the country, in order, by means
of its numerous rivers, lakes, and dreams, to
obtain at laft a complete knowledge of it, and alfo to
become acquainted with the inhabitants, with the view of
bringing them to the knowledge of God. To this end I
have toiled condantly for the pad fourteen or dfteen years , 78
yet have been able to advance my dedgns but little, be-
caufe I have not received the afddance which was necef-
fary for the fuccefs of fuch an undertaking. Neverthelefs,

without

,8 Champlain’s firft voyage was made in 1619. It was therefore fully fifteen
in 1603, and this journal was publithed years fince his explorations began.

IOO

Voyages of

without lofing courage, I have not ceafed to pufh on, and
vifit various nations of the favages; and, by affociating
familiarly with them, I have concluded, as well from their
converfation as from the knowledge already attained, that
there is no better way than, difregarding all ftorms and
difficulties, to have patience until His Majefty fhall give
the requifite attention to the matter, and meanwhile, not
only to continue the exploration of the country, but alfo to
learn the language, and form relations and friendfhips with
the leading men of the villages and tribes, in order to lay
the foundations of a permanent edifice, as well for the glory
of God as for the renown of the French.

And His Majefty having transferred and intrufted the
fuperintendence of this work to Monfeigneur the Prince de
Conde, the latter has, by his management, under the author-
ity of His Majefty, fuftained us againft all forts of jealoufies
and obftacles concerted by evil withers. This has, as it were,
animated me and redoubled my courage for the continuation
of my labors in the exploration of New France, and with
increafed effort I have pu fired forward in my undertaking
into the mainland, and farther on than I had previoufly
been, as will be hereafter indicated in the courfe of this
narrative.

But it is appropriate to ftate frrft that, as I had obferved
in my previous journeys, there were in fome places people
permanently fettled, who were fond of the cultivation
of the foil, but who had neither faith nor law, and lived
without God and religion, like brute beafts. In view of
this, I felt convinced that I fliould be committing a grave
offence if I did not take it upon myfelf to devife fome

means

Sieur de Champlain. ioi

means of bringing them to the knowledge of God. To
this end I exerted myfelf to find fome good friars, with
zeal and affiedion for the glory of God, that I might
perfuade them to lend fome one, or go themfelves, with me
to thefe countries, and try to plant there the faith, or at
leafl do what was poffible according to their calling, and
thus to obferve and afcertain whether any good fruit could
be gathered there. But fince to attain this objedt an
expenditure would be required exceeding my means, and
for other reafons, I deferred the matter for a while, in view
of the difficulties there would be in obtaining what was
neceffary and requifite in fuch an enterprife ; and fince,
furthermore, no perfons offered to contribute to it. Never-
thelefs, while continuing my fearch, and communicating my
plan to various perfons, a man of diftindtion chanced to pre-
fent himfelf, whofe intimate acquaintance I enjoyed. 1 his
was Sieur Hoiiel, Secretary of the King and Controller-
general of the fait works at Brouage, a man of devoted
piety, and of great zeal and love for the honor of God and
the extenfion of His religion. 79 He gave me the following
information, which afforded me great pleafure. He faid
that he was acquainted with fome good religious Fathers, of
the order of the Recolledts, in whom he had confidence ;
and that he enjoyed fuch intimacy and confidence with
them that he could eafily induce them to confent to under-
take the voyage ; and that, as to the neceffary means
for fending out three or four friars, there would be no lack

of

,9 Vide Hijloire du Canada, par Sa- is likewife referred to the Memoir of
gard, Trofs ed., pp. 27, 28. The reader Champlain, Vol. I. pp. 122-124.

102

Voyages of

of people of property who would give them what they
needed, offering for his part to affift them to the extent of
his ability ; and, in fad, he wrote in relation to the fubjed
to Father du Verger, 80 who welcomed with joy the under-
taking, and, in accordance with the recommendation of
Sieur Flouel, communicated it to fome of his brethren, who,
burning with charity, offered themfelves freely for this holy
undertaking.

Now he was at that time in Saintonge, whence he fent
two men to Paris with a commiffion, though not with abfo-
lute power, referving the reft to the Nuncio of our Holy
Father the Pope, who was at that time, in 1614, in France. 81
He called upon thefe friars at their houfe in Paris, and was
greatly pleafed with their refolution. We then went all to-
gether to fee the Sieur Nuncio, in order to communicate to
him the commiffion, and entreat him to interpofe his author-
ity in the matter. But he, on the contrary, told us that he
had no power whatever in fuch matters, and that it was to
their General that they were to addrefs themfelves. Not-
withstanding this reply, the Recollects, in confederation of
the difficulty of the mififion, were unwilling to undertake
the journey on the authority of Father du Verger, fearing
that it might not be fufficient, and that the commiffion
might not be valid, on which account the matter was poft-
poned to the following year. Meanwhile they took coun-
fel, and came to a determination, according to which all
arrangements were made for the undertaking, which was

to

60 Bernard du Verger, a man of ex- 81 Robert Ubaldini was nuncio at this
alted virtue. Laver dihe. time. Vide Laverdiere in loco.

Sieur de Champlain. 103

to be carried out in the following fpring ; awaiting which
the two friars returned to their convent at Brouage.

I for my part improved the time in arranging my affairs
in preparation for the voyage.

Some months after the departure of the two friars, the
Reverend Father Chapoiiin, Provincial of the Recoiled
Fathers, a man of great piety, returned to Paris. Sieur
Iloiiel called on him, and narrated what had taken place
refpeding the authority of Father du Verger, and the
million he had given to the Recoiled Fathers. After which
narrative the Provincial Father proceeded to extol the plan,
and to interell himfelf with zeal in it, promifing to promote it
with all his power, and adding that he had not before well
comprehended the fubjed of this miffion ; and it is to be
believed that God infpired him more and more to profecute
the matter. Subfequently he fpoke of it to Monfeigneur the
Prince de Conde, and to all the cardinals and bifhops who
were then affembled at Paris for the Seffion of the Eftates.
All of them approved and commended the plan ; and to fhow
that they were favorably difpofed towards it, they affured
the Sieur Provincial that they would devife among them-
felves and the members of the Court means for raifing a
fmall fund, and that they would colled fome money for
affilting four friars to be chofen, and who were then chofen
for the execution of fo holy a work. And in order to facili-
tate the undertaking, I vifited at the Eftates the cardinals
and bilhops, and urgently reprefented to them the advantage
and ufefulnefs which might one day refult, in order by my
entreaties to move them to give, and caufe others who
might be ftimulated by their example to give, contri-
butions

1 04 Voyages of

butions and prefents, leaving all to their good will and
judgment.

The contributions which were made for the expenfes of
this expedition amounted to nearly fifteen hundred livres
which were put into my hands, and then employed, accord-
ing to the advice and in the prefence of the Fathers, for the
purchafe of what was neceffary, not only for the mainte-
nance of the Fathers who fhould undertake the journey into
New France, but alfo for their clothing, and the attire and
ornaments neceffary for performing divine fervice. The
friars were fent on in advance to Honfleur, where their
embarkation was to take place.

Now the Fathers who were appointed for this holy
enterprife were Father Denis 82 as commiffary, Jean d’01-
beau, 8u Jofeph le Caron, and Pacifique du Pleffis, 84 each of
whom was moved by a holy zeal and ardor to make the
journey, through God’s grace, in order to fee if they might
produce fome good fruit, and plant in thefe regions the
ftandard of Jefus Chrift, determined to live and to die
for His holy name, fhould it be neceffary to do fo and
the occafion require it. Everything having been prepared,
they provided themfelves with church ornaments, and we
with what was neceffary for our voyage.

I left Paris the laft day of February to meet at Rouen
our affociates, and reprefent to them the will of Monfeigneur
the Prince, and alfo his defire that thefe good Fathers

fhould

Denis Jamay. Sagard writes this 84 Pacifique du Pleflis was a lay-
^ss 6 ! brother, although the title of Father is

Jean d Olbeau. Vide Hijloire du given to him by feveral early writers.
Canada ,par Gabriel Sagard, Paris, 1636, Vide citations by Laverdilre in loco ,
Trofs ed., Vol. I. p. 28. Q ue bec ed., Vol. IV. p. 7.

Sieur de Champlain. 105

(hould make the journey, fince he recognized the fa6l that
the affairs of the country could hardly reach any perfection
or advancement, if God fhould not firft of all be ferved ; with
which our affociates were highly pleafed, promifing to affift
the Fathers to the extent of their ability, and provide them
with the fupport they might need.

The Fathers arrived at Rouen the twentieth of March
following, where we flayed fome time. Thence we went to
Honfleur to embark, where we alfo flayed fome days, waiting
for our veffel to be got ready, and loaded with the necef-
faries for fo long a voyage. Meanwhile preparations were
made in matters of confcience, fo that each one of us might
examine himfelf, and cleanfe himfelf from his fins by peni-
tence and confeffion, in order to celebrate the facrament
and attain a flate of grace, fo that, being thereby freer in
confcience, we might, under the guidance of God, expofe
ourfelves to the mercy of the waves of the great and
perilous fea.

This done, we embarked on the veffel of the affociation,
which was of three hundred and fifty tons burden, and was
called the Saint Etienne, commanded by Sieur de Pont
Grave. We departed from Honfleur on the twenty-fourth
day of Auguft, 85 in the above-mentioned year, and fet fail
with a very favorable wind. We continued on our voyage
without encountering ice or other dangers, through the
mercy of God, and in a fhort time arrived off the place
called Tadouffac, on the twenty-fifth day of May, when we

rendered

86 Read April 24. It is obvious from Sagard fays le 24 cT Auril. Vide Hif-
the context that it could not be Auguft. toire du Canada, Trofs ed., Vol. I. p. 36.

14

io6

Voyages of

rendered thanks to God for having conducted us fo favor-
ably to the harbor of our deftination.

Then we began to fet men at work to fit up our barques
in order to go to Quebec, the place of our abode, and to the
great Falls of Saint Louis, the rendezvous of the favages,
who come there to traffic.

The barques having been fitted up, we went on board
with the Fathers, one of whom, named Father Jofeph , 86 de-
fired, without flopping or making any flay at Quebec, to go
diredtly to the great Falls, where he faw all the favages and
their mode of life. This induced him to go and fpend the
winter in their country and that of other tribes who have a
fixed abode, not only in order to learn their language, but alfo
to fee what the profpect was of their converfion to Chriftian-
ity. This refolution having been formed, he returned to Que-
bec the twentieth day of June 8 ' for fome church ornaments
and other neceffaries. Meanwhile I had flayed at Quebec in
order to arrange matters relating to our habitation, as the
lodgings of the Fathers, church ornaments, the conftrudtion
of a chapel for the celebration of the mafs, as alfo the em-
ployment of perfons for clearing up lands. I embarked for
the Falls together with Father Denis , 88 who had arrived the
fame day from Tadouffac with Sieur de Pont Grave.

As to the other friars, viz., Fathers Jean and Pacifique , 89
they flayed at Quebec in order to fit up their chapel and
ai range their lodgings. They were greatly pleafed at feeing
the place fo different from what they had imagined, which
increafed their zeal.

We

Caron.

87 Vide Laverdiere in loco.

86 The Recolleft Father Jofeph le

88 Father Denis Jamay.

89 Jean d’Olbeau and Pacifique du
Pleffis.

Sieur de Champlain . 107

We arrived at the Rivihre des Prairies, five leagues below
the Falls of Saint Louis, whither the favages had come down.
I will not attempt to fpeak of the pleafure which our
Fathers experienced at feeing, not only fo long and large a
river, filled with many fine iflands and bordered by a region
apparently fo fertile, but alfo a great number of ftrong and
robuft men, with natures not fo favage as their manners,
nor as they acknowledged they had conceived them to be,
and very different from what they had been given to under-
ftand, owing to their lack of cultivation. I will not enter
into a defcription of them, but refer the reader to what I
have faid about them in my preceding books, printed in
the year 1614. 90

To continue my narrative : We met Father Jofeph, who
was returning to Quebec in order to make preparations,
and take what he needed for wintering in their country.
This I did not think advifable at this feafon, but coun-
felled him rather to fpend the winter at our fettlement as
being more for his comfort, and undertake the journey
when fpring came or at leafl in fummer, offering to accom-
pany him, and adding that by doing fo he would not fail
to fee what he might have feen by going, and that by
returning and fpending the winter at Quebec he would
have the fociety of his brothers and others who remained
at the fettlement, by which he would be more profited
than by flaying alone among thefe people, with whom he
could not, in my opinion, have much fatisfadlion. Never-

thelefs,

®° This refers to the volume bearing date 1613, but which may not have been
actually iflued from the prefs till 1614.

108 Voyages of

thelefs, in fpite of all that could be faid to him and all
reprefentations, he would not change his purpofe, being
urged by a godly zeal and love for this people, and hoping
to make known to them their falvation.

His motive in undertaking this enterprife, as he ftated to
us, was that he thought it was neceffary for him to go there
not only in order to become better acquainted with the
charadteriftics of the people, but alfo to learn more eafily
their language. In regard to the difficulties which it was
reprefented to him that he would have to encounter in his
intercourfe with them, he felt affured that he could bear and
overcome them, and that he could adapt himfelf very well
and cheerfully to the manner of living and the inconveni-
ences he would find, through the grace of God, of whofe
goodnefs and help he felt clearly affured, being convinced
that, fince he went on His fervice, and fince it was for the
glory of His name and the preaching of His holy gofpel
that he undertook freely this journey, He would never
abandon him in his undertaking. And in regard to tempo-
ral provifions very little was needed to fatisfy a man who
demands nothing but perpetual poverty, and who feeks for
nothing but heaven, not only for himfelf but alfo for his
brethren, it not being confident with his rule of life to have
any other ambition than the glory of God, and it being his
purpofe to endure to this end all the hardfhips, fufferings,
and labors which might offer.

Seeing him impelled by fo holy a zeal and fo ardent a
charity, I was unwilling to try any more to reftrain him.
Thus he fet out with the purpofe of being the firft to an-
nounce through His holy favor to this people the name

of

Sieur de Champlain. 109

of God, having the great fatisfaction that an opportunity
prefented itfelf for fuffering fomething for the name and
glory of our Saviour Jefus Chrift.

As foon as I had arrived at the Falls, I vifited the people,
who were very defirous of feeing us and delighted at our
return. They hoped that we would furnifh them fome
of our number to affift them in their wars againft our
enemies, reprefenting to us that they could with difficulty
come to us if we ffiould not affift them; for the Iroquois,
they faid, their old enemies, were always on the road
obftrudting their paffage. Moreover I had conftantly prom-
ifed to affift them in their wars, as they gave us to under-
ftand by their interpreter. Whereupon Sieur Pont Grave
and myfelf concluded that it was very neceffary to affift
them, not only in order to put them the more under obliga-
tions to love us, but alfo to facilitate my undertakings and
explorations which, as it feemed, could only be accomplifhed
by their help, and alfo as this would be a preparatory ftep to
their converfion to Chriftianity . 91 Therefore I refolved to
go and explore their country and affift them in their wars, in
order to oblige them to fhow me what they had fo many
times promifed to do.

We accordingly caufed them all to affemble together, that
we might communicate to them our intention. When they
had heard it, they promifed to furnifh us two thoufand five
hundred and fifty men of war, who would do wonders, with
the underftanding that I with the fame end in view ffiould

furnifh

s * Our views of the war policy of Champlain are dated at fome length in
Vol. I. pp. 189-193.

I IO

Voyages of

furnifh as many men as poffible. This I promifed to do be-
ing very glad to fee them decide fo well. Then I proceeded
to make known to them the methods to be adopted for fight-
mg, in which they took efpecial pleafure, manifefting a strong
hope of vidtory. Everything having been decided upon, we
feparated with the intention of returning for the execution
of our undertaking. But before entering upon this journey
which would require not lefs than three or four months, it
feemed defirable that I fliould go to our fettlement to make
the neceffary arrangements there for my abfence.

On the day of following I fet out on my

return to the Riviere des Prairies. 92 While there with two
canoes of favages I met Father Jofeph, who was returning
from our fettlement with fome church ornaments for cele-
brating the holy facrifice of the mafs, which was chanted on
the border of the river with all devotion by the Reverend
Fathers Denis and Jofeph, in prefence of all the people, who
weie amazed at feeing the ceremonies obferved and the
ornaments which feemed to them fo handfome. It was
fomething which they had never before feen, for these Fa-
thers were the firfl who celebrated here the holy mafs.

To return and continue the narrative of my journey: I
arrived at Quebec on the 26th, where I found the Fathers
Jean and Pacifique in good health. They on their part

ld tlieir dut y at that pJace in getting all things ready.

1 hey celebrated the holy mafs, which had never been faid

tieie before, nor had there ever been any prieft in this
region.

" Laverdiere thinks it probable th;
Champlain left the Falls of St. Louis c
the 23d of June, and that the Holy Ma

Having

was celebrated on the Riviere des
Prairies on the 24th, the feftival of St.
John the Baptift.

Sieur de Champlain. 1 1 1

Having arranged all matters at Quebec, I took with me
two men and returned to the Riviere des Prairies, in order
to go with the favages. I left Quebec on the fourth day of
July, and on the eighth of the month while en route I met
Sieur du Pont Grave and Father Denis, who were returning
to Quebec, and who told me that the favages had departed
greatly difappointed at my not going with them ; and that
many of them declared that we were dead or had been taken
by the Iroquois, fince I was to be gone only four or five days,
but had been gone ten. This made them and even our
own Frenchmen give up hope, fo much did they long to fee
us again. They told me that Father Jofeph had departed
with twelve Frenchmen, who had been furni fired to affift the
favages. This intelligence troubled me fomewhat; fince, if I
had been there, I fhould have arranged many things for the
journey, which I could not now do. I was troubled not
only on account of the fmall number of men, but alfo
becaufe there were only four or five who were acquainted
with the handling of arms, while in fuch an expedition the
belt are not too good in this particular. All this however
did not caufe me to lofe courage at all for going on with the
expedition, on account of the defire I had of continuing my
explorations. I feparated accordingly from Sieurs du Pont
Grave and Father Denis, determined to go on in the two
canoes which I had, and follow after the favages, having
provided myfelf with what I needed.

On the 9th of the month I embarked with two others,
namely, one of our interpreters 93 and my man, accompanied

b y

TV* ', n . t f r P reter was undoubtedly policy of Champlain to fend fuitable
lenne Brule. It was a clearly defined young men among the favages, particu-
larly

I 12

Voyages of

by ten favages in the two canoes, thefe being all they could
carry, as they were heavily loaded and encumbered with
clothes, which prevented me from taking more men.

We continued our voyage up the River St. Lawrence fome
fix leagues, and then went by the Riviere des Prairies,
which difcharges into that river. Leaving on the left the
Falls of St. Louis, which are five or fix leagues higher up,
and paffing feveral fmall falls on this river, we entered a lake, 94
after paffing which we entered the river where I had been
before, which leads to the Algonquins, 96 a diftance of eighty-
nine leagues 96 from the Falls of St. Louis. Of this river I
have made an ample defcription, with an account of my
explorations, in my preceding book, printed in 1614. 97 For
this reafon I fhall not fpeak of it in this narrative, but pafs
on diredfly to the lake of the Algonquins. 98 Here we en-
tered a river 99 which flows into this lake, up which we went
fome thirty-five leagues, paffing a large number of falls both
by land and water, the country being far from attractive, and
covered with pines, birches, and fome oaks, being alfo very
rocky, and in many places somewhat hilly. Moreover it was
very barren and fterile, being but thinly inhabited by certain
Algonquin favages, called Otaguottouemin , 100 who dwell in

the

larly to learn their language, and fub-
fequently to aft as interpreters. Brule
is fuppofed to have been of this clafs.

04 The Lake of Two Mountains.

The River Ottawa, which Cham-
plain had explored in 1613, as far as
Allumet Ifland, where a tribe of the
Algonquins refided, called later ICiche-
fipirini. Vide Relation des Jlfuites,
1640, p. 34.

06 This is an over-eftimate.

07 Champlain here again, Vide note

90, refers to the ilTue bearing date 1613.
It is not unlikely that while it bears the
imprint of 1613. it did not aftually iffue
from the prefs till 1614.

98 The lake or expanfion of the Ottawa
on the fouthern fide of Allumet Uland
was called the lake of the Algonquins,
as Allumet Ifland was oftentimes called
the Ifland of the Algonquins.

00 The River Ottawa,
wo p£re Vimont calls this tribe Kota-
koutouenii. Relation des Jifuites , 1640,

P- 34'

Sieur de Champlain. 1 1 3

the country, and live by hunting and the fifh they catch in
the rivers, ponds, and lakes, with which the region is well
provided. It fcems indeed that God has been pleafed to
give to thefe forbidding and defert lands fome things in
their feafon for the refrefhment of man and the inhabitants
of thefe places. For I affure you that there are along the
rivers many ftrawberries, alfo a marvellous quantity of blue-
berries, 101 a little fruit very good to eat, and other fmall
fruits. The people here dry thefe fruits for the winter, as
we do plums in France for Lent. We left this river, which
comes from the north, 102 and by which the favages go to the
Saguenay to barter their furs for tobacco. This place is
fituated in latitude 46°, and is very pleafant, but otherwife
of little account. 103

Continuing our journey by land, after leaving the river of
the Algonquins, we paffed feveral lakes 104 where the favages
carry their canoes, and entered the lake of the Nipiffings, 105
in latitude 46° 15', on the twenty-fixth day of the month,

having

P 34- Pfere Rogueneau gives Outaouko- What is known as its eaft branch rifes
touemiouek , and remarks that their lan- 150 miles north of the city of Ottawa,
guage is a mixture of Algonquin and Extending towards the weft in a winding
Montagnais. Vide Relation des yefuites, courfa for the diftance of about 300
•f>5pi P 4 34 j alfo Laverdilre in loco. miles, it turns towards the foutheaft,

1 Blues, blueberries. The Canada and a few miles before it joins the Mat-
blueberry, V acctmum Canadenfe. Under tawan its courfe is direfilly fouth. From
the term blues feveral varieties may have its northeaftern fource by a fhort por-
been included. Charlevoix describes tage is reached the river Chomouchouan,
and figures this fruit under the name an affluent of Lake St. John and the
Bluet dit Canada. Vide Defcription des Saguenay.

Plantes Principales de V A mirique Sep- 103 Mattawa is 197 miles from Ottawa.

tentnonale, in Hijloire de la Nouvelle We have no means of giving the latitude
trance , Paris, 1744, Tom. IV. pp. 371, with entire accuracy, but it is about
37z ; also Vol. I. p. 303, note 75, of this 46° 20'.

w °j'k- 104 Lac du Talon and Lac la Tortue.

02 At its junfilion with the Mattawan, 105 Nipiffings, or Nipiffirini. Cham-
the Ottawa’s courfe is from the north, plain writes Nipifierinii.

15

1 14 Voyages of

having gone by land and the lakes twenty-five leagues, or
thereabouts . 106 We then arrived at the cabins of the rav-
ages, with whom we flayed two days. There was a large
number of them, who gave us a very welcome reception.
They are a people who cultivate the land but little. A
fhows the drefs of thefe people as they go to war ; B that of
the women, which differs in no wife from that of the Mon-
tagnais and the great people of the Algonquins, extending
far into the interior . 107

During the time that I was with them the chief of this
tribe and their molt prominent men entertained us with
many banquets according to their cuflom, and took the
trouble to go fifhing and hunting with me, in order to treat
me with the greateft courtefy poffible. Thefe people are
very numerous, there being from feven to eight hundred
fouls, who live in general near the lake. This contains a
large number of very pleafant iflands, among others one
more than fix leagues long, with three or four fine ponds
and a number of fine meadows ; it is bordered by very fine
woods, that contain an abundance of game, which fre-
quent the little ponds, where the favages alfo catch fifli.
The northern fide of the lake is very pleafant, with fine
meadows for the grazing of cattle, and many little ftreams,
difcharging into the lake.

They were fifhing at that time in a lake very abundant in
various kinds of fifli, among others one a foot long that was

very

106 On the 26th of July. The diltance lated miles, it would be a not very incor-
Irom the junftion of the Ottawa and reft eftimate.

the Mattawan to Lake Nipiffing is about 107 Vide the reprefentations here re-
thirty-two miles. If lieues were tranf- ferred to.

Sieur de Champlain. 1 1 5

very good. There are alfo other kinds which the favages
catch for the purpofe of drying and ftoring away. The lake
is fome eight leagues broad and twenty-five long , 108 into
which a river 109 flows from the north weft, along which they
go to barter the merchandife, which we give them in ex-
change for their peltry, with thofe who live on it, and who
fupport themfelves by hunting and fifliing, their country con-
taining great quantities of animals, birds, and fifh . 110

After retting two days with the chief of the Nipiffings
we re-embarked in our canoes, and entered a river, by which
this lake difcharges itfelf . 111 We proceeded down it fome
thirty-five leagues, and defcended feveral little falls by land
and by water, until we reached Lake Attigouautan.. All
this region is ftill more unattractive than the preceding,
for I faw along this river only ten acres of arable land, the
reft being rocky and very hilly. It is true that near Lake
Attigouautan we found fome Indian corn, but only in fmall
quantity. Here our favages proceeded to gather fome
fquafhes, which were acceptable to us, for our provifions
began to give out in confequence of the bad management of
the favages, who ate fo heartily at the beginning that towards
the end very little was left, although we had only one meal
a day. But, as I have mentioned before, we did not lack for
blueberries 112 and ftrawberries ; otherwife we fhould have
been in danger of being reduced to ftraits.

We met three hundred men of a tribe we named Cheveux

Releves,

108 Lake Nipiffing, whofe dimenfions Outimagami, Oicachegami, Mitchita-

are over-ftated. mou, Outurbi, Kiristinon. Vide Rela-

109 Sturgeon River. tion des Jefuites. 1640. p. 34.

110 P&re Vimont gives the names of 111 French River.

thefe tribes as follows, — Timifcimi , 113 Blues. Vide ant 'ea, note 101.

1 1 6 Voyages of

Releves , 113 fince their hair is very high and carefully arranged,
and better dreffed beyond all companion than that of our
courtiers, in fpite of their irons and refinements. This gives
them a handfome appearance. They have no breeches,
and their bodies are very much pinked in divifions of vari-
ous fhapes. They paint their faces in various colors, have
their noftrils pierced, and their ears adorned with beads.
When they go out of their houfes they carry a club. I
vifited them, became fomewhat acquainted, and formed a
friendfhip with them. I gave a hatchet to their chief, who
was as much pleafed and delighted with it as if I had given
him fome rich prefent. Entering into converfation with
him, I inquired in regard to the extent of his country, which
he pictured to me with coal on the bark of a tree. He gave
me to underftand that he had come into this place for
drying the fruit called blues™ to ferve for manna in winter,
and when they can find nothing elfe. A and C fhow the
manner in which they arm themfelves when they go to war.
They have as arms only the bow and arrow, made in the
manner you fee depidted, and which they regularly carry;
alfo a round fhield of dreffed leather 115 made from an animal
like the buffalo . 116

The next day we feparated, and continued our courfe
along the fhore of the lake of the Attigouautan , 117 which

contains

113 This fignificant name is given with
reference to their mode of dreffing their
hair.

114 Blueberries, Vaccinium Canadenfe.

115 De cuir bcullu, for cuir bouilli,
literally “ boiled leather.”

116 The fhields of the favages of this

region may have been made of the hide
of the buffalo, although the range of this
animal was far to the northweft of them.
Champlain faw undoubtedly among the
Hurons (kins of the buffalo. Vide postea,
note 180.

117 Lake Huron is here referred to.

Sieur de Champlain. \ \ j

contains a large number of iflands. We went fome forty-
five leagues, all the time along the fhore of the lake. It is
very large, nearly four hundred leagues long from eaft to
weft, and fifty leagues broad, and in view of its great extent
I have named it the Mer Douce™ It is very abundant in
various forts of very good fifh, both thofe which we have and
thofe we do not, but efpecially in trout, which are enor-
moufly large, fome of which I faw as long as four feet and
a half, the leaft being two feet and a half. There are alfo
pike of like fize, and a certain kind of fturgeon, a very large
fifh and of remarkable excellence. The country bordering
this lake is partly hilly, as on the north fide, and partly flat,
inhabited by favages, and thinly covered with wood, includ-
ing oaks. After croffing a bay, which forms one of the
extremities of the lake , 119 we went fome feven leagues until
we arrived in the country of the Attigouautan at a village
called Otouacha , on the firft day of Auguft. Here we found
a great change in the country. It was here very fine, the
largeft part being cleared up, and many hills and feveral riv-
ers rendering the region agreeable. I went to fee their Indian
corn, which was at that time far advanced for the feafon.

118 The greateft length of Lake Huron
on a curvilinear line, between the dif-
charge of St. Mary’s Strait and the out-
let, is about 240 miles; its length due
north and fouth is 186 miles, and its ex-
treme breadth about 220 miles. Bou-
chette.

119 Coafting along the eaftern fhore of
the Georgian Bay, when they arrived at
Matchedafh Bay they crolted it in a
fouthwefterly courfe and entered the
country of the Attigouautans, or, as they
are fometimes called, the Attignaouen-
tans. Relation des Jefuites, 1640, p. 78.

Thefe

They were a principal tribe of the
Hurons, living within the limits of the
prefent county of Simcoe. It is to be
regretted that the Jefuit Fathers did
not accompany their relations with local
maps by which we could fix, at leaft
approximately, the Indian towns which
they vifited, and with which they were
fo familiar. For a defcription of the
Hurons and of their country, the origin
of the name and other interefting par-
ticulars, vide Pere Hierofme Lalemant. ,
Relation des Jefuites, 1639, Quebec ed.
p. 50.

1 18

Voyages of

Thefe localities feemed to me very pleafant, in compan-
ion with fo difagreeable a region as that from which we had
come. The next day I went to another village, called Car-
maron, a league diftant from this, where they received us in
a very friendly manner, making for us a banquet with their
bread, fquafhes, and fifih. As to meat, that is very fcarce
there. The chief of this village earneftly begged me to flay,
to which I could not confent, but returned to our village,
where on the next night but one, as' I went out of the cabin
to efcape the fleas, of which there were large numbers and
by which we were tormented, a girl of little modefty came
boldly to me and offered to keep me company, for which
I thanked her, fending her away with gentle remonftrances,
and fpent the night with fome favages.

The next day I departed from this village to go to an-
other, called Touaguainchain , and to another, called Teque-
nonquiaye , in which we were received in a very friendly
manner by the inhabitants, who fhowed us the belt cheer
they could with their Indian corn ferved in various ftyles.
This country is very fine and fertile, and travelling through
it is very pleafant.

Thence I had them guide me to Carhagouha, which was
fortified by a triple palifade of wood thirty-five feet high for
its defence and protection. In this village Father Jofeph
was flaying, whom we faw and were very glad to find well.
He on his part was no lefs glad, and was expeding nothing
fo little as to fee me in this country. On the twelfth day of
Auguft the Recoiled Father celebrated the holy mafs, and
a crofs was planted near a fmall houfe apart from the village,
which the favages built while I was flaying there, awaiting

Sieur de Champlain.

1 19

the arrival of our men and their preparation to go to the
war, in which they had been for a long time engaged.

Finding that they were fo flow in affembling their army,
and that I fliould have time to vifit their country, I refolved
to go by fhort days’ journeys from village to village as far as
Cahiague, where the rendezvous of the entire army was to
be, and which was fourteen leagues diftant from Carhagouha,
from which village I fet out on the fourteenth of Auguft
with ten of my companions. I vifited five of the more im-
portant villages, which were enclofed with palifades of wood,
and reached Cahiague, the principal village of the country,
where there were two hundred large cabins and where all
the men of war were to affemble. Now in all thefe villages
they received us very courteoufly w T ith their Ample welcome.
All the country where I went contains fome twenty to
thirty leagues, is very fine, and fituated in latitude 44 0 30'.
It is very extenfively cleared up. They plant in it a great
quantity of Indian corn, which grows there finely. They
plant likewife fquafhes, 120 and fun-flowers, 121 from the feed of
which they make oil, with which they anoint the head. The
region is extenfively traverfed with brooks, difcharging into
the lake. There are many very good vines 122 and plums,

which

120 Sitroiiilles for citroiiilles. Vic
Vol. II. p. 64, note 128.

1-1 Herbe aufoleil. The funflower (
Northeaft America, Helianthus mult
florus. This fpecies is found froi
Quebec to the Satkatchewan, atributai
Winnipeg. Vide Chronologic!
Hijlory of Plants , by Charles Pickerim
M.D., Boflon, 1879, P- 9>4- Charli
voix, m the defcription of his journe
through Canada in 1720, fays: “ TI

Soleil is a plant very common in the
fields of the favages, and which grows
feven or eight feet high. Its flower,
which is very large, is in the fhape of
the marigold, and the feed grows in the
fame manner. The favages, by boiling
it, draw out an oil, with which they
greafe their hair.” Letters to the Dutchefs
of Lefdiguieres, London, 1763, p. 95.

122 Vignes. Probably the froft grape,
Vitis cor difolia.

I 20

which are excellent , 123 rafpberries , 121 itrawberries , 125 little
wild apples , 126 nuts , 127 and a kind of fruit of the form and
color of fmall lemons, with a fimilar tafte, but having an
interior which is very good and almoft like that of figs.
The plant which bears this fruit is two and a half feet
high, with but three or four leaves at moft, which are
of the fhape of thofe of the fig-tree, and each plant bears
but two pieces of fruit There are many of thefe plants
in various places, the fruit being very good and favory. m
Oaks, elms, and beeches 129 are numerous here, as alfo forefts
of fir, the regular retreat of partridges 130 and hares . 131 There
are alfo quantities of fmall cherries 132 and black cherries , 133
and the fame varieties of wood that we have in our forefts in
France, The foil feems to me indeed a little landy, yet it is

for

i2s Prunes. The Canada plum, Prunus
A mericana.

124 Framboifes. The wild red rafp-
berry, Rubus Jtrigofus.

125 Fraifes. The wild llrawberry,
Fragaria Virginiana. Vide Pickering
Chro. Hist. Plants , p. 771.

126 Petites pomines fauuages. Prob-
ably the American crab-apple, Pyrus
coronaria.

127 Noix. This may include the but-
ternut and fome varieties of the walnut.
Vide Vol. I. p. 264.

128 Doubtlefs the May-apple, Podo-
phyllum peltatum. In the wilds of
Simcoe this fruit may have feemed toler-
able from the abfence of others more
defirable. Gray fays, “It is flightly
acid, mawkilh, eaten by pigs and boys.”
Cf. Florula Bojlonienfis , by Jacob Bige-
low, M.D. Bofton, 1824, pp. 215, 216.

129 Les Chefnes , ormeaux , hejlres.

For oaks fee Vol. I. p. 264. Elms,
plainly the white elm, Ulmus Ameri-

cana, so called in contradiftindlion to
the red or flippery elm, Ulmus fulva.
The favages fometimes ufed the bark of
the flippery elm in the conftrudlion of
their canoes when the white birch could
not be obtained. Vide Charlevoix? s
Letters , 1763, p. 94. For the beech, fee
Vol. I. p. 264.

130 p erc irix. Canada Groufe, Tctrao
Canadenfis , fometimes called the Spruce
Partridge, differing from the partridge
of New England, which is the Ruffed
Groufe, Bonafa umbellus. This latter
fpecies is, however, found likewife in
Canada.

isi Lapins. The American hare,
I.cpus A mericanus.

132 Cerifes petites. Reference is evi-
dently here made to the wild red cherry,
Prunus Pennfylvanica, which is the
fmalleft of all 'the native fpecies. Cf.
Vol. I. p. 264.

133 Merifes. The wild black cherry,
Prunus ferotina.

Sieur de Champlain . 12 1

for all that good for their kind of cereal. The fmall tradt
of country which I vifited is thickly fettled with a countlefs
number of human beings, not to fpeak of the other diftri&s
where I did not go, and which, according to general report,
are as thickly fettled or more fo than thofe mentioned above.
I reflected what a great misfortune it is that fo many poor
creatures live and die without the knowledge of God, and
even without any religion or law eftablifhed among them,
whether divine, political, or civil ; for they neither worfhip,
nor pray to any objedt, at leaft fo far as I could perceive
from their converfation. But they have, however, fome fort
of ceremony, which I fliall defcribe in its proper place, in
regard to the fick, or in order to afcertain what is to happen
to them, and even in regard to the dead. Thefe, however,
are the works of certain perfons among them, who want to
be confidentially confulted in fuch matters, as was the cafe
among the ancient pagans, who allowed themfelves to be
carried away by the pcrfuafions of magicians and diviners.
Yet the greater part of the people do not believe at all in
what these charlatans do and fay. They are very generous
to one another in regard to provifions, but otherwife very
avaricious. They do not give in return. They are clothed
with deer and beaver {kins, which they obtain from the Al-
gonquins and Nipiffings in exchange for Indian corn and
meal.

On the 17th of Auguft I arrived at Cahiague, where I
was received with great joy and gladnefs by all the favages
of the country, who had abandoned their undertaking, in the
belief that they would fee me no more, and that the Iroquois
had captured me, as I have before ftated. This was the

caufe

122

Voyages of

caufe of the great delay experienced in this expedition, they
even having poftponed it to the following year. Meanwhile
they received intelligence that a certain nation of their
allies , 134 dwelling three good days’ journeys beyond the En-
touhonorons , 135 on whom the Iroquois alfo make war, defired
to affift them in this expedition with five hundred good men;
alfo to form an alliance and eftablifh a friendfhip with us,
that we might all engage in the war together; moreover
that they greatly defired to fee us and give expreffion to the
pleafure they would have in making our acquaintance.

I was glad to find this opportunity for gratifying my
defire of obtaining a knowledge of their country. It is fitu-
ated only feven days from where the Dutch 136 go to traffic
on the fortieth degree. The favages there, affifted by the
Dutch, make war upon them, take them prifoners, and
cruelly put them to death ; and indeed they told us that the

184 The Carantouanais. Vide Carle
de la Nozevelle France, 1632., alfo Vol.
I. p. 304. This tribe was probably lit-
uated on the upper waters of the Suf-
quehanna, and confequently fouth of
the Five Nations, although we faid in-
advertently in Vol. I. p. '128 that they
were on the weft of them. General
John S. Clark thinks their village was
at Waverly, near the border of Pennfyl-
vania. In Vol. I. p. 143, in the 13th line
from the top, we Ihould have faid the
Carantouanais inftead of Entouhono-
rons.

135 The Entouhonoronswereapart, it
appears, of the Five Nations. Cham-
plain fays they unite with the Iroquois
in making war againft all the other tribes
except the Neutral Nation. Lake On-
tario is called Lac des Entouhonoroeis,
and Champlain adds that their country

preceding

is near the River St. Lawrence, the
paffage of which they forbid to all other
tribes. Vide Vol. I. pp. 303, 304. He
thus appears to apply the name Iro-
quois to the eaftern portion of the Five
Nations, particularly thofe whom he
had attacked on Lake Champlain; and
the Huron name, Entouhonorons, to the
weftern portion. The fubdivifions, by
which they were diftinguilhed at a later
period, were probably not then known,
at leaft not to Champlain.

130 Flamens. The Dutch were at
this time on the Hudfon, engaged in
the fur trade with the favages. Vide
FI iflory of the State of New York by
John Romeyn Brodhead, New York,
1 S53. pp. 38-65. Hiflory of New Nether-
land, or New York under the Dutch , by
E. B. O’Callaghan, New York, 1846,
pp. 67-77.

123

Sieur de Champlain.

preceding year, while making war, they captured three of the
Dutch, who were affifting their enemies , 137 as we do the Atti-
gouautans, and while in action one of their own men was
killed. Neverthelefs they did not fail to fend back the three
Dutch prifoners, without doing them any harm, fuppofing
that they belonged to our party, fince they had no knowledge
of us except by hearfay, never having feen a Chriftian ; other-
wife, they faid, thefe three prifoners would not have got off fo
eafily, and would not efcape again fhould they furprife and
take them. This nation is very warlike, as thofe of the nation
of the Attigouautans maintain. They have only three vil-
lages, which are in the midft of more than twenty others, on
which they make war without affiftance from their friends ;
for they are obliged to pafs through the thickly fettled coun-
try of the Chouontouaroiion , 138 or elfe they would have to
make a very long circuit.

After arriving at the village, it was neceffary for me to
remain until the men of war fhould come from the furround-
ing villages, fo that we might be off as foon as poffible.
During this time there was a conftant fucceffion of banquets
and dances on account of the joy they experienced at feeing
me fo determined to affift them in their war, juft as if they
were already affured of victory.

The greater portion of our men having affembled, we fet
out from the village on the firft day of September, and paffed
along the fhore of a fmall lake , 139 diftant three leagues from
the village, where they catch large quantities of fifh, which

they

138 r; 16 ' 1 " cnem ' es were the Iroquois. 139 Lake Couchiching, a fmall fheet
Lhouontouaroiion, another name of water into which pafs by a fmall out-
or kntouhoronon. let the waters of Lake Simcoe.

124

Voyages of

they preferve for the winter. There is another lake, 140 clofely
adjoining, which is twenty-five leagues in circuit, and flows
into the fmall one by a ftrait, where the above mentioned
extenfive fifhing is carried on. This is done by means of
a large number of flakes which alinoft clofe the ftrait, only
fome little openings being left where they place their nets, in
which the fifh are caught. Thefe two lakes difcharge into
the Mer Douce. We remained fome time in this place to
await the reft of our favages. When they were all affembled,
with their arms, meal, and neceffaries, it was decided to
choofe fome of the moft refolute men to compofe a party
to go and give notice of our departure to thofe who were to
affift us with five hundred men, that they might join us, and
that we might appear together before the fort of the enemy.
This decifion having been made, they difpatched two canoes,
with twelve of the moft ftahvart favages, and alfo with one
of our interpreters, 141 who afked me to permit him to make
the journey, which I readily accorded, inafmuch as he was
led to do fo of his own will, and as he might in this way fee
their country and get a knowledge of the people living
there. The danger, however, was not fmall, fince it was necef-
fary to pafs through the midft of enemies. They fet out on
the 8th of the month, and on the ioth following there was
a heavy white froft.

We continued our journey towards the enemy, and went
fome five or fix leagues through thefe lakes, 142 when the fav-
ages

140 Lake Simcoe. Laverdi&re fays 142 Dans ces lacs. From Lake Chou-

the Indian name of this lake was Ouen- chiching, coafting along thenortheaftern
taronk, and that it was likewife called fhore of Lake Simcoe, they would make
Lac aux Claies. five or fix leagues in reaching a point

141 Etienne Bruld. Vide postea. p- 208. neareft to Sturgeon Lake.

125

Sieur de Champlain.

ages carried their canoes about ten leagues by land. We
then came to another lake , 143 fix to feven leagues in length
and three broad. From this flows a river which difcharges
into the great lake of the Entouhonorons. After traverflng
this lake we paffed a fall, and continuing our courfe down
this river for about fixty-four leagues 144 entered the lake
of the Entouhonorons, having paffed, on our way by land,
five falls, fome being from four to five leagues long. We
alfo paffed feveral lakes of confiderable fize, through which
the river paffes. The latter is large and very abundant in
good fifh.

It is certain that all this region is very fine and pleafant.
Along the banks it feems as if the trees had been fet out for
ornament in moft places, and that all thefe tracfts were in
former times inhabited by favages, who were fubfequently
compelled to abandon them from fear of their enemies. Vines
and nut-trees are here very numerous. Grapes mature, yet
there is always a very pungent tartnefs which is felt remain-
ing in the throat when one eats them in large quantities,
arifing from defedl of cultivation. Thefe localities are very
pleafant when cleared up.

Stags and bears are here very abundant. We tried the
hunt and captured a large number as we journeyed down.
It was done in this way. They place four or five hundred
favages in line in the woods, fo that they extend to certain
points on the river; then marching in order with bow and

arrow

148 Undoubtedly Sturgeon Lake.

144 From their entrance of Sturgeon
Lake to the point where they reached
Lake Ontario, at the eaftem limit of
Amherft Ifland, the diftance is, in its

winding and circuitous courfe, not far
from Champlain’s eftimate, viz. fixty-
four leagues. That part of the river
above Rice Lake is the Otonabee ; that
below is known as the Trent.

126

Voyages of

arrow in hand, fhouting and making a great noife in order
to frighten the beafts, they continue to advance until they
come to the end of the point. Then all the animals be-
tween the point and the hunters are forced to throw them-
felves into the water, as many at least as do not fall by the
arrows fhot at them by the hunters. Meanwhile the favages,
who are expreffly arranged and polled in their canoes along
the fhore, eafily approach the flags and other animals, tired
out and greatly frightened in the chafe, when they readily
kill them with the fpear heads attached to the extremity of
a piece of wood of the fhape of a half pike. This is the
way they engage in the chafe ; and they do likewife on the
iflands where there are large quantities of game. I took
efpecial pleafure in feeing them hunt thus and in obferv-
ing their dexterity. Many animals were killed by the fhot
of the arquebus, at which the favages were greatly fur-
prifed. But it unfortunately happened that, while a flag
was being killed, a favage, who chanced to come in range,
was wounded by a fhot of an arquebus. Thence a great
commotion arofe among them, which however fubfided
when fome prefents were given to the wounded. This is
the ufual manner of allaying and fettling quarrels, and, in
cafe of the death of the wounded, prefents are given to
the relatives of the one killed.

As to fmaller game there is a large quantity of it in its
feafon. I here are alfo many cranes , 145 white as fwans, and
other varieties of birds like thofe in France.

We

146 Grues. The white crane, Grus Bolton, 1872, p. 271. Charlevoix fays,
mericanus. Adult plumage pure white. “We have cranes of two colors, fome
oues s Key to North American Birds , white and others gris de tin,” that is

127

Sieur de Champlain.

We proceeded by fhort days’ journeys as far as the fhore
of the lake of the Entouhonorons, conftantly hunting as
before mentioned. Here at its eaftern extremity, which is
the entrance to the great River St. Lawrence, we made the
traverfe, in latitude 4 3°, 148 where in the paffage there are very
large beautiful illands. We went about fourteen leagues in
paffing to the fouthern fide of the lake towards the territory
of the enemy. 147 The favages concealed all their canoes in
the woods near the fhore. We went fome four leagues
over a fandy ftrand, where I obferved a very pleafant and
beautiful country, interfered by many little dreams and two
fmall rivers, which difcharge into the before-mentioned lake,
alfo many ponds and meadows, where there was an endlefs
amount of game, many vines, fine woods, and a large number
of chellnut trees, whofe fruit was ftill in the burr. The
cheftnuts are fmall, but of a good flavor. The country is
covered with forefts, which over its greater portion have not
been cleared up. All the canoes being thus hidden, we left
the border of the lake, 148 which is fome eighty leagues long

and

a purple or lilac color. This latter
fpecies is the brown crane, Grus Cana-
denfis. “ Plumage plumbeous gray.”
Cones. Vide Charlevoix' s Letters, Lon-
don, 1763, p. 88.

1(6 The latitude of the eaftern end of
Amherft Ifland is about 44 0 n'.

147 This traverfe, it may be prefumed,
was made by coafting along the fhore,
as was the cuftom of the favages with
their light canoes.

748 It appears that, after making by
eftimate about fourteen leagues in their
bark canoes, and four by land along the
jhore, they ftruck inland. Guided merely
by the diftances given in the text, it is

not poflible to determine with exacfncfs
at what point they left the lake. This
arifes from the fadl that we are not fure
at what point the meafurement began,
and the eftimated diftances are given,
moreover, with very liberal margins.
But the eighteen leagues in all would
take them not very far from Little
Salmon River, whether the eftimate
were made from the eaftern end of
Amherft Ifland or Simcoe Ifland, or any
place in that immediate neighborhood.
The natural features of the country, for
four leagues along the coaft north of
Little Salmon River, anfwer well to the
defcription given in the text. The cheft-

nut

128

Voyages of

and twenty-five wide. 149 The greater portion of its fhores is
inhabited by favages. We continued our courfe by land for
about twenty-five or thirty leagues. In the fpace of four days
we croffed many brooks, and a river which proceeds from a
lake that difcharges into that of the Entouhonorons. 150 This
lake is twenty-five or thirty leagues in circuit, contains fome
fine iflands, and is the place where our enemies, the Iroquois,
catch their fifh, in which it abounds.

On the 9th of the month of Odtober our favages going
out to reconnoitre met eleven favages, whom they took
prifoners. They confided of four women, three boys, one
girl, and three men, who were going fifhing and were diftant
fome four leagues from the fort of the enemy. Now it is to
be noted that one of the chiefs, on feeing the prifoners, cut
off the finger of one of thefe poor women as a beginning of
their ufual punifhment ; upon which I interpofed and repri-
manded the chief, Iroquet, reprefenting to him that it was
not the adt of a warrior, as he declared himself to be, to con-
duct himself with cruelty towards women, who have no
defence but their tears, and that one fhould treat them with
humanity on account of their helpleffnefs and weaknefs; and
I told him that on the contrary this add would be deemed to
proceed from a bafe and brutal courage, and that if he com-
mitted any more of thefe cruelties he would not give me

heart

nut and wild grape are (till found there.
Vide MS. Letters of the Rev. James
Crofs, D.D., LL.D., and of S.D. Smith,
Efq., of Mexico, New York.

149 Lake Ontario, or Lake of the En-
touhonorons, is about a hundred and
eighty, miles long, and about fifty-five
miles in its extreme width.

160 The river here croffed was plainly
Oneida River, flowing from Oneida
Lake into Lake Ontario. The lake is
identified by the iflands in it. Oneida
Lake is the only one in this region which
contains any iflands whatever, and con-
fequently the river flowing from it muft
be that now known as Oneida River.

129

Sieur de Champlain.

heart to affift them or favor them in the war. To which
the only anfwer he gave me was that their enemies treated
them in the fame manner, but that, fince this was dif-
pleafing to me, he would not do anything more to the
women, although he would to the men.

The next day, at three o’clock in the afternoon, we arrived
before the fort 151 of their enemies, where the favages made
fome fkirmifhes with each other, although our defign was
not to difclofe ourfelves until the next day, which however
the impatience of our favages would not permit, both on
account of their defire to fee fire opened upon their enemies,
and alfo that they might refcue fome of their own men who
had become too clofely engaged, and were hotly preffed.
Then I approached the enemy, and although I had only a
few men, yet we fhowed them what they had never feen
nor heard before ; for, as foon as they faw us and heard the
arquebus fhots and the balls whizzing in their ears, they
withdrew fpeedily to their fort, carrying the dead and
wounded in this charge. We alfo withdrew to our main
body, with five or fix wounded, one of whom died.

This done, we withdrew to the diftance of cannon range,
out of fight of the enemy, but contrary to my advice and to
what they had promifed me. This moved me to addrefs
them very rough and angry words in order to incite them to
do their duty, forefeeing that if everything fhould go accord-
ing to their whim and the guidance of their council, their
utter ruin would be the refult. Neverthelefs I did not fail
to fend to them and propofe means which they fhould
ufe in order to get poffeffion of their enemies.

Thefe

151 For the probable fite of this fort, fee Vol. I. p. 130, note 83.

17

130

Voyages of

Thefe were, to make with certain kinds of wood a cava-
lier , which fliould be higher than the palifades. Upon this
were to be placed four or five of our arquebufiers, who
thould keep up a conftant fire over their palifades and
galleries, which were well provided with ftones, and by this
means diflodge the enemy who might attack us from their
galleries. Meanwhile orders were to be given to procure
boards for making a fort of mantelet to protect our men
from the arrows and ftones of which the favages generally
make ufe. Thefe inftruments, namely the cavalier and
mantelets, were capable of being carried by a large number
of men. One mantelet was fo conftrucied that the water
could not extinguifh the fire, which might be fet to the
fort, under cover of the arquebufiers who were doing their
duty on the cavalier. In this manner, I told them, we might
be able to defend ourfelves fo that the enemy could not
approach to extinguifh the fire which we fliould fet to their
ramparts.

This propofition they thought good and very feafonable,
and immediately proceeded to carry it out as I directed. In
fadt the next day they fet to work, fome to cut wood, others
to gather it, for building and equipping the cavalier and
mantelets. The work was promptly executed and in lefs
than four hours, although the amount of wood they had
collected for burning againft the ramparts, in order to fet
fire to them, was very fmall. Their expedtation was that
the five hundred men who had promifed to come would do
fo on this day, but doubt was felt about them, since they had
not appeared at the rendezvous, as they had been charged
to do, and as they had promifed. This greatly troubled our

favages ;

Sietir de Champlain. 1 3 1

favages; but feeing that they were fufficiently numerous to
take the fort without other affiftance, and thinking for my
part that delay, if not in all things at lead in many, is preju-
dicial, I urged them to attack it, reprefenting to them that
the enemy, having become aware of their force and our arms,
which pierced whatever was proof againft arrows, had begun
to barricade themfelves and cover themfelves with ftrong
pieces of wood, with which they were well provided and
their village filled. I told them that the leafi: delay was the
belt, fince the enemy had already ftrengthened themfelves
very much ; for their village was enclofed by four good pali-
fades, which were made of great pieces of wood, interlaced
with each other, with an opening of not more than half a
foot between two, and which were thirty feet high, with gal-
leries after the manner of a parapet, which they had furnifhed
with double pieces of wood that were proof againft our
arquebus fhots. Moreover it was near a pond where the
water was abundant, and was well fupplied with gutters,
placed between each pair of palifades, to throw out water,
which they had alfo under cover infide, in order to extin-
guifli fire. Now this is the charadter of their fortifications
and defences, which are much ftronger than the villages of
the Attigouautan and others.

We -approached to attack the village, our cavalier being
carried by two hundred of the ftrongefi; men, who put it
down before the village at a pike’s length off. I ordered
three arquebufiers to mount upon it, who were well pro-
tected from the arrows and ftones that could be fhot or
hurled at them. Meanwhile the enemy did not fail to fend
a large number of arrows which did not mifs, and a great

many

132

Voyages of

many ftones, which they hurled from their palifades. Never-
thelefs a hot fire of arquebufes forced them to diflodge and
abandon their galleries, in confequence of the cavalier which
uncovered them, they not venturing to fliow themfelves, but
fighting under fhelter. Now when the cavalier was carried
forward, inftead of bringing up the mantelets according to
order, including that one under cover of which we were
to fet the fire, they abandoned them and began to scream at
their enemies, fhooting arrows into the fort, which in my
opinion did little harm to the enemy.

But we muft excufe them, for they are not warriors, and
befides will have no difcipline nor correction, and will do only
what they pleafe. Accordingly one of them fet fire incon-
fiderately to the wood placed againft the fort of the enemy,
quite the wrong way and in the face of the wind, fo that it
produced no effeCt.

This fire being out, the greater part of the favages began
to carry wood againft the palifades, but in fo fmall quantity
that the fire could have no great effefit. There alfo arofe
fuch diforder among them that one could not underftand
another, which greatly troubled me. In vain did I fhout in
their ears and remonftrate to my utmoft with them as to the
danger to which they expofed themfelves by their bad
behavior, but on account of the great noife they made they
heard nothing. Seeing that fhouting would only burft my
head, and that my remonflrances were ufelefs for putting a
flop to the diforder, I did nothing more, but determined
together with my men to do what we could, and fire upon
fuch as we could fee.

Meanwhile the enemy profited by our diforder to get

water

133

Sieur de Champlain.

water and pour it fo abundantly that you would have faid
brooks were flowing through their fpouts, the refult of
which was that the fire was inftantly extinguifhed, while
they did not ceafe thooting their arrows, which fell upon us
like hail. But the men on the cavalier killed and maimed
many. We were engaged in this combat about three
hours, in which two of our chiefs and leading warriors were
wounded, namely, one called Ockateguain and another Orani,
together with fome fifteen common warriors. The others,
feeing their men and fome of the chiefs wounded, now
began to talk of a retreat without farther fighting, in expedla-
tion of the five hundred men, 152 whofe arrival could not be
much delayed. Thus they retreated, a diforderly rabble.

Moreover the chiefs have in fa<5t no abfolute control over
their men, who are governed by their own will and follow
their own fancy, which is the caufe of their diforder and the
ruin of all their undertakings ; for, having determined upon
anything with their leaders, it needs only the whim of a
villain, or nothing at all, to lead them to break it off and
form a new plan. Thus there is no concert of adtion among
them, as can be feen by this expedition.

Now we withdrew into our fort, I having received two
arrow wounds, one in the leg, the other in the knee, which
caufed me great inconvenience, afide from the fevere pain.
When they were all affembled, I addreffed them fome words
of remonftrance on the diforder that had occurred. But
all I faid availed nothing, and had no effedt upon them.
They replied that many of their men had been wounded like

myfelf,

153 They were of the tribe called Carantouanais. Vide antea, note 134.

134

Voyages of

myfelf, fo that it would caufe the others much trouble and
inconvenience to carry them as they retreated, and that it
was not poffible to return again againft their enemies, as
I told them it was their duty to do. They agreed, how-
ever, to wait four days longer for the five hundred men who
were to come; and, if they came, to make a fecond effort
againft their enemies, and execute better what I might tell
them than they had done in the paft. With this I had to
content myfelf, to my great regret.

Herewith is indicated the manner in which they fortify
their towns, from which reprefentation it may be inferred
that thofe of their friends and enemies are fortified in like
manner.

The next day there was a violent wind, which lafted two
days, and was very favorable for fetting fire anew to the fort
of the enemy which, although I urged them ftrongly, they were
unwilling to do, as if they were afraid of getting the word: of
it, and befides they pleaded their wounded as an excufe.

We remained in camp until the 16th of the month, 153
during which time there were fome fkirmifhes between the
enemy and our men, who were very often furrounded by the
former, rather through their imprudence than from lack of
courage ; for I affure you that every time we went to the
charge it was neceffary for us to go and difengage them
from the crowd, fince they could only retreat under cover of
our arquebufiers, whom the enemy greatly dreaded and
feared ; for as foon as they perceived any one of the arque-
bufiers they withdrew fpeedily, faying in a perfuafive manner

that

168 This was in the month of October.

*35

Sieur de Champlain.

that we fhould not interfere in their combats, and that their
enemies had very little courage to require us to affift them,
with many other words of like tenor, in order to prevail
upon us.

I have reprcfented by figure E the manner in which they
arm themfelves in going to war.

After fome days, feeing that the five hundred men did not
come, they determined to depart, and enter upon their retreat
as foon as poffible. They proceeded to make a kind of bafket
for carrying the wounded, who are put into it crowded up in
a heap, being bound and pinioned in fuch a manner that it
is as impoffible for them to move as for an infant in its
twaddling clothes ; but this is not without caufing the
wounded much extreme pain. This I can fay with truth
from my own experience, having been carried fome days,
fince I could not {land up, particularly on account of an
arrow-wound which I had received in the knee. I never
found myfelf in fuch a gehenna as during this time, for
the pain which I fuffered in confequence of the wound in
my knee was nothing in comparifon with that which I en-
dured while I was carried bound and pinioned on the back
of one of our favages ; fo that I loft my patience, and as foon
as I could fuftain myfelf, got out of this prifon, or rather
gehenna.

The enemy followed us about half a league, though at a dis-
tance, with the view of trying to take fome of thofe compofing
the rear guard ; but their efforts were vain, and they retired.

Now the only good point that I have feen in their mode
of warfare is that they make their retreat very fecurely,
placing all the wounded and aged in their centre, being

well

136 Voyages of

well armed on the wings and in the rear, and continuing
this order without interruption until they reach a place of
fecurity.

Their retreat was very long, being from twenty-five to
thirty leagues, which caufed the wounded much fatigue, as
also thofe who carried them, although the latter relieved
each other from time to time.

On the 1 8th day of the month there fell much fnow and
hail, accompanied by a ftrong wind, which greatly incom-
moded us. Neverthelefs we fucceeded in arriving at the
fhore of the lake of the Entouhonorons, at the place where
our canoes were concealed, which we found all intadt, for we
had been afraid left the enemy might have broken them up.

When they were all affembled, and I faw that they were
ready to depart to their village, I begged them to take me to
our fettlement, which, though unwilling at first, they finally
concluded to do, and fought four men to conduct me.
Four men were found, who offered themfelves of their own
accord ; for, as I have before faid, the chiefs have no control
over their men, in confequence of which they are often
unable to do as they would like. Now the men having
been found, it was neceffary alfo to find a canoe, which was
not to be had, each one needing his own, and there being no
more than they required. This was far from being pleafant
to me, but, on the contrary greatly annoyed me, fince it led
me to fufpedt fome evil purpofe, inafmuch as they had
promifed to conduct me to our fettlement after their war.
Moreover I was poorly prepared for fpending the winter
with them, or elfe fhould not have been concerned about
the matter. But not being able to do anything, I was

obliged

137

Sieur de Champlain.

obliged to refign myfelf in patience. Now after fome
days I perceived that their plan was to keep me and my
companions, not only as a fecurity for themfelves, for
they feared their enemies, but alfo that I might liften to
what took place in their councils and affemblies, and deter-
mine what they fhould do in the future againft their enemies
for their fecurity and prefervation.

The next day, the 28th of the month, they began
to make preparations; fome to go deer-hunting, others to
hunt bears and beavers, others to go fifhing, others to return
to their villages. An abode and lodging were furnifhed me
by one of the principal chiefs, called D'Arontal, with whom I
already had fome acquaintance. Having offered me his cabin,
provifions, and accommodations, he fet out alfo for the deer-
hunt, which is efteemed by them the greateft and moft noble
one. After crofting, from the ifland, 151 the end of the lake,
we entered a river 155 fome twelve leagues in extent. They
then carried their canoes by land fome half a league, when
we entered a lake 156 which was fome ten or twelve leagues
in circuit, where there was a large amount of game, as
fwans, 157 white cranes, 158 outardes , 159 ducks, teal, fong-thrufh, 160

larks,

154 Et apris auoir trauerfe le bout 167 Cygnes, fwans. Probably the T rum-

du lac de laditte ijle. From this form of peter Swan. Cygnus buccinator. They
expreflion this ifland would feem to have were efpecially found in Sagard’s time
been vifited before. But no particular about Lake Nipiffing. “Mais pour des
ifland is mentioned on their former Cignes, qu’ils appellent Horhev , il y
traverfe of the lake. It is impoflible to en a principalement vers les Epiceri-
nx with certainty upon the ifland referred nys.” Vide Le Grand Voyage av Pays
to. It may have been Simcoe or Wolf des Hurons par Fr. Gabriel Sagard,
Ifland, or fome other. Paris, 1632, p. 303.

155 probably Cataraqui Creek. Vide 158 Grues blanches. Vide antea, n. 145.

Vol. I. p. 136, 159 Houjlardes. Vide antea, note 32.

156 p er ] la p S Loughborough Lake, or 160 Mauuis, Song-Thrufli. Doubtlefs
the fyftem of lakes of which this is a part, the Robin, Turdus migratorius.

18

138 Voyages of

larks , 161 fnipe , 162 geefe , 163 and feveral other kinds of fowl too
numerous to mention. Of thefe I killed a great number,
which flood us in good Head while waiting for the capture of
a deer. From there we proceeded to a certain place fome ten
leagues diftant, where our favages thought there were deer
in abundance. Affembled there were fome twenty-five
favages, who fet to building two or three cabins out of
pieces of wood fitted to each other, the chinks of which they
flopped up by means of mofs to prevent the entrance of the
air, covering them with the bark of trees.

When they had done this they went into the woods to a
fmall forefl of firs, where they made an enclofure in the form of
a triangle, clofed up on two fides and open on one. This en-
clofure was made of great flakes of wood clofely preffed to-
gether, from eight to nine feet high, each of the fides being
fifteen hundred paces long. At the extremity of this triangle
there was a little enclofure, conftantly diminifiring in fize, cov-
ered in part with boughs and with only an opening of five feet,
about the width of a mediunr-fized door, into which the deer
were to enter. They were fo expeditious in their work, that
in lefs than ten days they had their enclofure in readinefs.
Meanwhile other favages had gone fifhing, catching trout
and pike of prodigious fize, and enough to meet all our
wants.

All preparations being made, they fet out half an hour
before day to go into the wood, fome half a league from

the

161 Alloiiettes, larks. Probably the 168 Oyes, geefe. The common Wild
Brown Lark, Anthus ludoviciattus. Goofe, Branta Canadenfis, or it may
Found everywhere in North America. include all the fpecies taken colledtively.

162 Beccajfines. Probably the Ameri- For the feveral fpecies found in Canada,

can Snipe, Gallinago Wilfonii. vide antea , note 32.

f

139

Sieur de Champlain .

the before-mentioned enclofure, feparated from each other
fome eighty paces. Each had two fticks, which they ftruck
together, and they marched in this order at a flow pace
until they arrived at their enclofure. The deer hearing this
noife flee before them until they reach the enclofure, into
which the favages force them to go. Then they gradually
unite on approaching the bay and opening of their tri-
angle, the deer fkirting the fides until they reach the end,
to which the favages hotly purfue them, with bow and arrow
in hand ready to let fly. On reaching the end of the tri-
angle they begin to fhout and imitate wolves , 164 which are
numerous, and which devour the deer. The deer, hearing
this frightful noife, are conftrained to enter the retreat by the
little opening, whither they are very hotly purfued by arrow
fhots. Having entered this retreat, which is fo well clofed
and fattened that they can by no poffibility get out, they are
eafily captured. I affure you that there is a Angular pleaf-
ure in this chafe, which took place every two days, and was
fo fuccefsful that, in the thirty-eight days 165 during which we
were there, they captured one hundred and twenty deer,
which they make good ufe of, referving the fat for winter,
which they ufe as we do butter, and taking away to their
homes fome of the flefh for their feftivities.

They have other contrivances for capturing the deer;
as fnares, with which they kill many. You fee depidted
oppofite the manner of their chafe, enclofure, and fnare.

Out

154 Les loups. The American Wolf, their preparations on the 28th of October
Lupus occidentalis. on the fhores of Lake Ontario till they

166 The thirty-eight days during which began their homeward journey on the
they were there would include the whole 4th of December. Vide antea, p. 137 ;
period from the time they began to make pojlea, p. 143.

140

Voyages of

Out of the fkins they make garments. Thus you fee how
we fpent the time while waiting for the froft, that we might
return the more eafily, fince the country is very marfhy.

When they firft went out hunting, I loft my way in the
woods, having followed a certain bird that feemed to me
peculiar. It had a beak like that of a parrot, and was of the
fize of a hen. It was entirely yellow, except the head which
was red, and the wings which were blue, and it flew by in-
tervals like a partridge. The defire to kill it led me to pur-
fue it from tree to tree for a very long time, until it flew
away in good earneft. Thus lofmg all hope, I defired to
retrace my fteps, but found none of our hunters, who had
been conftantly getting ahead, and had reached the enclofure.
While trying to overtake them, and going, as it feemed to
me, ftraight to where the enclofure was, I found myfelf loft
in the woods, going now on this fide now on that, without
being able to recognize my pofition. The night coming on,
I was obliged to fpend it at the foot of a great tree, and in
the morning fet out and walked until three o’clock in the
afternoon, when I came to a little pond of ftill water. Here
I noticed fome game, which I purfued, killing three or four
birds, which were very acceptable, fince I had had nothing
to eat. Unfortunately for me there had been no funfhine
for three days, nothing but rain and cloudy weather, which
increafed my trouble. Tired and exhaufted I prepared to
reft myfelf and cook the birds in order to alleviate the hun-
ger which I began painfully to feel, and which by God’s
favor was appeafed.

When I had made my repaft I began to confider what
I fhould do, and to pray God to give me the will and

courage

Sieur de Champlain. 14 1

courage to fuftain patiently my misfortune if I fhould be
obliered to remain abandoned in this foreft without counfel
or confolation except the Divine goodnefs and mercy,
and at the fame time to exert myfelf to return to our
hunters. Thus committing all to His mercy I gathered up
renewed courage going here and there all day, without per-
ceiving any foot-print or path, except thofe of wild beafls, of
which I generally faw a good number. I was obliged to
pafs here this night alfo. Unfortunately I had forgotten to
bring with me a ffnall compafs which would have put me on
the right road, or nearly fo. At the dawn of day, after a
brief repaft, I fet out in order to find, if poffible, fome brook
and follow it, thinking that it muft of neceffity flow into the
river on the border of which our hunters were encamped.
Having refolved upon this plan, I carried it out fo well that
at noon I found myfelf on the border of a little lake, about a
league and a half in extent, where I killed fome game, which
was very timely for my wants ; I had likewife remaining
fome eight or ten charges of powder, which was a great
fatisfaclion.

I proceeded along the border of this lake to fee where
it difcharged, and found a large brook, which I followed
until five o’clock in the evening, when I heard a great noife,
but on carefully liftening failed to perceive clearly what it
was. On hearing the noife, however, more diftindlly, I
concluded that it was a fall of water in the river which I was
fearching for. I proceeded nearer, and faw an opening,
approaching which I found myfelf in a great and far-reaching
meadow, where there was a large number of wild beafls, and
looking to my right I perceived the river, broad and long.

I

142

Voyages of

I looked to fee if I could not recognize the place, and walk-
ing along on the meadow I noticed a little path where the
favages carried their canoes. Finally, after careful obferva-
tion, I recognized it as the fame river, and that I had gone
that way before.

I paffed the night in better fpirits than the previous
ones, fupping on the little I had. In the morning I re-
examined the place where I was, and concluded from cer-
tain mountains on the border of the river that I had not
been deceived, and that our hunters muft be lower down by
four or five good leagues. This diftance I walked at my
leifure along the border of the river, until I perceived the
fmoke of our hunters, where I arrived to the great pleafure
not only of myfelf but of them, who were ftill fearching for
me, but had about given up all hopes of feeing me again.
They begged me not to ftray off from them any more, or
never to forget to carry with me my compafs, and they added :
If you had not come, and we had not fucceeded in finding
you, we fhould never have gone again to the French, for fear
of their accufing us of having killed you. After this he 166
was very careful of me when I went hunting, always giving
me a favage as companion, who knew how to find again the
place from which he ftarted fo well that it was something
very remarkable.

To return to my fubjedt: they have a kind of fuperftition
in regard to this hunt; namely, they believe that if they
fhould roafi: any of the meat taken in this way, or if any of
the fat fhould fall into the fire, or if any of the bones fhould

be

166 The author here refers to the Vide antea, p. 137. Cf. alfo Quebec ed.
chief D’Arontal, whofe gueft he was. 1632, p. 928.

Sieur de Champlain. 143

be thrown into it, they would not be able to capture any
more deer. Accordingly they begged me to roaft none of
this meat, but I laughed at this and their way of doing.
Yet, in order not to offend them, I cheerfully defifled, at
lead in their prefence ; though when they were out of fight
I took fome of the belt and roafted it, attaching no credit to
their fuperftitions. When I afterwards told them what I
had done, they would not believe me, faying that they could
not have taken any deer after the doing of fuch a thing.

On the fourth day of December we fet out from this place,
walking on the river, lakes, and ponds, which were frozen,
and fometimes through the woods. Thus we went for nine-
teen days, undergoing much hardfhip and toil, both the fav-
ages, who were loaded with a hundred pounds, and myfelf,
who carried a burden of twenty pounds, which in the long
jonrney tired me very much. It is true that I was fometimes
relieved by our favages, but neverthelefs I fuffered great dif-
comfort. The favages, in order to go over the ice more
eafily, are accuftomed to make a kind of wooden fledge, 11 "
on which they put their loads, which they eafily and fwiftly

drag

167 Trainees de bois, a kind of fledge, favage and attached to the end of the
The Indian’s fledge was made of two fledge. The fledge was fo narrow that
pieces of board, which, with his ftone it could be drawn eafily and without
axe and perhaps with the aid of fire, he impediment wherever the favage could
patiently manufactured from the trunks thread his way through the pathlefs
of trees. The boards were each about forefts.

fix inches wide and fix or feven feet The journey from their encampment
long, curved upward at the forward end northeaft of Kingfton on Lake Ontario
and bound together by crofs pieces, to the capital of the Hurons was not
The fides were bordered with ftrips of lefs in a ftraight line than a hundred
wood, which ferved as brackets, to and fixty miles. Without a pathway, in
which was fattened the ftrap that bound the heart of winter, through water and
the baggage upon the fledge. The load melting fnow, with their heavy burdens,
was dragged by a rope or ftrap of the hardfhip and exhauftion can hardly
leather patting round the breaft of the be exaggerated.

i 4 4

Voyages of

drag along. Some days after there was a thaw, which
cauled us much trouble and annoyance ; for we had to go
through pine forefts full of brooks, ponds, marfhes, and
fwamps, where many trees had been blown down upon each
other. This caufed us a thoufand troubles and embar-
raffments, and great difcomfort, as we were all the time
wet to above our knees. We were four days in this plight,
fince in moft places the ice would not bear. At laft, on
the 20th of the month, we fucceeded in arriving at our vil-
lage. 108 Here the Captain Yroquet had come to winter with
his companions, who are Algonquins, alfo his fon, whom
he brought for the fake of treatment, fince while hunting
he had been ferioufly injured by a bear which he was trying
to kill.

After refting fome days I determined to go and vifit Fa-
ther Jofeph, and to fee in winter the people where he was,
whom the war had not permitted me to fee in the fummer.
I fet out from this village on the 14th 169 of January follow-
ing, thanking my hoft for the kindnefs he had fhown me,
and, taking formal leave of him, as I did not expedt to fee
him again for three months.

The next day I faw Father Jofeph, 170 in his fmall houfe
where he had taken up his abode, as I have before ftated. I
flayed with him fome days, finding him deliberating about
making a journey to the Petun people, as I had alfo thought

of

168 Namely at Cahiague. In the iflue
of 1632, Champlain fays they arrived on
the 23d day of the month. Vide Quebec
ed., p. 929. Leaving on the 4th and
travelling nineteen days, as ftated above,
they would arrive on the 23d December.

109 Probably the 4th of January.

170 Father Jofeph Le Caron had re-
mained at Carhagouha, during the ab-
fence of the war party in their attack
upon the Iroquois, where Champlain
probably arrived on the 5th of January.

145

Sieur de Champlain .

of doing, although it was very difagreeable travelling in
winter. We fet out together on the fifteenth of February
to go to that nation, where we arrived on the feventeenth
of the month . 171 Thefe Petun people plant the maize, called
by us ble de Turquie , and have fixed abodes like the reft.
We went to Seven other villages of their neighbors and
allies, with whom we contracted friendfhip, and who prom-
ifed to come in good numbers to our fettlement. They wel-
comed us with good cheer, making a banquet with meat
and fifh, as is their cuftom. To this the people from all
quarters flocked in order to fee us, fhowing many manifes-
tations of friendship, and accompanying us on the greater
part of our way back. The country is diversified with
pleafant Slopes and plains. They were beginning to build
two villages, through which we paffed, and which were
Situated in the midft of the woods, becaufe of the conven-
ience 172 of building and fortifying their towns there. Thefe
people live like the Attignouaatitans , 173 and have the Same
cuftoms. They are Situated near the Nation Neutre , 174 which

are

1,1 In the iflue of 1632, the arrival of
Champlain and Le Caron is (fated to
have occurred on the 17th of January.
This harmonizes with the correction of
dates in notes 169, 170.

. The Huron name of the Petuns was
Tionnontateronons, or Khionontatero-
ttons, or Quieunontateronons. Of them
Vimont fays, “ Les Khionontateronons,
qu’on appelle la nation du Petun, pour
l’abondance qu'il y a de cette herbe,
font eloignez du pays des Hurons, dont
ils parlent la langue, enuiron douze ou
quinze lieues tirant h l’Occident.” Vide
Relation des Jtfuites, 1640, p. 95 ; His.
Du Canada , Vol. I. p. 209. Sagard.

For fome account of the fubfequent hif-
tory of the Nation de Petun, vide In-
dian Migration in Ohio, by C. C. Bald-
win, 1879, p. 2.

172 It was of great importance to the
Indians to felect a fite for their villages
where fuitable wood was acceffible, both
for fortifying them with palifades and
for fuel in the winter. It could not be
brought a great diftance for either of
thefe purpofes. Hence when the wood
in the vicinity became exhaufted they
w-ere compelled to remove and build
anew.

173 That is to fay like the Hurons.

174 The Nation Neutre was called by

the

19

146

Voyages of

are powerful and occupy a great extent of country. After
vifiting thefe people, we fet out from that place, and went
to a nation of favages, whom we named Cheveux RelevesF
They were very happy to fee us again, and we entered into
friendfhip with them, while they in return promifed to come
and fee us, namely at the habitation in this place.

It has feemed to me defirable to defcribe them and their
country, their cuftoms and mode of life. In the firft place
they are at war with another nation of favages, called Afifla-
gueroiion , 176 which means Gens de Feu , who are diftant from
them ten days’ journey. I informed myfelf accordingly very
particularly in regard to their country and the tribes living
there, as alfo to their charadler and numbers. The people
of this nation are very numerous, and are for the moft

part

the Hurons At/i 8 andaronk or Attihou-
andaron. Vide Relation des Jefuites,
1641, p. 72; DiRonaire de la Langve
Hvronne, par Sagard, a Paris, 1632.
Champlain places them, on his map of
1632, South of Lake Erie. His knowl-
edge of that lake, obtained from the
lavages, was very meagre as the map
itfelf Ihows. The Neutres are placed
by early writers on the weft of Lake
Ontario and north of Lake Erie. Vide
Laverdiere in loco , Quebec ed., p. 546 ;
alfo, Indian Migration in Ohio, by C.
C. Baldwin, p. 4. They are placed far
to the fouth of Lake Erie by Nicholas
Sanfon. Vide Cartes de l' Ameriauc,

1657.

1,0 The Cheveux Relevds are repre-
fented by Champlain as dwelling weft
of the Petuns, and were probably not
far from the moft fouthern limit of
the Georgian Bay. Strangely enough
Nicholas Sanfon places them on a large
ifland that feparates the Georgian Bay

from Lake Huron. Vide Cartes de
P A merique par N. Sanfon, 1657.

176 Atfijlaehronons , ou Nation du
Feu. Their Algonquin name was Maf-
coutins or Mafkoutens, with feveral
other orthographies. The fignificance
of their name is given by Sagard as fol-
lows: I Is font errans, finon que quel-
ques villages d’entr’eux fement des
bleds d’lnde, et font la guerre k vne
autre Nation, nommee AJJitagueronon,
qui veut dire gens de feu : car en langue
Huronne AJJifla fignifie du feu, et
Eronon , fignifie Nation. Le Grand
Voyage dv Pays des Hvrons, par Gabriel
Sagard, a Paris, 1632, p. 78. Vide
Relation des Jefuites , 1641, p. 7 2; D'f~
covery and Exploration of the Mijfif-
ftppi Valley , by John Gilmary Shea, p.

1 3 : Indian Migration in Ohio, by C.
C. Baldwin, pp. 9, 10; Difcovery of the
Northwejl by John Nicolet, by C. W.
Butterfield, p. 63; E A meriqve en

Plvfievrs Caries , par N. Sanfon, 1657.

Sieur de Champ lam. 147

part great warriors, hunters, and fifhermen. They have
feveral chiefs, each ruling in his own diftridt. In general
they plant Indian corn, and other cereals. They are
hunters who go in troops to various regions and countries,
where they traffic with other nations, diftant four or five
hundred leagues. They, are the cleaned; favages in their
houfehold affairs that I have ever feen, and are very in-
duftrious in making a kind of mat, which conftitutes their
Turkiffi carpets. The women have the body covered, but
the men go uncovered, with the exception of a fur robe in
the form of a cloak, which they ufually leave off in fummer.
The women and girls are not more moved at feeing them
thus, than if they faw nothing unufual. The women live
very happily with their hulbands. They have the following
cuftom when they have their catamenia : the wives with-
draw from their hulbands, or the daughter from her father
and mother and other relatives, and go to certain fmall
houfes. There they remain in retirement, awaiting their
time, without any company of men, who bring them food
and neceffaries until their return. Thus it is known who
have their catamenia and who have not. This tribe is
accuftomed more than others to celebrate great banquets.
They gave us good cheer and welcomed us very cordially,
earneftly begging me to affift them againft their enemies,
who dwell on the banks of the Mer Douce., two hundred
leagues diftant ; to which I replied that they muft wait until
another time, as I was not provided with the neceffary
means. They were at a lofs how to welcome us. I have
reprefented them in figure C as they go to w r ar.

There is, alfo, at a diftance of a two days’ journey from them,

in

148 Voyages of

in a foutherly direction, another favage nation, that produces
a lame amount of tobacco. This is called Nation Neutre.

O

They number four thoufand warriors, and dwell weftward of
the lake of the Entouhonorons, which is from eighty to a
hundred leagues in extent. They, however, affift the Che-
veux Releves againft the Gens de Feu. But with the Iroquois
and our allies they are at peace, and preferve a neutrality.
There is a cordial underftanding towards both of thefe na-
tions, and they do not venture to engage in any difpute or
quarrel, but on the contrary often eat and drink with them
like good friends. I was very defirous of vifiting this nation,
but the people where we were diffuaded me from it, fay-
ing that the year before one of our men had killed one of
them, when we were at war with the Entouhonorons, which
offended them ; and they informed us that they are much
inclined to revenge, not concerning themfelves as to who
(truck the blow, but inflicting the penalty upon the firft one
they meet of the nation, even though one of their friends,
when they fucceed in catching him, unlefs harmony has
been previoufly reftored between them, and gifts and pref-
ents beftowed upon the relatives of the deceafed. Thus I
was prevented for the time being from going, although fome
of this nation affured us that they would do us no harm for
the reafon affigned above.

Thus we were led to return the fame way we had come,
and continuing my journey, I reached the nation of the
Pijieriniig who had promifed to conduct me farther on in

the

177 Pijierinii , the Nipiffings. This againft the Iroquois, and who were paff-
relates to thofe Nipiffings who had ac- ing the winter among the Hurons. He
companied Champlain on the expedition had expected that they would accom-
pany

l 49

Sieur de Champlain .

the profecution of my plans and explorations. But I was
prevented by the intelligence which came from our great
village and the Algonquins, where Captain Yroquet was,
namely, that the people of the nation of the Atignouaati-
tans 178 had placed in his hands a prifoner of a hoftile nation,
in the expeftation that this Captain Yroquet would exercife
on the prifoner the revenge ufual among them. But they
faid that, inflead of doing fo, he had not only fet him at
liberty, but, having found him apt, and an excellent hunter,
had treated him as his fon, on account of which the Ati-
gnouaatitans had become jealous and refolved upon ven-
geance, and had in fadt appointed a man to go and kill this
prifoner, allied as he was. As he was put to death in the
prefence of the chiefs of the Algonquin nation, they, indig-
nant at fuch an add and moved to anger, killed on the fpot
this rafh murderer; whereupon the Atignouaatitans feeling
themfelves infulted, feeing one of their comrades dead, feized
their arms and went to the tents of the Algonquins, who
were paffing the winter near the above mentioned village,
and belabored them feverely, Captain Yroquet receiving
two arrow wounds. At another time they pillaged fome of
the cabins of the Algonquins before the latter could place
themfelves in a date of defence, fo that they had not an
equal chance. Notwithffanding this they were not recon-
ciled to the Algonquins, who for fecuring peace had given
the Atignouaatitans fifty necklaces of porcelain and a hun-
dred

pany him on explorations on the north them of the quarrel that had arifen be-
of them. But arriving at their encamp- tween the Algonquins and the Hurons.
ment, or. his return from the Petuns 178 Attigouantans, the principal tribe
and Chtveux Relev^s, he learned from of the Hurons.

i5o

Voyages of

dred branches of the fame 179 which they value highly, and
likewife a number of kettles and axes, together with two
female prifoners in place of the dead man. They were, in a
word, ftill in a date of violent animofity. The Algonquins
were obliged to fuffer patiently this great rage, and feared
that they might all be killed, not feeling any fecurity,
notwithftanding their gifts, until they fhould be differently
fituated. This intelligence greatly difturbed me, when I
confidered the harm that might arife not only to them, but
to us as well, who were in their country.

I then met two or three favages of our large village, who
earneftly entreated me to go to them in order to effeft a
reconciliation, declaring that if I did not go none of them
would come to us any more, fmce they were at war with the
Algonquins and regarded us as their friends. In view of
this I fet out as foon as poffible, and vifited on my way the
Nipiffings to afcertain when they would be ready for the
journey to the north, which I found broken off on account of
these quarrels and hoftilities, as my interpreter gave me to
underftand, who faid that Captain Yroquet had come among
all thefe tribes to find and await me. He had requefted
them to be at the habitation of the French at the fame time
with himfelf to fee what agreement could be made between
them and the Atignouaatitans, and to poftpone the journey
to the north to another time. Moreover, Yroquet had given

porcelain

1,9 Colliers de pourceline. Thefe graved reprefentation may be feen in
necklaces were compofed of (hells, Hijloire de L' Amerique Septentnonale y
pierced and (Irung like beads. They par De la Potherie, Paris, 1722, Tom. I.
were of a violet color, and were efteemed p. 334. For a full defcription of thefe
of great value. The branches were necklaces and their fignificance and ufe
firings of white (hells, and were more in their councils, vide Charlevoix 1 s Let-
cornmon and lefs valuable. An en- ters, London, 1763, p. 132.

Sieur de Champlain . 1 5 1

porcelain to break off this journey. They promifed us to be
at our habitation at the fame time as the others.

If ever there was one greatly difheartened it was myfelf,
fince I had been waiting to fee this year what during many
preceding ones I had been feeking for with great toil and
effort, through fo many fatigues and rifks of my life. But
realizing that I could not help the matter, and that every-
thing depended on the will of God, I comforted myfelf, re-
folving to fee it in a fhort time. I had fuch fure informa-
tion that I could not doubt the report of thefe people, who
go to traffic with others dwelling in thofe northern regions,
a great part of whom live in a place very abundant in the
chafe, and where there are great numbers of large animals,
the fkins of feveral of which I faw, and which I concluded
were buffaloes 180 from their reprefentation of their form.
Fiffiing is alfo very abundant there. This journey requires
forty days, as well in returning as in going.

I fet out towards our above-mentioned village on the
15th of February, taking with me fix of our men. Having
arrived at that place the inhabitants were greatly pleafed, as
alfo the Algonquins, whom I fent our interpreter to vifit in
order to afcertain how everything had taken place on both

fides,

180 Buffles, buffaloes. The American
Bifon, Bos Amtricanus. The fkins
feen by Champlain in the poffeffion of
the favages feem to indicate that the
range of the buffalo was probably fur-
ther eaft at that period than at the
prefent time, its eaftern limit being now
about the Red River, which flows into
Lake Winnipeg. The limit of its
northern range is generally ftated to
be at latitude 60 °, but it is fometimes

found as far north as 63° or 64°. Vide
Dr. Shea’s intereiling account of the
buffalo in Difcovery and Exploration
of MiJJiJJippi Valley, p. 18. The range
of the Mulk Ox is ftill farther north,
rarely fouth of latitude 67°. His home
is in the Barren Grounds, weft of Hud-
fon Bay, and on the iilands on the north
of the American Continent, where he
fublifts largely on lichens and the
meagre herbage of that frofty region.

152

Voyages of

fides, for I did not with to go myfelf that I might give no
ground for fufpicion to either party.

Two days were fpent in hearing from both Tides how
everything had taken place. After this the principal men
and feniors of the place came away with us, and we all
together went to the Algonquins. Here in one of their
cabins, where feveral of the leading men were affembled,
they all, after fome talk, agreed to come and accept all that
might be faid by me as arbiter in the matter, and to carry
out what I might propofe.

Then I gathered the views of each one, obtaining and
inveftigating the wifhes and inclinations of both parties, and
afcertained that all they wanted was peace.

I fet forth to them that the belt courfe was to become
reconciled and remain friends, fince being united and bound
together they could the more eafily withftand their enemies;
and as I went away I begged them not to afk me to effedt
their reconciliation if they did not intend to follow in all re-
fpedts the advice I fhould give them in regard to this difpute,
fince they had done me the honor to requeft my opinion.
Whereupon they told me anew that they had not defired my
return for any other reafon. I for my part thought that if I
fhould not reconcile and pacify them they would feparate
ill difpofed towards each other, each party thinking itfelf
in the right. I reflected, alfo, that they would not have
gone to their cabins if I had not been with them, nor to the
French if I had not interefted myfelf and taken, fo to fpeak,
the charge and condudt of their affairs. Upon this I faid to
them that as for myfelf I propofed to go with my hoft, who
had always treated me well, and that I could with difficulty

find

»53

Sieur de Champlain.

find one fo good; for it was on him that the Algonquins laid
the blame, faying that he was the only captain who had
caufed the taking up of arms. Much was faid by both fidcs,
and finally it was concluded that I fhould tell them what
feemed to me beft, and give them my advice.

Since I faw now from what was faid that they referred the
whole matter to my own decifion as to that of a father, and
promifed that in the future I might difpofe of them as I
thought beft, referring the whole matter to my judgment
for fettlement, I replied that I was very glad to fee them fo
inclined to follow my advice, and affured them that it fhould
be only for the beft interefts of the tribes.

Moreover I told them, I had been greatly difturbed at
hearing the further fad intelligence, namely the death of one
of their relatives and friends, whom we regarded as one of
our own, which might have caufed a great calamity refulting
in nothing but perpetual wars between both parties, with
various and ferious difafters and a rupture of their friend-
fhip, in confequence of which the French would be deprived
of feeing them and of intercourfe with them, and be obliged
to enter into alliance with other nations; fince we loved
each other as brothers, leaving to God the punifhment of
thofe meriting it.

I proceeded to fay to them, that this mode of adftion be-
tween two nations, who were, as they acknowledged, friendly
to each other, was unworthy of reafoning men, but rather
charadleriftic of brute beafts. I reprefented to them, more-
over, that they were enough occupied in repelling their
enemies who purfued them, in routing them as often as
poftible, in purfuing them to their villages and taking them

20 prifoners ;

154

Voyages of

prifoners ; and that thefe enemies, feeing divifions and
wars among them, would be delighted and derive great ad-
vantage therefrom, and be led to lay new and pernicious
plans, in the hope of foon being able to fee their ruin, or at
leaft their enfeebling through one another, which would be
the trueft and eafieft way for them to conquer and become
matters of their territories, fince they did not affilt each
other.

I told them likewife that they did not realize the harm
that might befall them from thus adding; that on account of
the death of one man they hazarded the lives of ten thou-
fand, and ran the rifle of being reduced to perpetual flavery;
that, although in fact one man was of great value, yet they
ought to confider how he had been killed, and that it was
not with deliberate purpofe, nor for the fake of inciting a civil
Avar, it being only too evident that the dead man had firft
offended, fince with deliberate purpofe he had killed the
prifoner in their cabins, a moft audacious thing, even if the
latter were an enemy. This aroufed the Algonquins, who,
feeing a man that had been fo bold as to kill in their own
cabins another to whom they had given liberty and treated
as one of themfelves, were carried away with paffion ; and
fome, more excited than the reft, advanced, and, unable to
reftrain or control their wrath, killed the man in queftion.
Neverthclefs they had no ill feeling at all towards the nation
as a whole, and did not extend their purpofes beyond the
audacious one, who, they thought, fully deferved what he
had wantonly earned.

And befides I told them they mult confider that the En-
touhonoron, finding himfelf wounded by two blows in the

ftomach,

Sieur de Champlain. 155

ftomach, tore from his wound the knife which his enemy
had left there and gave the latter two blows, as I had been
informed ; fo that in fa6t one could not tell whether it was
really the Algonquins who had committed the murder. And
in order to fhow to the Attigouantans that the Algonquins
did not love the prifoner, and that Yroquet did not bear
towards him the affe&ion which they were difpofed to think,
I reminded them that they had eaten him, as he had inflidted
blows with a knife upon his enemy ; a thing, however, un-
worthy of a human being, but rather charadteriftic of brute
beafts.

I told them alfo that the Algonquins very much regretted
all that had taken place, and that, if they had fupppofecl fuch
a thing would have happened, they would have facrificed this
Iroquois for their fatisfadtion. I reminded them likewife
that they had made recompenfe for this death and offence,
if fo it fliould be called, by large prefents and two prifoners,
on which account they had no reafon at prefent to com-
plain, and ought to reftrain themfelves and adt more mildly
towards the Algonquins, their friends. I told them that,
fince they had promifed to fubmit every thing to arbitration,
I entreated them to forget all that had paffed between them
and never to think of it again, nor bear any hatred or ill will
on account of it to each other, but to live good friends as
before, by doing which they would conftrain us to love them
and affift them as I had done in the paft. But in cafe they
lliould not be pleafed with my advice, I requefted them to
come, in as large numbers as poffible, to our fettlcment, fo
that there, in the prefence of all the captains of veffels, our
friendthip might be ratified anew, and meafures taken to

fee ure

1 5 6 Voyages of

fecure them from their enemies, a thing which they ought
to confider.

Then they began to fay that I had fpoken well, and that
they would adhere to what I had faid, and all went away to
their cabins, apparently fatisfied, excepting the Algonquins,
who broke up and proceeded to their village, but who, as it
feemed to me, appeared to be not entirely fatisfied, fince
they faid among themfelves that they would not come to
winter again in thefe places, the death of thefe two men
having coft them too dearly. As for myfelf, I returned to
my hoft, in whom I endeavored to infpire all the courage I
could, in order to induce him to come to our fettlement,
and bring with him all thofe of his country.

During the winter, which lafted four months, I had fuffi-
cient leifure to obferve their country, culloms, drefs, manner
of living, the character of their affemblies, and other things
which I fhould like to defcribe. But it is neceffary firft to
fpeak of the fituation of the country in general and its divi-
fions, alfo of the location of the tribes and the diftances
between them.

The country extends in length, in the direction from eaft
to weft, nearly four hundred and fifty leagues, and fome
eighty or a hundred leagues in breadth from north to fouth,
from latitude 41 0 to 48° or 49 0181 This region is almoft an
ifland, furrounded by the great river Saint Lawrence, which
paffes through feveral lakes of great extent, on the fhores
of which dwell various tribes fpeaking different languages,
having fixed abodes, and all fond of the cultivation of the
foil, but with various modes of life, and cuftoms, fome better

than

181 Champlain is here fpeaking of the whole country of New France.

157

Sieur de Champlain.

than others. On the fhore north of this great river, extend-
ing wefterly Tome hundred leagues towards the Attigouan-
tans, 182 there are very high mountains, and the air is more
temperate than in any other part of thefe regions, the latitude
being 41°. All thefe places abound in game, fuch as flags,
caribous, elks, does, 183 buffaloes, bears, wolves, beavers, foxes,
minxes, 184 weafels, 185 and many other kinds of animals which
we do not have in France. Filhing is abundant, there being
many varieties, both thofe which we have in France, as
alfo others which we have not. There are likewife many
birds in their time and feafon. The country is traverfed by
numerous rivers, brooks, and ponds, connedling with each
other and finally emptying into the river St. Lawrence and
the lakes through which it paffes. The country is very
pleafant in fpring, is covered with extenfive and lofty for-
efts, and filled with wood fimilar to that which we have in
France, although in many places there is much cleared land,
where they plant Indian corn. This region alfo abounds in
meadows, lowlands, and marfhes, which furnifh food for the
animals before mentioned.

The country north of the great river is very rough and
mountainous, and extends in latitude from 47 0 to 49 0 , and
in places abounds in rocks. 186 So far as I could make out,

thefe

182 This fentence in the original is
unfinifhed and dcfedtive. Au cojle vers
le Nort , icelle grande riuiere terant a
c Occident, etc. In the ed. 1632, the
reading is A u cojle vers le nort d' icelle
grande nmere tirant au furoujl , etc.
The tranflation is according to the ed.
of 1632. Vide Quebec ed., p. t)4i.

88 Champlain here gives the four

fpecies of the cervus family under
names then known to him, viz., the
moofe, wapiti or elk, caribou, and the
common deer.

184 Foiiines, a quadruped known as
the minx or mink, Mujlela vifon.

186 Martes , weafels, Mujlela vulgaris.

186 The country on the north, &c.
Having defcribed the country along the

coaft

1 5 8 Voyages of

thefe regions are inhabited by favages, who wander through
the country, not engaging in the cultivation of the foil,
nor doing anything, or at lead as good as nothing. But
they are hunters, now in one place, now in another, the
region being very cold and difagreeable. This land on the
north is in latitude 49 0 and extends over fix hundred leagues
in breadth from eaft to weft, of parts of which we have full
knowledge. There are alfo many fine large rivers rifing in
this region and difcharging into the before-mentioned river,
together with an infinite number of fine meadows, lakes, and
ponds, through which they pafs, where there is an abundance
of fifh. There are likewife numerous iflands which are for
the moft part cleared up and very pleafant, the moft of them
containing great quantities of vines and wild fruits.

With regard to the regions further weft, we cannot well
determine their extent, fince the people here have no knowl-
edge of them except for two or three hundred leagues or
more wefterly, from whence comes the great river, which
paffes, among other places, through a lake having an extent
of nearly thirty days’ journey by canoe, namely that which
we have called the Mer Douce. This is of great extent, be-
ing nearly four hundred leagues long. Inafmuch as the fav-
ages, with whom we are on friendly terms, are at war with
other nations on the weft of this great lake, we cannot
obtain a more complete knowledge of them, except as they
have told us feveral times that fome prifoners from the dif-
tance of a hundred leagues had reported that there were
tribes there like ourfelves in color and in other refpedts.

Through

coaft of the St. Lawrence and the lakes, north, even to the fouthern borders of
he now refers to the country ftill further Hudfon’s Bay. Vide small map.

159

Sieur de Champlain.

Through them they have feen the hair of thefe people,
which is very light, and which they efteem highly, faying
that it is like our own. I can only conjedture in regard
to this, that the people they fay refemble us were thofe
more civilized than themfelves. It would require adtual
prefence to afcertain the truth in regard to this matter.
But affiftance is needed, and it is only men of means, leifure,
and energy, who could or would undertake to promote this
enterprife fo that a full exploration of thefe places might be
made, affording us a complete knowledge of them.

In regard to the region fouth of the great river it is very
thickly fettled, much more fo than that on the north, and by
tribes who are at war with each other. The country is very
pleafant, much more fo than that on the northern border, and
the air is more temperate. There are many kinds of trees
and fruits not found north of the river, while there are many
things on the north fide, in compenfation, not found on the
fouth. The regions towards the eaft are fufficiently well
known, inafmuch as the ocean borders thefe places. Thefe
are the coafts of Labrador, Newfoundland, Cape Breton, La
Cadie, and the Almouchiquois , 187 places well known, as I
have treated of them fufficiently in the narrative of my pre-
vious voyages, as likewife of the people living there, on
which account I fiiall not fpeak of them in this treatife, my
objedt being only to make a fuccindt and true report of what
I have feen in addition.

The country of the nation of the Attigouantans is in lati-
tude

187 Almouchiquois, fo in the French the Saco River, were denominated Al-
for Almouchiquois. All the tribes at mouchiquois by the French. Vide Vol.
and fouth of Choiiacoet, or the mouth of II. p. 63, et pajjim.

i6o

Voyages of

tude 44 0 30', and extends two hundred and thirty leagues 188
in length wefterly, and ten in breadth. It contains eighteen
villages, fix of which are enclofed and fortified by palifades
of wood in triple rows, bound together, on the top of which
are galleries, which they provide with ftones and water ; the
former to hurl upon their enemies and the latter to extin-
guifh the fire which their enemies may fet to the palifades.
The country is pleafant, moft of it cleared up. It has the
fhape of Brittany, and is fimilarly fituated, being almoft fur-
rounded by the Mer Douce™ They affume that thefe
eighteen villages are inhabited by two thoufand warriors,
not including the common mafs which amounts to perhaps
thirty thoufand fouls.

Their cabins are in the fhape of tunnels or arbors, and are
covered with the bark of trees. They are from twenty-five
to thirty fathoms long, more or lefs, and fix wide, having a
paffage-way through the middle from ten to twelve feet wide,
which extends from one end to the other. On the two fides
there is a kind of bench, four feet high, where they deep in
fummer, in order to avoid the annoyance of the fleas, of
which there are great numbers. In winter they deep on the
ground on mats near the fire, fo as to be warmer than they

would

188 The country of the Attigouan-
tans, fometimes written Attigouautans,
the principal tribe of the Hurons, ufed
by Champlain as including the whole,
with whom the French were in clofe
alliance, was from eaft to weft not more
than about twelve leagues. There muft
have been fome error by which the au-
thor is made to fay that it was two hun-
dred and thirty leagues. Laverdihre
suggefts that in the manufcript it might

have been 23, or 20 to 30, and that the
printer made it 230.

189 The author plainly means that the
country of the Hurons was nearly fur-
rounded by the Mer Douce ; that is to
fay, by Lake Huron and the waters con-
nected with it, viz., the River Severn,
Lake Couchiching, and Lake Simcoe.
As to the population, compare The Jef-
uits in North America , by Francis
Parkman, LL.D., note p. xxv.

Sieur de Champlain. 161

would be on the platform. They lay up a flock of dry wood,
with which they fill their cabins, to burn in winter. At the
extremity of the cabins there is a fpace, where they preferve
their Indian corn, which they put into great calks made of
the bark of trees and placed in the middle of their encamp-
ment. They have pieces of w'ood fufpended, on which they
put their clothes, provifions, and other things, for fear of the
mice, of which there are great numbers. In one of thefe
cabins there may be twelve fires, and twenty-four families.
It fmokes exceffively, from which it follows that many re-
ceive ferious injury to the eyes, fo that they lofe their fight
towards the clofe of life. There is no window nor any
opening, except that in the upper part of their cabins for the
fmoke to efcape.

This is all that I have been able to learn about their
mode of life ; and I have defcribed to you fully the kind of
dwelling of thefe people, as far as I have been able to learn
it, which is the fame as that of all the tribes living in thefe
regions. They fometimes change their villages at intervals
of ten, twenty, or thirty years, and transfer them to a difi
tance of one, two, or three leagues from the preceding fitu-
ation , 190 except when compelled by their enemies to diflodge,
in which cafe they retire to a greater diftance, as the Antou-
honorons, who went fome forty to fifty leagues. This is the
form of their dwellings, which are feparated from each other
fome three or four paces, for fear of fire, of which they are
in great dread.

Their life is a miferable one in comparifon with our own ;

but

190 Vide antea, note 172, for the reafon of thefe removals.

21

162

Voyages of

but they are happy among themfelves, not having experi-
enced anything better, and not imagining that anything
more excellent is to be found. Their principal articles of
food are Indian corn and Brazilian beans , 191 which they
prepare in various ways. By braying in a wooden mortar
they reduce the corn to meal. They remove the bran
by means of fans made of the bark of trees. From this
meal they make bread, ufing alfo beans which they firft
boil, as they do the Indian corn for foup, fo that they may
be more eafily crufhed. Then they mix all together, fome-
times adding blueberries 103 or dry rafpberries, and fometimes
pieces of deer’s fat, though not often, as this is fcarce with
them. After fteeping the whole in lukewarm water, they
make bread in the form of bannocks or pies, which they
bake in the allies. After they are baked they wafh them,
and from thefe they often make others by wrapping them in
corn leaves, which they fatten to them, and then putting them
in boiling water.

But this is not their moft common kind. They make an-
other, which they call migan , which is as follows: They
take the pounded Indian corn, without removing the bran,
and put two or three handfuls of it in an earthen pot full of
water. This they boil, ftirring it from time to time, that it
may not burn nor adhere to the pot. Then they put into

the

191 Fcbues du Brefil. This was un- Courfing of the Indians, His. Plymouth
doubtedly the common trailing bean, Plantation , p. 83. fpeaks of “their
Phafeolus vulgaris , probably called the beans of various collours.” It is poflible
Brazilian bean, becaufe it refembled a that the name, fcbues du Br(fil, was
bean known under that name. It was given to it on account of its red color,

found in cultivation in New England as was that of the Brazil-wood, from the

as mentioned by Champlain and the Portuguefe word braza , a burning coal,
early Englilh fettlers. Bradford dif- 192 Vide antea, note 101.

Sieur de Champlain. 163

the pot a fmall quantity of fifh, frefh or dry, according to
the feafon, to give a flavor to the migan , as they call it.
They make it very often, although it fmells badly, efpecially
in winter, either becaufe they do not know how to prepare
it rightly, or do not with to take the trouble to do fo. They
make two kinds of it, and prepare it very well when they
choofe. When they ufe fifh the migan does not fmell
badly, but only when it is made with venifon. After it is
all cooked, they take out the fifh, pound it very fine, and
then put it all together into the pot, not taking the trouble
to remove the appendages, fcales, or inwards, as we do,
which generally caufes a bad tafte. It being thus pre-
pared, they deal out to each one his portion. This migan
is very thin, and without much fubftance, as may be well fup-
pofed. As for drink, there is no need of it, the migan being
fufficiently thin of itfelf.

They have another kind of migan , namely, they roafi new
corn before it is ripe, which they preferve and cook whole
with fifh, or flefh when they have it. Another way is this :
they take Indian corn, which is very dry, roafi it in the
afhes, then bray it and reduce it to meal as in the former
cafe. This they lay up for the journeys which they under-
take here and there. The migan made in the latter manner
is the beft according to my tafte. Figure H fhows the
women braying their Indian corn. In preparing it, they
cook a large quantity of fifh and meat, which they cut into
pieces and put into great kettles, which they fill with w r ater
and let it all boil well. When this is done, they gather
with a fpoon from the furface the fat which comes from the
meat and fifh. Then they put in the meal of the roafted

corn,

164

Voyages of

corn, conftantly ftirring it until the migan is cooked and
thick as foup. They give to each one a portion, together
with a fpoonful of the fat This difh they are accuftomed to
prepare for banquets, but they do not generally make it.

Now the corn frefhly roafted, as above defcribed, is highly
efteemed among them. They eat alfo beans, which they boil
with the mafs of the roafted flour, mixing in a little fat and
fifh. Dogs are in requeft at their banquets, which they often
celebrate among themfelves, efpecially in winter, when they
are at leifure. In cafe they go hunting for deer or go fifh-
ing, they lay afide what they get for celebrating thefe ban-
quets, nothing remaining in their cabins but the ufual thin
migan , refembling bran and water, fuch as is given to hogs
to eat.

They have another way of eating the Indian corn. In
preparing it, they take it in the ear and put it in water under
the mud, leaving it two or three months in this ftate until
they think it is putrefied. Then they remove it, and eat it
boiled with meat or fifh. They alfo roaft it, and it is better
fo than boiled. But I affure you that there is nothing that
fmells fo badly as this corn as it comes from the water all
muddy. Yet the women and children take it and fuck it
like fugar-cane, nothing feeming to them to tafte better, as
they fhow by their manner. In general they have two
meals a day. As for ourfelves, we failed all of Lent and
longer, in order to influence them by our example. But it
was time loft.

They alfo fatten bears, which they keep two or three
years, for the purpofe of their banquets. I obferved that if
this people had domeftic animals they would be interefted

in

Sieur de Champlain. 165

in them and care for them very well, and I fhovved them the
way to keep them, which would be an eafy thing for them,
fince they have good grazing grounds in their country, and
in large quantities, for all kinds of animals, horfes, oxen,
cows, Iheep, fvvine, and other kinds, for lack of which one
would confider them badly off, as they feem to be. Yet
with all their drawbacks they feem to me to live happily
among themfelves, fince their only ambition is to live and
fupport themfelves, and they lead a more fettled life than
thofe who wander through the forefts like brute beafls. They
eat many fquafhes , 193 which they boil, and roaft in the allies.

In regard to their drefs, they have various kinds and flyles
made of the fkins of wild beafts, both thofe which they cap-
ture themfelves, and others which they get in exchange for
their Indian corn, meal, porcelain, and fifhing-nets from the
Algonquins, Nipiffings, and other tribes, which are hunters
having no fixed abodes. All their clothes are of one uniform
fiiape, not varied by any new flyles. They prepare and fit
very well the fkins, making their breeches of deer-fkin rather
large, and their ftockings of another piece, which extend up
to the middle and have many folds. Their fhoes are made
of the fkins of deer, bears, and beaver, of which they ufe
great numbers. Befides, they have a robe of the fame fur,
in the form of a cloak, which they wear in the Irifh or
Egyptian ffcyle, with fleeves which are attached with a firing
behind. This is the way they are dreffed in winter, as is
feen in figure D. When they go into the fields, they gird
up their robe about the body; but when in the village,

they

198 Sitrouelles, or citrouilles. the com- morpha. Vide Vol. II. note 128. For
mon fummer fquafh, Cucurbita poly- figure D, -vide p. 116.

1 66

Voyages of

they leave off their fleeves and do not gird themfelves. The
Milan trimmings for decorating their garments are made of
glue and the fcrapings of the before-mentioned fkins, of
which they make bands in various ftyles according to their
fancy, putting in places bands of red and brown color amid
thofe of the glue, which always keep a whitifh appearance,
not lofing at all their fhape, however dirty they may get.
There are thofe among thefe nations who are much more
fkilful than others in fitting the fkins, and ingenious in in-
venting ornaments to put on their garments. It is our
Montagnais and Algonquins, above all others, who take more
pains in this matter. They put on their robes bands of por-
cupine quills, which they dye a very fine fcarlet color . 194
They value thefe bands very highly, and detach them fo
that they may ferve for other robes when they wifh to make
a change. They alfo make ufe of them to adorn the face,
in order to give it a more graceful appearance whenever they
wifh particularly to decorate themfelves.

Moft of them paint the face black and red. Thefe colors
they mix with oil made from the feed of the fun-flower, or
with bear’s fat or that of other animals. They alfo dye their
hair, which fome wear long, others fliort, others on one fide
only. The women and girls always wear their hair in one
uniform ftyle. They are dreffed like men, except that they
always have their robes girt about them, which extend down

to

194 The coloring matter appears to
have been derived from the root of the
bedftraw, Galium tinctorum. Peter
Kalm, a pupil of Linnaeus, who travelled
in Canada in 1749, fays, “The roots of
this plant are employed by the Indians

in dyeing the quills of the American por-
cupines red, which they put into feve-
ral pieces of their work, and air, fun,
or water feldom change this color."
Travels into North America , London,
1771, Vol. III. pp. 14-15.

Sieur de Champlain. 167

to the knee. They are not at all afhamed to expofe the
body from the middle up and from the knees down, unlike
the men, the reft being always covered. They are loaded
with quantities of porcelain, in the fhape of necklaces and
chains, which they arrange in the front of their robes and
attach to their waiffe. They alfo wear bracelets and ear-
rings. They have their hair carefully combed, dyed, and oiled.
Thus they go to the dance, with a knot of their hair behind
bound up with eel-fkin, which they ufe as a cord. Some-
times they put on plates a foot fquare, covered with porce-
lain, which hang on the back. Thus gaily dreffed and
habited, they delight to appear in the dance, to which their
fathers and mothers fend them, forgetting nothing that they
can devife to embellifh and fet off their daughters. I can
teftify that I have feen at dances a girl who had more than
twelve pounds of porcelain on her perfon, not including the
other bagatelles with which they are loaded and bedecked.
In the illuftration already cited, F fliows the drefs of the
women, G that of the girls attired for the dance.

All thefe people have a very jovial difpofition, although
there are many of them who have a fad and gloomy look.
Their bodies are well proportioned. Some of the men and
women are well formed, ftrong, and robuft. There is a mod-
erate number of pleafing and pretty girls, in refpedt to figure,
color, and expreffion, all being in harmony. Their blood is
but little deteriorated, except when they are old. There are
among thefe tribes powerful women of extraordinary height.
Thefe have almoft the entire care of the houfe and work ;
namely, they till the land, plant the Indian corn, lay up a
ftore of wood for the winter, beat the hemp and fpin it,

making

1 68

Voyages of

making from the thread fidiing-nets and other ufeful things.
The women harveft the corn, houfe it, prepare it for eating,
and attend to houfehold matters. Moreover they are ex-
pedited to attend their hufbands from place to place in the
fields, filling the office of pack-mule in carrying the baggage,
and to do a thoufand other things. All the men do is to
hunt for deer and other animals, fifii, make their cabins, and
go to war. Having done thefe things, they then go to other
tribes with which they are acquainted to traffic and make
exchanges. On their return, they give themfelves up to
feftivities and dances, which they give to each other, and
when thefe are over they go to fleep, which they like to do
bed: of all things.

They have fome fort of marriage, which is as follows:
when a girl has reached the age of eleven, twelve, thirteen,
fourteen, or fifteen years fhe has fuitors, more or lefs accord-
ing to her attractions, who woo her for fome time. After
this, the confent of their fathers and mothers is afked, to
whofe will the girls often do not fubmit, although the mod:
difcreet and confiderate do fo. The lover or fuitor prefents
to the girl fome necklaces, chains, and bracelets of porcelain.
If the girl finds the fuitor agreeable, die receives the prefent.
Then the lover comes and remains with her three or four
nights, without faying anything to her during the time.
They receive thus the fruit of their affections. Whence it
happens very often that, after from eight to fifteen days, if
they cannot agree, die quits her fuitor, who forfeits his neck-
laces and other prefents that he has made, having received
in return only a meagre fatisfaction. Being thus difap-
pointed in his hopes, the man feeks another woman, and the

girl

Sieur de Champlain. 169

girl another fuitor, if it feems to them defirable. Thus they
continue to do until a favorable union is formed. It fome-
times happens that a girl thus paffes her entire youth, hav-
ing more than twenty mates, which twenty are not alone in
the enjoyment of the creature, mated though they are ; for
when night comes the young women run from one cabin to
another, as do alfo the young men on their part, going where
it feems good to them, but always without any violence,
referring the whole matter to the pleafure of the woman.
Their mates will do likewife to their women-neighbors, no
jealoufy arifing among them on that account, nor do they
incur any reproach or infult, fuch being the cuflom of the
country.

Now the time when they do not leave their mates is when
they have children. The preceding mate returns to her,
renews the affection and friendfhip which he had borne
her in the paft, afferting that it is greater than that of any
other one, and that the child file has is his and of his beget-
ting. The next fays the fame to her. In fine, the victory
is with the ftronger, who takes the woman for his wife.
Thus it depends upon the choice of the woman to take and
accept him who fhall pleafe her belt, having meantime in her
fearching and loves gained much porcelain and, befides, the
choice of a hufband. The woman remains with him without
leaving him ; or if fhe do leave him, for he is on trial, it muft
be for fome good reafon other than impotence. But while
with this hufband, fhe does not ceafe to give herfelf free rein,
yet remains always at home, keeping up a good appearance.
Thus the children which they have together, born from fuch
a woman, cannot be fure of their legitimacy. Accordingly,

in

22

1 70 Voyages of

in view of this uncertainty, it is their cuftom that the chil-
dren never fucceed to the property and honors of their
fathers, there being doubt, as above indicated, as to their
paternity. They make, however, the children of their fillers,
from whom they are known to have iffued, their fucceffors
and heirs.

The following is the way they nourilh and bring up their
children : they place them during the day on a little wooden
board, wrapping them up in furs or Ikins. To this board they
bind them, placing them in an eredl pofition, and leaving a
little opening for the child to do its neceffities. If it is a
girl, they put a leaf of Indian corn between the thighs, which
preffes againlt its privates. The extremity of the leaf is
carried outfide in a turned pofition, fo that the water of the
child runs off on it without inconvenience. They put alfo
under the children the down of certain reeds that we call
hare’s-foot, on which they reft very foftly. They alfo clean
them with the fame down. As an ornament for the child, they
adorn the board with beads, which they alfo put on its neck,
however fmall it may be. At night they put it to bed, entirely
naked, between the father and mother. It may be regarded
as a great miracle that God fliould thus preferve it fo that
no harm befalls it, as might be expedted, from fuffocation,
while the father and mother are in deep deep, but that rarely
happens. The children have great freedom among thefe
tribes. The fathers and mothers indulge them too much,
and never punifti them. Accordingly they are fo bad and of
fo vicious a nature, that they often ftrike their mothers and
others. The moft vicious, when they have acquired the
ftrength and power, ftrike their fathers. They do this when-
ever

Sieur de Champlain. i 7 1

ever the father or mother does anything that does not pleafe
them. This is a fort of curfe that God inflidis upon them.

In refpedt to laws, I have not been able to find out that
they have any, or anything that approaches them, inafmuch
as there is not among them any corredtion, punifbment, or
cenfure of evil-doers except in the way of vengeance, when
they return evil for evil, not by rule but by paffion, which
produces among them conflicts and differences, which occur
very frequently.

Moreover, they do not recognize any divinity, or worfhip
any God and believe in anything whatever, but live like
brute beads. They have, however, fome refpedt for the devil,
or fomething fo called, which is a matter of uncertainty,
fince the word which they ufe thus has various fignifications
and comprifes in itfelf various things. It is accordingly dif-
ficult to determine whether they mean the devil or fome-
thing elfe, but what efpecially leads to the belief that what
they mean is the devil is this : whenever they fee a man
doing fomething extraordinary, or who is more capable than
ufual, or is a valiant warrior, or furthermore who is in a rage
as if out of his reafon and fenfes, they call him oqui , or, as
we fhould fay, a great knowing fpirit, or a great devil.
However this may be, they have certain perfons, who are
the oqui , or, as the Algonquins and Montagnais call them,
manitous ; and perfons of this kind are the medicine-men,
who heal the fick, bind up the wounded, and predidt future
events, who in fine practife all abufes and illufions of the
devil to deceive and delude them. Thefe oquis or conjur-
ers perfuade their patients and the fick to make, or have
made banquets and ceremonies that they may be the fooner

healed,

172 Voyages of

healed, their objed being to participate in them finally them-
felves and get the principal benefit therefrom. Under the
pretence of a more fpeedy cure, they likewife caufe them to
obferve various other ceremonies, which I lhall hereafter
fpeak of in the proper place. Thefe are the people in whom
they put efpecial confidence, but it is rare that they are pof-
feffed of the devil and tormented like other favages living
more remote than themfelves.

This gives additional reafon and ground to believe that
their converfion to the knowledge of God would be more
eafy, if their country were inhabited by perfons who would
take the trouble and pains to inftrudt them. But it is not
enough to fend to them friars, unlefs there are thofe to fup-
port and affift them. For although thefe people have the
delire to-day to know what God is, to-morrow this difpofi-
tion will change when they are obliged to lay afide and bring
under their foul ways, their diffolute manners, and their
favage indulgences. So that there is need of people and
families to keep them in the way of duty, to conftrain them
through mildnefs to do better, and to move them by good
example to mend their lives. Father Jofeph 195 and myfelf
have many times conferred with them in regard to our
belief, laws, and cuftoms. They liftened attentively in their
affemblies, fometimes faying to us: You fay things that pafs
our knowledge, and which we cannot underftand by words,
being beyond our comprehenfion ; but if you would do us a
fervice come and dwell in this country, bringing your wives
and children, and when they are here we lhall fee how you

ferve

ms p£ re j 0 f e ph L e Caron, who had pafied the winter among the Hurons.

Sieur de Champlain. 173

ferve the God you worfhip, and how you live with your
wives and children, how you cultivate and plant the foil,
how you obey your laws, how you take care of animals,
and how you manufacture all that we fee proceeding from
your inventive fkill. When we fee all this, we fliall learn
more in a year than in twenty by fimply hearing you dif-
courfe; and if we cannot then underhand, you fliall take
our children, who fliall be as your own. And thus being
convinced that our life is a miferable one in comparifon
with yours, it is eafy to believe that we fhall adopt yours,
abandoning our own.

Their words feemed to me good common fenfe, fhowing
the defire they have to get a knowledge of God. It is a
great wrong to let fo many men be loft, and fee them perifh
at our door, without rendering them the fuccor which can
only be given through the help of kings, princes, and eccle-
fiaftics, who alone have the power to do this. For to them
alone belongs the honor of fo great a work ; namely, planting
the Chriftian faith in an unknown region and among favage
nations, since we are well informed about thefe people, that
they long for and defire nothing fo much as to be clearly
inftru<5ted as to what they fhould do and avoid. It is ac-
cordingly the duty of thofe who have the power, to labor
there and contribute of their abundance, for one day they
muft anfwer before God for the lofs of the fouls which they
allowed to perifh through their negligence and avarice ; and
thefe are not few but very numerous. Now this will be
done when it fliall pleafe God to give them grace to this
end. As for myfelf, I defire this refult rather to-day than
to-morrow, from the zeal which I have for the advancement

of

174

Voyages of

of God’s glory, for the honor of my King, and for the wel-
fare and renown of my country.

When they are fick, the man or woman who is attacked
with any difeafe fends for the oqui, who vifits the patient
and informs himfelf about the malady and the fuffering.
After this, the oqui fends for a large number of men, women,
and girls, including three or four old women. Thefe enter
the cabin of the fick, dancing, each one having on his head
the fkin of a bear or fome other wild bead, that of the bear
being the moft common as it is the moft frightful. There
are three or four other old women about the fick or fuffer-
ing, who for the moft part feign ficknefs, or are fick merely
in imagination. But they are foon cured of this ficknefs,
and generally make banquets at the expenfe of their friends
or relatives, who give them fomething to put into their
kettle, in addition to the prefents which they receive from
the dancers, fuch as porcelain and other bagatelles, fo that
they are foon cured; for when they find that they have
nothing more to look for, they get up with what they have
fecured. But thofe who are really fick are not readily cured
by plays, dances, and fuch proceedings.

To retuin to my narrative : the old women near the fick
peifon receive the prefents, each finging and paufing in turn.
When all the prefents have been made, they proceed to lift
up their voices with one accord, all finging together and
keeping time with flicks on pieces of dry bark. Then all the
women and girls proceed to the end of the cabin, as if they
wei e about to begin a ballet or mafquerade. The old women
walk in front with their bearfkins on their heads, all the others
following them, one after the other. They have only two

kinds

Sieur de Champlain. 175

kinds of dances with regular time, one of four fteps and the
other of twelve, as in the trioli de Bretagne. They exhibit
much grace in dancing. Young men often take part with
them. After dancing an hour or two, the old women lead
out the fick perfon to dance, who gets up dolefully and pre-
pares to dance, and after a fhort time the dances and enjoys
as much as the others. I leave it to you to confider how
fick flie was. Below is reprefented the mode of their
dances.

The medicine-man thus gains honor and credit, his patient
being fo foon healed and on her feet. This treatment, how-
ever, does nothing for thofe who are dangeroufly ill and
reduced by weaknefs, but caufes their death rather than
their cure ; for I can teftify that they fometimes make fuch
a noife and hubbub from morning until two o’clock at night
that it is impoffible for the patient to endure it without great
pain. Sometimes the patient is feized with the defire to
have the women and girls dance all together, which is done
in accordance with the direction of the oqui. But this is
not all, for he and the manitou , accompanied by fome others,
make grimaces, perform magic arts, and twift themfelves
about fo that they generally end in being out of their fenfes,
feemingly crazy, throwing the fire from one fide of the cabin
to the other, eating burning coals, holding them in their
hands for a while, and throwing red-hot afhes into the eyes
of the fpedfators. Seeing them in this condition, one would
fay that the devil, the oqui , or manitou, if he is thus to be
called, poffeffes and torments them. This noife and hubbub
being over, they retire each to his own cabin.

But thofe who fuffer efpecially during this time are the

wives

1 76 Voyages of

wives of thofe poffeffed, and all the inmates of their cabins,
from the fear they have left the raging ones burn up all that
is in their houfes. This leads them to remove everything
that is in fight; for as foon as he arrives he is all in a
fury, his eyes flafliing and frightful, fometimes ftanding up,
fometimes feated, as his fancy takes him. Suddenly a fit
feizes him, and laying hold of everything he finds in his
way he throws them to one 'fide and the other. Then he
lies down and fleeps for fome time. Waking up with a
jump, he feizes fire and ftones which he throws about reck-
lefsly on all fides. This rage paffes off with the fleep which
feizes him again. Then he rages and calls feveral of his
friends to fweat with him. The latter is the beft means they
have for preferring themfelves in health. While they are
fweating, the kettle boils to prepare them fomething to eat.
They remain, two or three hours or fo, covered up with great
pieces of bark and wrapped in their robes, with a great many
ftones about them which have been heated red hot in the
fire. They fing all the time while they are in the rage, occa-
fionally flopping to take breath. Then they give them many
draughts of water to drink, fince they are very thirfty, when
the demoniac, who was crazy or poffeffed of an evil fpirit,
becomes fober.

Thus it happens that three or four of thefe lick perfons
get well, rather by a happy coincidence and chance than
in confequence of any intelligent treatment, and this con-
fiims their falfe belief that they are healed by means of
thefe ceremonies, not confidering that, for two who are thus
cured, ten others die on account of the noife, great hubbub
and hiffing, which are rather calculated to kill than cure

a

Sieur de Champlain. \ yy

a Tick perfon. But that they exped to recover their health
by this noife, and we on the contrary by filence and reft
fhows how the devil does everything in hoftility to the good.’
There aie alfo women who go into thefe rages, but they
do not do fo much harm. They walk on all fours like beafts.
Seeing this, the magician, called oqui , begins to ting ; then,
with fome contortions of the face, he blows upon her, ’dired-
ing her to drink certain waters, and make at once a banquet
of fifh or flefh, which muft be procured although very fcarce
at the time. W hen the fhouting is over and the banquet
ended, they return each to her own cabin. At another time
he comes back and viftts her, blowing upon her and finging
in company with feveral others, who have been fummoned
for this purpofe, and who hold in the hand a dry tortoife-fhell
filled with little pebbles, which they caufe to refound in the
ears of the Tick woman. They dire# her to make at once
three or four banquets with finging and dancing, when all
the girls appear adorned and painted as I have reprefented
in figure G. The oqui orders mafquerades, and direds
them to difguife themfelves, as thofe do who run along the
ftrects in France on March-gras . l! ' 6 Thus they go and fing
near the bed of the fick woman and promenade through the
village while the banquet is preparing to receive the mafkers,
who return very tired, having taken exercife enough to be
able to empty the kettle of its migan.

According to their cuftom each houfehold lives on what
it gets by fifhing and planting, improving as much land as it
needs. They clear it up with great difficulty, fince they do

not

“ 9 Mardi-gras, Shrove-Tuefday, or nival, the dav before Afh Wednefday,
flejh Tue/day, the laft day of the Car- the firft day in Lent.

23

i ;8

Voyages of

not have the implements adapted to this purpofe. A party
ftrip the trees of all their branches, which they burn at
their bafe in order to kill them. They clear carefully the
land between the trees, and then plant their corn at dif-
tances of a pace, putting in each place fome ten kernels, and
fo on until they have made provifion for three or four years,
fearing that a bad year may befall them. The women attend
to the planting and harvefting, as I have faid before, and to
procuring a fupply of wood for winter. All the women aid
each other in procuring this provifion of wood, which they
do in the month of March or April, in the order of two
days for each. Every houfehold is provided with as much
as it needs ; and if a girl marries, each woman and girl
is expected to carry to the newly married one a parcel of
wood for her provifion, lince fine could not procure it alone,
and at a feafon when fire has to give her attention to other
things.

The following is their mode of government : the older
and leading men affemble in a council, in which they fettle
upon and propofe all that is neceffary for the affairs of the
village. This is done by a plurality of voices, or in ac-
cordance with the advice of fome one among them whofe
judgment they confider fuperior: fuch a one is requefted
by the company to give his opinion on the propofitions that
have been made, and this opinion is minutely obeyed.
They have no particular chiefs with abfolute command, but
they fhow honor to the older and more courageous men,
whom they name captains, as a mark of honor and refpedt,
of which there are feveral in a village. But, although they
confer more honor upon one than upon others, yet he is not

on

Sieur de Champlain. 1 79

on that account to bear fway, nor efteem himfelf higher
than his companions, unlefs he does fo from vanity. They
make no ufe of punifhments nor arbitrary command, but
accomplifh everything by the entreaties of the feniors, and
by means of addreffes and remonftrances. Thus and not
otherwife do they bring everything to pafs.

They all deliberate in common, and whenever any mem-
ber of the affembly offers to do anything for the welfare of the
village, or to go anywhere for the fervice of the community,
he is requefted to prefent himfelf, and if he is judged capa-
ble of carrying out what he propofes, they exhort him, by fair
and favorable words, to do his duty. They declare him to be
an energetic man, fit for undertakings, and affure him that
he will win honor in accomplifhing them. In a word, they
encourage him by flatteries, in order that this favorable dif-
pofition of his for the welfare of his fellow-citizens may
continue and increafe. Then, according to his pleafure, he
refufes the refponfibility, which few do, or accepts, fince
thereby he is held in high efteem.

When they engage in wars or go to the country of their
enemies, two or three of the older or valiant captains make
a beginning in the matter, and proceed to the adjoining
villages to communicate their puqoofe, and make prefents to
the people of thcfe villages, in order to induce them to
accompany them to the wars in queftion. In fo far they adl
as generals of armies. They defignate the place where they
defire to go, difpofe of the prifoners who are captured, and
have the direction of other matters of efpecial importance,
of which the)'- get the honor, if they are fuccefsful ; but, if
not, the difgrace of failure in the war falls upon them.

Thefe

1 80 Voyages of

Thefe captains alone are looked upon and confidered as
chiefs of the tribes.

They have, moreover, general affemblies, with reprefenta-
tives from remote regions. Thefe reprefentatives come every
year, one from each province, and meet in a town defignated
as the rendezvous of the affembly. Here are celebrated great
banquets and dances, for three weeks or a month, according
as they may determine. Here they renew their friendfhip,
refolve upon and decree what they think beft for the prefer-
vation of their country againft their enemies, and make each
other handfome prefents, after which they retire each to his
own diftridl.

In burying the dead, they take the body of the deceafed,
wrap it in furs, and cover it very carefully with the bark
of trees. Then they place it in a cabin, of the length of the
body, made of bark and eredted upon four polls. Others
they place in the ground, propping up the earth on all
fides, that it may not fall on the body, which they cover
with the bark of trees, putting earth on top. Over this
trench they alfo make a little cabin. Now it is to be under-
flood that the bodies remain in thefe places, thus inhumed,
but for a period of eight or ten years, when the men of the
village recommend the place where their ceremonies are
to take place; or, to fpeak more precifely, they hold a
general council, in which all the people of the country are
prefent, for the purpofe of defignating the place where a
feflival is to be held. After this they return each to his
own village, where they take all the bones of the deceafed,
flrip them and make them quite clean. Thefe they keep
very carefully, although they fmell like bodies recently in-
terred.

1 8 1

Sieur de Champlain.

terred. Then all the relatives and friends of the deceafed
take thefe bones, together with their necklaces, furs, axes,
kettles, and other things highly valued, and carry them,
with a quantity of edibles, to the place affigned. Here,
when all have affembled, they put the edibles in a place
defignated by the men of the village, and engage in ban-
quets and continual dancing. The feftival continues for
the fpace of ten days, during which time other tribes, from
all quarters, come to witnefs it and the ceremonies. The
latter are attended with great outlays.

Now, by means of these ceremonies, including dances,
banquets, and affemblies, as above dated, they renew their
friendfhip to one another, faying that the bones of their rela-
tives and friends are to be all put together, thus indicating
by a figure that, as their bones are gathered together and
united in one and the fame place, fo ought they alfo, during
their life, to be united in one friendfhip and harmony, like
relatives and friends, without feparation. Having thus min-
gled together the bones of their mutual relatives and friends,
they pronounce many difcourfes on the occafion. Then, after
various grimaces or exhibitions, they make a great trench, ten
fathoms fquare, in which they put the bones, together with
the necklaces, chains of porcelain, axes, kettles, fword-blades,
knives, and various other trifles, which, however, are of no
flight account in their eftimation. They cover the whole
with earth, putting on top feveral great pieces of wood, and
placing around many pofts, on which they put a covering.
This is their manner of proceeding with regard to the dead,
and it is the moft prominent ceremony they have. Some
of them believe in the immortality of the foul, while others

have

1 82

Voyages of

have only a prefentiment of it, which, however, is not fo
very different ; for they fay that after their deceafe they will
go to a place where they will fmg, like crows, a fong, it muft
be confeffed, quite different from that of angels. On the
following page are reprefented their fepulchres and manner
of interment.

It remains to defcribe how they fpend their time in win-
ter ; namely, from the month of December to the end of
March, or the beginning of our fpring, when the fnow
melts. All that they might do during autumn, as I have
before ftated, they poftpone to be done during winter ;
namely, their banquetings, and ufual dances for the fake of
the fick, which I have already defcribed, and the affemblages
of the inhabitants of various villages, where there are ban-
quetings, finging, and dances, which they call tabagiesg and
where fometimes five hundred perfons are colle&ed, both
men, women, and girls. The latter are finely decked and
adorned with the belt and moft coftly things they have.

On certain days they make mafquerades, and vifit each
other’s cabins, afking for the things they like, and if they
meet thofe who have what they want, these give it to them
freely. Thus they go on afking for many things without
end ; fo that a fingle one of thofe foliciting will have robes
of beaver, bear, deer, lynxes, and other furs, alfo fifh, Indian
corn, tobacco, or boilers, kettles, pots, axes, pruning-knives,
knives, and other like things. They go to the houfes and
cabins of the village, finging thefe words, That one gave
me this, another gave that, or like words, by way of com-
mendation

197 Vide Vol. I. pp. 236-238.

Szetir de Champlain. 183

mendation. But if one gives them nothing they get angry,
and fhow fuch fpite towards him that when they leave they
take a ftone and put it near this man or that woman who
has not given them anything. Then, without faying a
word, they return Tinging, which is a mark of infult, cenfure,
and ill-will. The women do fo as well as the men, and this
mode of proceeding takes place at night, and the mafquer-
ade continues feven or eight days. There are fome of their
villages which have mafkers or merry-makers, as we do on
the evening of Mardi-gras , and they invite the other vil-
lages to come and fee them and win their utenfils, if they
can. Meanwhile banquets are not wanting. This is the
way they fpend their time in winter.

Moreover the women fpin, and pound meal for the journeys
of their hufbands in fummer, who go to other tribes to trade,
as they decide to do at the above-mentioned councils, in
which it is determined what number of men may go from
each village, that it may not be deprived of men of war for
its protection ; and nobody goes from the country without
the general confent of the chiefs, or if they fhould go they
would be regarded as behaving improperly. The men make
nets for fifhing, which they carry on in fummer, but gener-
ally in winter, when they capture the fifh under the ice with
the line or with the feine.

The following is their manner of fifhing. They make
feveral holes in a circular form in the ice, the one where
they are to draw the feine being fome five feet long and
three wide. Then they proceed to place their net at this
opening, attaching it to a rod of wood from fix to feven feet
long, which they put under the ice. This rod they caufe to

pafs

1 84 Voyages of

pafs from hole to hole, when one or more men, putting their
hands in the holes, take hold of the rod to which is attached
an end of the net, until they unite at the opening of five to
fix feet. Then they let the net drop to the bottom of the
water, it being funk by little ftones attached to the end.
After it is down they draw it up again with their arms at its
two ends, thus capturing the fifh that are in it. This is, in
brief, their manner of fifhing in winter.

The winter begins in the month of November and con-
tinues until the month of April, when the trees begin to
fend forth the fap and fhow their buds.

On the 2 2d of the month of April we received news from
our interpreter, who had gone to Carantoiian, through thofe
who had come from there. They told us that they had left
him on the road, he having returned to the village for
certain reafons.

Now, refuming the thread of my narrative, our favages
affembled to come with us, and condudt us back to our hab-
itation, and for this purpofe we fet out from their country on
the 20th of the month , 198 and were forty days on the way.
We caught a large number of fifh and animals of various
kinds, together with small game, which afforded us efpecial
pleafure, in addition to the provifions thus furnifhed us for
our journey. Upon our arrival among the French, towards
the end of the month of June, I found Sieur du Pont Grave,
who had come from France with two veffels, and who had
almoft defpaired of feeing me again, having heard from the
favages the bad news, that I was dead.

We

198 This mail have been on the 20th of May.

Sieur de Champlain. 185

We alfo faw all the holy fathers who had remained at
our fettlement. They too were very happy to fee us again,
and we none the lefs fo to fee them. Welcomes and felici-
tations on all fides being over, I made arrangements to fet
out from the Falls of St. Louis for our fettlement, taking
with me my holt D’Arontal. I took leave alfo of all the
other favages, affuring them of my affeCtion, and that, if I
could, 1 would fee them in the future, to affift them as I
had already done in the paft, bringing them valuable pref-
ents to fecure their friendlhip with one another, and beg-
ging them to forget all the difputes which they had had
when I reconciled them, which they promifed to do.

Then we fet out, on the 8th of July, and arrived at our
fettlement on the i ith of that month. Here I found every-
body in good health, and we all, in company with our holy
fathers, who chanted the Divine fervice, returned thanks to
God for His care in preferving us, and protecting us amid
the many perils and dangers to which we had been expofed.

After this, and when everything had become fettled, I
proceeded to fhow hofpitalities to my holt, D’Arontal, who
admired our building, our condudt, and mode of living.
After carefully obferving us, he faid to me, in private, that
he fliould never die contented until he had feen all of his
friends, or at leaft a good part of them, come and take
up their abode with us, in order to learn how to ferve God,
and our way of living, which he efteemed fupremely happy
in comparifon with their own. Moreover he faid that, if he
could not learn it by word of mouth, he would do fo much
better and more eafily by fight and by frequent intercourfe,
and that, if their minds could not comprehend our arts,

fciences,

24

1 86

Voyages of

fciences, and trades, their children who were young could
do fo, as they had often reprefented to us in their country in
converfation with Father Jofeph. He urged us, for the pro-
motion of this objedt, to make another fettlement at the
Falls of St. Louis, fo as to fecure them the paffage of the
river againft their enemies, affuring us that, as foon as we
fhould build a houfe, they would come in numbers to live
as brothers with us. Accordingly I promifed to make a
fettlement for them as foon as poffible.

After we had remained four or five days together, I
gave him fome valuable prefents, with which he was greatly
pleafed, and I begged him to continue his affection for us,
and come again to fee our fettlement with his friends.
Then he returned happy to the Falls of St. Louis, where
his companions awaited him.

When this Captain D’Arontal had departed, we enlarged
our habitation by a third at leaft in buildings and fortifica-
tions, fince it was not fufficiently fpacious, nor convenient
for receiving the members of our own company and likewife
the ftrangers that might come to fee us. We ufed, in build-
ing, lime and fand entirely, which we found very good
there in a fpot near the habitation. This is a very ufeful
material for building for thofe difpofed to adapt and accuf-
tom themfelves to it.

The Fathers Denis and Jofeph determined to return to
France, in order to teftify there to all they had feen, and to
the hope they could promife themfelves of the converfion of
thefe people, who awaited only the affiftance of the holy
fathers in order to be converted and brought to our faith
and the Catholic religion.

During

Sieur de Champlain. 187

During my ftay at the fettlement I had fome common
grain cut; namely, French grain, which had been planted
there and which had come up very finely, that I might
take it to France, as evidence that the land is good and
fertile. In another part, moreover, there was fome fine In-
dian corn, alfo fcions and trees which had been given us by
Sieur du Monts in Normandy. In a word, all the gardens
of the place were in an admirably fine condition, being
planted with peas, beans, and other vegetables, alfo fquafhes
and very fuperior radifhes of various forts, cabbages, beets,
and other kitchen vegetables. When on the point of
departure, we left two of our fathers at the fettlement;
namely, Fathers Jean d’Olbeau and Pacifique, 199 who were
greatly pleafed with all the time fpent at that place, and
refolved to await there the return of Father Jofeph, 200 who
was expected to come back in the following year, which
he did.

We failed in our barques the aoth day of July, and
arrived at Tadouffac the 23d day of the month, where Sieur
du Pont Grave awaited us with his veffel ready and equipped.
In this we embarked and fet out the 3d day of the month
of Auguft. The wind was fo favorable that we arrived in
health by the grace of God, at Honfleur, on the 10th day of
September, one thoufand fix hundred and fixteen, and upon
our arrival rendered praife and thanks to God for his great
care in preferving our lives, and delivering and even {hatch-
ing us, as it were, from the many dangers to which we had
been expofed, and for bringing and conducing us in health

to

m Jean d’Olbeau and the lay brother 200 Jofeph le Caron, who accompanied
Pacifique du Pleffis. Champlain to France.

1 88

V oyages of Champlain .

to our country ; we befought Him alfo to move the heart of
our King, and the gentlemen of his council, to contribute
their affiftance fo far as neceffary to bring thefe poor favages
to the knowledge of God, whence honor will redound to his
Majefty, grandeur and growth to his realm, profit to his
fubjeds, and the glory of all thefe undertakings and toils to
God, the foie author of all excellence, to whom be honor
and glory. Amen.

CONTINUATION OF THE VOYAGES

AND DISCOVERIES MADE IN NEW FRANCE,

BY

SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN,

CAPTAIN FOR THE KING IN THE WESTERN MARINE,
IN THE YEAR 1618.

T the beginning of the year one thoufand fix
hundred and eighteen, on the twenty-fecond of
March, I fet out from Paris , 201 together with
my brother-in-law , 202 for Honfleur, our ufual
port of embarkation. There we were obliged to
make a long ftay on account of contrary winds. But
when they had become favorable, we embarked on the large
veffel of the affociation, which Sieur du Pont Grave com-
manded. There was alfo on board a nobleman, named De

la Mothe,

201 Champlain made a voyage to New brief narrative of the events that oc-
France in 1617, but appears to have curred that year. Vol. I. pp. 34~44
kept no journal of its events. He fim- 202 Euftache Boulld. His father was
ply obferves that nothing occurred Nicolas Boulld, Secretary of the King s
worthy of remark. Vide ilfue of 1632, Chamber, and his mother was Mar-
Quebec ed., p. 969. Sagard gives a guerite Alix. Vide Vol. I. p. 205 et

pajjim.

190

Voyages of

la Mothe, 203 who had previoully made a voyage with the Jefu-
its to the regions of La Cadie, where he was taken prifoner
by the Englifh, and by them carried to the Virginias, the
place of their fettlement. Some time after they transferred
him to England and from there to France, where there arofe
in him an increafed defire to make another voyage to New
France, which led him to feek the opportunity prefented by
me. I had aflured him, accordingly, that I would ufe my
influence and affiftance with our aflociates, as it feemed to
me that they would find fuch a perfon defirable, fince he
would be very ufeful in thofe. regions.

Our embarkation being made, we took our departure
from Honfleur on the 24th day of May following, in the
year 16x8. The wind was favorable for our voyage, but
continued fo only a very few days, when it fuddenly changed,
and we had all the time head winds up to our arrival, on the
3d day of June following, on the Grand Bank, where the
freflx fifhery is carried on. Here we perceived to the wind-
ward of us fome banks of ice, which came down from the
north. While waiting for a favorable wind we engaged in
fifhing, which afforded us great pleafure, not only on ac-
count of the fifh but alfo of a kind of bird called fauquets , 204
and other kinds that are caught on the line like fifh. For,

on

203 Nicolas de La Mothe, or de la Peter Kalm, on his voyage in 1749, fays

Motte le Vilin. He had been Lieutenant “ Terns, Jlerna hirundo, Linn., though
of Sauflaye in 1613, when Capt. Argali of a fomewhat darker colour than the
captured the French colony at Mount common ones, we found after the forty-
Defert. Vide Les Voyages de Chant- firft degree of north latitude and forty-
plain , 1632, Quebec ed., p. 773; Rela- feventh degree of weft longitude from
turn de la Nouvelle France, P£re Biard, London , very plentifully, and fometimes
P- 64. in flocks of fome hundreds; fometimes

204 Fatiquets. Probably the common they fettled, as if tired, on our fhip.”
Tern, or Sea Swallow. Sterna hirundo. Kahn's Travels, 1770, Vol. I. p. 23.

Sieur de Champlain. 19 1

on throwing the line, with its hook baited with cod liver,
thefe birds made for it with a ruth, and in fuch numbers
that you could not draw it out in order to throw it again,
without capturing them by the beak, feet, and wings as they
flew and fell upon the bait, fo great were the eagernefs and
voracity of thefe birds. This fifhing afforded us great pleaf-
ure, not only on account of the fport, but on account of the
infinite number of birds and fifli that we captured, which
were very good eating, and made a very defirable change
on fhipboard.

Continuing on our route, we arrived on the 15th of the
month off Ifle Percee, and on St. John’s day 205 following
entered the harbor of Tadouffac, where we found our fmall
veffel, which had arrived three weeks before us. The men
on her told us that Sieur des Chefnes, the commander, had
gone to our fettlement at Quebec. Thence he was to go to
the Trois Rivieres to meet the favages, who were to come
there from various regions for the purpofe of trade, and
likewife to determine what was to be done on account of
the death of two of our men, who had been treacheroufly
and perfidioufly killed by two vicious young men of the
Montagnais. Thefe two unfortunate victims, as the men
on the veffel informed us, had been killed while out hunting
nearly two years 206 before. Thofe in the fettlement had
always fuppofed that they had been drowned from the up-
fetting of their canoe, until a fhort time before, one of the
men, conceiving an animofity againft the murderers, made a

difclofure

205 St. John’s day was June 24th. aflaffinated about the middle of April,

208 According to Sagard they were 1617. Hijt. Canada, Vol. I. p. 42.

192

Voyages of

difclofure and communicated the fadd and caufe of the mur-
der to the men of our fettlement. For certain reafons it has
feemed to me well to give an account of the matter and of
what was done in regard to it. But it is almoft impoffible
to obtain the exadd truth in the cafe, on account, not only
of the fmall amount of teftimony at hand, but of the diver-
fity of the ftatements made, the molt of which were pre-
fumptive. I will, however, give an account of the matter
here, following the ftatement of the greater number as being
nearer the truth, and relating what I have found to be the
moft probable.

The following is the occafioa of the murder of the two un-
fortunate deceafed. One of the two murderers paid frequent
vifits to our fettlement, receiving there a thoufand kindneffes
and favors, among other perfons from Sieur du Parc, a noble-
man from Normandy, in command at the time at Quebec, in
the fervice of the King and in behalf of the merchants of
the Affociation in the year 1616. This favage, while on one
of his cuFomary vifits, received one day, on account of fome
jealoufy, ill treatment from one of the two murdered men,
who was by profeffion a lockfmith, and who after fome
words beat the favage fo foundly as to imprefs it well upon
his memory. And not fatisfied with beating and mifufing
the favage he incited his companions to do the fame, which
aroufed ftill more the hatred and animofity of the favage
towards this lockfmith and his companions, and led him to
feek an opportunity to revenge himfelf. He accordingly
watched for a time and opportunity for doing fo, adding
however cautioully and appearing as ufual, without Flowing
any fign of refentment.

Some

Sieur de Champlain . 193

Some time after, the lockfmith and a failor named Charles
Pillet, from the ifland of Re, arranged to go hunting and
flay away three or four nights. For this purpofe they got
ready a canoe, and embarking departed from Quebec for
Cape Tourmente. Here there were fome little iflands
where a great quantity of game and birds reforted, near
Ifle d’Orleans, and diftant feven leagues from Quebec. The
departure of our men became at once known to the two
favages, who were not flow in darting to purfue them and
carry out their evil defign. They fought for the place
where the lockfmith and his companion went to deep, in
order to furprife them. Having afcertained it at evening,
at break of day on the following morning, the two favages
flipped quietly along certain very pleafant meadows. Arriv-
ing at a point near the place in quedion, they moored their
canoe, landed and went ftraight to the cabin, where our men
had flept. But they found only the lockfmith, who was pre-
paring to go hunting with his companion, and who thought
of nothing lefs than of what was to befall him. One of
thefe favages approached him, and with fome pleafant words
removed from him all fufpicion of anything wrong in order
that he might the better deceive him. But as he faw him
ftoop to adjuft his arquebus, he quickly drew a club that he
had concealed on his perfon, and gave the lockfmith fo
heavy a blow on his head, that it fent him daggering and
completely dunned. The favage, feeing that the lockfmith
was preparing to defend himfelf, repeated his blow, flruck
him to the ground, threw himfelf upon him, and with a knife
gave him three or four cuts in the domach, killing him in
this horrible manner.

In

194

Voyages of

In order that they might alfo get podedion of the failor,
the companion of the lockfmith who had darted early in the
morning to go hunting, not becaufe they bore any fpecial
hatred towards him, but that they might not be difcovered
nor accufed by him, they went in all directions fearching for
him. At lad, from the report of an arquebus which they
heard, they difcovered where he was, in which direction they
rapidly haltened, fo as to give no time to the failor to reload
his arquebus and put himfelf in a date of defence. Ap-
proaching, they bred their arrows at him, by which having
prodrated him, they ran upon him and bnifhed him with the
knife.

Then the affadins carried off the body, together with the
other, and, binding them fo brmly together that they would
not come apart, attached to them a quantity of dones and
pebbles, together with their weapons and clothes, fo as not
to be difcovered by any fign, after which they carried them
to the middle of the river, threw them in, and they lank to
the bottom. Here they remained a long time until, through
the will of God, the cords broke, and the bodies were wafhed
afhoie and thrown far up on the bank, to ferve as accufers
and incontedable witneffes of the attack of thefe two cruel
and treacherous affadins. For the two bodies were found at a
didance of more than twenty feet from the water in the woods,
but had not become feparated in fo long a time, being dill
dimly bound, the bones, dripped of the dedi like a fkeleton,
alone remaining. For the two victims, contrary to the ex-
pectation of the two murderers, who thought they had done
their work fo fecretly that it would never be known, were
found a long time after their difappearance by the men of

our

195

Sieur de Champlain.

our fettlement, who, pained at their abfence, fearched for
them along the banks of the river. But God in his juftice
would not permit fo enormous a crime, and had caufed it
to be expofed by another favage, their companion, in retal-
iation for an injury he had received from them. Thus their
wicked ads were difclofed.

The holy Fathers and the men of the fettlement were
greatly furprifed at feeing the bodies of thefe two unfortu-
nates, with their bones all bare, and their fkulls broken by
the blows received from the club of the favages. The
Fathers and others at the fettlement advifed to preferve
them in fome portion of the fettlement until the return of
our veffels, in order to confult with all the French as to the
belt courfe to purfue in the matter. Meanwhile our people
at the fettlement refolved to be on their guard, and no
longer allow fo much freedom to thefe favages as they had
been accuftomed to, but on the contrary require reparation
for fo cruel a murder by a procefs of juftice, or fome other
way, or let things in the mean time remain as they were, in
order the better to await our veffels and our return, that we
might all together confult what was to be done in the
matter.

But the favages feeing that this iniquity was difcovered,
and that they and the murderer were obnoxious to the
French, were feized with defpair, and, fearing that our men
would exercife vengeance upon them for this murder, with-
drew for a while from our fettlement . 207 Not only thofe guilty

of

207 Sagard fays the French, on account who were afTembled at Trois Rivieres,
of this affair, were menaced by eight Vide Hijloire du Canada , 1636, Vol. I.
hundred favages of different nations p. 42. The ftatement, “on eftoit menacd

1 96 Voyages of

of the aft but the others alfo being feized with fear came
no longer to the fettlement, as they had been accuftomed to
do, but waited for greater fecurity for themfelves.

Finding themfelves deprived of intercourfe with us, and
of their ufual welcome, the favages fent one of their com'
panions named by the French, La Ferriere , to make their
excufes for this murder; namely, they afferted they had
never been accomplices in it, and had never confented to it,
and that, if it was defired to have the two murderers for the
fake of infliding juftice, the other favages would willingly
confent to it, unlefs the French fhould be pleafed to take as
reparation and reftitution for the dead fome valuable prefents
of fkins, as they are accuftomed to do in return for a thing
that cannot be reftored. They earneftly entreated the
French to accept this rather than require the death of the
accufed which they anticipated would be hard for them to
execute, and fo doing to forget everything as if it had not
occurred.

To this, in accordance with the advice of the holy Fa-
thers, it was decided to reply that the favages fhould bring
and deliver up the two malefactors, in order to afcertain
from them their accomplices, and who had incited them to
do the deed. This they communicated to La Ferriere for
him to report to his companions. This

de hui6t cens Sauuages de diuerfe na- of the French, who defired to produce
tions, qui f’eftoient affemblez es Trois upon their minds a ftrong moral im-
Rivieres h deflein de venir furprendre preffion, in order to prevent a recurrence
les Frangois & leur coupper h tous la of the murder, which was a private
gorge, pour preuenir la vengeance qu’ils thing, in which the great body of the
euffent pfi prendre de deux de leurs favages had no part. They could not
hommes tuez par les Montagnais en- be faid to be hoftile, though they pru-
uiron la my Auril de l’an 1617,” is, we dently put themfelves in a ftate of
think, too ftrong. The favages were defence, as, under the circumftances, it
excited and frightened by the demands was very natural they fhould do.

197

Sieur de Champlain.

This decifion having been made, La Ferriere withdrew to
his companions, who upon hearing the decifion of the
French found this procedure and mode of juftice very
ftrange and difficult; fince they have no eftablifhed law
among themfelves, but only vengeance and reftitution by
prefents. After confidering the whole matter and deliber-
ating with one another upon it, they fummoned the two
murderers and fet forth to them the unhappy pofition into
which they had been thrown by the event of this murder,
which might caufe a perpetual war with the French,
from which their women and children would fuffer. How-
ever much trouble they might give us, and although they
might keep us fhut up in our fettlement and prevent us
from hunting, cultivating and tilling the foil, and although
we were in too fmall numbers to keep the river blockaded,
as they perfuaded themfelves to believe in their confultations ;
ftill, after all their deliberations, they concluded that it was
better to live in peace with the French than in war and per-
petual diftruft.

Accordingly the favages thus affembled, after finifhing
their confultation and reprefenting the fituation to the ac-
cufed, afked them if they would not have the courage to go
with them to the fettlement of the French and appear be-
fore them; promifing them that they fliould receive no
harm, and affuring them that the French were lenient and
difpofed to pardon, and would in fhort go fo far in dealing
with them as to overlook their offence on condition of their
not returning to fuch evil ways.

The two criminals, finding themfelves convidted in con-
fcience, yielded to this proportion and agreed to follow this

advice.

198 Voyages of

advice. Accordingly one of them made preparations, ar-
raying himfelf in fuch garments and decorations as he could
procure, as if he had been invited to go to a marriage or
fome great feftivity. Thus attired, he went to the fettle-
ment, accompanied by his father, fome of the principal
chiefs, and the captain of their company. As to the other
murderer, he excufed himfelf from this journey , 208 realizing
his guilt of the heinous adt and fearing punifhment.

When now they had entered the habitation, which was
forthwith furrounded by a multitude of the favages of their
company, the bridge 209 was drawn up, and all of the French
put themfelves on guard, arms in hand. They kept a flrift
watch, fentinels being ported at the neceffary points, for fear
of what the favages outfide might do, fince they fufpedted
that it was intended actually to inflidt punifhment upon the
guilty one, who had fo freely offered himfelf to our mercy,
and not upon him alone, but upon thofe alfo who had accom-
panied him infide, who likewife were not too fure of their
perfons, and who, feeing matters in this ftate, did not expedt
to get out with their lives. The whole matter was very well
managed and carried out, fo as to make them realize the
magnitude of the crime and have fear for the future. Other-
wife there would have been no fecurity with them, and we
fhould have been obliged to live with arms in hand and in
perpetual diftruft.

After this, the favages fufpedting left fomething might
happen contrary to what they hoped from us, the holy

Fathers

" !I! le y were t ' len at J' rols Rivieres, feet deep, conftrudted with a draw-

° The moat around the habitation bridge, to be taken up in cafe of need,
at Quebec was fifteen feet wide and fix Vide Vol. II. p. 182.

Sieur de Champlain. 199

Fathers proceeded to make them an addrefs on the fubjedt
of this crime. They fet forth to them the friendfhip which
the French had fhown them for ten or twelve years back,
when we began to know them, during which time we had
continually lived in peace and intimacy with them, nay even
with fuch freedom as could hardly be expreffed. They
added moreover that I had in perfon affifted them feveral
times in war againft their enemies, thereby expofing my life
for their welfare ; while we were not under any obligations
to do fo, being impelled only by friendfhip and good will
towards them, and feeling pity at the miferies and perfec-
tions which their enemies caufed them to endure and fuffer.
This is why we were unable to believe, they faid, that this
murder had been committed without their confent, and
efpecially fince they had taken it upon themfelves to favor
thofe who committed it.

Speaking to the father of the criminal, they reprefented to
him the enormity of the deed committed by his fon, faying
that as reparation for it he deferved death, fince by our law
fo wicked a deed did not go unpunifhed, and that whoever
was found guilty and convidted of it deferved to be con-
demned to death as reparation for fo heinous an adt ; but, as
to the other inhabitants of the country, who were not guilty
of the crime, they faid no one wifhed them any harm or de-
fired to vifit upon them the confequences of it.

All the favages, having clearly heard this, faid, as their
only excufe, but with all refpedt, that they had not confented
to this adt ; that they knew very well that thefe two criminals
ought to be put to death, unlefs w T e fhould be difpofed to par-
don them ; that they were well aware of their wickednefs, not

before

200

Voyages of

before but after the commiffion of the deed ; that they had
been informed of the death of the two ill-fated men too late
to prevent it. Moreover, they faid that they had kept it
fecret, in order to preferve conftantly an intimate relation-
fhip and confidence with us, and declared that they had
adminiftered to the evil-doers fevere reprimands, and fet
forth the calamity which they had not only brought upon
themfelves, but upon all their tribe, relatives and friends ;
and they promifed that fuch a calamity fhould never occur
again and begged us to forget this offence, and not vifit it
with the confequences it deferved, but rather go back to the
primary motive which induced the two favages to go there,
and have regard for that. Furthermore they faid that the
culprit had come freely and delivered himfelf into our hands,
not to be punifhed but to receive mercy from the French.

But the father, turning to the friar, 210 faid with tears,
there is my fon, who committed the fuppofed crime ; he is
worthlefs, but confider that he is a young, foolifh, and incon-
fiderate perfon, who has committed this a6t through paffion,
impelled by vengeance rather than by premeditation : it is
in your power to give him life or death ; you can do with
him what you pleafe, fince we are both in your hands.

After this addrefs, the culprit fon, prefenting himfelf with
affurance, fpoke thefe words. Fear has not fo feized my
heart as to prevent my coming to receive death according
to my deferts and your law, of which I acknowledge myfelf
guilty. Then he dated to the company the caufe of the
murder, and the planning and execution of it, juft as I have
related and here fet forth. After

510 Probably P£re le Caron, who was in charge of the million at Quebec at
that time.

201

Sieur de Champlain.

After his recital he addreffed himfelf to one of the agents
and clerks of the merchants of our Affociation, named Beau-
chaine , begging him to put him to death without further for-
mality.

Then the holy Fathers fpoke, and faid to them, that the
French were not accuftomed to put their fellow-men to death
fo fuddenly, and that it was neceffary to have a conful-
tation with all the men of the fettlement, and bring forward
this affair as the fubjedft of confideration. This being a
matter of great confequence, it was decided that it fhould be
carefully conducted and that it was beft to poftpone it to a
more favorable occafion, which would be better adapted to
obtain the truth, the prefent time not being favorable for
many reafons.

In the firft place, we were weak in numbers in comparifon
with the favages without and within our fettlement, who, re-
fentful and full of vengeance as they are, would have been
capable of fetting fire on all fides and creating diforder
among us. In the fecond place, there would have been per-
petual diftruft. and no fecurity in our intercourfe with them.
In the third place, trade would have been injured, and the
fervice of the King impeded.

In view of thefe and other urgent confiderations, it was
decided that we ought to be contented with their putting
themfelves in our power and their willingnefs to give fatisfac-
tion fubmiffively, the father of the criminal on the one hand
prefenting and offering him to the company, and he, for his
part, offering to give up his own life as reftitution for his
offence, juft as his father offered to produce him whenever
he might be required.

26

This

202

Voyages of

This it was thought neceffary to regard as a fort of honor-
able amend, and a fatisfa&ion to juftice. And it was confid-
ered that if we thus pardoned the offence, not only would
the criminal receive his life from us, but, alfo, his father and
companions would feel under great obligations. It was
thought proper, however, to fay to them as an explanation of
our adion, that, in view of the fa6t of the criminal’s public
affurance that all the other favages were in no refpedt ac-
complices, or to blame for the aft, and had had no knowl-
edge of it before its accomplifhment, and in view of the fa6t
that he had freely offered himfelf to death, it had been de-
cided to reftore him to his father, who fhould remain under
obligations to produce him at any time. On thefe terms and
on condition that he fhould in future render fervice to the
French, his life was fpared, that he and all the favages might
continue friends and helpers of the French.

Thus it was decided to arrange the matter until the veffels
fhould return from France, when, in accordance with the
opinion of the captains and others, a definite and more
authoritative fettlement was to be concluded. In the mean
time we promifed them every favor and the prefervation of
their lives, faying to them, however, for our fecurity, that
they fhould leave fome of their children as a kind of hoflage,
to which they very willingly acceded, and left at the fettle-
ment two in the hands of the holy Fathers, who proceeded to
teach them their letters, and in lefs than three months taught
them the alphabet and how to make the letters.

From this it may be feen that they are capable of inftruc-
tion and are eafily taught, as Father Jofeph 211 can teftify.

The

211 Vide Hijioire du Canada, par Sagard, 1636, Vol. I. p. 45.

203

Sieur de Champlain .

The veffels having fafely arrived, Sieur du Pont Grave,
fome others, and myfelf were informed how the affair
had taken place, as has been narrated above, when we all
decided that it was defirable to make the favages feel
the enormity of this murder, but not to execute punifh-
ment upon them, for various good reafons hereafter to be
mentioned.

As foon as our veffels had entered the harbor of Tadouf-
fac, even on the morning of the next day, 212 Sieur du Pont
Grave and myfelf fet fail again, on a fmall barque of ten or
twelve tons’ burden. So alfo Sieur de la Mothe, together
with Father Jean d’Albeau, 213 a friar, and one of the clerks
and agent of the merchants, named Loquin , embarked on a
little fhallop, and we fet out together from Tadouffac.
There remained on the veffel another friar, called Father
Modejle , 214 together with the pilot and mailer, to take care
of her. We arrived at Quebec, the place of our fettlement,
on the 27th of June following. Here we found Fathers
Jofeph, Paul, and Pafifique, the friars, 216 and Sieur Hebert 218
with his family, together with the other members of the

fettlement.

m They arrived on St. John’s day,
antea, note 205, and confequently this
was the 25th of June, 1618.

213 Jean d’Olbeau.

214 F rere Modefte Guines. Vide His-
toire du Canada , par Sagard, h Paris,
1636, Vol. I. p. 40.

215 Jofeph le Caron, Paul Huet, and
Pacifique du Pleffis.

216 Louis Hdbert, an apothecary, fettled
at Port Royal in La Cadie or Nova
Scotia, under Foutrincourt, was there
when, in 1613, pofTefTion was taken in
the name of Madame de Guercheville.
He afterward took up his abode at

Quebec with his family, probably in the
year 1617. His eldeft daughter Anne
was married at Quebec to Eftienne
Jonqueft, a Norman, which was the firft
marriage that took place with the
ceremonies of the Church in Canada.
His daughter Guillemette married Wil-
liam Couillard, and to her Champlain
committed the two Indian girls, whom
he was not permitted by Kirke to take
with him to France, when Quebec was
captured by the Englifh in 1629. Louis
Hdbert died at Quebec on the 25th of
January, 162 y. Hijloire du Canada ,
Vol. I. pp. 4L S9 1 -

204

Voyages of

fettlement. They were all well, and delighted at our re-
turn in good health like themfelves, through the mercy of
God.

The fame day Sieur du Pont Grave determined to go to
Trois Rivieres, where the merchants carried on their trad-
ing, and to take with him fome merchandife, with the
purpofe of meeting Sieur des Chefnes, who was already
there. He alio took with him Loquin, as before mentioned.
I flayed at our fettlement fome days, occupying myfelf with
bufinefs relating to it; among other things in building a
furnace for making an experiment with certain allies, direc-
tions for which had been given me, and which are in truth
of great value; but it requires labor, diligence, watchfulnefs
and fkill ; and for the working of thefe allies a fufficient
number of men are needed who are acquainted with this art.
This firlt experiment did not prove fuccefsful, and we polt-
poned further trial to a more favorable opportunity.

I vilited the cultivated lands , 217 which I found planted
with fine grain. The gardens contained all kinds of plants,
cabbages, radiflies, lettuce, purflain, forrel, parlley, and other
plants, fquafhes, cucumbers, melons, peas, beans and other
vegetables, which were as fine and forward as in France.
There were alfo the vines, which had been tranfplanted,
already well advanced. In a word, you could fee everything
growing and flourilhing. Afide from God, we are not to
give the praile for this to the laborers or their fkill, for it is
probable that not much is due to them, but to the richnefs
and excellence of the foil, which is naturally good and

adapted

217 Thefe fields were doubtlefs thofe came into the country with his family
of Louis Hubert, who was the firft that to live by the cultivation of the foil.

Sieur de Champlain. 205

adapted for everything, as experience fhows, and might be
turned to good account, not only for purpofes of tillage and
the cultivation of fruit-trees and vines, but alfo for the nour-
ilhment and rearing of cattle and fowl, fuch as are common
in France. But the thing lacking is zeal and affedtion for
the welfare and fervice of the King.

I tarried fome time at Quebec, in expectation of further
intelligence, when there arrived a barque from Tadouffac,
which had been fent by Sieur du Pont Grave to get the
men and merchandife remaining at that place on the before-
mentioned large veffel. Leaving Quebec, I embarked with
them for Trois Rivieres, where the trading was going on, in
order to fee the favages and communicate with them, and
afcertain what was taking place refpedting the affaffination
above fet forth, and what could be done to fettle and fmooth
over the whole matter.

On the 5th of July following I fet out from Quebec, to-
gether with Sieur de la Mothe, for Trois Rivieres, both for
engaging in traffic and to fee the favages. We arrived at
evening off Sainte Croix, 218 a place on the way fo called.
Here we faw a fhallop coming ftraight to us, in which were
fome men from Sieurs du Pont Grave and des Chefnes,
and alfo fome clerks and agents of the merchants. They
afked me to defpatch at once this fhallop to Quebec for fome
merchandife remaining there, faying that a large number of
favages had come for the purpofe of making war.

This intelligence was very agreeable to us, and in order
to fatisfy them, on the morning of the next day I left my

barque

ale Platon. Vide Vol. I., note 155.

206 V oyages of

barque and went on board a fhallop in order to go more
fpeedily to the favages, while the other, which had come
from Trois Rivieres, continued its courfe to Quebec. We
made fuch progrefs by rowing that we arrived at the before-
mentioned place on the 7th of July at 3 o’clock in the after-
noon. Upon landing, all the favages with whom I had been
intimate in their country recognized me. They were await-
ing me with impatience, and came up to me very happy and
delighted to fee me again, one after the other embracing me
with demonftrations of great joy, I alfo receiving them in
the fame manner. In this agreeable way was fpent the
evening and remainder of this day, and on the next day
the favages held a council among themfelves, to afcertain
from me whether I would again affift them, as I had done
in the paft and as I had promifed them, in their wars againft
their enemies, by whom they are cruelly haraffed and tortured.

Meanwhile on our part we took counfel together to deter-
mine what we fhould do in the matter of the murder of the
two deceafed, in order that juftice might be done, and that
they might be reftrained from committing fuch an offence
in future.

In regard to the affiftance urgently requefted by the fav-
ages for making war againft their enemies, I replied that
my difpofition had not changed nor my courage abated, but
that what prevented me from affifting them was that on the
previous year, when the occafion and opportunity prefented,
they failed me when the time came; becaufe when they had
piomifed to return with a good number of warriors they did
not do fo, which caufed me to withdraw without accomplifh-
ing much. Yet I told them the matter fhould be taken into

confideration,

Sieur de Champlain. 207

confideration, but that for the prefent it was proper to deter-
mine what fhould be done in regard to the affaffination of
the two unfortunate men, and that fatisfadtion muft be had.
Upon this they left their council in feeming anger and vex-
ation about the matter, offering to kill the criminals, and
proceed at once to their execution, if affent were given, and
acknowledging freely among themfelves the enormity of the
affair.

But we would not confent to this, poffponing our aflifl-
ance to another time, requiring them to return to us the
next year with a good number of men. I affured them,
moreover, that I would entreat the King to favor us with
men, means, and fupplies to affift them and enable them
to enjoy the reft they longed for, and vidtory over their ene-
mies. At this they were greatly pleafed, and thus we
feparated, after they had held two or three meetings on the
fubjedt, coiling us feveral hours of time. Two or three
days after my arrival at this place they proceeded to make
merry, dance, and celebrate many great banquets in view
of the future war in which I was to affift them.

Then I ftated to Sieur du Pont Grave what I thought
about this murder ; that it was defirable to make a greater
demand upon them ; that at prefent the favages would dare
not only to do the fame thing again but what would be more
injurious to us ; that I confidered them people who were
governed by example ; that they might accufe the French
of being wanting in courage ; that if we faid no more about
the matter they would infer that we were afraid of them :
and that if we fhould let them go fo eafily they would
grow more infolent, bold, and intolerable, and we fhould even

thereby

208

Voyages of

thereby tempt them to undertake greater and more perni-
cious defigns. Moreover I faid that the other tribes of rav-
ages, who had or fhould get knowledge of this a6t, and that
it had been unrevenged, or compromifed by gifts and pref-
ents, as is their cuftom, would boafl that killing a man is no
great matter; fince the French make fo little account of
feeing their companions killed by their neighbors, who drink,
eat, and affociate intimately with them, as may be feen.

But, on the other hand, in confideration of the various
circumftances ; namely, that the favages do not exercife rea-
fon, that they are hard to approach, are eafily eflranged, and
are very ready to take vengeance, that, if we fhould force
them to inflidt punifhment, there would be no fecurity for
thofe defirous of making explorations among them, we deter-
mined to fettle this affair in a friendly manner, and pafs over
quietly what had occurred, leaving them to engage peaceably
in their traffic with the clerks and agents of the merchants
and others in charge.

O

Now there was with them a man named EJtienne Brule ,
one of our interpreters, who had been living with them for
eight years, as well to pafs his time as to fee the country
and learn their language and mode of life. He is the one
whom I had defpatched with orders to go in the direction
of the Entouhonorons, 219 to Carantoiian, in order to bring

with

y Champlain fays, donni charge Carantouanais, allies of the Hurons,
a aller vers les Entouhonorofis a Ca - were fouth of them, occupying appar-
rantoiian.' By reference to the map ently the upper waters of the Sufque-
of 1632, it will be feen that the En- hanna. A dotted line will be feen on
touhonorons were fituated on the fouth- the fame map, evidently intended to
ern borders of Lake Ontario. They mark the courfe of Brule’s journey,
were underftood by Champlain to be a From the meagre knowledge which
part at leaft of the Iroquois ; but the Champlain pofTeffed of the region, the

209

Sieur de Champlain.

with him the five hundred warriors they had promifed
to fend to affift us in the war in which we were engaged
againft their enemies, a reference to which is made in the
narrative of my previous book . 220 I called this man, namely
Eftienne Brule, and afked him why he had not brought the
affiftance of the five hundred men, and what was the caufe
of the delay, and why he had not rendered me a report.
Thereupon he gave me an account of the matter, a narra-
tive of which it will not be out of place to give, as he is more
to be pitied than blamed on account of the misfortunes which
he experienced on this commiffion.

He proceeded to fay that, after taking leave of me to go
on his journey and execute his commiffion, he fet out with
the twelve favages whom I had given him for the purpofe
of fhowing the way, and to ferve as an efcort on account of
the dangers which he might have to encounter. They were
fuccefsful in reaching the place, Carantoiian, but not with-
out expofing themfelves to rifk, fince they had to pafs
through the territories of their enemies, and, in order to
avoid any evil defign, purfued a more fecure route through
thick and impenetrable forefts, wood and brufh, marfhy bogs,
frightful and unfrequented places and waftes, all to avoid
danger and a meeting with their enemies.

But, in fpite of this great care, Brule and his favage
companions, while croffing a plain, encountered fome hoftile

favages,

line can hardly be fuppofed to be very merous canton of the Five Nations,
accurate, which may account for Cham- Vide Continuation of the New Difcov -
plain’s indefinite expreffion as cited at ery, by Louis Hennepin, 1699, p. 95 ;
the beginning of this note. also Origin of the name Seneca in Mr.

The Entouhonorons, Ouentouoro- O. H. Marlhall’s brochure on De la
nons, Tfonnontouans, or Senecas con- Salle among the Senecas, pp. 43~45-
ftituted the moil weftern and moil nu- 220 Vide antea, p. 124.

210

Voyages of

favages, who were returning to their village and who were
furprifed and worfted by our favages, four of the enemy
being killed on the fpot and two taken prifoners, whom
Brule and his companions took to Carantoiian, by the
inhabitants of which place they were received with great
affection, a cordial welcome, and good cheer, with the
dances and banquets with which they are accuftomed to
entertain and honor ftrangers.

Some days were fpent in this friendly reception ; and, after
Brule had told them his miffion and explained to them the
occafion of his journey, the favages of the place affembled in
council to deliberate and refolve in regard to fending the
five hundred warriors afked for by Brule.

When the council was ended and it was decided to fend
the men, orders were given to collect, prepare, and arm
them, fo as to go and join us where we were encamped
before the fort and village of our enemies. This was only
three fhort days’ journey from Carantoiian, which was pro-
vided with more than eight hundred warriors, and ftrongly
fortified, after the manner of thofe before defcribed, which
have high and ftrong palifades well bound and joined to-
gether, the quarters being conftru&ed in a fimilar fafhion.

After it had been refolved by the inhabitants of Caran-
toiian to fend the five hundred men, thefe were very long in
getting ready, although urged by Brule, to make hafte, who
explained to them that if they delayed any longer they
would not find us there. And in fa6t they did not fucceed
in arriving until two days after our departure from that
place, which we were forced to abandon, fince we were too
weak and worn by the inclemency of the weather. This

caufed

Sieur de Champlain.

2 I I

caufed Brule, and the five hundred men whom he brought,
to withdraw and return to their village of Carantoiian.
After their return Brule was obliged to ftay, and fpend
the reft of the autumn and all the winter, for lack of com-
pany and efcort home. While awaiting, he bulled himfelf
in exploring the country and vifiting the tribes and terri-
tories adjacent to that place, and in making a tour along
a river 221 that debouches in the diredlion of Florida, where
are many powerful and warlike nations, carrying on wars
againft each other. The climate there is very temperate,
and there are great numbers of animals and abundance
of {mail game. But to traverfe and reach thefe regions
requires patience, on account of the difficulties involved in
paffing the extenfive waftes.

He continued his courfe along the river as far as the
fea , 222 and to iflands and lands near them, which are inhab-
ited by various tribes and large numbers of favages, who are
well difpofed and love the French above all other nations.
But thofe who know the Dutch 223 complain feverely of them,
fince they treat them very roughly. Among other things
he obferved that the winter was very temperate, that it
fnowed very rarely, and that when it did the fnow was not a
foot deep and melted immediately.

After traverfing the country and obferving what was note-
worthy, he returned to the village of Carantoiian, in order to
find an efcort for returning to our fettlement. After fome

flay

212

Voyages of

flay at Carantoiian, five or fix of the favages decided to make
the journey with Brule. On the way they encountered a
large number of their enemies, who charged upon Brule and
his companions fo violently that they caufed them to break
up and feparate from each other, fo that they were unable
to rally: and Brule, who had kept apart in the hope of
efcaping, became fo detached from the others that he could
not return, nor find a road or fign in order to effeft his
retreat in any direction whatever. Thus he continued to
wander through foreft and wood for feveral days without
eating, and almoft defpairing of his life from the preffure
of hunger. At laft he came upon a little footpath, which he
determined to follow wherever it might lead, whether toward
the enemy or not, preferring to expofe himfelf to their hands
trufting in God rather than to die alone and in this wretched
manner. Befides he knew how to fpeak their language,
which he thought might afford him fome affiftance.

But he had not gone a long diftance when he difcovered
three favages loaded with fifh repairing to their village. He
ran after them, and, as he approached, fhouted at them, as
is their cuftom. At this they turned about, and filled with
fear were about to leave their burden and flee. But Brule
fpeaking to them reaffured them, when they laid down their
bows and arrows in fign of peace, Brule on his part laying
down his arms. Moreover he was weak and feeble, not hav-
ing eaten for three or four days. On coming up to them,
after he had told them of his misfortune and the miferable
condition to which he had been reduced, they fmoked to-
gether, as they are accuftomed to do with one another and
their acquaintances when they vifit each other. They had

pity

213

Sieur de Champlain .

pity and compaffion for him, offering him every affiftance,
and conducing him to their village, where they entertained
him and gave him fomething to eat.

But as foon as the people of the place were informed that
an Adorefetoiiy had arrived, for thus they call the French,
the name fignifying men of iron , they came in a rufli and
in great numbers to fee Brule. They took him to the
cabin of one of the principal chiefs, where he w r as inter-
rogated, and afked who he was, whence he came, what
circumftance had driven and led him to this place, how
he had loft his way, and whether he did not belong to the
French nation that made war upon them. To this he
replied that he belonged to a better nation, that was defi-
rous folely of their acquaintance and friendfhip. Yet they
would not believe this, but threw themfelves upon him, tore
out his nails with their teeth, burnt him with glowing fire-
brands, and tore out his beard, hair by hair, though contrary
to the will of the chief.

During this fit of paffion, one of the favages obferved an
Agnus Dei , which he had attached to his neck, and afked
what it was that he had thus attached to his neck, and
was on the point of feizing it and pulling it off. But Brule
faid to him, with refolute w'ords, If you take it and put me
to death, you will find that immediately after you will fud-
denly die, and all thofe of your houfe. He paid no attention
however to this, but continuing in his malicious purpofe
tried to feize the Agnus Dei and tear it from him, all of
them together being defirous of putting him to death, but
previoufly of making him fuffer great pain and torture, fuch
as they generally practife upon their enemies.

But

2 1 4 Voyages of

But God, fhowing him mercy, was pleafed not to allow
it, but in his providence caufed the heavens to change fud-
denly from the ferene and fair ftate they were in to dark-
nefs, and to become filled with great and thick clouds, upon
which followed thunders and lightnings fo violent and long
continued that it was fomething ftrange and awful. This
ftorm caufed the favages fuch terror, it being not only un-
ufual but unlike anything they had ever heard, that their
attention was diverted and they forgot the evil purpofe
they had towards Brule, their prifoner. They accordingly
left him without even unbinding him, as they did not dare
to approach him. This gave the fufferer an opportunity to
ufe gentle words, and he appealed to them and remon-
ftrated with them on the harm they were doing him without
caufe, and fet forth to them how our God was enraged at
them for having fo abufed him.

The captain then approached Brule, unbound him, and
took him to his houfe, where he took care of him and
treated his wounds. After this there were no dances, ban-
quets, or merry-makings to which Brule was not invited.
So after remaining fome time with thefe favages, he deter-
mined to proceed towards our fettlement.

Taking leave of them, he promifed to reftore them to har-
mony with the French and their enemies, and caufe them
to fwear friendfhip with each other, to which end he faid he
would return to them as foon as he could. Thence he went
to the country and village of the Atinouaentans , 224 where I

had

-.-4 Attigouantans or Attignaouantans. and the Iroquois were of the fame
1 he principal tribe of the Hurons, fome- original flock. Vide Vol. I. p. 276,
times called Les tons Iroquois , as they note 212.

215

Sieur de Champlain.

had already been ; the favages at his departure having con-
duced him for a diftance of four days’ journey from their
village. Here Brule remained fome time, when, refuming
his journey towards us he came by way of the Mer Douce , 285
boating along its northern fhores for fome ten days, where
I had alfo gone when on my way to the war.

And if Brule had gone further on to explore thefe re-
gions, as I had directed him to do, it would not have been
a mere rumor that they were preparing war with one an-
other. But this undertaking was referved to another time,
which he promifed me to continue and accomplifh in a fliort
period with God’s grace, and to conduct me there that I
might obtain fuller and more particular knowledge.

After he had made this recital, I gave him affurance that
his fervices would be recognized, and encouraged him to
continue his good purpofe until our return, when we fhould
have more abundant means to do that with which he would
be fatisfied. This is now the entire narrative and recital of
his journey from the time he left me 220 to engage in the

above-mentioned

225 Lake Huron. For the different cuftoms, the character and fpirit of their

names which have been attached to this life, but thefe young men by their long
lake, vide Local Names of Niagara refidence with the favages acquired a
Frontier, by Orfamus H. Marfhall, 1881, good knowledge of their language, and
P- 37 - _ were able to aft as interpreters. This

226 BrCdd was delpatched on his mif- was a matter of very great importance,
fion Sept. 8, 1615. Vide antea, p. 124. as it was often neceffary for Champlain

As we have already ftated in a pre- to communicate with the different tribes
vious note, it was the policy of Cham- in making treaties of friendihip, in difcuff-
plain y> place competent young men with ing queftions of war with their enemies,
the different tribes of favages, to obtain in fettling difagreements among them-
that kind of information which could felves, and in making arrangements with
only come from an aflual and prolonged them for the yearly purchafe of their
refidence with them. This enabled him peltry. It was not eafy to obtain fuit-
to fecure not only the moft accurate able perfons for this important office,
knowledge of their domeftic habits and Thofe who had the intellectual qualifi-
cations.

2l6

Voyages of

above-mentioned explorations ; and it afforded me pleafure
in the profpedt thereby prefented me of being better able
to continue and promote them.

With this purpofe he took leave of me to return to the
favages, an intimate acquaintance with whom had been
acquired by him in his journeys and explorations. I begged
him to continue with them until the next year, when I
would return with a good number of men, both to reward
him for his labors, and to affift as in the paft the favages,
his friends, in their wars.

Refuming the thread of my former difcourfe, I muff note
that in my laft and preceding voyages and explorations I
had paffed through numerous and diverfe tribes of favages

not

cations, and who had any high afpira- But among Champlain’s interpreters
tions, would not naturally incline to pafs there were doubtlefs fome who bore a
years in the itupid and degrading affo- very different charafter. Jean Nicofet
ciations, to fay nothing of the hardfhips was certainly a marked exception. Al-
and deprivations, of favage life. They though Champlain does not mention
were generally therefore adventurers, him by name, he appears to have been
whofe honefty and fidelity had no better in New France as early as 1618, where
foundation than their felfifli interefts. he fpent many years among the Algon-
Of this fort was this Etienne Bruld, as quins, and was the firfl: Frenchman who
well as Nicholas Marfolet and Pierre penetrated the diftant Northweft. He
Raye, all of whom turned traitors, fell- married into one of the mod refpe&able
ing themfelves to the Englifli when families of Quebec, and is often men-
Quebec was taken in 1629. Of Bruld, tioned in the Relations des Jdfuites. Vide
Champlain ufes the following emphatic a brief notice of him in Difcovery and
language : “ Le truchement Brufld h qui Exploration of the Mijfjfippi Valley,
l’on donnoit cent piftolles par an, pour by John Gilmary Shea, 1852, p. xx. A
inciter les fauuages h venir h la traitte, full account of his career has recently
ce qui eftoit de tref-mauuais exemple, been publifhed, entitled Hijlory of the
d’enuoyer ainfi des perfonnes fi malui- Difcovery of the Northweft by John
uans, que Ion euft deub chaftier feuere- Nicolet in 1634, with a Sketch of his
ment, car l’on recognoiifoit cet homme Life. By C. W. Butterfield. Cincin-
pour eftre fort vicieux, & adonnd aux nati, 1881. Vide alfo Details fur la Vie
femmes; mais que ne fait faire l’efpe- de Jean Nicollet, an extraft from Re-
rance du gain, qui palfe par defius toutes lation des Jf idles, 1643, in Ddcouvertes,
confiderations.” Vide if ne of 1632, Oue- etc., par Pierre Margry, p. 49.
bee ed., pp. 1065, 1229.

Sieur de Champlain. 217

not known to the French nor to thofe of our fettlement,
with whom I had made alliances and fworn friendfhip, on
condition that they fhould come and trade with us, and that
I fhould aflift them in their wars ; for it muft be underftood
that there is not a fingle tribe living in peace, excepting the
Nation Neutre. According to their promife, there came
from the various tribes of favages recently difcovered fome
to trade in peltry, others to fee the French and afcertain
what kind of treatment and welcome would be fhown them.
This encouraged everybody, the French on the one hand to
fhow them cordiality and welcome, for they honored them
with fome attentions and prefents, which the agents of the
merchants gave to gratify them ; on the other hand, it en-
couraged the favages, who promifed all the French to come
and live in future in friendfhip with them, all of them declar-
ing that they would deport themfelves with fuch affediion
towards us that we fhould have occafion to commend them,
while we in like manner were to aflift them to the extent of
our power in their wars.

The trading having been concluded, and the favages hav-
ing taken their leave and departed, we left Trois Rivieres on
the 14th of July of this year. The next day we arrived at
our quarters at Quebec, where the barques were unloaded
of the merchandife which had remained over from the
traffic and which was put in the warehoufe of the mer-
chants at that place.

Now Sieur de Pont Grave went to Tadouffac with the
barques in order to load them and carry to the habitation
the provifions neceffary to fupport thofe who were to remain

and winter there, and I determined while the barques were

thus

2l8

Voyages of Champlain.

thus engaged to continue there for fome days in order to
have the neceffary fortifications and repairs made.

At my departure from the fettlement I took leave of the
holy Fathers, Sieur de la Mothe, and all the others who were
to flay there, giving them to expedt that I would return, God
affifting, with a good number of families to people the coun-
try. I embarked on the 26th of July, together with the Fa-
thers Paul and Pacifique, 227 the latter having wintered here
once and the other having been here a year and a half,
who were to make a report of what they had feen in the
country and of what could be done there. We fet out on
the day above mentioned from the fettlement for Tadouf-
fac, where we were to embark for France. We arrived
the next day and found our veffels ready to fet fail. We
embarked, and left Tadouffac for France on the 13th of the
month of July, 1618, and arrived at Honfleur on the 28th
day of Auguft, the wind having been favorable, and all being
in good fpirits.

227 Paul Huet and Pacifique du Plef- more than a year and a half, having
fis. The latter had been in New France arrived in 1615. Vide antea, pp. 104-5.

EXPLANATION

OF

TWO GEOGRAPHICAL MAPS OF NEW FRANCE.

T has feemed to me well to make fome ftate-
ments in explanation of the two geographical
maps. Although one correfponds to the other
fo far as the harbors, bays, capes, promonto-

— ries, and rivers extending into the interior are

concerned, neverthelefs they are different in refpedt to the
bearings.

The fmalleft is in its true meridian, in accordance with
the directions of Sieur de Caflelfranc in his book on the
mecometry of the magnetic needle , 2 " 8 where I have noted,
as will be feen on the map, feveral declinations, which have

been

228 The determination of longitudes
has from the beginning been environed
with almolt infuperable difficulties. At
one period the declination of the mag-
netic needle was fuppofed to furnilh the
means of a practical folution. Sebaf-
tian Cabot devoted confiderable atten-
tion to the fubjefl, as did likewife Peter
Plancius at a later date. Champlain

appears to have fixed the longitudes on
his fmaller map by calculations bafed
on the variation of the needle, guided
by the principles laid down by Guil-
laume de Nautonier, Sieur de Caftel-
franc, to whofe work he refers in the
text. It was entitled, Mecometrie de
Veymant, deft d dire la maniere de me-
furer les longitudes par le tnoyen de

I'eymant-

220

Voyages of

been of much fervice to me, fo alfo all the altitudes, latitudes,
and longitudes, from the forty-firft degree of latitude to the
fifty-firft, in the direction of the North Pole, which are the
confines of Canada, or the Great Bay, where more efpecially
the Bafques and Spaniards engage in the whale fifhery. In
certain places in the great river St. Lawrence, in latitude 45°,
I have obferved the declination of the magnetic needle, and
found it as high as twenty-one degrees, which is the greateft
I have feen.

The ffnall map will ferve very well for purpofes of navi-
gation, provided the needle be applied properly to the rofe 229
indicating the points of the compafs. For inftance, in ufing
it, when one is on the Grand Bank where frefli fifhing is
carried on, it is neceffary, for the fake of greater conven-
ience, to take a rofe where the thirty-two points are marked
equally, and put the point of the magnetic needle 12, 15,
or 16 degrees from the Jieur de /is on the northweft fide,
which is nearly a point and a half, that is north a point

northweft,

Peymant. This rare volume is not to called the fly. Card may perhaps be
be found, as far as my inquiries extend, derived from the Italian cardo , a thiftle,
in any of the incorporated libraries on which the face of the compafs may be
this continent. There is however a fuppofed to refemble. On the corn-
copy in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, plete circle of the compafs there are
to which in the catalogue is given the thirty-two lines drawn from the centre
bibliographical note : Six livres. Folio, to the circumference to indicate the di-
Tolofe, 1603. reftion of the wind. Each quarter of

It is hardly neceffary to add that the the circle, or 90°, contains eight lines
forces governing the variation of the reprefenting the points of the compafs
needle, both local and general, are fo in that quarter. They are named with
inconftant that the hope of fixing longi- reference to the cardinal points from
tudes by it was long fince abandoned. which they begin, as : 1, north ; 2, north
The reafon for the introduction of the byeaft; 3, north-northeaft ; 4. northeaft
explanation of the maps at this place by north ; 5, northeaft ; 6, northeaft by
will be feen nntea , p. 39. eaft ; 7, eaft-northeaft ; 8, eaft by north.

229 The rofe is the face or card of the The points in each quarter are named
mariner’s compafs. It was anciently in a fimilar manner.

22 1

Sieur de Champlain.

northweft or a little more, from the fleur de lis of faid rofe,
and then adjuft the rofe to the compafs. By this means
the latitudes of all the capes, harbors, and rivers can be
accurately afcertained.

I am aware that there are many who will not make ufe
of it, but will prefer to run according to the large one,
fince it is made according to the compafs of France, where
the magnetic needle varies to the northeaft, for the reafon
that they are fo accuftomed to this method that it is diffi-
cult for them to change. For this reafon I have prepared
the large map in this manner, for the affiftance of the ma-
jority of the pilots and mariners in the waters of New
France, fearing that if I had not done fo, they would have
afcribed to me a miftake, not knowing whence it proceeded.
For the fmall plans or charts of Newfoundland are, for the
moft part, different in all their ftatements with refpedt to
the pofitions of the lands and their latitudes. And thofe
who may have fome fmall copies, reafonably good, efteem
them fo valuable that they do not communicate a knowl-
edge of them to their country, which might derive profit
therefrom.

Now the conftrudtion of thefe maps is fuch that they
have their meridian in a direction north-northeaft, making
weft weft-northweft, which is contrary to the true meridian
of this place, namely, to call north-northeaft north, for the
needle inftead of varying to the northweft, as it fhould,
varies to the northeaft as if it were in France. The con-
fequence of this is that error has refulted, and will continue
to do fo, fince this antiquated cuftom is pradtifed, which they
ftill retain, although they fall into grave miftakes.

They

222 Voyages of

They alfo make ufe of a compafs marked north and fouth ;
that is, fo that the point of the magnetic needle is diredtly
on the fieur de lis. In accordance with fuch a compafs
many conftru<5t their fmall maps, which feems to me the
better way, and fo approach nearer to the true meridian of
New France, than the compaffes of France proper, which
point to the northeaft. It has come about, confequently, in
this way that the firft navigators who failed to New France
thought there was no greater deviation in going to thefe
parts than to the Azores, or other places near France, where
the deviation is almoft imperceptible in navigation, the navi-
gators having the compaffes of France, which point northeaft
and reprefent the true meridian. In failing conftantly weft-
ward with the purpofe of reaching a certain latitude, they
laid their courfe diredtly weft by their compafs, fuppofing
that they were failing on the one parallel where they wifhed
to go. . By thus going conftantly in a ftraight line and not
in a circle, as all the parallels on the furface of the globe
run, they found after having traverfed a long diftance, and
as they were approaching the land, that they were fome
three, four, or five degrees farther fouth than they ought
to be, thus being deceived in their true latitude and reck-
oning.

It is true, indeed, that, when the weather was fair and the
fun clearly vifible, they corrected their latitude, but not with-
out wondering how it happened that their courfe was wrong,
which arofe in confequence of their failing in a ftraight in-
ftead of a circular line according to the parallel, fo that in
changing their meridian they changed with regard to the
points of the compafs, and confequently their courfe. It is,

therefore,

223

Sieur de Champlain.

therefore, very neceffary to know the meridian, and the dec-
lination of the magnetic needle, for this knowledge can ferve
all navigators. This is efpecially fo in the north and fouth,
where there are greater variations in the magnetic needle,
and where the meridians of longitude are fmaller, fo that the
error, if the declination were not known, would be greater.
This above-mentioned error has accordingly arifen, becaufe
navigators have either not cared to corredt it, or did not
know how to do fo, and have left it in the ftate in which
it now is. It is confequently difficult to abandon this man-
ner of failing in the regions of New France.

This has led me to make this large map, not only that it
might be more minute than the fmall one, but alfo in order
to fatisfy navigators, who will thus be able to fail as they do
according to their fmall maps ; and they will excufe me for
not making it better and more in detail, for the life of a
man is not long enough to obferve things fo exadlly that at
leaft fomething would not be found to have been omitted.
Hence inquiring and pains-taking perfons will, in failing,
obferve things not to be found on this map, but which they
can add to it, fo that in the courfe of time there will be no
doubt as to any of the localities indicated. At leaft it feems
to me that I have done my duty, fo far as I could, not having
failed to put on my map anything that I have feen, and thus
giving to the public fpecial knowledge of what had never
been defcribed, nor fo carefully explored as I have done it.
Although in the part others have written of thefe things,
yet very little in comparifon with what we have explored
within the paft ten years.

MODE

224

Voyages of

MODE OF DETERMINING A MERIDIAN LINE.

AKE a fmall piece of board, perfectly level, and
place in the middle a needle C, three inches
high, fo that it fhall be exactly perpendicular.
Expofe it to the fun before noon, at 8 or 9
o’clock, and mark the point B at the end of the
fhadow caft by the needle. Then opening the compaffes,
with one point on C and the other on the fhadow B, defcribe
an arc AB. Leave the whole in this pofition until afternoon
when you fee the fhadow juft reaching the arc at A. Then
divide equally the arc AB, and taking a rule, and placing
it on the points C and D, draw a line running the whole
length of the board, which is not to be moved until the
obfervation is completed. This line will be the meridian of
the place you are in.

And in order to afcertain the declination of the place
where you are with reference to the meridian, place a com-
pafs, which muft be rectangular, along the meridian line, as
fhown in the figure above, there being upon the card a circle
divided into 360 degrees. Divide the circle by two diamet-
rical lines; one reprefenting the north and fouth, as indi-
cated by EF, the other the eafl and weft, as indicated by
GH. Then obferve the magnetic needle turning on its
pivot upon the card, and you will fee how much it deviates
from the fixed meridian line upon the card, and how many
degrees it varies to the northeaft or northweft.

CHAMPLAIN’S

225

Sieur de Champlain.

CHAMPLAIN’S LARGE MAP.

GEOGRAPHICAL CHART OF NEW FRANCE, MADE BY SIEUR
DE CHAMPLAIN OF SAINTONGE, CAPTAIN IN ORDINARY
FOR THE KING IN THE MARINE. MADE IN THE YEAR
1612.

HAVE made this map for the greater conven-
ience of the majority of thofe who navigate on
thefe coafts, fince they fail to that country ac-
cording to compaffes arranged for the hemi-
fphere of Afia. And if I had made it like the
fmall one, the majority would not have been able to ufe it,
owing to their not knowing the declinations of the needle . 230

Obferve that on the prefent map north-northeaft hands
for north, and weft-northweft for weft ; according to which
one is to be guided in afcertaining the elevation of 'the
degrees of latitude, as if thefe points were actually eaft and
weft, north and fouth, fince the map is conftrudted according
to the compaffes of France, which vary to the northeaft . 231

SOME DECLINATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE,

WHICH I HAVE CAREFULLY OBSERVED.

Cap Breton 14 0 50'

Cap de la Heve . . . . x 6° 1 5'

Baye Ste. Marie . . . . 17 0 16'

Port Royal 17 0 8'

En la grande R. St. Laurent 21°

St. Croix 1 7 ° 3 2 ’

Riviere de Norumbegue . 18° 40'

Quinibequi 19 0 12’

Mallebarre 18 0 40'

All obferved by Sieur de Champlain, 1612.

References

280 The above title is on the large 281 For this note fee the upper right-
map of 1612. This note is on the upper hand corner of the map.
left-hand corner of the fame map.

226

Voyages of

REFERENCES ON CHAMPLAIN’S LARGE MAP.

Port Fortune.

Baye Blanche.

Baye aux Illes.

Cap des Illes.

Port aux Illes.

Ifle Haute.

Ille des Monts Deferts.
Cap Corneille.

Illes aux Oifeaux.

Cap des Deux Bayes.

Port aux Mines.

Cap Fourchu.

Cap Negre.

Port du Roffignol.

St. Laurent.

Riviere de l’lfle Verte.
Baye Saine.

Riviere Sainte Marguerite.
Port Sainte Hdlene.

Ifle des Martires.

Illes Rangdes.

Port de Savalette.

Paffage du Glas.

1. Port aux Anglois.

2. Baye Courante.

3. Cap de Poutrincourt.

4. Ifle Gravde.

5- Paffage Courant.

6. Baye de Gennes.

7. Ifle Perdue.

8. Cap des Mines.

9. Port aux Coquilles.

10. Illes Jumelles.

11. Cap Saint Jean.

12. Ifle la Nef.

13. La Ileronnidre Ille.

14. Illes Rangees.

15. Baye Saint Luc.

16. Paffage du Gas.

1 7. Cote de Montmorency.

18. Riviere de Champlain.

19. Riviere Sainte Marie.

20. Ifle d’Orldans.

21. Ille de Bacchus.

Note. — The reader will obferve that in a few inftances the references are
wanting on the map.

CHAMPLAIN’S

Sieur de Champlain.

227

CHAMPLAIN’S NOTE TO THE SMALL MAP.

N the fmall map 232 is added the ftrait above La-
brador between the fifty-third and fixty-third
degrees of latitude, which the Englilh have dis-
covered duing the prefent year 1612, in their
voyage to find, if poffible, a paffage to China
by way of the north. 233 They wintered at a place indicated
by this mark, 6. But it was not without enduring fevere
cold, and they were obliged to return to England, leaving
their leader in the northern regions. Within fix months
three other veffels have fet out, to penetrate, if poffible, ftill
farther, and, at the fame time, to fearch for the men who
were left in that region. geographical

232 In Champlain’s iffue in 1613, the
note here given was placed in the pre-
liminary matter to that volume. It was
placed there probably after the reft of
the work had gone to prefs. We have
placed it here in connexion with other
matter relating to the maps, where it
feems more properly to belong.

238 This refers to the fourth voyage
of Henry Hudfon, made in 1610, for
the purpofe here indicated. He pene-
trated Lomley’s Inlet, hoping to find a
paffage through to the Pacific Ocean,
or, as it was then called, the South Sea,
and thus find a direct and fhorter courfe
to China. He paffed the winter at about
52 0 north latitude, in that expanfe of
water which has ever fince been appro-
priately known as Hudfon’s Bay. A
mutiny having broken out among his
crew, he and eight others having been
forced into a fmall boat, on the 21ft of
June, 1611, were fet adrift on the fea,
and were never heard of afterward.

A part of the mutinous crew arrived
with the Ihip in England, and were im-
mediately thrown into prifon. The fol-
lowing year, 1612, an expedition under
Sir Thomas Button was fent out to feek
for Hudfon, and to profecute the fearch
ftill further for a northweft paffage. It
is needlefs to add that the fearch was
unfuccefsful.

A chart by Hudfon fortunately efcaped
deftruftion by the mutineers. Singu-
larly enough, an engraving of it, en-
titled, Tabvla Navtica, was publifhed
by Heffel Gerritz at Amfterdam the
fame year. Champlain incorporated the
part of it illuftrating Hudfon’s difcovery
in his fmaller map, which is dated the
fame year, 1612. He does not intro-
duce it into his large map, although that
is dated likewife 1612. A fac-fimile of
the Tabula Nautica is given in Henry
Hudfon the Navigator , by G. M.
Afher, LL.D., publifhed by the Hak-
luyt Society in i860.

228

Voyages of Champlain.

GEOGRAPHICAL MAP OF NEW FRANCE, IN ITS TRUE
MERIDIAN.

Made by Sieur Champlain, Captain for the King in the Marine. 1613.

Q. Cap Fourchu.

1. This figure is inverted on the map. Vide antea, note 59, p. 62 2. Vide

antea, note 47, pp. 59, 81. The figure cc is mifplaced and thould be where 0-0
is on the map, on the extreme weftern border near the forty-feventh degree of
north latitude. 3. This figure 0-0 on the map occupies the place which ihould
be occupied by 00 . . Vide antea , p. 58, note 46- 4. A duller of iflands of which

the Ifland of Birds is one. 3. This letter, placed between the River St. John and
the St. Croix, refers to the latter. 6. The letter S appears twice on the coall of
La Cadie. The one here referred to is the more wefterly. 7. This reference is
probably to the Lake of Two Mountains, which will be feen on the map weft of
Montreal. 8. St. Croix on the map is where a crofs furmounted by the figure 4
may be feen. 9. This appears to refer to the Chaudiere. Vide Vol. I. p. 296.
10. This refers to the Falls of Montmorency. 11. A fmall river flowing into
Mai Bay. Vide Vol. I. p. 295 ; alfo Les Voyages de Champlain, Quebec ed.,
p. 1099. 12. Vide Vol. I. p. 234. 13. The figures are wanting. Cape St. Mary

is on the fouthern coaft of Newfoundland. Vide Vol. I. p. 232.

*0 Matou-ouefcariny. 1.

5 Gafpay.

00 Oiiefcariny. 2.

0-0 Quenongebin. 3.

A. Tadouffac.

B. Lefquemain.

C. Ifle Percee.

D. Baye de Chaleur.

E. Ifles aux Gros Yeux. 4.

H. Baye Franfoife.

/. Ifles aux Oyfeaux.

L. Riviere des Etechemins. 5.

M. Menane.

N. Port Royal.

P. Ifle Longue.

SS. Lac de Medicis. 7.

T. Sefambre.

V. Cap des Deux Bayes.

3. L’lfle aux Coudres.

4. Saindte Croix. 8.

4. Riviere des Etechemins. 9.

5. Sault. 10.

6. Lac Saindt Pierre.

7. Riviere des Yroquois.

9. Ifle aux Lieures.

10. Riviere Platte. 11.

11. Mantane. 12.

40. Cap Saindte Marie. 13.

P. Port au Mouton.

S. Port du Roflignol. 6.

INDEX.

Lnu .falls, tms'ilcw.

leiiakw

Wi£f\h boye

i clones froida

Canada*

^tr cnees

SMagucnU

illc/auxgros yew

'ague nay

tcrrnieuuer\i

noi^

Hcstro is nuictc

J/louucllc frarvL

S mOnt TTii

mAUcbarr

eport fortune

myjoineufi

TI

119

72

72]

»7

724

177

a

FAG [_■ tA /\ M E- t A.

A

\

maremiynum

72

720

77

77

777

7-T5

726

77

776

777

Lnu .falls, tms'ilcw.

leiiakw

Wi£f\h boye

i clones froida

Canada*

^tr cnees

SMagucnU

illc/auxgros yew

'ague nay

tcrrnieuuer\i

noi^

Hcstro is nuictc

J/louucllc frarvL

S mOnt TTii

mAUcbarr

eport fortune

myjoineufi

TI

119

72

72]

»7

724

177

a

FAG [_■ tA /\ M E- t A.

A

\

maremiynum

72

720

77

77

777

7-T5

726

77

776

777

INDEX.

A.

Adorefetoiiy, 213.

Agnus Dei, 213.

Algonquins, 9, 10, 20, 21, 22, 30, 31,
35. 5D 52, 55, 58, 59, 72, 81, 82, 1 12,
1 13, 114, I2i, 144, 149, t 5 °> I 5 I , 153 ,
154, 155, 165, 166, 216.

Algonquins, Little Nation of, 59.
Algonquins, River of, 52, 55.

Alix, Marguerite, 189.

All Devils’ Point, 47.

Allumette Ifland, 58, 62, 69, 78, 81, 1 12.
Allumette Lake, 69.

Almouchiquois, 159.

Alvert, 34.

Amherft Ifland, 125, 127.

Amfterdam, 227.

Anadabijou, 31.

Ange, Sieur L’, 47, 50, 84, 87.
Antelope, 86.

Antouhonorons, 161.

Argali, Capt. Samuel, 190.
Aronadabigeau, 31.

Arveft, 34.

Aflier, G. M., 54, 227.

Alh Wednefday, 177.

Afia, 225.

Afiftagueroiion, 146.

Aflaflination of two Frenchmen, 192.
Affitagueronon, 146.

Affociation, 192, 201.

Afticou, 61.

Aftrolabe, 64-66.

Atinouaentans, 214.

Atlas, Walker and Miles, 64.
Atfiftaehronons, 146.

Attignaouentans, 117.
Attignouaatitans, 145, 149.
Attigouautan Lake, 115, 116.
Attigouautans, 117, 123, 131, 149, 155,
157 , 159 , 214-
Attihouandaron, 146.

Attiouandaronk, 146.

Azores, 222.

B.

Baldwin, C. C., 143, 146.
Barnes, A. S., 66.

Barren Grounds, 151.
Bafques, 220.

Batifcan, Indian chief, 10.
Baye aux Illes, 226.

Baye Blanche, 226.

232

Index.

Baye Chaleur, 228.

Baye Courante, 226.

Baye de Gennes, 226.

Baye Francois, 228.

Baye Saint Luc, 226.

Baye Ste. Marie, 225.

Beans, 162, 164.

Bears, 157, 164, 166.

Beauchaine, 201.

Beaulieu, Sieur de, 44.

Beavers, 157.

Beaches, 120.

Belle Ille, 34.

Beilin, 12, 54.

Befouat, 68.

Biard, Pierre, 49, 190.

Biencourt, Charles de, 8.

Bigelow, Jacob, M.D., 120.

Birds, Ifland of, 228.

Bifon, American, 151.

Blagrave, M., 66.

Blueberries, 113, 1 1 5, 116, 162.
Blundeville, Thomas, 66.

Bodleian Library, 220.

Bouchette, Jofepli, 12, 69, 117.

Boulld, Euftache, 14, 189.

Boulle, Nicholas, 189.

Bourbon, Henri de, 42, 45, 46.

Bouyer, 27, 28, 30, 48.

Bradford, Governor William, 162.
Bretagne, 175.

Briffac, Marfhal de, 54.

Brittany, 34, 160.

Brodhead, John Romeyn, 1 22, 21 1.
Brouage, 101, 103.

Bruld, Eftienne, in, 112, 124, 208-
216.

Bruffi, Rapide de, 56.

Buffalo, city of, 64, 65.

Buffaloes, 151, 157.

Burials, Indian, 69, 70.
Butterfield, C. W., 146, 216.
Button, Sir Thomas, 227.

C.

Cabot, Sebaftian, 219.

Cadie, La, 228.

Cahiagud, it 9, 1 21, 144.

Callieres Bonnevue, Louis Hector, 13.
Canada, 13, 37 . 48 , 79 , 85, 101, 104,

1 13, 1 19, 120, 138, 166, 195, 220.
Canada, Hiftory of, 60.

Canaries, 53.

Canfeau, 6, 8.

Cap Corneille, 226.

Cap de la Hdve, 225.

Cap de Poutrincourt, 226.

Cap de Raye, 47.

Cap des Deux Bayes, 226, 228.

Cap des Ifles. 226.

Cap des Mines, 226.

Cape Breton, 5-7, 47, 159, 225.

Cape Breton Ifland, 6.

Cape St. Lawrence, 8.

Cape Tourmente, 193.

Cape Raye, 5, 8, 47.

Cap Fourchu, 226, 228.

Cap Ndgre, 226.

Cap Saint Jean, 226.

Cap Saincte Marie, 228.

Carantoiian, 184, 208-212.
Carantouanais, 122, 133, 208.
Carhagouha, 1 18, 119, 144.

Caribou, 13, 85, 157.

Carmaron, 118.

Caron, Jofeph le, Father, 104, 106, 107,
no, hi, 1 18, 144,186, 187, 200,202,
203.

Index.

233

Carte de I’lfle de Montreal, 12.

Cartier, Jacques, 12, 37, 38, 48, 49.

Caftelfranc, Sieur de, 219.

Cataraqui Creek, 137.

Caton, John Dean, 86.

Cavalier, 130.

Cemeteries, Indian, 69, 70.

Cervus family, 85.

Cefcaud, De, 97.

Champlain, Samuel de, his voyage to
New France and its dangers, 1-10 ;
departure from Quebec to the Falls
of St. Louis, and conference with the
favages ; feeks out a place for a fet-
tlement, 10-19; interviews with the
favages, 19-33 ; his return to France ;
affairs of the Affociation, 34-38;
dedication of his journal to the Prince
de Condci, 42; obtains his commif-
fion amid oppofition, 43-47 ; returns
to New France and goes to the Falls
of St. Louis, 47-52 ; his exploration
of the Ottawa in fearch of the North
Sea, under the falfe ftatements of
Nicholas de Vignau, 52-87 ; return
to France, 87 ; dedication of publi-
cation of 1619 to the King, and pref-
ace to the fame, 91-95 ; his intro-
duction of miffionaries into New
France, 99-105 ; his preparations
and explorations among the favage
tribes on the Ottawa Lake Nipiffing ;
the Hurons and other tribes, his de-
fcription of the manners and cuf-
toms of the Indians, his journey to
weftern New York and attack of an
Iroquois fort, return to Canada,
deer hunt, winter in Simcoe County
.with the Hurons and incidents of
the winter, and his effay on the

character, habits, and cuftoms of the
Indians ; return to France, 106- 188;
his voyage of 1618, the murder of
two Frenchmen by the favages, the
difficulty of punifhing the criminals,
189-208 ; he receives the account of
fitienne Bruld among the favages
of the fouthern borders of New York,
and among the Iroquois, 208-216;
he returns again to France, 216-
218.

Chapoiiin, Rev. Father, 103.

Charioquois, 19, 30.

Charlevoix, Francois Xavier, 12, 13,49,
1 13, 1 19, 126, 127, 150.

Chateauguay River, 55.

Chats, Nation des, 62.

Chaucer, Geoffrey, 66.

ChaudRre, 228.

Chaudifere Falls, 60, 61, 83.

Chaudi&re Lake, 61.

Cherries, 120.

Cheveux Relevds, 115, 146, 148, 149.

Chefapeake Bay, 2 II.

Chefnes, Sieur des, 191, 204, 205.

China, 227.

Chomouchouan, River, 113.

Chouontouaroiion, 123.

Chriftian, 29, 123.

Clark, Gen. John S-, 122.

Collet, Claude, 89. 97.

Columbia, Britiffi, 86.

Condd, Prince de, 41, 43, 84, 100, 103,
104.

C6te de Montmorency, 226.

Coues, Elliott, Dr., 49, 126, 127.

Couillard, William, 203.

Crab-apple, 120.

Cranes, 126, 137.

Croix, Sainte, Ifland of, 63.

3 °

234

Index .

Crofs, planted, 63, 80, 1 1 8.
Crofs, Rev. James, D.D., 128.

D.

Dances, 174, 175.

D'Avezac, 49.

D'Arontal, Indian chief, 137, 142, 185,
186.

Dedication to the King, 91-93.

Deer, 85, 157.

De Monts, Sieur, 15, 34, 35, 44, 187.
Denis, Father, Jamay, 104, 106, 107,
1 10, 11 1.

Does, 157.

Dogs, 164.

Dominion of Canada, 64.

Ducks, 137.

Dutch, 122, 123, 211.

E.

Elk, 85, 157.

Elms, 120.

England, 66, 227.

Englilh, 52, S3, 77, 78, 190, 216, 227.
Entouhonorons, 122, 123, 125, 127,
128, 136, 148, 208, 209.

Epicerinys, 137.

Europe, 13, 48.

F.

Fall of the Rideau, 60.

Falls of St. Louis 9, 16, 38, 51, J2, 55,
59, 7°, 7i, 72, 73, 80, 83, 84, 87, 106,
107, 109, 1 12, 185, 186, 187.

Fauquets, 190.

Ferriere, La, 196, 197.

Ferro, Iiland of, 53.

Fitz Roy, 62.

Five Nations, 122, 209.

Flamens, 122.

Florida, 22, 68, 21 1, 214, 217.
Fontainebleau, 35.

Foxes, 1 57.

France, 2, 8, 9, 12, 13, 19, 20, 25, 34,
37 , 43 - 45 , 48 , 54 , 63 , 80, 87, 102, 1 13,
120, 126, 157, 186, 202,203,205,218,
221, 222, 225.

France, Arms of, 63, 80.

Frenchmen, 21, 23, 24, 55, 58, 59, 73,
82, hi, 160, 184, 195, 196, 197, 199,
202, 207, 208, 21 1, 216.

French River, 115.

Frifius, Gemma, 66.

G.

Gafpay, 228.

Gafpd, 8, 87.

Gatineau River, 59.

Gens de Feu, 146, 148.

Geographical Map, 219.

Georges, Sieur, 54.

Georgian Bay, 117, 146.

Gerrits, Heffel, 227.

Goofe, 49, 138.

Gould’s Landing, 81.

Grand Bank, 1, 2, 47, 87, 190, 220.
Grand Saut, Le, 17.

Grand Saut S. Louys, 17, 18.

Grapes, 1 19, 125.

Gray, Afa, 120.

Great Britain, 66.

Green Idand, 60.

Greig, 12.

Index ,

235

Groufe, 120.

Guerchville, Marchionefs de, 203.
Guines, Modefte, 203.

H.

Hadley, John, 66.

Hague, The, 54.

Hakluyt Society, 54, 227.

Hares, 120.

Hubert, Anne, 203.

Hubert, Guillemette, 203.

Hubert, Louis, 203, 204.

Hennepin, Louis, 209.

Henry IV., 54.

Heronnierre, La Ifle, 226.

Heron Ifland, 16, 18.

Herons, 15.

Honfleur, 1, 8, 47, 104, 105, 187, 189,
190, 218.

Hontan, Baron La, 49.

Hoiiel, Sieur, 101, 102, 103.

Hudfon’s Bay, 54, 1 5 1, 227.

Hudfon, Henry, 53, 54, 227.

Hudfon River, 122.

Huet, Paul, 203, 218.

Huron, Lake, 1 16, 160.

Hurons, 46, 49, 62, 68, 69, 116, 117,
137, 143, 145. 148 , 149- 160 ; country,
extent of, 156, 137, 208, 214.

I.

Icefloes, 1-8.

India, 54.

Indian, 26, 55, x 17.

Indian corn, 62, 119, 147, 157, 161-165,
167, 170.

Indians, their feafts, 26; cabins, 160,
161 ; villages, 161 , drefs, 165 ; wo-
men, their occupation, 167, 168, 178 ;

fiihing-nets, 167; marriages, 167-169,
178; children, 170; law, 171 ; great
quarrel, 149-1 56 ; food, 162-164; reli-
gion, 1 7 1— 1 74 ; ficknefs and method
of treatment, 174— 1 77 ; agriculture,
177 ; mode of government, 178-180 ;
dances, 174, 175, 180, 181 ; burial of
the dead, 32, 180-182 ; occupation in
winter, 182, 183; feafts, 182 ; fifhing
with nets, 183, 184.

Indies, 9, 12.

Iroquet, or Yroquet, 19, 25, 28, 30, 144,
149, 150.

Iroqouis, 12, 21, 22, 28, 48, 56, 60, in,
121-123, 128, 144, 147, 148, 208,214.

Iroquois, River of, 15.

Ifle aux Coudres, 228.

Ifle aux Lieures, 228.

Ifle de Bacchus, 226.

Ifle de Sainte HeRne, 14, 18, 32, 55.

Ille des Martires, 226.

Ifle des Monts Ddferts, 226.

Ifle d’Orleans, 193, 226.

Ifle Gravde, 226.

Ifle Haute, 226.

Ifle La Heronniferre, 226.

Ifle La Nef, 226.

Ifle Longue, 228.

Ifle Penfde, 87, 191, 228.

Ifle Perdue, 226.

Ifles aux Gros Yeux, 228.

Ifles aux Oiseaux, 226, 228.

Ifles Jumelles, 226.

Ifles Rangdes, 226.

Ifles Ranges, 226.

J-

Jamay, Father Denis, 104, 106, in,
186.

Index ,

236

Jean, D’Olbeau, 104, 106, no.

Jeannin, Prefident, 44, 54.

Jefuit Fathers, 117.

Jeune, Le, 49.

Jonqueft, Eltienne, 203.

Jofeph, Father, le Caron, 104, 106, 107,
no, in, 118.

K.

Kalm, Peter, 166, 190.
Khionontateronons, 145.

Kichefipirini, 112.

Kingfton, 143.

Kinounchepirini, 58.

Kiriftinon, 115.

Kirke, Sir David, 203.

Kotakoutouemi, 112.

L.

Labrador, 53, 159, 227.

La Cadie, 159, 190, 203, 228.

Lac aux Claies, 124.

Lac de Medicis, 228.

Lac des Entouhonorons, 122.

Lac de Soiffons, 56.

Lac du Talon, 113.

Lachine Rapids, 9.

Lac la Tortue, 113.

Lac Saint Pierre, 228.

Lake Couchiching, 123, 124, 160.

Lake des Chats, 62.

Lake des Ifles, 59.

Lake Erie, 146.

Lake Huron, 116, 117, 146, 160, 215.
Lake Nipiffing, 14, 55, 74, 115.

Lake Ontario, 122, 125, 128, 139, 143,
208.

Lake St. John, 113.

Lake St. Louis, 55.

Lake Simcoe, 123, 124, 160.

Lake Simon, 59.

Lake Winnipeg, 119, 151.

Lalemant, Pere Hierofme, 117.
Laverdiere, 12, 16, 44, 54, 59, 68, 87,
102, 104, 106, 113, 124, 146, 160.
Larks, 138.

Lent, 113, 164, 177.

Lefcarbot, 48, 50.

Lefdiguieres, Dutchefs of, 13, 49, 119.
Lefquemain, 228.

Licenfe of the King, 97.

Linnaeus, 166, 190.

Little River, 12.

Little Salmon River, 127.

Lomley’s Inlet, 227.

London, 190.

Long Fall, 56.

Long Lake, 59.

Loquin, 203, 204.

Loughborough Lake, 137.

Louis, his death, 15-17.

Lower Charente, 35.

Lynxes, 13.

M.

Madawalka River, 62.

Magazine of American History, 65, 66.
Magnetic Needle, declinations of, 225.
Maifonneuve, Sieur de, 84, 87.

Maize, 69, 145.

Mai Bay, 228.

Mallebarre, 225.

Manitous, 171.

Mantane, 228.

Mantelet, 130.

Mardi-gras, 177, 183.

Index ,

2 37

Marennes, 34.

Margry, Pierre, 216.

Mariners’ Compafs, 220, 222, 225.
Marfhall, O. H., 64, 66, 209, 215.
Marfolet, Nicolas, 216.

Masfeoutins, 146.

Mafkoutens, 146.

Mataouchkarini, 62.

Matchedaih Bay, 117.
Matou-oiiefcarini, 62.
Matou-oiiefcariny, 228.

Mattawa, 1 13.

Mattawan River, 113, 114.

May-apple, 120.

Mecometry, 219.

Medicis, Lac de, 228.

Menane, 228.

Mer Douce, 1 17, 124, 147, 157, 160,
215.

Meridian Line, 224.

Mexico, 86.

Migan, Indian food, 162, 163, 177.
Minxes, 157.

Miffiffippi Valley, 216.

Mitchitamou, 1 1 5.

Moinerie, Sieur de, 50.

Montagnais, 15, 20, 31, 47, 1 13, ri4,
166, 191, 196.

Montmorency, Cote de, 226.
Montmorency, Falls of, 228.
Montmorency, Henri de, 54.

Montreal, 9, 12, 66, 69, 81, 228.

Mont Royal, 11, 18.

Moofe, 13, 85, 157.

Mothe, Nicolas De la, 189, 203, 205,
218.

Mount Defert, 190.

Mulk-Ox, iji.

Mufkrat Lake, 64, 69, 81.

N.

Nation des Chats, 62.

Nautonier, Guillaume de, 219.
Nebicerini, 55, 72, 75, 76.

Necklaces, 149, ijo.

Neutral Nation, or, Nation Neutre,
122, 14s, 146, 148, 217.

New Brunfwick, 85.

New England, 49, 120, 162.
Newfoundland, 47, 159, 221, 228.

New France, 36, 39, 41-43, 49, 50, 81,
9 L 95 > 97 , 99 , 1°°, i° 4 , >13, 122, 156,
189, 190, 216, 218,222, 223, 228.
New York, 128.

Niagara, 215.

Nibachis, 66, 68.

Nicholet, John, or Jean, 146, 216.
Nipifierinii, 113.

Nipiffings, 72, 1 13, IIS, I2l > 148,15°,
165.

Nipiffirini, 113.

Normandy, 47, 50, 51, 187, 192.

North Sea, 42, 52, 54, 74, 78.
Norumbegue, Riviere de, 225.

Nova Scotia, 85, 203.

Nuncio, Sieur, 102.

Nuts, 120, 125,

O.

Oaks, 120.

O’Callaghan, E.B., 122.

Ochateguain, 133.

Ochateguins, 19, 35, 46, 55, 67, 68, 78.
Ohio, 145.

Olbeau, Jeand’, 104, 106, 110, 187, 203.
Oloiiacha, 117.

Oneida Lake, 128.

Oneida River, 128.

Index.

238

Oqui, 171, 174, 175, * 77 -
Orani, 133.

Orignal, 85.

Orleans, Ifle d’, 50, 193.
Otaguottouemin, 112.

Otonabee River, 125.

Ottawa, City of, 60, 67, 113.

Ottawa River, 55, 61-3, 69,81, 112-114.
Ouachegami, 115.

Ouaouechkairini, 59.

Ouentaronk, 124.

Ouentouoronons, 209.

Oiiefcariny, 228.

Ouefcharini, 59, 81.
Outaoukotouemiouek, 113.

Outardes, 48, 137.

Outetoucos, 15-17, 32.

Outimagami, 115.

Outurbi, 1 15.

Oxford, 220.

P.

Pacific Ocean, 227.

Parc, Sieur du, 10, 85, 192.

Paris, 35, 49, 50, 52, 97, 102, 103, 113,
189, 203.

Parkman, Francis, 160.

Parliamentary Court of Rouen, 46.
Partridges, 120.

Paflage Courant, 226.

Paflage de Glas, 226.

Paflage du Gas, 226
Paul, Pdre, 203, 218.

Pennant, 48.

Pennfylvania, 122.

Penfde Ifle, 87, 191.

Petite Rividre, 12.

Petuns, 144, 145, 149.

Pickering Charles, M. D., 119, 120.
Pigeons, 86.

Pillet, Charles, 193.

Pifierinii, 148.

Place Royale, 11, 13-15.

Plancius, Peter, 219.

Platon, 205.

Pleflis, Pacifique du, Brother, 104, 106,
no, 187, 203, 218.

Plum, Canada, 120.

Plymouth, 162.

Point aux Vaches, 47.

Point Callidres, 12, 13.

Pons, ^35.

Pont Gravd, 9, 14, 24, 31, 34, 47, 105,
106, 109, hi, 184, 187,189,203-205,
207, 217.

Pope, Holy Father, 102.

Porcelain, 165.

Porcupine quills, 166.

Portage du Fort, 63, 81.

Portage road, old, 66.

Port aux Anglois, 226.

Port aux Coquilles, 226.

Port aux Ifles, 226.

Port aux Mines, 226.

Port de Savelette, 226.

Port du Roflignol, 226, 228.

Port Fortund, 226.

Port Mouton, 228.

Port Royal, 8, 203, 225, 228.

Port Sainte Helene, 226.

Potherie, De la, 12, 49, 50, 150.
Poutrincourt, Sieur de, 8, 203.

Preface to Journal of 1615, 95.

Q-

Quebec, 9, 11, 33, 35, 36, 38, 45,46,
49, 50, 51, 106, 109, no, in, 119,

Index.

239

142, 191, 192, 193, 198, 200, 203, 205,
206, 216, 2x7.

Quenechouan, 56.

Quenongebin, 58, 228.
Quieunontateronons, 145.

Quinibequi, 225.

R.

Rabbits, 13.

Rapide de Bruffi, 56.

Rapide des Chats, 62.

Rafpberries, 120, 162.

Raye, Pierre, 216.

Recollefts, 101-103.

Red cedar, 63.

Red River, 15 1.

Rd, I Hand of, 193.

Relation des J^fuites, 58, 59, 62, 112,
113, ns, 117 , 145 , h6, 216.

Rice Lake, 125.

Rideau River, 60.

Riviere de Champlain, 226.

Riviere de 1 ’Ifle Verte, 226.

Rivi&re de Loup, 55.

Rivi&re de Norumbegue, 225.

Rivifere de Petite Nation, 59.

Rivi&re des Etechemins, 228.

Rivi&re des Prairies, 107, no, ill, 1 12.
Riviere des Yroquois, 228.

Riviere Platte, 228.

Riviere Sainte Marguerite, 226.
Riviere Sainte Marie, 226.

Riviere St. Laurent, 225.

Riviere St. Pierre, 12.

River Severn, 160.

River Trent, 125.

Rochelle, La, to, 34, 35, 46, 54, 87.
Rogueneau, P6re, 113.

Rofe, 220.

Rofs, 64.

Rouen, 46, 47, 48, 87, 104, 105.

Ruflell, A. J., 66, 81.

S.

Sagard, Gabriel, 49, 62, 101, 104, 105,
137, HS, 146,189, 191, 195, 202, 203.
Saguenay, 38, 113.

Saint Barnabas’ Day, 85.

St. Croix, 38, 205, 225, 228.

Saint Etienne, 105.

Saintes, 35.

Saint John, River, 228.

Saint John’s Day, 191, 203.

St. Laurent, 226.

Saint Lawrence River, 12, 38, 55, 59,
62, 1 12, 122, 127, 156, 157, 220, 226.
Saint Louis, 17.

St. Louis, Falls of, 38, 51, 59.

St. Louis, Lake, 55-
Saint Louis, Le Grand Sault, 12, 38.
St. Malo, 37, 38, 46, 50, 51, 84, 87.
Saint Mary’s Strait, 117.

St. Maurice, River. 59.

Saint Paul, Island of, 8.

Saint Peter’s River, 12.

Sainte Pierre, Iflands of, 8.

Saint Pierre, Riviere, 12.

Sainttonge, 35.

Salle, de la. 209.

Sanfon, Nicholas, 146.

Salkatchewan River, 119.

Sault, 228.

Sauflaye, 190.

Savignon, 15, 17, 25, 30.

Scadding, Henry, D.D., 66.

Senecas, 209.

Sefambre, 228.

Shea, John Gilmary, 146, 151, 216.

240

Index.

Shrove-Tuefday, 177.

Sillery, 54.

Sillery, Nicholas Brulant de, 54.
Simcoe, 1 17, 120.

Simcoe Ifland, 127, 137.

Sledges, Indian, 143.

Smith, S. D., of Mexico, N. Y., 128.
Smith, W. H., 60.

Snipe, 138.

Soiflons, Comte de, 44.

SoilTons, Lac de, 56.

Song-thrufh, 137.

South Sea, 227.

Spain, 54.

Spaniards, 37, 220.

Squafhes, 119, 165.

Stags, 13, 157.

Stofflerus, 66.

Strawberries, 115, 120.

Sturgeon Lake, 124, 125.

Sturgeon River, 115.

Sunflower, 119, 166.

Susquehanna River, 208.

Swallow Sea, 190.

Swans, 137.

T.

Tabagie, 51, 71, 72, 182.

Tabvla Navtica, 227.

Tadouffac, 8-10, 14, 13, 30, 31, 34, 38,
48, 51, 68, 87, 105, 106, 187, 191,
203, 205, 217, 2x8, 228.

Tecoueliata, 33.

Tequenonquiaye, 118.

Terns, 190.

TefToiiat, 68, 69, 71, 75, 77, 79, 81.
Thomas, interpreter, 67, 76, 79.
Tibaut, 34.

Timifcimi, 1 1 5.

Tionnontateronons, 143.

j Toronto, 66.

Touaguainchain, 118.

Tregouaroti, 19.

Tremblaye, Sieur de, 50.

Trefart, 10.

Trois Rivieres, 10, 33, 38, 191, 193,
196, 198, 204-206, 217.

Trofs, Edwin, bookfeller, 104, 103.
Tfonnontouans, 209.

Turquie, bl6 de, 143.

Two Mountains, Lake of, 13, 26, 36,
1 1 2, 228.

U.

Urbaldini, Robert, 102.

V.

Verger, Father Bernard du, 102, 103.
Verrins, 54.

Vignau, Nicholas de, 32, 53, 73.

Vilin, de la Motte le, 190.

Villages, Indian, 145.

Vimont, P£re Barthelemy, 58, 39, 62,
112, 115, I 4S-
Virginias, 190.

Voyages to New France, 1-9, 47, 48,
103, 189-191.

W.

Walker and Miles, 15.

Wapiti, 83, 137.

Waverly, 122.

Weafels, 137.

Whitefifh Lake, 59.

Whitfuntide, 34.

Wolf, 13, 139, 157.

Wolf Ifland, 137.

Y.

Yroquet, Captain, 144. 149, 130, 135.
