Voyages of Samuel de Champlain, Vol. 2 (Samuel de Champlain (Charles P. Otis, trans.; Edmund F. Slafter, ed.), 1613)
==========================================================
Champlain's Voyages (1613-32) - the founder of New France's own account; the primary record of early Canada and the Great Lakes. The Prince Society translation (1878-82, 3 vols.). Vol. 2 of 3.

Champlain’S  Voyages.

Boston:

PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY,
Bv  John  Wilson  and  Son.

1878.

TWO  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY  COPIES,  SMALL  PAPER.

VOYAGES

OF

Samuel  de  Champlain.

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FRENCH

By  CHARLES  POMEROY  OTIS,  Ph.D.

WITH  HISTORICAL  ILLUSTRATIONS,

AND  A

MEMOIR

By  THE  REV.  EDMUND  F.  SLAFTER,  A.M.

VOL.  II.

1604-  1610.

HELIOTYPE  COPIES  OF  TWENTY  LOCAL  MAPS.

98ci6tan:

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  PRINCE  SOCIETY.
1878.

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1878,  by

EDMUND  F.  SLAFTER,

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington.

lEKttor:

The  rev.  EDMUND  F.  SLAFTER,  A.M.

PREFACE.

HAMPLAIN’S  edition  of  1613  contains,  in  con-
ne(5lion  with  the  preliminary  matter,  two  pieces
of  poetry,  one  figned  L’ange,  Paris,  the  other
Motin.  They  were  contributed  doubtlefs  by
fome  friend,  intended  to  be  complimentary  to  the  author,
to  embellifh  the  volume  and  to  give  it  a favorable  introduc-
tion to  the  reader.  This  was  in  conformity  to  a prevailing
cuftom  of  that  period.  They  contain  no  intrinfic  hiflorical
intereft  or  value  whatever,  and,  if  introduced,  would  not  ferve
their  original  purpofe,  but  would  rather  be  an  incumbrance,
and  they  have  confequently  been  omitted  in  the  prefent
work.

Champlain  alfo  included  a fummary  of  chapters,  identical
with  the  headings  of  chapters  in  this  tranflation,  evidently
intended  to  take  the  place  of  an  index,  which  he  did  not
fupply.  To  repeat  thefe  headings  would  be  fuperfluous,
particularly  as  this  work  is  furniflied  with  a copious  index.

The

VI

Preface.

The  edition  of  1613  was  divided  into  two  books.  This
divilion  has  been  omitted  here,  both  as  fuperfluous  and
confufing.

The  maps  referred  to  on  Champlain’s  title-page  may  be
found  in  Vol.  III.  of  this  work.  In  France,  the  needle
defleds  to  the  eaft;  and  the  dial-plate,  as  figured  on  the
larger  map,  that  of  1612,  is  conftrudfed  accordingly.  On
it  the  line  marked  nornordejl  reprefents  the  true  north,
while  the  index  is  carried  round  to  the  left,  and  points
out  the  variation  of  the  needle  to  the  weft.  The  map  is
oriented  by  the  needle  without  reference  to  its  variation,
but  the  true  meridian  is  laid  down  by  a strong  line  on
which  the  degrees  of  latitude  are  numbered.  From  this
the  points  of  the  compafs  between  any  two  places  may
be  readily  obtained.

A Note,  relating  to  Hudfon’s  difcoveries  in  1612,  as  de-
lineated on  Champlain’s  fmall  map,  introduced  by  him
in  the  prefatory  matter,  apparently  after  the  text  had  been
ftruck  off,  will  appear  in  connexion  with  the  map  itfelf,
where  it  more  properly  belongs.

E.  F.  S.

Boston,  ii  Beacon  Street,

Odlober  21,  1878.

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS,

Page

Preface  v

Champlain’s  Dedication  of  his  Work  to  the  King xi

Address  to  the  Queen  Regent xiii

Extract  from  the  License xv

Voyage  1604  to  1608 i

First  Voyage  as  Lieutenant,  1608  to  1610 159

Second  Voyage  as  Lieutenant,  1610 231

Local  Maps:  Port  de  la  H^ve,  10;  Port  du  Roiflignol,  ii ; Port  du
Mouton,  22;  Port  Royal,  24;  Port  des  Mines,  26;  Riviere  St.
Jehan,  29 ; Ifle  de  Sainte  Croix,  32 ; Habitation  de  L’lfle  Ste.

Croix,  35  ; Quinibequy,  56  ; Chouacoit  R.,  65  ; Port  St.  Louis,  78 ;

Malle  Barre,  82 ; L’Abitafion  du  Port  Royal,  97;  Le  Beau  Port,

1143  Port  Fortune,  122;  The  Attack  at  Port  Fortune,  129;  Port
de  Tadoucac,  170;  Quebec,  175;  Abitation  de  Quebecq,  183;
Defeat  of  the  Iroquois  at  Lake  Champlain,  221.

Index

259

THE  VOYAGES

OF  SIEUR  DE  CHAMPLAIN,

Of  Saintonge,  Captain  in  ordinary  to  the
King  in  the  Marine;

OR,

A MOST  FAITHFUL  JOURNAL  OF  OBSERVATIONS
made  in  the  exploratiofi  of  New  France,  describing  not  only  the
countries,  coasts,  rivers,  ports,  and  harbors,  with  their  latitudes
and  the  various  deflections  of  the  Magnetic  Needle,  but  likewise  the
religious  belief  of  the  inhabitants,  their  superstitions,  mode  of  life
and  warfare;  furnished  with  numerous  illustrations.

Together  with  two  geographical  maps  : the  first  for  the  purposes  of
navigation,  adapted  to  the  compass  as  used  by  mariners,  which
deflects  to  the  north-east ; the  other  in  its  true  meridian,  with
longitudes  and  latitudes,  to  which  is  added  the  Voyage  to  the
Strait  north  of  Labrador,  from  the  53d  to  the  63d  degree  of  lati-
tude, discovered  in  1612  by  the  English  when  they  were  searching
for  a northerly  course  to  China.

PARIS.

Jean  Berjon,  Rue  St.  Jean  de  Beauvais,  at  the  Flying  Horse,
and  at  his  store  in  the  Palace,  at  the  gallery
of  the  Prisoners.

M.  DC.  XIII.

WITH  AUTHORITY  OF  THE  KING.

TO  THE  KING.

IRE,

Your  Majejly  has  doubtlefs  ftill  knowledge  of
the  difcoveries  made  in  your  fe'rvice  in  New
France^  called  Canada^  through  the  defcriptions^
given  by  certain  Captains  and  Pilots^  of  the  voyages  and
difcoveries  made  there  during  the  pafi  eighty  years.  Thefe.,
however^  prefent  nothing  fo  honorable  to  your  Kingdom^  or
fo  profitable  to  the  fervice  of  your  Majefiy  and  your  fubjedls.^
as  will,  I doubt  not^  the  maps  of  the  coafis^  harbors^  rivers^
and  the  fituation  of  the  places  defcribed  in  this  little  treatife^
which  I make  bold  to  addrefs  to  your  Majefiy^  and  which  is
entitled  a foumial  of  Voyages  and  Difcoveries^  which  I have
made  in  connection  with  Sieur  de  MontSy  your  Lieutenant  in
New  France.  This  I doy  feeling  myf elf  urged  by  a jufi  fenfe
of  the  honor  I have  received  during  the  lafi  ten  years  in
commiffions,  not  onlyy  Sirey  from  your  Majefiy y but  alfo  from
the  late  king,  Henry  the  Greaty  of  happy  memoryy  who  com-
mijfioned  me  to  make  the  mofi  exaCl  refearclies  and  explo-
rations in  my  power.  This  I have  doncy  and  addedy  more-

overy

xii  Dedication  to  the  King,

oveTj  the  maps  contained  in  this  little  book^  where  I have  fet
forth  in  particular  the  dangers  to  which  one  would  be  liable.
The  fubje6ls  of  your  Majefly,^  whom  you  may  be  pleafed  here-
after to  employ  for  the  prefervation  of  what  has  been  dif
covered,,  will  be  able  to  avoid  thofe  dangers  through  the
knowledge  afforded  by  the  maps  contained  in  this  treatife,,
which  will  ferve  as  an  example  in  your  kingdom  for  increaf
ing  the  glory  of  your  Majefly^  the  welfare  of  your  fubjeTts,,
and  for  the  honor  of  the  very  humble  fervice,,  for  which,,
to  the  happy  prolongation  of  your  days,,  is  indebted^

Sire,

Your  mofl  humble,  mofl  obedient,

and  mofl  faithful  fervant  and  fubje6l.

CHAMPLAIN.

TO  THE  QUEEN  REGENT,

Mother  of  the  King.

ADAME,

Of  all  the  moll:  ufeful  and  excellent  arts,  that  of
navigation  has  always  feemed  to  me  to  occupy
the  firft  place.  For  the  more  hazardous  it  is,
and  the  more  numerous  the  perils  and  Ioffes  by  which  it  is
attended,  fo  much  the  more  is  it  efteemed  and  exalted  above
all  others,  being  wholly  unfuited  to  the  timid  and  irrefolute.
By  this  art  we  obtain  knowledge  of  different  countries,  re-
gions, and  realms.  By  it  we  attract  and  bring  to  our  own
land  all  kinds  of  riches,  by  it  the  idolatry  of  paganifm  is
overthrown  and  Chrillianity  proclaimed  throughout  all  the
regions  of  the  earth.  This  is  the  art  which  from  my  early
age  has  won  my  love,  and  induced  me  to  expofe  myfelf  almoft
all  my  life  to  the  impetuous  waves  of  the  ocean,  and  led  me
to  explore  the  coafts  of  a part  of  America,  efpecially  of  New
France,  where  I have  always  defired  to  fee  the  Lily  flourifh,
and  alfo  the  only  religion,  catholic,  apoftolic,  and  Roman.
This  I truft  now  to  accomplifli  with  the  help  of  God,  affifted
by  the  favor  of  5'our  Majefly,  whom  I moft  humbly  entreat

to

1

xiv  Address  to  the  Queen  Regent.

to  continue  to  fuftain  us,  in  order  that  all  may  fucceed  to  the
honor  of  God,  the  welfare  of  France,  and  the  fplendor  of
your  reign,  for  the  grandeur  and  profperity  of  which  I will
pray  God  to  attend  you  always  with  a thoufand  bleffings,
and  will  remain,

Madame,

Your  molt  humble,  moft  obedient,

and  moft  faithful  fervant  and  fubjed,

CHAMPLAIN.

EXTRACT  FROM  THE  LICENSE.

Y letters  patent  of  the  King,  given  at  Paris  the
ninth  of  January,  1613,  and  in  the  third  year  of
our  reign,  by  the  King  in  his  Council,  Perreau,
and  fealed  with  the  fimple  yellow  feal,  it  is  per-
mitted to  Jean  Berjon,  printer  and  bookfeller
in  this  city  of  Paris,  to  print,  or  have  printed  by  whomfoever
it  may  feem  good  to  him,  a book  entitled  The  Voyages  of
Samuel  de  Champlain  of  Saintonge,  Captain  in  ordinary  for
the  King  in  the  Marine^  &C.,  for  the  time  and  limit  of  fix
entire  confecutive  years,  from  the  day  when  this  book  lhall
have  been  printed  up  to  the  faid  time  of  fix  years.  By  the
fame  letters,  in  like  manner  all  printers,  merchant  bookfellers,
and  any  others  whatever,  are  forbidden  to  print  or  have
printed,  to  fell  or  diflribute  faid  book  during  the  aforefaid
time,  without  the  fpecial  confent  of  faid  Berjon,  or  of  him
to  whom  he  fhall  give  permiffion,  on  pain  of  confifcation  of
fo  many  of  faid  books  as  fhall  be  found,  and  a difcretionary
fine,  as  is  more  fully  fet  forth  in  the  aforefaid  letters.

VO YAG  E S

OF

SIEUR  DE  CHAMPLAIN.

VOYAGE  IN  THE  YEAR  1604.

CHAPTER  I.

The  Benefits  of  Commerce  have  induced  Several  Princes  to  seek  an
Easier  Route  for  Traffic  with  the  People  of  the  East.  — Several
Unsuccessful  Voyages.  — Determination  of  the  French  for  this
Purpose.  — Undertaking  of  Sieur  de  Monts:  his  Commission  and
its  Revocation.  — New  Commission  to  Sieur  de  Monts  to  enable
him  to  continue  his  Undertaking.

HE  inclinations  of  men  differ  according  to  their
varied  difpofitions ; and  each  one  in  his  calling
has  his  particular  end  in  view.  Some  aim  at
gain,  fome  at  glory,  fome  at  the  public  weal.
The  greater  number  are  engaged  in  trade,  and
efpecially  that  which  is  tranfadled  on  the  fea.  Hence  arife
the  principal  fupport  of  the  people,  the  opulence  and  honor
of  flates.  This  is  what  raifed  ancient  Rome  to  the  fov-
ereignty  and  mattery  over  the  entire  world,  and  the  Vene-
tians to  a grandeur  equal  to  that  of  powerful  kings.  It  has

I

2

Voyages  of

in  all  times  caufed  maritime  towns  to  abound  in  riches,
among  which  Alexandria  and  Tyre  are  diftinguiflied,  and
numerous  others,  which  fill  up  the  regions  of  the  interior
with  the  objedts  of  beauty  and  rarity  obtained  from  foreign
nations.  For  this  reafon,  many  princes  have  ftriven  to  find
a northerly  route  to  China,  in  order  to  facilitate  commerce
with  the  Orientals,  in  the  belief  that  this  route  would  be
fliorter  and  lefs  dangerous.

In  the  3^ear  1496,  the  king  of  England  commiffioned  John
Cabot  and  his  fon  Sebaftian  to  engage  in  this  fearch.^  About
the  fame  time,  Don  Emanuel,  king  of  Portugal,  defpatched
on  the  fame  errand  Gafpar  Cortereal,  who  returned  with-
out attaining  his  objedf.  Refuming  his  journeys  the  year
after,  he  died  in  the  undertaking;  as  did  alfo  his  brother
Michel,  who  was  profecuting  it  perfeveringly.^  In  the  years
1534  3.nd  i535i  JS'Cques  Cartier  received  a like  commiffion
from  King  Francis  I.,  but  was  arrefted  in  his  courfe.®  Six
years  after,  Sieur  de  Roberval,  having  renewed  it,  fent  Jean

1 The  firft  commiffion  was  granted  by
Henry  VII.  of  England  to  John  Cabot
and  his  three  fons,  Lewis,  Sebaftian
Sancius,  March  5,  1496. — Ry pier's
Fadera,yo\.  XII.  p.  595.  The  firft
voyage,  however,  was  made  in  1407.
The  fecond  commiflion  was  granted  to
John  Cabot  alone,  in  Vide Hak-

luyt,  1600,  London,  ed.  1810,  Vol  ITT
pp.  25-31.

^ Cortereal  made  two  voyages  under
i^e  patronage  of  Emmanuel,  King  of
Portugal,  the  firft  in  1500,  the  fecond

J’®  failed

with  two  Ihips  from  Lif bon,  and  explored
fix  hundred  miles  or  more  on  our  north-
ern coaft.  The  veflel  in  which  he  failed
was  loft ; and  he  periflied,  together  with

Alfonfe

fifty  natives  whom  he  had  captured.
The  other  veflel  returned,  and  reported
the  incidents  of  the  expedition.  The
next  year,  Michael  Cortereal,  the  brother
of  Gafpar,  obtained  a commiflion,  and
went  in  fearch  of  his  brother ; but  he
did  not  return,  and  no  tidings  were  ever
heard  of  him.

. Jacques  Cartier  made  three  voyages
P ^,534’  I535»  and  1540,  refpe6lively,
in  which  he  effedled  very  important  dif-
covenes  ; and  Charlevoix  juftly  remarks
at  Cartier’s  Memoirs  long  ferved  as  a
^ide  to  thofe  who  after  him  navigated
e gulf  and  river  of  St.  Lawrence.  For
Canier  s commiflion,  fee  Hazard^ s State
Papers,  Vol.  I.  p.  19

3

Sieur  de  Champlain.

Alfonfe  of  Saintonge  farther  northward  along  the  coaft  of
Labrador;^  but  he  returned  as  wife  as  the  others.  In  the
years  1576, 1577,  and  1578,  Sir  Martin  Frobiflier,  an  Englifli-
man,  made  three  voyages  along  the  northern  coafts.  Seven
years  later,  Humphrey  Gilbert,  alfo  an  Englifliman,  fet  out
with  five  fhips,  but  fuffered  fhipwreck  on  Sable  Ifland,
where  three  of  his  veffels  were  loft.  In  the  fame  and  two
following  years,  John  Davis,  an  Englifhman,  made  three
voyages  for  the  fame  objedl;  penetrating  to  the  7 2d  degree,
as  far  as  a ftrait  which  is  called  at  the  prefent  day  by  his
name.  After  him.  Captain  Georges  made  alfo  a voyage  in
1590,  but  in  confequence  of  the  ice  was  compelled  to  return
without  having  made  any  difcovery.®  The  Hollanders,  on

their

^ Roberval’s  voyage  was  made  in
1 542,  and  is  reported  by  Jean  Alfonfe.  —
Vide  Hakluyt.,  1600,  London,  ed.  1810,
Vol.  III.  p.  291.  On  an  old  map,  drawn
about  the  middle  of  the  fixteenth  cen-
tury, Roberval  is  reprefented  in  a full-
length  portrait,  clad  in  mail,  with  fword
and  fpear,  at  the  head  of  a band  of
armed  foldiers,  penetrating  into  the
wilds  of  Canada,  near  the  head- waters
of  the  Saguenay.  The  name,  “ Monfr-
de  Roberual,”  is  inferted  near  his  feet,
— Vide  Monuments  de  la  GSographie.,
XIX.,  par  M.  Jomard,  Paris.

® For  the  narrative  of  the  voyages  of
Frobiflier,  Gilbert,  and  Davis,  vide  Hak-
luyt, Vol.  III.  Of  the  fleet  of  five
veflels  commanded  by  Sir  Humphrey
Gilbert,  in  1 583,  the  Ralegh  put  back  to
England,  on  account  of  ficknefs  on
board ; the  Golden  Hinde  returned
fafely  to  port ; the  Swallow  was  left  at
Newfoundland,  to  bring  home  the  fick  ;
the  Delight  was  loft  near  Sable  Ifland  ;
and  the  Squirrel  went  down  on  its  way

to  England,  fome  days  after  leaving
Sable  Ifland.  Thus  two  only  were  loft,
while  a third  was  left.

There  muft  have  been  fome  error  in  re-
gard to  the  voyage  of  Captain  Georges.
There  is  no  printed  account  of  a voy-
age at  that  time  by  any  one  of  this
name.  There  are  two  theories  on
which  this  ftatement  may  be  explained.
There  may  have  been  a voyage  by  a
Captain  Georges,  which,  for  fome  un-
known reafon,  was  never  reported ; or,
what  is  more  likely,  Champlain  may
refer  to  the  voyage  of  Captain  George
Weymouth,  undertaken  in  1602  for  the
East  Ind.  Company,  which  was  defeated
by  the  icebergs  which  he  encountered,
and  the  mutiny  of  his  men.  It  was  not
uncommon  to  omit  part  of  a name  at
that  period.  Of  Pont  Gravd,  the  laft
name  is  frequently  omitted  by  Cham-
plain and  by  Lefcarbot.  The  report  of
Weymouth’s  voyage  was  not  printed
till  after  Champlain  wrote ; and  he
might  eafily  have  miftaken  the  date.

4

Voyages  of

their  part,  had  no  more  precife  knowledge  in  the  direction  of
Nova  Zembla.

So  many  voyages  and  difcoveries  without  refult,  and  at-
tended with  fo  much  hardfliip  and  expenfe,  have  caufed  us
French  in  late  years  to  attempt  a permanent  fettlement  in
thofe  lands  which  we  call  New  France,®  in  the  hope  of  thus
realizing  more  eafily  this  objedt ; fince  the  voyage  in  fearch
of  the  defired  paflage  commences  on  the  other  fide  of  the
ocean,  and  is  made  along  the  coafl:  of  this  region/  Thefe
confiderations  had  induced  the  Marquis  de  la  Roche,  in  1598,
to  take  a commiffion  from  the  king  for  making  a fettlement
in  the  above  region.  With  this  objed,  he  landed  men  and
fupplies  on  Sable  Ifland;*  but,  as  the  conditions  which  had
been  accorded  to  him  by  his  Majefty  were  not  fulfilled,  he
was  obliged  to  abandon  his  undertaking,  and  leave  his  men
there.  A year  after.  Captain  Chauvin  accepted  another
commiffion  to  tranfport  fettlers  to  the  fame  region ; * but,  as

this  was  fhortly  after  revoked,  he  profecuted  the  matter  no
farther.

After  the  above,*®  notwithftanding  all  thefe  accidents  and
difappomtments,  Sieur  de  Monts  defired  to  attempt  what  had

been

Ihe  name  of  New  France,  Nows
Vrancifca,  appears  on  a map  in  Ptolemy
publifhed  at  Bafle  in  1530.  ^

’ The  controlling  objeft  of  the  nu-
merous voyages  to  the  north-eaft  coaft
of  America  had  hitherto  been  to  difcover
a Ihorter  courfe  to  India.  In  this  re-
Ipett,  p Champlain  ftates  above,  they
had  all  proved  failures.  He  here  inti-
mates that  the  fettlements  of  the  French
on  this  coaft  were  intended  to  facilitate
this  defign.  It  is  obvious  that  a colo-

nial eftablifhment  would  offer  great  ad-
vantages as  a bafe  in  profecutingfearches
for  this  defired  paflage  to  Cathay.

^ fome  account  of  this  difaftrous
expedition,  fee  Memoir^  Vol.  I.

® Vide  Memoir^  Vol.  I.

It  will  be  obferved  that  Champlain
oes  not  mention  the  expedition  fent  out
by  Commander  de  Chaftes,  probably
becai^e  its  objedl  was  exploration,  and
o actual  fettlement.  — Vide  an  account
ot  De  Chaftes  in  the  Memoir,  Vol.  I.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  5

been  given  up  in  defpair,  and  requefted  a commiflion  for  this
purpofe  of  his  Majefty,  being  fatisfied  that  the  previous
enterprifes  had  failed  becaufe  the  undertakers  of  them  had
not  received  affiftance,  who  had  not  fucceeded,  in  one  nor
even  two  years’  time,  in  making  the  acquaintance  of  the
regions  and  people  there,  nor  in  finding  harbors  adapted  for
a fettlement.  He  propofed  to  his  Majefty  a means  for  cov-
ering thefe  expenfes,  without  drawing  any  thing  from  the
royal  revenues;  viz.,  by  granting  to  him  the  monopoly  of
the  fur-trade  in  this  land.  This  having  been  granted  to
him,  he  made  great  and  exceflive  outlays,  and  carried  out
with  him  a large  number  of  men  of  various  vocations.
Upon  his  arrival,  he  caufed  the  neceffary  number  of  habita-
tions for  his  followers  to  be  conftrudfed.  This  expenditure
he  continued  for  three  confecutive  years,  after  which,  in  con-
fequence  of  the  jealoufy  and  annoyance  of  certain  Bafque
merchants,  together  with  fome  from  Brittany,  the  monopoly
which  had  been  granted  to  him  was  revoked  by  the  Council
to  the  great  injury  and  lofs  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  who,  in  con-
fequence  of  this  revocation,  was  compelled  to  abandon  his
entire  undertaking,  facrificing  his  labors  and  the  outfit  for
his  fettlement.

But  fince  a report  had  been  made  to  the  king  on  the  fer-
tility of  the  foil  by  him,  and  by  me  on  the  feafibility  of  dif-
covering  the  paffage  to  China,“  without  the  inconveniences
of  the  ice  of  the  north  or  the  heats  of  the  torrid  zone,

through

In  Champlain’s  report  of  the  voyage  the  laft  lake  in  the  chain  was  fait,  and
of  1603,  after  obtaining  what  informa-  he  therefore  believed  it  to  be  the  South
tion  he  could  from  the  natives  relating  Sea.  He  doubtlefs  enlarged  verbally
to  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  chain  of  before  the  king  upon  the  feafibility  of  a
lakes,  he  fays  they  informed  him  that  paffage  to  China  in  this  way.

6

Voyages  of

through  which  our  failors  pafs  twice  in  going  and  twice  in
returning,  with  inconceivable  hardfhips  and  rifks,  his  Maj-
efty  diredted  Sieur  de  Monts  to  make  a new  outfit,  and
fend  men  to  continue  what  he  had  commenced.  This  he
did.  And,  in  view  of  the  uncertainty  of  his  commiffion,’®  he
chofe  a new  fpot  for  his  fettlement,  in  order  to  deprive  jealous
perfons  of  any  fuch  diftruft  as  they  had  previoufly  conceived.
He  was  alfo  influenced  by  the  hope  of  greater  advantages  in
cafe  of  fettling  in  the  interior,  where  the  people  are  civilized,
and  where  it  is  eafier  to  plant  the  ChrifUan  faith  and  eftablifh
fuch  order  as  is  neceffary  for  the  protedlion  of  a country,  than
along  the  fea-fhore,  where  the  favages  generally  dwell.  From
this  courfe,  he  believed  the  king  would  derive  an  ineftimable
profit ; for  it  is  eafy  to  fuppofe  that  Europeans  will  feek  out
this  advantage  rather  than  thofe  of  a jealous  and  intradlable
difpofition  to  be  found  on  the  fliores,  and  the  barbarous
tribes.*®

CHAPTER  II.

The  commijQ&on  here  referred  to
was  doubtlefs  the  one  renewed  to  him
in  1608,  after  he  had  made  his  fearches
on  the  fliores  of  New  England  and
Nova  Scotia,  and  after  the  commiflion
or  charter  of  1603  had  been  revoked.
Champlain  is  here  ftating  the  advantages
of  a fettlement  in  the  interior,  on  the

fliores  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  rather  than
on  the  Atlantic  coaft.

In  this  chapter,  Champlain  fpeaks
of  events  ftretching  through  feveral
years  ; but  in  the  next  he  confines  him-
felf  to  the  occurrences  of  1603,  when
De  Monts  obtained  his  charter.

Sieur  de  Champlain.

7

CHAPTER  II.

Description  of  Sable  Island  ; Cape  Breton  ; La  Heve  ; Port  au
Mouton;  Port  Cape  NECRfe ; Sable  Bay  and  Cape;  Cormorant
Island  ; Cape  Fourchu  ; Long  Island  ; Bay  of  Saint  Mary  ; Port
Saint  Margaret;  and  of  all  Noteworthy  Objects  along  this
Coast.

I EUR  DE  MONTS,  by  virtue  of  his  commif-
fion  having  publifhed  in  all  the  ports  and  har-
bors of  this  kingdom  the  prohibition  againft  the
violation  of  the  monopoly  of  the  fur-trade  ac-
corded him  by  his  Majefty,  gathered  together
about  one  hundred  and  twenty  artilans,  whom  he  embarked
in  two  veffels;  one  of  a hundred  and  twenty  tons,  com-
manded by  Sieur  de  Pont  Grave ; another,  of  a hundred
and  fifty  tons,  in  which  he  embarked  himfelf,’®  together  wdth
feveral  noblemen.

We  fet  out  from  Havre  de  Grace  April  7th,  1604,  and  Pont
Grave  April  loth,  to  rendezvous  at  Canfeau,'’  twenty  leagues

from

Vide  CommiJfLon  du  Roy  au  Steur
de  Monts,  pour  Vhabitation  is  terres
de  la  Cadie,  Canada,  et  autres  endroits
en  la  Nouvelle- France,  Hiftoire  de
a Nouvelle- France,  par  Marc  Lefcar-
bot,  Paris,  1612,  Qvat.  Liv.  p.  431.
This  charter  may  alfo  be  found  in  Eng-
lifh  in  a Colleilion  of  Voyages  and  Trav-
els compiled  from  the  Library  of  the
Earl  of  Oxford,  by  Thomas  Of  borne,
London,  I745»  Vol.  II.  pp.  79^79^  >
alfo  in  Murdochs  Hiflory  of  Nova  Sco-
tia, Halifax,  1865,  Vol.  I.  pp.  21-24*

The  fecond  officer,  or  pilot,  was,
according  to  Lefcarbot,  Captain  Morel,
of  Honfleur.

16  This  was  under  the  dire<5lion  of
De  Monts  himfelf ; and  Captain  Timo-
thde,  of  Havre  de  Grace,  was  pilot,  or
the  fecond  officer.

i"^  Lefcarbot  writes  this  name  Camp-
feau  ; Champlain’s  orthography  is  Can-
ceau;  the  Englifh  often  write  Canfo,  but
more  corre6Uy  Canfeau.  It  has  been  de-
rived from  Canfoke,  an  Indian  word,
meaning  the  frowning  cliffs.

8

Voyages  of

from  Cape  Breton.’®  But,  after  we  were  in  mid-ocean,  Sieur
de  Monts  changed  his  plan,  and  diredled  his  courfe  towards
Port  Mouton,  it  being  more  foutherly  and  alfo  more  favor-
able  for  landing  than  Canfeau.

On  May  ift,  we  fighted  Sable  Ifland,  where  we  ran  a rifk
of  being  loft  in  confequence  of  the  error  of  our  pilots,  who
were  deceived  in  their  calculation,  which  they  made  forty
leagues  ahead  of  where  we  were.

This  ifland  is  thirty  leagues  diftant  north  and  fouth  from
Cape  Breton,  and  in  length  is  about  fifteen  leagues.  It  con-
tains a fmall  lake.  The  ifland  is  very  fandy,  and  there  are
no  trees  at  all  of  confide  rable  fize,  only  copfe  and  herbage,
which  ferve  as  pafturage  for  the  bullocks  and  cows,  which
the  Portuguefe  carried  there  more  than  fixty  years  ago,  and
which  were  very  ferviceable  to  the  party  of  the  Marquis  de  la
Roche.  The  latter,  during  their  fojourn  of  feveral  years
there,  captured  a large  number  of  very  fine  black  foxes,’®

“ The  Cape  and  Ifland  of  Cape  Bre-
ton  appear  to  have  taken  their  name
from  the  fifhermen  of  Brittany,  who  fre-
quented that  region  as  early  as  1504.  —
Vide  Champlain^ 5 Voyages^  Paris,  1632,
p.  9.

Thdvet  failed  along  the  coaft  in  1556,
and  is  quoted  by  Laverdi^re,  as  follows  :
“ In  this  land  there  is  a province  called
Campeftre  de  Berge,  extending  towards
the  fouth-eaft  ; in  the  eaftern  part  of  the
fame  is  the  cape  or  promontory  of  Lor-
raine, called  fo  by  us ; others  have  given
It  the  name  of  the  Cape  of  the  Bretons,
fince  the  Bretons,  Bifayans,  and  Nor-
mans repair  thither,  and  coaft  ^long  on
their  way  to  Newfoundland  to  fifti  for
codfifti.”

An  infcription,  “ tera  que  foy  de/cu-
berta  por  bertomhf  on  an  old  Portu-

whofe

guefe  map  of  1520,  declares  it  to  be  a
country  difcovered  by  the  Bretons.  It
is  undoubtedly  the  oldeft  French  name
on  any  part  of  North  America.  On
Gaftaldo’s  map  in  Mattiolo^s  Italian
tranflation  of  Ptolemy,  1548,  the  name
of  Breton  is  applied  both  to  Nova  Scotia
and  to  the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton.

^ Winthrop  fays  that  Mr.  John  Rofe,
■vmo  was  call  away  on  Sable  Ifland  about
j[o33>  “ faw  about  eight  hundred  cattle,
fmall  and  great,  all  red,  and  the  largeft
he  ever  faw ; and  many  foxes,  wherof
fome  perfea  black.”  —Winthrop' s Hijl.
New  E7ig.,  Bofton,  1853,  Vol.  I.  p.
193-

Champlain  doubtlefs  obtained  his  in-
formation in  regard  to  the  cattle  left
upon  Sable  Ifland  by  the  Portuguefe
from  the  report  of  Edward  Haies  on

the

Sieur  de  Champlain.  9

whofe  fkins  they  carefully  preferved.  There  are  many  fea-
wolves  “ there,  with  the  fkins  of  which  they  clothed  them-
felves  fince  they  had  exhaufled  their  own  flock  of  garments.
By  order  of  the  Parliamentary  Court  of  Rouen,  a veffel  was
fent  there  to  recover  them.^‘  The  directors  of  the  enterprife
caught  codfifh  near  the  ifland,  the  neighborhood  of  which
abounds  in  fhoals.

On  the  8th  of  the  fame  month,  we  fighted  Cap  de  la

Heve,^  to  the  eaft  of  which

the  voyage  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  in

1583:

“ Sablon  lieth  to  the  fea-ward  of  Cape
Briton  about  twentj;^-five  leagues,  whith-
er we  were  determined  to  goe  vpon  in-
telligence we  had  of  a Portugal  (during
our  abode  in  S.  Johns)  who  was  himfelfe
prefent,  when  the  Portugals  (aboue  thirty
eeres  part)  did  put  in  the  fame  Ifland
oth  Neat  and  Swine  to  breede,  which
were  fince  exceedingly  multiplied.  This
feemed  vnto  vs  very  happy  tidings,  to
haue  in  an  Ifland  lying  fo  neere  vnto  the
maine,  which  we  intended  to  plant  vpon,
fuch  ftore  of  cattell,  whereby  we  might
at  all  times  conueniently  be  relieued  of
vi6luall,  and  ferued  of  nore  for  breed.
— Edward  Haies  in  Hakluyfs  Voyages,
London,  ed.  1810,  Vol.  III.  p.  197.

^ “ Loups  marins,”  feals.

“ The  forty  poor  wretches  whom
he  left  on  Sable  Ifland  found  on  the
feafhore  fome  wrecks  of  veflels,  out  of
which  they  built  barracks  to  fliield  them-
felves  from  the  feverity  of  the  weather.
They  were  the  remains  of  Spanifli  vef-
fels,  which  had  failed  to  fettle  Cape
Breton.  From  thefe  fame  fliips  had
come  fome  Iheep  and  cattle,  which  had
multiplied  on  Sable  Ifland ; and  this
was  for  fome  time  a refource  for  thefe
poor  exiles.  Fifli  was  their  next  food  ;
and,  when  their  clothes  were  worn  out,

is  a bay,  containing  feveral

iflands

they  made  new  ones  of  feal-fldn.  At
laft,  after  a lapfe  of  feven  years,  the
king,  having  heard  of  their  adventure,
obliged  Chedotel,  the  pilot,  to  go  for
them  ; but  he  found  only  twelve,  the
reft  having  died  of  their  hardftiips.  His
majefty  defired  to  fee  thofe,  who  returned
in  the  fame  guife  as  found  by  Chedotel,
covered  with  feal-flcin,  with  their  hair
and  beard  of  a length  and  diforder  that
made  them  refemble  the  pretended  river-
gods,  and  fo  disfigured  as  to  infpire  hor-
ror. The  king  gave  them  fifty  crowns
apiece,  and  fent  them  home  releafed  from
all  procefs  of  law.”  — Sheds  Charlevoix,
New  York,  i866,  Vol.  I.  p.  244.  See
alfo  Sir  William  Alexander  and  Ameri-
can Colonization,  Prince  Society,  1873,
p.  174  ; Murdoch's  Nova  Scotia,  Vol.  I.
p.  II ; Hakluyt,  Vol.  II.  pp.  679,  697.

This  cape  ftill  bears  the  fame  name,
and  is  the  weftern  point  of  the  bay  at
the  mouth  of  a river,  likewife  of  the  fame
name,  in  the  county  of  Lunenberg,  Nova
Scotia.  It  is  an  abrupt  cliff,  rifing  up
one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the
level  of  the  fea.  It  could  therefore  be
feen  at  a great  diftance,  and  appears  to
have  been  the  firft  land  fighted  by  them
on  the  coaft  of  La  Cadie.  A little  north
of  Havre  de  Grace,  in  Normandy,  the
port  from  which  De  Monts  and  Cham-
plain had  failed,  is  to  be  feen  the  high.

10

Voyages  of

iflands  covered  with  fir-trees.  On  the  main  land  are  oaks,
elms,  and  birches.  It  joins  the  coaft  of  La  Cadie  at  the
latitude  of  44°  5',  and  at  16°  15'  of  the  defledlion  of  the  mag-
netic needle,  diftant  eafi-north-eafi;  eighty-five  leagues  from
Cape  Breton,  of  which  we  fhall  fpeak  hereafter.

On  the  1 2th  of  May,  we  entered  another  port,^  five  leagues
from  Cap  de  la  Heve,  where  we  captured  a veffel  engaged
in  the  fur-trade  in  violation  of  the  king’s  prohibition.  The

mafter’s

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  db  la  Hevk.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  The  place  where  velTels  anchor.  B.  A fmall  river  dry  at  low  tide.  C.
Places  where  the  favages  have  their  cabins. ^ D.  Shoal  at  the  entrance  of  the
harbor.2  E.  A fmall  ifland  covered  with  wood.®  F.  Cape  de  la  H^ve.'*  G.  Bay
where  there  are  many  iflands  covered  with  wood.  H.  A river  extending  fix  or
feven  leagues  inland  with  but  little  water.  /.  A pond  near  the  fea.

Notes,  i.  The  letter  C is  wanting,  but  the  location  of  the  cabins  is  obvious.
2.  The  letter  D is  alfo  wanting,  but  the  figures  fufficiently  indicate  the  depth  of
the  water.^  3.  The  letter  E appears  twice  oy  miflake.  4.  The  letter  F is  like-
wife  wanting.  It  has  been  fuppofed  to  be  reprefented  by  one  of  the  £’’s  on  the
fmall  ifland,  but  Cap  de  la  H^ve,  to  which  it  refers,  was  not  on  this  ifland,  but  on
the  main  land.  The  i^fliould  have  been,  we  think,  on  the  weft  of  the  harbor,
where  the  elevation  is  indicated  on  the  map.  Vide  note  22.

commanding,  rocky  bluff,  known  as  Cap
de  la  Hhfe.  The  place  which  they  firft
flighted,  fimilar  at  leafl:  in  fome  refpe<5ls,
they  evidently  named  after  this  bold  and
ftriking  headland,  which  may,  perhaps,
have  been  the  lafl:  objedl  which  they  flaw
on  leaving  the  fliores  of  France.  The
word  Heve  feems  to  have  had  a local
meaning,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the
following  excerpt : “ A name,  in  Lower
Normandy,  for  cliffs  hollowed  out  below,
and  where  fifhermen  fearch  for  crabs.’’
— Littre.  The  harbor  delineated  on

Champlain’s  local  map  is  now  called
Palmerfton  Bay,  and  is  at  the  mouth  of
Petit  River.  The  latitude  of  this  harbor
is  about  44°  15'.  De  Laet’s  defcription
is  fuller  than  that  of  Champlain  or  Lef-
carbot. — Vide  Noviis  Orbis,  1633,  p.

2®  Liverpool,  which  for  a long  time
bore  the  name  of  Port  Roffignol ; the
lake  at  the  head  of  the  river,  about  ten
miles  long  and  two  or  three  wide,  the
largefl:  in  Nova  Scotia,  Hill  bears  that
appellation.-  The  latitude  is  44°  2'  30".

i(.  Voyages  of

covered  with  fir-trees.  On  the  main  land  arc  oaks
£.  H .s!vi  birches.  It  joins  the  coaft  of  La  Cadie  at  the
i:;df  t..  i 44"  5',  and  at  16“  15'  of  the  defiedlion  of  the  mag.
c r “vdle,  Jiflant  eaft-north-eaft  eighty-five  leagues  trom
v;?  i ‘ l-f,  t.;.  of  which ’ve  fhall  fpeak  hereafter.

;;c  5 2th  of  Mav,  we  entered  another  port,®  five  leagues
frofv.  rii.  de  la  Hcv«.,  where  we  captured  a veffel  engraed
in  »h,-.  f’!'- u-ade  in  vi;-;atiwa  of  the  king’s  prohibition.  The

mailer's

Cm^S^PLAIN’S  Ii\  laMATION  of  TKK  ACCOMPA.NY7'm  Map,

PoKT  0«  LA.  Hxvs.

Tk<'  jfigurts  indu  aU  fathoms  of  w'ltrr.

A,  That  pb. : =■  ..rt  arc  h«>r.  B,  A fmall  river  dry  af  1<  -x  tide.  C

Placeh  -Ahen!:  thr  a ";rc<>  h their  cabins.^  D.  Shoal  at  the  entraace  of  tht
harbor.^  A ..n  i1  v.  a;V':  c<  ’.  f*r  ^ with  wood-*  F.  Cape  de  la  H^ve.*  6.  Bay
where  there  are  r.-.iny  iHa-.ids  c^sv.-.rei^  wood.  N.  A river  extending;  hx  or
feven  leagues  inland  wnh  but  1 tic  waicr.,  /.  A pond  near  the  fea.

Notes,  i.  The  letter  T h warning,  but  the  location  of  thi;  cabins  is  obvious.
2.  The  letter  J7  is  aifo  vaating.  but  the  figures  fufSciently  indicate  the  depth  n.f
the  Viter.  3.  The  lett^nr  A .ipj^ars  twice  oy  millake.  4 Tlic  letter  F is  iiVc
wife  wa-iung.  It  has  Ixen  fuppofed  to  be  reprefented  by  one  vf  ^he  /T’s  on  t
fmall  dand,  but  Cap  de  la  Heec  , to  which  it  refers,  was  not  or*  thisifland,  but  ci!
the  rjvr  m land.  The  rViunfM  have  f>eeu,  we  think,  on  the  vi  h of  the  harbor,
wlhrn  the  elevation  ts  UKficattid  oi>  •Mr.  Vfe/n  note  22.

Ut  la  The  place  which  tliey  hr}'  >?.  • ] ,'iy.  and  is  .at  the  mouth  rt

lighter  fo\n.ir  at  leaft  in  feme  lefpei'n  ;,  I t * i The  latitude  of  this  harlx*
they  evidently  named  iPter  (hi-:  Oold  a.-aJ  is  r -v.  f <L  De  Lad’s  deforipdor
ftrikniji  Ilea* hand,  which  may.  perhaps,  is  fur  that  =>f  Cham-.lain  or  Lcf

hiv  . irij  the  iallobicAl  whir rnh  carb.,:.  • . . -r'  AvvJts  Of  f>is\  1G33,

r*  vAv-.ig  tKt  fte»r  -s  of  The  51.

.ecmr  ro  L^ve  had  U load  JLiver.  >t.  v.  inch  for  a long  tlm

■ - -r  . V fp-Mt,  the  bore  the  a.  ...  .(  l>ort  Rolfign(3;  thr

‘ \ :u  . : :ij  i „>wer  lake  at  tht  ’ r the  river,  about
t ' ‘b-  . : ’ii indow,  miles  10%  wo  or  three  wide,  th'*-

'‘i  ‘ " iargeft  in  Hill  bears  tbirt

H .:  17*  »f  <.n  appella^;  '/  ^ Vm-  bv^tude  is  445*  2^  •

9<f^i9<i£i99‘s^9\ ,

PcrrJu

1

)

r

Sietir  de  Champlain.  1 1

malter’s  name  was  Roffignol,  whofe  name  the  port  retained,
which  is  in  latitude  44“  15'.

On  the  13th  of  May,  we  arrived  at  a very  fine  harlxjr,
where  there  are  two  little  flreams,  called  Port  au  Mouton,"
which  is  feven  leagues  dii^int  from  that  of  Roflignol.  The
land  is  very  ftony,  and  covered  with  copfe  and  heath.  There
are  a great  many  rabbits,  and  a quantity  of  game  in  confe-
(juence  of  the  ponds  there.

As  foon  as  we  had  difembarked,  each  one  commenced
making  huts  after  his  falhion,  on  a point  at  the  entrance  of
the  harbor  near  two  frelh-w'ater  pemds.  Sieur  de  Monts  at
the  fame  time  defpatched  a fliallop,  in  which  he  fent  one  of
us,  with  fome  fav^es  as  guides,  as  bearers  of  letters,  along
the  coaft  of  La  Cadie,  to  fearch  for  Pont  Grav^,  who  had  a
portion  of  the  neceffary  fupplies  for  our  winter  fojourn,  Th  -
latter  was  found  at  the  Bay  of  All-Hles,®*  ver}'  anxious  abeuc

us

Champi.ain’s  Expi.vnation  of  the  accompawik:,  Mai.

B POJIT

Tkt  u^UcaU  /cUh^.t

A.  A river  extendiag  twenty^^ive  leagues  itiland.  A.  T1  e \ce  where  vcflels
Anchor.  C Place  on  the  meur.  land  where  lavage*  Vlivt  rheir  dwellings.
D.  Roadftead  where  veiTels  a.nchi)r  while  waiting  toi  tf»c  ti  -c.  / . Place  on  the

liland  where  the  favages  have  their  cabins.  A*.  Cb  ifMiC  dry  at  low  tkle.  G,
Shore  of  the  main  land.  The  dotted  places  indicate  the  thoais.

Note.  It  would  feem  as  if  in  the  title  RolTynol,  on  the  maj?,  the  two  dots  on
the  7 imiead  of  the  n were  platied  there  by  miftakc.

“ Lcqocl  ils  appel^rent  />  Port  du
Mouton.  a Toccafion  dhin  mouton  <n:i
Tettant  nov^  r^  vint  \ bord,  et  ful  mant^
de  bonne  guerre.'*  — djt  /*/

Nouvelle- France^  par  Marc  Lelcarix-t,
Paris,  1612,  Qvat  l-iv.  p.  449.  it  <biJ

bears  the  raiwe  of  F'ort  Mouton,  and  an
iiiand  in  the  hav  is  called  Mouton  If-

" S^ye  <U  Toutesdfles.  Lefcarbot
b •*  La  Have  des  lies  ; " and  Char-
Baye  dc  toutes  les  Ifles.”  It
was

Steur  de  Champlain.  1 1

mailer’s  name  was  Roffignol,  whofe  name  the  port  retained,
which  is  in  latitude  44°  15'.

On  the  1 3th  of  May,  we  arrived  at  a very  fine  harbor,
where  there  are  two  little  Ilreams,  called  Port  au  Mouton,^
which  is  feven  leagues  diflant  from  that  of  Roffignol.  The
land  is  ver}'^  ftony,  and  covered  with  copfe  and  heath.  There
are  a great  many  rabbits,  and  a quantity  of  game  in  confe-
quence  of  the  ponds  there.

As  foon  as  we  had  difembarked,  each  one  commenced
making  huts  after  his  falliion,  on  a point  at  the  entrance  of
the  harbor  near  two  freffi-water  ponds.  Sieur  de  Monts  at
the  fame  time  defpatched  a ffiallop,  in  which  he  fent  one  of
us,  with  fome  favages  as  guides,  as  bearers  of  letters,  along
the  coall  of  La  Cadie,  to  fearch  for  Pont  Grave,  who  had  a
portion  of  the  neceffary  fupplies  for  our  winter  fojourn.  The
latter  was  found  at  the  Bay  of  All-Ifles,“  very  anxious  about

us

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  du  Ro.ssignol.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water*

A.  A river  extending  twenty-five  leagues  inland.  B.  The  place  where  vefiels
anchor.  C,  Place  on  the  main  land  where  the  favages  have  their  dwellings.
D*  Roadftead  where  vefiels  anchor  while  waiting  for  the  tide.  E*  Place  on  the
ifland  where  the  favages  have  their  cabins.  F.  Channel  dry  at  low  tide.  G*
Shore  of  the  main  land.  The  dotted  places  indicate  the  flioals.

Note.  It  would  feem  as  if  in  the  title  Rofiynol,  on  the  map,  the  two  dots  on
thej/  inftead  of  the  n were  placed  there  by  miftake.

2^  “ Lequel  ils  appel^rent  Le  Port  du
Afouton,  h.  I’occafion  d’un  mouton  qui
f ’eltant  novd  revint  k bord,  et  fut  mangd
de  bonne  guerre.’’  — Hijloire  de  la
Nouvelle- France.,  par  Marc  Lefcarbot,
Paris,  1612,  Qvat.  Liv.  p.  449.  It  ftill

bears  the  name  of  Port  Mouton,  and  an
ifland  in  the  bay  is  called  Mouton  If-
land.

26  Baye  de  Toutes-ifles.  Lefcarbot
calls  it  “ La  Baye  des  lies  ; ” and  Char-
levoix, “Baye  de  toutes  les  Ifles.”  It

was

12

Voyages  of

us  (for  he  knew  nothing  of  the  change  of  plan) ; and  the  letters
were  handed  to  him.  As  foon  as  he  had  read  them,  he  returned
to  his  fhip  at  Canfeau,  where  he  feized  fome  Bafque  veffels^
engaged  in  the  fur-trade,  notwithftanding  the  prohibition  of
his  Majefty,  and  fent  their  matters  to  Sieur  de  Monts,  who
meanwhile  charged  me  to  reconnoitre  the  coaft  and  the  har-
bors fuitable  for  the  fecure  reception  of  our  veffel.

With  the  purpofe  of  carrying  out  his  wifhes,  I fet  out  from
Port  Mouton  on  the  19th  of  May,  in  a barque  of  eight  tons,
accompanied  by  Sieur  Ralleau,  his  fecretary,  and  ten  men.
Advancing  along  the  coaft,  we  entered  a harbor  very  con-
venient for  veffels,  at  the  end  of  which  is  a fmall  river,  ex-
tending very  far  into  the  main  land.  This  I called  the  Port
of  Cape  Negro,^^  from  a rock  whofe  diftant  view  refembles  a
negro,  which  rifes  out  of  the  water  near  a cape  paffed  by  us
the  fame  day,  four  leagues  off  and  ten  from  Port  Mouton.
This  cape  is  very  dangerous,  on  account  of  the  rocks  run-
ning out  into  the  fea.  The  fliores  which  I faw,  up  to  that
point,  are  very  low,  and  covered  with  fuch  wood  as  that  feen
at  the  Cap  de  la  PI  eve ; and  the  iflands  are  all  filled  with
game.  Going  farther  on,  we  paffed  the  night  at  Sable  Bay,^
where  veffels  can  anchor  without  anv  dano'ei*

was  the  bay,  or  rather  the  waters,  that
flretch  along  the  fhores  of  Halifax
County,  between  Owl’s  Head  and  Lif-
comb  River.

26  The  confifcated  provifions  taken  in
the  vefTels  of  the  Bafque  fur-traders  and
in  that  of  RolTignol  were,  according  to
Lefcarbot,  found  very  ufeful.  De  Monts
had  given  timely  notice  of  his  monopoly*
and,  whether  it  had  reached  them  or  not!
they  were  doubtlefs  wrong  in  law.  Al-
though De  Monts  treated  them  with
gentlenefs,  neverthelefs  it  is  not  unlikely

that  a compromife  would  have  been  bet-
ter policy  than  an  entire  confifcation  of
their  property,  as  thefe  Bafques  after-
wards, on  their  return  to  France,  gave
him  ferious  inconvenience.  They  were
inftrumental  mainly  in  wrefting  from
him  his  charter  of  La  Cadie.

27  Le  Port  du  Cap  A^egri.  This  port
ftill  bears  the  name  of  Negro  Harbor.
It  is  fituated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Clyde,
the  fmall  river  referred  to  in  the  text.

Near  Cape  Sable  Ifland,  at  what  is
now  known  as  Barrington  Harbor.

13

Sieur  de  Champlain.

The  next  day  we  went  to  Cape  Sable, ^ alfo  very  danger-
ous, in  confequence  of  certain  rocks  and  reefs  extending
almoft  a league  into  the  fea.  It  is  two  leagues  from  Sable
Bay,  where  we  had  fpent  the  night  before.  Thence  we  went
to  Cormorant  Ifland,®®  a league  diftant,  fo  called  from  the
infinite  number  of  cormorants  found  there,  of  whofe  eggs
we  colleded  a cask  full.  From  this  ifland,  we  failed  wefterly
about  fix  leagues,  croffing  a bay,  which  makes  up  to  the
north  two  or  three  leagues.  Then  we  fell  in  with  feveral
iflands*^  diftant  two  or  three  leagues  from  the  main  land ; and,
as  well  as  I could  judge,  fome  of  them  were  two  leagues  in
extent,  others  three,  and  others  were  ftill  fmaller.  Moft  of
them  are  very  dangerous  for  large  veffels  to  approach,  on
account  of  the  tides  and  the  rocks  on  a level  with  the  water.
Thefe  iflands  are  filled  with  pines,  firs,  birches,  and  afpens.
A little  farther  out,  there  are  four  more.  In  one,  we  faw  fo
great  a quantity  of  birds,  called  penguins,^  that  we  killed

them

This  is  Hill  called  Cape  Sable,  and
is  the  fouthern  point  of  Sable  Ifland,
or,  more  properly,  the  clufter  of  rock,
and  iflets  that  furround  its  fouthern  ex-
tremity.

IJle  aux  Cormorans,  It  is  diffi-
cult to  diftinguifh  with  certainty  the
ifland  here  referred  to,  but  it  was
probably  Hope  Ifland,  as  this  lies
di really  in  their  way  in  croffing  the
bay,  fix  leagues  wide,  which  is  now
known  as  Townfend  Bay,  The  bird
here  mentioned  was  the  common  cor-
morant, Graculus  carbo^  of  a glofly
greenifli-black  color,  back  and  wings
bronzy-gray  ; about  three  feet  in  length,
and  is  common  on  our  northern  Atlantic
coaft;  eminently  gregarious,  particularly
in  the  breeding  feafon,  congregating  in
vafl;  flocks.  At  the  prefent  time,  it

breeds  in  great  numbers  in  Labrador
and  Newfoundland,  and  in  the  winter
migrates  as  far  fouth  as  the  Middle
States.  They  feed  principally  upon  fifli,
lay  commonly  two  eggs,  of  a pale  green-
ifli  color,  overlaid  with  a white  chalky
fubflance.  — Vide  Cones' s Key  to  A or.
Am.  Birds,  Bolton,  1872,  p.  302.

A clufter  of  iflands  now  known  as
the  Toufquet  or  Tuflcet  Iflands.  Fur-
ther on,  Champlain  fays  they  named
them  IJles  aux  loups  marins,  Sea- Wolf
Iflands.  About  five  leagues  fouth  of
them  is  an  ifland  now  called  Seal  Ifland.
The  four  more  which  he  faw  a little
further  on  were  probably  in  Townfend
Bay.

This  is  the  Auk,  A Icidce,  and

muft  not  be  confounded  with  the  pen-
guin of  the  fouthern  hemifphere,  although

it

H

Voyages  of

them  eafily  with  flicks.  On  another,  we  found  the  fliore  com-
pletely covered  with  fea-wolves,®®  of  which  we  captured  as
many  as  we  wiflied.  At  the  two  others  there  is  fuch  an
abundance  of  birds  of  different  forts  that  one  could  not  im-
agine it,  if  he  had  not  feen  them.  There  are  cormorants,
three  kinds  of  duck,  geefe,  marmettes  ?,  buflards,  fea-parrots,
fnipe,  vultures,  and  other  birds  of  prey;  gulls,  fea-larks  of
two  or  three  kinds ; herons,  large  fea-gulls,  curlews,  fea-mag-
pies,  divers,  ofpreys,  appoils  F,  ravens,  cranes,  and  other  forts
which  I am  not  acquainted  with,  and  which  alfo  make  their

it  is  defcribed  by  the  early  navigators  of
the  Northern  Atlantic  under  that  appel-
lation. In  Anthony  Parkhurft’s  letter
to  Hakluyt,  1 578,  he  fays : “ Thefe  birds
are  alfo  called  Penguins,  and  cannot
flie,  there  is  more  meate  in  one  of  thefe
then  in  a goofe  : the  Frenchmen  that
fifh  neere  the  grand  baie,  do  bring  fmall
ftore  of  flefh  with  them,  but  vi6luall
themfelues  alwayes  with  thefe  birds.’’  —
Hakluyt^  London,  ed.  1810,  Vol.  III.
p.  172.  Edward  Haies,  in  his  report  of
the  voyage  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  in
1583,  fays  : “ We  had  fight  of  an  Ifland
named  Penguin,  of  a foule  there  breed-
ing in  abundance,  almoft  incredible,
which  cannot  flie,  their  wings  not  able
to  carry  their  body,  being  very  large
(not  much  lefle  then  a goofe),  and  ex-
ceeding fat ; which  the  Frenchmen  vfe
to  take  without  difficulty  vpon  that  If-
land, and  to  barrel!  them  vp  with  fait.”
Ide7n^  p.  1 91.

The  Auic  is  confined  to  the  northern
hemifphere,  where  it  reprefents  the  pen-
guins of  the  fouthern.  Several  fpecies
occur  in  the  Northern  Atlantic  in  almoft
incredible  numbers  ; they  are  all  marine,
feed  on  fifti  and  other  animal  fubftances
exclufively,  and  lay  from  one  to  three
eggs  on  the  bare  rocks.  Thofe  feen  by

nefts

Champlain  and  other  early  navigators
were  the  Great  Auk,  Alca  impends,
now  nearlv  extindl.  It  was  formerly
found  on  the  coaft  of  New  England,  as
is  proved  not  only  by  the  teftimony  of  the
primitive  explorers,  but  by  the  remains
found  in  fliell-heaps.  The  lateft  dif-
covery  was  of  one  found  dead  near  St.
Auguftine,  in  Labrador,  in  1870.  A
fpecimen  of  the  Great  Auk  is  pre-
ferved  in  the  Cambridge  Mufeum. —
Fide  Coues^s  Key  to  North  Am.  Birds^
Bofton,  1872,  p.  338.

The  fea-wolf  or  /ouf  7/tarin  of  Cham-
plain is  the  marine  mammiferous  quad-
ruped of  the  family  Phocidoe^  known  as
the  feal.  Sea-wolf  was  a name  applied  to
it  by  the  early  navigators. — Vide  Pur-
chases Pilgrims^  London,  1625,  Vol.  IV.
p.  1 385.  Thofe  here  mentioned  were  the
common  feal,  Phoca  vitulina^  which  are
ftill  found  on  the  coafts  of  Nova  Scotia,
vulgarly  known  as  the  harbor  feal.  They
are  thinly  diftributed  as  far  fouth  as
Long  Ifland  Sound,  but  are  found  in
great  numbers  in  the  waters  of  Labra-
dor and  Newfoundland,  where  they  are
taken  for  the  oil  obtained  from  them,
and  for  the  fkins,  which  are  ufed  foi
various  purpofes  in  the  arts.

15

Sieur  de  Champlain.

nefts  here.®*  We  named  thefe  Sea-Wolf  Iflands.  They  are  in
latitude  43°  30',  diftant  from  four  to  five  leagues  from  the
main  land,  or  Cape  Sable.  After  fpending  pleafantly  fome
time  there  in  hunting  (and  not  without  capturing  much
game),  we  fet  out  and  reached  a cape,®®  which  we  chriftened
Port  Fourchu  from  its  being  fork-fhaped,  diftant  from  five
to  fix  leagues  from  the  Sea-Wolf  Iflands.  This  harbor  is
very  convenient  for  veffels  at  its  entrance ; but  its  remoter
part  is  entirely  dry  at  low  tide,  except  the  channel  of  a little
ftream,  completely  bordered  by  meadows,  which  make  this
fpot  very  pleafant.  There  is  good  codfifhing  near  the  har-
bor. Departing  from  there,  we  failed  north  ten  or  twelve
leagues  without  finding  any  harbor  for  our  veffels,  but  a
number  of  very  fine  inlets  or  fhores,  where  the  foil  feems  to
be  well  adapted  for  cultivation.  The  woods  are  exceedingly
fine  here,  but  there  are  few  pines  and  firs.  This  coaft  is
clear,  without  iflands,  rocks,  or  fhoals ; fo  that,  in  our  judg-
ment, veffels  can  fecurely  go  there.  Being  diftant  quarter
of  a league  from  the  coaft,  we  went  to  an  ifland  called  Long
Ifland,®®  lying  north-north-eaft  and  fouth-fouth-weft,  which
makes  an  opening  into  the  great  Baye  Fran9oife,®^  fo  named
by  Sieur  de  Monts.

This

8^  The  names  given  to  thefe  birds  bor.  — Memorials  of  Englijh  and
were  fuch,  doubtlefs,  as  were  known  to  French  Co7nmiffaries.,  London,  1755.
belong  to  birds  fimilar  in  color,  fize,  and  It  ftill  retains  the  name  given  to  it

figure  in  Europe.  Some  of  them  were  by  Champlain.  It  forms  a part  of  the
probably  mifapplied.  The  name  alone  weftern  limit  of  St.  Mary’s  Bay,  and  a
is  not  fufficient  for  identification.  line  drawn  from  it  to  the  St.  Croix,  cut-

This  cape,  near  the  entrance  to  ting  the  Grand  Manan,  would  mark  the
Yarmouth,  llill  bears  the  fame  name,  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.
from  fourchu.,  forked.  On  a map  of  The  Bay  of  Fundy  was  thus  firfi
1755,  it  is  called  Forked  Cape,  and  named  “ Baye  Frangoife  ” by  De  Monts,
near  it  is  Fork  Ledge  and  Forked  Har-  and  continued  to  be  fo  called,  as  will

appear

i6

Voyages  of

This  ifland  is  fix  leagues  long,  and  nearly  a league  broad
in  fome  places,  in  others  only  quarter  of  a league.  It  is
covered  with  an  abundance  of  wood,  fuch  as  pines  and  birch.
All  the  coaft  is  bordered  by  very  dangerous  rocks ; and  there
is  no  place  at  all  favorable  for  veffels,  only  little  inlets  for
fliallops  at  the  extremity  of  the  ifland,  and  three  or  four
fmall  rocky  iflands,  where  the  favages  capture  many  fea-
wolves.  There  are  ftrong  tides,  efpecially  at  the  little  paffage  ^
of  the  ifland,  which  is  very  dangerous  for  veffels  running^the
rifk  of  paffing  through  it.

From  Long  Ifland  paffage,  we  failed  north-eaft  two  leagues,
when  we  found  a cove®^  where  veffels  can  anchor  in  fafety,
and  which  is^  quarter  of  a league  or  thereabouts  in  circuit.
The  bottom  is  all  mire,  and  the  furrounding  land  is  bordered
by  very  high  rocks.  In  this  place  there  is  a very  good  filver
mine,  according  to  the  report  of  the  miner,  Mafler  Simon,
who  accompanied  me.  Some  leagues  farther  on,  there  is
a little  ftream  called  river  Boulay"  where  the  tide  rifes  half
a league  into  the  land,  at  the  mouth  of  which  veffels  of  a
hundred  tons  can  eafily  ride  at  anchor.  Quarter  of  a league
from  here  there  is  a good  harbor  for  veffels,  where  we  found
an  iron  mine,  which  our  miner  eftimated  would  yield  fifty  per

cent.

appear  by  reference  to  the  early  mat
as  that  of  De  Laet,  1633  I Charlevb
17A4  ; Rouge,  1778.  It  firft  appears  d
of  Diego  Home
M without  name.  On  Cabo

Mappe-Mpnde,  in  “Monuments  de
Gdographie,”  we  find  rio  fondo,  whi(
may  reprefent  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  ai
may  have  fuggefted  the  name  adopti

Sir  William  Alexander’s  map,  1624,  h;

Argal’s  Bay;  Moll’s  map,  1712,  has
fundi  Bay;  that  of  the  Englifii  and
f rench  Commiflaries,  1 75S,  has  Bay  of
f undy,  or  Argal.

88  This  ftrait,  known  by  the  name
1 etit  Paffage,  feparates  Long  Ifland
from  Digby  Neck.

^ place  called  Little  River,  on
Neck.

Now  known  as  Sandy  Cove.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  17

cent.^^  Advancing  three  leagues  farther  on  to  the  north-
eaft/^  we  faw  another  very  good  iron  mine,  near  which  is  a
river  furrounded  by  beautiful  and  attractive  meadows.  The
neighboring  foil  is  red  as  blood.  Some  leagues  farther  on
there  is  ftill  another  river, ^ dry  at  low  tide,  except  in  its  very
fmall  channel,  and  which  extends  near  to  Port  Royal.  At
the  extremity  of  this  bay  is  a channel,  alfo  dry  at  low  tide,^^
furrounding  which  are  a number  of  paflures  and  good  pieces
of  land  for  cultivation,  where  there  are  neverthelefs  great
numbers  of  fine  trees  of  all  the  kinds  previoufly  mentioned.
The  diftance  from  Long  Ifland  to  the  end  of  this  bay  may
be  fome  fix  leagues.  The  entire  coaft  of  the  mines  is  very
high,  interfered  by  capes,  which  appear  round,  extending
out  a fliort  diftance.  On  the  other  fide  of  the  bay,  on  the
fouth-eaft,  the  land  is  low  and  good,  where  there  is  a very
good  harbor,  having  a bank  at  its  entrance  over  which  it  is
neceffary  to  pafs.  On  this  bar  there  is  a fathom  and  a half
of  water  at  low  tide ; but  after  paffing  it  you  find  three,  with
good  bottom.  Between  the  two  points  of  the  harbor  there  is
a pebbly  iflet,  covered  at  full  tide.  This  place  extends  half  a
league  inland.  The  tide  falls  here  three  fathoms,  and  there
are  many  fhell-fifh,  fuch  as  mufcles,  cockles,  and  fea-fnails.
The  foil  is  as  good  as  any  that  I have  feen.  I named  this
harbor  Saint  Margaret.^®  This  entire  fouth-eaft  coaft  is  much

lower

Lefcarbot  fays  of  this  iron  mine,
and  of  the  filver  mine  above,  that  they
were  proved  not  to  be  abundant.

This  was  probably  near  Roffway.

This  was  clearly  South  Creek  or
Smelt  River,  which  rifes  near  Annapo-
lis Bafin,  or  the  Port  Royal  Bafin  of  the
French.

He  here  doubtlefs  refers  to  North
Creek,  at  the  north-eaftern  extremity  of
St.  Mary’s  Bay.

Now  Weymouth  Harbor,  on  the
fouth-eaflern  Ihore  of  St.  Mary’s  Bay,
at  the  mouth  of  SilTibou  River,  and  di-
re6lly  oppofite  Sandy  Cove,  near  the
iron  mine  mentioned  above.

3

i8

Voyages  of

lower  than  that  of  the  mines,  which  is  only  a league  and  a
half  from  the  coaft  of  Saint  Margaret,  being  feparated  by  the
breadth  of  the  bay,^  which  is  three  leagues  at  its  entrance.  I
took  the  altitude  at  this  place,  and  found  the  latitude  45°  30',
and  a little  more,^^  the  defledlion  of  the  magnetic  needle
being  17®  16'.

After  having  explored  as  particularly  as  I could  the  coafts,
ports,  and  harbors,  I returned,  without  advancing  any  farther,
to  Long  Ifland  paffage,  whence  I went  back  outfide  of  all  the
iflands  in  order  to  obferve  whether  there  was  any  danger  at
all  on  the  water  fide.  But  we  found  none  whatever,  except
there  were  fome  rocks  about  half  a league  from  Sea- Wolf
Iflands,  which,  however,  can  be  eafily  avoided,  fmce  the  fea
breaks  over  them.  Continuing  our  voyage,  we  were  overtaken
by  a violent  wind,  which  obliged  us  to  run  our  barque  afhore,
where  we  were  in  danger  of  lofiing  her,  which  would  have
caufed  us  extreme  perplexity.  The  tempeft  having  ceafed,
we  refumed  the  fea,  and  the  next  day  reached  Port  Mouton,
where  Sieur  de  Monts  was  awaiting  us  from  day  to  day,
thinking  only  of  our  long  flay,*®  and  whether  fome  accident
had  not  befallen  us.  I made  a report  to  him  of  our  voyage,

and

The  diftance  acrofs  the  bay  at  this
point,  as  here  ftated,  is  nearly  accurate.

This  is  clearly  a miftake  ; the  true
latitude  at  the  Petit  PalTage  is  44°  23'.
It  may  here  be  remarked  that  Cham-
plain’s latitudes  are  very  inaccurate,
often  varying  more  than  half  a degree  ;
doubtlefs  owing  to  the  imperfe6lion  of
the  inftruments  which  were  employed  in
taking  them.

^ They  had  been  occupied  in  this
exploration  about  three  weeks.  Lef-

carbot  fays  a month,  but  this  is  an
overftatement.  By  a careful  examina-
tion of  the  text,  it  will  appear  that  they
departed  from  Port  Mouton  on  the  19th
of  May,  and  that  feveral  days  after  their
return,  not  lefs  than  nine,  they  were
again  in  St.  Mary’s  Bay,  on  the  16th  of
June.  They  had  been  abfent,  therefore,
about  twenty-one  days.  The  latitude
of  Port  Mouton,  ilated  a little  below  to
be  44°,  is  in  fa6l  43°  57'.

19

Sieur  de  Champlain.

and  where  our  veffels  might  go  in  fafety.  Meanwhile,  I
obferved  very  particularly  that  place  which  is  in  latitude

O

44  •

The  next  day  Sieur  de  Monts  gave  orders  to  weigh  anchor
and  proceed  to  the  Bay  of  Saint  Mary,^®  a place  which  we
had  found  to  be  fuitable  for  our  veffel  to  remain  in,  until  we
fliould  be  able  to  find  one  more  advantageous.  Coafting
along,  we  paffed  near  Cape  Sable  and  the  Sea-Wolf  Iflands,
whither  Sieur  de  Monts  decided  to  go  in  a fhallop,  and  fee
fome  iflands  of  which  we  had  made  a report  to  him,  as  alfo
of  the  countlefs  number  of  birds  found  there.  Accordingly,
he  fet  out,  accompanied  by  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  and  feveral
other  noblemen,  with  the  intention  of  going  to  Penguin
Ifland,  where  we  had  previoufly  killed  with  flicks  a large
number  of  thefe  birds.  Being  fomewhat  dillant  from  our
fliip,  it  was  beyond  our  power  to  reach  it,  and  flill  lefs  to
reach  our  veffel ; for  the  tide  was  fo  flrong  that  we  were
compelled  to  put  in  at  a little  ifland  to  pafs  the  night,  where
there  was  much  game.  I killed  there  fome  river-birds,  which
were  very  acceptable  to  us,  efpecially  as  we  had  taken  only  a
few  bifcuit,  expecting  to  return  the  fame  day.  The  next
day  we  reached  Cape  Fourchu,  diftant  half  a league  from  there.
Coafting  along,  we  found  our  veffel  in  the  Bay  of  Saint  Mary.
Our  company  were  very  anxious  about  us  for  two  days,  fear-
ing left  fome  misfortune  had  befallen  us ; but,  when  they  faw
us  all  fafe,  they  were  much  rejoiced.

Two  or  three  days  after  our  arrival,  one  of  our  priefts,

named

« This  bay,  ftill  retaining  its  ancient  nommde  la  baye  Sainde  Marie.”  —
appellation,  was  so  named  by  Cham-  ChamplainU s Voyages.,  1632,  Quebec  ed.,
plain  on  his  firft  vifit.  “ Celle  baye  fut  Vol.  V.  p.  716.

20

Voyages  of

named  Mefire  Aubry  “ from  Paris,  got  loft  fo  completely  in
the  woods  while  going  after  his  fword,  which  he  had  for-
gotten, that  he  could  not  find  the  veffel.  And  he  was  thus
feventeen  days  without  any  thing  to  fubfift  upon  except  fome
four  and  bitter  plants  like  the  forrel,  and  fome  fmall  fruit  of
little  fubftance  large  as  currants,  which  creep  upon  the
ground.®^  Being  at  his  wits’  end,  without  hope  of  ever  fee-
ing us  again,  weak  and  feeble,  he  found  himfelf  on  the  fhore
of  Baye  Fran9oife,  thus  named  by  Sieur  de  Monts,  near  Long
Ifland/^  where  his  ftrength  gave  out,  when  one  of  our  fliallops
out  fifliing  difcovered  him.  Not  being  able  to  fliout  to  them,
he  made  a fign  with  a pole,  on  the  end  of  which  he  had  put
his  hat,  that  they  fliould  go  and  get  him.  This  they  did  at
once,  and  brought  him  off.  Sieur  de  Monts  had  caufed
a fearch  to  be  made  not  only  by  his  own  men,  but  alfo  by
the  favages  of  thofe  parts,  who  fcoured  all  the  woods,  but

*0  Nicholas  Aubry,  a young  Parifian
of , good  family,  “ vn  certain  homme
d’Eglife/’  as  Lefcarbot  fays,  proba-
bly not  long  in  holy  orders,  had  under-
taken this  voyage  with  De  Monts  to
gratify  his  defire  to  fee  the  New  World,
though  quite  againft  the  withes  of  his
friends,  who  had  fent  in  vain  to  Hon-
fleur  to  prevent  his  embarkation.  Af-
ter the  fearch  made  by  De  Monts,
with  the  founding  of  trumpets  and  the
difcharge  of  cannon,  they  left  St.
M^y’s  Bay,  having  given  up  all  ex-
pectation of  his  recovery.  Some  two
weeks  afterward,  an  expedition  was  fent
^t  to  St.  Mary’s  Bay,  conduced  by
De  Champdord,  an  experienced  pilot,
with  a mineralogift,  to  fearch  for  filver
and  iron  ore.  While  fome  of  the  party
were  on  a fifliing  excurfion,  they  refcued

brought

him,  as  dated  in  the  text.  The  fafe  re-
turn of  the  young  and  too  venturefome
ecclefiaflicgave  greatrelief  to  De  Monts,
as  Lefcarbot  fays  a Proteflant  was
charged  to  have  killed  him,  becaufe
they  quarrelled  fometimes  about  their
religion.  — Vide  Hijioire  de  Nouvelle-
France,  par  Marc  Lefcarbot,  Paris,  1612,
Qvat.  Liv.  p.  453.

^ The  partridge-berry,  Mitchella^  a
trailing  evergreen,  bearing  fcarlet  ber-
ries, edible  but  nearly  taftelefs,  which
remain  through  the  winter.  It  is  pecu-
liar to  America,  and  this  is  probably
the  firft  time  it  was  noticed  by  any
hiftorical  writer.

He  was  on  the  weftern  fide  of
Digby  Neck,  at  its  fouthem  extremity,
near  the  Petit  Paffage  on  the  fliore  of
the  Bay  of  Fundy.

21

Sieur  de  Champlain.

brought  back  no  intelligence  of  him.  Believing  him  to  be
dead,  they  all  faw  him  coming  back  in  the  fhallop  to  their
great  delight.  A long  time  was  needed  to  reftore  him  to  his
ufual  ftrength.

CHAPTER  III.

Description  of  Port  Royal  and  the  Peculiarities  of  the  Same.  — Isle
Haute.— Port  of  Mines.  — Baye  Francoise.— The  River  St.  John,
AND  what  we  observed  BETWEEN  THE  PORT  OF  MlNES  AND  THE  SAME.

— The  Island  called  by  the  Savages  Manthane.  — The  River  of
THE  EtECHEMINS,  AND  SEVERAL  FiNE  ISLANDS  THERE.  — ST.  CROIX
Island,  and  other  Noteworthy  Objects  on  this  Coast.

OME  days  after,  Sieur  de  Monts  decided  to  go
and  examine  the  coafts  of  Baye  Fran9oile.  For
this  purpofe,  he  fet  out  from  the  veffel  on  the
1 6th  of  May,®  and  we  went  through  the  ftrait
of  Long  Ifland.®  Not  having  found  in  St.  Ma-
ry’s Bay  any  place  in  which  to  fortify  ourfelves  except  at  the
coft  of  much  time,  we  accordingly  refolved  to  fee  whether  there
might  not  be  a more  favorable  one  in  the  other  bay.  Head-
ing north-eaft  fix  leagues,  there  is  a cove  where  veffels  can
anchor  in  four,  five,  fix,  and  feven  fathoms  of  water.  The
bottom  is  fandy.  This  place  is  only  a kind  of  roadftead.®
Continuing  two  leagues  farther  on  in  the  fame  dire<5lion,  we
entered  one  of  the  fineft  harbors  I had  feen  along  all  thefe

coafis.

For  May  read  June.  It  could  not
have  been  in  May,  iince  Champlain  fet
out  from  Port  Mouton  on  his  exploring
expedition  on  the  19th  of  May,  which
muft  have  been  a month  previous  to
this.

^ What  is  now  called  the  Petit
Paffage,  the  narrow  ftrait  between
Long  Ifland  and  Digby  Neck.

Gulliver’s  Hole,  about  two  leagues
fouth-weft  of  Digby  Strait.

22

Voyages  of

coafts,  in  which  two  thoufand  veffels  might  lie  in  fecurity.
The  entrance  is  eight  hundred  paces  broad ; then  you  enter
a harbor  two  leagues  long  and  one  broad,  which  I have
named  Port  Royal.®®  Three  rivers  empty  into  it,  one  of
which  is  very  large,  extending  eaftward,  and  called  Riviere
de  l’6quille,®^  from  a little  fifh  of  the  fize  of  an  efplan  which
is  caught  there  in  large  numbers,  as  is  alfo  the  herring,  and
feveral  other  kinds  of  fifh  found  in  abundance  in  their  feafon.
This  river  is  nearly  a quarter  of  a league  broad  at  its  en-
trance, where  there  is  an  illand  ®®  perhaps  half  a league  in
circuit,  and  covered  with  wood  like  all  the  reft  of  the  coun-
try.

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  au  Mouton.

TAe  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water,

A.  Place  where  veffels  lie.  B.  Place  where  we  made  our  camp.  C.  A pond.
D.  An  ifland  at  the  entrance  to  the  harbor,  covered  with  wood.  E,  A river  very
fhallow.  E.  A pond.  G.  A very  large  brook  coming  from  the  pond  F.  H.  Six
little  iflands  in  the  harbor.  Z.  Country,  containing  only  copfe  and  heath  of  very
fmall  fize.  Af.  Sea-lhore.

Note.  — The  wanting  letter  L fhould  probably  be  placed  where  the  trees  are
reprefented  as  very  fmall,  between  the  letters  B and  the  ifland  F.

Champlain  here  names  the  whole
harbor  or  bafin  Port  Royal,  and  not  the
place  of  habitation  afterward  fo  called.
The  firfl;  fettlement  was  on  the  north
fide  of  the  bay  in  the  prefent  hamlet
of  Lower  Granville,  not  as  often  al-
leged at  Annapolis.  Champlain’s

engraving  or  map  of  Port  Royal.

“ Equille.”  A name,  on  the  coafts
between  Caen  and  Havre,  of  the  fifli
called  lanqon  at  Granville  and  St.
Malo,  a kind  of  malacopterygious  fifh.

living  on  fandy  ftiores  and  hiding  in
the  fend  at  low  tide. — Littrd.  A fpe-
cies  of  fand  eel.  This  ftream  is  now
known  as  the  Annapolis  River.  Lef-
carbot  calls  it  Riviere  du  Dauphin.

This  ifland  is  fituated  at  the  point
where  the  Annapolis  River  flows  into  the
bay,  or  about  nine  miles  from  Digby,
ftraight.  Champlain  on  his  map  gives
it  no  name,  but  Lefcarbot  calls  it
Biencourville.  It  is  now  called  Goat
Ifland.

22

Voyages  oj

coaite.  in  which  two  thoufand  vcfhds  might  % vm

tnttrance  is  eight  hundred  }J2u:es  bread,

a riarVx'f  two  leagues  long  and  one  b x>ad,  whk’;*
narficd  Port  Royal*  Three  riwrs  empty  inw  r nys
which  is  very  large,  extending  eailwvard,  and  cii}k«  - ■
de  i Jiiquille,^  from  a little  fiili  of  the  (ize  of  an  ^

is  caught  there  in  large  numljers,  as  is  alfo  tiie  &
feverai  other  kinds  of  fifli  found  in  abundance  i?.  tiv  • #

-jp.

This  river  is  neaWy  a quarter  of  a league  inroad  ;si  i -eV
trance,  whe  re  there  is  an  ifland*  perhaps  h.‘li  i '

circuit,  anei  covered  with  wcK>d  like  all  the  t»£  t|ii'

Cbampi. AIN’S  Description  of  the  ACtoMPANyiwa

Pc*T  *0

JifHrii  imficaft  /srfhrmf  cf

A,  Place  vefTels  lie.  B.  Place  where  we  made  our  camp  " /

D,  An  ifUn4  at  the  entrance  to  the  harbor,  covered  with  wood.  E A
fhallow,  F.  A pond.  G.  A very  Urge  brook  «2oming  frrim  the  f " i'
little  Iflandii  m the  harbor.  L.  Country,  contaLnii^  only  copfe  and  t ; '
fmall  fixe.  M Sea-fhore.

Note.  — The  wanting  letter  L Should  probably  be  p!.^ced  where  trer  j-K  -i  -
reprefented  aa  v^ry  fmaVl,  between  the  letters  B ai>d  the  in?did  V.

••  Ch3mplain  here  names  the  whole
harbor  or  Hmln  h’ort  Royal,  and  not  the
place  ot  bahitiitlcm  afterward  fo  called.
The  f«rA  i«t dement  was  on  the  iM>rth
fide  of  the  in  the  prefen t hamlet
of  Lower  <.^ramiUe,  not  as  often  al^
leged  at  Anna^polia.  — Vidg  Champlain’s
engraving  or  m.ap  ot  Port  Royal,

^ F.quiLe  A name,  on  the  coafts
between  Cacr^  xnd  Ha\Te,  of  the  ^ih
call<^d  at  Granville  and  St.

a kiad  ot  maUcopterygioiis  nlh,

living  on  Tandy  'horen  nv^.  f-  .<  ^
the  lanti  at  l»>w  4 |v

ctes  of  fand  eel‘  Thb
known  IS  the  . innaj:><>iiw
carbot  cidU  H Klvif'i  - an  L ’

“ This  ifiand  is
where  the  AnnajmHs
bay,  or  ai;»p«t  niae  mil's.*
straight.  Champlain  on  ;•  +
u no  name,  bu^  L«‘.'t
Biewccurville.  It  is  r»©tv-
Bland.  ^ 'r

©•£  - * OQV  r 0 Qt

23

Sieur  de  Champlain.

try,  as  pines,  firs,  fpruces,  birches,  afpens,  and  fome  oaks,
although  the  latter  are  found  in  fmall  numbers  in  compari-
fon  with  the  other  kinds.  There  are  two  entrances  to  the
above  river,  one  on  the  north,  the  other  on  the  fouth  fide  of
the  ifland.  That  on  the  north  is  the  better,  and  veffels  can
there  anchor  under  fhelter  of  the  ifland  in  five,  fix,  feven,
eight,  and  nine  fathoms.  But  it  is  neceffary  to  be  on  one’s
guard  againft  fome  fhallows  near  the  ifland  on  the  one  fide,
and  the  main  land  on  the  other,  very  dangerous,  if  one  does
not  know  the  channel.

We  afcended  the  river  fome  fourteen  or  fifteen  leagues,
where  the  tide  rifes,  and  it  is  not  navigable  much  far-
ther. It  has  there  a breadth  of  fixty  paces,  -and  about  a
fathom  and  a half  of  water.  The  country  bordering  the
river  is  filled  with  numerous  oaks,  afhes,  and  other  trees.
Between  the  mouth  of  the  river  and  the  point  to  which  we
afcended  there  are  many  meadows,  which  are  flooded  at  the
fpring  tides,  many  little  flreams  traverfing  them  from  one
fide  to  the  other,  through  which  fhallops  and  boats  can  go
at  full  tide.  This  place  was  the  moft  favorable  and  agreeable
for  a fettlement  that  we  had  feen.  There  is  another  ifland
within  the  port,  diftant  nearly  two  leagues  from  the  former.
At  this  point  is  another  little  ftream,  extending  a confider-
able  diftance  inland,  which  we  named  Riviere  St.  Antoine.®*
Its  mouth  is  diftant  from  the  end  of  the  Bay  of  St.  Mary
fome  four  leagues  through  the  woods.  The  remaining  river

is

Lefcarbot  calls  it  Claudiane.  It  is  rived  from  the  French  pronunciation  of
now  known  as  Bear  Ifland.  It  was  the  lafl:  fyllable  of  Imbert.
fometimes  called  He  d’H^bert,  and  ^ At  prefent  known  as  Bear  River ;
likewife  Imbert  Ifland.  Laverdi^re  Lefcarbot  has  it  Hebert,  and  Charle-
fuggefts  that  the  prefent  name  is  de-  voix,  Imbert.

24

Voyages  of

is  only  a fmall  ftream  filled  with  rocks,  which  cannot  be
afcended  at  all  on  account  of  the  fmall  amount  of  water,
and  which  has  been  named  Rocky  Brook“  This  place  is  in
latitude®^  45“;  and  17°  8'  of  the  defledlion  of  the  magnetic
needle.

After  having  explored  this  harbor,  we  fet  out  to  advance
farther  on  in  Baye  Fran9oife,  and  fee  whether  we  could  not
find  the  copper  mine,®*  which  had  been  difcovered  the  year
before.  Heading  north-eafl,  and  failing  eight  or  ten  leagues

along

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  Map.

Port  Royal.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  Our  habitation.*  B.  Garden  of  Sieur  de  Champlain.  C.  Road  through
the  woods  that  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  had  made.  D.  Itland  at  the  mouth  of
Equille  River.  E.  Entrance  to  Port  Royal.  F.  Shoals,  dry  at  low  tide.  G.
River  St.  Antoine.*  H.  Place  under  cultivation  for  fowing  wheat.’  /.  Mill  that
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  had  made.  L.  Meadows  overflowed  at  higheft  tides.  M.
Equille  River.  N.  Seacoaft  of  Port  Royal.  O.  Ranges  of  mountains.  P.  Ifland
near  the  river  St.  Antoine.  Q.  Rocky  Brook."  R.  Another  brook.’  .S’.  Mill
River.*  T.  Small  lake.  V.  Place  where  the  favages  catch  herring  in  the  fea-
fon.  X.  Trout  brook.'^  Y.  A lane  that  Sieur  de  Champlain  had  made.

riv^r  sf  AntA-.?  • ‘!if  Lower  Granville.  2.  The  ftream  weft  of

nanolk  ^ No  nUA  3-  The  fite  of  the  prefent  town  of  An-

Uroov  Brook.  5.  Morris  River.  6.  Allen  River.  7.  Trout

fecond  ScofieldkKk  " Thorne’s,  Ld  the

un  modern  maps  called  Moofe
River,  and  fometimes  Deep  Brook.  It
IS  a few  miles  eaft  of  Bear  River.

The  latitude  is  here  overftated : it
mould  be  44°  39/  30".

preceding  year,  M.  Prevert
ot  bt.  Malo  had  made  a glowing  report
oitenlively  bafed  on  his  own  obferva-

tions  and  information  which  he  had  ob-
tained from  the  Indians,  in  regard  to
certain  mines  alleged  to  exift  on  the
coaft  dire(5lly  fouth  of  Northumber-
land Strait,  and  about  the  head  of  the
Bay  of  Fundy.  It  was  this  report  of
Prevert  that  induced  the  prefent  fearch.

24

Voyages  oj

is  only  a fmall  ftream  filled  with  rt>c.k
afeended  at  all  on  account  of  the  fma

and  which  has  been  named  Rocky  Brook.**  T'hi*  i,
latitude‘s  45®;  and  17°  8'  of  the  detiection  of  th^
needle.

After  having  explored  this  harbor,  we  fet  i
farther  on  in  Baye  Fran9oife,  and  fee  whether  = ;
find  the  copper  mine,*®  which  had  been  difcvv«
before.  Heading  north-eaft,  and  failing  eight  or  :?

Champlain’s  Dp,siKiPTio->r  or  thk  Majp.

F-  vT  R jyal.

j ktr  yifrurei  indicaU  ^ TtMtrr.

A.  Our  habitation.*  B.  Garden  of  Sieur  de  Charftjfttin  r

the  wood-s  that  .Sieur  de  I’outrincourt  had  made.  IK  m

Equille  River.  B.  Entrance  to  Port  Royai  F.  Shoals,  dry  *•:
River  St.  Antoine.*  H.  Place  under  cultiv.ition  for  fowin»  wh«« J
Sieur  de  Pmifrincourt  had  made.  L.  Meadow.s  overflowe.1  at  s:- , "
Equille  River,  N.  Seacoaft  of  Port  Royal.  O.  Rang.  t.  c'  ,.c,a.n'Iv
near  the  river  St  Antoine.  Q.  Rocky  Brook.'  /?.

River.*  T.  .‘r  niaJI  lake.  V.  Place  where  the  favatres  cat.,),  t.  -i  • ;
fon.  A’.  Trout  brook.'  V.  A lane  that  Sieur  de  Charoj.i3!«

Notes,  i.  On  the  prefent  fite  of  Lower  Granvill -.  j>

3-  The  lite  of  th.  r>re  ta,
napolis.  4- -Now  called  Deep  Brook.  5.  Morris  Kiw-r,  6.  .

SVlcorelS  ■*  * ■

« On  modern  maps  called  Moofc
River,  and  fometimes  Deep  Brook.  It
IS  a few  miles  call  of  Bear  River.

•3  xhe  latitude  is  here  overftated
mould  be  44®

^f“c  prV.  vear,  M.  Preven
ot  bt.  Male  n ui  UHifit*  u liJowing  report
olteniivcly  baira  on  rJs  own  obferv^a-

tlons  and  ?nf*or?n;4»jv:n  k
uliied  frofu  tin*  V wx*
certain  mines  ufl  -
It  covift  direcLiy  .

land  Strait,  and
Bay  of  Kund\b  ; . .
Prevert  that  ^

25

Sieur  de  Champlain.

along  the  coaft  of  Port  Ro5'aI,®^  we  croffed  a part  of  the  bay
fome  five  or  fix  leagues  in  extent,  when  we  arrived  at  a place
which  we  called  the  Cape  of  Two  Bays;®®  and  we  paffed  by
an  ifland  a league  diflant  therefrom,  a league  alfo  in  circuit,
rifing  up  forty  or  forty-five  fathoms.®®  It  is  wholly  furrounded
by  great  rocks,  except  in  one  place  which  is  doping,  at  the
foot  of  which  Hope  there  is  a pond  of  fait  water,  coming  from
under  a pebbly  point,  having  the  form  of  a fpur.  The  fur-
face  of  the  ifland  is  flat,  covered  with  trees,  and  containing
a fine  fpring  of  water.  In  this  place  is  a copper  mine.
Thence  we  proceeded  to  a harbor  a league  and  a half  diflant,
where  we  fuppofed  the  copper  mine  was,  which  a certain
Prevert  of  St.  Malo  had  difcovered  by  aid  of  the  favages
of  the  country.  This  port  is  in  latitude  45°  40',  and  is  dry
at  low  tide.®^  In  order  to  enter  it,  it  is  neceffary  to  place  bea-
cons, and  mark  out  a fand-bank  at  the  entrance,  which  borders
a channel  that  extends  along  the  main  land.  Then  you
enter  a bay  nearly  a league  in  length,  and  half  a league  in
breadth.  In  fome  places,  the  bottom  is  oozy  and  fandy,

where

^ Along  the  Bay  of  Fundy  nearly
parallel  to  the  bafin  of  Port  Royal
would  better  exprefs  the  author’s  mean-
ing.

^ Cape  Chigne6lo,  the  point  where
the  Bay  of  Fundy  is  bifurcated;  the
northern  arm  forming  Chigne6lo  Bay,
and  the  fouthern,  the  Bay  of  Mines  or
Minas  Bafin.

I fie  Haute,  or  high  ifland. — Vide
CharlevoiTds  Map.  On  fome  maps  this
name  has  been  ftrangely  perverted  into
Ifle  Holt,  Ifle  Har,  &c.  Its  height  is
320  feet.

This  was  Advocate’s  Harbor.  Its
diftance  from  Cape  Chigne6fo  is  greater

than  that  ftated  in  the  text.  Further
on,  Champlain  calls  it  two  leagues,
which  is  nearly  corredf.  Its  latitude  is
about  45°  20'.  By  comparing  the  Ad-
miralty charts  and  Champlain’s  map  of
this  harbor,  it  will  be  feen  that  impor-
tant changes  have  taken  place  fince
1604.  The  tongue  of  land  extending
in  a fouth-eaflerly  diredlion,  covered
with  trees  and  flirubbery,  which  Cham-
plain calls  a fand-bank,  has  entirely  dif-
appeared.  The  ordinary  tides  rife  here
from  thirty- three  to  thirty-nine  feet,  and
on  a fandy  fliore  could  hardly  fail  to
produce  important  changes.

26

Voyages  of

where  veffels  may  get  aground.  The  fea  falls  and  rifes  there
to  the  extent  of  four  or  five  fathoms.  We  landed  to  fee
whether  we  could  find  the  mines  which  Prevert  had  reported
to  us.  Having  gone  about  a quarter  of  a league  along  cer-
tain mountains,  we  found  none,  nor  did  we  recognize  any
refemblance  to  the  defcription  of  the  harbor  he  had  given
us.  Accordingly,  he  had  not  himfelf  been  there,  but  probably
two  or  three  of  his  men  had  been  there,  guided  by  fome
favages,  partly  by  land  and  partly  by  little  flreams,  while  he
awaited  them  in  his  fhallop  at  the  mouth  of  a little  river  in
the  Bay  of  St.  Lawrence.®*  Thefe  men,  upon  their  return,
brought  him  feveral  fmall  pieces  of  copper,  which  he  fliowed
us  when  he  returned  from  his  voyage.  Neverthelefs,  we

found

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  Map.

Port  des  Mines.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water,

A,  A place  where  veffels  are  liable  to  run  aground.  B.  A fmall  river.  C,  A
tongue  of  land  compofed  of  fand.  D,  A point  compofed  of  large  pebbles,  which
is  like  a mole.  E.  Location  of  a copper  mine,  which  is  covered  by  the  tide  twice
a day.  E,  An  ifland  to  the  rear  of  the  Cape  of  Mines. ^ G.  Roadftead  where
veffels  anchor  while  waiting  for  the  tide.  H.  Ifle  Haute,  which  is  a league  and
a half  from  Port  of  Mines.  I,  Channel.  L,  Little  River.  M.  Range  of  moun-
tains along  the  coaft  of  the  Cape  of  Mines.

Note.  i.  Now  called  Spencer’s  Ifland.  Champlain  probably  obtained  his
knowledge  of  this  ifland  at  a fubfequent  vifit.  There  is  a creek  extending  from
near  Spencer’s  Ifland  between  the  rocky  elevations  to  Advocate’s  Harbor,  or
nearly  fo,  which  Champlain  does  not  appear  to  have  feen,  or  at  leaft  he  does  not
reprefent  it  on  his  map.  This  point,  thus  made  an  ifland  by  the  creek,  has  an
elevation  of  five  hundred  feet,  at  the  bafe  of  which  was  the  copper  mine  which
they  difcovered.  — Vide  note  67.

According  to  the  Abb^  Laverdi^re,  the  lower  part  of  the  Gulf  was  fometimes
called  the  Bay  of  St.  Lawrence.

•IX

c : 'Jf

26

i 'oyiiges  of

..vh  •:  u '.-.  Vi.jty  get  aground.  The  fea  falls  and

tf»  r t 'X  four  or  five  fathoms.  We  'ati

* <•  ' .id  find  the  mines  which  Prevert

to  u v H -.ving  gone  about  a quarter  of  a leagu**
i?nti  wt  found  none,  nor  did  we  rec

r«  ftmb'faiio;  ii.  the  defeription  of  the  harbor  he
us.  A'-  ;rt!M;z!y.  he  had  not  himleii  heeu  there,  h-vl
t’.vf>  m three  of  his  men  had  L'teen  there,  guide^tf  fi?*

tbr'  '>f  Lawience.*  Thcie  men,  ujx>n  thetr
brcujght  him  h.'vtrai  fmaii  pieces  of  t.Oj-.per,  which  he
m when  he  returned  from  his  voy-’ge,  NeverttefJB#|,-  #s>r:

A where  vttjlcis  itt  liable  to  run  agf<«iDb  ' A faiall  river.  * .
lungne  <>/  Hml  ccwnp''^t'e#J  0/  u«<t.  Z>.  A point  comr  “ . pebbk-  ^

is  like  a of  21  copper  mine,  whicn  > .-•  * by  the  Itjc  ^ •

a day.  F.  .Vn  iJland  to  the  rear  of  the  Cape  ^soadilead

vc‘ffels  anchor  wh  i?-  yraituijg  tor  the  tide,  //.  Ifle  ui  a leagu-^  ;r

a Itaif  from  Port  o!  iV1  /.  Channel.  Z..  Little  : / i^ange  of  Uk>  ~

tains  the  tOwA  of  the  Cape  of  Mines,

.Son;  i Snv!^  lailcd  Spencer's  Ifland.  ChatTi  • >-*

i'4  this  idawfl  at  a fubiequent  vilit.  Th;=r  > % -.  T?:rk  *>1 ; .

aV.r  ?'  Sj?«*r- the  rocky  elevati»>>i«  u .1^  - ^ ^

U>,  which  Ora.mpUm  docs  not  appear  to  have  ■ -c  ^ c.  . >

repfcKol  it  «*ii  jirip.  i bis  point,  thns  made  an  1 .

tleraP.on  o4  lirr  feet,  at  tbc  bale  of  which  ^ *

ihev  di<cw«T^  - Frdf  nuie  f*y.

^ Arcrffi^^  to  the  AijM  l^iverdi^,  the  lower  part  of  the  v
called  the  of  St  Lawrence

favixgca-,  partly  oy  land  and  partly  by  littie  ttresn
avvjiitrd.  them  in  hi.s  fliallop  at  the  mouth  of  a hi

partly  oy  land  and  partly  by  little  ftreaniS:  %

themi  m hi.s  fliallop  at  the  mouth  of  a Uttk  ■*?:

CHAMeio*.td^  ; LU  :>vC.vrri  >7r  or

Tkf  (aMc^  v/

91  •

) I

if"

K>

>o,

VO

27

Sieur  de  Champlain.

found  in  this  harbor  two  mines  of  what  feemed  to  be  copper,
according  to  the  report  of  our  miner,  who  confidered  it
very  good,  although  it  was  not  native  copper.

The  head®  of  the  Baye  Fraii9oife,  which  we  croffed,  is
fifteen  leagues  inland.  All  the  land  which  we  have  feen
in  coafting  along  from  the  little  paffage  of  Long  I Hand
is  rocky,  and  there  is  no  place  except  Port  Royal  where  vef-
fels  can  lie  in  fafety.  The  land  is  covered  with  pines  and
birches,  and,  in  my  opinion,  is  not  very  good.

On  the  20th  of  May,™  we  fet  out  from  the  Port  of  Mines
to  feek  a place  adapted  for  a permanent  flay,  in  order  to  lofe
no  time,  purpofmg  afterwards  to  return,  and  fee  if  we  could
difcover  the  mine  of  pure  copper  which  Prevert’s  men  had
found  by  aid  of  the  favages.  We  failed  weft  two  leagues  as  far
as  the  cape  of  the  two  bays,  then  north  five  or  fix  leagues ;
and  we  croffed  the  other  bay,^^  where  we  thought  the  copper
mine  was,  of  which  we  have  already  fpoken:  inafmuch  as
there  are  there  two  rivers,™  the  one  coming  from  the  diredlion
of  Cape  Breton,  and  the  other  from  Gafpe  or  Tregatte,  near
the  great  river  St.  Lawrence.  Sailing  weft  fome  fix  leagues,
we  arrived  at  a little  river,™  at  the  mouth  of  which  is  rather  a

low

They  had  juft  croffed  the  Bay  of  The  rivers  are  the  Cumberland
Mines.  From  the  place  where  they  Bafin  with  its  tributaries  coming  from
croffed  it  to  its  head  it  is  not  far  from  the  eaft,  and  the  Petitcoudiac  {petit
fifteen  leagues,  and  it  is  about  the  fame  and  coude.,  little  elbow,  from  the  angle
diftance  to  Port  Royal,  from  which  he  formed  by  the  river  at  Mon6lon,  called
may  here  eftimate  the  diftance  inland.  the  Bend),  which  flows  into  Shepody
Read  June. — Vide  antea,  note  53.  Bay  coming  from  the  north  or  the  di-
Chigne6to  Bay.  Charlevoix  has  reftion  of  Gafp^.  Champlain  men-
Chignitou  ou  Beau  Baffin.  On  De  tions  all  thefe  particulars,  probably  as
Laet’s  Map  of  1633,  on  Jacob  von  anfwering  to  the  defcription  given  to
Meur’s  of  1673,  and  Homenn’s  of  1729,  them  by  M.  Prevert  of  the  place  where
we  have  B.  de  Gennes.  The  Cape  of  copper  mines  could  be  found.

Two  Bays  was  Cape  Chigne6fo.  **  Quaco  River,  at  the  mouth  of  which

28

Voyages  of

low  cape,  extending  out  into  the  fea ; and  a fhort  dillance  in-
land  there  is  a mountain, having  the  fliape  of  a Cardinal’s  hat.
In  this  place  we  found  an  iron  mine.  There  is  anchorage  here
only  for  fhallops.  Four  leagues  weft  fouth-weft  is  a rocky
point’®  extending  out  a fhort  diftance  into  the  water,  where
there  are  ftrong  tides  which  are  very  dangerous.  Near  the
point  we  faw  a cove  about  half  a league  in  extent,  in  which
we  found  another  iron  mine,  alfo  very  good.  Four  leagues
farther  on  is  a fine  bay  running  up  into  the  main  land  at
the  extremity  of  which  there  are  three  iflands  and  a rock ; two
of  which  are  a league  from  the  cape  towards  the  weft,  and  the
other  is  at  the  mouth  of  the  largeft  and  deepeft  river  we  had
yet  feen,  which  we  named  the  river  St.  John,  becaufe  it  was
on  this  faint  s day  that  we  arrived  there.”  By  the  favages  it  is
called  Ouygoudy.  This  river  is  dangerous,  if  one  does  not  ob-

ferve

femblance,  as  Champlain  fuggefts,  to
the  chapeau  de  Cardinal.

McCoy’s  Head,  four  leagues  weft
of  Quaco  : the  “ cove  ” may  be  that  on
the  eaft  into  which  Gardner’s  Creek
flows,  or  that  on  the  weft  at  the  mouth
of  Emmerfon’s  Creek.

1 he  Bay  of  St.  John,  which  is  four
leagues  fouth-weft  of  McCoy’s  Head.
The  iflands  mentioned  are  Partridge
Ifland  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,  and
two  fmaller  ones  farther  weft,  one  Meo-
genes,  and  the  other  Shag  rock  or  fome
unimportant  iflet  in  its  vicinity.  The
rock  mentioned  by  Champlain  is  that  on
which  Spit  Beacon  Light  now  ftands.

^ The  feftival  of  St.  John  the  Bap-
tift  occurs  on  the  24th  of  June ; and,
arriving  on  that  day,  they  gave  the
name  of  St.  John  to  the  river,  which
has  been  appropriately  given  alfo  to
the  city  at  its  mouth,  now  the  metropo-
lis of  the  province  of  New  Brunfwick.

the  water  is  fhallow : the  low  cape  ex-
tending out  into  the  fea  is  that  on  which
Quaco  Light  now  ftands,  which  reaches
out  quarter  of  a mile,  and  is  compara-
tively low.  The  fhore  from  Goofe  River,
near  where  they  made  the  coaft,  is  very
high,  meafuring  at  different  points  783,
73S.»  650,  400,  300,  500,  and  380  feet,
while  the  “low  cape”  is  only  250  feet,
and  near  it  on  the  weft  is  an  elevation
of  400  feet.  It  would  be  properly  repre-
fented  as  “ rather  a low  cape  ” in  contra-
diftin6lion  to  the  neighboring  coaft.
Iron  and  manganefe  are  found  here,
and  the  latter  has  been  mined  to  fome
extent,  but  is  now  difcontinued,  as  the  ex-
penfe  is  too  great  for  the  prefent  times.

^ This  mountain  is  an  elevation,
eight  or  ten  miles  inland  from  Quaco,
which  may  be  feen  by  veffels  coafting
along  from  St.  Martin’s  Head  to  St
indicated  on  the  charts  as
Mt.  Theobald,  and  bears  a ftriking  re-

■•Hf  <fW

29

Sieur  de  Champlain.

iC3Ww^iU51y  certain  poir>t3  aiid  rocks  on  the  two  fules.  It  is
its  entrance,  and  then  becomes  broader.  certain
||i^  being  paiied,  it  becomes  narrower  again,  and  forms  a
fat!  between  two  large  < lilfs,  where  the  water  runs  fo
♦hat  a j)«ece  of  wood  thrown  in  is  drawn,iinder  and  not
feca  ac^iin.  But  by  waiting  t'.’l  high  tide  youcanpafs  this  fall
very  eathy."  Then  it  expands  again  to  the  extent  of  about

a

ChAMFI  DESCRIFriON  OF  THE  ACCOMPANYING  MAP.

IRmhuu  St.  Jbmah.

•i  Afwrer  itUicoU  falhom*  ^ v/aUr,

A.  Three  iflands  above  1’ r falts.»  B.  Mountains  riang  up  from  the  main  land,
two  leagues  fouth  of  the  nvei.  C.  The  fall  in  the  river.  D.  Shoals  where
vefiels,  when  the  tide  is  oat,  .n  liat-h-  ran  aground.  E.  Cabin  wl^re  the  fav-
ao-es  fortify  themfelves.  E.  A pebh’y  '.w'iti!  where  there  is  a crofs.  G.  ^n  'flan
at  the  entrance  of  the  rlver.»  //.  A fmall  brook  coming  trom  a h^e  pood.  /.
Arm  of  the  fea  dry  at  low  tide.*  L.  Two  little  rocky  iflets.*  M.  A fmall  pond.
.V.  Two  brooks.  O.  Very  dangerous  fhoals  along  the  coaft,  which
tide.  P.  Way  by  which  the  favages  carry  their  canoes  in  paffing  the  falls.  ^
Place  for  anchoring  where  the  river  runs  with  full  current

Notes,  i.  The  iflands  are  not  clofe  together  here  'f

very  near  the  main  land  on  one  fhore.  am!  t y - lirv  at  "low

a.  MiU  Pond.  4.  Marsh  Creek,  vr,  fhahow  but  0>rt  en«uUy  i1r>  at  it  w

i Thefe  iflets  are  not  now  reprelentr.i  on  the  charts,  and  aye
he  -here  from  which  the  foil  may  haw  been  waflied  away  Imre  1604.

*’*  Champlain  was  under  a

about  paf!in}4  the  (>*.1!  -it
sft.iuth  of  the  .‘>1.  John  ai  high  tid  r H
' \Ti  i.iCi  ouly  be  pifl’ed  at

The  waters  of  the  river  at  -ow
are  a?v.ut  twelve  feet  higher  U;-r
the  oC  the  feuL  At  high  tide*,

d the  i<?a  are  about  five  lect
ihan  the  waters  of  the  ri^xr
uJ  low  tide  there  is  a taj.
ff^v^rard,  ar.«^  at  high  tide  tljerc  is  a fan

.nwird,  at  neither  of  which  times  can
the  iA\]  lx  fxiflcd.  The  only  time  lor
wlicn  the  waters  ol
fi,.  r A ^r“  on  .*  level  with  the  waters  of
'xhr  riv>'r  This  occitrs  twice  everv  rkle.
It  tnc  t vei  pc  .inr  at  Die  flood  and  lihe
wifc  a»  **hc  cob.  The  perif>d  for  ^talhng
ah.i^Vt  iitteen  or  twenty  mimurs^
and  oi  ct7urfu  o rurs  four  a day.

VefTrii*  rihembk*  in  coniidensble  num-
bers ib'.^ve  and  Ulow  to  embrace  -

29

Sieur  de  Champlain,

ferve  carefully  certain  points  and  rocks  on  the  two  fides.  It  is
narrow  at  its  entrance,  and  then  becomes  broader.  A certain
point  being  paffed,  it  becomes  narrower  again,  and  forms  a
kind  of  fall  between  two  large  cliffs,  where  the  water  runs  fo
rapidly  that  a piece  of  wood  thrown  in  is  drawn^nder  and  not
feen  again.  But  by  waiting  till  high  tide  you  can  pafs  this  fall
very  eafily.'*  Then  it  expands  again  to  the  extent  of  about

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Rivihre  St.  Jkhan.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  Three  iAands  above  the  falls.i  B.  Mountains  rifmg  up  from  the  main  land,
two  leagues  fouth  of  the  river.  C.  The  fall  in  the  river  D.  Shoals  where
veflels,  when  the  tide  is  out,  are  liable  to  run  apund.  E.  Cabin  ^„d

ages  fortify  themfelves.  F.  A pebbly  point  where  there  is  a “

at  the  entrance  of  the  river.*  H.  A fmall  brook  coming  from  a little  pond.  /.
Arrof“a  dry  at  low  tide.^  L.  Two  little  rocky  iflets.*  M E fmall  pond.
N.  Two  brooks.  O.  Very  dangerous  flioals  along  the

tide.  P.  Way  by  which  the  favages  carry  their  canoes  in  paffing  the  tails.  ^
Place  for  anchoring  where  the  river  runs  with  full  current.

notes.  I.  The  iflands  are  not  clofe  together  as  here  ^^^rt^fd^e ?dand
ve^y  near  the  main  land  on  one  Ihore,  two  on  the  other^^^  2^^^  aSow  tidt

1'  fcsfi  -

?he  fcore  fZ  which  the  foil  may  have  been  walhed  away  fince  1604.

■^8  Champlain  was  under  a miffappre-
henfion  about  paffing  the^  fall  at  the
mouth  of  the  St.  John  at  high  tide.  1
can  in  fa6l  only  be  palled  at  about  half
tide.  The  waters  of  the  river  at  low
tide  are  about  twelve  feet  higher  than
the  waters  of  the  fea.  At  high -tide,  the
waters  of  the  fea  are  about  five  teet
higher  than  the  waters  of  the  river.
Confequently,  at  low  tide  there  is  a tali
outward,  and  at  high  tide  there  is  a a

vard,  at  neither  of  which  times  can
j fall  be  paired.  The  only  time  for
[Ting  the  fall  is  when  the  waters  of
> fea  are  on  a level  with  the  waters  of
2 river.  This  occurs  twice  everv  tide,
the  level  point  at  the  flood  and
fe  at  the  ebb.  The  period  for  paffing
Is  about  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,
d of  coiirfe  occurs  four  times  a day.
‘flels  alfemble  in  confiderable  num-
rs  above  and  below  to  embrace  the

30

Voyages  of

a league  in  fome  places,  where  there  are  three  iflands.  We
did  not  explore  it  farther  up.™  But  Ralleau,  fecretary  of
Sieur  de  Monts,  went  there  fome  time  after  to  fee  a favage
named  Secondon,  chief  of  this  river,  who  reported  that  it  was
beautiful,  large,  and  extenfive,  with  many  meadows  and  fine
trees,  as  oaks,  beeches,  walnut-trees,  and  alfo  wild  grape-
vines. The  inhabitants  of  the  country  go  by  this  river
to  Tadouffac,  on  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence,  making  but
a fhort  portage  on  the  journey.  From  the  river  St.  John
to  Tadouffac  is  fixty-five  leagues.^  At  its  mouth,  which
is  in  latitude  45°  40',  there  is  an  iron  mine.***

From  the  river  St.  John  we  went  to  four  iflands,  on  one
of  which  we  landed,  and  found  great  numbers  of  birds  called
magpies,®^  of  which  we  captured  many  fmall  ones,  which  are
as  good  as  pigeons.  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  came  near  get-
ting loll:  here,  but  he  came  back  to  our  barque  at  lall,  when
we  had  already  gone  to  fearch  for  him  about  the  illand,  which
is  three  leagues  dillant  from  the  main  land.  Farther  well
are  other  iflands ; among  them  one  fix  leagues  in  length,
called  by  the  favages  Manthane,*®  fouth  of  which  there  are

opportunity  of  pafling  at  the  favoring
moment.  There  are  periods,  however,
when  the  river  is  fwollen  by  rains  and
melting  fnow,  at  which  the  tides  do  not
rife  as  high  as  the  river;  and  confe-
quently  there  is  a conftant  fall  outward,
and  veflels  cannot  pafs  until  the  hieh
water  fubfides.

They  afcended  the  river  only  a
Ihort  diftance  into  the  large  bay  juft
above  the  falls,  near  which  are  the
three  iflands  mentioned  in  the  text.

The  diftance  from  the  mouth  of
the  river  St.  John  to  Tadouflac  in  a
direcft  line  is  about  flxty-five  leagues.

among

But  by  the  winding  courfe  of  the  St.
John  it  would  be  very  much  greater.

Champlain’s  latitude  is  inexa6l.
St.  John’s  Harbor  is  45®  16'.

82  Margos,  magpies.  The  four  iflands
which  Champlain  named  the  Magpies
are  now  called  the  Wolves,  and  are  near
the  mouth  of  Paflamaquoddy  Bay.
Charlevoix  has  Oifeaux,  the  Birds.

88  Manan.  Known  as  the  Grand
Manan  in  contradiftindion  to  the  Petit
Manan,  a fmall  ifland  ftill  further  weft.
It  is  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  miles
long,  and  about  fix  in  its  greateft  width.
On  the  fouth  and  eaftern  fide  are  Long

31

Sieur  de  Champlain.

among  the  iflands  feveral  good  harbors  for  veffels.  From
the  Magpie  Iflands  we  proceeded  to  a river  on  the  main  land
called  the  river  of  the  Etechemins,®*  a tribe  of  favages  fo
called  in  their  country.  We  paffed  by  fo  many  iflands  that
we  could  not  afcertain  their  number,  which  were  very  fine.
Some  were  two  leagues  in  extent,  others  three,  others  more
or  lefs.  All  of  thefe  iflands  are  in  a bay,*®  having,  in  my
eftimation,  a circuit  of  more  than  fifteen  leagues.  There
are  many  good  places  capable  of  containing  any  number  of
veffels,  and  abounding  in  fifh  in  the  feafon,  fuch  as  codfifli,
falmon,  bafs,  herring,  halibut,  and  other  kinds  in  great  num-
bers. Sailing  weft-north-wefl;  three  leagues  through  the
iflands,  we  entered  a river  almofl:  half  a league  in  breadth  at
its  mouth,  failing  up  which  a league  or  two  we  found  two
iflands : one  very  fmall  near  the  weftern  bank ; and  the
other  in  the  middle,  having  a circumference  of  perhaps  eight
or  nine  hundred  paces,  with  rocky  fides  three  or  four  fathoms
high  all  around,  except  in  one  fmall  place,  where  there  is  a
fandy  point  and  clayey  earth  adapted  for  making  brick  and
other  ufeful  articles.  There  is  another  place  affording  a
flielter  for  veffels  from  eighty  to  a hundred  tons,  but  it  is
dry  at  low  tide.  The  ifland  is  covered  with  firs,  birches,
maples,  and  oaks.  It  is  by  nature  very  well  fituated,  except
in  one  place,  where  for  about  forty  paces  it  is  lower  than
elfewhere : this,  however,  is  eafily  fortified,  the  banks  of  the

main

Ifland,  Great  Duck,  Rofs,  Cheyne,  and  The  St.  Croix  River,  fometimes

White  Head  Iflands,  among  which  good  called  the  Scoudic.
harborage  niay  be  found.  The  name,  Paflamaquoddy  Bay.  On  Gaftal-

as  appears  in  the  text,  is  of  Indian  do’s  map  of  1550  called  Angoulefme.
origin.  It  is  fometimes  fpelled  Me-  On  Rouge’s Atlas  Ameriquain,”  1778,
nane,  but  that  in  the  text  prevails.  it  is  written  PalTamacadie.

32

Voyages  of

main  land  being  diftant  on  both  fides  fome  nine  hundred  to  a
thoufand  paces.  Veffels  could  pafs  up  the  river  only  at  the
mercy  of  the  cannon  on  this  ifland,  and  we  deemed  the  loca-
tion the  moft  advantageous,  not  only  on  account  of  its  fitua-
tion  and  good  foil,  but  alfo  on  account  of  the  intercourfe
which  we  propofed  with  the  favages  of  thefe  coafts  and  of
the  interior,  as  we  fliould  be  in  the  midft  of  them.  We
hoped  to  pacify  them  in  the  courfe  of  time,  and  put  an  end
to  the  wars  which  they  carry  on  with  one  another,  so  as  to
derive  fervice  from  them  in  future,  and  convert  them  to  the
Chriftian  faith.  This  place  was  named  by  Sieur  de  Monts
the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix.*®  Farther  on,  there  is  a great  bay,  in

which

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Isle  de  Sainte  Croix.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  -water.

A.  A plan  of  our  habitation.  B.  Gardens.  C.  Little  iflet  ferving  as  a plat-
form for  cannon.^  D.  Platform  where  cannon  were  placed.  E.  The  Cemetery.
F.  The  Chapel.  G.  Rocky  Ihoals  about  the  Ifland  Sainte  Croix.  H.  A little
iflet.^  /.  Place  where  Sieur  de  Monts  had  a water-mill  commenced.  L.  Place
where  we  made  our  coal.  M.  Gardens  on  the  weftern  fliore.  N.  Other  gardens
on  the  eaftern  fliore.  O.  Very  large  and  high  mountain  on  the  main  land.^
River  of  the  Etechemins  flowing  about  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix.

Notes,  i.  This  refers  to  the  fouthern  end  of  the  ifland,  which  was  probably
leparated  at  high  tide,  where  a cannon  may  be  feen  in  pofition.  2.  Little  De
Monts  s Ifland,  fometimes  called  Little  Dochet’s  Ifland.  3.  This  “mountain”  is
now  called  Chamcook  Hill.  Its  height  is  627  feet.  At  the  northern  end  of  the
1 and  on  the  right  there  is  an  extenfive  fandy  fhoal,  dry  at  low  tide,  of  a triangular
lhape  as  formerly,  and  has  apparently  changed  very  little  fince  the  days  of  Cham-

rp,  . Holy  SamBe  Croix,  ifland,  two  flreams  flow  into  the  main

1 his  name  was  fuggefted  by  the  cir-  channel  of  the  river  at  the  fame  place,
m ance  that,  a few  miles  above  the  one  from  the  eaft  and  the  other  from  the

weft,

f I

ti

t

■

!■  . ,

0

O

si

«

-•  '

i' ;‘.  /*  ’ '’l

32  Voyages  of  . "

main  land  being  didant  on  both  fides  fome
thoufand  paces.  VefTels  could  pafs  up  the  mv"
mercy  of  the  cannon  on  this  ifland,  and  v/e  : ''

tion  the  moft  advantageous,  not  onl}'  on  ai>  o .'at
tion  and  good  foil,  but  alfo  on  account  of  ? ;.c

which  we  propofed  with  the  favages  of  theft  ; ‘ . i of

the  interior,  as  we  fliould  be  in  the  ml- ill  c-?  ;»  '.e

hoped  to  pacify  them  in  the  courfe  of  time,  ana  > ..  ;id

to  the  wars  which  they  carry  on  with  one  an<  th*f.  • to
derive  fervice  from  them  in  future,  and  coir.v:  t ths  ■ ; > -die
Chriftian  faith.  This  place  was  nair.,.d  by  tjicur  d<;  Mv  nts
the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix.***  Farther  on,  there  v a grt  ar  ;.„y  in

.»  ’r  ;ch

CHAJtfrtiiK  S Description  of  ths  a<«  , asiing  Mat.

5-

|=‘-  l»LM  on  S.A.il«r«

^ tffiiicAi* /aik^tnzs  0/

1 A,  plan  of  habitU:ion.  />.  C.  Uttic  !*, . M .-.l'ig  as  a plat-

form for  caiinon.*  />.  Platto-'m  whrre  cannoit  went  phic^  vi,  I’hc  Cemetery.

The  Chapel.  G,  Kocky  DuKsisj  afwt  the  Illand  SaiMt  / x.  //.  A little
iflet  * I,  PWe  where  Siea»'  cle  Monts  had  a wate'^-min  - r^d  L,  Place

where  we  made  our  coal.  A/.  C 4i«ifta:>  on  ihv  wclUtf?  fh-  .rc  ' « >! her  gardens

on  the  eahern  tbof  d.  O.  Very  Wge  and  kigh  mounrai^  rm  if  ^ r , land.*  P.
Khrer  of  the  Eiechemins  flowing  ^bfjut  the  Ifland  of  • : b:

Notes,  i.  This  refers  to  th#  end  of  the  i.dajK^  'rh-.h  probably

feparated  at  high  tide,  where  a cannon  maybe  iee«  -n  > Ljhdc  Dt

j MoiUshx  Ifland,  fometimes  caUeil  Uuh;  iKiChet's  IiUftd.  3 I r-^unrun’’ i«

now  called  Chiimcook  HiU  lu  height  Is  627  feet.  At  the  n n r-'.'  the
I ifland  on  the  right  the?.::  iu  an  extenllve  fan<lv  fhoal.  dry  at  lid.;,  *,!ii  a ;;g4iJ*r

mape  as  formerly,  and  has  api>:;rtkr-v  . vtrr?  JiUh  ??«?  Jkyr.  .'hjao-

phiin.

^ The  Holy  Croh^  Sair.  G tw  j llream.%  H'sm  &-'■  iwfe

This  name  was  fuggetted  ry  iSe*  cir  t Uatme!  ->f  the  rivet  ai
cumftance  that,  a few  ad'c.s  ^ from  the  eafl  and  the

33

Sieur  de  Champlain.

which  are  two  illands,  one  high  and  the  other  flat ; alfo  three
rivers,  two  of  moderate  fize,  one  extending  towards  the  eaft,
the  other  towards  the  north,  and  the  third  of  large  fize,
towards  the  weft.  The  latter  is  that  of  the  Etechemins,  of
which  we  fpoke  before.  Two  leagues  up  this  there  is  a
waterfall,  around  which  the  favages  carry  their  canoes  fome
five  hundred  paces  by  land,  and  then  re-enter  the  river.
Faffing  afterwards  from  the  river  a fiiort  diftance  overland,
one  reaches  the  rivers  Norumbegue  and  St.  John.  But  the
falls  are  impafiable  for  veflels,  as  there  are  only  rocks  and  but

four  or  five  feet  of  water.®^

weft,  while  a bay  makes  up  between
them,  prefenting  the  appearance  of  a
crofs.

“ Et  d’autant  qu’k  deux  lieues  au  def-
fus  il  y a des  ruilTeaux  qui  viennent  com-
me  en  croix  de  ddcharger  dans  ce  large
bras  de  mer,  cette  ile  de  la  retraite  des
Frangois  fut  appelde  Saincte  Croix.^^
— His.  Nouvelle- France^  par  Lefcarbot,
Paris,  1612,  Qvat.  Liv.  pp.  461,  462.

It  is  now  called  De  Monts’s  Ifland.
It  has  been  called  Dochet’s  Iftand  and
Neutral  Ifland,  but  there  is  great  appro-
priatenefs  in  calling  it  after  its  firft  oc-
cupant and  proprietor,  and  in  honor  of
him  it  has  been  fo  named  with  fui table
ceremonies.  — Vide  Godfrey's  Centen-
nial Difcourfe.,  Bangor,  1870,  p.  20.
The  United  States  maintain  a light
upon  the  ifland,  which  is  feventy-one
feet  above  the  level  of  the  fea,  and  is
vifible  twelve  nautical  miles.  The  ifland
itfelf  is  moderately  high,  and  in  the
wideft  part  is  one  hundred  and  eighty
paces  or  about  five  hundred  and  forty
feet.  The  area  is  probably  not  more
than  fix  or  feven  acres,  although  it  has
been  eftimated  at  twice  that.  It  may
have  been  diminifhed  in  fome  flight  de-

In  May  and  June,  fo  great  a

number

gree  fince  the  time  of  Champlain  by  the
a6lion  of  the  waves,  but  probably  very
little.  On  the  fouthern  extremity  of
the  ifland  where  De  Monts  placed  his
cannon,  about  twenty-five  years  ago  a
workman  in  excavating  threw  out  five
fmall  cannon-balls,  one  of  which  was
obtained  by  Peter  E.  Vofe,  Efq.,  of
Dennyfville,  Me.,  who  then  refided  near
the  ifland,  and  was  converfant  with  all
the  circumftances  of  the  difcovery.  They
were  about  a foot  and  a half  below  the
furface,  and  the  workman  was  exca-
vating for  another  purpofe,  and  knew
nothing  of  the  hiftory  of  the  ifland.  At
our  folicitation,  the  ball  belonging  to
Mr.  Vofe  has  recently  been  prefented
to  the  New  England  Hiftoric  Genealogi-
cal Society,  of  which  he  is  a member.
It  is  iron,  perfe6lly  round,  two  and  a
quarter  inches  in  diameter,  and  weighs
22|  oz.  avoirdupois.  There  can  be  no
reafonable  doubt  that  thefe  balls  are
relics  of  the  little  French  colony  of  1604,
and  probably  the  only  memorial  of  the
kind  now  in  exiftence.

The  defcription  in  the  text  of  the
environs  of  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix  is
entirely  accurate.  Some  diftance  above,
5 and

34

Voyages  of

number  of  herring  and  bafs  are  caught  there  that  veffels  could
be  loaded  with  them.  The  foil  is  of  the  fineft  fort,  and  there
are  fifteen  or  twenty  acres  of  cleared  land,  where  Sieur  de
Monts  had  fome  wheat  fown,  which  flourifhed  finely.  The
favages  come  here  fometimes  five  or  fix  weeks  during  the
fifiiing  feafon.  All  the  reft  of  the  country  confifts  of  very
denfe  forefts.  If  the  land  were  cleared  up,  grain  would
flourifli  excellently.  This  place  is  in  latitude  45°  20',®®  and
17°  32'  of  the  defledtion  of  the  magnetic  needle.

CHAPTER  IV.

Sieur  de  Monts,  finding  no  Other  Place  better  adapted  for  a Per-
manent Settlement  than  the  Island  of  St.  Croix,  fortifies  it  and
BUILDS  Dwellings.  — Return  of  the  Vessels  to  France,  and  of
Ralleau,  Secretary  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  for  the  Sake  of  Arrang-
ing SOME  Business  Affairs.

OT  finding  any  more  fuitable  place  than  this
ifland,  we  commenced  making  a barricade  on
a little  iflet  a fhort  diftance  from  the  main  ifland,
which  ferved  as  a ftation  for  placing  our  cannon.
All  worked  fo  energetically  that  in  a little  while
it  was  put  in  a ftate  of  defence,  although  the  mofquitoes

and  in  view  from  the  ifland,  is  the  fork,
or  Divide,  as  it  is  called.  Here  is  a
meeting  of  the  waters  of  Warwig  Creek
from  the  eaft,  Oak  Bay  from  the  north,
and  the  river  of  the  Etechemins,  now
called  the  St.  Croix,  from  the  weft.
Thefe  are  the  three  rivers  mentioned
by  Champlain,  Oak  Bay  being  confid-
ered  as  one  of  them,  in  which  may  be
feen  the  two  iflands  mentioned  in  the
text,  one  high  and  the  other  low.  A

(which

little  above  Calais  is  the  waterfall,
around  which  the  Indians  carried  their
bark  canoes,  when  on  their  journey  up
the  river  through  the  Scoudic  lakes,
from  which  by  land  they  reached  the
river  St.  John  on  the  eaft,  or,  on  the
weft,  pafling  through  the  Mettawam-
keag,  they  reached  the  Norumbegue,  or
Penobfcot  River.

The  latitude  of  the  Ifland  of  St.
Croix  is  45°  7'  43".

35

Sieur  dc  ^^ainpla  --.

'/.h’ch  are  little  flies)  ai-ijKi-  v-“  us  excefl. vely  in  our  work.
■ >r  there  were  feveraJ  of  ih;!  ni«  n whofe  faces  were  fo  fwol-
I by  their  bites  that  rb-.-  • o fld- Icarcely  fee.  The  barri-
v af-e  l>eing  finithed,  Sieur  1 ’.louts  fent  his  barque  to  notify
' . roft  of  our  party,  who  w r..  with  o^r  veffel  in  the  bay  of
Mar)',  to  come  to  St.  Croix.  This  wls  promptly  done,
i rhile  awaiting  them  we  fpent  our  lime  very  pleafantly.

S days  after,  our  velfcis  having  arrived  and  anchored,
cCfcmharked.  Then,  without  lofing  time,  Sieur  de  Monts
UTiW:.**'  h^d  to  employ  the  workmen  in  building  houfes  for  our
snd  allowed  me  to  determine  the  arrangement  of  oor
A irK  .,t  After  Sieur  de  Monts  had  determined  the  place
for  t:  lorehoufe,  which  is  nine  fathoms  long,  three  wide,

and  ' A f.'  feet  high,  he  adopted  the  plan  for  his  owm  houfe,
whv,  ^ oad  promptly  built  by  gotxl  workmen,  aud  then
u.  c'v  u)  fach  one  his  location.  Straightway,  the  men
K ,;i:=  V!)  g tlv^r  t<»gc?litr  hy  fives  and  fixes,  each  according
iii  rft-'rt , Then  all  fet  to  work  to  clear  up  the  ifland,  to

Ch.4 4 A.m’s  Description  cr  the  accom‘»a vying  Map,

HA»TTi^TION  DE  ' ' 5»TE.  C*0»X.

indkuie  fiiifutms  o/  toaier.

t Sieur  dq  Monts.  B.  Public  building  where  we  fpent  our  time
^ ^ C.  The  llorehoufe.  D.  Dwelling  of  the  guard.  E,  Thcblack-

frreO.  ■ / Dwelling  of  the  carpenters.  G,  The  well.  //.  The  oven  where

the  i . #5  WAS  made.  A KLitchen.  A.  Gardens,  /kf.  Other  gardens.  A\  Place
in  t'<  -tvsree  v^Vurre  a tree  (lands.  O.  Palifade.  P,  Dwellings  of  the  Sieurs
fi  vVwiTlir,  Ch»r:»p?aiii,  and  Champdord.  Q.  Dwelling;  of  .Sieur  Boulay,  and  other
aurdK*i%  R,  dwelling  where  the  Sioura  de  Geneftou,  Sourin,  and  other  artifans
r IM tiling  of  the  Sieurs  de  Beaumont,  la  Motte  Bourioli,  and  Fouge-
f ‘.  Dweiling  of  our  curate.  A'.  Other  gardens.  Y,  The  river  furronnd-
^ 'thaarl

35

Sieur  de  Champlain,

(which  are  little  flies)  annoyed  us  exceffively  in  our  work.
For  there  were  feveral  of  our  men  whofe  faces  were  fo  fwol-
len  by  their  bites  that  they  could  fcarcely  fee.  The  barri-
cade being  finiflied,  Sieur  de  Monts  fent  his  barque  to  notify
the  reft  of  our  party,  who  were  with  our  veffel  in  the  bay  of
St.  Mary,  to  come  to  St.  Croix.  This  was  promptly  done,
and  while  awaiting  them  we  fpent  our  time  very  pleafantly.

Some  days  after,  our  veffels  having  arrived  and  anchored,
all  difembarked.  Then,  without  lofmg  time,  Sieur  de  Monts
proceeded  to  employ  the  workmen  in  building  houfes  for  our
abode,  and  allowed  me  to  determine  the  arrangement  of  our
fettlement.  After  Sieur  de  Monts  had  determined  the  place
for  the  ftorehoufe,  which  is  nine  fathoms  long,  three  wide,
and  twelve  feet  high,  he  adopted  the  plan  for  his  own  houfe,
which  he  had  promptly  built  by  good  workmen,  and  then
afligned  to  each  one  his  location.  Straightway,  the  men
began  to  gather  together  by  fives  and  fixes,  each  according
to  his  defire.  Then  all  fet  to  work  to  clear  up  the  ifland,  to

go

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Habitation  dk  l’Isle  Sth.  Croix.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  Dwelling  of  Sieur  de  Monts.  B.  Public  building  where  we  fpent  our  time
when  it  rained.  C.  The  ftorehoufe.  D.  Dwelling  of  the  guard.  E.  The  black-
fmith  fliop.  E.  Dwelling  of  the  carpenters.  G.  The  well.  //.  The  oven  where
the  bread  was  made.  /.  Kitchen.  L.  Gardens.  M,  Other  gardens.  N.  Place
in  the  centre  where  a tree  ftands.  O.  Palifade.  P.  Dwellings  of  the  Sieurs
d’Orville,  Champlain,  and  Champdord.  Q.  Dwelling  of  Sieur  Boulay,  and  other
artifans.  R.  Dwelling  where  the  Sieurs  de  Geneftou,  Sourin,  and  other  artifans
lived.  T.  Dwelling  of  the  Sieurs  de  Beaumont,  la  Motte  Bourioli,  and  Fouge-
ray.  V,  Dwelling  of  our  curate.  X.  Other  gardens.  K The  river  furround-
ing the  ifland.

36  Voyages  of

go  to  the  woods,  to  make  the  frame  work,  to  carry  earth  and
other  things  neceffary  for  the  buildings.

While  we  were  building  our  houfes,  Sieur  de  Monts  de-
fpatched  Captain  Fouques  in  the  veffel  of  Roffignol,®*  to  find
Pont  Grave  at  Canfeau,  in  order  to  obtain  for  our  fettlement
what  fupplies  remained.

Some  time  after  he  had  fet  out,  there  arrived  a fmall  barque
of  eight  tons,  in  which  was  Du  Glas  of  Honfleur,  pilot  of
Pont  Grave’s  veffel,  bringing  the  Bafque  fhip-mafters,  who  had
been  captured  by  the  above  Pont  Grave  while  engaged  in
the  fur-trade,  as  we  have  ftated.  Sieur  de  Monts  received  them
civilly,  and  fent  them  back  by  the  above  Du  Glas  to  Pont  Grave,
with  orders  for  him  to  take  the  veffels  he  had  captured  to
Rochelle,  in  order  that  juflice  might  be  done.  Meanwhile,
work  on  the  houfes  went  on  vigoroufly  and  without  ceffation ;
the  carpenters  engaged  on  the  florehoufe  and  dwelling  of
Sieur  de  Monts,  and  the  others  each  on  his  own  houfe,  as
I was  on  mine,  which  I built  with  the  afliftance  of  fome  fer-
vants  belonging  to  Sieur  d’Orville  and  myfelf.  It  was  forth-
with completed,  and  Sieur  de  Monts  lodged  in  it  until  his
own  was  finiflied.  An  oven  was  alfo  made,  and  a hand-
mill  for  grinding  our  wheat,  the  working  of  which  involved
much  trouble  and  labor  to  the  moft  of  us,  fince  it  was  a toil-
fome  operation.  Some  gardens  were  afterwards  laid  out,  on
the  main  land  as  well  as  on  the  ifland.  Here  many  kinds  of
feeds  were  planted,  which  flourifhed  very  well  on  the  main

land,

This  was  the  veflel  taken  from  fays  Grav6  was  his  furname.  — Vide
Captain  Roflignol  and  confifcated.  — Hijloire  de  la  Nou.  Fran,^  Paris,  1612,
Vide  antea^  pp.  10,  12  ; alfo  note  26.  Qvat.  Liv.  p.  501.  To  prevent  any  con-
^ Champlain  and  others  often  write  fufion,  we  write  it  Pont  Grav^  in  all
only  Pont  for  Pont  Gravd.  Lefcarbot  cafes.

37

Sieur  de  Champlain.

land,  but  not  on  the  ifland,  fince  there  was  only  fand  here,
and  the  whole  were  burned  up  when  the  fun  (hone,  although
fpecial  pains  were  taken  to  water  them.

Some  days  after,  Sieur  de  Monts  determined  to  afcertain
where  the  mine  of  pure  copper  was  which  we  had  fearched
for  fo  much.  W^ith  this  objedt  in  view,  he  defpatched  me
together  with  a favage  named  Meffamoiiet,  who  afferted  that
he  knew  the  place  well.  I fet  out  in  a fmall  barque  of  five
or  fix  tons,  with  nine  failors.  Some  eight  leagues  from  the
ifland,  towards  the  river  St.  John,  we  found  a mine  of  copper
which  was  not  pure,  yet  good  according  to  the  report  of  the
miner,  who  faid  that  it  would  yield  eighteen  per  cent.  Farther
on  we  found  others  inferior  to  this.  When  we  reached  the
place  where  we  fuppofed  that  was  which  we  were  hunting
for,  the  favage  could  not  find  it,  fo  that  it  was  neceffary  to
come  back,  leaving  the  fearch  for  another  time.

Upon  my  return  from  this  trip,  Sieur  de  Monts  re-
folved  to  fend  his  veffels  back  to  France,  and  alfo  Sieur
de  Poutrincourt,  who  had  come  only  for  his  pleafure,  and  to
explore  countries  and  places  fuitable  for  a colony,  which  he
defired  to  found ; for  which  reafon  he  aflced  Sieur  de  Monts
for  Port  Royal,  which  he  gave  him  in  accordance  with  the
power  and  directions  he  had  received  from  the  king.*^  He
fent  back  alfo  Ralleau,  his  fecretary,  to  arrange  fome  matters
concerning  the  voyage.  They  fet  out  from  the  Ifland  of

St.  Croix  the  lafl  day  of  Auguft,  1604.

^ CHAPTER  V.

De  Monts’s  charter  provided  for  difcrepancy  in  the  orthography  of  this
the  diftribution  of  lands  to  colonifts.  name.  Lefcarbot,  De  Laet,  and  Char-
This  gift  to  De  Poutrincourt  was  con-  levoix  write  Poutrincourt.  In  his  Latin
firmed  afterwards  by  the  king.  We  epitaph,  vide  Murdoch's^  Nova  Scolia,
may  here  remark  that  there  is  the  ufual  Vol,  I.  p.  59,  it  is  Potrincurbus,  w 1 e

38

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  V.

Of  the  Coast,  Inhabitants,  and  River  of  Norumbegde,  and  of  all

THAT  OCCURRED  DURING  THE  EXPLORATION  OF  THE  LATTER.

FTER  the  departure  of  the  veffels,  Sieur  de
Monts,  without  lofing  time,  decided  to  fend
perfons  to  make  difcoveries  along  the  coaft  of
Norumbegue;  and  he  intruded  me  with  this
work,  which  I found  very  agreeable.

In  order  to  execute  this  commiffion,  I fet  out  from  St.
Croix  on  the  2d  of  September  with  a patache  of  feventeen  or
eighteen  tons,  twelve  failors,  and  two  favages,  to  ferve  us  as
guides  to  the  places  with  which  they  were  acquainted.  The
fame  day  we  found  the  veffels  where  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt
was,  which  were  anchored  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  St.
Croix  in  confequence  of  bad  weather,  which  place  we  could
not  leave  before  the  5th  of  the  month.  Having  gone  two  or
three  leagues  feaward,  fo  denfe  a fog  arofe  that  we  at  once
loll;  light  of  their  veffels.  Continuing  our  courfe  along  the
coaft,  we  made  the  fame  day  fome  twenty-five  leagues,  and
paffed  by  a large  number  of  illands,  banks,  reefs,  and  rocks,
which  in  places  extend  more  than  four  leagues  out  to  fea.
We  called  the  illands  the  Ranges,  moft  of  which  are  covered

with

Champlain  has  Poitrincourt.  In  Pou-
trincourt’s  letter  to  the  Roman  Pontiff,
Paul  V.,  written  in  Latin,  he  fays,  Ego
Johannes  de  Biencour,  vulgb  De  Pov-
trincovr  a vita  reltgiofiis  a?nator  et

attejlor  perpetuus^  etc.  This  muft  be
conclufive  for  Poutrincourt  as  the  proper
orthography.  — Vide  His.  Nov,  Fra.,
par  Lefcarbot,  Paris,  1612,  p.  612.

39

Sieur  de  Champlain.

with  pines,  firs,  and  other  trees  of  an  inferior  fort.  Among
thefe  iflands  are  many  fine  harbors,  but  undefirable  for  a
permanent  fettlement.  The  fame  day  we  paffed  alfo  near
to  an  ifland  about  four  or  five  leagues  long,  in  the  neigh-
borhood of  which  we  juft  efcaped  being  loft  on  a little
rock  on  a level  with  the  water,  which  made  an  opening  in
our  barque  near  the  keel.  From  this  ifland  to  the  main  land
on  the  north,  the  diftance  is  lefs  than  a hundred  paces.  It
is  very  high,  and  notched  in  places,  fo  that  there  is  the  ap-
pearance to  one  at  fea,  as  of  feven  or  eight  mountains  ex-
tending along  near  each  other.  The  fummit  of  the  moft  of
them  is  deftitute  of  trees,  as  there  are  only  rocks  on  them.
The  woods  confift  of  pines,  firs,  and  birches  only.  I named
it  Ifle  des  Monts  Deferts.**  The  latitude  is  44°  30'.

The  next  day,  the  6th  of  the  month,  we  failed  two  leagues,
and  perceived  a fmoke  in  a cove  at  the  foot  of  the  moun-
tains above  mentioned.  We  faw  two  canoes  rowed  by  fav-
ages,  which  came  within  mufket  range  to  obferve  us.  I fent
our  two  favages  in  a boat  to  affure  them  of  our  friendthip.
Their  fear  of  us  made  them  turn  back.  On  the  morning  of
the  next  day,  they  came  alongfide  of  our  barque  and  talked
with  our  favages.  I ordered  fome  bifcuit,  tobacco,  and  other
trifles  to  be  given  them.  Thefe  favages  had  come  beaver-
hunting

The  natives  called  this  ifland  Mount  Manfell.  But  the  name  given
Pemetiq.  IJle  que  les  Sauuages  appel-  to  it  by  Champlain  has  prevailed,  and
lent  Pemetiq. — Vide  Relation  de  la  fl;ill  adheres  to  it.

Nouvelle-France^  par  P.  Biard,  i6i6,  The  defcription  here  given  of  the
Relations  des  J^fuites,  Quebec  ed.  1858,  barrennefs  of  the  ifland  clearly  fuggefts
p.  44.  When  the  attempt  was  made  in  the  origin  of  the  name.  Defert  fliould
1613  to  plant  a colony  there  by  the  therefore  be  pronounced  with  the  ac-
Marchionefs  de  Guercheville,  the  fettle-  cent  on  the  firfl:  fyllable.  The  latitude
ment  was  named  St.  Sauveur.  This  of  the  mofl:  northern  limit  of  the  ifland
ifland  was  alfo  by  the  Englifli  called  is  44°  24'.

40

Voyages  of

hunting  and  to  catch  filh,  fome  of  which  they  gave  us.
Having  made  an  alliance  with  them,  they  guided  us  to  their
river  of  Pentegoiiet,®®  fo  called  by  them,  where  they  told  us
was  their  captain,  named  Beffabez,  chief  of  this  river.  I
think  this  river  is  that  which  feveral  pilots  and  hiftorians  call
Norumbegue,**  and  which  moft  have  defcribed  as  large  and
extenfive,  with  very  many  iflands,  its  mouth  being  in  latitude
43°,  43°  30',  according  to  others  in  44°,  more  or  lefs.  With
regard  to  the  defledfion,  I have  neither  read,  nor  heard  any
one  fay  any  thing.  It  is  related  alfo  that  there  is  a large.

Penobfcot.  The  name  of  this  river
has  been  varioufly  written  Pentagoet,
Pentagwet,  Pemptegoet,  Pentagovett,
Penobfkeag,  Penaubfket,  and  in  various
other  ways.  The  Englifh  began  early
to  write  it  Penobfcot.  It  is  a word  of
Indian  origin,  and  different  meanings
have  been  affigned  to  it  by  thofe  who
have  undertaken  to  interpret  the  lan-
guage from  which  it  is  derived.

The  Abbd  Laverdi^re  is  of  the
opinion  that  the  river  Norumbegue  was
identical  with  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  His
only  authority  is  Jean  Alfonfe,  the  chief
pilot  of  Roberval  in  1541-42.  Alfonfe
fays  : “ Beyond  the  cape  of  Noroveregue
defcends  the  river  of  the  faid  Norove-
regue, which  is  about  twenty-five  leagues
from  the  cape.  The  faid  river  is  more
than  forty  leagues  broad  at  its  mouth,
and  extends  this  width  inward  well
thirty  or  forty  leagues,  and  is  all  full  of
iflands  which  enter  ten  or  twelve  leagues
into  the  fea,  and  it  is  very  dangerous
with  rocks  and  reefs.”  If  the  cape  of
Norumbegue  is  the  prefent  Cape  Sable,
as  it  is  fuppofed  to  be,  by  coafting  along
the  fliores  of  Nova  Scotia  from  that
cape  in  a north-wefterly  diredlion  a little
more  than  twenty  leagues,  we  fliall
reach  St.  Mary’s  Bay,  which  may  be
regarded  as  the  beginning  of  the  Bay

thickly

of  Fundy,  and  from  that  point  in  a
ftraight  line  to  the  mouth  of  the  Penob-
fcot the  diftance  is  more  than  forty
leagues,  which  was  the  breadth  of  the
Norumbegue  at  its  mouth,  according  to
the  ftatement  of  Alfonfe.  The  Abb^
Laverdi^re  is  not  quite  corred  in  faying
that  the  river  Norumbegue  is  the  fame
as  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  It  includes,  ac-
cording to  Alfonfe,  who  is  not  altogether
confiftent  with  himfelf,  not  only  the  Bay
of  Fundy,  but  likewife  the  Penobfcot
River  and  the  bay  of  the  fame  name,
with  its  numerous  iflands.  Alfonfe  left
a drawing  or  map  of  this  region  in  his
Cofmography,  which  Laverdi^re  had  not
probably  feen,  on  which  the  Bay  of
Fundy  and  the  Penobfcot  are  corredlly
laid  down,  and  the  latter  is  defignated
the  “Riviere  de  Norvebergue.”  It  is
therefore  obvious,  if  this  map  can  be
relied  upon,  that  the  river  of  Norum-
begue was  identical,  not  with  the  Bay
of  Fundy,  but  with  the  Penobfcot,  in
the  opinion  of  Alfonfe,  in  common  with
the  “plufieurs  pilottes  et  hiftoriens”
referred  to  by  Champlain.  — Vide  copy
of  the  Chart  from  the  MS.  Cofmogra-
phy of  fean  Alfonfe  in  Bibliotheque
Nationale,  Paris,  in  Mr.  Murphy’s  Voy-
age of  Verrazzano,  New  York,  1875.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  41

thickly  fettled  town  of  favages,  who  are  adroit  and  fkilful,
and  who  have  cotton  yarn.  I am  confident  that  moft  of
thofe  who  mention  it  have  not  feen  it,  and  fpeak  of  it
becaufe  they  have  heard  perfons  fay  fo,  who  knew  no  more
about  it  than  they  themfelves.  I am  ready  to  believe  that
fome  may  have  feen  the  mouth  of  it,  becaufe  there  are  in
reality  many  iflands,  and  it  is,  as  they  fay,  in  latitude  44
its  entrance.  But  that  any  one  has  ever  entered  it  there  is
no  evidence,  for  then  they  would  have  defcribed  it  in  another
manner,  in  order  to  relieve  the  minds  of  many  of  this  doubt.

I will  accordingly  relate  truly  what  I explored  and  faw,
from  the  beginning  as  far  as  I went.

In  the  firfl  place,  there  are  at  its  entrance  feveral  iflands
diftant  ten  or  twelve  leagues  from  the  main  land,  which  are
in  latitude  44°,  and  18“  40'  of  the  defledion  of  the  magnetic
needle.  The  Ifle  des  Monts  Deferts  forms  one  of  the
extremities  of  the  mouth,  on  the  eaft ; the  other  is  low
land,  called  by  the  favages  Bedabedec,®*  to  the  weft  of  the
former,  the  two  being  diftant  from  each  other  nine  or  ten
leagues.  Almoft  midway  between  thefe,  out  in  the  ocean,
there  is  another  ifland  very  high  and  confpicuous,  which  on
this  account  I have  named  Ifle  Haute.^  All  around  there
is  a vaft  number  of  varying  extent  and  breadth,  but  the

largeft

An  indefinite  region  about  Rock-  Ifle  Haute,  high  ijland.^  which  name

land  and  Camden,  on  the  weftern  bank  it  flill  retains.  Champlain  wrote  it  on
of  the  Penobfcot  near  its  mouth,  ap-  his  map,  1632,  “ Ifle  Haulte.
pears  to  have  been  the  domain  of  the  been  anglicized  by  fome  into  Ifle  Holt.
Indian  chief,  Beflabez,  and  was  denomi-  It  is  nearly  fix  miles  long,  and  has
nated  Bedabedec.  The  Camden  Hills  average  width  of  over  two  miles,  and  is
were  called  the  mountains  of  Bedabe-  the  highest  land  in  its  vicinity,  re^^hing
dec,  and  Owl’s  Head  was  called  Beda-  at  its  higheft  point  four  hundred  feet
bedec  Point.  above  the  level  of  the  fea.

6

42

Voyages  of

largeft  is  that  of  the  Monts  Deferts.  Fifliing  as  alfo  hunting
are  very  good  here;  the  fifli  are  of  various  kinds.  Some
two  or  three  leagues  from  the  point  of  Bedabedec,  as  you
coaft  northward  along  the  main  land  which  extends  up  this
river,  there  are  very  high  elevations  of  land,  which  in  fair
weather  are  feen  twelve  or  fifteen  leagues  out  at  fea.®^  Faff-
ing to  the  fouth  of  the  Ifle  Haute,  and  coafting  along  the  fame
for  a quarter  of  a league,  where  there  are  fome  reefs  out  of
water,  and  heading  to  the  weft  until  you  open  all  the  moun-
tains northward  of  this  ifland,  you  can  be  fure  that,  by  keep-
ing in  fight  the  eight  or  nine  peaks  of  the  Monts  Deferts  and
Bedabedec,  you  will  crofs  the  river  Norumbegue;  and  in
order  to  enter  it  you  muft  keep  to  the  north,  that  is,  towards
the  higheft  mountains  of  Bedabedec,  where  you  will  fee  no
iflands  before  you,  and  can  enter,  fure  of  having  water  enough,
although  you  fee  a great  many  breakers,  iflands,  and  rocks
to  the  eaft  and  weft  of  you.  For  greater  fecurity,  one  fhould
keep  the  founding  lead  in  hand.  And  my  obfervations  lead
me  to  conclude  that  one  cannot  enter  this  river  in  any  other
place  except  in  fmall  veflels  or  fliallops.  For,  as  I ftated
above,  there  are  numerous  iflands,  rocks,  fhoals,  banks,  and
breakers  on  all  fides,  fo  that  it  is  marvellous  to  behold.

Now  to  refume  our  courfe : as  one  enters  the  river,  there
are  beautiful  iflands,  which  are  very  pleafant  and  contain

fine

Camden  Hills  or  Mountains.  They
are  five  or  fix  in  number,  from  900  to
1,500  feet  high,  and  may  be  feen,  it  is
faid,  twenty  leagues  at  fea.  The  more
prominent  are  Mt.  Batty,  Mt.  Pleafant,
and  Mt.  Hofmer,  or  Ragged  Mountain.
They  are  fometimes  called  the  Megunti-
cook  Range.  Colonel  Benjamin  Church

denominates  them  “ Mathebeftuck’s
Hills.’’  — Vide  Churches  Hijtory  of  King
Philip'^s  War^  Newport,  1772,  p.  143.
Captain  John  Smith  calls  them  the
mountains  of  Penobfcot,  “againfl:  whofe
feet  doth  beat  the  fea,”  which,  he  adds,
‘‘you  may  well  fee  fixteen  or  eighteen
leagues  from  their  fituation.”

43

Sieur  de  Champlain.

fine  meadows.  We  proceeded  to  a place  to  which  the  fav-
ages  guided  us,  where  the  river  is  not  more  than  an  eighth
of  a league  broad,  and  at  a diftance  of  fome  two  hundred
paces  from  the  weflern  fliore  there  is  a rock  on  a level  with
the  water,  of  a dangerous  chara6ter.®*  From  here  to  the  Ifle
Haute,  it  is  fifteen  leagues.  From  this  narrow  place,  where
there  is  the  leafi;  breadth  that  we  had  found,  after  failing
fome  feven  or  eight  leagues,  we  came  to  a little  river  near
which  it  was  neceffary  to  anchor,  as  we  faw  before  us  a great
many  rocks  which  are  uncovered  at  low  tide,  and  fince  alfo,
if  we  had  defired  to  fail  farther,  we  could  have  gone  fcarcely
half  a league,  in  confequence  of  a fall  of  water  there  coming
down  a dope  of  feven  or  eight  feet,  which  I faw  as  I went
there  in  a canoe  with  our  favages ; and  we  found  only  water
enough  for  a canoe.  But  excepting  the  fall,  which  is  fome
two  hundred  paces  broad,  the  river  is  beautiful,  and  unob-
ftrudled  up  to  the  place  where  we  had  anchored.  I landed
to  view  the  country,  and,  going  on  a hunting  excurfion,  found
it  very  pleafant  fo  far  as  I went.  The  oaks  here  appear  as
if  they  were  planted  for  ornament.  I faw  only  a few  firs,  but
numerous  pines  on  one  fide  of  the  river;  on  the  other  only  oaks,
and  fome  copfe  wood  which  extends  far  into  the  interior.®®

And

This  narrow  place  in  the  river  is  Col.  Me.  His.  Soc.,  Vol.  V.  p.  385.
juft  above  Caftine,  where  Cape  Jellifon  The  “ rock  ” alluded  to  by  Champlain
ftretches  out  towards  the  eaft,  at  the  is  Fort  Point  Ledge,  bare  at  half  tide,
head  of  the  bay,  and  at  the  mouth  of  fouth-eaft  by  eaft  from  the  Point,  and
the  river.  At  the  extremity  of  the  cape  diftant  over  half  a mile.  Champlain’s
is  Fort  Point,  fo  called  from  Fort  Pow-  diftances  here  are  fomewhat  overefti-
nall,ere6led  there  in  1759,  ^ fteep  rocky  mated.

elevation  of  about  eighty  feet  in  height.  The  terminus  of  this  exploration

Before  the  ere6lion  of  the  fort  by  Gov-  of  the  Penobfcot  was  near  the  prefent
ernor  Pownall,  it  was  called  Wafaum-  fite  of  the  city  of  Bangor.  The  fmall
keag  Point. — Vide  PownalVs  Journal^  river  near  the  mouth  of  which  they  an-
chored

44

Voyages  of

And  I will  ftate  that  from  the  entrance  to  where  we  went,
about  twenty-five  leagues,  we  faw  no  town,  nor  village,  nor
the  appearance  of  there  having  been  one,  but  one  or  two
cabins  of  the  favages  without  inhabitants.  Thefe  were  made
in  the  fame  way  as  thofe  of  the  Souriquois,  being  covered
with  the  bark  of  trees.  So  far  as  we  could  judge,  the  favages
on  this  river  are  few  in  number,  and  are  called  Eteche-
mins.  Moreover,  they  only  come  to  the  iflands,  and  that
only  during  fome  months  in  fummer  for  fifh  and  game,  of
which  there  is  a great  quantity.  They  are  a people  who
have  no  fixed  abode,  fo  far  as  I could  obferve  and  learn  from
them.  For  they  fpend  the  winter  now  in  one  place  and  now
in  another,  according  as  they  find  the  beft  hunting,  by  which
they  live  when  urged  by  their  daily  needs,  without  laying  up
any  thing  for  times  of  fcarcity,  which  are  fometimes  fevere.

Now  this  river  muft  of  necelfity  be  the  Norumbegue;  for,
having  coafted  along  paft  it  as  far  as  the  41°  of  latitude,  we
have  found  no  other  on  the  parallel  above  mentioned,  except
that  of  the  Quinibequy,  which  is  alrnofl  in  the  fame  latitude,
but  not  of  great  extent.  Moreover,  there  cannot  be  in  any
other  place  a river  extending  far  into  the  interior  of  the
country,  fince  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence  wafhes  the  coaft
of  La  Cadie  and  Norumbegue,  and  the  diftance  from  one  to
the  other  by  land  is  not  more  than  forty-five  leagues,  or  fixty
at  the  wideft  point,  as  can  be  feen  on  my  geographical  map.

Now  I will  drop  this  difcuffion  to  return  to  the  favages  who

chored  was  the  Kendufkeag.  The  falls
which  Champlain  vifited  with  the  In-
dians in  a canoe  are  thofe  a Ihort  dif-
tance above  the  city.  The  fentence,
a few  lines  back,  beginning  “But  ex-

had

cepting  this  fall”  is  complicated,  and
not  quite  logical,  but  the  author  evi-
dently means  to  defcribe  the  river  from
its  mouth  to  the  place  of  their  anchor-
age at  Bangor.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  45

had  condudled  me  to  the  falls  of  the  river  Norumbegue,
who  went  to  notify  Beffabez,  their  chief,  and  other  favages,
who  in  turn  proceeded  to  another  little  river  to  inform  their
own,  named  Cabahis,  and  give  him  notice  of  our  arrival.

The  1 6th  of  the  month  there  came  to  us  fome  thirty  fav-
ages on  alTurances  given  them  by  thofe  who  had  ferved  us
as  guides.  There  came  alfo  to  us  the  fame  day  the  above-
named  Beffabez  with  fix  canoes.  As  foon  as  the  favages
who  were  on  land  faw  him  coming,  they  all  began  to  fmg,
dance,  and  jump,  until  he  had  landed.  Afterwards,  they  all
feated  themfelves  in  a circle  on  the  ground,  as  is  their  cuf-
tom,  when  they  wifli  to  celebrate  a feftivity,  or  an  harangue
is  to  be  made.  Cabahis,  the  other  chief,  arrived  alfo  a little
later  with  twenty  or  thirty' of  his  companions,  who  withdrew
one  fide  and  enjoyed  greatly  feeing  us,  as  it  was  the  firft  time
they  had  feen  Chriftians.  A little  while  after,  I went  on
fliore  with  two  of  my  companions  and  two  of  our  favages  who
ferved  as  interpreters.  I diredled  the  men  in  our  barque  to
approach  near  the  favages,  and  hold  their  arms  in  readinefs
to  do  their  duty  in  cafe  they  noticed  any  movement  of  thefe
people  againfl  us.  Beffabez,  feeing  us  on  land,  bade  us  fit
down,  and  began  to  fmoke  with  his  companions,  as  they
ufually  do  before  an  addrefs.  They  prefented  us  with  veni-
fon  and  game.

I diredted  our  interpreter  to  fay  to  our  favages  that  they
fhould  caufe  Beffabez,  Cabahis,  and  their  companions  to
underftand  that  Sieur  de  Monts  had  fent  me  to  them  to  fee
them,  and  alfo  their  country,  and  that  he  defired  to  preferve
friendftiip  with  them  and  to  reconcile  them  with  their  ene-
mies, the  Souriquois  and  Canadians,  and  moreover  that  he

defired

46  Voyages  of

defired  to  inhabit  their  country  and  fliow  them  how  to  culti-
vate it,  in  order  that  they  might  not  continue  to  lead  fo
miferable  a life  as  they  were  doing,  and  fome  other  words  on
the  fame  fubje(5l.  This  our  favages  interpreted  to  them,  at
which  they  fignified  their  great  fatisfadlion,  faying  that  no
greater  good  could  come  to  them  than  to  have  our  friend-
fhip,  and  that  they  defired  to  live  in  peace  with  their  enemies,
and  that  we  fliould  dwell  in  their  land,  in  order  that  they
might  in  future  more  than  ever  before  engage  in  hunting
beavers,  and  give  us  a part  of  them  in  return  for  our  pro-
viding them  with  things  which  they  wanted.  After  he  had
finiflied  his  difcourfe,  I prefented  them  with  hatchets,  pater-
nofters,  caps,  knives,  and  other  little  knick-knacks,  when  we
feparated  from  each  other.  All  the  reft  of  this  day  and  the
following  night,  until  break  of  day,  they  did  nothing  but
dance,  fing,  and  make  merry,  after  which  we  traded  for  a
certain  number  of  beavers.  Then  each  party  returned,
Beffabez  with  his  companions  on  the  one  fide,  and  we  on
the  other,  highly  pleafed  at  having  made  the  acquaintance
of  this  people.

The  1 7th  of  the  month  I took  the  altitude,^®®  and  found
the  latitude  45°  25'.  This  done,  we  fet  out  for  another
river  called  Quinibequy,  diftant  from  this  place  thirty-five

leagues,

100  interview  with  the  Indians  on  the  place  where  they  then  were,  and
the  i6th,  and  the  taking  of  the  altitude  nearly  twenty  leagues  diftant  from  Be-
on  the  17th,  muft  have  occurred  before  dabedec.  Confequently,  they  were  fif-
the  party  left  their  anchorage  at  Bangor  teen  leagues  above  Bedabedec,  which
with  the  purpofe,  but  which  they  did  was  fituated  near  the  mouth  of  the
^t  ac^mplifti  that  year,  of  vifiting  the  river.  The  latitude,  which  they  ob-
Kennebec.  Tbis  may  be  inferred  from  tained  from  their  observations,  was  far
Champlain  s ftatement  that  the  Kenne-  from  corre6l : it  fliould  be  44°  46'.
bee  was  thirty-five  leagues  diftant  from

47

Sieur  de  Champlain.

leagues,  and  nearly  twenty  from  Bedabedec.  This  nation  of
ravages  of  Quinibequy  are  called  Etechemins,  as  well  as
thofe  of  Norumbegue.

The  1 8th  of  the  month  we  paffed  near  a fmall  river  where
Cabahis  was,  who  came  with  us  in  our  barque  fome  twelve
leagues;  and  having  afked  him  whence  came  the  river  No-
rumbegue, he  told  me  that  it  paffes  the  fall  which  I mentioned
above,  and  that  one  journeying  fome  diftance  on  it  enters
a lake  by  way  of  which  they  come  to  the  river  of  St.  Croix,
by  going  fome  diftance  over  land,  and  then  entering  the  river
of  the  Etechemins.  Moreover,  another  river  enters  the  lake,
along  which  they  proceed  fome  days,  and  afterwards  enter
another  lake  and  pafs  through  the  midft  of  it.  Reaching  the
end  of  it,  they  make  again  a land  journey  of  fome  diftance,
and  then  enter  another  little  river,  which  has  its  mouth  a
league  from  Quebec,  which  is  on  the  great  river  St.  Law-
rence.“*  All  thefe  people  of  Norumbegue  are  very  fwarthy,

dreffed

The  Indian  chief  Cabahis  here
points  out  two  trails,  the  one  leading
to  the  French  habitation  juft  eftablifhed
on  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix,  the  other  to
Quebec ; by  the  former,  pafling  up  the
Penobfcot  from  the  prefent  fite  of  Ban-
gor, entering  the  Matawamkeag,  keep-
ing to  the  eaft  in  their  light  bark  canoes
to  Lake  Bofcanhegan,  and  from  there
pafling  by  land  to  the  ftream  then  known
as  the  river  of  the  Etechemins,  now
called  the  Scoudic  or  St.  Crojx.  The
expreflion  “by  which  they  come  to  the
river  of  St.  Croix  ” is  explanatory  : it
has  no  reference  to  the  name  of  the
river,  but  means  Amply  that  the  trail
leads  to  the  river  in  which  was  the
ifland  of  St.  Croix.  This  river  had  not
then  been  named  St.  Croix,  but  had

been  called  by  them  the  river  of  the
Etechemins.  — Vide  antea.,  p.  31.

The  other  trail  led  up  the  north
branch  of  the  Penobfcot,  pafling  through
Lake  Pemadumcook,  and  then  on
through  Lake  Chefuncook,  Anally  reach-
ing the  fource  of  this  ftream  which  is
near  that  of  the  Chaudi^re,  which  latter
flows  into  the  St.  Lawrence,  near  Que-
bec. It  would  feem  from  the  text  that
Champlain  fuppofed  that  the  Penobfcot
flowed  from  a lake  into  which  ftreams
flowed  from  both  the  obje6live  points,
viz.  St.  Croix  and  Quebec  ; but  this  was
a miftake  not  at  all  unnatural,  as  he  had
never  been  over  the  ground,  and  ob-
tained his  information  from  the  Indians,
whofe  language  he  imperfe6lly  under-
ftood.

48  Voyages  of

dreffed  in  beaver-fkins  and  other  furs,  like  the  Canadian  and
Souriquois  favages,  and  they  have  the  fame  mode  of  life.

The  20th  of  the  month  we  failed  along  the  weftern  coaft,
and  paffed  the  mountains  of  Bedabedec,“^  when  we  anchored.
The  fame  day  we  explored  the  entrance  to  the  river,  where
large  veffels  can  approach ; but  there  are  infide  fome  reefs,  to
avoid  which  one  muft  advance  with  founding  lead  in  hand.
Our  favages  left  us,  as  they  did  not  wifli  to  go  to  Quini-
bequy,  for  the  favages  of  that  place  are  great  enemies  to
them.  We  failed  fome  eight  leagues  along  the  weftern  coaft
to  an  ifland'®®  ten  leagues  diftant  from  Quinibequy,  where
we  were  obliged  to  put  in  on  account  of  bad  weather  and
contrary  wind.  At  one  point  in  our  courfe,  we  paffed  a large
number  of  iflands  and  breakers  extending  fome  leagues  out
to  fea,  and  very  dangerous.  And  in  view  of  the  bad  weather,
which  was  fo  unfavorable  to  us,  we  did  not  fail  more  than
three  or  four  leagues  farther.  All  thefe  iflands  and  coafts
are  covered  with  extenfive  woods,  of  the  fame  fort  as  that
which  I have  reported  above  as  exifting  on  the  other  coafts.
And  in  confideration  of  the  fmall  quantity  of  provifions  which
we  had,  we  refolved  to  return  to  our  fettlement  and  wait
until  the  following  year,  when  we  hoped  to  return  and  ex-
plore more  extenfively.  We  accordingly  fet  out  on  our
return  on  the  23d  of  September,  and  arrived  at  our  fettle-
ment on  the  2d  of  Odtober  following.

1 he  above  is  an  exadl  ftatement  of  all  that  I have  ob-

ferved

102  Bedabedec  is  an  Indian  word,  fig-  ws  Mofquito  and  Metinic  Iflands  are
nitying  Mpe  of  the  waters,  and  was  each  about  ten  leagues  call  of  the  Ken-
plamly  the  point  known  as  Owl’s  Head,  nebec.  As  the  party  went  but  four
t gave  name  to  the  Camden  Mountains  leagues  further,  the  voyage  muft  have
alio.  Vide  antea,  note  95.  terminated  in  Mufcongus  Bay.

49

Sieur  de  Champlain.

ferved  refpedling  not  only  the  coafts  and  people,  but  alfo  the
river  of  Norumbegue ; and  there  are  none  of  the  marvels
there  which  fome  perfons  have  defcribed.^®*  I am  of  opinion
that  this  region  is  as  difagreeable  in  winter  as  that  of  our
fettlement,  in  which  we  were  greatly  deceived.

CHAPTER  VI.

Of  the  Mal  de  la  Terre,  a very  Desperate  Malady. — How  the  Sav-
AGES,  Men  and  Women,  spend  their  Time  in  Winter.  — And  all

THAT  OCCURRED  AT  THE  SETTLEMENT  WHILE  WE  WERE  PASSING  THE

Winter.

HEN  we  arrived  at  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix,  each
one  had  finifhed  his  place  of  abode.  Winter
came  upon  us  fooner  than  we  expedted,  and
prevented  us  from  doing  many  things  which  we
had  propofed.  Neverthelefs,  Sieur  de  Monts  did
not  fail  to  have  fome  gardens  made  on  the  ifland.  Many

began

An  idle  llory  had  been  circulated,
and  even  found  a place  on  the  pages  of
fober  hiftory,  that  on  the  Penobfcot,  or
Norumbegue,  as  it  was  then  called,  there
exifted  a tair  town,  a populous  city,  with
the  accelTories  of  luxury  and  wealth.
Champlain  here  takes  pains  to  fhow,  in
the  fulleft  manner,  that  this  ftory  was  a
bafelefs  dream  of  fancy,  and  utterly
without  foundation.  Of  it  Lefcarbot
naively  fays,  “If  this  beautiful  town  hath
ever  exifted  in  nature,  I would  fain
know  who  hath  pulled  it  down,  for  there
are  now  only  a few  fcattered  wigwams
made  of  poles  covered  with  the  bark
of  trees  and  the  (kins  of  wild  beafts.^^
There  is  no  evidence,  and  no  proba-
bility, that  this  river  had  been  navi-

gated by  Europeans  anterior  to  this  ex-
ploration of  Champlain.  The  exiftence
of  the  bay  and  the  river  had  been  noted
long  before.  They  are  indicated  on  the
map  of  Ribero  in  1529.  Rio  de  Gamas
and  Rio  Grande  appear  on  early  maps
as  names  of  this  river,  but  are  foon  dif-
placed  for  Norumbega,  a name  which
was  fometimes  extended  to  a wide  range
of  territory  on  both  fides  of  the  Penob-
fcot. On  the  Mappe- Monde  of  1 543-47,
iffued  by  the  late  M.  Jomard,  it  is  de-
nominated Auorobagra,  evidently  in-
tended for  Norumbega.  Thevet,  who
vifited  it,  or  failed  along  its  mouth  in
1556,  fpeaks  of  it  as  Norumbegue.  It
is  alleged  that  the  aborigines  called  it
Agguncia.  According  to  Jean  Alfonfe,

50

Voyages  of

began  to  clear  up  the  ground,  each  his  own.  I alfo  did  fo
with  mine,  which  was  very  large,  where  I planted  a quantity
of  feeds,  as  alfo  did  the  others  who  had  any,  and  they  came
up  very  well.  But  fince  the  ifland  was  all  fandy,  every  thing
dried  up  almoft  as  foon  as  the  fun  flione  upon  it,  and  we  had
no  water  for  irrigation  except  from  the  rain,  which  was  in-
frequent.

Sieur  de  Monts  caufed  alfo  clearings  to  be  made  on  the
main  land  for  making  gardens,  and  at  the  falls  three  leagues
from  our  fettlement  he  had  work  done  and  fome  wheat  fown,
which  came  up  very  well  and  ripened.  Around  our  habita-
tion there  is,  at  low  tide,  a large  number  of  fhell-fifh,  fuch  as
cockles,  mufcles,  fea-urchins,  and  fea-fnails,  which  were  very
acceptable  to  all.

The  fnows  began  on  the  6th  of  Odober.  On  the  3d  of
December,  we  faw  ice  pafs  which  came  from  fome  frozen
river.  The  cold  was  fharp,  more  fevere  than  in  France,  and
of  much  longer  duration;  and  it  fcarcely  rained  at  all  the
entire  winter.  I fuppofe  that  is  owing  to  the  north  and
north-weft:  winds  paffing  over  high  mountains  always  covered
with  fnow.  The  latter  was  from  three  to  four  feet  deep  up
to  the  end  of  the  month  of  April ; lafting  much  longer,  I fup-
pole,  than  it  would  if  the  country  were  cultivated.

During  the  winter,  many  of  our  company  were  attacked  by
a certain  malady  called  the  mal  de  la  terre ; otherwife  fcurvy,
as  I have  fince  heard  from  learned  men.  There  were  pro-
duced, in  the  mouths  of  thofe  who  had  it,  great  pieces  of  fuper-

it  was  difcovered  by  the  Portuguefe  and
Spaniards.  His.  de  la  N.  France,

par  M.  Lefcarbot,  Paris,  1612,  Qvat.
Piv.  p.  495.  The  orthography  of  this

fluous

name  is  various  among  early  writers,  but
Norumbegue  is  adopted  by  the  moft
approved  modern  authors.

51

Sieur  de  Champlain.

fluous  and  drivelling  flefh  (caufing  extenfive  putrefadlion),
which  got  the  upperhand  to  fuch  an  extent  that  fcarcely  any
thing  but  liquid  could  be  taken.  Their  teeth  became  very
loo.'e,  and  could  be  pulled  out  with  the  fingers  without  its
caufing  them  pain.  The  fuperfluous  flefli  was  often  cut  out,
which  caufed  them  to  ejeft  much  blood  through  the  mouth.
Afterwards,  a violent  pain  feized  their  arms  and  legs,  which
remained  fwollen  and  very  hard,  all  fpotted  as  if  with  flea-
bites  ; and  they  could  not  walk  on  account  of  the  contradion
of  the  mufcles,  fo  that  they  were  almoft  without  ftrength,  and
fuffered  intolerable  pains.  They  experienced  pain  alfo  in
the  loins,  ftomach,  and  bowels,  had  a very  bad  cough,  and
fhort  breath.  In  a word,  they  were  in  fuch  a condition  that
the  majority  of  them  could  not  rife  nor  move,  and  could  not
even  be  railed  up  on  their  feet  without  falling  down  in  a
fwoon.  So  that  out  of  feventy-nine,  who  compofed  our
party,  thirty-five  died,  and  more  than  twenty  were  on  the
point  of  death.  The  majority  of  thofe  who  remained  well
alfo  complained  of  flight  pains  and  fhort  breath.  We  were
unable  to  find  any  remedy  for  thefe  maladies.  A pojl  mortem
examination  of  feveral  was  made  to  inveftigate  the  caufe  of
their  difeafe.

In  the  cafe  of  many,  the  interior  parts  were  found  morti-
fied, fuch  as  the  lungs,  which  were  fo  changed  that  no  natural
fluid  could  be  perceived  in  them.  The  fpleen  was  ferous
and  fwollen.  The  liver  was  legueux?  and  fpotted,  without
its  natural  color.  The  vena  cava,  fuperior  and  inferior,  was
filled  with  thick  coagulated  and  black  blood.  The  gall  was
tainted.  Neverthelefs,  many  arteries,  in  the  middle  as  well
as  lower  bowels,  were  found  in  very  good  condition.  In

52

Voyages  of

the  cafe  of  fome,  incifions  with  a razor  were  made  on  the
thighs  where  they  had  purple  fpots,  whence  there  iffued  a
very  black  clotted  blood.  This  is  what  was  obferved  on  the
bodies  of  thofe  infedled  with  this  malady.^^®

Our  furgeons  could  not  help  fuffering  themfelves  in  the
fame  manner  as  the  reft.  Thofe  who  continued  fick  were
healed  by  fpring,  which  commences  in  this  country  in  May.^*^®
That  led  us  to  believe  that  the  change  of  feafon  reftored  their
health  rather  than  the  remedies  prefcribed.

During  this  winter,  all  our  liquors  froze,  except  the  Span-
ifh  wine.  Cider  was  difpenfed  by  the  pound.  The  caufe  of
this  lofs  was  that  there  were  no  cellars  to  our  florehoufe,  and
that  the  air  which  entered  by  the  cracks  was  fharper  than
that  outfide.  We  were  obliged  to  ufe  very  bad  water,  and
drink  melted  fnow,  as  there  were  no  fp rings  nor  brooks ; for
it  was  not  poffible  to  go  to  the  main  land  in  confequence  of
the  great  pieces  of  ice  drifted  by  the  tide,  which  varies  three
fathoms  between  low  and  high  water.  Work  on  the  hand-

^0®  Mai  de  la  terre.  Champlain  had
bitter  experiences  of  this  difeafe  in
Quebec  during  the  winter  of  1608-9,
when  he  was  Itill  ignorant  of  its  char-
a6ler ; and  it  was  not  till  feveral  years
later  that  he  learned  that  it  was  the  old
malady  called  fcurbut^  from  the  Scla-
vonic fcorb^  Latinized  into  fcorbuticus,
Lefcarbot  fpeaks  of  this  difeafe  as  little
underftood  in  his  time,  but  as  known  to
Hippocrates.  He  quotes  Olaus  Mag-
nus, who  defcribes  it  as  it  appeared
among  the  nations  of  the  north,  who
called  it  forbet^  from  KaKos,  bad,

and  ffiy,  a habit.  This  undoubtedly  ex-
prelTes  the  true  caufe  of  this  difeafe,
now  familiarly  known  as  the  fcurvy.
It  follows  expofure  to  damp,  cold,  and

mill

impure  atmofphere,  accompanied  by  the
long-continued  ufe  of  the  fame  kind  of
food,  particularly  of  fait  meats,  with  bad
water.  All  of  thefe  conditions  exifted
at  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix.  Champlain’s
defcription  of  the  difeafe  is  remarkably
accurate.

106  paflage  might  be  read,  which
is  in  this  country  in  May:”  lequel  com--
7nence  en  ces  pays  IcL  eji  en  May.  As
Layerdi^re  fuggefts,  it  looks  as  if  Cham-
plain wrote  it  firft  commencey  and  then,
thinking  that  the  winter  he  had  experi-
enced might  have  been  exceptional,  fub-
flituted  efly  omitting  to  erafe  co^nmencey
fo  that  the  fentence,  as  it  ftands,  is  faulty,
containing  two  verbs  inftead  of  one,  and
being  fufceptible  of  a double  fenfe.

53

Sieur  de  Champlain.

mill  was  very  fatiguing,  fmce  the  moft  of  us,  having  flept
poorly,  and  fuffering  from  infufficiency  of  fuel,  which  we
could  not  obtain  on  account  of  the  ice,  had  fcarcely  any
ftrength,  and  alfo  becaufe  we  ate  only  fait  meat  and  vegeta-
bles during  the  winter,  which  produce  bad  blood.  The  lat-
ter circumftance  was,  in  my  opinion,  a partial  caufe  of  thefe
dreadful  maladies.  All  this  produced  difcontent  in  Sieur  de
Monts  and  others  of  the  fettlement.

It  would  be  very  difficult  to  afcertain  the  character  of  this
region  without  fpending  a winter  in  it ; for,  on  arriving  here
in  fummer,  every  thing  is  very  agreeable,  in  confequence  of
the  woods,  fine  country,  and  the  many  varieties  of  good  fiffi
which  are  found  there.  There  are  fix  months  of  winter  in
this  country.

The  favages  who  dwell  here  are  few  in  number.  During
the  winter,  in  the  deepeft  fnows,  they  hunt  elks  and  other
animals,  on  which  they  live  moft  of  the  time.  And,  unlefs
the  fnow  is  deep,  they  fcarcely  get  rewarded  for  their  pains,
fince  they  cannot  capture  any  thing  except  by  a very  great
effort,  which  is  the  reafon  for  their  enduring  and  fuffering
much.  When  they  do  not  hunt,  they  live  on  a fhell-fifti,
called  the  cockle.  They  clothe  themfelves  in  winter  with
good  furs  of  beaver  and  elk.  The  women  make  all  the  gar-
ments, but  not  fo  exadlly  but  that  you  can  fee  the  flefti  under
the  arm-pits,  becaufe  they  have  not  ingenuity  enough  to  fit
them  better.  When  they  go  a hunting,  they  ufe  a kind  of
fnow-ffioe  twice  as  large  as  thofe  hereabouts,  which  they  attach
to  the  foies  of  their  feet,  and  walk  thus  over  the  fnow  with-
out finking  in,  the  women  and  children  as  well  as  the  men.
They  fearch  for  the  track  of  animals,  which,  having  found.

54

Voyages  of

they  follow  until  they  get  fight  of  the  creature,  when  they
fhoot  at  it  with  their  bows,  or  kill  it  by  means  of  daggers
attached  to  the  end  of  a fhort  pike,  which  is  very  eafily  done,
as  the  animals  cannot  walk  on  the  fnow  without  finking  in.
Then  the  women  and  children  come  up,  eredt  a hut,  and
they  give  themfelves  to  feafting.  Afterwards,  they  return
in  fearch  of  other  animals,  and  thus  they  pafs  the  winter.
In  the  month  of  March  following,  fome  favages  came  and
gave  us  a portion  of  their  game  in  exchange  for  bread
and  other  things  which  we  gave  them.  This  is  the  mode
of  life  in  winter  of  thefe  people,  which  feems  to  me  a very
miferable  one.

We  looked  for  our  veffels  at  the  end  of  April ; but,  as  this
paffed  without  their  arriving,  all  began  to  have  an  ill-boding,
fearing  that  fome  accident  had  befallen  them.  For  this  rea-
fon,  on  the  15th  of  May,  Sieur  de  Monts  decided  to  have  a
barque  of  fifteen  tons  and  another  of  feven  fitted  up,  fo  that  we
go  at  the  end  of  the  month  of  June  to  Gafpe  in  quell
of  veffels  in  which  to  return  to  France,  in  cafe  our  own  Ihould
not  meanwhile  arrive.  But  God  helped  us  better  than  we
hoped;  for,  on  the  15th  of  June  enfuing,  while  on  guard
about  II  o clock  at  night,  Pont  Grave,  captain  of  one  of  the
veffels  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  arriving  in  a fliallop,  informed  us
that  his  Ihip  was  anchored  fix  leagues  from  our  fettlement,
and  he  was  welcomed  amid  the  great  joy  of  all.

The  next  day  the  veffel  arrived,  and  anchored  near  our
habitation.  Pont  Grave  informed  us  that  a veffel  from  St.
Malo,  called  the  St.  Ellienne,  was  following  him,  bringing
us  provifions  and  fupplies.

On  the  17th  of  the  month,  Sieur  de  Monts  decided  to  go

in

55

Sieur  de  Champlain.

in  queft  of  a place  better  adapted  for  an  abode,  and  with  a
better  temperature  than  our  own.  With  this  view,  he  had
the  barque  made  ready,  in  which  he  had  purpofed  to  go  to
Gafpe.

CHAPTER  VII.

Discovery  of  the  Coast  of  the  Almouchiquois  as  far  as  the  Forty-
second  Degree  of  Latitude,  and  Details  of  this  Voyage.

N the  1 8th  of  June,  1605,  Sieur  de  Monts  fet
out  from  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix  with  fome
gentlemen,  twenty  failors,  and  a favage  named
Panounias,  together  with  his  wife,  whom  he  was
unwilling  to  leave  behind.  Thefe  we  took,  in
order  to  ferve  us  as  guides  to  the  country  of  the  Almouchi-
quois,  in  the  hope  of  exploring  and  learning  more  particu-
larly by  their  aid  what  the  charader  of  this  country  was,
efpecially  fince  fhe  was  a native  of  it.

Coafting  along  infide  of  Manan,  an  ifland  three  leagues
from  the  main  land,  we  came  to  the  Ranges  on  the  feaward
fide,  at  one  of  which  we  anchored,  where  there  was  a large
number  of  crows,  of  which  our  men  captured  a great  many,
and  we  called  it  the  Ifle  aux  Corneilles.  Thence  we  went  to
the  Ifland  of  Monts  Deferts,  at  the  entrance  of  the  river
Norumbegue,  as  I have  before  Hated,  and  failed  five  or  fix
leagues  among  many  iflands.  Here  there  came  to  us  three
favages  in  a canoe  from  Bedabedec  P oint,  where  their  captain
was;  and,  after  we  had  had  fome  converfation  with  them,
they  returned  the  fame  day.

On  Friday,  the  ill  of  July,  we  fet  out  from  one  of  the

iflands

5 6 Voyages  of

iflands  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where  there  is  a very  good
harbor  for  veffels  of  a hundred  or  a hundred  and  fifty  tons.
This  day  we  made  fome  twenty-five  leagues  between  Beda-
bedec  Point  and  many  iflands  and  rocks,  which  we  obferved
as  far  as  the  river  Quinibequy,  at  the  mouth  of  which  is  a very
hio-h  ifland,  which  we  called  the  Tortoife.^*"  Between  the
latter  and  the  main  land  there  are  fome  fcattering  rocks,
which  are  covered  at  full  tide,  although  the  fea  is  then  feen
to  break  over  them.^®*  Tortoife  Ifland  and  the  river  lie  fouth-
fouth-eaft  and  north-north-weft.  As  you  enter,  there  are  two
medium-fized  iflands  forming  the  entrance,  one  on  one  fide,
the  other  on  the  other ; and  fome  three  hundred  paces  far-
ther in  are  two  rocks,  where  there  is  no  w^ood,  but  fome  little
grafs.  We  anchored  three  hundred  paces  from  the  entrance

in

Champlain’s  Description  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Quinibequv.

The  Jigures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  The  courfe  of  the  river.  B.  Two  iflands  at  the  entrance  of  the  river.  C
Two  very  dangerous  rocks  in  the  river.  D.  Iflets  and  rocks  along  the  coaft.
E.  Shoals  where  at  full  tide  veflels  of  flxty  tons’  burden  may  run  aground.  F.
Place  where  the  favages  encamp  when  they  come  to  fifli.  G.  Sandy  Ihoals  along
the  coaft.  H.  Pond  of  frefli  water.  I.  Brook  where  fliallops  can  enter  at  half
tide.  L.  Iflands  to  the  number  of  four  juft  within  the  mouth  of  the  river.

IJle  de  la  Tortue.^  commonly  known
as  Seguin  Ifland,  high  and  rocky,  with
precipitous  fliores.  It  is  nearly  equi-
diftant  from  Wood,  Pond,  and  Salter’s
Iflands  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec,
and  about  one  mile  and  three  quarters
from  each.  The  United  States  light
upon  it  is  i8o  feet  above  the  level  of  the

fea.  It  may  be  feen  at  the  diftance  of
twenty  miles.

108  Ellingwood  Rock,  Seguin  Ledges,
and  White  Ledge.

100  Pond  Ifland  on  the  weft,  and  Stage
Ifland  on  the  eaft : the  two  rocks  re-
ferred to  in  the  fame  fentence  are  now
called  the  Sugar  Loaves.

«;6

P^oyages  of

i(I:u>ds  at  t’lc  u'louth  of  the  ri.-er,  -.vhere  thi'pe  »

harl«jr  for  velTels  of  a hundred  or  a huo.or'^d

Thi>  day  we  made  C>me  tweal.  lwf|<ti|fi||i

bedcc  Point  and  many  iila;;d'  in  - liW  jjj

as  far  as  the  river  Quinibeqiu . P’i  ■

high  idand,  which  w'e  called  lisc

latter  and  the  main  land  thoc  r n r nSJfewllii

which  are  covered  at  full  tide.  ;d;r  . ..y-

to  break  over  To»1'*;k'  ! ^

fouth-eafl;  and  north-north-weft.  ;;t;  v ■»  , :v-  jjiipf.

medium-fized  ifiands  forming  th*  ■ / j.*> %

the  other  on  the  other;’®*  and  k.imc  i.  Vi>>itw4  j|

th<  r in  ar?:  two  rocks,  where  the  n ;

grafs.  Wt:  anchored  three  hundre*  ■ ■ ^ ij

Cil.i»r»CAi}»'s  T>itsciur-i  ■ - s

r

KfTfe  r'vt?

;-=<ks  it
‘ •"•  ftiii

:<5fi  ukay  run

Sandy  (h-  *;-
d jfi^llops  can  •:
“tih  of  tht

57

Sieur  de  Champlain.

in  five  and  fix  fathoms  of  water.  While  in  this  place,  we
were  overtaken  by  fogs,  on  account  of  which  we  refolved  to
enter,  in  order  to  fee  the  upper  part  of  the  river  and  the
ravages  who  live  there;  and  we  fet  out  for  this  purpofe
on  the  5th  of  the  month.  Having  made  fome  leagues,  our
barque  came  near  being  loft  on  a rock  which  we  grazed  in  paff-
ing  no  Further  on,  we  met  two  canoes  which  had  come  to
hunt  birds,  which  for  the  moft  part  are  moulting  at  this  fea-
fon,  and  cannot  fly.  We  addreffed  thefe  favages  by  aid  of
our  own,  who  went  to  them  with  his  wife,  who  made  them
underftand  the  reafon  of  our  coming.  We  made  friends  with
them  and  with  the  favages  of  this  river,  who  ferved  us  as
guides.  Proceeding  farther,  in  order  to  fee  their  captain,
named  Manthoumermer,  we  paffed,  after  we  had  gone  feven
or  eight  leagues,  by  fome  iflands,  ftraits,  and  brooks,  which

extend

This  was  apparently  in  the  upper
part  of  Back  River,  where  it  is  ex-
ceedingly narrow.  The  minute  and  cir-
cumftantial  defcription  of  the  mouth
of  the  Kennebec,  and  the  pofitive  ftate-
ment  in  the  text  that  they  entered  the
river  fo  defcribed,  and  the  conform-
ity of  the  defcription  to  that  laid  down
on  our  Coaft  Survey  Charts,  as  well
as  on  Champlain’s  local  map,  all  ren-
der it  certain  that  they  entered  the
mouth  of  the  Kennebec  proper;  and,
having  entered,  they  muft  have  paffed
on  a flood-tide  into  and  through  Back
River,  which  in  fome  places  is  fo  nar-
row that  their  little  barque  could  hardly
fail  to  be  grazed  in  paffmg.  Having
reached  Hockomock  Bay,  they  paffed
down  through  the  lower  Hell  Gate,
rounded  the  fouthern  point  of  Weft
Port  or  Jerremifquam  Ifland,  failing
up  its  eaftern  fhore  until  they  reached
the  harbor  of  Wifcaffet ; then  down  the

weftern  fide,  turning  Hockomock  Point,
threading  the  narrow  paffage  of  the
Safanoa  River  through  the  upper  Hell
Gate,  entering  the  Sagadahoc,  paffmg
the  Chops,  and  finally  through  the  Neck,
into  Merrymeeting  Bay.  The  narrow-
nefs  of  the  channel  and  the  want  of
water  at  low  tide  in  Back  River  would
feem  at  firft  blufh  to  throw  a doubt  over
the  poffibility  of  Champlain’s  paffmg
through  this  tidal  paffage.  But  it  has
at  leaft  feven  feet  of  water  at  high  tide.
His  little  barque,  of  fifteen  tons,  with-
out any  cargo,  would  not  draw  more
than  four  feet  at  moft,  and  would  pafs
through  without  any  difficulty,  incom-
moded only  by  the  narrownefs  of  the
channel  to  which  Champlain  refers.
With  the  fame  barque,  they  paffed  over
the  bar  at  Naufet,  or  Mallebarre,  where
Champlain  diftin6lly  fays  there  were
only  four  feet  of  water.  — Vide  pojlea^
p.  81.

5 8 Voyages  of

extend  along  the  river,  where  we  faw  fome  fine  meadows.
After  we  had  coafted  along  an  ifland  fome  four  leagues  in
length,  they  conducted  us  to  where  their  chief  was  with
twenty-five  or  thirty  favages,  who,  as  foon  as  we  had  anchored,
came  to  us  in  a canoe,  feparated  a fhort  diftance  from  ten
others,  in  which  were  thofe  who  accompanied  him.  Coming
near  our  barque,  he  made  an  harangue,  in  which  he  expreffed
the  pleafure  it  gave  him  to  fee  us,  and  faid  that  he  defired  to
form  an  alliance  with  us  and  to  make  peace  with  his  enemies
through  our  mediation.  He  faid  that,  on  the  next  day,  he
would  fend  to  two  other  captains  of  favages,  who  were  in  the
interior,  one  called  Marchin,  and  the  other  Safinou,  chief
of  the  river  Quinibequy.  Sieur  de  Monts  gave  them  fome
cakes  and  peas,  with  which  they  were  greatly  pleafed.  The
next  day  they  guided  us  down  the  river  another  way  than
that  by  which  we  had  come,  in  order  to  go  to  a lake ; and,
palling  by  fome  iflands,  they  left,  each  one  of  them,  an  arrow
near  a cape  where  all  the  favages  pafs,  and  they  believe
that  if  they  Ihould  not  do  this  fome  misfortune  would  befall
them,  according  to  the  perfuafions  of  the  devil.  They  live
in  fuch  fuperllitions,  and  practife  many  others  of  the  fame
fort.  Beyond  this  cape  we  paffed  a very  narrow  waterfall,
but  only  with  great  difficulty ; for,  although  we  had  a favor-
able and  frelh  wind,  and  trimmed  our  fails  to  receive  it  as
well  as  poffible,  in  order  to  fee  whether  we  could  not  pafs  it
in  that  way,  we  were  obliged  to  attach  a hawfer  to  fome  trees

on

112  Port,  or  Jerremifquam  Ifland.  another  way  than  that  by  which  they

“2  This  was  Wifcaflet  Harbor,  as  had  come,
arther  on  it  will  be  feen  that  from  this  Hockomock  Point,  a rocky  pre-

pomt  they  ftarted  down  the  river,  taking  cipitous  bluff.

59

Sieur  de  Champlain.

on  fliore  and  all  pull  on  it.  In  this  way,  by  means  of  our
arms  together  with  the  help  of  the  wind,  which  was  favorable
to  us,  we  fucceeded  in  paffing  it.  The  favages  accompany-
ing us  carried  their  canoes  by  land,  being  unable  to  row
them.  After  going  over  this  fall,  we  faw  fome  fine  meadows.
I was  greatly  furprifed  by  this  fall,  fince  as  we  defcended
with  the  tide  we  found  it  in  our  favor,  but  contrary  to  us
when  we  came  to  the  fall.  But,  after  we  had  paffed  it,  it  de-
fcended as  before,  which  gave  us  great  fatisfadtion.”^  Pur-
fuing  our  route,  we  came  to  the  lake,^^®  which  is  from  three

The  movement  of  the  waters
about  this  “ narrow  waterfall  ” has  been
a puzzle  from  the  davs  of  Champlain  to
the  prefent  time.  Tne  phenomena  have
not  changed.  Having  confulted  the
United  States  Coaft  Pilot  and  likewife
feveral  perfons  who  have  navigated  thefe
waters  and  have  a perfonal  ^owledge
of  the  “fall,”  the  following  is,  we  think,
a fatisfactory  explanation.  The  ftream
in  which  the  fall  occurs  is  called  the
Safanoa,  and  is  a tidal  current  flow-
ing from  the  Kennebec,  oppofite  the
city  of  Bath,  to  the  Sheepfcot.  It  was
up  this  tidal  paflage  that  Champlain  was
failing  from  the  waters  of  the  Sheepfcot
to  the  Kennebec,  and  the  “narrow
waterfall”  was  what  is  now  called  the
upper  Hell  Gate,  which  is  only  fifty
yards  wide,  hemmed  in  by  walls  of  rock
on  both  fides.  Above  it  the  Safanoa
expands  into  a broad  bay.  When  the
tide  from  the  Kennebec  nas  filled  this
bay,  the  water  rufhes  through  this  nar-
row gate  with  a velocity  fometimes  of
thirteen  miles  an  hour.  There  is  prop-
erly no  fall  in  the  bed  of  the  ftream,  but
the  appearance  of  a fall  is  occafioned
by  the  pent-up  waters  of  the  bay  above
rufhing  through  this  narrow  outlet,  hav-
ing accumulated  fafter  than  they  could

to

be  drained  off.  At  half  ebb,  on  a fpring
tide,  a wall  of  water  from  fix  inches  to
a foot  flretches  acrofs  the  ftream,  and
the  roar  of  the  flood  boiling  over  the
rocks  at  the  Gate  can  be  heard  two  miles
below.  The  tide  continues  to  flow  up
the  Safanoa  from  the  Sheepfcot  not  only
on  the  flood,  but  for  fome  time  on  the
ebb,  as  the  waters  in  the  upper  part  of
the  Sheepfcot  and  its  bays,  in  returning,
naturally  force  themfelves  up  this  paf-
fage  until  they  are  fufficiently  drained
off  to  turn  the  current  in  the  Safanoa  in
the  other  dire6lion.  Champlain,  failing
from  the  Sheepfcot  up  the  Safanoa,  ar-
rived at  the  Gate  probably  juft  as  the
tide  was  beginning  to  turn,  and  when
there  was  comparatively  only  a flight
fall,  but  yet  enough  to  make  it  neceflary
to  force  their  little  barque  up  through
the  Gate  by  means  of  hawfers  as  de-
fcribed  in  the  text.  After  getting  a
fhort  diftance  from  the  narrows,  he
would  be  on  the  water  ebbing  back  into
the  Kennebec,  and  would  be  ftill  moving
with,  the  tide,  as  he  had  been  until  he
reached  the  fall.

Merrymeeting  Bay,  fo  called  from
the  meeting  in  this  bay  of  the  two  rivers
mentioned  in  the  text  a little  below,  viz.,
the  Kennebec  and  the  Androfcoggin .

6o

Voyages  of

to  four  leagues  in  length.  Here  are  fome  iflands,  and  two
rivers  enter  it,  the  Quinibequy  coming  from  the  north
north-eaft,  and  the  other  from  the  north-weft,  whence  were
to  come  Marchin  and  Safinou.  Having  awaited  them  all
this  day,  and  as  they  did  not  come,  we  refolved  to  improve
our  time.  We  weighed  anchor  accordingly,  and  there  ac-
companied us  two  favages  from  this  lake  to  ferve  as  guides.
The  fame  day  we  anchored  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where
we  caught  a large  number  of  excellent  fifh  of  various  forts.
Meanwhile,  our  favages  went  hunting,  but  did  not  return.
The  route  by  which  we  defcended  this  river  is  much  fafer
and  better  than  that  by  which  we  had  gone.  Tortoife  Ifland
before  the  mouth  of  this  river  is  in  latitude”®  44°  ; and  19°
1 2'  of  the  defledtion  of  the  magnetic  needle.  They  go  by
this  river  acrofs  the  country  to  Quebec  fome  fifty  leagues,
making  only  one  portage  of  two  leagues.  After  the  por-
tage, you  enter  another  little  ftream  which  flows  into  the
great  river  St.  Lawrence.”'^  This  river  Quinibequy  is  very
dangerous  for  veffels  half  a league  from  its  mouth,  on  account
of  the  fmall  amount  of  water,  great  tides,  rocks  and  fhoals  out-
fide  as  well  as  within.  But  it  has  a good  channel,  if  it  were
well  marked  out.  The  land,  fo  far  as  I have  feen  it  along
the  fhores  of  the  river,  is  very  poor,  for  there  are  only  rocks
on  all  fides.  There  are  a great  many  fmall  oaks,  and  very
little  arable  land.  Fifh  abound  here,  as  in  the  other  rivers
which  I have  mentioned.  The  people  live  like  thofe  in  the

neighborhood

The  latitude  of  Seguin,  here  called  proach  very  near  to  the  Chaudi^re,
Tortoife  Ifland,  is  43®  42'  25".  which  flows  into  the  St.  Lawrence  near

The  head-waters  of  the  Kennebec,  Quebec,
as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Penobfcot,  ap-

Sieur  de  Champlain.

6 1

neighborhood  of  our  fettlement ; and  they  told  us  that  the
favages,  who  plant  the  Indian  corn,  dwelt  very  far  in  the  in-
terior, and  that  they  had  given  up  planting  it  on  the  coafts
on  account  of  the  war  they  had  with  others,  who  came  and
took  it  away.  This  is  what  I have  been  able  to  learn  about
this  region,  which  I think  is  no  better  than  the  others.

On  the  8th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  the  mouth  of

this  river,  not  being  able  to  do  fo  fooner  on  account  of
the  fogs.  We  made  that  day  fome  four  leagues,  and  paffed
a bay,“®  where  there  are  a great  many  iflands.  From  here
large  mountains  are  feen  to  the  weft,  in  which  is  the  dwell-
ing-place of  a favage  captain  called  Aneda,  who  encamps
near  the  river  Quinibequy.  I was  fatisfied  from  this  name
that  it  was  one  of  his  tribe  that  had  difcovered  the  plant
called  Aneda,*^  which  Jacques  Cartier  faid  was  so  powerful
againft  the  malady  called  fcurvy,  of  which  we  have  already
fpoken,  which  harafled  his  company  as  well  as  our  own,
when  they  wintered  in  Canada.  The  favages  have  no  knowl-
edge at  all  of  this  plant,  and  are  not  aware  of  its  exiftence,

although

Cafco  Bay,  which  ftretches  from
Cape  Small  Point  to  Cape  Elizabeth.
It  has  within  it  a hundred  and  thirty-
fix  iflands.  They  anchored  and  pafled
the  night  fomewhere  within  the  limits
of  this  bay,  but  did  not  attempt  its  ex-
ploration.

Thefe  were  the  White  Mountains
in  New  Hampfliire,  towering  above  the
fea  6,225  feet.  They  are  about  fixty
miles  diftant  from  Cafco  Bay,  and  were
obferved  by  all  the  early  voyagers  as
they  failed  along  the  coaft  of  Maine.
They  are  referred  to  on  Ribero’s  Map
of  1529  by  the  Spanifli  word  motanas,
and  were  evidently  feen  by  Eftevan
Gomez  in  1525,  whofe  difcoveries  are

delineated  by  this  map.  They  will  alfo
be  found  on  the  Mappe-Monde  of  about
the  middle  of  the  fixteenth  century,  and
on  Sebaftian  Cabot’s  map,  1544,  both
included  in  the  “ Monuments  de  la  Gd-
ographie  ” of  Jomard,  and  they  are  alfo
indicated  on  numerous  other  early
maps.

^20  This  conj‘e6lure  is  not  fuftained  by
any  evidence  beyond  the  fimilarity  of
the  names.  There  are  numerous  idle
opinions  as  to  the  kind  of  plant  which
was  fo  efficacious  a remedy  for  the
fcurvy,  but  they  are  utterly  without
founaation.  There  does  not  appear  to
be  any  means  of  determining  what  the
healing  plant  was.

62

Voyages  of

although  the  above-mentioned  favage  has  the  fame  name.
The  following  day  we  made  eight  leagues.^^^  As  we  paffed
along  the  coaft,  we  perceived  two  columns  of  fmoke  which
fome  favages  made  to  attrafl  our  attention.  We  went  and
anchored  in  the  diredlion  of  them  behind  a fmall  ifland  near
the  main  land/^^  where  we  faw  more  than  eighty  favages
running  along  the  fhore  to  fee  us,  dancing  and  giving  ex-
preffion  to  their  joy.  Sieur  de  Monts  fent  two  men  together
with  our  favage  to  vifit  them.  After  they  had  fpoken  fome
time  with  them,  and  affured  them  of  our  friendfhip,  we  left
with  them  one  of  our  number,  and  they  delivered  to  us  one
of  their  companions  as  a hoftage.  Meanwhile,  Sieur  de
Monts  vifited  an  ifland,  which  is  veiy  beautiful  in  view  of
what  it  produces ; for  it  has  fine  oaks  and  nut-trees,  the  foil
cleared  up,  and  many  vineyards  bearing  beautiful  grapes  in
their  feafon,  which  were  the  firfl;  we  had  feen  on  all  thefe
coafts  from  the  Cap  de  la  Heve.  We  named  it  Me  de
Bacchus.^^  It  being  full  tide,  we  weighed  anchor  and  en-
tered

121  The  four  leagues  of  the  previous
day  added  to  the  eight  of  this  bring
them  from  the  Kennebec  to  Saco  Bay.

122  The  fmall  ifland  “proche  de  la
grande  terre  ” was  Stratton  Ifland  : they
anchored  on  the  northern  fide  and  nearly
eaft  of  Bluff  Ifland,  which  is  a quarter
of  a mile  diftant.  The  Indians  came
down  to  welcome  them  from  the  prom-
ontory long  known  as  Black  Point,  now
called  Front’s  Neck.  Compare  Cham-
plain’s local  map  and  the  United  States
Coaft  Survey  Charts.

128  Champlain’s  narrative,  together
with  his  fketch  or  drawing,  illuftrating
the  mouth  of  the  Saco  and  its  environs,
compared  with  the  United  States  Coaft
Survey  Charts,  renders  it  certain  that

this  was  Richmond  Ifland.  Lefcarbot
defcribes  it  as  a great  ifland,  about
half  a league  in  compafs,  at  the  en-
trance of  the  bay  of  the  faid  place  of
Choiiacoet.  It  is  about  a mile  long,  and
eight  hundred  yards  in  its  greatell
width.  — Coajl  Pilot.  It  received  its
prefent  name  at  a very  early  period.
It  was  granted  under  the  title  of  “a
fmall  ifland,  called  Richmond,”  by  the
Council  for  New  England  to  Walter
Bagnall,  Dec.  2,  1631.  — Vide  Calendar
of  Eng.  State  Papers.,  Col.  1574-1660,
p.  137.  Concerning  the  death  of  Bag-
nall on  this  ifland  a fhort  time  before
the  above  grant  was  made,  vide  Win-
throp'" s Hifl.  New  Eng. ed.  1853,  Vol.  I.
pp.  75,  1 18.

Sieur  de  Champlain,  63

tered  a little  river,  which  we  could  not  fooner  do ; for  there  is
a bar,  there  being  at  low  tide  only  half  a fathom  of  water,  at
full  tide  a fathom  and  a half,  and  at  the  higheft  water  two
fathoms.  On  the  other  fide  of  the  bar  there  are  three,  four,
five,  and  fix  fathoms.  When  we  had  anchored,  a large  num-
ber of  ravages  came  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  began  to
dance.  Their  captain  at  the  time,  whom  they  called  Hone-
mechin,****  was  not  with  them.  He  arrived  about  two  or
three  hours  later  with  two  canoes,,  when  he  came  fweeping
entirely  round  our  barque.  Our  favage  could  underftand  only
a few  words,  as  the  language  of  the  Almouchiquois  (for
that  is  the  name  of  this  nation)  differs  entirely  from  that  of
the  Souriquois  and  Etechemins.  Thefe  people  gave  figns  of
being  greatly  pleafed.  Their  chief  had  a good  figure,  was
young  and  agile.  We  fent  fome  articles  of  merchandife  on
fliore  to  barter  with  them ; but  they  had  nothing  but  their
robes  to  give  in  exchange,  for  they  preferve  only  fuch  furs
as  they  need  for  their  garments.  Sieur  de  Monts  ordered
fome  provifions  to  be  given  to  their  chief,  with  which  he  was
greatly  pleafed,  and  came  feveral  times  to  the  fide  of  our
boat  to  fee  us.  Thefe  favages  thave  off  the  hair  far  up  on
the  head,  and  wear  what  remains  very  long,  which  they  comb
and  twift  behind  in  various  ways  very  neatly,  intertwined
with  feathers  which  they  attach  to  the  head.  They  paint
their  faces  black  and  red,  like  the  other  favages  which  we
have  feen.  They  are  an  agile  people,  with  well-formed  bod-
ies.

Lefcarbot  calls  him  Olmechin.  — faid  to  have  been  born  among  the  Al-
Hijioire  de  la  Nouvelle  France,^  par  M.  mouchiquois,  would  be  able  to  interpret
Lefcarbot,  Paris,  1612,  p.  558.  their  language,  but  in  this  they  appear

^25  They  had  hoped  that  the  wife  of  to  have  been  difappointed.  — Vide  an-
Panounias,  their  Indian  guide,  who  was  p.  55.

64

Voyages  of

ies.  Their  weapons  are  pikes,  clubs,  bows  and  arrows,  at
the  end  of  which  fome  attach  the  tail  of  a fifh  called  the
fignoc,  others  bones,  while  the  arrows  of  others  are  entirely
of  wood.  They  till  and  cultivate  the  foil,  fomething  which
we  have  not  hitherto  obferved.  In  the  place  of  ploughs,  they
ufe  an  inftrument  of  very  hard  wood,  ftiaped  like  a fpade.
This  river  is  called  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  Choii-
acoet.^^®

The  next  day  Sieur  de  Monts  and  I landed  to  obferve
their  tillage  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  We  faw  their  Indian
corn,  which  they  raife  in  gardens.  Planting  three  or  four
kernels  in  one  place,  they  then  heap  up  about  it  a quantity
of  earth  with  fliells  of  the  fignoc  before  mentioned.  Then
three  feet  diftant  they  plant  as  much  more,  and  thus  in  fuc-
ceffion.  With  this  corn  they  put  in  each  hill  three  or  four
Brazilian  beans,^^  which  are  of  different  colors.  When  they
grow  up,  they  interlace  with  the  corn,  which  reaches  to  the
height  of  from  five  to  fix  feet ; and  they  keep  the'  ground
very  free  from  weeds.  We  faw  there  many  fquafhes,*®

and

126  From  the  Indian  word,  M’-foo-ah-
koo-et,  or,  as  the  French  pronounced
it,  Chouacoet^  which  had  been  the  name
applied  by  the  aborigines  to  this  locality
we  know  not  how  long,  is  derived  the
name  Saco,  now  given  to  the  river  and
city  in  the  fame  vicinity.  The  orthog-
raphy given  to  the  original  word  is  va-
rious, as  Sawocotuck,  Sowocatuck,  Sa-
wakquatook,  Sockhigones,  and  Chou-
acoft.  The  variations  in  this,  as  in
other  Indian  words,  may  have  arifen
from  a mifapprehenfion  of  the  found
given  by  the  aborigines,  or  from  igno-
rance, on  the  part  of  writers,  of  the
proper  method  of  reprefenting  foqnds,

joined  to  an  utter  indifference  to  a mat-
ter which  feemed  to  them  of  trifling  im-
portance.

Febues  du  BrifU.  This  is  the
well-known  trailing  or  bufli-bean  of
New  England,  Phafeolus  vulgaris^
called  the  “ Brazilian  bean  ” becaufe  it
refembled  a bean  known  in  France  at
that  time  under  that  name.  It  is  fome-
times  called  the  kidney-bean.  .It  is  in-
digenous to  America.

Citrouilles^  the  common  fummer
fquafli,  Cucurbita  polymorpha,  as  may
be  feen  by  reference  to  Champlain’s
map  of  i6i2,  where  its  form  is  deline-
ated over  the  infcription,  la  forme  des

fitroules.

tfiisc.

• Champlam.  65

•:  -.cbacco,  which  they  likewife  culti-
. - The

• V ^ ijl-i  *\AHOS  ri?  THE  ACCOMPAJfirmO  Ma».

Ckooacozt  R.

rki  jSjir^rr  indkait  /dUkamt  of  ^vaier,

yi.  ; r.  /».  Place  where  they  have  their  fortrefs.  C.  Cabins  In  the
Jv.  which  they  cultivate  the  land  and  plant  Indian  corn.  D.  Eirten-
■ ruttdi  which  is  fandy,  but  covered  with  grafs.  E.  Another  place  where
dwellings  all  together  after  they  have  planted  their  corn.  f.
v *iood  pallurage.  G.  Spring  of  freth  water,  H.  A large  point  of
tested  up  except  ibmc  fniit  trees  aud  wild  vines.  /.  Little  idand  at  the
. the  river.  L.  Another  ifle;.  Two  iOar.ds  under  fhdter  of  which
. . anchor  with  good  l>e»tom.  dV.  A point  of  lajkd  cle*'ired  up  where
to  us.  O*  Ftnir  idands.  P,  Little  b*wk  drv  at  iow  tide.

-•vvg  ihe  coail.  P.  Roaolted  can  anchor  while  waiting  for

blto'b  fhi*  05  the  \viy  die  lancer,  marked

^ i;***  H *nrr  a.>j  ;«  r.*!-  , anti  a hr^Jf  firf?m  Prouds

^ - >i  '<  ’'Vom  Stmtpm  is  bluff  Ifland,

- i*  ifis- the  fomherri  end  of  ?he  bay,

wbiuh  iv.Ord  Si  Ltes  maintain  a light.
E8H  himdred  ind  6t:v  yatvot  t^  is  ixegro  liland.  The

s 3iage  lilaiui.  T)ic  . iH.rttr  c»f  mile  weft  of  the

" diUet  The  neck  or  foutb  weft  of  the  iftands,  is

,i,  - ' C i i:  t»ML,  much  retorted  to  on  ;ng  place  in  tne  fummer.  The

4 ->  * mouth  of  the  river  in  Krup.  lUand,  and  that  directly  north  of  it  is

: ..'^x  Prt>m  the  mouth  of  riie  River  to  ProuPs  Neck,  marked  A'  is  one  of
:hes  in  New  England,  extending  about  fix  nautical  miles.  Its  fouth-
- *.c  >cty  is  known  as  Ferr}",  the  northern  Scarborough,  and  midway  between
!'»h1  v)rchard  Beach,  the  latter  a popular  refort  in  the  fummer  mouths  of
. • ^roia  diftant  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada*

- It  is  indigenous  to  America.  Jguajhy  their  Vine  aples,  which  the
^ : o fqtiafh  is  oerived  from  the  In-  En^lijk  from  them  call  Sguajke^^  about
* -ntafquajfi  or  ifqu^terfqua/h.  the  bignelfc  of  Apples,  of  fevcrall  col-
' ...:vjer,  when  their  come  is  fpent,  ours,  a fweet,  light,  wholefome  refrelh-
-;rr»iquafhes  is  their  beft  bread,  i^’'  — Williams^  Key^  1643,

bke  the  young  Pumpion.” — htarraganfett  Club  ed.,  p.  125.

/•  England  Profpe^y  1634,  Cour^eSy  the  pumpkin,  Cucurhita

ed.,  p.  76.  AJkutor  maxima^  indigenous  to  America.  As
9 the

Sieur  de  Champlain,

65

and  pumpkins,*^
vate/®*

and  tobacco,  which  they  likewife  culti-
The

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Chouacoit  R.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water*

A.  The  river.  B.  Place  where  they  have  their  fortrefs.  C,  Cabins  in  the
open  fields,  near  which  they  cultivate  the  land  and  plant  Indian  corn.  D.  Exten-
five  trad  of  land  which  is  fandy,  but  covered  with  grafs.  E.  Another  place  where
they  have  their  dwellings  all  together  after  they  have  planted  their  corn.  f.
Marfhes  with  good  pafturage.  G.  Spring  of  frefli  water.  H*  A large  point  of
land  all  cleared  up  except  fome  fruit  trees  and  wild  vines.  /.  Little  ifland  at  the
entrance  of  the  river.  L.  Another  iflet.  M.  Two  iflands  under  Ihelter  of  which
vefiels  can  anchor  with  good  bottom.  N*  A point  of  land  cleared  up  where
Marchin  came  to  us.  O.  Four  iflands.  P.  Little  brook  dry  at  low  tide,  gf*
Shoals  along  the  coaft.  P.  Roadfted  where  veflels  can  anchor  while  waiting  for
the  tide.

Notes.  Of  the  two  iflands  in  the  northern  part  of  the  bay,  the  larger,  marked
Aff  is  Stratton  Ifland,  nearly  half  a mile  long,  and  a mile  and  a half  from  Front’s
Neck,  which  lies  north  of  it.  A quarter  of  a mile  from  Stratton  is  Bluff  Ifland,
a fmall  ifland  north-weft  of  it.  Of  the  four  iflands  at  the  fouthern  end  of  the  bay,
the  moft  eaftern  is  Wood  Ifland,  on  which  the  United  States  maintain  a light.
The  next  on  the  weft,  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards  diftant,  is  Negro  Ifland.  The
third  ftill  further  weft  is  Stage  Ifland.  The  fourth,  quarter  of  a mile  weft  of  the
laft  named,  is  Baflcet  Ifland.  The  neck  or  peninfula,  fouth-weft  of  the  iflands,  is
now  called  the  Pool,  much  reforted  to  as  a watering-place  in  the  fummer.  The
ifland  near  the  mouth  of  the  river  is  Ram  Ifland,  and  that  dire6tly  north  of  it  is
Eagle  Ifland.  From  the  mouth  of  the  River  to  Prout’s  Neck,  marked  W,  is  one  of
the  fineft  beaches  in  New  England,  extending  about  fix  nautical  miles.  Its  fouth-
ern extremity  is  known  as  Ferry,  the  northern  Scarborough,  and  midway  between
them  is  Old  Orchard  Beach,  the  latter  a popular  refort  in  the  fummer  months  of
perfons  from  diftant  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada.

fitroules.  It  is  indigenous  to  America.
Our  word  fquafli  is  derived  from  the  In-
dian ajkutafqua/h  or  ifquouterfquajh.
“In  fummer,  when  their  come  is  fpent,
Tfquouterfquaflies  is  their  beft  bread,
a fruit  like  the  young  Pumpion.”  —
IVooPs  New  England  ProfpeCl,,  1634,
Prince  Society  ed.,  p.  76.  AJkuta-

fquajh,^  their  Vine  aples,  which  the
Englijh  from  them  call  Squa/hes^  about
the  bigneflfe  of  Apples,  of  feverall  col-
ours, a fweet,  light,  wholefome  refrefli-
ing.”  — Roger  Williams,,  Key,,  1643,
Narraganfett  Club  ed.,  p.  125.

Courses,  the  pumpkin,  Cucurbita
maxUna^  indigenous  to  America.  As

66

Voyages  of

The  Indian  corn  which  we  faw  was  at  that  time  about  two
feet  high,  fome  of  it  as  high  as  three.  The  beans  were
beginning  to  flower,  as  alfo  the  pumpkins  and  fquafhes.
They  plant  their  corn  in  May,  and  gather  it  in  September.

We

the  pumpkin  and  likewife  the  fquafh
were  vegetables  hitherto  unknown  to
Champlain,  there  was  no  French  word
by  which  he  could  accurately  identify
them.  The  names  given  to  them  were
fuch  as  he  thought  would  defcribe
them  to  his  countrymen  more  nearly
than  any  others.  Had  he  been  a bota-
nifl,  he  would  probably  have  given  them
new  names.

Petum,  Tobacco,  Nicotiana  ruf-
iica^  fometimes  called  wild  tobacco.  It
was  a fmaller  and  more  hardy  fpecies
than  the  Nicotiana  tab^cum^  now  culti-
vated in  warmer  climates,  but  had  the
fame  qualities  though  inferior  in  ftrength
and  aroma.  It  was  found  in  cultivation
by  the  Indians  all  along  our  coaft  and
in  Canada.  Cartier  obferved  it  growing
in  Canada  in  1535.  Of  it  he  fays:
“ There  groweth  alfo  a certain  kind  of
herbe,  whereof  in  Sommer  they  make  a
great  prouifion  for  all  the  yeere,  making
great  account  of  it,  and  onely  men  vfe
of  it,  and  firfl  they  caufe  it  to  be  dried
in  the  Sunne,  then  weare  it  about  their
neckes  wrapped  in  a little  beafts  fkinne
made  like  a little  bagge,  with  a hollow
peece  of  ftone  or  wood  like  a pipe  ;
then  when  they  pleafe  they  make  pon-
der of  it,  and  then  put  it  in  one  of  the
ends  of  the  faid  Cornet  or  pipe,  and  lay-
ing a cole  of  fire  vpon  it,  at  the  other
ende  fucke  fo  long,  that  they  fill  their
bodies  full  of  fmoke,  till  that  it  commeth
out  of  their  mouth  and  noftrils,  euen  as
out  of  the  Tonnell  of  a chimney.  They
fay  that  this  doth  keepe  them  war  me
and  in  health  : they  neuer  goe  without
fome  of  it  about  them.  We  ourfelues
haue  tryed  the  fame  fmoke,  and  hauing

put  it  in  our  mouthes,  it  feemed  almoft
as  hot  as  Pepper.”  — Jacques  Cartier^
2 Voyage^  1535  j Hakluyt^  London,  ed.
1810,  Vol.  III.  p.  276.

We  may  here  remark  that  the  efcu-
lents  found  in  cultivation  at  Saco,  beans,
fquafties,  pumpkins,  and  corn,  as  well  as
the  tobacco,  are  all  American  tropical  or
fubtropical  plants,  and  muft  have  been
tranfmitted  from  tribe  to  tribe,  from
more  fouthern  climates.  The  Indian
traditions  would  feem  to  indicate  this.
‘‘  They  have  a tradition,”  fays  Roger
Williams,  “ that  the  Crow  brought  them
at  firfi:  an  Indian  Graine  of  Come  in  one
Fare,  and  an  Indian  or  French  Beane
in  another,  from  the  Great  God  Kau-
tantouwit'‘s  field  in  the  Southweft  from
whence  they  hold  came  all  their  Come
and  Beanes.”  — Key  to  the  Language
of  America,  London,  1643,  Narraganfett
Club  ed.,  p.  144.

Seventy  years  before  Champlain,
Jacques  Cartier  had  found  nearly  the
fame  vegetables  cultivated  by  the  In-
dians in  the  Valley  of  the  St.  Lawrence.
He  fays  : “ They  digge  their  grounds
with  certaine  peeces  of  wood,  as  bigge
as  halfe  a fword,  on  which  ground  grow-
eth their  come,  which  they  call  Offici ;
it  is  as  bigge  as  our  fmall  peafon.  . . .
They  haue  alfo  great  ftore  of  Mulke-
milions,  Pompions,  Gourds,  Cucumbers,
Peafon,  and  Beanes  of  euery  colour,
yet  differing  from  ours.”  — Hakluyt,  Vol.
III.  p.  276.  For  a full  hiftory  of  thefe
plants,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the
Hiflory  of  Plants,  a learned  and  elabo-
rate work  now  in  prefs,  by  Charles
Pickering,  M.D.^  of  Bofton.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  67

We  faw  alfo  a great  many  nuts,  which  are  fmall  and  have
feveral  divifions.  There  were  as  yet  none  on  the  trees,  but
we  found  plenty  under  them,  from  the  preceding  year.  We
faw  alfo  many  grape-vines,  on  which  there  was  a remarkably
fine  berry,  from  which  we  made  fome  very  good  verjuice.
We  had  heretofore  feen  grapes  only  on  the  Ifland  of  Bacchus,
diftant  nearly  two  leagues  from  this  river.  Their  permanent
abode,  the  tillage,  and  the  fine  trees  led  us  to  conclude  that
the  air  here  is  milder  and  better  than  that  where  we  paffed
the  winter,  and  at  the  other  places  we  vifited  on  the  coaft.
But  I cannot  believe  that  there  is  not  here  a confiderable
degree  of  cold,  although  it  is  in  latitude  43°  45'.*®*  The  for-
efls  in  the  interior  are  very  thin,  although  abounding  in  oaks,
beeches,  afhes,  and  elms ; in  wet  places  there  are  many  wil-
lows. The  favages  dwell  permanently  in  this  place,  and  have
a large  cabin  furrounded  by  palifades  made  of  rather  large
trees  placed  by  the  fide  of  each  other,  in  which  they  take
refuge  when  their  enemies  make  war  upon  them.'®^  They
cover  their  cabins  with  oak  bark.  This  place  is  very  pleaf-
ant,  and  as  agreeable  as  any  to  be  feen.  The  river  is  very
abundant  in  fifh,  and  is  bordered  by  meadows.  At  the
mouth  there  is  a fmall  ifland  adapted  for  the  conftrudtion  of
a good  fortrefs,  where  one  could  be  in  fecurity.

On  Sunday,’®  the  12th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  the

river

The  latitude  of  Wood  Ifland  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  Champlain
the  mouth  of  the  Saco,  where  they  were  fpeaks  of  as  a fuitable  location  for  a for-
at  anchor,  is  43°  27'  23".  trefs,  is  Ram  Ifland,  and  is  low  and

The  fite  of  this  Indian  fortification  rocky,  and  about  a hundred  and  fifty
was  a rocky  bluff  on  the  weftern  fide  of  yards  in  length.

the  river,  now  owned  by  Mr.  John  For  Sunday  read  Tuefday. — Vide

Ward,  where  from  time  to  time  Indian  Shurtleff's  Calendar.
relics  have  been  found.  The  ifland  at

68

Voyages  of

river  Chouacoet.  After  coafting  along  fome  fix  or  feven
leagues,  a contrary  wind  arofe,  which  obliged  us  to  anchor
and  go  afhore,*®^  where  we  faw  two  meadows,  each  a league
in  length  and  half  a league  in  breadth.  We  faw  there  two
ravages,  whom  at  firfl;  we  took  to  be  the  great  birds  called
buftards,  to  be  found  in  this  country ; who,  as  foon  as  they
caught  fight  of  us,  took  flight  into  the  woods,  and  were  not
feen  again.  From  Chouacoet  to  this  place,  where  we  faw
fome  little  birds,  which  fing  like  blackbirds,  and  are  black
excepting  the  ends  of  the  wings,  which  are  orange-colored,’®
there  is  a large  number  of  grape-vines  and  nut-trees.  This
coafl:  is  fandy,  for  the  mofl;  part,  all  the  way  from  Quinibe-
quy.  This  day  we  returned  two  or  three  leagues  towards
Chouacoet,  as  far  as  a cape  which  we  called  Ifland  Harbor,’®
favorable  for  veffels  of  a hundred  tons,  about  which  are  three
iflands.  Heading  north-eaft  a quarter  north,  one  can  enter
another  harbor’®^  near  this  place,  to  which  there  is  no  ap-
proach, although  there  are  iflands,  except  the  one  where  you
enter.  At  the  entrance  there  are  fome  dangerous  reefs.
There  are  in  thefe  iflands  fo  many  red  currants  that  one
fees  for  the  mofl;  part  nothing  elfe,’^  and  an  infinite  number

of

This  landing  was  probably  near  xhis  harbor  is  Goofe  Fair  Bay,

Wells  Neck,  and  the  meadows  which  from  one  to  two  miles  north-eaft  of  Cape
they  faw  were  the  fait  marfties  of  Wells.  Porpoife,  in  the  middle  of  which  are
1*®  The  Red-wing  Blackbird,  Age-  two  large  ledges,  “ the  dangerous  reefs  ”
IcBus  phcEfiiceus^  of  luftrous  black,  with  to  which  Champlain  refers,
the  bend  of  the  wing  red.  They  are  xhis  was  the  common  red  currant

ftill  abundant  in  the  fame  locality,  and  of  the  gardens,  Ribes  rubrum^  which  is
indeed  acrofs  the  whole  continent  to  the  a native  of  America.  The  fetid  currant,
Pacific  Ocean.  — Vide  Cones' s Key^  Bof-  Ribes  projlratum^  is  also  indigenous  to
J^72,  p.  156;  Baird's  Report^  this  country.  It  has  a pale  red  fruit,
Wamington,  1858,  Part  II.  p.  526.  which  gives  forth  a very  difagreeable

Le  Port  aux  IJles.  This  Ifland  odor.  JofTelyn  refers  to  the  currant
Harbor  is  the  prefent  Cape  Porpoife  both  in  his  Voyages  and  in  his  Rarities.
Harbor.  ^ Tuckerman

Sieur  de  Champlain.  69

of  pigeons, of  which  we  took  a great  quantity.  This  Illand

Harbor'*®  is  in  latitude  43°  25'.

On  the  15th  of  the  month  we  made  twelve  leagues.  Coaft-
ing  along,  we  perceived  a fmoke  on  the  fhore,  which  we
approached  as  near  as  poffible,  but  faw  no  favage,  which  led
us  to  believe  that  they  had  fled.  The  fun  fet,  and  we  could
find  no  harbor  for  that  night,  fince  the  coaft  was  flat  and
fandy.  Keeping  off,  and  heading  fouth,  in  order  to  find  an
anchorage,  after  proceeding  about  two  leagues,  we  obferved
a cape'*'  on  the  main  land  fouth  a quarter  fouth-eafl:  of  us,
fome  fix  leagues  diftant.  Two  leagues  to  the  call  we  faw
three  or  four  rather  high  iflands,'*^  and  on  the  weft  a large  bay.
The  coaft  of  this  bay,  reaching  as  far  as  the  cape,  extends
inland  from  where  we  were  perhaps  four  leagues.  It  has  a
breadth  of  two  leagues  from  north  to  fouth,  and  three  at  its
entrance.'*®  Not  obferving  any  place  favorable  for  putting

Tuckerman  found  it  growing  wild  in  the
White  Mountains.

The  paffenger  pigeon,  EClopiJies
mi^raioriuSf  formerly  numerous  in
New  England.  Commonly  known  as
the  wild  pigeon.  Wood  fays  they  fly
in  flocks  of  millions  of  millions.  — JVew
England  ProfpeCl,  1634,  Prince  Society
ed.,  p.  31.

Champlain’s  latitude  is  lefs  in-
accurate than  ufual.  It  is  not  poflible
to  determine  the  exa6l  point  at  which
he  took  it.  But  the  latitude  of  Cape
Porpoife,  according  to  the  Coaft  Survey
Charts,  is  43°  21'  43".

Cape  Anne.

The  point  at  which  Champlain  firft
faw  Cape  Anne,  and  the  “ ifles  aflez
hautes,”  the  Ifles  of  Shoals,  was  eaft  of
Little  Boar’s  Head,  and  three  miles  from
the  fliore.  Nine  years  afterward.  Captain
John  Smith  vifited  thefe  iflands,  and  de-

nominated them  on  his  map  of  New
England  Smith’s  Ifles.  They  began
at  a very  early  date  to  be  called  the
Ifles  of  Shoals.  “Smith’s  Ifles  are  a
heape  together,  none  neere  them,  againft
Accominticus.”  — SmitEs  Defcrtption
of  New  England.  Rouge’s  map,  1778,
has  Ifles  of  Shoals,  ou  des  Ecoles,  For
a full  defcription  and  hiftorv  of  thefe
iflands,  the  reader  is  referred  to  “ The
Ifles  of  Shoals,”  by  John  S.  Jennefs,
New  York,  1875.

Champlain  has  not  been  felicitous
in  his  defcription  of  this  bay.  He  prob-
ably means  to  fay  that  from  the  point
where  he  then  was,  off  Little  Boar’s
Head,  to  the  point  where  it  extends
fartheft  into  the  land,  or  to  the  weft,  it
appeared  to  be  about  twelve  miles,  and
that  the  depth  of  the  bay  appeared  to
be  fix  miles,  and  eight  at  the  point  of
greateft  depth.  As  he  did  not  explore

70

Voyages  of

we  refolved  to  go  to  the  cape  above  mentioned  with
fliort  fail,  which  occupied  a portion  of  the  night.  Approach-
ing to  where  there  were  fixteen  fathoms  of  water,  we  anchored
until  daybreak.

On  the  next  day  we  went  to  the  above-mentioned  cape,
where  there  are  three  iflands^®  near  the  main  land,  full  of
wood  of  different  kinds,  as  at  Chouacoet  and  all  along  the
coaft ; and  ftill  another  flat  one,  where  there  are  breakers,
and  which  extends  a little  farther  out  to  fea  than  the  others,
on  which  there  is  no  wood  at  all.  We  named  this  place
Ifland  Cape,*^  near  which  we  faw  a canoe  containing  five  or
fix  ravages,  who  came  out  near  our  barque,  and  then  went
back  and  danced  on  the  beach.  Sieur  de  Monts  fent  me  on

the  bay,  it  is  obvious  that  he  intended
to  fpeak  of  it  only  as  meafured  by  the
eye.  No  name  has  been  affigned  to  this
expanfe  of  water  on  our  maps.  It
wafhes  the  coaft  of  Hampton,  Salifbury,
Newburyport,  Ipfwich,  and  Annifquam.
It  might  well  be  called  Merrimac  Bay,
after  the  name  of  the  important  river
that  empties  its  waters  into  it,  midway
between  its  northern  and  fouthern  ex-
tremities.

It  is  to  be  obferved  that,  ftarting
from  Cape  Porpoife  Harbor  on  the  morn-
ing of  the  15th  of  July,  they  failed  twelve
leagues  before  the  fail  of  the  night  com-
menced. This  would  bring  them,  allow-
ing for  the  fmuofities  of  the  fhore,  to  a
point  between  Little  Boar’s  Head  and
the  Ifles  of  Shoals.  In  this  diftance,
they  had  pafted  the  fandy  ftiores  of
Wells  Beach  and  York  Beach  in  Maine,
and  Fofs’s  Beach  and  Rye  Beach  in  New
Hampftiire,  and  ftill  faw  the  white  fands
of  Hampton  and  Salifbury  Beaches
ftretching  far  into  the  bay  on  their  right
The  excellent  harbor  of  Portfmouth,

fliore

land-locked  by  numerous  iflands,  had
been  pafted  unobferved.  A fail  of
eighteen  nautical  miles  brought  them  to
their  anchorage  at  the  extreme  point  of
Cape  Anne.

Straitfmouth,  Thatcher,  and  Milk
Iftand.  They  were  named  by  Captain
John  Smith  the  Three  Turks’  Heads,”
in  memory  of  the  three  Turks’  heads
cut  off  by  him  at  the  fiege  of  Caniza,
by  which  he  acquired  from  Sigifmundus,
prince  of  Tranfylvania,  their  effigies  in
his  fhield  for  his  arms.  — The  true  Trav-
els^ Adventures,  and  Obfervations  of
Captaine  John  Smith,  London,  1629.

146  What  Champlain  here  calls  “le
Cap  aux  Iftes,”  Iftand  Cape,  is  Cape
Anne,  called  Cape  Tragabigzanda  by
Captain  John  Smith,  the  name  of  his
miftrefs,  to  whom  he  was  given  when
a prifoner  among  the  Turks.  The  name
was  changed  by  Prince  Charles,  after-
ward Charles  I.,  to  Cape  Anne,  in  honor
of  his  mother,  who  was  Anne  of  Den-
mark.— Vide  D^cription  of  New  Eng-
land by  Capt.  John  Smith,  London,  1616.

71

Sieur  de  Champlain.

{hore  to  obferve  them,  and  to  give  each  one  of  them  a knife
and  fome  bifcuit,  which  caufed  them  to  dance  again  better
than  before.  This  over,  I made  them  underftand,  as  well  as
I could,  that  I defired  them  to  fhow  me  the  courfe  of  the
Ihore.  After  I had  drawn  with  a crayon  the  bay,“'^  and  the
Ifland  Cape,  where  we  were,  with  the  fame  crayon  they  drew
the  outline  of  another  bay,^^®  which  they  reprefented  as  very
large ; here  they  placed  fix  pebbles  at  equal  diftances  apart,
giving  me  to  underftand  by  this  that  thefe  figns  reprefented
as  many  chiefs  and  tribes.^^  Then  they  drew  within  the  firft
mentioned  bay  a river  which  we  had  paffed,  which  has  fhoals
and  is  very  long.*®*  We  found  in  this  place  a great  many
vines,  the  green  grapes  on  which  were  a little  larger  than
peas,  alfo  many  nut-trees,  the  nuts  on  which  were  no  larger
than  mufket-balls.  The  favages  told  us  that  all  thofe  inhab-
iting this  country  cultivated  the  land  and  fowed  feeds  like
the  others,  whom  we  had  before  feen.  The  latitude  of  this
place  is  43°  and  fome  minutes.*®*  Sailing  half  a league  far-
ther.

This  was  the  bay  weft  of  a line
drawn  from  Little  Boar’s  Head  to  Cape
Anne,  which  may  well  be  called  Merri-
mac  Bay.

1^8  MalTachufetts  Bay.

It  is  interefting  to  obferve  the
agreement  of  the  lign-writing  of  this
favage  on  the  point  of  Cape  Anne  with
the  ftatement  of  the  hiftorian  Gookin,
who  in  1656  was  fuperintendent  of  In-
dian affairs  in  Maffachufetts,  and  who
wrote  in  1674.  He  fays  : “Their  chief
fachem  held  dominion  over  many  other
petty  governours ; as  thofe  of  Weecha-
galkas,  Neponfitt,  Punkapaog,  Nonan-
tam,  Naftiaway,  and  fome  of  the  Nip-
muck  people,  as  far  as  Pokomtacuke,
as  the  old  men  of  Maffachufetts  af-

firmed.” Here  we  have  the  fix  tribes,
reprefented  by  the  pebbles,  recorded
feventy  years  later  as  a tradition  handed
down  by  the  old  men  of  the  tribe.
Champlain  remarks  further  on,  “ I ob-
ferved  in  the  bay  all  that  the  favages
had  defcribed  to  me  at  Ifland  Cape.”

This  was  the  Merrimac  with  its
fhoals  at  the  mouth,  which  they  had
paffed  without  obferving,  having  failed
from  the  offing  near  Little  Boar’s  Head
diredlly  to  the  head  of  Cape  Anne,  dur-
ing the  darknefs  of  the  previous  night.

The  latitude  of  the  Straitfmouth
Ifland  Light  on  the  extreme  point  of
Cape  Anne  is  42°  39'  43".  A little  eaft
of  it,  where  they  probably  anchored,
there  are  now  fixteen  fathoms  of  water.

72

Voyages  of

ther,  we  obferved  feveral  favages  on  a rocky  point^®^  who  ran
along  the  ftiore,  dancing  as  they  went,  to  their  companions  to
inform  them  of  our  coming.  After  pointing  out  to  us  the
diredtion  of  their  abode,  they  made  a fignal  with  fmoke  to
fhow  us  the  place  of  their  fettlement.  We  anchored  near  a
little  ifland,^®  and  fent  our  canoe  with  knives  and  cakes  for
the  favages.  From  the  large  number  of  thofe  we  faw,  we
concluded  that  thefe  places  were  better  inhabited  than  the
others  we  had  feen.

After  a day  of  fome  two  hours  for  the  fake  of  obferving
thefe  people,  whofe  canoes  are  made  of  birch  bark,  like  thofe
of  the  Canadians,  Souriquois,  and  Etechemins,  we  weighed
anchor  and  fet  fail  with  a promife  of  fine  weather.  Continu-
ing our  courfe  to  the  weft-fouth-weft,  we  faw  numerous
iflands  on  one  fide  and  the  other.  Having  failed  feven  or
eight  leagues,  we  anchored  near  an  ifland,^®^  whence  we  ob-
ferved many  fmokes  along  the  fhore,  and  many  favages  run-
ning up  to  fee  us.  Sieur  de  Monts  fent  two  or  three  men
in  a canoe  to  them,  to  whom  he  gave  fome  knives  and  pater-
nofters  to  prefent  to  them ; with  which  they  were  greatly
pleafed,  and  danced  feveral  times  in  acknowledgment.  We
could  not  afcertain  the  name  of  their  chief,  as  we  did  not
know  their  language.  All  along  the  fhore  there  is  a great

deal

Emmerfon’s  Point,  forming  the
eaftern  extremity  of  Cape  Anne,  twenty
or  twenty-five  feet  high,  fringed  with  a
wall  of  bare  rocks  on  the  fea.

Thatcher’s  Ifland,  near  the  point
juft  mentioned.  It  is  nearly  half  a mile
long  and  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards
wide,  and  about  fifty  feet  high.

It  is  not  poffible  to  determine  with
abfolute  certainty  the  place  of  this  an-

chorage. But  as  Champlain  defcribes,
at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  what  muft
have  been  Charles  River  coming  from
the  country  of  the  Iroquois  or  the  weft,
moft  likely  as  feen  from  his  anchorage,
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  he  an-
chored in  Bofton  Harbor,  near  the
weftern  limit  of  Noddle’s  Ifland,  now
known  as  Eaft  Bofton.

73

Sieur  de  Champlain.

deal  of  land  cleared  up  and  planted  with  Indian  corn.  The
country  is  very  pleafant  and  agreeable,  and  there  is  no  lack
of  fine  trees.  The  canoes  of  thofe  who  live  there  are  made
of  a fingle  piece,  and  are  very  liable  to  turn  over  if  one  is  not
Ikilful  in  managing  them.  We  had  not  before  feen  any  of
this  kind.  They  are  made  in  the  following  manner.  After
cutting  down,  at  a coft  of  much  labor  and  time,  the  largefl
and  talleft  tree  they  can  find,  by  means  of  ftone  hatchets  (for
they  have  no  others  except  fome  few  which  they  received

from  the  favages  on  the  coafts

The  fifhermen  and  fur-traders  had
vifited  thefe  coafts  from  a very  early
period.  — Vide  antea^  note  i8.  From
them  they  obtained  the  axe,  a moft  im-
portant implement  in  their  rude  mode
of  life,  and  it  was  occafionally  found  in
ufe  among  tribes  far  in  the  interior.

La  Cadie.  Careleflhefs  or  indifference
in  regard  to  the  orthography  of  names
was  general  in  the  time  of  Champlain.
The  volumes  written  in  the  vain  attempt
to  fettle  the  proper  method  of  fpelling
the  name  of  Shakefpeare,  are  the  fruit
of  this  indifference.  La  Cadie  did  not
efcape  this  treatment.  Champlain  writes
it  Arcadie,  Accadie,  La  Cadie,  Acadie,
and  L’ Acadie ; while  Lefcarbot  uni-
formly, as  far  as  we  have  obferved,  La
Cadie.  We  have  alfo  feen  it  written
L’ Arcadie  and  L^ Accadie,  and  in  fome,
if  not  in  all  the  preceding  forms,  with
a Latin  termination  in  ia.  It  is  deemed
important  to  fecure  uniformity,  and  to
follow  the  French  form  in  the  tranfla-
tion  of  a French  work  rather  than  the
Latin.  In  this  work,  it  is  rendered  La
Cadie  in  all  cafes  except  in  quotations.
The  hiftory  of  the  name  favors  this  form
rather  than  any  other.  The  commiflion
or  charter  given  to  De  Monts  by  Henry
IV.  in  1603,  a ftate  paper  or  legal  docu-

of  La  Cadie,*®  who  obtained

them

ment,  drawn,  we  may  fuppofe,  with  more
than  ufual  care,  has  La  Cadie,  and  re-
peats it  four  times  without  variation.
It  is  a name  of  Indian  origin,  as  may
be  inferred  by  its  appearing  in  compo-
fition  in  fuch  words  as  PalTamacadie,
Subenacadie,  and  Tracadie,  plainly  de-
rived from  the  language  fpoken  by  the
Souriquois  and  Etechemins.  Fifty-five
years  before  it  was  introduced  into
De  Monts’s  commiflion,  it  appeared  writ-
ten Larcadia  in  Gaftaldo’s  map  of
“Terra  Nova  del  Bacalaos,”  in  the
Italian  tranflation  of  Ptolemy’s  Geogra-
phy, by  Pietro  Andrea  Mattiolo,  printed
at  Venice  in  1548.  The  colophon  bears
date  06lober,  1 547.  This  rare  work  is
in  the  pofleflion  of  Henry  C.  Murphy,
LL.D.,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
a very  beautiful  copy  of  the  map.  It
appeared  again  in  1561  on  the  map  of
Rufcelli,  which  was  borrowed,  as  well
as  the  whole  map,  from  the  above  work.
— Vide  Rufcelli' s map  in  Dr.  KohPs
Docu7nentary  Hijlory  of  Maine,  Maine
Hift.  Soc.,  Portland,  1869,  p.  233.  On
this  map,  Larcadia  ftands  on  the  coaft  of
Maine,  in  the  midft  of  the  vaft  territory
included  in  De  Monts’s  grant,  between
the  degrees  of  forty  and  forty-fix  north
latitude.  It  will  be  obferved,  if  we

take

10

74

Voyages  of

them  in  exchange  for  furs),  they  remove  the  bark,  and  round
off  the  tree  except  on  one  fide,  where  they  apply  fire  gradu-
ally along  its  entire  length ; and  fometimes  they  put  red-hot
pebble-ftones  on  top.  When  the  fire  is  too  fierce,  they  extin-
guifh  it  with  a little  water,  not  entirely,  but  fo  that  the  edge
of  the  boat  may  not  be  burnt.  It  being  hollowed  out  as
much  as  they  wifh,  they  fcrape  it  all  over  with  ftones,  which
they  ufe  inftead  of  knives.  Thefe  ftones  refemble  our  mulket
flints.

On  the  next  day,  the  17th  of  the  month,  we  weighed
anchor  to  go  to  a cape  we  had  feen  the  day  before,  which
feemed  to  lie  on  our  fouth  fouth-weft.  This  day  we  were
able  to  make  only  five  leagues,  and  we  pafled  by  fome
iflands  covered  with  wood.  I obferved  in  the  bay  all  that
the  favages  had  defcribed  to  me  at  Ifland  Cape.  As  we  con-
tinued our  courfe,  large  numbers  came  to  us  in  canoes  from
the  iflands  and  main  land.  We  anchored  a league  from  a
cape,  which  we  named  St.  Louis, where  we  noticed  fmoke

in

take  away  the  Latin  termination,  that
the  pronunciation  of  this  word  as  it  firft
appeared  in  1547,  would  not  differ  in
fomid  from  La  Cadie.  It  feems,  there-
fore, very  clear  that  the  name  of  the
territory  ftretching  along  the  coaft  of
Maine,  we  know  not  how  far  north  or
fouth,  as  it  was  caught  from  the  lips  of
the  natives  at  fome  time  anterior  1547,
was  beft  reprefented  by  La  Cadie,  as
pronounced  by  the  French.  Whether
De  Monts  had  obtained  the  name  of  his
American  domain  from  thofe  who  had
recently  vifited  the  coaft  and  had  caught
its  found  from  the  natives,  or  whether
he  had  taken  it  from  this  ancient  map,
we  muft  remain  uninformed.  Several
writers  have  ventured  to  interpret  the

word,  and  give  us  its  original  meaning.
The  following  definitions  have  been
offered:  i.  The  land  of  dogs;  2.  Our
village;  3.  The  fifh  called  pollock;  4*
Place;  5.  Abundance.  We  do  not
undertake  to  decide  between  the  dif-
agreeing  dodfors.  But  it  is  obvious  to
remark  that  a rich  field  lies  open  ready
for  a noble  harveft  for  any  young
fcholar  who  has  a genius  for  philology,
and  who  is  prepared  to  make  a life
work  of  the  ftudy  and  elucidation  of
the  original  languages  of  North  Amer-
ica. The  laurels  in  this  field  are  ftill
to  be  gathered.

The  iflands  in  Bofton  Bajr.

This  attempt  to  land  was  in  Marth-
field  near  the  mouth  of  South  River.

Not

75

Sieur  de  Champlain.

in  feveral  places.  While  in  the  a6l  of  going  there,  our  barque
grounded  on  a rock,  where  we  were  in  great  danger,  for,  if
we  had  not  fpeedily  got  it  off,  it  would  have  overturned  in
the  fea,  fince  the  tide  was  falling  all  around,  and  there  were
five  or  fix  fathoms  of  water.  But  God  preferved  us,  and  we
anchored  near  the  above-named  cape,  when  there  come  to  us
fifteen  or  fixteen  canoes  of  favages.  In  fome  of  them  there
were  fifteen  or  fixteen,  who  began  to  manifeft  great  figns  of
joy,  and  made  various  harangues,  which  we  could  not  in  the
leaft.  underfland.  Sieur  de  Monts  fent  three  or  four  men  on
fhore  in  our  canoe,  not  only  to  get  water,  but  to  fee  their
chief,  whofe  name  was  Honabetha.  The  latter  had  a num-
ber of  knives  and  other  trifles,  which  Sieur  de  Monts  gave
him,  when  he  came  alongfide  to  fee  us,  together  with  fome
of  his  companions,  who  were  prefent  both  along  the  fhore
and  in  their  canoes.  We  received  the  chief  very  cordially,
and  made  him  welcome ; who,  after  remaining  fome  time,
went  back.  Thofe  whom  we  had  fent  to  them  brought  us
fome  little  fquafhes  as  big  as  the  fift,  which  we  ate  as  a falad,
like  cucumbers,  and  which  we  found  very  good.  They
brought  alfo  fome  purflane,^®®  which  grows  in  large  quantities
among  the  Indian  corn,  and  of  which  they  make  no  more
account  than  of  weeds.  We  faw  here  a great  many  little
houfes,  fcattered  over  the  fields  where  they  plant  their  Indian
corn.

There

Not  fucceeding,  they  failed  forward  a corn  in  New  England,  and  is  regarded
league,  and  anchored  at  Brant  Point,  with  no  more  intereft  now  than  in  1605.
which  they  named  the  Cape  of  St.  It  is  a tropical  plant,  and  was  intro-
Louis.  duced  by  the  Indians  probably  by  acci-

168  This  purflane,  Portulaca  oleracea,  dent  with  the  feeds  of  tobacco  or  other
ftill  grows  vigoroufly  among  the  Indian  plants.

76  Voyages  of

There  is,  moreover,  in  this  bay  a very  broad  river,  which
we  named  River  du  Guaft/®  It  ftretches,  as  it  feemed  to  me,
towards  the  Iroquois,  a nation  in  open  warfare  with  the
Montagnais,  who  live  on  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence.

CHAPTER  VIII.

Continuation  of  the  Discoveries  along  the  Coast  of  the  Almou-

CHIQUOIS,  AND  WHAT  WE  OBSERVED  IN  DETAIL.

HE  next  day  we  doubled  Cap  St.  Louis, fo
named  by  Sieur  de  Monts,  a land  rather  low,
and  in  latitude  42°  45'.*®^  The  fame  day  we
failed  two  leagues  along  a fandy  coaft,  as  we
pafled  along  which  we  faw  a great  many  cabins
and  gardens.  The  wind  being  contrary,  we  entered  a little

bay

have  reprefented  to  him  that  it  was
fmall,  winding  in  its  courfe,  and  that  it
came  from  the  fouth.  We  infer,  there-
fore, that  he  not  only  faw  it  himfelf,
but  probably  from  the  deck  of  the  little
French  barque,  as  it  was  riding  at
anchor  in  our  harbor  near  Eaft  Bolton,
where  Charles  River,  augmented  by  the
tide,  flows  into  the  harbor  from  the
well,  in  a ftrong,  broad,  deep  current.
They  named  it  in  honor  of  Pierre  du
Guall,  Sieur  de  Monts,  the  commander
of  this  expedition.  Champlain  writes
the  name  “ du  Gas ; ’’  De  Laet  has
“ de  Gua  ; ” while  Charlevoix  writes
“du  Guaft.”  This  latter  orthography
generally  prevails.

It  will  be  obferved  that,  after  doub-
ling this  cape,  they  failed  two  leagues,
and  then  entered  Plymouth  Harbor,  and
confequently  this  cape  mull  have  been
what  is  now  known  as  Brant  Point.

The  latitude  is  42®  s'.

Here  at  the  end  of  the  chapter
Champlain  feems  to  be  reminded  that
he  had  omitted  to  mention  the  river  of
which  he  had  learned,  and  had  probably
feen  in  the  bay.  This  was  Charles
River.  From  the  weftern  flde  of  Nod-
dle’s Illand,  or  Fall  Boflon,  where  they
were  probably  at  anchor,  it  appeared  at
its  confluence  with  the  Myftic  River  to
come  from  the  welt,  or  the  country  of
the  Iroquois.  By  reference  to  Cham-
plain’s large  map  of  1612,  this  river  will
be  clearly  identified  as  Charles  River,  in
connexion  with  Bofton  Bay  and  its  nu-
merous iflands.  On  that  map  it  is  rep-
refented as  a long  river  flowing  from
the  weft.  This  defcription  of  the  river
by  Champlain  was  probably  from  per-
fonal  obfervation.  Had  he  obtained  his
information  from  the  Indians,  they
would  not  have  told  him  that  it  was
broad  or  that  it  came  from  the  weft,  for
fuch  are  not  the  fadls  ; but  they  would

77

Sieur  de  Champlam.

bay  to  await  a time  favorable  for  proceeding.  There  came
to  us  two  or  three  canoes,  which  had  juft  been  fifhing  for
cod  and  other  fifh,  which  are  found  there  in  large  numbers.
Thefe  they  catch  with  hooks  made  of  a piece  of  wood,  to
which  they  attach  a bone  in  the  ftiape  of  a fpear,  and  fallen
it  very  fecurely.  The  whole  has  a fang-fhape,  and  the  line
attached  to  it  is  made  out  of  the  bark  of  a tree.  They  gave
me  one  of  their  hooks,  which  I took  as  a curiofity.  In  it  the
bone  was  faftened  on  by  hemp,  like  that  in  France,  as  it
feemed  to  me,  and  they  told  me  that  they  gathered  this  plant
without  being  obliged  to  cultivate  it;  and  indicated  that  it
grew  to  the  height  of  four  or  five  feet.‘®^  This  canoe  went
back  on  fliore  to  give  notice  to  their  fellow  inhabitants,  who
caufed  columns  of  fmoke  to  arife  on  our  account.  We  faw
eighteen  or  twenty  favages,  who  came  to  the  fhore  and  began
to  dance.  Our  canoe  landed  in  order  to  give  them  fome
bagatelles,  at  which  they  were  greatly  pleafed.  Some  of
them  came  to  us  and  begged  us  to  go  to  their  river.  We
weighed  anchor  to  do  fo,  but  were  unable  to  enter  on  account
of  the  Imall  amount  of  water,  it  being  low  tide,  and  were
accordingly  obliged  to  anchor  at  the  mouth.  I went  aftiore,
where  I faw  many  others,  who  received  us  very  cordially.  I
made  alfo  an  examination  of  the  river,  but  faw  only  an  arm
of  water  extending  a fhort  diftance  inland,  where  the  land  is

only

This  was  plainly  our  Indian  hemp,  Academy^  Vol.  I.  p.  424.  It  is  the
Afchpias  incarnata,  “The  fibres  of  Swamp  Milkweed  of  Gray,  and  grows  in
the  bark  are  ftrong,  and  capable  of  being  wet  grounds.  One  variety  is  common
wrought  into  a fine  foft  thread  ; but  it  in  New  England.  The  Pilgrims  found
is  very  difficult  to  feparate  the  bark  from  at  Pl^outh  “ an  excellent  ftrong  kind
the  ftalk.  It  is  faid  to  have  been  ufed  of  Flaxe  and  Hempe.” — Vide  Mourt's
by  the  Indians  for  bow-ftrings.’*  — Vide  Relation^  Dexter’s  ed.,  p.  62.

Cutler  in  Memoirs  of  the  American

78  Voyages  of

only  in  part  cleared  up.  Running  into  this  is  merely  a brook
not  deep  enough  for  boats  except  at  full  tide.  The  circuit
of  the  bay  is  about  a league.  On  one  fide  of  the  entrance
to  this  bay  there  is  a point  which  is  almoft  an  ifland,  covered
with  wood,  principally  pines,  and  adjoins  fand-banks,  which
are  very  extenfive.  On  the  other  fide,  the  land  is  high.
There  are  two  iflets  in  this  bay,  which  are  not  feen  until  one
has  entered,  and  around  which  it  is  almoft  entirely  dry  at  low
tide.  ^ This  place  is  very  conspicuous  from  the  fea,  for  the
coafl:  is  very  low,  excepting  the  cape  at  the  entrance  to  the
bay.  We  named  it  the  Port  du  Cap  St.  Louis,*®®  diftant

two

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  St.  Louis.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A.  Indicates  the  place  where  veflels  lie.  B.  The  channel.  C.  Two  iilands  >
D.  Sandy  downs.“  E.  Shoals.  F.  Cabins  where  the  favages  till  the  ground.
G.  Place  where  we  beached  our  barque.  H.  Land  having  the  appearance  of
an  ifland,  covered  with  wood  and  adjoining  the  fandy  downs.*  /.  A hio-h  prom-
ontory which  may  be  feen  four  or  five  leagues  at  fea.<

bv  ChJmniain  now  the  fole  reprefentative  of  the  two  figured

fwent  o^of  ®'‘her  united  the  two,  or

^ower  ” who^w^.:  “^^^i^fter  Clark,  the  mafter’s  mate  of  the  “May

fro^C^Lno  when  the  party  of  Pilgrims,  fent  out

niffht^f^thp  landed  on  this  ifland, \nd  pafied  the

Sh  Ed  n Morton’s  Memorial,  j66g,  Ply-

tat^^n  d^87^  Thic^H  Chronicles,  p.  i6o  ; Bradford’s  His.  Plym.Plam

PWuth  delineation  removes  all  doubt  as  to  the  mifling  ifland  in

SaS  n mcorrednefs  of  the  theory  as  to  its  being

St’s  Refat’ion^^^n  Chronicles,  p.  64.  Fid,  also

Head  whkh  Saquifli  Neck.  (3)  Saquifli

Sare  rift  S^rvlv  rT  ^®"J°«ewhat  changed  fmce  the  time  of  ChampLn.
compare  Coaft  Survey  Chart  of  Plymouth  Harbor,  1857.  (4)  Manomet  Bluff.

Q^p  From  the

drawing  of  this  Harbor  left  by  Cham-

plain, the  map  in  his  edition  of  1613,
and  alfo  that  of  the  edition  of  1632,  it

is

78  Voyages  of  | •

o?-h'  in  part  cii-ared  up.  Running  into  this  k

not  dvcp  enough  ff>r  boats  except  at  full  tldt-.  TW

of  thi  hay  is  about  a league.  On  one  fide

to  this  bay  there  is  a point  which  is  almoll  an

with  wood,  principally  pines,  and  adjoins

are  very  extenfive.  On  the  other  hd**.  the  fcuji

There  are  two  iflets  in  this  bay,  whic  h .jrc  i,v.4

has  entered,  and  around  which  it  is  aisne  A entirer^

tide.  This  place  is  very  conspicuous  fn*!',  tiie

coaft  is  veiy  low,  excepting  the  cay>e  .u  iTv  ■

bay.  We  named  it  the  Port  du  Cap  vs  j '

Champlain  s Explanation  of  init

Port  .St,  Lor-ii.  ^ ;ir

indie •tzd  Jutkamt  id  •

A,  Indicates  the  place  where  vefTels  lie.  B.  riic  -^po  II

D.  Samivd^>wns«  K,  Shoals.  F.  Cabins  wh^c  -

O.  Pi.'icc:  where  we  l>eachcd  mr  barque.  //.
an  rewered  w-?h  wood  and  adjoining  the  fa^civ  ri  >v.i3:5  - l

omory  whu^.  n'.ay  be  iecn  four  or  five  leagues  at  foa  " -

- Clark's  IflaiHi  is  now  the  ibic  >

by  Champlain  m 1605.  The  action  of  the  b *.  : >'

1 wept  one  of  them  away.  It  was  named  after  Clark
Flower,  who  was  the  firtt  to  ftep  on  fhore,  when  - i

from  Cape  Cod  Harbor  to  felea  a habitation,  iari;:-  -*>  ra  ^
night  of  the  9th  of  Decemlrer,  O.S.  1620.  i /y-  : - .i-

mwith  Ed.  1826.  p.  35  : Young's  Chronicles,  p '
bdicn.  p- 8/.  ihis  delineation  removes  all  doL*  -j:

^vd!0^v^,  f,rho-  »na  ihows  the  incorreaneis  rU  i t ; *#'
M*^'  **"  .,  7'  »n  a aote  in  Young's

- ^-d..  note  197.  "2}  %A:  i

/V, . Somt  what  changed

■ '^•’*5^'  i h,trt  OT  Flymouti,  Harbor.  1.H5  ..

^ }\h4  ^
drawing  oi

‘^v  ' ^ ijiuis.  From  the
*niR  >iarl)or  left  by  Cham-

plain, the  wjtp
and  alfo  that

I

4 J

:v

K\

79

Sieur  de  Champlain,

two  leagues  from  the  above  cape,  and  ten  from  the  Ifland
Cape.  It  is  in  about  the  fame  latitude  as  Cap  St.  Louis.

On  the  19th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  this  place.
Coafting  along  in  a foutherly  direftion,  we  failed  four  or  five
leagues,  and  palTed  near  a rock  on  a level  with  the  furface  of
the  water.  As  we  continued  our  courfe,  we  faw  fome  land
which  feemed  to  us  to  be  iflands,  but  as  we  came  nearer  we
found  it  to  be  the  main  land,  lying  to  the  north-north-weft  of
us,  and  that  it  was  the  cape  of  a large  bay,^®*  containing  more
than  eighteen  or  nineteen  leagues  in  circuit,  into  which  we
had  run  fo  far  that  we  had  to  wear  off  on  the  other  tack  in
order  to  double  the  cape  which  we  had  feen.  The  latter  we
named  Cap  Blanc, fince  it  contained  fands  and  downs

which

is  plain  that  the  “Port  du  Cap  St.
Louis  ” is  Plymouth  Harbor,  where
anchored  the  “ Mayflower  ’’  a little  more
than  fifteen  years  later  than  this,
freighted  with  the  firft  permanent  Eng-
lifh  colony  eftabliflied  in  New  England,
commonly  known  as  the  Pilgrims.  The
Indian  name  af  the  harbor,  according
to  Captain  John  Smith,  who  vifited  it
in  1614,  was  Accomack.  He  gave  it,
by  dire6lion  of  Prince  Charles,  the
name  of  Plymouth.  More  recent  in-
veftigations  point  to  this  harbor  as  the
one  vifited  by  Martin  Pring  in  1603.  —
Vide  Paper  by  the  Rev,  Benj.  F.  De
Cojla,^  before  the  New  England  His.
Gen.  Society,^  Nov.  7,  1877,  New  Eng-
land His.  and  Gen.  Regifter,  Vol.
XXXII.  p.  79.

The  interview  of  the  French  with
the  natives  was  brief,  but  courteous
and  friendly  on  both  fides.  The  Eng-
lifli  vifits  were  interrupted  by  more  or
lefs  hoftility.  “ When  Pring  was  about
ready  to  leave,  the  Indians  became  hof-
tile  and  fet  the  woods  on  fire,  and  he

faw  it  burn  Hor  a mile  fpace.*’’  — De
Cojla.  A fkirmifh  of  fome  ferioufnefs
occurred  with  Smith’s  party.  “After
much  kindnefle  vpon  a fmall  occafion,
wee  fought  alfo  with  fortie  or  fiftie  of
thofe  : though  fome  were  hurt,  and  fome
flaine,  yet  within  an  hour  after  they
became  friends.”  — Smith's  New  Eng-
land,,  Bofton,  ed.  1865,  p.  45.

Cape  Cod  Bay.

They  named  it  “ le  Cap  Blanc,”
the  White  Cape,  from  its  white  appear-
ance, while  Bartholomew  Gofnold,  three
years  before,  had  named  it  Cape  Cod
from  the  multitude  of  codfifli  near  its
fliores.  Captain  John  Smith  called  it
Cape  James.  All  the  early  navigators
who  pafled  along  our  Atlantic  coaft  feem
to  have  feen  the  headland  of  Cape  Cod.
It  is  well  defined  on  Juan  de  la  Cofa’s
map  of  1 500,  although  no  name  is  given
to  it.  On  Ribero’s  map  of  1529  it  is
called  C.  de  arenas.  On  the  map  of
Nic.  Vallard  de  Dieppe  of  1543,  it  is
called  C.  de  Croix,

8o

Voyages  of

which  had  a white  appearance.  A favorable  wind  was  of
great  affiftance  to  us  here,  for  otherwife  we  fliould  have  been
in  danger  of  being  driven  upon  the  coaft.  This  bay  is  very
fafe,  provided  the  land  be  not  approached  nearer  than  a good
league,  there  being  no  iflands  nor  rocks  except  that  juft
mentioned,  which  is  near  a river  that  extends  fome  diftance
inland,  which  we  named  St.  Suzanne  du  Cap  Blanc,*®®  whence
acrofs  to  Cap  St.  Louis  the  diftance  is  ten  leagues.  Cap
Blanc  is  a point  of  fand,  which  bends  around  towards  the
fouth  fome  fix  leagues.  This  coaft  is  rather  high,  and  con-
fifts  of  fand,  which  is  very  confpicuous  as  one  comes  from
the  fea.  At  a diftance  of  fome  fifteen  or  eighteen  leagues
from  land,  the  depth  of  the  water  is  thirty,  forty,  and  fifty
fathoms,  but  only  ten  on  nearing  the  fliore,  which  is  unob-
ftrudted.  There  is  a large  extent  of  open  country  along  the
fliore  before  reaching  the  woods,  which  are  very  attradfive
and  beautiful.  We  anchored  off  the  coaft,  and  faw  fome
favages,  towards  whom  four  of  our  company  proceeded.
Making  their  way  upon  a fand-bank,  they  obferved  fomething
like  a bay,  and  cabins  bordering  it  on  all  fides.  When  they
were  about  a league  and  a half  from  us,  there  came  to  them
a favage  dancing  all  over,  as  they  expreffed  it.  He  had  come

down

166  Wellfleet  Harbor.  It  may  be  ob-  leagues.  Now,  as  the  diftance  acrofs
ferved  that  a little  farther  back  Cham-  to  Brant  Point,  or  Cap  St.  Louis,  from
plain  fays  that,  having  failed  along  in  a Wellfleet  Harbor,  is  ten  leagues,  and  as
foutherly  diredtion  four  or  five  leagues.  Cap  Blanc  or  Cape  Cod  is  north-north-
they  were  at  a place  where  there  was  a weft  of  it,  it  is  plain  that  Wellfleet  Har-
“ rock  on  a level  with  the  furface  of  the  bor  or  Herring  River,  which  flows  into
water,”  and  that  they  faw  lying  north-  it,  was  the  river  which  they  named  St.
north-weft  of  them  Cap  Blanc,  that  is,  Suzanne  du  Cap  Blanc,  and  that  the
Cape  Cod  ; he  now  fays  that  the  ^‘rock”  “rock  on  a level  with  the  water”  was
is  near  a river,  which  they  named  St.  one  of  the  feveral  to  be  found  near  the
Suzanne  du  Cap  Blanc,  and  that  from  entrance  of  Wellfleet  Bay.  It  may  have
it  to  Cap  St.  Louis  the  diftance  is  ten  been  the  noted  Bay  Rock  or  Blue  Rock.

Sieur  de  ChciMplain.  8i

down  from  the  high  fhore,  but  turned  about  fhortly  after  to
inform  his  fellow  inhabitants  of  our  arrival.

The  next  day,  the  20th  of  the  month,  we  went  to  the  place
which  our  men  had  feen,  and  which  we  found  a very  danger-
ous harbor  in  confequence  of  the  fhoals  and  banks,  where  we
faw  breakers  in  all  diredlions.  It  was  almoft  low  tide  when
we  entered,  and  there  were  only  four  feet  of  water  in  the
northern  paffage ; at  high  tide,  there  are  two  fathoms.  After
we  had  entered,  we  found  the  place  very  fpacious,  being  per-
haps three  or  four  leagues  in  circuit,  entirely  furrounded  by
little  houfes,  around  each  one  of  which  there  was  as  much
land  as  the  occupant  needed  for  his  fupport.  A fmall  river
enters  here,  which  is  very  pretty,  and  in  which  at  low  tide
there  are  fome  three  and  a half  feet  of  water.  There  are  alfo
two  or  three  brooks  bordered  by  meadows.  It  would  be  a
very  fine  place,  if  the  harbor  were  good.  I took  the  altitude,
and  found  the  latitude  42°,  and  the  defledion  of  the  magnetic
needle  18°  40'.  Many  favages,  men  and  women,  vifited  us,
and  ran  up  on  all  fides  dancing.  We  named  this  place  Port
de  Mallebarre.^®’^

The  next  day,  the  21ft  of  the  month,  Sieur  de  Monts
determined  to  go  and  fee  their  habitation.  Nine  or  ten  of
us  accompanied  him  with  our  arms;  the  reft  remained  to
guard  the  barque.  We  went  about  a league  along  the  coaft.
Before  reaching  their  cabins,  we  entered  a field  planted  with

Indian

Port  de  Mallebarre^  Naufet  Har-  fouth,  and  this  has  apparently  changed
bor,  in  latitude  41°  48'.  By  comparing  its  interior  channel,  and  the  whole  form
Champlain’s  map  of  the  harbor,  it  will  of  the  bay.  The  name  itfelf  has  drifted
be  feen  that  important  changes  have  away  with  the  fands,  and  feebly  clings
taken  place  fince  1605.  The  entrance  to  the  extremity  of  Monomoy  Point  at
has  receded  a mile  or  more  towards  the  the  heel  of  the  Cape.

82

Voyages  of

Indian  corn  in  the  manner  before  defcribed.  The  corn  was
in  flower,  and  five  and  a half  feet  high.  There  was  fome  lefs
advanced,  which  they  plant  later.  We  faw  many  Brazilian
beans,  and  many  fquaflies  of  various  fizes,  very  good  for  eat-
ing ; fome  tobacco,  and  roots  which  they  cultivate,  the  latter
having  the  tafle  of  an  artichoke.  The  woods  are  filled  with
oaks,  nut-trees,  and  beautiful  cyprefles,^®®  which  are  of  a red-
difli  color  and  have  a very  pleafant  odor.  There  were  alfo
feveral  fields  entirely  uncultivated,  the  land  being  allowed  to

remain

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Mallbbarrb.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water,

A.  The  two  entrances  to  the  harbor.  B,  Sandy  downs  where  the  favages
killed  a failor  belonging  to  the  barque  of  Sieur  de  Monts.  C Places  in  the  har-
bor where  the  barque  of  Sieur  de  Monts  was.  D,  Spring  on  the  fhore  of  the  har-
bor. E.  A river  flowing  into  the  harbor.  F.  A brook.  G,  A fmall  river  where
quantities  of  fifli  are  caught.  H.  Sandy  downs  with  low  fhrubs  and  many  vines.
/.  Ifland  at  the  point  of  the  downs.  L,  Houfes  and  dwelling-places  of  the  fav-
ages that  till  the  land.  M . Shoals  and  fand-banks  at  the  entrance  and  infide  of
the  harbor.  O,  Sandy  downs.  P,  Sea-coaft.  q.  Barque  of  Sieur  de  Poutrin-
court,  when  he  vifited  the  place  two  years  after  Sieur  de  Monts.  R,  Landing  of
the  party  of  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt.

Notes.  A comparifon  of  this  map  with  the  Coafl:  Survey  Charts  will  Ihow
very  great  changes  in  this  harbor  fince  the  days  of  Champlain.  Not  only  has
the  mouth  of  the  bay  receded  towards  the  fouth,  but  this  receflion  appears  to
have  left  entirely  dry  much  of  the  area  which  was  flooded  in  1605.  Under  refer-
ence q,  on  the  above  map,  it  is  intimated  that  De  Poutrincourt’s  vifit  was  two
years  Jiter  that  of  De  Monts.  It  was  more  than  one,  and  was  the  fecond  year
after,  but  not,  ftridly  fpeaking,  “ two  years  after.’'

168  N’ot  flridfly  a
juniper,  the  Savin,
perus  Virginiafta^

cyprefs,  but  rather  a
or  red  cedar,  Juni-
a tree  of  exclufively

American  origin ;
could  not  be  truly
name  then  known

and  confequently  it
charadlerized  by  any
to  Champlain.

82

Voyages

of

JncHarr  corn  in  the  manner  befote  "

*n  lunver,  and  five  and  a half  feet  bi^-
^wJvanced.  which  they  plant  later.  W -
brans,  and  niany  fquathes  of  varii^i*  a -■■■
ine  : Ibme  tobacco,  and  roots  which  ib
hawing  the  tafte  of  an  artichoke,  j
oaks,  nut-trees,  and  beautiful  '

dilh  color  and  have  a very  plcafa  » ■
feveral  fields  entirely  uncultivac ?

Ch.\mplain’s  Explanation  op  rr-;.

Mallssamas.
Tke  JiguTfi  indicaU

-

A The  two  entrances  to  the  harbor.
kilhMi  a iailor  belonging  to  the  barque  of  Sh  ui
bur  wl»ere  the  barque  of- Si eur  de  Moms  wa4.  ^ ^

bor.  £.  A river  flowing  into  the  harbor.  / A ^

of  fifli  are  caught.  H,  Sandy  ~ ^

/.  Tlhui^i  at  the  point  of  the  downs.  L.
age^  that  HSI  the  land.  AT,  Shoals  and  ?:

♦nc  O.  Sandy  downs.  P.  Sea-coaft  r.

Vtn  n he  vidted  the  place  two  years  a;l^•
th*  d Sleur  de  Poutrincourt.

Nrrrvw-  A cotnparlfon  of  this  map  with
v«T'  * i.hanges  in  this  harbor  fiuce  th  j:?
tr  . r .►<  the  bay  receded  towards  th^  4 ..

;«:a  irukely  dr>*  much  of  the  area  which  v-.  -

tnt^T  y.  -ft  the  above  map,  it  is  intimated
d.At  tif  De  Monts.  It  was  uiuii
dncHy  fpeaking,  “two  years  after

. H ryprefs,  bat  rather  a

" f*  or  red  cedar,  yum-

: a tree  of  oxclurjvely

W P

4cs';^=--V^-:;v:.;:?-i:v  ^ . 3.  ' -H— ^

sa-r'  -^i-;  . • -•  •o^.-»oo.i^

^.300.|^p*  goo

Sieur  de  Champlain.  83

remain  fallow.  When  they  with  to  plant  it,  they  fet  fire  to
the  weeds,  and  then  work  it  over  with  their  wooden  fpades.
Their  cabins  are  round,  and  covered  with  heavy  thatch  made
of  reeds.  In  the  roof  there  is  an  opening  of  about  a foot  and
a half,  whence  the  fmoke  from  the  fire  paffes  out.  We  afked
them  if  they  had  their  permanent  abode  in  this  place,  and
whether  there  was  much  fnow.  But  we  were  unable  to  afcer-
tain  this  fully  from  them,  not  underftanding  their  language,
although  they  made  an  attempt  to  inform  us  by  figns,  by
taking  fome  fand  in  their  hands,  fpreading  it  out  over  the
ground,  and  indicating  that  it  was  of  the  color  of  our  collars,
and  that  it  reached  the  depth  of  a foot.  Others  made  figns
that  there  was  lefs,  and  gave  us  to  underftand  alfo  that  the
harbor  never  froze  ; but  we  were  unable  to  afcertain  whether
the  fnow  lafted  long.  I conclude,  however,  that  this  region
is  of  moderate  temperature,  and  the  winter  not  fevere.
While  we  were  there,  there  was  a north-eafl  ftorm,  which
lafted  four  days;  the  fky being  fo  overcafl  that  the  fun  hardly
fhone  at  all.  It  was  very  cold,  and  we  were  obliged  to  put
on  our  great-coats,  which  we  had  entirely  left  off.  Yet  I
think  the  cold  was  accidental,  as  it  is  often  experienced  elfe-
where  out  of  feafon.

On  the  23d  of  July,  four  or  five  feamen  having  gone  on
fhore  with  fome  kettles  to  get  frefli  water,  w'hich  was  to  be
found  in  one  of  the  fand-banks  a fhort  diftance  from  our
barque,  fome  of  the  favages,  coveting  them,  watched  the  time
when  our  men  went  to  the  fpring,  and  then  feized  one  out  of
the  hands  of  a failor,  who  was  the  firfl  to  dip,  and  who  had
no  weapons.  One  of  his  companions,  ftarting  to  run  after
him,  foon  returned,  as  he  could  not  catch  him,  fince  he  ran

much

84  Voyages  of

much  fafter  than  himfelf.  The  other  favages,  of  whom  there
were  a large  number,  feeing  our  failors  running  to  our  barque,
and  at  the  fame  time  fhouting  to  us  to  fire  at  them,  took  to
flight.  At  the  time  there  were  fome  of  them  in  our  barque,
who  threw  themfelves  into  the  fea,  only  one  of  whom  we
were  able  to  feize.  Thofe  on  the  land  who  had  taken  to
flight,  feeing  them  fwimming,  returned  ftraight  to  the  failor
from  whom  they  had  taken  away  the  kettle,  hurled  fev-
eral  arrows  at  him  from  behind,  and  brought  him  down.
Seeing  this,  they  ran  at  once  to  him,  and  defpatched  him
with  their  knives.  Meanwhile,  hafte  was  made  to  go  on
fhore,  and  mufkets  were  fired  from  our  barque : mine,  burft-
ing  in  my  hands,  came  near  killing  me.  The  favages,  hearing
this  difcharge  of  fire-arms,  took  to  flight,  and  with  redoubled
fpeed  when  they  faw  that  we  had  landed,  for  they  were  afraid
when  they  faw  us  running  after  them.  There  was  no  likeli-
hood of  our  catching  .them,  for  they  are  as  fwift  as  horfes.
We  brought  in  the  murdered  man,  and  he  was  buried  fome
hours  later.  Meanwhile,  we  kept  the  prifoner  bound  by  the
feet  and  hands  on  board  of  our  barque,  fearing  that  he  might
efcape.  But  Sieur  de  Monts  refolved  to  let  him  go,  being
perfuaded  that  he  was  not  to  blame,  and  that  he  had  no  pre-
vious knowledge  of  what  had  tranfpired,  as  alfo  thofe  who,  at
the  time,  were  in  and  about  our  barque.  Some  hours  later
there  came  fome  favages  to  us,  to  excufe  themfelves,  indi-
cating by  figns  and  demonftrations  that  it  was  not  they  who
had  committed  this  malicious  a(5l,  but  others  farther  off  in
the  interior.  We  did  not  wifh  to  harm  them,  although  it
was  in  our  power  to  avenge  ourfelves.

All  thefe  favages  from  the  Ifland  Cape  wear  neither  robes

Sieur  de  Champlain.  85

nor  furs,  except  very  rarely  : moreover,  their  robes  are  made
of  graffes  and  hemp,  fcarcely  covering  the  body,  and  coming
down  only  to  their  thighs.  They  have  only  the  fexual  parts
concealed  with  a fmall  piece  of  leather;  fo  likewife  the
women,  with  whom  it  comes  down  a little  lower  behind  than
with  the  men,  all  the  reft  of  the  body  being  naked.  When-
ever the  women  came  to  fee  us,  they  wore  robes  which  were
open  in  front.  The  men  cut  off  the  hair  on  the  top  of  the
head  like  thofe  at  the  river  Chouacoet.  I faw,  among  other
things,  a girl  with  her  hair  very  neatly  dreffed,  with  a fkin
colored  red,  and  bordered  on  the  upper  part  with  little  shell-
beads.  A part  of  her  hair  hung  down  behind,  the  reft
being  braided  in  various  ways.  Thefe  people  paint  the  face
red,  black,  and  yellow.  They  have  fcarcely  any  beard,  and
tear  it  out  as  faft  as  it  grows.  Their  bodies  are  well-propor-
tioned. I cannot  tell  what  government  they  have,  but  I
think  that  in  this  refpe<5l  they  refemble  their  neighbors,  who
have  none  at  all.  They  know  not  how  to  worfhip  or  pray ;
yet,  like  the  other  favages,  they  have  fome  fuperftitions,  which
I fhall  defcribe  in  their  place.  As  for  weapons,  they  have
only  pikes,  clubs,  bows  and  arrows.  It  would  feem  from
their  appearance  that  they  have  a good  difpofition,  better
than  thofe  of  the  north,  but  they  are  all  in  fa6t  of  no  great
worth.  Even  a flight  intercourfe  with  them  gives  you  at
once  a knowledge  of  them.  They  are  great  thieves  and,  if
they  cannot  lay  hold  of  any  thing  with  their  hands,  they  try
to  do  fo  with  their  feet,  as  we  have  oftentimes  learned  by
experience.  I am  of  opinion  that,  if  they  had  any  thing  to
exchange  with  us,  they  would  not  give  themfelves  to  thiev-
ing. They  bartered  away  to  us  their  bows,  arrows,  and  quiv-
ers.

86

Voyages  of

ers,  for  pins  and  buttons ; and  if  they  had  had  any  thing
elfe  better  they  would  have  done  the  fame  with  it.  It  is
neceffary  to  be  on  one’s  guard  againfl  this  people,  and  live  in
a date  of  diftruft  of  them,  yet  without  letting  them  perceive
it.  They  gave  us  a large  quantity  of  tobacco,  which  they  dry
and  then  reduce  to  powder.^®*  When  they  eat  Indian  corn,
they  boil  it  in  earthen  pots,  which  they  make  in  a way  dif-
ferent from  ours.^™  They  bray  it  alfo  in  wooden  mortars  and
reduce  it  to  flour,  of  which  they  then  make  cakes,  like  the
Indians  of  Peru.

In  this  place  and  along  the  whole  coaft  from  Quinibequy,
there  are  a great  many  Jiguenocsg  which  is  a fifh  with  a

The  method  of  preparing  tobacco
here  for  fmoking  was  probably  not  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  Indian  tribes  in
Canada.  Among  the  Huron  antiquities
in  the  Mufeum  at  the  Univerfity  Laval
are  pipes  which  were  found  already
filled  with  tobacco,  fo  prepared  as  to
refemble  our  fine-cut  tobacco.  — Vide
Laverdilre  in  loco.

The  following  defcription  of  the
Indian  potterv,  and  the  method  of  its
manufacture  by  their  women,  as  quoted
by  Laverdi^re  from  Sagard’s  Hiftory  of
Canada,  who  wrote  in  1636,  will  be  in-
terefting  to  the  antiquary,  and  will  illuf-
trate  what  Champlain  means  by  “ a way
different  from  ours  : ” —

“They  are  fkilful  in  making  good
earthen  pots,  which  they  harden  very
well  on  the  hearth,  and  which  are  fo
ftrong  that  they  do  not,  like  our  own,
break  over  the  fire  when  having  no
water  in  them.  But  they  cannot  fuftain
dampnefs  nor  cold  water  fo  long  as  our
own,  fince  they  become  brittle  and  break
at  the  leafl:  fhock  given  them  ; otherwife
they  laft  very  well.  The  favages  make
them  by  taking  fome  earth  of  the  right

fliell

kind,  which  they  clean  and  knead  well
in  their  hands,  mixing  with  it,  on  what
principle  I know  not,  a fmall  quantity
of  greafe.  Then  making  the  mafs  into
the  fhape  of  a ball,  they  make  an  inden-
tation in  the  middle  of  it  with  the  fill,
which  they  make  continually  larger  by
ftriking  repeatedly  on  the  outfide  with  a
little  wooden  paddle  as  much  as  is  nec-
elTary  to  complete  it.  Thefe  veffels  are
of  different  fizes,  without  feet  or  han-
dles, completely  round  like  a ball,  ex-
cepting the  mouth,  which  proiefts  a
little.”  ^

This  cruflacean,  Limulus  poly-
pheinus,  is  Hill  feen  on  the  ftrands  of
New  England.  They  are  found  in  great
abundance  in  more  fouthern  waters  : on
the  fhores  of  Long  Ifland  and  New  Jer-
fey,  they  are  colleCled  in  boat-loads  and
made  ufeful  for  fertilizing  purpofes.
Champlain  has  left  a drawing  of  it  on
his  large  map.  It  is  vulgarly  known
as  the  king-crab,  or  horfe-foot;  to  the
latter  it  bears  a ftriking  fimilarity.  This
very  accurate  defcription  of  Champlain
was  copied  by  De  Laet  into  his  elabo-
rate work  “Nows  Orbis,”  publifhed

in

Sieur  de  Champlain.  87

Ihell  on  its  back  like  the  tortoife,  yet  different,  there  being  in
the  middle  a row  of  little  prickles,  of  the  color  of  a dead  leaf,
like  the  reft  of  the  fifh.  At  the  end  of  this  fhell,  there  is
another  ftill  fmaller,  bordered  by  very  fharp  points.  The
length  of  the  tail  varies  according  to  their  fize.  With  the
end  of  it,  thefe  people  point  their  arrows,  and  it  contains
alfo  a row  of  prickles  like  the  large  fhell  in  which  are  the
eyes.  There  are  eight  fmall  feet  like  thofe  of  the  crab,  and
two  behind  longer  and  flatter,  which  they  ufe  in  fwimming.
There  are  alfo  in  front  two  other  very  fmall  ones  with  which
they  eat.  When  walking,  all  the  feet  are  concealed  except-
ing the  two  hindermoft.  which  are  flightly  vifible.  U nder  the
fmall  fhell  there  are  membranes  which  fwell  up,  and  beat  like
the  throat  of  a frog,  and  reft  upon  each  other  like  the  folds  of
a waiftcoat.  The  largeft  fpecimen  of  this  fifh  that  I faw  was
a foot  broad,  and  a foot  and  a half  long.

We  faw  alfo  a fea-bird  with  a black  beak,  the  upper  part
flightly  aquiline,  four  inches  long  and  in  the  form  of  a lancet ;
namely,  the  lower  part  reprefenting  the  handle  and  the  upper
the  blade,  which  is  thin,  fharp  on  both  fides,  and  fhorter  by

a

in  1633,  accompanied  by  an  excellent  exceedingly  long ; they  fly  in  clofe  flocks,
wood-engraving.  This  Ipecies  is  pecu-  moving  flmultaneoufly.  They  feem  to
liar  to  our  Atlantic  waters,  and  naturally  feed  as  they  Ikim  low  over  the  water,
at  that  time  attra6led  the  attention  of  the  under-mandible  grazing  or  cutting
Europeans,  who  had  not  feen  it  before,  the  furface,  and  thus  taking  in  their
The  Black  Skimmer  or  Cut- water,  food.  — Vide  Cones' s Key  to  North
Rhynchops  nigra.  It  appears  to  be  dif-  American  Birds^  Bofton,  1872,  p.  324.
tin6l  from,  but  clofely  related  to,  the  Whether  Champlain  faw  this  bird  as
Terns.  This  bird  is  here  defcribed  with  a ‘‘  ftray  ’’  on  the  fhores  of  Cape  Cod,  or
general  accuracy.  According  to  Dr.  whether  it  has  fince  ceafed  to  come  in
Coues,  it  belongs  more  particularly  to  the  large  numbers  as  far  north  as  formerly.
South  Atlantic  and  Gulf  States,  where  offers  an  interefling  inquiry  for  the  orni-
it  is  very  abundant ; it  is  frequent  in  the  thologifts.  Specimens  may  be  feen  in
Middle  States,  and  only  occafionally  the  Mufeum  of  the  Bofton  Society  of
feen  in  New  England.  The  wings  are  Natural  Hiftory.

. 88

Voyages  of

a third  than  the  other,  which  circumftance  is  a matter  of
aftonifhment  to  many  perfons,  who  cannot  comprehend  how
it  is  poffible  for  this  bird  to  eat  with  fuch  a beak.  It  is  of
the  fize  of  a pigeon,  the  wings  being  very  long  in  proportion
to  the  body,  the  tail  fhort,  as  alfo  the  legs,  which  are  red ; the
feet  being  fmall  and  flat.  The  plumage  on  the  upper  part  is
gray-brown,  and  on  the  under  part  pure  white.  They  go
always  in  flocks  along  the  fea-fhore,  like  the  pigeons  with  us.

The  ravages,  along  all  thefe  coafts  where  we  have  been,  fay
that  other  birds,  which  are  very  large,  come  along  when  their
corn  is  ripe.  They  imitated  for  us  their  cry,  which  refembles
that  of  the  turkey.  They  fhowed  us  their  feathers  in  feveral
places,  with  which  they  feather  their  arrows,  and  which  they
put  on  their  heads  for  decoration ; and  alfo  a kind  of  hair
which  they  have  under  the  throat  like  thofe  we  have  in
France,  and  they  fay  that  a red  crefl;  falls  over  upon  the
beak.  According  to  their  defcription,  they  are  as  large  as  a
buftard,  which  is  a kind  of  goofe,  having  the  neck  longer  and
twice  as  large  as  thofe  with  us.  All  thefe  indications  led  us
to  conclude  that  they  were  turkeys.'^®  We  fhould  have  been

very

Champlain  was  clearly  corre6l  in  tides.  Such  as  love  Turkie  hunting,
his  conclufion.  The  wild  Turkey,  Me-  moft  follow  it  in  winter  after  a new-falne
leagris  gallopavo,  was  not  uncommon  Snow,  when  hee  may  followe  them  by
in  New  England  at  that  period.  Wood  their  tradls  ; fome  haue  killed  ten  or  a
and  Joflelyn  and  Higginfon,  all  fpeak  of  dozen  in  half  a day ; if  they  can  be
it  fully : — ^ found  towards  an  evening  and  watched

“Of  thefe,  fometimes  there  will  be  where  they  peirch,  if  one  come  about  ten
forty,  threefcore  and  a hundred  of  a or  eleven  of  the  clock,  he  may  flioote  as
flocke  ; fometimes  inore,  and  fometimes  often  as  he  will,  they  will  fit,  unleffe
leffe  ; their  feeding  is  Acornes,  Hawes,  they  be  flenderly  wounded.  Thefe  Tur-
and  Berries  ; fome  of  them  get  a haunt  kies  remaine  all  the  yeare  long,  the  price
to  frequent  our  Englifh  come:  In  win-  of  a good  Turkey  cocke  is  foure  fhillings ;
ter,  when  the  fnow  covers  the  ground,  and  he  is  well  worth  it,  for  he  may  be
they  refort  to  the  Sea  fhore  to  look  for  in  weight  forty  pound ; a Hen,  two
Shrimps,  and  fuch  fmal  Filhes  at  low  Ihillings.’*  — Wood^s  New  England

Profpefli

Sieur  de  Champlain.  89

very  glad  to  fee  fome  of  thefe  birds,  as  well  as  their  feathers,
for  the  fake  of  greater  certainty.  Before  feeing  their  feathers,
and  the  little  bunch  of  hair  which  they  have  under  the  throat,
and  hearing  their  cry  imitated,  I flaould  have  thought  that
they  were  certain  birds  like  turkeys,  which  are  found  in  fome
places  in  Peru,  along  the  fea-fhore,  eating  carrion  and  other
dead  things  like  crows.  But  thefe  are  not  fo  large ; nor  do
they  have  fo  long  a bill,  or  a cry  like  that  of  real  turkeys ;
nor  are  they  good  to  eat  like  thofe  which  the  Indians  fay
come  in  flocks  in  fummer,  and  at  the  beginning  of  winter  go
away  to  warmer  countries,  their  natural  dwelling-place.

CHAPTER  IX.

ProfpePl.,  1634,  Prince  Society  ed.,  Bof-
ton,  p.  32.

<‘The  Turkic^  who  is  blacker  than
ours  ; I haue  heard  feveral  credible  per-
fbns  affirm,  they  haue  feen  Turkic  Cocks
that  have  weighed  forty,  yea  fixty  pound ;
but  out  of  my  perfonal  experimental
knowledge  I can  affure  you,  that  I haue
eaten  my  ffiare  of  a Turkic  Cock.,  that
when  he  was  pull’d  and  garbidg’d,
weighed  thirty  [9]  pound ; and  I haue
alfo  feen  threefcore  broods  of  young
Turkics  on  the  fide  of  a marfh,  funning
themfelves  in  a morning  betimes,  but
this  was  thirty  years  fince,  the  Englijh
and  the  Indians  having  now  deflroyed
the  breed,  fo  that  ’tis  very  rare  to  meet
with  a wild  Turkic  in  the  Woods  ; But
fome  of  the  Engli/h  bring  up  great  flore
of  the  wild  kind,  which  remain  about
their  Houfes  as  tame  as  ours  in  Eng-
land?'*  — New  England"* s Rarities.,  by
John  Joffelyn,  Gent,  London,  1672,
Tuckerman’s  ed.,  pp.  41,  42.

“Here  are  likewife  abundance  of
Turkies  often  killed  in  the  Woods,

farre  greater  then  our  Englifh  Turkies,
and  exceeding  fat,  fweet,  and  flefhy,  for
here  they  haue  aboundance  of  feeding
all  the  yeere  long,  as  Strawberriees,  in
Summer  at  places  are  full  of  them  and
all  manner  of  Berries  and  Fruits.”  —
New  England  Plantation.,  by  Francis
Higginfon,  London,  1630.  Vide  alfo
Bradford's  Hijl.  Plym.  Plantation.,
1646,  Deane’s  ed.,  Bofton,  1856,  p.  105.

It  appears  to  be  the  opinion  among
recent  ornithologifts  that  the  fpecies  of
turkey,  thus  early  found  in  New  Eng-
land, was  the  Meleagris  A mericana^  long
fince  extirpated,  and  not  identical  with
our  domefticated  bird.  Our  domeflic
turkey  is  fuppofed  to  have  originated
in  the  Weft  Indies  or  in  Mexico,  and
to  have  been  tranfplanted  as  tamed  to
other  parts  of  this  continent,  and  to
Europe,  and  named  by  Linnaeus  Me-
leagris gallopavo.  — Vide  Report  on  the
Zo  'ology  of  Pacific  Railroad  Routes.,  by
Baird,  Wafhington,  1858,  Vol.  IX.  Part
II.  pp.  613-618;  Cones'* s Key,  Bofton,
1872,  pp.  231,  232.

12

90

Voyages  of

CHAPTEjR  IX.

Return  from  the  Discoveries  along  the  Coast  of  the  Almouchiquois.

E had  fpent  more  than  five  weeks  in  going  over
three  degrees  of  latitude,  and  our  voyage  was
limited  to  fix,  fince  we  had  not  taken  provifions
for  a longer  time.  In  confequence  of  fogs  and
ftorms,  we  had  not  been  able  to  go  farther  than
Mallebarre,  where  we  waited  feveral  days  for  fair  weather,  in
order  to  fail.  Finding  ourfelves  accordingly  preffed  by  the
fcantinefs  of  provifions,  Sieur  de  Monts  determined  to  return
to  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix,  in  order  to  find  another  place  more
favorable  for  our  fettlement,  as  we  had  not  been  able  to  do  on
any  of  the  coafls  which  we  had  explored  on  this  voyage.

Accordingly,  on  the  25th  of  July,  we  fet  out  from  this
harbor,  ih  order  to  make  obfervations  elfewhere.  In  going
out,  we  came  near  being  loft  on  the  bar  at  the  entrance,  from
the  miftake  of  our  pilots,  Cramolet  and  Champdore,  matters
of  the  barque,  who  had  imperfedlly  marked  out  the  entrance
of  the  channel  on  the  fouthern  fide,  where  we  were  to  go.
Having  efcaped  this  danger,  we  headed  north-eaft  for  fix
leagues,  until  we  reached  Cap  Blanc,  failing  on  from  there

to

Champlain  is  in  error  as  to  the  Anne,  and  about  i6'  eaft  of  the  weftern
longitude  of  Mallebarre,  or  Naufet  har-  point  of  Cap  Blanc,  or  Cape  Cod ; and,
bor,  from  which  they  took  their  depart-  to  reach  their  defti nation,  they  muft
ure  on  the  25th  of  July,  1605.  This  port  have  failed  north-weft,  and  not  north-
is  about  38'  eaft  of  Ifland  Cape,  or  Cape  eaft,  as  he  erroneoufly  ftates.

91

Sieur  de  Champlain.

to  Ifland  Cape,  a diftance  of  fifteen  leagues,  with  the  fame
wind.  Then  we  headed  eaft-north-eaft  fixteen  leagues,  as
far  as  Chouacoet,  where  we  faw  the  favage  chief,  Marchin,*^®
whom  we  had  expedled  to  fee  at  the  Lake  Quinibequy.  He
had  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  valiant  ones  of  his
people.  He  had  a fine  appearance : all  his  motions  were  dig-
nified, favage  as  he  was.  Sieur  de  Monts  gave  him  many
prefents,  with  which  he  was  greatly  pleafed  ; and,  in  return,
Marchin  gave  him  a young  Etechemin  boy,  whom  he  had
captured  in  war,  and  whom  we  took  away  with  us ; and  thus
we  fet  out,  mutually  good  friends.  We  headed  north-eaft  a
quarter  eaft  for  fifteen  leagues,  as  far  as  Quinibequy,  where
we  arrived  on  the  29th  of  the  month,  and  where  we  were
expedling  to  find  a favage,  named  Safinou,  of  whom  I
fpoke  before.  Thinking  that  he  would  come,  we  waited
fome  time  for  him,  in  order  to  recover  from  him  an  Eteche-
min young  man  and  girl,  whom  he  was  holding  as  prifoners.
While  waiting,  there  came  to  us  a captain  called  Anaffou,
who  trafficked  a little  in  furs,  and  with  whom  we  made  an
alliance.  He  told  us  that  there  was  a fhip,  ten  leagues  off
the  harbor,  which  was  engaged  in  fifliing,  and  that  thofe  on
her  had  killed  five  favages  of  this  river,  under  cover  of  friend-
fiiip.  From  his  defcription  of  the  men  on  the  veffel,  we
concluded  that  they  were  Englifh,  and  we  named  the  ifland
where  they  were  La  Nef ; for,  at  a diftance,  it  had  the

They  had  failed  to  meet  him  at
the  lake  in  the  Kennebec ; namely,
Merrymeeting  B^y.—  Vtde  antea,  p.
60.

The  ifland  which  they  thus  named
La  Nefy  the  Ship,  was  Monhegan,

appearance

about  twenty-five  nautical  miles  eaft
from  the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec,  a
mile  and  a third  long,  with  an  elevation
at  its  higheft  point  of  a hundred  and
forty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  fea,
and  in  latitude  43°  45'  52".  Cham-
plain’s

92  Voyages  of

appearance  of  a ship.  Finding  that  the  above-mentioned

plain’s  conje6lure  as  to  the  nationality
of  the  fhip  was  corre6l.  It  was  the
“ Archangel,”  commanded  by  the  cele-
brated explorer,  Captain  George  Wey-
mouth, who  under  the  patronage  of  the
Earl  of  Southampton  came  to  explofe
our  Atlantic  coaft  in  the  fpring  of  1605,
for  the  purpofe  of  feledling  a fite  for
an  Englifh  colony.  He  anchored  neaf
Monhegan  on  the  28th  of  May,  N.  S. ;
and,  after  fpending  nearly  a month  in
reconnoitring  the  iflands  and  mainland
in  the  vicinity,  and  capturing  five  of  the
natives,  he  took  his  departure  for  Eng-
land on  the  26th  of  June.  On  the  5th
of  July,  juft  9 days  after  Weymouth
left  the  coaft,  De  Monts  and  Cham-
plain entered  with  their  little  barque
the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec.  They  do
not  appear  to  have  feen  at  that  time  any
of  the  natives  at  or  about  the  mouth  of
the  river  ; and  it  is  not  unlikely  that,  on
account  of  the  feizure  and,  as  they  fup-
pofed,  the  murder  of  their  comrades  by
Weymouth,  they  had  retired  farther  up
the  river  for  greater  fafety.  On  the
return,  however,  of  the  French  from
Cape  Cod,  on  the  29th  of  July,  Anaflbu
gave  them,  as  Hated  in  the  text,  a
friendly  reception,  and  related  the  ftory
of  the  feizure  of  his  friends.

To  prevent  the  interference  of  other
nations,  it  was  the  policy  of  Weymouth
and  his  patron  not  to  difclofe  the  local-
ity of  the  region  he  had  explored  ; and
confequently  Rofier,  the  narrator  of  the
voyage,  fo  fkilfully  withheld  whatever
might  clearly  identify  the  place,  and
couched  his  defcriptions  in  fuch  indefi-
nite language,  that  there  has  been  and
is  now  a great  diverfity  of  opinion  on
the  fubje<5l  among  local  hiftorians.  It
was  the  opinion  of  the  Rev.  Thomas
Prince  that  Weymouth  explored  the
Kennebec,  or  Sagadahoc,  and  with  him
coincide  Mr.  John  McKeen  and  the

Safinou

Rev.  Dr.  Ballard,  of  Brunfwick.  The
Rev.  Dr.  Belknap,  after  fatisfadlory
examinations,  decided  that  it  was  the
Penobfcot ; and  he  is  followed  by  Mr.
William  Willis,  late  Prefident  of  the
Maine  Hiftorical  Society.  Mr.  George
Prince,  of  Bath,  has  publiftied  an  elabo-
rate paper  to  prove  that  it  was  St.
George’s  River ; and  Mr.  David  Culh-
man,  of  Warren,  coincides  in  this  view.
Other  writers,  not  entering  into  the
difcuflion  at  length,  accept  one  or  an-
other of  the  theories  above  mentioned.
It  does  not  fall  within  the  purview  of
our  prefent  purpofe  to  enter  upon  the
difcuflion  of  this  fubjedl.  But  the
ftatement  in  the  text,  not  referred  to
by  any  of  the  above-mentioned  writers,
“ that  thofe  on  her  had  killed  five  fava-
ges  of  this  riverf  que  ceux  de  dedans
auoient  tuS  cinq  fauuages  d'icelle  riu-
iere,  can  hardly  fail  to  have  weight  in
the  decifion  of  this  interefting  queftion.

The  chief  Anaflbu  reported  that  they
were  “ killed,”  a natural  inference  under
the  circUmftances  ; but  in  fadl  they  were
carefully  concealed  in  the  hold  of  the
ftiip,  and  three  of  them,  having  been
tranfported  to  England  and  introduced
into  his  family,  imparted  much  impor-
tant information  to  Sir  Ferdinando
Gorges,  whofe  diftinguifhed  career  was
afterward  fo  intimately  connedled  with
the  progrefs  of  American  colonization.
For  the  difcuflion  touching  the  river
explored  by  Weymouth,  vide  P rinds
Annals^  1736,  in  loco;  Belknafis  Amer-
ican Biogrciphy^  1794,  Vol.  II.,  art.
Weymouth  ; Re7narks  on  the  Voyage  of
George  Waymouth^  by  John  McKeen,
Col.  Me.  His.  Society,  Vol.  V.  p.  309?
Comments  on  WaymoutRs  Voyage,  by
William  Willis,  idem,  p.  344 ; Voyage
of  Captain  George  Weymouth,  by
George  Prince,  Col.  Me.  His.  Soc.,
Vol.  VI.  p.  293  ; WeymoutRs  Voya^,

Sieur  de  Champlain.  93

Safmou  did  not  come,  we  headed  eaft-fouth-eaft,"®*  for  twenty
leagues,  to  Ifle  Haute,  where  we  anchored  for  the  night.

On  the  next  day,  the  ift  of  Auguft,  we  failed  eaft  fome
twenty  leagues  to  Cap  Corneille,”^  where  we  fpent  the
night.  On  the  2d  of  the  month,  we  failed  north-eaft
feven  leagues  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  St.  Croix,  on  the
weflern  fhore.  Having  anchored  between  the  two  firft
iflands,”*  Sieur  de  Monts  embarked  in  a canoe,  at  a diftance
of  fix  leagues  from  the  fettlement  of  St.  Croix,  where  we
arrived  the  next  day  with  our  barque.  We  found  there
Sieur  des  Antons  of  St.  Malo,  who  had  come  in  one  of  the
veffels  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  to  bring  provifions  and  alfo  other
fupplies  for  thofe  who  were  to  winter  in  this  country.

CHAPTER  X.

by  David  Cufhman,  idem.^  p.  309 ;
George  Weymouth  and  the  Kennebec.,
by  the  Rev.  Edward  Ballard,  D.D.,
Memorial  Volume  of  the  Popham  Cele-
bration, Portland,  1863,  p.  301.

176  i-n  lYe  headed  eajl  fouth-eajl.  It
is  poffible  that,  on  leaving  the  mouth  of
the  Kennebec,  they  failed  for  a fhort
diftance  to  the  fouth-eaft  ; but  the  gen-
eral courfe  was  to  the  north-eaft.

Cap  Corneille,  or  Crow  Cape,  was
apparently  the  point  of  land  advancing
out  between  Machias  and  Little  Ma-

chias  Bays,  including  perhaps  Crofs
Ifland.  De  Monts  and  his  party  prob-
ably anchored  and  paffed  the  night  in
Machias  Bay.  The  pofition  of  Cap
Corneille  may  be  fatisfa6lorily  fixed  by
its  diftance  and  dire6lion  from  the
Grand  Manan,  as  feen  on  Champlain’s
map  of  1612,  to  which  the  reader  is
referred.

This  anchorage  was  between  Cam-
pobello  and  Moofe  Ifland,  on  which  is
fituated  the  town  of  Eaftport.

94

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  X.

The  Dwelling-Place  on  the  Island  of  St.  Croix  transferred  to
Port  Royal,  and  the  Reason  why.

lEUR  DE  MONTS  determined  to  change  his
location,  and  make  another  fettlement,  in  order
to  avoid  the  fevere  cold  and  the  bad  winter
which  we  had  had  in  the  Ifland  of  St.  Croix.
As  we  had  not,  up  to  that  time,  found  any
fuitable  harbor,  and,  in  view  of  the  fhort  time  we  had  for
building  houfes  in  which  to  eftablifli  ourfelves,  we  fitted  out
two  barques,  and  loaded  them  with  the  frame-work  taken
from  the  houfes  of  St.  Croix,  in  order  to  tranfport  it  to  Port
Royal,  twenty-five  leagues  diftant,  where  we  thought  the  cli-
mate was  much  more  temperate  and  agreeable.  Pont  Grave
and  I fet  out  for  that  place ; and,  having  arrived,  we  looked
for  a fite  favorable  for  our  refidence,  under  flielter  from  the
north-weft  wind,  which  we  dreaded,  having  been  very  much
haraffed  by  it.

After  fearching  carefully  in  all  diredlions,  we  found  no
place  more  fuitable  and  better  fituated  than  one  (lightly
elevated,  about  which  there  are  fome  marflies  and  good
fprings  of  water.  This  place  is  oppofite  the  ifland  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  Equille.^^^  To  the  north  of  us  about

a

y®  In  the  original,  Champlain  has
written  the  name  of  this  river  in  this
particular  inftance  Guille,  probably  an
abbreviation  for  Anguille,  the  French
name  of  the  fifli  which  we  call  the  eel.

Lefcarbot  fays  the  “river  was  named
LEquille  becaufe  the  firft  fifh  taken
therein  was  an  Squille, — Vide  antea,
note  57.

95

Sieur  de  Champlain.

a league,  there  is  a range  of  mountains/*®  extending  nearly
ten  leagues  in  a north-eaft  and  fbuth-weft  diredlion.  The
whole  country  is  filled  with  thick  forefts,  as  I mentioned
above,  except  at  a point  a league  and  a half  up  the  river,
where  there  are  forne  oaks,  although  fcattering,  and  many
wild  vines,  which  one  could  eafily  remove  and  put  the  foil
under  cultivation,  notwithftanding  it  is  light  and  fandy.  We
had  almofl:  refolved  to  build  there;  but  the  confideration
that  we  fliould  have  been  too  far  up  the  harbor  and  river  led
us  to  change  our  mind.

Recognizing  accordingly  the  fite  of  our  habitation  as  a
good  one,  we  began  to  clear  up  the  ground,  which  was  full
of  trees,  and  to  eredl  houfes  as  foon  as  poflible.  Each  one
was  bufy  in  this  work.  After  every  thing  had  been  arranged,
and  the  majority  of  the  dwellings  built,  Sieur  de  Monts
determined  to  return  to  France,  in  order  to  petition  his
Majefty  to  grant  him  all  that  might  be  neceffary  for  his
undertaking.  He  had  defired  to  leave  Sieur  d’Orville  to
command  in  this  place  in  his  abfence.  But  the  climatic
malady,  mal  de  la  terre,  with  which  he  was  afflidled  would  not
allow  him  to  gratify  the  with  of  Sieur  de  Monts.  On  this
account,  a conference  was  held  with  Pont  Grave  on  the  fub-
je6l,  to  whom  this  charge  was  offered,  which  he  was  happy  to
accept ; and  he  finifhed  what  little  of  the  habitation  remained
to  be  built.  I,  at  the  fame  time,  hoping  to  have  an  oppor-
tunity to  make  fome  new  explorations  towards  Florida,
determined  to  flay  there  alfo,  of  which  Sieur  de  Monts  ap-
proved.

CHAPTER  XI.

The  elevation  of  this  range  varies  from  fix  hundred  to  feven  hundred  feet.

96

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  XL

What  took  Place  after  the  Departure  of  Sieur  de  Monts  until
NO  Tidings  of  what  he  had  promised  being  received,  we  departed
FROM  Port  Royal  to  return  to  France.

S foon  as  Sieur  de  Monts  had  departed,  a portion
of  the  forty  or  forty-five  who  remained  began
to  make  gardens.  I,  alfo,  for  the  fake  of  occu-
pying my  time^  made  one,  which  was  furround-
ed  with  ditches  full  of  water,  in  which  I placed
fome  fine^  trout,  and  into  which  flowed  three  brooks  of  very
fine  running  water,  from  which  the  greater  part  of  our  fettle-
ment  was  fupplied.  I made  alfo  a little  fluice-way  towards
the^  fhore,  in  order  to  draw  off  the  water  when  I wifhed.
This  fpot  was  entirely  furrounded  by  meadows,  where  I con-
ftrudled  a fummer-houfe,  wdth  fome  fine  trees,  as  a refort  for
enjoying  the  frefli  air,  I made  there,  alfo,  a little  refervoir
for  holding  falt-water  fifli,  which  we  took  out  as  we  wanted
them.  I took  efpecial  pleafure  in  it,  and  planted  there
fome  feeds  which  turned  out  well.  But  much  work  had  to
be  laid  out  in  preparation.  We  reforted  often  to  this  place
as  a paftime ; and  it  feemed  as  if  the  little  birds  round  about
took  pleafure  in  it,  for  they  gathered  there  in  large  numbers,
warbling  and  chirping  fo  pleafantly  that  I think  I never
heard  the  like.

The  plan  of  the  fettlement  was  ten  fathoms  long  and  eight
wide,  making  the  diftance  round  thirty-fix.  On  the  eaftern
fide  is  a ftore-houfe,  occupying  the  width  of  it,  and  a very

fine

!

!

i

97

the  northern  fi&
handfomely  ffnilTied,
of  the  workmen,
a platform,  whgre  four  can-
. t!w  corner,  towards  the  eaft,
ariorm,  <m  can  bfe  feen  frdm  the

i-

Milrlin^  were  completed,  I went  to
.(d  the  fa\^e  named  Secondon,  the
; < vert’s  party  to  the  copper  mine,
'me  in  fearch  of  with  Sieur  de  Monts,
of  Mines*  though  without
t«'d  him  to  go  there  with  ua,  which

he

;»  <»  twi  jtceoiii’Aiifvuw  Kac

- -motion,  ww  placed*

;|^  f S^ur  de  Toni  Cnt  . : attti  ChainpUftt.  Jt.

#4  ^ h#k#rj.  //•  'Oie

‘ *"  ^ ^ W9H  Itared.  Thh

5Mid  fi0^hy  dUN^U  there  when
''P:  trisiHf  tCr^rw  ^Ab^t^Ulw.  Q.  Tl\e

41  ^ l^ott wiw  o<i ibc-priffMit  fite  of  the  hamlet

v<vSi  4 to  the

rm  msrktii  the  "j^jifie  c4  the  cemete^^

: the  ad,  Ms^  L.  Takes  the

tcTiadlcah?  file  rW«r.  the  moat  «

M TjcfbaiMy  hkUcsko^  the  clv.=i  rljag  of  the  geoOe-

Vidr  1^, -^i  3ti»

.

97

Sieur  de  Champlain.

fine  cellar  from  five  to  fix  feet  deep.  On  the  northern  fide
are  the  quarters  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  handfomely  finifhed.
About  the  back  yard  are  the  dwellings  of  the  workmen.
At  a corner  of  the  weftern  fide  is  a platform,  where  four  can-
non were  placed ; and  at  the  other  comer,  towards  the  eaft,
is  a palifade  fhaped  like  a platform,  as  can  be  feen  from  the
accompanying  illuftration.

Some  days  after  the  buildings  were  completed,  I went  to
the  river  St.  John  to  find  the  favage  named  Secondon,  the
fame  that  conducted  Prevert’s  party  to  the  copper  mine,
which  I had  already  gone  in  fearch  of  with  Sieur  de  Monts,
when  we  were  at  the  Port  of  Mines,  though  without  fuccefs.“‘
Having  found  him,  I begged  him  to  go  there  with  us,  which

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

L’Abitasion  DU  Port  Royal.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water,

A.  Dwelling  of  the  artifans.  B.  Platform  where  the  cannon  were  placed.
C.  The  ftore-houfe.  D.  Dwelling  of  Sieur  de  Pont  Gravd  and  Champlain.  E.
The  blackfmith’s  ftiop.  F.  Palifade  of  pickets.  G.  The  bakery.  H.  The
kitchen.  O.  Small  houfe  where  the  equipment  of  our  barques  was  ftored.  This
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  afterwards  had  rebuilt,  and  Sieur  Boulay  dwelt  there  when
Sieur  du  Pont  Grav^  returned  to  France.  P.  Gate  to  our  habitation.  Q.  The
Cemetery.  R.  The  River.

Notes.  The  habitation  of  Port  Royal  was  on  the  prefent  fite  of  the  hamlet
of  Lower  Granville  in  Nova  Scotia.  /.  Points  to  the  garden-plots.  K,  Takes  the
place  of  a which  is  wanting  on  the  map,  and  marks  the  place  of  the  cemete^,
where  may  be  feen  the  crucifix,  the  death’s-head,  and  crofs-bones.  L.  Takes  the
place  of  R,  which  is  wanting,  to  indicate  the  river.  M.  Indicates  the  moat  on
the  north  fide  of  the  dwelling.  N,  Probably  indicates  the  dwelling  of  the  gentle-
men, De  Monts  and  others.

Vide  antea^  pp.  25,  26.

13

98  Voyages  of

he  very  readily  confented  to  do,  and  proceeded  to  thow  it  to  us.
We  found  there  fome  little  pieces  of  copper  of  the  thicknefs
of  a fou,  and  others  flill  thicker  imbedded  in  grayifh  and
red  rocks.  The  miner  accompanying  us,  whofe  name  was
Mafter  Jacques,  a native  of  Sclavonia,  a man  very  fkilful  in
fearching  for  minerals,  made  the  entire  circuit  of  the  hills
to  fee  if  he  could  find  any  gangue,*®  but  without  fuccefs.  Yet
he  found,  fome  fteps  from  where  we  had  taken  the  pieces  of
copper  before  mentioned,  fomething  like  a mine,  which,  how-
ever, was  far  from  being  one.  He  faid  that,  from  the  appear-
ance of  the  foil,  it  might  prove  to  be  good,  if  it  were  worked ;
and  that  it  was  not  probable  that  there  could  be  pure  copper
on  the  furface  of  the  earth,  without  there  being  a large  quan-
tity of  it  underneath.  The  truth  is  that,  if  the  water  did  not
cover  the  mines  twice  a day,  and  if  they  did  not  lie  in  fuch
hard  rocks,  fomething  might  be  expeded  from  them.

After  making  this  obfervation,  we  returned  to  our  fettle-
ment,  where  we  found  fome  of  our  company  fick  with  the
mal^  de  la  terre,  but  not  fo  ferioufly  as  at  the  Ifiand  of  St.
Croix ; although,  out  of  our  number  of  forty-five,  twelve  died,
including  the  miner,  and  five  were  fick,  who  recovered  the
following  fpring.  Our  furgeon,  named  Des  Champs,  from
Honfleur,  fkilful  in  his  profeflion,  opened  fome  of  the  bodies,
to  fee  whether  he  might  be  more  fuccefsful  in  difcoveringthe
caufe  of  the  maladies  than  our  furgeons  had  been  the  year
before.  He  found  the  parts  of  the  body  affe(5ted  in  the
fame  manner  as  thofe  opened  at  the  Ifiand  of  St.  Croix,
but  could  difcover  no  means  of  curing  them,  any  more  than
the  other  furgeons.

On

tainLgthfoTof  mS.’'

99

Sieur  de  Champlain.

On  the  20th  of  December,  it  began  to  fnow,  and  fome  ice
paffed  along  before  our  fettlement.  The  winter  was  not  fo
fharp  as  the  year  before,  nor  the  fnow  fo  deep,  or  of  fo  long
duration.  Among  other  incidents,  the  wind  was  fo  violent
on  the  20th  of  February,  1605,'^  that  it  blew  over  a large
number  of  trees,  roots  and  all,  and  broke  off  many  others.
It  was  a remarkable  fight.  The  rains  were  very  frequent,
which  was  the  caufe  of  the  mild  winter  in  comparifon  with
the  paft  one,  although  it  is  only  twenty-five  leagues  from
Port  Royal  to  St.  Croix.

On  the  firft  day  of  March,  Pont  Grave  ordered  a barque  of
feventeen  or  eighteen  tons  to  be  fitted  up,  which  was  ready
on  the  15th,  in  order  to  go  on  a voyage  of  difcovery  along
the  coaft  of  Florida.^®^  With  this  view,  we  fet  out  on  the  i6th
following,  but  were  obliged  to  put  in  at  an  ifland  to  the  fouth
of  Manan,  having  gone  that  day  eighteen  leagues.  We  an-
chored in  a fandy  cove,  expofed  to  the  fea  and  the  fouth
wind.^®®  The  latter  increafed,  during  the  night,  to  fuch  an
impetuolity  that  we  could  not  ftand  by  our  anchor,  and  were
compelled,  without  choice,  to  go  afhore,  at  the  mercy  of  God
and  the  waves.  The  latter  were  fo  heavy  and  furious  that
while  we  were  attaching  the  buoy  to  the  anchor,  fo  as  to  cut
the  cable  at  the  hawfe-hole,  it  did  not  give  us  time,  but  broke
ftraightway  of  itfelf.  The  wind  and  the  fea  caft  us  as  the
wave  receded  upon  a little  rock,  and  we  awaited  only  the

moment

188  por  1605,  read  1606.  Manan  and  Wood  Ifland,  the  latter

Florida,  as  then  known,  extended  being  fouth  of  Manan,  and  is  plainly
from  the  peninfula  indefinitely  to  the  the  ifland  referred  to  in  the  text.  This
north.  cove  is  open  to  the  fouth  wind  and  the

Seal  Cove,  which  makes  up  be-  fea  in  a ftorm.  Wood  Ifland  has  a
tween  the  fouth-weft  end  of  the  Grand  fandy  (bore  with  occafional  rocks.

lOO

Voyages  of

moment  to  fee  our  barque  break  up,  and  to  fave  ourfelves,
if  poffible,  upon  its  fragments.  In  thefe  defperate  ftraits,
after  we  had  received  feveral  waves,  there  came  one  fo  large
and  fortunate  for  us  that  it  carried  us  over  the  rock,  and  threw
us  on  to  a little  fandy  beach,  which  infured  us  for  this  time
from  fhipwreck.

The  barque  being  on  fhore,  we  began  at  once  to  unload
what  there  was  in  her,  in  order  to  afcertain  where  the  dam-
age was,  which  was  not  fo  great  as  we  expected.  She  was
fpeedily  repaired  by  the  diligence  of  Champdore,  her  mailer.
Having  been  put  in  order,  fire  was  reloaded;  and  we  waited
for  fair  weather  and  until  the  fury  of  the  fea  flrould  abate,
which  was  not  until  the  end  of  four  days,  namely,  the  2 ill  of
March,  when  we  fet  out  from  this  miferable  place,  and
proceeded  to  Port  aux  Coquilles,^*®  feven  or  eight  leagues
dillant.  The  latter  is  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  St.  Croix,
where  there  was  a large  quantity  of  fnow.  We  flayed  there
until  the  29th  of  the  month,  in  confequence  of  the  fogs  and
contrary  winds,  which  are  ufual  at  this  feafon,  when  Pont
Grave  determined  to  put  back  to  Port  Royal,  to  fee  in  what
condition  our  companions  were,  whom  we  had  left  there  fick.
Having  arrived  there,  Pont  Grave  was  attacked  with  illnefs,
which  delayed  us  until  the  8th  of  April.

On  the  9th  of  the  month  he  embarked,  although  Hill  in-
difpofed,  from  his  deftre  to  fee  the  coaft  of  Florida,  and  in  the
belief  that  a change  of  air  would  reftore  his  health.  The

fame

18«  pgrf  Coquilles,  the  harbor  of  and  was  probably  Head  Harbor,  which
(hells.  This  port  was  near  the  north-  affords  a good  harbor  of  refuge.  — Vtde
eaftern  extremity  of  CampobeUo  Ifland,  Champlain’s  Map  of  1612,  reference  9.

lOI

Sieur  de  Champlain,

fame  day  we  anchored  and  paffed  the  night  at  the  mouth  of
the  harbor,  two  leagues  diftant  from  our  fettlement.

The  next  morning  before  day,  Champdore  came  to  afk
Pont  Grave  if  he  wiflied  to  have  the  anchor  raifed,  who
replied  in  the  affirmative,  if  he  deemed  the  weather  favorable
for  fetting  out.  Upon  this,  Champdore  had  the  anchor
raifed  at  once,  and  the  fail  fpread  to  the  wind,  which  was
north-north-eaft,  according  to  his  report.  The  weather  was
thick  and  rainy,  and  the  air  full  of  fog,  with  indications  of
foul  rather  than  fair  weather.

While  going  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,^®^  we  were
fuddenly  carried  by  the  tide  out  of  the  paffage,  and,  before
perceiving  them,  were  driven  upon  the  rocks  on  the  eaft-
north-eaft  coaft.'®*  Pont  Grave  and  I,  who  were  afleep,  were
awaked  by  hearing  the  failors  ffiouting  and  exclaiming,  “We
are  loft ! ” which  brought  me  quickly  to  my  feet,  to  fee  what
was  the  matter.  Pont  Grave  was  ftill  ill,  which  prevented
him  from  rifmg  as  quickly  as  he  wifhed.  I was  fcarcely  on
deck,  when  the  barque  was  thrown  upon  the  coaft ; and  the
wind,  which  was  north,  drove  us  upon  a point.  We  unfurled
the  mainfail,  turned  it  to  the  wind,  and  hauled  it  up  as  high
as  we  could,  that  it  might  drive  us  up  as  far  as  poffible  on
the  rocks,  for  fear  that  the  reflux  of  the  fea,  which  fortunately
was  falling,  would  draw  us  in,  when  it  would  have  been  im-
poffible  to  fave  ourfelves.  At  the  firft  blow  of  our  boat  upon
the  rocks,  the  rudder  broke,  a part  of  the  keel  and  three

or

187  gy  « harbor  ” is  here  meant  An-  where  the  tides  rife  from  twenty-three
napolis  Bay.  to  twenty-feven  feet.

This  wreck  of  the  barque  took  place  ^8®  North-eaft.  The  text  has  noroueji^
on  the  Granville  lide  of  Digby  Strait,  clearly  a mifprint  for  nordejl.

102

Voyages  of

or  four  planks  were  fmafhed,  and  fome  ribs  ftove  in,  which
frightened  us,  for  our  barque  filled  immediately;  and  all
that  we  could  do  was  to  wait  until  the  fea  fell,  fo  that  we
tnight  get  afliore.  For,  otherwife,  we  were  in  danger  of  our
lives,  in  confequence  of  the  fwell,  which  was  very  high  and
furious  about  us.  The  fea  having  fallen,  we  went  on  thore
amid  the  florm,  when  the  barque  was  fpeedily  unloaded,  and
we  faved  a large  portion  of  the  provifions  in  her,  with  the' help
of  the  favage.  Captain  Secondon  and  his  companions,  who
came  to  us  with  their  canoes,  to  carry  to  our  habitation
what  we  had  faved  from  our  barque,  which,  all  thattered  as
file  was,  went  to  pieces  at  the  return  of  the  tide.  But  we,
mofl:  happy  at  having  faved  our  lives,  returned  to  our  fettle-
ment  with  our  poor  favages,  who  flayed  there  a large  part  of
the  winter ; and  we  prailed  God  for  having  refcued  us  from

this  fhipwreck,  from  which  we  had  not  expedled  to  efcape  fo
eafily.

The  lofs  of  our  barque  caufed  us  great  regret,  fince  we
found  ourfelves,  through  want  of  a veffel,  deprived  of  the
profpedl  of  being  able  to  accomplifh  the  voyage  we  had
undertaken.  And  we  were  unable  to  build  another;  for
time  was  prelfing,  and  although  there  was  another  barque  on
the  flocks,  yet  it  would  have  required  too  long  to  get  it  ready,
and  we  could  fcarcely  have  made  ufe  of  it  before  the  return
from  France  of  the  veffels  we  were  daily  expedling.

This  was  a great  misfortune,  and  owing  to  the  lack  of
orefight  on  the  part  of  the  mafler,  who  was  obftinate,  but  lit-
^ acquainted  with  feamanfhip,  and  trufting  only  his  own  head.

e was  a good  carpenter,  fkilful  in  building  veffels,  and  care-
ful

Sieur  de  Champlcitfi.  103

ful  in  provifioning  thenm  with  all  neceffaries,  but  in  no  wife
adapted  to  failing  them.

Pont  Grave,  having  arrived  at  the  fettlement,  received  the
evidence  againft  Champdore,  who  was  accufed  of  having  run
the  barque  on  fhore  with  evil  intent.  Upon  fuch  informa-
tion, he  was  imprifoned  and  handcuffed,  with  the  intention
of  taking  him  to  France  and  handing  him  over  to  Sieur  de
Monts,  to  be  treated  as  juftice  might  diredl.

On  the  15th  of  June,  Pont  Grave,  finding  that  the  vef-
fels  did  not  return  from  France,  had  the  handcuffs  taken  off
from  Champdore,  that  he  might  finifh  the  barque  which  was
on  the  flocks,  which  fervice  he  difcharged  very  well.

On  the  1 6th  of  July,  the  time  when  we  were  to  leave,  in
cafe  the  veffels  had  not  returned,  as  was  provided  in  the  com-
miflion  which  Sieur  de  Monts  had  given  to  Pont  Gravd,  we
fet  out  from  our  fettlement  to  go  to  Cape  Breton  or  to  Gafpe
in  fearch  of  means  of  returning  to  France,  fince  we  had
received  no  intelligence  from  there.

Two  of  our  men  remained,  of  their  own  accord,  to  take
care  of  the  provifions  which  were  left  at  the  fettlement,  to
each  of  whom  Pont  Grave  promifed  fifty  crowns  in  money,
and  fifty  more  which  he  agreed  to  eflimate  their  pay  at  when
he  fhould  come  to  get  them  the  following  year.^*®

There  was  a captain  of  the  favages  named  Mabretou,’®*
who  promifed  to  take  care  of  them,  and  that  they  fhould  be
treated  as  kindly  as  his  own  children.  We  found  him  a

friendly

Thefe  two  men  were  M.  La  Taille  Vide  Hijioire  Nouvelle  France^  Paris,
and  Miquelet,  of  whom  Lefcarbot  fpeaks  1612,  pp.  545,546.
in  terms  of  enthufiaftic  praife  for  their  Mabretou^  by  Lefcarbot  written

patriotic  courage  in  voluntarily  rifking  Membertou.
their  lives  for  the  good  of  New  France.

1 04  Voyages  of

friendly  favage  all  the  time  we  were  there,  although  he  had
the  name  of  being  the  word  and  moft  traitorous  man  of  his
tribe.

CHAPTER  XII.

Departure  from  Port  Royal  to  return  to  France. Meeting  Ral-

LEAu  AT  Cape  Sable,  which  caused  us  to  turn  back.

N the  1 7th  of  the  month,  in  accordance  with  the
refolution  we  had  formed,  we  fet  out  from  the
mouth  of  Port  Royal  with  two  barques,  one
of  eighteen  tons,  the  other  of  feven  or  eight,
with  the  view  of  purfuing  the  voyage  to  Cape
Breton  or  Canfeau.  We  anchored  in  the  ftrait  of  Long
Illand,^^  where  during  the  night  our  cable  broke,  and  we
came  near  being  loft,  owing  to  the  violent  tides  which  ftrike
upon  feveral  rocky  points  in  and  about  this  place.  But,
through  the  diligent  exertions  of  all,  we  were  faved,  and
efcaped  once  more.

On  the  2 1 ft  of  the  month  there  was  a violent  wind,  which
broke  the  irons  of  our  rudder  between  Long  Ifland  and
Cape  Fourchu,  and  reduced  us  to  fuch  extremities  that  we
were  at  a lofs  what  to  do.  For  the  fury  of  the  fea  did  not  per-
mit us  to  land,  fince  the  breakers  ran  mountain  high  along
the  coaft,  fo  that  we  refolved  to  perifh  in  the  fea  rather  than
to  land,  hoping  that  the  wind  and  tempeft  would  abate,  fo
that,  with  the  wind  aftern,  we  might  go  afhore  on  fome  fandy

beach.

Petit  Paffage,  leading  into  St.  Mary’s  Bay.

105

Sietir  de  Champlain.

beach.  As  each  one  thought  by  himfelf  what  might  be  done
for  our  prefervation,  a failor  faid  that  a quantity  of  cordage
attached  to  the  flern  of  our  barque,  and  dragging  in  the
water,  might  ferve  in  fome  meafure  to  fleer  our  veffel.  But
this  was  of  no  avail ; and  we  faw  that,  unlefs  • God  fhould  aid
us  by  other  means,  this  would  not  preferve  us  from  fhip-
wreck.  As  we  were  thinking  what  could  be  done  for  our
fafety,  Champdore,  who  had  been  again  handcuffed,  faid  to
fome  of  us  that,  if  Pont  Grave  defired  it,  he  would  find
means  to  fleer  our  barque.  This  we  reported  to  Pont  Grave,
who  did  not  refufe  this  offer,  and  the  reft  of  us  flill  lefs.
He  accordingly  had  his  handcuffs  taken  off  the  fecond  time,
and  at  once  taking  a rope,  he  cut  it  and  faflened  the  rudder
with  it  in  fuch  a fkilful  manner  that  it  would  fleer  the  fhip
as  well  as  ever.  In  this  way,  he  made  amends  for  the  mif-
takes  he  had  made  leading  to  the  lofs  of  the  previous  barque,
and  was  difcharged  from  his  accufation  through  our  entrea-
ties to  Pont  Grave  who,  although  fomewhat  reludlantly,
acceded  to  it.

The  fame  day  we  anchored  near  La  Baye  Courante,'®*  two
leagues  from  Cape  Fourchu,  and  there  our  barque  was  re-
paired.

On  the  23d  of  July,  we  proceeded  near  to  Cape  Sable.

On  the  24th  of  the  month,  at  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,
we  perceived  a fhallop,  near  Cormorant  I Hand,  coming  from
Cape  Sable.  Some  thought  it  was  favages  going  away  from

Cape

La  Baye  Courante.^  the  bay  at  of  the  barque  near  this  bay,  two  leagues
the  mouth  of  Argyl  or  Abuptic  Riv-  from  Cape  Fourchu,  was  probably  near
er,  fometimes  called  Lobfter  Bay.  — Pinckney  Point,  or  it  may  have  been
Vide  CampbelVs  Yarmouth  County.,  N,  under  the  lee  of  one  of  the  Tufquet
S.j  p.  13.  The  anchorage  for  the  repair  Iflands.

14

I o6  Voyages  of

Cape  Breton  or  the  Ifland  of  Canfeau.  Others  faid  it  miCTht
be  fliallops  fent  from  Canfeau  to  get  news  of  us.  Finally,  as
we  approached  nearer,  we  faw  that  they  were  Frenchmen,
which  delighted  us  greatly.  When  it  had  almoft  reached  us,
we  recognized  Ralleau,  the  Secretary  of  Sieur  de  Monts,
which  redoubled  our  joy.  He  informed  us  that  Sieur  de
Monts  had  defpatched  a veffel  of  a hundred  and  twenty  tons,
commanded  by  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  who  had  come  with
fifty  men  to  a6t  as  Lieutenant-General,  and  live  in  the  coun-
try ; that  he  had  landed  at  Canfeau,  whence  the  above-
mentioned  veffel  had  gone  out  to  fea,  in  order,  if  poflible,  to
find  us,  while  he,  meanwhile,  was  proceeding  along  the  coaft
in  a fhallop,  in  order  to  meet  us  in  cafe  we  fhould  have  fet
out,  fuppofing  we  had  departed  from  Port  Royal,  as  was  in
fadt  the  cafe  : in  fo  doing,  they  adted  very  wifely.  All  this
intelligence  caufed  us  to  turn  back ; and  we  arrived  at  Port
Royal  on  the  25  th  of  the  month,  where  we  found  the  above-
mentioned  veffel  and  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  and  were  great-
ly delighted  to  fee  realized  what  we  had  given  up  in  de-
fpair.^®®  He  told  us  that  his  delay  had  been  caufed  by
an  accident  which  happened  to  the  fhip  in  leaving  the  boom

at

Lefcarbot,  who  with  De  Poutrin-  ferved,  perhaps  while  they  were  repair-
court  was  in  this  vefTel,  the  “ Jonas,”  ing  their  barque  at  Baye  Courante.  As
gives  a very  elaborate  account  of  their  Ralleaudidnot  join  the  “Jonas ’’till  after
arrival  and  reception  at  Port  Royal.  It  their  arrival  at  Port  Royal,  Poutrincourt
feems  that,  at  Canfeau,  Poutrincourt,  did  not  hear  of  the  departure  of  the
fuppofing  that  the  colony  at  Port  Royal,  colony  till  his  arrival.  Champlain’s
not  receiving  expe(5led  fuccors,  nad  dates  do  not  agree  with  thofe  of  Lefcar-
poffibly  already  embarked  for  France,  bot,  and  the  latter  is  probably  correft.
as  was  in  fa6l  the  cafe,  had  defpatched  According  to  Lefcarbot,  Poutrincourt
a fmall  boat  in  charge  of  Ralleau  to  arrived  on  the  27th,  and  Pont  Gravd
reconnoitre  the  coaft,  with  the  hope  of  with  Champlain  on  the  31ft  of  July,
meeting  them,  if  they  had  already  em-  Vide  His.  Nou.  France,  Paris,  1612,
barked.  The  “Jonas  ’’  pafled  them  unob-  pp.  544,  547.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  107

at  Rochelle,  where  he  had  taken  his  departure,  and  that  he
had  been  hindered  by  bad  weather  on  his  voyage.*®*

The  next  day,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  proceeded  to  fet
forth  his  views  as  to  what  fhould  be  done  ; and,  in  accordance
with  the  opinion  of  all,  he  refolved  to  ftay  at  Port  Royal
this  year,  inafmuch  as  no  difcovery  had  been  made  fince  the
departure  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  and  the  period  of  four  months
before  winter  was  not  long  enough  to  fearch  out  a fite  and
conftrudt  another  fettlement,  efpecially  in  a large  veffel,
unlike  a barque  which  draws  little  water,  fearches  every-
where, and  finds  places  to  one’s  mind  for  effecting  fettle-
ments.  But  he  decided  that,  during  this  period,  nothing
more  fhould  be  done  than  to  try  to  find  fome  place  better
adapted  for  our  abode.*®®

Thus  deciding,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  defpatched  at  once
fome  laborers  to  work  on  the  land  in  a fpot  which  he  deemed
fuitable,  up  the  river,  a league  and  a half  from  the  fettlement
of  Port  Royal,  and  where  we  had  thought  of  making  our
abode.  Here  he  ordered  wheat,  rye,  hemp,  and  feveral  other
kinds  of  feeds,  to  be  fown,  in  order  to  afcertain  how  they
would  flourifh.*®®

On

Lefcarbot  gives  a graphic  account
of  the  accident  which  happened  to  their
vefTel  in  the  harbor  of  Rochelle,  delay-
ing them  more  than  a month  ; and  the
bad  weather  and  the  bad  feamanfliip  of
Captain  Foulques,  who  commanded  the
“ Jonas,”  which  kept  them  at  fea  more
than  two  months  and  a half.  — Vide
His.  Nou.  France.,  Paris,  1612,  p.  523,
et  feq.

Before  leaving  France,  Poutrin-
court had  received  inftrudlions  from  the
patentee,  De  Monts,  to  feek  for  a good

harbor  and  more  genial  climate  for  the
colony  farther  fouth  than  Mallebarre,  as
he  was  not  fatisfied  either  with  St.  Croix
or  Port  Royal  for  a permanent  abode.
— Vide  Lef carhops  His.  Nou.  France ^
Paris,  t6i2,  p.  552.

19«  By  reference  to  Champlain’s  draw-
ing of  Port  Royal,  it  will  be  feen  that
the  place  of  this  agricultural  experiment
was  on  the  fouthern  fide  of  Annapolis
River,  near  the  mouth  of  Allen  River,
and  on  the  identical  foil  where  the  village
of  Annapolis  now  Hands.

io8

Voyages  of

On  the  2 2d  of  Auguft,  a fmall  barque  was  feen  approach-
ing our  fettlement.  It  was  that  of  Des  Antons,  of  St.  Malo,
who  had  come  from  Canfeau,  where  his  veffel  was  engaged
in  fifhing,  to  inform  us  that  there  were  fome  veffels  about
Cape  Breton  engaged  in  the  fur-trade;  and  that,  if  we
would  fend  our  fliip,  we  might  capture  them  on  the  point
of  returning  to  France.  It  was  determined  to  do  fo  as  foon
as  fome  fupplies,  which  were  in  the  fhip,  could  be  unloaded.'”
This  being  done,  Pont  Grave  embarked,  together  with
his  companions,  who  had  wintered  with  him  at  Port  Royal,
excepting  Champdore  and  Foulgere  de  Vitre.  I alfo  flayed
with  De  Poutrincourt,  in  order,  with  God’s  help,  to  complete
the  map  of  the  coafts  and  countries  which  I had  commenced.
Every  thing  being  put  in  order  in  the  fettlement,  Sieur  de
Poutrincourt  ordered  provifions  to  be  taken  on  board  for  our
voyage  along  the  coaft  of  Florida.

On  the  29th  of  Auguft,  we  fet  out  from  Port  Royal,  as  did
also  P ont  Grave  and  Des  Antons,  who  were  bound  for  Cape
Breton  and  Canfeau,  to  feize  the  veffels  which  were  engaging
in  the  fur-trade,  as  I have  before  ftated.  After  getting  out
to  fea,  we  were  obliged  to  put  back  on  account  of  bad
weather.  But  the  large  veffel  kept  on  her  courfe,  and  we
foon  loft  fight  of  her.

CHAPTER  XIII.

It  appears  that  this  fur-trader  was
one  Boyer,  of  Rouen,  who  had  been  de-
livered from  prifon  at  Rochelle  by  Pou-
trincourt’s  lenity,  where  he  had  been
incarcerated  probably  for  the  fame  of-

fence. They  did  not  fucceed  in  captur-
ing him  at  Canfeau. — Vide  His.  Non.
France^  par  Lefcarbot,  Paris,  1612,  p.
553-

Sieur  de  Champlain.

109

CHAPTER  XIII.

Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  sets  out  from  Port  Royal  to  make  Discov-
eries. —All  that  was  seen,  and  what  took  Place  as  far  as
Mallebarre.

N the  5th  of  September,  we  fet  out  again  from
Port  Royal.

On  the  7th,  we  reached  the  mouth  of  the
river  St.  Croix,  where  we  found  a large  number
of  ravages,  among  others  Secondon  and  Meffa-
mouet.  We  came  near  being  loft  there  on  a rocky  iflet,  on
account  of  Champdore’s  ufual  obftinacy.

The  next  day  we  proceeded  in  a fhallop  to  the  Ifland  of
St.  Croix,  where  Sieur  de  Monts  had  wintered,  to  fee  if  we
could  find  any  fpikes  of  wheat  and  other  feeds  which  we  had
planted  there.  We  found  fome  wheat  which  had  fallen  on
the  ground,  and  come  up  as  finely  as  one  could  wifh ; alfo  a
large  number  of  garden  vegetables,  which  alfo  had  come  up
fair  and  large.  It  gave  us  great  fatisfadtion  to  fee  that  the
foil  there  was  good  and  fertile.

After  vifiting  the  ifland,  we  returned  to  our  barque,  which
was  one  of  eighteen  tons,  on  the  way  catching  a large  num-
ber of  mackerel,  which  are  abundant  there  at  this  feafon.  It
was  decided  to  continue  the  voyage  along  the  coaft,  which
was  not  a very  well-confidered  conclufion,  fince  we  loft  much
time  in  pafling  over  again  the  difcoveries  made  by  Sieur  de
Monts  as  far  as  the  harbor  of  Mallebarre.  It  would  have

been

I lO

Voyages  of

been  much  better,  in  my  opinion,  to  crofs  from  where  we
were  dire6lly  to  Mallebarre,  the  route  being  already  known,
and  then  ufe  our  time  in  exploring  as  far  as  the  fortieth
degree,  or  ftill  farther  fouth,  reviliting,  upon  our  homeward
voyage,  the  entire  coaft  at  pleafure.

After  this  decifion,  we  took  with  us  Secondon  and  Meffa-
mouet,  who  went  as  far  as  Choiiacoet  in  a fhallop,  where  they
wifhed  to  make  an  alliance  with  the  people  of  the  country,
by  offering  them  fome  prefents.

On  the  1 2th  of  September,  we  fet  out  from  the  river  St.
Croix.

On  the  2 1 ft,  we  arrived  at  Choiiacoet,  where  we  faw  One-
mechin,  chief  of  the  river,  and  Marchin,  who  had  harvefted
their  corn.  We  faw  at  the  Ifland  of  Bacchus*®*  fome  grapes
which  were  ripe  and  very  good,  and  fome  others  not  yet  ripe,
as  fine  as  thofe  in  France ; and  I am  fure  that,  if  they  were
cultivated,  they  would  produce  good  wine.

In  this  place,  Sieur  de  PoutrincOurt  fecured  a prifoner  that
Onemechin  had,  to  whom  Meffamouet  *®*  made  prefents  of

kettles,

Richmond  Ifland.  — Vide  antea,
note  123.  The  ripe  grapes  which  he
faw  were  the  Fox  Grape,  Vitis  labrufca,
which  ripens  in  September.  The  fruit
is  of  a dark  purple  color,  tough  and
muiky.  The  Ifabella,  common  in  our
markets,  is  derived  from  it.  It  is  not
quite  clear  whether  thofe  feen  in  an  un-
ripe Hate  were  another  fpecies  or  not.
If  they  were,  they  were  the  Froft  Grape,
Vitis  cordifolia,  which  are  found  in  the
northep  parts  of  New  England.  The
berry  is  fmall,  black  or  blue,  having  a
bloom,  highly  acid,  and  ripens  after
frolts.  This  ifland,  fo  prolific  in  grapes,
became  afterward  a centre  of  commer-

cial importance.  On  Joflelyn’s  voyage
of  1638,  he  fays  : “The  Six  and  twen-
tieth day,  Capt.  Thomas  Cam^nock  went
aboard  of  a Barke  of  300  Tuns,  laden
with  Ifland  Wine,  and  but  7 men  in  her,
and  never  a Gun,  bound  for  Richmonds
Ifland,  Set  out  by  Mr.  Trelaney^  of  Pli-
mouthT — Voyages^  1675,  Bolton,  Vea-
zie’s  ed.,  1865,  p.  12.

Meflamouet  was  a chief  from  the
Port  de  la  H^ve,  and  was  accompanied
by  Secondon,  alfo  a chief  from  the  river
St.  John.  They  had  come  to  Saco  to
difpofe  of  a quantity  of  goods  which
they  had  obtained  from  the  French
fur-traders.  Meflamouet  made  an  ad-

drefs

1 1 1

Sieur  de  Champlain.

kettles,  hatchets,  knives,  and  other  things.  Onemechin
reciprocated  the  fame  with  Indian  corn,  fquaflies,  and  Bra-
zilian beans ; which  was  not  very  fatisfadtory  to  Meffamouet,
who  went  away  very  ill-difpofed  towards  them  for  not  prop-
erly recognizing  his  prefents,  and  with  the  intention  of  mak-
ing war  upon  them  in  a fliort  time.  For  thefe  nations  give
only  in  exchange  for  fomething  in  return,  except  to  thofe
who  have  done  them  a fpecial  fervice,  as  by  affifting  them  in
their  wars.

Continuing  our  courfe,  we  proceeded  to  the  Ifland  Cape,“®
where  we  encountered  rather  bad  weather  and  fogs,  and  faw
little  profpedl  of  being  able  to  fpend  the  night  under  (belter,
fince  the  locality  was  not  favorable  for  this.  While  we  were
thus  in  perplexity,  it  occurred  to  me  that,  while  coafting  along
with  Sieur  de  Monts,  I had  noted  on  my  map,  at  a diftance
of  a league  from  here,  a place  which  feemed  fuitable  for
veffels,  but  which  we  did  not  enter,  becaufe,  when  we  paffed
it,  the  wind  was  favorable  for  continuing  on  our  courfe.
This  place  we  had  already  paffed,  which  led  me  to  fuggeft  to
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  that  we  (liould  fland  in  for  a point  in
light,  where  the  place  in  queftion  was,  which  feemed  to  me
favorable  for  paffing  the  night.  We  proceeded  to  anchor  at
the  mouth,  and  went  in  the  next  day.“^

Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  landed  with  eight  or  ten  of  our
company.  We  faw  fome  very  fine  grapes  just  ripe,  Brazilian

, peas,

drefs  on  the  occafion,  in  which  he  Hated  ^ Cape  Anne.

that  he  had  been  in  France,  and  had  ^oi  Gloucefter  Bay,  formerly  called

been  entertained  at  the  houfe  of  Mons.  Cape  Anne  Harbor,  which,  as  we  fliall
de  Grandmont,  governor  of  Bayonne,  fee  farther  on,  they  named  Beauport^
— Vide  His.  Non.  France.,  par  Lefcar-  the  beautiful  harbor,
bot,  Paris,  1612,  p.  559,  etfeq.

I 12

Voyages  of

peas,  pumpkins,  fquafhes,  and  very  good  roots,  which  the
favages  cultivate,  having  a tafte  fimilar  to  that  of  chards"^
They  made  us  prefents  of  fome  of  thefe,  in  exchange  for  little
trifles  which  we  gave  them.  They  had  already  finifhed  their
harveft.  We  faw  two  hundred  favages  in  this  very  pleafant
place ; and  there  are  here  a large  number  of  very  fine  wal-
nut-trees,=**®  cypreffes,  faffafras,  oaks,  afhes,  and  beeches.  The

202  Brazilian  peas.  This  fhould  un-
doubtedly read  Brazilian  beans.  Pois
du  Br^fil  is  here  ufed  apparently  by
mi  Hake  for  febues  du  Brdfd.  — Vide
antea,  note  127.

203  Chards,  a vegetable  difli,  compofed
of  the  footftocks  and  midrib  of  artichokes,
cardoons,  or  white  beets.  The  “ very
good  roots,”  des  racines  qui font  bonnes^
were  Jerufalem  Artichokes,  Helianthus
tuberofus,  indigenous  to  the  northern
part  of  this  continent.  The  Italians  had
obtained  it  before  Charnplain’s  time,  and
named  it  Girafole^  their  word  for  fun-
flower,  of  which  the  artichoke  is  a
fpecies.  This  word,  girafole^  has  been
Angularly  corrupted  in  England  into
Jerufalem;  hence  Jerufalem  artichoke,
now  the  common  name  of  this  plant
We  prefume  that  there  is  no  inftance
on  record  of  its  earlier  cultivation  in
New  England  than  at  Naufet  in  i6oc,
vide  antea,  p.  82,  and  here  at  Gloucef-
ter  in  1606.

2®^  Under  the  word  noyers,  walnut-
may  have  compre-
hended the  hickories,  Carya  alba  and
porctna^  and  perhaps  the  butternut.  Jug-
Ians  cmerea,  all  of  which  might  have
been  feen  at  Gloucefter.  It  is  clear  from
his  defcnption  that  he  faw  at  Saco  the
hickory,  Carya  porcina,  commonly
known  p the  pig-nut  or  broom  hickory.
He  probably  faw  likewife  the  Ihag-bark,
Carya  alba,  as  both  are  found  growing
wild  there  even  at  the  prefent  day  --

cnier

Vide  antea,  p.  67.  Both  the  butternut
and  the  hickories  are  exclufively  of
American  origin ; and  there  was  no
h rench  name  by  which  they  could  be
more  accurately  defignated.  Noyer  is
applied  in  France  to  the  tree  which  pro-
duces the  nut  known  in  our  markets  as
the  Englifh  walnut.  Joffelyn  figures  the
hickory  under  the  name  of  walnut.  —
Vide  New  Eng.  Rarities,  Tuckerman’s
ed.,  p.  97.  See  alfo  Wood"* s New  Eng
Profpea,  1634,  Prince  Soc.  ed.,  p.  18.

2«s  The  trees  here  mentioned  are  fuch
probably  as  appeared  to  Champlain  ef-
pecially  valuable  for  timber  or  other
pradlical  ufes.

The  cyprefs,  cyprh,  has  been  already
referred  to  in  note  168.  It  is  diftin-
guilhed  for  its  durability,  its  power  of
refilling  the  ufual  agencies  of  decay,  and
is  widely  ufed  for  polls,  and  fleepers  on
the  track  of  railways,  and  to  a limited
extent  for  cabinet  work,  but  lefs  now
than  in  earlier  times.  William  Wood
fays  of  it : This  wood  is  more  defired

for  ornament  than  fubftance,  being  of
color  red  and  white,  like  Eugh,  fmelling
as  fweete  as  luniper;  it  is  commonly
ufed  for  feeling  of  houfes,  and  making
of  Chefts,  boxes  and  flaves.”—  Woo^ls
New  Eng.  ProfpeR,  1634,  Prince  Soc.
ed.,  p.  19.

The  faffafras,  Sajfafras  officinale,  is
indigenous  to  this  continent,  and  has  a
fpicy,  aromatic  flavor,  efpecially  the  bark
and  root.  It  was  in  great  repute  as  a

medicine

Sieur  de  Champlain.  1 1 3

chief  of  this  place  is  named  Quiouhamenec,  who  came  to
fee  us  with  a neighbor  of  his,  named  Cohouepech,  whom
we  entertained  fumptuoufly.  Onemechin,  chief  of  Choiia-
coet,  came  alfo  to  fee  us,  to  whom  we  gave  a coat,  which  he,
however,  did  not  keep  a long  time,  but  made  a prefent  of
it  to  another,  fince  he  was  uneafy  in  it,  and  could  not  adapt
himfelf  to  it.  We  faw  alfo  a favage  here,  who  had  fo
wounded  himfelf  in  the  foot,  and  loft  fo  much  blood,  that
he  fell  down  in  a fwoon.  Many  others  furrounded  him,  and
fang  fome  time  before  touching  him.  Afterwards,  they  made
fome  motions  with  their  feet  and  hands,  fhook  his  head  and
breathed  upon  him,  when  he  came  to  himfelf.  Our  furgeon
drefled  his  wounds,  when  he  went  off  in  good  fpirits.

The  next  day,  as  we  were  calking  our  fhallop,  Sieur  de
Poutrincourt  in  the  woods  noticed  a number  of  favages  who
were  going,  with  the  intention  of  doing  us  fome  mifchief,
to  a little  ftream,  where  a neck  connedts  with  the  main  land,
at  which  our  party  were  doing  their  wafhing.  As  I was
walking  along  this  neck,  thefe  favages  noticed  me ; and,  in

order

medicine  for  a long  time  after  the  dif-  Oaks,  chefnes,  of  which  feveral  of  the
covery  of  this  country.  Cargoes  of  it  larger  fpecies  may  have  been  feen  : as,
were  often  taken  home  by  the  early  the  white  oak,  Quercus  alba;  black  oak,
voyagers  for  the  European  markets ; and  Quercus  tinCloria;  fcarlet  oak,  Quercus
it  is  faid  to  have  fold  as  high  as  fifty  coccinea;  and  red  oak,  Quercus  rubra,
livres  per  pound.  Dr.  Jacob  Bigelow  Afii-trees,  frefnes^t  probably  the  white

fays  a work  entitled  “ SalTafrafologia  ” alh,  I^raxtnus  Americanay  ^nd  not  un-
was  written  to  celebrate  its  virtues  ; but  likely  the  black  afli,  Fraxinus  fambuci-
its  properties  are  only  thofe  of  warm  aro-  folia^  both  valuable  as  timber,
matics.  Joflelyn  defcribes  it,  and  adds  Beech-trees,  heftres.,  of  which  there  is
that  it  does  not  “grow  beyond  Black  but  a fingle  fpecies,  Fagits  ferruginea,
Point  eaftward,”  which  is  a few  miles  the  American  beech,  a handfome  tree,
north-eaft  of  Old  Orchard  Beach,  near  of  fymmetrical  growth,  and  clean,
Saco,  in  Maine.  It  is  met  with  now  fmooth,  afh-gray  bark  : the  nut,  of  trian-
infrequently  in  New  England:  feveral  gular  fhape,  is fweet and  palatable.  The
fpecimens,  however,  may  oe  feen  in  the  wood  is  brittle,  and  ufed  only  for  a few
Granary  Burial  Ground  in  Bofton.  purpofes.

15

1 1 4 Voyages  of

order  to  put  a good  face  upon  it,  fince  they  faw  that  I had
difcovered  them  thus  feafonably,  they  began  to  fliout  and
dance,  and  then  came  towards  me  with  their  bows,  arrows,
quivers,  and  other  arms.  And,  inafmuch  as  there  was  a
meadow  between  them  and  myfelf,  I made  a fign  to  them  to

dance

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Lb  Beau  Port.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water.

A,  Place  where  our  barque  was.  B.  Meadows.  C,  Small  ifland.^  D.
Rocky  cape.  E.  Place  where  we  had  our  fliallop  calked. 2 f Little  rocky
iflet,  very  high  on  the  coaft.®  G.  Cabins  of  the  favages  and  where  they  till  the
foil.  H.  Little  river  where  there  are  meadows.^  I.  Brook.  L.  Tongue  of  land
covered  with  trees,  including  a large  number  of  falTafras,  walnut-trees,  and  vines.®
M.  Arm  of  the  fea  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Ifland  Cape.®  N.  Little  River.  0.
Little  brook  coming  from  the  meadows.  P.  Another  little  brook  where  we  did
our  wafhing.  Q.  Troop  of  favages  coming  to  furprife  us.*^  R.  Sandy  ftrand.®
S.  Sea-coaft.  T.  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  in  ambufcade  with  fome  feven  or  eight
arquebufiers.  V.  Sieur  de  Champlain  difcovering  the  favages.

Notes.  Le  Beau  Port  is  Gloucefter.  ^ Ten-Pound  Ifland.  It  is  forty
rods  long  and  thirty  feet  high.  On  it  is  a U.  S.  Light,  fifty  feet  above  the  fea-
level.  2 This  peninfula  is  now  called  Rocky  Neck.  Its  fouthern  part  and  the
caufeway  which  connedls  it  with  the  main  land  are  now  thickly  fettled.  ® This  is
Salt  Ifland.  ^ This  is  the  fmall  flream  that  flows  into  Frefh-Water  Cove.  ® This
is  now  called  Eaftern  Point,  is  three  quarters  of  a mile  long,  and  about  half  a mile
in  its  greateft  width.  At  its  fouthern  extremity  is  a U.  S.  Light,  fixty  feet  above
the  fea-level.  The  fcattering  rocks  figured  by  Champlain  on  its  weftern  fhore  are
now  known  as  Black  Befs.  ® Squam  River,  flowing  into  Annifquam  Harbor.
^ They  were  creeping  along  the  eaftern  bank  of  Smith’s  Cove.  ® The  beach
of  South-Eaft  Harbor.  A comparifon  of  his  map  with  the  Coaft  Survey  Charts
will  exhibit  its  furprifing  accuracy,  efpecially  when  we  make  allowance  for  the
fa6l  that  it  is  merely  a fketch  executed  without  meafurements,  and  with  a very
brief  vifit  to  the  locality.  The  projedlion  or  cape  weft  of  Ten-Pound  Ifland,
including  Stage  Head,  may  be  eafily  identified,  as  likewife  Fort  Point  diredly
north  of  the  lame  ifland,  as  feen  on  our  maps,  but  north-weft  on  that  of  Cham-
plain, ftiowing  that  his  map  is  oriented  with  an  inclination  to  the  weft.  The
moft  obvious  defedl  is  the  forefhortening  of  the  Inner  Harbor,  which  requires
much  greater  elongation.

\rr>y\:

p b

Sieur  de  Champlain.  1 1 5

dance  again.  This  they  did  in  a circle,  putting  all  their
arms  in  the  middle.  But  they  had  hardly  commenced,  when
they  oMerved  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  in  the  wood  with  eight
muflceteers,  which  frightened  them.  Yet  they  did  not  flop
until  they  had  finifhed  their  dance,  when  they  withdrew  in
all  diredlions,  fearing  left  fome  unpleafant  turn  might  be
ferved  them.  We  faid  nothing  to  them,  however,  and  fliowed
them  only  demonftrations  of  gladnefs.  Then  we  returned  to
launch  our  ftiallop,  and  take  our  departure.  They  entreated
us  to  wait  a day,  faying  that  more  than  two  thoufand  of  them
would  come  to  fee  us.  But,  unable  to  lofe  any  time,  we  were
unwilling  to  flay  here  longer.  I am  of  opinion  that  their
objedl  was  to  furprife  us.  Some  of  the  land  was  already
cleared  up,  and  they  were  conftantly  making  clearings.  Their
mode  of  doing  it  is  as  follows : after  cutting  down  the  trees
at  the  diftance  of  three  feet  from  the  ground,  they  burn  the
branches  upon  the  trunk,  and  then  plant  their  corn  between
thefe  ftumps,  in  courfe  of  time  tearing  up  alfo  the  roots.
There  are  likewife  fine  meadows  here,  capable  of  fupporting
a large  number  of  cattle.  This  harbor  is  very  fine,  contain-
ing water  enough  for  veflels,  and  affording  a fhelter  from  the
weather  behind  the  iflands.  It  is  in  latitude  43“,  and  we
gave  it  the  name  of  Le  Beauport.^®®

The  laft  day  of  September  we  fet  out  from  Beauport,
and,  pafling  Cap  St.  Louis,  flood  on  our  courfe  all  night
for  Cap  Blanc.^  In  the  morning,  an  hour  before  daylight,

we

Le  Beauport.  The  latitude  of  Ten-  207  j-g^der  may  be  reminded  that
Pound  Ifland,  near  where  the  French  Cap  St.  Louis  is  Brant  Point;  Cap
barque  was  anchored  in  the  Harbor  of  Blanc  is  Cape  Cod ; and  Baye  Blanche
Gloucefter,  is  42°  5".  is  Cape  Cod  Bay.

ii6  Voyages  of

we  found  ourfelves  to  the  leeward  of  Cap  Blanc,  in  Baye
Blanche,  with  eight  feet  of  water,  and  at  a diftance  of  a
league  from  the  fhore.  Here  we  anchored,  in  order  not  to
approach  too  near  before  daylight,  and  to  fee  how  the  tide
was.  Meanwhile,  we  fent  our  fhallop  to  make  foundings.
Only  eight  feet  of  water  were  found,  fo  that  it  was  neceffary
to  determine  before  daylight  what  we  would  do.  The  water
fank  as  low  as  five  feet,  and  our  barque  fometimes  touched
on  the  fand,  yet  without  any  injury,  for  the  water  was  calm,
and  we  had  not  lefs  than  three  feet  of  water  under  us.
Then  the  tide  began  to  rife,  which  gave  us  encouragement.

When  it  was  day,  we  faw  a very  low,  fandy  fliore,  off  which
we  were,  and  more  to  the  leeward.  A fhallop  was  fent  to  make
foundings  in  the  diredlion  of  land  fomewhat  high,  where  we
thought  there  would  be  deep  water ; and,  in  faff,  we  found  feven
fathoms.  Here  we  anchored,  and  at  once  got  ready  the  ftial-
lop,  with  nine  or  ten  men  to  land  and  examine  a place  where
we  thought  there  was  a good  harbor  to  flielter  ourfelves  in,
if  the  wind  fliould  increafe.  An  examination  having  been
made,  we  entered  in  two,  three,  and  four  fathoms  of  water.
When  we  were  infide,  we  found  five  and  fix.  There  were
many  very  good  oyfters  here,  which  we  had  not  feen  before,
and  we  named  the  place  Port  aux  Huiftres.^®*  It  is  in  lati-
tude

Le  Port  aux  Hui/lres,  Oyfter  the  inattention  of  their  pilot,  or  all  thefe
Harbor.  The  reader  will  obferve,  by  together,  they  had  paffed  to  the  leeward
looking  back  a few  fentences  in  the  nar-  of  the  point  aimed  at,  and  before  morn-
rative,  that  the  French  coafters,  after  ing  found  themfelves  near  a harbor,
leaving  Cap  St.  Louis,  that  is,  Brant  which  they  fubfequently  entered,  in
Point,  had  aimed  to  double  Cape  Cod,  Cape  Cod  Bay.  It  is  plain  that  this
and  had  direfled  their  courfe,  as  they  port,  which  they  named  Oyfter  Harbor,
fuppofed,  to  accomplifh  this  purpofe.  was  either  that  of  Wellfleet  or  Barn-
Owing,  however,  to  the  ftrength  of  the  ftable.  The  former,  it  will  be  remem-
wind,  or  the  darknefs  of  the  night,  or  bered,  Champlain,  with  De  Monts,

entered

Sietir  de  Champlain.  1 1 7

tude  42®.  Three  canoes  of  favages  came  out  to  us.  On
this  day,  the  wind  coming  round  in  our  favor,  we  weighed
anchor  to  go  to  Cap  Blanc,  diftant  from  here  five  leagues
north  a quarter  north-eaft,  and  we  doubled  the  cape.

On  the  next  day,  the  2d  of  Odober,  we  arrived  off  Malle-
barre,^  where  we  flayed  fome  time  on  account  of  the  bad
weather.  During  this  time,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  with  the
fhallop,  accompanied  by  twelve  or  fifteen  men,  vifited  the

harbor,  where  fome  hundred

entered  the  preceding  year,  1605,
and  named  it,  or  the  river  that  flows
into  it,  St.  Suzanne  du  Cap  Blanc.  —
Vide  antea.,  note  166.  It  is  obvious
that  Champlain  could  not  have  entered
this  harbor  the  fecond  time  without  rec-
ognizing it ; and,  if  he  had  done  fo,  he
would  not  have  given  to  ft  a name  en-
tirely different  from  that  which  he  had
given  it  the  year  before.  He  was  too
careful  an  obferver  to  fall  into  fuch  an
extraordinary  miflake.  We  may  con-
clude, therefore,  that  the  port  in  queftion
was  not  Wellfleet,  but  Barnftable.  This
conclufion  is  fuftained  by  the  conditions
mentioned  in  the  text.  They  entered,
on  a flood-tide,  in  twelve,  eighteen,  and
twenty-four  feet  of  water,  and  found
thirty  or  thirty-fix  when  they  had  paffed
into  the  harbor.  It  could  hardlvbe  ex-
pelled that  any  harbor  among  the  fhift-
ing  fands  of  Cape  Cod  would  remain
precifely  the  fame,  as  to  depth  of  water,
after  the  lapfe  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
years.  Neverthelefs,  the  difcrepancy
is  fo  flight  in  this  cafe,  that  it  would
feem  to  be  accidental,  rather  than  to
arife  from  the  folidity  or  fixednefs  of  the
harbor-bed.  The  channel  of  Barnftable
Harbor,  according  to  the  Coaft  Survey
Charts,  varies  in  depth  at  low  tide,  for
two  miles  outfide  of  Sandy  Neck  Point,
from  feven  to  ten  feet  for  the  firft  mile,

and  fifty  favages,  finging  and

dancing

and  for  the  next  mile  from  ten  feet  to
thirty-two  on  reaching  Beach  Point,
which  may  be  confidered  the  entrance
of  the  bay.  On  pafllng  the  Point,  we
have  thirty-fix  and  a half  feet,  and  for  a
mile  inward  the  depth  varies  from  twelve
to  twenty  feet.  Add  a few  feet  for  the
rife  of  the  tide  on  which  they  entered,
and  the  depth  of  the  water  in  1606  could
not  have  been  very  different  from  that
of  to-day.  The  “ low  fandy  coaft  ” which
they  faw  is  well  reprefented  by  Spring
Hill  Beach  and  Sandy  Neck  ; the  “ land
fomewhat  high,’’  by  the  range  of  hills  in
the  rear  of  Barnftable  Harbor.  The
diftance  from  the  mouth  of  the  harbor
to  Wood  End  light,  the  neareft  point  on
Cape  Cod,  does  not  vary  more  than  a
league,  and  its  difedlion  is  about  that
mentioned  by  Champlain.  The  differ-
ence in  latitude  is  not  greater  than
ufual.  It  is  never  fufficiently  exa6l  for
the  identification  of  any  locality.  The
fubftantial  agreement,  in  fo  many  partic-
ulars with  the  narrative  of  the  author,
renders  it  quite  clear  that  the  Port  aux
Huijtres  was  Barnftable  Harbor.  They
entered  it  on  the  morning  of  the  ift  of
06lober,  and  appear  to  have  left  on  the
fame  day.  Sandy  Neck^  light,  at  the
entrance  of  the  harbor,  is  in  latitude
41®  43'  19".

209  Naufet  Harbor.

1 1 8 Voyages  of

dancing  according  to  their  cuftom,  appeared  before  him.
After  feeing  this  place,  we  returned  to  our  veffel,  and,  the
wind  coming  favorable,  failed  along  the  coaft  towards  the
fouth.

CHAPTER  XIV.

Continuation  of  the  above  Discoveries,  and  what  was  observed
OF  Particular  Importance.

HEN  we  were  fome  fix  leagues  from  Mallebarre,
we  anchored  near  the  coaft,  the  wind  not  being
fair,  along  which  we  obferved  columns  of  fmoke
made  by  the  favages,  which  led  us  to  determine
to  go  to  them,  for  which  purpofe  the  fhallop
was  made  ready.  But  when  near  the  coaft,  which  is  fandy,
we  could  not  land,  for  the  fwell  was  too  great.  Seeing  this,
the  favages  launched  a canoe,  and  came  out  to  us,  eight  or
nine  of  them,  finging  and  making  figns  of  their  joy  at  feeing
us,  and  they  indicated  to  us  that  lower  down  there  was  a
harbor  where  we  could  put  our  barque  in  a place  of  fecurity.
Unable  to  land,  the  fhallop  came  back  to  the  barque;  and  the
favages,  whom  we  had  treated  civilly,  returned  to  the  fhore.

On  the  next  day,  the  wind  being  favorable,  we  continued
our  courfe  to  the  north  five  leagues,  and  hardly  had  we
gone  this  diftance,  when  we  found  three  and  four  fathoms  of
water  at  a diftance  of  a league  and  a half  from  the  fhore.
On  going  a little  farther,  the  depth  fuddenly  diminifhed  to  a
fathom  and  a half  and  two  fathoms,  which  alarmed  us,  fince

we

Clearly  a mi  flake.  Champlain  here  whereas,  the  whole  context  fhows  that
fays  they  “ continued  their  courfe  north,”  they  mufl  have  gone  fouth.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  1 1 9

we  faw  the  fea  breaking  all  around,  but  no  paffage  by  which
we  could  retrace  our  courfe,  for  the  wind  was  diredly  con-
trary.

Accordingly  being  fhut  in  among  the  breakers  and  fand-
banks,  we  had  to  go  at  hap-hazard  where  there  feemed  to  be
the  moft  water  for  our  barque,  which  was  at  moft  only  four
feet:  we  continued  among  thefe  breakers  until  we  found  as
much  as  four  feet  and  a half.  Finally,  we  fucceeded,  by  the
grace  of  God,  in  going  over  a fandy  point  running  out  nearly
three  leagues  feaward  to  the  fouth-fouth-eaft,  and  a very  dan-
gerous place.^“  Doubling  this  cape,  which  we  named  Cap
Batturier,^^  which  is  twelve  or  thirteen  leagues  from  Malle-
barre,^’®  we  anchored  in  two  and  a half  fathoms  of  water,
fince  we  faw  ourfelves  furrounded  on  all  fides  by  breakers
and  fhoals,  except  in  fome  places  where  the  fea  was  breaking

but

211  «The  fandy  point  running  out
nearly  three  leagues  ” was  evidently  the
ifland  of  Monomoy,  or  its  reprefentative,
which  at  that  time  may  have  been  only  a
continuation  of  the  main  land.  Cham-
plain does  not  delineate  on  his  map  an
ifland,  but  a fand-bank  nearly  in  the
fliape  of  an  ifofceles  triangle,  which  ex-
tends far  to  the  fouth-eaft.  Very  great
changes  have  undoubtedly  taken  place
on  this  part  of  the  coaft  fince  the  vifit
of  Champlain.  The  fand-bar  figured
by  him  has  apparently  been  fwept  from
the  fouth-eaft  round  to  the  fouth-weft,
and  is  perhaps  not  very  much  changed
in  its  general  features  except  as  to  its
pofition.  “ We  know  from  our  ftudies
of  fuch  flioals,”  fays  Prof.  Mitchell,  Chief
of  Phyfical  Hydrography,  U.  S.  Coaft
Survey,  “ that  the  relative  order  of  banks
and  beaches  remains  about  the  fame,
however  the  fyftem  as  a whole  may

change  its  location.’*  — Mafs.  Harbor
Commijfioners*  Report.,  1873,  P-  99*

212  Batturier.  This  word  is  an  ad-
je<5live,  formed  with  the  proper  termina-
tion from  the  noun,  batture.,  which  means
a bank  upon  which  the  fea  beats,  reef  or
fand-bank.  Cap  Batturier  may  there-
fore be  rendered  fand-bank  cape,  or  the
cape  of  the  fand-banks.  Batturier  does
not  appear  in  the  di6lionaries,  and  was
doubtlefs  coined  by  Champlain  himfelf,
as  he  makes,  farther  on,  the  adje6live
truitilre.,  in  the  expreflion  la  rivilre
truiti^re.,  from  the  noun,  truite.

218  The  diftances  here  given  appear
to  be  greatly  overftated.  From  Naufet
to  the  fouthern  point  of  Monomoy,  as  it
is  to-day,  the  diftance  is  not  more  than
fix  leagues.  But,  as  the  fea  was  rough,
and  they  were  apparently  much  delayed,
the  diftance  might  naturally  enough  be
overeftimated.

120

Voyages  of

but  little.  The  ftiallop  was  fent  to  find  a channel,  in  order
to  go  to  a place,  which  we  concluded  to  be  that  which  the
favages  had  indicated.  We  alfo  thought  there  was  a river
there,  where  we  could  lie  in  fecurity.

When  our  ftiallop  arrived  there,  our  party  landed  and
examined  the  place,  and,  returning  with  a favage  whom  they
brought  off,  they  told  us  that  we  could  enter  at  full  tide,
which  was  refolved  upon.  We  immediately  weighed  anchor,
and,  under  the  guidance  of  the  favage  who  piloted  us,  pro-
ceeded to  anchor  at  a roadftead  before  the  harbor,  in  fix
fathoms  of  water  and  a good  bottom ; for  we  could  not
enter,  as  the  night  overtook  us.

On  the  next  day,  men  were  fent  to  fet  flakes  at  the  end  of
a fand-bank  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,  when,  the  tide
rifing,  we  entered  in  two  fathoms  of  water.  When  we  had
arrived,  we  praifed  God  for  being  in  a place  of  fafety.  Our
rudder  had  broken,  which  we  had  mended  with  ropes ; but
we  were  afraid  that,  amid  thefe  fhallows  and  flrong  tides,  it
would  break  anew,  and  we  fhould  be  loft.  Within  this  har-
bor there  is  only  a fathom  of  water,  and  two  at  full  tide.
On  the  eaft,  there  is  a bay  extending  back  on  the  north
fome  three  leagues,**'^  in  which  there  is  an  iftand  and  two

other

The  anchorage  was  in  Chatham
Roads,  or  Old  Stage  Harbor.

215  Harding’s  Beach  Point.

215  They  were  now  in  Stage  Harbor,
in  Chatham,  to  which  Champlain,  farther
on,  gives  the  name  of  Port  FortunL
21^  This  is  the  narrow  bay  that
ftretches  from  Morris  Ifland  to  the
north,  parallel  with  the  fea,  feparated
from  it  only  by  a fand-bank,  and  now
reaching  beyond  Chatham  into  the  town

of  Orleans.  By  comparing  Champlain’s
map  of  Port  Fortune  with  modern  charts,
it  will  be  feen  that  the  “ bay  extending
back  on  the  north  fome  three  leagues  ”
terminated,  in  i6o6,  a little  below  Chat-
ham Old  Harbor.  The  ifland  on  Cham-
plain’s map  marked  G.  was  a little  above
the  harbor,  but  has  been  entirely  fwept
away,  together  with  the  neck  north  of
it,  reprefented  on  Champlain’s  map  as
covered  with  trees.  The  bay  now  ex-
tends,

I 2 I

Sieur  de  Champlain.

other  little  bays  which  adorn  the  landfcape,  where  there  is
a confiderable  quantity  of  land  cleared  up,  and  many  little
hills,  where  they  cultivate  corn  and  the  various  grains  on
which  they  live.  There  are,  alfo,  very  fine  vines,  many  wal-
nut-trees, oaks,  cypreffes,  but  only  a few  pines.^^®  All  the
inhabitants  of  this  place  are  very  fond  of  agriculture,  and
provide  themfelves  with  Indian  corn  for  the  winter,  which
they  ftore  in  the  following  manner : —

They  make  trenches  in  the  fand  on  the  flope  of  the  hills,
fome  five  to  fix  feet  deep,  more  or  lefs.  Putting  their  corn
and  other  grains  into  large  grafs  facks,  they  throw  them  into
thefe  trenches,  and  cover  them  with  fand  three  or  four  feet
above  the  furface  of  the  earth,  taking  it  out  as  their  needs
require.  In  this  way,  it  is  preferved  as  well  as  it  would  be
poffible  to  do  in  our  granaries.®*®

We

tends,  as  we  have  Hated  above,  into  the
town  of  Orleans.  The  ifland  G,  known
in  modern  times  as  Ram  Ifland,  difap-
peared  in  1851,  although  it  ftill  continued
to  figure  on  Walling’s  map  of  1858.
The  two  other  little  bays  mentioned  in
the  text  fcarcely  appear  on  Champlain’s
map  ; and  he  may  haVe  inadvertently
included  in  this  bay  the  two  that  are
farther  north,  viz.  Crow’s  Pond  and
Pleafant  Bay,  although  they  do  not  fall
within  the  limits  of  his  map.

218  Vide  antea.,  notes  168,  204,  205.

212  Indian  corn,  Zea  mays.,  is  a plant
of  American  origin.  Columbus  faw  it
among  the  natives  of  the  Weft  Indies,
“ a fort  of  grain  they  call  Maiz,  which
was  well  tafted,  bak’d,  or  dry’d  and
made  into  flour.” — Vide  Hijlory  of  the
Life  and  Actions  of  Chris.  Columbus
by  his  Son  Ferdinand  Columbus.,
ChurchilVs  Voyages,  Vol.  II.  p.  510.

It  is  now  cultivated  more  or  lefs

extenfively  in  nearly  every  part  of  the
world  where  the  climate  is  fuitable.
Champlain  is  the  firft  who  has  left  a rec-
ord of  the  method  of  its  cultivation  in
New  England,  vide  antea,  p.  64,  and
of  its  prefervation  through  the  winter.
The  Pilgrims,  in  1620,  found  it  depofited
by  the  Indians  in  the  ground  after  the
manner  defcribed  in  the  text.  Bradford
fays  they  found  “ heaps  of  fand  newly
padled  with  their  hands,  which  they,
digging  up,  found  in  them  diverce  faire
Indean  baflkets  filled  with  come,  and
fome  in  eares,  faire  and  good,  of  diverce
collours,  which  feemed  to  them  a very
goodly  fight,  haveing  never  feen  any
fuch  before.”  — His.  Plym.  Plantation,
p.  82.  Squanto  taught  the  Englifli  how
to  “fet  it,  and  after  how  to  drefs  and
tend  it.” — Idem,  p.  100.

“ The  women,”  fays  Roger  Williams,
“ fet  or  plant,  weede,  and  hill,  and  gather
and  barne  all  the  come  and  Fruites  of

1 2 2 Voyages  of

We  faw  in  this  place  feme  five  to  fix  hundred  favages,  all

naked

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  Fortune.

The  figures  indicate  fathoms  of  water,

A,  Pond  of  fait  water.^  B,  Cabins  of  the  favages  and  the  lands  they  cultivate.
C.  Meadows  where  there  are  two  little  brooks.  C.  Meadows  on  the  ifland,  that
are  covered  at  every  tide.^  D.  Small  mountain  ranges  on  the  illand,  that  are  cov-
ered with  trees,  vines,  and  plum-trees.®  E,  Pond  of  frelh  water,  where  there  is
plenty  of  game.^  F.  A kind  of  meadow  on  the  ifland.®  G,  An  ifland  covered
with  wood  in  a great  arm  of  the  fea.®  H.  A fort  of  pond  of  fait  water,  where
there  are  many  fliell-fifli,  and,  among  others,  quantities  of  oyflers."^  /.  Sandy
downs  on  a narrow  tongue  of  land.  L,  Arm  of  the  fea.  M,  Roadftead  before
the  harbor  where  we  anchored.®  N.  Entrance  to  the  harbor.  0.  The  harbor
and  place  where  our  barque  was.  P,  The  crofs  we  planted.  Q.  Little  brook.
R.  Mountain  which  is  feen  at  a great  diftance.^  S,  Sea-fliore.  T.  Little  river.
V,  Way  we  went  in  their  country  among  their  dwellings  : it  is  indicated  by
fmall  dots.io  X,  Banks  and  flioals.  K Small  mountain  feen  in  the  interior.ii
Z.  Small  brooks.  9.  Spot  near  the  crofs  where  the  favages  killed  our  men. ^2

Notes.  ^ This  is  now  called  Oyfter  Pond.  2 xhe  letter  C appears  twice  in  the
index,  but  both  are  wanting  on  the  map.  The  former  feems  to  point  to  the  mea-
dows on  the  upper  left-hana  corner  : the  other  fliould  probably  take  the  place  of
the  O on  the  weftern  part  of  the  ifland  above  F.  ® This  range  of  hills  is  a
marked  feature  of  the  ifland.  ^ This  pond  is  ftill  diftinguifhed  for  its  game,  and
is  lea.fed  by  gentlemen  in  Bofton  and  held  as  a preferve.  ® This  is  known  as
Morris  Ifland  ; but  the  ftrait  on  the  north  of  it  has  been  filled  up,  and  the  ifland  is
now  a part  of  the  main  land.  ® This  ifland  has  been  entirely  obliterated,  and  the
neck  on  the  north  has  likewife  been  fwept  away,  and  the  bay  now  extends  feveral
leagues  farther  north.  The  deftru(5lion  of  the  ifland  was  completed  in  1851,  in  the
gale  that  fwept  away  Minot’s  Light.  In  1847,  it  i^3,d  an  area  of  thirteen  acres
and  an  elevation  of  twenty  feet.  — Vide  Harbor  Com.  Report.,  1873.  ^ This  is  now
called  the  Mill  Pond.  ® Chatham  Roads,  or  Old  Stage  Harbor.  ® A moderate
elevation,  by  no  means  a mountain  in  our  fenfe  of  the  word.  The  circuit
here  indicated  is  about  four  or  five  miles.  Another  path  is  indicated  in  the  fame
manner  on  the  extreme  northern  end  of  the  map,  which  fhows  that  their  excur-
fions  had  been  extenfive.  This  is  now  called  the  Great  Chatham  Hill,  and  is
a confpicuous  landmark.  ^2  xhis  is  a creek  up  which  the  tide  fets.  The  other
brook  figured  on  the  map  a little  fouth  of  the  crofs  has  been  artificially  filled
up,  but  the  marfhes  which  it  drained  are  ftill  to  be  feen.  Thefe  landmarks  enable
us  to  fix  upon  the  locality  of  the  crofs  within  a few  feet.

the  field,”  and  of  drying  the  corn,  he
adds,  “ which  they  doe  carefully  upon

heapes  and  Mats  many  dayes,  before
they  barne  it  up,  covering  it  up  with

Mats

123

Sieur  de  Champlain.

naked  except  their  fexual  parts,  which  they  cover  with  a
fmall  piece  of  doe  or  feal-fkin.  The  women  are  alfo  naked,
and,  like  the  men,  cover  theirs  with  fkins  or  leaves.  They
wear  their  hair  carefully  combed  and  twifted  in  various  ways,
both  men  and  women,  after  the  manner  of  the  favages  of
Chouacoet.^®  Their  bodies  are  well-proportioned,  and  their
fkin  olive-colored.  They  adorn  themfelves  with  feathers,
beads  of  fliell,  and  other  gewgaws,  which  they  arrange  very

neatly

Mats  at  night,  and  opening  when  the
Sun  is  hot”

The  following  are  teftimonies  as  to
the  ufe  made  by  the  natives  of  the  In-
dian corn  as  food : —

“ They  brought  with  them  in  a thing
like  a Bow-cafe,  which  the  principall  of
them  had  about  his  waft,  a little  of  their
Come  powdered  to  Powder,  which  put
to  a little  water  they  eate.’^  — Mourfs
Relation.,  London,  1622,  Dexter’s  ed.,

p.  88.

“ Giving  vs  a kinde  of  bread  called  by
Maiziuml'* — Idem,  p.  10 1.

“ They  feldome  or  never  make  bread
of  their  Indian  corne,  but  feeth  it  whole
like  beanes,  eating  three  or  four  comes
with  a mouthfull  of  fifti  or  flefti,  fome-
times  eating  meate  firft  and  comes  after,
filling  chinckes  with  their  broth.”  —
IVood's  New  Eng.  Prof  pell,  London,
1634,  Prince  Society’s  ed.,  pp.  75,  76.

“ Nokekich.  Parchld  meal,  which  is
a readie  very  wholefome  food,  which
they  eate  with  a little  water  hot  or  cold  :

. . . With  a fpoonfull  of  this  meale  and
a fpoonfull  of  water  from  the  Brooke,
have  I made  many  a good  dinner  and
fupper.”  — Roger  Williamses  Key,  Lon-
don, 1643,  Trumbull’s  ed.,  pp.  39,  40.

“Their  food  is  generally  boiled  maize,
or  Indian  corn,  mixed  witn  kidney  beans
or  fometimes  without.  . . . Alfo  they
mix  with  the  faid  pottage  feveral  forts

of  roots,  as  Jefufalem  artichokes,  and
ground  nuts,  and  other  roots,  and  pom-
pions,  and  fqualhes,  and  alfo  feveral
forts  of  nuts  or  mails,  as  oak-acorns,
chefnuts,  walnuts  : Thefe  hulked  and
dried,  and  powdeted,  they  thicken  their
pottage  therewith.”  — Hifiorical  Collec-
tions  of  the  Indians,  by  Daniel  Gookin,
1674,  Bolton,  1792,  p.  10.

The  character  of  the  Indian  drefs,
as  here  defcribed,  does  not  differ  widely
from  that  of  a later  period.  — Vide
Mourfs  Relation,  1622,  Dexter’s  ed.,
p.  135  ; Roger  Williamses  Key,  1643,
Trumbull’s  ed.,  p.  143,  et  feq. ; Hiftory
of  New  England,  by  Edward  Johnfon,
1654,  Poole’s  ed.,  pp.  224,  225.

Champlain’s  obfervations  were  made  in
the  autumn  before  the  approach  of  the
winter  frofts.

Thomas  Morton,  writing  in  1632,
fays  that  the  mantle  which  the  women
“ ufe  to  cover  their  nakednefle  with  is
much  longer  then  that  which  the  men
ufe ; for  as  the  men  haue  one  Deeres
Ikinn,  the  women  haue  two  foed  to-
gether at  the  full  length,  and  it  is  fo
lardge  that  it  trailes  after  them,  like  a
great  Ladies  trane,  and  in  time,”  he
Iportively  adds,  “ I thinke  they  may
haue  their  Pages  to  beare  them  up.”  —
New  Eng.  Canaan,  1632,  in  Force’s
Tradls,  Vol.  II.  p.  23.

1 24

Voyages  of

neatly  in  embroidery  work.  As  weapons,  they  have  bows,
arrows,  and  clubs.  They  are  not  fo  much  great  hunters  as
good  filhermen  and  tillers  of  the  land.

In  regard  to  their  police,  government,  and  belief,  we  have
been  unable  to  form  a judgment ; but  I fuppofe  that  they  are
not  different  in  this  refpedt  from  our  favages,  the  Souriquois
and  Canadians,  who  worfhip  neither  the  moon  nor  the  fun,
nor  any  thing  elfe,  and  pray  no  more  than  the  beafts.“‘
There  are,  however,  among  them  fome  perfons  who,  as  they
fay,  are  in  concert  with  the  devil,  in  whom  they  have  great
faith.  They  tell  them  all  that  is  to  happen  to  them,  but
in  fo  doing  lie  for  the  mofl  part.  Sometimes  they  fucceed
in  hitting  the  mark  very  well,  and  tell  them  things  fimilar
to  thofe  which  adtually  happen  to  them.  For  this  reafon,
they  have  faith  in  them,  as  if  they  were  prophets;  while
they  are  only  impoflors  who  delude  them,  as  the  Egyptians
and  Bohemians  do  the  limple  villagers.  They  have  chiefs,
whom  they  obey  in  matters  of  war,  but  not  otherwife,  and
who  engage  in  labor,  and  hold  no  higher  rank  than  their
companions.  Each  one  has  only  fo  much  land  as  he  needs
for  his  fupport.

Their  dwellings  are  feparate  from  each  other,  according  to
the  land  which  each  one  occupies.  They  are  large,  of  a cir-
cular fhape,  and  covered  with  thatch  made  of  graffes  or  the
hufks  of  Indian  corn.^  They  are  furniflied  only  with  a bed

221  This  conclufion  harmonizes  with  Winflow  was  at  firft  of  the  fame
the  opinion  of  Thomas  Morton,  who  opinion,  but  afterward  faw  caufe  for
fays  that  the  natives  of  New  England  changing  his  mind. — Vide  WtnJloTds
are  fine  fide,  fine  lege,  et  fine  rege,^"‘  and  Relation,  1624,  in  Young’s  Chronicles,
that  they  have  no  worfhip  nor  religion  p.  355.  See  alfo  Roger  Williamses  Key,
_n  ^ 1632,  in  Trumbull’s  ed.,  p.  159.

or

222  u Their  houfes,  or  wigwams,”  fays
Gookm,

125

Sieur  de  Champlam.

or  two,  raifed  a foot  from  the  ground,  made  of  a number  of
little  pieces  of  wood  preffed  againft  each  other,  on  which
they  arrange  a reed  mat,  after  the  Spanith  ftyle,  which  is  a
kind  of  matting  two  or  three  fingers  thick : on  thefe  they
fleep.^  They  have  a great  many  fleas  in  fummer,  even  in
the  fields.  One  day  as  we  went  out  walking,  we  were  befet
by  fo  many  of  them  that  we  were  obliged  to  change  our
clothes.

All  the  harbors,  bays,  and  coafts  from  Chouacoet  are  filled
with  every  variety  of  fifh,  like  thofe  which  we  have  before
our  habitation,  and  in  fuch  abundance  that  I can  confidently
affert  that  there  was  not  a day  or  night  when  we  did  not  fee
and  hear  pafs  by  our  barque  more  than  a thoufand  porpoifes,
which  were  chafing  the  fmaller  fry.  There  are  alfo  many
fliell-fifh  of  various  forts,  principally  oyflers.  Game  birds  are
very  plenty.

It

Gookin,  “ are  built  with  fmall  poles  fixed
in  the  ground,  bent  and  faftened  together
with  barks  of  trees,  oval  or  arborwife  on
the  top.  The  beft  fort  of  their  houfes
are  covered  very  neatly,  tight,  and  warm
with  the  bark  of  trees,  ftripped  from
their  bodies  at  fuch  feafons  when  the
fap  is  up ; and  made  into  great  flakes
with  preflures  of  weighty  timbers,  when
they  are  green  ; and  fo  becoming  dry,
they  will  retain  a form  fuitable  for  the
ufe  they  prepare  them  for.  The  meaner
fort  of  wigwams  are  covered  with  mats
they  make  of  a kind  of  bulrufli,  which
are  alfo  indifferent  tight  and  warm,  but
not  fo  good  as  the  former.”  — Vide
Hijtorical  Colle^ions,  1674,  Bofton,
1752,  p.  9.

^ The  conflru6lion  of  the  Indian
couch,  or  bed,  at  a much  later  period
may  be  feen  by  the  following  excerpts  :

“ So  we  defired  to  goe  to  reft : he  layd  vs
on  the  bed  with  himfelfe  and  his  wife,
they  at  one  end  and  we  at  the  other,  it
being  only  plancks  layd  a foot  from  the
ground,  and  a thin  mat  upon  them.”  —
Mourfs  Relation^  London,  1622,  Dex-
ter’s ed.,  pp.  107,  108.  “ In  their  wig-

wams, they  make  a kind  of  couch  or
mattrelfes,  firm  and  ftrong,  raifed  about
a foot  high  from  the  earth  ; firft  covered
with  boards  that  they  fplit  out  of  trees  ;
and  upon  the  boards  they  fpread  mats
generally,  and  fometimes  bear  (kins  and
deer  (kins.  Thefe  are  large  enough  for
three  or  four  perfons  to  lodge  upon  ;
and  one  may  either  draw  nearer  or  keep
at  a more  diftance  from  the  heat  of  the
fire,  as  they  pleafe  ; for  their  mattreffes
are  fix  or  eight  feet  broad.”  — Cookings
Hijlorical  Colle^ions^  1674,  Bofton,
1792,  p.  10.

126

Voyages  of

It  would  be  an  excellent  place  to  eredt  buildings  and  lay
the  foundations  of  a State,  if  the  harbor  were  fomewhat  deeper
and  the  entrance  fafer.  Before  leaving  the  harbor,  the  rudder
was  repaired ; and  we  had  fome  bread  made  from  flour,  which
we  had  brought  for  our  fubfiftence,  in  cafe  our  bifcuit  fliould
give  out.  Meanwhile,  we  fent  the  fliallop  with  five  or  fix  men
and  a favage  to  fee  whether  a paffage  might  be  found  more
favorable  for  our  departure  than  that  by  which  we  had  en-
tered.

After  they  had  gone  five  or  fix  leagues  and  were  near  the
land,  the  favage  made  his  efcape,®®^  fince  he  was  afraid  of  being
taken  to  other  favages  farther  fouth,  the  enemies  of  his  tribe,
as  he  gave  thofe  to  underfland  who  were  in  the  fliallop.
The  latter,  upon  their  return,  reported  that,  as  far  as  they
had  advanced,  there  were  at  leaft  three  fathoms  of  water,  and
that  farther  on  there  were  neither  fliallows  nor  reefs.

We  accordingly  made  hafle  to  repair  our  barque,  and  make
a fupply  of  bread  for  fifteen  day's.  Meanwhile,  Sieur  de
Poutrincourt,  accompanied  by  ten  or  twelve  arquebufiers,
vifited  all  the  neighboring  country,  which  is  very  fine,  as  I
have  faid  before,  and  where  we  faw  here  and  there  a large
number  of  little  houfes.

Some  eight  or  nine  days  a^fter,  while  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt
was  walking  out,  as  he  had  previoufly  done,®^®  we  obferved  the
favages  taking  down  their  cabins  and  fending  their  women,
children,  provifions,  and  other  neceffaries  of  life  into  the

woods.

This  exploration  appears  to  have  ““  On  the  map  of  Port  Fortune,  or
extended  about  as  far  as  Point  Gam-  Chatham,  the  courfe  of  one  of  thefe
mon,  where,  being  “ near  the  land,’’  excurhous  is  marked  by  a dotted  line,
their  Indian  guide  left  them,  as  ftated  to  which  the  reader  is  referred. — Vide
in  the  text.  notes  on  the  map  of  Pqrt  Fortund.

127

Sieur  de  Champlain.

woods.  This  made  us  fufpedl  fome  evil  intention,  and  that
they  purpofed  to  attack  thofe  of  our  company  who  were  work-
ing on  fhore,  where  they  flayed  at  night  in  order  to  guard
that  which  could  not  be  embarked  at  evening  except  with
much  trouble.  This  proved  to  be  true ; for  they  determined
among  themfelves,  after  all  their  effedls  had  been  put  in  a
place  of  fecurity,  to  come  and  furprife  thofe  on  land,  taking
advantage  of  them  as  much  as  poffible,  and  to  carry  off  all
they  had.  But,  if  by  chance  they  fhould  find  them  on  their
guard,  they  refolved  to  come  with  figns  of  friendfhip,  as
they  were  wont  to  do,  leaving  behind  their  bows  and  arrows.

Now,  in  view  of  what  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  had  feen,  and
the  order  which  it  had  been  told  him  they  obferved  when
they  wifhed  to  play  fome  bad  trick,  when  we  paffed  by  fome
cabins,  where  there  was  a large  number  of  women,  we
gave  them  fome  bracelets  and  rings  to  keep  them  quiet  and
free  from  fear,  and  to  mofl  of  the  old  and  diflinguifhed  men
hatchets,  knives,  and  other  things  which  they  defired.  This
pleafed  them  greatly,  and  they  repaid  it  all  in  dances,  gam-
bols, and  harangues,  which  we  did  not  underftand  at  all.  We
went  wherever  we  chofe  without  their  having  the  affurance
to  fay  any  thing  to  us.  It  pleafed  us  greatly  to  fee  them
fhow  themfelves  fo  fimple  in  appearance.

We  returned  very  quietly  to  our  barque,  accompanied  by
fome  of  the  favages.  On  the  way,  we  met  feveral  fmall
troops  of  them,  who  gradually  gathered  together  with  their
arms,  and  were  greatly  aftonifhed  to  fee  us  so  far  in  the  in-
terior, and  did  not  fuppofe  that  we  had  juft  made  a circuit  of
nearly  four  or  five  leagues  about  their  territory.  Faffing
near  us,  they  trembled  with  fear,  left  harm  fhould  be  done

them.

128  Voyages  of

them,  as  it  was  in  our  power  to  do.  But  we  did  them
none,  although  we  knew  their  evil  intentions.  Having  ar-
rived where  our  men  were  working,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt
inquired  if  every  thing  was  in  readinefs  to  refift  the  defigns
of  this  rabble.

He  ordered  every  thing  on  fhore  to  be  embarked.  This
was  done,  except  that  he  who  was  making  the  bread  ftayed
to  finifh  a baking,  and  two  others  with  him.  They  were
told  that  the  favages  had  fome  evil  intent,  and  that  they
fliould  make  hafle  to  embark  the  coming  evening,  fmce
they  carried  their  plans  into  execution  only  at  night,  or  at
daybreak,  which  in  their  plots  is  generally  the  hour  for  mak-
ing a furprife.

Evening  having  come,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  gave  orders
that  the  fhallop  fliould  be  fent  afliore  to  get  the  men  who
remained.  This  was  done  as  foon  as  the  tide  would  permit,
and  thofe  on  fhore  were  told  that  they  muft  embark  for  the
reafon  afligned.  This  they  refufed  in  fpite  of  the  remon-
ftrances  that  were  made  Petting  forth  the  rifks  they  ran  and
the  difobedience  to  their  chief.  They  paid  no  attention  to
it,  with  the  exception  of  a fervant  of  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,
who  embarked.  Two  others  difembarked  from  the  fliallop
and  w'ent  to  the  three  on  fhore,  who  had  ftayed  to  eat  fome
cakes  made  at  the  fame  time  with  the  bread.

But,  as  they  were  unwilling  to  do  as  they  were  told,  the
fliallop  returned  to  the  veffel.  It  was  not  mentioned  to
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  who  had  retired,  thinking  that  all  were
on  board.

The  next  day,  in  the  morning,  the  15  th  of  Odtober,  the
favages  did  not  fail  to  come  ^nd  fee  in  what  condition  our

men

f

Sieur  de  Champlain.  129

men  were,  whom  they  found  afleep,  except  one,  who  was
near  the  fire.  When  they  faw  them  in  this  condition,  they
came,  to  the  number  of  four  hundred,  foftly  over  a little  hill,
and  fent  them  fuch  a volley  of  arrows  that  to  rife  up  was
death.  Fleeing  the  beft  they  could  towards  our  barque,
fhouting,  “ Help!  they  are  killing  us!”  a part  fell  dead  in  the
water;  the  others  were  all  pierced  with  arrows,  and  one
died  in  confequence  a fhort  time  after.  The  favages  made
a defperate  noife  with  roarings,  which  it  was  terrible  to  hear.

U pon  the  occurrence  of  this  noife  and  that  of  our  men,  the
fentinel,  on  our  veffel,  exclaimed,  “To  arms!  They  are  kill-
ing our  men ! ” Confequently,  each  one  immediately  feized
his  arms ; and  we  embarked  in  the  fliallop,  fome  fifteen  or
fixteen  of  us,  in  order  to  go  aflhore.  But,  being  unable  to
get  there  on  account  of  a fand-bank  between  us  and  the  land,
we  threw  ourfelves  into  the  water,  and  waded  from  this  bank

to

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

The  Attack  at  Port  Fortune.

The  figures  indicate  fcUkoms  of  water.

A.  Place  where  the  French  were  making  bread,  B.  The  favages  furprifing  the
French,  and  fhooting  their  arrows  at  them.  C French  burned  by  the  favages.  D,
The  French  fleeing  to  the  barque,  completely  covered  with  arrows.  E.  Troops
of  favages  burning  the  French  whom  they  had  killed.  F.  Mountain  bordering  on
the  harbor.  G.  Cabins  of  the  favages.  French  on  the  fliore  charging  upon
the  favages.  /.  Savages  routed  by  the  French.  L.  Shallop  in  which  were

the  French.  M.  Savages  around  our  lhallop,  who  were  furprifed  by  our  men.
N.  Barque  of  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt.  O.  The  harbor.  P.  Small  brook.

Q.  French  who  fell  dead  in  the  water  as  they  were  trying  to  flee  to  the  barque.

R.  Brook  coming  from  certain  marfhes.  S.  Woods  under  cover  of  which  the
favages  came.

17

130

Voyages  of

to  the  fhore,  the  diftance  of  a mufket-fhot.  As  foon  as  we
were  there,  the  favages,  feeing  us  within  arrow  range,  fled
into  the  interior.  To  purfue  them  was  fruitlefs,  for  they  are
marvelloufly  fwift.  All  that  we  could  do  was  to  carry  away
the  dead  bodies  and  bury  them  near  a crofs,  which  had  been
fet  up  the  day  before,  and  then  to  go  here  and  there  to  fee
if  we  could  get  fight  of  any  of  them.  But  it  was  time  wafted,
therefore  we  came  back.  Three  hours  afterwards,  they  re-
turned to  us  on  the  fea-fhore.  We  difcharged  at  them  feveral
fhots  from  our  little  brafs  cannon;  and,  when  they  heard
the  noife,  they  crouched  down  on  the  ground  to  avoid  the
fire.  In  mockery  of  us,  they  beat  down  the  crofs  and  difin-
terred  the  dead,  which  difpleafed  us  greatly,  and  caufed  us  to
go  for  them  a fecond  time  ; but  they  fled,  as  they  had  done
before.  We  fet  up  agaiij  the  crofs,  and  reinterred  the  dead,
whom  they  had  thrown  here  and  there  amid  the  heath,  where
they  kindled  a fire  to  burn  them.  We  returned  without  any
refult,  as  we  had  done  before,  well  aware  that  there  was
fcarcely  hope  of  avenging  ourfelves  this  time,  and  that  we
fliould  have  to  renew  the  undertaking  when  it  fliould  pleafe
God.

On  the  1 6th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  Port  Fortun^
to  which  we  had  given  this  name  on  account  of  the  mif-
fortune  which  happened  to  us  there.  This  place  is  in  lati-
tude 41  20^,  and  fome  twelve  or  thirteen  leagues  from

Mallebarre.^

CHAPTER  XV.

Port  Fortuni,  perhaps  here  ufed
to  fignify  the  port  of  chance  or  hazard ;
referring  particularly  to  the  dangers
they  encountered  in  paffing  round  Mon-
omoy  to  reach  it.  The  latitude  of  Stage

Harbor  in  Chatham  is  41®  40'.  The
dillance  from  Mallebarre  or  Naufet  to
Port  Fortune,  or  Stage  Harbor,  by
water  round  the  fouthern  point  of  Mon-
omoy,  is  at  the  prefent  time  about  nine

leagues.

Sieur  de  Champlain.

131

CHAPTER  XV.

The  Inclemency  of  the  Weather  not  permitting  us  AT  that  Time
TO  continue  our  Discoveries,  we  resolved  to  return  to  our  Set-
tlement. What  happened  to  us  until  we  reached  it.

FTER  having  gone  fome  fix  or  feven  leagues,  we
fighted  an  ifland,  which  we  named  La  Soup9on-
neufe,^  becaufe  in  the  diflance  we  had  feveral
times  thought  it  was  not  an  ifland.  Then  the
wind  became  contrary,  which  caufed  us  to  put
back  to  the  place  whence  we  had  fet  out,  where  we  flayed
two  or  three  days,  no  favage  during  this  time  prefenting  him-
felf  to  us.

On  the  20th,  we  fet  out  anew  and  coafted  along  to  the
fouth-weft  nearly  twelve  leagues,^  where  we  paffed  near  a
river  which  is  fmall  and  difficult  of  accefs  in  confequence  of
the  fhoals  and  rocks  at  its  mouth,  and  which  I called  after

my  own  name.^  This  coafl

leagues.  The  diftance  may  poffibly
have  been  greater  in  1606,  or  Cham-
plain may  have  increafed  the  diftance
by  giving  a wide  berth  to  Monomoy  in
pafling  round  it.

La  Soupqonneufe.,  the  doubtful.
Martha’s  Vineyard.  Champlain  and
Poutrincourt,  in  the  little  French  barque,
lying  low  on  the  water,  creeping  along
the  ftiore  from  Chatham  to  Point  Gam-
mon, could  hardly  fail  to  be  doubtful
whether  Martha’s  Vineyard  were  an
ifland  or  a part  of  the  main  land.  Lef-
carbot,  fpeaking  of  it,  fays,  et  fut  ap-
pelie  rile  Douteufe.

is,  fo  far  as  we  faw,  low  and

fandy.

Nearly  twelve  leagues  in  a fouth-
wefterly  dire6lion  from  their  anchorage
at  Stage  Harbor  in  Chatham  would
bring  them  to  Noblka  Point,  at  the  en-
trance of  the  Vineyard  Sound.  This
was  the  limit  of  Champlain’s  explora-
tions towards  the  fouth.

229  tt  Called  after  my  own  name,”  viz.
Rivilre  de  Champlain. — Vide  map,  1612.
This  river  appears  to  be  a tidal  paflage
conne6ling  the  Vineyard  Sound  and
Buzzard’s  Bay,  having  Nonameflet
and  Uncatena  Iflands  on  the  fouth-weft,
and  Nobfka  Point,  Wood’s  Holl,  and
Long  Neck  on  the  north-eaft.  On  our

Coaft

132

Voyages  of

fandy.  The  wind  again  grew  contrary  and  very  ftrong,  which
caufed  us  to  put  out  to  fea,  as  we  were  unable  to  advance  on
one  tack  or  the  other:  it,  however,  finally  abated  a little  and
grew  favorable.  But  all  we  could  do  was  to  return  again  to
Port  Fortune,  where  the  coaft,  though  low,  is  fine  and  good,
yet  difficult  of  accefs,  there  being  no  harbors,  many  reefs,
and  shallow  water  for  the  diftance  of  nearly  two  leagues
from  land.  The  moft  that  we  found  was  feven  or  eight
fathoms  in  fome  channels,  which,  however,  continued  only
a cable’s  length,  when  there  were  fuddenly  only  two  or  three
fathoms ; but  one  fhould  not  trufl  the  water  who  has  not
well  examined  the  depth  with  the  lead  in  hand.

Some  hours  after  we  had  returned  to  port,  a fon  of  Pont
Grave,  named  Robert,  loft  a hand  in  firing  a mufket,  which
burft  in  feveral  pieces,  but  without  injuring  any  one  near
him.

Seeing  now  the  wind  continuing  contrary,  and  being  un-
able to  put  to  fea,  we  refolved  meanwhile  to  get  poffeflion  of
fome  favages  of  this  place,  and,  taking  them  to  our  fettlement,
put  them  to  grinding  corn  at  the  hand-mill,  as  punifhment
for  the  deadly  affault  which  they  had  committed  on  five  or
fix  of  our  company.  But  it  was  very  difficult  to  do  this  when
we  were  armed,  fince,  if  we  went  to  them  prepared  to  fight,

they

Coaft  Survey  Charts,  it  is  called  Hadley  barque,  elevated  but  a little  above  the
River.  _ Its  length  is  nearly  two  miles,  furface  of  the  water,  its  fource  in  Buz-
in a winding  courfe.  The  mouth  of  zard’s  Bay  could  not  be  difcovered,  ef-
this  paftage  is  full  of  boulders,  and  in  a pecially  if  they  pafled  round  Noblka
receding  tide  the  current  is  rough  and  Point,  under  the  lee  of  which  they  prob-
boifterous,  and  would  anfwer  well  to  the  ably  obtained  a view  of  the  “ flioals
defcription  in  the  text,  as  no  other  river  and  rocks  ” which  they  fawat  the  mouth
does  on  the  coaft  from  Chatham  to  of  the  river.

Wood’s  Roll.  On  the  fmall  French

133

Sieur  de  Champlain.

they  would  turn  and  flee  into  the  woods,  where  they  were  not
to  be  caught.  It  was  neceffary,  accordingly,  to  have  recourfe
to  artifice,  and  this  is  what  we  planned : when  they  fliould
come  to  feek  friendlhip  with  us,  to  coax  them  by  Ihowing
them  beads  and  other  gewgaws,  and  aflure  them  repeatedly
of  our  good  faith ; then  to  take  the  fliallop  well  armed,  and
conduft  on  fhore  the  moft  robuft  and  ftrong  men  we  had,
each  one  having  a chain  of  beads  and  a fathom  of  match  on
his  arm ; ^ and  there,  while  pretending  to  fmoke  with  them
(each  one  having  an  end  of  his  match  lighted  fo  as  not  to
excite  fufpicion,  it  being  cuftomary  to  have  fire  at  the  end
of  a cord  in  order  to  light  the  tobacco),  coax  them  with
pleafing  words  fo  as  to  draw  them  into  the  fhallop;  and,
if  they  fiiould  be  unwilling  to  enter,  each  one  approaching
fliould  choofe  his  man,  and,  putting  the  beads  about  his
neck,  fliould  at  the  fame  time  put  the  rope  on  him  to  draw
him  by  force.  But,  if  they  fhould  be  too  boifterous,  and  it
fliould  not  be  poffible  to  fucceed,  they  fhould  be  ftabbed,  the
rope  being  firmly  held ; and,  if  by  chance  any  of  them  fliould
get  away,  there  fliould  be  men  on  land  to  charge  upon  them
with  fwords.  Meanwhile,  the  little  cannon  on  our  barque
were  to  be  kept  ready  to  fire  upon  their  companions  in  cafe
they  fliould  come  to  aflift  them,  under  cover  of  which  fire-
arms

A fathom  of  match  on  his  arm.  was  difcharged  by  means  of  a notched
This  was  a rope,  made  of  the  tow  of  wheel  of  fteel,  fo  arranged  that  its  fric-
hemp  or  flax,  loofely  twifted,  and  pre-  tion,  when  in  motion,  threw  fjparks  of
pared  to  retain  the  fire,  fo  that,  when  fire  into  the  pan  that  contained  the
once  lighted,  it  would  burn  till  the  whole  powder.  The  fnaphance  was  a flight
was  confumed.  It  was  employed  in  improvement  upon  the  wheel-lock.  The
conne6lion  with  the  match-lock,  the  flint-lock  followed,  now  half  a centurv
arm  then  in  common  ufe.  The  wheel-  fince  fuperfeded  by  the  percuflion  lock
lock  followed  in  order  of  time,  which  and  cap.

134

Voyages  of

arms  the  fliallop  could  withdraw  in  fecurity.  The  plan
above-mentioned  was  well  carried  out  as  it  had  been  ar-
ranged.

Some  days  after  thefe  events  had  tranfpired,  there  came
favages  by  threes  and  fours  to  the  fhore,  making  figns  to  us
to  go  to  them.  But  we  faw  their  main  body  in  ambufcade
under  a hillock  behind  fome  bulhes,  and  I fuppofe  that  they
were  only  defirous  of  beguiling  us  into  the  fhallop  in  order
to  difcharge  a Ihower  of  arrows  upon  us,  and  then  take  to
flight.  Neverthelefs,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  did  not  hefi-
tate  to  go  to  them  with  ten  of  us,  well  equipped  and  deter-
mined to  fight  them,  if  occafion  offered.  We  landed  at  a
place  beyond  their  ambufcade,  as  we  thought,  and  where
they  could  not  furprife  us.  There  three  or  four  of  us  went
afliore  together  with  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt : the  others  did
not  leave  the  fhallop,  in  order  to  protedt  it  and  be  ready  for
an  emergency.  We  afcended  a knoll  and  went  about  the
woods  to  fee  if  we  could  not  difcover  more  plainly  the  am-
bufcade.  When  they  faw  us  going  fo  unconcernedly  to
them,  they  left  and  went  to  other  places,  which  we  could  not
fee,  and  of  the  four  favages  we  faw  only  two,  who  went  away
very  flowly.  As  they  withdrew,  they  made  figns  to  us  to
take  our  fhallop  to  another  place,  thinking  that  it  w'as  not
favorable  for  the  carrying  out  of  their  plan.  And,  when  we
alfo  faw  that  they  had  no  defire  to  come  to  us,  we  re-embarked
and  went  to  the  place  they  indicated,  which  was  the  fecond
ambufcade  they  had  made,  in  their  endeavor  to  draw  us  un-
armed to  themfelves  by  figns  of  friendfhip.  But  this  we  were
not  permitted  to  do  at  that  time,  yet  we  approached  very
near  them  without  feeing  this  ambufcade,  which  we  fup-

pofed

135

Sieur  de  Champlain.

pofed  was  not  far  off.  As  our  fliallop  approached  the  fhore,
they  took  to  flight,  as  alfo  thofe  in  anrbufh,  after  whom  we
fired  fome  mufket-fhots,  fmce  we  faw  that  their  intention  was
only  to  deceive  us  by  flattery,  in  which  they  were  difap-
pointed ; for  we  recognized  clearly  what  their  purpofe  was,
which  had  only  mifchief  in  view.  We  retired  to  our  barque
after  having  done  all  we  could.

On  the  fame  day,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  refolved  to  return
to  our  fettlement  on  account  of  four  or  five  fick  and  wounded
men,  whofe  wounds  were  growing  worfe  through  lack  of
falves,  of  which  our  furgeon,  by  a great  miftake  on  his  part,
had  brought  but  a fmall  provifion,  to  the  detriment  of  the
fick  and  our  own  difcomfort,  as  the  flench  from  their  wounds
was  fo  great,  in  a little  veffel  like  our  own,  that  one  could
fcarcely  endure  it.  Moreover,  we  were  afraid  that  they  would
generate  difeafe.  Alfo  we  had  provifions  only  for  going
eight  or  ten  days  farther,  however  much  economy  might  be
pradlifed ; and  we  knew  not  whether  the  return  would  lafl  as
long  as  the  advance,  which  was  nearly  two  months.

At  any  rate,  our  refolution  being  formed,  we  withdrew,  but
with  the  fatisfadlion  that  God  had  not  left  unpunifhed  the
mifdeeds  of  thefe  barbarians.^*  We  advanced  no  farther

than

They  did  not  capture  any  of  the  Nova  Scotia.  With  the  latter  they  had
Indians,  to  be  reduced  to  a fpecies  of  no  hoftile  conflidls  whatever,  although
flavery,  as  they  intended  ; but,  as  will  the  Indians  were  fufficiently  implacable
appear  further  on,  inhumanly  butchered  and  revengeful  towards  their  enemies,
feveral  of  them,  which  would  feem  to  Thofe  inhabiting  the  peninfula  of  Cape
have  been  an  a6l  of  revenge  rather  than  Cod,  and  as  far  north  as  Cape  Anne,  were
of  punilhment.  The  intercourfe  of  the  more  fufpicious,  and  had  apparently
French  with  the  natives  of  Cape  Cod  lefs  clear  conceptions  of  perfonal  rights,
was,  on  the  whole,  lefs  fatisfa6lory  than  efpecially  the  rights  of  property.  Might
that  with  the  northern  tribes  along  the  and  right  were  to  them  identical.  What-
Ihores  of  Maine,  New  Brunfwick,  and  ever  they  defired,  they  thought  they  had

136  Voyages  of

than  to  latitude  41°  30',  which  was  only  half  a degree  farther
than  Sieur  de  Monts  had  gone  on  his  voyage  of  difcov-
ery.^®*  We  fet  out  accordingly  from  this  harbor.

On  the  next  day,  we  anchored  near  Mallebarre,  where  we
remained  until  the  28th  of  the  month,  when  we  fet  fail.
On  that  day  the  air  w^as  very  cold,  and  there  was  a little  fnow.

We  took  a diredl  courfe  for

a right  to  have,  if  they  had  the  power
or  wit  to  obtain  it.  The  French  came
in  conta6l  with  only  two  of  the  many
fubordinate  tribes  that  were  in  polTef-
fion  of  the  peninfula ; viz. , the  Monomoy-
icks  at  Chatham,  and  the  Naufets  at
Eaftham.  The  conflidl  in  both  inftances
grew  out  of  an  attempt  on  the  part
of  the  natives  to  commit  a. petty  theft.
But  it  is  quite  poffible  that  the  invafion
of  their  territory  by  ftrangers,  an  un-
pardonable offence  among  civilized  peo-
ple, may  have  created  a feeling  of  hof-
tility  that  found  a partial  gratification
in  ftealing  their  property  ; and,  had  not
this  occafion  offered,  the  llifled  feeling  ^
of  hoflility  may  have  broken  out  in
fome  other  form.  In  general,  they  were
not  fubfequently  unfriendly  in  their  in-
tercourfe  with  the  Englifh.  The  Nau-
fets were,  however,  the  fame  that  fent
a fhower  of  arrows  upon  the  Pilgrims
in  1620,  at  the  place  called  by  them  the
“ Firfl:  Encounter,”  and  not  more  than
three  miles  from  the  fpot  where  the
fame  tribe,  in  1605,  had  attacked  the
French,  and  flain  one  of  De  Monts’s
men.  It  mult,  however,  be  fiid  that,  be-
fide  the  invafion  of  their  country,  the  Pil-
grims had,  fome  days  before,  rifled  the
granaries  of  the  natives  dwelling  a few
miles  north  of  the  Naufet.s,  and  taken
away  without  leave  a generous  quantity
of  their  winter’s  fupply  of  corn  ; and  this
may  have  infpired  them  with  a defire
to  be  rid  of  vifitors  who  helped  them-

Norumbegue  or  Ifle  Haute.

Heading

felves  to  their  provifions,  the  fruit  of
their  fummer’s  toil,  their  dependence
for  the  winter  already  upon  them,  with
fo  little  ceremony  and  fuch  unfcrupu-
lous  felfilhnefs  ; for  fuch  it  muft  have
appeared  to  the  Naufets  in  their  favage
and  unenlightened  ftate.  It  is  to  be
regretted  that  thefe  excellent  men,  the
Pilgrims,  did  not  more  fully  compre-
hend the  moral  charadler  of  their  con-
du<51:  in  this  inftance.  They  loft  at  the
outfet  a golden  opportunity  for  impref-
fing  upon  the  minds  of  the  natives  the
great  pradlical  principle  enunciated  by
our  Lord,  the  foundation  of  all  good
neighborhood,  llavra  ovv  ocra  av

LVa  TTOLOiCnv  VfJUV  ol  av6p<syjTQL',  OVTO)  Kai
VfX€LS  7TOL€LT€  aVTOLS.  MaT0.  vil.  12. —

Vide  Bradford"' s Hifl.  Plym.  Plan-
tation^ pp.  82,  83;  MourPs  Relation^
London,  1622,  Dexter’s  ed.,  pp.  21,  22,

30,  3L  55-  . ,

The  latitude  of  Noblka  Point,  the
mofi:  fouthern  limit  of  their  voyage,  is
41®  31',  while  the  latitude  of  Naufet
Harbor,  the  fouthern  limit  of  that  of
De  Monts  on  the  previous  year,  1605,
is  41°  49'.  They  confequently  advanced
but  18',  or  eighteen  nautical  miles,  fur-
ther fouth  than  they  did  the  year  be-
fore. Had  they  commenced  this  year’s
explorations  where  thofe  of  the  preced-
ing terminated,  as  Champlain  had  ad-
viled,  they  might  have  explored  the
whole  coaft:  as  far  as  Long  Ifland  Sound.
Vide  aniea,  pp.  109,  no.

137

Sieur  de  Champlain.

Heading  eaft-north-eaft,  we  were  two  days  at  fea  without  fee-
ing land,  being  kept  back  by  bad  weather.  On  the  following
night,  we  fighted  the  iflands,  which  are  between  Quinibequy
and  Norumbegue.'‘“  The  wind  was  fo  ftrong  that  we  were
obliged  to  put  to  fea  until  daybreak ; but  we  went  fo  far  from
land,  although  we  ufed  very  little  fail,  that  we  could  not  fee
it  again  until  the  next  day,  when  we  faw  Ifle  Haute,  of  which
we  were  abreaft.

On  the  laft  day  of  Odtober,  between  the  Ifland  of  Monts
Deferts  and  Cap  Corneille,^  our  rudder  broke  in  feveral
pieces,  without  our  knowing  the  reafon.  Each  one  ex-
preffed  his  opinion  about  it.  On  the  following  night,  with
a frelh  breeze,  we  came  among  a large  number  of  iflands  and
rocks,  whither  the  wind  drove  us ; and  we  refolved  to  take
refuge,  if  poflible,  on  the  firft  land  we  fhould  find.

We  were  for  fome  time  at  the  mercy  of  the  wind  and  fea,
with  only  the  forefail  fet.  But  the  worfl  of  it  was  that  the
night  was  dark,  and  we  did  not  know  where  we  were  going ;
for  our  barque  could  not  be  fleered  at  all,  although  we  did
all  that  was  poflible,  holding  in  our  hands  the  fheets  of  the
forefail,  which  fometimes  enabled  us  to  fleer  it  a little.  We
kept  continually  founding,  to  fee  if  it  were  poflible  to  find
a bottom  for  anchoring,  and  to  prepare  ourfelves  for  what
might  happen.  But  we  found  none.  Finally,  as  we  were
going  fafler  than  we  wiflied,  it  was  recommended  to  put  an
oar  aflern  together  with  fome  men,  fo  as  to  fleer  to  an  ifland
which  we  faw,  in  order  to  fhelter  ourfelves  from  the  wind.
Two  other  oars  alfo  were  put  over  the  fides  in  the  after  part

of

Between  the  Kennebec  and  Penobfcot.

28*  Vide  antea^  note  177.

18

o

138

Voyages  of

of  the  barque,  to  affifl  thofe  who  were  fleering,  in  order  to
make  the  veffel  bear  up  on  one  tack  and  the  other.  This
device  ferved  us  fo  well,  that  we  headed  where  we  wilhed,
and  ran  in  behind  the  point  of  the  ifland  we  had  feen,'
anchoring  in  twenty-one  fathoms  of  water  until  daybreak!
when  we  propofed  to  reconnoitre  our  pofition  and  feek  for  a
place  to  make  another  rudder.  The  wind  abated.  At  day-
break, we  found  ourfelves  near  the  Ifles  Rangees,“®  entirely
furrounded  by  breakers,  and  we  praifed  God  for  having  pre-
ferved  us  fo  wonderfully  amid  fo  many  perils.

On  the  ifl  of  November,  we  went  to  a place  which  we
deemed  favorable  for  beaching  our  veffel  and  repairing  our
helm.  On  this  day,  I landed,  and  faw  fome  ice  two  inches
thick,  it  having  frozen  perhaps  eight  or  ten  days  before.  I
obferved  alfo  that  the  temperature  of  the  place  differed  very
much  from  that  of  Mallebarre  and  Port  Fortunh ; for  the
leaves  of  the  trees  were  not  yet  dead,  and  had  not  begun  to
fall  when  we  fet  out,  while  here  they  had  all  fallen,  and  it
was  much  colder  than  at  Port  Fortune.

On  the  next  day,  as  we  were  beaching  our  barque,  a canoe
came  containing  Etechemin  favages,  who  told  the  favage
Secondon  in  our  barque  that  louanilcou,  with  his  compan-
ions, had  killed  fome  other  favages,  and  carried  off  fome
women  as  prifoners,  whom  they  had  executed  near  the  Ifland
of  Monts  Deferts.

On  the  9th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  near  Cap  Cor-
neille, and  anchored  the  fame  day  in  the  little  paffage^  of
Sainte  Croix  River.

On

^ IJles  Rangies,  the  fmall  illands
^ong  the  coaft  fouth-weft  of  Machias.
Vide  map  of  1612.

Petit pajfage  de  la  Riuilre  Sainde
Croix,  the  fouthern  ftrait  leading  into

Eaftport

139

Sieur  de  Champlain.

On  the  morning  of  the  next  day,  we  landed  our  favage  with
fome  fupplies  which  we  gave  him.  He  was  well  pleafed  and
fatisfied  at  having  made  this  voyage  with  us,  and  took  away
with  him  fome  heads  of  the  favages  that  had  been  killed  at
Port  Fortune.^^  The  fame  day  we  anchored  in  a very
pretty  cove  ^ on  the  fouth  of  the  Ifland  of  Manan.

On  the  1 2th  of  the  month,  we  made  fail ; and,  when  under
way,  the  fliallop,  which  we  were  towing  aftern,  flruck  againft
our  barque  fo  violently  and  roughly  that  it  made  an  opening
and  ftove  in  her  upper  works,  and  again  in  the  recoil  broke
the  iron  faftenings  of  our  rudder.  At  firft,  we  thought  that
the  firft  blow  had  ftove  in  fome  planks  in  the  lower  part,
which  would  have  funk  us ; for  the  wind  was  fo  high  that  all
we  could  do  was  to  carry  our  forefail.  But  finding  that  the
damage  was  flight,  and  that  there  was  no  danger,  we  managed
with  ropes  to  repair  the  rudder  as  well  as  we  could,  fo  as  to
ferve  us  to  the  end  of  our  voyage.  This  was  not  until  the
14th  of  November,  when,  at  the  entrance  to  Port  Royal,  we
came  near  being  loft  on  a point ; but  God  delivered  us  from
this  danger  as  well  as  from  many  others  to  which  we  had
been  expofed.^

CHAPTER  XVI.

Eaftport  Harbor.  This  anchorage  ap-
ears  to  have  been  in  Quoddy  Roads
etween  Quoddy  Head  and  Lubeck.

In  reporting  the  ftratagem  reforted
to  for  decoying  the  Indians  into  the
hands  of  the  French  at  Port  Fortund,
Champlain  pafles  over  the  details  of  the
bloody  encounter,  doubtlefs  to  fpare
himfelf  and  the  reader  the  painful  re-
cord ; but  its  refults  are  here  dillin6lly
ftated.  Compare  antea^  pp.  132,  133.

Sailing  from  Quoddy  Head  to
Annapolis  Bay,  they  would  in  their

courfe  pafs  round  the  northern  point  of
the  Grand  Manan  ; and  they  probably
anchored  in  Whale  Cove,  or  perhaps
in  Long  Ifland  Bay,  a little  further
fouth.  Champlain’s  map  is  fo  oriented
that  both  of  thefe  bays  would  appear  to
be  on  the  fouth  of  the  Grand  Manan.
Vide  map  of  1612.

239  Champlain  had  now  completed  his
furvey  fouth  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  He
had  traced  the  fhore-line  with  its  fmuof-
ities  and  its  numberlefs  iflands  far  be-
yond the  two  diflinguifhed  headlands.

Cape

140

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  XVI.

Return  from  the  Foregoing  Discoveries,  and  what  transpired  dur-
ing THE  Winter.

PON  our  arrival,  Lefcarbot,  who  had  remained
at  the  fettlement,  affifted  by  the  others  who
had  flayed  there,  welcomed  us  with  a humorous
entertainment.^

Having  landed  and  had  time  to  take  breath,
each  one  began  to  make  little  gardens,  I among  the  reft
attending  to  mine,  in  order  in  the  fpring  to  fow  feveral  kinds
of  feeds  which  had  been  brought  from  France,  and  which
grew  very  well  in  all  the  gardens.

Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  moreover,  had  a water-mill  built
nearly  a league  and  a half  from  our  fettlement,  near  the
point  where  grain  had  been  planted.  This  mill  was  built

at

Cape  Sable  and  Cape  Cod,  which  re-
fpedlively  mark  the  entrance  to  the  Gulf
of  Maine.  The  priority  of  thefe  obfer-
vations,  particularly  with  reference  to
the  habits,  mode  01  life,  and  chafa<5ler
of  the  aborigines,  invells  them  with  an
unufual  intereft  and  value.  Anterior  to
the  vilits  of  Champlain,  the  natives  on
this  coaft  had  come  in  contaft  with
Europeans  but  rarely  and  incidentally,
altogether  too  little  certainly,  if  we  ex-
cept thofe  refiding  on  the  fouthern  coaft
of  Nova  Scotia,  to  have  any  modifying
effe6l  upon  their  manners,  cuftoms,  or
mode  of  life.  What  Champlain  reports,
therefore,  of  the  Indians,  is  true  of  them
in  their  purely  favage  ftate,  untouched
by  any  influences  of  European  civiliza-

tion. This  diftinguiflies  the  record,  and
gives  to  it  a fpecial  importance.

Lefcarbot,  the  author  of  a Hiftory
of  New  France  often  referred  to  in  our
notes,  publiflied  a volume  entitled  “ Les
Muses  de  la  Novvelle  France,”  in
which  maybe  found  the  play  entitled  Le
Theatre  de  Neptvne,  which  he  com-
pofed  to  celebrate  the  return  of  this  ex-
pedition.

The  mill  is  reprefented  on  Cham-
plain^s  map  of  Port  Royal  as  fituated
on  the  ft  ream  which  he  calls  Riviln
du  Moulin^  the  River  of  the  Mill.  This
is  Allen  River ; and  the  fite  of  the  mill
was  a fhort  diftance  fouth-eaft  of  the
“ point  where  corn  had  been  planted,”
which  was  on  the  fpot  now  occupied  by
the  village  of  Annapolis.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  141

at  a fall,  on  a little  river  which  is  not  navigable  on  account  of
the  large  number  of  rocks  in  it,  and  which  falls  into  a fmall
lake.  In  this  place,  there  is  fuch  an  abundance  of  herring
in  their  feafon  that  fhallops  could  be  loaded  with  them,  if
one  were  to  take  the  trouble  to  bring  the  requifite  apparatus.
The  ravages  alfo  of  this  region  come  here  fometimes  to  fifh.
A quantity  of  charcoal  was  made  by  us  for  our  forge.  Dur-
ing the  winter,  in  order  not  to  remain  idle,  I undertook  the
building  of  a road  along  the  wood  to  a little  river  or  brook,
which  we  named  La  Truitiere,^  there  being  many  trout
there.  I afked  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  for  two  or  three
men,  which  he  gave  me  to  affift  in  making  this  paffage-
way.  I got  along  fo  well  that  in  a little  while  I had  the  road
through.  It  extends  through  to  trout-brook,  and  meafures
nearly  two  thoufand  paces.  It  ferved  us  as  a walk  under  the
fhelter  of  the  trees,  which  I had  left  on  both  fides.  This  led
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  to  determine  to  make  another  through
the  woods,  in  order  that  we  might  go  ftraight  to  the  mouth
of  Port  Royal,  it  being  a diftance  of  nearly  three  leagues  and
a half  by  land  from  our  fettlement.  He  had  this  commenced
and  continued  for  about  half  a league  from  La  T ruitiere ; but
he  did  not  finifh  it,  as  the  undertaking  was  too  laborious,  and
he  was  occupied  by  other  things  at  the  time  more  neceffary.
Some  time  after  our  arrival,  we  faw  a fhallop  containing  fav-
ages,  who  told  us  that  a favage,  who  was  one  of  our  friends,
had  been  killed  by  thofe  belonging  to  the  place  whence
they  came,  which  was  Norumbegue,  in  revenge  for  the  kill-
ing of  the  men  of  Norumbegue  and  Quinibequy  by  louan-

ifcou,

2^2  Vide  antea.,  note  212.  See  alfo  the  map  of  Port  Royal,  where  the  road  is
delineated,  p.  24.

142

Voyages  of

ifcou,  alfo  a favage,  and  his  followers,  as  I have  before  re-
lated ; and  that  fome  Etechemins  had  informed  the  favage
Secondon,  who  was  with  us  at  that  time.

The  commander  of  the  fliallop  was  the  favage  named
Ouagimou,  who  was  on  terms  of  friendfliip  with  Beffabez,
chief  of  the  river  Norumbegue,  of  whom  he  alked  the  body
of  Panounias,^^®  who  had  been  killed.  The  latter  granted  it
to  him,  begging  him  to  tell  his  friends  that  he  was  very  forry
for  his  death,  and  affuring  him  that  it  was  without  his  knowl-
edge that  he  had  been  killed,  and  that,  inafmuch  as  it  was
not  his  fault,  he  begged  him  to  tell  them  that  he  defined  they
might  continue  to  live  as  friends.  This  Ouagimou  promifed
to  do  upon  his  return.  He  faid  to  us  that  he  was  very  un-
eafy  until  he  got  away  from  them,  whatever  friendfhip  they
might  fhow  him,  fmce  they  were  liable  to  change ; and  he
feared  that  they  would  treat  him  in  the  fame  manner  as  they
had  the  one  who  had  been  killed.  Accordingly,  he  did  not
tarry  long  after  being  difmiffed.  He  took  the  body  in  his
fhallop  from  Norumbegue  to  our  fettlement,  a diftance  of
fifty  leagues.

As  foon  as  the  body  was  brought  on  fhore,  his  relatives
and  friends  began  to  fhout  by  his  fide,  having  painted  their
entire  face  with  black,  which  is  their  mode  of  mourning.
After  lamenting  much,  they  took  a quantity  of  tobacco  and
two  or  three  dogs  and  other  things  belonging  to  the  deceafed,
and  burned  them  fome  thoufand  paces  from  our  fettlement
on  the  fea-fhore.  Their  cries  continued  until  they  returned
to  their  cabin.

The

248  xhis  Indian  Panounias  and  his  on  his  expedition  to  Cape  Cod.  — Vide
Wife  had  accompanied  De  Monts  in  1605,  antea^  p.  55.

143

Sieur  de  Champlain.

The  next  day  they  took  the  body  of  the  deceafed  and
wrapped  it  in  a red  covering,  which  Mabretou,  chief  of
this  place,  urgently  implored  me  to  give  him,  fince  it  was
handfome  and  large.  He  gave  it  to  the  relatives  of  the
deceafed,  who  thanked  me  very  much  for  it.  After  thus
wrapping  up  the  body,  they  decorated  it  with  feveral  kinds  of
matachiats ; that  is,  firings  of  beads  and  bracelets  of  diverfe
colors.  They  painted  the  face,  and  put  on  the  head  many
feathers  and  other  things,  the  finefl  they  had.  Then  they
placed  the  body  on  its  knees  between  two  flicks,  with  another
under  the  arms  to  fuflain  it.  Around  the  body  were  the
mother,  wife,  and  others  of  the  relatives  and  friends  of  the
deceafed,  both  women  and  girls,  howling  like  dogs.

While  the  women  and  girls  were  fhrieking,  the  favage
named  Mabretou  made  an  addrefs  to  his  companions  on
the  death  of  the  deceafed,  urging  all  to  take  vengeance  for
the  wickednefs  and  treachery  committed  by  the  fubjedls  of
Beffabez,  and  to  make  war  upon  them  as  fpeedily  as  poflible.
All  agreed  to  do  fo  in  the  fpring.

After  the  harangue  was  finifhed  and  the  cries  had  ceafed,
they  carried  the  body  of  the  deceafed  to  another  cabin.
After  fmoking  tobacco  together,  they  wrapped  it  in  an  elk-
fkin  likewife ; and,  binding  it  very  fecurely,  they  kept  it  until
there  fhould  be  a larger  number  of  favages  prefent,  from  each
one  of  whom  the  brother  of  the  deceafed  expedled  to  re-
ceive prefents,  it  being  their  cuflom  to  give  them  to  thofe
who  have  loll  fathers,  mothers,  wives,  brothers,  or  fillers.

On  the  night  of  the  26th  of  December,  there  was  a fouth-
eafl  wind,  which  blew  down  feveral  trees.  On  the  lafl  day
of  December,  it  began  to  fnow,  which  continued  until  the

morning

144

Voyages  of

morning  of  the  next  day.  On  the  i6th  of  January  following,
1607,  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  defiring  to  afcend  the  river
Equille,^^  found  it  at  a diftance  of  fome  two  leagues  from
our  fettlement  fealed  with  ice,  which  caufed  him  to  return,
not  being  able  to  advance  any  farther.  On  the  8th  of  Feb-
ruary, fome  pieces  of  ice  began  to  flow  down  from  the  upper
part  of  the  river  into  the  harbor,  which  only  freezes  along
the  fliore.  On  the  loth  of  May  following,  it  fnowed  all
night ; and,  towards  the  end  of  the  month,  there  were  heavy
hoar-frofts,  which  lafted  until  the  loth  or  12th  of  June,  when
all  the  trees  were  covered  with  leaves,  except  the  oaks,  which
do  not  leaf  out  until  about  the  15th.  The  winter  was  not  fo
fevere  as  on  the  preceding  years,  nor  did  the  fnow  continue
fo  long  on  the  ground.  It  rained  very  often,  fo  that  the  rav-
ages fuffered  a fevere  famine,  owing  to  the  fmall  quantity  of
fnow.  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  fupported  a part  of  them  who
were  with  us ; namely,  Mabretou,  his  wife  and  children,  and
fome  others.

We  fpent  this  winter  very  pleafantly,  and  fared  generoufly
by  means  of  the  Ordre  de  Bon  Temps,  which  I introduced.
This  all  found  ufeful  for  their  health,  and  more  advantageous
than  all  the  medicines  that  could  have  been  ufed.  By  the
rules  of  the  order,  a chain  was  put,  with  fome  little  ceremo-
nies, on  the  neck  of  one  of  our  company,  commiffioning  him
for  the  day  to  go  a hunting.  The  next  day  it  was  conferred
upon  another,  and  thus  in  fucceflion.  All  exerted  themfelves
to  the  utmofl;  to  fee  who  would  do  the  befl;  and  bring  home
the  fineft  game.  We  found  this  a very  good  arrangement,  as
did  alfo  the  favages  who  were  with  us.^

was  a happy  one,  as  it  ferved  to  difpel

^ Now  the  Annapolis  River.

^ The  conceit  of  this  novel  order

Sieur  de  Champlain.  145

There  were  fome  cafes  of  mal  de  la  terre  among  us,  which
was,  however,  not  fo  violent  as  in  the  previous  years.  Never-
thelefs,  feven  died  from  it,  and  another  from  an  arrow  wound,
which  he  had  received  from  the  favages  at  Port  Fortune.^*®

Our  furgeon,  named  Matter  Ettienne,  opened  fome  of  the
bodies,  as  we  did  the  previous  years,  and  found  almott  all  the
interior  parts  affedled.  Eight  or  ten  of  the  fick  got  well  by
fpring.

At  the  beginning  of  March  and  of  April,  all  began  to  pre-
pare gardens,  fo  as  to  plant  feeds  in  May,  which  is  the  proper
time  for  it.  They  grew  as  well  as  in  France,  but  were  fome-
what  later.  I think  France  is  at  leatt  a month  and  a half
more  forward.  As  I have  ttated,  the  time  to  plant  is  in  May,
although  one  can  fometimes  do  fo  in  April ; yet  the  feeds
planted  then  do  not  come  forward  any  fatter  than  thofe
planted  in  May,  when  the  cold  can  no  longer  damage  the
plants  except  thofe  which  are  very  tender,  fince  there  are
many  which  cannot  endure  the  hoar-frotts,  unlefs  great  care
and  attention  be  exercifed.

On  the  24th  of  May,  we  perceived  a fmall  barque  of  fix

or

the  gloom  of  a long  winter  in  the  forefts
of  La  Cadie,  as  well  as  to  improve  the
quality  and  variety  of  their  diet.  The
noblejfey  or  gentlemen  of  the  party,  were
fifteen,  who  ferved  in  turn  and  for  a
fingle  day  as  caterer  or  fteward,  the  turn
of  each  recurring  once  in  fifteen  days.
It  was  their  duty  to  add  to  the  ordinary
fare  fuch  delicate  filh  or  game  as  could
be  captured  or  fecured  by  each  for  his
particular  day.  They  always  had  fome
delicacy  at  oreakfaft  ; but  the  dinner
was  the  great  banquet,  when  the  moft
impofing  ceremony  was  obferved.

Champlain  does  not  inform  us

how  many  of  Poutrincourt’s  party  were
killed  in  the  affray  at  Chatham.  He
mentions  one  as  killed  on  the  fpot.  He
fpeaks  of  carrying  away  the  “dead
bodies  for  burial.  He  alfo  fays  they
made  a “ deadly  affault  ” upon  “ five  or
fix  of  our  company  ; ” and  another  ap-
pears to  have  died  of  his  wounds  after
their  return  to  Port  Royal,  as  ftated  in
the  text.

Vne  petite  barque.  The  French
barque  was  a fmall  veffel  or  large  boat,
rigged  with  two  mails  ; and  thofe  em-
ployed by  De  Monts  along  our  coaft
varied  from  fix  to  eighteen  tons  burden,
19  and

146

Voyages  of

or  feven  tons’  burthen,  which  we  fent  men  to  reconnoitre ; and
it  was  found  to  be  a young  man  from  St.  Malo,  named
Chevalier,  who  brought  letters  from  Sieur  de  Monts  to  Sieur
de  Poutrincourt,  by  which  he  diredled  him  to  bring  back  his
company  to  France.^*  He  alfo  announced  to  us  the  birth  of
Monfeigneur,  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  to  our  delight,  in  honor
of  which  event  we  made  bonfires  and  chanted  the  Te  Deum?'^
Between  the  beginning  and  the  20th  of  June,  fome
thirty  or  forty  favages  affembled  in  this  place  in  order  to
make  war  upon  the  Almouchiquois,  and  revenge  the  death
of  Panounias,  who  was  interred  by  the  favages  according  to
their  cuftom,  who  gave  afterwards  a quantity  of  peltry  to  a

brother

and  mull  not  be  confounded  with  our
modern  bark,  which  is  generally  much
larger.

The  vaijfeau^  often  mentioned  by
Champlain,  included  all  large  velTels,
thofe  ufed  for  fifhing,  the  fur-trade,  and
the  tranfportation  of  men  and  fupplies
for  the  colony.

The  chaloupe  was  a row-boat  of  con-
venient lize  for  penetrating  lhallow
places,  was  dragged  behind  the  barque
in  the  explorations  of  our  coalt,  and
ufed  for  minor  invelligations  of  rivers
and  elluaries.

The  fatache^  an  advice-boat,  is  rarely
ufed  by  Champlain,  and  then  in  the
place  of  the  lhallop.

It  feems  that  young  Chevalier  had
come  out  in  the  “Jonas,”  the  fame  Ihip
that  had  brought  out  Poutrincourt,  Lef-
carbot,  and  others,  the  year  before.  It
had  Hopped  at  Canfeau  to  filh  for  cod.
It  brought  the  unwelcome  news  that
the  company  of  De  Monts  had  been
broken  up ; that  the  Hollanders,  con-
ducted by  a “ French  traitor  named  La
JeunelTe,”  had  dellroyed  the  fur-trading
eftablilhments  on  the  St.  Lawrence,

which  rendered  it  impra6licable  to  fuf-
tain,  as  heretofore,  the  expenfes  of  the
company.  The  monopoly  of  the  fur-
trade,  granted  to  De  Monts  for  ten
years,  had  been  refcinded  by  the  King’s
Council.  “We  were  very  fad,”  fays
Lefcarbot,  “to  fee  fo  fine  and  holy  an
undertaking  broken  off,  and  that  fo
many  labors  and  perils  endured  had  re-
fulted  in  nothing;  and  that  the  hope
of  eflablilhing  there  the  name  of  God
and  the  Catholic  Faith  had  difappeared.
Notwithflanding,  after  M.  de  Poutrin-
court had  a long  while  mufed  here-
upon, he  faid  that,  although  he  fhould
have  none  to  come  with  him,  except  his
family,  he  would  not  forfake  the  enter-
prife.”  — His.  Nou.  Frayice.,  par  M.  Lef-
carbot, Paris,  1612,  pp.  591-2.

249  On  the  1 6th  of  April,  1607,  was
born  the  fecond  fon  of  Henry  IV.  by
Marie  de  Medicis,  who  received  the
title,  Le  Due  d’ Orleans.  In  France,
public  rejoicings  were  univerfal.  On
the  22d  of  the  month,  he  was  invefted
with  the  infignia  of  the  Order  of  St.
Michael  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  with  great
pomp,  on  which  occafion  a banquet  was

147

Sieur  de  Champlain.

brother  of  his.^  The  prefents  being  made,  all  of  them  fet
out  from  this  place  on  the  29th  of  June  for  Choiiacoet,  which
is  the  country  of  the  Almouchiquois,  to  engage  in  the  war.

Some  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  above  Chevalier,  Sieur
de  Poutrincourt  fent  him  to  the  rivers  St.  John^^  and  St.
Croix  to  trade  for  furs.  But  he  did  not  permit  him  to  go
without  men  to  bring  back  the  barque,  fmce  fome  had  re-
ported that  he  defired  to  return  to  France  with  the  veffel  in
which  he  had  come,  and  leave  us  in  our  fettlement.  Lefcarbot
was  one  of  thofe  who  accompanied  him,  who  up  to  this  time

had

given  by  the  King  in  the  great  hall  at
Fontainebleau,  and  in  the  evening  the
park  was  illuminated  by  bonfires  and  a
pyrotechnic  difplay,  which  was  witneffed
by  a vaft  concourfe  of  people.  The
young  prince  was  baptized  privately  by
the  Cardinal  de  Gondy,  but  the  date
ceremonies  of  his  chriftening  were  de-
layed, and  appear  never  to  have  taken
place  : he  died  in  the  fifth  year  of  his
age,  never  having  received  any  Chriftian
name.  — Vide  the  Life  of  Marie  de
MediciSy  by  Miss  Pardoe,  London,  1852,
Vol.  I.  p.  416 ; Memoirs  of  the  Duke  of
Sully Lennox,  trans.,  Phila.,  1817,  Vol.
IV.  p.  140.  In  New  France,  the  little
colony  at  Port  Royal  attefted  their  loy-
alty by  fuitable  manifeftations  of  joy.
“ As  the  day  declined,”  fays  Lefcarbot,
“ we  made  bonfires  to  celebrate  the  birth
of  Monfeigneur  le  Due  d’ Orleans,  and
caufed  our  cannon  and  falconets  to  thun-
der forth  again,  accompanied  with  plenty
of  mufket-fhots,  having  before  for  this
puipofe  chanted  a Te  Deuml'*  — Vide
His.  Non.  France.,  Paris,  1612,  p.  594.

Lefcarbot  fays  that  about  four
hundred  fet  out  for  the  war  againft  the
Almouchiquois,  at  Choiiacoet,  or  Saco.
The  favages  were  nearly  two  months  in
affembling  themfelves  together.  Ma-
bretou  had  fent  out  his  two  fons,  A6lau-

din  and  A6faudinech,  to  fummon  them
to  come  to  Port  Royal  as  a rendezvous.
They  came  from  the  river  St.  John,  and
from  the  region  of  Gafpd.  Their  pur-
pofe  was  accomplifhed,  as  will  appear  in
the  fequel.

At  St.  John,  they  vifited  the  cabin
of  Secondon,  the  Sagamore,  with  whom
they  bartered  for  fome  furs.  Lefcarbot,
who  was  in  the  expedition,  fays,  “ The
town  of  Oui'goudy  was  a great  enclofure
upon  a hill,  compaffed  about  with  high
and  fmall  trees,  tied  one  againft  am
other  ; and  within  it  many  cabins,  great
and  fmall,  one  of  which  was  as  large  as
a market-hall,  wherein  many  houfeholds
refided.”  In  the  cabin  of  Secondon,  they
faw  fome  eighty  or  a hundred  favages,
all  nearly  naked.  They  were  celebrat-
ing a feaft  which  they  call  Tabagie.
Their  chief  made  his  warriors  pafs  in
review  before  his  guefts.  — Vide  His.
Nou.  France.,  par  M.  Lefcarbot,  Paris,
1612,  p.  598.

252  They  found  fack  at  St.  Croix  that
had  been  left  there  by  De  Monts’s  colony
three  years  before,  of  which  they  drank.
Calks  were  still  lying  in  the  deferted
court-yard  ; and  others  had  been  ufed
as  fuel  by  mariners,  who  had  chanced
to  come  there.

148  Voyages  of

had  not  left  Port  Royal.  This  is  the  fartheft  he  went,  only
fourteen  or  fifteen  leagues  beyond  Port  Royal.

While  awaiting  the  return  of  Chevalier,  Sieur  de  Poutrin-
court  went  to  the  head  of  Baye  Fran9oife  in  a fhallop  with
feven  or  eight  men.  Leaving  the  harbor  and  heading  north-
eaft  a quarter  eaft  for  fome  twenty-five  leagues  along  the
coafl,  we  arrived  at  a cape  where  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  de-
fired  to  afcend  a cliff  more  than  thirty  fathoms  high,  in  doing
which  he  came  near  lofing  his  life.  For,  having  reached  the
top  of  the  rock  which  is  very  narrow,  and  which  he  had
afcended  with  much  difficulty,  the  fummit  trembled  beneath
him.  The  reafon  was  that,  in  courfe  of  time,  mofs  had  gath-
ered there  four  or  five  feet  in  thicknefs,  and,  not  being  folid,
trembled  when  one  was  on  top  of  it,  and  very  often  when  one
ftepped  on  a ftone  three  or  four  others  fell  down.  Accord-
ingly, having  gone  up  with  difficulty,  he  experienced  Hill
greater  in  coming  down,  although  fome  failors,  men  very
dexterous  in  climbing,  carried  him  a hawfer,  a rope  of  me-
dium fize,  by  means  of  which  he  defcended.  This  place  was
named  Cap  de  Poutrincourt,^  and  is  in  latitude  45°  40'.

We  went  as  far  as  the  head  of  this  bay,  but  faw  nothing
but  certain  white  ftones  fuitable  for  making  lime,  yet  they  are
found  only  in  fmall  quantities.  We  faw  alfo  on  fome  iflandsa
great  number  of  gulls.  We  captured  as  many  of  them  as  we
wifhed.  We  made  the  tour  of  the  bay,  in  order  to  go  to  the
Port  aux  Mines  where  I had  previoufly  been,^  and  whither

1

De  Laet’s  map  has  C.  de  Poutrin-  It  is  lituated  at  the  entrance  of  the  Bafm
court ; the  map  of  the  Englifh  and  of  Mines,  and  about  eight  miles  fouth-
French  CommifTaries,  C.  Fendu  or  Split  weft  of  Parrf  borough.  The  point  of  this
Cape.  Halliburton  has  Split  Cape,  fo  cape  is  in  latitude  45°  20'.
like  wife  has  the  Admiralty  map  01  i860.  ^64  antea^  p.  26.

149

Sieur  de  Champlain.

I conduced  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt,  who  collefted  fome  little
pieces  of  copper  with  great  difficulty.  All  this  bay  has  a cir-
cuit of  perhaps  twenty  leagues,  with  a little  river  at  its  head,
which  is  very  fluggiffi  and  contains  but  little  water.  There
are  many  other  little  brooks,  and  fome  places  where  there
are  good  harbors  at  high  tide,  which  rifes  here  five  fathoms.
In  one  of  thefe  harbors  three  or  four  leagues  north  of  Cap
de  Poutrincourt,  we  found  a very  old  crofs  all  covered  with
mofs  and  almofl;  all  rotten,  a plain  indication  that  before  this
there  had  been  Chriftians  there.  All  of  this  country  is  cov-
ered with  denfe  forefts,  and  with  fome  exceptions  is  not  very
attra6tive.“®

From  the  Port  aux  Mines  we  returned  to  our  fettle-
ment.  In  this  bay  there  are  ftrong  tidal  currents  running  in
a fouth-wefterly  diredlion.

On  the  1 2th  of  July,  Ralleau,  fecretary  of  Sieur  de  Monts,
arrived  with  three  others  in  a fhallop  from  a place  called
Niganis,^^  diftant  from  Port  Royal  fome  hundred  and  fixty
or  hundred  and  feventy  leagues,  confirming  the  report  which
Chevalier  had  brought  to  Sieur  de  Poutrincourt.

On  the  3d  of  July,®*®  three  barques  were  fitted  out  to  fend

the

The  author  is  here  fpeaking  of  of  Cape  Breton,  fouth  of  Cape  North:
the  country  about  the  Bafm  of  Mines,  by  De  Laet  called  Ninganis  j Englifli
The  river  at  the  head  of  the  bay  is  the  and  French  Commiffaries,  Niganijhe ;
Shubenacadie.  It  is  not  eafy  to  deter-  modern  maps,  Ni^nijh.
mine  where  the  mofs -covered  crofs  was  The  3^  of  July  was  doubtlefs  an

found.  The  diftance  from  Cap  de  Pou-  error  of  the  printer  for  the  30th,  as
trincourt  is  indefinite,  and  the  dire6lion  appears  from  the  later  date  in  the  pre-
could  not  have  been  exa6lly  north,  ceding  paragraph,  and  the  ftatement  of
There  is  too  much  uncertainty  to  war-  Lefcarbot,  that  he  left  on  the  30th  of
rant  even  a conje6lure  as  to  its  locality.  July.  He  fays  they  had  one  large  barque,
^ The  Port  aux  Mines  is  Advocate’s  two  fmall  ones,  and  a fhallop.  One  of
Harbor. — Vide  antea.,  p.  26,  and  note  67.  the  fmall  ones  was  fent  before,  while
Niganis  is  a fmall  bay  in  the  Ifland  the  other  two  followed  on  the  30th  ; and

ISO

Voyages  of

the  men  and  fupplies,  which  were  at  our  fettlement,  to  Can-
feau,  diftant  one  hundred  and  fifteen  leagues  from  our  fettle-
ment, and  in  latitude  45°  20',  where  the  velTel  was  engao-ed
in  fifhing,  which  was  to  carry  us  back  to  France.  * ^
Sieur  de  Poutrincourt  fent  back  all  his  companions,  but
remained  with  eight  others  at  the  fettlement,  fo  as  to  carry
to  France  fome  grain  not  yet  quite  ripe.^“

On  the  loth  of  Augufi,  Mabretou  arrived  from  the  war,
who  told  us  that  he  had  been  at  Chouacoet,  and  had  killed
twenty  favages  and  wounded  ten  or  twelve ; alfo  that  One-
niechin,  chief  of  that  place,  Marchin,  and  one  other,  had  been
killed  by  Safinou,  chief  of  the  river  of  Quinibequy,  who  was
afterwards  killed  by  the  companions  of  Onemechin  and  Mar-
chin.  All  this  war  was  fimply  on  account  of  the  favage
Panounias,  one  of  our  friends  who,  as  I have  faid  above,  had
been  killed  at  Norumbegue  by  the  followers  of  Onemechin
and  Marchin.  At  prefent,  the  chiefs  in  place  of  Onemechin,
Marchin,  and  Safinou  are  their  fons:  namely,  for  Safinou,
Pememen;  Abriou  for  his  father,  Marchin;  and  for  One-
mechin, Queconficq.  The  two  latter  were  wounded  by  the
followers  of  Mabretou,  who  feized  them  under  pretence  of
friendfhip,  as  is  their  fafhion,  fomething  which  both  Tides  have
to  guard  againfl:.^*

he  adds  that  Poutrincourt  remained
eleven  days  longer  to  await  the  ripen-
mg  of  their  grain,  which  agrees  with
Champlain’s  fubfequent  ftatement,  that
he  left  with  Poutrincourt  on  the  nth  of
France^  1612,

!!!  — Vide  antea,^.  146.

Vide  antea,  note  258.

The  implacable  charader  of  the

CJTAPIKK  XVll.

American  Indian  is  well  illuftrated  in
this  fkirmifli  which  took  place  at  Saco.
The  old  chief  Mabretou,  whofe  life  had
been  prolonged  through  feveral  genera-
tions, had  infpired  his  allies  to  revenge,
and  had  been  prefent  at  the  confli6l.
The  Indian  Panounias  had  been  killed
in  an  affray,  the  particular  caufe  of
which  is  not  flated.  To  avenge  his
death,  many  lives  were  loft  on  both  fides.

The

Sieur  de  Champlain.

151

CHAPTER  XVII.

The  Settlement  abandoned.  — Return  to  France  of  Sieur  de  Pou-

TRINCOURT  AND  ALL  HIS  COMPANY.

I the  nth  of  Auguft,  we  fet  out  from  our  fettle-
ment  in  a ftiallop,  and  coafted  along  as  far  as
Cape  Fourchu,  where  I had  previoufly  been.

Continuing  our  courfe  along  the  coaft  as  far
as  Cap  de  la  Heve,  where  we  firfl:  landed  with
Sieur  de  Monts,  on  the  8th  of  May,  1604,^®^  we  examined
the  coaft  from  this  place  as  far  as  Canfeau,  a diftance  of
nearly  fixty  leagues.  This  I had  not  yet  done,  and  I ob-
ferved  it  very  carefully,  making  a map  of  it  as  of  the  other
coafts.

Departing  from  Cap  de  la  Heve,  we  went  as  far  as  Sefam-
bre,  an  ifland  fo  called  by  fome  people  from  St.  Malo,^*®  and
diftant  fifteen  leagues  from  La  Heve.  Along  the  route  are
a large  number  of  iflands,  which  we  named  Les  Martyres,^®*
fmce  fome  Frenchmen  were  once  killed  there  by  the  favages.
Thefe  iflands  lie  in  feveral  inlets  and  bays.  In  one  of  them

is

The  two  chiefs  of  Saco  were  flain,  and
in  turn  the  author  of  their  death  per-
illed by  the  hand  of  their  friends.  Lef-
carbot  informs  us  that  Champdor^,  under
Poutrincourt,  fubfequently  vifited  Saco,
and  concluded  a formal  peace  between
the  belligerent  parties,  emphafizing  its
importance  by  impreflive  forms  and
ceremonies.

Vide  antea.,  p.  9 and  note  22.

Sefambre.  This  name  was  prob-
ably fuggefted  by  the  little  iflet,  C^zem-

bre.,  one  of  feveral  on  which  are  military
works  for  the  defence  of  St.  Malo.  On
De  Laet’s  map  of  1633,  it  is  written
Sefembre ; on  that  of  Charlevoix,  1 744,
Sincembre,  It  now  appears  on  the
Admiralty  maps  corrupted  into  Sambro.
There  is  a cape  and  a harbor  near  this
ifland  which  bear  the  fame  name.

The  iflands  ftretching  along  from
Cap  de  la  H^ve  to  Sambro  Ifland  are
called  the  Martyres  lies  on  De  Laet’s
map,  1633.

152

Voyages  of

is  a river  named  St.  Marguerite,^®®  diftant  feven  leagues  from
Sefambre,  which  is  in  latitude  44°  25'.  The  iflands  and
coafts  are  thickly  covered  with  pines,  firs,  birches,  and  other
trees  of  inferior  quality.  Fifh  and  alfo  fowl  are  abundant.

After  leaving  Sefambre,  we  paffed  a bay  which  is  unob-
flruded,  of  feven  or  eight  leagues  in  extent,  with  no  iflands
except  at  the  extremity,  where  is  the  mouth  of  a fmall  river,
containing  but  little  water.^®  Then,  heading  north-eaft  a
quarter  eaft,  we  arrived  at  a harbor  diftant  eight  leagues  from
Sefambre,  which  is  very  fuitable  for  veffels  of  a hundred  or
a hundred  and  twenty  tons.  At  its  entrance  is  an  ifland.
from  which  one  can  walk  to  the  main  land  at  low  tide.  We
named  this  place  Port  Saindte  Helaine,^®’  which  is  in  lati-
tude 44°  40'  more  or  lefs.

From  this  place  we  proceeded  to  a bay  called  La  Baye
de  Toutes  Ifles,^®®  of  fome  fourteen  or  fifteen  leagues  in  ex-
tent, a dangerous  place  on  account  of  the  prefence  of  banks,
flioals,  and  reefs.  The  country  prefents  a very  unfavora-
ble appearance,  being  filled  with  the  fame  kind  of  trees

which

2®®  The  bay  into  which  this  river
empties  ftill  retains  the  name  of  St.
Margaret.

2®®  Halifax  Harbor.  Its  Indian  name
was  Chebu<5fo,  written  on  the  map  of
the  Englifh  and  French  Commiffaries
ShebtlctH.  On  Champlain’s  map,  1612,
as  likewife  on  that  of  De  Laet,  1633,  it
is  called  Baye  Sennef  perhaps  from
faine,  fignifying  the  unobftrudled  bay.

Eight  leagues  from  the  Ifland  Se-
fambre or  Sambro  Ifland  would  take
them  to  Perpifawick  Inlet,  which  is
doubtlefs  Le  Port  Saincle  Helaine  of
Champlain.  The  latitude  of  this  harbor

is  44°  41',  differing  but  a fingle  minute
from  that  of  the  text,  which  is  extraor-
dinary, the  ufual  variation  being  from
ten  to  thirty  minutes.

2®®  Nicomtau  Bay  is  fifteen  leagues
from  Perpifawick  Inlet ; but  La  Baye  de
Toutes  Ifles  is,  more  ftri6lly  fpeaking,
an  archipelago,  extending  along  the
coafl,  fay  from  Clam  Bay  to  Lifcomb
Point,  as  may  be  feen  by  reference  to
Champlain’s  map,  1612,  and  that  of  De
Laet,  1633,  Cruxius,  i6(b,  and  of  Charle-
voix, 1744.  The  north-eaftern  portion
of  this  archipelago  is  now  called,  ac-
cording to  Laverdi^re,  Ifland  Bay.

Sieur  de  Chafyiplain.  153

which  I have  mentioned  before.  Here  we  encountered  bad

weather.

Hence  we  paffed  on  near  a river,  fix  leagues  diflant,  called
Riviere  de  I’lfle  Verte,“*  there  being  a green  ifland  at  its
entrance.  This  lliort  diflance  which  we  traverfed  is  filled

with  numerous  rocks  extending  nearly  a league  out  to  fea,
where  the  breakers  are  high,  the  latitude  being  45“  1 5'.

Thence  we  went  to  a place  where  there  is  an  inlet,  with
two  or  three  iflands,  and  a very  good  harbor,^®  diftant  three
leagues  from  I’lfle  Verte.  We  paffed  alfo  by  feveral  iflands
near  and  in  a line  with  each  other,  which  we  named  Ifles
Rangees,”‘  and  which  are  diftant  fix  or  feven  leagues  from
rifle  Verte.  Afterwards  we  paffed  by  another  bay^^  con-
taining feveral  iftands,  and  proceeded  to  a place  where  we
found  a veffel  engaged  in  fifhing  between  fome  iflands,  which
are  a fhort  diftance  from  the  main  land,  and  diftant  four
leagues  from  the  Rangees.  This  place  we  named  Port  de
Savalette,^®  the  name  of  the  mafter  of  the  veffel  engaged  in

fifhing.

2®^  Rivilre  de  VIJle  Verte^  or  Green
Ifland  River,  is  the  River  St.  Mary  ; and
Green  Ifland  is  Wedge  Ifland  near  its
mouth.  The  latitude  at  the  mouth  of
the  river  is  45°  3'.  This  little  ifland  is
called  /.  Verte  on  De  Laet’s  map,  and
likewife  on  that  of  Charlevoix ; on  the
map  of  the  Englifli  and  French  Commif-
faries,  Lifcomb  or  Green  Ifland.

This  inlet  has  now  the  incongru-
ous name  of  Country  Harbor  : the  three
iflands  at  its  mouth  are  Harbor,  Goofe,
and  Green  Iflands.  The  inlet  is  called
Mocodome  on  Charlevoix’s  map.

There  are  feveral  iflets  on  the  eaU
of  St.  Catharine’s  River,  near  the  fliore,
which  Laverdi^re  fuggefts  are  the  IJles
Rangies,  They  are  exceedingly  fmall.

and  no  name  is  given  them  on  the  Ad-
miralty charts.

272  Tor  Bay.

278  Le  Port  de  Savalette.  Obvioufly
White  Haven,  which  is  four  leagues
from  the  Rangdes  and  fix  from  Canfeau,
as  flated  in  the  text.  Lefcarbot  gives
a very  interefting  account  of  Captain
Savalette,  the  old  Bafque  fiflierman,
who  had  made  forty-two  voyages  into
thefe  waters.  He  had  been  eminently
fuccefsful  in  fifhing,  having  taken  daily,
according  to  his  own  account,  fifty
crowns’  worth  of  codfifh,  and  expe6led
his  voyage  would  yield  ten  thoufand
francs.  His  veffel  was  of  eighty  tons
burden,  and  could  take  in  a hundred
thoufand  dry  codfifh.  He  was  well
20  known,

154

Voyages  of

fifhing,  a Bafque,  who  entertained  us  bountifully,  and  was
very  glad  to  fee  us,  fince  there  were  favages  there  who  pur-
pofed  fome  harm  to  him,  which  we  prevented.^*

Leaving  this  place,  we  arrived  on  the  27th  of  the  month
at  Canfeau,  diftant  fix  leagues  from  Port  de  Savalette,  having
paffed  on  our  way  a large  number  of  iflands.  At  Canfeau,
we  found  that  the  three  barques  had  arrived  at  port  in  fafety.
Champdore  and  Lefcarbot  came  out  to  receive  us.  We  alfo
found  the  veffel  ready  to  fail,  having  finifhed  its  fifhing  and
awaiting  only  fair  weather  to  return.  Meanwhile,  we  had
much  enjoyment  among  thefe  iflands,  where  we  found  the
greatefl  poffible  quantity  of  rafpberries.

All  the  coaft  which  we  paffed  along  from  Cape  Sable  to
this  place  is  moderately  high  and  rocky,  in  molt  places  bor-
dered  by  numerous  iflands  and  breakers,  which  extend  out
to  fea  nearly  two  leagues  in  places,  and  are  very  unfavorable
for  the  approach  of  veffels.  Yet  there  cannot  but  be  good
harbors  and  roadfleads  along  the  coafts  and  iflands,  if  they
were  explored.  As  to  the  country,  it  is  worfe  and  lefs  prom-
ifmg  than  in  other  places  which  we  had  feen,  except  on  fome
rivers  or  brooks,  where  it  is  very  pleafant ; but  there  is  no
doubt  that  the  winter  in  thefe  regions  is  cold,  lafting  from  fix
to  feven  months.

The  harbor  of  Canfeau  is  a place  furrounded  by  iflands,

to

known,  and  a great  favorite  with  the
voyagers  to  this  coaft.  He  was  from  St.
Jean  de  Luz,  a fmall  feaport  town  in  the
department  of  the  Lower  Pyrenees  in
France,  near  the  borders  of  Spain,  diflin-
guifhed  even  at  this  day  for  its  fifhino-
intereft.  ^

274  The  Indians  were  in  the  habit  of
leleaing  from  day  to  day  the  belt  of

Savalette’s  filh  when  they  came  in,  and
appropriating  them  to  their  own  ufe,
nolens  volens,

Caft/eau.  Currency  has  been
given  to  an  idle  fancy  that  this  name
was  derived  from  that  of  a French
navigator,  but  it  has  been  abundantly
difproved  by  the  Abb^  Laverdi^re.  It
is  undoubtedly  a word  of  Indian  origin.

155

Sieur  de  Champlain.

to  which  the  approach  is  verj^  difficult,  except  in  fair  weather,
on  account  of  the  rocks  and  breakers  about  it.  Fifhing,  both
green  and  dry,  is  carried  on  here.

From  this  place  to  the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton,  which  is  in
latitude  45°  45'  and  14°  50'  of  the  defledlion  of  the  magnetic
needle,’"®  it  is  eight  leagues,  and  to  Cape  Breton  twenty-five.
Between  the  two  there  is  a large  bay,^^  extending  fome  nine
or  ten  leagues  into  the  interior  and  making  a paffage  between
the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton  and  the  main  land  through  to  the
great  Bay  of  St.  Lawrence,  by  which  they  go  to  Gafpe  and
Ifle  Percee,  where  fifhing  is  carried  on.  This  paffage  along
the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton  is  very  narrow.  Although  there
is  water  enough,  large  veflels  do  not  pafs  there  at  all  on
account  of  the  ftrong  currents  and  the  impetuofity  of  the
tides  which  prevail.  This  we  named  Le  Paffage  Courant,’"*
and  it  is  in  latitude  45°  45'.

The  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton  is  of  a triangular  fhape,  with  a
circuit  of  about  eighty  leagues.  Moft  of  the  country  is  moun-
tainous, yet  in  fome  parts  very  pleafant.  In  the  centre  of  it

there

2^®  The  variation  of  the  magnetic
needle  in  1871,  fifteen  miles  fouth  of  the
Harbor  of  Canfeau,  was,  according  to
the  Admiralty  charts,  23°  weft.  The
magnetic  needle  was  employed  in  navi-
gation as  early  as  the  year  1200,  and  its
variation  had  been  difcovered  before
the  time  of  Columbus.  But  for  a long
period  its  variation  was  fuppofed  to  be
fixed ; that  is  to  fay,  was  fuppofed  to
be  always  the  fame  in  the  fame  locality.
A few  years  before  Champlain  made  his
voyages  to  America,  it  was  difcovered
that  its  variation  in  Paris  was  not  fixed,
hut  that  it  changed  from  year  to  year.
If  Champlain  was  aware  of  this,  his

defign  in  noting  its  exa6l  variation,  as
he  did  at  numerous  points  on  our  coaft,
may  have  been  to  furnifti  data  for  de-
termining at  fome  future  day  whether
the  variation  were  changeable  here  as
well  as  in  France.  But,  whether  he  was
aware  of  the  difcovery  then  recently
made  in  Paris  or  not,  he  probably  in-
tended, by  noting  the  declination  of  the
needle,  to  indicate  his  longitude,  at
leaft  approximately.

277  Chedabudlo  Bay.

278  The  Strait  of  Canfeau.  Cham-
plain gives  it  on  his  map,  1612,  Pafage
du  glas;  De  Laet,  1633,  Pajfage  du
glasj  Creuxius,  16^,  Fretum  Camp-

feiumj

1 5 6 Voyages  of

there  is  a kind  of  lake,^'^®  where  the  fea  enters  by  the  north
a quarter  north-weft,  and  alfo  by  the  fouth  a quarter  fouth-
eaft.^*“  Here  are  many  iflands  filled  with  plenty  of  game,
and  fhell-fith  of  various  kinds,  including  oyfters,  which,  how-
ever, are  not  of  very  good  flavor.  In  this  place  there  are
two  harbors,  where  fifliing  is  carried  on ; namely,  Le  Port
aux  Anglois,^®^  diftant  from  Cape  Breton  fome  two  or  three
leagues,  and  Niganis,  eighteen  or  twenty  leagues  north  a
quarter  north-weft.  The  Portuguefe  once  made  an  attempt  to
fettle  this  ifland,  and  fpent  a winter  here ; but  the  inclemency
of  the  feafon  and  the  cold  caufed  them  to  abandon  their
fettlement.

On  the  3d  of  Septemiber,  we  fet  out  from  Canfeau.  On
the  4th,  we  were  off  Sable  Ifland.  On  the  6th,  we  reached
the  Grand  Bank,  where  the  catching  of  green  fifti  is  carried
on,  in  latitude  45°  30'.  On  the  26th,  we  entered  the  found
near  the  fliores  of  Brittany  and  England,  in  fixty-five  fath-
oms of  water  and  in  latitude  49°  SS'  On  the  28th,  we  put
in  at  Rofcou,^*  in  lower  Brittany,  where  we  were  detained
by  bad  weather  until  the  laft  day  of  September,  when,  the
wind  coming  round  favorable,  we  put  to  fea  in  order  to  pur-

fue

feium;  Charlevoix,  1744,  Pajfage  de  error  iornorde/l.  There  are,  indeed,  two
Canceau.  It  appears  from  the  above  palTages,  both  on  the  north-eaft,  dif-
that  the  early  name  was  foon  fuper-  tinguifhed  as  the  Great  and  the  Little
leded  by  that  which  it  now  bears.  Bras  d’Or.

279  Now  called  La  Bras  d^Or,  The  Le  Port  aux  Ang/ots,ih^  Harbor

^ Englifli.  On  De  Laet’s  map,

T>  palTage  of  La  Port  aux  Angloix.  This  is  the  Harbor

Bras  d Or  on  the  ^ fouth -weft  ; and  of  Louif burgh,  famous  in  the  hiftory
Champlain  corredls  his  error,  as  maybe  of  the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton,
teen  by  reference  to  his  map  of  1612.  232  Rofcoff,  a fmall  feaport  town.  On

It  may  alfo  be  Hated  that  the  fea  enters  Mercator’s  Atlas  of  1623,  it  is  written
irorn  the  north-eaft.  Nordouejl  in  the  Rofcou,  as  in  the  text,
original  is  here  probably  a typographical

157

Sieur  de  Champlain.

fue  our  route  to  St.  Malo,®®®  which  formed  the  termination  of
thefe  voyages,  in  which  God  had  guided  us  without  fhipwreck
or  danger.

End  of  the  Voyages  from  the  Year  1604  to  1608.

288  According  to  Lefcarbot,  they  re-
mained at  St.  Malo  eight  days,  when
they  went  in  a barque  to  Honfleur,
narrowly  efcaping  fhipwreck.  Poutrin-
court  proceeded  to  Paris,  where  he  ex-
hibited to  Henry  IV.  corn,  wheat,  rye,
barley,  and  oats,  produdls  of  the  colony
which  he  had  fo  often  promifed  to  cher-
ifh,  but  whofe  means  of  fubfiftence  he
had  now  neverthelefs  ungracioufly  taken
away.  Poutrincourt  alfo  prefented  to

him  five  oujiards^  or  wild  geefe,  which
he  had  bred  from  the  fhell.  The  king
was  greatly  delighted  with  them,  and
had  them  preferved  at  Fontainebleau.
Thefe  exhibitions  of  the  produdls  of
New  France  had  the  defired  effedf  upon
the  generous  heart  of  Henry  IV. ; and
De  Monts’s  monopoly  of  the  fur-trade
was  renewed  for  one  year,  to  furnifh
fome  flight  aid  in  eflablifhing  his  colon-
ies in  New  France.

THE  VOYAGES

TO  THE

GREAT  RIVER  ST.  LAWRENCE,

MADE  BY

SIEUR  DE  CHAMPLAIN,

Captain  in  Ordinary  to  the  King  in  the  Marine,

FROM  THE  YEAR  1608  TO  THAT  OF  1612,

CHAPTER  I.

Determination  of  Sieur  de  Monts  to  make  Explorations  in  the  In-
terior ; HIS  Commission,  and  its  Infringement  by  the  Basques,  who

DISARMED  THE  VESSEL  OF  PONT  GRAVE  ; AND  THE  AGREEMENT  BETWEEN
THEM  WHICH  THEY  SUBSEQUENTLY  MADE.

AVING  returned  to  France  after  a flay  of  three
3 years  in  New  France,^  I proceeded  to  Sieur  de

n Monts,  and  related  to  him  the  principal  events

of  which  I had  been  a witnefs  fmce  his  depart-
— ure,  and  gave  him  the  map  and  plan  of  the  moft
remarkable  coafts  and  harbors  there.

Some  time  afterward,  Sieur  de  Monts  determined  to  con-
tinue his  undertaking,  and  complete  the  exploration  of  the

interior

Champlain  arrived  on  the  Ihores  of  had  confequently  been  on  our  coaft
America  on  the  8th  of  May,  1604,  and  three  years,  three  months,  and  twenty-
left  on  the  3d  of  September,  1607.  He  five  days.

1 6o  Voyages  of

interior  along  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence,  where  I had
been  by  order  of  the  late  King  Henry  the  Great  ^ in  the
year  1603,  for  a diftance  of  fome  hundred  and  eighty  leagues,
commencing  in  latitude  48°  40',  that  is,  at  Gafpe,  at  the
entrance  of  the  river,  as  far  as  the  great  fall,  which  is  in  lati-
tude 45°  and  fome  minutes,  where  our  exploration  ended,  and
where  boats  could  not  pafs  as  we  then  thought,  fince  we
had  not  made  a careful  examination  of  it  as  we  have  fince
done.^®®

Now  after  Sieur  de  Monts  had  conferred  with  me  feveral
times  in  regard  to  his  purpofes  concerning  the  exploration,
he  refolved  to  continue  fo  noble  and  meritorious  an  under-
taking, notwithflanding  the  hardfhips  and  labors  of  the  paft.
He  honored  me  with  his  lieutenancy  for  the  voyage;  and,  in
order  to  carry  out  his  purpofe,  he  had  two  veffels  equipped,
one  commanded  by  Pont  Grave,  who  was  commillioned  to
trade  with  the  favages  of  the  country  and  bring  back  the
veffels,  while  I was  to  winter  in  the  country.

Sieur  de  Monts,  for  the  purpofe  of  defraying  the  expenfes
of  the  expedition,  obtained  letters  from  his  Majefty  for  one
year,  by  which  all  perfons  were  forbidden  to  traffic  in  peltry
with  the  favages,  on  penalties  ftated  in  the  following  com-
miflion : —

Henry  by  the  grace  of  God  King  of  France  and
Navarre,  to  our  beloved  and  faithful  Councillors,  the  officers

of

284  King  Henry  the  Great,

died  in  i6io,  and  this  intro-
ductory palTage  was  obvioufly  written
after  that  event,  probably  near  the  time
of  the  publication  of  his  voyages  in  1613.

In  the  preliminary  voyage  of  1603,
Champlain  afcended  the  St.  Lawrence
as  far  as  the  falls  of  St.  Louis,  above
Montreal.

i6i

Sieur  de  Champlain,

of  our  Admiralty  in  Normandy,  Brittany,  and  Guienne,  bail-
iffs, marfhals,  prevofts,  judges,  or  their  lieutenants,  and  to
each  one  of  them,  according  to  his  authority,  throughout  the
extent  of  their  powers,  jurifdidlions,  and  precindls,  greeting ;

Adling  upon  the  information  which  has  been  given  us
by  thofe  who  have  returned  from  New  France,  refpedting  the
good  quality  and  fertility  of  the  lands  of  that  country,  and
the  difpofition  of  the  people  to  accept  the  knowledge  of  God,
We  have  refolved  to  continue  the  fettlement  previoufly  un-
dertaken there,  in  order  that  our  fubjedts  may  go  there  to
trade  without  hinderance.  And  in  view  of  the  propofition
to  us  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  Gentleman  in  Ordinary  of  our
chamber,  and  our  Lieutenant-General  in  that  country,  to  make
a fettlement,  on  condition  of  our  giving  him  means  and  fup-
plies  for  fuftaining  the  expenfe  of  it,^  it  has  pleafed  us  to
promife  and  affure  him  that  none  of  our  fubjedfs  but  himfelf
fhall  be  permitted  to  trade  in  peltry  and  other  merchandife,
for  the  period  of  one  year  only,  in  the  lands,  regions,  harbors,
rivers,  and  highways  throughout  the  extent  of  his  jurifdic-
tion:  this  We  defire  to  have  fulfilled.  For  thefe  caufes  and
other  confiderations  impelling  us  thereto,  We  command  and
decree  that  each  one  of  you,  throughout  the  extent  of  your
powers,  jurifdidtions,  and  precindts,  fhall  adt  in  our  ftead
and  carry  out  our  will  in  dillindtly  prohibiting  and  forbidding
all  merchants,  matters,  and  captains  of  veffels,  alfo  failors  and
others  of  our  fubjedts,  of  whatever  rank  and  profeffion,  to  fit
out  any  veffels,  in  which  to  go  themfelves  or  fend  others  in

' order

. 286  contribution  by  Henry  IV.  monopoly  of  the  fur- trade  granted  by
did  not  probably  extena  beyond  the  him  in  this  commiflion.

21

i62

Voyages  of

order  to  engage  in  trade  or  barter  in  peltry  and  other  things
with  the  ravages  of  New  France,  to  vifit,  trade,  or  communi-
cate  with  them  during  the  fpace  of  one  year,  within  the  jurif-
didtion  of  Sieur  de  Monts,  on  penalty  of  difobedience,  and
the  entire  confifcation  of  their  veffels,  fupplies,  arms,  and
merchandife  for  the  benefit  of  Sieur  de  Monts ; and,  in  order
that  the  punifhment  of  their  difobedience  may  be  affured,
you  will  allow,  as  We  have  and  do  allow,  the  aforefaid  Sieur
de  Monts  or  his  lieutenants  to  feize,  apprehend,  and  arreft
all  violators  of  our  prefent  prohibition  and  order,  alfo  their
veffels,  merchandife,  arms,  fupplies,  and  vidfuals,  in  order  to
take  and  deliver  them  up  to  the  hands  of  juftice,  fo  that
aaion  may  be  taken  not  only  againft  the  perfons,  but  alfo
the  property  of  the  offenders,  as  the  cafe  fhall  require.  This
is  our  will,  and  We  bid  you  to  have  it  at  once  read  and  pub-
lifhed  in  all  localities  and  public  places  within  your  authority
and  jurifdiaion,  as  you  may  deem  neceffary,  by  the  firft  one
of  our  officers  or  fergeants  in  accordance  with  this  requifition,
by  virtue  of  thefe  prefents,  or  a copy  of  the  fame,  properly  at-
tefted  once  only  by  one  of  our  well-beloved  and  faithful  coun-
cillors, notaries,  and  fecretaries,  to  which  it  is  Our  will  that
credence  fhould  be  given  as  to  the  prefent  original,  in  order
that  none  of  our  fubjedfs  may  claim  ground  for  ignorance,
but  that  all  may  obey  and  adt  in  accordance  with  Our  will
in  this  matter.  We  order,  moreover,  all  captains  of  veffels,
mates,  and  fecond  mates,  and  failors  of  the  fame,  and  others
on  board  of  veffels  or  fhips  in  the  ports  and  harbors  of  the
aforefaid  country,  to  permit,  as  We  have  done,  Sieur  de  Monts,
and  others  poffeffing  power  and  authority  from  him,  to  fearch
the  aforefaid  veffels  which  fliall  have  engaged  in  the  fur-trade

after

Sieur  de  Champlain.  163

after  the  prefent  prohibition  fhall  have  been  made  known  to
them.  It  is  Our  will  that,  upon  the  requifition  of  the  afore-
faid  Sieur  de  Monts,  his  lieutenants,  and  others  having
authority,  you  fhould  proceed  againft  the  difobedient  and
offenders,  as  the  cafe  may  require  : to  this  end.  We  give  you
power,  authority,  commiffion,  and  fpecial  mandate,  notwith-
ftanding  the  a6l  of  our  Council  of  the  17th  day  of  July  laft,^®^
any  hue  and  cry,  Norman  charter,  accufation,  objedlion,  or
appeals  of  whatfoever  kind ; on  account  of  which,  and  for
fear  of  difregarding  which,  it  is  Our  will  that  there  fhould  be
no  delay,  and,  if  any  of  thefe  occur.  We  have  withheld  and
referved  cognizance  of  the  fame  to  Ourfelves  and  our  Council,
apart  from  all  other  judges,  and  have  forbidden  and  prohib-
ited the  fame  to  all  our  courts  and  judges : for  this  is  Our
pleafure.

Given  at  Paris  the  feventh  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of
grace,  fixteen  hundred  and  eight,  and  the  nineteenth  of  Our
reign.  Signed,  HENRY.

And  lower  down.  By  the  King,  Delomenie.  And  fealed
with  the  fingle  label  of  the  great  feal  of  yellow  wax.

Collated  with  the  original  by  me.  Councillor,  Notary,  and
Secretary  of  the  King.

I proceeded  to  Honfleur  for  embarkation,  where  I found
the  veffel  of  Pont  Grave  in  readinefs.  He  left  port  on  the
5th  of  April.  I did  fo  on  the  13th,  arriving  at  the  Grand
Bank  on  the  15th  of  May,  in  latitude  45”  15'.  On  the  26th,

we

This,  we  prefume,  was  the  a6l  abrogating  the  charter  of  De  Monts  granted
in  1603.

1 64  Voyages  of

we  fighted  Cape  St.  Mary,“*  in  latitude  46°  45',  on  the  Ifland
of  Newfoundland.  On  the  27th  of  the  month,  we  fighted
Cape  St.  Lawrence,  on  Cape  Breton,  and  alfo  the  Ifland  of
St.  Paul,  diftant  eighty-three  leagues  from  Cape  St.  Mary.*®
On  the  30th,  we  fighted  Ifle  Percee  and  Gafpe,**®  in  latitude
48“  40',  diftant  from  Cape  St.  Lawrence  from  feventy  to
feventy-five  leagues.

On  the  3d  of  June,  we  arrived  before  Tadouffac,  diftant
from  Gafpe  from  eighty  to  ninety  leagues ; and  we  anchored
in  the  roadftead  of  Tadouffac,^^  a league  diftant  from  the
harbor,  which  latter  is  a kind  of  cove  at  the  mouth  of  the
river  Saguenay,  where  the  tide  is  very  remarkable  on  ac-
count of  its  rapidity,  and  where  there  are  fometimes  violent
winds,  bringing  fevere  cold.  It  is  maintained  that  from  the
harbor  of  Tadouffac  it  is  fome  forty-five  or  fifty  leagues  to
the  firft  fall  on  this  river,  which  comes  from  the  north-north-

weft.

like  an  arch,  under  which  a boat  of
Bifcay  may  pafs  with  its  fail  up,  and
this  has  given  it  the  name  of  \ht  pierced
ifland/’ — Letters  to  the  Ducnefs  of
Lefdiguilres^  by  Francis  Xavier  de
Charlevoix,  London,  1763,  p.  12.

The  pofition  in  the  roadftead  was
fouth-eafl;  of  the  harbor,  fo  that  the  har-
bor was  feen  on  the  north-weft.  Char-
levoix calls  it  Moulin  Baude.  The
reader  will  find  the  pofition  indicated
by  the  letter  M on  Champlain’s  map  of
the  Port  of  Tadouflac.  Baude  Moulin
(Baude  Mill),  diredlly  north  of  it,  was
probably  a mill  privilege.  Charlevoix,
in  1720,  anchored  there,  and  afked
them  to  fliow  him  the  mill ; and  they
fhowed  him  fome  rocks,  from  which
iflfued  a ftream  of  clear  water.  He  adds,
they  might  build  a water-mill  here,  but
probably  it  will  never  be  done.

288  This  cape  ftill  retains  its  ancient
name,  and  is  fituated  between  St.
Mary’s  Bay  and  Placentia  Bay.

28®  Cape  St.  Lawrence  is  the  northetn-
moft:  extremitv  of  the  Ifland  Of  Cape
Breton,  and  the  Ifland  of  St.  Paul  is
twenty  miles  north-eaft  of  it.

2®®  The  Ifle  Percde,  or  pierced  ifland,
is  a fliort  diftance  north  of  the  Ifland  of
Bonaventure,  at  the  entrance  of  Mai
Bay,  near  the  village  of  Percde,  where
there  is  a government  light.  Gafpd
Bay  is  fome  miles  farther  north.  “ Be-
low the  bay,”  fays  Charlevoix,  ‘‘we
perceive  a kind  of  ifland,  which  is  only
a fteep  rock  about  thirty  fathoms  long,
ten  high,  and  four  in  breadth  : it  looks
like  part  of  an  old  wall,  and  they  fay  it
joined  formerly  to  Mount  loli,  which  is
over  againft  it  on  the  continent  This
rock  has  in  the  midft  of  it  an  opening

Sieur  de  Champlain,  165

weft.  The  harbor  is  fmall,  and  can  accommodate  only  about
twenty  veffels.  It  has  water  enough,  and  is  under  ftielter
of  the  river  Saguenay  and  a little  rocky  ifland;  which  is
almoft  cut  by  the  river ; elfewhere  there  are  very  high  moun-
tains with  little  foil  and  only  rocks  and  fand,  thickly  covered
with  fuch  wood  as  fir  and  birch.  There  is  a fmall  pond  near
the  harbor,  fhut  in  by  mountains  covered  with  wood.  There
are  two  points  at  the  mouth : one  on  the  fouth-weft  fide,  ex-
tending out  nearly  a league  into  the  fea,  called  Point  St.
Matthew,  or  otherwife  Point  aux  Allouettes ; and  another  on
the  north-weft  fide,  extending  out  one-eighth  of  a league,  and
called  Point  of  all  Devils,^  from  the  dangerous  nature  of  the
place.  The  winds  from  the  fouth-fouth-eaft  ftrike  the  har-
bor, which  are  not  to  be  feared ; but  thofe,  however,  from  the
Saguenay  are.  The  two  points  above  mentioned  are  dry  at
low  tide : our  veflel  was  unable  to  enter  the  harbor,  as  the
wind  and  tide  were  unfavorable.  I at  once  had  the  boat
lowered,  in  order  to  go  to  the  port  and  afcertain  whether
Pont  Grave  had  arrived.  While  on  the  way,  I met  a fliallop
with  the  pilot  of  Pont  Grave  and  a Bafque,  who  came  to
inform  me  of  what  had  happened  to  them  becaufe  they  at-
tempted to  hinder  the  Bafque  veffels  from  trading,  according
to  the  commiflion  obtained  by  Sieur  de  Monts  from  his
Majefty,  that  no  veffels  fhould  trade  without  permiflion  of
Sieur  de  Monts,  as  was  expreffed  in  it;  and  that,  notwith-
ftanding  the  notifications  which  Pont  Grave  made  in  behalf
of  his  Majefty,  they  did  not  defift  from  forcibly  carrying  on

their

Pointe  de  tons  les  Diables.  Now  is  ftill  called  Pointe  aux  Alouettes,  or
known  as  Pointe  aux  Vaches,  cows.  Lark  Point.

The  point  on  the  other  fide  of  the  river

i66

Voyages  of

their  traffic ; and  that  they  had  ufed  their  arms  and  main-
tained themfelves  fo  well  in  their  veffel  that,  difcharging
all  their  cannon  upon  that  of  Pont  Grave,  and  letting  off
many  mufket-ffiots,  he  was  feverely  wounded,  together  with
three  of  his  men,  one  of  whom  died,  Pont  Grave  mean-
while  making  no  refiftance;  for  at  the  firft  ffiower  of  muf-
ketry  he  was  ftruck  down.  The  Bafques  came  on  board
of  the  veffel  and  took  away  all  the  cannon  and  arms,  de-
claring that  they  would  trade,  notwithftanding  the  prohibi-
tion of  the  King,  and  that  when  they  were  ready  to  fet  out
for  France  they  would  reftore  to  him  his  cannon  and  ammu-
nition, and  that  they  were  keeping  them  in  order  to  be  in  a
ftate  of  fecurity.  Upon  hearing  all  thefe  particulars,  I was
greatly  annoyed  at  fuch  a beginning,  which  we  might  have
eafily  avoided.

_ Now,  after  hearing  from  the  pilot  all  thefe  things,  I afked
him  why  the  Bafque  had  come  on  board  of  our  veffel.  He
told  me  that  he  came  in  behalf  of  their  mafter,  named
Darache,  and  his  companions,  to  obtain  affurance  from  me

that  I would  do  them  no  harm,  when  our  veffel  entered  the
harbor.

I replied  that  I could  not  give  any  until  I had  feen  Pont
rave.  The  Bafque  faid  that,  if  I had  need  of  any  thing  in
their  power,  they  would  affift  me  accordingly.  What  led  them
to  ufe  this  language  was  fimply  their  recognition  of  having
one  wrong,  as  they  confeffed,  and  the  fear  that  they  would
not  be  permitted  to  engage  in  the  whale-fiffiery.  After  talk-
ing  at  length,  I went  affiore  to  fee  Pont  Grave,  in  order  to
^liberate  as  to  what  was  to  be  done.  I found  him  very  ill.
e related  to  me  in  detail  all  that  had  happened.  We  con-
cluded

167

Sieur  de  Champlain.

eluded  that  we  could  only  enter  the  harbor  by  force,  and  that
the  fettlement  mull  not  be  given  up  for  this  year,  fo  that  we
confidered  it  beft,  in  order  not  to  make  a bad  caufe  out  of  a
juft  one,  and  thus  work  our  ruin,  to  give  them  affurances
on  my  part  fo  long  as  I fhould  remain  there,  and  that  Pont
Grave  fhould  undertake  nothing  againft  them,  but  that  juftice
fhould  be  done  in  France,  and  their  differences  fhould  be
fettled  there.

Uarache,  matter  of  the  veffel,  begged  me  to  go  on  board,
where  he  gave  me  a cordial  reception.  After  a long  confer-
ence, I fecured  an  agreement  between  Pont  Grave  and  him,
and  required  him  to  promife  that  he  would  undertake  noth-
ing againft  Pont  Grave,  or  what  would  be  prejudicial  to  the
King  and  Sieur  de  Monts;  that,  if  he  did  the  contrary,  I
fhould  regard  my  promife  as  null  and  void.  This  was  agreed
to,  and  figned  by  each.

In  this  place  were  a number  of  favages  who  had  come  for
traffic  in  furs,  feveral  of  whom  came  to  our  veffel  with  their
canoes,  which  are  from  eight  to  nine  paces  long,  and  about  a
pace  or  pace  and  a half  broad  in  the  middle,  growing  nar-
rower towards  the  two  ends.  They  are  very  apt  to  turn
over,  in  cafe  one  does  not  underftand  managing  them,  and
are  made  of  birch  bark,  ftrengthened  on  the  infide  by  little
ribs  of  white  cedar,  very  neatly  arranged ; they  are  fo  light
that  a man  can  eafily  carry  one.  Each  can  carry  a weight
equal  to  that  of  a pipe.  When  they  want  to  go  overland  to  a
river  w’here  they  have  bufmefs,  they  carry  them  with  them.
From  Chouacoet  along  the  coaft  as  far  as  the  harbor  of
Tadouffac,  they  are  all  alike.

CHAPTER  II.

i68

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  II.

Of  the  Riveb  Saguenay,  and  the  Savages  who  visited  us  there.  — Of

THE  ISLANI  OF  ORLEANS,  AND  ALL  THAT  WE  OBSERVED  THERE  WORTHY
OF  Note.

■TER  this  agreement,  I had  fome  carpenters  fet
to  work  to  fit  up  a little  barque  of  twelve  or
fourteen  tons,  for  carrying  all  that  was  needed
for  our  fettlement,  which,  however,  could  not  be
got  ready  before  the  lafl:  of  June.

Meanwhie,  I managed  to  vifit  fome  parts  of  the  river
Saguenay,  afine  river,  which  has  the  incredible  depth  of  fome
one  hundrec  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  fathoms.^®  About  fifty
leagues  fron  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,  there  is,  as  is  faid,  a
great  waterf.ll,  defcending  from  a very  high  elevation  with
great  impetiofity.  There  are  fome  iflands  in  this  river,  very
barren,  beinj  only  rocks  covered  with  fmall  firs  and  heathers.
It  is  half  a hague  broad  in  places,  and  a quarter  of  a league
at  its  moutl,  where  the  current  is  fo  ftrong  that  at  three-
quarters  flocd-tide  in  the  river  it  is  ftill  running  out.  All
the  land  thd  I have  feen  confifls  only  of  mountains  and

rocky

The  deep  ft  founding  as  laid
down  on  Laurie’  Chart  is  one  hundred
and  forty-fix  fahoms.  The  faiue  au-
thority lays  the  banks  of  the  river
throughout  its  ourfe  are  very  rocky,
and  vary  in  height  from  one  hundred
and  feventy  to  thee  hundred  and  forty
yards  above  the  ftream.  Its  current
is  broad,  deep,  nd  uncommonly  vehe-
ment: in  fome  paces,  where  precipices

intervene,  are  falls  from  fifty  to  fixty
feet  in  height,  down  which  the  whole
volume  of  water  rufhes  with  tremendous
fury  and  noife.  The  general  breadth
of  the  river  is  about  two  and  a half
miles,  but  at  its  mouth  its  width  is
contradled  to  three-quarters  of  a mile.
The  tide  runs  upward  about  fixty-five
miles  from  its  mouth.

Sieur  de  Champlah.  169

rocky  promontories,  for  the  moft  part  covced  with  fir  and
birch,  a very  unattradlive  country  on  both  Hes  of  the  river.
In  a word,  it  is  mere  waftes,  uninhabited  h either  animals
or  birds ; for,  going  out  hunting  in  places  /hich  feemed  to
me  the  moft  pleafant,  I found  only  fome  'ery  fmall  birds,
fuch  as  fwallows  and  river  birds,  which  go  here  in  fummer.
At  other  times,  there  are  none  whatever,  ii  confequence  of
the  exceflive  cold.  This  river  flows  from  th  north-weft.

The  favages  told  me  that,  after  palfing  te  firft  fall,  they
meet  with  eight  others,  when  they  go  a da’s  journey  with-
out finding  any.  Then  they  pafs  ten  otbrs,  and  enter  a
lake,^  which  they  are  three  days  in  croflig,  and  they  are
eafily  able  to  make  ten  leagues  a day  up  ftrem.  At  the  end
of  the  lake  there  dwells  a migratory  peopl.  Of  the  three
rivers  which  flow  into  this  lake,  one  comesfrom  the  north,
very  near  the  fea,  where  they  confider  it  muh  colder  than  in
their  own  country;  and  the  other  two  from  other  diredtions
in  the  interior,^®  where  are  migratory  favges,  living  only
from  hunting,  and  where  our  favages  carr3the  merchandife
we  give  them  for  their  furs,  fuch  as  beaver,  tiarten,  lynx,  and
otter,  which  are  found  there  in  large  nurbers,  and  which

they

If  the  Indians  were  three  days  in  pean  who  behel<  that  magnificent  e?^
croffing  Lake  St.  John  here  referred  to,  panfe  of  inland  vater.”  Vide  Tranf-
whofe  length  is  varioufly  Hated  to  be  adions^  Lit.  aniHts.  Soc.  of  Quebec^
from  twenty-five  to  forty  miles,  it  could  1867-68,  p.  5-  ^ ,

hardly  have  been  the  fhorteft  time  in  The  firft  f thefe  three  rivers,

which  it  were  polfible  to  pafs  it.  It  which  the  trawler  will  meet  as  he
may  have  been  the  ufual  time,  fome  of  pafles  up  the  nohern  fhore  of  the  lake,
which  they  gave  to  fiftiing  or  hunting,  is  the  Periboncalowing  from  the  nortn-
“ In  1647,  Father  Jean  Duquen,  mif-  eaft.  The  fecorl  is  the  Miftaflina,  rep-
fionary  at  Tadouffac,  afcending  the  refented  by  the  idians  as  commg  ^om
Saguenay,  difcovered  the  Lake  St.  John,  the  fait  fea.  Tie  third  is  the  C o-
and  noted  its  Indian  name,  Picouagami,  mouchonan,  floing  from  the  nortti-
or  Flat  Lake.  He  was  the  firft  Euro-  weft.

22

170  Voyages  of

they  then  carry  to  our  veffels.  Thefe  people  of  the  north
report  to  our  favages  that  they  fee  the  fait  fea ; and,  if  that
is  true,  as  I think  it  certainly  is,  it  can  be  nothing  but  a
gulf  entering  the  interior  on  the  north.^  The  favages  fay
that  the  diflance  from  the  north  fea  to  the  port  of  Tadouffac
is  perhaps  forty-five  or  fifty  days’  journey,  in  confequence  of
the  difficulties  prefented  by  the  roads,  rivers,  and  country,
which  is  very  mountainous,  and  where  there  is  fnow  for  the
moft  part  of  the  year.  This  is  what  I have  definitely  afcer-
tained  in  regard  to  this  river.  I have  often  wifhed  to  explore
it,  but  could  not  do  fo  without  the  favages,  who  were  unwill-
ing that  I or  any  of  our  party  fhould  accompany  them.
Neverthelefs,  they  have  promifed  that  I fhall  do  fo.  This
exploration  would  be  defirable,  in  order  to  remove  the  doubts
of  many  perfons  in  regard  to  the  exiftence  of  this  fea  on  the

north.

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Port  de  Tadoucac.

The  figures  indicate  the  fathoms  of  water-

A,  A round  mountain  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Saguenay.  B.  The  harbor  of
Tadouffac.  C.  A fmall  frefh- water  brook.  D.  The  encampment  of  the  favages
when  they  come  to  traffic.  E,  A peninfula  partly  enclohng  the  port  of  the  river
Saguenay.  E,  Point  of  All  Devils.  G.  The  river  Saguenay.  H.  Point  aux
Alouettes.  /.  Very  rough  mountains  covered  with  firs  and  beeches.  L.  The
mill  Bode.  M . The  roadftead  where  veffels  anchor  while  waiting  for  wind  and
tide.  N.  A little  pond  near  the  harbor.  O.  A fmall  brook  coming  from  the
pond  and  flowing  into  the  Saguenay.  P,  Place  without  trees  near  the  point
where  there  is  a quantity  of  grafs.

There  was  doubtlefs  an  Indian  to  Rupert  River,  which  flows  into  the
trail  from  the  head-waters  of  the  Miftaf-  lower  part  of  Hudfon’s  Bay.
fiiia  to  Miftaffin  Lake,  and  from  thence

1

y

(

Sieur  de  Champlain.  171

north,  where  it  is  maintained  that  the  Englith  have  gone  in
thefe  latter  years  to  find  a way  to  China.^

I fet  out  from  Tadouffac  the  laft  day  of  the  month  to  go
to  Quebec.^  We  paffed  near  an  ifland  called  Hare  Ifland,^
diftant  fix  leagues  from  the  above-named  port:  it  is  two
leagues  from  the  northern,  and  nearly  four  leagues  from  the
fouthern  fhore.  From  Hare  Ifland  we  proceeded  to  a little
river,  dry  at  low  tide,  up  which  fome  feven  hundred  or  eight
hundred  paces  there  are  two  falls.  We  named  it  Salmon
River,®^  fince  we  caught  fome  of  thefe  fifh  in  it.  Goatling
along  the  north  fhore,  we  came  to  a point  extending  into  the
river,  which  we  called  Cap  Dauphin,^'  diftant  three  leagues
from  Salmon  River.  Thence  we  proceeded  to  another,  which

we

The  fait  fea  referred  to  by  the
Indians  was  undoubtedly  Hudfon’s  Bay.
The  difcoverer  of  this  bay,  Henry  Hud-
fon,  in  the  years  1607,  1608,  and  1609,
was  in  the  northern  ocean  fearching  for
a paffage  to  Cathay.  In  1610,  he  dif-
covered  the  ftrait  and  bay  which  now
bear  his  name.  He  paffed  the  winter
in  the  fouthern  part  of  the  bay  ; and  the
next  year,  1611,  his  failors  in  a mutiny
forced  him  and  his  officers  into  a fhallop
and  abandoned  them  to  perifh.  Noth-
ing was  heard  of  them  afterward.
The  fame  of  Hudfon’s  difcovery  had
reached  Champlain  before  the  publi-
cation of  this  volume  in  1613.  This
will  be  apparent  by  comparing  Cham-
plain’s fmall  map  with  the  Tabula
Nautica  of  Hudfon,  publifhed  in  1612.
It  will  be  feen  that  the  whole  of  the
Carte  G^ographique  de  la  Nouvelle
France  of  Champlain,  on  the  weft
of  Lumley’s  Inlet,  including  Hudfon’s
Strait  and  Bay,  is  a copy  from  the
Tabula  Nautica.  Even  the  names  are  in

Englifh,  a few  chara6leriftic  ones  being
omitted,  fuch  as  Prince  Henry,  the
King’s  Forlant,  and  Cape  Charles.  —
Vide  Henry  Hudfon  the  Navigator.,  by
G.  M.  Afher,  LL.D.,  Hakluyt  Society,
i860,  p.  xliv.

This  was  June  30,  1608.

29^  IJle  aux  Lilvres.,  or  hares.  This
name  was  given  by  Jacques  Cartier,-
and  it  is  ftill  called  Hare  Ifland.  It  is
about  ten  geographical  miles  long,  and
generally  about  half  or  three-quarters
of  a mile  wide.

800  Ri'vilre  aux  Saulmons.  “From
all  appearances,”  fays  Laverdi^re,  “ this
Salmon  River  is  that  which  empties
into  the  ‘ Port  k I’Equilles,’  eel  harbor,
alfo  called  ‘ Port  aux  Quilles,’  Skittles
Port.  Its  mouth  is  two  leagues  from
Cape  Salmon,  with  which  it  must  not
be  confounded.”  It  is  now  known  as
Black  River.

991  Cap  Dauphin,  now  called  Cape
Salmon,  which  is  about  three  leagues
from  Black  River.

1 72

Voyages  of

we  named  Eagle  Cape,^“  diftant  eight  leagues  from  Cap
Dauphin.  Between  the  two  there  is  a large  bay,^^  at  the  ex-
tremity of  which  is  a little  river  dry  at  low  tide.  From  Eao-le
Cape  we  proceeded  to  I fie  aux  Coudres,®®^  a good  league  dif-
tant, which  is  about  a league  and  a half  long.  It  is  nearly
level,  and  grows  narrower  towards  the  two  ends.  On  the
weftern  end  there  are  meadows,  and  rocky  points  extending
fome  diftance  out  into  the  river.  On  the  fouth-weft  fide  it
is  very  reefy,  yet  very  pleafant  in  confequence  of  the  woods
furrounding  it.  It  is  diftant  about  half  a league  from  the
northern  ftiore,  where  is  a little  river  extending  fome  diftance
into  the  interior.  We  named  it  Riviere  du  Gouffre,®*®  fince
abreaft  of  it  the  tide  runs  with  extraordinary  rapidity ; and,
although  it  has  a calm  appearance,  it  is  always  much  agi-
tated, the  depth  there  being  great:  but  the  river  itfelf  is
fhallow,  and  there  are  many  rocks  at  and  about  its  mouth.
Coafting  along  from  Ifte  aux  Coudres,  we  reached  a cape
which  we  named  Cap  de  Tourmente,*®*  five  leagues  diftant;

and

Cap  d,  VAigle^  now  known  as
Cap  aux  Oies,  or  Goofe  Cape.  The
Eagle  Cape  of  to-day  is  little  more  than
two  leagues  from  Cape  Salmon,  while
Goofe  Cape  is  about  eight  leagues,  as
Hated  in  the  text.

The  bay  ftretching  between  Cape
Salmon  and  Goofe  Cape  is  called  Mai
Bay,  within  which  are  Cape  Eagle,
Murray  Bay,  Point  au  Pies,  White
Cape,  Red  Cape,  Black  Cape,  Point
P^re,  Point  Corneille,  and  Little  Mai
Bay.  In  the  rear  of  Goofe  Cape  are
Les  Eboulemens  Mountains,  2,547  feet
in  height.  On  the  oppofite  fide  of  the
river  is  Point  Ouelle,  and  the  river  of
the  fame  name.

IJle  aux  Coudres^  Hazel  Ifland,
fo  named  by  Jacques  Cartier,  ftill  re-
tains its  ancient  appellation.  Its  dif-
tance from  Goofe  Cape  is  about  two
leagues.  The  defcription  of  it  in  the
text  is  very  accurate.

806  Ri'Dilre  du  Gouffre.  This  river
ftill  retains  this  name,  fignifying  whirl-
pool, and  is  the  fame  that  empties
into  St.  Paul’s  Bay,  oppofite  Ifle  aux
Coudres.

Cap  de  Tourmente^  cape  of  the
tempeft,  is  eight  leagues  from  Ifle  aux
Coudres,  but  about  two  from  the  Ifle  of
Orleans,  as  ftated  in  the  text,  which
fufficiently  identifies  it.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  173

and  we  gave  it  this  name  becaufe,  however  little  wind  there
may  be,  the  water  rifes  there  as  if  it  were  full  tide.  At  this
point,  the  water  begins  to  be  frefh.  Thence  we  proceeded  to
the  Ifland  of  Orleans,®”  a diftance  of  two  leagues,  on  the
fouth  fide  of  which  are  numerous  iflands,  low,  covered  with
trees  and  very  pleafant,  with  large  meadows,  having  plenty
of  game,  fome  being,  fo  far  as  I could  judge,  two  leagues  in
length,  others  a trifle  more  or  lefs.  About  thefe  iflands  are
many  rocks,  alfo  very  dangerous  fliallows,  fome  two  leagues
diftant  from  the  main  land  on  the  fouth.  All  this  fliore,  both
north  and  fouth,  from  Tadouffac  to  the  Ifland  of  Orleans,  is
mountainous,  and  the  foil  very  poor.  The  wood  is  pine,  fir,
and  birch  only,  with  very  ugly  rocks,  fo  that  in  mofl  places
one  could  not  make  his  way.

Now  we  pafled  along  fouth  of  the  Ifland  of  Orleans,  which
is  a league  and  a half  diftant  from  the  main  land  and  half  a
league  on  the  north  fide,  being  fix  leagues  in  length,  and  one
in  breadth,  or  in  fome  places  a league  and  a half.  On  the
north  fide,  it  is  very  pleafant,  on  account  of  the  great  extent
of  woods  and  meadows  there ; but  it  is  very  dangerous  failing,
in  confequence  of  the  numerous  points  and  rocks  between
the  main  land  and  ifland,  on  which  are  numerous  fine  oaks

and

IJle  d^Orldans.  Cartier  difcovered  probably  the  Froft  Grape,  Vitis  cordi-
this  ifland  in  1635,  named  it  the  folia.  The  “ Ifland  of  Orleans  ’’  foon
Ifland  of  Bacchus,  becaufe  he  faw  vines  became  the  fixed  name  of  this  ifland,
growing  there,  which  he  had  not  before  which  it  ftill  retains.  Its  Indian  nanm
feen  in  that  region.  He  fays,  “ Et  par-  is  faid  to  have  been  Minima.— Vide
eillement  y trouuafmes  force  vignes,  ce  Laverdi^re’s  interefting  note,  CEuvres
que  n’auyons  veu  par  cy  deuant  k toute  de  Champlain.,  Tome  II.  p.  24.  Cham-
la  terre,  & par  ce  la  nommafmes  I’yfle  plain’s  eftimate  of  the  lize  of  the  iiland
de  Bacchus.”  — Brief  Ricit  de  la  Mavt-  is  nearly  accurate.  It  is,  according  to
gallon  Faite  en  mdxxxv.,  par  Jacques  the  Admiralty  charts,  feventeen  marine
Cartier,  D’Avezac  ed.,  Paris,  1863,  pp.  miles  in  length,  and  four  in  its  greateft
14,  15.  The  grape  found  here  was  width.

174

Voyages  of

and  in  fome  places  nut-trees,  and  on  the  borders  of  the  woods
vines  and  other  trees  fuch  as  we  have  in  France.  This  place
is  the  commencement  of  the  fine  and  fertile  country  of  the
great  river,  and  is  diftant  one  hundred  and  twenty  leagues
from  its  mouth.  Off  the  end  of  the  ifland  is  a torrent  of
water  on  the  north  fliore,  proceeding  from  a lake  ten  leagues
in  the  interior : **  it  comes  down  from  a height  of  nearly
twenty-five  fathoms,  above  which  the  land  is  level  and  pleaf-
ant,  although  farther  inland  are  feen  high  mountains  appear-
ing to  be  from  fifteen  to  twenty  leagues  diftant.

CHAPTER  III.

Arrival  at  Quebec,  where  we  constructed  our  Place  of  Abode  ; its
Situation.  — Conspiracy  against  the  Service  of  the  King  and  my
Life  by  some  of  our  Men.  — Punishment  of  them,  and  all  that

TRANSPIRED  IN  THE  AfFAIR.

ROM  the  Ifland  of  Orleans  to  Quebec  the  dif-
tance  is  a league.  I arrived  there  on  the  3d  of
July,  when  I fearched  for  a place  fuitable  for
our  fettlement,  but  I could  find  none  more
convenient  or  better  fituated  than  the  point  of

Quebec,

This  was  the  river  Montmorency,  ters^  London,  1763,  p.  19.  The  foUow-
which  rifes  in  Snow  Lake,  fome  fifty  ing  is  Jean  Alfonfe’s  defcription  of  the
miles  in  the  interior.  — Vide  Champlain’s  fall  of  Montmorency  : “ When  thou  art
reference  on  his  map  of  Quebec  and  come  to  the  end  of  the  Ifle,  thou  ftialt
its  environs.  He  gave  this  name  to  the  fee  a great  River,  which  falleth  fifteene
river,  which  it  ftill  retains,  in  honor  of  or  twenty  fathoms  downe  from  a rocke,
the  Admiral  Montmorency,  to  whom  he  and  maketh  a terrible  noyfe.” — Hakluyt^
dedicated  his  notes  on  the  voyage  of  Vol.  III.  p.  293.  The  perpendicular
1603.  — Vide  Laverdi^re^  in  loco;  alfo  defcent  of  the  Montmorency  the  falls
Champlain^  162^2  i Charlevoix's  Let-  is  240  feet.

1

!

i

I

I

[

175

Sieur  de  Chainplain.

Quebec,  fo  called  by  the  favages,^  which  was  covered  with
nut-trees.  I at  once  employed  a portion  of  our  workmen  in

cutting

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Quebec.

The  fii^ures  indicate  the  fathoms  of  water,

A.  The  fite  where  our  habitation  is  built.^  B.  Cleared  land  where  we  fow
wheat  and  other  grain.^  C.  The  gardens.^  D,  Small  brook  coming  from  marfhes.'*
E.  River  where  Jacques  Cartier  pafled  the  winter,  which  in  his  time  he  called
St.  Croix,  and  which  name  has  been  transferred  to  a place  fifteen  leagues
above  Quebec.^  F.  River  of  the  marlhes.®  G.  Place  where  was  colle6ted
the  grafs  for  the  animals  brought  here.*^  //.  The  grand  fall  of  Montmorency,
which  defcends  from  a height  of  more  than  twenty-five  fathoms  into  the  river.^
/.  The  end  of  the  Ifland  of  Orleans.  L.  A very  narrow  point  on  the  fliore  eaft
of  Quebec.®  M.  Roaring  river  which  extends  to  the  Etechemins.  N,  The  great
river  of  St.  Lawrence.  O.  Lake  in  the  roaring  river.  P,  Mountains  in  the
interior;  bay  which  I named  New  Bifcay.  q.  Lake  of  the  great  fall  of  Mont-
morency.i®  R.  Bear  Brook.^^  Brook  du  Gendre.^®  T.  Meadows  overflowed
at  every  tide.  V.  Mont  du  Gas,  very  high,  fituated  on  the  bank  of  the  river.^^
X.  Swift  brook,  adapted  to  all  kinds  of  mills.  K Gravelly  fhore  where  a quantity
of  diamonds  are  found  fomewhat  better  than  thofe  of  Alanfon.  Z,  The  Point  of
Diamonds.  9.  Places  where  the  favages  often  build  their  cabins.

Notes.  The  following  notes  on  Champlain’s  explanation  of  his  map  of
Quebec  are  by  the  Abbd  Laverdi^re,  whofe  accurate  knowledge  of  that  city  and
^ its

Champlain  here  plainly  means  to
fay  that  the  Indians  call  the  narrow
place  in  the  river  Quebec,  For  this
meaning  of  the  word,  viz.  narrowing
of  waters,  in  the  Algonquin  language,
the  authority  is  abundant.  Laverdi^re
quotes,  as  agreeing  with  him  in  this
view,  Bellenger,  Ferland,  and  Lefcarbot.
“ The  narrowing  of  the  river,”  fays
Charlevoix,  “ gave  it  the  name  of  Que-
beio  or  Quebec^  which  in  the  Algonquin
language  fignifies  contraBion.  The
Abenaquis,  whofe  language  is  a dialedf
of  the  Algonquin,  call  it  Quelibec,

which  fignifies  fomething  fliut  up.”  —
Charlevoiod s Letters^  pp.  18,  19.  Alfred
Hawkins,  in  his  “ Hillorical  Recollec-
tions of  Quebec,”  regards  the  word  of
Norman  origin,  which  he  finds  on  a
feal  of  the  Duke  of  Suffolk,  as  early  as
1420.  The  theory  is  ingenious;  but  it
requires  fome  other  chara6leriftic  hif-
torical  fa6ls  to  challenge  our  belief.
When  Cartier  vifited  Quebec,  it  was
called  by  the  natives  Stadacone.  — Vide
Cartier's  Brief  Ricit,  1545,  D’Avezac
ed.,  Paris,  1863,  p.  14.

1/6  Voyages  of

cutting  them  down,  that  we  might  conftrud  our  habitation
there : one  I fet  to  fawing  boards,  another  to  making  a cellar
and  digging  ditches,  another  I fent  to  Tadouffac  with  the
barque  to  get  fupplies.  The  find  thing  we  made  was  the
ftorehoufe  for  keeping  under  cover  our  fupplies,  which  was
promptly  accomplifhed  through  the  zeal  of  all,  and  my  atten-
tion to  the  work.

Some  days  after  my  arrival  at  Quebec,  a lockfmith  con-
fpired  againft  the  fervice  of  the  king.  His  plan  was  to  put

me

its  environs  renders  them  efpecially  valuable.  They  are  given  entire,  with  only
flight  modifications.  ^ That  is  properly  the  point  of  Quebec,  including  what  is  at
prefent  enclofed  by  La  Place,  the  ftreet  Notre  Dame,  and  the  river.  2
clearing  mull  have  been  what  was  called  later  the  Efplanade  du  Fort,  or  Grande
Place,  or  perhaps  both.  The  Grande  Place  became,  in  1658,  the  fort  of  the
Hurons:  it  was  the  fpace  included  between  the  C6te  of  the  lower  town  and  the
Rue  du  Fort.  » a little  above  the  gardens,  on  the  Hope  of  the  Cote  du  Saut  au
Matelot,  a crofs  is  feen,  which  feems  to  indicate  that  at  that  time  the  cemetery
was  where  it  is  faid  to  be  when  it  is  mentioned  fome  years  later  for  the  firft  time.

" According  to  the  old  plans  of  Quebec,  thefe  marlhes  were  reprefented  to  be
weft  of  Mont  Carmel,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  glacis  of  the  Citadel.  The  brook
paired  eaftward  of  the  grounds  of  the  Urfulines  and  Jdfuites,  followed  for  fome
diftance  the  Rue  de  la  Fabrique  as  far  as  the  enclofure  of  the  Hotel  Dieu,  to
the  eaft  of  which  it  ran  down  the  hill  towards  the  foot  of  the  Cote  de  la  Cano-
lerie.  ® The  river  St,  Charles.  The  letter  E does  not  indicate  precifely  the  place
where  Jacques  Quartier  wintered,  but  only  the  mouth  of  the  river.  ® Judging
from  the  outlines  of  the  Ihore,  this  brook,  which  came  from  the  fouth-well,  flowed
into  the  harbor  of  the  Palais,  towards  the  weftern  extremity  of  the  Parc.  ^ This
is  probably  what  was  called  later  the  barn  of  the  Meliieurs  de  la  Compagnie,  or
fimply  La  Grange,  and  appears  to  have  been  fomewhere  on  the  avenue  of  Mont
Carmel.  ® The  fall  of  Montmorency  is  forty  fathoms  or  two  hundred  and  forty
hrench  feet,  or  even  more.  ® Hence  it  is  feen  that  in  1613  this  point  had  as  yet
no  name.  In  1629,  Champlain  calls  it  Cap  de  Ldvis  : it  can  accordingly  be  con-
cluded that  this  point  derives  its  name  from  that  of  the  Due  de  Ventadour,  Henri
de  Ldvis,  and  that  it  must  have  been  fo  named  between  the  years  1625  and  1627,
the  time  when  he  was  regent.  The  Lake  of  the  Snows  is  the  fource  of  the
weftern  branch  of  the  Riviere  du  Saut.  La  Riviere  de  Beauport,  which  is  called
likewife  La  Diftillerie.  ^2  Called  later  Ruifteau  de  la  Cabane  aux  Taupiers,  Riviere
Chalifour,  and  finally  Riviere  des  Fous,  from  the  new  infane  afylum,  by  the  fite  of
which  it  now  paftes.  Height  where  is  now  fituated  the  baftion  of  the  Roi  h la
Citadelle.  This  name  was  given  it,  doubtlefs.  in  memory  of  M.  de  Monts,  Pierre
du  Guaft.  This  figure  appears  not  only  at  the  Point  du  Cap  Diamant,  but
alfo  along  the  ftiore  of  Beauport,  and  at  the  end  of  the  Ifland  of  Orleans.

177

Sieur  de  Champlain,

me  to  death,  and,  getting  poffeffion  of  our  fort,  to  put  it  into
the  hands  of  the  Bafques  or  Spaniards,  then  at  Tadouffac,
beyond  which  veffels  cannot  go,  from  not  having  a knowledge
of  the  route,  nor  of  the  banks  and  rocks  on  the  way.

In  order  to  execute  his  wretched  plan,  by  which  he  hoped
to  make  his  fortune,  he  fuborned  four  of  the  worft  charadters,
as  he  fuppofed,  telling  them  a thoufand  falfehoods,  and  pre-
fenting  to  them  profpedts  of  acquiring  riches.

Thefe  four  men,  having  been  won  over,  all  promifed  to  adt
in  fuch  a manner  as  to  gain  the  reft  over  to  their  fide ; fo
that,  for  the  time  being,  I had  no  one  with  me  in  whom  I could
put  confidence,  which  gave  them  ftill  more  hope  of  making
their  plan  fucceed : for  four  or  five  of  my  companions,  in
whom  they  knew  that  I put  confidence,  were  on  board  of
the  barques,  for  the  purpofe  of  protedting  the  provifions  and
fupplies  neceflary  for  our  fettlement.

In  a word,  they  were  fo  fkilful  in  carrying  out  their
intrigues  with  thofe  who  remained,  that  they  were  on  the
point  of  gaining  all  over  to  their  caufe,  even  my  lackey,  prom-
ifing  them  many  things  which  they  could  not  have  fulfilled.

Being  now  all  agreed,  they  made  daily  different  plans  as  to
how  they  fhould  put  me  to  death,  fo  as  not  to  be  accufed  of
it,  which  they  found  to  be  a difficult  thing.  But  the  devil,
blindfolding  them  all  and  taking  away  their  reafon  and  every
poffible  difficulty,  they  determined  to  take  me  while  unarmed,
and  flrangle  me ; or  to  give  a falfe  alarm  at  night,  and  ffioot
me  as  I went  out,  in  which  manner  they  judged  that  they
would  accomplilh  their  work  fooner  than  otherwife.  They
made  a mutual  promife  not  to  betray  each  other,  on  penalty
that  the  firfl  one  who  opened  his  mouth  fhould  be  poniarded.

*3  They

178  Voyages  of

They  were  to  execute  their  plan  in  four  days,  before  the
arrival  of  our  barques,  otherwife  they  would  have  been  unable
to  carry  out  their  fcheme.

On  this  very  day,  one  of  our  barques  arrived,  with  our
pilot.  Captain  Teftu,  a very  difcreet  man.  After  the  barque
was  unloaded,  and  ready  to  return  to  Tadouffac,  there  came
to  him  a lockfmith,  named  Natel,  an  affociate  of  Jean  du  Val,
the  head  of  the  confpiracy,  who  told  him  that  he  had  prom-
ifed  the  reft  to  do  juft  as  they  did ; but  that  he  did  not  in
fadl  defire  the  execution  of  the  plot,  yet  did  not  dare  to  make
a difclofure  in  regard  to  it,  from  fear  of  being  poniarded.

Antoine  Natel  made  the  pilot  promife  that  he  would  make
no  difclofure  in  regard  to  what  he  fhould  fay,  fince,  if  his
companions  fhould  difcover  it,  they  would  put  him  to  death.
The  pilot  gave  him  his  affurance  in  all  particulars,  and  alked
him  to  ftate  the  charadter  of  the  plot  which  they  wifhed  to
carry  out.  This  Natel  did  at  length,  when  the  pilot  faid  to
him  : “ My  friend,  you  have  done  well  to  difclofe  fuch  a ma-
licious defign,  and  you  fhow  that  you  are  an  upright  man,  and
under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  thefe  things
cannot  be  paffed  by  without  bringing  them  to  the  knowledge
of  Sieur  de  Champlain,  that  he  may  make  provifion  againft
them ; and  I promife  you  that  I will  prevail  upon  him  to
pardon  you  and  the  reft.  And  I will  at  once,”  faid  the  pilot,
“ go  to  him  without  exciting  any  fufpicion ; and  do  you  go
about  your  bufinefs,  liftening  to  all  they  may  fay,  and  not
troubling  yourfelf  about  the  reft.”

The  pilot  came  at  once  to  me,  in  a garden  which  I was
having  prepared,  and  faid  that  he  wifhed  to  fpeak  to  me  in  a
private  place,  where  we  could  be  alone.  I readily  affented,

and

179

Sieur  de  Champlain.

and  we  went  into  the  wood,  where  he  related  to  me  the  whole
affair.  I asked  who  had  told  it  to  him.  He  begged  me  to
pardon  him  who  had  made  the  difclofure,  which  I confented
to  do,  although  he  ought  to  have  addreffed  himfelf  to  me.
He  was  afraid,  he  replied,  that  you  would  become  angry,  and
harm  him.  I told  him  that  I was  able  to  govern  myfelf
better  than  that,  in  fuch  a matter ; and  defired  him  to  have
the  man  come  to  me,  that  I might  hear  his  ftatement.  He
went,  and  brought  him  all  trembling  with  fear  left  I fliould
do  him  fome  harm.  I reaffured  him,  telling  him  not  to  be
afraid;  that  he  was  in  a place  of  fafety,  and  that  I fliould
pardon  him  for  all  that  he  had  done,  together  with  the  others,
provided  he  would  tell  me  in  full  the  truth  in  regard  to  the
whole  matter,  and  the  motive  which  had  impelled  them  to  it.
“Nothing,”  he  faid,  “had  impelled  them,  except  that  they
had  imagined  that,  by  giving  up  the  place  into  the  hands  of
the  Bafques  or  Spaniards,  they  might  all  become  rich,  and
that  they  did  not  want  to  go  back  to  France.”  He  alfo
related  to  me  the  remaining  particulars  in  regard  to  their
confpiracy.

After  having  heard  and  queftioned  him,  I dire6led  him  to
go  about  his  work.  Meanwhile,  I ordered  the  pilot  to  bring
up  his  ftiallop,  which  he  did.  Then  I gave  two  bottles  of
wine  to  a young  man,  dire(5ling  him  to  fay  to  thefe  four
worthies,  the  leaders  of  the  confpiracy,  that  it  was  a prefent
of  wine,  which  his  friends  at  Tadouffac  had  given  him,  and
that  he  wifhed  to  fhare  it  with  them.  This  they  did  not
decline,  and  at  evening  were  on  board  the  barque  where  he
was  to  give  them  the  entertainment.  I loft  no  time  in  going
there  fliortly  after ; and  caufed  them  to  be  feized,  and  held
until  the  next  day.  Then

1 8o  Voyages  of

Then  were  my  worthies  aftoniihed  indeed.  I at  once  had
all  get  up,  for  it  was  about  ten  o’clock  in  the  evening,  and
pardoned  them  all,  on  condition  that  they  would  difclofe  to
me  the  truth  in  regard  to  all  that  had  occurred ; which  they
did,  when  I had  them  retire.

The  next  day  I took  the  depofitions  of  all,  one  after  the
other,  in  the  prefence  of  the  pilot  and  failors  of  the  veffel,
which  I had  put  down  in  writing ; and  they  were  well  pleafed,
as  they  faid,  fmce  they  had  lived  only  in  fear  of  each  other,
efpecially  of  the  four  knaves  who  had  enfnared  them.  But
now  they  lived  in  peace,  fatisfied,  as  they  declared,  with  the
treatment  which  they  had  received.

The  fame  day  I had  fix  pairs  of  handcuffs  made  for  the
authors  of  the  confpiracy : one  for  our  furgeon,  named  Bon-
nerme,  one  for  another,  named  La  Taille,  whom  the  four
confpirators  had  accufed,  which,  however,  proved  falfe,  and
confequently  they  were  given  their  liberty.

This  being  done,  I took  my  worthies  to  Tadoulfac,  beg-
ging Pont  Grav6  to  do  me  the  favor  of  guarding  them,
fmce  I had  as  yet  no  fecure  place  for  keeping  them,  and  as
we  were  occupied  in  conflrudting  our  places  of  abode.  An-
other objedt  was  to  confult  with  him,  and  others  on  the  Ihip,
as  to  what  fhould  be  done  in  the  premifes.  We  fuggelled
that,  after  he  had  finifhed  his  work  at  Tadoulfac,  he  Ihould
come  to  Quebec  with  the  prifoners,  where  we  fhould  have
them  confronted  with  their  witnelfes,  and,  after  giving  them
a hearing,  order  juftice  to  be  done  according  to  the  offence
which  they  had  committed.

I went  back  the  next  day  to  Quebec,  to  haften  the  com-
pletion of  our  ftorehoufe,  lb  as  to  fecure  our  provifions,

which

Sieur  de  Champlain.  i8i

which  had  been  mifufed  by  all  thofe  fcoundrels,  who  fpared
nothing,  without  refledling  how  they  could  find  more  when
thefe  failed ; for  I could  not  obviate  the  difficulty  until  the
ftorehoufe  fhould  be  completed  and  fliut  up.

Pont  Grave  arrived  fome  time  after  me,  with  the  prifoners,
which  caufed  uneafiness  to  the  workmen  who  remained,  fince
they  feared  that  I fhould  pardon  them,  and  that  they  would
avenge  themfelves  upon  them  for  revealing  their  wicked
defign.

We  had  them  brought  face  to  face,  and  they  affirmed
before  them  all  which  they  had  ftated  in  their  depofitions,  the
prifoners  not  denying  it,  but  admitting  that  they  had  adted
in  a wicked  manner,  and  fhould  be  punifbed,  unlefs  mercy
might  be  exercifed  towards  them;  accurfing,  above  all,  Jean
du  Val,  who  had  been  trying  to  lead  them  into  fiich  a con-
fpiracy  from  the  time  of  their  departure  from  France.  Du
Val  knew  not  what  to  fay,  except  that  he  deferved  death,
that  all  ftated  in  the  depofitions  was  true,  and  that  he  begged
for  mercy  upon  himfelf  and  the  others,  who  had  given  in
their  adherence  to  his  pernicious  purpofes.

After  Pont  Grave  and  I,  the  captain  of  the  veffel,  furgeon,
mate,  fecond  mate,  and  other  failors,  had  heard  their  depofi*
tions  and  face  to  face  ftatements,  we  adjudged  that  it  would
be  enough  to  put  to  death  Du  Val,  as  the  inftigator  of  the
confpiracy ; and  that  he  might  ferve  as  an  example  to  thofe
who  remained,  leading  them  to  deport  themfelves  corre<5tly
in  future,  in  the  difcharge  of  their  duty ; and  that  the  Span-
iards and  Bafques,  of  whom  there  were  large  numbers  in  the
country,  might  not  glory  in  the  event.  We  adjudged  that
the  three  others  be  condemned  to  be  hung,  but  that  they

fhould

1 82  Voyages  of

fhould  be  taken  to  France  and  put  into  the  hands  of  Sieur
de  Monts,  that  fuch  ample  juftice  might  be  done  them  as  he
fliould  recommend  ; that  they  fliould  be  fent  with  all  the  evi-
dence and  their  fentence,  as  well  as  that  of  Jean  du  Val
who  was  ftrangled  and  hung  at  Quebec,  and  his  head  was
put  on  the  end  of  a pike,  to  be  fet  up  in  the  moft  confpicuous
place  on  our  fort.

CHAPTER  IV.

Return  of  Pont  Grave  to  France.  — Description  of  our  Quarters
AND  THE  Place  where  Jacques  Cartier  stayed  in  1535.

FTER  all  thefe  occurrences,  Pont  Grave  fet  out
from  Quebec,  on  the  i8th  of  September,  to  re-
turn to  France  with  the  three  prifoners.  After
he  had  gone,  all  who  remained  conduced  them-
felves  corredlly  in  the  difcharge  of  their  duty.

I had  the  work  on  our  quarters  continued,  which  was
compofed  of  three  buildings  of  two  flories.  Each  one  was
three  fathoms  long,  and  two  and  a half  wide.  The  ftore-
houfe  was  fix  fathoms  long  and  three  wide,  with  a fine  cellar
fix  feet  deep.  I had  a gallery  made  all  around  our  buildings,
on  the  outfide,  at  the  fecond  ftory,  which  proved  very  con-
venient. There  were  alfo  ditches,  fifteen  feet  wide  and  fix
deep.  On  the  outer  fide  of  the  ditches,  I conflrudted  feveral
fpurs,  which  enclofed  a part  of  the  dwelling,  at  the  points
where  we  placed  our  cannon.  Before  the  habitation  there  is
a place  four  fathoms  wide  and  fix  or  feven  long,  looking  out
upon  the  river-bank.  Surrounding  the  habitation  are  very
good  gardens,  and  a place  on  the  north  fide  fome  hundred  or

hundred

«

Sieur  de  Champlain.  183

hundred  and  twenty  paces  long  and  fifty  or  fixty  wide.  More-
over, near  Quebec,  there  is  a little  river,  coming  from  a lake
in  the  interior,®^®  diftant  fix  or  feven  leagues  from  our  fettle-
ment.  I am  of  opinion  that  this  river,  which  is  north  a quarter
north-weft  from  our  fettlement,  is  the  place  where  Jacques

Cartier

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Abitation  db  Qubbbcq.

A,  The  ftorehoufe.  B,  Dove-cote.  C.  A building  where  our  arms  are  kept,
and  for  lodging  our  workmen.  D.  Another  building  for  our  workmen.  E.  Dial.
F.  Another  building,  comprifmg  the  blackfmith’s  fhop  and  the  lodgings  of  the
mechanics.  G.  Galleries  extending  entirely  round  the  dwellings.  H,  The  dwell-
ing of  Sieur  de  Champlain.  /.  Gate  to  the  habitation  where  there  is  a draw-
bridge. L.  Promenade  about  the  habitation  ten  feet  wide,  extending  to  the
border  of  the  moat.  M.  Moat  extending  all  round  our  habitation.  N,  Plat-
forms, of  a tenaille  form,  for  our  cannon.  O,  Garden  of  Sieur  de  Champlain.
P,  The  kitchen.  Q.  Open  fpace  before  the  habitation  on  the  bank  of  the  river.
R,  The  great  river  St.  Lawrence.

The  river  St.  Charles  flows  from
a lake  in  the  interior  of  the  fame  name.
It  was  called  by  the  Montagnais,  ac-
cording to  Sagard  as  cited  by  Laver-
di^re,  in  loco.,  “ Cabirecoubat,  becaufe
it  turns  and  forms  feveral  points.”  Car-
tier  named  it  the  Holy  Crofs,  or  St.
Croix,  becaufe  he  fays  he  arrived  there
“ that  day  ; ” that  is,  the  day  on  which
the  exaltation  of  the  Crofs  is  celebrated,
the  14th  of  September,  1535. — Vide
Cartier.,  Hakluyt,  Vol.  III.  p.  266.  The
R^colledls  gave  it  the  name  of  St.
Charles,  after  the  grand  vicar  of  Pon-
toife,  Charles  des  Boues.  — Laverdilre.,
in  loco.  Jacques  Cartier  wintered  on  the
north  fliore  of  the  St.  Charles,  which  he
called  the  St.  Croix,  or  the  Holy  Crofs,
about  a league  from  Quebec.  “ Hard

by,  there  is,  in  that  riuer,  one  place
very  narrow,  deep,  and  fwift  running,
but  it  is  not  pafTing  the  third  part
of  a league,  ouer  againfl;  the  which
there  is  a goodly  high  piece  of  land,
with  a towne  therein : and  the  country
about  it  is  very  well  tilled  and  wrought,
and  as  good  as  poflibly  can  be  feene.
This  is  the  place  and  abode  of  Donna-
cona,  and  of  our  two  men  we  took  in
our  firll  voyage,  it  is  called  Stadacona,
. . . vnder  which  towne  toward  the
North  the  riuer  and  port  of  the  holy
crofle  is,  where  we  ftaied  from  the  15  of
September  vntil  the  16  of  May,  1536,
and  there  our  fhips  remained  dry  as  we
faid  before.” — Vide  Jacques  Cartier,
Second  Voyage,  Hakluyt,  Vol.  III.
p.  277.

1 84  Voyages  of

Cartier  wintered, fince  there  are  ftill,  a league  up  the  river,
remains  of  what  feems  to  have  been  a chimney,  the  founda-
tion of  which  has  been  found,  and  indications  of  there  hav-
ing been  ditches  furrounding  their  dwelling,  which  was
fmall.  We  found,  alfo,  large  pieces  of  hewn,  worm-eaten
timber,  and  fome  three  or  four  cannon-balls.  All  thefe
things  fhow  clearly  that  there  was  a fettlement  there  founded
by  Chriftians ; and  what  leads  me  to  fay  and  believe  that  it
was  that  of  Jacques  Cartier  is  the  fadf  that  there  is  no  evi-
dence whatever  that  any  one  wintered  and  built  a houfe  in
thefe  places  except  Jacques  Cartier,  at  the  time  of  his  difcov-
eries.  This  place,  as  I think,  muft  have  been  called  St
Croix,  as  he  named  it;  which  name  has  fince  been  tranf-
ferred  to  another  place  fifteen  leagues  weft  of  our  fettlement
But  there  is  no  evidence  of  his  having  wintered  in  the  place
now  called  St.  Croix,  nor  in  any  other  there,  fince  in  this
direction  there  is  no  river  or  other  place  large  enough  for
veffels  except  the  main  river  or  that  of  which  I fpoke  above ;
here  there  is  half  a fathom  of  water  at  low  tide,  many  rocks,
and  a bank  at  the  mouth ; for  veffels,  if  kept  in  the  main  river,
where  there  are  ftrong  currents  and  tides,  and  ice  in  the  win-
ter, drifting  along,  would  run  the  rifk  of  being  loft ; efpecially
as  there  is  a fandy  point  extending  out  into  the  river,  and
filled  with  rocks,  between  which  we  have  found,  within  the
last  three  years,  a paffage  not  before  difcovered;  but  one
muft  go  through  cautioufly,  in  confequence  of  the  dangerous
points  there.  This  place  is  expofed  to  the  north-weft  winds ;

and

The  fpot  where  Jacques  Cartier  wintered  was  at  the  jun6lion  of  the  river
Lairet  and  the  St.  Charles.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  185

and  the  river  runs  as  if  it  vsrere  a fall,  the  tide  ebbing  two  and
a half  fathoms.  There  are  no  figns  of  buildings  here,  nor
any  indications  that  a man  of  judgment  would  fettle  in  this
place,  there  being  many  other  better  ones,  in  cafe  one  were
obliged  to  make  a permanent  flay.  I have  been  defirous  of
fpeaking  at  length  on  this  point,  fmce  many  believe  that  the
abode  of  Jacques  Cartier  was  here,  which  I do  not  believe,
for  the  reafons  here  given;  for  Cartier  would  have  left  to
pofterity  a narrative  of  the  matter,  as  he  did  in  the  cafe  of
all  he  faw  and  difcovered ; and  I maintain  that  my  opinion
is  the  true  one,  as  can  be  fhown  by  the  hiftory  which
he  has  left  in  writing.

As  ftill  farther  proof  that  this  place  now  called  St.  Croix  is
not  the  place  where  Jacques  Cartier  wintered,  as  moft  perfons
think,  this  is  what  he  fays  about  it  in  his  difcoveries,  taken
from  his  hiftory;  namely,  that  he  arrived  at  the  Ifle  aux
Coudres  on  the  5th  of  December,®'^  1535,  which  he  called  by
this  name,  as  hazel-nuts  were  found  there.  There  is  a ftrong
tidal  current  in  this  place ; and  he  fays  that  it  is  three  leagues
long,  but  it  is  quite  enough  to  reckon  a league  and  a half.
On  the  7th  of  the  month,  Notre  Dame  Day,®'®  he  fet  out
from  this  ifland  to  go  up  the  river,  in  which  he  faw  fourteen
iflands,  diftant  feven  or  eight  leagues  from  Ifle  aux  Coudres

on

Cartier  difcovered  the  Ifle  of  Notre  Dame  Day,  iour  de  nojlre

Coudres,  that  is,  the  ifle  of  filberts  or  dame^  fhould  read  “Notre  Dame  Eve.
hazel-nuts,  on  the  6th  of  September,  Cartier  fays,  Le  feptiejme  tour  dudtCl
I Vide  Cartier^  1545,  D’Avezac  moys  iour  nojlre-dame,^^  tic,  — Idem,
ed.,  Paris,  1863,  p.  12.  This  ifland  is  p.  12.  Hakluyt  renders  it,  “The  feu-
five  nautical  miles  long,  which  agrees  enth  of  the  moneth  being  our  Ladees
with  the  ftatement  of  Champlain,  and  euen.” — Vol.  III.  p.  265.
its  greateft  width  is  two  miles  and  a
quarter.

24

1 86  Voyages  of

on  the  fouth.  He  errs  fomewhat  in  this  eftimatioii,  for  it
is  not  more  than  three  leagues^*  He  alfo  fays  that  the
place  where  the  iflands  are  is  the  commencement  of  the
land  or  province  of  Canada,  and  that  he  reached  an  ifland
ten  leagues  long  and  five  wide,  where  extenfive  fifheries  are
carried  on,  fifh  being  here,  in  fadl,  very  abundant,  efpecially
the  fturgeon.  But  its  length  is  not  more  than  fix  leagues,
and  its  breadth  two ; a fa6t  well  recognized  now.  He  fays
alfo  that  he  anchored  between  this  ifland  and  the  main  land
on  the  north,  the  fmallefl  paffage,  and  a dangerous  one,
where  he  landed  two  favages  whom  he  had  taken  to  France,
and  that,  after  flopping  in  this  place  fome  time  with  the
people  of  the  country,  he  fent  for  his  barques  and  went
farther  up  the  river,  with  the  tide,  feeking  a harbor  and
place  of  fecurity  for  his  fhips.  He  fays,  farther,  that  they
went  on  up  the  river,  coafting  along  this  ifland,  the  length
of  which  he  eflimates  at  ten  leagues ; and  after  it  was  paffed
they  found  a very  fine  and  pleafant  bay,  containing  a little
river  and  bar  harbor,  which  they  found  very  favorable  for
fheltering  their  veffels.  This  they  named  St.  Croix,  fince
he  arrived  there  on  this  day ; and  at  the  time  of  the  voyage
of  Cartier  the  place  was  called  Stadaca,®^®  but  we  now  call
it  Quebec.  He  fays,  alfo,  that  after  he  had  examined  this
place  he  returned  to  get  his  veffels  for  palling  the  winter
there.

Now  we  may  conclude,  accordingly,  that  the  diftance  is

only

As  Champlain  fuggefts,  thefe  in  much  lefs  than  feven  or  eight  leagues,
iflands  are  only  three  leagues  higher  as  Cartier  eflimates.
up  the  river ; but,  as  they  are  on  the  op-  This  was  an  error  in  tranfcribing.

polite  fide,  they  could  not  be  compalTed  Cartier  has  Stadacone.  — Vide  Brief

Ricit,  IS4S,  D’Avezac  ed.,  p.  14.

Sieur  de  Champlain.  187

only  five  leagues  from  the  Ifle  aux  Coudres  to  the  Ifle  of
Orleans  at  the  weftern  extremity  of  which  the  river  is  very
broad;  and  at  which  bay,  as  Cartier  calls  it,  there  is  no  other
river  than  that  which  he  called  St.  Croix,  a good  league
diftant  from  the  Ifle  of  Orleans,  in  which,  at  low  tide,  there
is  only  half  a fathom  of  water.  It  is  very  dangerous  for
veffels  at  its  mouth,  there  being  a large  number  of  fpurs ;
that  is,  rocks  fcattered  here  and  there.  It  is  accordingly
neceffary  to  place  buoys  in  order  to  enter,  there  being,  as  I
have  ftated,  three  fathoms  of  water  at  ordinary  tides,  and
four  fathoms,  or  four  and  a half  generally,  at  the  great  tides
at  full  flood.  It  is  only  fifteen  hundred  paces  from  our
habitation,  which  is  higher  up  the  river;  and,  as  I have
ftated,  there  is  no  other  river  up  to  the  place  now  called  St.
Croix,  where  veffels  can  He,  there  being  only  little  brooks.
The  fhores  are  flat  and  dangerous,  which  Cartier  does  not
mention  until  the  time  that  he  fets  out  from  St.  Croix,  now
called  Quebec,  where  he  left  his  veffels,  and  built  his  place  of
abode,  as  is  feen  from  what  follows.

On  the  19th  of  September,  he  fet  out  from  St  Croix,
where  his  veffels  were,  fetting  fail  with  the  tide  up  the  river,
which  they  found  very  pleafant,  as  well  on  account  of  the
woods,  vines,  and  dwellings,  which  were  there  in  his  time,  as
for  other  reafons.  They  cafl  anchor  twenty-five^  leagues

from  the  entrance  to  the  land  of  Canada , that  is,  at  the

weftern

The  diftance,  according  to  Laurie’s
Chart,  is  at  leaft  twenty-fix  nautical
miles.

817  Canada  at  this  time  was  regarded
by  the  Indians  as  a limited  territory.

lituated  at  or  about  Quebec.  This  ftate-
ment  is  confirmed  by  the  teftimony  of
Cartier : “ Ledi<5l  Donnacona  pria  noltre
cappitaine  de  aller  le  lendemain  veoir
Canada,  Ce  que  luy  promift  le  diCt
cappitaine.

1 88

Voyages  of

weftern  extremity  of  the  Ifle  of  Orleans,  fo  called  by  Cartier.
What  is  now  called  St.  Croix  was  then  called  Achelacy,  at
a narrow  pafs  where  the  river  is  very  fwift  and  dangerous  on
account  of  the  rocks  and  other  things,  and  which  can  only
be  paffed  at  flood-tide.  Its  diftance  from  Quebec  and  the
river  where  Cartier  wintered  is  fifteen  leagues.

Now,  throughout  the  entire  extent  of  this  river,  from
Quebec  to  the  great  fall,  there  are  no  narrows  except  at  the
place  now  called  St.  Croix,  the  name  of  which  has  been
transferred  from  one  place  to  another  one,  which  is  very  dan-
gerous, as  my  defcription  fliows.  And  it  is  very  apparent,
from  his  narrative,  that  this  was  not  the  fite  of  his  habitation,
as  is  claimed ; but  that  the  latter  was  near  Quebec,  and  that
no  one  had  entered  into  a fpecial  inveftigation  of  this  matter
before  my  doing  fo  in  my  voyages.  For  the  firft  time  I was
told  that  he  dwelt  in  this  place,  I was  greatly  aftoniflied,  find-
ing no  trace  of  a river  for  veffels,  as  he  dates  there  was.

This

cappitaine.  Et  le  ledemain,  13.  iour  du
did  moys,  ledid  cappitaine  auecques
fes  gentilz  hommes  accompaigne  de
cinquante  compaignons  bien  en  ordre,
alleret  veoir  ledict  Donnacona  & fon
peuple,  qui  ell  diftat  dou  elloient  lef-
dides  nauires  d’une  lieue.”  — Vide  Brief
Rdcit,  1545,  D’Avezac  ed.,  p.  29.  Of
the  above  the  following  is  Hakluyt’s
tranflation : Donnacona  their  Lord

delired  our  Captaine  the  next  day  to
come  and  fee  Canada,  which  he  prom-
ifed  to  doe  : for  the  next  day  bejng  the
13  of  the  moneth,  he  with  all  his  Gen-
tlemen and  fiftie  Mariners  very  well
appointed,  went  to  vifite  Donnacona  and
his  people,  about  a league  from  our
Ihips.”

Their  Ihips  were  at  this  time  at  St.

Croix,  a Ihort  diftance  up  the  St.
Charles,  which  flows  into  the  St.  Law-
rence at  Quebec ; and  the  little  Indian
village,  or  camp,  which  Donnacona
called  Canada,  was  at  Quebec.  Other
palfages  from  Cartier,  as  well  as  from
Jean  Alfonfe,  harmonize  with  this  which
we  have  cited.  Canada  was  therefore
in  Cartier’s  time  only  the  name  of  a
very  fmall  territory  covered  by  an  In-
dian village.  When  it  became  the  cen-
tre of  French  interefts,  it  alTumed  a
wider  meaning.  The  St.  Lawrence  was
often  called  the  Rivef  of  Canada,  then
the  territory  on  its  fliores,  and  finally
Canada  has  come  to  comprehend  the
vaft  Britifh  polfeflions  in  America  known
as  the  “ Dominion  of  Canada.”

Sieur  de  Champlain.  189

This  led  me  to  make  a careful  examination,  in  order  to
remove  the  fufpicion  and  doubt  of  many  perfons  in  regard
to  the  matter^®

While  the  carpenters,  fawers  of  boards,  and  other  work-
men, were  employed  on  our  quarters,  I fet  all  the  others  to
work  clearing  up  around  our  place  of  abode,  in  preparation
for  gardens  in  which  to  plant  grain  and  feeds,  that  we
might  fee  how  they  would  flourifh,  as  the  foil  feemed  to  be
very  good.

Meanwhile,  a large  number  of  favages  were  encamped  in
cabins  near  us,  engaged  in  fifhing  for  eels,  which  begin  to
come  about  the  1 5th  of  September,  and  go  away  on  the  1 5th
of  Odlober.  During  this  time,  all  the  favages  fublift  on  this
food,  and  dry  enough  of  it  for  the  winter  to  lafl  until  the  month
of  February,  when  there  are  about  two  and  a half,  or  at  moft
three,  feet  of  fnow ; and,  when  their  eels  and  other  things
which  they  dry  have  been  prepared,  they  go  to  hunt  the
beaver  until  the  beginning  of  January.  At  their  departure
for  this  purpofe,  they  intrufled  to  us  all  their  eels  and  other
things,  until  their  return,  which  was  on  the  1 5th  of  December.
But  they  did  not  have  great  fuccefs  in  the  beaver-hunt,  as
the  amount  of  water  was  too  great,  the  rivers  having  overrun
their  banks,  as  they  told  us.  I returned  to  them  all  their
fupplies,  which  lafled  them  only  until  the  20th  of  January.
When  their  fupply  of  eels  gave  out,  they  hunted  the  elk  and

fuch

The  locality  of  Cartier’s  winter*-  overwhelming  teftimony  which  he  brings
quarters  is  eftablifhed  by  Champlain  to  bear  upon  the  fubjedl.  Charlevoix
with  the  certainty  of  an  hiftorical  dem-  makes  the  St.  Croix  of  Cartier  the
onftration,  and  yet  there  are  to  be  found  Riviere  de  Jacques  Cartier. — Vide
thofe  whofe  judgment  is  fo  warped  by  Shed's  Charlevoix.^  Vol.  I.  p.  ii6.
preconceived  opinion  that  they  refill  the

190

Voyages  of

fuch  other  wild  beafts  as  they  could  find  until  fpring,  when  I
was  able  to  fupply  them  with  various  things.  I paid  efpecial
attention  to  their  cuftoms.

Thefe  people  fuffer  fo  much  from  lack  of  food  that  they
are  fometimes  obliged  to  live  on  certain  fhell-filh,  and  eat
their  dogs  and  the  fkins  with  which  they  clothe  themfelves
againfl;  the  cold.  I am  of  opinion  that,  if  one  were  to  fliow
them  how  to  live,  and  teach  them  the  cultivation  of  the  foil
and  other  things,  they  would  learn  very  aptly.  For  many  of
them  poffefs  good  fenfe,  and  anfwer  properly  queftions  put  to
them.  They  have  a bad  habit  of  taking  vengeance,  and  are
great  liars,  and  you  muft  not  put  much  reliance  on  them,  ex-
cept judicioufly,  and  with  force  at  hand.  They  make  prom-
ifes  readily,  but  keep  their  word  poorly.  The  moft  of  them
obferve  no  law  at  all,  fo  far  as  I have  been  able  to  fee,  and
are,  befides,  full  of  fuperftitions.  I afked  them  with  what
ceremonies  they  were  accuftomed  to  pray  to  their  God,  when
they  replied  that  they  had  none,  but  that  each  prayed  to  him
in  his  heart,  as  he  wiflied.  That  is  why  there  is  no  law  among
them,  and  they  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  worfhip  and  pray
to  God,  living  as  they  do  like  brute  beafts.  But  I think  that
they  would  foon  become  good  Chriftians,  if  people  would  come
and  inhabit  their  country,  which  they  are  for  the  moft  part
defirous  of.  There  are  fome  favages  among  them,  called  by
them  Pilotois,  whom  they  believe  have  intercourfe  with  the
devil  face  to  face,  who  tells  them  what  they  muft  do  in  regard
to  war  and  other  things ; and,  if  he  fhould  order  them  to  exe-
cute any  undertaking,  they  would  obey  at  once.  So,  alfo,  they
believe  that  all  their  dreams  are  true ; and,  in  fadt,  there  are
many  who  fay  that  they  have  had  vifions  and  dreams  about

matters

Sieur  de  Champlain.  19 1

matters  which  actually  come  to  pafs  or  will  do  fo.  But,  to
tell  the  truth,  thefe  are  diabolical  vifions,  through  which  they
are  deceived  and  mifled.  This  is  all  I have  been  able  to
learn  about  their  brutifh  faith.  All  thefe  people  are  well
proportioned  in  body,  without  deformity,  and  are  agile.  The
women,  alfo,  are  well-formed,  plump,  and  of  a fwarthy  color,  in
confequence  of  certain  pigments  with  which  they  rub  them-
felves,  and  which  give  them  a permanent  olive  color.  They
are  dreffed  in  fkins : a part  only  of  the  body  is  covered.  But
in  winter  they  are  covered  throughout,  in  good  furs  of  elk,
otter,  beaver,  bear,  feals,  deer,  and  roe,  of  which  they  have  large
quantities.  In  winter,  when  the  fnow  is  deep,  they  make  a
fort  of  fnow-fhoe  of  large  fize,  two  or  three  times  as  large  as
that  ufed  in  France,  which  they  attach  to  their  feet,  thus  going
over  the  fnow  without  finking  in ; otherwife,  they  could  not
hunt  or  walk  in  many  places.  They  have  a fort  of  marriage,
which  is  as  follows : When  a girl  is  fourteen  or  fifteen  years
old,  and  has  feveral  fuitors,  fhe  may  keep  company  with  all  fhe
likes.  At  the  end  of  five  or  fix  years,  fhe  takes  the  one  that
pleafes  her  for  her  hufband,  and  they  live  together  to  the  end
of  their  lives.  But  if,  after  living  fome  time  together,  they
have  no  children,  the  man  can  difun  ite  himfelf  and  take
another  woman,  alleging  that  his  own  is  good  for  nothing.
Hence,  the  girls  have  greater  freedom  than  the  married
women.

After  marriage,  the  women  are  chafte,  and  their  hufbands
generally  jealous.  They  give  prefents  to  the  fathers  or  rela-
tives of  the  girls  they  have  wedded.  Thefe  are  the  ceremo-
nies and  forms  obferved  in  their  marriages.  In  regard  to

their  burials : When  a man  or  a woman  dies,  they  dig  a pit,

in

192

Voyages  of

in  which  they  put  all  their  property,  as  kettles,  furs,  axes,
bows,  arrows,  robes,  and  other  things.  Then  they  place  the
body  in  the  pit  and  cover  it  with  earth,  putting  on  top  many
large  pieces  of  wood,  and  another  piece  upright,  painted  red
on  the  upper  part.  They  believe  in  the  immortality  of  the
foul,  and  fay  that  they  fhall  be  happy  in  other  lands  with  their
relatives  and  friends  who  are  dead.  In  the  cafe  of  captains
or  others  of  fome  diftindtion,  they  celebrate  a banquet  three
times  a year  after  their  death,  finging  and  dancing  about  the
grave.

All  the  time  they  were  with  us,  which  was  the  moft  fecure
place  for  them,  they  did  not  ceafe  to  fear  their  enemies  to
fuch  an  extent  that  they  often  at  night  became  alarmed  while
dreaming,  and  fent  their  wives  and  children  to  our  fort,  the
gates  of  which  I had  opened  to  them,  allowing  the  men  to
remain  about  the  fort,  but  not  permitting  them  to  enter,  for
their  perfons  were  thus  as  much  in  fecurity  as  if  they  had
been  infide.  I alfo  had  five  or  fix  of  our  men  go  out  to  reaf-
fure  them,  and  to  go  and  afcertain  whether  they  could  fee
any  thing  in  the  woods,  in  order  to  quiet  them.  They  are
very  timid  and  in  great  dread  of  their  enemies,  fcarcely  ever
fleeping  in  repofe  in  whatever  place  they  may  be,  although  I
conflantly  reaffured  them,  fo  far  as  I could,  urging  them  to
do  as  we  did  ; nainely,  that  they  fhould  have  a portion  watch
while  the  others  flept,  that  each  one  fhould  have  his  arms  in
readinefs  like  him  who  was  keeping  watch,  and  that  they
fliould  not  regard  dreams  as  the  adlual  truth  to  be  relied
upon,  fince  they  are  moflly  only  falfe,  to  which  I alfo  added
other  words  on  the  fame  fubjedl.  But  thefe  remonftrances
were  of  little  avail  with  them,  and  they  faid  that  we  knew

better

193

Sieur  de  Champlain.

better  than  they  how  to  keep  guard  againft  all  things ; and
that  they,  in  courfe  of  time,  if  we  continued  to  flay  with
them,  would  be  able  to  learn  it.

CHAPTER  V.

Seeds  and  Vines  planted  at  Quebec.  — Commencement  of  the  Winter
AND  Ice. — Extreme  Destitution  of  Certain  Indians.

N the  I ft  of  0(5lober,  I had  fome  wheat  fown,
and  on  the  15th  fome  rye.  On  the  3d,  there
was  a white  froft  in  fome  places,  and  the  leaves
of  the  trees  began  to  fall  on  the  1 5th.  On  the
24th,  I had  fome  native  vines  fet  out,  which
flourifhed  very  well.  But,  after  leaving  the  fettlement  to  go
to  France,  they  were  all  fpoiled  from  lack  of  attention,  at
which  I was  much  troubled  on  my  return.  On  the  i8th  of
November,  there  was  a great  fall  of  fnow,  which  remained
only  two  days  on  the  ground,  during  which  time  there  was  a
violent  gale  of  wind.  There  died  during  this  month  a failor
and  our  lockfmith*'®  of  dyfentery,  fo  alfo  many  Indians  from
eating  eels  badly  cooked,  as  I think.  On  the  5th  of  February,
it  flowed  violently,  and  the  wind  was  high  for  two  days.  On
the  20th,  fome  Indians  appeared  on  the  other  fide  of  the
river,  calling  to  us  to  go  to  their  affiftance,  which  was  beyond
our  power,  on  account  of  the  large  amount  of  ice  drifting  in
the  river.  Hunger  preffed  upon  thefe  poor  wretches  fo  fe-
verely  that,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  they  refolved,  men,  women,

and

Unlefs  they  had  more  than  one  lockfmith,  this  muft  have  been  Antoine
Natel.  — Vide  antea.^  p.  178.

25

194  Voyages  of

and  children,  to  crofs  the  river  or  die,  hoping  that  I fhould
affift  them  in  their  extreme  want.  Having  accordingly  made
this  refolve,  the  men  and  women  took  the  children  and  em-
barked in  their  canoes,  thinking  that  they  could  reach  our
fhore  by  an  opening  in  the  ice  made  by  the  wind ; but  they
were  fcarcely  in  the  middle  of  the  ftream  when  their  canoes
were  caught  by  the  ice  and  broken  into  a thoufand  pieces.
But  they  were  fkilful  enough  to  throw  themfelves  with  the
children,  which  the  women  carried  on  their  backs,  on  a large
piece  of  ice.  As  they  were  on  it,  we  heard  them  crying  out
fo  that  it  excited  intenfe  pity,  as  before  them  there  feemed
nothing  but  death.  But  fortune  was  fo  favorable  to  thefe  poor
wretches  that  a large  piece  of  ice  ftruck  againft  the  fide  of
that  on  which  they  were,  fo  violently  as  to  drive  them  afliore.
On  feeing  this  favorable  turn,  they  reached  the  Ihore  with
as  much  delight  as  they  ever  experienced,  notwithftanding
the  great  hunger  from  which  they  were  fuffering.  They  pro-
ceeded to  our  abode,  fo  thin  and  haggard  that  they  feemed
like  mere  fkeletons,  moft  of  them  not  being  able  to  hold
themfelves  up.  I was  aftonifhed  to  fee  them,  and  obferve  the
manner  in  which  they  had  croffed,  in  view  of  their  being  fo
feeble  and  weak.  I ordered  fome  bread  and  beans  to  be
given  them.  So  great  was  their  impatience  to  eat  them,  that
they  could  not  wait  to  have  them  cooked.  I lent  them  alfo
fome  bark,  which  other  favages  had  given  me,  to  cover  their
cabins.  As  they  were  making  their  cabin,  they  difcovered  a
piece  of  carrion,  which  I had  had  thrown  out  nearly  two
months  before  to  attradl  the  foxes,  of  which  we  caught  black
and  red  ones,  like  thofe  in  France,  but  with  heavier  fur.
This  carrion  confifted  of  a fow  and  a dog,  which  had  fuf-

tained

195

Sieur  de  Champlain.

tained  all  the  rigors  of  the  weather,  hot  and  cold.  When  the
weather  was  mild,  it  flank  fo  badly  that  one  could  not  go
near  it.  Yet  they  feized  it  and  carried  it  off  to  their  cabin,
where  they  forthwith  devoured  it  half  cooked.  No  meat
ever  feemed  to  them  to  tafle  better.  I fent  two  or  three
men  to  warn  them  not  to  eat  it,  unlefs  they  wanted  to  die :
as  they  approached  their  cabin,  they  fmelt  fuch  a flench  from
this  carrion  half  warmed  up,  each  one  of  the  Indians  holding
a piece  in  his  hand,  that  they  thought  they  fhould  difgorge,
and  accordingly  fcarcely  flopped  at  all.  Thefe  poor  wretches
finifhed  their  repafl.  I did  not  fail,  however,  to  fupply  them
according  to  my  refources ; but  this  was  little,  in  view  of  the
large  number  of  them.  In  the  fpace  of  a month,  they  would
have  eaten  up  all  our  provifions,  'if  they  had  had  them  in
their  power,  they  are  fo  gluttonous ; for,  when  they  have
edibles,  they  lay  nothing  afide,  but  keep  confuming  them
day  and  night  without  refpite,  afterwards  dying  of  hunger.
They  did  alfo  another  thing  as  difgufling  as  that  jufl  men-
tioned. I had  caufed  a bitch  to  be  placed  on  the  top  of  a
tree,  which  allured  the  martens  and  birds  of  prey,  from
which  I derived  pleafure,  fmce  generally  this  carrion  was  at-
tacked by  them.  Thefe  favages  went  to  the  tree,  and,  being
too  weak  to  climb  it,  cut  it  down  and  forthwith  took  away
the  dog,  which  was  only  fkin  and  bones,  the  tainted  head
emitting  a flench,  but  which  was  at  once  devoured.

This  is  the  kind  of  enjoyment  they  experience  for  the
moft  part  in  winter ; for  in  fummer  they  are  able  to  fupport
themfelves,  and  to  obtain  provifions  fo  as  not  to  be  affailed

by

Martres,  The  common  weafel,  Mujlela  vulgaris.

196

Voyages  of

by  fuch  extreme  hunger,  the  rivers  abounding  in  fiih,  while
birds  and  wild  animals  fill  the  country  about.  The  foil
is  very  good  and  well  adapted  for  tillage,  if  they  would
but  take  pains  to  plant  Indian  corn,  as  all  their  neighbors
do,  the  Algonquins,  Ochaflaiguins,®^^  and  Iroquois,  who  are
not  attacked  by  fuch  extremes  of  hunger,  which  they  pro-
vide againfi:  by  their  carefulnefs  and  forefight,  fo  that  they
live  happily  in  comparifon  with  the  Montagnais,  Canadians,
and  Souriquois  along  the  feacoaft.  This  is  in  the  main  their
wretched  manner  of  life.  The  fnow  and  ice  laft  three  months
there,  from  January  to  the  8th  of  April,  when  it  is  nearly
all  melted ; at  the  lateft,  it  is  only  feldom  that  any  is  feen
at  the  end  of  the  latter  month  at  our  fettlement.  It  is  re-
markable that  fo  much  fnow  and  ice  as  there  is  on  the  river,
and  which  is  from  two  to  three  fathoms  thick,  is  all  melted
in  lefs  than  twelve  days.  From  Tadouffac  to  Gafp^  Cape
Breton,  Newfoundland,  and  the  Great  Bay,  the  fnow  and  ice
continue  in  moft  places  until  the  end  of  May,  at  which  time

the

Ochajiaiguins.  This,  fays  La-
verdi^re,  is  what  Champlain  firft  called
the  Hurons,  from  the  name  of  Ocha-
teguin,  one  of  their  chiefs.  Huron  was
a nickname  : the  proper  name  of  this
tribe  was  Wendot  or  Wyandot.  They
occupied  the  eaftern  bank  of  Lake  Hu-
ron and  the  fouthern  Ihores  of  the
Georgian  Bay.  The  knowledge  of  the
feveral  tribes  here  referred  to  had  been
obtained  by  Champlain,  partly  from  his
own  obfervation  and  partly  from  the
Indians.  The  Algommequins  or  Al-
gonquins, known  at  this  time  to  Cham-
plain, were  from  the  region  of  the
Ottawa.  The  Yroquois  or  Iroquois
dwelt  fouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence  in  the

State  of  New  York,  and  comprifed  what
are  generally  known  as  the  Five  Nations.
The  Montagnais  or  Montaignets  had
their  great  trading-poll  at  Tadouffac,
and  roamed  over  a vail  territory  north
and  eaft  of  that  point,  and  weft  of  it  as
far  as  the  mountains  that  feparate  the
waters  of  the  Saguenay  and  thofe  of  the
Ottawa.  The  name  was  given  to  them
by  the  French  from  this  mountain
range.  The  Canadians  were  thofe
about  the  neighborhood  of  Quebec.
The  Souriquois  were  of  Nova  Scotia,
and  fubfequently  known  as  Micmacs.
Of  moft  of  thefe  different  tribes,  Cham-
plain could  fpeak  from  perfonal  knowl-
edge.

197

Sieur  de  Champlain.

the  entire  entrance  of  the  great  river  is  fealed  with  ice  ; al-
though at  Quebec  there  is  none  at  all,  fliowing  a ftrange  dif-
ference for  one  hundred  and  twenty  leagues  in  longitude,  for
the  entrance  to  the  river  is  in  latitude  49°  50'  to  5 1°,  and  our
fettlement  ^ in  46°  40'.

CHAPTER  VI.

The  Scurvy  at  Quebec.  — How  the  Winter  passed.  — Description  of
THE  Place. — Arrival  at  Quebec  of  Sieur  des  Marais,  Son-in-
law  OF  Pont  Grave.

I HE  fcurvy  began  very  late;  namely,  in  February,
and  continued  until  the  middle  of  April.  Eigh-
teen were  attacked,  and  ten  died ; five  others
dying  of  the  dyfentery.  I had  fome  opened,  to
fee  whether  they  were  tainted,  like  thofe  I had
feen  in  our  other  fettlements.  They  were  found  the  fame.
Some  time  after,  our  furgeon  died.®^  All  this  troubled  us
very  much,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  we  had  in  attending
to  the  fick.  The  nature  of  this  difeafe  I have  defcribed
before.

It  is  my  opinion  that  this  difeafe  proceeds  only  from  eating
exceffively  of  fait  food  and  vegetables,  which  heat  the  blood
and  corrupt  the  internal  parts.  The  winter  is  alfo,  in  part,
its  caufe;  fince  it  checks  the  natural  warmth,  caufing  a

ftill  greater  corruption  of  the  blood.  There  rife  alfo  from

the

Laverdifere  gives  the  exaft  latitude  His  name  was  Bonnerme.  Vide

of  Quebec  at  the  Obfervatory,  on  the  antea^  p.  i8o.
authority  of  Captain  Bayfield,  as  46°

49'  8".

198  Voyages  of

the  earth,  when  firft  cleared  up,  certain  vapors  which  infefl
the  air : this  has  been  obferved  in  the  cafe  of  thofe  who  have
lived  at  other  fettlements ; after  the  firft  year  when  the  fun
had  been  let  in  upon  what  was  not  before  cleared  up,  as
well  in  our  abode  as  in  other  places,  the  air  was  much
better,  and  the  difeafes  not  fo  violent  as  before.  But  the
country  is  fine  and  pleafant,  and  brings  to  maturity  all  kinds
of  grains  and  feeds,  there  being  found  all  the  various  kinds
of  trees,  which  we  have  here  in  our  forefts,  and  many  fruits,
although  they  are  naturally  wild ; as,  nut-trees,  cherry-trees,
plum-trees,  vines,  rafpberries,  ftra wherries,  currants,  both  green
and  red,  and  feveral  other  fmall  fruits,  which  are  very  good.
There  are  alfo  feveral  kinds  of  excellent  plants  and  roots.
Fifhing  is  abundant  in  the  rivers ; and  game  without  limit  on
the  numerous  meadows  bordering  them.  From  the  month  of
April  to  the  15th  of  December,  the  air  is  fo  pure  and  healthy
that  one  does  not  experience  the  flightefl  indifpofition.  But
January,  February,  and  March  are  dangerous,  on  account  of  the
fickneffes  prevailing  at  this  time,  rather  than  in  fummer,  for
the  reafons  before  given  ; for,  as  to  treatment,  all  of  my  com-
pany were  well  clothed,  provided  with  good  beds,  and  well
warmed  and  fed,  that  is,  with  the  fait  meats  we  had,  which,
in  my  opinion,  injured  them  greatly,  as  I have  already  ftated.
As  far  as  I have  been  able  to  fee,  the  ficknefs  attacks  one
who  is  delicate  in  his  living  and  takes  particular  care  of  him-
felf  as  readily  as  one  whofe  condition  is  as  wretched  as  poffi-
ble.  We  fuppofed  at  firfl  that  the  workmen  only  would  be
attacked  with  this  difeafe ; but  this  we  found  was  not  the  cafe.
Thofe  failing  to  the  Eaft  Indies  and  various  other  regions,  as
Germany  and  England,  are  attacked  with  it  as  well  as  in  New

France.

199

Sieur  de  Champlain,

France.  Some  time  ago,  the  Flemifli,  being  attacked  with
this  malady  in  their  voyages  to  the  Indies,  found  a very  ftrange
remedy,  which  might  be  of  fervice  to  us ; but  we  have  never
afcertained  the  charadler  of  it.  Yet  I am  confident  that,
with  good  bread  and  frefh  meat,  a perfon  would  not  be  liable
to  it.

On  the  8th  of  April,  the  fnow  had  all  melted ; and  yet  the
air  was  ftill  very  cold  until  April,®“^  when  the  trees  begin  to
leaf  out.

Some  of  thofe  fick  with  the  fcurvy  were  cured  when  fpring
came,  which  is  the  feafon  for  recovery.  I had  a favage  of  the
country  wintering  with  me,  who  was  attacked  with  this  dif-
eafe  from  having  changed  his  diet  to  fait  meat ; and  he  died
from  its  effedls,  which  clearly  fhows  that  fait  food  is  not
nourifhing,  but  quite  the  contrary  in  this  difeafe.

On  the  5th  of  June,  a fhallop  arrived  at  our  fettlement
with  Sieur  des  Marais,  a fon-in-law  of  Pont  Grave,  bringing
us  the  tidings  that  his  father-in-law  had  arrived  at  Tadouffac
on  the  28th  of  May.  This  intelligence  gave  me  inuch  fatif-
fadlion,  as  we  entertained  hopes  of  affiftance  from  him.  Only
eight  out  of  the  twenty-eight  at  firft  forming  our  company
were  remaining,  and  half  of  thefe  were  ailing.

On  the  7th  of  June,  I fet  out  from  Quebec  for  Tadouffac
on  fome  matters  of  bufinefs,  and  afked  Sieur  des  Marais  to
flay  in  my  place  until  my  return,  which  he  did.

Immediately  upon  my  arrival,  Pont  Grav6  and  I had  a
conference  in  regard  to  fome  explorations  which  I was  to
make  in  the  interior,  where  the  favages  had  promifed  to

guide

*24  Read  May  inftead  of  April.

200

Voyages  of

guide  us.  We  determined  that  I fhould  go  in  a flaallop  with
twenty  men,  and  that  Pont  Grave  fhould  flay  at  Tadouffac  to
arrange  the  affairs  of  our  fettlement ; and  this  determination
was  carried  out,  he  {pending  the  winter  there.  This  arrange-
ment was  efpecially  definable,  fmce  I was  to  return  to  France,
according  to  the  orders  fent  out  by  Sieur  de  Monts,  in  order
to  inform  him  of  what  I had  done  and  the  explorations  I had
made  in  the  country.

After  this  decifion,  I fet  out  at  once  from  Tadouffac,  and
returned  to  Quebec,  where  I had  a fliallop  fitted  out  with  all
that  was  neceffary  for  making  explorations  in  the  country  of
the  Iroquois,  where  I was  to  go  with  our  allies,  the  Mon-
tagnais.

CHAPTER  VII.

Departure  from  Quebec  and  Voyage  to  the  Ile  St.  Eloi.  — Meeting

THERE  WITH  THE  AlGONQUINS  AND  OCHATAIGUINS.

ITH  this  purpofe,  I fet  out  on  the  i8th  of  the
month.  Here  the  river  begins  to  widen,  in  fome
places  to  the  breadth  of  a league  or  a league  and
a half.  The  country  becomes  more  and  more
beautiful.  There  are  hills  along  the  river  in
part,  and  in  part  it  is  a level  country,  with  but  few  rocks.
The  river  itfelf  is  dangerous  in  many  places,  in  confe-
quence  of  its  banks  and  rocks ; and  it  is  not  fafe  failing
without  keeping  the  lead  in  hand.  The  river  is  very
abundant  in  many  kinds  of  fifh,  not  only  fuch  as  we  have
here,  but  others  which  we  have  not.  The  country  is  thickly
covered  with  maffive  and  lofty  forefls,  of  the  fame  kind  of

trees

201

Sieur  de  Champlciin.

trees  3s  we  hcive  sbout  our  habitation.  There  are  alfo  many
vines  and  nut-trees  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  many
fmall  brooks  and  ftreams  which  are  only  navigable  with
canoes.  We  paffed  near  Point  St.  Croix,  which  many  main-
tain, as  I have  faid  elfewhere,  is  the  place  where  Jacques  Car-
tier  fpent  the  winter.  This  point  is  fandy,  extending  fome
diftance  out  into  the  river,  and  expofed  to  the  north-weft
wind,  which  beats  upon  it.  There  are  fome  meadows,  covered
however  every  full  tide,  which  falls  nearly  two  fathoms  and  a
half.  This  paffage  is  very  dangerous  on  account  of  the  large
number  of  rocks  ftretching  acrofs  the  river,  although  there  is  a
good  but  very  winding  channel,  where  the  river  runs  like  a
race,  rendering  it  neceffary  to  take  the  proper  time  for  paff-
ing.  This  place  has  deceived  many,  who  thought  they  could
only  pafs  at  high  tide  from  there  being  no  channel : but  we
have  now  found  the  contrary  to  be  true,  for  one  can  go  down
at  low  tide  ; but  it  would  be  difficult  to  afeend,  in  confequence
of  the  ftrong  current,  unlefs  there  were  a good  wind.  It  is
confequently  neceffary  to  wait  until  the  tide  is  a third  flood,
in  order  to  pafs,  when  the  current  in  the  channel  is  fix,  eight,
ten,  twelve,  and  fifteen  fathoms  deep.

Continuing  our  courfe,  we  reached  a very  pleafant  river,
nine  leagues  diftant  from  St.  Croix  and  twenty-four  from
Quebec.  This  we  named  St.  Mary’s  River.®®®  The  river  all
the  way  from  St.  Croix  is  very  pleafant.

Purfuing  our  route,  I met  fome  two  or  three  hundred
ravages,  who  were  encamped  in  huts  near  a little  ifland  called

St.  Iloi,®®®  a league  and  a half  diftant  from  St.  Mary.  We

made

This  river  is  now  called  the  Sainte  A fmall  ifland  near  Batifcan,  not

Anne.  charts.

26

202

Voyages  of

made  a reconnoiffance,  and  found  that  they  were  tribes  of
ravages,  called  Ochateguins  and  Algonquins,®®''  on  their
way  to  Quebec,  to  affill  us  in  exploring  the  territory  of  the
Iroquois,  with  whom  they  are  in  deadly  hoftility,  fparing
nothing  belonging  to  their  enemies.

After  reconnoitring,  I went  on  fhore  to  fee  them,  and  in-
quired who  their  chief  was.  They  told  me  there  were  two,
one  named  Yroquet,  and  the  other  Ochafteguin,  whom  they
pointed  out  to  me.  I went  to  their  cabin,  where  they  gave
me  a cordial  reception,  as  is  their  cuftom.

I proceeded  to  inform  them  of  the  objedt  of  my  voyage,
with  which  they  were  greatly  pleafed.  After  fome  talk,  I
withdrew.  Some  time  after,  they  came  to  my  lhallop,  and
prefented  me  with  fome  peltry,  exhibiting  many  tokens  of
pleafure.  Then  they  returned  to  the  fhore.

The  next  day,  the  two  chiefs  came  to  fee  me,  when  they
remained  fome  time  without  faying  a word,  meditating  and
fmoking  all  the  while.  After  due  refledlion,  they  began  to
harangue  in  a loud  voice  all  their  companions  who  were  on
the  bank  of  the  river,  with  their  arms  in  their  hands,  and  lif
tening  very  attentively  to  what  their  chiefs  faid  to  them,  which
was  as  follows ; that  nearly  ten  moons  ago,  according  to  their
mode  of  reckoning,  the  fon  of  Y roquet  had  feen  me,  and  that
I had  given  him  a good  reception,  and  declared  that  Pont
Gravb  and  I defined  to  affift  them  againft  their  enemies,  with
whom  they  had  for  a long  time  been  at  warfare,  on  account
of  many  cruel  a6ls  committed  by  them  againft  their  tribe,
under  color  of  friendfhip;  that,  having  ever  fmce  longed  for
vengeance,  they  had  folicited  all  the  favages,  whom  I faw  on

827  HuFons  and  Algonquins.

203

Sieur  de  Champlain.

the  bank  of  the  river,  to  come  and  make  an  alliance  with  us,
and  that  their  never  having  feen  Chriftians  alfo  impelled  them
to  come  and  vifit  us ; that  I fliould  do  with  them  and  their
companions  as  I wifhed;  that  they  had  no  children  with
them,  but  men  verfed  in  war  and  full  of  courage,  acc^uainted
with  the  country  and  rivers  in  the  land  of  the  Iroquois ;
that  now  they  entreated  me  to  return  to  our  fettlement,  that
they  might  fee  our  houfes,  and  that,  after  three  days,  we  fhould
all  together  come  back  to  engage  in  the  war ; that,  as  a token
of  firm  friendfhip  and  joy,  I fliould  have  muflcets  and  arque-
bufes  fired,  at  which  they  would  be  greatly  pleafed.  This  I
did,  when  they  uttered  great  cries  of  aftonilhment,  efpecially
thofe  who  had  never  heard  nor  feen  the  like.

After  hearing  them,  I replied  that,  if  they  defired,  I
fliould  be  very  glad  to  return  to  our  fettlement,  to  gratify
them  ftill  more ; and  that  they  might  conclude  that  I had  no
other  purpofe  than  to  engage  in  the  war,  fince  we  carried  with
us  nothing  but  arms,  and  not  merchandife  for  barter,  as  they
had  been  given  to  underftand  ; and  that  my  only  defire  was  to
fulfill  what  I had  promifed  them ; and  that,  if  I had  known
of  any  who  had  made  evil  reports  to  them,  I fliould  regard
them  as  enemies  more  than  they  did  themfelves.  They  told
me  that  they  believed  nothing  of  them,  and  that  they  never
had  heard  any  one  fpeak  thus.  But  the  contrary  was  the
cafe ; for  there  were  fome  favages  who  told  it  to  ours.  I con-
tented myfelf  with  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  fhow  them
in  fadl  fomething  more  than  they  could  have  expedled  from
me.

CHAPTER  VIII.

204

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  VIII.

Return  to  Quebec.  — Continuation  afterwards  with  the  Savages  to
THE  Fall  of  the  River  of  the  Iroquois.

HE  next  day,  we  fet  out  all  together  for  our  fettle-
ment,  where  they  enjoyed  themfelves  fome  five  or
fix  days,  which  were  fpent  in  dances  and  feftivities,
on  account  of  their  eagernefs  for  us  to  engage
in  the  war.

Pont  Grave  came  forthwith  from  Tadouffac  with  two  little
barques  full  of  men,  in  compliance  with  a letter,  in  which  I
begged  him  to  come  as  fpeedily  as  poffible.

The  favages  feeing  him  arrive  rejoiced  more  than  ever,  in-
afmuch  as  I told  them  that  he  had  given  fome  of  his  men  to
affifl  them,  and  that  perhaps  we  fhould  go  together.

On  the  28th  of  the  month,®®®  we  equipped  fome  barques
for  affifting  thefe  favages.  Pont  Grave  embarked  on  one  and
I on  the  other,  when  we  all  fet  out  together.  The  firft  of
J une,®®®  we  arrived  at  St.  Croix,  diftant  fifteen  leagues  from
Quebec,  where  Pont  Grave  and  I concluded  that,  for  certain
reafons,  I fhould  go  with  the  favages,  and  he  to  our  fettlement
and  to  Tadouffac.  This  refolution  being  taken,  I embarked
in  my  fhallop  all  that  was  neceffary,  together  with  Des  Marais
and  La  Routte,  our  pilot,  and  nine  men.

I fet  out  from  St.  Croix  on  the  3d  of  June®®®  with  all  the
favages.  We  paffed  the  Trois  Rivieres,  a very  beautiful

country,

828  The  reader  will  obferve  that  this  8^9  Read  ill  of  July,
mull  have  been  the  28th  of  June,  1609.  8so  Read  3d  of  July.

205

Sieur  de  Champlain.

country,  covered  with  a growth  of  fine  trees.  From  this
place  to  St.  Croix  is  a diflance  of  fifteen  leagues.  At  the
mouth  of  the  above-named  river  there  are  fix  ifiands,  three
of  which  are  very  fmall,  the  others  fome  fifteen  to  fixteen
hundred  paces  long,  very  pleafant  in  appearance.  Near  Lake
St.  Peter,®'*®  fome  two  leagues  up  the  river,  there  is  a little
fall  not  very  difficult  to  pats.  This  place  is  in  latitude  46°,
lacking  fome  minutes.  The  favages  of  the  country  gave  us
to  underftand  that  fome  days’  journey  up  this  river  there  is  a
lake,  through  which  the  river  flows.  The  length  of  the  lake
is  ten  days’  journey,  when  fome  falls  are  paffed,  and  after-
wards three  or  four  other  lakes  of  five  or  fix  days’  journey  in
length.  Having  reached  the  end  of  thefe,  they  go  four  or
five  leagues  by  land,  and  enter  ftill  another  lake,  where  the
Sacque  has  its  principal  fource.  From  this  lake,  the  favages
go  to  Tadouffac.®®®  The  Trois  Rivieres  extends  forty  days’
journey  of  the  favages.  They  fay  that  at  the  end  of  this  river
there  is  a people,  who  are  great  hunters,  without  a fixed
abode,  and  who  are  lefs  than  fix  days’  journey  from  the
North  Sea.  What  little  of  the  country  I have  feen  is  fandy,
very  high,  with  hills,  covered  with  large  quantities  of  pine
and  fir  on  the  river  border ; but  fome  quarter  of  a league  in-
land the  woods  are  very  fine  and  open,  and  the  country  level.

Thence  we  continued  our  courfe  to  the  entrance  of  Lake

St.  Peter,

The  river  is  now  called  St.  time  called  St.  Peter,  in  1603,  on  St.
Maurice;  and  the  town  at  its  mouth,  Peter’s  day,  the  29th  June,  and  prob-
Three  Rivers.  Two  iflands  at  the  mouth  ably  fo  named  it  from  that  circumftance.
of  the  river  divide  it  into  three ; hence,  From  the  carrying-place  they

it  was  originally  called  Trois  Rivieres,  enter  the  Lake  St.  John,  and  it
or  Three  Rivers.  defcend  by  the  Saguenay  to  Tadouffac.

Laverdi^re  fuggefts  that  Cham-  In  the  preceding  paflage,  Sacqud  was
plain  entered  this  lake,  now  for  the  firft  plainly  intended  for  Saguenay.

2o6

Voyages  of

St.  Peter,  where  the  country  is  exceedingly  pleafant  and  level,
and  croffed  the  lake,  in  two,  three,  and  four  fathoms  of  water,
which  is  fome  eight  leagues  long  and  four  wide.  On  the
north  fide,  we  faw  a very  pleafant  river,  extending  fome  twenty
leagues  into  the  interior,  which  I named  St.  Suzanne;  on
the  fouth  fide,  there  are  two,  one  called  Riviere  du  Pont,
the  other.  Riviere  de  Gennes,®®‘‘  which  are  very  pretty,  and
in  a fine  and  fertile  country.  The  water  is  almoft  flill  in  the
lake,  which  is  full  of  fifh.  On  the  north  bank,  there  are  feen
fome  flight  elevations  at  a diftance  of  fome  twelve  or  fifteen
leagues  from  the  lake.  After  eroding  the  lake,  we  paffed  a
large  number  of  iflands  of  various  fizes,  containing  many  nut-
trees  and  vines,  and  fine  meadows,  with  quantities  of  game
and  wild  animals,  which  go  over  from  the  main  land  to  thefe
iflands.  Fifh  are  here  more  abundant  than  in  any  other  part
of  the  river  that  we  had  feen.  From  thefe  iflands,  we  went  to
the  mouth  of  the  River  of  the  Iroquois,  where  we  flayed  two
days,  refrefhing  ourfelves  with  good  venifon,  birds,  and  fifli,
which  the  favages  gave  us.  Here  there  fprang  up  among
them  fome  difference  of  opinion  on  the  fubjedl  of  the  war,  fo
that  a portion  only  determined  to  go  with  me,  while  the  others
returned  to  their  country  ivith  their  wives  and  the  merchand-
ife  which  they  had  obtained  by  barter.

Setting  out  from  the  mouth  of  this  river,  which  is  fome
four  hundred  to  five  hundred  paces  broad,  and  very  beautiful,

running

Of  the  three  rivers  flowing  into  gois ; and  his  De  Gennes  is  now  repre-
Lake  St.  Peter,  none  retains  the  name  lented  by  the  Yamalka.  Compare
given  to  them  by  Champlain.  His  St.  Champlain’s  map  of  1612  with  Laurie’s
Suzanne  is  the  river  du  Loup ; his  Chart  of  the  river  St.  Lawrence.
Rivilre  du  Pont  is  the  river  St.  Fran-

207

Sieur  de  Champlain.

running  fouthward,®^®  we  arrived  at  a place  in  latitude  45°,
and  twenty-two  or  twenty-three  leagues  from  the  Trois  Riv-
ieres. All  this  river  from  its  mouth  to  the  firft  fall,  a diftance
of  fifteen  leagues,  is  very  fmooth,  and  bordered  with  woods,
like  all  the  other  places  before  named,  and  of  the  fame  forts.
There  are  nine  or  ten  fine  iflands  before  reaching  the  fall
of  the  Iroquois,  which  are  a league  or  a league  and  a half
long,  and  covered  with  numerous  oaks  and  nut-trees.  The
river  is  nearly  half  a league  wide  in  places,  and  very  abun-
dant in  filh.  We  found  in  no  place  lefs  than  four  feet  of
water.  The  approach  to  the  fall  is  a kind  of  lake,®*®  where
the  water  defcends,  and  which  is  fome  three  leagues  in  cir-
cuit. There  are  here  fome  meadows,  but  not  inhabited  by
favages  on  account  of  the  wars.  There  is  very  little  water  at
the  fall,  which  runs  with  great  rapidity.  There  are  alfo  many
rocks  and  ftones,  fo  that  the  favages  cannot  go  up  by  water,
although  they  go  down  very  eafily.  All  this  region  is  very
level,  covered  with  forefts,  vines,  and  nut-trees.  No  Chnftians
had  been  in  this  place  before  us ; and  we  had  confiderable
difficulty  in  afcending  the  river  with  oars.

As  foon  as  we  had  reached  the  fall,  Des  Marais,  La  Routte,
and  I,  with  five  men,  went  on  fhore  to  fee  whether  we  could
pafs  this  place ; but  we  went  fome  league  and  a half  without
feeing  any  profpeft  of  being  able  to  do  fo,  finding  only  water
running  with  great  fwiftnefs,  and  in  all  direftions  many
very  dangerous,  and  with  but  little  water  about  them.  ^ o

fall  is  perhaps  fix  hundred  paces  broad.  Finding  that  it  was
^ impoffible

This  is  an  error : the  River  of  the
Iroquois,  now  commonly  known  as  the
Richelieu,  runs  towards  the  north.

886  The  Chambly  Bafin.  On  Charle-
voix’s Carte  de  la  Riviere  Richelieu,  it
is  called  Baffin  de  St.  Louis.

2o8

Voyages  of

impoffible  to  cut  a way  through  the  woods  with  the  fmall
number  of  men  that  I had,  I determined,  after  confultation
with  the  reft,  to  change  my  original  refolution,  formed  on  the
affurance  of  the  favages  that  the  roads  were  eafy,  but  which
we  did  not  find  to  be  the  cafe,  as  I have  ftated.  We  accord-
ingly returned  to  our  fhallop,  where  I had  left  fome  men  as
guards,  and  to  indicate  to  the  favages  upon  their  arrival  that
we  had  gone  to  make  explorations  along  the  fall.

After  making  what  obfervations  I wifhed  in  this  place,  we
met,  on  returning,  fome  favages,  who  had  come  to  reconnoitre,
as  we  had  done.  They  told  us  that  all  their  companions  had
arrived  at  our  fliallop,  where  we  found  them  greatly  pleafed,
and  delighted  that  we  had  gone  in  this  manner  without  a
guide,  aided  only  by  the  reports  they  had  feveral  times  made
to  us.

Having  returned,  and  feeing  the  flight  profpedt  there  was
of  paffing  the  fall  with  our  fliallop,  I was  much  troubled.
And  it  gave  me  efpecial  diffatisfa(^ion  to  go  back  without
feeing  a very  large  lake,  filled  with  handfome  iflands,  and
with  large  tra6ls  of  fine  land  bordering  on  the  lake,  where
their  enemies  live  according  to  their  reprefentations.  After
duly  thinking  over  the  matter,  I determined  to  go  and
fulfil  my  promife,  and  carry  out  my  defire.  Accordingly,  I
embarked  with  the  favages  in  their  canoes,  taking  with  me  two
men,  who  went  cheerfully.  After  making  known  my  plan  to
Des  Marais  and  others  in  the  fhallop,  I requefted  the  former
to  return  to  our  fettlement  with  the  reft  of  our  company,  giv-
ing them  the  affurance  that,  in  a fhort  time,  by  God’s  grace,
I would  return  to  them.

I proceeded  forthwith  to  have  a conference  with  the  cap-
tains

209

Sieur  de  Champlain.

tains  of  the  favages,  and  gave  them  to  underftand  that  they
had  told  me  the  oppofite  of  what  my  obfervations  found  to
be  the  cafe  at  the  fall ; namely,  that  it  was  impoflible  to  pafs
it  with  the  lhallop,  but  that  this  would  not  prevent  me  from
affifting  them  as  I had  promifed.  This  communication  trou-
bled them  greatly;  and  they  defired  to  change  their  deter-
mination, but  I urged  them  not  to  do  fo,  telling  them  that
they  ought  to  carry  out  their  firft  plan,  and  that  I,  with  two
others,  would  go  to  the  war  with  them  in  their  canoes,  in
order  to  fhow  them  that,  as  for  me,  I would  not  break  my
word  given  to  them,  although  alone ; but  that  I was  unwill-
ing then  to  oblige  any  one  of  my  companions  to  embark,  and
would  only  take  with  me  thofe  who  had  the  inclination  to  go,
of  whom  I had  found  two.

They  were  greatly  pleafed  at  what  I faid  to  them,  and  at
the  determination  which  I had  taken,  promifing,  as  before,  to

ftlow  me  fine  things.

CHAPTER  IX.

27

210

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  IX.

Departure  from  the  Fall  of  the  Iroquois  River.  — Description  of
A Large  Lake.  — Encounter  with  the  Enemy  at  this  Lake  ;
THEIR  Manner  of  Attacking  the  Iroquois,  and  their  Behavior
in  Battle.

SET  out  accordingly  from  the  fall  of  the  Iro-
quois River  on  the  2d  of  July.®^  All  the  rav-
ages fet  to  carrying  their  canoes,  arms,  and
baggage  overland,  fome  half  a league,  in  order
to  pafs  by  the  violence  and  ftrength  of  the  fall,
which  was  fpeedily  accomplifhed.  Then  they  put  them  all
in  the  water  again,  two  men  in  each  with  the  baggage ; and
they  caufed  one  of  the  men  of  each  canoe  to  go  by  land  fome
three  leagues,*®®  the  extent  of  the  fall,  which  is  not,  however,
fo  violent  here  as  at  the  mouth,  except  in  fome  places,  where
rocks  obftrudt  the  river,  which  is  not  broader  than  three  hun-
dred or  four  hundred  paces.  After  we  had  paffed  the  fall,  which
was  attended  with  difficulty,  all  the  favages,  who  had  gone

by

88’’'  The  River  of  the  Iroquois,  fo
called  by  Champlain,  was  long  known
by  that  name,  fays  Charlevoix,  becaufe
thefe  Indians  generally  defcended  it,  in
order  to  make  their  inroads  into  the
colony.  Fort  Richelieu,  at  the  mouth  of
the  river,  ere6led  in  1641,  was  named
after  the  celebrated  Cardinal,  the  river
having  already  taken  his  name.  This
fort  having  been  demoliflied,  another
was  built  by  M,  de  Sorel,  a French
officer  in  command,  which  took  his
name,  as  likewife  did  the  river.  A fort
was  built  on  the  fame  river  at  the  pref-

ent  village  of  Chambly  in  1664,  and
called  Fort  St.  Louis.  This  wooden
ftru6lure  was  replaced  by  another  of
Hone,  ere6led  prior  to  1721,  to  which
the  name  of  Chambly  was  given,  as
likewife  by  fome  writers  to  the  river.
The  river  has  likewife  fometimes  been
called  the  St.  Johns,  but  the  prevailing
name  is  the  Richelieu.

888  Read  the  12th  of  July.

88®  This  fall  is  now  avoided,  and  the
navigation  of  the  Richelieu  fecured  by
a canal  connefting  Chambly  Bafin  and
St.  Johns,  a dillance  of  about  ten  miles.

Sieur  de  Champlain.

21  I

by  land  over  a good  path  and  level  country,  although  there
are  a great  many  trees,  re-embarked  in  their  canoes.  My
men  went  alfo  by  land ; but  I went  in  a canoe.  The  favages
made  a review  of  all  their  followers,  finding  that  there  were
twenty-four  canoes,  with  fixty  men.  After  the  revmw  was
completed,  we  continued  our  courfe  to  an  ifland,®'*®  three
leagues  long,  filled  with  the  fineft  pines  I had  ever  feen.
Here  they  went  hunting,  and  captured  fome  wild  animals.
Proceeding  about  three  leagues  farther  on,  we  made  a halt,

in  order  to  reft  the  coming  night.

They  all  at  once  fet  to  work,  fome  to  cut  wood,  and  others
to  obtain  the  bark  of  trees  for  covering  their  cabins,  for  the
fake  of  Iheltering  themfelves,  others  to  fell  large  trees  for
conftrudling  a barricade  on  the  river-bank  around  their  cab-
ins, which  they  do  fo  quickly  that  in  lefs  than  two  hours  fo
much  is  accomplifhed  that  five  hundred  of  their  enemies
would  find  it  very  difficult  to  diflodge  them  without  killing
large  numbers.  They  make  no  barricade  on  the  river-bank,
where  their  canoes  are  drawn  up,  in  order  that  they  may  be
able  to  embark,  if  occafion  requires.  After  they  were  eftab-
liftied  in  their  cabins,  they  defpatched  three  canoes,  with  nine
good  men,  according  to  their  cuftom  in  all  their  encampments,
to  reconnoitre  for  a diftance  of  two  or  three  leagues,  to  fee  if
they  can  perceive  any  thing,  after  which  they  return.  They
reft  the  entire  night,  depending  upon  the  obfervation  of  thefe
fcouts,  which  is  a very  bad  cuftom  among  them ; for  t ey
are  fometimes  while  fleeping  furprifed  by  their  enernies,  w o

daughter

J40  It

is  here

pofed  tu

2 12

Voyages  of

flaughter  them  before  they  have  time  to  get  up  and  prepare
for  defence.  Noticing  this,  I remonftrated  with  them  on  the
miflake  they  made,  and  told  them  that  they  ought  to  keep
watch,  as  they  had  feen  us  do  every  night,  and  have  men  on
the  lookout,  in  order  to  liften  and  fee  whether  they  perceived
any  thing,  and  that  they  firould  not  live  in  fuch  a manner  like
hearts.  They  replied  that  they  could  not  keep  watch,  and
that  they  worked  enough  in  the  day-time  in  the  chafe,  fince,
when  engaged  in  war,  they  divide  their  troops  into  three
parts  : namely,  a part  for  hunting  fcattered  in  feveral  places ;
another  to  conrtitute  the  main  body  of  their  army,  which  is
always  under  arms ; and  the  third  to  adl  as  avanf-coureurs,  to
look  out  along  the  rivers,  and  obferve  whether  they  can  fee
any  mark  or  fignal  fliowing  where  their  enemies  or  friends
have  parted.  This  they  afcertain  by  certain  marks  which  the
chiefs  of  different  tribes  make  known  to  each  other ; but,  thefe
not  continuing  always  the  fame,  they  inform  themfelves  from
time  to  time  of  changes,  by  which  means  they  afcertain
whether  they  are  enemies  or  friends  who  have  parted.  The
hunters  never  hunt  in  advance  of  the  main  body,  or  avant-
coureurs,  fo  as  not  to  excite  alarm  or  produce  diforder,  but  in
the  rear  and  in  the  diredlion  from  which  they  do  not  antici-
pate their  enemy.  Thus  they  advance  until  they  are  within
two  or  three  days’  march  of  their  enemies,  when  they  proceed
by  night  Healthily  and  all  in  a body,  except  the  van-couriers.
By  day,  they  withdraw  into  the  interior  of  the  woods,  where
they  rert,  without  rtraying  off,  neither  making  any  noife  nor
any  fire,  even  for  the  fake  of  cooking,  fo  as  not  to  be  noticed
in  cafe  their  enemies  fliould  by  accident  pafs  by.  They  make
no  fire,  except  in  fmoking,  which  amounts  to  almort  nothing.

They

213

Sieur  de  Champlain.

They  eat  baked  Indian  meal,  which  they  foak  in  water,  when
it  becomes  a kind  of  porridge.  They  provide  themfelves  with
fuch  meal  to  meet  their  wants,  when  they  are  near  their  ene-
mies, or  when  retreating  after  a charge,  in  which  cafe  they
are  not  inclined  to  hunt,  retreating  immediately.

In  all  their  encampments,  they  have  their  Pilotois,  or
Oftemoy,*”  a clafs  of  perfons  who  play  the  part  of  foothfayers,
in  whom  thefe  people  have  faith.  One  of  thefe  builds  a cabin,
furrounds  it  with  fmall  pieces  of  wood,  and  covers  it  with  his
robe : after  it  is  built,  he  places  himfelf  infide,  fo  as  not  to  be
feen  at  all,  when  he  feizes  and  fhakes  one  of  the  polls  of  his
cabin,  muttering  fome  words  between  his  teeth,  by  which  he
fays  he  invokes  the  devil,  who  appears  to  him  in  the  form  of  a
ftone,  and  tells  him  whether  they  will  meet  their  enemies  and
kill  many  of  them.  This  Pilotois  lies  proflrate  on  the  ground,
motionlefs,  only  fpeaking  with  the  devil : on  a fudden,  he
rifes  to  his  feet,  talking,  and  tormenting  himfelf  in  fuch  a
manner  that,  although  naked,  he  is  all  of  a perfpiration.  All
the  people  furround  the  cabin,  feated  on  their  buttocks,  like
apes.  They  frequently  told  me  that  the  fhaking  of  the  cabin,
which  I faw,  proceeded  from  the  devil,  who  made  it  move,
and  not  the  man  inlide,  although  I could  fee  the  contrary ,
for,  as  I have  dated  above,  it  was  the  Pilotois  who  took  one

of  the  fupports  of  the  cabin,  and  made  it  move  in  this  manner.

They

841  u Thefe  two  wofds  were  ufed  in
Acadie  to  indicate  the  jongleur,  or  for-
cerer.  The  word  pilotois,  according  to
P.  Biard,  Rel.  i6ii,  p.  17,  came  from
the  Bafques,  the  Souriquois  ufing  the
word  autmoin,  which  Lefcarbot  writes
aoutmoin,  and  Champlain  ojlemoy.  P .

Leieune,  in  the  Relation  of  1636,  P*
informs  us  that  the  Montagnais  called
their  Ibrcerers  manitouftouekbi ; and  ac-
cording to  P.  Br^beuf,  Rel.  1635?  P*  35>
the  Hurons  defignated  theirs  by  the
name  arendiouanel'^  — Laverdtere,  tn
loco.

214

Voyages  of

They  told  me  alfo  that  I fliould  fee  fire  come  out  from  the
top,  which  I did  not  fee  at  all.  Thefe  rogues  counterfeit  alfo
their  voice,  fo  that  it  is  heavy  and  clear,  and  fpeak  in  a lan-
guage unknown  to  the  other  favages.  And,  when  they  repre-
fent  it  as  broken,  the  favages  think  that  the  devil  is  fpeaking,
and  telling  them  what  is  to  happen  in  their  war,  and  what
they  mufl  do.

But  all  thefe  fcapegraces,  who  play  the  foothfayer,  out  of  a
hundred  words,  do  not  fpeak  two  that  are  true,  and  impofe
upon  thefe  poor  people.  There  are  enough  like  them  in  the
world,  who  take  food  from  the  mouths  of  the  people  by  their
impoftures,  as  thefe  worthies  do.  I often  remonftrated  with
the  people,  telling  them  that  all  they  did  was  fheer  nonfenfe,
and  that  they  ought  not  to  put  confidence  in  them.

Now,  after  afcertaining  from  their  foothfayers  what  is  to  be
their  fortune,  the  chiefs  take  flicks  a foot  long,  and  as  many
as  there  are  foldiers.  They  take  others,  fomewhat  larger,  to
indicate  the  chiefs.  Then  they  go  into  the  wood,  and  feek  out
a level  place,  five  or  fix  feet  fquare,  where  the  chief,  as  fergeant-
major,  puts  all  the  flicks  in  fuch  order  as  feems  to  him  bell.
Then  he  calls  all  his  companions,  who  come  all  armed ; and
he  indicates  to  them  the  rank  and  order  they  are  to  obferve
in  battle  with  their  enemies.  All  the  favages  watch  carefully
this  proceeding,  obferving  attentively  the  outline  which  their
chief  has  made  with  the  flicks.  Then  they  go  away,  and
fet  to  placing  themfelves  in  fuch  order  as  the  flicks  were  in,
when  they  mingle  with  each  other,  and  return  again  to  their
proper  order,  which  manoeuvre  they  repeat  two  or  three  times,
and  at  all  their  encampments,  without  needing  a fergeant
to  keep  them  in  the  proper  order,  which  they  are  able  to

Sieur  de  Champlain.  215

keep  accurately  without  any  confufion.  This  is  their  rule
in  war.

We  fet  out  on  the  next  day,  continuing  our  courfe  in  the
river  as  far  as  the  entrance  of  the  lake.  There  are  many
pretty  iflands  here,  low,  and  containing  very  fine  woods  and
meadows,  with  abundance  of  fowl  and  fuch  animals  of  the
chafe  as  flags,  fallow-deer,  fawns,  roe-bucks,  bears,  and  others,
which  go  from  the  main  land  to  thefe  iflands.  We  captured
a large  number  of  thefe  animals.  There  are  alfo  many
beavers,  not  only  in  this  river,  but  alfo  in  numerous  other
little  ones  that  flow  into  it.  Thefe  regions,  although  they  are
pleafant,  are  not  inhabited  by  any  favages,  on  account  of
their  wars ; but  they  withdraw  as  far  as  poffible  from  the  rivers
into  the  interior,  in  order  not  to  be  fuddenly  furprifed.

The  next  day  we  entered  the  lake,^^  which  is  of  great  ex-
tent, fay  eighty  or  a hundred  leagues  long,  where  I faw
four  fine  iflands,  ten,  twelve,  and  fifteen  leagues  long,  which
were  formerly  inhabited  by  the  favages,  like  the  River  of  the
Iroquois ; but  they  have  been  abandoned  fince  the  wars  of
the  favages  with  one  another  prevail.  There  are  alfo  many
rivers  falling  into  the  lake,  bordered  by  many  fine  trees  of  the
fame  kinds  as  thofe  we  have  in  France,  with  many  vines  finer
than  any  I have  feen  in  any  other  place ; alfo  many  cheflnut-
trees  on  the  border  of  this  lake,  which  I had  not  feen  before.
There  is  alfo  a great  abundance  of  fifh,  of  many  varieties .

among

The  diftances  are  here  oyerftated
by  more  than  threefold,  both  in  refer-
ence to  the  lake  and  the  iflands.  This
arofe,  perhaps,  from  the  flow  progrefs
made  in  the  birch  canoes  with  a party
of  fixty  undifciplined  favages,  a methooi

of  travelling  to  which  Champlain  was
unaccuftomed ; and  he  may  likewife
have  been  mifled  by  the  exaggerations
of  the  Indians,  or  he  may  have  faded  lo
comprehend  their  reprelenUtion  of  dil-
tances.

2 1 6 Voyages  of

among  others,  one  called  by  the  favages  of  the  country  Cha-
oufarou^  which  varies  in  length,  the  largefl:  being,  as  the
people  told  me,  eight  or  ten  feet  long.  I faw  fome  five  feet
long,  which  were  as  large  as  my  thigh ; the  head  being  as  big
as  my  two  fifts,  with  a fnout  two  feet  and  a half  long,  and  a
double  row  of  very  fliarp  and  dangerous  teeth.  Its  body  is,
in  fhape,  much  like  that  of  a pike  ; but  it  is  armed  with  fcales

fo  flrong  that  a poniard  could

Of  the  meaning  of  chaoufarou^  the
name  given  by  the  Indians  to  this  fifh,
we  have  no  knowledge.  It  is  now  known
as  the  bony-fcaled  pike,  or  gar  pike,  Le-
pidojleus  ojfeus.  It  is  referred  to  by
feveral  early  writers  after  Champlain.

“ I faw,”  fays  Sagard,  “in  the  cabin
of  a Montagnais  Indian  a certain  fifh,
which  fome  call  Chaoufarou,  as  big  as
a large  pike.  It  was  only  an  ordinary
fized  one,  for  many  larger  ones  are  feen,
eight,  nine,  and  ten  feet  long,  as  is  faid.
It  had  a fnout  about  a foot  and  a half
long,  of  about  the  fame  lhape  as  that  of
the  fnipe,  except  that  the  extremity  is
blunt  and  not  fo  pointed,  and  of  a large
fize  in  proportion  to  the  body.  It  has  a
double  row  of  teeth,  which  are  very  (harp
and  dangerous ; . . . and  the  form  of
the  body  is  like  that  of  a pike,  but  it  is
armed  with  very  flout  and  hard  fcales,
of  filver  gray  color,  and  difficult  to  be
pierced.” — Sagard'^s  Hijlory  of  Canada^
Bk.  iii.  p.  765  ; La'verdi'tre,  Sagard’s
work  was  publiffied  in  1636.  He  had
undoubtedly  feen  this  fingular  fiffi  ; but
his  defcription  is  fo  nearly  in  the  words
of  Champlain  as  to  fuggefi  that  he  had
taken  it  from  our  author.

Creuxius,  in  his  Hiflory  of  Canada,
publiffied  at  Paris  in  1604,  defcribes
this  fiffi  nearly  in  the  words  of  Cham-
plain, with  an  engraving  fufficiently
accurate  for  identification,  but  greatly
wanting  in  fcientific  exadlnefs.  He

not  pierce  them.  Its  color  is
filver-gray.

adds,  “It  is  not  defcribed  by  ancient
authors,  probably  becaufe  it  is  only
found  in  the  Lake  of  the  Iroquois ; ” that
is,  in  Lake  Champlain.  From  which  it
may  be  inferred  that  at  that  time  it  had
not  been  difcovered  in  other  waters.
By  the  French,  he  fays,  it  is  called
armatus.  This  is  in  evident  allufion  to
its  bony  fcales,  in  which  it  is  proteded
'as  in  a coat  of  mail.

It  is  defcribed  by  Dr.  Kay  in  the
Natural  Hiflory  of  New  York,  Zo-
ology, Part  I.  p.  271.  On  Plate  XLIII.
Fig.  139,  of  the  fame  work,  the  reader
will  obferve  that  the  head  of  the  fifh
there  repi'efented  flrikingly  refembles
that  of  the  chaoufarou  of  Champlain  as
depidled  on  his  map  of  1612.  The
drawing  by  Champlain  is  very  accurate,
and  clearly  identifies  the  Gar  Pike.
This  fingular  fiffi  has  been  found  in
Lake  Champlain,  the  river  St.  Law-
rence, and  in  the  northern  lakes,  like-
wife  in  the  Miffiffippi  River,  where  is  to
be  found  alfo  a clofely  related  fpecies
commonly  called  the  alligator  gar.  In
the  Mufeum  of  the  Boflon  Society  of
Natural  Hiflory  are  feveral  fpecimens,
one  of  them  from  St.  John’s  River,
Florida,  four  feet  and  nine  inches  in
length,  of  which  the  head  is  feventeen
and  a half  inches.  If  the  body  of  thofe
feen  by  Champlain  was  five  feet,  the
head  two  and  a half  feet  would  be  in
about  the  ufual  proportion.

217

Sieur  de  Champlain.

filver-gray.  The  extremity  of  its  fnout  is  like  that  of  a fwine.
This  fifli  makes  war  upon  all  others  in  the  lakes  and  rivers.
It  alfo  poffeffes  remarkable  dexterity,  as  thefe  people  informed
me,  which  is  exhibited  in  the  following  manner.  When  it
wants  to  capture  birds,  it  fwims  in  among  the  rufhes,  or  reeds,
which  are  found  on  the  banks  of  the  lake  in  feveral  places,
where  it  puts  its  fnout  out  of  water  and  keeps  perfedlly  ftill ;
fo  that,  when  the  birds  come  and  light  on  its  fnout,  fuppofing
it  to  be  only  the  flump  of  a tree,  it  adroitly  clofes  it,  which  it
had  kept  ajar,  and  pulls  the  birds  by  the  feet  down  under
water.  The  favages  gave  me  the  head  of  one  of  them,  of
which  they  make  great  account,  faying  that,  when  they  have
the  headache,  they  bleed  themfelves  with  the  teeth  of  this
fifh  on  the  fpot  where  they  fuffer  pain,  when  it  fuddenly  paffes
away.

Continuing  our  courfe  over  this  lake  on  the  weflern  fide,  I
noticed,  while  obferving  the  country,  fome  very  high  moun-
tains on  the  eaflern  fide,  on  the  top  of  which  there  was  fnow.^
I made  inquiry  of  the  favages  whether  thefe  localities  were
inhabited,  when  they  told  me  that  the  Iroquois  dwelt  there,
and  that  there  were  beautiful  valleys  in  thefe  places,  with
plains  produdtive  in  grain,  fuch  as  I had  eaten  in  this  coun-
try, together  with  many  kinds  of  fruit  without  limit.®“  They

faid

The  Green  Mountain  range  in  with  their  refpeftive  heights.  The
Vermont,  generally  not  more  than  twenty  Chin,  4,34^  feet;  The  Nofe,  4»o44>
or  twenty-five  miles  dillant.  Champlain  Camel’s  Hump,  4?o83 ; Js^y’s  I^ak, 4,010;
was  probably  deceived  as  to  the  fnow  Killington  Peak,  3f9^4’  This  region
on  their  fummits  in  July.  What  he  faw  was  at  an  early  period  called  Irocofia,^
was  doubtlefs  white  limeftone,  which  This  is  not  an  inaccurate  defcnp-

might  naturally  enough  be  taken  for  tion  of  the  beautiful  as  well  as  rich  and
fnow  in  the  abfence  of  any  pofitive  fertile  valleys  to  be  found  among  the
knowledge.  The  names  of  the  fummits  hills  of  Vermont,
vifible  from  the  lake  are  the  following,

28

2 1 8 Voyages  of

faid  alfo  that  the  lake  extended  near  mountains,  fome  twenty-
five  leagues  diftant  from  us,  as  I judge.  I faw,  on  the
fouth,  other  mountains,  no  lefs  high  than  the  firft,  but  with-
out any  fnow.®^®  The  favages  told  me  that  thefe  mountains
were  thickly  fettled,  and  that  it  was  there  we  were  to  find
their  enemies ; but  that  it  was  neceffary  to  pafs  a fall  in  order
to  go  there  (which  I afterwards  faw),  when  we  fhould  enter
another  lake,  nine  or  ten  leagues  long.  After  reaching  the
end  of  the  lake,  we  fhould  have  to  go,  they  faid,  two  leagues
by  land,  and  pafs  through  a river  flowing  into  the  fea  on  the
Norumbegue  coaft,  near  that  of  Florida,^^  whither  it  took
them  only  two  days  to  go  by  canoe,  as  I have  fince  afcertained
from  fome  prifoners  we  captured,  who  gave  me  minute  infor-
mation in  regard  to  all  they  had  perfonal  knowledge  of,
through  fome  Algonquin  interpreters,  who  underftood  the
Iroquois  language.

Now,  as  we  began  to  approach  within  two  or  three  days’
journey  of  the  abode  of  their  enemies,  we  advanced  only  at
night,  refling  during  the  day.  But  they  did  not  fail  to  prac-
tise conftantly  their  accuftomed  fuperftitions,  in  order  to  af-

certain

84®  On  entering  the  lake,  they  faw  the
Adirondack  Mountains,  which  would
appear  very  nearly  in  the  fouth.  The
points  vihble  from  the  lake  were  Mt.
Marcy,  5,467  feet  high  above  tide-water ;
Dix’s  Peak,  5,200  ; Nipple  Top,  4,900  ;
Whiteface,  4,900;  Raven  Hill,  2,100;
Bald  Peak,  2,065. — Vide  Palmer^ s,  Lake
Chafnpiain^  p.  12.

847  The  river  here  referred  to  is  the
Hudfon.  By  pafling  from  Lake  Cham-
plain through  the  fmall  ftream  that  con-
ne6ls  it  with  Lake  George,  over  this
latter  lake  and  a fhort  carrying  place,

the  upper  waters  of  the  Hudfon  are
reached.  The  coaft  of  N orumbegue  and
that  of  Florida  were  both  indefinite  re-
gions, not  well  defined  by  geographers
of  that  day.  Thefe  terms  were  fupplied
by  Champlain,  and  not  by  his  inform-
ants. He  could  not  of  courfe  tell  pre-
cifely  where  this  unknown  river  reached
the  fea,  but  nati^rally  inferred  that  it  was
on  the  fouthern  limit  of  Norumbegue,
which  extended  from  the  Penobfcot  to-
wards Florida,  which  latter  at  that  time
was  fuppofed  to  extend  from  the  Gulf  of
Me^^ico  indefinitely  to  the  north.

219

Sieur  de  Champlain.

certain  what  was  to  be  the  refult  of  their  undertaking  ; and
they  often  afked  me  if  I had  had  a dream,  and  feen  their  en-
emies, to  which  I replied  in  the  negative.  Yet  I did  not
ceafe  to  encourage  them,  and  infpire  in  them  hope.  When
night  came,  we  fet  out  on  the  journey  until  the  next  day,
when  we  withdrew  into  the  interior  of  the  foreft,  and  fpent
the  reft  of  the  day  there.  About  ten  or  eleven  o’clock,  after
taking  a little  walk  about  our  encampment,  I retired.  While
fleeping,  I dreamed  that  I faw  our  enemies,  the  Iroquois,
drowning  in  the  lake  near  a mountain,  within  fight.  When
I expreffed  a wifti  to  help  them,  our  allies,  the  favages,  told
me  we  muft  let  them  all  die,  and  that  they  were  of  no  impor-
tance. When  I awoke,  they  did  not  fail  to  afk  me,  as  ufua  ,
if  I had  had  a dream.  I told  them  that  I had,  in  fad,  had  a
dream.  This,  upon  being  related,  gave  them  fo  much  con  -
dence  that  they  did  not  doubt  any  longer  that  good  was  to

happen  to  them,  _

When  it  was  evening,  we  embarked  in  our  canoes  to  con-
tinue our  courfe ; and,  as  we  advanced  very  quietly  and  with-
out making  any  noife,  we  met  on  the  29th  of  the  month  the
Iroquois,  about  ten  o’clock  at  evening,  at  the  extremity  of  a
cape  which  extends  into  the  lake  on  the  weftern  bank.  They
had  come  to  fight.  We  both  began  to  utter  loud  cries,  all
getting  their  arms  in  readinefs.  We  withdrew  out  on  the
water,  and  the  Iroquois  went  on  fhore,  where  they  drew  up
all  their  canoes  clofe  to  each  other  and  began  to  fell  trees
with  poor  axes,  which  they  acquire  in  war  fometimes,  ufing
alfo  others  of  ftone.  Thus  they  barricaded  themfelves  very

well.  , 1 •

Our  forces  alfo  paffed  the  entire  night,  their  canoes  being

drawn

220

Voyages  of

drawn  up  clofe  to  each  other,  and  fattened  to  poles,  fo  that
they  might  not  get  feparated,  and  that  they  might  be  all  in
readinefs  to  fight,  if  occalion  required.  We  were  out  upon
the  water,  within  arrow  range  of  their  barricades.  When
they  were  armed  and  in  array,  they  defpatched  two  canoes  by
themfelves  to  the  enemy  to  inquire  if  they  wifhed  to  fight,  to
which  the  latter  replied  that  they  wanted  nothing  elfe : but
they  faid  that,  at  prefent,  there  was  not  much  light,  and  that
it  would  be  neceffary  to  wait  for  daylight,  fo  as  to  be  able  to
recognize  each  other ; and  that,  as  foon  as  the  fun  rofe,  they
would  offer  us  battle.  This  was  agreed  to  by  our  fide.
Meanwhile,  the  entire  night  was  fpent  in  dancing  and  finging,
on  both  fides,  with  endlefs  infults  and  other  talk ; as,  how  lit-
tle courage  we  had,  how  feeble  a refiftance  we  would  make
againft  their  arms,  and  that,  when  day  came,  we  fhould  realize
it  to  our  ruin.  Ours  alfo  were  not  flow  in  retorting,  telling
them  they  would  fee  fuch  execution  of  arms  as  never  before,
together  with  an  abundance  of  fuch  talk  as  is  not  unufual  in
the  fiege  of  a town.  After  this  finging,  dancing,  and  bandy-
ing words  on  both  fides  to  the  fill,  when  day  came,  my  com-
panions and  myfelf  continued  under  cover,  for  fear  that  the
enemy  would  fee  us.  We  arranged  our  arms  in  the  beft  man-
ner poffible,  being,  however,  feparated,  each  in  one  of  the  ca-
noes of  the  favage  Montagnais.  After  arming  ourfelves  with
light  armor,  we  each  took  an  arquebufe,  and  went  on  fhore.
I faw  the  enemy  go  out  of  their  barricade,  nearly  two  hundred
in  number,  flout  and  rugged  in  appearance.  They  came  at
a flow  pace  towards  us,  with  a dignity  and  affurance  which
greatly  amufed  me,  having  three  chiefs  at  their  head.  Our
men  alfo  advanced  in  the  fame  order,  telling  me  that  thofe

who

22  1

Sieur  de  Champlain.

who  had  three  large  plumes  were  the  chiefs,  and  that  they
had  only  thefe  three,  and  that  they  could  be  diftinguilhed  by
thefe  plumes,  which  were  much  larger  than  thofe  of  their
companions,  and  that  I fhould  do  what  I could  to  kill  them.

I promifed  to  do  all  in  my  power,  and  faid  that  I was  very
forry  they  could  not  underftand  me,  fo  that  I might  give
order  and  fhape  to  their  mode  of  attacking  their  enemies,  and
then  we  fhould,  without  doubt,  defeat  them  all ; but  that  this
could  not  now  be  obviated,  and  that  I fhould  be  very  glad  to
fliow  them  my  courage  and  good-will  when  we  fhould  engage
in  the  fight.

As  foon  as  we  had  landed,  they  began  to  run  for  fome  two
hundred  paces  towards  their  enemies,  who  flood  firmly,  not
having  as  yet  noticed  my  companions,  who  went  into  the
woods  with  fome  favages.  Our  men  began  to  call  me  with
loud  cries;  and,  in  order  to  give  me  a paffage-way,  they
opened  in  two  parts,  and  put  me  at  their  head,  where  I

marched  fome  twenty  paces  in  advance  of  the  reft,  until  I

was

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  tHe  accompanying  Map.

Dbfbat  of  thb  Iroquois  at  Lakb  Champlain.

A.  The  fort  of  the  Iroquois.  B.  The  enemy.  C.  Canoes  of  the  enemy,  made
of  oak  bark,  each  holding  ten,  fifteen,  or  eighteen  men.  D.  Two  chiefs  who
were  killed.  E,  One  of  the  enemy  wounded  by  a mufket-fhot  of  Sieur  de  Cham-
plain.  F.  Sieur  de  Champlain.  G.  Two  mulketeers  of  Sieur  de  Champlain.
H.  Montagnais,  Ochaftaiguins,  and  Algonquins.  /.  Canoes  of  our  allied  fav-
ages  made  of  birch  bark.  K.  The  woods.

Notes.  The  letters  A,  F,G,  and  A',  are  wanting  but  the  objefts  to  which  they
point  are  eafily  recognized.  The  letter  If  has  been  placed  on  the  canoes  ot  the
allies  inftead  of  the  colleded  body  of  the  allies  immediately  above  them.

222

Voyages  of

was  within  about  thirty  paces  of  the  enemy,  who  at  once
noticed  me,  and,  halting,  gazed  at  me,  as  I did  alfo  at  them.
When  I faw  them  making  a move  to  fire  at  us,  I refted
my  mulket  againft  my  cheek,  and  aimed  diredlly  at  one  of
the  three  chiefs.  With  the  fame  fliot,  two  fell  to  the  ground ;
and  one  of  their  men  was  fo  wounded  that  he  died  fome  time
after.  I had  loaded  my  mufket  with  four  balls.  When  our
fide  faw  this  fhot  fo  favorable  for  them,  they  began  to  raife
fuch  loud  cries  that  one  could  not  have  heard  it  thunder.
Meanwhile,  the  arrows  flew  on  both  fides.  The  Iroquois
were  greatly  aftonifhed  that  two  men  had  been  fo  quickly
killed,  although  they  were  equipped  with  armor  woven  from
cotton  thread,  and  with  wood  which  was  proof  againft  their
arrows.  This  caufed  great  alarm  among  them.  As  I
was  loading  again,  one  of  my  companions  fired  a fhot  from
the  woods,  which  aftonifhed  them  anew  to  fuch  a degree
that,  feeing  their  chiefs  dead,  they  loft  courage,  and  took  to
flight,  abandoning  their  camp  and  fort,  and  fleeing  into  the
woods,  whither  I purfued  them,  killing  ftill  more  of  them.
Our  favages  alfo  killed  feveral  of  them,  and  took  ten  or  twelve
prifoners.  The  remainder  efcaped  with  the  wounded.  Fif-
teen or  fixteen  were  wounded  on  our  fide  with  arrow-fhots ;
but  they  were  foon  healed.

After  gaining  the  victory,  our  men  amufed  themfelves  by
taking  a great  quantity  of  Indian  corn  and  fome  meal  from
their  enemies,  alfo  their  armor,  which  they  had  left  behind
that  they  might  run  better.  After  feafting  fumptuoufly,
dancing  and  finging,  we  returned  three  hours  after,  with
the  prifoners.  The  fpot  where  this  attack  took  place  is  in

latitude

Sieur  de  Champlain.

223

latitude  43“  and  fome  minutes,®^®  and  the  lake  was  called  Lake
Champlain.®^®

This  battle,  or  Ikirmifli,  clearly
took  place  at  Ticonderoga,  or  Cheon-
dero/a,  as  the  Indians  called  it,  where
a cape  juts  out  into  the  lake,  as  de-
fcribed  by  Champlain.  This  is  the
logical  inference  to  be  drawn  from  the
whole  narrative.  It  is  to  be  obfenred
that  the  purpofe  of  the  Indians,  whom
Champlain  was  accompanying,  was  to
find  their  enemies,  the  Iroquois,  and
give  them  battle.  The  journey,  or  war-
path, had  been  clearly  marked  out  and
defcribed  by  the  Indians  to  Champlain,
as  may  be  feen  in  the  text.  It  led  them
along  the  weftern  Ihore  of  the  lake  to
the  outlet  of  Lake  George,  over  the  fall
in  the  little  ftream  conneaing  the  two
lakes,  through  Lake  George,  and  thence
to  the  mountains  beyond,  where  the
Iroquois  refided.  They  found  the  Iro-
quois, however,  on  the  lake  ; gave  thein
battle  on  the  little  cape  alluded  to  ; and
after  the  vidory  and  purfuit  for  fome
diftance  into  the  foteft,  and  the  gather-
ing up  of  the  fpoils,  Champlain  and  his
allies  commenced  their  journey  home-
ward. But  Champlain  fays  he  faw  the
fall  in  the  ftream  that  connedls  the  two
lakes.  Now  this  little  ftream  flows  into
Lake  Champlain  at  Ticonderoga,  and
he  would  naturally  have  feen  the  fall,  if
the  battle  took  place  there,  while  in
purfuit  of  the  Iroquois  into  the  foreft,  as
defcribed  in  the  text.  The  fall  was  in
the  line  of  the  retreat  of  the  Iroquois
towards  their  home,  and  is  only  a inile
and  three-quarters  from  the  cape  jutting
out  into  the  lake  at  Ticonderoga.  If  the
battle  had  occurred  at  any  point  north
of  Ticonderoga,  he  could  not  have  feen
the  fall,  as  they  retreated  immediately
after  the  battle : if  it  had  taken  place
fouth  of  that  point,  it  would  have  been
oft  the  war-path  which  they  had  deter-
mined to  purfue.  We  mull  conclude,
therefore,  that  the  battle  took  place  at

Ticonderoga,  a little  north  of  the  ruins
of  the  old  Fort  Carillon,  direaiy  on  the
ftiore  of  the  lake.  If  the  reader  will
examine  the  plan  of  the  battle  as  given
by  Champlain’s  engraving,  he  will  fee
that  it  conforms  with  great  exadnefs  to
the  known  topography  of  the  place.  The
Iroquois,  who  had  their  choice  of  pofi-
tions,  are  on  the  north,  in  the  diredion
of  Willow  Point,  where  they  can  moft
eafily  retreat,  and  where  Champlain  and
his  allies  can  be  more  eafily  hemmed  in
near  the  point  of  the  cape.  The  Iro-
quois are  on  lower  ground,  and  we
know  that  the  furface  there  ftielves  to
the  north.  The  well-known  fandy  bot-
tom of  the  lake  at  this  place  would  fur-
nifh  the  means  of  faftening  the  canoes,
by  forcing  poles  into  it,  a little  out  from
the  ftiore  during  the  night,  as  they
adbially  did.  On  Champlain’s  map  of
1632,  this  point  is  referred  to  as  the  lo-
cation of  the  battle  ; and  in  his  note  on
the  map.  No.  65,  he  fays  this  is  the  place
where  the  Iroquois  were  defeated  by
Champlain.  All  the  fads  of  the  narrative
thus  point  to  Ticonderoga,  and  render  it
indifputable  that  this  was  the  fcene  ot
the  firft  of  the  many  recorded  conflicts
on  this  memorable  lake.  We  fhould  not
have  entered  into  this  difcuflion  fo  fully,
had  not  feveral  writers,  not  well  in-
formed, exprefled  views  wholly  incon-
fiftent  with  known  faas.

849  The  Indian  name  of  Lake  Uiam-
plain  is  Caniaderiguariinte.,  the  lal^
that  is  the  gate  of  the  country.  —
Adminijlration  of  the  Colomes.^  oy
Thomas  Pownall,  1768,  p.  267.  1ms
name  was  very  flgnificant,  fince  the  lake
and  valley  of  Champlain  was  the  pte,
or  war-path,  by  which  the  hoftile  tribes
of  Iroquois  approached  their  enemies
on  the  north  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and
vice  verfa.

224

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  X.

Return  from  the  Battle,  and  what  took  Place  on  the  Way.

FTER  going  fome  eight  leagues,  towards  evening
they  took  one  of  the  prifoners,  to  whom  they
made  a harangue,  enumerating  the  cruelties
which  he  and  his  men  had  already  practifed
towards  them  without  any  mercy,  and  that,  in  like
manner,  he  ought  to  make  up  his  mind  to  receive  as  much.
They  commanded  him  to  fing,  if  he  had  courage,  which  he
did ; but  it  was  a very  fad  fong.

Meanwhile,  our  men  kindled  a fire ; and,  when  it  was  well
burning,  they  each  took  a brand,  and  burned  this  poor  crea-
ture gradually,  fo  as  to  make  him  fuffer  greater  torment.
Sometimes  they  flopped,  and  threw  water  on  his  back.  Then
they  tore  out  his  nails,  and  applied  fire  to  the  extremities  of
his  fingers  and  private  member.  Afterwards,  they  flayed  the
top  of  his  head,  and  had  a kind  of  gum  poured  all  hot  upon
it ; then  they  pierced  his  arms  near  the  wrifls,  and,  drawing  up
the  finews  with  flicks,  they  tore  them  out  by  force ; but,  fee-
ing that  they  could  not  get  them,  they  cut  them.  This  poor
wretch  uttered  terrible  cries,  and  it  excited  my  pity  to  fee  him
treated  in  this  manner,  and  yet  fhowing  fuch  firmness  that
one  would  have  faid,  at  times,  that  he  fuffered  hardly  any
pain  at  all.  They  urged  me  flrongly  to  take  fome  fire,  and
do  as  they  did.  I remonftrated  with  them,  faying  that  we
practifed  no  fuch  cruelties,  but  killed  them  at  once;  and

that

225

Sieur  de  Champlain.

that,  if  they  wifhed  me  to  fire  a mufket-fhot  at  him,  I Ihould
be  willing  to  do  fo.  They  refufed,  faying  that  he  would  not
in  that  cafe  fuffer  any  pain.  I went  away  from  them,  pained
to  fee  fuch  cruelties  as  they  practifed  upon  his  body.  When
they  faw  that  I was  difpleafed,  they  called  me,  and  told  me  to
fire  a mufket-fliot  at  him.  This  I did  without  his  feeing  it,
and  thus  put  an  end,  by  a fingle  fhot,  to  all  the  torments  he
would  have  fuffered,  rather  than  fee  him  tyrannized  over.
After  his  death,  they  were  not  yet  fatisfied,  but  opened  him,
and  threw  his  entrails  into  the  lake.  Then  they  cut  off  his
head,  arms,  and  legs,  which  they  fcattered  in  different  direc-
tions ; keeping  the  fcalp  which  they  had  flayed  off,  as  they
had  done  in  the  cafe  of  all  the  reft  whom  they  had  killed  in
the  conteft.  They  were  guilty  alfo  of  another  monftrofity  in
taking  his  heart,  cutting  it  into  feveral  pieces,  and  giving  it  to
a brother  of  his  to  eat,  as  alfo  to  others  of  his  companions,  who
were  prifoners : they  took  it  into  their  mouths,  but  would  not
fwallow  it.  Some  Algonquin  favages,  who  were  guarding
them,  made  fome  of  them  fpit  it  out,  when  they  threw  it  into
the  water.  This  is  the  manner  in  which  thefe  people  behave
towards  thofe  whom  they  capture  in  war,  for  whom  it  would  be
better  to  die  fighting,  or  to  kill  themfelves  on  the  fpur  of  the
moment,  as  many  do,  rather  than  fall  into  the  hands  of  their
enemies.  After  this  execution,  we  fet  out  on  our  return  with
the  reft  of  the  prifoners,  who  kept  finging  as  they  went  along,
with  no  better  hopes  for  the  future  than  he  had  had  who  was
fo  wretchedly  treated.

Having  arrived  at  the  falls  of  the  Iroquois,  the  Algon-

quins  returned  to  their  own  country;  fo  alfo  the  Ochate-

guins,

29

226

Voyages  of

guins,®“  with  a part  of  the  prifoners : well  fatisfied  with  the
refults  of  the  war,  and  that  I had  accompanied  them  fo  readily.
We  feparated  accordingly  with  loud  proteflations  of  mutual
friendlhip ; and  they  afked  me  whether  I would  not  like  to
go  into  their  country,  to  affift  them  with  continued  fraternal
relations ; and  I promifed  that  I would  do  fo.

I returned  with  the  Montagnais.  After  informing  myfelf
from  the  prifoners  in  regard  to  their  country,  and  of  its
probable  extent,  we  packed  up  the  baggage  for  the  return,
which  was  accomplifhed  with  fuch  defpatch  that  we  went
every  day  in  their  canoes  twenty-five  or  thirty  leagues,  which
was  their  ufual  rate  of  travelling.  When  we  arrived  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  Iroquois,  fome  of  the  favages  dreamed
that  their  enemies  were  purfuing  them.  This  dream  led
them  to  move  their  camp  forthwith,  although  the  night
was  very  inclement  on  account  of  the  wind  and  rain;  and
they  went  and  paffed  the  remainder  of  the  night,  from  fear
of  their  enemies,  amid  high  reeds  on  Lake  St.  Peter.  Two
days  after,  we  arrived  at  our  fettlement,  where  I gave  them
fome  bread  and  peas ; alfo  fome  beads,  which  they  afked  me
for,  in  order  to  ornament  the  heads  of  their  enemies,  for  the
purpofe  of  merry-making  upon  their  return.  The  next  day,  I
went  with  them  in  their  canoes  as  far  as  Tadouffac,  in  order
to  witnefs  their  ceremonies.  On  approaching  the  fhore,  they

each

“0  The  Indian  allies  on  this  expedi-  who  belonged  in  the  neighborhood  of
tion  were  the  Algonquins  {Algoume-  Tadouffac,  or  farther  call. — Vide  antea^
quins')^  the  Hurons  (Ochafequins),  and  p.  202,  They  now,  at  the  falls  near
the  Montagnais  {Af ontagnets).  The  two  the  Balin  of  Chambly,  departed  to  their
former,  on  their  way  to  Quebec,  had  homes,  perhaps  on  the  Ottawa  River  and
met  Champlain  near  the  river  St.  Anne,  the  fhores  of  Lake  Huron,
and  joined  him  and  the  Montagnais,

227

Sieur  de  Champlain,

each  took  a flick,  to  the  end  of  which  they  hung  the  heads  of
their  enemies,  who  had  been  killed,  together  with  fome  beads,
all  of  them  finging.  When  they  were  through  with  this,  the
women  undrefled  themfelves,  fo  as  to  be  in  a flate  of  entire
nudity,  when  they  jumped  into  the  water,  and  fwam  to  the
prows  of  the  canoes  to  take  the  heads  of  their  enemies,  which
were  on  the  ends  of  long  poles  before  their  boats : then  they
hung  them  about  their  necks,  as  if  it  had  been  fome  coflly
chain,  fmging  and  dancing  meanwhile.  Some  days  after,  they
prefented  me  with  one  of  thefe  heads,  as  if  it  were  fomething
very  precious ; and  alfo  with  a pair  of  arms  taken  from  their
enemies,  to  keep  and  fhow  to  the  king.  This,  for  the  fake  of
gratifying  them,  I promifed  to  do.

After  fome  days,  I went  to  Quebec,  whither  fome  Algon-
quin favages  came,  exprefling  their  regret  at  not  being  pref-
ent  at  the  defeat  of  their  enemies,  and^  prefenting  me  with
fome  furs,  in  confideration  of  my  having  gone  there  and
aflifled  their  friends.

Some  days  after  they  had  fet  out  for  their  country,  diflant
about  a hundred  and  twenty  leagues  from  our  fettlement,  I
went  to  Tadouffac  to  fee  whether  Pont  Grave  had  returned
from  Gafpe,  whither  he  had  gone.  He  did  not  arrive  until
the  next  day,  when  he  told  me  that  he  had  decided  to  return
to  France.  We  concluded  to  leave  an  upright  man.  Captain
Pierre  Chavin  of  Dieppe,  to  command  at  Quebec,  until  Sieur
de  Monts  fhould  arrange  matters  there.

CHAPTER  XI.

228

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  XL

Return  to  France,  and  what  occurred  up  to  the  Time  of
Re-embarkation  .

FTER  forming  this  refolution,  we  went  to  Que-
bec to  eftablifti  him  in  authority,  and  leave  him
every  thing  requifite  and  neceffary  for  the  fettle-
ment,  together  with  fifteen  men.  Every  thing
being  arranged,  we  fet  out  on  the  firft  day  of
September**^  for  Tadouffac,  in  order  to  fit  out  our  veffel  for
returning  to  France.

We  fet  out  accordingly  from  the  latter  place  on  the  5th
of  the  month,  and  on  the  8th  anchored  at  Ifie  Percee.  On
Thurfday  the  loth,  we  fet  out  from  there,  and  on  the  i8th,
the  Tuefday  following,  we  arrived  at  the  Grand  Bank.  On
the  2d  of  06tober,  we  got  foundings.  On  the  8th,  we  an-
chored at  Conquet  in  Lower  Brittany.  On  Saturday  the
loth,  we  fet  out  from  there,  arriving  at  Honfleur  on  the  13th.

After  difembarking,  I did  not  wait  long  before  taking  port
to  go  to  Sieur  de  Monts,  who  was  then  at  Fontainebleau,
where  His  Majefty  was.  Here  I reported  to  him  in  detail  all
that  had  tranfpired  in  regard  to  the  winter  quarters  and  our
new  explorations,  and  my  hopes  for  the  future  in  view  of  the
promifes  of  the  favages  called  Ochateguins,  who  are  good
Iroquois.®®®  The  other  Iroquois,  their  enemies,  dwell  more

to

September,  1609.  Ochateguins,  called  by  the

A fmall  feaport  town  in  the  de-  French  Hurons,  were  a branch  of  the
partment  of  Finiflerre,  twelve  miles  Iroquois.  Their  real  name  was  Yendots.
weft  of  Breft.  They  were  at  this  time  allied  with  the

Algonquins,

229

Sieur  de  Champlain.

to  the  fouth.  The  language  of  the  former  does  not  differ
much  from  that  of  the  people  recently  difcovered  and  hitherto
unknown  to  us,  which  they  underftand  when  fpoken.

I at  once  waited  upon  His  Majefty,  and  gave  him  an  ac-
count of  my  voyage,  which  afforded  him  pleafure  and  fatif-
faction.  I had  a girdle  made  of  porcupine  quills,  very  well
worked,  after  the  manner  of  the  country  where  it  was  made,
and  which  His  Majefty  thought  very  pretty.  I had  alfo  two
little  birds,  of  the  fize  of  blackbirds  and  of  a carnation
color  alfo,  the  head  of  a fifti  caught  in  the  great  lake  of
the  Iroquois,  having  a very  long  fnout  and  two  or  three
rows  of  very  ftiarp  teeth:  A reprefentation  of  this  fifli  may

be  found  on  the  great  lake,  on  my  geographical  map.®®

After  I had  concluded  my  interview  with  His  Majefty,
Sieur  de  Monts  determined  to  go  to  Rouen  to  meet  his  affo-
ciates,  the  Sieurs  Collier  and  Le  Gendre,  merchants  of  Rouen,
to  confider  what  fhould  be  done  the  coming  year.  They  re-
folved  to  continue  the  fettlement,  and  finifli  the  explorations
up  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence,  in  accordance  with  the  prom-
ifes  of  the  Ochateguins,  made  on  condition  that  we  fhould
affift  them  in  their  wars,  as  I had  given  them  to  underftand.

Pont  Gravb  was  appointed  to  go  to  Tadouflac,  not  only  for
traffic,  but  to  engage  in  any  thing  elfe  that  might  realize
means  for  defraying  the  expenfes.

Sieur  Lucas  Le  Gendre,  of  Rouen,  one  of  the  partners,  was

ordered  to  fee  to  the  purchafe  of  merchandife  and  fupplies,

the

Algonquins,  in  a deadly  war  with  their
Iroquois  coufins,  the  Five  Nations. —
Vide  GallatitPs  Synop/is,  Tranfaaions
of  Am.  Antiq.  Society,  Cambridge,  1836,
Vol.  II.  p.  69,  et paffitn.

854  The  fcarlet  tanager,  Pyranga
rubra,  of  a fcarlet  color,  with  black
wings  and  tail.  It  ranges  from  Texas
to  Lake  Huron.

855  Videantea^  p.  216;  and  map,  1612.

230

Voyages  of  Champlain.

the  repair  of  the  veffels,  obtaining  crews,  and  other  things
neceffary  for  the  voyage.

After  thefe  matters  were  arranged,  Sieur  de  Monts  returned
to  Paris,  I accompanying  him,  where  I flayed  until  the  end
of  February.  During  this  time,  Sieur  de  Monts  endeavored
to  obtain  a new  commiffion  for  trading  in  the  newly  difcovered
regions,  and  where  no  one  had  traded  before.  This  he  was
unable  to  accomplifh,  although  his  requefts  and  propofals  were
juft  and  reafonable.

But,  finding  that  there  was  no  hope  of  obtaining  this  com-
miffion, he  did  not  ceafe  to  profecute  his  plan,  from  his  defire
that  every  thing  might  turn  out  to  the  profit  and  honor  of
France.

During  this  time,  Sieur  de  Monts  did  not  exprefs  to  me
his  pleafure  in  regard  to  me  perfonally,  until  I told  him  it  had
been  reported  to  me  that  he  did  not  wifti  to  have  me  winter
in  Canada,  which,  however,  was  not  true,  for  he  referred  the
whole  matter  to  my  pleafure.

I provided  myfelf  with  whatever  was  defirable  and  neceffary
for  fpending  the  winter  at  our  fettlement  in  Quebec.  For
this  purpofe  I fet  out  from  Paris  the  laft  day  of  February  fol-
lowing,^ and  proceeded  to  Honfleur,  where  the  embarkation
was  to  be  made.  I went  by  way  of  Rouen,  where  I flayed
two  days.  Thence  I went  to  Honfleur,  where  I found  Pont
Grave  and  Le  Gendre,  who  told  me  they  had  embarked  what
was  neceffary  for  the  fettlement.  I was  very  glad  to  find  that
we  were  ready  to  fet  fail,  but  uncertain  whether  the  fupplies
were  good  and  adequate  for  our  fojourn  and  for  fpending  the
winter.

Anno  Domini  i6io.

SECOND  VOYAGE

OF

SIEUR  DE  CHAMPLAIN
TO  NEW  FRANCE,  IN  THE  YEAR  i6io.

CHAPTER  I.

Departure  from  France  to  return  to  New  France,  and  Occur-
rences UNTIL  OUR  Arrival  at  the  Settlement.

HE  weather  having  become  favorable,  I em-
barked at  Honfleur  with  a number  of  artifans
on  the  7th  of  the  month  of  March.®*^  But,  en-
countering bad  weather  in  the  Channel,  we  were
obliged  to  put  in  on  the  Englifti  coaft  at  a
place  called  Porlan,^  in  the  roadftead  of  which  we  ftaye^
fome  days,  when  we  weighed  anchor  for  the  Ifle  d Huy,

near  the  Englifh  coaft,  fmce  we  found  the  roadftead  of  Porlan
° very

«.  1„  ,h.  title  .bov.,  Champkinoll.  “

.0  th/llle

232

Voyages  of

very  bad.  When  near  this  ifland,  fo  denfe  a fog  arofe,  that
we  were  obliged  to  put  in  at  the  Hougue.^®

Ever  fince  the  departure  from  Honfleur,  I had  been
afflicfted  with  a very  fevere  illnefs,  which  took  away  my  hopes
of  being  able  to  make  the  voyage ; fo  that  I embarked  in  a
boat  to  return  to  Havre  in  France,  to  be  treated  there,  being
very  ill  on  board  the  veffel.  My  expedlation  was,  on  recover-
ing my  health,  to  embark  again  in  another  veffel,  which  had
not  yet  left  Honfleur,  in  which  Des  Marais,  fon-in-law  of
Pont  Grave,  was  to  embark ; but  I had  myfelf  carried.  Hill
very  ill,  to  Honfleur,  where  the  veffel  on  which  I had  fet  out
put  in  on  the  15th  of  March,  for  fome  ballaft,  which  it  needed
in  order  to  be  properly  trimmed.  Here  it  remained  until
the  8th  of  April.  During  this  time,  I recovered  in  a great
degree ; and,  though  ftill  feeble  and  weak,  I neverthelefs  em-
barked again.

We  fet  out  anew  on  the  i8th  of  April,  arriving  at  the
Grand  Bank  on  the  19th,  and  fighting  the  Iflands  of  St.  Pierre
on  the  2 2d.®®^  When  off  Menthane,  we  met  a veffel  from  St.
Malo,  on  which  was  a young  man,  who,  while  drinking  to  the
health  of  Pont  Grave,  loft  control  of  himfelf  and  was  thrown
into  the  fea  by  the  motion  of  the  veffel  and  drowned,  it  being
impoffible  to  render  him  afliftance  on  account  of  the  violence
of  the  wind.

On  the  26th  of  the  month,  we  arrived  at  Tadouflac,  where

there

La  HoMgue.  There  are  two  fmall
iflands  laid  down  on  the  carte  of  Orte-
lius,  1603,  under  the  name  Les  Hougue-
aux,  and  a hamlet  near  by  called  Hougo,
which  is  that,  doubtlefs,  to  which  Cham-
plain here  refers.

Comparing  this  flatement  with  the
context,  it  will  Be  clear  that  the  paffage
fhould  read  the  8th,  and  not  the  i8th  of
April.  The  “Iflands  of  St.  Pierre,’^
IJles  S.  Pierre^  includes  the  Ifland  of
St.  Peter  and  the  clufter  furrounding  it.

233

Sieur  de  Champlain.

there  were  veffels  which  had  arrived  on  the  i8th,  a thing
which  had  not  been  feen  for  more  than  fixty  years,  as  the
old  mariners  faid  who  fail  regularly  to  this  country.®*^  This
was  owing  to  the  mild  winter  and  the  fmall  amount  of  ice,
which  did  not  prevent  the  entrance  of  thefe  veffels.  We
learned  from  a young  nobleman,  named  Sieur  du  Parc,  who
had  fpent  the  winter  at  our  fettlement,  that  all  his  compan-
ions were  in  good  health,  only  a few  having  been  ill,  and
they  but  flightly.  He  alfo  informed  us  that  there  had  been
fcarcely  any  winter,  and  that  they  had  ufually  had  frefh  meat
the  entire  feafon,  and  that  their  hardeft  talk  had  been  to
keep  up  good  cheer.

This  winter  fhows  how  thofe  undertaking  in  future  fuch
enterprifes  ought  to  proceed,  it  being  very  difficult  to  make
a new  fettlement  without  labor  j and  without  encountering
adverfe  fortune  the  firft  year,  as  has  been  the  cafe  in  all  our
firft  fettlements.  But,  in  fad,  by  avoiding  fait  food  and  ufing
frelli  meat,  the  health  is  as  good  here  as  in  France.

The  favages  had  been  waiting  from  day  to  day  for  us  to  go
to  the  war  with  them.  When  they  learned  that  Pont  Grave
and  I had  arrived  together,  they  rejoiced  greatly,  and  came  to
fpeak  with  us.

I went  on  fhore  to  affure  them  that  we  would  go  with
them,  in  conformity  with  the  promifes  they  had  made  me,
namely,  that  upon  our  return  from  the  war  they  would  ffiow
me  the  Trois  Rivieres,  and  take  me  to  a fea  fo  large  that

the

•*2  M.  Ferland  infers  from  this  ftate-  Roberval  in  IS49)  extend  their  filhing
ment  that  the  Bafques,  Normans,  and  and  fur-trading  voyages  as  far  as  Ta-
Bretons  had  been  accuftomed  for  the  douffac.  — Vide  Coursd'HiJl.du  Canada,
laft  fixty  years,  from  the  lalt  voyage  of  as  cited  by  Laverdi^re.

30

234

Voyages  of

the  end  of  it  cannot  be  feen,  whence  we  fliould  return  by
way  of  the  Saguenay  to  Tadouffac.  I afked  them  if  they
ftill  had  this  intention,  to  which  they  replied  that  they  had,
but  that  it  could  not  be  carried  out  before  the  next  year,
which  pleafed  me.  But  I had  promifed  the  Algonquins  and
Ochateguins  that  I would  affift  them  alfo  in  their  wars,  they
having  promifed  to  fhow  me  their  country,  the  great  lake,
fome  copper  mines,  and  other  things,  which  they  had  indi-
cated to  me.  I accordingly  had  two  firings  to  my  bow,  fo
that,  in  cafe  one  fhould  break,  the  other  might  hold.

On  the  28th  of  the  month,  I fet  out  from  Tadouffac  for
Quebec,  where  I found  Captain  Pierre,^  who  commanded
there,  and  all  his  companions  in  good  health.  There  was
alfo  a favage  captain  with  them,  named  Batifcan,  with  fome
of  his  companions,  who  were  awaiting  us,  and  who  were,
greatly  pleafed  at  my  arrival,  finging  and  dancing  the  entire
evening.  I provided  a banquet  for  them,  which  gratified
them  very  much.  They  had  a good  meal,  for  which  they
were  very  thankful,  and  invited  me  with  feven  others  to  an
entertainment  of  theirs,  not  a fmall  mark  of  refpe6t  with  them.
We  each  one  carried  a porringer,  according  to  cuftorn,  and
brought  it  home  full  of  meat,  which  we  gave  to  whomfoever
we  pleafed.

Some  days  after  I had  fet  out  from  Tadouffac,  the  Mon-
tagnais  arrived  at  Quebec,  to  the  number  of  fixty  able-bodied
men,  en  route  for  the  war.  They  tarried  here  fome  days,
enjoying  themfelves,  and  not  omitting  to  ply  me  frequently
with  queftions,  to  affure  themfelves  that  I would  not  fail  in

my

Captain  Pierre  Chavin,  of  Dieppe.  Vide  antea^  p.  227.

235

Sieur  de  Champlain.

m/  promifes  to  them.  I affured  them,  and  again  made
promifes  to  them,  afking  them  if  they  had  found  me  breaking
my  word  in  the  paft.  They  were  greatly  pleafed  when  I
renewed  my  promifes  to  them.

They  faid  to  me : “ Here  are  numerous  Bafques  and  Mifti-
goches”  (this  is  the  name  they  give  to  the  Normans  and
people  of  St.  Malo),  “ who  fay  they  will  go  to  the  war  with
us.  What  do  you  think  of  it?  Do  they  fpeak  the  truth?”
I anfwered  no,  and  that  I knew  very  well  what  they  really
meant ; that  they  faid  this  only  to  get  poffefllon  of  their  com-
modities. They  replied  to  me : “You  have  fpoken  the  truth.
They  are  women,  and  want  to  make  war  only  upon  our  beavers.”
They  went  on  talking  ftill  farther  in  a facetious  mood,  and  in
regard  to  the  manner  and  order  of  going  to  the  war.

They  determined  to  fet  out,  and  await  me  at  the  Trois
Rivieres,  thirty  leagues  above  Quebec,  where  I had  promifed
to  join  them,  together  with  four  barques  loaded  with
merchandife,  in  order  to  traffic  in  peltries,  among  others  with
the  Ochateguins,  who  were  to  await  me  at  the  mouth  of  the
river  of  the  Iroquois,  as  they  had  promifed  the  year  before,
and  to  bring  there  as  many  as  four  hundred  men  to  go  to
the  war.

CHAPTER  II.

236

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  II.

Departure  from  Quebec  to  assist  our  Allied  Savages  in  their  War

AGAINST  the  IrOQUOIS,  THEIR  EnEMIES  ; AND  AlL  THAT  TRANSPIRED
UNTIL  OUR  Return  to  the  Settlement.

SET  out  from  Quebec  on  the  14th  of  June,  to
meet  the  Montagnais,  Algonquins,  and  Ochate-
guins,  who  were  to  be  at  the  mouth  of  the  river
of  the  Iroquois.  When  I was  eight  leagues
from  Quebec,  I met  a canoe,  containing  two
ravages,  one  an  Algonquin,  and  the  other  a Montagnais,
who  entreated  me  to  advance  as  rapidly  as  poffible,  faying
that  the  Algonquins  and  Ochateguins  would  in  two  days  be
at  the  rendezvous,  to  the  number  of  two  hundred,  with  two
hundred  others  to  come  a little  later,  together  with  Yroquet,
one  of  their  chiefs.  They  afked  me  if  I was  fatisfied  with
the  coming  of  thefe  favages.  I told  them  I could  not  be
difpleafed  at  it,  fince  they  had  kept  their  word.  They  came
on  board  my  barque,  where  I gave  them  a good  entertain-
ment. Shortly  after  conferring  with  them  about  many
matters  concerning  their  wars,  the  Algonquin  favage,  one  of
their  chiefs,  drew  from  a fack  a piece  of  copper  a foot  long,
which  he  gave  me.  This  was  very  handfome  and  quite
pure.  He  gave  me  to  underftand  that  there  were  large
quantities  where  he  had  taken  this,  which  was  on  the  bank
of  a river,  near  a great  lake.  He  faid  that  they  gathered  it
in  lumps,  and,  having  melted  it,  fpread  it  in  flieets,  fmoothing

it

Sieur  de  Champlain.  237

it  with  ftones.  I was  very  glad  of  this  prefent,  although  of

fmall  value.®“

8®^  This  teftimony  of  the  Algonquin
chief  is  interefting,  and  hiftorically  im-
portant. We  know  of  no  earlier  refer-
ence to  the  art  of  melting  and  malleating
copper  in  any  of  the  reports  of  the  navi-
gators to  our  northern  coaft.  That  the
natives  poffelTed  this  art  is  placed  beyond
queftion  by  this  paflage,  as  well  as  by
the  recent  difcovery  of  copper  imple-
ments in  Wifconfm,  bearing  the  marks
of  mechanical  fufion  and  malleation.
The  fpecimens  of  copper  in  the  polTef-
fion  of  the  natives  on  the  coaft  of  New
England,  as  referred  to  by  Brereton  and
Archer,  can  well  be  accounted  for  with-
out fuppofing  them  to  be  of  native  manu-
fadure,  though  they  may  have  been  fo.
The  Bafques,  Bretons,  Englifti,  and  Por-
tuguefe  had  been  annually  on  our  nor-
thern coafts  for  fiftiing  and  fur-trading
for  more  than  a century,  and  had  dif-
tributed  a vaft  quantity  of  articles  for
favage  ornament  and  uie  ; and  it  would,
therefore,  be  difficult  to  prove  that  the
copper  chains  and  collars  and  other
trinkets  mentioned  by  Brereton  and
Archer  were  not  derived  from  this
fource.  But  the  teftimony  of  the  early
navigators  in  the  lefs  frequented  region
of  the  St.  Lawrence  is  not  open  to  this
interpretation.  When  Cartier  advanced
up  the  Gulf  of  Lawrence  in  1535,  the
favages  pointed  out  the  region  of  the
Saguenay,  which  they  informed  him
was  inhabited,  and  that  from  thence
came  the  red  copper  which  they  called
cai^netdaze.

“Et  par  les  fauuaiges  que  auions,
nous  a eft^  didl  que  ceftoit  le  commence-
ment du  Saguenay  & terre  habitable.  Et
que  de  la  ve  noit  le  cuyure  rouge  qu’ilz
appellSt  caignetdaze.” — Brief  Ricit.,  par
Jacques  Cartier,  1545,  D’Avezac  ed.,  p.
9.  Vide  idem.,  P-  34*

When  Cartier  was  at  Ifle  Coudres,

Arriving

fay  fifty  miles  below  Quebec,  on  his
return,  the  Indians  from  the  Saguenay
came  on  board  his  fhip,  and  made  cer-
tain prefents  to  their  chief,  Donnacona,
whom  Cartier  had  captured,  and  was
taking  home  with  him  to  France.
Among  thefe  gifts,  they  gave  him  a
great  knife  of  red  copper,  which  came
from  the  Saguenay.  The  words  of
Cartier  are  as  follows  : —

“ Ddnerent  audidl  Donnacona  trois
pacquetz  de  peaulx  de  byeures  & loups
marins  auec  vng  grad  coufteau  de  cuy-
ure rouge,  qui  vient  du  Saguenay  &
autres  chofes.”  — Idem.,  p.  44.

This  voyage  of  Cartier,  made  in  1535,
was  the  earlieft  vifit  by  any  navigator
on  record  to  this  region.  It  was  eighty
years  before  the  Recolleas  or  any  other
miffionaries  had  approached  the  Gulf  of
St.  Lawrence.  There  was,  therefore,
no  intercourfe  previous  to^  this  that
would  be  likely  to  furniffi  the  natives
with  European  utenfils  of  any  kind,  par-
ticularly knives  of  red  copper.  It  is  im-
poffible  to  fuppofe  that  this  knife,  feen
by  Cartier,  and  declared  by  the  natives
to  have  come  from  the  Saguenay,  a
term  then  covering  an  indefinite  region
ftretching  we  know  not  how  far  to  the
north  and  weft,  could  be  otherwife  than
of  Indian  manufa6lure.  In  the  text,
Champlain  diftinaiy  ftates  on  the  tefti-
mony of  an  Algonquin  chief  that  it  was
the  cuftom  of  the  Indians  to  melt  copper
for  the  purpofe  of  forming  it  into
fheets,  and  it  is  obvious  that  it  would
require  fcarcely  greater  ingenuity  to
fabricate  moulds  in  which  to  caft  the
various  implements  which  they  needed
in  their  Ample  arts.  Some  of  thefe  im-
plements, with  indubitable  marks  of
having  been  caft  in  moulds,  have  been
recently  difcovered,  with  a multitude  of
others,  which  may  or  may  not  have

pafled

238  Voyages  of

Arriving  at  Trois  Rivieres,  I found  all  the  Montagnais
awaiting  me,  and  the  four  barques  as  I dated  above,  which
had  gone  to  trade  with  them.

The  ravages  were  delighted  to  fee  me,  and  I went  on  fhore
to  fpeak  with  them.  They  entreated  me,  together  with  my
companions,  to  embark  on  their  canoes  and  no  others,  when
we  went  to  the  war,  faying  that  they  were  our  old  friends.
This  I promifed  them,  telling  them  that  I defired  to  fet  out
at  once,  fince  the  wind  was  favorable ; and  that  my  barque
was  not  fo  fwift  as  their  canoes,  for  which  reafon  I defired  to
go  on  in  advance.  They  earneftly  entreated  me  to  wait  until
the  morning  of  the  next  day,  when  we  would  all  go  together,
adding  that  they  would  not  go  fafter  than  I fhould.  Finally,
to  fatisfy  them,  I promifed  to  do  this,  at  which  they  were
greatly  pleafed.

On  the  following  day,  we  all  fet  out  together,  and  con-
tinued our  route  until  the  morning  of  the  next  day,  the
19th  of  the  month,  when  we  arrived  at  an  ifland^  off  the

river

paired  through  the  fame  procefs.  The
teftimony  of  Champlain  in  the  text,
and  the  examples  of  moulded  copper
found  in  the  lake  region,  render  the  evi-
dence, in  our  judgment,  entirely  conclu-
five  that  the  art  of  working  copper
both  by  fufion  and  malleation  exifted
among  the  Indians  of  America  at  the
time  of  its  firft  occupation  by  the
French.

During  the  period  of  five  years,  be-
ginning in  1871,  an  enthufiaftic  anti-
quary, Mr.  F.  S.  Perkins,  of  Wifconfin,
colledled,  within  the  borders  of  his  own
State,  a hundred  and  forty-two  copper
implements,  of  a great  variety  of  forms,
and  defigned  for  numerous  ufes,  as
axes,  hatchets,  fpear-heads,  arrow-
heads, knives,  gouges,  chifels,  adzes,

augers,  gads,  drills,  and  other  articles
of  anomalous  forms.  Thefe  are  now
depofited  in  the  archives  of  the  Hiftor-
ical  Society  of  Wifconfin.  Other  col-
le6lions  are  gradually  forming.  The
procefs  is  of  neceflity  flow,  as  they  are
not  often  found  in  groups,  but  fingly,
here  and  there,  as  they  are  turned  up  by
the  plough  or  fpade  or  other  imple-
ments of  hufbandry.  The  ftatement  of
Champlain  in  the  text,  and  the  teftimony
of  Cartier  three-quarters  of  a century
earlier,  to  which  we  have  referred,  give
a new  hiftorical  fignificance  to  thefe
recent  difcoveries,  and  both  together
throw  a frelh  light  upon  the  pre-hiftoric
period.

This  was  the  Ifland  St.  Ignace,
which

239

Sieur  de  Champlain.

river  of  the  Iroquois,  and  waited  for  the  Algonquins,  who
were  to  be  there  the  fame  day.  While  the  Montagnais  were
felling  trees  to  clear  a place  for  dancing,  and  for  arranging
themfelves  for  the  arrival  of  the  Algonquins,  an  Algonquin
canoe  was  fuddenly  feen  coming  in  hafte,  to  bring  word
that  the  Algonquins  had  fallen  in  with  a hundred  Iroquois,
who  were  ftrongly  barricaded,  and  that  it  would  be  difficult
to  conquer  them,  unlefs  they  ffiould  come  fpeedily,  together
with  the  Matigoches,  as  they  call  us.

The  alarm  at  once  founded  among  them,  and  each  one  got
into  his  canoe  with  his  arms>  They  were  quickly  in  readinefs,
but  with  confufion ; for  they  were  fo  precipitous  that,  inftead
of  making  hafte,  they  hindered  one  another.  They  came  to
our  barque  and  the  others,  begging  me,  together  with  my  com-
panions, to  go  with  them  in  their  canoes,  and  they  were  fo
urgent  that  I embarked  with  four  others.  I requefted  our
pilot.  La  Routte,  to  ftay  in  the  barque,  and  fend  me  fome  four
or  five  more  of  my  companions,  if  the  other  barques  would
fend  fome  fhallops  with  men  to  aid  us;  for  none  of  the
barques  were  inclined  to  go  with  the  favages,  except  Captain
Thibaut,  who,  having  a barque  there,  went  with  me.  The
favages  cried  out  to  thofe  who  remained,  faying  that  they
were  woman-hearted,  and  that  all  they  could  do  was  to  make
war  upon  their  peltry.

Meanwhile,  after  going  fome  half  a league,  all  the  favages
croffing  the  river  landed,  and,  leaving  their  canoes,  took  their

bucklers.

which  lies  oppolite  the  mouth  of  the  river
Iroquois  or  Richelieu.  Champlain’s  de-
fcription  is  not  fufficiently  definite  to
enable  us  to  identify  the  exa6l  location
of  this  confli6l  with  the  favages.  It  is,

however,  evident,  from  feveral  intima-
tions found  in  the  text,  that  it  was  about
a league  from  the  mouth  of  the  Riche-
lieu, and  was  probably  on  the  bank  of
that  river.

240

Voyages  of

bucklers,  bows,  arrows,  clubs,  and  fwords,  which  they  attach  to
the  end  of  large  flicks,  and  proceeded  to  make  their  way  in  the
woods,  fo  faft  that  we  foon  loft  fight  of  them,  they  leaving  us,
five  in  number,  without  guides.  This  difpleafed  us ; but,  keep-
ing their  tracks  conflantly  in  fight,  we  followed  them,  although
we  were  often  deceived.  We  went  through  denfe  woods,
and  over  fwamps  and  marfhes,  with  the  water  always  up  to
our  knees,  greatly  encumbered  by  a pike-man’s  corfelet,  with
which  each  one  was  armed.  We  were  alfo  tormented  in  a
grievous  and  unheard-of  manner  by  quantities  of  mofquitoes,
which  were  fo  thick  that  they  fcarcely  permitted  us  to  draw
breath.  After  going  about  half  a league  under  thefe  cir-
cumftances,  and  no  longer  knowing  where  we  were,  we  per-
ceived two  favages  paffing  through  the  woods,  to  whom  we
called  and  told  them  to  flay  with  us,  and  guide  us  to  the
whereabouts  of  the  Iroquois,  otherwife  we  could  not  go
there,  and  fhould  get  lofl  in  the  woods.  They  flayed  to
guide  us.  After  proceeding  a fhort  diflance,  we  faw  a favage
coming  in  hafte  to  us,  to  induce  us  to  advance  as  rapidly  as
poffible,  giving  me  to  underfland  that  the  Algonquins  and
Montagnais  had  tried  to  force  the  barricade  of  the  Iroquois
but  had  been  repulfed,  that  fome  of  the  befl  men  of  the
Montagnais  had  been  killed  in  the  attempt,  and  feveral
wounded,  and  that  they  had  retired  to  wait  for  us,  in  whom
was  their  only  hope.  We  had  not  gone  an  eighth  of  a
league  with  this  favage,  who  was  an  Algonquin  captain,
before  we  heard  the  yells  and  cries  on  both  tides,  as  they
jeered  at  each  other,  and  were  fkirmifhing  flightly  while
awaiting  us.  As  foon  as  the  favages  perceived  us,  they
began  to  fliout,  fo  that  one  could  not  have  heard  it  thunder.

I

Sieur  de  Champlain.  241

I gave  orders  to  my  companions  to  follow  me  fteadily,  and
not  to  leave  me  on  any  account.  I approached  the  barricade
of  the  enemy,  in  order  to  reconnoitre  it.  It  was  conftrudled
of  large  trees  placed  one  upon  an  other,  and  of  a circular
lliape,  the  ufual  form  of  their  fortifications.  All  the  Mon-
tagnais  and  Algonquins  approached  likewife  the  barricade.
Then  we  commenced  firing  numerous  mufket-fhots  through
the  brufh-wood,  fince  we  could  not  fee  them,  as  they  could
us.  I was  wounded  while  firing  my  firft  fhot  at  the  fide  of
their  barricade  by  an  arrow,  which  pierced  the  end  of  my
ear  and  entered  my  neck.  I feized  the  arrow,  and  tore  it
from  my  neck.  The  end  of  it  was  armed  with  a very  fharp
ftone.  One  of  my  companions  alfo  was  wounded  at  the
fame  time  in  the  arm  by  an  arrow,  which  I tore  out  for  him.
Yet  my  wound  did  not  prevent  me  from  doing  my  duty : our
lavages  alfo,  on  their  part,  as  well  as  the  enemy,  did  their
duty,  fo  that  you  could  fee  the  arrows  fly  on  all  fides  as
thick  as  hail.  The  Iroquois  were  aflonifhed  at  the  noife  of
our  mufkets,  and  efpecially  that  the  balls  penetrated  better
than  their  arrows.  They  were  fo  frightened  at  the  effe<5t
produced  that,  feeing  feveral  of  their  companions  fall

wounded

Champlain’s  Explanation  of  the  accompanying  Map.

Fort  dks  Iroquois.

A.  The  fort  of  the  Iroquois.  B.  The  Iroquois  throwing  themfelves  into  the
river  to  efcape  the  purfuit  of  the  Montagnais  and  Algonquins  who  followed  for
the  purpofe  of  killing  them.  D.  Sieur  de  Champlain  and  five  of  his  men.
R.  The  favages  friendly  to  us.  F,  Sieur  des  Prairies  of  St.  Malo  with  his
comrades.  G,  Shallop  of  Sieur  des  Prairies.  H,  Great  trees  cut  down  for  the
purpofe  of  deftroying  the  fort  of  the  Iroquois.

31

242

Voyages  of

wounded  and  dead,  they  threw  themfelves  on  the  ground
whenever  they  heard  a difcharge,  fuppofing  that  the  fhots
were  fure.  We  fcarcely  ever  miffed  firing  two  or  three  balls
at  one  fhot,  refting  our  mufkets  mofl;  of  the  time  on  the
fide  of  their  barricade.  But,  feeing  that  our  ammunition
began  to  fail,  I faid  to  all  the  favages  that  it  was  neceffary
to  break  down  their  barricades  and  capture  them  by  ftorm ;
and  that,  in  order  to  accomplifh  this,  they  mufl  take  their
fhields,  cover  themfelves  with  them,  and  thus  approach  fo
near  as  to  be  able  to  fatten  flout  ropes  to  the  ports  that  fup-
ported  the  barricades,  and  pull  them  down  by  main  rtrength,
in  that  way  making  an  opening  large  enough  to  permit  them
to  enter  the  fort.  I told  them  that  we  would  meanwhile,  by
our  mufketry-fire,  keep  off  the  enemy,  as  they  endeavored  to
prevent  them  from  accomplifhing  this ; alfo  that  a number
of  them  fhould  get  behind  fome  large  trees,  which  were  near
the  barricade,  in  order  to  throw  them  down  upon  the  enemy,
and  that  others  fliould  protedt  thefe  with  their  fliields,  in  order
to  keep  the  enemy  from  injuring  them.  All  this  they  did
very  promptly.  And,  as  they  were  about  finifhing  the  work,
the  barques,  dirtant  a league  and  a half,  hearing  the  reports
of  our  mufkets,  knew  that  we  were  engaged  in  conflidl ; and
a young  man  from  St.  Malo,  full  of  courage,  Des  Prairies  by
name,  who  like  the  rert  had  come  with  his  barque  to  engage
in  peltry  traffic,  faid  to  his  companions  that  it  was  a great
fhame  to  let  me  fight  in  this  way  with  the  favages  without
coming  to  my  affirtance ; that  for  his  part  he  had  too  high  a
fenfe  of  honor  to  permit  him  to  do  fo,  and  that  he  did  not
wifh  to  expose  himfelf  to  this  reproach.  Accordingly,  he
determined  to  come  to  me  in  a fhallop  with  fome  of  his

companions.

243

Sieur  de  Champlain.

companions,  together  with  fome  of  mine  whom  he  took  with
him.  Immediately  upon  his  arrival,  he  went  towards  the
fort  of  the  Iroquois,  fituated  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  Here
he  landed,  and  came  to  find  me.  Upon  feeing  him,  I ordered
our  ravages  who  were  breaking  down  the  fortrefs  to  flop,  fo
that  the  new-comers  might  have  their  fhare  of  the  fport.  I
requeued  Sieur  des  Prairies  and  his  companions  to  fire  fome
falvos  of  mufketry,  before  our  favages  fhould  carry  by  ftorm
the  enemy,  as  they  had  decided  to  do.  This  they  did,  each
one  firing  feveral  ftiots,  in  which  all  did  their  duty  well.
After  they  had  fired  enough,  I addreffed  myfelf  to  our  fav-
ages, urging  them  to  finilh  the  work.  Straightway,  they
approached  the  barricade,  as  they  had  previoufly  done,  while
we  on  the  flank  were  to  fire  at  thofe  who  fhould  endeavor  to
keep  them  from  breaking  it  down.  They  behaved  fo  well
and  bravely  that,  with  the  help  of  our  mufkets,  they  made  an
opening,  which,  however,  was  difficult  to  go  through,  as  there
was  ftill  left  a portion  as  high  as  a man,  there  being  alfo
branches  of  trees  there  which  had  been  beaten  down,  forming
a ferious  obftacle.  But,  when  I faw  that  the  entrance  was  quite
pradticable,  I gave  orders  not  to  fire  any  more,  which  they
obeyed.  At  the  fame  inftant,  fome  twenty  or  thirty,  both
of  favages  and  of  our  own  men,  entered,  fword  in  hand,  with-
out finding  much  refiftance.  Immediately,  all  who  were
unharmed  took  to  flight.  But  they  did  not  proceed  far;  for
they  were  brought  down  by  thofe  around  the  barricade,  and
thofe  who  efcaped  were  drowned  in  the  river.  We  capered
fome  fifteen  prifoners,  the  reft  being  killed  by  mufket-fhots,
arrows,  and  the  fword.  When  the  fight  was  over,  there  ^me
another  fliallop,  containing  fome  of  my  companions  This,

244

Voyages  of

although  behind  time,  was  yet  in  feafon  for  the  booty,  which,
however,  was  not  of  much  account.  There  were  only  robes
of  beaver-fkin,  and  dead  bodies  covered  with  blood,  which
the  favages  would  not  take  the  trouble  to  plunder,  laughing
at  thofe  in  the  laft  fhallop,  who  did  fo ; for  the  others  did  not
engage  in  fuch  low  bufmefs.  This,  then,  is  the  vi(5lory  ob-
tained by  God’s  grace,  for  gaining  which  they  gave  us  much
praife.

The  favages  fcalped  the  dead,  and  took  the  heads  as  a
trophy  of  victory,  according  to  their  cuftom.  They  returned
with  fifty  wounded  Montagnais  and  Algonquins  and  three
dead,  finging  and  leading  their  prifoners  with  them.  They
attached  to  flicks  in  the  prows  of  their  canoes  the  heads
and  a dead  body  cut  into  quarters,  to  eat  in  revenge,  as  they
faid.  In  this  way,  they  went  to  our  barques  off  the  River  of
the  Iroquois.

My  companions  and  I embarked  in  a fhallop,  where  I had
my  wound  dreffed  by  the  furgeon,  De  Boyer,  of  Rouen,  who
likewife  had  come  here  for  the  purpofe  of  traffic.  The  favages
fpent  all  this  day  in  dancing  and  finging.

The  next  day,  Sieur  de  Pont  Grave  arrived  with  another
fhallop,  loaded  with  merchandife.  Moreover,  there  was  alfo
a barque  containing  Captain  Pierre,  which  he  had  left  behind,
it  being  able  to  come  only  with  difficulty,  as  it  was  rather
heavy  and  a poor  failer.

The  fame  day  there  was  fome  trading  in  peltry,  but  the
other  barques  carried  off  the  better  part  of  the  booty.  It
was  doing  them  a great  favor  to  fearch  out  a flrange  people
for  them,  that  they  might  afterwards  carry  off  the  profit
without  any  rifk  or  danger.

That

245

Sieur  de  Champlain.

That  day,  I afked  the  favages  for  an  Iroquois  prifoner  which
they  had,  and  they  gave  him  to  me.  What  I did  for  him  was
not  a little ; for  I faved  him  from  many  tortures  which  he  muft
have  fuffered  in  company  with  his  fellow-prifoners,  whofe
nails  they  tore  out,  alfo  cutting  off  their  fingers,  and  burning
them  in  feveral  places.  They  put  to  death  on  the  fame  day
two  or  three,  and,  in  order  to  increafe  their  torture,  treated
them  in  the  following  manner.

They  took  the  prifoners  to  the  border  of  the  water,  and
faftened  them  perfedly  upright  to  a flake.  Then  each  came
with  a torch  of  birch  bark,  and  burned  them,  now  in  this
place,  now  in  that.  The  poor  wretches,  feeling  the  fire,
raifed  fo  loud  a cry  that  it  was  fomething  frightful  to  hear ;
and  frightful  indeed  are  the  cruelties  which  thefe  barbarians
practife  towards  each  other.  After  making  them  fuffer
greatly  in  this  manner  and  burning  them  with  the  above-
mentioned  bark,  taking  fome  water,  they  threw  it  on  their
bodies  to  increafe  their  fuffering.  Then  they  applied  the
fire  anew,  fo  that  the  fkin  fell  from  their  bodies,  they  con-
tinuing to  utter  loud  cries  and  exclamations,  and  dancing
until  the  poor  wretches  fell  dead  on  the  fpot.

As  foon  as  a body  fell  to  the  ground  dead,  they  flruck  it
violent  blows  with  flicks,  when  they  cut  off  the  arms,  legs,
and  other  parts ; and  he  was  not  regarded  by  them  as  manly,
who  did  not  cut  off  a piece  of  the  flefh,  and  give  it  to  the
dogs.  Such  are  the  courtefies  prifoners  receive.  But  fliU
they  endure  all  the  tortures  inflidled  upon  them  with  fuch
conflancy  that  the  fpedlator  is  aflonifhed.  ^

As  to  the  other  prifoners,  which  remained  in  pofTeffion  o
the  Algonquins  and  Montagnais,  it  was  left  to  their  wives

246  Voyages  of

and  daughters  to  put  them  to  death  with  their  own  hands ;
and,  in  fuch  a matter,  they  do  not  fliow  themfelves  lets
inhuman  than  the  men,  but  even  furpafs  them  by  far  in  cru-
elty; for  they  devife  by  their  cunning  more  cruel  punifh-
ments,  in  which  they  take  pleafure,  putting  an  end  to  their
lives  by  the  moll  extreme  pains.

The  next  day  there  arrived  the  Captain  Yroquet,  alfo
another  Ochateguin,  with  fome  eighty  men,  who  regretted
greatly  not  having  been  prefent  at  the  defeat.  Among  all
thefe  tribes  there  were  prefent  nearly  two  hundred  men,  who
had  never  before  feen  Chriflians,  for  whom  they  conceived  a
great  admiration.

We  were  fome  three  days  together  on  an  ifland  off  the
river  of  the  Iroquois,  when  each  tribe  returned  to  its  own
country.

I had  a young  lad,  who  had  already  fpent  two  winters  at
Quebec,  and  who  was  defirous  of  going  with  the  Algonquins
to  learn  their  language.  Pont  Grave  and  I concluded  that,
if  he  entertained  this  defire,  it  would  be  better  to  fend  him
to  this  place  than  elfewhere,  that  he  might  alcertain  the
nature  of  their  country,  fee  the  great  lake,  obferve  the  rivers
and  tribes  there,  and  alfo  explore  the  mines  and  objedls  of
fpecial  interefl:  in  the  localities  occupied  by  thefe  tribes,  in
order  that  he  might  inform  us,  upon  his  return,  of  the  fa6ls
of  the  cafe.  We  afked  him  if  it  was  his  defire  to  go,  for  I
did  not  wifh  to  force  him.  But  he  anfwered  the  queftion  at
once  by  confenting  to  the  journey  with  great  pleafure.

Going  to  Captain  Yroquet,  who  was  ftrongly  attached  to
me,  I afked  him  if  he  would  like  to  take  this  young  boy
to  his  country  to  fpend  the  winter  with  him,  and  bring  him

back

247

Sieur  de  Champlain,

back  in  the  fpring.  He  promifed  to  do  fo,  and  treat  him  as
his  own  fon,  faying  that  he  was  greatly  pleafed  with  the  idea.
He  communicated  the  plan  to  all  the  Algonquins,  who  were
not  greatly  pleafed  with  it,  from  fear  that  fome  accident  might
happen  to  the  boy,  which  would  caufe  us  to  make  war  upon
them.  This  hefitation  cooled  the  defire  of  Y roquet,  who  came
and  told  me  that  all  his  companions  failed  to  find  the  plan  a
good  one.  Meanwhile,  all  the  barques  had  left,  excepting  that
of  Pont  Gravd,  who,  having  fome  prefling  bufmefs  on  hand,
as  he  told  me,  went  away  too.  But  I flayed  with  my  barque
to  fee  how  the  matter  of  the  journey  of  this  boy,  which  I
was  defirous  fhould  take  place,  would  refult.  I accordingly
went  on  ftiore,  and  afked  to  fpeak  with  the  captains,  who
came  to  me,  and  we  fat  down  for  a conference,  together  with
many  other  favages  of  age  and  diflinaion  in  their  troops
Then  I afked  them  why  Captain  Yroquet,  whom  I regarded
as  my  friend,  had  refufed  to  take  my  boy  with  him.  I faid
that  it  was  not  aaing  like  a brother  or  friend  to  refufe  me
what  he  had  promifed,  and  what  could  refult  in  nothing
but  good  to  them;  taking  the  boy  would  be  a means  of  in-
creafing  flill  more  our  friendfhip  with  them  and  forming  one
with  their  neighbors;  that  their  fcruples  at  doing  fo  only
gave  me  an  unfavorable  opinion  of  them;  and  that  if  y
would  not  take  the  boy,  as  Captain  Yroquet  had  P^^ifed,
would  never  have  any  friendfhip  with  them,  for  y
not  children  to  break  their  promifes  in  this  manner.  Th  y
then  told  me  that  they  were  fatisfied  with  the  a-angeme^
only  they  feared  that,  from  change  of  diet  to  fomethi  g
than  he  had  been  accuflomed  to,  fome  harm  mig  PP

248  Voyages  of

to  the  boy,  which  would  provoke  my  difpleafure.  This  they
faid  was  the  only  caufe  of  their  refufal.

I replied  that  the  boy  would  be  able  to  adapt  himfelf  with-
out difficulty  to  their  manner  of  living  and  ufual  food,  and
that,  if  through  ficknefs  or  the  fortunes  of  war  any  harm
ffiould  befall  him,  this  would  not  interrupt  my  friendly  feel-
ings towards  them,  and  that  we  were  all  expofed  to  accidents,
which  we  muft  fubmit  to  with  patience.  But  I faid  that  if
they  treated  him  badly,  and  if  any  misfortune  happened  to
him  through  their  fault,  I ffiould  in  truth  be  difpleafed,  which,
however,  I did  not  expedt  from  them,  but  quite  the  contrary.

They  faid  to  me : “ Since,  then,  this  is  your  delire,  we  will
take  him,  and  treat  him  like  ourfelves.  But  you  ffiall-alfo
take  a young  man  in  his  place,  to  go  to  France.  We  ffiall
be  greatly  pleafed  to  hear  him  report  the  fine  things  he  fliall
have  feen.”  I accepted  with  pleafure  the  propofition,  and  took
the  young  man.  He  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  the  Ochate-
guins,  and  was  alfo  glad  to  go  with  me.  This  prefented  an
additional  motive  for  treating  my  boy  flill  better  than  they
might  otherwife  have  done.  I fitted  him  out  with  what  he
needed,  and  we  made  a mutual  promife  to  meet  at  the  end  of
June.

We  parted  with  many  promifes  of  friendffiip.  Then  they
went  away  towards  the  great  fall  of  the  River  of  Canada,
while  I returned  to  Quebec.  On  my  way,  I met  Pont  Grave
on  Lake  St.  Peter,  who  was  waiting  for  me  with  a large
patache,  which  he  had  fallen  in  with  on  this  lake,  and  which
had  not  been  expeditious  enough  to  reach  the  place  where
the  favages  were,  on  account  of  its  poor  failing  qualities.

We  all  returned  together  to  Quebec,  when  Pont  Grave

went

Sieur  de  Champlain.  249

went  to  Tadouffac,  to  arrange  fome  matters  pertaining  to  our
quarters  there.  But  I flayed  at  Quebec  to  fee  to  the  recon-
flru(5lion  of  fome  palifades  about  our  abode,  until  Pont  Grave
fhould  return,  when  we  could  confer  together  as  to  what  was
to  be  done.

On  the  4th  of  June,  Des  Marais  arrived  at  Quebec,  greatly
to  our  joy ; for  we  were  afraid  that  fome  accident  had  hap-
pened to  him  at  fea.

Some  days  after,  an  Iroquois  prifoner,  whom  I had  kept
guarded,  got  away  in  confequence  of  my  giving  him  too  much
liberty,  and  made  his  efcape,  urged  to  do  fo  by  fear,  not-
withftanding  the  affurances  given  him  by  a woman  of  his
tribe  we  had  at  our  fettlement.

A few  days  after,  Pont  Grave  wrote  me  that  he  was  think-
ing of  paffing  the  winter  at  the  fettlement,  being  moved  to  do
fo  by  many  confiderations.  I replied  that,  if  he  expedled  to
fare  better  than  I had  done  in  the  pafl,  he  would  do  well.

He  accordingly  haftened  to  provide  himfelf  with  the  fup-

plies  neceffary  for  the  fettlement.

After  I had  finiflred  the  palifade  about  our  habitation,  and
put  every  thing  in  order.  Captain  Pierre  returned  in  a barque
in  which  he  had  gone  to  Tadouffac  to  fee  his  friends.  I alfo
went  there  to  afcertain  what  would  refult  from  the  fecond
trading,  and  to  attend  to  fome  other  fpecial  bufinefs  which  I
had  there.  Upon  my  arrival,  I found  there  Pont  Grave,  who
ftated  to  me  in  detail  his  plans,  and  the  reafons  inducing  him
to  fpend  the  winter.  I told  him  frankly  what  I thought  of
the  matter ; namely,  that  I believed  he  would  not  derive  much
profit  from  it,  according  to  the  appearances  that  were  p am  y
to  be  feen.

32

He

250  Voyages  of

He  determined  accordingly  to  change  his  plan,  and  de-
fpatched  a barque  with  orders  for  Captain  Pierre  to  return
from  Quebec  on  account  of  fome  bufinefs  he  had  with  him ;
with  the  intelligence  alfo  that  fome  veffels,  which  had  arrived
from  Brouage,  brought  the  news  that  Monfieur  de  Saint  Luc
had  come  by  poll  from  Paris,  expelled  thofe  of  the  religion
from  Brouage,  re-enforced  the  garrifon  with  foldiers,  and
then  returned  to  Court ; that  the  king  had  been  killed,  and
two  or  three  days  after  him  the  Duke  of  Sully,  together  with
two  other  lords,  whofe  names  they  did  not  know.®®^

All  thefe  tidings  gave  great  forrow  to  the  true  French  in
thefe  quarters.  As  for  myfelf,  it  was  hard  for  me  to  believe
it,  on  account  of  the  different  reports  about  the  matter,  and
which  had  not  much  appearance  of  truth.  Still,  I was  greatly
troubled  at  hearing  fuch  mournful  news.

Now,  after  having  flayed  three  or  four  days  longer  at
Tadouffac,  I faw  the  lofs  which  many  merchants  mufl  fuffer,
who  had  taken  on  board  a large  quantity  of  merchandife,
and  fitted  out  a great  number  of  veffels,  in  expedlation  of
doing  a good  bufinefs  in  the  fur-trade,  which  was  fo  poor  on
account  of  the  great  number  of  veffels,  that  many  will  for  a
long  time  remember  the  lofs  which  they  fuffered  this  year.

Sieur  de  Pont  Grave  and  I embarked,  each  of  us  in  a
barque,  leaving  Captain  Pierre  on  the  veffel.  We  took  Du
Parc  to  Quebec,  where  we  finifhed  what  remained  to  be

done

866  por  fome  account  of  Saint  Luc,  the  rumor  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of
fee  Memoir,  Vol.  I.  By  thofe  of  the  re-  Sully  was  erroneous.  Maximelien  de
ligion,  ceux  de  la  Religion^  are  meant  the  B^thune,  the  Duke  of  Sully,  died  on  the
Huguenots,  or  Protenants.  22d  of  December,  1641,  at  the  age  of

The  aifaflination  of  Henry  IV.  oc-  eighty-two  years,
curred  on  the  14th  of  May,  1610;  but

251

Sieur  de  Champlain.

done  at  the  fettlement.  After  every  thing  was  in  good  con-
dition, we  refolved  that  Du  Parc,  who  had  wintered  there
with  Captain  Pierre,  fhould  remain  again,  and  that  Captain
Pierre  fhould  return  to  France  with  us,  on  account  of  fome
bufmefs  that  called  him  there.

We  accordingly  left  Du  Parc  in  command  there,  with  fix-
teen  men,  all  of  whom  we  enjoined  to  live  foberly,  and  in  the
fear  of  God,  and  in  ftridl  obfervance  of  the  obedience  due  to
the  authority  of  Du  Parc,  who  was  left  as  their  chief  and
commander,  juft  as  if  one  of  us  had  remained.  This  they
all  promifed  to  do,  and  to  live  in  peace  with  each  other.

As  to  the  gardens,  we  left  them  all  well  fupplied  with
kitchen  vegetables  of  all  forts,  together  with  fine  Indian
corn,  wheat,  rye,  and  barley,  which  had  been  already  planted.
There  were  alfo  vines  which  I had  fet  out  when  I fpent  the
winter  there,  but  thefe  they  made  no  attempt  to  preferve ;
for,  upon  my  return,  I found  them  all  in  ruins,  and  I was
greatly  difpleafed  that  they  had  given  fo  little  attention  to
the  prefervation  of  fo  fine  and  good  a plot,  from  which  I
had  anticipated  a favorable  refill t.

After  feeing  that  every  thing  was  in  good  order,  we  fet
out  from  Quebec  on  the  8th  of  Auguft  for  Tadouflac,  in
order  to  prepare  our  veffel,  which  was  fpeedily  done.

CHAPTER  III.

252

Voyages  of

CHAPTER  III.

Return  to  France.  — Meeting  a Whale;  — the  Mode  of  capturing

THEM.

N the  1 3th  of  the  month,  we  fet  out  from  Tadouf-
fac,  arriving  at  lie  Percee  the  next  day,  where
we  found  a large  number  of  veffels  engaged  in
the  filhery,  dry  and  green.

On  the  1 8th  of  the  month,  we  departed  from
lie  Percee,  paffing  in  latitude  42°,  without  fighting  the  Grand
Bank,  where  the  green  fifliery  is  carried  on,  as  it  is  too  narrow
at  this  altitude.

When  we  were  about  half  way  acrofs,  we  encountered  a
whale,  which  was  afleep.  The  veffel,  paffing  over  him,  awak-
ening him  betimes,  made  a great  hole  in  him  near  the  tail,
without  damaging  our  veffel ; but  he  threw  out  an  abundance
of  blood.

It  has  feemed  to  me  not  out  of  place  to  give  here  a brief
defcription  of  the  mode  of  catching  whales,  which  many
have  not  witneffed,  and  fuppofe  that  they  are  fhot,  owing  to
the  falfe  affertions  about  the  matter  made  to  them  in  their
ignorance  by  impoflors,  and  on  account  of  which  fuch  ideas
have  often  been  obftinately  maintained  in  my  prefence.

Thofe,  then,  moft  fkilful  in  this  filliery  are  the  Bafques,
who,  for  the  purpofe  of  engaging  in  it,  take  their  veffels  to  a
place  of  fecurity,  and  near  where  they  think  whales  are  plenty.
Then  they  equip  feveral  fhallops  manned  by  competent  men
and  provided  with  hawfers,  fmall  ropes  made  of  the  belt

hemp

Sieur  de  Champlain.  253

hemp  to  be  found,  at  lead  a hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  long.
They  are  alfo  provided  with  many  halberds  of  the  length  of
a fhort  pike,  whofe  iron  is  fix  inches  broad ; others  are  from
a foot  and  a half  to  two  feet  long,  and  very  fharp.  Each
fhallop  has  a harpooner,  the  moft  agile  and  adroit  man  they
have,  whofe  pay  is  next  higheft  to  that  of  the  mailers,  his
pofition  being  the  moft  dangerous  one.  This  lhallop  being
outfide  of  the  port,  the  men  look  in  all  quarters  for  a whale,
tacking  about  in  all  diredlions.  But,  if  they  fee  nothing,
they  return  to  the  fliore,  and  afcend  the  higheft  point  they
can  find,  and  from  which  they  can  get  the  moft  extenfive
view.  Here  they  ftation  a man  on  the  look-out.  They  are
aided  in  catching  fight  of  a whale  both  by  his  fize  and  the
water  he  fpouts  through  his  blow-holes,  which  is  more  than
a puncheon  at  a time,  and  two  lances  high.  From  the
amount  of  this  water,  they  eftimate  how  much  oil  he  will
yield.  From  fome  they  get  as  many  as  one  hundred  and
twenty  puncheons,  from  others  lefs.  Having  caught  fight  of
this  monftrous  filh,  they  haften  to  embark  in  their  fhallops,
and  by  rowing  or  failing  they  advance  until  they  are  upon
him.

Seeing  him  under  water,  the  harpooner  goes  at  once  to
the  prow  of  the  lhallop  with  his  harpoon,  an  iron  two  feet
long  and  half  a foot  wide  at  the  lower  part,  and  attached  to
a Hick  as  long  as  a fmall  pike,  in  the  middle  of  which  is
a hole  to  which  the  hawfer  is  made  fall.  The  harpooner,
watching  his  time,  throws  his  harpoon  at  the  whale,  which
enters  him  well  forward.  As  foon  as  he  finds  himfelf
wounded,  the  whale  goes  down.  And  if  by  chance  turning
about,  as  he  does  fometimes,  his  tail  ftrikes  the  lliallop,  it

254

Voyages  of

breaks  it  like  glafs.  This  is  the  only  ritk  they  run  of  being
killed  in  harpooning.  As  foon  as  they  have  thrown  the  har-
poon into  him,  they  let  the  hawfer  run  until  the  whale  reaches
the  bottom.  But  fometimes  he  does  not  go  ftraight  to
the  bottom,  when  he  drags  the  fliallop  eight  or  nine  leagues
or  more,  going  as  fwiftly  as  a horfe.  Very  often  they  are
obliged  to  cut  their  hawfer,  for  fear  that  the  whale  will  take
them  under  water.  But,  when  he  goes  ftraight  to  the  bottom,
he  refts  there  awhile,  and  then  returns  quietly  to  the  furface,
the  men  taking  aboard  again  the  hawfer  as  he  rifes.  When
he  comes  to  the  top,  two  or  three  ftiallops  are  ftationed  around
with  halberds,  with  which  they  give  him  feveral  blows.  Find-
ing himfelf  ftruck,  the  whale  goes  down  again,  leaving  a trail
of  blood,  and  grows  weak  to  fuch  an  extent  that  he  has  no
longer  any  ftrength  nor  energy,  and  returning  to  the  furface
is  finally  killed.  When  dead,  he  does  not  go  down  again :
faftening  ftout  ropes  to  him,  they  drag  him  afhore  to  their
head-quarters,  the  place  where  they  try  out  the  fat  of  the
whale,  to  obtain  his  oil.  This  is  the  way  whales  are  taken,
and  not  by  cannon-ftiots,  which  many  fuppofe,  as  I have  ftated
above.

To  refume  the  thread  of  my  narrative : after  wounding  the
whale,  as  mentioned,  we  captured  a great  many  porpoifes,
which  our  mate  harpooned  to  our  pleafure  and  amufement.
We  alfo  caught  a great  many  fifli  having  a large  ear,  with  a
hook  and  line,  attaching  to  the  hook  a little  fifti  refembling
a herring,  and  letting  it  trail  behind  the  veffel.  The  large  ear,
thinking  it  in  fadl  a living  fifh,  comes  up  to  fwallow  it,  thus
finding  himfelf  at  once  caught  by  the  hook,  which  is  con-
cealed in  the  body  of  the  little  fifli.  This  fifli  is  very  good,

and

Sieur  de  Champlain.  255

and  has  certain  tufts  which  are  very  handfome,  and  refemble
thofe  worn  on  plumes.

On  the  2 2d  of  September,  we  arrived  on  foundings.  Here
we  faw  twenty  veffels  fome  four  leagues  to  the  weft  of  us,
which,  as  they  appeared  from  our  veflel,  we  judged  to  be

Flemifh.  ,

On  the  25th  of  the  month,  we  fighted  the  Ifle  de  Greneze,
after  experiencing  a ftrong  blow,  which  lafted  until  noon.

On  the  27th  of  the  month,  we  arrived  at  Honfleur.

•*8  Guernfey,  which  lay  direftly  before  that  met  the  eye  on  their  way  to  Hon
them  as  they  advanced  up  the  Engliih  lleur.

Channel,  and  was  the  firft  large  ifland

INDEX.

i

.\BE!

.\bri-

Abo]

Acac

Accc

Accc

Acb-

A&

AdJ

Alii:

Aih

Ale

I

AI

Al

M

Al

a:

A

A

A

INDEX.

A.

Abenaque,  175.

Abriou,  150.

Abuptic  River,  105.

Acadie,  213.

Accomack,  79.

Accominticus,  69.

Achelacy,  188.

Adaudin,  147.

Adlaudinech,  147.

Adirondack  Mountains,  218.
Advocate’s  Harbor,  25,  26,  149*
Ag:guncia,  49.

Alexander,  Sir  William,  9,  16.
Alexandria,  2.

Alfonfe,  Jean,  2,  40,  49,  i74»  188.
Algonquin,  I75>

226,  227,  228,  229,  234,  236,  237,  239,
240,  241,  244,  245,  246,  247.

Allen  River,  24,  107,  140-
All  Ifles,  Bay  of,  ii.

Almouchiquois,  S5»  ^3>  I47*

Alonfon,  175.

Alouettes,  Point  aux,  165,  170.
America,  4,  20,  64,  74>  I5S>  J^59-
American  Academy,  Memoirs  of,  77-
American  Antiquarian  Society,  229.

Anaffou,  92.

Androfcoggin,  59.

Aneda,  its  healing  qualities,  61.
Anglois,  Le  Port  aux,  156.
Angoulefme,  31.

Annapolis,  22,  24,  107,  140.
Annapolis  Bafin,  17,  loi,  139.
Annapolis  River,  22,  107,  I44-
Anne,  Ste.,  201,  226.

Anne  of  Denmark,  70.

Annifquam,  70.

Annifquam  Harbor,  114-
Antoine,  St.  Riviere,  23,  24.

Antons,  Sieur  de,  93,  108.
Archangel,  92.

Archer,  237.

Argal’s  Bay,  16.

Argyl  River,  105.

Artichokes,  Jerufalem,  82,  112,  123.
Afher,  G.  M.,  171.

Afli-tree,  113-
Aubry,  Nicholas,  20.

Auguftine,  St.,  14.

Auk,  13,  14-

B.

Bacalaos,  73.

Bacchus,  Ifle  de,  62,  67*  no,  I73-

26o

Index,

Back  River,  57.

Bagnall,  Walter,  62.

Bald  Peak,  218.

Ballard,  Rev.  Dr.  Edward,  92,  93.
Baird’s  Report,  68,  89.

Bangor,  33,  43,  44,  46-
Bank,  Grand,  156,  228.

Barnftable,  116,  117.

Barque,  French,  145.

Barrington  Harbor,  12.

Bafques,  12,  154,  165,  166,  177,  213,
233,  235,  237,  252.

Bath,  59,  92.

Batifcan,  201.

Battle,  preparation  for,  by  Indians,
214;  of  Lake  Champlain,  219-223;
at  the  mouth  of  the  Richelieu,  240-
246.

Batturier,  Cap,  119.

Baude,  Moulin,  164.

Baye  de  Toutes  Ifles,  152.

Baye  Frangoife,  15,  20,  21,  24,  27,  148.
Bayfield,  Capt.,  197.

Bay,  La  Courante,  105,  to6.

Bay  of  Fundy,  15,  16,  20,  24,  25,  27,
40,  139-

Bay  of  St.  John,  28.

Bay  of  Mines,  25,  27.

Bay  of  St.  Lawrence,  26.

Bayonne,  iii.

Bear  Brook,  175.

Bear  Ifland,  23.

Bear  River,  24.

Beaumont,  35.

Beauport,  iii,  115.

Beauport,  Riviere  de,  176.

Bedabedec,  41,  42,  46,  47,  48,  55,  56.
Beech-trees,  113.

Belknap,  Rev.  Jer.,  92.

Bellenger,  175.

Berjon,  Jean,  ix,  xv.

Beflabez,  45,  46,  142,  143.

Biard,  P^re,  39,  213.

Biblioth^que  Nationale,  40.
Biencourville,  22.

Bigelow,  Dr.  Jacob,  113.

Birds,  names  of,  14,  15.

Black  Befs,  114.

Blackbird,  68.

Black  Cape,  172.

Black  Point,  62.

Black  River,  171.

Black  Skimmer,  87.

Bluff  Ifland,  62.

Bohemians,  124.

Bonaventure,  Ifland  of,  164.
Bonnerme,  180,  197.

Bofcanhegan  Lake,  47.

Boflon,  1 13,  122.

Bofton  Bay,  74,  76.

Boflon  Society  of  Natural  Hiflory,  87,
216.

Boues,  Charles  de,  183.

Boulay,  16,  35,  97.

Bourioli,  la  Motte,  35.

Boyer,  108.

Boyer,  De,  244.

Bradford,  Wm.,  78,  89,  121,  136.

Brant  Point,  75,  76,  80,  115,  116.

Bras  d’Or,  La,  1 56.

Brazilian  beans,  64,  82,  in,  112.
Brdbeuf,  P^re,  213.

Brereton,  237.

Brefl,  228.

Bretons,  233,  237.

Brouage,  250.

Brunfwick,  92.

Burials,  142,  143,  146,  igi,

Buflards,  14.

Buzzard’s  Bay,  131,  13?,

Index.  '261

c.

Cabahis,  45,  47.

Cabot,  John,  2.

Cabot,  Sebaftian,  2,  16,  61.
Cabirecoubat,  183.

Caen,  22.

Calais,  34.

Calendar  Eng.  State  Papers,  62.
Camden,  41.

Camden  Mountains,  42,  48.

Cambridge  Mufeum,  14.

CamePs  Hump,  217.

Cammock,  Thomas,  no.

Campbell,  105.

Campeftre  de  Berge,  8.

Campobello  I Hand,  100.

Canada,  3,  7,  61,  66,  72,  86,  186,  187,
188,  216,  230,  233,  248.

Canada,  River  of,  248.

Canadians,  45,  48,  124,  196.

Caniza,  70.

Cannon-balls  at  St.  Croix,  33.

Canoes,  72,  73,  74,  167-
Canfeau,  7,  8,  12,  104,  106,  I08,  146,
ISO,  151,  IS3,  154,  15s,  156.

Canfoke,  7.

Cap  aux  Oies,  172.

Cap  Blanc,  79,  80,  90,  115,  n6,  117.
Cap  Corneille,  93,  137,  138.

Cap  Dauphin,  171,  172.

Cap  de  Tourmente,  172.

Cap  St.  Louis,  74,  75,  76,  80,  115,  116.
Cape  Anne,  69,  70,  71,  72,  90,  iii,  135.
Cape  Breton,  8,  9,  10,  27,  103,  104,  106,
108,  149,  155,  156,  164,  196-
Cape  Breton,  I Hand  of,  155*

Cape  Charles,  171.

Cape  Cod,  79»  80,  87,  90,  92,  115,  117,

135,  140.

Cape  Cod  Bay,  79,  115,  116.

Cape  Cod  Harbor,  78.

Cape,  Crow,  93.

Cape  Elizabeth,  61.

Cape  James,  79.

Cape  Jellifon,  43.

Cape  North,  149.

Cape  of  Mines,  26.

Cape  Porpoife,  68,  69,  70.

Cape  Sable,  13,  15,  19,  40,  105,  140,
154-

Cape  St.  Lawrence,  164.

Cape  Salmon,  171,  172.

Cape  St.  Mary,  164.

Cape  Small  Point,  61.

Cardinal’s  Hat,  28.

Carillon,  Fort,  224.

Cartier,  Jacques,  2,  61,  66,  171,  172,
173.  175.  176, 183,  184, 185,  i86,  187,
188,  189,  201,  237.

Cafco  Bay,  61.

Caftine,  43.

Catharine,  St,  River,  153.

Cathay,  4,  171-
Cedar,  82.

Chalifour,  Riviere,  176.

Chaloupe,  146.

Chambly  Bafin,  207,  210,  226.
Chambly,  M.  de,  210.

Chamcook  Hill,  32.

Champdord,  De,  20,  35,  90,  100,  loi,
108,  109,  15 1,  154-
Champs,  Des,  98.

Chaoufarou,  216.

Chards,  112.

Charles  L,  70.

Charles,  Prince,  70,  79.

Charles,  St.,  River,  176,  183,  184.
Charles  River,  72,  76.

Charlevoix,  2,  9,  ii,  16,  25,  27,  30,

262

Index,

37,  IS2>  153,  156,  164,  17s.  189,  207,
210.

Chatham,  120,  126,  130,  13 1,  132,  136,
145.

Chatham  Hill,  Great,  122.

Chatham  Old  Harbor,  120,  122.
Chatham  Roads,  120,  122.

Chaudi^re,  47,  60.

Challes,  4.

Chauvin,  Capt.,  4.

Chavin,  Capt.  Pierre,  227,  234,  244,
Chebu6lo,  152.  [249,  250,  251.

Chedabu6lo  Bay,  155.

Chedotel,  9.

Cherry-trees,  198.

Chefuncook,  47.

Chevalier,  146,  147,  148,  149.

Cheyne  Ifland,  31.

Chigne6lo  Bay,  25,  27.

Chigne6lo,  Cape,  25,  27.

Chin,  217.

China,  2,  5,  171.

Chomouchonan,  169.

Chops,  57.

Choiiacoet,  62,  64,  68,  70,  85,  91,  no,
1 13,  123,  125,  147,  T50,  167.
Chriftians,  45,  149,  203,  207,  246*
Church,  Col.  Benjamin,  42.

Churchill’s  Voyages,  121.

Clam  Bay,  152.

Clark’s  Ifland,  78.

Claudiane,  23.

Clyde,  12.

Coaft  Pilot,  62.

Cohoiiepech,  113.

Collier,  Sieur,  229.

Columbus,  Chriftopher,  121,  155.
Columbus,  Ferdinand,  121.
Commiflaries,  Englifh  and  French,  15,
16,  148,  149,  IS3-

Conquet,  228.

Copper  mines,  25,  27,  37,  97,  98,  149.
Coquilles,  Port  aux,  100.

Cormorant,  14.

Cormorant  Ifland,  13,  105.

Corn,  Indian,  in,  121,  122,  123.
Corneilles,  Ifle  aux,  55.

Cortereal,  Gafpar,  2.

Cortereal,  Michael,  2.

Cofa,  Juan  de  la,  79.

Coudres,  Ifle  aux,  172,  185,  187.
Country  Harbor,  153.

Coues’s  Key,  13,  14,  68,  87,  89.
Council,  Royal,  163.

Coy,  Me,  Head,  28.

Cramolet,  90.

Cranes,  14.

Croix,  St,  15,  31,  32,  33,  34,  35,  37,  38,
47,  49,  52,  SS,  90,  93,  94,  98,  99,  J°o,
107,  109,  138,  147,  184,  185,  186, 187,
188,  201,  204,  205.

Croix,  St.,  River,  31,  32,  175,  183.
Crofs  Ifland,  93.

Crow’s  Pond,  121.

Cruxius,  152,  155,  216.

Cumberland  Bafin,  27.

Curlew,  14.

Currant,  red,  68,  198.

Cufliman,  David,  92,  93.

Cutler,  77.

Cutwater,  87.

Cyprefs,  82,  112.

D.

D’Avezac,  175,  186,  188,  237.
Darache,  166.

Dauphin,  Riviere  du,  22.

Davis,  John,  3.

Deane,  Charles,  89.  ^

Index.  263

De  Cofta,  Benjamin  F.,  79.

Deep  Brook,  24.

De  Laet,  10,  16,  27,  37,  76,  86,  148,
149,  151,  152,  i53»  i5S»  156.

De  Monts  Ifland,  Little,  32,  33.
Dennyfville,  31.

Devils,  Point  of  all,  165,  170.

Dexter,  Henry  M.,  77,  78,  123,  125,
136.

Diamonds,  Point  of,  175,  176-
Dieppe,  79,  227,  234.

Divide,  34.

Digby  Neck,  16,  20,  21,  22.

Digby  Strait,  10 1.

Diftillerie,  La,  176.

Dix  Peak,  218.

DochePs  liland.  Little,  32,  33.

Dogs  of  the  ravages,  142,  190.
Donnacona,  188,  237.

Ducks,  14.

Du  Glas,  36.

Duquen,  Father  Jean,  168.

E.

Eagle  Cape,  172.

Eaft  Bofton,  76.

Eaftern  Point,  114.

Eaftham,  136.

Eaft  India  Co.,  3.

Eaft  Indies,  197.

Eaftport,  93,  139-
Eboulemens  Mountains,  172.
Egyptians,  124.

Ellingwood  Rock,  56.

^loi,  St.,  201.

Emanuel,  Don,  2.

Emmerfon’s  Creek,  28.

Emmerfon’s  Point,  72.

England,  2,  3,  156,  197.

Englifti,  171,  237.

Englifh  Channel,  255.

^quille,  Riviere  de,  22,  24,  94,  144.
Efplanade  du  Fort,  176.

Eftienne,  Mafter,  145.

Eftienne,  St.,  54.

Etechemins,  31,  32,  44>  47>  63,  72,  73,
91,  138,  142,  175-
Europe,  15.

Europeans,  49,  237.

F.

Fendu,  6,  148.

Ferland,  175,  233.

Finifterre,  228.

Firft  Encounter,  136.

Filhing,  mode  of,  by  the  Indians,  77.
Flax,  77.

Fleas  at  Chatham,  125.

Flemifti,  199,  255.

Florida,  95,  99,  100,  108,  216,  218.
Foedera,  Rymer’s,  2.

Fontainebleau,  157,  228.

Force,  Peter,  123,  124.

Forked  Cape,  15.

Fort  Point,  43,  114-
Fort  Point  Ledge,  43.

Fort  Pownall,  43.

Fofs’s  Beach,  70.

Foulgerd  de  Vitrd,  108.

Fougeray,  35.

Fouques,  Captain,  36,  107.

Fourchu  Cape,  19,  104,  105,  151-
Fourchu  Port,  15.

Fous,  Riviere  des,  176.

France,  12,  37,  77.  102.  «°3.  140,

145, 146, 147,  ISO.  iSS.  159.  174. 182,
186,  191,  200,  227,  228,  232,  248.
Francis  L,  2.

264  Index.

Frangois,  St.,  206.

French,  196,  216,  228.

Frefli- Water  Cove,  114.

Frobifher,  Sir  Martin,  3.

G.

Gallatin,  Albert,  229.

Gardner’s  Creek,  28.

Gafp^,  27,  S4,  103,  147,  ISS.  160,  164,
196,  227.

Gaftaldo,  8,  31,  73.

Gas,  Mont  du,  175.

Geefe,  14.

Gendre,  Lucas  Le,  229,  230.

Gendre,  River  du,  175.

Geneftou,  De,  35.

Gennes,  B.  de,  27.

Gennes,  Riviere  de,  206.

Georges,  Captain,  3.

George,  St.,  River,  92.

Georgian  Bay,  196.

Germany,  197.

Gilbert,  Humphrey,  3,  14.

Gloucefter,  in,  112,  114,  115.

Goat  Ifland,  22.

Gondy,  Cardinal  de,  147.

Granary  Burial  Ground,  113.

Grand  Bank,  163,  222.

Grand  Manan,  15.

Grandmont,  in.

Granville,  22.

Granville,  Lower,  97.

Grapes,  71,  no,  in,  173.

Gray,  Afa,  76.

Great  Duck  Ifland,  31.

Green  Ifland,  153.

Green  Mountains,  217.

Grenezd,  Ifle  de,  255.

Godfrey,  33.

Gomez,  Eftevan,  61.

Gookin,  Daniel,  71,  123,  125.

Goofe  Cape,  172.

Goofe  Fair  Bay,  68.

Goofe  Ifland,  153.

Goofe  River,  28.

Gofnold,  Bartholomew,  79.

Gouffre,  Riviere  du,  172.

Guaft,  Pierre  du,  76.

Guercheville,  Marchionefs  de,  39.
Guernfey,  255.

Guienne,  161.

Gulls,  14.

Gulliver’s  Hole,  21.

H.

Hadley  River,  132.

Haies,  Edward,  8,  9,  14.

Hakluyt,  2,  3,  9,  14,  66,  171,  174,  183,
185,  188.

Halliburton,  148.

Halifax,  12,  152.

Hampton,  70.

Harbor  Ifland,  1 53.

Harding’s  Beach  Point,  120.

Hare  Ifland,  171.

Haute,  Ifle,  25,  26,  41,  42,  43,  93,  136,
137-

Havre  de  Gr^ce,  7,  9,  22,  232.
Hawkins,  Alfred,  175.

Hazard’s  State  Papers,  2.

Hazel  Ifland,  172.

Head  Harbor,  100.

Hdbert,  Ifle  d’,  23.

Hell  Gate,  57,  59.

Hemp,  Indian,  77.

Henry  IV.,  157,  160,  229,  250.

Henry  VII.,  2.

Herons,  14.

Index.

Herring  River,  8o.

H^ve,  Cap  de  la,  9,  10,  12, 62,  no,  151.

Higginfon,  Francis,  88,  89.

Hippocrates,  52.

Hockomock  Bay,  57,  58.

Hollanders,  3,  146.

Homem  Diego,  16.

Homenn,  27.

Honabetha,  75.

Honemechin,  63.

Honfleur,  7,  20,  98,  157,  163,  228,  230,
231,  232,  255.

Horfe-foot  Crab,  86.

H6tel  Dieu,  176.

Hougue,  232.

Hougueaux,  232.

Hudfon,  Henry,  vi,  171.

Hudfon  River,  218.

Hudfon’s  Bay,  170,  171.

Huguenots,  250.

Huiftres,  Port  aux,  116,  117.

Hurons,  176,  196,  202,  213,  226,  228.

Huron,  Lake,  196,  226,  229.

Huy,  Ifland  of,  231.

I.

Imbert,  23.

Indians,  at  the  Kennebec,  39,  58,  91,
92;  at  Saco,  62^7,  no;  at  Cape
Anne,  70-72 ; in  Rofton  Harbor,
72-74 ; at  Brant  Point,  74,  75  ; at
Plymouth,  77,  78;  at  Naufet,  81-86;
at  Gloucefter,  n i-n  5 ; at  Barnftable,
1 17;  at  Chatham,  121-136;  at  St.
John,  147 ; at  TadoulTac,  167,  233 ;
at  Quebec,  189-196,  202,  203;  at
Lake  Champlain,  210-227 ; at  the
river  Richelieu,  239-246.

Indian  corn,  61,  64,  66,  73,  75?  ^2,  86,
III,  115,  121,  222,  251.

265

Indian  hemp,  77.

Indian  houfes,  67,  83,  124.

Ipfwich,  70.
louanifcou,  138,  141.

Irocofia,  217.

Iroquois,  76,  196,  200,  202,  203,  207,
218,  221,  223,  224,  225,  226,  228,  229,
235,  239,  240,  241.

Iroquois,  Lake  of  the,  216.

Iroquois  River,  206,  207,  210,  215,  236.
Ifland  Cape,  70,  71,  74,  84,  90,  91,  in.
Ifland  Bay,  152.

Ifland  Harbor,  68,  69.

Ifles  of  Shoals,  69,  70.

Ifles  Ranges,  138.

Ifle  Verte,  Riviere  de  l\  153.

Italians,  112.

j-

Jacques,  Mafter,  98.

Jay’s  Peak,  217.

Jennefs,  John  S.,  69.

Jeunefle,  La,  146.

Jerremifquam  Ifland,  57,  58.

Jdfuites,  39,  176.

John,  St.,  28,  29.

John,  St.,  Baptift,  28.

John,  St,  Lake,  168,  205.

John,  St.,  River,  9,  210,  216.

John,  St,  Riviere,  29,  30,  33,  34,  37, 97,
no,  147.

Johnfon,  Edward,  123.

Jonas,  106,  107,  150.

Jomard,  Edme  Francois,  3,  49,  61.
Joflelyn,  John,  68,  88,  89,  no,  112, 113.
Juniper,  82.

K.

Kay,  Dr.,  216.

Kendufkeag,  44.

266

Index.

Kennebec,  46,  56,  57,  59,  60,  62,  91,  92,
93»  137-

Killington  Peak,  217.

King  Crab,  86.

King’s  Forlant,  171.

Kohl,  Dr.,  73.

L.

Labrador,  ix,  3,  14.

La  Cadie,  7,  9,  10,  ii,  12,  44,  73,  74»
145-

Lair  et,  River,  184.

Lake  Champlain,  216,  218,  223.

Lake  George,  218,  223.

L’Ange,  Paris,  v.

Larcadia,  73.

Latitude,  by  Champlain,  18.

Laverdi^re,  L’Abb^,  23,  26,  40,  52,  86,

152. 153, 154,  171,  173.  I7S,  183,  196,

197,  205,  213,  215,  233.

Lark  Point,  165.

Laurie,  168,  206.

Lejeune,  213.

Lennox,  147.

Lefcarbot,  3,  7,  10,  ii,  12,  17,  18,  20,
22,  23,  33,  36,  37,  38,  50,  62,  63,  73,
94,  103,  106,  107,  108,  III,  131,  140,

146,  147,  1497  iSL  153,  154,  157,  i75»
213.

Lefdigui^res,  Duchefs  of,  164,

L6vis,  Cap  de,  176.

Ldvis,  Henri  de,  176.

Licenfe,  Extract  from,  xv.

Linnaeus,  89.

Lifbon,  2.

Lifcomb  Ifland,  153.

Lifcomb  Point,  1 52.

Lifcomb  River,  12.

Little  Boar’s  Head,  69,  70,  71.

Littrd,  10,  22.

Liverpool,  10.

Lobfter  Bay,  105.

Long  Ifland,  15,  16,  17,  20,  21,  27,  30,
104.

Long  Ifland  Bay,  139.

Long  Ifland  Sound,  14,  18,  136.

Long  Neck,  13 1.

Louif burgh.  Harbor  of,  1 56.

Louis,  St.,  Baflin  de,  207.

Louis,  St.,  Falls  of,  160.

Louis,  St.,  Fort,  210.

Loup,  River  du,  206.

Lower  Granville,  22,  24.

Lubeck,  139.

Lumley’s  Inlet,  171.

Lunenburg,  9.

Luz,  Jean  de,  154.

M.

Mabretou,  103,  143,  144,  147,  150.
Machias,  93,  138.

Magnetic  Needle,  10,  24,  34,  155.
Magnus,  Olaus,  52.

Magpie  Iflands,  31.

Magpies,  30.

Mai  Bay,  164,  172.

Mallebarre,  57,  81,  90,  T07,  109,  no,
117,  118,  136,  138.

Maine,  61,  135.

Maine,  Gulf  of,  140.

Maine  Hiftorical  Society,  43,  73,  92.
Mai  de  la  terre,  or  fcurvy,  50,  95,  98,

145,  199

Malo,  St.,  22,  24,  25,  27,  54,  93,  108,

146,  151,  IS7,  23s.  241,  242.
Manomet,  78.

Manan,  Grand,  Petit,  30,  55,  93,  99,
139-

Index.  267

Manthane,  30.

Manthoumermer,  57.

Mappe-Monde,  49,  61.

Marais,  Sieur  des,  199,  204,  207,  208,
232,  249.

Marchin,  58,  60,  91,  no,  150.

Margaret,  St.,  17,  18.

Marguerite,  St.,  152.

Marie  de  Medicis,  Queen  Regent,  xiii,
146, 147.

Marriage,  191.

Marfh  Creek,  29.

Marfhfield,  74.

Martha’s  Vineyard,  131.

Martin,  St.,  Head,  28.

Martyres,  Les,  15 1.

Mary,  Riviere  St.,  153.

Mary’s,  St.,  Bay,  15,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,

23,  35.  40,  104,  164-

Mary’s,  St.,  River,  201.

MalTachufetts  Bay,  71.

MalTachufetts  Harbor  Commiflioners’
Report,  1 19.

Matachiats,  143.

Match-lock,  133.

Mattiolo,  8,  73.

Maurice,  St.,  River,  205.

May  Flower,  78,  79.

McKeen,  John,  92.

Megunticook  Range,  42.

Membertou,  103.

Menthane,  232.

Mercator,  156.

Merrimac  Bay,  70,  71.

Merrymeeting  Bay,  57,  59,
Meflamouet,  37,  no,  in.

Metinic  Iflands,  48.

Mettawamkeag,  34,  47*

Meur,  Jacob  von,  27.

Mexico,  89.

Mexico,  Gulf  of,  218.

Micmacs,  196.

Milk  Ifland,  70.

Milkweed,  77.

Mill  Pond,  29,  122.

Mill  River,  24.

Minas  Bafin,  25,  148,  149.

Minigo,  173.

Minot’s  Light,  122.

Miquelet,  M.,  103.

Miffiflippi  River,  216.

Miftaflina,  169,  170.

Miftaffin  Lake,  170.

Miftigoches,  235,  239.

Mitchella,  partridge-berry,  20.
Mitchell,  Prof.,  119.

Mocodome  Inlet,  153.

Moll,  16.

Monhegan,  91,  92.

Monomoy,  81,  130,  131.

Monomoyicks,  136.

Montagnais,  76,  183,  196,  200,  213,  216,
219,  221,  226,  234,  236,  239,  240,  241,
244,  245.

Mont  Carmel,  176.

Montmorency,  174,  i75>  ^7^-
Montreal,  160.

Monts  D^ferts,  Ifle  des,  39, 41,  55»  I37,

138.

Monts,  Sieur  de,  4,  5,  6,  7,  159,  160;
his  commiffion,  160-163,  165,  167,
176,  182,  200,  227,  228,  229,  230.
Moofe  Ifland,  93.

Moofe  River,  24.

Morel,  Capt,  7.

Morris  Ifland,  120,  122.

Morris  River,  24.

Morton’s  Memorial,  78.

Morton,  Thomas,  123,  124.
Mofquitoes,  34,  240.

268

Index.

Mofquito  Iflands,  48.

Motin,  V.

Moulin  Baude,  164.

Mount  Joli,  164.

Mount  Manfell,  39.

Mount  Marcy,  218.

Mouton,  Port,  8,  ii,  12,  18,  21,  22.
Mundlon,  27.

Murdoch,  Beamifli,  7,  9,  37.
Murphy,  Henry  C.,  40,  73.

Murray  Bay,  172.

Mufcongus  Bay,  48.

Mufeiim  of  Univerfity  Laval,  86.
Myftic  River,  76.

N.

Narraganfett  Club,  65,  66.

Nafhaway,  71.

Natel,  Antoine,  178,  193.

Naufet,  57,  81,  90,  1 17,  1 19,  130,  136.
Nef,  La,  91.

Negro,  Cape,  12.

Neponfitt,  71.

Neutral  I hand,  33.

New  Brunfwick,  28,  135.

New  England,  6,  14,  64,  69,  77,  79,  86,
87,  88,  1 12,  121,  124,  237.

New  England,  Council  for,  62.

New  England  Hiftoric  Genealogical
Society,  33,  79.

Newfoundland,  3,  13,  14,  164,  196.

New  France,  4,  7,  103,  140,  147,  157,
IS9,  161,  197.

New  Hampfhire,  61,  70.

New  Jerfey,  86.

New  York,  196.

New  York,  Natural  Hiftory  of,  216.
Nicomtau  Bay,  152.

Niganis,  149,  156.

Nipmuck,  74.

Nipple  Top,  218.

Noblka  Point,  13 1,  132,  136.

Noddle’s  Ifland,  76.

Noix,  Ifle  aux,  21 1.

Nonantam,  71.

NonamelTet  Ifland,  13 1.

Nova  Scotia,  7,  8,  9,  10, 14,  40,  97,  135,
140,  196.

Nova  Zembla,  4.

Normandy,  9,  161.

Normans,  233,  235.

Novus  Orbis,  10,  86.

North  America,  8.

North  Creek,  17.

North  Sea,  205.

Northumberland  Strait,  24.
Norumbeque,  33,  34,  4°,  42,  44,  45,  47,
49,  50,  55,  136,  137,  141,  142,  218.
Nofe,  217.

O.

Oak,  1 13.

Oak  Bay,  34.

Ochateguins,  196,  202,  221,  225,  228,
229,  234,  235,  246,  248.

Old  Orchard  Beach,  113.

Old  Stage  Harbor,  120.

Olmechin,  63.

Onemechin,  no,  in,  113,  150.

Ordre  de  Bon  Temps,  144.

Orleans,  120,  12 1.

Orleans,  Duke  of,  146.

Orleans,  Ifle  of,  172,  173,  174,  175,  176,
187,  188.

Ortelius,  231.

Orville,  d’,  35,  36,  95.

Ofborne,  Thomas,  7.

Oftemoy,  213.

Vw/

Index.  269

Ottawa,  196,  226.

Ouagimou,  142.

Ouygoudy,  28,  147.

Owl’s  Head,  12,  41,  48.

Oxford,  Earl  of,  7.

Oyfter  Harbor,  116.

Oyfter  Pond,  122.

P.

Pacific  Ocean,  68.

Palmer,  218.

Palmerfton  Bay,  10.

Panounias,  55,  63,  142,  146,  150.

Parc,  Sieur  du,  233,  250,  251.

Pardoe,  Mifs,  147.

Paris,  2,  20,  38,  40,  155,  157,  230,  250.
Parkhurft,  Anthony,  14.

Parrf  borough,  148.

Partridge-berry,  20.

Partridge  I Hand,  28,  29.

Paffage  Courant,  155.

PafTage,  Petit,  16,  18,  20,  21.
Paffamacadie,  3I)  73-
PafTamaquoddy  Bay,  30,  31.

Patache,  146.

Paul  V.,  Roman  Pontiff,  38.

Paul’s,  St.,  Bay,  172.

Paul,  St.,  Ifland  of,  164.
Pemadumcook,  Lake,  47.

Pememen,  150.

Pemetiq,  39.

Penguins,  13,  I4»  ^9-
Penobfcot  River,  34,  4o>  4^?  42>  43>  47>
49, 60, 92, 137, 218.

Pentegouet,  40.

Perc^e,  Ifle,  155,  164,  228,  252.
Peribonca,  169.

Perkins,  F.  S.,  238.

Perpifawick  Inlet,  152.

Peru,  85,  89.

Peter,  St.,  Lake  of,  205,  206,  226,  248.
Petitcoudiac,  27.

Petit  PafTage,  104,

Petit  River,  10.

Petum,  66.

Pickering,  Dr.  Charles,  66.

Picouagami,  169.

Pigeons,  69.

Pike,  Bony-fcaled,  or  gar,  216.

Pilgrims  of  Plymouth,  77,  79.

Pilotois,  190,  213.

Pinckney  Point,  105.

Placentia  Bay,  164.

Pleafant  Bay,  121.

Plum-trees,  198.

Plymouth  Harbor,  76,  79.

Point  au  Pies,  172.

Point  Corneille,  172.

Point  Gammon,  126,  13 1.

Point  Ouelle,  172.

Point  P^fe,  172.

Pokomtacuke,  71.

Pond  Ifland,  56.

Pont  Gravd,  3,  7,  IL  3^,  54,  94,  95,  97,
99,  100,  loi,  103,  105,  108,  132,  160,
163,  165,  166,  167, 180,  181,  182,  199,
200,  202,  204,  227,  229,  230,  232,  233,
244,  246,  247,  248,  249,  250.

Pont  Gravd,  Robert,  132.

Pontoife,  Grand  Vicar  of,  183.

Pont,  Riviere  du,  206.

Poole,  William  F.,  123.

Popham  Celebration,  93.

Port  k I’fiquilles,  171.

Port  du  Cap  St.  Louis,  78,  79.

Port  Fortune,  120,  126,  130,  132,  138,
I39»  145-

Portland,  Dorfetfhire,  231.

Port  of  Mines,  26,  97,  148,  I49*

270

Index.

Port  Royal,  17,  22,  24,  25,  27,  37,  94,
97,  99,  100,  104,  106,  107,  108,  109,

139,  140,  141,  147,  148,  149-
Port  St.  Helaine,  152.

Portfmouth,  70.

Portugal,  2,  9.

Portuguefe,  8,  156,  237.

Pottery,  Indian,  86.

Poutrincourt,  Cap  de,  149.
Poutrincourt,  Sieur  de,  19,  24,  30,  37,
38,  82,  97,  106,  107,  108,  III,  1 13,
1 14,  1 15,  1 17,  126,  127,  128,  134,  135,

140,  141,  144,  145,  146,  147,  148,  149,
150,  151,  157.

Pownall,  Governor  Thomas,  43,  223.
Prairies,  Sieur  des,  241,  242.

Prevert,  M.,  24,  25,  26,  27,  97.

Prince  George,  92.

Prince  Henry,  171.

Prince,  Rev.  Thomas,  9^.

Prince  Society,  9,  65,  69,  112,  I2^.
Pring,  Martin,  79.

Prout’s  Neck,  62.

Ptolemy,  8,  73.

Pumpkins,  65,  112.

Punkapaog,  71.

Purchas’s  Pilgrims,  14.

Purflane,  75.

Pyrenees,  Lower,  154.

Q-

Quaco  Light,  28.

Ouaco  River,  27.

Quebec,  19,  39,  47,  52,  60,  171,  174,
i75i  176,  180,  182,  183,  186, 187,  1 88,
196,  197,  199,  200,  201,  202,  204,  226,
227,  228,  230,  234,  23s,  236,  237,  246,
248,  249,  250,  251.

Quebec,  Lit.  and  His.  Soc.,  169.

Quelibec,  175.

Queconlicq,  150.

Quinibequy,  44,  46,  47,  48,  56,  58,  60,
61,  68,  86,  91,  137,  141,  150.

Quoddy  Roads,  Head,  139.
Quiouhamenec,  113.

R.

Ralleau,  12,  29,  37,  106,  149.

Ram  I Hand,  67,  121.

Rangdes,  Ifles,  153.

Ranges,  38,  55.

Raven  Hill,  218.

Rdcolle6ls,  183,  237.

Red  Cape,  172.

Religion  of  the  favages,  1 90-1 92.
Ribero,  49,  61,  79.

Richelieu,  Cardinal,  210.

Richelieu  Fort,  210.

Richelieu,  River,  207,  239.

Richmond  Illand,  62,  no.

Rio  de  Gamas,  49.

Rio  Grande,  49.

River  du  Guaft,  76.

Riviere  de  Champlain,  13 1.

Riviere  du  Moulin,  140.

Roberval,  2,  3,  40.

Roche,  Marquis  de  la,  4,  8.

Rochelle,  35,  107,  108.

Rockland,  41.

Rocky  Brook,  24.

Rome,  I.

Rofcoff,  156.

Rofcou,  156.

Rofe,  John,  8.

Rofier,  92.

Rofs  Ifland,  31.

Roflignol,  Capt.,  35,  36.

Rollignol,  Port,  10,  it,  12.

Index.

Roflway,  17.

Rouen,  108,  229,  230,  244"

Rouen,  Parliamentary  Court,  9.

Rouge,  16,  31,  69.

Routte,  La,  204,  207,  239.

Rue  de  la  Fabrique,  176.

Rue  du  Fort,  176.

Rupert  River,  170.

Rufcelli,  75.

Rye  Beach,  70.

S.

Sable  Bay,  12,  13.

Sable  Ifland,  3,  4,  8,  9,  12,  13,  156.

Saco,  62,  64,  112,  113,  147,  ISO.  151-
Sagadahoc  River,  57,  92.

Sagard,  86,  183,  216.

Saguenay,  3,  164,  165,  168,  169,  170,
196,  205,  234,  237.

Saint  Luc,  M.  de,  250.

Saintonge,  3.

Salifbury,  70.

Salmon  River,  171.

Salter’s  Ifland,  56.

Salt  Ifland,  114.

Sambro,  151.

Sandy  Cove,  16,  17.

Sandy  Neck  Point,  117.

Saquifli  Head,  78.

Safanoa  River,  57,  59.

Safinou,  57,  60,  93,  150.

Saflafras,  112.

Saint  Lawrence,  2,  5,  6,  27,  30,  44,  47>
60,  66,  76,  146,  I55»  ^75,  183,

188,  196,  206,  216,  223,  229,  237.
Saint  Pierre,  Iflands  of,  232.

Saut,  Riviere  du,  176.

Sauveur,  St.,  39.

Savalette,  Port  de,  153,  I54-

271

Savin,  82.

Sclavonia,  98.

Scofield’s  Brook,  24.

Scoudic  Lakes,  34.

Scoudic  River,  31,  47.

Seal,  14.

Seal  Cove,  99.

Seal  Ifland,  13.

Sea-Wolf  Iflands,  13,  14,  I5,  18,  19.
Secondon,  29,97,  102,  no,  147.

Seguin  Ifland,  56,  60.

Seguin  Ledges,  56.

Sefambre,  151,  152.

Shafer’s  Brook,  24.

Shakefpeare,  73.

Shallop,  146.

Shea,  John  Gilmary,  9,  189.

Sheepfeot,  59.

Shepody  Bay,  27.

Shipwreck,  loi,  102.

Shurtleff’s  Calendar,  67.

Siguenoc,  86.

Silver  mine,  16.

Simon,  Mafler  Miner,  16.

Siflibou  River,  17.

Skittles  Port,  171-
Smelt  River,  17.

Smith,  Capt.  John,  42,  69,  70,  79*
Smith’s  Cove,  114.

Smith’s  Ifles,  69.

Snipe,  14.

Snow  Lake,  174.

Snows,  Lake  of,  176.

Snow-flioes,  53,  191.

Sorel,  M.  de,  210.

Souriquois,  45»48,  63,  72,  73,  196,  213.
SoupQonneufe,  131.

Sourin,  35.

Southampton,  Earl  of,  92.

South  Eall  Harbor,  114.

Index.

272

South  River,  74.

South  Sea,  5.

Spain,  154.

Spaniards,  177.

Spencer’s  Ifland,  26.

Spit  Beacon  Light,  28.

Split  Cape,  148.

Spring  Hill  Beach,  117.

Squam  River,  114.

S quanto,  1 21.

Squafh,  64,  66,  75,  82,  112.
Stadacone,  175,  186.

Stage  Harbor,  120,  130,  131.

Stage  Head,  114.

Stage  Ifland,  56.

Straitfmouth  Ifland,  70,  71.

Stratton  Ifland,  62,  65.

Subenacadie,  73,  149.

Suffolk,  Duke  of,  175.

Sugar  Loaves,  56.

Sully,  Duke  of,  147,  250.

Suzanne,  St.,  du  Cap  Blanc,  80,  206.

T.

Tadouflac,  30,  164,  167,  168,  169,  170,
I7L  I73»  176,  177,  180,  196,  199,  200,
204,  205,  226,  227,  228,  229,  232,  233,
234,  249,  251,  252.

Taille,  La,  180.

Taille,  M.  La,  103.

Ten-Pound  Ifland,  114,  115.

Teftu,  Capt.,  178.

Texas,  229.

Thatcher  Ifland,  70,  72.

Theatre  de  Neptune,  140.  .

Theobald,  St.,  28.

Thdr^fe,  St.,  Ifland  of,  21 1,

Thevet,  49.

Thibaut,  Capt.,  239.

Thorne’s  Brook,  24.

Three  Rivers,  205.

Three  Turks’  Heads,  70.

Tobacco,  66,  82,  86.

Tortoife  Ifland,  56,  60.

Ticonderoga,  223,  224.

Timothde,  Capt.,  7.

Tracadie,  73.

Tragabigzanda,  70.

Tranfylvania,  70.

Tregattd,  27.

Trelany,  no.

Trois  Rivieres,  204,  207,  233,  235,  238.
Truitti^re,  141.

Trumbull,  123.

Tuckerman,  112.

Turkey,  88,  89,

Turks,  70.

Tufquet  Iflands,  13,  105.

T>vo  Bays,  25,  27.

Tyre,  2.

U.

Uncatena  Ifland,  13 1.

United  States,  33,  56,  62.

Urfulines,  176.

V.

Vaches,  Pointe  aux,  165.

Val,  Jean  du,  178,  18 1.

Vallard,  Nic.,  79.

Veazie,  no.

Venetians,  i.

Venice,  73.

Ventador,  Due  de,  176.

Vermont,  217.

Verrazzano,  40.

Index.

Vineyard  Sound,  13 1.

Vofe,  Peter  E.,  33.

Vultures,  14.

W.

Walling’s  Map,  121.

Walnut,  1 1 2.

Ward,  John,  67.

Warren,  92.

Warwig  Creek,  34.

Wafaumkeag  Point,  43.

Wedge  Illand,  153.

Weechagalkas,  71.

Wellfleet,  116.

Wellfleet  Harbor,  80.

Wells  Neck,  68,  70.

Weft  Indies,  121.

Weft  Port,  57,  58.

Weymouth,  George,  3,  92,  93.
Weymouth  Harbor,  17.

Whale  Cove,  139.

Whales,  mode  of  taking,  252-254.
White  Cape,  172.

Whiteface,  218.

White  Haven,  153.

White  Ifland,  31.

White  Ledge,  56.

White  Mountains,  61.

273

Wight,  Ifle  of,  231.

Williams,  Roger,  65,  66,  121,  123,  124.
Willis,  William,  92.

Willow  Point,  224.

Window,  Edward,  124.

Wifcaflet,  57,  58.

Wifconlln,  237,  238.

Wifconfm,  Hiftorical  Society  of,  238.
Winthrop,  John,  Gov.,  8,  62.

Wolves,  30.

Wood  End,  117.

Wood  Ifland,  mouth  of  the  Kennebec,
56 ; Saco  Bay,  67 ; Grand  Manan,
99.

Wood’s  Holl,  13 1,  132.

Wood’s  New  Eng.  Profpe6l,  65,  69,  88,
112,  123.

Wyandot  or  Wendot,  196.

Y.

Yamaflca,  206.

Yarmouth,  15.

Yendots,  228.

York  Beach,  70.

Young,  Alexander,  78.

Yroquet,  Captain,  202,  236,  245,  246,
2.

Cambridge : Press  of  John  Wilson  & Son.

I'

WILLIAM  FOGG  I.1BKAK^
