Voyages of Samuel de Champlain, Vol. 1 (Samuel de Champlain (Charles P. Otis, trans.; Edmund F. Slafter, ed.), 1613)
==========================================================
Champlain's Voyages (1613-32) - the founder of New France's own account; the primary record of early Canada and the Great Lakes. The Prince Society translation (1878-82, 3 vols.). Vol. 1 of 3.

CHAMPLAIN’S VOYAGES.

Boston:
PRINTED FOR

THE SOCLEFY;
By Joun WItson anp Son.

1880,

2]
mR
~
a
2)
oO
aI
BR
by
bw
Qa
a
<
Q
i
64
=)
z
=)
m
2
=
BR

;

te

rod

re
|

CUAMPLAIN (SAMUEL DE)

Waprés un portrait gravé par Moncornet

+

VOYAGES

OF

SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH

By CHARLES POMEROY OTIS, Px.D.

WITH HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATIONS,

MEMOIR

By THE REV. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

Vot. I.
1567-1635.
FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS.
Boston:

PUBLISHED BY THE PRINCE SOCIETY.
1880.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1880, by

EDMUND F. SLAFTER,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

EHvitor :
Tur REV. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

Pome ra BR,

pee PRE labors and achievements of the navigators

a ha feted] and explorers, who vifited our coafts between
Z | the latt years of the fifteenth and the early years
of the feventeenth centuries, were naturally
enough not fully appreciated by their contemporaries, nor
were their relations to the future growth of European
interefts and races on this continent comprehended in
the age in which they lived. NumberlefS events in which
they were actors, and perfonal characteriftics which
might have illuftrated and enriched their hiftory, were there-
fore never placed upon record. In intimate connection
with the career of Cabot, Cartier, Roberval, Ribaut, Lau-
donniére, Gofnold, Pring, and Smith, there were vat do-
mains of perfonal incident and interefting faét over which
the waves of oblivion have paffed forever. Nor has Cham-
plain been more fortunate than the reft. In ftudying his life
and character, we are conftantly finding ourfelves longing to

know much where we are permitted to know but little. His
early

vi Preface.

early years, the proceffes of his education, his home virtues,
his filial affeGtion and duty, his focial and domettic habits
and mode of life, we know imperfectly; gathering only a
few rays of light here and there in numerous directions, as
we follow him along his lengthened career. The reader will
therefore fail to find very much that he might well defire to
know, and that I fhould have been but too happy to embody
in this work. In the pofitive abfence of knowledge, this
want could only be fupplied from the field of pure imagina-
tion. To draw from this fource would have been alien both
to my judgment and to my tafte.

But the effential and important events of Champlain’s
public career are happily embalmed in imperifhable records.
To gather thefe up and weave them into an impartial and
truthful narrative has been the fimple purpofe of my pref-
ent attempt. If I have fucceeded in marfhalling the authen-
tic deeds and purpofes of his life into a complete whole,
giving to each undertaking and event its true value and im-
portance, fo that the hiftorian may more eafily comprehend
the fulnefs of that life which Champlain confecrated to the
progrefs of geographical knowledge, to the aggrandizement
of France, and to the diffemination of the Chriftian faith in

the church of which he was a member, I fhall feel that my
aim has been fully achieved.

The annotations which accompany Dr. Otis’s faithful and
{cholarly tranflation are intended to give to the reader fuch

information

— ee

3 rc . oes : 4
. aH i K Ak —e, ’
oP Ae Cay Oe BA.

Preface. Vil

information as he may need for a full underftanding of the
text, and which he could not otherwife obtain without the
inconvenience of troublefome, and, in many inftances, of dif-
ficult and perplexing inveftigations, The fources of my
information are fo fully given in conneétion with the notes

that no further reference to them in this place is required.
In the progrefs of the work, I have found myfelf under
great obligations to numerous friends for the loan of rare
books, and for valuable fuggeftions and affiftance. The
readinefs with which hiftorical fcholars and the cuftodians of
our great depofitories of learning have refponded to my in-
quiries, and the cordiality and courtefy with which they have
uniformly proffered their affiftance, have awakened my deep-
eft gratitude. I take this opportunity to tender my cordial
thanks to thofe who have thus obliged and aided me. And,
while I cannot fpread the names of all upon thefe pages, I
haften to mention, firft of all, my friend, Dr. Otis, with whom
I have been fo clofely affociated, and whofe courteous man-
ner and kindly fuggeftions have rendered my tafk always an
agreeable one. I defire, likewife, to mention Mr. George
Lamb, of Bofton, who has gratuitoufly executed and con-
tributed a map, illuftrating the explorations of Champlain ;
Mr. Juftin Winfor, of the Library of Harvard College; Mr.
Charles A. Cutter, of the Bofton Atheneum; Mr. John
Ward Dean, of the Library of the New England Hiftoric
Genealogical Society; Mrs. John Carter Brown, of Provi-
dence,

Vill Preface.

dence, R. I.; Mifs S. E. Dorr, of Bofton; Monfieur L.
Delifle, Dire@eur Général de la Bibliothéque Nationale, of
Paris; M. Mefchinet De Richemond, Archivifte de la Cha-
rente Inferieure, La Rochelle, France; the Hon. Charles
H. Bell, of Exeter, N. H.; Francis Parkman, LL.D., of
Bofton; the Abbé H. R. Cafgrain, of Riviére Ouelle, Can-
ada; John G. Shea, LL.D., of New York; Mr. James
M. LeMoine, of Quebec; and Mr. George Prince, of Bath,
Maine.

I take this occafion to ftate for the information of the
members of the Prince Society, that fome important facts
contained in the Memoir had not been received when the
text and notes of the fecond volume were ready for the
prefs, and, to prevent any delay in the completion of the
whole work, Vol. II. was iffued before Vol. L, as will appear
by the dates on their refpective title-pages,

BosTON, 14 ARLINGTON STREET,
November 10, 1880.

“SSar-

teAoGe- OF CONTENTS.

PAGE
PRERAUP veto ten ee ttes ee el woe ee en ee ae >
MEMOIR OF SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN ....- - - + = « I=204
ANNOTATIONES POSTSCRIPTH . « «© 6 © © © © «© «© + «+ 205-214
PREFACE TO ‘THE: TRANSLATION «9. v6 + «ee 4s ws 6 SEHH224
DEDICATION TO THE ADMIRAL, CHARLES DE MONTMORENCY 227
EXTRACT FROM THE LICENSE OF THE KING. 229
THE SAVAGES, OR VOYAGE OF SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN, 1603 . 231-291
CHAMPLAIN’S EXPLANATION OF THE CARTE DE LA NOVVELLE
BRANCH, 2639 °. 3 e505: ce OH, eee es

THE PRINCE Society, ITs CONSTITUTION AND MEMBERS. . 305-

ILLUSTRATIONS.

ENGRAVED PorTRAIT OF CHAMPLAIN ON Woop, AFTER THE EN-
GRAVING OF MoncorNet By E. Ronyat, Aeliotype.

MAP ILLUSTRATING THE EXPLORATIONS OF CHAMPLAIN, Aeliotype.
ENGRAVED PORTRAIT OF CHAMPLAIN, AFTER A PAINTING BY
Tu. HameL From aN ENGRAVING OF MONCORNET, feed.
ILLUMINATED TITLE-PAGE OF THE VOYAGE OF 1615 ET 1618, Aelio-

type.
CARTE DE LA NOVVELLE FRANCE, 1632, “eliotype.

INDEX ( — 4-o e  e eee ORe oks Soe

318

321

CALCUL des lieux du Soleil é de la Lune a Paris au temps du paffage obfervé de la Lune au
remps moyen, fuiyant | équation du temps, prife a. abord dans la Connoiffance des Temps,

SOLE I.

at

=
=

14° 59' 41

Moyen mouvem. da Soleil pour1750... 9f 104 00’ 21”
Pour le 16 Novembre... 4s. 22.2. “0.15. 24. 25
Pour t4h5.97 All Si cvyetee sats «ae EOs GOs 3165 6557
Longitude moyenne du Soleil....... 7. 26. 1. 43,
E’quation du centre du Soleil. ...... — 1. 19. 57%
Bien dteSoleil. .. <a. 26 3 os, O88 gm Sq. ge age

i
|
, n
Moyen mouvem. de la Lune pour 1750. « 6f 084 16’ 19
Pour le 16 Novembre......- Peis nO, 2. 47
* I
Pour 14" 59 37". see eee cree eee O o8. 1b. 545
Longitude moyenne de Ja Lune...... + 3. 02. 57. 005
“4 1 . Ny
Premiére Equation. .. 2 ees eeeeees ++ oo. 08. 06%
Lieu de la Lune premiérement corrigé « .» 3+ 03+ 05. 07%

Stave san OS. Oh. 19

Seconde E’quation. .. +. +

Liew de Ja Lune deuxi¢mement corrig¢e. . .

Troifieme Equation
Lieu de la Lune troificmement corrigé. . .

Y’quation du centre...

Lieu de Ja Lune quatriemement corrigé. «.

Variation... .

et # ee ee we fe

Licu de Ja Lune cinquiémement corrigé . .

Sixiéme Equation... .

Vrai lien de Ja Lune... .-
Réduction a ?Ecliptique .
Longitude de Ja Lune... ....-
Latitude de Ja Lune auftrale. ..
Demi-diametre horizontal de la Lune... . ©
00.

Parallaxe horizoatale de Ja Lune... 2... O-

Ms

CALGUCTL 2a Like Pe

Moyen mouvem. de l’apogée du Solcil pour 1750. .
Pour le 16 Novembre... + ++ +s ee eee

Longitude moyenne de Vapogée du Soleil. . .- -
A fouflraire de la longitude moyenne du Soleil. .

Anomalie moyenne du Soleil... - 6 + + + + 4 17+ 24: 53

CALCUL DU LIZLU DE La a, U NG.

Moyen mouv. de l'apogéc de Ia Lune pour 1750... 5£ 204 58’ 52”
Pour le 16 Novembre... 6.52. eee cece eee Be OF 0939. OF
Power Go SG 66 bale oe he ees Cec ss Oe CREE

Longitude moyenne de l'apogée de Ja Lune... .. 6. 26. 42. 06:

Prepgiere Equation. 62 i6 «7% 0c 6 2% 2s 02 0s ys

Lieu de l’apogée de Ja Lune premicrement corrigé .. 6. 26. 28.
Equation de Vapogée. . 2. eee eee eee eens

Vrai lieu de Fapogée dela Lune....-...-

SR RR Sa

La plus grande d’entre les 24¢5 équat. dumoy. mouv. . ae
P q y

ft /
of oof 3, 52

Ea plus grande variation... ..22e+eeseesee O. 00. BG. 504
Exeu! da Soleil: .). = 26 - dtc SR OC . f - of 2 ate! 45”
Apogée de Ja Lune premierement corriggé. «2... 1 ee 6. 26. Way, 21 -
AroumMeNnt ANNE! es cleisile «516 + cle ee ; O. 28.) me. 233

24¢ équat. da moy. mouv. en fuppof, Ja plus grande de 3/45”... — oo.
Ainfi 2° 45" + 3/7" 3: 3’ 52%p = — 3’ 13” Scconde équation vraie.
60s 1g? 1025 1323"... Binet 03 23” 60's 2/6" 32.03/23"... Be.got oo’ 2!
8. 58. 14
Equat. de lapog.....- 9.01. 37 Laplusgr.¢éq. ducentre...7. 08. 44

O}- o7

7. O9. of
/ ? k

Lien de Ja Lune troifiemement corrigé. .. 2... 1 ees 38 off. ome 3 3"
Apogée, se ae ws Sig kA Ceo cee — 7 Of 29. 58
Anomalie moyenne de Ja Lunte......... Aare coe oe
60’: | 3" 39° |e 3a! pa ee ae eee col. 64 42! 3!
3-57 2.08} + 01.59 + 02. ot
6. 08. 32 6. a. 4%
30° 30" 2 36" v0" F sr 8! Ae" cee Bee cus + 07.564 6. 08, 3
Equation du centre... ee eee... 6,16.285 Diffs «- « Os 36. 14

Lieu de fa Lane quatriemement corrigé. ©. 6 6 ee ee of off 19! 02"
Biew da) Solsilte 2. cess enc ae eds oe O7- 24+ 418) 45
Diftance de Ja Lune au Soleil... 26.0. 42045 O07 14. 37. 17
Pour 36! fale ens $5’ §.0° 55 power 37 «sie. « « 36’ 59%. Differences.... 1/ o:"
Donc pour 36’ s0"% Variation .... ++ 36. 504

Apogecidelta: Ltine-< 7 ww ee iss 8 se ww wl wv o7f o54 29! 58-
Apogée du Sole! ..... cumin ena 15 aha te @ietieee 03. 08. 36. 50
Diftance ces Apogées.. 04.5. 4 sh eu 8ica) Sueare, aus? “o ers 5 ae of.
Ditlance de Ja Lune au Soleil. . 1... be) seabed) ah (ei cen

OF) V4. 37. 97

A 7 - _

Somme des dift. de Ja Lune au Soleil & des apogées... 1a. 44. 30; 2; 3
;

Pace 288

yidien , le 16 Novembre 1790, a 15" 14! 24" temps vrai, &
ou on la trouve pour cette heure de 14! 42"4 fouffradive.

La premiere équat. dutemps.. — — 5’ 20"
la feconde. ... .< ice eei == Oe

Equation du temps..... +2 «14. 47
Memps Viale. « s 6 ae ate ee HSE Tame

Temps moyen corrrigé,.... 4. 59. 37

Sich 60’: 1’ 30" ::24/
3 +r
16021

3822

Moyen mouvement du Neeud retr. pouri750....

Pour le 16 Novemb... 164 5.6’ 44"
Pour ¥4® Geis nus vies OO. OF. 59

Longitude moyenne du Noeud......
Premicre Eyquation.....

Lieu du Neeud premicrement corrigé. .

53"! Equation du centre pour 4f 174

wvrees

9843 Re of 37” Eq. ducent. pour 417424’ 53%... r. 39.572

gf Fo? 15° oo

Somme’ der, Oo. F6. 58. 43

———

e\eisiisiel Ox 231 el Ge vz

Tt 00. 06. 312
Dio Heures ec. 48

Equation ann INGeud i. ars cietteretsiiss eel enemeneue (forse One lana
Vrai lieu du Noeud. ..... Fale ei aualereteec amen OTM De eo ones
2
CSCI ee RE Ee at

Lieu du Soleil... .. Cn reir Viet Meas emt amet aS o7f aad Bit acts
+

Lieu du Noeud premicrement corrigé. .. 2.2... : o8. 23. 22. 48 2
J 5

Diftance du Soleil au Noeud . .

paced ae aa ee
s Sees eweees DL Ob 28. 562

‘ “ ae us
co: [ 4 |e 18! 56% 32 (7a

54 1 3’ 16”
+ 00. 04%
e—_—_—

17 15/ oo”
— oo. 324
Eqquat. du Neeud....— 1. 14. 274

Argument de Ja Latide .........
R: fin. hyp.

174 46! so"
R : tang. hyp.

:: fin. incl.
Li

54 13 20"

3
+

5.
ee eee

I

13. 203 Inclin. de Yorbite.

3f oof 55"
ze 108)

6. 17. 26. ee

“er

1i"}
’

ari

Re. fin. 014 35 34.” Latitude auftrale.

i: cofin. inclin...? Rl tang. 17. 42. 412 are de l’Ecliptique.
7. 46. se argum. de la Latir.

— 4.09. Réduct. al’Eclipt.

oth ae ee 34 32/52 3h 16, 17 16. 19
c— 03 z — 03+
16. 134 16. eae
gg jes 21% st 8 407d Be cea t eee we oe ooF 16, oe
Detn-dianietre eis 6 5 a6 a5. a05-5 16. 14 Différence.... 00. 02
GOrrechOn tse) <) oie) epee leis os — 094
Demi-diamewre corrigé..... 16. 044
“ “we
état he ee vet 59. Ce SO». he
PP cca fee eee en vee ae
58. 485 58. 5830
y “” 1
394307: oR zs 8 go%l...., REV as ols oo. o2t 58. 482
Parallaxe horizontale......,..- 38. sot Differ... 00, og +
MEOrreQion: as cian ais 8 wise so — 36
Parallaxe horizont. corr. . 58 142

ie Hekiotype Printing Co.2il Tramunt StBoston

MEMOIR

OF

SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN.

CHAPTER I.

PARENTAGE. — BIRTH. — HOME AT BrovaGeE.—Its Srruation.—A MILI-
TARY STATION. —ITs SALT Works. —His EpuCATION.— EARLY LOVE

OF THE SEA.— QUARTER-MASTER IN BRITTANY. — CATHOLICS AND
HUGUENOTS. — CATHERINE DE MEDICIS.— THE LEAGUE.—DUKE DE
MERCG@:UR. — MARSHAL D’AUMONT. —DE Saint Luc.— MARSHAL DE
BRISSAC. — PEACE OF VERVINS.

PH AMPLAIN was defcended from an anceftry
whofe names are not recorded among the re-
nowned families of France. He was the fon
of Antoine de Champlain, a captain in the
marine, and his wife Marguerite LeRoy. They
lived in the little village of Brouage, in the ancient prov-
ince of Saintonge. Of their fon Samuel, no contempora-
neous record is known to exift indicating either the day or
year of his birth. The period at which we find him engaged
in active and refponfible duties, fuch as are ufually affigned

to mature manhood, leads to the conjecture that he was born
about

2 Memor of 1567.

about the year 1567. Of his youth little is known. The
forces that contributed to the formation of his character are
moftly to be inferred from the abode of his early years, the
occupations of thofe by whom he was {urrounded, and the
temper and fpirit of the times in which he lived.

Brouage is fituated in a low, marfhy region, on the fouth-
ern bank of an inlet or arm of the fea, on the fouthweft-
ern fhores of France, oppofite to that part of the [fland of
Oleron where it is feparated from the mainland only by a
narrow channel. Although this little town can boaft a great
antiquity, it never at any time had a large population. It is
mentioned by local hiftorians as early as the middle of the
eleventh century. It was a feigniory of the family of Pons.
The village was founded by Jacques de Pons, after whofe
proper name it was for a time called Jacopolis, but foon re-
fumed its ancient appellation of Brouage.

An old chronicler of the fixteenth century informs us that
in his time it was a port of great importance, and the theatre
of a large foreign commerce. Its harbor, capable of receiv-
ing large fhips, was excellent, regarded, indeed, as_ the
fineft in the kingdom of France." It was a favorite idea of
Charles VIII. to have at all times feveral war-fhips in this
harbor, ready againft any fudden invafion of this part of the
coatt.

At the period of Champlain’s boyhood, the village of
Brouage had two abforbing interefts. Firft, it had then re-

cently

1 The following from Marfhal de duquel dépend celui de Brouage, qui eft
Montlue refers to Brouage in 1568. le plus beau port de mer de la France.”
Speaking of the Huguenots he fays : — Commentaires, Paris, 1760, Tom. III.
“Or ils n’en pouvoient choifir un plus A P- 340. 4 : g
leur advantage, que celui de la Rochelle,

1567. Samuel de Champlain. 3

cently become a military post of importance; and fecond, it
was the centre of a large manufacture of falt. To thefe
two interefts, the whole population gave their thoughts, their
energy, and their enterprife.

In the reign of Charles IX.,a fhort time before or per-
haps a little after the birth of Champlain, the town was
fortified, and diftinguifhed Italian engineers were employed
to defign and execute the work. To prevent a fudden at-
tack, it was furrounded by a capacious moat. At the four
angles formed by the moat were elevated ftruCtures of earth
and wood planted upon piles, with baftions and projecting
angles, and the ufual devices of military architecture for the
attainment of ftrength and facility of defence.?

During the civil wars, ftretching over nearly forty years of
the laft half of the fixteenth century, with only brief and
fitful periods of peace, this little fortified town was a poft
ardently coveted by both of the contending parties. Situ-
ated on the fame coaft, and only a few miles from Rochelle,
the f{tronghold of the Huguenots, it was obvioufly exceed-
ingly important to them that it fhould be in their poffeffion,
both as the key to the commerce of the furrounding
country and from the very great annoyance which an
enemy holding it could offer to them in numberlefs ways.
Notwithftanding its ftrong defences, it was neverthelefs
taken and retaken feveral times during the ftruggles of that

period.

2 “Ta Riviere Puitaillé qui en étoit Rochelle, par Arcere, 4 la Rochelle, 1756,
Gouverneur, fut chargé de faire travail- Tom. I., p. 121.
ler aux fortifications. 3elarmat, Be- 8 Hiftoire de la Saintonge et de
phano, Caftritio d’Urbin, & le Cavalier ?Aunzs, 1152-1548, par M. D. Maffion,
Orlogio, tous Ingénieurs Italiens, pré- Paris, 1838, Vol. II., p. 406.
fiderent aux travaux.” — Hi/loire La

4 Memotr of 1570.
period. It was furrendered to the Huguenots in 1570, but
was immediately reftored on the peace that prefently fol-
lowed. The king of Navarre‘ took it by ftrategy in 1576,
placed a ftrong garrifon in it, repaired and ftrengthened its
fortifications; but the next year it was forced to furrender to
the royal army commanded by the duke of Mayenne’ In
1585, the Huguenots made another attempt to gain pofleffion
of the town. The Prince of Condé encamped with a ftrong
force on the road leading to Marennes, the only avenue to
Brouage by land, while the inhabitants of Rochelle co-oper-
ated by fending down a fleet which completely blocked up
the harbor.© While the fiege was in fuccefsful progrefs, the

prince

* The King of Navarre “fent for
Monfieur de Mirabeau under colour of
treating with him concerning other bufi-
neffes, and forced him to deliver up
Broiiage into his hands, a Fort of great
importance, as well for that it lies upon
the Coaft of the Ocean-sea, as becaufe
it abounds with fuch ftore of falt-pits,
which yeeld a great and conftant reve-
nue; he made the Sieur de Montaut
Governour, and put into it a ftrong
Garrifon of his dependents, furnifhing
it with ammunition, and fortifying it
with exceeding diligence.” — His. Civ,
Warres of France, by Henrico Caterino
Davila, London, 1647, p. 455.

®* “The Duke of Mayenne, having
without difficulty taken Thone-Charente,
and Marans, had laid fiege to Broiiage,a
place, for fituation, ftrength, and the
profit of the falt-pits, of very great im-
portance; when the Prince of Condé,
having tryed all poffible means to relieve
the befieged, the Hugonots after fome
difficulty were brought into fuch a con-
dition, that about the end of Auguft
they delivered it up, faving only the

lives of the Souldiers and inhabitants,
which agreement the Duke punctually
obferved.” — Aizs. Civ. Warres, by
Davila, London, 1647, p.472. See alfo
Memoirs of Sully, Phila., 1817, Vol. ii
p. 69.

“Le Feudi XXVIII Mars. Fut tenu
Confeil au Cabinet de la Royne mere
du Roy [pour] avifer ce que M. du
Maine avoit & faire, & j’ai mis en avant
lYenterprife de Brouage.— Fournal de
flenri II., Paris, 1744, Tom. IIL55p;
220.

° “The Prince of Condé refolved to
befiege Broiiage, wherein was the Sieur
de St. Luc, one of the League, with no
contemptible number of infantry and
some other gentlemen of the Country.
The Rochellers confented to this En-
terprife, both for their profit, and repu-
tation which redounded by it; and
having fent a great many Ships thither,
befieged the Fortrefs by Sea, whilft the
Prince having poffeffed that pafiage
which is the only way to Broiiage by
land, and having fhut up the Defendants
within the circuit of their walls, ftraight-

ned

ed its
der to
Sol
leflion

throng

-0per
ed up

1586. Samuel de Champlain. 5

prince unwifely drew off a part of his command for the relief
of the caftle of Angiers;? and a month later the fiege was
abandoned and the Huguenot forces were badly cut to
pieces by de Saint Luc,* the military governor of Brouage,
who purfued them in their retreat.

The next year, 1586, the town was again threatened by
the Prince of Conde, who, having collected another army,
was met by De Saint Luc near the ifland of Oleron, who
fallied forth from Brouage with a ftrong force; and a conflict
ensued, lafting the whole day, with equal lofs on both fides,
but with no decifive refults.

Thus until 1589, when the King of Navarre, the leader of
the Huguenots, entered into a truce with Henry III., from
Champlain's birth through the whole period of his youth
and until he entered upon his manhood, the little town
within whofe walls he was reared was the fitful fcene of war

and peace, of alarm and conflict.

ned the Siege very clofely on that fide.”
— Davila, p. 582. See alfo, Hifoire
de Thou, & Londres, 1734, Tom. 1X., p.
383.

The blocking up the harbor at this
time appears to have been more effective
thanconvenient. Twenty boats or rafts
filled with earth and ftone were funk
with a purpofe of deftroying the harbor.
De Saint Luc, the governor, fucceeded
in removing only four or five. The
entrance for veffels afterward remained
difficult except at high tide. Subfe-
quently Cardinal de Richelieu expended
a hundred thoufand francs to remove the
reft, but did not fucceed in removing
one of them. — Vide Hifloire de La Ro-
chelle, par Arcere, Tom. I. p. 121.

7 The Prince of Condé. “ Leaving
Monfieur de St. Mefmes with the In-

But

fantry and Artillery at the Siege of
Brouage, and giving order that the Fleet
fhould continue to block it up by fea,
hee departed upon the eight of October
to relieve the Caftle of Angiers with
800 Gentlemen and 1400 Harquebuziers
on horfeback.” — Davila, p. 583. See
alfo Memoirs of Sully, Phila., 1817, Vol.
I., p. 123; Hifloire de Thou, a Londres,
1734, Tom. IX., p. 385.

8 « S7. Luc fallying out of Broiiage,
and following thofe that were fcattered
feverall wayes, made a great flaughter
of them in many places; whereupon
the Commander, defpairing to rally the
Army any more, got away as well as
they could poffibly, to fecure their own
ftrong holds.” — Hs. Civ. Warres of
France, by Henrico Caterino Davila,
London, 1647, p. 588.

6 Memoir of 1589.

But in the intervals, when the waves of civil ftrife fettled
into the calm of a temporary peace, the citizens returned
with alacrity to their ufual employment, the manufaéture of
falt, which was the abforbing article of commerce in their
port.

This manufacture was carried on more extenfively in
Saintonge than in any other part of France. The falt was
obtained by fubjecting water drawn from the ocean to folar
evaporation. The low marfh-lands which were very exten-
five about Brouage, on the fouth towards Marennes and on
the north towards Rochefort, were eminently adapted to this
purpofe. The whole of this vaft region was cut up into falt
bafins, generally in the form of parallelograms, excavated at
different depths, the earth and rubbith scooped out and
thrown on the fides, forming a platform or path leading from
bafin to bafin, the whole prefenting to the eye the appear-
ance of a vaft chefs-board. The argillaceous earth at the
bottom of the pans was made hard to prevent the efcape of
the water by percolation. This was done in the larger ones
by leading horfes over the furface, until, fays an old chroni-
cler, the bafins “would hold water as if they were brafs.”
The water was introduced from the fea, through fluices and
fieves of pierced planks, paffing over broad furfaces in fhal-
low currents, furnifhing an opportunity for evaporation from
the moment it left the ocean until it found its way into the
numerous falt-bafins covering the whole expanfe of the
marfhy plains. The water once in the bafins, the procefS of
evaporation was carried on by the fun and the wind, affifted
by the workmen, who agitated the water to haften tl

ne pro-
cefs. The firft formation of falt was on tl

1€ furface, having
a

vely i
alt was
0 folar
exten.
ind on

to this

from
ppear.
tthe
pe of

ones
PO
raf.”

and

1589. Samuel de Champlain. 7

a white, creamy appearance, exhaling an agreeable perfume
refembling that of violets. This was the fineft and moft
delicate falt, while that precipitated, or falling to the bottom
of the bafin, was of a darker hue.

When the cryftallization was completed, the falt was gath-
ered up, drained, and piled in conical heaps on the platforms
or paths along the fides of the bafins. At the height of the
feafon, which began in May and ended in September, when
the whole marfh region was covered with countlefs white
cones of falt, it prefented an interefting picture, not unlike
the tented camp of a vaft army.

The falt was carried from the marfhes on pack-horfes,
equipped each with a white canvas bag, led by boys either to
the quay, where large veffels were lying, or to fmall barques
which could be brought at high tide, by natural or artificial
inlets, into the very heart of the marth-fields.

When the period for removing the falt came, no time was
to be loft, as a fudden fall of rain might deftroy in an hour
the products of a month. A {mall quantity only could be
tranfported at a time, and confequently great numbers of
animals were employed, which were made to haften over the
finuous and angulated paths at their higheft fpeed. On
reaching the fhips, the burden was taken by men ftationed
for the purpofe, the boys mounted in hafte, and galloped
back for another.

The fcene prefented in the labyrinth of an extenfive falt-
marfh was lively and entertaining. The picturefque drefs
of the workmen, with their clean white frocks and linen
tights; the horfes in great numbers mantled in their fnowy

falt-bags, winding their way on the narrow platforms, moving
in

“eae Seep amt

|
|
|
|
|

pivenitifees ta

8 Memoir of 1589.

in all direCtions, turning now to the right hand and now to
the left, doubling almoft numberlefs angles, here advancing
and again retreating, often going two leagues to make the
diftance of one, maintaining order in apparent confufion,
altogether prefented to the diftant obferver the afpect of a
grand equeftrian mafquerade.

The extent of the works and the labor and capital invefted
in them were doubtlefs large for that period. A contempo-
rary of Champlain informs us that the wood employed in the
conftruction of the works, in the form of gigantic fluices,
bridges, beam-partitions, and fieves, was fo vaft in quantity
that, if it were deftroyed, the forefts of Guienne would not
fuffice to replace it. He alfo adds that no one who had feen
the falt works of Saintonge would eftimate the expenfe of
forming them lefs than that of building the city of Paris
itfelf.

The port of Brouage was the bufy mart from which
the falt of Saintonge was diftributed not only along the
coaft of France, but in London and Antwerp, and we know
not what other markets on the continent of Europe.

The

® An old writer gives us fome idea of | TRANSLATION. — They import in fine

the vaft quantities of falt exported from
France by the amount {ent to a fingle
country.

“Important denique fexies mille vel
circiter centenarios falis, quorum finguli
conftant centenis modiis, ducentenas ut
minimum & vicenas quinas, vel & tri-
cenas, pro falis ipfius candore purita-
teque, libras pondo pendentibus. fena
igitur illa centenariorum millia, compu-
tatis in fingulos aureis nummis tricenis,
centum & octoginta referunt aureorum
millia.” — Belgice Defcriptio, a Lud.
Gvicciardino, Amftelodami, 1652, p. 244.

6000 centenarii of falt, each one of
which contains 100 bufhels, weighing
at leaft 225 or 230 pounds, according
to the purity and whitenefs of the falt;
therefore fix thoufand centenarii, com-
puting each at thirty golden nummi,
amount to 180,000 aurei.

It may not be eafy to determine the
value of this importation in money,
fince the value of gold is conftantly
changing, but the quantity imported
may be readily determined, which was

according to the above ftatement,
67,500 tons.
A

15,

| now ty
Wancing
lake the
onfution
ect of 3

invefted
ntempo
d in the
» fluices,
quantity
yuld not
had feen
vente

of Pats

) which
ng the
e know

1589. Samuel de Champlain. 9

The early years of Champlain were of neceffity intimately
affociated with the ftirring fcenes thus prefented in this prof-
perous little feaport. As we know that he was a careful
obferver, endowed by nature with an active temperament
and an unufual degree of practical fenfe, we are fure that
no event efcaped his attention, and that no myftery was per-
mitted to go unfolved. The military and commercial enter-
prife of the place brought him into daily contaét with men
of the higheft charaéter in their departments. The falt-
factors of Brouage were perfons of experience and activity,
who knew their bufinefS, its methods, and the markets at
home and abroad. The fortrefs was commanded by diftin-
guifhed officers of the French army, and was a rendezvous
of the young nobility ; like other fimilar places, a training-
{chool for military command. In this affociation, whether
near or remote, young Champlain, with his eagle eye and
quick ear, was receiving leffons and influences: which were
daily fhaping his unfolding capacities, and gradually com-
pacting and cryftallizing them into the firmnefs and ftrength
of character which he fo largely difplayed in after years.

His education, fuch as it was, was of courfe obtained dur-
ing this period. He has himfelf given us no intimation of

its

A treaty of April 30, 1527, between De Witt, writing about the year 1658,
Francis I. of France and Henry VIII. fays they received in Holland of “ falt,
of England, provided as follows: yearly, the lading of 500 or 600 thips,
** And, befides, fhould furnifh unto the exported from Rochel, Maran, Brouage,
faid Henry, as ‘long as hee lived, yearly, the Ifland of Oleron, and Ree. "— Re-
of the Salt of Brotiage, the value of fif- publick of Holland, by John De Witt,
teene thoufand Crownes.’ "Life and London, 1702, p. 271. But it no longer
Raigne of Henry VIII, by Lord Her- holdsthe pre-eminence which it did three
bert of Cherbury, London, 1649, p. 206. centuries ago. Saintonge long fince

Saintonge continued for a long time yielded the palm to Brittany.
to be the fource of large exports of falt.

2

10 Memo of 1589.

its character or extent. A careful examination of his nu-
merous writings will, however, render it obvious that it was
limited and rudimentary, fcarcely extending beyond the fun-
damental branches which were then regarded as neceffary in
the ordinary tranfactions of bufinefSs. As the refult of in-
ftruGion or affociation with educated men, he attained to a
good general knowledge of the French language, but was
never nicely accurate or eminently fkilful in its ufe. He evi-
dently gave fome attention in his early years to the ftudy
and praétice of drawing. While the fpecimens of his work
that have come down to us are marked by grave defects, he
appears neverthelefs to have acquired facility and fome {kill
in the art, which he made exceedingly ufeful in the illuftra-
tion of his difcoveries in the new world.

During Champlain’s youth and the earlier years of his
manhood, he appears to have been engaged in practical navi-
gation. In his addrefs to the Queen” he fays, “this is the
art which in my early years won my love, and has induced
me to expofe myself almoft all my life to the impetuous
waves of the ocean.” That he began the praétice of naviga-
tion at an early period may likewife be inferred from the fact
that in 1599 he was put in command of a large French fhip
of 500 tons, which had been chartered by the Spanifh au-
thorities for a voyage to the Weft Indies, of which we {hall
{peak more particularly in the fequel. It is obvious that he
could not have been intrufted with a command fo difficult
and of fo great refponfibility without practical experience in
navigation; and, as it will appear hereafter that he was in

the
0 Vide Guvres de Champlain, Quebec ed., Tom. III. p- v.

138)

us Nu

it was
1¢ fun.
ary in
of in
d toa
ut was
He evi
> fludy
i$ work
ts, he
1¢ {kil
lutte

ig the
nduced
jet uous
navi
he fadt
h hip
fh ale
e fall
hat he
ificult
nce 10
yas 1
the

1592. Samuel de Champlazn. II

the army feveral years during the civil war, probably from
1592 to 1598, his experience in navigation muft have been
obtained anterior to that, in the years of his youth and early
manhood.

Brouage offered an excellent opportunity for fuch an em-
ployment. Its port was open to the commerce of foreign
nations, and a large number of veffels, as we have already
feen, was employed in the yearly diftribution of the falt of
Saintonge, not only in the feaport towns of France, but in
England and on the Continent. In thefe coafting expedi-
tions, Champlain was acquiring {kill in navigation which was
to be of very great fervice to him in his future career, and
likewife gathering up rich ftores of experience, coming in
contact with a great variety of men, obferving their manners
and cuftoms, and quickening and ftrengthening his natural
tafte for travel and adventure. It is not unlikely that he
was, at leaft during fome of thefe years, employed in the na-
tional marine, which was fully employed in guarding the
coaft againft foreign invafion, and in reftraining the power of
the Huguenots, who were firmly feated at Rochelle with a
{ufficient naval force to give annoyance to their enemies
along the whole weftern coaft of France.

In 1592, or foon after that date, Champlain was appointed
quarter-mafter in the royal army in Brittany, difcharging the
office feveral years, until, by the peace of Vervins, in 1598, the
authority of Henry IV. was firmly eftablifhed throughout
the kingdom. This war in Brittany conftituted the clofing
fcene of that mighty ftruggle which had been agitating the
nation, wafting its refources and its beft blood for more

than half a century. It began in its incipient ftages as far
back

12 1562.

Memoir of

back as the decade following 1530, when the preaching of
Calvin in the Kingdom of Navarre began to make known
his tranfcendent power. The new faith, which was making
rapid ftrides in other countries, eafily awakened the warm
heart and active temperament of the French. The principle
of private judgment which lies at the foundation of Protef-
tant teaching, its fpontaneity as oppofed to a faith impofed
by authority, commended it efpecially to the learned and
thoughtful, while the fame principle awakened the quick and
impulfive nature of the maffes. The effort to put down the
movement by the extermination of thofe engaged in it,
proved not only unfuccefsful, but recoiled, as ufual in fuch
cafes, upon the hand that ftruck the blow. Confifcations, im-

prifonments, and the ftake daily increafed the number of
thofe which thefe fevere meafures were intended to dimin-
ith. It was impoffible to mark its progrefs. When at inter-

vals all was calm and placid on the furface, at the fame time,
down beneath, where the eye of the detective could not
penetrate, in the clofet of the fcholar and at the firefide of
the artifan and the peafant, the new gofpel, filently and with-
out obfervation, was {preading like an all-pervading leaven."
In 1562, the repreffed forces of the Huguenot could no
longer be reftrained, and, burfting forth, affumed the form
of

11 In 1558, it was eftimated that there
were already 400,000 perfons in France
who were declared adherents of the
Reformation. — Ranke’s Civil Wars in

that God bridled them in fuch manner
that we were preferved under. His pro-
tection.” — Bernard Paliffy, 1580. Vide
Morlay’s Life of Paliffy, Vol. i154 ps

france, Vol. I., p. 234.

“Although our affemblies were moft
frequently held in the depth of midnight,
and our enemies very often heard us
pafling through the ftreet, yet fo it was,

274.
When Henry IV, befieged Paris, its

population was more than 200,000. —
Malte-Brun,

in it
n fuch
1, ft
ber of
dimin-
‘Inter
fime,
d not
ide of
with.
ven,”
ld no
form

1562. Samuel de Champlain. 13

of organized civil war. With the exception of temporary
lulls, originating in policy or exhauftion, there was no ceffa-
tion of arms until 1598. Although it is ufually and perhaps
beft defcribed as a religious war, the ftruggle was not alto-
gether between the Catholic and the Huguenot or Protef-
tant. There were many other elements that came in to give
their coloring to the conteft, and efpecially to determine the
courfe and policy of individuals.

The ultra-Catholic defired to maintain the old faith with
all its ancient preftige and power, and to crufh out and ex-
clude every other. With this party were found the court,
certain ambitious and powerful families, and nearly all the
officials of the church. In clofe alliance with it were the
Roman Pontiff, the King of Spain, and the Catholic princes
of Germany.

The Huguenots defired what is commonly known as lib-
erty of confcience; or, in other words, freedom to worfhip
God according to their own views of the truth, without in-
terference or reftriction. And in clofe alliance with them
were the Queen of England and the Proteftant princes of
Germany.

Perfonal motives, irrefpective of principle, united many
perfons and families with either of thefe great parties which
feemed moft likely to fubferve their private ambitions. The
feudal fyftem was nearly extin¢t in form, but its fpirit was
ftill alive. The nobles who had long held fway in fome of
the provinces of France defired to hold them as diftin¢t
and feparate governments, and to tranfmit them as an inher-
itance to their children. This motive often determined their

political affociation.
During

14 Memoir of 1585.

During moft of the period of this long civil war, Catherine
de Medicis * was either regent or in the exercife of a con-
trolling influence in the government of France. She was a
woman of commanding perfon and extraordinary ability,
fkilful in intrigue, without confcience and without perfonal
religion. She hefitated at no crime, however black, if
through it fhe could attain the objects of her ambition.
Neither of her three fons, Francis, Charles, and Henry, who
came fucceffively to the throne, left any legal heir to fucceed
him. The fucceffion became, therefore, at an early period,
a queftion of great intereft. If not the potent caufe, it was
neverthelefs intimately connected with moft of the blood-
fhed of that bloody period.

A folemn league was entered into by a large number. of
the ultra-Catholic nobles to fecure two avowed objeéts, the
fucceffion of a Catholic prince to the throne, and the utter
extermination of the Huguenots. Henry, King of Navarre,
afterwards Henry IV. of France, admitted to be the legal heir
to the throne, was a Proteftant, and therefore by the decree
of the League difqualified to fucceed. Around his ftandard,
the Huguenots rallied in great numbers. With him were
affociated the princes of Condé, of royal blood, and many
other diftinguifhed nobles. They contended for the double
purpofe of fecuring the throne to its rightful heir and of
emancipating and eftablifhing the Proteftant faith.

But there was another clafs, acting indeed with one or the

other

% “Catherine de Médicis was of a and curled lip reminded the fpe€tator of
large and, at the fame time, firm and her great uncle, Leo X.”— Civil Wars
powerful figure; her countenance had ix France, by Leopold Ranke, London
an olive tint, and her prominent eyes 1852, p. 28. : :

a COD.
1e Was 4
ability,
Derfona|
lack, i
bition
ry, whe
fucceed
period
It was

: blood:

nber of
ts, the
le utter
lavarte,
val hel
decree
andatt
m were
| mat
double
and o

1598. Samuel de Champlain. [5

other of thefe two great parties, neverthelefs influenced by
very different motives. It was compofed of moderate Cath-
olics, who cared little for the political {chemes and civil power
of the Roman Pontiff, who dreaded the encroachments of the
King of Spain, who were firmly patriotic and defired the
aggrandizement and glory of France.

The ultra-Catholic party was, for a long period, by far the
moft numerous and the more powerful; but the Huguenots
were fufficiently {trong to keep up the ftruggle with varying
fuccefs for nearly forty years.

After the alliance of Henry of Navarre with Henry III.
again{t the League, the moderate Catholics and the Hugue-
nots were united and fought together under the royal ftand-
ard until the clofe of the war in 1598.

Champlain was perfonally engaged in the war in Brittany
for feveral years. This province on the weftern coast of
France, conftituting a tongue of land jutting out as it were
into the fea, ifolated and remote from the great centres of
the war, was among the laft to furrender to the arms of
Henry IV. The Huguenots had made but little progrefs
within its borders. The Duke de Mercceur* had been its
governor for fixteen years, and had bent all his energies to

feparate

18 Philippe Emanuel de Lorraine,
Duc de Mercceur, born at Nomény,
September 9, 1558, was the fon of
Nicolas, Count de Vaudemont, by his
fecond wife, Jeanne de Savoy, and was
half-brother of Queen Louife, the wife
of Henry III. He was made governor
of Brittany in 1582. He embraced the
party of the League before the death of
Henry III., entered into an alliance
with Philip II., and gave the Spaniards
poffeffion of the port of Blavet in 1591.

He made his fubmiffion to Henry IV.
in 1598, on which occafion his only
daughter Frangoife, probably the rich-
eft heirefs in the kingdom, was con-
tracted in marriage to Céfar, Duc de
Vendéme, the illegitimate fon of Henr

IV. by Gabrielle d’Eftrées, the Duchets
de Beaufort. The Duc de Mercceur
died at Nuremburg, February 19, 1602.
—Vide Birch’s Memoirs of Queen Eliz-
abeth, Vol. 1., p. 82; Davila’s His. Civil
Warres of France, p. 1476.

1592.

16 Memotr of

feparate it from France, organize it into a diftinct kingdom,
and tranf{mit its fceptre to his own family.

Champlain informs us that he was quarter-mafter in the
army of the king under Marfhal d’Aumont, de Saint Luc,
and Marshal de Briffac, diftinguifhed officers of the French
army, who had been fucceffively in command in that province
for the purpofe of reducing it into obedience to Henry IV.

Marfhal d’Aumont* took command of the army in Brit-
tany in 1592. He was then feventy years of age, an able
and patriotic officer, a moderate Catholic, and an uncompro-
mifing foe of the League. He had expreffed his fympathy

for Henry IV. a long time before the death of Henry IIL,
and when that event occurred he immediately efpoufed the
caufe of the new monarch, and was at once appointed to the

14 Jean d’Aumont, born in 1522, a
Martfhal of France who ferved under fix
kings, Francis I., Henry II., Francis II.,
Charles IX., Henry III., and Henry IV.
He diftinguitfhed himfelf at the battles of
Dreux, Saint-Denis, Montcontour, and
in the famous fiege of Rochelle in 1573.
After the death of Henry III., he was
the firft to recognize Henry IV., whom
he ferved with the fame zeal as he had
his five predeceffors. He took part in
the brilliant battle of Arques in 1589.
In the following year, he fo diftinguifhed
himfelf at Ivry that Henry IV., inviting
him to fup with him after this memora-
ble battle, addreffed to him thefe flatter-
ing words, “ I] eft jufte que vous foyez du
feftin, aprés m’avoir fi bien fervi & mes
noces.” At the fiege of the Chateau de
Camper, in Upper Brittany, he received
a mufket fhot which fractured his arm,
and died of the wound on the roth of
Auguft, 1595, at the age of feventy-
three years. “Ce grand capitaine qui

command

avoit fi bien merité du Roi et de la
nation, emporta dans le tombeau les
regrets des Officiers & des foldats,
qui pleurerent amérement la perte de
leur Général. La Bretagne qui le re-
gardoit comme fon pere, le Roi, tout
le Royaume enfin, furent extremé-
ment touchez de fa mort. Malgré la
haine mutuelle des factions qui divi-
foient la France, il étoit fi eftimé dans les
deux partis, que fil fe fit agi de trouver
un chevalier Francois fans reproche, tel
que nos peres en ont autrefois eu, tout
le monde auroit jetté les yeux fur
d Aumont.” — Hifioire Univerfelle de
Facque-Augufte de Thou, x Londres,
1734, Tom. XII., p. 446. Vide alfo,
Larouffe; Camden's His. Queen Eliza-
beth, London, 1675, pp. 486, 487 ; Memoirs
of Sully, Philadelphia, 1817, pp. 122,
210; Qiuvres de Brantéme, Tom. IV.,
pp. 46-49; Histoire de Bretagne, par
M. Daru, Paris, 1826, Vol. III. p. 3193
freer’s His. Henry IV., Vol. 11., p. 70:

1s
Ingdon

r in the
int Li,
: French
province
ry IV,
in Br
an able
comp
ympaty
ny Ill,
ated the
cl to the
omimand

Br
| et de b

1596. Samuel de Champlain. 17

command of one of the three great divifions of the French
army. He received a wound at the fiege of the Chateau
de Camper, in Brittany, of which he died on the roth of
Auguft, 1595.

De Saint Luc, already in the fervice in Brittany, as lieu-
tenant-general under D’Aumont, continued, after the death
of that officer, in fole command. He raifed the fiege of the
Chateau de Camper after the death of his fuperior, and pro-
ceeded to capture feveral other pofts, marching through the
lower part of the province, repreffing the licenfe of the fol-
diery, and introducing order and difcipline. On the 5th of
September, 1596, he was appointed grand-mafter of the
artillery of France, which terminated his fpecial fervice in

Brittany.

The king immediately appointed in his place Marfhal de
Briffac,” an officer of broad experience, who added other

18 Francois d’Efpinay de Saint-Luc,
fometimes called Le Brave Saint Luc,
was born in 1554, and was killed at the
battle of Amiens on the 8th of Septem-
ber, 1597. He was early appointed
governor of Saintonge, and of the For-
trefs of Brouage, which he fuccefsfully
defended in 1585 againft the attack of
the King of Navarre and the Prince de
Condé. He affifted at the battle of
Coutras in1587. He ferved as a lieuten-
ant-general in Brittany from 1592 to
1596. In1594, he planned with Briffac,
his brother-in-law, then governor of
Paris for the League, for the furrender
of Paris to Henry IV. For this he was
offered the baton of a Marfhal of France
by the king, which he modeftly declined,
and begged that it might be given to
Briffac. In 1578, through the influence or
authority of Henry III., he married the

3

great

heirefs, Jeanne de Coffe-Briflac, fifter of
Charles de Coffe-Briffac, mentioned in
note 16, po/fea, a lady of no perfonal at-
tractions, but of excellent underftanding
and charatter.— Vide Courcelles’ Hif-
toire Généalogique des Pairs de France,
Vol. Il.; Birch’s Memoirs of Queen
Elizabeth, Vol. 1., pp. 163,191; Freer’s
Henry II1., p. 162; De Mezeray’s His.
France, 1683, p. 861.

16 Charles de Coffe-Briffac, a Mar-
fhal of France and governor of Angiers.
He was a member of the League as
early as 1585. He conceived the idea
of making France a republic after the
model of ancient Rome. He laid his
views before the chief Leaguers but none
of them approved his plan. He delivered
up Paris, of which he was governor, to
Henry IV. in 1594, for which he received
the Marfhal’s baton. He died in 1621,

at

Memoir of

great qualities to thofe of an able foldier. No diftinguifhed
battles fignalized the remaining months of the civil war in
this province. The exhaufted refources and faltering cour-
age of the people could no longer be fuftained by the flatter-
ies or promifes of the Duke de Mercceur. Wherever the
fquadrons of the marfhal made their appearance the flag of
truce was raifed, and town, city, and fortrefs vied with each
other in their hafte to bring their enfigns and lay them at
his feet.

On the feventh of June, 1598, the peace of Vervins was
publifhed in Paris, and the kingdom of France was a unit,
with the general fatisfaction of all parties, under the able,

1598.

wife, and catholic fovereign, Henry the Fourth.”

at the fiege of Saint Jean d’Angely.—
Vide Davila, pp. 538, 584, 585; Szdly,
Philadelphia, 1817, Vol. I., p. 420;
Brantéme, Vol. I1l., p. 84; His. Col-
lections, London, 1598, p. 35 ; De Thou,
a Londres, 1724, Tome XIL., p. 449.

iv « By the Articles of this Treaty the
king was to reftore the County of Charvo-
Jois to the king of Spain, to be by him
held of the Crown of France; who in
exchange reftor’d the towns of Ca/ice,
Ardres, Montbulin, Dourlens,la Capelle,
and /e Catelet in Picardy, and Blavet in

CHAPTER IL

Britanny ; which Articles were Ratifi’d
and Sign’d by his Majefty the eleventh
of June [1598]; who in his gayety of
humour, at fo happy a conclufion, told
the Duke of E/pernon, That with one
dafh of his Pen he had done greater
things, than he could of a long time
have perform’d with the beft Swords of
his Kingdom.” —Life of the Duke of
E/fpernon, London, 1670, p. 203; Hi/-
toire du Roy Henry le Grand, par Pre-
fixe, Paris, 1681, p. 243.

Ih

Puithed
Wat ty
& col
flatter
ver the
flag o
h each
hem at

Ins Was
Unit,
@ able

1592. Samuel de Champlain. 19

CHAPTER II.

QUARTER-MASTER. — VISIT TO West INDIES, SouTH AMERICA, MExIco. —
His REPORT. —SUGGESTS A SHIP CANAL. — VOYAGE OF 1603. — EARLIER
VoyAGES. — CARTIER, DE LA ROQUE, MARQUIS DE LA ROCHE, SIEUR
DE CHAUVIN, DE CHASTES. — PRELIMINARY VOYAGE.—RETURN TO
FRANCE.— DEATH OF DE CHASTES.—SIEUR DE MONTS OBTAINS A
CHARTER, AND PREPARES FOR AN EXPEDITION TO CANADA.

We HE fervice of Champlain as quarter-mafter in
the war in Brittany commenced probably with
the appointment of Marfhal d’Aumont to the
command of the army in 1592, and, if we are
right in this conjecture, it covered a period of
not far from fix years. The activity of the army, and the
difficulty of obtaining fupplies in the general deftitution of
the province, impofed upon him conftant and _ perplexing
duty. But in the midft of his embarraffments he was gath-
ering up valuable experience, not only relating to the con-
duct of war, but to the tranfactions of bufinefS under a
great variety of forms. He was brought into clofe and
intimate relations with men of character, ftanding, and influ-
ence. The knowledge, difcipline, and felf-control of which
he was daily becoming mafter were unconfcioufly fitting him
for a career, humble though it might feem in its feveral
ftages, but neverthelefs noble and potent in its relations to
other generations.

At the clofe of the war, the army which it had called into
exiftence was difbanded, the foldiers departed to their homes,
the office of quarter-mafter was of neceffity vacated, and
Champlain was left without employment.

Cafting

tik
4 ai a
ff j |
aE ie‘ip
:

; 7
ay gat
+
FE

|
|
|

20 Memoir of 1598.

Cafting about for fome new occupation, following his in-
ftinGtive love of travel and adventure, he conceived the idea
of attempting an exploration of the Spanifh Weft Indies,
with the purpofe of bringing back a report that should be
ufeful to France. But this was an enterprife not eafy either
to inaugurate or carry out. The colonial eftablifhments of
Spain were at that time hermetically fealed againft all inter-
courfe with foreign nations. Armed fhips, like watch-dogs,
were ever on the alert, and foreign merchantmen entered
their ports only at the peril of confifcation. It was necef-
fary for Spain to fend out annually a fleet, under a convoy
of fhips of war, for the tranfportation of merchandife and
fupplies for the colonies, returning laden with cargoes of
almoft pricelefs value. Champlain, fertile in expedient, pro-
pofed to himfelf to vifit Spain, and there form fuch acquaint
ances and obtain fuch influence as would fecure to him in
fome way a paffage to the Indies in this annual expedition.

The Spanith forces, allies of the League in the late war, had
not yet departed from the coaft of France. He haftened to
the port of Blavet,"* where they were about to embark, and
learned to his furprife and gratification that feveral French
fhips had been chartered, and that his uncle, a diftinguithed
French mariner, commonly known as the Provencal Cappr
tazne, had received orders from Martfhal de Briffac to condu&
the fleet, on which the garrifon of Blavet was embarked, to
Cadiz in Spain. Champlain eafily arranged to accompany

his
18 Blavet was fituated at the mouth of

the River Blavet, on the fouthern coaft
of Brittany. Its occupation had been
granted to the Spanifh by the Duke de
Merceceur during the civil war, and, with

other places held by the Spanifh, was
{urrendered by the treaty of Vervins, in
June, 1598. It was rebuilt and fortified

by Louis XIII., and is now known as
Port Louis.

#805: Samuel de Champlain. 21

his uncle, who was in command of the “ St. Julian,” a ftrong,
well-built fhip of five hundred tons.

Having arrived at Cadiz, and the object of the voyage
having been accomplifhed, the French fhips were difmiffed,
with the exception of the “St. Julian,” which was retained,
with the Provincial Captain, who had accepted the office of
pilot-general for that year, in the fervice of the King of
Spain.

After lingering a month at Cadiz, they proceeded to St.
Lucar de Barameda, where Champlain remained three
months, agreeably occupied in making obfervations and
drawings of both city and country, including a vifit to Se-
ville, fome fifty miles in the interior.

In the mean time, the fleet for the annual vifit to the Weft
Indies, to which we have already alluded, was fitting out at
Saint Lucar, and about to fail under the command of Don
Francifco Colombo, who, attracted by the fize and good
failing qualities of the “Saint Julian,” chartered her for the
voyage. The fervices of the pilot-g general were required in
another direction, and, with the approbation of Colombo, he
gave the command of the “Saint Julian” to Champlain.
Nothing could have been more gratifying than this appoint-
ment, which affured to Champlain a vifit to the more
important Spanifh colonies under the moft favorable cir-
cumftances.

He accordingly fet fail with the fleet, which left Saint
Lucar at the beginning of January, 1599.

Paffing the Canaries, in two months and fix days they

fighted the little ifland of Defeada,” the veffibule of the

great

1 Defeada, fignifying in Spanifh the defired land.

eS ae aaa

i
\
‘E
{

FEAR Da ooh VATE

as OLA I aes
Se

22 Memo of 1600.

great Caribbean archipelago, touched at Guadaloupe, wound
their way among the group called the Virgins, turning to
the fouth made for Margarita,” then famous for its pearl
fifheries, and from thence failed to St. Juan de Porto-rico.
Here the fleet was divided into three fquadrons. One was
to go to Porto-bello, on the Ifthmus of Panama, another to
the coaft of South America, then called Terra Firma, and
the third to Mexico, then known as New Spain. This latter
{quadron, to which Champlain was attached, coafted along
the northern fhore of the ifland of Saint Domingo, other-
wife Hifpaniola, touching at Porto Platte, Mancenilla, Mof
quitoes, Monte Chrifto, and Saint Nicholas, Skirting the
fouthern coaft of Cuba, reconnoitring the Caymans,™ they
at length caft anchor in the harbor of San Juan d’Ulloa, the
ifland fortrefs near Vera Cruz. While here, Champlain
made an inland journey to the City of Mexico, where he
remained a month. He alfo failed in a patache, or advice-
boat, to Porto-bello, when, after a month, he returned again

to

” Margarita, a Spanifh word from are all the Pearls fent to be refined and

the Greek papyapirns, fignifying a pearl.
The following account by an eye-witnefs
will not be uninterefting: “Efpecially
it yieldeth ftore of pearls, thofe gems
which the Latin writers call Unzones,
becaufe nulli duo reperiuntur difcreti,
they always are found to grow in couples.
In this Ifland there are many rich Mer-
chants, who have thirty, forty, fifty
Blackmore flaves only to fith out of the
fea about the rocks thefe pearls. . . .
They are let down in bafkets into the
Sea, and fo long continue under the
water, until by pulling the rope by which
they are let down, they make their fign
to be taken up... . From Margarita

bored to Carthagena, where is a fair
and goodly ftreet of no other fhops then
of thefe Pearl dreffers. Commonly in
the month of ¥z/Zy there is a fhip or two
at moft ready in the Ifland to carry the
King’s revenue, and the Merchant’s
pearls to Carthagena. One of thefe
fhips is valued commonly at three {core
thoufand or four fcore thoufand ducats
and fometimes more, and therefore are
reafonable well manned; for that the
Spaniards much fear our Englifh and
the Holland thips.”— Vide New Survey
of the Weft Indies, by Thomas Gage,
London, 1677, p. 174.
41 Caymans, Crocodiles.

ihn

e WOU,
rang i
Its pat
orton
One my
other
rma, att
his lat
ed along
0, a
la, Mot
ting th
ns)" thy
}loa, te
nampa
vhere te
r aie

od aga

r60r. Samuel de Champlain. 23

to San Juan d’Ulloa. The fquadron then failed for Ha-
vana, from which place Champlain was commiffioned to
vifit, on public bufinefs, Cartagena, within the prefent limits
of New Grenada, on the coaft of South America. The
whole armada was finally collected together at Havana, and
from thence took its departure for Spain, paffing through
the channel of Bahama, or Gulf of Florida, fighting Ber-
muda and the Azores, reaching Saint Lucar early in March,
1601, after an abfence from that port of two years and two
months.”

On Champlain’s return to France, he prepared an elabo-
rate report of his obfervations and difcoveries, luminous
with fixty-two illuftrations fketched by his own hand. As it
was his avowed purpofe in making the voyage to procure
information that fhould be valuable to his government, he
undoubtedly communicated it in fome form to Henry IV.
The document remained in manufcript two hundred and
fifty-feven years, when it was firft printed at London in an
Englifh tranflation by the Hakluyt Society, in 1859. It is
an exceedingly interefting and valuable tract, containing a
lucid defcription of the peculiarities, manners, and cuftoms
of the people, the foil, mountains, and rivers, the trees, fruits,
and plants, the animals, birds, and fifhes, the rich mines found
at different points, with frequent allufions to the fyftem of
colonial management, together with the character and fources
of the vaft wealth which thefe fettlements were annually

yielding to the Spanifh crown.
The

22 For an interefting account of the Englith corfairs, see Votes on Giovanni
beft route to and from the Weft Indies da Verrazano, by J. C. Brevoort, New
in order to avoid the vigilant French and York, 1874, p. Iol.

| I
il!

lL
VEIE \t
en
ie
vies
ti
bat
Wh
ie

a

ee Sal

Memoir of 1601,

The reader of this little treatife will not fail to fee the
drift and tendency of Champlain’s mind and character un-
folded on nearly every page. His indomitable perfeverance,
his careful obfervation, his honeft purpofe and amiable
fpirit are at all times apparent. Although a Frenchman,
a foreigner, and an entire ftranger in the Spanifh fleet, he
had won the confidence of the commander fo completely,
that he was allowed by fpecial permiffion to vifit the City of
Mexico, the Ifthmus of Panama, and the coaft of South
America, all of which were prominent and important centres
of intereft, but neverthelefs lying beyond the circuit made
by the {quadron to which he was attached.

For the moft part, Champlain’s narrative of what he faw
and of what he learned from others is given in fimple terms,
without inference or comment.

His views are, however, clearly apparent in his defcription
of the Spanifh method of converting the Indians by the
Inquifition, reducing them to flavery or the horrors of a
cruel death, together with the retaliation praétifed by their
furviving comrades, refulting in a milder method. This
treatment of the poor favages by their more favage matters
Champlain illuftrates by a graphic drawing, in which two
ftolid Spaniards are guarding half a dozen poor wretches
who are burning for their faith. In another drawing he
reprefents a miferable victim receiving, under the eye and
direction of the prieft, the blows of an uplifted baton, as a
penalty for not attending church.

Champlain’s forecaft and fertility of mind may be clearly
feen in his fuggeftion that a ship-canal acrofs the Ifthmus of
Panama would be a work of great practical utility, faving, in

the

thy,

fee thy
ler
vera
amial

8 by tk
101s Ot}
by te
id. Th
e malts
hich
wretch
ging
eye ath
ton, 3

ie cle!
hms
faving, *

th

1601.

Samuel de Champlain. 25

the voyage to the Pacific fide of the Ifthmus, a diftance of
more than fifteen hundred leagues.”

As it was the policy of Spain to withhold as much as pof.-
fible all knowledge of her colonial fyftem and wealth in the
Weft Indies, we may add, that there is probably no work
extant, on this fubject, written at that period, fo full, impar-

tial, and truthful as this tract by Champlain.

It was un-

doubtedly written out from notes and fketches made on the

23 At the time that Champlain was at
the ifthmus, in 1599-1601, the gold and
filver of Peru were brought to Panama,
then tranfported on mules a diftance of
about four leagues to a river, known as
the Rio Chagres, whence they were con-
veyed by water firft to Chagres, and
thence along the coaft to Porto-bello,
and there fhipped to Spain.

Champlain refers to a fhip-canal in
the following words: “One might
judge, if the territory four leagues in
extent lying between Panama and this
river were cut through, he could pafs
from the fouth fea to that on the other
fide, and thus fhorten the route by more

than fifteen hundred leagues. From
Panama to the Straits of Magellan

would conftitute an ifland, and from
Panama to New Foundland another, fo
that the whole of America would be in
two iflands.” — Vide Brief Difcovrs des
Chofes Plus Remarqvables, par Sammvel
Champlain de Brovage, 1599, Quebec
ed., Vol. I. p. 41. This projeét of a
fhip canal acrofs the ifthmus thus fug-
gefted by Champlain two hundred and
eighty years ago is now attracting the
public attention both in this country and
in Europe. Several fchemes are on foot
for bringing it to pafs, and it will un-
doubtedly be accomplithed, if it fhall be
found after the moft careful and thorough
inveftigation to be within the fcope of
4

{pot

human power, and to offer adequate
commercial advantages.

Some of the difficulties to be over-
come are fuggefted by Mr. Marth in the
following excerpt :—

“The moft coloffal projet of canali-
zation ever fuggefted, whether we con-
fider the phyfical difficulties of its execu-
tion, the magnitude and importance of
the waters propofed to be united, or the
diftance which would be faved in navi-
gation, is that of a channel between the
Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific, acrofs
the Ifthmus of Darien. I do not now
{peak of a lock-canal, by way of the
Lake of Nicaragua, or any other route,
— for fuch a work would not differ effen-
tially from other canals and would
fcarcely poffefs a geographical char-
aéter, —but of an open cut between the
two feas. The late furvey by Captain
Selfridge, fhowing that the loweft point
on the dividing ridge is 763 feet above
the fea-level, muft be confidered as de-
termining in the negative the queftion
of the poffibility of fuch a cut, by any
means now at the control of man; and
both the fanguine expectations of bene-
fits, and the dreary fuggeftions of danger
from the realization of this great dream,
may now be difmiffed as equally chimer-
ical.” — Vide The Earth as Modified by
Human Aion, by George P. Marth,
New York, 1874, p. 612.

1602.

Memoir of

fpot, and probably occupied the early part of the two years
that followed his return from this
period we are not aware that he entered

expedition, during which
upon any other im-
portant enterprife.

This tour among the Spanifh colonies, and the defcription
which Champlain gave of them, information fo much de-
fired and yet fo difficult to obtain, appear to have made a
{trong and favorable impreffion upon the mind of Henry
IV., whose quick comprehenfion of the character of men was
one of the great qualities of this diftinguifhed fovereign.
He clearly faw that Champlain's character was made up of
thofe elements which are indifpenfable in the fervants of the
executive will. He accordingly affigned him a penfion to
enable him to refide near his perfon, and probably at the
fame time honored him with a place within the charmed
circle of the nobility.’s

While Champlain was refiding at court, rejoicing doubt-
lefs in his new honors and full of the marvels of his recent
travels, he formed the acquaintance, or perhaps renewed an
old one, with Commander de Chaftes,” for many years gov-
ernor

24 A tranflation of Champlain’s Voy-

charged by his government with many
age to the Weft Indies and Mexico was

important and refponfible duties. In

made by Alice Wilmere, edited by
Norton Shaw, and publifhed by the
Hakluyt Society, London, 1859.

25 No pofitive evidence is known to
exift as to the time when Champlain was
ennobled. It feems moft likely to have
been in acknowledgment of his valuable
report made to Henry IV. after his vifit
to the Weft Indies.

28 Amyar de Chaftes died on the 13th
of May, 1603, pony refpected and be-
loved by his fellow-citizens. He was

1583, he was fent by Henry III., or rather
by Catherine de Médicis, to the Azores
witha military force to fuftain the claims
of Antonio, the Prior of Crato, to the
throne of Portugal. He was a warm
friend and fupporter of Henry IV., and
took an aétive part in the battles of
Ivry and Arques. He commanded the
French fleet on the coafts of Brittany;
and, during the long ftruggle of this
monarch with internal enemies and ex-
ternal foes, he was in frequent communi-

cation

nis ede

pewel @

1602. Samuel de Champlain. 27

ernor of Dieppe, who had given a long life to the fervice of
his country, both by fea” and by land, and was a warm and
attached friend of Henry IV. The enthufiafm of the young
voyager and the long experience of the old commander made
their interviews mutually inftructive and entertaining. De
Chaftes had obferved and ftudied with great intereft the re-
cent efforts at colonization on the coaft of North America.
His zeal had been kindled and his ardor deepened doubtlefs
by the glowing recitals of his young friend. It was eafy for
him to believe that France, as well as Spain, might gather in
the golden fruits of colonization. The territory claimed by
France was farther to the north, in climate and in fources of
wealth widely different, and would require a different man-
agement. He had determined, therefore, to fend out an
expedition for the purpofe of obtaining more definite infor-
mation than he already poffeffed, with the view to furren-
der fubfequently his government of Dieppe, take up his
abode in the new world, and there dedicate his remaining
years to the fervice of God and his king. He accordingly

obtained

cation with the Englifh to fecure their
co-operation, particularly againft the
Spanifh. He accompanied the Duke
de Boullon, the diftinguifhed Huguenot
nobleman, to England, to be prefent and
witnefs the oath of Queen Elizabeth to
the treaty made with France.

On this occafion he received a valu-
able jewel as a prefent from the Englith
queen. He afterwards directed the cere-
monies and entertainment of the Earl of
Shrew{fbury, who was deputed to receive
the ratification of the before-mentioned
treaty by Henry IV. Vide Bu/fk's His.
Spain and Portugal, London, 1833, p.
129 et paffim,; Denis His. Portugal,

Paris, 1846, p. 296; Freer’s Life of
flenry IV., Vol. I. p. 121, e¢ paffiim;
Memoirs of Sully, Philadelphia, 1817,
Vol. I. p. 204; Birch's Memoirs Queen
Elizabeth, London, 1754, Vol. Il. pp.
121, 145, 151, 154, 155; Afelnt MSS.
Chron., cited by Shaw in War, Voyage
to Weft Ind. and Mexico, Hakluyt Soc.,
1859, p. Xv.

27 “Ay méme tems les nouvelles
vinrent.. «... que le Commandeur
de Chaftes dreffoit une grande Armée de
Mer en Bretagne.” — Yournal de Henri
T/T. (1586), Paris, 1744, Tom. III. p.
279.

28 Memowr of 1603,

obtained a commiffion from the king, affociating with himfelf
fome of the principal merchants of Rouen and other cities,
and made preparations for defpatching a pioneer fleet to re-
connoitre and fix upon a proper place for fettlement, and to
determine what equipment would be neceffary for the con-
venience and comfort of the colony. He fecured the fervices
of Pont Grave,” a diftinguifhed merchant and Canadian fur-
trader, to conduét the expedition. Having laid his views
open fully to Champlain, he invited him alfo to join the ex-
ploring party, as he defired the opinion and advice of fo
careful an obferver as to a proper plan of future operations.

No propofition could have been more agreeable to Cham-
plain than this, and he exprefled himfelf quite ready for the
enterprife, provided De Chaftes would fecure the confent of
the king, to whom he was under very great obligations.
De Chaftes readily obtained the defired permiffion, coupled,
however, with an. order from the king to Champlain to bring
back to him a faithful report of the voyage. Leaving Paris,
Champlain haftened to Honfleur, armed with a letter of in-
ftruGtions from M. de Gefures, the fecretary of the king, to
Pont Grave, direCting him to receive Champlain and afford
him every facility for feeing and exploring the country which
they were about to vifit. They failed for the fhores of the
New World on the 15th of March, 1603.

The reader fhould here obferve that anterior to this date no
colonial fettlement had been made on the northern coafts of

America.

_% Du Pont Gravé was a merchant of He was greatly refpected by Champlain,
St. Malo. He had been affociated with and was clofely affociated with him till
Chauvin in the Canada trade, and con- 1629. After the Englifh captured Que-
tinued to vifit the St. Lawrence for this bec, he appears to have retired, force
purpofe almoft yearly for thirty years. to do fo by the infirmities of age.

coupl
to brag
ng Pari

et Of ih

king,

id. af
fry wi

5 I

tap: Samuel de Champlain. 29

America. Thefe regions had, however, been frequented by
European fifhermen at a very early period, certainly within
the decade after its difcovery by John Cabot in 1497. But
the Bafques, Bretons, and Normans,” who vifited thefe
coafts, were intent upon their employment, and confequently
brought home only meagre information of the country from
whofe fhores they yearly bore away rich cargoes of fith.

The firft voyage made by the French for the purpofe of
difcovery in our northern waters of which we have any
authentic record was by Jacques Cartier in 1534, and an-
other was made for the fame purpofe by this diftinguifhed
navigator in 1535. In the former, he coafted along the fhores
of Newfoundland, entered and gave its prefent name to the
Bay of Chaleur, and at Gafpe took formal poffeffion of the
country in the name of the king. In the fecond, he afcended
the St. Lawrence as far as Montreal, then an Indian village
known by the aborigines as Hochelaga, fituated on an ifland
at the bafe of an eminence which they named Mont-Royal,
from which the present commercial metropolis of the Domin-
ion derives its name. After a winter of great fuffering, which
they paffed on the St. Charles, near Quebec, and the death of
many of his company, Cartier returned to France early in
the fummer of 1536. In 1541, he made a third voyage,
under the patronage of Frangois de la Roque, Lord de Ro-

berval, a nobleman of Picardy. He failed up the St. Law-
rence,

29 Jean Parmentier, of Dieppe, author
of the Difcorfo @un gran capitano in
Ramufio, Vol. III., p. 423, wrote in the
year 1539, and he fays the Bretons and
Normans were in our northern waters
thirty-five years before, which would bein
1504. Vide Mr. Parkman’s learned note

and citations in Pioneers of France in
the New World, pp. 171, 172- The
above is doubtlefs the authority on which
the early writers, such as Pierre Biard,
Champlain, and others, make the year
1504 the period when the French voy-
ages for fifhing comment ed.

30 Memoir of 1542.

rence, anchoring probably at the mouth of the river Cap
Rouge, about four leagues above Quebec, where he built a
fort which he named Charlef/bourg-Royal. Here he pafied
another dreary and difheartening winter, and returned to
France in the fpring of 1542. His patron, De Roberval,
who had failed to fulfil his intention to accompany him the
preceding year, met him at St. John, Newfoundland. In vain
Roberval urged and commanded him to retrace his courfe;
but the refolute old navigator had too recent an experience
and faw too clearly the inevitable obftacles to fuccefs in their
undertaking to be diverted from his purpofe. Roberval pro-
ceeded up the Saint Lawrence, apparently to the fort juft
abandoned by Cartier, which he repaired and occupied the
next winter, naming it Roy-Frangois;* but the difafters
which followed, the ficknefS and death of many of his com-
pany, foon forced him, likewife, to abandon the enterprife
and return to France.

Of these voyages, Cartier, or rather his pilot-general, has
left full and elaborate reports, giving interefting and detailed
accounts of the mode of life among the aborigines, and of
the character and products of the country.

The entire want of fuccefs in all thefe attempts, and the
abforbing and wafting civil wars in France, paralyzed the
zeal and put to reft all afpirations for colonial adventure for
more than half a century.

But in 1598, when peace again began to dawn upon the
nation, the fpirit of colonization revived, and the Marquis
de la Roche, a nobleman of Brittany, obtained a royal com-

miffion

* Vide Voyage of lohn Alphonfe of Xanctoigne, Hakluyt, Vol. I1., p. 293.

val ps
fort j
pied th
difaes
his ou

Af
and th

} hy
eron The
zed. Mle

ture 100

pon the
Margus
al cot
mil

p My

1398 Samuel de Champlain. 31

miffion with extraordinary and exclufive powers of govern-
ment and trade, identical with thofe granted to Roberval
nearly fixty years before. Having fitted out a veffel and
placed on board forty convicts gathered out of the prifons of
France, he embarked for the northern coafts of America.
The firft land he made was Sable Ifland, a moft forlorn fand-
heap rifing out of the Atlantic Ocean, fome thirty leagues
foutheaft of Cape Breton. Here he left thefe wretched crim-
inals to be the ftrength and hope, the bone and finew of the
little kingdom which, in his fancy, he pictured to himfelf
rifing under his foftering care in the New World. While
reconnoitring the mainland, probably fome part of Nova
Scotia, for the purpofe of feleéting a fuitable location for his
intended fettlement, a furious gale {wept him from the coaft,
and, either from neceffity or inclination, he returned to
France, leaving his hopeful colonifts to a fate hardly fur-
paffed by that of Selkirk himfelf, and at the fame time dif
miffing the bright vifions that had fo long haunted his mind,
of perfonal aggrandizement at the head of a colonial eftab-
lifhment.

The next year, 1599, Sieur de Saint Chauvin, of Nor-
mandy, a captain in the royal marine, at the fuggeftion of
Pont Grave, of Saint Malo, an experienced fur-trader, to
whom we have already referred, and who had made feveral
voyages to the northweft anterior to this, obtained a commif-
fion fufficiently comprehenfive, amply providing for a colo-
nial fettlement and the propagation of the Chriftian faith,
with, indeed, all the privileges accorded by that of the Mar-
quis de la Roche. But the chief and prefent object which

Chauvin and Pont Grave hoped to attain was the monopoly
of

32 Memoir of 1600.

Jo

of the fur trade, which they had good reafon to believe they
could at that time conduct with fuccefs. Under this com-
miffion, an expedition was accordingly fitted out and failed
for Tadouflac. Succefsful in its main object, with a full
cargo of valuable furs, they returned to France in the au-
tumn, leaving, however, fixteen men, fome of whom perifhed
during the winter, while the reft were refcued from the fame
fate by the charity of the Indians. In the year 1600, Chau-
vin made another voyage, which was equally remunerative,
and a third had been projeéted on a much broader {cale,
when his death intervened and prevented its execution.

The death of Sieur de Chauvin appears to have vacated
his commiffion, at leaft practically, opening the way for an-
other, which was obtained by the Commander de Chatftes,
whofe expedition, accompanied by Champlain, as we have
already feen, left Honfleur on the 15th of March, 1603. It
confifted of two barques of twelve or fifteen tons, one com-
manded by Pont Grave, and the other by Sieur Prevert, of
Saint Malo, and was probably accompanied by one or more
advice-boats. They took with them two Indians who had
been in France fome time, doubtlefS brought over by De
Chauvin on his laft voyage. With favoring winds, they foon
reached the banks of Newfoundland, fighted Cape Ray, the
northern point of the Ifland of Cape Breton, Anticofti and
Gaspé, coafting along the fouthern fide of the river Saint
Lawrence as far as the Bic, where, croffing over to the
northern fhore, they anchored in the harbor of Tadouflac.
After reconnoitring the Saguenay twelve or fifteen leagues,
leaving their veffels at Tadouflac, where an active fur trade
was in progrefs with the Indians, they proceeded up the St.

Lawrence

1603. Samuel de Champlain. 34

Lawrence in a light boat, paffed Quebec, the Three Rivers,
Lake St. Peter, the Richelieu, which they called the river
of the Iroquois, making an excurfion up this ftream five or
fix leagues, and then, continuing their courfe, paffing Mon-
treal, they finally caft anchor on the northern fide, at the
foot of the Falls of St. Louis, not being able to proceed
further in their boat.

Having previoufly conftructed a fkiff for the purpofe, Pont
Grave and Champlain, with five failors and two Indians with
a canoe, attempted to pafs the falls. But after a long and
perfevering trial, exploring the fhores on foot for fome miles,
they found any further progrefs quite impoffible with their
prefent equipment. They accordingly abandoned the under-
taking and fet out on their return to Tadouflac. They
made fhort ftops at various points, enabling Champlain to
purfue his inveftigations with thoroughnefs and deliberation.
He interrogated the Indians as to the courfe and extent of
the St. Lawrence, as well as that of the other large rivers, the
location of the lakes and falls, and the outlines and general
features of the country, making rude drawings or maps to
illuftrate what the Indians found difficult otherwife to ex-
plain."

The favages alfo exhibited to them fpecimens of native
copper, which they reprefented as having been obtained from
the diftant north, doubtlefs from the neighborhood of Lake
Superior. On reaching Tadouffac, they made another ex-
curfion in one of the barques as far as Gafpe, obferving the

rivers,

81 Compare the refult of thefe in- La Hontan, 1684, ed. 1735, Vol. I. p.
quiries as ftated by Champlain, p.2520f 30.
this vol. and ew Voyages, by Baron

5

34 Memoir of 1603.

rivers, bays, and coves along the route. When they had
completed their trade with the Indians and had fecured from
them a valuable collection of furs, they commenced their re-
turn voyage to France, touching at feveral important points,
and obtaining from the natives fome general hints in regard
to the exiftence of certain mines about the head waters of
the Bay of Fundy.

Before leaving, one of the Sagamores placed his fon in
charge of Pont Grave, that he might fee the wonders of
France, thus exhibiting a commendable appreciation of the
advantages of foreign travel. They alfo obtained the gift of
an Iroquois woman, who had been taken in war, and was
foon to be immolated as one of the victims at a cannibal
feaft. Befides thefe, they took with them alfo four other na-
tives, a man from the coaft of La Cadie, and a woman and
two boys from Canada.

The two little barques left Gafpe on the 24th of Auguft;
on the sth of September they were at the fifhing ftations
on the Grand Banks, and on the 20th of the fame month
arrived at Havre de Grace, having been abfent fix months
and fix days.

Champlain received on his arrival the painful intelligence
that the Commander de Chaftes, his friend and patron,
under whofe aufpices the late expedition had been con-
ducted, had died on the 13th of May preceding. This event
was a perfonal grief as well as a ferious calamity to him, as
it deprived him of an intimate and valued friend, and caft a
cloud over the bright vifions that floated before him of dif
coveries and colonies in the New World. He loft no time
in repairing to the court, where he laid before his fovereign,

Henry IV.,

nt pi
in tea
wales

his fon
onde (
on of
the gt

fat
1 Cane
other &
oman 2

of Auge
ng fae
yme
fix mon

atellige
nd pate
heen

Thisete
fo hi?
and C2

him 0:

ft n0 1

Henty

_foverel

1603. Samuel de Champlain. 35

Henry IV., a map conftructed by his own hand of the re-
gions which he had juft vifited, together with a very particu-
lar narrative of the voyage.

This “petit difcours,” as Champlain calls it, is a clear,
compact, well-drawn paper, containing an account of the
character and products of the country, its trees, plants, fruits,
and vines, with a defcription of the native inhabitants, their
mode of living, their clothing, food and its preparation, their
banquets, religion, and method of burying their dead, with
many other interefting particulars relating to their habits
and cuftoms.

Henry IV. manifefted a deep intereft in Champlain’s nar-
rative. He liftened to its recital with great apparent fatif-
faction, and by way of encouragement promifed not to
abandon the undertaking, but to continue to beftow upon it
his royal favor and patronage.

There chanced at this time to be refiding at court, a Hu-
guenot gentleman who had been a faithful adherent of Henry
IV, in the late war, Pierre du Guaft, Sieur de Monts, gen-
tleman ordinary to the king’s chamber, and governor of Pons
in Saintonge. This nobleman had made a trip for pleafure
or recreation to Canada with De Chauvin, feveral years before,
and had learned fomething of the country, and efpecially of
the advantages of the fur trade with the Indians. He was
quite ready, on the death of De Chatftes, to take up the en-
terprife which, by this event, had been brought to a fudden
and difaftrous termination. He immediately devifed a
fcheme for the eftablifhment of a colony under the patron-
age of a company to be compofed of merchants of Rouen,
Rochelle, and of other places, their contributions for cover-

Ing

Memoir of

be fupplemented, if not
trade in furs and peltry

1603.

ing the expenfe of the enterprife to
rendered entirely unneceffary, by a
to be conducted by the company.
In lefs than two months after the return of the laft expe-
dition, De Monts had obtained from Henry IV., though
contrary to the advice of his moft influential minifter,* a char-

ter conftituting him the king’s lieutenant in La Cadie, with
all neceffary and defirable powers for a colonial fettlement.
The grant included the whole territory lying between the
goth and 46th degrees of north latitude. Its fouthern
boundary was on a parallel of Philadelphia, while its north-
ern was on a line extended due weft from the moft eafterly
point of the Ifland of Cape Breton, cutting New Brunfwick
on a parallel near Fredericton, and Canada near the junc-
tion of the river Richelieu and the St. Lawrence. It will
be obferved that the parts of New France at that time beft
known were not included in this grant, viz., Lake St. Peter,
Three Rivers, Quebec, Tadouffac, Gafpe, and the Bay Cha-
leur. Thefe were points of great importance, and had
doubtlefs been left out of the charter by an overfight arifing
from an almoft total want of a definite geographical knowl-
edge of our northern coaft. Juftly apprehending that the
places above mentioned might not be included within the
limits of his grant, De Monts obtained, the next month, an
extenfion of the bounds of his exclufive right of trade, fo

that

to be expeéted from all thofe countries
of the new world, which are beyond the
fortieth degree of latitude. His majefty

_® The Duke of Sully’s difapproba-
tion is expreffed in the following
words: ‘* The colony, that was fent to

Canada this year, was among the num-
ber of thofe things that had not my ap-
probation ; there was no kind of riches

gave the conduét of this expedition to the
Sieur du Mont.” — Memoirs of Sully,
Philadelphia, 1817, Vol. III. p. 185-

1604. Samuel de Champlain. 34

that it fhould comprehend the whole region of the gulf and
river of St. Lawrence.*

The following winter, 1603-4, was devoted by De Monts
to organizing his company, the collection of a fuitable band
of colonifts, and the neceffary preparations for the voyage.
His commiffion authorized him to feize any idlers in the city
or country, or even conviéts condemned to tranfportation,
to make up the bone and finew of the colony. To what
extent he reforted to this method of filling his ranks, we
know not. Early in April he had gathered together about
a hundred and twenty artifans of all trades, laborers, and fol-
diers, who were embarked upon two fhips, one of 120 tons,
under the direction of Sieur de Pont Grave, commanded,
however, by Captain Morel, of Honfleur; another of 150
tons, on which De Monts himfelf embarked with feveral no-
blemen and gentlemen, having Captain Timothée, of Havre
de Grace, as commander.

De Monts extended to Champlain an invitation to join
the expedition, which he readily accepted, but, neverthelefs,
on the condition, as in the previous voyage, of the king’s
affent, which was freely granted, neverthelefs with the com-
mand that he fhould prepare a faithful report of his obfer-

vations and difcoveries.
CHAPTER III.

83 “ Frequenter, negocier, et commu-
niquer durant ledit temps de dix ans,
depuis le Cap de Raze jufques au qua-
rantiéme degré, comprenant toute la céte
de la Cadie, terre et Cap Breton, Bayes
de Sainct-Cler, de Chaleur, Ile Percée,
Gachepé, Chinfchedec, Mefamichi, Lef-

quemin, Tadouffac, et la riviere de
Canada, tant d’un cété que d’autre, et
toutes les Bayes et rivieres qui entrent
au dedans defdites cétes.”— Extract of
Commiffion, Hifloire de la Nouvelle-
France, par Lefcarbot, Paris, 1866, Vol.
II. p. 416.

Moe ~ “ — aa . “ane
TITS 8 amen RAAT ETT TE OTF ‘

i ce
Zi Pee:
y it ;
a & i - ‘7
ga @
{
4 : 33
ae E
u a a
Hi .
tele
7: Bi
Z tLe |
4
;
y 4

Memoir of

CHAPTER III.

DE Monts LEAVES FoR LA CApIE— THE Coasts OF Nova ScoTIA.— THE
Bay oF Funpy.— SEARCH FOR COPPER MINE.—CHAMPLAIN EXPLORES
THE PENOBSCOT. —DE Monts’s ISLAND.— SUFFERINGS OF THE COLONY.
— EXPLORATION OF THE COAST AS FAR AS NAUSET, ON CAPE Cop.

=—qvqi EE MONTS, with Champlain and the other no-
| blemen, left Havre de Grace on the 7th April,
1604, while Pont Grave, with the other veffel,
followed three days later, to rendezvous at Can-

feau.

Taking a more foutherly courfe than he had originally
intended, De Monts came in fight of La Héve on the 8th of
May, and on. the 12th entered Liverpool harbor, where he
found Captain Roffignol, of Havre de Grace, carrying on a
contraband trade in furs with the Indians, whom he arrefted,
and confifcated his veffel.

The next day they anchored at Port Mouton, where they
lingered three or four weeks, awaiting news from Pont
Grave, who had in the mean time arrived at Canfeau, the
rendezvous agreed upon before leaving France. Pont Grave
had there difcovered feveral Bafque fhips engaged in the fur-
trade. Taking poffeffion of them, he fent their mafters to
De Monts. The fhips were fubfequently confifcated and
fent to Rochelle.

Captain Fouques was defpatched to Canfeau in the veffel
which had been taken from Roffignol, to bring forward the
fupplies which had been brought over by Pont Gravé.

Having tranfihipped the provifions intended for the colony,

Pont Grave

thy

other m
th Ant
ner ve
sat Ce

ong
he Shi
where
ng 0

arf

per th
om Pit
ea,
mnt Gat
n thee
pales
ated 2

1604. Samuel de Champlain. 39

Pont Gravé proceeded through the Straits of Canfeau up
the St. Lawrence, to trade with the Indians, upon the profits
of which the company relied largely for replenifhing their
treafury.

In the mean time Champlain was fent in a barque of eight
tons, with the fecretary Sieur Ralleau, Mr. Simon, the miner,
and ten men, to reconnoitre the coaft towards the wett.
Sailing along the fhore, touching at numerous points, doub-
ling Cape Sable, he entered the Bay of Fundy, and after
exploring St. Mary’s Bay, and difcovering feveral mines of
both filver and iron, returned to Port Mouton and made to
De Monts a minute and careful report.

De Monts immediately weighed anchor and failed for the
Bay of St. Mary, where he left his veffel, and, with Cham-
plain, the miner, and fome others, proceeded to explore the
Bay of Fundy. They entered and examined Annapolis
harbor, coafted along the weftern fhores of Nova Scotia,
touching at the Bay of Mines, paffing over to New Brunt
wick, fkirting its whole foutheaftern coaft, entering the har-
bor of St. John, and finally penetrating Paflamaquoddy Bay
as far as the mouth of the river St. Croix, and fixed upon
De Monts’s Ifland ** as the feat of their colony. The veffel

at

84 De Monts’s Ifland. Of this ifland la riviere de Pentagoiiet, jufques a celle
Champlain fays: “This place was named de faint Jean, il peut y avoir quarante 4
by Sieur De Monts the Ifland of St. quarante cinq lieués; la premiere riviere

Croix.” —Vide Vol. II. p. 32, note 86.
St. Croix has now for a long time been
applied as the name of the river in which
this ifland is found. The French de-
nominated this ftream the River of the
Etechemins, after the name of the tribe
of favages inhabiting its fhores. Vide
Vol. II. p. 31. It continued to be fo
called for along time. Denys fpeaks
of it under this name in 1672. ‘ Depuis

que l’on rencontre le long de la cofte, eft
celle des Etechemins, qui porte le nom
du pays, depuis Bafton jufques au Port
royal, dont les Sauvages qui habitent
toute cette étendué, portent auffi le
mefme nom.” — Defcription Geogra-
phique et Hiftorique des Coftes de
L’Ameriqve Septentrionale, par Nicho-
las Denys, Paris, 1672, p. 29, e¢ ver/o.

Memoir of 1604,

at St. Mary’s with the colonifts was ordered to join them,
and immediately active meafures were taken for laying out
gardens, erecting dwellings and ftorehoufes, and all the
neceflary preparations for the coming winter. Champlain
was commiffioned to defign and lay out the town, if fo it
could be called.

When the work was fomewhat advanced, he was fent in a
barque of five or fix tons, manned with nine failors, to fearch
for a mine of pure copper, which an Indian named Mefla-
moiiet had affured them he could point out to them on the
coaft towards the river St. John. Some twenty-five miles
from the river St. Croix, they found a mine yielding eighteen
per cent, as eftimated by the miner; but they did not dif
cover any pure copper, as they had hoped.

On the laft day of Auguft, 1604, the veffel which had
brought out the colony, together with that which had been
taken from Roffignol, took their departure for the fhores of
France. In it failed Poutrincourt, Ralleau the fecretary of
De Monts, and Captain Roffignol.

From the moment of his arrival on the coaft of America,
Champlain employed his leifure hours in making {ketches
and drawings of the moft important rivers, harbors, and In-
dian fettlements which they had vifited.

While the little colony at De Monts’s Ifland was a¢tive in
getting its appointments arranged and fettled, De Monts
wifely determined, though he could not accompany it himéelf,
neverthelefs to fend out an expedition during the mild days
of autumn, to explore the region ftill further to the fouth,
then called by the Indians Norumbegue. Greatly to the
fatisfaGtion of Champlain, he was perfonally charged with

this

seu: Samuel de Champlain. Al

this important expedition. He fet out on the 2d of Septem-
ber, in a barque of feventeen or eighteen tons, with twelve
failors and two Indian guides. The inevitable fogs of that
region detained them nearly a fortnight before they were
able to leave the banks of Paflamaquoddy. Pafling along
the rugged fhores of Maine, with its endlefs chain of iflands
rifing one after another into view, which they called the
Ranges, they at length came to the ancient Pemetigq, lying
clofe in to the fhore, having the appearance at fea of feven
or eight mountains drawn together and fpringing from the
fame bafe. This Champlain named Monts Dé/erts, which
we have anglicized into Mount Defert,* an appellation
which has furvived the viciffitudes of two hundred and
feventy-five years, and now that the ifland, with its falubri-
ous air and cool fhades, its bold and picturefque fcenery, is
attraGting thoufands from the great cities during the heats
of fummer, the name is likely to abide far down into a dif-
tant and indefinite future.

Leaving Mount Defert, winding their way among numer-
ous iflands, taking a northerly direction, they foon entered
the Penobfcot,* known by the early navigators as the river

Norumbegue.

85 Champlain had, by his own explora-
tions and by confulting the Indians, ob-
tained a very full and accurate knowl-
edge of this ifland at his firft vifit, on the
sth of September, 1604, when he named
it Monts-déferts, which we preferve in
the English form, Mount DESERT.
He obferved that the diftance acrofs the
channel to the mainland on the north
fide was lefs than a hundred paces. The
rocky and barren fummits of this clufter
of little mountains obvioufly induced
him to give to the ifland its appropriate

and defcriptive name. Véde Vol. II. p.
39. Dr. Edward Ballard derives the
Indian name of this ifland, Pemetig,
from femé’e, floping, and 4, land. He
adds that it probably denoted a fingle
locality which was taken by Biard’s
company as the name of the whole
ifland. Vide Report of U.S. Coaft Sur-
vey for 1868, p. 253.

3 Penobfcot is a corruption of the
Abnaki pa"nawa"b/eek. A nearly exact
tranflation is “at the fall of the rock,”
or “at the defcending rock.” Vide

Trumball’s

Memoir of 1604,
Norumbegue. They proceeded up the river as far as the
mouth of an affluent now known as the Kendufkeag,?” which
was then called, or rather the place where it made a junction
with the Penobfcot was called by the natives, Kade/qutt, fit-
uated at the head of tide-water, near the prefent fite of the
city of Bangor. The falls above the city intercepted their
further progrefs. The river-banks about the harbor were
fringed with a luxurious growth of foreft trees. On one
fide, lofty pines reared their gray trunks, forming a natural
palifade along the fhore. On the other, maffive oaks alone
were to be feen, lifting their fturdy branches to the {kies,
gathered into clumps or {tretching out into long lines, as
if a landfcape gardener had planted them to pleafe the eye
and gratify the tafte. An exploration revealed the whole

furrounding region clothed in a fimilar wild and primitive
beauty.

After a leifurely furvey of the country, they returned to
the mouth of the river. Contrary to what might have been
expected, Champlain found fcarcely any inhabitants dwelling
on the borders of the Penobfcot. Here and there they faw
a few deferted wigwams, which were the only marks of hu-
man occupation. At the mouth of the river, on the borders

of

Trumball’s Ind. Geog. Names, Collec-
tions Conn. His. Society, Vol. II. p. 19.
This name was originally given probably
to fome part of the river te which its
meaning was particularly applicable.
This may have been at the mouth of the
river a Fort Point, a rocky elevation not
lefs than eighty feet in height. Or it
may have been the “ fall of water coming
down a flope of feven or eight feet,” as
Champlain expreffes it, a fhort diftance
above the fite of the prefent city of Ban-
gor. That this name was first obtained

by thofe who only vifited the mouth of
the river would feem to favor the former
fuppofition.

37 Dr. Edward Ballard fuppofes the
original name of this ftream, X ade/quit,
to be derived from £ahz, a Micmac word
for eel, denoting cel fream, now COT-
rupted into Kendu/keag. The prefent
fite of the city of Bangor is where Biard
intended to eftablifh his miffion in 1613,
but he was finally induced to fix it at
Mount Defert.—Vide Relations des Fé-
Suites, Quebec ed., Vol. I. p- 44-

) the fe
ng ins:
ale thee
| them
d prt

tunel
+ hae

if5 dre

re they?

atks (2

the bow

1604. Samuel de Champlain. 43

of Penobfcot Bay, the native inhabitants were numerous.
They were of a friendly difpofition, and gave their vifitors a
cordial welcome, readily entered into negotiations for the
fale of beaver-kins, and the two parties mutually agreed to
maintain a friendly intercourfe in the future.

Having obtained from the Indians fome valuable informa-
tion as to the fource of the Penobfcot, and obferved their
mode of life, which did not differ from that which they had
feen flill further eaft, Champlain departed on the 20th of
September, dire¢ting his courfe towards the Kennebec.
But, encountering bad weather, he found it neceflary to take
fhelter under the lee of the ifland of Monhegan.

After failing three or four leagues farther, finding that his
provifions would'not warrant the continuance of the voyage, he
determined, on the 23d of September, to return to the fettle-
ment at Saint Croix, or what is now known as De Monts’s
Ifland, where they arrived on the 2d day of October, 1604.

De Monts’s Ifland, having an area of not more than fix or
feven acres, is fituated in the river Saint Croix, midway be-
tween its oppofite fhores, directly upon the dividing line
between the townfhips of Calais and Robinfton in the
State of Maine. At the northern end of the ifland, the
buildings of the fettlement were cluftered together in
the form of a quadrangle with an open court in the centre.
Firft came the magazine and lodgings of the foldiers, then
the manfion of the governor, De Monts, furmounted by the
colors of France. Houfes for Champlain and the other

gentlemen,® for the curé, the artifans and workmen, filled up
and
Champdoré, Beaumont, la Motte Bou-

or Foulgeré de Vitré,
Geneftou,

88 The other gentlemen whofe names
we have learned were Meffieurs d’Orville, rioli, Fougeray

A4 Memoir of 1604.

and completed the quadrangle. Below the houfes, gardens
were laid out for the feveral gentlemen, and at the fouthern
extremity of the ifland cannon were mounted for prote¢tion
againft a fudden affault.

In the ample forefts of Maine or New Brunfwick, rich in
oak and maple and pine, abounding in deer, partridge, and
other wild game, watered by cryftal fountains {pringing from
every acre of the foil, we naturally picture for our colonifts
a winter of robuft health, phyfical comfort, and focial enjoy-
ment. The little ifland which they had chofen was indeed
a charming fpot in a fummer’s day, but we can hardly com-
prehend in what view it could have been regarded as fuitable
for a colonial plantation. In fpace it was wholly inade-
quate ; it was deftitute of wood and frefh water, and its foil
was fandy and unproductive. In fixing the location of their
fettlement and in the conftruction of their houfes, it is obvi-
ous that they had entirely mifapprehended the character of
the climate. While the latitude was nearly the fame, the
temperature was far more rigorous than that of the funny
France which they had left. The fnow began to fall on the
6th of Ogtober. On the 3d of December the ice was feen
floating on the furface of the water. As the feason ad-
vanced, and the tide came and went, huge floes of ice, day
after day, {wept by the ifland, rendering it impracticable to
navigate the river or pafs over to the mainland. They were
therefore imprifoned in their own home. Thus cut off from
the game with which the neighboring forefts abounded, they
were compelled to fubfift almoft exclufively upon falted

meats.

Geneftou, Sourin, and Boulay. The mentioned from time to time, is vari-
orthography of the names, as they are ous.

1605. Samuel de Champlain. AS

meats. Nearly all the foreft trees on the ifland had been
ufed in the conftruction of their houfes, and they had confe-
quently but a meagre fupply of fuel to refift the chilling
winds and penetrating frofts. For frefh water, their only
reliance was upon melted fnow and ice. Their ftore-houfe
had not been furnifhed with a cellar, and the froft left nothing
untouched ; even cider was difpenfed in folid blocks. To
crown the gloom and wretchednefs of their fituation, the
colony was vifited with difeafe of a virulent and fatal char-
acter. As the malady was beyond the knowledge, fo it baf-
fled the fkill of the furgeons. They called it mal de la terre.
Of the feventy-nine perfons, compofing the whole number
of the colony, thirty-five died, and twenty others were
brought to the verge of the grave. In May, having been
liberated from the baleful influence of their winter prifon
and revived by the genial warmth of the vernal fun and by
the frefh meats obtained from the favages, the difeafe abated,
and the furvivors gradually regained their ftrength.
Difheartened by the bitter experiences of the winter, the
governor, having fully determined to abandon his prefent
eftablifhment, ordered two boats to be conftructed, one of
fifteen and the other of feven tons, in which to tranfport his
colony to Gafpé, in cafe he received no fupplies from France,
with the hope of obtaining a paffage home in fome of the
fifhing veffels on that coaft. But from this difagreeable al-
ternative he was happily relieved. On the 15th of June,
1605, Pont Grave arrived, to the great joy of the little col-
ony, with all needed fupplies. The purpofe of returning to
France was at once abandoned, and, as no time was to be

loft, on the 18th of the fame month, De Monts, Champlain,
feveral

ee
i
ce

aR Tm

46 Memoir of 1605,

feveral gentlemen, twenty failors, two Indians, Panounias
and his wife, fet fail for the purpofe of difcovering a more eli-
gible fite for his colony fomewhere on the fhores of the pref
ent New England. Pafling flowly along the coaft, with which
Champlain was already familiar, and confequently without
extenfive explorations, they at length reached the waters of
the Kennebec,” where the furvey of the previous year had
terminated and that of the prefent was about to begin.

On the 5th of July, they entered the Kennebec, and,
bearing to the right, paffed through Back River,” grazing
their barque on the rocks in the narrow channel, and then
{weeping down round the fouthern point of Jerremifquam
Ifland, or Weftport, they afcended along its eaftern fhores till
they came near the prefent fite of Wifcaffet, from whence they
returned on the weftern fide of the ifland, through Monfeag
Bay, and threading the narrow paffage between Arrowfick
and Woolwich, called the Upper Hell-gate, and again enter-
ing the Kennebec, they finally reached Merrymeeting Bay.
Lingering here but a fhort time, they returned through the
Sagadahock, or lower Kennebec, to the mouth of the river.

This exploration did not yield to the voyagers any very
interefting or important refults. Several friendly interviews
were held with the favages at different points along the
route. Near the head waters of the Sheepfcot, probably in
Wifcaffet Bay, they had an interview, an interefting and joy-

ous

89 Kennebec. Biard, in the Relation probably equivalent in meaning to guin-

de la Nouvelle France, Relations des
Féfuites, Quebec ed., Vol. I. p. 35,
writes it Quinibeguiz, and Champlain
writes it Quinibeguy and Quinebegui;
hence Mr. Trumball infers that it is

ni-pi-ohke, meaning “long water place,”
derived from the Abnaki, Keo ué-be-hi.
— Vide Ind. Geog. Names, Col. Conn.
His. Soc. Vol. If. p. 15.

4 Vide Vol. II. note r1o.

iy Ch

1605, Samuel de Champlain. A

ous meeting, with the chief Manthoumerme and his twenty-
five or thirty followers, with whom they exchanged tokens
of friendfhip. Along the fhores of the Sheepfcot their atten-
tion was attracted by feveral pleafant ftreams and fine ex-
panfes of meadow; but the foil obferved on this expedition
generally, and efpecially on the Sagadahock,* or lower
Kennebec, was rough and barren, and offered, in the judg-
ment of De Monts and Champlain, no eligible fite for a new
fettlement.

Proceeding, therefore, on their voyage, they ftruck directly
acro{s Cafco Bay, not attempting, in their ignorance, to enter
the fine harbor of Portland.

On the gth of July, they made the bay that ftretches from
Cape Elizabeth to Fletcher’s Neck, and anchored under the
lee of Stratton Ifland, directly in fight of Old Orchard
Beach, now a famous watering place during the fummer
months.

The favages having feen the little French barque ap-
proaching in the diftance, had built fires to attract its atten-
tion, and came down upon the fhore at Prout’s Neck,
formerly known as Black Point, in large numbers, indicating
their friendlinefs by lively demonftrations of joy. From this
anchorage, while awaiting the influx of the tide to enable
them to pafs over the bar and enter a river which they faw
flowing into the bay, De Monts paid a vifit to Richmond’s

Ifland,

41 Sagadahock. This name is par- Vol. II. p. 30. Dr. Edward Ballard
ticularly applied to the lower part of derives it from /ankéai-1-wi, to finifh,
the Kennebec. It is from the Abnaki, and ov, a locative, “ the finifhing place,”
JSa'chede‘aki, “land at the mouth.”— which means the mouth of a river. —

Vide Indian Geographical Names, by
J. H. Trumball, Col. Conn. His. Society,

Vide Report of U. S. Coaft Survey,
1868, p. 258.

48

Memoir of

1605.

Ifland, about four miles diftant, with which he was greatly

delighted, as he found it richly

{tudded with oak and hickory,

whofe bending branches were wreathed with luxuriant grape-

vines loaded with green clufters of unripe fruit.
gave to the ifland the claffic name of

the god of wine, they
Bacchus.”

5

At full tide they

In honor of

paffed over the bar and catft

anchor within the channel of the Saco.
The Indians whom they found here were called Almou-

chiquois,

and differed in many refpe¢ts from any which they

had feen before, from the Sourequois of Nova Scotia and
the Etechemins of the northern part of Maine and New

Brunfwick. They fpoke a different language, and, unlike
their neighbors on the eaft, did not fubfist mainly by the
chafe, but upon the produéts of the foil, fupplemented by
fith, which were plentiful and of excellent quality, and which
they took with facility about the mouth of the river. De

Monts and Champlain made an excurfion upon the fhore,
where their eyes were refrefhed by fields of waving corn,
and gardens of {quafhes, beans, and pumpkins, which were

then burfting into flower.

“2 Bacchus Ifland. This was Rich-
mond’s Ifland, as we have ftated in Vol.
Il. note 123. It will be admitted that
the Bacchus Ifland of Champlain was
either Richmond’s Ifland or one of thofe
in the bay of the Saco. Champlain does
not give a fpecific name to any of the
iflands in the bay, as may be feen by
referring to the explanations of his map
of the bay, Vol. Il. p. 65. If one of
them had been Bacchus Ifland, he would
not have failed to refer to it, according
to his uniform cuftom, under that name.
Hence it is certain that his Bacchus
Ifland was not one of thofe figured on

Here they saw in cultivation
the

his local map of the bay of the Saco.
By reference to the large map of 1632,
it will be feen that Bacchus Ifland is
reprefented by the number 50, which is
placed over againft the largeft ifland in
the neighborhood and that fartheft to the
eaft, which, of courfe, muft be Rich-
mond’s Ifland. It is, however, proper to
{tate that thefe reference figures are not
in general fo carefully placed as to enable
us to rely upon them in fixing a locality,
particularly if unfupported by other evi-
dence. But in this cafe other evidence
Is not wanting.

43 Vide Vol. 11. pp. 64-67-

1605. Samuel de Champlain. 49

the rank narcotic fetwn, or tobacco, jutt beginning to
{pread out its broad velvet leaves to the fun, the fole luxury
of favage life. The forefts were thinly wooded, but were
neverthelefs rich in primitive oak, in lofty afh and elm, and
in the more humble and fturdy beech. As on Richmond’s
Ifland fo here, along the bank of the river they found grapes
in luxurious growth, from which the failors bufied themfelves
in making verjuice, a delicious beverage in the meridian
heats of a July fun. The natives were gentle and amiable,
graceful in figure, agile in movement, and exhibited unufual
tafte, dreffing their hair in a variety of twifts and braids,
intertwined with ornamental feathers.

Champlain obferved their method of cultivating Indian
corn, which the experience of two hundred and feventy-five
years has in no effential point improved or even changed.
They planted three or four feeds in hills three feet apart,
and heaped the earth about them, and kept the foil clear of
weeds. Such is the method of the fuccefsful New England
farmer to-day. The experience of the favage had taught
him how many individuals of the rank plant could occupy
prolifically a given area, how the foil muft be gathered about
the roots to fuftain the heavy ftock, and that there muft be
no rival near it to draw away the nutriment on which the
voracious plant feeds and grows. Civilization has invented
implements to facilitate the proceffes of culture, but the ob-
fervation of the favage had Jed him to a knowledge of all
that is abfolutely neceffary to enfure a prolific harvett.

After lingering two days at Saco, our explorers proceeded

on

44 Nicotiana ruftica. Vide Vol. 11, by Charles Pickering, M.D. Bofton,
note 130. Chronological His. Plants, 1879. p. 741, et pafim.

7

aa
aig
ati eE |
ha @:
a
1

RE ARI Ta ono

Memotr of 1605.

on their voyage. When they had advanced not more than
twenty miles, driven by a fierce wind, they were forced to
caft anchor near the falt marfhes of Wells. Having been
driven by Cape Porpoife, on the fubfidence of the wind, they
returned to it, reconnoitred its harbor and adjacent iflands,
together with Little River, a few miles ftill further to the
eaft. The fhores were lined all along with nut-trees and
grape-vines. The iflands about Cape Porpoife were matted
all over with wild currants, fo that the eye could fcarcely dif
cern any thing elfe. AttraGted doubtlefs by this fruit, clouds
of wild pigeons had affembled there, and were having a mid-
fummer’s feftival, fearlefs of the treacherous {nare or the hunt-
er’s deadly aim. Large numbers of them were taken, which
added a coveted luxury to the not over-ftocked larder of the
little French barque.

On the 15th of July, De Monts and his party left Cape
Porpoife, keeping in and following clofely the finuofities of
the fhore. They faw no favages during the day, nor any ev-
idences of any, except a rifing fmoke, which they approached,
but found to be a lone beacon, without any furroundings of
human life. Thofe who had kindled the fire had doubtlefs
concealed themfelves, or had fled in difmay. Poflibly they had
never feen a fhip under fail. The fifhermen who frequented
our northern coaft rarely came into thefe waters, and the
little craft of our voyagers, moving without oars or any ap-
parent human aid, feemed doubtlefs to them a monfter glid-
ing upon the wings of the wind. At the fetting of the fun,
they were near the flat and fandy coaft, now known as Wal-
lace’s Sands. They fought in vain for a roadftead where
they might anchor fafely for the night. When they were

oppofite

ing a
yr the b
ken, mit
rder cht

y let Wy
nol

not at
appr
puncing

dot
bye
regu
5, aul?

1605. Samuel de Champlain. 51

oppofite to Little Boar’s Head, with the Ifles of Shoals di-
rectly eaft of them, and the reflected rays of the fun were
ftill throwing their light upon the waters, they faw in the
diftance the dim outline of Cape Anne, whither they di-
rected their courfe, and, before morning, came to anchor
near its eaftern extremity, in fixteen fathoms of water. Near
them were the three well-known iflands at the apex of the
cape, covered with foreft-trees, and the woodlefs clufter of
rocks, now called the Savages, a little further from the
fhore.

The next morning five or fix Indians timidly approached
them in a canoe, and then retired and fet up a dance on the
fhore, as a token of friendly greeting. Armed with crayon
and drawing-paper, Champlain was defpatched to feek from
the natives fome important geographical information. Dif-
penfing knives and bifcuit as a friendly invitation, the fav-
ages gathered about him, affured by their gifts, when he
proceeded to impart to them their firft leffon in topograph-
ical drawing. He pictured to them the bay on the north
fide of Cape Anne, which he had juft traverfed, and fignify-
ing to them that he defired to know the courfe of the fhore
on the fouth, they immediately gave him an example of their
apt fcholarfhip by drawing with the fame crayon an accurate
outline of Maffachufetts Bay, and finifhed up Champlain’s
own {ketch by introducing the Merrimac River, which, not
having been feen, owing to the prefence of Plum Ifland,
which ftretches like a curtain before its mouth, he had
omitted to portray. The intelligent natives volunteered a
bit of hiftory. By placing fix pebbles at equal diftances,
they intimated that Maffachufetts Bay was occupied by fix

tribes,

52 Memoir of 1605.
tribes, and governed by as many chiefs.* He learned from
them, likewife, that the inhabitants of this region fubfifted
by agriculture, as did thofe at the mouth of the Saco, and
that they were very numerous.

Leaving Cape Anne on Saturday, the 16th of July, De
Monts entered Mafiachufetts Bay, failed into Bofton harbor,
and anchored on the weftern fide of Noddle’s Ifland, now better
known as Eaft Bofton. In paffing into the bay, they obferved
large patches of cleared land, and many fields of waving
corn both upon the iflands and the mainland. The water
and the iflands, the open fields and lofty foreft-trees, pre-
fented fine contrafts, and rendered the fcenery attractive and
beautiful. Here for the firft time Champlain obferved the
log canoe. It was a clumfy though ferviceable boat in full ©

waters, neverthelefs unftable and dangerous in unfkilful
hands. They faw, iffuing into the bay, a large river, coming

from the weft, which they named River du Guaft, in honor
of Pierre du Guaft, Sieur de Monts, the patentee of La
Cadie, and the patron and director of this expedition. This
was Charles River, feen, evidently juft at its confluence with

the Myftic.**
On Sunday, the 17th of July, 1605, they left Bofton har-
bor, threading their way among the iflands, pafling leifurely
along

45 Daniel Gookin, who wrote in 1674,
fpeaks of the following fubdivifions
among the Maffachufetts Indians:
“Their chief fachem held dominion
over many other petty governours ; as
thofe of Weechagafkas, Neponfitt, Pun-
kapaog, Nonantam, Nafhaway, and fome
of the Nipmuck people.” ~ Vide Gook-
in’s His. Col.

% Vide Vol. Il. note 159. Mu/hau-

womuk, which we have converted into
Shawmut, means, “where there is
going-by-boat.” The French, if they
heard the name and learned its mean-
ing, could hardly have failed to fee the
appropriatenefs of it as applied by the
aborigines to Bofton harbor. — Vide
Trumball in Conneticut Hiftorical So-
ciety’s Colleétions, Vol. II. p. 5.

1605. Samuel de Champlain. 53

along the fouth fhore, rounding Point Allerton on the pe-
ninfula of Nantafket, gliding along near Cohaffet and Scitu-
ate, and finally caft anchor at Brant Point, upon the fouthern
borders of Marfhfield. When they left the harbor of Bofton,
the iflands and mainland were fwarming with the native pop-
ulation. The Indians were, naturally enough, intenfely in-
terefted in this vifit of the little French barque. It may
have been the firft that had ever made its appearance in the
bay. Its fize was many times greater than any water-craft
of their own. Spreading its white wings and gliding filently
away without oarfmen, it filled them with furprife and admi-
ration. The whole population was aftir. The cornfields and
fifhing ftations were deferted. Every canoe was manned,
and a flotilla of their tiny craft came to attend, honor, and
fpeed the parting guefts, experiencing, doubtlefs, a fenfe of
relief that they were going, and filled with a painful curiofity
to know the meaning of this myfterious vifit.

Having paffed the night at Brant Point, they had not ad-
vanced more than two leagues along a fandy fhore dotted
with wigwams and gardens, when they were forced to enter
a {mall harbor, to await a more favoring wind. The Indians
flocked about them, greeted them with cordiality, and in-
vited them to enter the little river which flows into the
harbor, but this they were unable to do, as the tide was
low and the depth infufficient. Champlain’s attention was
attracted by feveral canoes in the bay, which had juft com-
pleted their morning’s work in fifhing for cod. The fifh
were taken with a primitive hook and line, apparently in
a manner not very different from that of the prefent day.

The line was made of a filament of bark ftripped from the
trunk

iid aa
se i

fee
“) = |
{ yi i
tae:
( t
Ei | ES

54 Memotr of 1605,

trunk of a tree; the hook was of wood, having a fharp
bone, forming a barb, lafhed to it with a cord of a grafly
fibre, a kind of wild hemp, growing fpontaneoufly in that
region. Champlain landed, diftributed trinkets among the
natives, examined and fketched an outline of the place,
which identifies it as Plymouth harbor, which Captain John
Smith vifited in 1614, and where the May Flower, full fix
years later, landed the firft permanent colony planted upon
New England foil.

After a day at Plymouth, the little barque weighed anchor,
{wept down Cape Cod Bay, approaching near to the reefs of
Billingfgate, defcribing a complete femicircle, and finally,
with fome difficulty, doubled the cape, whofe white fands
they had feen in the diftance glittering in the funlight, and
which they appropriately named Cag Blanc. This cape,
however, had been vifited three years before by Bartholomew
Gofnold, and named Cape Cod, which appellation it has re-
tained to the prefent time. Paffing down on the outfide
of the cape fome diftance, they came to anchor, fent ex-
plorers on fhore, who, afcending one of the lofty fand-
banks which may ftill be feen there filently refifting the
winds and the waves, difcovered, further to the fouth, what is
now known as Naufet harbor, entirely furrounded by Indian
cabins. The next day, the 20th of July, 1605, they effected

an

“' It was probably on this very bluff,
from which was feen Naufet harbor on
the 19th of July, 1605, that, after the
lapfe of two hundred and feventy-four
years, on the 17th of November, 1879,
the citizens of the United States, with
the flags of America, France, and Eng-
land gracefully waving over their heads,

addreffed their congratulations by tele-
graph to the citizens of France, at Brett,
on the communication between the two
countries, that day completed, through
fubmarine wires, under the aufpices of
the “Compagnie Frangaife du Télé-
graphe de Paris & New York.”

nlght

This

1605. Samuel de Champlain. sy

an entrance without much difficulty. The bay was fpacious,
being nine or ten miles in circumference. Along the bor-
ders, there were, here and there, cultivated patches, inter-
fperfed with dwellings of the natives. The wigwam was
cone-fhaped, heavily thatched with reeds, having an orifice
at the apex for the emiffion of fmoke. In the fields were
growing Indian corn, Brazilian beans, pumpkins, radifhes,
and tobacco; and in the woods were oak and hickory and
red cedar. During their ftay in the harbor they encoun-
tered an eafterly ftorm, which continued four days, fo raw
and chilling that they were glad to hug their winter cloaks
about them on the 22d of July. The natives were friendly
and cordial, and entered freely into converfation with Cham-
plain; but, as the language of each party was not under-
ftood by the other, the information he obtained from them
was moftly by figns, and confequently too general to be hif-
torically interefting or important.

The firft and only act of hoftility by the natives which
De Monts and his party had thus far experienced in their
explorations on the entire coaft occurred in this harbor.
Several of the men had gone afhore to obtain frefh water.
Some of the Indians conceived an uncontrollable defire to
capture the copper veffels which they faw in their hands.
While one of the men was ftooping to dip water from a
fpring, one of the favages darted upon him and fnatched the
coveted veffel from his hand. An encounter followed, and,
amid fhowers of arrows and blows, the poor failor was bru-
tally murdered. The victorious Indian, fleet as the rein-
deer, efcaped with his companions, bearing his prize with
him into the depths of the foreft. The natives on the fhore,

who

56 Memoir of 1605,

who had hitherto fhown the greatett friendlinefs, foon came
to De Monts, and by figns difowned any participation in
the aét, and affured him that the guilty parties belonged far
‘n the interior. Whether this was the truth or a piece of
adroit diplomacy, it was neverthelefs accepted by De Monts,
fince punifhment could only be adminiftered at the rifk of
caufing the innocent to fuffer inftead of the guilty.

The young failor whofe earthly career was thus fuddenly
terminated, whofe name even has not come down to us, was
doubtlefs the firft European, if we except Thorvald, the
Northman, whofe mortal remains flumber in the foil of
Maffachufetts.

As this voyage of difcovery had been planned and pro-
vifioned for only fix weeks, and more than five had already
elapfed, on the 25th of July DeMonts and his party left
Naufett harbor, to join the colony ftill lingering at St.
Croix. In paffing the bar, they came near being wrecked,
and confequently gave to the harbor the fignificant appella-
tion of Port de Mallebarre,a name which has not been loft,
but neverthelefs, like the fhifting fands of that region, has
floated away from its original moorings, and now adheres to
the fandy cape of Monomoy.

On their return voyage, they made a brief ftop at Saco, and
likewife at the mouth of the Kennebec. At the latter point
they had an interview with the fachem, Anaffou, who in-
formed them that a fhip had been there, and that the men
on board her had feized, under color of friendfhip, and killed
five favages belonging to that river. From the defcription
given by Anaffou, Champlain was convinced that the fhip
was Englith, and fubfequent events render it quite certain

that

1605. Samuel de Champlain. ey

that it was the “ Archangel,” fitted out by the Earl of South-
ampton and Lord Arundel of Wardour, and commanded by
Captain George Weymouth. The defign of the expedition
was to fix upon an eligible fite for a colonial plantation, and,
in purfuance of this purpofe, Weymouth anchored off Mon-
hegan on the 28th of May, 1605, zew /2y/e, and, after {pend-
ing a month in explorations of the region contiguous, left
for England on the 26th of June.* He had feized and car-
ried away five of the natives, having concealed them in the
hold of his fhip, and Anaffou, under the circumftances, natu-
rally fuppofed they had been killed. The ftatement of the
fachem, that the natives captured belonged to the river
where Champlain then was, namely, the Kennebec, goes far
to prove that Weymouth’s explorations were in the Kenne-
bec, or at leaft in the network of waters then comprehended
under that appellation, and not in the Penobfcot or in any
other river farther eaft, as fome hiftorical writers have fup-
pofed.

It would appear that while the French were carefully fur-
veying the coafts of New England, in order to fix upon an
eligible fite for a permanent colonial fettlement, the Englith
were likewife upon the ground, engaged in a fimilar invefti-
gation for the fame purpofe. From this period onward, for
more than a century and a half, there was a perpetual con-
fli& and ftruggle for territorial poffeffion on the northern
coaft of America, between thefe two great nations, fome-
times active and violent, and at others fubfiding into a femi-
flumber, but never ceafing until every acre of foil belonging

to
48 Vide Vol. II. p. 91, note 176.
8

58 Memo of 1605,

to the French had been transferred to the Englifh bya fol-
emn international compact.

On this exploration, Champlain noticed along the coaft
from Kennebec to Cape Cod, and defcribed feveral objects in
natural hiftory unknown in Europe, fuch as the horfe-foot
crab,” the black fkimmer, and the wild turkey, the latter two
of which have long fince ceafed to vifit this region.

CHAPTER IV.

ARRIVAL OF SUPPLIES AND REMOVAL TO PorT ROYAL. — DE Monts RE-
TURNS TO FRANCE. — SEARCH FOR MINES. — WINTER. — SCURVY. — LATE
ARRIVAL OF SUPPLIES AND EXPLORATIONS ON THE COAST OF MASSA-
CHUSETTS. —GLOCESTER HARBOR, STAY AT CHATHAM AND ATTACK OF
THE SAVAGES.— Woop’s Hoi. — RETURN TO ANNAPOLIS BASIN.

@qN the 8th of Augutft, the exploring party reached

4} St. Croix. During their abfence, Pont Grave
had arrived from France with additional men
and provifions for the colony. As no fatisfac-
tory fite had been found by De Monts in his
recent tour along the coaft, it was determined to remove the
colony temporarily to Port Royal, fituated within the bay
now known as Annapolis Bafin. The buildings at St. Croix,

with

49 The Horfefoot-crab, Limulus poly-
phemus. Champlain gives the Indian
name, figuenoc. Uariot faw, while at
Roanoke Ifland, in 1585, and defcribed
the fame cruftacean under the name of
Jeckanauk, The Indian word is ob-
vioufly the fame, the differing French
and Englith orthography reprefenting
the fame found. It thus appears that
this fhell-fifh was at that time known

by the aborigines under the fame name
for at leaft a thoufand miles along
the Atlantic coaft, from the Kennebec,
in Maine, to Roanoke Ifland, in North
Carolina. Vide Hariot’'s Briefe and
True Report of the New Found Land
of Virginia, Hakluyt, Vol. III. p. 334
See alfo Vol. II. of this work, notes 171,
172, 173, for fome account of the black
fkimmer and the wild turkey.

1605, Samuel de Champlain. 59

with the exception of the ftore-houfe, were taken down and
tranfported to the bay. Champlain and Pont Gravé were
fent forward to felect a place for the fettlement, which was
fixed on the north fide of the bafin, directly oppofite to Goat
Ifland, near or upon the prefent fite of Lower Granville.
The fituation was protected from the piercing and dreaded
winds of the northweft by a lofty range of hills,° while it was
elevated and commanded a charming view of the placid bay
in front. The dwellings which they erected were arranged
in the form of a quadrangle with an open court in the centre,
as at St. Croix, while gardens and pleafure-grounds were laid
out by Champlain in the immediate vicinity.

When the work of the new fettlement was well advanced,
De Monts, having appointed Pont Grave as his lieutenant,
departed for France, where he hoped to obtain additional
privileges from the government in his enterprife of planting
a colony in the New World. Champlain preferred to re-
main, with the purpofe of executing more fully his office as
geographer to the king, by making difcoveries on the Atlan-
tic coaft ftill further to the fouth.

From the beginning, the patentee had cherifhed the defire
of difcovering valuable mines fomewhere on his domains,
whofe wealth, as well as that of the fur-trade, might defray
fome part of the heavy expenfes involved in his colonial en-
terprife. While feveral inveftigations for this purpofe had
proved abortive, it was hoped that greater fuccefS would be
attained by fearches along the upper part of the Bay of
Fundy. Before the approach of winter, therefore, Cham-

plain

59 On Lefcarbot’s map of 1609, this elevation is denominated Monit de la
Rogue. Vide alfo Vol. II. note 180.

Memoir of 1605.

plain and the miner, Matter Jaques, a Sclavonian, made a tour
to St. John, where they obtained the fervices of the Indian
chief, Secondon, to accompany them and point out the place
where copper ore had been difcovered at the Bay of Mines,
The fearch, thorough as was practicable under the circum.
ftances, was, in the main, unfuccefsful ; the few fpecimens
which they found were meagre and infignificant.

The winter at Port Royal was by no means fo fevere as
the preceding one at St. Croix. The Indians brought in
wild game from the forefts. The colony had no want of
fuel and pure water. But experience, bitter as it had been,
did not yield to them the fruit of practical wifdom. They
referred their fufferings to the climate, but took too little
pains to protect themfelves againft its rugged power. Their
dwellings, haftily thrown together, were cold and damp,
arifing from the green, unfeafoned wood of which they were
doubtlefs in part conftructed, and from the ftanding rain-
water with which their foundations were at all times inun-
dated, which was neither diverted by embankments nor
drawn away by drainage. The dreaded mal de la ¢erre, ot
{curvy, as might have been anticipated, made its appearance
in the early part of the feafon, caufing the death of twelve
out of the forty-five comprifing their whole number, while
others were proftrated by this painful, repulfive, and deprefl-
ing difeafe.

The purpofe of making further difcoveries on the fouthern
coaft, warmly cherifhed by Champlain, and entering fully
into the plans of De Monts, had not been forgotten. Three
times during the early part of the fummer they had equipped
their barque, made up their party, and left Port Royal for

this

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 61

this undertaking, and as many times had been driven back
by the violence of the winds and the waves.

In the mean time, the fupplies which had been promifed
and expected from France had not arrived. This naturally
gave to Pont Grave, the lieutenant, great anxiety, as without
them it was clearly inexpedient to venture upon another
winter in the wilds of La Cadie. It had been ftipulated by
De Monts, the patentee, that if fuccors did not arrive before
the middle of July, Pont Gravé fhould make arrangements for
the return of the colony by the fifhing veffels to be found at
the Grand Banks. Accordingly, on the 17th of that month,
Pont Grave fet fail with the little colony in two barques, and
proceeded towards Cape Breton, to feek a paffage home.
But De Monts had not been remifs in his duty. He had,
after many difficulties and delays, defpatched a veffel of a
hundred and fifty tons, called the “Jonas,” with fifty men
and ample provifions for the approaching winter. While
Pont Gravé with his two barques and his retreating colony
had run into Yarmouth Bay for repairs, the “ Jonas” paffed
him unobferved, and anchored in the bafin before the de-
ferted fettlement of Port Royal. An advice-boat had, how-
ever, been wifely defpatched by the “ Jonas” to reconnoitre
the inlets along the fhore, which fortunately intercepted the
departing colony near Cape Sable, and, elated with frefh
news from home, they joyfully returned to the quarters they
had fo recently abandoned.

In addition to a confiderable number of artifans and la-
borers for the colony, the “ Jonas” had brought out Sieur
De Poutrincourt, to remain as lieutenant of La Cadie, and

likewife Marc Lefcarbot, a young attorney of Paris, who had
already

62 Memotr of 1666,

already made fome {cholarly attainments, and who fubfe.
quently diftinguifhed himfelf as an author, efpecially by the
publication of a hiftory of New France.

De Poutrincourt immediately addreffed himfelf to putting
all things in order at Port Royal, where it was obvioutly
expedient for the colony to remain, at leaft for the winter,
As foon as the “ Jonas” had been unladen, Pont Grave and
moft of thofe who had fhared his recent hardtfhips, departed
in her for the fhores of France. When the tenements had
been cleanfed, refitted, and refurnifhed, and their provifions
had been fafely ftored, De Poutrincourt, by way of experi-
ment, to teft the character of the climate and the capability
of the foil, defpatched a {quad of gardeners and farmers five
miles up the river, to the grounds now occupied by the
village of Annapolis,* where the foil was open, clear of foreft
trees, and eafy of cultivation. They planted a great variety
of feeds, wheat, rye, hemp, flax, and of garden efculents,
which grew with extraordinary luxuriance, but, as the feafon
was too late for any of them to ripen, the experiment failed
either as a teft of the foil or the climate.

On a former vifit in 1604, De Poutrincourt had conceived
a great admiration for Annapolis bafin, its protected fituation,
its fine fcenery, and its rich foil. He hada ftrong defire to
bring his family there and make it his permanent abode.
With this defign, he had requefted and received from De
Monts a perfonal grant of this region, which had alfo been
confirmed to him * by Henry IV. But De Monts withed to

plant

51 Lefcarbot locates Poutrincourt’s Francois eftans reuenus (ainfi qu’a
fort on the fame fpot which he called efté diét) le Sieur de Potrincourt pre-
Mariefort, the fite of the prefent village fenta 2% feu d’immortelle memorie
of Annapolis. Henry le Grand la donnation a luy

52 “Doncques l’an 1607, tous les faicte

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 63

plant his La Cadian colony in a milder and more genial cli-
mate. He had therefore enjoined upon De Poutrincourt, as
his lieutenant, on leaving France, to continue the explorations
for the feleétion of a fite ftill farther to the fouth. Accord-
ingly, on the 5th of September, 1606, De Poutrincourt left
Annapolis Bafin, which the French called Port Royal, in a
barque of eighteen tons, to fulfil this injunction.

It was Champlain’s opinion that they ought to fail direCtlly
for Naufet harbor, on Cape Cod, and commence their explo-
rations where their fearch had terminated the preceding
year, and thus advance into a new region, which had not
already been furveyed. But other counfels prevailed, and a
large part of the time which could be fpared for this in-
veftigation was exhaufted before they reached the harbor of
Naufet. They made a brief vifit to the ifland of St, Croix,
in which De Monts had wintered in 1604-5, touched alfo at
Saco, where the Indians had already completed their harveft,
and the grapes at Bacchus Ifland were ripe and lufcious.
Thence failing dire¢tly to Cape Anne, where, finding no fafe
roadftead, they paffed round to Gloucefter harbor, which they
found fpacious, well protected, with good depth of water,
and which, for its great excellence and attractive fcenery,
they named Beauport, or the beautiful harbor. Here they
remained feveral days. It was a native fettlement, com-
prifing two hundred favages, who were cultivators of the foil,
which was prolific in corn, beans, melons, pumpkins, tobacco,
and grapes. The harbor was environed with fine foreft
trees, as hickory, oak, afh, cyprefs, and faffafras. Within

the

faicte par le fieur de Monts, reque- diéte Requefte,” &c. Relations des
rant humblement Sa Majefté de la ra- $é/uites, 1611, Quebec ed., Vol. I. p.
tifier. Le Roy eut pour agreable la 25. Vide Vol. Il. of this work, p. 37.

64 Memoir of 1606.

the town there were feveral patches of cultivated land, which
the Indians were gradually augmenting by felling the trees,
burning the wood, and after a few years, aided by the natural
procefs of decay, eradicating the ftumps. The French were
kindly received and entertained with generous hofpitality.
Grapes juft gathered from the vines, and fquafhes of feveral
varieties, the trailing bean ftill well known in New England,
and the Jerufalem artichoke crifp from the unexhaufted foil,
were prefented as offerings of welcome to their guefts. While
thefe gifts were doubtlefs tokens of a genuine friendlinefs fo
far as the favages were capable of that virtue, the lurking fpirit
of deceit and treachery which had been inherited and foftered

by their habits and mode of life, could not be reftrained.
The French barque was lying at anchor a fhort diftance
northeaft of Ten Pound Ifland. Its boat was undergoing
repairs on a peninfula near by, now known as Rocky Neck,
and the failors were wafhing their linen juft at the point
where the peninfula is united to the mainland. While Cham-
plain was walking on this caufeway, he obferved about fifty
favages, completely armed, cautioufly {creening themfelves
behind a clump of bufhes on the edge of Smith’s Cove. As
foon as they were aware that they were feen, they came forth,
concealing their weapons as much as poffible, and began to
dance in token of a friendly greeting. But when they ‘dif
covered De Poutrincourt in the wood near by, who had
approached unobferved, with eight armed mufketeers to dif-
perfe them in cafe of an attack, they immediately took to
flight, and, fcattering in all directions, made no further hof-
tile demonftrations.® This ferio-comic incident did not im
terfere

58 This fcene is well reprefented on Champlain’s map of Beauport or Glou-
cefter Harbor. Vide Vol. Il. p. 114. : : 2

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 65

terfere with the interchange of friendly offices between the
two parties, and when the voyagers were about to leave, the
favages urged them with great earneftnefs to remain longer,
affuring them that two thoufand of their friends would pay
them a vifit the very next day. This invitation was, how-
ever, not heeded. In Champlain’s opinion it was a ru/e
contrived only to furnifh a frefh opportunity to attack and
overpower them.

On the 30th of September, they left the harbor of Gloucef-
ter, and, during the following night, failing in a foutherly
direction, pafling Brant Point, they found themfelves in the
lower part of Cape Cod Bay. When the fun rofe, a low,
fandy fhore ftretched before them. Sending their boat for-
ward to a place where the fhore feemed more elevated, they
found deeper water and a harbor, into which they entered in
five or fix fathoms. They were welcomed by three Indian
canoes. They found oyfters in fuch quantities in this bay,
and of fuch excellent quality, that they named it Le Port
aux FTuiftres,* or Oyfter Harbor. After a few hours, they
weighed anchor, and directing their courfe north, a quarter
northeaft, with a favoring wind, foon doubled Cape Cod.
The next day, the 2d of Odtober, they arrived off Naufet.
De Poutrincourt, Champlain, and others entered the harbor
in a fmall boat, where they were greeted by a hundred and
fifty favages with finging and dancing, according to their
ufual cuftom. After a brief vifit, they returned to the barque
and continued their courfe along the fandy fhore. When near
the heel of the cape, off Chatham, they found themfelves
imperilled among breakers and fand-banks, fo dangerous as

to
84 Le Port aux Huz/ftres, Barnftable Harbor. Vide Vol. II. Note 208.
9

LE
aq

66 Memoir of 1606.

to render it inexpedient to attempt to land, even with a final]
boat. The favages were obferving them from the fhore, and
foon manned a canoe, and came to them with finging and
demonftrations of joy. From them, they learned that lower
down a harbor would be found, where their barque might
ride in fafety. Proceeding, therefore, in the fame direction,
after many difficulties, they fucceeded in rounding the penin-
fula of Monomoy, and finally, in the gray of the evening,
caft anchor in the offing near Chatham, now known as Old
Stage Harbor. The next day they entered, paffing between
Harding’s Beach Point and Morris Ifland, in two fathoms of
water, and anchored in Stage Harbor. This harbor is about
a mile long and half a mile wide, and at its weftern extrem-
ity is connected by tide-water with Oyfter Pond, and with
Mill Cove on the eaft by Mitchell’s River. Mooring their
barque between thefe two arms of the harbor, towards the
wefterly end, the explorers remained there about three weeks.
It was the centre of an Indian fettlement, containing five or
fix hundred perfons. Although it was now well into Otto.
ber, the natives of both fexes were entirely naked, with the
exception of a flight band about the loins. They fubfifted
upon fifth and the products of the foil. Indian corn was
their ftaple. It was fecured in the autumn in bags made of
braided grafs, and buried in the fand-banks, and withdrawn
as it was needed during the winter. The favages were of
fine figure and of olive complexion. They adorned them-
felves with an embroidery fkilfully interwoven with feathers
and beads, and dreffed their hair in a variety of braids, like
thofe at Saco. Their dwellings were conical in fhape, cOv-
ered with thatch of rufhes and corn-hufks, and furrounded

by

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 67

by cultivated fields. Each cabin contained one or two beds,
a kind of matting, two or three inches in thicknefs, fpread
upon a platform on which was a layer of elaftic ftaves, and
the whole raifed a foot from the ground. On thefe they
fecured refrefhing repofe. Their chiefs neither exercifed
nor claimed any fuperior authority, except in time of war.
At all other times and in all other matters complete equality
reigned throughout the tribe.

The ftay at Chatham was neceffarily prolonged in baking
bread to ferve the remainder of the voyage, and in repairing
their barque, whofe rudder had been badly fhattered in the
rough paffage round the cape. For thefe purpofes, a bakery
and a forge were fet up on fhore, and a tent pitched for the
convenience and protection of the workmen. While thefe
works were in progrefs, De Poutrincourt, Champlain, and
others made frequent excurfions into the interior, always
with a guard of armed men, fometimes making a circuit of
twelve or fifteen miles. The explorers were fafcinated with
all they faw. The aroma of the autumnal foreft and the
balmy air of Otober ftimulated their fenfes. The nut-trees
were loaded with ripe fruit, and the rich clufters of grapes
were hanging temptingly upon the vines. Wild game was
plentiful and delicious. The fifh of the bay were sweet, del-
icate, and of many varieties. Nature, unaided by art, had
thus fupplied fo many human wants that Champlain gravely
put upon record his opinion that this would be a most ex-
cellent place in which to lay the foundations of a common-
wealth, if the harbor were deeper and better protected at its
mouth.

After the voyagers had been in Chatham eight or nine
days,

i
aig
i F

i

|
thie
Tile

on
Hi

66 Memoir of 1606.

to render it inexpedient to attempt to land, even with a fmall
boat. The favages were obferving them from the fhore, and
foon manned a canoe, and came to them with finging and
demonftrations of joy. From them, they learned that lower
down a harbor would be found, where their barque might
ride in fafety. Proceeding, therefore, in the fame direction,
after many difficulties, they fucceeded in rounding the penin-
fula of Monomoy, and finally, in the gray of the evening,
caft anchor in the offing near Chatham, now known as Old
Stage Harbor. The next day they entered, paffing between
Harding’s Beach Point and Morris Ifland, in two fathoms of
water, and anchored in Stage Harbor. This harbor is about
a mile long and half a mile wide, and at its weftern extrem-
ity is connected by tide-water with Oyfter Pond, and with
Mill Cove on the eaft by Mitchell’s River. Mooring their
barque between thefe two arms of the harbor, towards the
wefterly end, the explorers remained there about three weeks.
It was the centre of an Indian fettlement, containing five or
fix hundred perfons. Although it was now well into Octo.
ber, the natives of both fexes were entirely naked, with the
exception of a flight band about the loins. They fubfifted
upon fifh and the products of the foil. Indian corn was
their flaple. It was fecured in the autumn in bags made of
braided grafs, and buried in the fand-banks, and withdrawn
as it was needed during the winter. The favages were of
fine figure and of olive complexion. They adorned them-
felves with an embroidery fkilfully interwoven with feathers
and beads, and dreffed their hair in a variety of braids, like
thofe at Saco. Their dwellings were conical in fhape, cOv-
ered with thatch of rufhes and corn-hufks, and furrounded

by

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 67

by cultivated fields. Each cabin contained one or two beds,
a kind of matting, two or three inches in thicknefs, fpread
upon a platform on which was a layer of elaftic ftaves, and
the whole raifed a foot from the ground. On thefe they
fecured refrefhing repofe. Their chiefs neither exercifed
nor claimed any fuperior authority, except in time of war.
At all other times and in all other matters complete equality
reigned throughout the tribe.

The ftay at Chatham was neceffarily prolonged in baking
bread to ferve the remainder of the voyage, and in repairing
their barque, whofe rudder had been badly fhattered in the
rough paffage round the cape. For thefe purpofes, a bakery
and a forge were fet up on fhore, and a tent pitched for the
convenience and protection of the workmen. While thefe
works were in progrefs, De Poutrincourt, Champlain, and
others made frequent excurfions into the interior, always
with a guard of armed men, fometimes making a circuit of
twelve or fifteen miles. The explorers were fafcinated with
all they faw. The aroma of the autumnal foreft and the
balmy air of Otober ftimulated their fenfes. The nut-trees
were loaded with ripe fruit, and the rich clufters of grapes
were hanging temptingly upon the vines. Wild game was
plentiful and delicious. The fifth of the bay were sweet, del-
icate, and of many varieties. Nature, unaided by art, had
thus fupplied fo many human wants that Champlain gravely
put upon record his opinion that this would be a most ex-
cellent place in which to lay the foundations of a common-
wealth, if the harbor were deeper and better protected at its
mouth,

After the voyagers had been in Chatham eight or nine
days,

68 Memoir of 1606.

days, the Indians, tempted by the implements which they
faw about the forge and bakery, conceived the idea of taking
forcible poffeffion of them, in order to appropriate them to
their own ufe. As a preparation for this, and particularly to
put themfelves in a favorable condition in cafe of an attack
or reprifal, they were feen removing their women, children,
and effeéts into the forefts, and even taking down their
cabins. De Poutrincourt, obferving this, gave orders to the
workmen to pafs their nights no longer on fhore, but to go
on board the barque to affure their perfonal fafety. This
command, however, was not obeyed. The next morning, at
break of day, four hundred favages, creeping foftly over a
hill in the rear, furrounded the tent, and poured fuch a volley
of arrows upon the defencelefs workmen that efcape was im-
poffible. Three of them were killed upon the fpot; a fourth
was mortally and a fifth badly wounded. The alarm was
given by the fentinel on the barque. De Poutrincourt,
Champlain, and the reft, aroufed from their flumbers, rufhed
half-clad into the fhip’s boat, and haftened to the refcue.
As foon as they touched the fhore, the favages, fleet as the
greyhound, efcaped to the wood. Purfuit, under the cir-
cumftances, was not to be made; and, if it had been, would
have ended in their utter deftruGtion. Freed from immedi-
ate danger, they collected the dead and gave them Chriftian
burial. near the foot of a crofs, which had been ereéted the
day before. While the fervice of prayer and fong was offered,
the favages in the diftance mocked them with derifive atti-
tudes and hideous howls. Three hours after the French
had retired to their barque, the mifcreants returned, tore
down the crofs, difinterred the dead, and carried off the

garments

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 69

garments in which they had been laid to reft. They were
immediately driven off by the French, the crofs was reftored
to its place, and the dead reinterred.

Before leaving Chatham, fome anxiety was felt in regard
to their fafety in leaving the harbor, as the little barque had
fearcely been able to weather the rough feas of Monomoy
on their inward voyage. A boat had been fent out in fearch
of a fafer and a better roadway, which, creeping along by the
fhore fixteen or eighteen miles, returned, announcing three
fathoms of water, and neither bars nor reefs. On the 16th
of October they gave their canvas to the breeze, and failed
out of Stage Harbor, which they had named Port Fortuné,s
an appellation probably fuggefted by their narrow efcape in
entering and by the bloody tragedy to which we have juft re-
ferred. Having gone eighteen or twenty miles, they fighted
the ifland of Martha’s Vineyard lying low in the diftance
before them, which they called La Soupgonneu/e, the fufpi-
cious one, as they had feveral times been in doubt whether
it were not a part of the mainland. A contrary wind forced
them to return to their anchorage in Stage Harbor. On the
2oth they fet out again, and continued their courfe in a
fouthwefterly direGtion until they reached the entrance of
Vineyard Sound. The rapid current of tide water flowing
from Buzzard’s Bay into the found through the rocky chan-

nel

55 Port Fortuné. In giving this name in peril and fear, but neverthelefs in
there was doubtlefs an allufion to the fafety. They had fuffered by the at-
goddefs Fortuna of the ancients, tack of the favages, but, fortunately had
whofe office it was to difpenfe riches efcaped utter annihilation, which they
and poverty, pleafures and pains, bleff- might well have feared. It had been to
ings and calamities. They had ex- them eminently the port of hazard or

erienced good and evil at her fickle chance. Vide Vol. Il. Note 231. La

and. They had entered the harbor Soupconneufe. Vide Vol. 11, Note 227.

70 Memoir of 1606,

nel between Nonameffet and Wood’s Holl, they took to be a
river coming from the mainland, and named it Revere de
Champlain.

This point, in front of Wood's Holl, is the fouthern limit
of the French explorations on the coaft of New England,
reached by them on the 2oth of October, 1606.

Encountering a ftrong wind, approaching a gale, they
were again forced to return to Stage Harbor, where they
lingered two or three days, awaiting favoring winds for their
return to the colony at the bay of Annapolis.

We regret to add that, while they were thus detained,
under the very fhadow of the crofs they had recently
erected, the emblem of a faith that teaches love and forgive-
nefs, they decoyed, under the guife of friendfhip, feveral of
the poor favages into their power, and inhumanly butchered
them in cold blood. This deed was perpetrated on the bafe
principle of Zax ¢adonzs, and yet they did not know, much
lefs were they able to prove, that their victims were guilty or
took any part in the late affray. No form of trial was ob-
ferved, no witneffes teftified, and no judge adjudicated. It
was a fimple murder, for which we are fure any Chriftian’s
cheek would mantle with fhame who fhould offer for it any
defence or apology.

When this piece of barbarity had been completed, the
little French barque made its final exit from Stage Harbor,
paffed fuccefsfully round the fhoals of Monomoy, and an-
chored near Naufet, where they remained a day or two, leav-
ing on the 28th of Odtober, and {failing directly to Ifle
Haute in Penobfcot Bay. They made brief ftops at fome
of the iflands at the mouth of the St. Croix, and at the

Grand

it
m

1606. Samuel de Champlain. vt

Grand Manan, and arrived at Annapolis Bafin on the 14th of
November, after an exceedingly rough paffage and many
hair-breadth efcapes.

CHAPTER V.

RECEPTION OF THE EXPLORERS AT ANNAPOLIS BASIN. —A DREARY WIN-
TER RELIEVED BY THE ORDER OF BON TEMPS. — NEWS FROM FRANCE.
— BIRTH OF A PRINCE.— RUIN OF DE Monts’s Company.—Two Ex-
CURSIONS AND DEPARTURE FOR FRANCE, —CHAMPLAIN’S EXPLORATIONS
COMPARED. — DE Monts’s NEw CHARTER FOR ONE YEAR AND CHAM-
PLAIN’S RETURN IN 1608 TO NEW FRANCE AND THE FOUNDING OF QUE-
BEC, — CONSPIRACY OF Du VAL AND HIS EXECUTION.

1TH the voyage which we have defcribed in the
laft chapter, Champlain terminated his explora-
tions on the coaft of New England. He never
afterward ftepped upon her foil. But he has left
us, neverthelefs, an invaluable record of the char-
acter, manners, and cuftoms of the aborigines as he faw
them all along from the eaftern borders of Maine to the
Vineyard Sound, and carefully ftudied them during the pe-
riod of three confecutive years. Of the value of thefe explo-
rations we need not here fpeak at length. We {hall refer
to them again in the fequel.

The return of the explorers was hailed with joy by the
colonifts at Annapolis Bafin. To give é/a¢ to the occafion,
Lefcarbot compofed a poem in French, which he recited at
the head of a proceffion which marched with gay reprefen-
tations to the water’s edge, to receive their returning friends.

Over the gateway of the quadrangle formed by their dwell-
ings,

72 Memoir of 1606.

ings, dignified by them as their fort, were the arms of France,
wreathed in laurel, together with the motto of the king: —
Dvo PROTEGIT VNVS.
Under this, the arms of De Monts were difplayed, overlaid
with evergreen, and bearing the following infcription :—
Dapit Devs HIS QVOQVE FINEM.
Then came the arms of Poutrincourt, crowned alfo with
garlands, and infcribed :—
IN VIA VIRTVTI NVLLA EST VIA,

When the excitement of the return had paffed, the little
fettlement fubfided into its ufual routine. The leifure of the
winter was devoted to various objects bearing upon the future
profperity of the colony. Among others, a corn mill was
erected at a fall on Allen River, four or five miles from the
fettlement, a little eaft of the prefent fite of Annapolis. A
road was commenced through the foreft leading from Lower
Granville towards the mouth of the bay. Two fmall
barques were built, to be in readinefs in anticipation of a fail-
ure to receive fuccors the next fummer, and new buildings
were ereéted for the accommodation of a larger number of
colonifts. Still, there was much unoccupied time, and, fhut
out as they were from the ufual affociations of civilized life,
it was hardly poffible that the winter fhould not feem long
and dreary, efpecially to the gentlemen.

To break up the monotony and add variety to the dull
routine of their life, Champlain contrived what he called
L’OrprE DE Bon Temps, or The Rule of Mirth, which was
introduced and carried out with fpirit and fuccefs. The fifteen
gentlemen who {fat at the table of De Poutrincourt, the gov-

ernor,

Wa,

1606. Samuel de Champlain. 73

ernor, comprifing the whole number of the order, took turns
in performing the duties of fteward and caterer, each holding
the office for a fingle day. With a laudable ambition, the
Grand Mafter for the time being laid the foreft and the fea
under contribution, and the table was conftantly furnifhed with
the moft delicate and well feafoned game, and the fweeteft as
well as the choiceft varieties of fish. The frequent change
of office and the ingenuity difplayed, offered at every repatft,
either in the viands or mode of cooking, fomething new and
tempting to the appetite. At each meal, a ceremony be-
coming the dignity of the order was ftri¢tly obferved. At
a given fignal, the whole company marched into the dining-
hall, the Grand Mafter at the head, with his napkin over his
fhoulder, his ftaff of office in his hand, and the glittering
collar of the order about his neck, while the other members
bore each in his hand a difh loaded and fmoking with fome
part of the delicious repaft. A ceremony of a fomewhat
fimilar character was obferved at the bringing in of the
fruit. At the clofe of the day, when the laft meal had been
ferved, and grace had been faid, the mafter formally com-
pleted his official duty by placing the collar of the order
upon the neck of his fucceffor, at the fame time prefenting
to him a cup of wine, in which the two drank to each oth-
er’s health and happinefs. Thefe ceremonies were generally
witneffed by thirty or forty favages, men, women, boys, and
girls, who gazed in refpectful admiration, not to fay awe,
upon this exhibition of European civilization. When Mem-
bertou,®% the venerable chief of the tribe, or other fagamores

were

58 Membertou. See Pierre Biard’s account of his death in 1611. Relations
des Féfuites. Quebec ed., Vol. I. p. 32.

b fe)

ede ea ear pare —S
MoAb eA eR el SNES ahem te ak te meh em a AN et .
3 0

i cadig pet yidlbiecninta’ Lcd

74 Memoir of 160}.

were prefent, they were invited to a feat at the table, while
bread was gratuitoufly diftributed to the reft.

When the winter had paffed, which proved to be an ex.
ceedingly mild one, all was aftir in the little colony. The
preparation of the foil, both in the gardens and in the larger
fields, for the fpring fowing, created an agreeable excitement
and healthy activity.

On the 24th May, in the midft of thefe agricultural enter-
prifes, a boat arrived in the bay, in charge of a young man
from St. Malo, named Chevalier, who had come out in com-
mand of the “ Jonas,” which he had left at Canfeau engaged
in fifhing for the purpofe of making up a return cargo of
that commodity. Chevalier brought two items of intelligence
of great intereft to the colonifts, but differing widely in their
charaGter. The one was the birth of a French prince, the
Duke of Orleans; the other, that the company of De Monts
had been broken up, his monopoly of the fur-trade with-
drawn, and his colony ordered to return to France. The
birth of a prince demanded expreffions of joy, and the event
was loyally celebrated by bonfires and a Te Deum. It was,
however, giving a fong when they would gladly have hung
their harps upon the willows.

While the {cheme of De Monts’s colonial enterprife was
defeCtive, containing in itfelf a principle which muft fooner
or later work its ruin, the difappointment occafioned by its
fudden termination was none the lefs painful and humiliating.
The monopoly on which it was bafed could only be main-
tained by a degree of feverity and apparent injutftice, which
always creates enemies and engenders ftrife. The feizure
and confifcation of feveral fhips with their valuable cargoes

on

table

0 be ale
lon,
nthe bp
é exe

tural exe

1607. Samuel de Champlain. 75

on the fhores of Nova Scotia, had awakened a perfonal hof-
tility in influential circles in France, and the fufferers were
able, in turn, to ftrike back a damaging blow upon the
author of their loffes. They eafily and perhaps juftly repre-
fented that the monopoly of the fur-trade fecured to De
Monts was fapping the national commerce and diverting to
perfonal emolument revenues that properly belonged to the
ftate. To an impoverifhed fovereign with an empty treaf-
ury this appeal was irrefiftible. The facrednefs of the king’s
commiffion and the lofs to the patentee of the property al-
ready embarked in the enterprife had no weight in the
royal fcales. De Monts’s privilege was revoked, with the
tantalizing falvo of fix thoufand livres in remuneration, to
be collected at his own expenfe from unproduCtive fources.

Under thefe circumftances, no money for the payment of
the workmen or provifions for the coming winter had been
fent out, and De Poutrincourt, with great reluctance, pro-
ceeded to break up the eflablifhment. The goods and
utenfils, as well as fpecimens of the grain which they had
raifed, were to be carefully packed and fent round to the
harbor of Canfeau, to be fhipped by the “ Jonas,” together
with the whole body of the colonifts, as foon as fhe fhould
have received her cargo of fifth.

While thefe preparations were in progrefs, two excurfions
were made; one towards the weft, and another northeafterly
towards the head of the Bay of Fundy. Lefcarbot accom-
panied the former, paffing feveral days at St. John and the
ifland of St. Croix, which was the wefterly limit of his ex-
plorations and perfonal knowledge of the American coaft.

The other excurfion was conducted by De Poutrincourt,
accompanied

76 Memo of 1607.

accompanied by Champlain, the object of which was to
fearch for ores of the precious metals, a fpecies of wealth
earneftly coveted and overvalued at the court of France.
They failed along the northern fhores of Nova Scotia, en-
tered Mines Channel, and anchored off Cape Fendu, now
Anglicifed into the uneuphonious name of Cape Split. De
Poutrincourt landed on this headland, and afcended a fteep
and lofty fummit which is not lefs than four hundred feet
in height. Mofs feveral feet in thicknefs, the growth of
centuries, had gathered upon it, and, when he ftood upon
the pinnacle, it yielded and trembled like gelatine under
his feet. He found himfelf in a critical fituation. From
this giddy and unftable height he had neither the {kill or
courage to return. After much anxiety, he was at length
refcued by fome of his more nimble failors, who managed
to put a hawfer over the fummit, by means of which he
fafely defcended. They named it Cap de Poutrincourt.

They proceeded as far as the head of the Bafin of Mines,
but their fearch for mineral wealth was fruitlefs, beyond a
few meagre {pecimens of copper. Their labors were chiefly
rewarded by the difcovery of a mofs-covered crofs in the laft
{tages of decay, the relic of fifhermen, or other Chriftian
mariners, who had, years before, been upon the coatt.

The exploring parties having returned to Port Royal, to
their fettlement in what is now known as Annapolis Bafin,
the bulk of the colonifts departed in three barques for Can-
feau, on the 30th of July, while De Poutrincourt and
Champlain, with a complement of failors, remained fome
days longer, that they might take with them fpecimens of
wheat {till in the field and not yet entirely ripe.

On

ie
My

hich Te:
f We
af Fra
4 Scat:
Fenty
t Spl J
ded a fe
hundred f
¢ ron
:fhod
laine
tion, Fr
r the ft
as at key
pho many
of which
cour
fin of Me
lel, bey

6 were Ce

5 0

os in tee
ther Chie
coal
ort Re
papi
ques mY
tinct
aa
{pei
ripe.

1607. Samuel de Champlain. 77

On the 11th of Auguft they likewife bade adieu to Port
Royal amid the tears of the affembled favages, with whom
they had lived in friendfhip, and who were difappointed and
grieved at their departure. In paffing round the peninfula
of Nova Scotia in their little fhallop, it was neceffary to keep
clofe in upon the fhore, which enabled Champlain, who had
not before been upon the coaft eaft of La Héve, to make a
careful furvey from that point to Canfeau, the refults of
which are fully ftated in his notes, and delineated on his
map of 1613.

On the 3d of September, the “ Jonas,” bearing away the
little French colony, failed out of the harbor of Canfeau,
and, direéting its courfe towards the fhores of France, ar-
rived at Saint Malo on the 1ft of Odtober, 1607.

Champlain’s explorations on what may be ftri¢tly called
the Atlantic coaft of North America were now completed.
He had landed at La Héve in Nova Scotia on the 8th of
May, 1604, and had confequently been in the country three
years and nearly four months. During this period he had
carefully examined the whole fhore from Canfeau, the eaftern
limit of Nova Scotia, to the Vineyard Sound on the fouth-
ern boundaries of Maffachufetts. This was the moft ample,
accurate, and careful furvey of this region which was made
during the whole period from the difcovery of the continent
in 1497 down to the eftablifhment of the Englifh colony at
Plymouth in 1620. A numerous train of navigators had
paffed along the coaft of New England: Sebaftian Cabot,
Eftevan Gomez, Jean Alfonfe, Andre Thevet, John Haw-
kins, Bartholomew Gofnold, Martin Pring, George Wey-
mouth, Henry Hudfon, John Smith, and the reft, but the

knowledge

78

Memoir of

1607.

knowledge of the coaft which we obtain from them is ex.
ceedingly meagre and unfatisfactory, efpecially as compared
with that contained in the full, fpecific, and detailed defcrip-
tions, maps, and drawings left us by this diftinguifhed pio-
neer in the ftudy and illuftration of the geography of the

New England coatt.7

81 Had the diftinguifhed navigators
who early vifited the coafts of North
America illuftrated their narratives by
drawings and maps, it would have
added greatly to their value. Capt.
John Smith’s map, though neceffarily
indefinite and general, is indifpenfable
to the fatisfaCtory ftudy of his {till more
indefinite “ Defcription of New Eng-
land.” It is, perhaps, a fufficient apol-
ogy for the vaguenefs of Smith’s
ftatements, and therefore it ought to be
borne in mind, that his work was origi-
nally written, probably, from memory,
at leaft for the moft part, while he was
a prifoner on board a French man-of-
war in 1615. This may be inferred
from the following ftatement of Smith
himfelf. In {peaking of the movement
of the French fleet, he fays: ‘‘ Still we
fpent our time about the Iles neere
Fyall; where to keepe my perplexed
thoughts from too much meditation of
my miferable eftate, I writ this dif-
courfe.” Vide Defcription of New
England by Capt. John Smith, Lon-
don, 1616.

While the defcriptions of our coaft
left by Champlain are invaluable to the
hiftorian and cannot well be overefti-
mated, the procefs of making thefe fur-
veys, with his profound love of fuch
explorations and adventures, muft have
given him great perfonal fatisfaction
and enjoyment. It would be difficult
to find any region of fimilar extent
that could offer, on a fummer’s excur-
fion, fo much beauty to his eager and

The

critical eye as this. The following de-
{cription of the Gulf of Maine, which
comprehends the major part of the field
furveyed by Champlain, that lying be-
tween the headlands of Cape Sable and
Cape Cod, gives an excellent idea of
the infinite variety and the unexpected
and marvellous beauties that are ever
revealing themfelves to the voyager as
he paffes along our coaft : —

“ This fhoreland is alfo remarkable,
being fo battered and frayed by fea and
{torm, and worn perhaps by arctic cur-
rents and glacier beds, that its natural
front of fome 250 miles is multiplied to
an extent of not lefs than 2,500 miles
of falt-water line; while at an average
diftance of about three miles from the
mainland, ftretches a chain of outpofts
confifting of more than three hundred
iflands, fragments of the main, ftriking
in their diverfity on the weft; low,
wooded and graffy to the water’s edge,
and rifing eaftward through bolder
types to the crowns and cliffs of Mount
Defert and Quoddy Head, an advancin
feries from beauty to fublimity; an
behind all thefe are deep bafins and
broad river-mouths, affording conveni-
ent and fpacious harbors, in many
of which the navies of nations might
fafely ride at anchor.... Efpecially
attractive was the region between the
Pifcataqua and Penobfcot, in its mar-
vellous beauty of fhore and fea, of ifland
and inlet, of bay and river and harbor,
furpaffing any other equally extenfive
portion of the Atlantic coaft, and com-

pared

1607. Samuel de Champlain. 79

The winter of 1607-8 Champlain paffed in France, where
he was pleafantly occupied in focial recreations which were
efpecially agreeable to him after an abfence of more than
three years, and in recounting to eager lifteners his experi-
ences in the New World. He took an early opportunity to
lay before Monfieur de Monts the refults of the explorations
which he had made in La Cadie fince the departure of the
latter from Annapolis Bafin in the autumn of 1605, illuftrat-
ing his narrative by maps and drawings which he had pre-
pared of the bays and harbors on the coaft of Nova Scotia,
New Brunfwick, and New England.

While moft men would have been difheartened by the op-
pofition which he encountered, the mind of De Monts was,
neverthelefs, rekindled by the recitals of Champlain with
frefh zeal in the enterprife which he had undertaken. The
vifion of building up a vaft territorial eftablifhment, contem-
plated by his charter of 1604, with his own perfonal aggran-
dizement and that of his family, had undoubtedly vanifhed.
But he clung, neverthelefs, with extraordinary tenacity to
his original purpofe of planting a colony in the New World.
This he refolved to do in the face of many obftacles, and
notwithftanding the withdrawment of the royal prote¢tion
and bounty. The generous heart of Henry IV. was by no
means infenfible to the merits of his faithful fubje@t, and, on
his folicitation, he granted to him letters-patent for the ex-
clufive right of trade in America, but for the fpace only of a
fingle year. With this fmall boon from the royal hand, De
Monts haftened to fit out two veffels for the expedition.

One

pared by travellers earlieft and lateft, Aiffory, by Jofhua L. Chamberlain,
with the famed archipelago of the LL.D., Prefident of Bowdoin College,
fEgean.” Vide Maine, Her Place in Augufta, 1877, pp- 4-5.

80 Memoir of 1668.

One was to be commanded by Pont Grave, who was to de-
vote his undivided attention to trade with the Indians for
furs and peltry ; the other was to convey men and material
for a colonial plantation.

Champlain, whofe energy, zeal, and prudence had im-
preffed themfelves upon the mind of De Monts, was ap-
pointed lieutenant of the expedition, and intrufted with the
civil adminiftration, having a {ufficient number of men for
all needed defence againft favage intruders, Bafque fifher-
men, or interloping fur-traders.

On the 13th of April, 1608, Champlain left the port of
Honfleur, and arrived at the harbor of Tadouffac on the 3d
of June. Here he found Pont Grave, who had preceded
him by a few days in the voyage, in trouble with a Bafque
fur-trader. The latter had perfifted in carrying on his traffic,
notwithftanding the royal commiffion to the contrary, and
had fucceeded in difabling Pont Grave, who had but little
power of refiftance, killing one of his men, ferioufly wound-
ing Pont Gravé himfelf, as well as feveral others, and had
forcibly taken poffeffion of his whole armament.

When Champlain had made full inquiries into all the cir-
cumftances, he faw clearly that the difficulty muft be com-
promifed; that the exercife of force in overcoming the
intruding Bafque would effectually break up his plans for
the year, and bring utter and final ruin upon his undertaking.
He wifely decided to pocket the infult, and let juftice flum-
ber for the prefent. He confequently required the Bafque,
who began to fee more clearly the illegality of his courfe, to
enter into a written agreement with Pont Grave that neither
fhould interfere with the other while they remained in the

country,

’ 1608. Samuel de Champlain. 81
mae country, and that they fhould leave their differences to be
da fettled in the courts on their return to France.

i ae Having thus poured oil upon the troubled waters, Cham-

h plain proceeded to carry out his plans for the location and
lal eftablifhment of his colony. The difficult navigation of the
Is Way St. Lawrence above Tadouffac was well known to him.
ed wi The dangers of its numberlefs rocks, fand-bars, and fluétu-
u mae ating channels had been made familiar to him by the voyage
alque te of 1603. He determined, therefore, to leave his veffel in

the harbor of Tadouffac, and conftruct a fmall barque of
the pot twelve or fourteen tons, in which to afcend the river and fix
ac on te! upon a place of fettlement.
nad pre While the work was in progrefs, Champlain reconnoitred
ith a bie the neighborhood, collecting much geographical information
‘on hist from the Indians relating to Lake St. John and a tradition-
ent. ary falt fea far to the north, exploring the Saguenay for fome
tad bt diftance, of which he has given us a defcription fo accurate
‘oul. and fo carefully drawn that it needs little revifion after the
hers ald lapfe of two hundred and feventy years.

On the laft of June, the barque was completed, and Cham-
i rT plain, with a complement of men and material, took his
ee : departure. As he glided along in his little craft, he was
mi Be exhilarated by the fragrance of the atmofphere, the bright
rec coloring of the foliage, the bold, pi¢turefque fcenery that
his conftantly revealed itfelf on both fides of the river. The
isnt lofty mountains, the expanding valleys, the luxuriant forefts,
et i the bold headlands, the enchanting little bays and inlets,
ed te Bt and the numerous tributaries burfting into the broad waters
f his of the St. Lawrence, were all carefully examined and noted
ye in his journal. The expedition feemed more like a holiday
eat - excurfion

; i
a
Be:

Wee

. : aT | a
a la - “ aed
si ch RO inh 5 ca cA Mba le gh ALIEN, WA adbaAndsaubtbomnee tie annie dance

82 Memotr of 1608.

excurfion than the grave prelude to the founding of a city
to be renowned in the hiftory of the continent.

On the fourth day, they approached the fite of the prefent
city of Quebec. The expanfe of the river had hitherto been
from eight to thirteen miles. Here a lofty headland, ap-
proaching from the interior, advances upon the river and
forces it into a narrow channel of three-fourths of a mile in
width. The river St. Charles, a {mall ftream flowing from
the northweft, uniting here with the St. Lawrence, forms a
bafin below the promontory, fpreading out two miles in one
direction and four in another. The rocky headland, jutting
out upon the river, rifes up nearly perpendicularly, and to a
height of three hundred and forty-five feet, commanding
from its fummit a view of water, foreft and mountain of fur-
paffing grandeur and beauty. A narrow belt of fertile land
formed by the crumbling @éé77s of ages, ftretches along be-
tween the water’s edge and the bafe of the precipice, and
was then covered with a luxurious growth of nut-trees. The
magnificent bafin below, the protecting wall of the headland
in the rear, the deep water of the river in front, rendered this
{pot peculiarly attractive. Here on this narrow plateau,
Champlain refolved to place his fettlement, and forthwith
began the work of felling trees, excavating cellars, and con-
ftructing houfes.

On the 3d day of July, 1608, Champlain laid the founda-
tion of Quebec. The name which he gave to it had been
applied to it by the favages long before. It is derived from
the Algonquin word guebio, or quebec, fignifying a xarrow-
émg, and was defcriptive of the form which the river takes at
that place, to which we have already referred.

A

fi
Ing of ae

tthe ps
headland
he tier
of a nik:
flowing i
ence, fons;
males in te
dland, jt
ly, and
command
intain of &
f fertile ba
yes alg
recipi
trees, I
the head
renders
row pt
nd fortes
ars, ad

the 1
it bad
Jered 2
mane
gam

iver fait

1608. Samuel de Champlain. 83

A few days after their arrival, an event occurred of exciting
intereft to Champlain and his little colony. One of their
number, Jean du Val, an abandoned wretch, who poffeffed a
large fhare of that ftrange magnetic power which fome men
have over the minds of others, had fo fkilfully praGtifed upon
the credulity of his comrades that he had drawn them all into
a fcheme which, afide from its atrocity, was weak and ill-
contrived at every point. It was nothing lefs than a plan to
affaffinate Champlain, feize the property belonging to the ex-
pedition, and fell it to the Bafque fur-traders at Tadouffac,
under the hallucination that they fhould be enriched by the
pillage. They had even entered into a folemn compaét, and
whoever revealed the fecret was to be vifited by inftant death.
Their purpofe was to feize Champlain in an unguarded mo-
ment and ftrangle him, or to fhoot him in the confufion of a
falfe alarm to be raifed in the night by themfelves. But
before the plan was fully ripe for execution, a barque unex-
pectedly arrived from Tadouffac with an inftalment of uten-
fils and provifions for the colony. One of the men, Antoine
Natel, who had entered into the confpiracy with reluctance,
and had been reftrained from a difclofure by fear, fummoned
courage to reveal the plot to the pilot of the boat, firft fecur-
ing from him the affurance that he fhould be fhielded from
the vengeance of his fellow-confpirators. The fecret was
forthwith made known to Champlain, who, by a ftroke of
fineffe, placed himfelf beyond danger before he flept. At
his fuggeftion, the four leading fpirits of the plot were in-
vited by one of the failors to a focial repaft on the barque,
at which two bottles of wine which he pretended had been

given him at Tadouffac were to be uncorked. In the eo?
fo)

—

er = ooo

aT

F

| :
int
iF | ae }
ie |i a
} H
H ;
i
iz
if i ,
i ah
i i
b
iy t ?
bi j
; 4) ;
iy E
: 3 f
ait eet ;
al a 4
oF }
# | |
i 44
it lie * we
ie fi
j 3
4 33.4
« 3 .
< ts 3
cat
t ‘
4 ;
mae !
Fe
+f ;
|
4
ose ce
‘| 4 {
if i]
i E is
ie
tbe iP
i
Ff

shh

eae RS ee RP RI Fe =

84 Memo of 1608,

of the feftivities, the “ four worthy heads of the confpiracy,” as
Champlain fatirically calls them, were fuddenly clapped into
irons. It was now late in the evening, but Champlain never.
thelefs fummoned all the reft of the men into his prefence,
and offered them a full pardon, on condition that they would
difclofe the whole fcheme and the motives which had induced
them to engage in it. This they were eager to do, as they
now began to comprehend the dangerous compact into which
they had entered, and the peril which threatened their own
lives. Thefe preliminary inveftigations rendered it obvious
to Champlain that grave confequences muft follow, and he
therefore proceeded with great caution.

The next day, he took the depofitions of the pardoned
men, carefully reducing them to writing. He then departed
for Tadouflac, taking the four confpirators with him. On
confultation, he decided to leave them there, where they
could be more fafely guarded until Pont Gravé and the
principal men of the expedition could return with them to
Quebec, where he propofed to give them a more public and
formal trial. This was accordingly done. The prifoners
were duly confronted with the witneffes. They denied
nothing, but freely admitted their guilt. With the advice
and concurrence of Pont Grave, the pilot, furgeon, mate,
boatf{wain, and others, Champlain condemned the four con-
fpirators to be hung; three of them, however, to be fent
home for a confirmation or revifion of their fentence by the
authorities in France, while the fentence of Jean Du Val,
the arch-plotter of the malicious {cheme, was duly executed
in their prefence, with all the folemn forms and ceremonies
ufual on fuch occafions. Agreeably to a cuftom of that

period,

1608. Samuel de Champlain. 85

period, the ghaftly head of Du Val was elevated on the
higheft pinnacle of the fort at Quebec, looking down and
uttering its filent warning to the bufy colonifts below; the
grim fignal to all beholders, that “the way of the tranfgreffor
is hard.”

The cataftrophe, had not the plot been nipped in the bud,
would have been fure to take place. The final purpofe of
the confpirators might not have been realized; it mutt
have been defeated at a later ftage; but the hand of Du
Val, prompted by a malignant nature, was nerved to ftrike a
fatal blow, and the life of Champlain would have been facri-
ficed at the opening of the tragic fcene.

The punifhment of Du Val, in its character and degree,
was not only agreeable to the civil policy of the age, but
was neceffary for the protection of life and the maintenance
of order and difcipline in the colony. A confpiracy on land,
under the prefent circumftances, was as dangerous as a mu-
tiny at fea; and the calm, careful, and dignified procedure
of Champlain in firmly vifiting upon the criminal a fevere
though merited punifhment, reveals the wifdom, prudence,
and humanity which were prominent elements in his mental

and moral conftitution.
CHAPTER VI.

Memoww of

CHAPTER VI.

ERECTION OF BUILDINGS AT QUEBEC. — THE SCURVY AND THE STARVING
SAVAGES. — DISCOVERY OF LAKE CHAMPLAIN, AND THE BATTLE AT TI-
CONDEROGA. — CRUELTIES INFLICTED ON PRISONERS OF WAR, AND THE
FESTIVAL AFTER VICTORY. — CHAMPLAIN’S RETURN TO FRANCE AND HIS
INTERVIEW WITH HENRY IV.— VOYAGE TO NEW FRANCE AND PLANS OF
DISCOVERY. — BATTLE WITH THE IROQUOIS NEAR THE MOUTH OF THE
RICHELIEU. — REPAIR OF BUILDINGS AT QUEBEC,— NEWS OF THE As-
SASSINATION OF HENRY IV.—CHAMPLAIN’S RETURN TO FRANCE AND
HIS CONTRACT OF MARRIAGE. — VOYAGE TO QUEBEC IN I6I1I.

N the 18th of September, 1608, Pont Grave,
having obtained his cargo of furs and peltry,
failed for France.

The autumn was fully occupied by Cham-

plain and his little band of colonifts in complet-

ing the buildings and in making fuch other provifions as
were needed againft the rigors of the approaching winter.
From the foreft trees beams were hewed into fhape with the
axe, boards and plank were cut from the green wood with
the faw, walls were reared from the rough ftones gathered
at the bafe of the cliff, and plots of land were cleared near
the fettlement, where wheat and rye were fown and grape-
vines planted, which fuccefsfully tefted the good qualities of
the foil and climate.

Three lodging-houfes were erected on the northweft angle
formed by the junction of the prefent ftreets St. Peter and
Sous le Fort, near or on the fite of the Church of Notre
Dame. Adjoining, was a ftore-houfe. The whole was fur-
rounded by a moat fifteen feet wide and fix feet deep, thus

giving

1n Comes

FOVILOLS 8

ing Wi

ne itt

1608. Samuel de Champlain. 87

giving the fettlement the character of a fort ; a wife precau-
tion againft a fudden attack of the treacherous favages.®

At length the funny days of autumn were gone, and the
winter, with its fierce winds and its penetrating frofts and
deep banks of fnow, was upon them. Little occupation
could be furnifhed for the twenty-eight men that compofed
the colony. Their idlenefs foon brought a defpondency that
hung like a pall upon their fpirits. In February, difeafe
made its approach. It had not been expected. Every de-
fence within their knowledge had been provided againtt it.
Their houfes were clofely fealed and warm; their clothing
was abundant; their food nutritious and plenty. Buta diet
too exclufively of falt meat had, notwithftanding, in the opin-
ion of Champlain, and we may add the want, probably, of
exercife and the prefence of bad air, induced the mad de la
terre or {curvy, and it made fearful havoc with his men.
Twenty, five out of each feven of their whole number,
had been carried to their graves before the middle of April,
and half of the remaining eight had been attacked by the
loathfome fcourge.

While the mind of Champlain was oppreffed by the fuf-
fering and death that were at all times prefent in their abode,
his fympathies were {till further taxed by the condition of the
favages, who gathered in great numbers about the {ettle-
ment, in the moft abject mifery and in the laft ftages of
ftarvation. As Champlain could only furnifh them, from his
limited ftores, temporary and partial relief, it was the more
painful to fee them flowly dragging their feeble frames about

in

58 The fituation of Quebec and an may be feen by reference to Vol II. pp.
engraved reprefentation of the buildings 175, 183.

Memotr of 1609.

in the fnow, gathering up and devouring with avidity dif-
carded meat in which the procefs of decompofition was far
advanced, and which was already too potent with the ftench
of decay to be approached by his men.

Beyond the ravages of difeafe * and the ftarving Indians,
Champlain adds nothing more to complete the gloomy pic-
ture of his firft winter in Quebec. The gales of wind that
{wept round the wall of precipice that protected them in the
rear, the drifts of fnow that were piled up in frefh inftal-
ments with every ftorm about their dwelling, the biting froff,
more piercing and benumbing than they had ever experi-
enced before, the unceafing groans of the fick within, the
femi-weekly proceffion bearing one after another of their
diminifhing numbers to the grave, the myftery that hung
over the difeafe, and the impotency of all remedies, we know
were prominent features in the picture. But the imagina-
tion feeks in vain for more than a fingle circumftance that
could throw upon it a beam of modifying and foftening light,
and that was the prefence of the brave Champlain, who bore
all without a murmur, and, we may be fure, without a throb
of unmanly fear or a fenfation of cowardly difcontent.

But the winter, as all winters do, at length melted reluc-
tantly away, and the fpring came with its verdure and its
new life. The fpirits of the little remnant of a colony be-
gan to revive. Eight of the twenty-eight with which the
winter began were ftill furviving. Four had efcaped attack,
and four were rejoicing convalefcents.

On the 5th of June, news came that Pont Grave had ar-
rived from France, and was then at Tadouffac, whither

Champlain

59 Scurvy, or mal de la terre. — Vide Vol. 11. note 105.

-
nitance

ening

1609. Samuel de Champlain. 89

Champlain immediately repaired to confer with him, and
particularly to make arrangements at the earlieft poffible
moment for an exploring expedition into the interior, an un-
dertaking which De Monts had enjoined upon him, and
which was not only agreeable to his own wifhes, but was a
kind of enterprife which had been a paffion with him from
his youth.

In anticipation of a tour of exploration during the ap-
proaching fummer, Champlain had already afcertained from
the Indians that, lying far to the fouthweft, was an extenfive
lake, famous among the favages, containing many fair iflands,
and furrounded by a beautiful and produétive country.
Having expreffed a defire to vifit this region, the Indians
readily offered to a¢t as guides, provided, neverthelefs, that
he would aid them in a warlike raid upon their enemies, the
Iroquois, the tribe known to us as the Mohawks, whofe
homes were beyond the lake in queftion. Champlain without
hefitation acceded to the condition exacted, but with little
appreciation, as we confidently believe, of the bitter confe-
quences that were deftined to follow the alliance thus inau-
gurated; from which, in after years, it was inexpedient, if
not impoffible, to recede.

Having fitted out a thallop, Champlain left Quebec on his
tour of exploration on the 18th of June, 1609, with eleven
men, together with a party of Montagnais, a tribe of Indi-
ans who, in their hunting and fifhing excurfions, roamed
over an indefinite region on the north fide of the St. Law-
rence, but whofe headquarters were at Tadouffac. After
afcending the St. Lawrence about fixty miles, he came upon

an encampment of two hundred or three hundred favages,

= Hurons

go Memoir of

Hurons © and Algonquins, the former dwelling on the bor-
ders of the lake of the fame name, the latter on the upper
waters of the Ottawa. They had learned fomething of the
French from a fon of one of their chiefs, who had been at
Quebec the preceding autumn, and were now on their
way to enter into an alliance with the French againft the
Iroquois. After formal negotiations and a return to Que-
bec to vifit the French fettlement and witnefS the effect of
their firearms, of which they had heard and which greatly
excited their curiofity, and after the ufual ceremonies of feaft-
ing and dancing, the whole party proceeded up the river
until they reached the mouth of the Richelieu. Here they
remained two days, as guefts of the Indians, feafting upon
fifth, venifon, and water-fowl.

While thefe feftivities were in progrefs, a difagreement

1609.

arofe among the favages, and the bulk of them, including

the women, returned to their homes. Sixty warriors, how-
ever, fome from each of the three allied tribes, proceeded up
the Richelieu with Champlain. At the Falls of Chambly,
finding it impoffible for the fhallop to pafs them, he directed
the pilot to return with it to Quebec, leaving only two men
from the crew to accompany him on the remainder of the
expedition. From this point, Champlain and his two brave
companions entrufted themfelves to the birch canoe of the
favages. For a fhort diftance, the canoes, twenty-four in all,

were

60 Hurons. “The word Huron comes
from the French, who feeing thefe Indi-
ans with the hair cut very fhort, and
ftanding up ina ftrange fafhion, givin
them a fearful air, cried out, the fir
time they faw them, Qwed/e hures/
what boars’ heads! and fo got to call

them Hurons.” — Charlevoix’s His.
New France, Shea’s Trans. Vol. II. p.
71. Vide Relations des Féfuites, Que-
bec ed. Vol. I. 1639, p. 51; alfo note
321, Vol. II. of this work, for brief
notice of the Algonquins and other
tribes.

ty 1609. Samuel de Champlain. gI
were tranfported by land, The fall and rapids, extending as
far as St. John, were at length paffed. They then pro-
ceeded up the river, and, entering the lake which now bears
the name of Champlain, crept along the weftern bank, ad-
vancing after the firft few days only in the night, hiding
themfelves during the day in the thickets on the fhore to
avoid the obfervation of their enemies, whom they were
now liable at any moment to meet.

On the evening of the 29th of July, at about ten o'clock,
when the allies were gliding noifelefily along in reftrained
filence, as they approached the little cape that juts out into
the lake at Ticonderoga, near where Fort Carillon was after-
wards erected by the French, and where its ruins are ftill to
be feen,” they difcovered a flotilla of heavy canoes, of oaken
bark, containing not far from two hundred Iroquois warriors,

faoreen

| od armed and impatient for confli@. A furor and frenzy as of

y HIMES) ° ° pally .

rot ik fo many enraged tigers inftantly feized both parties. Cham-
Sy 8 . oe . . . ’

vost? plain and his allies withdrew a {hort diftance, an arrow’s

occtat

Cn range from the fhore, faftening their canoes by poles to
Hath ; ;
tal keep them together, while the Iroquois haftened to the wa-

_ ter’s edge, drew up their canoes fide by fide, and began to
‘hu fell trees and conftrué& a barricade, which they were well able
ie : to accomplifh with marvellous facility and fkill. Two boats
ee were fent out to inquire if the Iroquois defired to fight, to
ae which they replied that they wanted nothing fo much, and,
four as

61 For the identification of the fite of
this battle, fee Vol. II. p. 223, note
348. It is eminently hiftorical ground.
Near it Fort Carrillon was erected by
the French in 1756. Here Abercrom-
bie was defeated by Montcalm in 1758.
Lord Amherft captured the fort in 1759.

Again it was taken from the Englith by
the patriot Ethan Allen in 1775. It
was evacuated by St. Clair when envi-
roned by Burgoyne in 1777, and now
for a complete century it has been vif-
ited by the tourift as a ruin memorable
for its many hiftorical affociations.

1

1
i
3
4
i

Se eo er emnnee ICN UY ESN INSE TI (0 Seuss an EOnTS he

92 Memoir of 1609.

as it was now dark, at funrife the next morning they would
give them battle. The whole night was {pent by both par-
ties in loud and tumultuous boafting, berating each other in
the roundeft terms which their favage vocabulary could fur-
nifh, infultingly charging each other with cowardice and
weaknefs, and declaring that they would prove the truth of
their affertions to their utter ruin the next morning.

When the fun began to gild the diftant mountain-tops, the
combatants were ready for the fray. Champlain and his two
companions, each lying low in feparate canoes of the Mon-
tagnais, put on, as beft they could, the light armor in ufe at
that period, and, taking the fhort hand-gun, or arquebus, went
on fhore, concealing themfelves as much as poffible from the
enemy. As foon as all had landed, the two parties haftily
approached each other, moving with a firm and determined
tread. The allies, who had become fully aware of the deadly
character of the hand-gun and were anxious to fee an exhibition
of its myfterious power, promptly opened their ranks, and
Champlain marched forward in front, until he was within
thirty paces of the Iroquois. When they faw him, attracted
by his pale face and ftrange armor, they halted and gazed at
him in a calm bewilderment for fome feconds. Three Iro-
quois chiefs, tall and athletic, ftood in front, and could be
eafily diftinguifhed by the lofty plumes that waved above their
heads. They began at once to make ready for a difcharge
of arrows. At the fame inftant, Champlain, perceiving this
movement, levelled his piece, which had been loaded with
four balls, and two chiefs fell dead, and another favage was
mortally wounded by the fame fhot. At this, the allies
raifed a fhout rivalling thunder in its ftunning effect. From

both

1609. Samuel de Champlain. 93

both fides the whizzing arrows filled the air. The two
French arquebufiers, from their ambufeade in the thicket,
immediately attacked in flank, pouring a deadly fire upon
the enemy’s right. The explofion of the firearms, altogether
new to the Iroquois, the fatal effets that inftantly followed,
their chiefs lying dead at their feet and others faft falling,
threw them into a tumultuous panic. They at once aban-
doned every thing, arms, provifions, boats, and camp, and
without any impediment, the naked favages fled through
the foreft with the fleetnefs of the terrified deer. Champlain
and his allies purfued them a mile and a half, or to the firft
fall in the little ftream that conneéts Lake Champlain ® and

Lake George. The victory was complete. The allies

® This lake, difcovered and explored
by Champlain, is ninety miles in length.
Through its centre runs the boundary
line between the State of New York
and that of Vermont. From its difcov-
ery to the prefent time it has appro-
priately borne the honored name of
Champlain. For its - Indian name,
Caniaderiguartinte, fee Vol. II. note
349. According to Mr. Shea the Mo-
hawk name of Lake Champlain is Canz-
atagaronte. — Vide Shea’s Charlevoix,
Vol. II. p. 18.

Lake Champlain and the Hudfon
River were both difcovered the fame
year, and were feverally named after
the diftinguithed navigators by whom
they were explored. Champlain com-
pleted his explorations at Ticonderoga,
on the 30th of July, 1609, and Hudfon
reached the higheft point made by him
on the river, near Albany, on the 22d of
September of the fame year.— de Vol.
II. p. 219. Alfo The Third Voyage of
Mafter Henry Hudfon, written by Rob-
ert Ivet of Lime-houfe, CoJ//ections of
New York His. Society, Vol. 1. p. 140.

gathered
Lake George. The Jefuit Father,
Ifaac Jogues, having been fummoned in
1646 to vifit the Mohawks, to attend to
the formalities of ratifying a treaty of
peace which had been concluded with
them, pafling by canoe up the Riche-
lieu, through Lake Champlain, and ar-
riving at the end of Lake George on the
29th of May, the eve of Corpus Chritfti,
a feftival celebrated by the Roman
Church on the Thurfday after Trinity
Sunday, in honor of the Holy Eucha-
rift or the Lord’s Supper, named this
lake Lac pu SAINT SACREMENT. The
following is from the Jefuit Relation of
1646 by Pere Hierofme Lalemant. Ils
arriuérent la veille du S. Sacrement au
bout du lac qui eft ioint au grand lac de
Champlain. Les Iroquois le nomment
Andiatarocté, comme qui diroit, 1& ot
le lac fe ferme. Le Pere le nomma le
lac du S. Sacrement.— Relations des
Féfuites, Quebec ed. Vol. II. 1646, p.
15. 2
Two important faéts are here made
perfectly plain ; viz. that the original In-
dian name of the lake was ———
anc

94 Memoir of

gathered at the fcene of conflict, danced and fang in tri-
umph, collected and appropriated the abandoned armor,
feafted on the provifions left by the Iroquois, and, within
three hours, with ten or twelve prifoners, were failing down
the lake on their homeward voyage.

After they had rowed about eight leagues, according to
Champlain’s eftimate, they encamped for the night. A pre-
vailing characteriftic of the favages on the eaftern coaft, in
the early hiftory of America, was the barbarous cruelties
which they inflited upon their prifoners of war.* They
did not depart from their ufual cuftom in the prefent in-
ftance. Having kindled a fire, they felected a victim, and
proceeded to excoriate his back with red-hot burning brands,
and to apply live coals to the ends of his fingers, where they

1609.

and that the French named it Lac du
Saint Sacrement becaufe they arrived
on its fhores on the eve of the feftival
celebrated in honor of the Eucharift or
the Lord’s Supper. Notwithftanding
this very plain ftatement, it has been
affirmed without any hiftorical founda-
tion whatever, that the original Indian
name of this lake was Horican, and that
the Jefuit miffionaries, having felected
it for the typical purification of baptifm
on account of its limpid waters, named
it Lac du Saint Sacrement. This per-
verfion of hiftory originated in the ex-
traordinary declaration of Mr. James
Fenimore Cooper, in his novel entitled
“The Laft of the Mohicans,” in which
thefe two erroneous ftatements are given
as veritable hiftory. This new difcovery
by Cooper was heralded by the public
journals, {cholars were deceived, and
the bold impofition was fo fuccefsful
that it was even introduced into a merito-
rious poem in which the Horican of the
ancient tribes and the baptifmal waters

would

of the limpid lake are handled with
{kill and effe&t, Twenty-five years after
the writing of his novel, Mr. Cooper's
confcience began ferioufly to trouble
him, and he publicly confeffed, in a
preface to ‘* The Lat of the Mohicans,”
that the name Horican had been firft
applied to the lake by himfelf, and with-
out any hiftorical authority. He is
filent as to the reafon he had affigned
for the French name of the lake, which
was probably an affumption growing out
of his ignorance of its meaning. — Vide
The Laft of The Mohicans, by J. Fen-
imore Cooper, Gregory’s ed. New
York, 1864, pp. ix-x and 12.

64 “ There are certain general cuftoms
which mark the California Indians, as,
the non-ufe of torture on prifoners 0}
war,” &c,— Vide The Tribes of Califor-
nia, by Stephen Powers, in Coméribu-
tions to North American Ethnology,
Vol. III. p. 15. Tribes of Wa/fhington
and Oregon, by George Gibbs, idem,
Vol. I. p. 192.

thy

i in
ad am
nd, why

ling dom

coding

ng bra

ey
whore
WHET ue

1609. Samuel de Champlain. 95

would give the moft exquifite pain. They tore out his
finger-nails, and, with fharp flivers of wood, pierced his wrifts
and rudely forced out the quivering finews. They flayed off

the fkin from the top of his head,* and poured upon the
bleeding wound a ftream of boiling melted gum. Champlain
remonftrated in vain. The piteous cries of the poor, tormented
victim excited his unavailing compaffion, and he turned away
in anger and difguft. At length, when thefe inhuman tortures
had been carried as far as they defired, Champlain was per-
mitted, at his earneft requeft, with a mufket-thot to put an
end to his fufferings. But this was not the termination of
the horrid performance. The dead vi@im was hacked in
pieces, his heart fevered into parts, and the furviving prifon-
ers were ordered to eat it. This was too revolting to their
nature, degraded as it was ; they were forced, however, to
take it into their mouths, but they would do no more, and
their guard of more compaffionate Algonquins allowed them

to caft it into the lake.

This exhibition of favage cruelty was not extraordinary,
but according to their ufual cuftom. It was equalled, and,

if poffible, even furpaffed,

6 “Tt has been erroneoufly afferted
that the practice of {calping did not
prevail among the Indians before the
advent of Europeans. In 1$35, Cartier
faw five fcalps at Quebec, dried and
ftretched on hoops. In 1564, Laudon-
niére faw them among the Indians of
Florida. The Algonquins of New Eng-
land and Nova Scotia were accuftomed
to cut off and carry away the head,
which they afterwards {calped. Thofe
of Canada, it feems, fometimes {calped
the dead bodies on the field. The Al-
gonquin practice of carrying off heads

in the treatment of captives

generally

as trophies is mentioned by Lalemant,
Roger Williams, Lefcarbot, and Cham-
plain.” — Vide Pioneers of France in
the New World, by Francis Parkman,
Boston, 1874, p. 322. The practice of
the tribes on the Pacific coaft is differ-
ent. “In war they do not take {calps,
but decapitate the flain and bring in the
heads as trophies.” — Contributions to
Am. Ethnology, by Stephen Powers,
Wathington, 1877, Vol. III. pp. 21, 221.
Vide Vol. I. p. 192. The Yuki are an
exception. Vol. III. p. 129.

Memoir of 1609.

generally, and efpecially of the Jefuit miffionaries in after
years.

When the party arrived at the Falls of Chambly, the Hu-
rons and Algonquins left the river, in order to reach their
homes by a fhorter way, tranfporting their canoes and effects
over land to the St. Lawrence near Montreal, while the reft
continued their journey down the Richelieu and the St.
Lawrence to Tadouflac, where their families were encamped,
waiting to join in the ufual ceremonies and rejoicings after a
great victory.

When the returning warriors approached Tadouffac, they
hung aloft on the prow of their canoes the fcalped heads of
thofe whom they had flain, decorated with beads which they
had begged from the French for this purpofe, and with a
favage grace prefented thefe ghaftly trophies to their wives
and daughters, who, laying afide their garments, eagerly
fwam out to obtain the precious mementoes, which they
hung about their necks and bore rejoicing to the fhore,
where they further teftified their fatisfaCtion by dancing and
finging.

After a few days, Champlain repaired to Quebec, and early
in September decided to return with Pont Grave to France.
All arrangements were fpeedily made for that purpofe. Fit
teen men were left to pafs the winter at Quebec, in charge
of Captain Pierre Chavin of Dieppe. On the 5th of Sep-
tember they failed from Tadouffac, and, lingering fome days
at Ifle Percé, arrived at Honfleur on the 13th of October,
1609.

Champlain

6 For an account of the fufferings of Hi/fory of Catholic Miffions, by John
Brébeuf, Lalemant, and Jogues, fee Gilmary Shea, pp. 188, a 217.

1609. Samuel de Champlain. 97

Champlain haftened immediately to Fontainebleau, to
make a detailed report of his proceedings to Sieur de Monts,
who was there in official attendance upon the king” On
this occafion he fought an audience alfo with Henry IV.,,
who had been his friend and patron from the time of his firtt
voyage to Canada in 1603. In addition to the new difcov-
eries and obfervations which he detailed to him, he exhib-
ited a belt curioufly wrought and inlaid with porcupine-quills,
the work of the favages, which efpecially drew forth the
king’s admiration. He alfo prefented two {pecimens of the
{carlet tanager, Pyranga rubra, a bird of great brilliancy of
plumage and peculiar to this continent, and likewife the head
of a gar-pike, a fith of fingular charaCteriftics, then known
only in the waters of Lake Champlain.*

At this time De Monts was urgently feeking a renewal of
his commiffion for the monopoly of the fur-trade. In this
Champlain was deeply interefted. But to this monopoly
a powerful oppofition arofe, and all efforts at renewal
proved utterly fruitlefS. De Monts did not, however, aban-
don the enterprife on which he had entered. Renewing his
engagements with the merchants of Rouen with whom he
had already been affociated, he refolved to fend out in the
early fpring, as a private enterprife and without any fpecial
privileges or monopoly, two veffels with the neceffary equip-
ments for ftrengthening his colony at Quebec and for carry-
ing on trade as ufual with the Indians.

Champlain was again appointed lieutenant, charged with

the

6" He was gentleman in ordinary to par Marc Lefcarbot, Paris, 1612, p.
the king’s chamber. “ Gentil-homme 432. 2
ordinaire de néftre Chambre.” — Vide 88 Called by the Indians chaou/arou.
Commiffion du Roy au Sieur de For a full account of this cruftacean
Monts, Hiftoire dela Nouvelle France, vide Vol. 11. note 343.

13

{ +
Tree!
& 4 ;
H i ta
4i

i i 7
eee:
| if i

Memoir of 1610,

the government and management of the colony, with the
expectation of paffing the next winter at Quebec, while Pont

_ Gravé, as he had been before, was {pecially entrufted with

the commercial department of the expedition.

They embarked at Honfleur, but were detained in the
Englifh Channel by bad weather for fome days. In the
mean time Champlain was taken ferioufly ill, the veffel
needed additional ballaft, and returned to port, and they did
not finally put to fea till the 8th of April. They arrived at
Tadouflac on the 26th of the fame month, in the year 1610,
and, two days later, failed for Quebec, where they found the
commander, Captain Chavin, and the little colony all in ex-
cellent health.

The eftablifhment at Quebec, it is to be remembered, was
now a private enterprife. It exifted by no chartered rights,
it was proteéted by no exclufive authority. There was con-
fequently little encouragement for its enlargement beyond
what was neceflary as a bafe of commercial operations. The
limited cares of the colony left, therefore, to Champlain, a
larger fcope for the exercife of his indomitable defire for ex-
ploration and adventure. Explorations could not, however,
be carried forward without the concurrence and guidance
of the favages by whom he was immediately furrounded.
Friendly relations exifted between the French and the united
tribes of Montagnais, Hurons, and Algonquins, who occu-
pied the northern fhores of the St. Lawrence and the great
lakes. A burning hatred exifted between thefe tribes and
the Iroquois, occupying the fouthern fhores of the fame river.
A deadly warfare was their chief employment, and every
fummer each party was engaged either in repelling an in

vafion

1610. Samuel de Champlain. 99

vafion or in making one in the territory of the other.
ed Thofe friendly to Champlain were quite ready to act as pio-
neers in his explorations and difcoveries, but they expected
and demanded in return that he fhould give them aétive per-
fonal affiftance in their wars. Influenced, doubtlefs, by pol-
icy, the fpirit of the age, and his early education in the civil
conflicts of France, Champlain did not hefitate to enter into

=

an alliance and an exchange of fervices on thefe terms,
In the preceding year, two journeys into diftant regions
a had been planned for exploration and difcovery. One be-
: ft ginning at Three Rivers, was to furvey, under the guidance of
yal we the Montagnais, the river St. Maurice to its fource, and thence,
by different channels and portages, reach Lake St. John,
bere returning by the Saguenay, making in the circuit a diftance
ned of not lefs than eight hundred miles. The other plan was
re Was (lt to explore, under the direction of the Hurons and Algon-
ent Let quins, the vaft country over which they were accuftomed to
tions, Te roam, paffing up the Ottawa, and reaching in the end the
hampla region of the copper mines on Lake Superior, a journey not
fire fr lefs than twice the extent of the former.
home Neither of thefe explorations could be undertaken the
id ui prefent year. Their importance, however, to the future pro-
frou grefs of colonization in New France is fufficiently obvious,
he ut The purpofe of making thefe furveys fhows the breadth and
“ho wifdom of Champlain’s views, and that hardthips or dangers
| et were not permitted to interfere with his patriotic fenfe of
“ites? duty.
‘eet Soon after his arrival at Quebec, the favages began to as-
| of femble to engage in their ufual fummer's entertainment of
pags making war upon the Iroquois. Sixty Montagnais, equipped

In

5 —

ie as NEST
a

|
| {
4 ie
seid ;
é : ;
eat it
Heecel i
chee}
gate Ele}
j ré
¥
]
r
z
}
bP F
1
-
Eee
ee &
F
nes
it
2

Rmnitihdeenie .
bas Ay RRR
Dem eS) RN
wo

PoP reatticccearer nantes

a a i as tre

o> SIRNA REE TISSEETEROPEEGTRREEN YEEDTORETEET

100 Memoir of 1610.

in their rude armor, were haftening to the rendezvous which,
by agreement made the year before, was to be at the mouth
of the Richelieu.’ Hither were to come the three allied
tribes, and pafs together up this river into Lake Champlain,
the “gate” or war-path through which thefe hoftile clans
were accuftomed to make their yearly pilgrimage to meet
each other in deadly conflict. Sending forward four barques
for trading purpofes, Champlain repaired to the mouth of
the Richelieu, and landed, in company with the Montagnais,
on the Ifland St. Ignace, on the 19th of June. While prep-
arations were making to receive their Algonquin allies from
the region of the Ottawa, news came that they had already
arrived, and that they had difcovered a hundred Iroquois
ftrongly barricaded in a log fort, which they had _haftily
thrown together on the brink of the river not far diftant, and
to capture them the affiftance of all parties was needed without
delay. Champlain, with four Frenchmen and the fixty Mon-
tagnais, left the ifland in hafte, paffed over to the mainland,
where they left their canoes, and eagerly rufhed through the
marfhy foreft a diftance of two miles. Burdened with their
heavy armor, half confumed by mofquitoes which were fo thick
that they were fcarcely able to breathe, covered with mud
and water, they at length ftood before the Iroquois fort.” It
was a ftructure of logs laid one upon another, braced and
held together by pofts coupled by withes, and of the ufual
circular form. It offered a good protection in favage wat-

fare.

6 The mouth of the Richelieu was 7 Champlain’s defcription does not
the ufual place of meeting. In 1603, the enable us to identify the place of this
allied tribes were there when Champlain battle with exainefs. It will be ob-
afcended the St. Lawrence. They had _ferved, if we refer to his text, that, leav-
a fort, which he defcribes. — Vide foftea, ing the ifland of St. Ignace, and going
p. 243. half

us
he mu
ee al
ham
file ly

1610. Samuel de Champlain. IOI

fare. Even the French arquebus difcharged through the
crevices did flow execution.

It was obvious to Champlain that, to enfure victory, the
fort muft be demolithed. Huge trees, fevered at the bate,
falling upon it, did not break it down. At length, directed
by Champlain, the favages approached under their fhields,
tore away the fupporting pofts, and thus made a breach, into
which rufhed the infuriated befiegers, and in hot hafte fin-
ithed their deadly work. Fifteen of the Iroquois were taken
prifoners ; a few plunged into the river and were drowned ;
the reft perifhed by mufket-fhots, arrow-wounds, the toma-

hawk, and the war-club. Of the allied favages three were
killed and fifty wounded. Champlain himfelf did not efcape

half a league, croffing the river, they
landed, when they were plainly on the
mainland near the mouth of the Riche-
lieu. They then went half a league,
and finding themfelves outrun by their
Indian guides and loft, they called to
two favages, whom they faw going
through the woods, to guide them. Go-
ing a /hort difiance, they were met by a
meffenger from the fcene of conflié, to
urge them to haften forwards. Then,
after going /e/s than an eighth of a
league, they were within the found of
the voices of the combatants at the fort.
Thefe diftances are eftimated without
meafurement, and, of courfe, are inex-
act: but, putting the diftances men-
tioned altogether, the journey through
the woods to the fort was apparently a
little more than two miles. Had they
followed the courfe of the river, the dif-
tance would probably have been fome-
what more: perhaps nearly three miles.
Champlain does not pofitively fay that
the fort was on the Richelieu, but the
whole narrative leaves no doubt that
fuch was the faét. This river was the

altogether

avenue through which the Iroquois
were accuftomed to come, and they
would naturally encamp here where
they could choofe their own ground,
and where their enemies were fure
to approach them. If we refer to
Champlain’s illuftration of Fort des
Lroquois, Vol. Il. p. 241, we fhall ob-
ferve that the river is piétured as com-
paratively narrow, which could hardly
be a true reprefentation if it were in-
tended for the St. Lawrence. The ef-
caping Iroquois are reprefented as
fwimming towards the right, which was
probably in the direétion of their homes
on the fouth, the natural courfe of their
retreat. The fhallop of Des Prairies,
who arrived late, is on the left of the
fort, at the exaét point where he would
naturally difembark if he came up the
Richelieu from the St. Lawrence. From
a ftudy of the whole narrative, together
with the map, we infer that the fort was
on the weftern bank of the Richelieu,
between two and three miles from its
mouth. We are confident that its lo-
cation cannot be more definitely fixed.

—

SS

7
,

ie
H

a

TA ede ere

er

x

> 1 epntingalomre ne pre

PROC a Pe my ym ee faa EF

ee
Fra
a
of

Pet |
3

£

ae

102 Memotr of 1610.

altogether unharmed. An arrow, armed with a fharp point
of ftone, pierced his ear and neck, which he drew out with
his own hand. One of his companions received a fimilar
wound in the arm. ‘The victors fcalped the dead as ufual,
ornamenting the prows of their canoes with the bleeding
heads of their enemies, while they fevered one of the bodies
into quarters, to eat, as they alleged, in revenge.

The canoes of the favages and a French fhallop having
come to the fcene of this battle, all foon embarked and re-
turned to the Ifland of St. Ignace. Here the allies, joined
by eighty Huron warriors who had arrived too late to par-
ticipate in the conflict, remained three days, celebrating
their victory by dancing, finging, and the adminiftration of
the ufual punifhment upon their prifoners of war. This
confifted in a variety of exquifite tortures, fimilar to thofe
inflicted the year before, after the victory on Lake Cham-
plain, horrible and fickening in all their features, and which
need not be fpread upon thefe pages. From thefe tortures
Champlain would gladly have fnatched the poor wretches,
had it been in his power, but in this matter the favages
would brook no interference. There was a folitary excep-
tion, however, in a fortunate young Iroquois who fell to him
in the divifion of prifoners. He was treated with great kind-
nefs, but it did not overcome his exceffive fear and diftruft,
and he foon fought an opportunity and efcaped to his
home.”

When the celebration of the victory had been completed,
the Indians departed to their diftant abodes. Champlain,

however,

7 For a full account of the Indian treatment of prifoners, vide antea, pp.
94, 95- Alfo Vol. II. pp. 224-227, 244-246.

Z 1610. Samuel de Champlain. 103

hat however, before their departure, very wifely entered into an
WV out w agreement that they fhould receive for the winter a young
da fe Frenchman who was anxious to learn their language, and, in
id a return, he was himfelf to take a young Huron, at their
ble {pecial requeft, to pafs the winter in France. This judicious
the i arrangement, in which Champlain was deeply interefted and

which he found fome difficulty in accomplifhing, promifed
an important future advantage in extending the knowledge
of both parties, and in ftrengthening on the foundation of
perfonal experience their mutual confidence and friendfhip.
After the departure of the Indians, Champlain returned
pede to Quebec, and proceeded to put the buildings in repair and

min to fee that all neceffary arrangements were made for the
sar! fafety and comfort of the colony during the next winter.
y y S
oy On the 4th of July, Des Marais, in charge of the veffel
shhh; belonging to De Monts and his company, which had been
at Ch left behind and had been expected foon to follow, arrived at
sgh Quebec, bringing the intelligence that a fmall revolution had
ml taken place in Brouage, the home of Champlain, that the
; Proteftants had been expelled, and an additional guard of fol-
ie a? diers had been placed in the garrifon. Des Marais alfo brought
tary the ftartling news that Henry IV. had been affaffinated on i
fel nh the 14th of May. Champlain was penetrated by this an- i
ora i nouncement with the deepeft forrow. He fully faw how 1]
nd it great a public calamity had fallen upon his country. France Hi
pel ty had loft, by an ignominious blow, one of her ableft and wifeft
fovereigns, who had, by his marvellous power, gradually
engl united and compaéted the great interefts of the nation, which
Chan had been fhattered and torn by half a century of civil con-
hovel flicts and domeftic feuds. It was alfo to him a perfonal lofs.
The
ie ath

Fe TTT | OY,

tw. vos poll fase “a - -
he A Aan RETR ATP COC cee

3°
a ay
a2
re
if

104 Memowr of 1610,

The king had taken a fpecial intereft in his undertakings,
had been his patron from the time of his firft voyage to New
France in 1603, had fuftained him by an annual penfion, and
on many occafions had fhown by word and deed that he fully
appreciated the great value of his explorations in his Ameri-
can domains. It was difficult to fee how a lofs fo great both
to his country and himfelf could be repaired. A cloud of
doubt and uncertainty hung over the future. The condition
of the company, likewife, under whofe aufpices he was act
ing, prefented at this time no very encouraging features.
The returns from the fur-trade had been fmall, owing to the
lofs of the monopoly which the company had formerly en-
joyed, and the exceffive competition which free-trade had
ftimulated. Only a limited attention had as yet been given
to the cultivation of the foil. Garden vegetables had been
placed in cultivation, together with fmall fields of Indian
corn, wheat, rye, and barley. Thefe attempts at agriculture
were doubtlefs experiments, while at the fame time they were
ufeful in fupplementing the ftores needed for the colony's
confumption.

Champlain’s perfonal prefence was not required at Quebec
during the winter, as no aétive enterprife could be carried
forward in that inclement feafon, and he decided, therefore,
to return to France. The little colony now confifted of fix-
teen men, which he placed in charge, during his abfence, of
Sieur Du Parc. He accordingly left Tadouffac on the 13th
of Auguft, and arrived at Honfleur in France on the 27th
of September, 1610.

During the autumn of this year, while refiding in Paris,
Champlain became attached to Héléne Boullé, the daughter

of

D tear th

A clout ¢

610. Samuel de Champlain. 105

of Nicholas Boullé, fecretary of the king’s chamber. Sh
was at that time a mere child, and of too tender years to act
for herfelf, particularly in matters of fo great importance as
thofe which relate to marital relations. However, agreeably
to a cuftom not infrequent at that period, a marriage con-
traét * was entered into on the 27th of December with her
parents, in which, neverthelefs, it was {tipulated that the
nuptials fhould not take place within at leaft two years from
that date. The dowry of the future bride was fixed at fix
thoufand livres ¢ournozs, three fourths of which were paid
and receipted for by Champlain two days after the figning
of the contract. The marriage was afterward confummated,
and Helen Boulle, as his wife, accompanied Champlain to
Quebec, in 1620, as we fhall fee in the fequel.
Notwithftanding the difcouragements of the preceding year
and the {mall profpeét of future fuccefs, De Monts and the
merchants affociated with him ftill perfevered in fending an-
other expedition, and Champlain left Honfleur for New
France on the firft day of March, 1611. Unfortunately, the
voyage had been undertaken too early in the feafon for thefe
northern waters, and long before they reached the Grand
Banks, they encountered ice-floes of the moft dangerous
character. Huge blocks of cryftal, towering two hundred

/ Oo

.feet above the furface of the water, floated at times near

them,

™ Vide Contrat de mariage de Sa-
muel de Champlain, Guvres de Cham-
plain, Quebec ed. Vol. VI., Pidces
Fuflificatives, p. 33.

Among the early marriages not un-
common at that period, the following
are examples. Céfar, the fon of Henry
IV., was efpoufed by public ceremonies
to the daughter of the Duke de Mer-

ceeur in 1598. The bridegroom was
four years old and the bride-elec&t had
juft entered her fixth year. The great
Condé, by the urgency of his avaricious
father, was unwillingly married at the
age of twenty, to Claire Clemence de
Maillé Brézé, the niece of Cardinal
Richelieu, when fhe was but thirteen
years of age.

iy
ii
}
;
ae
,]
|

106 Memoir of r611,

them, and at others they were furrounded and hemmed in
by vaft fields of ice extending as far as the eye could reach.
Amid thefe ceafelefs perils, momentarily expecting to be
crufhed between the floating iflands wheeling to and fro
about them, they ftruggled with the elements for nearly two
months, when finally they reached Tadouffac on the 13th of
May.

CHAPTER VII.

THE FUR-TRADE AT MONTREAL. — COMPETITION AT THE RENDEZVOUS. —
No EXxpLoRATIONS.— CHAMPLAIN RETURNS TO FRANCE. — REORGANIZA-
TION OF THE COMPANY. — COUNT DE SOISSONS, HIS DEATH.— PRINCE
DE ConpE. — CHAMPLAIN’s RETURN TO NEW FRANCE AND TRADE WITH
THE INDIANS. — EXPLORATION AND DE VIGNAN, THE FALSE GUIDE. —
INDIAN CEREMONY AT CHAUDIERE FALLS.

©) HAMPLAIN loft no time in haftening to Que-

bec, where he found Du Parc, whom he had left

in charge, and the colony in excellent health.

The paramount and immediate object which

now engaged his attention was to fecure for the

prefent feafon the fur-trade of the Indians. This furnifhed
the chief pecuniary fupport of De Monts’s company, and
was abfolutely neceflary to its exiftence. He foon, therefore,
took his departure for the Falls of St. Louis, fituated a fhort
diftance above Montreal, and now better known as La Chine

Rapids. In the preceding year, this place had been agreed

upon as a rendezvous by the friendly tribes. But, as they

had not arrived, Champlain proceeded to make a thorough
exploration on both fides of the St. Lawrence, extending his
journeys more than twenty miles through the forefts and

along

1611, Samuel de Champlain. 107

along the fhores of the river, for the purpofe of felecting a
proper fite for a trading-houfe, with doubtlefs an ultimate
purpofe of making it a permanent fettlement. After a full
furvey, he finally fixed upon a point of land which he named
La Place Royale, fituated within the prefent city of Montreal,
on the eaftern fide of the little brook Pierre, where it flows
into the St. Lawrence, at Point A Calligre. On the banks
of this fmall ftream there were found evidences that the land
to the extent of fixty acres had at fome former period been
cleared up and cultivated by the favages, but more recently
had been entirely abandoned on account of the wars, as he
learned from his Indian guides, in which they were incef-
fantly engaged.

Near the fpot which had thus been felected for a future
fettlement, Champlain difcovered a depofit of excellent clay,
and, by way of experiment, had a quantity of it manufac.
tured into bricks, of which he made a wall on the brink of
the river, to teft their power of refifting the frofts and the
floods. Gardens were alfo made and feeds fown, to prove the
quality of the foil. A weary month paffed flowly away, with
fcarcely an incident to break the monotony, except the
drowning of two Indians, who had unwifely attempted to
pafs the rapids in a bark canoe overloaded with heron, which
they had taken on an ifland above. In the mean time, Cham-
plain had been followed to his rendezvous by a herd of ad-
venturers from the maritime towns of France, who, ftimu-
lated by the freedom of trade, had flocked after him in
numbers out of all proportion to the amount of furs which
they could hope to obtain from the wandering bands of fav-

ages that might chance to vifit the St. Lawrence. The river
was

=w

a

:
he
| i

108 Memowr of 1611.

was lined with thefe voracious cormorants, anxioufly watch-
ing the coming of the favages, all impatient and eager to
fecure as large a fhare as poffible of the uncertain and mea-
gre booty for which they had croffed the Atlantic. Fifteen
or twenty barques were moored along the fhore, all feeking
the beft opportunity for the difplay of the worthlefs trinkets
for which they had avaricioufly hoped to obtain a valuable
cargo of furs.

A long line of canoes was at length feen far in the diftance.
It was a fleet of two hundred Hurons, who had fwept down
the rapids, and were now approaching flowly and in a digni-
fied and impreffive order. On coming near, they fet up a
fimultaneous fhout, the token of favage greeting, which
made the welkin ring. This falute was anfwered by a hun-
dred French arquebufes from barque and boat and {hore.
The unexpected multitude of the French, the newnefs of
the firearms to moft of them, filled the favages with difmay.
They concealed their fear as well and as long as poffible.
They deliberately built their cabins on the fhore, but foon
threw up a barricade, then called a council at midnight, and
finally, under pretence of a beaver-hunt, fuddenly removed
above the rapids, where they knew-the French barques
could not come. When they were thus in a place of fafety,
they confeffed to Champlain that they had faith in him,
which they confirmed by valuable gifts of furs, but none
whatever in the grafping herd that had followed him to the
rendezvous. The trade, meagre in the aggregate, divided
among fo many, had proved a lofs to all. It was foon
completed, and the favages departed to their homes. Subfe-
quently, thirty-eight canoes, with eighty or a hundred Al-

gonquin

SE AM em ae

r6rr. Samuel de Champlain. 109

gonquin warriors, came to the rendezvous. They brought,
however, but a {mall quantity of furs, which added little to
the lucrative character of the fummer’s trade.

The reader will bear in mind that Champlain was not here
merely as the fuperintendent and refponfible agent of a
trading expedition. This was a fubordinate purpofe, and the
refult of circumftances which his principal did not choofe,
but into which he had been unwillingly forced. It was
neceffary not to overlook this intereft in the prefent exigency,
neverthelefs De Monts was fuftained by an ulterior purpofe
of a far higher and nobler chara@ter. He till entertained
the hope that he fhould yet fecure a royal charter under
which his afpirations for colonial enterprife fhould have full
{cope, and that his ambition would be finally crowned with
the fuccefs which he had fo long coveted, and for which he
had fo affiduoufly labored. Champlain, who had been for
many years the geographer of the king, who had carefully
reported, as he advanced into unexplored regions, his furveys
of the rivers, harbors, and lakes, and had given faithful de-
{criptions of the native inhabitants, knowledge abfolutely
neceffary as a preliminary ftep in laying the foundation of a
French empire in America, did not for a moment lofe fight
of this ulterior purpofe. Amid the commercial operations
to which for the time being he was obliged to devote his
chief attention, he tried in vain to induce the Indians to
conduct an exploring party up the St. Maurice, and thus
reach the headwaters of the Saguenay, a journey which had
been planned two years before. They had excellent excufes
to offer, and the undertaking was neceffarily deferred for the

prefent. He, however, obtained much valuable information
from

I «teeta

110 Memowr of 611.

from them in converfations, in regard to the fource of the
St. Lawrence, the topography of the country which they
inhabited, and even drawings were executed by them to
illuftrate to him other regions which they had perfonally
vifited.

On the 18th of July; Champlain left the rendezvous,
and arrived at Quebec on the evening of the next day.
Having ordered all neceffary repairs at the fettlement, and,
not unmindful of its adornment, planted rofe-bufhes about
it, and taking fpecimens of oak timber to exhibit in France,
he left for Tadouffac, and finally for France on the 11th of
Auguft, and arrived at Rochelle on the 16th of Septem-
ber, 1611.

Immediately on his arrival, Champlain repaired to the city
of Pons, in Saintonge, of which De Monts was governor,
and laid before him the fituation of his affairs at Quebec.
De Monts ftill clung to the hope of obtaining a royal com-
miffion for the exclufive right of trade, but his affociates
were wholly difheartened by the competition and confequent
loffes of the laft year, and had the fagacity to fee that there
was no hope of a remedy in the future. They accordingly
declined to continue further expenditures. De Monts pur
chafed their intereft in the eftablifhment at Quebec, and,
notwithftanding the obftacles which had been and were Mill
to be encountered, was brave enough to believe that he could
{tem the tide unaided and alone. He haftened to Paris to
fecure the much coveted commiffion from the king. Impor-
tant bufinefs, however, foon called him in another direction,
and the whole matter was placed in the hands of Champlain,
with the underftanding that important modifications were to

be

5 a ea Oa

No

1611. Samuel de Champlain, III

be introduced into the conftitution and management of the
company.

The burden thus unexpectedly laid upon Champlain was
not a light one. His experience and perfonal knowledge
led him to appreciate more fully than any one elfe the diffi-
culties that environed the enterprife of planting a colony
in New France. He faw very clearly that a royal commif-
fion merely, with whatever exclufive rights it conferred,
would in itfelf be ineffeCtual and powerlefs in the prefent
complications. It was obvious to him that the adminiftration
muft be adapted to the ftate of affairs that had gradually
grown up at Quebec, and that it muft be fuftained by pow-
erful perfonal influence.

Champlain proceeded, therefore, to draw up certain rules
and regulations which he deemed neceffary for the manage-
ment of the colony and the protection of its interefts. The
leading characteriftics of the plan were, firft, an affociation
of which all who defired to carry on trade in New France
might become members, fharing equally in its advantages
and its burdens, its profits and its loffes: and, fecondly, that
it fhould be prefided over by a viceroy of high pofition and
commanding influence. De Monts, who had thus far been
at the head of the undertaking, was a gentleman of great
refpectability, zeal, and honefty, but his name did not, as fo-
ciety was conftituted at that time in France, carry with it
any controlling weight with the merchants or others whofe
views were adverfe to his own. He was unable to carry out
any plans which involved expenfe, either for the exploration
of the country or for the enlargement and growth of the

colony. It was neceflary, in the opinion of oe to
place

(OT ip gale rms nme OR INA ee .

a” 1
Heigl ii
BR] i
Pe} iat,
aw
‘ ;
|

TOM CATT S rary TUTTI

112 Memoir of 1612.

place at the head of the company a man of fuch exalted
official and focial pofition that his opinions would be liftened
to with refpeét and his wifhes obeyed with alacrity.

He fubmitted his plan to De Monts and likewife to Prefi-
dent Jeannin,? a man venerable with age, diftinguifhed for
his wifdom and probity, and at this time having under his
control the finances of the kingdom. They both pronounced
it excellent and urged its execution.

Having thus obtained the cordial and intelligent affent of
the higheft authority to his fcheme, his next ftep was to fe-
cure a viceroy whofe exalted name and ftanding fhould con-
form to the requirements of his plan. This was an object
fomewhat difficult to attain. It was not eafy to find a noble-
man who poffeffed all the qualities defired. After careful
confideration, however, the Count de Soiffons * was thought

78 Pierre Jeannin was born at Autun,
in 1540, and died about 1622. He be-
gan the practice of law at Dijon, in
1569. Though a Catholic, he always
counfelled tolerant meafures in the
treatment of the Proteftants. By his in-
fluence he prevented the mafiacre of the
Proteftants at Dijon in 1572. Hewasa
Councillor, and afterward Prefident, of
the Parliament of Dijon. He was the
private advifer of the Duke of May-
enne. He united himfelf with the party
of the League in 1589. He negotiated
the peace between Mayenne and Henry
IV. The king became greatly attached
to him, and appointed him a Councillor
of State and Superintendent of Finan-
ces. He held many offices and did great
fervice to the State. After the death of
the king, Marie de Médicis, the regent,
continued him as Superintendent of
Finances.

74 Count de Soiffons, Charles de Bour-

to

bon, was born at Nogent-le-Rotrou, in
1556, and died Nov. 1, 1612. He was
educated in the Catholic religion. He
aéted for a time with the party of the
League, but, falling in love with Cather-
ine, the fifter of Henry IV., better to
fecure his objeét he abandoned the
League and took a military command
under Henry III., and diftinguifhed
himfelf for bravery when the king was
befieged in Tours. After the death of
the king, he efpoufed the caufe of
Henry IV., was made Grand Mafter
of France, and took part in the fiege of
Paris. He attempted a fecret marriage
with Catherine, but was thwarted; and
the unhappy lovers were compelled, by
the Duke of Sully, to renounce their
matrimonial intentions. He had been
Governor of Dauphiny, and, at the
time of his death, was Governor of
Normandy, with a penfion of 50,000
crowns.

thn,

saa; Samuel de

to unite better than any other

=

Champlain. 113

the chara¢teriftics which the

office required, Champlain, therefore, laid before the Count,
through a member of the king’s council, a detailed exhibi-
tion of his plan and a map of New France executed by him-

felf. He foon after received an

intimation from this nobleman

of his willingnefs to accept the office, if he fhould be ap-
pointed. A petition was fent by Champlain to the king and
his council, and the appointment was made on the 8th of
Oétober, 1612, and on the 15th of the fame month the Count

iffued a commiffion appointing

Champlain his lieutenant.

Before this commiffion had been publifhed in the ports and

the maritime towns of France,

as required by law, and before

a month had elapfed, unhappily the death of the Count
de Soiffons fuddenly occurred at his Chateau de Blandy.
Henry de Bourbon, the Prince de Condé5 was haftily ap-
pointed his fucceffor, and a new commiffion was iffued to
Champlain on the 22d of November of the fame year.

The appointment of this pri

of high pofition and influence,

7 Prince de Condé, Henry de Bour-
bon II., the pofthumous fon of the firft
Henry de Bourbon, was born at Saint
Jean d’Angely, in 1588. He married, in
1609, Charlotte Marguerite de Mont-
morency, the filter of Henry, the Duke
de Montmorency, who fucceeded him
as the Viceroy of New France. To
avoid the impertinent gallantries of
Henry IV., who had fallen in love with
this beautiful Princefs, Condé and his
wife left France, and did not return till
the death of the king. He headed a
confpiracy again{t the Regent, Marie de
Médicis, and was thrown into prifon on
the firft of September, 1616, where he
remained three years. Influenced by

15

nce carried with it the weight
though hardly the charaéter
which
ambition, and more particularly by his
avarice, he forced his fon Louis, Le
Grand Condé, to marry the niece of
Cardinal Richelieu, Claire Clémence de
Maillé-Brézé. He did much to confer
power and influence upon his family,
largely through his avarice, which was
his chief charaéteriftic. The wit of
Voltaire attributes his crowning glory to
his having been the father of the great
Condé. During the detention of the
Prince de Condé in prifon, the Mare-
{chal de Thémins was A¢ting Viceroy
of New France, having been appointed
by Marie de Médicis, the Queen Re-
gent.—Vide Voyages dv Sievr de
Champlain, Paris, 1632, p. 211.

i

Hf

y

¥

ig
[ia

ii

@

114 Memoir of 1612,

which would have been moft defirable under the circum-
ftances. He was, however, a potent fafeguard againft the
final fuccefs, though not indeed of the attempt on the part
of enemies, to break up the company, or to interfere with its
plans. No fooner had the publication of the commiffion
been undertaken, than the merchants, who had fchemes of
trade in New France, put forth a powerful oppofition. The
Parliamentary Court at Rouen even forbade its publication
in that city, and the merchants of St. Malo renewed their
oppofition, which had before been fet forth, on the flimfy
ground that Jacques Cartier, the difcoverer of New France,
was a native of their municipality, and therefore they had
rights prior and fuperior to all others.

After much delay and feveral journeys by Champlain to
Rouen, thefe difficulties were overcome. There was, indeed,
no folid ground of oppofition, as none were debarred from
engaging in the enterprife who were willing to fhare in the
burdens as well as the profits.

Thefe delays prevented the complete organization of the
company contemplated by Champlain’s new plan, but it was
neverthelefs neceffary for him to make the voyage to Que-
bec the prefent feafon, in order to keep up the continuity of
his operations there, and to renew his friendly relations with
the Indians, who had been greatly difappointed at not feeing
him the preceding year. Four veffels, therefore, were au-
thorized to fail under the commiffion of the viceroy, each of
which was to furnifh four men for the fervice of Champlain
in explorations and in aid of the Indians in their wars, if it
fhould be neceffary.

He accordingly left Honfleur in a veffel belonging to his

old

1613. Samuel de Champlain. 115

old friend Pont Grave, on the 6th of March, 1613, and ar-
rived at Tadouflac on the 29th of April. On the 7th of
May he reached Quebec, where he found the little colony in
excellent condition, the winter having been exceedingly
mild and agreeable, the river not having been frozen in the
fevereft weather. He repaired at once to the trading ren-
dezvous at Montreal, then commonly known as the Falls of
St. Louis. He learned from a trading barque that had pre-
ceded him, that a fmall band of Algonquins had already
been there on their return from a raid upon the Iroquois.
They had, however, departed to their homes to celebrate a
feaft, at which the torture of two captives whom they had
taken from the Iroquois was to form the chief element in the
entertainment. A few days later, three Algonquin canoes
arrived from the interior with furs, which were purchafed by
the French. From them they learned that the ill treatment of
the previous year, and their difappointment at not having feen
Champlain there as they had expected, had led the Indians
to abandon the idea of again coming to the rendezvous, and
that large numbers of them had gone on their ufual fum-
mer’s expedition againft the Iroquois.

Under thefe circumftances, Champlain refolved, in mak-
ing his explorations, to vifit perfonally the Indians who had
been accuftomed to come to the Falls of St. Louis, to affure
them of kind treatment in the future, to renew his alliance
with them againft their enemies, and, if poffible, to induce
them to come to the rendezvous, where there was a large
quantity of French goods awaiting them.

It will be remembered that an ulterior purpofe of the

French, in making a fettlement in North America, was to
enable

Ny
AG)
}
H
1.
| ol

116 Memoir of 1613,

enable them better to explore the interior and difcover an
avenue by water to the Pacific Ocean. This fhorter paflage
to Cathay, or the land of fpicery, had been the day-dream of
all the great navigators in this direction for more than a
hundred years. Whoever fhould difcover it would confer a
boon of untold commercial value upon his country, and
crown himfelf with imperifhable honor. Champlain had
been infpired by this dream from the firft day that he fet his
foot upon the foil of New France. Every indication that
pointed in this direction he watched with care and feized
upon with avidity. In 1611,a young man in the colony,
Nicholas de Vignan, had been allowed, after the trading
feafon had clofed, to accompany the Algonquins to their dif-
tant homes, and pafs the winter with them. This was one
of the methods which had before been fuccefsfully reforted
to for obtaining important information. De Vignan re-
turned to Quebec in the fpring of 1612, and the fame year
to France. Having heard apparently fomething of Hud-
fon’s difcovery and its accompanying difafter, he made it the
bafis of a ftory drawn wholly from his own imagination, but
which he well knew muft make a ftrong impreffion upon
Champlain and all others interefted in new difcoveries. He
ftated that, during his abode with the Indians, he had made
an excurfion into the forefts of the north, and that he had
actually difcovered a fea of falt water; that the river Ottawa
had its fource in a lake from which another river flowed into
the fea in queftion ; that he had feen on its fhores the wreck
of an Englifh fhip, from which eighty men had been taken
and flain by the favages ; and that they had among them an
Englith boy, whom they were keeping to prefent to him.

As

NO

1613. Samuel de Champlain. 117

As was expected, this ftory made a {trong impreffion upon
the mind of Champlain. The pricelefs object for which he
had been in fearch fo many years feemed now within his
grafp. The fimplicity and direG&inefS of the narrative, and
the want of any apparent motive for deception, were a {trong
guaranty of its truth. But, to make affurance doubly fure,
Vignan was crofs-examined and tefted in various ways, and
finally, before leaving France, was made to certify to the truth
of his ftatement in the prefence of two notaries at Rochelle.
Champlain laid the ftory before the Chancellor de Sillery,
the Prefident Jeannin, the old Marfhal de Briffac, and others,
who affured him that it was a queftion of fo great impor-
tance, that he ought at once to teft the truth of the narrative
by a perfonal exploration. He refolved, therefore, to make
this one of the objects of his fummer’s excurfion.

With two bark canoes, laden with provifions, arms, and a
few trifles as prefents for the favages, an Indian guide, four
Frenchmen, one of whom was the mendacious Vignan,
Champlain left the rendezvous at Montreal on the 27th of
May. After getting over the Lachine Rapids, they croffed
Lake St. Louis and the Two Mountains, and, paffing up the
Ottawa, now expanding into a broad lake and again con-
tracting into narrows, whence its pent-up waters fwept over
precipices and boulders in furious, foaming currents, they at
length, after incredible labor, reached the ifland Allumette,
a diftance of not lefS than two hundred and twenty-five
miles. In no expedition which Champlain had thus far
undertaken had he encountered obftacles fo formidable.
The falls and rapids in the river were numerous and diffi-

cult to pafs. Sometimes a portage was impoffible on account
of

=e

eae bo cage ke

=

ort

its

.
|
i

ee ee ee ane S-

118 Memoir of 1613,

of the denfenefs of the forefts, in which cafe they were com-
pelled to drag their canoes by ropes, wading along the edge
of the water, or clinging to the precipitous banks of the river
as beft they could. When a portage could not be avoided,
it was neceffary to carry their armor, provifions, clothing,
and canoes through the forefts, over precipices, and fome-
times over ftretches of territory where fome tornado had
proftrated the huge pines in tangled confufion, through
which a pathway was almoft impoffible.* To lighten their
burdens, nearly every thing was abandoned but their canoes,
Fith and wild-fowl were an uncertain reliance for food, and
fometimes they toiled on for twenty-four hours with fcarcely
any thing to appeafe their craving appetites.

Overcome with fatigue and oppreffed by hunger, they at
length arrived at Allumette Ifland, the abode of the chief
Teffoiiat, by whom they were cordially entertained. Nothing
but the hope of reaching the north fea could have fuftained
them amid the perils and fufferings through which they had
paffed in reaching this inhofpitable region. The Indians had
chofen this retreat not from choice, but chiefly on account of
its great inacceflibility to their enemies. They were afton-
ifhed to fee Champlain and his company, and facetioufly
fuggefted that it muft be a dream, or that thefe new-comers

had

_ ™ In making the portage from what mofquitoes. On the old portage road,
is now known as Portage du Fort to traverfed by Champlain and his party

Mutkrat Lake, a diftance of about nine
miles, Champlain, though lefs heavily
loaded than his companions, carried
three French arquebuifes, three oars,
his cloak, and fome fmall articles, and
was at the fame time bitterly oppreffed
by fwarms of hungry and infatiable

at this time, in 1613, an aftrolabe, in-
fcribed 1603, was found in 1867. The
prefumptive evidence that this inftru-
ment was loft by Champlain is ftated in
a brochure by Mr. O. H. Marthall.
—Vide Magazine of American Hiftory
for March, 1879.

WS

ty 1613, Samuel de Champlain. 119

had fallen from the clouds. After the ufual ceremonies of
feafting and fmoking, Champlain was permitted to lay before
Teffotiat and his chiefs the objet of his journey. When he
informed them that he was in fearch of a falt fea far to the
Cth north of them, which had been actually feen two years be-
nd fore by one of his companions, he learned to his difappoint-
ment and mortification that the whole ftory of Vignan was
a fheer fabrication. The mifcreant had indeed paffed a

ten he winter on the very fpot where they then were, but had never if
It CaN been a league further north. The Indians themfelves had My
food, a no knowledge of the north fea, and were highly enraged at H
1 {ear the bafenefs of Vignan’s falfehood, and craved the opportu-

nity of defpatching him at once. They jeered at him, calling
him a “ liar,” and even the children took up the refrain, vo-
ciferating vigoroufly and heaping maledictions upon his

head.
Indignant as he was, Champlain had too much philofophy
ter in his compofition to commit an indifcretion at fuch a mo-

ment as this. He accordingly reftrained the favages and his
own anger, bore his infult and difappointment with exem-
plary patience, giving up all hope of feeing the falt fea in
this direction, as he humoroufly added, “except in imagina-
tion.”

Before leaving Allumette Ifland on his return, Champlain
invited Teffoiiat to fend a trading expedition to the Falls of
St. Louis, where he would find an ample opportunity for an
exchange of commodities. The invitation was readily ac-
cepted, and information was at once fent out to the neigh-
boring chiefs, requefting them to join in the enterprife.
The favages foon began to affemble, and when —

: eft,

120 Memowr of 1613.

left, he was accompanied by forty canoes well laden with
furs; others joined them at different points on the way, and
on reaching Montreal the number had {wollen to eighty.

An incident occurred on their journey down the river
worthy of record. When the fleet of favage fur-traders had
arrived at the foot of the Chaudiére Falls, not a hundred
rods diftant from the fite of the prefent city of Ottawa,
having completed the portage, they all affembled on the
fhore, before relaunching their canoes, to engage in a cere-
mony which they never omitted when paffing this {pot. A
wooden plate of fuitable dimenfions was paffed round, into
which each of the favages caft a fmall piece of tobacco.
The plate was then placed on the ground, in the midft of the
company, and all danced around it, finging at the fame time.
An addrefs was then made by one of the chiefs, fetting forth
the great importance of this time-honored cuftom, particu-
larly as a fafeguard and protection againft their enemies.
Then, taking the plate, the fpeaker caft its contents into
the boiling cauldron at the bafe of the falls, the act being
accompanied by a loud fhout from the affembled multitude.
This fall, named the Chaudiére, or cauldron, by Champlain,
formed in fact the limit above which the Iroquois rarely if
ever went in hoftile purfuit of the Algonquins. The region
above was exceedingly difficult of approach, and from which
it was ftill more difficult, in cafe of an attack, to retreat.
But the Iroquois often lingered here in ambuth, and fell upon
the unfufpeCting inhabitants of the upper Ottawa as they
came down the river. It was, therefore, a place of great
danger; and the Indians, enflaved by their fears and fuper-
ftitions, did not believe it poffible to make a profperous jour-

. ney,

~~

fs
thy

1613. Samuel de Champlain. 121
den wi .

y ney, without obferving, as they paffed, the ceremonies above
defcribed.

On reaching Montreal, three additional fhips had arrived
from France with a licenfe to carry on trade from the Prince
de Condé, the viceroy, making feven in allin port. The trade
with the Indians for the furs brought in the eighty canoes,
which had come with Champlain to Montreal, was foon
defpatched. Vignan was pardoned on the folemn promife,
a condition offered by himfelf, that he would make a journey
to the north fea and bring back a true report, having made
a moft humble confeffion of his offence in the prefence of
the whole colony and the Indians, who were purpofely affem-

it bled to receive it. This public and formal adminiftration of
ane reproof was well adapted to produce a powerful effec upon
tng it the mind of the culprit, and clearly indicates the moderation
pati and wifdom, fo uniformly charaéteriftic of Champlain’s ad-

ene miniftration,

i The bufinefs of the feafon having been completed, Cham-
plain returned to France, arriving at St. Malo on the 26th of
Auguft, 1613. Before leaving, however, he arranged to fend
back with the Algonquins who had come from Ifle Allu-
mette two of his young men to pafs the winter, for the pur-
pofe, as on former occafions, of learning the language and
obtaining the information which comes only from an intimate
and prolonged affociation.

CHAPTER VIIL
16

——< |e er near ee ee “eee heey
Sg -

eee

See

Sa

‘a € ne ae . Fi es
Facata . 3 eae 1
is Soe eeost 2 Z PT ee — eat ~ =.
A: TITRE TRA ieertenniieste ei ecanemciiaemiiaensnisnes. “<> abba nessa <= =

Memoir of

CHAPTER VIIL.

CHAMPLAIN OBTAINS MISSIONARIES FOR NEw FRANCE.— MEETS THE INDI-
ANS AT MONTREAL AND ENGAGES IN A WAR AGAINST THE IROQUOIS.
— His JouRNEY TO THE HURONS, AND WINTER IN THEIR CounrTrRY.

URING the whole of the year 1614, Champlain
remained in France, occupied for the moft part
in adding new members to his company of af-
fociates, and in forming and perfecting fuch
plans as were clearly neceffary for the profper-

ity and fuccefs of the colony.

His mind was particularly

abforbed in devifing means for the eftablifhment of the
Chriftian faith in the wilds of America. Hitherto nothing
whatever had been done in this direction, if we except the
efforts of Poutrincourt on the Atlantic coaft, which had
already terminated in difafter”” No miffionary of any fort

7 De Poutrincourt obtained a con-
firmation from Henry IV. of the gift to
him of Port Royal by De Monts, and
proceeded to eftablifh a colony there in
1608. In 1611, a Jefuit miffion was
planted by the Fathers Pierre Biard
and Enemond Maffé. It was chiefly
patronized by a bevy of ladies, under
the leaderfhip of the Marchionefs de
Guerchville, in clofe affociation with
Marie de Médicis, the queen-regent,
Madame de Verneuil, and Madame de
Soudis. Although De Poutrincourt was
a devout member of the Roman Church,
the miffionaries were received with re-
luétance, and between them and the
patentee and his lieutenant there was
a conftant and irrepreffible difcord.
The lady patronefs, the Marchionefs de
Guerchville, determined to abandon

had

Port Royal and plant a new colony at
Kadefquit, on the fite of the prefent
city of Bangor, in the State of Maine.
A colony was accordingly organized,
which included the fathers, Quentin
and Lalemant with the lay brother,
Gilbert du Thet, and arrived at La
Héve in La Cadie, on the 6th of May,
1613, under the conduét of Sieur de la
Sauffaye. From there they proceeded
to Port Royal, took the two miffionaries,
Biard and Maffé, on board, and coafted
along the borders of Maine till they
came to Mount Defert, and finally de-
termined to plant their colony on that
ifland. A fhort time after the arrival
of the colony, before they were in any
condition for defence, Captain Samuel
Argall, from the Englifh colony in Vir-
ginia, fuddenly appeared, and captured

an

Hikus Samuel de Champlain. 123

x

had hitherto fet his foot upon that part of the foil of New
France lying within the Gulf of St. Lawrence® A freth
intereft had been awakened in the mind of Champlain. He
faw its importance in a new light. He fought counfel and
advice from various perfons whofe wifdom commended them to
his attention. Among the reft was Louis Houél, an intimate
friend, who held fome office about the perfon of the king,
and who was the chief manager of the falt works at Brou-
age. This gentleman took a hearty intereft in the project,
and affured Champlain that it would not be difficult to raife
the means of fending out three or four Fathers, and, more-
over, that he knew fome of the order of the Recollects, be-
longing to a convent at Brouage, whofe zeal he was fure
would be equal to the undertaking. On communicating
with them, he found them quite ready to engage in the work.
Two of them were fent to Paris to obtain authority and en-
couragement from the proper fources. It happened that
about this time the chief dignitaries of the church were in
Paris, attending a feffion of the Eftates. The bifhops and
cardinals were waited upon by Champlain, and their zeal
awakened and their co-operation fecured in raifing the necef-
fary means for fuftaining the miffion. After the ufual nego-
tiations and delays, the objet was fully accomplithed ; fifteen

hundred

and tranfported the whole colony, and
fubfequently that at Port Royal, on the
alleged ground that they were intrud-
ers on Englith foil. Thus difaftroufly
ended Poutrincourt’s colony at Port
Royal, and the Marchionefs de Guerch-
ville’s miffion at Mount Defert. — Vide
Voyages par le Sr. de Champlain,
Paris ed. 1632, pp. 98-114. Shea’s
Charlevoix, Vol. 1. pp. 260-286.

78 Champlain had tried to induce
Madame de Guerchville to fend her
miffionaries to Quebec, to avoid the ob-
ftacles which they had encountered at
Port Royal; but, for the fimple reafon
that De Monts was a Calvinift, fhe would
not liften to it.— Vide Shea’s Charlevoix,
Vol. I. p. 274; Voyages du Stevr de
Champlain, Paris ed. 1632, pp. 112,
113.

124 Memoir of 1615,

hundred Zvres were placed in the hands of Champlain for
outfit and expenfes, and four Recollect friars embarked with
him at Honfleur, on the fhip “St. Etienne,” on the 24th of
April, 1615, viz., Denis Jamay, Jean d’Olbeau, Jofeph le
Caron, and the lay-brother Pacifique du Pleffis.”

On their arrival at Quebec, Champlain addreffed himfelf
immediately to the preparation of lodgings for the miffiona-
ries and the erection of a chapel for the celebration of divine
fervice. The Fathers were impatient to enter the fields of
labor feverally affigned to them. Jofeph le Caron was ap-
pointed to vifit the Hurons in their diftant foreft home,
concerning which he had little or no information; but he
neverthelefs entered upon the duty with manly courage and
Chriftian zeal. Jean D’Olbeau affumed the miffion to the
Montagnais, embracing the region about Tadouflac and the
river Saguenay, while Denis Jamay and Pacifique du Pleffis
took charge of the chapel at Quebec.

At the earlieft moment poffible Champlain haftened to
the rendezvous at Montreal, to meet the Indians who had
already reached there on their annual vifit for trade. The
chiefs were in raptures of delight on feeing their old friend
again, and had a grand fcheme to propofe. They had not
forgotten that Champlain had often promifed to aid them in
their wars. They approached the fubje@t, however, with
moderation and diplomatic wifdom. They knew perfectly
well that the trade in peltry was greatly defired, in fact that
it was indifpenfable to the French. The fubftance of what
they had to fay was this. It had become now, if not im-
poffible, exceedingly hazardous, to bring their furs to market.

Their

"9 Vide Hiftoire du Canada, par Gabriel Sagard, Paris, 1636, pp. 11-12.

I,

rage ai
fon to te
40 ant tl

du Pls

we

1618. Samuel de Champlain. 125

Their enemies, the Iroquois, like fo many prowling wolves,
were fure to be on their trail as they came down the Ot-
tawa, and, incumbered with their loaded canoes, the {truggle
muft be unequal, and it was nearly impoffible for them ever
to be winners. The only folution of the difficulty known to
them, or which they cared to confider, as in all Indian war-
fare, was to annihilate their enemies utterly and wipe out
their name for ever. Let this be done, and the fruits of
peace would return, their commerce would be fafe, profper-
ous, and greatly augmented.

Such were the reafons prefented by the allies. But there
were other confiderations, likewife, which influenced the
mind of Champlain. It was neceffary to maintain a clofe
and firm alliance with the Indians in order to extend the
French difcoveries and domain into new and more diftant
regions, and on this extenfion of French influence depended
their hope of converting the favages to the Chriftian faith.
The force of thefe confiderations could not be refifted.
Champlain decided that, under the circumftances, it was
neceffary to give them the defired affiftance.

A general affembly was called, and the nature and extent of
the campaign fully confidered. It was to be of vaftly greater
proportions than any that had hitherto been propofed. The
Indians offered to furnifh two thoufand five hundred and
fifty men, but they were to be gathered together from differ-
ent and diftant points. The journey mutt, therefore, be long
and perilous. The objective point, viz., a celebrated Iro-
quois fort, could not be reached by the only feafible route in
a lefs diftance than eight hundred or nine hundred miles,

and it would require an abfence of three or four months.
Preparations

126 Memor of 1615.

Preparations for the journey were entered upon at once.
Champlain vifited Quebec to make arrangements for his
long abfence. On his return to Montreal, the Indians, im-
patient of delay, had already departed, and Father Jofeph
le Caron had gone with them to his diftant field of miffion-
ary labor among the Hurons.

On the gth of July, 1615, Champlain embarked, taking
with him an interpreter, probably Etienne Briilé, a French
fervant, and ten favages, who, with their equipments, were to
be accommodated in twocanoes. They entered the Riviére
des Prairies, which flows into the St. Lawrence fome leagues
eaft of Montreal, crofling the Lake of the Two Mountains,
paffed up the Ottawa, taking the fame route which he had
traverfed fome years before, revifiting its long fucceffion of
reaches, its placid lakes, impetuous rapids, and magnificent
falls, and at length arrived at the point where the river, by
an abrupt angle, begins to flow from the northweft. Here,
leaving the Ottawa, they entered the Mattawan, paffing
down this river into Lac du Talon, thence into Lac la Tortue,
and by a {hort portage, into Lake Nipiffing. After remain-
ing here two days, entertained generoufly by the Nipiffingian
chiefs, they croffed the lake, and, following the channel of
French River, entered Lake Huron, or rather the Georgian
Bay. They coafted along until they reached the northern
limits of the county of Simcoe. Here they difembarked and
entered the territory of their old friends and allies, the Hu-
rons.

The domain of this tribe confifted of a peninfula formed
by the Georgian Bay, the river Severn, and Lake Simcoe,
at the fartheft, not more than forty by twenty-five miles in

extent,

pros
vanity

fountains

etal

fing
anne

rhed a
the Ht

1615. Samuel de Champlain, 127

extent, but more generally cultivated by the native popula-
tion, and of a richer foil than any region hitherto explored
north of the St. Lawrence and the lakes. They vifited four
of their villages and were cordially received and feafted on
Indian corn, fquafhes, and fith, with fome variety in the
methods of cooking. They then proceeded to Carhagouha,”
a town fortified with a triple palifade of wood thirty-five
feet in height. Here they found the Recollect Father Jofeph
Le Caron, who, having preceded them but a few days,
and not anticipating the vifit, was filled with raptures of
aftonifhment and joy. The good Father was intent upon
his pious work. On the 12th of Auguft, furrounded by his
followers, he formally ereéted a crofs as a fymbol of the
faith, and on the fame day they celebrated the mafs and
chanted Te Deum Lavpamus for the firft time.

Lingering but two days, Champlain and ten of the French,
eight of whom had belonged to the fuite of Le Caron, pro-
ceeded flowly towards Cahiagué,** the rendezvous where the
muftering hofts of the favage warriors were to fet forth to-
gether upon their hoftile excurfion into the country of the
Iroquois. Of the Huron villages vifited by them, fix are
particularly mentioned as fortified by triple palifades of
wood. Cahiagué, the capital, encircled two hundred large
cabins within its wooden walls. It was fituated on the north

of

*° Carhagouha, named by the French
Saint Gabriel. Dr. J. C. Taché, of
Ottawa, Canada, who has given much
attention to the fubjeét, fixes this village
in the central part of the prefent town-
fhip of Tiny, in the county of Simcoe.
— MS. Letter, Feb. 11, 1880.

8! Cahiagué. Dr. Taché places this
village on the extreme eaftern limit of

the townfhip of Orillia, in the fame
county, in the bend of the river Severn,
a fhort diftance after it leaves Lake
Couchiching. The Indian warriors do
not appear to have launched their flo-
tilla of bark canoes until they reached
the fifhing ftation at the outlet of Lake
Simcoe. This village was fubfequently
known as Saint-Fean Baptifee.

128 Memo of 1615.

of Lake Simcoe, ten or twelve miles from this body of water,
furrounded by a country rich in corn, fquafhes, and a
great variety of fmall fruits, with plenty of game and fifh.
When the warriors had moftly affembled, the motley crowd,
bearing their bark canoes, meal, and equipments on their
fhoulders, moved down in a fouthwefterly direction till they
reached the narrow ftrait that unites Lake Chouchiching
with Lake Simcoe, where the Hurons had a famous fifhing
wear. Here they remained fome time for other more tardy
bands to join them. At this point they defpatched twelve
of the moft ftalwart favages, with the interpreter, Etienne
Brilé, on a dangerous journey to a diftant tribe dwelling on
the weft of the Five Nations, to urge them to haften to the
fort of the Iroquois, as they had already received word from
them that they would join them in this campaign.
Champlain and his allies foon left the fifhing wear and
coafted along the northeaftern fhore of Lake Simcoe until
they reached its moft eaftern border, when they made a port-
age to Sturgeon Lake, thence fweeping down Pigeon and
Stony Lakes, through the Otonabee into Rice Lake, the
River Trent, the Bay of Quinte, and finally rounding the
eaftern point of Amherft Ifland, they were fairly on the wa-
ters of Lake Ontario, jufl as it merges into the great River
St. Lawrence, and where the Thoufand Iflands begin to
loom into fight. Here they croffed the extremity of the lake
at its outflow into the river, paufing at this important geo-
graphical point to take the latitude, which, by his imperfect
inftruments, Champlain found to be 43° north.”
Sailing
82 The latitude of Champlain is here was taken. It could not, however have

far from correét. It is not poflible to been at a point much below 44°7’.
determine the exa¢t place at which it

WS

1615. Samuel de Champlain. 129

Sailing down to the fouthern fide of the lake, after a dif
tance, by their eftimate, of about fourteen leagues, they landed
and concealed their canoes in a thicket near the fhore.
Taking their arms, they proceeded along the lake fome ten
miles, through a country diverfified with meadows, brooks,
ponds, and beautiful forefts filled with plenty of wild game,
when they ftruck inland, apparently at the mouth of Little
Salmon River. Advancing in a foutherly direCtion, along
the courfe of this ftream, they croffed Oneida River, an out-
let of the lake of the fame name. When within about ten
miles of the fort which they intended to capture, they met a
{mall party of favages, men, women, and children, bound on
a fifhing excurfion. Although unarmed, neverthelefs, accord-
ing to their cuftom, they took them all prifoners of war, and
began to inflict the ufual tortures, but this was dropped on
Champlain’s indignant interference. The next day, on the
roth of October, they reached the great fortrefs of the Iro-
quois, after a journey of four days from their landing, a dif-
tance loofely eftimated at from twenty-five to thirty leagues.
Here they found the Iroquois in their fields, induftrioufly
gathering in their autumnal harveft of corn and fquathes.
A {fkirmifh enfued, in which feveral were wounded on both
fides.

The fort,a drawing of which has been left us by Cham-
plain, was fituated a few miles fouth of the eaftern terminus
of Oneida Lake, on a fmall ftream that winds its way in a
northwefterly dire¢tion, and finally lofes itfelf in the fame
body of water. This rude military ftructure was hexagonal
in form, one of its fides bordering immediately upon a

{mall pond, while four of the other laterals, two on the
17 right

130

Memoir of

1615.

right and two on the left, were wafhed by a channel of water
flowing along their bafes.* The fide oppofite the pond alone

88 There has naturally been fome
difficulty in fixing fatisfactorily the fite
of the Iroquois fort attacked by Cham-
plain and his allies.

The fources of information on which
we are to rely in identifying the fite of
this fort are in general the fame that we
refort to in fixing any locality mentioned
in his explorations, and are to be found in
Champlain’s journal of this expedition,
the map contained in what is commonly
called his edition of 1632, and the en-
graved picture of the fort executed by
Champlain himfelf, which was publifhed
in conne¢tion with his journal. The
information thus obtained is to be con-
fidered in connetion with the natural
features of the country through which
the expedition paffed, with fuch allow-
ance for inexaétness as the hiftory, na-
ture, and circumftances of the evidence
render neceffary.

The map of 1632 is only at beft an
outline, drafted on a very fmall scale,
and without any exact meafurements
or actual furveys. It pictures general
features, and in connection with the
journal may be of great fervice.

Champlain’s diftances, as given in his
journal, are eftimates made under cir-
cumftances in which accuracy was
fcarcely poffible. He was journeying
along the border of lakes and over the
face of the country, in company with
fome hundreds of wild favages, hunting
and fifhing by the way, marching in an
irregular and defultory manner, and his
ftatements of diftances are wifely ac-
companied by very wide margins, and
are of little fervice, taken alone, in fix-
ing the fite of an Indian town. But
when natural features, not fubject to
change, are defcribed, we can eafily
comprehend the meaning of the text.

had

The engraving of the fort may or may
not have been fketched by Champlain
on the fpot: parts of it may have been
and doubtlefs were fupplied by memory,
and it is decifive authority, not in its
minor, but in its general features.

With thefe obfervations, we are pre-
pared to examine the evidence that
points to the fite of the Iroquois fort.

When the expedition, emerging from
Quinté Bay, arrived at the eaftern end
of Lake Ontario, at the point where the
lake ends and the River St. Lawrence
begins, they croffed over the lake, pafl-
ing large and beautiful iflands. Some
of thefe iflands will be found laid down
on the map of 1632. They then pro-
ceeded, a diftance, according to their
eftimation, of about fourteen leagues, to
the fouthern fide of Lake Ontario, where
they landed and concealed their canoes.
The diftance to the fouthern fide of the
lake is too indefinitely ftated, even if
we knew at what precife point the meaf-
urement began, to enable us to fix the
exact place of the landing.

They marched along the fandy fhore
about four leagues, and then ftruck in-
land. If we turn to the map of 1632, on
which a line is drawn to rudely repre-
fent their courfe, we fhall fee that on
ftriking inland they proceeded along the
banks of a fmall river to which feveral
fmall lakes or ponds are tributary. Little
Salmon River being fed by numerous
fmall ponds or lakes may well be the
ftream figured by Champlain. The text
fays they difcovered an excellent coun-
try along the lake before they ftruck in-
land, with fine foreft-trees, efpecially the
cheftnut, with abundance of vines. For
feveral miles along Lake Ontario on the
north-eaft of Little Salmon River the
country anfwers to this defcription.

—Ni

1615 Samuel de

=

Champlain. 131

had an.unobftructed land approach. As an Indian military

work, it was of great ftrength.

—Vide MS. Letters of the Rev. Fames
Cross, D.D., LL.D, and of S. D. Smith,
Efg., of Mexico, N.Y.

The text fays they continued their
courfe about twenty-five or thirty
leagues. This again is indefinite, al-
lowing a margin of twelve or fifteen
miles ; but the text alfo fays they crofled
a river flowing from a lake in which
were certain beautiful iflands, and more-
over that the river fo croffed difcharged
into Lake Ontario. The lake here re-
ferred to muft be the Oneida, fince that
is the only one in the region which con-
tains any iflands whatever, and there-
fore the river they croffed muft be the
Oneida River, flowing from the lake of
the fame name into Lake Ontario.

Soon after they croffed Oneida River,
they met a band of favages who were
going fifhing, whom they made prifon-
ers. This occurred, the text informs
us, when they were about four leagues
from the fort. They were now fome-
where fouth of Oneida Lake. If we
confult the map of 1632, we {hall find
reprefented on it an expanfe of water
from which a ftream is reprefented as
flowing into Lake Ontario, and which is
clearly Oneida Lake, and fouth of this
lake a ftream is reprefented as flowing
from the eaft in a northwefterly direc-
tion and entering this lake towards its
weftern extremity, which muft be Chit-
tenango Creek or one of its branches.
A fort or enclofed village is alfo figured
on the map, of fuch huge dimenfions that
it fubtends the angle formed by the creek
and the lake, and appears to reft upon
both. Itis plain, however, from the text
that the fort does not reft upon Oneida
Lake; we may infer therefore that it
refted upon the creek figured on the
map, which from its courfe, as we have

It was made of the trunks of
trees,

already feen, is clearly intended to rep-
refent Chittenango Creek or one of its
branches. A note explanatory of the
map informs us that this is the village
where Champlain went to war againtt
the ‘ Antouhonorons,” that is to fay,
the Iroquois. The text informs us that
the fort was on a pond, which furnifhed
a perpetual fupply of water. We there-
fore look for the fite of the ancient fort
on fome fmail body of water connected
with Chittenango Creek.

If we examine Champlain’s engraved
reprefentation of the fort, we fhall fee
that it is fituated on a peninfula, that
one fide refts on a pond, and that two
ftreams pafs it, one on the right and
one on the left, and that one fide only
has an unobftruéted land - approach.
Thefe channels of water courfing along
the fides are fuch marked characterif-
tics of the fort as reprefented by Cham-
plain, that they muft be regarded as im-
portant features in the identification of
its ancient fite.

On Nichols’s Pond, near the north-
eaftern limit of the townfhip of Fenner
in Madifon County, N.Y., the fite of
an Indian fort was fome years fince dif-
covered, identified as fuch by broken
bits of pottery and ftone implements,
fuch as are ufually found in localities of
this fort. It is fituated on a peculiarly
formed peninfula, its northern fide reft-
ing on Nichols’s Pond, while a fmall
ftream flowing into the pond forms its
weftern boundary, and an outlet of the
pond about thirty-two rods eaft of the
inlet, running in a fouth-eafterly direc-
tion, forms the eaftern limit of the fort.
The outlet of this pond, deflecting to
the eaft and then fweeping round to the
north, at length finds its way in a wind-
ing courfe into Cowafhalon Creek, thence

into

oak pacer nal caw rm, eng

se

132 Memow of 615,

trees, as large as could be conveniently tranfported. Thefe
were fet in the ground, forming four concentric palifades, not
more than fix inches apart, thirty feet in height, interlaced and
bound together near the top, fupporting a gallery of double
paling extending around the whole enclofure, proof not only
againft the flint-headed arrows of the Indian, but againft the
leaden bullets of the French arquebus. Port-holes were
opened along the gallery, through which effective fervice
could be done upon affailants by hurling ftones and other
miffiles with which they were well provided. Gutters were
laid along between the palifades to conduct water to every

into the Chittenango, through which it
flows into Oneida Lake, at a point north-
weft of Nichols’s Pond.

If we compare the geographical fitua-
tion of Champlain’s fort as figured on
his map of 1632, particularly with refer-
ence to Oneida Lake, we fhall obferve
a remarkable correfpondence between
it and the fite of the Indian fort at
Nichols’s Pond. Both are on the fouth
of Oneida Lake, and both are on
ftreams which flow into that lake by
running in a north-wefterly dire¢tion.
Moreover, the fite of the old fort at
Nichols’s Pond is fituated on a peninfula
like that of Champlain; and not only
so, but it is on a peninfula formed by a
pond on one fide, and by two ftreams of
water on two other oppofite fides; thus
fulfilling in a remarkable degree the
conditions contained in Champlain’s
drawing of the fort.

If the reader has carefully examined
and compared the evidences referred to
in this note, he will have feen that all
the diftinguifhing circumftances con-
tained in the text of Champlain’s jour-
nal, on the map of 1632, and in his
drawing of the fort, converge to and
point out this fpot on Nichols’s Pond,

part

as the probable fite of the palifaded
Iroquois town attacked by Champlain
in 1615.

We are indebted to General John S.
Clark, of Auburn, N.Y., for pointing out
and identifying the peninfula at Nich-
ols’s Pond as the fite of the Iroquois
fort. — Vide Shea’s Notes on Cham-
plain’s Expedition into Weftern New
York in 1615, and the Recent Identifi-
cation of the Fort, by General John S.
Clark, Penn/ylvania Magazine of Hif-
tory, Philadelphia, Vol. II. pp. 103-108 ;
alfo A Loft Point in Hiftory, by L. W.
Ledyard, Cazenovia Republican, Vol.
XXV. No. 47; Champlain’s Invafion
of Onondaga, by the Rev. W. M. Beau-
champ, Baldwinfville Gazette, for June
27, 1879.

We are indebted to Orfamus H. Mar-
fhall, Efq., of Buffalo, N.Y., for proving
the fite of the Iroquois fort to be in the
neighborhood of Oneida Lake, and not
at a point farther weft as claimed by
feveral authors. — Vide Proceedings of
the New York Hiftorical Society for
1849, p. 96; Magazine of American
fiftory, New York, Vol. I. pp: I-13;
Vol. II. pp. 470-483.

NN

1615. Samuel de Champlain. 133

part of the fortification for extinguifhing fire, in cafe of
need.

It was obvious to Champlain that this fort was a complete
protection to the Iroquois, unlefs an opening could be made
in its walls. This could not be eafily done by any force
which he and his allies had at their command. His only
hope was in fetting fire to the palifades on the land fide.
This required the diflodgement of the enemy, who were pofted

li in large numbers on the gallery, and the protection of the
B Het men in kindling the fire, and fhielding it, when kindled,
‘ae againft the extinguifhing torrents which could be poured

from the water-fpouts and gutters of the fort. He confe-
quently ordered two inftruments to be made with which
he hoped to overcome thefe obftacles. One was a wooden
tower or frame-work, dignified by Champlain as a cavalier,
fomewhat higher than the palifades, on the top of which
was an enclofed platform where three or four fharp-fhooters
could in fecurity clear the gallery, and thus deftroy the effec-
tive force of the enemy. The other was a large wooden
fhield, or manzele¢é, under the protection of which they could
in fafety approach and kindle a fire at the bafe of the fort,
and protect the fire thus kindled from being extinguifhed by
water coming from above.

When all was in readinefs, two hundred favages bore the
framed tower and planted it near the palifades. Three ar-
quebusiers mounted it and poured a deadly fire upon the
defenders on the gallery. The battle now began and raged
fiercely for three hours, but Champlain ftrove in vain to carry
out any plan of attack. The favages rufhed to and fro in a
frenzy of excitement, filling the air with their difcordant

yells,

if
f
+

ae

ns

i

Soe ener

< bebz

134 Memoir of 1615.

yells, obferving no method and heeding nocommands. The
wooden fhields were not even brought forward, and the burn-
ing of the fort was undertaken with fo little judgment and
{kill that the fire was inftantly extinguifhed by the fountains
of water let loofe by the fkilful defenders through the gut-
ters and water-{pouts of the fort.

The fharp-fhooters on the tower killed and wounded a
large number, but neverthelefs no effective impreffion was
made upon the fortrefs. Two chiefs and fifteen men of the
allies were wounded, while one was killed, or died of wounds
received in a f{kirmifh before the formal attack upon the fort
began. After a frantic and defultory fight of three hours,
the attacking favages loft their courage and began to clamor
for a retreat. No perfuafions could induce them to renew
the attack.

After lingering four days in vain expe¢tation of the ar-
rival of the allies to whom Brilé had been fent, the retreat
began. Champlain had been wounded in the knee and leg,
and was unable to walk. Litters in the form of bafkets
were fabricated, into which the wounded were packed in a
conftrained and uncomfortable attitude, and carried on the
fhoulders of the men. As the tafk of the carriers was
lightened by frequent relays, and, as there was little bag-
gage to impede their progrefs, the march was rapid. In
three days they had reached their canoes, which had re-
mained in the place of their concealment near the fhore
of the lake, an eftimated diftance of twenty-five or thirty
leagues from the fort.

Such was the character of a great battle among the con-
tending favages, an undifciplined hoft, without plan or well-

defined

SS

16r5. Samuel de Champlain. $y

defined purpofe, rufhing in upon each other in the heat of a
fudden frenzy of paffion, ftriking an aimlefs blow, and follow-
ing it by a hafty and cowardly retreat. They had, for the
time being at leaft, no ulterior defign. They fought and ex-
pected no fubftantial reward of their confli@. The {weet-
nefs of perfonal revenge and the blotting out a few human
lives were all they hoped for or cared at this time to attain.
The invading party had apparently deftroyed more than they
had themfelves loft, and this was doubtlefs a fuitable reward
for the hazards and hardthips of the campaign.

The retreating warriors lingered ten days on the fhore of
Lake Ontario, at the point where they had left their canoes,
beguiling the time in preparing for hunting and fifhing ex-
curfions, and for their journey to their diftant homes. Cham.
plain here took occafion to call the attention of the allies to
their promife to condu@ him fafely to his home. The
head of the St. Lawrence as it flows from the Ontario is lefs
than two hundred miles from Montreal, a journey by canoes
not difficult to make. Champlain defired to return this way,
and demanded an efcort. The chiefs were reluGant to grant
his requeft. Mafters in the art of making excufes, they faw
many infuperable obftacles. In reality, they did not defire
to part with him, but wifhed to avail themfelves of his
knowledge, counfel, and perfonal aid again{t their enemies.
When one obftacle after another gave way, and when volun-
teers were found ready to accompany him, no canoes could
be fpared for the journey. This clofed the debate. Cham-
plain was not prepared for the expofure and hardfhip of a
winter among the favages, but there was left to him no

choice. He fubmitted as gracefully as he could, and with
fuch

136 Memoir of 1615,

fuch patience as neceffity made it poffible for him to com-
mand.

The bark flotilla was at length ready to leave the borders
of the prefent State of New York. According to their
ufual cuftom in canoe navigation, they crept along the fhore
of the Ontario, revifiting an ifland at the eaftern extremity
of the lake, not unlikely the fame place where Champlain
had ftopped to take the latitude a few weeks before. Crofl-
ing over from the ifland to the mainland on the north, they
appear to have continued up the Cataraqui Creek eaft of
Kingfton, and, after a fhort portage, entered Loughborough
Lake, a fheet of water then renowned as a refort of water-
fowl in vaft numbers and varieties. Having bagged all
they defired, they proceeded inland twenty or thirty miles,
to the objective point of their excurfion, which was a fa-
mous hunting-ground for wild game. Here they conftruct-
ed a deer-trap, an enclofure into which the unfufpecting
animals were beguiled and from which it was impoffible for
them to efcape. Deer-hunting was of all purfuits, if we
except war, the moft exciting to the Indians. It not only
yielded the richeft returns to their larder, and fupplied more
fully other domeftic wants, but it poffeffed the element of
fafcination, which has always given zeft and infpiration to
the fportfman.

They lingered here thirty-eight days, during which time they
captured one hundred and twenty deer. They purpofely
prolonged their ftay that the froft might feal up the marfhes,
ponds, and rivers over which they were to pafs. Early in
December they began to arrange into convenient packages
their peltry and venifon, the fat of which was to ferve as

butter

bof
WW

-

1615. Samuel de Champlain. 137

butter in their rude huts during the icy months of winter.
On the 4th of the month they broke camp and began their
weary march, each favage bearing a burden of not lefs than
a hundred pounds, while Champlain himfelf carried a pack-
age of about twenty. Some of them conftruGted rude
fledges, on which they eafily dragged their luggage over the
ice and fnow. During the progrefs of the journey, a warm
current came {weeping up from the fouth, melted the ice,
flooded the marthes, and for four days the overburdened and
weary travellers ftruggled on, knee-deep in mud and water
and flufh. Without experience, a lively imagination alone
can picture the toil, fuffering, and expofure of a journey
through the tangled forefts and half-fubmerged bogs and
marfhes of Canada, in the moft inclement feafon of the
year.

At length, on the 23d of December, after nineteen days
of exceffive toil, they arrived at Cahiagueé, the chief town of
the Hurons, the rendezvous of the allied tribes, whence they
had fet forth on the firft of September, nearly four months
before, on what may feem to us a bootlefs raid. To the fav-
age warriors, however, it doubtlefs feemed a different thing.
They had been enabled to bring home valuable provifions,
which were likely to be important to them when an unfuc-
cefsful hunt might, as it often did, leave them nearly deftitute
of food. They had loft but a fingle man, and this was lef
than they had anticipated, and, moreover, was the common
fortune of war. They had invaded the territory and made
their prefence felt in the very home of their enemies, and
could rejoice in having inflicted upon them more injury than
they had themfelves received. Though they had not —

ture

an, +s S
RIE REE

138 Memoir of 1615.

tured or annihilated them, they had done enough to infpire
and fully fuftain their own grovelling pride.

To Champlain even, although the expedition had been ac-
companied by hardfhip and fuffering and fome difappoint-
ments, it was by no means a failure. He had explored an
interefting and important region; he had gone where Euro-
pean feet had never trod, and had feen what European eyes
had never feen ; he had, moreover, planted the lilies of France
in the chief Indian towns, and at all fuitable and important
points, and thefe were to be witneffes of poffeffion and
ownerfhip in what his exuberant imagination faw as a vaft
French empire rifing into power and opulence if the weft-
ern world.

It was now the laft week in December, and the deep
fnows and piercing cold rendered it impoffible for Champlain
or even the allied warriors to continue their journey further.
The Algonquins and Nipiffings became guefts of the Hu-
rons for the winter, encamping within their principal walled
town, or perhaps in fome neighboring village not far re-
moved.

After the reft of a few days at Cahiagué, where he had
been hofpitably entertained, Champlain took his departure
for Carhagouha, a fmaller village, where his friend the Recol-
leét Father, Jofeph le Caron, had taken up his abode as the
pioneer miffionary to the Hurons. It was important for Le
Caron to obtain all the information poffible, not only of the
Hurons, but of all the furrounding tribes, as he contem-
plated returning to France the next fummer to report to his
patrons upon the character, extent, and hopefulnefs of the
miffionary field which he had been fent out to explore.

Champlain

If,

fa
ty

ee

1615. Samuel de Champlain. 139

Champlain was happy to avail himfelf of his company in
executing the explorations which he defired to make.

They accordingly fet out together on the 15th of January,
and penetrated the tracklefs and fnow-bound forefts, and, pro-
ceeding in a weftern direction, after a journey of two days,
reached a tribe called Pe¢wus, an agricultural people, fimilar
in habits and mode of life to the Hurons. By them they
were hofpitably received, and a great feftival, in which all
their neighbors participated, was celebrated in honor of their
new guefts. Having vifited feven or eight of their villages,
the explorers pufhed forward ftill further weft, when they
came to the fettlement of an interefting tribe, which they
named Cheveux-Relevés, or the “ lofty haired,” an appellation
fuggefted by the mode of dreffing their hair.

On their return from this expedition, they found, on reach-
ing the encampment of the Nipiffings, who were wintering
in the Huron territory, that a difagreement had arifen be-
tween the Hurons and their Algonquin guefts, which had
already affumed a dangerous character. An Iroquois cap-
tive taken in the late war had been awarded to the Algon-
quins, according to the cuftom of dividing the prifoners
among the feveral bands of allies, and, finding him a {kilful
hunter, they refolved to fpare his life, and had adtually
adopted him as one of their tribe. This had offended the
Hurons, who expected he would be put to the ufual torture,
and they had commiffioned one of their number, who had
inftantly killed the unfortunate prifoner by plunging a knife
into his heart. The affaffin, in turn, had been fet upon by
the Algonquins and put to death on the fpot. The perpe-

trators of this laft act had regretted the occurrence, and had
done

140 Memow of 1616.

done what they could to heal the breach by prefents: but
there was, neverthelefs, a fmouldering feeling of hoftility ftill
lingering in both parties, which might at any moment break
out into open conflict.

It was obvious to Champlain that a permanent difagree-
ment between thefe two important allies would be a great
calamity to themfelves as well as difaftrous to his own plans.
It was his purpofe, therefore, to bring them, if poffible, to a
cordial pacification. Proceeding cautioufly and with great
deliberation, he made himfelf acquainted with all the facts
of the quarrel, and then called an affembly of both parties
and clearly fet before them in all its lights the utter foolifh-
nefs of allowing a circumftance of really fmall importance
to interfere with an alliance between two great tribes; an
alliance neceffary to their profperity, and particularly in the
war they were carrying on againft their common enemy, the
Iroquois. This appeal of Champlain was fo convincing that
when the affembly broke up all profeffed themfelves entirely
fatisfied, although the Algonquins were heard to mutter their
determination never again to winter in the territory of the
Hurons, a wife and not unnatural conclufion.

Champlain’s conftant intercourfe with thefe tribes for many
months in their own homes, his explorations, obfervations,
and inquiries, enabled him to obtain a comprehenfive, defi-
nite, and minute knowledge of their character, religion,
government, and mode of life. As the fruit of thefe invef-
tigations, he prepared in the leifure of the winter an elabo-
rate memoir, replete with difcriminating details, which is and
mutt always be an unqueftionable authority on the fubject of

which it treats.
CHAPTER IX.

——_ _—)—

NO

1616. Samuel de Champlain. 141

CHAPTER IX.

CHAMPLAIN’S RETURN FROM THE HURON COUNTRY AND VOYAGE TO FRANCE.
— THE CONTRACTED VIEWS OF THE COMPANY OF MERCHANTS, — THE
PRINCE DE CONDE SELLS THE VICEROYALTY TO THE DUKE DE Monrt-
MORENCY. — CHAMPLAIN WITH HIS WIFE RETURNS TO QUEBEC, WHERE
HE REMAINS FouR YEARS.— HAVING REPAIRED THE BUILDINGS AND
ERECTED THE FORTRESS OF ST. LOUIS, CHAMPLAIN RETURNS TO FRANCE.
— THE VICEROYALTY TRANSFERRED TO HENRY DE LEVI, AND THE COM-
PANY OF THE HUNDRED ASSOCIATES ORGANIZED.

Za BOUT the 20th of May, Champlain, accompa-

nied by the miffionary, Le Caron, efcorted by a

delegation of favages, fet out from the Huron

capital, in the prefent county of Simcoe, on
their return to Quebec. Purfuing the fame
circuitous route by which they had come, they were forty
days in reaching the Falls of St. Louis, near Montreal,
where they found Pont Grave, juft arrived from France, who,

with the reft, was much rejoiced at feeing Champlain, fince a

rumor had gone abroad that he had perifhed among the

favages.

The party arrived at Quebec on the 11th of July. A pub-
lic fervice of thankfgiving was celebrated by the Recolleét
Fathers for their fafe return. The Huron chief, D’Arontal,
with whom Champlain had paffed the winter and who had
accompanied him to Quebec, was greatly entertained and
delighted with the eftablifhment of the French, the buildings
and other acceffories of European life, fo different from his
own, and earneftly requefted Champlain to make a fettle-

ment at Montreal, that his whole tribe might come and
refide

142 Memowr of 1616.

refide near them, fafe under their proteCtion againft their
Iroquois enemies.

Champlain did not remain at Quebec more than ten days,
during which he planned and put in execution the enlarge-
ment of their houfes and fort, increafing their capacity by at
leaft one third. This he found neceffary to do for the greater
convenience of the little colony, as well as for the occafional
entertainment of ftrangers. He left for France on the 20th
day of July, in company with the Recollect Fathers, Jofeph
le Caron and Denis Jamay, the commiffary of the miffion,
taking with them fpecimens of French grain which had been
produced near Quebec, to teftify to the excellent quality of
the foil. They arrived at Honfleur in France on the roth
of September, 1616.

The exploration in the diftant Indian territories which
we have juft defcribed in the preceding pages was the lat
made by Champlain. He had plans for the furvey of other
regions yet unexplored, but the favorable opportunity did not
occur. Henceforth he directed his attention more exclu-
fively than he had hitherto done to the enlargement and
ftrengthening of his colonial plantation, without fuch fuccefs,
we regret to fay, as his zeal, devotion, and labors fitly de-
ferved. The obftacles that lay in his way were infurmount-
able. The eftablifhment or factory, we can hardly call it a
plantation, at Quebec, was the creature of a company of
merchants. They had invefted confiderable fums in fhip-
ping, buildings, and in the employment of men, in order to
carry on a trade in furs and peltry with the Indians, and they
naturally defired remunerative returns. This was the limit
of their purpofe in making the inveftment. The corpora-

tors

1618. Samuel de Champlain. 143

tors faw nothing in their organization but a commercial en-
terprife yielding immediate refults. They were infpired by
no generofity, no loyalty, or patriotifm that could draw from
them a farthing to increafe the wealth, power, or aggrandize-
ment of France. Under thefe circumftances, Champlain
ftruggled on for years againft a current which he could
barely direct, but by no means control.

Champlain made voyages to New France both in 1617 and
in 1618. In the latter year, among the Indians who came
to Quebec for the purpofe of trade, appeared Etienne Brule,
the interpreter, who it will be remembered had been de-
fpatched in 1615, when Champlain was among the Hurons,
to the Entouhonorons at Carantouan, to induce them to join
in the attack of the Iroquois in central New York. During
the three years that had intervened, nothing had been heard
from him. Brule related the ftory of his extraordinary ad-
ventures, which Champlain has preferved, and which may be
found in the report of the voyage of 1618, in Volume III.
of this work.™

At Quebec, he met numerous bands of Indians from remote

regions,

& The charaGter of Etienne Brulé,
either for honor or veracity, is not im-
proved by his fubfequent condu&. He
appears in 1629 to have turned traitor,
to have fold himfelf to the Englifh, and
to have piloted them up the river in
their expedition againft Quebec.
Whether this conduét, bafe certainly
it was, ought to affect the credibility
of his ftory, the reader muft judge.
Champlain undoubtedly believed it
when he firft related it to him. He
probably had no means then or after-
wards of tefting its truth. In the edi-
tion of 1632, Brulé’s ftory is omitted.

It does not neceffarily follow that it
was omitted becaufe Champlain came
to difcredit the ftory, fince many paf-
fages contained in his preceding publi-
cations are omitted in the edition of
1632, but they are not generally paflages
of fo much geographical importance as
this, if it be true. The map of 1632
indicates the country of the Carantou-
anais; but this information might have
been obtained by Champlain from the
Hurons, or the more weftern tribes
which he vifited during the winter of
1615-16. — Vide ed. 1632, p. 220.

144 Memow of 1618,

regions, whom he had vifited in former years, and who, in ful-
filment of their promifes, had come to barter their peltry for
fuch commodities as fuited their need or fancy, and to renew
and ftrengthen their friendfhip with the French. By thefe re-
peated interviews, and the cordial reception and generous
entertainment which he always gave them, the Indians
dwelling on the upper waters of the Ottawa, along the bor-
ders of Lake Huron, or on the Georgian Bay, formed a
{trong perfonal attachment to Champlain, and yearly brought
down their fleets of canoes heavily freighted with the valu-
able furs which they had diligently fecured during the pre-
ceding winter. His perfonal influence with them, a power
which he exercifed with great delicacy, wifdom, and fidelity,
contributed largely to the revenues annually obtained by the
affociated merchants.

But Champlain defired more than this. He was not fat-
isfied to be the agent and chief manager of a company or-
ganized merely for the purpofe of trade. He was anxious
to elevate the meagre factory at Quebec into the dignity and
national importance of a colonial plantation. For this pur-
pofe he had tefted the foil by numerous experiments, and
had, from time to time, forwarded to France fpecimens of
ripened grain to bear teftimony to its productive quality.
He even laid the fubjeét before the Council of State, and
they gave it their cordial approbation. By thefe means giv-
ing emphafis to his perfonal appeals, he fucceeded at length
in extorting from the company a promife to enlarge the ef-
tablifhment to eighty perfons, with fuitable equipments, farm-
ing implements, all kinds of feeds and domeftic animals,
including cattle and fheep. But when the time came, this

promife

1619. Samuel de Champlain. 145

promife was not fulfilled. Differences, bickerings, and feuds
{prang up in the company. Some wanted one thing, and
fome wanted another. Even religion caft in an apple of dif
cord. The Catholics wifhed to extend the faith of their
church into the wilds of Canada, while the Huguenots de-
fired to prevent it, or at leaft not to promote it by their own
contributions. The company, infpired by avarice and a de-
fire to reftrict the eftablifhment to a mere trading poft, raifed
an iffue to difcredit Champlain. It was gravely propofed
that he fhould devote himfelf exclufively to exploration, and
that the government and trade fhould henceforth be under
the direction and control of Pont Gravé. But Champlain
was not a man to be ejected from an official pofition by thofe
who had neither the authority to give it to him or the power
to take it away. Pont Grave was his intimate, long-tried,
and trufted friend; and, while he regarded him with filial
refpect and affection, he could not yield, even to him, the
rights and honors which had been accorded to him as a rec-
ognition, if not a reward, for many years of faithful fervice,
which he had rendered under circumftances of perfonal
hardfhip and danger. The king addreffed a letter to the
company, in which he direéted them to aid Champlain as
much as poffible in making explorations, in fettling the
country, and cultivating the foil, while with their agents in
the traffic of peltry there fhould be no interference. But
the fpirit of avarice could not be fubdued by the mandate of
the king. The affociated merchants were ftill obftinate.
Champlain had intended to take his family to Canada that
year, but he declined to make the voyage under any impli-
cation of a divided authority. The veffel in which he was

19 to

1619.

Memoir of

146

to fail departed without him, and Pont Grave fpent the
winter in charge of the company’s affairs at Quebec.

Champlain, in the mean time, took fuch active meafures
as feemed neceffary to eftablifh his authority as lieutenant of
the viceroy, or governor of New France. He appeared be-
fore the Council of State at Tours, and after an elaborate
argument and thorough difcuffion of the whole fubject, ob-
tained a decree ordering that he fhould have the command
at Quebec and at all other fettlements in New France, and
that the company fhould abftain from any interference with
him in the difcharge of the duties of his office.

The Prince de Condé having recently been liberated from
an imprifonment of three years, governed by his natural ava-
rice, was not unwilling to part with his viceroyalty, and early
in 1620 transferred it, for the confideration of eleven thoufand
crowns, or about five hundred and fifty pounds fterling, to
his brother-in-law, the Duke de Montmorency,* at that time
high-admiral of France. The new viceroy appointed Cham-
plain his lieutenant, who immediately prepared to leave for
Quebec. But when he arrived at Honfleur, the company,
difpleafed at the recent change, again brought forward the
old queftion of the authority which the lieutenant was to
exercife in New France. The time for difcuffion had, how-
ever, paffed. No further words were now to be watfted.

The

adopted the party of Gafton, the Duke

8 Henry de Montmorency II. was
of Orleans, and having excited the

born at Chantilly in 1595, and was be-

headed at Touloufe Oct. 30, 1632. He
was created admiral at the age of feven-
teen. He commanded the Dutch fleet
at the fiege of Rochelle. He made the
campaigns of 1629 and 1630 in Pied-
mont, and was created a marfhal of
France after the victory of Veillane. He

province of Languedoc of which he was
governor to rebellion, he was defeated,
and executed as guilty of high treafon.
He was the laft fcion of the elder
branch of Montmorency, and his death
was a fatal blow to the reign of feu-
dalifm.

1620. Samuel de Champlain. 147

The viceroy fent them a peremptory order to defift from fur-
ther interferences, or otherwife their fhips, already equipped
for their yearly trade, would not be permitted to leave port.
This meffage from the high-admiral of France came with
authority and had the defired effect.

Early in May, 1620, Champlain failed from Honfleur, ac-
companied by his wife and feveral Recolle¢t friars, and, after
a voyage of two months, arrived at Tadouffac, where he was
cordially’ greeted by his brother-in-law, Euftache Boullé, who
was very much aftonifhed at the arrival of his fifter, and par-
ticularly that fhe was brave enough to encounter the dangers
of the ocean and take up her abode in a wildernefs at once
barren of both the comforts and refinements of European
life.

On the rith of July, Champlain left Tadouffac for Que-
bec, where he found the whole eftablifhment, after an abfence
of two years, in a condition of painful negleét and diforder.
He was cordially received, and becoming ceremonies were
obferved to celebrate his arrival. A fermon compofed for
the occafion was delivered by one of the Recolle@t Fathers,
the commiffion of the king and that of the viceroy appoint-
ing him to the fole command of the colony were publicly
read, cannon were difcharged, and the little populace, from
loyal hearts, loudly vociferated Vive le Roy /

The attention of the lieutenant was at firft dire@ted to ref-
toration and repairs. The roof of the buildings no longer
kept out the rain, nor the walls the piercing fury of the
winds. The gardens were in a ftate of ruinous neglect, and
the fields poorly and fcantily cultivated. But the zeal, en-
ergy, and induftry of Champlain foon put every thing in

repair,

148 Memo of 1621.

repair, and gave to the little fettlement the afpect of neat-
nefs and thrift. When this was accomplifhed, he laid the
foundations of a fortrefSs, which he called the Fort Saint
Louis, fituated on the creft of the rocky elevation in the
rear of the fettlement, about a hundred and feventy-two feet
above the furface of the river, a pofition which commanded
the whole breadth of the St. Lawrence at that narrow point.
This work, fo neceffary for the protection and fafety of
the colony, involving as it did fome expenfe, was by no
means fatisfactory to the Company of Affociates. Their
general fault-finding and chronic difcontent led the Duke
de Montmorency to adopt heroic meafures to filence their
complaints. In the fpring of 1621, he fummarily dif-
folved the affociation of merchants, which he denominated
the “Company of Rouen and St. Malo,” and eftablifhed
another in its place. Hecontinued Champlain in the office
of lieutenant, but committed all matters relating to trade to
William de Caen, a merchant of high ftanding, and to Eme-
ric de Caen the nephew of the former, a good naval captain.
This new and hafty reorganization, arbitrary if not illegal,
however important it might feem to the profperity and fuc-
cefs of the colony, laid upon Champlain new refponfibilities
and duties at once delicate and difficult to difcharge. Though
in form fuppreffed, the company did not yield either its ex-
iftence or its rights. Both the old and the new company
were, by their agents, early in New France, clamoring for
their

8° Among other annoyances which fupplied the Indians with fire-arms and
Champlain had to contend againft was ammunition. This was illegal, and en-
the contraband trade carried on by the dangered the fafety of the colony. —
unlicenfed Rochellers, who not only Vide Voyages par De Champlain, Paris,
carried off quantities of peltry, but even 1632, Sec. Partie, p. 3.

ht 1621. Samuel de Champlain. 149

their refpetive interefts. De Caen, in behalf of the new,
infifted that the lieutenant ought to prohibit all trade with
the Indians by the old company, and, moreover, that he
ought to feize their property and hold it as fecurity for their
unpaid obligations. Champlain, having no written authority
for fuch a proceeding, and De Caen declining to produce
any, did not approve the meafure and declined to a@t. The
yt threats of De Caen that he would take the matter into his
own hands, and feize the veffel of the old company com-
manded by Pont Grave and then in port, were fo violent
that Champlain thought it prudent to place a body of armed
men in his little fort ftill unfinifhed, until the fury of the
altercation fhould fubfide.” This decifive meafure, and time,
the natural emollient of irritated tempers, foon reftored
peace to the contending parties, and each was allowed to
carry on its trade unmolefted by the other. The prudence
of Champlain’s conduct was fully juftified, and the two com-
panies, by mutual confent, were, the next year, confolidated
into one.

Champlain remained at Quebec four years before again
returning to France. His time was divided between many
local enterprifes of great importance. His fpecial attention
was given to advancing the work on the unfinifhed fort, in
order to provide againft incurfions of the hoftile Iroquois,"
who at one time approached the very walls of Quebec, and
attacked unfuccefsfully the guarded houfe of the Recollects
on the St. Charles.° He undertook the reconftru€tion of

the

8 Vide ed. 1632, Sec. Partie, Chap. IIT. 89 The houfe of the Recolleéts on the
88 Vide Hift. New France, by Char- St. Charles was ereéted in 1620, and
levoix, Shea’s Trans., Vol. II. p. 32. was called the Conuent de Noftre
Dame

150 Memo of 1624,

the buildings of the fettlement from their foundations. The
main ftructure was enlarged to a hundred and eight feet”
in length, with two wings of fixty feet each, having fmall
towers at the four corners. In front and on the borders of
the river a platform was erected, on which were placed can-
non, while the whole was furrounded by a ditch fpanned by
drawbridges.

Having placed every thing at Quebec in as good order as
his limited means would permit, and given orders for the
completion of the works which he had commenced, leaving
Emeric de Caen in command, Champlain determined to re-
turn to France with his wife, who, though devoted to a relig-
ious life, we may well fuppofe was not unwilling to exchange
the rough, monotonous, and dreary mode of living at Que-
bec for the more congenial refinements to which fhe had
always been accuftomed in her father’s family near the court
of Louis XIII. He accordingly failed on the 15th of Au-
guft, and arrived at Dieppe on the 1ft of Oftober, 1624.
He haftened to St. Germain, and reported to the king and
the viceroy what had occurred and what had been done dur-
ing the four years of his abfence.

The interefts of the two companies had not been adjufted
and they were ftill in conflict. The Duke de Montmo-
rency about this time negotiated a fale of his viceroyalty to
his nephew, Henry de Levi, Duke de Ventadour. This no-

bleman,
Dame des Anges.’ The Father Jean rigue Septentrionale 1637, par Pierre

d’Olbeau laid the firft ftone on the 3d
of June of that year. — Vide Hiftoire du
Canada par Gabriel Sagard, Paris,
1636, Trofs ed., 1866, p. 67; Décou-
vertes et Etabliffements des Francais,
dans Poueft et dans le fud de L’ Ame-

Margry, Paris, 1876, Vol. I. p. 7.

% Hundred and eight feet, dix-huit
toyfes. The Zoz/ is here eftimated at fix
feet. Compare Voyages de Champlain,
Laverditre’s ed., Vol. I. p. lii, and ed.
1632, Paris, Partie Seconde, p. 63.

A

1626. Samuel de Champlain. 151

bleman, of a deeply religious caft of mind, had taken holy
orders, and his chief purpofe in obt: uning the viceroyalty
was to encourage the planting of Catholic ‘miffions in New
France. As bs {piritual directors were Jefuits, he naturally
committed the work to them. Three fathers and two lay
brothers of this order were fent to Canada in 1625, and oth-
ers fubfequently joined them. Whatever were the fruits of
their labors, many of them perifhed in their heroic under-
taking, manfully fuffering the exquifite pains of mutilation
and torture.

Champlain was reappointed lieutenant, but remained in
France two years, fully occupied with public and private du-
ties, and in frequent confultations with the viceroy as to the
beft method of advancing the future interefts of the colony.
On the 15th of April, 1626, with Euftache Boullé, his brother-
in-law, who had been named his affiftant or lieutenant, he
again failed for Quebec, where he arrived on the sth of July.
He found the colonifts in excellent health, but neverthelefs
approaching the borders of ftarvation, having nearly ex-
haufted their provifions. The work that he had laid out to
be done on he buildings had been entirely negleéted. One
important reafon for this neglect, was the neceffary employ-
ment of a large number of the moft efficient laborers, for the
chief part of the fummer in obtaining forage for their cattle
in winter, collecting it at a diftance of twe enty- -five or thirty
miles from the Gitlement, To obviate this inconvenience,
Champlain took an early opportunity to erect a farm-houfe
near the natural meadows at Cape Tourmente, where the

cattle could be kept with little attendance, a appointing at the
fame time an overfeer for the men, and making a weekly
vifit

152 Memo of 1627.

vifit to this eftablifhment for perfonal infpection and over-
fight.

The fort, which had been erected on the creft of the
rocky height in the rear of the dwelling, was obvioufly too
{mall for the protection of the whole colony in cafe of an
attack by hoftile favages. He confequently took it down
and ereéted another on the fame fpot, with earthworks on
the land fide, where alone, with difficulty, it could be ap-
proached. He alfo made extenfive repairs upon the ftore-
houfe and dwelling.

During the winter of 1626-27, the friendly Indians, the
Montagnais, Algonquins, and others gave Champlain much
anxiety by unadvifedly entering into an alliance, into which
they were enticed by bribes, with a tribe dwelling near the
Dutch, in the prefent State of New York, to affift them
againft their old enemies, the Iroquois, with whom, however,
they had for fome time been at peace. Champlain juftly
looked upon this foolifh undertaking as hazardous not only
to the profperity of thefe friendly tribes, but to their very
exiftence. He accordingly fent his brother-in-law to Three
Rivers, the rendezvous of the favage warriors, to convince
them of their error and avert their purpofe. Boullé fuc-
ceeded in obtaining a delay until all the tribes fhould be
affembled and until the trading veffels fhould arrive from
France. When Emeric de Caen was ready to go to Three
Rivers, Champlain urged upon him the great importance of
fuppreffing this impending conflict with the Iroquois. The
efforts of De Caen were, however, ineffectual. He forthwith
wrote to Champlain that his prefence was neceflary to arreft
thefe hoftile proceedings. On his arrival, a grand council

was

1627. Samuel de Champlain. 153

was affembled, and Champlain fucceeded, after a ful] {tate-
ment of all the evils that muft evidently follow, in reverfing
their decifion, and meffengers were fent to heal the breach.
Some weeks afterward news came that the embafladors were
inhumanly maffacred.

Crimes of a ferious nature were not unfrequently com-
mitted againft the French by Indians belonging to tribes,
with which they were at profound peace. On one occafion
two men, who were conducting cattle by land from Cape
Tourmente to Quebec, were affaffinated in a cowardly man-
ner. Champlain demanded of the chiefs that they fhould
deliver to him the perpetrators of the crime. They ex-
preffed genuine forrow for what had taken place, but were
unable to obtain the criminals. At length, after confulting
with the miffionary, Le Caron, they offered to prefent to
Champlain three young girls as pledges of their good faith,
that he might educate them in the religion and manners of
the French. The gift was accepted by Champlain, and
thefe favage maidens became exceedingly attached to their
fofter-father, as we fhall fee in the fequel.

The end of the year 1627 found the colony, as ufual, in a
depreffed ftate. Asa colony, it had never profpered. The
average number compofing it had not exceeded about fifty
perfons. At this time it may have been fomewhat more,
but did not reach a hundred. A fingle family only appears
to have fubfifted by the cultivation of the foil The reft

were

%l There was but one private houfe gard, Hift. du Canada, 1636, Trofs ed.
at Quebec in 1623, and that belonged Vol. I. p. 163. There were fifty-one
to Madame Hébert, whofe hufband was inhabitants at Quebec in 1624, includ-
the firft to attempt to obtain a living by ing men, women, and children, — Vide
the cultivation of the foil.— Vide Sa- Champlain, ed. 1632, p. 76.

20

a.
oe i ada a A a a ko a

Se AA vr ee RTL OR

;

4)

]

al

fae
Hed):

154 Memoir of 1627.

were fuftained by fupplies fent from France. From the be-
ginning difputes and contentions had prevailed in the cor-
poration. Endlefs bickerings fprung up between the Hu-
guenots and Catholics, each fenfitive and jealous of their
rights All expenditures were the fubjeét of cenforious
criticifm. The neceffary repairs of the fort, the enlargement
and improvement of the buildings from time to time, were too
often refifted as unneceffary and extravagant. The company,
as a mere trading affociation, was doubtlefs fuccefsful.
Large quantities of peltry were annually brought by the In-
dians for traffic to the Falls of St. Louis, Three Rivers,
Quebec, and Tadouffac. The average number of beaver-
fkins annually purchafed and tranfported to France was
probably not far from fifteen thoufand to twenty thoufand,
and in a moft favorable year it mounted up to twenty-two
thoufand The large dividends that they were able to make,
intimated by Champlain to be not far from forty per centum
yearly, were, of courfe, highly fatisfactory to the company.
They defired not to impair this chara¢teriftic of their enter-
prife. They had, therefore, a prime motive for not wifhing
to lay out a fingle unneceffary franc on the eftablifhment.

Their

%® Vide Champlain, ed. 1632, pp. from the Indians, and the amount, as

107, 108, for an account of the attempt
on the part of the Huguenot, Emeric de
Caen, to require his failors to chaunt
pfalms and fay prayers on board his
fhip after entering the River St. Law-
rence, contrary to the direétion of the
Viceroy, the Duke de Ventadour. As
two thirds of them were Huguenots, it
was finally agreed that they fhould con-
tinue to fay their prayers, but muft omit
their pfalm-finging.

98 Father Lalemant enumerates the
kind of peltry obtained by the French

follows: “En efchange ils emportent
des peaux d’Orignac, de Loup Ceruier,
de Renard, de Loutre, et quelquefois il
f’en rencontre de noires, de Martre, de
Blaireau et de Rat Musqué, mais prin-
cipalement de Caftor qui eft le plus
grand de leur gain. On m’a dit que
pour vne année ils en auoyent emporté
iufques & 22000. L’ordinaire de chaque
année eft de 15000, ou 20000, A vne pif-
tole la piece, ce n’eft pas mal allé.” —
Vide Rélation de la Nouvelle France en
Annee 1626, Quebec ed. p. 5.

{hing

c=

~

1627. Samuel de Champlain. 155

Their policy was to keep the expenfes at the minimum and
the net income at the maximum. Under thefe circum-
ftances, nearly twenty years had elapfed fince the founding
of Quebec, and it ftill poffeffed only the charaéter of a
trading poft, and not that of a colonial plantation. This
progrefs was fatisfactory neither to Champlain, to the vice-
roy, nor the council of ftate. In the view of thefe feveral
interefted parties, the time had come for a radical change in
the organization of the company. Cardinal de Richelieu
had rifen by his extraordinary ability as a ftatefman, a fhort
time anterior to this, into fupreme authority, and had af-
fumed the office of grand mafter and chief of the navigation
and commerce of France. His fagacious and comprehen-
five mind faw clearly the intimate and interdependent rela-
tions between thefe two great national interefts and the
enlargement and profperity of the French colonies in
America. He loft no time in organizing meafures which
fhould bring them into the clofeft harmony. The company
of merchants whofe finances had been fo {fkilfully managed
by the Caens was by him at once diffolved. A new one was
formed, denominated Za Compagnie de la Nouvelle-France,
confifting of a hundred or more members, and commonly
known as the Company of the Hundred Affociates. It was
under the control and management of Richelieu himfelf.
Its members were largely gentlemen in official pofitions
about the court, in Paris, Rouen, and other cities of France.
Among them were the Marquis Deffiat, fuperintendent of
finances, Claude de Roquemont, the Commander de Razilly,
Captain Charles Daniel, Sébaftien Cramoify, the diftinguifhed
Paris printer, Louis Houél, the controller of the falt works in

Brouage,

Sere FMR GOR APT ST ANT ENTER AE TRE RE TT

TT

Ceres

ee

ae ae RTET

ete ee

SLAY NERO

LR EO Ty oe Entre Tee yee toe tee

156 Memotr of 1627.

Brouage, Champlain, and others well known in public cir-
cles.

The new company had many characteriftics which feemed
to affure the folid growth and enlargement of the colony, Its
authority extended over the whole domain of New France
and Florida. It provided in its organization for an actual
capital of three hundred thoufand livres. It entered into an
obligation to fend to Canada in 1628 from two to three
hundred artifans of all trades, and within the fpace of fif-
teen years to tranfport four thoufand colonifts to New
France. The colonifts were to be wholly fupported by the
company for three years, and at the expiration of that pe-
riod were to be affigned as much land as they needed for
cultivation. The fettlers were to be native-born Frenchmen,
exclufively of the Catholic faith, and no foreigner or Hugue-
not was to be permitted to enter the country.* The char-
ter accorded to the company the exclufive control of trade,

and

%4 This exclufivenefs was character- their commonwealth thofe who differed

iftic of the age. Cardinal Richelieu
and his affociates were not qualified by
education or by any tendency of their
natures to inaugurate a reformation in
this direétion. The experiment of
amalgamating Catholic and Huguenot
in the enterprifes of the colony had been
tried but with ill fuccefs. Contentions
and bickerings had been inceffant, and
subverfive of peace and good neighbor-
hood. Neither party had the fpirit of
practical toleration as we underftand it,
and which we regard at the prefent day
as a pricelefs boon. Nor was it under-
ftood anywhere for a long time after-
ward. Even the Puritans of Maffachu-
fetts Bay did not comprehend it, and
took heroic meafures to exclude from

from them in their religious faith. We
certainly cannot cenfure them for not
being in advance of their times. It
would doubtlefs have been more manly
in them had they excluded all differing
from them by plain legal enaétment, as
did the Society of the Hundred Afio-
ciates, rather than to imprifon or banith
any on charges which all fubfequent gen-
erations muft pronounce unfuftained. —
Vide Memoir of the Rev. Fohn Wheel-
wright, by Charles H. Bell, Prince So-
ciety, ed. 1876, pp. 9-31 ef paffim,;
Hutchinfon Papers, Prince Society ed.,
1865, Vol. I. pp. 79-113. American
Criminal Trials, by Peleg W. Chandler,
Bofton, 1841, Vol. 1. p. 29.

a6 Samuel de Champlain. ry

and all goods manufactured in New France were to be free
of impofts on exportation. Befides thefe, it fecured to the
corporators other and various exclufive privileges of a femi-
feudal character, fuppofed, however, to contribute to the
profperity and growth of the colony.

The organization of the company, having received the for-
mal approbation of Richelieu on the 29th of April, 1627,
was ratified by the Council of State on the 6th of May,
1628.

CHAPTER X.

THE FAVORABLE PROSPECTS OF THE COMPANY OF NEW FRANCE, — THE
ENGLISH INVASION OF CANADA AND THE SURRENDER OF QUEBEC. —
CAPTAIN DANIEL PLANTS A FRENCH COLONY NEAR THE GRAND CIBou. —
CHAMPLAIN IN FRANCE, AND THE TERRITORIAL CLAIMS OF THE FRENCH
AND ENGLISH STILL UNSETTLED.

HE Company of New France, or of the Hun-
dred Affociates, loft no time in carrying out the
purpofe of its organization. Even before the
ratification of its charter by the council, four
armed veffels had been fitted out and had al-

ready failed under the command of Claude de Roquemont,

a member of the company, to convoy a fleet of eighteen

tranfports laden with emigrants and ftores, together with

one hundred and thirty-five pieces of ordnance to fortify
their fettlements in New France.

The company, thus compofed of noblemen, wealthy mer-
chants, and officials of great perfonal influence, with a large
capital, and Cardinal Richelieu, who really controlled and

fhaped

158 Memo of 1627.
fhaped the policy of France at that period, at its head, pof
feffed fo many elements of ftrength that, in the reafonable
judgment of men, fuccefs was affured, failure impoffible.%

To Champlain, the vifion of a great colonial eftablifhment
in New France, that had fo long floated before him in the
diftance, might well feem to be now almoft within his grafp.

But difappointment was near at hand. Events were al-
ready tranfpiring which were deftined to caft a cloud over
thefe brilliant hopes. A fleet of armed veffels was already
croffing the Atlantic, bearing the Englifh flag, with hoftile
intentions to the fettlements in New France. Here we mutt
paufe in our narrative to explain the origin, character, and
purpofe of this armament, as unexpected to Champlain as it
was unwelcome.

The reader muft be reminded that no boundaries between
the French and Englifh territorial poffeffions in North
America at this time exifted. Each of thefe great nations
was putting forth claims fo broad and extenfive as to utterly
exclude the other. By their refpective charters, grants, and
conceffions, they recognized no fovereignty or ownerfhip but
their own.

Henry IV. of France, made, in 1603, a grant to a favorite
nobleman, De Monts, of the territory lying between the for-
tieth and the forty-fixth degrees of north latitude. James I.
of England, three years later, in 1606, granted to the Vir-

ginia

% The affociation was a joint-ftock For a full ftatement of the organiza-
company. Each corporator was bound tion and contftitution of the Company of
to pay in three thoufand livres; and as New France, Vide Mercure Francots,
there were over a hundred, the quick Tome XIV. pp. 232-267. Vide alfo
capital amounted to over 300,000 livres. Charlevoix's Hift. New France, Shea’s

— Vide Mercure Francois, Paris, 1628, Trans. Vol. II. pp- 39-44.
Tome XIV. p. 250.

hy,

d, Naf

ment

In the

v

sap,
ele ah
1 over
) ]
leady
hofhle
é mut
ald

128 It

1627. Samuel de Champlain. 159

ginia Companies the territory lying between the thirty-fourth
and the forty-eighth degrees of north latitude, covering the
whole grant made by the French three years before. Creux-
ius, a French hiftorian of Canada, writing fome years later
than this, informs us that New France, that is, the French
poffeffions in North America, then embraced the immenfe
territory extending from Florida, or from the thirty-fecond
degree of latitude, to the polar circle, and in longitude from
Newfoundland to Lake Huron. It will, therefore, be feen
that each nation, the Englifh and the French, claimed at
that time fovereignty over the fame territory, and over nearly
the whole of the continent of North America. Under
thefe circumftances, either of thefe nations was prepared to
avail itfelf of any favorable opportunity to difpoffefs the
other.

The Englifh, however, had, at this period, particular and
fpecial reafons for defiring to accomplifh this important ob-
ject. Sir William Alexander,® Secretary of State for Scot-
land at the court of England, had received, in 1621, from
James I., a grant, under the name of New Scotland, of a
large territory, covering the prefent province of Nova Scotia,
New Brunfwick, and that part of the province of Quebec
lying eaft of a line drawn from the head-waters of the River
St. Croix in a northerly diretion to the River St. Lawrence.
He had affociated with him a large number of Scottifh no-
blemen and merchants, and was taking active meafures to
eftablifh Scottifh colonies on this territory. The French
had made a fettlement within its limits, which had been

broken

% Vide Sir William Alexander and American Colonization, Prince Society,
Bofton, 1873.

160 Memowr of . 1628.

broken up and the colony difperfed in 1613, by Captain
Samuel Argall, under the authority of Sir Thomas Dale,
governor of the colony at Jameftown, Virginia. A defultory
and ftraggling French population was {till in occupation, un-
der the nominal governorfhip of Claude La Tour. Sir Wil-
liam Alexander and his affociates naturally looked for more
or lefs inconvenience and annoyance from the claims of the
French. It was, therefore, an object of great perfonal im-
portance and particularly defired by him, to extinguifh all
French claims, not only to his own grant, but to the neigh-
boring fettlement at Quebec. If this were done, he might
be fure of being unmolefted in carrying forward his colonial
enterprife.

A war had broken out between France and England the
year before, for the oftenfible purpofe, on the part of the
Englith, of relieving the Huguenots who were fhut up in
the city of Rochelle, which was beleaguered by the armies
of Louis XIII., under the dire€tion of his prime minifter,
Richelieu, who was refolved to reduce this laft ftronghold to
obedience. The exiftence of this war offered an opportu-
nity and pretext for difpoffeffing the French and extinguith-
ing their claims under the rules of war. This object could
not be attained in any other way. The French were too
deeply rooted to be removed by any lefs violent or decifive
means. No time was, therefore, loft in taking advantage of
this opportunity.

Sir William Alexander applied himfelf to the formation of
a company of London merchants who fhould bear the ex-
penfe of fitting out an armament that fhould not only over-
come and take poffeffion of the French fettlements and forts

wherever

1628. Samuel de Champlain. 161

wherever they fhould be found, but plant colonies and ere
fuitable defences to hold them in the future. The company
was {fpeedily organized, confifting of Sir William Alexander,
junior, Gervafe Kirke, Robert Charlton, William Berkeley,
and perhaps others, diftinguifhed merchants of London.”
Six {hips were equipped with a fuitable armament and letters
of marque, and defpatched on their hottile errand, Capt,
David Kirke, afterwards Sir David, was appointed admiral
of the fleet, who likewife commanded one of the fhips.*
His brothers, Lewis Kirke and Thomas Kirke, were in com-
mand of two others. They failed under a royal patent exe-
cuted in favor of Sir William Alexander, junior, fon of the
fecretary, and others, granting exclufive authority to trade,

feize, and confifcate French or

Spanith fhips and deftroy the

French fettlements on the river and Gulf of St. Lawence

and parts adjacent.

% Vide Colonial Papers, Vol. V. 87,
III, We do not find the mention of
any others as belonging to the Company
of Merchant Adventurers to Canada.

%8 Sir David Kirke was one of five
brothers, the fons of Gervafe or Gervais
Kirke, a merchant of London, and his
wife, Elizabeth Goudon of Dieppe in
France. The grandfather of Sir David
was Thurfton Kirke of Norton, a {mall
town in the northern part of the county
of Derby, known as the birthplace of
the fculptor Chantrey. This little ham-
let had been the home of the Kirkes for
feveral generations, Gervafe Kirke had,
in 1629, refided in Dieppe for the moft of
the forty years preceding, and his chil-
dren were probably born there. Sir
David Kirke was married to Sarah,
daughter of Sir Jofeph Andrews. In
early life he was a wine-merchant at
Bordeaux and Cognac. He was knighted

21

Kirke

by Charles I. in 1633, in recognition of
his fervices in taking Quebec. On the
13th of November, 1637, he received a
grant of “the whole continent, ifland,
or region called Newfoundland.” In
1638, he took up his refidence at Ferry-
land, Newfoundland, in the houfe built
by Lord Baltimore. He was a friend
and correfpondent of Archbifhop Laud,
to whom he wrote, in 1639, “That the
ayre of Newfoundland agrees perfectly
well with all God’s creatures, except
Jefuits and fchifmatics.” He remained
in Newfoundland nearly twenty years,
where he died in 1655-56, having expe-
rienced many difappointments occa-
fioned by his loyalty to Charles I. —
Vide Colonial Papers, Vol. 1X. No. 76;
The Firft Englifh Congueft of Canada,
by Henry Kirke, London, 1871, paffim ;
Les Voyages du Sievr de Champlain,
Paris ed. 1632, p. 257.

162 Memoir of 1628.

Kirke failed, with a part if not the whole of his fleet, to
Annapolis Bafin in the Bay of Fundy, and took poffeffion of
the defultory French fettlement to which we have already
referred. He left a Scotch colony there, under the com-
mand of Sir William Alexander, junior, as governor, The
fleet finally rendezvoufed at Tadouffac, capturing all the
French fifhing barques, boats, and pinnaces which fell in its
way on the coaft of Nova Scotia, including the Ifland of
Cape Breton.

From Tadouffac, Kirke defpatched a fhallop to Quebec, in
charge of fix Bafque fifhermen whom he had recently cap-
tured. They were bearers of an official communication
from the admiral of the Englifh fleet to Champlain. About
the fame time he fent up the river, likewife, an armed barque,
well manned, which anchored off Cape Tourmente, thirty
miles below Quebec, near an outpoft which had been eftab-
lifhed by Champlain for the convenience of forage and paf-
turage for cattle. Here a fquad of men landed, took four
men, a woman, and little girl prifoners, killed fuch of the
cattle as they defired for ufe and burned the reft in the fta-
bles, as likewife two fmall houfes, pillaging and laying wafte
every thing they could find. Having done this, the barque
haftily returned to Tadouffac.

We mutt now afk the reader to return with us to the little
fettlement at Quebec. The proceedings which we have juft
narrated were as yet unknown to Champlain. The fummer
of 1628 was wearing on, and no fupplies had arrived from
France. It was obvious that fome accident had detained
the tranfports, and they might not arrive at all. His provi-
fions were nearly exhaufted. To fubfift without a refupply

was

vernor, |}

fino alt
inng di}

munict
in, Aba

ned barge

fmt
ft

tye

pl
} 1

1628, Samuel de Champlain. 163

was impoffible. Each weary day added a new keennefs to
his anxiety. A winter of deftitution, of ftarvation and death
for his little colony of well on towards a hundred perfons
was the painful picture that now conftantly haunted his
mind. To avoid this cataftrophe, if poffible, he ordered a
boat to be conftructed, to enable him to communicate with
the lower waters of the gulf, where he hoped he might ob-
tain provifions from the fifhermen on the coaft, or tranfporta-
tion for a part or the whole of his colony to France.

On the goth of July, two men came up from Cape Tour-
mente to announce that an Indian had brought in the news
that fix large fhips had entered and were lying at anchor in
the harbor of Tadouffac. The fame day, not long after, two
canoes arrived, in one of which was Foucher, the chief herdf.
man at Cape Tourmente, who had efcaped from his captors,
from whom Champlain firft learned what had taken place at
that outpoft.

Sufficiently affured of the character of the enemy, Cham-
plain haftened to put the unfinithed fort in as good condition
as poffible, appointing to every man in the little garrifon his
pot, fo that all might be ready for duty at amoment’s warning.
On the afternoon of the next day a fmall fail came into the
bay, evidently a ftranger, directing its courfe not through the
ufual channel, but towards the little River St. Charles. It
was too infignificant to caufe any alarm. Champlain, how-
ever, fent a detachment of arquebufiers to receive it. It
proved to be Englith, and contained the fix Bafque fifhermen
already referred to, charged by Kirke with defpatches for
Champlain. They had met the armed barque returning to
Tadouffac, and had taken off and brought up with them

the

164 Memo of 1628.

the woman and little girl who had been captured the day
before at Cape Tourmente.

The defpatch, written two days before, and bearing date
July 8th, 1628, was a courteous invitation to furrender Que-
bec into the hands of the Englith, affigning feveral natural
and cogent reafons why it would be for the intereft of all par-
ties for them to do fo. Under different circumftances, the
reafoning might have had weight; but this Englifh admiral
had clearly conceived a very inadequate idea of the character
of Champlain, if he fuppofed he would furrender his poft, or
even take it into confideration, while the enemy demanding
it and his means of enforcing it were at a diftance of at
leafta hundred miles. Champlain fubmitted the letter to
Pont Grave and the other gentlemen of the colony, and we
concluded, he adds, that if the Englifh had a defire to fee us
nearer, they muft come to us, and not threaten us from fo
great a diftance.

Champlain returned an anfwer declining the demand,
couched in language of refpectful and dignified politenefs.
It is eafy, however, to detect a tinge of farcafm running
through it, fo delicate as not to be offenfive, and yet fuffi-
ciently obvious to convey a ferene indifference on the part
of the French commander as to what the Englifh might
think it beft to do in the fequel. The tone of the reply, the
air of confidence pervading it, led Kirke to believe that the
French were in a far better condition to refift than they
really were. The Englifh admiral thought it prudent to
withdraw. He deftroyed all the French fifhing veffels and
boats at Tadouffac, and proceeded down the gulf, to do the
fame along the coatt.

We

1628. Samuel de Champlain. 165

We have already alluded, in the preceding pages, to De
Roquemont, the French admiral, who had been charged by
the Company of the Hundred Affociates to convoy a fleet
of tranfports to Canada. Wholly ignorant of the impor-
tance of an earlier arrival at Quebec, he appears to have
moved leifurely, and was now, with his whole fleet, lying at
anchor in the Bay of Gafpé. Hearing that Kirke was in
the gulf, he very unwifely prepared to give him battle, and
moved out of the bay for that purpofe. On the 18th of
July the two armaments met. Kirke had fix armed veffels
under his command, while De Roquemont had but four.
The conflict was unequal. The Englith veffels were unen-
cumbered and much heavier than thofe of the French. De
Roquemont” was foon overpowered and compelled to fur-
render. His whole fleet of twenty-two veffels, with a hun-
dred and thirty-five pieces of ordnance, together with fupplies
and colonifts for Quebec, were all taken. Kirke returned to
England laden with the rich fpoils of his conquett, having
practically accomplithed, if not what he had intended, nev-
erthelefs that which fatisfied the avarice of the London mer-
chants under whofe aufpices the expedition had failed. The
capture of Quebec had from the beginning been the objetive
purpofe of Sir William Alexander. The taking of this fleet
and the cutting off their fupplies was an important ftep in
this undertaking. The conqueft was thereby affured, though

not completed.
Champlain,

® Champlain criticifes with merited
feverity the conduét of De Roquemont,
and clofes in the following words: “Le
merite d’un bon Capitaine n’eft pas
feulemét au courage, mais il doit eftre
accOpagné de prudéce, qui eft ce qui

les fait eftimer, cOme eftat fuiuy de
rufes, ftratagefmes, & d’inventids: plu-
fieurs auec peu ont beaucoup fait, & fe
font rédus glorieux & redoubtables.”” —
Vide Les Voyages dv Sieur de Cham-
plain, ed. 1632, part II p. 166.

166 Memowr of 1628,

Champlain, having defpatched his reply to Kirke, naturally
fuppofed he would foon appear before Quebec to carry out his
threat. He awaited this event with great anxiety. About ten
days after the meffengers had departed, a young Frenchman,
named Defdames, arrived in a {mall boat, having been
fent by De Roquemont, the admiral of the new company,
to inform Champlain that he was then at Gafpe with a large
fleet, bringing colonifts, arms, ftores, and provifions for the
fettlement. Defdames alfo ftated that De Roquemont in-
tended to attack the Englifh, and that on his way he had
heard the report of cannon, which led him to believe that
a conflict had already taken place. Champlain heard nothing
more from the lower St. Lawrence until the next May, when
an Indian from Tadouffac brought the ftory of De Roque-
mont’s defeat.

In the mean time, Champlain reforted to every expedient
to provide fubfiftence for his famifhing colony. Even at the
time when the furrender was demanded by the Englith, they
were on daily rations of feven ounces each. The means of
obtaining food were exceedingly flender. Fifhing could not
be profecuted to any extent, for the want of nets, lines, and
hooks. Of gunpowder they had lefs than fifty pounds, and
a poffible attack by treacherous favages rendered it inexpe-
dient to expend it in hunting game. Moreover, they had no
falt for curing or preferving the flefh of fuch wild animals as
they chanced to take. The few acres cultivated by the mif-
fionaries and the Hébert family, and the fmall gardens
about the fettlement, could yield but little towards fuftaining
nearly a hundred perfons for the full term of ten months,
the fhorteft period in which they could reafonably expect

fupplies

1629. Samuel de Champlain. 167

fupplies from France. A fyftem of the utmoft economy was
inftituted. A few eels were purchafed by exchange of bea-
ver-(kins from the Indians. Peafe were reduced to flour firft
by mortars and later by hand-mills conftructed for the pur-
pofe, and made into a foup to add flavor to other lefs palatable
food. Thus economifing their refources, the winter finally
wore away, but when the {pring came, their fcanty means
were entirely exhaufted. Henceforth their fole reliance was
upon the few fifh that could be taken from the river, and the
edible roots gathered day by day from the fields and forefts.
An attempt was made to quarter fome of the men upon the
friendly Indians, but with little fuccefs. Near the laft of
June, thirty of the colony, men, women, and children, unwill-
ing to remain longer at Quebec, were defpatched to Gafpe,
twenty of them to refide there with the Indians, the others
to feek a paffage to France by fome of the foreign fifhing-
veffels on the coaft. This detachment was conduéted by
Euftache Boullé, the brother-in-law of Champlain. The rem-
nant of the little colony, ditheartened by the gloomy prof-
pect before them and exhaufted by hunger, continued to
drag out a miferable exiftence, gathering fuftenance for the
wants of each day, without knowing what was to fupply the
demands of the next.

On the roth of July, 1629, three Englith veffels were feen
from the fort at Quebec, diftant not more than three miles,
approaching under full fail.” Their purpofe could not be
miftaken. Champlain called a council, in which it was de-

cided

100 On the 13th of March, 1629, let- ers, in favor of the “ Abigail,” 300
ters of marque were iffued to Capt. tons, the “ William,” 200 tons, the
David Kirke, Thomas Kirke, and oth- “ George” of London, and the “ Jarvis.”

168 Memoir of 1629,

cided at once to furrender, but only on good terms; other-
wife, to refift to their utmoft with {uch flender means as they
had. The little garrifon of fixteen men, all his available
force, haftened to their pofts. A flag of truce foon brought
a fummons from the brothers, Lewis and Thomas Kirke,
couched in courteous language, afking the furrender of the
fort and fettlement, and promifing fuch honorable and rea-
fonable terms as Champlain himfelf might dictate.

To this letter Champlain * replied that he had not, in his
prefent circumftances, the power of refifting their demand,
and that on the morrow he would communicate the condi-
tions on which he would deliver up the fettlement ; but, in
the mean time, he muft requeft them to retire beyond can-
non-fhot, and not attempt to land. On the evening of the
fame day the articles of capitulation were delivered, which
were finally, with very little variation, agreed to by both
parties.

The whole eftablifhment at Quebec, with all the mov-
able property belonging to it, was to be furrendered into the
hands of the Englifh. The colonifts were to be tranfported
to France, neverthelefs, by the way of England. The offi-
cers were permitted to leave with their arms, clothes, and the
peltries belonging to them as perfonal property. The fol-
diers were allowed their clothes and a beaver-robe each; the
miffionaries, their robes and books. This agreement was
fubfequently ratified at Tadouffac by David Kirke, the ad-
miral of the fleet, on the 19th of Auguft, 1629,

On the 20th of July, Lewis Kirke, vice-admiral, at the

head

101 This correfpondence is preferved Ze Sievr de Champlain, Paris, 1632, pp-
by Champlain. — Vide Les Voyages par 215-219. a

$+ othe
8 5 hy
aval
brought
as Kite
er of th
8 and rep

if, ins
“demi,
he cond
t* but,
yond ca
ig he
ed, whith

by bt

1629, Samuel de Champlain. 169

head of two hundred armed men,” took formal poffeffion of
Quebec, in the name of Charles I., the king of England.
The Englifh flag was hoifted over the Fort of St. Louis,
Drums beat and cannon were difcharged in token of the ac-
complifhed victory.

The Englifh demeaned themfelves with exemplary cour-
tefy and kindnefsS towards their prifoners of war. Cham-
plain was requefted to continue to occupy his accuftomed
quarters until he fhould leave Quebec; the holy mafs was
celebrated at his requeft; and an inventory of what was
found in the habitation and fort was prepared and placed in
his hand, a document which proved to be of fervice in the
fequel. The colonifts were naturally anxious as to the difpo-
fition of their lands and effets ; but their fears were quieted
when they were all cordially invited to remain in the fet.
tlement, affured, moreover, that they fhould have the fame
privileges and fecurity of perfon and property which they
had enjoyed from their own government. This generous
offer of the Englith, and their kind and confiderate treat-
ment of them, induced the larger part of the colonifts to
remain.

On the 24th of July, Champlain, exhaufted by a year of
diftreffing anxiety and care, and depreffed by the adverfe
proceedings going on about him, embarked on the veffel of
Thomas Kirke for Tadouflac, to await the departure of the
fleet for England. Before reaching their deftination, they
encountered a French fhip laden with merchandife and fup-
plies, commanded by Emeric de Caen, who was endeavoring

to

102 Vide Abjtra& of the Depofition of endar of State Papers, Colonial, 1574-
Capt. David Kirke and Others. Cal- 1660, p. 103.

22

170 Memoyr of 1629,

to reach Quebec for the purpofe of trade and obtaining cer-
tain peltry and other property {tored at that place, belonging
to his uncle, William de Caen. A conflict was inevitable.
The two veffels met. The ftruggle was fevere, and, for a
time, of doubtful refult. At length the French cried for
quarter. The combat ceafed. De Caen afked permiffion to
fpeak with Champlain. This was accorded by Kirke, who
informed him, if another fhot were fired, it would be at the
peril of his life. Champlain was too old a foldier and too
brave a man to be influenced by an appeal to his perfonal
fears. He coolly replied, It will be an eafy matter for you
to take my life, as I am in your power, but it would be a
difgraceful a&, as you would violate your facred promife. I
cannot command the men in the fhip, or prevent their doing
their duty as brave men fhould; and you ought to commend
and not blame them.

De Caen’s fhip was borne asa prize into the harbor of Ta-
douffac, and paffed for the prefent into the vortex of general
confifcation.

Champlain remained at Tadouffac until the fleet was ready
to return to England. In the mean time, he was courte-
oufly entertained by Sir David Kirke. He was, however,
greatly pained and difappointed that the admiral was unwill-
ing that he fhould take with him to France two Indian girls
who had been prefented to him a year or two before, and
whom he had been carefully inftructing in religion and man-
ners, and whom he loved as his own daughters. Kirke, how-
ever, was inexorable. Neither reafon, entreaty, nor the tears
of the unhappy maidens could move him. As he could not
take them with him, Champlain adminiftered to them fuch

confolation

1629. Samuel de Champlain. 171

confolation as he could, counfelling them to be brave and

virtuous, and to continue to fay the prayers that he had taught
’ them. It was a relief to his anxiety at laft to be able to ob-
a tain from Mr. Couillard,’ one of the earlieft fettlers at Que-
i bec, the promife that they fhould remain in the care of his
i wife, while the girls, on their part, affured him that they
h would be as daughters to their new fofter-parents until his
he return to New France.

0 Quebec having been provifioned and garrifoned, the fleet
ul failed for England about the middle of September, and ar-
lu rived at Plymouth on the 20th of November. On the 27th,
4 the miffionaries and others who wifhed to return to France,

difembarked at Dover, while Champlain was taken to Lon-
don, where he arrived on the 2gth.

nf At Plymouth, Kirke learned that a peace between France

and England had been concluded on the 24th of the preced-
hy ing April, nearly three months before Quebec had been
| taken ; confequently, every thing that had been done by this

expedition muft, fooner or later, be reverfed. The articles of
‘i peace had provided that all conquefts fubfequent to the date
ts of that inftrument fhould be reftored. It was evident that

Quebec, the peltry, and other property taken there, together
with the fifhing-veffels and others captured in the gulf, muft
‘4 be reftored to the French. To Kirke and the Company of
' London Merchants this was a bitter difappointment. Their
expenditures had been large in the firft inftance; the prizes
of the year before, the fleet of the Hundred A ffociates which
‘ they

108 Couillard. Champlain writes Cou- which remained at Quebec after it was
Ohh fart. This appears to have been William taken by the Englith.— Vide Laver-
mn Couillard, the fon-in-law of Madame azdvre’s note, Ceuvres de Champlain,
Me Hébert and one of the five families Quebec ed. Vol. VI. Pp. 249.

172 Memo of 1629.

they had captured, had probably all been abforbed in the
outfit of the prefent expedition, comprifing the fix veffels
and two pinnaces with which Kirke had failed for the con-
queft of Quebec. Sir William Alexander had obtained, in
the February preceding, from Charles I., a royal charter of
Tue Country AND Lorpsuip oF CANADA IN AMERICA,"
embracing a belt of territory one hundred leagues in width,
covering both fides of the St. Lawrence from its mouth to
the Pacific Ocean. This charter with the moft ample pro-
vifions had been obtained in anticipation of the taking of
Quebec, and in order to pave the way for an immediate oc-
cupation and fettlement of the country. Thus a plan for
the eftablifhment of an Englifh colonial empire on the banks
of the St. Lawrence had been deliberately formed, and down
to the prefent moment offered every profpect of a brilliant
fuccefs. But a cloud had now fwept along the horizon and
fuddenly obfcured the last ray of hope. The proceeds of their
two years of inceffant labor, and the large fums which they
had rifked in the enterprife, had vanifhed like a mift in the
morning fun. But, as the caufe of the Englifh became more
defperate, the hopes of the French revived. The loffes of
the latter were great and difheartening ; but they faw, never-
thelefS, in the diftance, the long-cherifhed New France of the
paft rifing once more into renewed ftrength and beauty.

On his arrival at London, Champlain immediately put
himfelf in communication with Monfieur de Chateauneuf,
the French ambaffador, laid before him the original of the

capitulation,

104 An Englifh tranflation of this Vide Sir William Alexander and Amer-
charter from the Latin original was zcan Colonization, Prince Society, Bof-
publifhed by the Prince Society in 1873. ton, pp. 239-249.

1629. Samuel de Champlain. 173

capitulation, a map of the country, and fuch other memoirs
as were needed to fhow the fuperior claims of the French to
Quebec on the ground both of difcovery and occupation."
Many queftions arofe concerning the poffeffion and owner-
fhip of the peltry and other property taken by the Englith,
and, during his ftay, Champlain contributed as far as poffible
to the fettlement of thefe complications. It is fomewhat
remarkable that during this time the Englifh pretended to
hold him as a prifoner of war, and even attempted to extort
a ranfom from him,'® preffing the matter fo far that Cham-
plain felt compelled to remonftrate againft a demand fo ex-
traordinary and fo obvioufly unjuft, as he was in no fenfe a
prifoner of war, and likewife to ftate his inability to pay a
ranfom, as his whole eftate in France did not exceed feven
hundred pounds fterling.

After having remained a month in London, Champlain
was permitted to depart for France, arriving on the latt day
of December.

At Dieppe he met Captain Daniel, from whom he learned

that

106 Champlain publithed, in 1632, a
brief argument fetting forth the claims
of the French, which he entitles, A bregé
des Defcovvertures de la Nouuelle
France, tant de ce que nous auons def-
couuert comme auffi les Anglots, deputs
les Virgines iusgu’au Freton Danis,
& de cegweux & nous pounons pre-
tendre fuiuant le rapport des Hiftoriens
gui en ont deferit, que ie vrapporte cy
aeffous, gui feront iuger & un chacun du
tout fans paffion. — Vide ed. 1632, p- 290.
In this paper he narrates fuccinétly the
early difcoveries made both by the
French and Englith navigators, and en-
forces the doétrine of the fuperior claims
of the French with clearnefs and

ftrength. It contains, probably, the
fubftance of what Champlain placed at
this time in the hands of the French
embaflador in London.

106 It is difficult to conceive on what
ground this ranfom was demanded, fince
the whole proceedings of the Englith
againft Quebec were illegal, and con-
trary to the articles of peace which
had juft been concluded. That fuch a
demand was made would be regarded as
incredible, did not the fact reft upon
documentary evidence of undoubted
authority. — Vide Laverdiere’s citation
from State Papers Office, Vol. V. No.
33, CEuvres de Champlain, Quebec ed.,
Vol. VI. p. 1413.

174 Memoir of 1630.

that Richelieu and the Hundred Affociates had not been
unmindful of the preffing wants of their colony at Quebec.
Arrangements had been made early in the year 1629 to fend to
Champlain fuccor and fupplies, and a fleet had been organized
to be conduéted thither by the Commander Ifaac de Razilly.
between France and England on the 24th of April. It was,
confequently, deemed unneceffary to accompany the tranf
ports by an armed force, and thereupon Razilly’s orders were
countermanded, while Captain Daniel of Dieppe,” whofe
fervices had been engaged, was fent forward with four veffels
and a barque belonging to the company, to carry fupplies to
Quebec. A ftorm fcattered his fleet, but the veffel under
his immediate command arrived on the coaft of the Ifland
of Cape Breton, and anchored on the 18th of September,
novo ftylo, in the little harbor of Baleine, fituated about fix
miles eafterly from the prefent fite of Louifburgh, now
famous in the annals of that ifland. Here he was furprifed
to find a Britifh fettlement. Lord Ochiltrie, better known
as Sir James Stuart, a Scottifh nobleman, had obtained a
grant, through Sir William Alexander, of the Ifland of Cape
Breton, and had, on the roth of the July preceding, zovo /tyla,
planted there a colony of fixty perfons, men, women, and
children, and had thrown up for their protection a temporary
fort. Daniel confidered this an intrufion upon French foil.
He accordingly made a bloodlefs capture of the fortrefs at

Baleine,

107 Vide Relation dv Voyage fait par
le Capitaine Daniel de Dieppe, année
1629, Les Voyages du Sieur de Cham-
plain, Paris, 1632, p.271. Captain
Daniel was enrolled by Creuxius in the

Society of New France or the Hundred
Affociates, as Carolus Daniel, nauticus
Capitaneus. Vide Hiftoria Canadenjis
for the names of the Society of the
Hundred Affociates.

While preparations were in progrefs, peace was concluded

1630. Samuel de Champlain. 175

Baleine, demolifhed it, and, failing to the north and {weep-
ing round to the weft, entered an eftuary which he fays the
favages called Grand Cibou,'* where he erected a fort and
left a garrifon of forty men, with provifions and all necef-
fary means of defence. Having fet up the arms of the
King of France and thofe of Cardinal Richelieu, erected a
houfe, chapel, and magazine, and leaving two Jefuit miffion-
aries, the fathers Barthelemy Vimond and Alexander de
Vieuxpont, he departed, taking with him the Britith colonitts,
forty-two of whom he landed near Falmouth in England,
and eighteen, including Lord Ochiltrie, he carried into
France. This fettlement at the Bay of St. Anne, or Port
Dauphin, accidentally eftablithed and inadequately fuftained,
lingered a few years and finally difappeared.

Having received the above narrative from Captain Daniel,
Champlain foon after proceeded to Paris, and laid the whole
fubject of the unwarrantable proceedings of the Englith in

detail

108 Cibou. Sometimes written Chi- the Great Bras d’Or, feparated from it
bou. ‘Cibou means,” fays Mr. J. by Cape Dauphin, and now known as
Hammond Trumball, “fimply river in St. Anne’s Bay. It took the name of

all eaftern Algonkin languages.” — A/S.
letter, Nicholas Denys, in his very full
itinerary of the coaft of the ifland of
Cape Breton fpeaks alfo of the entree
du petit Chibou ou de Labrador. This
petit Chibou, according to his defcrip-
tion, is identical with what is now known
as the Little Bras d’Or, or fmaller paf-
fage to Bras d’Or Lake. It feems prob-
able that the great Cibou of the Indians
was applied originally by them to what
we now call the Great Bras d’Or, or
larger paflage to Bras d’Or Lake. It is
plain, however, that Captain Daniel
and other early writers applied it to an
eftuary or bay a little further weft than

St. Anne’s immediately on the planting
of Captain Daniel’s colony, as Cham-
plain calls it, Phabitation Jainfe Anne
en Vifle du Cap Breton in his relation
of what took place in 1631.— Voyages,
ed. 1632, p. 298. A very good defcrip-
tion of it by Pére Perrault may be
found in Fe/uit Relations, 1635, Quebec
ed. p. 42. — Vide, alfo, Defcription de
PAmerique Septentrionale par Mon-
fieur Denys, Paris, 1672, p. 155, where
is given an elaborate defcription of St.
Anne’s Harbor. Granfidou may be
feen on Champlain’s map of 1632, but
the map is too indefinite to aid us in
fixing its exact location,

i

176 Memoir of 1630.

detail before the king, Cardinal Richelieu, and the Company
of New France, and urged the importance of regaining pof-
feffion as early as poffible of the plantation from which they
had been unjuftly ejected. The Englifh king did not hefi-
tate at an early day to promife the reftoration of Quebec,
and, in fact, after fome delay, all places which were occupied
by the French at the outbreak of the war. The policy of
the Englith minifters appears, however, to have been to poft-
pone the execution of this promife as long as poffible, prob-
ably with the hope that fomething might finally occur to
render its fulfilment unneceffary. Sir William Alexander,
the Earl of Stirling, who had very great influence with
Charles I., was particularly oppofed to the reftoration of the
fettlement on the fhores of Annapolis Bafin. This fell
within the limits of the grant made to him in 1621, under
the name of New Scotland, and a Scotch colony was now in
occupation. He contended that no proper French planta-
tion exifted there at the opening of the war, and this was
probably true; a few French people were, indeed, living
there, but under no recognized, certainly no actual, authority
or control of the crown of France, and confequently they
were under no obligation to reftore it. But Charles I.
had given his word that all places taken by the Englifh
fhould be reftored as they were before the war, and no ar-
gument or perfuafions could change his refolution to
fulfil his promife. It was not, however, till after the lapfe
of more than two years, owing, chiefly, to the oppofition of
Sir William Alexander, that the reftoration of Quebec and
the plantation on Annapolis Bafin was fully affured by the
treaty of St. Germain en Laye, bearing date March 29, 1632.

The

vt)
Alt

1632. Samuel de Champlain. 177

The reader muft be reminded that the text of the treaty juft
mentioned and numerous contemporary documents fhow that
the reftorations demanded by the French and granted by the
Englifh only related to the places occupied by the French
before the outbreak of the war, and not to Canada or New
France or to any large extent of provincial territory what-
ever.” When the reftorations were completed, the boundary
lines diftinguifhing the Englifh and French poffeffions in
America were ftill unfettled, the territorial rights of both
nations were {till undefined, and each continued, as they had
done before the war, to claim the fame territory as a part of
their refpective poffeffions. Hiftorians, giving to this treaty
a fuperficial examination, and not confidering it in connec-
tion with contemporary documents, have, from that time to
the prefent, fallen into the loofe and unauthorized ftatement
that, by the treaty of St. Germain en Laye, the whole do-
main of Canada or New France was reftored to the French.
Had the treaty of St. Germain en Laye, by which Que-
bec was reftored to the French, fixed accurately the boun-
dary lines between the two countries, it would probably have
faved the expenditure of money and blood, which continued
to be demanded from time to time until, after a century and
a quarter, the whole of the French poffeffions were tranf-
ferred, under the arbitration of war, to the Englifh crown.
CHAPTER Xt
109 Vide Sir William Alexander and ters, and Tratts relating to the Coloni-

American Colonization, Prince Society, zation of New Scotland, Bannatyne
1873, pp. 66-72. — Royal Letters, Char- Club, Edinburgh, 1867, p. 77 e¢ paffim.

23

PMR TEKINES a,

serene” DMR eT OT

178 Memotr of 1632.

CHAPTER XI.

EMERIC DE CAEN TAKES POSSESSION OF QUEBEC. — CHAMPLAIN PUBLISHES
HIS VOYAGES. — RETURNS TO NEW FRANCE, REPAIRS THE HABITATION,
AND ERECTS A CHAPEL.— His LETTER TO CARDINAL DE RICHELIEU. —
CHAMPLAIN’S DEATH.

N breaking up the fettlement at Quebec, the
loffes of the De Caens were confiderable, and it
was deemed an act of juftice to allow them an
opportunity to retrieve them, at leaft in part;
and, to enable them to do this, the monopoly of

the fur-trade in the Gulf of St. Lawrence was granted to

them for one year, and, on the retirement of the Englith,

Emeric de Caen, as provifional governor for that period,

took formal poffeffion of Quebec on the 13th of July, 1632.
In the mean time, Champlain remained in France, devot-

ing himfelf with charateriftic energy to the interefts of New

France. Befide the valuable counfel and aid which he gave

regarding the expedition then fitting out and to be fent to

Quebec by the Company of New France, he prepared and

carried through the prefs an edition of his Voyages, com-

prifing extended extraGs from what he had already pub-
lifhed, and a continuation of the narrative to 1631. He
alfo publifhed in the fame volume a Treatife on Navigation,
and a Catechifm tranflated from the French by one of the
Fathers into the language of the Montagnais."®

On

110 This catechifm, bearing the fol- dois, autre gue celuy des Montagnars,
lowing title, is contained on fifteen pages four la Conuerfion des habitans dudit
in the ed. of 1632: Doctrine Chrefti- pays. Parle R. P. Brebeuf dela mefme
enne, dv R. P. Lede{me dela Compagnie Compagnie. It is in double columns,
de Tefus. Traduitie en Langage Cana- one fide Indian and the other French.

",

1633. Samuel de Champlain. 179

On the 23d of March, 1633, having again been commit.
fioned as governor, Champlain failed from Dieppe with a
fleet of three veffels, the “ Saint Pierre,” the “Saint Jean,”
and the “ Don de Dieu,” belonging to the Company of New
France, conveying to Quebec a large number of colonifts,
together with the Jefuit fathers, Enemond Maflé and Jean
de Brebeuf. The three veffels entered the harbor of Que-
bec on the 23d of May. On the announcement of Cham.
plain’s arrival, the little colony was all aftir. The cannon
at the Fort St. Louis boomed forth their hoarfe welcome
of his coming. The hearts of all, particularly of thofe
who had remained at Quebec during the occupation of the
Englith, were overflowing with joy. The three years’ ab-
fence of their now venerable and venerated governor, and
the trials, hardfhips, and difcouragements through which
they had in the mean time paffed, had not effaced from their
minds the virtues that endeared him to their hearts. The
memory of his tender folicitude in their behalf, his brave
example of endurance in the hour of want and peril, and
the {weetnefs of his parting counfels, came back afreth to
awaken in them new pulfations of gratitude. Champlain’s
heart was touched by his warm reception and the vifible
proofs of their love and devotion. This was a bright and
happy day in the calendar of the little colony.

Champlain addreffed himfelf with his old zeal and a re-
newed {trength to every intereft that promifed immediate or
future good refults. He at once direéted the renovation and
improvement of the habitation and fort, which, after an oc-
cupation of three years by aliens, could not be delayed. He
then inftituted means, holding councils and creating a new

trading-poft,

180 Memoir of 1633.

trading-poft, for winning back the traffic of the allied tribes,
which had been of late drawn away by the Englifh, who
continued to fteal into the waters of the St. Lawrence for
that purpofe. Atan early day after his re-eftablifhment of
himfelf at Quebec, Champlain proceeded to build a memo-
rial chapel in clofe proximity to the fort which he had ereéted
fome years before on the creft of the rocky eminence that
overlooks the harbor. He gave it the appropriate and fig-
nificant name, Notre Dame DE RECOUVRANCE, in grateful
memory of the recent return of the French to New France.™
It had long been an ardent defire of Champlain to eftablith
a French fettlement among the Hurons, and to plant a mif-
fion there for the converfion of this favorite tribe to the
Chriftian faith. Two miffionaries, De Brebeuf and De Noué,
were now ready for the undertaking. The governor fpared
no pains to fecure for them a favorable reception, and vig-
oroufly urged the importance of their miffion upon the Hurons
affembled at Quebec.'* But at the laft, when on the eve of
fecuring his purpofe, complications arofe and fo much hof-
tility was difplayed by one of the chiefs, that he thought it

prudent

1 The following extraéts will fhow
that the chapel was erected in 1633, that
it was built by Champlain, and that it
was called Notre Dame de Recouv-
rance.

Nous les menafmes en noftre petite
chapelle, qui a commencé cefte année a
fembellir.— Vide Relations des Fé/uites.
Quebec ed. 1633, p. 30.

La fage conduitte et la prudence de
Monfieur de Champlain Gouuerneur de
Kebec et du fleuue fainét Laurens, qui
nous honore de fa bien-veillance, rete-
nant vn chacun dans fon deuoir, a fait
que nos paroles et nos predications

ayent efté bien receués, et la Chapelle
qu'il a fait dreffer proche du fort a l’hon-
neur de noftre Dame, &c. — /dem, 1634,

ta
La troifiéme, que nous allons habiter
cette Autome, la Refidence de Noftre-
dame de Recouurance, 4 Kebec proche
du Fort. — /dem, 1635, p. 3:

12 According to Pére Le Jeune, from
five to feven hundred Hurons had af-
fembled at Quebec in July, 1633, bring-
ing their canoes loaded with merchan-
dife. — Vide Relations des Fefuites,
Quebec ed. 1633, p. 34-

|
}
t
i

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 181

prudent to advife its poftponement to a more aufpicious mo-
ment. With thefe and kindred occupations growing out of
the refponfibilities of his charge, two years foon paffed away.

During the fummer of 1635, Champlain addreffed an in-
terefting and important letter to Cardinal de Richelieu,
whofe authority at that time fhaped both the domeftic and
foreign policy of France. In it the condition and impera-
tive wants of New France are clearly fet forth. This docu-
ment was probably the laft that Champlain ever penned, and
is, perhaps, the only autograph letter of his now extant.
His views of the richnefs and poffible refources of the coun-
try, the vaft miffionary field which it offered, and the policy
to be purfued, are fo clearly ftated that we need offer no
apology for giving the following free tranflation of the let-
ter in thefe pages."

LETTER OF CHAMPLAIN TO CARDINAL DE RICHELIEU.

MownsEIGNEvuR, — The honor of the commands that I have
received from your Eminence has infpired me with greater
courage to render to you every poffible fervice with all the
fidelity and affection that can be defired from a faithful fer-
vant. I fhall {pare neither my blood nor my life whenever
the occafion fhall demand them.

There are {ubjects enough in thefe regions, if your Emi-
nence, after confidering the character of the country, hall
defire to extend your authority over them. This territory
is more than fifteen hundred leagues in length, lying be-
tween the fame parallels of latitude as our own France. It

is

us This letter was printed in CEuvres nal is at Paris, in the Archives of For-
de Champlain, Quebec ed. Vol. vi. eign Affairs.
Pitces Fuflificatives, p. 35. The origi-

EE ————

Come TT per oer

182 Memo of 1635:

is watered by one of the fineft rivers in the world, into which
empty many tributaries more than four hundred leagues in
length, beautifying a country inhabited by a vaft number of
tribes. Some of them are fedentary in their mode of life,
poffeffing, like the Mufcovites, towns and villages built of
wood; others are nomadic, hunters and fifhermen, all long-
ing to welcome the French and religious fathers, that they
may be inftructed in our faith.

The excellence of this country cannot be too highly efti-
mated or praifed, both as to the richnefs of the foil, the
diverfity of the timber fuch as we have in France, the abun-
dance of wild animals, game, and fifth, which are of extraor-
dinary magnitude. All this invites you, Monfeigneur, and
makes it feem as if God had created you above all your pre-
deceffors to do a work here more pleafing to Him than any
that has yet been accomplifhed.

For thirty years I have frequented this country, and have
acquired a thorough knowledge of it, obtained from my own
obfervation and the information given me by the native in-
habitants. Monfeigneur, I pray you to pardon my zeal, if I
fay that, after your renown has fpread throughout the Eaft,
you fhould end by compelling its recognition in the Weft.

Expelling the Englifh from Quebec has been a very im-
portant beginning, but, neverthelefs, fince the treaty of peace
between the two crowns, they have returned to carry on
trade and annoy us in this river; declaring that it was en-
joined upon them to withdraw, but not to remain away, and
that they have their king’s permiffion to come for the period
of thirty years. But, if your Eminence wills, you can make
them feel the power of your authority. This can, further-

more,

v65%. Samuel de Champlain. 183

more, be extended at your pleafure to him who has come
here to bring about a general peace among thefe peoples,
who are at war with a nation holding more than four hun-
dred leagues in fubjection, and who prevent the free ufe of
the rivers and highways. If this peace were made, we fhould
be in complete and eafy enjoyment of our poffeffions. Once
eftablifhed in the country, we could expel our enemies, both
Englifh and Flemings, forcing them to withdraw to the coatt,
and, by depriving them of trade with the Iroquois, oblige
them to abandon the country entirely. It requires but one
hundred and twenty men, light-armed for avoiding arrows,
by whofe aid, together with two or three thoufand favage
warriors, our allies, we fhould be, within a year, abfolute
matters of all thefe peoples, and, by eftablifhing order among
them, promote religious worfhip and fecure an incredible
amount of traffic.

The country is rich in mines of copper, iron, fteel, brafs,
filver, and other minerals which may be found here.

The coft, Monfeigneur, of one hundred and twenty men is
a trifling one to his Majefty, the enterprife the moft noble
that can be imagined.

All for the glory of God, whom I pray with my whole
heart to grant you ever-increafing profperity, and to make
me, all my life,

Monfeigneur,
Your moft humble,
Mott faithful, and
Moft obedient fervant,

CHAMPLAIN,
AT QUEBEC, IN NEW FRANCE, the 15th of Auguft, 1635.

In

184 Memoir of 1635.

In this letter will be found the key to Champlain’s war-
policy with the Iroquois, no where elfe fo fully unfolded.
We fhall refer to this fubject in the fequel.

Early in Oétober, when the harveft of the year had ri-
pened and been gathered in, and the leaves had faded and
fallen, and the earth was mantled in the fymbols of general
decay, in fympathy with all that furrounded him, in his
chamber in the little fort on the creft of the rocky promon-
tory at Quebec, lay the manly form of Champlain, {mitten
with difeafe, which was daily breaking down the vigor and
{trength of his iron conftitution. From loving friends he re-
ceived the miniftrations of tender and affiduous care. But
his earthly career was near its end. The bowl had been
broken at the fountain. Life went on ebbing away from
week to week. At the end of two months and a half, on
Chriftmas day, the 25th of December, 1635, his fpirit paffed
to its final reft.

This otherwife joyous feftival was thus clouded with a
deep forrow. No heart in the little colony was untouched
by this event. All had been drawn to Champlain, fo many
years their chief magiftrate and wife counfellor, by a fponta-
neous and irrefiftible refpect, veneration, and love. It was
meet, as it was the univerfal defire, to crown him, in his
burial, with every honor which, in their circumftances, they
could beftow. The whole population joined in a mournful
proceffion. His fpiritual advifer and friend, Father Charles
Lalemant, performed in his behalf the laft folemn fervice
of the church. Father Paul Le Jeune pronounced a funeral
difcourfe, reciting his virtues, his fidelity to the king and the
Company of New France, his extraordinary love and devo-

tion

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 185

tion to the families of the colony, and his laft counfels for
their continued happinefs and welfare."

When thefe ceremonies were over, his body was pioufly
and tenderly laid to reft, and foon after a tomb was con-
ftructed for its reception expreffly in his honor as the bene-
factor of New France."’ The place of his burial ™* was
within the little chapel fubfequently erected, and which was
reverently called La Chapelle de M. de Champlain, in grate-
ful memory of him whofe body repofed beneath its fhelter-

ing walls.

M4 Vide Relations des $é/uites, Que-
bec ed. 1636, p. 56. Creuxius, Hiftoria
Canadenfis, pp. 183-4.

15 Monfieur le Gouuerneur, qui efti-
moit fa vertu, defira qu’il fuft enterré
prés du corps de feu Monfieur de Cham-
plain, qui eft dans vn fepulchre par-
ticulier, erigé exprés pour honorer la
memoire de ce fignalé perfonnage qui a
tant obligé la Nouuelle France. — Vide
Relations des Féfuites, Quebec ed. 1643,
Pp. 3-

6 The exaét fpot where Champlain
was buried is at this time unknown.
Hiftorians and antiquaries have been
much interefted in its difcovery. In
1866, the Abbés Laverdiére and Cafgrain
were encouraged to believe that their
fearches had been crowned with fuc-
cefs. They publifhed a ftatement of
their difcovery. Their views were con-
troverted in feveral critical pamphlets
that followed. In the mean time, addi-
tional refearches have been made. The
theory then broached that his burial
was in the Lower Town, and in the Re-
collect chapel built in 1615, has been
abandoned. The Abbé Caferain, in an
able difcuffion of this fubje&t, in which
he cites documents hitherto unpub-
lifhed, fhows that Champlain was buried

24

CHAPTER XII.

in a tomb within the walls of a chapel
erected by his fucceffor in the Upper
Town, and that this chapel was fituated
fomewhere within the court-yard of
the prefent poft-office. Pére Le Jeune,
who records the death of Champlain
in his Relation of 1636, does not men-
tion the place of his burial; but the
Pére Vimont, in his Relation of 1643,
in fpeaking of the burial of Pére
Charles Raymbault, fays, the “Gov-
ernor defired that he fhould be buried
near the body of the late Monfieur de
Champlain, which is ina particular tomb
erected exprefily to honor the memory
of that diftinguifhed perfonage, who
had placed New France under fuch
great obligation.” In the Parifh Reg-
ifter of Notre Dame de Quebec, is the
following entry: “ The 22d of Oétober
(1642), was interred zz the Chapel of
M. De Champlain the Pére Charles
Rimbault.” It is plain, therefore, that
Champlain was buried in what was then
commonly known as ¢he Chapel of M. de
Champlain. By reference to ancient
documents or deeds (one bearing date
Feb. to, 1649, and another 22d April, 1652,
and in one of which the Chapel of
Champlain is mentioned as contiguous
to a piece of land therein defcribed), the

Abbé

pera ~ Ale

186 Memoir of 1635.

CHAPTER XII.

CHAMPLAIN’S RELIGION. — His WAR POLICY. — His DOMESTIC AND SOCIAL
Lire. — CHAMPLAIN AS AN EXPLORER. — His LITERARY LABORS. — THE

RESULTS OF HIS CAREER.
3S Champlain had lived, fo he died, a firm and con-
f {i{tent member of the Roman church. In harmony
with his general character, his religious views
were always moderate, never betraying him into
aes). ceffes, or into any merely partifan zeal. Born
during the profligate, cruel, and perfidious reign of Charles
IX., he was, perhaps, too young to be greatly affected by the
evils charaCteriftic of that period, the maffacre of St. Barthol-
omew’s and the numberlefs vices that fwept along in its train.
His youth and early manhood, covering the plaftic and
formative period, ftretched through the reign of Henry IIL,
in which the ftandards of virtue and religion were little if
in any degree improved. Early in the reign of Henry IV.,
when he had fairly entered upon his manhood, we find him

clofely

Abbé Cafgrain proves that the Chapel that when the chapel was deftroyed,

of M. de Champlain was within the
fquare where is fituated the prefent poft-
office at Quebec, and, as the tomb of
Champlain was within the chapel, it fol-
lows that Champlain was buried fome-
where within the poft-office fquare above
mentioned.

Excavations in this {quare have been
made, but no traces of the walls or
foundations of the chapel have been
found. In the excavations for cellars
of the houfes conftruéted along the
{quare, the foundations of the chapel
may have been removed. It is poffible

which was at a very early period, as no
reference to its exiftence is found fub-
fequent to 1649, the body of Champlain
and the others buried there may have
been removed, and no record made of
the removal. The Abbé Cafgrain ex-
preffes the hope that other difcoveries
may hereafter be made that thall place
this interefting queftion beyond all
doubt. — Vide Documents Inédits Rela-
tifs au Tombeau de Champlain, pat
PAbbé H. R. Cafgrain, L’Opinion Pub-
ligue, Montreal, 4 Nov. 1875.

iL

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 187

clofely affociated with the moderate party, which encouraged
and fuftained the broad, generous, and catholic principles of
that diftinguifhed fovereign.

When Champlain became lieutenant-governor of New
France, his attention was naturally turned to the religious
wants of his diftant domain. Proceeding cautioufly, after
patient and prolonged inquiry, he feleted miffionaries who
were earneft, zealous, and fully confecrated to their work.
And all whom he fubfequently invited into the field were
men of character and learning, whofe brave endurance of
hardfhip, and manly courage amid numberlefs perils, thed
glory and luftre upon their holy calling.

Champlain’s fympathies were always with his miffionaries
in their pious labors. Whether the enterprife were the
eftablifhment of a miffion among the diftant Hurons, among
the Algonquins on the upper St. Lawrence, or for the
enlargement of their accommodations at Quebec, the print-
ing of a catechifm in the language of the aborigines, or if
the foundations of a college were to be laid for the educa-
tion of the favages, his heart and hand were ready for the
work,

On the eftablifhment of the Company of New France, or
the Hundred Affociates, Proteftants were entirely excluded.
By its conftitution no Huguenots were allowed to {fettle
within the domain of the company. If this rule was not
fuggefted by Champlain, it undoubtedly exifted by his decided
and hearty concurrence. The mingling of Catholics and
Huguenots in the early hiftory of the colony had brought
with it numberlefs annoyances. By fifting the wheat before
it was fown, it was hoped to get rid of an otherwife inevitable

caufe

ASN ni PIGS ani a

Serre” ~

a ote

188 Memoir of 1635.

caufe of irritation and trouble. The corre¢tnefs of the prin-
ciple of Chriftian toleration was not admitted by the Roman
church then any more than it is now. Nor did the Prot-
eftants of that period believe in it, or praétife it, whenever
they poffeffed the power to do otherwife. Even the Purt-
tans of Maffachufetts Bay held that their charter conferred
upon them the right and power of exclufion. It was not
eafy, it is true, to carry out this view by fquare legal enact-
ment without coming into confli€t with the laws of England;
but they were adroit and {kilful, endowed with a marvellous
talent for finding fome indirect method of laying a heavy
hand upon Friend or Churchman, or the more independent
thinkers among their own numbers, who defired to make their
abode within the precinéts of the bay. In the earlier years
of the colony at Quebec, when Proteftant and Catholic were
there on equal terms, Champlain’s religious affociations led
him to fwerve neither to the right hand nor to the left. His
adminiftration was characterized by juftice, firmnefs, and
gentlenefs, and was defervedly fatisfactory to all parties.

In his later years, the little colony upon whofe welfare and
Chriftian culture he had beftowed fo much cheerful labor
and anxious thought, became every day more and more dear
to his heart. Within the ample folds of his charity were
likewife encircled the numerous tribes of favages, fpread over
the vaft domains of New France. He earneftly defired that
all of them, far and near, friend and foe, might be inftructed
in the dotrines of the Chriftian faith, and brought into will-
ing and loving obedience to the crofs.

In its perfonal application to his own heart, the religion
of Champlain was diftinguifhed by a natural and gradual

progrefs,

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 189

progrefs. His warmth, tendernefs, and zeal grew deeper
and ftronger with advancing years. In his religious life
there was a clearly marked feed-time, growth, and ripening
for the harveft. After his return to Quebec, during the laft
three years of his life, his time was efpecially fyftematized and
appropriated for intellectual and fpiritual improvement.
Some portion was given every morning by himfelf and thofe
who conftituted his family to a courfe of hiftorical reading,
and in the evening to the memoirs of the faintly dead whofe
lives he regarded as fuitable for the imitation of the living,
and each night for himfelf he devoted more or lefs time to
private meditation and prayer.

Such were the devout habits of Champlain’s life in his
later years. We are not, therefore, furprifed that the hifto-
rian of Canada, twenty-five years after his death, fhould
place upon record the following concife but comprehenfive
eulogy : —

“ His furpafling love of juftice, piety, fidelity to God, his
king, and the Society of New France, had always been con-
fpicuous. But in his death he gave fuch illuftrious proofs
of his goodnefs as to fill every one with admiration.” "7

The reader of thefe memoirs has doubtlefs obferved with
furprife and perhaps with difappointment, the readinefs with
which Champlain took part in the wars of the favages. On
his firft vifit to the valley of the St. Lawrence, he found the
Indians dwelling on the northern fhores of the river and the
lakes engaged in a deadly warfare with thofe on the fouth-
ern, the Iroquois tribes occupying the northern limits of the

prefent

1 Vide Creuxius, Hiftoria Canadenjis, pp. 183, 184.

SCE REAR

—

190 Memoir of 1635.

prefent State of New York, generally known as the Five
Nations. The hoftile relations between thefe favages were
not of recent date. They reached back to a very early but
indefinite period. They may have exifted for feveral centu-
ries. When Champlain planted his colony at Quebec, in
1608, he at once entered into friendly relations with all the
tribes which were his immediate neighbors. This was emi-
nently a fuitable thing to do, and was, moreover, neceffary
for his fafety and protection.

But a permanent and effective alliance with thefe tribes
carried with it of neceffity a folemn affurance of aid againft
their enemies. This Champlain promptly promifed without
hefitation, and the next year he fulfilled his promife by lead-
ing them to battle on the fhores of Lake Champlain. At
all fubfequent periods he regarded himfelf as committed to
aid his allies in their hoftile expeditions againft the Iroquois.
In his printed journal, he offers no apology for his conduct
in this refpeét, nor does he intimate that his views could be
queftioned either in morals or found policy. He rarely
affigns any reafon whatever for engaging in thefe wars. In
one or two inftances he ftates that it feemed to him neceflary
to do fo in order to facilitate the difcoveries which he wifhed
to make, and that he hoped it might in the end be the means
of leading the favages to embrace Chriftianity. But he no-
where enters upon a full difcuffion of this point. It is enough
to fay, in explanation of this filence, that a private journal like
that publifhed by Champlain, was not the place in which to
forefhadow a policy, efpecially as it might in the future be
fubject to change, and its fuccefs might depend upon its
being known only to thofe who had the power to fhape and

direct

1635. Samuel de Champlain. IQt

direct it. But neverthelefS the filence of Champlain has
doubtlefS led fome hiftorians to infer that he had no good
reafons to give, and unfavorable criticifms have been beftowed
upon his conduct by thofe, who did not underftand the cir.
cumftances which influenced him, or the motives which con-
trolled his aétion.

The war-policy of Champlain was undoubtedly very plainly
fet forth in his correfpondence and interviews with the vice-
roys and feveral companies under whofe authority he acted.
But thefe difcuffions, whether oral or written, do not appear
in general to have been preferved. Fortunately a fingle doc-
ument of this character is ftill extant, in which his views
are clearly unfolded. In Champlain’s remarkable letter to
Cardinal de Richelieu, which we have introduced a few pages
back, his policy is fully ftated. It is undoubtedly the fame
that he had aéted upon from the beginning, and explains the
franknefs and readinefs with which, firft and laft, as a faithful
ally, he had profeffed himéfelf willing to aid the friendly tribes
in their wars againft the Iroquois. The object which he
wifhed to accomplifh by this tribal war was, as fully ftated
in the letter to which we have referred, firft, to conquer the
Iroquois or Five Nations; to introduce peaceful relations be-
tween them and the other furrounding tribes ; and, fecondly,
to eftablifh a grand alliance of all the favage tribes, far and
near, with the French. This could only be done in the order
here ftated. No peace could be fecured from the Iroquois,
except by their conqueft, the utter breaking down of their
power. They were not fufceptible to the influence of reafon,
They were implacable, and had been brutalized by long-
inherited habits of cruelty. In the total annihilation of their

power

192 Memoir of 1635.

power was the only hope of peace. This being accomplifhed,
the furviving remnant would, according to the ufual cuftom
among the Indians, readily amalgamate with the victorious
tribes, and then a general alliance with the French could
be eafily fecured. This was what Champlain wifhed to
accomplifh. The pacification of all the tribes occupying
both fides of the St. Lawrence and the chain of north-
ern lakes would place the whole domain of the American
continent, or as much of it as it would be defirable to
hold, under the eafy and abfolute control of the French
nation.

Such a pacification as this would fecure two objects ;
objets eminently important, appealing {trongly to all who
defired the aggrandizement of France and the progrefs and
fupremacy of the Catholic faith. It would fecure for ever
to the French the fur-trade of the Indians, a commerce then
important and capable of vaft expanfion. The chief ftrength
and refources of the favages allied with the French, the
Montagnais, Algonquins, and Hurons, were at that period
expended in their wars. On the ceffation of hoftilities, their
whole force would naturally and inevitably be given to the
chafe. A grand field lay open to them for this exciting
occupation. The fur-bearing country embraced not only
the region of the St. Lawrence and the lakes, but the vatt
and unlimited expanfe of territory ftretching out indefinitely
in every direGtion. The whole northern half of the continent
of North America, filled with the moft valuable fur-producing
mammalia, would be open to the enterprife of the French,
and could not fail to pour into their treafury an incredible
amount of wealth. This Champlain was far-fighted enough

to

ee ae

)
!

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 193

to fee, and his patriotic zeal led him to defire that France
fhould avail herfelf of this opportunity.

But the conqueft of the Iroquois would not only open to
France the profpect of exhauftlefs wealth, but it would ren-
der acceffible a broad, extenfive, and inviting field of miffion-
arylabor. It would remove all external and phyfical obftacles
to the fpeedy tranfmiffion and offer of the Chriftian faith to
the numberlefs tribes that would thus be brought within
their reach.

The defire to bring about thefe two great ulterior pur-
pofes, the augmentation of the commerce of France in the
full development of the fur-trade, and the gathering into the
Catholic church the favage tribes of the wildernefs, explains
the readinefs with which, from the beginning, Champlain
encouraged his Indian allies and took part with them in their
wars againft the Five Nations. In the very laft year of his
life, he demanded of Richelieu the requifite military force to
carry on this war, reminding him that the coft would be
trifling to his Majefty, while the enterprife would be the
moft noble that could be imagined.

In regard to the domeftic and focial life of Champlain,
fcarcely any documents remain that can throw light upon

the

"8 The juftnefs of Champlain’s con-
ception of the value of the fur-trade has
been verified by its fubfequent hiftory.
The Hudfon’s Bay Company was organ-
ized for the purpofe of carrying on this
trade, under a charter granted by
Charles II., in 1670. A part of the
trade has at times been condu@ted by
other affociations. But this company
is ftill in aétive and vigorous operation.
Its capital is $10,000,000. At its reor-
ganization in 1863, it was eftimated that

it would yield a net annual income,
to be divided among the corporators,
of $400,000, It employs twelve hun-
dred fervants befide its chief faétors.
It is eafy to fee what a vaft amount of
wealth in the fhape of furs and peltry
has been pouring into the European
markets, for more than two hundred
years, from this fur-bearing region, and
the fources of this wealth are probably
little, if in any degree, diminithed.

194 Memowr of 1635.

the fubject. Of his parents we have little information
beyond that of their refpectable calling and ftanding. He
was probably an only child, as no others are on any occa-
fion mentioned or referred to. He married, as we have feen,
the daughter of the Secretary of the King’s Chamber, and
his wife, Héléne Boullé, accompanied him to Canada in 1620,
where fhe remained four years. They do not appear to have
had children, as the names of none are found in the records
at Quebec, and, at his death, the only claimant as an heir,
was a coufin, Marie Cameret, who, in 1639, refided at Ro-
chelle, and whofe hufband was Jacques Herfant, controller
of duties and impofts. After Champlain's deceafe, his wife,
Héléne Boullé, became a novice in an Urfuline convent in
the faubourg of St. Jacques in Paris. Subfequently, in
1648, fhe founded a religious houfe of the fame order in the
city of Meaux, contributing for the purpofe the fum of
twenty thoufand livres and fome part of the furnifhing. She
entered the houfe that fhe had founded, as a nun, under the
name of Sifter Héléne de St. Auguftin, where, as the
foundrefs, certain privileges were granted to her, fuch as a
fuperior quality of food for herfelf, exemption from attend-
ance upon fome of the longer fervices, the reception into the
convent, on her recommendation, of a young maiden to be
a nun of the choir, with fuch pecuniary affiftance as fhe
might need, and the letters of her brother, the Father Euf
tache Boullé, were to be exempted from the ufual infpection.
She died at Meaux, on the 2oth day of December, 1654, in

the convent which fhe had founded.'”
As

19 Vide Documents inédits sur Sa- ravay, archivifte-paléographe, Paris,
muel de Champlain, pax Etienne Cha- 1875.

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 195

As an explorer, Champlain was unfurpaffed by any who
vifited the northern coafts of America anterior to its perma-
nent fettlement. He was by nature endowed with a love of
ufeful adventure, and for the difcovery of new countries he
had an infatiable thirft. It began with him as a child, and
was frefh and irrepreffible in his lateft years. Among the
arts, he affigned to navigation the higheft importance. His
broad appreciation of it and his ftrong attachment to it, are
finely ftated in his own compact and comprehenfive defcrip-
tion.

“ Of all the moft ufeful and excellent arts, that of navigation
has always feemed to me to occupy the firft place. For the
more hazardous it is, and the more numerous the perils and
loffes by which it is attended, fo much the more is it efteemed
and exalted above all others, being wholly unfuited to the timid
and irrefolute. By this art we obtain a knowledge of differ-
ent countries, regions, and realms. By it we attract and bring
to our own land all kinds of riches; by it the idolatry of
paganifm is overthrown and Chriftianity proclaimed through-
out all the regions of the earth. This is the art which won
my love in my early years, and induced me to expofe myfelf
almoft all my life to the impetuous waves of the ocean, and
led me to explore the coafts of a part of America, efpecially
thofe of New France, where I have always defired to fee the
Lily flourith, together with the only religion, catholic, apo-
ftolic, and Roman.”

In addition to his natural love for difcovery, Champlain
had a combination of other qualities which rendered his
explorations pre-eminently valuable. His intereft did not
vanifh with feeing what was new. It was by no means a

mere

196 Memotr of 1635.

mere fancy for fimple fight-feeing. Reftleffnefs and volatility

did not belong to his temperament. His inveftigations were
never made as an end, but always as a means. His under-

takings in this direction were for the moft part fhaped and

colored by his Chriftian principle and his patriotic love of
France. Sometimes one and fometimes the other was more
prominent.

His voyage to the Weft Indies was undertaken under a
twofold impulfe. It gratified his love of exploration and
brought back rare and valuable information to France.
Spain at that time did not open her ifland-ports to the com-
merce of the world. She was drawing from them vaft reve-
nues in pearls and the precious metals. It was her policy to
keep this whole domain, this rich archipelago, hermetically |
fealed, and any foreign veffel approached at the rifk of cap-
ture and confifcation. Champlain could not, therefore,
explore this region under a commiffion from France. He
accordingly fought and obtained permiffion to vifit thefe
Spanifh poffeffions under the authority of Spain herfelf. He
entered and perfonally examined all the important ports that
furround and encircle the Caribbean Sea, from the pearl-
bearing Margarita on the fouth, Defeada on the eaft, to Cuba
on the weft, together with the city of Mexico, and the Ifth-
mus of Panama on the mainland. As the fruit of thefe jour-
neyings, he brought back a report minute in defcription, rich
in details, and luminous with illuftrations. This little bro-
chure, from the circumftances attendant upon its origin, is
unfurpaffed in hiftorical importance by any fimilar or com-
peting document of that period. It muft always remain of
the higheft value as a truftworthy, original authority, without

which

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 197

which it is probable that the hiftory of thofe iflands, for that
period, could not be accurately and truthfully written.

Champlain was a pioneer in the exploration of the Atlan-
tic coaft of New England and the eaftern provinces of Can-
ada. From the Strait of Canfeau, at the northeaftern
extremity of Nova Scotia, to the Vineyard Sound, on the
fouthern limits of Maffachufetts, he made a thorough furvey
of the coaft in 1605 and 1606, perfonally examining its moft
important harbors, bays, and rivers, mounting its headlands,
penetrating its forefts, carefully obferving and elaborately
defcribing its foil, its products, and its native inhabitants.
Befides lucid and definite defcriptions of the coaft, he exe-
cuted topographical drawings of numerous points of intereft
along our fhores, as Plymouth harbor, Naufet Bay, Stage
Harbor at Chatham, Gloucefter Bay, the Bay of Saco, with
the long ftretch of Old Orchard Beach and its interfperfed
iflands, the mouth of the Kennebec, and as many more on
the coaft of New Brunfwick and Nova Scotia. To thefe he
added defcriptions, more or lefs definite, of the harbors of
Barnftable, Wellfleet, Bofton, of the headland of Cape Anne,
Merrimac Bay, the Ifles of Shoals, Cape Porpoife, Rich-
mond’s Ifland, Mount Defert, Ifle Haute, Seguin, and the
numberlefs other iflands that adorn the exquifite fea-coaft of
Maine, as jewels that add a new luftre to the beauty of a
peerlefs goddefs.

Other navigators had coafted along our fhores. Some of
them had touched at fingle points, of which they made mea-
gre and unfatisfactory furveys. Gofnold had, in 1602, dif
covered Savage Rock, but it was fo indefinitely located and
defcribed that it cannot even at this day be identified. Re-

folving

198 Memowr of 1635.

folving to make a fettlement on one of the barren iflands
forming the group named in honor of Queen Elizabeth and
{till bearing her name, after fome weeks fpent in erecting a
ftorehoufe, and in colleGting a cargo of “furrs, fkyns, faxa-
fras, and other commodities,” the project of a fettlement was
abandoned and he returned to England, leaving, however,
two permanent memorials of his voyage, in the names which
he gave refpectively to Martha’s Vineyard and to the head-
land of Cape Cod.

Captain Martin Pringcame to our fhores in 1603, in fearch
of a cargo of faffafras. There are indications that he entered
the Penobfcot. He afterward paid his refpects to Savage
Rock, the undefined doxanza of his predeceffor. He foon
found his defired cargo on the Vineyard Iflands, and hatftily
returned to England.

Captain George Weymouth, in 1605, was on the coaft of
Maine concurrently, or nearly fo, with Champlain, where he
paffed a month, explored a river, fet up a crofs, and took pof-
feffion of the country in the name of the king. But where
thefe tranfaCtions took place is ftill in difpute, fo indefinitely
does his journalift defcribe them.

Captain John Smith, eight years later than Champlain,
furveyed the coaft of New England while his men were col-
leGting a cargo of furs and fifh. He wrote a defcription of
it from memory, part or all of it while a prifoner on board a
French fhip of war off Fayall, and executed a map, both
valuable, but neverthelefs exceedingly indefinite and general
in their character.

Thefe flying vifits to our fhores were not unimportant,
and muft not be undervalued. They were neceffary fteps in

the

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 199

the progrefs of the grand hiftorical events that followed.
But they were meagre and hafty and fuperficial, when com-
pared to the careful, deliberate, extenfive, and thorough, not
to fay exhauftive, explorations made by Champlain.

In the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Cartier had preceded Cham-
plain by a period of more than fixty years. During this
long, dreary half-century the ftillnefS of the primeval foreft
had not been difturbed by the woodman’s axe. When
Champlain’s eyes fell upon it, it was ftill the fame wild, un-
frequented, unredeemed region that it had been to its firft
difcoverer, The rivers, bays, and iflands defcribed by Car-
tier were identified by Champlain, and the names they had
already received were permanently fixed by his added au-
thority. The whole gulf and river were re-examined and
defcribed anew in his journal. The exploration of the Riche-
lieu and of Lake Champlain was puthed into the interior
three hundred miles from his bafe at Quebec. It reached
into a wildernefs and along gentle waters never before feen
by any civilized race. It was at once fafcinating and hazard-
ous, environed as it was by vigilant and ferocious favages,
who guarded its gates with the fleeplefs watchfulnefs of the
fabled Cerberus.

The courage, endurance, and heroifm of Champlain were
tefted in the ftill greater exploration of 1615. It extended
from Montreal, the whole length of the Ottawa, to Lake
Nipiffing, the Georgian Bay, Simcoe, the fyftem of fmall
lakes on the fouth, acrofs the Ontario, and finally ending in
the interior of the State of New York, a journey through
tangled forefts and broken water-courfes of more than a
thoufand miles, occupying nearly a year, executed in the

face

200 Memoir of 1635-

face of phyfical fuffering and hardfhip before which a nature
lef intrepid and determined, lefs loyal to his great purpofe,
lefs generous and unfelfith, would have yielded at the outfet.
Thefe journeys into the interior, along the courfes of navi-
gable rivers and lakes, and through the primitive forefts, laid
open to the knowledge of the French a domain vaft and in-
definite in extent, on which an empire broader and far richer
in refources than the old Gallic France might have been
fuccefsfully reared.

The perfonal explorations of Champlain in the Weft In-
dies, on the Atlantic coaft, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, in
the State of New York and of Vermont, and among the
lakes in Canada and thofe that divide the Dominion from
the United States, including the full, explicit, and detailed
journals which he wrote concerning them, place Champlain
undeniably not merely in the front rank, but at the head of
the long lift of explorers and navigators, who early vifited
this part of the continent of North America.

Champlain’s literary labors are interefting and important.
They were not profeffional, but incidental, and the natural
outgrowth of the career to which he devoted his life. He
had the fagacity to fee that the fields which he entered as
an explorer were new and important, that the afpect of every
thing which he then faw would, under the influence and
progrefs of civilization, foon be changed, and that it was
hiftorically important that a portrait fketched by an eye-
witnefs fhould be handed down to other generations. It
was likewife neceffary for the immediate and fuccefsful
planting of colonies, that thofe who engaged in the under-
taking fhould have before them full information of all the

conditions

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 201

conditions on which they were to build their hopes of final
fuccefs.

Infpired by fuch motives as thefe, Champlain wrote out
an accurate journal of the events that tranfpired about him,
of what he perfonally faw, and of the obfervations of others,
authenticated by the beft tefts which, under the circumftances,
he was able toapply. His natural endowments for this work
were of the higheft order. As an obferver he was fagacious,
difcriminating, and careful. His judgment was cool, com-
prehenfive, and judicious. His ftyle is in general clear, logi-
cal, and compact. His acquired ability was not, however,
extraordinary. He was a {cholar neither by education nor
by profeffion. His life was too full of ative duties, or too
remote from the centres of knowledge for acquifitions in the
departments of elegant and refined learning. The period
in which he lived was little diftinguifhed for literary culture.
A more brilliant day was approaching, but it had not yet
appeared. The French language was ftill crude and unpol-
ifhed. It had not been difciplined and moulded into the
excellence to which it foon after arofe in the reign of Louis
XIV. We cannot in reafon look for a grace, refinement,
and flexibility which the French language had not at that
time generally attained. But it is eafy to fee under the rude,
antique, and now obfolete forms which charatterize Cham-
plain’s narratives, the elements of a f{tyle which, under early
difcipline, nicer culture, and a richer vocabulary, might have
made ita model for all times. There are, here and there, fome
involved, unfinifhed, and obf{cure paffages, which feem, in-
deed, to be the offspring of hafte, or perhaps of carelefS and
inadequate proof-reading. But in general his {tyle is with-

26 out

At

‘| +
We
i j
f tf a

Syper er oo

202 Memowr of 1635-

out ornament, fimple, dignified, concife, and clear. While
he was not a diffufive writer, his works are by no means lim-
ited in extent, as they occupy in the late erudite Laverdiere’s
edition, fix quarto volumes, containing fourteen hundred
pages. In them are three large maps, delineating the whole
northeaftern part of the continent, executed with great care
and labor by his own hand, together with numerous local
drawings, picturing not only bays and harbors, Indian canoes,
wigwams, and fortreffes, but feveral battle fcenes, conveying
a clear idea, not poffible by a mere verbal defcription, of the
favage implements and mode of warfare.° His works in-
clude, likewife, a treatife on navigation, full of excellent fug-
geftions to the practical feaman of that day, drawn from
his own experience, ftretching over a period of more than
forty years.

The Voyages of Champlain, as an authority, muft always
ftand in the front rank. In truftworthinefs, in richnefs and
fullnefs of detail, they have no competitor in the field of
which they treat. His obfervations upon the character,
manners, cuftoms, habits, and utenfils of the aborigines, were
made before they were modified or influenced in their mode
of life by European civilization. The intercourfe of the
ftrolling fur-trader and fifhermen with them was fo infre-
quent and brief at that early period, that it made upon them
little or no impreffion. Champlain confequently pictures
the Indian in his original, primeval fimplicity. This will

always

120 The later fketches made by Cham- accurate, but fome of them are fkilfully
plain are greatly fuperior to thofe which done, and not only do no difcredit to an
he executed to illuftrate his voyage in amateur, but difcover marks of artiftic
the Weft Indies. They are not only tafte and {fkill.

1635. Samuel de Champlain. 203

always give to his narratives, in the eye of the hiftorian,
the ethnologift, and the antiquary, a peculiar and pre-emi-
nent importance. The refult of perfonal obfervation, emi-
nently truthful and accurate, their teftimony muft in all
future time be incomparably the beft that can be obtained
relating to the aborigines on this part of the American con-
tinent,

In completing this memoir, the reader can hardly fail to
be impreffed, not to fay difappointed, by the fact that refults
apparently infignificant fhould thus far have followed a life
of able, honeft, unfelfith, heroic labor. The colony was ttill
fmall in numbers, the acres fubdued and brought into culti-
vation were few, and the aggregate yearly products were
meagre. But it is to be obferved that the productivenefs of
capital and labor and talent, two hundred and feventy years
ago, cannot well be compared with the ftandards of to-day.
Moreover, the refults of Champlain’s career are infignificant
rather in appearance than in reality. The work which he
did was in laying foundations, while the fuperftructure was
to be reared in other years and by other hands. The palace
or temple, by its lofty and majettic proportions, attracts the
eye and gratifies the tafte; but its unfeen foundations, with
their nicely adjufted arches, without which the fuperftructure
would crumble to atoms, are not lefs the refult of the pro-
found knowledge and praétical wifdom of the architect. The
explorations made by Champlain early and late, the organ-
ization and planting of his colonies, the refiftance of avari-
cious corporations, the holding of numerous favage tribes in
friendly alliance, the daily adminiftration of the affairs of the
colony, of the favages, and of the corporation in France, to

the

She ee

eT ene

204 Memoir of De Champlam. 1635.

the eminent fatisfaGtion of all generous and noble-minded
patrons, and this for a period of more than thirty years, are
proofs of an extraordinary combination of mental and moral
qualities. Without impulfivenefs, his warm and tender fym-
pathies imparted to him an unufual power and influence over
other men. He was wife, modeft, and judicious in council,
prompt, vigorous, and practical in adminiftration, fimple and
frugal in his mode of life, perfiftent and unyielding in the
execution of his plans, brave and valiant in danger, un-
felfifh, honeft, and confcientious in the difcharge of duty.
Thefe qualities, rare in combination, were always confpic-
uous in Champlain, and juftly entitle him to the refpect and
admiration of mankind.

ia
»

ANNOTATIONES POSTSCRIPTA.

USTACHE BOULLE. A brother-inlaw of
Champlain, who made his firft vifit to Canada
in 1618. He was an aétive affiftant of Cham-
plain, and in 1625 was named his lieutenant.
He continued there until the taking of Quebec

by the Englith in 1629. He fubfequently took holy orders.

—Vide Doc. inédits fur Samuel de Champlain, par Etienne

Charavay. Paris, 1875, p. 8.

Pont GravE. The whole career of this diftinguifhed
merchant was clofely affociated with Canadian trade. He
was in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, in the intereft of Chauvin,
in 1599. He commanded the expedition fent out by De

‘Chafte in 1603, when Champlain made his firt exploration

of the River St. Lawrence. He was intrufted with the chief
management of the trade carried on with the Indians by the
various companies and viceroys under Champlain’s lieuten-
ancy until the removal of the colony by the Englith, when
his active life was clofed by the infirmities of age. He was
always a warm and trufted friend of Champlain, who fought
his counfel on all occafions of importance.

THE

/
4
:
tif
e

206 Annotationes Postscripte.

Tue Birtu or Cuampiarn. All efforts to fix the exa@
date of his birth have been unfuccefsful. M. De Richemond,
author of a Biographie de la Charente Inférieure, inftituted
moft careful fearches, particularly with the hope of finding a
record of his baptifm. The records of the parith of Brou-
age extend back only to Auguft 11, 1615. The duplicates,
depofited at the office of the civil tribunal of Marennes
anterior to this date, were deftroyed by fire.— I/S. letter of
M. De Richemond, Archivift of the Dep. of Charente Lnfe-
rieure, La Rochelle, July 17, 1875.

Marc Lescarsot. We have cited the authority of this
writer in this work on many occafions. He was born at
Vervins, perhaps about 1585. He became an advocate, and
a refident of Paris, and, according to Larouffe, died in 1630.
He came to America in 1606, and paffed the winter of that
year at the French fettlement near the prefent fite of Lower
Granville, on the weftern bank of Annapolis Bafin in Nova
Scotia. In the fpring of 1607 he croffed the Bay of Fundy,
entered the harbor of St. John, N. B., and extended his voy-
age as far as De Monts’s Ifland in the River St. Croix. He
returned to France that fame year, on the breaking up of
De Monts’s colony. He was the author of the following,
works: LHzftoire de la Nouvelle France, 1609; Les M: ufes de
la Nouvelle France; Tableau de la Suze, auguel font décrites
les Singularites des Alpes, Paris, 1618; La Chaffe aux Anglais
dans Vifle de Rhé et au Siége de la Rochelle, et la Réduétion
de cette Ville en 1628. Paris, 1629.

PirymoutH Harszor. This note will modify our remarks
on p. 78, Vol. II. Champlain entered this harbor on the

18th

Annotationes Postscripte. 207

18th of July, 1605, and, lingering but a fingle day, failed
out of it on the r9th. He named it Port S¢ Louts, or Port
du Cap St. Louis.— Vide antea, Pp. 53, 54; Vol. IL, pp.
76-78. As the fruit of his brief ftay in the harbor of Plym-
outh, he made an outline {ketch of the bay which preferves
moft of its important features. He delineates what is now
called on our Coaft Survey maps Long Beach and Duxbury
Beach. At the fouthern extremity of the latter is the head-
land known as the Gurnet. Within the bay he figures two
iflands, of which he fpeaks alfo in the text. Thefe two
iflands are mentioned in Mourt’s Relation, printed in 1622,
— Vide Dexter's ed. p. 60. They are alfo figured on an old
map of the date of 1616, found by J. R. Brodhead in the
Royal Archives at the Hague; likewife on a map by Lucini,
without date, but, as it has Bofton on it, it muft have been
executed after 1630. Thefe maps may be found in Doe.
fis. of the State of New York, Vol. 1.; Documents relating
to the Colonial His. of the State of New York, Vol. Epos
The reader will find thefe iflands likewife indicated on the
map of William Wood, entitled Zhe South part of New-
England, as it ts Planted this yeare, 1634.— Vide New Eng-
land Profpeé?, Prince Society ed. They appear alfo on
Blafkowitz’s “ Plan of Plimouth,” 1774. — Vide Changes in
the Harbor of Plymouth, by Prof. Henry Mitchell, Chief
of Phyfical Hydrography, U. S. Coaft Survey, Report of
1876, Appendix No. 9. In the colle@tions of the Mafs,
Hiftorical Society for 1793, Vol. II. in an article entitled
A Topographical Defcription of Duxborough, but without
the author’s name, the writer {peaks of two pleafant iflands
within the harbor, and adds that Saquifh was joined to the

Gurnet

Termes

STI

tI NINES TMA DEE TEES

208 Annotationes Postscripte.

Gurnet by a narrow piece of land, but for fev eral years the
water had made its way acrofs and 2z/ulated it.

From the early maps to which we have referred, and the
foregoing citations, it appears that there were two iflands in
the harbor of Plymouth from the time of Champlain till
about the beginning of the prefent century. A careful col-
lation of Champlain’s map of the harbor with the recent
Coaft Survey Charts will render it evident that one of ee
iflands thus figured by Champlain, and by others later,

Saquifh Head; that fince his time a fand- bank has need
thrown up and now become permanent, connecting it with
the Gurnet by what is now called Saquifh Neck. Prof.
Mitchell, in the work already cited, reports that there are
now four fathoms lefs of water in the deeper portion of the
roadftead than when Champlain explored the harbor in 1605.
There mutt, therefore, have
{and to produce this refult, and this accounts for the neck of
{and which has been thrown up and become fixed or perma-
nent, now conneéting Saquifh Head with the Gurnet.

been an enormous depofit of

Mount Desert. This ifland was difcovered on the fifth
day of September, 1604. Champlain having been comif-
fioned by Sieur De Monts, the Patentee of La Cadie, to
make difcoveries on the coaft fouthweft of the Saint Croix,
left the mouth of that river in a fmall barque of feventeen or
eighteen tons, with twelve failors and two favages as guides,
and anchored the fame evening, apparently near Bar Harbor.
While here, they explored Frenchman’s Bay as far on the
north as the Narrows, where Champlain fays the diftance
acrofs to the mainland is not more than a hundred paces.

The

Hull

4

|
|,
h

Annotationes Postscripte. 209

The next day, on the fixth of the month, they failed two
leagues, and came to Otter Creek Cove, which extends up
into the ifland a mile or more, neftling between the fpurs of
Newport Mountain on the eaft and Green Mountain on the
weft. Champlain fays this cove is “at the foot of the moun-
tains,” which clearly identifies it, as it is the only one in the
neighborhood anfwering to this defcription. In this cove
they difcovered feveral favages, who had come there to hunt
beavers and to fifth, On a vifit to Otter Cove Cliffs in
June, 1880, we were told by an old fifherman ninety years
of age, living on the borders of this cove, and the ftatement
was confirmed by feveral others, that on the creek at the
head of the cove, there was, within his memory, a well-
known beaver dam.

The Indians whofe acquaintance Champlain made at this
place conducted him among the iflands, to the mouth of the
Penobfcot, and finally up the river, to the fite of the prefent
city of Bangor. It was on this vifit, on the fifth of Septem-
ber, 1604, that Champlain gave the ifland the name of AZonts-
déferts. The French generally gave to places names that
were fignificant. In this inftance they did not depart
from their ufual cuftom. The fummits of most of the moun-
tains on this ifland, then as now, were only rocks, being
deftitute of trees, and this led Champlain to give its fignifi-
cant name, which, in plain Englifh, means the ifland of the
defert, wafte, or uncultivatable mountains. If we follow the
analogy of the language, either French or Englith, it fhould
be pronounced with the accent on the penult, Mount Défert,
and not on the laft fyllable, as we fometimes hear it. This
principle cannot be violated without giving to the word a

27 meaning

|
i

— ne -

SS=

|

Hh
|
|

Myper ee ors eos
RCE MOT SARE ORT TATT ey ATR a

ree igdiaane

210 Annotationes Postscripte.

meaning which, in this connection, would be obvioufly inap-
propriate and abfurd.

Carte pE LA NovvELLeE FRANCE, 1632. As the map of
1632 has often been referred to in this work, we have intro-
duced into this volume a heliotype copy. The original was
publifhed in the year of its date, but it had been completed
before Champlain left Quebec in 1629. The reader will bear
in mind that it was made from Champlain’s perfonal explo-
rations, and from fuch other information as could be ob-
tained from the meagre fources which exifted at that early
period, and not from any accurate or fcientific furveys.
The information which he obtained from others was derived
from more or lefs doubtful fources, coming as it did from
fifhermen, fur-traders, and the native inhabitants. The two
former undoubtedly conftructed, from time to time, rude
maps of the coaft for their own ufe. From thefe Champlain
probably obtained valuable hints, and he was thus able to
fupplement his own knowledge of the regions with which he
was leaft familiar on the Atlantic coaft and in the Gulf of
St. Lawrence. Beyond the limits of his perfonal explorations
on the weft, his information was wholly derived from the
favages. No European had penetrated into thofe regions, if
we except his fervant, Etienne Brile, whofe defcriptions
could have been of very little fervice. The deficiencies of
Champlain’s map are here accordingly moft apparent. Riv-
ers and lakes farther weft than the Georgian Bay, and fouth
of it, are fometimes laid down where none exift, and, again,
where they do exift, none are portrayed. The outline of
Lake Huron, for illuftration, was entirely mifconceived. A

river-like

|
|
|

Annotationes Postscripte. 211

river-like line only of water reprefents Lake Erie, while Lake
Michigan does not appear at all.

The delineation of Hudfon’s Bay was evidently taken from
the Tasuta Nautica of Henry Hudfon, as we have fhown
in Note 297, Vol. II., to which the reader is referred.

It will be obferved that there is no recognition on the
map of any Englith fettlement within the limits of New
England. In 1629, when the Carte de la Novvelle France
was completed, an Englith colony had been planted at Plym-
outh, Mafs., nine years, and another at Pifcataqua, or Portf-
mouth, N. H., fix years. The Rev. William Blaxton had
been for feveral years in occupation of the peninfula of
Shawmut, or Bofton. Salem had alfo been fettled one or
two years. These laft two may not, it is true, have come
to Champlain’s knowledge. But none of thefe fettlements
are laid down on the map. The reafon of thefe omiffions
is obvious. The whole territory from at leaft the goth de-
gree of north latitude, ftretching indefinitely to the north,
was claimed by the French. As poffeffion was, at that day,
the moft potent argument for the juftice of a territorial
claim, the recognition, on a French map, of thefe Englith
fettlements, would have been an indifcretion which the wife
and prudent Champlain would not be likely to commit.

There is, however, a diftin@ recognition of an Englith
fettlement farther fouth. Cape Charles and Cape Henry
appear at the entrance of Chefapeake Bay. Virginia is in-
fcribed in its proper place, while Jameftown and Point Com-
fort are referred to by numbers,

On the borders of the map numerous fifh belonging to
thefe waters are figured, together with feveral veffels of dif

ferent

4
i
f
j
t
;

EN ee?

0 Gere ttt rr

212 Annotationes Postscripte.

ferent fizes and in different attitudes, thus preferving their
form and ftructure at that period. The degrees of latitude
and longitude are numerically indicated, which are convenient
for the references found in Champlain’s journals, but are
neceffarily too inaccurate to be otherwife ufeful. But not-
withftanding its defects, when we take into account the lim-
ited means at his command, the difficulties which he had to
encounter, the vaft region which it covers, this map muft be
regarded as an extraordinary achievement. It is by far the
moft accurate in outline, and the moft finifhed in detail, of
any that had been attempted of this region anterior to this
date.

Tue Porrrairs oF CHAMPLAIN.— Three engraved por-
traits of Champlain have come to our knowledge. All of
them appear to have been after an original engraved portrait
by Balthazar Moncornet. This artift was born in Rouen
about 1615, and died not earlier than 1670. He practifed
his art in Paris, where he kept a fhop for the fale of prints.
Though not eminently diftinguifhed as a fkilful artift, he
neverthelefs left many works, particularly a great number of
portraits. As he had not arrived at the age of manhood
when Champlain died, his engraving of him was probably
executed about fifteen or twenty years after that event. At
that time Madame Champlain, his widow, was ftill living, as
likewife many of Champlain’s intimate friends. From fome
of them it is probable Moncornet obtained a fketch or por-
trait, from which his engraving was made.

Of the portraits of Champlain which we have feen, we
may mention firft that in Laverdiére’s edition of his works.

This

Annotationes Postscripte. 213

This is a half-length, with long, curling hair, mouftache and
imperial. The fleeves of the clofe-fitting coat are flafhed,
and around the neck is the broad linen collar of the period,
faftened in front with cord and taffels. On the left, in the
background, is the promontory of Quebec, with the repre-
fentation of feveral turreted buildings both in the upper and
lower town. On the border of the oval, which inclofes the
fubject, is the legend, Moncornet Ex c. ~. The engraving
is coarfely executed, apparently on copper. It is alleged to
have been taken from an original Moncornet in France.
Our inquiries as to where the original then was, or in whofe
poffeffion it then was or is now, have been unfuccefsful. No
original, when inquiries were made by Dr. Otis, a fhort time
fince, was found to exift in the department of prints in the
Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris.

Another portrait of Champlain is found in Shea’s tranfla-
tion of Charlevoix’s Hiftory of New France. This was taken
from the portrait of Champlain, which, with that of Cartier,
Montcalm, Wolfe, and others, adorns the walls of the recep-
tion room of the Speaker of the Houfe of Commons, in the
Parliament Houfe at Ottawa, in Canada, which was painted
by Thomas Hamel, from a copy of Moncornet’s engraving
obtained in France by the late M. Faribault. From the
coftume and general features, it appears to be after the fame
as that contained in Laverdiére’s edition of Champlain’s
works, to which we have already referred. The artift has
given it a youthful appearance, which fuggefts that the origi-
nal {ketch was made many years before Champlain’s death.
We are indebted to the politenefs of Dr. Shea for the copies
which accompany this work.

A

214 Annotationes Postscripte.

A third portrait of Champlain may be found in L’Hiftoire
de France, par M. Guizot, Paris, 1876, Vol. v. p. 149. The
infcription reads: “Cuamptain [SAMUEL DE], d’aprés un
portrait grave par Moncornet.” It is engraved on wood
by E. Ronjat, and reprefents the fubjeét in the advanced
years of his life. In pofition, coftume, and acceffories it is
widely different from the others, and Moncornet mutt have
left more than one engraving of Champlain, or we muft
conclude that the modern artifts have taken extraordinary
liberties with their fubje@t. The features are {trong, {pirited,
and chara¢teriftic. A heliotype copy accompanies this
volume.

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION.

HE journals of Champlain, commonly called his
Voyages, were written and publifhed by him at
intervals from 1603 to 1632. The firft volume
was printed in 1603, and entitled, —

1. Des Savvages, ov, Voyage de Samvel Champlain, de
Brovage, fait? en la France Nouuelle, Can mil Jix cens trots.
A Paris, chez Clavde de Monftr ceil, tenant Ja boutigue en la
Cour du Palais, au nom de Fefus. 1604. Auec priuilege du
Roy. 12mo. 4 preliminary leaves. Text 36 leaves. The
title-page contains alfo a fub-title, enumerating in detail the
fubjects treated of in the work. Another copy with flight
verbal changes has no date on the title-page, but in both
the “ privilége” is dated November 15, 1603. The copies
which we have ufed are in the Library of Harvard College,
and in that of Mrs. John Carter Brown, of Providence, R. I.

An Englifh tranflation of this iffue is contained in Pur-
chas his Pilgrimes. WLondon, 1625, vol. iv., pp. 1605-16109.

The next publication appeared in 1613, with the following
title : —

2. Les Voyages dv Sievr de Champlain Xatntongeots,
Capitaine ordinatre pour le Roy, en la marine. Divifez en
dev livres. ou, jovrnal tref-fidele des obfervations faites és

defcouuertures

t
eis |F
: 4
' P
7 a
) Beas
he
|

AOR SS re RO MENESISeh  S

pure —
Pome Tt. Steger

¥

216 Preface to the Translation.

defcouuertures de la Nouuelle France: tant en la defcriptid
des terres, coftes, riuieres, ports, haures, leurs hauteurs, &
plufieurs delinatfons de la guide-aymant ; guen la creace des
peuples, leur Juperflition, fagon de viure & de guerroyer:
enricht de quantile de figures. A Paris, chez Fean Berjon,
vue S. Fean de Beauuats, au Cheual volant, & en Ja boutique
au Palais, & la gallerie des prifonniers. MDC, XLl. Ave
privilege dv Roy. 4to. 10 preliminary leaves. Text, 325
pages; table 5 pp. One large folding map. One fmall
map. 22 plates. The title-page contains, in addition, a
fub-title in regard to the two maps.

The above-mentioned volume contains, alfo, the Fourth
Voyage, bound in at the end, with the following title: —

Quvatrie/me Voyage dv S’ de Champlain Capitaine ordin-
aire pour le Roy en la marine, & Lieutenant de Monfecgneur
le Prince de Condé en la Nouuelle France, fait en lannee
1613. 52 pages. Whether this was alfo iffued as a fepa-
rate work, we are not informed.

The copy of this publication of 1613 which we have ufed
is in the Library of Harvard College.

The next publication of Champlain was in 1619. There
was a re-iffue of the fame in 1620 and likewife in 1627.
The title of the laft-mentioned iffue is as follows : —

3. Voyages et Defcovvertvres faites en la Novivelle France,
depuis lannée 1615. tufgues a la fin de Lannée 1618. Parle
Sieur de Champlain, Cappitaine ordinaire pour le Roy en la
Mer du Ponant. Seconde Edition. A Paris, chez Clavde Col-
let,au Palais, en la gallerie des Prifonniers. M.D.C.XX VII.
Avec privilege dv Roy, 12mo. 8 preliminary leaves. Text
158 leaves, 6 plates. The title-page contains, in addition,

a

;

"de Chaz
au Capita
dinaive

LES
VOYAGES
S”
on,
"le ROY
ct la nonmelle

J

Adu

; mpl
Be
b France es an: fy

SESE oo at re A a prior

Co won a Ai he NAS AN SD I IRON

oi

Sot aiDpt Aen sansa FT

Preface to the Translation. 217

a fub-title, giving an outline of the contents. The edition
of 1627, belonging to the Library of Harvard College, con-
tains likewife an illuminated title-page, which we here give
in heliotype. As this illuminated title-page bears the date
of 1619, it was probably that of the original edition of that
date.

The next and laft publication of Champlain was iffued in
1632, with the following title : —

4. Les Voyages de la Novvelle France occidentale, ditle
Canada, faits par le S* de Champlain Xainctongeors, Capt-
taine pour le Roy en la Marine du Ponant, & toutes les
Defcouuertes guila faites en ce pais depurs Lan 1603. tu/ques
en Lan 1629. Ox fe voit comme ce pays a fie premuerement
defcouuert par les Frrangors, fous Cauthorité de nos Roys tref-
Chreftiens, tufques au regne de fa Majefie & prefent regnante
Lovits XIII. Roy de France & de Navarre. A Paris. Chez
Clavde Collet au Palais, en la Gallerie des Prifonniers, &
LE ftoille d Or, M.DC.XXXII, Aue Priuilege du Roy.
There is alfo a long fub-title, with a ftatement that the vol-
ume contains what occurred in New France in 1631. The
volume is dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu. 4to. 16 prelim-
inary pages. Text 308 pages. 6 plates, which are the fame
as thofe in the edition of 1619. “Seconde Partie,” 310
pages. One large general map; table explanatory of map,
8 pages. “Traitte de la Marine,” 54 pages. 2 plates.
“ Doétrine Chreftienne” and “ L’Oraifon Dominicale,” 20
pages. Another copy gives the name of Seveftre as pub-
lifher, and another that of Pierre Le-Mvr.

The publication of 1632 is ftated by Laverdiére to have
been reiffued in 1640, with a new title and date, but without

28 further

i
-
HY
:
:

i —-
pet tnntae eae

1 sta a= a P
TOON REST TF nee

1 ORSAY oe

218 Preface to the Translation.

further changes. This, however, is not found in the National
Library at Paris, which contains all the other editions and
iffues. The copies of the edition of 1632 which we have
confulted are in the Harvard College Library and in the
30fton Athenzeum.

It is of importance to refer, as we have done, to the partic-
ular copy ufed, for it appears to have been the cuftom in
the cafe of books printed as early as the above, to keep the
type ftanding, and print iffues at intervals, fometimes with-
out any change in the title-page or date, and yet with alter-
ations to fome extent in the text. For inftance, the copy of
the publication of 1613 in the Harvard College Library
differs from that in Mrs. Brown’s Library, at Providence, in
minor points, and particularly in reference to fome changes
in the fmall map. The fame is true of the publication of
1603. The variations are probably in part owing to the
lack of uniformity in fpelling at that period.

None of Champlain’s works had been reprinted until 1830,
when there appeared, in two volumes, a reprint of the publi-
cation of 1632, “at the expenfe of the government, in order
to give work to printers.” Since then there has been pub-
lithed the elaborate work, with extenfive annotations, of the
Abbé Laverdiére, as follows : —

CEvuvrES DE CHAMPLAIN, PUBLIEES SOUS LE PATRONAGE DE
LUNIVERSITE Lava: Par v’Assé C, H. Laverpiére, M. A.
SEconDE Epition. 6 TOMES. 4TO. QUEBEC: IMPRIME AU
SEMINAIRE PAR Geo. E. DEsBaRATS. 1870.

This contains all the works of Champlain above mentioned,
and the text is a faithful reprint from the early Paris edi-
tions. It includes, in addition to this, Champlain’s narrative

of

Preface to the Translation. 219

of his voyage to the Weft Indies, in 1598, of which the fol-
lowing is the title : —

Brief Difcovrs des chofes plus remargqvables gue Sammvel
Champlain de Brovage a reconneues aux Indes Occidentalles
au voiage guil en a farét en icelles en Cannée mil v’ w17.**. xix.
& en année mil v7 7. comme enfurt.

This had never before been publifhed in French, al-
though a tranflation of it had been iffued by the Hakluyt
Society in 1859. The JZS. is the only one of Champlain’s
known to exift, excepting a letter to Richelieu, publifhed by
Laverdiere among the “ Piéces Juftificatives.” When ufed
by Laverdiére it was in the poffeffion of M. Feret, of Dieppe,
but has fince been advertifed for fale by the Paris bookfell-
ers, Maifonneuve & Co., at the price of 15,000 francs, and is
now in the poffeffion of M. Pinart.

The volume printed in 1632 has been frequently com-
pared with that of 1613, as if the former were merely a
fecond edition of the latter. But this conveys an erroneous
idea of the relation between the two. In the firft place, the
volume of 1632 contains what is not given in any of the
previous publications of Champlain. That is, it extends his
narrative over the period from 1620 to 1632. It likewife
goes over the fame ground that is covered not only by the
volume of 1613, but alfo by the other ftill later publications
of Champlain, up to 1620. It includes, moreover, a treatife
on navigation. In the fecond place, it is an abridgment,
and not a fecond edition in any proper fenfe. It omits
for the most part perfonal details and defcriptions of the
manners and cuftoms of the Indians, fo that very much that
is effential to the full comprehenfion of Champlain’s work

as

FO eae TRAHAN TIT

FR ANDES WT
RMIT 7

220 Preface to the Translation.

as an obferver and explorer is gone. Moreover, there feems
to be fome internal evidence indicating that this abridgment
was not made by Champlain himfelf, and Laverdiére fug-
gefts that the work has been tampered with by anothet
haid. Thus, all favorable allufions to the Récollets, to
whom Champlain was friendly, are modified or expunged,
while the Jefuits are made to appear in a prominent and fav-
orable light. This queftion has been {pecially confidered
by Laverdigre in his introduction to the iffue of 1632, to
which the reader is referred.

The language ufed by Champlain is effentially the claffic
French of ‘the time of Henry IV. The dialect or patois of
Saintonge, his native province, was probably underftood and
fpoken by him; but we have not difcov ered any influence of
it in his writings, either in refpect to idiom or vocabulary.
An occafional appearance at court, and his conftant official
intercourfe with public men of prominence at Paris and
elfewhere, rendered neceffary ftrict attention to the language
he ufed.

But though ufing in general the language of court and
literature, he offends not unfrequently apa the rules of
grammar and logical arrangement. Probab ly his bufy career
did not allow him to read, much lefs ftudy, at leaft in refer-
ence to their ftyle, fuch mafter pieces of literature as the
“Effais” of Montaigne, the ie a of Amyot, or the
“ Hiftoire Univerfelle” of D’Aubigné. The voyages of Cartier
he undoubtedly read; but, although fuperior in point of lit
erary merit to Champlain’s writings, they were by no means
without their blemifhes, nor were they worthy of being com-
pared with the claffical authors to which we have alluded. But

Champlain’s

Preface to the Translation. 221

Champlain’s difcourfe is fo ftraightforward, and the thought
fo fimple and clear, that the meaning is feldom obfcure, and
his occafional violations of grammar and loofenefs of ftyle
are quite pardonable in one whofe occupations left him little
time for correction and revifion. Indeed, one rather won-
ders that the unpretending explorer writes fo well. It is the
thought, not the words, which occupies his attention. Some-
times, after beginning a period which runs on longer than
ufual, his intereft in what he has to narrate feems fo com-
pletely to occupy him that he forgets the way in which he
commenced, and concludes in a manner not in logical ac-
cordance with the beginning. We fubjoin a paffage or two
illuftrative of his inadvertencies in refpect to language. They
are from his narrative of the voyage of 1603, and the text of
the Paris edition is followed:

1. “Au dit bout du lac, il y a des peuples qui font caban-
nez, puis on entre dans trois autres riuieres, quelques trois
ou quatre iournees das chacune, ot au bout defdites riuieres,
il y a deux ou trois manieres de lacs, d’ot prend la fource
du Saguenay.” Chap. iv.

2. “Cedit iour rengeant toufiours ladite cofte du Nort,
iufques 4 vn lieu ot nous relachafmes pour les vents qui
nous eftoiét contraires, ot il y auoit force rochers & lieux
fort dangereux, nous feufmes trois iours en attendant le beau
temps.” Chap. v.

3. “ Ce feroit vn grand bien qui pourroit trouuer a la cofte
de la Floride quelque paffage qui allaft donner proche du
fufdit grand lac.” Chap. x.

4. “lefquelles [riuieres] vont dans les terres, ot! le pays y
eft tref-bon & fertille, & de fort bons ports.” Chap. x.

i
H |
j

2

bdo

2 Preface to the Translation.

5. “Il yaauffi vne autre petite riuiere qui va tomber comme
a moitie chemin de celle par ot reuint ledict fieur Preuert,
ou font comme deux manieres de lacs en cefte-dicte riuiere.”
Chap. xii.

The following paflages are taken at random from the voy-
ages of 1604-10, as illuftrative of Champlain’s ftyle in gen-
eral :

1. Explorations in the Bay of Fundy, Voyage of 1604-8.

“ De la riuiere fainct Iean nous fufmes 4 quatre ifles, en
I’vne defquelles nous mifmes pied a terre, & y trouuafmes
grande quantite d’oifeaux appellez Margos, dont nous prifmes
force petits, qui font auffi bons que pigeonneaux. Le fieur
de Poitrincourt f’y penfa efgarer: Mais en fin il reuint a
noftre barque comme nous I’allions cerchant autour de ifle,
qui eft efloignee de la terre ferme trois lieues.” Chap. iii.

2. Explorations in the Vineyard Sound. Voyage of 1604-8.

“Comme nous eufmes fait quelques fix ou fept lieues nous
eufmes cognoiffance d’vne ifle que nous nommafimes la foup-
conneufe, pour auoir eu plufieurs fois croyance de loing que
ce fut autre chofe qu’vne ifle, puis le vent nous vint con-
traire, qui nous fit relafcher au lieu d’ot: nous eftions partis,
auquel nous fufmes deux on trois jours fans que durant ce
temps il vint aucti fauuage fe prefenter 4 nous.” Chap. xv.

3. Fight with the Indians on the Richelieu. Voyage of
1610.

“Les Yroquois f’eftonnoient du bruit de nos arquebufes,
& principalemét de ce que les balles perfoient mieux que
leurs flefches; & eurent tellement l’efpouuate de leffet
qu’elles faifoient, voyat plufieurs de leurs cédpaignons
tombez morts, & bleffez, que de crainte qu’ils auoient, croy-

ans

Preface to the Translation. 223

ans ces coups eftre fans remede ils fe iettoient par terre,
quand ils entendoient le bruit: auffi ne tirions gueres A
faute, & deux ou trois balles 4 chacun coup, & auios la
plufpart du temps nos arquebufes appuyees fur le bord de
leur barricade.” Chap. ii.

The following words, found in the writings of Champlain,
are to be noted as ufed by him in a fenfe different from the
ordinary one, or as not found in the dictionaries, They
occur in the voyages of 1603 and 1604-11. The numbers
refer to the continuous pagination in the Quebec edition :

appowl, 159. A fpecies of duck. (?)

catalougue, 266. A cloth ufed for wrapping up a dead
body. Cf. Spanith catalogo.

déferter, 211, et paffim. In the fenfe of to clear up a new
country by removing the trees, &c.

e/plan, 166. A fmall fith, like the éguille of Normandy.

giarre, 250. A kind of mat. Cf. Spanith efera.

Jleurty, 247. To break or foam, fpoken of the waves of
the fea.

legueux, 190. Watery. (?) Or for Zgneux, fibrous. (?)

marmette, 159. A kind of fea-bird.

Matachias, 75, et paffim. Indian word for ftrings of beads,
ufed to ornament the perfon.

papef, 381. Name of one of the fails of a veffel.

petunoir, 79. Pipe for fmoking.

Pilotua, 82, et paffim. Word ufed by the Indians for
foothfayer or medicine-man.

Souler, 252. In fenfe of, to be wont, accuftomed.

tructzére, 264. Trout-brook.

The firft and main aim of the tranflator has been to give

the

FIRM anar eR

—

224 Preface to the Translation.

the exact fenfe of the original, and he has endeavored alfo to
reproduce as far as poffible the fpirit and tone of Champlain's
narrative. The important requifite in a tranflation, that it
fhould be pure and idiomatic Englifh, without any transfer
of the mode of expreffion peculiar to the foreign language,
has not, it is hoped, been violated, at leaft to any great ex-
tent. If, perchance, a French term or ufage has been tranf
ferred to the tranflation, it is becaufe it has feemed that the
fenfe or fpirit would be better conveyed in this way. At
beft, a tranflation comes fhort of the original, and it is per-
haps pardonable at times to admit a foreign term, if by this
means the fenfe or ftyle feems to be better preferved. It is
hoped that the prefent work has been done fo as to fatisfy
the demands of the hiftorian, who may find it convenient to
ufe it in his inveftigations.

C. Fo

BosTON, June 17, 1880.

ere SAVAGES

OR VOYAGE OF

SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN

OF BROUAGE,
Made in New France in the year 1603.
DESCRIBING,

The customs, mode of life, marriages, wars, and dwellings of the

Savages of Canada. Discoveries for more than four hundred and

| fifty leagues in the country. The tribes, animals, rivers, lakes,
islands, lands, trees, and fruits found there. Discoveries on the

coast of La Cadie, and numerous mines existing there according

to the report of the Savages.

PARIS.

Claude de Monstr’ceil, having his store in the Court of the Palace,
under the name of Jesus.

WITH AUTHORITY OF THE KING.

DEDICATION.

To the very noble, high and powerful Lord
Charles De Montmorency, Chevalier of the
Orders of the King, Lord of Ampuille and of
Meru, Count of Secondigny, Viscount of Melun,
Baron of Chateauneuf and of Gonnort, Admiral
of France and of Brittany.

My Lord,

Although many have written about the country of
Canada, I have nevertheless been unwilling to rest satisfied
with their report, and have visited these regions expressly in
order to be able to render a faithful testimony to the truth,
which you will see, if it be your pleasure, tn the brief nar-
rative which I address to you,and which I beg you may find
agreeable, and I pray God for your ever increasing great-
ness and prosperity, my Lord, and shall remain all my Life,

Your most humble
and obedient servant,
S. CHAMPLAIN.

Athy peeing ft 4 y re oe

EXTRACT FROM THE LICENSE.

mara Y licenfe of the King, given at Paris on the 15th
=| of November, 1603, figned Brigard.
Permiffion is given to Sieur de Champlain to
; y have printed by fuch printer as may feem good
~~ to him,a book which he has compofed, entitled,
“ The Savages, or Voyage of Sieur de Champlain, made in
the Year 1603;” and all book-fellers and printers of this
kingdom are forbidden to print, fell, or diftribute faid book,
except with the confent of him whom he fhall name and
choofe, on penalty of a fine of fifty crowns, of confifcation,
and all expenfes, as is more fully ftated in the licenfe.

Said Sieur de Champlain, in accordance with his licenfe,
has chofen and given permiffion to Claude de Monftr’ceil,
book-feller to the Univerfity of Paris, to print faid book, and
he has ceded and transferred to him his licenfe, fo that no
other perfon can print or have printed, fell, or diftribute it,
during the time of five years, except with the confent of faid
Monftr’ceil, on the penalties contained in the {aid licenfe.

Leanetrer ores se

OLS ET

THE SAVAGES,

OR

VOYAGE OF SIEUR DE CHAMPLAIN

MADE IN THE YEAR 1603.

CHAPTER I.

BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE VOYAGE FROM HONFLEUR IN NORMANDY TO
THE PORT OF TADOUSSAC IN CANADA.
w\E fet out from Honfleur on the 15th of March,
1603. On the fame day we put back to the
roadftead of Havre de Grace, the wind not being
favorable. On Sunday following, the 16th, we
| fet fail on our route. On the 17th, we fighted
d’'Orgny and Grenefey,™ iflands between the coaft of Nor-
mandy and England. On the 18th of the fame month, we faw
the coaft of Brittany. On the roth, at 7 o’clock in the evening
we reckoned that we were off Oueffant.” On the 2r1ft, at
7 o'clock in the morning, we met feven Flemith veffels, com-

ing,

121 Alderney and Guernfey. French 12 The iflands lying off Finiftére, on
maps at the prefent day for Alderney the weftern extremity of Brittany in
have d’Aurigny. France.

LCT ANTES ETT R LE TTI

een

Spe mepypgeennoarae

emer

it
EE
F
ij

232 Voyages of

ing, as we thought, from the Indies. On Eafter day, the
30th of the fame month, we encountered a great tempeft,
which feemed to be more lightning than wind, and which
lafted for feventeen days, though not continuing fo fevere as
it was on the firft two days. During this time, we loft more
than we gained. On the 16th of April, to the delight of
all, the weather began to be more favorable, and the fea
calmer than it had been, fo that we continued our courfe
until the 28th, when we fell in with a very lofty iceberg.
The next day we fighted a bank of ice more than eight
leagues long, accompanied by an infinite number of fmaller
banks, which prevented us from going on. In the opinion
of the pilot, thefe maffes of ice were about a hundred ora
hundred and twenty leagues from Canada. We were in
latitude 45° 40’, and continued our courfe in 44°.

On the 2nd of May we reached the Bank at 11 o'clock in
the forenoon, in 44° 40°. On the 6th of the fame month we
had approached fo near to land that we heard the fea beating
on the fhore, which, however, we could not fee on account of
the denfe fog, to which thefe coafts are fubjeét.33 For this
reafon we put out to fea again a few leagues, until the next
morning, when the weather being clear, we fighted land,
which was Cape St. Mary.™

On the 12th we were overtaken by a fevere gale, lafting
two days. On the 15th we fighted the iflands of St. Peter.”
On the 17th we fell in with an ice-bank near Cape Ray, fix
leagues in length, which led us to lower fail for the entire night

that

128 The fhore which they approached 124 In Placentia Bay, on the fouthern
was probably Cape Pine, eaftof Placen- coaft of Newfoundland.
tia Bay, Newfoundland. 125 Weft of Placentia Bay.

Szeur de Champlain. re

that we might avoid the danger to which we were expofed. On
the next day we fet fail and fighted Cape Ray,’* the iflands of
St. Paul, and Cape St..Lawrence.”” The latter is on the main-
land lying to the fouth, and the diftance from it to Cape Ray
is eighteen leagues, that being the breadth of the entrance to
the great bay of Canada.** On the fame day, about ten
o'clock in the morning, we fell in with another bank of ice,
more than eight leagues in length. On the 20th, we fighted
an ifland fome twenty-five or thirty leagues long, called Azx-
ticofzy,*9 which marks the entrance to the river of Canada.
The next day, we fighted Gafpé,"° a very high land, and be-

12 Cape Ray is northweft of the
iflands of St. Peter.

127 Cape St. Lawrence, now called
Cape North, is the northern extremity
of the ifland of Cape Breton, and the
ifland of St. Paul is a few miles north
of it.

128 The Gulf or Bay of St. Lawrence.
It was fo named by Jacques Cartier on
his fecond voyage, in 1535. Nous nom-
mafmes la diéte baye la Sainét Laurens.
Brief Récit, 1545, D’Avezac ed. p. 8.
The northeaftern part of it is called on
De Laet’s map, “ Grand Baye.”

129 « This ifland is about one hundred
and forty miles long, thirty-five miles
broad in its wideft part, with an average
breadth of twenty-feven and one-half
miles.”"—Le Moine’s Chronicles of the
St. Lawrence, p. too. It was named
by Cartier in 1535, the Ifland of the
Affumption, having been difcovered on
the 15th of Auguft, the feftival of the
Affumption. Nous auons nommes
Vyfle de VAffumption. — Brief Récit,
1545, D’Avezac’s ed. p.g. Alfonfe, in his
report of his voyage of 1542, calls it the
Ife de l’ Afcenfion, probably by miftake.
“The Ifle of Afcenfion is a goodly ifle
and a goodly champion land, without

gan

any hills, ftanding all vpon white rocks
and Alabafter, all couered with wild
beafts, as bears, Luferns, Porkefpicks.”’
Hakluyt, Vol. U11. p. 292. Of this ifland
De Laet fays, “ Elle eft nommee en lan-
gage des Sauuages Vati/cotec.”—Hi/t.
du Nouveau Monde,a Leyde, 1640, p.
42. Vide alfo Wyet’s Voyage in Hakluyt,
Vol. III. p. 241. Laverdiére fays the
Montagnais now call it MVatafcoueh,
which fignifies, where the bear is caught.
He cites Thevet, who fays it is called
by the favages Vaticou/ti, by others de
Laifple. The ufe of the name Anticofty
by Champlain, now fpelled Anticofti,
would imply that its corruption from the
original, Vati/cotec, took place at a very
early date. Or it is poffible that Cham-
plain wrote it as he heard it pronounced
by the natives, and his orthography
may beft reprefent the original.

180 Gachepé, fo written in the text,
fubfequently written by the author Ga/-
pey, but now generally Gafpé. It is
fuppofed to have been derived from the
Abnaquis word Kat/epi oz, which means
what is feparated from the reft, and to
have reference to a remarkable rock,
three miles above Cape Gafpé, feparated
from the fhore by the violence of the

30 waves,

Voyages of

234

gan to enter the river of Canada, coafting along the fouth
side as far as Montanne,’" diftant fixty-five leagues from
Gafpé. Proceeding on our courfe, we came in fight of the
Bic,"? twenty leagues from Mantanne and on the fouthern
fhore; continuing farther, we croffed the river to Tadouflac,
fifteen leagues from the Bic. All this region is very high,
barren, and unproductive.

On the 24th of the month, we came to anchor before Ta-
douffac,33 and on the 26th entered this port, which has
the form of a cove. It is at the mouth of the river Saguenay,
where there is a current and tide of remarkable fwiftnefs
and a great depth of water, and where there are fometimes
troublefome winds,™ in confequence of the cold they bring.
It is ftated that it is fome forty-five or fifty leagues up to
the firft fall in this river, and that it flows from the northweft.
The harbor of Tadouffac is fmall, in which only ten or twelve

waves, the incident from which it takes
its name. — Vide Voyages de Champlain,
ed. 1632, p. 91; Chronicles of the St.
Lawrence, by J. M. Le Moine, p. 9.

181 A river flowing into the St. Law-
rence from the fouth in latitude 48°52"
and in longitude weft from Greenwich
67°32’, now known as the Matane.

182 For Bic, Champlain has Pc, which
is probably a typographical error. It
feems probable that Bic is derived from
the French word ézcogue, which means
a place of fmall confideration, a little
paltry town. Near the fite of the an-
cient Bic, we now have, on modern maps,
Bicogue Rocks, Bicguette Light, Bic
Ifland, Bic Channel, and Bic Anchor-
age. As fuggefted by Laverdiére, this
appears to be the identical harbor en-
tered by Jacques Cartier, in 1535, who
named it the Ifles of Saint John, be-
caufe he entered it on the day of the

veffels

beheading of St. John, which was the
29th of Auguft. Nous les nomma{mes
les Yfleaux fainét Jehan, parce que nous
y entrafmes le iour de la decollation du-
di& sai&t. Brief Récit, 1545, D’Ave-
zac’s ed. p. 11. Le Jeune {peaks of the
Ife du Bic in 1635. Vide Relation des
Féfuites, p. 19.

188 Tadouffac, or Tadouchac, is derived
from the word ¢otouchac, which in Mon-
tagnais means dreafis, and Saguenay
fignifies water which /prings forth,
from the Montagnais word /aki-nip.
— Vide Laverdire in loco. Tadouffac,
or the breafts from which water fprings
forth, is naturally fuggefted by the
rocky elevations at the bafe of which
the Saguenay flows.

184 Jypetueux, plainly intended to
mean ¢voublefome, as may be feen from
the context.

—— ow

Szeur de Champlain. 235

veffels could lie; but there is water enough on the eaft, thel-
tered from the river Saguenay, and along a little mountain,
which is almoft cut off by the river. On the fhore there are
very high mountains, on which there is little earth, but
only rocks and fand, which are covered with pine, cyprefs
and fir,’ and a fmallifh fpecies of trees. There is a fmall
pond near the harbor, enclofed by wood-covered mountains.
At the entrance to the harbor, there are two points: the
one on the weft fide extending a league out into the river,
and called St. Matthew’s Point ;"° the other on the foutheatt
fide extending out a quarter of a league, and called All-
Devils’ Point. This harbor is expofed to the winds from
the fouth, foutheaft, and fouth-fouthweft. The diftance from
St. Matthew’s Point to All-Devils’ Point is nearly a league ;

both points are dry at low tide.

185 Pine, dius. The white pine, Pzxus
Strobus, or Strobus Americanus, grows
as far north as Newfoundland, and as
far fouth as Georgia. It was obferved
by Captain George Weymouth on the
Kennebec, and hence deals afterward
imported into England were called Wey-
mouth pine, — Vide Chronological Hif-
tory of Plants, by Charles Pickering,
M.D., Bofton, 1879, p. 809. This is
probably the fpecies here referred to by
Champlain. Cyprefs, Cyprez. This was
probably the American arbor vite, Thuja
occidentalis, a fpecies which, according
to the Abbé Laverdiére, is found in the
neighborhood of the Saguenay. Cham-
plain employed the fame word to defig-
nate the American favin, or red cedar,
Funiperus Virginiana, which he found
on Cape Cod.— Vide Vol. II. p. 82.
Note 168.

Fir, /apins. The fir may have been
the white fpruce, Ades alba, or the
black fpruce, A dzes nigra, or the balfam
fir or Canada balfam, Adies balfamea,

CHAPTER JE,

or yet the hemlock fpruce, Adzes Cana-
denjis.

186 S%. Matthew's Point, now known
as Point aux Allouettes, or Lark Point.
Vide Vol. 11. p 165, note 292. Ad/U-
Devils’ Point, now called Pointe aux
Vaches. Both of thefe points had
changed their names before the publica-
tion of Champlain’s ed., 1632. — Vide
p- 119 of that edition. The laft men-
tioned was called by Champlain, in 1632,
pointe aux roches. Laverdiére thinks
voches was a typographical error, as
Sagard, about the fame time, writes
vaches. — Vide Sagard, Hifloire du
Canada, 1636, Strofs. ed., Vol.I. p. 150.

We naturally afk why it was called
pointe aux vaches, or point of cows.
An old French apothegm reads Le dzable
eft aux vaches, the devil is in the cows,
for which in Englifh we fay, “the devil
is to pay.” May not this proverb have
fuggetted vaches as a fynonyme of da-
bles ?

236 Voyages of

CHAPTER II.

FAVORABLE RECEPTION GIVEN TO THE FRENCH BY THE GRAND SAGAMORE OF
THE SAVAGES OF CANADA. — THE BANQUETS AND DANCES OF THE LATTER,
— THEIR WAR WITH THE [ROQUOIS. — THE MATERIAL OF WHICH THEIR
CANOES AND CABINS ARE MADE, AND THEIR MODE OF CONSTRUCTION. —
INCLUDING ALSO A DESCRIPTION OF ST. MATTHEW’S POINT.

iN the 27th, we went to vifit the favages at St.

Matthew’s point, diftant a league from Tadouf-

fac, accompanied by the two favages whom

Sieur du Pont Gravé took to make a report

of what they had feen in France, and of the

friendly reception the king had given them. Having landed,
we proceeded to the cabin of their grand Sagamore’? named

Anadabijou, whom we found with fome eighty or a hundred

of his companions celebrating a éadagze, that is a banquet.

He received us very cordially, and according to the cuftom

of his country, feating us near himfelf, with all the favages

arranged in rows on both fides of the cabin. One of

the favages whom we had taken with us began to make
an addrefs, fpeaking of the cordial reception the king had
given them, and the good treatment they had received in
France, and faying they were affured that his Majefty was
favorably difpofed towards them, and was defirous of peo-
pling their country, and of making peace with their enemies,
the Iroquois, or of fending forces to conquer them. He alfo
told them of the handfome manors, palaces, and houfes they

had

187 Sagamo, thus written in the Montagnais language, is derived from
French. According to Lafléche, as ¢chi, great, and okimazt, chief, and
cited by Laverdiére, this word, in the confequently fignifies the Great Chief.

Szeur de Champlain. 237

had feen, and of the inhabitants and our mode of living. He
was liftened to with the greateft poffible filence. Now, after
he had finifhed his addrefs, the grand Sagamore, Anadabijou,
who had liftened to it attentively, proceeded to take fome
tobacco, and give it to Sieur du Pont Gravé of St. Malo,
myfelf, and fome other Sagamores, who were near him.
After a long fmoke, he began to make his addrefs to all,
{peaking with gravity, {topping at times a little, and then
refuming and faying, that they truly ought to be very glad
in having his Majefty for a great friend. They all.anfwered
with one voice, //o, ho, ho, that is to fay yes, yes. He con-
tinuing his addrefs faid that he fhould be very glad to have
his Majefty people their land, and make war upon their
enemies; that there was no nation upon earth to which they
were more kindly difpofed than to the French: finally he
gave them all to underftand the advantage and profit they
could receive from his Majefty. After he had finithed his
addrefs, we went out of his cabin, and they began to cele-
brate their éadagze or banquet, at which they have elk’s meat,
which is fimilar to beef, alfo that of the bear, feal and beaver,
thefe being their ordinary meats, including alfo quantities of
fowl. They had eight or ten boilers full of meats, in the
middle of this cabin, feparated fome fix feet from each other,
each one having its own fire. They were feated on both fides,
as I ftated before, each one having his porringer made of
bark. When the meat is cooked, fome one diftributes to
each his portion in his porringer, when they eat in a very
filthy manner. For when their hands are covered with fat,
they rub them on their heads or on the hair of their dogs, of
which they have large numbers for hunting. Before their

meat

(TF enn en ee

= Sep RS TE
STAT GR AEOOE TIS IT

aa pes eo VT Preis
ET LO ar

238 Voyages of

meat was cooked, one of them arofe, took a dog and hopped
around thefe boilers from one end of the cabin to the other.
Arriving in front of the great Sagamore, he threw his dog
violently to the ground, when all with one voice exclaimed,
Ho, ho, ho, after which he went back to his place. Inftantly
another arofe and did the fame, which performance was con-
tinued until the meat was cooked. Now after they had
finifhed their sadagze, they began to dance, taking the heads
of their enemies, which were flung on their backs, as a fign
of joy. One or two of them fing, keeping time with their
hands, which they ftrike on their knees: fometimes they
ftop, exclaiming, H/o, ho, ho, when they begin dancing again,
puffing like a man out of breath. They were having this
celebration in honor of the victory they had obtained over
the Iroquois, feveral hundred of whom they had killed, whofe
heads they had cut off and had with them to contribute to
the pomp of their feftivity. Three nations had engaged in
the war, the Etechemins, Algonquins, and Montagnais.
Thefe, to the number of a thoufand, proceeded to make war
upon the Iroquois, whom they encountered at the mouth of
the river of the Iroquois, and of whom they killed a hundred.
They carry on war only by furprifing their enemies; for they
would not dare to do fo otherwife, and fear too much the
Iroquois, who are more numerous than the Montagnais,
Etechemins, and Algonquins.

On

188 The Etechemins may be faid in
general terms to have occupied the ter-
ritory from St. John, N. B., to Mount
Defert Ifland, in Maine, and perhaps
ftill further weft, but not fouth of Saco.
The Algonquins here referred to were
thofe who dwelt on the Ottawa River.

The Montagnais occupied the region on
both fides of the Saguenay, having their
trading centre at Tadouflac War had
been carried on for a period we know
not how long, perhaps for feveral cen-
turies, between thefe allied tribes and
the Iroquois.

Szeur de Champlain. 239

On the 28th of this month they came and ereCted cabins at
the harbor of Tadouffac, where our veffel was. At daybreak
their grand Sagamore came out from his cabin and went
about all the others, crying out to them in a loud voice to
break camp to go to Tadouffac, where their good friends
were. Each one immediately took down his cabin in an
incredibly fhort time, and the great captain was the firft to
take his canoe and carry it to the water, where he embarked
his wife and children, and a quantity of furs. Thus were
launched nearly two hundred canoes, which go wonderfully
faft; for, although our fhallop was well manned, yet they went
fafter than ourfelves. Two only do the work of propelling
the boat, a man and a woman. Their canoes are fome eight
or nine feet long, and a foot or a foot anda half broad in
the middle, growing narrower towards the two ends. They
are very liable to turn over, if one does not underftand how
to manage them, for they are made of the bark of trees
called douzlle,® ftrengthened on the infide by little ribs of
wood {trongly and neatly made. They are fo light that a
man can eafily carry one, and each canoe can carry the
weight of a pipe. When they with to go overland to fome
river where they have bufinefs, they carry their canoes with
them.

Their cabins are low and made like tents, being covered

with the fame kind of bark as

189 Bouille for bouleau, the birch-
tree. Betula papyracea, popularly
known as the paper or canoe birch. It
is a large tree, the bark white, and {plit-
ting into thin layers. It is common in
New England, and far to the north.

that before mentioned. The
whole

The white birch, Betula alba, of Eu-
rope and Northern Afia, is ufed for
boat-building at the prefent day.— Vide
Chronological Hiftory of Plants, by
Charles Pickering, M.D., Bofton, 1879,
Pp. 134-

a

GK ge TITY EF DS (OCH
+ ah snare e

URE NHI Ne HR MMR

Parsee Raa sat Ao rem a RHR RR

240 Voyages of

whole top for the fpace of about a foot they leave uncovered,
whence the light enters; and they make a number of fires
direétly in the middle of the cabin, in which there are fome-
times ten families at once. They fleep on fkins, all together,
and their dogs with them.”

They were in number a thoufand perfons, men, women
and children. The place at St. Matthew’s Point, where they
were firft encamped, is very pleafant. They were at the foot
of a fmall flope covered with trees, firs and cypreffes. At
St. Matthew’s Point there is a fmall level place, which is feen
at a great diftance. On the top of this hill there is a level
tract of land, a league long, half a league broad, covered with
trees. The foil is very fandy, and contains good pafturage.
Elfewhere there are only rocky mountains, which are very

barren. The tide rifes about this flope, but at low water
leaves it dry for a full half league out.

140 The dog was the only domeftic
animal found among the aborigines of
this country. ‘The Auftralians,” fays
Dr. Pickering, “ appear to be the only
confiderable portion of mankind defti-
tute of the companionfhip of the dog.
The American tribes, from the Arétic
Sea to Cape Horn, had the companion-
fhip of the dog, and certain remarkable
breeds had been developed before the
vifit of Columbus (F. Columbus 25);
further, according to Coues, the cro{s
between the coyote and female dog is
regularly procured by our northweftern
tribes, and, according to Gabb, “ dogs
one-fourth coyote are pointed out; the
fa& therefore feems eftablifhed that the
coyote or American barking wolfe,

CHAPTER III.

Canis latrans, is the dog in its original
wild ftate.” — Vide Chronological Hiftory
of Plants, etc., by Charles Pickering,
M.D., Bofton, 1879, p. 20.

“It was believed by fome fora length
of time that the wild dog was of recent
introduétion to Auftralia; this is not
fo.” — Vide Aborigines of Vittoria, by
R. Brough Smyth, London, 1878, Vol. I.
p. 149. The bones of the wild dog
have recently been difcovered in Aul-
tralia, at a depth of excavation, and in
circumftances, which prove that his ex-
jftence there antedates the introduction
of any fpecies of the dog by Europeans.
The Auttralians appear, therefore, to be
no exception to the univerfal compan-
ionfhip of the dog with man.

Szeur de Champlain. 241

CHAPTER III.

THE REJOICINGS OF THE INDIANS AFTER OBTAINING A VICTORY OVER THEIR
ENEMIES.— THEIR DISPOSITION, ENDURANCE OF HUNGER, AND MALICcIOUS-
NESS. — THEIR BELIEFS AND FALSE OPINIONS, COMMUNICATION WITH EVIL
SPIRITS. — THEIR GARMENTS, AND HOW THEY WALK ON THE Snow. —
THEIR MANNER OF MARRIAGE, AND THE INTERMENT OF THEIR DEAD.

4g] the oth of June the favages proceeded to have

a rejoicing all together, and to celebrate their

tabagie, which I have before defcribed, and to

dance, in honor of their victory over their ene-
mies. Now, after they had feafted well, the

Algonquins, one of the three nations, left their cabins and

went by themfelves to a public place. Here they arranged

all their wives and daughters by the fide of each other, and
took pofition themfelves behind them, all finging in the
manner I have defcribed before. Suddenly all the wives
and daughters proceeded to throw off their robes of fkins,
prefenting themfelves ftark naked, and expofing their fexual
parts. But they were adorned with matachzats, that is beads
and braided ftrings, made of porcupine quills, which they dye
in various colors. After finifhing their fongs, they all faid
together, Ho, ho, ho: at the fame inftant all the wives and
daughters covered themfelves with their robes, which were
at their feet. Then, after ftopping a fhort time, all fuddenly
beginning to fing throw off their robes as before. They do
not ftir from their pofition while dancing, and make various
geftures and movements of the body, lifting one foot and
then the other, at the fame time ftriking upon the ground.
Now, during the performance of this dance, the Sagamore
31 of

242 Voyages of

of the Algonquins, named Be/fouat, was feated before thefe
wives and daughters, between two fticks, on which were hung
the heads of their enemies. Sometimes he arofe and went
haranguing, and faying to the Montagnais and Etechemins:
“Look! how we rejoice in the victory that we have obtained
over our enemies; you muft do the fame, fo that we may be
fatisfied.” Then all faid together, Ho, ho, ho. After return-
ing to his pofition, the grand Sagamore together with all his
companions removed their robes, making themfelves ftark
naked except their fexual parts, which are covered with a
fmall piece of fkin. Each one took what feemed good to
him, as matachiats,hatchets, fwords, kettles, fat, elk flefh,
feal, in a word each one had a prefent, which they proceeded
to give to the Algonquins. After all thefe ceremonies, the
dance ceafed, and the Algonquins, men and women, carried
their prefents into their cabins. Then two of the moft agile
men of each nation were taken, whom they caufed to run,
and he who was the fafteft in the race, received a prefent.

All thefe people have a very cheerful difpofition, laughing
often; yet at the fame time they are fomewhat phlegmatic.
They talk very deliberately, as if defiring to make themfelves
well underftood, and ftopping fuddenly, they reflect for a
long time, when they refume their difcourfe. This is their
ufual manner at their harangues in council, where only the
leading men, the elders, are prefent, the women and children
not attending at all.

All thefe people fuffer fo much fometimes from hunger,
on account of the fevere cold and fnow, when the animals
and fowl on which they live go away to warmer countries,
that they are almoft conftrained to eat one another. I am of

opinion

Szeur de Champlain. 243

opinion that if one were to teach them how to live, and in-
ftruct them in the cultivation of the foil and in other re-
{pects, they would learn very eafily, for I can teftify that
many of them have good judgment and refpond very appro-
priately to whatever queftion may be put to them." They
have the vices of taking revenge and of lying badly, and are
people in whom it is not well to put much confidence, ex-
cept with caution and with force at hand. They promife
well, but keep their word badly.

Moft of them have no law, fo far as I have been able to
obferve or learn from the great Sagamore, who told me that
they really believed there was a God, who created all things.
Whereupon I faid to him: that, “ Since they believed in one
fole God, how had he placed them in the world, and whence
was their origin.” He replied: that, “ After God had made
all things, he took a large number of arrows, and put them
in the ground; whence fprang men and women, who had
been multiplying in the world up to the prefent time, and
that this was their origin.” I anfwered that what he faid
was falfe, but that there really was one only God, who had
created all things upon earth and in the heavens. Seeing
all thefe things fo perfect, but that there was no one to
govern here on earth, he took clay from the ground, out of
which he created Adam our firft father. While Adam was
fleeping, God took a rib from his fide, from which he formed
Eve, whom he gave to him as a companion, and, I told him,
that it was true that they and ourfelves had our origin in
this manner, and not from arrows, as they fuppofe. He faid
nothing, except that he acknowledged what I faid, rather than

what
141 Vide Vol. II. of this work, p. tgo.

244 Voyages of

what he had afferted. I afked him alfo if he did not believe
that there was more than one only God. He told me their
belief was that there was a God, a Son, a Mother, and the
Sun, making four; that God however, was above all, that
the Son and the Sun were good, fince they received good
things from them; but the Mother, he faid, was worthlefs,
and ate them up; and the Father not very good. I remon-
ftrated with him on his error, and contrafted it with our
faith, in which he put fome little confidence. I afked him
if they had never feen God, nor heard from their anceftors
that God had come into the world. He faid that they had
never feen him; but that formerly there were five men who
went towards the fetting fun, who met God, who afked
them: “ Where are you going?” they anfwered: “We are
going in fearch of our living.” God replied to them: “ You
will find it here.” They went on, without paying attention
to what God had faid to them, when he took a ftone and
touched two of them with it, whereupon they were changed
to ftones; and he faid again to the three others: “ Where are
you going?” They anfwered as before, and God faid to
them again: “Go no farther, you will find it here.” And
feeing that nothing came to them, they went on; when God
took two fticks, with which he touched the two firft, where-
upon they were transformed into fticks, when the fifth one
ftopped, not wifhing to go farther. And God afked him
again: “Where are you going?” “I am going in fearch of
my living.” “Stay and thou fhalt find it.” He ftaid with-
out advancing farther, and God gave him fome meat, which
he ate. After making good cheer, he returned to the other

favages, and related to them all the above.
He

Szeur de Champlain. 245

He told me alfo that another time there was a man who
had a large quantity of tobacco (a plant from which they
obtain what they fmoke), and that God came to this man,
and afked him where his pipe was. The man took his pipe,
and gave it to God, who fmoked much. After fmoking to
his fatisfaction, God broke the pipe into many pieces, and
the man afked: “Why haft thou broken my pipe? thou
feeft in truth that I have not another.” Then God took one
that he had, and gave it to him, faying: “ Here is one that
I will give you, take it to your great Sagamore; let him
keep it, and if he keep it well, he will not want for any thing
whatever, neither he nor all his companions.” The man
took the pipe, and gave it to his great Sagamore; and while
he kept it, the favages were in want of nothing whatever: but

he faid that afterwards the grand Sagamore loft this pipe,
which was the caufe of the fevere famines they fometimes
have. I afked him if he believed all that; he faid yes, and
that it was the truth. Now I think that this is the reafon
why they fay that God is not very good. But I replied,
“that God was in all refpects good, and that it was doubt-
lefs the Devil who had manifefted himfelf to thofe men, and
that if they would believe as we did in God they would not
want for what they had need of; that the fun which they
faw, the moon and the ftars, had been created by this great
God, who made heaven and earth, but that they have no
power except that which God has given them; that we be-
lieve in this great God, who by His goodnefs had fent us
His dear Son who, being conceived of the Holy Spirit, was
clothed with human flefh in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
lived thirty years on earth, doing an infinitude of miracles,

raifing

ae
-
i
:
4
rs
:
q
bY

246 Voyages of

raifing the dead, healing the fick, driving out devils, giving
fight to the blind, teaching men the will of God his Father,
that they might ferve, honor and worfhip Him, fhed his
blood, fuffered and died for us, and our fins, and ranfomed
the human race; that, being buried, he rofe again, defcended
into hell, and afcended into heaven, where he is feated on
the right hand of God his Father.”* I told him that this
was the faith of all Chriftians who believe in the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit; that thefe, neverthelefs, are not three
Gods, but one the fame and only God, and a trinity in which
there is no before nor after, no greater nor fmaller; that the
Virgin Mary, mother of the Son of God, and all the men and
women who have lived in this world doing the commandments
of God, and enduring martyrdom for his name, and who by
the permiffion of God have done miracles, and are faints in
heaven in his paradife, are all of them praying this Great
Divine Majefty to pardon us our errors and fins which we
commit againft His law and commandments. And thus, by
the prayers of the faints in heaven and by our own prayers
to his Divine Majefty, He gives what we have need of, and
the devil has no power over us and can do us no harm. I
told them that if they had this belief, they would be like us,
and that the devil could no longer do them any harm, and
that they would not lack what they had need of.

Then this Sagamore replied to me that he acknowledged
what I faid. Iafked him what ceremonies they were accuf-
tomed to in praying to their God. He told me that they were
not accuftomed to any ceremonies, but that each prayed in his

heart

142 This fummary of the Chriftian faith is nearly in the words of the Apoftles
Creed.

Szeur de Champlain. 247

heart as he defired. This is why I believe that they have
no law, not knowing what it is to worfhip and pray to God,
and living, the moft of them, like brute beafts. But I think
that they would fpeedily become good Chriftians, if people
were to colonize their country, of which moft of them were
defirous.

There are fome favages among them whom they call Pzdo-
toua,"* who have perfonal communications with the devil.
Such an one tells them what they are to do, not only in re-
gard to war, but other things; and if he fhould command
them to execute any undertaking, as to kill a Frenchman or
one of their own nation, they would obey his command at
once.

They believe, alfo, that all dreams which they have are
real; and many of them, indeed, fay that they have feen in
dreams things which come to pafs or will come to pafs.
But, to tell the truth in the matter, thefe are vifions of the
devil, who deceives and mifleads them. This is all that
I have been able to learn from them in regard to their mat-
ters of belief, which is of a low, animal nature.

All thefe people are well proportioned in body, without
any deformity, and are alfo agile. The women are well-
fhaped, full and plump, and of a fwarthy complexion, on
account of the large amount of a certain pigment with
which they rub themfelves, and which gives them an olive
color. They are clothed in fkins, one part of their body
being covered and the other left uncovered. In winter they
provide for their whole body, for they are dreffed in good
furs, as thofe of the elk, otter, beaver, feal, ftag, and hind,

which
48 On Pilotoua or Pilotois, vide Vol. I. note 341.

si

ooo ep

ee

cane

248 Voyages of

which they have in large quantities. In winter, when the fnows
are heavy, they make a fort of raguette,* two or three times
as large as thofe in France. Thefe they attach to their feet,
and thus walk upon the fnow without finking in ; for without
them, they could not hunt or make their way in many places.

Their manner of marriage is as follows: When a girl
attains the age of fourteen or fifteen years, fhe may have
feveral fuitors and friends, and keep company with fuch as
fhe pleafes. At the end of fome five or fix years fhe may
choofe that one to whom her fancy inclines as her hufband,
and they will live together until the end of their life, unlefs,
after living together a certain period, they fail to have chil-
dren, when the hufband is at liberty to divorce himfelf and
take another wife, on the ground that his own is of no worth.
Accordingly, the girls are more free than the wives; yet as
foon as they are married they are chafte, and their hufbands
are for the moft part jealous, and give prefents to the father
or relatives of the girl whom they marry. This is the man-
ner of marriage, and conduét in the fame.

In regard to their interments, when a man or woman dies,
they make a trench, in which they put all their property, as
kettles, furs, axes, bows and arrows, robes, and other things.
Then they put the body in the trench, and cover it with
earth, laying on top many large pieces of wood, and erecting
over all a piece of wood painted red on the upper part.
They believe in the immortality of the foul, and fay that
when they die themfelves, they fhall go to rejoice with their

relatives and friends in other lands.
CHAPTER IV.

144 ne maniere de raquette. The for ftriking the ball in the game of ten-
fnow-fhoe, which much refembles the nis. This name was given for the want
racket or battledore, an inftrument ufed of one more fpecific.

Szeur de Champlain. 249

CHAPTER IV,

THE RIVER SAGUENAY AND ITS SOURCE.

WN the 11th of June, I went fome twelve or fif-
teen leagues up the Saguenay, which is a fine
river, of remarkable depth. For I think, judg-
ing from what I have heard in regard to its
fource, that it comes from a very high place,
whence a torrent of water defcends with great impetuofity,
But the water which proceeds thence is not capable of pro-
ducing fuch a river as this, which, however, only extends
from this torrent, where the firft fall is, to the harbor of Ta-
douffac, at the mouth of the Saguenay, a diftance of fome
forty-five or fifty leagues, it being a good league and a half
broad at the wideft place, and a quarter of a league at the
narroweft; for which reafon there is a ftrong current. All
the country, fo far as I faw it, confifted only of rocky moun-
tains, moftly covered with fir, cyprefs, and birch; a very un-
attractive region in which I did not find a level tract of land
either on the one fide or the other. There are fome iflands
in the river, which are high and fandy. In a word, thefe are
real deferts, uninhabitable for animals or birds. For I can
teftify that when I went hunting in places which feemed to
me the moft attractive, I found nothing whatever but little
birds, like nightingales and fwallows, which come only in
fummer, as I think, on account of the exceffive cold there,
this river coming from the northwett.

They told me that, after paffing the firft fall, whence this
torrent comes, they pafs eight other falls, when they go a day’s
32 journey

250 Voyages of

journey without finding any; then they pafs ten other falls
and enter a lake “S which it requires two days to crofs, they
being able to make eafily from twelve to fifteen leagues a day.
At the other extremity of the lake is founda people who
live in cabins. Then you enter three other rivers, up each
of which the diftance is a journey of fome three or four
days. At the extremity of thefe rivers are two or three bod-
ies of water, like lakes, in which the Saguenay has its fource,
from which to Tadouffac is a journey of ten days in their
canoes. There is a large number of cabins on the border of
thefe rivers, occupied by other tribes which come from the
north to exchange with the Montagnais their beaver and
marten {kins for articles of merchandife, which the French
veffels furnifh to the Montagnais. Thefe favages from the
north fay that they live within fight of a fea which is falt. If
this is the cafe, I think that it is a gulf of that fea which flows
from the north into the interior, and in faét it cannot be
otherwife.* This is what I have learned in regard to the
River Saguenay.

CHAPTER V.

145 This was Lake St. John. ‘This tained from the Indians a very correct
defcription is given nearly verbatim in idea not only of the exiftence but of the
Vol. II. p. 169.— Vide notes in the charaéter of Hudfon’s Bay, although
fame volume, 294, 295. that bay was not difcovered by Hudfon

48 Champlain appears to have ob- till about feven years later than this.

Szeur de Champlain. 251

CHAPTER V.

DEPARTURE FROM TADOUSSAC FOR THE FALL. — DESCRIPTION OF HARE
IsLAND, IsLE Du Coupre, ISLE D’ORLEANS, AND SEVERAL OTHERS. —
Our ARRIVAL AT QUEBEC

N Wednefday, the eighteenth day of June, we fet
out from Tadouffac for the Fall.” We paffed
near an ifland called Hare Ifland,“* about two
leagues from the northern fhore and fome feven
leagues from Tadouffac and five leagues from

the fouthern fhore. From Hare Ifland we proceeded

along the northern coaft about half a league, to a point ex-
tending out into the water, where one mutt keep out farther.

This point is one league “? from an ifland called Lfle au Cou-

dre, about two leagues wide, the diftance from which to the

northern fhore is a league. This ifland has a pretty even

{urface, growing narrower towards the two ends. At the

weftern end there are meadows and rocky points, which ex-

tend out fome diftance into the river. This ifland is very

pleafant on account of the woods furrounding it. It has a

great deal of flate-rock, and the foil is very gravelly ; at its

extremity there is a rock extending half a league out into

the
MT Saut de St. Louis, about three The diftances are here overeftimated.
leagues above Montreal. From Hare Ifland to the northern fhore

us Tle au Lieure. Ware Ifland, fo the diftance is four nautical miles, and
named by Cartier from the great num- to the fouthern fix.
ber of hares which he found there. Le 49 The point neareft to Hare Ifland
foir feufmes A ladiéte yfle, ou trou- is Cape Salmon, which is about fix geo-
uafmes grand ndbre de lieures, defquelz graphical miles from the Ifle au Cou-
eufmes quatité: & parce la ndmafmes dres, and we fhould here correct the
lyfle es lieures.— Brief Reécit, par error by reading not one but two
Jacques Cartier, 1545, D’Avezac ed. leagues. The author did not probably
p- 45. intend to be exact.

tel
Pte
; eat
it
4
|
:

252 Voyages of

the water. We went to the north of this ifland,"® which is
twelve leagues diftant from Hare Ifland.

On the Thurfday following, we fet out from here and
came to anchor in a dangerous cove on the northern fhore,
where there are fome meadows and a little river,'** and where
the favages fometimes erect their cabins. The fame day,
continuing to coaft along on the northern fhore, we were
obliged by contrary winds to put in at a place where there
were many very dangerous rocks and localities. Here we
ftayed three days, waiting for fair weather. Both the north-
ern and fouthern fhores here are very mountainous, refembling
in general thofe of the Saguenay.

On Sunday, the twenty-fecond, we fet out for the Ifland
of Orleans," in the neighborhood of which are many iflands
on the fouthern fhore. Thefe are low and covered with
trees, feem to be very pleafant, and, fo far as I could judge,
fome of them are one or two leagues and others half a league
in length. About thefe iflands there are only rocks and
fhallows, fo that the paffage is very dangerous.

They are diftant fome two leagues from the mainland on
the fouth. Thence we coafted along the Ifland of Orleans
on the fouth. This is diftant a league from the mainland on
the north, is very pleafant and level, and eight leagues long.
The coatft on the fouth is low for fome two leagues inland ; the

country

160 le au Coudre.—Vide Brief Récit, than before.” — Letters to the Duche/s
par Jacques Cartier, 1545, D’Avezac ed. of Lefdiguieres, London, 1763, p- 15.
p- 44; alfo Vol. II. of this work, p. 151 This was probably about two
172. Charlevoix fays, whether from tra- leagues from the Ifle aux Coudres, where
dition or on good authority we know not, is a fmall ftream which ftill bears the
that “in 1663 an earthquake rooted up name La Petite Riviére.
a mountain, and threw it upon the Ifle au 182 [fle a’ Orléans. — Vide Vol. Il.
Coudres, which made it one-half larger p. 173.

Szeur de Champlain. 253

country begins to be low at this ifland, which is perhaps two
leagues diftant from the fouthern fhore. It is very danger-
ous paffing on the northern fhore, on account of the fand-
banks and rocks between the ifland and mainland, and it is
almoft entirely dry here at low tide.

At the end of this ifland I faw a torrent of water 3 which
defcended from a high elevation on the River of Canada.
Upon this elevation the land is uniform and pleafant, al-
though in the interior high mountains are feen fome twenty
or twenty-five leagues diftant, and near the firft fall of the
Saguenay.

We came to anchor at Quebec, a narrow paflage in the
River of Canada, which is here fome three hundred paces
broad. There is, on the northern fide of this paffage, a
very high elevation, which falls off on two fides. Elfe-
where the country is uniform and fine, and there are good
tracts full of trees, as oaks, cypreffes, birches, firs, and af-
pens, alfo wild fruit-trees and vines which, if they were culti-
vated, would, in my opinion, be as good as our own. Along
the fhore of Quebec, there are diamonds in fome flate-rocks,
which are better than thofe of Alencon. From Quebec to
Hare Ifland is a diftance of twenty-nine leagues.

CHAPTER VE

18 On Champlain’s map of the harbor ties can be attributed to it, arifes from
of Quebec he calls this “torrent” Ze its height and not from the volume of

grand faut de Montmorency, the grand water. — Vide ed. 1632, Dilizs— On
fall of Montmorency. It was named Bellin’s Atlas Maritime, 1764, its height
by Champlain himfelf, and in honor of is put down at Jfixty-jfive feet. Bay-

the “noble, high, and powerful Charles
de Montmorency,” to whom the jour-
nal of this voyage is dedicated. “The
ftream is fhallow; “in fome places,”
Charlevoix fays, ‘not more than ankle
deep.” The grandeur or impreffive-
nefs of the fall, if either of thefe quali-

field’s Chart more correétly fays 251 feet
above high water fpring tides. — Vide
Vol. II. of this work, note 308.

154 Nous vinfmes moutller Lancre a
Quebec, qui eft un deftroict de laditt
riutere de Canadas. ‘Thefe words very

clearly

panini Nath 2

ip
it |
3
-
i.
|
i
1%
:
;
;

254 Voyages of

CHAPTER VI.

Or THE Pornt ST. CROIX AND THE RIVER BATISCAN. — OF THE RIVERS,
Rocks, IsLANDs, LANDS, TREES, FRUITS, VINES, AND FINE COUNTRY
BETWEEN QUEBEC AND THE TROIS RIVIERES.

IN Monday, the 23d of this month, we fet out

from Quebec, where the river begins to widen,

fometimes to the extent of a league, then a

league and a half or two leagues at moft. The

country grows finer and finer; it is everywhere
low, without rocks for the moft part. The northern {hore is
covered with rocks and fand-banks ; it is neceffary to go along
the fouthern one about half a league from the fhore. There
are fome {mall rivers, not navigable, except for the canoes of
the favages, and in which there are a great many falls. We
came to anchor at St. Croix, fifteen leagues diftant from
Quebec ; a low point rifing up on both fides."** The coun-
try is fine and level, the foil being the beft that I had feen,
with extenfive woods, containing, however, but little fir
and cyprefs. There are found there in large numbers vines,
pears, hazel-nuts, cherries, red and green currants, and cer-
tain little radifhes of the fize of a fmall nut, refembling truf-
fles in tafte, which are very good when roafted or boiled,

All this foil is black, without any rocks, excepting that there
is

clearly define the meaning of Quebec, 155 The Point of St. Croix, where they
which is an Indian word, fignifying a anchored, muft have been what is now
narrowing or a contraction. — Vide Vol. known as Point Platon. Champlain’s
II. p. 175, note 309. The breadth of diftances are rough eftimates, made
the river at this point is undereftimated. under very unfavorable circumitances,
It is not far from 1320 feet, or three- and far from accurate. Point Platon is
quarters of a mile. about thirty-five miles from Quebec.

‘
‘

Szeur de Champlain. 20%
a large quantity of flate. The foil is very foft, and, if well
cultivated, would be very productive.

On the north fhore there is a river called Batifcan,™® ex-
tending a great diftance into the interior, along which the
Algonquins fometimes come. On the fame fhore there is
another river,” three leagues below St. Croix, which was as
far as Jacques Cartier went up the river at the time of his
explorations."** The above-mentioned river is pleafant, ex-
tending a confiderable diftance inland.
fhore is very even and pleafing.

On Wednefday,’ the 24th, we fet out from St. Croix,
where we had ftayed over a tide and a half in order to pro-
ceed the next day by daylight, for this is a peculiar place on
account of the great number of rocks in the river, which is
almoft entirely dry at low tide; but at half-flood one can be-
gin to advance without difficulty, although it is neceffary to
keep a good watch, lead in hand.
three fathoms and a half.

The farther we advanced, the finer the country became.
After going fome five leagues and a half, we came to anchor
on the northern fhore. On the Wednefday following, we fet
out from this place, where the country is flatter than the

preceding

All this northern

The tide rifes here nearly

156 Champlain does not mention the
rivers precifely in their order. On his
map of 1612, he has Contree de Ba/ti/-
guan on the weft of Trois Riviéres.
The river Batifcan empties into the St.
Lawrence about four miles weft of the
St. Anne. — Vide Atlas Maritime, by
Bellin, 1764; Atlas of the Dominion
of Canada, 1875.

187 River Jacques Cartier, which is in
fact about five miles eaft of Point Platon,

158 Jacques Cartier did, in faét, afcend
the St. Lawrence as far as Hochelaga,
or Montreal. The Abbé Laverdiére fug-
gefts that Champlain had not at this time
feen the reports of Cartier. Had he feen
them he would hardly have made this
ftatement. Pont Gravé had been here
feveral times, and may have been
Champlain’s incorreét informant. Vide
Laverdibre in loco.

159 Read Tuefday.

256 Voyages of

preceding and heavily wooded, as at St. Croix. We paffed
near a {mall ifland covered with vines, and came to anchor on
the fouthern fhore, near a little elevation, upon afcending
which we found a level country. There is another fmall ifland
three leagues from St. Croix, near the fouthern fhore.” We
fet out on the following Thurfday from this elevation, and
paffed by a little ifland near the northern fhore. Here I
landed at fix or more fmall rivers, up two of which boats
can go fora confiderable diftance. Another is fome three
hundred feet broad, with fome iflands at its mouth, It ex-
tends far into the interior, and is the deepeft of all.* Thefe
rivers are very pleafant, their fhores being covered with
trees which refemble nut-trees, and have the fame odor; but,
as I faw no fruit, I am inclined to doubt. The favages told
me that they bear fruit like our own.
_ Advancing fll farther, we came to an ifland called St.
Eloi; * alfo another little ifland very near the northern fhore.
We paffed between this ifland and the northern fhore, the
diftance from one to the other being fome hundred and fifty
feet; that from the fame ifland to the fouthern fhore, a league
and a half. We paffed alfo near a river large enough for
canoes. All the northern fhore is very good, and one can
fail along there without obftruction; but he fhould keep the
lead in hand in order to avoid certain points. All this fhore
along

160 Richelieu Ifland, fo called by the 161 This river is now known as the
French, as early as 1635, nearly oppofite Sainte Anne. Champlain fays they
Dechambeau “Point. Vide Laurie’s named it Riviire Saincte Marie. —
Chart. It was called St. Croix up to Vide Quebec ed. Tome III. p. 1755
1633. Laverdidre in loco. Thelndians Vol. II. p. 201 of this work.
called it Ka ouapaffinifkakhi.—éfuit _* An inconfiderable ifland near Ba-
Relations, 1635, p+ 13- tifcan, not laid down on the charts.

Szeur de Champlain. 257

along which we coafted confifts of fhifting fands, but a fhort
diftance in the interior the land is good.

The Friday following, we fet out from this ifland, and
continued to coaft along the northern fhore very near the
land, which is low and abundant in trees of good quality
as far as the Trois Riviéres. Here the temperature begins
to be fomewhat different from that of St. Croix, fince the
trees are more forward here than in any other place that I
had yet feen. From the Trois Riviéres to St. Croix the
diftance is fifteen leagues. In this river‘ there are fix
iflands, three of which are very fmall, the others being from
five to fix hundred feet long, very pleafant, and fertile fo
far as their fmall extent goes. There is one of thefe in
the centre of the above-mentioned river, confronting the
River of Canada, and commanding a view of the others,
which are diftant from the land from four to five hundred
feet on both fides. It is high on the fouthern fide, but
lower fomewhat on the northern. This would be, in my
judgment, a favorable place in which to make a fettlement,
and it could be eafily fortified, for its fituation is {trong
of itfelf, and it is near a large lake which is only fome four
leagues diftant. This river extends clofe to the River Sague-
nay, according to the report of the favages, who go nearly a
hundred leagues northward, pafs numerous falls, go overland
fome five or fix leagues, enter a lake from which principally

the

168 The St. Maurice, anciently known
as Trois Rividrs, becaufe two iflands
in its mouth divide it into three chan-
nels. Its Indianname, according to Pére
Le Jeune, was Aefaberoutin. It appears
to be the fame river mentioned by Car-
tier in his fecond voyage, which he ex-

33

plored and reported as fhallow and of
no importance. He found in it four {mall
iflands, which may afterward have been
fubdivided into fix. He named it Za@
Riutere du Fouez.— Brief Rétit, par
Jacques Cartier, D’Avezac ed. p. 28.
Vide Relations des Fésuites, 1635, p. 13.

258 Voyages of

the Saguenay has its fource, and thence go to Tadouffac.™
I think, likewife, that the fettlement of the Trois Riviéres
would be a boon for the freedom of fome tribes, who dare
not come this way in confequence of their enemies, the Iro-
quois, who occupy the entire borders of the River of Can-
ada; but, if it were fettled, thefe Iroquois and other favages
could be made friendly, or, at leaft, under the protection of
this fettlement, thefe favages would come freely without fear
or danger, the Trois Riviéres being a place of paffage. All
the land that I faw on the northern fhore is fandy. We af-
cended this river for about a league, not being able to pro-
ceed farther on account of the ftrong current. We continued
on in a fkiff, for the fake of obfervation, but had not gone
more than a league when we encountered a very narrow fall,
about twelve feet wide, on account of which we could not go
farther. All the country that I faw on the borders of this
river becomes conftantly more mountainous, and contains a
great many firs and cypreffes, but few trees of other kinds.

CHAPTER VII.

16 An eaftern branch of the St. Mau- ent of the Saguenay, may be reached
rice River rifes in a fmall lake, from by a land portage of not more than five
which Lake St.John, whichis anafflu- or fix leagues.

Szeur de Champlain. 259

CHAPTER VII.

LENGTH, BREADTH, AND DEPTH OF A LAKE.—OF THE RIVERS THAT FLOW
INTO IT, AND THE ISLANDS IT CONTAINS.— CHARACTER OF THE SuR-
ROUNDING COUNTRY.— OF THE RIVER OF THE IROQUOIS AND THE ForR-
TRESS OF THE SAVAGES WHO MAKE WAR UPON THEM.

N the Saturday following, we fet out from the

Trois Riviéres, and came to anchor at a lake
eS four leagues diftant. All this region from the

Y A Trois Riviéres to the entrance to the lake is

~—— low and ona level with the water, though fome-

what higher on the fouth fide. The land is very good and
the pleafanteft yet feen by us. The woods are very open, fo
that one could eafily make his way through them.

The next day, the 29th of June,’ we entered the lake,
which is fome fifteen leagues long and feven or eight wide.
About a league from its entrance, and on the fouth fide, is a
river *” of confiderable fize and extending into the interior
fome fixty or eighty leagues. Farther on, on the fame fide,
there is another fmall river, extending about two leagues
inland, and, far in, another little lake, which has a length of

165 They entered the lake on St.
Peter’s day, the 29th of June, and, for
this reafon doubtlefs, it was fubfe-
quently named Lake St. Peter, which
name it ftill retains. It was at firft
called Lake Angouléme.— Vide mar-
ginal note in Hakluyt, Vol. III. p
271. lLaverdiére cites Thévet to the
fame effect.

166 From the point at which the river
flows into the lake to its exit, the dif-
tance is about twenty-feven miles and
its width about feven miles. Cham-

perhaps

plain’s diftances, founded upon rough
eftimates made on a firft voyage of diffi-
cult navigation, are exceedingly inaccu-
rate, and, independent of other data,
cannot be relied upon for the identifica-
tion of localities.

167 The author appears to have con-
fufed the relative fituations of the two
rivers here mentioned. The fmaller one
fhould, we think, have been mentioned
firft. The larger one was plainly the
St. Francis, and the fmaller one the
Nicolette.

h
i
fF
t
ab
El,
Veal
iii

STDa aE Ttaaeaieea tae

260 Voyages of

perhaps three or four leagues. On the northern fhore,
where the land appears very high, you can fee for fome
twenty leagues; but the mountains grow gradually fmaller
towards the weft, which has the appearance of being a flat
region, The favages fay that on thefe mountains the land
is for the moft part poor. The lake above mentioned is
fome three fathoms deep where we paffed, which was nearly
in the middle. Its longitudinal direétion is from eaft to
weft, and its lateral one from north to fouth. I think that it
muft contain good fifh, and fuch varieties as we have at
home. We paffed through it this day, and came to anchor
about two leagues up the river, which extends its courfe
farther on, at the entrance to which there are thirty little
iflands.® From what I could obferve, fome are two leagues
in extent, others a league and a half, and fome lefs. They
contain numerous nut-trees, which are but little different
from our own, and, as I am inclined to think, the nuts are
good in their feafon. I faw a great many of them under the
trees, which were of two kinds, fome fmall, and others an
inch long; but they were decayed. There are alfo a great
many vines on the fhores of thefe iflands, moft of which,
however, when the waters are high, are fubmerged. The

country here is fuperior to any I have yet feen.
The laft day of June, we fet out from here and went to
the

168 This would feem to be the Baze la
Valliére, at the fouthweftern extremity
of Lake St. Peter.

168 The author here refers to the
iflands at the weftern extremity of Lake
St. Peter, which are very numerous.
On Charlevoix’s Carte de la Riviére de

Richelieu they are called Lftes de Riche-
fieu. The more prominent are Monk
Ifland, Ifle de Grace, Bear Ifland, Ifle
St. Ignace, and Ifle du Pas. Cham-
plain refers to thefe iflands again in
1609, with perhaps a fuller defcription
— Vide Vol. II. p. 206.

Szeur de Champlain. 261

the entrance of the River of the Iroquois,’ where the fay-
ages were encamped and fortified who were on their way to
make war with the former.”* Their fortrefs is made of a
large number of ftakes clofely preffed againft each other. It
borders on one fide on the fhore of the great river, on the
other on that of the River of the Iroquois. Their canoes
are drawn up by the fide of each other on the fhore, fo that
they may be able to flee quickly in cafe of a furprife from
the Iroquois; for their fortrefs is covered with oak bark, and
ferves only to give them time to take to their boats.

We went up the River of the Iroquois fome five or fix
leagues, but, becaufe of the ftrong current, could not pro-
ceed farther in our barque, which we were alfo unable to
drag overland, on account of the large number of trees on
the fhore. Finding that we could not proceed farther, we
took our fkiff to fee if the current were lefs ftrong above;
but, on advancing fome two leagues, we found it ftill ftronger,
and were unable to go any farther.”* As we could do no-
thing elfe, we returned in our barque. This entire river is
fome three to four hundred paces broad, and very unob-
ftructed. We faw there five iflands, diftant from each other
a quarter or half a league, or at moft a league, one of which,
the neareft, is a league long, the others being very fmall.

All

170 The Richelieu, flowing from Lake
Champlain to the St. Lawrence. For
defcription of this river, fee Vol. II. p.
210, note 337. In 1535 the Indians at
Montreal pointed out this river as lead-
ing to Florida. — Vide Brief Récit, par
Jacques Cartier, 1545, D’Avezac ed,

1 The Hurons, Algonquins, and
Montagnais were at war with the Iro-

quois, and the favages affembled here
were coinpofed of fome or all of thefe
tribes.

172 The rapids in the river here were
too {trong for the French barque, or even
the fkiff, but were not difficult to pafs
with the Indian canoe, as was fully
proved in 1609.— Vide Vol. II. p. 207
of this work.

i
I
{
.
f

coset nent nen Se rer enn

ee

262 Voyages of

All this country is heavily wooded and low, like that which
I had before feen; but there are more firs and cypreffes than
in other places. The foil is good, although a little fandy.
The direction of this river is about fouthweft.’73
The favages fay that fome fifteen leagues from where we
had been there is a fall * of great length, around which they
carry their canoes about a quarter of a league, when they
enter a lake, at the entrance to which there are three iflands,
with others farther in. It may be fome forty or fifty leagues
long and fome twenty-five wide, into which as many as ten
rivers flow, up which canoes can go for a confiderable dif
tance.”5 Then,at the other end of this lake, there is another
fall, when another lake is entered, of the fame fize as the
former,’ at the extremity of which the Iroquois are en-
camped. They fay alfo that there is a river” extending to
the coaft of Florida, a diftance of perhaps fome hundred or
hundred and forty leagues from the latter lake. All the
country of the Iroquois is fomewhat mountainous, but has a
very good foil, the climate being moderate, without much
winter.
CHAPTER VIII.

178 The courfe of the Richelieu is did not comprehend his Indian inform-
nearly from the fouth to the north. ants, or they greatly exaggerated the
174° The rapids of Chambly. comparative fize of this lake.

175 Take Champlain, difcovered by 7 The Hudfon River.— Vide Vol.
II. p. 218, note 347.

him in 1609. — Vide Vol. II. ch. ix.
176 Lake George. Champlain either

Szeur de Champlain. 263

CHAPTER VIII.

ARRIVAL AT THE FALL.— DESCRIPTION OF THE SAME AND ITS REMARK-
ABLE CHARACTER.— REPORTS OF THE SAVAGES IN REGARD TO THE
END OF THE GREAT RIVER.

ETTING out from the River of the Iroquois,
we came to anchor three leagues from there, on
the northern fhore. All this country is low,
and filled with the various kinds of trees which
I have before mentioned.

On the firft day of July we coafted along the northern
fhore, where the woods are very open; more fo than in any
place we had before feen. The foil is alfo everywhere favor-
able for cultivation.

I went in a canoe to the fouthern {fhore, where I fawa
large number of iflands,’* which abound in fruits, fuch as
grapes, walnuts, hazel-nuts, a kind of fruit refembling chett-
nuts, and cherries; alfo in oaks, afpens, poplar, hops, ath,
maple, beech, cyprefs, with but few pines and firs. There
were, moreover, other fine-looking trees, with which I am
not acquainted. There are alfo a great many ftrawberries,
ra{pberries, and currants, red, green, and blue, together with
numerous {mall fruits which grow in thick grafs. There are
alfo many wild beafts, fuch as orignacs, ftags, hinds, does,
bucks, bears, porcupines, hares, foxes, beavers, otters, mufk-
rats, and fome other kinds of animals with which I am
not acquainted, which are good to eat, and on which the
favages fubfift.. We

78 Tfle Plat, and at leaft ten other 179 The reader will obferve that the
iflets along the fhore before reaching catalogue of fruits, trees, and animals

the Verchéres. — Vide Laurie’s Chart. mentioned above, includes only fuch as
are

264

Voyages of

We paffed an ifland having a very pleafant appearance,

are important in commerce. They are,
we think, without an exception, of
American fpecies, and, confequently,
the names given by Champlain are not
accurately defcriptive. We notice them
in order, and in italics give the name
ii by Champlain in the text.
Grapes. Vignes, probably the froft
grape, Vitis cordifolia. — Pickering’s
Chronological Hiftory of Plants, p. 875.
Walnuts. /Vozx, this name is given in
France to what is known in commerce
as the Englifh or European walnut,
Fuglans regia, a Perfian fruit now cul-
tivated in moft countries in Europe.
For want of a better, Champlain ufed
this name to fignify probably the butter-
nut, Puglans cinerea, and five varieties
of the hickory; the fhag-bark, Carya
alba, the mocker-nut, Carya tomento/a,
the {mall-fruited Carya microcarpa, the
pig-nut, Carya glabra, bitter-nut, Carya
amara, all of which are exclufively
American fruits, and are ftill found in
the valley of the St. Lawrence. — J7S.
Letter of F. M. Le Moine, of Quebec ;
Jeffrie’s Natural Hiftory of French Do-
minions in America, London, 1760, p. 41.
Hazel-nuts, zoy/ettes. The American
filbert or hazel-nut, Corylus Ameri-
cana. The flavor is fine, but the fruit
is {maller and the fhell thicker than that
of the European filbert.
“ Kind of fruit refembling cheftnuts.”
This was probably the cheftnut, Ca/lanea
Americana. The fruit much refembles

the European, but is fmaller and
{fweeter.

Cherries, ceri/es. Three kinds may
here be included, the wild red cherry,
Prunus Pennfylvanica, the choke cher-
ry, Prunus Virginiana, and the wild
black cherry, Prunus /erotina.

Oaks, che/nes. Probably the more no-
ticeable varieties, as the white oak, Quer-
cus alba, and red oak, Quercus rubra.

fome

Afpens, trembles. The American af-
pen, Populus tremuloides. :

Poplar, pible. For piboule, as fug-
gefted by Laverdiére, a variety of poplar.

Hops, houblon. Humulus lupulus,
found in northern climates, differing
from the hop of commerce, which was
imported from Europe.

Ath, fre/ne. The white ath, Praxz-
nus Americana, and black ath, Fraxi-
nus fambuctfolia.

Maple, éraé The tree here ob-
ferved was probably the rock or fugar
maple, Acer faccharinum. Several
other fpecies belong to this region.

Beech, he/tre. The American beech,
Fagus ferruginea, of which there is but
one {pecies. — Vide, Vol. I1. p. 113, note
205.

Cyprefs, cyprez.— Vide antea, note
135.

Strawberry, fraz/es. The wild ftraw-
berry, Fragaria vefca, and Fragaria
riniana, both f{pecies, are found in
this region. — Vzde Pickering’s Chrono-
logical Hiftory of Plants, p. 873.

Rafpberries, framboifes. The Amer-
ican rafpberry, Rubus ftrigofus.

Currants, red, green, and blue, gvoz-
zelles rouges, vertes, and bleues. The
firft mentioned is undoubtedly the red
currant of our gardens, Rides rubrum.
The fecond may have been the unripe
fruit of the former. The third doubt-
lefs the black currant, Aides nigrum,
which grows throughout Canada. — Vide
Chronological Hiftory of Plants, Pick-
ering, p. 871; also Vol. II. note 138.

Orignas, fo written in the original
text. This is, I think, the earlieft men-
tion of this animal under this Algonquin
name. It was written, by the French,
fometimes orignac, orignat, and orig-
nal.— Vide Féfuit Relations, 1635, p-
16; 1636, p. 11, et pafim,; Sagard, H7z/2.
du Canada, 1636, p. 749; Defcription

de

Szeur de Champlain. 265

fome four leagues long and

de PAmerique, par Denys, 1672, p.
27. Orignac was ufed interchangeably
with é/az, the name of the elk of north-
ern Europe, regarded by fome as the
fame {fpecies.— Vide Mammals, by
Spenfer F. Baird. But the orvignac of
Champlain was the moofe, Alce A meri-
canus, peculiar to the northern latitudes
of America. Moofe is derived from the
Indian word moo/édé. This animal is
the largeft of the Cervus family. The
males are faid to attain the weight of
eleven or twelve hundred pounds. Its
horns fometimes weigh fifty or fixty
pounds. It is exceedingly fhy and diffi-
cult to capture.

Stags, cerfs. This is undoubtedly a
reference to the caribou, Cervus /aran-
dus. Sagard (1636) calls it Caribou ou
afne Sauuages, caribou or wilde afs. —
Hiift. du Canada, p. 750. La Hontan,
1686, fays harts and caribous are killed
both in fummer and winter after the
fame manner with the elks (moofes),
excepting that the caribous, which are
a kind of wild affes, make an eafy efcape
when the fnow is hard by virtue of their
broad feet (Voyages, p. 59). There
are two varieties, the Cerwus tarandus
arcticus and the Cervus tarandus
Jylveftris. The latter is that here
referred to and the larger and finer
animal, and is ftill found in the forefts
of Canada.

Hinds, diches, the female of cer/s, and
does, dazus, the female of daim, the fal-
low deer. Thefe may refer to the fe-
males of the two preceding fpecies, or
to additional {pecies as the common red
deer, Cervus Virginianus, and fome
other fpecies or variety. La Hontan in
the paffage cited above {peaks of three,
the e/k which we have fhown to be the
moofe, the well-known caribou, and the
hart, which was undoubtedly the com-
mon red deer of this region, Cervus

34

about half a league wide.” I
faw

Virginianus. I learn from Mr. J. M.
LeMoine of Quebec, that the Wapiti,
Llaphus Canadenfis was found in the
valley of the St. Lawrence a hundred
and forty years ago, feveral horns and
bones having been dug up in the forett,
efpecially in the Ottawa diftrict. It is
now extinét here, but is ftill found in
the neighborhood of Lake Winipeg
and further weft. Cartier, in 1535,
fpeaks of dains and cerfs, doubtlefs re-
ferring to different {pecies.— Vide Brief
Récit, D’ Avezac ed. p. 31 ver/o.

Bears, ours. The American black
bear, Urfus Americanus. The grifly
bear, Ur/us ferox, was found on the
Ifland of Anticofti. —Vide Hi/t. du Ca-
nada, par Sagard, 1636, pp. 148, 750. La
Hontan’s Voyages, 1687, p. 66.

Porcupines, porc/-e/pics. The Can-
ada porcupine, Hy/erzx pilofus. A noc-
turnal rodent quadruped, armed with
barbed quills, his chief defence when
attacked by other animals.

Hares, /apins. The American hare,
Lepus Americanus.

Foxes, reynards. Of the fox, Canis
vulpes, there are feveral fpecies in Can-
ada. The moft common is of a carroty
red color, Vulpes fulvus. The Ameri-
can crofs fox, Canis decuffatus, and the
black or filver fox, Canis argentatus,
are varieties that may have been found
there at that period, but are now rarely
if ever seen.

Beavers, caftors. The American
beaver, Caffor Americanus. The fur
of the beaver was of all others the moft
important in the commerce of New
France.

Otters, /outres. This has reference
only to the river otter, Lutra Canaden/is.
The fea otter, Lutra marina, is only

180 The Verchéres.
found

eae

~-e one at

a Te BSE ICN CR Ta

Yolen tytn an

on

tiem ieet ST

yestintes

Enews

Wt TARR EIN
saad hl bs,
nn ~ pone

ee PES eee
a ie

epee

eis Soar

266 Voyages of

faw on the fouthern fhore two high mountains, which ap-
peared to be fome twenty leagues in the interior.** The
favages told me that this was the firft fall of the River of the
Iroquois.

On Wednefday following, we fet out from this place, and
made fome five or fix leagues. We faw numerous iflands ;
the land on them was low, and they were covered with trees
like thofe of the River of the Iroquois. On the following
day we advanced fome few leagues, and paffed by a great
number of iflands," beautiful on account of the many mead-
ows, which are likewife to be feen on the mainland as well as
on the iflands. The trees here are all very fmall in compar-
ifon with thofe we had already paffed.

We arrived finally, on the fame day, having a fair wind,
at the entrance to the fall. We came to an ifland almoft in
the middle of this entrance, which is a quarter of a league
long. We paffed to the fouth of it, where there were from
three to five feet of water only, with a fathom or two in fome
places, after which we found fuddenly only three or four
feet. There are many rocks and little iflands without any
wood at all, and on a level with the water. From the lower
extremity of the above-mentioned ifland in the middle of the
entrance, the water begins to come with great force. Although

we
found in America on the north-weft 182 From the Verchéres to Montreal,
Pacific coaft. the St. Lawrence is full of iflands,

Mufkrat, rats mufquets. The mufk- among them St, Therefe and namelefs
rat, Fiber zibethecus, fometimes called others.
mufquafh from the Algonquin word, 188 This was the Ifland of St. Héléne,
mn fren bfn, is found in three varie- a favorite name given to feveral other
ties, the black, and rarely the pied and places. He fubfequently called it St.
white. For a defcription of this animal Héléne, probably from Héléne Boullé,
vide Le Feune, Fésuit Relations, 1635, his wife. Between it and the mainland
pp. 18, 19. on the north flows the Rapide de Sie.

181 Summits of the Green Mountains. A/arie.— Vide Laurie's Chart.

————
——

Steur de Champlain. 267

we had a very favorable wind, yet we could not, in {pite
of all our efforts, advance much. Still, we paffed this ifland
at the entrance of the fall. Finding that we could not pro-
ceed, we came to anchor on the northern {fhore, oppofite a
little ifland, which abounds in moft of the fruits before men-
tioned.* We at once got our {kiff ready, which had been
exprefily made for paffing this fall, and Sieur Du Pont Gravé
and myfelf embarked in it, together with fome favages whom
we had brought to fhow us the way. After leaving our
barque, we had not gone three hundred feet before we had
to get out, when fome failors got into the water and dragged
our fkiff over. The canoe of the favages went over eatfily,
We encountered a great number of little rocks on a level
with the water, which we frequently ftruck.

There are here two large iflands; one on the northern
fide, fome fifteen leagues long and almoft as broad,’ begins
in the River of Canada, fome twelve leagues towards the
River of the Iroquois, and terminates beyond the fall. The
ifland on the fouth fhore is fome four leagues long and _ half
a league wide." There is, befides, another ifland *” near
that on the north, which is perhaps half a league long and a
quarter wide. There is ftill another {mall ifland between that

on the north and the other farther fouth, where we paffed
the entrance to the fall." This being paffed, there is a kind

184 This landing was on the prefent
fite of the city of Montreal, and the
little ifland, according to Laverdiére, is
now joined to the mainland by quays.

185 The ifland of Montreal, here re-
ferred to, not including the Ifle Jéfus,
is about thirty miles long and nine miles
in its greateft width.

of

186 The Ifle Perrot is about feven or
eight miles long and about three miles
wide.

187 Tfland of St. Paul, fometimes called
Nuns’ Ifland.

#88 Round Ifland, fituated juft below
St. Héléne’s, on the eaft, fay about
fifty yards diftant.

268 Voyages of

of lake, in which are all thefe iflands, and which is fome five
leagues long and almoft as wide, and which contains a large
number of little iflands or rocks. Near the fall there is a
mountain,’ vifible at a con Mfiderable diftance, alfo a fmall
river coming from this mountain and falling into the lake.”
On the fouth, fome three or four mountains are feen, which
feem to be fifteen or fixteen leagues off in the interior.
There are alfo two rivers; the one *” reaching to the firft
lake of the River of the Iroquois, along which the Algon-
quins fometimes go to make war upon them, the other near
the fall and exte costing 1 fome feet inland.’

On approaching this fall %3 with our little fkiff and the
canoe, I faw, to my aftonifhment, a torrent of water defcend-
ing with an impetuofity fuch as I have never before wit-
neffed, although it is not very high, there being in fome
places only a fathom or two, and at moft but three. It de-

fcends

18 The mountain in the rear of the {treams do not appear on modern erie
city of Montreal, 700 feet in height, dif and have probably now entirely difap-

covered in Oétober, 1535, by Jacques Vide Charlevoix’s Carte de
Cartier, to which he gave the name after /, Montreal; Atlas Maritime,
which the city is called. “Nous nom- par Sieur Bellin; likewife A//as of the
afmes la dicte montaigne le mont Dominion of Canada, 1875. ‘

Royal.” — Brief Récit, 1545, D’ Avezac 191 The River St. Lambert, according

ed. p. 23. When Cartier made his vifit to Laverdiére, a fmall ftream from which
to this place in 1535, he found on or by a fhort portage the Indian with his
near the fite of the prefent city of Mont- canoe could eafily reach Little River,
real the famous Indian town called which flows into the bafin of Chambly,
Hochelaga. Champlain does not fpeak the lake referred to by Champlain.
of it in the ee and it had of courfe This was the route of the Algonquins,

entirely difappeared. — Vide Cartier’s at leaft on their return from their raids
defcription in Beek Récit, above cited. upon the Iroquois. — Vide Vol. Il. p.
199 Riviére St. Pierre. This little 225.
1¢

river is formed by two fmall ftreams 2 Laverditre fuppofes this infignifi-
flowing one from the north and the cant ftream to be La riviére de la
other from the fouth fide of the moun- Tortue.

tain. Bellin and Charlevoix denominate 198 The Falls of St. Louis, or the
it La Petite Rividre. Thefe fmall Lachine rapids.

Szeur de Champlain. 269

{cends as if by fteps, and at each defcent there is a remark-
able boiling, owing to the force and fwiftnefs with which the
water traverfes the fall, which is about a league in length.
There are many rocks on all fides, while near the middle
there are fome very narrow and long iflands. There are
rapids not only by the fide of thofe iflands on the fouth
fhore, but alfo by thofe on the north, and they are fo danger-
ous that it is beyond the power of man to pafs through with
a boat, however fmall. We went by land through the woods
a diftance of a league, for the purpofe of feeing the end of
the falls, where there are no more rocks or rapids; but the
water here is fo fwift that it could not be more fo, and this
current continues three or four leagues; fo that it is impof-
fible to imagine one’s being able to go by boats through
thefe falls. But any one defiring to pafs them, fhould pro-
vide himfelf with the canoe of the favages, which a man can
eafily carry. For to make a portage by boat could not be
done in a fufficiently brief time to enable one to return to
France, if he defired to winter there. Befides this firft fall,
there are ten others, for the moft part hard to pafs; fo that
it would be a matter of great difficulty and labor to fee and
do by boat what one might propofe to himfelf, except at
great coft, and the rifk of working in vain. But in the canoes
of the favages one can go without reftraint, and quickly,
everywhere, in the fmall as well as large rivers. So that, by
ufing canoes as the favages do, it would be poffible to fee all
there is, good and bad, in a year or two.

The territory on the fide of the fall where we went over-
land confifts, fo far as we faw it, of very open woods, where
one can go with his armor without much difficulty. The air

1S

Voyages of

is milder and the foil better than in any place I have before

270

There are extenfive woods and numerous fruits, as in
It is in latitude 45° and

feen.
all the places before mentioned.
fome minutes.

Finding that we could not advance farther, we returned to
our barque, where we afked our favages in regard to the
continuation of the river, which I directed them to indicate
with their hands; fo, alfo, in what direction its fource was.
They told us that, after pafling the firft fall,"* which we had
feen, they go up the river fome ten or fifteen leagues with
their canoes,’ extending to the region of the Algonquins,
fome fixty leagues diftant from the great river, and that they
then pafs five falls, extending, perhaps, eight leagues from
the firft to the laft, there being two where they are obliged
The extent of each fall may be an
After this, they

to carry their canoes.'®
eighth of a league, or a quarter at moft.
enter a lake,'” perhaps fome fifteen or fixteen leagues long.
3eyond this they enter a river a league broad, and in which
they go feveral leagues."* Then they enter another lake
fome four or five leagues long.” After reaching the end
of this, they pafs five other falls,7° the diftance from the
firft to the laft being about twenty-five or thirty leagues.

Three

194 Lachine Rapids.

19 Paffing through Lake St. Louis,
they come to the River Ottawa, fome-
times called the River of the Algon-
quins.

196 The Cafcades, Cedres and Rapids
du Céteau du Lac with fubdivifions.
Laverdidre. La Hontan mentions four
rapids between Lake St. Louis and St.
Francis, as Ca/cades, Le Cataradte du
Trou, Sauts des Cedres,and du Buiffon.

1% Lake St. Francis, about twenty-
five miles long.

198 Long Saut.

199 Hardly a lake but rather the river
uninterrupted by falls or rapids.

200 The fmaller rapids, the Galops,
Point Cardinal, and others.—Vide La
Hontan’s defcription of his paffage up

this river, Vew Voyages to N. America,
London, 1735.

Vol. I. p. 30.

Szeur de Champlain.

271

Three of thefe they pafs by carrying their canoes, and the
other two by dragging them in the water, the current not
being fo ftrong nor bad as in the cafe of the others, Of all
thefe falls, none is fo difficult to pafs as the one we faw.
Then they come to a lake fome eighty leagues long,**
with a great many iflands; the water at its extremity being
frefh and the winter mild. At the end of this lake they pafs
a fall,°* fomewhat high and with but little water flowing
over. Here they carry their canoes overland about a quar-
ter of a league, in order to pafs the fall, afterwards entering
another lake *3 fome fixty leagues long,
good water. Having reached the end, they come to a ftrait >
two leagues broad and extending a confiderable diftance into

the interior. They faid they had never gone any farther,

and containing very

nor feen the end of a lake*’ fome fifteen or fixteen leagues
diftant from where they had been, and that thofe relating
this to them had not feen any one who had feen it: that
fince it was fo large, they would not venture out upon it, for

fear

701 Lake Ontario. It is one hundred water and the perpendicular fall of 160

and eighty miles long. — Garneau.

*2 Niagara Falls. Champlain does
not appear to have obtained from the
Indians any adequate idea of the gran-
deur and magnificence of this fall.
The expreffion, gui e/t guelgue peu
éleué, on il y a peu d'eau, laquelle de-
JScend, would imply that it was of mod-
erate if not of an inferior character.
This may have arifen from the want of
a fuitable medium of communication,
but it is more likely that the intenfely
practical nature of the Indian did not
enable him to appreciate or even ob-
ferve the beauties by which he was
furrounded. The immenfe volume of

feet render it unfurpaffed in grandeur
by any other cataraét in the world. Al-
though Champlain appears never to
have feen this fall, he had evidently
obtained a more accurate defcription of
it before 1629.— Vide note No. 90 to map
in ed. 1632.

208 Lake Erie, 250 miles long. —Gar-
neaUu.

24 Detroit river, or the ftrait which
connects Lake Erie and Lake St. Clair.
— Atlas of the Dominion of Canada.

205 Lake Huron, denominated on early
maps Mer Douce, the fweet fea of which
the knowledge of the Indian guides was
very imperfect.

A ST EA PE OTE EY

—

we ee

|

Sree

272 Voyages of

fear of being furprifed by a tempeft or gale. They fay that
in fummer the fun fets north of this lake, and in winter
middle; that the water there is very bad, like that

6

about the
of this fea.”
I afked them whether from this laft lake, which they had
feen, the water defcended continuoufly in the river extending
to Gafpé. They faid no; that it was from the third lake
only that the water came to Gafpé, but that beyond the laft
fall, which is of confiderable extent, as I have faid, the water
was almoft ftill, and that this lake might take its courfe by
other rivers extending inland either to the north or fouth, of
which there are a large number there, and of which they do
not fee the end. Now, in my judgment, if fo many rivers flow
into this lake, it muft 2st neceff ity be that, having fo fmall
difcharge at this fall, it fhould flow off into fome very large
river. But what leads me to believe that there is no river
through which this lake flows, as would be expected, in view
of the large number of rivers that flow into it, is the fact
that the favages have not feen any river taking its courfe
into the interior, except at the place where they have been.
This leads me to believe that it is the fouth fea which is falt,
as they fay. But one is not to attach credit to this opinion
without more complete evidence than the little adduced.
This is all that I have actually feen refpecting this matter,
or heard from the favages in refponfe to our interrogatories.
CHAPTER IX.

206 The Indians with whom Cham- cafionally referred was probably Hud-
plain came in contaét on this hafty fon’s Bay, of which fome knowledge
vifit in 1603 appear to have had fome may have been tranfmitted from the
notion of a falt fea, or as they fay tribes dwelling near it to others more
water that is very bad like the fea, remote, and thus paffing from tribe to
lying in an indefinite region, which tribe till it reached, in rather an inde-
neither they nor their friends had ever finite fhape, thofe dwelling on the St.
vifited. The falt fea to which they oc- Lawrence. 7

Szeur de Champlain. 273

CHAPTER IX.

RETURN FROM THE FALL TO TADOUSSAC. — TESTIMONY OF SEVERAL SAV

AGES IN REGARD TO THE LENGTH AND COMMENCEMENT OF THE GREAT
RIVER OF CANADA, NUMBER OF THE FALLS, AND THE LAKES WHICH IT
TRAVERSES.

< fet out from the fall on Friday, the fourth
of June,”” and returned the fame day to the
river of the Iroquois. On Sunday, the fixth
of June, we fet out from here, and came to an-
chor at the lake. On Monday following, we
came to anchor at the Trois Riviéres. The fame day, we
made fome four leagues beyond the Trois Riviéres. The
following Tuefday we reached Quebec, and the next day the
end of the ifland of Orleans, where the Indians, who were
encamped on the mainland to the north, came to us. We
queftioned two or three Algonquins, in order to afcertain
whether they would agree with thofe whom we had interro-
gated in regard to the extent and commencement of the
River of Canada.

They faid, indicating it by figns, that two or three leagues
after paffing the fall which we had feen, there is, on the
northern fhore, a river in their territory; that, continuing in
the faid great river, they pafs a fall, where they carry their
canoes; that they then pafs five other falls comprifing, from
the firft to the laft, fome nine or ten leagues, and that thefe
falls are not hard to pafs, as they drag their canoes in the
moft

07 As they were at Lake St. Peter on the 29th of June, it is plain that this
fhould read Fuly.

35

eae

~ry
ee

\

nest

sel umeaihidis io slide caliaiiein indha inh iets Sect caaks cain aida

Lpeerarer se?

core aad

‘|

274 Voyages of

moft of them, except at two, where they carry them. After
that, they enter a river which is a fort of lake, comprifing
fome fix or feven leagues; and then they pafs five other
falls, where they drag their canoes as before, except at two,
where they carry them as at the firft; and that, from the
frit to the laft, there are fome twenty or twenty -five leagues.
Then they enter a lake fome hundred and fifty leagues in
length, and fome four or _ ive leagues from the entrance of
this lake there is a river ** extending northward to the Algon-
quins, and another towards the Iroquois,” where the faid
Algonquins and the Iroquois make war upon each other.
And a little farther along, on the fouth fhore of this lake,
there is another river,”° extending towards the Iroquois;
then, arriving at the end of this lake, they come to another
fall, where they carry their canoes; beyond this, they enter
another very large lake, as long, perhaps, as the firft. The
latter they have vifited but very little, they faid, and have
heard that, at the end of it, there is a fea of which they have
not feen the end, nor heard that any one has, but that the
water at the point to which they have gone is not falt, but
that they are not able to judge of the water beyond, fince they
have not advanced any farther; that the courfe of the water
is from the weft towar ds the eaft, and that they do not know
whether, beyond the lakes they have feen, there is another
watercourfe towards the weft; that the fun fets on the right
of this lake; that is, in my judgment, northweft more or
lefs; and that, at the firft lake, the water never freezes, which

leads

28 This river extending north from 209 The Ofwego River.
Lake Ontario is the river-like Bay of 210 The Genefee River, after which
Quinté. they come to Niagara Falls.

Szeur de Champlain. 275

leads me to conclude that the weather there is moderate."
They faid, moreover, that all the territory of the Algonquins
is low land, containing but little wood; but that on the fide of
the Iroquois the land is mountainous, although very good
and productive, and better than in any place they had feen.
The Iroquois dwell fome fifty or fixty leagues from this
great lake. This is what they told me they had feen, which
differs but very little from the ftatement of the former fav-
ages.

On the fame day we went about three leagues, nearly to
the Ifle aux Coudres. On Thurfday, the tenth of the month,
we came within about a league and a half of Hare Ifland, on
the north fhore, where other Indians came to our barque,
among whom was a young Algonquin who had travelled
a great deal in the aforefaid great lake. We queftioned him
very particularly, as we had the other favages. He told us
that, fome two or three leagues beyond the fall we had feen,
there is a river extending to the place where the Algonquins
dwell, and that, proceeding up the great river, there are
five falls, fome eight or nine leagues from the firft to the laft,
paft three of which they carry their canoes, and in the other
two drag them; that each one of thefe falls is, perhaps, a
quarter of a league long. Then they enter a lake fome fif-
teen leagues in extent, after which they pafs five other falls,
extending from the firft to the laft fome twenty to twenty-five
leagues, only two of which they pafs in their canoes, while
at the three others they drag them. After this, they enter
a very large lake, fome three hundred leagues in length.

Proceeding

11 We can eafily recognize Lake although this account is exceedingly
Ontario, Lake Erie and Niagara Falls, confufed and inaccurate.

276 Voyages of

Proceeding fome hundred leagues in this lake, they come to
a very large ifland, beyond which the water is good; but
that, upon going fome hundred leagues farther, the water has
become fomewhat bad, and, upon reaching the end of the
lake, it is perfectly falt. That there is a fall about a league
wide, where a very large mafs of water falls into faid lake;
that, when this fall is paffed, one fees no more land on either
fide, but only a fea fo large that they have never feen the
end of it, nor heard that any one has; that the fun fets on
the right of this lake, at the entrance to which there is a
river extending towards the Algonquins, and another towards
that the
country of the Iroquois is fomewhat mountainous, though

As.
Oo

the Iroquois, by way of which they go to war;
very fertile, there being there a great amount of Indian
corn and other products which they do not have in their
own country. That the territory of the Algonquins is low
and fertile.

I afked them whether they had knowledge of any mines.
They told us that there was a nation called the good Iro-
quois,* who come to barter for the articles of merchandife
which the French veffels furnifh the Algonquins, who fay
that, towards the north, there is a mine of pure copper,
fome bracelets made from which they fhowed us, which they
had obtained from the good Iroquois; 7" that, if we wifhed

to

212 Reference is here made to the
Hurons who were nearly related to the
Iroquois. They were called by the
French the good Iroquois in diftin¢ction
from the Iroquois in the State of New
York, with whom they were at war.

218 A f{pecimen of pure copper was

fubfequently prefented to Champlain-—
Vol olds peo: Vide a brochure on
Pre-hiftoric Copper Implements, by the
editor, reprinted from the New é
Hiftorical and Genealogical Regifter for
Jan. 1879; alfo reprinted in the Collec-
tions of Wis. Hift. Soc., Vol. VIII. 1880.

230:

Szeur de Champlain. 277

to go there, they would guide thofe who might be depated
for this object.

This is all that I have been able to afcertain from all par-
ties, their ftatements differing but little from each other,
except that the fecond ones who were interrogated faid that
they had never drunk falt water; whence it appears that
they had not proceeded fo far in faid lake as the others.
They differ, alfo, but little in refpect to the diftance, fome
making it fhorter and others longer; fo that, according to
their ftatement, the diftance from the fall where we had been
to the falt fea, which is poffibly the South Sea, is fome four
hundred leagues. It is not to be doubted, then, according
to their ftatement, that this is none other than the South
Sea, the fun fetting where they fay.

On Friday, the tenth of this month,”* we returned to Ta-
douffac, where our veffel lay.

GHAPTER. -X.

VoYAGE FROM TADOUSSAC TO ISLE PERCEE.— DESCRIPTION OF MOLUES
BAY, THE ISLAND OF BONAVENTURE, BAY OF CHALEUR: ALSO SEVERAL
Rivers, LAKES, AND COUNTRIES WHERE THERE ARE VARIOUS KINDS OF

MINES.

3) I once, after arriving at Tadouffac, we embarked
for Gafpe, about a hundred leagues diftant. On
the thirteenth day of the month, we met a troop
of favages encamped on the fouth fhore, nearly
half way between Tadouffac and Gafpé. The
name of the Sagamore who led them is Armouchides, who
is

a4 Friday, July 11th.

i
}
a
5
iH
HE |
be
ey
rf
ta
ia,

ie sene

peer

rm

278 Voyages of

is regarded as one of the moft intelligent and daring of the
favages. He was going to Tadouflac to barter their arrows
and orignac meat*s for beavers and martens*® with the
Montagnais, Etechemins, and Algonquins.

On the 15th day of the month we arrived at Gafpe, fitu-
ated on the northern fhore of a bay, and about a league and
a half from the entrance. This bay is fome feven or eight
leagues long, and four leagues broad at its entrance. There
is a river there extending fome thirty leagues inland.”
Then we faw another bay, called Molués Bay" fome three
leagues long and as many wide at its entrance. Thence we
come to Ifle Percée,?” a fort of rock, which is very high and
fteep on two fides, with a hole through which fhallops and
boats can pafs at high tide. At low tide, you can go from
the mainland to this ifland, which is only fome four or five
hundred feet diftant. There is alfo another ifland, about a
league foutheaft of Ifle Percée, called the Ifland of Bona-
venture, which is, perhaps, half a league long. Gafpé,
Molués Bay, and Ifle Percée are all places where dry and
green fifhing is carried on.

Beyond Ifle Percée there is a bay, called Baye de Chaleurs,”

extending
218 Orignac. Moofe.— Vide antea, plied on account of the excellent fith
note 179. of the neighborhood. The harbor of

216 Martens, martres. This may in- Mal-Bay is enclofed between two points,
clude the pine-marten, /u/tela martes, Point Peter on the north, and a high
and the pecan or fither, 1/«/tela Cana- rocky promontory on the fouth, whofe
denfis, both of which were found in large cliffs rife to the height of 666 feet. —
numbers in New France. Vide Charts of the St. Lawrence by

217 York River. Captain H. W. Bayfield.

218 Molues Bay, Paye des Molués 219 Tile Percée. — Vide Vol. 11. note
Now known as Mal-Bay, from morue, 290. —
codfith, a corruption from the old or- 220 Baye de Chaleurs. This bay was
thography molue and daze, codfifh bay, fo named by Jacques Cartier on account
the name having been originally ap- of the exceflive heat, chaleur, expe-

rienced

Szeur de Champlain. 279

extending fome eighty leagues weft-fouthweft inland, and
fome fifteen leagues broad at its entrance. The Canadian
favages fay that fome fixty leagues along the fouthern fhore
of the great River of Canada, there is a little river called
Mantanne, extending fome eighteen leagues inland, at the
end of which they carry their canoes about a league by land,
and come to the Baye de Chaleurs,”* whence they go fome-
times to Ifle Percée. They alfo go from this bay to Tre-
gate ** and Mifamichy.”

Proceeding along this coaft, you pafs a large number of
rivers, and reach a place where there is one called Souricoua,
by way of which Sieur Prevert went to explore a copper
mine. They go with their canoes up this river for two or
three days, when they go overland fome two or three leagues
to the faid mine, which is fituated on the feafhore fouthward.
At the entrance to the above-mentioned river there is an
ifland ** about a league out, from which ifland to Ifle Percée
is a diftance of fome fixty or feventy leagues. Then, con-
tinuing along this coaft, which runs towards the eatt, you
come to a {trait about two leagues broad and twenty-five

long.

rienced there on his firft voyage in 1634.
—Vide Voyage de Facques Cartier,
Mechelant, ed. Paris, 1865, p. 50. The
depth of the bay is about ninety miles
and its width at the entrance is about
eighteen. It receives the Riftigouche
and other rivers.

221 By a portage of about three leagues
from the river Matane to the Matapedia,
the Bay of Chaleur may be reached by
water.

222 Tregaté, Tracadie. By a very fhort
portage between Bafs River and the

Big Tracadie River, this place may be
reached.

223 Mifamichy, Miramichi. This is
reached by a fhort portage from the
Nepifiguit to the head waters of the
Miramichi.

224 Tt is obvious from this defcription
that the ifland above mentioned is She-
diac Ifland, and the river was one of
the feveral emptying into Shediac Bay,
and named Souricoua, as by it the In-
dians went to the Souriquois or Micmacs
in Nova Scotia.

a el

Sayre oR or

280 Voyages of

long.*5 On the eaft fide of it is an ifland named S¢ Law-
rence,” on which is Cape Breton, and where a tribe of fav-
ages called the Souréguors winter. Paffing the ftrait of the
Ifland of St. Lawrence, and coafting along the fhore of La
Cadie, you come to a bay *” on which this copper mine is fit-

uated. Advancing ftill farther, you find a river ** extending
fome fixty or eighty leagues inland, and nearly to the Lake

of the Iroquois, along which the favages of the coaft of La

Cadie go to make war upon the latter.

One would accomplifh a great good by difcovering, on the
coaft of Florida, fome pafflage running near to the great lake
before referred to, where the water is falt; not only on ac-
count of the navigation of veffels, which would not then be
expofed to so great rifks as in going by way of Canada, but
alfo on account of the fhortening of the diftance by more
than three hundred leagues. And it is certain that there
are rivers on the coaft of Florida, not yet difcovered, extend-
ing into the interior, where the land is very good and fertile,
and containing very good harbors. The country and coatft
of Florida may have a different temperature and be more
productive in fruits and other things than that which I have
feen; but there cannot be there any lands more level nor of
a better quality than thofe we have feen.

The favages fay that, in this great Baye de Chaleurs, there
is a river extending fome twenty leagues into the interior,

at

22% The Strait of Canfeau. 228 The River St. John by which they

226 St. Lawrence. This ifland had reached the St. Lawrence, and through

then borne the name of the /fand of the River Richelieu the lake of the Iro-

Cape Breton for a hundred years. quois. It was named Lake Champlain
221 The Bay of Fundy. in 1609. Véde Vol. II. p. 223.

Szeur de Champlain. 281

at the extremity of which is a lake * fome twenty leagues in
extent, but with very little water; that it dries up in fummer,
when they find in it, a foot or foot and a half under ground,
a kind of metal refembling the filver which I fhowed them,
and that in another place, near this lake, there is a copper
mine.

This is what I learned from thefe favages.

CHAPTER XI.

RETURN FROM ISLE PERCEE TO TADOUSSAC. — DESCRIPTION OF THE
Coves, Harsors, RIVERS, ISLANDS, Rocks, FALLS, BAys, AND SHAL-
LOWS ALONG THE NORTHERN SHORE.

7 E fet out from Ifle Percée on the nineteenth

of the month, on our return to Tadouffac.

When we were fome three leagues from Cape
Evéque 3° we encountered a tempeft, which
lafted two days, and obliged us to put into a
large cove and wait for fair weather. The next day we fet
out from there and again encountered another tempefl. Not
wifhing to put back, and thinking that we could make our
way, we proceeded to the north fhore on the 28th of July,
and came to anchor in a cove which is very dangerous on
account of its rocky banks. This cove is in latitude 51° and
fome minutes.”

The

229 By traverfing the Riftigouche 281 On paffing to the northern fhore
River, the Matapediac may be reached, of the St. Lawrence, they entered, ac-
the lake here defignated. cording to the conjecture of Laverdiére,
230 Hyefgue. This cape cannot be Moifie Bay. It feems to us, however,
identified. more likely that they entered a cove fome-
where

36

ee) ee ete

282 Voyages of

The next day we anchored near a river called St. Margaret,
where the depth is fome three fathoms at full tide, and a fath-
om and a half at low tide. It extends a confiderable diftance
inland. So far as I obferved the eaftern fhore inland, there is
a waterfall fome fifty or fixty fathoms in extent, flowing into
this river; from this comes the greater part of the water
compofing it. At its mouth there is a fand-bank, where there
is, perhaps, at low tide, half a fathom of water. All along
the eaftern fhore there is moving fand; and here there is a
point fome half a league from the above mentioned river,*”
extending out half a league, and on the weftern fhore there
is a little ifland. This place is in latitude 50°. All thefe
lands are very poor, and covered with firs. The country is
fomewhat high, but not fo much fo as that on the fouth fide.

After going fome three leagues, we paffed another river,
apparently very large, but the entrance is, for the moft part,
filled with rocks. Some eight leagues diftant from there,
is a point * extending out a league and a half, where there
is only a fathom and a half of water. Some four leagues

beyond
where among the Seven Iflands, per- ifland formed by the moving fands. —
haps near the weftchannel tothe Seven Vide Bayfield’s charts.
Iflands Bay, between Point Croix and 88 Rock River, in latitude 50° 2’.
Point Chafié, where they might have 284 Point De Monts. The Abbé La-
found good anchorage and a rocky verdiére, whofe opportunities for know-
fhore. The true latitude is fay, about ing this coaft were excellent, ftates that

50° of. The latitude 51°, as given by there is no other point between Rock
Champlain, would cut the coaft of La- River and Point De Monts of fuch ex-

brador, and is obvioufly an error.

282 This was probably the river {till
bearing the name of St. Margaret.
There is a fandy point extending out on
the eaft and a peninfula on the weftern
fhore, which may then have been an

tent, and where there is fo little water.
As to the diftance, Champlain may
have been deceived by the currents, or
there may have been, as fuggefted by
Laverdiére, a typographical error. The
diftance to Point De Monts is, in fact,
eighteen leagues.

Samuel de Champlain. 283
beyond this point, there is another, where there is water
enough.** All this coaft is low and fandy.

Some four leagues beyond there is a cove into which a
This place is capable of containing a large
There is a low point

river enters,.”3°
number of veffels on its weftern fide.
extending out abouta league. One mutt fail along the eaftern
fide for fome three hundred paces in order to enter. This is
the beft harbor along all the northern coaft; yet it is very
dangerous failing there on account of the fhallows and fand-
banks along the greater part of the coaft for nearly two
leagues from the {fhore.

Some fix leagues farther on is a bay,” where there is a
This entire bay is very fhoal, except on the
water,

fandy ifland.
eaftern fide, where there are fome four fathoms of
In the channel which enters this bay, fome four leagues from
there, is a fine cove, into which a river flows. There is a
large fall on it. All this coaft is low and fandy. Some five
leagues beyond, is a point extending out about half a
league,** in which there is a cove; and from one point to
the other is a diftance of three leagues; which, however, is
only fhoals with little water.

Some two leagues farther on, is a ftrand with a good har-

bor

286 Point St. Nicholas. — Laverdidre.
This is probably the point referred to,
although the diftance is again three
times too great.

236 The Manicouagan River.—Laver-
didre. The diftance is {till exceffive, but
in other refpects the defcription in the
text identifies this river. On Bellin’s
map this river is called Riviére Noire.

281 Outard Bay. The ifland does not
now appear. It was probably an ifland

of fand, which has fince been fwept
away, unlefs it was the fandy peninfula
lying between Outard and Manicoua-
gan Rivers. The fall is laid down on
Bayfield’s chart.

%8 Berfimis Point. Walker and Miles
have Betfiamites, Bellin, Berfiamites,
Laverditre, Be¢/famis, and Bayfield, Ber-
fimis. The text defcribes the locality

with fufficient accuracy.

284 Voyages of

bor and a little river, in which there are three iflands,”? and
in which veffels could take fhelter.

Some three leagues from there, is a fandy point,
ing out about a league, at the end of which is a little ifland.

240

extend-

Then, going on to the Efquemin,*" you come to two fmall,
low iflands and a little rock near the fhore. Thefe iflands
are about half a league from the Efquemin, which is a very
bad harbor, furrounded by rocks and dry at low tide, and, in
order to enter, one muft tack and go in behind a little rocky
point, where there is room enough for only one veffel. A
little farther on, is a river extending fome little diftance into
the interior; this is the place where the Bafques carry on
the whale-fifhery.*” To tell the truth, the harbor is of no
account at all.

We went thence to the harbor of Tadouffac, on the third
of Auguft. All thefe lands above-mentioned along the fhore
are low, while the interior is high. They are not so attract-
ive or fertile as thofe on the fouth fhore, although lower.

This is precifely what I have feen of this northern fhore.

CHAPTER XII.
239 Jeremy Ifland. Bellin, 1764, lays 21 Efguemin. Walker and Miles

down three iflands, but Bayfield, 1834, have E/coumain, Bellin, Le/guemin,
has but one. Two of them appear to Bayfield, A/guamine, and Laverdiére,

have been {wept away or united in one. E/coumins. The river half a league
240 Three leagues would indicate diftant is now called River Romaine.
Point Colombier. But Laverdiére fug- 42 The River Leffumen, a fhort dif

gefts Mille Vaches as better conforming tance from which is An/z aux Bafques,
to the defcription in the text, although or Bafque Cove. This is probably the
the diftance is three times too great. locality referred to in the text.

Sieur de Champlain. 285

CHAPTER -X1t,

CEREMONIES OF THE SAVAGES BEFORE ENGAGING IN WAR. — OF THE AL-
MOUCHICOIS SAVAGES AND THEIR STRANGE ForM.— NARRATIVE OF
SIEUR DE PREVERT OF ST. MALO ON THE EXPLORATION OF THE LA
CADIAN COAST ; WHAT MINES THERE ARE THERE; THE EXCELLENCE
AND FERTILITY OF THE COUNTRY.

PON arriving at Tadouffac, we found the favages,
whom we had met at the River of the Iroquois,
and who had had an encounter at the firft lake
with three Iroquois canoes, there being ten
of the Montagnais. The latter brought back

the heads of the Iroquois to Tadouffac, there being only

one Montagnais wounded, which was in the arm by an ar-

row; and in cafe he fhould have a dream, it would be necef-
fary for all the ten others to execute it in order to fatisfy
him, they thinking, moreover, that his wound would thereby
do better. If this favage fhould die, his relatives would
avenge his death either on his own tribe or others, or it
would be neceffary for the captains to make prefents to the
relatives of the deceafed, in order to content them, other-
wife, as I have faid, they would practife vengeance, which is
a great evil among them.

Before thefe Montagnais fet out for the war, they all gath-
ered together in their richeft fur garments of beaver and
other fkins, adorned with beads and belts of various colors.
They affembled in a large public place, in the prefence of a
fagamore named Begourat, who led them to the war. They
were arranged one behind the other, with their bows and

arrows, clubs, and round fhields with which they provide
themfelves

LaDy ERODE ARTS TTA PL ITT ee MARIS LSet cs remem TH ID

“yy

i

fem RR ART a mnrquen

ares

ppninyicierinn

286 V “OVages of

themfelves for fighting. They went leaping one after the
other, making various geftures with their bodies, and many
fnail-like turns. Afterwards they proceeded to dance in the
cuftomary manner, as I have before defcribed; then they
had their ¢adagze, after which the women {tripped themfelves
ftark naked, adorned with their handfomeft matachiats. Thus
naked and dancing, they entered their canoes, when they
put out upon the water, ftriking each other with their oars,
and throwing quantities of water at one another. But they
did themfelves no harm, fince they parried the blows hurled
at each other. After all thefe ceremonies, the women with-
drew to their cabins, and the men went to the war againft
the Iroquois.

On the fixteenth of Auguft we fet out from Tadouffac,
and arrived on the eighteenth at Ifle Percee, where we found
Sieur Prevert of St. Malo, who came from the mine where he
had gone with much difficulty, from the fear which the favages
had of meeting their enemies, the Almouchicois,** who are
favages of an exceedingly ftrange form, for their head is
{mall and body fhort, their arms flender as thofe of a {fkele-
ton, fo alfo the thighs, their legs big and long and of uni-
form fize, and when they are feated on the ground, their
knees extend more than half a foot above the head, fome-
thing ftrange and feemingly abnormal. They are, however,
very agile and refolute, and are fettled upon the beft lands

of

48 Almouchiguois. Champlain here Indians found fouth of Saco, on the coaft
writes Armouchicois. The account here of Maflachufetts, if accurately reported,
given to Prevert, by the Souriquois or is far from correét. Vide Champlain’s

Micmacs, as they have been more re- defcription of them, Vol. II. p. 63, é
cently called, of the Almouchicois or Jafim.

Sceur de Champlain. 287

of all the coaft of La Cadie;** fo that the Souriquois fear
them greatly. But with the affurance which Sieur de Pre-
vert gave them, he took them to the mine, to which the fav-
ages guided him.*5 It is a very high mountain, extending
fomewhat feaward, glittering brightly in the funlight, and
containing a large amount of verdigris, which proceeds from
the before mentioned copper mine. At the foot of this
mountain, he faid, there was at low water a large quantity of
bits of copper, fuch as he fhowed us, which fall from the top
of the mountain. Going on three or four leagues in the
direction of the coaft of La Cadie, one finds another mine;
alfo a {mall river extending fome diftance in a foutherly di-
rection, where there is a mountain containing a black pig-
ment with which the favages paint themfelves. Then, fome
fix leagues from the fecond mine, going feaward about a
league, and near the coaft of La Cadie, you find an ifland
containing a kind of metal of a dark brown color, but white
when it is cut. This they formerly ufed for their arrows
and knives, which they beat into fhape with ftones, which
leads me to believe that it is neither tin nor lead, it being fo
hard; and, upon our fhowing them fome filver, they faid
that the metal of this ifland was like it, which they find
fome one or two feet under ground. Sieur Prevert gave to

the

** Coaft of La Cadie. This extent 5 Prevert did not make this explora-

given to La Cadie correfponds with the
charter of De Monts, which covered
the territory from 40° north latitude to
46°. The charter was obtained in the
autumn of this fame year, 1603, and be-
fore the account of this voyage by
Champlain was printed. —Vide Vol. 11.
note 155.

tion, perfonally, although he pretended
that he did. He fent fome of his men
with Secondon, the chief of St. John,
and others. His report is therefore
fecond-hand, confufed, and inaccurate.
Champlain expofes Prevert’s attempt to
deceive in a fubfequent reference to
him. Compare Vol. II. pp. 26, 97, 98.

Beta ip ceeee. > arms ee

ry eee

hee NS HL oo

RH

t

t

F

:

i
ig

7

288 Voyages of

the favages wedges and chifels and other things neceffary
to extract the ore of this mine, which they promifed to do,
and on the following year to bring and give the fame to
Sieur Prevert.

They fay, alfo, that, fome hundred or hundred and twenty
leagues diftant, there are other mines, but that they do not
dare to go to them, unlefs accompanied by Frenchmen to
make war upon their enemies, in whofe poffeffion the mines
are.

This place where the mine is, which is in latitude 44° and
fome minutes,”° and fome five or fix leagues from the coaft of
La Cadie, is a kind of bay fome leagues broad at its entrance,
and fomewhat more in length, where there are three rivers
which flow into the great bay near the ifland of St. John,”
which is fome thirty or thirty-five leagues long and fome fix
leagues from the mainland on the fouth. There is alfo an-
other fmall river emptying about half way from that by which
Sieur Prevert returned, in which there are two lake-like
bodies of water. There is alfo ftill another fmall river,
extending in the direction of the pigment mountain. All
thefe rivers fall into faid bay nearly foutheaft of the ifland
where thefe favages fay this white mine is. On the north
fide of this bay are the copper mines, where there is a good
harbor for veffels, at the entrance to which is a fmall ifland.
The bottom is mud and fand, on which veffels can be run.

From

248 44° and fome minutes, The Ba- Facgues Cartier, 1534, Michelant, ed.

fin of Mines, the place where the cop-
per was faid to be, is about 45° 30’.

47 [land of St. Fohn. Prince Ed-
ward Ifland. It was named the Ifland
of St. John by Cartier, having been
difcovered by him on St. John’s Day, the
24th of June, 1534.— Vide Voyage de

Paris, 1865, p. 33. It continued to be fo
called for the period of ‘wo hundred and

fixty-five years, when it was changed to

Prince Edward Ifland by an att of its
legiflature, in November, 1798, which
was confirmed by the king in council,
Feb. I, 1799.

Szeur de Champlain. 289

From this mine to the mouth of the above rivers is a dif.
tance of fome fixty or eighty leagues overland. But the dif.
tance to this mine, along the feacoaft, from the outlet between
the Ifland of St. Lawrence and the mainland is, I fhould
think, more than fifty or fixty leagues.**

All this country is very fair and flat, containing all the
kinds of trees we faw on our way to the firft fall of the great
river of Canada, with but very little fir and cyprefs.

This is an exact ftatement of what I afcertained from
Sieur Prevert.

CHAPTER XIII.

A TERRIBLE MONSTER, WHICH THE SAVAGES CALL GouGoU. — OUR SHORT
AND FAVORABLE VOYAGE BACK TO FRANCE.

| HERE is, moreover, a ftrange matter, worthy of
being related, which feveral favages have affured
me was true ; namely, near the Bay of Chaleurs,
towards the fouth, there is an ifland where a
terrible monfter refides, which the favages call
Gougou, and which they told me had the form of a woman,
though very frightful, and of fuch a fize that they told me
the tops of the mafts of our veffel would not reach to his
middle, fo great do they picture him; and they fay that he
has often devoured and ftill continues to devour many favages;
thefe he puts, when he can catch them, into a great pocket,

and afterwards eats them; and thofe who had efcaped the
jaws

48 That is, from the Strait of Canfeau round the coaft of Nova Scotia to
the Bay of Mines.

37

Voyages of

jaws of this wretched creature faid that its pocket was fo

290

great that it could have put our veffel into it. This monfter
makes horrible noifes in this ifland, which the favages call
the Gougou; and when they fpeak of him, it is with the
greateft poffible fear, and feveral have affured me that they
have feen him. Even the above-mentioned Prevert from St.
Malo told me that, while going in fearch of mines, as men-
tioned in the previous chapter, he paffed fo near the dwell-
ing-place of this frightful creature, that he and all thofe on
board his veffel heard ftrange hiffings from the noife it made,
and that the favages with him told him it was the fame crea-
fo afraid that they hid themfelves
wherever they could, for fear that it would come and carry
them off.
that all the favages in general fear it, and tell fuch ftrange
things about it that, if I were to record all they fay, it would
be regarded as a myth; but I hold that this is the dwelling-
place of fome devil that torments them in the above-men-
tioned manner.”*?

ture, and that they were

What makes me believe what they fay is the fact

This is what I have learned about this
Gougou.
Before

24 The defcription of this enchanted
ifland is too indefinite to invite a con-
jeCture of its identity or location. The
refounding noife of the breaking waves,
mingled with the whiftling of the wind,
might well lay a foundation for the fears
of the Indians, and their excited imagi-
nations would eafily fill out and com-
plete the picture. In Champlain’s time,
the belief in the active agency of good
and evil fpirits, particularly the latter,
in the affairs of men, was univerfal. It
culminated in this country in the trage-
dies of the Salem witchcraft in 1692. It

has fince been gradually fubfiding, but
neverthelefs {till exifts under the miti-
gated form of fpiritual communications.
Champlain, fharing the credulity of his
times, very naturally refers thefe ftrange
phenomena reported by the favages,
whofe ftatements were fully accredited
and corroborated by the teftimony of his
countryman, M. Prevert, to the agency
of fome evil demon, who had taken up
his abode in that region in order to vex
and terrify thefe unhappy Indians. As
a faithful hiftorian, he could not omit
this ftory, but it probably made no more

imprefiion

Szeur de Champlain. 291

Before leaving Tadouffac on our return to France, one of
the fagamores of the Montagnais, named Bechourat, gave
his fon to Sieur Du Pont Grave to take to France, to whom
he was highly commended by the grand fagamore, Anada-
bijou, who begged him to treat him well and have him fee
what the other two favages, whom we had taken home with
us, had feen. We afked them for an Iroquois woman they
were going to eat, whom they gave us, and whom, alfo, we
took with this favage. Sieur de Prevert alfo took four fav-
ages: a man from the coaft of La Cadie, a woman and two
boys from the Canadians.

On the 24th of Auguft, we fet out from Gafpe, the veffel
of Sieur Prevert and our own. On the 2d of September
we calculated that we were as far as Cape Race; on the 5th,
we came upon the bank where the fifhery is carried on; on
the 16th, we were on foundings, fome fifty leagues from
Oueffant; on the 20th we arrived, by God’s grace, to the joy
of all, and with a continued favorable wind, at the port of
Havre de Grace.
impreffion upon his mind than did the tion of 1613, when fpeaking of the cop-
thoufand others of a fimilar charaéter per mines in that neighborhood, nor

with which he muft have been familiar. yet in that of 1632, and it had probably
He makes no allufion to it in the edi- paffed from his memory.

CHAMPLAIN’S EXPLANATION

OF THE

CARTE DE LA NOVVELLE FRANCE.
26

163

TABLE FOR FINDING THE PROMINENT PLACES ON

THE
A. Baye des Iles)
B. Cale/me.?
C. Baye des Trefpaffes.
D. Cap de Leuy?

MAP.

E. Port du Cap de Raye, where the cod-fifhery is carried on,
F. The north-weft coaft of Newfoundland, but little known.
G. Paffage to the north at the 52d degree.*

H. JLfle St. Paul, near Cape St. Lawrence.

1 It is to be obferved that fome of the
letters and figures are not found on the
map. Among the reft, the letter A is
wanting. It is impoffible of courfe to
tell with certainty to what it refers, par-
ticularly as the places referred to do not
occur in confecutive order. The Abbé
Laverdiére thinks this letter points to
the bay of Bofton or what we com-
monly call Maffachufetts Bay, or to the

I,

Bay of all Ifles as laid down by Cham-
plain on the eaftern coaft of Nova Sco-
tia.

2 On the fouthern coaft of Newfound-
land, now known as Placentia Bay.

3 Point Levi, oppofite Quebec.

4 The letter G is wanting, but the
reference is plainly to the Straits of
Belle Ifle, as may be feen by reference
to the map.

APA yo ep Ra Re:

Say Hon CAE ORE MRRNIE ET ee

294 Champlain's Explanation of the

I. JLfle de Safinou, between Monts Déferts and Ifles aux Corneilles.5

K; Lfle de Mont-véal, at the Falls
leagues in circuit.®

L. Riutere Feannin£

M. Riuzere St. Antoine5

of St. Louis, fome eight or nine

N. Kind of falt water difcharging into the fea, with ebb and flood,

abundance of fifh and fhell-fifh, and in fome places oyfters

of not very good flavor.®

P. Port aux Coquilles, an ifland at the mouth of the River St.

Croix, with good fifhing.”

Lac de Soiffons.
Baye du Gouffre.®

aSHAY RO

Lefquemain, where there is a
and trout, near which is a

Ifle de Monts Déferts, very hig
Lfle S. Barnabé, in the great river near the Bic.

Iflands where there is fifhing,”
12

h.

{mall river, abounding in falmon
little rocky iflet, where there was

formerly a ftation for the whale fifhery."

si

La Pointe aux Alloiiettes, where, in the month of September,

there are numberlefs larks, alfo other kinds of game and

fhell-fith.

5 This ifland was fomewhere between
Mount Defert and Jonefport; not un-
likely it was that now known as Petit
Manan. It was named after Safanou,
chief of the River Kennebec. Vide
Vole ii pi68:

®° The undereftimate is fo great, that
it is probable that the author intended
to fay that the leneth of the ifland is
eight or nine leagues.

™ The Boyer, eaft of Quebec. It ap-
pears to have been named after the
Prefident Jeannin. Vide antea, p. 112.

8 A river eaft of the Ifland of Or-
leans now called Riviére du Sud.

® 'N is wanting.

Z.

10 A harbor at the north-eaftern ex-
tremity of the ifland of Campobello.
Vide Vol. Il. p. too.

11 Q is wanting. The reference is
perhaps to the iflands in Penobfcot
Bay.

2 Lac de Soiffons. So named after
Charles de Bourbon, Count de Soiffons,
a Viceroy of New France in 1612,
Vide antea, p. 112. Now known as
the Lake of Two Mountains.

18 A bay at the mouth of a river of
this name now called St. Paul’s Bay,
near the Ifle aux Coudres. Vide Vol. II.
note 305.

M4 Vide antea, note 241.

8.

Carte de la Novvelle France, 295

Lfle aux Liéures, fo named becaufe fome hares were captured
there when it was firft difcovered.¥

Port & Lefquille, dry at low tide, where are two brooks coming
from the mountains."

Port au Saulmon, dry at low tide. There are two fmall iflands
here, abounding, in the feafon, with {trawberries, rafpberries,
and d/uets." Near this place is a good roadftead for veflels,
and two {mall brooks flowing into the harbor.

Riuiere Platte, coming from the mountains, only navigable for
canoes. It is dry here at low tide a long diftance out.
Good anchorage in the offing.

Lfles aux Couldres, fome league and a half long, containing in
their feafon great numbers of rabbits, partridges, and other
kinds of game. At the fouthweft point are meadows, and
reefs feaward. There is anchorage here for veffels between
this ifland and the mainland on the north.

Cap de Tourmente, a league from which Sieur de Champlain had
a building erected, which was burned by the Englith in 1628.
Near this place is Cap Bruflé, between which and Ifle aux
Coudres is a channel, with eight, ten, and twelve fathoms
of water. On the fouth the fhore is muddy and rocky. To
the north are high lands, &c.

Lfle d’ Orléans, fix leagues in length, very beautiful on account of
its variety of woods, meadows, vines, and nuts. The wett-
ern point of this ifland is called Cap de Condé.

Le Sault de Montmorency, twenty fathoms high,® formed by a
river coming from the mountains, and difcharging into the
St. Lawrence, a league and a half from Quebec.

9.

15 An ifland in the River St. Law- l Bluets, Vaccinium Canaden/fe, the
rence weft of Tadoufiac, ftill called Hare Canada blueberry. Champlain fays it
Ifland. Vide antea, note 148. is a {mall fruit very good for eating,

18 Figure 2 is not found on the map, Vide Quebec ed. Voyage of 1615, p. 509.
and it is difficult to identify the place 18 Vide Vol. II. p. 176.
referred to.

296 Champlain's Explanation of the

9. Riuiere S. Charles, coming from Lac S. Jofeph,” very beautiful
At full tide barques can go up
uis river are built the churches

with meadows at low tide.

as far as the firft fall. On t
and quarters of the reverend Jéfuit and Récolle¢t Fathers.
Game is abundant here in fpring and autumn.

10, Lustre des Etechemins,™ by which the favages go to Quine-
bequi, croffing the country with difficulty, on account of the
falls and little water. Sieur de Champlain had this explora-
tion made in 1628, and found a favage tribe, feven days from

are called the Abenaquiuoit.

Quebec, who till the foil, anc
Riutéere de Champlain, near that of Batifquan, north-weft of the
Grondines.
12. Rzuzere de Sauuages.

If.

13. Jfle Verte, five or fix leagues from Tadouffac.”

15. Riuiere Batifquan, very pleafant, and abounding in fith.

16. Les Grondines, and fome neighboring iflands. A good place for
hunting and fifhing.

17. Riutere des Eflurgeons & Saulmons, with a fall of water from
fifteen to twenty feet high, two leagues from Sainéte Croix,
which defcends into a fmall pond difcharging into the great
river St. Lawrence.”

18. JLfle de St. Eloy, with a paflage between the ifland and thé main-
land on the north.”

19. Lac S. Pierre, very beautiful, three to four fathoms in depth,

and abounding in fifh, furrounded by hills and level tra¢ts,

with
diére would be the courfe which the
Indians would naturally take to reach

19 For Lac S. FYoseph, read Lac S.
Charles.

7° Champlain here calls the Chau- the head-waters of the Kennebec, where
diére the River of the Etechemins, not- dwelt the Abenaquis.
withftanding he had before given the 71 River Verte, entering the St. Law-
name to that now known as the St. rence on the fouth of Green Ifland, Op-
Croix. Vide Vol. II. pp. 30, 47, 60. pofite to Tadouflac.

There is ftill a little eaft of the Chau-
diére a river now known as the Ete-
chemin; but the channel of the Chau-

22 Green Ifland.
*3 Jacques Cartier River.
*4 Near the Batifcan.

Carte de la Novvelle France. 297

with meadows in places. Several {mall ftreams and brooks
flow into it.

20. Kiuidre du Ga/i, very pleafant, yet containing but little water,™

21. Riutdre Sain Antoine.

22. Riutere Sainéte Suzanne”

23. Riuidre des Yrocois, very beautiful, with many iflands and
meadows. It comes from Lac de Champlain, five or fix days’
journey in length, abounding in fith and game of different
kinds. Vines, nut, plum, and cheftnut trees abound in many
places. There are meadows and very pretty iflands in it,
To reach it, it is neceffary to pafs one large and one fmall
fall.”

24. Sault de Riuidre du Saguenay, fifty leagues from Tadouffac, ten
or twelve fathoms high.”

25. Grand Sault, which falls fome fifteen feet, amid a large number
of iflands. It is half a league in length and three leagues
broad.”

26. Port au Mouton.

27. Baye de Camp/feau.

28. Cap Baturier, on the Ifle de Sain& Jean.

29. A river by way of which they go to the Baye Francoife.”

30. Chaffe des Eflans.®

31. Cap de Richelieu, on the eaftern part of the Ifle d’Orleans.®

2. A fmall bank near Ifle du Cap Breton.
. Riuiédre des Puans, coming from a lake where there is a mine
oS
of pure red copper."
34.
* Nicolet. Vide Laverdiére’s note, 82 Moofe Hunting, on the weft of
Quebec ed. Vol. III. p. 328, Gafpé. a
76 River St. Francis. 83 Argentenay. — Laverdiére. } ¢
27 Riviére du Loup. ** Champlain had not been in this
28 River Richelieu. region, and confequently obtained his
* This number is wanting. information from the favages. There
®° The Falls of St. Louis, above Mont- is no fuch lake as he reprefents on his
real, The figures are wanting. map, and this ifland producing pure cop-
$1 One of the fmall rivers between per may have been Ifle Royale, in Lake

Cobequid Bay and Cumberland Strait. Superior.

38

piel | i
Beeb | ce |
VEY ii me
HET 1

LE |

Hie |

i

ite

HE 4
HE A hy |e
Gey tt
ny .
tf

208 Champlain's Explanation of the

34. Sault de Ga/ion, nearly two leagues broad, and difcharging into
the Mer Douce. It comes from another very large lake,
which, with the Mer Douce, have an extent of thirty days’
journey by canoe, according to the report of the favages.®

Returning to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Coaft of La Cadie.

35. Riuicre de Gafpey.™®

36. Riuiere de Chaleu.™

37. Several Iflands near Mifcou and the harbor of Mifcou, between
two iflands.

38. Cap del’lfle Saind Fean.®

39. Port au Roffignol.

40. Riuidre Platte”

41. Port du Cap Naigré. On the bay by this cape there is a
French fettlement, where Sieur de la Tour commands, from
whom it was named Port la Tour. The Reverend Récollect
Fathers dwelt here in 1630.

42. Baye du Cap de Sable.

43. Baye Saine®

44. Baye Courante, with many iflands abounding in game, good
fifhing, and places favorable for veffels.”

45. Port du Cap Fourchu, very pleafant, but very nearly dry at low
tide. Near this place are many iflands, with good hunting.

47. Petit Paffage de Ifle Longue. Here there is good cod-fithing.

48. Cap des Deux Bayes.®

49. Port des Mines, where, at low tide, fmall pieces of very pure
copper are to be found in the rocks along the fhore.“

50.
85 The Falls of St. Mary. 41 Halifax Harbor. Vide Vol. Il.
86 York River. note 266.
87 The Riftigouche. #2 Vide Vol. II. note 192.
88 Now called North Point. 48 Now Cape Chignecto, in the Bay
89 Probably Gold River, flowing into of Fundy. :
Mahone Bay. 44 Advocates’ Harbor.

Still called Port La Tour.

Carte de la Novvelle France. 299

50. Lfles de Bacchus, very pleafant, containing many vines, nut, plum,

and other trees.®

5 Iflands near the mouth of the river Chouacoet.

52. Lfles Affez Hautes, three or four in number, two or three leagues
diftant from the land, at the mouth of Baye Longue.®

53. Baye aux Ifles, with fuitable harbors for veffels. The country
is very good, and fettled by numerous favages, who till the
land. In thefe localities are numerous cypreffes, vines, and

nut-trees.”

54. La Soupconneufe, an ifland nearly a league diftant from the

land.*
55. Baye Longue.”
56. Les Sept Lfles.™
57. Riutere des Etechemins.™

The Virginias, where the Englifh are fettled, between the 36th and

37th degrees of latitude.

Captains Ribaut and Laudonniére

made explorations 36 or 37 years ago along the coafts
adjoining Florida, and eftablifhed a fettlement.

58. Several rivers of the Virginias, flowing into the Gulf.
59. Coaft inhabited by favages who till the foil, which is very good.

60. Poindie Confort.”
61. LJmmefian.™
62. Chefapeacg Bay.

63. Bedabedec, the coaft weft of the river Pemetegoet.”

64. Belles Prairies.

4 Richmond Ifland. Vide note 42
Vol. I. and note 123 Vol. II. of this
work.

46 The Ifles of Shoals. V2de Vol. II.
note 142.

47 Bofton Bay.

48 Martha’s Vineyard. Vide Vol. II.
note 227.

49 Merrimac Bay, as it may be ap-
propriately called, ftretching from Little
Boar’s Head to Cape Anne.

65.

50 Thefe iflands appear to be in Cafco
Bay.

61 The figures are not on the map.
The reference is to the Scoudic, com-
monly known as the River St. Croix.

52 There is probably a typographical
error in the figures. The paflage fhould
read “66 or 67 years ago.”

58 Now Old Point Comfort.

54 Jameftown, Virginia.

55 Vide Vol. II. note 95.

300 Champlain's Explanation of the

65. Place on Lac Champlain where the Yroquois were defeated by
Sieur Champlain in 1606.

66. Petit Lac, by way of which they go to the Yroquois, after paff-
ing over that of Champlain.”

67. Baye des Trefpaffez, on the ifland of Newfoundland.

68. Chappeau Rouge.

69. Baye du Sainét Efprit.

70. Les Vierges.

71. Port Breton, near Cap Sainét Laurent, on Ifle du Cap Breton,

72. Les Bergeronnettes, three leagues from Tadouffac.

73. Le Cap ad’ Efpoir, near Ifle Percée.®

74. Forillon, at Poinéte de Gafpey.

75. Lfle de Mont-réal, at the Falls of St. Louis, in the River St.
Lawrence.®

79. Riuiere des Prairies, coming from a lake at the Falls of St.
Louis, where there are two iflands, one of which is Mont-
réal. For feveral years this has been a ftation for trading
with the favages.™

77. Sault de la Chaudiere, on the river of the Algonquins, fome
eighteen feet high, and defcending among rocks with a great
roar.

78. Lac de Nibachis, the name of a favage captain who dwells here
and tills a little land, where he plants Indian corn,”

79. Eleven lakes, near each other, one, two, and three leagues in

extent, and abounding in fifth and game. Sometimes the
favages go this way in order to avoid the Fall of the Calu-

mets,

56 This fhould
Vol. II. note 348.

read 1609. Vide Ottawa feparating the Ifland of Mont-

real from the Ifle Jésus, and flows into

7 Lake George. Vide antea, note 63,
Pp. 93.

58 This
name.

6° This number is wanting.

60 This river comes from the Lake of
Two Mountains, is a branch of the

cape {till bears the fame

the main channel of the Ottawa two or
three miles before it reaches the eaftern
end of the Ifland of Montreal.

*! The Chaudiére Falls are near the
fite of the city of Ottawa. Vide antea,
p. 120.

62 Mufkrat Lake.

Carte de la Novvelle France. 301

mets, which is very dangerous. Some of thefe localities
abound in pines, yielding a great amount of refin.®

80. Sault des Pierres a Calunmet, which refemble alabatter.

81. Lfle de Tefouac, an Algonquin captain (Zéfouac) to whom the
favages pay a toll for allowing them paflage to Quebec.

82. La Riuicre de Tefouac, in which there are five falls.”

83. A river by which many favages go to the North Sea, above the
Saguenay, and to the Three Rivers, going fome diftance over-
land.®

84. The lakes by which they go to the North Sea.

85. A river extending towards the North Sea.

86. Country of the Hurons, fo called by the French, where there are
numerous communities, and feventeen villages fortified by
three palifades of wood, with a gallery all around in the
form of a parapet, for defence againft their enemies. This
region is in latitude 44° 30’, with a fertile foil cultivated by
the favages.

87. Paffage of a league overland, where the canoes are carried.

88. A river difcharging into the Mer Douce.”

89. Village fortified by four palifades, where Sieur de Champlain
went in the war againft the Antouhonorons, and where fev-
eral favages were taken prifoners.®

90. Falls at the extremity of the Falls of St. Louis, very high,
where many fifh come down and are ftunned.®

gi. A {mall river near the Sault de la Chaudiére, where there is a
waterfall nearly twenty fathoms high, over which the water

flows

88 This number is wanting on the
map. Mufkrat Lake is one of this fuc-
ceffion of lakes, which extends eafterly
towards the Ottawa.

64 Allumette Ifland, in the River Ot-
tawa, about eighty-five miles above the
capital of the Dominion of Canada.

6 That part of the River Ottawa
which, after its bifurcation, fweeps

around and forms the northern boun-
dary of Allumette Ifland.

66 The Ottawa beyond its junétion
with the Matawan.

67 French River.

88 Vide antea, note 83, p- 130.

69 Plainly Lake St. Louis, now the
Ontario, and not the Fad/s of St. Louis.
The reference is here to Niagara Falls.

renee’

TR,

A ee MEP TET IT, 9 PT

Shee

302

Champlain's Explanation of the

flows in fuch volume and with fuch velocity that a long arcade
is made, beneath which the favages go for amufement, without
getting wet. It is a fine fight.”

92. This river is very beautiful, with numerous iflands of various

fizes. It paffes through many fine lakes, and is bordered
by beautiful meadows. It abounds in deer and other
animals, with fifh of excellent quality. There are many
cleared tra¢ts of land upon it, with good foil, which have
been abandoned by the favages on account of their wars.
It difcharges into Lake St. Louis, and many tribes come to
thefe regions to hunt and obtain their provifion for the
winter.”

93. Cheftnut foreft, where there are great quantities of cheftnuts, on
Pe) > | ,

the borders of Lac St. Louis. Alfo many meadows, vines,
and nut-trees.”

94. Lake-like bodies of falt water at the head of Baye Francois,

where the tide ebbs and flows. Iflands containing many
birds, many meadows in different localities, fmall rivers flow-
ing into thefe {pecies of lakes, by which they go to the Gulf
of St. Lawrence, near Ifle S. Jean.”

95. Le Haute, a league in circuit, and flat on top. It contains frefh

water and much wood. It is a league diftant from Port aux
Mines and Cap des Deux Bayes. It is more than forty fathoms
high on all fides, except in one place, where it flopes, and
where there is a pebbly point of a triangular shape. In the
centre is a pond with falt water. Many birds make their
nefts in this ifland.

6 La Riuiire des Algommequins, extending from the Falls of St.

7 The River Rideau.

Louis nearly to the Lake of the Biffereni, containing more
than eighty falls, large and fmall, which muft be paffed by
going

72 On the borders of Lake Ontario in

1 The River Trent difcharges into the State of New York.
the Bay of Quinté, an arm of Lake "8 The head-waters of the Bay of
Ontario or Lac St. Louis. Fundy.

Carte de la Novvelle France. 303

going around, by rowing, or by hauling with ropes. Some
of thefe falls are very dangerous, particularly in going
down.”

Gens de Petun. This is a tribe cultivating this herb (¢obacco), in
which they carry on an extenfive traffic with the other tribes.
They have large towns, fortified with wood, and they plant
Indian corn.

Cheveux Releuez. Thefe are favages who wear nothing about the
loins, and go ftark naked, except in winter, when they clothe
themfelves in robes of {kins, which they leave off when they
quit their houfes for the fields. They are great hunters, fifh-
ermen, and travellers, till the foil, and plant Indian corn.
They dry é/wets® and rafpberries, in which they carry on an
extenfive traffic with the other tribes, taking in exchange
fkins, beads, nets, and other articles. Some of thefe people
pierce the nofe, and attach beads to it. They tattoo their
bodies, applying black and other colors. They wear their
hair very ftraight, and greafe it, painting it red, as they do
alfo the face.

La Nation Neutre. This is a people that maintains itfelf againft all
the others. They engage in war only with the Affiftaque-
ronons. They are very powerful, having forty towns well
peopled.

Les Antouhonorons. ‘They confift of fifteen towns built in ftrong
fituations. They are enemies of all the other tribes, except
Neutral nation. Their country is fine, with a good climate,
and near the river St. Lawrence, the paffage of which they
forbid to all the other tribes, for which reafon it is lefs vifited
by them. They till the foil, and plant their land.”

Les Yroquots.

™ The River Ottawa, here referred England were accuftomed to dry the
to, extends nearly to Lake Nipiffing, blueberry for winter’s ufe. Vide Foffe-
here fpoken of as the lake of the Bife- lyn’s Rarities, Tuckerman’s ed., Botton,
rent. 1865, p. I13.

7 The Canada blueberry, Vaccinium 76 This reference is to the Antouo-
Canadense. The aborigines of New ~vonons, as given on the map.

304 Champlain's Eexplanation.

Les Yroquois. They unite with the Antouhonorons in making war
againft all the other tribes, except the Neutral nation.
Carantouanis. This is a tribe that has moved to the fouth of the An-
touhonorons, and dwells in a very fine country, where it is
fecurely quartered. They are friends of all the other tribes,

except the above named Antouhonorons, from whom they are

only three days’ journey diftant. Once they took as prifon-
ers fome Flemifh, but fent them back again without doing
them any harm, fuppofing that they were French. Between

Lac St. Louis and Sault St. Louis, which is the great river

St. Lawrence, there are five falls, numerous fine lakes, and

at pretty iflands, with a pleafing country abounding in game

! and fifh, favorable for fettlement, were it not for the wars
which the favages carry on with each other.

La Mer Douce is a very large lake, containing a countlefs number of
iflands. It is very deep, and abounds in fith of all varieties
and of extraordinary fize, which are taken at different times
and feafons, as in the great fea. The fouthern fhore is much
pleafanter than the northern, where there are many rocks
and great quantities of caribous.

Le Lac des Bifferenis is very beautiful, fome twenty-five leagues in
circuit, and containing numerous iflands covered with woods
and meadows. The favages encamp here, in order to catch
in the river fturgeon, pike, and carp, which are excellent
and of very great fize, and taken in large numbers. Game
is alfo abundant, although the country is not particularly
attractive, it being for the moft part rocky.

Note. — The following are marked Fourchu; 4. Port Royal; 5. St. Croix;
on the map as places where the French 6, Ifle des Monts Déferts: 7. Port de
have had fettlements: 1. Grand Ci- Mifcou; 8. Tadouffac : 9. Quebec; Io.
bou; 2. Cap Naigre; 3. Port du Cap St. Croix, near Quebec,

deere Sacer

EE ESET EE a RRs a RTT

288 |:

osteo bs ]na ora Bs)

SEN VS 1 7 dea dC SEGA EEE ES re
oe | = Rina Sea Sse gees asa Gaile SAO ga

Nera NCEP NIE SENATE EEC

MER DV NORT

“A ee, me ers amen!
Rt ie te os

if Ficu ou les fauuages font
l fecherze de fram mebocteat
lues tous 25 ans

pox y
= . te Al tgomumeg ant
ve & te) am

Mer douce .

we de ee grand lac, et de toutes fes terres MEM, me Lew a aula

3 & gl ar fs t ag
mili S Lows parle de C hamp las, es Q a 2
on eae oy “ius oe Sige Sift : + rer

5 ORL Henacvit ~~
Port aux Iter
wed ol ae
— nation Aneutre .
; g

Nesion eee ae
BOS s a

ye de la nouuelle a
wielle France, augmentee F
poh fares ea a anc. a fasctie ‘a ‘nit
aig ag? ar ener yyg pie pouy: feRoy
5 7 acts deus oz

16 . 9; a déefceumert plufeurs co a , Lise thy me
et Nations de fauuages,par ak wcagnues comme
fot ferratins gl foe myprimneren 16% 2.
ou il ye uott catte marque 3

bes fosz Iie Reimecess foe habits tags

SLi Eres EL eR RENEE

te HELIOTYPE PrintinG Co.2ll Tremont St: Boston

tie PRINCE SOGIERE®,

Commontwealth of Massachusetts.

IN THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY-FOUR.

AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE PRINCE SOCIETY.

Be it enacted by the Senate and Houfe of Reprefentatives, in General Court
affembled, and by the authority of the fame, as follows:

SECTION I. John Ward Dean, J. Wingate Thornton, Edmund F. Slafter,

and Charles W. Tuttle, their affociates and fucceffors, are made a corporation
by the name of the PRINCE SOCIETY, for the purpofe of preferving and extending
the knowledge of American Hiftory, by editing and printing fuch manufcripts,
rare tracts, and volumes as are moftly confined in their ufe to hiftorical ftudents
and public libraries.

SECTION 2. Said corporation may hold real and perfonal eftate to an
amount not exceeding thirty thoufand dollars.

SECTION 3. This act fhall take effet upon its paflage.

Approved March 18, 1874.

NoTE. — The Prince Society was organized on the 25th of May, 1858.
What was undertaken as an experiment has proved fuccefsful. This AcT OF
INCORPORATION has been obtained to enable the Society better to fulfil its
object, in its expanding growth.

atk. PRINCE SQrGaee sy.

CONSTITUTIOR“N

ArTIcLE I,— This Society fhall be called THE PRINCE SociETyY ;
and it fhall have for its object the publication of rare works, in
print or manufcript, relating to America.

ARTICLE II.— The officers of the Society fhall be a Prefident,
Secretary, and a Treafurer; who together fhall form the Council
of the Society.

ArticLe III.— Members may be added to the Society on the
recommendation of any member and a confirmatory vote of a

majority of the Council.

Libraries and other Inftitutions may hold memberfhip, and be
reprefented by an authorized agent.

All members fhall be entitled to and fhall accept the volumes
printed by the Society, as they are iffued from time to time, at the
prices fixed by the Council; and memberthip fhall be forfeited by
a refufal or negleét fo to accept the faid volumes.

Any perfon may terminate his memberfhip by refignation ad-
dreffed in writing to the Prefident ; provided, however, that he fhall
have previoufly paid for all volumes iffued by the Society after the
date of his election as a member.

Articte IV.—The management of the Society’s affairs fhall

be vefted in the Council, which fhall keep a faithful record of its

four Vice-Prefidents, a Correfponding Secretary, a Recording
proceedings,

t

5
ct
t

308 The Prince Soctety.

proceedings, and report the fame to the Society annually, at its
General Meeting in May.

ARTICLE V.—On the anniverfary of the birth of the Rev.
Thomas Prince, — namely, on the twenty-fifth day of May, in every
year (but if this day fhall fall on Sunday or a legal holiday, on
the following day), a General Meeting fhall be held at Bofton, in
Maffachufetts, for the purpofe of eleéting officers, hearing the
report of the Council, auditing the Treafurer’s account, and tran-
facting other bufinefs.

ArtIcLE VI.—The officers fhall be chofen by the Society an-
nually, at the General Meeting ; but vacancies occurring between
the General Meetings may be filled by the Council.

ArTIcLE VII.— By-Laws for the more particular government
of the Society may be made or amended at any General Meeting.

ARTICLE VIII.— Amendments to the Conftitution may be made
at the General Meeting in May, by a three-fourths vote, provided
that a copy of the fame be tranfmitted to every member of the
Society, at leaft two weeks previous to the time of voting thereon.

005 00 ——_

LOU 424 4,

RULES AND REGULATIONS.

1. THE Society fhall be adminiftered on the mutual principle,
and folely in the intereft of American hiftory.

2. A volume fhall be iffued as often as practicable, but not more
frequently than once a year.

3. An editor of each work to be iffued fhall be appointed, who
fhall be a member of the Society, whofe duty it fhall be to pre-
pare, arrange, and conduct the fame through the prefs; and, as he
will neceffarily be placed under obligations to fcholars and others

for

Lhe Prince Society. 309

for affiftance, and particularly for the loan of rare books, he fhall
be entitled to receive ten copies, to enable him to acknowledge and
return any courtefies which he may have received.

4. All editorial work and official fervice fhall be performed
gratuitoully.

5. All contraéts conneéted with the publication of any work
fhall be laid before the Council in diftinét {pecifications in writ-
ing, and be adopted by a vote of the Council, and entered in a
book kept for that purpofe ; and, when the publication of a volume
is completed, its whole expenfe fhall be entered, with the items
of its coft in full, in the fame book. No member of the Council
fhall be a contractor for doing any part of the mechanical work
of the publications.

6. The price of each volume fhall be a hundredth part of the
coft of the edition, or as near to that as conveniently may be; and
there fhall be no other affeff{ments levied upon the members of
the Society.

7. A fum, not exceeding one thoufand dollars, may be fet apart
by the Council from the net receipts for publications, as a working
capital ; and when the faid net receipts fhall exceed that fum, the
excefs fhall be divided, from time to time, among the members of
the Society, by remitting either a part or the whole coft of a
volume, as may be deemed expedient.

8. All moneys belonging to the Society fhall be depofited in the
New England Truft Company in Bofton, unlefs fome other banking
inftitution fhall be defignated by a vote of the Council ; and faid
moneys fhall be entered in the name of the Society, fubject to the
order of the Treafurer.

g. It shall be the duty of the Prefident to call the Council to-
gether, whenever it may be neceffary for the tranfaction of bufinefs,

and to prefide at its meetings.
10. It shall be the duty of the Vice-Prefidents to authorize all
bills before their payment, to make an inventory of the property

of

nae

310 The Prince Soctety.

of the Society during the month preceding the annual meeting
and to report the fame to the Council, and to audit the accounts
of the Treafurer.

11. It fhall be the duty of the Correfponding Secretary to iffue
all general notices to the members, and to conduét the general
correfpondence of the Society.

12. It fhall be the duty of the Recording Secretary to keep a
complete record of the proceedings both of the Society and of
the Council, in a book provided for that purpofe.

13. It fhall be the duty of the Treafurer to forward to the
members bills for the volumes, as they are iffued ; to fuperintend
the fending of the books ; to pay all bills authorized and indorfed
by at leaft two Vice-Prefidents of the Society; and to keep an
accurate account of all moneys received and difburfed.

14. No books fhall be forwarded by the Treafurer to any mem-
ber until the amount of the price fixed for the fame fhall have
been received ; and any member neglecting to forward the {aid
amount for one month after his notification, fhall forfeit his mem-
berthip.

OFFICERS

OF

THE PRINCE SG is.

Prefident.

THE REV. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

Vice-Prefidents.
JOHN WARD DEAN, AM. .
WILLIAM B. TRASK, Esa. . Ls
THE HON. CHARLES H. BELL, A.M.
JOHN MARSHALL BROWN, A.M..
Corre[ponding Secretary.
CHARLES W. TUTTLE, Ph.D.

Recording Secretary.

DAVID GREENE HASKINS, Jr., A.M. .

Treafurer.

ELBRIDGE H. GOSS, Esq. -

Boston, Mass.

Boston, Mass.
30sTON, Mass.
EXETER, N, H.
PORTLAND, ME.

Boston, Mass.

CAMBRIDGE, Mass.

Boston, Mass.

THE PRINCE: SOCIErx,

1880.

The Hon. Charles Francis Adams, LL.D.

Samuel Agnew, Efq. .

Thomas Coffin
Walter T.
George L. Bal
Samuel L. M.

John J. Bell, A.M.

Amory,
William Sumner Appleton, A.M.
Avery, Ef

q-

A.M. .

com, Efq.
Barlow, Efq.
The Hon. Charles H. Bell, A.M.

Samuel Lane Boardman, Efe

The Hon. James Ware Bradb ae LL D.

if Carfon Brevoort, LL.D..
Sidney Brooks, A.M..
Mrs. John Carter Brown

John Marfhall
Jofeph

Brow

n,

O. Brown, Efq.

A.M.

Philip Henry Brown, A.M.

Thomas O. H. P. Burnham, Efq.

George Bement Butler, Efq.

The Hon. Mellen Chamberlain,
William Eaton Chandle

r, A.M.

George Bigelow Chafe, A.M. .
Efq.

Clarence H. Clark,

Gen. John S. Clark,
Ethan N. Coburn, E

fq.

Jeremiah Colburn, A.M.

A.M..

Bofton, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Claremont, N.H.
New York, N.Y.
Exeter, N.H.
Exeter, N.H.
Bofton, Mafs.
Auguita, Me.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
Bofton, Mafs.
Providence, R.I.
Portland, Me.
New York, N.Y.
Portland, Me.
Bofton, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Chelfea, Mafs.
Concord, N.H.
Bofton, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Auburn, N.Y.
Charleftown, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.

The Prince Society. 313
Providence, R.I.

3? et eculen-te) - IBOLLORM Whats:
Beaits Coming, Hig. s) ss. 4 *a->s ton wens Albanya Mews
Ellery Bicknell Crane, Efq. Worcetter, Mats.
Abram E. Cutter, Efq. Charleftown, Mafs.
The Rev. Edwin A. Dalrymple, S. T. D. Baltimore, Md.
William M. Darlington, Efq. Pittf{burg, Pa.
John Ward Dean, A.M. . Bofton, Mafs.
Charles Deane, LL.D. Cambridge, Mafs.
Edward Denham, Efg. . : New Bedford, Mafs.
Prof. Franklin B. Dexter, A.M. . New Haven, Ct.
The Rev. Henry Martyn Dexter, D.D. Bofton, Mafs.
Samuel Adams Drake, Efq. Melrofe, Mafs.
Henry Thayer Drowne, Efq. New York, N.Y.

Jofeph J. Cooke, Efq.
Deloraine P. Corey, Efq.

Henry H. Edes, Efq.

Jonathan Edwards, A.B., M. D.

Janus G. Elder, Efq.
Samuel Eliot, LL.D.

Charleftown, Mafs.
New Haven, Ct.
Lewifton, Me.

Bofton, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.
New York, N.Y.
New York, N.Y.
Woods Holl, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Danvers, Mafs.
Haverhill, Mafs.
Montpelier, Vt.
Bangor, Me.
Salem, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.

New York, N.Y.
Somerville, Mafs.
Elizabethtown, N.Y.
Providence, R.I.

Alfred Langdon Elwyn, M.D.

James Emott, Efq. Ea.

The Hon. William M. Evarts, LL. D.

Jofeph Story Fay, Efq.. . . .

John S. H. Fogg, M.D. . .

The Rev. Henry W. Foote, A.M.

Samuel P. Fowler, Efq. . “aes
james-Es Gale Bigy s.-8-> 6 ae ee
Marcus D. Gilman, Efq.

The Hon. John E. Godfrey oer
Abner C. Goodell, Jr., A.M. 0 3 2 6 2%
Elbridge H. Gofs, Efq. . : ‘
The Hon. Chief Juftice Horace Gesy, LL. D. .
William W. Greenough, A.B... . «© - « « +
Ifaac J. Greenwood, A.M. .

Charles H. Guild, Efq. . J ee ees
The Hon. Robert S. Hale, LL.D. Aes eae BET ee
C. Fike Harris, “A.Me- se ee

314

David Greene Hatkins, Jr.,
The Hon. Francis B. Hayes,
Thomas Wentworth Higginfon,
W. Scott Hill, M.D.

James F. Hunnewell, Efq.
Theodore Irwin, Efq.

The Hon. Clark Jillfon

Mr. Sawyer Junior .

George Lamb, é
Edward F. de Lancey, Efq.

William B. Lapham, M.D.

Henry Lee, A.M.

John A. Lewis, Efgq. F

Orfamus H. Martfhall, Efq.

William T. R. Marvin, A.M..

William F. Matchett, Efq.

Frederic W. G. May, Efq. :

The Rev. James H. Means, D.D. .

George H. Moore, LL.D.. ‘

The Hon. Henry C. Murphy, LL.D.

The Rev. James De Normandie, AM.

The Hon. James W. North

Prof. Charles E. Norton, A.M. .

John H. Ofborne, ig

George T. Paine, Efe

The Hon. John Gales Palfrey. LL y.

Daniel Parifh, Jr., Efq.

Francis Parkman, LL.D.

Auguftus T. Perkins, A.M.

The Rt. Rev. William Stevens Bis, D. D., i: D.
William Frederic Poole, A.M.

George Prince, Efq.

Capt. William Prince, U.S.A.

Samuel S. Purple, M.D.

The Hon. John Phelps Putnam, A. M.

Edward Afhton Rollins, A.M.

A.M.
A.M.
A.M..

Efq: «

The Prince Soctety.

Cambridge, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Cambridge, Mafs.
Augufta, Me.
Charleftown, Mafs.
Ofwego, N.Y.
Worcefter, Mafs.
Nafhua, N.H.
Bofton, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Augufta, Me.
Bofton, Mafs.
Botton, Mafs.
Buffalo, N.Y.
Bofton, Mafs,
Bofton, Mats.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
Portfmouth, N.H.
Augufta, Me.
Cambridge, Mafs.
Auburn, N.Y.
Providence, R.I.
Cambridge, Mafs.
New York, N. Y.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Davenport, Iowa.
Chicago, Ill.
Bath, Me.

New Orleans, La.
New York, N.Y.
Bofton, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.

The Prince Soctety.

The Hon. Mark Skinner .

The Rev, Carlos Slafter, A.M. .
The Rev. Edmund F. Slafter, A.M.
Charles C, Smith, Efq..

Samuel T’. Snow, Efq. .

Oliver Blifs Stebbins, Efq.
George Stevens, Efq.

The Hon. Edwin W. Stoughton
William B. Trafk, Efq. . ;
The Hon. William H. Tuthill
Charles W. Tuttle, Ph.D.

The Rey, Alexander Hamilton Vinton, D.D.

Jofeph B. Walker, A.M.

William Henry Wardwell, Efq. .

Mifs Rachel Wetherill .

Henry Wheatland, A.M., M.D. .

John Gardner White, A.M.

William Adee Whitehead, A.M.
William H. Whitmore, A.M.

Henry Auftin Whitney, A.M.

The Hon. Marfhall P. Wilder, Ph.D. .
PACOTYOWGNIOR, BAG. . >
The Hon, Robert C. Winthrop, LL.D.
Charles Levi Woodbury, Efq.

Afhbel Woodward, M.D. .

J. Otis Woodward, Efq.

LIBRARIES.

American Antiquarian Society
Amherft College Library .
Aftor Library .

Bofton Athenzum

Bofton Library Society

Britifh Mufeum F
Concord Public Library

315

Chicago, Ill.
Dedham, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs,
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Lowell, Mafs,
New York, N.Y.
Bofton, Mafs.
Tj

Botton, Mafs.
Pomfret, Ct.
Concord, N.H.
Bofton, Mafs,

Philadelphia, Pa.

pton, lowa.

Salem, Mafs.
Cambridge, Mafs.
Newark, N.J.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Bofton, Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Franklin, Ct.
Albany, N.Y.

Worcefter, Mafs.
Ambherft, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Bofton, Matfs.
30fton, Mafs.
London, Eng.
Concord, Mafs.

316 The Prince Society.

Eben Dale Sutton Reference Library .
Free Public Library

Grofvenor Library :

Harvard College Library .

Hiftorical Society of Pennfylvania .
Library Company of Philadelphia .
Library of Parliament .

Library of the State Department
Long Ifland Hiftorical Society

Maine Hiftorical Society .

Maryland Hiftorical Society .
Maffachufetts Hiftorical Society
Mercantile Library ;

Minnefota Hiftoricz 5 Society
Newburyport Public Library, Peal ois F a
New England Hiftoric Genealogical Society
Newton Free Library

New York Society Library

Plymouth Public Library .
Portfmouth Atheneum .
Public Library of the City of Bofton
Redwood Library ‘ ,

State Library of Maff achuletts $
State Library of New York

State Library of Rhode Ifland .

State Library of Vermont

Williams College Library .

Yale College Library

Peabody, Mafs.
Worcefter, Mafs.
Buffalo, N.Y.
Cambridge, Mafs.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Philadelphia, Pa.
Ottawa, Canada.
Wafhington, D.C.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
Brunfwick, Me.
3altimore, Md.
Bofton, Mafs.
ee York, N.Y.

t. Paul, Minn:
eee Mafs.
Bofton, Mafs.
Newton, Mafs.
New York, N.Y.
Plymouth, Mafs.
Portfmouth, N.H.
Bofton, Mafs.
Newport, R.I.
30fton, Mafs.
Albany, N.Y.
Providence, R.I.
Montpelier, Vt.
Williamftown, Mafs.
New Haven, Ct.

PUBLICATIONS OF THE SOCIETY.

NEW ENGLAND’S PROSPECT.

A true, lively and experimentall defcription of that part of America, commonly called
Nevv England: difcovering the State of that Countrie, both as it ftands to our new-
come Lygli/h Planters; and to the old Natiue Inhabitants. By Wm.L1am Woop.
London, 1634. Preface by Charles Deane, LL.D.

THE HUTCHINSON PAPERS.
A Collection of Original Papers relative to the Hiftory of the Colony of Maffachu-

fetts-Bay. Reprinted from the edition of 1769. Edited by William H. Whitmore,
A.M., and William S. Appleton, A.M. 2 vols.

JoHN DuntToN’s LETTERS FROM NEW ENGLAND.

Letters written from New England A.D. 1686. By John Dunton in which are
defcribed his voyages by Sea, his travels on land, and the characters of his friends
and acquaintances. Now firft publifhed from the Original Manufcript in the Bodleian
Library, Oxford. Edited by William H. Whitmore, A.M.

THE ANDROS TRACTS.

Being a ColleCtion of Pamphlets and Official Papers iffued during the period be-
tween the overthrow of the Andros Government and the eftablifhment of the fecond
Charter of Maffachufetts. Reprinted from the original editions and manufcripts.
With a Memoir of Sir Edmund Andros, by the editor, William H. Whitmore, A.M.
3 vols.

Str WILLIAM ALEXANDER AND AMERICAN COLONIZATION.

Including three Royal Charters, iffued in 1621, 1625, 1628; a Tract entitled an
Encouragement to Colonies, by Sir William Alexander, 1624; a Patent, from the
Great Council for New England, of Long Ifland, and a part of the prefent State of
Maine; a Roll of the Knights Baronets of New Scotland; with a Memoir of Sir
William Alexander, by the editor, the Rev. Edmund F. Slafter, A.M.

JoHN WHEELWRIGHT.

Including his Faft-day Sermon, 1637 ; his Mercurius Americanus, 1645, and other
writings ; with a paper on the genuinenefs of the Indian deed of 1629, and a Memoir
by the editor, Charles H. Bell, A.M.

318 Publications of the Socrety.

VOYAGES OF THE NORTHMEN TO AMERICA.

Including extracts from Icelandic Sagas relating to weftern voyages by North-
men in the tenth and eleventh centuries, in an Englith tranflation by North Ludlow
Beamifh; with a Synopfis of the hiftorical evidence and the opinion of Profeffor

Rafn as to the places vifited by the Scandinavians on the coaft of America. Edited,

with an Introduétion, by the Rev. Edmund F. Slafter, A.M.

THE VOYAGES OF SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN.

Including the Voyage of 1603, and all contained in the edition of 1613, and in that
of 1619; tranflated from the French by Charles P. Otis, Ph.D. Edited, with a Memoir
and hiftorical illuftrations, by the Rev. Edmund F. Slafter, A.M.

This work confifts of three volumes. Volumes I. and II. have been iffued; Vol. IIT.
will follow as foon as praéticable.

VOLUMES IN PREPARATION.

1. CAPTAIN JOHN MAsoN, the founder of New Hamphhire, including his Tra& on
Newfoundland, 1620, and the feveral American Charters in which he was a Grantee ;
with a Memoir and hiftorical illuftrations by CHARLES W. TuTrT ez, Ph.D.

2. SIR FERDINANDO GoRGES, including his Tract entitled A Brief Narration, 1658,
American Charters granted to him, and other papers ; with hiftorical illuftrations and
a Memoir by the Rev. EpMuND F. SLArrer, A.M.

3. THE VOYAGES OF SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN, including the Voyage of 1603, and
all contained in the edition of 1613, and in that of 1619. Tranflated into Englith by
CHARLES P. OTIs, Ph.D. Edited, with a Memoir and hiftorical illuftrations, by the
Rev. EDMUND F. SLAFTER, A.M.

Two of the three volumes, of which this work will confift, have already been iffued.

4. SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT, including his Difcourfe to prove a Paffage by the
North-Weft to Cathaia and the Eaft Indies; his Letters Patent to difcover and
poffefs lands in North America, granted by Queen Elizabeth, June 11, 1578; with
hiftorical illuftrations and a Memoir by CHARLES W. TuTTrLe, Ph.D.

It is the intention of the Council to iffue at leaft one volume annually, but not
neceflarily in the order in which they are placed above.

N.B. Communications to the officers of the Society thould be directed to 18 Som-
erfet Street, Bofton, Mais.

Md phe

~“

».. om”
aaa) ue part

IN DE xX.
pe

NZ RS

INDEX

A. America, North, 27, 77, 78, 115, 157,
159, 192.

Abenaquis, 296. America, South, 22, 23, 24.
Abenaquiuoit, 296. Amherft Ifland, 128.
Abercrombie, Gen’l, 9r. Amherft, Lord Jeffrey, 91.
Abnaki, 41, 46. Amiens, 17.
Advocates’ Harbor, 298. Amyot, 220.
Albany, 93. Anadabijou, 236, 237, 291.
Alderney, 231. Anaffou, 56, 57.
Alengon, 253. Andiataroété, 93.
Alexander, Sir William, 159, 160, 165, Andrews, Sir Jofeph, 161.

72) 174,176, 2775. 317- Andros, Sir Edmund, 317.
Alexander, Sir William, Jr., 161, 162. Angiers, 5, 17.
Alfonfe or Alphonfe, Jean, 30, 77, 233. Annapolis Harbor, or Bafin, 39, 58, 62,
Algommequins, La Riuiére des, 302. 63, 71, 76, 79, 162, 176, 206.
Algonquins, 90, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 108, Annapolis, Village of, 62, 72.

115, 116, 121, 138, 139, 152, 175, 187, Annotationes Poftcripte, 205.

192, 238, 241, 242, 255, 261, 268, 273, Anfe aux Bafques, 284.

274, 275, 276, 278, 301. Anticofti, 32, 233.
Algonquins, River of, 300. Anticofty, 233, 265.
All Devils’ Point, 335. Antoine, Riuiére, St., 294, 297.
Allen, Ethan, Gen’l, 91. Antonio, Prior of Crato, 26.
Allen River, 72. Antouhonorons, 131, 301, 303, 304.
Allouettes, Point aux, 235, 294. Antouoronons, 303, 304.
Allumet Ifland, 118, 119, 121, 301. Antwerp, 8.
Almouchiquois, 286. Apoftles’ Creed, 246.
America, 25, 28, 29, 31, 40, 54, 79, 94, Arcere, 3, 5.

109, 122, 155, 159, 177, 195, 206. Archangel, 57.

4I

222
o+-

Archives of Foreign Affairs, 181.
Arctic Sea, 240.
Ardres, 18.
Argall, Capt. Samuel, 122, 160.
Argentenay, 297.
29%
277.
Arms of France, 72.

Armouchides,

Arquebufiers, 93.
Arques, 16, 26.
Arrowlwick, 46.
Artichoke, Jerufalem, 64.
Arundel, Lord of, 57.
Afcenfion, Ifle of, 233.
Ath, 264.

Afia, Northern, 239.
Afpens, 264.

Affelini, 27.
Affiftaqueronons, 303.
Affumption, Ifland of, 233.
Aftrolabe, 118.

Aubigné, D’, 220.
Auburn, N. Y., 132.
Augutta, 79.

Aumont, Marfhal d’, 16, 17, 19.
Aunis, 3-

Aurigny, 231.
Auftralians, 240.
Azores, 23, 26.

B.

Bacchus Ifland, 48, 63.
Bacchus, Ifles de, 299.

Back River, 46.

Bahama, 23.

Baie la Valliére, 260.

Baird, Spenfer F , 265.
Baleine, 174, 175.

Ballard, Rev. Edward, 42, 47.

Baltimore, Lord, 161.

Index.

Bangor, 42, 122, 209.

Bannatyne Club, 177.

Bar Harbor, 208.

Barnabé, Ifle, S., 294.

Barnftable Harbor, 65, 197.

Bafque Cove, 284.

Bafques, 29, 38, 80, 83, 162, 163, 284.
Bafs River, 279

Batifquan, Riuiére, 296.

in

5

Batifcan, 2
Baturier, Cap, 297.

Baye aux Ifles, 299.
Baye des Ifles, 293.

Baye des Trefpaffez, 293.
Baye Francoife, 297, 302.
Baye Longue, 299.
Baye Saine, 298
3ayfield, Capt. H.

283, 284.

222, 280, 298, 302.

Bay of Mines, 39, 60, 76.

3eamifh, North Ludlow, 318.

Bear Ifland, 260.

Bears, 265, 278

Beauchamp, Rev. W. M., 132.

Beaumont, 43.

Beauport, 63.

Beavers, 265.

Bechourat, Sagamore, 291.

Bedabedec, 299.

Beech, 264.

Begourat, Sagamore, 285.

Belarmat, 3.

Bell, Charles H., viii, 156, 317-

Belle Ifle, Straits of, 293.

Belles Prairies, 299.

Bellin, Atlas, Maritime, 253, 268, 283,
284.

Index. 323

Bephano, 3.
Bergeronnettes, Les, 300.
Berjon, Jean, 216.
Berkeley, William, 16r.
Bermuda, 23.
Berfimis Point, 283.
Biard, Pierre, 29, 41, 46, 122.
Bibliothéque Nationale, 213.
Bic, 32, 234 294-
Billingfgate, 54.
Birch, 15, 17, 27, 239.
Biffereni, Lake of, 302, 303, 304.
Bifferenis, Lac des, 304.

Black Point, 47.

Black-fkimmer, 58.

Blafkowitz, Plan of Plymouth, 207.
Blavet, I
Blaxton,

18, 20.
tha Rev. William, 211.
Blueberry, Canada, 295, 303:
Bon Temps, L’ordre de, 72.
Bordeaux, I61.
Bofton, 211, 293.
218.
2, 197, 199.

Bofton Atheneum, vii,
Bofton Harbor,
Boulay, 44.
Boullé, Euftache, 147, 151, 152,
194, 205-

Boullé, Héléne, 104, 105, 194, 266.
Boullé, Nicholas, 105.

3oullon, Duke de, 27.

Bowdoin College, 79.

Boyer, 294-

Brantoéme, 16, 18.

Bras d’Or, Great, 175.

Bras d’Or, Little, 175.

Brébeuf, Jean de, 96, 178, 179, 180,
Breft, 54.

Breton, Cap, 300.

Breton, Port, 300.

Bretons, 29.

Brevoort, J. C., 2
Brigard, 229.

Briffac, Marafhal de, 16, 17, 20, 117.

Brittany, 9, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18,
26, 30, 227, 231.

Brittany, Upper, 16.

Broadhead, J. R., 207.

Brouage,

155, 225.

I, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 17, 103, 12

Ig, 20,

Ww

Brown, Mrs. John Carter, vii, 215, 218.

Brilé, Etienne, 126, 128,
Bruflé, Cap, 295.

143.

3uffalo, 132.

Buiffon, Saut du, 270.
Burgoyne, Gen’l John, 91.
Burials, 248.
Bufk, 27.

Buzzard’s Bay, 69.

Indian,

Cc.

Cabin, Indian, 239.
Cabot, John, v, 29.
Cabot, Sebaftian, 77.
Cadiz, 20, 21.

Caen, Emeric de, 148, 149, 150, 152,
154, 155, 169, 170, 178.
Caen, William de, 148, 155, 179, 178.

Cahiagué,
Calais, 43.
Calefme, 293.

Calice, 18.

California Indians, 94.

Calumet, Sault des Pierres 4, 301.
Calvin, John, 12, 123.

Camden, 16.

Cameret, Marie, 194.

Camper, Chateau de, 16, 17+
Campobello, Ifland of, 294.
Campfeau, Baye de, 297.

127, 137, 138.

324 Lndex.

Canada, 34, 35, 36, 37, 95, 97, 145, ISI, Cape Split, 76.

153, 156, 159, 165, 177, 189, 194, 196, Cape St. Lawrence, 233, 300.

200, 205, 213, 225 227, 232, 205, 273, Cape St. Mary, 232.

280, 301. Cape Tourmente, 151, 153, 162, 163,
Canada, Great Bay of, 233. 104.
Canada, River of, 233, 234, 253, 257, Carantouan, 143.

Carantouanis, 304.
Carhagouha, 127, 138.

1 Caribbean Sea, 22, 196,
Caniatagaronte, 93. Carillon, Fort, gr.
Canoe, Indian, 5 Caron, Jofeph, le, 124, 127, 138, 141,
Canfeau, 38, 39, 74, 75, 76, 77, 197, 142, 153.

280, 289. Carte de la Nouvelle France, 210, 211.
Cap Blanc, 54. Carthagena, 22, 23.
Cap de Levy, 293. 114, 199,
Cap de Poutrincourt, 76. , 257, 261,
Cap Rouge, 30 :
Cape Dauphin, 175. Cartier, Jacques, River, 296.
Cape Elizabeth, 47. Cafcades, 270.
Cape Evéque, 281. Cafco Bay, 47, 299.
Cape Fendu, 76. in, L’Abbé, H. R., viii, 185, 186.
Cape Gafpé, 233. Cataraqui Creek, 136.
Cape Henry, 211. Catechifm, 178.
Cape Horn, 240. Catelet, le, 18.
Capelle, La, 18. Cathay, 116.
Cape Anne, 51, 52, 63, 197, 299. Catholic, 13, 14, 15, 16, 112, 145, 151,
Cape Breton, 31, 32, 36, 37, 61, 162, 154, 156, 187, 188, 192, 193.

280, Cavalier, 133.

Caymans, 22.

Cedres, 270.

Cape Cod, 54, 58, 63, 65, 78, 1098, Cerberus, 199.

235. Céfar, Duc de Vendéme, 15, ros.
Cape Cod Bay, 54, 65. Chaleur, Bay of, 29, 36, 37, 279.
Cape North, 233. Chaleurs, Baye de, 278, 279, 280,
Cape Pine, 232, Chaleu, Riuiére de, 298.

Cape Porpoife, so, 197. Chamberlain, Jofhua L., 79.
Cape Race, 291. Chambly, 262, 268.

Cape Ray, 32, 232, 233. Chambly, Falls of, go, 96.
Cape Sable, 39, 61, 78. Champdoré, 43.

Cape Salmon, 251. Champlain, Antoine de, 1.

L[ndex. aa

Champlain, Samuel de, birth, 206;
parentage and home at Brouage
I-II; quarter-mafter in the army,
1-19; his vifit to the Weft Indies,
20-26; his firft voyage to Canada, 26-
35; his fecond voyage and three years
fojourn on the Atlantic coaft of Amer-
ica under De Monts, 35-78; pre-
pares for a voyage to Canada, 78-80 ;
fettles difficulties at Tadouflac, 80,
81; fails up the St. Lawrence, 81, 82;
he lays the foundations of Quebec,
82; attempt to affaffinate him, 83-
85 ; his firft winter at Quebec, 86-88 ;
tour of exploration and difcovery of
Lake Champlain, 89-91; battle at
Ticonderoga, 91-96; his return to
France, 96, 97; returns to Canada,
98 ; battle at the mouth of the Riche-
lieu, 99-103 ; he hears of the death
of Henry IV. and returns to France,
103, 104; his marriage, 105 ; returns
to Canada, 105; he repairs to the
Falls of St. Louis, the rendezvous
for Indian trade, 10o6-r10; returns to
France and reorganizes the company,
Ifo-114; returns to New France,
115 ; explores the Ottawa, 115-121 ;
returns to France and takes miffion-
aries to Canada, 122-124; his explo-
ration of the upper Ottawa, Lake
Nipiffing, Lake Huron, Simcoe, On-
tario, penetrates the interior of Weft-
ern New York and gives battle to
the Iroquois, 124-135; goes into win-
ter quarters with the Hurons, 135-
138; explorations during the winter,
138-140; returns to the Falls of St.
Louis, 141, 142; voyages to France,
143; efforts to revive the company,

144-147; takes his wife to Canada,
147 ; repairs the buildings at Quebec,
148-150; in France two years, 151 ;
erects a farm-houfe at Cape Tour-
mente, 151; difficulty with Indians,

2

154, 155; the company of New
France, organized, 155, 157; the
Englifh attack New France, 158-
173; receives Capt. Daniel’s account
of his colony planted in the Ifland
of Cape Breton, 173-175; he lays
the fubject of the Britifh invafion
before the government at Paris, 175-
177; he attends to the publication of
his works at Paris, 178; returns to
Quebec, and enters upon feveral new
enterprifes, 179-181; his letter to
Richelieu, 181-183; his death, 184,
185 ; fummary of his character, 186-
204; portrait of, 212; titles of his
publications, 215-219; his dedica-
tion to Charles Montmorency.

Champlain, Lac de, 297, 300.

Champlain, Lake, 93.

Champlain, Madame, 212.

Champlain Riviére de, 70, 296.

Chandler, Peleg W., 156.

Chantrey, 161.

Chantilly, 146.

Chaoufarou, 97.

Chapel of M. de Champlain, 185.

Chappeau Rouge, 300.

Charavay, Etienne, 194, 205.

Charente Inférieure, 206.

Charlefbourg Royal, 30.

Charles I., 161, 169, 172, 176.

Charles II., 193.

Charles VIII., 2.

Charles IX., 3, 14, 16, 186.

326 L[ndex.

Charles Riuiére, S., 296.

Charles River, 52.

Charlevoix, 90, 123, 149, 158, 213, 252,

253, 260, 268.

Charlton, Robert, 161.

Charolois, 18.

Chaffe des Eflans, 297.

Chaftes, Amyar de, 26, 27, 28, 32, 34,
205.

hateau de Blandy, 113.

1Ateauneuf, 172.

chatham, 65, 66, 67, 69, 197.
haudiére River, 296.
naudiére Falls, 120.
maudiére, Sault de, 300, 301.

auvin, de Saint, 28, 31, 32, 35, 205.

1

ivin, Capt. Pierre, 96, 98.
1erries, 264.

1efapeacq Bay, 299.
chefapeake Bay, 211.
ievalier, 74.
1eveux-Relevés, 139, 303.
1eftnuts, 264.

1infchedec, 37-

NO). GG tiene) Ghee OO. OO 'O'O

Chittenango Creek, 131, 132.

Chouacoet, 299.

Cibou, 175, 304.

Clark, General John S., 132.

Coaft Survey, 41, 47, 207, 208.

Cobequid Bay, 297.

Cognac, 161.

Cohaffet, 53.

Collet, Clavde, 216, 217.

Colombo, Don Francifco, 21.

Columbus, F., 240.

Company of Merchant Adventurers,
161, 171.

Company of New France, or Hundred
Affociates, 155, 156, 157, 158, 165,
171, 174, 176, 178, 179, 184, 187, 189.

Condé, Cap de, 295.
Cond

Louis, le Grand, 113.

Condé, Prince of, 4, 5, 14, 17, 105, 113,
121, 146, 216.

Confort, Poinéte, 299.

Connecticut Hiftorical Society, 42, 46,
47, 52.

Convent de Notre Dame, 149.

Convent, Urfuline, 194.

Cooper, James Fenimore, 94.

Copper Implements, Pre-hiftoric, 276.

93-

Coffe-Briffac, Charles, 17,

Corpus Chritti

Coffe-Briffac, Jeanne de, 17.
Coteau du Lac, Rapids du,

Rwy

Couchiching, Lake, 127, 12
Coudre, Ifle au, 251, 25
Coues, 240

Couillard, William, 171.
Courante, Baye, 298.
Courcelles, 17.

Coutras, 17.
Cowathalon Creek, 131.
Cramoify, Sebaftian, 155.
Creuxius, 159, 174, 185, 189.
Crofs, James, D.D., 131.
Cuba, 22, 196.

Cumberland Strait, 297.
Currants, 264.

Cutter, Charles A., vii.
Cyprefs, 235, 264.

D.

Dale, Sir Thomas, 160.

Daniel, Capt. Charles, 155, 173, 174,
175.

Darien, Ifthmus of, 25.

D’Arontal, 141.

Lndex. 737

Daru, M., 16.

Dauphiny, 112.

D’Avezac, 233, 234, 251, 252, 257, 261,
265, 268.

Davila, Henrico Caterino, 4, 5, 18.

Deane, Charles, 317.

Dean, John Ward, vii, 306.

Dechambeau Point, 256.

Deer-trap, 136.

Deffiat, Marquis, 155.

De Laet, Jean, 233.

Delifle, L., viii.

De Monts, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 45,
47, 5°, 52, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62,
63, 72, 74, 75, 79, 80, 89, 97, 103,
105, 106, 109, I10, III, 112, 122, 123,
158, 206, 208, 287.

De Monts’ Ifland, 39, 40, 43, 206.

Denis, 27.

Denys, Nicholas, 39, 175, 265.

Derby, 161.

Defbarats, Geo. E., 218.

Defdames, 166.

Defeada, 21, 196.

Detroit River, 271.

Deux Bayes, Cap des, 298, 302.

De Witt, John, 9.

Dexter, H. M., 207.

Diamonds, 253.

Dieppe, 27, 29, 150, 161, 173, 174, 179,
219.

Dijon, 112.

Dog, 238, 240.

Domingo, St., 22.

Dominion of Canada, 29, 200, 301.

Dorr, S. E., viii.

Dourlens, 18.

Dover, Eng., 171.

Du Guaft, Pierre, 52.

Du Parc, 104, 106.

Dutch, 152.

Du Val, Jean, 83, 84, 85.
Duxborough, 207.
Duxbury Beach, 207.

Eaft Bofton, 52.

Elizabeth, Queen, 15, 27, 198.

England and Englifh, 11, 13, 22, 27,
54, 57, 158, 159, 160, 162, 164, 166,
167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174,
175, 176, 177, 179, 180, 182, 183, 198,
205, 211, 231, 299.

ifh Channel, 98.

§
Entouhonorons, 143.
‘{pernon, Duke of, 18.

eo oe ok

<fpoir, Le Cap d’, 300.

Efprit, Baye du Sainét, 300.
Eftrées, Gabrielle d’, 15.
Etechemins, 238, 242, 278.
Etechemins, Riuiére des, 296, 299.
Europe, 8, 58, 239.

F.

Falls of St. Louis, 33, 106, 115, I19,
141, 154, 251, 268, 294, 297, 300, 301,
302, 304.

Falls of St. Mary, 298.

Falmouth, Eng., 175.

Faribault, M., 213.

Fayall, 198.

Fenner, 131.

Féret, M., 219.

Ferryland, 161.

Fir, 235.

Fith-hook and line, 53.

Five Nations, 128, 190, I91, 193.

328 Lndex.

Flag, or lilies of France, 138.
Flemings, 183.

Flemifh, 231, 304.

Fletcher’s Neck, 47.

a, 95, 156, 159, 221, 261, 262,

» 299.

Florida, Gulf of, 23.

Fontainebleau, 97.

Forillon, 300.

Fort, Iroquois, in Fenner, N. Y., 130,

3t, 13

Fort Saint Louis, 148, 169, 179.

Foucher, 163.

Fougeray, or Foulgeré de Vitré, 43.

Fouques, Captain, 38.

Fourchu, Port du Cap, 298, 304.

Foxes, 265.

France, French, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 20, 27, 29, 31, 34, 40, 43, 45,
52, 54, 58, 59, 61, 62, 63, 74, 75, 76,
79, 80, 88, go, 96, 98, 103, 104, 107,
IIO, 113, 116, 121, 122, 141, 142, 143,
144, 146, 151, 152, 155, 158, 160, 161,
162, 163, 167, 168, 169,170, 171, 172,
173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181,
182, 191, 192, 193, 196, 200, 203, 206,
209, 211, 219, 236, 269, 291, 301, 304.

Francis I., 9, 16.

Francis II., 14, 16.

Francoife de Mercceur, 15.

Fredericton, 36.

Frenchman’s Bay, 208.

French River, 126, 301.

Freer, 16, 17, 27.

Fyall, 78.

G.

Gachepé, 233.
Gage, Thomas, 22.

Galops, Rapids

, 270.

Garneau, Francis Xavier, 271.

Gar-pike, 9

7
Gafpé, 29, 32,
2

166, 167,

33, 34; 3

ey, Poinéte de, 300.
» i

6, 37, 45, 165,

» 234, 272, 277, 278, 291,

Gafton, Duke of Orleans, 146.
Gatton, Sault de, 298.

Genefee River, 274.

Georgia, 235.
>
3

Germany, 13.
Gefures, M. de, 28.

Gibbs, George,

194.

Gilbert, Sir Humphrey, 318.
I 2723

Giovanni da Verrazano,

a3

Gloucefter Harbor, 63, 65, 197.

Goat Ifland, 59.
Goat River, 298.
Gomez, Eftevan, 77.

Gookin, Daniel, 52.
Gorges, Sir Ferdinando, 318.
Gofnold, Bartholomew, v, 54, 75, 197:
Goudon, Elizabeth, 161.
Goufire, Baye de, 294.
Gougou, 289, 290.

Grand Banks, 34, 61, 105.
Grand Cibou, 175, 304.
Grand Sault, 297.

Granfibou, 175.
Grapes, 49, 264.
Green Ifland, 296.

Green Mountain, 208.
Green Mountains, 266,

Greenwich, 234.
Grenefey, 231.

Grondines, Les, 296.
Guadaloupe,

22

L[ndex.

Guaft, Pierre du, Sieur de Monts, 35.

Guerchville, Marchionefs de, 122, 123.

Guernfey, 231.

Guicciardino, Ludovico, 8.

Guienne, 8.

Guizot, M, Francois Pierre Guillaume,
214.

Gurnet, 207, 208.

Fe

Hague, Royal Archives of,
Hakluyt, Richard, 30, 58, :
Hakluyt Society 26,
Halifax Harbor, 298.

» 23,
Hamel, Thomas, 213.
Harding’s Beach Point, 66.
Hare Ifland, 251,
Hares, 263.
Hariot, Thomas, 58.

Haute Ifle, 70, 197.

Hautes, Ifles Affez, 299.

Havana, 23.

Havre du Grace, 34, 37, 38, 231, 291.

Hawkins, John, 77.

Hazel-nuts, 264.

Hébert, Madame, 153, 166, 171.

Henry II., 16.

Henry DLL, 4, 5, 14, 15,16, 17; 26, 27,
112, 186.

Henry IV., If, 12, 14, 15,16, 17, 18, 23,
26, 29, 34, 35, 36, 62, 79, 97, 103, 105,
FP2: 173; 158, 186, 220.

Henry VIII., 9.

Herbert, Lord, of Cherbury, 9.

Herfaut, Jacques, 194.

Hinds, 265.

Hifpaniola, 22.

Hiftory, Magazine of Am., 132.

122

22,

42

=)
No

Hiftory, Penn. Magazine of

268.

» 132
Hochelaga, 29, 2
Holland, 9, 22.

Honfleur, 28, 32, 37

Pe a os)
105, I14, 124, 142, 146, 147, 231.
Hontan, Baron La, 33, 265, 270.
Hops, 264.
94.
Horfefoot-crab, 58.
Houél, Louis, 23

80, 96, 98, 104,

Horican,

Hudfon, Henry, 77, 93, 116, 211, 250.
Hudfon River, 93, 262.

Hudfon’s Bay, 211, 250, <
Hudfon’s Bay Company, 193.
Huguenots, 2, 3, 4, 5, II,
» 145, 154, 156, 160, 187.

126,

124, 127, 128, 137, 138, 139, 143,
180, 187, 192, 261, 276, 301.

Icebergs, 232, 233-

Immeftan, 299.

Indians, 32, 33, 35, 38) 39, 40, 46, 53,

55, 60, 63, 64, 66, 81, 88, 102, 103,

106, 107, 109, 114, I15, 116, 124, 148,
149, 153, 163, 166, 167, 192, 193, 222.

Indian Corn, 49, 52, 55, 63, 66, 127,
128, 129, 300, 303.

Iroquois, 34, 88, 90, 91, 92, 93; 98, 99,

122

100, IOI, If5, 1%20, 127, 131, 132,
139, 140, 143, 152, 183, 184, 190, IQI,
193, 238, 258, 261, 262, 274, 275, 276,
280, 285, 286, 291.

Iroquois, Fort, or Fortrefs, 100, I0T,
261.

Iroquois River, 33, 261, 263, 266, 267,

273, 285, 297.

od

Tfle aux Coudres, 275.
Ifle aux Lieures, 295.
Ifle de Chaffe, 296.
Ifle de Grace, 260.
Ifle de Safinon, 204.
fle de St. Eloy, 296.

> d’Orléans, 252.
Ifle du Pas, 260.

> Haute, 302.
Ifle Jéfus, 300.

> Perrot, 267.
2 Plat,

Ifle Royale, 297.

263.

Ifles aux Corneilles, 294.
Ifles de Richelieu, 260.

Ifles of Shoals, 51, 197, 299.
Ifle St. Ignace, 260.

Ifle St. Paul, 293.

Ifle Verte, 296.

Ivry, 16, 26.

Jacopolis, 2.

Jacques Cartier, River, 255.
Jamay, Denis, 124, 142.

James I., 158, 159.

211, 299.

a Sclavonian, 60.

Jameftown, 160,
Jaques, Matter,
Jean, Cap d’Ifle Sain&, 298.

Jean d’Angely, 18.

ais, Saint, 216.

Jean de Beau

Jean, Ifle Sainét, 297,

Jeannin, Prefident
294.

Jeannin, Riuiére, 294.

Jeffrie, 264.

Jeremy Ifland, 284.

Jerremifquam Ifland, 46.

L[ndex.

Jéfuites, 94, 96, 122, 161, 175, 178, 179,
220, 234, 256, 296.

Jeune, Pére le, 180, 184, 185, 234, 257,
266.

Jogues, Ifaac, 93, 96.

Jonas, The, 61, 62, 74, 75, 77.

Jonefport, Me., 294.

Jofeph, Lac S., 296.

Joffelyn, John, 303.

Julian, St., 21.

Jvet, Robert, 93.

Kadefquit, 42, 122

Kendufkeag, 42

Kennebec River, 43, 46, 47, 56, 57, 58,
197, 294, 396.

Kingfton, 136.

Kirke, Sir David, 161, 162, 163, 164,
165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172.

Kirke, Gervafe, 161.

Kirke, Henry, 161.

Kirke, Lewis, 161, 168.

Kirke, Thomas, 161, 167, 168, 169, 170.

Kirke, Thurfton, 161.

Labrador, 282.
La Cadie, 34,

1S, 300.

Lac du St. Sacrament, 93, 94.

La Chine Rapids, 106, 117, 268, 270.
Lac Petit, 300.

Lac St. Charles, 296.
Lafléche, 236.

La Héve, 38, 77, 122.

L[ndex. 331

Lake Angouléme, 259.

Lake Champlain, 93, 97, 100, 102, 190,

199, 261, 262, 280.

Lake Erie, 211, 271, 275.

Lake George, 93, 262, 300.

Lake Huron, 144, 159, 210, 271.

Lake Michigan, 211, 271.

Lake Nipiffing, 126, 199, 303.

Lake Ontario, 128, 130, 131, 135, 199,

274, 275, 301, 302.

Lake of Two Mountains, 117, 126.

Lake Simcoe, 126, 127, 128.

Lake St. Clair, 271.

Lake St. Francis, 270.

Lake St. John, 81, 99, 258.

Lake St. Louis, 117, 270, 301, 302,
304.

Lake St. Peter, 33, 36, 259, 260, 273,
296.

Lake Superior, 33, 99, 297:

Lake Winipeg, 265.

Lalemant, Father Charles, 184.

Lalemant, Hierofme, -93, 95, 96, 124,
154.

Lamb, George, vii.

Languedoc, 146.

Laifple, 233.

Lark Point, 235.

Laroufile, 16, 206

Laud, Archbifhop, 161.

Laudonniére, Capt., v, 95, 269.

Laurie’s Chart, 256, 263, 266.

Laverdiére, L’Abbé, C. H., 150, 171,

3 36,
270, 281, 282, 283, 284, 293, 297.
League, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 112.
Ledyard, L. W., 132.
Leo X., 14.
Le Roy, Marguerite, I.

Lefcarbot, Marc, 37, 59, 61, 62, 71, 75,
95, 97, 206; his writings, 206.

Lefdiguieres, Duchefs of, 252.

Lefquemin, 37, 294.

Levi, Henry de, 150.

Library, National, of Paris, 218.

Library of Harvard College, vii, 215,
216, 217, 218.

Little Boar’s Head, 51, 299.

Little River, 50, 268.

Little Salmon River, 129, 130.

Liverpool, 38.

London, 8, 23, 26, t60, 161, 165, 171,

1972, 1935

15.

t

Long Beach, 207.

Long Saut, 270.

Loughborough, Lake, 136.
Louife, Queen, I5.

Louis XIII., 20, 150, 160, 217.
Louis XIV., 201.

Lower Granville, 59, 72, 206.
Lucar de Barameda, St., 21, 23.
Lucini, 207.

M.

Madifon, County of, 131.

Magellan, Straits of, 25.

Mahone Bay, 298.

Maillé Brézé, Claire Clemence, 105,
113.

Maine, 41, 43, 44, 58, 71, 79; 122, 197,
258.

Maine, Gulf of, 78.

Maine, M. du, 4.

Maifonneuve & Co., 219.

Mal-Bay, 278.

Mal de la terre, 45, 60, 87.

Mallebarre, Port de, 56.

Malte-Brun, 12.

al , a

Hy
Bee i i)
i) |
Hd 2 1) |
b }
pee
bit |
Lee | it
}
}
ip
ae aK
5 '
3 : ; {
¢ 1 ef
rh ' ,

rove

“aes atte

¢

x

Manan, Grand, 71.
Manan, Petit, 294.
Mancenilla, 22.

Manicouagan River, 283.
Mantelet, or fhield, 133.
Manthoumerme, 47.
Maple, 264.

Marais, Des, 103.
Maran, 9.

Marennes, 5, 6, 206.
Margaret, River St, 282.
Margarita, 22, 196.
Margry, Pierre, 150.
Mariefort, 62.

md

[farie, Rapide de Ste., 266.
Marie, Riviére Ste., 2506.
Marque, Letters of, 167.
Marriage of Indians, 248.
Marfhall, O. H., 118, 132.
Marthfield, 53.

Marth, Geo. P., 25.

Martens, 278,

Tartha’s Vineyard, 69, 198, 299.

sao

afon, Captain John, 318.
Maffachufetts, 56, 77, 197, 286.
Maffachufetts Bay, 51, 52. 156, 293.
Maflachufetts Indians, 52.

M
Mafié, Enemond, 122, 179.
Maffion, M. D., 3.
Matane, River, 234.
Matapedia, 279.

Mattawan River, 126, 301.
Mayenne, Duke of, 4, 112.
May Flower, 54.

=

eaux, 194.
Médicis, Catherine de, 14, 26.

Médicis, Marie de, 112, 113, 122.
Membertou, 73.
Merceeur, Duke de, 15, 18, 20, 105.

affachufetts Hiftorical Society, 207.

335 L[ndex.

Mercure Francois, 158.

fer Douce, 271, 298, 301, 304.

NV
Merrimac Bay, 299.

[
ferrimac River, 51.

iS

errymeeting Bay, 46.
fefamichi, 37.
effamoiiet, 40.
etaberoutin, <

ae

i

Mexico, 22, 24, 2

Mezeray, de, 15, 17.
Micmacs, 42, 279, 286.
Mill Cove, 66.

Mille Vaches, 284.
Mines, Bafin of, 288, 289.
Mines Channel, 76.
Mines, Port des. 29, 302.

Mirabeau, Monfieur de, 4.
Miramichi, 279.

Mirth, Rule of, 72

Mifcou, 298, 304.

Mitchell, Prof. Henry, 207, 208.
Mitchell’s River, 66.

Mohawks, 88, 93.

Mohicans, 94.

Moine, Le, viii, 233, 234, 264, 265.
Moifie Bay, 281.

Moncornet, Balthazar, 212, 213, 214.
Monhegan, 43, 57.

Monk Ifland, 260.

Monomoy, 56, 66, 69, 70.

Monfeag Bay, 46.

Montanne River, 234, 279.
Montbulin, 18.

Mont de la Roque, 59.

Montluc, Marfhal de, 2.

Monftr’ceil, Clavde de, 215, 225, 229.

Montagnais, 89, 98, 99, 100, 152, 178,
3, 234, 236, 238, 242, 250, 261,
I

.
>)

"Ff

aaa
— ———X—  —q——— en

r

[ndex. 333

Montaigne, 220.

Montmorency, Admiral Charles de,
226, 253.

Montmorency, Charlotte Marguerite
de, 113.

Montmorency, Henry, Duke de, 113,
146, 148, 150.

Montmorency, Le Saulte de, 295.

Montreal, 29, 33, 96, 106, 107, 115, 117,
120, I21, 124, 126, 135, 141, 186, 199,
251, 255, 261, 266, 267, 268, 297.

Mont-réal, Ifle de, 294, 300.

Montaut, Sieur de, 4.

Montcalm, Gen’! Louis Jos., 91.

Monts Déferts, Ifle de, 41, 209, 294,
304.

Monte Chrifto, 22.

Moofe, 265.

Morel, Captain, 37.

Morlay, 12.

Morris Ifland, 66.

Mofquitoes, 22.

Motte Bourioli, La, 43.

Mount Defert, 41, 42, 78, 122, 123, 197,
208, 238, 294.

Mourt’s Relation, 207.

Mouton, Port au, 297.

Mutfcovites, 181.

Mvr, Pierre Le, 217.

Mufhauwomuk, 52.

Mutkrat, 266.

Mufkrat Lake, 118, 300, 301.

Myftic River, 52.

N.
Naigré, Port du Cap, 298, 304.

Nantafket, 53.
Nafhaway, 52.

Natel, Antoine, 83.

Natifcotec, 233.

Naufet Harbor, 54, 56, 63, 65, 70, 197.

Navarre, 4, 5, 12, 17, 217.

Navigation, Treatife on, 178.

Nepefiguit River, 279.

Neponfitt, 52.

Neutral Nation, 303, 304.

Neutre, La Nation, 303.

New Brunfwick, 36, 39, 44, 159, 197-

New England, 46, 49, 54, 57, 64, 70, 71,
77, 78, 95, 197, 198, 207, 210, 239,
303.

New England Hiftorical and Genea-
logical Regifter, vii, 276.

New Foundland, 25, 29, 32, 159, 161,
232, 293, 300.

New France, 36, 37, 62, 99, 104, 105,
III, 113, 114, 116, 123, 146, 148, 149,
151, 156, 157, 159, 171, 172, 177, 178,
180, 181, 183, 185, 187, 188, 195, 213,
216, 225, 265, 278.

New Grenada, 22.

Newport Mountain, 209.

New Scotland, 159, 176, 177.

New York, 93, 136, 143, 152, 170, 199,
200, 276, 302.

New York, Documentary Hitt. of, 207.

New York Hitt. Society, 93, 132.

Niagara Falls, 271, 274, 275, 301-

Nicaragua, Lake of, 25.

Nicholas, St., 22.

Nichols Pond, 131, 132.

Nicolet River, 297.

Nicolette River, 259.

Nipiffing Lake, 126, 199, 303-

Nipiffings, Indians, 138, 139.

Nipmuck, 52.

Noddle’s Ifland, 52.

Nogent-le-Rotrou, 112.

rd aa”

334 L[ndex.

Nomény, 15.

Nonamef

Nonantam, 32.

Normand} 223, 231
Normans, 29.

North Carolina,

North Point, 298.

North Sea, 301.

Norton, 161.

Norumbegue, 40, 4I!.

Notre Dame, Church of, 86.
Notre Dame de Recouvrance, 180.

Notre Dame de Quebec, Parifh Reg

ter, 185.
Noué, Anne de, 180.
Nova Scotia, 31, 39, 75, 76, 77, 79; 95,
159, 162, 197, 206, 279, 289, 293.
Nuremburg, I5.

O.

Oaks, 264.

Ochiltrie, Lord, 174, 175.
Olbeau, Jean d’, 124, 150.
Old Orchard Beach, 47, 197.

Old Point Comfort, 299.
Old Stage Harbor, 66.
Oleron, 2, 5, 9.

Oneida Lake, 129, 131, 132.
Oneida River, 129, 131.

Onondaga, Invafion of, 132.

Ontario, Lake, 271.
Opinion Publique, 186.
Oregon, 94.

Orgny, d’, 231.

Orignac, 153, 264, 265, 278.
Orillia, 127.

Orleans, Duke of, 74.

Orleans, Ifland of, 25

Orléans, Ifle d’, 295, 297.
a

Orlogio, Cavalier, 3.
Orville, D’, 43.
Ofwego River, 274.

/

Otis, Dr. Charles P., vi, vii, 213, 224,
318.
Otonabee, 128.

Ottawa, City of, 1

Ottawa River, 90, 99, 100, 116, 120,

126, 199, 238, 265, 270, 300, 301,

265.

Otter Cove Cliffs, 209.
Otter Creek Cove, 209.
Oueffant, 231, 291.
Outard Bay, 283.
Oyfter Harbor, 65.
Oyfter Pond, 66.

SP

Pacific Coatt, 95.

Pacific Ocean, 116, 172.

Paliffy, Bernard, 12.

Panama, I{thmus of, 22, 24, 25, 196.

Panounias, 46.

Paris, 12, 17, 18, 28, 61, 104, 110, 112,
123, 155, 175, 181, 206, 212, 213, 225,
220.

Parkman, Francis, viii, 29, 95.

Parmentier, Jean, 29.

Paffamaquoddy Bay, 39, 41.

Peltry, 154.

Pemetegoet, 299.

Pemetiq, 41.

Penobfcot, 41, 42, 57, 78, 198, 208.

Penobfcot Bay, 43, 70, 294.

Percée, Ile, 37, 278, 279, 280, 281, 286,
300.

Perrault, Pére, 175.

5

———=¢

——_ eer _ — 00 0S ee. ORD
?

Lndex. oss

Peru, 25.

Petit Paffage de ’'Ifle Longue, 298.

Petun, Gens de, 303.

Petuns, 139.

Philadelphia, 36.

Philip II., 15.

Picardy, 18, 29.

Pickering, Dr. Charles, 49, 235, 239,
240, 264.

Piéces Juttificatives, 181.

Piedmont, 146.

Pierre, Brook, 107.

Pigeon Lake, 128.

Pilotoua, 247.

Pinart, M., 219.

Pine, 235.

Pifcataqua, 78, 211.

Placentia Bay, 232, 293.

Place Royale, La, 107.

Pleffis, Pacifique, du, 124.

Plymouth, 77, 207, 211.

Plymouth, Eng., 171.

Plymouth Harbor, 54, 197, 206, 207,
208.

Point a Calliére, 107.

Point Allerton, 53.

Point aux Vaches, 235.

Point Cardinal, 270.

Point Chaflé, 282.

Point Colombier, 284.

Point Comfort, 211.

Point Croix, 282.

Point de Monts, 282.

Point Levi, 293.

Point Peter, 278.

Point Platon, 254.

Point St. Nicholas, 283.

Poitrincourt, 222.

Pons, 35.

Pons, Jacques, de, 2, IIo.

Pont Gravé, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38,
45, 58, 59, 61, 62, 70, 84, 86, 88, 96,
98, 115, 141, 145, 146, 149, 164, 205,
236, 237, 255, 267, 201.

Pontiff, Roman, 13, 15.

Poplar, 264.

Porcupines, 265.

Portage du Fort, t20.

Port A Lefquille, 295.

Port aux Coquilles, 294.

Port aux Huiftres, 65.

Port aux Saulmon, 295.

Port Dauphin, 175.

Port du Cap de Raye, 293.

Port Fortuné, 69.

Portland, 47.

Port Louis, 20, 21.

Port Mouton, 38,

Porto-bello, 22, 25.

Porto Platte, 22.

Porto-rico, San Juan de, 22.

Port Royal, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 76, 77,
122, 123, 304.

Port St. Louis, 207.

Portfmouth, 211.

Portugal, 26, 27.

Poutrincourt, 40, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65; 67,
68, 72, 75, 76, 122, 123.

Powers, Stephen, 94, 95.

Prairies, M. Des, tol.

Prefixe, 18.

Prevert, Sieur, 32, 222, 279, 286, 287,
288, 289, 290, 291.

Prince Edward Ifland, 288.

Prince, George, viii.

Prince, The Rev. Thomas, 308.

Prince Society, 156, 159, 172, 177, 207,
305 ; act of incorporation, 306; con-
ftitution, 307, 308 ; rules and regula-
tions of the Council, 308-310; offi-

a —_—

336 Index.

cers, 311 ; names of members, 312-

316; publications, 317, 3183 works in

preparation, 318.

Prout’s Neck,

-rovencal Cappitaine, 20.
Puitaillé,

-unkapaog, 52.

I >?

La Riviere, 3-

Purchas, his Pilgrims, 215.

ans, 156.

Quaddy Head, 78.
Quarter-mafter, 16, 19.
Quebec, 28, 29, 30, 33, 36, 82, 84, 85,
87, 89, 90, 95,
104, 105, 110, 114, 115, 116, 123, 124,
126, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 149,
151, 153,154, 160, 161, 162,
166,
174,
184, 187, 189, 190, 194,

, 169, 170, 171,
8, 179, 180, 182,

199, 205, 209,

213, 218, 253, 254, 264, 273, 293, 294,
295, 296, 301, 304.

Quebec, Province of, 159.

Quentin, Father, 122.
Quinibequi, Quinibequy, Quinebequi,
46, 206.

Quinté, Bay of, 128, 130, 274, 302.

Rafn, Prof. Charles C., 318,
Ralleau, Sieur, 37, 40.
Ramufio, 29.

Ranges, 4I.

Ranke, Leopold, 12, 14.

Rafpberry, 264, 303.
Raze, Cap de, 37:
Razilly,

Commander Ifaac de, 155,

+°
Raymbault, Pére ¢ harles, 18

Vi

Recolleét Chapel, 185.
Recolleéts, Fathers,

142, 147

Relations des Jéfuites, 42,

90, 93, 154,
264, 266.

175, 180, 185, 256, 257

Religion of the Savages, 243-247.

Ribaut, Cap Jean, v, 299.

Rice Lake, 128.

Richelieu, Cap de, 297.

Richelieu, Cardinal de, 5, 105, 113, 155,
5; i,

156, 157, 160, 174, 17 176, 181, 19

193, 217,
Richelieu Ifland, 256.
Richelieu River, 33, 36, 90, 93, 96, 100,

IOI, 199, 222, 260, 261, 262, 280, 297.

219.

Richemond, Mefchinet de, viii, 206.
Richmond’s Ifland, 47, 48, 49, 197,
299.

Rideau River, 302.

Rio Chagres, 25.
Riftigouche River, 281,

River du Guatft, 52.

River Leffumen, 284.

River of Canada, 273, 278.
River of the Algonquins, 270.
River Romaine, 284.

River St. Lambert, 268.
River Trent, 128.

Riuiére de Gafpey, 298.
Riuiére de Sauuages, 296.
Riuiére des Efturgeons & Saulmons,
296.

Index.

Riviére des Prairies, 126, 300.
Riuiére des Puans, 297.
Riuiére du Gaft, 297.

Riuiére Platte, 295, 298.
Riuiére Sainéte Suzanne, 297.
Riviére du Fouez, 257.
Riviere du Loup, 297.

Riviére du Sud, 294.

Rivitre Noire, 283.

Riviére Petite, 252.

Riviére St. Pierre, 268.

Roanoke Ifland, 58.

Roberval, Jean Francois, v, 29, 30, 31.
Robinfton, 43.

Rochefort, 6.

Roche, Marquis de la, 30, 31.
Rochelle, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, II, 35, 38, 110,
117, 146, 148, 157, 160, 194, 206.

Rock River, 282.

Rocky Neck, 64.

Roman Church, 93, 122,

Rome, 17.

Ronjat, E., 214.

Roque, Francois de la, 29.

Roquemont, Claude de, 155, 157, 165,
166.

Roffignol, Captain, 38, 40, 298.

Rouen, 28, 35, 114, 148, 155, 212.

Round Ifland, 267.

Roy-Frangois, 30.

186, 188.

Ss.

Sable, Baye de Cap, 298.

Sable Ifland, 31.

Saco, 48, 49, 52, 56, 63, 66, 197, 238,
286.

Sagadahock, 46, 47.

Sagamore, 34, 236, 243, 245.

Joe

Sagard, Gabriel, 150, 153, 235,
265.
Saguenay, 32, 81, 99, 109, 124, 2

264,

234, 235, 238, 249, 250, 252, 253, 25
258, 301.

Saguenay, Sault de Riuiére, 297.

Sainét Cler, Baie de, 37.

Saint Anne, Bay of, 175.

Saint Anne, River, 255, 256.

Saint Bartholomew’s, 186.

Saint Charles, River, 29, 82, 149,

Saint Clair, Gen’l, 91.

Saint Croix, in Canada, 254, 255, 256,
257, 296, 304.

Saint Croix, Ifland of, 39, 43, 56, 58,
59, 60, 63, 75, 294, 304.

Saint Croix, Ifland in Canada, 256.

Saint Croix, River, 39, 40, 70, 159, 206,

163.

208, 299.
Saint Eloi, Ifland of, 256.
Saint Francis, River, 259, 297-
Saint Gabriel, 127, 176, 177.
Saint Germain, I50.
Saint Héléne, 266, 267.
Saint Ignace, Ifland of, 100, 102.
Saint Jacques, 194.
Saint Jean Baptifte, 127.
Saint Jean d’Angely, 113.
Saint John, Ifland of, 288.
Saint John, Ifles of, 234.
Saint John, Lake, 250.
Saint John, New Brunfwick, 39, 60, 75,
206, 238, 280, 287.
Saint John, Newfoundland, 30.
Saint John on the Richelieu, 91.
Saint John, River, 40.

Saint Lawrence, Chronicles, 233, 234.
Saint Lawrence, Gulf of, 123, 161, 166,
178, 199, 200, 210, 233, 298, 302.

Saint Lawrence, Ifland of, 280, 289.

338

Saint Lawrence, River of, 28, 29, 39,
32, 33, 36, 37, 39, 89, 96, 98, 100,
I

°
.
ra)
ON
oO
I
9
iS)
on
iS

56, 172, 180,
, 261, 264,
265, 272, 281, 295, 296, 300, 303.

Saint Louis, Sault, 304.
Saint Luc, de, 4, 5, 16, 17.
Saint Malo, 28, 31, 32, 74, 77, 114, 121,

148, 237, 286, 290.

187, 192,

Saint Matthew’s Point, 235, 236, 240.

Saint Maurice, River, 99, 109, 257,
258.

Saint Mary’s Bay, 39, 40.

Saint Mefmes, 5.

Saintonge, I, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 17, 35, 110.

Saint Paul’s Bay, 294.

io 2)
4
=}
ad
tae}
i=)
—
rx}
=]
Qo
a
°
N
>}
iS)
On
N

Saint Peter, Street of, 86.
Saint Therése, 266.
Salem, 211, 290.
Salt-works, 6-10,

San Juan d’Ulloa, 22, 2
Saquifh, 207, 208.
Safinoa, 294.

Sauffaye, Sieur de la, 122.
Savage-Rock, 197, 198.
Savages, 51, 66, 68.
Scituate, 53.

Scotland, 159.

Scotch Colony, 162.
Scoudic River, 299.
Scurvy, 45, 60, 87.
Secondon, Indian Chief, 60, 287.
Seguin, 197.

Selfridge, Capt., 25.

Sept Ifles, Les, 299.
Seven Iflands, 282.
Seven Iflands Bay, 282.

Index.

Severn River, 126, 127.

Seveftre, 217.

Seville, 21.

Shawmut, 52, 211.

Shaw Norton, 26, 27.

Shea, John Gilmary, viii, 90, 93, 96,
123, 132, 149, 158, 213

Shediac Ifland, 279.

1eep{cot, 46, 47-

1ip-canal, 24.

irew{bury, Earl of, 27.

Simcoe, 126, 127, I4I, 199.

Simon, Mr., 39.

Sillery, Chancellor de, 117.

Slafter, Edmund F., 306, 317, 318.
Smith, Captain John, v, 54, 77, 78, 198.
Smith’s Cove, 64.

Smith, S. D., 131.

Smyth, R. Brough, 240.

Snow-fhoe, 248.

op)

S
S

Soiffons, Charles de Bourbon, Count
de, 112, 113, 294.

Soiffons, Lac de, 294.

Soudis, Madame de, 122.

Soupconneuse, La, 69, 299.

Souricoua, 279.

Sourin, 44.

Souriquois, 279, 286, 287.

Sous le Fort, Street of, 86.

Southampton, Earl of, 57.

South Sea, 277.

Spain, or Spanifh, to, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21,
22, 24, 26, 27, 161, 195.

Spain, New, 22, 23, 25, 27.

Spruce, 235.

Stage Harbor, 66, 68, 70, 197.

Stags, 265.

Stirling, Earl of, 176.

Stony Lake, 128.

Stratton Ifland, 47.

a et

—o

Lndex. 339

Strawberry, 264. |
Stuart, Sir James, 174.
Sturgeon Lake, 128.
Sully, Duke of, 4, 5, 16, 18, 27, 36, |

112.

Tr.

Tabajie, 236, 237, 241, 286.

Tabula Nautica, 211.

Hache, Dr: J, C., 12%

Tadouflac, 32, 33, 36, 37, 80, 81, 83,
84, 88, 89, 96, 98, 104, 106, IIo, 115,
124, 147, 154, 162, 163, 164, 166, 168,
169, 170, 231, 234, 236, 238, 239, 249,
250, 251, 258, 277, 278, 284, 285, 286,
291, 295, 296, 297, 300, 304.

Talon, Lac du, 126.

Tanager, fcarlet, 97.

Télégraphe, Compagnie du, 54.

Ten Pound Ifland, 84.

Terra Firma, 22.

Tefouac, La Riuiére de, 301.

Tefouac, Ifle de, 301.

Tefloiiat, chief, 118, 119.

Thémins, Marefchal, 113.

Thet, Gilbert du, 122.

Thevet, André, 77, 233, 239.

Thone, Charente, 4.

Thornton, J. Wingate, 306.

Thorvald, the Northman, 56.

Thou, Jacque-Augutte, de, 5, 16, 18.

Thoufand Iflands, 128.

Three Rivers, 33, 36, 99, 152, 154, 255,
257, 258, 259, 273, 301.

Ticonderoga, 91, 93.

Timothée, Captain, 37.

Tiny, 127.

Tobacco, 49, 55, 63-

Toleration, Chriftian, 188. |

Tortue, La Riviére de la, 268.

Touloufe, 146.

Tourmente, Cap de, 295.

Tours, 112, 146.

Tour, Claude la, 160.

Tour, Port la, 298.

Tour, Sieur de la, 298.

Tortue, Lac la, 126.

Tracadie, 279.

Trent, River, 302.

Trefpaffez, Baye des, 300.

Tribes, American, 240.

Trofs, 153.

Trou, Cataraéte du, 270,

Trumball, J. Hammond, 42, 46, 47, 52,
175.

Tuckerman, Edward, 303.

Turkey, wild, 58.

Tuttle, Charles W., 306, 318.

Two Mountains, Lake of, 294, 300.

U.

United States, 54, 200.
Univerfité Laval, 218.
Univerfity of Paris, 229.
Upper Hell-gate, 46.
Urbin, Caftritio d’, 3.

V.

Vaudemont, Nicholas, Count de, 15.
Veillane, 146.

Ventadour, Duke de, 150, 154.
Vera Cruz, 22.

Verchéres, 263, 265, 266.

Vermont, 93, 200.

Verneuil, Madame de, 122.

Verte River, 296.

340 Index.

Vervins, 11, 18, 20, 206.

Vierges, Les, 300.

Vieuxpont, Alexander de, 175.

Vignan, Nicholas de, 116, 117, I19,
21.

Vimont, Barthélemy, 175, 185-

Vineyard Ifland, 198.

Vineyard Sound, 69, 71, 77, 197, 222.

Virginia, 58, 122, 160, 211, 299.

nia Companies, 158.

Virgin Mary, 246.

Virgins, 22.

Voitaire, 113.

Ww.

Wallace’s Sands, 50.

Walnuts, 264.

Weechagafkas, 52.

Wellfleet, 197.

Wells, 50.

Wettport, 46.

Weft Indies, 10, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26,
27, 196, 200, 219.

Weymouth, Captain George, 57, 77,
198, 235.

Wheelwright, Rev. John, 156, 317-
Whitmore, William H., 317.

Wigwam or Cabin, Indian, 55, 239, 240-

Williams, Roger, 95.
Winfor, Juftin, vii.
Wilmere, Alice, 26.
Winipeg, Lake, 265.
Witcaffet, 46.

Wifconfin, Hift. Society, 276.
Women, Indian, 247.
Wood’s Holl, 70.

Wood, William, 207, 317.
Woolwich, 46.

Wyet, 233-

X.

Xaintongeois, 215, 217.
Xanctoigne, 30.

Me

Yarmouth Bay, 61.
York River, 278, 298.
Yroquois, 222, 300, 304-
Yuki, 95.

University Press: John Wilson and Son, Cambridge.

=

a la

ae

tt eS
