Chorea Gigantum; or, The Most Famous Antiquity of Great Britain, Vulgarly Called Stone-Heng
Walter Charleton
Chorea Gigantum. London: Henry Herringman, 1663 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1475-1640_chorea-gigantum_charleton-walter_1663).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

uh -/ tanteh; ND ——— 663.
| ants Parrocghl
CHOREA GIGANTRHM, -g
OR,
The moſt Famous Ancieniry of -
GREAT-BRITAN,


RX Vulgarly called
$5 TONEHENG,
6 Standing on Salisbury Plain , |
Reſtored to the


D AN B | S2


*,

J

ET" F b : , Y

By Walter Charleton, D* in Phyſic, and Phyſician
in Ordinary tg His Majeſty. |


Rent —m—__—


Que per conſtruttionem lapidum , & marmoreas moles, aut
terrenos tunaulos in magnam ednitos altitudinem , conſtant


10n propagabunt lougans diem: quippe & 1pſa intereunt | :
Seneca, de Conſolat. agPolyb,* .


—  — —— _— dai


| LONDON,' _
Printed for Henry Herringman , at the Sign 6f the Anchor its
che Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 166 3.


e, ; \


4


To the K ING's Moſt Excellent


M.A 4K: Þ


POUR Majeſties Cu-
>| riolity to ſurvey the
Subject of this Diſ-
conrſe , the ſo much
admired e Antiquity
}f STONE-HENG , hath ſometime
een ſo great and nrgent, as to find
7 700m in Yonr Royal Breaſt, a-
nd ſt Your weightieft Cares; and
0 carryY ou manymiles ont of Your
ay toward Safety , even at ſuch
a


|
|
f
|
|
[


a time, when any Heart , but your

Fearleſs and Invincible one,would
have been wholly fill d with appre-
hen/ions of Danger. For, as I have
' had the Hononr to hear from that
Oracle of Truth and Wiſdom ,
Your Majeſtie's own Month:
You were pleaſed to viſit that
Monument , and, for many honrs
together, entertain our ſelf with

the delightful view thereof, When
after the defeat of Your Loyal -
Army , at Worceſter , Almighty
God , in Infinite Mercy to Your

three Kingdoms , miraculouſly de- '
livered You out of the blood)
Faws of thoſe Monſters of Sin
and Cruelty, who taking (,onnſel ,
onely from the Heinouſnefs of
therr Crimes , ſought Impunity |
in the higheſt A of
EDEM,


them ; deſperately hoping to ſe-
cure Rebellion by Regicide, ayd
by deſtroying therr Soveraign., to
continue their Tyranny over their
Fellow-Smubjects.


This, as at firſt it antmated Me,
to make ſtrict Enquiry into the
Origine, aud Occalion of the
Wonder ( /o the Vulgar call it )
fo far as the gloomy darkneſs of
Oblivion Would admit ; fo hath it
ag emboldned me , tolay at T our
Majeſties Feet the © following
Account of my Succeſs in that
Enquiry : inall poſfppble Hunili-
ty and Reverence , beſeeching
Touto Honour , withY our Gra-
cious Acceptance , the REsToRA-
TION of that Gigantick Pile,
Whoſe dead Remains You [0 high-

| ly


ly Ennobled by Your Preſence,
Once -You made it Tour Diver-
tiſement, to look upon it eeping in
deep Forgetfulncſs, and Well-nigh
diſantmated by the ' Lethargy of
Time ( which often brings the
River Lethe to flow as Well
above ground , as below ) : Diſ-
dain not, therefore, now to caſt an
Eye upon it , when it appears to
lift up its Maſirve Head again, and

offers , in plain Language, to tell
You the Story of its Life, from
whence it was derived, by whom
it was formed , for What noble Uſe
it was intended , and how it hath
ſruce been ſacrilegionſly violated.
Which Story , though grounded
onely on Conjecture ; is neverthe-
Teſs neither Wnpleaſant , nor Wn-

profitable. A
Having


Having diligently compared
STONE-HENG With other. Anti-
quities of the ſame Kind,” at this
aay, ſtanding in Denmark :; aud
finding a perfett Reſemblance ix
moſt. f not in all Particulars 0b-
ſeryable , on both ſides; and ac-
quainting my ſelf moxeover with
the Uſes of thoſe rudely-masg-
nificent Struttures, for many hun-
dreds of years togethey : I now at -
length conceive it to have been
Frefted bythe DANES, when
They had this Nation in ſnb-
jection; and principally , -, Gn
Wholly Deſignd to be a Court

Royal, oz place for the EleQtion
and Inauguration of th2ir Kings 2
according to a certain ftrange Cii-
ſtome, yer of eldeft Date , moſt ſa-

FR


cred:


TY


— —


cred Eſteem, and but late Diſcon-
tinuance among that Martial


People.


Whether, or no, my Authori-
ties aud Reaſonings for this New
Opinion of mine , be ſuch , asgay
be allowed ſufficient to fe It
highly Probable ( for, further 1
pretend not ) : as becomes me, I
moſt humbly, moſt freely ſubmit to
Tour Majeſty s moſt Excellent,
Judgement, x Which Y ore are no
les Supreme , than in Your
Power ; and than Which , none
can be either moxe Diſcerning ,, or
more Equitable. . $0 chat if it
prove ſo fortunate , as to receive
Tour Approbation , I need not
fear the Cenſure of any Under- +

- ſtanding


acts _w "


”


ſtanding Reader : if not, T ſhall
however gain this advantage, to
have my Miſtake reftifid by a
King, Whoſe Reaſons are Demon-
rations, Whoſe Enquiries are
the beſt Direfttions unto Truth,
whoſe Afſent always is a ſign of
Truth, and to Whoſe other Regal
Prerogatives an admirable Wiſ-
dom hath ſuperadded this , that
He is leſs ſubjett tobe impoſed up-
&, than any other Man.


Is the mean time, and ever , ac-
_ cording to my Duty, I ſhall eax-
neftly pray to eAlmighty God ,
that He would be pleaſed to en-
richTour Sacred NAajeſty, with
all Blefiings anſ[Wwerable to the
Largeneſs of Your Mind , tothe
Sublimity of Yoxr Condition, -
LC


the V Veight of Your Charge, to +
the Multitude of Yowr Virtues ,


and to. the Hopes and Withes of
all Your Good Sub jects.


April the 27%


Your Majeſties


\q | moſt Loyal , moſt Obedient,
moſt Humble,


Subjct and Servant ,


Warlrtk Cuanrtrton,


To my worthy Friend , D* Charleton , oz bis clear Diſ-
covery of ST Ox E-HENG to bautteena DANISH
Court-Royal, for the EleFion of Kings , and not a
Roman Temple , as ſuppoſed ty M* Inigo Jones.


Ow much obliging is Your learned Care !
Still buſie to preſerve , or to repatr ;
Which unto Men nor onely life can give ,
But makes their Monuments themſclyves to live.
Health comes to them by Your immortal aim :
And to their Ations Trath, the health of Fame:
The ſickly World ſeems thus Reſtor'd by Thee 3
Whilf thy large Sovl, like its Eternity ,
On waſting Time atchievs new ViRories ,
Which buried now in its own ruins lyes.


Nor wert Thou toengage with Time alone ;
But that which kept the Wonder more unknown ,
Mens Errors ; which are ſtill the greateſt crime ,
And more deftroy the truth of _ » than Time.


For,


em mm


> goon Pray

* £ _ 3

S867 "—A\ |
Pr —__ be

SI

T ” - # # ®

ww *T


Though once a Temple thought, now provas
Since we , who arc ſo bleſt with Xonarcby,,


Mult gladly learn, from Thy Diſcovery


Thatgreat Reſpe#s not onely haye been found
Where Gods were orſbip'd, but where Kings were Cronn'd..


Rob.. Howard.


”

To.

. a4 of
Pd


|


Tomy Homo? 4 Prienit , I Charkton , on bis learned
and uſoful warts 5 and more 'particultrly this of
ST 0x8-xzNG, bybim Reſtore to the tyue Poundeys,


He lonerft Tyranny that ever ſway'd,
| l Wasthatwhetein our Pe 4M
Their free-born Reaſon rothe Stapirree ,
And made his Torch their aniverſal Light.
So Truth, while onely one fupph'd the State ,
Grew ſcarce, and dear, and yetlophiſticare.
Until*'rwas bought, like Emp'rique Wares, or Charts ,
Hard words ſeal'd up with Ariſtotle's Armes.
Columbus was the firſt that ſhook his Throne
And found a Temp'rate in a Torrid Lone :
The fevriſh aire fann'd by a cooling breez ,
The fruitful Vales ſet round withthady Trees 5 -
And guiltkfs 2472, thar danc'd away their tithe ,
Freſh as their Groves, and Happy astheit Clime,
Had we ſtill paid that homage to a Name ,
Which onely Gvd and Nature juſtly clairh 3
The weferz Seas had been ont utmoſt bound,
Where 7oets ftill might dream the Su# was drown'd :.
And all the Starys, that ſhine in Southern Skies ,
Had been admir'dby none but Salvage Eyes,


Among th Aſſertoys of free Reafon's claitn ,
The Ergliſbare not leaft in Worth, or Fatne..
The World to Bacon does not onely. owe
Its preſent Knowledge, bur its futere too,

Gilbert ſhall live, ti wa” oy ceaſe ro draw ,
Or Britiſh Fleets the bouridleſs Ocean awe. ©
And noble Boyle, not leſs in Nature ſeen,
Than his great Brother read in States and Aden.


—


"Tho Crreling fircams, oncerhought but pools,. of blood
(( Whether Life's tewel , or the Bodie's tood )
From dark Oblivion Harvey's. name ſhallſave ;
'While Ezt kceps all the honaurtliat he gave,
Nor are Tow\, Learned Friend, the leaſt renown'd ;
"Whole Fagnc, nor circumſcrib'd withEpgliſb ground,
* Fles like rhe nimble journeys.of.che Light; W
- And is, like that, unſpent roo in irs flight,
'Whar ever Truths have been., by Art, or Chace ,
KRedecm'dfrom Erroror from: 1gnerance,
Thin in their Authors, { like rich veins in Ore )
Your Works unite ,:and till diſcover more.
Suchis the hcaling virtue of Your Pen ,
To perfc& Cures on Books, as well as Men.
Nor is This Wotk the leaſt : You well may give
To Mennew yigour , who make Stoxes to live.
Through'Yov, the DA NE S (their ſhort Dominion loſt )
A longer Conqueſt than the Saxozs boaſt.
SToNB-4ENG, Once thought a Temple , You have found


A Throne, where Kings, our Earthly Gods, were Crown'd,
"Where by their wondring Subje&s were ſeen ,
«Choſe by their Stature, and their Princely meen.

Our Soveraigu here above the reſt _ ſtand;

And here be choſe again to ſway the Land.


Theſe Ruines ſheltred once H7s Sacred Head ,
Then when from wor fters fatal Field He fled;
Watch'd by the Genius of this Kingly place ,
And mighty Viſions of the Daniſh Race.

His Refuge then was for a Temple ſhown :
But, He Reſ.or'd, 'tis now become a Throze.


John Driden,


STONE-HENG RESTORED
TO THE D ANES.


>


"te F all MoxumzNTs built by Mankind fince the
»- beginning of the World,- chere ſeem co be only
two General Cauſes, :


$ MA The Firs T Natxral,namely a certain defire of
WG) Immorealicy, inherent in, and as it were. Eflential
w co the Human Soul. Which being an Immaterial
Eſſence, participant of Divinity both in ics Crea-
tion, and Hopes, perpetually carrierh about ic this 1mpreſs-or character
of that Erernal Being, from whence'ic was derived ; that it abhorrech
Oblivion,and as not contented with char perperulty in _— which
Nature hath ordained by propagation of the Species, ( an inſtitucion
common alſo to Brute Animals ) it aims at another kind of Ererniry,
by ſeaking co deliver the Remembrance of ſome notable ations to all
ſucceeding Generations. So ſtrong are the incitements of this our
congenial Ambition, that the Dulleſt Souls are not alrogerher inſenf«
ble. of them, . and Heroique: ones feel a ſorr of felicity in ſuffering
chemſelves ro be tranſported by'them: - Yea, many have preferr'd the
Imaginary life of Glory,co that Real = of Nature; and through meſt
z | aorrid


£vy «. %
; I >


.  STONE-HENG RESTORED -


horrid dangers and pains expoſed chemſelves to deach, meerly. out of

an obſcure hope of being ſoon revived by Fame, and abtaining # better
ſubliſtence in the immortality of their Names. With ſuch ſehenmenes
as theſe Old Emmixs doubtleſs was toucht,when he rejoyced in the per»
petuity of reputarion, thar he fancied to. bimſelf fromthe mecics of bis
Verſes, and exulringly exclames -


Voluto viun' per ora virun,Y.
And Ovid, when he towres himſelf with


Ore legar popult, perque onenia ſacula fama,
S; js. habent veri vatuns preſagia, vivam,


Nay, the grave Romer Orator himſelf was not exempted from the
fecrert citillations of the ſame proleprical perſwaſion, when { Pro
Heare.l) he brake forth into this pathetic expreſhon : Non hec vita
dicenda eft, que corpore & ſpirits continetur ; illa, inquam, illa vita
eſt, que viget memoria ſeculorum ommun, quan poſteritas alit, quan
2pſa etermras ſemper intuetur. * This is not tobe aeconneed life,
«* which confiſterh in the conjun&ion of Body and Soul : chat, I fay,
« that is life indeed, which flouriſberh in che memory of all ages,
« which Poſtericy nouriſherh, which Ecernity ir ſelf ever lookethup-
«on. And into another of the like heighth ( Philip. 12. ) in theſe
words : Brevis vita data eft, memnoria ue reddite vite ſerpirerea ;
94 fi non efſer longior, quam hec vita, quis eſcet rams amens, ui Max-
mis laboribus & periculis ad. ſumman hn, conten-
deret ? Now, albeic this AfeRion of the Mind, in ſome perſons
meeting with the humor of Vain Glory, becomes an »gnts farum ,
and miſguides them to a falſe Erermy (for, the laſt cold we catch in
our graves, makes us deaf to even the loudeſt praiſes of men : and if
it did nor, yet would the pleaſure of choſe praiſes be as ſhort and tran-
firory, as the breath thar gives chem being : ) yet cannot it be eaſily
denied to be a confiderable argument of the Souls Immortality ;
foraſmuch as the moſt rigid of Philoſophers find ir to be Natural
( Ariftotle 2. de Anima, terms it S$vowdToflov, moſt Natural ) and
confeſs,thar Nature hath implanced in us no o_ in vain,or which
is not capable of ſatisfaRion, if rightly addrefied ro its. proper ob-
jeas.- However, thus much may modeſtly be affirmed, that there is
na


TO THE DANES: z


no man but thinks himſelf ſomewhat concerned in times that ſhall
come afrer him $g and that che moſt excellent works of men had theic
firſt beginnings from chis Apperice of poſthume Fame, For, whence
came che fouridations of Empires, the inſticurions of Republiquesg
Secs, Societies, and Laws to govern them ? Whence the building of
Cicies, che ereRion ,of Pyranuds, Mauſoleas, Obelisks, Temples,
Amphicheatres, Statues, Palaces , and the like coſtly Monuments ?
Whence, thoſe many Volames of Hiſtory, Annals, Philoſophy, Arts
and Sciences, and all other kind of Knowledge > Whence all the
brave performances and atchievements in Warr 2 Whence the li-
beralicy of Teſtaments, the adoption of Heirs, the afhancing of greac
Families, the defire of Iflue ? Whence, I ſay, can we derive all theſe,
and in cruth all other che principal defigns and ations of Mankind ,
if not from that which Cicero ( 1. Twſcul) calls ſeculorum quoddane
augurium futurorum, a certain implanced Ambition of men to exrend
the proſpe& of cheir hopes beyond the dark vale of Death, and have
their names ſurvive cheir Funerals ? ſo char though ſome Scepriques
may perhaps diſpure, whether chis Ambition be purely Natural, or
meerly Opinionative : yer, I preſume, none will contradi& chis ma»
nifeſt cruch, That-all Nations are beholding to ic for cheir chiefeſt
Ornaments and Memorials ; eſpecially if due conſideration be had of
the neer affinity berwixt this chair Firſt Cauſe, and


The O THER, which is Politique ; namely an incicemenc of
men to hazardous undertakings, and enterprizes of difficulty, by ſer-
ring before- their eyes the glotious Examples of ſuch among their
Predecefſors, who by a&ions of eminent forricude, prudence, juſtice,
knowledge, piery to their Country, or otherthe like Virtues, bave
highly obliged mankind. ' For, ſince Glory and Renown is one of
the ſharpeſt ſpurrs to Heroical ſpirics ; and that glory is alwayes great-
eſt, thar is moſt permanent : it was a high point of Wiſedome and
Policie in our Forefathers ro ere publick memorials of great and
worrhy men, ſuch as being lookr-upon by their Succeſlors,; might in-
ſpire chem wich a generous Emulation co atchieve che like meritori-
ous aRions, that ſo they may atrain to the like honout and eſteem
with thoſe that (hall come after them.- ' Vircue, chough a ſufficienc
reward to it ſelf, would yer have but few followers, unleſs attended
on by Fame.. Whereupon Cicero ( in 1. Twſcular, ) diſcourſing of
eallant men, fayes poſitively, Eorum nem nnquam, ſine magna ſpe

B 2 Pr m40rt a-


& STONE-HENG RESTORED


rmmortalitatis, ſe - patria offerret ad myrtem ; no min, however
mignanimousand brave, would for the good of his Country offer hime
ſelf rodearh, without grear hope of immortality ; and Emripides (in
Ajace ) not indecently cries out


$Ww Ts dybvrG- ds Toy Gio TOS Geolols
x15 ducpper, X, mPod\ss oNiogeTa:,


Among the moſt durable Memorials of worchy Men and ARiong,
by which generous ſpirits are animated co tread in the rough and crag-
gy wayes of Virtue, upon expeAation the-Gratirude of poſteriry will
endeavour to vindicare cheir: names and deſerts from the- devouring
jaws of Oblivion ; che firſt place belongs eothoſe, which-che Greci-
ans cull Kevoſof we; rhe Romans Monnmenta, and we in imitation of
them Monuments : becuuſe they ſerve to inſtru he preſent and iu-
cure ages,in things done in ages palt ; and remain to ſucceeding gene-
rations, as certain M:morials of the famous performances of their
Anceſtors. The word Monumentum deriving it ſelf from Morneo:;
and rhar again holding from Aſemoria ; as Yarro (de lingna Latin,
lib. 8. ) monere eſt a menooria diftum, quod is, qui monet, perinde ſit
ac memoria. So thata Monument, in propriety of fignificarion, is
an Admonition by putting in remembrance. Ih which ſenſe Cicers
ſpeaking to Ceſar, (aith, ſed Ego, que monument: ratio ſit, nomine ipſ»
admoneor, ad memoriam mags ſpettare debere poſteritatis, © quam ad
preſentis temporis gratiam. And in a Minufcripr Regiltrs of the
Sray Friers in London, kept in S:r Robere Cottons Libraty, there is
this agreeable definition of a Monument ; MMommentum eſt quaſi mo -
nens mentem, & ſic ſolet a doftioribus Etymologiart : mymet namyue
bifaria m humanam mentem, cum aut mortis memoriam incutit, viſis
precedentium ſepulchris ; aut e1 fdem conſpettis, alit ad wirtmis-iter
ſtrenue calcandum incitant wr i anmantwr.


Hence ir-comes, that notwithſtanding-the chings invented to give
notice to poſtericy of the laudable'archievzments of their Progenicors,
be almoſt infinitely various in their natures, materials, forms , &c.
yer till hath the word Monument been uſed, as a general nam, to
denote chem : which Feſt long (ance obſerved in this ſaying ; Monu-
mentum eſt, quod mtu cauſa edificatum eft, & quicquid in mens
riam alicujus fattum eſt, ut fana, porticss, ſcripta, & carmina, ec.

A To


\.7O THE DANES. 5


To enumerate the ſeveral Kinds,or Differences of theſe inanimate
Remembrancers ; and deduce each of thoſe differences from irs pro-
per Cauſes and occahions, is neicher neceſſary co, nor conſiſtent with
my preſent defgn, which is confined within the circle of one fingle
m ent. Let it ſuffice, therefore, if Tin rhe general advertiſe,
chit their Variery is owing nor onely to che diverſity of Peoples and
Nations, that founded, erefed, compoſed them of different Mace-
rials, afcer ſundry manners,. and with various arrifices, each according
co their proper Genius,” elief, Cuſtomes, Commodiries,and the like :
bur alſo to the circumſtances of Time, Ptace, Fortune, and Occafion,
So thar no wonder,. if thefe (as all other the works of Man ) are vaſt-
ly differenc among themſelves, in Marcer, Form, Magnicude, Arri-

ce, Coft, Magnificence, Situation, and Deſign,


Nor is ic more a-wonder, that this: great Difference ſometimes
rurns- co the Confuſion of ancient Monuments, and makes them no
Monuments ar all ; by rendring their particular fignifications ſo in-
diſtin&, that even che beſt Anciquaries ( choſe Maſters-of the Rolls —-
of cime ) fall into contention nor onely concerning the Authors by
whom, and the Times wherein; bur alſo about the Erds, or Purpoſes
for which they were ac firſt ſer ” ' For, the Monuments of even one
and che ſame Nation, in one and the ſame Country, having been now
and then varied in faſhion, magnificence, &c. according to the ſeve-
ral vicifficudes of Time, mutations of Religion, and other revolutions
of Fate: ir cannot bur be highly diffienlt for lage poſteriry, who are lefr
in ignorance of rhe reſpettive occaſions and motives of rhoſe changes,
ro ſearch into the intentions of their Founders ;- eſpecially, where
Hiſtory hach been either alcogerher Gilent, or (what's as bad ) full of
uncercainries concerning their Originals. And where the darkneſs of
Oblivion hath been added ro thar of aged Time ; certainly,our Curio-
firy can hardly find the way-to rruch, nor is the glimmering light of
Reaſon likely to afford other diſcoveries, bur what are ConjeQural.
So true it. is, thit Monuments themſelves are ſubjeft to Forgerfulneſs,
even while they remain: and that when neither the Writings of nen li-
ving ty the ſame age; or not long after their ereftion, nor uncorrupred
Tradition hath concurred-to grve them life 3 they uſnally ſtand rather
as dead objetts of popular wonder, and occaſions of f ables, than as cer-
tain records of Antiquity, | |


nz <_—_— w


Do


46 STONE-HENG RESTORED


Do = require an Inſtance, or Example of the truth of what I here
ſay ? Pleaſe you ro-converr your eyes upon that moſt notable Antiqui-
commonly called STO NE--HENG, on Salubwry plain ;
you ſhall chere find one moſt eminent, moſt fir for your purpoſe ,
moſt worthy your contemplation. For, though this Giganrique Re-
main be wonderfull as well in reſpe& of the ſtrangeneſs of ics Form,
as of the vaſtneſs of the ſtones, of which it 1s compoſed ; and therefore
among all the Anriquiries of this our Iſland, none ſeems berrer ro
have deſerved the commemoration of our ancient Writers : Yer ſuch
hach been ics Fare, that ir hath our-lived- ir ſelf, and buried as well
che Names, as Bones of thoſe Worthies co whoſe memory it was
conſecrated ; nor can you meet With any Rory of credit ro inform
you when, or by whom it was ereted. Having raiſed horror and aſto-
niſhmenr in the Beholder ; ic leaves him to entertain himſelf wirh
thoughts as varions,as che plain it ſtands upon is wide, and as confuſed,
as Ruine harh made ir tones : the proſpe& of ir ar a diſtance not more
delighting the eye,than the neer ſurvey doth perplex the brain, or che
dare of it amule the underſtanding. What the vulgar idlely feign of
the Rones of it, namely char they are innumerable, nor in reſpe& of
the greatneſs of their number, bur of I know nor what magical in-
chantment ſuppoſed impreſſed upon the whole pile, that deludes the
attempts of Arichmetique ; I find true of the Years of its continuance,
irs Bzginniog being as obſcure, as the Fable of Merlins tranſportation
of it our of Ireland, by witchcrafc, is abſurd and ridiculous ; yea ſo far
hath oblivion prevail'd,thit now we are in doubr, not only what King,
Prince, or General, but alfo what Nation it was, that bequeathed us
this Wonder for a Legacy.


The conſideration of this, together wick a certain deep reſentment
of che misfortune of the Founders of this prodigious Fabrique,who in
deſpite of ics greatneſs and durabiliry, ſeem utrerly loſt and forgorren,
as if they had enrombed in the bowels of the deepeſt Ocean, or
in the ſandy deſerts of Arab:4 : as it hath often raiſed in me a kind of
indignation againſt the enviouſneſs of Time, ( which hardly endures
chat Creatures ſubje& co morraliry in their Nature, thould be above
it in their memory,and,in derifion. of mans greateſt works, ſometimes
brings the River Lerhe co flow as well above grotind, as below ;) ſo
did it enkindle in me an ardent defire co conttibute my mire roward
the reſearching,who or what thoſe Worthies were, that entruſted their


remembrance


T0 THE DANES. 7


remembrance to this forgerfull Heap. And in compliance with this
defire, having from the neceſlary ——_ of my profeſſion bor-
reowed ſome hours,for the reading of ſuch Authors, as well ancient, as
modern, who have either lightly mentiened, or profeſledly created of
chis venerable piece of Antiquity, or others reſembling ir ; and equi-
rably examined che reſpeRive probability, or improbabiliry of their
different opinions Sm Origine, by comparing them wich the
agrecableneſs, or diſagreeableneſs they hold co the parts and proprie-
ries of the building ir {elf,and wich the concurrence of Hiſtory, Time,
Place and other circumſtances : I ar lengrh believed, I was arrived,
though not at perfect ſarisfaRtion,yer at reaſonable grounds for a Con-
jeRure, that moſt probably ir was a Monument anciently ere&ed by
the Denes, at ſuchtime as that warlike Nation uſurped the ſoveraign-
ry of this our fertil Iſland. After this, being further animued by rhis
medirarion ;' that if it be, as doubrleſs it 1s, a kind of Inhumanity and
Sacrilege, to deſpoil rhe dead of the glory due to rbem, by alienating
che memorials chafkRudiouſly left behind chem, and cransferring the
honour of cheir works upon Rirangers, who have no better citle chere-
unto, than whar the miſtake, or flatrery of after ages gave them ; on
che contrary,. it muſt be a ſort of Piery to endeavour to reſtore che
erue owners to the poſſeſſion of their Merirs, by reviving the juſtice of
their claim 2: 1 none 7 ge my ſelf che liberty ro conceive; the Candid
and Ingenious would take ir in good part, if by publiſhing the Rea-
ſons that induced me to bevf that Opinion, I modeſtly made them al-
ſo judges of irs probability ; contenting my ſelf only with the fimpli-
city and innocence of my deyoir, and ſubmicring my colle&ions ro
their wiſer examination. And thus you have the Occaſion, Motives,
Deſign, and Equity of thefollowing diſcourſe; As for-che Method,
and Style of it ; you will ſoon perceive the Oneto be ſomewhat con-
fuſed, the Other alrogether rude and unpoliſhed :-ſo that ir cannot be
denied, but I have in ſome ſort obſerved a decoram with the Monu-
ment I ſpeak of z; the parts thereof being now in great diſorder, and
the ſtones alwayes unhewn, as they come from the Quarrie. Bur boch
being Natural and nnaffe&ed, I hope yon will bear with their other
defe&s zeſpectally when you ſhall conſider, that in Arguments of this
nature, cleerneſs'df proofs, and authority of teſtimonies, and faichful-
neſs of quotations are much to be preferred before- exatneſs of Me-
thod, and Elegancy-of Phraſe,


You


$ STONE-HENG RESTORED
You, perhaps, have not'yer beheld chis Mohument, or at leaſt nor
taken a ſurvey of ir-in its ftarely ruines ; and, thereforegir beboverh


me to prepare yourhe berter ro judge of ics Antiquity, and Deſign,
by entertaining you-in che firſt place with che _ |


Deſcription of Stone-heng, by Mr, Camden.


& About fix miles from Sal;sbwry, northward ( ſaich He') on Sal:
© bury Plain, isto be ſeen a hug? and monſtrous piece'of work, ſuch
© 25 Cicero rermeth inſanan ſubſtrutiorem. For, within the Circuic
« of a ditch, there are ere&:d, in manner of a Crown, in three ranks
&« or courſes, one within another, certain mighty and nnwrought
& tones ; whereof ſome are twenty eight foor high, and-ſeven foor
& broad : upon the heads of which others, like overthwartpieces, do
&« bear and reſt croſswiſe, with ſmall renents and morreſcies, ſo as the
© whole frame ſeemeth to hang 3 whereof we aft ir ST O N E-
* HE NG, like as our old Hiſtorians termed ir, for the greatneſs,
o« Chorea Grgantum, the Giants Dance,


"Then, to illuſtrate his deſcription, He ſubjoyns this Draught, or


F; gure,


— >


'8 ono, ur 55I1q 51132 95r]q


=


_—_


li


one { — W _


E | >


2-5


k


Þ I


W
Ll


a
fame <(M


= You


LAWE" Aw)
4 =
/ WD
TAY


=


WY


-


{ (CR . ,


> = In;


DS |


TO THE DANES, | 9


Where A. denoreth the Perpendicular tones, called Corfe-
ſones, weighing twelve Tunn, carrying in hight
twenty four Foor, in breadth ſeven Foot, and in
compaſs fixreen: and

, B, the Overchwart tones, called Cronets, of ſix or
ſeven Tunn weight,


Here in all likelihood, You will a little wonder, -both by whac
way Mr. Camden could attain to the weight of theſe ſo ponderous
maſſes, ſo as to be poſitive in the afſignmenr of it : and why, having
firſt made the altitude of the Ere&ed Rones, or Columns to be rwen-
ty eight foor,he immediately,in the explication of his pourtraiQ,brings
ic down to onely twenty four foot, Nor, indeed, can I eaſe you of
char wonder ;- ocherwiſe than by referring the former to his meer
ConxRure, and the other to his Forgerfulneſs, Bur this tranſitory
remarque is of as ſmall importance to our main ſcrutiny z as His de-
ſcription comes ſhort of chat ſatisfaion, which is required to an exa&t
ſurvey of all partsof the wonder. Let us paſs, therefore, if your curi-
ofity and leiſure permit, . tothe more ample


Deſcription of Stone-heug, by Mr, Inigo Jones,


. Who being, and nor unworthily, called by 2dr, Web a his pre-
face to Ads, Temes his Book, entituled Srone-heng Reſtored) the Eng»
liſh Vitruvinsz and having, as Himſelf profeſlerh, in the 56. page of
che ſame Book, with no little pains, and charge, meaſured the whole
work, and diligencly ſearched rhe .Foundations of it 3 ſeems to pro»
miſe us a.more full account in all particulars, - - |


« This Antiquity ( ſaith He) becauſe the Architraves are ſer upon

_ © the heads of the-upright Rones, and hang as it were in the air, is
« generally known by the name of S2oxe-heng. The whole works
* in general, being of a Circular form, is 110. toor diameter ; double
© winged about, without a roof ; anciently environed with a deep
© crench, *{till appearing abour thirty foot broad. So that betwi't ity
< and the work it ſelf, a large and void ſpace of ground being lefe ;
« ir had from the Plain three. open-Entrances, the moſt conſpicuous
« whereof lies North-eaſft; Ar each of which was raiſed, on the out-
«de of the Trench aforeſaid*, two huge ones, Gate-wiſe ; parallel

C


6« where-


10 STONE-HENG RESTORED. -


© whereunto,on the infide, two others of leſs proportions. The Ttmer
« part of the work, conſiſting of an Exagonal figure, was raiſed, _b
« dye | rgoge! 1 the baſes of four Equilareral Triangles, whi

« formed the whole StruQure. . This Inner part likewiſe was double,
« haying within. it alſo another Exagon raiſed ; and all.char parc with-
« in the Trench, fired upon a commanding ground, eminent, and
« higher by much than any of the Plain lying without, and in the mid-
« deſt thereof upon a foundarion of bard Chalk, rhe work-it ſelf was
« placed. Inſomuch, that from what part ſoever they came unto ir,
© they roſe by an aſcending hill.


© Inthe inmoſt parr isa Stone pond. not much above the ſur-
«face of the Earth, and lying cowards the Eaſt, four foot broad, and
&« fixreen in length, W ich, whether an Alcar, or no, I leave to the
« judgment of others, |


© The Great ſtones, which made the Entrances from the ourfide
W& the Trench , are ſeyen foot broad, rhree thick, and ewenty
& high, . |


« Their Parallels, on the infide of the Trench, are. four foor broad,
«* 2nd chree thick z but ſo broken, their proportions In hight cannor
« be exatly meaſured. >


&« The tones, which make the Outward Circle, carry in breadch
"ſeven foot, in rhickneſs 3 and 3, and in hight 15 and 3. : each
* ſtone having two Tenons mortaiſed into the Archicraye continuing
< upon them, chroughout the whole circumference. For, cheſe Archi-
< rraves being joynred dire&ly in the middle of each of the Perpendi-
cular ſtones, that their weight might have an equal bearing z and
* on each fide of the joynt a Tenon wrought ( as remains yer to
& ſeen) : ir may poſitively be concluded thereby, the Archicrave con»
« rinued round about this Outward Circle.


& The ſmaller ſtones of the Inner Circle are two foot and 2 in
« breadrh, 1. thick, and 6. high, Theſe had no Architrave upon them,
* bur were raiſed perpendicular, of a Pyramidal form,


« The Stones of the Greater Hexagon, 7. foot and & in breadch ,
_- | «:hree


"mm


c({\\


'ny
tha. FR
\ uf" a


fo THE DANES.” tr
** chree foot nine inches inchickneſs, and twenty foot in hight ; each
« hayirig one Tenon in the middle.


« The tones of the Inner ons 2. foot 6. inches broad, 1. foor


* and © thick, and eight foor high ; in form. Pyramidal, like thoſe


© of the Inner Cucle.


« The Architrave lying round about upon the Perpendicalar ſtones -


« of the Outward Circle, is three foot and 3 broady ewo foor and 4
© high or chick. |


« The Archicrave on the top of the great ſtones of the Ourward
«© Hexagon, 16, foot long, 3. foot g. inches broad, 3: foor 4 inches
<« high. This Architrave continuing onely from ſtone to ſtone, lefer
<« berwixt every two andtwo, a void ſpace, free to the air, unco-
« yered.


< Afrer this Survey (and ſome other Defigns, that he fancied cor-

©reſpondent thereunto ) He obligeth his Readers with the whole

'« work in ProſpeQive, as it now lies in 1ts ruines, repreſenting ir ſelf
« to the eye thus. | |


The Figure.


In which P., repreſents the manner of the Tenons, of a round
© form, morraiſed into'the Archicrave of the Out»
__ . ward Circle : and |


©: the Tenons of the like form, in the middle of the
ſtones of the Greater Hexagon. _.


Refleing upon theſe two Deſcriptians, and comparing.cthem to-
gerhet wich due care : Youy'l find chem ar open yariance, and ng
' inſs many, andfo conſiderable particulars, char-'cwill be a.hard ras

for you' to keep them from mutually diſcrediring each ocher, For


(1.) Mr. Caniden expteſly affirn's, He obſerved the Ranks, oc
Coutfes, in which all the Stones were ereRed, to be only Three, one
wichin another, ; and fr. hh, as confidently ayouches, He found


them to be Four, C 3 (2.) The


:
A
bbef
X

5


Iz S TONE-HENG RESTORED


* (2. ). The Former faith all thoſe three Courſes are Circwler : the --
Later ſaith, of his Four, two only are Circular, che other two Hex-
agonal, K |


(3- ) Thi gives you a punctual account of Three open Extrances, %:
marked with rwo huge tones perpendicularly raiſed on the outfide of *
che Trench, and other two of lefſer dimenſions in like manner fired
on the'infide, in poſition parallel. : T hat is utrerly filenc concerning
any ſuch matrer 3 yea implicitly denies it, in that hee delivered, that
all che ſtones obſerved the ciccumferences of their proper Circles.


( 4.) Inlike manner, the One ſtumbles upon an Altar-foxe ( for

ſuch He conceived, and ſuch He would have us believe ir ro be, nor-

' wichſtanding his ſeeming to leave men to che liberry of their own

judgment in thar point : J over which che Other leaped cleerly, wich-
out ſo much as ever rouching it.


( 5. ): 1r. Camden aflignes ro the Perpendicular Rones of the
largeſt fhze, rwenry four foot of Altitude : but Afr, Jones will not al-
low them to exceed twenty foot.


Behold, here, a notable Example of the war of Mens judge-
enſe |


ments, even in things eaſily determinable by the | aud how hard
it 38 to diſcern truth with others eyes.) What, then, ſhall we conclude
on it the caſe ? Upon whoſe relation may we, with greateſt ſecuriry
ro our belief, depend ? If we compare the Repmrations of theſe two
Authors ; we findchem equally high and venerable: che One being
worthily efteem:d one of the principal Amtiquaries, and moſt Learn-
ed men of his time z che Ocher as worthily reckoned among the moſt
excellent 4rchitefts this Nation ever bred, and a general Scholar. If
we ballance their ſeveral M%:/:tes reſpeRtive ro the marrer in hand ;
no great advantage of weight;appears on either fide: for if My. Jones
were more converſant in YV:trzvim, and more exaR in the Rules of
Geometry 5 Mr. Camden was not ignorant of the Arr of Deſigning
raughe by rhe one,nor unacquainted with the uſe of the Other;as is evi-
dent from many paſſages in his immortal Writings. However, He
was certainly skilfull enough in the common wayes of meaſuring and
ſurveyinganot to be miſtaken in.che dimenſions and platform of Srone-
heng. If we compure the Times, in which they ſeverally cook their
draughty of chis Wonder, 3 the differeftice will be ſo ſmall, as not ro
ſalve.


70 THE DANES. 13


ſolve the variouſneſs of them : for, they were Contemporaries, and
not above forty years, at moſt, ſeem to have intervened betwixrt the
Writing of one and the orher, concerning this Argument. A ſmall
ſpace of time to wear off four foot of hardeſt ſtone from the heads of
the Pzrpendiculars or Columns ; eſpecially conſidering not ſo much as
an inch is diminiſhed from rheir fides. And much too-ſhorrt a rime ,
for ſo many new ſtones to grow up ing as Mr: Jones diſcovered more
than the orher perceived.” Laſtly, as for their Yeracity ; that's a thing
ſacred, admitting of neither diſfrure, nor compariſon z and *cwere
breach of Charity not to be confident of this z that both of them had
ſo great devotion and reverence toward the majeſty of Truth, as nei- |
ther would dare to off:nd her, by willingly deluding the preſent and
furure ages, With counterfeir Cerrificates, or by adding or diminiſh-
ing, where they pretend roexaRneſs and fidelity. And yer notwith-
ſanding, ſuch is their misfortune, and our trouble, we cannor give cre-
dit to both at once:rhat one hath miſtaken, is manifeſt ;rhat both were
miſtiken, and abour the ſame particulars, is improbable z ro derermine
on which fide the Error lies, is difficult, bur by a new ſurvey z and to
reconcile them in all points, ſeems impoſſible, . Wherefore, chough
the clue of my ſlender Obſervations upon the place, be not ſtrong e»
nough to conduct you our of this Labyrinth :-yer, I hope, my zeal to
crutch may excuſe my plainneſs and freedome, if I adventure to aſſure
you, that having more than once or ewice delighted my ſelf with view-
ing chis admirable Antiquity, and with all poſſible artentiveneſs of
mind contemplated che form, order, and parts of it ; I alwaies obſer-
ved Mr. Camdens Draught ro come much neerer in-reſemblance
both ro the work ic ſelf, and co the idex thereof formed in-my Imagi-
nation out of its ruines, than that bequeathed to the world by Mfr.
Fones, though much more-elaborate and artificial. Neverrheleſle ,
che Model I have conceived of the whole Fabrique in General, being
not caſt in the mould of ArchiteRonical Principles, nor adjuſted by
rhe maxims of Geometry ; but rude and ſimple, ſuch as my Eyes deli-
yered in to my brain : I think it not worth the labour of Copying ;
bur leave eyery man tothe liberty of fancying as he pleaſeth, when he
hath ſufficiently gazed upon the Original. . In the mean time, ler us
proceed ro our Capital Enquiry, #/þo were the Authors of this ſtupen-
d:ous Building, thar doth ſo amaze and amuſe ics beholders, |


What Scalger wittily and truly ſaid, in one of his Exereieaions;
concerning the nature of Colowrs ; viz- that objelts moſt cletr and 1w4-


mifeſt


14 STONE-HENG RESTORED


nifeſt to the Senſe, art often moſt full of difficulty and obſcurity whes
brought honse to the Underſtanding : holds true alſo of this Monument,
which is not thore conſpicuous to the Eye, for its greatneſs and emi
nency, than dark tothe Mind, in reſpeR of its original and founda-
ron, ' of which no certain remains are to be found. *Sothart we are
not more beholding to Time, for ſuffering the Sceleton or Bones of
cis Giant co ſtand ſo long ; than injured by ir, in that 'ic {6 ſoon


e Xtinguiſht the /ife, or fory of it.


For, firft, our moſt ancient, and moſt authentique Hiſtorians, who
committed to record the moſt memorable a&ions and traverſes of _
Fortune among the Britains -; and who may withgood reaſon be al-
lowed to have been not much above one age founger than Stone-
heng it ſelf-: have paſſed ir over in ſilence, as a thing, either of whoſe
Being they were my 1pnorant, or of whoſe Pp they were
utterly uncertain, So that from their Wricings, nothing can be dedu-
ced toward our information, |


And then, as for ſuch others of our Country-men, as well Hifori-
egraphers, as Antiquaries, Who living at leſs or greater diſtance of
rime afrer the former, have created expreſly of ir ; rhey deliver res
ſo various and inconſiſtent among themſelves, 1nd ſeverally ſo embroy-
led wich improbabilicies and incongruiries ; that they appear ro have
taken up their reſpeRive opinions eicher from obſolere and darkſome
rradirions,or from {lender and queſtionable authoriries, or at beſt from
plauſible conjeAures, So that from theſe Authors likewiſe, little is
_ to be borrowed roward our determination. However,it being my dury
ro preſume, you are not unwilling co hear theſe Opinions, what and
whoſe rhey are ; I ſhall nor decline the labour of cofKeRine and reci-
citing them fincerely- and farrhfully : eſpecially for as much as' many
things are well worthy our Knowledge, that cannot yet deſerve our
Belief ;, and even Filtions ſometinsrs have accidentally given light to
long obſcured veriies, * *


The Eldeft and moſt wulgarly received Opinion, then, concerning
the firſt Foundation of Srone-heng, is, that it was erefted by that [
much renowned Brittiſh-roman ( for, a Roman He was, waterna ex
parte, by the Mothers fide ) Aurelius JrrIOs 1 memory of thoſe


forr hundred and ſixty Noble Britains, im peaceable manner invited to
4 treaty of accommodation, to be held in or neer the Town of Ambresbu-
, ry.


TO THE DANES. 15


that bloody inyader and leader of the Saxons, Hengiſt ; and upoy a
x ab word 23. moſt ON on by bim and his =
inhuman confederates, upon the place in which they were aſſembled.
And che principal, -if not che firſt Aurhor of this report, was Geffery
Monmouth (1n1ib, 6, Hiſter. Britanmic. ) co whom I remic you for a
more full. narration of che manner how this perfidious Maſſacte was
defigned and executed, and how the Monument of Stone-heng was
ſer up, as a perperurl Memorial of choſe many Worthies, who there
ſuffered a Civil Martyrdome, being ſacrificed in honour of cheir
Country,


The Next neer of Kin to the firſt, as to Time ; though e diamerro

contrary, in all other reſpe&s ) is, That the ſame Aurelius Ambrofius
being deceaſed, his ſorrowfull ſubjetts, the Britans, to teſtifie to ſuccee-
ding Ages how high an honour they had for the reliques of Him, under
whoſe valiant dent condutt, and by whoſe conragein-ſpiring
Example, they had ſo often repulſed and defeated their ſavage Ene-
mics, raiſed this Magmficent ſtruttare over the place of his ſepultare,
as amoſt durable witneſs of his Heroical Virtues, and ther own grate«
full piety, And this conceir ſeems derived chiefly from Polydor Yir-
£il, who (:n bib 3,) relating the paſſages of warr, berwixt the Bri-
rans and Saxons of thoſe times, expreſly affirms ir-as a memorable
truth, in words of this ſenſe. ** In memory of his archievements for
« rhe liberty and good of his Country, the Bricans ſer up-a magnih-
<« cent Sepulchre for their General, Ambrefins, made of great ſquare
& tones, in form of a Crown ( obſerve here, how exattly Polydor's deſ-
« cr;ption of the gener.:l Aſpett of Stone-heng agrees with that of Mr.
« Camden formerly mentioned) in that very place, where He was ſlain
&« in fight ; that che forticude of ſo noble a Chieſtain, might be neither
<« forgotren among themſelves, nor lefr unremembred co poſterity.
& Which Monument is yet remaining in-che Dioceſs of Salisbury, near
&ro the Town called Amesbury,


A Third Conje&ure we meet with, which though of much younger
date, doth yer pretend to be grounded upon an Accident of Warre
ſo ancient , that we have ſcarcely any records of the a&ions berwixe
che Bricans and Romans in this Iſland, of cerrcainty above ir and it is,
chat Stone-beng was built by the old Britains as a Sepulchral Monne:
ment for their Magnammons, but unfortunate Queen, Bunduca or Bo-
adicia, Dowager of Praſutagus, King of the Iceni z who with all her

| IP principal


16 STONE-HENG RESTORED
pri neipal Nobility, and a numerous Army, was fatally overthrown in
attel by that handfull of Romans, »nder the command of Suetonius
Paulinus, then Lieutenant in Britanny. The-Father of this more par-:
tial, chan probable fancy, was the Tranſlator of Lucius Florns ( one
Mr. Bolton, as I have been told by ſeveral Scationers) and Author of
rhat ingenious Book, entituled Nero Ceſar, publiſhed De fonger agoe,
thanin the year 1624. who our of a certain exceſs of devotion tothe
Fame of chat Britiſh Amazon ( as each Hiſtorian muſt have his par-
ticular Heros, or Heroine, whoſe virtues he delights to magnifie aboye
all others ) willing to heighten her glories by all means poſſible ; and
raking advantage of cheſe words of Don Caſſizes concerning her fune-
ral rices, Britann humaverunt Eams magnifice, the Britans inhumed
her with ſolemn and magnificent pomp : rather chan ſuffer herco want
a Toomb proportionate to the grandure of her birth, ſoyeraignty, and
ſpiric, would needs be ſo courtly, as to beſtow cthat.huge pile of Rones
upon her to which the laws of Hiſtory gave her no right at all. Bur ler
us hear with what feryor of Zeal, and freedom of vote, He conferrerh
this favour upon the Lady, © The Story of Bundnca, ſaith He, | Ners
« Ciſar p.182,& 183.] than which neicher our own-noble Country,
&« nor the whole globe of Earth, hath a rarer, was ſo litle underſtood +
.« by Monmenth, as it doth not appear at all,-char ever the bare ſound
&« thereof arrived within his hearing. But had the pretious yolumes of
& the Cornelian Annals, and Dio Caſſins, and John Xiphiline (where
« her Heroick deeds are upon record to all poſterity) been within the
&« ſphear of his ſtudies ; not Aurelius Ambroſius, nor thoſe four hun-
& dred and threeſcore noblemen of Britain murdered in Yortigers
«Reign, ſhould perhaps have carried away with him the fame of this
«* Miterial wonder, but Her Magnanimous ſelf. * Higher than to Her
© no Books do reach, with any probability of a Perſon more capable of
&uch a Teſtimony, than ſhe ; and the profound oblivion which co; .
&« vers the Aurhor, and the firſt intention of rearing them, where now
« they ſtill defie the weather, doth ſtrongly fortifie my ſuſpicion, rhar
' « the ſthnes were conſecrated to the glory of Buxdaca, and of her
« Captains ſlain in her Quarrel, ſo long time fince as Nero Caſars
&« dayes, much above fifceen hundred years, &c, |


Here, after the recical of theſe Three ſo different Suppeſitions, 1
ſhould immediarely have proceeded to the Examination of them in
order : but 2r. Impo Fones having, not many years paſt, with fingular
judgement,and great pain, fully dereted the particular weakneſſes of

_- each,


Poe,
-» ns
* \ i »f-


*
&
«IF5f 21,


TO THE DANES. """


each, and improbabiliries of all ; and my Genius being alwayes ayeri©
co the dull and unproficable drudgery of tranſcriprion z I think ir ſuf-
ficient, if I refer You to His elaborate diſcourſe vpon the ſame ab-
firuſe Argument, while I apply my ſelf to the ſerions conſideration of
a Foxrth opinion, ro which His fruicfull Imagination ſeems to have
oiven birth, and His ample $kill in ArchiceQure, credir,


Mr. Jones his Opanton, they, of the Founders, Antiquity
and Deſygn of Stone-heng, 1s


«.T hat it was a work of the ROMANS, built by them, when they flo-
ri ſhed here in greateſt peace and proſperity ," and happily betwixt the .
times of Agricola's government, and the reign of Confintine the Grear,
about £560 years age; not 4s a Sepulchral Monument, but as a T em-
ple, and particularly conſecrated to the imaginary Deity of Coelus, or
Coelum, from whence their ſuperſtitions belief derived the original of
all things. TERS,

The Grounds whereon He advanced, and Reaſons with which He
endeavoured to ſupport this ſo new and firange ſurmiſe ;- being
brought into order, and feiv words, are theſe that follow.


Firſt, that the Romans were, and no other Nation could be Foun- -
ders of Stone-beng, He arguerh from ( 1.) the Magmſicence-; (2.) the
Order ; (3.) the Archite5tomcal Scheme ;, ( 4: ) the double Portico in
the greater C:rcle of Stones, and another Portico in the Cell, or Hex-
agon ; (5. ) the Manner and Poſition of the Columns of the Building z
and ( 6 ; from the Roman Re/:ques frequently found neer the place,


"y
Secondly, that it was a Temple, He would infer from (1. ) the /nter-
vall, or ſpacious Court round abour ; (2, ) the Cell, and its Porticoes;
( 3.) the Altar, and itspofition Eaftward ; ( 4. ) the Msxt, or Com-
Order ; (5.)the Aſpett of the whole Fabrique 5 and (6.) from
the Skwls of Beafts digged up in the circumyacent ground,


Thirdly, that this ſo plauſibly imagined Temple was conſecrated
in particular co the God, Coels ; He concluderh from (1.) the S:ta-
—_ 2. )the Aſpelt Hypethros ;( 3.) the Manner, or Form 3 (4)
che Or


er 3( 5. ) che Decorwns of the Qure' (6. ) the Pyrams


ru
D Figure


1338” cSTONEHENG RESTORED
ure of the ſtones ; and (7. from the Kr4ds of Beaſts cuſtomarily
ed inſacrifice ro that Deity. And this is the Summary of all thoſe


particulars, from whoſe concurrent hints He ſeems to have deduced
his Invention. |


An Invention exceedingly fine and ſubtle,I confeſs ; ſavouring of a
pregnant Wir, and no ſmall Learning, eſpecially in the myſteries of
ancient AtchiceQure in uſe among the Romans ; and therefore much
applanded by ſome of more than vulgar judgment : yet not ſo firmly
founded, as to be impregnable ; nor ſo clofely compacted in all its
parts, as to keep our all weather of Contradiion. Wherefore though
it be far from my defign to batter and demoliſh it ( for, incrath, ut de-
ſervesro ſtand, though meerly for the pleaſantneſs : ) yet my devotion
totruth, and the intereſt of my preſent diſquifirion concur to excuſe
my boldneſs, if having brought you to it, I adventure to ſhew you the
ſeveral Flaws, chinks, and defeQts diſcoverable therein ; leaving ir at
laſt co your own judomenr, whether it be ſirong enough ro ſecure any


7


mans belief, rhar ſhall ſer up his reſt in it,


Let us, therefore, begin at the Firſt Partition, 12, That Stone-heng
w4s 4 peice of Roman Archnettare ; and carefully view the ſtrength of
thoſe Reaſons'alleged ro prove it (oto be. Ma


( Fifſt,) As for the Mapmificence thereof ; what Ariſtotle (4. Eth,
cap. 2.) terms Mtyuoreenentthe I atines Magnficentiat: Majeſtas,
doth not confilt alone in'the Magnitude or Maſſineſs of either the Ma-
refials of a Buileing, or the whole Pile: ( for, then thoſe huge floncs
lying one upon another, call'd Wringchees , In Cormpall, would be a
mighificenc Airufture) : biitin an artificial Decorum, ' or agreeable
pulchritude conjoyned with greatneſs of bulk, Which two Quali-
ries meering togerher'in any Fabtiqueg cauſe it to preſent it felf roche
eye with a certain twofoldigracefulneſs or majeſty, that infantly rai-
ſetha kind of Reſpe&, -ahd where ir is rare and excellent, a'kindof
delichefull Wonder alfoihche'beholders. So thie-we ufeinor to call
Grear things, Majeſtical, in reſpeR of cheit large dimenſions alone :
nor Little things, Magnificent, notwithſtanding their Elegancy, And
this I conceive robe the adizquite notion of Moagnificenceamong z11
ArchiteQs.' * Now, according toithis notion, though the ſtones of
Stone- heng be; - indeet, -exttaordinarily bigand:ponderous ; yer for-
aſtmuidh as chey are cud, roveh,/cravoy, md diffortn amang thernſel ves,

| bo and


TO. THE DANES, 19


and defticure of any great Art or Elegancy in their general difpoktion
and conſtcuRion z I perceive my ſelf under no conſtraint or:neceſhiry


of apprehending it as a Magnificent building, ar leaſt in ſo high a de-
oree, as Mr, Jones would haye us believe, when He affirms, that be
twixt Rome and our 1ſland, there 18 no Monument, in which the Ro»
man Magnificence 1's more conſpicuous, than un this, If by Magnifi-
cence He meant {aguum apparatum, che difficulty of che Meang,
frengrth of Engines, mulcitude of hinds, length of rime, &c. neceſſati-
ly made uſe of in bringing rogerher, and raifing ſo many and To large
Rones ; then doth his Inference fall co the ground : there being many
ancique Monuments yet remaining, ſome in Exgland, others in Scet=
land, orhers again 11 Denmark.2nd Norway. ; Which conſiſting of the
like micerials, and choſe perhaps further fercht roo, could not but re-
quire like ftrengrh, labour, and arr to their ereion, and yer the Ko-
»ans had no hand in ſerting up either of chem: ; as ſhall be made ap-
pear, when rhe thread of my diſcourſe hath broughFme co mention
them more opportunely. Furthermore, what judicious Eye, that hath
once beheld rhe remi1ins of Dyocletiaz?s Baths, Nero's Palace, MMar-
cells his Theatre, Yeſþaſians Temple of Peace, the great C:rque, or
other the monſtrous buildings of the Remars in /taly ; can afterward
fancy any ſuch thing as Roman Magnificence in this formleſs Uniform
Heap of maſly ſtones ar Srone-hevg ? there being as little of propor-
rion or reſemblance bertwisr this and thoſe, as betwixt St. Pancrace
Church, -and St. Paxls; or as berwixt a Welſh montaineers cottage,
and the Royal Palace of Hampton Comrt, Nor am I alone of this
judgment ; for the 4#thor of the life of Nero Ceſar, formerly cited,
apprehended ſo lictle of COTE in the thing, that. fromthe very
Ryudene ſs thereof He concludes it (though erroneouſly) to have been a
work ofthe Britains,


(Secondly, ) As for the Order, which dr. Fores affirms to be the
Tuſcan ; that you may the more cleerly diſcern,whether any ſuch thine
was obſerved by the Builders of Stoxe-heng, in that work, or nor, it 1
needfull for me to pur you in mind at leaſt, What that Tuſcan Orde”
is, what Conditions it hath that are Common to the other orders alſo -
and what diftin& Proprieties, The Ancient Roman Archice&Rs ge
nerally divided their RruQures :n. parietes continues, & intermiſſos ,
into Zztire or Continued walls, and Interm: ſions made by Columns or
Pillars. Of theſe Co/umns they had, partly from the Grecrans, parrly
of their own invention, Five different Kinds, or ſorts ; which reckoned

D: 2: __ acoording


20 STONE-HENG RESTORED


according to their reſpeRive dignity and perfeRtion, are the Txſcay ,
Doric, Tome, Corinthian, and Compound, or ( as 1t 15. commonly na-
med ) /talic, The Twſcas ( which alone relates to our preſent buſi-
neſs ) eſt plana, maſſiva, ſeu ruſtica columna, finnl1s robuſto alicus &
bent artuato raricole, viliter amitto, is a plain, maſſive, or ruſtical
Column, carrying ſome reſemblance to a firong and well-limbed
Country-man, meanly clad ; as Fitruwixs (1:b. 4. cap. I.) not unficly
principally Three, according to Sr, H. Wottexs enumeration of them,
7 prima parte Elementorum Architetture, for the Excellency thereof
nk into Latin by John de Laet. Firſt, th2 P.llars of all che Oc-
ders are Rotwnde figure, of a Round figure. Por, though ſome con-
ceive the Column Arricurges, of which YVitravixs ſperks (1th, 3, cap.
3.) was Square ; yer Was it lookt upon as irregular, and never admit-
red into the orders, but among orher extravagant inventions, condems
ned by Him. Secondly, Omnes d1minunntur F contrahunt ur inſenſi.
biliter, plus aut mints, ſecundum proportionem [us alritudinir,ab tertia
parte ja ſui ſurſum, All are Contracted or leſlzned inſenfibly ,
more or leſs, according to the proportion of their altitude, from che


third part of their Scape, or lower part, upward. - Which Gai/ielme,


Philander, (one of the belt Interpreters of YV:truwvins,) from the exact


tanguan venuſtiſſimam diminutionem, as the molt com2ly and grace»
full diminution ; and moſt reſembling the Taper growth of Pine-
trees, from whoſe pattern the Figure of all Columns was firſt taken,
Thirdly, Omnes ſu9s habent Stylokat asy/altitudine tertie partis totins
Columne, cemprehenſa baſi & capitulo ; All have their Pedeftals, of
the hight of the rhird part of the whole Column, from the baſe to
the head, The Proprieties of the [ſcan order (to omit others cf
lefle imporcance ) conlift principally in eworhings, viz. the. Propor-
tion of the Longicude of che Pillar it ſelf, and the ſnterco/ammninm, or
diſtance berwixr Pillar and Pillar,” The Hrght, or Lengrh of the Pil-
lar ought to be Sex d1ametrorum craſſiſſime partis rnfertoris ipſins ſeas
pr, fix Diamerers of its thickneſs in che biggeſt parr a little above che
berrome. For YVitrawvins ( ib, 3. cap. i.) accounts the length of a
Mans foot to be the fixt part of his whole body, in ordinary dimenſi-
on : and Man,accordingto Protagoras, is T0 TOV. &T%/fav xouud-
Tov WeTPI ; of all. exatt Symmetry the Prototype, or firſt Exemplar,
And the /ztercolumninm, or Intervall betwixc che Pillars, is required
to be circiter quatwor illms dram:trorum, Of abour four Diamerers,


Now


.7O THE DANES. © 21
Now, theſe Qualificatiohs of the Twſcar order being thus ſer down »
on one ſide of che parallel : ler us turn our Eyes upon Stove-heng and
ſee what Analogy 15 to be found therein, - ro make up the other.” ( 1.)
At Stone-heng, very few, or none at all of the Upright Rones, or Co-
lumns are Rowund, nonor in any degree related to that figure ; bur
broad and flat, and moſtly reſembling Parallelipipeds, rather chan
Cylinders ; as the eye wirneflerh. - So that here is a manifeſt inconfor-
miry to the Figure required indifferently in all the five orders. ( 2.)
Their Contrattion, or Leflening upward is not Uniform, bur rudely
various, in ſome greater, in others leſs, in none inſenfible, in all irre-
oular : ſoas therein likewiſe they want the due proportion of Dimi-
nution common to all genuinely figured Columns. ( 3. ) They have
no Pedeſtals at all, being ſer in the ground ; which is a third incongru-
icy. (4-) The Perpendiculars of the Greater Circle are, according to
Mr. Joxes his meaſure, in altitude 15, foot and £, in depth 3. foer,
and in breadth ſeven foor, Where then is to be found the proportion of
Longitude to fix Diameters of the thickeſt parr of che Column ?
( 5.) Their /ztervalls, or middle ſpaces ſeem ro be abour nine foor.
For, Mr. Jones himſelf compures the lengrh of each Ep:ſtylinm, or
Architrave, continued in round from Column ro' Column, to be pre-
Ciſely 16. foot zand there muſt he half the breadth of che Column, at
each end, allowed for the meering of the two Architraves in the mid-
dle, if not for the more firm bearing of their weighr : ſo char mea-
ſuring the diſtance of che ſupporters, by the remaining pare of the Ar-
chitrave,' ir will be nine foot. Which agrees not with the /ztercolnm= .
num of T afcan Pillars. To conclude this prragraph, therefore ; ei-
ther the Conditions of the Tſca Order here recired, are not accord-
ing to the rules of ArckiteRure taught bY YV:rrwvim, and his excellenc
Interprerer, Sr. H. Watton : or Mr, Jones was miſtaken, when He
conceived the Order of Sroxe-heng to be Tuſcan,


(Thirdly, ) As for the Architeftonical Scheme, in uſe among the
Circle. by which He thought the whole work of Srone-heng deſigned and
formed 3 it is much _ imagined, than demonſtrated to bz really
therein, For( 1.) that Rule of Vitruvius (lib. 5.:cap.6.) ro which
He referrs us for c2reification z-1f you take ir intire, and not the later
half only, as He cunningly did, runs-thiv. Tpſeus auter Theatr: con-
formato ſic ef fatienda, nt quam magna kh eſt perrmetros 11, |
cemro medio collocato circumagatur linea rotundationts 4 1n eaque Qua*

t 97


_ more m—_—_—_ ee —_—


22 STONE-HENG RESTORED:


vor ſcribantur trigona paribus lateribus & intervallis, qua extremam
lineam circinationts tangant, quibus Aftrolagt, ex mobs CONVemen-
tia aftrorum, ratiocinantur, By the very firſt words whereof it is
molt manifeſt, che Rule ir ſelf concerns the defignarion, nor of a
round Temple, bur of a Theatre ; and che Contexe of the whole Chap-
cer following declares it to have been invented for a threefold uſe,
namely rhe moſt advantageous diſpolicion of the Proſcenium,” Scena,
and Orcheſtra ; the equal diffuſion of the voyces of the Singers and
ARors ; and the convenient ordering of Seats for the SpeQators, Bur,
what's this to Afr. Jones his conceipt of a Temple ; and ſuch a one toog
as muſt bear the Aſpe& Hypethros, ſive ſub divo, 1, e, open ar top ?
However, conceiving this Text might ſerve his turn, and the great
name of YVitruvim give ſome authority co his Phancy, rnat orherwiſe
would hardly paſs among judicious men ; he induſtriouſly uſurped rhe
quotation of 1t," by perverting the genuine ſenſe to a wrong purpoſe ;
and to the end his Readers might be the longer in finding our che
fraud, artificially omicring the citation of the particular Chapter, he
leaves them to a redious reſearch through rhe whole Book ; a labour ſo

oreac, the patience of moſt, rhough Learned, would not extend to the

enduring of it, upon ſoſlender an occaſion. ( 2.) The Queſtion is,

not whether this kind of ArchiceRonical Scheme were anciencly uſed
by the Romans, in ſome of their publick Zdifices ; but whether Stones

heng was formed according to ſuch a Scheme, or not ? Mr. Jores, in-
rw. hath expreſly affirmed ic : but, how hath he made it appear ?
Thar be hatch drawn four Equilateral and Equidiſtant Triangles wich»
in the circumference of the Greater Circle of ones, ſo as all the An-
gles are terminated in the circular line, is not ſufficient co prove it :
not onely 4. but 4oo. and many more ſuch Triangles, inthe area of a
cient, that he cell's us, the 1nterſeftion of the ſeveral Triangles fully
demonſtrateth after what manner the Greater Hexagon, wy, open at
Stone-heng, was raiſed from the ſolid wall environng the Cell of the
Peripheros : becauſe our ſenſe aſſures us, there: are no foor-ſteps or
remains of any ſuch ſolid wall of a circular form, raiſed where the in-
rerſe&ions of the Triangles are {\ppoſed to be made z and becauſe we
have no evidence, but tis ſingle word, that there is any Hexagon at all
in che work ; whereas, neither Myr. Camden, nor the Author of Nero
Ceſar, nor My ſelf, nqgany other (for ought T could ever learn, and
yet I have -enquired of any Gentlemen who had carefully ſurvey'd
| the


.TO THE DANES. 23


the Antiquicy, and were well able co diſcern a Hexagon from a Cir.
cle ) conld ever perceive any ſuch matter, Again, _ he ſpeaks of
Three Entrances leading into the T emple of Stone-heng from the Plain,
and thoſe likewiſe comparated by an Eqmlateral Triangle : yet is it
manifelt everi from his own Draughrs of che work, and irs Platform,
chat all chez Perpendiculars or Columns of che Ourward Circle are equi-
diftanc each from other z and if ſo, where are choſe Three Entrances?
or how ſhould we diſtinguiſh them from the other intercolumniary, or
yoid ſpaces ? All which conſidered, there remains ( as I chink) nortye
upon any mans belief, that Srone-heng was a Roman Scructure, in
reſpe& of the Scheme, by which ic was deſigned and compoſed.


( Fourthly,) As for the Doxble Portico reported to be in the out-
ward Circle, and another within the Greater Hexagon, formed after
the RomaMfaſhion in ſtruttures of great Magmficence : that you may
be the berrer able ro judge, wherher He were in che right, yea'or no ;
give me leave to acquaint You, what a Portzco properly is, what the
Roman Atchirefts called a Dozble Portico, and what Mr. Fones cer-
merh Port:coes in chis place. YVitrwwin( (ib, 5. cape g ) ferring down

recepts for the conſtruRtion of Porticees belonging to a Theatre ,
_ his diſcourſe rhus, Poſ? ſcenam Porticus ſunt conftituend e, uti
cum imbres repente ludos 1nterpellaverint , habeat populns, quo ſe reci-
priat ex theatro : *Behind.che Scene are to be made Porricoes,.to the
« endche people may have whicher to withdraw themſelves out of the
« Theatre, when ſuddain ſhowrs-difturb their ſpores. And Philander
cominenting upon theſe words, ſaith chus ; Portscnraddite ſunt ſacris
edibus, illuſtrium virorum don1bns, > publicis edificus, neceſſuatis,
aut rnamrmti,anmue caſa; (ub es ropentinas pluvias vitabant , uns=
bras ac frigora captabant, vars ſermotubies diens conſumebant, a me-
ridie ſnlem byeme, a ſeptenitrione aftivas unbras exoipientes : © To
& ſacred buildings, tothe houſes of great perſonages, ' and to-publique
« zdifices are-added Porches, fot 'rieceſſity,)or ornament, or delight ;
© under themchey ſhektredrhemſelves from ſuddain rains, irhey re-
-<rired forſhadeand-coolneſs, 'and' calked away the:day ; receiving

 <Sanſhine fromthe fourh'in winter, and-in ſummer ſhadow fromthe
©north. Promwhence ir is-moft cleer, moſt certain;that all Porticoes
are:additional ftruures, wherein men maybe prote&ed-from rain
and:furr; fuch.as the memorable 'Porricoes of Apollo!Palatinns, of Au-
-guſtus im oampo Martio, of the Pantheon, of Antonin Pins, :of the
Cupirat omrhe fide of rhe Capirotive till, in \Rowe. 'Of py =
27 291 . ome


HP — — — ——— =


w4 --
+ PF —_


—_—  —_— CR;


Es So : nr;


G—_——— WE. .o..om anos wv co


24 STONE-HENG RESTORED


ſome are made with parietibme continsis, ſolid walls on one fide, and
Pillars on the other ; as in all Persſty/iay or paved walks encloſed with
Columns, ſuch as the caſtly Palace of #rb:n at Rome is adorned with,
ſuch as the Cloyfters in Monaſteries , ſuch as the walks tinder the 01d
Exchange, andthoſe commonly called the P:zazzaes of Covent-G ar-
den. Others conſiſt of ſolid walls on both fides, with rowes of Pillars
ſer ar diſtance from the walls ; of which ſort we have a glorious exam-
ple in rhe Portico at the weſt end of Sr. Pau/s Church, in defigning
andraifing of which Ar. Jones himſelf was principal Ar-chire&. Bur
all are Tette, Roofed or covered at top ; otherwiſe how ſhould they
ſarisfie the uſe or end for which they were intended, namely co ſhelcer
men from exceſhve heat in ſummer, and from wer weather in all ſea-
ſons of rhe year ? As for Dowble"Porricoes, they are no wayes different
from fingle onss, except in chis only, that they have a double order or
range-of Columns. For, Philander interprering theſe w@rds of //;-
truvins ( loco citato) circa theatra ſunt Porticus & ambulationes, que
videntur ita oportere collocari, uti duplices ſint, habeantque exteriores
columnas Doricas, cum Epiſtylius & ornamentis, ex ratione modula-
tronis Dorice perfettas ; expreſly ſaith, Porticus Duplices appellate
ſunt a duplici columnarum ordine, Porches are termed Double, from
che double order of Pillars,of which they are compoſed. And theſe,
doubcleſs,, are rhe adzquate notions of Porticoes, both ſimple, and
double : and what every man underſtands, when he hears them ſpoken
of. Bur what Ar. Jones intendeth by Porticoes in Stoxe-heng ; ts
difficulc to be conceived from his own diſcourſe ; and more difficute
co be found inthe work it ſelf : ſo that we are confined co the liberr
of conje&uring: By the- double Portico, - therefore, in the ourwar
Circle or wing of Rones 3. He means either the double row of Pillars
ſet in round, of which the inner conſifterh of ſmaller Rones, ſuch as he
compares to Pillafters: or the ſpace berween each rwo Columns, with
atr Architrave over head, If the fir ff ; then ic may be demanded,
why che inner order of Columns are nor equal in altirude ro the out-
ward, as they ought to have been by YVitruvizs direRions, and as they
alwayes were in Roman double Porticoes ? and why is one order co-
vered with Atchicraves, the other not ? If the other 4 it may be'ob-
zjeacd, the Portico then canbe but fingle,contrary ro what ir is ſuppo-
ſed to be.The ſame may be ſaid likewiſe of che other Portico imagined
in che Greater Hexagon. But, whatever part of the Fabrique He fan-
cied to be a Portico ; thus much is evident, that-it will not afford de-
fence againſt the injuries of immaderate heat or: rain ;. and —_—
eſerves


TOTHE-DANES. » 25


deſerves not thar Title, in trifneſs of ſpeech, And it ſeems, He thar
cook the liberty ſoo call ir, was pur to a hard ſhifrro blanch over the
fingularity of his conceipt : For, ſtriving to aflerc ic, robe cuſtomary
among che old Rowan Archirects, to form the like Porticoes in their
Temples , and more particularly in ſuch Temples , as properly be-
longed to the Aſpe& Hypethros, or were Rooflels ; rather chan wanc
the Patronage of Vieravimws in the caſe, he was forced to deprave the
Text he alleged toward his- defence. The words there lying in this
order, ( lib. 3. cap. 1. ſub finem) Reliqua omma eadem habent que
Dypteros , ſed intertore parte colunsxas in altitudine duplices , remotas
a parietibus ad circuitionen ( ut porticus ) Periſtyliorum : not as He
- (pag-70.)Junfairhfully recites them,thus (obſerve I pray) Hypethros in
ket ervore parte habet columnas remotas 4 parietibus , ad circuitionems
( #« porticns ) Periſtyliorum ; adding and omitting what he thought
fir, A courſe highly difingenious, and in the end as highly ſcandalous,
For, whoſo-uſurps the licence of falfifying rhe Text of any Author ,
much more of one ſo grave and oraculous, as YVitruvixs, wharever ad-
vantage he imagines may ariſe from thence to his private opinion , in
caſe the impoſture be not dere&ed : certainly ic cannot countervail

chat ſhame and diſcredit that inevitably follows , when the judicious
and examining Reader ſhall come , by having recourſe to the Ori-

oinal, to find how groſly he might hav2 beendeluded , had he truſted

to the Quotation. And he that makes ns ſcruple to impoſe an error, by

corrupting another's Dottrine , forfeits the credit he expetts to his

own, and 15 a[mays to be ſuſpetted of partiality to his Tenents, eſpeci-

ally where he broacheth Novelties, and venteth them upon ns other

Reputation , but that of his ſingle teſtimony, It is bur juſtice , there-

fore , if meeting with nothing in our Antiquity , that anſwers to any

form of Porricoes, which, as Appendages to their Temples , were


having any other obligation co grant the being of any Portico there ,

beſides Mr. Jones his bare conje&ure , and that upon grounds obſcure

and fallible : I ſay, ic is but juſtice if we ſuſpeR , that He onely ima-

gin'dthem tobe ſuch,


(5) As for the Artifice.,'or Manner of Workmranſhip ſhewn in
Stone-heng , by which you are tounderſtand onely the pl2cing of the
Upright Scones, anſwerable to Columns; moſt true ir is, indeed, the
old Komans uſed to ſer the Columns of publique Fabriques, at ſo
much che leſs diſtance one from another , by how much grearer the

perh, E Columns


26 STOXNE-HENG RESTORED


Columns were in Diameter , naming char particular kind of range ,
Pycnoftylos, i. e. Crebris Colunmis , the cloſe order, from rhe cloſe
or thick ſanding of rhe Pillars, Nor is ir leſsrrue , that in our Mo-
nument) the Perpendiculars , chough extraordinary great in compaſs ,
have their intercolumnary ſpaces little in compariſon ; becauſe of the
weight of the incumbent Archicrave, which might otherwiſe break of
itſelf, And yer nevertheleſs I chink ir ſcarce warrantable thence to
conclude, thoſe Perpendiculars were erected by a Roman Artiſt, For,
if you conſult Vitrwvins ( lib, 3. ac 6H ) abour the true proportions
of the Cloſe order ; you may ſoon be informed by him in theſe few
words : Pycnoſtylos eſt , cujus mtercolummo numus & dimidiate co-
lumne craſſitudo interpon poteſt ; * The Pycnoſtyles is that, where the
© Intercolumnium, or Intervall, is equal to the thickneſs, and half the
© chickneſs of che Column ir ſelf. To whom Berna/dinus Baldus
fully afſents, in his explanation of the word Pycnoſtylos, ( Lexic, Vi-
travian. pag. 96.) where he ſaith; [nde ſpecies 1ſfa nowen adepta eff,
guod intercolummun ſit moduli unins tantum cum dimidio:; Then
if you eſtimate the intervall from Perpendicular ro Perpendicular , in
the great Round of Sroxe-heng , by the length of che Architrave be-
rwixt its two Supporters , according tro my manner of computation
formerly given, you will find it to be abont 9g foot, and ſo inconform
rothe Rule of che Cloſe order. After, perchance, you may give ear
ro my conjeture , Thar the Puilder had reſpe& chiefly ro the length
of the overchwarr Srones, placing rhe Supporters — » With=
out any other conſideration or precepr of Arr, rather of Neceſſity,
than Choice : and that if he could have been furniſhed with Stones
fic for Architraves, of larger dimenſions in lengrh and depth, (other-
wiſe they could nor have born their own gravity ) in all likelihood he
had proportionably enlarged the ſpaces of the Columns ; it being evi-
dent , he made uſe of the greateſt Srones he could ger , of both ſorts.
Bur this is nor material ; ic being ſufficient, thar che Rule of the Pyc-
oſtylos was not exaRly followed in the poſition of the Columns ar
Stone-heng ; and conſequently , that the Manner is not Reman , as
Mr, Jones would perſwade.


(6) Asfor the manner of fixing the Architraves upon the head of
the Perpendicalars by Tenons and Morteſes ; that likewiſe ſeems bur
an uncertain ſign of Rowan _— For, thoſe Archirraves being

ene


to be placed /» e/£gmi/ibrio, ſoas the point of Reſt at each end oughr
te. be there , where che weight was found equal on each fide: = the
Workman


TOTHE DANES. 25


Workman had codo roward their continuance in chat poſture, was, to
contrive-ſorofaſten chem , as thar no force of wind or tempeſt, nor-
any other ( unleſs extreme) violence , by diminiſhing the gravity on
one fide , might incline or ſway them ro fink dowh on the other ;
which could not otherwiſe be effe&ed ,, bur by corroborating the
e/Equil:briums byTenons made in theSupporrers,and lerinto heles or
Morreſes in the Archicrave, no kind of Morter or Cement being
ſtrong enough for that purpoſe. And thus much common reaſon
- might tech the Maſons, wirhour any great skill in _— or hav-
ing recourſe to either che Rules or Parterns of Roman ArchiteRure,
Which, perhaps, was the cauſe why Yirrav:ns ſpake ſo lictle of this
way of confirming great (tones in buildings, as taking ir for granted ,
rhe contrivement was ſo plain and obvious fo men, even of bur cams
mon underſtznding , as that it was needleſs for him coinfiſt upon any
Precepts concerning it : For, all I can meet with in his whole Vo-
lume, relating chereunto, is onely a flight, tranficory , and obſcure
rouch, ( /b. 2. cap. $8.) which is this, Qzod f qurs noluerit 12 1d
vitium incidere, medio cavo ſervato ſecundum Orthoſtratas intrinſe=
cur, ex rubro ſaxo quadrato, ant exteſta, ant ſilicibus ordinarits ,
ſtruat bipedales parietes, & cum anſis ferrets , & plumbo frontes
vintte ſint : ita enms n0n acervatim , ſed ordine ſtruttum opus poterit
eſſe ſine vit1o ſempiternum,quod cubilia & coagmenta eorum inter ſe ſe-
dentia,cy ſuntturis all:igata non protradent opas,ne 9, Orthoſtratas inter
ſe religatos lab; patientur.From whence nevertheleſs lictle can be col-
le&ed, rhar is capable of application ro the manner of banding ſtones
rogerher in our Antiquity: all that is, ve muſt be beholding ro the indu-
ſry of Philanderfor , who, after his interpreration of thz word Or-
thiſtrate , which f12nifies upright Props , ſuch' as the Tralians rerm
Speront, PJllaſtri contraforti, addeth , Inciduntur in his canales, in
qn2s, veluti in faminas, aliud quidpiam, ceuw maſculum, ineat com-
mittatur 9,: cnjuſmod: ſunt, quas noſtri Morteſias, quaſs Mordeſias ,
a nwrdendo, vacant ; commuſſure ſcilicet genus, cum perpet#» canals
Induntur , 1nſerunturve tabule., awt quippiam ſimile, Beſides ,
though M- Jores alleged the authority of Leo Baptiſta Albertus , the
Florentine, coptove, that in mighry Strutcures, where the ſtones were
of extraordinary greatneſs, ch2 Ronnys uſed to lay them Withour any
unAuous incorporating Marrer' between: yet he neicher hath , nor
couldb-ing under the hand'sf any Author a Certificice, thit' no ocher
N:tion did'the like before; or uficil after the Romans hid , by Cone
queſt, 6r-Cothmerce; civiliz'd rhetn.”  'And, therefore, ic was qo
| E 2 what


—_— _ . <FBE N :
SY *; IF. 4 o E ——
"DOSES SS Og i 1 ne ATT — Ce


28 STONE-HENG RESTORED


wh boldly done of him, to infer that Srone-heng was a Roman
ſtruRure , becauſe che Architraves were compaSted ro their Suppor-
ters by Tenons and Morteſes : when the Ex1mples of the like way of
Holdfaſts for huge ftones, among other Nations, ( ſome of which
were at that time barbarous ) are infinice , and ftand in the road-way
of eyery man's obſervation.


(73 And laſtly) Asfor the frequercy of Roman Relicks in Wilt-
ſhire, ſuch as Camps, Fortrefles , Trenches, ana the like, ſome of
which are even to this day diſcernable, at leaſt by their prints or foot»
ſteps, in places not far from Stoxe-heng ; I (hill willingly allow thus
much, that conjoyned with Hiſtory, they may be good reſtimonies of
the lodging of Roman Armies in thoſe plices, and of their military
rraverſes , during their War with th Britans ; yet, ſeeing they carry
no face of fimilitude, nor ſhew of relation ro our Anciquity, th Laws
of Logick will juſtifie my warineſs and unbelief, if T doubt chem to be
ſo much as probable Arguments of rhe Romans being Auchors alſo of
that Work.


Having thus. chread afrer thre1d, unravell'd'M* Jones his long Web
of Reaſons, which he thought ſo cloſely and arrificially woven , as to
be ſtrong enough to bind his Readers to a belief of his Opinion , tha:
Stone-heng w1s a Roman StruQure : give me leave to 2dd an Argu-
ment or two of mine own, of ſo much weight , as would have alone
been ſufficient to break aſunder his whole contexrure, hid I not weak-
ned it at all,


Mr. Camden, in the cloſe of his Diſcourſe concerning Stone-
heng., makes report of a certain Table , or plate of Merall, as ir had
been Tin and Le1d commixc, found in or by the Monument, in the '
time of King Hezxry the viij. whereon were engraven many Letters ,
bur in ſo range a Charaer, thac neither Sr Thomas Eliot , nor
Mr. Z:1ly Sghoolmaſter of Sc, Pauls, could tell what ro make of it ;
and ſo took no Care to preſerve ir. Now certain it is this Inſcription
was not left by the Romaxs, whogenerally wrote all their Memorials
in their own Language , whoſe Charaer hath long our-laſted their
Empire , continuing the ſame inall Ages z as appears even by their


; Coingofgreneſt Antiquity, andall cheir Monumencal Epigraphs , of


which Camden hath colleRed a great number, ſuch as have been found
in Exgland, and Grwcerns a large volume of others, diſpersd nor
onely


70 THE DANES. 29


onely through Italy, but all parts of che Earth, where ever the Roman
Eagle pearch'd, Nor doth it appear to have been either Greek, or
Hebrew, or Britiſh, or Saxon ; becauſeall theſe Linguages, and their
ſeveral Charaters, were well known to Sir T hemas Eliot and
Mc, Lilly, who were excellent Linguifts, and good Antiquaries, as
the yer living Fame of one, and Writings of the other teſtifie. Ir re
mains, therefore , thi theſe were Barbarexs CharaRters : and ifſo,
whac hinders , but that we may gueſs them to be Littere Runice ,
ſroe Gothice, th: Rumc or Gothic Characters, ſuch as were conſtantly
uſed by thz Dares in all their antique monumental Inſcriptions , or
Engravements ? Eſpecially ſince John Speed , in his Deſcription of
Devonſhire, writes , That near Exmo'e are certain remains of an an-
tient Work,, namely, mighty Stones, ſet ſome informof a Triangle ,
others inround, orderly T:lpoſed : and that upon one of them was an En-
gravement in Diniſh Letters, which could not be read by men moſt
learned. And thar grave and univerſally learned man , Olaus Hor-
12s, (Phyſician to the preſent King of De»mark, and not above four
ears paſt deceaſed , and who hath vouchſafed ſometimes ro honour
me with his Epiſtles ) in his firſt Book, cap. 9. de Monuments Da»
nicts, takerh ſpecial notice of this Inſcription , and deplorerh che une
fortunate loſs of it, wirh t:nam bono publico communicatum fuiſſet ;
ſorſan de rebus praclaris 4 mſtratibus wbidem geſtis teſtaretwr, Thar
the Danes of old, affe&ing ( as all other Nations of the world , how.
ever rude and illiterate ) to perpetuate the remembrance of their no.
table actions and ſuccefles, delighred to raiſe Monuments of their
Butels, ViRtories, and othr Archievments » a8alſo of their Kings ,
principal Commanders, and great Perſons z and leave ſhort Records
of che particular occaſions of choſe Monuments , ingraven in Rumc
Lercers ; belides this, that they hfd none hut the Gothic Language in
uſe among them , is manifeſt from the refimony of Saxo Gramma-
ticus , Who ( in Prefation, Hiſtor, Danic. ) recommends the obſer-
vation thereof to his Re1ders, as a thing neceſſarily conducing to their
underftanding many, otherwiſe obſcure paſlages in his Hiſtory, Wec
19u0t un volo, (aich He, Danorum ant1quores 5 conſpicu s fe ortitudims
oper: bus editis, glorie emulatione ſuſfuſos , Roman ſtyl: imitatione ,
nm ſolum rerum a ſe magmfice geſtarum titulos exquiſito contextns
genere, velnti Pottico quodam opere Kg tors * Vernm enam ma-
Jorum alta patrii ſermunis carminbus vulgata, lingue ſue literis
ſaxis ac rupibus inſculpenda curaſſe. And as for Precedents or Ex-
ewpples of that kind , they are ſo numerous , that Olaus Wormins his
wo


Jo STONE-HENG RESTORED -
two Volumes, De Monum. Damc. & de Literis Rumicis , moſily
conkiſt of ſuch : otherwiſe pethaps I ſhould have exerciſed your pa-
tience in reading ſome of choſe more conſpicuous ones commemo-
rated by Saxo Grammaticns, his Comment ator, Stephanus Stephanins,
John Cramtz.uus , and other Writers of Daniſh Antiquities ; char ſo I
might bave aſbſted the probability of my conjeure , that che Cha-
racters on the Plare found by Srone-heng , were Ranic or Gothic,
However, you have ſeen upon what fair grounds you mayentertain a

erſwaſion, that they were not Latine, and therefore not left by the
Romans.


Again, This our Monument confifterh wholly of Stones wrought,
roxgh, and rude, as they lay in their beds of earth, ( their Texons and
Morteſes onely excepred ) and of ſuch various ſhapes , that the moſt
curious eye can ſcarcely find a perfe& fimilitude in any wo of them :
and Mr, Joxes ought to have evinced , either by Teſtimonies authen-
tick, or by Examples , that the Romans had ever raiſed any publick
Structure of che like Materials ; which being above his-power (as Ig
conceive at leaſt) he warily omitted co attempt it, as he did the proof
of many other particulars equally imporrant toward the verification of
his grand Poſition, Whereas Olaus Wormins bath been o liberal in
his Contributions toward the maintenance of my Suppoſition , as ro
furniſhme with not onely verbal Deſcriprions, bur lively Draughts or
Pi&ures alſo of ſundry Antique Damſh Monuments , as well in the
Bulk and Rudeneſs of the Stones , as in the Order and Mafiner of
their poſition and fituation , much reſembling our Sroxe-heng ; and
( as may be not obſcurely colleted from a Conference of Times,
Actions, Hiſtories , Ruines, &c,) .not much different as ro
Antiquity. And this I chink an Argument not unworthy yout ſerious
conſideration; if nor weighty enough to counterpoiſe all rhe reaſons
urged by Mr. Jones, ro enforce his Dream, rhat the Romans were Au-
thors of Stoxr-heng.


Hiving thus long entertaine1 you , with examining the ſolidity of
the Firſt Story of our Archire&'s phintaſtical Building ; Time and
Ocder joyntly command me to uſher you uptothe Second : wherein I
ſhall no longer deram yqu , than while I try ch2 ſoundneſs of thoſe
Berms, upon which He finpoſed his ſo lofty conceipr, that Stone-heug
wasa TEMPLE, Which he preſumes |


(1 ) From


TO THE DANES. 3Y


( x ) Fromehe _ Cowrt lying round abour ic, agreeing wic!
thoſe of Roman Idolatrous Temples , wherein Beaſts broughr for

Viims were {lain , and into which none but Prieſts might encer. To

which ic may be objeRed , firſt, Thar the void ſpace beryixt the ur-

moſt Circutavallation or Trench, in Stoxe-hexg, and the Building ic
ſelf, doth not exa&Rly correſpond with the Atria of Reman Structures;
and therefore cannot , without corrupting the ſevere Dialect of Ar-
chice&s, be cermed a Comre, For, whoſo atrentively peruſerh Yitru-
215 his Diſcourſe De Atris , (lib. 6. cap, 4. ) will ſoon perceive ,

chat Hz by che word Atri*m, conſtantly means primnm edificium,
quod anteriori janua intrantibus gccurrit, the firſt Building that offers
ic ſelf ro the fight of rhoſe who enter by the fore-gate : And Berral-

dinus Baldss , mhis Note upon the firſt line of rhat Chapter, ſaith ,

Arbitramur nos vetera Atria , noſtrarum «dium parti 11h reſpordere,

quam vulgo Anditum 4:c:1ms, Andatam , Caminatamve ; que qui-

dem prima poſt ingreſſum oftii introgredientibus occurrit ; ea non

quidems ſnbdivalis , ſed tetta & concamerata, To which may be an-
nex'd the agreeable judgment of Claudius Salmaſins ( in Solinum ,
pag. 1218. ) apparet Atrium , primo non fuſſe veſtibulum ; ne,
arcam Hypathram; ſed partem adis ſub tetto, at g, adeo penetrale, &
fortaſſe concameratam porticum. Secing therefore, that the Roman
Atrium always was covered at the top, and moſt frequently arched

alſo ; and that there is no ſuch thing berwixt the outward Circle of
Stones, and-the great Trench environing it : Where is the Analogy
or Reſemblance ſuppoſed 2 Again, Indulging Him the liberry of our
yulgar phraſe, according to whichthe Area, or plot of ground , be-
ewixt a Building and 1ts Boundaries , may rightly enough be call'd a
Court : yer, where is the neceſſity , yea, where che probability, chat
char Court was originally defign'd and marck'd out for a place for
che laughrer of Victims ? Muſt all Struures environed wich ſuch
Aree be Temples? or all Roman Temples be accommodated with the
like our-lers? If (0, what will become of our Authors fancy , that
thoſe vaſt Srones ſtanding in a Circle near Long-Compton in Oxford-
ſhire, called Roll-ftones, were antiently a Temple , and a Roman one
t002 For, theſe are deſticute of all ourward circumvallation or en»
trrenchment, But he force of this. Argument depends, perhaps, upon
rs conſpiracy with its fellows ; and therefore , if from them all pur
rogether , it (hall appear , char our Menument was intended for a
Temple ; 1 ſhall no longer doubt , whether che void ſpace of ground
within the Trench be che Court belonging ro ir.
| ( 2 ) From


j" 5 TONEBENO RESTORED © ©
£2.) From a largeStone, 16 feer long and 4. broad',. "WF
nor much above-cbe ſurface of the earth , ages, Par means gr
lefler Hexagon," which He takes for an Altar, : W > I.cannor
aſſent, for two conſiderations. - Firſt , rbe Humili "Al


in his Deſcription of the Monument (as you may TR f
of three open Entrances leading from the Plain into the work ir ſelf,

che moſt conſpicuous of which lay North-Eaſt :  whichis y in-

confiftent with the cuſtome of the Romans , who always made che

orand Entrance into the Temple, whatever it were, & regione A{tdris

& Srgm, in chat part, which was dire&ly oppoſite rothe place. where
'the Altar and Statue ay; ereced z = rhe mop -y {{t ador af uns
venentes Drvinitatem ſuſpicerent , T hat the pe comi 'to

make their adoration , .. he ar their entrance have both Alt and

Image in front , ſo as to behold them ar firſt elevation of cheir eyes,

-Would you-bave-Authority for this? Hear YVirrnoice himſelf, des |
amen ſors Deorum inmortalinnm y ad regiones quas ſpettare debent ,
ſic erumt conftitnende, mi, (i nulla ratio rmpedeerit , "i fmerit
poteiÞ as adis, Siguum quod erit in Cella collocatum, ſpeftet ad veſper-
tinam cali regionem : #ti 9 adierint ad aramimmolantes y aut ſa-
crificia fagremes , ſpettent ad partem cali erientss , & , ſmelachrum
quod erit in alley & ita vora [uſcipremtes comueantur eden, & orien-
tem cali, ipſag, ſimulachra videantur exoraentiacommers ſupplicantes
& ſacrificantes ; quod g, Aras omnes Deorens peceſſe eſie videatur ad
orientem ſpeitare, (lib. 4. cap,5) Whence we may afely conclude,
that if the pokition of che- Altar were right , rene of the principal
Encrance leading up .to it was wrong. Burt thould we grape this-to
+, have -


"a. 5 {Gs 'THED'A?


onginal an -Alcar-
a Se Fas


as well Sacred, reg Sager
Temples ; nh adv was one he ba


Dares 3 even inthe = men ”

Alrars; IT ION OE Fs, -
mins, ( Monum. Danicor: 11h, 6k G "Drverfi" ab bis cernid
Tammli', ſaxir grandioribus wind s Tat mramg, extrend-.
tarem vole = rels, wjs Is ras medio — Ara
extat, Inhiſce vulgus Grgames ales credit, gorge


af fr


haud raro's talibss elites, Sede ejuſl "eps ut £46k et
mliis deſtinatos puts ,. yoo b1n Foy Th cla
pro totins gentis Yncolunirate .immolata'| Jab”. ALY if
you compir Stbne-heng, rogerhet with ouf ow ta of Giants

| incerc*d;and rhe 's als of Oxen or Buls plomred up ir the adjacent


fields ;.” You will find as mich reaſon ro believe ica_ tral Mo-
nument.(er up by chat watlike/and ambitious Nice , in therime o
theitryranby bers, wichan Altar in for cheit Pzoan ar
Tale... W's with M* | ly op Fe Rowan


Thc) mat uſe fi " ancient
EEE


Fry oe » ſuch as have indeed
gir-heade;Hur can hever hr pdow ned
not how ftri&


+ ny by ti
ſwrrewnde i 40 jt


| though ? our Stone-herg reſembles neither of theſe Forms : nor the
Maweorery becgpiie hath a Cell, as Himſelf ſuppoſerh 5-nor the Pe»
rypteros,, e It warus a continued wall to incompaſi that Cell, 2x
our eyes. Witneſs. - Where then is the Similirude and Conformiry/ ?
Why,"ratherthanfail, -our Authar ſhall advencure to-make thar like
co.both, which ceally is like to neicher. For Realing the ourward
Circle from che. Monopteros, and the Cell from the Peripterss, and
rhen again ſurrounding char fame Cell (not wich.a Circley as be qughe,
bur Y wich a Hexagon of Pillars : of both Forms He makes a 7hurd,
nor being able ro mrbbold from confefſing (ſo much had the: joy. of
his *Evpmu, Wha, tranſported him) iy the end, thar it was a New
Invention, Which yet he needed nor to have told us.- :$o here you find
him guilty of a donble fault ; confounding of two poiodly and irre-
| y diftin& Forms of ſacred Edifices ; and converting a'Cir-
cle, the effential and proper figure of all ſuch Cells, as belongedrothe
Perpteros, into a Hexagon. | Is this fair and candid dealing, think
you, in a man of Letters ? Noth it become one of che famous
| ArchiceAt of our age, chus co build Caſtles inthe ait, and flye to
ſanQuary made up of Fi&ions ? Bur this isnot all, From a ſtrangemd-
unheard of confuſion of ſeveral Forms, He proceedsto. blend toge-. -
cher alſo ſeveral Orders of conſecrared Buildings. For, He-will have
the Order, of which his Temple. of Srove-heng-mult conſiſt, robe
partly T »ſcans partly Corinthian : affirming, that ai the plainneſs” and
ſol:dnefſs of the Tulcan order , appears eminently through the whole
Work, ſo the narrowne(s of the ſpaces betwixt the - Stones," viſibly diſe
cavers the delicacy and ſoftneſs of the Corinthian, Where (horcortake
notice of the manifeſt contradiftion in the very terms Incutrs@
grand Error, in commixing, in-ons Temple, rwo ſo Ocders+
when, by bis own confeſſion , ( pag. 90. )-the Romans hadfor each of
their Deities @ cert ain particular of Temples, erved that:
diftinition of Orders ſe ftriftly, that they ſaldome or never-variedthems
According to that of Vitrwvixs, (lib, 4. cap." 7+) Non ommbus Dris
11 {dem ratiombus ades ſunt faciende, qued abies alia-varittate ſacra-
run Religionuns baket effeftns,, And: had they not done ſo, How
could the Roma Archites of old , have; been able CR
xp Divinicy this orchar Fane was peculiarly ? ory
y.could the Modern ArchiceQs of 7taly , at chis- Day ,- by ſeeing
enely che ruiney of chem , give ſuch- p! copjeAures z. cancern=


4


Sad AS Dedication , pag to be
ing era Srornggy brrhy.net of my timeandpains\ in
ware, Poets mma , that hath no foiindation,of either y or

enc- {rom ancient revichatien eſpecially when the Founder
Himſelfwas forced ro excuſe the fragiliryand weakneſs thereof 4 with
this Plea 3 T he learned in Antiquities, very well know, thoſe thin
which obl1vien hath ſo long removed er ores. " WeRApe tobe Fl
covered, ( Pap. 77. p; |


(4 Andlaſily) Frome the Healrof Bull or YOtes; of Hidrewnd
erher ſuch Beafts, digged up inor near this Antiquity asf no man
could imagine other, buc choſe were rhe Heads of ſuch Beaſts, as yere
ancjently made Holocaufts in thar place, Why » is it "not equally
probable, they mighr be che $knlls of Carre} flnn forthe ſaftenafice
of ſome one'or of thoſe many/Armics ,*that'encamped -on che
adjacent Plain, where the Lines of their Enrrenchments and* For-
rreflesare yer vifible > Was ic nor a common thing for Armies to
catry wr 1 with them whole Hetds of Beaſts for their Proviſion y and
to bu bones of ſuchas: they killed , a Lroiny bory by
from c = ofvand ? "And, boureekh ering VILges ah,
rradirion among bs Inhabiranrs of the” _ z and
by other reſtimonies yer remaining, char all chi Fone-hew
to Ambrerbityy , was , till within theſe 200 orion x Foref Full
great Trees; and therefore not improbable; burrbe- Heads of Deer

he rhere, withour any relation ar alt ro Stone-heng. | Birgrane
chem to be the Offall or Reliques of * reaſon, yy
ſhould be Ropaar Sacrifices , when the Day alſo uſed the like ,
may appear from what I larefy defivered'ont of Olans Parmar, of
the cuſtome of rhat Nation to offer Beaſts in Sacrifice rothe Ghoſts of
rheir deceaſed Commanders , upon their > x mer Monuments 2
__ Argynen afherofore, beingas 1 ebaee ave ge Srogerher

phinly ly obrents:

ha boo anenr Influence.over his Rezſon , = He net
upon fbch fender 1 Evidences , Sar our Front was anc
Roman Ternple: . qaptducrin) Ahn


we ſhoudri the nie He a ee <A
firling his StruMire ro Goa Calm: brtſedingit doth norap-
peat ro hrve been'4' Teinpte' 1 qwere ini yain/ tobefollicirous abour


the 2 Deditation of it. Omirring, _ rotake'norice 6f away
Defe&s


b


A


5x0" —_— DANES, | 33.


C-


5 TOFEWE NG neSrorED- Eg


mblem, of J; |
Book; amet ION dic Art ſub
10:t, Animadyetfion., at the en Xt it, Nunquan mh


ries mn rAt1o , 94 bs, wihil Fl tam olſeu-


pg


ADRIN 6 ea pry fig ns Fs
reproof of certain oycr-weening and audacious. Wits ,.chat thinking
chemſelyes quick-lighced enough co ſee chrough che .;darknels of obli-
Yian , and inake | diſcoveries agar yay Mo oe ong ince interpoſed
a  Fomere pm to lnd Tem le hey, in the
confuſi ruines of a. Tower ons s
Rennes £0-that pugpole councerf Geng Mar i Piflars, a kgs Ga je


en Opin ape rg


not t0.poinc at.chingsmnfi we Jeſcry in raki La ola eng, |
Founderschem(clves ever defigned., pr a co themſelyes Examples

ere, and. in favour of their own exrravagahtim
mes of Auchors moſt Jracrable, ud. che


| Wha che Romans claim ms , You lave | haink's «large + Heir:
ber a Pmpitieyapne $24 1 rb-RP


- The T de Ft DANES 1 Siehangy,


Which isgrounded chiefly | Cuſtom, and Prefidenc
that they, more than 4ny ocher Narion whatſoever, -were.in ol, Tag
anderen a goo ie her he reinemens of their barbarous Man-


ang) bich Mr
Ruments , that compar'd. $0 our (


of their.) Stone-ben » ſeem ro
TR meſs if not Cas ace ies,


IS #


.-+707HE DANES: '&
of many 4re/ rater | limo ne bl ins


£0 pcove,, / fomehe
__ Antiquariet,
 Qlans Marmaie: < lb. yo PETE j being bel"
onder.chac greaz-mulcicude- of Srony Monuments in his. Councry', .gf
Try as the.mplt worthy to. be. commemorated, He had propoſed to
himſelf to creat ; firſt makes a general divifion of themrinto.: Two
Claſſes : namely, Literata, que ex [axis conft abanj literatura pri (ca,
wulgo Runica, exterts Gothicay exarati,, Letrer?d Monuments , tuch
as confifted of large ſones , with Inſcriptions of Ranic, or Gothic
Charadters, ſpeaking their occ-(1ons and ancentions; and; /literarayque
ex rudibus quibuſdan uliteratis,certo tamen ordine & ſerie diſpoſitis,
Unlerter'd,, which were compoſed of rude ſtones, without engrave-
muy butiſo-daſpoſed after.a certam {manner , .as th © the;Beholder
from che order of cheir poſicion colle&, upon what Accidents,
forwhat Ends or Uſes-chey bad been ſetup. So thac T heſexoug
deftinue of he Elemancs of Language, were _ abſolucely. Dumb,
bur ſpake; chair parricular- es in a. more obſcure Diale& of Ft-
,and-were cead-in the. Alphaber of their proper. Platforms. Then -
iubgivide _ later ſorr por mo ditin& Ranks ; _—_—_—
Sepalchra, $ CONLaining © of eminentperſons def
Forw,: places of Judicature, where-Right and Juſtice, were admini=
red 4 according ro-the Laws and-Cuſtoms of the Country 2 Duel
larum ; Strara;Cirques-or places of Duetls, or Gamp-fights :: Trophea,
Trophies, where-Bartells had been foughc, yas 1 Enemy defeated
and Com:tralialoca, places wherein-Kings and Supreme Comman-
derswereeleaed by che general rurages of che People, and Inau-
gurated wich great Pomp and publi , ſuch as che rudeneſs
of thar Nation , and the limplicicy of choſe rimes afforded, This
Scheme-being drawn, as-the rule of his Method 3 He rhence-forward
proceeds to ofeach-kind. And weate obliged therein. to
follow blim ſtep by ep ; thacſo we may che ſooner ,, ng
viation., arrive at degfee of Gacigfaion., whether
| andwhich of all thoſe different ſores of Antique Monumencs h
neara reſemblanceof Stone-beny:, as thar. we.may, fromche apparent
fmilnude of rheir Forms, infer a probable char in their (ngew
and Defpgnations ; Which is the period of our erawail


; As for the Liter@e, whkch carry their Age ind Ticles engrnes


he


% RN "I 4 ; AY WY a "MY" Fn RN ER WY Go : | "
38. STONE-HENG RESTORED
a8 amr” og ry and chough chat Place of Merall with -

ous CharaRers, of which we have formerly raken notice; mighe
probably appertain unco,ic ; yer is n6t that ſufhcienrto riate it
rothe order of Mohuments ; whoſe dignity -and value*confift chiefly
in their Ep:graphs, Ranging it, cherefore, among the [lterats ; ler
ua while inſilt upon a particular ſurvey of thoſe: beginning ar the
| | Sepulcbres.: i oP ; *


Whereof I meet with ſome, in Olavs Wormins , thatare in more
than one poigt of analogy correſpondent to Srove- Heng.


_ One tands in Seland , ona plain ; near the high-way'leadiog to'a
certain ſmall Town, called Birck; formed according to this deſcrip-
tion of our Author. Ex ſaxis rudioribus mediocribus ', quadrata' in
longitudinem tendens, duttaeſt area; buic tres colles ſew T unmli in
eluſi, undig, circa radicem , ejuſdem ferme magmtudims ſaxis
cintti.” Major meditullinm occupans , 19 apice aram babet ex-ſaxis
quatuor Ft upende' magnitudinis exitruttum , ita ut tria quartuns
maximim & planum ſuftineam., © A plot of ground, of a ſquare
< running out in length , isempalled with rude Rones, not-of the
<« largeſt ſcantlings : in which are iticluded three Mounts of Earth,
<< oreareſt Mount , Randing in the middle, hach.on irs rop, an Alrar
* madeup of four tones of ſtupendious magnitude,'ſo as three iand-
& ing in Triangle, ſupport the fourth upon their heads, whichis-the
« oreateſt of all, and plain or flat. B2LIWP


A -Secord ,' firnate nor- far from the ſame place , and ſomewhat
more eminent, confiſterh of a 7 »»#lus; or mount of earth caſt up ,
der which , the common people have a Tradition,” that a Giant,
nanie was Langbeer K:iſer, wasantiently buried 3 and. encom-
= | mw fifry-fix peak Ahn rr _ _ hec ſaxe pere
4, reboat, ut concamerat um opus ſubeſſe colligere facile quis poſits
faich our Autbor -' rs maſſive d wc; wr Anock'd bard wich a


ſtone-, yields a great ſound like the Ecchoes of Vaults, ſo thar iris
ny - be colleQed, thar there is an arched ot vaulted hollowneſs un»


Here


ages, Loh" cy TO THE-D / ? " _— - gl |
. Here ler us make a ſtand for minuce or twoz and refle& upon a
few particulars char offer chemſelves to our obſervation, ._ Firſt, theſe
ewo Sepulchral Monuments are ſituate in Canpic patentibus, in open
and ſparious z acleer eviderice,. the Danes (as many orher Nati-
ons ) anciently uſed co-bury in large and»wide plains. Secondly, chey
threw up mouncs of Earth over their dead : and thoſe of rwo ſorts, ac-
cording roche qualicies of che perſons inhumed. For,of cheſe 7 »ma/z,
ſuch-as were ample; and naked, ſerved to denote the interrment of
Common Souldiers, togerher with cheir inferior officers, flatn in bar-
rel uponthe place : but thoſe compaſſed abour with great fidhes, ſer
in ſingle, double, or treble order, were deſigned co conſerve the me-
mory of great Captains or. Generals. For, Wormuns touching upon
cheſe 7 »my(:,left this remark concerningrheir Diſtintion. Ys; r«-
dzores ſunt, ex ſolaterra inrotunditatem & conum congeita conftant ;
ex 118, qui una vel multiplics Saxorum [erie circa baſin cinguntur, ex-
ercituum: Imperatoribus, aliisque Maguatibns dicati creduntur ;, ut
Sunplices nullis ornats lapidibus, miluibus fFrenuis, &- athletis de pa-
tia bene meritts, Howſoever, in thoſe Martial rimes; .when no ver--
rue could: render any man noble. or great,. bur.Forticude, and Honour
lay.in the. ſtcengeh racher of che Arm,. than, of the Head ;-the Armies
of-chis Nation conſtancly. preferred monuments of mighty ſtones,much
above thoſe Twml:;. or ( as we call chem );Burrows z nor ever enrru-
lied: che fame of cheir Worrhies roſuch fimple and homely conſervato--
ries, bur only in places where Rocks and Quarries were ſcarce.. This
we learn froma very-remackable cexc- in the Commentaries of Petra
Lindebergiss:  Screndum autem,. quod ' Dam, cum propter defettuns
[axorum, Pyramides ac- Obeliscos extruere numme potuerint, olim. in
memoriam Regum & :Heroun [uorum ex terra coaceruata ingentens
nw lem months initar eminemem ftatuerint. . From whence ic 1s very
plain; , chat che 'old+Daves.uſed not tg inhunje their Chiefralns. and
higheſt Commanders under Tombs of Earthz. bur. in caſe of neceſfity,
where neither che place of che barrel, in which chey were Nain (if they
dyed in war) nor the Country neer it, . afforded chem tones of dimen-
fions: fir for Pyramids and Obeliſques. . iſe they made uſe of
Bones of the largeſt ſize che ing no- pains nor


skill in Archiceure could amount to. Hereupon Worm 1s ; e/Etaris
progreſſu plas apere in Magnatum trwmulic poſituns ndetur, Nam, non
ſolum 4s gr andes cippo1 paris bteris notazos npoſnerunt ,  defunits

adolowes : 1 etiam tumnles ipſor tam. in epice, ' quam th


y could poſſibly ger :
coſt to.caiſe-rbem up inro che moſt magibcmnt Pabrignd, their liccle


titnlos eas


> p@ F


,


DO 3 . & 4 = »” 4." ow» td -«
STONE HENG XEST!
rf


-
=


% 4 4 ,
o


viſende magnituldinis cinxere ſaxis, aream inſuper quadrat ans
pr ao: gue torans molem gr androribus incladerer, &c, To which
we may ny ſubjoyn a parallel record of Chr:ſtianus Cilreine
 (tib.r. Bell Dithmarſici.) Erant, ſaich He, Magna ume Dancorum
[epulture in ſylus + agrit, twmwloſque ag geſtue i ws i'veftiemes
muniebant ; ard cenns complures paſſin wi + 941 Gigan-
ram Strata vocantur, 'Markhere the near afhnity of the-very Name ;
Stoze-þeng being by all our Authors, who have mentioned-it, called
Chorea Gig amums, the Giants Dance, and the moſt magnificent Storiy
Monuments of the Damſh_ Princes, Strata Gigantwm, the Giants
pavements or paths. The aſt obſervable is, char in many-of their
Lpulchril piles rhey placed an Alrar ; eo fine, faith Worminegut thidews
in memoriuns defunth quotannis: ſacra peragantur ; that they mighr
yearly offer ſacrifices rorhe defunR, at leaſt in memory of chem, upon
the place of cheir inhumation. Of chis we have a ſufficient confirma-
tion from a norte of {#bbo Emmine, (tth, 1.Hi for. Fris pag.21; ) Com
memratione di gnum videtur, quod rn Regione hac ingentts molis faxa
complura, que nulla veftatione , nulla vi hominuns illac deport ari potw-
iſſe , 05 magnirudinem credas,, congeſta inveniant #7, quorum ea diſpo-
ſptio oft , - Aras referre ry Nam PU wx=ay v3 alia
11s impoſita ſunt plana, reliFumque foramen, per qu:d reptare hon
Fr ee Jeſerves ohanteakbs, rhat [Oormcoyes hr |
** multirudes of Stones congeſted of fo vaſt maſles, thar you would be- ;
*lieve them impoſſible” tobe 'removed by any Engines; 'by aty the *
<c orcateſtſ{trengrh of Men ;'andfo diſpoſed, ' as'to repreſent” Alejts,
© For uponthe heads of fome;others are impoſed,of a plain figure, and
« 2hole or empry ſpace feft'undemmeath, through” whichs man may
* creep. Nor ought. it ro ſeerm'ſo fingular and Rranges piece of $u-
pertiriongors phleprixcique-n dull headed Northern Narion;ro fer
(p.Altrsim'the midiFdf fe $ Qaohond tmaffive Tombs'+ when Tem-
'ptes chemfelyes firt'grew ip of meaner Sepuſchies, '8ved Kriong
e Grecians. _ "This perhaps, you'[ {mile ar, as a paradox inp we
Tore ir behooves meto produce - ſome credible' Authofity 6 aNlett'ir,


V o
n *%
” C


© terpens Alex audrgins (38 Protreptico)1s the min, "whobeth
Shoal fe pind Bibetic tntnesro proverb. 6
"temple condbre Per uA MF. toy eddie | Sax
"Funt agnifiets YT roulita, | Tore Vocata Mts Nie
4 ll adss Ae; Vi ſepalebr ns


Len Lariſedn ortuevs'Te a H8s


Ib Mie fartieril led'beltly ares qloyue Atheiiienſ,
a 3 \ Corres fepnlchrin


oy
ut. ab A rtiocht iy wit P07 831 avs Joriprnns


furt


 £* > TO THE'DANDSd or 41
x" 4


wit tin templo'wero 5; quens Poliada Grass appear, jacrt
Nibaeg Bn Bowe here ulomho lang w Landed i place, and


- - it more imports us, to proceed to 6 2
« A'Third notable Example of Stony & in Denmark,


« Which compoſed of a Twhwiww'or" caſt up in the middle,
" _ chree orders Ne ge you ſer in — Anon at equal
< diſtance; the ourm ing a large quadravgle of fifty paces length
<< iyeach fide, the other ewo & Circles one mrichionochiry poo.
& ſents it ſelf to the admirarion of paſſengers, on a plain, abour a mile
&© from Roeſchild, and neer the high way thar/leads from thence to
«< F pram Of this Of. Worm bach given a perfe& Draughe,
« ( Monument Damcor, pag. 35.) TO ; I


For a Fow#rth, T have, among many others, choſen rhe notable Mo-
numenr of King Harald Hyldetard (whoſe courage, continency, and
wiſedome, togerher wich ig happy ſucceſſes in warr, are highly cele-
brared by Saxo Grammaticus ) which yer remains neer Lethra, or
Leire, in Selaxd, anciencly the ſeat of Kings, nowa decaid obſcure
village : ſax# grandioribiuus Fipatum, in meditullio immenſa mole qua-
dr ata, munoribns alits innixa exornatum ;compaſſed abouc with ſtones

- of extraordinary greatneſs, -and in the middle ennobled wich one
» Square ftohe,or rock,'of ah immenſe bulk;, reſting upon che heads of
ers of inferior magnitude ; whoſe piQure; t in coo ſmall a mo-


dule, is taketi alſo by our Auchor,


Now, from the various ftruQure of rheſe four grand Se nei-
rhet of which doth fully quadrate wich other ; ir 15m , che'Foun-
derswere" not firit in obſerving any ſuch ſer form of placing-their
- flones, that might ar firſt view. diſtinguiſh chem: from other Monu-
merfts z unleſs in chis onely, char che Exrerior Munimenr or pate of
great ſtones was commonly either exaRly ſquare, or neetlyapproacti-
10g that regular figure. be ſomarimes they varied from char alſo,

as Foymire himſelf confelleth. ” For, albeit in hisgeneral-deſcriprion


of the faſhion of this ſort of Sepulchres,he rells us, they hat! arcam quk-
dratam, que totam molemt grandioribues ſaxis includeret :\yer atret-
ward, inche ſame Chapter, he mentions ſome, that had not been for-
med according ro'that rule." \His\words are, Diverſe ab-his quidans
 cernivt ay timuls, figre"obluhyiari congerie depreſſions ſax. graz-
dioribus williqne' contig ira | ;


urramque extremiturens mole atts-
G od,


tr. reliquis clandant, Fe. Bur of this firft Kind of Unlertered:Dg.
nique Monuments,we hayetaken a ſufficient ſurvey. Let us paſs, there-
fore, ro rhe Second, viz. Fora, or | |


_ Where judgment was publickly given. concerning Right, and lit
gious ſures determined beryyixt ſubje& and ſubje, according to the
Known laws and conſtitutions of the country 3 and that either imme»
diarely by the King himſelf, where the parties concerned were Noble,
or the matter in controverfie 1mporranc z or ocherwiſe by his deputed
Judges, in caſes of leſs moment, Theſe Courts were, like Juſtice her
elf, naked, and open; ſtanding,ner in Cities,nor Towns, but in fields
and ſpacious campanias ; nor covered wirh roofs,but witha kind of rude
magnificence madeonly of a cerrain plot of ground,of a Quadrangular,
or Oval figure, ſer apart by an encloſure of the vaſi:t ones, thac
could poſſibly be had, - placed like Columns, at equal diſtance 3- with
one great ſtone,. for 2 judgment ſear, , in or neer the middle : .as ap-
pears from che remains af:Two ( anciencly.yery eminent.) yer viſible
m Denmark. . / S


The Onein Seland, neer the Cup Dzething 3 whoſe,manner of
firuRure,. and capacicy Of. Wermane having wich great diligence ſur-
de magnitudins cinftum furſie, eminente in cjus meditullis grandinſ-
culo qurdum:; onnia vero 1n ovalem diffoſita errant fignram, ita qui-
dens, ut utrinqu: ad-latera, circa medium porta quaſi, vel aditus pate-
ret meridiens & ſeptemtrionens- verſus. ay Ty WOnAgunta Paſſa 4-
s latirudo v1ginrs, This Forums, or Ling (in the Danrque lan-
guage-) was begirr abour with forry fix flones of wonderfull magni-
<« wde, and-had one great fiowe Randing in the middle :all che ones *
< of che Encloſure were diſpoſed-intoan, Oval hgure, ſo that about che
« middle, on each fide, was lefr as ir were a gite,or Entrance, one to-
« wardrhe Southy the other roward che North, - The length of the 6-
*-yal wasningry. paces; the breadth rwenty... -- | |


© The Other neer Aaſmumta2p , und/que_camp:bus ſeptum, hemm'd
wWonall fides with ones equal ro Rocks : which gave name tothe place

. where it Rands, thar beipg called Tinget, .torhis day, Manjodurof
1 r "


©.


N -
. "s.
-


_
y *%. -


—


24 243 = aA ts
Cu Ae Sites as
w we »


—__ = TO THE'DANES'®. uz
abe ſame kind are tobe ſcen' inocher Provinces of -Denmark.; ſaith
our Anthore rbpoere? | £


- _ Astheſe Courrs of Juſtice were rude in their Fabrique , ſo for
many Ages together,were che ways of :7r4al practiſed: in chem. [ For ,
from Frothe Magnics, who ſwayed the: Daonſh Sceptre , abour rhe
moſt happy rime of our Saviow”s Nativity , down along: until the
Reign of Senotts, in the year of our Lord 986. all weighty and diff-
cult concroverfies -were decided per MMonowachiam , by - the
Defendanc being obliged co combar the Plainciff openly wichin the
lifts of rhe-Courr, and prove the goodneſs of his cauſe þy che ſharpneſs
of his weapons, without. other Advocate bur his own courage, A very
ſavage and unequal manner of trial this ! where always che Sword of *
ultice was'-put inco the hand ofthe Criminal', where- many times
Right had no Vindication bur from Fortune, and che moſt Innocent,
if overcome , ' Was either co die-upon the place of his purgation , 'or,
what's more grievous, to become Slave. to bis unjuſt Accuſer. Yer
men were. hereto bound 'by a ſevere Law , made by the ſaid Frotho ,
and reciced by Saxo Grammaticus , ( Hiſt: Dame, lib/5, ), Aﬀcer ,
che Beams of che Chriſtian Faith Chining on thoſe northern Nations,and |
in ſome degree overcoming the gloomineſs of cheir barbarous Man- Zr [4
ners and Cuſtomes ; .chat Law was abrogated , and in che place of þ £1" Pug
Duels, the ſomewhat leſs cruel , bur not much leſs uncerrain way ofn 23
Trial. per  Ordelimom, by Fire-Ondeal ſucceeded ; and was continuedI*4f |
in. the ſame. Courts, till abour-che' year of Chriſt 3350. it was con-/f"" {ues 54
demned byna decree of the Lateran Council , and an Edi& of King ears 7p
oidemarne 11. an Extrat of which you may find in Wormins ,, 2 1159076
Monunt, Damic, 11b. 1. cap, 1%. ) Then began all cauſes. ro be de- gun naping
_ termined by the judgmenr of twelve Jarors , as here wich us in Eng- yr Y. lele
of nes ſirnamed Lodbzog , who ruled in Denmark about che year J- 4 nos atten
of Chrift $20.3 and as ſome Damſb Wrirers boaſt , was derived from? prices
him to out Erheldred ) but ic ſeems'mor to have been eicher by uni-j, Ha gh AHoorr=s
verſal_cuftome eſtabliſhed; or by Rri&-and penal Laws enforced, ſo as4 . C {n%% 5
rorally ro excluderhe-Ordeal in all-caſes, until the ſaid Woldemarne <_.7 ) oF nah
dom ares "


id


pn .


his days. And Harald the vij*, after the abolition of Duels , intro- 5

duced a new, but pernicious manner of determining contentions , by Va4222—
which che Parry" accuſed might purge himſelf of wharever Crime

charged __ him ; Solo jurameriti ſdcraments',' by onely his own

fngle Oath , 34g, comra omen teſtium fidem, and thar againſt the

_ & 2 cleareſt


TH | os A IRA agg rap = Yea ah TS ILY; WA x KEY =}
as ' STONE-HENG RESTORED | _
cleareſt reftimonyof Wirnefſes: as" Sax Grammat. hath left upon
record, (156. ij. ) But the unreaſonableneſs hereof was fo grear, and
che evil conſ ſo many, chat ir could nor continue long. Not.
wichftanding he ways of Trial were thus various 3 yertheplaces were
From which wepals to rhe Third ſort of Dangze unlerter'd Monu-

ments, Us. wee | 44 ?


Places of Combats , or Fights.


Theſe wete, indeed, always deſigned by Great flones , but nor
conſtant to any one Figure, ſo as co be thefeby alone diſtinguiſhable ,
withour rhe help of Tradition, For, though Save Grammat. ( bb, 1.
cap. 29.) willing to give ſome dire&ions, how, from the ſeyeral
Ordinarions of the Stones , Poſteriry mighr gueſs arighr at che ſeveral
caſions , npon which chey were ſer up ; delivers this as a general
Rule : Refto & longo ordine pugilums certamina ; quadrato turmas
bellantium, & ſpherico rk ye deſignantia ſepultwras ; ac cuncee
bidem, vel: prope , fortunatins trinnphaſſe -


ato equeftrivum acies 1
yet Wormirs profeſierh , he much doubred whether this- order were
every where ſtritly obſerved. ot not ; afterward alleging Examples
of differenc Pigures. | *;


One he mentions out ofthe Aurhot of H; For, Breneenfis, ( bib. 2.
cap. 9.) thitconfiting of one mighty Stone, 'was erefed'in memo-
rybf a Duel fought near a place named Agrimefwedel, in which a
famous Combarant , Biurguido , overcame and Nleyy-a Champion of
the S[avs, and acquired immortal honor. * ' 5 a


Others he ſpeaks of char were marked wich many hnge' ones ſer
equally diftanreach from other, in a #re:ght line; Torme that were
eruly Girques , and ſome Quadrangular : all which , * rogerher with
the Laws and Manner of ſuch-Camp-fights beryyixr che Champions. -
Damc.Jtib. x. cape 9. ) In che mean cimeThaſtento the Danſp


©. Trophies, ©,
Or Monuments of great Bartels fought'y and F/ithiries obtain'd, -
Which , though agreeing among chemſelyes'; In their durable and


I EPO "I" Y%8 fan wes et a6 _>S
TOS I © " i» 4 xt. F 7 IP  #
. ; Gs C 2 G , - ww” de.
 - TO THE DANES:
_-
*


_—;
miſſiz Mxterials, are nevertheleſs irreconcilably diſcrepant'in their
Forms. So that in theſe ,' as well as ir the orher ſores hirherro ſur-


vey'd, the Founders ſeem to have entruſted che remembrance of rheir

glorious Snccefles , as much ro the yoice of Fame, and popular Tra-
dicion , aSro the obſcure- ſignification of any one Figure or Scheme
obſerved in rhe Monumencs themſelves: or elſe varying} che. Plar-
forms of rheir Triumphal Piles , according to the various Tircum-
ances of their Encounters, and fortanate Archievments., and che
commodiries of rhe place ; rhey left Poſtericy, who conld nor arrive
ar certiin knowledge of thoſe Circumſtances , to grope afrer cheir
particular Scories, in the darkneſs of uncertain Anja. Fhts our
Aurhor, Of, Wormizs, was too ingenuous to excuſe, or conceal ; and
therefore chough , in compliance with the former perſwalion of his
Country, he tells us, Fnregri exercitns frragems lapidum quadrata in
plano d;ſpoſutrone indicaſſe , ** That the antient Danes by Rones die
& poſed intoa Quadtangle , ſhewed the overthrow of a whole Army
« of their Enemies, upon or near that place : yet he immediately ſub.
joyns , Yerum non whi 4, ab omnibus preciſe obſervatum fwmiſſe hunc
ordinem ac diſpoſitionem ſaxorum , plane mihi 5" ra 3 © Bur I
*« perſwade my ſelf fully , rhar this order or diſpolicion of che Rones ,
« was not preciſely obſerved by all, in all places, However, ic um-
porrs us not to pretermit an Example , or two, of theſe huge Trium-
phal Antiquities,


In che Dioceſs of Bergen, on a wide mountainous-place., near 2
Village, called Zyſnes, you may, wich a delightful wonder, behold
fix ſtones of ati incredible magnicude , reſembling Pyramids, erected
at equal diſtances, in'two ſemu-circles, one within another z each eti-
vironed with two entire circles of lefſer flones of Oval figure ; and in
the middle of the intercolumnary ſpaces 'in each ſemi-carcte , agrett
multiryde of the like ones heaped. one upory:another ,vtitl they
amornt coward a'Cone : andall in z moſt elegant order ,. ſerup in
memory of # bloody Brttel fought ypo«the place z as rhe people of che
Country report by hear-ſay from cheir fore-fathers ,- chough cheir re»
tions differ in many circumſtantial pareiaulars. ' After this: deſcrip»
rion., our Author addeth, Plwra-ejn[dem'peneris &f alibi im eaderns
Diaceſi videre & obſervare licet , fignra quidems divar(4, ſed enndem
in uſum fabrefatta. bo: I OEbs (TO gen” nba? 1h 2


Bur, what need we eravel into Denmark, for Patrerns of this kind
of


ſ


4 5 TONE-RENG RESTORED -

Monuments, when we have two moſt notable ones' here ac home?
jr: in Cormval, *another in Oxfordſhire ? which, if you haye noche.
beld with your owneyes, and dare give credit to M' Camdexs , you
may have chem repreſenced to you in theſe his Deſcriprions,


« Neat'S* Neothsin Cormwe! ((aich he) upon a plain adjacent roa
< gyondrous pile of Rocks heaped up rogerber upon one one of leſſer
<« fire, faſhioned naturally in form of a Cheeſe , ſo as ir ſeemeth co be

<« preſſed like a Cheeſe, whereupon it is named, #+:ng-Cheeſez are
< ro be ſeen many great ſtones , in ſome ſort four-ſquare, of which
ſeven oreight are picched upright, of equal diftance aſunder,” The
< neighbour Inbabiranes rerm them Hwrlers ;as being by a devout and
<< 2odly error perſwaded , they had been Men ſomerimes cransformed
© into Stones , for profaning the Lord's Day with hurling the Ball,
« Orhers would have it cobe a Trophy or Monumenc , in memorial
of ſome Bartel, And ſo doubcleſs this was, and nor improbably left
by the Danes. :


© Notfar from Burford , upon the very border of Oxferd-ſhire ,
<< 15an antient Monument , to Wit , certain huge ſtones placed in a
< circle. The common people call them Ro/l-r:ch Foxes, and dream
<« they were ſometimes Men , by a miraculous Metamorphoſis turned
* into hard tones. The Devel of them , ſuch aSiris, pourtraied
*« long fince, here I repreſenrunto your view. For, withour all form,
< and ſhape they be, unequal , and by ſong continuance of time much
"yg hche The higheſt of chem all, which without the Circle Took-
Fra nes the earch, they call che King ; becauſe he ſhould haye been
&« King of England ( forſooth ) if he had once ſeen Long Compton , a
&« liccle Town lying beneach, . and which one may ſee, it he go ſome
«few paces forward : other five, ftanding ar the other fide , touching
<2s it were one another , chey imagine to have been Knights mounc-
< ed on Horſeback z and che reſt the Army. Theſe would I verily
« rhink to have been_the Monument of ſome ViRtory,,. and. haply
<< ereted by Rellothe Dare, who afrerward conquered Normandy,
*© For, what cime He with his Danes troubled England with depre-
«4 dations, we read , that the Daves joyned Batre] with che Engl;ſh
* thereby, at Hoch Norten; a place for no. one thing more famous in
* old cime, than for the woful ſlaughter of the Emglzhinthat fough-
< ren field, under che Reign of King Edward the Elder, |


To


_ ” z
LASz x. =


To theſe may- be annexed another eminent Trophy',. known by


the name of Stipperfones, upon Heck owe Forreftin Shrop”
re » cnt et pls or hens a ethers like Rocks per-


+ Ri” + 4 by we # #* n - bY d ., q
RITIS Joints een, cy << Sy 3-e< -
© w ; A T .. © o . i ; : » \ [ ad
' :.. I \..- : v3] -


icularly er thickly together ,, and ſer- up to perperuare the
—_ of : Faral defeat given tothe Britans by Harald. Concern-
ing which- Giraldus Cambrenſis hath this clear teftitnony, Harald-
3n perſon bein ave the-laft. foorman, with fort-men , and , light
arms, pu: rp erable for ſuch an Expedition in Wales , va-
liam ly went round. about through all Wales, Py 4s that he left few or
none alive, And for a perpetual memory of this Viftory , you nay find
 wery many great ftones in that country eretted after the antique manner
n blocks z #n thoſe places wherein. Ht had. been Conqueror , wuh
. bh words engraven , Hic fuic Victor Haraldus :. Here was Harald
Canqueror.; Now theſe being ſufficient inſtances of Danigue Tri-
umphal Monuments , ic remains onely chat we ſearch after ſome of
their Loca Comntialia , or


Places deſigned for the EleSion and Inauguration of
their Kings.

In which, not onely their Noble-men and Grandees , but alſo the
Commons being upon-ſummons aſſembled from all parrs of che Na-
tion; uſed ro eonſulc and vote about matrers of State of greateſt im-
porrance, more eſpecially npon the death of che Prince; and in thar
caſe, to give rheir Suffrages for the.nexc in blood, or power, to ſucceed
him.. This buſineſs, 2s ing of molt concernment tothe Publick ,,
was performed with and ſolemnity anſwerable ; - che manner
-and Ceremonies whereof are conciſely ſer-down' by Saxo Gramma-
ticws ; thus. Lettiri Regems veteres affxis hum ſaxis inſſtere, ſuf-


fragiag, promere conſueverunt » ſubjettorum-lapiduns- firmitate fatti
A. ang Peas ©« Our Fore-farhers kevaro ele& cheir King,: *


« uſed ro Rand upon Rones pirch'd” upright in che ground,- and to give
« cheir ſuffrages; by rhe. firmneſs of the ſtones upon whichthey Rood,
« racitly.declaring,che firmneſs of cheir a& ,. and.as by a good Omen
_ «fqoreſhewing the durability of his (4+099) wg And Ol. Worn

more-fully deſcribing the. manner, both of the open Senare-Houſe , .


and of the EleRXion it ſelf, faith ,. Reper1#ntwr in his oris loca quedam
is quibus Reges olim folemm creabantur pompa , que cinita adbus
grandibus-ſaxis , mtplurimnm. duodecins ,_ conſp: cinntmr , im medio

; grandiove-


43> -STONE-H :
andiore quodam prominente, (61 nin un ſuffr agiicn o. Reems
kin, magnoque applauſu excipiebamt, Hit & Parc ag |
bant, & de regm ne, 1 conſultabant.. =_ vero defignatari \
Elettores ſaxts rmſiſtebant for uns cingentibus, decrets firmuitudinens pro-
munciantes : -inchis Country are , beheld certain -Courrs of Parlia-
© ment, in Which heretofore Kings were ele&ed with ſolemn face;
« whichare ſurrounded wich mighty Rones,for the moſt pare twelve in
<< number, and one other tone exceeding rhe reſt in eminency; ſer-in
«© the middle, - upon which (as upon a Regal Throne ) they ſeared rhe
© new elected King, by the general ſuffrage of the aſſembly, and in-
© augurated him with great applauſeand loud acclamarions. they
© held their great Councils, and conſulred about affairs of the King-
** dome. Bur when they met together ro-nominate cheir King, 'c
« EleQors Rood upright upon the Rones environing the Court, and
< piving their voyces, thereby confirmed rheir choice. (3


This rudely-magnificent Cuſtome of EleQing the ſupreme Magi-
ſtrate, in ſuch open circles of huge ſtones, and afcer ſuch a.manner ; as
it was of higheſt Antiquity, ſo was it likewiſe of greateſt Duration a-
mong the Danes, For, Bernhardus Malincrot ( in libr, de Archi-"
cancellariis, p. 158, ) chrough a long ſeries or deſcent of cheir Kings,
brings it down to the time of the Emperor Cþarls the fourth, ' wt
publiſhing that ſo renowned golden Bull de Elett:one Imperatornns,
gave occaſion to the abrogation of it. Lf:


Yea, ſo ſacted were theſe Courrs, and inſuch bigh eſteem and ve»
neration were they held, for many hundreds of years together ;'rhat
even .in time of publick peace and tranquillity, the Candidare Kin
was de jure obliged there co receive his ſolemn. Inauguration, and af-
ſutne the Enfigns of Royalty : as 'if the Place and Ceremonies were
eſſential parrs of his Hghe to-ſoveraignty, and the vores of his Ele&ors
mach more valid and authentique, for being pronounced in that F4- '
ram, And if it haphed that the King fell in ſome forein expedition
dy the hand of the Enemy, or by a leſs glorious death ; there enſued
an Inter-regnwns, ll ſuch time as bis ſurviving Army had in ſome con-.
venient plain brought. cogerher a mul: rude of the largeſt ones rhey
could poſſibly find, and ſer them borh for rhe interrmenr of his Corps,
and the ele&ion of his Succeſſor: and this as well becauſerhey reputed
an Ele&ion in ſuch a place, a good addition of Title z as becauſe many
oreat and irreparable incommodiries might redound ro'rhe RE

uring


Y n . Pat « L f ; $4 4
y p \ þ , a of =. Lea p TA a 84 3.
: =; 4 aw am fe rat.
* 4 - po - & " - . k ! l :
. Pa » 5
%
” . " 4


- dated ML Nb 4. 4a "LAS "a web-y | 4 ; , ,
v1 ALS of / L *@®DE:\ a. Is 1 ” as


ing that pauſeot reſpire of Government, in caſe the new ele&ion
— untilchey had returned inco their own Country, and
aſſembled: che beſt parc of _ GN Ae IO -EEOER Ty 7s 8
Kings-benches, as they may be proper y enoughrermed, confideri
cheir dignity-and- uſe; - To-authoriſe-this; winch"orherwiſe wgte bo
thought romantique, I am: provided -of atexr our of a-very |
' grave and faichfull wricer of chat Nation, Swemngins 3 which is well
worthy my recital, and your ſpecial conſideration ; being that which
g2ve me the firft hint for my-conjeRure touching the End or purpoſe,
for which Stope-heng was buile, The rext-is:this 3 Locuws publice
Regie elethons poſtquam incolss convenientems, ad quem, nulla obſtan-
te rtenerts difficultate, omnes qu erant vocatt, vemre poſſent,elegiſcext 3
ſaxa grandia finguler opera at 4, ſtudio conquirt, at 4, in eundum l0-
' Cum, quem eleltion; Regie bf narant, comportari curarunt, Ne,
enins 111, quemadmodum hodie, deſtinata-elethom Regum certa erant
loca, ſed pro arbitrio ſententiag, corum, qui autoritate of potentia alios
antecellebant, eligebantur, Huc comportata faxa conſcendentes hi,
quabus eligends j1us commendat um erat, circunſtante populo, ſuſfragia
ex 1tt frnkam :and may be chus Engliſhed. -© When for the publick
<« election of the King,. they had made choice of a place convenient,
<*.co which all-chat were ſummoned mighrs wich the leaſt difficulty of
«« travail, repair z they took care, that ones of exttaordinary greatneſs
&* ſhould be, -avith- ſingular labour and diligence, ſought forth, 'and
* brought togerher in the ſame place,. which chey had appointed for
. Trhe Royal EleRion. For, there were not then, as now a dayes, cet-
<rain appointed places for that affair-3 bur ſuch were choſen, ar the
« pleaſure and judgment of thoſe, who excelled others-in aurhoricy -
* 1nd power- Upon the ſtones brought hither, thoſe to whom the
« right of ele&ing was delegated, mounting up, delivered their ſuf-
'- <6 frages, che people anding round abour below.” The ſame inevery
parcicular is confirmed by the learned Stephanm. Stephanins, in) his
\ Commentaries upon the firſt Book of Saxo Grammaticws his Hiſtory
of Denma#k ; whither I remir the unſatisfied; 5! wy k f
As for Examples of this nobleſt.and moſt magnificent forr of Mo-
numents z Olau Wormnne hath: furniſhed us wich Three very conſpi-
Cuous ones ; one in Seland, neerLeire, called Kongftolon, lor Kings |
chrone-; another'in Schoxeland, not far from Zundie,mi which homage
was annually . paid to King'Olaw', - and Chriſtians the firſt was wuh
royal ſolemnity inaugurated and WROes with GIANTS:
bY IELSIP, | ir


__ "IEEE PENNE I DNS OLTE dt eo Eiite bes ORhs eh Rows =
go  S TONEHENS RESTORED —©
" hird JV row -in the a bric Pan” y, in hich p... ,


broned, as che name which rothis day it bears,ſeems-ro

wicneſs. \Andrhereaſon he gives, why chere is one in'each of theſe
chree Provinces; 'is, char ancienclyrhey were ipalicies,
and under the dominion of as many perry Kings 3 chough now redu-
06 ſoveraignry of a Monarch , the'p


- | Nor are-we deſticure of the like in Eg/and,” For, in Cormwall,
en 2 large plain, called Brſcaw own, near a village named St. Buri.
ens, ſtand erected, in a circle, ninereen huge ones, diſtant each from
the other abour twelve foot ; wich one one far higher and greater
than the reſt in the Centre. Which though Camden ſuppoſerh co be
FIome Trophy left by che Romans, under the later Emperors jor elſe by
Athelſtane the Saxon, when he had ſubdued che Cormiſb men 7 yer
confidering, on one fide, chat the Romance uſed nor toerernizetheir
victories here, or elſe where, by any ſuch Trophies ; and, on the other,
rhac there was a time, when che Daxes alſo had not only Cormwall, bur
all England belide, under their barbarous ſubjeRion z and that this.
Monument doth in all particulars correſpond with the Courts of E=
legions Royal in Deamaerk; of which T am now ſpeaking z conſidering
this, I ſay, no reaſon appears tothe contrary, but T may aflenc'to the
opinion of Formins, thar ir was, after a great defear-of che Engliſh
Sexons, by his Country-men, ereed' for the Ele&ion'of their own
Ring, and che inveſticure of him with che ſoveraignty of his newly ac-
"quired Prinapaliry, + Ds DOR-2tult SHPPP


- Here, perhaps; You'l be a licele ſurpriz'd, if Tadventureto make our.,
-Stone-heng ic ſelf bring up the rear of this laſt and moſt. Gigantique*
. " divifion-of Damigque Antiquicies. Bur, it is my ConjeQuure ; che ulri-
*-mate 'ſcope'of my-fo laborious Enquiry ;' che'/point' in- which all the-
lines of this long. diſcourſe*concencre. "Wherefore, having now at
lengrh brought you to a place, where You may at once behold the
 - firengthof all choſe ſeveral Reaſons, that conſpired toſuggeſt that 0--.
pinion rome : it is fir T ſhould draw them rogerher in as fmall a com-

| paſs, as can, andſopreſenc them £o your conſideration, while whar
hach been delivered both of atl-che Dawſh Unlecrer'd| Monuments in
general,.and in parcicular..of their Cort for Eleftion of Kings, is yer
freſh in your memory. / Andchis,I conceive, may be moſt —_—_—


*. £


- tion will have Dave the. firſt ro have been hkewiſe'elefted; -andin. |


and moſt advantagiouſly effeed by way of Parallel ;
np oor 4on = oe re oak ms mann: = 1-10


fn. VS OT ts. thts.
. A T” —_ > - ——— _— _
*\ 44 .. « by 4 4 44 £4 EIT" EL "+4 I, — —_
- =


-
a


The. dndiewt_ Courts of j 8 TON E-H BNG


/


Parliament in Denmark: - _
alwayes | -4 7 blewiſe E321
HA Et a


Ere fituated in large and CO in a ſpacious Plain , a-
'Y open Plains nor far from| \Jbowt two mules diftant from
ſome Town, of. competent re- | Ambresbury,” anciently a Town of
ceprion, at leaſt for people of the| g7e«t wore > and ©
beſt Quality : and 8
, &


II, I \£


In, or neer to the middle of chef - 1» 4 mediterranean or mid-land
Kingdom; chat ſuch as were ſum-{ Commry ; for ſo Camden' calls
moned to convene, upon the E-f Wiltſhire : awd
leRion of a King, or other affair
of publick importance, might re-{ *
pair thicher with,equal conveni-
ency: and | |


TIL II:


Upon a gently rifing ground, MH#ppon'a plot of ground ſome-
for t. Tt pref , and | what more eminent, than the tire
that che Common people afſem-| camjacent Plains which enlargerh
bled ro confirm the ſuffrage of | the proſet? of the. Prle, and whiob
che EleRtors , by their univerſal | caunot be approached but by an gafte-

applauſe and congratulatory accla- | aſcent, 0» all fides. _ -+
. mations.'; might ſee and. wirneſs |
che ſolemri manner of the ag]
on, ' |
w” ; | H2 IVY, Were


on


3s _STOMEMEN


IV.


. - Were open,on- the Top, and
fides ; tharſo'the King elect Ran
ding in-che middle, mighr be be-
heldfromall quarters of the neigh-
beuring Plain z and the Vores of
the EleRors the. better heard by
che multitude, Randing round a- |
bour, at a becomming diſtance.


V.
\
Made onely of huge ſtones, the
largeſt char could poſiibly be found
ny where in the Country ; rade,
u


2wn, of no certain figure,


— > ;


VI. |


.- And theſe fer upright, at equal
-diſtance eachfrom orher, in a Cir-
de ; -thar ſo the EleRors ſtanding
upon them might make a round :


VIL


. With one ſtone taller and bi
gerchanthe reſt, ereced in t
:Cehrcre,,for the King to ſtand up-
. ny, and ſhew himſelf ro the peo-
| ple, ar che time of his Inaugurari-
on,
. clamarians, wiſhes of felicicy, and


other teſtimonies of ſubmiſſion};
, and fealty, tits


—_


ANG ue} ces ts get
G- RESTORED . ©


-


5


and receive. their joyfull Ac.


| theirs


Ix I
EIT


I'V.


| 1s uncovered above, or rooflefl,
and - exvironed- not mth continn-
ed walls, but ftones pitcht up-
right ; ſo that ſuch as ſtand on any

ia: without,” may perceive what's


done within,


bs


—_


V.


Made of toner of vait magni-
tude ; and unhewy, , 45 they came


from the Ouarry, of no regular fis '
gure : and © bt "To


| V1.

Theſe ſet in round, equally di-
H ant among themſelves, and per-
pendicular ; | 5


VII.
| With one Stone, in the inmo
circle (now lying along and bro»
ken, but at firſt ſet upright, and
then probably placed at the very
centre of the whole work.) whoſe
Yempaini ng fragment 4 a together
make, according to Mr. Jones his


' accompt, ſixteen feet in length ;
Which XI Che ro have Cows
Kongfolon ( a4 the Danes call
Jr Kings throne, 4s an


| Altar


VIII. Witk-


" F Ac 4 I - i ©. . < 2 - 6. - NF 6; - — "
4, : Fei 2 548 4 _S — - W 4
my ad TO 7 £ 4 AN 4 x O \' "
- \ = | = » G ,
* -Y Th - w P. » 4 v
*


-
—_— ”


vn 1. VIIL,


Ep g74ph, cut, 'or


— Wichoup: any Inſcriptions, 0. |.  Having-w
Lectersingraven upon any one of | trenchs 4x any of the Ste
rhe Scones : becauſe the Fabrique| c Sy lent evidence - of
was ſufficiently Known by its pro-J 25 DeFenmen and uſe, 1n the fi-
per Form ; and the Uſe in pecu»'} gwre of :t5 plarform; and perfetti-
liar manner, cuſtomary to the | 0» 1# eo nevs 3.and ſeas
Danes, - _. hing uts ab ute Ar yi
| | dayes ) well- Lange e
of  utfneſ, and the ſims Re
it bore to others eretted by. the


2 A ſame Nation in their own Conmry,


_


»


Thus far, You ſze, the Parallel holds in all parriculars, [even to 4
high degree of Reſemblance ; there being no one thing in the Antique
Courts of Parliament yet remaining in Denmare , Which is nor to be
found alſo in our Srone-heng. - Some rhings, E muſt acknowledge, are
obſeryed-in This, more than in thoſe: and leſt I mighr be thoughe 0-
ver-favourable and partial ro my own Conceipt ; if-I ſhould omir ro-
no:e them ; I ſhall particularly obſerve what they are.


The Fiſt apparent Difference,then; conſiſts in this ; that i» Srone-
heng the number of ſtones 15 much greater. - Which norw'rhſtanding
may wichour much difficulty or Rcaining be reconciled, by refle&ing
upon the” Examples of che Cougg of Ele&ions-Royal in Denmark ,
newly alleged. For, though Of. Wormite ſaith, that thoſe conſiſted
for rhe moſt part of cwelvo huge ſtones ſer npright, afrer rhe manner of
Pyramids, or Columns, in the circumference of a Circle, 'and one,
more eminent, in the Centre : yer ſo far is he from confining all of the
ſame ſorr to thar, or any otherdefinite number, thar he brings ſeveral +
inſtinces of ſome char came ſhort of; and others that- much exceeded
ir. Sochat from thence we may ww colle&, that in old time che
Danes made their Courts, of this, Kind, ſometimes of fewer, ſome-


rimes of more Columns .; according tothe ſcarcity, -or abundance of
 fictingſtones,in che Country, in; which'they occaſionally raiſeg chem ;
if not allo accerding to the leſſer or greater number'of Eleors,. who
- | = EE | Were.


4m TTONEMENGRESPORED
were to ſtand and yore upon them,, Noris ir to b arded, that
.ar Stone-heng, the \ 29 ran bo at leaſt, char may be called a
Circle, which really is a Pogo» ; fuch flar and broad Pillars, being,in
of theit wanc" of Convexyy on'theit ott- ides, cy
(pe\K Cir J conan only rele lt { Thich ape
th che moſtancient patterns,


-


reſ
maxe 2
exactly ;
The *Second is this, that Srone-heng hath Three citcular orders of
Stones, wherets the Orhrrr have to mote chai ove, Which nevet-
theleſs may receive? farisfaRtory Solucion, as the former, either from
the greater plenty of convenient Rones in #77/rſhire, yea in ſundry pla-
ces nor yery remore from the work ic ſelf, of which wee ſhall ſhortly
have occaſion to rake parricular notice :. or from the greater number
of Eleftors, who being of the Nobilicy, and principal Officers of
Armies, in proceſs of time were multiplied co a more numerous liſt,
chan in former ages, as may be obſerved in all orher nations alſo :- or
perhaps from hence alſo, that Stoxe-heng was deſigned both for a Se-
pulchral Monument of one King,or General, chere ſlain in batrail. ;
and for x Court of Ele&ion for his immediare Succeſſor. For, you
may remember, T have already acquainted You, how uſinl a rhing it
was amongſt the Dazes, rocelebrate the Funeral of one Prince, and
ſolemnize the Inauguration of anorher, at one and rhe ſame time, and
im one andthe ſame place z perpetuating rhEmemory of borh, by cir-
cles of vaſt ſtones ; and that Texemplified this in rhe maſſive Tomb
of King Harald Hyld:tand, which was both a Sepulchral Monument
for Him,and a Court of Ele&ion for ſucceeding Kings, for miny ages
afcer. Nor have T omirred, to ſupply yon with deſcriptions of rwo
Famous Dariqze Antiquities, that confiſt of a Threefo!d order of
Scones, all of mignirude equal co,Mf not much tranſcending thoſe of


Stone-heng.


The Third, and [aft point of Diſparity is; that in Stoxe-heng, rhe
outmoſt and infnolt rounds of Columns are furmſhed wich Eprſtyles,
or Architr@ves, reſting upon their heads ; bur none ſuch are found
upor' che uprght tones in any of the Courrs of Ele&ion in Denmark,
Bur, this, as the two former, may be.referred to rhe grear abundince of
fuch tones 'in //ſpire, more than in ahy province, of Dexmark, ;
where theywere not ro be had but rarely, as 1s intimated in chat rexr -
of Petri Lindebergins formetly quoted, Dani cum, propter defeftuns
Saxorum) prramides & obeliſcos extruere minine poraerint, olims it
Wer 141


$2 Ru 4 ba” * b. 74 wy ” F n | 2 _ p ” \ n; ol 4 k 6, 'V 7 if 6a
- S . f 4 - 4 L

o c Hh 4 LY + I - u Ss ©

: - . « , : '


minwian Regis & He Tum ex terra coureroare
montis inft ar eminentem fhatuivre 5 © The Danes when they could»
Knoe, forwan ry ere Pyramids and Obeliſces, hererofore


$O \ © Ss


« they caſt upa huge Mount of Earth ,in'tiemory of rheir Kings and
- Heroes.” Nor was it unuſual e6 chem £o raiſe up from the ground
Rones of wonderful ſcanclings); 4nd impoſe'themi; (in manner of Ar-
'chitraves, upon'the tops of orhers; eſpecially in their works of greareſt
Magnificence, and where theyinrended to raiſe. admiration in potie-
riry, at the prodigious ſirengeh, and extraordinary meansrequired ro
_ advance ſuch huge weights, roſogrear'a hejghe t' a8 I have formerly
proved both by authentique Teſtimonies; | and - agreeable Examples,
Being, therefore ; through the forrtinare ſucceſs of their Arms, in poſ-
ſeſfion of England, and afſembling in Wiltſhire , where they mer wirh
ſtore of materials fic for rheir purpoſe z a ling to chemſel[ves ro
ere& a irely Monumenr,1frer the faſhion of their own Country, with
ſome addirion of vaſtneſs correſpondent - ' ir is not improbable , thar
they made choice of this kind of SuperfiruRure of Archicraves,or plain
long fones laid  overthwart upon the rops of the Columns z as thar-
which might both hold ſome analogy with other Monuments in their
own Nation, and alſo be of conſiderable uſe , in affording m=2 con-
venient and firm fooring for ſuch perſons of honourable condirion ,
who were pfincipally to give their Vores ar the Ele&ion of the King ,
Aandingin round upon the ſtones; cperuly when their lace” Viories
had augmented the Rock of their. Nobility, and who, perhaps, were by
chis rime more than could and upon the lingle Columns, and needed
the addicion of Architrayes ro ſupport them at che Solemniry;


- ” And thus you ſee, how che points of D:fſiwilitude br Tnconferavity


berwixt Srone-heng, and its more antique Patrerns in| Pane-land ,.


may be reaſonably Tolved. However, it cannot be denied , bur chey
are, both in number, and weight ,” much inferior to the- particulars of
che precedent Parallel or Reſemblance: and therefore oughr/ nor to
be pur in the Bilance againſt 'rhf&m/," nor to be ” of ſuch - ime
portance, $ ro derratt from the verifimilicy of my Conjeure, thar
Stone» heyg was principally, if not wholly , deſigned” and raiſed for a
Comrt- Royal, Sore]


"= Bit; 'chis Diſcovety/( ar eaft'y if ir may deſerve-char nate?) is a
work of SuperctbHrion; my underenking fromrhe irff, having been
onely co mike it On bin probable , 'thar Srone-beng. originally:

was


Ws 74,


EY YUNG


TORO I Ou nn ha


—ſ — Pare: = a. Te TOR IN Po = e\ 34 ol hy
.3TAN RED Had
_


why ha beng tc BE Which f *, lhe :
ey Pars 8 qi $097 Ligmes.s


'Nerenhelet, 1 mult nor fo 8: ere n wt f = |
unworchy ſecious -conſi Bus ge $5. aps ;
anrient


md:


,

"bſh in; upon the Lhe n "Hard; {Make For, ING Author,
. in whom any wordis found concerning it, was Geffery of Monmonth,
who ( rogether with his fellow Hiftoriographers, Willtans of Malmes:
Pp bury , Henry of Humington., and Simon of Durham: lived; in the
days, of King Stephen. ocontemprible Argument, England
no ſuch Monument, as Stone-beng , was, exranc , until the Danes had
oyer-run - and. conquered this Nation-:- it being hard 'to conceive,
that choſe Wricers, who commirred ro record mtrers of much ſmal has
moment , and (according co the Monkiſh humour-of choſe: darker
rimes) Co much delighted chemſelves in relating, wonderful acci-
dents, and extraotdinay:adventutes ;' would have condemned to ohli-
vion ſo eminent a thing as Seene-hew , and in a deep ſilence” haye

paſſed oyer the moſt admirevle Antiquiry of Great Britain.”


And as for.che volgar Conceit char the great decay Ms Strabdars

ſhews it to have been more antique, than the Daniſh Invaſion and Con-
weſt heres, it may be eaſily ſolved by anſwering , chat the, ruines-evi-

Trnce themſelves co be the effeR , not of 7s ime, ( the ones. chem-

; ſelves being of a temper To compaRt.andhard , char the iron reerh. of
| that conſuming Enemy cannor gaaw or corrode them; nor. any force .

of rempeſis impair them.in rhe leaſt ). bur of che ſacrilegious violence

of Men, 'who no Faveriromn down moſt:of: che Architraves »/and re-

moved many of the more porrable ones , - converting them to private

uſes in-Buildings{Land-marks, &c. as appears by ca tobe. ſeen

in the neighbouring Villages and Fields,


Ahdif- the greatneſs of injec nee cams IS mucheſ
oughe the# aftne(s and-Sexpendions L ; , when it was
extife and enſagyece, co be chotughe-ſu ſuf neo difpolieſs che ed


engaging che whole Nation a
purſes.c quake wire work Ben an =oar Teri
| chis>che itory of Nerwey affuresus ; inehe lit of Haraldus Har-

fagre, y nr y: Shagees char Country., conſumed three whole
years, anda vaſtcreaſure , -. 3G. 359 Mount , and
fencing ir abour wirh Nonevof irude, And Saxo Gnam-
maticus (_lib. 16. Hiſt. Dame. wk glorious ations of Ha-
rald, Girnamed Blaatand, the ſon of Glrmeadand Thrra, ( daughter
K. Erhelred of Evgland) among other his grear- exploits, cells us, chac
« He ſec his whole Army, and another of Oxen, on work, c& remove,
6 © fromehe Jutland (hore, one immenſe Stone, or litthe Rock', and
iccothe place, whereche body of his Mother {ay inhumed,

66 Bran ereting ic over her grave, he mighe at once erernize' che te-
« mory of her virtues, and of his own A iety.: "being ſo farele-
vated with the glory of the attempt”; chat he y demiinded of
ene ofthe Officers of his Navy,.. min veer ' An tavtans alias
molens mortals manu tentatam conſpexerit, - © If ever he had ſeen”
<< ſs mountainous a Bulk-underraken to be.tranſported by morrall
* hands. Upon occaſion of which very retacion, Ol: Wornins ( Mon.
 . Danic, pag, 39.) concludes'y Non igitur in ſnuptibus parentalibus fa-
ciendis ulli gents ceſſiſſe vident uy oft ates , of ies hi Tumnli
0/1m conſtiterunt , quam hodie a nobis oft eftimant wr 3 © Our Country- _
<« men, therefore, ſeem inferiour ro no Nation,in ſumptuous Funerals
<for cheit Anceſtors, and cheſe Sepulchres heretofore coſt mugh more,
Pre in _ days imagin'd, Eco chisafferrion yer fur-
ther , give meleave to urg&-one pertinent and pregnanr teſti-
many; oiief the Preface of theſame Sexo Grammat, Danicam re-


1onem Giganted quondany' cults exercitam ,. eximie magyitudinis


AXA 2 buſtis ac ſptenbus affixa teſtantur. Owl fi qurs-v1 mon-
ftroſa ys ambigat , q am montrun excelſa hier,
cat 4, , fi callet, quis eoruns verticibus cates taunts


Nr

vexerit, Tnopinabile nas g, E oata miraculs hujus eſtimator advertet, -

ut molens ſuper plano unmet vel difficile mobilens, in tam am montane

jakanoalis of apicems ſimplex er at labor,” auth 'uſttaties humans

roborss conatus' extwlerit, | Wirim vero talil ay reYMom Adthores poſt

dilwvialis inmndationts excnrſtins Grganes extiterint\, an viri f corporrt
I oIrs


%


= _Y > et AIP IEEE "TRE PRs ” * ET he SY þ "wv £1 L 7 60% ls”,
. i - * y 4 one Cans <{** « hy l - ; = Ig wy b b_ Cy 4 : as =
> - \ 4 bo , py Y >: -.
| ST NG RESTOR |
” a , = > ny
. - 3» 4 , l
" -


Uribus ' ante alios pradits'; parum notitietradirum.””. ** That Dar
* lard antiencly was inhabited by Giants, ſtones of wonderſal mag-
** nitude, affixed-tqrhe Sepulchres and Cayes of our Anceſtors, bear
** wicne(s. -; Which if any doubt to have been effeKed by monſtrous
© ſtrengrh, ler him behold rhe rops of ſome Mountains,. and tell, if he
© be able, who broughr thither Rocks.of ſuchimmenſe grearneG, For;
** every :competent-Judge/of this wonder will perceive it to exceed
© the imaginationof man.,, how che meer labour of Mortals,- or uſual
** effort of human ſtrength could advance to a point of ſuch mounta- /
© nous ſublimicy', a weight not atall, or not withour extreme diffi-
« culry ,. moyable even on plain. ground, Bur, wherher the Authors
© of theſe mighty works were Giants , living 'after the -Deluge was
*fallen ; or Men endowed with extraordinary firength of body :+ is
«not to.be. known from Stoty. - /Now , if any nnprejudicate-man ,*
having heard theſe teſtimonies , ſhall firſt enquire'of- our. Hiftorians ,
what mighty Armies, and numerous ſwarms of people , were brought
cut of thoſe Norchern-Countries to infeſt Brita», rogerher with their
- too proſperous ſucceſſes in many fights ; and then conſider wich him-
ſelf, what ſuch 'vaſt numbers. of men employed at once ,- and am
| biriouſly co-operating in ſuch a work ,, might be able to perform; ar
afew years, yea monrhs, and thac by meer natural firength, withoue
any great skill in Mechaniques, or the Art of removing great weighes
by Engines : certainly,.he will find no difficulty in admiring ic cobe-
as poſhible, and perhaps more probable, for the Daves 10 have broughy
the great ones ar Srope-heng.to that ground., and there erected them


any ocber Nation,


-. Eſpecially when iris moſt probable, that thoſe Ranes wete ferch'd*
no farcher off, chan from 4ib»ry or Rocky, about rhree or Four miles
diſtant from ſarleborow inthe ſameCounty. For,in the Fields adjoyn-
ing tv thoſe cwo Villages,and principally the later (which as Camden
obſerves, borrowed irs name fromthence ) there. ſtand up'great Rones
like Rocks, infinjee. in number ; -all which perfeRly reſemble: choſe ar
Stone-heng, in colour,.graing hardneſs , and brariching of-yeins ; and_
many of them alſo in figure and proportions z- brought thicher , asis.
walgarly, and perhaps. not untruly; believed, by the violence of the-
univerſal Deluge, and there lefr in Vallies, as the force of the currents
abated-.. 1 Theſe ſtones Fi my ſelf have often. ſeen ,. in journeys to-
Z$ath-fromLonden;and comparing thera with hoſe at Stepe- heng,founds
| 7» ſo,


option, the/Founders of chit
Materials from rhe fore-named


Mare med places 3" among ſo grete '4 imulrirude
ſele&ing ſuch, as in mignicude and ſhape ' might Fefic comport with
. their defignes ; and rranſporring chem from thence. Bur How ? or


by what mraxs 7 Thar's the grexeſt wonder of alf !


Concerning this grand Difficulry  - therefore, I ſays, Thar chough ©

the unlearned. Vulgar miy be diſpetiſed withall , © Lceire the tran-
:ſportation of ſuch ſtones”, as an effe&of more than Human Arr and
Strength ; and accordingly to bave recourſe to the ridiculous Fable of
Merlin's bringing them out of Tre/and by Magique Diabokcal, andthe
help of Spirits :* Yer £o Scholxrs atid Travellers, the martec will ap-

"pear to come (© ſhort of che:Miracle; 'as ſcarce toattatn ro-a Compa-
riſon with ſundry other performances , not onely 'of the Ancients ,
but of the Moderns aid, in che like kind. |


For , among the e£gyptian Monuments of extraordinary fabour
and magnificence, we read in Herodotus (1ib. 2, cap. t75-") of one
huge Pyramid, built by King Cleopes Fin which was not one ſtone leſs
than 3o foo long , andall of them fetch'd from Arabia the Rocky :
and how- Amaſis, another «Egyptian Monarch , had a hoe of plea-
ſure-for himſelf, cur ove of one entire one, 12 cubits long, 14 broad,
and -$ high; and alſo-made rhe Scatue of a'Sphynx,, or e/£ gyptian Car ,
of another bngle one, which,wasin lengrh143 feet, in heigheh 62 ,
and in compaſsof the 'Head 102. And Drodorns Siculus ( Biblioth,
lib, 1. (et; 2.) reports of SeſoFFris, a"third King of e/&gypt , that in
Aa Temple of Yulcan at Memphis ,, he ere&ed two Statues y ' one for
himſelf, anocher for his wife., each of one ſolid Stone , and 30 cubits


Among the Tew:ſh, we'read in Joſephus ( de Bello Judaic. 1ib, 6.
cap. 6. ) of chree mYgnificene Towers built by Herod, in whicheve-
ry ſtone being of whice Marble, was 20 cubits long, 1o broad , and
5 high : and-which was. yer more wonderful, the old.wall it ſelf was
ficuared - on'a Reep rifing ground : io that 'tis ſcarce imaginable by
» hart puiſſine means ſo-many ſtones of ſuch prodigious weight, ſhould

be taken whole our-of the Quarrey , and conveyed co 4 place of ſuch .


Among the Grecian, we read in Plixy ( lib, 36, cap. 14, ) thac
wt 1 2+ in


Dee gongr x COhgOGs.. :
; hw Rawas, beſides rhe - ng Fig
eiral, ( dedeperdit, trewls 31,.) of fundry Obelroks, made: of foiany *
whole ones; whereof ſome were 40z ſome 80, others go cubits high ;
moſt of them brought from-e/£gypr co Rome y and there A wick
this Diſtich POS Pe SALOGEIES


S Lapis e Ft unus ; dic, quafnit arte levatss ?
Sed {e ſunt plures z 410, bt tongeries ?


If this be oneRone ; How *ryvas rais'd; divine.
If more than one ; ſhew, where any do combine.


In Rome there. Rtinds allo an Obeligl of oneſolid fone, 2 kind'of
'Ophite, or ſpotred Marble ;-;anciently conſecrared to rhe 'hohour of
the. great 7ulins Ceſar, and eregedonthelefr fide of the Vixticar

Temple; in the Cirque of Neros. but, in the year 15$6, removed into
2 More. eminent place, ; arthe vaſt charge of Pope Sixtws Qaintus',
and by che admirable kill. of Domnews F ontanws , an excallent Ar-
hired. Whichis in height x70ifoor, above che biſe p/ in breadrh, ar.
the borrom, 1.2. foot, nd ac the'top 83 'in "weight D561 pound,

beſides the heavineſs of the Inſtruments or Engines ufed in. _ ,
that amounted co 204 2824 pounds, according ro the computation
Georgins Drandins, ( in atiomb. ad Solini memorabilia, 1% 1
fol. 131, ) The removing of this Obelisk was ſo rarea piece of Att,
chat beſides che-vaſt creaſure he received in reward, the Engineer got
immorcal renown rhereby ; no leſsthan 56 learned men CC»
lebrating his praiſes ; as Monantholins ( 1n Comment, in Ariſt, Me.
chanic, oap. 19.) remarkerh, -If fo ; what did choſe deſerve, who fir
digged the ſame our of the Marble Quarries of Eyypr gypt, ah broughtze
entire ag Rome > Doubtles this was much che more glorious _—_

of the two.

| gr afrer theſe ſuperlative Examples, . what think you ane
Stone-heng, berwixt which and thoſe, as to dimenGons; i 1s yo moke*+
proportions chan berwixr a Pygmic and a Grant ? Can you allow it


£ co


Ln


pp pn pang orgs;
diſtance from Rockley', gore herhaonar gt ie ſees ty |
mere ferched 5to rhe place where chey wete fer up , is nor above 26


INK SEL - You'tobje&, perehance j that thoſe ' mighty works
by Narions; among Which wete many excellent” Mi-

las reat Matters in Nie Arrof Mechaniques to which
xy 42-0 y moveable , and which contairieth Demonificive
Rules howhe apes Oake may be torn upby the roots iirh a
| wy eatrr grip eras of ocean aged Magiq Vapor

erved'y and clearly proved; ( I; chap. 1 chis of
Storie-heng by Trade and barbarois peopl e', fro 3 2h ant of ſuch
Machines ah artificial: helps. hart chis, therefore, anſwer ; Thc
it doth not appearthe Danes were ſorude ) #$to have no acquain- -
rance at all with che uſe of Engines for the elevation of monſtrous


| but rather che contrary , inſotmuch as: rheir carrying eyen
Rocketh | ir


thetnſelves from che Sea-ſhore cothe very hearr of their Comm-
ery, of which I have formerly ſpoken , ſufficiently intimates cheir


being verſed inthe uſe of the Lzaver, Roller, Wheel, Pulley, Wedge,


and: Screw, which- are fundamental Faculties of Mech (ques) it-


being ſcarce conceivable, how otherwiſe chey ſhould raiſe _


rentous:Monuments, as they did.” Bur allowing chem to have |
as Unskilful, as You pleaſe, in ſich Inſtruments ; yer” conſider how
Numerous. they were , and how -ftrenuouſly grear ſwarms of them
uſed to joyn hands rogerher in ſuchattemprs z and you have not forgor
oarnr they es, Maltorum manibus grande levatuy one, Many hands |


work. What prodigious matrers may be effe&ed by meer


feng: and hand-force of grear Multitudes, _ Rules of Arr ,
may be-difcerned from:che ſavage [»dians 3 tg deftitute of


other Marbemariques, bur what Nature diQared hom 0 arid want-.


che adtaricage* of Engines , did yer by their fimple toy! and =_


farjg1ble diligence , remove ones: of incredible sreatneſs, ed


Sie i meal


Aoſta (( Hiffor, Tndic. lib.'6; cap: he) telates ood Web


one ſtone broughe to 7 1a 1g HANACH,) W


and 6thick : and chat in Fu ir tarelieſt Edifices were many other of. |


a vaſter- m3gnicude. |
- To conclude, cherefoge, wich aſhce review of ile bach er


,
= - . . . =
-
. we F 4
bd -_
j of *I s 4 w : -
' : | | 4 * 4 5 '#
2 "PRE - ** 4M $5 Fc - | ww #
A dn Rn tt, / 2
- © ad.” :


. ticularly in Eng/and and Scorjand ; (3) rhatin Denmark, at this day,
there Rand many Rupendious Piles of Rones,'h moſt particulars agree-
ing with that, of which I have now diſcourſed ; (4) char upon 2 fri
and impartial inqueſt , neither theantient Brit a!ns, nor Romans, nor
Saxovs, are found to have any juſtifiable ricle ro the honor of founding
that of Stone-heng ;- ( 5 ) chat no one of our old Hiftorians made men-
ion of any- ſuch work , until long after the Daves hid acquired rhe
Soveraign Power inchis Iſland , and left ſundry memorials of cheir
victorious Armies ; (6) cþat the great impairment of che Fabrick ſince
chat time of che Danique conqueſt, doth not evincer to be of greater
antiquiry ; (7) char neither the Magnificence of the ſame ,; ar firſt;
(8) nor che vaſtae(s of rzngrh, and 8Kill in Engines, required ts the
cranſportation and elevarioh of (tones of ſuch prodigious-weight ; are
ſufficient Arguments tothe contrary : conſidering theſe things, I'ſay,
why may I nor con jeQure, thit the Danes,” and onely the Danes were
the Authors of Stone-heng > Sure I am of thus much, that chis Opinion
of mine, if it be erroneous, is yer highly plauſible: having rhis/advan-
tage over the orhers congerning the ſame obſcure ſubjeR ,thar irisnor
fo eafily co be refured, - Noris ic arrogancy in me, to affirm, chatif 1
have bezn deceived in entertaining this conceipt in the place of Truth;
- ir was becauſe I found ir.in the livery and colours of Trurh. However,
Iexpe&you ſhould confider; it is no diſhonor ro'even theb2t.Marks-
min; not ta hic thewhice., when he: is forced to ſhoot im'che” dark.
Which conſideration being alone ſufficient ro ſecure my wel-intended
endeavours, from to09 ſeyere and difingenious c2nſure, .in caſe it ſhall
hereafter be diſcovered, that I have been miſtaken in the Main thing
ſought afrer, nam2ly, che Authors of our Antiquity : I-doubr nor, bur
your Candor will extend iralſo; rothz favourable conſtruction of -my
_ © ſuppoſions concerning the- Circumſtznces. + Fo
In the ſtrength of chis confidence, therefore, I advenrure to acquaint
you moreover with my conje&ure concerning the T I M E, when.
"3 ome hd 1 oF Edie Stone-heng


"rhe cortage of a Cow-heard (who had entertained him inco his ſez-


Camp (inwi&fhire, and probably not far fromthe place, where Sronee


-into-the I{hnd called Ed/z»gſey, invironed with two Rivers, T have __


{teining himſelf by fiſhirſs and fowling, Among other advencures thar”


yy þ< ; <> : 6 . = - . ©% : .
T gb - Th © 4 $3 5 "e929 A a »
i mM p 4 ”Y \

| | Ss |


on £3 Th *
» & n


Pr ghee inted King of this Iſland, ſo-was| Learne King,
and moſt munificent Patron ts Scholars, that ever ſwaied the Sceprer
of Britain, For, all our Chronicles agrecingly deliver, char He was
fcarcely ſeare&in his throne, when there came overgrearer fwarms of .
Danes, tharvever before, to infeſt hisdomintons ; and tharafter miny-
unfortunate bartails wichthem, he was reduced co thit excremity, rhar
leaving his I1rge Monarchy'to the rage and rapine of thoſe inſulting
Pagans, the fled for (afery of his life into che Mariſhes of Sommer-
{etſhire,, where for ewo years he lay concealed in-a poor diſguiſe, ſus.


befell chis glorious perſon in-chis dark Eclipſe, ir is nor unworthy re-1
membrance, that on a time as he was fitting inthe chimney-cornet in


vice) and bulied-in crimming his bow and arrows ; a-Cake of dovgh i
lying tobe baked .on rhe hearch before*him, chanced co be burned ; V
which the goodwife impuring to hisnegleR; 'in woo fury caſt away:

his bow and arrows; and ſharply checking him;ſaid ; Thos fellow, hf |

thou ſee the breads bury before thy.face, and wilt not turn it ? and yet - *
thow art glad to eat it, beſore it be half baked. Shortly after his, leare -*þ
ning. policy f:om adverſity, and deriving courage from neceſſity ; he xi
vencu-ed; in the habic of a.common Minſtrel, to enter into the Daxes


beng frands)and having viewed the manner of theirencamping,and ob=
rerred their ſecuricy, he rerurned back to ſeveral of his Lords retreated: %


and Parret, in S»merſ*tſhire, >nd acquainting thetwin how careleſs
and'open a poſture he found-cthe Enemy ; recoltle&ed the ſcarrer'd
remains of his forces, and with theſe ſurpriſing che- Dazer, and putcing
them firſt into 2 pahick rerror, and chento flight, gayechem {6 con--
fiderable-a defear, har they immediately ſubmitred coa Treaty, and _
deliver'd Hoſtages for performance of condirions, "7


Now, conſidering the extreme Tow ebb of Fortune, ro which this
excellent King was at that time brought ; and the high flood of prof--
periry that in the mean while had advanced che Danes over all parts
of his Dominions, inſomuch ehat-norhing ſeemed wanting ro complere
their conqueſt, but only to find our the few Defendancs who remained
in obſcurity ;,and wirhall refleQing upon the former mentioned Cu.

| Rome: #*


» - a
x
hv [Fa
: 9 _
LAY


a+


2
« * z-
_ ”
5 - 6. by X
, ”
-


CE oe” , 4
Y =_— 4 . % s
=
hw. +, F > ©
= ” H86A "2
my = 4 3 «< f _
U% , * - ,
- . #
_—
%
%
s:


T M
__
'” & -—- o
FA
Ss K
=


<
: .

-
"HL I


op ne Kngton except a
mcampiny >rheir Main ned y ga For ni
\ ſetringup _ ret ita vce cop
wly aquired power; they imployed during t
WW -. of leaſure and jollity, in-erecuing Sto mepp © wherein toe
"IJ  I:& andingugurare theic ſupreme Comma EY "
We che weakneſs of che diſtreſſed H!fred- dhardingthem a: fs port
» and that county yielding chem-fic macexials for{0! and flus.
pedions a work, Nor is it improbable,rhar the grear ſu iryandidiſ-.
axders in which the Royal-Sptefound them » when-rhe mnagi of
tage parton; coor inoan _ ception of the majeſtyof his;
on, and procured him a freewelcome into t ; might be-
were by the jubile chey celebrated, afrer ber Camp Y
uw task, and therein newly crowned their, King; afrera eriums
manner, :ſuch asaronce correſponded weir ce of char
Anceſtors,and expreſſed che profuſeneſs of their-publick.joy, For ma- |
ny of or Hiſtorians relate, chat the Diniſh Army wonnemae
looſe to luxury-and-revelling, 3. and char the unknown Muſician.
ogg to play axe their ores ing ae. Gormwnd, 1n-his tent, di =
raps; I maybe chought ro0
_ from-ſiich endce iy and ciceumftzncial bmes, chapece
1ycogueſs ar che Age of chis Antiquity; concerning whoſe Original
.neicher Hiſtory, 'nor Tradicion hach left any glimpſe coElight
the: inquificive might-be guided chrough the darkſome vale of Uricer«
raintyzro the delightfull manſion of Truch, Leaying everyman;there- -
foregto he libercy of his own choughts, rouching this parcicular, *as'als. .
ſo-whatever elſe bach __ ſaidof the _—— ic ſelf,” and” its 75s |
. ginabDefignarion-; I here pur a-period ro.this Diſcourſe, - wherein !
_— I have advencured to contend with Oblivion z-1 Thedo cen
ſurp upon the TER of others. - *


A


a
= - ©


FR oc CIs wb


f. Deptt «35
n __ 6
agate S532! ;
: v1 6
© whakt


1
:
*


Fw ,
«3% $4


which the ao ph eon-"
nt, is both.


DO. Kapp "_—_— ribbed at -t,
Ou triarys ar gt


&+
b


s i 25, 5, 8
