THE NEW SYDENHAM

SOCIETY.


INSTITUTED MDCCCLVIII.


VOLUME LXXII.


LECTUEES


THE DISEASES OP


THE NERVOUS SYSTEM,


DELIVERED AT LA SALPÊTRIÈRE


J. M. CHARCOT, \%2Z  -{^Sl

PROFESSOR  TO THE FACULTT  OV  MEDICINE  OF  PARIS  ; PHÏSICIAN TO LA SALPÊtEIÈRE  ; MEMBEE

OF ÏHE ACADKMY OF MEDICINE, AND OF  THE CLINICAL SOCIETY OF LONUON-

PRESIDENT OF THE ANATOMICAI, SOCIETY, AND EX-VICE-PRESIDENT

OF THE BIOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF PARIS, ETC.


TRANSLATED  BY

GEORGE  SIGERSON,  M.D.,  M.Ch.,

LICENTIATE OF THE KING AND QUEEN's COLLKGE OF PHYSICIANS  ; LECTURER ON BIOLOGY AND

EX-DEAN OF THE FACULTÏ OF SCIENCE, CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND; PELLOW OF

THE LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONUON; MEMBER OF  THE SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY OF

BELGIUM, AND OF THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY, ETC.


LONDON:  ^^' ^  '^ '' ^

THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

MDCCCLXXVII.

,8  7-'


^  «f  "^^


CONTENTS.


LECTURE  I.


DISORDERS  OF  NUTRITION  CONSEQUENT  ON  LESIONS  OF
THE  NEUVES.

PAGE

SuMMARY. — Prellminary  observations.  Object  of  thèse  lectures  :  they
shall  be  devoted  to  those  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  aud  of  the
spinal  cord,  especially,  which  are  niost  usually  met  with  in  the  Sal>
pêtrière  Hospital.  Nutritive  disorders  conséquent  on  lésions  of  the
eerebro- spinal  axis  and  of  the  nerves.  Thèse  morbid  altérations
may  aifect  the  skin,  the  connective  tissue,  the  muscles,  the  articu»
lations,  the  viscera.  Their  importance  in  relation  to  diagnosis  and
prognosis.  Nutritive  dérangements  conséquent  on  lésions  of  the
peripheral  nerves.  Slight  influence  (in  the  normal  state)  of  the
nervous  System  upon  nutritive  action.  Passive  lésions  of  the  nerves
and  spinal  cord  do  not  directly  produce  disorders  of  nutrition  in  the
peripheral  parts.  Démonstrative  experiments.  Influence  of  the
irritation  and  inflammation  of  nerves  or  of  nervous  centres  on  the
production  of  nutritive  disturbances.  Nutritive  disorders  consé-
quent on  traumatic  lésions  of  nerves,  considered  specially.  They  arise
not  from  complète  but  from  imperfect  sections  or  from  contusions,
&c.,  of  the  nerve.  Cutaneous  éruptions  :  erythema,  zona  traumatica,
pemphigus,  "  glossy  skin."  Muscular  lésions,  atrophy.  Articular
lésions.  Lésions  of  the  osseous  system  :  periostitis,  necrosis.  Dis-
orders  of  nutrition  conséquent  on  non-traumatic  lésions  of  the
nerves;  their  analogy  with  those  which  resuit  from  traumatic
lésions.  Nutritive  disorders  affecting  the  eyes  in  cases  of  com»
pression  of  the  trifacial  by  tumour.  Inflammation  of  the  spinal
nerves,  conséquent  on  vertébral  cancer,  on  spinal  pachymeningitis,
on  asphyxia  by  charcoal  fumes,  &c.  Cutaneous  éruptions  (zona,
pemphigus,  &c.),  muscular  atrophy,  and  articular  affections,  which,
in  such  cases,  are  developed  in  conséquence  of  the  neuritis.  Anœs-
thetic  lepra,  leprous  perineuritis,  lepra  mutilans .  .  .3


VI  CONTENTS.


LECTURE  II.

NUTRITIVE  DISORDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  NERVE  LESIONS
iContinued).  AFFECTIONS  OP  THE  MUSCLES.  NUTRITIVE
DISORDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF  THE  SPINAL
COUD.

PAGB

SuMMABY.— Anatomical  and  functional  modifications  occurring  in  muscles
under  the  influence  of  lésions  of  the  nerves  supplying  them.  Im-
portance of  electrisation  as  a  means  of  diagnosis  and  prognosis.
Researches  of  Dr.  Duclienne  (de  Boulogne).  Experiments  :  Long
persistence  of  the  electrical  contractility  and  of  normal  nutrition  of
muscles,  after  the  section  or  excision  of  motor  or  mixed  nerves  in
the  case  of  animais.  Pathoiogical  cases  :  Diminution  or  speedy
abolition  of  the  electrical  contractility,  foUowed  by  rapid  atrophy  of
the  muscles  in  cases  of  rheumatic  paralysis  of  the  facial  nerve,  and
of  irritative  lésions  of  mixed  nerves,  whether  of  traumatic  or
spontaneous  origin.  Causes  of  apparent  contradiction  between  the
results  of  experiment  and  the  facts  of  pathology.  Application  of
the  researches  of  M.  Brown-Séquard  :  Irritative  nerve-lesions  alone
détermine  the  speedy  abolition  of  electrical  contractility,  foUowed
by  rapid  atrophy  of  the  muscles.  Experiments  of  MM.  Erb,
Ziemssen,  O.  Weiss.  Contusion  and  ligation  of  nerves  are  irrita-
tive lésions.  Différence  of  the  results  obtained  in  the  exploration
of  muscles  wheu  faradisation  and  galvanisation  are  employed.  The
results  of  thèse  new  researches  are  comparable  with  the  facts  of
human  pathology;  they  do  uot  weaken  the  proposition  of  M.
Brown-Séquard.

Trophic  disorders  consécutive  on  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord.  Con-
sidered  with  regard  to  their  influence  on  the  '  nutrition  of  the
muscles  thèse  lésions  constitute  two  well-defined  groups.

First  group  :  lésions  of  the  cord  having  no  direct  influence  on  muscular
nutrition  :  a,  lésions  in  circumscribed  spots  affecting  the  grey  sub-
stance to  but  a  slight  extent  vertically,  e.g.  partial  myelitis,  tumours,
Pott's  disease  ;  b,  extensive  fasciculated  lésions  of  the  posterior
white  or  the  antero-lateral  colunms,  without  the  grey  matter  par-
ticipating  ;  e.  g.  primitive  or  secondary  sclcrosis  of  the  posterior,
antero-lateral  columns,  &c.

Second  group  :  Lésions  of  the  spinal  cord  which  influence,  more  or
less  rapidly,  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  :  a,  fasciculated  or  cir-
cumscribed lésions  which  affect  the  anterior  cornua  of  the  grey
matter  to  a  certain  extent,  in  heiglit  ;  central  myelitis,  ha;raatomyelia,
&c.  ;  b,  irritative  lésions  of  the  large  nerve-cells  of  the  anterior
cornua  with  or  without  participation  on  the  |)art  of  the  white  fasci-
culi:  infantile  spinal  paralysis,  spinal  paralysis  of  adults,  gênerai
spinal paralyses (Duchenne  de Boulogne),  progressive  muscular


CONTENTS.  'VU

PAGE

atrophy,  &c.  Prédominant  influence  of  lésions  of  the  grey  matter
in  the  production  of  trophical  troubles  of  the  muscles.  Thèse  facts
can  be  interpreted  by  means  of  Browu-Soquard's  proposition  , 28


LECTURE III.

DISORDERS  OF  NUTRITION  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF
THE  SPINAL  CORD  AND  BRAIN.

SuMMABT. — Cutaneous  aifections  in  sclerosis  of  the  posterior  columns  :
papular  or  lichenoid  éruptions,  urticaria,  zona,  pustular  éruptions  ;
their  relations  with  the  fulgurant  pains  ;  the  former  appear  to  arise
from  the  same  organic  cause  as  the  latter.
Eschars  of  rapid  development  (acute  bed-sores)  in  diseases  of  the
brain  and  spinal  cord.  Mode  of  évolution  of  this  skin-affection  :
erythema,  buUae,  mortification  of  the  derma,  accidents  consécutive
on  the  formation  of  eschars  :  a,  putrid  infection,  purulent  infection,
gangrenons  emboli  ;  h,  simple  purulent  ascending  meningitis,  icliorous
ascending  meningitis.  Acute  bed-sore  in  apoplexy  symptomatic  of
circumscribed  cérébral  lésions.  It  appears  principally  in  the  gluteal
région  of  paralysed  extremities  ;  its  importance  in  prognosis.  Acute
bed-sore  in  diseases  of  the  spinal  cord  ;  it  generally  occupies  the
sacral  région.
Arthropathies  depending  on  a  lésion  of  the  brain  or  spinal  cord.
A.  Acute  or  subacute  forms  ;  they  appear  in  cases  of  traumatic
lésion  of  the  spinal  cord  ;  in  myelitis  occasioned  by  compression
(tumours,  Pott's  disease),  in  primary  myelitis,  in  récent  hemiplegia,
connected  with  cérébral  softening.  Thèse  arthropathies  occupy  the
joints  of  paralysed  limbs.  B.  Chronic  forms  ;  they  seem  to  dépend,
like  amyotrophies  of  spinal  origin,  on  a  lésion  of  the  anterior  cornua
of  the  grey  axis  ;  observed  in  posterior  sclerosis  (locomotor  ataxia)
and  in  certain  cases  of  progressive  muscular  atrophy . .  • ^3


LECTURE IV.

NUTRITIVE  DISORDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF  THE
BRAIN  AND  SPINAL  CORD.  (CONCLUSION.)  AFFECTIONS
OF  THE  VISCERA. THEORETICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

SuMMARY. — Viscéral  hyperœmia  and  ecchymoses  consécutive  on  expéri-
mental lésions  of  différent  portions  of  the  encephalon,  and  on  intra-
encephalic  hsemorrhage.  Experiments  of  Schiff  and  Brown-Séquard  :
Personal  observations. Thèse  lésions  seem  to  dépend  on  vaso-motor


CONTENTS.


paralysis  :  they  should  form  a  separate  category.  Opinion  of  Scliroe-
der  van  der  Kolk,  relative  to  the  relations  alleged  to  exist  between
certain  lésions  of  the  encephalon  and  différent  forms  of  pneuraonia,
and  pulmonary  tuberculisation.  HEemorrhage  of  the  supra-renal
capsules  in  myelitis.  Nephritis  and  cystitis  consécutive  on  irritative
spinal  affections  of  sudden  invasion,  vphether  traumatic  or  spon-
taneous.  Rapid  altération  of  the  urine  under  thèse  circumstances;
often  remarked  contemporaneously  vi^ith  the  development  of  eschars
in  the  sacral  région;  its  connection  vrith  lésions  of  the  uriuary
passages  which  are  due  to  direct  influence  of  the  nervons  system.
Theory  of  the  production  of  nutritive  disorders  consécutive  on  lésions
of  the  nervous  system.  InsufSciency  of  our  présent  kuowledge,
■with  respect  to  this  question.  Paralysis  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves  ;
consécutive  hyperaemia  ;  trophic  disorders  not  produced.  Excep-
tions to  the  rule.  Irritation  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves  :  the  consé-
quent ischsemia  seems  to  hâve  no  marked  influence  on  local  nutri-
tion. Dilator  and  secretor  nerves  :  researches  of  Ludvpig  and
Claude  Bernard;  analogies  between  thèse  two  orders  of  nerves.
Theoretical  application  of  trophic  nerves.  Samuel's  hypothesis.
Exposition. Criticisms. Conclusion  .  ,  .  -103


LECTURE  V.

ON PARALYSIS AGITANS.

SuMMAKY. — Of  tremor  in  gênerai.  Its  varieties.  Intermittent  tremor.
Continuons  tremor.  Influence  of  sleep,  rest,  and  voluntary  motion.
Distinction  established  by  Van  Svirieten.  Opinion  of  M.  Gubler.
Tremor,  according  to  Galen.  Paralysis  agitans,  and  disseminated
sclerosis, — independent  diseases.  Parkinson's  researches.  French
Works  :  MM.  Sée,  Trousseau,  Charcot,  and  Vulpian.  Paralysis
agitans  admitted  to  the  right  of  domicile  in  classic  treatises.

Pundamental  characters  of  paralysis  agitans.  A  disease  of  adult  life.
Its  symptoms.  Modifications  observed  in  the  gait.  Tendency  to
propulsion  and  retropulsion.  Invasion  ;  its  modes,  slow  or  abrupt.
Period  of  stationary  intensity.  Ilead  and  neck  not  afi'ected  by
tremor.  Altérations  of  speech.  Rigidity  of  the  muscles.  Attitude
of  the  body  and  limbs.  Déformation  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Delay
in  the  exécution  of  movements.  Perversions  of  eensibility.  Cramps  ;
gênerai  sensation  of  tension  and  fatigue  :  need  of  fréquent  change
of  position.  Habituai  feeling  of  excessive  beat.  Température  in
paralysis  agitans.  Influence  of  the  kind  of  convulsions — static  or
dynamic.

Terminal  period. Confinement  to  bed. Disorders  of  nutrition. En-


CONTENTS.  IX


feeblement  of  tlie  intellect.  Sacral  eschars.  Terminal  complaints  :
they  difFer  from  those  of  disseminated  sclerosis.  Duration  of  para-
lysis  agitans.

Necroscopical  results.  Inconstant  lésions  in  paralysis  agitans  ;  fixed
lésions  in  disseminated  sclerosis.  Lésions  of  tlie  pons  Varolii  and
of  the  meduUa  oblongata  (Parkinson,  Oppolzer).  Pathological
physiology.

Etiology.  External  causes  ;  violent  moral  émotions  ;  influence  of
damp  cold,  wlien  much  prolonged  ;  irritation  of  certain  peripheral
nerves.  Predisposing  causes.  Influence  of  âge.  Paralysis  agitans
appears  at  a  more  advanced  period  of  life  than  disseminated  sclerosis.
Sex. Hereditary  prédisposition. Influence  of  race  .  .129


LECTURE VI.

DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS. PATHOLOGICAL  J^NATOMY.

SoMMAKY. — History  of  disseminated  sclerosis  ;  French  period  ;  German
period  ;  New  French  investigations  ;  Macroscopic  morbid  anatoniy  ;
external  aspect  of  the  patches  of  sclerosis  ;  their  distribution  iu
brain,  cerebellum,  protuberantia,  bulbus  rachidicus,  and  spinal  cord.
Patches  of  sclerosis  on  the  nerves.  Spinal,  cephalic  or  buibar,  and
cerebro-spinal  forms.  Characters  of  the  sclerosed  patches  ;  their
colour,  consistence,  &c.
Microscopic  anatomy  ;  sketch  of  the  normal  histology  of  the  spinal
cord  ;  Nerve-tubes  ;  Neuroglia,  its  distribution  ;  Cortical  layer  of
the  recticulum.  Characters  of  the  neuroglia,  influence  of  chromic
acid.  Arterial  capillaries.  Histological  characters  of  the  sclerosed
patches  ;  transverse  sections  ;  peripheral  zone  ;  transition  zone  ;
central  région.  Longitudinal  sections.  Altérations  of  the  blood-
vessels.  Examiuation  of  the  sclerosed  patches  in  the  fresh  state.
Histological  lésions  consécutive  on  section  of  the  nerves.  Fatty
granulations  in  sections  of  the  sclerosed  patches  observed  in  the
fresh  state.  Modifications  of  the  nerve-cells.  Mode  of  succession
of  the  lésions  .  .  .  .  .  .  -157


LECTURE VII.

DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS:  ITS  SYMPTOMATOLOGY.

SuMMARY. — Difi'erent  aspects  of  disseminated  sclerosis,  considered  frora
a  clinical  point  of  view. Causes  of  error  in  diagnosis.
Clinical  examinatiou  of  a  case  of  disseminated  sclerosis. Tremor:


CONTENTS.


PAGE


modifications  caused  thereby,  in  the  handwriting  ;  characters  whioh
distinguish  it  from  the  tremor  of  paralysis  agitans,  chorea,  gênerai
paralysis,  and  the  motor  incoordination  of  ataxia.

Cephalic  symptoms.  Disorders  of  vision  :  diplopia,  amblyopia,  nystag.
mus. Impeded  utterance. Vertigo.

State  of  the  inferior  extremities.  Paresis.  Remissions.  Absence  of
disorders  of  sensibility.  Commixture  of  rare  symptoms;  tabetio
phenomena  ;  muscular  atrophy.  Permanent  contracture.  Spinal
epilepsy ........ 182


LECTURE VIII.

APOPLECTIFORM  SEIZURES  IN  DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS.
PERIODS  AND  EORMS.  PATHOLOGICAL  PHYSIOLOGY.
ETIOLOGY. TREATMENT.

SuMMARY. — Apoplectiform  seizures.  Their  frequency  in  disseminated
sclerosis.  General  considérations  ou  apoplectiform  attacks  in  gênerai
paralysis,  and  in  cases  of  circumscribed  cérébral  lésions  of  old  stand-
ing (hsemorrhage  and  ramollissement).  Pathogeny  of  apoplectiform
seizures  ;  insufficiency  of  the  congestion  theory.  Symptoms  :  state
of  the  puise  ;  élévation  of  the  central  température.  Apoplectiform
seizures  in  old  cases  of  hemiplegia.  Importance  of  température  in
diagnosis.

Periods  in  disseminated  sclerosis.  First,  second,  and  third  periods.
Symptoms  of  bulbar  paralysis.  Eorms  and  duration  of  disseminated
sclerosis.

Pathological  physiology  :  relation  betvfeen  symptoms  and  lésions.

Etiology.  Influence  of  sex  and  âge.  Hereditary  prédisposition.
Previous  nervous  affections.  Occasional  causes  :  prolongea  action
of  moist  cold  ;  traumatism  ;  moral  causes.

Proguosis. Treatment  .  .  .  .  .  . 203


LECTURE IX.

HYSTERICAL ISCHURIA.

SuMMAKY. — Introduction.  Hysterical  ischuria.  Différences  which  divide
it  from  oliguria.  General  considérations.  Supplementary  vomitiug.
Historical  sketch.  Causes  which  hâve  thrown  doubt  on  the  exist-
ence of  hysterical  ischuria.  Distinction  between  calculons  ischuria
and  hysterical  ischuria.
Case.  Hysterical  paralysis  and  contracture.  Complète  hemianaesthesia.


CONTENTS.  XI


Hemiopia  and  achromatopsia.  Ovarian  hypersBsthesia.  Rétention
of  urine.  Tympanitis.  Convulsive  seizures  ;  trismus.  Manifesta-
tion of  hysterical  iscliuria.  Précautions  taken  to  guard  against
errer.  Complète  auuria.  Uraernic  vomiting.  Relation  of  the
quantity  of  urine  excreted  to  the  vomited  matter.  Chemical  analysis
of  vomited  matter,  urine,  and  blood. Suspension  of  phenomena.

Reappearance  of  hysterical  ischuria.  New  results  of  chemical
analyses.

Serions  nature  of  common  anuria  and  of  expérimental  anuria.
Limit  of  the  duration  of  accidents  compatible  with  life.  Influence
of  the  évacuation  of  even  a  minute  quantity  of  urine.  Rapid  ap-
pearance  of  symptoms  in  calculous  ischuria;  their  tardiness  in
hysterical  ischuria.  Innocuousness  of  symptoms  in  direct  ratio
with  the  quantity  of  urine  secreted.  Résistance  to  inanition  in
hysteria,

Mechanism  of  hysterical  ischuria.  Iraperfect  supply  of  information
in  relation  to  this  subject .  .  .  .  .  .225


LECTURE X.

HYSTERICAL  HEMTAN^STHESIA.

SuMMARY. — Hemianaesthesia  and  ovarian  hypersesthesia  in  hysteria.  Ere-
quent  association  of  thèse  two  symptoms.  Erequency  of  hemianaes-
thesia in  hysterical  patients  ;  its  varieties,  complète  or  incomplète.
Characters  of  hysterical  hemianaesthesia,  ischsemia  and  the  "  Con-
vulsionnaires."  Lésions  of  spécial  sensés.  Achromatopsia.  Relations
between  hemiansesthesia,  ovarian  hypersesthesia,  paresis,  and  con-
tracture. Variation  of  symptoms  in  hysteria.  Diagnostic  value
of  hysterical  hemianaesthesia;  necessary  restrictions.
Hemianaesthesia  depending  on  certain  encephalic  lésions.  Its  analogies
with  hysterical  hemianaesthesia.  Cases  in  which  encephalic  hemian-
aesthesia resembles  hysterical  hemianaesthesia.  Seat  of  the  encephalic
lésions  capable  of  producing  hemianaesthesia.  Eunctions  of  the
optic  thalamus  ;  British  theory  ;  French  theory.  Criticism.  Ger-
man  nomenclature  of  différent  parts  of  the  encephalon.  Its  ad-
vantages  as  regards  the  circumscription  of  lésions.  Case  of  hemian-
aesthesia recorded  by  Tiirck  ;  spécial  seat  of  the  encephalic  lésions
in  thèse  cases.  Observation  of  M.  Magnan.  Altération  of  spécial
sensés  ........ 246


XU  CONTENTS.

LECTURE XI.
OVARIAN  HYPERJISTHESIA.


PAGE


SuMMAKY. — Local  hysteria  of  British  authors,  Ovarian  pain  ;  its  fre-
quency. Historical  remarks. Opinion  of  M.  Briquet.

Cbaracters  of  ovarian  liyperœstbesia.  Its  exact  position.  Aura  hys-
terica  :  first  node  ;  globus  hystericus,  or  second  node  ;  cephalie
phenomena  or  tlurd  node.  The  starting-point  of  the  first  node  in
the  ovary. Lésions  of  the  ovary. Desiderata.

Relations  between  ovarian  bypersesthesia  and  the  other  accidents  of
local  hysteria.

Ovarian  compression.  Its  influence  on  the  attacks.  Modus  operandi.
Ovarian  compression  as  a  means  of  arrestingor  preventinghysterical
convulsions  known  in  former  times.  Its  application  in  bysterical
épidémies.  Epidémie  of  St.  Médard — the  remedy  termed  "  secours,"
Analogies  which  exist  between  the  arrest  of  bysterical  convulsions
by  compression  of  the  ovary,  and  the  arrest  of  the  aura  epileptica
by  ligature  of  a  limb.

Conclusion  from  a  therapeutical  point  of  view. Clinical  observations  . 262


LECTUEE XII.

HYSTEEICAL  CONTHACTURE.

SuMMAKY.— Forms  of  bysterical  contracture.  Description  of  the  hémi-
plégie form  ;  analogies  and  différences  between  bysterical  contracture
and  that  resulting  from  a  circumscribed  lésion  of  the  brain.  Ex-
ample of  the  paraplégie  form  of  bysterical  contracture.
Prognosis.— Sudden  recovery  in  some  cases.  Scientific  explanation  of
certain  reputedly  miraculous  events.  Incurability  of  contracture
in  a  certain  number  of  bysterical  patients.  Examples.  Anatomical
lésions.  Sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns.  Varieties  of  contracture.
Hysterical  club-foot  ...••• 283


CONTENTS.  XlU

LECTURE XIIL
HYSTERO-EPILEPSY.

PAGE

StJMMARY. — Hystero-epilepsy.  Meaning  of  this  term.  Opinions  of
autliors.  Epileptiform  hysteria  ;  bysteria  with  mixed  crises.
Varieties  of  hystero-epilepsy  ;  hystero-epilepsy  with  distinct  crises  ;
hystero-epilepsy  with  corabined  crises,  or  attaques-accès  (seizure
fits).  Différences  and  analogies  between  epilepsy  and  hystero-
epilepsy.  Diagnostic  signs  supplied  by  esamination  of  central
température  in  hystero-epileptic  acme,  and  in  epileptic  acme.  Epi-
leptic  acme  ;  its  phases.  Clinical  characters  of  hysteria,  epileptic
acme.  Gravity  of  certain  exceptional  cases  of  hystero-epilepsy.
Case  recorded  by  Wunderlich  .  .  .  .  , 300

APPENDIX.

Case  of  Paralysis  Agitans  .  .  .  .  .  'Si?


TEANSLATOH'S  PREFACE.


Although  but  recently  published  in  Paris,  the  Lectures  of  Pro-
fesser Charcot  on  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System  hâve  already  taken
a  place  amongst  the  classic  works  of  médical  literature,  and  been
translated  into  several  Continental  languages.  When  preparing  for
thefollowing  version,  it  was  judged  best  to  await  the  appearance  of
the  second  French  édition  ;  thus  the  reader,  in  exchange  for
some  delay,  has  been  enabled  to  obtain  the  work  in  its  most  correct
form,  enlarged  by  about  one  sixth.  It  was  found  inconvénient  to
reproduce  the  ten  plates  appended  to  the  French  volume  ;  neverthe-
less,  the  références  made  to  them,  in  the  text,  hâve  been  preserved,
with  a  view  to  facilitate  the  researches  of  those  who  may  désire  to
consult  the  original  designs.

It  is  proper  to  mention  that  thèse  lectures  were  reported  and
edited  in  French  by  Dr.  Bourneville,  editor  of  '  Le  Progrès  Médical/
whose  name  or  initial  will  be  found  attached  to  several  notes.

G.  S.

Dublin.


PART FIRST.


DISORDERS OF NUTRITION CONSEQUENT

ON  LESIONS OF THE BRAIN  AND

SPINAL CORD.


LECTURE I.

DISOflDERS  OF  NUTRITION  CONSEQUENT  ON  LESIONS
OF  THE  NERVES.

SuMMARY. — Frelimînary  observations.  Ohject  of  thèse  lectures:
they  sTiall  he  devoted  to  those  diseuses  of  the  nervous  System,  and
of  the  sonnai  cord,  especially,  which  are  most  usually  met  zoith
in  the  Salpétrïère  Hospital.  Nutritive  disorders  conseqiient  on
lésions  of  the  cerehro-sphial  axis  and  of  the  nerves.  Thèse
morhid  altérations  may  affect  the  shin,  the  connective  tissue,  the
muscles,  the  articulations,  the  viscera.  Their  importance  iti
relation  to  diagnosis  and  prognosis.  Nutritive  dérangements
conséquent  on  lésions  of  the  perlpheral  nerves.  Slight  influence
[in  the  normal  staté)  of  the  nervous  System  upon  oiutritive  action.
Passive  lésions  of  the  nerves  and  spinal  cord  do  not  directly
produce  disorders  of  nutrition  in  the  peripher  al  parts.  Démon-
strative experiments.  Influence  of  the  irritation  and  inflam-
mation of  nerves  or  of  nervous  centres  on  the  production  of
nutritive  disturbances.  Nutritive  disorders  conséquent  on
traumatic  lésions  of  nerves,  considered  specially.  They  arise
notfrom  complète  but  from  imperfect  sections  orfrom  contusions,
8fc.,  of  the  nerve.  Cutaneous  éruptions  :  erythema,  zona
traumatica,  pemphigus,  '^  glossy  skin."  Muscular  lésions,
atrophy.  Articular  lésions.  Lésions  of  the  osseous  System  :
periostitis,  necrosis.  Disorders  of  nutrition  conséquent  on  non-
traumatic  lésions  of  the  nerves  ;  their  analogy  with  those  tohich
resuit  from  traumatic  lésions.  Nutritive  disorders  affecting
the  eyes  in  cases  of  compression  of  the  trifacial  by  tumour.
Inflammation  of  the  spinal  nerves,  conséquent  on  vertébral  cancer,
on  spinal  pachymeningitis,  on  asphyxia  by  charcoal  fumes,  8fc.
Cutaneous  éruptions  [zona,  pemphigus,  ^c),  muscular  atrophy^
and  articular  affections,  lohich,  in  such  ca^es,  are  developed  in


4  PRELTMINAEY OESEEVATIONS.

conséquence  of  the neuritis. Ânœsthetic  lepra,  lepwns  jî?er^-
nenritis,  lepra  mutUans.

Gentlemen, — Never  without  émotion,  yet  iiever  witliowt  great
gratification^,  do  I  inaugurale,  each  session,  tlie  séries  of  lectures,
whicli  you  hâve  assembled  to  hear.  On  sucli  occasions,  indeed,  I
never  fail  to  discover  the  friendly  faces  of  former  students,  some  of
whom  hâve  attained  professorial  rank,  and  some  of  whom  hâve
already  signalized  their  career  by  brilliant  researches.  Their  pré-
sence affords  me  a  great  satisfaction,  and  I  ghidly  seize  the  occasion
to  testify  my  gratitude.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  unusual  number  of  those  who  hâve  assem-
bled hcre  to-day  is  a  convincing  proof  of  the  correctness  of  my
belief  vvhen,  five  years  ago,  I  ventured  to  maintain  that  this  vast
emporium  of  human  suffering  might  one  day  become  a  seat  of
theoretical  and  clinical  instruction,  of  uncontested  utihty.^

It  is  true,  gentlemen,  that  the  field  of  observation  before  us  does
not  embrace  the  entire  of  pathology.  But,  taken  for  what  it  is,
who  shall  complain  of  its  extent,  or  say  that  it  is  not  vast  ?  On
the  one  hand,  it  offers  for  our  study  the  ailments  of  the  aged,  which
call  for  a  share  of  our  attention.  On  the  other  hand,  amongst
chronic  diseases,  it  exhibits,  under  conditions  peculiarly  favourable
to  research,  and  gathered  together  in  numerous  array,  those  diseases
of  the  nervous  and  of  the  locomotor  Systems  which  are  so  common,
and  consequently  so  interesting  to  the  physician — diseases  the
pathology  of  which  has  begun,  within  the  last  twenty  years,  to-
émerge  from  the  deep  darkness  which  had  previously  covered  it.

As  for  myself,  gentlemen,  I  hâve  never  doubted  that  the  Hospital
of  La  Salpêtrière  was  destined  to  become,  both  for  the  diseases  of
old  âge  and  for  many  chronic  disorders,  an  incomparable  centre  of
instruction.  Ail  that  was  required  to  realize  this  idea  was  that
certain  modifications  should  be  made  in  the  internai  arrangement  of
this  institution,  and  I  amhappy  to  inform  you  that  circumstances,
at  présent,  seem  wholly  favourable  to  our  views.

The  authorities  hâve  already,  without  any  solicitation,  placed
under  our  care  wards  containing  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  beds,
where  we  may  study  ail  the  forms  of  epilepsy  and  of  the  graver
hysterical  affections.  The  Director  of  the  Assistance  Publique  has
also  formed  the  project  of  opening  in  this  hospital  a  dispensary
>  This  lecture  was  delivered  in  May,  1870.


FRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.  5

--speeiaîly  destmed  for  patients  suffering  from  clirouic  aliments,  and
■a  ward  to  wliich  a  certain  number  of  them  should  be  admitted,  tem-

porarily,  to  undergo  treatment.

When  ail  thèse  éléments  of  study  sliall  liave  been  classed  and

organized with a view to scientific investigation and clinical
■  instruction,  I  bave  no  hésitation  in  saying  that  we  shall  possess

at  Paris  an  institution  which,  of  its  kind,  can  scarcely  hâve  a  rival.^

I  hope  to  bave  soon  the  happiness  of  seeiug-  this  plan  realized  in  ail
vits  détails. But  if  unforeseen  cirçumstances  should  call  me  else-

where,  it  would still yield me  a  deep gratification to see my
-successors  crovvning  the  édifice  whose  first  foundations  only  I  had

been  allowed  to  build.

Gentlemen,  your  time  is  valuable,  and  I  do  uot  désire  that  this

preamble  should  extend  too  far. It  is  time  to  corne  to  the  spécial

subject  of  thèse  lectures. I  purpose  then  to  dévote  this  session  to
4he  study  of  those  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  and  especially  of

the  spinal  cord,  which  are  most  usually  met  with  in  this  hospital.

As  I  feel  it  would  be  objectionable  to  plunge  at  once  into  technical

détails,  it  seemsto  me  suitable  to  invite  your  attention  to  a  question

of  gênerai  interest,  and  one  which  we  shall  encounter  at  every  step  in

the  course  of  our  studies.

I.

Lésions  of  the  cerebro-spinal  axis  frequently  react  upon  différent
,  portions  of  the  body  and  produce  there,  by  means  of  the
iierves,  various  disorders  of  nutrition.  Thèse  secondary  affections
constitute  one  of  the  most  interesting  pathological  groups,  and  I
«hall  therefore  dévote  several  sittings  to  trace  out  foryou  the  prin-
cipal featuresof  their  history.

The  consécutive  lésions  in  question  may  affect  most  of  the  tissues,
•  and  may  occupy  the  most  diverse  régions  of  the  body;  thus,  we  may
iind  them  in  the  skin,  the  connective  tissue,  the  articulations,  the
bones,  and  even  the  viscera.  They  generally  présent,  at  least  at
the  beginning,  the  characteristics  of  inflammatory  action.  Fre-
,quently  they  play  in  the  drama  of  disease  but  an  accessory  part,
-being  simply  added  on  to  the  usual  symptoms,  hyperœsthesia,
-ansesthesia,  hyperkinesis,  akinesis,  motor  incoordination,  &c.  But
-were  it  only  for  the  interest  they  hâve,  when  considered  from  the

1  This  project  lias,  unfortunatelj,  not  yet  beeu  made  a  reality  (September,


6  DISOEDEES OP NUTEITION.

staud-point  of  pathological  physiology,  tliey  should  not  be
neglected.

Occasionallj,  however,  tliese  lésions  assume  an  uumistakable  im-
portance in  the  eyes  of  the  clinical  observer,  either  because  of  tlie
serions  ailments  which  they  cause,  or  because  of  their  value  as  re-
gards diagnosis  or  prognosis.  Allow  me  to  offer  some  examples  in
support  of  tins  assertion.

Last  year  I  pointed  ont  to  you,  and  I  shall  return  to  this
symptom  again,  that  the  sacral  escbar  wliich  is  developed  in  tbe
course ofapoplexyfrom  cérébral  htemorrhage  or  from  softening  of  the
brain  allows  us  to  lay  down  a  prognosis  of  almost  absolute  certainty.
The  sacral  eschars,  the  affections  of  the  kidneys  and  of  the  bladder,
which  are  produced  with  such  rapidity  in  certain  acute  diseases
and  in  the  exacerbations  of  some  chronic  diseases  of  the  spinal  cord,
are  often  the  immédiate  cause  of  death.

An  arthropathy,  arising  in  the  course  of  locomotor  ataxia,  may
deprive  the  patient  of  ail  future  use  of  a  limb  which  might  other-
wise  bave  served  him  long.

rinally,  thèse  consécutive  lésions  of  nutrition  sometimes  deceive
the  physician,  who  may  mistake  them  for  the  disease  itself.  Such,
for  instance,  are  certain  forms  of  progressive  muscular  atrophy
which  were  formerly  regarded  as  primary  affections  of  the  muscles
themselves,  and  whose  origin  really  lies  in  certain  inorbid  altérations
which  hâve  taken  place  in  the  grey  matter  of  the  spinal  cord.

It  would,  I  believe,  be  superfluous  to  multiply  exaraples,  for
thèse  observations  should  now  suffice  to  indicate  the  interest  Avliich
belongs  to  the  study  of  such  lésions  of  nutrition.

The  power  of  producing,  under  certain  morbid  conditions,  lésions
of  nutrition,  in  the  peripheral  parts  of  the  body  or  in  the  viscera,  is
not  an  attribute  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  alone.  Thèse  centres
share  the  privilège  with  the  nerves  which  radiate  from  them.  And
it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  consécutive  affections  produced  by  pro-
topathic  lésions  developed  in  the  most  widely  différent  régions  of  the
nervous  system  présent  most  remarkable  analogies,  in  spite  of  some
spécifie  différences.  lience  when  the  physician's  attention  has  been
called  to  such  affections  it  is  often  a  question  of  extrême  difïiculty
to  détermine  what  portion  of  the  nervous  system  was  originally
affected,  and  what  is  the  true  cause  of  the  trophical  lésion.

This  considération  has  induced  me  not  to  limit  our  study  to  tlie
lésions  which  are assignable  to  cérébral or  spinal causes  alone.


DISOEDERS OF NUTRITION.  7

Thèse  sball  be^  if  you  will^  our  objective  point  ;  but  it  seems  useful  to
draw  out_,  in  parallel  lines,  tlie  history  of  those  trophical  troubles
which  appear  in  conséquence  of  lésions  of  the  peripheral  nerves.
Is  it  not,  indeed,  one  of  the  greatcst  advantages  of  the  comparative
method  that  it  créâtes  light  by  contrasts  ?  In  order  to  bound  our
field  of  study,  we  shall,  however,  only  take  into  considération  those
nutritive  disorders  which  appear  in  the  peripheral  domain  of  the
siiffering  nerve,  The  trophical  changes  which  take  place  in  consé-
quence of  reflex  action,  in  a  région  more  or  less  remote,  and  within
the  domain  of  nerves  which  hâve  uudergone  no  primitive  lésions,
constitute  undoubtedly  an  interesting  subject_,  but  one  which  deserves
to  be  treated  specially.

II.

In  hearing  me  speak,  gentlemen,  of  the  nutritive  disorders  which
arise  under  the  influence  of  lésions  of  the  nervous  centres  or  of  the
nerves,  most  of  you,  I  am  sure,  hâve  been  immediately  reminded  of
the  corresponding  problem  which  is  debated  in  normal  physiology.

There  is  nothing  hetter  estahlished  in  jmthologi/  (as  I  hope  to
demonstrate)  than  the  existence  qf  trophical  troubles  consecpient  on
lésions  of  the  nervous  centres  or  qf  the  nerves.  Nevertheless,  you
are  aware  that  the  most  advanced  physiology  teaches  that,  in  the
normal  state,  the  nutrition  of  différent  parts  of  the  body  does  not
essentially  dépend  upon  the  influence  of  the  nervous  System.

Thèse  statements  appear  contradictory,  but  the  opposition  is
only  in  appear ance  and  not  in  reality.  This  I  shall  endeavour  to
prove,  and  with  that  object  I  hâve  to  ask  your  permission  to  make
a  short  incursion  into  the  domain  of  expérimental  physiology.

You  are  aware  that  in  order  to  show  that  the  chemical  acts  of
molecular  rénovation,  which  constitute  nutrition,  are  not  im-
mediately dépendent  on  the  action  of  the  nervous  System,'  many
kinds  of  arguments  are  adduced  :

1°.  The  most  complex  acts  of  nutritive  life  take  place  in  certain
organisms  without  the  intervention  of  a  nervous  System.  Plants,
for  instance,  and  some  of  the  lowest  animais,  such  as  certain
protozoa,  though  unprovided  with  nervous  Systems,  manifest  great
vital  activity.  Does  not  the  embryo,  it  is  also  asked,  perform  ail
the  acts  of  organic  life,  at  a  period  when  it  as  yet  possesses  no
nervous  élément  whatever  ?

2°.  They base another argument on the fact that certain


■8  INFLUENCE OF NEKVE-SECTION.

tissues,  even  iu  the  superior  animais,  are  totally  devoid  of  nerves
and  vessels.  As  instances,  they  refer  to  the  epithelial  layer  and  to
cartilage,  which  if  placed  under  patliological  conditions  will  become
seats  of  cell- prolifération — a  plain  proof  tliat  nutrition  can  take
place  tliere  in  a  very  energetic  manner.^

3°.  Finally,  arguments  bearing  more  directly  on  the  subject
are  drawn  from  the  arsenal  of  expérimental  physiology.  You
know  that,  after  section  of  the  nerves  supplying  them^  and  even
■when  the  spinal  cord  has  been  destroyed,  the  peripheral  parts  of

*..."The  whole  organic  life  of  animais,  e.  e.  everything  which  goes  on  in
them  without  the  interveutiou  of  any  sensation,  or  other  mental  act,  may  go
on  without  tlie  intervention  of  the  nervous  System  and  stands  in  no  relation  of
dependence  to  any  cliange  in  nervous  matter  ;  just  as  the  corresponding  functions
of  circulation,  nutrition,  sécrétion,  absorption,  go  on  in  equal  perfection  in  the
lowest  class  of  animais  where  no  nerves  are  detected  and  iu  the  whole  veget-
able  kingdom,  where  there  is  no  plausible  reason  for  supposing  that  nerves
exist  ;  .  .  .  the  nervous  System  lives  and  grows  within  an  animal  as  a  parasitic
plant  does  in  a  vegetable." — '  British  and  Foreign  Med.-Chir.  Review,'  vol.  iii,
1837,  pp.  9,  10  ;  and  Carpenter,  '  Principles  of  Human  Physiology,'  Phila-
delphia,  1855,  p.  59.

The  foUowing  is  a  succinct  analysis  of  an  essay,  in  which  M.  Charles  Robin
lias  quite  recently  expounded  the  prévalent  ideas  of  the  présent  day  in  référ-
ence to  the  far  from  promineut  rôle  which  the  nervous  system  plays  in  the  work
of  nutrition  : — "  Those  chemical  acts  which,  in  a  living  organism,  constitute
molecular  rénovation,  otherwise  called  nutrition,  are  not  under  the  direct
influence  of  the  nerves.  There  can  be  no  question  hère  of  an  influence  of
■nerves  over  tissues,  comparable  to  that  of  electricity  upon  chemical  action.
There  exist  no  nerves  which  extend  over  the  extra-vascular  anatomical  éléments,
such  as  the  epithelium,  like  those  nerve-tubes  which  proceed  and  are  applied
to  Ihe  muscular  fibrils.  The  cause  of  the  movement  of  nutrition  lies  in  the
anatomical  cléments  themselves.  In  plants,  where  no  nervous  system  is  found,
we  see  the  tissues  suddenly  swell,  the  cells  increase  and  multiply.  lu  the  em-
bryo,  cells  are  formed,  and  increase  and  multiply,  before  tlie  appcarance  of
any  peripheral  nerve-element.  Nutrition  is,  therefore,  a  gênerai  property  of
anatomical  éléments,  be  they  animal  or  vegetable.  Sécrétion  itself  is  a  property
inhérent  in  anatomical  éléments,  as  De  Elainville  and  A.  Comte  hâve  observed.
In  the  lower  animais,  and  in  the  case  of  animal  grafts,  it  is  évident  that  the
nutrition  of  tissues  is  iudependent  of  the  nervous  system."  "Disordcrs  of  sécré-
tion and  of  absorption,  indurations,  softenings,  hypertrophies,  and  other
altérations  consécutive  ou  nerve-Iesions,  are  a  conséquence  of  perturbations  of
the  circulation  through  the  médium  of  the  preceding  (vaso-niotor)  nerves,
directly  affcctcd  by  rcflcx  action,  and  are  not  a  conséquence  of  the  action  of
nerves  which  sliould,  like  electricity,  hâve  an  influence  over  the  molecular  or
chemical  acts  of  assimilation  and  dis-assimilation  in  a  zone  of  a  certain  extent
bcyond  their  surface." — '  Journal  de  l'Anatomie,'  &c.,  1867,  pp.  276 — 300.


INFLUENCE OF NERVE- SECTION.  9

the  body,  such  as  the  muscles  or  the  bones  of  a  limb,  will  continue
to  live  and  be  nourislied  for  a  considérable  time,  almost  as  efficiently
as  tbough  they  were  under  normal  conditions.  In  such  cases,
lésions  of  nutrition  do  not  make  tlieir  appearance  until  a  com-
paratively  long  period  bas  elapsed.  Even  then  they  are  almost  always
ipurely  passive,  and  seem,  in  reality,  due  to  the  state  of  inaction  to
which  the  parts  are  condemned  in  conséquence  of  the  suppression
of  nervous  influence.  This  belief  is  supported  by  the  fact  tliat
lésions,  displaying  similar  characteristics,  présent  themselves  when
limbs  are  kept  in  a  state  of  immobility,  though  the  nervous  System
be  not  directly  implicated.  Such  passive  lésions,  which  we  sliall
meet  with  in  différent  paralytic  affections,  hâve  nothing  in  common
with  the  spécial  trophical  lésions  which  engage  our  attention.
Generally  they  can  be  distinguished  from  them,  objectively,  by
certain  particular  signs.

The  spécial  lésions  are  almost  always  characterized,  at  some
period  of  their  évolution,  at  least,  by  évidence  of  phlegmasic  irri-
tation. From  the  commencement  they  usually  take  on  the  appear-
ance of  inflammation  ;  and  they  may,  as  we  shall  see,  issue  in  ulcé-
ration, gangrené,  and  uecrosis.  There  is,  besides,  one  characteristic
common  to  most  of  them,  and  that  is  the  great  rapidity  of  their
development,  after  the  lésion  of  nerves  or  nervous  centres  which
provokes  their  manifestation.  Sometimes  they  make  their  appear-
ance with  incredible  quickness.  Thus  we  frequently  see  eschars
visible  on  the  sacrum,  the  second  or  third  day  after  the  accident,
in  certain  cases  of  fracture  of  the  backbone,  with  compression  and
irritation  of  the  spinal  cord.

It  may  therefore  be  laid  down  as  a  gênerai  rule  that  there  is  a
striking  distinction  betweeu  jjassive  lésions,  resulting  from  func-
tioual  inaction  alone,  and  trojpJiic  disorders  which  folio w  on  certain
lésions  of  the  nervous  centres.  The  former  are  slow  of  production
and  usuallv  manifest  no  symptom  of  inflammation  ;  the  latter  often
suddenly  break  out  and  generally  présent,  at  least  at  the  commence-
ment, more  or  less  notable  signs  of  phlegmasic  irritation.

AUow  me,  gentlemen,  to  remind  you,  briefly,  of  some  of  the  experi-
ments  to  which  I  hâve  just  alluded,  and  which  tend  to  demon-
strate  that  the  nerves  and  spinal  cord  hâve  no  direct  immédiate
influence  upon  the  nutrition  of  peripheral  parts.

1°.  One  of  the  first  of  thèse  relates  to  the  section  of  the  ischiatic
nerve  in  mammalia. Schroeder  van  der  Kolk,  who  was  one  of  the


10  INFLUENCE OF NERVE-SECTION.

earliest  to  make  the  expérimenta  attributed  the  disorders  of  nutri-
tion wliich  foUowed,  with  some  rapidity  in  sucli  cases,  in  the  cor-
responding  member,  to  the  abolition  of  the  action  of  the  nervous
System  in  conséquence  of  the  section.  M.  Brown-Séquard  repeated
the  expérimenta  in  1849^  on  guinea-pigs  and  rabbits,  and  succeeded
in  sho\^"ing  that  the  trophical  troubles  whiqh  follow  in  the  course  of
a  few  days,  and  which  consist  of  tuméfaction  of  the  extremity  of  the
member,  ulcération  of  the  toes,  loss  of  the  nails,  only  make  their
appearance  because  the  animal  is  no  longer  able  to  préserve  the
limb,  now  devoid  of  movement  and  sensation  in  conséquence  of  the
section  of  the  ischiatic,  from  the  action  of  external  influences,  such
as  contact  with  the  hard  rough  ground  over  which  it  is  dragged.
Wben  the  animal  experimeuted  on  was  placed  under  proper  condi-
tions, confined  in  a  box,  for  instance,  the  bottom  of  which  was
covered  with  a  thick  Tayer  of  bran,  there  was  no  modification  of
nutrition  to  be  remarked  in  the  paralysed  member,  except  a  more  or
less  perceptible  atrophy  which,  however,  only  made  its  appearance
slowly  in  the  course  of  time.^

ïhis  atrophy  which  follows  the  section  of  the  ischiatic  nerve,  evi-
dently  results  from  the  functional  inaction  to  which  the  paralyzed
limb  is  condemned.  It  affects  not  only  the  muscles,  but  also  the
bones  and  the  skin,  as  J.  Eeid  bas  already  remarked.  It  will  not  be
produced,  even  when  the  section  bas  been  complète,  if,  following  the
example  of  the  physiologist  quoted,  you  take  care  to  pass  a  gal-
vanic  current  daily  through  the  muscles  of  the  paralysed  member.

2°.  The  complète  section  of  the  trifacial  nerve,  made  within  the
cranium,  présents  results  perfectly  in  keeping  with  those  produced
by  section  of  the  ischiatic.  You  are  aware  that  the  lésions  of  the
eye  which  are  found  in  animais  subjected  to  this  opération,  and
which  were  formerly  considered  by  some  physiologists  as  the  consé-
quence of  the  abolition  of  the  nutritive  influence  of  the  trifacial,
hâve,  since  the  experiments  of  Snellen  in  1857  and  those  of  Biittner

^  Brown-Séquard,  "  Sur  les  altérations  pathologiques  qui  suivent  la  section
du  nerf  sciatique,"  '  Comtes-rendus  des  Séances  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  t.  i,
1849;  and  'Expérimental  Ilesearclies  applicd  to  Pliysiology  and  l'athology,'
New  York,  1863,  p.  6.

After  tlic  section  of  a  mixed  ncrvc  the  atrophy  of  tiie  muscles  does  not
generally  begin  to  show  itself,  in  man  and  mammalia,  by  a  slight  emaciation,
iinlil  the  end  of  about  a  month.  At  the  close  of  the  second  month  it  is  more
marked  ;  it  is  very  évident  at  the  end  of  threc  months. — Magnin,  Thèse  de
l'aris,  1866,  p.  19.


SECTION OF SPINAL COBD.  11

in  1862,  been  recognized  as  resultingfrom  tlie  consécutive  anjiesthesia
wliicli  exposes  tlie  parts,  deprived  of  sensation,  to  ail  kinds  of
traumatic  causes.  If  tlie  eye  be  protected  after  the  section  of  the
nervc,  cither  by  Snellen''s  method  of  tying  the  still  sensitive  ear  of
the  same  side  in  front  of  it,  or  by  Biittner's  plan  of  covering  it
with  a  pièce  of  thick  leather,  the  trophical  troubles  will  not  make
their  appearance  in  the  cornea.  A  certain  amount  of  neuro-para-
lytic  hypercemia  in  the  iris  and  conjunctiva  is,  in  short,  the  only
phenomenon  observable,  after  section  of  the  trifacial,  when  the  eye
has  been  properly  protected.^

3°.  With  respect  to  the  spinal  cord  it  seems  demonstrated  that
a  complète  transverse  section,  or  even  its  destruction  for  a  certain
length,  when  resultiug  in  no  considérable  inflammation  of  the  organ,.
is  not  immediately  followed  by  troubles  of  nutrition  in  the  para-
Ijsed  members.  M.  Brown-Séquard  has  shown  that  the  ulcérations
whicli  appear,  rather  quickly,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  génital  organs
of  mammalia  and  birds,  after  complète  transverse  section  of  Hie  cord,
are  not  direct  conséquences  of  the  absence  of  nervous  influx.  They
are  produced  by  the  prolonged  pressure,  and  the  contact  of  fœcal
matters  and  decomposed  urine,  to  which  thèse  parts  are  exposed.

The  hinder  limbs  of  a  young  cat,  which  survived  for  nearly  three
months  the  complète  destruction  of  the  lumbar  région  of  the  spinal
cord,  were  seen  to  develop  in  a  normal  manner.  The  functions  of
organic  life  seemed  to  proceed  there  in  due  accordance  with  physiologi-
cal  order  ;  the  sécrétion  of  claws  and  hair  went  on  as  in  a  healthy  and
uninjured  animal."

According  to  Valentin,  when  the  posterior  portion  of  the  spinal
cord  has  been  destroyed,  in  mammalia  and  frogs,  you  will  find  the
electrical  contractility  of  the  muscles  of  the  hind  members  persist
until  death  supervene,  that  is  to  say,  for  several  weeks  or  even
several  months  after  the  opération.^

Tosumup:  in  those  animais  whose  spinal  cords  hâve  been  com-
pletely  divided  transversely,  or  extirpated  in  part,  ulcérations  and  even
eschars  may  form,  principally  in  those  régions  subject  to  pressure;

^  See  the  experiments  of  M.  Schiff  relating  to  tliis  subject  in  tlie  thesis  of
M.  Hauser,  entitled  '  Nouvelles  recherches  relatives  à  l'iiiflueuce  du  système
nerveux  sur  la  nutrition,'  Paris,  1858.

"  Browu-Séquard, /oc.  cil.,  pp.  14,  15,  16.

^  Valentin,  'Versuch  eiuer  Physiologischen  Pathologie  der  Nerven,'  2  Abth.>
p.  43,  Leipzig,  1864.


13  INFLUENCE OP VASO-MOTORS.

but  it  is  always  possible  to  attribute  thèse  lésions  to  the  ansesthesia
-and  paralysis,  in  conséquence  of  whicli  the  animal  lies  constantly  in
contact  with  its  excréments  or  uuwittingly  wounds  itself,  when
dragging  about  its  paralysed  members.  As  to  the  atrophy  which
supervenes,  in  the  long  run,  in  the  paralysed  limbs  after  this  opéra-
tion, it  arises  solely,  as  in  the  case  of  the  section  of  the  ischiatic
nervc;  from  the  functional  inertia  to  which  they  are  condemned.

It  follows  from  ail  thèse  facts,  which  expérimental  physiology
offers,  that  the  abolition  of  the  action  of  the  nervous  System,  whether
determined  by  complète  section  of  the  peripheral  nerves  or  by  de-
struction of  a  portion  of  the  spinal  cord,  produces  no  other  nutri-
tive disturbance  in  the  anatomical  éléments  of  the  paralyzed  members
than  what  would  be  caused  in  the  same  éléments  by  the  influence
-of  functional  inertia,  or  prolonged  inaction  alone.

The  discovery  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves  and  of  the  effects  which
follow  the  paralysis  of  thèse  nerves  was  not  destined  to  modify  this
formula»  in  any  essential  manner.  It  is  in  fact  demoustrated  at
présent,  that  neuro-paralytic  hypersemia,  however  far  it  may  go,  is
iiever  of  itself  alone  sufïicient  to  cause  an  altération  in  the  nutrition
of  tissues.  Undoubtedly,  this  hypersemia,  as  M.  Schiff  has  pointed
eut,  créâtes  a  certain  prédisposition  to  inflammatory  action,  which
may  supervene  either  spontaneously  (to  ail  appearance,  at  least)
in  the  diseased  animal  or  in  conséquence  of  irritative  causes  which
would  be  comparatively  trifling  in  a  healthy  organism.  But  lésions
of  nutrition  of  neuro-paralytic  origin  are  nowise  comparable  to  the
trophical  troubles  which  forra  the  spécial  object  of  our  study, — they
■constitute  a  class  apart.  The  latter,  as  we  shall  frequently  hâve
occasion  to  observe,  may  develop  and  accomplish  their  évolution
without  being  preceded  or  accompanied  by  any  of  the  phenomena
which  betray  the  paralytic  state,  or  the  contrary  condition,  of  the
vaso-motor  nerves.  At  présent  we  shall  dwell  no  longer  upou  this
subject,  which  we  shall  hâve  an  opportunity  of  referring  to  here-
after.

III.

If  lésions,  whose  conséquence  is  the  abolition  or  suspension  of
the  action  of  the  nervous  system,  are  impotent  to  produce  in
distant  parts  other  nutritive  disturbances  than  those  attributable  to
prolonged  inaction,  U  is  not  ilins  as  regards  lésions  loliich  détermine
either  in  the  nerves  or  nervous  centres  an  exaltation  of  their
jpro]pertics,  an  irritation ,  or  an  inflammation.


INFLUENCE OF NEEVE-IRRITATION.  15

Tliatj  gentlemen,  is  a  proposition  of  capital  importance  :  it
control?^  in  fact,  tlie  question  which  engages  our  attention.  Althougli
long  since  discovered  by  M.  Brown-Séquard  the  principle  upon
which  it  reposes  is  stillj  if  I  do  not  mistake,  too  frequently  ovcr-
looked  botli  by  physiologists  and  by  pathologists.^  We  shall  find  in
due  time  and  place,  that  human  patliology  présents  many  facts  and
décisive  arguments  in  support  of  this  proposition.  On  the  other
liand,  we  shall  hâve  less  frequently  to  quote  the  results  of  experi-
raents  on  animais.  The  especial  reason  of  this  paucity  lies,
undoubtedly,  in  the  fact  that  the  uervous  tissue  of  animais  seems
inuch  better  able  than  that  of  man  to  resist  the  influence  of  the
diverse  causes  of  irritation  and  inflammation.  AU  experimenters
are  aware  that  even  the  most  serious  traumatic  lésions  of  the  spinal
cord  or  of  the  peripheral  nerves  do  not  readily  produce,  in  the  case
of  most  animais,  a  myelitis  or  a  neuritis,  having  some  duration,  which
could  be  considered  comparable  with  those  developed  so  quickly  in
man,  after  the  very  slightest  lésions.

The  experiments  which  go  to  show  that  irritative  lésions  of  the
nerve-tissues  are  capable  of  determining  varions  trophical  troubles
in  the  parts  they  supply,  are,  as  we  hâve  said,  few  in  number.
They  relate  almost  exclusively  to  the  fifth  pair.

The  following  is  an  abridged  account  of  an  experimeut  of
Samuel  :

In  the  case  of  a  rabbit,  two  needles  are  applied  to  the
Casserian  ganglion  and  an  inductive  current  produced  :  imme-
diately  ensue  a  more  or  less  marked  contraction  of  the  pupil,
and  at  the  same  time  a  slight  injection  of  the  vessels  of  the  con-
junctiva.  The  lachrymal  sécrétion  is  greatly  increased.  The
sensibility  of  the  eyelids,  conjunctiva,  and  cornea  is  augmented.
After  the  opération,  the  contraction  of  the  pupil  persists,  though  not
to  the  same  extent,  and  the  hypersesthesia  is  still  further  increased.
Inflammatory  action  generally  sets  in  at  the  end  of  twenty-four
hours  ;  it  iucreases  in  intensity  during  the  second  and  third  days
and  then  gradually  diminishes.  Ail  the  stages  of  ophthalmia  may
be  observed,  from  the  slightest  conjunctivitis  to  the  most  intense
blenuorrhœa. The  exaltation  of  the  sensibility  still  proceeds,  and

^  '  Note  sur  quelques  cas  d'affectiou  de  la  peau,  dépendent  d'une  influence  du
système  nerveux,'  par  J.  M.  Charcot,  suivies  de  "  Remarques  sur  la  mode  d'in-
fluence du  système  nerveux  sur  la  nutrition,"  par  le  docteur  Brown-Séquard,
'  Journal  de  Physiologie,'  t.  ii.  No.  5,  p.  108,  1859.


14  INFLUENCE OF NERVE-IKRITATION.

tlie  hypersesthesia  may  rise  to  such  a  degree  that,  at  the  sliglitest
touch  of  the  eye,  the  animal  is  seized  with  gênerai  convulsions.  On
the  cornea  a  gênerai  opacity  develops,  and  we  find,  besides,  some-
times  little  exulcerations,  sometimes  a  solitary  oval-shaped  ulcer
occupying  the  middle  portion  of  tins  membrane.  In  one  case  a
small  purulent  collection  formed  in  the  anterior  chamber.  Hypersemia
excepted,  no  pathological  altérations  of  the  iris,  neither  adhérions  nor
changes  of  colour,  are  ever  observed.

In  every  instance,  hypersesthesia  of  the  ophthalmic  branches  of
the  fifth  pair  is  specifically  remarked.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  we
cannot  hère,  as  in  the  experiments  of  Snellen  and  Biittner,  invoke
the  aid  of  ansesthesia  in  order  to  explaiu  the  trophical  troubles
supervening  in  an  imperfectly  protected  eye.^

After  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  divide  the  trifacial  in  a  rabbit,
Meissner  observed  certain  remark able  lésions  of  nutrition  to  ensue
in  the  eye,  which  liad  preserved  its  sensibility.  The  author  care-
fuUy  points  out  that  thèse  lésions  loere  producecl  witliout  Iiavhig  heen
preceded  hy  cmy  sign  of  neuro-paralytic  liyperœmia.  A  post-mortem
examination  revealed  that  the  (internai)  médian  part  of  the  trifacial
alone  had  been  woiinded  by  the  instrument  (a  neurotome).-  Schiff
also  cites  four  cases,  in  support  of  Meissner's  observation,  of  partial
lésions  of  the  trifacial  in  the  cranium,  which  were  followed  by
inflammation  of  the  eye,  although  its  sensibility  persisted.^

In  Samuel's  experiment  trophical  troubles  arose  in  the  eye,  in
conséquence  of  faradaic  irritation  of  the  fifth  pair.  May  we  not
infer  that,  in  the  experiments  of  Meissner  and  Schiff,  the  lésions  of
the  eye  were  caused  by  phlegmasic  irritation  developed  in  the  nerve
in  conséquence  of  the  imperfect  section  ?  In  support  of  this  opinion,
I  would  remind  you  that  incomplète  sections,  in  man,  are  much
raore  likely  than  complète  sections  to  give  rise  to  irritative  action.
This  fact  has  long  been  familiar  to  surgeons.  We  may  suppose
that  it  holds  good,  at  least  to  some  extent,  in  the  case  of  animais
as  well  as  of  man.*

'  Samuel,  'Die  Tropliischen  Nerven,'  Leipzig,  1860,  p.  61.

2  G.  Meissner,  "  Ueber  die  nacli  der  Durciisclineidung  der  Trigeminus  am
Auge  der  Kauinchens  Eintretcnde  Ernaliruugstarung,"  '  Ilenle  und  Pfeufer's
Ztsch.'  (3),  xxix,  96-104.  '  Ceiitralblatt,'  1867,  p.  265.  '  Gazette  Hebdomadale,'
1866,  p.  634.

•■'  Schiff,  '  Henle's  Zeitsch.'  (3),  xxix,  217-229.  '  Centralblatt,'  1867,  p.  655.
'  Gazette  Ilebdom.,'  1867,  p.  634.

^  Tiiis  is  not  the  interprétation  which  Meissner  proposed  for  bis  experiment.


INFLUENCE OP NERVE-IERITATION.  15

Let  me  place,  side  by  side,  with  thèse  facts  several  observations
recorded  in  référence  to  the  human  organism,  to  which  I  shall  after-
wards  recur,  They  relate  also  to  the  trifacial  nerve.  Like  the
preceding  experiments,  they  show  that  irritative  lésions  of  this  nerve,
spontaneously  developed,  may  also,  without  being  followed  by
ansesthesia,  give  rise  to  very  striking  nutritive  disorders  in  the  eye.

A  woman,  aged  57,  whose  case  has  been  noted  by  Bock,i  ex-
perienced,  for  about  a  year,  violent  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the
face.  Thougli  intermittent  at  first,  they  became  afterwards  almost
continuons.  The  sensibility  of  the  face  never  completely  disap-
peared;  sHght  pressure  was,  indeed,  scarcely  felt,  but  if  the  pressure
was  increased,  it  brought  on  acute  pains.  The  conjunctiva  of  the
right  eye  was  injected.  The  cornea,  slightly  opaque  ail  over,  pre-
sented  a  hypertrophie  ulcération  in  its  lower  part,  of  about  two  lines
in  length.  Afterwards,  the  ulcération  increased  in  depth,  and  the
opacity  of  the  cornea  was  augmented.  Perforation  at  last  ensued,
and,  under  the  influence  of  pressure,  issue  was  given  to  a  puriform
liquid.  Death  took  place  unexpectedly.  On  a  post-morteni  exami-
nation  the  Casserian  ganglion  of  the  right  side  was  found  to  be  of
considérable  volume  and  very  hard.  The  three  branches  of  the
right  trifacial  were  likewise  found  much  thickened  up  to  the  point
of  their  émergence  from  the  bone.

The  following  case  is  taken  from  a  memoir  by  rriedreich.-

A  man,  aged  6^,  was  suddenly  smitteu  by  hemiplegia  on  the  right
side,  with  loss  of  sensibility  on  the  same  side. Some  weeks  before

He  supposes  that  the  iunermosfc  flbrils  of  the  trifacial,  which  had  alone  been
eut,  in  the  case  quoted,  hâve  a  spécial  action  on  the  nutrition  of  the  eye.  He
bases  his  opinion  on  this  that,  in  three  other  cases  where  the  trifacial  had
undergoae  incomplète  section,  but  where  the  innermost  nerve-fibrils  had  been
respected,  no  trophical  troubles  in  the  eye  ensued,  although  this  organ  which
had  lost  its  sensibility  was  not  protected  from  external  agencies.  We  think
that  incomplète  sections  need  to  be  repeated  a  considérable  number  of  times
before  it  is  possible  to  pronounce  a  deflnite  judgment  on  the  interprétation
propoSed  by  Meissner.

1  Bock,  'Ugeskrift  for  Laeger,'  1842,  vii,  p.  431.  Extract  in  '  Hannover's
Jahresbericht,'  '  MuUer's  Archiv,'  1844,  p.  47,  and  Schiff's  '  Untersuchungen
zur  Physiologie  des  Nervenssystems  mit  Berûcksichtigung  der  Pathologie,'
Frankfurt  am  Main,  1855,  pp.  61,,  64.

"  Friedreich,  'BeitrJige  zur  Lehre  von  den  Geschwiilsten,  innerhalb  der
Schaedelhohle,' Wurzburg,  1843,  p.  15,  and  Schiff's  '  Untersuchungen,' &c.,
p.  100.


16  INFLUENCE OP NEEVE-IRRITATION.

this  attack  he  had  felt  slight  laucinating  pains  in  tlie  left  side  of
the  face  and  in  the  globe  of  tlie  left  eye.  Thèse  pains  increased
rapidly  and  to  a  high  degree  after  the  apoplectic  attack.  At  the
same  time  the  conjunctiva  of  the  left  eye  became  injected,  and  there
was  an  increase  of  the  lachrymal  sécrétion  :  later  on,  the  conjunc-
tiva was  coated  by  a  pseudo-raembranous  puriform  exudation.  The
left  pupil,  though  very  much  contracted^  was  still  sensitive  to  the
action  of  light.  Sensibility  remained  normal  over  the  whole  of  the
left  side  of  the  face.

At  the  autopsy  there  was  found  at  the  surface  of  the  middle
peduncle  of  the  cerebellum  a  collection  of  little  sarcomatous
tumours,  which,  taken  altogether,  were  about  the  size  of  a  filbert.  The
adjacent  brain-substance,  especially  next  the  cerebellum,  was  softened
and  very  much  injected.  The  left  trifacial  nerve,  at  its  émergence
from  the  base  of  the  encephalon,  was  red,  slightly  softened,  and
flattened  by  the  tumour.

It  would  be  easy  to  quote  a  considérable  number  of  cases  analo-
gous  to  those  \ve  hâve  cited,  but  thèse  will  suffice  for  the  object  we
hâve  now  in  view.i

^  Facts  relating  to  nutritive  disorders  of  tlie  eye,  consécutive  on  spontaneous
lésions  of  j,he  fifth  pair  in  mau,  are  numerous  enougb,  but  we  liave  only  wished
to  mention  those  in  which  it  was  well  establisbed  that  the  facial  sensibility  had
net  been  touched.  The  two  following  cases,  however,  are  also  deserving  of
notice  although  they  are  not  so  explicit,  in  this  respect,  as  those  of  Bock  and
Freidreich.

A  vigorous  individual,  after  a  blow  received  upon  the  head,  became  subject
to  violent  fîxed  pains,  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  and  suffered  occasioually
from  epileptic  fits.  Afterwards,  the  pains  became  localizcd  in  the  right  eye  and
car.  The  eye  was  red,  tumefied,  and  projecting,  but  still  covered  by  the
paralysed  upper  eyelid.  Turbid  cornea  ;  iris,  contracted  and  motionless  ;
brown-coloured  at  first,  then  greenish.  The  cornea  became,  at  length»
opaque.

Post-mortem. — The  lower  surface  of  the  anterior  and  middle  lobes  présent,
on  the  right  side,  several  steatomata  of  the  size  of  a  beau,  or  almond.  The
Casserian  ganglion  and  the  three  branches  of  the  trifacial  are  covered  over  by  a
stiff  cartilaginous  mass.  The  motor  oculi  is  compressed,  and  its  colour  altered.
The  statc  of  the  sensibility  of  the  skiu  of  the  face  is  unl'ortunatcly  not  given
in  this  case.  F.  A.  Landmann,  '  Commentatio  pathologico-atomica  exhibons
morbum  cerebri  oculique  singularem;  '  in-4°,  Leipzig,  1820,  and  ScliilT's
'Untersuch.,'  p.  51.

In  the  well-known  case  recorded  by  Serres,  'Journal  de  Physiologie,' v,
182,5,  pp.  223,  and  '  Anatomie  comparée  du  Cerveau,'  in  spite  of  the  profound
altération  of  the  Casserian  ganglion  and  of  the  roots  of  the  larger  fasciculus  of


CONTRADICTOEY EXPERIMENTS.  17

Apart  from  the  fifth  pair,  expérimental  lésions  of  other  nerves  are
still  more  rarely  found  to  détermine  the  appearance  of  trophical
troubles  in  the  periplieral  parts.  We  should  quote,  however^  as
-cxamples  of  tliis  species,  the  remarkable  effects  produced  upon  the
nutrition  of  the  kidneys  by  lésions  of  the  nerves  supplying  them.
Amongst  the  experimenters  some,  like  Krimer,  Brachet,  Muller  and
Peipers,  A.  Moreau,  and  Wittich,  assert  that  they  can,  almost  with
certainty,  produce,,  by  means  of  thèse  lésions,  more  or  less  deep-
seated  altérations  in  the  kidneys.  Others,  however,  such  as  Paul
Bert  and  Hermann,  on  repeating  the  same  experiments  uuder  appa-
rently  identical  conditions,  déclare  that  they  obtaiued  nothing  but
négative  results.

May  we  not,  at  least  partially,  account  for  this  singular  contradic-
tion, in  the  following  manner  :  no  rénal  lésion  was  manifested  when
nerve-sections  had  been  complète  and  thorough  ;  on  the  contrary,
such  lésion  appeared,  or,  perhaps  I  should  say,  may  hâve  appeared
when  the  section  was  imperfect,  or  when  the  scalpel  was  replaced  by
caustics,  by  ammonia  for  instance  (Corrente,  Scliiff),  thèse  being  cir-
cnmstances  eminently  proper  to  détermine  in  the  injured  nerves  a
more  or  less  active  irritation  or  even  to  set  up  manifest  intlammatory
action.^  Prom  this  point  of  view  the  question  would  probably
deserve  to  be  revised  with  the  help  of  uew  researches.

We  mentioned,  a  little  time  ago,  the  effects  of  transverse  sections
and  partial  destruction  of  the  spinal  cord  in  so  far  as  regards  the
nutrition  of  parts  deprived  of  feeling  and  motion  in  conséquence  of
such  opérations.  We  said  that,  when  the  opérations  did  not  give
rise  to  intlammatory  action  in  the  injured  cord,  (and  this  takes  place
in  the  great  majority  of  cases),  there  are  found  in  the  paralysed
members  simply  a  degeneration  with  atrophy  of  the  muscles,  very
slowly  supervening,  ulcérations  of  the  derm,  and  perhaps  eschars

the  trifacia!,  there  was  not  complète  paralysis  of  the  seusitive  portion  of  the
nerve,  for  the  whole  surface  of  the  face  had  preserved  the  sensé  of  feeliug.
There  had  been  acute  inflammation  of  the  right  eye,  with  œdema  of  the  lids,
obnubilation  and  subsequently  complète  opacitj  of  the  cornea.  The  right
•Casserian  ganglion  was  of  a  greyish  yellow,  tumefied,  and  moist  with  a  serons
exudation.  That  portion  of  the  ganglion  where  the  ophthahnic  nerve  arises
was  red  and  injected.  The  roots  of  the  larger  fasciculus  presented  a  dirty
bue,  contrastiug  with  tlie  colour  of  the  lesser  branch,  wliicli  had  remained
bealthy.  The  three  nerves,  on  issuing  from  the  ganglion,  were  of  a  yellow
colour,  whlch  disappeared  at  their  exit  from  the  cranium.

^  See  '  Zeitschrift  fiir  ration,  Med.,'  35  Bd.,  p.  343.

2


18  IRRITATION OF SPINAL CORD.

caused  by  dragging  over  a  rough  surface,  or  by  continuous  contact
with  decomposed  urine,  and  want  of  cleanliness.  In  one  word,  ail
the  effects,  to  wliich  functional  inertia  of  the  liinder  member  of  ani-
mais give  lise,  are  présent,  and  thèse  only.  But  the  scène  changes
completely  if,  in  conséquence  of  circumstances  that  cannot  be  fore-
seen,  nor  as  yet  produced  at  will,  inflammation  is  set  up  in  the
vicinity  of  the  spinal  lésion.  Then,  indeed,  as  M.  Brown-Séquard
has  shown,  and  as  I  hâve  had  many  opportunities  of  observing,
muscular  change  takes  place  with  great  rapidity  ;  in  but  a  few  days
after  the  opération,  the  altération  is  very  manifest.  The  emaciation
of  the  muscular  masses  soon  becomes  appréciable,  and  makes  very
quick  progress.  Eruptions  appear  on  the  skin  which  promptly  issue
in  the  formation  of  ulcérations  and  of  eschars,  though  the  most
minute  care  be  taken  to  préserve  cleanliness.  They  develop  espe-
ciaUy  in  those  régions  which  are  subject  to  pressure,  to  friction,  to
prolonged  contact  with  the  urine  ;  but  they  may  also  make  their
appearance  apart  from  thèse  conditions,  although  the  cases  are
rare,^

I  might  dwell,  at  length,  on  thèse  trophic  troubles  connected
with  traumatic  inflammation  of  the  spinal  cord  in  animais,  but  it
will  be  more  appropriate  to  recur  to  the  matter  when  studying  the
features  of  myelitis,  spontaneously  developed  in  man.  Besides,  I
hâve  no  désire  to  prolong  overmuch  this  incursion  into  the  field  of
expérimental  physiology.  We  hâve  already  obtaiued  one  resuit,  if
I  mistake  not  ;  the  facts  quoted  suffice,  it  seems  to  me,  to  establish
that  the  abolition  oftJie  action  of  ilie  nervoiis  System  has  no  direct
immédiate  influence  on  the  peripheral  parts — on  the  other  hand,
they  make  it  appear  at  least  extremely  probable  that  morhid
excitation  or  irritation of  the  nerves  or  nerve-centres  are  of a

^  It  is  doubtless  in  the  same  manner,  that  is,  by  invokinf:^  the  existence  of
inflammation  about  the  injured  point,  that  we  should  explain  the  disorders  that
sometimes  occur  in  the  nutrition  of  the  eye,  in  many  animais,'  after  section  of
a  latéral  half  of  the  spinal  cord,  in  the  back.  Tlie  affections  of  the  eye
(ulcérations,  melting  away  of  the  cornea,  purulent  conjunctivitis),  observed  by
M.  Brown-Séquard  in  the  guinea-pig  ('  Comptes-Ecndus  de  la  Société  de
Biologie,'  t.  ii,  1850,  p.  134)  hâve  been  met  with  by  M.  Vulpiaii,  in  the  frog,
after  the  section  of  the  correspondiiig  half  of  the  cord,  near  the  medulla
oblongata  (this  fact  was  orally  communicated).  Such  affections  do  not  super-
vcne  in  ail  animais  which  hâve  been  thus  opcrated  on,  and  it  is  at  least  highly
probable  that  they  arise  only  in  cases  where,  conséquent  on  the  section,  au
iûflammatory  action  was  set  up  in  the  superior  segment  of  the  spinal  cord.


TEAUMATIC NEEVE-LESIONS.  19

nature  to  give  rise  to  the  most  various  nutritive  dérangements  in
distant  parts.

By  what  means  or  mechanism  does  this  irritation  of  the  nervous
System  react  upon  the  peripheral  parts,  and  détermine  there  lésions
of  nutrition  such  as  those  we  hâve  mentioned?  Are  thèse  due
to  an  irritation  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves  or  to  their  paralysis?
Or  do  they  dépend  on  an  irritation  of  those  hypothetical  nerves,
which  anatomy  as  yet  knows  not,  and  which  are  sometimes  called
lâ'ophic  nerves?  Thèse  are  questions  which  we  shall  hâve  to
discuss  hereafter  ;  at  présent  we  must  return  to  the  domain  of
human  pathology,  and  I  hope  to  make  you  acknowledge  that  the
principle  already  set  out  by  expérimental  physiology  has  its  applica-
tion hère  in  a  still  more  manifest  manner.  This  principle  shall  be
our  due,  and  it  will  lead  us,  I  hope,  to  comprehend  why  lésions,
which  appear  at  first  sight  similar  and  which  are  referrible  to  the
same  points  of  the  nervous  or  peripheral  Systems,  should  produce,
in  pathological  cases,  results  so  opposite  and  even  so  contradictory
in  appearance.

The  trophic  troubles  which  we  purpose  to  pass  in  review  are
produced :

1°.  By  lésions  of  the  peripheral  nerves,  which  lésions  may  be
either  due  to  traumatic  causes  or  spontaneously  developed.

2°.  By  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord  and  of  the  meduUa  oblongata.

3°.  By  lésions  of  certain  portions  of  the  encephalon.

Trophic  Disorders  conséquent  on  Lésions  of  the  Nerves.

Let  us  commence  by  considering  lésions  of  the  nerves.  They
présent  the  simplest  conditions  of  study.  Surgery,  in  this  respect,
supplies  us  with  records  of  great  value  ;  for  traumatic  lésions  of
the  nerves  are  occasionally  to  be  observed  in  the  human  organism,
under  conditions  of  simplicity  comparable  with  those  accompanying
the  expérimental  lésions  inflicted  on  animais.

A.  At  the  outset,  I  shall  establish  what  I  consider  to  be  a
fundamental  distinction  between  thèse  traumatic  lésions  of  nerves,
the  importance  of  which  you  will  soon  perceive.  i°.  The  lésion
sometimes  consists  of  a  clean  and  complète  section,  in  which  case
the  effects  are  merely,  speaking  generally,  those  resulting  from  the
absence  of  nerve-action  ;  2°,  sometimes,  owing  to  contused  or
lacerated wounds,  the  lésion  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  set  up


20  AFFECTIONS OF THE SKIN.

irritation  iu  the  nerve,  in  wliich  case,  and  then  only,  we  see  arise
those  tropliical  troubles  to  which  I  invite  your  attention.  Let
us  fîrst  consider  the  cases  belonging  to  the  second  group.

The  traumatic  nerve-lesions  iti  question  may  give  rise  to  morbid
phenomena  affecting  the  skin,  the  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue,
the  muscles,  the  joints,  and  the  bones.  You  are  aware  that  the
last  American  war  has  furnished  occasion  for  some  very  important
studies  on  this  subject;  they  hâve  been  given  to  the  public  by
Dr  s.  Weir  Mitchel,  Morehouse,  and  Keen  in  an  interesting  work
of  which  we  shall  often  avail  ourselves.^  To  one  of  my  former
students,  the  late  lamented  Mougeot,  we  also  owe  a  very  remark-
able  treatise  on  cutaneous  affections  developed  under  the  influence
of  lésions  of  the  peripheral  nerves.  It  is  not  to  be  expected
that  I  can  enter  into  détails,  and  consequently  I  must  refer  any  of
you  who  désire  to  investigate  this  question  fuUy,  to  the  thesis  of
Mougeot,  in  which  ail  records  relative  to  the  subject  hâve  been
most  carefully  brought  together."

a.  Sk'm  affections. — The  accidents  which  traumatic  nerve-lesions
may  occasion  in  the  integuments  are  of  several  kinds  :

1°.  The  first  includes  éruptions,  of  varions  forms,  but  chiefiy
those  characterised  by  vesicles  and  bulla3.  We  shall  cite,  in  the
first  place,  the  zona  [herpès  zoster),  which  is  frequently  observed  in
such  cases,  and  which  on  that  account  might  be  designated  zona
traumaiica.  I  described,  at  the  time,  a  very  fine  spécimen  of  this
kind,  observed  at  the  hospital  of  La  Charité,  under  the  treatment  of
my  master,  Eayer.-^ The  American  surgeons,  already  mentioned,

^  S.  Weir  Mitchel,  G.  E..  Morehouse,  and  W.  Keen,  '  Guushot  Wounds
and  other  injuries  of  Nerves.'  Philadclphia,  1864.  Extract  in  'Archives
Générales  de  Médecine/  1865,  t.  i.  Tiiis  work  lias  been  translated  into  Freuch
.by  Dr.  Dastre  (1874).

2  J»  B.  A.  Mougeot,  '  Recherches  sur  quelques  troubles  de  nutrition  cou-
eecutives  aux  affections  des  nerfs,'  Paris,  1867.

'  "A  patient,  admitted  into  Dr.  Raycr's  wards  in  1851,  Lad  duriug  the
troubles  of  June,  1848,  received  a  bullet  iu  the  outer  inferior  part  of  the  tiiigh.
Some  timeafter  the  wound  had  healed,  acute  pains  in  the  leg  supervened,  which
were  almost  continuous,  but  with  occasional  cxaccrbations.  Thèse  pains,  which
seemcd  to  start  from  the  cicatrix,  extended  io  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  and  fol-
lowed  evidently  the  course  of  the  nerves.  This  neuralgia,  which  resisted  ail  incans
of  cure  cmploycd,  was  several  times,  during  the  patient's  sojourn  at  La  Charité,
acconipanicd  by  an  éruption  of  herpctic  vesicles,  arraugcd  in  grou;)s  closcly
resembling  those  of  herpès  zoster  and  occupying  the  skin  of  the  painl'ul  parts.'


AFFECTIONS OF THE MUSCLES.  2V

have  describedj  under  the  name  of  eczematous  éruptions,  an  affection
of  the  skin  whicli  may  be  placed  witli  this  form.

2°.  The  second  kind  includes  pemphigoid  éruptions,  of  which
I  have  also  described  a  well-marked  spécimen.  Hère  we  see  the
pemphigus  buUse  developing  with  great  rapidity,  and  reappearing
from  time  to  time  on  différent  parts  of  the  tegumentary  System  sup-
pKed  by  the  wounded  nerve.  They  leave  after  them  well-nigh
indelible  scars.  This  kind  of  éruption  is  sometimes  seen  on  vicious
cicatrices,  and  is  then  most  probably  due  to  irritation  set  up  in  some
nerve-filament  which  bas  been  either  strained  or  compressed  in  the
cicatricial  tissue.

3°.  In  the  third  place  we  may  note  a  cutaneous  redness,  whicÈ'
resembles  erytliema  pernio  ;  ^  and  a  certain  tuméfaction  of  the  skin
and  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue,  as  remarked  by  Hamilton,  which
simulate  phlegmon  (pseudo-phlegmon).^

4°.  rinally,  we  have  that  cutaneous  affection  which  bas  been
described  by  the  American  surgeons  under  the  name  of  "  Glossy
Skin.^^  The  skin  becomes  smooth,  pale,  and  bloodless;  the
sudoriparous  glands  are  atrophied,  and  their  sécrétion  is  diminished;
the  epidermis  is  cracked,  and  the  nails  likewise  are  cracked  and
curved  in  a  very  remarkable  manner.  Hère,  in  fact,  we  have  to
deal  with  a  peculiar  inflammation  of  the  skin,  which  recalls  some  of
the  features  of  the  disease  known  as  scleroderma.

è.  Affections  qf  the  Muscles. — The  muscles  waste  away  often  in  a
very  rapid  manner,  and  lose  sometimes  partially,  sometimes  com-

Charcot,  "  Sur  quelques  cas  d'affection  de  la  peau,  dépendant  d'une  influence
du  système  nerveux,"  'Journal  de  Physiologie,'  t.  ii,  No.  5,  Janvier,  1859.

In  the  sanie  Journal,  an  analogous  case  was  recorded  by  M.  Rouget.  "  A
husbandman,  whilst  lea])ing  a  trench,  received  a  charge  of  rabbit-shot  from  bis
gun,  in  the  middle  région  and  on  the  iuner  side  of  the  left  arm.  In  the  bottoov
of  the  wound,  which  was  over  three  inches  wide,  one  saw  the  brachial  artery^
the  torn  basilic  vein  and  several  contused  nerves,  especially  the  internai  brachial
cutaneous.  The  wound  healed  quickly  enough,  but  in  about  from  two  and  a
half  to  three  nionths,  there  supervened  a  herpes-like  éruption  on  the  posterior-
internal  part  of  the  forearm,  occupying  an  area  of  some  two  inches  in  diameter,
in  a  portion  of  the  forearm  deprived  of  feeling.  Examples  of  herpès  following
on  a  contusion  over  the  course  of  a  nerve  (Oppolzer),  or  resulting  from  a  straia
or  an  effort  (Thomas),  are  far  from  rare." {Vide  Mougeot,  loc.  cit.,  p.  38.)

'  Charcot,  loc.  cit.,  '  Eruption  particulière  siégeant  sur  la  face  dorsale  d'une
main  et  des  doigts,  et  probablement  consécutive  à  la  lésion  des  filets  nerveux
qui  se  distribuent  a  ces  parties.'

-  Mougeot,  loc.  cit.,  p.  30.


22  AFFECTIONS OF THE JOINTS AND BONES.

pletely,  tlieir  electrical  contractility.  But  this  muscular  atropliy  will
form  the  subject  of  a  spécial  study.

c.  Affections  of  the  Joints. — Traumatic  nerve-lesions  produce,  in
relation  to  the  joints^  symptoms  wliich  recall  in  a  marked  mauner
the  features  of  subacute,  articular  rheumatism.  Thèse  arthropathies
usually  terminate  in  anchylosis.

d.  Affections  of  the  Bones. — Under  similar  circumstances  we
occasionally  find  periostitis  produced,  often  followed  by  necrosis.

But  I  shall  not  proceed  further  with  this  brief  enumeration,  as
what  we  hâve  seen  will  suffice  for  our  purpose.  It  is  important,
especially  at  présent,  to  endeavour  to  specify,  as  exactly  as  possible,
the  particular  conditions  under  the  influence  of  which  thèse  trophical,
troubles  are  developed,  after  traumatic  lésions  of  the  nerves.

Paget,  who  was  one  of  the  first  to  call  attention  to  thèse  acci-
dents, does  not  hesitate  to  confess  his  ignorance  in  relation  to  them.^
The  American  surgeons,  on  the  other  hand,  whom  we  hâve  already
quoted,  hâve  succeeded  in  determining  the  conditions  in  question,
and  tlieir  testimony  is  the  more  valuable  to  us  hère,  because  it  is
based  upon  observation  alone,  wholly  empirical,  and  free  from  any
preconceived  idea.  After  having  remarked,  as  indeed  Paget  had
done  before  them,  that  thèse  consécutive  affections  are  almost  always
preceded  or  accompanied  by  burning  pains  (evidently  correlated  to
an  irritative  condition  of  the  injured  nerve),  whilst  anœsthesia  is
almost  altogether  absent,  they  explicitly  point  ont  that  thèse  dis-
orders  usually  take  place  after  contusions,  punctiires,  incom/plete
sections  of  the  nerves, — that  is  to  say,  after  traumatic  causes  which
are  most  compétent  to  produce  neuritis,  or  at  least  the  neuralgic
condition.  On  the  other  hand,  and  upon  this  our  authors  insist,
thèse  dérangements  are  not  observed  to  follow  complète  sections  of  the
nerves  the  common  conséquences  of  the  abolition  of  nervous  action
being  the  only  phenomena  perceptible  in  such  cases.

It  should  be  added,  in  conclusion,  that  the  peripheral  affections
which  are  attributable  to  nervous  irritation,  occur  spontaneously  in
tlie  mojority  of  cases,  witliout  the  intervention  of  pressure,  or  of  any
external  cause  whatever.^

But  thèse  can  only  be  looked  upon  as  very  gênerai  conditions  :
we  should  be  able  to  penetrate  more  deeply  and  seek  whether  there

•  Paget,  '  Médical  Times  and  Gazette,'  Loudon,  March  26,  1864.
-  'Gunsbot  Wound?,'  etc.,  loc.cit.,  pp.  71-77,  aud  'Archives  Générales  de
Médecine,'  t.  i,  1865,  pp.  188,  191,  194.


INFLUENCE OF NERVE-IREITATION.  23

does  not  exist  in  tlie  affecied  iierves  a  constant  anatomical  lésion
that  can  be  correlated  with  the  manifestation  of the  peripheral
lésions. Unfortunately^  we  must  confine  ourselves  liere  to  pointing
out  a  lacuna  which  future  research  will  not,  undoubtedlj,  fail  soon
to  fill. However,  the  symptoms,  taken  as  a  whole,  plead  already
in  favour  of  the  existence  of  a  neuritis. In  addition,  we  may  appeal
to  the  necroscopical  results  which  hâve  been  obtained,  in  certain  cases
of  organic  nerve-lesions,  in  which  thewhole  séries  of  peripheral  affec-
tions that  we  hâve  learned  to  recognise  as  a  conséquence  of  traumatic
lésions  may  be  observed, Infûct,  in  thèse  cases,  (which  will  shortly
engage  our  attention),  the  afFected  nerves  hâve  been  sometimes  found
tumefied,  infiltrated  with  exuded  matter,  and  greatly  congested. Ex-
amined  under  the  microscope, we  discern  a  more  or less  well-
marked  multiplication  of  the  nuclei  of  the  tube-sheaths  (sheaths  of
Schwann)  or  of  those  of  the  neurilemma  and  sometimes,  moreover,
ail  the  signs  of  grauular  degeneration  of  the  medullary  cylinders.
Nothing  as  yet,  however,  proves  that  an  irritation  capable  of  deter-
mining  the  production  of  remote  trophic  troubles  may  not exist
in  the  nerve  without  beiug  betrayed  by  such  comparatively  coarse
lésions. It  is  opportune  hère  to  point  out  that  every  neuritis  does
not  necessarily  entail  the  manifestation  of  trophic  troubles. The
case  is  quite  otherwise. In  order  that  thèse  should  follow,  the
intervention  of  certain  circumstances  is  required,  which  analysis  has
not  as  yet  enabled  us  to  describe. The  fact  mentioned  stands  out
in  contrast  with  what  we  know  of  those  lésions  which  supervene,
in  distant  parts,  after  complète  nerve-sections,  for  the  latter  may  be
looked  upon  as  obligatory  and  inévitable  conséquences  of every
nerve  lésion  which  absolutely  deprives  the  parts  in  question  of  the
influence  of  the  nervous  system.

However  this  be  considered,  the  influence  of  the  irritation  of  a
nerve  upon  the  development  of  the  nutritive  dérangement  with
which  we  are  concerned,  is  set  under  a  strong  light  and  rendered
manifest,  as  it  were,  by  the  observation  of  cases  in  which  thèse  acci-
dents, after  a  teraporary  disapjîearance,  are  seen  to  be  reproduced  on
every  reappearance  of  the  irritative  cause.  As  an  example,  I  will
mention  a  well-known  and  often  quoted  case,  which  Paget  relates
on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Hilton  :

A  patient,  under  treatment  in  Guy's  Hospital,  for  fracture  of  the
inferior  extremity  of  the  radius  was  found  to  hâve  acquired  a  volumi-
nous  callus  which  compressed  the  médian  nerve. Ulcers  that  proved


24  SrONTANEOUS NERVE-LESIO^'S.

rebellious  to  ail  curative  efforts  had  formed,  in  conséquence,,  on  thc
skin  of  the  thunnb  and  of  the  first  hvo  Angers  of  the  hand.  By
flexing  the  wrist  so  as  to  relax  the  soft  parts  of  the  palmar  sur-
face and  tlms  to  relieve  the  nerve  from  compression,  it  was  alwajs
found  possible  to  bring  about  the  cure  of  the  ulcers  in  a  fevv
days.  But  as  soon  as  the  patient  tried  to  make  use  of  his  haiid
the  nerve  was  again  subjected  to  compression  and  the  ulcers  were
were  observed  to  reappear  with  but  little  delay.^

B.  It  now  remains  for  us  to  consider  those  trophic  disorders
which  arise  in  conséquence  of  spontaneously  developed,  non-trau-
matic,  nerve-lesions.  As  I  hâve  given  you  to  understand,  \ve  shall
hère  encounter  the  whole  séries  of  affections  whicli  we  hâve  just  re-
viewed.  This  circumstance  will  perniit  me  to  deal  briefly  with  the
matter;  it  is  enough  to  quote  some  typical  examples,  the  majority  of
which  I  borrow  from  the  rich  treasury  of  facts  accumulated  in  M.
Mougeot^s  work."

To  demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  transition  I\vill  mention,  in  the
iirst  place,  certain  cases  in  which  an  influence,  not  properly  traumatic
but  yet  belonging  to  the  mechanical  order,  bas  determined  an  affec-
tion of  the  nerve.  It  is  manifestly  in  this  manner  that  trophic
disorders  of  the  eye,  conséquent  on  lésions  of  the  trifacial,  are  pro-
duced,  as  in  such  cases  the  cause  is  usually  found  to  be  this,
namely,  that  intracranial  tumours,  developed  in  the  vicinity  of  the
nerve,  détermine  in  it  by  compression  a  more  or  less  active  irrita-
tion Avithout  effecting  any  solution  of  continuity  m  the  nerve-
tubes.  Cancer  of  the  vertébral  column  may,  as  you  are  aware,  bring
on  softening  of  tlie  vertebrœ  to  such  an  extent  that  the  laminœ  give-
way  and  the  intervertébral  notches  are  narrowed.  The  nerves  in
their  transit  through  thèse  foramina  are  consequently  compressed),
irritated,  and  sometimes  becomeinflamed.  Under  such  circumstances
I  hâve  seen  an  herpetic  éruption  occupy,  on  the  right  side,  ail  the
cutaneous  régions  supplied  by  branches  of  the  cervical  plexus,  in
conséquence  of  the  compression  to  which  the  nerves  that  go  to  form
it  were  subjected,  in  their  exit  through  the  spinal  foramina.  The
cervical  portion  of  the  cord  itself  and  the  roots  of  the  cervical
nerves  were  healthy,  as  the  post-mortem  examination  showed,  but  on
opening  the  right  foramina  the  spinal  ganglia  and  the  nerve  trunks

•  J.  Paget,  'Lectures  on  Surgical  Patlioloc'y,'  v.  i,  p.  43.
-  Motifijeot,  loc.  cil.,  cliaj).  ii,  "Des  lésions  organiques  des  nerfs  et  {Ie3~
troubles  de  nutrition  consécutifs."


IISU^LAMMATION OF THE SPINAL KEEVES.  25>

were  found  tumefied  and  of  a  vivid  red  colour.  Moreover^  in  tlie
gaiiglia  as  in  the  iierves  we  saw,  ou  a  microscopical  examination,.
tliat  tbere  had  been  a  vast  multiplication  of  nuclei.  On  the  con-
trary,  the  gauglia  and  uerves  of  tlie  left  side  presented  uo  trace  of
altération. 1

It  is  highly  remaïkable  to  find  tbat  an  inflammation,  strictiy
limited  to  the  spinal  gauglia  and  nerves,  may  be  devcloped
spontaneously  and  without  the  intervention  of  any  raechanical  cause,
giving  lise  nevertlieless,  as  Von  Biirensprung  bas  sbown^  to  an
herpetic  éruption,  in  tbose  cutaueous  régions  to  whicli  tbe  uerves,
under  irritation,  are  distributed.-  Tbere  are  some  reasons  for
believiug  tbat  a  considérable  number  of  cases  of  spontaneous
berpes  make  their  appearauce  in  conséquence  of  a  neuritis  of  tbis
kind.^  Tbe  spinal  gauglia  also  bave  been  found  mucb  altered,.
althougb  neitber  the  spinal  cord,  nor  the  anterior  and  posterior
uerve-roots,  nor  even  the  intercostal  uerves  tbemselves  participated
in  the  lésion.  A  case  in  point  bas  been  recently  noted  by  Herr
E.  Wagner.^

An  individual,  aged  23,  sufferiug  from  pulmonary  pbtbisis^
complained,  towards  the  close  of  bis  existence,  of  an  berpetic
éruption  occupying  tbe  régions  corresponding  to  tbe  niutb  and
tentb  intercostal  uerves  of  tbe  left  side.  On  post-mortem  examina-
tion,  it  was  found  tbat  tbe  bodies  of  the  six  inferior  dorsal  and  two-
superior  lumbar  vertebrœ  had  been  attacked  by  caries.  Tbe  dura
mater  in  the  région  corresponding  to  thèse  vertebrae  was  surrounded
externally  by  a  thick  layer  of  caseous  pus  whicb  extended  to  tbe  nerve-
sbeatbs  and  spinal  gauglia.  Tbe  dura  mater  itself  was  tbickened
and  split  into  two  lamiuœ,  especially  in  tbe  neigbbourbood  of  the
nintb,  tentb,  and  eleventb  dorsal  uerve-roots.  Althougb  tbe
lésions  of  tbe  dura  mater  seemed  as  well  marked  on  tbe  right  side

1  Ciiarcot  et  Cotard,  "  Sur  un  cas  de  zona  du  cou  avec  altération  des  nerfs
du  plexus  cervical  et  des  ganglions  correspondent  s  des  racines  spinales  pos-
térieures," 'Mémoires  de  la  Société  de  Biologie.' Année  1865,  p.  41.

-  Von  Biirensprung,  "Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  Zoster,"  '  Arcliiv  i'iir
Anat.  uud  Pbysiolog.,'  No.  4,  1865,  and  '  Canstatt's  Jahresb.,'  1864,  t.  iv,  p.
128.

^  ]\Iougeot,  loc.  cit.,  p.  65.

■•  U.  Th.  Bahrdt,  "  Beitrage  zur  /Eùologie  des  Herpès  Zoster,"  Diss.  Leipzig,
1869,  and  E.  Wagner,  "  Patholog.  Anatomische  uud  Klinische  Beitrage  zur
Kenntniss  der  Gefiisnerven."  'Arcliiv  der  Heilkunde,'  4e  lieft,  Leipzig,  1870,.
p.  321.


26  TROPHICAL DISORDERS FROM NBUEITIS.

as  on  the  left,  yet  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  dorsal  ganglia  of
the  left  side  only  were  swollen  and  presented  appréciable  altérations
under  the  microscope.  In  thèse  three  ganglia  the  nerve-cells  had
disappeared,  and  in  the  immédiate  vicinity  of  their  vacant  alveolse
were  seen  ail  the  signs  of  abnormal  prolifération  in  the  connective
tissue,  carried  to  an  advanced  stage.

In  many  cases  of  chronic  spinal  meningitis,  accompanied  by
thickening  of  the  dura  mater,  I  hâve  myself  observed  the  con-
<îomitant  inflammation  of  the  spinal  nerves  (in  their  passage  through
the  méninges)  give  rise,  not  only  to  more  or  less  well-marked
atrophy  of  the  muscular  mass,  but  also  to  varions  cutaneous
€ruptions  which  generally  presented  the  appearance  either  of  zona
or  of  pemphigus.  In  a  lecture  delivered  at  Dublin,^  M.  Brown-
Séquard  had  previously  pointed  out  the  existence  of  spécial
«utaneous  éruptions  on  the  arms  in  cases  of  spinal  meningo-
neuritis  localised  in  the  inferior  portion  of  the  cervical  région.

Erythema,  zona,  muscular  atrophy,  and  certain  arthropathies
hâve  been  correlated,  by  M.  Duménil,  with  chronic  progressive
neuritis,^  and  by  M.  Leudet  with  peripheral  neuritis,  consécutive
■on  asphyxia  from  charcoal  fumes.*

But  it  is,  above  ail,  in  anasthetic  lepra  that  we  encounter  in
their  full  development  the  trophical  disorders  which  we  hâve  studied
in  connection  with  traumatic  nerve-lesious.  The  initial  morbid
process  hère  consists,  as  we  learn  from  the  important  researches  of
Herr  Virchow,^  in  a  leprous  permeuritis  characterised  by  a  spécial
cell-proliferation,  in  the  space  between  the  iierve-tubes,  wliich
■détermines  their  slow  destruction.  The  nerves,  then,  frequently
présent  in  their  course  a  spindle-shaped  swelling  which  may  some-
times  be  readily  recognised,  during  life,  in  régions  where  they  lie
superficial,  as  the  ulnar  nerve  at  the  elbow,  and  thus  assist  in  the
diagnosis.  Thèse  altérations  give  rise,  at  the  outset,  to  symptoms
of  hyperaîsthesia,  and  afterwards  to  those  of  ansesthesia.

'  'Quarterly  Journal  of  Medicine,'  May,  1865  [pp.  11,  12  of  spécial  édition].

*  Dunicnil,  '  Contributions  pour  servir  <\  l'histoire  des  paralysies  périphériques,
spécialement  de  la  névrite." '  Gazette  Hebdomadaire,'  1868. Nos.  4,  5,  6.

•'*  Leudet,  '  Recherches  sur  les  troubles  des  nerfs  périphériques  et  surtout
des  vaso-moteurs,  consccul  ifs  a  l'aspliyxie  par  la  vapeur  du  charbon,"  '  Arciiives
Générales  de  Médecine,'  Mai,  1865.

*  R.  Virchow,"  Die  Krankhaften  Geschwiilste,"  '  Nerven-Lcpra,'  t.  ii,  p.  521,
1864-5.


LEPHOUS TERINEURITIS.  27

With  the  exception  of  zona,  whicli  I  liave  not  seen  mentioned
anywhere,  we  find  in  thèse  circumstances  almost  the  whole  séries  of
the  trophical  lésions  which  we  hâve  already  described  :  a,  pemphigus
as  pemjohigiis  leprosus  ;  h,  "  glossy  skin  ;"  c,  muscular  atrophy  ;
d,  periostitis  and  finally  necrosis.  When  the  latter  lésions  attain  a
high  degree  of  intensity  we  may  hâve  occasionally  to  note,  you  are
aware,  the  loss  of  part  of  a  member.  This  often  happens  without
pain  ;  because,  when  it  does  occur,  anœsthesia  is  usually  présent
{J,epra  mutilans)}  Some  hâve  attributed  thèse  varions  accidents
and  mutilations  to  the  effects  of  the  ansesthesia.  It  should  not,
certainly,  be  regarded  as  the  soie  efficient  cause  ;  for  it  is  not  only
proved  that  this  merely  facilitâtes  the  intervention  of  external
agencies,  but  also  that  it  can  be  relegated  to  a  secondary  position,
and  even  eliminated  altogether  if  we  take  into  account  the  cases
given  by  Dr.  Thomson  in  which  there  was  absolutely  no  ausesthesia."

We  hâve  hère  been  able  only  to  pass  rapidly  in  review  the  disor-
ders  of  nutrition  which  resuit  from  irritative  lésions  of  the  peri-
pheral  nerves.  In  the  foUowing  lectures  we  will  return  to  the
subject  again,  but  our  principal  object  will  be  to  describe  the  tro-
phical troubles  which  are  correlated  to  lésions  of  the  brain  and  spinal
cord.

1  P.  Steudener,  '  Beitriige  zur  Pathologie  der  Lepra  Mutilans.'  Mit  3  Taf.
Erlangeu,  1867.

"  A.  S.  Thomson,  '  Brit.  aud  Por.  Med.-Chir.  Review,'  1854,  April,  p.  496,
quoted  by  H.  Virchow.


LECTUEE IL

NUTRITIVE  DISOEDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  NERVE-LESIONS
{Continued).  AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  MUSCLES.  NUTRITIVE
DISORDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF  THE  SPINAL
CORD.

SuMMARY. — Anatomical  and  functional  modifications  occnrrlng  in
muscles  iinder  the  injluence  of  lésions  of  tlie  nerves  supplt/ivg
t/iem.  Importance  of  electrisation  as  a  means  of  diagnosis  and
prognosis.  Besearc/ies  of  Dr.  Buchenne  {de  Boulogne').  Ex-
perïments  :  Bong  persiste7ice  of  the  electrical  contractility  and
of  normal  nutrition  qf  muscles,  after  the  section  or  excision  of
motor  or  mixed  nerves  in  the  case  of  animais.  Pathological
cases  :  Bimitmtion  or  speedy  abolition  of  the  electrical  contrac-
tility, folloioed  hy  rapid  atrojphy  of  the  muscles  in  cases  of
rheumatic  paralysisof  the  facial  nerve,  and  of  irritative  lésions
of  mixed  nerves,  lohether  qf  traumatic  or  spontaneous  origin.
Cause  of  apparent  contradiction  helween  the  results  of  cxperiment
and  thefacts  of  pathology .  Application  ofthe  researches  ofM.
Brown-Séquard  :  Britative  nerve-lesïons  olone  détermine  the
speedy  abolition  of  electrical  contractility ,  foUowed  by  rapid
atrophy  ofthe  muscles.  Experiments  ofMM.  Erb,  Ziemssen,  and
0.  IFeiss.  Contusion  and  ligation  qf  nerves  are  irritative  lésions.
BifJ'erence  of  the  results  obtained  in  the  exploration  qf  muscles
ivhen  faradisation  and  galvanisation  are  employed.  The  results
of  thèse  neiv  researches  are  comparable  with  the  facts  of  himan
pathology  ;  they  do  not  weahen  the  2^roposition  of  M.  Broivn-
Scqnard.

Trophic  disorders  consécutive  on  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord.
Considered  with  regard  to  their  influence  on  the  nutrition  of  the
rauscles  thèse  lésions  constituie  two  %oell-defined  group)S.

First  group  :  lésions  of  the  cord  having  no  direct  influence  on
muscular  nutrition  :  a,  lésions  in  circumscribed  spots  affecting
the  grey  substance  to  but  a  slight  extent  vertical ly,  e.  g.  partial


AFFECTIONS OF THE MUSCLES.  29

mi/eUfis,  timours,  PoU's  disease  ;  h,  extemive  fasclcnlated
lésions  of  the  wJiite  posterior  or  antero -latéral  columns,  wiihont
tlie  grey  matter  participating  ;  e.g.  primitive  or  sccomlary
sclerosis  qf  the  posterior,  antero-lateral  columns,  S^c.

Second group  :  Usions  of  the  spinal  cord  which  influence,  more
or  less  rapidhj,  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  :  a,  fasciculated  or
circumscribed  lésions  which  affect  the  anterior  cornua  qf  the
grey  matter  to  a  certain  extent,  in  Iteight  ;  central  myelitis,
hœmatomyelia,  8fc. — è,  irritative  lésions  of  the  large  nerve-cells
of  the  anterior  cornua  with  or  loithout  participation  on  the  part
of  the  white  fasciculi  :  infantile  spinal paralysis,  spinal  para-
lysis  qfadults,  gênerai  spinal  paralyses  {Duchenne  de  Boulogne),
progressive  muscular  atropihy,  Sfc.  Predotninant  inflioence
of  lésions  of  the  grey  matter  in  the  production  of  trophical
trouLles  of  the  muscles.  Thèse  facts  can  le  interpreted  hy
means  of  Brown-Séiiuard' s  proposition.

Gentlemen. — In  the  preceding  lecture,  whilst  sketching  the  liis-
tory  of  nutritive  troubles  consécutive  on  nerve-lesious,  I  purposely
avoided  dwelling  on  the  anatomical  or  functional  modifications  to  be
found  in  muscles  under  the  influence  of  thèse  lésions.  I  desired  to
reserve  this  question  for  a  spécial  study.  In  reality,  as  you  will
soon  acknowledge,  this  is  a  subject  surrounded  by  difficulties  of  ail
kinds  and  is  even  now  the  object  of  a  thousand  controversies.

You  are  aware  of  the  great  progress  which  has  been  made  in  the
clinical  history  of  paralytic  affections,  under  the  influence  of  the
labours  of  Dr.  Duchenue  (de  Boulogne).  But  you  know  also,  with-
out  doubt,  that  a  considérable  number  of  the  facts  discovered  by
this  eminent  pathologist  seem  to  be  in  flagrant  contradiction  with  the
results  obtained  by  physiologists  in  their  experiments  upon  animais.

What  is  the  reason  of  this  discordance  ?  In  what  direction  are
we  to  look  for  means  of  eifecting  a  reconciliation  between  them  ?
Thèse  are  desiderata,  which  I  do  not  undertake  to  answer  in  a
manner  perfectly  satisfactory  on  every  point.  Yet  I  must  not  recoil
from  before  the  difïîculty  ;  I  am  bound,  at  least,  to  examine  it.  To  be
candid,  I  feel  some  répugnance  to  treat  a  question,  where  the  results
of  the  electrical  exploration  of  nerves  and  muscles  must  be  con-
tinually  referred  to,  in  the  présence  of  men  who  hâve  made  so  pro-
found  a  study  of  this  mode  of  examination.  But  if  they  meet  with
criticism,  I  hope  they  will  accord  me  their  gênerons  indulgence.


30  EXPEEIMENTS ON ANIMALS.

I.

We  may  say,  in  a  gênerai  manner,  that  electro-diagnosis,  if  I
may  invent  a  term^  anuounces  and  demonstrates  (in  certain  patho-
logical  cases  where  a  somewhat  intense  lésion  of  a  mixed  or  motor
nerve  has  taken  place),  the  rapid  and  great  diminution,  it  may  be
even  the  total  disappearance  of  that  property  which  is  known  by
the  uame  of  electrical  contractility.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  experi-
ments  on  animais  appear  to  show  that,  after  lésions  inflicted  on
nerves,  the  muscles  préserve  for  a  comparatively  long  time,  even
indefinitely,  according  to  some  authors,  the  property  of  contracting
under  the  stimulus  of  electricity.

You  will  readily  understand  the  interest  which,  from  our  point  of
view,  belongs  to  the  récognition  and  study  of  facts  of  this  kind.  It
suffices  to  remind  you  that  the  enfeeblement  and,  à  fortiori,  the
loss  of  electrical  contractility,  rapidly  ensuing  on  the  lésion  of  a
nerve,  are,  as  clinical  observation  has  frequently  shown,  the  first
term  of  a  séries  of  phenomena  which,  if  the  physician  do  not  inter-
vene,  almost  necessarily  entail,  in  certain  cases,  the  more  or  less
complète  atrophy  of  the  muscle  and  sometimes  the  total  loss  of  its
functions.

In  order  to  set  ont  in  a  clearer  light  the  discordance  to  which
I  hâve  called  your  attention,  allow  me,  gentlemen,  briefly  to  recall
the  expérimental  facts  in  question  :

A.  It  was  proposed,  in  thèse  experiments,  to  seek  ont  the  modi-
fications which  take  place  in  the  properties  of  muscles  and  in  their
anatomical  structure,  after  the  section  or  excision  of  the  nerves
supplying  them.  Experiments  abound  :  they  hâve  been  made  and
repeated  by  MM.  Longet,  Schiff,  Brown-Séquard,  Vulpian,  and  it
must  be  added  that  the  results  which  they  hâve  given  appear,  at
least  as  regards  essential  points,  to  be  quite  concordant.  The
following  are  the  principal  incidents  of  thèse  experiments  that  seem
to  call  for  notice  hère.

When  a  nerve  has  undergone  section  or  partial  excision,  its  peri-
pheral  extremity  begins,  from  the  fifth  to  the  sixth  day  after  the
opération,  to  undergo  even  in  its  finest  ramifications  a  séries  of
altérations  whose  ultimate  conséquence  is  the  disappearance  of  the
meduUary  cylinder,  whilst  the  axial  filament  appears,  on  the  contrary,
to  persist  almost  indefinitely.^

>  Professor  Schiff  has  showu  that,  iu  cases  of  nerve-degeneration  following


ELECTEICAL CONTE ACTILITY.  31

On  tlie  otlier  hand^  from  the  fourth  day,  that  is  to  say,  before
ev^en  the  lésions  of  the  degeneration  are  appréciable,  the  nerve
(accordingto  M.  Yulpian,  loc.  cit.,  p.  235)  is  found  to  hâve  alreadj
lost  the  faculty  of  being  excitcd  by  différent  agencies,  and  in  par-
ticular  by  the  electrical  stimulus.  There  is  no  différence  of  opinion
in  référence  to  this  point.  With  respect  to  the  muscle;  it  does  not
présent,  at  first,  any  modification  whatever  of  the  electrical  con-
tractility.  The  decrease,  and  still  more  the  utter  loss  of  this  pro-
perty,  if  they  do  ensue,  are  never  produced  until  after  a  considérable
lapse  of  time,  and  very  slowly.  Hère,  again,  there  is  no  divergence
of  opinion.  If  some  physiologists  state  they  hâve  seen  the  electrical
contractility  lesseued,  or  eveu  lost,  at  from  six  to  twelve  weeks  after
the  section  of  a  mixed  nerve,  M.  Schiff  lias,  on  the  contrary,  under

on  section  tbe  axis  cyliuders  persist,  cnnlrary  to  wliat  M.  Waller  had  asserted  ;
he  found  tlie  filaments  in  tlie  uerve-fîbres  of  nerves  of  mammalia,  wliich  had
becn  eut  iive  niouths  previously.  "We  Lave  also  recognised,"  says  M.  Vul-
pian  ('Leçons  sur  la  Physiologie  du  Système  Nerveux,'  1866,  p.  236),  "the
existence  of  this  axial  filament  at  the  end  of  more  than  six  nionths.  It  appears
to  me  very  probable  that  it  persists  beyond  this  space."

Since  the  above  was  written,  M.  Ranvier  ('  Comptes  Rendus  de  l'Académie
des  Sciences,'  1872)  published  the  resuit  of  his  researches  on  nerve-degenera-
tion,  and  demonstrated  the  destruction  of  the  axis-cylinder.  Havino-  had
opportunities  of  examining  his  préparations  whilst  studying  in  his  Laboratory,
I  may  be  allowed  to  state  that  the  contiuuity  of  the  axis-cylinder  was  plainly
shown  to  be  broken,  at  intervais  ;  it  has  been  objected,  in  a  German  periodical,
that  this  might  be  an  appearance  due  to  the  reageut  employed,  but  the  alléga-
tion is  invalid,  seeing  that  the  production  of  the  resuit  does  not  dépend  upon
the  use  of  one  reageut.  The  foUowing  is  a  brief  summary  of  M.  Ranvier's
conclusions.  The  interanuular  segment  constitutes  an  histological  unit.  It  is
formed  by  Schwann's  sheath,  lined  by  a  layer  of  protoplasm  coutaining  a  lenticu-
lar  nucleus  ;  beneath  is  the  meduUary  sheath,  through  which  passes  the  axis  cylin-
der,  whieh  is  probably  enveloped  in  a  protoplasmic  layer,  reflected  at  the
annular  constrictions  which  terminate  the  segment.  Twenty-four  hours  after
section  of  the  isehiatic  or  pneumo-gastric  nerve,  in  a  rabbit,  the  nuclei  in  ques-
tion are  slightly  swollen,  and  the  outer  protoplasmic  layer  becomes  granular.
Forty-eight  hours  after  section,  the  tuméfaction  of  the  nucleus  is  greater,  and
the  protoplasmic  layer  forms  lumps  that  jut  into  the  raedullary  matter,  and  give
it  an  irregular  shape.  After  the  seventy-second  hour,  the  nucleus  is  so  swollen
as  to  fill  nearly  the  width  of  the  tube — there,  the  medullary  matter,  completely
interruptcd,  leaves  a  space  occupied  by  a  mass  of  protoplasm  sprinkled  with
fatty  granulations,  and  enclosing  the  nucleus.  The  protoplasm  is  also  swollen
at  différent  points  and  has  driven  back  the  medullary  sheath,  reducing  it,  to  a
mère  thread,  or  completely  dividing  it.  Towards  the  end  of  the  third  day  the
axis-cylinder  is  eut  across,  opposite  each  nucleus. This  fact  explains  the  loss


■32  ELECTEICAL CONTEACTILITY.

some  circuin stances  found  it  perfectly  preserved  at  the  end  of  four-
teen  months.^  The  sarae  stateinent  holds  good  if  the  section  be
made  of  an  exclusively  motor  nerve.  M.  Longet  had  already  shown
that,  whilst  the  motricity  of  nerve  is,  as  we  hâve  said,  entirely
aboHshed  four  days  after  section,  the  muscuhir  irritability,  in  so
far  as  the  facial  nerve  is  concerned,  persists  in  the  corresponding
muscles  for  over  three  months.^  After  excision  or  section  of  the
facial  nerve,  MM.  Brown-Séquard  and  Martin-Magron  hâve  seen
the  irritability  of  the  facial  muscles  survive,  in  the  case  of  guinea-
pig  and  rabbit,  for  nearly  two  years.^  M.  Vulpian  lias  also  borne
testimony  to  precisely  the  same  effect,'^  About  the  year  1847,  in  the
laboratory  of  my  excellent  master  Martin-]\Iagron,  whilst  working  in
a  field,  which  my  sensitiveness  in  référence  to  animal  sufFeriiig  soon
caused  me  to  abandon,  I  was  able  personally  to  observe  the  almost

of  excito-niotricity  iu  a  iierve,  which  superveues  at  about  tliis  daic  at'ter  sec-
tion, accordiiiQ,'  to  Loii2fet.  Froin  the  fourtli  day,  tlie  degeneratiou  goes  on
increasiug,  and  ou  the  sixth  the  medullary  matter  is  reduced  to  minute  frag-
ments, whilst  the  protoplasm  which  lias  become  very  abundant  contains  a
considérable  uumber  of  fatty  granulations  and  its  nuclei  bave  niultiplied.
From  the  seventeenth  to  the  twentieth  day  the  prolifération  of  nuclei  does  not
actively  proceed.  Wheu  the  nerve  is  examined  iu  transverse  section  very  few
axis-oylinders  are  found  in  the  tubes  on  the  twentieth  day.  Thèse  remarks
refer  to  the  peripheral  end  of  the  divided  nerve  :  the  process  of  degeneration
in  the  central  eud  is  very  différent.  The  medullary  matter  is  decomposed  into
fine  granulations,  accreted  in  oval  clustcrs,  the  iniclei  inultiply  aud  the  proto-
plasm augments,  without  hcwever  segmenting  the  medullary  matter,  by  jutting
•masses.  On  Ihe  coutrary,  the  nuclei  are  flattened  l)etwecn  theaxis-cyliudcr  aud
Schwann's  sheath.  The  axis-cylinder  itself  persists,  its  connection  with  the
nerve -centres  being  preserved  it  energetically  rcsists  the  destructive  action  of
the  nuclei  and  protoplasm.  Hence,  M.  Ilanvier  lias  corne  to  the  conclusion  that
the  altérations  undergone  by  nerve-tubes,  in  the  peripheral  portion  of  a  divided
nerve,  which  are  commonly  called  degenerative  hâve  not  this  charactcr  iu  so  far
as  the  cellular  éléments  of  the  nerve-tube  are  concerned,  for  this,  ou  tiic  con-
trary,  displays  phenomcua  of  formative  activity  which  hâve  an  opposite  meaniiig
to  that  of  degeneratiou,  iu  the  language  of  aiiatomo-pathologists  (Cl.  Siger-
son).

'  Schiir,  '  Lclubuch  dcr  Physiologie  des  Menschcn,'  1858-59,  p.  18:  M.
Schilf  asserts  that  he  saw,  in  two  cases,  an  excitability  of  the  muscles  jjcrsist
for  fourtecn  moutlis  after  section  of  the  corresponding  nerves,  the  hypoglossal
nerve  had  been  divided  iu  onc  case,  and  the  ischiatic  iu  the  other.

-  Longet,  '  Anatomie  et  Physiologie  du  Système  Nerveux,'  t.  i,  p.  Gt„  [842.

^  Brown-Sérpiard,  '  P>ullctins  de  la  Société  Philomathique,'  1847,  pp.  74  et  88,
'Bulletins  de  la  Société  de  iiiologic,'  t.  iii,  1851,  p.  loi.

■•  Vulpian,  loc.  cU.,  p.  235.


EXPEKIMENTS.  35

indefinite  persistence  of  electrical  contractilit}^  iii  the  correspondiug
muscles,  after  the  excision  of  the  facial  nerve.

The  resuit  is  so  palpable^  striking,  and  easy  of  observation  that
most  physiologists  hâve  corne,  if  I  mistake  not,  to  question  whetlier
muscular  irritability  ever  disappears  completely  in  conséquence  of
the  section  or  excision  of  the  nerves,  They  concède,  at  most,  that
in  such  a  case  there  may  be  produced,  in  the  course  of  time,  a  less  or
greater  degree  ofenfeeblement  of  the  contractile  property  of  the  mus-
cles. Almost  ail  of  them  point  out  that  if  the  electrical  stimulation
sometimes  becomes  powerless  to  détermine  contraction  of  the  muscles,
yet  this  will  be  produced  under  the  influence  of  mechanical  irri-
tation.

It  was  to  be  supposed  that  the  nutritive  or  trophical  modifications
corresponding  to  thèse  functional  changes  would  likewise  be  very
slowly  produced  and  but  slightly  apparent.  This,  in  fact,  is  what
seeras  to  take  place.  Most  authors  appear  to  agrée  in  recognising
that  the  atrophy  of  the  muscle  and  its  histological  degeneration
supervene  only  when  a  very  loug  time  has  elapsed  after  the  nerve-
section.  According  to  M.  Longet,^  when,  three  months  after  divi-
sion of  the  facial  nerve,  a  post-mortem  examination  was  made
scarcely  any  traces  of  atrophy,  however  slight,  were  to  be  observed.
But  he  doubtless  refers  to  an  examination  made  with  the  naked  eye.
M.  Schiff'  asserts  that,  when  the  paralysis  consécutive  on  a  nerve-
section  is  of  old  standing,  the  muscles  show  a  certain  amount  of
wasting.  It  is  probable  that  a  certain  number  of  muscular  fasciculi
waste  away  and  disappear.  In  most  cases,  the  microscope  reveals
that  a  considérable  number  of  thèse  fasciculi  undergo  fatty  degene-
ration and  présent  an  accumulation  of  fat  in  their  interspaces.-  M.
Yulpian's  researches  hâve  given  analogous  results,  but,  according  to
this  author,  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscular  fibre  is  olten
completely  absent.^

Before  comparing  the  facts  of  pathology  with  the  results  of  expe-

'  Longet,  loc.  cit.,  p.  63.

2  Schiff,  loc.  cit.,  p.  175.

^  Vulpian,  loc.  cit.,  iu  cases  of  paralysis,  consécutive  ou  nerve-sectiou,
besides  the  atrophy  of  primitive  nerve-fibres  wbich  is  produced  in  the  course
of  time,  M.  Vulpian  lias  long  since  remarked  the  prolifération  of  the  nuclei  of
the  sarcolemma,  and  some  other  indicia  of  iuflammatory  action.  This  is  a
very  interesting  fact,  since  iioted  by  other  observers,  and  one  to  which  we  shall
hâve  occasion  again  to  refer  (sec  note  -  ivfrà,  pp.  36  7).

3


34.  PATHOLOGICAL  FACTS.

riinents  on  animais,  it  is  important  to  clearly  understand  tlie  condi-
tions under  whicli  the  latter  hâve  been  conducted.  In  the  first
place,  the  physiologist  makes  a  section  or  excision  of  the  muscular
nerves  ;  in  the  second  place,  he  resorts  to  direct  electrical  stimu-
lation, applied  to  the  denuded  nerve  or  muscle.  He  makes  use  of
galvanism,  almost  exclusively,  as  an  agent  of  exploration  and  takes
no  heed  of  the  différence  which  may  exist,  as  to  their  action  on
nerve-fibre  or  muscular  fascicle,  between  the  excitation  obtained  by
means  of  induction  (or  interrupted)  currents,  and  that  determined
by  the  galvanic  (or  continued)  carrent.  Thèse  are  circumstances
which  it  is  important  to  note,  especially  in  relation  to  the  experi-
ments  which  I  shall  call  old,  although  they  do  not  yet  date  from  a
very  remote  period.  We  shall  see  afterwards  that  quite  récent  re-
searches,  in  which  the  action  of  both  currents  bas  been  comparatively
studied,  bave  yielded  results  apparently  différent  in  some  respects
from  thosc  furnished  by  former  experiments.

B.  Let  us  now  take  the  field  of  human  pathology  into  considéra-
tion. The  facts  which  it  offers  us,  are  connected  with  lésions  of
mixed  or  motor  nerves  which  either  take  place  spontaneously  or
supervene  in  conséquence  of  a  wound.

In  the  first  place,  we  will  describe  the  phenomena  observed  in
cases  of  peripheral  paralysis  of  the  facial  nerve  and,  particularly,
where  that  paralysis  is  due  to  the  influence  of  cold  (rheumatismal
paralysis  a  frigoré),  M.  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  has  showu,  as
y  ou  are  aware,  that  in  such  a  case,  the  electrical  contractility  of  the
muscles  of  the  face  is  remarkably  Icssened  and  even  appears  some-
times  to  be  extinct,^  before  the  end  of  the  first  week.  You  will
remark  that  between  this  period  of  seven  days,  which  according  to
M.  Duchenne  may  mark  the  beginning  of  the  decrease  of  electrical
contractility  in  rheumatismal  paralysis  of  the  facial  nerve,  and  the
term  assigned  by  some  physiologists  for  the  persistence  of  the  same
property  in  animais,  after  nerve-section,  the  différence  is  great.
Nevertheless,  researches  again  and  again  renewed  hâve  demonstrated
the  perfect  accuracy  of  M.  Duchenne^s  assertion.  Quite  recently
also,  in  a  case  of  rheumatismal  paralysis  of  the  facial  nerve,  Dr.  Erb,
having  had  an  opportunity  of  following  the  course  of  the  symptoms
from  day  to  day,  noted  that,  on  the  ninth  day,  the  electrical  contrac-

'  Duchenne  (de  Boulogiu;),  '  .Elcctrisation  localisée,'  2C  cdilioii,  1861,  p.  669.


ALTERATION OP THE MUSCLES.  35

tility  had  already  dimiiiislied  to  a  considérable  extent.i  In  a  similar
case^  recorded  by  Dr.  Onimus  when,  eiglit  days  after  the  invasion
of  tlie  diseasc,  the  induction  current  was  resorted  to,  the  paralysed
muscles  did  not  présent  the  slightest  contraction. 2

The  same  fact  is  usually  remarked  in  cases  of  peripheral  paralysis
of  the  facial  nerve,  resulting  froni  causes  other  than  the  influence  of
cold,  and  likewise  in  those  of  traumatic  paralysis  of  nerves  of  ex-
tremities.  The  last-mentioned  generally  folio ws,  as  you  know,  on
abrupt  compression,  contusion,  or  concussion  of  a  mixed  nerve,  as  a
conséquence,  for  instance,  of  scapulo-humeral  luxations.  The  elec-
trical  contractility  lias  been  many  times  found  very  notably  lessened
from  the  tenth,  and  even  from  the  fifth  day  in  the  muscles,  struck
with  paralysis,  after  such  and  similar  accidents.^

Clinical observation  demonstrates,you  must  know,  that,  as  a  gênerai
rule,  the  muscles  which  thus  présent  a  prompt  diminution  and,  above
ail,  a  prompt  disappearauce  of  electrical  contractility  are  soon
affected  by  atrophy  which  sometimes  becomes  very  rapidly  manifest,
especially  in  the  case  of  paralysed  limbs.  It  would  be  highly
interesting  to  study,  in  the  several  phases  of  their  develop-
ment,  the  histological  altérations  to  which  this  rapid  w^asting  of
muscular  masses  is  assignable  ;  but  this  is  a  subject  in  relation  to
which  we  possess  as  yet  but  little  exact  information.  It  seems,
however,  to  follow  from  some  researches  and  particularly  from  a
case  recorded  in  détail  by  Dr.  Erb,  that  thèse  lésions  hâve  nothing
in  common  with  passive  fatty  degeneration,  pure  and  simple,  such
as  we  find  in  muscles  that  hâve  been  long  condemned  to  inactivity.
They  appear  on  the  contrary  to  présent  the  clearest  characteristics
of  an  inflammatory  proccss,  to  wit,  a  more  or  less  ixiarked  hyper-
plasia  of  the  interstitial  connective  tissue,  recalling  to  some  extent
what  we  see  in  cirrhosis,  and  a  multiplication  of  the  nuclei  of  the
sarcolemma.  Concurrently  with  the  development  of  thèse  altéra-
tions, the  muscular  fibres  undergo  a  very  évident  decrease  in  their
transverse  diameter,  but  they  préserve,  in  most  instances,  their
striated  appearance. The  fatty  granular  degeneration  of  the  mus-

1  W.  Erb,  '  Zur  Pathologie  uud  Pathologischen  Anatomie  Periplieriscber
Paralyseii,'  iii  'Deutscli.  Arcliiv/  t.  iv,  1868,  p.  539. Gradolfs  case.

2  'Gazette  des  Hôpitaux,'  30  Juiu,  1870,  p.  298.

3  Duclienne  de  Boulogne,  loc.  cit. Obs.,  p.  191,  Paralysie  suite  de  luxation
scapulo-liuméral. Obs.,  p.  193,  Paralysie  suite  de  contusion  du  nerf  cubital.


36  ALTERATION  OF THE MUSCLES.

cular  fibres  is  rarely  met  witli,  in  thèse  cases^  and  appears  to  be  alto-
gether  accidentai.^

It  is  clear  that  if,  in  the  muscular  atrophy  which  pliysiologists
obtain,  in  tlie  long  run,  by  section  or  excision  of  the  nerve,  the  his-
tological  lésion  were  always  fatty  degeneration  without  trace  of  irri-
tative  action  the  contrast  would  be  extremely  manifest.  But  un-
fortunately  for  the  simphcity  of  things,  we  see  that  this,  perhaps,  is
not  the  case.-

'  The  following  is  an  abridgement  of  tlie  observation  rccorded  by  Dr.  Erb
in  Lis  interesting  memoir  :

Peter  Schmieg,  aged  22  years,  suffers  from  pulmonary  ])litliisis  in  its  last
stage,  and  likewise  lias  caries  of  tlie  petrous  portion  and  niastoid  process.  An  ab-
scess  bas  biirst  in  the  vicinity  of  the  latter.  On  tlie  22nd  of  March,  1867,  almost
complète  paralysis  of  the  left  facial  nerve  occurs.  The  paralysis  is  particularly
évident  in  the  frontal  muscle.  Investigation  of  the  electrical  contractility
having  been  made,  first  ou  March  24th  (the  second  day  of  the  disorder),  next  on
the  3rd  April  (i2th  day),  by  means  of  faradisation,  it  was  found  normal  on
both  dates.  On  the  lyth  April  (26th  day),  for  the  first  time,  it  is  ascertained
that  the  frontal  and  zygomatic  muscles  of  the  left  side  contract  but  feebly
under  faradaic  stimulation.  On  the  3oth  April  (39th  day),  faradisation  no
longer  causes  contraction  in  thèse  muscles,  the  other  muscles  of  the  left  side
of  the  face  respond  but  feebly  to  the  stimulus.  Death  supervenes  May  2nd
(40th  day).

Post-mortem. — The  trunk  of  the  facial  nerve  bounds  an  abscess  wliich  bas-
opened  beliind  the  car  :  it  is  denuded  to  a  certain  exteut.  The  uerve-trunk.
is  envelojjcd  on  every  side  by  a  mass  of  indurated  connective  tissue.  This
conuective  envelope  closely  adhères  to  the  external  nerve-sheath  of  tiie  nerve,
•which,  however,  is  still  free  within  it.  To  the  naked  eye,  the  branches  of  the
facial  nerve  offer  no  perceptible  modifications  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  left
frontal  muscle  is  pale,  flabby,  and  thin.  Where  the  nerve-trunk  is  enveloped
by  the  mass  of  connective  tissue  tliere  is  found,  interposed  between  the  uerve-
fibres,  a  quantity  of  fibrous  connective  tissue,  with  numerous  oval  nuclei,.
faintly  granular.  A  certain  uumber  of  the  nerve-iibres  themselves  présent  the
several  stages  of  fatty  degeneration.  Many  of  the  fibres  hâve  preserved  their
normal  character.  Some  of  the  filaments  supplying  the  frontal  muscle  scarcely
show  any  but  degenerated  nerve-ûbres  ;  other  filaments  beloiiging  ap-
parently  to  the  trifacial  bave  ail  their  fibres  in  a  normal  condition.  The  left
frontal  muscle  is  greatly  altered  :  thick  septa  of  newly  formed  connective
tissue  are  obscrved,  interposed  between  the  primitive  muscular  fasciculi.  The
latter  are  much  rcduccd  in  bulk,  and  contain  a  large  quantity  of  nuclei.  On
most  of  the  atrophied  fibrils  the  striation  romains  distinct;  on  others  it  is.
scarcely  perceptible.  A  certain  numbcr  of  the  primitive  (ultimate)  bundles
présent  the  characteristics  of  waxy  altération,  but  none  of  fatty  granular
degeneration  (W.  Erb,  loc.  cit.,  'Deutscli.  Arciiiv,'  Bd.  5,  p.  44,  1866).

-  We  reserve  the  right  of  returning  upon  this  délicate  point  in  the  course


APPARENT CONTRADICTION.  37

It  follows,  in  short,  from  the  parallel  wliich  we  hâve  placed  bc-
'ïore  you  that  clinical  facts,  thoiigh  most  carefully  observed,  are  or
at  least  appear  to  be  in  formai  opposition  to  expérimental  facts,
likewise  collectée!  by  the  strictest  methods.  We  should  endeavour
'to  penetrate  the  reasou  of  this  discordance.  Let  us  first  seek  if  it
can  be  found  in  the  différence  betweeu  the  conditions  of  observation
in  which  the  physiologist  and  the  physician  take  their  stand.

The  first  thing  which  requires  to  be  distinctly  brought  ont  relates
io  the  mode  of  exploration.  The  pathologist  finds  himself  forbidden
to  explore  the  muscle,  except  through  the  skin,  whilst  the  physiolo-
gist, as  we  hâve  already  remarked,  can  act  under  more  favorable
conditions,  since  he  may  apply  the  électrodes  directly  to  the  nerve
or  muscle. It  miglit  be  anticipated  that,  where  a  certain  degree  of

of  OUI-  lectures.  At  présent,  let  it  sutSce  to  note  that  irritative  lésions  of
muscles,  quite  similar  to  tliose  which  liavc  been  described,  hâve  beeu  recently
recorded  by  very  compétent  observers,  in  several  animais,  after  section  and
•excision  of  niixed  or  purely  motor  nerves,  that  is  to  say,  outside  the  conditions
which  commonly  cause  irritative  nerve-lesions.  Thus,  wheu  he  had  eut  out  a
portion  of  the  ischiatic  nerve,  Dr.  Mantegazza  ('  Histologisch-Veranderungeii
nach  der  Nervendurchschneiduug,'  in  'Schmidt's  Jahresb.,'  p.  148,  t.  136,
1857,  and  '  Gaz.  Lomb.,'  p.  18,  1867)  found,  after  the  thirtieth  day,  the
■  muscles  pale,  the  connective  tissue  iuterposed  between  the  primitive  (or  ulti-
mate)  fasciculi  evidently  hypertrophicd,  the  fasciculi  (theniselves  diminished  ia
bulk)  presenting  a  mauifest  multiplication  of  the  nuclei  of  their  sarcolemma,
but  still  preserving  their  transversal  striœ.  A  considérable  number  of  the
fasciculi  showed  a  granular  aspect,  but  the  granulations  dissolved  in  acetic
acid.  Professor  Vulpian  lias,  likewise,  met  with  identical  altérations  in  the
lingual  muscles  of  a  dog,  fifty  days  after  the  avulsion  of  the  central  part  of  the
hypoglossal  ncrvc  ('Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  ii,  p.  577,  1869).  ïhc absence
of  fatty  degeneration  in  the  primitive  fasciculi,  the  atrophy  of  thèse  flbres
with  persistence  of  the  transversal  striation,  and  the  prolifération  of  the  sarco-
lemma-nuclei,  liave  also  been  observed  by  M.  Vulpian  (hc.  clL,  p.  559^)  in  the
muscles  of  the  human  leg,  in  a  case  of  résection  of  a  segment  of  the  ischiatic  nerve
datiug  from  fivc  months  before.  That  being  the  case,  we  are  led  to  admit  that
complète  sections,  excisions,  and  avulsions  of  nerves  do  occasionally  détermine
irritative  lésions  in  them  :  or  else, — if  furthcr  observations  should  prove  ihe
fact  recorded  by  MM.  Mantegazza  and  Vulpian  to  be  constant, — that  the
■muscular  lésions  which  foUow  passive  lésions  of  motor  or  mixed  nerves  are  not
essentially  différent,  histologically  considered,  from  those  which  supcrvene  on
irritative  lésions  of  Ihose  nerves.  If  the  facts  should  support  the  second
hypothesis  thcre  would  still  be  occasion,  we  thiuk,  to  différent iate,  in  spitc  of
so  mauy  analogies,  between  muscular  altérations  connected  with  funclional
iuertia  and  those  conséquent  on  nerve-irritation.  It  appears,  in  fact,  to  be
.demonstrated  tiiat  the  latter  supcrvene  vv'ith  much  greatcr  rapidity,  and  are


38  INFLUENCE OF EXPLOEATION-METHODS.

diminution  of  tlie  electrical  contractility  obtains,  direct  ap])lication
would  be  still  capable  of  determining  contractions,  when  (indirect)
exploration  through  the  skin  would,  perbaps,  be  powerless,  or  would
at  most  provoke  very  feeble  contractions.  Experimentshave  justified
tbe  accuracy  of  tbis  anticipation.  Tbus,  in  a  case  of  clubfoot,  witli
fatty  degeneration  of  tbe  muscles,  Valeutin,  after  tbe  opération,  re-
marked  contractions,  of  a  feeble  cbaracter  indeed,  take  place  in  one
of  tbe  most  tbrougbly  altered  muscles,  under  tbe  influence  of
direct  stimulation.i In  tbis  case,  if  we  may  judge  by  analogy,  ex-

precedcd  and  accompanied  by  more  or  less  marked  modifications  of  electrical
contractility,  wliicli  do  not  show  themselves  iu  the  former  with  the  same
characteristics,  and  only  make  their  appearance  at  the  end  of  a  comparatively
very  long  lapse  of  time.

It  is  to  be  desired  that  a  séries  of  researches  were  instituted  with  the  spécial
object  of  elucidating  the  question  which  has  just  been  raised.  There  does.
indeed,  already  exist  a  certain  nuniber  of  facts  tending  to  demonstrate  that
immobilisation  may,  by  itself  aloue,  aud  outside  of  ail  nervous  influence,
provoke  in  certain  organs  and  tissues,  ail  tbe  characteristics  of  inflammatory
action.  I  shall  cite  but  one  example  :  we  know  the  articular  affections,  de-
scribed  by  MM.  Tessier  and  Bonnet,  which  supervene  when  limbs  are  con-
demned  to  immobility,  as  the  treatment  of  certain  cases  of  fractui'e  requires.
Quite  rccently,  M.  Menzel  undertook  a  séries  of  experiments,  which  consisted
in  immobilising,  by  plaster  of  Paris  bandages,  a  certain  number  of  articulations
of  dogs  and  rabbits.  Now,  from  the  fîfteentli  day,  the  synovial  membrane  was
found  to  be  vividly  injected  and  tumefied,  the  articular  cavity  contained  red
corpuscles,  white  corpuscles,  and  epithelial  cells  ;  fînally,  the  cells  of  the
diarlhrodial  cartilage  were  found  to  be  the  seat  of  well-marked  prolifération
('Gazette  Médicale  de  Strasbourg,' No.  5,  1871).  Thèse  researches  deserve
to  be  followed  out  and  applied  to  the  study  of  the  modifications  which  may
affeet  différent  parts  of  a  limb  under  the  influence  of  functional  inertia,  con-
tinued  for  a  less  or  greater  length  of  time.

'  Valentin,  '  Versuch.  eiuer  Physiologischen  Pathologie  der  Nerven.'  Leip-
zic  und  ïïeidelberg,  1864,  2e  abtheil,  p.  42.

An  expcriment  of  great  interest,  from  tins  point  of  view,  was  made  by  my
(late)  master,  Dr.  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne),  to  whom  the  priority  of  investiga-
tion seems  to  belong.  He  relates  ('  Electrisation  localisée,'  p.  40),  that  haviug
found  a  portion  of  the  vastus  externus  denuded  in  tlie  case  of  a  wounded
patient  (Salle  St.  Bernard,  Hôtel  Dieu),  lie  applied  a  dry  électrode  to  the
denuded  portion  of  tlie  muscle.  The  contraction  which  followed  was  accom-
panied by  a  dull  sensation,  characteristic  of  clcctro-muscular  contraction.  He
next  placed  the  same  électrodes  on  the  unharmed  skin  over  the  same  muscle,
and  only  produccd  a  burning  sensation,  without  muscular  contraction.  This
rcsult,  conscquently,  givcs  cmphatic  support  so  far  to  the  statcmcnt  in  the
above  lecture.  But  Dr.  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  proceeds  to  observe  that
haviug  replaced  the  mctallic  électrodes  by  moist  sponges,  enclosed  in  excitator-


EXPEllIMENTS.  39

ploration  througli  tlie  skin  would  ])robably  hâve  given  no  resuit.
Some  facts,  borrowecl  from  tlie  domain  of  expérimental  pliysi-
ology,  furnisli  similar  évidence.

When^  in  tlie  case  of  a  rabbit  whose  right  facial  nerve  liad  been
eut  across  about  a  moiith  before,  electricity  was  applied  tlirough  the
shaven  and  moistened  skin,  to  the  right  facial  muscles,  no  apparent
efl'ect  was  produced,  whilst  extremely  strong  contractions  were
caused,  when  the  homologous  région  of  the  left  side  vvas  acted  on.
But,  when  the  muscles  were  denuded  on  the  right  side,  where  the
ncrvc  was  eut,  and  electricity  applied  to  them,  very  marked  con-
tractions were  produced.  Agaiu,  a  segment  of  the  left  external
popliteal  nerve,  about  two  inches  in  lengtli,  was  excised,  the  animal,
this  time,  being  a  vigorous  horse.  One  month  after  the  opération,  the
hair  was  shaven  off  the  antero-external  surface  of  each  leg,  and  the
électrodes  of  a  pile  were  a])plied.  On  the  healthy  leg,  energetic
contractions  followed  the  application;  but  no  contraction  was
caused  in  the  other,  when  the  same  test  was  attempted.  Then,  the
paralysed  muscles  were  denuded  and  the  stimulus  was  applied  to
them  directly,  the  minimum  power  of  the  instrument  being  em-
ployed.  Lively  contractions  were  the  conséquence.^  A  considérable
number  of  similar  examples  could,  doubtless,  be  collected  without
difïiculty.  Hence,  it  is  demonstrated  that  exploration  through  the
skin  can  only  supply  approximative  data,  and  that  it  does  not  re-
veal  the  real  state  of  the  electrical  contractility,  but  such  as  they  are
the  data  furnished  are  not  the  less  exact  and  must  be  considered  as
of  the  highest  importance,  for  it  is  impossible  not  to  acknowledge
that  the  great  decrease  or  apparent  loss of  contractiUty,  detected

cylinders,  aud  placed  thèse  on  the  skin,  he  obtained  contraction  with  the  same
dull  characteristic  sensation,  previously  produced  by  application  of  the
metallic  électrodes  to  the  denuded  muscle.  As  this  experiment  was  not  made
with  a  view  to  détermine  the  exact  différence  caused  by  the  interposition  of
the  skin,  the  latter  statemeut  does  not  couflict  with  any  given  in  the  text  ;
whilst  the  circumstances  of  the  two  experiments  amply  justify  the  view  taken
by  Professor  Charcot.  It  is  logical  to  suppose  that  the  différence  of  electrical
action,  due  to  the  interposition  of  the  skin,  which  was  noted  in  the  first  experi-
ment, would  stili  remaiu,  though  to  a  very  much  less  extent,  in  the  second
experiment,  and  would  hâve  been  probably  detected  by  Dr.  Duchenne  (de
Boulogne)  had  his  investigation  been  conducted  with  the  object  of  ascertaiuing
the  précise  araount  of  obstruction  given  by  the  skin.  The  experiment  of
Valentin  helps  to  fulfil  this  desideratum  (S.).

'  Experiment  of  M.  Chauvcau,  inMagniu  :  'Thèse  de  Paris,'  p.  21,  1866.


40  FAEADISATION AND GALVANISATION.

by  exploration  through  the  skin,  corresponds  to  a  diminution  or  at
least  to  a  very  great  modification  of  this  property.

Another  question  which  requires  to  be  considered  relates  to  the
nature  of  the  electrical  agency  employed  in  exploration.  Galvani-
sation^ as  I  mentioned  just  now,  has  been  almost  the  only  means
made  use  of  in  the  experiments  concerning  nerve-sections  in  animais,
whiist  in  clinical  practice,  following  Dr.  Duchenne's  method^  the
work  of  investigation  has  been  pursued  until  lately,  by  means  of
faradisation^  exclusively.  Now,  it  follows  from  researches  made  a
îew  years  ago  in  Germany,  and  recently  taken  up  in  France,  that
galvanisation  has  often  power  to  cause  muscular  contractions  even
where  faradisation  seemed  to  indicate  an  absolute  loss  of  electrical
contractility .

This  fact,  recorded  for  the  first  time  by  Baierlacher,  in  1859/  in
a  case  of  facial  paralysis,  has  been  remarked  since,  either  under  the
same  circumstances,  or  in  différent  cases  of  paralysis  cansequent  on
traumatic  lésions  of  mixed  nerves,  by  Schultz,^  Brenner,^  Ziemssen,*
Eosenthal,^  Meyer,*^ — by  Brûckner,'''  in  pseudo-hypertrophie  para-
lysis, and,  finally,  by  Hammond  in  infantile  paralysis.  From
this  it  will  be  seen  that  galvanisation  may  still  reveal  contrac-
tile power  présent  in  many  cases  of  paralysis,  whether  arising  from
rheumatic  or  traumatic  causes,  when  an  exploration,  conducted
by  faradisation  only,  would  indicate  a  profound  altération  of  elec-
trical contractility.  But,  even  though  this  is  the  case,  the  character
drawn  from  the  abolition  or  rapid  decrease  of  faradaic  contraciilïty
would  subsist,  not  the  less,  in  ail  its  value  :  it  will  still  allow  us  to
maintain  the  contrast  between  paralyses  from  nerve-lesions,  such  as
clinical  practice  usually  présents,  and  paralyses  determined  in  ani-
mais by  nerve- section,  since  the  character  in  question  is  déficient  in
the  latter  cases.

We  bave  now  to  examine  if  the  nerve-lesions  which  provoke  a
prompt  modilication  of  the  electrical  contractility,  soon  foUowed  by
muscular  atrophy,  can  be  assimilated  without  réservation,  as  some

1  Baïerlaclier,  'Bayz.  iirztl.  Inlelligcnzblatt,'  1869.

2  Schultz,  'Wiener  mcdic.  Woclicusclir.,'  No.  27,  1860.

'  Grûnewaldt,  '  Ueber  die  Lalimuugcn  dos  Nerv.  l'acialis.'  Pot.  nicd.  Ztscb.,
Bd.  iii,  p.  321  ff.,  1862.

*  Ziemssen,  'Elektricitat  in  der  Med./  2  aufl.,  1864.

*  Rosentlial,  '  Elcktrotlicrapie/  2  aufl.,  1869.

^  Mcyer,  'Die  Elektricitiit,'  etc.,  2  aufl,,  i86r.
^  Briickiier,  '  Dcutscli  Klinik,'  No.  30,  186,1^.


NERVE-LESIONS.  41

authors  appear  to  believe^  to  nerve-sections,  as  performed  upon
animais.  In  realitj,  gentlemen,  this  is  not  at  ail  the  case,  and,  if  I
err  not,  it  is  in  this  circumstance  that  we  must  seek  the  knot  of  the
disputed  question.  We  may  say,  speaking  generally,  that  the  sec-
tions or  excisions  of  nerves  do  not  usually  set  up,  in  thèse,  any
reactive  process.  The  degeneration  of  the  fibres  of  the  distal  end,
whicli  follows  the  opération  as  a  necessary  conséquence,  may  be  con-
sidered,  supposing  no  complication  to  interfère,  as  a  purely  passive
process.  The  muscles  supplied  by  the  divided  nerves  are  necessarily
smitten  witli  functional  iuertia  ;  but  they  do  not  appear  to  undergo
any  otlier  changes  than  those  which,  in  the  course  of  tirae,  resuit
from  inaction.^

Very  différent  are  the  affections  of  the  nerves  to  which  are  as-
signable, in  man,  the  disorders  that  constitute  the  object  of  our
study.  They  arise  almost  always  wlien  of  traumatic  origin,  as  we
hâve  said,  under  the  influence  of  causes  such  as  concussion,  contu-
sion, compression,  imperfect  division, — ail  eminently  calculated  to
provoke  in  the  difierent  tissues  which  enter  into  the  composition  of
a  nerve,  the  development  of  irritative  action.  In  fact,  it  is  not
rare,  in  cases  of  this  kind,  that  muscular  wasting  of  a  rapid  type,
galloping  atrophy  as  it  were,  announced  almost  from  the  outset  by
the  diminution  and  loss  of  the  faradaic  contractility,  should  be  pre-
ceded,  accompanied,  or  followed — vvliere  a  mixed  nerve  is  concerned
— by  more  or  less  acute  pains,  or  by  abnormal  sensations,  ail  being
indicia  of  the  irritation  set  up  in  the  sensitive  nerve-fibres.-  To  thèse
pains  may  often  be  added  the  appearance  of  trophical  skin-disorders,
pemphigoid  éruptions,  glossy  skin,  herpès — which  we  hâve  come  to
recognise  as  one  species  of  the  effects  of  irritative  lésions  of  the
cutaueous  nerves,  and  which  are  never  seen,  in  any  shape  or  form,
after  simple  sections  of  the  nerve-trunks.^  The  phenomena  of
spontaneously  developed  diseases  lead  to  identical  conclusions.
Sometimes  caries  of  the  petrous  bone  exists,  the  trunk  of  the  facial

'  See  ante,  note  -,  pp.  36-37.

^  Ducheniie  (de  Boiilo_2;ne),  loc.  cit.,  Obs.  ix,  x.

3  To  mention  one  example,  see  the  caic  recently  rcported  by  Dr.  Constantia
Paul  ('Société  de  Thérapeutique,'  Séance  du  7  Mai,  1871,111  '  Gazette  Médi-
cale,' p.  257,  No,  25,  1871).  One  of  the  most  remarkable  dérangements  of
nutrition  produced  by  nerve-lesions  is  the  emaciation  or  atrophy  of  the  muscles
supplied  by  thèse  nerves.  This  atrophy  may  exist  alone,  or  may  be  associated
with  other  nutritive  disorders  of  the  same  kiud  occupying  the  skia  and  its
appendages  (Mitchel,  Morehouse,  and  Keen,  '  Gunshot  Wounds,'  &c.,  p.  69).


42  lERITATIVE NERVE-LESIONS.

nerve  lies  in  the  pus,  where  it  is  corapletely  surrounded,  as  in  the
case  wliicli  Dr.  Erb  records,  by  a  deuse  slieath  of  newly  formed  con-
iiective  tissue.i  At  other  times,  the  nerve  is  compressed  by  a  slowly
develo])ed  tumour  whicli  mnst  irritate,  for  some  space  of  time,  tbe
iiervous  fibres  before  completely  crushing  them — nay,  tliere  is  none
of  tbe  séries,  even  including  so-called  rheumatismal  paralysis,  or
paralysis  a  fngore  (tbough  hère  we,  as  yet,  lack  positive  évidence)
which  should  not  apparently  be  attributed  to  inflammation  of  the
connective  sheathing  of  the  nerve-trnnk.3  I  am  not  unaware  that
complète  nerve-sections  are  somewhat  frequently  met  witli  in  sur-
gical  praetice  :  I  know  also  that  in  such  cases,  you  may  see  atrophy
of  tlie  muscles  and  loss  of  electrical  contractility  supervene.  But
I  do  not  believe  that  many  cases  of  this  kind  can  be  adduced  in
which  an  observer  bas  noted/y-om  the  first  daij s  diminution  or  lossqf
faradaic  contractility  and  from  the  first  loeeks,  atrophy  and  degene-
ration  of  the  muscles.  Although  I  bave  made  some  researches  on
this  subject  I  bave  not  found  up  to  the  présent  any  cases  unques-
tionably  possessing  this  characteristic.

We  are  thus  induced,  gentlemen,  to  bave  recourse  hère  also  to
the  luminous  distinction  proposed  by  M.  Brown-Séquard  : — nerve-
irritation  alone  is  capable  of  determinitig  rapid  and  early  (drophy
of  the  muscles,  preceded  hy  decrease  or  disappearance  of  faradaic
contractility .  Complète  nerve-division  does  not  induce  atrophy  and
loss  of  electrical  reaction  until  after  an  incomi'tarahly  greater  lapse  of
time,  as  in  the  case  of  prolonged  inaction.

That  being  concedcd,  we  liave  now  to  seck  in  what  manner — an
irritative  nerve-lesion  being  given  the  existence  of  which  bas  been
recognised — we  can  dérive  from  it,  as  a  more  or  less  direct  consé-
quence, the  rapid  loss  of  electrical  contractility,  the  early  atrophy
of  the  muscles,  and,  in  a  Avord,  tbe  whole  séries  of  phenomena  which
clinical  observation  discerns  in  the  cases  that  engage  our  attention.

The  enfeeblement  or  loss  of  contractility  is,  you  are  aware,  next
to  motor  paralysis  (which  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances  heads
the  ])roces3ion),  the  first  fact  which  we  take  note  of,  in  such  circum-
stances.  Some  authors  seem  to  see,  in  this  symptom,  a  very  simple
conséquence  of  the  loss  of excitability  in  the  nerve,  supervening

'  See  P.  Broiiardel,  'Lésions  du  roclier,  carie,  nécrose,  et  des  complications
qui  en  sont  la  conséquence/  Extrait  du  '  Bulletin  de  la  Société  7\.natomique,'
Paris,  1867.

^  F.  Niemeyer,  '  Lebrbuch  der  S|)ec.  Pathologie  und  Thérapie,'  ye  aufl.,
2e  VA.,  p.  365.


IRRITATIVE XERVE-LESIONS.  43^

liere  at  au  early  period  (about  tlie  fifth  day),  as  in  tlic  case  of
nerve-sections,  and  assignable  to  degeneration  of  the  medullary
sheaths,  beyond  tlie  injured  part.  It  appears  certain  that  the  con-
tractions of  the  muscles,  caused  by  electricity,  are  more  marked
when  we  can  act  upon  them  through  the  médium  of  the  nerves,
than  where  the  stimulus,  in  conséquence  of  the  distinction  of  the
nerve-filaments,  can  no  longer  bear  upon  the  contractile  substance
itself.  But  however  this  may  be,  if  the  opinion  to  whicli  we  refer
were  well  founded,  the  marked  enfeeblement  or  apparent  abolition  of
the  electrical  contractility  superveuiug  some  days  after  the  opéra-
tion should  be  a  constant  fact,  after  nerve-sections;  since  in  such
cases  the  distal  end  of  the  nerve  always  loses  its  excitability  at  the
end  of  tive  or  six  days.  Now,  we  know  that  this  is  not  the  case.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  by  no  meaus  proved  that  nerve-lesions
which  induce  early  loss  of  electrical  contractility  are  always  suffi-
ciently  intense  to  completely  interrupt  the  continuity  of  the  nerve-
fibres  and  détermine  tlie  destruction  of  the  medullary  cylinder.  A
certain  number  uf  facts  might,  in  truth,  be  cited  which  tend  to  de-
monstrate  that  the  continuity  of  the  nerve  persists,  at  least  to  some-
exteut,  even  after  lésions  which  rapidly  occasion  the  appearance  of
the  most  évident  trophic  disorders  in  the  muscles.

Thus,  after  a  traumatic  lésion  bearing  on  the  course  of  a  nerve,
we  sometimes  see  the  power  of  motion  remain,  and  only  become  en-
feebled  whcn  trophic  lésions  hâve  supervened  in  the  muscle.^  It  is
important  to  note,  besides,  that  muscular  and  cutaneous  sensibility
are  often  preserved,  in  a  nearly  normal  condition,  in  cases  of  lésions
of  mixed  nerves,  even  when  rapid  enfeeblement  of  the  electrical
contractility  and  consécutive  muscular  atrophy  are  carried  very  far.
This  is  a  fact  to  which  due  prominence  has  been  given  by  MM.
Duchenue  (de  Boulogne),"^  Mitchel,  Morehouse,  and  Xeen.^

^  See  tlie  observation  quoted  by  Duchenue  (de  Boulogne),  loc.  cit.,  p.  207.

-  "In  paraly tic  diseases  consécutive  on  traumatic  lésions  of  mixed  nerves,
the  functional  dérangements  affect  the  sensibility  of  muscles  less  than  their
contractility.  Thus  a  luxation  of  the  shoulder-joiut  having  occasioned  a  lésion
of  the  nerves  that  supply  the  arm,  fore-arm,  and  hand,  I  liave  knowii  the
patient  to  complain  of  rather  marked  muscular  sensation,  even  when  thes&
muscles  did  not  exhibit  the  slightest  contraction  under  the  influence  of  the
most  intense  electrical  excitation.  Cutaneous  sensibility  is  less  affected  than.
muscular  sensibility,  in  thèse  same  nervous  lésions." — Duchenue  (de  Boulogue)^,
loc.  cit.,  p.  2t6.

^'  Mitchel,  &c.,  loc.  cit.,  p.  97.


44  MODE OF ACTION.

Is  it  probable  tliat^  in  sucb  cases,  tlie  motor-fibres  would  hâve
undergone  great  altérations,  -wliilst  tlie  sensitive  fibres,  inter-
mingled  with  tliem  throughout  tlie  nerve,  would  hâve  alone
been  spared  ?  But  take  an  argument  of  a  somewhat  more
direct  bearing.  After  certain  affections  ôf  the  spinal  cord,  such  as
hsematomyelia,  acute  central  myelitis,  infantile  paralysis, — diseases
in  whicli  the  initial  lésion  occupies  most  especially  the  grey  matter, —
it  is  common,  when  irritative  nerve-lesions  are  in  question,  to  see
a  diminution  or  a  total  abolition  of  the  electrical  contractility
supervene  in  the  muscles  of  the  paralysed  member.  The  muscular
nerves  hâve  been  several  times  examined,  in  such  cases,  under  the
microscope  ;  sometimes,  they  appeared  normal,  at  others,  they  pre-
sented  to  a  certain  degree  the  changes  characterising  fatty  granular
tlegeneration,  but  then  thèse  altérations  were  not  at  ail  in  proportion,
either  in  extent  or  in  intensity,  to  the  muscular  disorders.  We
shall  hâve  occasion  again  to  refer  to  this  important  fact.

You  see  by  what  précèdes  that,  in  my  opinion,  the  rapid  aboli-
tion of  electrical  excitability  observed  after  nerve-section  cannot
be  altogether  assigned  to  the  fatty  granular  degeneration  of  the
meduUary  sheath,  and  to  the  loss  of  excitability  of  the  nerve-fibres,
which  would  be  the  conséquence  of  this  altération.  If  this  be  so,
it  becomes  very  probable  that  the  phenomenon  in  question  is,  at
least  in  part,  the  effect  of  some  change  supervening  in  the  constitu-
tion of  the  contractile  substance,  under  the  influence  of  the  irritation
transraitted  to  the  primitive  muscular  fasciculus  through  the  ter-
minal nerve-branches.  The  rapidity  which  may  mark  the  production
•of  this  trophic  trouble  is  not  an  argument  against  our  hypothesis.
Expérience,  in  fact,  demonstrates  that  under  the  influence  of  certain
causes,  such,  for  example,  as  the  abrupt  interruption  of  the  course
of  arterial  blood,  the  muscular  fibre  may  expérience  still  more
rapidly — after  a  few  hours  merely — a  modification  which  is  un-
doubtedly  closely  analogous,  for  it  also  reveals  its  existence  by  the
abolition  of  the  spécifie  contractile  power  of  the  muscle.^

'  "  I  divided  oiic  iscliiaiic  iierve  iii  eacli  of  Iwo  rabbits  and  two  guinea-
•pigs.  Teu  days  after,  1  jicrceivcd  that  the  divided  iicrve  prodiiccd  no  inove-
iiieiit  when  I  galvauised  it.  The  muscles  contractcd  actively  wheu  J  applicd
both  pôles  to  thein.  Ilavingnoted  this,  I  ticd  the  aorta  bclow  the  origin  of
•Ihe  icnal  arterics,  and  three  hours  after  1  again  tried  the  cllects  of  galvanism.
Tiierc  were  no  contractions  set  up  in  the  Icg,  neither  wlieu  1  stiniulatcd  the
«erve,  nor  when  1  directly  stinndated  the  muscles. I  then  loosed  tlie  ligature  ;


ALTERATION  OF  THE  CONTEACTILE  FIERE. 45

To  judge  by  the  usual  concaténation  of  phenomena,  discerned
by  clinical  observation^  tliis  altération  of  the  contractile  fibre,
manifested  externally  by  modifications  of  the  electrical  contractility,
would  be  the  precursor  and  the  first  terra  of  a  séries  of  graver
lésions  which  gradually  lead  to  the  wasting  of  the  muscle,  and
sometimes  induce  the  complète  and  définitive  abolition  of  its  func-
tions.  Observations,  to  which  we  bave  already  referred  and  to
which  we  shall  hereafter  return,  appear  to  indicate  that  the  lésions
in  question  are  largely  of  an  irritative  nature.  One  might  be
tempted  after  that,  following  the  wanderings  of  the  theory  at
présent  in  vogue,  to  consider  thèse  lésions  as  the  more  or  les&
direct  conséquence  of  a  paralysis  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves,  conco-
mitant with  the  paralysis  of  the  motor  muscular  nerves.  Amougst
the  arguments  which  hâve  weight  against  this  view,  we  may  confine
ourselves  to  pointing  out  one,  namely,  that  the  requisite  signs  of
vaso-motor  paralysis — the  repletion  of  the  blood-vessels  and  the
augmentation  of  the  température — are  not  to  be  seen,  except  on
very  exceptional  occasions,  in  those  patients  who,  after  a  nerve-
lesion,  suff'er  from  paralysis  with  rapid  diminution  of  electrical
contractility.

Numerous  facts  attesta  on  the  contrary,  that  the  skin  is  generally
pale  and  bloodless,  whiist,  at  the  same  time,  the  local  température
is  manifestly  lowered  from  the  very  beginning.i

II.

Such,  gentlemen,  was  the  solution  of  the  vexed  question,  which
I  had  accepted,  when  I  became  acquainted  with  some  new  investi-
gations that  had  been  carried  out  in  Germany.  The  results  furnished
by  thèse  researches,  where  numerous  experiments  on  animais  are
paralleled  with  pathological  facts,  seemed  to  me,  at  first  sight,.
destined  to  destroy  the  whole  édifice.  For,  indeed,  to  judge  by  the
conclusions  formulated  by  the  authors,  the  opposition  between
passive  and  irritative  lésions  of  the  nerves,  considered  in  référence
to  their  effects  on the  contractility  and  the  nutrition  of  muscles,.

at  the  end  of  a  very  short  time,  tne  muscles  again  became  irritable.  The
ischiatic  nerve  did  not  recover  its  lost  property.  In  this  experiment  the
muscles  of  the  leg,  after  having  completely  lost  their  irritability,  only  recovered
it  by  nutrition,  since  neither  the  nerve-centres  nor  the  divided  ischiatic  nerve
could  give  it." — (Brown-Séquard,  'Journal  de  Physiologie,'  t.  ii,  p.  77,  1859.)
^  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne),  loc.  cit.,  p.  234.  Mitchel,  loc.  cit.,  p.  13^
Polet,  'Etude  sur  la  température  des  parties  paralysées,'  Paris,  1867,  p.  7.


46  •  EXPERIMENTS ON ANIMALS.

would  be  anytliing  but  establishecl.  I  shall  set  out  by  declaririg
that  the  experiments  to  which  I  allude,  instituted  by  Dr.  Erb,  in
1868,  and  by  MM.  Ziemsseii  and  O.  Weiss  at  the  same  period,  but
•independently,  appear  to  liave  been  most  carefully  conducted.  It
remains  to  be  seen  wliether  tliey  liave  the  signification  which  has
been  attributed  to  them.

Various  nerve-lesions — by  contusion,  ligature,  and  section  in  a
■very  few  cases — having  been  produced  in  rabbits,  it  was  purposed
^to  make  daily  observations  of  whatever  modifications  of  electrical
>  contractihty  should  take  place,  as  regarded  nerves  and  muscles,
under  the  action  of  the  continued  current  and  of  faradisation,  each
being  employed  in  its  turn.  The  electrisation.  was  applied  some-
times  through  the  skin,  as  in  cliuical  cases,  sometiraes  directly,  as
in  ])hysiological  research.  Dr.  Erb  also  undertook  the  task  of
following  as  far  as  possible  from  day  to  day,  the  histological  altera-
■'tions  corresponding  to  the  changes  of  electrical  excitability.

Let  us,  in  the  first  place,  examine  the  phenomena  observed  in
thèse  cases  in  connection  with  the  injured  nerves.  Suppose  that
the  ischiatic  nerve  of  a  rabbit  lias  been  injured  from  being  crushed
with  a  forceps.  The  lésion  may  be  cither  slight  or  severe.  If  it  be
«evercj  an  almost  immédiate  loss  of  the  electrical  contractility  is
■uoted,  whether  galvanism  or  faradisation  be  employed.  On  the
régénération  of  the  nerve,  the  recovery  of  the  excitability  takes
place  slowly  as  regards  the  central  end,  but  quickl}^,  on  the  contrary,
in  the  distal.  If  the  lésion  be  slight,  the  electrical  excitability
returns  rapidly  to  the  central  end,  whilst  it  never  completely  ceased
io  exist  in  the  peripheral  extremity.

You  see  that  thèse  first  results  do  not  diverge  perceptibly  from
those  obtaiued  ni  former  experiments,  since  it  was  likewise  showu
by  them  that  a  divided  nerve  loses  its  excitabihty  from  the  first
days.

Let  us  uow  study  the  phenomena  which,  in  the  new  experiments,
are  set  prominently  forth  by  the  electrical  exploration  of  the  muscles.
Ilere,  gentlemen,  the  results  diverge  in  a  marked  manner  from  those
furnished  by  former  experiments,  and  approximate,  on  the  contrary,
very  closely  to  pathological  facts.

Thus  farailalc  exploration  indicates,  from  the  first  days,  a  dimi-
nution, and  afterwards — from  live  to  fourteen  days  in  intense  cases,
tolal  abolition  of  the  contractility.

This  is  not  ail. Galvanic  exploration,  also,  detccts  an  cnfeeble.


EXPERIMENTS ON ANIMALS. '  47

ment  of  the  muscular  contractions,  froin  the  first  days  ;  but^  after
tlie  second  week,  tliis  enfeeblement  is  followed  by  an  exaltation
which  persists  during  the  wliole  period  of  faradaic  dépression,  and
which  disappears  in  its  turn,  when  faradisation  résumes  its  power.

The  muscuLir  lésions  which  correspond  to  thèse  modifications  of
electrical  contractihty  hâve  been  studied  with  great  care  by  Dr.
Erb  ;  for  many  reasons  they  deserve  the  name  of  cirrhosis  of  the
muscles,  proposed  by  Dr.  Mantegazza.^  They  distinctly  and  com-
pletely  recall  those  lésions  which  the  first-mentioned  author  pointed
out  in  a  case  of  facial  paralysis,  observed  in  mau.

The  first  altérations  make  their  apj)earauce  in  the  interstitial
connective  tissue  :  from  the  first  week,  there  is  an  accumulation  of
numerous  rouuded  cell-elements,  recalling  the  tissue  of  granulation  ;
thèse  afterwards  assume  an  elongated  form,  disappear  and  give  place
to  undulated  connective  tissue.  The  muscular  fasciculi  do  not
begin  to  show  any  altérations  till  about  the  second  week.  At  this
period,  the  diminution  of  their  diameters  is  already  noticeable.
This  atrophy  makes  rapid  progress.  However,  the  transversal  stria-
tion  persists,  and  the  fibres  never  offer  any  trace  of  the  altérations
characterisiug  granular  fatty  degeneration.  On  the  other  hand,  from
a  very  early  period,  the  nuclei  of  the  sarcolemma  are  seen  to  mul-
tiply  and  group  together  in  little  collections,  whilst  concurrently
with  this,  the  contractile  matter  présents  différent  phases  of  those
modifications  of  structure,  known  as  waxy  degeneration.

Such  are  the  phenomena  pointed  out  as  consécutive  on  nerve-
lesions  which,  according  to  our  authors,  would  be  équivalent  to
complète  sections.  Well,  I  hâve  no  hésitation  in  declaring  that  this
parallel  is  far  from  being  secure  from  criticism.  The  results  obtained
by  Dr.  Erb  and  by  Dr.  Ziemssen  relate  to  conditions,  undoubtedly,
comparable  with  those  which  pathology  gives  us,  but  not  at  ail  with
those  which  were  determined  in  the  old  experiments.  Let  us  see
liow  thèse  observers  hâve  proceeded  in  the  great  majority  of  in-
stances. It  will  be  found  that  they,  almost  always,  ligatured  the
nerve  more  or  less  tightiy,  or  else  crushed  it  more  or  less  completely
with  a  forceps.  Now  do  not  thèse  circumstances  furnish  ample
reasons  for  presuming  that  irritation  of  the  nerve  fikament  may  hâve
intervened  hère,  as,  in  our  opinion,  it  intervenes  in  pathological
cases  ?

But  there  is  no  question  of  a  mère  presumption. The  existence
*  Vide  supra,  note,  pp.  36-37.


48  CONTUSION AND LIGATURE OF NERVES.

of  an  inflammation  occupying,  not  only  the  neiglibourhood  of  the
contused  points^  but  even  the  whole  length  of  the  peripheral  portion
of  the  injured  nerve  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  descriptions  of
Dr.  Erb  himself.  The  neurilemma,  especially,  shows  the  charac-
teristic  signs  of  the  inflammatory  process  ;  from  the  first  week,
rounded  cell-elements,  having  a  solitary  nucleus,  are  seen  accumu-
lated  in  great  numbers.  At  a  more  advanced  period,  a  more  or  less
thick  layer  of  fibrous  tissue  is  found  interposed  between  the  nerve-
filaments  which  hâve  undergone  the  difl'erent  phases  of  fatty  degene-
ration.  As  a  conséquence  the  nerve-bundle  has  acquired  a  consist-
ence  which  enables  it  to  resist  dilaceration,  more  tenaciously  than  a
normal  nerve.

It  seems  to  us  rational  to  admit  tliat,  in  thèse  experiments  as  in
the  cases  relating  to  man,  the  irritative  lésions  which  occupy  the
nerves  extend  their  influence  to  the  muscles.  It  may^  indeed,  appear
diffîcult  to  conceive  that  a  nerve,  which  has  undergone  the  altéra-
tions of  fatty  dcgeneration  and  is  deprived  of  its  motricity,  should
still  possess  a  certain  amount  of  vitality,  and  be  capable,  under  the
influence  of  an  irritative  lésion,  of  reacting  on  the  muscular  fibre  and
determining  trophic  disorders  therein.  It  is  proper,  however,  to
point  ont,  in  référence  to  tins,  that  the  irritation  probably  dates  from
the  very  moment  when  the  nerve  was  ligatured  or  contused.  It  is
certain,  besides,  that  the  vitality  is  far  from  being  definitely  de-
stroyed  in  nerves  completely  separated  from  the  nervous  centres,
since  the  work  of  régénération  can  proceed  without  the  distal  and
central  ends  being  united.^  It  is  useful  to  remember,  also,  that  it  is
only  on  hypothetical  grounds  and  without  proof  positive  that  nerve-
tubes,  deprived  of  their  meduUary  matter  and  reduced  to  the  axis-
cylinder,  are  said  to  be  denuded  of  every  kind  of  vital  property.

We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  ligature  and  contusion  are  not
the  only  means  employed  in  the  experiments  of  Drs.  Erb  andZiemssen.
Thèse  authors  hâve  also  made  sections  and  excisions  of  nerves,
though  in  comparatively  few  cases.  They  state  that  the  results  are
always  identical,  whether  complète  section  or  contusive  lésion  be  in
question.  Eut  if  we  go  back  to  the  détails  of  the  observations,  it  is
not  difUcult  to  see  that  this  conclusion  cannot  be  accepted,  without
reserve.  We  find  in  Ziemssen's  work,  especially,  a  very  significant
chapter,  considered  from  this  point  of  view.  It  treats  of  cases  in
■which  excisions  of  the  ischiatic  nerve  were  made,  the  excised  por-
'  Vulpiau,  'Système  nerveux,'  loc.  cil.,  p.  269.


SECTION AND EXCISION OF NEEVES.  49

tions  being  some  millimètres  in  lengtli.  Now,  tlie  results  obtained
in  conséquence  of  sucli  a  lésion  are  very  différent  from  those  wliich
this  author  and  Dr.  Erb  remarked  after  ligature  and  contusion  of
nerves.  They  resemble,  in  many  respects,  tlie  facts  gleaned  from
physiological  experiments.  Thus,  in  the  first  place,  the  electrical
contractility  diminishes,  after  excision,  in  a  progressive  manner,  but
very  slowly.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  abolished  until  many  months
hâve  passed, — not  disappearing  at  an  early  period,  varying  from  the
tifth  to  the  fourteenth  day,  as  happens  in  the  case  of  contused
lésions.  In  the  second  place,  we  do  not  meet  hère  witli  that  opposi-
tion between  the  eflPects  of  faradisation  and  those  of  galvanisation
which  vras  observed  in  cases  of  contusion  and  which  exists,  as  you
remember,  in  most  of  the  pathological  cases  where  man  is  concerned.
Thèse  two  modes  of  exploration,  on  the  contrary,  produce  precisely
parallel  effects  :  faradaic  contractility  and  galvanic  contractility  grow
weak  together,  and  together  résume  their  wonted  intensity,  on  the
régénération  of  the  nerve  which,  indeed,  requires  to  be  long  waited  for.^

If  I  do  not  deceive  myself,  we  may  conclude  from  this  sketch  that,
when  there  is  question  of  complète  section  or  of  excision  of  the  nerves,
the  récent  observations  harmonise  on  ail  essential  points  with  the
old  researches.  On  the  other  hand,  the  results  obtained  by  MM.
Erb  and  Ziemssen,  from  the  employment  of  contusion  and  ligature
of  the  nerves  of  animais,  are  comparable  with  the  phenomena  which
occur  in  man  in  conséquence  of  irritative  lésions  of  mixed  or  purely
motor  nerves.

Now,  if  this  be  so,  the  dissidences  which  we  pointed  out  at  the

1  Compare  the  observation  No.  ii,  fîg.  3,  in  the  memoir  of  Ziemssen  and
"Weiss  {loc.  cit.,  p.  589),  relative  to  a  case  of  ligature  of  the  anterior  tibial
nerve  in  a  rabbit,  with  the  observation  No.  ii  (p.  593),  conceruing  excision  of
the  ischiatic,  in  a  rabbit  also.  In  the  first  case,  faradaic  contractility  seemed
extinguished  from  the  i2th  day  after  the  opération,  whilst  galvanic  contractility,
on  the  other  hand,  iucreased  froin  the  2nd  day,  and  kept  to  a  high  level  until
the  moment  when  faradaic  contractility  approached  its  normal  standard  again
(the  44th  day).  In  the  second  case,  on  the  contrary,  both  faradaic  and  galvanic
contractility  became  enfeebled  together  and  progressively,  but  in  a  very  slow
manner.  They  ceased  to  be  manifest  almost  simultaneously  about  the  niiddle  of
the  third  month  only,  and  made  their  appearance  together  about  four  months
and  a  half  after  their  cessation.  MM.  Ziemssen  and  O.  Weiss  express  them-
selves  in  the  foUowing  terms  in  référence  to  the  effects  of  the  excision  of  the
ischiatic  in  a  rabbit.  "In  animais,  on  which  this  opération  had  been  per-
formed,"  "  galvanic  excitability  decliued  progressively,  and  this  enfeeblement
was  not  preceded  by  a  stage  of  exaltation. It  proceeded  slowly,  at  the  same

4


50  LESIONS OF SPINAL COED.

beginning  of  tliis  study  are  smoothed  away,  and  consequently  we
hâve  reason  to  acknowledge,  in  speaking  of  rauscular  affections^  tht
fundamental  distinction  between  the  effects  of  tJœ  absence  of  action,  and
tJiose  ofmorbid  action  of  the  iiervous  System  which  we  hâve  already  put
prominently  forward  in  discussing  cutaneous  and  articulai'  affections.^

TrOPHIC DISORDERS CONSECUTIVE ON LESIONS OF THE

Spinal  Cord.

Irritative  lésions  of  the  nervous  centres,  like  those  of  the  nerves,
hâve  the  power  of  producing  remote  trophic  disorders  in  différent
parts  of  the  body.  In  the  expositipn  of  thèse  consécutive  altéra-
tions which  we  are  going  to  offer  you,  we  shall  again  find  the  whole
séries  of  morbid  affections  (witli  the  exception  of  some  slight  différ-
ences) which  we  hâve  remarked  taking  place  after  nerve-lesions.
The  knowledge  of  their  history,  which  we  hâve  already  gained,  will
singularly  facilitate  the  task  that  remains  to  be  accomplished.

We  may  say,  in  a  gênerai  manner,  gentlemen,  that  the  skin,  the
mnscles,  the  joints,  the  bones,  and  the  viscera,  may  become  the
seats  of  varions  trophic  disorders,  conséquent  on  lésions  of  the
spinal  cord  and  of  the  brain.

Let  us  take  the  affections  of  the  muscles,  in  the  first  place,  since
the  investigation  we  hâve  just  conciuded,  has  led  us  towards
that  question.  The  considérations  we  are  about  to  set  forth  con-
cerning  thèse  affections  relate  only  to  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord  and

rate  as  the  enfeeblement  of  farado-muscular  excitability.  Galvaiiio  excitabiiity
disappeared  iu  the  second  half  of  the  3rd  month,  to  re-appear  towards  the  7th
or  8tli  month"  (Joe.  cit.,  pp.  592  et  593).

^  Récent  experiments  made  by  M.  Vulpian  ('  Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  iv,
1871-1872,  pp.  757,  758),  confirmiug  on  almost  every  point  those  of  MM.
Erb  and  Ziemssen,  establish  that  the  cfFects  of  section  of  peripheral  nerves
upon  the  physiological  properties  and  structure  of  the  muscles  do  not  essen-
tially  differ  from  tliose  caused  by  the  application  of  varions  irritative  agencies,
to  the  same  nerves,  such  as  local  contusion,  ligature,  and  cautery.  On  the
othcr  hand,  the  histological  observations  of  MM.  Neumann  ('Archiv  f.  Heil-
kunde,'  Leipzig,  1868),  Ranvier('  Comptes  Rendus  de  l'Académie  des  Sciences,'
3oth  Dcccmber,  1872),  Eichhorst  (Virchow's  'Archiv,'  1874,  i2th  December),
hâve  placcd  beyond  doubt  that  in  the  peripheral  extreniities  of  the  divided
ncrve  altérations  are  constantly  produced,  e.ff.,  multiplication  of  the  cells  of
the  intcr-annular  segment,  which  betray  the  présence  of  an  irritative  process.
The  opposition  between  the  cffccts  of  nerve-section  and  of  nerve-irritation
caniiot,  after  this,  bc  any  longer  maintained  in  the  strict  terms  in  which  it  was
set  out  in  this  lecture  {Authors  note  to  the  2nd  Edition).


CONSECUTIVE  MYOPATHIES.  51

medulla  oblongata  ;  for  it  is  at  least  very  doubtful  whether  lésions
of  the  brain  proper  hâve  ever  the  effect  of  directly  produciug  altéra-
tions of  the  muscular  tissue,  and  this,  as  we  shall  see  in  due  time
and  place,  is  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance.

Miisndar  lésions  consécutive  on  affections  of  the  sjnnal  cord. — Of
irritative  spinal  lésions,  there  are  sorae  which  détermine  the  very  rapid'
production  of  ail  the  kinds  of  functional  and  organic  muscular  altéra-
tions which  we  hâve  been  studying,  as  conséquences  of  nerve-lesions,
There  are  others,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  electrical  contractility
and  the  trophic  condition  of  the  muscles  are  preserved  in  perfect
integrity,  during  a  comparatively  considérable  lapse  of  time,  for
months  and  occasionally  even  for  years.  The  muscle,  in  the  latter
case,  only  becomes  slowly  altered,  under  the  influence  of  the  func-
tional inertia  to  which  the  limbs,  stricken  with  motor  paralysis,  are
subjected.  Hence  we  find  it  possible  to  separate  the  irritative  spinal
disorders  into  two  very  distinct  groups,  which  we  shall  pass  suc-
cessively  in  review.

A.  Inihejîrst  group  we  place  those  of  the  irritative  lésions  of  the
cord  which,  as  a  rule,  do  not  directly  modify  the  nutrition  of  the
muscles.  They  hâve  one  character  in  common  : — ail  tend  to  limit
themselves  to  the  white  fasciculi  of  the  cord,  and  if  the  grey  matter
be,  at  times,  invaded,  the  région  of  the  anterior  cornua  is  respected,
or  at  least  the  great  multipolar  nerve-cells  which  occupy  that  ré-
gion are  spared.  Such  are  the  différent  forms  of  fasciculated
scterosis,  whether  it  be  protopathic  or  consécutive  on  a  circum-
scribed  lésion  (en  /b^er)  of  the  brain  or  spinal  cord,  whether
it  occupy  the  posterior  fasciculi  only,  or  the  latéral  fasciculi  only,
or  both  simultaneously  ;  so  long  as  the  express  condition  stated
be  fulfilled,  that  is  to  say,  so  long  as  the  integrity  of  the  great
nerve-cells  be  preserved,  the  lésions  in  question  may  attain  their
highest  degree  of  development,  may,  for  instance,  invade  the  white
fasciculi  in  their  whole  width  and  their  whole  height,  without  direct
détérioration  to  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  animated  by  nerves
issuing  from  the  injured  portions  of  the  cord.i

The  scène  would  necessarily  change,  if  the  irritative  process,  ex-
ceeding  the  limits  usually  assigned  it,  happened  to  extend  from  the.
white  fasciculi  to  the  anterior  cornua  of  the  grey  matter  ;  then,  in.

^  Cliarcot  et  JofFroy,  "Deux  cas  d'atrophie  musculaire  progressive  av^c
lesiou  de  la  substance  grise  et  des  faisceaux  antéro-latéraux  de  la  moel'ie
épinière,"  in  '  Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  il,  p.  635.


53


CONSECUTIVE  MYOPATHIES,


conséquence  of  tlie  participation  of  the  motor-cells^  a  more  or  less
rapid  and  thorougli  atropliy  of  the  muscles  might  supervene.  It
is  in  this  way,  as  I  hâve  pointed  out  elsewhere/  that  the  symptoms
of  gênerai  spinal  paralysis  or  of  progressive  amyotrophy  are  some-
times  superadded  to  the  classic  symptoms  of  posterior  or  latéral
sclerosis^  &c.  We  hâve  quite  recently  seen  many  cases  of  this  kind
where  we  had  opportunities  of  observing  necroscopically,  in  the  most
distinct  manner,  the  altération  of  the  nerve-cells  to  which^  according
to  my  view,  the  trophic  muscular  lésion  should  be  attributed."

^  Cbarcot  et  Joffroy,  loc.  cit.,  p.  354.

-  See,  amongst  otlier  cases,  that  receutly  published  by  one  of  my  students,
M.  Pierret,*  '  Sur  les  altérations  de  la  substance  grise  de  la  moelle  epiuière
dans  l'ataxie  locomotrice  considérées  dans  leurs  rapports  avec  l'atrophie  muscu-
laire qui  complique  quelquefois  cette  affection  (in  '  Archives  de  Physiologie,'
&c.,  t.  iii,  p.  599).  In  this  instance,  phlegmasic  action  had  extended  from  the
posterior  columns  to  the  right  anterior  cornu  of  grey  niatter,  following  the
course  of  the  internai  radicular  fibres  of  the  correspoïKling  side,  the  consécu-
tive muscular  atrophy  was  exactly  liniited  to  the  members  of  the  riglit  side
{vide  fig.  i).


*  Fig.  I. — This  figure  is  illustrative  of  M.  Pierrei's  case  (a  summaryof  wliich
is  appended)  ;  it  represents  a  transverse  section  of  the  spinal  cord  taken
from  the  lumbar  eiilargement.  Â.  Posterior  roots.  B.  Internai  radicular
fasciculi  travcrsing  the  area  of  the  posterior  colunms.  Tiie  sclerosis  is
seen  limited,  in  tlie  posterior  columns,  to  tlie  course  of  thèse  fasciculi.  On
the  right,  the  phlegmasic  process  bas  extended,  along  the  course  of  the  radi-
cular fasciculi  to  the  right  anterior  rornu,  C.  This  cornu  hasevidenlly  saf-
fered  diminution,  in  every  diameter,  moreover  tlie  extcrnal  group  of  motor
cells  bas  complctely  disappeared,  and  we  (ind  iu  its  place  a  dense,  opaque,
apparently  fibroid  tissue,  containing  numerous  disseminated  myeloc^tes.


CONSECUTIVE  MYOPATHIES.  53

The  same  ruie  holds  goocl  for  dissemiiiated  sclerosis  {sclérose  en
plaques)}  and  for  the  diffused  scléroses.  The  same  may  be  said  of
primary  partial  myelitïc  affections  or  of  those  determined  by
tumour-pressure,  Pott's  disease  of  the  vertebrre,  &c.  Thèse  diflerent
diseases  hâve  no  du'ect  influence  over  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  so
long  as  they  do  not  involve  the  system  of  motor  nerve-cells.

AA^e  can  scarcely  conceive  of  an  exception^  save  in  those  very
rare  cases,  where  the  lésion,  though  circumscribed  to  the  white
fasciculi,  occupies  that  portion  of  the  cord  traversed  by  bundles  of
nerve-tubes,  from  wliich  issue  the  posterior  roots.  If  thèse  bundles
sliould  be  at  ail  involved  in  the  altérations,  the  équivalent  of  a
lésion  afCecting  the  peripheral  nerves  would  necessarily  be  produced.^

Tlie  following  is  a  succinct  account  of  a  case  whicli  shows  well  the  mechanism
by  which  consécutive  unilatéral  fasciculated  sclerosis  may,  by  extending  to  the
grey  matter,  détermine  the  production  of  muscular  atrophy  :

A  womau,  aged  about  70  years,  had  beeu  stricken  with  left  hemiplegia,  con-
sécutive ou  the  formation  of  a  blood-clot  in  the  right  cérébral  hémisphère.
The  members  of  the  paralysed  side,  which  had  at  au  early  period  beeu  con-
tractured,  commeuced  to  diminish  in  bulk,  not  quite  two  months  after  the  attack.
The  muscular  wasting  affected  ail  parts  of  the  paralysed  members,  in  an
uniforni  manner  ;  it  was  accompanied  by  a  very  marked  decrease  of  electrical
contractility  and  made  rapid  progress.  At  the  time  when  the  atrophy  became
évident,  the  skin  of  the  affected  members,  on  ail  points  subjected  to  the  slightest
pressure,  presented  bullse  which  soon  gave  place  to  eschars.  At  the  autopsy,
we  observed,  on  examiniug  hardened  sections  of  the  braiu,  that  the  descend-
iug  fasciculated  sclerosis  of  the  left  latéral  columu  had  beeu  propagated  to  the
auterior  cornu  of  the  grey  matter  of  the  correspouding  side,  and  had  there
caused  atrophy  of  a  certain  number  of  the  motor-cells.

'  In  the  case  of  a  woman,  suÊFering  from  multilocular  cerebro-spinal  sclerosis,
whoni  we  treated  some  years  ago,  oue  ofthe  sclerosed  patches  had  invaded,  uear
the  mid  cervical  région,  almost  the  whole  of  the  grey  matter  of  the  cord,  for  a
certain  height,  and  the  auterior  cornua  in  particular.  At  this  level  the  nerve-
cells  mostly  presented  grave  atrophie  lésions,  and  a  good  number  of  them  had
vanished,  without  leaviug  any  trace.  The  woman's  liands  presented  the
déformation  known  as  a  griffe,  i.e.  they  were  claw-like.  The  muscles  of
the  theuar  and  hypothenar  régions,  as  well  as  the  interossei  were  atrophied  ;
the  fore-arms  also  showed  great  atrophy,  limited  to  certain  groups  of
muscles.

^  In  référence  to  partial  myelitic  affections,  whether  protopathic,  or  de-
termined by  the  vicinity  of  a  tumour,  the  following  remark  will  not  be  out  of
place  : — They  are  most  commouly  fouud  at  a  pointof  the  dorsal  région  of  the  spinal
cord,  which  they  occupy  for  but  a  very  small  extent,  iu  height.  It  would  foUow
from  this  arrangement  that  if,  whether  primarily  or  iu  conséquence  of  eonceutric
extension  of  the  morbid  process,  the  auterior  cornua  of  the grey  matter


54  CONSECUTIVE  MYOPATHIES.

B.  The  second  group  will  include  tliose  affections  of  tlie  spinal
cordj  the  almost  inévitable  conséquence  of  which  it  is  to  détermine
more  or  less  grave  disorders  in  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles.  This
group  may  be  separated  into  two  subdivisions  :

1°.  The  first  includes  those  acute  or  subacute  lésions,  whether
diffuse  or  circumscribed  {en  foyer),  which  involve  a  great  length
of  both  the  white  and  the  grey  substances,  but  which  generally
predominate  in  the  latter.  They  are  commonly  followed  by  great
modifications  of  electrical  contractility,  and  by  a  rapidly  developed
atrophy  of  muscular  fibre.

I  will  refer  to  acute  central  myelitis,  in  the  first  place.  When
it  has  been  somewhat  geueralised,  and  occupies,  for  instance,  a
considérable  portion  of  the  dorso-lumbar  swelling,  the  early  diminu-
tion of  electrical  contractility  in  the  lower  extremities  is  a  symptom
which  probably  is  never  completely  absent.  Herr  Mannkopf  has
seen,  in  such  cases,  the  electrical  contractility  remarkably  altered  seven
days  after  the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms.i  When  the
patients  are  not  too  quickly  carried  off,  you  may  follow  the  develop-
ment  of  the  correlated  phenomena — the  atrophy  of  the  muscular
masses  soon  shows  itself,  and  the  histological  lésions  of  the  primi-
tive (ultimate)  fasciculi  become  promptly  perceptible.

According  to  MM.  Mannkopf-  and  Engelken^  thèse  lésions  are
chiefly  remarkable  on  account  of  the  prolifération  of  the  nuclei  of  the
sarcolemma.  They  bear,  in  fact,  the  stamp  of  the  irritative  process.
Hère  also  fatty  degeneration  of  the  primitive  fasciculi  is  an  ex-
ceptional  incident. As  to  the  nerves  which  supply  the  affected

became  involved,  the  muscular  lésions  which  resuit  therefrom  would  be  con-
fined  to  very  circumscribed  régions  of  the  thorax  or  even  of  the  abdomen,  and
might  not  betray  themselves  during  life,  by  any  perceptible  symptom.  A,t  ail
times,  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  of  the  extremities,  if  there  be  no  compli-
cation, remains  perfectly  intact,  when  the  partial  myelitis  occupies  the  position
we  hâve  just  mentioned.  It  would  be  quite  otherwise  in  any  case  where  a
focus  of  myelitis,  cven  though  very  mucli  circumscribed,  should  occupy  certain
parts  of  the  cervical  or  lumbar  enlargemeuts.  The  muscular  lésions  super-
vening,  in  conséquence  of  the  invasion  of  the  anterior  coruua,  would  then
hâve  their  seat  in  the  extremities  and  would  betray  their  présence  by  functional
disorders,  and  by  altérations  of  form,  in  those  parts,  which  could  not  long
«scape  attention.

'  Mannkopf,  '  Amtlicher  Bericht  liber  die  Versammlung  Deutscher  Natur-
forscher  und  Aerzte  zu  Ilannover,'  p.  251. Hannovcr,  1866.

^  Mannkopf,  loc.  cil.

^  Engelken,  '  Beitrag  zur  Patholog.  der  acuten  Myelitis.' Zurich,  1867.


LESIONS OF MOTOR NERVE-CELLS.  55

muscles,  they  were  found  by  Herr  Mannkopf,  after  repeated  examina-
tioiis,  to  be  sometimes  healtby,  sometimes  affected  by  comparatively
slight  altérations  nowise  •  proportionate  in  intensity  to  tbe  severity
of  the  muscular  lésions.^

Sjnnal  apoplexij  [hamatomyelio)  should  be  mentioned  in  tbe
second  place.  Tbis  is  an  affection  wbich,  considered  from  tbe
standpoints  of  patbogenyand  patbological  anatomy,  differs  essentially
from  common  intra-cerebralbœmorrbage;  for,  in  bsematomyelia,  tbe
effusion  usually  takes  place  in  tbe  midst  of  tissues  wbicb  bave
already  suffered  modification  from  infiammatory  action.  Tbe  blood
is  cbiefiy  efFused  in  tbe  grey  matter,  wbicb  it  often  invades  tbrougb-
out  tbe  major  part  of  its  lengtb.  Wben  tbis  bappens,  diminution
or  even  abolition  of  electrical  contractility,  supervening  early  in
tbe  muscles  of  tbe  paralysed  members,  is  a  symptom  wbicb  seems
constant.  It  was  observed  fourteen  days  after  tbe  development  of
tbe  brst  accident,  by  Levier  ;~  on  tbe  very  day  of  tbe  attack,  by
CoHn  (?)  ;  on  tbe  nintb  day,  in  a  case  recorded  by  Duriau.^  Spinal
apoplexy  is  an  affection  wbicb,  in  gênerai,  is  rapidly  fatal  ;  it  bas  as
yet  furnisbed  no  opportunity  of  observing  tbe  bistological  lésion  of
tbe  primitive  fasciculi  and  tbe  atropby  of  tbe  muscular  masses,
wbicb  would  doubtless  uot  fail  to  follow  if  life  were  prolonged.

It  is  probable,  gentlemen,  tliat  fractures  and  luxations  of  the
vertébral  column,  by  producing  an  irritation  of  tbe  cord  wbicb  from
partial  tends  to  become  gênerai,  may  bave  tbe  effect  of  determining,
as  Dr.  Ducbenne  (de  Boulogne^)  bas  remarked,  a  prompt  diminution
of  electrical  contractility  in  tbe  muscles  of  tbe  paralysed  member.

2°.  Tbe  affections  wbich  compose  tbe  second  category  are
tbe  product  of  more  délicate  lésions.  Tbese  are,  in  fact,  limited,  in
a  seemingly  systematic  manner,  to  tbe  grey  matter  of  tbe  anterior
cornua,  tbe  eutire  extent  of  wbicb  tbey  rarely  invade  ;  we  see  tbem
often  very  exactly  localised  in  tbe  circumscribed  oval  space  occupied
by  a  group  or  cluster  of  motor  cells  (fig.  3).

Tbe  neuroglia,  in  tbe  affected  parts,  becomes  usually  opaque,

'  Vide  supra,  p.  36.

-  Levier,  '  Beitrag  zur  Pathologie  der  E,uckenniarksapopIexie.'  luaugural-
dissertatiou. Bern,  1864.

^  Duriau,  '  Unioa  Médicale,'  t.  i,  1859,  p.  308.

■*  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne),  Observation,  p.  246,  loc.  cit.,  fracture  of  the
vertébral  column,  about  the  niiddle  of  the  dorsal  région.  The  spinal  cord
softened  for  several  inches,  iu  the  dorso-lumbar  région.  Enfeeblement  of  the
electrical  contractility  from  the  sixth  day  after  the  accident.


56


LESIONS OF MOTOE NEKVE-CELLS.


denser,  strewn  with  immerous  myelocytes  and  consequently  exhibits
the  signs  of  inflammatory  action.  At  the  same  time,  the  nerve-
cells  présent  différent  degrees  and  différent  modes  of  atrophie  de-


<l


FiG.  2. — Fragment  ofa  transverse  section  ofthe  spinal  cord  takenfrom  the  limhar
région,  in  a  case  of  infantile  spinal  paralysis  occupying  the  right  inferior
extremiti/.  The  right  anterior  cornu  of  grey  matter  is  represented.  The
lésions  affect  exclusively,  the  antero-exterual  group  of  nerve-cells  :  a,  cervi.v
cornu  posierioris  ;  b,  postero-extenial  group  of  nerve-cells  ;  c,  autero-ex-
ternal  group.  The  cells  of  the  latter  group  hâve  completely  disappeared,
whereas  those  of  groups  b  and  d  are  perfectly  distinct  ;  d,  internai  group  ;
c,  the  commissure.

génération.  But  what  are  the  éléments  first  affected  ?  Everything
leads  us  to  believe  thèse  to  be  the  nerve-cells.  It  would,  indeed,  be
difficult  to  comprehend  how  the  altération  could  show  itself  strictly
localised  in  the  vicinity  of  the  cells  if  its  starting-point  were  in  the
neuroglia.  There  are  cases  besides,  in  which  the  atrophy  of  a
certain  number,  or  even  of  a  whole  group^  of  nerve-cells  is  the  only
altération  which  can  be  discerned,  on  histological  examination.  The
connective  web  préserves  its  transparency,  in  those  points^  and  ail
the  characters  of  normal  structure,  with  but  few  exceptions.  There
are  other  not  less  significant  cases,  also,  where  lésions  of  the  neuroglia
appear  much  more  developed  about  the  central  parts  of  a  cluster
of  nerve-cells,  than  in  the  peripheral  portion,  and  also  much  more


INFANTILE SPINAL PAliALYSIS.  57

manifest  in  the  immédiate  iieiglibourliood  of  the  cells  themselves,
thau  in  the  intervais  between  them,  so  that  tliey  appear  like  so
many  centres  or  foci,  whence  the  inflammatory  process  radiated  out-
wards  for  some  distance  in  every  direction.  On  the  other  hand^  it
caunot  be  admitted  that  the  irritation  was  originally  developed  in
the  peripheral  portion  and  ascended  to  the  central  parts  along  the
anterior  nerve-roots,  for  the  latter  generally  présent,  on  a  level  with
the  altered  points  of  the  cord,  only  comparatively  trifling  lésions
and  not  at  ail  of  intensity  proportiouate  to  the  lésions  of  the  grey
matter.  It  appears  évident,  from  ail  that  précèdes,  that  the  motor
nerve-cells  are,  in  reality,  the  primary  seat  of  the  evil.  Usually,  it  is
true,  the  irritative  process  next  invades  the  neuroglia,  its  second
stage;  and  extends  step  by  step  to  the  différent  régions  of  the
anterior  cornua  ;  but  that  is  by  no  means  necessary.  Hence
we  must,  a  fortiori,  regard  as  a  consécutive  and  purely  accessory
fact,  the  extension,  in  certain  cases,  of  the  morbid  process  to  the
antero-Iateral  fasciculi,  in  the  immédiate  neighbourhood  of  the
anterior  cornua  of  grey  matter.i

Infantile  spinal  paraljjsis  is,  up  to  the  présent,  the  most  perfect
type  of  the  affections  which  compose  this  category.  The  numerous
researches  made  recently  in  France,  in  référence  to  the  spinal  lésions
on  which  they  dépend,  concur  to  indicate,  as  an  essential  fact,  the
profound  altération  of  a  large  number  of  motor-cells,  in  those
régions  of  the  cord  whence  the  nerves  emanate  which  supply  the
paralysed  muscles.^  In  the  vicinity  of  the  atrophied  cells,  the  con-
nective  network  almost  always  offers  manifest  traces  of  an  inflam-

'  The  views  set  fortli  above  relative  to  the  rôle  of  the  so-called  motor  nerve-
cells  iu  the  pathogeny  of  progressive  muscular  atrophy,  iufautile  paralysis,
acute  central  myelitis,  and  of  ail  the  amyotrophies  arising  from  spinal  causes,
in  gênerai,  were  stated  in  a  lecture  which  I  delivered  at  La  Salpûtrière  in  June
1868.  Cf.  Hayem,  'Archives  de  Physiologie/  1869,  p.  263.  Charcot  et
Joffroy,  id.,  p.  756.  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  and  Joffroy,  id.,  1870.  Thèse
views  hâve  been  utilised  in  the  récent  work  of  Dr.  Hammond  :  '  A  Treatise
on  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System/  Sect.  iv.  'Diseases  of  Nerve-cells/ p.
683,  New  York,  1871.

"  On  atrophy  of  the  motor  nerve-cells  iu  infantile  paralysis,  consult  Prévost,
in  'Comptes  Rendus  de  la  Société  de  Biologie/  1866,  p.  215.  Charcot  et
Joffroy,  "  Cas  de  Paralysie  Infantile  Spinale,  avec  lésions  des  cornes  antérieures
de  la  substance  grise  de  la  moelle  épinière/'  in  'Archives  de  Physiologie,' p.
135,  1870,  pis.  V  et  vi.  Parrot  et  Joffroy,  id.,  p.  309.  Vulpian,  id.,  p.  316.
H.  Roger  et  Damaschino,  "  Recherches  Anatomiques  sur  la  Paralysie  Spinale
de  l'Enfance,"  in  '  Gazette  Médicale/  Nos.  41,  43,  et  suiv.,  1870  (Gg.  2).


58  PROGRESSIVE  MUSCULAR  ATROPHY.

matory  process.  Judging  from  tlie  gênerai  aspect  of  tlie  plieno-
mena,  we  are  induced  to  admit,  as  a  higlily  probable  hypotliesis,
tliat,  in  infantile  spinal  paraiysis,  a  superacute  irritative  action  sud-
denly  seizes  on  a  large  nuuaber  of  nerve-cells  and  makes  them
promptly  lose  their  motor  functions.  Some  cells,  wliicli  hâve  been
but  slightly  attacked,  will  recover  their  functions  some  day,  and  this
phase  corresponds  to  the  amélioration  of  symptoms  which  alvvays
supervenes  at  a  certain  period  of  the  disease.  Others,  however,
hâve  been  more  severely  involved,  and  the  irritation  of  which  they
were  the  seat  is  transmitted  along  the  nerves  to  the  paralysed  muscles
which,  in  conséquence,  suffer  trophic  lésions  of  a  more  or  less
serious  character.^  However  it  be,  it  is  known  that  diminution
or  even  loss  of  faradaic  contractility  may  be  observed,  in  certain
muscles,  barely  five  or  six  days  after  the  abrupt  invasion  of  the
first  symptoms.  The  emaciation  of  the  muscular  mass  makes  rapid
progress,  besides,  and  soon  becomes  évident.  The  altérations
which,  on  histological  examination,  are  found  in  the  affected  mus-
cles are  thèse  :  firstly,  simple  atrophy  of  the  primitive  fasciculi  witli
the  transverse  strise  preserved  ;  and,  secondly,  the  marks  of  a  more
or  less  active  prolifération  of  sarcolemma-nuclei  on  some  isolated
fasciculi.  The  accumulation  of  fat,  sometimes  seen  in  old  cases,
seems  to  be  a  purely  adventitious  phenomenon."

Progressive  imiscular  atrophy  offers  for  our  study  the  irritative
atrophy  of  the  motor  cells  in  its  chronic  form.^  Hère  we  are  not
concerned  with  a  superacute  irritative  process  suddenly  invading  the
nerve-ceDs,  and  laying  hold  on  a  large  number  of  them.  Thèse  are
now  affected  successively,  one  by  one,  in  a  progressive  manner  ;  a
considérable  number  of  them  are  spared,  even  in  the  most  seriously

'  Cbarcot  et  Joffroy,  loc.  cil.

-  Ibid.,  loc.  cit.  ;  Vulpian,  lor.  cil.

^  On  atrophy  of  tlic  motor-cells  in  progressive  muscular  atrophy,  see  Luys,
'  Société  de  Biolofçie,'  iS6o.  Durnénil  (de  Rouen),  "  Atrophie  nmscuhiire  grais-
seuse progressive,  histoire  critique,"  Rouen,  1867.  "Nouveaux  faits  relatifs  à
la  pathogéaie  de  l'atropliie  musculaire  progressive,"  in  '  Gazette  hcbdom.,'
Paris,  1867.  Lockhart  Clarkc,  "  On  a  Case  of  Muscular  Atrophy,"  '  Britisli
and  Foreign  Medico-Chirurgical  Review,'  July,  1872.  "A  Case  of  Muscular
Atrophy,"  Beale's  '  Archives,'  t.  iv,  1867.  "  On  a  case  of  Muscular  Atrophy,"  in
'Medico-Chir.  Transactions,'  t.  iv,  1867.  O.  Schiippel,  "  Ueberllydroniyelus,"
in  'Archiv  der  Hcilkunde,'  Leipzig,  1865,  p.  289.  Hayem,  in  'Archives
de  Physiologie,'  1869,  p.  263,  pi.  7.  Charcot  et  JolTroy,  in  'Archives  de  J'iiysio-
logie,'  1869,  p.  355.


GENERAL SPINAL PARALYSLS.  59

compromised  régions,  uiitil  nearly  the  lasfc  period  of  the  disease.  The
development  of  the  muscular  lésions  corresponds  to  this  mode  of
évolution  of  the  spinal  lésions.  Thus,  it  is  rare  that  the  trophic
disorders  affect  simultaneously  ail  the  primitive  fasciculi  of  a  muscle  ;
hence  it  foUows  that  the  latter  may  respond,  in  a  more  or  less  ira-
perfect  manner,  to  the  command  of  the  Will,  and  still  enter  into
contraction  under  the  influence  of  electrical  excitations,  even  when
its  volume  lias  been  very  markedly  diminished.^

There  exist,  indeed,  at  least  two  very  distinct  forms  of  progressive
amyotrophy  correlated  to  an  irritative  lésion  of  motor  cells.  One
of  them,  whicli  is  2^'>'^iopathic,  arises  exclusively  from  the  lésion  in
question,  and  this  form,  priuiarily  developed  because  of  an  original
or  acquired  prédisposition,  tends,  as  of  necessity,  to  become  gene-
ralised.  In  the  other  form,  to  which  we  called  your  attention  a
moment  ago,  the  nerve-cell  is  only  secondarily  affected,  consecutively
on  a  lésion  of  the  white  fasciculi,  for  instance,  and  as  it  were  acci-
dentally.  Progressive  amyotrophy,  in  the  latter  case,  may  perhaps  be
called  symptomatïc,  it  has  less  tendency  to  become  generalised,  and
its  prognosis  is  certainly  less  gloomy.^

As  regards  adult  spinal  paralysis,  and  gênerai  spinal  paralysis
(Duchenne  de  Boulogne)  pathological  anatomy  has  not  yet  given
any  definite  décision.  But  to  judge  from  the  symptoms,  it  is  at
least  very  probable  that  thèse  afl'ections  also  dépend  on  a  lésion  of
the  motor  nerve-cells  of  the  auterior  cornua.  Adult  spinal  paralysis
resembles  that  of  childhood  by  the  almost  sudden  invasion  of  motor-
paralysis,  by  the  tendency  which  it  shows  to  rétrograde,  at  a
given  moment,  by  the  diminution  or  abolition  of  faradaic  contrac-
tility  showing  itself  precociously  in  a  certain  number  of  paralysed
muscles,  and,  finally,  by  the  rapid  atrophy  which  thèse  same  muscles
•constantly  exhibit  to  a  more  or  less  marked  extent.  A  slovrer
évolution,  often  occurring  in  a  subacute  or  chronic  manner,  a  ten-
dency to  become  generalised,  especially  évident  in  the  first  stages,
fréquent  pauses,  foUowed  by  invasion  of  hitherto  untouched  parts,
distinguish,  on  the  contrary,  gênerai  spinal  paralysis,  and  make  it
resemble  progressive  muscular  atrophy,  with  which  it  is  sometimes,

'  Charcot,  " Leçons  faites  à  la  Salpêirière  in  1870."  See  also  Hallopeau,
in  'Archives  de  Médecine,'  Septembre,  1871,  pp.  277,  305.

-  On  the  two  forms  of  progressive  amyotrophy  of  spinal  origin,  see  Charcot
•et  Joffroy  in  '  Archives  de  Physiologie,'  1869,  pp.  756,  757.  Duchenne  (de
Boulogne)  et  Joffroy  in  'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  1870,  p.  499.


60  LESIONS OF THE BULBUS EACHIDTCUS.

very  erroneouslj,  confounded  in  clinical  practice.  The  former,
however,  is  clearly  separated  from  the  latter  by  the  following
characters  :  the  muscles  of  an  entire  extremity  or  of  portion  of  a
limb,  are  struck,  en  masse,  in  an  almost  uniform  manner,  with
paralysis  or  atrophy;  they  présent,  at  a  period  but  little  remote
from  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  very  marked  modifications
of  electrical  contractihty  ;  usually,  in  conclusion,  a  period  of
recovery  supervenes,  during  which  the  atrophied  muscles  regain,
at  least  partially,  their  volume  and  their  functions.^

Muscular  lésions  consécutive  on  affectmis  ofthe  hidbus  racJddicus.
This  is  a  subject  which  has  been,  as  yet,  but  little  explored.  How-
ever  some  facts,  which  hâve  accumulated  until  they  now  form  a
respectable  number,  gleaned  from  the  history  of  labio-glosso-
laryngeal  paralysis  and  disseminated  sclerosis  [en  plaques)  tend  to
establish  that,  in  the  case  of  the  bulbus  as  well  as  in  that  of  the
spinal  cord,  irritative  lésions  of  the  white  fasciculi  hâve  no  direct
influence  on  the  nutrition  of  muscles.  Those,  on  the  contrary,
which  affect  the  motor  cell  clusters  distributed  over  the  floor  of  the
fourth  ventricle,  or  the  fasciculi  of  nerve-tubes  emanating  from  thèse
aggregations  may,  as  I  hâve  demonstrated,  détermine  a  more  or  less
marked  atrophy  of  the  muscular  fibres  of  the  tongue,  pharynx,
larynx  and  orbicularis  oris.''^

The  summarised  account  which  has  been  laid  before  you  will  suf-
fice,  I  hope,  to  place  in  prominence  the  remarkable  rôle  which,  ac-
cording  to  the  most  récent  researches,  lésions  of  the  anterior  nerve-
cells  play  in  the  production  of  trophic  muscular  disorders  consécu-
tive on  altérations  of  the  spinal  cord.  This  rôle  does  not  seem
doubtful  in  the  pathogeny  of  infantile  paralysis  and  of  the  différent
forms  of  amyotrophy  of  spinal  origin.  Its  influence  is,  certainly,
less  distinctly  demonstrated,  though  still  highly  probable,  as  regards
hœmatomyelia,  acute  central  myelitis,  and,  in  a  word,  ail  the  irri-
tative affections  of  the  spinal  cord  in  which  the  grey  axis  is  found  to
be  involvcd.  On  the  other  hand,  the  absence  of  ail  participation  on
the  part  of  the  white  fasciculi,  and  of  the  posterior  cornua,  in  the

'  Duclicuue  (de  Boulogne),  '  De  l'eleetrisation  localisée,' 3rd  édition.

-  Compare  Cliarcot,,  "  Note  sur  un  cas  de  paralysie  glosso-laryngée,  suivi
d'autopsie,"  in  'Archives  de  Physiologie,' 1869,  pp.  356,  636,  pi.  xiii.  Obs,
de  Catherine  Aubel.  Ducheimc  (de  Boulogne)  et  Jofl'roy,  "  De  l'atrophie  aïgue
et  chronique  des  cellules  nerveuses  de  la  moelle  et,  du  bulbe  rachidien,"
'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  1870,  p.  499.


INFLUENCE OP MOTOR NERVE-CELLS.  61

clevelopment  of  the  muscular  affections  in  question  is  a  fact  wliicli
lienceforth  rests  on  abundant  évidence.

This  acknowledged,  gentlemen,  we  liave  cause  to  inquire  why
lésion  of  the  motor  nerve-cells  induces  that  of  the  muscular  fibres,
whilst  even  the  gravest  irritative  altérations  of  the  white  fasciculi
hâve  no  direct  iniluence  on  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles.

With  respect  to  the  first  point,  one  cannot  fail  to  imagine  more
or  less  plausible  hypothèses  which,  however,  are  evideutly  prématuré.
The  teachings  of  expérimental  physiology  cannot  be  called  to  our
assistance  hère  ;  its  methods  of  ])rocedure,  inferior  to  those  of  disease
in  that  respect,  are  not  sulïicieutly  délicate  to  allow  the  nerve-cells  to
be  attacked  in  an  isolated  manner.  We  must  therefore,  confine
ourselves,  at  présent,  to  registering  the  facts  as  they  are  ofTered  us
in  clinical  practice,  illustrated  by  pathological  anatomy,  and  to  point
out  that  the  motor  nerve-cells,  comparable  in  that  respect  to  the
peripheral  nerves,  possess  the  power,  when  they  hâve  become  the
seat  of  irritation,  of  modifying,  by  remote  action,  the  vitality
and  structure  of  the  muscles.

As  regards  the  second  point,  if  what  we  hâve  said  concerning
the  effects  of  nerve-irritation  be  referred  to,  it  may  seem  contra-
dictory,  at  first  sight,  that  the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  should  not  be
affected  when  the  white  fasciculi  of  the  cord  are  occupied  by  inflam-
mation. To  show  that  the  contradiction  is  only  apparent  it  will
suffice,  however,  to  remind  you  that,  in  spite  of  the  analogy  of  com-
position, the  white  columns  are  not  at  ail  comparable  to  the  nerves.
Experiments,  in  fact,  reveal,  in  the  latter,  properties  which  are  not  to
be  found  in  the  former,  and  vice  versa.  Anatomy  also  shows  that
the  nerve-tubes  which  constitute  the  nerves  are  but  to  a  very  small
extent  the  direct  continuation  of  those  which,  by  their  union,  form
the  white  substance  of  the  cord.  Thèse  fasciculi  appear  to  be  almost
entirely  composed  of  fibres  which,  arising  either  in  the  encephalon
or  in  the  cord  itself  establish,  after  the  manner  of  commissures,
communications  between  the  spinal  cord  and  the  brain,  or  between
différent  points  of  the  grey  spinal  axis.  It  was  to  be  anticipated,
from  this,  that,  in  many  respects,  the  white  fasciculi  of  the  cord  would,
under  the  influence  of  irritative  lésions,  behave  differently  from  the
peripheral  nerves.

When  I  formed  the  idea  of  laying  before  you,  gentlemen,  the
principal  facts  relating  to  the  nutritive  disorders  which  make  their
appearance  consecutively  on  affections  of  the  nervous  System,  I  hoped


63  IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT.

that  my  task  might  be  brought  fairly  to  an  end,  in  the  course  oî
two  lectures.  But,  according  as  I  advance  in  this  exposition,  the
importance  and  extent  of  the  question  display  themselves  in  ail
their  distinctness.  Notwithstanding  the  détails  which  I  hâve  already
given,  I  am  far  from  having  exhausted  the  subject,  and  I  dare  to
hope  that  you  will  not  hâve  cause  to  regret  the  time  that  yet  remains
to  be  dedicated  to  its  study.


LECTURE  III.

DISORDERS  or  NUTRITION  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF
THE  SPINAL  CORD  AND  BRAIN.

SuMMARY. — Cutaneous  affections  in  sclerosis  of  tlie posteo'ior  cohimns:
papidar  or  lichenoid  empilons,  nrtlcaria,  zona,piistular  érup-
tions ;  thelr  relations  ivith  tJie  fulgurant  pains  ;  the  former
appear  to  arise  front  the  same  organic  cause  as  the  latter.

Eschars  of  rapld  development  {acute  bed-sores)  In  diseuses
qf  the  hrain  and  spinal  cord.  Mode  of  évolution  of  this
skln-affectlon  :  eri/thema,  bullce,  mortlf  cation  of  the  derma,
accidents  consécutive  on  the  formation  of  eschars  :  a,  putrld
infection,  purulent  infection,  gangrenons  emholl  ;  \),  simple
piorulent  ascending  meningitis,  ichorous  ascending  meningltls.
Acute  bed-sore  in  apoplexy  symptomatic  qf  circimscribed  céré-
bral lésions.  It  appears  principally  in  the  gluteal  région  qf
paralysed  extremltles  ;  its  importance  in prognosls.  Acute  bed-
sore  in  dlseas  es  of  the  spinal  cord;  it  generally  occupies  the
sacral  région.

Arthropathles  dependlng  on  a  lésion  qf  the  brain  or  spinal
cord.  A.  Acute  or  subacute  forms  ;  they  appear  in  cases  qf
traumatic  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord  ;  in  myelltis  occasloned  by
compression  {tumours,  Pott's  dlsease),  in  prlmary  myelltis,  in
récent  hemiplegla,  connected  toith  cérébral  sqftening.  Thèse
arthropathles  occupy  the  joints  of  paralysed  limbs.  B,
Chronlc  forms  ;  they  seem  to  dépend,  llke  amyotrophles  of  sjolnal
origin,  on  a  lésion  qf  the  anterlor  cornua  of  the  grey  axis  ;  ob-
served  in  posterior  sclerosis  {locomotor  ataxla)  and  in  certain
cases  qf  progressive  muscular  atrophy.

Gentlemen, — In  treating  of  the  nutritive  disorders  determined
by  lésions  of  the  peripheral  nerves,  I  gave  you  to  expect  that  thèse
consécutive  affections  would,  for  the  most  part,  be  represented  in


64 CUTANEOUS AFFECTIONS IN LOCOMÛTOR ATAXIA.

cases  of  lésions  of  the  spinal  axis,  It  is  true,  we  sliall  not  always
find  liere  a  servile  imitation  ;  indeed,  as  a  gênerai  rule^  the  trophic
disorders  of  cérébral  or  spinal  origin,  as  we  shall  often  hâve  occasion
to  note,  bear  v/ith  them  the  distinctive  stamp  of  their  cause.  But
there  are  circumstances  in  which  the  reseinblance  between  affections
of  central  origin  and  those  which  dépend  on  a  lésion  of  the  peri-
pheral  nerves  is  so  striking  that  discrimination  may  be  a  most
difficult  task.  We  will  cite,  as  examples  of  this  class^  certain  cuta-
neous  éruptions  which  sometimes  supervene  in  the  course  of  ataxia.

I.

The  cutaneous  affections,  to  which  we  hâve  just  alluded,  may
be  classified  as  follows  :  a,  papnlar  or  lichenoid  éruptions  ;  h,  nrti-
caria  ;  c,  zona  ;  d,  pnstular  éruptions,  analogous  to  ecthyma.

The  following,  in  a  few  words,  are  the  results  of  my  observations
on  this  subject.  It  is  not  rare  to  see  the  skin  of  the  legs  and  thighs
become  temporarily  covered  with  a  more  or  less  confluent  papular
or  lichenoid  éruption,  conséquent  on  paroxysms  of  the  fulgurant  or
shooting  pains,  characteristic  of  locomotor  ataxy.  In  the  case  of  a
woman,at présent  under  treatmentatLaSalpêtrière,enormous  patches
of  urticaria  are  produced,  at  every  paroxysra,  over  the  parts  where  the
keenest  pains  are  felt.  In  another  case,  the  skin  of  the  right  gluteal
région  becomes  covered  with  an  herpetic  éruption,  limited  however  to
the  course  of  the  nervous  filaments  which  convey  the  pain.  Tinally,
a  third  patient  presented,  under  analogous  circumstances,  still  more
remarkable  phenomena.  This  woman,  aged  sixty-one  years,  was
received  into  the  hospital  on  account  of  blindness  fsclerous  atrophy
of  the  optic  nerves)  about  eight  years  ago  ;  she  is  now  suffering
from  well-marked  locomotor  ataxia.  In  her  case,  the  évolution  of
the  disease  has  been  very  rapid,  for  the  first  paroxysms  of  shooting
pains  date  from  the  month  of  ]\Iarch,  1865,  and  in  July,  1866,  the
incoordination  was  so  far  advanced  as  to  render  walking  difficult.
Oae  of  thèse  fits,  which  happened  in  Junc,  1 867,  was  of  exceptional
intensity.  The  pains  which  were  really  horrible,  seemed  fixed,  during
sevcral  days,along  the  course  of  the  cutaneous  branches  of  the  right
lesser  ischiatic  nerve,  and  of  that  supplying  the  levator  ani.i

'  The  nerve  called  "relevcur  de  l'anus"  by  French  anatomists,  is  a  branch
of  tlie  fonrth  anterior  sacral  nerve,  althouî^li  the  muscle,  bearing  the  same  uamc,
rcccives  twigs  from  the  superficial  pcrincal  nerve  (S.).


THEIR RELATION TO FQLGURANT PAINS.  65

During  this  time,  the  correspondiug  parts  of  tlie  skin  became
covered  witli  a  great  number  of  pustules,  analogous  to  ecthyma,
sorae  of  whidi  proved  the  starting  points  of  deep  ulcérations.  Besides
this,  a  rouiided  eschar  of  about  two  inches  in  diameter,  wliich  in-
volved  the  derm  iiearly  throughout  its  whole  thickness,  developed
in  the  riglit  sacral  région,  a  few  inches  from  the  médian  liue  im-
înediately  under  the  extremity  of  the  coccyx.  The  sore  persisting
after  the  élimination  of  the  sphacelated  parts,  cicatrisation  was  not
complète  until  two  months  had  elapsed.  In  another  paroxysm,  the
flashing  pains  followed  the  direction  of  the  vertical  portion  of  the  left
internai  saphenous  nerve,  and  a  pustular  éruption  was  soon  thrown
out  on  the  skin  of  the  régions  to  which  this  nerve  is  distributed.

There  is  one  character  common  to  ail  thèse  éruptions,  and  it  is
of  a  kind  to  show  that  we  hâve  not  hère  to  deal  with  common  dis-
orders, — they  ail  make  their  appearance  concurrently  with  certain
intense  and  persistent  exacerbations  of  the  spécifie  pains,  which  are
in  some  sort  pathognomonic  of  fasciculated  sclerosis  of  the  posterior
columns,  which  it  is  customary  to  call  fulgurant  or  flashing  pains.

Let  me  add,  as  another  character,  that  the  éruptions  in  question
habitually  show  themselves  along  the  course  of  the  nerves  invaded
hy  the  fulgurating  pain.

Prom  what  précèdes  you  will  observe  that  the  existence  of  those
cutaneous  éruptions  seems  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  ful-
gurant pains  :  hence  it  becomes  at  least  very  probable  that  one  and
the  same  organic  cause  présides  over  the  development  of  both  the
former  and  the  latter.

What,  then,  is  the  reason  of  the  présence  of  fulgurant  pains
among  the  symptoms  of  sclerosis  of  the  posterior  columns  ?  I  do
not  désire  to  enter  to-day  upon  a  long  discussion  of  this  question
which  will  meet  us  again  ;  it  will  suffice,  at  présent,  to  tell  you  that,
in  ail  probability,  thèse  pains  dépend  upon  the  irritation  set  up,
during  their  intra-spinai  course,  in  those  of  the  nerve-tubes  emanat-
ing  from  the  posterior  roots  which,  under  the  name  of  internai
radicular  fasciculi,  {internai  Jibroîis  masses  of  tlie  posterior  roofs  m
the  nomenclature  of  Kolliker),i  pass,  for  a  certain  extent,  through
the  area  of  the  posterior  columns  before  penetrating  the  posterior
■cornua  of  the  grey  matter.

It  appears  but  little  possible  to  connect  the  fulgurant  pains  with  any
■one  of  the  following  lésions  : i°,  atrophy  of  posterior  roots,  before
'  Kôlliker,  '  Histologie  Humaine/  P.  i,  pp.  345,  346.

5


66 PATHOGENY  OF  FULGURANT  PAINS.

entering  the  cord  ;  2°,  posterior  spinal  meningitis  ;  3°,  sclerosis  of
the  posterior  cornua  of  tlie  grey  matter  ;  4°,  irritative  lésions  of
the  spinal  ganglia  or  of  the  peripheral  nerves, — for  thèse  pains  hâve
been  met  with  in  a  certain  number  of  ataxic  cases  in  which  post-
mortem  examinations  hâve  demonstrated  the  absence  of  ail  lésions
of  the  kinds  enumerated.

In  support  of  this  proposition  allow  me,  gentlemen,  to  recall  the
results  of  the  autopsy  which  Dr.  Bouchard  and  I  made,  in  the  case
of  a  woman  who  died  in  this  hospital,  during  the  first  period  of
progressive  locomotor  ataxia.^  This  patient  had  experienced  the
spécial  paroxysmal  pains,  in  a  high  degree,  lasting  for  some  fifteen
years,  until  the  epoch  of  her  death  caused  by  an  adventitious  disease.
No  sign  of  motor  incoordination  had  ever  shown  itself.  The
patient  walked  with  ease,  without  throwing  forward  the  leg,  or
stamping  with  the  heel^  nor  did  closing  the  eyes  affect  her  certainty
of  movement.  On  post-mortem  examination,  we  saw  that  the  pos-
terior roots  had  preserved  their  normal  characters,  and  beyond  some
equivocal  traces  of  meningitis,  the  only  perceptible  lésions  met  with
occupied  the  posterior  columns  and  consisted  of  a  multiplication  of
neuroglia-nuclei  with  thickening  of  the  meshes  of  the  reticulum,  but
without  concomitant  altération  of  the  nerve-tubes.  To  complète
the  démonstration,  I  could  cite  many  cases  of  the  same  kind  where
the  fulgurant  pains  had  been  likewise  very  intense,  and  where,  on  a
post-mortem  examination,  I  was  unable  to  discover  the  existence  of
any  altération  whatever,  either  in  the  posterior  grey  cornua,  or  in
the  peripheral  nerves,  or  in  the  spinal  méninges.

ïrom  this  it  would  appear  necessary  that  we  should  seek,  in  the
irritative  altération  of  the  posterior  columns  of  the  spinal  cord,  the
starting  point  of  the  fulgurant  pains  of  ataxic  patients.  But  it
seems  scarcely  probable  that  ail  parts  of  thèse  fasciculi  ought  to  be
indiscriminately  arraigned  on  this  count;  everything,  on  the  contrary,
induces  us  to  believe  that  the  sensitive  fibres,  issuing  from  the  pos-
terior roots,  which  compose  a  portion  of  theinternal  radïcular fasciculi
should  alone  be  incriminated.  Thèse  fibres  would  participate,  from
time  to  time,  pcriodically^,  in  the  irritation  whose  permanent  seat  is
in  the  coluinns  tlicmselves  ;  and  thus  would  be  produced  those
paroxysms  of  shooting  or  flashing  pains  which,  in  accordance  with

'  "  Douleurs  fulgurantes  de  l'ataxic,  saus  incoordination  des  mouvements,
sclérose  commençante  des  cordons  postérieurs  de  la  moelle  ("pinièrc,"  iu
*  Comtes  llcndus  des  Séances  et  Mémoires  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,"  1866.


lERTTATION OP RADIOULAR FASCICULI.  67

a well-known physiological law are referred to tlie  periphery,
altliough  in  reality  due  to  a  central  cause.

How  are  we  to  understand  the  appearance  of  tlie  cutaneous
éruptions  sometimes  observed  in  ataxic  patients,  at  the  very  time  of
tlie  occurrence  of  fulgurant  paroxysms  of  abnormal  intensity  ?  It
is  certain  that  the  nerve  fibres  which  form  the  internai  radicular
fasciculi  are  not  ail  sensitive  ;  tliere  are,  for  instance,  at  least  some
amongst  them  which  assist  in  the  accomplishment  of  reflex  actions  ;
there  are  others  also,  no  doubt,  at  least  it  is  what  thèse  cutaneous
éruptions  tend  to  demonstrate,  which  belong  to  the  system  of  centri-
fugal  nerves  and  which  possess  a  more  or  less  direct  influence  over  the
exercise  of  the  nutritive  functions  of  the  skin.  The  irritation  of  the
latter  class  of  fibres,  an  irritation  more  difficult  to  set  up  than  that
of  the  sensitive  fibres,  should  be  invoked  to  explain,  in  the  cases  I
hâve  above  alluded  to,  the  production  of  papular  affections  at  one
time,  and,  at  another,  of  vesicular,  pustular,  or  gangrenons  disorder.

Are  the  posterior  fasciculi  the  only  departments  of  the  spinal
cord,  the  irritation  of  which  is  capable  of  determining  such  aff'ec-
tions  ?  This  is  a  question  which  must  remain  unanswered  for  the
présent.  Ail  that  can  be  said  is  that  such  éruptions  hâve  not  yet
been  observed,  except  where  there  was  some  complication,  in  cases
of  irritative  lésions  confined  to  the  antero-lateral  columns,  or  to  the
anterior  cornua  of  the  grey  matter  ;  and  as  to  the  part  which  the
posterior  cornua  may  play,  in  this  respect,  we  are  in  the  most
complète  ignorance  upon  that  subject.

On  the  other  liand,  some  facts  hâve  been  collected  which  tend  to
establish  that  zonais  sometimes  developed  underthe  direct  influence
of  partial  lésions  of  the  encephalon.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  an  aged
woman  attacked  with  hemiplegia,  whose  history  has  been  recorded  by
Dr.  Duncan,  an  éruption  of  zona  appeared  on  the  thigh  of  the  para-
lysedside;  motor  paralysis  had  supervened  almost  simultaueously
with  the  éruption,  and  both  passed  away  nearly  at  the  same  tiine.i

In  the  case  of  a  child,  recorded  by  Dr.  Payne,  the  zona,  which
marked  out  the  course  of  superficial  branches  of  the  anterior  crural
nerve,  showed  itself  three  days  after  the  develo]nnent  of  a  hemi-
plegia occupying  the  same  side  of  the  body  as  the  éruption."
Thèse  cases,  which  can  be  multiplied,  are  undoubtedly  very  inter-
esting;  unfortunately,  they  hâve  been  related in  a  very  summary

'  'Journal  of  Cutaneous  Medicine,'  &c.,  69. Erasmus  Wilson,  October,  i86â.
-  '  British  Médical  Journal,'  August,  1871.


68  KELATION OF ZONA TO ENCEPHALIC LESIONS.

mauner  onl}',  and  caution  is  needed,  I  tliink,  in  drawing  conclusions
from  them,  which  may  prove  prématuré.  I  can^  in  fact,  cite  a  case
in  many  respects  analogous  to  the  preceding,  whicli  I  recently
observed  at  La  Salpêtrière,  and  where  the  cause  of  the  zona  was
most  probably  the  irritation  of  a  peripheral  nerve.  Hère  again,
the  seat  of  the  vesicular  éruption  was  in  the  inferior  extremity  of
the  paralysed  side,  where  it  followed  the  distribution  of  the  super-
•iicial  twigs  of  the  cutaneous  perineal  nerve.  It  showed  itself  also,
simultaneously  with  the  hemiplegia  which,  making  an  abrupt
appearance,  was  correlated  to  the  formation  in  one  of  the  cérébral
hémisphères  of  a  focus  of  ramoUissemeut,  itself  being  determined  by
the  emb&lic  oblitération  of  a  posterior  cérébral  artery.  As  to  the
zona,  it  was  produced,  I  believe,  after  the  following  mechanism  ;  a
spinal  arterial  brandi,^  arising,  no  doubt,  from  one  of  the  latéral
sacral  arteries  was,  on  a  post-mortem  examination,  found  to  be  ob-
structed  by  a  blood-clot,  and  to  form  a  comparatively  voluminous
■cord,  adhering  to  one  of  the  posterior  spinal  roots  of  the  cauda
equina.  It  is  probable  that,  on  its  passage  througli  the  sacral
foramen,  this  arteriole,  exceedingly  distended  by  the  thrombus  had
compressed  either  the  spinal  ganglion,  or  an  initial  brauch  of  the
ischiatic  nerve,  so  as  to  set  up  irritation  in  it.  A  vegetating  ulcéra-
tion, which  was  noticed  on  one  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta
appears  to  hâve  been  the  starting  point  of  ail  the  accidents  which
•we  hâve  just  described."

You  will  observe  that,  in  this  case,  the  coexistence  of  the  hemi-
iplegia  and  of  the  vesicular  éruption  resulted  to  a  certain  extent  from
a  fortuitous  coïncidence.  Ilowever  it  be,  in  default  of  zona,  there
are  other  trophic  disorders  of  the  skin,  the  existence  of  which

'.  Oiie  of  the  rami  mechdlœ  spinalis,  see  N.  Rudiuger,  "  Arterienverzweigung',
iii  dem  Wirbelcanal,  &c.,"  in  '  Verbreituug  des  Sympatliicus,'  p.  2,  Mûnclien,
1863.

^  The  following  are  the  principal  détails  of  this  case  which  présents  a  fine
example  of  ulcérons  endocarditis,  with  multiple  emboli  and  atyphoid  condition.

The  patient  Lacq,  ....  aged  22  years,  a  soldier,  M-as  admitted  on  the  28lh
Dcccmbcr,  1870,  to  the  Salpêtrière  ambulance  (fever  ward).  He  had  been
sufl'eriug,  it  seems,  from  an  intense  fevcr  for  two  or  tliree  days.  On  the  day
of  admission  the  following  symptonis  wcre  noted  :  severc  cephalalgia,  pains  in
the  loins,  diarrhœa.  The  patient  cannot  swallow  the  smallcst  quantity  of
liquid  without  bcing  taken  witii  nausca  and  voniitiiig.  Skin  hot,  puise  very
fréquent.  It  was  rcgarded  as  a  case  of  typhoid  fevcr.  Noisy  dclirium  during
the  nigiit.  Next  day,  29th  December,  was  noticed  the  existence  of  an  almost
complète  hemiplegia  of  the  Icft  side. The  paralysed  mcmbers  were  not  rigid  ;


"  DECUBITDS  ACDTUS  : ACUTE  BED-SOEE. 69?

may  sometimes  be  attributecl  to  tlie  influence  of  an  encepbalic  lésion.
This  is  a  fact  wbich,  I  hope  at  least,  will  soon  be  placed  beyond
doubt.

IL
Eschars  of  rajiiil  development. Decuhiius  acutus  :  acute  led-sore} —

incomplète  facial  paralysis,  on  tlie  left  side,  likewise  existed.  The  eyes  are
constantly  directed  to  thje  right  side,  and  there  is  nystagmus.  Puise  120;
rectal  température  40*5°  Cent.  On  tlie  breast,  fore-arms,  and  thighs,  the  skin-
shows  a  great  number  of  little  ecchymoses,  somewhat  resembling  flea-bites, — -
fréquent  respirations,  sibilant  râles. — Tyœpanitis.  On  the  antero-external
surface  of  the  left  paralysed  leg,  there  exists  an  éruption  of  zona  which
answers  exactly  to  the  distribution  of  the  superScial  twigs  of  the  cutaneous
perineal  branch  of  the  musculo-cutaneous  nerve.  The  first  group  of  vesicles  is
seen  above  and  below  the  patella;  a  larger  group  is  disposed  in  a  vertical:'
straight  line  which  descends  to  the  middle  third  of  the  leg  ;  the  third  group
occupies  the  neck  of  the  foot  before  and  inside  of  the  external  malleolus.  The
éruption  is  tolerably  developed.  It  is  remarked  tliat  some  traces  of  it  existed
the  day  before, — that  is  to  say,  previous  to  the  hemiplegia.  On  the  3oth,  the
éruption  is  in  fuU  vigour. The  patient  succumbs  at  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

Âutopsi/. — One  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta  is  ulcerated  and  covered
with  végétations,  fibrinous,  soft  and  reddish  in  appearance.  The  niesenteric
glands  are  somewhat  red  and  swolleu,  but  there  exists  no  trace  of  dothien-
enterical  éruptions  or  ulcérations  in  the  sniall  or  large  intestines.  Numerous
ecchymoses  are  observed  ou  the  viscéral  and  pariétal  pleurce,  in  the  pericardium,
and  in  the  peritoneum.  The  spleen  and  kidneys  présent  infarcti  in  différent
stages  of  development.  ïlight  cérébral  hémisphère;  on  many  points  of  the
occipital  lobe  the  pia  mater,  which  is  much  iujected,  présents  large  patches  of
sanguine  suffusion.  The  lobe  itself  is  softened  throughout  nearly  its  whole
extent  ;  the  cérébral  niatter  there  assumes  a  greyish  colour,  and  at  one  point
in  the  midst  of  the  softened  parts  we  note  an  effusion  of  blood,  as  big  as  an
almond.  The  posterior  cérébral  artery  of  the  same  side  is  completely  obliterated
by  a  thrombus.  The  spinal  cord,  prepared  with  chromic  acid,  and  examined  in
thin  sections,  présents  no  perceptible  altérations.  At  the  cauda  equina,  on  the
left  side,  we  found  adheriug  to  one  of  the  posterior  spinal  roots  which  give
origin  to  the  sacral  ])lexus,  an  arteriole  (spinal  branch,  arising  froni  the  latéral
sacral  artery)  distended  by  ablood-clot.  The  obliterated  artery,  equal  in  size  to  a
crow-quill,  may  be  followed  from  the  point  where  the  root  has  been  eut  not  far
from  the  corresponding  sacral  foramen,  to  the  spinal  cord  ;  upon  this  it  can
still  further  be  followed  the  whole  length  of  the  lumbar  enlargement,  where  ife
ascends  along  the  posterior  médian  fissure,  contrary  to  the  usual  arrangement
of  the  posterior  spinal  arterial  plexus.

'  Lecubiiîis  (when  qualified  by  the  adjectives  acutus,  clironicus,  ominosîts)
signiûes,  not  the  position  of  the  patient  in  bed,  but  the  bed-sores  supposed
to  resuit  from  such  position.  This  term,  though  etymologically  objectionable,
is  generally  employed  in  foreign  hospitals.  As  its  adoption  in  this  translation
might  confuse,  and  appears  to  be  unnecessary,  the  term  "  bed-sore  "  has  beeu
substituted  (S.).


70  MODE  OF  EVOLUTION.

I  hasten  to  leave  tlie  question  of  éruptions  occurring  in  locomotor
ataxia,  which,  on  the  whole,  hâve  but  a  secondary  importance,  in  order
to  draw  your  attention,  in  a  very  spécial  manner,  to  another  affection
of  the  skin  which  holds  a  most  important  position  in  the  cHnical
history  of  a  considérable  number  of  the  diseases  of  the  brain  and
spinal  cord.

The  cutaneous  affection,  which  I  am  about  to  discuss,  shows
itself  at  first  under  the  form  of  an  erythematous  patch,  on  which
vesiculae  and  buUge  are  rapidly  developed  ;  it  terminâtes  very  often
in  mortification  of  the  skin  and  subjacent  tissues.

Usually  it  occupies  the  sacro-gluteal  régions;  but  it  may  also
appear  almost  indifferently  on  ail  parts  of  the  trunk  or  members
subjected,  in  the  decubitus,  to  a  somewhat  continuous  pressure.
Even  a  very  slight  and  very  short  pressure  sufhces  to  make  it
appear  in  certain  cases.  Finally,  there  are  other  cases  still,  though
thèse  indeed  are  very  exception  al,  in  which  it  seems  to  be  pro-
duced  without  the  intervention  of  the  least  pressure  or  of  any
other  occasional  cause  of  the  same  kind.^

This  is  a  very  différent  affection  from  ail  those  varions  éruptions
which  are  so  commonly  remarked  over  the  sacrum  in  patients  con-
demned  by  différent  disorders  to  long  maintain  a  recumbent  position
in  bed.  Thèse  éruptions  which  are  sometimes  erythematous  and
lichenoid,  sometimes  pustular  and  ulcerous,  sometimes  papular,
having  a  deceptive  resemblance  to  syphilitic  sores  (^placfies  mu-
queuses), are  generally  occasioned  by  repeated  and  prolonged  contact
with  irritating  substances,  such  as  urine  or  fsecal  matters.  They,
as  well  as  acute  bed-sore,  may  become  the  starting  points  of  genuine
eschars  ;  but  the  acute  bed-sore  is  distinguished  from  the  former
by  important  characters,  namely  :  firstly,  by  appearing  shortly  after
the  commencement  of  the  primary  disease,  or  following  on  a  sudden
exacerbation  ;  and,  secondly,  by  a  very  rapid  évolution.

On  account  of  the  peculiar  interest  belonging  to  it,  the  affection,
in  question,  certainly  deserves  to  be  designated  by  an  appellation  pro-
per  to  itself.  One  of  the  few  authors  who  hâve  made  it  a  spécial  study,
Herr  Samuel,  lias  proposed  to  characterise  it  by  the  name  oidecnbitus
ac2itus  or  eschar  of  rapid  formation.  He  desires  thus  to  distinguish  it
from  (lecubilus  chronicus,  that  is,  from  the  dermal  necrosis  which

^  Brown-Séquard,  '  Lectures  on  the  Central  Nervous  System,'  Philadclphia,
1868,  p.  248. Couyba,  'Des  Troubles  Tropluques,'  &c.,  Thèse  de  Paris,  1871
P-43-


CHAEACTERISTICS OP ACUTE EED-SOEE.  71

appears  long  after  tlie  invasion  of  tlie  disease  whicli  occasions  its
existence.  We  propose  to  accept  this  appellation,  wliilst  reminding
you,  however,  tliat  the  raortitication  of  tlie  skin  is  not  everythiug
in  clecnbitus  acutiis}  It  answers,  on  the  wliole,  to  the  most  ad-
vaneed  phases  of  the  morbid  process.  It  may  happen,  indeed,  that
the  vesiculse  or  bullse  will  dry  up  and  disappear  without  that  portion
of  the  derm,  on  -which  they  were  seated,  presenting  the  least  trace  of
necrosis.  This  is  principally  observed  when  they  are  produced  on
parts  where  the  pressure  has  only  been  of  short  duratiou,  of  little
intensity,  and,  so  to  speak,  accidentai,  as  over  the  ankles,  on  the
inner  surface  of  the  knees,  the  legs,  or  the  thighs.  Now,  it  behoves
you  to  be  able  to  recognise  the  significance  of  thèse  vesiculse  and
bullse,  from  their  first  appearance  on  the  scène  ;  for,  even  at  that
period,  they  enable  us  under  certain  circumstances  to  formulate  a
prognosis,  with  certainty.

The  opportunity  has  been  given  me,  many  times,  of  following  as
it  were  day  by  day,  hour  by  hour,  the  évolution  of  the  acute  bed-
sore,  in  cases  of  apoplexy  consécutive  on  hsemorrhage,  or  on  soften-
ing  of  the  brain  which  we  so  often  meet  with  in  this  hospital.^

I  can  refer  to  the  observations  I  made  in  regard  to  this,  in  the
gênerai  description  which  follows,  for  I  hâve  been  able  to  establish,
from  another  stand-point,  that  the  acute  bed-sore  connected  with
brain- diseases  does  not  essentially  differ  from  that  which  arises  under
the  influence  of  spinal  lésions.

Some  days  or  even  some  hours  only  after  the  manifestation  of  the
cérébral  or  spinal  affection,  or  again,  following  on  a  sudden  exacer-
bation  of  thèse  affections,  there  appear  on  certain  points  of  the  skin
one  or  many  erythematous  patches,  variable  in  extent  and  irregular
in  shape.^  The  skin  there  has  a  rosy  hue,  sometimes  it  is  dark  red,
and  even  violet,  but  the  colour  disappears  momentarily  on  pressure
with  the  finger.  Under  somewhat  rare  conditions,  which  hitherto  I
hâve  met  with  almost  entirely  in  cases  of  spinal  lésions,  there  ap-
pears  besides,  iuvolving  the  derm  and  subjacent  tissues,  an  <?/?/;«-
7'enili/  phlegmonous  tiimef action,  which  may  be  accompanied  some-

'  See  note  ^  p.  69.

-  Cliai-cot,  "  Note  sur  la  formation  rapide  d'une  escliare  à  la  fesse  du  côte
paralysé  dans  l'hémiplégie  récente  de  cause  cérébrale,"  '  Archives  de  Physiol.
normale  et  pathol./  t.  i,  1868,  p.  308.

^  I  hâve  ascertained,  anatomically,  that  in  such  cases  the  derm  is  infiltrated
^vith  leucocytes,  as  happens  in  erysipelas.


72  CHAKACTEEISTICS OF ACUTE BED-SOEE.

times  by  acute  pain,  if  the  région  bas  not  been  previously  smitten
with  aiiœsthesia.

On  the  morrowj  or  after-morrow,  vesiculœ  or  bullae  make  their
appearance  tovvards  the  central  part  of  the  erytliematous  patch  ;
they  contain  a  liquid,  sometimes  colourless  and  perfectly  transparent,
sometimes  more  or  less  opaque,  reddish,  or  brown-coloured.

Matters  may  remain  so,  as  we  bave  already  mentioned,  and  then
the  vesicles  and  blebs  soon  wither,  dry  up^  and  disappear.  At
other  times,  however,  the  elevated  epidermis  becomes  torn,  drops  off
in  pièces,  and  lays  bare  a  bright  red  surface  strewn  with  bluish  and
violet  points  or  patches,  corresponding  with  a  sanguine  infiltration
of  the  derm.  In  such  cases  the  subcutaneous  connective  tissue,  and
sometimes  even  the  subjacent  muscles  are  themselves  already  invaded
by  sanguine  infiltration.  This  fact  I  bave  repeatedly  verified  by
post-mortem  examination.

The  violet  patches  extend  rapidly  in  width  and  their  edges  soon
run  together  and  unité.  A  short  time  after,  there  supervenes  in  the
affected  part,  a  mortification  of  the  derm  which,  at  first  superficial,
soon  grows  profound.  Prom  that  time,  the  eschar  is  constituted.
Later  on  cornes  the  development  of  the  work  of  reaction  and  élimi-
nation, followed,  in  favourable  cases,  by  a  period  of  réparation  which
is  too  often  impeded  in  its  course.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me,  I
think,  to  expatiate  on  this  point.

I  bave  been  occupying  your  attention  with  minute  détails,  but  I
trust  I  shall  induce  you  to  acknowledge  that  they  bave  their  own
peculiar  interest.  E.  Bright  thought  tbem  sufïiciently  worthy  of
notice  and  novel  enough  to  believe  he  should  insist  upon  them  in
bis  *'  Reports  of  Médical  Cases/'  and  should  get  wax  models  made
of  the  bullse  of  acnte  bed-sore,  observed  in  a  case  of  traumatic
paraplegia.i  Thèse  models  still  figure,  no  doubt,  in  the  muséum  of
Guy's  Hospital.

'  It  will  not  be  deemed  iiiappropriate  to  quote  hère  the  remaiks  which  R.
Bright  lias  appended  to  his  rases  of  affections  of  the  spinal  cord,  with  rapid^
formation  of  bulhc  and  eschars,  wliicli  he  has  consigued  to  Jiis  "  Reports  of
Médical  Cases,"  (t.  ii,  '  Diseases  of  the  Brain  and  Nervoiis  System,'  London,
1831).  First  cornes  a  case  wherc  softcning  of  the  spinal  cord  supervened,
without  any  known  external  cause,  in  a  young  woman  aged  21  ;  the  lésion
occupied  the  lumbar  enlargement  immediately  above  the  cauda  equiua.  Tha
case  sugj^ested  the  following  reflectious  :

"  Anotiier  curious  circumstar.ee  connectcd  with  paralysis  of  the  lower
cxtrcmilics  is  illustratcd  by  this  case  : — the  tcndeucy  which  is  observed  iu  suoli»


CONSECUTIVE AFFECTIONS.  73

Since  then,  as  far  as  I  know,  this  subject  lias  but  sh'ghtly  ar-
rested  the  attention  of  observers,  with  a  few  rare  exceptions.^  Ifc
would  be  unjust^  however,  not  to  acknowledge  that,  in  cases  of  typhus
and  typhoid  fevers,  a  cutaneous  affection,  which  offers  the  closest
analogies  with  this  disorder  and  which,  perhaps,  partly  dépends  on
analogous  conditions,  has  been  minutely  described  in  Trance  by
Piorry,'-  and  in  Germany,  by  Pfeiifer.^

Let  us  return,  gentlemen,  to  the  hed-&ore  provoked  by  diseases
of  the  nervous  centres.  You  know  too  well  the  accidents  which
eschars,  from  whatever  cause  arising,  are  capable  of  engendering  foi?
me  to  indulge  in  a  detailed  description.  Allow  me,  however,  to
sketch  out  in  a  few  words  the  principal  amongst  them,  for  you  must
expectto  see  them  often  figuring  in  the  lastperiod  of  a  greatnumbei?
of  affections  of  the  brain,  and  especially  of  the  spinal  cord.

The  eschars,  if  they  but  attain  a  certain  extent,  constitute,  as  you
are  aware,  dangerous  foci  of  infection  ;  and,  in  fact,  putrid  intoxica-

affections  to  the  formation  of  vesications  or  bullœ,  wLicli  frequently  make
their  appearance  in  a  iiiglit,  on  some  part,  as  the  knee,  the  aukle,  or  the
instep,  where  accidentai  pressure  or  irritation  has  taken  place  ;  they  contain  a
limpid  fluid  which  after  a  few  days  becomes  opaque.  It  has  sometimes  struck
me  that  this  connexion  between  interrupted  nervous  action  and  the  formatioa
of  bullas,  might  hereafter  be  found  to  throw  light  on  that  most  singular
disease  herpès  zoster  which,  from  the  peculiar  pain  with  which  it  is  accom-
panied,  as  well  as  from  its  strict  confinement  to  one  side  of  the  body,  seems  to
be  couuected  with  some  peculiar  condition,  perhaps  the  distension  of  the
sentient  nerves."  (p.  383.)

Three  other  cases  relating  to  traumatic  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord  (caused  by
a  fall  from  a  height,  the  passage  of  a  wagon,  &c.)  are  comniented  on  as  foUows  l

"  The  two  most  remarkable  points  to  be  incidentally  uoticed  in  the  fore-
going  cases  are,  first,  the  diseased  state  of  the  bladder,  resulting  from  its
diminished  power  to  resist  iujury,  and  from  the  changes  takiug  place  in  the
condition  of  the  urine,  detained  in  its  most  depending  part,  which  becomes-
one  of  the  most  fréquent  causes  of  fatal  irritation  in  paraplegia  ; — and  secondly,.
we  observe  the  occurrence  of  bullœ  on  the  paralysed  limbs,  to  which  circum-
stance  1  hâve  aheady  alluded  in  sofne  reniarks  made  at  p.  383  ;  the  geueraL
inability  to  resist  iujury  is  likewise  marked  by  extensive  sloughing  of  ail  the
paralysed  parts  on  which  pressure  is  made."  (p.  423.)

'  After  R.  Bright,  we  must  specially  refer  to  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  ("Injuries
of  the  Spinal  Cord,"  '  Med.-Chir.  Transactions,'  t.  xx,  1837,)  and  Brown-
Séquard  {loc  cit.).

"  A.  Touzé,  "  Des  dermopathies  et  des  dermonécroses  sacro-coccygiennes,'*
Thèses  de  Paris,  1853.

^  Kerchensteiner's  "Bericht,"  in  'Henle  und  Pfeiifer's  Zeitschrift  fiir  ra-
lionelle  Medicin,'  Bd.  v. See  also  Wunderlich,  'Pathologie,'  t.  ii,  p.  285.


74  CONSECUTIVE  AFFECTIONS.

tion,  denoted  by  a  more  or  less  intense  rémittent  fever,  is  one  of  tlie
complications  they  most  commonly  provoke.

Next  cornes  purnlent  infection,  with  production  of  metastatic
abscesses  in  the  viscera.^ This  species  appears  to  be  seldom  met  with.

We  sball  also  notice  gangrenons  emholi.  In  tliis  variety,  tlirombi
impregnated  with  gangrenons  ichor  are  transported  to  a  distance  and
give  rise  to  gangrenons  métastases,  which  are  principally  observed
in  the  lungs.  This  is  a  point  upon  which  Dr.  Bail  and  myself  hâve
insisted  in  a  work  published  in  1857.-  But  long  before  us,  and
even  long  before  the  theory  of  embolism  had  been  Germanised,
M.  Foville  had  expressed  his  opinion  that  a  considérable  number  of
cases  of  pulmonary  gangrené,  observed  in  the  insane,  and  in  différent
diseases  of  the  nervous  centres,  are  caused  by  "the  transport  into  the
lungs  of  a  part  of  the  fluid  which  bathes  the  eschars  of  the  breech.''^

The  process  of  mortification  tends  gradually  to  invade  the
deeper  tissues.  The  ruin  that  results  is  sometimes  carried  to  the
highest  degree;  thus  the  trochanteric  serous  bursse  may  be  laid
open,  the  trochanter  dennded  of  its  periosteum,  the  muscles,  the
nerve-trunks,  and  arterial  branches  of  a  certain  calibre  laid  bare.
But  the  most  dangerous  accidents  are  those  determined  by  the
denudation  and  loss  of  substance  of  the  sacrum  and  coccyx,  the  de-
struction of  the  sacro-coccygean  ligament,  and  the  consécutive  open-
ing  of  the  sacral  canal  or  arachnoid  cavity.  In  conséquence  of
thèse  disorders,  the  pus  and  the  gangrenons  ichor  may  proceed  to
infiltrate  the  fatty  cellular  tissue  which  envelops  the  dura  mater,
or  even,  if  this  membrane  be  destroyed  in  any  point,  it  may  pene-
trate  into  the  cavity  of  the  arachnoid.^

Under such  circumstances,  grave  cerebro-spinal complications

'  Billroth  und  Wàckerling,  in  '  Langenbeek's  Archiv  fur  Klin.  Chir.,'  Bd.  i,
1861,  §  470.  Fracture  of  the  sixtli  dorsal  vertebra,  rapid  formation  of  cschar
on  sacrum.  Manifest  symptoms  of  pyœmia  :  six  or  eight  abscesses  on  the
surface  of  the  kidneys.  Midderdorf,  '  Knochenbrilcb,'  §  62.  Fracture  of
the  eightb  dorsal  vertebra.  Rapid  formation  of  eschar  ;  pyœmia  ;  metastatic
abscesses  in  tlie  lungs.

-  "  De  la  coïncidence  des  gangrènes  viscérales  et  des  affections  gangreneuses
extérieures,  in  'Union  Médicale/  26  et  28  Janvier,  1860.

^  '  Dictionnaire  de  Méd.  et  de  Chir.  Prat.,'  t.  i,  p.  5,'^6.

''  B.  Brodic,  loc.  ciL,  p.  153.  Velpeau,  'Anatom.  Chirurgicale.'  Ollivier
(d'Angers)  'Traité  des  maladies  de  la  moelle  épinière,'  t.  i,  pp.  314,  324,  3rd
édition,  1837.  Moynier,  "De  l'eschare  du  sacrum  et  des  accidents  qui  peu-
vent en  résulter  "  ('  Moniteur  des  Sciences  Médicales  et  Pharmaceutiques,'  Paris,
1859). Lisfranc,  'Archives  Générales  de  Médecine,'  4c  année,  t.  xiv,  p.  291.


PATHOGENT OF  ACUTE BED-SOEE.  75

supervene;  they  may  be  collected  into  two  principal  classes.  At
one  time  we  see  a  simple  purulent  ascending  meningitls  ;  at  anotlier,
a  sort  of  ichorous  ascending  meningitis,  of  which  Lisfranc  and
Baillarger  hâve  reported  many  remarkable  examples.  In  such  a
case,  it  is  found  that  a  puriform,  greyish,  acrid,  and  fœtid  liquid
steeps  the  méninges  and  the  cord  itself,  sometimes  the  lower  part
only  is  bathed  in  it,  sometimes  tlie  wliole  cord.  This  liquid  is  oc-
casionally  found  at  tlie  base  of  tlie  encephalon,  in  tlie  fourth
ventricle,  in  the  aqueduct  of  Sylvius,  and  even  in  the  latéral  ven-
tricles.  In  ail  thèse  points  the  cérébral  matter  is  discoloured  at
its  surface  and  to  a  certain  depth,  taking  a  slaty  bluish  tint  which
has  several  times  been  considered,  but  very  wrongly,  as  constituting
one  of  the  characters  of  gangrené  of  the  brain.i  M.  Baillarger
was  the  fîrst,  I  believe,  to  recognise  the  real  nature  of  this  altéra-
tion. Wliat  we  hâve  to  note  there  is,  above  ail,  a  phenomenon  of
imbibitiou,  macération,  and  dyeing.  Remark  that  always,  when
ichorous  cérébral  meningitis  has  a  sacral  eschar  as  its  starting  point,
the  slaty  tint  is  found  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  spinal
cord,  it  is  constantly  better  marked  there  than  in  the  encephalon,
and  more  manifest  the  nearer  you  keep  to  the  eschar.  On  the  con-
trary,  in  the  case  where  a  sanious  ulcer  of  the  face,  a  cancroid  for
instance,  after  having  destroyed  the  bone,  has  denuded  the  dura
mater,  the  slaty  coloration  induced  by  ichorous  macération  may,  as
I  hâve  many  times  observed,  remain  limited  to  the  anterior  lobes  of
the  brain,  in  the  régions  corresponding  to  the  bottom  of  the  ulcer.

To  thèse  complications  which  I  hâve  been  only  able  to  indicate  in
a  very  summary  manner,  we  must  with  Ollivier  (d'Angers)  connect
the  grave  cérébral  or  cerebro-spinal  symptoms,  as  yet  but  ill-defined,
which  rapidly  terminate  life  in  a  great  number  of  cases  of  disease
of  the  spinal  cord.

We  hâve  now  to  enter  upon  détails  and  to  show  you  the  prin-
cipal circumstance  s  under  which  acute  bed-sore  is  produced,  under
the  influence  of  lésions  of  the  brain  and  of  the  spinal  cord,  as  well
as  the  varieties  of  position  and  of  évolution  which  it  présents,
according  to  the  variety  or  seat  of  the  lésion  which  has  provoked  its
appearance.  We  shall  also  hâve  to  inquire  whether  the  mode  of
production  of  this  trophic  lésion  of  the  skin  comes  under  the
gênerai  theory  which  we  hâve  hitherto  had  to  accept. With  this

'  Dubois  (d'Amiens),  '  Mémoires  de  l'Académie  de  Médecine,'  t.  xxvii,  p.  50,
1865,  1866.


76  BED-SORE IN CEREBE.\L LESIONS.

aim,  we  shall  successively  review  tlie  différent  affections  of  the  brain,
and  of  the  cord  which  may  give  rise  to  acute  bed-sore.

A.  Of  acuie  bed-sore  m  apoplea://  symptomaiïc  qf  cerelral  lésions-
in  focal  centres.  It  is  especially  observed  in  the  apoplexy  consécu-
tive on  intra-encephalic  hœmorrhage,  or  on  partial  softening  of  the
brain.  But  it  may  also  be  produced  in  meningeal  hœmorrhage,  in
pachymeningitisj  and  finally  in  cases  when  intra-cranial  tumours
give  rise  to  apoplectiform  attacks.  Thç  latter  bave  often  given  me
opportunities  for  observing  it  in  patients  attacked  with  partial  ence-
phalitis  caused  by  wounds  received  in  battle.^

'  The  courtesy  of  my  coUeague,  JNI.  Cruveilhier,  surgeon  to  La  Salpêtrière,,
euables  me  to  record  the  foUowing  fact,  which  I  give  as  an  example  of  the
last-meutioned  class.

Tlie  patient,  Louis  Ernst,  a  Saxon  soldier,  was  picked  up,  at  Villiers,  on  the
field  of  battle,  Nov.  30,  1870,  and  brought  to  the  ambulance  of  La  Salpêtrière,
the  same  evening  about  nine  o'clock.  A  buUet  had  traversed  his  skull^
piercing  it  through  and  through  ;  one  of  the  orifices  was  situated  on  the  upper
part  of  the  forehead,  a  little  to  the  left  of  the  médian  line  ;  the  other,  on  the
right  side,  about  the  middle  of  the  pariétal  bone.  The  cérébral  substance  pro-
truded,  like  a  mushroom,  through  the  last-named  orifice.  ïhe  temporal  région
and  the  upper  eyelid  of  tlie  right  side  were  ecchymosed  and  tumefied  ;  pro-
fouud  coma.  December  3rd,  somnolence  ;  the  patient,  when  iuterrogatecl
sharply,  mutters  some  iiiarticulate  sounds  ;  he  puis  out  the  tongue  perfectly,
when  told  ;  déglutition  proceeds  with  ease.  Almost  complète  hemiplegia  is
found  to  exist,  wiUi  flaccidity  of  the  muscles  of  the  members  of  the  right  side.
Erom  time  to  time,  without  provocation,  a  sort  of  spasmodic  contraction
occurs  in  the  superior  member  of  this  side,  cansing  momentary  pronation  of
the  arm.  ïhe  diaphragm  seems  to  be  also,  from  time  to  time,  the  seat  of
analogous  contractions.  The  respiration,  irregular  at  tiiues,  is  calm,  without
stertor.  Therc  is  no  déviation  of  head,  or  eyes.  The  labial  commissures  are.
not  (Irawn  to  one  side.  Seusibility  appears  mucii  bluntcd  over  ail  parts  of  the
body.  No  vomiting.  Puise  vcry  fréquent,  140.  ]3ecember  4tli  (fiftli  day),
same  state  as  the  previous  day,  but  the  somnolence  is  more  intense  than-
yesterdciy;  contractions  of  the  facial  muscles  are  induced  with  difiiculty,  on
forcibly  pincliing  ïhe  skin.  Livoluntary  passage  of  urine  and  fœces.  Skia
warm,  covered  with  perspiration;  axillary  température  41°  C.  The  commence-
ment cf  an  eschar  is  obseroed  on  the  right  gluteal  cminence  (Jhe  parali/sed  side)  ;
nothinrj  of  the  Icind  exists  on  the  left.  On  the  inner  surface  of  the  rirjlit  thigh,
a  little  above  the  knee,  on  a  point  where  the  flexed  left  knee  seems  tohave  cxercised
a  ralher  prohnged  fressure  during  the  night,  a  bulla  is  found,  about  the  size  of
an  alniond,full  of  a  lemon-coloured  liquor  and  surrounded  bg  an  ergthematous
zone,  of  little  extent.  The  left  knee,  in  tlic  part  where  the  i)rcssure  must  bave
bcen,  shows  no  trace  of  crythema  or  of  epidermic  élévation.  The  patient
ôuccumbed  on  the  5th  December.

Autopsg. — The  two  cérébral  hcmisphcrcs,  at  their  middic  and  superior  parts.


BED-SOEE IN  CEREBEAL LESIONS.  77

The  erythema,  in  ail  cases  of  this  kiud,  usually  shows  itself  frora
the  second  to  the  fourth  day  after  the  attack,  rarely  sooner,  some-
times  later.  It  affects  a  peculiar  position.  It  is  not  in  the  sacral
région,  so  commonly  invaded  in  cases  of  spinal  affection,  that  it
develops,  nor  on  any  point  of  the  médian  parts,  but  towards  the
«entre  of  the  gluteal  région,  and,  most  usually,  if  there  be  unilatéral
lésion  of  the  brain,  exclusively  on  the  side  corresponding  with  the
hemiplegia. (Fig.  3.)


FiG.  3. — Gluteal  escliar  of  the  paralysed  side  lu  a  case  of  apoplexy,  consé-
cutive ou  hœmorrhage  :  a^  mortified  portion  ;  b,  erythematous  zone.

On  the  morrow  or  after-morrow,  the  bullous  éruption  and  then
in  the  points  corresponding  to  the  internai  extreniities  of  the  anterior  and
posterior  marginal  convolutions,  are  transformed  into  a  confused  mess,  partly
reddish,  where  little  dissemiuated  clots  are  found  hère  and  there  ;  partly  bluisli
(slate-coloured).  Ou  a  transverse  section  it  is  found  that  the  softening
extends  to  the  centrum  ovale  (majus)  of  Vieussens,  to  the  vicinity  of  the
latéral  veutricles,  which  however  it  does  not  attain,  even  on  the  left  side,  where
the  focus  of  the  enccphalitis  is  much  more  extensive,  in  ail  directions,  than
on  the  right.  The  optic  tlialami  and  corpora  striata  are  perfectly  normal.  In
the  vicinity  of  the  softcned  parts  of  the  brain,  the  dura  mater  is  covered  with  a
ueo-merabrane,  of  fibrinous  character,  and  purulent  in  parts.  The  cranium
is  found  to  be  fractured  in  several  parts,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  orifices
which  gave  passage  to  the  projectile.


78 "  DECUBITUS  OMINOSUS  :  "  OMINOUS  BED-SOEE.

the  ecchymotic  blotch  make  their  appearance  on  the  central  part  of
the  erjthematous  patch,  tliat  is,  about  two  inches  from  the  inter-
gluteal  fissure,  and  about  an  inch  and  a  half  beneath  a  supposititious
line,  drawn  fromits  upper  extremity,  perpendicularly  to  its  direction.
Next,  mortification  of  the  derm  supervenes  in  this  same  point,  and
it  rapidly  spreads,  if  the  patient  survive  ;  but  it  is  rather  rare,  on
the  whole,  for  the  acute  bed-sore  of  apoplectic  sufferers  to  reach
the  stage  of  confirmed  eschar.

It  is  likewise  uncommon  to  observe,  in  addition  to  the  gluteal
éruption,  bullse  or  vesicles  developed  on  the  heel,  the  internai  sur-
face of  the  knee,  and,  in  short,  on  the  several  points  of  the  para-
lysed  lower  extremity  which  may  be  subjected  to  a  slight  pressure.

I  should  not  omit  to  point  ont  to  you  that,  according  to  my
observations,  this  skin-atfection  appears  but  very  exceptionally  in
cases  which  are  to  hâve  a  favourable  termination;  its  appearance
therefore  constitutes  a  most  inauspicious  sigu.  We  might,  in  fact,
call  it  decuhlius  ominosus,  or  omïnoiis  led-sore,  by  way  of  distinction.
This  symptom,  I  repeat,  is  rarely  deceptive,  and  as  its  existence  may
be  discerned  from  the  first  days,  it  consequently  acquires,  as  you
will  understand,  a  great  value  in  doubtful  cases.  The  very  marked
lowering  of  the  central  température,  beneath  the  normal  rate,  ob-
servable at  the  outset  of  au  attack,  is  to  my  knowledge  the  only
sign  that  can  rival  the  preceding,  in  cases  of  sudden  hemiplegia.

The  circumstances  in  which  acute  bed-sore  of  apoplectic  patients
develops,  evidently  do  not  permit  us  to  refer  to  the  intervention
of  pressure  on  the  parts  where  it  appears,  as  the  only  élément  in
its  production.  The  pressure  is  the  same  on  both  naies,  but  the
éruption  is  exclusively  produced,  or  at  least  always  prédominâtes  in
that  of  the  paralysed  side.  Many  a  time  I  was  careful  to
niake  the  patient  repose  upon  the  non-paralysed  side,  during  the
grcatcr  part  of  the  day,  and  this  précaution  lias  not  in  any  way
modified  the  production  of  the  eschar.  Besides,  what,  in  such  a
case,  could  be  the  influence  of  a  pressure  which  is  only  in  opération
for  two  or  three  days  ?  Nor  can  the  irritating  contact  of  urine  be
given  as  the  cause.  In  several  cases,  I  hâve  had  this  liquid  drawn
off  hour  by  hour,  day  and  night,  during  tlie  whole  tiine  of  the
discase,  in  order  to  avoid  as  mucli  as  possible  the  irritation  of  the
skin  of  the  seat,  and  in  spite  of  every  care,  the  eschar  was  produced
in  accordance  witli  the  rulcs  I  hâve  indicated.

What  may  be  the  organic  cause  of  this  singular  trophic  lésion?


ACUTB BED-SOEE OP SPINAL OEIGIN.


79


I  was  long  under  the  impression  that  this  lésion  should  be  con-
sidered  as  one  of  the  effects  of  ueuro-paralytic  hypersemia,  wliich
betrays  itself  always,  in  a  more  or  less  prominent  manner,  you  are
aware,  in  members  struck  with  hemiplegia  of  cérébral  origin^  by  a
comparative  élévation  of  température.  But  this  hypothesis  is,  as
we  shall  see,  open  to  a  number  of  objections.  The  facts  which  will
be  set  forth^  as  we  proceed,  render  it  probable  that  we  must  hère
recognise  the  irritation  of  certain  régions  of  the  encephalon,  which,
in  the  normal  state,  are  believed  to  exercise  a  more  or  less  direct  in-
fluence over  the  nutrition  of  différent  parts  of  the  external  tégument.
B.  Of  acute  bed-sore  of  spinal  origin.  When  acute  bed-sore
appears  under  the  influence  of  a  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord,  it  shows
itself  in  the  very  great  majority  of  cases  in  the  sacral  région — and
consequently  above  and  internai  to  the  chosen  seat  of  eschars  of
cérébral  origin.  Hère  it  occupies  the  médian  line  and  extends  sym-
metrically,  ou  either  side,  towards  the  adjacent  parts. (Fig.  4.) It


PiG.  4. — Escliar  of  the  sacral  région  in  a  case  of  partial  niyelitis  occupjiug
tlie  dorsal  région  of  the  spiual  cord  :  a,  mortified  portion  ;  b,  erythematous
zone,

may,  indeed,  happen  that  only  one  side  will  be  affected — in  the  case,


80  TBAUMATIC MYELITES.

for  instance,  \\'liere  a  latéral  half  of  the  cord  is  alone  engaged,  and
tlien  the  cutaneous  lésion  frequently  shows  itself  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  body  from  the  spinal  lésion.

The  influence  of  attitudes  hère  plays  an  important  part.  Thus
it  is  customarj  wheu  the  jiatients  are  so  placed  as  to  repose  on
the  side,  during  part  of  the  day,  to  find,  besides  the  sacral  eschar,
vast  necrosive  ulcérations  developing  on  the  trochanteric  régions.
It  is  also  common  enough  to  see,  contrary  to  what  happens  in
cérébral  cases,  that  the  différent  parts  of  the  paralysed  litnbs  which
are  exposed  to  even  slight  and  brief  pressure,  as  the  ankles,  heels
and  inner  surface  of  kuees,  présent  lésions  characteristic  of  acute
bed-sore.  Eschars  may  also  show  themselves,  but  indeed  very  rarely,
on  a  level  with  the  apex  of  the  scapula,  or  over  the  olecranon
process.i

Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  the  spinal  lésions  which
produce  acute  bed-sore  are  also  those  which  give  rise  to  rapid
muscular  atrophy  and  to  other  disorders  of  the  same  class.  The
almost  simultaneous  developmeut  of  thèse  différent  consécutive
affections  raakes  it  seem  probable,  already,  that  they  hâve  a  common
origin.

It  behoves  us  to  remark,  however,  that  this  rule  is  far  from  being
absolute.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  characteristic  of  certain  spinal
affections  that  rapid  muscular  atrophy  is  developed  without  being
accompanied  by  eschars  ;  whilst  there  are  others,  on  the  contrary,
where  the  eschars  may  be  produced  without  the  nutrition  of  the
muscles  in  the  paralysed  limb  being  affected.  This  is,  in  truth,  a
fact  of  great  interest  from  the  stand-point  of  pathological  physiology,
and one which we shall take care to bring into prominence.

(Fig.4)-

{a)  We  will  mention,  in  the  first  place,  the  traumatic  lésions  of  the
spinal  cord,  those  in  particular  which  resuit  from  fractures  or  luxa-
tions of  the  vertébral  column.  Xumerous  cases  of  this  kind,
recorded by Bright,^ Brodie,^ Jeffrey s,^ Ollivier (d'Angers),^

'  W.  Clapp,  '  Proviuc.  Mcd.  and  Surg.  Journal,'  1851,  p.  322,  and  Gurlt,
■lue.  cil.,  p.  110,  Ko.  76.

2  II.  Briglit,  '  Report  of  Médical  Cases,'  t.  ii,  pp.  3S0,  432,  London,  1821.

*  ]?.  Brodic,  '  Medic.-Ciiirurg.  Transactions,'  p.  148,  t.  ii,  1836.

••  JcflVeys,  "Cases  of  fractured  spine,"  in  'Loudoa  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,'  '
July,  1S2G.

•*  Ollivier  (d'Angers),  loc.  cil.,  t.  i.


TlîAUMATIC  MYELITES.  81

Laugier,!  Gurlt/  and  sorae  others/  show  with  what  rapidity  sacral
eschars  may  be  produced  in  sucli  cases.  In  order  to  enablc  you  to
form  distinct  ideas,  in  relation  to  tliis^  I  shail  request  permission
to  relate  briefly  some  of  thèse  cases.

In  one  case,  reported  by  Dr.  Wood^  of  New  York,^  there  was
fracture  of  the  seventh  cervical  vertebra,  resulting  from  a  fall  down
stairs  ;  death  took  place  four  days  after  the  accident.  From  the
second  day,  redness  of  the  sacral  région  was  noticed,  and  a  bulla
formed  at  the  coccyx. Hœmaturia  super veued  on  the  third  day.

A  fall  from  a  height  determined  complète  diastasis  of  the  sixth
and  seventh  cervical  vertebnic  ;  death  supervened  sixty  hours  after
the  accident,  and^  at  that  period,  a  vvell-marked  bed-sore  was
already  visible.  This  fact  is  recorded  by  Dr.  Biichner,  of  Darmstadt.^

One  of  Jefl'rey's  cases  relates  to  the  fracture  of  the  fourlli  dorsal
vertebra  ;  a  coniirmed  eschar  occupied  the  sacral  région,  from  the
fourth  day.  The  eschar  supervened  three  days  after  the  accident,
in  a  patient  whose  historyhas  been  narrated  by  Ollivier  (d'Angers),
on  the  authority  of  Guersant,  and  wlio  had  received  a  bullet  in  the
body  of  the  eighth  dorsal  vertebra.

Another  case,  given  by  Jeffreys,  is  particularly  worthy  of  interest,
The  patient  had  falleii,  from  a  ladder,  a  height  of  twenty-iive  feet.
On  post-mortem  examinatiou  it  was  found  that  the  bodies  of  the
seventh  and  eighth  dorsal  vertebrœ  were  broken  in  several  pièces,
and  had  been  niuch  displaced.  On  the  day  of  the  fall,  the  skin
was  cold,  and  the  puise  barely  perceptible.  Ail  the  parts  below
the  fracture  were  deprived  of  sensibility  and  motion.  Next  day,
there  were  continuai  érections  ;  "  then  supervened  jîhlyctœnse  in
the  région  of  the  sacrum,"  and,  on  the  same  day,  "^  the  patient
recovered  his  sensibility."  I  point  out  this  last  feature  to  your
attention,  because  many  authors  hâve  endeavoured,  very  erroneouslv,
as  you  see,  to  raake  anœsthesia  play  an  important  part  in  the  patho-
geny  of  acute  bed-sore  of  spinal  origin.  The  persistence  of  sensibility,
in  the  parts  situated  below  the  lésion,  is  also  marked  out,  in  a  more

'  Laiigicr,  "Des  Icsions  traumatiques  de  la  moelle  épinicre,"  'Thèse  de  con-
cours,' Paris,  1848.

^  E.  Gurlt,  'Handbucli  derLehrc  voii  deu  KnocbeubrûcheD/  2  Th.i.  Liefer
Hainm.  1864.

■''  See  an  intercstiiig  cîiapter  on  this  subjcct  in  Herr  Saniuel's  work,  loc.  cit.,

P-  239-
■*  Gurlt,  loc.  cit.,  Tableau  No.  97.  ^  Gurlt,  loc.  cit..  No,  86.

G


82  TRAUMATIC  MYELITES.

or  less  explicit  manner,  in  a  case  recorded  by  Colliny,!  relating  to  a
fracture  of  the  seventli  cervical  vertebra,  wliere  the  eschar  appeared
on  the  fourth  day,  as  well  as  in  a  case  meutioned  by  Ollivier
(d'Angers)/  wliere  tliere  was  fracture  of  the  twelfth  dorsal  vertebra.
The  eschar,  in  the  latter  case,  made  its  appearance  on  the  thirteenth
day.

It  is  useless  to  multiply  thèse  examples,  for  ail  surgeons  agrée  in
ackuowledging  that  the  rapid  formation  of  eschars  is  one  of  the
most  common  of  the  phenomena  consécutive  on  spinal  lésions
resulting  from  fracture  with  displacement  of  vertebrse.  According
to  Gurlt,  vi^hose  opinion  as  regards  tliis  subject  is  based  on  the
study  of  a  very  large  number  of  observations,^  it  is  from  the  fourth
to  the  fifth  day  after  the  accident  that  the  first  symptoms  of  acute
bed-sore  most  usually  commence  to  appear  ;  but  they  may,  as  we
hâve  just  seen,  set  in  much  earlier,  as  on  the  second  day,  and  even
sooner.  It  seems,  and  the  remark  lias  been  made  by  Brodie,  that
the  production  of  eschars  occurs  early  in  proportion  as  the  lésion
affects  a  high  point  of  the  cord.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  resuit
from  the  statistics  drawn  up  by  J.  Aslihurst  that  nutritive  troubles
become  fréquent  in  proportion  as  the  wound  is  lower  down.  Thus,
according  to  this  author,  eschars  were  only  observed  in  three  cases,
after  lésions  of  the  cervical  région  (being  1/41  per  cent.)  ;  twelve
times  (or  9/23  per  cent.)  for  the  dorsal  région,  whilst  as  regards
the  lumbar  région,  the  proportion  rose  to  1 3  per  cent, (seven  cases).'*

Priapism,  clonic  convulsions  of  variable  intensity,  supervening  in
the  paralysed  members,  either  spontaneously  or  induced,  tonic
convulsions  coming  on  in  paroxysms — ail  those  symptoms,  which
usually  reveal  a  state  of  irritation  of  the  cord  and  méninges,  hâve
been  many  times  mentioned  among  the  phenomena  which,  in
fractures  of  the  vertébral  column,  précède,  accompany,  or  closely
folio w  the  precocious  formation  of  eschars.

In  such  circumstances,  as  we  havc  already  seen,  ansesthesia  of
the  parts  smitten  with  motor-paralysis,  is  not  a  constant  fact.  As  to
the  remarkable  élévation  of  température  of  which  thèse  parts  some-

'  Quoted  by  Ollivier  (d'Angers),  loc.  cit.

-'  Scnsibility  was  also  preserved  in  Dr.  Biicbner's  case,  quoted  above,  where
tbe  eschar  appeared  bcfore  the  close  of  the  tliird  day.

2  Sec  Gurlt,  loc.  cit.,  p.  94,  analysis  of  270  cases.

*  J.  Aslihurst,  "  Injuries  of  the  Spine,  with  analysis  of  nearly  400  cases,"
Philadelphia,  1867.


TRAUMATIC  HEMIPAEAPLEGIA.  88

tiines  become  tlie  seat  in  conséquence  of  vaso-motor  paralysis,^  it
cannot  now  be  ascertained  whether  it  was  then  présent  or  not^  tbe
attention  of  the  observers  not  having  been  drawn  to  this  particular
phenomenon,  We  sliall  note,  on  the  contrary,  as  a  symptom  which
shows  itself  frequently  at  the  same  time  as  the  acute  bed-sore,  the
émission  of  sanguinolent  urine,  alkaline  in  reaction,  and  sometimes
purulent.  This  is  a  fact  to  which  we  shall  hâve  occasion  to  revert.
Necroscopical  examiuation,  hitherto,  has  not,  in  gênerai,  revealed
anything  in  connection  with  spinal  lésions  which  can  be  considered
peculiar  to  the  cases  where  rapidly  developing  eschars  are  produced.
We  frequently,  however,  find  mention  made  of  altérations  of  the
spinal  cord,  which  place  beyond  doubt  the  existence  of  an  iuflam-
matory  process  ;  the  présence  of  purulent  infiltration,  and  even
the  formation  of  abscesses  in  the  midst  of  the  softened  parts,  hâve
been  observed  in  several  instances.

h.  The  study  of  cases  of  hemiparaplegia,  consécutive  on  wounds
involviug  only  a  latéral  half  of  the  spinal  cord,  may  furnish  useful
information  concerning  the  pathogeny  of  acute  bed-sore,  and  of
some  other  trophic  disorders  of  spinal  origin.  We  learn,  from  the
experiments  of  M,  Brown-Séquard,  that,  after  wounds  of  this  kind,
there  supervenes  in  animais  motor-paralysis  of  the  lower  extremity,
on  the  same  side  with  the  lésion.  The  limb  présents  also  a  more  or  less
marked  degree  of  exaltation  of  tactile  sensibility,  and  it  likewise
offers  a  notable  élévation  of  température  correlated  with  vaso-motor
paralysis.  The  opposite  limb  préserves,  on  the  contrary,  its  normal
température  and  power  of  motion,  whilst  the  tactile  sensibility  is
much  lessened,  and  may  even  be  extinct.  Ail  thèse  particulars  are
exactly  reproduced  in  man  under  analogous  circumstauces. In  his

'  In  a  case  of  fracture  of  the  vertébral  columu  iu  the  dorsal  région,  observed
by  J.  Hutchinson,  ou  the  second  day  after  the  accident,  the  température  of
the  feet,  taken  at  the  iuner  ankles,  rose  (to  ioi°  F.,  or)  above  sS'^  Cent.  In
the  normal  state,  accordiug  to  observations  made  in  London  Hospital,  by
Dr.  Woodman,  the  thermometer  placed  between  the  two  first  toes  gave  au
average  of  27"5°  C.  (8i'5°  E.),  the  maximum  being  34'5°  C.  (94°  F.),  and  the
minimum  2i"5°  C.  (70°  F.).  See  J.  Hutchinson,  "On  Fractures  of  the  Spine,"
in  '  London  Hospital  Reports,'  t.  iii,  1866,  p.  363.  See  also  H.  Weber  and
GuU,  in  'The  Lancet,'  Jan.  27,  1872,  p.  117.  Clinical  Society  of  London.
[See  also  Mr.  J.  W.  Teale,  "Caseof  llemarkable  Elévation  of  Température  '
after  injury  of  the  spine,  iu  a  young  lady,  where  122°  F.  (50°  C.)  is  stated  to
hâve  been  observed,  'Lancet,'  1875,  p.  340;  and  J.  Hutchinson,  "On  the
Température  and  Circulation  after  Crushing  of  the  Cervical  Spinal  Cord,"
'  Lancet,'  1875,  pp.  714,  747.] (S.)


84  TEAUMATIC  HEMIPAEAPLEGIA.

case^  as  iu  that  of  animais,  vve  may  also  find  différent  trophic  dérange-
ments supervening,  which  appear  almost  simultaneously,  and  whicli
are  ail  manifestly  due  to  spinal  lésion.  Among  the  nutritive  lésions
of  tins  kind  observed  in  man^  we  would  especially  point  out  the
rapid  diminution  of  the  (faradaic)  electrical  contractility  of  the
muscles,  soon  followed  by  atrophy, — a  particular  form  of  arthro-
pathy  to  which  I  shall  refer  in  a  few  moments — and  finally,  acute
bed-sore.  It  is  a  remarkable  thing  that,  whilst  the  arthropathy
and  muscular  atrophy  are  to  be  found  in  the  limb  on  the  same  side
with  the  lésion,  the  eschar  seems  to  prefer,  as  we  hâve  already  re-
marked,  to  show  itself  on  the  member  of  the  opposite  side,  where
it  occupies  the  sacral  région,  and  the  gluteal,  in  the  immédiate
neighbourhood  of  the  former.  This  peculiar  disposition  of  che
eschar  in  relation  to  the  seat  of  the  spinal  lésion  is,  according  to
what  M.  Brown-Séquard  lias  told  me,  a  constant  fact  in  the  case
of  animais;  in  man, it  has  already  been  several  times  observed.
As  an  example  of  the  class,  I  shall  briefly  cite  the  following  facts  :
A  man,  aged  twenty  years,  whose  history  has  been  related  by  M.
Vignes,^  received  on  the  back  of  the  thorax,  between  the  ninth
and  tentli  dorsal  vertebrœ,  a  sword  eut  which,  to  judge  from  the
symptoms,  injured  the  left  latéral  half  of  the  spinal  cord  chiefly.
Motor  paralysis  immediately  ensued,  which,  at  first  affecting  both
the  lower  extremities,  appeared  from  the  next  day  to  be  almost
entirely  confined  to  the  left  leg.  Hypersesthesia  is  very  manifest
in  the  latter  member  ;  the  right  limb  présents,  on  the  coutrary,  a
well-marked  obnubilation  of  sensibility,  whilst  the  power  of  motion
has  nearly  quite  returned.  The  symptoms  showed  rapid  improve-
ment  up  to  the  twelfth  day  after  the  accident  ;  on  that  day  it
was  remarked  that,  without  perceptible  cause,  the  left  leg,  still  more
sensitive  than  in  the  normal  state,  had  increased  in  volume,  and
also  that  in  the  left  knee-joint  there  had  accumulated  a  quantity
of  fluid  sufficient  to  kecp  the  patella  raised  half  an  inch  above
the  condyles.  Two  days  later  an  eschar  was  observed  occupying
the  right  latéral  ])art  of  the  sacrum  and  right  gluteal  région.

The  case  recorded  by  M]\l.  Joflroy  and  Salomon,-  of  onc  of  Dr.
Cusco^s  patients,  which  was  recently  communicated  to  the  Société
de  Biologie,  rei)roduces,  as  it  were,  the  foregoing  case,  cvcn  in  its
suiallest  détails. In  the  former,  as  in  the  latter,  after  a  traumatic

'  Brown-Séquard,  'Journal  de  la  Physiologie,'  &c.,  t.  iii,  p.  130,  1863.
2  '  Gazette  Médicale  de  Paris,'  Nos.  6,  7,  8,  1872.


TEAUMATIO HEMIPAEAPLEGIA.  85

lésion  affecting  one  latéral  half  of  the  cord  in  tlie  dorsal  région,
we  find  motor  paralysis  supervening  in  the  inferior  extremity  that
corresponds  to  the  injured  side;  this  limb  présents  a  notable  aug-
mentation of  température — a  fact  not  mentioned  by  Vignes,  though
probably  présent — and  manifest  hypersesthesia;  whilst  the  opposite
limb,  unhavmed  in  its  motor  functions,  offers  a  remarkable  diminu-
tion of  ail  kiuds  of  sensibility  whilst  preserving  the  normal  tem-
pérature. In  addition — and  this  is  the  point  which  we  désire  to
put  especially  forward — shortly  after  the  accident,  and  without  any
appréciable  cause,  there  supervened  an  arthropathy  in  the  knee  of
the  paralysed  limb,  whilst,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sacral  région,  the
nates  of  the  member  deprived  of  sensibility  but  not  paralysed  in
motion,  became  the  seat  of  an  eschar.^

'  On  account  of  the  iuterest  couuected  with  it,  we  sliall  mentiou  the  principal
détails  of  this  case.

The  patient,  jMartin,  aged  about  40  years,  was  stabbed  wiili  a  poignard,  in
the  night  of  the  i.^-iôth  February,  1871.  The  weapon  entercd  at  the  third
dorsal  vertebra.  The  direction  of  the  woiind  is  downward,  backward,  and  to
the  right.  Having  been  brought  to  hospilal  immediately  ai'tcr  the  wound,  it
was  ûbserved  that,  even  then,  the  left  inferior  extremity  was  completeiy  stricken
with  motor-paralysis,  whilst  the  corresponding  member  on  the  other  side  showed
nothing  of  the  kind.  February  i6th,  in  the  morning,  the  foUowing  note  was
made  : — Left  lower  extremity,  complète  motor-paralysis.  The  limb  is  per-
fectly  flaccid  ;  no  trace  of  contraction,  or  rigidity,  no  spasmodic  movements,
nor  subsultus.  Ou  the  contrary,  sensibility  appears  in  the  same  limb  to  be
€xaggerated  in  ail  its  modes  ;  the  least  touch  of  the  skin,  especially  near  the
foot,  causes  pain.  Pressure  lias  the  same  effect.  A  slight  pinch  or  a  tickie
is  followed  by  very  painful  sensations.  Finally,  the  contact  of  a  cold  surface
also  produces  painful  sensations  which  the  patient  compares  to  those  producible
-by  a  séries  of  prickings.  Right  lower  extremity  :  ail  the  voluutary  move-
ments are  perfectly  normal,  but  ^;er  contra,  the  sensibility  is  almost  completeiy
destroyed.  Complète  analgesia;  sensitiveness  to  touch  almost  null.  The
contact  of  a  cold  body  is  marked  by  an  obscure  duU  prickling  sensation.  The
insensibility  is  not  limited,  on  the  right,  to  the  lower  limb  ;  it  ascends  to  a  level
with  the  nipple. The  urine  and  fseces  passed  involuntarily.

February  24th  (eighth  day). — The  same  phenomena  are  observed;  in  addition
it  is  noted  that  the  left  (motor-paralysed)  limb  is  warmer  than  the  right.
The  patient  com plains  of  a  sensation  of  constriction  or  rather  of  compression
at  the  base  of  the  thorax.

Mardi  5th  (seventeenth  day). — The  patient  complains  of  troubled  sight:  the
•left  pupil  is  more  contracted  than  the  right,  and  the  vessels  of  the  left  eye  are
more  volumirious  and  more  numerous  than  those  of  the  right  eye.  The
évacuations  hâve  again  become  voluntary,  for  two  days  past.  The  state  of  the
lower  extremities  is  still  unchanged.

March  i3th  (twenty-fîfth  day). — The  right  nates,  siuce  yesterday,  lias  been


86  TEAUMATIC HEMIPAEAPLEGIA.

I  take  the  following  case  from  an  interesting  work  by  Herr  W.
Millier  •}  in  this  instance  the  artliropathy  is  not  mentioned  ;  on  the
other  hand,  we  fmd  mention  of  rapid  wasting  of  the  muscles  of  the
paralysed  limb,  preceded  for  several  days  by  a  well-marked  diminu-
tion of  faradaic  contractiliiy. In  ail  other  matters,  Miiller's  ob-
servation is  in  conformity  with  those  of  MM.  Yigucs  and  Joffroy.
The  case  is  that  of  a  woman,  aged  21,  who  received  a  stab  with  a
knife  in  the  back,  at  the  fourth  dorsal  vertebra  ;  the  weapon,  as  the
autopsy  demonstrated  afterwards,  had  completely  divided  the  left
latéral  half  of the  spinal  cord,  two  millimètres  above  the  third
dorsal  pair. On  the  very  day  of  the  accident  complète  paralysis  and
hyperœsthesia  of  the  left  lower  extremity  was  observed  ;  the  opposite
limb  was  anœsthetic,  but  not  paralysed. On  the  second  day  it  was
found  that  the  muscles  of  the  paralysed  member  and  those  of  the
lower  part  of  the  abdomen  gave  no  reaction  under  the  influence  of
faradaic  stimulation,  whilst,  in  the  homologous  parts  of  the  opposite
side,  the  electrical  contractility  remained  normal. On  the  eleventh
day  an  eschar  was  formed,  occupying  the  sacral  région  and  extend-
ing  to  the  right  gluteal  eminence.  On  the  same  day,  it  was  remarked
that  the  paralysed  limb  had  notably  wasted  away,  measuring  about
two  inches  less  in  circumference  than  the  ansesthetic  member.  Death
occurred  on  the  thirteenth  day. On  a  post-mortem  examination,
tlie  borders  of  the  spinal  wound  appeared  tumefied,  and  of  a  reddish-
brown  colour  ;  a  thin  purulent  layer  covered  it. Below  the  wound
the  left  latéral  column,  throughout  its  whole  length,  offered  the
anatomical  characteristics  of  descending  myelitis.

The  simultaneous  appearance  of  différent  trophic  disorders  noted
in  thèse  cases,  and  in  some  others  of  the  same  kind,  seem  to  indi-
cate  a  common  cause.  This  cause,  to  ail  appearance,  is  nothing
tlie  scat  of  vivid  redness,  aud  tlie  epidermis  bas  already  fallen  off  from  a  part
of  the  erythematous  patch.

March  i4th. — The  derm  is  denuded  to  tlic  size  of  a  crown-piece  on  tlie
ri"-bt  nates,  near  the  sacrum  :  it  is  also  ecchymosed  (acuie  bed-sore).  On
Feb.  24th,  it  had  been  already  remarked  that  some  pain  was  felt  when  the
left  knec  (motor-paralyscd  limb)  was  moved  ;  to-day,  it  is  noted  that  this
joint  is  swollcn  and  red,  and  that  it  is,  besides,  the  seat  of  spontaneous
pains,  cxaggeratcd  on  movcment  (spinal  artbropatliy).

March  24th. — An  ulcération,  this  day  covered  with  granulations,  lias  formcd
on  the  right  nates,  on  a  levcl  with  the  ecchymosed  patch.  The  swcUing,  redness,
aud  pains  havc  alniost  completely  disappeared  from  the  left  knee.

1  W.  Millier,  "Bcitriigc  zur  patiiologisch  Anatomie  und  Physiologie  des
nienschlichcn  lliickenmarkes,"  Leipzig,  1871. Obs.  i.


SPONTANEOUS MYELITES.  87

other  than  the  extension  to  certain  régions  of  the  inferior  segment
of  tlie  cord,  of  the  inflammatory  action  originally  set  up  in  the
immédiate  vicinity  of  the  wound.^

That  being  admitted,  it  would  seem  legitimate,  relying  on  the  facts
stated  in  the  preceding  lecture,  to  assign  the  rapid  and  gênerai
atrophy  of  the  paralysed  muscles,  noted  in  Herr  Miiller's  case,  to  the
invasion  of  the  anterior  cornu  of  the  grey  substance  throughout
the  whole  extent  of  the  cord,  whence  nerves  are  given  forth  to  the
paralysed  muscles;  the  invasion  in  question  taking  place  either
progressively  by  direct  downward  propagation  ;  or  indirectly  by  the
latéral  columns.  Tins  lésion  of  the  anterior  cornu  we  shall  mention,
in  a  moment,  to  explain  the  development  of  the  arthropathy  de-
scribed  in  the  observations  of  Viguès  and  Joffiroy.  Now,  with  re-
spect to  the  eschars,  their  appearance  on  the  side  opposite  the  spinal
lésion  tends  to  establish  that  the  nerve-fibres  (whose  altération,
under  such  circumstances,  provokes  the  mortification  of  the  external
tégument)  do  not  follow  the  same  course  as  those  which  influence
the  nutrition  of  joints  and  muscles,  and  that  they,  on  the  contrary,
decussate  in  the  cord  in  the  same  manner  as  the  nerve-fibres  sub-
serving  the  transmission  of  tactile  impressions.

Another  item  of  information  which  we  get  from  cases  of  hemi-
paraplegia  consécutive  on  a  unilatéral  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord,  is
this,  namely  :  acute  bed-sore  may  show  itself  independently  of  ail
neuroparalytic  hypersemia,  since  we  observe  it  forming  upon  that
side  of  the  body  where  the  vaso-motor  nerves  are  not  afiected.

c.  I  shall  now  mention  the  case  where  myelitis  results,  not,  as  in
the  preceding  instance,  from  a  wound  or  attrition  of  the  spinal
cord,  but  from  indirect  traumatic  influence,  such  for  example  as  an
effort  made  in  raising  a  weight.  Acute  bed-sore  may,  in  cases
of  this  kind,  be  produced  as  rapidly  as  though  there  had  been  frac-
ture of  the  vertébral  column,  as  the  following  fact  recorded  by  Dr.
Gull  demonstrates  :

A  man,  aged  35,  by  trade  a  labourer  in  the  London  Docks,
felt,  after lifting  a  load,  a  sudden  pain  in  his  back. He  was

^  In  a  woik,  recently  published,  I  hâve  endeavoured  to  establish  that,  after
wounds  of  the  spinal  cord,  irritative  lésions  such  as  hypertrophy  of  the  axis-
cylinders,  prolifération  of  myelocytes,  &c.,  may  be  observed  at  some  distance
from  tlie  spinal  wound,  above  and  below  it,  scarcely  twenty-four  hours  after
the  accident.  Charcot,  "  Sur  la  tuméfaction  des  cellules  nerveuses,  motrices,
et  des  cylindres  d'axe  des  tubes  nerveux  dans  certains  cas  de  myélite,"  m
'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  No.  i,  1872,  p.  95. Obs.  i.


88  PATHOLOGY OF BED-SOEE OF SPINAL OKIGIN.

able  to  walk  to  liis  home,  about  a  uiile  off.  Ou  tlie  morning  of  the
second  day  after,  bis  lower  limbs  were  completely  paralysed  ;  two
days  later,  or  four  days  after  the  accident,  au  escbar  bad  begun  to
form  on  the  sacral  région,  and  the  urine  which  flowed  from  the
bladder  was  ammoniacal.  The  patient  succumbed  ten  days  after
paralysis  bad  set  in.  At  the  post-mortem  examination,  it  was
noted,  after  careful  scrutiny,  tbat  the  boues  and  ligaments  of  the
vertébral  column  presented  no  lésion  ;  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
iîfth  and  sixth  dorsal  vertebra3  the  spinal  cord  was  transformed
throughout  its  whole  breadth  iuto  a  thick  liquid,  rauco-purulent
in  appearance  and  in  colour  both  brown  and  greenish.^

FoUowing  the  example  of  traumatic  myélites,  spontaneous  acute
myelitis  also  very  frequently  détermines  the  precocious  formation  of
sacral  eschars,  principally  when  it  sets  in  suddenly,  and  when  the
évolution  is  rapid.  In  order  not  to  enter  on  lengthy  détails,  in  con-
nection with  tins  matter,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  indicating  some
-examples  illustrative  of  this  class  of  cases.  The  sore  bas  been
noticed  on  the  fifth  day  in  a  case  reported  by  Mr.  Duckworth,^  on
the  sixth  day  in  the  case  of  a  patient  under  the  care  of  M.  Woilliez,
which  M.  Joffroy  bas  communicated  to  mer,  on  the  ninth  day  in  an
observation  of  M.  Engelken,  on  the  twelfth  day  in  auother  case
related  by  the  same  author;"^  finally,  in  a  case  of  cervico-dorsal
meningo-myelitis,  published  by  MM.  Voisin  and  Cornil,  the  eschar
formed  on  the  sixth  day.*  Thèse  ex  amples  might  be  easily  in-
creased.

Acute  bed-sore  frequently  accompanies  hrematomyelia  (which
indeed  appears  to  be,  at  ieast  in  a  certain  number  of  cases,  only  an
accident  of  central  myelitis)  ;  thus  we  found  it  in  the  case  of  Duriau,
already  quoted,  where  mortification  showed  itself  in  the  sacral  région
only  four  days  after  the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms.^

We  may  also  observe  rapid  mortification  of  the  skin  of  the  sacral
région  supervening,  even  in  spinal  diseases  of  slow  évolution,  when  a
new  course  of  active  irritation  intervenes  on  a  sudden,  or  when
acute  inflammatory  action  is  suddenly  superadded  tothe  initial  lésion.

'  W.  Gull,  "Cases  of  Paraplcgia,"  in  '  Guy's  Hospital  Eeports,'  1858,
p.  189,  Case  xxii.

-  'The  Laucet/  6  Nov.,  1869,  p.  638.

^  Loc.  cit.,  '  Patliolocçie  der  aciiten  Myelitis,'  Zuiicli,  1867.

**  'Gazette  des  Hôpitaux,'  1865,  No.  26.

''  'Union  Médicale/  t.  i,  1858,  p.  308.


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  GEEY  SUBSTANCE. 89

Not  only  tlie  exacerbation  of  partial  scleroseci  myelitis,  but  the
sudden  irruption  iuto  the  rachidian  cavity  of  pus  emanating  from  an
abscess,  in  the  case  of  a  patient  suffering  from  vertébral  disease
may,  as  I  can  attest,  détermine  the  ra])id  formation  of  eschars.
The  same  resuit  would  be  likewise  produced  in  case  a  tumour  occu-
.pying  the  central  portions  of  the  cord  should,  by  its  présence,  pro-
voke  the  development  of  acute  myelitis.  Several  examples  of  this
ikind  are  on  record.^

If  the  évidences  which  we  hâve  collected  hère  do  not  yet  allow  us
to  construct  a  pathogenic  theory  of  acute  bed-sore  of  spinal  origin,
they  at  least  sufïice,  if  I  mistake  not,  to  exhibit  the  principal  con-
ditions of  the  phcnomenon.  Manifestly,  we  must  relegate  to  a
secoudary  position  the  influence  of  pressure  ;  and  also  that  of  vaso-
motor  paralysis  which  may  be  completely  absent,  as  we  hâve  seen  m
relation  to  the  hemiparaplegia  resulting  from  the  traumatic  lésion  of
a  latéral  half  of  the  cord.  On  the  whole^  the  dominant  and  ever
présent  fact  is  the  active  irritation  of  a  more  or  less  extensive  région
of  the  spinal  cord — mostly  showing  itself,  anatomically,  by  the
characteristics  of  acute  or  superacute  myelitis,  and,  clinically,  by
the  assemblage  of  symptoms  which  are  assignable  to  this  kind  of
lésion.  To  explain  the  production  of  trophic  disorders  which  issue
in  sacral  mortification,  hère  again  it  is  not  to  absence  of  nerve-action
that  we  should  appeal,  but  to  irritation  of  the  spinal  cord.  This
conclusion  is  in  conformity  with  the  expérimental  results  which  show
that,  in  animais,  the  development  of  gangrenons  ulcérations  over
the  sacrum  do  not  supervene  on  ordinary  sections  of  the  cord,  but
only  in  cases  where  inflammation  has  been  set  up  in  the  neighbour-
liood  of  the  spinal  lésion.

It  is  scarcely  probable  that  ail  the  constituent  parts  of  the  cord
are  indiscriminately  apt,  under  the  influence  of  irritation,  toprovoke
the  development  of  acute  bed-sore.  The  great  frequency  of  this  acci-
dent in  cases  of  hœmatomyelia,  and  of  acute  central  myelitis,  where
the  lésion  occupies  chiefly  the  central  régions  of  the  spinal  cord,
seem  to  designate  the  grey  substance  as  playing  a  prédominant  part  in
this  respect.  And  this  power  is  no  doubt  shared  in  by  the  posterior
white  fasciculi,  for  we  know  that  the  irritation  of  certain  parts  of
thèse  fasciculi  has  the  effect  of  determining  the  production  not  only

'  Aniougst  otliers  see  MacDowel's  "Case  of  Paraplegia,"  in  '  Dublia
■Quarterly  Journal,'  1862.


90 INFLUENCE  OF  THE  GEEY  SUBSTANCE.

of  différent  cutaneous éruptions,  but  also,  though  rarely  indeed,
that  of  dermal  necrosis.^

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  perfectly  established  that  ail  portions  of
tlie  grey  matter  should  not  be  indifferently  accused  ;  some  of  tliem,
in  fact  may,  as  we  hâve  already  suggested,  undergo  the  gravest
lésions,  without  acute  bed-sore  ever  supervening.  Such  are  the
anterior  cornua,  whose  lésions,  per  contra,  hâve,  as  y  ou  are  aware,
a  most  decided  influence  on  the  nutrition  of  muscles  and,  as  we  shall
soon  see,  on  that  of  joints  also.

Hence  it  is  that  sacral  eschar  is  often  absent  in  infantile  spinal
paralysis,  and  in  adult  spinal  paralysis — diseases  wliich  are  charac-
terised  anatomically  by  acute  inflammatory  lésions,  System atically
limited  to  the  area  of  the  anterior  cornua  ;  whereas,  those  other
diseases,  which  affect  the  skin,  dépend  upon  irritative  lésions
occupying,  either  the  central  and  posterior  portions  of  the  grey
matter,  or  the  posterior  white  fasciculi.  Trom  this  particular  point
of  view  there  is  reason  to  recognise,  in  the  spinal  cord,  the  existence
of  two  régions  endowed  with  very  distinct  properties.  Now,  since
thèse  régions  may  be  affected  either  separately  or  simultaneously,
it  follows  that,  in  clinical  practice,  acute  bed-sore  and  acute  mus-
cular  atrophy  will  sometimes  appear  separately^  and  that  they  will
sometimes,  on  the  contrary,  coexist  in  the  same  individual.

!From  what  précèdes,  the  influence  of  irritative  lésions  of  the
spinal  cord  upon  the  development  of  acute  bed-sore  seems  to  us
placed  beyond  doubt.  Herr  Samuel  has,  however,  advanced  a  con-
trary opinion  ;  he  thinks  that  the  spinal  cord  does  not  play  any  part
lierein,  and  that  the  spinal  ganglia  or  peripheral  nerves  are  alone
implicated.  We  shall  mention  elsewhere  the  arguments  on  which
this  theory  is  based  ;  but  we  are  now  able  to  point  out  that  it  is  in
formai  contradiction  with  what  has  been  noted  in  the  numerous  cases
of  traumatic  myelitis  affecting  an  elevated  part  of  the  cord — the
cervical  région,  for  instance,  or  the  superior  portion  of  the  dorsal
région — cases  where  acute  bed-sore  supervenes  in  the  sacral  région,
and  certainly  without  the  direct  participation  of  the  spinal  ganglia,
or  of  the  peripheral  nerves.  The  cases  of  hœmatomyelia,  or  of
spontaneous  central  myelitis,  followed  by  precocious  eschars,  are
likewise  adverse  to  the  views  of  Herr  Samuel.

It  is  not  allcged,  however,  that  the  irritative  lésions  of  the  peri-
pheral nerves,  and  pcrhaps  also  those  of  the  spinal  ganglia,  may  not
'  See  ante.  Lecture  iii,  §  i,  p.  65.


LESIONS  OF  NERVES.  91

sometimes  liave  the  effect  of  cTeterminiug  the  rapid  formation  of
eschars. No  doubt^  the examples published  of dermal  necrosis
developed in  conséquence of  a  puncture^  incomplète  section, or
compression  of  a  nerve  are  rare  enough;  but  many  of  them  are
thoroughly  convincing.^ In  connection  witli  tins,  I  will  relate  tlie
case  of  a  female  patient  whicli  I  hâve  been  recently  studying  at  La
Salpêtrière. She  had,  on  the  left  side,  an  enormous  fibrous  tumour
which  compressed,  in  the  pelvis,  the  roots  of  the  ischiatic  and  crural
nerves  of  the  corresponding  lower  extremity. There  had  resulted  a
paretic  state  of  this  member,  accompanied  by  acute  pains  running
along  the  track  of  the  principal  nerve-trunks. One  morning,  shortly
after  the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms  of  compression,  it  was
remarked  that  an  eschar  had  rapidly  formed  near  and  to  the  left  of
the  sacral  région. The  inner  surface  of  the  left  knee,  likewise,  in  a
spot  which  had  been  pressed  upon  by  the  right  knee  for  a  considér-
able time  during  the  night,  in  conséquence  of  the  attitude  of  the
patient  when  asleep, presented  some  pemphigoid  bullse,  full  of  a
brownish  liquid,  which  soon  gave  place  to  an  eschar. jSFothing  of
the  kind  was  developed  on  the  right  knee. This  is  perhaps  the  place
to  mention  that  spontaneous  zona  which,  in  certain  cases  at  least,  is
very  probably  connected  with  the  inflammation  of  some  nerve,  may,
according  to  the  remark  of  Eayer,  occasionally  issue  in  the  more
or  less  deep  mortification  of  the  skin. I  hâve  been  often  a  witness
to  this  fact,  occurring  among  the  aged  persons  in  this  hospital,  and
I  hâve  been  many  times  able  to  satisfy  myself  that  pressure  on  the  spot
occupied  by  the  éruption  did  not  hère  play  an  essential  part. As  to
acute  bed-sore  of  the  breech,  I  am  much  inclined  to  believe  that,  in  a
certain  number  of  cases,  it  should  be  attributed  to  an  irritative  lésion
of  the  nerves  of  the  cauda  equina. A  case  recently  published  by
M.  Couyba,  in  his  inaugural  dissertation^  may  be  cited  as  one  of
several  examples  of  this  class.^

'  See,  amongst  receut  published  facts,  a  case  reported  by  Dr.  W.  A.  Lanson
('The  Lancet,'  30  Dec,  1S71,  p.  913),  and  two  cases  of  Dr.  Vitrac  ('Union
Médicale  de  la  Gironde,'  t.  ii,  p.  127,  and  'Revue  Phot.  des  Hôpitaux,'  1871).

^  Rayer,  '  Maladies  de  la  Peau,'  t.  i,  p.  335.

^  A  young  private  in  the  Garde  Mobile  received  a  buUet-wound,  at  the
outposts  of  Clamart.  The  projectile  had  entered  near  the  anterior  extremity
of  the  tenth  rib  on  the  left  side,  and  had  emerged  on  the  right  side  of  the
vertébral  column,  about  three  inclies  from  the  spine,  on  a  level  with  the  second
lumbar  vertebra.  Paresis,  with  acute  hyperscsthesia  of  the  lower  extremities,
followed. On  the  right  gluteal  emiueuce  a  bulla  (which  quickly  gave  place  to


•92  SPINAL  AETHROPATHIES.

III.

On  Ârthroj^athies  of  Cerehral  or  Spinal  Origin. — Nutritive  disor-
clers  consécutive  on  lésions  of  tlie  nervous  centres  not  uufrequently
take  up  their  seat  in  tlie  articulations.  The  varieties  presented  by
thèse  articular  affections,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  cérébral  or
spinal  lésions  from  which  they  arise,  hâve  led  me  to  establish  two
|)rincipal  catégories.

A.  The  first  comprises  arthropathies  of  acute  or  subacute  form,
accompanied  by  tuméfaction,  redness,  and  sometimes  by  pain  of
a  more  or  less  severe  character.  This  form  was  indicated  for  the
first  time,  if  I  mistake  not,  by  an  American  physician,  Professer
jVIitche]_,i  who  observed  it  in  the  paraplegia  connected  with  Pott's
disease  of  the  vertébrée,  in  which,  however,  it  is  very  rare,  in  my
opinion.2  It  happens  more  frequently  as  a  conséquence  of  a  trau-
matic  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord,  as  we  find  from  the  sufficient  évi-
dence of  the  cases,  above  quoted,  which  hâve  been  recorded  by  MM.
Viguès  and  Joffroy;'^  A  case  of  concussion  of  the  cord,  related  by
Dr.  Gull,  supplies  an  analogous  démonstration.*

Acute  or  subacute  inflammation  of  the  joints  of  paralysed  limbs
may  supervene  also,  in  sjwntaneous  mijelitis  ;  as  examples  of  this
class,  I  may  mention  a  case  reported  by  Dr.  Gull,^  and  another  case
which  M.  Moynier  published  in  the  '  Moniteur  des  Sciences  Médi-
cales^ for  1859. The  second  case  relates  to  a  young  man,  aged

an  escliar)  appeared  on  the  fiftli  day  after  the  accident.  Tlie  escliar  exteuded
in  a  progressive  mauner,  so  as  at  last  to  cover  the  whole  of  the  sacro-gluteal
région. Death  occurred  on  tlie  niaeteenth  da3\

Fost-viortem. — A  purulent  niass  covers  the  anterior  and  postcrior  surfaces  of
the  cord,  and  extends  from  the  cauda  equina  to  the  cervical  région.  The  cord
.itself  when  examined,  first,  in  the  fresh  state,  next  in  nunierous  hardened
sections,  did  not  exhibit  any  altération.  On  the  other  liand,  a  certain  number
of  nerve-tubes  in  the  nerve-filaments  which  form  the  cauda  equina  presented
the  auatomical  charactcrs  of  fatfy  granular  degcneration. — Coiiyba,  '  Thèse  de
'Paris,'  1871. Obs.  xiii,  p.  53.

'  Milchel,  'American  Journal  of  the  Médical  Sciences,'  t.  viii,  p.  5,1^,  1831.

^  I  liave,  however,  seen  one  knee  become  the  seat  of  a  subacute  arlhropathy
in  a  woniau  sufï'ering  from  paralysis  consécutive  on  Pott's  disease.  This  case
.'has  been  recorded  in  the  thesis  of  M.  Michaud,  "  Sur  la  méningite  et  la
jmyélite  dans  le  mal  vertébral,"  Paris,  187 1.

•'  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  91,  92.

^  Gull,  '  Guy'.s  IIos[)ilal  Reports,'  3rd  séries,  t.  iv,  1858. Case  xxvii.

*  Gull,  idem,  Obs.  xxvii.


AETHROPATHY  OF  HEMIPLEGIC  PATIENTS.  95

eigîiteeii,  who,  after  lodging  for  a  long  tirae  in  a  darap  place,  and
undergoing  great  fatigue,  had  presented  ail  the  symptoms  of  subacutc
myelitis.  Paralysis  of  motion  begau  to  show  itself  on  the  25th  of
January  ;  it  became  complète  on  the  çth  Eebruary.  On  the  23rd
of  the  same  month,  the  skin  of  the  sacral  région  presented  an  ery-
thematous  patch  which  gave  place  to  an  eschar,  on  the  5th  of  Mardi.
On  the  6th  of  this  month,  there  was  severe  pain  in  the  right  knee,
which  was  swollen,  and  in  which  the  sensation  of  fluctuation  was
perceptible.  In  addition,  there  was  painful  tuméfaction  of  the  tibio-
tarsal  articulation  of  the  same  side.  On  the  çth  of  IMarch,  the
knee  had  decreased  in  size,  and  on  the  same  day,  eschars  made  their
appearance  on  the  heels.  The  autopsy  revealed  a  focus  of  ramollisse-
ment sitnated  not  quite  two  inches  above  the  cauda  equiua.

l'inally,  in  a  case  of  central  myelitis  in  a  child,  having  its  origiu
in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  solitary  tubercle  sitnated  in  the  cervical
région  of  the  cord,  Dr.  Gull  records  the  formation  of  an  intra-
articular  effusion,  occupying  one  of  the  knees,  at  the  time  when  the
paralysis  bcgan  to  invade  the  lower  extremities.^

It  is  remarkable  to  see  thèse  arthropathies,  consécutive  on  the  dif-
férent acute  and  subacute  forms  of  myelitis,  frequently  forming,  when
the  muscles  of  the  paralysed  limbs  are  beginning  to  waste  away,  or
again  when  an  eschar  is  being  rapidly  developed  on  the  breecli.

The  artliroimthij  of  paraplégie  patients,  first  described  I  believe
in  1846,  by  Scott  Alison,"  afterwards  by  Brown-Séquard,  and  the

'  Gull,  loc.  cit..  Case  xxxii.

"  Scott  Alisoii,  "  Arthrites  occurring  in  the  Course  of  Paralysis,"  Note  read
before  the  Médical  Society  of  Loiidou,  Jaii.  16,  1846,  'The  Laucet,'  t.  i,  p^
276,  1846.  It  is  mauil'estly  to  the  arthritis  of  paraplégie  patients,  such  as-
we  hâve  described  it  ('  Arch.  de  Physiologie,'  t.  i),  that  the  note  of  Dr.  AUison
refers.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  the  affection  to  remain  confined  to  the
paralysed  limbs,  aud  not  to  extend  to  the  sound  members.  The  affected  joints
are  liot,  swollen,  aud  in  some  cases  painful,  either  spontaneously  or  on  move-
ment  made.  The  parts  most  frequently  affected  are  the  knee,  elbow,  wrist,
hand,  aud  foot.  This  form  of  artliritis  seems  to  show  itself  cliiefly  in  cases
where  the  hemiplegia  is  consécutive  on  encephalitis  or  on  Inain  softeuin."-.
Two  cases,  selected  from  a  number  of  others  of  the  same  kiud,  and  cited  as
examples,  deserve  to  be  briefiy  recorded  liere  :

Case  I. — A  woman,  aged  49  years,  who  had  long  enjoyed  perfect  health
and  had  never  suffered  from  any  form  of  arthritic  disease,  was  suddeuly  struck
■with  hemiplegia  ;  some  days  after,  tuméfaction  and  heat  at  the  wrist  of  the
paralysed  side  set  in,  and  a  little  later  on,  the  knee  and  foot  of  the  same  side


94  ARTHEOFATHY  OP  HEMIPLEGIC  PxVTIENTS.

anatomical  and  clinical  cliaracters  of  wliicli  I  hâve  made  kuown,
belongs,  if  I  mistake  not,  to  tlie  same  category. In  tliis  second

becarae  swollen  and  painful  iu  tlieir  turn.  Tliere  was  no  œdema.  ïlie  para-
lysed  limbs  were  rather  rigid.

On  fost-mortem  examination,  partial  softeuing  of  the  brain  was  discovered.
Eacli  rénal  pelvis  was  filled  witli  little  calcul!  of  uric  acid.

Case  II.- — A  nian,  aged  54,  house  painter,  wlio  had  experieuced  several
attacks  of  goût,  was  struck  witli  sudden  liemiplegia.  Soon  after  the  wrist,
the  hand,  and  the  foot,  became  hot  and  swollen.  ïhe  paralysed  limbs  were
rigid.

At  the  autopsy,  the  brain  appeared  softened,  and  a  voluminous  blood-clot
was  found  iu  one  of  the  latéral  ventricles.

Dr.  Alison  endeavoured  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  arthritis  in  the  course
of  (hémiplégie)  paralysis,  by  showing  that  "  the  healthy  relation  between  the
living  tissues  and  the  materials  of  the  blood  was  disturbed.  Two  morbid  con-
ditions gave  rise  to  this  disturbance,  viz.,  a  state  of  reduced  vitality  in  the
paralysed  parts,  and  the  présence  of  exciting  and  noxious  agents  in  the  blood.
In  proof  of  this  varions  facts  were  referred  to,  and  the  author  related  two
singular  cases  of  the  iuflammatory  red  line  of  the  gums  foUowing  the  use
of  mercury,  in  paralysis  of  one  sida  of  the  face,  beiug  strictly  conQned  to  the
paralysed  side  of  the  mouth.  The  paralysed  parts  were  in  fact  more  délicate
tests  of  poisons  than  parts  in  a  state  of  healtii.  In  proof  of  the  présence  of
exciting  agents  in  the  blood  the  gouty  diathesis  of  the  second  case  and  the
lithic  acid  calculi  in  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  of  the  iirst  case,  were  adduced."

We,  in  our  turn,  would  point  ont  that,  most  certaiuly,  thèse  cases  are  alto-
gether  exceptioual,  as  regards  the  question  at  issue,  for  most  frequently,  as  may
be  understood  froni  a  perusal  of  the  cases  published  in  our  work  ('  Archives  de
Physiologie,'  t.  i),  the  arthritis  supervenes  in  hémiplégie  patients  as  a  more  or
less  direct  conséquence  of  the  cérébral  lésion,  quite  apart  from  ail  influence
of  goût,  rheumatism,  or  other  diathetic  condition.

Hence,  whilst  acknowledging  the  accuracy  of  Dr.  Alison's  clinical  descrip-
tions, I  am  unable  to  endorse  the  pathogenic  theory  which  he  bas  proposed.
I  am,  however,  far  from  denying  that  the  articulations  of  paralysed  members,
in  cases  of  hemiplegia  of  cérébral  origin,  may,  as  Dr.  Alison  holds,  be  par-
ticularly  disposed  to  become  foci  of  élimination  for  other  agents  previously
accumulated  in  the  blood.  I  myself  communicated  to  the  Société  de  Biologie,
at  the  timc  of  its  occurrence,  a  case  in  which  this  particular  disposition  was
very  prominent.  A  woman,  aged  about  40  years,  had  been  suddenly  struck
with  right  hemiplegia,  three  years  beforc  hcr  admission  iuto  my  wards.  The
paralysed  limbs  were  strongly  contracturcd  now  and  again,  the  several  joints  of
thèse  limbs,  the  knee  espccially  and  the  foot,  were  the  scats  of  tuméfaction  and
pain.  The  patient,  being  aphasie,  in  a  high  degrec,  it  was  impossible  to  ascer-
tain  if  she  had  been  previously  subjcct  to  goût  or  rheumatism.

At  the  autopsy,  we  found  a  vast  ochreous  cicatrix,  the  vestige  of  a  focus  of
cérébral  hxmorrhage,  situated  exterior  to  the  extra-ventricular  nucleus  of  the
corpus  striatum.  In  most  of  the  articulations  of  the  limbs  on  the  right  side,
which  had  been  hcniiplcgic,  the  tîiarthrodial  cartilages  were  incrustcd  towards


PATHOLOGICAL  ANATOMY.  95

variety,  as  well  as  in  the  first^  tlie  arthropathies  are  limited  to  tlie
paraljsed  limbs  and  mostly  occupy  the  upper  extremities.  They
supervene,  especially,  after  circumscribed  cérébral  ramollissement
{eu  foi/er),  ViXià,  more  rarely,  as  a  conséquence  of  intra-eucephalic
hsemorrhage.

They  usually  form  fifteen  days  or  a  month  after  the  attack  of
apoplexy,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  moment  when  the  tardy  contracture
that  lays  hold  on  the  paralysed  members  appears,  but  they  may
also  show  themselves  at  a  later  epoch. The  tuméfaction,  redness,

tlieir  central  parts  witli  deposits  of  urate  of  soda,  both  crystallised  and  amor-
plious.  The  joints  of  the  limbs,  on  theother  side,  presented  no  similar  appear-
ance.  Some  white  striœ,  which  were  fouud  on  microscopical  and  microchemical
examiuation  to  be  formed  by  urate  of  soda,  were  noticed  in  the  kidueys.

It  is  undoubtedly  most  remarkable  to  find,  in  this  case,  that  the  gouty
deposit  fonns  exclusively  in  the  joints  of  the  paralysed  members  ;  but,  I
cannot  too  ofteu  repeat  that  facts  of  this  kind  are  exceptional,  and,  in  any
case,  they  hâve  nothing  in  common,  from  a  pathogenic  point  of  view,  with  the
ordinary  arthritis  of  hémiplégie  patients  ('  Cas  d'Hubert,'  see  Bourneville,
"  Etudes  cliniques  et  thermometriques  sur  les  maladies  du  système  nerveux,"

P-58).

The  merit  is  due  to  M.  Brown-Séquard  of  having  directed  attention  anew
to  the  arthropathy  of  hémiplégie  patients,  and  of  having  determined  the
organic  cause,  better  than  Dr.  Alisou  had  donc.  He  thus  expresses  himself
in  a  lecture  published  in  *  The  Lancet  '  ("  Lectures  on  the  Mode  and  Origia
of  Symptoms  of  Diseases  of  the  Brain,"  Lecture  i.  Part  ii,  'The  Lancet,'
July  13,  1861).  After  having  admitted  that  the  painful  sensations,  such  as
formication  and  priekling,  which  are  experieuced  in  the  paralysed  members,  in
conséquence  of  a  cérébral  lésion,  resuit  generally  from  a  direct  irritation  of
the  encephalie  nerve-flbres,  he  adds  :

"  It  is  most  important  not  to  confound  thèse  sensations  (which  are  referred
sensations,  like  those  taking  place  when  the  ulnar  nerve  bas  beeu  iujured  at
the  elbow  joint)  with  other  and  sometimes  very  painful  sensations  in  the
muscles  or  in  the  joints  of  paralysed  limbs.  Thèse  last  sensations  very  rarely
exist  when  the  limbs  are  not  moved,  or  when  there  is  no  pressure  upon  thera  ;
they  appear  at  once,  or  are  increased  by  any  pressure  or  movemeut.  They
dépend  upon  a  subacute  inflammation  of  the  muscles  or  joints,  which  is  ofteu
mistaken  for  a  rheumatic  affection.  This  subinflammation  in  paralysed  limbs
is  often  the  resuit  of  au  irritation  of  the  vaso-motor  or  nutrition  nerves  of  the
encephalou."

Before  M.  Brown-Séquard,  and  before  even  Mr.  Scott  Alison,  many  phy-
sicians  had  already  remarked  the  arthritis  of  paralytic  patients,  but  without
bringing  out  the  iuterest  connected  therewith.  Consult  R.  Dann,  '  The
Lancet,'  t.  ii,  p.  238,  1841.  Durand-Fardel,  'Maladies  des  Vieillards,'  p.  131.
Paris,  1854,  Observation,  Lemoine.  Valleix,  'Guide  du  Médecin  Praticien,'
t.  iv,  1853,  p.  514. Grisolle,  'Pathologie  Interne,'  2nd  édition,  t.  ii,  p.  257.


96  CLINICAL  CHAEACTEES.

and  pain  of  the  joints  are  sometimes  marlcecl  enougli  to  recall  the-
corresponding  phenomena  of  acute  articulai  rheumatism.  The  ten-
diuous  sheaths  are,  indeetl,  often  affected  at  the  same  time  as  the
articulations.

I  hâve  shown  that  we  hâve  hère  a  true  synovitis  with  végétation,
multiplication  of  the  nuclear  and  fibroid  éléments  which  form  the
articular  serous  membrane,  and  augmentation  in  number  and  volume
of  the  capillary  vessels  which  are  there  distributed.  In  intense
cases,  a  sero-fibrinous  exudation  is  produced,  with  which  are
mingled,  in  varions  proportions,  white  blood-corpuscles  that  may
become  abundant  enougli  to  distend  the  synovial  cavity.  The
diarthrodial  cartilages  and  ligamentous  parts  hâve  not  hitherto
appeared  to  présent  any  concomitant  lésion  perceptible  to  the  naked
eye.  On  the  other  hand,  the  tendiuous  synovial  sheaths,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  affected  joints,  take  part  in  the  inflamma-
tory  process,  and  appear  greatly  congested.i

It  is  needless  to  insist  upou  the  interest  which  pertains  to  thèse
arthropathies  as  regards  diagnosis, — articular  rheumatism,  whether
acute  or  su^acute,  being  an  affection  often  connected  with  certain
forms  of  cérébral  softening,  and  one  which,  indeed,  shows  itself  also,
occasionally,  after  traumatic  causes  capable  of  determining  shock  iix
the  nervous  centres.  On  the  other  hand,  many  affections  of  the
spinal  cord  are  erroneously  attributed  to  a  rheumatic  diathesis  in
conséquence  of  the  coexistence  of  thèse  articular  symptoms.  The
clinical  characters  which  render  it  easy  to  recognise  arthropathies
correlated  with  lésions  of  the  nervous  centres,  and  which  allow  them
to  be  distinguished  from  cases  of  rheumatic  arthritis,  are  chiefly
thèse  :

1°.  Their  limitation  to  the  joints  of  the  paralysed  members.

2°.  The generally determinate epoch in which, in cases of

'  Cliarcot,  "  Sur  cuiclques  arthropathies  qui  paraissent  dépendre  d'une
lésion  du  cerveau  ou  de  la  moelle  épinicre,"  '  Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  i,
p.  396,  ri.  vi,  figs.  I,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6.  Paris,  1868.  The  arthropaUiy  in  question
should  apparently  not  be  coni'oiinded  with  the  articular  alFcction  which  lias
been  describcd,  in  lattcr  days,  by  Ilcrr  llitzig  of  Berlin,  "  Ucbcr  cinc  ber
schwcren  llemiplegicn,  Aul'trelende  Gallcnkafl'cction,"  in  '  Virchow's  Arehiv,*
Bd.  xlviii,  hft.  3  u.  4,  1869.  Tliis  spccies  appcars,  espccially,  wlien  the  hemi-
plegia  is  of  comparatively  old  date,  and  the  i)atients  havc  been  ablc  lo  walk  for
sonie  time  ;  it  chiefly  occupies  the  shoulder-joint,  and  results  principally  from
the  displacement  of  the  articular  surfaces,  occasioned  by  the  paralysis  of  thé-
muscles  which  surround  the  joint.


ARTHEOPATHIES  OP  ATAXIC  PATIENTS.  97

•sudden  hemiplegia,  they  raake  their  appearance  on  the  morbid
•scène.

3°.  The  coexistence  of  other  trophic  troubles  of  the  sanae
•order^  such  as  eschars  of  rapid  formation  ;  and  (when  the  spinal
•cord  is  involved)  acute  muscular  atrophy  of  the  paraljsed  mem-
bers,  cystitis,  nephritis^  <S:c.

B.  The  type  of  the  second  group  is  to  be  found  in  progressive
locomotor  ataxia.  Allow  me  to  fix  your  attention  for  an  instant
upon  this  species  of  articular  affection,  in  which  I  take  a  paternal
interest,  ail  the  more  lively  because  the  signification  I  attached  to  it
bas  liad  to  encounter  many  sceptics.  And  at  first,  a  word  as  to
the  clinical  characters  of  the  artliropathy  of  ataxic  patients.^

This  disorder  generally  shows  itself  at  a  determinate  epoch  of  the
ataxia,  and  its  appearance  coincides,  so  to  speak,  in  many  cases
with  the  setting  in  of  motor  incoordination.

Without  any  appréciable  external  cause,  we  may  see,  betweeu  one
day  and  the  next,  the  development  of  a  gênerai  and  often  enormous
tuméfaction  of  the  member,  most  commonly  without  any  pain
whatever,  or  any  fébrile  reaction.  At  the  end  of  a  few  days  the
gênerai  tuméfaction  disappears,  but  a  more  or  less  considérable
•swelling  of  the  joint  remains,  owing  to  the  formation  of  hydarthus  ;
and  sometimes  to  the  accumulation  of  liquid  in  the  periarticular
serous  bursse  also.  On  puncture  being  made,  a  transparent  lemon-
coloured  liquid  has  been  frequently  drawn  from  the  joint.

One  or  two  weeks  after  the  invasion,  sometimes  much  sooner,
the  existence  of  more  or  less  marked  cracking  sounds  may  be  noted,
betraying  the  altération  of  the  articular  surfaces  which,  at  this
period,  is  already  profound.-  The  hydarthus  becomes  quickly  re-
solved,  leaving  after  it  an  extrême  mobility  in  the  joint.  Hence
consécutive  luxations  are  frequently  found,  their  production  being
largely  aided  by  the  wearing  away  of  the  heads  of  the  bones  which
has  taken  place.  I  hâve  several  times  observed  a  rapid  wasting  of
the  muscular  masses  of  the  members  affected  by  the  articular
disorder.

Ataxic  artliropathy  usually  occupies  the knees,  shoulders,  and

'  Cliarcot,  "  Sur  quelques  Arthropathies,"  &c.,  p.  i.  '  Archives  de  Pliys.,'
t.  i,  1868.

'  In  some  cases  the  crackiug  souuds  hâve  preceded,  by  several  days,  the
appearance  of  the  gênerai  tuméfaction  of  the  member  ;  but,  as  a  rule,  the
latter  is  the  ûrst  symptom  observed.

7


98


ANATOMICAL  CHAEACTEES.


elbows  ;  it  may  also  take  up  its  seat  in  the  hip-joint.  The  anatomo-
pathological  information  wliich  we  possess  respecting  it,  is  as  yet
very  imperfect.  However,  one  character  is  apparently  constant,
namely,  the  enormous  wearing  down  which  is  exhibited  in  a  very
short  space  of  time  by  the  articular  extremities.  At  the  end  of
ttiree  months,  this  head  of  a  humérus  which  I  show  you,  and  which
belonged  to  a  female  patient  in  whom  we  were  enabled  to  study  the
invasion  of  the  arthropathy,  was^  as  you  may  remark  (fig.  5),  to  a
great  extent  destroyed.  I  would  call  your  attention  to  the  fact,
that  you  do  not  find  on  this  spécimen,  the  bony  burr  around  the
worn  articular  surface,  which  wonld  not  fail  to  be  présent  if  this
were  a  case  of  common  dry  arthritis.i


Fig.  5. — Upper  extremity  of  a  liealtliy  liumerus,  and  of  a  humérus  present-
ing  the  lésions  of  ataxic  arthropathy.


I  now  place  before  you  in  order  to  establish  the  contrast,  a  knee-
joint  also  taken  from  a  woman  wlio  presented  the  symptoms  of
ataxic  arthropathy,  but  in  whom  the  articular  affection  was  of
much  older  date.  Besides  the  wearing  down  of  the  articular  sur-
faces which,  as  in  the  preceding  case,  is  carried  very  far,  you
notice  hère  the  présence  of  foreign  bodies,  of  bony  stalactites,  and,
in  a  Word,  of  ail  the  customary  accompaniments  of  arthritis  dé-
formant. Thèse  latter  altérations,  I  repeat,  were  absolutely  want-
ing  in  the  first  case. On  this  account,  I  am  led  to  believc  that  they

^  Compare  Charcot,  "Ataxic  locomotrice  progressive,  artliropatliie  de
l'épaule  gauche.  Tlcsultats  nccroscopiques,"  in  'Archives  de  Physiologie,*
t.  ii,  p.  121,  1869.


CLINICAL  CHARACTERS.  99

are  nowise  necessary,  and  that  tliey  are  produced  in  an  accidentai
maunei'j  and  to  ail  appearance  chiefly  by  the  more  or  less  ener-
getic  movements  to  which  the  patients  sometimes  continue  to
subject  the  affected  members.

I  wish  to  confine  myself  at  présent  to  this  indication  of  the  most
gênerai  features  of  the  arthropathies  of  ataxic  patients,  for  this  is  a
subject  which  I  propose  to  treat  hereafter  in  more  détail.  What
I  hâve  to  say  will  suffice,  I  hope,  to  show  that  the  articular
affection  in  question  is,  itself  also,  the  expression  of  trophic
disorders  directly  dépendent  on  the  lésion  of  the  spinal  nerve-
centre.  But  hère  are  the  principal  arguments  upon  which  I  base
my  opinion.

I  would  point  ont,  in  the  first  place,  the  absence  of  ail  traumatic
or  diathetic  cause  of  rheumatism  or  of  goût,  for  instance,  which
might  explain  the  appearance  of  the  articular  disease  in  the  cases
which  I  hâve  studied.  Herr  R.  Wolkmann^  has  said  that  the  arthro-
pathy  of  ataxic  patients  is  simply  the  resuit  of  the  distension  of  the
articular  ligaments  and  capsules,  in  conséquence  of  the  awkward
manner  of  walking  peculiar  to  this  class  of  persons.  The  ca^es,
which  are  now  numerous,  in  which  our  arthropathy  affected  the  upper
extremities,  and  occupied  either  the  shoulder  or  the  elbow,  are  suffi-
cient  to  prove  that  the  interprétation  proposed  by  Wolkmann  could
hâve  but  a  very  narrow  bearing.  The  influence  of  a  mère  mechanical
cause  cannot  be  invoked,  at  least  not  as  a  principal  agency,  eveu
in  cases  where  the  arthropathy  occupies  the  lower  extremities.  I
hâve,  in  fact,  taken  care  to  point  out,  supporting  my  words  by  oft
repeated  clinical  observations,  that  the  articular  affection  in  ques-
tion is  developed  at  a  comparatively  early  epoch  of  the  sclerosis  of
the  posterior  columns,  and  at  a  time  when  motor  incoordination  is
as  yet  null,  or  scarcely  manifest.

The  clinical  characters  of  our  arthropathy  are,  besides,  really
spécial.  Its  sudden  invasion,  marked  by  the  gênerai  tuméfaction  of
the  member  ;  the  rapid  altérations  of  the  articular  surfaces  ;  finally,
its  appearance  at,  as  it  were,  a  determinate  epoch  of  the  spinal
disease  with  which  it  is  connected,  constitute  so  many  peculiarities
which  are,  if  I  err  not,  found  together  in  no  other  articular  affec-
tion.

But  hère  is  a  more  direct  argument. Holding  as  we  did  that

'  Canstatt'â  '  Jahresbericht/  1868-1869,  2  Bel.,  p.  391.


dOO  PATHOGENT.

the  artbropathy  in  question  is  a  trophic  lésion  consécutive  on  the
disease  of  the  spinal  cortl,  we  yet  could  not  think  of  Connecting  it
with  any  of  the  common  altérations  of  progressive  locomotor  ataxia
— with  sclerosis  of  the  posterior  columns,  posterior  spinal  menin-
gitis,  or  atrophy  of  the  posterior  roots  of  the  spinal  nerves.  On  the
«ther  hand,  a  minute  examination  of  many  cases  had  taught  us  that
it  was  impossible  to  invoke  a  lésion  of  the  peripheral  nerves.  It  is
in  the  grey  matter  of  tlie  anterior  cornua  of  the  cord  that  the  start-
ing  point  of  this  curious  complication  of  the  ataxia  is  to  be  found
âccording  to  our  belief.'  It  is  not  very  rare  to  find  the  spinal  grey
matter  affected  in  locomotor  ataxia  ;  but  the  lésion  is  then  generally
found  in  the  posterior  cornua.  Now,  it  was  quite  différent  in  two
cases  of  locomotor  ataxia,  complicated  with  arthropathy,  in  which  a
careful  examination  of  the  cord  bas  been  made  ;  the  anterior  cornua
were,  in  both  cases,  remarkably  wasted  and  deformed,  and  a  certain
number  of  the  great  nerve-cells,  those  of  the  external  group  es-
.specially,  had  decreased  in  size,  or  even  disappeared  altogether
without  leaving  any  vestiges.  The  altération,  besides,  showed  itself
exclusively  in  the  anterior  cornu  corresponding  to  the  side  on  which
the  articular  lésion  was  situated  (fig.  6) .  It  affected  the  cervical
région,  in  the  first  case,  where  the  arthropathy  occupied  the  shoulder;
dt  was  observed,  a  little  above  the  lumbar  région,  in  the  second  case
"which  presented  an  example  of  arthropathy  of  the  knee.  Above
and  below  thèse  points,  the  grey  matter  of  the  anterior  cornua  ap-
peared  to  be  exempt  from  altération.

It  may  be  asked  whether  this  altération  of  one  of  the  anterior
■cornua  of  the  cord,  which  microscopical  examination  reveals,  may
•not  be  a  resuit  of  the  functional  inertia  to  which  the  corresponding
member  has  been  condemned  on  account  of  the  articular  lésion.  This
hypothesis  must  be  rejected  because,  on  the  one  hand,  in  both  of
our  cases,  the  members  affected  by  the  arthropathics  had  preservcd  to
a  great  degree  their  freedom  of  motion  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
lésion  of  the  grey  matter  differed  essentially  hère  from  that  which  is
produced  after  the  amputation  of  a  member,  or  the  section  of  the
nerves  supplying  it.

From  what  précèdes,  I  hope  to havc  made  it  appear  at  least

'  Sce  Cliarcot  et  Joffroy,  "Note  sur  une  lésion  de  la  substance  ç;rise  de  la
'nioëlle  épinicre,  observée  dans  un  cas  d'art  liropathic  lice  à  l'ataxie  locomotrice
progressive,"  'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  iii,  p.  306,  1870.


AETHEOPATHIES  IX  PEOGEESSIVE  AMYOTEOPHY. lOÎ

highly  probable  that  the  inflammatory  process,  fîrst  developed  in  the
postei'ior  columns,  by  gradually  extending  to  certain  régions  of  tha
anterior  cornua  of  the  grey  matter  was  able  to  occasion  the  develop-
ment  of  the  articular  affection  in  our  two  patients.  If  the  résulta*!
obtained  in  thèse  two  cases  are  confirmed  by  new  observations,  we


FiG.  6. — J,  lliglit  anterior  coruu.  A',  Left  anterior  cornu.  B,  Posterior
grey  commissure  and  central  canal.  C,  Anterior  médian  fissure,  a  a',  An-
terior external  cell-group.  b  b',  Anterior  internai  cell-group.  c',  Right
posterior  external  cell-group.  The  correspouding  left  group  (c)  is  almost
altogether  absent.

should  be  naturally  led  to  admit  that  arthritic  affections  connected  with
myelitis,  and  those  observed  to  follow  on  cérébral  softening,  are  like-
wise  due  to  the  invasion  of  the  same  régions  of  the  grey  matter  of
the  spinal  cord.  In  cases  of  brain-softening,  the  descending  sclerosis
of  one  of  the  latéral  columns  of  the  cord  might  be  considered  as  the
starting  point  of  the  diffusion  of  inflammatory  work.

MM.  Patruban,!  Eemak,^  and  quite  recently,  Herr  Rosenthal,^
hâve  observed  in  prof/ressive  w;^/5t7</ar  «//o;j/^j/^  arthropathies 'o'hich
by  their  chnical  characters  are  closely  allied  with  those  of  ataxic
patients.  This  is  nothing  surprising,  if  we  remember  that  a  pri-
mary  or  secondary  irritative  lésion  of  the  nerve-cells  of  the  anterior
cornua  of  the  spinal  grey  matter  appears^  in  the  majority  of  cases,  ta-

1  Patruban,  '  Zeitsclirift  fur  prakt.  Heilkunde,'  1862,  No.  i.
-  Pi.emak,  '  Allgemeine  mediziuisclie  central  Zeitung,'  Mardi,  1863,  20  st.
^  Kosenthal, '  Lelirbuch  der  Nervenkraukheiten/ p.  571. Wien, 1870..
See  also  Benedikt,  '  Elektrotberapie,'  t.  ii,  p.  384.


102 ARTHROPATHIES  IN  PROGRESSIVE  AMYOTROPHY.

be  the  starting- point  of  tlie  arayotrophy  whicb,  in  clinical  practice,
is  usuaily  designated  by  the  name  of  progressive  muscular  atrophy.

Por  to-day,  gentlemen,  I  shall  stop  hère  in  this  investigation,
which  I  expect  to  bring  to  a  conclusion  at  our  next  conférence.


LECTURE IV.

NUTRITIVE  DISORDERS  CONSECUTIVE  ON  LESIONS  OF  THE
BRAIN  AND  SPINAL  CORD.  (CONCLUSION.)  AFFECTIONS
OF  THE|VISCERA. THEORETICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

SuMMAUY. —  Viscéral  hyper œmïa  and  ecchymoses  consécutive  on  expé-
rimental lésions  of  différent  portions  of  the  encephalon,  and  on
intra-encephalic  hœmorrhage.  Bxperiments  of  Schiff  and
Brown-Séquard  :  personal  observations.  Thèse  lésions  seem  ta
dépend  on  vaso-motor  paralysis  :  they  should  form  a  separate
category.  Opinion  of  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk,  relative  to  the
relations  alleged  to  exist  hetween  certain  lésions  of  the  ence-
phalon and  différent  forms  of  pneumonia,  and pulmonary  tuber-
cnlisation.  Ha-morrhage  of  the  supra-renal  capsules  in  mye-
litis.  Nephritis  and  cystitis  consécutive  on  irriiative  spinal
affections  of  sudden  invasion,  lohether  traumaticor  spontaneoiis.
Hapid  altération  of  the  îtrine  under  thèse  circumstances  ;  often
remarked  contemporaneously  with  the  development  of  eschars  in
the  sacral  région;  ils  connection  with  lésions  of  the  urinary pas-
sages which  are  due  to  direct  influence  of  the  nervous  System.
Theory  of  the  pi'^'oduction  of  nutritive  disorders  consécutive  on
lésions  of  the  nervous  System.  Insufflciency  of  our  présent
Tcnoioledge,  with  respect  to  this  question.  Paralysis  of  the
vaso-motor  nerves  ;  consécutive  hyperœmia  ;  trophic  disorders
not  produced.  Exceptions  to  the  rule.  Irritation  qf  the  vaso-
motor  nerves  :  the  conséquent  ischmnia,  seems  to  hâve  no  marJced
influence  on  local  nutrition.  Bilator  and  secretor  7ierves  :
researches  of  Ludwig  and  Claude  Bernard  ;  analogies  hetween
thèse  two  orders  of  nerves.  Theoretical  application  of  trophic
nerves.  SamueVs  hypothesis.  Exposition.  Criticisms.  Con-
clusion.

Gentlemen, — The  réverbération  of  lésions  of  the  nervous  System  is
Dot  felt  only  in  the  peripheral  parts,  in  the  skin,  bones,  and  muscles.


104  VISCEKAL  ECCHTMOSES.

tlie  viscera  themselves  may  also  be  influenced  by  thèse  lésions..
It  is  kiiown  that  certain  altérations  of  the  encephalon,  especially
tliose  wliich  affect  the  optic  thalami,  the  corpora  striata,  and  par-
ticularly  the  différent  parts  of  the  isthmus^  whether  caused  experi-
mentally,  or  spontaneously  produced,  are  occasionally  followed  by
the  manifestation  of  certain  viscéral  lésions.

Thus  in  some  experiments  ruade  by  Professor  Schiff^  and  by  Brown-
Séquard^  there  frequently  supervened  in  the  lungs,  stomach,  or
kidneysj  either  simple  hypersemia  or  real  ecchymoses^  conséquent  on.
traumatic  irritation  of  the  optic  thalami,  corpora  striata,  pons
Varolii,  and  bulbus  rachidicus,  &c.  Again,  nothing  is  more  com-
mon,  as  I  hâve  sliown,  than  to  find  in  man,  in  cases  of  apoplexy
symptomatic  of  cérébral  softening,  but  especially  in  cases  of  intra-
encephalic  hsemorrhage  in  foci,  patches  of  congestion  and  real
ecchymoses  on  the  pleurse,  the  endocardium,  and  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  stomach.^

What  is  the  reason  of  thèse  singular  altérations  ?  Professor  Schiff
does  not  hesitate  to  look  on  them  as  being  simply  the  effects  of  the
paralysis  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves.

I  am  very  much  inclined,  for  my  part,  to  believe  that  the  patho-
genic  process  is  hère  more  complex.  Nevertheless,  the  direct  influ-
ence,  so  to  speak,  of  neuro-paralytic  hypersemia  on  the  development  of
ecchymoses,  in  apoplectic  patients,  seems  well  established  by  the
following  case  which  I  communicated  to  the  Société  de  Biologie,
in  1868.

A  female  in  La  Salpêtrière  was  struck  with  apoplexy,  followed  by
hemiplegia  of  the  left  side,  and  succumbed  a  few  days  after.  The
paralysed  members  had  presented  a  comparatively  considérable  in-
crease  of  température.  At  the  autopsy,  we  discovered  in  the  right
hémisphère  a  récent  hsemorrhagic  focus,  occupying  the  corpus  stri-
atum.  The  epicranial  aponeurosis  presented  on  the  left,  or  hémi-
plégie side,  a  wine-red  colour^  and,  hère  and  there,  spots  of
ecchymosis.

The  abnormal  colour  and  the  ecchymoses  stopped  suddenly  at
the  médian line. The  right half  of the epicranium had pre-

1  Scbiff,  'Gazette  Hebdomadaire,'  t.  i,  p.  428.  'Lezioni  di  Tiziologia
sperimentale  sul  systema  iicrvoso  encefalieo,'  pp.  287,  297,  373-.  Krenze,.
1866.  'Leçons  sur  la  Physiologie  de  la  Digestion,'  t.  ii,  p.  433.  Florence».
1867.

-  'Société  de  Biologie,'  1870.

^  'Comptes  Kcndus  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  19  Juin,  1869. Paris,  187a-


VISCEKAL  ECCHYMOSES.  105

served  its  customary  pallor  :  no  traces  of  ecchymosis  were  to  be
found.  Spots  of  ecchymosis  were  observed  in  the  substance  of  the~
pleurse,  of  the  endocardium,  and  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
stomach.^

However  it  be,  the  viscéral  lésions  in  question  differ  by  important
characteristics  from  the  affections  which  form  the  principal  object  of
our  studies.  Those  are  congestions  and  ecchymoses,  as  we  hâve
said  ;  the  symptoms  of  inflammation  are  never  superadded  without
the  intervention  of  some  accessory  cause,  a  thing  altogether  unneces-
sary,  as  you  are  aware,  in  cases  of  common  trophic  lésions.  We  hâve
consequently  grounds  for  placing  in  a  separate  category,  at  least  tem-
porarily,  the  congestions  and  ecchymoses  -which  make  their  appear-
ance  consecutively  on  lésions  of  difierent  parts  of  the  encephalon.

Again,  some  authors,  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk  amongst  others,,
consider  that  the  diff'erent  forms  of  pneumonia,  and  even  of  pulmonary
tuberculisation,  which  frequently  supervene  in  the  course  of  certain
encephalic  affections,  dépend,  in  such  circumstances,  on  the  influence
of  lésions  of  the  brain  and  medulla  oblongata  upon  the  lungs.  But
it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  cases  upon  which  the  alleged'
connection  rests  are  not  yet  sufficiently  convincing."

'  'Comptes  Eendus  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  année  1868.  Paris,  1869,.
p.  213.

"  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk.  '' Atropby  of  the  braiu,"  Sydenham  Society,.
1861.  The  author  dwells  on  the  lact  that,  according  to  the  statistics  published
in  lus  Treatise  on  the  Spinal  Cord,  ail  the  epileptic  patients  whose  toiigues
were  bitten,  succumbed  in  conséquence  of  phthisis,  pneumonia,  or  marasmus..
He  adds  that,  according  to  Durand-Fardel,  patients  attacked  by  braiu-softening
almost  always  die  of  a  pulmonary  affection,  and  lie  quotes  Eugel's  statistics
which  support  this  view  ('Prager  Yierteljahaschr.,'  vii  Jahrg.,  Bd.  iii).  He
refers  to  the  experiments,  now  of  old  date,  in  which  Schiff  believed  he  saw,.
in  the  rabbit,  tubercles  (?)  developed  in  the  upper  lobe  of  the  lung  after  the
section  of  the  ganglion  of  the  pneumogastric  nerve  ('  "Wunderlich's  Archiv/
6  Jahr.,  8  heft,  pp.  769  et  seq.),  aud  fiually  points  out  that,  among  tlie  observa-
tions collected  by  Brown-Séquard  in  his  "  Hecherchcs  sur  la  Physiologie  de  la
protubérance  annulaire"  ('  Journal  de  la  Physiologie,'  t.  i),  tliere  are  a  certain
number  wherc  phthisis  and  pneumonia  occasioued  death.  Cruveilhier,  Andral,,.
aud  Piorry  had  long  siuce  noted  the  prédominant  part  which,  according  to  them,
acute  j)ncumonia  plays  in  the  issue  of  apoplexies  determiued  by  cerebrali
softeniiig  or  hœmorrhagc.

According  to  the  observations  which  I  hâve  collected  at  La  Salpctricre,
lobular  or  lobar  inflammations  of  the  lungs  would  be  less  fréquent,  under  the
circumstances,  than  thèse  physicians  seem  to  believe.


106 HyEMOERHAGE  OP  SUPEA-EENAL  CAPSULES.

Spinal  lésions,  as  well  as  lésions  of  tlie  encephalon,  may  be  fol-
loued  by  tlie  production  of  viscéral  ecchymoses.  It  will  suffice  for
me  to  remind  you  that  if  tlie  lumbar  cord  be  wounded  with  a  punc-
turing  instrument,  in  a  guinea-pig,  effusion  of  blood  into  the  supra-
renal  capsules  occasionally  follows.^  It  seems  riglit  to  recall  this
experiraent  of  Brown-Séquard,  because  Imman  pathology  supplies
us  with  analogous  facts.  Quite  recently  my  friend  Dr.  Bouchard
bas  told  me  of  a  case  of  acute  myelitis,  observed  in  Professor
Béhier's  wards,  and  promptly  terminating  in  death.  At  the  autopsy,
besides  the  lésions  of  partial  myelitis,  the  existence  of  récent  hemor-
rhagic  foci  were  discerued  in  the  substance  of  the  supra-renal  cap-
sules.

But,  I  repeat,  congestive  and  ecchymotic  lésions  appear  to  form
a  separate  order.  On  the  other  hand,  the  affections  of  the  kidneys
and  of  the  bladder,  to  wbich  I  wish  now  to  call  your  attention,  are,
by  the  gênerai  bearing  of  their  characteristics,  allied  to  the  group
of  trophic  lésions,  properly  so  called.

You  are  aware  that  nephritis  and  cystitis  are  very  common  com-
plications of  irritative  spinal  affections,  of  sudden  invasion,  whether
they  be  of  traumatic  origin,  or  spontaneously  developed.

It  bas  been  long  recognised  that,  after  fracture  of  the  vertébral
column  with  consécutive  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord,  the  urine  fre-
quently  undergoes  rapid  altération.  Dupuytren  pointed  out,  as  you
may  recollect,  that  in  sucli  circumstances  the  cathéter  left  in  the
bladder  to  guard  against  rétention  of  urine,  became  rapidly  coated
with  a  calcareous  incrustation."  But  it  was  Brodie  especially,  who
called  attention  to  the  characters  presented  by  the  urine  in  the  case
of  persons  stricken  with  traumatic  paraplegia.^  On  the  eighth,  on
the  third,  and  on  the  second  day,  he  bas  observed  the  urine  become
alkaline,  and  exhale  a  fœtid  ammoniacal  odour,  at  the  moment  of
émission.  Soon  afterwards,  it  contained  blood-clots,  muco-pus,
deposits  of  ammoniaco-magnesian  phosphates.  It  wouid,  in  fact,  be
easy  to  gatber  from  authors  a  very  great  number  of  cases  in  whicli
the  urine-changes,  noticed  by  Brodie,  bave  occurred  in  the  first  days
following  on  paraj)legia,  determined  by  fracture  of  the  vertébral

'  Brown-S6quard,  "  Influence  d'une  partie  de  la  moelle  cpinière  sur  les
capsules  surrénales,"  'Comptes  Rendus  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  1S51,  t.  iii,
p.  146.

-  Ollivier  (d'Angers),  loc.  cil.,  t.  i,  p.  372.

^  Brodie,  '  Medico-Chirurg.  Transactions,'  loc.  cit.


NEPHRO-CYSTITIS.  107

column.^  At  the  autopsy,  in  such  cases^  more  or  less  advanced
lésions  of  purulent  nephro-cystitis  are  found.'"

But  traumatic  lésions  of  this  kind  are,  in  gênerai,  little  suited  to
illustrate  clearly  tlie  relations  which  exist  between  inflammation
■of  the  urinary  passages  and  altérations  of  the  spinal  cord.  For  it  eau
always  be  supposed,  if  strictly  considered,  that  a  fall  or  concussion
violent  enough  to  produce  fracture  of  the  spine,  may  hâve  determined
the  vesico-renal  lésions  by  the  same  shock.

It  is  otherwise  when  we  hâve  to  deal  with  an  affection^  sponta-
neously  developed  in  the  spinal  cord,  or  with  a  wound  determined  in
this  organ  by  the  blow  of  some  sharp  weapon.  Now,  even  in
cases  of  this  kind,  it  is  common  to  find,  a  short  time  after  the
invasion  of  the  paralytic  phenomena,  a  more  or  less  marked  modi-
fication in  the  constitution  of  the  urine,  connected  with  nephro-
vesical  altérations,  not  unfrequently  of  a  serious  character.  I  shall
confine  myself  to  mentioning,  by  way  of  example,  the  following
facts.

In  one  case,  previously  described,  of  hemiparaplegia  caused  by
a  knife-stab  the  urine  became  alkaline  on  the  third  day,  and  soon
after  muco-puruleut. Deatli  occurred  on  the  thirteenth  day.

At  the  autopsy,  very  évident  inâammatory  lésions  were  found  in
the  kidneys,  ureters,  and  bladder.^  In  an  analogous  case,  reported
by  M.  Brown-Séquard,  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Maunder,^  the
urine  was  likewise  found  to  be  alkaline,  a  very  short  time  after  the
accident.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  very  interesting  inasmuch  as  they
show  that  a  unilatéral  and  very  circumscribed  lésion  of  the  cord
suffices  to  détermine  a  more  or  less  grave  and  generalised  affection
of  the  urinary  passages.

Ahke  in  spontaneous  acute  myelitis,  of  sudden  invasion,  and  in
hfematomyelia,  is  the  appearance  of  ammoniacal,  sanguineous,  and
muco-purulent  urine  a  fact  of  fréquent  occurrence,  soon  after  the
manifestation  of  paralytic  symptoms.  Thus  the  urine  was  already
greatly  altered  on  the  fifth  day,  in  the  case  of  acute  myelitis,  which

^  See  Stanley,  ist  case.  Urine  strongly  ammoniacal  on  tlie  fifth  day;
2nd  case,  ammoniacal  urine  on  the  fourth  day.  '  London  Medico-Chirurg.
Trans.,'  t.  xviii,  p.  i.  Jeffreys  :  urine  ammoniacal  and  sanguineous,  the
seventh  day  (Ollivier,  d'Angers,  loc.  cit.,  t.  i,  p.  322).

-  Molendrinski,  "  Bruch  des  Zweiten  Lendenwirbels,"  Langenbeck's
*Archiv,'  xi  Ed.,  1869,  p.  8,(^9.

^  Case  of  W.  Millier,  see  anfe,  '  Third  Lecture,'  p.  86.

^  'Journal  de  Physiologie,'  t.  vi,  p.  152,  1863.


108  ALTERATIONS  OF  URINE.

we  hâve  quoted  from  Dr.  Duckworth;^  on  the  sixth  day,  in  tîiat
given  by  M.  Joffroy.-  It  was  ammoniacal  the  fourth  day,  in
Dr.  Gull's  patient  ;  ^  sanguineous  the  third,  and  purulent  the  ninth,
in  a  case  recorded  by  Herr  Mannkopf.'*'

In  the  case  of  hsematomyelia,  recorded  by  M.  Duriau,''  the
urine  was  ammoniacal  and  contained  blood-clots  the  fourth  day  ;  it
presented  the  same  character  the  sixth  day  and  became  gradually
purulent  in  a  case  reported  by  Olhvier  (d^ Angers)  on  the  authority
of  Monod.^  In  this  instance^  there  was  hemiparaplegia,  consécutive
on  the  présence  of  a  hsemorrhagic  focus  occupying  a  latéral  half  of
the  spinal  cord.  You  will  find^  in  the  work  of  M.  Rayer,  the
description  of  lésions,  frequently  grave,  affecting  the  kidneys,  the
rénal  pelves,  and  the  bladder,  to  which  thèse  changes  in  the  urine
should  be  attributed.'^

Many  of  the  observations,  just  cited,  contain  an  item  of  informa-
tion the  importance  of  which  cannot  escape  your  notice.  It  is
mentioned  that  the  urine  which  until  then  was  normal  became,  as  I
hâve  said,  ammoniacal,  sanguineous,  or  muco-purulent,  at  the  very
time  when  eschars  were  being  developed  on  the  sacral  région,  and
when  the  electrical  contractility  was  beginning  to  grow  feeble  in
the  paralysed  muscles.^

How  are  we  to  understand  so  rapid  a  development of  the  in-

1  See  unie,  '  Third  Lecture/  p.  88.

2  Idem,  p.  88.

3  Idem,  p.  87.

''  '  Berliner  Klin.  Wocliensclirift,'  t.  i,  No.  i,  1864.

5  '  Third  Lecture,'  p.  88.

^  Ollivier  (d'Angers),  loc.  cit.,  t.  ii,  p.  177.

"^  Rayer,  '  Traité  des  maladies  des  reins,'  t.  i,  p.  530  et  seq.  "  Accordinj^
to  my  observations,"  llayer  writes,  "  iu  the  diseases  of  tiie  spinal  cord,  when
the  urine  contained  iu  the  bladder  is  alkaline,  it  is  so,  not  because  of  a  décom-
position dilïicult  to  be  explained  without  atmospheric  contact,  and  in  a  short
space  of  time,  but  rather  by  a  vice  of  rénal  sécrétion  which  should  be  attributcd,
in  most  cases,  to  au  inflammatory  irritation  of  thèse  organs"

As  regards  the  description  of  altérations  in  the  urinary  passages,  consécutive
on  acute  affections  of  the  spinal  cord,  consult,  Engelken,  loe.  cit.,  p.  12..
Mannkopf,  'Bericht  liber  die  Versanimlung  zu  ILinnover,'  p.  259;  and  'Berlin.
Klin.  Woch.,'  t.  i.  Coni])arc,  Eosenstcin,  '  Nicrenkranklieiten,'  2  Ed.,  p.  287..
Berlin,  1870.

"  Ollivier  (d'Angers)  liad  alrcady  remarkcd  that,  in  trauniatic  paraplegia^
when  the  urine  alters  at  an  carly  period  the  eschars  arc  found  to  form  rapidlj
in  the  sacral  région, Loc.  cit.,  t.  ii,  p.  37.


THEORETIOAL  PORTION.  109

flammatory  lésions  of  tlie  urinary  passages  after  acute  affections^
spontaneous  or  tvaumatic,  of  the  spinal  cord  ?  Manifestly,  the
paralytic  rétention  of  tlie  urine  cannot  hère  be  pleaded^  at  least  not
as  the  sole,  nor  even  as  the  prédominant,  pathogenic  élément.
Neither  is  it  possible  to  attach  great  weight  to  the  opinion  ^  which
would  attribute  the  urine-changes,  in  such  circumstances,  to  the
introduction  of  unclean  cathéters,  carrying  vibriones.  In  point  of
fact,  the  introduction  of  vibriones  into  the  bladder  could  only  be  a
chance  occurrence,  whilst  the  appearance  of  ammoniacal,  san-
guineous,  and  purulent  urine,  in  the  course  of  acute  myelitis  is,
like  the  production  of  eschars,  what  may  be  termed  a  regular
fact.

The  notorious  insufficiency  of  the  pathogenic  conditions  just
enumerated,  renders  it  at  least  highly  probable  that  there  is  a  direct
action  of  the  nervous  System  engaged  in  the  production  of  the
affection  of  the  urinary  passages  which  we  are  considering.  The
cause  of  this  affection,  as  of  the  otlier  trophic  lésions  which  often
show  themselves  at  the  same  time,  would  therefore  be  the  irritation
of  certain  portions  of  the  spinal  centre,  and  more  particularly,  no
doubt,  of  the  grey  substance.

Theoretical  Portion.

Gentlemen, — In  the  foregoing  séries  of  studies,  we  hâve  often
had  occasion  to  acknowledge  that  the  development  of  the  trophic
disorders,  ensuing  after  lésions  of  the  nervous  System,  is  not  in
gênerai  (contrary  to  a  wide-spread  opinion)  the  conséquence  of
absence  of  action  of  différent  parts  of  that  System.  Ear  from  that,
thèse  affections  would  resuit,  in  our  view,  from  the  irritation  set
up,  under  certain  conditions,  either  in  the  peripheral  nerves  or  in
the  nervous  centres  themselves.  Tlius,  we  find  ourselves  possessing
a  view,  which  is  of  primary  importance  to  the  pathologist,  and  you,
without  further  explanation,  can  readily  divine  the  practical  déduc-
tions to  which  it  may  guide  us.

But  it  must  next  be  acknowledged  that  this  wholly  empirical
notion  marks  only  the  first  step  taken  towards  the  scientific  know-
ledge  of  the  phenomena,  which  observation  has  allowed  us  to  esta-
blish. Por,  if  we  know  the  mode  of  initial  altération  and  its  seat  as

'  Traube,  '  Munk.  Beiiiuer  Kliu.  Wocbeusch.,'  p.  19,  1864.


110  VASO-MOTOR  THEORT.

well^  there  remains  yet  to  be  determined^  in  tlie  first  place^  tlie
means  by  whicli  tliis  lésion  reacts  upon  tlie  perip lierai  parts.

Evidentlj,  this  reaction  is  produced  by  means  of  tlie  nerves,  but
that  also,  from  a  tlieoretical  point  of  view,  is  an  insufficient  datum.
It  is  necessary  to  endeavour  to  be  more  précise,  and  to  seek  what  is
tlie  élément,  in  that  pliysiologically  complex  totality  called  a  nerve,
by  whicli  the  transmission  is  operated,  and  also  the  mechanism  of
this  transmission.

I  approach  the  question  just  raised,  with  an  almost  absolute
certainty  of  not  being  able  to  answer  it  by  rigorous  arguments.
Perhaps,  I  should  hâve  avoided  it,  desirous  of  not  wasting  your
valuable  time,  if  I  were  not  convinced  that  it  behoves  us  at  least  to
show  the  inanity  of  a  theory  which  professes  to  résolve  it,  and
which  to-day  enjoys  an  almost  uiicontested  sway.

You  are  not  unaware,  gentlemen,  of  the  considérable  influence
which  has  beeii  attributed  to  the  vaso-motor  nerves  in  the  explana-
tion  of  pathological  phenomena.  I  am  far  from  wishing  to  ignore
the  fact  that  a  goodly  number  of  thèse  phenomena  do,  indeed,
directly  dépend  either  on  the  dilatation  or  on  the  contraction  of  the
smaller  vessels,  determined  by  nervous  influence.  But  in  so  far  as
the  trophic  disorders  which  form  the  object  of  our  studies  are  con-
cerned,  I  hope  that  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  show,  from  a  brief
examiuation,  that  the  vaso-vioior  theory  is  altogether  insufficient.

In  order  to  attain  this  aira,  I  am  induced  to  remind  you  of  some
of  the  expérimental  facts  which  hâve  unveiled  the  functions  of  thèse
centrifugal  nerves  whose  ultimate  ramifications  go  to  animate  the
muscular  coat  of  the  smaller  vessels.  I  shall,  in  the  first  place,
recall  the  phenomena  noticed  when  thèse  nerves  hâve  been  para-
lysed  in  conséquence  of  complète  section,  for  instance.

Section  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves^  has  the  immédiate  effect  of
producing  a  paralytic  dilatation  of  the  vessels  to  which  they  are  dis-
tributed.  Ilence  results  a  state  of  hyperœmia,  terracd  neuro-pur a-
lijtic,  which  has  been  especially  well  studied  in  cases  of  section  of
the  £rreat  syrapathctic  nerve  in  the  cervical  région,  but  which  is  to
be  found  with  almost  identical  characters  after  a  great  number  of
lésions  of  the  nervous  centres  or  of  the  peripheral  nerves.  The
conséquences  of  this  hyperœmia  are,  from  our  point  of  view,  par-

•  Tor  the  physiology  and  jmtliologj^  of  the  vaso-molor  nerves,  consult,
Vulpian,  "Leçons  sur  ra])parcil  vaso-moteur,"  rceciiillies  par  C.  Carville,
Paris,  1875  []>lol,c  lo  Ihe  second  ediliou).


NEURO-PAEALTTIC HYPEEiEMIA.  111

ticularly  worthy  of  interest.  You  know  that  the  part  answering  to
the  divided  nerve,  présents  a  relative  élévation  of  température,  which
appears  solely  to  resuit  from  the  afflux  of  a  greater  quantity  of
blood.  You  know  that  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  hyper-
asmic  territory  an  exaltation  seems  also  to  ensue  of  ail  the  vital
properties  of  every  élément  and  every  tissue.  At  least,  the  sen-
sitive  as  well  as  the  motor  nerves,  and  the  muscles  themselves  become
more  excitable,'  and  the  latter  préserve,  longer  than  is  usual  after
death  lias  occurred,  their  proper  contractility."  Nevertheless,  in
spite  of  thèse  new  conditions, — and  this  is  a  point  which  requires  ta
be  set  promiuently  forth, — the  accomplishment  of  the  intimate  acts
of  nutrition  appears  to  be  modified  in  nothing  essential,  Thus,  in
the  experiments  of  M.  Ollier^,  agreeing  in  that  respect  with  those  of
M.  Claude  Bernard,  there  is  not  found  to  supervene,  in  young  animais
after  section  of  the  great  sympathetic  in  the  neck,  either  an  ac-
célération or  an  exaggeration  in  the  growth  of  the  parts  of  the
face,  even  when  subjected  for  months  to  neuro-paralytic  hypersemia.
Nor  does  it  appear  that  this  hypersemia,  hovvever  intense  or  prolonged
it  may  be,  has  ever  the  effect,  save  under  exceptional  circumstances
to  be  hereafter  mentioned,  of  determining  by  itself  the  development
of  inflammatory  action.  And  if  the  expérimenter  iutervenes  and
applies  agents  capable  of  provokiug  inflammation,  the  morbid  pro-
cess  determined  by  this  influence  goes  through  its  course  in  the
hypersemic  parts  as  if  under  normal  conditions  ;  it  offers  no  spécial
characters,  except,  indeed,  that  the  injured  parts  tend  to  heal  with
greater  promptness.

,_^^  It  is  true  that,  in  référence  to  the  latter  points,  M.  SchifF  pro-
fesses a  very  différent  opinion.  He  affirms,  in  fact,  that  changes  of
nutrition  originate  in  the  hyperssmic  parts,  in  cases  of  vaso-motor
paralysis,  under  the  influence  of  the  slightest  local  mechanical
irritant,'^  and  that  inflammation  hère  readily  takes  on  a  destructive
character.^  But  upon  this  subject  he  is  in  direct  opposition  to
MM.  Snellen,  Virchow*'  and  O.  Weber.^

1  Brown-Séquard,  '  Lectures  on  Physiology  and  Patliology,'  Pliiladclpliia,
1860,  p.  1457-

-  Brown-Scquard,  hc.  cit. Josepb,  in  '  Ceutralblatt,'  1871,  No.  46.

3  OUier,  'Journal  de  la  Physiologie/  t.  vi,  p,  108.

"  Scliiff,  'Physiologie  de  la  digestion,'  p.  235,  t.  i.  'Lezioni  di  Fisiologia,'
Pirenze,  1866,  p.  35.  *  Schiff,  '  Digestion,'  t.  ii,  p.  423.

c  Virchow,  '  Cell-pathologie,'  4  éd.,  p.  158.

7  O.  Weber,  '  Centralblatt,'  1864,  p.  148.


113  NEURO-PAEALYTIC  HYPERiEMIA.

In  a  récent  expérimenta  besides,  Herr  Sinitziu  states  tliat  after  the
extirpation  of  the  superior  cervical  ganglion  on  one  side,  the  introduc-
vtion  of  aslender  pièce  of  glass  into  the  corneaof  the  same  side  caused
raerely  a  very  slight  inflammatory  reaction,  sometimes  scarcely  notice-
^able  ;  whilst  on  the  opposite  side,  in  the  selfsame  animal,  its  introduc-
tion caused,  on  the  contrary,  a  most  active  inflammation  with  purulent
infiltration  of  the  cornea,  iritis,  panophthalmia,  &c.i  M.  Claude
Bernard,  indeed,  long  since  pointed  out  that  ablation  of  the  supe-
rior cervical  ganglion  appears  to  retard  the  manifestation  of  the
nutritive  disorders  occasionally  determined  in  the  eye  by  section  of
the  lifth  pair  of  nerves,^  and  Herr  Sinitzin  has  arrived  at  the  same
.results  in  his  experiments.

Prom  this  you  may  perceîve  that,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of
Professor  Schiff,  neuro-paralytic  hypersemia  does  not  create  in  the
parts  it  occupies,  a  peculiar  prédisposition  to  the  production  of
trophic  dérangement.  It  would  even  seem  that  thèse  parts  are
better  able  to  resist  the  action  of  disorganising  causes  and  that  any
disorder  set  up  there  is  more  speedily  repaired  than  elsewhere.

In  man,  so  far  as  this  question  is  concerned,  little  différence  is  to
be  found  occurring,  from  what  is  observed  in  animais.  At  ail  events,
«euro-paralytic  hypersemia  has  been  seen  to  persist  for  a  long  period
in  parts  of  the  body,  as  for  instance  in  the  face,  without  any  nutri-
tive disorder  ever  supervening.  M.  Perroud  has  collected  a  certain
number  of  cases  of  this  kind,  in  a  memoir  read  in  1864,  before  the
Médical  Society  of  Lyons.  It  suffices,  indeed,  to  glance  at  the
numerous  works  which,  of  late  years,  hâve  been  published  upon
Angioneuroses  to  perceive  that  nutritive  disorders  are  a  rather  rare
accompaniment  of  neuro-paralytic  hypersemia.  A  new  argument  may,
perhaps,  be  added  in  support  of  the  thesis  which  we  uphold.  It  is
this  :  The  élévation  of  température,  tested  by  means  of  a  thermo-
meter,  is,  we  hâve  said,  a  phenomenon  indissolubly  linkeJ  with  the
existence  of  partial  hypersemias  of  neuro-paralytic  origin.  Tins
local  hyperthermia  should  necessarily  exist  in  parts  presenting  the
trophic  dérangements  we  havc  described,  if  thèse  were  really  dépen-
dent on  a  neuro-paralytic  cause.  Now,  that  docs  not  happcn,  as  a
gênerai  fact.  If  a  marked  élévation  of  température  has  been  many
timcs  observed  in  those  régions  of  the  body  where  an  éruption  of

»  Sinitzin, 'Ccntralblatt:/  1871,  p.  i6i.

^  Claude  Bernard,  '  Système  Nerveux,'  t.  ii,  p.  65,  1865.


NEUEO-PAKALYTIO  HITEE^MIA.  113

zona,  consécutive  on  neuralgia,  or  neuritis  liad  developed  ;i  on  the
other  haud  it  may  besaid  that  irritative  lésions  of  the  péri pheral  uerves,
in  tlie  conditions  when  they  usually  détermine  trophic  disorders,
appear  to  be  accompanied  rather  by  a  lowering  of  tlie  thermal
standard  than  by  its  élévation.  This  lowering  bas  beeu  observed
at  every  period  of  the  nerve-affection  ;  it  has  been  noted  near
the  commencement/  still  oftener  in  the  advanced  stages.^  When
spinal  lésions  are  coucerned,  it  is  true  that  occasionally  the  members
subject  to  trophic  troubles,  rapid  muscular  atrophy,  buUar  éruptions,
or  eschars,  exhibit  a  more  or  less  marked  élévation  of  température.^
But  at  other  times,  perhaps  in  the  majority  of  instances,  this  phenom-
enon  is  absent  ;  thus  it  is  absent  in  partial  myelitis,^  and  in  infantile
paralysis  f — the  same  rule  holds  good  for  cases  of  slow  évolution,
such  as,  for  instance,  progressive  muscular  atrophy.7

You  observe,  from  what  précèdes,  that  the  trophic  disorders
connected  with  irritative  lésions  of  the  nervous  centres  may,  in  a
considérable  number  of  cases  at  least,  occur  without  that  élévation
of  température  whicli  should,  I  repeat,  be  necessarily  présent  in  ail
cases,  if  they  really  originate  in  hypersemia,  consécutive  on  paralysis
of  the  vaso-motor  nerves.

1  Horuer,  quoted  by  0.  Wyss,  'Archiv  der  Heilkunde,'  1871.  See  note  to
p.  563.  Charcot,  '  Névralgie  du  nerf  cubital.  Eruption  du  Zona  sur  le  trajet  du
nerf  affecté  ;  examen  thermométrique,'  Thèse  de  Mougeot,  Paris,  1867,  p.  loi.

-  Polet,  "  Cas  de  Contusion  du  plexus  bracliial,  observé  par  M.  Lanuelougue,"
*  Etude  sur  la  température  des  parties  paralysées,'  Paris,  1867,  p.  7.

^  Hutchinson, /oc.  Cî7.  Earle,  '  Medico-Chirurg.  Trans.,'  vol.  vii,  1816,  p.
173.  Yellowly,  ici.,  t.  iii.  W.  B.  Woodmann,  in  '  Sydenham  Society's  Traus-
aclions.'  Translation  of  Wundeiiich,  'On  Température  in  Diseases,'  p.  152.
W.  Mitchel,  'Injuries  of  Nerves,'  Philadelphia,  1872,  p.  175.  In  two  cases
of  nerve-wounds  witli  "  glossy  skin,"  the  région  occupied  by  the  trophic
lésion  was  from  one  to  two  degrees  warnier  than  the  corresponding  région  of
the  healthy  limb.  But  above  this  point,  the  thermometer  marked  ouc  degree
lower  than  on  the  healthy  limb.  H.  Eischer,  '  Ueber  trophische  Storungeu
nach  Nervenverletzungen  an  den  Extremitaten,"  in  '  Berliner  Klin.  Woch-
enschr.,'  1871,  No.  13.  The  température  of  theliinbs,  ou  which  the  most  varied
trophic  disorders  occur,  is,  at  first,  higher  than  that  of  the  healthy  members,
afterwards  it  is  relatively  lower  ;  but  there  are  many  exceptions  to  this  rule.

•*  Levier,  "  Cas  d'  Hématomyélie,"  loc.  cit. ^  Mannkoff,  loc.  cit.

^  Ducheune  (de  Boulogne),  loc.  cit.,  3rd  édition,  p.  398.

"^  Landois  und  Mosler,  in  'Berliner  Klinisch.  Woclienschr.,'  1868,  s.  45.
Eor  examples  of  depressed  température  supervening  after  spinal  iujury,  see  J.
Hutchinson  :  "  Température,  &c.,  after  crushing  of  the  cervical  spinal  cord,"
'Lancet,'pp.  713,  747. 1875. (S.)

8


114  NEURO-PAEALTTIC  HYPEK^MIA.

Heuce  it  follows  that  neuro-paralytic  liypersemia  and  tlie  produc-
tion of  tropliic  dérangements  are,  in  ordinary  conditions,  plienomena
independent  of  eacli  other.  But  as  we  suggested,  a  little  ago,
there  are  circumstances  in  which,  contrary  to  the  usual  rule^  local
nutrition  may  receive  a  serions  blow  from  tlie  mère  fact  that  the  part
has  been  withdrawn  from  vaso-motor  innervation.  This  happens,
as  experiments  attest,  when  the  whole  organism  lias  been  subjected
to  potent  debilitating  causes.  Thus,  a  vigorous  animal  has  long  had
the  great  sympathetic  nerve  divided  on  one  side  of  the  neck  ;
nevertheless,  no  injury  has  been  experienced  in  the  parts  corre-
sponding  to  the  distribution  of  the  divided  nerve.  But  let  the  animal
fall  sick,  or  be  deprived  of  food,  then  the  scène  changes  immedi-
ately  and  we  see,  says  M.  Claude  Bernard,  inflammatory  phenomena
ensue  in  that  side  of  the  face  which  corresponds  with  the  expéri-
mental section.  On  that  side,  even  without  the  intervention  of  any
external  agent  whatever,  the  conjunctiva  and  the  pituitary  mem-
brane rapidly  begin  to  suppurate.^

It  is  legitimate  to  suppose  that  the  animais  in  which  Professor
Schiff  saw  trophic  lésions  supervene,  consecutively  on  neuro-paralytic
hypersemia,  under  the  influence  of  the  slightest  mechanical  irritation,
had  been  suffering  from  the  debilitating  conditions  noticed  by  M.
Claude  Bernard.  In  man,  the  same  concurrence  of  circumstances
ought  necessarily  to  détermine  efl^ects  analogous  to  those  observed  in
animais,  and  we  may,  indeed,  question  whether  some  of  our  trophic
dérangements  are  not  really  produced  in  this  manner.  Such  is,
perhaps,  the  case  as  regards  the  acide  hed-sore  of  apoplectic
patients.  Hère,  in  fact,  the  gênerai  condition  is  most  unfavourable,
and  the  gluteal  eschar  occupies  precisely  that  side  of  the  body  which,
on  account  of  the  motor  paralysis,  présents  a  relative  élévation  of
température,  evidently  coimected  with  vaso-motor  hypersemia.'-^

However  it  be,  this  pathogenic  interprétation  can  hâve  but  a
very  restricted  application,  for  acute  bed-sore  arising  from  lésion
of  the  nervous  centres  may  appear  in  many  cases,  after  hemi-
lateral  lésions  of  the  spinal  cord  for  example,^  on  parts  of  the
body  where  the  vaso-motor  innervation  is  not  visibly  afl'ected  and
apart  from  every  symptom  indicative  of  great  dépression  of  the
organism.

*  Claude  Bernard,  'Physiologie  du  Système  Nerveux,' t.  ii,  p.  535,  Paris,
1858. 'Médical  Tiincs  aud  Gazette,'  p.  79,  t.  ii,  1861.
'■'  Sce  ante^  Tliird  Lecture,  p.  76.  3  Hjij_  p_  g^^


IRKiTATION  or VASO-MOTOR  NEEVES.  115

We  hâve  now  to  enquire  whether  tlie  irritation  of  the  vaso-motor
nerves  eau  account  for  the  phenomena  which  are  not  explained  by
the  paralysis  of  the  same  nerves.  Let  us  first  take  expérimental
irritation.  Partial  ischsemia,  of  a  more  or  less  intense  character,  is
the  most  prominent  resuit  of  this  irritation  :  it  may  be  carried  so
far  that  not  even  a  drop  of  blood  flows  on  pricking  the  skin.i  The
parts,  in  which  vascular  spasm  thus  impedes  the  circulation,  grow
pale  and  cold  ;  their  vital  activity  decreases  ;  the  excitability  of  the
muscles  and  of  the  nerves  falls  belovv  the  normal  standard. -  It  is
natural  to  think  that  grave  nutritive  lésions,  teuding  to  necrobiosis
or  to  sphacelus,  should  necessarily  resuit  froni  the  prolongation  of
such  a  state.  But  it  is  important  to  observe  that  this  is  commonly
a  question  of  a  temporary  phenomenon,  lasting  at  longest  for  a  few
hours  only.  For  by  the  very  fact  of  the  prolongation  of  the  irri-
tation the  action  of  the  nerve  seems  to  exhaust  itself,  and  hyperae-
raia,  geuerally,  soon  folio ws  on  anœmia.3  However,  by  reproducing,
at  short  intervais,  the  irritation  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves,  it  is  pos-
sible to  cause  the  ischeemic  state  to  predominate  for  a  certain  time.
Still  I  do  not  beheve  that  aïiy  trophic  lésion  would  be  ever  experi-
mentally  produced,  by  this  method.  Herr  0.  Weber  who,  by  means
of  an  ingenious  apparatus,  says  he  lias  kept  up,  for  nearly  a  week,  irri-
tation of  the  cervical  sympathetic  nerve,  of  a  permanent  character,  so
to  speak,  and  marked  by  a  thermal  decrease  of  2°  C,  has  not  seen
the  slightest  trace  of  nutritive  trouble  superveniug  in  the  corre-
sponding  side  of  the  face.''  Cases  counected  with  human  pathology
yield  the  same  testimony.  Thus  it  is  not  rare  to  find,  in  certain
cases  of  angioneuroses,  amongst  hysterical  patients  for  example,
a  very  intense  and  very  persistent  partial  ischsemia;  yet  trophic
troubles  never  show  themselves,  under  such  circumstances.^  As  to
the  instances  of  spontaneous  gangrené,  which  hâve  been  attributed
to  vascular  spasm  they  would  not  hâve,  to  judge  from  my  own
observations,  the  signification  assigned  them  ;  for,  in  ail  cases  of  this
kind  which  I  hâve happened  to meet  Avith,  I  hâve found  the

1  Brown-Séquard,  'Course  of  Lectures,'  &c.,  p.  147,  Philadelpliia.
-  Brown-Séquard,  loc.  cit.,  p.  142.

^  Waller,  'Proc.  Royal  Society,  London,"  Vol.  ii,  1S60-72,  p.  89  et  seq.
■»  O.  Weber,  '  Centralblatt,'  No.  10,  1864,  p.  147.

*  Liégeois,  'Société  de  Biologie,'  1S59,  p.  274. Charcot,  iu  'Mouvement
Médical,'  Nos.  25,  26,  ire  série;  No.  i,  nouvelle  série,  1872.


116  CONSECUTIVE  TSCH^MIA. — DILATOR  NERVES.

calibre  of  the  vessel  occluded  by  an  altération  of  tlie  arterial  walls
•or  obstructed  by  a  tlirombus.^

From  tlie  foregoing  observations  you  perceive  that  it  is  neither
to  a  paralytic  nor  to  an  irritative  affection  of  tlie  vaso-motor  nerves,
properly  so  caîled,  that  we  should  attribute  tlie  tropliic  disorders
which  supervene  in  conséquence  of  lésions  of  tlie  nervous  system.

Physiological  experiments.  in  thèse  latter  years,  hâve  revealed
the  existence  of  centrifugal  nervous  filaments,  the  irritation  of  which
has  the  effect  of  determining  dilatation  of  the  blood-vessels,  and
consequently  hypereemia  of  the  région  to  which  thèse  nerves  are
distributed.

Whilst  irritation  of  the  common  vaso-motor  nerves  produces  is-
«hsemia,  irritation  of  the  dilator  nerves  détermines,  on  the  contrary,
a  more  or  less  intense  hypersemia.  The  chorda  tympani  may  be  con-
sidered,  at  the  présent  moment,  as  the  prototype  of  dilator  nerves-
But  nerves  endowed  with  sitnilar  properties  exist  in  the  face,"  in
the  penis,3  and  in  the  abdomen.*  There  are  probably  others  in
-existence  also  in  many  parts  of  the  body.

"We  are  far  from  possessing  a  certain  knowledge  of  the  mode  of
action  of  thèse  nerves.  According  to  the  hypothesis  adopted  by  M.
Claude  Bernard,  this  is  how  we  should  explain  the  remarkable
afflux  of  arterial  blood  which  takes  place  in  the  submaxillary  gland,
under  the  influence  of  the  chorda  tympani.  In  the  opinion  of  that
eminent  physiologist,  the  irritation  of  this  nerve  is  transmitted  to
the  little  ganglionic  masses  which  are  distributed  in  great  numbers
on  the  intra-glandular  extremities  of  the  nerve.  Thèse  would,  in
their  turn,  react  by  a  sort  of  nervous  interférence'^  on  the  nerve-
filaments  of  the  great  sympathetic  or  vaso-constrictor,  and  paralyse
their  action.  Thus  the  chorda  tympani,  and  the  same  doubtless
should  be  said  of  ail  the  other  dilator  nerves,  would  play  the  part
of  a  check  nerve  in  relation  to  the  vaso^motors.  lience,  as  you
see,  the  resuit  of  the  action  of  the  dilator  nerves  would,  according

'  See  the  Tliesis  of  M.  Beuni,  'Recherches  sur  quelques  points  de  la
gangrcuc  spontanée,'  Paris,  1867. Obs.  v,  xi,  xvii.

-  Claude  Bernard,  'Revue  Scientifique,'  t.  ii,  2  série,  1872.  Schill",  'Di-
gestion,' t.  i,  p.  252.

■*  Ereetor  nerves  of  Eckhardt,  'Beitragc  zur  Anat.  uud  Phys.,'  t.  ii.  Luven,
'Bericht  der  Sachs.  Ges.,'  1866.

■•  Claude  Bernard,  loc.  ci/.

^  Claude  Bernard,  toc,  ciL,  p.  120^.


DILATOR  NEEVES.  117

to  this  tlieory,  be  simply  vaso-motor  paralysis.' Now,  if  it  he  true
tliat  vaso-motor  paralysis,  even  wheii  carried  very  far,  as  happens

'  For  a  cliiiical  illustration  in  the  liuman  subject  of  the  pbysiological  tlieory,
see  "  Note  sur  la  Paralysie  vaso-motrice  généralisée  des  membres  supérieurs,"
parle  Dr.  Sigerson  (Publications  du  '  Progrès  Médical  '),  1874,  Adrien  Delahaye,
Paris  ;  or  Translation  by  Dr.  Bariiard  Ellis,  New  York.

The  following  are  some  of  the  principal  featnres  of  this  case,  to  which  Dr.
Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  invited  the  writer's  attention,  and  which,  at  the
request  of  that  eminent  physician,  was  made  the  subject  of  a  detailed  study,
from  pathological  and  physiological  stand-points.  Ths  extract  is  taken  from
Dr.  Barnard  Ellis's  translation  :

"  History. — The  patient  C — ,  aged  50,  a  copper-trimmer  by  trade,  is  a  man
of  robust  cpustitution,  and  florid  complexion,  who  bas  hitherto  enjoyed  excel-
lent health.  He  bas  had  neither  cough,  nor  colic,  nor  any  of  the  syniptoms
usually  assigued  to  copper-poisouiug,  whether  the  heart,  the  respiratory,  or  the
digestive  organs,  be  considered.  Tlie  hands,  which  are  in  an  abnormal  condi-
tion, présent  no  lésion  except  the  cicatrix  of  an  old  whitlow  on  the  left  fore-
finger.  He  came  to  be  treated  for  impotence,  and  that,  at  first,  was  ail  he
complained  of  ;  but  other  phenomena  were  soon  discovered,  some  of  which
were  traced  back  several  years.  By  careful  questioning  the  following  facts
were  elicited.  In  1872  he  was  aware  of  a  weakness  in  the  arnis  and  legs,  but
niost  especially  in  the  knees.  This  sensation,  however,  neither  became  localised
uor  remained  constant  ;  it  seemed  to  Ait  through  ail  bis  members.  In  1873,
he  noticed  that  it  predominated  in  the  lefc  kuee.  This  uneasy  sensation,  which
gave  no  pain,  and  was  transient,  seemed  to  ascend  along  the  leg  from  the  calf
to  the  thigh;  and  the  proof  that  it  was  not  mcrely  a  subjective  sensation
lies  in  the  fact  that  the  weakness  of  the  leg  increased  so  much  at  times  that
he  was  obliged  to  sit  down.  He  usually  recovered,  however,  in  a  few  minutes,
and  was  able  to  go  about  his  work  as  before.  No  aggravation  of  his  symptoms
occurred  when  he  walked  out  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  exercise  did  him  good,  and
after  a  brisk  walk  of  half  an  hour  he  felt  a  marked  sensation  of  pleasurable
ease.

This  disorder,  as  we  see,  was  intermittent,  showing  itself  after  intervais  of
comparative  health.  In  January  last  (1874),  however,  he  was  attacked,  in  a
more  enduring  manner,  in  both  upper  and  lower  extremities, — the  feeling  of
debility  being  greatest  in  the  left  arm  and  right  leg.  So  much  was  he  enfeebled
that,  whereas  when  formerly  attacked  he  could  lift  a  weight  of  about  two  or
three  pounds,  he  became  at  this  time  unable  even  to  keep  his  forearm  flexed  on
his  arm.  He  preserved  the  power  of  flexion,  but  not  the  power  of  maintaining  it,
as,  in  a  few  seconds,  the  forearm  would  fall  of  its  own  weight.  At  this  stage,
the  niuscular  force  of  the  hands,  tested  by  the  dynamometer  of  Dr.  Duchenne
(de  Boulogne)  was  équivalent,  on  an  average,  to  43  kilogrammes,  or  94'6  Ibs.

The  colour  of  his  hands  had  become  a  deep  red,  and  this  florid  flusli  ex-
tended  up  the  forearms,  gradually  diminishing  in  inteusity.  Let  us  add  that,
notwitbstanding  the  vascular  disturbauce,  there  was  nothing  that  could  be  re-
ferred  to  the  existence  of  scleroderma,  to  which  there  was  some  superficial


118  DILATOE  NERVES.

for  instance  in  cases  of  complète  section  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves,  is
not  a  cause  of  trophic  disorders,  the  same  rule  must  plainly  hold
good  as  regards  the  paralysis  produced  under  the  influence  of  the
dilator  nerves.  But,  gentlemen,  as  you  will  see  farther  on,  the
mode  of  action  of  the  dilator  nerves  may  be  considered  from  an
altogether  difl'erent  point  of  view.

resemblance.  The  patient  complained  of  great  beat  in  tbe  liands  and  fore-
arms,  and  this  increase  of  température  was  plainly  perceptible  to  ail  -wbo
toiicbed  tbeni  ;  and  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  tbeir  sensibility  was  so
sjrcatly  augmentée!,  that  everytbing  be  toucbed — instruments,  wood,  or  paper —
appeared  to  bim  as  cold  as  ice.  He  was  troubled  with  formication  in  tbe
forearms,  wbicb  iucreased  to  a  painful  degree  wben  be  rubbed*bis  bands
together  as  wben  wasbing  tbem.  Heat  aggravated  and  cold  diminisbed  tbe
pain, — facts  of  wbicb  be  bad  become  aware  on  using  cold  and  warm  water.

As  to  tbe  inferior  extremities,  tbey  preseuted  différent  pbenomena.  Tbere  was,
indeed,  debility,  as  bas  been  remarked,  but  tbe  symptoms  of  tbe  disease  seem
to  bave  dccussated.  Whilst  tbe  left  arm  was  tbe  weaker,  tbe  riglit  leg  was
tbe  more  fccble.  Instead  of  tbe  bypera?stbesia  wbicb  we  observed  in  tbe
bands,  tbere  was  a  notable  loss  of  sensibility  in  tbe  rigbt  foot,  so  tbat  be  did
not  feel  tbe  ground  wben  walking.  Tbis  foot  seemed  to  bim  asleep  or  be-
numbed.  Tbere  was,  at  times,  sligbt  formication  in  tbe  rigbt  leg,  but  very
little  in  tbe  left.  Nor  was  tbere  a  bypotbermal  condition  bere,  as  in  the  upper
extremities.  Altbougb  tbe  température  of  tbe  soles  of  bis  feet  seemed  normal
to  bimself,  duriug  tbe  daytime,  it  bad  been  remarked  tbat,  wben  be  was  lying
down  and  during  tbe  niglit,  tbcy  were  ice-cold  to  tbe  toucli.

In  tbe  lunibar  région,  be  bad  experienced  an  intense  itcbiness,  as  if  be  bad
been  beatcn  witli  ncttles.  Tbis  unpleasant  sensation  was  not  constant,  and  bad
only  appeared  Cve  or  six  times  in  ail,  and  tben  only  in  tbe  moruingand  at  nigbt,
wben  be  was  dressing  or  uudressing  aud  exposed  to  the  cold  air — pbenomena
oceasionally  présent  in  tbe  case  of  persons  suffering  from  urticaria.  Tbere
were  no  wbeals  perceptible.  It  is  bighly  interesting  to  note  tbat  wben  this
■urtication  niade  its  appearance  in  the  loins,  tbe  formication  disappcarcd  from
the  upper  extremities.

As  tbere  was  reason  to  suspect  tbe  existence  of  ocuhu-  troubles,  we  iuterro-
gated  bis  meniory  and  found  tbat  be  bad  observed  somcthing  like  a  mist  before
bis  eyes,  cspecially  at  uight.  This  disordor  bad,  iu  fact,  rcaehed  such  a  point
in  January,  1874,  tbat  lie  bad  given  up  attenipting  to  read.  On  tlie  left  eye-
ball,  a  barmlcss  pterygium  was  remarked.  Applying  the  opbthalmoscope,
Profcssor  Panas  found  that  tbe  fundus  of  tlie  rigbt  cye  was  normal,  whilst
tiierc  was  a  very  markcd  excavation  of  the  papilla  of  the  left  cye,  tbe  fundus
of  whieh  was  slightly  congested.

Let  us  note  in  conclusion,  that  during  the  conlinuancc  of  iiis  ailinent  be
complained  of  great  thirst,  and  of  uiuiswal  drowsiucss  aftcr  meals."

This  patient  rccovcred  under  trcatment  by  faradisation,  as  relatcd  in  tbe
trcatise  already  mcntioned  (S.).


SECEETOR  NEEVES  :  LUDWIG  S  EESEAEOHES. 119

I  would  remind  you  of  tlie  fundamental  experiments  of  Ludwig,
relative  to  tlie  influence  of  certain  nerves  on  tlie  sécrétion  of  tlie  sub-
maxillary  gland.^  Notwitlistanding  tlie  criticisms  wliicli  hâve  assailed
tlie  conclusions  drawn  from  his  experiments  by  this  celebrated  phy-
siologiste thèse  conclusions  do  not  appear  to  hâve  been  shaken.  I
hâve  to  request  your  permission  to  enter  into  some  détails  in  ré-
férence to  this  subject  ;  they  are  absolutely  necessary  for  the  object
we  hâve  in  view.

When  you  irritate  the  peripheral  end  of  the  nerve  proceeding  to
the  submaxillary  gland — a  nerve  supplied  as  we  now  know  from  the
chorda  tympani — the  following  phenomena  are  observed.  A  very
abuiidant  sécrétion  of  saliva  is  produced, — the  quantity  may  be  so
large  that,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  the  volume  of  saliva  secreted
shall  greatly  exceed  the  volume  of  the  gland  itself.  This  fact  demon-
strates  at  the  outset  that  we  hâve  not  to  deal  hère  with  a  simple  phe-
nomenon  of  excrétion,  or  expulsion  of  previously  secreted  saliva.

According  to  the  views  of  Stilling  and  of  Henle,  which  prevailed  at
the  time  Ludwig  published  his  first  investigations,  one  might  be
tempted  to  explain  the  phenomeuon  in  question  by  admitting  that
the  irritated  glandular  nerve  acts  upon  the  veins  of  the  gland,  caus-
ing  tliem  to  contract.  The  augmentation  of  the  tension  of  the  blood,
conséquent  on  the  venous  contraction,  would,  by  this  hypothesis,  be
the  cause  of  the  augmentation  of  the  salivary  sécrétion.  But
Ludwig  lias  shown  that  ligature  of  the  veins,  without  concomitant
irritation  of  the  glandular  nerve,  does  not  increase  the  sécrétion  of
saliva. That  second  hypothesis  should,  therefore,  also  be  eliminated.

But  perhaps  the  irritation  of  the  glandular  nerve  Jwhich,  as  you
are  aware,  lias  the  effect  of  inducing  dilatation  of  the  arteries  may
détermine  the  sécrétion,  simply  because  it  momentarily  augments
the  afflux  of  arterial  blood  into  the  gland?  This  argument  is
reiidered  invalid  by  an  experiment,  made  by  Ludwig,  which  shows
that,  during  irritation,  the  manometric  pressure  in  Wharton^s  duct
is  superior  to  the  pressure  of  the  blood  in  the  arterial  conduits.
Besides,  the  hypersécrétion  of  saliva  from  irritation  of  the  chorda
tympani  is  still  exhibited,  after  ligature  of  the  arteries  supplying
the  gland — in  the  case  of  an  animal  killed  by  bleeding — or  even  in

'  Ludwig,  'Mitth.  der  Zuricli  Naturforscli.,'  1851.  '  Zeitsclir.  fur  rat.  Med.,'
n.  f.  Bd.  i,  p,  255.  'Wiener  Med.  Wochensclir./  1860,  x,  No.  28,  p.  483.
See  also  the  works  published  by  Ludwig  in  co-operatiou  with  Bêcher,  E,ahn,  and
Gianuzzi.


120  LUDWICt's  eesearohes.

tlie  case  of  a  head  separated  from  the  body.  Let  us  also  add  tliis
most  remarkable  fact,  namely,  the  saliva  and  the  venous  blood
which  flow  forth  from  the  submaxillary  gland,  whilst  the  glandular
nerve  is  being  stimulated,  présent,  as  MM.  Ludwig  and  Spiess^  hâve
shown,  a  higher  température  than  the  arterial  blood  which  passeS'^
into  the  gland."

Judging  from  the  gênerai  bearing  of  thèse  results,  it  appears  évi-
dent that  the  influence  of  the  nervous  System  on  the  submaxillary
sécrétion  cannot  be  explained  by  the  simple  phenomena  of  vascular
dilatation  and  constriction.  We  are  induced  to  recognise  in  the
glandular  nerve  a  two-fold  property,  since,  in  addition  to  its
influence  over  the  vessels,  the  dilatation  of  which  it  détermines,
it  also  exerts  an  immédiate  action  on  those  parts  of  the  gland
which  accomplish  the  chemical  act  of  sécrétion,  or,  in  other
words,  upon  the  secreting  cells.  This  influence  of  the  nerve  upon
sécrétion  seems,  indeed,  to  be  the  fandamental  fact,  for  it  shows
itself,  in  conséquence  of  excitation,  even  when  the  effects  of  the
concomitant  dilatation  are  annihilated.  As,  on  the  other  hand,  it
does  not  appear  possible,  experimentally,  to  suppress  separately
the  secretor  action,  leaving  the  dilator  action  alone  persisting,^  it
is  legitimate  to  suppose  that  the  latter  dépends  on  the  former  as  a
more  or  less  direct  conséquence.

We  had,  therefore,  reason  to  inquire  what  might  be  the  link
of  connection  between  the  excitation  of  the  secretor  éléments  deter-
mined  by  stimulation  of  the  nerve,  and  the  hyperœmia  which
follows  that  excitation.  Several  physiologists  hâve  thought  tliat
we  hâve  hère  to  deal  with  an  attraction  which  the  secretor  éléments

1  Ludwig  imd  Spiess,  '  Sitzungsber.,'  d.  v.,  Ak.  Math.  CL,  1857,  Bd.  xxv,  p.

584.

-  In  référence  to  tins,  see  a  Lecture  of  M.  Vulpian,  '  Revue  des  Cours
Scientifiques,'  3rd  année,  1865-1866,  p.  741.

^  By  récent  experiments,  however,  M.  Ileidenhain  seems  to  liave  been  able
to  demonstrate  tliat,  in  tlie  chorda  tympani,  différent  uerve-fibrils  are  devoted
to  sécrétion  and  to  circulation  in  tlie  submaxillary  gland.  Hc  states  that  iu
dogs,  placcd  undcr  the  influence  of  woorari,  after  injection  into  the  jugular
veiu  of  a  dose  of  atropine  sufficient  to  completely  paralyse  the  cardiac  filaments
of  the  pneumogastric,  the  stimulation  of  the  chorda  tympani  no  longer  deter-
mined  the  sliglitest  sécrétion.  Nevcrtheless,  tliere  was  an  accélération  of  tl!£
venous  currcnt  which  did  not  notably  differ  from  the  accélération  determined
by  irritation  of  the  chorda,  beforc  poisoning.  'Archives  de  riiysiologie,'  4
Juillet,  1872.


THEOEY  OF  ATTKACTION.  121

of  the  gland  sliould  exert  upon  the  blood.  "So  tliat  to  tlie  force
hitherto  known  as  assisting  the  return  of  the  circulating  bbod
to  the  heart  and  which  is  terraed  vis  a  tergo,  we  should  add  a
new  attractive  force  in  corrélation  with  the  intimate  nutrition  of
the  éléments,  a  force  named  by  many  authors  vis  a  f route '^^  Is
this  a  purely  theoretical  conception,  unsupported  by  experiments,.
and  merely  destined  to  cloak  our  ignorance  ?  By  no  means.  The
Works  of  H.  Weber,  Schuler,  Lister,  &c.,2  contain  numerous  expéri-
mental facts  calculated  to  render  évident  the  attraction  which  the
tissues  can  exercise,  under  certain  conditions,  over  the  circulating
blood.  I  will  cite  two  facts,  of  this  sort,  as  examples,  in  which
the  phenomena  may  be  studied  apart  from  any  intervention  of  the
nervous  System.  I  borrow  them  from  a  lecture  on  the  Theory  of
Sécrétions,  delivered  in  the  jMuseum  of  Natural  History,  by
Professer  Vulpian.^

If  you  eut  ail  the  nerves  of  a  frog's  limb  and  then  determnie  an
excitation  by  placing  a  small  drop  of  nitric  acid  on  the  skin  of  the
web  of  its  foot,  a  more  or  less  intense  hyperœmia  will  be  produced
in  this  point,  at  the  end  of  a  certain  period.  The  second  fact
is  conclusive.  An  &^g  on  the  fourth  day  of  incubation  présents
a  very  distinct  vascularity  of  the  umbilical  membrane.  At  that
period,  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  question  of  nervous  influence.
Now,  if  you  place  a  small  drop  of  nicotine  on  any  point  of
tliis  vascular  area,  there  ensues  around  this  point  so  great  a
congestion  that  almost  ail  the  blood  flows  thither.  In  truth,  this
hypersemia,  this  stasis  by  irritation  of  the  tissues,  displays  itself,  at
first  glanée,  with  I  know  not  what  semblance  of  a  metaphysical
conception.  But  an  effort  bas  long  since  been  made  to  give  an
interprétation  of  this  phenomenon  on  physico-chemical  grounds.
Thus,  in  1844,  Dr.  Draper^  remarked  that  where  a  capillary  tube
contains  two  liquids,  of  différent  natures,  if  one  of  them  hâve  a
greater  chemical  affinity  for  the  parietes  of  the  tube  than  the  other,
motion  ensues,  and  the  liquid  which  has  the  greater  affinity  pushes
the  other  before  it.  The  arterial  blood  having  a  greater  affinity  for
the  tissues  than  the  venous  blood,  saturated  with  the  products  of

'  Vulpian,  'Revue  des  Cours  Scientifiques,'  t.  iii,  p.  744.
2  See  O.  Welier,  '  Haudbucli  der  Chirurgerie,'  t.  i,  p.  m.
^  Vulpian,  toc.  cit.,  p.  743.

*  Draper,  "  A  Treatise  ou  the  Forces  which  Produce,"  &c  ,  New  York,  1844^
Savory,  'British  and  Foreigu  Review,'  t.  xvi,  1855,  p.  19.


122  IRRITATION  01^  GLAND-NERVES.

disintegration,  it  should  follow  that  tlie  venous  blood  would  be
driven  b^k.  According  to  this  hypothesis,  it  would  suffice  to
quicken  the  cliemical  process  of  nutrition,  in  order  to  increase  the
intensity  of  motion  (or  afflux),  and  lierein  the  action  of  the  nerves
may  intervene.  The  ])henomena  of  stasis  are  capable  of  being
explained  in  an  analogous  manner,  by  an  appeal  to  the  laws  of
osmosis  (blood-stasis,  by  diffusion)  ,i

However  it  be,  Avhatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena,
you  perceive  that  the  attraction  which  the  tissues,  under  the  influ-
ence of  certain  agents,  exercise  upon  the  blood  is  a  fact  experimentally
established,  w-holly  apart  from  any  action  of  the  nervous  system.
Now,  in  order  to  apply  this  datum  to  the  case  of  the  submaxillary
gland,  it  suffices  to  admit  that  the  glandular  nerve,  when  subjected
to  excitation,  induces  a  modification  of  the  intimate  nutrition  of  the
secretor  cells — and  then,  in  conséquence  of  this  change,  vascular
dilatation  would  take  place.

Anatomy  seems,  besides,  to  throw  a  new  light  upon  the  question
by  showing  that  the  terminations  of  the  glandular  nerves  penetrate
into  the  secretor  cells. ^  Herr  Heidenhain  has  even  endeavoured  to
demonstrate  that  a  gland,  of  which  the  nerves  hâve  been  subjected
to  a  somewhat  prolonged  irritation,  présents  a  histological  constitu-
tion differing  in  some  respects  from  that  of  a  gland  in  a  state  of
repose.  The  old  cells,  termed  mucous  cells,  appear  in  fact,  after  the
irritation,  to  be  replaced  by  young  cells  of  récent  formation.^  If  the
views  of  Herr  Heidenhaiu  be  confirmed,  we  should  attribute  to  the
nerve  a  direct  influence,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  development  of  gland-
cells.*

The  hypothesis  which  has  just  been  formulated  in  relation  to
secretor  nerves,  might  apparently  be  extended  to  other  nerves  in
which  expérimental  physiology  has discerned  the  property  of  de-

'  O.  Webcr,  loc.  cit.

"-  E.  F.  W.  Plùgcr,  "  Das  Nervengewebe  der  Speiclicldriise,"  in  Stricker's
Ilandbucli,  t.  i,  p.  313.

'  Heidenhain,  "  Sludien  der  Pliysiologischen  Instituts,"  3e  Breslau,  1868,
and  Stricker's  Ilandbueli,  loc.  cit.,  p.  330.

■*  According  to  M.  Jlanvier  ('Traduction  de  Frcy,'  p.  437),  aiid  M.  Ewald
(' Jaliresber.,'  t.  i,  1870-1871,  p.  55),  the  rcsults  obtaincd  by  Ilerr  Heidenhaiu
ought  to  be  intcrpreted  as  follows  : — Under  the  influence  of  tlie  irritation  of
the  gland-nerves,  the  cells  called  mucous  cells  simply  lose  the  mucus  they
<;ontain  and  résume  the  appearance  of  pariétal  gland-cclls.  Thcre  would  cou-
sequtiitly  be  no  formation  of  new  cells  hère,  as  Heidenhaiu  asserts.


TROPHIC  NEEVE  THEOKY.  123

termining  the  dilatation  of  vessels  under  tlie  influence  of  stiinuli.
Thèse  nerves  would  act  primarily  on  the  inter-vascuhir  éléments  and
quicken  therein  the  movements  of  composition  and  décomposition.
Vascular  dilatation  would  follow,  as  a  consécutive  phenomenon.  In
support  of  this  view,  one  may  hère  also  invoke  the  teachiugs  of
anatomy  which,  in  thèse  latter  days,  lias,  it  is  stated,  succeeded  in
following,  at  least  in  the  frog,  the  nerve-endings  even  into  the
nucleoli  of  the  corpuscles  of  the  cornea,  aud  of  the  conjunctival
cells  of  the  nictitatiug  membrane.^

This  interprétation  was  long  since  proposed  byM.Brown-Séquard,^
and  Professor  Schiff  seems  to  countenance  it  when  he  acknow-
ledges  that  *' active  dilatalion  appears  to  be  alien  to  the  proper
coats  of  the  vessels  aud  to  take  place  through  the  médium  of  the
inter-vascular  tissues/^'^

The  incursion  which  we  hâve  made  into  the  domain  of  physiology
was  undertaken  with  the  intention  of  collecting,  as  we  went,  évi-
dences which  we  can  uow  profitably  apply.  It  is  requisite,  indeed,
to  fîx  your  attention  for  a  while  upon  the  trophic  nerve  tlieory,
as  it  is  called,  which,  in  default  of  otlier  hypothèses  whose  insuffl-
ciency  was  admitted,  has  been  sometimes  recurred  to  in  order  to
explain  the  production  of  nutritive  lésions  developed  by  an  influence
of  the  nervous  System.  Now,  by  this  theory,  at  least  as  it  has
been  formulated  by  Herr  Samuel,  the  supposititious  nerves  would
be,  as  it  were,  constructed  after  the  model  of  the  secretor  nerves  in
this  respect  that,  like  them,  they  would  exercise,  in  the  normal
state,  a  direct  influence  over  the  nutrition  of  the  parts  wliere  it  is
supposed  their  ultimate  terminations  are  distributed.  Their  physio-
logical  rôle  would  be,  not  to  operate  directly,  but  to  quicken,
throughout  the  tissues,  those  exchanges  which  constitute  elenientary
assimilation  and  disassimilation,  just  as  the  function  of  the  secretor
nerves  is  to  set  at  work  in  the  gland-cell  an  inhérent  property,  inde-
feasibly  connected  with  the  phenomena  of  intimate  nutrition.  The
autonomy  of  the  anatomical  éléments  in  accomplishing  the  nutritive
acts  istherefore  not  at  ail  overlooked;  it  is  only  proposed  toconsider

'  SeeKûhne,  in  'Gaz.  Hebdom.,'  t.  ix,  No.  15,  1862.  Lipmaun,  "Endiguug
der  Nerven  im  eigentlicben  Gewebe  uud  im  hiutereii  Epithel  der  Honihaut  des
Frosclies,"  in  Virchow's  '  Arcliiv,'  38e  Ed.,  p.  118,  1869.  Eberth,  in  '  Archiv
fur  Mikros.  Anat.,'  Ed.  iii.

^  Brown-Séquard,  'Eesearcbes  ou  Epilepsy,'  p.  70.  'Central  Nervous
System/  pp.  148,  172,  174.

■*  SchifF,  '  Leçons  sur  la  Digestion,'  t.  i,  p.  256.


124  THEOKY  OF  SAMUEL.

the  trophic  nerves  as  forming,  in  their  totality,  a  perfecting  appli-
ance  peculiar  to  superior  organisms.

So  much  for  the  physiological  aspect  of  the  theory  : — Now,  as  re-
gards its  apphcation  to  the  interprétation  ofpathologicalphenomena,
it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  a  fréquent  resuit  of  morbid  irritation
set  up  in  nerves^  endowed  with  such  properties,  would  be  to  carry  dis-
turbance  into  the  intimate  nutrition  of  the  innervated  parts,  and  to
provoke  therein,  occasion  serving,  the  consécutive  development  ofthe
inflammatory  process.  Suppression  of  the  action  of  thèse  nerves
would,  on  the  contrary,  hâve  no  other  efPect  than  that  of  lessening
the  intensity  of  the  nutritive  movement,  and  circîimscrihed  atrophj/
is  mentioned  as  an  example  of  the  trophic  disorders  which  may  thus
supervene.

Thèse  are  the  gênerai  features  of  the  theory  ;  as  to  the  détails,  it
was  to  be  anticipated  that  an  hypothesis  created  by  the  need  of  ex-
plaining  as  yet  but  little  known  phenomena,  insufficiently  examined
at  the  period  of  its  publication,  was  destined  to  become  speedily
antiquated.  That,  in  fact,  is  what  has  happened.  It  cannot  be
admitted  to-day,  that  ail  the  trophic  nerves  hâve  their  central
origin  in  the  posterior  spinal  ganglia,  or  in  the  analogous  ganglia  of
the  cranial  nerves;  for  the  cases  are  numerous,  as  you  hâve  seen,
where  a  lésion,  situated  in  the  central  portion  of  the  spinal  cord
or  even  in  the  encephalon,  provokes  the  manifestation  of  trophic
dérangements  in  the  peripheral  parts.  Henceforth,  also,  we  must
take  count  of  facts,  unknown  when  Samuel's  book  appeared,  which
place  beyond  ail  doubt  the  influence  of  lésions  of  the  anterior
nerve-cells  on  the  development  of  différent  kinds  of  myopathies.

I  hâve  never  shared  in  the  disdain  with  which  the  theory,  that
has  just  been  briefly  described,  was  almost  universally  met.  It  has
ever  seemed  to  me  that,  in  spite  of  its  imperfections,  it  was  worthy
of  being  recommended  to  the  attention  of  physicians  because  it  ex-
plains  better,  in  my  opinion,  the  phenomena  which  they  are  called
ou  to  observe,  in  practice,  than  ail  the  other  hypothèses  pre-
viously  invoked.  I  am  very  far  however,  from  wishing  to  ignore
tlie  objections  allegcd  against  it.  In  the  first  place,  the  existence
of  trophic  nerves  is  not,  certainly,  demonstrated  aiiatomically  ;  it
must  be  admitted,  moreover,  that  most  of  the  experiments  made
on  animais  by  Herr  Samuel,  with  the  object  of  revealing  their
existence,  hâve  not  been  felicitous.  Some,  when  repeated  by  other
obscrvers,  hâve  not  hitherto  reproduced  the  stated  rcsults  ; others-


CEITICAL EXAMIXATION.  125

îiave  had  to  be  given  up,  as  tainted  witli  numerous  causes  of  error.^
But  ail  the  arguments  directed  against  this  theory  hâve  not  so  inucli
value  as  thèse.  If^  for  instance^  we  were  bouiid  to  condemn  the
hypothesis  of  trophic  nerves,  by  the  mère  fact  that  it  is  useless  in
physiology,  I  vvould  point  out  that  the  utility  of  the  secretor  uerves
was  only  recognised,  as  an  afterthought.  We  should,  in  like  manner,
be  necessarily  compelled  to  recognise  the  utility  of  trophic  nerves,
if  experiments  should  at  any  time  déclare  in  their  favour.  Again,  it
is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  part  played  by  the  secretor  nerves  is
absolutely  spécial,  and  wholly  unexampled  in  the  organism.  With
thèse  nerves  we  can  already  compare  the  dilator  nerves^  if  it  be
true  that  they  act  according  to  the  mechanism  already  indicated.
We  should  place  also  beside  them,  following  the  récent  observations
of  Herr  Goltz,  the  nerves  of  absorption  which,  according  to  this
physiologiste  act  upon  the  endothelial  cells  of  the  blood-vessels  in
the  same  way  as  the  nerves  of  sécrétion  act  upon  the  glandular
epithelium.  On  the  whole,  we  do  not  see  that  any  reason  exists
to  decree,  a  priori,  that  the  trophic  nerves  shall  not,  some  day,
be  called  to  a  place  in  this  group.-

However  this  be,  before  adopting  a  theory  which  cannot  subsist
without  calling  out  a  whole  system  of  nerves  whose  existence  is  as
yet  problematical,  it  is  necessary  to  make  sure,  by  every  means,  that
it  is  really  impossible  to  explain  the  phenomena,  the  interprétation  of
which  is  required,  by  appealing  to  the  properties  of  the  différent
nerves  already  known.  We  must  take  care  not  to  infringe  the  axiom
of  Logic,  Hmid  miiltijolicanda  entia  ahsque  necessitate.  Now,  the
vaso-motor  theory  being  eliminated,  there  yet  undoubtedly  remains
much  to  be  done  from  this  point  of  view.

There  is  one  opinion,  amongst  others,  which  has  not  received  atten-
tion, so  far  as  I  know,  and  which  perhaps  deserves  to  be  taken  into
considération.  The  numerous  and  décisive  experiments  which  hâve
been  recently  made  on  the  connexions  formed  by  uniting  ends  of  di-
vided  nerves  possessingdifferent  functions,such  as  the  hypoglossal  and
lingual  uerves  for  example,^  hâve  shown  that  excitations,  produced  on
any  point  of  a  sensitive  or  motor  nerve-fibre,  are  propagated  at  once

'  See  Tobias,  '  Vircliow's  Arcbiv,'  bd.  xxiv,  p.  579,  aud  O.  Weber  in  'Ceu-
trablatt,'  1864,  p.  145.

-  Goltz  in  '  Pfliiger's  Archiv,'  t.  i,  v,  p.  53,  aud  '  Journal  of  Anatomy  aud
Physiology,'  2nd  séries,  May,  1872,  p.  480.

^  Vulpiau,  '  Pliysiologie  du  Système  Nerveux,'  p.  290.


126  CONCLUSIOXS.

and  simultaneonsly  in  ceiitripetal  and  centrifngal  directions.  From
this,  it  is  allowable  to  suppose  tliat  pathological  irritations,  developed
on  a  sensitive  nerve,  either  at  its  central  origin  or  on  some  point  of
its  course,  reverberating  in  a  centrifugal  direction  to  the  ultimate
extremities  of  the  nerve-filaments,  i.e.,  to  tlie  papillee  of  the  derm,  or
the  substance  of  the  rete  mucosum,,i  could  there  provoke  inflammatory
action,  in  certain  cases.  In  this  way  \ve  could  couiprehend,  for  in-
stance, the  somewhat  fréquent  development  of  pemphigoid  or  bullar
éruptions,  and  of  zona,  in  conséquence  of  lésions  atfecting  the  pos-
terior  fasciculi  of  the  cord,  or  the  sensitive  spinal  roots.  With  respect
to  the  motor  nerves,  I  do  not  see  any  serious  reason  to  prevent  us
from  admitting  that  pathological  irritations,  affecting  the  nerve-cells
of  the  anterior  cornua,  would  sometimes  be  transmitted  to  the  mus-
cular  fasciculi,  by  means  of  the  nerve-hlaments  which,  in  the  physio-
logical  state,  transmit  voluntary  excitations.  A  certain  number,  at
least,  of  the  trophic  disorders,  consécutive  on  lésions  of  the  nervous
System,  would  perhaps  find  their  explanation  in  this  hypothesis,
without  its  being  necessary  to  hâve  recourse  to  the  trophic  nerve
theory.

We  hâve  arrived,  gentlemen,  at  the  conclusion  of  this  pathogenic
discussion,  and,  as  I  allowed  you  to  perceive  from  the  beginning,  the
question  in  dispute  still  awaits  its  solution.  I  shall  not  regret,
however,  the  course  of  explanation  we  hâve  followed,  if,  by  placing
before  your  eyes  the  documentary  évidences  of  the  case,  I  hâve  suc-
ceeded  in  inspiring  you  with  the  désire  of  entering  more  deeply  into
an  investigation  which  concerns,  to  such  a  suprême  extent,  the
pathology  of  the  whole  nervous  System.


See  Langerhans,  '  Vircliow's  Arcliiv/  Bd.  44,  aud  A.  Biesadecki,  Stricier's

dhiioli n rtnn


Handbucb,  p.  595


PART SECOND.


PARALYSIS AGITAIS AIS^D DISSEMINATED
SCLEROSIS.


LECTURE  V.

ON  PAIIALYSIS  AGITANS.

SuMMARY. —  Of  trem.or  in  général.  lis  variefies.  Intermittent
tremor.  Continuous  tremor.  Injfnence  qf  sleep,  rest,  an&
voluntary  motion.  Distinction  established  hy  Van  Swieten,
Opinion  qf  M.  Gubler.  Tremor,  accordiîig  to  Galen^
Parali/sis  agitans,  and  disseminated,  sclerosis, — independenf
d/iseases.  Parkinson's  researches.  French  worJcs  :  MM.  Sée,
Trousseau,  Charcot,  and  TuJpian.  Paralysis  agitans  admitted
to  the  right  of  domicile  in  classic  treatises.

Fundamental  cliaracters  of  paralysis  agitans.  A  disease  of
adtdt  life.  Ils  symptoms.  Modifications  ohserved  in  the  gait..
Tendency  to  propulsion  and  retropulsion.  Invasion;  its  modes,
sloîo  or  ahrapt.  Period  of  stationary  intensity.  Ilead  and
iLech  not  afecied  hy  tremor.  Altérations  qf  speech.  Rigidity
qf  the  muscles.  Attitude  of  the  hody  and  limbs.  Déformation-
of  the  hands  and  f cet.  Deluy  in  the  exécution  of  movements.
Perversions  of  sensitnlity .  Cramps  ;  gênerai  sensation  of
tension  and  fatigue  :  need  qf  fréquent  change  of  position.
Habituai  feeling  of  excessive  heat.  Température  in  paralysis^
agitans.  Influence  of  the  hind  of  convulsions — stafic  or
dynamic.

Terminal  period.  Confinement  to  bed.  Disorders  of  nutrition^
Enfeehlernent  of  the  intellect.  Sacral  eschars.  Terminal  corn-
plaints  :  they  differ  from  tkose  of  disseminated  sclerosis^
Duration  of  paralysis  agitans.

Necroscopical  results. Inconstant lésions  in  paralysis  agitans j
fixed  lésions  in  disseminated  sclerosis. Lésions  of'the  P&a^
Varolii  and  of  the  medulla  ohlongata  [Parkinson,  Oppolzer) .
Pathological  Physiology.

Fiiology. External  causes  ;  violent  moral  émotions  ;  influence  f)f

9


130  OF  TEEMOE  IN  GENEE  AL.

(lamp  cola,  toïieu  mucJt  jyyolovged  ;  irrilatiou  of  ceriain  penpTie-
ral  nerves.  Preclis2msing  ccmses.  Influence  of  âge.  Paralj/sîs
agitans  appears  at  a  more  advanced  period  of  life  ilian  dis-
seminated  sclerosis.  Sex.  Ilereditary  prédisposition .  In-
fluence of  face.

Gentlemen, — Those  amongst  you,  wlio,  this  morning,  passed
tlirough  our  wards,  were  probably  surprised  to  find  coUected  tliere
so  great  a  number  of  female  patients,  in  wliom  tremor  seems  to
constitute  tlie  paramount  or  at  least  the  most  striking  symptom  of
tlie  disease  wliich  they  labour  under.  This  gathering  of  patients,
forming  a  genus  apart,  I  purposely  contrived.  In  tliat  way,  I
desired  to  enable  you  to  recognise,  by  means  of  a  comparative
study,  certain  shades  of  distinction  and  even  marked  différences
which  the  examination  of  isolated  cases  does  not  allow  you  so
readily  to  discern.

At  first  glanée,  you  may  bave  thouglit  the  scène  monotonous  in
eharacter.  Indeed,  to  a  superficial  observer  the  phenomenon  of
tremor  in  ail  thèse  women  must  appear  identical,  or  almost  so  :  oue
thing  alone  strikes  the  gazer's  glance,  as  peculiarly  noticeable,  it  is
the  diversity  in  position  and  intensity  of  the  rhythmical  oscillations
of  the  limbs.  But  a  more  attentive  inspection  soon  allowed  you
to  distinguish,  under  this  apparent  uniformity,  différent  features
which  at  first  had  completely  escaped  you.

Thus,  to  mention  merely  the  most  m.anifest  fact,  you  hâve  been
enabled  to  remark  that  some  of  our  patients  do  not  tremble  except
when  executing  a  coôrdinated  movement  with  a  member,  as  in  the  act
of  raising  a  glass  of  water  to  the  lips  to  drink,  or  again  when  they
attempt  to  rise  from  their  chairs  in  order  to  walk  about.  In  the
latter  case,  every  part  of  the  body  may  be  shaken  by  energetic
eonvulsive  movements,  rendcring  it  difficult  and  sometimes  even
impossible  to  stand  upright  or  to  walk  along  the  floor.  On  the
other  hand,  when  they  arc  at  rest  and  not  affected  by  any  strong
émotion,  thèse  same  womeii,  whether  seated  or  lying,  présent  the
most  natural  attitudes;  the  différent  parts  of  their  bodies  are  no-
wise  agitated,  and  if  you  saw  them  only  under  such  circumstances
you  would  certainly  not  suspect  the  disease  which  has  possession  of

them.

In  a  second  séries  of  cases,  on  the  contrary,  the  tremor  is  con-
tinuous,  permanent;  it  agitâtes  the  members  unceasingly,  allowing


VAEIETIES  OF  TREMOE.  131

thein  no  peace,  and  if  purposed  movements  exaggerate  it  at  times,
repose  does  not  cause  its  disappearance.  In  reality,  during  waking
liours,  when  the  affection  is  intense,  tliere  is  no  truce  for  thèse
patients.  Whatever  be  the  position  they  assume,  whether  they  sit
or  lie  down,  they  are  always  trembling.  Sleep  alone  puts  a
temporary  stop  to  the  spasmodic  agitation  of  their  members  ;  but
hardly  hâve  they  awaked  than  the  tremor  makes  its  appearance
anew  and  soon  résumes  its  former  intensity.

Thus,  if  we  take  count  merely  of  this  primary  distinction,
founded  on  the  influence  of  repose  and  of  purposed  movements
over  the  production  of  tremor,  it  becomes  already  possible,  as  you
perceive,  to  gather  into  two  principal  groups  the  patients  whose
cases  occupy  our  attention.

The  first  group  would  comprise  those  in  wliom  tremor  is  only
shown  when  an  intentional  movement  is  mâde  ;  whilst  the  patients,
in  whom  tremor  is  a  constant  symptom,  or  from  whom  it  rarely
départs,  except  during  sleep,  would  coustitute  the  second  group.
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  each  of  thèse  groups,  far  from
formiug  a  homogeneous  whole,  embraces  numerous  morbid  species,
of  very  différent  natures,  in  spite  of  the  analogy  impressed  upon
them  by  the  possession  of  this  symptom  in  common.

The  distinction  which  I  strive  to  make  manifest  to  you  is,  in  my
opinion,  of  the  higheat  importance  in  the  history  of  chronic
diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  accompanied  by  tremor.  In  our
own  days,  it  lias  been  almost  universally  misunderstood,  and,  if  I
mistake  not,  you  will  seek  in  vain  for  a  trace  of  it  in  our  classic
authors.  However,  as  M.  Guéneau  de  Mussy  lias  justly  pointed
out  in  a  récent  clinical  lecture,^  the  physicians  of  the  last
century  had  taken  it  into  considération,  and  perfectly  understood
its  value.

Van  Swieteu,  among  others,  expressly  recognised  the  two  kinds
of  tremor;  nay  more,  he  endeavoured  to  connect  each  of  them
witli  a  particular  physiological  condition.  Allow  me,  hère,  to
invite  your  attention  to  the  commentary  on  the  625th  Aphorism,
where  you  will  find  a  physiological  interprétation  of  the  tremor-symp-
tom  that  is  far  from  being  devoid  of  interest  even  for  a  modem  reader.

Thus,  according  to  Van  Swieten,  the  tremor  which  persists,
during  repose  in  bed,  results  from  an  irritation  that  afïects  the

'  Mussy,  '  Gazette  des  Hôpitaux,'  1868.


133  VAEIETIES  OF  TREMOR.

nervous  centres  in  an  intermittent  and  rhythmical  manner.  This
would  consequently  be  a  convulsive  phenomenon — tremor  coactus.

On  the  other  hand,  the  tremor  which  is  exclusively  shown,  during
the  exécution  of  voluntary  moveraents,  would  dépend  on  a  defect  of
stimulus,  the  resuit  of  an  insufïiciency  of  the  nervous  fluid  whose
function  it  is  to  cause  contraction  of  the  muscles  under  the
influence  of  the  will.  This,  therefore,  would  be  a  paralytic  tremor
— tremor  a  dehïl'itate.

An  interprétation  of  the  phenomena,  which  does  not  radically
diverge  from  the  foregoing,  was  published,  a  few  years  ago,  by
M.  Gubler,  one  of  the  few  modem  authors  who  bave  upheld  the
distinction  between  the  two  kinds  of  tremor.^  M.  Gubler  notes
that,  in  certain  cases,  the  tremor  consists,  not  in  a  succession  of
contrary  movements  withdrawn  from  the  influence  of  the  will,  but
in  alternate  contractions  and  relaxations  of  the  muscles  in  action,
whether  employed  to  alter  the  position  of  a  limb,  or  of  the  whole
body,  or  to  préserve  the  natural  attitude  of  the  varions  parts.
Hère,  the  muscular  contractions,  instead  of  proceeding,  as  in  the
normal  state,  gradually,  imperceptibly,  and  without  shock,  take
place  on  the  contrary  by  jerks,  and  as  if  by  interrupted  current,
with  intervais  of  rest.  This  pathological  condition  which,  according
to  M.  Gubler  might  be  designated  muscular  astasis,  stands  distinctly
apart  from  that  condition  in  which  tremor  is  not  determined  solely
by  the  contractions  required  to  maintain  the  corporeal  attitude  or  in
obédience  to  mental  command,  and  taking  place  by  jerks.  In  the
second  case,  involuntary  and  purposeless  contractions  really  exist,
and  are  incessantly  excited  by  an  internai  stimulus.

The  classification  must,  in  truth,  be  a  most  natural  one,  for  it
dates  from  long  before  Van  Swieten  :  Galen  had  established  it.  He
also,  in  fact,  distinguished  two  kinds  of  trembling  :  one,  which  he
designated  rpefxoç  (tremor),  is  the  paralytic  shake  ;  the  other,  which
he  styled  îraXjuoç  (palpitation),  is  the  clonic,  spasmodic,  convulsive
agitation.*

But  the  physiological  aspect  of  the  disease  must  not  detain  us
any  longer,  for  we  could  not  think  of  entering,  at  this  moment,  into
a  discussion  which  would  be  prématuré.  Let  it  suffice  that  we  hâve
put  prominently  forward  thosc  characters  which  can  bc  recognised

'  'Archives  Générales  de  Médecine,'  r;e  série,  t.  xv,  1860,  p.  702.
-  G.  V.  Van  Swieten,  '  Commeutaria/  t.  ii,  p.  167. Paris,  1771.


PARALYSIS  AGITANS  AND  DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSLS. 133

by  the  simplest  observation,  irrespective  of  any  theoretical  pre-
possession.  It  is  because  thèse  hâve  not  been  considered,  that  the
two  affections  which  are  to  form  the  object  of  our  first  chnical
studies — -2mrahjsis  agitans  and  cîisseminated  sclerosis — hâve  remained
«ntil  to-day,  confouuded  under  the  same  rubric,  although  they  are,
in  every  respect,  perfectly  iudepeudent  of  each  other.  Both,  indeed,
reckon  tremor  amongst  their  most  important  symptoms  ;  but,  in  the
first,  the  rhythmical  oscillations  of  the  limbs  are  nearly  quite  perma-
nent, whilst  iu  the  second  they  only  supervene  on  the  attempt  to
exécute  intended  movements.  We  hâve  just  pointed  out  a  distinctive
character  which  already  enables  us  to  lay  down  a  broad  line  of
démarcation  betweeu  the  two  affections.  However,  that  is  far,
indeed,  from  being  the  only  one  which  we  hâve  to  set  before  you,  as
you  will  hereafter  perceive.

Parali/sis  agltans  which  shall  first  engage  our  attention  and  of
"wliich  I  hâve  shown  you  several  well-marked  examples,  was  the
first  to  be  inscribed  on  nosological  lists.  Its  history,  however,  does
not  reach  far  back.  The  first  regular  description  given  of  it  only
dates  from  1817;  it  is  due  to  Dr.  Parkinson,  who  published  it  in  a
little  work  entitled  '  Essay  on  the  Shaking  Palsy.'  From  that
period,  paralysis  agitans  lias  been  often  mentioned  in  England  and
in  Germany  ;  but  in  France  it  remained  almost  unheard  of  until
thèse  latter  years,  for,  if  I  mistake  not,  it  was  first  described,  in  an
explicit  manner,  by  M.  G.  Sée  in  his  memoir  on  Chorea,  wliere  it
figures  among  the  diseases  that  might  be  confounded  with  St.
Vitus'  Dance.

In  1859,  M.  Trousseau  in  his  Lectures  on  Chorea  succinctly
tabulated  the  principal  characters  of  paralysis  agitans.  Three  years
later  ]\I.  Vulpian  and  I  published  a  study  on  this  subject  in  the
■Gazette  Ilefjdomadalre}  We  had  but  recently  been  appointed  to
La  Salptêtrière.  Desiring  to  inform  ourselves  fully  as  to  the
nature  aud  characters  of  this  disease,  which  we  were  called  to
observe,  on  a  large  scale,  we  were  struck  by  the  insufliciency  of
the  détails  to  be  fouud  in  existing  works.  This  led  us  to  collect
the  tacts  which  lay  under  our  observation,  and,  uniting  thèse
'with  the  accounts  given  by  foreign  authors,  we  traced  a  tolerably
■^complete  history  of  paralysis  agitans,  considering  the  period.

From  that  date,  this  disease  obtained  the  right  of  domicile  in

'  'Gazette  Hebdomadaire,'  1861,  pp.  765,  816,  et  1862,  p.  54.


134  HISTORIOAL  SKETCH.

classic  Works.  In  the  second  édition  of  his  lectures,  Trousseau
dévotes  a  considérable  space  to  its  considération.  It  figures  in  the
last  édition  of  M.  Grisolle's  book,  and  in  Reynolds'  EncijclopecVm  •}
but  in  ail  thèse  descriptions,  and  our  own  does  not  at  ail  escape  this
reproach,  there  is  complète  confusion  between  paralysis  agitaus  and
disseminated  sclerosis.  The  line  of  démarcation  between  thèse  two
diseases  was  for  the  first  time  indicated  by  myself,  if  I  mistake  not,
in  the  thesis  of  M.  Ordenstein.^  It  behoves  us  thereforeto  establish
a  parallel  between  thèse  two  affections,  by  comparing  them  with
eacli  other  in  the  threefold  relations  of  symptoms,  causes,  and
lésions;  for  that  purpose,  we  shall  refer  to  the  afore-mentioned
documents  and  to  the  numerons  observations  which  we  hâve  col-
lected  in  this  hospital.  It  will  be  easy  for  you  to  discern  in  the
patients  whom  I  hâve  gathered  together  in  thèse  wards,  the  cha-
racters  which  I  am  about  to  insist  on.

FUNDAMENTAL ChARACïERS OF PaRALTSIS AGITANS.

Paralysis  agitans,  separated  from  foreigu  éléments,  is,  gentlemen,
at  présent  a  neurosis,  in  this  sensé  that  it  possesses  no  proper  lésion.
In  the  différent  accounts  that  hâve  beeu  jjublished  we  see  incon-
gruous  lésions  mentioned  ;  some  of  thèse  belong  to  disseminated
sclerosis  ;  others,  by  their  multiplicity  and  their  variability,  yield
support  to  our  opinion  that,  up  to  the  présent  time,  paralysis
agitans  can  lay  no  claim  to  any  definite  material  lésion.

It  assails  persons  alreacly  advanced  in  âge,  tliose  especially  who
hâve  passed  their  fortieth  or  fifticth  year.  This  limit,  however,  is
not  absolute,  for  M.  Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  has  told  us  of  a  case
where  the  patient  was  a  youth  of  sixteen.  However  it  be,  its
natural  place  is  amongst  the  diseases  of  the  second  period  of  hfe.
But  it  would  be  going  too  far  to  consider  it  as  being  a  senile  disease.

l'requently  the  causes  remain  unknown.  However,  of  the  etio-
logical  data  two deserve  to  bc  cited  : i°,  dump  cold,  such  as  that

'  J.  Koyiiolds,  'A  System  of  Medicine,'  t.  ii,  p.  184;  art.  'Paralysis
Agitaus,'  by  W.  11.  Sandcrs.

■■*  '  Sur  la  paralysie  agitante  et  la  sclérose  en  plaques  géucralisce,'  Thèse
de  Paris,  1868.  Celui,  liowever,  had  remarked  that  in  two  cases  of  multiple
induration  of  the  braiu  and  spiual  cord,  the  tremor  was  only  exhibited  after
movemeuts  which  the  patient  wished  to  make,  but  never  in  a  state  of  repose,
nor  duriiig  sleep,  "  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Lehre  der  Paralysis  agitans,"  in  '  VVieucr
Med.  Wochenschr.,'  Mai,  1860.


SYMPTOMS  OF  PABALYSIS  AGITA^'S.  135

arising  froui  a  prolongée!  sojourn  in  a  badly  ventilated  apartment,
or  in  a  low  dark  dwelling  on  tlie  ground  lioor,  &c.  ;  2°  acute  moral
p,molions.  Tlie  latter  cause  appears  to  be  tolerably  common.  One
of  tlie  patients^  wliom  you  bave  visited,  was  seized  under  tbe  fol-
lowing  circumstances  :  Her  husband^  one  of  tbe  Garde  Municipale^
lormed  part  of  tbe  troops  wbo  fouglit  against  tbe  insurgents  in
]832.  Having  seeu  ber  busband^s  borse  return  riderless  to  tbe
larraeks,  sbe  received  a  great  sbock,  dreading  some  disaster.  Tbat
"very  day  sbe  began  to  tremble,  and  tbe  sbaking,  wbicb  at  first  was
localised  in  tbe  rigbt  band,  extending  gradually,  invaded  eacb  of
tiie  otber  members  in  succession.  I  sball  bave  occasion  to  quote
i.umerous  examples  of  tbe  same  kind  for  your  information.

Tbe  symptoms  of  paralysis  agitans  are  not  ail  of  tbe  same  value,
Tbe  most  striking  symptom  consiste  of  a  tremor,  existing  even  wben
tbe  individual  reposes,  limited  at  first  to  one  member,  tben  little  by
'ittle  becoming  generalised,  wliilst  respecting,  bowever,  tbe  bead.
I0  tbis  pbenomenon  is  superadded  sooner  or  later  an  apparent
dminution  of  muscular  strengtb.  ïbe  movements  are  slow  and
seem  feeble,  altbougb  dynamometrical  experiments  prove  tbat  tbis
diminution  is  not  real.  Tbis  motor  impotence  appears  to  be
die  in  part,  as  we  sball  see,  to  tbe  rigidity  wbicb  prevails  in  tbe
miscles.

A  singular  symptom  is  tbat  wbicb,  frequently  at  an  early,  but
usially  at  a  late  period,  cornes  to  complicate  tbe  situation — tbe
patient  loses  tbe  faculty  of  preserving  equilibrium  wliilst  walking.
In  some  patients  also  we  notice  a  tendency  to  propulsion  or  to
re-ropulsion  :  witbout  feeling  any  giddiness,  tbe  patient  is,  in  tbe
fiRt  case,  propelled  forward,  and,  as  it  were,  compelled  to  adopt  a
qtick  pace  ;  tbe  individual  is  unable,  witbout  extrême  difficulty,  to
stop — being  apparently  forced  to  follow  a  flying  centre  of  gravity.

A  pecubar  attitude  of  tbe  body  and  its  members,  a  fixed  look,  and
in.mobile  features  sbould  also  be  enumerated  among  tbe  more  im-
portant symptoms  of  tbis  disease.

Tbe  marck  of  paralysis  agitans  is  slow,  and  progressive.  Its
(hraiïon  is  long — sometimes  it  bas  gone  on  for  tbirty  years.  Tbe
fatal  terin  supervenes  eitber  by  tbe  advance  of  âge,  or  because
o:  intercurrent  diseases  wbicb  may  be  accidentai  or  occasioned  by
marasmus,  confinement  to  bed,  &c.  In  tbe  first  case,  an  acute
disease,  sucb  as  pneumonia,  occurs  :  in  tbe  second,  deatb  takes
jiace  froin  a  sort  of nervous exhaustion,  nutrition dégénérâtes.


Î36  SLOW  I^^VASION.

ihe  patient  cannot  sleep,  escliars  are  formed  aud  conclude  the
morbid  scène.

Such,  gentlemen,  are  tlie  more  gênerai  characters  of  paralysi?
■agitans.  But  in  order  that  you  may  the  better  compreliend  their
significance,  it  is  proper  to  enter  more  deeply  into  a  study  of  the
symptoms  and  to  show  how  they  arise,  increase,  and  are  connected
'is'ith  the  différent  stages  of  the  disease.  To  this  end,  and  in  order
to  give  greater  clearness  to  our  description,  we  will  establisa
■several  periods  which  we  shall  describe,  in  due  order.

Let  us  examine,  in  the  first  place,  the  manner  of  its  invasioi.
Expérience  teaches  that  paralysis  agitans  sets  in  sometimes  slowly
and  progressively  ;  sometimes,  on  the  contrary,  in  an  almost  abrujl
manner.

A.  Slow  invasion.  —  In  the  immense  majority  of  cases,  the
invasion  is  insidious,  the  disease  first  showing  itself  as  slight  ano
benignant.  The  tremor  is  circumscribed  to  the  foot,  the  hand,  œ
the  thumb.  This  symptom,  apparently  of  so  trifiing  a  nature,  lorg
remains  solitary.  It  présents,  however,  certain  characters  whi^h
require  to  be  recognised,  and  on  which  we  shall  lay  stress.  Is  the
hand  attacked  ?  Its  several  segments  are  seen  to  oscillate  o^er
-each  other,  stirred  by  an  almost  pathognomonic  motion.  The  patient
■closes  the  fîngers  on  the  thumb  as  though  in  the  act  of  spinnTig
wool  ;  at  the  same  moment  the  wrist  is  bent  by  rapid  jerks  upon  :he
fore-arm,  and  the  fore-arm  on  the  arm.

At  this  stage  of  the  disease  the  tremor  may  be  merely  passng
^nd  transitory.  It  breaks  out  when  least  expected,  the  pati;nt
€njoying  complète  repose  of  mind  and  body,  and  it  frequently  occirs
without  his  being  conscious  of  it.  The  act  of  walking  (even  wliere
the  up])er  extremities  are  afFected),  the  act  of  grasping,  liftiag,
taking  a  pen,  writing,  any  effort  at  ail  of  the  will,  may  at  this  cpoch
often  suffice  to  suspend  the  tremor.  Later  on,  it  will  be  no  longer
;so.  Moreover,  as  it  augmeuts  in  intensity  and  })ersistence,  :he
tremor  invades  little  by  little,  and  not  without  observing  certain
rules  in  its  progress,  the  parts  which  hâve  hitherto  remained  souid.
If,  for  instance,  it  first  aftected  the  right  hand,  at  the  end  of  so:ne
months  or  of  some  years,  the  turn  of  the  right  foot  will  cône;
next  the  left  hand,  and  after  that  the  left  foot  will  be,  successivdy,
assailed.

DecusscUed  invasion  is  more  rare.  I  hâve,  however,  at  least  twice
■seen  the  affection  first  seize  the  right  upper  extrcmity,  and  pass


ABEUPT  INVASION.  137

iiext  to  the  left  lower  extremity.  It  is  mucli  more  common  to  see
the  tremor  confîned  for  a  long  time  to  the  members  of  one  side  of
the  body  {hémiplégie  t^pe),  or  to  the  two  lower  extremities  [para-
plégie type).  The  head  is  always  nearly  quite  respected  at  every
stage  of  the  disease,  eveu  in  the  most  intense  cases  ;  and  this  is  a
character  to  which  we  shall,  hereafter,  give  ])rominence,  for  the
contrary  is  often  observed  in  the  cerebro-spinal  form  of  disseminated
sclerosis.

I  hâve  to  ask  your  utmost  attention  to  a  mode  of  progresnve
invasion  which,  although  exceptional,  is  not  the  less  worthy  of
interest.  The  tremor  is  not  absolutely  the  first  symptom  recorded.
It  may  possibly  be  preceded  sometiines  by  a  very  remarkable  feeling
of  fatigue,  sometimes  by  rheumatoid  or  neuralgic  pains,  which  are
occasionally  most  severe,  occupying  the  member  or  the  régions  of
the  members  which  sliall  soon  be  seized,  but  secondarily,  by  the
convulsive  agitation.  I  might  quote  several  cases  of  this  kind  to
you,  and,  in  such  circumstauces,  it  is  not  rare  to  find  that  some
traumatic  cause  exists,  such  as  a  puncture,  as  Piomberg  lias  seen,  or,
as  1  hâve  myself  observed,  a  violent  contusion  of  the  member  which
was  ultimately  taken  with  pain  and  trembling.  The  paralysis  agitans
which  sets  in,  aftcr  this  manner,  behavcs  itself,  however,  throughout
its  ulterior  course  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  its  progress  is  effected
in  accordance  with  the  same  laws.

B.  Abntpt  invasion. — Wheu,  in  conséquence  of  a  moral  cause,  a
shock  of  terror  for  instance,  tremor  suddenly  supervenes,  it  sometimes
occupies  one  member  only,  sometimes  it  seizes  on  ail  the  members
at  once,  from  the  very  commencement.  After  persisting  for  a  few
days  it  may  possibly  improve  or  even  vanish.  But,  later  on,  after
a  séries  of  alternate  improveraents  and  exacerbations,  it  takes  up
its  abode  in  a  permanent  manner.  This,  at  least,  is  what  we  hâve
seen  very  distinctly  occurring  in  several  cases.

The  duration  of  this  initial  phrase  varies  from  about  one  to  two
■or  three  years,  whatever  may  hâve  been  the  manner  of  its  invasion.

C.  Period  of  slaiionary  intensifg. — When  paralysis  agitans  has
acquired  its  perfect  development,  the  trembling,  besides  invading
several  members,  becomes,  at  least  in  severe  cases,  almost  incessant.
Its  intensity,  however,  is  not  the  same  at  ail  times.  Différent
circumstances,  formerly  without  influence  over  it,  now  augment  it.
Moral  émotions  count  amongst  thèse,  and  the  exercise  of  voluntary
movements. In  addition,  we  find  a  kind  of crises — paroxysms


138  STATIONAEY  PEEIOD.

occurring  spoiitaneously,  without  appréciable  cause.  Ou  tlie  otlier
handj  natural  sleep,  and  sleep  induced  by  chloroform,  always
annihilate  tlie  couvulsive  jerking^  for  tlie  time  being.

At  tliis  stage  of  the  disease,  especially,  tlie  peculiar  characteristics
of  the  tremor  are  displayed  in  ail  tlieir  fuluess;  then  also  we
occasionally  find  the  rhythmical  and  involuntary  oscillations  of  the
différent  parts  of  the  hand  recalling  the  appearance  of  certain  co-
ordinated  movements.  Thus,  in  some  patients,  the  thumb  moves  over
the  fiugersj  as  when  a  pencil  or  paper-ball  is  rolled  between  them  ;
in  others,  the  movements  are  more  complicated  and  resemble  what
takes  place  in  crumbling  a  pièce  of  bread.  I  hâve  shown  you  some
examples  of  this  kind.  Thèse  are,  if  I  do  not  mistake,  peculiarities
which  belong  specifically  to  the  tremor  of  paralysis  agitans  ;  I  do
not  believe  that  tliey  are  to  be  found  in  any  other  species.  They
hâve  beeu  clearly  recognised  by  M.  Gubler  {J,oc.  cit.),  who,  having
occupied  the  position  of  clinical  clerk  in  La  Salpêtrière,  was  enabled
to  study  the  disease  on  a  large  scale.^


0  3 ^o'

Y\g.  7. — Spécimen  of  bandwritiug  iu  paralysis  agitansJ
The  hands  aud  neck,  we  repeat,  remain  unaffected  ;  this  is  the

'  The  tremor  causes  the  handwritiug  to  exliibit  characters  which  are  some-
what  spécial.  When  the  disease  is  comraenoinf^,  the  writiug  at  first  gUnce
seeins  normal,  but  when  examined  with  a  magnifying  glass  iuequalities  are
perceived,  some  parts  beiug  thicker  and  heavier  than  others.  Later  ou,  in  the
period  of  stationary  intensity  for  instance,  tlie  changes  are  more  marked  and
consequently  plaiuer.  The  above  spécimen,  fig.  7,  represents  the  writiiig  of  a
patient  whose  case  we  studied  at  the  Hôpital  St.  Louis,  in  1869.  The  strokes
forming  the  letters  are  very  irregular  and  sinuous,  whilst  the  irregularities  and
sinuositics  are  of  a  very  limited  width  (Bourneville).

On  a  carel'ul  cxamination  of  this  spécimen  of  writiug  it  will  be  perceived
that  the  down-strokes  are  ail,  with  the  exception  of  the  Orst  letter,  niade  with
comparative  flrmness  and  are,  in  fact,  nearly  normal — the  huer  up-strokes,  on
tlie  contrary,  are  ail  trcmulous  in  appearance,  aud  it  is  to  the  uusteadincss  of
thèse  liiies  that  the  peculiar  character  of  the  writing  hère  is  priucipally  due.
IVom  this  I  would  infer,  that  the  flcxors  of  the  fingers  were,  at  this  stage  of
the  disease,  less  alfected  by  tremor  than  the  extcusors,  aud  that,  amougst  the


PHYSIOGNOMY.  139

ruie.  Far  frorn  trembling,  tlie  muscles  of  tlie  face  are  motionless,
there  is  even  a  remarkable  fixity  of  look,  and  the  features  présent
a  permanent  expression  of  mounifulness^  sometimes  of  stolitlness  or
stupidity.  The  njstagmus  wliich  so  frequently  figures  in  the
symptomatology  of  disseminated  sclerosis,  lias  no  existence  in
paralysis  agitans.  Nor  are  the  muscles  of  the  jaws  affected  by
convulsive  agitation.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find
that  the  tougue,  even  when  enclosed  in  the  buccal  cavity,  is
stirred  by  a  well-marked  tremor,  which  augments  when  the  organ
is  protruded.  Sometimes  the  lips  adhère,  as  though  firmly  pressed
together,  so  that  the  red  portion  is  no  longer  visible,  and  the
cutaneous  surface  seems  puckered.i  Tliere  is  no  real  difficulty  of
speech,  but  the  utterance  is  slow,  jerky,  and  short  of  phrase  :  the
pronunciation  of  eacli  word  appears  to  cost  a  considérable  effort  of

latter,  the  iiiterossei  were  probably  the  earliest  affected.  This  inference  will
not  be  without  iiiterest  for  those  who  remember  the  attentiou  wbich  Dr.
Ducheuue  (de  Boulogne)  gave  to  the  conduct  of  thèse  muscles  in  the  varions
paralytic  and  atrophie  affections  of  the  hand  (Sigerson).

^  AU  thèse  characteristics  are  found  well  marked  in  the  case  of  tlie  patient,
Marie-Anne  Perd.  .  .,  -wlio  is  still  uuder  M.  Charcot's  care  (Salle  St.  Alex-
andre, No.  9).  The  bead,  held  in  a  somewbat  fixed  position,  is  slightly  bent
forward.  ïhe  features  are,  so  to  speak,  without  expression  ;  the  brovF-wrinkles,
similar  on  botli  sides,  are  deeply  marked  ;  the  eyelids  are  less  mobile  than  in  the
normal  state,  on  account  of  a  species  of  contraction  in  the  supraciliary  muscle
which  appears  habituai  and  which  deepens  the  brow-wrinkles.  When  the  patient
is  recjucsted  to  close  her  eyes,  she  does  so,  without  effort,  she  says  ;  but  the
upper  lids  are  tlicn  stirred  by  little  convulsive  movements  whicli  would  rather
lead  one  to  suppose  that  it  required  a  certain  force  to  keep  them  closed.  And,
in  fact,  if  they  be  kept  in  this  position,  the  convulsive  movements  (a  kind
of  rapid  winkiug)  augment  in  direct  ratio  with  the  continuance  of  the
test,  so  that  the  occlusion  ceases  to  be  complète.  The  eyes  look  straight  for-
ward ;  there  is  no  nystagmus.  When,  in  cxamining  the  sensitiveuess  to  light
of  the  pupils,  we  attemptto  open  and  close  tiie  eyelids,  iualternation,  a  certain
résistance  is  met  with,  in  the  latter  case,  which  is  due  to  the  convulsive  move-
ments of  the  upper  lids  that  tiic  patient  canuot  control.  The  gaze  is,  in  some
sort,  without  expression.

ïhe  lips  are  drawn  togetiier  and  somewhat  pouting,  as  though  a  muscular
contraction  maintained  theiu  in  apposition  ;  it  follows  that  the  uaso-iabial
furrows  arc  shallow,  like  the  jugo-mental.  The  upper  lip  is  motionless,  the
under  lip  is  moved  by  a  very  fine  tremor  at  the  labial  commissures.  The
patient  is  obliged  to  make  an  effort  in  order  to  open  her  mouth  ;  she  can  oiily
open  it  imperfectly,  and  cannot  keep  it  oj)en  for  a  few  minutes.  She  appears
to  account  for  this  customary  and  as  it  were  permanent  apposition  of  her  lips,
when  she  says,  "Elles  se  collent  ensemble  mes  lèvres"  (Bourneville).


140  MODIFICATION  OF UTTEEANCE.

tlie  will.  If  the  tremor  of  the  body  be  intense  it  may  liappeu  that
the  utterance  will  be  tremulous,  broken,  jolted  out  as  it  were  like
that  of  an  inexperienced  rider  on  horseback,  when  the  animal  is
trotting.  However^  in  botli  cases,  we  sbould  only  recognise  in  this
a  phenomenon  of  transmitted  tremor.^  Finally,  the  patients  seem
to  speak  between  their  teeth.  Déglutition  is  accomplished  with
ease,  though  perhaps  slowly  ;  frequently  in  cases  of  somewhat  old
standing  the  saliva,  accumulated  in  the  mouth,  is  involuntarily
allowed  to  escape.  The  respiratory  muscles  do  not  seem  to  share  in
the  convulsive  disorder  of  the  extremities.  We  bave  to  remark,
however,  that  some  patients  expérience  an  almost  continuai  feeling  of
oppression.

We  shall  now  point  out  a  characteristic  which,  we  believe,  was
overlooked  by  Parkinson  as  well  as  by  most  of  his  successors  :  we
allude  to  the  rigidilj/  to  be  found,  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  disease,
in  the  muscles  of  the  extremities,  of  the  body,  and,  for  the  most  part,  in
those  of  the  neck  also.  When  this  symptom  déclares  itself,  the  patients
complain  of  cramps,  followed  by  stiti'ness,  which,  at  first  transient,
is  afterwards  more  or  less  lasting,  and  is  subject  to  exacerbations.
Generally  the  flexor  muscles  are  the  first,  as  they  are  always  the
most  inteusely,  affected.  When  this  muscular  stiffness  bas  become
permanent  it  causes  the  patients,  in  many  cases,  to  assume  a  cha-
racteristic attitude.  Thus  on  account  of  the  rigidity  of  the
anterior  muscles  of  the  neck,  the  head,  as  Parkinson  remarked,  is
greatly  bent  forward,  and,  as  one  might  say,  fixed  in  that  position  ;
for  the  patient  cannot,  without  much  effort,  raise  it  up,  or  turn  it
to  the  right  or  left.  The  body  also  is  almost  always  slightly
inclined  forward,  when  the  patient  is  standing.^

1  lu  référence  to  utterance,  we  may  quote  a  fiagnieiit  of  the  record  of  tlie
patient,  Perd.  .  .  .  Utterance  begau  to  grnw  difficult,  in  tliis  woman,  two
vears  ago  ;  and  during  the  hist  year  the  dilEcuIty  has  considerabiy  increascd.
Wlicn  the  patient  spealcs,  her  lips  tremble,  and  the  enunciation  of  the  first
syllables  is  laboriously  accomplished  ;  lier  utterance  is  tremulous  especially  at
first,  gradually,  as  she  goes  on  speaking,  the  tremulousness  grows  less,  and  the
-words  are  pronounced  in  a  stronger  voice.  The  patient  seems  to  speak  between
ber  teeth  ;  hcr  lips  scarcely  separate,  and  the  jaws  are,  as  it  were,  adhèrent
each  to  each.  The  tongue  is  stirred  by  a  uniform  and  gênerai  tremulousness,
even  when  lying  in  the  buccal  cavity,  and  when  it  is  protruded  the  motion
au"ments.  The  patient  asscrts  that  she  cannot  kcep  it  out  long  :  "  It  cornes
back,  in  spitc  of  me,"  she  says.  The  mouth  is  oftcn  fuU  of  saliva,  and  Perd.  .  .
attributcs  to  this  fact  part  of  her  dilliculty  of  utterance  (B.).

-  Sec  plate  at  the  end  of  this  volume.


ATTITUDE  or  UPPER  EXTREMITIES.


14B


The  attitude  of  the  upper  extremities  deserves  to  be  noticed.
The  elbows  are  habitually  held  a  little  apart  from  the  chest,  the
fore-arms  being  slightly  flexed  upon  the  arms  ;  the  hands,  flexed
upon  the  fore-arms,  rest  upon  the  stomach.^  In  the  course  of
time,  the  hands,  on  account  of  the  permanent  rigidity  of  certain
muscles,  présent  déformations  which  it  is  necessary  to  be  acquainted
with,  as  they  hâve  frequently  rendered  diagnosis  difiîcult.


Fig.  8. — Tlie  writiug  liand. Habituai  attitude  of  the  band  at  a  somewbat
advanced  stage  of  paralysis  agitaus.

Commonly,  the  thumb  and  index  are  extended  and  apposed,  as  if
to  hold  a  pen  ;  the  fingers,  slightly  inclined  towards  the  palm,  are
ail  deviated  outwards  to  the  ulnar  side  (fig.  8).

The  fingers,  in  many  cases,  alternately  flexed  and  extended  at
their  several  articulations,  présent  a  séries  of  inclinations  whicK


Fig.  9. — Digital déformation,  simulating  tbat  of  primitive  cbronic  articulât-

rbeumatisra.

have a deceptive resemblance to certain types of déformation
observed  in  chronic  progressive  rheumatism  (figs.  g  and  lo).

The  distinction,  however,  is  usually  made  with  ease,  if  the  ob-
server be  forewarned  and  on  his  guard. In  cases  of  paralysis  agitaus

'  See  plate  at  tbe  end  of  tbis  volume,  iu  wbicb  the  patient  Gav.  .  .  is
depicted  ;  ber  case  is  described  iu  an  appeudix.  Tbe  inclination  forward,  wbicb
was  very  marked  wbeu  M.  Ricbard  made  tbe  sketcb,  lias  since  become  more
decided.  Moreover,  sbe  now  exbibits  a  tendency  to  incline  towards  the  rigbt
side.  Tbis  latéral  inclination  is  found  to  exist  also  in  another  of  M.  Cbarcot's
patients,  named  Bau.  .  .


142  ATTITUDE  OP  LOWEE  EXTREMITIES.

there  is  found,  in  fact,  neither  tlie  articulai-  tuméfaction  and  stiff-
ness,  nor  tlie  osseous  deposits  and  cracking  sounds  observed  in  nodose
rheumatism.


jpje.  lo. Digital  déformation,  simulating  tliat  of  primitive  chronic  articular

rheumatism.

Witli  respect  to  tlie  lower  extremities,  the  rigidity  of  the  muscles
is  sometimes  so  intense  as  to  suggest  tlie  existence  of  real  para-
plegia^  witli  muscular  contracture.  In  tlie  case  of  the  two  female
patients,  to  wliom  I  directed  your  attention  in  tlie  wards,  their  lower
limbs,  as  you  hâve  seen,  are  rigid  in  semi-flexion  ;  they  can  neither
be  flexed  nor  extended  witliout  considérable  difficulty.  The  knees  are
drawn  togetber  in  adduction  :  tbe  feet  are  stiff,  extended,  and  turned
in,  simulating  tlie  malformation  known  as  talipes  equinus  {parus)  club-
foot;  the  toes  are  raised  and  recurved  so  as  to  form  a  griffe  (or  claw)
on  account  of  the  extension  of  the  first  and  concomitant  flexion  of
the  second  phalanges.  Nevertheless,  thèse  women  still  retain  the
power  of  moving  their  lower  extremities,  thougli  slowly  indeed  and
with  difficulty  :  they  are  even  able,  as  you  hâve  witnessed,  to  walk
in  a  kind  of  a  way,  without  assistance  or  support.  I  hâve  pointed
out  to  you,  gentlemen,  that,  contrary  to  what  takes  place  in  true
paraplegia  with  contracture,  we  do  not  hère  discover  that  tétanie
tremulation,  which,  whether  arising  spontaneously  or  provoked  by
certain  attitudes,  characterises  one  of  the  varieties  of  spinal  cpilepsy.
This  symptom,  on  the  other  hand,  is  generally  found  in  the  para-
plegia which  frequently  accompanies  disseminated  sclerosis,  and  this
is  a  distinguishing  character  on  which  we  shall  hâve  occasion  to  lay
stress  in  diagnosis.

As  Herr  Bencdikt  has  remarked  in  liis  récent  treatise  on  Electro-
thcrapeutics,  the  habituai  rigidity  of  a  certain  number  of  muscles
undoubtedly  contributcs,  to  a  great  extent,  in  rendering  movement
laborious.  But  this  is  not,  we  believe,  the  only  cause  that  should
bc  recognised.  ilowever,  it  is  this  rigidity  which,  detcrmining  the
«^••eneral  attitude,  is  the  reason  that  the  patients,  shrunken  upon


PAEALYSIS  AGITANS  WITHOUT  TREMOE.  143

theraselves  as  it  were,  seem  to  move  ail  of  a  pièce  ;  1-liat  tlieir  joints
ap23ear  "  soldered  together/'  to  use  a  common  but  lairly  descriptive
terni  whicli  I  borrow  from  a  patient  ;  and  that,  finally,  thc  head
and  body  are  kept  inclined  forward~-a  circumstance  whicli  bas
certainly  its  own  share  in  producing  that  tendency  to  fall  forward
"wbich  the  patients  expérience  when  walking.

Gentlemen,  there  are  cases^  thougli  thèse  are  rare  indeed,  in
which  muscular  rigidity  is  a  syniptom  of  the  early  stage  of  the
disease,  and  a  really  prédominant  one.  I  bave  recently  observed  an
example  which  belongs  to  this  category.  The  patient  had  scarcely
noticed  the  tremor  which,  in  fact,  showed  little  intensity  in  bis  case,
and  was  confined  to  one  hand.  He  already  displayed,  however,  in
a  high  degree,  the  peculiar  attitude  of  the  body  and  its  members,
the difficulty of  movement,  and the  characteristic gait.i Such

'  Tlie  followiug  case,  wliicli  we  abridge,  belongs  to  tliis  category  of  excep-
tional  facts.  Guill.  .  .,  aged  53  years  (Salle  St.  Alexandre,  No.  10,  La  Sal-
pêtricre)  after  haviug,  for  some  time,  suffered  from  ccplialalgia,  wanderin"*
pains  of  a  laucinating  character,  and  a  feeling  of  constriction  at  the  epigas-
trium,  noticed,  four  years  ago,  that  the  différent  joints  of  the  rigiit  upper
extreinity  were  growing  stifl".  To  this  phenomenon,  weakness  was  superadded.
The  stifFness  and  debility  invaded,  successively,  tlie  leffc  lower  extrcmity,  the
left  arm,  and  afterwards  the  right  leg.  In  1870,  a  tendency  to  propulsion  and
retropulsion  made  its  appearance.  Thus  when  the  patient  ascended  tlie  stairs
to  lier  lodgiug,  she  was  propelled  forward,  and  only  stopped  when  she  could
lay  hold  on  some  resisting  body;  "without  this  précaution,"  she  said,  "l'd
upset."

To-day,  her  condition  is  as  follows  : — Head  slightly  beut  forward,  ncck  stifF.
The  brow  is  deeply  furrowed,  cspccially  over  the  eyebrows,  whicli  are  uplifted
as  are  the  upper  eyelids  :  hence  the  physiognomy  lias  a  sort  of  stolid  look.
Utterance  is  free.  In  walking,  the  patient  takes  short  steps  and  kceps  the
arms  close  to  the  body,  the  fore-arms  flexed,  aud  the  hands  joined  together,  as
if  for  support.  The  fingers,  takeu  together,  are  slightly  bent  and  gathcred  ;
the  whole  hand  is  inclined  outward  towards  the  ulnar  side.  Ail  the  joints
are  stifF,  but  in  différent  degrees,  the  stiffness  being  greatest  on  the  right  side.
Sensation  is  preserved.  During  the  night,  the  patient  expériences  a  feeling  of
cold  which  passes  down  from  the  shoulder  to  the  wrist,  and  returns  in  fits
lasting  from  five  to  six  minutes.  The  members,  especially  the  right  arm,  feel
heavy.  When  the  patient  wishes  to  rise  from  her  chair,  aud  is  hiudered
from  helping  herself  by  grasping  adjacent  objects,  she  catches  the  legs  of  the
chair  with  her  hands  in  order  to  draw  forward  the  pelvis,  then  she  puts  her
hands  lower  down  ou  the  sides  of  the  chair,  and  after  some  efforts  and  a  kind
of  balancing  to  aud  fro,  she  succeeds  in  getting  up.

Her  slumber  is  generally  short.  During  the  night,  Guill.  .  .  keeps  herself
covered  with  the  slieet  only,  having  a  thin  petticoat  spread  over  her  knees


144  EXECUTIVE  EETACDATION.

cases  are  exceptional.  Most  commonly  muscular  stiffness  only
appears,  or  becomes  prominent,  in  tlie  aclvanced  pliases  of  paralysis
agitans.  Now,  when  it  begins  to  be  nianifest  the  patients  bave
long  experienced,  in  the  exécution  of  movements,  a  notable  want  of
ease  which  is  due  to  anotber  cause.

You  will  readily  discover,  in  some  of  the  patients  whom  I  bave
sbown  you,  tbat  laboriousness  in  tbe  exécution  of  movements  wbicli
is  dépendent  neitber  on  tbe  existence  of  tremors,  nor  on  tbat  of
muscular  rigidity  ;  and  a  somewbat  attentive  examination  will  enable
vou  to  recognise  tbe  significant  fact  tbat,  in  sucb  cases,  tbere  is
rather  retardatiou  in  the  exécution  of  movements  tlian  real  eiifeehle-
ment  of  iîie  motor  pon-ers.  Tbe  patient  is  still  able  to  acconiplish
most  of  tbe  motor  acts,  in  spite  of  tbe  trembling,  but  goes  about
performing  tbem  witb  extrême  slowness.  We  noticed  tbis  fact  a  hw
moments  ago,  in  its  relation  to  tbe  faculty  of  speecb  ;  tbere  is  a
comparatively  considérable  lapse  of  time  between  tbe  tbougbt  and
tbe  act.  One  migbt  suppose  tbat  tbe  nervous  influx  cannot  be  set
to  work,  in  ber  case,  until  after  extraordinary  efforts,  and,  in  reality,
tbe  sligbtest  movements  occasion  extrême  fatigue.  Tbis  group  of
phenomena  bas  been  frequently  taken  as  an  indication  of  a  real  para-
lytic  enfeeblement.  Nevertbeless,  you  will  bave  many  an  opportunity
of  assuring  yourselves  tbat  in  cases  wbere  tbe  disease  bas  not  yet

because  tbey  ave  cold.  A  coverlet,  she  says,  "wouldbetoo  warm  and  too
hcavy."  Let  us  note  also  an  incessant  ueed  of  change  of  posture  (or  fidgetiuess).
She  is  seavcely  seated  for  four  or  five  minutes  wlien  she  asks  to  be  placed  farther
forward,  then  to  one  side,  &c.  Some  moments  after,  she  requests  tliat  her
legs  (which  hâve  a  tendency  to  adduction)  shall  beseparated  ;  then  she  begs  to
1)0  lieljied  to  rise.  AU  thèse  symptoms  sufBce  to  show  that  we  hâve  hère  a
case  of  paralysis  agitans.  Ncvertheless,  although  the  disease  is  of  four  years'
standing,  there  is  scarcely  auy  trembling,  the  right  hand  alone  being  afiected
by  it,  and  that  only  for  the  last  three  mouths.  From  this  it  will  be  seen  that
it  is  possible  to  diaguose  paralysis  agitans,  even  when  tremor  is  absent  (B.)..
It  was  the  same  witli  respect  to  another  patient  whom  M.  Charcot  observed,
a  short  time  ago  (1872).  This  man,  aged  50  years,  was  attackcd  by  "Parkin-
sou's  disease"  in  conséquence  of  a  strong  émotion  oeeasioued  by  the  attcmpts
of  the  Federalists,  during  the  time  of  the  Commune,  to  incorporatc  him  ia
their  battalions.  In  his  case,  ail  tiie  symptoms  and  cspccially  the  attitude
were  présent,  but  tlic  tremor  was  likewisc  déficient.  Fiiiully,  ]\lr.  Goweis  has
coiniiiunicated  to  M.  Charcot  a  case,  noted  by  him,  in  the  National  Hospital
for  Epilepsy  and  Paralysis  of  London  ;  the  patient,  a  woman  uamed  Anne
Phillij)S,  cxhibited  ail  the  symptoms  of  paralysis  agitans,  cxccpting  the  trem-
bling, wiiich  is  barely  perceptible  in  her  movements.  (B.)  {Noie  to  the  second'
dit  ion.)


MUSCULA.U STRENGTH. PECULIAR GAIT.  145

reached  its  last  limits,  the  muscular  power  is  retained,  in  a  remarkable
degree.  This  fact  bas  been  verified,  on  several  occasions^  by  means  of
the  dynamometer  :  in  some  cases,  even,  the  curious  pheuomenon  was
noted  of  the  greatest  amount  of  measured  force  being  présent  in
that  member  which  was  to  ail  appearance  the  weakest  and  most
tremulous.^

Yet  a  Word  upon  the  gaït  peculiar  to  patients  affected  by
paralysis  agitans.  You  bave  seen  some  of  our  patients  get  up
slowly  and  laboriously  from  their  seats_,  hesitate  for  some  seconds
to  step  ont,  then,  once  started,  go  off  in  spite  of  themselves  at  a  rapid
rate.  Several  times  they  threatened  to  fall  heavily  forward.  Does  this--
irrésistible  tendency  to  adopt  a  running  pace  dépend  exclusively  on
the  centre  of  gravity  being  displaced  forward  by  the  inclination  of
the  head  and  body  ?  This  explanation,  which  may,  perhaps,  be
admissible  in  some  instances,  will  not  serve  for  ail.  There  are,  in
fact,  certain  patients  who,  in  contradistinction  to  those  described,
tend  to  run  backwards  when  in  motion,  and  to  fall  backwards,.
although  their  bodies  are  manifestly  inclined  forward.  Besides,,
propulsion,  like  retropulsion,  is  not  absolutely  connected  with  the'
bent  attitude  of  the  body,  for  it  is sometimes  seen  at  an  early

^  We  bave  examined  tlie  amount  of  dynamornetrical  force  présent,  in  six
of  M.  Charcot's  patients. The  followiug  are  the  results  :

ist.  Perd. — Eight  explorations  :  average  on  tlie  right  side,  60  ;  ou  the  left,

42.

2nd.  Guill. — Nine  explorations  :  average  on  the  right  side,  67  ;  on  the  leffc,

3rd.  Berr. — Tliirteen  explorations  :  average  on  the  right  side,  '^ffd  ;  on  the
left,  41  "4.

4th.  Gav. — Five  explorations:  average  ou  the  right  side,  39"6  ;  on  tlie  lel't,

43"4-

5th.  Beau. — Five  explorations  :  average  on  the  right  side,  65\rj  ;  on  the
left,  4  2 '3.

6th.  Dan. — Five  explorations:  average  on  the  right  side,  41  "4;  on  the  left

33'3-

If  thèse  figures  be  compared  with  the  standard  average  85,  which  we
obtaiued  by  similar  explorations  in  the  case  of  five  persous  of  the  same  âge
as  our  patients,  it  becomes  évident  that  the  dynamornetrical  force,  far  froni
being  preserved  in  paralysis  agitans,  is,  on  the  contrary,  dimiuished.  It  is  ail
the  more  difficult  to  explain  the  divergence  betweeu  the  old  opinion  and  our
facts,  since  in  two  of  our  patients  this  diminution  is  as  well-marked  at  the
early  stage  of  the  disease  as  at  the  most  advanced.  Finally,  in  three  cases,
the  dyuamometrical  enfeeblement  is  greatest  on  the  side  where  tremor  pré-
dominâtes (B.).

10


146 PROPULSION  AND  EETROPULSION.

period  of  the  disease,  even  before  there  is  any  inclination  of  tlie
body  at  all.^  In  short,  thèse  are  not  constant  and  necessary  phe-
nomena;  they  are  even  frequently  enough  absent,  and  are  to  be
found  in  the  symptomatic  tables  of  diseases  other  than  paralysis
agitans,  as  in  certain  cases  of  cérébral  lésion,  for  example,  It  is,
however,  right  to  mention  that,  in  the  latter  event,  they  are  often
connected  with  vertigo,  whilst  in  paralysis  agitans  the  movements  of
propulsion  and  retropulsion  do  not  supervene  in  conséquence  of
any  feeling  of  giddiness.

The  symptoms  which  I  hâve  just  reviewed  are  not,  gentlemen,  the

^  Thèse  phenomena  are  very  évident  in  a  patient  under  M.  Charcot's  charge
(Salle  St.  Alexandre,  No.  22).  This  woman  has  attained  a  more  advaneed
stage  of  the  disease,  without  however  beiug  bed-ridden,  than  the  two  patients
mentioned  in  the  preceding  notes.  Ail  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  met
with  in  her  case  ;  but  we  shall  merely  sélect  from  her  history  the  tacts  which
relate  to  propulsion  and  retropulsion.  Suppose,  when  seated,  shc  is  direcied
to  arise  and  walk,  what  do  we  observe  ?  She  hésitâtes  for  a  few  moments,
then  bends  the  body  forward,  aud  after  swinging  herself  to  and  fro,  as  it  were,
suddenly  rises.  When  up,  she  does  not  set  o£f  at  once  ;  she  seems  to  require
to  poise  or  balance  herself  first  ;  she  appears  in  some  sort  uncertain,  the  body
being  iuclined  forward  ;  finally,  she  décides  to  start.  Slow  at  the  outset,  her
gait  is  gradually  accelerated,  and,  after  a  course  of  teu  yards,  she  rushes  forward
at  such  a  rate  that  if,  at  a  given  moment,  she  did  not  fîud  some  obstacle  to
lay  hold  on — a  bed,  chair,  or  wall — she  would  fall  suddenly.  In  this  case,
thercfore,  iwopulsion  is  as  manifest  as  possible.

Retropulsion  is  sometimes  overlooked  because,  in  order  that  patients  should
be  conscious  of  possessing  it,  they  nnist  hâve  had  some  spécial  occasion  to
walk  backwards.  M.  Charcot  employs  a  very  simple  method  of  exhibiting  its
existence.  When  the  patient  is  standing,  it  sufBces  to  pull  her,  unexpectedly
and  slightly,  by  the  skirt,  in  order  to  make  her  immediately  commence
walking  backward  ;  the  rétrograde  movement  soon  becomes  very  rapid,  and
would  be  quickly  dangerous  if  proper  précautions  were  not  taken  (B.).

The  fact  of  the  phenomena  of  propulsion  and  retropulsion  bciug  both
présent  in  the  same  patient  furnislies  an  argument  in  support  of  Professor
Charcot's  proposition  that  the  propulsive  tendency  is  not  absolutcly  connected
with  the  forward  attitude.  In  this  case,  the  woman  when  stopped  in  the
midst  of  an  onward  walk,  being  caught  by  the  gown  and  gently  pulled  back,
immediately  began  to  recède,  aud  this  without  any  perceptible  change  of
attitude.  As  mention  has  been  made  of  the  existence  of  a  stolid  look,  in
such  patients,  it  will  not  be  uniuteresting  to  note,  in  relation  to  the  question
of  the  influence  of  disease  on  tlic  mental  faculties,  that  although  this  patient
was  in  an  advaneed  stage  of  the  discase  and  had  the  charactcristic  facial  signs,
her  niind  appeared  stiil  active  (in  1874).  "Elle  va  comme  une  machine,"
said  au  observer,  on  seeiug  lier  walk.  "  Mais  oui,  comme  une  maciiine  ù  vapeur,"
was  her  quick  rcsponse  (Sigerson).


DISAGREEABLE SENSATIONS.  147

only  phenomena  wliicli  deserve  to  arrest  your  attention.  Paralysis
agitans  is  not  merely  one  of  the  saddest  of  diseases,  inasmuch  as  it
deprives  tlie  patients  of  the  use  of  tiieir  limbs,  and  sooner  or  later
reduces  tliem  to  ahnost  absolute  inaction  ;  it  is  also  a  cruel  affection,
because  of  the  unpleasant  sensations  which  the  sufîerers  expérience.
Usually,  indeed,  (the  neuralgic  cases  which  we  hâve  already  described
being  excepted),  they  are  not  affected  by  acute  pains,  but  by  dis-
agreable  sensations  of  a  spécial  order.  They  coniplain  of  cramps,
or  rather  of  a  nearly  permanent  sensation  of  tension  and  traction  in
most  of  the  muscles,  There  is  also  a  feeling  of  utter  prostration,  of
fatigue,  which  comes  on  especially  after  the  fits  of  trembling  ;  in
short,  an  indefinable  uneasiness,  which  shows  itself  in  a  perpétuai
désire  for  change  of  posture.  Seated,  the  patients  every  moment
feel  obhged  to  get  up  ;  standing,  after  a  few  steps  they  require  to
sit  down.  This  need  of  change  of  position  is  principally  exhibited
at  night  in  bed  by  the  more  infirm,  who  are  incapable  of  attending
on  thcmselves.  The  nurses  charged  witli  their  care  will  tell  you  :
"  They  must  be  turned  now  on  the  right  side,  now  on  the  left,  now
on  the  back."  Half  an  hour,  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  has  scarcely
elapsed  until  they  require  to  be  turned  again,  and  if  their  wish  be  not
immediately  gratified  they  give  vent  to  moans,  which  sufhciently
testify  to  the  intense  uneasiness  they  expérience.  In  spite  of
thèse  différent  troubles,  the  transmission  of  the  cutaneous  sensitive
impressions  is  not  altered  in  paralysis  agitans  ;  cold,  beat,  a  pinch,
the  slightest  touch,  are  ail  jierceived,  as  in  the  normal  state,  and
with  the  wonted  rapidity.

But  there  is  one  very  troublesome  sensation  which  the  patients
expérience,  and  which  I  hâve  not  found  mentioned  in  auy  description  ;
this  is  an  liabïtual  sensation  of  excessive  heaf,  so  tliat  you  shall  see
them  in  the  heart  of  winter  throw  oflp  the  bedclothes,  and  in  the  day-
tinie  only  retain  the  lightest  garments.  Ail  the  cases  under  our
charge  give  évidence  in  favour  of  this  assertion.  It  is  a  peculiarity
worth  noticing,  although  no  reason  can  be  given  for  it,  that  this
sensation  of  beat  is  especially  felt  in  the  epigastrium  and  the  back.
Still  it  may  affect  the  limbs  and  face  also.  It  is  not  of  uniform
intensity  at  ail  times.  It  appears  to  attain  its  maximum  after  the
paroxysms  of  trembling,  and  it  is  then  frequently  accompanied  by
profuse  pcrspiration,  which  is  sometimes  so  great  as  to  necessitate  a
change  of  linen  ;  but  it  may  also  be  found  in  patients  who  do  not
thus  perspire  and  who  are  but  little  troubled  with  tremor.


148  SENSATION OF HEAT. TEMPEEATURE.

The  knowledge  of  tliis  fact  long  since  led  me  to  inquire  whetlier
the  central  température  Avas  altered  in  thèse  patients.  Now  expé-
rience has  proved  to  me  that,  whatever  may  hâve  been  the  intensity
of  this  subjective  sensation  or  of  the  tremor,  the  (rectal)  température
remained  at  the  physiological  limit  (37'5°  C.  =  99"5°  3^.)-

You  will  not  be  surprised,  gentlemen,  to  lind  that  the  muscular  con-
tractions, even  when  so  energetic  and  gênerai  as  are  those  we  note
in  certain  cases  of  paralysis  agitans,  do  not  give  rise  to  an  accumula-
tion of  heat  in  the  central  parts.  Thèse  muscular  contractions  are
dynamïc.  Now,  you  are  aware  that  siat'ic  muscular  contractions
alone,  as  M.  Béclard  has  pointed  eut,  occasion  an  élévation  of  tem-
pérature thermometrically  appréciable.  Prom  this  point  of  view,  as
we,  M.  Ch.  Bouchard  and  myself,  hâve  endeavoured  to  estabhsh,  in
an  essay  communicated  to  the  Société  de  Biologie/  convulsions  may
be  classed  under  two  heads  :

1°.  Siatic,  in  which  tonic  contractions  predominate;  thèse
augment  the  température  to  a  more  or  less  marked  extent.  To  this
category  tetanus  and  epilepsy  belong.

2°.  Dynamic,  in  which  clonic  convulsions  predominate.  Thèse
do  not  affect  the  température  in  a  marked  manner.  Thermometrical
explorations,  which  we  hâve  repeated  many  times  in  cases  of  paraly-
sis agitans,  and  in  some  cases  of  chorea  characterised  by  excessive
agitation,  seem  to  us  to  hâve  placed  the  latter  point  beyond  ail  doubt.^

In  connection  with  this  question  it  would  be  interesting  to  déter-
mine whetlier  the  urine,  in  paralysis  agitans,  présents  any  important
modification  in  its  chemical  composition,  and,  particularly,  any  aug-
mentation in  the  proportion  of  sulphates,  inasmuch  as,  accordingto
Dr.  Bence  Jones,  such  changes  take  place  in  chorea  and  delirium
tremens — diseases  in  which  there  is  great  muscular  expenditure.

1  "  Sur  les  variations  de  la  température  centrale  qui  s'observent  dans
certaines  affections  convulsives  et  sur  la  distinction  qui  doit  être  établie  u  ce
point  de  vue  entre  les  convulsions  toniques  et  les  convulsions  cloniques." —
'Mémoires  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  i866.

"  This  statement  is  corroborated  by  fîve  new  cases.  Tive  explorations
niade  in  the  case  of  Bcr.  gave  an  average  température  of  37*48°  C.  In  the
case  of  Guill,  tliree  explorations  gave  37"6°.  In  the  case  of  Dan.  thrce  morning
explorations  gave  37*3°  C.  ;  and  four  evening  explorations,  37.8°.  In  the
case  of  Grav.  two  morning  explorations  gave  37°'  ;  and  four  evening  ex-
plorations 37'6".  In  the  case  of  Bau.  thrce  morning  explorations  gave  37'i°  ;
and  four  evening  explorations  37'45°.  The  puise  in  tlic  first  case  rcached  90;
ia  the  second,  86;  in  the  third,  84;  and  in  the  liftli,  So.  The  uumbcr  of
respirations,  in  thèse  cases,  was  normal  (B.).


TEKMINAL PEEIOD.  149

Tliis  is  a  desideratum  which  we  propose  some  day  to  make
good.^

Gentlemen,  tlie  symptoms  we  liave  described  to  you  persist,  such
as  we  see  tliem,  for  a  less  or  greater  lapse  of  time  ;  tlien,  sooner  or
îater,  there  cornes  a  period  that  heralds  the  fatal  issue,  which  may  be
•called  the  terminal  period.  The  affection  pursuing  its  course,  the
difficulty  of  movement  increases,  and  the  patients  are  obliged  to
remain,  the  whole  day  long,  seated  ou  a  chair,  or  are  altogether  con-
fined  to  the  bed.  Then,  nutrition  suffers,  especially  the  nutrition  of
the  muscular  System.  There  may  supervene,  as  I  hâve  twice  observed,
a  genuine  fatty  wasting  of  the  muscles.  At  a  given  moment,
the  mind  becomes  clouded  and  memory  is  lost.  General  prostration
sets  in,  the  urine  and  faîces  are  passed  unconsciously,  and  eschars
appear  upon  the  sacrum.  In  such  cases,  the  patients  succumb
to  the  mère  progress  of  their  disease,  by  a  sort  of  exhaustion  of
the  nervous  system;  and  it  is  perfectly  true,  as  several  authors
hâve  remarked,  that  at  this  terminal  period  the  tremor,  however
intense  it  was  before,  is  frequently  seen  to  diminish  and  even  to
disappear.2  On  a  post-mortem  examination,  it  is  not  common  to
£nd  any  important  viscéral  lésion  capable  of  accounting  for  the
occurrence  of  death.  We  do  not  observe,  for  instance,  the  lésions
of  caseous  pneumonia,  or  of  tubercular  phthisis,  which,  as  we
shall  see,  usually  terminate  the  existence  of  women  attacked  with
disseminated  sclerosis  or  with  progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

Such,  however,  is  probably  not  the  most  usual  kind  of  death  in

'  Researches  hâve  since  beea  made,  iu  référence  to  tliis  subject,  by  M.  P.
Eegnard  iii  the laboratory  of the  Sorbonne, — two  of the  patients in  M.

'  Charcot's  wards  beiug  placed  under  examination.  In  both  cases,  the  urine
contained  a  nearly  normal  proportion  of  urea,  but  a  less  than  normal  propor-
tion of  sulphuric  acid.  The  average  of  fourteen  spécimens  gave  19*50
grammes  of  tirea  ;  and  i'25  instead  of  2  grammes  of  sulphuric  acid.
It  follows  from  thèse  analyses  that  the  excrétion  of  sulphates  is
diminished  in  paralysis  agitans,  contrary  to  the  opinion  advanced  by  Dr.
Bence  Jones  when  treating  of  chorea.  In  the  latter  affection,  indeed,
Lehmann  and  Gruner  hâve  always  found  a  diminution  of  sulphates.  Vogel,
on  liis  side,  arrives  at  the  same  results,  and  he  thinks  that  the  contrary  con-
clusions of  Dr.  Bence  Jones  must  be  attributed  to  tlie  insufficiency  of  the
analytic  method  employed. — -Note  to  Second  (FrencJi)  Edition.

-  In  the  case  of  a  patient  under  M.  Charcot's  charge  (Latouil — Marie-
Françoise) whose  clinical  history  is  given,  i/i  extenso,  in  the  thesis  of

■Gîaveleira,  the  trembling  completely  disappeared  the  second  day  hIj:i
^eath  ('De  la  Paralysie  Agitans,'  1872,  p.  35).


150  PATHOLOGICAL  ANATOMT.

paralysis  agitaus.  The  fatal  termination,  in  fact,  is  frequently  owing
to  an  intercurrent  discase.  Trousseau  tlirice  beheld  death  super-
vene  in  conséquence  of  pneumonia,  and  I  hâve  noticed  the  same
thing  myself  in  several  individuals  suffering  from  paralysis  agitans.
Was  this  complication  due  to  the  habit  whicli  such  patients  hâve  of
remaining  uncovered,  even  in  the  coldest  vreather,  on  account  of
the  sensation  of  interior  heat  they  expérience  ?  We  are  unable  to
afhrm  it.

Let  us  not  forget,  gentlemen,  that  paralysis  agitans  is  one  of  the
grave  affections  of  the  nervous  system  whose  duration  is  the  longest.
It  may  last  for  thirty  years.  The  symptoms  of  the  third  period
may  themselves,  as  I  hâve  witnessed,  linger  on  for  four  or  five
years.

If  I  hâve  dwelt  thus  minutely  upon  the  symptomatological  descrip-
tion of  paralysis  agitans,  it  is  because  it  constitutes,  even  at  the
présent  hour,  uearly  the  whole  of  the  history  of  this  disease.

The  few  autopsies  wliich  hâve  until  now  been  made  on  persons
supposedly  affected  by  paralysis  agitans  may  be  grouped  into  three
classes.

The  first  class  includes  the  cases  in  whicli  no  perceptible  lésion
has  been  met  with  in  spite  of  the  most  attentive  explorations.
Several  facts  of  this  kind  hâve  been  placed  on  record  by  différent
authors.  For  my  part,  I  hâve  iioted  three  well-raarked  cases
of  paralysis  agitans  in  which  the  results  of  the  autopsies  were
altogether  négative.  At  other  times,  we  find  mention  made  of
common-place  lésions,  particularly  of  senile  cérébral  atrophy  ;  now
this  may  exist,  as  is  well  known,  without  the  slightest  tremor  having
been  ever  présent.

The  second  class  comprises  the  observations  published  by  some
authors, — Bamberger,  Lebert,  and  Skoda,  for  instance, —  under  the
head  of  paralysis  agitans,  and  in  which  lésions  hâve  been  found  that,
in  ail  probability,  pertain  to  disseminated  sclerosis.  Such  are  the  cases
of  Bamberger,  Lebert,  and  Skoda.  Was  paralysis  agitans  really  the
disease  under  considération,  or  were  not  the  clinical  symptoms  rather
those  of  disseminated  sclerosis  ?  The  latter  was  certainly  the  fact,
at  least  as  regards  Skoda's  case.  We  shall,  however,  revert  to  this
question,  on  a  future  occasion.

Fiiially,  the  last  group  contains  the  case  given  by  Parkinson  and
that  of  Oppolzer.  In  Parkinson's  case,  which,  by  the  way,  he
relates  at  secondhand,  it  appears that there  was an  augmenta-


PATHOLOGICAL PHYSIOLOGY.  151

tion  of  volume,  with  induration  of  the  pons  Varolii,  of  the  metlnlla
oblongata,  and  of  the  cervical  portion  of  the  cord,  and  that  in  addition
to  this  the  nerves  of  the  tongue  and  those  of  the  arm  were  apparently
tendinous.  The  latter  necrosco])icnl  détail,  with  others  unnecessary
to  mention,  seems  of  a  kiud  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  value  of  this
case  from  an  anatomo-pathological  point  of  view.

As  to  the  account  given  by  Professor  Oppolzer  it  is  scarcely  more
conclusive,  in  our  opinion,  in  spite  of  the  importance  that  has  been
accorded  it.  On  iwst-morteni  examination  there  was  also  found  au
induration  of  the  pons  Yarolii,  which,  after  microscopical  scrutiny,
was  attributed  to  a  hyperplasia — a  prolifération  of  the  connective
tissue.  What  are  the  characters  of  this  hyperplasia  ?  The  narrative
is  silent  respecting  them.  There  is  no  mention,  in  the  original  text,
of  any  atrophy  of  the  nervous  cléments,  nor  of  any  signs  of  fatty
degeneration,  two  lésions  given,  for  what  reason  I  know  not,  in  the
version  adopted  by  Trousseau  in  his  clinical  lectures.

The  foregoing  considérations  show,  gentlemen,  that  the  spécial
lésion  of  paralysis  agitans  remains  to  be  discovered.^

The  pathological  physïology  of  the  disease  is  scarcely  more  ad-
vanced  tlian  its  anatomy.  Very  shortly,  I  expect  I  shall  hâve  an
opportunity  of  demonstrating  the  accuracy  of  this  assertion  before
you.  I  shall  not  dwell  upon  the  subject  now,  as  I  désire  to  conclude
the  clinical  history  of  paralysis  agitans  by  stating  what  we  know  with
respect  to  the  etiology  and  therapeutical  history  of  this  disease.

Etiology. — A.  Among  external  causes,  two  especially  hâve  a  right
to  be  mentioned,  in  a  tolerably  large  number  of  cases.  Pirst
in  order  comes  the  influence  of  violent  shocks  of  the  i  nervous
System — fright,  terror,  the  sudden  communication  of  bad  news,  &c.
Instances  of  this  kind  abound  in  books,  and  the  facts  which  wehave

1  Since  tbis  lecture  was  delivered  (iu  1868),  M.  Charcot  lias  bad  occasion
to  make  tbree  new  post-mortem  exaniinations.  Tbe  lésions  he  met  with  are  of
two  kinds  :  Those  of  tbe  first,  constant  in  thèse  tbree  cases,  cousisted  in  (a)
oblitération  of  tbe  central  canal  of  the  spinal  cord  by  prolifération  of  the
epitbelial  cléments  wbich  line  the  ependyma  ;  {b)  prolifération  of  tbe  nuclei
which  surround  the  ependyma  ;  {c)  pigmentation  of  nerve-cells,  most  marked
in  Clarke's  columu  cliiefly.  Of  tbe  second  kind  of  lésion,  one  was  peculiar  to  two
of  thèse  tbree  cases,  and  consistcd  in  a  multiplication  of  tbe  amyloid  cor-
puscles, —  one  was  found  only  iu  a  single'  case  ;  this  was  a  sclerosed  patch  ou
the  posterior  surface  of  the  bulbus  racbidicus.  In  tbe  most  marked  case"(of
paralysis  agitans)  there  was  no  lésion  of  tbe  protubentia  or  of  the  bulbus
discovered. (For  further  détails,  see  Joffroy,  '  Société  de  Biologie/  1871.)


152  EXTERNAL CAUSES.

ourselves  collected  oblige  us  to  put  away  ail  scepticism  on  this
subject.

Of  the  female  patients  wliom  we  bave  interrogated  many  related
liow  their  complaint  took  its  rise  in  the  midst  of  the  political  com-
motions by  which  our  country  has  been  agitated.  It  may  be  sufficient
to  mention  the  case  of  the  gendarmées  wife,  which  we  bave  already
referred  to,  and  that  of  a  woman  at  présent  occupying  bed  No.  3  in
the  Salle  St.  Alexandre,  who  began  to  tremble  after  a  violent  émotion
occasioned  by  the  events  of  December,  1851.  Besides  the  instances
which  came  under  our  own  observation  we  may  mention — 1°,  a  case  of
M.  Hillairet  (recorded  in  our  memoir)  concerning  a  father  who  saw  his
son  killed  before  his  eyes  ;  i°,  another  case,  published  by  Oppolzer,
relating  to  a  burgher  of  Vienna,  terrified  by  the  bursting  of  a  bomb
beside  liim  -^  and  3°,  a  case  given  by  Van  Swieten,  where  a  man
was  suddenly  roused  from  sleep  by  a  fearful  thunder-clap.  It  would
be  easy  to  multiply  examples,  but  this  could  add  nothing  to  what
we  hâve  already  told  you.  What  it  behoves  you  to  know  is  the
fact  that,  in  ail  thèse  patients,  the  trembling  followed  immediately,
or  almost  immediately,  on  the  occurrence  of  the  cause.  But  the
peculiar  nature  of  the  cause,  be  it  known  to  you,  does  not  impress
any  spécial  character  upon  the  disease.

Let  us  note,  in  the  second  place,  the  influence  of  prolongea
exposure  to  moist  cold  in  the  production  of  paralysis  agitans,  an
influence  which,  according  to  some  authors,  should  suffice  to  esta-
blish  its  rheumatic  origin.  However,  one  important  fact  may  be
alleged  against  this  view,  which  is  that,  neither  before  the  develop-
ment  nor  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  do  we  meet  with  any  form
of  chronic  or  acute  articular  rheumatism,  some  rare  cases  excepted.
We  notice,  at  most,  in  cases  where  the  influence  of  cold  can  be
accused,  the  présence  of  wandering  rheumatic  or  neuralgic  pains.

'  In  a  work  published  in  1873  ('Berliner  Klin.  Wochenschrift,'  No.  24,  p.
278,  &c.),  Dr.  O.  Kohts  reports  a  number  of  cases  of  nervous  affections,
observed  at  Strasbourg,  which  the  patients  attributed  to  the  terror  caused  by
the  bombardment  of  that  city.  The  author,  who  expatiates  complacently  on
that  disastrous  event,  informs  us  that  the  number  of  bombs  showered  upon
Strasbourg  amounted  in  thirty-one  days  to  193,722,  making,  as  he  calculâtes,
€249  V^^  day,  269  per  hour,  or  from  four  to  five  per  minute.  Amongst  the
pathological  cases  quoted,  three  appear  to  relate  to  paralysis  agitans  :  one  is  that
of  a  woman,  aged  fifty  years,  another  that  of  a  woman  aged  sixty-one  years,
and  tlie  third  that  of  a  man  aged  fifty-six  years.  (B.) — Note  to  the  Second
French  Edition.


INFLUENCE OP COLD AND NERVE-IREITATION.  153

In  this  conuectiou  we  may  quote  tlie  case  of  a  womaii  to  wliom
your  attention  was  drawn,  and  vvhose  (elephantine)  gait  recalls  that
of  tlie  larger  })achyderms.  This  woman,  who  was  engaged  in  wafer-
making,  lived  for  over  teu  years  in  a  very  damp  apartment  on  the
ground-floor,  and  the  description  she  gives  of  her  unhealthy  abode
leaves  no  doubt  upon  the  subject.  She  was,  moreover,  exposed  to
fréquent  chills  in  carrying  on  her  trade.

There  are  cases  in  which  this  cause  is,  in  our  opinion,  far  from
having  played  the  part  assigned  to  it.  Such  is  that  recorded  by
Eomberg  relating  to  a  man  who,  in  1813,  was  stripped  naked  by
the  Cossacks  in  snowy  weather.  Is  the  action  of  cold  to  be  accused
in  this  case,  or  the  influence  of  terror  ?

Finally,  we  will  point  ont  a  third  cause,  which  has  been  silently
passed  over,  by  most  médical  writers,  in  describing  this  disease,
namely,  the  irritation  of  certain  peripheral  nerves,  supervening  in
conséquence  of  a  wound  or  contusion.  A  case  mentioned  by  Haas,
from  Door,  in  1853,  and  quoted  by  Dr.  Sanders,  appears  to  belong
to  this  etiological  group.  It  rehites  to  a  girl  of  nineteen,  under
whose  right  toe-nail  a  thorn  had  penetrated.  She  immediately  com-
plained  of  acute  pain,  and  soon  after  was  seized  with  trembling,
which,  though  at  first  limited  to  the  wounded  foot,  gradually  became
generaHsed.  This  trembling,  it  is  said,  completely  disappeared  in
the  course  of  time.  A  termination  so  exceptional  affords  us  reason
to  doubt  whether  this  was  really  a  case  of  paralysis  agitans.

The  wife  of  one  of  our  provincial  brethren,  whom  I  attended,
received  a  severe  contusion  of  the  left  thigh,  owing  to  a  fall  from
her  carriage.  After  some  time  there  supervened  in  the  injured  limb
acute  pain  following  the  course  of  the  ischiatic  nerve,  and,  shortly
afterwards,  the  extremity  was  affected  by  trembling  throughout  its
entire  extent.  This  tremor,  which  was  at  first  temporary,  became
permanent  later  on,  and  finally  invaded  the  other  members.

With  this  case  we  may  place  that  of  a  midwife,  who  was  also
taken  with  paralysis  agitans.  This  patient,  who  was  under  my
care  in  La  Salpêtrière  for  many  years,  had  experienced  a  violent
pain,  limited  to  the  course  of  the  nerves  of  the  leg  and  foot.  The
parts  so  affected  were  the  first  seized  with  tremor.  The  pain,
which  had  arisen  spontaneously,  and  which  was  at  times  intolérable,
resisted  the  most  energetic  remédies.  It  persisted  until  the  death
of  the  patient,  on  whom,  unfortunately,  no  autopsy  could  be
performed.


154  PEEDISPOSING INFLUENCES.

B.  We  hâve  indicated  the  cases  in  whicli  the  influence  of  an
etiological  élément  may  be  discerned  ;  but  there  are  others  where
the  most  attentive  investigations  do  not  lead  to  any  resuit.  Hère
we  are  reduced  to  inquire  into  the  predisposing  influences,  which  it
now  remains  for  us  to  review.

In  relation  to  the  question  of  âge,  we  should  point  out  that
shaking  palsy  is  not,  as  has  been  asserted,  a  senile  disease.  It  is
true  that  it  sets  in  after  forty,  and  consequeutly  at  a  later  period
than  disseminated  sclerosis.  This  rule,  however,  is  not  absolute  ;
some  instances  may  be  cited  in  which  the  disease  showed  itself
at  an  early  âge,  at  twenty,  for  example,  as  in  a  case  which  M.
Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  has  told  us  of.^

Sex  appears  not  to  exercise  any  pathogenic  influence  ;  paralysis
agitans  is  found  as  commonly  in  maies  as  in  females.

We  possess  no  précise  information  with  respect  to  the  influence
of  liereditary  prédisposition.  Unlike  locomotor  ataxia  in  certain
circumstances,  and  progressive  muscular  atrophy,  paralysis  agitans
is  not  a  family  disease.  The  observations  which  hâve  produced  a
contrary  impression  relate  to  partial  tremors  that  showed  no  ten-
dency  to  become  generalised,  and  which  pertain  rather  to  the  class
of  convulsive  twitchings  [tics  convîùlsifs) .

There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  (in
England  and  North  America)  is  the  most  subject  to  this  disease.  The
accounts  which  I  hâve  received  from  physicians  of  the  countries
mentioned,  niy  personal  expérience,  and  especially  the  information
with  which  ray  friend,  M.  Brown-Séquard,  has  supphed  me,  ail
yield  support  to  this  opinion.

But  even  in  those  countries  shaking  palsy  is  not  vcri/  common.
Dr.  Sanders,  in  his  statistical  table,  which  comprises  England  and

1  M.  Fioupe  has  published  in  the  '  Journal  de  Médecine  et  de  Chirurgie
Pratiques'  (p.  389,  1874)  the  case  of  a  young  girl,  under  the  care  of  Dr.
Siredcy,  who  was  stricken  with  shaking  palsy  at  the  âge  of  from  fîfteen  to
sixteen  years  :  "  Towards  the  end  of  tlie  siège  of  Paris  she  had  one  day  taken
refuge  in  a  ccUar  to  bc  out  of  the  way  of  the  projectiles,  when  a  shell  burst,
destroying  three  or  four  persons  at  hcr  side.  Seized  with  violent  terror,  she
fainted  away,  and  when,  after  a  few  instants,  she  came  to  lier  sensés,  it  was
soon  observcd  that  lier  riglit  arm  was  shakcn  by  a  slight  tremor,  which  in  a
little  time  invaded  the  riglit  lower  extremity  also."  She  présents,  at  présent,
ail  the  symptoms  which  dénote  paralysis  agitans  :  characteristic  physioguomy,
fixity  of  gaze,  spécial  attitude  of  hcad  and  body,  peculiar  gait,  propulsion,
rctropulbiou,  &c.  (B.) — Note  to  the  Second  French  Edition.


TREATMENT.  155

Wales,  aiid  reaclies  from  1855  to  1863,  records  205  cases  of  death
by  paralysis  agitaus — that  is,  an  average  of  22  deaths  per  year  (four-
teeu  meu  and  eiglit  women) .  Finally^  tliis  disease  figures  in  the
fifth  place,  side  by  side  witli  locomotor  ataxia,  on  the  etiological
list  of  affections  treated  at  La  Salpêtricre.

Treaiment. —  A  few  words,  in  conclusion,  gentlemen,  upon  thera-
peutical  remédies.  It  is  an  incontestable  fact  that  paralysis  agitans
is  sometimes  cured.  Does  this  cure  take  place  spontaneously,  or
because  of  the  remédies  employed  ?  The  latter  hypothesis  is  but
little  probable,  so  far  as  the  majority  of  thèse  fortunate  cases  are
concerned,  for  the  same  drugs,  to  which  the  crédit  of  effecting  the
cure  in  such  cases,  lias  been  given,  hâve  completely  failed  in  other
cases.  EUiotson  administered  carbonate  of  iron,  and  Brown-Séquard
chloride  of  barium — each  of  them  had  a  success  to  chronicle,  and,
along  with  that,  cases  in  which  the  results  were  négative.  M.
Duchenne  (de  Boulogne)  has  likewise  to  record  the  cure  of  one  of
his  patients.  Thèse  instances  prove  that  paralysis  agitans  is  not
incurable.  But  we  must  eonfess  that  we  are  ignorant  of  the  means
employed  by  nature  to  ])roduce  this  resuit.

Everything,  or  almost  everything,  has  been  tried  against  this
disease.  Among  the  médicinal  substances  that  bave  been  extolled,
and  which  T  hâve  administered  wH.hout  any  bénéficiai  effect,  I  need
only  enumerate  a  few.  Strychnine,  praised  by  Trousseau  ('  Journal
de  Beau  '),  appears  to  me  rather  to  exasperate  the  trembling  than
to  calm  it.  Ergot  of  rye  and  belladomia,  recommended  on  account
of  their  anti-convulsive  qualifies,  hâve  not  yielded  any  very  profit-
able results.  The  same  verdict  must  be  given  in  référence  to  opium,
which,  on  the  contrary,  augments  reflex  excitability,  and  which  was
supposed  capable  of  moderating  the  tremor  because  of  diminishing
the  pain.  Latterly  I  hâve  made  use  of  hyoscyamine,  from  which
some  patients  hâve  obtained  relief;  its  action,  however,  is  simply
palliative.

Ogle  gave  Calabar  bean  without  any  advantage.  As  to  nitrate
of  silver  it  has  always  appeared  to  us  to  exaggerate  the  convulsive
condition,  and  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  in  disseminated
sclerosis  it  sometimes  produces  a  fairly  marked  amendment,  and
diminishes  the  intensity  of  the  shaking.^

1  M.  Eulenberg  has  recently  recommended  the  hypoderraic  injection  of  a
solution  composed  of  one  part  of  arseuiate  of  potash  to  two  parts  of  water
('  Berliner  Klin.  Wochenschr./  Nov.,  1872). This  mode  of  treatment,  having


156  TEEATMENT.

Finally,  we  should  mention  the  application  of  electricity,  which,
-according  to  some  physicians^  lias  brought  about  several  cures.
Neither  statical  electricity  nor  the  interrupted  curreut  is  recom-
mended.  Thèse  agents,  though  of  benefit,  it  is  said^  in  chorea  are,
at  least  according  to  Dr.  Gull,  inefficient  as  against  paralysis  agitans.
The  continued  current  of  a  galvanic  pile  is  prescribed.  It  is  not
necessary,  gentlemen,  to  remind  you  to-day  that  the  physiological
^nd  therapeutical  effects  differ  remarkably  as  you  make  use  of  one
or  other  of  thèse  kinds  of  currents.  However  it  be,  there  are  at
least  tvvo  cases  in  which  this  method  of  treatment  seems  to  hâve
proved  successfnl..  The  first  pertains  to  Eemak,  the  second  to  Dr.
Eussell  E,eynolds.  It  is  proper,  therefore,  when  the  occasion  ofPers,
to  hâve  recourse  to  the  continued  current.

been  tried  by  us  iu  M.  Charcot's  wards,  gave  no  satisfactory  results  ('  Progrès
Médical,'  1874,  p.  245).  We  hâve  also  prescribed  bromide  of  camplior  in  the
case  of  two  patients  iu  the  same  ward,  vphose  disease  liad  lasted  for  several
years.  In  tbe  first  weeks  there  was  amendment  of  some  symptoms,  but  this  im-
provement  did  not  persist.  It  niight,  perhaps,  be  well  to  recur  to  this  thera-
peutic  agent  in  less  advanced  cases.  (B.) — Note  to  the  Second  French  Edition.


LECTURE  YI.

DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS. PATHOLOGICAL  ANATOMï.

SuMMAEY. — Hisfori/  of  disseminated  sclerosis  ;  Freiich  periocl  ;
German  period  ;  New  French  investigations  ;  Macroscopic
morhid  anatomy  ;  external  aspect  of  tlie  patches  of  sclerosis  ;
iheir  distribution  in  hrain,  cereheUum,  protuberantia,  hidbus
raclàdicus,  and  sjnnal  cord.  Patc/ies  of  sclerosis  on  tlie  nerves.
Spinal,  cephalic  or  bulbar,  and  cerebro- spinal  f omis.  Characters
of  the  sclerosed patelles  ;  tJieir  colour,  consistence,  8fc.

3Iicroscopic  anatomy  ;  sTcetch  of  the  normal  histology  of
the  spinal  cord  ;  Nerve-tubes  ;  Neuroglia,  ifs  distribution  ;  Cor-
tical layer  of  the  reticulmn.  Characters  of  the  neuroglia,
influence  of  chromlc  acid.  Arterial  capillaries.  Hisiological
cjiaracters  of  the  sclerosed patches  ;  transverse  sections  ;  péri"
^heral  zone  ;  transition  zone  ;  central  région.  Longitudinal
sections.  Altérations  of  the  blood-vessels.  Examination  ofthe
sclerosed  patches  in  thefresh  state.  liistological  lésions  consecio-
tive  on  section  of  the  nerves.  Fatty  granulations  in  sections
of  the  sclerosed  2^(f'tches  observed  in  the  fresh  state.  Modi-
fications of  the  nerve-cells. Mode  of  succession  of  the  lésions.

Gentlemen, — At  our  last  conférence  I  dwelt  upon  tlie  distinction
whicli  sliould  be  made  between  the  différent  kinds  of  tremor.  I
menti oned,  at  the  outset,  that  thej  coukl  be  divided  into  two  groups ;
one,  in  which  tremor  is  in  some  sort  permanent  ;  another,  in
which  tremor  only  supervenes  on  purposed  movements.  Then,
proceeding  from  thèse  notions,  I  cited  as  an  example  of  the  tremor
characteristic  of  the  first  class,  that  observed  in  paralysis  agitans,  the
history  of  which  I  traced  for  you.  On  onr  way,  I  noted  some  of  the
characters  which  enable  usj  in  thèse  days^  to  distinguish  this  disease


158  HISTOEICAL SKETCH.

from  auotlier  affection,  previously  coiifouucled  witli  it,  iiainelj,  from
disseminated  sclerosis.

To  tliis  affection,  wliicli  offers  us  an  example  of  tremulation
belonging  to  the  second  class,  i.e.  a  tremor  wliicli  only  appcars  under
certain  conditions,  we  shall  dev^ote  the  présent  and  succecding  lectures.
Anatomically  considered,  disseminated  sclerosis  forms  a  clearly  de-
fined  patliological  species  ;  cliuically,  the  case  is  différent,  and  in
this  connection  we  shall  hâve  many  blanlcs  to  fill  up.  Let  us  begin
by  a  fevv  words  on  the  history  of  the  snbject.

HisTouicAL  Note.

Disseminated  sclerosis  is  found  mentioned,  for  the  first  time,  in
Cuveilhier^s  '  Atlas  d'Anatomie  Pathologique/  1835-1842,  an  admir-
able work,  which  ought  to  be  more  frequently  consulted  by  ail  who
désire  to  avoid  the  disappointmeut  of  making  second-hand  "  dis-
coveries"  in  morbid  anatomy.  In  Parts  23  and  23  you  will
observe  représentations  of  the  lésions  found  in  disseminated  sclerosis,
and,  side  by  side,  you  can  read  the  clinical  observations  which  re-
late to  them.  I  take  advantage  of  this  opportunity  to  commend  to
your  perusal  a  remarkable  chapter  on  paraplegia.  Previous  to  this
epoch,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  no  trace  of  disseminated
sclerosis  to  be  discovered  anywhere.

After  Cruveilhier,Carswell  in  the  article  on  '^  Atrophy,''  contained  in
his  'Atlas,'  183S,  lias  had  lésions  depicted  which  pertain  to  dissemi-
nated sclerosis.  But  this  author,  who  has  drawn  the  materials  of  his
work  chiefly  from  the  hospitals  of  Paris,  does  uot  relate  any  clinical
case  in  connection  with  this  subject.  Even  to-day  I  do  not  belicve
that  disseminated  sclerosis  is  known  in  England.i  I  do  not  find
it  indicated  in  any  of  the  standard  works  published  in  that  country,
not  even  in  Dr.  Gull's  valuable  collection.-

Thus,  up  till  that  time,  the  prnicipal  documents  in  connection
with  this  disease  had  been  collected  in  Prance.  Prom  that  period
forth,  during  a  lapse  of  several  years,  this  question  dropped  into
almost  comi)lcte  oblivion,  and  we  hâve  to  seek  in  Germany  for  ncw
iudicia.  Ludwig  Turck  published,  in  1855,  examples  of  lésions
manifestly  belonging  to  disseminated  sclerosis  ;  still,  the  physio-
logical  aspect  of  it  alone  engaged  his  mind  ;'"  llokitansky  indicatcs

'  Tliis  lecture  was  dolivercd  in  1868.

-  Cases  of  i'aniplcgia  in  '  Guy's  IIospitalRcports/  1S56— iS.yS.

^  "  Beobachtungeii  iiber  das  Leitungsvermogeii  des  Meuscldidcn  lluclien


PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY.  159

them  in  liis  treatise  ;^  iVerichs  "  and  Valentine  ^  record  two  observa-
tions; Rindfleisch,^  Leyden/  and  Zenker/'  présent  in  thcir  turn
some  éléments  towards  the  solution  of  tlie  problem.  There  were,
liowever,  desiderata  to  be  supplied,  and  new  researches  were  indis-
pensable. It  was  at  La  Salpêtrière  that  the  question  of  dissemi-
nated  sclerosis  once  more  attracted  attention  amougst  us.  In  1862,
M.  Vulpian  and  myself  placed  new  examples  on  record.  M.
Bouchard,  founding  his  remarks  on  the  cases  collected  by  us  at
the  Salpêtrière,  reopened  the  subject  in  a  treatise  which  he  read
before  the  Médical  Congress  at  Lyons.

In  the  preceding  enumeration  of  authorities,  we  bave  taken  count
chiefly  of  the  works  relatiug  to  the  pathological  anatomy  of  the  sub-
ject,^ as  we  propose  to  make  mention  hereafter  of  those  wliich  coutain
clinical  détails.  To  the  items  of  information  culled  from  the  writers
whose  names  are  mentioned  above,  we  shall  add  other  information
drawn  from  unpublished  sources/  and,  in  order  to  facilitate  the
understanding  of  our  studies,  we  shall  place  before  your  eyes  tjbe
anatomical  préparations  which  we  hâve  preserved.

Macroscopic  Anatomy,

Disseminated  sclerosis,  as  I  hâve  informed  you,  gentlemen,  is  not  an
exclusively  spinal  affection.  It  invades  the  cerebrum,  the  pons  Varolii,
the  cerebellum,  the  bulbus  rachidicus,  as  well  as  the  spinal  cord.
We  shall,  therefore,  enumerate  the  altérations  which  are  to  be  ob-
served,  taking  the  most  distinctive  cases,  in  the  différent  parts  of
the  nervous  system,  viewing  them  first  externally,  then  in  section.

We  hâve  hère  to  consider  a  comparatively  coarse  altération,
and  it  is  surprising  that  it  should  hâve  escaped  observation  so
long. On  the  plates  before  you,  in  which  thèse  changes  are  ac-

raarks,"  '  Sitzungsbericlite  der  Kais.  Akademie  der  Wissenscbafteii,  Matb.
Natur.  Class.,'  t.  xvi,  1855,  p.  229.

1  'Lehrbuch  der  Patbolojîiscben  Auatomie,'  1856,  Zweiter  Baud,  p.  48S.

^  'Haeser's  Arcbiv,'  Band  x.

3  "  TJeber  die  Sclérose  der  Gebirns  uud  lliickemiiarks  "  ('  Dcutscbe  Ivliuik,'
1856,  No.  14).

''  "  Histologisclie  Détail  zu  der  Grauen  Degeueratiùu  von  Hira  und  Rùckeii-
marks"  (' Vircbow's  Arcbiv,'  JJ.  xxvi,  liei't  und  6,  p,  474).

^  "  Ueber  graue  Degeneratiou  des  PLÛckeumarks  "  ('Deutscbe  Klinik,'  No.
13,  1867).

^  "Ein  Beitrag  zur  Sclérose  des  Hirns  und  lluckcnmarks  "  ('  Zeitscbrift  fur
B,at.  Mediziu,'  B.  xxiv,  Heft  2  und  3).


160  DISTRIBUTION OF SCLEEOSED NODULES.

curately  depicted,  you  see  the  spinal  cord  spotted  with  greyish
patelles,  liaving  a  more  or  less  regular  outline,  but  in  every  case
distinctly  circumscribed  and  contrasting  widely  witli  tlie  adjacent
portion  of  the  cord. (See  Plates  III  and  IV.)

Sometimes  discrète,  sometimes  confluent,  thèse  spots  or  patches,  as
you  may  easily  perceive,  are  disseminated  without  any  apparent  order
and  as  it  were  by  chance,  over  the  whole  of  the  spinal  cord .  The  medulla
oblongata  itself  does  not  escape, — far  from  it  (see  Plate  I,  figs.  i  and
3)  ;  différent  portions  of  the  encephalon  are  also  frequently  afFected.

But  we  cannot  content  ourselves  with  this  simple  sketch,  and  we
must  enter  upon  the  détails  of  a  more  regular  description.  At  the
outset,  we  should  remark  that  a  mère  external  examination  will
give  but  a  very  imperfect  idea  of  the  lésion.  The  spots  or  patches
which  we  hâve  mentioned  are  not  superfîcial  ;  they  constitute  real
kernels  or  foci  which  penetrate  into  the  substance  of  the  tissues.
Prequently,  indeed,  the  section  itself  will  reveal  the  existence  of
other  spots  concealed  in  the  interior.

Let  us  first  examine  the  encephalon.  The  gênerai  appearance  of
the  cerebrum  proper  has  undergone  no  modification  of  form,  nor,
we  may  add,  of  colour  ;  for  the  patches  are  very  rarely  found  on  the
grey  substance  of  the  convolutions.  It  is  différent,  however,  as
regards  the  central  parts.  There,  in  fact,  we  fmd  the  patches,
especially  on  the  walls  of  the  ventricles,  in  the  w^iite  substance  of
the  centrum  ovale,  the  septum  lucidum,  the  corpus  callosum,  and
finally  in  certain  régions  of  the  grey  matter,  e.g.^  the  optic  thalami,
and  the  corpora  striata  (Plate  II,  figs.  i  and  2) .

The  cerehellum  generally  présents  only  internai  patches,  which
occupy  especially  the  corpus  rhomboideum  (Plate  I,  figs.  i  and  2).

The  bulhns  raclààicus,  the  pons  VaroUi,  and  the  différent  dis-
tricts of  the  isthmus,  are  very  frequently  affected  by  patches
of  sclerosis  Avliich,  in  sucli  cases,  are  both  peripheral  and  deep-
seated.  When  the  bulbus  rachidicus  is  attacked,  the  patches  are
found  to  affect,  cither  singly  or  simultaneously,  the  corpora  olivaria,
pyramidalia,  restiformia,  and  the  posterior  région  where  the  nuclei
of  origin  of  the  bulbar  nerves  are  disposed.  As  regards  the  pons,
the  patches  generally  occupy  its  antero-inferior  aspect.  If  we  ascend
higher,  wc  see  the  corpora  mammilaria  (or  albicantia)  and  the  crura
cerebri  affected  (Plate  I,  figs.  i  and  2).

We  now  corne  to  the  spinal  cord.  Through  the  pia  mater  we
often  perceive  the  grey  spots  which  assume  a  rosy  tint  or  salmon-


SCLEROSED PATCHES ON CORD AND NEEVES.  161

colour,  ou  contact  "with  the  atmosphère.  But  it  is  especially  after
the  removal  of  this  membrane,  a  removal  easily  effected,  that  the
lésions  are  clearly  perceived.  They  afFect  the  whole  of  the  cord,
being  found  in  the  cervical,  dorsal,  and  lumbar  régions  ;  they
invade  ail  the  différent  columns  indiscriminately,  are  to  be  found  on
the  sides  of  the  fissures,  and  attack  the  grey  substance  as  well  as
the  white  (Plates  III  and  IV).

The  nerves  themselves  do  not  escape  sclerosis.  We  see  them,
indeed,  sometimes  émerge  from  a  sclerosed  patch  and  yet  remain  per-
fectly  Sound  ;  at  other  times,  we  find  them  afïected,  in  their  course,  by
sclerosed  patches  quite  similar  to  those  of  the  nerve-centres  ;  this  is
so,  at  least;  as  regards  those  parts  of  the  nerves  which  lie  adjacent  to  the
centres,  for  the  observations  of  MM.  Liouville  and  Vulpian  (which
hâve  been  frequently  verifled)  leavc  no  doubt  upon  the  subject.

The  crantai  nerves  that  hâve  been  found  to  présent  sclerosed
patches  are  the  optic,  the  olfactory,  and  the  fifth  pair.  As  to  the
rachidian  nerves  we  only  know  that  such  patches  hâve  been  observed
on  the  posterior  and  anterior  roots  :  but  we  are  not  aware  whether
they  hâve  been  thus  affected  in  their  extra-spinal  course  (Plate  I,
figs.  I  and  3,  a,  b) .

ï  will  not  dwell  any  further,  gentlemen,  on  the  topography  of
the  patches  of  sclerosis;  still,  I  cannot  refrain  from  request-
ing  your  earnest  attention  to  the  interest  which  belongs  to  this
question.

You  observe,  in  fact,  that  thèse  patches,  in  différent  cases,  occupy
very  différent  régions  ofthe  nervous  centres,  and  it  is  clear  that  this
variation  of  position  should  be  represented  by  very  différent
functional  disorders.  It  is,  indeed,  to  this  fact  that  the  disease
owes  a  large  portion  of  its  protean  character.  We  shall  return
to  this  subject  ;  at  présent,  you  will  remark  that  thèse  différences  of
position  give  rise  to  certain  important  clinical  divisions.  Some-
times the  patches  occupy  the  spinal  cord  exclusively  {spinal  for  m)  ;
sometimes  they  predominate  in  the  encephalon  [ccphalic  or  hnlbar
form)  ;  finally,  the  simultaneous  existence  of  patches  in  the  ence-
phalon and  cord  supplies  the  cerehro-spinal form.

In  order  to  close  what  I  hâve  to  say  respecting  the  macroscopic
anatomy  of  the  disease,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  indicate  the
principal  characters  which  the  patches  présent  when  considered  in
themselves.

Sometimes  they  are  salient,  and  as  it  were  turgescent  ;  at  other

11


162  MICROSCOPIC  ANATOMY.

times  they  are  on  a  level  witli  the  adjacent  parts  ;  finally,  tliey  are
sometimes  depressed,  when  of  old  date.

Tlieir  colour  resembles  that  of  tlie  grey  oaatter,  from  wliicli  it  is
difficult  to  distinguisli  them  ;  but  on  contact  witli  tlie  atmosphère
they  assume  a  rosy  hue,  and  numerous  vessels  are  observed  dis-
tributed  through  them.

Thèse  spots  hâve  a  firm  consistence,  and,  on  section,  présent  a
cleau  surface,  whence  exudes  a  transparent  lluid.

Such,  gentlemen,  as  regards  its  simple  anatomy,  is  disseminated
sclerosis,  or  sclerosis  generalised  in  patches  ;  we  hâve  now  to  enter
upon  its  minute  histological  détails.

In  order  to  bring  to  a  successful  issue  this  undertaking,  whicli
relates  to  facts  demanding  a  careful  exposition,  I  must  beg  you  to
grant  me  both  your  entire  attention  and  ail  your  indulgence.

MiCROScopic  Anatomy.
The  method  to  be  followed  is  simple.  We  sliould  proceed
from  a  considération  of  the  normal  state  of  the  tissues  ;  that
once  known,  it  will  be  more  easy  to  deduce  the  morbid  altéra-
tions. The  preliminary  knowledge  of  the  characteristics  of  the
normal  state,  as  regards  the  organs  and  the  éléments  whose
changes  we  wish  to  study,  is  doubtless  familiar  to  you,  and
we  might,  if  necessary,  enter  at  once  upon  an  examination  of  the
intimate  lésions.  Nevertheless,  as  you  are  aware,  the  histological
anatomy  of  the  nervous  centres  is,  in  many  respects,  quite  nevv  ;  many
of  the  questions  which  it  suggests  are  still  disputed  ;  whilst,  on  the
other  hand,  for  the  compréhension  of  pathological  lésions,  it  is  not
a  matter  of  indifférence  to  bave  a  more  or  less  well-grounded  opinion
in  relation  to  thèse  questions.  Thèse  considérations  induce  us  to
reraind  you,  at  least  in  a  succinct  manner,  of  certain  fundamental
facts  of  normal  anatomy.  We  shall,  however,  occupy  ourselves
chiefly  witli  the  spinal  cord,  an  organ  of  less  complexity  and  more
easily  studied  than  the  brain.  In  order  to  limit  the  field  of  our
examination  we  shall  not  delay  to  describe  the  nerve  éléments,
properly  so  called,  whethcr  tubes  or  cells,  nor  shall  we  dwell  on
their  reciprocal  relations  or  modes  of  grouping,  in  the  formation
of  what  is  known  as  the  white  and  grcy  substances.  We  propose  to
eoncentrate  your  attention  on  the  connective  gangue  (or  matrix)
which  surrounds  thèse  éléments  on  every  side.  To  this  connective
setting  a  high  interest  attaches,  especially  for  the  pathologist,  because


NORMAL HISTOLOGY.  ]63

we  must  attribute  to  it  a  suprême  part  in  tlie  causation  of  certain
altérations  of  the  nervous  centres,  and  particularly  in  the  cases  which
•at  présent  engage  our  attention.^

I.

A.  It  "will  be,  I  believej  of  advantage  to  inaugurate  tliis  study  by
:au  examination  of  thin  transparent  sections,  taken  transversely
from  segments  of  the  spinal  cord,  which  hâve  been  properly  hardened
in  dilate  chromic  acid  and  coloured  with  carminé.  Carminé  is  hère  a
precious  reagent.  Thanks  to  it,  certain  éléments  which  under  its
influence  assume  a  vivid  hue  are  thereby  set  in  relief,  whilst
other  éléments  préserve  their  usual  appearance.  Thus  the  gangli-
onic  cells,  their  nuclei,  their  neucleoli,  and  also  the  prolongations
of  thèse  cells,  are  strongly  coloured  under  the  influence  of  this  re-
agent. The  connective  matrix  also  becomes  tinted  throughout  its
whole  extent,  but  much  less  vividly  ;  as  regards  the  nerve-tubes,
the  axis  cylinder  alone  takes  the  carminé  tint,  whilst  the  medullary
sheath  completely  resists  its  action.

Ail  the  détails  which  this  mode  of  préparation  brings  out  may  be
followed  on  the  plate,  copied  from  Deiters,-  which  I  hère  ex-
hibit;  you  will  afterwards  easily  find  theni  in  the  very  beautiful
sections  which  I  shall  hâve  passed  before  you  for  inspection,  and
which  I  owe  to  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  Lockhart  Clarke.  Thèse  sections
should  be  at  first  examined  with  a  low  magnifying  power.

In  the  préparations,  as  in  the  plate,  the  portions  pertaining  to
the  white  substance  of  the  cord  seem  to.  you  at  first  sight  almost
entirely  composed  of  small  regularly  rounded  bodies,  like  dises,
placed  side  by  side,  and  having  ail  nearly  the  same  diameter.
Thèse  are  thin  cylindrical  segments,  resulting  from  section  of  the
nerve-tubes,  which  tubes  are,  in  that  part  of  the  cord,  disposed  longi-
tudinally,  having  the  same  direction  as  the  greater  axis  of  the  organ,
and  are  hère,  like  the  prisms  of  a  basaltic  causeway,  placed  parallel
each  to  each. In  the  centres  of  thèse  dises,  which  are  chiefly  formed

1  It  is  known  that  t.he  first  studies  of  the  connective  matrix;  of  the
spinal  cord  date  from  1810,  and  are  due  to  Keuffel;  but  it  is  less  known  that
Cruveilhier  in  his  article  on  apoplexy  in  the  'Dictionnaire  de  Médecine  et  de
Chirurj^ie  pratiques,'  published  in  1820,  mentioned  it  : — "Le  tissu  cellulaire
séreux  extrêmement  délié  qui  unit  et  sépare  les  fibres  cérébrales  et  qui  forme
une  trame  excessivement  tenue"  {loc.  cit.,  p.  209).

-  0.  Deiters,  '  Untersuch.  iiber  Gehirn  uud  Rûckenmark,'  Braunschwies-,
1865,  PI.  iii,  fig.  12.


164  ON THE NEUROGLIA.

of  non-tinted  medullary  matter,  having  a  brilliant  and  transparent
appearance,  you  will  see  a  point  or  rather  a  little  globule,  i.  e.  the
axis  cylinder,  coloured  carminé.

A  somewliat  more  careful  scrutiny  soon  enables  you  to  note
that  the  dises  in  question  are  not  exactly  in  contact,  and  that
they  are,  on  the  contrary,  more  or  less  plainly  separated,  each  from
its  neighbour,  by  an  apparently  homogeneous  substance,  which  the
carminé  colours  faintly,  and  which  seems  to  fill  like  a  cément  ail
the  interstices  that  the  nerve-elements  leave  between  them.  This
substance  is  nothing  other  than  the  connective  gangue  (or  matrix)
as  we  called  it  a  little  while  ago,  the  neuroglia  of  Virchow,  and  the
reticulum  of  Kolliker.  In  studying  its  mode  of  distribution  and
arrangement,  in  the  différent  parts  of  the  section,  you  will  readily
perceive  that  it  constitutes  an  important  portion  of  the  mass  of  the
organ.  Observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  in  the  peripheral  part  of
the  section  it  forms  a  ring  or  rather  a  zone  of  some  thickness,
from  which  the  nerve-tubes  are  altogether  absent.  This  zone  is
covered  externally  and  enveloped,  as  it  were,  by  the  pia  mater,
with  which  it  contracts  only  some  frail  attachments  ;  it  is,  besides,
perfectly  distinct  as  regards  structure  from  the  latter  membrane,
which  is  composed  of  fibrillary  connective  tissue  and  is,  therefore,
built  up  qnite  differently  from  the  neuroglia.  This  zone  has  been
carefully  described  by  Bidder,  and  by  Frommann,^  who  term  it  the
cortical  layeroi  the  reticulum  {R'mdenschlichf)  ;  we  shall  see,  further
on,  that,  considered  from  a  pathological  point  of  view,  it  is  of
incontestable  interest.

From  the  internai  border  of  this  zone  or  cortex  we  see  septa
arise  and  proceed,  at  certain  intervais,  which  direct  their  course
towards  the  centre  of  the  cord,  which  they  divide  into  triangular
compartments  of  almost  equal  size,  whose  bases  are  at  the  circum-
ference,  and  whose  apices  are  lost  in  the  grey  matter.  Each  of  thèse
septa  gives  off  secondary  dissepiments,  and  thèse  tertiary,  which  are
again  subdivided.  Their  ramifications  get  interwoven,  crossing  and
anastomosing,  so  as  to  produce  a  web  or  network  with  meshes  of
unequal  size.  Each  of  the  largest  of  thèse  meshes  may  enclose  a  fas-
ciculus  of  eight  or  ten  nerve-tubes,  or  even  more,  whilst  each  of  the
smaller  meshes  usually  contains  only  one.  The  reticulated  character
described  becomes  especially  évident  in  those  portions  of  the  prepara-

'  C.  Erommann,  '  Untcrsucli.ùber  die  iiormale  und  patholog.  Anatomie  des-
Uiickeiimarks/  Jena,  1864.


ON THE NEUROGLIA,  165

lion  where,  owing  to  tlie  peculiar  distribution  of  tlie  nerve-tubes,
the  connective  skeleton  persists  alone.

The  neuroglia  plays,  probably,  a  more  important  part  in  the  grey
substance  than  in  tlie  white  ;  there  are,  in  fact,  some  régions  almost
exclusively  formed  by  it,  as,  for  instance,  the  borders  of  the  central
canal  and  the  column  of  the  ependyma.  It  is  also  prédominant  in
that  part  of  the  posterior  cornua  known  as  the  gelatinous  substance
•of  Rolando  ;  in  the  posterior  commissure,  which  consequently  takes,
almost  throughout  its  whole  extent,  a  rosy  tint  in  the  préparations
•coloured  with  carminé,  whilst  the  anterior  commissure,  on  the  con-
trary,  in  conséquence  of  the  numerous  transverse  nerve-tubes  it
•contains,  is  much  less  affected  by  the  reagent.  In  the  grey  sub-
stance also,  as  in  the  white,  the  neuroglia  présents  a  reticulated
appearance  ;  but,  in  the  former  case,  the  greater  intricacy  of  the
trabeculse  causes  the  meshes  to  be  notably  smaller,  and  the  whole  to
assume  the  appearance  of  a  spongy  tissue.  In  both  states,  how-
ever,  it  serves  as  a  framework  and  support  for  the  blood-vessels.

B.  It  is  incumbent  on  us  now  to  investigate,  by  means  of  more
powerful  lenses,  what  is  the  histological  constitution  of  this  connective
gangue  or  web,  of  which  we  only  know  as  yet  the  most  superficial
appearances.  Hâve  we  hère  a  common  connective  tissue,  (laminons
■or  fibrillary)  ?  Certainly  not.  AU  observers  are  agreed  upon  this
point.  But,  beyond  this  purely  négative  notion,  almost  everything
-ehe  is  disputed  in  the  histological  history  of  the  neuroglia.  How-
ever,  one  opinion  tends  to  become  prévalent  hère,  and  this  opinion,
if  I  may  judge  from  impressions  arising  from  personal  observation,
■closely  approximates  to  the  truth.  According  to  this  view  the
neuroglia  would  be  formed,  like  the  stroma  of  lymphatic  glands,  for
instance,  after  the  type  of  simple  reticulated  connective  tissue  (Kol-
diker)  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  would  be  essentially  composed  of  stellate
cells,  generally  poor  in  protoplasm,  having  slender  prolongations,
ramified  several  times,  whose  branches  unité  with  other,  so  as  to
■4)ind  into  one  system  the  several  cells,  and  to  render  them,  as  it
■-were,  joint-partners  [Kolliker,i  Max  Schultze,  Frommann].^  In
this  for  m  of  the  connective  tissue  there  exists  but  very  little  amor-
•phous  matter  in  the  meshes  of  the  reticulum,  and  the  intermediate
fibrillary  substance,  which  is  one  of  the  fundamental  characteristics
<ol  the  laminons  tissue,  is  completely  déficient  hère.

-^  Kolliker,  '  Geweblehre/  5e  Ed.,  Leipzig,  1867,  §  108.
"  Loc.  cit.


166  ON THE NEUROGLIA.

Let  us  now  see  wliat  direct  examination  enables  us  to  cliscern  m
thin  sections  of  tlie  cord  liardened  by  cliromic  acid  and  coloured
with  carminé.  As  in  tlie  case  of  the  stroma  of  lymphatic  glands,
whicli  we  hâve  just  taken  for  example,  it  becomes  us  hère  to  distin-
guish,  in  the  first  place,  the  cells,  and,  in  the  second  place,  a
network  of  fibroid  trabeculse,  which  binds  thèse  cells  together.  Let
us  first  take  note  of  what  is  observed  in  the  white  substance.  The
points  of  the  reticulum,  where  several  trabeculse  nieet,  form  hère  and
there  swellings  or  nodes  of  différent  degrees  of  thickness,  situated
at  almost  equal  distances  froni  each  other.  Now,  ail  thèse
nodes,  but  especially  those  remarkable  by  their  great  size,  présent
towards  their  central  portion  a  definite,  rounded,-  and  somewhat
oval  corpuscle,  more  vividly  coloured  by  carminé  than  the  adjacent
parts.  Thèse  bodies  are  nuclei,  having  a  well-defined  border;  they
are  finely  granular,  are  devoid  of  nucleoli,  and  measure  each  on  an
average  from  0*004  m.  to  o'ooy  m.  They  are  solublein  acetic  acid,
which  causes  them  to  shrink  in  every  direction,  and  diminishes  their
diameter  sometimes  by  one  half  ;  they  are  known  by  the  name  of
7niiélocytes  (Ch.  Eobin),^  or  neiirogl'm  nuclei  (Virchow).-  A  thin
layer  of  protoplasm,  having  no  distinctly  cellular  appearance,  usually
surrounds  thèse  nuclei  {imjélocytes,  variété  noyau),  which,  at  other
times,  on  the  coutrary,  are  enclosed  in  a  genuine  rounded  or  stellate
oeil  {myélocytes,  variété  cellule),  and  furnished  with  more  or  less
numerous  prolongations  (from  three  to  ten,  according  to  Frommann),
of  difierent  lengths.'"

The  prolongations  appear  to  unité  with  the  trabeculaî  of  the
reticulum,  which  continue  them,  as  it  were,  without  any  perceptible
line  of  démarcation.  In  cases  where  the  cellular  form  is  not  distinct
the  nuclei,  either  naked  or  covered  only  with  a  thin  layer  of  proto-
plasm, look  like  centres  whence  arise  the  trabeculse  of  the  reticulum,
and  whence  they  radiate  in  différent  directions.

The  trabeculse  should  be  studied  in  their  turn,  and  considered
independently  of  the  connections  they  hâve  either  with  the  nuclei  or
with  the  cells  which  occupy  the  nodes  of  the  reticulum  ;  their  texture

1  Robin,  'Programme  du  Cours  d' Histologie,'  1864,  p.  46;  'Dictionnaire
Encyclopédique,'  2e  Série,  t.  i,  ire  part;  art.  Lamineux,  p.  284.

-  Virchow,  Die  Kraekhaft,  Gescliwùlste,  1864-65,  t.  il,  p.  127.

3  In  référence  to  tliis  subject  see  Haycni  and  Magnan,  'Journal  de  la
Physiologie,'  &c..  No.  i,  1876.  Hayem,  'Études  sur  les  diverses  formes
d'Euccplialitc,'  1868.


ON THE  NEUROGLIA.  167

varies  somewhat,  according  as  we  examine  them  in  transverse  and
in  longitudinal  sections.  In  the  first  case  they  hâve  the  appearance
of  thin  homogeneous  and  brilliant  dissepiments  of  a  fibroid  nature.
Anastomosing,  they  form  meslies,  the  smallest  of  whicli  is  still  large
enough  to  enclose  a  nerve-tube.  Suppose  we  observe  a  longitu-
dinal section  ?  The  trabeculse  are  seen  to  ramify  to  an  indefinite
extent,  and  produce  a  network  having  much  finer  meshes,  This
network  is  disposed  in  the  form  of  dissepiments,  which  separate  the
nerve-tubes  from  each  other  and  enclose  them,  like  a  sheath.  The
interstices  which  exist  hère  and  there  between  thèse  sheaths  and
the  nerve-tubes  seem  to  be  filled  up  by  a  small  quantity  of  finely
granular  amorphous  matter.  In  the  normal  state  we  meet  nowhere,
amongst  thèse  trabeculee,  with  the  slender  fibrillse  which  constitute
an  intégral  part  of  laminons  tissue.^

In  the  grey  substance  the  neuroglia  is  disposed  on  the  same
gênerai  plan  ;  the  meshes  of  the  fibroid  network  are,  however,  and
especially  in  parts  where  the  nerve-elements  disappear,  more  serried
than  in  the  white  substance,  and  from  this  cause  a  spongy  appear-
ance results,  which  we  hâve  already  noticed.  Let  us  add  that  the
stellate  cells  abound  in  greater  number  than  elsewhere  in  certain
régions  of  the  grey  substance,  and  that  they  sometimes  attain  such  a
development  that  it  becomes  very  difficult  to  distinguish  them  from
nerve-cells  ;  but  we  shall  hâve  occasion  to  refer  to  this  point  again.

A  dense  fibroid  network,  with  close  meshes  and  numerous  cells,  is
found  also  in  those  parts  of  the  white  substance  where  no  nerve-
tubes  exist,  in  the  cortical  layer  {Rindenschlicht) ,  for  example,  and
in  the  greater  septa  which  arise  from  it.

If  we  can  dépend  upon  the  preceding  description  it  is  incon-
testable that  the  neuroglia  deserves  to  be  classed  with  the  reticulated
connective  tissue  type,  whose  essential  characters  we  noted  a  little  ago.

But  this  description  has  been  chiefly  traced  out,  as  you  hâve  not
forgotten,  from  observations  made  on  fragments  of  spinal  cord  that
hâve  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  chromic  acid  for  a  greater  or
less  extent  of  time. Now,  can  it  be  asserted that the results

^  The  term  tissti  laniineux  was  applied  in  1799  by  Chaussier  to  the  'tissue
recently  and  still  commonly  known  as  cellular  tissue^  which  we  now  call  con-
nective tissue.  Professer  Robin  still  makes  use  of  Chaussier's  term,  alleging
it  to  be  the  best,  because  he  says  the  ultimate  éléments  of  this  tissue  are
long  filaments,  somewhat  flattened,  thin,  slender,  soft  and  hyaline,  smootb,
slightly  elastic,  fasciculated.  (Sigerson.)


ÎG8  ON THE NEUROGLIA.

obtained  by  tbis  method  of  préparation  are  beyond  tbe  reacb  of
•criticism  ?  Such  is  not  the  opinion  of  some  authors,  amongst  whom
we  must  cite,  in  the  foremost  place,  such  masters  as  Henle  and
>Ch.  Eobin.^  According  to  thèse,  the  fibroid  reticulum,  above
described,  has  no  real  existence,  but  is  an  artificial  product.

In  the  fresh  state,  before  the  application  of  reagents,  the  spaces
between  the  nerve-tubes  are  fiUed  (according  to  them),  not  by  solid
trabeculse,  arranged  so  as  to  form  the  meshes  of  a  network,  but
«imply  by  a  soft,  greyish,  finely  granular  substance,  in  the  midst
■of  which  the  myelocytes  are,  as  it  were,  held  in  suspension.

This  substance  has  the  property  of  hardening,  without  loss  of
volume,  under  the  influence  of  alcohol  and  différent  reagents,  of
chromic  acid  in  particular  ;  and  it  is  owiug  to  this  circumstance  that
it  présents  a  reticulated  appearance  in  préparations  treated  by  the
iatter  reagent.  To  thèse  objections,  arguments  or  rather  facts  hâve
•been  opposed,  some  of  which  possess,  we  think,  almost  absolute
authority.  It  is  conceded  that  in  the  normal  state  an  amorphous
matter  exists,  interposed  between  the  nerve-elements,  though  in
scanty  proportion  (Kolliker),  and  that  this  matter  possesses  the  pro-
perties  which  hâve  been  described.  It  is  also  conceded  that,  in  the
■fresh  state,  the  reticulum  is  less  distinctly  defined  than  in  préparations
hardened  by  the  use  of  acids.  But  it  is  not  the  less  true  that,  even
in  the  fresh  state,  thin  sections  of  the  white  substance  of  the  cord,
vrhen  placed  in  iodised  sérum  and  dilacerated  under  the  microscope,
permit  us  clearly  to  discern  on  their  borders  the  fibroid  tractus  of
the  connective  tissue  (Kolliker,  Frommann,  Schultze).  This  resuit,
which  it  is  easy  to  arrive  at  in  the  normal  state,  is  still  more  readily
■obtained  in  certain  pathological  conditions  when  the  normal  arrange-
ments are  exaggerated,  without  being  radically  altered  (Virchow).

This  is  what  takes  place,  for  instance,  as  we  shall  point  out,  in
•subacute  interstitial  myelitis  and  in  sclerosis  proper,  when  the  altér-
ation has  not  as  yet  exceeded  the  first  phases  of  its  évolution.

Trom  ail  this  it  has  been  concluded,  and  we  thiuk  the  conclusion
legitimate,  that  the  chromic  acid  has  no  other  spécifie  efi'ect  than  to
bring  out  into  better  relief  the  reticulated  texture  of  the  connective
gangue  or  setting  of  the  spinal  cord.  The  arrangement  was  pre-
viously  in  existence;  it  is  not  produced  from  nothing  by  the  action
of  the  reagent.

In  order  to  conclude  tlie  rcmarks  which  I  hâve  thought  it  my
'  '  Dict.  Encyclopédique,'  loc.  cit.


PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.  169

duty  to  ofFer  you,  in  référence  to  the  normal  histology  of  tlie  spinal
nerve-centre,  I  liave  only  a  word  to  add  concerning  an  anatomical
peculiarity  of  the  smaller  vessels,  and  principally  of  the  arterial
«apillaries,  in  the  substance  of  this  organ.  They  possess,  like  the
intra-encephalic  arterioles,  that  supernumerary  coat  whick  is  com-
monly  known  as  the  lymphatic  sheath  or  Robin's  sheath.
This  sheath  is  separated,  as  you  are  aware,  from  the  adventitious
coat  by  a  free  space,  fiUed  by  a  transparent  fluid  in  which  float
some  definite  éléments.  You  will  soon  recognise  the  interest  be-
longing  to  this  anatomical  arrangement,  wli^n  we  corne  to  the
question  of  iuterpreting  certain  lésions.^

II.

After  thèse  preliminaries,  it  becomes  easy  for  us,  gentlemen,  to
enter  upon  the  study  of  the  histological  altérations  of  the  spinal
cord  in  dissemhiatecl  sclerosis. The  description  of  thèse  changes,

'  Silice  this  lecture  was  delivered,  several  works  liave  been  pnblished  on  the
structure  of  the  ueuroglia  (see  ia  référence  to  this  subject  a  critical  review  by
Gombault,  '  Archives  de  Physiologie,'  1873,  p.  458). In  an  important  work,
M.  Ranvier,  whose  labours  liave  contributed  so  much  to  our  knowledge  of  the
connective  tissue,  bas  shown  that  the  cells,  described  by  Golgi  aud  Boll,  are
probablj  artificial products,  due  to the preparatory  method  adopted. The
connective  tissue  of  the  nerve-centres  is  but  little  différent  in  structure  from
that  of  other  régions  (Ranvier,  "  Sur  les  éléments  conjonctifs  de  la  moelle
épinière,"  in  '  Comptes-Rendus  de  l'Académie  des  Sciences,'  Décembre,  1873).
The  neuroglia  is  composed  of  little  connective  bundles  of  from  o'ooi  mm.  to
O"oo2  mm.  in  diameter. "They  do  uot  anastomose,"  says  M.  Ranvier,  "but
in  some  points  they  cross  each  other  to  the  number  of  four,  five,  six,  seven,
eight,  and  even  more. At  this  crossing  there  is  often  a  round or oval
nucleus, having little nucleoli,  which is flattened  and surrounded  by a
granular  zone. With  a  good  immersion  object-glass,  magnifying  from  600
to  800  diameters,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  ail  tliese  détails  and  to  discern  in  the
granular  zone  a  lamina  cf  protoplasm  which,  with  the  nucleus,  constitutes  a
little  flat  cell  of  the  connective  tissue. Beneath  and  above  this  cell  tiie  little
fasciculi  follow  each  other. It  does  not  seem  doubtful  to  me,"  ]\I.  Ranvier
adds,  "that  this  groupiug  bas  been  taken  for  a  ramiûed  cell;  but  that  is  an
error  which  will  be  abandoned,  I  am  sure,  by  ail  who  accurately  follow  the
same  method  "  (which  lie  indicates). On  other  points  of  the  same  préparation
may  be  seen  isolated  flat  cells,  and  again  (stellate)  crossiugs  without  cells  ;
thèse  appearances  leave  no  doubt  as  to  wliat  should  be  the  proper  interpréta-
tion of  the  foregoing  facts. The  reader  will  be  less  surprised  at  the  nunierous
conflicting  opinions published as regards the neuroglia, if he recall  the
numerous  discussions  excited  by  the  question  of  the  structure  of  the  con-
nective tissue  of  the  peripheral  organs. The  real  nature  of  this  structure
lias  been  only  revealed  by  récent  researches. {Note  to  the  Second  Edition.)


170  PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.

wliicli  we  are  about  to  give^  will  be  based^  principally,  ou  the  results
of  the  investigations  to  which  M.  Yulpian  and  myself  hâve  long
devoted  our  attention.  We  shall  also  hâve  several  opportunities  of
using,  after  due  revision,  the  researches  made,  previously  or  since,  on
the  same  subject  by  Valentiner,^  Eindfleisch,"  Zenker/  and  espe-
cially  by  rrommauii,^  who,  in  référence  to.the  examination  ofasmall
fragment  of  spinal  cord,  lias  written  a  large  volume,  adorned  with
remarkable  plates,  and  enriched  with  valuable  documents.

We  shall  describe  in  the  first  place  the  aj^pearances  which  may
be  discerned  :  i°,  on  trans verse  sections  ;  and  2°,  on  longitudinal
sections  of  fragments  of  the  cord  hardened  by  chromic  acid.  Then
we  shall  describe,  from  the  examination  of  fresh  spécimens,  certain
pecuharities  which  are  not  observable  in  hardened  sections.  In  both
cases  the  coloration  of  the  parts,  eflected  by  means  of  the  ammo-
niacal solution  of  carminé,  will  be  hère,  as  well  as  in  the  case  of
normal  spécimens,  an  auxiiiary  of  great  utility  of  which  it  is  proper
to  avail  ourselves.

A.  When  you  examine  with  the  naked  eye  a  segment  of  spinal
cord  affected  by  a  patch  of  scier osis,  the  morbid  part  appears
divided  from  the  healthy  portion,  in  an  abrupt  manner,  without
transition,  by  a  definite  line  of  démarcation.  Now  this  is  an  illu-
sion. Microscopical  examination,  even  when  a  low  power  is  used,
enables  us  to  state  that  the  apparently  healthy  région  bordering
the  sclerosed  patch  really  présents,  to  a  certain  width,  very  plain
traces  of  altération.  When  you  pass  the  apparent  limit  of  the
Sound  parts  the  lésions  become  more  marked  and  they  augment
gradually  in  intensity  as  you  approach  the  centre  of  the  patch,
where  they  acquire  their  highest  degree  of  development.  Whilst
proceeding  thus,  from  the  circumference  to  the  centre,  we  are  led  to
recognise  the  existence  of  several  concentric  zones,  which  answer  to
the  principal  phases  of  the  altération.^

a.  In  the  peripheral  zone  the  following  appearances  are  ob-
served  : — The  trabecuUc  of  the  reticulum  are  markedly  thickened  ;

'  Valenliner,  '  Deutsche  Klinik,'  1856,  p.  149.

-  Jiindfleiscli,  '  Vircliow's  Archiv,'  1863,  t.  xxvi,  p.  474.

■'  Zcnker,  '  Zeitscli.  der  llation,  Mediz.,'  1865,  Bd.  xxiii,  3  Tlcili.,  p.  226.

■*  Frommanii,  2  Theil,  Jena,  1867;  sec  also  Rokitansky,  '  Sitzungsber.,'
K.  M.  Klasse,  t.  xiii,  1851,  p.  136;  Cliarcot,  'Soc.  de  Biologie/  1868;
Bouchard,  'Soc.  Anat.,'  1868;  Ilayem,  'Études,'  &c.,  loc.  ciL,  "p.  ici.

*  Cbarcot,  '  Société  de  Biologie,'  1868.


rATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.  171

sometimes  thev  hâve  acquirecl  a  diameter  twice  as  great  as  that  pos-
sessed  in  the  normal  state.  At  the  same  time^  the  nuclei  which
occupy  llie  nodes  of  the  reticulum  hâve  become  more  voluminous  ;
they  are  occasionally  found  to  hâve  multiplied  and  you  may  count
two,  or  three  nuclei,  rarely  more,  in  each  node  j^  the  cellular  form
becomes  more  distinct,  owing  to  tlie  thickening  of  the  trabeculse  ;
the  nerve-tnbes  appear  to  be  farther  apart  each  from  each — in
reality,  they  hâve  chiefly  diminished  in  volume,  and  this  kind  of
atrophy  goes  on  at  the  expense  of  the  medullary  sheath,  for  the
axis-cylinder  has  preserved  its  normal  diameter,  or  it  may  even  be
hypertrophied.  The  amorphous  matter  wliicli  surrounds  the  fibres  of
the  reticulum,  on  ail  sides,  appears  to  be  more  abundant  than  in  the
healthy  state.-

h.  The  nerve-tubes  in  the  second  zone,  which  may  also  be  called
the  transition  zone,  hâve  become  still  more  slender.  Many  of  them
seem  to  hâve  disappeared  ;  in  reality,  they  hâve  been  merely  deprived
of  their  medullary  sheaths,  and  are  now  only  represented  by  their
axis-cylinders,  which,  indeed,  sometimes  acquire  comparativelv
colossal  dimensions.^  As  to  the  trabeculœ  of  the  reticulum,  thèse
ofFer  not  less  remarkable  altérations.  They  hâve  become  more
transparent,  their  outlines  are  less  distinct  ;  finally,  in  certain  parts,
and  this  is  a  really  fundamental  fact,  they  are  replaced  by  bundles  of
long  and  slender  fibrils,  closely  analogous  to  those  which  charac-
terise  common  connective  tissue  (laminons  tissue).  Thèse  fibrils
are  disposed  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  greater  axis  of  the  nerve-
tubes  ;  hence  but  little  of  them  is  seen  in  transverse  sections,  except
their  extremities  which  présent  the  appearance  of  a  multitude  of
very  fine  dots.  They  tend,  we  hâve  said,  to  usurp  the  place  of  the
fibres  or  trabeculse  of  the  reticulum  ;  but  they,  also,  invade  the
meshes  which  contain  the  Jierve-tubes,  according  as  thèse  diminish
in  size  by  loss  of  medullary  mater,  so  that  the  reticulated  or  alve-
olar  appearance  which  the  connective  gangue  or  matrix  shows  so
distinctly  in  the  healthy  state,  teudsto  become  more  and  more  effaced.^

c.  The  central  région  of  the  sclerosed  patch,  you  are  aware,  is
that  in  which  the  most  marked  altérations  are  observed. Hère  ail

*  Occa&iouully  some  of  thèse  nuclei  présent  towards  their  middle  région  au
indentation  which  seems  to  indicate  the  beginniug  of  scission.
'  Erommaun,  2  Theil,  PL  ii,  fig.  1,  and  passim.
^  Prommanu,  Charcot.
^  Erommaun,  2  Theil,  loc.  cit..  Pi.  iv,  figs.  i,  2,  3.


172  PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.

vestige  of  fibroid  reticulum  lias  disappeared  ;  we  no  longer  meet
with  distinct  trabeculœ  or  cell-forms  ;  the  nuclei  are  less  numerous
and  less  voluminous  tlian  in  the  external  zones;  tliey  are  shrunken
in  every  direction,  appear  shrivelled,  and  do  not  take  so  deep  a
tint  as  usual  under  tlie  action  of  carminé.^  They  may  be  observed
forming  little  groups  hère  and  there  in  the  interspaces  betvreen  the
bundles  of  fibrillœ.  The  latter,  however,  hâve  invaded  every  part.
They  now  fill  up  the  alveolar  spaces,  from  which  the  medullary
matter  has  completely  disappeared.  Nevertheless,  a  certain  number
of  axis-cylinders,  those  last  vestiges  of  the  nerve-tubes,  still  per-
sist  in  the  midst  of  the  fibrils  ;  but  they,  in  gênerai,  no  longer
retain  that  comparatively  large  volume  they  occasionally  possessed
in  the  early  phases  of  the  altération  ;  most  of  them,  indeed,  hâve
even  diminished  to  such  a  degree  that  they  might  be  mistaken,  so
close  is  the  resemblance,  for  the  fibril  filaments  of  new  formation,
from  which,  however,  we  shall  soon  learn  how  to  discriminate  them.

Such,  gentlemen,  is  the  final  term  of  the  morbid  process,  in  that
form  of  sclerosis  which  engages  our  attention.  And  this  indefinite
persistence,  as  we  may  call  it,  of  a  certain  number  of  axis-cylinders
in  the  midst  of  parts  which  hâve  undergone  the  extrême  of  fibrillary
metamorphosis,  is,  you  will  be  careful  to  remark,  a  character  which
seems  proper  to  disseminated  sclerosis.  It  is  certainly  not  observed,
at  least  to  the  same  extent,  in  theother  varieties  of  grey  induration,
whether  we  hâve  to  deal  witli  descending  spinal  sclerosis,  consécutive
on  lésions  of  the  brain,  or  with  that  which,  primarily  occupying
the  posterior  columns,  is  justly  considered  to  be  the  anatomical  suh-
stratum  of  progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

B.  The  results  of  the  examination  of  longitudinal  sections  con-
firm,  on  the  whole,  the  data  which  hâve  been  laid  before  you  :  I  may,
therefore,  spare  you  any  lengthy  détails,  and  confine  myself  to  the
following  observations  which  will  make  you  better  acquainted  with
some  aspects  of  the  neoplastic  fibril-formation.  In  sections  of  the
kind  mentioncdjthe  characteristics  of  this  tissue  arewell  seen,and  hère
you  can  best  observe  the  longitudinal  direction  of  the  fibrils,  their
brilliant  appcarance  which  makes  them  resemble  elastic  fibres,  and
their  arrangement  in  slightly  undulating  and  ever  parallel  fascicles.
On  dilacerating  thèse  bundles,  you  will  notice  that  the  fibrils  of
which  they  are  composed  are  extremcly  thin,  that  they  are  opaque
and  smooth,  that  they  seldom  divide  and  anastomose,  whilst,  on  the
'  yroniinann,  Charcot.


PATHOLOGICAL EISTOLOGY.  173-

contrary,  tliey  are  frequently  interwoven  and  entangled,  so  as  ta
form  a  kind  of  felted  tissue,  and  finally  that  they  are  scarcely  tinted
by  the  action  of  carminé  (fig.  9). The  latter  characters  sufficiently


FiG.  9  represents  a  fresh  préparation,  takeu  from  the  ceutre  of  a  patch  of
sclerosis,  coloured  with  carminé,  and  dilacerated.  lu  the  centre  is  seen  a
capillary  vessel,  supporting  several  uuclei.  To  the  right  and  let't  of  this
are  axis-cyliaders,  some  voluminous,  others  of  very  sinall  diameter,  and
ail  deprived  of  their  medullary  sheatlis.  The  capillary  vessel  and  the
axis-cylinders  were  vividly  coloured  by  tlie  carminé  ;  the  axis-cylinders
présent  perfectly  smooth  borders,  without  ramilication.  Between  them
are  seeu  slender  fibrilloe  of  récent  formation,  whicli  form  on  the  left  aud  in  the
centre  a  sort  of  network  resulting  from  the  entanglement  or  anastomosis
of  the  fibrils.  Thèse  are  distiuguished  from  tlie  axis-cylinders,  1°  by
their  diameter,  which  is  much  smaller  ;  2°  by  the  ramifications  which
they  présent  in  their  course  ;  3°  by  taking  no  coloration  from  carminé,
Nuclei  are  seen  scattered  about  ;  some  of  them  appear  to  be  in  connection
with  the  connective  fibrils  ;  others  hâve  assumed  an  irregular  form,  owin"-
to  the  action  of  the  ammoniacal  solution  of  carminé.

distinguisli  them  from  the  axis-cylinders  which,  moreover,  are  gene-
rally  larger,  translucid,  and  never  ramified.  They  raay  also  be
easily  discriniinated  from  the  fibres  of  the  reticulum,  with  which
they  are  sometimes  mingled,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  are  thicker,
shorter,  and  their  borders  bristle  with  branching  processes  ;  finally.


174  rATHOLOOTCAL HISTOLOGY.

they  differ  from  the  elastic  fibres  wliicli  are  so  often  found  in  common
con'nective  tissue  by  an  important  cliaracter  : — they  swell  np  under
the  influence  of  acetic  acid  and  forni  a  hyahne  transparent  mass,
which  cliange  does  not  occur  in  the  case  of  elastic  fibres.^

Cau  we  proceed  farther  in  the  study  of  the  fibres  and  endeavour
to  détermine  their  mode  of  formation  ?  Are  they,  for  instance,  as
Frommann  asserts,  partially  produced  in  the  very  substance  of
the  fibres  of  the  reticulum  which  they  are  destined  soon  to  displace,
and  partially  at  the  expense  of  the  cells  and  tlie  nuclei  of  the  neu-
ro.o-lia  ?  Do  they  arise,  on  the  contrary,  as  others  believe,  either
from  the  pre-existiug  amorphous  matter,  or  from  a  newly  formed
blastema  ?  In  other  words,  is  there  metamorphosis  or  substitution  ?
The  question,  we  think,  must  remain  undecided  yet  awhilc;  ail  that
we  can  say  respecting  it  is  that  the  fibrils  bave  sometimes  seemed
to  take  root  in  the  substance  of  the  nuclei  or  cells,  and  that  this
fact,  if  it  were  confirmed,  might  be  cited  in  support  of  Frommann's
thesis.

I  cannot  pass  over  in  silence  the  différent  altérations  which  those
blood-vessels  undergo  that  traverse  the  nodules  of  sclerosis.  Thèse
changes  may  be  well  studied  in  the  longitudinal  sections  of  the  cord,
hardened  by  chromic  acid.  At  the  commencement,  that  is  to  say,
in  the  peripheral  zone,  the  parietes  of  thèse  vessels,  even  of  thefinest
capillaries,  appear  much  thickened  and  contain  a  larger  number  of
nuclei  than  in  the  normal  state.  Nearer  the  centre  of  the  nodule
the  nuclei  are  still  more  abundant,  and,  besides,  the  adventitious
coat  is  replaced  by  several  layers  of  fibrils  quite  similar  to  those  which
are  simultaneously  developed  in  the  substance  of  the  reticulum.-
Lastly,  at  the  final  term  of  altération,  the  walls  of  the  vessels
hâve  become  so  thickened  that  their  calibre  sufFers  a  notable
diminution."'

I  should  notice,  in  passing,  the  habituai  ])resence  of  a  certain
number  of  amyloid  corpuscles  in  the  midst  of  the  fibrillary  tissue.
But  I  should  at  the  same  timc  mention  the  singular  fact  that  thèse
bodies  are  always  Icss  abundant  in  disseminated  sclerosis  than  in
the  other  varieties  of  grey  induration.

C.  It  is  not  always  without  difiiculty  that  we  succced  in  finding,
in  spécimens  which  hâve  not  been  prepared  with  chromic  acid,  ail

1  Valcntincr,  Zciikcr,  loc.  cit.  ;  Vulpian,  '  Cours  de  la  Faculté,'  1868.

2  Vulpian,  '  Cours  de  la  Faculté.'

3  Frommann,  loc.  cit.


rATHOLOaiCAL niSTOLOGY.  175

tlie  détails  which  I  liave  just  described.  On  tlie  other  liand,  tlie
fresli  spécimens  offer  this  advantage,  namelj,  they  allow  us  to
remark  certain  altérations  wliicli  would  hâve  passed  unnoticed  if  we
confined  ourselves  to  liardcned  préparations  oidy.  I  allude  hère  to
the  existence  of  globules  and  granulations  of  an  apparently  fatty
or  medullâry  nature,  which  we  almost  constantly^  meet  with  in
more  or  less  considérable  numbers  in  the  substance  of  the  sclerosed
patches  in  the  fresh  state,  and  which  soon  disappear  without  leav-
ing  any  trace  wlien  the  préparation  has  been  steeped  some  little
time  in  chromic  acid.  Now,  gentlemen,  the  présence  of  thèse  fatty
granulations  is  connected  with  an  important  phase  of  the  morbid
process,  I  mean  with  the  destruction  of  the  nerve-tube,  Ilowever,
before  entering  into  a  discussion  of  this  subject,  I  think  it  useful  to
begin  a  little  further  back  and  to  recall  to  your  memory,  by  a  suc-
cinct description,  the  modifications  of  structure  which  the  peripheral
nerves  undergo  when  they  are  separated,  by  complète  section,  from
the  nervous  centres.

At  the  outset  I  would  remind  you  that,  in  the  peripheral  nerves,
the  nerve- tubes  are  essentially  constituted  as  in  the  spinal  cord  by
a  cylinder  of  medullâry  matter  and  by  an  axis-cylinder,  but  that
they  also  possess  a  sheath  of  connective  tissue,  the  membrane  of
Schwann,  which,  according  to  the  most  récent  researches,-  does  not
appear  to  exist  in  the  more  slender  tubes  of  the  nerve-centres,  or
at  least  only  shows  itself  there  in  a  rudimentary  state.^  You  M'ill
perceive  in  a  moment  that  this  anatomical  peculiarity,  though
apparently  insignificant,  is  not  devoid  of  interest  from  the  point
of  view  we  occupy.

The  foUowing  are  the  phenomena  to  which  I  wished  particularly
to  call  your  attention.  Eight  or  ten  days  after  section  of  the  nerve
there  supervenes  a  sort  of  coagulation  of  the  medullâry  matter  which
breaks  up  into  small  masses,  irregularly  globular,  with  dark  sinuous
margins,  showing  a  double  outline,  and  having  consequentiy  pre-
served  ail  the  optical  characters  of  myéline  or  medullâry  substance.

^  This  fact  is,  at  least,  meutioned  by  ail  the  authors  who  bave  studied  fresh
spécimens  (Valentiner,  llindfleisch).  It  bas  uot  beeu  absent  from  any  one  of
the  spécimens  which  I  bave  examined  uuder  similar  conditions.  See  also
Rokitansky  in  'Bericht  der  Akademie  der  Wissensch.  zu  Wien,'  t.  xxiv,  1857.

-  Frey,  '  Handbuch  der  Histologie,'  &c.,  2e  edit.,  p.  354  ;  Leipzig,  Schulte,
•De  Eetinse  Structura/  1867,  p.  22  ;  KôUiker,  *  Geweblehre,'  5e  édit.,  1867,
t.  iv,  p.  257.

*  Vulj)ian,  '  Leçons  sur  la  Physiologie,'  &c.,  p.  316.


176


PATÏÏOLOGIOAL HISTOLOGY.


Segmentation  making  new  progress,  in  the  following  days,  it  will  soon
be  perceived  that  Schwann's  slieath  no  longer  contains  irregular
niasses  of  myéline,  but  globules  presenting  the  appearance  and  the
micro-chemical  characters  of  fat.  Thèse  globules,  which  are  at  first
rather  large,  become  gradually  smaller  and  smaller  as  the  process  of
division  goes  on,  and  jBnally  they  are  replaced  by  very  fine  granula-
tions, resembling  dust,  that  fiU  the  sheath  of  conuective  tissue.
Mingled  with  thèse  is  found  a  certain  proportion  of  paler  granula-
tions of  a  protein  nature  ;  and  lastly,  globules  and  granulations  dis-
appear,  and  Schwann's  sheath,  collapsing  on  itself,  becomes  so  plaited
and  wrinkled  that  when  you  examine  a  certain  number  of  sucli  altered
nerve-fibres,  placed  side  by  side  in  the  field  of  the  microscope,  you
would  think  you  beheld  a  fascicle  of  filamentous  connective  tissue.

AYhat becomes  of  the  axis-cylinderduring  thèse  changes  ?  Composed
as  it  is  principally  of  protéine  matter,  it  resists  for  a  long  time  the


FiG.  10. — Patch  of  sclerosis  in  tlic  frcsli  statc  :  a,  lymphatic  slicalli  of  a
vessel  distclldcd  by  voluminous  fatty  globules  ;  h,  a  vcssel  divided
transversely.  Tlic  adventitious  coat  is  separated  froni  the  lymphatic  slieath
by  a  free  spacc,  the  fatty  globules  which  distendcd  the  sheath  having
disappearcd;  ce,  fatty  globules,  galhered  into  small  groups,  dispersed
lierc  and  thcre  over  the  préparation.


PATHOLOGICAL ÏÏISTOLOGY.  177

action  of  the  causes  whicli  hâve  destroyed  the  medullary  substance
(or  myéline),  for  it  is  occasionally  still  found  in  the  sheath  several
weeks  or  even  several  months  after  section  of  the  nerve.i

To  sum  up  :  under  the  new  conditions  of  nutrition,  in  which  the
nerve-tubes  are  placed  by  section  of  the  nerve,  the  medullary  matter
coagulateSj  then  disintegrates  and  gives  origin,  on  the  one  hand,  to
protéine  molécules,  and,  on  the  other,  to  corpuscles  which  at  first
préserve  the  appearauce  of  myéline,  but  which,  in  conséquence  of
ulterior  modifications,  soon  présent  ail  the  characters  of  fatty  granu-
lations.-

Let  us  now  return  to  the  patches  of  sclerosis.  Hère  we  shall
hâve  to  study  phenomena  closely  analogous  to  those  we  hâve  just  been
discussing.

In  the  substance  of  the  sclerosed  nodule,  in  fresh  spécimens,  we  al-
most  constantly  meet,  as  already  mentioned,  with  globules  or  granules
presenting  the  gênerai  appearauce  of  fatty  bodies.  Their  number  is
sometimes  considérable.  They  show  themselves  under  two  principal
aspects,  Some  constitute  comparatively  voluminous  masses,  whose
darkandsinuous  edges  bound  formswhichsometimes  represent  irregu-
lar  oval  globules,  sometimes  are  club-like,  and  occasionally  kidnev-
shaped  (fig.  i  o) .  They  présent  a  double ,  border  like  the  myehne
(or  medullary  matter)  to  which  they  also  approximate  in  yet  other
respects.  Other  globules  are  true  fatty  droplets  or  granulations,
sometimes  free,  sometimes  aggregated  so  as  to  constitute  con-
fused  heaps  or  cohérent  clusters,  otherwise  called  gramdar  bodies,
devoid  of  nuclei  and  of  enveloping  membrane." Protéine  molécules

^  See  Vulpian,  'Leçons  de  Physiologie,'  jip.  237  and  298;  Eindfleisclj,
'Lebrbuch  der  Pathologisch  Gewebelehre,'  pp.  10  et  20,  1866.

"  According  to  Robin,  the  myéline  is  a  substance  particularly  rich  in  fatty
])rinciples,  and  it  may,  in  tins  respect,  be  approximated  to  the  contents  of  adi-
pose  cells  ('Journal  d'Anatomie,'  1868,  No.  3,  p.  309).  Walter  ('Virchow's
Archiv,'  20,  p.  426)  bas  expressed  the  opinion  that  it  is  constituted  by  an
amalgam  or  mixture  of  fatty  and  albuminoid  bodies,  which  merely  become
dissociated  in  cases  of  degeneration  of  the  nerve-tubes.  See  also  Rindileisch,
loc.  cit.,  p.  20,  §  52.

^  Besides  thèse  granular  bodies  proper  [Fettkornchen  Agglomeruté)  may  be
found,  in  sclerosed  patches,  granular  bodies  having  nuclei,  that  become  coloured
by  the  carminé  test,  and  possess  au  enveloping  membrane  {Fettkoniclien
ZeUeii)  ;  thèse  are  simply  cells  of  the  neuroglia  undergoing  fatty  degenera-
tion. See,  in  référence  to  the  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  granular  bodies,
I.  Poumeau,  'Thèse  de  Paris,' 1866;  Rokitansky,  'Bericht  der  Akad. der

12


178  PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.

are  to  be  seen  mingled  liere  and  there  witli  thèse  différent  granula-
tions. Ail  thèse  products  exactly  resemble,  you  will  observe,  those
which  resuit  from  the  disintegration  of  the  medullary  matter
(myéline)  in  cases  of  nerve-section.

Let  us  follow  up  thèse  analogies.  In  the  longitudinal  sections
which  I  place  before  you,  you  will  notice,  in  certain  parts,  long  trails
of  fatty  granulations  arranged  in  a  direction  parallel  to  that  of  the
nerve-tubes  ;  i  in  the  transverse  sections  they  form  hère  and  there
little  heaps,  like  separate  islets,  which  correspond  with  tolerable
fidelity  to  the  position  of  the  alveolœ.  Generally,  indeed,  the  granu-
lations hâve  broken  bounds,  crossed  the  borders  of  the  alveohe,  and
becomè  scattered  over  the  adjacent  tissues.  But  you  cannot  be
SLirprised  at  this,  when  you  remember  that  the  nerve-tubes  of  the
spinal  cord  are  devoid  of  that  cellular  coat  (Schwann's  sheath)
which,  in  divided  nerves,  encloses  and  contains  ail  the  products  of
the  disintegration  of  the  medulla  or  myéline.  The  meslies  of  the
reticulum  and  the  interstices  of  the  fibrillse  offer  easy  ways  of  escape
to  the  globules  of  myéline,  as  well  as  to  the  fatty  granulations,  by
means  of  which  they  may  permeate  the  tissue  and  spread  abroad."

Lastly,  we  would  hâve  you  remark  that  the  masses  of  (apparently)
medullary  matter  and  the  fatty  granulations  are  never  met  with  in
the  centre  of  the  sclerosed  patch,  that  is,  in  the  région  where  the
work  of  fibrillary  metamorphosis  and  of  destruction  of  nerve-tubes
lias  terminated  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  always  occupy  the  external
portions  of  the  patch,^  the  peripheral  and  transition  zones.  Now,
as  you  are  aware,  the  morbid  process  is  hère  in  full  activity  ;  hère  it
is  that,  compressed  on  ail  sides  and  straagulated  by  the  thickening
trabeculœ  of  the  reticulum  and  afterwards  by  the  fibrillary  fascicles
encroaching  on  the  alveolse,  the  medullary  cylinder  gradually
diminishes  in  volume  and  then  disappears  altogether,  leaving  the
nerve-tube  at  length  only  represented  by  the  axis -cylinder.  The
accumulation  of  medullary  or  fatty  globules  and  the  destruction  of
the  myeline-cylinder  consequently  take  place simultaneously  ;  we

Wiss.  zu  Wien,'  t.  xxiv,  1857;  Wedl,  'Rudim.  of  Patholog.  Histolog.,'  p.
292,  London,  1855.

I  It  is  not  rare  to  mcct,  in  the  aiidst  of  tlie  fibrillse,  with  axis-cylindcrs
partially  denudcd,  to  wliicli  globular  masses  adliere,  at  intervais,  which  havc
the  appearance  of  medullary  matter.

-  Cliarcot,  '  Société  de  Biologie,'  1868.

*  Ibidem.


PATHOLOGICAL  HISTOLOGY.  179

may  even  add  tliat  tlicy  procccd  abreast,  since  the  formnr  ceases
wlien  the  latter  is  concluded.  The  coexistence  of  tlie  two  pbenomena
evidently  cannot  be  fortuitous,  and,  takiûg  note  of  what  précèdes,  it
seems  to  us  legitiinate  to  concludc  tbat  the  meduUai'y  and  fatty  cor-
puscles  in  question  are  nothing  other  than  tlie  wreck  and  détritus
resulting  from  the  disintegration  of  the  nerve-tubes.i

What  becomes  afterwards  of  thèse  fatty  granulations  ?  They
disappear  in  ail  probability  by  absorption  ;  you  know  that  no  ves-
tiges of  them  are  discoverable  in  the  central  régions  of  the  sclerosed
patches.  This  is  the  place  to  submit  to  your  notice  a  phenomenon
which  undoubtedly  is  connccted  witli  this  act  of  absorption.  In  the
préparations,  which  I  am  about  to  send  round  for  inspection,  you
will  observe  that,  in  those  parts  wlierc  the  products  of  nerve-disin-
tegration  are  fouud,  the  lyinphatic  sheaths  of  the  smaller  vessels  en-
close within  their  cavities  varying  proportions  of  fatty  granulations  or
even,  though  more  rarely,  of  corpuscles  presenting  the  characters  of
myéline.  In  certain  points,  thèse  différent  products  are  so  abundant
that  the  lymphatic  sheaths  are  excessively  distended;  the  vessels
then  appear  to  bave  swollen  to  twice  and  thrice  their  normal  size,
and  they  stand  out,  like  little  white  tracks  visible  to  the  naked  eye,
on  the  grey  ground  of  the  sclerosed  patch.  Nevertheless,  the  coats
of  thèse  vessels  offer  no  other  altérations  than  those  indicated  above,
which  certainly  bave  no  relationship  with  atheromatous  degenera-
tion.  In  short,  we  hâve  hère  to  deal  with  a  fatty  infiltration  of  the
lymj)hatic  sheaths,  and  not  at  ail  with  a  primary  lésion  of  the  vas-
cular  pariel  es.  The  same  ])henomenon  is  again  met  with  in  cérébral
softening  from  arterial  oblitération  ;  in  most  of  the  forms  of  primary
or  secondary  sclerosis  ;  and,  in  short,  in  very  différent  affections  of
the  nervous  centres  wliich,  however,  bave  this  in  commou,  tliat
they  ail  détermine  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  nerve-tubes.  The
true  characters  of  this  phenomenon  appear  to  bave  been  suspected
by  Gull,2  and  by  BiUroth,"'  but  it  bas  been  principally  cleared  up  by
M.  Bouchard,  in  bis  excellent  studies  on  the  secondary  degeMerations
of  the  spinal  cord.*

1  Tliis  opitiiou  lias  been  already  very  distinctly  expressed  by  Eoidtansky  in
1S58. 'Eericlit,'  &e.,  loc.  cit.,  iSfj;.
-  "  Cases  of  Paraplegia,"  '  Guy's  llospital  lieports,'  Third  Séries,  1858,  t.  iv.

*  '  Arcliiv  der  Heilkunde,'  3  Jahr.,  p.  47.

*  Boucliard, 'Archives Générales de Médecine,'  Mars et Avril, 1S66:
Thèses  de  Paris,'  1867,  p.  44.


180  YELLOW CELL-DEGENERATION.

Tlie  description  wliicli  lias  been  given  you  of  sclerosic  altération,
disseminated  in  patches,  relates  chiefly  to  the  wliite  substance  of  the
cord  ;  but  it  may  be  equally  applied,  at  least  in  a  gênerai  way,  to  the
grey  matter.  In  botli  substances^  in  fact,  the  neuroglia  is  fashioned
on  the  same  mode],  and  the  altérations  effected  in  it  do  not  essen-
tially  differ;  consequently,  after  the  remarks  already  noted,  I
shall  only  make  spécial  mention  of  the  modification  which  the
nerve-cells  expérience  when,  on  the  grey  substance  being  invaded,
they  become  comprised  within  the  area  of  a  sclerosed  patch.  Thèse
cells  do  not  become  the  seat  of  nuclear  prolifération,  contrary  to
what  under  similar  circumstances  occurs  in  the  cells  of  the  connec-
tive  tissue  whose  nuclei  generally  multiply  ;  and  this  is,  in  fact,  a
characteristic  which  might,  if  needed,  be  a  help  to  distinguish  one
from  the  other  of  thèse  two  orders  of  anatomical  éléments.  The
nerve-cells  undergo  a  peculiar  altération  which  may  be  designated  by
the  term  ijelloiv  degeneraiion,  on  account  of  the  ochreous  tint  which
they  assume,  and  which  is  occasionally  somewhat  intense  ;  in  this
state  they  cease  to  be  coloured  by  carminé  as  in  the  normal  state  ;
the  nucleus  and  the  nucleolus  seem  to  be  formed  by  a  substance
haviiigavitreous  and  briUiant  appearance.  It  is  the  same  as  regards
the  body  of  the  cell,  which,  besides,  appears  as  if  composed  of  con-
centric  strata.

Finally,  ail  parts  of  the  cell  are  seized  by  atrophy,  which  may
lead  to  a  comparatively  considérable  diminution  of  its  bulk,  whilst,
at  the  same  time,  the  cell  processes  dwindle  away  and  disappear.i

lu  the  encephalon,  and  also  in  the  optic  and  olfactory  nerves,  the
sclerosed  patches  présent  essentially  the  same  characters  as  in  the
cord  ;  hence  we  do  not  think  it  would  be  of  any  advantage  to  enter
into  détails  in  relation  to  them.

Now  that  we  hâve  reached  the  conclusion  of  our  study,  we  may
try  to  array,  in  their  natural  order  of  séquence,  the  pheno-
meua  which  go  to  make  up  the  altération  in  question,  and  thus
endeavour  to  détermine  the  pathological  method  by  which  this
morbid  change  is  produced.

Undoubtedly,  the  multiplication  of  nuclei  and  the  concomitant
hyperplasia  of  the  reticulated  fibres  of  the  neuroglia  constitute  the
initial,  fundamental  fact,  and  necessary  antécédent;  the  dcgenera-
tive  atrophy  of  the  nerve  éléments  is  consécutive  and  secondary  ;  it

'  rrommann,  loc.  cit.;  Vulpiiiii,  'Cours  de  la  l'acuUc,'  1868;  Charcol,
'  Sociclc  de  Biologie,'  1868.


NATURE OF LESION.  181

liad  already  beguu  when  tlie  neuroglia  gave  way  to  the  fibriilary  tissue,
thougli  tlie  wasting,  afterwards,  proceeded  with  greater  rapidity.
The  hyperplasia  of  the  vascular  parietes  plays  merely  au  accessory
part.

In  wliat  consists  the  affection  of  the  neuroglia  which  marks  the  be-
ginning  of  this  séries  of  dérangements  ?  It  is  easy  to  discover  there
al]  the  characteristics  of  formative  irritation.  But,  after  recognising
the  fact  that  disseminated  sclerosis  is  a  primary  and  multilocular
chronic  interstitial  myelitis  or  encephalitis,  it  remains  for  us  to
détermine  the  histological  characters  which  distinguish  it  from  other
forms  of  sclerosis  of  the  nerve-centres,  and  also  from  several  kinds
of  myelitis  or  encephalitis  which,  having  their  starting-point  likewise
în  the  neuroglia,  nevertheless  do  not  issue  in  fibriilary  metamor-
phosis.  We  will  endeavour,  at  an  opportune  moment,  to  fulfil  this
duty.  At  présent,  gentlemen,  we  hasten  to  leave  the  department  of
pathological  anatomy  for  that  of  clinical  observation  in  order  to
show  you  by  what  array  of  symptoms  disseminated  sclerosis  of  the
nervous  centres  makes  its  existence  known.^

'  In  a  note  piiblished  in  the  '  Archives  de  Physiologie'  (1873,  p.  753),  one
of  Professer  Charcot's  studeuts,  Dr.  Debove,  has  shown  cause  for  the  modifica-
tion of  the  geuerally  received  opinion  in  référence  to  the  histology  of  dissemin-
ated sclerosis.  According  to  his  researches,  the  sclerosed  parts  are  formed  of
fibrillae  and  of  flat  cells,  quite  similar  to  tlie  cells  of  coramon  connective
tissue.  He  has  succeeded  in  demonstrating  this,  through  having  employed  the
method  of  interstitial  injections.

Thèse  facls  are  very  différent  from  what  was  believed  with  respect  to  the
structure  of  the  neuroglia  (see  note,  p.  169),  before  M.  Ranvier  demonstrated
that  the  connective  tissue  of  the  nerve-centres  does  not  essentially  differ  from
that  of  other  organs  ;  the  only  striking  peculiarity  being,  according  to  M.
Ranvier,  the  small  diameter  of  the  fibriilary  fascicles. — {Note  to  the  Second  Freiich
édition.')


LECTURE VII.

DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS:  ITS  SYMPTOMATOLOGY.

SuMMARY. — Biffèrent  aspects  of  disseminated  scier osis,  comidered
from  a  cUnical  jwiut  of  view. Causes  of  error  in  dïagnosïs.

Clinical  examlnation  qf  a  case  of  disseminated  sclerosis.
Tremor  :  tnodificatious  caused  therehy,  in  ihe  handwriting  ;
characters  wJdch  distinguisli  it  from  the  tremor  qf  parali/sis
agitans,  chorea,  gênerai  paralijsis,  and  the  motor  incoordination
of  ataxia.

Cephalic  symptoms.  Disorders  of  vision  :  diplopia,  amhlyopia,
7i)/stagm,us. Impteded  tdterance. Vertigo.

State  of  the  inferior  extremities.  Paresis.  Remissions.  Ab-
sence of  disorders  of  sensihilïty.  Commixiure  of  rare  symptoms  ;
tabetic phenomena  ;  muscular  atrophy.  Permanent  contracture.
Spinal  epilepsy.

In  the  preceding  lecture  we  minutely  described  the  anatomical
lésions  of  multilocular  sclerosis  of  the  nervous  centres.  Leaving
aside,  therefore,  this  portion  of  its  history  we  shall  proceed,  to-day,
to  point  out  the  séries  of  sjmptoms  by  which  it  makes  its  existence
clinically  known.

I.

A.  It  is  singular  that  a  morbid  state  which  possesses  so  distinct
and  so  striking  an  anatomical  substratum,  and  which,  in  short,  is
not  a  rare  disease,  should  hâve  escaped  clinical  analysis  for  such  a
length  of  time.  Yet  nothing  is  siinpler,  as  I  trust  to  show  you,
than  to  diagnose  the  affection  in  question,  by  the  bcdside  of  the
patient,  at  least  when  it  lias  reached  its  typical  period  of  perfect
developracnt.

If  it  be  asked  what  cause  so  lonc;  deferred  the  reco2;nition  of  dis-


CEEEBBO-SriNAL FORM.  183

seminated  sclerosis  and  its  admission  into  nosological  charts  where
it  sliould  occupy  a  place  beside  other  better-known  forms  of  primary
sclerosis  of  tbe  nervous  centres,  it  is  proper  to  point  to  the  diversity
of  aspects  under  whicli  it  may  be  encountered  in  the  hospitals.  It
is,  in  fact,  an  eminently  polymorphic  affection.

Our  anatomo-pathological  studies  ought  to  bave  made  you  anti-
cipate  tbat  it  would  be  so.  You  remember  that  the  patches  or
islets  of  sclerosis  sometimes  occupy  tbe  spinal  cord  exclusively,  that
in  otlier  cases  tbey  predominate  in  tbe  cérébral  hémisphères  and
the  medulla  oblongata,  and  that,  finally,  there  are  cases  in  which
they  are  dispersed  throughout  ail  the  departments  of  the  nervous
centres.  Thèse  varieties  of  position  induced  us  to  recognise,  from
an  anatomical  point  of  view,  tbe  tbree  following  forms  ;  i°,  the
ceplialic  form,  i°,  the  spinal  for  m,  and  3°,  the  mixed  or  cerehro-
spinal  form.  It  was  easy  to  foresee  tbat  eacb  of  thèse  forms
would  be  represented  by  a  group  of  symptoms  peculiar  to  itself.

B.  Let  us  first,  if  you  please,  concentrate  our  attention  on  the
cerebro-spinal  form.  It  is,  in  truth,  the  most  interesting  in  every
respect  and  that  which  you  will  bave  occasion  most  frequently  to
observe,  in  practice.  Well,  even  when  considered  in  this  type,  the
disease  may  assume  a  variety  of  masks.  Allow  me,  in  support  of
this  assertion,  to  mention  an  anecdote  which  one  of  my  colleagues
recently  related  to  me.

A  very  distinguished  physician,  one,  however,  who  was  but  Httle
familiar  with  tbe  symptomatology  of  disseminated  sclerosis,  had
come  to  visit  my  friend  in  the  clinical  department  over  which  he
présides.  In  order  to  do  him  honour,  my  colleague  presented  him
a  case  of  the  new  disease, — a  very  fine  spécimen  of  the  cerebro-
spinal  type.  The  patient,  leaving  bis  bed,  took  a  short  walk  down
the  ward.  "  This  is  an  ataxic,"  said  the  visitor.  *'  Perhaps  so,"
replied  my  colleague,  "but  what  do  you  think  of  the  rhythmical
movements  by  which  the  hand  and  upper  extremities  are  shaken  ?"
"  True,"  said  the  visitor,  "  he  is  also  afl'ected  with  chorea,  or  per-
haps with  paralysis  agitans.'^  The  patient  was  then  questioned.
He  replied,  but,  in  replying,  showed  a  marked  difiiculty  of  enuncia-
tion  ;  he  scanned  the  syllables  in  a  very  pecuHar  manner  ;  and  the
utterance  of  a  word  was  often  preceded  by  a  slight  trembling  of
the  lips.  "  I  understand,^'  said  the  physician,  "  you  wisbed  to  puzzle
me  by  presenting  a  most  complicated  case.  Hère  are  symptoms
which  belong  to  gênerai  paralysis. Pray  don't  proceed  any  further  ;


184  EEKORS IN DIAGNOSIS.

your  patient  probably  is  a  living  compendium  of  ail  nervous  patho-

logy."

Now,  gentlemen,  I  repeat  it,  this  was  simply  a  case,  thougli  a
very  complète  one,  of  the  cerebro-spinal  form  of  disseminated  scle-
rosis.

C.  Paralysis  agitans  is  especially  the  disease  with  wliicli  tins
form  of  sclerosis  lias  been  the  most  persistently  confounded,  and  for
which  it  is,  undoubtedly,  still  the  most  frequently  mistaken.  It  was
because  of  this  confusion  that,  at  the  time  we  laboured  to  draw
forth  disseminated  sclerosis  from  the  chaos  of  chronic  myelitic  affec-
tions, we  urged  M.  Ordenstein,  then  one  of  our  students,  to  tabulate
in  parallel  columns  the  opposite  characters  that  divide  this  disease
from  paralysis  agitans,  for  the  better  understanding  of  the  contrast.^
How  M.  Ordenstein  acquitted  himself  of  this  duty  is  known  to  you,
and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  déclare  that  his  dissertation  marks  a  serions
progress  in  the  clinical  history  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  nervous
System.

In  récent  days,  Herr  Baerwinkel,  a  distinguished  physician  of  Leip-
zig, after  having  related  a  very  interesting  example  of  cerebro-spinal
sclerosis,  which,  however,  presented  no  tremor  (as  sometimes
happens),  seems  to  insinuate  that  M.  Ordenstein  was  pleased  to
create  difficulties  which  had  no  real  existence,  in  order  to  give  him-
self the  facile  satisfaction  of  surmounting  them.  According  to  him,
"there  is  no  analogy  whatever  between  the  two  diseases.  Dr.  Baer-
winkel must,  doubtless,  hâve  forgotten  that  in  '  Canstatf  s  Jahres-
bericht  '  he  gave,  some  ten  years  ago,  the  analysis  of  a  case  observed
under  Skoda's  care, — in  that  case,  paralysis  agitans  had  been  dia-
gnosed  during  life,  whilst,  on  post-mortem  examination,  patches  of
disseminated  sclerosis  were  found  in  ail  parts  of  the  cerebro-spinal
axis.  The  case  appears  to  hâve  been  noted  with  the  greatest  fidelity.
It  is  stated,  and  this  point  deserves  remark,  that  the  tremor,  con-
trary  to  what  occurs  in  ordinary  cases  of  paralysis  agitans,  only
showed  itself  when  voluntary  movements  were  made,  and  subsided
■when  the  patient  was  at  rest.^

Nor  can  Ilerr  Baerwinkel  hâve  overlooked  the  case  recorded  by
Herr  Zenker  in  Henle's  Journal.  Hère  again  the  existence  of  multi-

'  "  Sur  la  Paralysie  Agitante  et  la  Sclérose  en  Plaques  Généralisée,"  Paris,
1867.
=  'Vien.  Med.  Halle,'  13,  1862.


EKROES m DIÂGXOSIS.  185

îocular  sclerosis  was  oiily  revealed  bythe  post-mortem  examination.'
During  life^  Professor  Hasse  liad  made  a  diagnosis  of  paralysis  agi-
tans,  and  yet,  in  the  symptomatological  description,  tliere  is  stress
laid  on  tlie  nature  of  the  tremor,  wliich  only  showed  itself  under  the
influence  of  émotion  or  on  the  occasion  of  voluutary  movements.

Thèse  examples  suffice,  I  présume,  to  show  you  that,  in  spite  of
the  opinion  of  Herr  Baerwinkel,  it  is  possible  to  confound  the  two
diseases,  since  such  confusion  lias  been  committed  by  clinical
observers  whose  skill  is  above  ail  question.

That  being  established,  I  ara  ready  to  concède  that  the  différent
•disguises  assumed  by  disseminated  sclerosis  are  coarse  masks,  and
that  to-day,  when  récent  works-  hâve  illuminated  the  field  of  dia-
gnosis, it  is  scarcely  permissible  to  be  caught  in  the  snare.  But  it
is  time,  gentlemen,  to  place  you  in  a  position  to  distinguish  the
characters  by  means  of  which  cerebro-spinal  disseminated  sclerosis
may  be  separated  from  those  diseases  which  more  or  less  closely
resemble  it.

II.

You  are  not  unaware,  gentlemen,  of  what  value  you  must  set  on
-clinical  descriptions,  eloquently  detailed  at  a  distance  from  the  bed-
side  of  the  patient.  They  seldom  succecd,  whatever  the  effort,  in
doing  more  than  giving  origin  to  indistinct  images  which  generally
leave  but  a  vague  and  transient  impression  on  the  mhid  of  the
auditor.

In  order  to  avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  falling  into  the  fault  I
Lave  just  mentioned,  I  will  proceed  in  your  présence  to  the  metho-
dical  examination  of  a  patient  who  présents  ail  the  symptoms  of
the  cerebro-spinal  form  of  disseminated  sclerosis,  in  the  period  of
perfect  development.

Mademoiselle  V — ,  aged  31,  has  been  suffering  for  about  eight
jears  under  the  affection  which  forms  the  object  of  the  présent  study.
Admitted  to  La  Salpêtrière  three  years  ago,  she  was  bequeathed  to
me  by  M.  Vulpian  when  he  left  this  hospital,  and  he,  at  the  same
time,  gave  me,  in  référence  to  her  case,  a  detailed  and  most  valuable

^  Zenker,  'Zeitsclirift  fiir  Medizin,'  Band  iii,  Reihe,  1865,  p.  228.

-  Bourneville  et  L.  Guerard,  "  De  la  Sclérose  eu  Plaques  Disséminées,"
Paris,  1S69  ;  Bourneville,  "  Nouvelle  Etude  sur  quelques  Points  de  la  Sclérose
«n  Plaques  Disséminées,"  Paris,  1869.


186  OF THE TREMOE.

note.  The  invasion  of  tlie  disease  dates,  we  hâve  said,  from  eight
years  ago  ;  it  is  therefore  a  case  of  old  standing.  I  will  tell  you
afterwards  of  the  différent  changes  which  characterised  the  early
phases  of  the  évolution  of  symptoms.  For  the  moment  I  wish  to
confine  myself  to  an  analysis  of  her  actual  condition.

One  symptom  which,  doubtless,  struck  you  ail  from  the  first  on
seeing  the  patient  enter,  assisted  by  a  nurse,  was  certainly  the  very
spécial  rhythmical  tremor  by  which  her  head  and  limbs  were  violently
agitated  whilst  she  was  walking.

You  hâve  likewise  noticed  that  when  the  patient  sat  upon  a
chair,  the  tremor  disappeared  at  once  and  corn pletely  from  her  upper
and  lower  limbs,  but  only  partially  from  the  head  and  trunk.  I
lay  stress  on  this  latter  point,  whilst  calling  your  attention  to  the
fact  that  the  new  attitude,  assumed  by  the  patient,  is  far  from  being
one  of  absolute  rest  as  regards  the  muscles  of  the  body  and  neck.
Besides,  we  must  make  allowance  for  the  existence  of  émotion  which
undeniably  plays  a  certain  part  hère.  I  shall  hâve  occasion  to  show
you  Mademoiselle  V —  when  reclining  in  bed,  and  in  complète
repose  ;  you  will  then  be  able  to  assure  yourself  of  the  utter  absence  of
ail  trace  of  tremor  in  the  difïerent  parts  of  her  body.  To  cause  the
rhythmical  agitation  again  to  appear  throughout  the  body,  it  will
sufïîce  to  make  the  patient  rise  from  her  seat.  To  bring  it  back
merely  in  a  partial  manner,  in  one  of  the  upper  extremities  for
instance,  I  will  request  her  to  lift  a  glass  full  of  water,  or  a  spoon,
to  her  mouth.  You  can  see  that,  in  the  several  acts  prescribed  by
the  will,  the  tremor  increases  in  direct  ratio  witli  the  extent  of  the
movement  executed.  Thus,  when  the  patient  wishes  to  lift  a  glass
full  of  water  to  her  lips,  the  rhythmical  agitation  of  the  hand  and
forearm  is  scarcely  noticeable  when  taking  hold  of  the  object  ;  but
it  becomes  more  and  more  exaggerated  as  the  glass  is  brought  uearer
to  the  eyes  ;  and  at  length  proceeds  to  such  an  extent  that,  at  the
moment  when  the  goal  is  being  attained,  the  glass  is,  as  you  observe,
dashed  with  violence  against  the  teeth,  and  the  water  is  flung  eut
to  a  distance.  This  great  disorder  is  not  shown,  I  repeat,  save  in
the  performance  of  movements  of  a  certain  amplitude.  As  regards
petty  opérations,  such  as  sewingor  ravelling  linen,  the  oscillations,  on
the  contrary,  arc  almost  null.  Some  time  ago,  the  patient  could  still
Write  distinctly  enough;  the  letters,  indecd,  werc  tremulous,  but
perfectly  readable.^

'  We  give  below  iwo  spccimeiis  of  ilic liandwriting  of  a  patient  named


OF THE TEEMOK.  187

To  sum  up,  ilie  tremor  in  question  onhj  manifests  Use!/  on  the
occasion of  intentional  movements of  some  extent  ; if  ceases  to

Lerutb,  who  succumbed  to  disseminated  sclerosis  in  M.  Charcot's  wards,
This  woman  was  admitted  to  La  Salpêtricre  September  24,  1S64.  In  May,
1865,  M.  Charcot  obtained  this  fragment  of  tlie  writing  (fig.  13).

PiG.  13.


£^'


^^


From  the  moiith  of  June,  Leruth  was  placed  uoder  the  nitrate  of  silver
treatment  (two  milligrammes,  then  four,  being  administered).  Under  the  in-
fluence of  this  medicine  the  tremor  diminished  in  a  notable  manner,  as  may  be
judged  from  au  examiuation  of  the  followiug  spécimen  of  her  writing  (fig.  14).


%  W  ^  -v^^


^  ^Ç  Gc/^^^/^c^


Eemark,  also,  that  in  May,  1865,  the  patient  was  greatly  fatigued  after
writing  the  three  lines,  of  which  a  fac-similé  is  given  above  ;  whilst  in  October
she  was  able  to  write  a  dozen  lines  witli  ease.  We  hâve  selected,  for  the
second  spécimen,  the  first  and  last  lines  of  what  she  wrote.

Judging  from  the  spécimens  in  our  possession,  it  is  difBcult  to  form  an
opinion  on  the  characteristics  of  the  handwriting  of  patients  atfected  with
disseminated  sclerosis.  Geuerally,  indeed,  we  hâve  examined  the  patients  at  au
advanced  stage  of  this  disease  ;  then  it  is  almost  impossible  to  obtain  anything
beyond  a  scribble  without  significance,  the  more  so  because  we  bave  no  term
of  coraparison. — (B.)


188  OF THE TEEMOR.

■exisi  token  the  mrisdes  are  ahaudoned  to  complète  repose.  Such,
gentlemen,  is  the  phenomenon  which  I  liave  been  led  to  regard  as
one  of  the  most  important  chnical  characters  of  cerebro-spinal  dis-
seminated  sclerosis.  I  do  not,  indeed^  prétend  to  put  this  forward
as  a  pathognomonic  symptom  ;  I  am  not  unaware  that  a  tremor
showing  itself,  with  somewhat  similar  characters,  is  occasionally
observed  in  affections  other  than  dissemiuated  sclerosis,  as,  for
instance,  in  mercurial  poisoning,  in  chronic  cervical  meningitis  with
sclerosis  of  the  cortical  layer  of  the  cord,  in  primary  or  consécutive
sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns,  &c.  It  is  not,  as  we  shall  see,  a
constant  symptom.  But  what  I  wish  at  présent  to  place  promi-
nently  before  you  is  the  fact  that,  in  dissemiuated  sclerosis,  when  no
other  complication  supervenes,  the  tremor,  if  it  exist  at  ail,  présents
itself  always  with  the  characters  which  I  hâve  assigned  to  it.  In  short,
this  is  a  symptom  which,  by  itself  alone,  w^ould  sulïice  to  distinguish
multilocular  sclerosis  of  the  nervous  centres  from  some  affections
which  so  nearly  resemble  it  as  to  render  confusion  possible.  In
référence  to  this  subject  I  shall  enter  into  some  détails.

The  tremor  oîparalj/sis  agitans  exists  as  well  when  the  members
are  in  a  state  of  repose  as  when  they  are  set  in  motion  by  the
will.  I  présent  a  patient  in  whom  the  tremor  has  persisted  for  long
years,  without  cessation  or  truce,  during  the  patientas  waking  hours.
It  never  stops  save  when  this  unfortunate  woman  is  plunged  in  pro-
found  sleep.  There  are  cases  of  shaking  palsy  where  the  tremor
only  shows  itself  intermittently,  but,  singularly  enough,  it  is  just  in
such  cases  that  the  tremor  shows  itself  rather  when  the  limbs  are  at
rest,  and  ceases  when  they  are  set  in  motion  by  the  will.  You  can
perceive  in  another  patient,  whom  I  submit  to  your  observation,
this  peculiar  characteristic  of  paralysis  agitans.  Eemark,  also,  in
both  thèse  women,  that  the  head  takes  no  share  in  the  trerabling  ;
or,  if  it  seem  shaken  by  the  oscillations,  thèse  are  plainly  com-
municatcd  to  it  by  the  agitation  of  other  parts  of  the  body, — there
is  transmission  of  shocks  from  the  affected  members  and  trunk.
The  absence  of  tremor  of  the  head  seems  to  me  an  almost  constant
fact  in  shaking  palsy.  I  will  add  that  in  this  affection  the  jerks  are
of  much  less  extent,  more  regular,  rapid,  and  serried,  if  I  may  so
speak,  than  in  multilocular  sclerosis.  In  tlie  latter,  the  oscillations
are  larger,  and  resemble,  in  many  respects,  the  gesticulations  of
•chorea  ;  this  analogy  is  so  close  that  before  the  publication  of  the
Works  which hâve  caused  it to  be  admitted into clinical  lists.


MOTOE TXCOOEDINATION.  ISD-

clisseminated  sclerosis  has  been  sometimes  designated  under  tlie
names  of  rliythmic  chorea  and  clioreiform  paralysis.

It  is,  however,  always  easy  to  distinguisli  the  6dd  and  disor-
derly  movements  of  chorea,  properly  so  called,  from  thc  rhythmical
oscillations  of  multilocular  sclerosis.  Note,  firstly,  that  in  the  latter
case,  if  tlie  action  of  the  upper  extremity  when  lifting  an  objcct  to
the  lips  be  considered,  the  main  direction  of  the  motion  persists  in
spite  of  the  obstacles  caused  lij  thc  jerics  of  the  tremor,  whicli,  as
we  hâve  just  said,  augment  as  the  hand  approaches  its  goal.  In
chorea,  on  the  contrary,  the  viain  direction  of  motion  woidd  he
disturled  from  the  oiUset  hj  contradictori/  movements,  quite  dis-
proportionate  in  magnitude,  ivhich  cause  the  goal  to  he  missed.
Add  to  this,  tliat  the  movements  of  chorea  show  themselves  sud-
denly  and  unexpectedly,  when  the  limbs  arc  in  a  state  of  perfect
rest;  thus,  apart  from  any  act  of  the  will,  the  choreic  patient  is
seen  to  thrust  ont  his  tongue,  make  a  grimace,  or  abruptly  raise  a
limb,  &c.  Now,  such  things  are  altogether  unknown  in  multilocular
sclerosis.

When,  in  progressive  locomotor  ataxia  (sclerosis  of  the  posterior
columns),  the  upper  extreraities  are  afFected,  we  find,  as  regards  pur-
posed  acts,  incoordinated  movements  which,  to  some  extent,  recall  the
gesticulation  of  chorea,  and  the  jerks  of  multilocular  sclerosis,  The
danger  of  confounding  them  may  be  avoided  by  attending  to  the
following  characters.  It  is  to  be  observed,  at  tlie  outset,  that  in  the
incoordination  of  ataxic  patients  we  do  not,  properly  speaking,  find
any  tremor  or  rhythmical  jerks,  but  rather  gesticulations  of  différent
degrees  of  disorder,  abruptness,  and  extent.  Examine  studiously,  in
the  case  of  the  patient  whom  I  place  before  you,  the  movements  of
the  hand  when  in  the  act  of  taking  liold  of  a  small  object,  and  you
will  find  truly  characteristic  peculiarities.  You  see  how,  at  the
moment  of  grasping,  the  fingers  separate  excessively,  and  are  ex-
tra vagantly  extended,  bendiug  towards  the  back  of  the  hand.  Then  the
object  is  seized  suddenly,  with  a  dash,  in  an  almost  convulsive  manner
by  the  abrupt  and  disproportiouate  flexion  of  ail  the  fingers.  This  is
a  symptom  of  ataxia  ;  you  will  never  observe  anything  of  the  kind
in  disseminated  sclerosis.  Lastly,  I  would  add — and  this  final  trait
is  truly  décisive — that,  in  ataxia,  the  closing  of  the  eyes  has  always
the  effect  of  exaggerating  in  a  very  marked  manner  the  incoordina-
tion of  the  movements,  whilst  it  does  not  at  ail  modify  the  rhyth-
mical jerks  of  multilocular  sclerosis.


190  FEEQUENCY OP TEEMOE.

We  sliould  not,  liowever,  forget  tliat  some  of  the  symptorns  of
ataxia  are  found  occasionally  mixed  up  with  tliose  of  disseminated
sclerosisj  when  the  sclerosed  islets  in  certain  régions  of  the  cord
spread  over  a  certain  height  of  the  posterior  columns.  A  case^  the
history  of  which  may  be  found  recorded  at  length  in  Cruveilhier's
'Atlas  d^Anatomie  Pathologique/  œaybecited  as  an  example  of  this
class.^  It  is  the  case  of  the  patient  Paget.  In  order  to  grasp  and
use  a  pin  she  required  to  hâve  lier  eyes  open^  otherwisc  the  pin
dropped  from  her  Angers.  On  a  post-mortem  examination,  it  was
found  that  one  of  the  sclerosed  patches  occupied  a  considérable
extent  of  the  posterior  columns  in  the  cervical  enlargement  of  the
cord.  But  I  shall  not  now  dwell  at  any  greater  length  upon  this
point,  to  which  we  shall  liave  several  opportunities  of  again  refer-

ring.

We  havehitherto,  almost  exclusively^studied  the  question  of  tremor
in  its  connection  with  the  upper  limbs  ;  but  we  also  kuow  that  it
may  affect  the  head^  the  body,  and  the  lower  extremities.  It  présents
itself  in  thèse  différent  parts,  with  ail  the  characters  that  we  hâve
described  in  référence  to  the  upper  limbs,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  absent
in  repose^  and  shows  itself  on  the  occasion  of  purposed  movements,
■or  in  case  of  attitudes  which  cannot  be  maintained  except  by  the
active  and  more  or  less  energetic  tension  of  certain  muscles  or  sets
of  muscles.

In  order  to  complète  the  characteristics  of  this  symptom,  we  must
enter  into  a  few  détails.  Tremor,  gentlemen,  as  I  long  ago  declared,
is  an  almost  constant  symptom  in  the  cerebro-spinal  form  of  dissemi-
nated  sclerosis.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  exceptional
cases  exist,  in  which — though  the  fact  is  as  yet  inexplicable — no
tremor  présents  itself  amongst  the  syraptomatological  group.  I
hâve  myself  observed  several  cases  of  this  kind.  But  you  should
note,  gentlemen,  that  tremor  may  hâve  existed,  to  a  greater  or  less
extent,  at  a  certain  anterior  epoch  of  the  disease,  and  may  hâve
disappeared  at  the  time  when  the  patient  ofîers  himself  for  examina-
tion. It  is,  therefore,  necessary,  on  this  account,  to  question  with  the
greatest  careth ose  patients  in  whom  this  symptom  is  ap})arcntly  absent.

It  is  the  rule  that  the  tremor  disappears  when  the  members  are
immobilised  by  permanent  contracture,  at  a  more  or  less  advaiiced
period  of  the  disease.  Tiiough  the  tremor  sometimes  shows  itself
almost  from  the  very  beginniiig,  yet  it  must  be  acknowledged  that

'  Ciuvcilliier,  '  Atlas  d'Aiiutoniic  Pathologique,'  livraison  3(S,  pp.  i  et  ii.


CEPHALIC SYMPTOMS.  191

it  is  usually  a  late  symptom.  In  conclusion^  gentlemen,  it  is  very
fréquent  and  almost  customary  tliat  the  tremor  sliall  net  last  as  long
as  the  disease;  it  grows  less  marked  as  the  patients  décline  in  strength,
and  it  sometimes  completely  vanishes  before  the  fatal  end  arrives.

III.

You  are  now  acquainted,  gentlemen,  witli  one  of  the  most
original  and  most  important  symptoms  of  sclerosis  in  generalised
patches.  A  deeper  and  more  circumstantial  study  of  the  case
which  we  hâve  before  us  will  enable  us  to  collect  many  other
indicia  which  are  not  less  valuable.  We  shall  discover  in  our  patient
a  whole  group  of  symptoms,  which  I  propose  to  call  cepliallc,  as
opposed  to  spinal  symptoms.  This  group  comprises  certain  dis-
orders  of  vision,  of  speech,  and  of  intellect.

A.  Let  us  first  apply  ourselves  to  the  question  of  visual  dis-
orders. Thèse  are  diplopia,  amblyopia,  and  especially  nystagmus.

a.  Blploina,  as  happeus  also  in  locomotor  ataxia,  is  an  initial
symptom,  usually  quite  transient,  but  yet  deserviug  of  passing
notice.

h.  Amhlppïa,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  persistent,  and  indeed  a
more  fréquent  symptom  of  cerebro -spinal  disseminated  sclerosis.  I
believe  I  may  af&rm  that,  contrary  to  what  takes  place  in  posterior
sclerosis,  it  very  rarely  issues  in  complète  blindness,^  This  is  a
peculiarity  worthy  of  notice,  especially  if  you  remember  that  patches
of  sclerosis  hâve  been  found,  after  death,  occupying  the  whole
thickness  of  the  nerve-trunk,  in  the  optic  nerves,  in  cases  where,
during  life,  au  enfeeblement  of  sight  simply  had  been  noted."
This  apparent  disproportion  between  the  symptom  and  the  lésion
constitutes  one  of  the  most  powerful  arguments  which  can  be
invoked  to  show  that  the  functional  continuity  of  the  nerve-tubes  is
not  absolutely  interrupted,  although  thèse,  in  their  course  through
the  sclerosed  patches,  hâve  been  despoiled  of  their  medullary
sheaths  and  reduced  to  axis-cylinders.

1  In  a  case  reported  by  M.  Magnan  ('Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  ii,  p.
765)  there  was  papillary  atropby  of  both  eyes,  with  complète  bliiiduess.

^  Case  of  the  patient,  Aspasie  Byr,  commuiiicated  by  M.  Vulpian.  This
observation  is  recorded,  in  extenso,  in  a  work  by  M.  H.  Liouville,  entitled
"  Observations  détaillées  de  deux  cas  de  sclérose  en  îlots  multiples  et  disséminés
du  cerveau  et  de  la  moelle  épiuière  "  ('  Mémoires  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'
1868,  p.  231).


192  DISOEDEES OF VISION.

On  examining  the  eyes  witli  the  ophthalmoscope^  an  opération
which  is  generally  rendered  difficult  by  the  existence  of  nystagmus,
we  usually  find,  under  sucli  circumstances,  either  almost  complète
integrity  of  the  papilla  of  the  optic  uerve^  even  when  amblyopia
is  far  advanced^  or  a  partial  lésion  ;  or^  finally,  in  the  rare  case&
where  blindness  is  complète,^  total  atrophy  (marked  by  a  pearly
white  coloration,  and  extrême  tenuity  of  the  vessels)  with  or  without
excavation  of  the  papilla.

In  the  case  of  Mademoiselle  V —  we  hâve  simply  a  rather  marked
amblyopia  of  botli  eyes.  No  well-determiued  lésion  lias  been  dis-
covered  on  ophthalmoscopic  examination.  It  is  worthy  of  notice
that,  in  this  casC;,  flashes  of  light  and  sparks  preceded  the  enfeeble-
ment  of  sight.  I  hâve  observed  the  same  phenomena  in  several
other  cases  of  amblyopia  connected  with  multilocular  sclerosis,

c.  'Nystagmus  is  a  symptom  of  sufficiently  great  importance  in
diagnosis,  since  it  is  to  be  met  with  in  about  half  the  number  of
cases.  It  is  not  found,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  locomotor  ataxia^
save  in  very  exceptional  cases.  Youmay  observe  that  it  exists,  to  a
very  advanced  extent,  in  Mademoiselle  V — .  We  hâve  there,  as
you  see,  a  quantity  of  little  jerks  or  twitches,  which  cause  the
eyeballs  to  oscillate  simultaneously  from  right  to  left,  then  from  left
to  right,  or  inversely.  There  are  cases  in  which  the  nystagmus  is
not  présent  so  long  as  the  gaze  is  fixed  on  nothing,  but  shows  itself
suddcnly,  in  a  more  or  less  manifest  manner,  as  soon  as  the  patients
are  asked  to  look  attentively  at  any  object.

B.  There  is  a  symptom  more  frequentiy  found  than  nystagmus,
one  which  is  almost  constant  in  multilocular  cerebro-spinal  sclerosis,
since  it  is  noted  in  twenty-two  out  of  the  twenty-three  cases  that  we
hâve  analysed,  and  this  is  a  peculiar  difficulté  of  enunciation  which
you  can  study  in  our  patient,  where  it  exists  in  a  typical  state  of
perfect  development.

The  affected  person  speaks  in  a  slow,  drawling  manner,  and  some-
times  almost  unintelligibly.  It  seems  as  if  the  tongue  had  become
"  too  thick/^  and  the  delivery  recalls  that  of  an  individual  suffering
from  incipient  intoxication.  A  doser  examination  shows  that  the
words  are  as  if  measured  or  scanned;  there  is  a  pause  after  every
syllablo,  and  the  syllables  themsclves  are  pronounccd  slowly,  The
patient  hésitâtes  in  the  articulation  of  lus  words,  but  there  is,  pro-

'  Case  quotcd  by  M.  Magnan.


CEPHALIO SYMPTOMS.  193

perly  speaking,  nothing  like  stammering. Certain  consonants^  l,  j),
and  g,  are  peciiliarly  ill-pronouncecl.

There  exists  in  the  case  of  Mademoiselle  V — ,  as  you  may  observe,
a  certain  slowness  in  the  movements  of  the  tongue  ;  you  see  that
it  is  even  affected  by  very  manifest  tremulation  when  protruded.  It
must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  this  is  a  constant  phenomenon,
for  I  hâve  several  times  found  that  speech  miglit  be  impeded  to  a
very  great  extent  without  the  tongue  presenting  tlie  least  trace  of
tremor.  The  tongue  always,  at  least  according  to  my  expérience,,
préserves  its  normal  volume,  and  I  hâve  never  seen  it  wrinkled  on
the  surface,  as  may  be  noticed  in  certain  cases  of  labio-glosso-
laryngeal  paralysis  with  atrophy  of  the  lingual  muscles.

The  difficulty  of  enunciation,  at  first  scarcely  perceptible,  becomes
gradually  aggravated  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  until  the
patientas  discourse  is  rendered  nearly  incompréhensible.  In  some
instances  it  becomes  suddenly  aggravated,  as  if  in  paroxysms,  and
then  grows  temporarily  better.

On  the  whole,  the  difficulty  of  speech  which  is  observed  in  cérébro-
spinal  sclerosis  approximates,  in  many  respects,  to  the  corresponding
symptom  of  progressive  gênerai  paralysis.  I  even  think  that,  in
many  cases,  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  between
them,  if  abstraction  were  made  of  the  assistance  given  by  concomi-
tant pheuomena.  Add  that  the  approximation  may  be  rendered
still  doser  by  the  circumstance  that,  in  multilocular  sclerosis,  as  in
gênerai  paralysis,  the  utterance  of  words  is  sometimes  preceded,  as
you  can  verify  in  our  patient,  by  a  slight  and,  as  it  were,  a  convulsive
contraction  of  the  lips.

However  it  be,  this  trouble  in  the  articulation,  to  which  I  call
your  attention,  is  a  very  important  symptom  of  multilocular  sclerosis.
It  may  potently  contribute  to  settle  the  diagnosis,  principally  in  those
cases,  which  are  indeed  exceptional,  where  tremor  of  the  hand  and
upper  extremities  is  absent.

To  this  symptom  may  successively  be  added,  especially  in.  advanced
stages  of  the  disease,  certain  disorders  of  déglutition,  of  circulation,
and  even  of  respiration.  Thèse  are  symptoms  of  progressive  hulbar
paralysis,  which  ought  to  give  the  alarm,  because,  becoming  rapidly
aggravated,  they  hâve  sometimes  suddenly  and  almost  unexpectedly
determined  the  fatal  termination.  On  account  of  the  interest  attach-
ing  to  them  in  prognosis,  they  shall  form  the  object  of  a  spécial
study,

13


]  94  VERTIGO.

C.  Vertigo,  in  about  three  fourtlis  of  the  cases,  is  one  of  the
pheiiomeiia  which  mark  the  invasion  of  multilocular  sclerosis  of  the
nervoLis  centres.  As  far  as  I  can  judge  from  the  descriptions  given
me  by  the  patients  whom  I  hâve  questioned,  the  vertigo  is  generally
of  the  gyratory  kind.  AU  objects  seem  to  be  whirling  round  with
great  rapidity,  and  the  individual  himself  feels  as  if  revolving  on  his
axis.  Threatened  with  loss  of  equilibrium,  the  patient  lays  hold  of
whatever  is  nigh  him.  In  most  cases,  this  giddiness  returns  in  fits
of  short  duration;  sometimes,  however,  it  persists  almost  witbout
interruption  for  a  certain  period,  superadded  to  the  tremor  and
paralytic  state  of  the  members  ;  it  often  contributes  considerably  to
render  it  almost  impossible  for  the  patient  to  stand  erect  or  continue
his  titubating  waik.  You  must  take  care  not  to  confound  this  titu-
bation  with  the  uncertainty  of  gait  which  is  connected  with  diplopia  ;
the  latter  ceases  when  the  patient  keeps  one  of  his  eyes  closed.

The  vertigo  in  question  is  ail  the  more  interesting  because  it
belongs  neither  to  locomotor  ataxia,  nor  to  paralysis  agitans,  and
may  consequently  help  in  forming  a  diagnosis.

D.  Most  of  the  patients  affected  by  multilocular  sclerosis,  whom  I
hâve  had  occasion  to  observe,  hâve  presented  at  a  certain  stage  of
the  disease  a  truly  peculiar  faciès.  The  look  is  vague  and  uncer-
tainj  the  lips  are  hanging  and  half-open;  the  features  hâve  a  stoHd
expression,  sometimes  even  an  appearance  of  stupor.  This  dominant
expression  of  the  physiognomy  is  almost  always  accompanied  by  a
corresponding  mental  state,  which  deserves  notice.  There  is  marked
enfeeblement  of  the  memory  ;  conceptions  are  formed  slowly  ;  the  in-
tellectual  and  emotional  faculties  are  blunted  in  their  totality.  The
dominant  fceling  in  the  patients  appears  to  be  a  sort  of  almost
stupid  indifférence  in  référence  to  ail  things.  It  is  not  rare  to  see
them  give  way  to  foolish  laughter  for  no  cause,^  and  sometimes,  on

^  A  patient,  under  M.  Charcot's  care,  of  whom  v/e  sliall  hâve  occasion  to
speak  again,  Ilortense  Dr — ,  is  frequently  seized  with  causcless  fits  of  laughter,
which  she  cannot  coutrol.  Ilaviug  been  subjcct,  before  the  invasion  of  the
disease,  to  lits  of  angcr,  she  has  noticcd,  with  regret,  that  they  hâve  incrcased
since  that  period.  (B.)  On  tlie  other  hand,  one  of  two  patients,  whose  cases
I  had  an  opportunity  of  studjing,  in  Professer  Bcliicr's  wards  in  the  Ilôtcl
Dieu,  did  not  exhibit  any  marked  intellectual  disordcr,  allhough  she  had  bcen
many  years  in  hospital.  The  second  patient,  whose  symptoms  were  more  ad-
vanced,  seemed  to  wake  froin  a  dream,  when  spoken  to  ;  then,  trying  vaiuly  to
fix  his  gaze  on  the  speaker,  lie  answered  intelligently,  but  the  (gradually  in-
crcasing)  difficulty  of  enunciution  madc  conversation  painful. (Sigcrson.)


PSYCHIC SYMPTOMS.  195

tlie  contrary,  melt  into  tears  without  reason.  Nor  is  it  rare^  amid
tbis  state  of  mental  dépression,  to  find  psychic  disorders  arise  wbicli
assume  one  or  other  of  tlie  classic  forms  of  mental  aliénation.

One  oftlie  patients  of  Valentiner,  usually  subject  to  melancbolia,
was,  from  timeto  time,  seized  witli  'ambitions  mania.  A  man,  whose
case  bas  been  recently  recorded  by  Dr.  Leube^  looked  upon  him-
self  as  destined  to  become  a  king_,  nay^  an  emperor;  he  boasted
that  be  possessed  a  large  number  of  oxen,  borses,  and  beautiful
mansions.  He  was  soon,  be  said,  about  to  form  a  matrimonial
alliance  with  "  a  countess/'  &c.^

Mademoiselle  Y —  was  seized,  a  few  weeks  ago,  vvitb  a  genuine
fit  of  lypemania.  Slie  bad  hallucinations  of  sigbt  and  hearing.  She
beheld  frightful  apparitions  and  beard  voices  tbreatening  her  witb
tbe  guillotine.  She  was  couvinced  that  we  wanted  to  poison  her.
Duriûg  twenty  days  sbe  refused  ail  kinds  of  nourisbment,  and  we  were
forced,  during  the  whole  of  that  time,  to  administer  food  by  means
of  tbe  stomach  pump.  To-day,  thèse  accidents  bave  almost  entirely
vanished.  Nevertbeless,  the  voices  are  still  beard  from  time  to  time.
You  see  tbe  patient  bas  been  taken,  during  our  examiuation,  witb
convulsive  laughter  whicli  sbe  cannot  moderate,  and  wbich  will
soon  be  followed  by  a  shower  of  tears.

IV.

In  order  to  conclude  the  descri])tive  study  of  the  case  which  I
bave  presented  you,  gentlemen,  as  a  type  of  mutilocular  sclerosis
of  the  nervous  centres,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  direct  your  atten-
tion to  the  state  of  the  lower  extremities.  You  bave  seen  that
Mademoiselle  A^ —  cannot  rise  from  her  seat,  stand  erect,  or  attempt
to  walk,  if  she  be  not  strongly  supported  by  two  assistants.  It  is
easy  to  note  that  the  cause  of  tbis  motor  impotence  is,  principally,
a  pseudo-tetanic  rigidity  which  bas  seized  on  the  lower  extremities,
and  which,  tbough  very  marked  wben  the  patient  is  seated  or  reclining,
becomes  exaggerated  to  tbe  bighest  degree  wben  sbe  attempts  to
rise  or  walk.

1  "  Ueber  multiple  iuselfôrmige  Sklerose  des  Gehirus  uiid  Rûckenniarks  "
('Deutscb.  Archiv,'  8  Bd.,  i  heft,  Leipzig-,  fSyo,  p.  14).

-  One  of  tbe  patients,  Aspasic  B — ,  observed  by  M.  Liouville,  in  M.  Vul-
pian's  wards,  bad  ballucinations  ;  Rosine  Spitale,  wbose  bistory  we  bave
abridged  (Bourneville  et  Guérard,  loc.  cit.,  p.  92)  from  M.  Valentiner,  fell  into
stupor  some  montbs  before  tbe  fatal  termination  of  tbe  disease.  (B.)


1Ô6  PARESIS  OF THE EXTREMITTES.

This  contracture  of  the  lower  limbsj  at  présent  permanent,  only
mauifested  itself  quite  recently  iu  the  case  of  Mademoiselle  V —  ;  it
is,  in  fact,  a  symptom  of  the  advanced  stages  of  the  disease.  In
the  évolution  of  the  morbid  process  it  is  always  preceded  at  a  con-
sidérable distance  by  a  paretïc  sfate,  presenting  some  peculiar
features,  witli  which  I  will  first  endeavour  to  raake  you  acquainted.

In  référence  to  this  particular  point  the  clinical  history  of
Mademoiselle  Y —  has  been  traversed  by  certain  incidents  which,
without  being  exactly  exceptional,  still  do  not  constitute  the  rule.
Consequentiy  I  am  forced  to  put  it  aside  for  the  moment,  reserving
the  right  of  soon  returning  to  it.  In  the  following  description
I  will  draw  upon  détails  recorded  in  a  certain  number  of  cases
which  I  hâve  collected,  and  in  which  the  paretic  ])eriod  was  developed
in  accordauce  with  the  normal  conditions.

Paresis  of  the  Umhs. — We  hâve  hère  a  more  or  less  marked
décline  of  the  motor  power  of  the  limbs,  which  is  frequently  maui-
fested at  the  very  outset  of  tbe  disease,  and  which  is  not  usually
connected  with  any  notable  disturbance  of  sensibility.

Generally  one  of  the  lower  limbs  is  first  and  solely  affected.  It
feels  heavy  and  difîicult  to  move;  the  foot  turns  àt  the  least
obstacle  in  walking,  or  the  whole  limb  suddenly  gives  way  under
the  weight  of  the  body.  The  other  limb  is  seized,  sooner  or  later,
in  its  turn  ;  however,  as  the  paresis  advances  with  extrême  slowness,
the  patients  are  still  able,  for  yet  a  long  while,  to  walk  about  with
more  or  less  ease  and  to  attend  to  their  occupations,  but  at  last
the  day  comes  when,  owing  to  an  aggravation  of  the  motor  paralysis,
they  may  be  confined  to  bed.  The  upper  extremities  are  themselves
invaded,  either  simultaneously  or  one  after  the  other,  usually  at  a
period  far  removed  from  the  invasion  of  the  disease.  Prequently  in
the  commencement  there  are  remissions;  thus,  it  is  not  rare  to  see
the  enfeebled  lower  limbs  résume,  for  a  time,  their  original  energy.
Such  remissions  may  even  occasionally  take  place  two  or  tliree
times.  I  point  out  this  peculiarity  to  your  notice  because  it  cer-
tainly  is  not  found,  to  the  same  extent,  in  other  chronic  diseases  of
the  spinal  cord.

I  should  revert  for  a  moment,  in  ordcr  to  lay  stress  on  the  fact,
already  noticed,  of  the  absence  of  disorders  of  sensibility.  The
patients  do,  indeed,  sometimes  complain  of  formications,  and  of  a
feeling  of  numbness  occupying  the  enfeebled  limb;  but  thèse  sym-


UNUSUAL SYMPTOMS.  197

ptoms  are  usually  trausient  and  but  little  marked. Besides,  it  is
easy  to  ascertain  that  cutaneous  sensibilitj,  in  tlie  afFected  members,
is  almost  always  preserved,  in  ail  its  modes. The  girdling  pains^
the  fulgurant  crises,  whicli  play  so  prominent  a  part  in  the  early
stages  of  progressive  locomotor  ataxy,  are  absent  hère. It  is  the
same  thing  with  respect  to  that  loss  of  the  sensé  of  position  of
parts,  which  also  belongs  to  ataxia. This  does  not  occur  in  regular
multilocular  sclerosis,  and  patients  afFected  by  the  latter  disease  can,
with  closed  eyes,  détermine  with  exactness  the  position  which  has
beeu  given  to  their  limbs. Nor  has  the  closure  of  the  eyes  any
marked  influence  on  the  power  of  the  patient  to  hold  himself  erect,
or  ou  his  manner  of  walking. His  gait  is  uncertain,  embarrassed,
titubating,  on  account both  of  muscular weakness and of the
tremor  which,  sooner  or  later,  is  superadded  ;  the  feet,  held  apart  in
order  to  enlarge  the  basis  of  support,  drag  awkwardly  over  the
ground,  from  which  it  is  hard  to  raise  them; When  titubation  is
very  much  marked  the  patients  threaten  to  fall  at  every  step,  and
they  do,  in  fact,  frequently  corne  to  the  ground. The  lower  ex-
tremities  are  not  flung  forward,  in  au  abrupt  manner  and  convul-
sively,  as  we  so  commonly  see  them  in  sclerosis  of  the  posterior
columns. The  sphincters  are  very  rarely  afFected  by  the  weakness
which  invades  the  muscles  of  the  limbs,  and  this  contrasts  with
what  occurs  in  many  spinal  affections,  where  you  see,  at  a  very  early
stage,  vesicular  and  rectal  troubles superadded  to  the  other  sym-
ptoms. Finally,  to  complète  the  picture,  we  should  lay  stress  on
the  habituai  absence  of  trophic  disorders  of  the muscles  in the
paraplegia  connected  with multilocular  sclerosis. The  enfeebled
muscles  préserve  almost  to  the  last  their  prominence  and  firmness  ;
tested  by  faradaic  exploration  they  do  not  présent,  at  any  stage,
traces  of  notable  enfeeblement  of  electric  contra ctility.

Intermixture  of  unusual  s^nijHoms. — I  made  mention,  as  we  pro-
ceeded,  of  a  certain  number  of  symptoms  which  I  took  care  to  elimi-
nate,  because  they  do  not  belong  to  the  regular  type  of  the  disease.
It  is  necessary  to  inform  you  now,  by  way  of  corrective,  that  thèse
symptoms  do  intermingle,  in  certain  cases,  with  the  ordinary  pheno-
mena  of  multilocular  sclerosis,  and  even  become  so  very  prominent
that  an  observer,  if  not  forewarned  on  the  subject,  would  perhaps  be
almost  necessarily  mistaken.  Under  this  aspect,  the  record  of
Mademoiselle  V —  may  furnish  us  with  valuable  information. I


198  ATAXIO SYMPTOMS.

extract,  therefore^  some  détails  froin  it,  dated  Mardi  34th,  1867,  that
is  to  say,  over  three  years  ago.  At  tliat  period,  when,  indeed,
the  paresis  and  tremor  were  so  far  advanced  in  the  lower  limbs  as  to
make  it  impossible  for  the  patient  to  walk,  except  by  the  help  of
two  assistants,  the  following  symptoms  were  noted  : — Wliilst  walk-
ing,  the  feet  are  slightly  thrown  forward,  "  as  with  ataxic  patients."
When  the  eyes  are  closed  there  is  "  exaggeration  of  the  titubation,
loss  of  equilibrium,  and  the  patient  would  certainly  fallif  not  strongly
upheld  by  two  assistants."  In  the  lower  limbs  "  tactual  sensibility
has  diminished  in  a  marked  manner.  The  patient,  with  closed
eyes,  cannot  tell  what  position  has  been  given  to  her  limbs.  She
expériences  in  them,  from  time  to  time,  violent  paroxysms  of  ful-
gurant pains."  Finally,  the  existence  of  a  girdling  pain  has  been
noted.

You  hâve  recognised,  in  this  enumeration,  nearly  the  whole  séries
of  phenomena  which  serve  clinically  to  characterise  progressive
locomotor  ataxy.  Some  of  them  are  to  be  found  présent  to-day  in
our  patient,  but  they  appear,  generally  speaking,  in  a  very  attenuated
form,  or  relegated  to  the  background.  Do  we  mean  to  say  that,
even  at  the  time  when  they  seemed  to  predominate,  they  were  of  a
nature  seriously  to  embarrass  the  diagnosis  ?  No,  decidedly  not,
and  I  am  convinced  that,  in  ail  cases  of  the  kind,  you  could  avoid
déception  by  bearing  in  mind  the  following  observations.

The  very  fact  of  paresis  of  the  lower  limbs  (which  does  not  exist
in  posterior  sclerosis,  or  which,  at  ail  events,  only  shows  itself  at  an
advanced  stage)  being  found  mixed  up  with  the  ataxic  symptoms^
should  put  you  on  the  true  path.  If  it  hâve  preceded  them  the
case  is  still  clearer.  You  will  also  certainly  hâve  to  chronicle  the
coexistence  of  some  of  the  symptoms  which  belong  only  to  multi-
locular  induration,  namely — tremor  of  the  extremities,  impeded
enunciation,  vertigo,  nystagmus,  &c.  It  is  necessary,  besides,  to
clearly  understand  the  reason  why  ataxic  symptoms  are  sometimes
manifested  in  the  course  of  multilocular  induration,  as  I  announced
above.  There  is  hère,  in  my  opinion,  no"  question  of  a  combination
of  the  elementary  forms  of  two  diseases — progressive  locomotor
ataxia  and  cerebro-spinal  disseminated  sclerosis.  As  for  myself,  I
hâve  never,  in  a  post-mortem  examination,  met  with  the  coexistence
of  multilocular  grey  induration  and  posterior  fascimlated  sclerosis  ;
and,  without  dcnyingthat  such  an  association  could  exist,  I  believe  it
to  be  at  least  infinitely  rare. It  is,  on  the  contrary,  cominon  cnough


AMYOTEOPHT.  199

for  tlie  sclerosed  patches  (wliich,  as  a  rule,  principally  occupy  tlie
antero-lateral  columns)  to  cross  the  postero-lateral  fissures  and  en-
croach  on  tlie  posterior  columns.  Occasionally  even,  I  liave  seen  them,
wlien  tliey  vvere  confluent,  inv^olve  a  large  portion  of  the  substance
of  thèse  columns  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  one  of  the  régions
of  the  cord,  the  lumbar  région  for  instance.  Now,  in  ail  cases  of
this  kind^  ataxic  symptoms  were  manifested  to  différent  degrees  of
intensity  during  life.  I  hâve  no  doubt  but  that  a  similar  arrange-
ment will  one  day  be  found  to  account  for  the  fulgurant  pains,  the
motor  incoordination,  and,  in  a  word,  for  ail  the  phenomena  of  the
same  order  which  are  stated  in  the  record  of  Mademoiselle  V — .^

Unusual  symptoms  of  another  kind  may  also  be  superadded  to
the  regular  symptoms  of  multilocular  sclerosis.  In  several  cases,
which  were  otherwise  well  characterised,  I  hâve  seen  an  atrophy  of
certain  muscles,  or  groups  of  muscles,  supervene,  which  recalled,  both
by  its  position  and  its  mode  of  invasion,  progressive  muscular  atrophy.
I  hâve  twice  had  the  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  anatomical

^  Cases  of  dissemiuated  sclerosis,  in  which  the  posterior  columns  were
iiivolved  so  as  to  occasion  some  of  the  symptoms  of  locomotor  ataxy,  are
numerous  enough.  We  may  mention,  firstly,  the  case  of  Paget,  recorded  by
Cruveilhier  in  his  '  Atlas  ;'  then  the  three  cases  which  were  related  at  length
in  our  memoir.  The  first  is  that  of  the  womau  Broisat  (dissemiuated
sclerosis,  principally  occupying  the  posterior  columns),  who  succumbed  in  M.
Charcot's  wards  ;  the  two  others,  which  were  perhaps  more  characteristic,
inasmuch  as  the  symptoms  and  lésions  of  locomotor  ataxia  were  more
promiuent,  were  quoted  from  Friedreich.  Finally,  we  will  briefiy  summarisc
another  case,  which  we  noted  during  the  siège,  in  M.  Marrotte's  wards  :

Joséphine  Leg — ,  aged  forty-six  years,  a  silk-winder,  lias  been  suffering  for
two  years.  She  presented  the  following  ataxic  symptoms — diffieulty  of  walk-
ing  with  closed  eyes  ;  notion  of  position,  with  respect  to  lower  limbs,  greatly
lost  ;  fréquent  fulgurant  pains  in  the  knees  and  legs  ;  girdle  pains.  But,  along
with  those  symptoms,  thèse  were  noted,  i.e.  considérable  paralytic  enfeeblement
of  the  lower  limbs  ;  préservation  of  the  différent  modes  of  sensibility  in  the  upper
and  lower  extreraities  ;  visual  integrity.  This  woman  succumbed  to  pyelo-
cystitis,  complicated  with  sacral  escbars.  Âutopsi/  : — Sclerosed  patches  on  the
left  external  motor  oculi  and  on  the  optic  nerves  ;  sclerosed  patelles  on  the
pons  Varolii,  the  right  superior  crus  cerebelli,  &c.  ;  sclerosed  patches  on  the
surface  of  the  latéral  ventricles,  in  the  interior  of  the  centrum  ovale,  on  the
anterior  face  of  the  bulbus  rachidicus,  and  in  the  fourth  ventricle.  In  the
spinal  cord  we  found,  i°,  a  sclerosed  patch,  four  inches  long,  occupying  the
left  posterior  column  ;  2°,  another  of  less  length  and  breadth  on  the  right
posterior  column  ;  3°,  beneath  it,  another  rather  circumscribed  patch  occupying
both  posterior  columns  ;  and  4°,  on  the  antero-lateral  surfaces  of  the  cord,  many
small  patches  of  sclerosis. (B.)


200  CONTEAOTUEE  OF  EXTREMITIES.

cause  of  this  new  complication  ;  in  botli  cases  tlie  irritative  process,
of  which  tbe  sclerosed  foci  are  the  seat,  had,  in  certain  régions  of  the
cord,  extended  to  the  nerve-cells  of  tlie  anterior  cornua  of  the  grey
matter,  aud  thèse  cells  had,  in  conséquence^  undergone  great
altérations,  Now^  according  to  the  researches  which  I  hâve  detailed
to  youj  it  is  but  little  doubtful  that  progressive  amyotrophy,  whether
protopathic  or  consécutive^  most  frequently  arises  from  an  irritative
lésion  of  the  great  nerve-cells^  termed  motor  cells.  ^

Termanent  conirackire  of  the  Umbs,  Spinal  epilepsy. — It  is  time
now  to  revert  to  the  contracture  noticeable  in  the  lower  extremities
of  the  patient  V — ,  which,  at  présent,  constitutes  a  permanent  pheno-
menon  that  you  may  study  as  a  most  perfect  type.  This,  gentlemen,
is  an  habituai  symptom  of  the  advanced  phases  of  multilocular
sclerosis.  It  does  not  follow  on  paresis,  suddenly  and  without
transition.  At  a  certain  stage  of  the  paretic  period  there  supervene,
either  spontaneously  or  under  the  influence  of  certain  excitations,
paroxysmal  phenomena,  during  which  the  lower  extremities  are
stiffened  in  extension,  whiist,  at  the  same  time,  they  are  drawn
together,  and,  as  it  were,  adhère  to  each  other.  Thèse  fits,  which
last  for  some  hours,  and  occasionally  for  some  days,  are  at  first
separated  by  intervais  of  greater  or  less  length.  Later  on  they  become
doser,  and,  at  a  given  moment,  permanent  contracture  is  definitely
established.  When  matters  hâve  reached  this  point,  the  following
symptoms  are  observed — the  lower  extremities,  as  happened  during
the  fits,  are  in  extension  ;  the  thighs  are  extended  on  the  pelvis,  the
legs  on  the  thighs  ;  the  feet  assume  the  attitude  presented  in  talipes

^  Erbstein  ('Deutscbes  Archiv  fur  Klinische  Medicin,'  t.  x,  fasc.  6,  p.  595)
lias  related  the  history  of  a  patient  who  succumbed  to  dissemiuated  sclerosis
(the  bulbo-spinal  form),  iii  wlioni,  during  life,  utrophy  of  the  anterior  portion
of  the  longue  had  becn  observed.  An  histological  examination  afterwards
showed — 1°,  numerous  foci  of  degeueration,  not  only  interposcd  between
the  fasciculi  of  the  hypoglossal  nerve  at  its  origin,  but  also  involving  them  and
consequcntly  internipliug  their  continuity.  A  section  showed  that  the  nucleus
of  the  hypoglossal  nerve  was  replaced  by  an  islet  of  sclerosed  lissue.  2°,
The  rauscuiar  fibres  of  the  anterior  portion  of  the  tongue  had  undergone  fatty
degeneration  ;  the  lésion  had  iavadcd  some  of  the  muscular  fasciculi  at  the
base  of  the  organ.

In  a  patient  namcd  Vincent,  who  succumbed  to  dissemiuated  sclerosis,  M.
Charcot  noticed  atrophy  of  the  muscles  of  the  tlicnar  eminonce.  Tlie  palm  of
the  liand  was  hollowcd  out,  and  the  tendons  of  the  flcxor  muscles  were  very
plainly  deûned,  i^?}


SPINAL EPILEPSY.  201

equinus  (varus)  ;  tlie  kuees^  moreover,  are  so  closely  drawii  together
that  you  cannot  separate  them  without  great  effort.  Botli  lower
limbs  are  very  generally  affected  simultaneously,  and  to  tlie  saine
extent  ;  tlieir  rigidity  is  somefcimes  so  marked  that,  in  lifting  one  of
them,  whilst  the  patient  is  in  bed,  you,  at  the  same  time,  lift  the
lower  half  of  the  body,  ail  in  one  pièce,  as  it  vvere.  Only  in  rare
cases,  and  in  the  later  stages  of  the  diseases,  does  flexion  of  the
thigh  and  leg  predominate  over  extension.

Permanent  contracture  may  invade,  in  exceptional  cases  however,
the  upper  extremities,  which  are  also  generally  placed  in  forced
extension  and  straitly  applied  to  each  side  of  the  body.  We  hâve
hère,  gentlemen,  to  deal  with  a  spasm  which  occupies  simultaneously
and  with  almost  equal  strength  the  antagonistic  muscles,  for,  when
the  limbs  are  flexed,  it  is  almost  as  difîicult  to  extend  them  as  it  is
to  bend  them  when  they  are  extended.

When  the  extremity  of  one  of  the  feet  is  grasped  by  the  hand,
and  somewhat  abruptly  extended  on  the  leg,  there  ensues  almost
immediately  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  corresponding  limb
a  sort  of  convulsive  trembling,  which  recalls  the  tremulation  deter-
rained  by  strychnine  poisouing.  This  tremulation,  which  must  not
be  confounded  with  the  peculiar  shake  that  supervenes  on  purposed
movements,  is  not  always  limited  to  the  limb  in  question;  it  is
sometimes  propagated  to  the  other  limb,  and  then  the  agitation  may
occasionally  become  so  intense  as  to  shake  the  whole  body,  and  even
the  bed  on  which  the  patient  reclines.  It  persists  in  some  cases  for
several  minutes,  and  even  much  longer,  after  cessation  of  the
act  which  set  it  going.  You  may  cause  it  to  stop  at  once,  as  M.
Brown-Séquard  has  shown,  and  as  I  hâve  often  since  observed,  by
grasping,  with  the  hand,  one  of  the  great  toes  of  the  patient  and
flexiug  it  suddenly  and  forcibly.  Immediately  after  this  opération
the  tétanie  rigidity  and  convulsive  trembling  cease  in  both  members,
which  become  temporarily  "perfectly  supple  and  pliable  as  after
death,  before  rigor  mortis  supervenes/^  ^  The  convulsive  tremula-
tion may  be  determined  by  faradisation,  by  pinching  the  skin  of  the
leg,  or,  more  rarely,  by  kneading  the  limb,  by  the  influence  of  cold,
or  by  tickling  the  sole  of  the  foot.  It  also  comes  on  sometimes
spontaneously,  or  at  least  apparently  so,  sometimes  because  of  an
effort  made  by  the  patient,  as  in  vomiting,  défécation,  raising  him-

'  Brown-Séquard,  'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  t.  i,  p.  158.


202  SPINAL EPILEPSY.

self  in  bed,  or  getting  out  and  placing  liis  foot  upon  the  floor.  It
is  also  provoked  by  an  attempt  to  walk,  for  permanent  rigidity  does
not  always  absolutely  prohibit  tliis  act  ;  the  patients  'can  sometimes
hobble  along  on  their  toes^  the  heel  being  raised  from  the  floor.
Finally,  this  tremulation  may  also  be  temporarily  produced,  along
witli  rigidity,  even  during  the  course  of  the  paretic  period,  under
the  influence  of  one  or  other  of  the  several  modes  of  excitation  which
we  hâve  just  reviewed.

Gentlemen,  the  phenomenon,  whose  principal  characters  I  hâve
hère  sketched,  is  nothing  other  than  the  spinal  epilepsy  described
by  M.  Brown-Séquard.  We  observe  it  présent  in  the  case  of
Mademoiselle  Y —  in  what  I  hâve  proposed  to  call  the  tonic  form.
This  form,  which  is  the  type  most  commonly  met  with  in  grey  mul-
tilocular  induration,  may  be  placed  in  opposition  to  the  saltatory
form,  which  prédominâtes,  on  the  contrary,  in  progressive  locomotor
ataxia  and  in  some  other  spinal  afi'ections.

Permanent  contracture  of  the  limbs  and  spinal  epilepsy  must  not
any  longer  detain  us.  Thèse  symptoms,  in  fact,  do  not  exclusively
belong  to  multilocular  sclerosis  of  the  nervous  centres.  Far  from
it.  They  shall,  therefore,  be  studied  apart,  both  generally  and  in
their  relations  with  the  différent  affections  of  the  spinal  cord  in  which
they  show  themselves.


LECTURE  VIII.

APOPLECTIFORM  SEIZURES  IN  DISSEMINATED  SCLEROSIS.
PERIODS  AND  FORMS.  PATHOLOGICAL  PHYSIOLOGY.
ETIOLOGY. TREATMENT.

SuMMARY. —  Ajmplectiform  seîzures.  TJieîr  freqitency  in  clissemi-
nated  sclerosis.  General  considérations  on  apoplectiform
attacks  in  gênerai  paralysis,  and  in  cases  of  circimiscribed
cereiral  lésions  of  old  standing  {hœmorrhage  and  ramollisse-
ment). Fathogeny  of  apoplectiform  seizures  ;  hisufficiency  of
tlie  congestion  theory.  Sym])toms  :  state  of  tlie  j}ulse  ;  élévation
ofthe  central  température.  Apoplectiform  seizures  in  old  cases
of  hemiplegia.  Importance  of  température  in  diagnosis.

Feriods  in  disseminated  sclerosis.  First,  second,  and  third
periods.  Symptoms  ofhulhar  paralysis.  Forms  and  duration  of
disseminated  sclerosis.

PatJwlogical  physiology  :  relation  hetween  symptoms  and
lésions.

Etiology,  Influence  of  sex  and  âge.  Hereditary  -prédisposi-
tion. Previous  nervous  affections.  Occasional  causes  :  pro-
longed  action  of  moist  cold  ;  traumatism  ;  moral  caiises,

Prognosis. Treatment.

Gentlemen, — I  purpose  calling  your  attention  to-  day,  in  the  first
place,  to  certain  cérébral  accidents  wliicli  may  happen  to  complicate
the  symptomatology  of  cerebro-spinal  disseminated  sclerosis.  I
refer  to  apoplectiform  seizures,  which  are  occasionally  encountered
several  times  in  the  course  of  the  disease,  and  which  sometimes  close
the  fatal  scène.  Thèse  attacks  hâve  not  hitherto  appeared  in  the
case  of  Mademoiselle  V — ,  whose  clinical  record  is  otherwise  so  com-
plète in  most  respects  ;  but  nothing  assures  us  that  they  ■will  not
some  day  show  themselves. In  fact,  this  is  not  a  rare  complication  ;


204  APOPLECTIFORM  SEIZURES.

I  find  it  mentioned  in  about  a  fifth  of  tlie  cases  whicli  I  bave  col-
lectée!, and  I  bave  personally  observed  it,  in  at  least  tbree  instances.^

Tbe  group  of  symptoms,  wbicb  constitutes  an  apoplectiform  seizure,
does  not  exclusively  belong  to  multilocular  sclerosis.  It  is  found  in
a  number  of  affections  wbicb  involve  several  points  of  tbe  cérébro-
spinal  axis  at  once,  and  particularly  in  progressive  gênerai  paralysis.
It  is,  indeed,  in  tbe  latter  disease  tbat  tbese  congesiive  attacJcs — as
tbey  are  commonly  called,  at  least  in  France — bave  been  specially
studied  on  account  of  tbeir  frequency.  Tbey  are  met  witb  tbere  in
ail  tbe  varions  forms  wbicb  tbey  assume.  Tbe  description  of  sucli
attacks,  in  progressive  gênerai  paralysis,  bas  given  rise  to  numerous
divisions  and  subdivisions.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  ail  tbe  varieties  of
form  wbicb  clinical  observation  bas  revealed — I  mean  tbe  graver
kinds — may  be  classed  as  belonging  to  two  fundamental  types,
namely —

ist.  Apoplectiform  attacJcs  (tbe  ''pseudo-apoplexy  "  of  Britisb
autbors),  and

2nd.  Upilej^itiform,  or  convuhive  attaclcs.

Tbe  cbaracteristics  of  botb  types  may,  bowever,  be  intermingled
and  confounded  in  tbe  same  paroxysm.  Tbe  first  type  only  bas
been,  up  to  tbe  présent,  met  witb  in  disseminated  sclerosis  ;  but  it
cannot  be  doubted  tbat,  wben  observations  relating  to  tbis  disease
sball  bave  accumulated,  tbey  will  enable  us  to  fiU  up  tbe  picture.

Among  tbe  otber  organic  diseases  of  tbe  nervous  centres  in  wbicb
apoplectiform  or  epileptiform  attacks  are  frequently  observed  I
sball  confine  myself  to  certain  circumscribed  cérébral  lésions  of  old
standing,  and  accompanied  by  permanent  bemiplegia.  Sucb  are
cérébral  hcbmorrliage  and  hrain-softenmg  wben  occupying  régions  of
tbe  encepbalon,  tbe  lésion  of  wbicb  bas  tbe  efFect  of  almost  cer-
tainly  determining  tbe  cerebro-spinal  altérations  knowu  under  tbe
name  of  descending  fascïcidated  scléroses.

Between  tbese  partial  lésions  of  tbe  brain  and  progressive  gênerai
paralysis  it  seems,  at  first  glance,  tbat  no  point  of  contact  exists.
Ilowever,  gentlemen,  bere  is  a  cbaracter  wbicb  brings  tbem  togetber  :
tbe  observations  of  M.  Magnan  and  tbose  of  Herr  Westpbal  bave
sbown  tbat,  in  gênerai  paralysis,  tbere  is  very  often  superadded  to  tbe
lésions  of  periencepbalitis a  sclerous  altération,  sometimes  diffuse

'  Case  III  of  tlie  memoir  of  M.  Vul))iaii,  commuiucaled  by  M.  Cliarcot.  Case
of  tlic  patient  Byr  (Cliarcot)  ;  case  of  Nicolas,  presented  to  tlie  Socicto  de
Biologie,  by  M.  Joffroy.


APOPLEOTIFOEM SEIZUPvBS.  S05

and  sometimes  fasciculated,  wliicli  occupies  the  cnira-cerebri^  pons
Varoliij  medulla  oblongata,  aud  certain  régions  of  the  spinal  cord,
at  the  same  time.  Now,  thèse  cerebro-spinal  lésions  (as  much  on
account  of  their  mode  of  distribution  as  because  of  the  pecuhar
nature  of  the  morbid  process)  deserve  to  be  assimilated  to  the
descending  fasciculated  scléroses  consécutive  on  hsemorrhageor  soften-
ing  of  the  brain.  We  know,  on  the  other  hand,  that,  in  multi-
locular  sclerosis,  the  sclerosed  patches  occupy  not  only  the  spinal
cord  (see  PI.  III  and  PL  lY)  aud  the  brain  proper  (PI.  I  and  PL
II),  but  are  likewise  very  commonly  found  in  différent  parts  of  the
isthmus  cerebri,  and  particularly  in  the  bulbus  rachidicus  (PL  I,  figs.
I  and  3).  You  see^  by  this,  that  the  existence  of  irritativc  lésions,  dis-
seminated  nearly  everywhere  in  the  cerebro-spinal  axis,  but  always
présent  in  the  isthmus  cerebri,  is  a  character  common  to  ail  those
affections,  so  différent  in  appearance,  in  which  the  so-called  congesûve
attacks  supervene.  I  would  especially  point  out  to  your  attention
the  constant  existence  of  the  bulbar  lésion,  which  is,  in  ail  probability,
a  prédominant  élément  in  the  production  of  thèse  attacks.

However  this  be,  gentlemen,  we  hâve  hère  permanent  altérations
of  slowly  progressive  évolution.  They  cannot,  consequently,  with-
out  the  assistance  of  other  lésions,  explain  the  development  of
accidents  which  are,  for  the  most  part,  suddenly  produced,  and
which  may  rapidly  disappear  without  leaving  any  trace.  I  am  not
unaware  that  many  physicians,  even  at  the  présent  day,  put  forward
the  theory  of  a  partial  sanguine  congestion — a  fluxion  which,  ac-
cording  to  the  needs  of  the  case,  should  affect  this  or  that  portion
of  the  encephalon.  As  regards  myself,  I  cannot  endorse  this  hypo-
thesis.  In  order  to  justify  my  scepticism  in  this  matter,  I  will  appeal
to  the  réminiscences  of  those  among  you  who,  in  this  hospital,  vvere
attached  to  the  department  for  the  insane.  How  many  times  hâve
they  not  been  disappoiuted  in  not  finding,  on  post-mortem  exami-
nation,  the  congestive  lésion,  which  they  expected  ?  But  I  shall
appeal,  above  ail,  to  the  cases  which  I  hâve  had  opportunities  of
collecting  in  my  accustomed  field  of  study.  Many  a  time  hâve  I
had  occasion  to  see  patients,  long  sufFering  from  hemiplegia,  the
resuit  of  brain-softening  or  intracephalic  hsemorrhage,  succumb
to  epileptiform  or  to  apoplectiform  attacks.  Now,  in  such  cases,
no  matter  what  attention  I  gave  to  the  autopsy,  I  hâve  ever
found  it  impossible  to  discover,  whether  in  the  nervous  centres  or  in
the  viscera,  any  récent  congestive  lésion,  œdematous  or  other,  which


206  APOPLECTIFOKM  SEIZURES.

could  explain  the  grave  symptoms  that  had  cliaracterised  tlie  fatal
termination  of  the  disease.  I  hâve  never  met  with  any  but  old
lésions — ochreous  foci,  yellow  patches,  or  foci  of  cellular  infiltra-
tion— on  whicli  depended  the  hemiplegia,  and  the  secondary  de-
generations  of  the  mesocephalon  and  of  the  cord,  which  are  the
conséquences  of  thèse  partial  lésions  of  the  cérébral  hémisphères.
In  short,  I  believe  that,  in  the  présent  state  of  science,  the  absence
of  proper  lésions  is,  anatomically  speaking,  a  common  characteristic
of  thèse  attacks,  whatever  be  the  form  they  assume  or  the  disease
with  which  they  are  connected.

In  what  relates  to  the  symptomatology  of  the  apoplectiform  and
epileptiform  attacks,  in  order  not  to  enter  upon  the  détails  of  a
regular  description,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  mentioning  the  fol-
lowing  peculiarities.  The  scène  generally  opens  unexpectedly,
withput  any  marked  preliminaries,  sometimes  by  rapid  and  more
or  less  intense  obnubilation  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  some-
times by  profound  coma,  suddenly  supervening.  In  certain  cases
convulsions  are  added,  which  recall  those  of  ordinary  epilepsy,
but  which  are  usually  localised  in  one  side  of  the  body  {epilept\form
attacks).  In  other  instances  there  are  no  convulsions  {aiwplec-
tiform  attachs).  In  both  cases  it  is  fréquent  to  find,  developed
from  the  outset,  a  more  or  less  complète  hemiplegia,  sometimes  with
flaccidity,  sometimes,  but  more  rarely,  with  rigidity  of  the  paralysed
members.  The  symptoms  may  gradually  grow  worse  in  the  course
of  a  few  days  and  induce  death.  This  is  usually  heralded  by  the
rapid  development  of  eschars  on  the  sacral  région.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  the  patient  is  destined  to  survive,  the  disappearance
of  the  symptoms  soon  becomes  manifest,  hemiplegia  is  the  only
one  that  holds  out  for  some  time,  but  sooner  or  later  it  also  dissi-
pâtes without  leaving  any  trace  of  its  existence.

Thèse  attacks  usually  recur  several  times,  generally  after  long
intervais,  during  the  course  of  the  disease.  So  far  as  disseminated
sclerosis  is  concerned,  they  hâve  been  noticed  thrice  in  Case  III
of  M.  Vulpian's  memoir,  thrice  in  Zenker's  case,^  and  up  to  seven
times  in  that  recorded  by  M.  Léo."  In  every  instance,  thèse  fits  left
after  them  a  notable  and  persistent  aggravation  of  ail  the  symptoms
of  the  original  discase.

The  sketch  wliich  I  hâve  given  you,  gentlemen,  would  be  too
'  Bournevillc  et  Gucrard,  loc.  cit.,  p.  112.
2  Ibid,  p.  112.


THEEMOMETEIC RESULTS.  207

imperfect  if  I  did  uot  call  your  attention  to  tlie  troubles  of  circu-
lation and  température  whicli,  as  a  gênerai  rule,  show  themselves
in  the  course  of  thèse  attacks.  The  puise  is  always  more  or  less
accelerated;  but,  besides,  (and  this  is  the  important  point);  the
température  of  the  central  parts  rises  rapidly  ;  it  may,  in  the  hours
immediately  following  the  invasion,  reach  38'5°  C.  (=  101*3  P.),
or  even  39°  (=  103*2  P.),  and  frequently,  at  the  endof  twelve  or
twenty-four  hours,  it  rises  to  40°  (=104  T.)^  ^^^  remains  at  this
élévation  for  some  hours,  without  necessarily  entailing  a  fatal  resuit.
But  if  the  patient  is  to  survive,  the  température  soon  diminishes
rapidly.  An  increase  above  40°  C.  is  almost  always  followed  by  a
fatal  termination.

Thèse  modifications  of  central  température  hâve  been  studied
by  Herr  Westphal  in  the  epileptiform  and  apoplectiform  attacks
of  progressive  gênerai  parali/sis  ;  I  hâve  met  with  them  again  in
the  attacks  which  supervene  in  patients  suffering  from  henùplegia
of  old  standing,  consécutive  on  hœrdorrhage  or  on  sofiening  of  the
brain.  In  order  the  better  to  settle  your  ideas  upon  this  subject  I
think  it  will  be  useful  to  summarisethe  détails  of  two  cases  relating
to  the  last-named  species.

The  first  case  is  that  of  a  woman,  aged  thirty-two  years,  affected  by
hemiplegia  of  the  right  side,  dating  from  childhood.  There  ex-
isted  gênerai  atrophy,  rigidity,  with  shortening  of  the  limbs,  and
paralysis,  such  as  are  generally  found  in  like  cases.  This  woman
was  subject  to  epileptiform  attacks.  She  was  brought  to  the  in-
firmary  some  hours  after  a  more  than  usually  severe  attack.  On
the  evening  of  her  admission  lier  température  was  above  38°  C.  (  =
100-4  r.)  ;  next  day  it  had  reached  40°  C.  (=  104  P.).  The  fits
became  subintrant;  they  were  repeated  about  a  hundred  times  a
day.  Eschars  formed  rapidly  on  the  sacral  région,  and  death
supervened  the  sixth  day.  On  that  day  the  rectal  température
stood  at  42*4°  C.  (=  108*32  P.).  On  post-mortem  examination
there  was  found,  at  the  surface  of  the  left  cérébral  hémisphère,
a  considérable  dépression  answering  to  a  yellow  patch,  the  remuant
of  a  vast  focus  of  ramoUisement.  The  whole  hémisphère,  more-
over,  was  atrophied.  No  trace  of  a  récent  lésion  could  be  found,
neither  in  the  nervous  centres  nor  in  the  viscera.

The  second  case  is  that  of  a  woman,  aged  sixty  years,  afflicted
with  right  hemiplegia  consécutive  on  cérébral  heemorrhage,  dating
from  two  years  previously. This  patient  had  already  experienced


208  THERMOMETRIC RESULTSi

several  epileptiform  or  apoplectiform  attacks,  which,  however,  were
generally  sliglit.  One  day  an  intense  and  prolonged  epileptiform
attack  supervened,  which  was  followed  by  an  apoplectiform  condition.
Tvvo  hours  after  the  setting  in  of  thèse  accidents^  the  rectal  tem-
pérature was  38*8°  C.  (=  iOT"84r.);  five  hours  later^  it  rose  to
40°  C.  (=  104  P.).  Next  day,  in  spite  of  tlie  cessation  of  con-
vulsions, the  température  was  41°  (=  105*8  F.);  and  the  day
following,  being  the  day  of  her  death,  it  reached  42*5°  C.  (=  io8"5
P.).  The  autopsy  showed  two  ochreous  foci,  one  occupying  the
corpus  striatumj  the  other  the  substance  of  a  convolution.  There
existed  no  récent  lésion  capable  of  explaining  the  accidents  which
had  determined  death.

I  hâve  as  yet  had  no  opportuuity  of  following,  day  by  day  and  at
différent  periods  of  the  day,  the  changes  of  central  température  in
a  case  of  apoj}lectiforf}i  seizicre  supervening  in  a  patient  affected  with
dissemînated  sclerosls.  Nevertheless,  we  can  gather  partial  results
from  différent  cases,  which  leave  no  doubt  that,  even  in  this  respect,
matters  proceed  exactly  in  the  same  way  in  multilocular  sclerosis,  as
in  progressive  gênerai  paralysis  and  in  circumscribed  lésions  of  the
cérébral  hémisphères,  Thus,  the  patient  whose  history  has  been
related  by  Herr  Zenker  was,  towards  the  close  of  his  life,  taken  with
an  apoplectiform  attack,  followed  by  hemiplegia  of  the  right  side.
Now,  on  the  day  of  the  seizure,  his  puise  being  at  136,  the  tempéra-
ture reached  39*6°  C.  (=  i03"28  F.).  Next  day,  the  thermometer
marked  40°  C.  (=104 P.).  The  day  after,  the  paralysis  had  ame-
liorated  and  the  température  had  fallen  back  to  the  physiological
figure.  In  the  case  of  the  patient  Nolle,  narrated  by  M.  Léo,  an
apoplectiform  attack  came  on  in  the  evening.  Next  morning
early,  the  puise  numbered  144,  and  the  température  stood  at  38*5  C.
(=  ioi"3  P.).  This  attack,  the  seventh  that  the  patient  had  expe-
rienced,  was  to  be  followed  on  the  same  night  by  death.  In  the
case  of  N — ,  whose  record  was  compiled  in  my  wards  by  M.  Joffroy,
five  hours  merely  after  the  invasion  of  an  apoplectiform  attack,  with in-
couipletc  loss  of  consciousness  and  gênerai  resolution  of  the  members,
the  rectal  température  stood  at  40*3°  C.  (=  1 04*54  F.),  and  the  puise
at  1 20.  Next  day  the  apoplectiform  symptoms  were  dissipated,  and
at  the  same  time  the  puise  and  the  température  had  returued  to
what  they  were  in  the  normal  state.^

If  I  hâve  dwelt  with  some  tenacity  on  the  changes  which  the
'  'Socictc  de  Biologie,'  t.  i,  5  série,  1869-70,  p.  145.


DISSEMINATED  SCLEEOSIS  : PEKIODS.  209

température  ofthe  bocly  présents,  iii  tlie  apoplectiform  and  epilepti-
form  seizures  of  gênerai  paralysis,  and  of  some  other  cerebro-spinal
affections,  it  is  because,  in  ray  judgment,  we  find  a  characteristic
therein  whicb  may,  in  certain  cases,  be  profitably  used  in  diagnosis.  It
is  not  necessary,  I  tliink,  to  enter  into  a  long  discussion  in  order
to  sliow  liow  difficult  it  is,  in  présence  of  a  patient  who  lias  just
been  stricken  with  apoplexy,  accompanied  or  not  by  convulsions,  to
décide  from  tlie  mère  contemplation  of  external  symptoms  whether
we  bave  to  deal  with  Inie  apoplexij,  resulting  from  the  actual  for-
mation of  a  focus  of  cérébral  hsemorrhage  or  of  ramollissement,  or
whether,  on  the  contrary,  we  hâve  before  us  a  simple  congesûve
attack.  Well,  an  examination  of  the  central  température  would
supply,  in  such  cases,  a  décisive  test.  I  bave,  in  fact,  demonstrated
by  repeated  observations^  that  in  true  apoplexy,  especially  when
it  dépends  upon  cérébral  heemorrhage,  the  température  constantly
diminishes,  some  moments  after  the  attack,  and  afterwards  remains,
generally  for  at  least  twenty-four  hours,  below  the  normal  standard,
even  when  intense  and  reiterated  convulsive  fits  occur.  Now,  we
hâve  just  seen  that,  in  the  so-called  congestive  attacks,  the  tempér-
ature, on  the  contrary,  from  the  invasion  of  the  first  symptoms,
rises  above  the  physiological  standard  and  tends  to  become  gradually
more  and  more  elevated  durinsr  the  whole  continuance  of  the  attack.


Peuiods  and  Forbis  of  Disseminated  Sclerosis.

Gentlemen,  after  having  considered,  one  by  oue,  the  différent
éléments  which  compose  the  symptomatology  of  multilocular  sclerosis
where  we  bave  to  deal  with  a  complète  case,  one  which  has  already
arrived  at  an  advanced  stage  of  its  évolution, — it  is  next  proper  to
show,  in  a  gênerai  view,  how  thèse  éléments  are  grouped  and  arrangea
in  the  différent  phases  and  forms  of  the  disease.  The  affection  is,  in
truth,  far  from  presentiug  itself  clothed  in  ail  its  attributes,  at  every
epoch  of  its  course.  At  the  outset  it  may  be  constituted  by  the  union
of  two  or  three  symptoms  only  ;  and,  besides,  there  are  cases  where

^  Cbarcot,  "  Note  sur  la  température  des  parties  centrales  dans  l'apoplexie  liée
à  rhémorrhagie  cérébrale  et  au  ramollissement  du  cerveau,"  iu  '  Comptes  llendus
des  Séances  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  t.  iv,  4c  série,  1867,  p.  92.  See  also
Charcot,  '  Leçons  sur  la  tliermométrie  clinique,  publiées  dans  la  Gazette
hebdomadaire,'  1869,  pp.  324,  742,  821  ;  Bourneville,  '  Études  cliniques  et
thermométriques  sur  les  Maladies  du  Système  Nerveux,'  Paris,  1870-73.

14


210  riEST  PEEIOD.

the  symptomatic  séries  remains  incomplète  until  the  fatal  end.  Now,
it  is,  especially,  when  the  disease  is  yet  at  an  early  stage,  or  when
it  assumes  an  imperfect  form,  tliat  it  is  important  to  know  liow  to
lecognise  it  by  the  slightest  indicia.

I  hâve  proposed  to  establish  three  periods  in  the  progressive
development  of  the  disease.  The  first  extends  from  the  moment
when  the  first  symptoms  appear  to  the  epocli  when  the  spasmodic
rigidity  of  the  members  reduces  the  patient  to  almost  absoliite  impo-
tence. The  second  comprises  the  space,  usually  of  considérable
length,  during  which  the  patient,  confined  to  bed,  or  barely  able  to
take  a  few  steps  about  the  room,  still  préserves  the  integrity  of  his
organic  functions.  The  third  commences  at  the  moment  when,  ail
the  symptoms  of  the  disease  becoming  simnltaneously  aggravated,
the  functions  of  nutrition  suffer  in  a  raanifest  manner.  We  will
take  occasion,  as  regards  this  ultimate  period,  to  notice  the  disorders
which,  in  the  common  order  of  things,  mark  the  last  phase  of  the
disease  and  accelerate  its  fatal  termination.


First  period. — The  mode  of  invasion  and  of  concaténation  of
symptoms  présents  certain  varieties  which  deserve  to  be  pointed  ont
to  your  notice.

Sometimes,  the  drama  is  begun  by  the  cephalic  symptoms.  Thus,
the  patients  commence  by  complaining  of  habituai  giddiness,  and
more  or  less  transient  diplopia  ;  little  by  little,  difiiculty  of  enuncia-
tion,  and  finally  nystagmus,  show  themselves.  The  union  of  thèse
symptoms  would  already  constitute  a  sufficiently  characteristic  group,
one  which,  even  if  tremor  provoked  by  movement  and  paresis  of  the
limbs  were  not  superadded,  should  of  itself  enable  us  to  establish  a
diagnosis,  on  strong  probabilities.

But  sucli  is  not  the  most  common  mode  of  invasion.  Generally,
the  spinal  phenomena  first  reveal  themselves,  and  so  common  is  this
circumstance  that  during  many  months — nay,  even  for  years — the
patients  may  présent  no  symptoms  other  than  an  enfeeblement,  a
more  or  less  markcd  paresis  of  the  lower  extremities,  displaying  a
tendency  to  become  aggravated,  in  a  slowly  progressive  manner,  and
to  extend  to  the  uppcr  extremities.  In  such  a  case,  the  position  of
the  clinical  observer  is  nccessarily  an  extremely  difiicult  one.  For,
in  short,  paresis  of  the  lower  limbs  is  a  somewhat  trite  symptom,
one  common  to  a  crowd  of  différent  diseases  ;  still,  it  sliows  itself  in


EEMISSIONS.  211

multilocular  sclerosis,  as  you  remember,  with  some  peculiar  features
which  may  indicate  tlie  riglit  patli  to  follow.  Thus,  howevermarked
it  may  be — settiug  aside  exceptioual  cases  where  tlie  lésion  prédomi-
nâtes in  the  posterior  columns — it  is  not  accompanied  by  any  trouble
of  sensibility,  nor  by  any  perceptible  disorder  of  nutrition  in  the
muscular  masses.  Add  to  this  that,  as  a  rule,  there  is  no  functional
dérangement  of  bladder  or  rectum.  Finally,  it  is  not  rare  to  meet
with  remissions,  and  even  with  complète  iniermissiovs,  which  give
rise  to  hopes  of  a  decided  cure.'  But  it  is  clear  that  thèse
indicia,  even  with  the  aid  of  ail  the  others,  only  supply  very
vague  data.  Certainty  can  hardly  be  secured  unless  the  peculiar
tremor,  or  some  of  the  cephalic  symptoras,  are  superadded  to  the
spinal  symptoms.

Hitherto^  gentlemen,  I  hâve  shown  you  the  invasion  and  ulterior
concaténation  of  accidents  as  slow  and  progressing  in  a  uniform
manner.  That,  in  fact,  is  by  far  the  most  usual  case;  but  it  is
important  you  should  know  that,  in  certain  exceptional  cir-
cumstances,  the  disease  may  set  in  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  or
after  a  few  preliminary  symptoms,  of  little  significance.

Thus,  vertigo  and  diplopia  having  suddenly  shown  themselves,
paresis  and  titubation  may  follow  in  a  few  days,  so  that  the  disease
is  thus,  as  it  were,  immediately  established,  This,  to  take  one  case
amongst  several,  is  what  happened  as  regards  the  young  woman
named  Vinch — ,  whom  some  of  you  may  hâve  seen  in  our  wards.

Sometimes  the  beginning  is  marked,  as  in  the  case  of  one  of

^  In  our  memoir,  we  summarised  a  certain  number  of  cases  in  which
remissions  were  found  so  complète  as  to  enable  the  patients,  who  had  been
paralysed,  to  résume  their  occupations.  (See  loc.  cit.,  obs.  iv,  ix,  x,  xi,  &c.)
In  an  observation  recorded  by  M.  Vulpian,  which  we  also  quoted  (p.  139),
there  was  a  séries  of  alternate  améliorations  and  aggravations.  We  shall
briefly  indicate  them  :

When  the  disease  was  still  récent,  there  supervened,  after  an  attack  of
smallpox,  a  quasi-complete  recovery.  This  improvement  lasted  for  three
years.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  the  menses  were  suppressed  ;  uew,  but  slight,
symptoms  showed  themselves,  which  disappeared  on  restoration  of  the  cata-
menia.  Two  years  after,  the  patient  had  au  attack  of  jaundice,  followed  by
new  symptoms.  Thèse  improved,  but  on  bronchitis  superveniug,  the  paresis  of
the  limbs  re-appeared  iu  a  more  marked  form,  and,  after  successive  remissions
and  recrudescences,  became  permanent.

Sometimes  the  remission  is  incomplète,  and  only  atfects  certain  symptoms,
particularly  incontinence  of  urine  and  of  fœces.  In  a  patient,  whose  case  was
uoted  by  Herr  Baerwinkel,  there  was  also  a  brief  remission. (B.)


212  GASTEIC  CRISES.

Valentiner's  patients^  by  an  abrupt  invasion  of  paresis  in  one  of  tlie
lower  extremities  ;  or  again,  as  occurred  in  M.  Léo's  case  and  in  that
of  one  of  my  patients,  whose  liistory  M.  Yulpian  bas  related/  tbe
invasion  is  inaugurated  by  an  apoplectiform  attack,  preceded  for
some  days  or  weeks,  by  vertigo  and  cephalalgia,  and  followed  by
temporary  beiniplegia.

Finally,  gentlemen,  there  is  yet  another  variety^  to  wliich  I  must
call  your  attention,  where  the  invasion  is  marked  by  an  affection  wbich
is  mostly  regarded  as  foreign  to  the  princi])al  disease,  altliough  it  is,
in  my  opinion,  intimately  bound  up  witb  it,  on  the  contrary,  by  a  liuk
not  recognised  until  now.  I  allude-  to  the  yastylc  or  gastralgie
crises,  whichever  you  please  to  call  them,  that  are  occasionally  very
severe,  and  are  accompanied  by  lypothymia,  by  repeated  vomiting,  &c.
Thèse  crises  hâve  often  opened  the  drama,  and  been  quickly  fol-
lowed by  the  usual  symptoms  of  multilocular  sclerosis;  it  is  not
rare,  also,  to  find  them  several  times  recurring  and  intermingling
with  thèse  symptoms,  during  the  early  stage  of  the  disease.  Of  this
class,  a  case  reported  by  M.  Liouville  ^  and  that  related  by  Herr
Zenke  furnish  good  examples.  Thèse  accidents  are  ail  the  more
worthy  of  notice  inasmuch  as  we  shall  find  them  agaiu,  with  nearly
the  same  characters,  in  other  forms  of  sclerosis  of  the  spinal  cord,
and  particularly  in  fasciculated  posterior  sclerosis  {locomofor
ataxia),  but  chiefly  in  its  initial  phases.  In  such  a  case,  thèse
gastric  crises,  coinciding  or  alternating  with  the  fulgurant  pains  of
the  limbs,  may  actually  be,  along  with  diplopia  and  perhaps  a  little
titubation  when  the  eyes  are  closed,  the  only  symptoms  of  the  dis-
ease in  question,  whose  true  nature  is  then  too  often  misunderstood.^
Thèse  same  gastric  crises  are  foiind,  as  my  friend  Dr.  Duchenne  (de
Boulogne)  and  I  hâve  observed,  in  the  form  of  suhacute  or  chrome
central  myelitis,  which  reproduces  the  symptoms  of  gênerai  spinal
paralysis.  Eut  I  do  not  wish  to  delay  any  longer  on  this  subject,
which  I  intend  soon  to  résume  and  to  discnss  in  détail,  as  its
importance  deserves.

'  Vulpia»,  "  Kote  sur  la  Sclérose  en  Plaques  de  la  Moelle  Epinièrc,"  Obs.  ii,
'Mémoires  de  la  Société  Médicale  des  Hôpitaux,'  1869.

-  '  Mémoires  de  la  Société  de  Biologie,'  5e  série,  l.  i,  p.  107,  Paris,  1S70.

^  See  wliat  M.  Charoot  lias  said,  in  référence  to  tliis  subjcct,  in  liis  lectures
delivered  at  La  Salpctrière  in  1868  (IJubois,  '  Etude  sur  quelques  points  de
l'ataxie  locomotrice,'  Paris,  1868,  "Des  crises  gastriques,"  p.  56;  'Leçons  sur
les  anomalies  de  l'ataxie  locomotrice,'  1873,  leçon  ii,  p.  32).


SECOND PERIOD.  213

II.

Second  j^erîod. — In  gênerai,  from  the  close  of  tlie  first  period,
raultilocular  sclerosis  shows  itself  arrayed  in  most  of  tlie  symptoms
wliich  characterise  it.  Thèse  symptoms  become  aggravated  and
intensified  daring  the  second  period,  and  spasmodic  contraction  of  the
limbs  is  superadded,  either  with  or  without  the  accompaniment  of
spinal  epilepsy,  in  conséquence  of  which  the  patients  who,  until  then,
bad  been  able  to  walk  or  hobble,with  more  or  less  difficulty,  are  thence-
forth  rendered  almost  quite  powerless,  and  definitely  confined  to  their
rooms  or  beds.  The  contracture  which  marks  the  commencement
of  this  period  is  almost  always  a  very  tardy  symptom;  it  seldom
shows  itself  till  two,  four,  or  even  six  years  after  the  appearance  of
the  first  accidents  of  mutiiocular  sclerosis.

m.

Thir cl  period. — The  commencement  of  this  final  period  is  marked,
as  I  mentioned  to  y  ou,  by  the  progressive  enfeeblement  of  the
organic  functions  ;  inappetency  becomes  habituai,  diarrhœa  fréquent,
and  soon  a  gênerai  emaciation  supervenes  which  grows  more  and  more
évident. 1  At  the  same  time,  there  ensues  an  aggravation  of  ail  the
symptoms  proper  to  this  disease,  the  obnubilation  of  the  intellect
proceeds  even  to  dementia,  the  difficulty  of  enunciation  is  carried  to
its  extrême,  and  the  patient  can  only  utter  an  unintelligible  grunting  ;
then  the  sphincters  become  paralysed,  and  it  is  not  rare  to  find  the
mucous  coat  of  the  bladder  aflected  with  ulcérons  inflammation.
Then,  on  the  sacral  région  and  on  ail  points  of  the  lower  limbs  sub-
\mitted  to  prolonged  pressure,  eschars  appear  which  occasionally
assume  enormous  dimensions,  and,  consecutively,  cornes  the  whole
séries  of  accidents  which  dépend  on  this  complication,  purulent
burrowing  sores  [fusées),  purulent  or  putrid  poisoning,  &c.  Death
foUows  without  delay.

*  At  tliis  period  of  the  disease,  especially,  we  notice  the  supervention
of  disorders  which  may,  perhaps,  be  classed  among  trophic  troubles.  Such
are— 1°.,  softening  of  the  vertebrœ,  of  the  troclianters,  of  the  head  of
the  tibia,  of  the  bones  of  the  tarsus,  &c.  (Bourneville  et  Guérard,  loc.  cit.,
cas  du  Docteur  Pennock,  p.  83)  ;  2°.,  a  cyphosis  and  (right)  scoliosis,
mentioned  iu  one  of  Friedreich's  cases  (B.  et  G.,  loc.  cit.,  pp.  213  and  214)  ;
3°,  an  effusion  of  liquid  into  the  two  femoro-tibial  articulations  (Obs.  de  M.
Malherbe).  (B.)


214  THIED  PERIOD.

In  most  cases  the  patientas  existence  may  be  abridged  by  some  in-
tercurrent disease  ;^  pneumonia,  caseous  phthisis,  and  dysentery  may
be  numbered  amongst  the  most  fréquent  of  thèse  terminal  affections."
^  In  the  cases  which  bave  sitice  been  published  we,  most  usually,  fiiid  the
terminal  diseases  indicated  by  M.  Charcot.  It  foUows  from  the  statistics
we  bave  collected  that  pulmonary  diseases  (pneumonia,  purulent  pleurisy,
tubercular  phthisis)  are  by  far  the  most  prominent.  We  should  also  mention
the  occurrence  of  acute  bed-sore,  of  ■pjjelo-cystltis  (one  case),  and  of  œcleniu
glotddis  (one  case). (B.)

^  In  this  manner,  the  patient  Vauthier  (the  subject  of  the  preceding  lecture)
succumbed,  and  the  patient  Bezot,  who  long  occupied  bed  No.  lo,  Salle  St.
Luc.  We  shall  rapidly  summarise  the  principal  facts  of  their  cliuical  history  :
I.  Vauth —  (Joséphine  C),  was  admitted  March  2ist,  1867,  toM.  Vulpian's
•wards,  and  died  January  7th,  1871  (aged  thirty-two),  in  M.  Charcot's  charge.
From  fourteen  to  twenty-one  years  of  âge,  she  suffered  from  vertigo  foUowed
by  vomiting.  Pregnancy,  at  twenty-one,  put  au  end  to  vomiting.  Disseminated
sclerosis  showed  itself  at  the  âge  of  twenty-three  years  six  months  :  weakness  of
the  lumbar  région,  very  great  fatigue  of  the  lower  limbs,  lancinating  pain  in  the
right  leg,  enfeeblement  of  the  sight,  diplopia.  At  twenty-five  years,  feeble-
ness  of  the  arms,  which  are  occasionally  affected  by  pains.

1867, — Nyît^gmus,  diplopia.  Integrity  of  the  muscular  masses,  loss  of
idea  of  position  as  regards  lower  limbs.  Paresis  and  tremor  of  tiie  upper
extremities.  Tactual  sensibility  largely  lost  everywhere.  Momentary  improve-
ment  under  nitrate  of  silver.

1868. — The  patient  can  no  longer  stand  erect;  the  symptoms  are  more
marked  ou  the  right  side  than  on  the  left;  the  tremor  of  the  upper  ex-
tremities has  augmented.  Prequent  fulgurant  pains,  especially  in  the  left
half  of  the  face.  Pits  of  giddiness  coming  on  at  close  intervais.  Nystagmus
more  marked.  In  May,  M.  Vulpian  administered  two  pills  of  o'025  gram.
(ornearly  \  grain)  of  extract  of  Calabar  Beau.  Soon  after,  a  fit  of  weakness,
tremor  exaggerated,  cold  sweats,  pallor  of  the  face  (thèse  phenomena  are,
perhaps,  due  to  the  Calabar  Beau).  Prom  July,  tbree  pills  of  Calabar  Bean.
In  November,  M.  Vulpian  suppresses  the  Calabar  Bean,  and  as  incontinence  of
urine  has  latterly  supervened,  he  prescribes  three  pills  of  o'03  gram.  (or  nearly
\  grain)  of  extract  of  Belladonna.  The  incontinence  of  urine,  after  presenting
some  transient  improvements,  ceased  altogether  in  the  course  of  December.

1870  (January). — Psychic  disorders  (see  (mtè,  p.  195).  In  the  course
of  this  year  the  symptoms  noted  augmented  in  severity  ;  and,  besides,
symptoms  of  bulbar  paralysis  made  their  appearance.  Thèse  became  rather
rapidly  worse,  and  the  patient  died,  as  it  were  asphyxiated,  Peb.  7th,  1871.

Âutopsi/. — Numerous  sclerosed  patches  found  to  exist  in  the  brain  and  spinal
cord.  On  account  of  the  ataxic  symptoms  presented  by  the  patient,  the  lésions
of  the  spinal  axis  deserve  mention.  There  were  sclerosed  patclies  throughout
the  whole  length  of  the  latéral  columns.  As  to  the  foslerior  columns,  tliey  are
affected  nearly  throughout,  but,  principally,  froin  the  lower  extreniity  of  the
dorsal  région  upwards.  Pig.  15  represents  the  lésions  observcd  on  a  section
taken  from  the  upper  part  of  the  lumbar  région. At  this  level  the  posterior


BULBAR  PARALYSIS.


215


I  hâve réservée! for spécial  mention the  appearance  of  some
symptoms  of  hnlhar  paralysis,  because  they  may,  by  au  abrupt  ag-

columns  are  completely  invaded  (6g.  15,  c),  but  especially  affected  in  the  mid-
région. The  latéral  columns  are  comparatively  less  injured.


PiG.  15. — Représentation  of  the  lésions  observed  on  a  section  taken  from  the
uppermost  portion  of  the  lumbar  région.  The  posterior  columns  are
invaded  throughout  their  breadth,  and  the  lésion  prédominâtes  in  their
middle  région.

II.  Bez —  (Pauline),  aged  thirty-five,  child's  nurse,  admitted  Feb.  I7th
into  M.  Charcot's  wards.  To  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  disseminated  sclerosis
were  added,  about  the  niouth  of  May,  dyspnœa  and  dysphagia.  The  difficulty
of  déglutition  compelled  the  patient  to  eat  very  slowly.  Return  of  food,
through  the  nasal  orifices,  was  not  observed  until  near  the  end.  The  patient
died  of  asphyxia,  June  i2th,  without  any  râles  having  been  noticed  in  the
lungs.

Âutopsi/. — Sclerosed  patch  on  the  chiasma  of  the  optic  nerves,  invading  the
tractus  opticus.  Sclerosed  patch  in  the  veutricles  and  in  the  ceutrum  ovale.
In  a  section  niade  a  centimètre  above  the  inferior  border  of  the  protuberantia
annularis,  on  a  level  with  the  apparent  origin  of  the  trifacial  nerve,  a  large
and  irreguiar  patch  of  sclerosis  is  found  (iig.  16,  b'  b').


FiG.  16. — a,  Pneumogastric  ;  b,  small  sclerosed  patch;  Z/',  large  sclerosed  patch.


216  DUEATION.

gravation,  precipitate  the  course  of  events,  and  induce  the  fatal
termination,  even  before  the  manifestation  of  tlie  phenomena  of  the
final  period.  Contemporaneously  with  increased  difficulty  of  utter-
ance,  there  appears  a  difïiculty  of  déglutition  which,  though  tran-
sient  at  first,  soon  becomes  permanent.  Then,  from  time  to  time,
paroxysms  of  dyspnœa  show  themselves,  of  less  or  more  gravity,  and
death  may  supervene  during  one  of  thèse  fits.  I  hâve  recently
observed  two  cases  which  terminated  in  this  manner.  On  a  post-
mortem  examination  it  was  seen^  in  both  thèse  cases,  that  a  patch  of
sclerosis  had  invaded  the  floor  of  the  fourth  ventricle,  where  it
enveloped  the  originating  nuclei  of  most  of  the  bulbar  nerves.^

After  the  détails  which  I  hâve  laid  before  you,  it  seems  useless  to
undertake  the  particular  description  of  the  différent  forms  which
multilocular  sclerosis  may  assume.  The  ccrelral  and  spinal  forms
correspond  to  an  incomplète  invasion  of  the  nervous  centres  by  the
sclerosis  ;  it  is,  if  you  like,  the  disease  arrested  in  its  development,
in  its  progress  either  of  ascent  or  of  descent.  The  symptomatic
séries  is,  therefore,  as  it  were,  curtailed  ;  but  the  symptoms,  con-
sidered  singly,  are  not  modified.  The  first,  or  cérébral,  form  is  very
rare  ;  the  second,  or  spinal,  is,  on  the  contrary,  very  fréquent  ;  but,  on
the  whole,  the  cerehro-spinal  form  constitutes  the  normal  type,  that
which  we  most  often  meet  with,  inpractice.

Cerebro-spinal  multilocular  sclerosis  complètes,  generally  speak-
ing,  its  whole  évolution  in  the  space  of  from  six  to  eight  years  ;  ^

Auotlier  transverse  sectiou,  corresponding  to  the  middie  part  of  the  cor-
pora  olivaria,  rcveals  another  patch  of  sclerosis  (fig.  17  c)  apparently  in-
volving  tlie  pneumogastric  (fig.  17  f/).  Microscopic  examination  of  the
îierves  showed  tlie  existence  of  mimerons  fatty  degenerated  tubes  in  the
hypoglossal  nerve,  and  traces  of  irritation  in  Sch\iann's  sheatli  in  the  pneumo-
gastric nerve.  As  to  the  other  organs,  and  particularly  the  pharynx,  the
larynx,  and  the  lungs,  they  were  ail  healthy.


c
Fig.  17. — a,  Pneumogastric  nerve  ;  b,  h^poglossal  nerve;  c,  sclerosed  patch.

1  It  is  rather  difEcult,  at  présent,  to  ascerfaiu  the  mean  duration  of  dis-
seminated  sclerosis. In  a  first  collection  (Bourneville  et  Guérard,  loc.  cit.,


PATHOLOGIOAL  PHYSIOLOGY.  217

this  establislies  another  coutrast  betweeii  it  and  paralysis  agitans,
the  normal  duration  of  wliicli  is  mucli  longer.  The  spinal  form
usually  gives  the  most  lengthy  respite  ;  it  may  net  terminate  its
course  for  a  space  of  twenty  years,  or  even  longer  still.^

Pathological  Physioloc4y;  Etiology;  Prognosis,  and
Treatment.

In  order  to  conclude  this  study,  gentlemen,  it  remains  for  me  to
discuss  the  pathological  pliysiology,  the  etiology,  and  finally  the
therapeutical  treatment  of  multilocular  sclerosis  of  the  nervous
centres.  Unfortunately,  the  facts  and  documents  whicli  refer  to
thèse  différent  subjects  ave  few  in  number,  and  as  yet  mostly  im-
perfect,  so  that  I  shaîl  be  compelied  to  confine  myself  to  a  few  sum-
mary  observations.

A.  The  cause  of  the  very  singular  mode  of  arrangement  under  which
the  sclerosed  islets  are  distributed  in  différent  parts  of  the  central  ner-
vous System,  is,  at  présent,  completely  unknown  to  us.  Herr  Riud-
fleisch  has  stated  that  the  starting-point  for  the  formation  of  sclerosed
foci  résides  in  the  vascular  system.  According  to  him,  the  inflamma-
tion of  the  walls  of  the  smaller  vessels,  always  to  be  met  with  in  the
centre  of  foci  during  the  process  of  formation,  would  be  the  initial
fact  ;  from  this  central  point  the  irritation  is  propagated  to  the  reti-
culum  of  the  neurogha,  wlience  it  radiâtes  in  ail  directions.  It  is
évident,  however,  that  this  explanation  only  sets  the  difhculty  a  little
farther  back.  Besides,  this  prédominant  part  accorded  to  vessels  in
the  évolution  of  the  morbid  process  is  anything  but  demonstrated.
I  am  even  very  much  disposed  to  believe,  judging  from  my  own

p.  148),  comprising  seventcen  cases,  we  found  a  mean  of  from  eight  to  ten
years.  In  another,  including  thirteeu  uew  cases,  we  found  a  mean  of  seven
and  a  half  years.  The  minimum  of  the  duration  of  the  disease  was  one  year
(case  of  M.  Malherbe,  in  '  Journal  de  Médecine  de  l'Ouest,'  1870,  p.  168,  and
Buschwald,  "  Ueber  Multiple  Sklerose  des  Hirns  und  Ruckenmarks,"  in
'  Deutsches  Archiv  fiir  Klin.  Medicin,'  c.  x,  fas.  iv  und  v,  p.  478,  1872).  The
maximum  is  from  sixteen  to  seventeen  years. (B.)

*  lu  three  cases  of  disseminated  sclerosis,  with  prédominance  of  lésions  of
the  posterior  columns,  the  disease  lasted  fourteen,  twenty-one,  and  twenty-
eight  years.  (Bourneville,  '  Nouvelle  étude  sur  quelques  points  de  la  sclérose
en  plaques  disséminées,'  1869.)

-  Eindfleisch,  "  Histol.  Détail  zu  der  Grauen  Degeneratiou  von  Gehirn  und
Ruckenmarks"  (' Virchow's  Archiv,'  1863,  t.  xxvi,  p.  474).


218  PATHOLOGICAL  PHYSIOLOGY.

observations,  tliat  tlie  altérations  of  vascular  tissue  and  those  of  the
recticulum  advance  side  by  side  in  parallel  lines,  without  acting  re-
ciprocally  on  each  other.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  question  arises
whether,  if  the  position  of  the  sclerosed  islets,  in  the  différent  por-
tions of  the  nervous  system,  be  given^wecan  deduce  therefrom  the
production  of  phenomena  which,  in  their  totality,  constitute  the
symptomatology  of  disseminated  sclerosis  ?  This  is,  at  least  to  some
extent,  possible.  We  hâve  already  shown  you  that  the  motor  inco-
ordination, the  loss  of  sensé  of  position,  and  the  fulgurant  pains
which  are  found  in  a  certain  number  of  cases,  may,  in  such  cases,  be
attributed  to  the  scierons  invasion  of  the  posterior  columns  of  the
cord  for  a  certain  altitude.  On  the  other  hand,  the  customary  pré-
dominance of  sclerosed  patches  along  the  course  of  the  antero-lateral
columns  accounts,  as  I  shall  soon  demonstrate  to  you,  for  the  almost
constant  existence  of  the  paresis  or  of  the  paralysis  of  the  limbs,  which
is  sooner  or  later  folio wed  by  permanent  contracture.  The  nystag-
mus  and  the  difficulty  of  enunci'ation  are  correlated  with  the  habi-
tuai localisation  of  nodules  in  the  substance  of  the  protuberantia
annularis  and  the  bulbus  rachidicus.  But  there  are  a  large  num-
ber of  other  symptoms,  the  interprétation  of  which  présents  much
greater  difficulty.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the  peculiar  tremor
which  is  manifested  during  certain  attitudes  of  the  body,  and  in  the
exécution  of  intentional  movements.  I  hâve  expressed  the  opinion
that  the  long  persistence  of  the  axis-cylinders,  deprived  of  medullary
sheathing,  in  the  midst  of  the  foci  of  sclerosis,  probably  plays  an  im-
portant part  hère.  The  transmission  of  voluntary  impulses  would
still  proceed  by  means  of  the  denuded  axis-cylinders,  but  it  would
be  carried  on  irregularly,  in  a  broken  or  jerky  manner,  and  would
thus  produce  the  oscillations  which  disturb  the  due  exécution  of
voluntary  movements.

This  résistance  of  the  axis-cyhnders  is  certainly  not  a  phenomenon
exclusively  pertaining  to  multilocular  induration;  but  it  is  hère  mani-
fested in  a  more  marked  manner  than  in  other  forms  of  sclerosis  of
the  nervous  centres.  It  may  also  be  quoted,  I  think,  to  account  for
the  slowness  with  which  the  paretic  symptoms  advance  in  dis-
seminated sclerosis,  and  for  the  long  space  of  time  which  elapses
before  they  give  place  to  complète  paralysis  and  permanent  con-
tracture.

B.  What  is  known  in  référence  to  the  conditions  that  préside  over
the  development  of  disseminated  sclerosis  comcs  to  very  little. It


CAUSES.  21^

seems,  however,  to  be  established  at  présent,  tliat.  the  disease  is  far
more  common  in  females  than  in  maies.  Thus,  of  ail  the  instances
which  I  collected  in  my  first  treatise,  only  three  or  four  related
to  inen.  The  cases  which  hâve  since  been  published  hâve  uot
modilied  this  resuit  in  any  perceptible  manner.  Adding  to  the
eighteen  cases  which  are  mentioned  in  the  monograph  of  MM.
Bourneville  and  Guérard,  sixteen  new  cases,  we  get  a  total  of  thirty-
four  cases,  of  which  nine  relate  to  maies,  and  twenty-five  to
females.

Judging  from  the  same  records,  it  follows  that  this  is  a  disease  of
youth,  or  of  the  first  half  of  adult  âge.  It  has  been  observed  in
patients  aged  fourteen,  fifteen,  and  seventeen  years,i  but  it  seems
most  frequently  to  set  in  between  twenty-five  and  thirty  years.  It
rarely  makes  its  appearance  after  thirty.  On  the  other  hand,  forty
years  seera  to  be  the  ultimate  limit  of  life  for  patients  affected  by
disseminated  sclerosis.

With  respect  to  the  influence  of  hereditary  prédisposition,  we
hâve  only  one  case  to  mention  in  which  it  seems  to  hâve  played  a
certain  part.  This  example  has  been  communicated  to  us  by  Dr.
Duchenne  (de  Boulogne).

In  the  pathological  antécédents  of  the  patients  themselves  we
generally  find  nothing  but  vague  indicia.  Hysteria  was  présent  in
some  cases,  but  in  most  we  only  lind  mention  made  of  ill-determined
neuropathies,  occasional  hemicrania,  or  neuralgias."

^  In  a  work  by  M.  Leubé  ("Ueber  multiple  inselformig  Sklerose  der
Gehirns  und  Ruckenmarks,"  in  '  Deutsches  Archiv,'  8  Bd.,  i  heft,  1870,  p.
14)  we  find  the  record  of  the  case  of  a  child  who  preseuted  the  first  symptoras
of  disseminated  sclerosis  at  the  âge  of  seven  years.  She  died  aged  fourteen
years  and  six  raonths.  Summary  :  slight  nystagmus  ;  right  facial  paralysis  ;
marked  ataxia  of  the  extremities,  especially  on  the  left  sida  ;  tremor  of  the
head  ;  difiiculty  of  utterance  ;  atrophy  of  the  legs.  Auiopsj/  :  sclerosis  of  the
pons  Varolii  and  annexes,  alniost  gênerai  on  the  right,  disseminated  on  the  left.
The  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  présent,  in  their  cortical  layers,  a  double  degene-
ration,  whitish-yeliow,  or  steel-grey,  partly  diffused,  partly  disseminated  in
patches.  In  the  cord,  and  principally  in  the  medulla  oblongata,  the  sclerosis
occupies,  firstly,  the  posterior  columns,  next  the  latéral  columns,  and  finally
the  anterior  columns. (B.)

"  There  is,  however,  an  etiological  cause  which  deserves  mention,  uamely,
the  influence  of  certain  acute  diseases  on  the  development  of  sclerosis.  The
foUowing  facts  are  given  in  support  of  this  assertion  :

1°.  In  a  case  given  by  Erbstein  ('  Deutsche  Archiv  fiir  Klinische  Medicin,'
t.  X,  fasc.  6,  p.  596)  disseminated  sclerosis  set  in  during  convalescence  from


'220  OCCASIONAL  CAUSES,

Amongst  occasïonal  causes,  we  frequently  fiud  mention  made  of
tlie  prolonged  action  of  moist  cold.^  In  one  case,  the  first  symptoms
are  alleged  to  hâve  appeared  a  short  time  after  a  fall.

But  the  circumstances  most  commonly  assigned  as  causes  of
•this  disease,  by  patients,  appertain  to  the  moral  order — long-
continued  grief  or  vexation,  such,  for  instance,  as  may  arise  from
ilhcit  pregnancy,  or  the  disagreeable  annoyances  and  carking  cares
which  a  more  or  less  false  social  position  entails.  This  is  often  the
case  as  regards  certain  female  teachers.  Having  said  so  much  with
Tcspect  to  women,"  the  question  of  maie  sufferers  arises.  Thèse  are,
for  the  most  part,  persons  who  hâve  lost  caste,  and  who,  thrown
ont  of  the  gênerai  current,  and  too  impressionable,  are  ill-provided
with  the  means  of  maintaining  what,  in  Darwin^s  theory,  is  called
the  ^'struggle  for  life."  In  short,  the  etiology  is  a  somewhat
irite  one,  such  as  may  be  met  with  again,  as  it  were,  at  the  begin-
ning  of  ail  the  chronic  diseases  of  the  central  nervous  system.

C.  The  proffnosis  has  hitherto  been  of  the  gloomiest. Shall  it  be

typboid  fever.  The  patient,  theu,  sufFered  fi"om  debility  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities,  and  a  difficulty  of  enunciation  ;  the  words  were  scanded,  and  the
pronunciation  was  somewhat  indistinct  and  monotonous.

2°.  A  patient  in  M.  Charcot's  charge,  Nie — (Julie)  noticed  a  certain  degree
of  weakness  in  her  lower  limbs,  ou  recovering  from  an  attack  of  choiera.  Some
short  time  after,  she  had  an  attack  of  typhoid  fever,  after  which  the  feebleness  of
her  limbs  augmeuted  in  a  slow  but  contiuuous  manner,  to  such  an  extent  that
she  was  soon  obiiged  to  use  a  caue.  {A.  Joffroy,  '  Mémoires  de  la  Société
-de  Biologie,'  1869,  p.  146.)

3°.  In  the  case,  recorded  by  MM.  Fontaine  and  Liouville,  it  is  mentioned
that  the  first  signs  of  sclerosis  were  preceded  by  copions  bilious  vomitings,
wliich  lasted  from  ten  to  fifteen  days.  (H.  Liouville,  in  '  Mémoires  de  la
Société  de  Biologie,'  1869,  p.  107.)

4°.  Fiually,  we  will  mention  the  case  of  a  woman  named  Dr —  (Hortense),
in  whom  the  first  symptoms  of  disseminated  sclerosis  appeared  soon  after  she
had  had  a  severe  attack  of  smallpox. (B.)

^  A  patient,  according  to  Herr  Baerwiukel,  experienced  a  difficulty  in  exe-
-<;uting  movements  with  the  right  leg,  three  days  after  having  fallen  into  water.
The  action  of  moist  cold  has  a  reality  in  this  case,  because  the  patient  allowed
liis  wetclothes  to  dry  upon  liim. (B.)

^  The  '  Lancct  '  (1873,  vol.  i,  p.  236)  has  published  the  summary  of  a  case  of
disseminated  sclerosis  recorded  by  Dr.  Moxon,  at  Guy's  Hospital,  in  which
we  Cnd  the  following  causes  mentioned — a,  fel)rilc  disease,  accompanied  bj
diarrhœa,  which  lasted  for  scveral  wecks  ;  i,  a  violent  moral  émotion  experienced
%  the  patient  ou  seeing  her  husband  in  bed  with  another  female. (B.)


PROGNOSIS. TEEATMENT.  221

always  tlius  ?  It  is  to  be  hoped  tliat^  wlien  tlie  disease  lias  becomc
better  known^  the  physician  will  learu  liow  to  take  advantage  of
that  spontaneous  tendency  to  remission  wbich  bas  been  noticed  in  a
great  number  of  cases.  Nor  must  it  be  overlooked  tliat,  at  the
présent  time,  the  real  nature  of  the  disease  is  not  recognised  until
the  lésions  hâve  become  well  marked,  and  are  consequently  but  little
amenable  to  the  influence  of  therapeutic  agencies.

D.  After  what  précèdes,  need  I  detain  you  long  over  the  ques-
tion of  treatment  ?  The  time  bas  not  yet  corne  vvhen  such  a  subject
can  be  seriously  considered.  I  can  only  tell  you  of  some  experi-
ments  which  hâve  been  tried,  the  results  of  which,  unfortunately,
hâve  not  been  very  encouraging,

Chloride  of  gold  and  phosphate  of  zinc  appear  to  hâve  rather
exasperated  than  improved  the  syinptoms.  Strychnine  bas  some-
times  caused  cessation  of  the  tremor,  but  its  influence  bas  always
been  transient.  The  same  is  to  be  said  of  nitrate  of  silver.  In
several  cases,  which  I  hâve  noted,  it  seems  to  hâve  had  a  very  favor-
able influence  over  the  tremor  aud  the  paresis  of  the  limbs,  but  this
influence  was  not  of  long  duration.

The  exhibition  of  this  drug  is  formally  contra-indicated  by
the  existence  of  permanent  contracture,  and  especially  of  spinal
epilepsy;  its  employment,  in  such  cases,  would  almost  certainly
hâve  the  effect  of  exasperating  thèse  symptoms.  The  hydropathic
treatment  seems  to  hâve  produced  a  temporary  amendment  in  one
case;  in  another,  on  the  contrary,  it  completely  failed.

Arsenic,  belladonna,  ergot  of  rye,  and  bromide  of  potassium  bave
been  likewise  administered,  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  without  auy
marked  benefit.  The  same  may  be  said  of  faradisation  and  of  gal-
vanism.  As  regards  the  employment  of  the  continued  current,
however,  farther  experiments  are  required  before  we  can  form  a
definite  judgment.^

-  Other  drugs  hâve  also  been  employed,  without  better  success  than  resulted
from  the  use  of  those  euumerated  by  M.  Charcot.  Such  are,  phosphorised  oil,
iodide  of  phosphetjlamine,  and  Calabar  Bean.  Since  the  publication  of  the
first  édition  of  thèse  Lectures  several  works  or  observations  concerning  dis-
seminated sclerosis  bave  appeared.  As  they  only  confirm  the  descriptions
traced  by  M.  Charcot,  we  confine  ourselves  to  a  simple  catalogue.  i°.  Timal,
"  Etude  sur  quelques  complications  de  la  sclérose  eu  plaques  disséminées."
Thèse  de  Paris,  1873.  2°  and  3°.  H.  Schûle,  "Beitrag  zur  raultiplen  Sklerose
des  Gehirns  uud  Ruckenraarks,"  in  '  Deutsches  Archiv  fur  Klinische  Medicin,'
1870,  Bd.  vii,  p.  259. "  Weiterer  Beitrag  zur  Hirn  Ruckenmarks  Sklerose  "


222  TREATMENT.

(ibid.,  1871,  Bd.  viii,  p.  223).  Baldwin,  "A  Case  ofDiffused  Cérébral  Sclerosis"
('Journal  of  Mental  Science,'  1873,  July,  p.  304).  5°.  Moxon,  "Two  Cases
of  insular  Sclerosis  of  tlie  Brain  and  Spinal  Cord"  ('The  Lancet,'  vol.  i,
p.  471,  609,  1875).  6°.  Euzzard,  "  Disseniinated  Cerebro-Spinal  Sclerosis,"
(ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  45).  7°-  Moxon,  "  Eiglit,  Cases  of  Insular  Sclerosis  of  the
Brain  and  Spinal  Cord"  ('  Guy's  Hospital  Reports/  3rd séries,  t.  xxi,  London,
1875).


PART THIRD.


HYSTERIA.— HYSTERO-EPILEPSY.


LECTUEE IX.

HYSTERICAL  ISCHUMA.

""SuMMARY, — Introduction.  Hystencal  iscJmria.  Différences  ivîdch
divide  itfrom  oligiiria.  General  considérations.  Supplementary
vomiting.  Historical  sketch.  Causes  which  hâve  throum  doubt
on  tJie  existence  of  hysterical  iscJinria.  Distinction  hetvjeen
calculons  isclmria  and  hysterical  ischuria.

Case.  Hysterical  paralysis  and  contracture.  Complète
hemianœsthesia.  Hemiopia  and  achromatopsia.  Ovarian
hyper œsihesia.  Rétention  of  urine.  Tympanïtis.  Conmdsive
seizures  ;  trismits.  Manifestation  of  hystericalischuria.  Pré-
cautions taken  io  guard  against  error.  Complète  amiria.
JJrœmic  vomiting.  Relation  of  the  quantity  of  urine  excreted  to
the  vomited  matter.  Chemical  analysis  of  vomited  matter,
nrine,  and  blood. Suspension  of  phenomena.

Re-appearance  of  hysterical  ischuria.  New  results  ofchemical
analyses.

Serious  nature  of  common  anuria  and  of  expérimental
amiria.  Limit  of  the  duration  of  accidents  compatible  with  life.
Influence  of  the  évacuation  of  even  a  minute  quantity  of  urine.
Rapid  appearance  of  symptoms  in  calculous  ischuria  ;  their
tardiness  in  hysterical  ischuria.  Innocuousness  of  sympttoms
in  direct  ratio  with  the  quantity  of  urine  secreied.  Résistance
to  inanition  in  hysteria.

Mechanism  of  hysterical  ischuria.  Imperfect  supply  of
information  in  relation  to  this  subject.

Gentlemen, — It  is  my  intention  to  résume  and  to  complète,  in
our  conférences  of  the  présent  year,  the  séries  of  studies  which  we
nndertook  two  years  ago,  and  which  were  rudely  interrupted  by  the
painful  events  with  which  you  are  acquainted.

At  the  epoch  when  we  were  forced  to  separate^  I  was  endeavouring,

15


226  PRELIMINART EEMAEKS.

by  thé  application  of  preliminary  researclies  concerning  trophtc
disorders  dépendent  on  nervous  influence,  to  show,  as  you  may
remember,  that  many  affections  of  the  muscular  System,  hitlierto
attributed  to  peripheral  causes,  are  in  reality  subordinate  to  lésions
occupying  well-defined  régions  of  the  grey  matter  of  the  spinal
cord.

This  group  of  muscular  affections,  which  I  propose  to  call  spinal
myopathies,  or  myopathies  of  spinal  origin,  shall  occupy  our  attention
in  a  very  spécial  manner.  I  will  also  revert  to  the  interesting  group
of  scierons  affections  of  the  spinal  cord,  and,  amongst  others,  to
that  sclerosis  which  détermines  the  symptomatic  phenomena  of  pro-
gressive locomotor  ataxia.^  The  subject  is  far  from  being  exhausted,
and  I  shall  hâve  occasion  to  point  out,  in  référence  to  thèse  dis-
eases,  many  facts  which  are  new,  or  which  were  previously  but
imperfectly  known,  and  which  the  investigations  conducted  in  this
hospital  hâve  made  clear.

1  intend  also  to  treat  of  the  severalkinds  oî  paraplegia^^  produced
by  slow  compression  of  the  cord,  oîchronic  spinal  meningitis,  and  of
some  diseases  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  the  study  of  which  bas
been  hitherto  greatly  neglected.

But  before  returning  with  you,  gentlemen,  to  thèse  arduous
questions,  I  cannot  resist  the  désire  of  taking  immédiate  advantage
of  a  number  of  very  remarkable  cases  of  hysteria  which  are,  at  pré-
sent, assembled  in  our  wards.  It  is  requisite  to  lay  hold,  without
delay,  on  this  fortunate  circumstance,  for,  on  account  of  the  mobile
character  proper  to  the  great  neurosis  I  hâve  named,  the  symptoms
which  are,  to-day,  manifest  in  a  high  development  may,  on  the
morrow,  bave  completely  vanished.

Among  thèse  cases  there  is  one  especially  deserving  of  attention,
which  shall  form  tlie  object  of  our  first  conférence  ;  it  is,  if  I  do
uot  deceive  myself,  a  legitimate  example  of  a  rare,  an  extremely
rare  affection,  the  very  existence  of  which  is  disputed  by  most
physicians.

ïhe  study  of  exceptional  cases,  gentlemen,  is  not  to  be  disdained.
They  are  not  always  mère  baits  for  vain  curiosity.  Many  a  time,
indeed,  they  supply  the  solution  of  difficult  problems.  In  that
respect  they  may  be  compared  to  those  lost  or  erratic  species  which

'  See  "  Leçons  sur  les  Maladies  du  Système  Nerveux,"  2e  série,  fascicules
2  et  3.

2  Charcot,  loc.  cit.,  2e  série,  fasc.  i.


ISCHURIA AND OLIGUEIA.  227

the  iiaturalist  anxiously  seeks  for,  because  they  show  the  mode  of
transition  between  différent  zoological  families,  or  enable  bim  to
unravel  some  knotty  point  of  comparative  anatomy  or  pbysiology.

Hystencal  tsclmna  is  the  affection  to  which  I  allude.  At  the
outset,  I  should  explain  to  y  ou  the  technical  meaning  of  this  désigna-
tion, which  some  of  you  now,  probably,  hear  mentioned  for  the  first
time.

A.  Ischuria,  stoppage  of  urine,  —  thèse  terms,  technically
considered,  signify  the  same  thing.  Hysterical  ischuria  bas,  bow-
ever,  a  more  restricted  meaning.

There  is  no  question  hère  of  a  simple  rétention  of  urine  in  the
bladder — tbat  is  a  hackneyed  fact  in  hysteria.  You  know  that  verj
commonly  the  use  of  the  cathéter,  in  such  cases,  may  need  to  be
continued  for  months,  nay  years;  but  then  the  urine  withdrawa
from  the  bladder  is  abundant  in  quantity,  or,  at  ail  events,  the
amount  is  not  far  removed  from  the  normal  standard.

In  the  ischuria  of  hysterical  patients  the  obstruction  is  situated
neither  in  the  urethra  nor  in  the  bladder.  It  lies  higher  up,  either
in  the  ureters  or  in  the  kidueys  themselves,  or  still  more  remotely.
But  that  is  a  point  which  yet  remains  to  be  decided.  The  principal
fact  is  this,  namely,  the  quantity  of  urine  secreted  in  the  twenty-
four  hours  and  withdrawn  by  the  cathéter  (for  hysterical  ischuria  is
almost  always  complicated  by  urethral  rétention),  this  quantity,  î
repeat,  is  remarkably  under  the  normal  amount.  It  is  even  frequentij
reduced  to  zéro,  and  during  several  days  there  is,  in  fact,  absolute
suppression  of  urine.

B.  It  is  proper,  in  this  relation,  to  establish  spécifie  catégories»
Oligurïa,  or  even  total  suppression  of  urine,  may  be  only  a  transienf,
phenomenon  in  hysterical  cases,  and  one,  as  Dr.  Laycock  bas  rightiy
remarked,  which  may  frequently  occur  unnoticed.  Thus,  we  oc-
casionally  observe  in  hysterical  patients,  especially  at  the  catameniai
periods,  a  complète  suppression  of  urine  which  does  not  last  more  thaa
from  twenty-four  to  thirty-six  hours.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  some
feeling  of  uneasiness  experienced,  and  the  puise  may  be  quickened;
but,  after  a  short  time,  a  few  spoonfuls  of  urine  are  expelled  and  the
normal  state  is  restored.^

The  cases  upon  which  I  would  fix  your  attention  are  very  differenè
from  those  to  which  I  bave  just  referred. They  présent  hysterieai

^  Laycock,  'A  Treatise  on  the  Nervous  Diseases  of  Women,'  Loîîdoa,
1840,  p.  229.


228  EXPERIMENTS.

ischuria  at  its  maximum  of  development  wlien  it  lias  assumed  tlie
cliaracter  of  a  permanent  symptom.  During  tlie  lapse  of  several
successive  days,  of  weeks,  and  of  montlis^  the  quantity  of  urine
rendered,  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  may  be  quite  iusignificant
in  amount  or  almost  nil.  Occasionally  even,  tliere  is  complète  sup-
presslon  of  urine  during  a  séries  of  several  days.

Wlien  matters  take  this  turn  tliere  is  superadded,  as  it  were  of
necessity,  anotlier  plienomenon  whicli  may  be  called  the  complément
of  the  first  ;  I  mean  repeated  vomitings,  whicli  take  place  daily  and
even  several  times  a  day,  so  long  as  the  ischuria  continues.  The
ejected  matter  occasionally,  it  is  said,  présents  the  appearance  and
exhales  the  odour  of  urine.  It  is  certain  tliat  chemical  analysis
has,  in  two  or  three  cases,  detected  in  this  vomited  matter  the  présence
of  a  certain  quantity  of  nrea.

To  sum  up,  gentlemen,  hysterical  ischuria  offers,  in  the  human
species,  a  more  or  less  exact  reproduction  of  some  of  the  symptoms
observed  in  animais^  in  cases  of  nephrotomy  or  of  oblitération  of
the  ureters  by  ligature.

The  experiments  of  Prévost  and  Dumas,  and  particularly  those  of
MM.  Claude  Bernard  and  Barreswill,  teach  us,  as  you  are  aware,
that,  after  thèse  mutilations,  a  vicarious  élimination  is  effected  by
means  of  the  intestine.  In  the  matter  so  eliminated,  there  hâve  been
found,  according  to  some  observers,  carbonate  of  ammonia  resulting
from  the  décomposition  of  the  urea  (Claude  Bernard),  and,  according
to  others,  ^lrea  itself  has  been  detected  (Munck).  Howèver  this  may
be,  so  long  as  the  élimination  is  effected,  the  animais  seem  to  suffer
little  inconvenience,  and  it  is  only  when  they  become  enfeebled  and
the  supplementary  excrétion  ceases,  that  grave  phenomena  présent
themselves  which  soon  occasion  dcath.

You  perceive  the  analogies  and,  at  the  saine  glance,  are  struck  by
the  contrast.  Cérébral  symptoms  inevitably  occur,at  a  given  moment,
in  cases  of  experiments  practised  on  animais,  whilst  in  hysterica
patients  the  alternation  between  rénal  excrétion  and  vicarious  ex-
crétion may  continue  for  weeks  and  months,  without  any  visible
disturbance  of  the  gênerai  health  ever  resulting.  But  I  do  not
wish  at  présent  to  dclay  upon  this  point,  to  which  I  will  hereafter
rcturn.


HISTOEICAL  SKETCH.  229


II.


Suclij  gentlemen,  is  hysterical  ischuria,  at  least  in  its  essential
character,  according  to  the  few  authors  who  hâve  acknowledged  its
existence  ;  for,  T  repeat,  the  reality  of  this  disorder  has  been  dis-
puted.  You  will  not  find  it  mentioned  in  any  of  the  récent  works
or  articles  on  hysteria,  not  even  in  the  most  complète  and  most
justly  esteemed  amongst  them.  There  is  no  mention  whatever  of
it,  for  instance,  in  the  great  work  of  M.  Briquet.  In  short,  of  con-
temporary  authors,  Dr.  T.  Laycock,  Professor  in  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  is,  perhaps,  the  only  pathologist  who,  in  his  writings,
has  given  domicile  to  hysterical  ischuria.  After  devoting  to  this
question  a  séries  of  articles,^  in  which  he  relates  two  original  cases,
Dr.  Laycock  returns  to  the  subject  in  his  well-known  work  on  the
'Nervous  Diseases  of  Women^  (1840).  Everywhere  else,  if  hys-
terical ischuria  be  mentioned,  it  receives  but  a  passing  notice  by
way  of  référence,  and  not  without  an  ironical  allusion  to  those
observers  who  bave  been  so  simple  as  to  gravely  accept  this
"pretended  symptom."

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  uninteresting  to  note  that  the  physio-
logists,  Haller  first,  then  Carpenter,  and  Claude  Bernard  (thèse,
however,  without  affirming  anything),  hâve  shown  themselves,  in
référence  to  this  subject,  far  less  sceptical  than  were  such
physicians  as  Prout  and  H.  Willis.

Until  recently ,  I  shared  the  almost  gênerai  incredulity  which  pre~
vailed  in  référence  to  hysterical  ischuria,  being,  indeed,  prepossessed
by  the  teachings  of  my  master.  Rayer,  who  never  lost  an  opportunity
of  expatiating  lengthily  on  the  varions  déceptions  of  which  hys-
terical patients  are  guilty.  And  he  did  not  hesitate  to  confess  that
he,  who  was  himself  a  sagacious  and  very  keen  observer,  had  often
nearly  fallen  a  victim  to  their  strategy.  -Latterly,  my  opinions
hâve  been  somewhat  modified  in  présence  of  the  case  to  which  I  shall
shortly  invite  your  attention.

Before  placing  you  in  a  position  to  judge  for  yourselves  whether
or  not  my  conversion  has  been  too  précipitât e,  let  us  investigate  the
principal  reasons  why  certain  authors  pass  over  hysterical  ischuria  in
silence,  whilst  others  only  mention  its  name  in  order  to  relegate  it
amongst  the  number  of  chimseras.

'  '  The  Edinburgh  Médical  and  Surgical  Journal,'  1838.


230  SIMULATION.

1°.  In  the  first  place,  it  must  be  remarked  that  liysterical  iscliuria
îs  a  rare  phenomenon,  at  least  in  its  very  marked  form,  for  it  is
possible,  as  we  bave  already  said,  that  sligbt  cases  many  often  be
overlooked.

a.  Thus,  Dr.  Laycock,  who  searcbed  everywhere,  could  not  col-
îect  more  than  twenty-seven  cases,  only  two  of  whicb  came  under
liis  own  observation.

b.  Let  us  add  that  a  somewhat  rigorous  criticism  would,  most
eertainly,  reduce  this  number  still  further.  Most  of  the  cases  are
old  ones,  dating  as  they  do  from  the  sixteenth  and  seventeentli  cen-
turies, and  they  do  not  offer  those  notes  of  exactness  which  we  re~
quire  at  the  présent  period.  Others  are  manifest  impostures.  Who
could  be  got  to  believe,  for  instance,  that  a  woman  could,  intwenty-
four  hours,  render  through  the  ear  half  a  gallon  of  a  fluid  which,
on  being  analysed,  was  found  to  contain  urea  ?  And  that  is  not  ail.
This  very  woman  is  stated  to  hâve,  at  the  same  time,  ejected  a  similar
fluid  by  the  navel — "  spirted  out"  is  the  term  employed  by  the  author
of  the  report.  Yet  ail  thèse  détails,  and  many  others  besides,  are
recorded,  with  the  utmost  gravity,  in  the  '  American  Journal  of
Médical  Sciences'  (1828).  Permit  me,  I  beg  of  you,  to  pass  in
silence  over  the  name  of  the  physician  who  made  himself  re-
sponsible  for  this  case.

3°.  Tliis  leads  me  to  say  a  word  on  simulation.  You  will  meet
with  it  at  every  step  in  the  history  of  hysteria,  and  one  finds  him-
self sometimes  admiring  the  amazing  craft,  sagacity,  and  persévér-
ance which  women,  under  the  influence  of  this  great  neurosis,  will
put  in  play  for  the  purposes  of  déception — especially  when  a
physician  is  to  be  the  victim.  As  to  the  case  in  point,  however,  it
doesnotseemto  me  demonstrated  that  the  erratic  parnria  of  hysteria
has  ever  been  wholly  simulated  and,  as  it  were,  created  by  thèse
patients.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  incontestable  that,  in  a  multitude
of  cases,  they  bave  taken  pleasure  in  distorting,  by  exaggerations,
the  principal  circumstances  of  their  disorder,  in  order  to  make  them
appear  extraordinary  and  wondcrful.

The  foUowing  is  the  gênerai  séquence  of  things.  Anuria  or
ischuria,  with  vomiting,  exists  alone  for  a  certain  time,  and  the
phenomenon  is  consequently  reduced  to  its  simplest  form.  Soon,
however  (especially  if  the  syraptoms  seem  to  excite  the  interest
and  curiosity  of  the  physicians),  pure  urine  will  be  thrown  up  in
considérable  quantity  ;  it  will  issue  from  the  ears,  the  navel,  the


CALCULOUS  OBLITERATION  OF  UEETERS.  231

eyes,  and  even  from  the  uose,  as  we  read  in  tlie  account  given
by  the  American  journal.  Einally,  if  the  wonder  of  the  observers
be  extremely  excited,  there  will  probably  be  vomiting  of  fsecal
matters.

Amongst  this  class  of  cases,  that  which  in  France  attained  most
notoriety  was  the  case  of  a  patient  named  Joséphine  Roulier,  who,
for  over  fifteen  months,  was  a  prominent  personage  in  the  clinical
wards  of  Professor  Leroux.  This  happened  about  the  year  1810.
The  patient  had  first  presented  the  symptoms  of  simple  ischuria
with  erratic  paruria.  Nysten^  who  records  the  case,  analysed  the
vomited  matters  and  detected  the  présence  of  urea.  Shortly  after,
there  came  a  ilow  of  urine  from  the  navel,  the  ears,  the  eyes,  the
nipples,  and  finally  an  évacuation  of  fsecal  matters  from  the  mouth.
You  see,  gentlemen,  that  the  séquence  is  always  the  same,  whatever
be  the  country  or  century  in  which  the  observations  were  taken.
The  fraud  was  discovered  by  Boyer.  It  was  found  that  the
use  of  a  strait  waistcoat  caused  cessation  of  the  extraordinary
phenomena,  and  some  hard  fsecal  pellets  were  discovered,  stored
away  in  the  patient's  bed  ready  for  use.  Unfortunately,  Nysten
hadjust  published  his  'Recherches  de  Physiologie  et  de  Chimie
Pathologiques.^  It  was  necessary  to  make  honorable  réparation.  A
note  was  accordingly  inserted  in  the  '  Journal  Général  de  Médecine,'
and  another  was  appended  to  some  copies  of  Nysten's  book.

In  présence  of  thèse  facts,  must  we  conclude  that  ail  is  im-
posture in  hysterical  ischuria  ?  I  do  not  believe  it,  gentlemen,
and  I  hope  you  will  share  my  opinion  when  you  shall  hâve  been
made  acquaiuted  with  ail  the  peculiarities  of  my  patientas  history.

There  is  another  circumstance  which  is,  also,  well  adapted  to
throw  an  unfavorable  shadow  upon  accounts  of  cases  of  hysterical
ischuria.  It  is  this  : — apart  from  hysteria,  suppression  of  urine
if  it  but  persist  beyond  a  few  days,  say  three,  or  four,  or  five,  is
an  exceedingly  serions  sym-ptom,  which  almost  necessarily  termi-
nâtes in  death.

Leaving  aside  those  cases  of  anuria  depending  on  an  acute  or
chronic  form  of  Bright's  disease,  which  are  too  complex  for  admis-
sion hère,  I  will  sélect  as  typical  the  calculons  ohllteratlon  of  the
2bTeters,  supervening  in  persons  previously  in  good  health.  In
such  cases,  it  lias  happened  that  sometimes  one  kidney  lias  been
reduced,  through  antécédent  disease,  to  a  fibrous  husk  filled  with
cysts,  and  consequently  rendered  incapable  of  fulfilling  its  function


233  EXCEPTIONAL  CASES.

of  eliminating  urine  ;  sometimes,  but  more  rarely,  botli  ureters  are
obliterated  at  once.  It  little  matters,  in  so  far  as  our  object  is  con-
cerued,  whether  this  oblitération  be  accompanied  or  not  by  the
pains  of  nephritic  colic.  Now,  Halford,^  Abercrombie,  and  ail
authors  who  hâve  studied  thèse  cases  agrée  in  stating  that  if  anuria
persist  beyond  four  or  five  days,  comatose  symptoms,  with  or
without  convulsions,  inevitably  appear  and  are  soon  foUowed  by
death.

Life  is  prolonged  a  little  if  even  a  small  quantity  of  urine  can,
be  rendered,  but  the  final  resuit  is  always  the  same.

There  is,  however,  the  chapter  of  exceptions,  which  we  should  the
less  neglect,  because  we  are  taking  advantage  of  some  of  its  con-
tents. The  folio wing  exceptional  cases  are  in  the  books  :

1°.  In  the  case  reported  by  Dr.  Laing,  of  Pochabers,  quoted  by
Robert  Willis,^  anuria  lasted  ten  days,  and  recovery  took  place.

2°.  In  the  case  of  a  patient  of  Dr.  W.  Eoberts  (of  Manchester)
somnolence  did  not  supervene  until  the  eighth  day,  four  days
before  death. '^

3°.  The  most  remarkable  example  within  my  knowledge  of
prolongation  of  life,  under  such  circumstances,  is  that  which  was
recently  published  by  Mr.  Paget,  in  the  'Transactions  of  the
Clinical  Society  of  London.'^  Although  there  was  absolute  anuria,
the  comatose  symptoms  did  not  présent  themselves  until  the  four-
teenth  day.  On  the  fifteentli  the  patient  passed  a  certain  quantity
of  urine.  There  was,  however,  aggravation  of  symptoms,  and  the
fatal  termination  took  place  on  the  twenty-third  day.

However  it  be,  you  observe  that,  just  as  happened  in  the  case  of
experiments  made  on  animais,  hère  also  the  contrast  is  striking
between  calculous  iscJmria,  which  almost  certainly  kills  the  patient,
and  lysterïcal  iscJmria,  which  allows  the  patient  to  survive  during
long  months  without  seriously  disturbing  the  gênerai  health.  We
are  thus  placed  in  présence  of  a  grave  problem.  Is  it  really  in-
soluble ?  This  is  a  question  which  we  purpose  investigating
at  a  future  opportunity.

'  '  Médical  Transactions/  published  by  the  Collège  of  Phjsicians,  t.  vi,
1820.
-  "Urinary  Diseases,"  London,  1838,  p.  35.

^  Sec  account  of  this  patient  in  Bournevillc,  "  Études  Clin,  et  Therm.,"  &c.,,
p.  175;  and  Roberts  in  'Mouvement  Médical,'  1871.

■^  J.  Paget,  "  Case  of  Suppression  of  Urine  vcry  slowly  fatal."  In  'Trans-
actions of  Clinical  bociety  of  Loudon,'  t.  ii,  1869.


CLINiCAL  CASE.  233-


III.


It  is  full  time,  gentlemen^  that  we  sliould  enter  upon  a  study  of
the  clinical  case  wliich  constitutes  tlie  basis  of  our  conférence.  In
the  first  place  we  must  examine  the  groundwork  to  whicli  our
observations  relate  ;  andj  witli  this  object  in  view,  the  best  thing  I
can  do  is  to  show  you  the  patient,  and  to  point  ont  before  you  the
symptoms  that  are  actually  in  existence,  amongst  which  you  will
discern  the  signs  of  an  intense,  inveterate  hysteria,  marked  by  a
characteristic  reunion  qî  permanent  sj/mptorns.

Justine  Etch — ,  born  in  the  department  of  the  Basses-Pyrenees,
is  forty  years  of  âge.  She  followed  the  profession  of  hospital  nurse.
She  was  admitted  into  this  hospital  of  La  Salpêtrière  in  1869,  so
that  we  can  trace  the  progress  of  her  malady  during  four  years.

What  is  her  présent  condition  ?  That  which  first  strikes  you  in
référence  to  her  is  the  vast  contracture  which  affects  the  upper  and
lower  limbs  on  the  left  side.  This  contracture,  which  ceases  neither-
during  natural  sleep,  nor  during  sleep  induced  by  chloroform,  unless
the  influence  of  this  agent  be  pushed  to  an  extrême,  suddenly
developed  itself  on  the  2oth  March,  1870,  after  a  severe  hysterical
fit.  We  should  mention,  however,  that  the  arm  had  previously
been  quite  paralysed,  but  flaccid,  whilst  the  corresponding  lower  ex-
tremity  was  already  rigid.  The  latter  circumstance,  together  with
the  rapidity  with  which  the  contracture  made  its  appearance,  autho-
rised  us  in  declaring,  at  the  time,  that  no  circumscribed  cérébral
lésion  had  occurred  to  cause  the  phenomena  displayed.

Another  distinguishing  feature  which  we  find,  in  this  patient,  is
the  existence  of  complète  hemianœsthesia,  which  occupies  both
the  contractured  limbs  and  the  left  half  of  the  face  and  body.  Not
only  does  this  ansesthesia  affect  the  external  tégument,  but  it  also
extends  to  those  portions  of  the  mucous  membrane  and  of  the  organs
of  sensé  situated  on  the  left  half  of  the  body.  Thus,  witli  respect  to
the  faculty  of  sight,  we  note  hère  the  existence  of  liemiopia  and  of
achromatopsïa  ;  this  phenomenon  was  observed  by  Dr.  Galezowski,
under  similar  circumstances,  and  is  one  to  which  we  shall  again
return.

When  developed  to  this  extent,  hemiansesthesia  gives  us  a  group
of  symptoms  which  are  almost  spécifie;  I  say  almost,  but  not  aiso-
lutet//,  spécifie,  because  we  shall  soon  see  that  even  coarse  cerebraV


234  OVAEIAN  HYPER^STHESIA.

lésions,  confined  to  certain  portions  of  the  encephalon,  may  at
least  partially  reproduce  them.

One  other  verj  important  symptom  is  presented  by  Justine
Etch — .  Tliis  is  a  pain  seated  just  above  the  left  groin.  M.
Briquet  bas  given  this  the  name  of  ccdïalgia,  and  regards  it  as
residing  in  the  muscles.  For  my  part,  agreeing  on  this  point  with
Négrier,  Schutzenberger,  and  Piorry,  I  believe  its  source  to  be
the  ovary.  Whatever  be  its  exact  seat,  this  pain,  which  I  shall
term  ovarian  hjperœsthesia,  is  to  a  certain  extent  pathognomonic.
Pressure,  whicli  exaspérâtes  it,  causes  irradiated  sensations  of  a
perfectly  spécial  character.  Thèse  sensations,  springing  from  the
ovarian  région,  successively  attain:  i°.  the  epigastriuni  ;  3°.
the  neck  or  throat, — manifesting  themselves  in  thèse  régions  by  a
more  or  less  considérable  oppression,  the  well-known  sensation  of  a
bail  or  globe  {glohus  hydericui), — 3°.  the  head,  where  the  irradia-
tion is  characterised  by  buzzing  and  whistling  in  the  left  ear,  by
cephalalgia  with  throbbings,  which  the  patient  compares  to  so  many
hammer-strokes  on  the  left  temple,  and  finally  to  an  obnubilation
of  sightin  the  corresponding  eye.  I  confine  rayself,  for  the  moment,
to  a  simple  enumeration  of  thèse  phenomena,  which  require  a  more
minute  description.

Among  the  other  symptoms,  I  must  not  forget  to  mention
rétention  of  urine  and  tj/nijMnitis,  which  also  are  permanent  phe-
nomena  in  this  case.  Pinally,  this  woman  is  subject  to  spécial
seizures,  which  are  sometimes  tetaniform,  sometimes  epileptiform,
but  which  occasionally  resemble  the  common  hysterical  type.  Thus,
this  morning,  you  can  perceive  a  symptom  which  dates  from  a
seizure  that  took  place  two  days  ago.  I  refer  to  the  trismus  which
lias  proved  au  obstacle  to  natural  alimentation  since  that  period.

IV.

The  patient  may  now  retire.  We  shall  be  able  to  relate  more  fully,
in  her  absence,  the  other  peculiarities  of  her  history.  It  is  a  real
Odyssey.  Hence  I  shall  bc  often  compelled  to  abridge  it,  whilst
taking  care,  however,  to  indicate  the  séquence  of  the  accidents.

The  first  fit  of  convulsions  occurred  in  1855.  ^^bat  the  circum-
stances  were  we  do  not  know.  The  account  she  gives  is  quite  a  ro-
mance, a  case  of  râpe  (?), — a  tangled  story,  the  accuracy  of  which  it  is
diilicult  to  ascertain.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  the  seizure  in
question  was  apparently  one  of  extrême  violence;  the  patient  fell


CLINICAL  CASE.  235

into  the  fire,  burning  lier  face,  aud  you  hâve  noticed  tlie  indelible
stiginata  wliich  were  caused  by  that  accident.  Datiiig  from  tliat
period,  the  fits  hâve  continued  to  show  themselves,  from  time  to  time,
with  the  same  characters,  but  rather  rarely, — about  twice  or  thrice  a
year.

Teu  years  later,  reteutiou  of  urine  appears.  The  patient  bas  an
attack  of  hemiplegia  with  flaccidity  of  the  left  side,  after  one  of  her
usual  fits,  and  is  brought  into  M.  Lasègue^s  wards.

Admitted  the  same  year  (1S69)  to  La  Salpêtrière,  we  note— 1°.
The  existence  of  left  hemiplegia,  with  flaccidity  of  the  upper  and  con-
tracture of  the  lower  extremity.  2°.  Hemiansesthesia  and  achroma-
topsia  of  the  same  side.  The  symptoms  then  presented  by  Justine
Etch —  are  detailed  in  the  thèses  of  MM.  Hélot  and  Berger.

In  1870  afFairs  remain  much  in  the  same  state,  ouly  that  a  uew
fit  has  been  foUowed  by  contracture  of  the  left  arm  ;  and,  at  that  time,
(in  1870)  I  showed  you  this  patient  as  supplyingan  example  of  the
hémiplégie  form  of  hysterical  contracture.^

In  the  month  of  March,  1 871,  a  fit  is  folio wed  by  flaccid  hemi-
plegia of  the  righiside.  In  a  month's  time,  the  flaccidity  is  replaced
by  contracture.  In  April,  then,  we  had  under  our  eyes  as  intense  a
contracture  of  the  four  extremities  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive  ;  the
contracture  was  absolute,  persisting  uight  and  day,  during  sleeping
and  waking,  and  even  resisting  the  influence  of  sleep  induced  by
chloroform,  or  only  giving  way  before  the  highest  dose.

This  woman  was,  therefore,  you  perceive,  condemned  to  complète
confinement  in  bed  ;  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  use  her  limbs.
Better  conditions  could  not  be  desired  to  render  surveillance  easy.
I  took  care,  moreover,  to  place  near  her  two  devoted  patients,  bed-
ridden  like  herself,  who  were  ready  to  reveal  ail  if  they  should  dis-
cover  any  trickery.  I  had  there  the  best  possible  police,  that  of
women  over  women,  for  you  are  aware  that  if  women  enter
into  any  plot  among  themselves  they  very  seldom  succeed.  This
statement  will,  I  believe,  be  sufiÊcient  to  convince  you,  gentlemen,
that,  during  this  first  period,  simulation  was  impossible.  My  friends
Professors  Brown-Séquard  and  Eouget,  who  saw  the  patient  at
this  epoch,  declared  themselves  satisfied  with  ail  the  précautions
taken.

*  The  lecture  referred  to,  wliicli  will  be  found  further  on,  was  first  published
in  the  'Revue  Photographique  des  Hôpitaux  de  Paris,'  i87i,p.  103.  Plate
XXV  of  the  '  Revue  '  gives  a  portrait  of  this  patient.


236  CLINIOAL  CASE.

It  now  remains  for  us  to  sliovv  you  liow^  in  the  midst  of  con-
ditions so  favorable  to  regular  inspection,  the  phenomenon  of
iscburia  was  produced.

The  ischuria  cominenced  in  the  month  of  April,  1871.  Before
this  a  woman  employed  in  the  hospital,  who  catheterised  the  patient,
several  times  a  day,  had  ah'eady  noticed  that  the  quantity  of  urine
withdrawn  was  occasionally  very  minute,  whilst  at  other  times
none  was  yielded  for  two  or  three  days,  or  even  more,  nor  were  the
sheets  ever  moistened.

In  addition  to  thèse  symptoras,  which  persisted  during  May  and
June,  vomiting  soon  appeared,  and  proceeded  without  effort  or
straining.  I  pretended,  from  the  outset,  to  be  nowise  surprised  at
thèse  occurrences,  confining  myself  to  directing  that  the  patient
should  be  discreetly  watched  both  night  and  day.  She  was  never,
however,  for  a  moment  detected  in  any  déception.

Cast  your  eyes,  I  pray  you,  on  thèse  diagrams  (Plates  V,  YI,  and
YII)  which  I  place  before  you,  and  you  can  follow,  in  the  several
phases  of  their  évolution,  the  accidents  which  hâve  presented  them-
selves  to  our  observation.  The  fabulation  begins  on  the  i6th  July,
1871,  when  I  caused  the  urines  and  vomited  matter  to  be  collected
separately,  day  by  day.  It  ceased  in  October  of  the  same  year
(Plates  V,  VI).

Prom  the  i6th  to  the  3ist  of  July  the  quantity  of  vomited  matter
varied  from  500  to  1750  centilitres,  the  daily  average  being  one
litre  (or  if  pints  nearly).  The  quantity  of  urine  varied  between
o  and  5  grammes;  the  average  in  the  twenty-four  hours  being  2*50
grammes  (or  about  38^  grains).  During  this  period,  there  was
absolute  ischuria  every  second  day.

In  August,  the  average  amouut  of  urine  rendered  was  3  grammes
(or  46  ]  grains)  ;  that  of  vomited  matter  was  one  litre  in  the  twenty-
four  hours.  During  the  course  of  this  month  there  was,  on  several
occasions,  complète  auuria,  lasting  for  several  days.  But,  note
that  the  total  absence  of  urine  never  persisted  beyond  eleven  days.

Prom  the  i  st  to  the  3oth  September,  the  average  amount  of
vomited  matter  rose  to  a  litre  and  a  half  (say  sf  pints)  per  day,
whilst  that  of  the  urine  rcmained  at  2*50  grammes  (Plate  VI).

There  is  one  fact  brought  into  promincnce,  on  examination  and
comparison  of  the  curves  rccorded  on  this  table,  namely,  that  the
curve  of  the  vomiting  generally  rises  when  that  of  tlie  urine  falls,
and  inversely.  Owing  to  this  state  of  alternate  cquilibrium  thcrc  has


CLINICAL  CASE.  237

been  a  tolerably  fair  balance  maintaiued  between  tlie  results  of  tliese
two  pheuomena.

What  lias  been  the  gênerai  condition  of  the  patient,  as  regards
bealtli,  during  tins  long  period  of  four  mouths  which  the  investigation
lasted?  At  no  time  hâve  we  remarked  any  disturbance  of  the
gênerai  health  worth  noticing.  The  alimentation  was,  as  you  can
readily  understand,  very  limited  ;  the  stomacli  rejected  almost
immediately,  but  without  fatigue  (a  characteristic  of  hysterical
vomiting  justly  noted  by  Dr.  H.  Salter '),  the  greater  portion  of  the
food  swallowed  by  the  patient.  Yet,  notwithstanding  thèse  adverse
conditions,  nutrition  scarcely  suffered.  This,  indeed,  is  a  fact  well
known,  apart  from  anuria,  in  cases  of  uncontrollable  hysterical
vomiting.

I  had  believed  from  the  outset  that  the  matter  vomited  by  our
patient  must  contain  urea.  The  first  investigations  undertaken  witli
a  view  to  detect  its  présence  were,  however,  fruitless  ;  then  I  requested
the  assistance  of  M.  Gréhant,  whose  competency  in  such  matters  is
beyond  a  doubt.  He  most  obligingly  placed  himself  at  our  disposai.

Twenty-two  cubic  centimètres  of  urine  collected  on  the  2oth  of
October,  and  representiug  the  whole  amount  of  urine  rendered  that
day,  gave,  on  analysis,  0*179  gramme  (nearly  2f  grains).  On  the
iith  October  the  total  vomited  matter,  amounting  to  1460  cubic
centimètres,  gave  3699  grammes  (or  26^  grains)  of  urea.

In  order  to  détermine  if  our  patieut's  blood  contained  a  greater
proportion  of  urea  than  in  the  normal  state,  we  decided  to  abstract
a  little  of  the  venous  fiuid.  In  order  to  accomplish  this  opération
it  was  necessary  to  induce  sleep,  on  account  of  the  obstacles  pre-
sented  by  the  contraction  of  the  members.  The  opération  having
been  accomplished,  M.  Gréhant  found  that  in  the  blood  taken
from  Etch —  the  urea  amounted  to  0'036  gramme  per  hundred
grammes  of  blood;  whiist  in  that  taken  for  comparative examination
from  a  healthy  individuel  there  existed  o*o34.  gramme  per  cent.
You  see  that  the  results  of  the  two  analyses  are  (almost)  identical.

Unfortunately  for  the  continuance  of  our  investigations,  the
administration  of  chloroform  had  the  effect  of  greatly  modifying  the
symptoms  which  we  had  been  watching  with  so  much  interest  ;
incontinence  of  urine  followed,  lasting  for  several  days.  The
vomiting,  moreover,  was  suspended  soon  after,  and  the  urine
gradually  returned  to  the  normal  standard,

1  The  '  Laucet,'  Nos.  i  and  2,  t.  ii,  1868.


238  VARIATIONS OF  HYSTEEICAL ISCHUEIA.


V.

Such,  gentlemen,  are  the  results  of  the  first  séries  of  studies
"which  decided  us  to  undertake  the  restoration  of  hysterical  ischuria
to  a  place  amongst  clinicalrealities.  The  same  phenomena,  indeed,
were  destined  agam  to  présent  themselves,  under  a  less  striking
aspect  it  may  be,  but  one  quite  as  fuîl  of  interest.  In  this  second
phase,  no  complète  anuria  occurred,  not  even  temporarily.  We
noted  a  simple  oliguria.  The  matter  vomited  was  not  thrown  off
in  such  abundance.  In  a  word,  if  the  accidents  had  been  a  little
less  marked,  and  if  we  had  not  been  enlightened  by  the  foregoing
observation,  it  is  incontestable  that  the  supplemental  élimination
of  urea  might  hâve  altogether  escaped  attention.

Let  us  briefly  observe  what  took  place  during  this  second
period.  After  a  more  or  less  complète  remission  of  symptoms,
rétention  of  urine  was  the  first  to  make  its  appearance  again.
This  was  in  January.  The  following  month,  after  a  fit,  we  noted
alternations  of  oliguria  and  of  polyuria,  when  tliere  were  two  litres
(or  3  e  pints)  ipasseà  j)er  diem.  In  March,  the  urinary  sécrétion
diminished  to  a  decided  extent;  and,  on  the  i8th  of  the  same
month,  vomiting  again  showed  itself.  From  that  date,  until  the
3ist  of  March,  the  daily  average  of  vomited  matter  amounted  to
500  grammes.  In  April,  the  average  was  800  grammes  for  the
vomited  matter  and  100  grammes  (=  1543*23  grains)  for  the  urine
(Plate  VII).

During  this  new  phase,  in  which  the  disease  ofî'ered  itself  for  in-
vestigation, we  were  not  under  so  favorable  conditions  as  on  the
previous  occasion.  The  patientas  right  arm  had  become  nearly
quite  free.  Hence  it  was  urgent  that  we  should  protect  ourselves
again  st  every  possible  cause  of  error.

In  addition  to  the  customary  surveillance,  which  was  not  relaxed
for  a  moment,  we  had  recourse  to  the  following  précautions  :— the
patient's  bed  was  carefully  examined  from  time  to  time,  and  neither
vessels  nor  cathéters  were  allowed  to  reraain  at  lier  disposai.  Finally,
I  succeeded  in  persuading  her  that  it  might,  perhaps,  be  bénéficiai
on  account  of  the  contracture  that  still  persisted  in  the  left  arm  to
make  use  of  a  strait  jacket.  To  this  she  consented.  The  applica-
tion of  the  strait  jacket  was  not,  however,  absolutely  continuons  ;  it


CHEMICAL  ANALYSES.  239

was  removed  at  meal-times,  when  the  patient  was  watched  by  the
person  who  fed  her.

At  différent  periods,  during  the  month,  M.  Gréhant  analysed  the
urine  and  the  vomited  matter  rendered  in  twelve  days.  During  this
lapse  of  time,  the  daily  average  of  the  urine  was  206  grammes,
containing  5*09  grammes  of  urea.  The  daily  average  of  vomited
matter,  amountingto  ofii  grammes,  yielded  3"i38  grammes  of  urea.
Adding  together  the  two  totals  of  urea  rendered,  we  obtained  the
low  figure  of  5*233  grammes.  I  can  show  you  a  spécimen  of  the
oxalate  of  urea  which  M.  Gréhant  extracted  from  the  matter  vomited
during  the  four  and  twenty  hours.  We  shall  make  use  of  this
resuit  in  a  moment.

We  did  not  discover,  any  more  than  on  the  previous  occasion,  the
existence  of  a  supplemental  élimination  by  the  skin  or  intestines.
The  patient  is  habitually  constipated,  and  we  did  not  observe,  at
either  time,  any  peculiarity  in  relation  to  the  external  tégument.
Her  gênerai  health  has  not  undergone  any  noteworthy  altération,
and  the  température  never  was  above  37°  C.  (  =  98*6°  T.)  and  some
tenths.^

Thus,  gentlemen,  this  new  investigation  confirms  the  accuracy  of
the  first,  and  both  concur  to  establish  the  existence  of  Jiysterical
ischuria,  with  erratic  jjamria  as  aproven  pathological  phenomenon,
utterlybeyondthe  possibility  of  simulation.  If  this  conclusion  belegiti-
mate,  it  is  obvious  that  some  value  must  be  attached  to  the  records  of
former  cases.  It  is  only  requisite  to  separate  the  truth  from  what  is
fictitious,  to  eliminate,  for  instance,  certain  extraordinary  phenomena
such  as  the  flow  of  urine  from  the  nose,  eyes,  &c.,  and  the  vomiting
of  fsecal  matter.  Some  of  thèse  accounts,  indeed,  exhibit,  in  ail  their
détails,  the  characteristics  of  a  truthful  statement. We  would  place

1  Etch —  lias  presented,  during  the  présent  year  (1875),  ^  ^^^  period  of
liysterical  ischuria.  On  examining  the  table  (PL  X),  which  represeuts  the
quautity  of  urine  rendered  each  day,  and  the  results  of  112  chemical  analyses
made  by  M.  P.  Regnard,  we  notice  that,  during  three  moiiths,  the  patient  ren-
dered from  fifteen  to  twenty  grammes  of  urine  daily,  containing  from  three  to
four  decigrammes  of  urea.  Some  days,  however,  in  the  midst  of  painful  fits,  the
patient  in  a  few  hours  emitted  up  to  four  litres  of  urine,  containing  27
grammes  of  urea.  During  this  period,  Etch — had  no  vomiting,  by  which  urea
might  hâve  been  evacuated,  as  happened  on  the  occasions  specified  in  the
lecture.  (See  in  référence  to  this  communication  which  we  made  in  con-
junction  with  M.  P.  Regnard  to  the  '  Société  de  Biologie,'  3  Juilliet,  1875).
We  shall  hâve  occasion,  further  on,  to  mention  under  what  circumstances  this
ischuria  suddenly  ceased. (See  Lecture  XII.)


■240  GEAYITY  OF  ORDINAEY  ANUEIA.

in  this  categorj  the  case  reported  by  Dr.  Girdlestoiie  (of  Yarmouth),
and  some  others  besides.

VI.

I  désire  now,  gentlemen^  to  investigate  with  you,  whether  the
contradiction  we  noticed  between  ord'mary  anuria  observed  in  man,
or  exi^erlmental  anuna  produced  in  animais,  on  the  one  hand,  and
hystencal  ischuria,  on  the  other,  be  quite  as  absolute  as  it  seemed  at
iirst  sight.

In  the  first  group  of  cases,  death  is  nearly  certain  to  happen  within
a  brief  space;  in  the  second,  the  gênerai  health  is  kept  up  in  a
tolerably  perfect  state  for  an  indefiuite  period.  The  opposition  is
therefore  extremely  marked.  Is  it  not,  however,  possible,  by  a
careful  scrutiny  of  ail  the  circumstances,  to  arrive  at  the  reason  of
this  discordance  ?  I  am  far  from  being  in  a  position  to  solve  the
problem  in  a  decided  manner.  Hence,  I  must  content  myself  with
stating  an  hypothesis  which,  perhaps,  may  seem  plausible  to  you,
but  which  I  request  you,  in  any  case,  to  take  only  for  what  it  is
worth.

That  animais  should  always  succumb  after  nephrotomy,  or  per-
manent ligature  of  the  ureters,  is  very  natural.  But  we  hâve
a  right  to  ask  what  would  happen  if  an  experiment  could  be
made  in  which,  for  instance,  the  obstruction  of  the  ureters,  instead
of  being  permanent,  was  intermittent  ?  Would  existence  be  pro-
longed  if,  in-  such  conditions,  a  regular  alternation  were  estab-
lished  between  the  rénal  and  the  supplemental  élimination?  In
spite  of  the  interest  which  would  attach  to  the  solution  of  this
problem,  I  put  it  aside  in  order  to  corne  to  the  question  of  human
pathology.

Let  us  then  résume  the  considération  of  calculons  obstruction
of  the  ureters,  to  which  we  referred  above.

The  first  remark  which  suggests  itself  to  the  mind  is  the  follow-
ing  :  In  our  patient,  complète  anuresis  never  lasted  longer  than  a
period  of  ten  days.  Now,  according  to  what  we  hâve  mentioned,
that  is  not  the  extrême  limit  at  which,  in  obstruction  of  the  ureters,
the  symptoms  of  miemic  poisoning  necessarily  appear,  since,  in
Paget's  case,  the  i)atient  preserved  his  gênerai  health  and  functional
integrity  till  the  fourteenth  day.  No  doubt  the  quantity  of  urine
secreted  by  Etch —  on  alternate  days  was  very  minute,  but  small  as
itwas,  it  is  of  real  importance;  for  every  author,  since  Halford,  has


COMPARATIVE  BENIGNITT  OF  HYSTERICAL  ISCHURIA. 241

Tecognised  the  great  relief  and  improvement  whicli  ensues  in  the
ureter-iscliuria  of  calculons  patients,  on  tlie  émission  of  the  smallest
quantity  of  urine.

Again,  we  liave  anotlier  peculiarity  :— calculous  patients  are
suddenly  sei/ed,  surprised  as  it  were  in  the  very  midst  of  good
health,  whilst,  to  judge  from  my  own  observations,  hysterical  ischuria
only  arrives  gradually  at  its  apogée.  Perhaps,  there  is  a  question
of  Itah'it  hère,  of  whicli  it  is  well  to  take  heed.  Far  be  it  from
me,  hovvever,  to  suppose  that  hysterical  patients  enjoy  a  peculiar
immuuity,  a  kind  of  Mithridatism,  with  respect  to  urœmic  in-
toxication. The  résistance  they  présent,  in  the  conditions  we  are
considering,  is  most  probably  due  to  another  cause — the  question
hère  is  rather  oue  of  doses. Let  me  explain.

The  insignificant  quantity  of  urea  eliminated  by  our  patient,  both
in  the  urine  and  the  vomited  matter,  must  hâve  caught  your  attention.
During  a  period  of  twelve  days,  we  hâve  said,  she  only  got  rid  of
five  grammes  of  urea  daily.  This  amount  is,  you  are  aware^  far
below  what  Schérer  found  in  the  case  of  an  insane  man,  who  had
been  fasting  for  three  weeks — from  nine  to  ten  grammes  of  urea  were
the  quantity  found  in  that  instance.^  We  hâve  also  seeu  that  there
was  no  reason  for  believing  that,  in  our  patient,  there  jv^as  any
élimination  of  urea  by  the  perspiration^  or  the  stools.  IN^ow,  in
every  case  of  poisoniug,  and  urœmia  is  probably  no  exception  to
the  rule,  we  must  take  the  dose  as  an  élément  to  be  considered.

Is  it  not,  then,  most  likely  that  this  very  diminution  of  the  amount
of  urea — which  doubtless  corresponded  to  a  corrélative  diminution
of  extractivematters — should  account,  in  our  patient,  for  the  absence
of  every  symptom  of  urœmic  intoxication  ?  We  are  thus  indaced  to
admit  that  in  this  case  of  Etch —  there  was,  so  long  as  the  ischuria

'  It  is  proper  to  meutioii  that  tlie  différence  of  sex  aud  couditiou  may  liave
contributed  somewhat  to  this  disparity  of  resulls.  With  respect  to  sex,  Eeigel
taking  an  average  of  58  analyses,  found  that  35*6  grammes  of  urea  were
yielded  by  a  m  aie  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  whilst  a  female  yielded  only  27.6,
in  the  same  time.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  Etch —  was  in  euforced
inaction,  duriug  the  investigation  ;  and  that  she  seems  to  hâve  been  unable  to
receive  nuich  nutritions  food.  Lehmann,  who  found  53"i9  grammes  of  urea  in
the  urine  rendered  on  the  eighth  day  of  a  strictly  nitrogenous  diet,  was  able
to  reduce  the  amount  to  i5"4i  grammes,  by  living  for  eight  days  on  uon-
azotized  food. Thèse  facts  go  to  support  Professor  Charcot's  views. (S.)

-  According  to  the  researches  of  M.  Favre  there  are  in  the  normal  state
only  o'43  gr.  of  urea  in  10,000  "grammes  of  perspiration. (S.)

16


242  MEGHAKISM  OF  HYSTîlElCAL  ISCHUEIA.

lastecl,  a  decrease  of  activity  in  the  phenomena  of  disassimilation,
manifesting  itself  by  an  absolute  diminution  of  excrementitious
matter.

This  condition,  besides,  is  probably  common  to  a  group  of  hys-
terical  cases.  In  fact,  it  lias  been  long  remarked  that  some  of  tliese
patients  when  subject  to  uncontroUable  vomiting,  bear  up  wonder-
fully  against  the  influence  of  a  restricted  and  insufficient  alimenta-
tion, without  losing  tlieir  plumpness  or  suffering  any  disturbance
in  tlieir  health  worth  noticing.i  It  would  certainly  be  of  interest,
under  such  circumstances,  to  make  comparative  analyses  day  by  day,
of  tlie  blood  and  urine,  in  order  to  ascertain  tlie  amounts  of  urea
and  extractive  matters  présent.  We  might,  possibly,  by  this  means
obtain  the  solution  of  the  problem  which  I  can  only  indicate  hère.

VII.

Wliat  is  the  mechanism  on  which  hysterical  ischuria  dépends  ?
Wliat  is  the  seat  of  the  obstacle  which  hinders  the  sécrétion  of  urine
from  being  effected  ?  The  urethra  and  the  bladder  are  evidently
not  incriminated.  Is  the  obstacle  in  the  ureter,  or  in  the  kidney
itself  ?  No  reason  exists  for  suspecting  the  existence  of  phlegmasia
of  the  rénal  glands  or  the  ureters;  the  composition  of  the  urine,  and
the  other  symptoras,  likewise,  are  opposed  to  such  an  hypothesis.  It  is
more  allowable  to  consider  that  we  hâve  hère  to  deal  with  some  action
of  the  nervous  system.  The  influence  of  the  nervous  System  on  the
sécrétion  of  urine  is  not  a  doubtful  matter.  It  may  sufhce  to  remind
you,  by  way  of  illustration,  that  temporary  suppression  of  urine  may
be  produced  in  dogs  by  the  mère  fact  of  laying  open  the  abdomen,
as»  Isl.  Claude  Bernard  has  observed  ;  and  that,  in  the  opération  for

^  A singular  case  of  this  kind  is  mentioned  by  Sirï.  Watson  ('Lectures  on
tbe  Principles  and  Practice  of  Pliysic,'  t.  i,  art.  i,  p.  704,  London,  1857.
''A  romantic  girl,"  he  says,  "  was  for  some  months  under  my  care  iu  tlie  hos-
pital  witli  that  complaint  (liysterical  hœmatemesis).  She  vomited  such
«juautities  of  davk  blood  (which  did  not  coagulate,  however),  as  I  woukl  not  hâve
believed  if  I  had  not  seenthem.  Day  aficr  day  there  were  potfuls  of  this  stufi',
yefe  she  did  not  losc  flesh,  and  she  menstruatcd  regularly  ;  and  what  was  very
curious,  tho  vomiting  was  always  suspended  during  the  monstrual  pcriod  and
recuvred  again  so  soon  as  the  natural  discliargeccased.  .  .  .  At  last  I  senthcr
away  just  as  bad  as  wlicn  slïcentered  tlic  hospitah"  She  rccovercd  aftcrwards
oagetting  married.  Tlio  alternai  ion  hcrc  may  bc  comparcd  wifh  that  poiuted
out  by  M.  Gharcot. (S.)


MECHANISM  OF  HYSTEETCAL ISOHUETA.  243

vesico-vaginal  listula,  it  also  occasionally  happens  (as  Jobert  de
Lamballe  remarked)  tliat  tlie  urine  may  be  suppressed  for  a  certain:
period.

May  it  not  be  tbat,  in  the  case  of  our  patient^  there  existed  a
spasmodic  oblitération  of  the  ureters  ?  That  thèse  conduits  possess
very  markcd  contractile  properties  is  an  admitted  fact:  thus,  Mulder
observed  them  contracting  energetically  in  a  patient  suffering  from
ecstrophy  of  the  bladder,  and  Valentin  reports  having  notieed  a
very  decided  contraction  supervening  under  the  influence  of  irritation
of  the  nervous  centres.^  This  supposition  appears  to  be  supported
by  analogical  reasouing,  for  in  hysterical  patients  we  frequentlj
find  long-continued  contraction  of  the  tongue,  the  œsophagus,  &c.
Hysterical  ischuria  should,  consequently,  be  paralleled  with  calculous
oblitération  of  the  ureters.  Unfortunately,  there  are  objections  of
some  weight  to  be  alleged  against  this  view.

The  expérimental  researches  of  Herr  Max  Hermann  demonstrate,
you  are  aware,  that  the  proportion  of  urea  to  the  quantity  of  urine
voided^  diminishes  when  there  is  counter-pressure  of  the  ureter.  If
the  pressure  reach  0"o6o  millimètres  of  mercury  no  more  urea  is  found..

Mr.  lloberts  (of  Manchester)^  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  this  state-

^  Donders'  '  Physiologie.'

-  "  Tiie  Pathology  of  Suppression  of  Urine,"  Lu  'The  Lancet,'  iS68,  Maj
23  and  30, — 1870,  JuneiS;  'Mouvement  Médicale/  1871,  pp.  22,32,128»

Sinee  this  Lecture  was  delivered  by  M.  Charcot,  M.  Ch.  Feruet  has  com-
nninicatcd  to  the  Société  Médicale  des  Hôpitaux  a  note  entitled  "  De  l'oligurie
et  de  i'auurie  hystériques  et  des  vomissements  qui  les  accompagnent  "  ('  Unioa
Médicale,'  17  Avril,  1873,  p.  566).  A f ter  having  stated  M.  Charcot's  opinions,  M.
Ch.  Feruet  reports  an  interesting  case,  of  whichthe  following  is  a  summary: —

Marie  L — ,  aged  ipyears,  cliloro-anaîmic,  menstruatedat  sixteen  years.  Her
menstruation  has  always  been  very  irregular.  A  sister  of  the  patient  is  subject
to  fréquent  liysterical  seizures.  In  Jauuary,  1871,  Marie  L — got  a  friglit,
which  threw  her  into  an  hysterical  fît.  In  May,  extrême  debility.  uneasiriess,
pains  in  tlie  limbs  (strengthening  regimen,  bark,  iron,  sea-bathing.)  At  the
end  of  the  month  of  August,  after  a  sea-bath,  Marie  L — ■  was  takeu  for  the
first  tinic  witli  vomiting.  "  She  began  by  throwing  up  the  solid  food,  then,
after  a  few  days,  she  vomited  ail  she  took  .  .  .  Thèse  repeated  vomitings  eoii-
tiuued,  witliout  iutermissiou,  till  the  month  of  October,  then  subsided  for  a  fort-
night,  wlien  thcy  recommeuced  with  their  original  inteusity  and  persisted
without  respite.  ...  In  March,  1873,  she  was  admitted  to  the  Hôtel-Dieui
(under  M.  Moissenet's  charge).

Treatm^nt. — Cold  lotions,  ice  and  Champagne,  blister  with  morphis,
to  the  epigastrium.  The  vomitings  gradually  diminisbed,  and  ouly  appeared
again  at  iutervals  ;  the  patient  left  the  hospital  ou  the  fifteenth  of  April,  the


244  MECHANISM  OF  HYSTERICAL  ISCHUEIA.

inentinits  relation  to  inan.  In  a  case  of  calculons  obstrnction  of  the
ureter,  tliere  escaped  a  small  quantity  of  clear  urine,  containing  only
50  centigrammes  of  urea  per  looo  grammes.  Now,  in  tlie  case
of  our  patient,  tlie  urine  contained  15  grammes  of  urea  per  1000
grammes, — an  amount  approximating  to  the  normal  standard.

Judging  from  this,  gentlemen,  the  obstacle  in  hysterical  ischuria
would  not  lie  in  the  ureters.  Where  then  does  it  réside  ?  Should
we  invoke  an  influence  of  the  nervous  System  analogous  to  that
which  Ludwig  discovered  in  the  case  of  the  salivary  gland  ?  In  the
absence  of  ail  information  on  this  point,  we  are  compelled  to  leave
the  question  in  suspense.

vomitings  having  ceased.  During  the  mouths  of  May  aud  Juue,  rare  vomitings.
They  returncd  iu  July,  after  some  vexations,  and  again  stopped,  owiug  probably
to  the  influence  of  bromideof  potassium.  At  the  end  of  July,  another  emotional
disturbance  set  them  again  in  action  with  their  former  frequeucy  and  persistence.

Marie  L —  was  admitted  a  second  time  to  the  Hotel-Dieu,  on  the  i8th
of  August,  1872.  She  then  came  under  M.  Ch.  Fernet's  observation,  when  she
presented  the  following  symptoms  :  excessive  debility  ;  anœmia  very  niarked,
characterised  especially  by  discoloration  of  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes  ;
intercostal  neuralgia;  ovarian  sensibility  developed  ou  the  left  side,  paiuful  on
pressure  ;  auœsthesia  existing  on  différent  points  of  the  skin;  complète  plantar
ansesthesia  ;  profound  analgesia  of  the  superior  extremities  ;  achromatopsia  of
the  left  eye,  which  cannot  distinguish  yellow  tints ;  vomitings.  The  paiient
allèges  that,  since  their  appearance,  she  only  voided  a  very  minute  quantity  of
urine,  that  she  often  remains  for  scveral  days  without  voiding  eveu  a  drop.

SeptemLer  4. — Milk-diet,  exclus  ively.  Prom  the  4th  to  the  pth  September,
there  was  but  one  émission  of  urine  (about  150  grammes).  From  this  epoch,
M.  Ch.  Eeruet  caused  to  be  exactly  weighed,  1°  the  quantity  of  food  taken,
and  2°  the  amount  of  urine  voided  aud  of  matters  vomited,  aud,  after  record-
ing  thèse  quantities  day  by  day,  he  says:  "The  examination  of  this  table
allows  us  to  establish  a  close  connection  between  the  state  of  the  urinary
function  and  the  vomitings.  In  a  first  period,  comprised  between  the  uintli
and  sixteenth  September,  that  is  to  say,  eight  entire  days,  the  urine  was
completely  suppressed  during  the  first  six  days,  and  its  quantity  was  very
scanty  during  tlie  last  two  ;  now,  iu  this  period,  the  patient  beiug  on  a  niilk
diet,  vomited  a  quantity  of  liquid  matter,  at  first  équivalent  to  one-half  or
three-fourths  of  the  fluids  swallowed  during  the  iîrst  four  days,  then  a  quantity
perceptibly  equal  to  the  quantity  of  milk  taken  during  the  last  four  days.

"In  a  second  period,  comprising  nine  days  (from the  i8th  to  the  26th  Sept.),
'the  quantity  of  vomited  matters  secms  to  hâve  diminishcd  ;  but  this  is  not  exactly
the  case,  as  we  see  on  comparing  it  with  the  quantity  of  food  taken.  The  diet
having  been  changed,  and  beiug  now  composcd  of  cold  soup  {bouillon),  of  raw
becf,  aud  of  lemonade,  the  vomited  matter  still  represents  almost  the  whole  of
liic  ingesta. Now,  during  this  time,  there  was  a  little  urine  the  first  two  days


ANOTHER  CASE  OF  HYSTEEIOAL  ISCHURIA.  245

(15  grammes  and  250  gr.),  but  its  émission  was  suspended  during  the  seven
days  following.

"Fiualiy,  iu  a  tliird  period,  lastiug  four  days,  (frora  the  27tli  to  3oth  Sept.),
we  see  the  urinary  functioii  re-established,  and  the  amount  of  urine  reaching
the  normal  standard  (1000  grammes,  500  gr.,  iioo  gr.  the  last  two  days)  ;  at
the  same  time,  the  vomitings  diminished  on  the  second  day  and  subsided  on  the
third  and  fourth."

Desirous  of  ascertaining  whether,  as  indicated  by  M.  Charcot,  the  vomiting
might  not  be  attributable  to  the  supplemental  élimination  of  urea  by  the  stomach,
M.  Ch.  Feruet  requested  M.  E.  Hardy  to  analyse  the  urine  and  the  vomited
matter.  From  a  summarised  table  of  thèse  analyses,  it  appears  that  "  the  urea  was
alway s  présent  to  auoteworthy  amount  (from  o','^5  gr.,  to  l'S)  grammes)  in  the
vomited  matter  ;  also,  when  the  sécrétion  of  urine  was  suppressed,  the  quantity
of  urea  contained  in  the  vomited  matter  was  gradually  increased  during  that
space  of  time.  From  the  I7th  to  the  27th  Sept.,  the  quantity  rose  from  0.62
to  1.08  grammes.  Finally,  from  the  day  when  the  urine  issuing  from  the
bladder  reached  what  might  be  considered  a  normal  amount,  the  urea
diminished  in  the  gastric  sécrétion,  disappearing  doubtless  at  the  same  time
as  the  vomiting."

A  moral  iuiluence — the  administration  of  the  pills  termed  "fulminantes"
{mica  panis)  — caused  a  sudden  change  in  the  condition  of  Marie  L — ,  dating
from  the  27th  September.  The  vomiting  ceased,  the  sécrétion  of  urine  resumed
its  course.  Finally,  the  patient  left  the  hospital,  in  very  fair  health,  in  the
course  of  November.  M.  Ch.  Fernet,  ia  concluding  his  note,  points  out  the
iiumerous  analogies  between  this  case  and  that  pf  M.  Charcot's  patient.

We  may  mention  also  a  tbesis  of  M.  Secouet,  '  Des  vomissements  urémiques
chez  les  femmes  hystériques,' (Paris,  avril,  1873),  which  contains  the  report  of  a
case  that,  though  imperfect  iu  some  respects,  should  apparently  be  classed  in
the  category  of  hysterical  ischuria. (B.)


LECTURE  X.

HYSTERICAL  HEMIANiSSTHESIA.

tSuMMARY. — Ilemimmsthesia  and  ovarian  hyper œstliesia  in,  hysteria.
Fréquent  association  qf  thèse  two  symjptoms.  Frequency  of
hemianasthcsia  in  hysterïcal 2^at'ients ;  iisvarieties,  complète  or
incomplète.  Char  acier  s  of  hysterical  hemianœsthesia.  Ischœmia
and  the  "  Convulsïonnaires"  Lésions  of  spécial  sensés.  Achro-
matopsia.  Relations  hetween  hemianœsthesia,  ovarian  hyper-
iBsthesia,  paresis  and  contracture.  Variation  of  sympio?ns  in
hysteria.  Diagnostic  value  of  hysterical  hemian(esthesia  ;
necessary  restrictions.

Hemianœsthesia  depending  on  certain  encephalic  lésions.
Its  analogies  vnth  hysterical  hemianœsthesia.  Cases  in  tohick
encephalic  hemianœsthesia  resembles  hysterical  hemianœsthesia.
Seat  of  the  encephalic  lésions  capable  of  prodncing  hemian-
œsthesia. Fiinctions  of  the  optic  thalaraus;  British  theory  ;
French  theory.  Criticism.  Germon  nomenclature  qf  différent
parts  of  the  encephalon.  Its  advantages  as  regards  the  circum-
scription  of  lésions.  Cases  of  hemianœsthesia  recorded  hy  Tiirck;
spécial  seat  of  the  encephalic  lésions  in  thèse  cases.  Observa-
tion of  M.  Magnan. Altération  of  spécial  sensés.

Gentlemen, — There  are  two  points  in  the  history  of  liysteria,
ïipoîi  which  I  wish  to  lay  particular  empliasis,  in  this  and  tlie  fol-
îowiiig  lectures.  Thèse  are,  on  the  one  hand,  hysterical  hemianœs-
thesia, and  on  the  other,  ovarian  hyper œsthesia.  If  I  set  tlicse  two
phenomena  side  by  side,  it  is  because  they  are  generally  found  as-
sociated  together  in  the  same  patients.  With  référence  to  ovarian
hyperœsthesia,  I  hope  to  render  évident  to  you  the  infhionce  of
preiênre  on  the  ovarian  région — an  influence  formerly  acknowlcdged,
but  afterwards denicd — ovcr the production  of  tlic  phenomena


OVAlilAN  HYSTEltlA.  247

of  the  hysterical  seizure.  I  shali  sliow  you  that  this  opération
détermines,  eitlier  the  premouitory  symptoms  merely  of  the  hys-
terical fit,  or,  in  a  certain  number  of  cases,  the  complète  seizure.
You  will  thus  be  enabled  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  the  assertion
formerly  made  by  Professor  Scliutzenberger,  witli  respect  to  this  phe-
nomenon,  in  spite  of  the  contradictions  offered  by  certain  observers.
I  shall  likewise  show  you  a  method  which  I  hâve  discovered,  or
rather  re-discovered,  whicli,  in  the  case  of  some  patients,  enables  us
to  arrest  the  course  of  even  the  most  intense  hysterical  fit, — I  refer
to  the  syste malle  compression  of  the  ovarian  région.  M.  Briquet
dénies  that  this  compression  bas  any  real  effect.  That  is  an  opinion
which  I  cannot  share,  and  this  leads  me  to  make  a  gênerai  remark  in
référence  to  M.  Briquet's  book.i  The  work  is  an  excellent  one,  the
resuit  of  minute  observation  and  patient  industry,  but  it  has  perhaps
one  weak  side  ;  ail  that  relates  to  the  ovary  and  the  utérus  is  treated
in  a  spirit  which  seeuis  very  singular  in  a  physician.  It  exhibits  a
kind  of  prudery,  an  unaccountable  sentimentality.  It  appears  as
though,  in  référence  to  thèse  questions,  the  author's  mind  were
always  preoccupied  by  one  dominant  idea  :  "  In  attempting  to  at-
tribute  everything  to  the  ovary  and  utérus,"  he  says  for  instance,
somewhere,  ''  hysteria  is  made  a  disorder  of  lubricity,  a  shameful
afî'ection,  which  is  calculated  to  render  hysterical  patients  objects  of
loathing  and  pity/^

Eeally,  gentlemen,  that  is  not  the  question.  Por  my  own  part,  I
am  far  from  believing  that  lubricity  is  always  at  work  in  hysteria  ;
I  am  even  convinced  of  the  contrary.  Nor  am  I  eitlier  a  strict
partisan  of  the  old  doctrine  which  taught  that  the  source  of  ail
hysteria  résides  in  the  génital  organs  ;  but,  with  Schutzenberger,  I
believe  it  to  be  absolutely  demonstrated  that,  in  a  spécial  form  of
hysteria, — which  I  shall  term,  if  you  please,  the  ovarian  form, —
the  ovary  does  play  an  important  part."  Pive  patients  whom  I
shall  présent  to  you  in  succession  are,  if  I  mistake  not,  manifest
examples  of  this  form  of  hysteria  ;  you  can  verify  the  accuracy  of
the  description  I  am  about  to  give,  by  personal  examination.

'  Briquet,  '  Traité  clinique  et  thérapeutique  de  l'hystérie/  Paris,  1859.

"  Grisolle  ('Traité  de  Pathologie  luterue,'  9e  édit.,  t.  ii,  p.  844)  mentions
the  case  of  a  girl,  aged  22,  who  had  neither  vagiua  nor  utérus,  aud  yet  was
subject  to  iiiost  violent  fits  of  hysteria.  Ou  autopsy,  MM.  Chassaignac  and
Prévost  could  discover  no  trace  of  a  utérus,  but  found,  in  the  ovariau  régions,
two  bodies  which  were  apparently  the  ovaries.  The  patient  had,  every  month,
exhibited  ail  tlie  symptoms  of  pre-catamenial  congestion. (S.)


248  HYSTERICAL  HEMIAN^STHESIA.

I.

You  are  ail  acquainted  witli  the  Jiemiantestkesla  qf  hi/sterical
patients.  There  woulcl  be  some  ingratitude  in  not  knowiug  the
nature  of  this  symptom,  for  it  lias  been  discovered  by  purely  Ereuch
investigations.  Piorry,  Macario,  and  Gendrin^  hâve  each  of  them,.
in  his  turn,  described  it  and  dwelt  upon  its  characteristics.  Not  long
after  them,  Szokalsky  made  it  known  in  Germany  ;  but  nothing
remained  for  him  to  do  save  to  confirm  by  observations^  which  are,,
bowever,  very  meritorious^  the  facts  that  had  been  already  declared
by  our  countrymen.

In  order  to  keep  witliin  bounds,  I  shall  enter  upon  a  discussion
of  complète  Jieinianccstliesia  only,  sucli  as  we  find  in  intense  cases.
This  will  be  suiïicient  for  my  présent  purpose.  Even  in  the  degree
mentioned,  it  is  a  fréquent  syinptom,  since  according  to  M.  Briquet,  it
obtains  in  93  cases  out  of  400.  Considered  with  respect  to  position,
we  find,  according  to  the  same  author,  that  in  70  cases  the  left
side  is  affected;  and  in  20,  the  right.

You  know  what  happens  uuder  such  circumstances.  Sapposing
that  the  two  halves  of  the  body  are  vertically  divided  by  an  antero-
posterior  plane,  one  entire  side — face,  neck,  body,  &c. — will  hâve
lost  the  sensé  of  feeling  ;  and  though  this  loss  of  sensibility  very
often  affects  the  superficial parts  merely, — the  external  tégument, — yet
it  sometimes  also  invades  the  deeper  régions,  affecting  the  muscles,
bones,  and  articulations.

Hijstencal  hemianasthesia  shows  itself,  as  you  are  aware,  under
two  principal  aspects;  it  is  complète  or  incomplète.  Ânalgesia,
with  or  without  insensibility  to  beat  or  cold,  or  thermo-anœsthesia  is
one  of  the  commonest  varieties  of  this  species.  The  distinct  manner
in  which  the  ansesthetic  parts  are  separated  from  the  healthy  parts
is  also  an  important  characteristic  of  hysterical  hemianœsthesia.  On
the  head,  face,  neck  and  body  the  démarcation  is  often  perfect  and
very  closely  corresponds  with  the  médian  line.  Another  symptom,
well  deserving  of  mention,  is  coustituted  by  the  comparative  pallor
and  coldness  of  the  auœsthctic  side.  Thèse  phenomeua,  conjoined
with  a  more  or  less  permanent  ischéemia,  hâve  been  many  times
observcd.  l'^xamples  of  them  hâve  been  givcn  by  Brown-Srquard
and  Liégeois.i  j^  difliculty  in  inducing  bleeding  by  pricking  the
anœsthetic  parts  with  a  pin  may,  in  intense  cases,  be  a  characteristic
of  the  ischîL'mia  in  question.

'  Liégeois,  'Mémoires  de  lu  Sociétc  de  Biologie,'  3e  série,  l,  i,  p.  274.


HYSTERICAL  HEMIAN^STHESIA  : ISCHURI;\.  249^

I  noticed  tliis  peculiarity  on  a  former  occasion.  The  matter  came
under  my  observation  in  this  way  :  on  leeches  being  applied  to  a
patient  affected  by  hysterical  hemianfesthesia^  I  saw  that  their  bites
yielded  very  little  blood  on  the  auœsthetic  side^  whilst  on  the  healthy
side  it  flowed  as  usual.  Grisolle,  wlio,  as  you  are  aware,  was  a  very
wise  and  exact  observer,  liad  noted  the  same  phenomenon.

This  ischfcmia  which,  indeed,  is  rather  rare  when  so  intense,  may
furnish  an  explanation  of  certain  reputedly  miraculous  occurrences.
Thus,  it  is  stated,  that,  in  the  épidémie  of  Saint  Medard,  the  sword-
blows  given  to  the  "  Convulsionnaires"  did  not  cause  bleeding.  The
reality  of  the  occurrence  cannot  be  rejected  without  examination.
If  it  be  true  that  many  of  thèse  "  Convulsionnaires  "  were  guilty  of
trickery,  we  are  nevertheless  compelled  to  acknowledge,  after  an
attentive  study  of  the  question,  that  most  of  the  phenomeua  which
they  presented,  and  of  which  history  has  given  us  a  naive  descrip-
tioni  were  not  entirely  simulated,  but  merely  amplified  and  exag-
gerated.  It  has  been  critically  demonstrated  that  hysteria  carried
to  an  extrême,  was  almost  alvvays  the  active  agent  in  thèse  cases  ;
and  in  order  that  a  wound,  such  as  that  made  by  a  sword,  should
not,  when  inflicted  on  thèse  anœsthetic  women,  hâve  caused  bleed-
ing, it  was  only  necessary,  as  you  may  infer  from  what  précèdes,
that  the  instrument  should  not  hâve  entered  too  deeply.

There  are  other  characters  also  of  hysterical  hemiausesthesia  which
are  deserving  of  ail  our  attention,  from  a  clinicai  as  well  as  from  a
theoretical  point  of  view.  The  mucous  ■membranes  are  affected,  on
one  side  of  the  body,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  external  tégument.
The  organs  of  the  sensés  themselves  are  affected  to  some  extent  in
the  anœsthetic  side.  Tade  may  hâve  vanished  in  the  correspond-
ing  half  of  the  tongue^  from  tip  to  base.  The  sensé  of  smell  is
less  acute.  Vision  is  weakened  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  and
if  amblyopia  occupy  the  left  side,  we  may  meet  with  a  most  note-
worthy  phenomenon,  to  which  M.  Galezowski  has  called  attention,
and  which  he  désignâtes  by  the  name  of  acliromatopsia.  However,
we  shall  return  to  this  topic.

Hysterical  hemianœstJiesia  does  not  seem  to  affect  the  viscera.
Thus,  to  mention  the  ovary  merely,  we  find  hyperaîsthesia  and  not
ansesthesia  présent.  That  organ  may  be  very  painful  on  pressure,  when

'  Carré  de  Moutgerori,  '  La  Vérité  des  Miracles  opérés  à  l'intercession  d&
M.  de  Paris  et  autres  Appelants,'  &c.,  1737.


250 HEMIAN.ESTHESIA  AND  OVAKIAN  HYPEE.ESTHESIA.

tlie  abdominal  wall  is  perfectly  insensible.  TsTow,  gentlemen,  there
exists  a  most  remarkable  relation  between  tlie  position  of  tlie  hemian-
sesthesia  and  tliat  et"  the  ovarian  liypersesthesia.  If  tlie  former  occupy
theleft  side,  the  hemiauœsthesia  occupies  the  left  side,  and  vice  verset.
When  ovarian  hypera^sthesia  is  double,  it  is  the  rulethat  the  anfusthesia
shall  présent  itself  in  a  generahzed  form,  and  it  consequently  occupies
nearly  the  whole,  or  quite  the  whole  of  the  body.

Not  only  does  such  a  relationship  exist  between  the  seat  of  the
liemianaîsthesia  and  that  of  the  ovarian  hypersesthesia,  but  a  similar  re-
lationship exists  with  regard  to  the  paresis,  or  to  the  contracture  of
the  limbs.  Thus,  when  the  paresis  or  the  contracture  supervenes^  it
always  shows  itself  on  the  same  side  with  the  hemianœsthesia.

The  hemianaîsthesia,  as  described,  is,  in  the  clinical  history  of
hysteria,  a  syniptom  of  the  greater  importance,  inasmuch  as  it  is
well-nigh  permanent.  The  only  variations  which  it  exhibits,  are  dépen-
dent upon  degree,  on  the  intensity  of  the  phenomena  which  consti-
tute  it,  and  occasionally,  w^e  should  also  mention,  on  the  fluctuation
of  some  of  thèse  phenomena.

Achromatopsia  belongs  to  the  number  :  it  was  distinctly  and  re-
peatedly  observed  in  oue  of  our  patients,  a  few  weeks  ago,  from
whom  it  bas  now  completely  disappeared.

It  is  uecessary  to  bear  in  miud  that  hemiansesthesia  is  a  sympton
which  requires  to  be  sought  for,  as  M.  Lasègue  very  judiciously  re-
marks.i  There  are,  in  fact,  many  patients  who  are  quite  surprised
■when  its  existence  is  revealed  to  them.

II.

I  propose  now  to  investigate  to  what  extent  hemianœsthesia,  such
as  we  hâve  described  it,  is  a  symptom  proper  to  hysteria.  In  rcality,
it  is  very  rare  for  it  to  be  reproduced,  with  the  gênerai  grouping  of
ail  its  characteristics,  by  any  other  disease.  Its  well-established  ex-
istence is,  therefore,  a  valuable  indication,  one  which  will  often  reveal
the  real  nature  of  many  symptoms,  which  would  otherwise  remain
doubtful.  That  is  a  point  on  which  M.  Briquet  was  right  to  lay
great  stress.  In  order  to  illustratc  the  importance  of  this  fact,  lie
relates  the  case  of  a  woman  who,  after  a  violent  émotion,  fell  rapidly
into  a  more  or  less  profound  coma,  witli  or  without  prcmonitory
convulsions  {i.e.  the  comatosc  form  of  hysteria),  and  who  was  seen,
on  recovering  her  sensés,  to  be  stricken  with  more  or  less  com])lete
' '  Archives  Générales  de  Médecine,'  1864,  t.  i,  p.  385.


HEMIANyESTHESIA  of  encephalio  origin.  251

liemiplegia.  Hère  we  hâve  a  group  of  symptoms  which  it  is  not
very  rare  to  meet  with  in  practice,  and,  on  such  an  occurrence,  it  niay
happen  tliat  the  physician  will  feel  himself  placed  in  a  very  em-
barrassing  position.  Now,  the  présence  of  hemiauœsthesia,  arrayed
in  ail  its  characteristics  which  would  most  probably  be  found  on
such  occasion,  might  then,  according  to  M.  Briquet,  indicate  the
true  patli  to  the  observer.  This  assertion  is  perfectly  accurate  ;  I
hâve  no  fault  to  fiud  with  it,  except  as  regards  one  point.

If  it  be  true  that  hemiansesthesia  is  an  almost  spécifie  symptom,
inasmuch  as  it  is  not  found  with  the  same  characteristics  in  the
immense  majority  of  cases  of  material  lésions  of  the  encephalon
(hœmorrhage,  softening,  tumours),  we  cannot  admit  this  to  be  an
absolute  characteristic.  It  is,  above  ail,  inaccurate  to  say  that  t/ie
liemianœsthesia,  developed  tmder  the  influence  of  enccplialïc  lésions,
always  differsfrom  hysterical  hemianœsthesia,  hy  tliefact  that^  in  the
former  case,  the  s¥in  of  the  face  does  not  participate  in  the  insensi-
bility,  or  that,  when  it  exists,  it  never  occiqnes  the  savie  side  as  the
insenslbility  of  the  mémhers.  This  is  an  inaccuracy  which  lias  been
reproduced,  almost  in  the  same  terms,  in  the  otherwise  very  interest-
ing  thesis  of  M.  Lébreton.^

I  feel  some  répugnance  in  again  attacking  the  remarkable  work
of  M.  Briquet,  but  the  more  estimable  the  work — and  it  is  justly
esteemed, — the  more  serions  become  any  inaccuracies  which  may
hâve  slipped  into  it.  This  relîection  will,  I  hope,  justify  me  in
criticising  it.

Gentlemen,  there  are  cases,  which,  though  indeed  exceptional,  are

thoroughly  authentic,  where  certain  circumscribed  cérébral  lésions  (en

foyer),  may  cause  the  production  of  hemianjesthesia  with  ail  the  signs

that  characterise  it  in  hysteria — or  very  nearly  ail. Allow  me  to

discuss  this  subject,  in  some  détail.

The  classic  doctrine,  at  least  amongst  us, — a  doctrine  which,
besides,  appeals  to  the  data  of  clinical  observation,  and  to  those  fur-
nished  by  experiments  on  animais, — teaches  that  circumscribed  céré-
bral lésions  {en foyer),  which  so  profoundly  aflect  the  power  of  motion,
especially  when  they  occupy  the  région  of  the  optic  thalamus  and
corpus  striaium,  produce  but  little  efFect  as  regards  sensibility.
Erom  this  point  of  view,  gentlemen,  the  resuit  is  said  to  be  always

1  Lebreton,  'Des  differeutes  variétés  de  la  paraljsie  hystérique,'  TLcse  de
Paris,  1868.


252  ENCEPHALIO  LESIONS.

the  same,  whether  tlie  lésions  occupy  specially  the  corpus  striatum,
tlie  optic  thalamus,  or  the  rampart  of  the  amygdalœ  (claustrum).

At  first  glance,  when  in  présence  of  the  sudden  developed  lésions
which  détermine  an  apoplectic  fit,  and  which  afFect  any  one  of  the
points  just  enumerated,  the  symptom  which  strikes  the  observer  is
a  hemiplegia,  more  marked  in  the  upper  than  in  the  lower  ex-
tremity,  and  accompanied  by  flaccidity.

In  the  face,  the  paralysis  usually  affects  the  buccinator  and  the
orbicularis  oris  ;  the  tongue  also  is  mostly  protuded  to  the  para-
lysed  side.  In  addition  to  motor-paralysis  cornes  paralysis  of  the
vaso-motor  nerves,  manifested  by  an  élévation  of  température  in  the
paralysed  limb.  Occasionally,  this  vaso-motor  paralysis  makes  i^s
appearance  from  the  outset.

As  to  sensibility,  it  is  not  modified  in  a  perceptible  manner,  or
least  not  in  a  durahle  manner.  The  spécial  sensés  présent  no  serions
altérations,  exceptsome  complication  supervenes,  as  where  embolism  of
tlie  arierïa  centralis  retinœ  occurs  (in  cases  of  brain-softening  consé-
cutive on  the  migration  of  a  valvular  végétation),  or  where  compres-
sion, by  contiguity,  of  the  tractus  opticus  happens  (on  occurrence  of  a
somewhat  voluminous  hœmorrhagic  lésion) .  Such  is  a  summary  of  the
symptoms  whicli  are  met  with  in  the  immense  majority  of  cases  of
haemorrhage  and  softening  affecting  the  points  of  the  encephalon  we
hâve  meutioned.

Undoubtedly,  gentlemen,  that  is  what  takes  place,  in  the  great
majority  of  cases.  But,  the  chapter  of  exceptions  accompanies  the
rule.  There  are  cases,  and  I  hâve  myself  observed  several  of  this
kind,  in  which  sensibility  is  affected  in  a  prédominant  manner,  and
in  which  ansesthesia  persists,  even  after  the  recovery  of  motion.

Such  altérations  of  sensibility  may  présent  themselves  with  the
foUowing  characters.  The  ansesthesia  alïects  one  entire  half  of  the
body  and  stops  just  at  the  médian  line.  Tlie  correspouding  half
of  the  face,  both  as  regards  the  skin  and  the  mucous  mem-
branes, shows  insensibility,  exactly  as  in  hysterical  hemiansesthesia.
Tlien  also  analgesia  and  thermo-aïuesthesia  may  be  observed,
with  conservation  of  tactual  sensibihty,  as  MM.  Landois  and
Mosler-  hâve  ascertained.  Einally,  there  are  also  cases,  though  of
more  rare  occurrence  and  as  y  et  imperfectly  described,  but  haviug
still  their  own  importance,  which  render  it  probable  that,  under

^  Hirscb,  '  Klinisclie  fragments,'  I.  Abth.,  p.  207,  Kœuigsberg,  1857.
-  Landois  et  Moslcr,  '  Berliiier  Klin.  Wochcns./  1868,  p.  401.


BEITISH  THEOEY.  253

sucli  circumstances,  altérations  of  the  spécial  sensés  may  exist
on  the  side  opposite  to  the  encephalic  lésion,  or,  in  other  words,  on
the  same  side  with  the  hemiansesthesia.

The  physiciaus  of  the  last  century  hâve  already  remarked  thèse
exceptional  phenomena.  Borsieri,  among  others,  relates  the  history
of  a  patient  who,  three  months  before,  had  been  stricken  with
apoplexy,  and  in  whom  aneesthesia  still  persisted^  although  the
power  of  movement  had  returned.  He  quotes  some  other  cases  of
the  same  kind  from  différent  authors.^

Analogous  cases  bave  been  mentioned  by  Abercrombie^  Andral,
and,  in  later  days,  by  Hirsch,  Leubuscher,  Broadbent,  Hughlings-
Jackson/  and  especially  by  Tiirck.  The  latter  alone  lias  been  able
to  furnish  décisive  data  in  référence  to  the  position  occupied  by
the  encephalic  lésions  in  snch  cases.

When  the  hemianœsthesia  présents  itself  with  thèse  characters,  the
optic  thalamus  is  almost  always  affected  in  a  prédominant,  if  not
in  an  exclusive  manner.  For  my  own  part,  I  hâve  seen  hemianses-
thesia  superadded  to  hemiplegia,  in  many  patients  affected  with
cérébral  hsemorrhage,  and,  in  such  cases,  on  post-mortem  examina-
tion  I  always  found  the  lésion  of  the  optic  thalamus,  the  existence
of  which  during  life  I  had  ventured  to  announce.

From  what  précèdes,  gentlemen,  should  we  conclude  that  tlie
lésion  of  the  optic  thalamus  is  the  real  organic  cause  of  the  hemian  -
festhesia  observed  in  ail  thèse  cases  ?  That  is  a  question  deserving  of
discussion.  I  am  thus  led  to  speak  of  the  physiological  theory,
wbicli  may  be  called  the  British  theory,  because  it  was,  I  believe,
first  published  and  maintained  by  Messrs.  Todd  and  Carpenter,  two
British  authors.  According  to  this  theory,  the  ojii'ic  tJialamus  is  the
centre  of  perception  of  tactual  impressions  ;  it  would,  in  some  degree,
correspond  to  the  posterior  cornua  of  the  grey  substance  of  the  spinal
cord.  The  corpus  striatnm  would  be  the  terminal  of  the  viotor
tractus  and  connected  with  the  exécution  of  voluntary  movements  ;
it  would  be  analogue  of  the  anterior  cornua  of  the  cord.

This  theory,  of  which  Schrœder  van  der  Kolk"'  has  shown  himself  the
avowed  partisan,  is,  if  we  might  use  the  word,  the  antipodes  of  the

^  Borsieri,  '  Inst.  pract./  vol.  iii,  p.  76.

"  H.  Jackson,  '  Note  on  the  Eunctions  of  the  Optic  Thalamus.'  lu  '  Lon-
(lon  Hospital  Reports,'  1866,  t.  iii,  p.  373.

2  Schrœder  van  der  Kolk,  '  Pathol.  und  Thérapie  der  Geistenkrankheiten.'
Brauuschweig,  1863,  p.  20,


254  FEENCH  THEOEY.

Prencli  theory,  which  you  will  find  set  fortli  in  a  very  complète
manner  in  M.  Vulpian's  Lectures.  According  to  the  latter  view,  tlie
centre  on  which  sensitive  impressions  are  transformed  into  sensations
would  not  be  in  the  brain  proper,  because  an  animal,  from  which  the
brain,  including  the  optic  thalamus  and  the  corpus  striatum,  has
been  removed,  continues  to  see,  to  hear,  and  to  feel  pain,  &c.  The
centre  of  sensitive  impressions  would  therefore  réside  lower  down,  in
the  2)rotuberantia  and  ]ierhaps  also  in  the  crura  cerebri.

Under  this  hypothesis,  the  foUowing  is  the  manner  in  which  its
advocates  regard,  in  the  pathological  domain,  tliose  authentic  facts
which  show  a  lésion  of  the  optic  thalamus  coinciding  with  the
decrease  or  abolition  of  sensibility  on  the  side  of  the  body  stricken
with  hemiplegia.  They  say,  and  their  allégation  is  perfectly  correct,
that,  in  such  cases,  we  hâve  frequently  to  do  with  récent  lésions,  sucli
as  mtra-encephalic  hœmorrhage,  or  ramollissement,  or  tumours —
lésions  by  which  the  optic  thalamus  is  extremely  distended,  and
which  consequently,  may  hâve  the  effect  of  determining  the  com-
pression of  the  adjacent  parts, — of  the  crura  cerebri  for  instance.  It
is,  on  the  other  hand,  well  established  that,  in  a  number  of  cases,
the  optic  thalamus  may  be  injured,  even  gravely  and  throughout
a  large  portion  of  its  extent,  without  being  followed  by  any  spécial
disorder  in  the  transmission  of  sensitive  impressions.

To  the  last  argument,  the  Britisli  authors,  M.  Broadbent  ^  among
othors,  oppose  the  plea  that  the  optic  thalamus,  the  presumed  centre
of  sensitive  impressions,  should  doubtless  be  assimilated  to  the  grey
axis  of  the  spinal  cord — the  latter,  it  is  known,  continues  to  trans-
mit thèse  impressions  even  when  it  has  suffered  the  most  serions
dérangement,  if  only  a  small  remuant  of  grey  matter  persist,  capable
of  Connecting  its  lower  with  its  upper  extremities.  I  oonfess  that
the  comparison  seems  to  me  far-fctched,  especially  from  the  mo-
ment it  is  laid  down  as  a  principle  that  the  optic  thalamus  should
be  considered  a  centre;  for,  so  far  as  regards  the  transmission  of
sfiflsitive  impressions,  the  grey  axis  of  the  cord  is  manifestly  merely
a  oonductor.

However  this  may  be,  gentlemen,  such  is  the  statc  of  the  ques-
tion. In  my  opinion,  the  disi)uted  points  cannot  be  definitely
solved,  exccpt  by  means  of  careful  clinical  observation,  verified  by
stodious  anatomical  investigations,  the  chicf  aiin  of  which  should  be
to  establish,  with  great  précision,  the  seat  of  the  enccphalic  lésions,
'  Broatlbcnt,  '  Médical  Society,'  Loudon,  1865,  and  '  Mcd.-Cliir.  Kevicw.'


EEQUISITE CONDITIONS.  255

to  wliicli  the  symptoms  recorded  during  life  miglit  be  correlated.
And  the  circumstances  of  the  case  should  be  such  that  the  in-
fluence of  compression,  or  any  other  phenomenon,  acting  by  con-
tiguity,  would  be  completely  eliminated.  Kow,  gentlemen,  in  the
présent  state  of  the  science,  the  cases  which  include  ail  thèse  con-
ditions are  extremely  rare,  so  far,  at  least,  as  my  knowledge  goes.
We  may,  however,  mention  as  approximating  to  this  idéal,  the  cases
which  were  presented  by  L.  Tiirck  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of
Vienna,^  to  which  I  hâve  already  alluded. They  were  four  in  number.

In  the  instances  recorded  by  L.  Tiirck,  there  had  been,  gentle-
men, either  old  hremorrhagic  foci,  then  represented  by  ochreous
cicatrices,  or  ramollissement  foci  arrived  at  the  stage  of  cellular
infiltration.  In  ail  the  cases,  the  hemiplegia  resulting  from  the
présence  of  foci  had  disappeared  long  before  death,  but  the  hemian-
sesthesia  had  persifeted  until  the  fatal  end.  The  portions  of  the
encephalon  aff'ected  by  the  altération  are  carefully  mapped  out.

The  German  nomenclature  of  the  différent  parts  of  the  encephalon,
however  forbiddiug  it  seems  to  us,  on  account  of  its  multiplicity
of  strange  terms,  yet  présents  in  my  opinion,  an  incontestable  advan-
tage,  that,  namely,  of  supplying  a  very  complète  topographical  map,  if
I  may  make  use  of  the  comparison,  where  the  smallest  hamlet  receives
a  name.  The  French  nomenclature  has,  no  doubt,  the  advantage
of  tending  to  simplification,  but  this  is  sometimes  to  the  détriment  of
absolute  exactness  ;  it  is  often  incomplète..  INTow,  with  respect  to
the  question  which  occupies  us,  there  is  no  détail,  however  minute,
which  ought  to  be  neglected.  We  must,  at  ail  hazards,  take  heed
of  the  slightest  détails,  for  we  are  quite  ignorant,  in  the  actual  state
of  the  science  of  the  brain-physiology,  wliether  some  little  point,
which  has  no  name  in  the  Trench  nomenclature,  may  uot  be  a
position  of  primary  importance.

Availing  ourselves,  therefore,  of  the  nomenclature  in  use*  beyond
the  Ehine,  let  us  endeavour  to  become  familiar  MÏtli  the  topo-
graphy,  in  order  that  we  may  accurately  recognise  the  seat  of  the
lésions,  in  the  observations  recorded  by  L.  Tûrck.

I  place  under  your  observation,  a  frontal  section  taken  across
the  cérébral  hémisphère?,  immediately  behind  the  corpora  mammil-
laria  (Eig.  i8).  You  recognise  on  this  section,  just  exterior  to  the
middle ventricles, the nucleus eaudatus (or intra-ventricular

^  '  Sitznngsber.  dcr  Kais.  Akademie  der  Wissenscbaftcu  zu  Wien,'  1859.
V.  infra,  the  analyses  of  tliese  cases.


256


TOPOGEAPHY  OF  EXCEPHALIC  LESIONS.


nucleus  of  the  corpus  striatum),  whichj  in  this  région,  is
merely  representcd  by  a  very  small  portion  of  grey  matter,
— beneath  and  interior  to  it,  the  ojotic  thalamus,  hère  largely
<leveloped  ;  external  to  this  h'es  the  capsula  interna,  formed  princi-
pally  by  bands  of  white  substance  which  are  simply  the  prolonga-
tions of  the  lower  stage  of  the  crura  cerebri  ;  thèse  proceed  to  ex-
pand  in  the  centrum  ovale  to  assist  in  constituting  the  corona
radiata  ; — external  to  this  is  the  extra -ventricular  omœleus  of  the
corpus  striatum,  in  which  you  distinguish  tliree  secondary  nuclei
denominated  by  the  numbers  1,1,  3;  the  third,  or  outermost,  is
sometimes  designated  by  the  term  putamen.  Still  more  external  is  a
thin  lamina  of  white  matter,  the  capsula  externa,  and  finally,  a  small
band  of  grey  substance,  the  rampart  (or  claustrum)  {Vormaner).^


TiG.  iS. — Transversal  section  of  brain, — a,  optic  thalamus  ; — b,  corpus  striatum,
Icnticular  nucleus; — c,  corpus  striatum,  caudate  nucleus  ;—/,  indication
of  the  radiating  corona  of  lleil  ; — 2,  2',  2",  apopleetic  foci  (Obs.  ii,  in
'  Tiirck's  Memoir,'  v.  hifrà,  pp.  258-9)  ; — 3,  vestige  of  an  apopleetic  focus
(Obs.  iii,  in  'Tiirck's  Memoir ').

Now,  gentlemen,  in  the  cases  recorded  by  Ilerr  Tiirck,  the  lésions
had  invadcd  alike  the  superior  and  external  portion  of  the  optic
thalamus,  the  third  nucleus  of  the  extra-ventricular  portion  of  the

^  The  vormauer  of  Germân  anatomists,  the  avant-mur,  rempart,  or  noyau
ruhané  of  the  Trench,  is  a  band  of  grey  matter  which,  arising  from  the
superior  portion  of  the  amygdala,  curvcs  round  towards  the  white  substance  of
the  convolutiou  bounding  the  fissure  of  Sylvius. (S.)


OBSERVATIONS  OF  TURCK.  257

corpus  striatum,  the  superior  portion  of  the  capsula  interna,  the
corresponding  région  of  the  radiating  corona,  and  the  adjacent  white
substance  of  the  posterior  lobe.

We  hâve  consequently  complex  lésions  to  deal  with  hère,  but  they,
at  ail  events_,  allow  the  région  which  requires  investigation,  to  be
circumscribed.  Purther  researches,  when  sufficiently  numerous,
will  enable  us  soon  to  ascertain  the  fundamental  lésion,  to  which
the  existence  of  the  hemiantesthesia  should  be  attributed.

Some  other  cases  of  hemiansesthesia,  of  cérébral  origin,  whicK
hâve  been  published  siuce  those  of  Tiirck  appeared,  testify  to  lésions
occupyiiig  the  same  circumscribed  région  of  the  encephalon  ;  they
make,  however,  no  important  additions  to  the  results  obtained  by
that  observer.  Such,  amongst  others,  is  the  case  recorded  by  Dr.
Hughlings-Jackson,^ — hère  again  the  altération  was  not  confined
to  the  thalamus  ;  it  extended  to  the  extra-ventricular  nucleus  of  the
corpus  striatum,  and  consequently  the  capsula  interna  must  hâve
been  affected  in  its  posterior  portion.  It  was  the  same  in  the  case
described  by  M.  Luys^,  the  médian  centre  of  the  optic  thalamus
was  affected,  but  the  altération  had  invaded  the  corpus  striatum,
(probably  the  extra-ventricular  nucleus).

To  recapitulate,  we  may  conclude  I  believe  from  what  précèdes
that,  in  the  cérébral  hémisphères,  there  exists  a  complex  région,
lésion  of  which  détermines  hemiauaesthesia  ;  the  limits  of  this
région  are  approximately  known,  but,  at  présent,  localisation
cannot  be  carried  any  further,  and  no  one  lias  a  right  to  say  that
in  the  région  in  question,  the  optic  thalamus  should  be  inculpated.
rather  than  the  capsula  interna,  the  centrum  ovale,  or  the  third
nucleus  of  the  corpus  striatum.

Up  to  the  period  in  which  we  write,  ansesthesia  of  gênerai  sensi-
bility  alone  appears  to  hâve  been  observed,  as  consécutive  on  an
altération  of  the  cérébral  hémisphères,  so  that  ohiiuhïlatlon  of  the
spécial  sensés  would  remain  as  a  distinctive  characteristic  of  hysterical
hemianajsthesia.  But,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  organs  of
thèse  sensés  hâve  been  attentively  explored  in  the  cases  of  liemi-

'  The  disease  was  uot  strictiy  limitée!  to  the  tluilanius  .  .  .  Outwards  the
disease  extended  through  the  small  tongue  of  corpus  striatum  wiiich  curves
round  tlie  outside  of  the  thalamus,  and  thence  up  to  the  grey  matter  of  the
convolutious  of  the  Sylviau  fissure.  ('  London  Hospital  Reports,'  loc  cil.,
t.  iii,p.  376.)

-  Luys,  '  Iconographie  photographique  des  centres  nerveux,'  p.  16.

17


258  DESIDERATA.

ansesthesia  of  cérébral  origin,  hitlierto  publislied  ;  tlie  records  are
sileut  with  respect  to  it.'

^  At  the  period  when  this  Lecture  was  delivered,  we  were  only  acquainted
with  the  observations  of  L.  Tiïrck  by  the  brief  mention  made  of  them  iu
Rosenthal's  '  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System.'  Since  then,  thanks
to  the  courtesy  of  M.  Magnan,  we  hâve  been  enabled  to  procure  the  complète
translation  of  Turck's  meraoir  ('Ueberdie  Beziechung  gewisses  Krankheit-
sherde  des  grossen  Gehirnes  zur  Anasthesie,'  Aus  dem  xxxvi  Band,  S.  191,
des  Jahrganges,  1859,  des  Sitzungsberichte  der  Mathem.  Naturw.  Classe  der
Kais.  Akaderaie  der  Wissenchaften).  We  thiuk  it  useful  to  give  the  substance
of  this  work.  After  recalliug  the  fact  that,  usually,  in  hemiplegia  caused  by  the
formation  of  apoplectic  foci  in  the  brain  (hsemorrhage  and  ramollissment),
the  sensibility  re-appears  very  promptly  as  a  gênerai  rule,  the  author  relates
four  cases  where,  on  the  contrary,  the  anœsthesia  persisted  in  a  higli  degree  of
intensity.

Case  i. — Fr.  Amerso,  set.  18.  In  August,  1858,  left  hemiplegia,  speedy
re-appearance  of  motor  power.  i2th  Nov. — The  movements  of  the  left
upper  extremity  are  rapid  and  energetic;  those  of  the  corresponding  inferior
extremity  exhibit  slight  paresis.  Very  intense  anresthesia  exists  on  the  left
side  (limbs,  body,  &c.).  Facial  sensibility  is  diminished,  on  this  side  only.  For-
mications  from  time  to  time  through  ail  the  left  side.  Died,  i8th  March,
1859.

Âulopsy. — At  the  base  of  the  corona  radiata  of  the  riglit  hémisphère,  imme-
diately  outside  of  the  tail  of  the  corpus  striatum,  appears  a  lacuna  of  the  size
of  a  pea  {cellular  infiliratmi) .  The  anterior  wall  of  this  lacuna  is  two  Unes
behiud  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  optic  thalamus.  Two  or  tbree  Unes  far-
ther  off,  another  lacuna  is  seen,  of  smaller  dimensions,  which  extends  to  four
or  fîve  Unes  behind  the  posterior  extremity  of  the  thalamus,  so  that  as  the  usual
leugth  of  the  optic  thalamus  is  eighteen  Unes,  the  portion  of  the  corona  radiata
which  lies  immcdiately  adjacent  to  the  tail  of  the  corpus  striatum  was
perforated,  fore  and  aft,  by  the  old  focus  of  ramollissement  for  au  extent  of
eleven  Unes.  A  similar  focus  iuvolves  the  external  portion  of  the  third  part  of
the  lenticular  nucleus.  It  commences  ncarly  two  Unes  behind  the  anterior
border  of  the  optic  thalamus  and  ends  at  about  four  Unes  from  the  posterior
extremity  of  the  optic  thalamus.  In  its  course  of  one  inch  long,  it  occupied
the'greater  lengtli  of  the  internai  side  of  the  third  part  of  the  lenticular
nucleus,  and  part  of  the  capsula  interna.  In  the  posterior  half  of  their
course,  then  two  foci  were  not  farther  part,  in  one  place,  than  the  distance  of
one  Une.  It  follows,  that  in  this  place,  almost  ail  the  corona  was  separatcd
from  the  internai  capsule  aud  the  optic  thalamus.  Spinal  cord. — Collection  of
granular  bodics  somewhat  abundaut  in  the  left  latéral  coluinu,  rare  in  the
anterior  columu.

Case  2,  S.  J — ,  œt.  55. — Apoplectic  attack,  foUowed  by  heiui])lcgia,  Oct.  25,
i8rti.  Two  months  after,  the  paralysis  of  the  extremitics  disappcared  to  such  an
extent  that  the  patient  could  cxtend  the  arms,  grasp  objccts  with  some  strength,
and  walk without  hclp,  but  lamcly. Ocl.,  1855. — Anœsthesia  of  the left


DESIDERATA.  259

Tor  my  own  part,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  tliat  tlie  participation
of  tlie  spécial  sensés  will  be  one  day  recognised,  when  care  shall

extremities  (face  aud  body  also  beuunibed,  but  in  a  less  degree)  persisting
since  tlie  attack.  Power  of  motion  recovered,  but  the  limbs  of  the  left  side
are  more  feeble  tlian  tliose  of  the  right. Died,  Oct.  31,  1858.

Autopsij. — Old  flat  cicatrix,  about  five  lines  in  breadth  and  eight  in  length,
situated  at  the  superior  and  external  part  of  the  right  optic  thalamus.  The
cicatrix  begius  four  aud  a  half  lines  behiud  the  left  auterior  extremity  of  the
optic  thalamus,  and  ends  eight  lines  farther  off.  Lying  parallel  to  this  cica-
trix is  another,  an  iuch  long,  occupying  the  third  part  of  the  lenticular  nucleus  ;
it  begius  two  lines  behiud  the  auterior  extremity  of  the  thalamus,  and  ends
nearly  three  lines  in  front  of  its  posterior  extremity  (figs.  18,  2,  aud  2').  There
was,  besides,  a  lacuna  in  the  right  inferior  lobe  (flgs.  18,  2"),  another  in  the
anterior  lobe  of  the  same  side,  two  as  big  as  a  pin's  head  in  the  auterior  part
of  the  right  optic  thalamus  ;  two  in  the  pons  Varolii,  and  finally,  one  in  the
right  and  superior  portion  of  the  left  hémisphère  of  the  cerebellum.  No
secoudary  degeueratiou  of  the  cord  was  observed.

Case  3.— Fr.  Hasvelka,  œt.  22.  November  ist,  1852.  Apoplectic
attack,  hemipiegia  on  the  right,  with  intense  anœsthesia  of  the  correspouding
Lalf  of  the  body.  At  the  end  of  five  weeks,  diminution  of  motor-paralysis.
leb.  3,  1S53. — Motion  quite  free,  on  the  right  side.  The  eutire  right  half  of
the  body  is  the  seat  of  very  marked  anœsthesia  (scalp,  ear,  face,  and  body).
The  ansesthesia  is  equally  noticeable  in  the  eye-lid,  uostril,  left  half  of  the
lips,  and  uot  only  ou  the  outer  but  also  on  the  inner  side.  The  right  conjunc-
tiva  is  less  seusitive  than  the  left.  When  the  right  nostril  is  tickled,  the
sensation  is  less  felt  than  in  the  left.  Same  différence  between  the  right
nieatus  auditorius,  and  the  left.  In  the  right  half  of  the  mouth  (tongue,
palate,  gums,  cheek),  the  sensation  of  beat  is  less  vivid  than  in  the  left.  At  the
lip  of  the  tongue  on  the  right,  and  over  the  space  of  au  inch  in  length,  the
patient  does  not  feel  the  taste  of  sait.  Same  resuit  as  regards  the  right  half
of  the  dorsum  and  root  of  the  tongue.  On  the  right  also,  the  sensé  of  smell
is  weakened,  and  vision  is  less  distinct.  When  the  pupils  hâve  been  made  to
contract  by  bringiug  a  light  close  to  the  eyes,  the  right  pupil  afterwards  dilates
more  than  the  left,  the  sensé  of  hearingis  normal  on  both  sides.  Fcbruary  26. —
The  ana;sthesia  has  diminished  ;  the  movements  are  more  energetic.  Mardi  15. —
Temporary  improvement  of  vision;  no  différence  between  the  two  eyes.
April  3. — The  anaesthesia  still  exists  over  the  right  half  of  the  body  (on  touch,
and  pinching). Dcbility  of  vision  augmeuted  on  the  right. Died  April  4.

Auiopsij. — In  the  white  substance  of  the  left  superior  lobe,  is  found  a  focus
of  ramollissement  two  iuclies  in  length  and  one  in  breadth.  It  dipped  into  the
inferior  couvolutions  of  the  operculum,  and  attained  the  surface  of  the  brain.
Its  posterior  extremity  corresponded  to  that  of  the  optic  thalamus  ;  its  anterior
part  greatly  exceeded  that  of  the  thalamus.  In  its  broadest  portion,  the  focus
was  only  separated  by  three  lines  from  the  tail  of  the  corpus  striatum.  The
couvolutions  lyiug  beueath,  were  to  the  extent  of  a  florin,  ycllow,  softeued,
aud  depressed. (Fig. 18,  3.) Optic  thalamus  healthy,  perhaps  a  little  frag-


260  DESIDERATA.

have  beeii  taken  to  seek  for  it.  My  opinion  is  founded  on  tlie  fol-
lowiug  basis.

There  exists  in  the  clinical  history  of  the  organic  diseases  of  the
nervons  centres  a  symptomatic  sign  but  little  knovvn,  and  little  re-
marked  as  yet,  which  I  shall  liave  occasion  some  day  to  discuss  in
détail  before  you.  This  is  a  kind  of  rhythmical  convulsion  whicli
occupies  an  entire  half  of  the  body,  including  the  face,  (in  many
instances  at  least),  and  which  assumes  soraetimes  the  appearance  of
the  clonic  jerking  of  chorea,  sometimes  that  of  the  tremor  of  para-
lysis  agitans.  This  hemilateral  trembling  occasionally  présents  itself
as  a  primary  affection  ;  at  other  times,  it  supervenes  consecutively
on  a  hemiplegia,  whose  invasion  was  sudden.  In  the  latter  case,  it
commences  to  appear  at  the  epoch  when  motor  paralysis  begins  to
improve. The  lésion  consists in  the  présence  either  of  a  focus  of-

meut  of  the  third  part  of  the  leuiicular  uucleus  has  been  touchcd.  The  focua
liad  destroycd  a  soinewhat  considérable  leiigih  of  white  substance,  and  the  two
external  thirds  of  the  foot  of  the  coroua  radiata.  Spinal  Cord. — Slight  agglo-
mération of  nuclei  in  the  most  posterior  part  of  the  latéral  column.

Case  IV. — Anne  B — ,  au  aged  woman,  died  22nd  February.  For  many
years  she  had  right  hemiplegia,  with  intense  ansesthesia  of  the  sanie  side.  lu
addition,  sensorial  ansesthesia  (sight,  smell,  taste)  of  the  same  side,  and-'
formications.

Autopsy. — Old  apoplcctic  focus,  pigmented  brown,  situai  ed  along  the  outer
part  of  the  left  optic  thalamus,  and  quite  close  to  the  tail  of  the  corpus  stria-
tum.  It  commences  six  lines  behiud  the  auterior  extremity  of  the  thalamus
and  extends  two  or  three  lines  in  front  of  its  posterior  extremity.  Anteriorly,
it  is  half  a  line,  and  posi.eriorly  two  or  three  lines  bcneath  the  superior
surface  of  the  thalamus,  which  is  considerably  depressed  in  this  direction.  Aa
inch  long  and  four  or  Cve  lines  deep,  the  focus  touches  a  large  extent  of  the
posterior  part  of  the  radiation  of  the  crus  cerebri,  a  part  of  the  internai
capsule,  aud,  perhaps,  a  part  also  of  the  lenticular  nucleus.  Spinal  Cord. —
Accumulation  of  granular  bodies  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  latéral
column.

To  sum  up  :  the  foci  were  seated  at  the  external  periphery  of  the  optic  thalami,
they  extended,  from  before  backwards,  in  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  cerebrum,
without,  in  most  cases,  rcaching  the  cxtrcmitics  of  the  thalamus.  They  werc
t'rom  eiglit  lines  to  an  inch  in  length,  rcaching  evcn  two  inches  into  the  white
substance.  The  régions  affected  were  :  the  superior  and  external  part  of  the
thalamus  ;  the  third  part  of  the  lenticular  nucleus  ;  the  {josterior  part  of  the
internai  capsule,  compriscd  between  the  thalamus  and  the  lenticular  uucleus  ;
the  corresponding  portion  of  the  white  substance  of  the  superior  lobe  opposed
to  it.  Several  of  thèse  régions  werc  always  affected  togethcr.  The  libres
which  procced  from  the  white  substance  of  the  hémisphère  into  the  external
part  of  the  optic  thalamus  werc  constuutly  affected.


HEMIANiESTHESIA  AND  CEREBEAL  LESION.  261

liœmorrliage  or  of  ramollissement,  or  in  tliat  of  a  tumour.  In  ail
cases  of  this  kind  which  I  hâve  hitherto  observed,  and  in  the
analogous  facts  collectcd  frora  varions  antliors,  the  lésion  iu  ques-
tion occupied  the  posterior  région  of  the  optic  thalamus  and  the
adjacent  parts  of  the  cérébral  hémisphère  exterior  to  it.

No\r,  hemianccsthesia  is  a  tolerably  common — but  still  not  a
constant — accompaniment  of  this  group  of  symptoms,  and  it
occupies  the  same  side  of  the  body  as  the  tremor.^

It  existed  in  a  high  degree  of  development,  in  a  maie  patient
whose  history  M.  Magnan  lias  recently  communicated  to  the  Société
de  Biolofjh  ;  in  his  case,  the  form  of  tremor  of  which  I  hâve  tried
to  give  you  a  summary  notion,  showed  itself  in  a  most  marked
manner.  Everything  tends  to  show  (I  cannot  be  more  positive
as  there  w\is  no  autopsy)  that  the  encephalic  lésion  was,  in  this
man,  of  the  same  sort,  with  respect  to  position,  as  that  which  I
found  in  my  patient.  Now^  in  this  case,  M.  Magnan  ascertained,
in  the  clearest  manner,  that  tactual  sensibility  was  not  alone  involved  ;
the  spécial  sensés  were  themselves  afTected,  as  they  are  in  hysterical
hemianœsthesia.  On  the  side  stricken  with  hemianœsthesia,  the  eye
was  afFected  with  amblyopia,  the  sensé  of  smell  was  lost,  and
taste  was  completely  abolished.

Heuce,  it  becomes  probable,  if  I  am  not  mistakeu,  that  complète
hemianagsthesia,  with  dérangements  of  the  spécial  sensés, — aud  con-
sequently,  such  as  is  presented  in  hysteria, — may,  in  certain  cases,
be  produced  by  a  circumscribed  lésion  of  the  cérébral  hémisphères.-

'  See  a  Lecture  of  M.  Charcot  (in  '  Le  Progrès  Médical,'  23  Janvier,  and
6  Tevrier,  1875),  on  'Hemicborée  post-hémiplégique.' (Note  to  snd  édition.)

"  Tlie  views  expressed  iutliis  Lecture,  relative  to  liemianœsthesiaof  cérébral
origin,  hâve  received  further  clinical  confirmation  from  the  incidents  of  a  case,
-which  we  noted,  in  M.  Charcot's  wards.  ('Progrès  Médical,'  1S73,  p.  244),
and  from  the  experiments  on  animais  conducted  by  M.  Veyssière  ('Recherches
cliniques  et  expérimentales  sur  l'hemiancsthesie  de  cause  cérébrale,'  Paris,
1874).  This  work  also  contains.  some  interesting  clinical  notes.  (Note  to  the
2nd  édition.)


LECTUEE  XI.

OVAEIAN  HYPER^STHESIA.

SuMMARY. — Local  liynteria  of  British  authors.  Ovarian  pain  ;  Us
frequency. Kistorical  remaries. Opinion  of  M.  Brifptet.

Characters  of  ovarian  hyper œsthesia.  lis  exact  position.
Aura  hysterica  :  first  node  ;  glohus  liystericus,  or  second  node  ;
cephalic  phenomena  or  third  node.  The  starting -point  of  the
first  node  is  in  the  ovary. Lésions  of  the  ovary  ;  desiderata.

Relations  between  ovarian  hyper œsthesia  and  the  other  acci-
dents qf  local  hysteria.

Ovarian  compression,  lis  infl^tence  on  the  attachs.  Modus
operandi.  Ovarian  compression  as  a  means  of  arresting  orpre-
venting  hysterical  convulsions  hioivn  informer  times.  Its  appli-.
cation  in  hysterical  épidémies.  Ejndemic  of  St.  Médard — the
remedy  termed  "  secours.'"  Analogies  which  exist  letween  the
arrest  of  hysterical  comndsions  ly  compression  of  the  ovary,  and
the  arrest  of  the  aura  einleptica  hy  ligature  of  a  limh.

Conclusion,  from  a  therapeutical  point  of  vieiv.  Clinical
observations.

Gentlemen, — By  the  somewhat  picturesque  and  certainly  very
practical  term  local  hysteria,  British  authors  are  accustomed  to
designate  most  of  the  accidents  which  persist,  in  a  more  or  less
permanent  manner,  in  the  intervais  between  the  convulsive  fits  of
hysterical  patients,  and  which  aluiost  always  enable  us,  on  account
of  the  characteristics  they  présent,  to  recognise  the  great  neurosis
for  what  it  really  is,  even  m  the  absence  of  convulsions.

nemlanasthesia,  jiaralysis,  contracture,  fixed pah fui  points  occu-
pying  différent  parts  of  the  body  (rachialgia,  pleuralgia,  clavus
hystericus),  according  to  this  définition,  come  under  the  head  of
local  hysteria.


OVAEIAN  PAIN.  263

I.

Among  tliese  symptoms  there  is  one  which,  on  account  of  tlie
prédominant  part  it,  in  my  opinion,  plays  in  the  clinical  liistory  of
certain  forms  of  hysteria,  seems  to  me  to  deserve  your  entire  atten-
tion. I  refer  to  the  pain  which  is  felt  in  one  side  of  the  abdomen,
especially  in  the  left,  but  which  may  occupy  both  sides,  at  the
extrême  limits  of  the  liypogastnc  région.  This  is  the  ovarian  pain,
concerning  which  I  said  a  few  words  in  my  last  lecture  ;  but  I  do  not
wish  to  make  unreserved  use  of  this  term  before  justifying,  the  hypo-
thesis  which  it  imphcitly  adopts — and  this,  I  trust,  will  be  an  easy  task.

This  pain  I  shall  enable  you  to  touch,  as  it  were,  with  the  finger,
in  a  few  moments,  and  to  observe  ail  its  characteristics,  by  intro-
ducing  to  your  notice  five  patients  who  constitute  almost  the  whole
of  the  hysterical  cases,  actually  existing  among  the  i6o  patients
who  occupy  the  department  devoted  in  this  hospital  to  women
affected  by  incurable  convulsive  diseases,  and  reputedly  exempt
from  mental  aliénation.

II.

You  already  perceive,  from  this  simple  indication,  that  ihac  pain
is  a  fréquent  symptom  in  hysteria  ;  this  is  a  fact  long  recognized
by-the  majority  of  observers.

Let  it  sufîice,  as  regards  former  times,  to  mention  the  names  of
Lorry  and  Pujol,  who,  most  particularly,  noticed  the  existence  of
hypogastric  and  abdominal  pains,  in  hysterical  cases.

It  is  singular,  after  this  statement,  to  find  that  Brodie  who  was
perhaps  the  first  to  recognize  ail  the  clinical  interest  which  attaches
to  local  hysteria,  does  not  treat  of  abdominal  pain  in  a  spécial  manner^.

It  seems  as  of  traditional  custom  that  the  practical  spirit  of
English  surgeons  should  be  attracted  by  the  clinical  difficulties
which  the  local  symptoms  of  hysteria  preseiit.  Mr.  Skey  who,  in
this  respect,  may  be  regarded  as  continuing  Brodie's  work,  in  a  very
interesting  séries  of  lectures  on  local  or  surgical  forms  of  hysteria,^
as  he  calls  them,  expatiates  on  the  iliac  pain,  or  pain  of  the  ovarian
région,  which,  in  his  opinion,  is  very  common,  and  which,  accord-
ing  to  his  view,  but  contrary  to  what  really  occurs,  is  chiefly  met
with  in  the  right  side.

^  Brodie,  '  Lecture  illustrative  of  certain  nervous  affections,'  1S37.
"  E.  C.  Skey,  'Hysteria. — Local  or  Surgical  forms  of  Hysteria,'  six  lec-
tures, London,  1870.


264  OVARIAN  PAIN.

You  are  aware  that,  in  Prance,  Schutzenberger,  Piorry,  and
Négrier,  hâve  laid  spécial  stress  on  this  symptom,  which  they  un-
liesitatingly  attribute  to  the  abnormal  sensibility  of  the  ovary.

In  Germany,  Eomberg  bas  followed  Schutzenlierger  on  this  topic  ;
however,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  as  regards  our  contemporaries,
most  of  the  German  authors  pass  in  almost  complète  silence  ovcr  ail
tbat  relates  to  this  hypogastric  pain.  This  is  the  case,  for  instance,
with  respect  to  Hasse  and  Valentiner.  Hence,  it  is  clear  that  this
symptom,  after  having  enjoyed  a  certain  degree  of  favour,  doubtless
on  account  of  the  theoretical  considérations  connected  with  it,  bas
■gone  somewhat  ont  of  fashion,  at  présent.

Symptoms,  also,  as  you  sce,  hâve  their  destiny  :  Ilahent  sua
fata.  I  should  not  be  surprised  if  the  otherwise  very  legiti-
mate  influence  of  M.  Briquet's  work  counted  for  a  good  deal  in
the  production  of  this  resuit.  It  now  becomes  our  duty  to  examine
how  far  we  ought  to  foUow  this  eminent  author  in  the  path  which  he
has  marked  out  for  us.

III.

I  am  far  from  saying  that  M.  Briquet  did  not  recognise  the  very
fréquent  existence  of  fixed  abdominal  pains  in  hysterical  cases.  He
has  even  coined  a  new  word  to  designate  thèse  pains  calialgia  (from
KoiXia,  the  belly),  and  a  word,  even  though  it  be  merely  a  word,  is
still  something  that  arrests  the  mind.  In  200,  out  of  430  cases
of  hysteria  M.  Briquet  met  with  cœlialgia.  However,  I  should  point
out  to  you  that,  under  this  name,  he  includes  alike  the  pains  of  the
upper  part  of  the  abdomen  and  those  of  the  iliac  and  hypogastric
régions,  but  the  latter  are  confessedly  the  most  common.

At  first  glance,  therefore,  it  seems  as  if  the  différence  between
M.  Briquet  and  his  predecessors  were  merely  an  apparent  one.
Now,  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  hère  is  the  chasm  which  divides
them.

Whilst  MM.  Schutzenberger,  Piorry,  and  Négrier  place  in  the
ovary  the  chief  seat — the  focus,  so  to  speak — of  the  iliac  pain,  M.
Briquet  only  admits  the  existence  of  a  simple  muscular  pain,  an
kystcncal  mi/odj/nia.  According  to  his  view:  1°,  pain  of  the  pyra-
midalis  or  of  the  lower  extremity  of  the  rectus  abdominis  has  been
mistaken  for  utérine  2oain  ;  2°,  pain  of  the  lower  extremity  of  the
obliquus  abdominis  takes  the  place  of  the  so-called  ovarïan  jjain.
Such  is  the  thesis  of  M.  Briquet.


OVAETAN  PAIN.  265

IV.

Let  us  investigate  togetlicr,  gentlemen,  the  basis  on  wliich  tliis
opinion  rests.  In  order  to  arrive  at  our  object,  I  am  about  to  refer
to  tbe  observations  which  I  bave  been  enabled  to  coUect  upon  a  large
scale  in  this  hospital.  I  shall,  therefore,  proceed  to  describe  this
pain,  sucli  as  I  bave  learned  to  know  it,

i^.  Sometimes  it  is  an  acute,  nay,  a  very  acute  pain;  tlie  patients
cannot  tolerate  tbe  sligbtest  toucb,  nor  suffer  tbe  weight  of  the  bed
clothes,  &c.;  tliey  sbrink  suddenly,  and  as  if  instinctively,  from  tbe
finger  of  tbe  investigator.  Add  to  tbis  a  certain  degree  of  tumé-
faction of  tlie  abdomen,  and  you  bave  tbe  clinical  appearance  of
false peritonitis — tbe  spurious peritoiùtls  of  Britisb  autbors.  It  is
manifest  tbat  tbe  muscles  and  tlie  skin  itself  sbare  in  tbe  suffering
hère.  The  pain  tben  occupies  a  considérable  exteut  of  tbe  surface  of
the  body,  and,  consequently,  is  not  easily  localised.  However,  Todd^
remarks,  and  I  bave  frequently  verified  tbe  accuracy  of  bis  state-
ment,  that  in  certain  cases,  a  circumscribed  cutaneous  hypertesthesia
occupies  a  rounded  dermal  space,  of  from  two  to  tbree  incbes  in
diameter.  Tbis  hypersesthesia  has  its  seat  partly  in  tbe  bypogastrium,
partly  in  the  iliac  fossa,  and  corresponds,  according  to  tbis  author,
to  the  région  of  the  ovary.

2°.  In  otber  cases,  the  pain  does  not  spontaneously  show  itself;
it  re([uires  pressure  to  discover  it,  and,  under  such  circumstances,  we
note  the  following  phenomena  :  a,  there  is  gênerai  anœstbesia  of  the
shin;  h,  the  muscles,  if  relaxed,  may  be  pinched  and  raised  without
causing  pain  ;  c,  tbis  preliminary  exploration  proves  that  tbe  seat  of
tbe  pain  is  neither  in  the  skin  nor  in  tbe  muscles.  It  is  conse-
quently  necessary  to  push  the  investigation  further,  and  by  ]:)ene-
trating,  as  it  were,  into  the  abdominal  cavity  by  pressure  of  the
fingers  we  reach  tbe  real  focus  of  the  pain.

This  opération  allows  us  to  make  certain  that  the  seat  of  the  pain
in  question  is  usuaDy  fixed,  that  it  is  always  nearly  the  same;  and
indeed,  it  is  not  uucommon  to  find  tliat  patients  point  it  out,  with
perfect  unanimity.  Prom  a  line  uniting  the  anterior  superior  spines
of  the  ilia,  let  fall  the  perpendicular  lines  which  form  the  latéral
limits  of  the  epigastrium,  and  at  the  intersection  of  thèse  vertical
and  horizontal  lines  will  be  found  the  focus  of  pain,  as  indicated  by

'  Todd,  'Clinical  Lectures  ou  tlie  Nervous  System.'  Lecture  xx,  p.  448,
London,  1856.


366  AUEA  HYSTERICA  : NODES.

the  patient,  and  wliicli  becomes  further  manifest  on  pressure  being
applied  by  the  finger.

Deep  exploration  of  this  région  allows  us  readily  to  recognise
part  of  the  superior  inlet  which  describes  an  inwardly  concave
curve;  this  is  our  guiding  point.  Towards  the  middle  part  of  this
rigid  crest,  the  hand  will  usually  meet  with  an  ovoid  body,  elongated
transversely,  which,  when  pressed  against  the  bony  wall,  shps  under
the  fingers.  When  this  body  is  swollen,  as  often  happens,  it  may
attain  the  size  of  an  olive,  or  of  a  small  egg,  but  with  a  little  ex-
périence its  présence  can  be  easily  ascertained,  even  when  it  is  of
much  smaller  dimensions.

It  is  at  this,  the  period  of  exploration,  that  the  pain  is  chiefly
determined  ;  it  then  manifests  itself  with  characters  which  may  be
called  speàfic.  This  is  no  common  pain  we  hâve  to  do  with,  but  a
complex  sensation  which  is  accompanied  by  ail,  or  some,  of  the
phenomena  of  the  aura  hystenca  ;  such  as  they  spontaneously  show
themselves  before  an  attack.  When  the  sensation  is  thus  determined,
the  patients  recognise  it  as  familiar, — as  having  felt  it  scores  of
times.

In  short,  gentlemen,  we  hâve  succeeded  in  circumscribing  the
initial  focus  of  the  aura,  and,  by  the  same  act,  we  hâve  provoked
irradiations  in  the  direction  of  the  epigastrium  {i\\Qjirst  node  of  the
aura,  to  use  M.  Piorry^s  terminology)  sometimes  complicated  with
nausea  and  vomiting  ;  then,  if  the  pressure  be  continued,  there  soon
supervene  palpitations  of  the  heart,  with  extrême  frequency  of  the
puise,  and  fînally,  the  sensation  of  the  globus  hystericus  is  developed
in  the  throat  {second  node).

At  this  point  terminâtes  the  description,  given  by  authors,  of  the
ascending  irradiations  which  constitute  the  aura  hysterica.  But,
judging  from  my  own  observations,  the  enumeration  of  sym])toms,
if  thus  limited,  would  be  incom])lete  ;  for  an  attentive  analysis  allows
us  to  ascertain  the  présence,  in  most  cases,  of  certain  cephalic  dis-
orders  which  are  evidently  the  continuation  of  the  same  séries  of
phenomena.  Such  are,  for  instance  (in  case  of  compression  of  the
left  ovary) ,  the  intense  sibilant  sounds  in  the  left  ear,  which  the
patients  com])arc  to  the  strident  noise  produced  by  the  whistle  of  a
railway  engine — a  sensation  as  of  blows  from  a  hammer  falling  on
the  left  tem])oral  région, — and,  lastly,  a  marked  obnubilation  of  sight
in  the  left  eye.

The  same  phenomena  show  themselves  in  the  corres])ondiiig  parts


AUKA  HYSTEEICA  : CEPHALIC  STMPTOMS.  267

of  tlie  right  side,  when  pressure  is  applied  on  exploration  of  tlie  right
ovary.

The  analysis  cannot  be  carried  further,  for  when  matters  hâve
arrived  at  this  point,  consciousness  becomes  profoundly  affected,  and.
in  their  confusion,  the  patients  no  longer  retain  the  faculty  of  de-
scribing  \vhat  they  feel.  Besides,  the  convulsive  fit  soon  supervenes,
if  the  experiment  be  persisted  with.

Leaving  out  of  the  question  the  phenomena  which  relate  to  the
last  phase  of  the  aura  hysterica  (the  cephaUc  si/mj^toriis) ,  I  hâve  just
been  describing  to  you,  gentlemen,  the  whole  séries  of  phenomena
obtained  in  the  experiment  of  Schutzenberger,  and  we  are  thus  led
to  acknowledge,  with  this  eminent  observer,  that  compression  of
the  ovarian  région,  simply  reproduces  artificially  the  séries  of  sym-
ptoms  that  spontaneously  présent  themselves  in  the  natural  course
of  the  disorder.

I  am  well  aware  that,  according  to  M.  Briquet,  the  aura
hysterica  starts,  in  the  immense  majority  of  cases,  from  the
epigastric  node  ;  neither  do  I  forget  that,  in  support  of  his  asser-
tion, this  author  quotes  au  imposing  array  of  figures.  But  we
must  not  always  bow  to  statistics,  and  it  may  be  fairly  asked
whether  M.  Briquet,  who  lias  shown  himself  somewhat  severe
upon  the  "  ovarists,"  lias  not  in  his  turn  allowed  himself  to  be
carried  away  by  some  préoccupation  which  made  him  neglect  to
inscribe  the  initial  iliac  pain  in  the  séries  of  phenomena  of  the
aura.

If  I  am  to  judge  from  my  own  observations,  this  iliac  pain  always
précèdes  in  point  of  time,  however  small  the  interval  may  be,  the
epigastric  pain,  in  the  development  of  the  aura,  and  consequently
it  constitutes  the  first  link  of  the  chain.

V.

It  remains  for  me,  gentlemen,  to  establish  that  this  particular
point,  where  the  iliac  pain  of  hysterical  patients  résides,  corresponds
exactly  with  the  position  of  the  ovary,  then  I  shall  hâve  rendered
it  highly  probably,  if  not  absolutely  demonstrated,  that  the  painful
oval  body,  whence  the  irradiatious  of  spontaneous  or  provoked
hysteria  start,  is  really  the  ovary  itself.

Generally,  I  believe,  an  imperfect  idea  is  formed  of  the  précise
position  which  the  ovary  occupies  duriiiglife.  When,  the  abdomen
being  laid  open,  and  the intestines  raised,  we  find  in  the  pelvis


26S  POSITION  OF  OVAEY.

behind  the  utérus,  in  front  of  the  rectum,  the  appendages  of  the
utérus  flabby,  shrunken,  and  as  it  were  shrivelled,  it  is  plain  that  we
are  in  présence  of  appearances  not  at  ail  answering  to  vital  con-
ditions. It  is  évident  that,  after  deatli,  the  arterial  network  of  the
Tallopian  tubes  and  of  the  ovaries  (the  vascular  wealtli  and  erectile
properties  of  which  hâve  been  so  well  illustrated  by  my  frieud  Pro-
fessor  Rouget,  of  Montpelier),  has  long  ceased  to  fulfil  its  func-
iions.  Again,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  laying  open  of  the
abdomen  most  certaiuly  alters  the  true  relations  of  the  appendages
of  the  utérus  to  other  parts.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  in
frozen  corpses,i  the  ovaries  occupy  a  more  elevated  position, — one
which  recalls  to  some  extent  their  admitted  position  in  the  new-born
infant.  In  the  diagram  before  you,  which  is  copied  from  the  ^  Atlas'  of
M.  Legendre,  you  see  a  horizontal  trans verse  section  of  the  body  of  a
woman,  aged  20  ;  its  plane  passes  three  quarters  of  an  inch  (2  centi-
mètres) above  the  pubis,  and  divides  one  of  the  ovaries  in  twain,
Avhilst  the  other,  lying  superior  to  it,  escapes.  From  this  it  appears
that,  in  the  adult  female,  the  ovary  should  be  situated  on  a  level
with  or  even  a  little  above  the  superior  inlet,  (or  brim  of  the  pelvis)
jutting  over  into  the  iliac  fossa  along  with  the  Fallopian  tube.  This
resuit  accords  in  every  particular  with  that  given  by  palpation
applied  to  the  living  body.  I  will  add  that  if  you  pass  a  long
needle  perpendicularly  through  a  corpse  laid  on  the  dissecting  table,  at
a  spot  corresponding  with  that  where  hysterical  patients  complain  of
ihac  ])ain,  you  hâve  every  chance — as  I  hâve  frequently  found — of
"transfixing  the  ovary.

This  position  of  the  ovary  appears,  in  fact,  to  hâve  been  im-
plicitly  recognised  by  Dr.  Chéreau  in  his  excellent  treatise  on
diseases  of  the  ovary,2  when  he  remarks  that,  in  women,  where
the  abdominal  wall  does  not  ofier  too  great  a  résistance  the  tumé-
faction, or  even  the  sensibility  only,  of  the  ovary  may  be  ascer-
tained.  The  introduction  of  the'finger  into  the  rectum  would  not  be
a  superior  mode  of  exploration,  accordiiig  to  our  author,  except
in  cases  where  the  abdominal  parietes  présent  an  invincible
obstacle.

Gentlemen,  after  ail  thèse  explanations  which  I  hâve  just  discusscd,
I  believe  I  havc  a  riglit  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  it  is  to  the

'  E.  Q,.  Legeudre,  'Analomie  Chirurgicale  homolograpbique,'  &c.,  pi.  X,
Paris,  1858,

^i'CLéreau,  'Etudes  sur  les  maladies  dcj'ovaire,'  Paris,  1841.


HYSTEEICAL  OVAETA.  26Ô

ovary,  and  the  ovarij  aloyie,  we  must  attribute  Ûiefixed  iliac pain  of
hysterical  patients.  It  is  true,  that  at  certain  epochs,  and  in  severe
caseSj  the  pain,  by  a  mechanism  which  I  need  not  at  présent  indi-
cate,  extends  to  the  muscles  and  to  the  skin  itself,  so  as  to  justify
the  description  given  by  M.  Briquet  ;  but  I  cannot  too  often  repeat
that,  if  liinited  to  thèse  external  phenornena,  the  description  would
be  incomplète  and  the  true  focus  of  the  pain  misapprehended.

VI.

This  would  be  the  place  to  investigate  what  is  the  anatomical  con-
dition of  the  ovary  in  cases  where  it  becomes  the  seat  of  tlie  iliac
pain  of  hysterical  patients.  In  the  actual  state  of  afïairs,  we
can  unfortunately  ouly  give  you  some  rather  vague  information,
in  référence  to  this  subject.  There  occasionally  exists  a  more
or  less  marked  tuméfaction  of  the  organ,  such  as  was  found  in
the  case  of  blennorrhagic  ovaritis  recorded  in  the  memoir  of  M.
Sclmtzenberger.  But  this  is  rather  an  exceptional  circumstance,
and  it  is  proper  to  remark  that  common  inflammation  of  the  ovary
may  exist  with  ail  its  cliaracters,  and  yet  there  shall  supervene  no
irradiations,  as  described,  neither  spontaneously  nor  under  the
influence  of  pressure.  M.  Briquet  has  not  failed  to  set  this  circum-
stance  proniinently  forward,  and  hère  he  is  perfectly  right.  Hence
we  must  eraphatically  déclare  that  every  ovarian  ivfamwation  is
not  indifl'erently  adapted  to  provoke  the  development  of  the  aura
hysterica.  Ovarian  tuméfaction  in  hysterical  patients  is  sometimes
completely  absent,  at  other  times  it  is  but  little  marked  ;  and  it
seems  probable  enough  that  the  tuméfaction  of  the  ovary^  in  such
cases,  is  the  resuit  of  a  vascular  turgescence  analogous  to  what  is
exhibited  after  the  occurrence  of  certain  neuralgic  affections.  Patho-
logical  anatomy  has  not  hitherto  supplied  us  with  any  positive  data
in  relation  to  this  question  ;  at  présent,  therefore,  you  may  designate
the  state  of  the  ovary  either  by  tlie  term  liyperlànesls  (Swe-
diaur),  or  ovarialfjia  (Sclmtzenberger),  or  ovaria  (Négrier), — the
name,  indeed,  matters  little,  when  the  fact  is  well  established.

YII.

It  being  conceded  that  the  ovary  is  the  starting-point  of  the
aura  hysterica,  at  least  in  a  group  of  cases,  it  will  not  be  uuiu-
teresting  now  to  show  that  an  important  and,  in  some  sortj  an  iiiti-


270  HYSTEEICAL  OVAEIA.

mate  relation  exists  between  tlie  ovarian  pain  and  the  otlier  plieno-
mena  of  local  hysteria.

You  can  in  fact  discern,  gentlemen,  in  the  patients  to  whom  I
•call  jour  attention  a  remarkable  concord  between  the  seat  of  the
iliac  pain  and  the  manner  in  which  the  concomitant  sjmptoms  are
localised.  I  will  not  revert  to  the  cephalic  phenomena  of  the  aura
which,  as  I  stated  a  little  ago,  are  manifested  o]i  the  same  side  with
the  ovarian  pain  ;  I  will  confine  myself  to  showing  that  the  /lemd-
anaslkesia,  the  paresis,  and  the  contracture  of  extremities,  occupy
the  left  side  when  the  avaria  is  situated  on  the  left,  and  vice
versa.  I  will  also  point  ont  to  you  that  when  the  ovarian  pain
■occupies  both  left  and  right  sides,  the  other  phenomena  become
bilatéral,  predominating  however  on  the  side  where  a  greater  in-
tensity  of  iliac  pain  is  felt.

On  several  occasions,  we  hâve  noted  in  some  of  our  patients  an
abrupt  change  of  the  seat  of  ovarian  pain.  The  patient  Ler —  is
one  of  thèse.  When  the  ovaria',  in  her  case,  predomiuated  in  the
left  side,  the  cephalic  symptoms  of  the  aura,  the  contracture  of  ex-
tremities, &c.,  showed,  for  the  time,  their  maximum  of  development
■on  the  same  side, — predominating  afterwards  on  the  right  side,
when  the  right  ovary  became  again  the  more  painful.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  ovarialgia  appears  to  be  a  con-
stant phenomenon,  one  eminently  permanent,  in  the  form  of
hysteria  which  engages  our  attention,  so  that,  taken  in  connection
with  some  other  indication  of  the  same  category,  it  may  guide
your  diagnosis  in  difficult  cases.

YIII.

It  remains  for  me  now,  gentlemen,  to  enter  upon  an  exposition
of  facts  which  will  probably  be  considered  by  you  as  the  main
feature  of  this  study.  Thèse  facts,  in  reahty,  are  of  a  nature,  if  I
€rr  not,  to  set  ont  in  still  greater  prominence  the  truly  prédominant
part  pertaining  to  ovarialgia  in  one  oftheforvis  of  JiJ/steria.

You  hâve  just  seeu  how  methodical  compression  of  the  ovary
can  détermine  the  production  of  the  aura,  or  sometimes  even  a
perfcct  hysterical  seizure.  I  jn'opose  now  to  show^  you  that  a  more
■energetic  compression  is  capable  of  sioppiug  the  devcloj)mcnt  of  the
attack  when  beginning,  or  even  of  cutting  it  short  when  the  évolu-
tion of  the  coiivulsive  accidents  is  more  or  less  advanced.  This,  at
least,  is  whai  you  can  very  plainly  discern  in  two  of  the  patients


OVARIAN  HYSTEEIA.  271

wliom  I  liave  placed  before  you.  In  their  cases,  tlie  arrest  of
the  convulsion,  wlien  compression  has  been  properly  applied,  is
total  and  final.  In  the  others,  the  manipulation  merely  modifies
the  phenomena  of  the  seizure  in  varying  degrees,  without  however,
producing  complète  cessation.  And  be  kind  enough  to  note  care-
fully  that  we  hâve  to  deal  in  ail  of  them,  not  with  common  vulgar
convulsive  hysteria,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,  but  with  convulsive
hysteria  in  what  is  uuanimously  recognised  as  its  gravest  type — I
mean  hystero-einlepsy.

Let  us  suppose  that  one  of  thèse  womeu  is  taken  with  a  seizure.
The  patient  suddenly  falls  to  the  ground,  with  a  shrill  cry  ;  loss  of
consciousness  is  complète.  The  tétanie  rigidity  of  ail  her  members,
which  generally  inaugurâtes  the  scène,  is  carried  to  a  higli  degree  ;
the  body  is  forcibly  bent  backwards,  the  abdomen  is  prominent,
greatly  distended,  and  very  resisting.

The  best  condition  for  a  perfect  démonstration  of  the  efîects  of
ovarian  compression,  in  such  a  case,  is  that  the  patient  should  be
laid  horizontally  in  dorsal  decubitus,  on  the  floor,  or,  if  possible,
on  a  mattress.i  The  physician  then,  kneeling  on  one  knee,  presses
the  closed  hand  or  fist  into  that  iliac  fossa,  which  he  had  previously
learned  to  regard  as  the  habituai  seat  of  the  ovarian  pain,

At  first,  he  must  throw  ail  his  strength  into  the  effort  in  order  to
vanquish  the  rigidity  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  But,  when  this  is
once  overcome  and  the  hand  feels  the  résistance  ofî'ered  by  the  rim
of  the  pelvis,  the  scène  changes  and  resolution  of  the  convulsive
phenomena  commences.

The  patient  soon  begins  to  make  numerous  and  sometimes  noisy  at-
tempts  to  swallow  j  then  consciousness  returns  almost  at  the  same  time,
and  now  the  woman  either  moans  and  weeps,  complainmg  that  you  are
hurting  her  (as  in  the  case  of  Marc — )  or  else  she  expériences  relief,
and  testifies  her  gratitude  ;  "Ah!  c'est  bien!  cela  fait  du  bien!"
is  always  the  cry  of  the  patient  Gen — ,  under  such  circumstances.

Whichever  happens,  the  resuit  in  short  is  always  the  same,  and  if
you  but  continue  the  pressure  for  two,  three,  or  four  minutes,  you
are  almost  certain  to  find  ail  the  phenomena  of  the  seizure  disappear

1  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  remark  that,  if  the  seizure  occur  whilst  the  patient
is  l'cposing,  the  method  of  compressiou  described  can  also  be  applied  without
removing  her  from  the  bed.  Applied  in  this  manner,  by  Profcssor  Charcot,  I
hâve  been  a  witness  to  its  iustantaneous  effect,  iu  the  hysterical  wards  of  La
Salpôtrière. (S.)


272  COMPRESSION  OF THE  OVAEY.

as  if  by  magie.  You  may,  besides,  vary  the  experiment  and,  at  your
pleasure,  by  removing  the  compression  and  again  applying  it,  you
can  stop  the  seizure  or  allow  it  to  recur  as  often  ahuost  as  you  like.

When  once  we  hâve  definitely  overcome  the  obstinate  résistance
which  the  abdominal  parietes  always  offer  at  first,  it  is  not  necessary
to  employ  ail  one's  strength,  and  the  application  of  the  two  first
fingers  of  the  haud  to  the  presumed  seat  of  the  ovary  is  sufficient
to  produce  the  desired  eilect.  However,  the  opération,  if  it  require
to  be  prolonged  for  some  minutes,  is  always  rather  fatiguing  to  the
physician. I  bave  contemplated  modifyingthe  modus  operandi.

Perhaps,  you  might  make  use  of  a  bag  filled  with  shot,  such  as
M.  Lannelongue  has  employed  for  a  différent  purpose,  or  the  appli-
cation of  an  appropriate  bandage  might  be  tried, — this  is  a  question
to  be  considered.  At  présent,  the  assistants  in  the  wards  who  bave
been  instructed  in  the  metbod  of  manipulation  described,  apply  it  day
by  day  in  the  case  of  those  patients  to  whom  it  is  really  bénéficiai.

IV.

It  is  singular  enough,  gentlemen,  that  a  method  the  practice  of
which  is  so  simple  and  which,  undoubtedly,  is  capable  of  rendering
real  service,  should  bave  fallen,  as  it  has  fallen  in  our  days,  into
complète  disuse.  As  I  bave  already  intimated,  the  invention  of  this
process  is  far  from  being  m.y  owu  ;  it  may  possibly  be  traced  to  a
very  ancient  period  ;  it  is  certain  tliat  it  dates  from  a  time  anterior
to  the  sixteenlh  ccntury.  The  foUowiug  is  what  I  hâve  learned
in  référence  to  it,  from  some  researches  made  rather  hurriedly
amongst  the  dusticst,  and  Iherefore  the  least  frequentcd,  volumes
of  my  library.

Willis,  in  the  i7th  century,  in  bis  treatise  on  convulsive  disease,
expressed  himself  as  follows  :  '  It  is  certain,'  he  says,  '  that  the  con-
vulsive spasm  which  cornes  from  the  belly  is  arrested  and  can  be  pre-
vented  from  ascending  to  the  neck  and  head  by  a  compression  of  the
abdomen,  determined  by  arms  being  clasped  round  the  body,  or  by
means  of  bandages  drawn  very  tight.'  Ile  states  also  that  he  succeedcd
himself  in  stopping  a  fit,  by  pressing  energetically  with  both  hands
joined  togetlicr  u])on  the  lower  part  of  the  belly.  But  Mcrcado'-^
(in 1513)  had  long  prcviously  advised  the  use  oï  frictions  on  the

^  Willis,  '  De  Morbis  Convulsivis/  i.  ii,  p.  34.

-  D.  L.  Mcrcatus,  '  Opéra,  lit.  iii,  De  virgiiiuiu  et  vidiuuum  affcctionibus,'
p.  546,  riaucor,  1620.


HISTOEIOAL SKETCH.  273

abdomen,  witli  the  object  of  reducing  the  womb,  which  he  supposée!  to
be  displaced,  according  to  the  old  doctrine.^  One  of  his  countrymen,
Monartèsj  it  seems,  went  about  it  in  a  more  determined  manner,  for
he  placed  a  large  stone  on  the  patientas  belly,  during  the  seizure.

It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  this  custom  prevailed  widelj  ;
for  I  do  not  find  it  mentioned  in  Laz.  Rivière^  nor  in  F.  Hoffmann.
Boerhave  alone,  at  the  beginning  of  the  i8th  centurj,  insists  anew
upon  compression  of  the  abdomen  during  the  hysterical  seizure  ;
it  should  be  apphed,  according  to  him,  by  means  of  a  cushion  placed
under  sheets  drawn  tight^  and  extending  from  the  false  ribs  to  the
crests  of  the  ilia.  In  this  manner,  he  says,  you  give  almost  certain
relief  to  the  patient,  provided  the  sensation  of  the  globus  hystericus
bas  not  yet  ascended  beyond  the  diaphragm.^

In  modem  times,  Eecamier,  reviewing  this  method,  which,  as  you
see,  was  already  ancient,  placed  on  the  belly  of  the  patient  a  cushion
upon  which  an  assistant  took  his  seat.  His  example  has  been  but
little  followed,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  except  by  Négrier_,  the  Director
of  the  School  of  Medicine  of  Angers,  whose  '  Collection  of  facts
relating  to  the  history  of  the  ovaries  and  of  the  hysterical  aftections
of  females/  published  in  1858,  does  not,  however,  appear  to  hâve
attracted  much  attention.  The  process  adopted  by  Négrier  is  a
more  methodical  one  than  tliose  employed  by  his  predecessors  ;  in
the  application  of  compression,  it  is  the  ovary  he  aims  at,  '  a  strong
and  broad  pressure  exerted  by  means  of  the  hand  upon  the  ovarian
région  is  sufficient  in  many  cases,^  remarks  Négrier,  '  to  ward  off
and  completely  suppress  the  convulsive  seizure.'

Bat,  let  us  put  aside  for  awhile  the  methods  of  regular  médical
practice,  and  see  what  hâve  been  the  processes  by  means  of  which,
in  certain  celebrated  hysterical  épidémies,  the  assistants  gave
relief  to  the  "  convulsionnaires."  Among  the  modes  of  succour
adopted,  we  find  mention  made  of  one  very  curions  custom  well  worth
examining,  the  original  notion  of  which  must,  in  ail  probability,  hâve
been  owing  to  the  suggestion  of  some  "  convulsionnaire  "  ;  I  allude  to
compression  of  the  abdomen.  There  are,  in  fact,  hysterical  patients,
who,  on  experiencing  the  premonitory  pains  of  the  aura,  instinctively
seek  relief  in  compression  of  the  ovarian  région.  Such  is  the  case,
for  instance,  as  regards  one  of  our  patients,  named  Gen — ,  whose

^  Négrier,  "  Receuil  de  faits  pour  servir  à  l'histoire  des  ovaires  et  des
affections  hystériques  de  la  femme,"  Angers,  1858,  pp.  158,  169.
-  Vau  Swieten,  '  Comra,,'  t,  iii,  p.  417.

18


274  HYSTEEICAL  EPIDEMICS.

symptoms  liave  been  already  discussed.  This  woman  has  long  been
accustomed  to  arrest  the  development  of  a  seizure  by  compressing
the  left  ovary  ;  slie  generally  succeeds  when  tlie  invasion  of  the  attack
does  not  take  place  with  great  rapidity.  If  she  fail  in  lier  effort,
she  calls  on  the  attendants  to  help  her  in  the  opération.

Let  us  examine  a  little  more  closely  thèse  incidents  of  convulsive
epidemicSj  as  we  find  them  narrated  in  history  :  they  supply  material
for  a  rétrospective  study  which  is  not  devoid  of  interest.

The  learned  Hecker,  writing  of  those  who  were  affected  with  St.
John's  Dance^i  remarks  that  they  frequently  complained  of  great
epigastric  pain^  and  requested  to  hâve  their  abdomen  compressed
by  bandages.

But,  in  référence  to  this  subject,  we  find  the  most  interesting
documents  in  connection  with  the  épidémie  of  St.  Médard,  as  it  is
called.  You  are  aware  how  this  took  place  when  the  religious
exaltation  of  the  Jansenists,  persecuted  on  account  of  the  Bull  Uni-
genitus,  was  at  its  climax.  The  épidémie,  which  begau  at  the  tomb
of  Deacon  Paris,  whodied  in  1727,  presented  two  distinct  periods.

The  first  was  chiefly  remarkable,  at  least  from  our  point  of  view,
on  account  of  the  cure  of  a  certain  number  of  sick  persons,  amongst
whom  were  several  suffering  from  well-attested  permanent  hysterical
contracture.^  In  the  second  period,  predominated  convulsions  of  a
more  or  less  singular  character,  but  which,  in  short,  differ  in  nothing
essential  from  those  which  characterise  hysteria  when  it  assumes  an
épidémie  form.  Now,  itwas  atthis  period  that  the  ])ractice  ofgiving
the  secours  (as  it  was  called)  made  its  appearance  in  the  épidémie
of  St.  Médard.

Of  what  did  this  succour  consist  ?  In  most  cases  methods  were
employed  to  cause  firm  compression  of  the  abdomen,  or  else  vio-
lent blows  were  given  it  with  some  instrument.  Thus  there  were  :
1°,  the  succour  administered  by  means  of  a  heavy  andiron,  with  which
the  abdomen  was  repeatedly  struck;  2°,  the  succour  given  by  means
of  a  wooden  beetle  or  large  pestle,  which  difTers  little  from  the
former  ;  3°,  in  this  case,  a  man  clasped  his  two  fists  togcther  and
thrust  them,  with  ail  his  might,  against  the  abdomen  of  the  "  con-

^  Hecker,  "  Danse  de  St.  Jean,"  Aix-la-Cbapellc,  1374,  "  Epidémie  de  St.
Witt,"  à  Strasbourg,  1437.

-  Carré  de  Montgeron,  loc.  cit.

3  Bourneville  and  Voulet,  "  De  la  contracture  hystérique  iiermancnte,"  pp
7-17,  Paris,  1872.


HTSTEEIOAL  EPIDEMICS.  275

vulsionnaire,  and,  tlie  better  to  succeed,  he  called  other  men  to  assist
liim  ;  4°,  tliree,  four,  or  even  five  persons  got  upon  th.e  body  of
the  sufferer — a  "  convulsionnaire,"  called  bj  her  co-religionists,
Sister  Margot,  had  a  particular  prédilection  for  this  species  of  suc-
cour  ;  5°j  finally,  there  is  a  case  wliere  long  bands  were  disposed
so  that  they  miglit  be  drawn  tight  to  left  and  right,  and  tlius  com-
press  tlie  abdomen.  Thèse  modes  of  succour,  wliichever  kind  was
adopted,  were  always,  it  appears,  followed  by  great  relief.

Hecquet,  a  physician  of  the  period,  declined  to  see  in  thèse  con-
vulsions, which  others  attributed  to  divine  influence,  anything  but
a  natural  phenomenon, — and  so  far  he  was  perfectly  right.  But  I
camiot  sliare  his  opinion  when,  in  his  work  entitled,  '  Du  Naturalisme
des  Convulsions,'  he  maintains  that  the  modes  of  succour  were  noth-
ing  else  than  practices  suggested  by  lubricity.  For  my  own  part,  I  do
not  well  see  what  lubricity  could  hâve  to  do  with  blows  of  pestles  and
andirons  administered  with  extrême  violence,  although  I  am  far  from
forgetting  what  a  depraved  taste  may  give  birth  to,  in  this  affection.
I  believe  it  is  very  much  simpler  and  very  much  more  legitimate  to
admit  that  the  succour — apart  from  the  amplifications  suggested  by
a  love  of  notoriety — corresponded  to  an  empirical  practice,  the  resuit
of  which  was  to  give  great  relief  in  cases  of  hysterical  seizure.

X.

You  hâve  assuredly  remarkcd,  gentlemen,  the  analogies  which  exist
bctween  this  arrest  of  hysterical  or  hystero-epileptical  convulsions,
determined  by  abdominal  compression,  and  the  arrest  of  convulsions
which  is  sometimes  effected  by  a  ligature  of  the  lïmh  from  which
the  phenomena  of  the  aura,  in  such  cases,  take  their  rise.  This,
perhaps,  is  the  place  to  remind  you  that  a  sudden  flexure  of  the
foot  causes,  as  M.  Brown-Séquard  lias  shown,  the  immédiate  cessa-
tion of  the  convulsive  tremulation  of  spinal  ejrilejisj/,  observable  in
certain  cases  of  myelitis.  You  are  not  unaware,  that,  in  expérimental
imtliology,  thèse  clinical  facts  find,  to  some  cxtent,  their  explanation.
I  caunot  enter  into  détails  at  présent,  let  it  suffice  to  remind  you  that
numerous  experiments  on  animais  bear  testimony  to  the  fact  that  sus-
pension of  reflex  excitability  of  the  spinal  cord  may  be  caused  by  irri-
tation of  the  peripheral  nerves.  Thus,  the  experiment  of  Herzen  shows
us  that,  in  the  case  of  a  decapitated  frog  (which  was  consequently
placed  in  an  excellent  condition  to  augment  to  the  utmost  the  reflex
excitability  of  the  spinal  cord),  if  the  lower  portion  of  the  cord  be


276  CONCLUSION.

irritated  it  will  be  impossible,  so  long  as  tliis  excitation  subsists,  to
call  into  action  tlie  excitability  of  tlie  superior  extremities.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  if  you  tie  a  ligature  tightly  round  the  upper
extremities  of  a  frog,  similarly  decapitated,  so  long  as  this  ligature
remains,  the  excitation  of  the  inferior  extremities  will  not  be  foUowed
by  reflex  movements.  Tins,  at  least,  is  what  is  demonstrated  by
Lewisson's  experiment.

However,  although  thèse  facts  are  more  easily  analysed  they  are
not,  in  the  actual  state  of  science,  more  easily  explained  than  the
corresponding  pheuomena  observable  in  man.

XI.

Time  presses,  and  I  cannot  dwell  any  longer  upon  this  subject.-
I  should,  however,  hâve  liked  to  show  you  the  importance,  from  a.
practical  point  of  view,  of  suppressing  severe  fits  of  hysteria,  or,  at
least,  of  moderating  their  intensity.  But  this  aspect  of  the  question
may  be  more  appropriately  illustrated  when  I  shall  hâve  described,
in  another  conférence,  the  conséquences  which  follow  reiterated  fits, —
otherwise,  termed  the  Jiystero-e^ileptlcal  acme?-  I  will  confine  myself,
at  présent,  to  formulating  as  follows,  one  of  the  conclusions  deducible
from  the  présent  study  :

Energetic  compression  of  the  painfal  ovari/  Jiasno  direct  influence
over  viost  of  tlie  permanent  srjmptoms  of  hysteria,  such  as  contrac-
ture, paralijsis,  hemianœsthesia,  S)'c.  ;  but  it  has  a  frecpientli^
décisive  effect  iq^on  the  convutsive  attaclc,  the  intensity  qfîchich  it
can  diminish,  and  even  the  cessation  of  tvhich  it  may  sometimes
détermine.

XII.

I  hâve,  in  conclusion,  gentlemen,  to  introduce  to  your  observation
the  patients  whom  I  hâve  h  ad  chiefly  in  view  in  the  preceding
description,  and  to  point  ont  the  most  salient  peculiarities  which
they  présent.

Case  I, — Marc — ,  set.  23,  suffering  from  hystero-epilepsy  since
the  âge  of  sixteen. It  is  not  certain  to  what  cause  the  origin  of  the

•  In  Trench,  état- de-mal  hi/stéro-épileptique.  Prencli  pathologists  euiploy
the  terin  état  {status,  àKfitj)  to  designate  that  period  of  a  disease  when  the
symptonis,  having  attained  their  utmost  intensity,  may  remain  for  some  time
stationarj,  as  it  were. (S.)


CLINICAL  CASES.  277

flisorder  should  be  attribiitecl.  However  that  may  be,  she  présents
the  following  phenomeua  of  local  hysteria  :  liemianasthesia,  ovaria,
and  paresis,  on  the  left  side.  She  is  likewise  subject  to  fréquent
vomiting,  and  bas  liad  achromatopsia  of  the  left  eye.

The  attacks  are  preceded  by  a  characteristic  aura  ;  the  premoni-
tory  phenomena  start  from  the  left  ovary,  and  the'  cephalic  symptoms
are  very  marked.  With  respect  to  the  seizures,  they  are  com-
posed  of  three  periods  :  a,  tetaniform,  epileptiform  convulsions,
foaming  at  the  mouth; — h,  (period  of  contortions)  great  movements
of  the  body  and  lower  extremities  ;  during  tins  stage,  the  patient  gives
utterance  to  strange  words,  and  seems  a  prey  to  moody  delirium  ; —
c,  tears  and  laughter  announcing  the  end  of  the  attack.  In  her  case,
a  prompt  and  absolute  cessation  of  ail  the  phenomena  is  determined
■  by  compression  of  the  left  ovary.

Case  II. — Cot — ,  œt.  21,  hysteria  began  at  the  âge  of  fifteen.
The  ill-treatment  she  had  sufîered  from  her  father,  who  was  addicted
to  alcoholic  excesses,  and  her  subséquent  career  as  a  prostitute,  hâve
■doubtless  exerted  a  certain  etiological  influence.  The  local  hysteria
is  still  more  marked  in  this  case,  than  in  the  former  one.  We  hâve
to  note  on  the  right  side  hemianœdhesïa,  ovarïanjicàn,  w^d  j^ermanent
contracture  with  tremulation  of  the  lower  extremity.

The  attack  is  heralded  by  a  distinct  aura,proceeding  from  the  right
ovary,  and  terminating  in  very  évident  cephalic  symptoms.  The
convulsions,  which  are  chiefly  tonic,  are  complicated  by  epilepti-
form phenomena  ;  C —  bites  her  tongue,  foams  at  the  mouth,  &c.
The  period  of  contortions  follows,  and  is  very  intense.  The  attack
frequently  terminâtes  by  contortions  of  the  pelvis,  with  laryngeal
constriction,  tears,  and  an  abundant  flow  of  urine.  In  her  case,
compression  of  the  ovary  modifies  the  intensity  of  the  fit,  without,
however,  arresting  it.  In  the  first  months  of  the  year,  this  patient
was  stricken  with  the  Iiystero-epileptical  acme,  to  which  we  will
return  in  another  lecture.^

Case  III. — Legr —  Geneviève  was  born  at  Loudun.  The  coïn-
cidence is  curions — for  that,  you  know,  was  the  scène  of  the  sad
drama  of  which  Urbain  Grandier  was  the  victim.  Geneviève  is  38
years  of  âge;  her  hysteria  dates  from  the  period  of  puberty.  Among
the  permanent  symptoms  of  local  hysteria,  we  observe  well-marked

^  This  case  is  detailed  in  full  iu  the  treatise  by  Bourneville  and  Voulet,  '  De
la  contracture  permanente.' Obs.  viii,  p.  41.


278  CLINICAL  CASES.

left  hemianœsthesîa,  left  ovarian  j)ain,  with  easily  discerned  tuméfac-
tion. Her  mindj  finally,  is  in  a  strange  state.

The  mcru  is  very  distinct,  and  the  cardiac  palpitations  and  cephalic
phenomena  constitute  the  prédominant  symptoms.  Each  seizure
is  divisible  into  three  stages  :  i°,  epileptiform  convulsions,  foaming,
and  stertor;  2°,  then  contortions  of  the  limbs  and  entire  body;  3°,
the  period  of  delirium,  during  which,  at  the  close  of  complète  attacks,
she  relates  ail  the  incidents  of  her  life.

Sometimes  the  patient,  inthis  latter  phase,  has  hallucinations;  she
sees  ravens  and  serpents  ;  moreover,  she  commences  a  kind  of
dance,  and  then  she  exhibits,  as  it  were,  in  an  embryonic  state  and
sporadic  form,  a  spécimen  of  those  dances  of  the  middle-ages,  de-
scribed  under  the  name  oî  saltatory  épidémies  (or  the  dancing  mania) .
In  connection  with  this,  I  would  hâve  you  note  that  certain  cases  of
hysteria — forming,  insomesort,varieties  within  the  species — présent
in  a  rudimentary  state  the  différent  convulsive  forms  which  are  ex-
hibited  in  a  highly  developed  state  in  the  time  of  épidémies.  This,
indeed,  is  a  point  which  Yalentiner  has  thoroughly  discussed  in
his  interesting  work  on  hysteria.i

In  Geneviève's  case,  compression  of  the  ovary  détermines  what
we  might  call  a  sudden  arrest  of  the  attack.  She  has  a  clear  con-
ception of  its  influence,  for  she  herself  tries  to  compress  the  région
which  gives  birth  to  the  aura,  and  when  she  cannot  succeed,  she,  as
we  hâve  already  mentioned,  calls  for  help  from  the  attendants.

Case  IV. — Ler — ,  set.  48,  is  a  patient  well  known  to  ail  the
physicians  who,  during  the  last  twenty  years,  hâve  frequented  this
hospital,  in  the  discharge  of  various  duties.  In  other  words,  hers  is
a  cas  célèbre  in  the  annals  of  hystero-epilepsy.  You  will  find  the
early  portion  of  her  history  narrated  in  the  thesis  of  M.  Dunant  (of
Geneva).  Ler —  ceased  to  menstruate  four  years  ago_,  notwithstand-
ing  which,  the  nervous  accidents  persist.  We  called  on  you  just
now  to  observe  the  présence  of  a  rudimentary  form  of  Tarantisr/i
in  Geneviève^s  case  ;  Ler —  is  a  Demoniac,  one  "  possessed  by  a
devil,^' — or,  again,  she  présents  the  image,  not  much  fainter  than
the  reality,  of  one  of  those  women  who  were  called  "  Jerkers  "  in
the  Methodist  Camp  Meetings,  and  who  assumed  the  most  horrify-
ing  attitudes  in  their  paroxysms. (See  Figs.  1 9,  20  and  21.)

'  Valentiner (Th.),  "  Die  Hystérie  uud  ihre  Heilung," v.  q.  extract  ia
'Mouvement  Médical,'  June,  1872.


CLTNICAL  CASES.


379


The  probable  cause  of  thèse  nervous  accidents  in  the  case  of  Ler —
deserves  mention.  Slie  had,  as  she  says,  a  séries  of  frights  :  i°,  at
the  âge  of  eleven,  she  was  terrified  by  a  mad  dog  ;  2°,  at  the  âge  of
sixteen,  she  was  struck  witli  horror  at  sight  of  the  corpse  of  a
murdered  woman  ;  3°,  at  the  same  age^  she  was  again  terrified  by
robbers  who,  as  she  was  passing  through  a  wood,  rushed  out  to
despoil  her  of  the  money  she  carried.


FiG.  19. — Attitude  of  Ler — during  the  attack;  period  of  contortion. (Fac-
simile  of  a  sketch  from  nature.)

The  components  of  local  hysteria,  in  her  case,  are  formed  by
hemianœsthesia,  ovaria,  paresis,  and  momentary  contractures  of
the  upper  and  lower  extremities  on  the  right  side. Sometimes  the


280


CLINICAL  CASES.


phenomena  invade  tlie  left  side,  and  tlien,  in  accordance  with  our
description,  we  find  double  o varia,  witli  double  ansesthesia,  &c.


FlG.  20. — Attitude  of  Ler —  during  tbe  attack  ;  period  of  coutortion. (Fac-
simile  of  a  sketch  from  nature.)

The  attacks,  which  are  heralded  by  a  well-marked  ovarian  aura,
are  characterised  in  the  first  stage,  by  epileptiform  and  tetaniforin
convulsions;  after  tbis  corne  great  gesticulations  of  a  voluntary
character,  in  whicli  tbe  patient,  assuming  the  most  frightful  postures,
reminds  one  of  the  attitudes  which  history  assigns  to  the  deraoniacs  ;
(period  of  contortions,  Figs.  19,  30  and  21).

At  this  stage  of  the  attack,  she  is  a  prey  to  delirium,  and  raves
cvidently  of the  events  which  seem  to  hâve  determined  lier  first


CLINICAL  CASES.


281


seizures. She  hurls  furious  invectives  against  imaginary  individuals,
crying  out,  "  villaius  !  robbers  !  brigands  !  fire  !  lire  ! 0,  tbe  dogs  !


ElG.  21. — Hystero-epileptic  attack  ;  period  of contortions. (Drawn  by  M.
Pùcher  from  a  sketch  made  by  M.  Charcot.)

l'mbitten  !  " — Hemiuiscences,  doubtless,  of  the  émotions  experienced
in  her  youth.

"Wlien  the  convulsive  portion  of  the  attack  is  ended,  there  super-
vene,  as  a  gênerai  rule  :  i°,  hallucination  of  vision  ;  the  patient
beholds  horrible  animais,  skeletons,  and  spectres;  2°,  paralysis  of
the  bladder  ;  3°^  paralysis  of  the  pharynx  ;  4°,  and  lastly,  a  more  or
less  marked  permanent  contracture  of  the  tongue.

Thèse  latter  phenomena  occasionally  render  it  necessary  to  hâve  re-
course, for  several  days,  to  the  use  of  the  cathéter,  and  to  the
employment  of  the  stomach  pump  for  alimentary  purposes.

Compression  of  the  ovary,  in  this  case  of  Ler— ,  is  almost  void  of
effect  upon  the  convulsions.^

'  We  published  the  detailed  account  of  this  patient's  case  in  the  'Progrès
Médical;  (Nos.  18-33,  1875).


283  CLINIOAL  CASES.

Case  V. — You  are  already  acquainted  with  this  patient,  named
Etch — ;  it  is  she  who  furnislied  us  with  materials  for  oui  lecture
on  liysterïcal  ischuria.^  We  note,  also,  in  this  case,  the  présence
of  Jiemianœsthesïa,  ach'omatopsla,  contracture,  and  avaria  on  the
left  side.  The  attacks  are  principally  tetaniform  and  tonic.  We
hâve  not,  hitherto,  had  the  opportunity  of  testing,  in  her  case,  the
influence  of  ovarian  compression  upon  the  convulsions.

^  FicI^  ante,  Lecture  ix.


LECTURE  XII.

HYSTERICAL  CONTRACTURE.

SuMMARY. — Forms  of  hysterical  contracture.  Description  of  the
hémiplégie  forni  ;  analogies  and  différences  hetioeen  hysterical
contracture  and  that  resnlting from  a  circumscribed  lésion  of  the
hrain.  Example  of  the  paraplegicform  of  hysterical  contracture.
Prognosls. — Sudden  recovery  in  some  cases.  Scientific  expia-
nation  of  certain  reputedly  miraculous  events.  Incurahility  of
contracture  in  a  certain  number  of  hysterical  patients.  Examples.
Ânatondcal  lésions.  Sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns.  Farieties
of  contracture. Hysterical  cluh-foot.

Gentlemen, — lu  his  standard  treatise  on  hysteria,  M.  Briquet,
though  lie  does  not  give  to  the  liistory  of  permanent  contracture,
which  may  affect  one  or  several  members  in  hysterical  cases,  ail  the
considération  that  in  my  judgment  it  deserves,  yet  traces  witha  sure
hand  the  most  salient  features  of  this  symptom.  This,  he  writes,  is
a  rare  complication.  He  had,  in  fact,  only  met  with  it  six  times  at
the  period  when  he  published  his  work.  In  one  case,  the  contrac-
ture occupied  one  limb  only  ;  in  two  others,  it  appeared  under  a
hémiplégie  form  ;  and  in  the  last  three  cases,  it  assumed  the  para-
plégie form.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  hysterical  contracture  can
présent  thèse  several  aspects.  You  will,  besides,  verify  the  fact  for
yourselves,  as  I  am  fortunate  enougli  to  be  able  to  place  under
your  observation  two  patients,  one  of  whom  présents  the  hémiplégie
form  and  the  other  the  paraplégie  form  of  hysterical  contracture.
We  are  thus  enabled  to  make  you  touch  with  the  finger,  as  it  were,
the  most  interesting  peculiarities  connected  with  this  singular  mani-
festation of  hysteria.


284


HYSTEEIOAL  CONTRACïUrxE.


Etch — ,  now  aged  40  years,  lias  been  affectée!  for  twenty  months
witli  left  hemiplegia.  You  perceive  tlie  superlor  extremïty  of  this
sicleis  in  semi-flexion  (fig.  22);  it  is  theseatof  considérable  rigidity,
a  fact  attested  by  tlie  difficulty  experienced  in  trying  to  increase  the
flexion,  and  tlie  impossibility  of  obtaining  complète  extension.^


?1G.  22. — Contracture  of  Icft  uppcr  extrcmity.

The  left  lower  extremity  is  in  extension;  its  several  parts  are,
co  to  speak,  in  a  forced  posture.  Tlius  tlie  tliigh  is  strongly
extendcd  on  the  pelvis,  tlie  leg  upon  tlie  tliigli.  The  foot  pré-
sents a  most  marked  example  of  talipes  equino-varns. In  addition

1  At  the  i)reseut  moment  (July,  ICS73)  tlie  contracture  of  tlic  left  extremi-
tics  is  observable,  with  ail  the  charactcristics  describcd  in  tlie  lecture,  whicli
was  dclivcrcd  in  June,  1870.  [Etch —  bassinée  recovcred,  sce  in/rà,  pp.  290-1-
S.]


HEMIPLEGIC  FOEM.  285

to  this,  tlie  adductor  muscles  of  tlie  tliigh  are,  also,  spasmodically
contractured.  In  short,  ail  the  joints  are  alike  rigid,  and  tlie  whole
limb  forms  as  it  were  an  inflexible  bar,  for,  by  grasping  the  foot,  you
can  raise,  in  one  pièce,  the  inferior  portion  of  the  patient's  body.
I  lay  particular  stress  upon  this  attitude  of  the  lower  extremity,
because  it  is  very  rare  in  hemiplegia  arising  from  circumscribed
cérébral  lésion  {en  foyer),  and  is,  on  the  contrary,  asit  were  the  rule
in  hysterical  contracture.  In  the  latter  case,  permanent  flexion  of
the  thigh  and  leg  is,  to  judge  from  my  own  expérience,  a  really
exceptional  fact.

We  hâve  hère  di permanent  contracture  in  the  rigorous  sensé  of  the
Word  ;  I  hâve  assured  myself  that  it  is  nowise  modified  during  the  pro-
foundest  sleep  ;  in  the  daytime,  there  are  no  alternations  of  increase
or  remission.  The  slumber  alone,  which  chloroform  procures,  causes
it  to  disappear  if  the  intoxication  produced  be  considérable.

Although  the  hémiplégie  contracture  by  which  our  patient  is
affected  is,  I  repeat,  of  nearly  two  years  standing,  you  perceive  that
the  nutrition  of  the  muscles  has  not  sensibly  sufl'ered.  I  should
also  add  that  the  electrical  contractility  has  remained  nearly  normal.

I  would  point  out  to  you,  in  passing,  that,  by  forcibly  setting  back
the  pointof  the  foot,  you  détermine  in  the  contractured  lower  extremity
a  trépidation  which  sometimes  persists  long,  even  when  the  foot  is
let  go,  and  allowed  to  résume  its  former  attitude.  You  are  aware  that
this  same  trépidation  is  very  commonly  met  with  in  paralysis  with
contracture,  arising  from  an  orgauic  spinal  lésion,  as,  for  instance,
when  the  latéral  columns  are  afîected  with  sclerosis;  but  I  hâve
likewise  seen  it,  in  a  number  of  cases,  in  which  hysterical  contracture
ended  suddenly  in  the  patient's  recovery.  Hence,  you  will  observe
that  this  phenomenon  is  not  one  of  absolute  worth,  so  far  as  an
anatomical  diagnosis  is  concerned.i

'  In  1868,  in  the  course  of  my  lectures  at  La  Salpê  trière,  I  called  attention
to  the  peculiar  trembling  which,  in  certain  patients  afFected  by  paralysis,  or
even  by  paresis,  of  the  lower  extremities,  was  produced  in  the  foot  when
it  was  caught  by  the  point  and  suddenly  turned  back  {v.  A.  Dubois,.
"  Etude  sur  quelques  points  de  l'ataxie  locomotrice  progressive,"  '  Thèse  de
Paris,'  1868).

The  trépidation,  thus  provoked,  generally  stops  as  soou  as  the  foot  is  no
onger  kept  iu  dorsal  flexion  ;  sometimes,  however,  it  persists  for  a  little  time
after.  Limited  to  the  foot  in  many  cases,  it  extends  often  to  the  entire
limb,  and  sometimes  even  to  the  lower  extremity  of  the  opposite  side.  In
cases  where  the  trembling  in  question  can  be  provoked  by  the  method  de-
scribed,  it  frequently  also  shows  itself,  either  spontaneously  (at  least  appareutly


286  CHARACTERS  OF  HYSTEEICAL  CONTRACTURE.

Leaving  out  of  tlie  question  the  différence  we  hâve  mention ed  re-
specting  the  attitude  of  the  lower  extremity,  ail  the  othcr  peculiarities
we  hâve  described  might^  strictiy  speaking,  apply  to  a  case  of  organic
hemiplegia,  resulting  from  a  deepseated  lésion  of  the  encephalon,
as  hsemorrhage  or  ramollissement,  for  instance.

Another  feature  of  resemblance  is  the  following  :  hemiplegia
showed  itself  suddenly  in  Etch —  duriug  a  seizure.  After  this
attack;  the  patient  remained  for  several  days  without  consciousness.

so)  or  under  the  influence  of  tlie  movemeuts  made  by  the  patient  to  raise
himself  in  bed,  to  rise  from  it  and  stand,  or  again  whilst  walking.

Trépidation  of  the  foot,  whether  provoked  or  spontaneous,  sliows  itself  in
varions  circumstances  when  the  latéral  fascielcs  of  the  spinal  cord  hâve  beeome,
throughout  a  certain  extent,  the  seat  of  a  slow  connective  prolifération.  Thèse
conditions  are,  it  is  plain,  the  same  as  those  in  which,  at  a  later  pcriod  thau  the
trembling,  the  production  of  permanent  contracture  takes  place.  Thus  spon-
taneous or  provoked  tremulation,  whether  limited  to  the  foot  or  gencralised,  is
observed  in  symmetrical  sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns,  m  disseminated
sclerosis,  whenever  the  spinal  foci  occupy  the  latéral  columns  to  the  extent  of
some  inches  in  length.  They  are  seen  when  sclerosis  descende?is  has  been
established  consecutively  on  compression  of  the  cord,  caused  by  a  tumour  ;  in
acute  or  subacute  transversal  myelitis  ;  or,  again,  in  latéral  sclerosis,  consécutive
on  certain  cérébral  lésions  such  as,  for  instance,  circumscribed  ramollissement,
or  hsemorrhage  of  the  opto-striate  bodies,  involving  the  capsula  interna.  The
tremulation  in  question  is,  therefore,  not  the  appanage  of  auy  one  disease  in
particular,  it  is  eonnected  with  affections  of  very  différent  origin,  but  in  which
latéral  sclerosis  is  a  common  feature.  However,  its  présence  in  cases  of
hysterical  contracture,  terminating  abruptly  in  recovery,  shows  that  it  cannot
always  be  attributed  to  a  perceptible  material  lésion  of  the  latéral  columns
(Dubois,  loc.  cit.,  Charcot  et  Joffroy,  'Archives  de  Physiologie,'  1869,  pp.  632
€t  seq.  ;  Charcot,  '  Leçons  sur  les  Maladies  du  Système  Nerveux,'  ire  Edition,
pp.  218,  307,  319).

Quite  recently  Herr  Westphal  and  Herr  Erb  hâve  each  devoted  to  the  study
of  this  symptom  a  treatise,  accompanied  with  ingénions  physiological  views.
According  to  thèse  authors,  provoked  trépidation  of  the  foot  (which  is  desig-
nated  by  Herr  Westphal  under  the  name  Fiiszphiinomenon)  would  be  a  reflex
phenomenon,  having  its  starting  point  in  the  tendons  (W.  Erb,  "  Sehnenrcflexe
bei  Gesiindcn  und  bei  Kiickenmarkskranken,"  '  Archiv  fiir  Psychiatrie,'  iv
Bund,  3  heft,  p.  792,  1875;  C.  Westphal,  "  Ueber  einige  Bewegungs-
Erscheimungen  an  gelahmteu  Gliedcrn,"  Idem,  p.  S83  ;  W.  Erb,  "  Ueber
cinen  wenigbekannten  Spinalen  Symptomencomplex,"  in  '  Bcrlincr  Klin.
Wochensehrift,'  1875,  No.  26).

In  some  casses  of  paralysis  of  the  upper  extremities,  when,  for  example,  we
bave  hemiplegia  consécutive  on  lésion  of  the  internai  capsule,  and  when  perman-
ent contracture  is  not  too  markcd,  we  can  succced,  by  suddenly  cxtendiug  the
fingcrs,  in  producing  a  spasmodic  trembling  of  the  hand,  similar  in  cvcry
respect  to  provoked  trépidation  of  the  foot. (J.  M.  C.)


CHAEACTEES  OF  HYSTEEIOAL  CONTRACTURE.  287

Having  indicated  the  analogies,  I  must  point  out  the  différences.
They  are  numerous  and  emphatic,  and  in  point  of  fact,  nothing  is
more  simple  than  to  assign  hysterical  contracture  to  its  proper  cause,
by  taking  note  of  cliaracters  whicli  are  almost  always  présent.

3°.  E,emarkj  in  the  first  place,  gentlemen,  the  absence  of  facial
paralysis  and  of  déviation  of  the  tongue,  when  that  organ  is  pro-
truded.  You  know  that  thèse  phenomena  always,  on  the  contrary,
exist  to  sorae  extent  in  hemiplegia  resulting  from  circumscribed
cérébral  lésion.^

2°.  Observe  also  the  existence  of  an  analgesia  and  of  an
ansesthesia,  which  may  be  termed  absolute,  extending  over  the
entire  paralysed  half  of  the  body,  and  consequently  occupying  the
face,  trunk,  &c.  This  altération  of  sensibility  involves  not  only  the
skin,  but  also  the  muscles,  and  perhaps  the  bones  ;  it  stops  exactly
at  the  médian  line.

This  kind  of  generalised  ansesthesia,  occupying  a  complète  half  of
the  body, — head,  trunk,  and  members — this  quasi-geometrical  limita-
tion of  the  ansesthetic  portion  by  a  vertical  plane  dividing  the  body
into  two  equal  parts,  are,  as  it  were,  the  peculiar  property  of  hysteria.^
However  it  happens,  this  symptom  is  very  rarely  observed  in  hemi-
plegia of  cérébral  origin,  and  in  case  of  spinal  hemiplegia,  that  is,  of
hemiplegia  resulting  from  a  unilatéral  lésion  of  the  spinal  cord,  the
ansesthesia,  as  M.  Brown-Séquard  has  shown,  would  occupy  the  side
opposed  to  that  affected  by  motor  paralysis.

3°.  We  hâve  many  other  distinctive  characters  to  point  out.
The  patient  is  intelligent,  and  we  hâve  no  reason  to  suspect  her
sincerity.  She  can,  therefore,  give  us  authentic  information  with
respect  to  the  mode  of  évolution  of  her  affection.  Tlie  following  is
a  succinct  account  of  her  history.

There  were  not,  it  appears,  any  hysterical  antécédents  in  her  case.
The  disease  set  in,  when  she  was  34  years  of  âge,  after  a  violent
moral  shock,  with  a  seizure  accompanied  by  loss  of  consciousness.
This  attack,  according  to  ail  probability,  assumed  the  epileptic  form
of  hysteria.  Etch — ,  in  fact,  fell  during  the  fit  into  the  fire,  and  she
bears  on  her  face  the  traces  of  the  burn  which  she  then  received.

'  According  to  Herr  Hasse  ('  Handbuch  der  Path.,  &c.,'  2  Auflaç,  Erlangen,
1869)  Herr  Altliaus  was  the  first  to  point  out  the  absence  of  facial  paralysis,  and
of  lingual  and  buccal  déviation  in  hysterical  hemiplegia.  This  is  not  the  case  ;  the
character  in  question  had  been,  previously,  prominently  set  forth  in  K,.  B.  Todd's
"Lectures  on  the  Nervous  System."

■'  V.  antè,  Lecture  X  on  "  Hemianœsthesia."


288  CHAEAOTEES  OF  HYSTERICAL  CONTEACTUEE.

Eenewed  attacks,  at  times  plainly  hysterical,  at  times  exhibiting  some
of  tlie  aspects  of  epilepsy,  supervened^  repeatedly,  during  tlie  follow-
ingyearsj  but,  at  the  âge  of  40,  appeared  the  permanent  symptoms
of  hysteria  wliicli  we  hâve  at  présent  to  study.  We  should,  tbere-
fore,  mention  in  what  concurrence  of  circum stances  tbey  were  de-
veloped,  for  we  sliall  find  tliere  some  characteristic  features.

a.  Menstruation  which,  until  then,  had  been  regular,  became
disordered;  the  patient,  from  time  to  time,  had  vomitings  of
blood  ;  1  there  was  considérable  tympanitis^  with  acute  pain  on
pressure  in  the  left  ovarian  région.  This  pain  was  of  a  spécial
character,  being  accompanied  by  peculiar  sensations  which  radiated
towards  the  epigastrium,  and  which  were  noticed  by  the  patient  as
heralding  most  of  her  seizures.  Thèse  symptoms,  including  the
tympanitis,  and  rétention  of  urine,  are  still  in  existence.

b.  Almost  simultaneously  with  the  occurrence  of  thèse  phenomenon,
Etch —  became  subject  to  persistent  rétention  of  urine,  which  néces-
sitâtes the  constant  employment  of  the  cathéter.

c.  Matters  were  still  in  this  state,  when,  in  October,  1868,  there
supervened  a  very  severe  attack,  accompanied  by  convulsions  and
followed  by  an  apoplectiform  condition  with  stertorous  breathing  ;
then  hemijilegia  suddenly  made  its  appearance.

Now,  gentlemen,  tins  considérable  tympanitis,  thèse  pains  in  the
ovarian  région,  this  rétention  of  urine,  constitute  a  group  of  symptoms,
the  importance  of  which  is  nearly  décisive  in  diagnosis.  Nothing
similar  is  to  be  seen  in  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  hemiplegia
arising  from  cérébral  lésions,  whilst  it  is  very  common,  on  the  contrary,
to  find  thèse  symptoms  preceding  the  appearance  of  the  permanent
phenomena  of  hysteria,  whether  hemiplegia  or  paraplegia,  This  is
a  point  which  M.  Briquet  has  not  failed  to  bring  out  ;  it  is  likewise
properly  noticed,  so  far  at  least  as  hysterical  paraplegia  is  concerned,
by  Dr.  Laycock,  in  the  following  terms  :  "  In  hysteria,  more  or  less
severe  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities  is  always  accompanied,"
he  might  hâve  added,  *'and  preceded,"  "  by  a  corresponding
degree  of  perturbation  in  the  functions  of  the  pelvic  viscera;  this
perturbation  is  manifested  by  constipation,  tympanitis,  vesical
paralysis,  increase  or  diminution  of  the  urinary  sécrétion,  ovarian
or  utérine  irritation,  &c."^

^  This  is  a  fréquent  accident  in  hysterical  patients,  when  there  is  a  notable
dérangement  of  the  catamenia.

'Treatise  on  the  Nervous  Diseases  of  Women,'  London,  1840,  p.  240,


HEMIPLEGIC AXD PARAPLEGIC FOEMS.  289

d.  AATien  Etch —  was  adinitted  a  year  ago,  (Juiie,  1869),  to  La
Salpêtrière,  tlie  hemiplegia  had  been  seven  or  eight  montlis  in  exis-
tence. Independently  of  the  cliaracteristic  peculiarities,  already  men-
tioned,  the  state  of  the  paralysed  members  could  be,  itself,  quoted
in  faveur  of  the  hysterical  origin  of  the  paralysis.  Thus,  whilst
the  upper  extremity  was  in  a  state  of  complète  and  absolute  flaccidity,
the  lower  extremity  presented  very  marked  rigidity  of  the  knee.
This  woukl  be  a  considérable  anomaly  in  a  case  of  liemiplegia,  con-
sécutive on  cérébral  lésion,  for,  in  such  a  case,  the  slowly  ensuing
rigidity  prefers  to  manifest  itself  in  the  upper  extremity.

c.  The  contracture  which  at  présent  occupies  the  upper  extremity,
only  dates  from  a  few  months  back,  and  it  was  developed  suddenly,
and  without  transition,  after  a  seiznre.  It  is  not  in  this  way,  as  you
know,  that  w^e  find  the  tardy  contracture  supervening,  which  results
from  hsemorrhage  or  ramollissement  of  the  brain.  In  the  latter  case,
contracture  always  sets  in  slowly  and  in  a  progressive  manner.

Thus,  gentlemen,  by  taking  note  of  ail  the  circumstances  which
hâve  just  been  enumerated,  uothing  is  more  easy  than  to  ascertain
the  real  cause  of  the  disease,  in  the  case  of  our  patient  Etch — .
In  the  following  observation,  which  relates  to  a  case  of  hysterical
paraplegia,!  the  same  facilities  for  making  a  differential  diagnosis
may  be  found.

II.

Alb — ,  aged  21  years,  a  foundling,  has  been  affected  for  about
two  years  with  permanent  contracture  of  the  inferior  extremities,
which  are,  as  you  may  observe,  in  extension  and  quite  rigid.
As  in  the  case  of  Etch — ,  muscular  contractility  is  not  dimi-
nished.  The  members  are  emaciated,  but  this  emaciatiou  affects
them  generally,  and  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  patient  is  subject  to
almost  uncontrollable  vomitings,  which  hinder  her  from  taking  sufii-
cient  nutriment.  We  hâve  likewise  to  note  an  almost  complète
analgesia  of  the  paralysed  members.

Now,  the  following  are  the  thoroughly  décisive  symptoms  which
allow  us  to  establish  the  diagnosis.

a.  Alb —  has  been  subject  to  hysterical  fits  since  she  was  sixteen
years  of  âge  ;  h,  she  has  been  for  four  years  affected  with  rétention

^  This  case  was  already  referred  to  in  Lecture  XI.  A  detailed  account  of
the  symptoms  may  be  found  in  the  memoir,  '  Comte-rendu  des  observations
recueillies  à  la  Salpêtrière,  concernant  l'épilepsie  et  l'hystéro-épilepsie.' (B.)

19


290  HYSTERICAL CONTRACTURE. PROGNOSIS.

of  urine,  whicli  generally  requires  the  cmployment  of  tlie  cathéter  ;  c,
she  présents  enormous  tympanitic  distension  of  the  abdomen  ;  d,  the
ovarian  régions  are  painful  on  pressure,  and  if  the  exploration  be
pressed,  an  hysterical  seizure  is  soon  provoked  ;  e,  contracture  of  the
inferior  estremities  supervened  suddenly,  without  transition, — and
this  is  a  symptom  which  we  hâve  already  had  occasion  to  emphasise
in  the  preceding  case.  Now,  such  symptoms  are  not  to  be  met  with
during  the  progress  of  sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns.

III.

Thus,  gentlemen,  nothing,  I  repeat,  is  simpler  than  the  clinical
interprétation  of  thèse  two  cases,  so  far  as  the  diagnosis  is  con-
cerned.  But  hère  is  a  point  where,  in  thèse  and  in  analogous  cases,
serions  difficulties  may  arise.

What  will  become  of  thèse  patients?  In  their  case,  paralysis
with  contracture  has  persisted,  without  amendment  for  four  years.
Will  this  contracture  some  day  be  resolved,  or  will  it,  on  the  con-
trary,  persist  indefinitely,  and  so  become  an  incurable  infîrmity?
Thèse  are  questions  which  we  must  ask,  without,  however,  pledging
ourselves  to  give  categorical  answers.

A.  It  is  possible  that,  in  spite,  of  its  long  duration,  this  contrac-
ture may,  without  leaving  any  trace  of  its  existence,  disappear —
perhaps  to-morrow,  or  in  a  few  days,  or  a  year  hence.  We  can
f orteil  nothing  concerning  it.  In  any  case,  if  recovery  talces  place,  it
may  he sudden^ From  one  day  to  the  next,  resumption  of  the

'  Dr.  Laycoek  remarks  tliat  a  woman  may  hâve  been  bed-ridden  for  several
months,  and  quite  uuable  to  use  lier  lower  extremities,  the  physieian  may  hâve
given  up  ail  hope  of  being  of  any  assistance  to  her,  when  suddenly,  under  the
influence  of  some  potcnt  moral  cause  she  will  be  seen  to  rise  from  lier  bed
"  no  longer  the  victim  of  nerves,  but  the  vanquisher,"  as  Thomas  Carlyle  says,
and  walk  about  as  well  as  if  she  had  never  been  stricken  with  paraplegia.
This  is  one  of  the  terminations  of  hysterical  paraplegia  which  the  physieian
should  never  losc  sight  of,  and  which  well  shows  what  risk  he  runs  in  pro-
nouncing  a  case  of  this  kind  to  be  incurable.  T.  Laycoek,  '  A  ïreatisc  on  the
Nervous  Diseases  of  Women,'  London,  1840,  p.  289  (Note  to  first  French
Edition).

This  anticipation  was  fulfillcd  during  the  présent  year,  as  regards  the  first
mentioncd.  of  the  two  patients  to  whom  allusion  was  made  in  this  passage,
italiciscd  in  the  first  édition,  'i'he  state  of  Etch —  on  the  2ist  of  May,
may  be  thus  summed  up  :  rétention  of  urine,  with  periodic  ischuria,  during
nine  years;  contracture  of  the  right  lower  extremity;  contracture  of  the
mcmbers  on  the  lei't  sidc,  of  six  years'  standing;  contracture  of  the  jaws.


STJDDEN EECOVERY.  291

normal  state  may  occur  ;  and  if  it  sliould  liappen,  that  at  tliis  period,
tlie  liysterical  diathesis  is  exliausted,  the  patients  may  once  more
take  tlieir  place  in  every-day  life.

In  connection  with  tliis,  gentlemen,  I  cannot  resist  pausing  a
moment  in  présence  of  thèse  rapid  and  often  unlioped-for  recoveries
from  a  disease  whicli,  during  such  a  length  of  time,  had  made  itself
remarkable  on  account  of  its  tenacity  and  its  résistance  to  ail  thera-
peutic  agents.  A  sudden  strong  émotion,  a  concurrence  of  events
taking  powerful  hold  of  the  imagination,  the  reappearance  of  long-
suppressed  catamenia,  &c.' — occurrences  such  as  thèse  are  frequently
the  occasions  of  those  prompt  recoveries.

I  hâve  seen  in  this  hospital,  three  cases  of  the  kind  which  I
request  your  permission  to  briefly  summarise.

1°.  In  the  first  case,  there  was  contracture  of  a  lower  extremity
(fîg,  23),  of  at  least  four  years'  standing.  On  account  of  the  mis-
conduct  of  this  patient,  I  was  obliged  to  give  her  a  stern  admonition
and  déclare  that  I  should  turn  lier  out  of  the  hospital.  Next
day,  the  contracture  had  entirely  disappeared.  This  fact  is  the
more  important,  because  convulsive  hysteria  existed  only  as  a  bye-
gone  fact  in  her  memory.  Por  two  or  three  years  past,  the  con-
tracture had  been  the  only  manifestation  of  the  great  neurosis.

2°.  The  second  case,  likewise,  concerns  a woman affected  by

necessitating  the  use  of  the  stomach-pump,  of  one  year's  standing  ;  aphonia,
lasting  during  ten  months.  On  tiie  23ud  May,  at  a  quarter  past  seven
o'clock  in  the  evening,  she  was  seized  with  a  fit,  marked  chiefly  by  great
oppression  ;  contracture  of  the  neck-muscles,  on  the  left,  which  twisted  the  chin
behind  the  left  shoulder.  The  patient  does  not  lose  consciousness,  she  believes
she  is  going  to  die;  she  shrieks, — the  contracture  of  the  jaws  vanishes.
She  tosses  about,  the  attendants  eudeavour  to  restrain  her  ;  with  her  right
arm,  which  has  become  free,  she  repels  those  who  hold  her.  She  wants  to  go
to  the  window  for  air;  and,  being  opposed,  her  passion  increases,  and  under
this  influence  it  was  observed  that  contracture  of  the  righfc  leg  disappeared,  and
that  this  was  followed  by  disappearance  of  that  of  the  left  Icg,  and  next  by
that  of  the  left  arm,  in  succession.  Etch —  is  allowed  to  rise  ;  she  walks
about  ;  in  eighteen  liours  recovery  tous  complète,  or  nearly  so.  Dating  i'rom
the  next  day,  the  urinary  sécrétion  became  normal  again  (PL  x).  The  arnblyo-
pia  and  ansesthesia  did  not  completely  disappear  until  a  few  days  had  elapsed,
and  the  patient  has  only  retaiued  some  cracking  Sound  in  her  joints,  principally
in  those  of  the  left  leg,  as  vestiges  of  her  permanent  contracture.  Li  conclu-
sion, the  only  traces  of  former  accidents  to-day,  are  some  slighfc  cracking  sounds
in  thejoints  of  the  limbs  previously  affected  by  contracture  (B.)  (Note  to  the
Second  Freuch  Edition.)


292


SUDDEN  EECOVEEY.


permanent  contracture  of  one  member  only. The  liysterical  crises,
proper,  liad  long  disappeared. This  woman  was  charged  with  tlieftf


FiG.  23. — Hysterical  contracture  of  tiie  right  lower  extremity.

the  contracture  which  had  lasted  for  two  years,  vanished  suddenly  on
account  of  the  moral  shock  caused  by  this  accusation.

3°.  In  the  third  case,  the  contracture  had  assumed  the  hémi-
plégie form  ;  it  affected  the  right  side,  and  was  particularly  évident
in  the  upper  extremity.  Recovery  took  place  almost  suddenly,
eighteen  months  after  invasion,  on  account  of  a  sudden  disap-
pointment.  At  that  time  there  was  no  ansesthesia,  and  the  patient,
whilst  confessing  to  having  experienccd  strange  nervous  dérange-
ments, denied  the  existence  of  any  real  hysterical  seizures  in  the  past..

It  is  necessary  to  recognise,  gentlemen,  the  possibility  of  those
recoveries  which,  even  at  the  présent  day,  hâve  been  cried  up  as


INCUEABLE  CONTRACTURE.  293

miraculous  by  some,  but  of  wliicli  only  charlatans  take  the  crédit  to
themselves,  in  self-glorification.  In  former  times,  similar  cases
were  frequently  cited,  when  it  was  sought  to  prove  before  sceptics
tlie  influence  of  the  supernatural  in  therapeutics.  Prora.  this  point
of  view,  you  will  read  with  interest  an  article  published  in  tlie  Revue
de  Philosophie  Positive  (ler  Avril,  1869),  by  the  vénérable  M.
Littré.i  I  allude  to  an  essay  entitled,  Vn  fragment  de  Médecine  rétro-
spective (Miracles  de  Saint  Louis),  in  which  is  found  an  account
of  several  cases  of  paralysis  cured  after  pilgrimages  to  St.  Denis,  to
the  tomb  where  the  mortal  remains  of  King  Louis  IX  had  recently
been  deposited.  Three  of  thèse  cases  are  especially  interesting  to  us
on  account  of  the  exactness  of  their  détails.  They  relate  to  women,
still  young,  who  were  suddenly  seized  with  contracture  of  one  of  the
lower  extremities,  or  of  botli  members  on  the  same  side  of  the  body,
which  likewise  presented  considérable  ansesthesia.  In  thèse  cases,
recovery  took  place  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  well
adapted  to  strike  the  imagination.  You  see,  gentlemen,  that  things
hâve  little  changed  since  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century.^

But  if  the  recovery  of  thèse  patients  is  possible,  and  even  probable,
it  does  not  necessarily  take  place,  and  it  may  be  that  the  contrac-
ture will  persist,  as  an  incurable  infirmity.  This  is  an  assertion,
which  it  will  not  be  difficult  for  me  to  justify.  But,  allow  me  to
point  out  to  you  that,  in  most  authors,  you  will  only  find  vague,  un-
certain,  and  far  from  satisfactory  assertions  in  référence  to  this
subject.

a.  I  introduce  to  you  a  patient,  now  aged  ^^  years,  who,  eighteen
years  ago,  was  seized,  after  an  hysterical  attack,  with  paraplegia  ac-
companied  by  contracture,  the  principal  characters  of  which  you  can
still  recognise.  At  the  beginning,  the  contracture  from  time  to  time
gave  évidence  of  temporary  amendment.  But,  for  over  sixteen  years,
it  has  never  undergone  the  least  modification.  In  this  case,  we  hâve
a  real  rigidity  of  the  muscles,  with  prédominance  of  the  action  of
the  extensors  and  adductors.  Even  after  sixteen  years  of  immobility
of  the  lower  extremities,  the  ligamentous  parts  are  not  afl^ected,  at
least  not  in  the  knees,  as  we  hâve  been  enabled  to  verify  by  an

^  Very  little,  in  reality,  for  the  professedly  miraculous  cures,  concerning
Tvhich  so  mucli  noise  lias  been  macle  in  thèse  later  days,  do  not  diifer  in  any
perceptible  character  frorn  the  miracles  of  St.  Louis.  The  reader  may  cou-
vince  himself  of  this  by  a  perusa!  of  the  work  recently  published  by  M.  Diday,
;<entitled,  'Examen  Médical  des  Miracles,'  &c.,  Paris,  1873  (Bourueville).


294


SCLEROSIS OP LATERAL COLUMNS.


exploration  made  whèn  tlie  patient  was  under  chloroform.  The
deformity  of  the  feet  alone,  wliicli  resembles  that  of  talipes  eqnino-
varus,  was  net  modified  during  this  artificial  sleep.  The  muscles
of  the  legs  and  thighs  are  markedly  atrophied,  and  faradaic  con-
tractility  is  diminished  there.  During  many  years,  hysteria  seems
to  hâve  been  completely  exhausted  in  this  wornan^  and  it  has  become
very  improbable  that  any  event  could  henceforth  alter,  in  any  way,  the
state  of  her  lower  extremities. (Fig.  24).!


FiG.  24. — Hysterical  contracture  of  botk  iuferior  extremities.

h.  What  condition  then  has  supervened  thus  to  maintain  the  ex-
istence of  this  parajîlegia  with  rigidity  of  the  limbs?  Evidently,
in  récent  cases  of  hysterical  contracture,  tlie  organic  modification
which  produces  permanent  rigidity,  whatever  it  may  be,  whatever  seat
it  occupy,is  veryslight,  and  very  fugitive,  since  its  correlated  symptoms
may  disappear  suddenly  and  without  transition. It  is  certain  that,

'  For  a  detailcd  accouut  of  this  case  see  p.  53  of  the  mcmoir  entitled  '  De
la  contracture  permanente,'  &c.  (B.)


SCLEEOSIS OF LATERAL COLUMNS.  295

with  tlie  means  of  investigation  whicli  we  possess  at  tlie  présent  day,
tlie  most  minute  necroscopic  scrutiny  would  not  be  capable  of  dis-
covering,  in  sucli  cases^  the  traces  of  this  altération.  But  is  it  the
same  with  respect  to  inveterate  cases  ?  No,  gentlemen,  I  believe  I
can  assert,  basing  my  opinion  on  my  knowledge  of  an  analogous
case,  that  in  this  woman  there  supervened,  at  a  certain  period,  a
scierons  lésion  of  the  latéral  columns,  which  would  be  discernible
now,  if  an  examination  were  possible.

It  has  happened  to  me,  in  fact,  once  to  discover,  in  the  case  of
an  hysterical  woman  (who  was  for  ten  years  affected  with  contracture
of  ail  four  members,  which  had  suddenly  supervened),  a  slerous  lésion
which  occupied  symmetrically  the  latéral  columns  throughout  nearly
the  whole  length  of  the  spinal  cord.  On  several  occasions  this  woman
experienced  temporary  remissions  of  the  contracture,  but  after  a  last
seizure,  it  had  become  definitely  permanent.^

'  Société  Médicale  des  Hôpitaux,  Séance  du  25  Janvier,  1865.  Precisely
as  we,  sometimes,  find  a  spinal  lésion,  auatomically  perceptible,  in  inveterate
cases  of  hysterical  contracture,  so  also  may  visual  troubles  be  accompanied  by
lésions  of  tlie  fuudus,  which  an  ophthalnioscopic  examination  will  reveal.  A
student  of  La  Salpêtrière,  M.  A;  Svynos,  has  giveu  in  bis  inaugural  thesis  ('Des
Amblyopies  et  des  Amauroses  Hystériques,'  Paris,  Juillet,  1873)  nearly  ail  that
relates  to  this  subject.  He  has,  in  particular,  described  in  détail  the  ophthalmo-
scopic  phenomena  uoted  on  différent  occasions  in  the  case  of  Etch — .

In  this  case,  which  has  beeu  repeatedly  referred  to  (Lecture  IX  and  XI),
no  lésion  was  discovered  for  a  long  time  in  the  fundus  of  the  ieft  eye,
affected  by  hysterical  amblyopia  ;  but  a  latcr  examination,  made  March  2oth,
1873,  by  M.  Galezowski,  revealed  the  followiug  altérations  :  1°,  the  papilla  is
uniformly  red  over  its  whole  extent,  a  pheucmeuou  consécutive  on  capiUary
congestion  ;  2°,  the  borders  of  the  papilla  are  effaced,  blurred,  on  account  of
a  diffuse  serous  exudation  which  extends  along  the  vessels  over  the  retina  ;
3°,  the  principal  brauch  of  the  central  artery,  which  is  distended  in  the  lower
part  of  the  retiua,  présents  a  fusiform  dilatation,  whilst  near  the  papilla  it
seems  to  be  in  a  state  of  spasmodic  contraction.  Accordiug  to  M.  Galezowski  :
•'  There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  ail  thèse  disorders  are  due  to  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  arteries  in  some  places,  and  their  dilatation  in  otliers.
Hence  the  occurrence  of  papillary  congestion  in  some  parts,  and  of  ansemia
in  otliers,  a  state  of  things  resulting  in  ]3eri-papillary  serous  infiltration."  (B.)
See  also  the  case  recorded  by  M.  Bonnefoy,  in  the  'Le  Mouvement  Médical,*
1873,  p.  276  (Note  to  the  First  Edition).

In  ail  the  patients  affected  by  hysterical  amblyopia,  who  were  recently
examined  by  M.  Laudolt  at  La  Salpêtrière,  the  visual  field  for  wbite  and  for
colours  was  found  to  be  concentrically  diminished,  even  in  cases  where  visual
acuity  and  central  perception  of  colours  are  normal  in  the  eye  of  the  non-
ansesthetic  side. AU  the  functious  of  the  retina  of  the  eye,  on  the  affected


296  PATHOLOGICAL PHYSIOLOGY.

It  is  undoubteclly  legitimate  to  draw  from  thé  foreging  facts,^  some
inductions  relative  to  the  patliological  physiology  of  hystcrical  con-

side,  hâve  proportionately  decreased.  For  détails  relating  to  diminution  of
the  Visual  field  for  colours,  in  hysterical  patients,  see  PI.  ix,  fig.  2,  which
represents  the  phenomena  noted  in  the  case  of  Marc —  and  the  account  by
which  it  is  accompauied. (Note  to  the  Second  French  Edition.)

'  To  the  cases  mentioned  by  M.  Charcot,  the  following,  noted  in  his  wards,
should  be  added,  confirming  as  it  does  his  teaching  in  every  particular.

Berf.he  Chat — ,  aged  iS  years  and  a  half,  (July,  1S73),  "^^^  subject  from
childhood  until  her  twelfth  year,  to  epistaxis,  always  supervening  in  the  riffhi
nostril ;  and  from  the  âge  of  twelve  until  she  was  fifteen,  to  cephalalgia,
alfecting  her  at  monthly  periods  nearly.  At  fifteen,  without  any  known
cause,  and  irrespective  of  any  appréciable  hereditary  influence,  she  had
suddenly  a  convulsive  seizure,  with  loss  of  consciousness.  Rare  during  her
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  years,  thèse  attacks  were  multiplied  in  the  course
of  her  eighteenth  year.  Some  of  them,  which  belong  to  the  category  of  simple
hysteria,  recur  during  every  two  or  three  months  ;  others,  partaking  of  the
nature  of  hystero-epilepsy  appear  every  month,  with  tolerable  regularity.  The
occurrence  of  the  catamenia  (in  January,  1873)  did  not  modify,  in  any  per-
ceptible manner,  the  frequency  and  character  of  the  convulsions.

At  the  time  of  her  admission  to  La  Salpêtrière,  (Sept.,  1872),  this  young
girl  presented  on  her  right  side  :  1°,  complète  hemiansesthesia  ;  2°,  ovarian
hypersesthesia.

Odober  8. — After  an  attack,  accompanied  by  delirium  lasting  for  about
twelve  hours,  contracture  of  the  right  lower  extremity  with  talipes  equino-
varus  supervened  ;  the  contracture  is  complicated  by  an  almost  constant
tremulation  (spinal  epilepsy).  From  the  loth  to  the  25th  of  October,  the
situation  is  unchanged,  in  spite  of  the  occurrence  of  a  hystero-epileptic
fit.

October  30. — Convulsive  paroxysms,  in  which  hysteria  prédominâtes.  During
the  second']  paroxysm,  the  persons  who  held  the  patient  lest  she  might  hurt
herself,  felt  the  right  leg,  which  till  then  had  been  in  extension,  bccome
suddenly  fiexcd  upon  the  thigh,  and  when  the  patient  came  to  her  sensés,  the
contracture  had  ceased.  Ciiat —  retained  a  certain  degree  of  debility  in  the
right  inferior  extremity,  principally  in  the  foot  which  was  turned  inwards.

November. — Berthe  walks  without  limping  ;  the  right  foot  still  turns
inwards  occasionally,  and  its  point  knocks,  at  times,  against  the  left  foot.
Sometimes,  also,  the  right  leg  is  taken  with  a  trembling  which  lasts  i\Ye  or
six  minutes,  and  which  is  foUowed  by  a  sort  of  numbness  that  generally
remains  during  the  course  of  the  day.  "  Then  I  can  no  longer  feel  my  leg,"
says  the  patient.

1873. — The  nniscular  debility  has  progressively  diminished.  To-day  (July  8)
Chat —  is  as  strong  ou  one  side  of  the  body  as  on  the  oiher  ;  the  right
hemiansesthesia  and  ovarian  pain  hâve  not  changed.  This  case  is  an  additional
proof  that  hysterical  paralysis,  with  contracture,  may  suddenly  disappear
without  the  assistance  of  any  intervention. (B.)


HYSTEEICAL  CONTRACTURE. PEOGNOSIS.  297

tracture.  According  to  tlie  considérations  we  hâve  mentioned,  ttie
latéral  columns,  or  at  least  their  posterior  portions — which  préside
over  permanent  contracture  in  cases  of  disseminated  or  fasciculated
sclerosis — are  indicated  as  being  tlie  seat  of  organic  modifications,
which  are  at  fîrst  of  a  temporary  character,  and  give  rise  to  hysterical
contracture.  In  the  course  of  time,  thèse  modifications,  whatever  they
may  be,  give  place  to  deeper  material  altérations, — genuine  sclerosis
is  established.  This  may  not  be,  perhaps,  beyond  the  resources  of
our  art,  but,  in  any  case,  its  existence  most  assuredly  no  longer  allows
us  to  hope  for  that  sudden  disappearance  of  contracture  which  forms
one  of  the  most  striking  characters  of  the  disease,  when  it  lias  not  as
jet  reached  the  most  advanced  phases  of  its  évolution.

Does  there  exist  any  sign  which  would  enable  us  to  indicate,  with
eertainty,  the  character  of  the  case;  to  ascertain,  for  instance,  whether
the  sclerosis  has,  or  has  not  definitely  taken  up  its  abode  in  the
latéral  columns  ?  I  do  not  believe,  gentlemen,  that  in  the  actual
state  of  science,  a  single  symptom  can  be  mentioned  which  offers,  in
this  respect,  an  absolute  worth  in  prognosis.

Convidsive  trépidation  of  the  contractured  members,  whether
purposely  iuduced,  or  spontaneously  supervening  [sjnnal  epilepsy),  a
certain  degree  of  emaciation  of  the  muscular  masses,  a  slight  diminu-
tion in  the  energy  of  electrical  contractility,  ought  not,judgingfrom
my  own  observation,  to  make  us  altogether  despair  of  seeing  the
contracture  disappear,  without  leaving  any  trace  behind.  On  the
contrary,  atrophy,  limited  to  certain  groups  of  muscles,  especially  if
fibrillary  contractions  be  added,  similar  to  those  we  observe  in  pro-
gressive muscular  atrophy,  or  a  very  marked  decrease  of  faradaic
electricity,  ought  to  make  us  suppose  not  only  that  the  latéral
columns  are  profoundly  injured,  but,  also,  that  the  anterior
cornua  of  the  grey  substance  hâve  been  invaded.  I  hâve  not  ob-
served,  up  to  the  présent,  thèse  latter  symptoms  except  in  cases  of
hysterical  contracture  of  very  old  standing,  and  which  left  but
little  hope  of  ever  again  seeing  the  aflected  members  résume  their
normal  functions.

I  will  add,  in  conclusion,  that  the  existence  of  a  spinal  organic
lésion,  of  more  or  less  gravity,  will  be  placed  almost  beyond  doubt
if,  under  the  influence  of  sleep  induced  by  chloroform,  rigidity
of  the  members  only  gives  way  slowly,  or  even  persists  to  any
marked  extent.

In  my  opinion,  so  long  as  thèse  symptoms  are  not  distinctly


298  HTSTERICAL CLUB-FOOT.

manifested,  we  should  despair  of  nothing.  It  is  besides  important
not  to  forget  that  latéral  sclerosls,  eveii  when  completely  established,
is  far  from  being  au  incurable  disorder,  as  I  hope  soon  to  prove  to
you.

In  the  case  of  tlie  patients  to  whom  I  bave  called  your  attention,
the  contracture  occupied  eitber  the  whole  of  one  member  or  of  two
members,  or  even  more.  But  tbere  are  cases  in  Avbicli  spasmodic
rigidity  remains  limited  to  some  portion  of  a  member,  as  the  foot  for
instance,  when  it  produces  a  sort  of  liyderical  diib-foot  {talîpedal
distortions,  of  M.  Laycock).  Quite  recently,  Dr.  E.  Boddaert
communicated  to  the  Médical  Society  of  Ghent  a  most  interesting
case  of  this  kiud,^  The  contracture  had  occasioned  the  deformity,
known  as  talipes  varus.  Similar  cases  hâve  been  collected  and
published  by  Dr.  Little,^  by  C.  Bell,^  by  Dr.  F.  C.  Skey,^  and  by
some  other  authors.

If  it  were  not  for  certain  reasons  of  propriety,  I  could,  in  my  turn,
gentlemen,  relate  in  ail  its  détails  the  history  of  a  case  which  resem-
bles  that  published  by  M.  Boddaert.

Let  it  suiïice  to  inform  you  that  a  young  girl,  at  présent  twenty-
two  years  of  âge,  very  nervous,  and  belonging  to  a  family  in  which
nervous  affections  predominate,  was,  three  years  ago^  suddenly  seized
with  painful  contracture  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg;  it  could  be
assigned  to  no  cause,  and  she  had  not  previously  shown  any  charac-
teristic  symptom  of  hysteria.  This  contracture,  which  made  the  foot
assume  the  attitude  of  most  marked  talipes  equino-varus,  gave  way
to  several  remissions  in  the  course  of  the  first  year,  but  during  nearly
two  years  it  h  as  remained  stationary  and  seems  permanent,  (June,
1870).

Several  of  the  muscles  of  the  leg  bave  become  greatly  atrophied  ;
they  likewise  présent  very  marked  fibrillary  contractions,  and  respond  '
but  feebly  to  electrical  excitation. Hence,  I  believe  that  there  is  little
chance  of  seeing  the  contracture  become  resolved,  more  especially  as

*  '  Annales  de  la  Société  de  Médecine  de  Gand,'  1 859,  p.  93.

*  A  '  Treatise  on  the  Nature  and  ïreatraent  of  Club  Foot  and  Aualogous
Distortions/  London,  1839,  Case  35.

^  '  The  Nervous  System  of  the  Human  Body,'  3rd  Edition,  1836,  Case
177.

^  '  llystcria,  &c.  :  Six  Lectures  Dclivered  to  the  Students  of  St.  Bartho-
lomew's  llospital/  1866,  3rd  Edition,  Loudon,  1870,  p.  102.


HYSTERIOAL CONTRACTURE. AMYOTROPHY.  299

it  shows  but  very  imperfect  amendment  during  sleep,  induced  by
cliloroform.  I  will  also  point  out  a  most  interesting  peculiarity;,
from  a  cliiiical  point  of  view  : — this  young  giri  bas  experienced  hys-
terical  seizures  in  the  course  of  the  last  few  montbs  onlv.


LECTURE  XIII.
HYSTERO-EPILEPSY.

SuMMARY. — Ilystero-einlepsy.  Meanïng  qf  tJds  term.  Opinions  of
authorSr  Ejnleptiform  hjsteria  ;  hysteria  with  mixed  crises.
Varieties  qf  hystero-epilejisy  ;  hystero-epilepsy  loith  distinct
crises  ;  hystero-ejnlepsy  with  combined  crises,  or  attaques- accès
{seiziire-fits) .  Biffereoices  and  analogies  hetween  epilepsy  and
Jiystero-ejpilepsy .  Diagnostic  signs  siipplied  hy  examination  of
central  tem/peratnre  in  hystero-epilej)tic  acme,  and  in  epileptic
acme.  Epileptic  acme  ;  ifs  phases.  Clinical  càaracters  qf
hysterio-epileptic  acme.  Gravity  qf  certain  exceptional  cases
of  hystero-epilepsy . Case  recorded  hy  Wunderlich.

Gentlemen, — In  the  brief  clinical  description  which  I  gave  you,
in  référence  to  eacli  of  the  patients  who  had  passed  under  your
observation  at  our  récent  conférences,  I  studied  to  bring  ont  the
principal  cliaracters  presented  by  the  convulsive  seizures  to  which
they  are  subject.

You  hâve  been  able  to  recognise,  with  ease,  that  we  hâve  not  hère
to  deal  with  common  attacks,  which  can  be  assigned  at  once  and
without  discussion  to  the  classic  type.  Nor  is  it  merely  by  their
great  intensity  that  thèse  convulsive  phenomena  are  distinguished,  but
also  by  the  form  they  assume;  and  what  most  strikes  the  observant
witness  is  to  lind  amongst  the  clonic  convulsions  of  hysteria,
certain  more  or  less  marked  features  which  recail  the  phenomena  of
epilepsy.

In  point  of  fact,  the  convulsive  form  of  disease  which  is  found
in  ail  thèse  cases,  is  that  whicli  lias  been  designated,  in  thèse
latter  times,  by  the  name  of  hystero-epilepsy  ;  and,  remembcr,  it  is
the  only  form  met  with  in  thèse  patients.  Thèse  women  would  not,
therefore,  be  simply  hysterical  patients,  they  are  ail  hystero-epilep-


HYSTEEO-EPILEPSY.  301

tical.  In  wliat  respect  do  they  clifFer  from  ordinary  liysterical  patients?
This  is  a  question  concerning  whicli  it  is  important  to  hâve  a  clear
understandingj  and  in  order  to  secure  tliat  objecta  I  request  your
permission  to  treat  the  matter  at  some  leugth.

I.

If  we  keep  to  the  terms  of  the  dénomination  generally  employed —
Itystero-epilepsy — it  would  appear  as  if  no  misunderstanding  could
arise.  It  signifies  that  in  patients^  so  aft'ected,  hysteria  is  présent  in
combination  with  epilepsy,  so  as  to  constitute  a  mixed  form,  a  kiud
of  hybrid  composed  half  of  hysteria  and  half  of  epilepsy.  But
does  this  appellation,  in  reality,  accurately  interpret  the  phenomena  ?
Superficially  looked  it,  it  would  seem  to  do  so,  since  we  hâve  recog-
nised  in  the  seizures  some  of  the  features  of  epilepsy.  This,  m  fact,
is  the  manner  in  whicli  most  modem  authors  appear  to  understand
the  term.  According  to  their  view,  hystero- epilepsy  would  be  a
mixture,  a  combination  of  the  two  neuroses,  varying  in  proportions
in  différent  cases;  it  is  not  epilepsy  alone,  nor  hysteria  alone,  but
both  together.

Such,  I  repeat,  is  the  most  popular  doctrine.  However,  it  is  far
from  being  universally  accepted,  and  the  camp  of  its  adversaries  still
reckons  many  adhérents.  Thèse  refuse  to  admit  the  legitimacy  of
this  hybrid,  half- epilepsy,  half-hysteria.  They  do  not,  indeed,  deny
that  epilepsy  and  hysteria  may  co-exist  in  the  same  individual.  The
most  superficial  observation  would  protest  against  any  such  assertion.
There  is  nothing  to  authorise  the  belief  that  thèse  diseases  are  antag-
onistic,  and  it  might  even  be  possible,  though  it  has  not  been  proved,
that  patients  affected  by  one  of  them,  might  by  that  very  fact  be  pre-
disposed  to  contract  the  other.  But,  under  such  circumstances,  it
is  added,  the  convulsive  accidents  remain  distinct  and  separate,
without  exercising  reciprocal  influence  over  each  other,  in  any  marked
manner,  and,  above  aU,  without  mingling  confusedly  so  far  as  to
justify  the  création  of  a  mixed  intermediate  species,  in  one  word,  of
a  hyhrid.

What,  then,  according  to  this  view,  is  the  signification  of  those
attacks,  the  existence  of  which  is  so  clearly  established  by  the  very
cases  that  form  the  foundation  of  our  study,  and  in  which  epilepsy
seems  mixed  up  with  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  convulsive  hysteria  ?

Epilepsy  would,  in  their  opinion,  èe présent  hère  only  in  the  ex-
ternat manifestation  ;  it  would  not  be  substantially  existent. In


303  EPILEPTirOEM HYSTERIA.

other  words,  we  would  hâve,  in  tliese  cases,  hysteria  solely  and
always  présent,  taking  on  it  the  semblance  of  epilepsy.  The  term
epilepUform  h?/stena,  which,  if  I  err  not,  Louyer  Villermay  was  one
of  the  first  to  employ,  would  serve  to  designate  thèse  mixed  attacks.
The  convulsion,  epileptic  in  form,  would  hère  appear,  as  it  appears
in  so  many  other  affections  of  the  nervous  system,  as  an  accessory
élément,  without  altering  in  anything  the  nature  of  the  original
disease.

II.

That,  gentlemen,  is  the  thesis  to  which  I  give  my  entire  adhésion.
It  has  already  been  maintained  by  some  most  compétent  authorities.
Of  them,  I  may  cite  Tissot,  Dubois  (of  Amiens),  Sandras,  and  M.
Briquet,  who  are  very  explicit  on  this  question.  '^Hysterical  seizures,"
says  M.  Tissot,  "sometimes  closely  resemble  epilepsy.  Hence,  they
hâve  been  classed  as  a  particular  form  of  hysteria,  under  the  name
of  epileptiform  hysteria.  But,  nevertheless,  thèse  seizures  hâve  not
the  true  characters  of  epilepsy ."i

M.  Dubois  (of  Amiens),  considers  epileptiform  hysteria,  as  hysteria
with  an  extra  degree  of  intensity  superadded  to  its  syraptoms,"
Sandras  expresses  a  similar  opinion.^

M.  Briquet,  wliose  article  on  this  subject  bears  the  mint-mark
of  the  soundest  observation,  says  that  this  species  of  hyderia,  toitlt
mixed  attachs,  is  only  a  particular  form  of  hysteria — is  simply  very
intense  hysteria, — the  prognosis  is  not  essentially  modified  :  the
nature  of  the  cause  which  occasioned  the  hysteria  and  certain  con-
ditions spécial  to  the  affectée!  individual,  account  for  the  modifica-
tions observed  in  the  form  of  seizure.  The  nature  of  the  hysteria
is  not,  itself,  radically  altered.

Be  good.  enough  to  remark,  gentlemen,  that  this  is  something
more  than  a  mère  question  of  words  ;  it  is  a  question  also  of  no-
sology,  and  cousequently,  a  question  of  diagnosis  and  of  prog-
nosis. Thèse  circumstances  will  I  trust,  suffice  to  justify  in  your
eyes  the  détails  on  which  I  am  obliged  to  enter,  in  order  that  the
conviction  which  I  entertain  may  take  its  place  in  your  minds.

III.
Let  us,  therefore,  enquire  upon  what  basis  the  prevailing  doctrine

^  Tissot,  '  Maladies  clos  Nerfs,'  t.  iv,  p.  75.
-  Dunant,  '  De  l'Hystcro-Epilepsie/  p.  11.
^  Sandras,  '  Maladies  Nerveuses,'  t.  i,  p.  205.


HYSTERO-EPILEPSY. VAPJETIES.  303

reposes.  Hysteria  and  epilepsy,  it  is  alleged,  may  be  combined  in
différent  ways  in  tlie  same  patient.  M.  Beau,  who  studied  in  this
hospital,  states  tliat  he  found  this  combination  in  32,  ont  of  276
patients.  It  takes  place  in  différent  modes^  and  tlie  foUowing  caté-
gories may  be  legitimately  established.

A.  In  tlie  first  group,  the  hysterical  seizures  and  tlie  epilcptic  fits
remain  distinct  ;  this  is  what  M.  Laudouzy  proposes  to  call  hystero-
epilepsy  with  distinct  crisis.  WeW,  gentlemen,  that  would  be  the
most  fréquent  form,  seeing  that  20  out  of  the  32  cases  reported  by
M.  Beau  belong  to  it.  Two  sub- divisions,  however,  should  be  estab-
lished in  this  species  :

1°.  Epilepsy  is  the  primary  disease  :  upon  this  stock  hysteria
becomes  grafted  in  due  time,  that  is  to  say,  most  frequently  at  the
period  of  puberty,  under  the  influence  of  certain  causes,  and  of  moral
émotions  in  particular.

A  case  which  M.  Briquet  quotes  from  Landouzy  deserves  to  be
summarised  for  your  instruction  as  bearing  upon  this  point.  A
young  woman,  who  had  been  affected  with  epilepsy  from  her  child-
liood,  got  married  at  the  âge  of  eighteen.  The  disease,  which  she
had  concealed,  soon  sliowed  itself.  Hence  arose  vexations  disputes
which  eiigendered  hysteria.  The  attacks,  proper  to  the  two  neuroses,
were  separate  and  preserved  their  spécifie  characters,  without  either
being  influenced  by  the  other.  A  reconcihation  having  taken  place
on  accouut  of  her  pregnancy,  between  the  patient  and  lier  hu^band,
domestic  peace  was  re-established  which  caused  the  hysteria  to  cease,
but  the  epilepsy  persisted.

2°.  At  other  times,  epilepsy  is  superaddedto  hysteria.  This  con-
dition appears  to  be  much  rarer  than  the  preceding.  M.  Briquet,
liowever,  reports  a  case  which  came  under  his  own  observation  in
which  the  attacks  were  distinctly  separate.  The  mind  becomes  ob-
scured,  in  the  long  run,  in  patients  belonging  to  this  class,  owing
undoubtedly  to  the  influence  of  the  epilepsy.

3°.  Some  other  combinations,  of  a  secondary  order,  hâve  been
mentioned. Thus  :

a.  Convulsive hysteria co-exists  with minor epilepsy^ (Bea«,
Dunant).

'  The  peiii  mal  of  Freiich  autliors.  This  form  of  the  disease,  so  distinct
from  the  common  form,  to  which  the  name  epilepsy  is  popularly  applied,  and
yet  so  important  in  itself,  especially  when  questions  of  liereditary  prédispositions
arise,  seenis  to  deserve  a  distinct  désignation.  (S.)


304  HYSTEEO-EPILEPSY. VARIETIES.

l.  Convulsive  epilepsy  is  superadded  to  soine  of  the  phenomena  of
non-convulsive  hysteria,  e.  g.,  contracture,  aneesthesia,  &c.  We
hâve  a  case  of  this  kind  among  our  patients.

But  thèse  différent  combinations  alter  nothing  in  the  essence  of
things.  Most  frequently  the  two  diseases,  in  hystero-epilepsy,  exist
simultané  ou  sly  and  proceed  their  several  ways,  Avithout  reacting  on
each  other  in  any  serious  manner,  each  of  them  preserving  its  own
characteristics  and  proper  prognosis.  With  respect  to  this  first  form
of  hystero-epilepsy  ail  authors  are  agreed.  The  second  form  only
is  concerued  in  the  debate.

B.  In  this  form,  the  hysterïa  and  the  epilejjsy  are  coeval  ;  they
both  develope  at  the  same  time.  Hère  the  crises  do  not  remain  dis-
tinct; they  hâve  never  been  so.  From  the  outset,  the  intermingling
had  been  effected,  and^  in  subséquent  attacks,  the  two  convulsive
forms  will  always  show  themselves  combined,  though  in  varying
proportions,  without  being  ever,  at  any  moment,  completely  dis-
severed.

To  this  condition  the  name  of  hjstero-epilepfiij  îv'ith  comhined
crises  bas  been  given.  In  the  technical  jargon  long  employed  in
the  spécial  wards  of  La  Salpêtrière,  thèse  crises,  in  such  cases,  are
called  ''  attaques-accès  "  (which  we  may  translate  "  seizure-fits  ").

IV.

Is  there  really  any  epilepsy  in  thèse  mixed  crises  ?  Such  is  the
question  which  we  hâve  now  to  discuss.  With  this  view,  it  is  right
that  we  should  take  the  description  of  hystero-epilepsy  with  mixed
crises,  as  agreed  upon  by  authors,  and  examine  it  under  ail  its
aspects.  From  M.  Briquet,  in  especial,  I  borrow  the  description  of
the  seizure-fit.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  in  complète  concordance  with
the  results  of  my  own  observation.

a.  From  the  outset,  the  mixed  attack  assumes  its  proper  character  ;
from  that  moment,  it  is  epileptiform  hysteria.  I  would  recall  to
your  memory  the  patient  Etch — ,  who,  in  her  first  attack,  fell
into  the  fire,  and  injured  her  face.^

b.  The  hysterical  aura,  such  as  we  hâve  described  it,  always  con-
stitutes  a  premonitory  symptom.  This  aura,  generally  of  long
duration,  occupies  the  abdomen,  the  epigastrium, — at  ail  events,  it
does  not  affect  the  head  alone  from  the  very  first,  nor  one  of  the

'  Lecture  XI. This  patient  is  also  mentioned  in  Lecture  IX.


HYSTERO-EPILEPTIC ATTACK.  305

extremities,  as  takes  place  in  ejiilcps^  with  aura.  Ilence  it  is  per-
fectly  exact  to  say  that  patients  suffering  from  hystero-epilepsy  with
mixed  crises  are  nearly  always  forewarned  in  sufficient  time  to
enable  them  to  take  précautions  or  to  seek  a  place  of  refuge,  when
thé  fit  is  coming  on.

c.  In  the  convulsive  attack,  the  so-called  epileptic phase  generally
présents  itself  first,  to  open  the  scène.  The  drama  begins — a  sudden
shriek,  extrême  pallor,  loss  of  consciousness,  a  fall,  distortion  of  the
features — then  tonic  rigidity  seizes  on  ail  the  members.  This  rigidity,
remark  it  well,  is  rarely  followed  by  the  clonic  convulsions,  brief
in  duration,  limited  in  oscillation,  predomiuating  on  one  side  of
the  body,  such  as  we  see  them  in  true  epilepsy.  Nevertheless,  the  face
may  become  greatly  tumefied  and  violet-coloured.  Tliere  is  foam-
ing  at  the  mouth,  and  the  foam  is  sometimes  bloody  on  account  of
the  tongue  or  lips  having  been  bitten.  Finally,  gênerai  relaxation
of  the  muscles  may  follow,  \Yith  coma,  and  stertorous  respiration
during  a  less  or  greater  length  of  time.

d.  To  this  first  phase,  which  I  repeat  is  the  one  chiefly  concerned
in  the  dispute,  the  clonic  pli ase  succeeds.  Then  ail  is  hysteria  :  great
gesticulations,  having  a  purposive  character,  supervene,  and  some-
times violent  contortions  are  made,  characteristic  of  the  most  varions
passions,  such  as  terror,  hatred,  &c.i  At  the  same  iimç,  paroxi/smal
■delirium  breaks  out.

e.  The  termination  of  the  attack  is  marked  by  sobs,  tears,  laugh-
ter,  &c.

Thèse  différent  phases  do  not  always  succeed  each  other  in  so
reguîar  a  manner  ;  they  get  entangled  occasionally,  and  now  one,  now
the  other  prédominâtes.  In  the  patient  C — ,  for  instance,  the
tonic  phase  prevails  to  a  great  extent  over  the  other,  and  sometimes
it  is  almost  exclusively  manifested.

V.

We  hâve  arrived,  gentlemen,  at  the  critical  point.  In  what  does
this  hysteria  with  complex  crises  difFer  from  ordinary  hysteria,  if  it
be  really  separate  ?  In  what  does  it  resemble  true  epilepsy,  if  there
be  reason  for  such  an  approximation  ?

Is  the  appearance  of  tonic  convulsions  a  novel  and  unwonted  fact,
in  the  classical  description  of  the  common  hysterical  attack?  Certainly

'  See  antt',  figures  19,  20,  and  21.

20


306  EPILEPSY AND HYSTEEO-EPILEPSY.

not.  It  is  not  really  exceptional,  in  common  hysterical  attacks  (when
no  one  thinks  at  ail  of  interpolating  tlie  epileptic  élément),  to  see
the  supervention  of  tonic  convulsions  occur,  having  an  epileptiform
character,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  the  seizure.  Ail  autliors  are
agreed  upou  this  point.  Thèse  convulsions  are  occasionally  so  marked
that  M.  Briquet  has  been  induced  to  establish,  side  by  side  with  the
clonic  or  classic  hysterical  seizure,  a  species  of  seizure  in  which
semi-tetanic  stiffness  prédominâtes  in  the  body  and  members.
Does  it  not,  therefore,  seem  already  probable  that  the  so-called  epi-
leptic form  is,  properly  speaking,  only  the  exaggeration,  the  highest
degree  of  development  of  this  varïety  of  common  hysteria  ?

YI.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  turn  our  gaze  upon  true  epilepsy,  we
shall  meet  with  a  certain  number  of  characteristic  peculiarities,  of
which  we  can  easily  make  profitable  use.

We  should  point  out,  in  the  first  place,  that,  according  to  the  de-
scription already  given,  the  epileptic  type  is  never  represented  in  the
seizure-fîts,  save  in  an  imperfect  manner,  in  rough  outline  as  it  were  ;
but,  indeed,  that  alone  would  not  be  a  décisive  argument.  Hère  is
a  more  significant  character.

Never,  in  descriptions  of  hystero-epilepsy  with  mixed  attacks,  do
you  find  mention  made  either  of  the  petit  mal,  or  of  the  epileptic
vertifjo.  AYe  might  also  add,  as  supplyiug  material  for  an  important
distinction,  that,  in  this  form  of  hystero-epilepsy,  even  the  most
intense  epileptiform  attack  is,  judging  from  our  own  observation,
modified  and  sometimes  even  arrested  in  its  development  by  com-
pression of  the  ovary.  This  never  happens  in  true  epilepsy,  as  we
hâve  over  and  over  again  assured  ourselves  by  experiment.^

In  cases  of  mixed  attacks,  even  when  frequently  repeated,  it  is
acknowledged  by  authors,  that  obnubilation  of  the  intellect  and
dementia  are  never  the  conséquences  of  thèse  seizures.  This  is
contrary  to  what  would  almost  necessarily  follow,  if  epilepsy  were
really  in  question.  I  cannot  dobetter,  in  connection  with  this,  than
recall  to  your  mind  the  case  of  the  patient  Ler — ,  who,  for  ncarly
forty  years,  has  been  subjeot  to  the  most  violent  epileptiform  hys-
teria. This  woman  is,  no  doubt,  odd,  and  whimsical  in  her  ways,
but  her  intellect  remains  what  it  was  at  the  outset. The  information

'  V.  untl.  Lecture  XI.


EPILErTIC ACME. TEMPERATURE.  307

we  hâve  receivecl,  on  inquiries  made^  do  not  permit  the  survival  of
any  doubt  as  regards  tliis  fact.  In  sliort^  in  cases  of  this  kind,  the
prognosis  is  nothing  différent  froin  that  of  intense  hysteria.  Such.
is  likewise  the  opinion  of  M.  Briquet.

Trom  this  considération  a  practical  conclusion  is  deducible_,  well
calculated  to  command  jour  attention.

There  is,  lastly,  another  characteristic  on  which  I  beg  leave  to  dwell
at  some  length,  because  it  has  not  hitherto  been  noted,  so  far  as  I
am  aware,  and  because,  in  my  judgment,  it  is  décisive.  This  charac-
teristic is  yielded  by  thermometrical  exploration  ;  and  I  hasten  to  seize
the  opportunity  which  présents  itself  now  of  showing  you,  by  a  new
example,  the  advantage  which  may  be  derived  from  this  mode  of  in-
vestigation in  the  clinical  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.

It  is  not,  gentlemen,  that  the  tonic  epileptiform  convulsions  of  hys-
terical  patients  differ,  in  any  respect,  from  the  convulsions  of  the  epi-
leptic  attack,  so  far  as  changes  of  central  température  are  concerned.
The  tonic  hysterical  seizure,  if  it  hâve  but  a  certain  intensity,  raises
the  température  by  i°  C,  (=i*8°  T.),  nay,  by  a  degree  and  some
tenths  (38°,  38-5°  C.,=  100-4°  l'v  I0i'3°  'F.),  exactly  as  we  find  to
resuit  from  an  attack  of  true  epilepsy,  This  is  a  fact  the  accuracy
of  which  we  hâve  had  many  opportunities  of  testing  in  thèse  wards."

But  if,  as  regards  thermie  élévation,  the  attack  of  epileptiform
hysteria  and  the  attack  of  true  epilepsy  be  identical,  it  is  quite
otherwise  when  we  hâve  to  deal  with  those  fast-following  fits  that
constitute  what,  as  regards  epilepsy,  hâve  been  called  in  France
les  séries  or  etai  de  mal  (=  statîis  epilejjtictis, — which  we  may
translate  by  the  term  ejùleptic  acme).

Of  this  epilepiic  acme  we  can  distinguish  two  kinds  :  the  minor
acme,  {les  petites  séries),  constituted  by  from  2  to  6  fits,  and  the  major
acme,  (les  gratides  séries),  in  which  from  20  to  30,  or  even  more  fits,
hâve  been  reckoned  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  I  address  myself  ex-
clusively  to  the  latter,  because  the  phenomenon,  on  which  I  wish  to
lay  stress,  then  manifests  itself  in  its  typical  state  of  full  develop-
ment.  In  such  cases,  gentlemen,  that  is  to  say,  when  a  great  number
of  true  epileptic  fits  succeed  each  other,  within  a  brief  space,  the
central  température  becomes  remarkably  augmented  ;  and,  most
assuredly,  this  thermie  increase  cannot  be  attributed  exclusively  to  the
répétition,  any  more  than  to  the  intensity,  of  tonic  muscular  contrac-

ï  Bourneville,  '  Etudes  Cliniques  et  Thermomètriques  sur  les  Maladies  dm
Système  Nerveux.'


308


EPILEPTIC ACME. TEMPERATURE.


lions,  for  tlie  convulsions  may  completely  cease  for  several  days,
•whilst  tlie  température  nevertlieless  persists^  during  this  time^at  a  very
'higli  élévation.

We  can  observe  and  foUow  thèse  peculiarities  on  the  diagram
•wliich  I  place  before  you,  and  wbich  represents  the  changes  of  central
température  in  the  patient  Cheval — ,  during  the  course  of  the
■ejnlejjtlc  acme  which  she  has  recently  experienced. (Fig.  25.)


Jours] 1


2 3 4

5 6 7 8  j

i

'\ 1 r

I


W.l


:  -ir-f-


\  1  ■  1

r

Aï

u

!

1

■in^

r

.:

1  '
i

;

i

BH

1

FiG,  2 15. — Température  (C)  taken  shortly  after  the  eleventh  fit.  rrom  the  eveniug
oC  the  first  day  uutil  the  morniug  of  the  second,  thirty-one  fits  occurred.
+  Température  after  a  remission  of  four  liours.  After  this  the  fits
take  place  at  greater  intervals,  and  cease  on  the  third  day.  The  dotted
Une  represents  the  state  of  the  puise.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  élévation  of  température  is,
in  the  great  raajority  of  cases,  even  after  complète  cessation  of  the
convulsions,  an  omen  of  the  darkest  significance.  It  is,  besides,
most  frequently  accompanicd  by  a  gênerai  state  of  the  constitution
whicli,  of  itself,  gives  much  cause  for  appréhension. Thus,  some-


HYSTERO-EPILEPTIO ACME.  309

times,  a  more  or  less  marked  delirium  exists,  whicli  M.  Delasiauve
attributes  to  meningitic  congestion  ;  sometimes,  on  the  contrary,
a  more  or  less  profound  coma — the  apoplectiform  congestion  of
authors — is  found.  In  both  cases  we  observe  great  prostration,  dry-
ness  of  the  tongue,  teudency  to  rapid  sloughing  over  the  sacrum  ;
lastly,  occasional  production  of  transient  hemiplegia,  the  cause  of
wliich  has  not,  as  yet,  been  revealed  by  any  post-mortem  examina-
tion.

However,  and  this  is  a  most  important  datum  to  note,  this  éléva-
tion of  température,  even  when  it  exceeds  41°  C.  (=  io5'8°  F.),  and
is  accompanied  by  the  grave  symptoms  just  enumerated,  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  a  sign  necessaril^  heralding  a  fatal  termination.  You
perceive  by  the  record  of  Chevall — ,  that  a  patient  may  still
recover,  even  from  the  midst  of  ail  thèse  grievous  circum stances.
Augmentation  of  température  above  41°  C.(=  io5'8°  F.)  is  not,  there-
fore,  necessarily  terminal  in  such  cases  ;  consequently,  the  assertions
published  by  Herr  Wunderlich,  and  after  him  by  Herr  Erb,  in  relation
to  this  point,  must  be  subjected  to  abatement.i

^  The  case  of  the  patient  Chevall —  is  related  at  full  length,  up  to  aôth
March,  1872,  ia  our  '  Etudes  Cliniques  et  Thermomètriques  sur  les  Maladies
du  Système  Nerveux*  (Obs.  xxxiii,  p.  285).  Since  that  period,  Chevall — ■
Edmée  has  been  seized  with  new  accidents  issuing  in  a  fatal  termination.  We
think  it  ail  the  more  useful  to  relate  them  hère  because,  besides  completing
the  former  record,  they  sapply  additional  proof  in  corroboration  of  the  opinions
stated  by  M.  Charcot  in  the  présent  lecture.

1873,  Febmaij  9. — For  about  a  week  Chevall —  has  been  tetchy  and
irritable;  sometimes  she  has  been  so  violent  that  constraint  was  necessary
(maniacal  excitement).

Tehruary  10. — Last  niglit  the  agitation  augmented;  Chevall —  prevented
the  other  patients  from  sleeping,  by  her  cries.  She,  however,  became  calm
after  three  o'clock  a.m.  Three  fits  were  noted  during  the  night.  From  one
o'clock  p. m.  till  three  o'clock  p. m.  the  fits  multiplied.  At  three  o'clock  :  puise
100;  rectal  température,  38"6°  C.  (=:ior48°  F.)

Tehruary  11. — Yesterday,  from  one  o'clock  till  nine  o'clock  p.m.,  forty-
three  fits  were  counted  ;  and  from  that  until  seveu  o'clock  a.m.,  seveuty  fits  ;
from  seven  o'clock  till  eleven  o'clock  a.m.,  when  this  note  was  taken,  there
occurred  thirty-five  fits. The  foUowing  is  a  description  of  the  fits  :

Five  or  ten  seconds  before  their  occurrence,  the  pupils  (especially  the  left)
became  widely  dilated.  Sometimes,  in  addition,  we  hâve  little  complainings,
grinding  of  the  teeth,  and,  exoeptionally,  a  slight  cry.  The  fit  begins  :  the
eyeballs  are  subject  to  very  marked  convulsive  movements  (nystagmus)  ;  the  face
grows  pallid,  and  is  deviated  to  the  left  ;  the  gaze,  at  first  fixed  and  direct^
is  averted  to  the  left. The  left  arm  rises,  and  then  stifFens,  simultaneously


310  HYSTERO-EPILEPTICAL ACME.

I  should  remiiid  you,  in  passing,  that  this  rapicl  increase  of  tem-
pérature  is far from being the  exclusive  appanage  of  tiie  epi-

with  tlie  riglit,  wliicli,  however,  rests  upon  the  bed.  The  tétanie  stifTuess  next
invades  the  lower  extremities.  At  the  end  of  a  few  seconds,  we  notice  semi-
occlusion  of  the  left  eyelids,  which  are  agitated,  like  the  muscles  on  the  same
side  of  the  face,  by  rapid  convulsive  movements.

Ten  to  fifteen  seconds  after,  the  face  and  eyes  turu  to  the  right  ;  the  body
inclines  to  the  right;  the  left  eyelids  open,  and  remain  nearly  niotionless  ;  but,
to  make  up  for  this,  the  convulsions  seize  upon  the  right  eyelids  and  the
muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  face.  The  mouth,  at  first  drawn  to  the
left,  is  now  drawn  to  the  right.  The  clouic  convulsions  mauifested  during
this  phase,  which  had  at  first  invaded  the  members  of  the  left  side,  now  pre-
dominate  on  the  right.

Finally,  the  fit  concludes  by  snoring,  extrême  lividness  of  the  face,  and
foaming  at  the  mouth.  At  the  elose  of  the  fit,  the  pupils  résume  their  normal
dimensions.

During  the  remissions  the  patient  is  in  complète  resolution.  When  raised
and  let  go  the  limbs  fall  inert.  Energetic  pinching  provokes  a  slight  raising  of
the  left  arni,  but  nothing  in  the  right.  When  the  soles  of  the  feet  are  tickled,
reflex  movements  are  set  up,  which  are  more  intense  ou  the  left  than  on  the
right.  The  right  eje  is  uot  injected,  whilst  considérable  hyperœmia  of  the  lower
half  of  the  left  eyeball  and  a  lesser  vascularisation  of  the  lower  lid  exist.  The
nostrils  are  pulvérulent.  The  digestive  tube  présents  no  particular  symptom  ;
there  was  a  stool  after  euema  yesterday  ;  Ch —  micturates  in  bed.  Erythema-
tous  patch  on  the  left  gluteal  région,  profuse  perspiratiou,  augmeuted  at  inter-
vais.  At  eleven  o'clock  :  puise  120  :  respiration  49,  noisy  ;  rectal  température,
40'8°  (=io5'44T.). At  noon  puise  130 ;  respiration  60.

Six  0' dock  p. m. — Seventy-six  fits  hâve  been  noted  since  eleven  o'clock  a.m.,
of  which  thirteen  occurred  after  half-past  four  o'clock  p.m.  Respiration  60  ;
rectal  température,  41  "3°  C.  (^io6'34°  P.)  Copions  perspiration  over  the
whole  body,  on  both  sides  indifferently.  The  entire  left  side  of  the  body
(face,  trunk,  &c.)  is  plainly  warmer  than  the  right.

The  eyelids  are  half-opeu  ;  the  eyes  turned  up  ;  the  pupils  are  moderately
dilated  (the  right  still  the  more  enlarged).  Before  every  fit,  dilatation  of  the
pupils  augments  in  a  remarkable  manner.  The  nystagnms  seems  to  appear
almost  simultaueously.  Neither  vomiting,  nor  stools,  nor  micturitiou.  Same
condition  of  right  gluteal  région. Coma. Stertorous  breathing.

Bight  d dock  p.m. — Puise — ;  respiration  70  ;  rectal  température  41  "a"  C.
ï"ourteen  fits.  From  this  time  forth  the  patient  had  no  more  fits.  She  died
at  three  o'clock  in  the  morniug.  Vaginal  température  (taken  by  another)  was
4i'2°  (=ioi'io°  F.).  At  eleven  o'clock  in  the  moruing  ou  the  iith  February,
i.e.,  eight  hours  after  death,  rectal  température  40°.  (^104°  F.)  (the  corpse
remaining  in  the  bed).  The  pupils  are  moderately  dilated,  and  both  equally
Numerous  livid  stripes  or  whcals  on  the  belly,  back,  buttocks,  and  thighs.

Post-mortem,  Feb.  18. — The  bones,  dura  mater,  and  sinuses  présent  nothing
abnormal. The quantity of cephalo-rachidian liquid  is not  augmented


TEMPERATURE.  311

leptic  acme  ;  it  is  likewise  observed  in  the  so-called  congestive,
apoplectiform,  or  epileptiform  attacks  of  progressive  gênerai  para-
lysis,  as  was  first  pointed  out  by  Herr  Westplaal,  who  lias,  how-
ever,  offered  an  interprétation  of  the  fact  which  is  little  in  con-
formity  witli  the  reality.^  It  is  also  observed  in  the  very  similar
attacks  which  may  supervene  in  the  course  of  disseminated  sclerosis,^
and,  lastly,  in  the  attacks  accompanied  or  not  by  convulsions
which  take  jjlace  in  cases  of  old  cérébral  foci  (hœmorrhage  or
ramollissement)  or  of  cérébral  tumours,  whatever  their  origin.
This  thermie  increase  contrasts,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  with  the
initial  decrease  which  almost  always  exists  at  the  moment  of  the
formation  of  a  cérébral  hasmorrhagic  focus, — and  that,  as  I  hâve
demonstrated,  is  a  characteristic  which  may  be  profitably  used  in
making  a  diagnosis.

But  it  is  time  to  return  to  epileptiform  hysteria,  from  which  this
digression  has  somewhat  separated  us.  Complex  fits  are  observed  in
hystero-epilepsy  precisely  as  in  true  epilepsy.  Landouzy  speaks  of
one  hysterical  patient  who  had  up  to  loo  fits  a  day.  The  hjstero-
epileptical  acme  may,  besides,  be  prolonged  over  a  considérable  space

Sanguineous  suffusion  on  the  couvex  surface  of  the  cérébral  hémisphères,
especially  on  the  right.  Arteries,  at  base  of  brain,  healthy.  Weight  of
encephalon,  1360  grammes.  Tlie  pia  mater  is  very  slightly  injected  at  base  of
brain  ;  most  marked  at  the  sphenoidal  lobe.  The  pia  mater  is  easily  detached
ou  both  sides,  and  the  brain  is  equally  moist.

Bight  hémisphère. — It  weighs  5  grammes  (=77-17  grs.)  more  than  left.  On
certain  couvolutions,  chiefly  those  lying  adjacent  to  the  Sylvian  fissure,  we  note
a  hortensia  coloration,  some  little  abrasions,  and,  on  a  few,  a  very  fine  red
punctuation.  The  convolutiou  of  the  cornu  Ammonis  présents  a  very  évident
induration.  This  induration,  which  asceuds  interiorly  along  the  said  couvolu-
tion,  prédominâtes  at  its  extremity.

Left  hémisphère. — The  cornu  Ammonis  présents  an  induration  much  less
marked  and  circumscribed  at  its  extremity.

Nothing  notable  in  the  cerebellum  and  isthmus.

Spinal  conl. — The  grey  substance,  viewed  with  the  naked  eye,  seems  a  little
deformed.

Thora.v. — Considérable  congestion  of  the  lower  half  of  the  lungs.  There  is,
moreover,  a  focus  of  red,  récent  hepatization  iu  the  lower  lobe.

Heart,  stomach,  spleen. — Healthy  ;  no  ecchymoses.  Liver,  not  congested.
Kidneys,  anaemia  of  cortical  substance  ;  pyramids  distinct.  Bladder,  nothing.
Utérus,  fair  size  ;  récent  corpus  luteum  on  one  of  the  avaries  ;  small  cysts
on  the  other  (B.).

1  Westphal,  loc.  cit.

2  V.  antè^  Lecture  VIIT.


312


TEMPEEATUKE.


of  time.  Georget  quotes  the  case  of  a  woman  who  suti'ered  from
an  almost  continuons  succession  offits  extending  over  forty-five  days.

In  the  case  of  our  patient  Co — ,  whose  seizures  bear  such  a  pré-
dominant and  strongly-marked  epileptiform  cliaracter,  ihe  parojc^s-
mal  acme  persistecl  over  ttvo  months,  and,  at  times,  the  accidents
attained  the  highest  degree  of  intensity.  Thus,  to  mention  one
instance,  on  the  32nd  of  January,  the  epileptiform  convulsions
followed  each  other,  without  interruption,  from  nine  o'clock  in  the
morning  until  eight  in  the  evening  ;  from  eight  until  nine  o'clock
there  was  a  resting  space,  after  which  the  attacks  came  on  again,
as  though  with  renewed  vigour,  and  persisted,  without  the  least  lucid
interva],  for  about  the  same  length  of  time.  We  may  without  any
exaggeration  calculate  that,  in  round  numbers,  she  experienced  from
150  to  200  epileptiform  fits  in  the  space  of  a  day  at  that  period.

Does  not  the  persistance  of  such  a  state,  without  a  fatal  termination,
already  indicate  by  what  an  abyss  true  epilepsy  is  separated  from
hystero-epilepsy  ?  "  If  that  were  not  hysteria,^""  said  the  experienced
head  nurses  of  thèse  wards,  speaking  of  Co — ,  whose  seizures  they
watched,  "  if  it  were  really  epilepsy,  the  woman  would  hâve  suc-
cumbed  long  ago/'  This  remark  is  thorouglily  well-founded  and
perfectly  correct.

Well,  gentlemen,  hère  is  the  point  upon  which,  especially,  I  wish
to  lay  stress, — never,  during  that  long  convulsive  period,  was  the
rectal  température  modifîed  in  a  perceptible  manner,  in  the  case  of
Co — 3  on  an  average  it  stood  at  37*8°  C.  (=  100*4°  P.)j  i^  o^y
rose  tp  38*5°  C.  (=  101 '3°  P.),  in  a  quite  exceptional  and  transient
manner. (Fig.  26.)


19  20 21  22 23  24  25 26


■PPw


FiG.  26.
I  should  add  that,  during  ail  this  tiinc,  the  gênerai  condition  of


TEMPEKATURE.  31^

the  patient  uever  gave  us  tlie  least  uueasiness,  in  spite  of  the  insuffi-
ciency  of  her  alimentation  and  the  enormous  amount  of  muscular
force  she  must  liave  expended.  Again,  her  mental  condition  was,  by
no  means,  so  deeply  modified  as  it  would  necessarily  hâve  been  if
the  disease  had  been  true  epilepsy.  At  no  period  was  there  invo-
luntary  évacuation  of  urine  or  faîces.  In  the  brief  respites  allowed
her  by  the  fits,  the  patient  rose  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
nature.  In  thèse  intervais,  also,  which  were  in  truth  very  brief^
the  hysterical  character  of  the  disease  showed  itself  in  ail
its  fulness,  especially  during  the  first  weeks.  A  flower  twined  in-
her  hair,  fantastic  curls,  an  old  bit  of  mirror  attached  to  the  bed-
post, — thèse  things  suflficiently  attested  the  favourite  occupations  of
this  woman  during  her  intervais  of  ease.

But  I  désire,  above  ail,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  thermal
state  which  careful  investigation  enabled  us  to  discover.  It  would,
in  short,  follow  from  what  précèdes  that,  whilst,  in  the  major
acme  of  epilepsy,  the  température  rises  very  rapidly  to  a  high
degree,  and  the  position  of  affairs  becomes  extremely  critical, — in
the  viajor  acme  of  Jii/stero-ejnlepsi/  on  the  contrary,  the  tempéra-
ture rarely  exceeds  the  normal  standard,  whilst  the  concomitant
gênerai  state  of  the  patient  is  not  of  a  kind  to  inspire  uneasiness.
It  is  not  necessary,  I  think,  to  dwell  at  any  length  upon  this  topic
in  order  to  emphasise  so  striking  a  contrast.

I  do  not,  however,  gentlemen,  want  you  to  take  in  its  strictly
literal  meaning  the  last  term  of  the  proposition  which  I  hâve  just
euunciated  ;  it  undoubtedly  applies  accurately  to  the  great  majority
of  cases,  but  the  chapter  of  exceptions  exists.  It  would  not,  in
fact,  be  unexampled  to  find  hysteria  terminating  in  death  during  the
convulsive  phase.  It  is  true  that  this  sad  resuit  is  nearly  always
owing  to  a  peculiar  kind  of  attack,  the  dyspnœlc  seizure}  But  I
repeat,  the  convulsive  fits  may  themselves  be  the  cause.  As  an
example,  I  may  remind  you  of  a  case  of  this  character  published  by
Herr  Wunderlich.^  It  relates  to  a  case  of  hystero-epilepsy,  compar-
able in  many  respects  to  that  which  I  hâve  just  described.

The  patient  in  question  experienced  epileptiform  attacks  for  more

'  Briquet,  loc.  cit.,  pp.  383  et  538.

"  The  foUowing  is  a  translation  (after  M.  Teinturier)  of  Wunderlicb's  case,
to  which  M.  Charcot  alludes  :

Note. — Eight  weeks  of  apyretic  hi/steriform  convulsions,  without  apparent'
danger. Suddenand  déplorable  change,  icithout  augmentation  of  paroxysmal  in^


314  HTSTERO-EPILEPSY. FATAL CASES.

tlian  eiglit  weeks,  though  in  number  they  were  somevvliat  limited,
and  not  accompanied  by  any  niarked  augmentation  of  température,

tensity. Beatli  in  tlie  course  of  a  few  Jiours,  witli  a  température of  43°  C.
(=109-4°  r.)

Post-rdortem. — Auna  Vogel,  œt.  19,  servant,  Lad  twice  menstruated  in  the
fortuight  before  falling  ill,  but  otherwise  in  good  bealth,  was  taken  with  con-
vulsions, for  the  first  time,  on  tbe  I3th  August,  1855,  after  a  severe  scolding,
according  to  her  own  account.  The  convulsions  came  on  agaiu,  iu  the  evening
of  the  I7th,  and  in  the  morning  of  the  i8th,  and  continued  almost  uninter-
ruptedly  throughout  the  night,  from  the  iSth  to  the  ipth.  Admitted  at  noon
on  the  I9th.  She  presented  at  midnight  slight  subsultus  in  the  left  arm,  in
which  the  présence  of  paralysis  without  iiisensibility  had  been  noted.  Then
she  experienced  a  feeliug  of  anguish  (coustrictiou  in  tbe  epigastrium),  gave
a  slight  cry,  and  had  convulsions,  first  iu  the  left  half  of  the  face,  and  then  in  the
right  also  ;  the  mouth  was  open,  the  eyelids  were  alternately  opeued  and  closed,
the  eyeballs  turned  greatly  upwards.  Then  supervened  violent  aud  rapid  clonic
convulsions  in  the  lower  extremities  aud  pelvis,  by  which  thèse  parts  were
projected  forward,  backward,  and  sideways.  The  face  was  cvauosed,  and  foam
llowed  from  the  mouth.  At  the  end  of  a  minute,  deep  and  superior  breathiug  ;
relaxation  of  the  limbs  and  face.  Afterwards  sleep,  appareutly  peaceful;
lastly,  yawiiiug,  opeuing  of  the  eyes,  and  return  to  consciousness  after  six
minutes.

The  patient  is  in  good  condition,  her  tongue  islittle  loaded  ;  the  température
is  38"i2°  C.  (=iioo*6°  P.),  the  puise  140  (after  the  fit)  ;  nothing  abnormal.  She
says,  however,  that  she  cannot  move  her  left  arm,  and  requests  that  it  shall
not  be  touched,  because  otherwise  she  will  get  convulsions.  Nevertheless,  she
can  grasp  sti'ongly  with  the  left  liaud.

In  the  night  of  the  i9-2oth,  six  seizures  ;  aud  iu  the  day  foUowing,  seven
seizures.  No  albumen  in  the  urine  ;  considérable  uric  sédiment.  Tongue
loaded.  Température,  morning  and  evening,  38' 12°  C.  (=ioo'6°r.);  puise
132  ;  respiration  24 — ■32.  In  the  night  of  the  20-2  ist,  seven  seizures  ;  thirteen
seizures  till  the  morning  of  the  22nd.  Température,  3776°  (=  99*96°  F.)  ;
stools  normal  ;  urine  slightly  turbid  from  the  présence  of  albumen.

From  eight  to  sixteen  fits  a  day,  in  the  following  days.  Condition  otherwise
tolcrable;  no  marked  élévation  of  température,  which  is  generally  normal,
never  above  38-i2'-'C.  (=ioo'6°  F.),  except  one  evening,  when  it  reaehed
38-75"  (=:ior75"  F.);  puise  usually  above  112;  tongue  loaded.  On  the  i6th,
confluent  vesicular  miliary  eru{)tiou  on  the  fînger  tips.  Urine  charged  with
phosphates,  without  albumen.  Duriug  the  seizures  she  sometimes  loses  con-
sciousness, somctimcs  not;  occasionally  shrieks  greatly.  Sensibility  persists  in
the  left  arm  and  leg.

']th  Septemher. — The  fits  become  more  fréquent,  last  several  days  without
interruption  ;  during  the  seizures  she  often  talks  and  shrieks.  Fréquent  évacua-
tions of  urine  and  fa;ccs  in  l)ed.  Improvemcnt,  then  stationary  condition  until
the  evening  of  the  2nd  (Jctober,  when  the  patient  présents  a  niarked  attack
of  collapse. h\  the  night  of  the  3rd  no  particular  seizures. In  the  morning


HYSTERO-EPILEPSY. FATAL CASES.  315

wlien  suddenly — witliout  known  cause,  without  the  intervention  of
new  accidents — the  scène  clianged  two  days  before  death  ;  tlie  patient
fell  into  collapse,  and  in  a  short  space  of  time  the  température  rose
to  43°  (  =  109-4°  F.).

This  example,  gentlemen,  will  sufïice  to  show  you  that,  in  présence
of  a  case  of  hystero-epileptic  acme,  whatever  be  its  intensity,  or
however  great  the  chances  of  a  favourable  issue,  it  would  be  im-
prudent to  abandon  ourselves  to  a  feeling  of  complète  and  absolute
security.

agitation  of  the  arms  and  divergent  strabismus.  The  head  inclined  forward
and  to  the  left  ;  consciousness  proserved  ;  slight  oyanosis.  From  ten  o'clock
fortb,  déglutition  impossible  ;  at  noon,  trisQius  ;  at  a  quarter  to  two  o'clock,
strong  convulsions,  not  afFectiug  the  head  ;  puise  extremely  fréquent  ;  tem-
pérature, 4i'87°;  intense  cyauosis,  foaming  at  the  mouth  ;  trachseal  râle.  Died
at  a  quarter  past  two  o'clock;  température,  43*1°  C.  (=109*58°  F.).  A
quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards,  température  42'75°  C.  (=io8"95°F.)

Post-moriem. — Body  in  good  condition  ;  large  cadaveric  spots  in  the  lower
parts  ;  no  muscular  rigidity.  The  crauium  and  its  contents  gorged  witb  blood  ;
posterior  convolutious  slightly  flattened  ;  cérébral  substance  rather  hard.
Slight  turbid  thickeuing  of  the  pia  mater  at  the  base  of  brain.  Capacity  of
cérébral  cavities  uearly  normal,  parietes  usual  consistence.  Pons  and  medulla
injected  with  blood,  dirty  greyish  red.  Lungs  congested  and  œdematous.
Hearù  normal.  Lioer  fatty  hère  and  tliere,  exsanguine  ;  bile,  clear  and  dark
brown.  Spleen,  sraall,  soft,  pale  brown,  exsanguine.  Stomach  dilated,  otherwise
normal,  as  were  the  intestines.  Kidnei/s  greatly  gorged  with  blood  ;  concrétion
size  of  half  a  pea  in  calyx  of  left  kidney.  Utérus  normal.  0 caries  containing
numerous  cysts,  as  large  as  peas  (Wunderlich,  '  Archiv  der  Heilkunde,'  t.  v,
p.  210).


APPENDIX.


CASE  OF  PARALYSIS  AGITANS.

[See  Plate  YIII,  which  represeuts  the  characteristic  attitude  of
patients  affected  by  paralysis  agitans.]

Antécédents. — Probable  cause  of  disease.  Commencement;  the  mem-
bers  successïvely  invaded  hy  debilïty.  Tremor  of  the  head,  then
of  the  limbs.

State  of  the patietit  in  i?»"]/^;  gênerai  attitude.  Tremor.  Gait  :
propulsion  and  retropulsïon.  Température,  puise,  8fc.

Modifications  supervening  in  the  disease,  frorn  July,  1874,
until  July,  1875.  '

Gav —  Anne  Marie,  set.  62,  was  admitted  to  La  Salpêtrière,
December  3ist,  1873;  came  under  M.  Charcot's  charge  (Salle  St.
Alexandre,  No.  3),  on  the  lath  November,  1873.

Antécédents. — Her  father,  a  carpenter,  died  of  an  accident  when
she  was  only  twelve  years  of  âge.  Her  mother,  who  succumbed  at
the  âge  of  seventy-four,  was  of  a  nervous  disposition,  easily  moved
to  passion,  but  had  been  affected  neither  by  tremor  nor  by  paralysis.
Her  only  sister  died  of  pleurisy  at  forty.  None  of  her  relations,
so  far  as  she  was  aware,  suffered  from  nervous  affections  nor,  par-
ticularly,  from  tremor.

Gav —  arrived  in  Paris  at  the  âge  of  four.  Her  childhood  and
youth  passed  without  the  occurrence  of  any  incident  worth  noticing.
Prom  the  âge  of  fourteen  she  menstruated  regularly.  Having
married  at  the  âge  of  twenty-eight,  she  has  had  five  children.
Pregnancy  and  confinement  generally  favorable.  Of  the  five  children,
the  eldest  (a  boy),  died  during  the  Commune,  aged  '>,^  ;  the  second
and  third  (boys  also)  enjoy  good  health  ;  the  fourth,  a  female,  aged


318  APPENDIX.

28,  is  subject  to  nervous  attacks  at  long  intervais  ;  the  fifth  died  at
birth.

The  patient  assures  us  that  she  bas  never  bad  any  serious  illness  ;
never,  for  instance,  was  affected  by  rbeumatism  or  chorea.  Although
she  had  been  a  costermonger  for  thirteen  years^  she  never  gave
way  to  excess  in  drink.  She  bas  always  lived  in  healthy  lodgings,
well  exposed  to  the  sunshine  -,  she  was  happy  in  her  home,  and  never
sufFered  from  any  privations.

Invasion  of  the  diseuse. — Her  affection  jSrst  showed  itself  in  1868,
under  the  foUowing  circumstances.  Her  third  son,  of  whom  she
was  particularly  fond,  unexpectedly  told  her  one  day  that  he  had
enlisted  as  a  soldier.  Tbis  news  greatly  afflicted  her  ;  she  wept  much
over  it,  and  from  the  following  day  was  aware  of  a  weakness  in  her
right  arm.  Soon  after,  the  left  arm  was  taken  in  the  same  way,  then
the  right  lower  extremity  was  invaded,  and  (simultaneously)  the  left.
During  the  nigbt-time  she  had  cramps  in  her  legs  which  made  her
cry  ont.  Next  she  experienced  weakness  in  the  loins.  At  the  time
of  her  entrance  into  hospital  (December,  1872),  she  was  not  so
weak  as  at  présent  (July  8th,  1874).  The  trembling  began  to  invade
the  members,  affecting  first  the  right  upper  extremity,  in  the  early
months  of  1873.  Lastly,  she  noticed  about  the  same  time  that  she
was  affected  by  retropulsion  ;  one  day,  having  missed  her  step,  she
felt  herself  compelled  to  walk  backwards  in  spite  of  herself.

Présent  state{^xi\^  8th,i  874) . — The  gênerai  attitude  of  the  patient,
when  standing,  is  that  described  by  M.  Charcot  in  Lecture  V,  and
which  is  so  faithfully  depicted  on  Plate  VIII,  by  M.  P.  Eicher.
The  body  and  head  are  bent  forward  ;  the  neck  is  stretched  and  the
head  seems  as  though  fixed  on  a  rigid  stem.  The  features  are  quite
immobile  ;  the  brow  is  but  faintly  marked  with  wrinkles  ;  the  eye-
lids  are  moderately  open  ;  the  patient  can,  however,  raise  or  lower
them  with  ease.  The  eyes,  but  slightly  expressive,  are  directed
forward  ;  the  patient  must  turn  her  whole  body  in  order  to  look
aside.  Sometimes  the  lips  adhère,  but  generally  the  mouth  is  half
open,  the  lower  lip,  relaxed  and  hanging,  allows  the  dental  arch  to
be  seen,  the  saliva  flows  involuntarily,  The  lips  and  tongue  do  not
tremble. Déglutition,  it  appcars,  is  almost  always  laborious.

Thcarms  are  held  slightly  apart  from  the  chest  ;  the  fore-arms,  half
flexed,  are  so  placed  that  the  bands  rest  on  the  umbilical  région,
whilst  the  clbows  are  somcwhat  apart  from  the  body.  The  thumb,
slightly  inflexcd,  rests  usually  on  the  forefinger  ;  the  other  fingers


APPENDIX.  319

are  slightly  bent  and  gathered  togetlier.  Botli  bands  are  disposed
in  the  same  manner.

The  legs  approximate,  though  tbc  knees  do  not  toucb.  If  tbe
legs  are  separated,  the  equilibrium  becomes  uncertain.  Whether  the
eyes  are  open  or  closed  the  attitude  of  the  patient  is  the  same.

She  sits  down  heavily,  and  ail  of  a  sudden,  She  cannot  rise  until
she  get  assistance,  and  even  then  the  attendants  hâve  to  use  strength
to  raise  her.  After  hesitating,  she  begins  to  walk,  advancing  first
with  short  steps,  afterwards  hurriedly, — there  is  propulsion.  "Some-
times/'  says  Gav —  "  I  ani  driveu  very  far,  until  I  meet  a  wall, —
and  if  I  don^t,  I  fall."  The  existence  of  retrojoulsion  is  also
marked  ;  to  observe  it,  it  is  only  necessary  to  pull  the  patient  gently
by  the  skirt, — the  method  adopted  by  M.  Charcot.  Immediately
she  begins  to  walk  backwards,  and  with  such  rapidity  that  she
would  soon  fall  if  not  watched.  The  hésitation  of  the  patient,  before
returniug,  is  greater  than  before  beginning  to  walk.

The  trembling  is  scarcely  notieeable,  especially  when  she  is  at
rest.  The  head  trembles,  at  times,  a  little  more  than  the  hands.
When  thèse  are  hanging  by  the  side,  they  generally  remaiu  motion-
less.  The  patient  can  incline  her  head  more  than  it  usually  is  in-
clined,  but  it  is  impossible  for  her  to  raise  it  in  extension  completely,
because  "  the  vertébral  column  is  stifF."

Neither  cephalalgia,  nor  vertigo,  nor  giddiness.  The  intellect  is
preserved  and  the  memory  good.  Her  sleep  is  less  abridged  than
we  find  to  be  the  case  with  most  patients  suffering  from  the  same
complaint.  She  would  even  sleep  well  if  she  were  not  frequently
waked  up  by  pains  in  the  heel  "  that  prick  me,  and  you'd  think
^twas  water  running  inside  the  heel.""  She  complains  of  a  constant
feeling  of  heat,  and  only  keeps  a  sheet  over  her  even  in  winter  time.

We  hâve  mentioned  the  state  of  her  strength,  measured  by  the
dynamometer  (Note  to  Lecture  V)  and  that  of  her  température,  so
we  shall  not  revert  to  thèse  points.

July,  1875. — The  weahness  has  goneon  increasing,  The  gênerai
attitude  remains  the  same  ;  however,  the  head  and  trunk  are  more
and  more  inclined  forward  ;  besides,  a  sort  of  latéral  inclinatioH  lias
occurred,  in  conséquence  of  which  the  right  half  of  the  body  pré-
cèdes the  left  half  in  walkhig.

At  présent,  the  li23S  are  almost  always  adhèrent  each  to  the
other;  the  upper  lip  is  puckered;  sometimes,  according  to  the
patient,  both  of  them  are  stifl". The  dental  arches  are  not  pressed


320-  APPENDIX.

against  eacli  other.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  patient  drew  lier  lips
together  to  diminish  the  trembling  of  the  cliin  ;  in  spite  of  this
précaution,  her  legs  are  stirred  by  little  twitcliing  movements,  whicli,
to  use  lier  owii  words,  remind  one  of  the  motion  of  rabbits'  lips.
The  longue  trembles  even  within  the  mouth  ;  when  protruded,  the
trembling  is  augmented.

The  trembling  of  the  head  is  composed  of  antero-lateral,  and
sometimes  latéral,  shakes,  of  very  limited  extent.  Thèse  oscilla-
tions are  transmitted  to  the  head  by  the  body,  as  was  mentioned
in  the  course  of  the  lecture.  When  the  patient  is  sitting,  her  legs
tremble,  and  her  feet  beat  rapidly  on  the  floor,  striking  little  blows.
To  sum  up  : — trembling  bas  progressed,  so  far  as  the  head  and
lower  extremities  are  concerued  ;  but  in  the  upper  extremities  there
is  little  altération.  Let  us  also  notice  that  the  necessity  of  changing
position  (fidgetiness),  which  was  little  marked  in  1874,  and  was
only  experienced  dui'ing  the  day,  is  much  more  manifest  at  présent,
and  torments  the  patient  not  only  during  the  daytime,  but  whilst
reposing  in  bed  (at  night).  Her  sleep  is  less  tlian  it  was  formerly.
The  patient  still  takes  exercise  in  the  ward  and  in  the  courtyard  of
tbe  infirmary  (B).


INDEX.


A.

ACHEOMATOPSIA,  hysterical,  233,  249,

277,  282
ACME,  epileptic,  307

—  hystero-epileptic,  276,  309
Ambltopia,  hysterical,  295

—  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  191
Amtoteophy,  protopathic (w.  Ateo-

PHY,  muscular)

—  symptomatic  :  in  hysterical  con-
tracture, 297;  of  cérébral  blood-
clot,  (note)  53  ,•  of  lieuiilateral  lé-
sion of  the  cord,  86  ;  of  dissemi-
nated sclerosis,  53,  199  ;  of  latéral
sclerosis,  52  ;  of  posterior  sclerosis,
52

Analgesia,  248,  252,  289

An^sthesia,  its  rôle  in  bed-sore  of
spinal  origin,  81

An&ioneueoses,  112;  of  hysterical
patients,  115

Apoplext,  spinal,  55

Aetheitis  deformans,  98

Aetheopathies  of  ataxic  patients,  6  ;
symptoms,  96;  seat,  97;  lésions  of
tiie  joints,  98;  altérations  of  cells
of  aiiterior  cornua,  100;  in  pro-
gressive muscular  atrophy,  101

—  of  cérébral  and  spinal  origin,  92

—  in  traumatic  hemiparajAegia,  85

—  of  hémiplégie  patients  :  historical
sketch,  93  ;  mode  of  invasion,
95  ;  lésions,  96  ;  cliuical  characters,
96.

AETicuiiATiONS,  trophic  afPections  of,

22  (see  Aetheopathies)
Attaques-acces,  304, 305  (v.  Seizuee-

FITS)

Attack,  APOPLECTIEorm,  in  dissemi-
nated sclerosis,  204  ;  its  f requency,
204,  206.

—  in  gênerai  paralysis,  204  ;  patho-
geiiesis,  206.

—  in  cases  of  apoplectic  foci  of  okl
standing,  206;  varieties,  204;  sym-
ptoms, 206  ;  puise  and  température,
207


Ataxia,  iocomotoe,  cutaneous  affec-
tions in,  64;  relation  between  thèse
affections  and  fulgurant  pains,  65  ;
différences  dividing  ataxia  from  the
tremor  of  disseminated  sclerosis,
189  ; — in  disseminated  sclerosis,  198

Ateophy,  muscular,  6  ;  consécutive  on
section  of  the  ischiatic  nerve,  10  ;
arthropathies  in,  101
—  progressive,  101  ;  irritative  lésions
of  nerve-cells  in,  58  ;  tendency  to
become  gênera  lised,  59

Atteaction  (theory  of),  121

Atjea,  hysterical,  234,  266  ;  characters
of,  266  ;  first  node,  or  ovarian  pain,
266  ;  second  node,  or  globus  hys-
tericus,  266  ;  third  node,  or  cepha-
lic  phenomena,  267  ;  influence  of
compression  of  the  ovary  on,  267,
271,  272,  275,  277,  278,  281,  306

AvANT-MUB  (see  Claustetjm),  256

B,

Bed-soee,  69,  114  (v.  Decubitus)

Beomide  of  camphoe,  156

BuLBUS  EAC^iDiCTTS,  muscular  lésions

consécutive on afleetions  of,  60  ;

lésions  of,  in  paralysis  agitans,  151  ;

in  disseminated  sclerosis,  160,  205

C.

Calabae  bean  in  paralysis  agitans,
155  ;  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  221

Capsule,  inteenai,  256

Capsules,  supea-eenal,  hsemorrhage
of,  in  spinal  lésions,  106

Cells,  neeve-,  motor  nerve-cells  in
anterior  cornua  of  the  grey  sub-
stance of  the  cord,  52;  lésions  of
thèse  cells  :  acute  form  (infantile
paralysis^,  57  ;  chronic  form,  pro-
gressive muscular  atrophy,  58;  rôle
of  motor  nerve-cells  in  the  produc-
tion of  trophic  troubles,  61  ;  yellow
degeneration  of  nerve-cells,  180;
lésions  of ,  in  disseminated  sclerosis,
199,  200  ;  in  hysterical  contracture,
297

21


322


INDEX.


Ceeebrum,  aiiatoinical  views  concern-

ing,  255
Choeda  tympani,  a  dilator  nerve,  116
Chobea, disorderly movemeuts of,

compared to tremor of  dissemi-

nated sclerosis, 189 (v. Hemi-

choeea)
CiCATEiCES,  vicious,  21
CiREHOSis  of  muscles,  47
CcELiALaiA,  hysterical,  234,  264
Cl-AUSTETJM,  256

Compression  of  the  ovary,  271  ;  its
influence  on  hysterical  seizure,  271  ;
luodus  operandi,  271  ;  historical
sketch,  272

Congestion,  apoplectiform  and  epilep-
tiform,  309

CONTEACTiLiTY,  electrical,  after  patho-
logical  and  after  expérimental
nerve-lesions,  32;  in  hysterical  con-
tracture, 297  ;  in  fractures  and  luxa-
tions of  the  vertébral  column,  55  ;
in  hœmatomyelia,  55  ;  in  acute  cen-
tral myelitis,  54  ;  in  disseminated
sclerosis,  179  {v.  Myopathies)

CoNTBACTrEE,  'permanent  hysterical,
233,  277,  279,  283  ;  action  of  chloro-
form  on,  285  ;  convulsive  tremu-
lation  in,  285  ;  hémiplégie  form,
284,  287  ;  charaeters  differentiating
it  from  organic  hemiplegia,  287  ;
hemiparaplegic  form,  283,'289,  293  ;
prognosis,  297  ;  sudden  recovery  in
sorae  cases,  292  ;  reputedly  miracu-
lous  cures,  293  ;  incurable  contrac-
tures, 295;  lésions  in,  294;  patho-
logical  physiology  of,  297

—  permanent,  in  sclérose  en  plaques
(disseminated  sclerosis),  200

—  tardy,  in  hemiplegia  of cérébral
origin,  95

—  of  the  ureters,  243

CoNVULSiONNAiEES,  249,  274;  dcmo-
niacs,  278

Convulsions  (arrest  of),  in  hysterical
cases,  by  compression  of  the  ovai-y,
271  ;  in  spinal  epilepsy,  275

COEPOEA OPTO  -  STEIATA, Icsions of,

their  ciTects,  251  ; French  thcory,
254  ;  British  theory,  253

CuERENTS,  electrical,  dilTerences  bc-
tween  continuod  and  iuterrupted,
34  {v.  Faeawisation)

Cuises,  gastric,  212

CuTANEOUS  diseases,  18,  20,  20,  64


D.

Decubitus  AcrTus  (acute  bed-sore),
69  ;  mode  of  évolution,  70  ;  con-
sécutive affections,  73  ;  in  apoplexy
symptomatic  of  cérébral  lésions
in  foci,  76;  sciit,  77;  pathogeny,
79, 114
—  of  spinal  origin,  72,  79;  seat,  79;  in
traumatic  myelitis,  80;  influence  of
position  of  spinal  lésion,  82;  in
traumatic  hemiparaplegia,  83;  in
spoutaneous  myelitis,  87  ;  epoch  of
manifestation,  88;  rôle  of  grey
substance  on  its  production,  89;
influence  of  nerve-lesions  on,  91

Degeneeation,  îoaxy,  of  the  muscles,
47

Déliée  des  geandeues,  ambitious  de-
lirium  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  195

DiPLOPiA  in  disseminated  sclerosis,
191,211

Dynamometee  in  paralysis  agitans,
135,  145

E.

Ecchymoses,  viscéral,  in  circumscribed
cérébral  lésions  (endocardium,
stomaeh,  pleura,  bladder),  104  ;  of
the  epicranial  aponeurosis,  104  ;
in  spinal  lésions,  106

Electeo-diagnosis,  30

Emboli,  gangrenons,  consécutive  on
acute  bed-sore,  74

Encephalitis,  76

Endocaeditis,  ulcérons,  with  multiple
emboli  and  typhoid  state,  68

Epidemics,  hysterical,  273  ;  of  St.  Me-
dard,  249,  274  ;  of  St.  Louis,  293

Epilepsy,  its  relations  with  hysteria,
300,  303  ;  description  of  a  fit,  301  ;
spinal  epilepsy  in  hysterical  con-
tracture, 285,  297;  in  disseminated
sclerosis,  201  ;  its  forms,  202  ;  ar-
rest of,  275,  306  («.  Acme)

Eeuptions,  eczematous,  20,  21  ;  liche-
noid  and  pnstular,  64;  pemphigoid,
21,  27,  91

Eeythema  pernio,  21

EscHAE  of  nates,  6  ;  of  rapid  forma-
tion, 69  ;  its  position  in  apoplexy,
77;  in  apoplectiform  attacks,  200  ;
sacral,  4  ;  in  locomotor  ataxy,  65  ;  in
epileptic  acme,  309  {v.  Decubitus)

Etat  de  mal,  epileptic,  307  ;  hystero-
epileptique,  276,  307  («.  Acme  and
Température)


INDEX.


323


ExciTABiLiTT,  electrical  (histological
altérations  corresponding  to  diminu-
tion of),  46

ExPERiMENTS  of  Erb,  Ziemmseu,  and
O.  Weiss,  46


Fasciculi,  internai  radicular,  66  ;  irri-
tation of,  iu  posterior  selerosis,  67

Faeadisation  and  galvanisation,  dif-
férence of  action,  34,  40,  46,  49  ;
in  disseminated  selerosis,  221

Foox  (deformity  of),  in  paralysis  agi-
taris,  142  (v.  Trépidation)

—  club,  hysterical,  294,  298
Fulgurant  pains,  66

G.

Gait,  in  paralysis  agitans,  145

Ganglion,  superior  cervical  (effects  of
its  extirpation),  112

Glosst  skin,  21

Geiffe  in  a  case  of  disseminated  sele-
rosis, with  lésion  of  the  nerve-cells,
53  ;  in  paralysis  agitans,  141

H.

Hands,  deformities  of,  in  paralysis
agitans,  141  ;  in  rheumatism,  141-2

H^MATOMYELiA,  55  ;  patliogeny,  55  ;
diminution  or  abolition  of  electri-
cal contractility,  55  ;  altération  of
urine,  108

Hemian^sthesia,,  hysterical,  233,  *
246,  270;  historical  sketch,  248  ;
lésions  of  spécial  sensés,  249  ;  re-
lations between  hemianœsthesia,
ovarian  hyperajstbesia,  paralysis,
and  contracture,  250,  270;  char-
acters  wliich  separate  it  from
bemiauœsthesia  of  cérébral  origin,
251

—  of  encephalic  origin,  historical
sketch, 253;  its  cliaracters,253,255;
cases  reported  by  Tûrck,  251,  258

Hemichoeea,  260

Hemiopia,  233

Hemipaeaplegia, traumatic, 83  ;

arthropathies in, 84  ; muscular

atrophy  in,  86; altération  of  urine

in,  107
Hemiplegia  in  apoplectiform  attacks,

204  ;  hysterical,  284
Herpès  zoster  (v.  Zona)
HiSTOLOGT, normal,  of  the nervous

System,  162
HypER^MiA, neuro-paralytic, 104,

110


HypeEjESThesia,  ovarian,  234,  246,
300  ;  its  f  rcquency,  263  ;  historical
sketch,  263;  clinical  characters,
264;  anatomical  lésions  of  the
ovary,  269  ;  conclusion,  276  ;  clini-
cal cases,  277,  281,  304

HTSTERIA («. CONTEACTUEE, EPIDE-

Mics,  Hemianœsthesia,  Otaeian
hyperjEsthesia,  Ischtjria,  Se-
coues), epileptiform,  302  ;  ovarian,
247  ;  severe,  251,  276  ;  local,  263
Hystero-epilepsy,  271,  300;  meaning
of  the  term,  301;  with  distinct
crises,  303  ;  varieties  of,  303  ;
nature  of,  305;  température  in,
307  ;  hystero-epileptic  acme,  311  ;
severe  cases  of,  312

I.

Immobilisation  of  members  (efPeets
of),  9,  13

Incoordination,  motor,  189

Infection,  purulent,  sequela  of  bed-
sore,  74

Intoxication,  putrid,  sequela  of  bed-
sore,  73

Ieeitability,  muscular,  32

Irritation  (rôle  of)  of  nerves  in  the
production  of  trophic  dérange-
ments, 18

Ischœmia,  hysterical,  249

IsCHURiA,  hysterical,  225  ;  transient,
227;  permanent,  228  ;  historical
sketch,  229  ;  simulation,  230  ;  dif-
fers  from  ischuria  caused  by  cal-
culus,  232  ;  clinical  case,  233  ;  dia-
grams  indicating  amountof  vomited
matter  and  of  urine,  236  ;  chcmical
analyses,  237-8  ;  remissions,  237  ;
reality  of,  239  ;  comparative  be-
nignityof,  241  ;  gravityof  calcular
ischuria,  240  ;  mechauism  of,  242

K.

IviDNEYS  (lésions  of)  consécutive  on
nerve-sections,  106-7  ;  expérimental
contradictions,  17


Lingual  muscles,  contractured,  281

Lepra,  anœ^thetic,  27

Lésions,  irritative,  12,  16  ;  ociilar,
consécutive  on  irritation  of  the
Gasserian  ganglion,  13,  16  ;  on
section  of  the  trifacial  nerve,  13,
14  ;  owing  to  spontaueous  lésions
of  fif  th  nerve,  15


324


INDEX.


M.

Meningitis  aseendens,  simple  puru-
lent, or  ichorous,  consécutive  on
bed-sore,  75  ;  cbronic  cervical,  26

Miracles  of  St.  Louis,  293;  of  St.
Medard,  249,  274

Meduila  SPiJSTAiis,  cffects  o£  trans-
verse section,  9,  17

Muscles,  trophic  or  nutritive  affec-
tions of,  28  ;  in  infantile  paralysis,
57  (».  Amyoteophy,  Ateophy,
Mtopathy,  Scleeosis,  dissemin-
ated)

Myelitis,  acute  central,  54;  diminu-
tion of  electrical  contractility  in,
54  ;  lésions  of  supra-renal  capsules,
106  ;  altérations  of  urine,  108  ;
gastric  crises,  210

—  partial,  aniyotrophy,  53

—  spontaneous,  87

—  traumatic,  80
Myodynia,  hysterical,  264
Myopathies  consécutive  on  lésions  of

tlie  spinal  cord,  £0

N.

Nepheo-cystitis  consécutive  on  spinal
lésions,  106,  107

Nepheotomy,  228  ; gravity  of,  240

Neetes,  contusion  and  ligature  of ,  48  ;
excision  of,  49  ;  patches  of  sclerosis
on,  161  ;  dilator,  116  (v.  Choeda
TYMPANi)  ;  facial  (paralysis  of)
32  ;  glandular  (irritation  of),  122;
ischiatic  (resuit  of  section  of),  9  ;
secretor  (researclies  of  Ludwig  on),
119  ;  trifacial  (resuit  of  section  of  ),
10,  13  ;  Samuel's  experiments,  13,
124  ;  spontaneous  lésions,  15;
trophic,  19,  123;  origin  of  thèse
nerves,  124;  vaso-motor,  125  ;  (rôle
of),  in  référence  to  nutrition,  12,
19  ;  irritation  of,  115

Neueitis,  22,  23  ;  trophic  disorders
connected  with,  24

Netjeoglia,  164

NuTEiTiON  (influence  of  the  nervous
System  on),  5,  6,  and  passim

Nystagmus  iu  disseminatcd  sclerosis,
192

0.

Obliteeation  of  ureters  by  calcul!,
231  ; duration,  232  ;  gravity,  240

Oligueia,  hysterical,  227

OssEODS  System  (trophic  affections  of),
22

Ovaey  (position  of),  267  {v.  Compees-
siON,  IIypeetesthesia)

Ovauialoia,  hysterical,  234,  250,  270


Paealysis  agitans,  130  ;  historical
sketch,  133  ;  nature,  134  ;  gênerai
characteristics  of,  134  ;  modes  of
invasion,  136  ;  symptoms,  station-
ary  period,  137  ;  tremor,  138  ;
attitude  of  body,  140  ;  its  value  in
diagnosis,  142  ;  P.  agitans  sine
tremore,  143  ;  painful  sensations,
147  ;  terminal  stage,  149  ;  termi-
uations,  149,  150;  pathological
anatomy,  150;  physiological  ana-
tomy,  151  ;  causes,  151,  154;  treat-
ment,  155  {v.  Peopulsion,  Reteo-

PULSION,  UtTEEANCE)

Paealysis,  hulbar,  symptomatic  of
disseminated  sclerosis,  215

—  consécutive  on  nerve-lesions,  40

—  gênerai  progressive,  characters
which  assimilate  it  to  disseminated
sclerosis,  183, 193  {v.  Apoplecti-

FOEM  ATTACES)

—  gênerai  spinal  (adult),  59  ;  its
analogies  and  différences  with  in-
fantile paralysis,  59

—  hysterical,  235,  290,  and  passim

—  infantile,  57  ;  anatomical  lésions,
57

—  lahio-glosso-laryngeal,  lésions  of
the  motor  cells,  60,  193

—  pseudo-hypertrophie,  40

—  rheumatic  (state  of  the  muscular
contractility  in),  34

Paeaplegia, traumatic (altération  of

urine  in),  106  {v.  Hemipaeaplegia)
Paeesis of the  lower  extremities  in

disseminated  sclerosis,  196  ;  remis-

si(ms,  196
Petit  mal,  epileptic,  306
Phaeynx  (paralysis  of  the),  281
Phlegmon  (pseudo-),  21,  71
Pbeliminary  remarks,  4
Peopulsion  in  paralysis  agitans,  135,

143,  146,  319
PuLSE  in  apoplectiform  attacks,  208
Putamen,  256

R.

Remissions,  137,  196

Rétention  of  urine  iu  hysterical  cases,

227.  288,  289
Reteopulsion in paralysis agitans,

135,  146,  319
Rigidity  ce  tue  limbs  and  neck  in

paralysis  agitans,  140  {v.  CoNTEAC-

tuee)

S.
Salivation  in  paralysis  agitans,  140

SCLEEODEIIMA 21


INDEX,


325


Sci^nosiStfasciculated,  51

—  descending ,  204

—  latéral,  in  hysteria,  294

—  posterior,  complicating  dissemi-
nated  sclerosis,  198  {v.  Ataxia,
iocomotor)

—  dissemhiated  {en  plaques),  lésions
of  motor-cells  in,  52,  53  ;  lésions
of  the  bulbus  in,  60,  160  ;  and
paralysis  agitans,  151  ;  historical
sketch,  133;  macroscopic  anatomy,
159;  distribution  of  sclerosed
patches  in  brain,  160  ;  in  spinal
cord,  160  ;  on  tbe  nerves,  161  ;  as-
pect of  sclerosed  patches,  161  ;  bis-
tology,  169;  altération  of  vessels
in,  174;  nature  of  the  lésion,  176,
181;  spinal  form,  161,  216;  cepba-
lic  or  bulbar  form,  161,'  216  ;  cere-
bro-spinal  form,  184,  216  ;  causes  of
error  in  diagnosis,  184;  diplopia,
191;  amblyopia,191;  cephalic  symp-
toms,191;  nystagmus,  192;  vertigo,

194  ;  faciès,  194;  psychic  symptoms,

195  ; state of lower extremities,

196  ;  unusual  symptoms,  197  ;
ataxia,  198;  muscular  atrophy,  199;
conti'acture  of  limbs,  200  ;  spinal
epilepsy,  200,  285  ;  apoplectiform
attacks,  204  ;  periods,  209  ;  remis-
sions, 211  ;  gastric  crises,  212  ;  in-
tercurrent diseases,  214;  bulbar
paralysis,  215  ;  duration,  216  ;  pa-
thological  physiology,  217  ;  causes,
219;  influence  of  acute  diseases,
219;  prognosis,  220  ;  treatment,  221

"  Secoues  "  {les)  in  relation  to  the
convulsionnaires,  273

Sections  of  nerves,  complète  or  in-
complète, 19,  23,  30,  46,  175

Simulation  in  hysteria,  230

Spasm  {v.  Conteactuee)

Speech  {v.  Uttebance)

T.

Taeantism,  278

Tempebatuee  (significance  of  decrease
of.  in  cérébral  apoplexy),  78  ;  dimi-
nution of,  accompanying  irri-
tant nerve-lesiona,  113  ;  dépendent
on  irritation  of  the  great  sympa-
thetic  (cervical),  115

—  in  paralysis  agitans,  148

—  in  apoplectiform  attacks,  208

—  in  hystero-epileptiform  attacks,
307

—  in  epileptiform  acme,  308

—  in  hystero-epileptiform  acme,  312


ToNGUE  (contracture  of),  281

Theemo-an^sthesia,  248

Teemoe,  in  gênerai,  130  ;  différence
as  regards  repose  and  movcment,
130;  varieties,  132  ;  historical
sketch,  133

—  \n  paralysis  agitans,  138,  188

—  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  186  ;
influence  of  movements,  187  ;  char-
acters  distinguishing  it  f rom  chorea,
189

—  motor  incoordination,  190
Teepidation,  provoked,  of  the  foot  in

hysteria,  289

—  in  sclerosis  of  the  latéral  columns,
289

—  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  289

—  in  descending  sclerosis,  289  (note)
Teismus,  234

Teophic  dérangements,  5  ;  différ-
ences distinguishing  them  from
passive  lésions,  9  ;  consécutive  ou
lésions  of  tbe  peripheral  nerves,  6  ;
traumatic  causes,  22  ;  spontaneous
lésions,  24  ;  theoretical  views,  1C9  ;
vaso-motor  theory,  110;  attraction
theory,  121  ;  trophic-nerve  theory,
123;  Samuel's  theory,  124;  criti-
cisms,  125  ;  conclusions,  126  ;  in
disseminated  sclerosis,  213

Tubeecle  of  spinal  cord,  93

Tympanitis,  234,  288,  290

U.

Ueea  in  hysterical  vomited  matter  ;  in
alvine  évacuations  after  nephro-
tomy  ;  influence  of  pressure  on  its
production,  228,  237,  239,  244

Ueetees  (spasmodic  contracture  of),
(«.  Obliteeation)

Ueticaeia  in  Iocomotor  ataxy,  64

Uttebance  (modifications  of)  in  para-
lysis agitans,  139  ;  in  disseminated
sclerosis,  192

V.

Veetigo,  in  disseminated  sclerosis,  194,

212  ;  epileptic,  306
VOMITING,  hysterical,  238,  241

—  urœmic,  228

—  of  blood,  288

Z.

Zona,  20,  24,  26  ;  in  Iocomotor  ataxy,
64  ;  dépendent  on  partial  lésions  of
encephalon,  67  ;  with  modifications
of  the  derm,  91  ;  local  élévation  of
température,  113

Zostee,  herpès  {v.  Zona)


eeeatum.
Page  93,  Unes  23  and  28,/or  "  paraplegit  "  read  "  hémiplégie.


PEINTED BY
ADLARD, BABTHOLOMEW CLOSE.


*^ '^


— ' " c=>

— m C3

iT,

— ~ C3

1  X

1 l"*»

— ::  c=>

— s =4

— (
r

— ^ C= ]

1  n


°=^ --


i -Tf


^  =

T X

1  m

c=?

-^

Ç--J

-•il-

'  m

«5

Kl

<=3

-JT

»]

l««l

■«s-j

'rr

•H

m

3'


en


LIBRARY  OF  THE

UNIVERSITY  OF  MASSACHUSETTS

MEDICAL  CENTRE  AT  WORCESTER
