The Examination and confession of certaine wytches at Chensforde in the countie of Essex : before the Quenes Maiesties judges, the xxvi daye of July, anno 1566, at the assise holden there as then, and one of them put to death for the same offence, as their examination declareth more at large.

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 6]

The examination of them with their confession before Doctor Cole and master Foscue at the same Sise verhatum as nere as coulde be gathered, and firste of Elizabeth Frauncis who saide as here foloweth.

FYrst the learned this arte of witchcraft at the age of .xii. yeres of hyr grandmother whose nam was mother Eue of Hatfyelde Peuerell disseased.

Item when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her to renounce GOD and his worde, and to geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it) whyche she delyuered her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte, and taughte her to feede the

[page 7]

sayde Catte with breade and mylke and she dyd so, also she taughte her to cal it by the name of Sathan and to kepe it in a basket.

When this mother Eue had geuen her the Cat Sathan, then this Elizabeth desired firste of the sayde Cat (callinge it Sathan) that she might be ryche and to haue goodes, and he promised her she shoulde, askinge her what she would haue, and she sayde shepe ( [...] • or this Cat spake to her as she confessed in a straunge holowe voice, (but suche as she vnderstode by vse) & this Cat forthwith brought shepe into her pasture to the nuber of .xviii

[page 7]

blacke and whyte, whych continued wyth her for a tyme, but in the ende dyd all weare awaye she knewe not howe.

Item when she had gotten these shepe, she desired to haue on Andrew Byles to her husband, which was a man of some welth, and the cat dyd promyse she shold, but that he sayde she must fyrste consent that t [...] • is Andrew shuld abuse her, and she so did.

And after when this Andrew had thus abused her he would not mary her, wherfore she willed Sathan to waste his goodes, which he forthwith did, and yet not beyng contentid with this, she wild him to touch his body, whych he forthewith dyd whereof he died.

Item that euery tyme that he did any thynge for her, she sayde that he required a drop of bloude, which she gaue him by prycking herselfe, sometime in one place & then in an other,

[page 8]

and where she pricked her selfe there remayned a red spot, which was styl to be sene.

Item whe this Andrew was dead, she douting her selfe with childe willed sathan to destroye it, and he bad her take a certayne herbe and drinke it whych she did, and destroyed the childe forthwyth.

Item when she desyred an other husbande, he promysed her an other, naminge this Frauncis whom shee nowe hath, but said he is not so rich as the other, willynge her to consent vnto that Frauncis in fornycation which she did, and therof conceaued a daughter that was borne within a quarter of a yere after they were maried.

After they were maryed they liued not so quietly as she desyred, beinge stirred (as she said) to much vnquietnes and moued to swearing and cursinge, wherfore she willed sathan her

[page 8]

Cat to kyll the childe, beinge aboute the age of half a yere olde and he did so, and when she yet founde not the quietnes that she desyred, she wylled it to lay a la [...] • enes in the leg of thys Frauncis her husbande, and it did in this maner. It came in a morninge to this Frauncis shoe, lying in it lyke a tode, and when he perceiued it puttinge on his shoe, and had touched it with his fote, he being sodenly amased asked of her what it was, and she bad him kil it, and he was forthwith taken with a lamenes wherof he can not healed.

After all this when shee had kept this Cat, by the space of .xv. or xvi. yeare, and as some saye (though vntruly) beinge wery of it, she came to one mother Waterhouse her neyghbour (a pore woman) when she was going to the oue, and desired her to geue her a cake, & she wold geue her a thing that she should be the better

[page 9]

for so log as she liued, & this mother waterhouse gaue her a cake, where vpon she brought her this cat in her apron and taught her as she was in structed before by her grandmother Eue, tellig her that she must cal him Sathan and geue him of her bloude and bread and milke as before, and at this examination woulde confesse no more.

¶Mother waterhouse of Nat [...] • ylde peuerell of the age of .lxii [...] •• . yeares being examined the same day confessed as followeth, & the xxix. daye suffered.

Fyrst she receyued this cat of this frances wife in y• order as is before sayde, who wild her to cal him satha, and told her that yf she made muche of him he would do for her what she wolde haue him to do.

Then when she had receyued him

[page 9]

the (to trye him what he coulde do) wyld hym to kyll a hog of her owne which he dyd, and she gaue him for his labour a chicken, which he fyrste required of her & a drop of her blod. And thys she gaue him at all times when he dyd any thynge for her, by prick [...] • ng her hand or face & puttinge the bloud to hys mouth whyche he sucked, & forthwith wold lye downe in hys [...] • ot againe, wherin she kepte him, the spots of all the which pr [...] • ks are yet to be sene in her skin.

Also she saythe that another tyme being offended with one father Kersye she toke her catte Sathan in her lap and put hym in the wood before her dore, & willed him to kyll three of this father Kersyes hogges, whiche he dyd, and retourning agayne told her so, and she rewarded hym as before, wyth a chicken and a droppe of her bloud, which chicken he eate vp cleane as he didde al the rest, and she

[page 10]

cold fynde remaining neyther bones nor fethers.

Also she confessed that fallyng out with one widdow Gooday she wylled Sathan to drowne her cow and he dyd so, and she rewardid hym as before.

Also she falling out wyth another of her neyboures, she killed her three geese in the same maner.

Item, shee confessed that because she could haue no [...] • est (which she required) she caused sathan to destroye the brewing at that tyme.

Also beyng denyed butter of an other, she caused her to lose the curdes ii. or .iii. dayes after.

Item fallinge out with an other of her neybours and his wife, shee wylled sathan to kyll hym with a bluddye [...] • i [...] • e, whereof he dyed, and shee rewarded him as before.

Likewyse shee confessed, that because she lyued somwhat vnquietly

[page 10]

with her husbande she caused [...] • atha to kyll hym, and he did so about .ix. yeres past, syth which tyme she hath lyued a widdow.

Also she said that when she wolde wyl him to do any thinge for her, she wolde say her Pater noster in laten.

Item this mother Waterhouse confessed that shee fyrst turned this Cat into a tode by this meanes, she

kept the [...] • at a great while in woll in a pot, and at length being moued by pouertie to occupie the wol, she praied

[page 11]

in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost that it wold turne into a tode, and forthwith it was turned into a tode, and so kept it in the pot without woll.

¶Also she said, that going to Brack stede a lyttle before her apprehentyon, this Sathan wylled her to hye her home, for she shulde haue great trouble, and that shee shoulde be eyther hanged or burned shortly, more at this tyme she wolde not confesse.

[page 11]

¶Ione Waterhouse, daughter to th [...] • mother Waterhouse, beinge of the age of .xviii. yeres, and examined, cofesseth as foloweth.

FYrst, that her mother this laste wynter would haue learned her this arte, but she lerned it not, nether yet the name of the thinge. She saith she neuer saw it but once in her mothers hand, and that was in the likenes of a tode, and at that time comming in at a sodeyn when her mother called it oute to worke some thynge withall, she herde her to call it Sathan, for shee was not

[page 12]

at any tyme truely taught if, nor did neuer exercise it before this time as foloweth.

Item she confessed that when her mother was gone to Breakstede, in her absence lacking breade, she went to a gyrle, a neighbours childe, and desired her to geue her a pece of bred and cheese, whiche when she denied and gaue her not, or at the least not so muche as wolde satisfye her, shee goinge home dydde as she had seene her mother doe, callynge Sathan, whiche came to her (as she sayd) she thoughte out of her mothers shewe frome vnder the dedde, in the lykenes of a great dogge, demaundynge

[page 12]

what she wolde haue, wherewithall she beyng a fearde, sayd she wold haue him to make such a gyrle a ferd naminge this gyrle, then asked hee her what she wolde geue hym, and she saide a red kocke, then sayde hee no, but thou shalt geue me thy body and sowle, whereby she beinge soore feared, and desyrous to be rydde of hym, sayd she wold: And herewith he went to this gyrle in the lykenes of an euyll [...] • auou [...] •• d dogge with hornes on his head, and made her very muche afearde, and dothe yet haunt her, nowe can not these witches (as they saye) cal hym in agayn, because they dyd not let hym out. And more (sayth shee) she neuer dydde, but this her doinge was the reuealyng of all the rest.

FINIS.
