THE  CHRONICLE
OF  NOVGOROD

lo 1 6- 1 471

THE CHRONICLE
OF  NOVGOROD

1016-1471

TRANSLATED FROM THE RUSSIAN
B  Y

ROBERT MICHELL

A  N  D

NEVILL FORBES, Ph.D.

Reader  in  Russian  in  the  University  of  Oxford
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

C. RAYMOND BEAZLEY, D.Litt,

Professor  of  Modern  History  in  the  University  of  Birmingham
AND AN ACCOUNT OF THE TEXT BY

A. A. SHAKHMATOV

Professor  in  the  University  of  St.  Petersburg

CAMDEN THIRD SERIES
VOL. XXV

LONDON
OFFICES OF THE SOCIETY

6 £f  7 SOUTH SQUARE

gray's inn, W.C.

I914

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

PAGE

General  Introduction  (and  Notes  to  Introduction)

. vii-xxxvi

Account  of  the  Text

xxxvii-xli

Lists  of  Titles,  Technical  terms,  etc. .

xlii-xliii

The  Chronicle

.  1-220

Appendix

221

Note  on  the  Bibliography

.  223-4

Index

225-37

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION

I.  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  NOVGOROD

"  Lord  Novgorod  the  Great,"  Gospodin  Velikii  Novgorod,  as  it  once
called  itself,  is  the  starting-point  of  Russian  history.  It  is  also
without  a  rival  among  the  Russian  city-states  of  the  Middle  Ages.
Kiev  and  Moscow  are  greater  in  political  importance,  especially  in
the  earliest  and  latest  mediaeval  times — before  the  Second  Crusade
and  after  the  fall  of  Constantinople — but  no  Russian  town  of  any
age  has  the  same  individuality  and  self-sufficiency,  the  same  sturdy
republican  independence,  activity,  and  success.

Who  can  stand  against  God  and  the  Great  Novgorod  ? — Kto  protiv
Boga  i  Velikago  Novgoroda  ? — was  the  famous  proverbial  expression
of  this  self-sufficiency  and  success.

From  the  beginning  of  the  Crusading  Age  to  the  fall  of  the
Byzantine  Empire  Novgorod  is  unique  among  Russian  cities,  not
only  for  its  population,  its  commerce,  and  its  citizen  army  (assuring
it  almost  complete  freedom  from  external  domination  even  in  the
Mongol  Age),  but  also  as  controlling  an  empire,  or  sphere  of  influence,
extending  over  the  far  North  from  Lapland  to  the  Urals  and  the  Ob.
The  modern  provinces  of  Novgorod,  Olonets,  and  Archangel,  with
portions  of  Vologda,  Perm,  and  Tobolsk,  represent  this  empire.^

The  great  Novgorod  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  quiet,  decayed  cathe-
dral town  of  to-day,  lies  on  both  sides  of  the  deep  and  broad  Vol-
khov, on  its  way  from  Lake  Ilmen  to  Ladoga  and  the  Baltic.  Here
we  are  about  one  hundred  miles  south-east  of  St.  Petersburg.

As  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  Side  or  Quarter  of  St.  Sophia  still  lies
on  the  left  of  the  Volkhov,  the  Commercial  Side  on  the  right.  The
eleventh-century  cathedral  of  the  Holy  Wisdom,  "  Saint  Sophia,"
is  still  one  of  the  historical  monuments  of  Russia,  while  the  walls  of
the  KremHn  of  Novgorod  show  how  slender  was  the  fourteenth-
century  Russian  skill  in  fortification. ^

But  the  mighty  turbulent  Republic  is  no  more.  The  modern
town,  of  some  26,000  people,  has  little  more  than  a  tenth,  perhaps,
of  its  old  numbers,  when  to  Ghillibert  de  Lannoy,  coming  from  the
Low  Countries  in  1413,  it  appeared  "  of  prodigious  greatness. "^
The  Hanseatic  Market  is  a  memory.  The  ancient  earthern  ramparts
are  in  ruins,  and  of  their  stone  towers  only  one,  The  White,  still
stands  on  the  south  of  the  city.  Quite  as  ruinous  is  the  Tower  of
Yaroslav,  overlooking  that  Court  of  Yaroslav,  which  was  once  the

viii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

favourite  meeting-place  of  the  popular  assemblies.  The  great  bell
which  summoned  the  citizens  to  these  assemblies,  or  to  riot,  hangs
there  no  longer.  More  than  from  Florence  or  from  Ghent  has  the
old  Hfe  departed,  which  made  Novgorod  a  Slavonic  counterpart  of
the  city-states  of  Italy  or  of  Flanders.*

Novgorod,  in  the  days  of  its  power,  is  in  name  an  elective  Princi-
pality, in  fact  something  like  a  democratic  Republic.  The  Veche,  or
General  Assembly  of  the  citizens,  is  the  ultimate  and  irresistible
authority,  though  its  ordinary  activities  are  of  course  limited  by
other  forces,  ecclesiastical,  commercial,  aristocratic,  and  princely.

(i)  The  power  of  these  Electoral  Knyazes  or  Princes  rests  mainly  on
their  own  personality,  and  their  capacity  of  maintaining  popularity
and  organizing  support.  In  modern  language,  Novgorod  is  largely
governed  by  the  party  system.  While  the  Prince  can  command  a
majority,  or  at  least  avoid  open  defeat,  he  is  secure,  except  against
surprise :  as  soon  as  his  party  is  the  weaker,  the  result  is  inevitable.
In  the  language  of  the  Chronicle,  they  "  show  him  the  way  out."

From  the  earliest  times  the  citizens  are  noted  for  their  "  free
spirit."  At  the  beginning  of  Russian  history  we  have  their  tradi-
tional revolt  against  the  very  Rurik  they  had  just  called  in  to  found
the  new  Slav-Scandinavian  people  of  Rus — "  Our  Land  is  great,
but  there  is  no  Order  or  Justice  in  it;  come  and  .  .  .  rule  over  us."
A  century  later,  Svyatoslav  proposes  to  govern  Novgorod  by  ordi-
nary officials,  but  the  city  insists  on  a  son  of  the  Grand  Prince.
"  We  know  how  to  find  another  Knyaz."  The  menace  is  heeded
(964-72).

Yaroslav  the  Lawgiver  (1016-54),  one  of  the  real  statesmen  of
'  Russian  history,  fully  recognizes  the  power  and  value  of  Novgorod.
Above  all  his  other  favours,  tradition  singles  out  the  Charters  or
Privileges  granted  by  him  to  the  city — a  Russian  parallel  to  the
"  Good  Laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor,"  or  the  German  Town
Charters  of  Charles  the  Great. ^

As  the  old  Russian  Federation,  under  the  Grand  Princes  of  Kiev,
falls  to  pieces  in  the  twelfth  century,  Novgorod  republicanism  de-
velops. The  sovereignty  is  treated  as  purely  elective,  and  depo-
sition becomes  well-nigh  parallel  to  election.  A  prince  installed  one
year  may  be  "  shown  out  "  the  next.

Thus  in  1136  (taking  examples  only  from  the  time  of  Stephen
and  Henry  II  of  England)  the  men  of  Novgorod  seize  and  imprison
Prince  Vsyevolod  in  the  Archbishop's  palace  "  with  his  wife  and
children,  and  his  mother-in-law,"  and  finally  expel  him.

INTRODUCTION  ix

The  next  prince  reigns  less  than  a  year ;  his  successor  is  driven  out
after  "twenty-one  months."  In  1141  the  city  "sat  without  a
prince  "  nine  months,  and  the  man  next  chosen  is  put  in  the  Arch-
bishop's Palace  and  "  let  go  "  after  a  few  weeks.

Again  in  1154  Novgorod  turns  out  its  prince,  and  "  fetches  in  "
another,  who  soon  goes  to  reign  at  Kiev,  leaving  his  son  David  in
his  place.  David  is  "  shown  the  road  "  before  the  close  of  this  same
year  (1154).

In  1157  David's  successor,  despite  the  support  of  the  Commercial
Quarter,  has  to  fly  under  cover  of  night.  The  prince  next  appointed
(in  1158)  is  shown  the  way  to  Ladoga  in  1160 — only  to  be  restored,
"  with  his  full  liberty,"  after  "  a  year  less  than  a  week,"  when  his
rival  and  supplanter  is  "  fetched  away."  And  in  this  way  examples
might  be  tenfold  multiplied.'

There  is  another  side  to  the  picture.  In  the  changeful  line  of
Novgorod  princes,  we  meet  sometimes  with  men  who  rule.  Yaro-
slav  the  Lawgiver,  in  the  eleventh  century,  is  such  a  sovereign;
Alexander  Nevsky,  in  the  thirteenth,  is  another.  From  1240,
when  he  gains  his  "  eponymous  "  triumph  upon  the  Neva,  till  his
death  in  1263,  Alexander  dominates  Novgorod.  He  even  makes
the  Republic  diplomatic.  After  the  intoxicating  victories  of  the
Neva  over  the  Swedes  (1240),  and  of  Lake  Chudskoe  over  the  Ger-
man Knights  (1242),  it  was  hard  to  submit  to  the  Mongol  tax-
gatherer  (as  in  1259).  But  Alexander  realizes  that  to  defy  the
Horde  is  to  complete  the  desolation  of  Russia.  The  hero  of  Nov-
gorod at  last  persuades  her  of  the  humiliating  truth.  He  rides  out
with  the  Mongol  emissaries,  whom  he  had  guarded  day  and  night
from  mob  violence,  and  under  his  protection  "  the  accursed  ones  "
go  "  through  the  streets,  writing  down  the  houses  of  the  Christians."
To  save  the  Russian  remnant,  Alexander  journeys  repeatedly  to  the
Western  Tartar  army  (or  Golden  Horde)  upon  the  Volga — once
at  least  to  the  Great  Khan  in  Mongolia  (1246-50).  Death  overtakes
him  on  his  way  home  from  the  Golden  Horde  in  1263.  The  news
reaches  Novgorod  as  the  Eucharist  is  finishing;  turning  to  the  people.
Archbishop  Cyril  tells  the  disaster — "  The  sun  of  the  Russian  land
has  set,  my  children."  "  Grant,  Merciful  Lord,"  exclaims  the
Chronicler,  "  that  he  may  see  Thy  Face  in  the  age  to  come,  for  he
has  laboured  for  Novgorod,  and  for  the  whole  Russian  land."'

Yet  even  this  hero  of  the  North,  fresh  from  the  victory  of  the
Neva,  has  for  a  time  to  leave  Novgorod,  "  with  his  mother  and  his
wife  .  .  .  having  quarrelled  "  with  the  citizens. Better  thoughts

X THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

come  with reflection. At  the  beginning  of  the  next  year  Alex-
ander is  recalled  (1241).^

As  time  goes  on,  and  Eastern  and  Western  Christendom  see  the
growth  of  more  powerful  monarchical  states,  the  Novgorod  princedom
further  declines,  and  at  last  we  find  the  citizens  doubting  only  whether
to  become  frankly  Muscovite  or  disloyally  Polish  (1471).*

(ii)  The  crisis  of  1471,  ended  by  the  victory  of  Moscow,  brings  into
relief  the  second  person  in  the  temporal  polity  of  the  Republic — in
"  the  accursed  "  Posadnitsa  Martha,  wife  of  the  Posadnik,  Gover-
nor, or  Burgomaster  Simon  Boretsky.  This  remarkable  woman,  a
Russian  parallel  to  Elizabeth  of  England,  Catherine  de  Medici,  and
the  rest  of  the  brilliant  female  offspring  of  the  Classical  Renaissance,
almost  succeeds  in  detaching  Novgorod  from  Russia  and  the
Eastern  Church,  and  is  therefore  not  greatly  flattered  by  the
Chronicle  of  the  city,  in  a  last  section  thoroughly  pervaded  by
Muscovite  influence.  The  hatred  of  her  opponents  shows  the
influence  which  one  Posadnik  at  least  is  able  to  exercise.  But
usually  the  Posadniks,  like  the  princes,  are  creatures  of  the  popular
will.  They  are  set  up  and  cast  down  almost  as  frequently,  and  their
fate  is  harder.  Deposed  princes  are  "  shown  the  road,"  but  deposed
or  unpopular  governors  are  often  killed.  Thus  in  1134,  1146,  1156,
1161,  1171.  1172,  1175,  1189,  1205,  1219,  we  hear,  within  one  cen-
tury only,  of  Posadniks  expelled  or  restored;  in  1167  and  1209  of
Posadniks  executed  or  proscribed.^"

The  Posadnik  riots  of  1209  give  us  a  vivid  picture  of  the  city  in
uproar.  "  The  men  of  Novgorod  held  a  Veche  over  Posadnik
Dmitri  and  his  brethren  .  .  .  And  they  went  to  plunder  their  courts
[houses]  and  set  fire  to  .  .  .  [them],  seizing  their  effects,  and  seUing
their  villages  and  servants  .  .  .  taking  of  their  treasures  a  countless
quantity."  Later  Dmitri  is  brought  in  dead,  and  Novgorod  would
have  thrown  the  body  from  the  bridge,  "  but  the  archbishop  forbade."
"  And  they  kissed  the  Cross  that  they  would  not  keep  Dmitri's
children  "  in  the  city.^^

Strong  governors  perhaps  appear  more  often  than  strong  princes.
And  such  governors  play  a  leading  part  in  home  and  foreign  politics,
asinll35,  1214,  1215,  1264.12

At  times,  as  in  1218,  the  Novgorod  Democracy  keeps  a  Posadnik
in  office,  in  defiance  of  the  Prince.  "  He  is  blameless,  and  we  will
not  give  in  to  this."  Yet  next  year  the  fickle  monster  may  displace
its  favourite,  only  to  replace  him  the  same  winter.'*

INTRODUCTION  xi

(iii)  As  everywhere  in  Old  Russia,  the  Church  in  Novgorod  is  of  the
first  importance.  Vast  as  is  the  sphere  of  the  Latin  Church  in
Western  history,  the  Greek  Church  in  Russia  is  only  less  pro-
minent because  of  the  absence  of  Papalism,  of  religious  war,  and
(in  comparison)  of  ecclesiastical  encroachment.

As  early  as  1034  Nestor  mentions  one  of  the  Vladykas  or
Archbishops,  whose  succession  is  so  carefully  recorded,  and  in  1045
the  historic  Cathedral  of  the  Holy  Wisdom,  the  Hagia  Sophia  or
Sophiisky  Sobor  of  Novgorod,  is  built  by  Yaroslav  the  Lawgiver  and
his  son  Vladimir.^*

St.  Sophia  becomes  the  symbol  of  the  freedom,  prosperity,  and
power  of  the  city.  "  Where  St.  Sophia  is,  there  is  Novgorod,"
exclaims  Prince  Mstislav  in  1215.  "  Come  to  your  patrimony,  to
St.  Sophia,"  the  citizens  beseech  Prince  Yaroslav.  "  With  the  aid
of  St.  Sophia,"  Novgorod  conquers  in  battle.  Sooner  than  submit
to  the  Mongol  census  (in  1259)  the  people  resolve  to  "  die  honourably
for  St.  Sophia."  "  I  bow  down  to  St.  Sophia,  and  to  the  men  of
Novgorod,"  says  Mstislav,  when  negotiating  for  his  installation  as
prince  (in  1210).  "  I  make  my  greeting  to  St.  Sophia  .  .  .  and  to
you:  God  grant  I  may  lie  by  my  father  in  St.  Sophia  " — is  the  fare-
well of  the  same  prince  to  Novgorod. ^-^

An  accused  Archbishop  who  has  been  exiled  rights  himself
"  through  God  and  St.  Sophia."  "  The  Devil  crushed  by  God  and
St.  Sophia,"  is  the  Chronicler's  exclamation,  at  the  end  of  a  riot,
when  "  brethren  come  together  .  .  .  and  kiss  the  Cross. "^^

The  Novgorod  Chronicje,  a  work  of  ecclesiastics,  abounds  in  refer-
ences  to  churcfTfnatters.  Almost  every  other  year  we  read  of  the
consecration  or  adornment  of  a  church  or  monastery,  "  a  refuge  for
Christians,  a  joy  to  Angels,  and  ruin  to  the  Devil."  Often  it  is  St.
Sophia  itself,  Novgorod's  Westminster,  which  is  repaired  or  beauti-
fied, or  which  becomes  the  burial  place  of  another  prince.^'

These  ecclesiastical  notes  constantl}^  throw  light  upon  political
and  social  conditions.  From  some  we  learn  of  a  Varangian  or  Scan-
dinavian Church;  from  others,  of  a  merchant's  daughter  becoming
an  abbess;  from  others,  of  the  Archbishop's  palace  used  as  a  prison
for  deposed  princes  or  other  great  offenders;  from  others,  again,  of
the  Vladykas  influence  in  heading  embassies,  stopping  riots,  recon-
ciling parties,  and  allaying  popular  fury.^^

The  Archbishops,  usually  chosen  by  the  Prince  and  citizens —

xii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

but  needing  confirmation  by  the  "  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia  "  at
Kiev,  Vladimir,  or  Moscow — ultimately  depend  on  popular  favour.
Thus  in  1211  Mitrofan  is  exiled,  "bearing  this  gladly,  Hke  John
Chrysostom,"  and  after  eight  years  is  recalled  by  the  same  popular
voice  (1219).  19

Monasticism,  which  began  in  the  Eastern  Church,  and  has  always
played  so  great  a  part  in  Russia,  is  strong  at  Novgorod.  Many  a
time  it  is  recorded  how  a  Bishop,  Igumen,  prince,  or  rich  man,
founds  a  monastery — "  a  refuge  for  Christians  and  a  delight  to  the
faithful":-"  like  the  "Bishop's  Court,"  the  Russian  monasteries
serve  at  times  as  guard-houses  for  prisoners  of  state. ^i

As  in  the  West,  so  in  the  East.  The  greatest  soldiers  and  states-
men may  take  refuge  in  the  cloister.  Alexander  Nevsky  himself,
when  he  feels  his  mortal  illness,  is  "  shorn  "  as  a  monk  (Nov.  14,
1263).

And  abundant  are  the  examples  of  prominent  ecclesiastics  of  the
Republic  being  "  shorn  into  "  (or  "  for  ")  the  schema,  "  choosing
to  lead  a  life  of  silence.  "^^

(iv)  "  Mediaeval  society  (many  still  believe)  included  only  soldiers,
churchmen,  and  peasants."  Mediaeval  Russia;  and  especially
Novgorod,  gives  as  much  help  against  this  superstition  as  any
Westernland.

The  burgess,  the  responsible  citizen,  who  possesses  a  stake  in  the
Republic,  and  who  deliberates,  votes,  and  fights  for  its  freedom  and
greatness,  is  constantly  in  evidence.

But  beyond  the  ordinary  business  and  business  man  of  the
average  prosperous  mediaeval  town,  the  merchant  and  his  trade
play  an  exceptional  part  in  Novgorod.  For  here  was  one  of  the
four  capital  factories  of  the  Hanseatic  League  in  non-German
lands.

Before,  or  during,  the  time  of  Frederic  Barbarossa,  foreign  traders
are  noticed  at  Novgorod  (1142);  Bremen  merchants  appear
in  Livonia  (1157);  and  direct  commerce  between  Cologne  and
Russia  is  recorded  (1165).  The  agreement  concluded  at  the  close
of  the  Crusading  Age  (1269)  between  Novgorod,  Liibeck,  and  Goth-
land, shows  that  the  Nemtsy  had  long  possessed  a  regular  com-
mercial status  on  the  Volkhov.  And  the  famous  Skra  or  code  of  the
Nemetski  factory  here  goes  back  to  the  early  thirteenth  century
(1225).23

Half  the  town  is  known,  we  have  seen,  as  the  Commercial  Side.^^

INTRODUCTION  xiii

Here  the  foreign  traders  had  their  quarters,  their  guildhall,  their
church  (of  St.  Peter),  their  shops,  stores,  and  dwelling-houses.
This  Court  of  the  Nemtsy,  or  Court  of  St.  Peter,  was  built,  like  the
Hansa  settlements  in  Bergen  and  London,  for  defence  as  well  as  for
trade,  and  was  closed  and  guarded  at  night.  At  its  head  was  a
Council  of  Aldermen,  with  a  President,  the  "  (Chief)  Alderman  of  St.
Peter's  Court."  Common  Rooms  (very  unlike  those  of  Oxford)  were
maintained  for  all  the  Hanseatics,  "  summer  and  winter  travellers  "
alike — both  the  privileged  seafarers,  and  the  landsmen  who,  as
enjoying  an  easier  life,  had  fewer  privileges  in  the  factory.  The
junior  clerks  and  apprentices  had  plenty  of  freedom  in  the  "  chil-
dren's room."

The  Nemtsy  of  St.  Peter's  Court  had  their  own  brewery,  bees,
and  forests.  Their  organization  was  largely  governed  by  the
sound  principles  of  keeping  their  good  things  to  themselves,  and
guarding  against  fraud  by  their  customers,  as  well  as  against  the
intrusion  of  non-Hanseatics  into  the  Russian  trade. -^

In  the  early  days  of  this  factory,  the  annual  profits  are  stored
at  St.  Mary's  Church  in  Visby — another  indication  of  Gothland
influence.  The  original  authors  of  the  Skra  are  probably  Gothland
merchants,  and  the  Novgorod  "  court  of  the  Nemtsy  "  is  perhaps
at  first  a  dependency  of  Visby.  But  in  the  fourteenth  century
the  Gothland  domination  is  first  rivalled,  then  replaced,  by  that  of
Liibeck.  Thus  from  1346  the  Hanseatic  President  in  Novgorod  is
chosen,  by  representatives  of  the  Hanse  towns,  from  among  Liibeck
and  Visby  merchants.^^

The  growth  of  Hanse  trade  in  Russia,  during  the  Mongol  Age
(1220-1460),  is  not  only  due  to  the  business  ability  of  the  German
merchants.  It  is  aided  by  the  disasters  (and  consequent  dependence)
of  the  Russian  people  at  this  time — by  Tartar,  Lithuanian,  and
especially  Teutonic,  conquest.

Except  in  Flanders,  no  field  of  non-German  trade  gives  so  wide  a
Hanseatic  picture,  shows  so  many  Hanse  centres  engaged  in  the  local
commerce.  Merchants  of  Brunswick,  Dortmund,  Duisburg,  Mag-
deburg, Munster,  and  pettier  towns  appear  in  Russia,  especially
in  Novgorod,  often  travelling  by  the  dangerous  overland  routes.
And  even  mediaeval  Russians  sometimes  venture  far  overland  in
search  of  customers.^'

The  Annals  of  Novgorod  abound  in  notices  of  trade. Already  in

xiv  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  twelfth  century  (as  in  1137,  1141-2,  1195)  the  mercantile  interest
makes  itself  felt  in  war  and  politics. ^^

Commercialism  further  develops  in  the  thirteenth  century,  when
we  hear  of  extortions  from  merchants,  in  1209;  of  merchants  sent,
with  the  Posadnik,  to  call  in  a  new  prince,  in  1215;  of  merchants
plundered  by  this  new  ruler  in  the  same  year;  of  gallant  tradesmen
(kettlemakers,  clockmakers,  silversmiths)  killed  in  battle  (in  1216,
1234,  and  later  years) ;  and  of  terrible  fires  on  the  Commercial  Side,
with  destruction  of  Varangian  and  Nemelski  merchandise,  in  the
Varangian  church,  or  in  Varangian  Street  (in  1217  or  1299).-^

In  the  fourteenth  century  commercial  matters,  and  especially

*^ interference  with  trade,  are  among  the  prominent  causes  of  quarrel

between  Novgorod  and  Sweden,  the  Teutonic  Order,  and  Moscow.^"

Lastly,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  foreign  values  and  coined  money
are  introduced  into  Novgorod  traffic,  and  the  old  tokens  super-
seded. Thus  in  1410  "  the  men  of  Novgorod  began  to  trade  in
Nemetski  artugs  and  Lithuanian  groshes  .  .  .  doing  away  with  skin-
tokens,"  and  in  1420  they  "  began  to  deal  in  silver  coin,"  and  sold
the  Nemtsy  their  artugs  again. ^^

(v)  Everyrank,  power,  and  interest  ia  JJJovgorQd  rests  upoiLthe
sovereign^eople.  As  no  dynasty  can  establish  itself  permanently,
still  less  any  aristocracy  of  western  type,  the  Republic  preserves
with  peculiar  purity  the  ancient  democratic  ideas  and  institutions.
Down  to  the  Muscovite  conquest,.' the  city  is  more  powerful  than
any  of  its  lords,  officials,  or  classes. ^^  The  great  popular  assembly,
comparable  to  that  of  Athens  in  power,  is  supremely  characteristic
■^vof  Novgorod  among  Russian  states.  The  Veche  invites  a  new
prince,  and  arraigns,  imprisons,  or  expels  him  when  it  pleases. ^^  It
elects  and  deposes  Posadniks  and  the  lesser  officers  of  state.^^  Within
the  limits  of  the  sacred  lot,  and  of  Orthodox  feehng,  it  elects,  as  it
can  depose,  the  Vladykas  or  Archbishops.^^  It  decides  peace  and
war,  and  punishes  criminals.  A  bad  character,  or  unpopular  per-
sonage, may  be  hurled  from  the  Great  Bridge — or  otherwise  put  out
of  the  way — at  the  conclusion  of  a  Veche.^^

Like  the  Polish  Diets,  the  Novgorod  Veches  nominally  respect
the  primitive  Slavonic  principle  of  necessary  unanimity.  But
there  is  no  real  liberum  veto  on  the  Volkhov.  Minorities  in  Novgorod
are  bludgeoned,  ducked,  drowned,  "  put  to  the  edge  of  the  sword,"
or  expelled  from  the  city. Prince  or  Posadnik — or  any  respectable

INTRODUCTION  xv

party  among  the  nobles  or  commons — -can  legally  or  practically
summon  the  Veche,  which  usually  meets  either  "  at  "  (i.e.  outside)
St.  Sophia,  or  in  the  Court  of  Yaroslav  on  the  Commercial  Side.
Sometimes  rival  parties  call  rival  Veches,  which  finish  with  a
conference  upon  the  Great  Bridge,  or  with  fighting.^''  Matters  of
religion  and  morality  are  an  important  part  of  the  work  of  the
Veche,  which  banned  pagan  superstitions,  punished  the  black  art,
designated  the  favoured  few  from  whom  a  new  archbishop  might
be  chosen,  or  deposed  an  unpopular  prelate. ^^

II.  THE  EMPIRE  OF  NOVGOROD.

On  any  general  view  of  European  history,  there  are  few  incidents
more  suggestive  than  the  territorial  expansion  of  Russia — the
eastern  vanguard  of  western  civilization.  However  we  may  criticize
the  Russian  people,  it  is  certainly  the  pioneer  and  representative  of
Christendom  in  the  north-east  of  Europe  and  in  the  north  of  Asia.
And  nowhere  in  the  Old  World  has  the  dominion  of  the  higher  races
been  so  widened  as  in  the  lands  from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  White,
and  from  the  Baltic  to  the  Sea  of  Japan,  which  have  been  gradually
v"  conquered  and  colonized  by  the  Slavonic-Scandinavian  Rus.

The  primitive  Russian  homeland  did  not  include  more  than  a
fraction  (mainly  in  the  West-Central  zone)  of  the  present  Russia-in-
Europe.  It  was  the  political,  mercantile,  and  adventuring  ambition
of  Russian  states,  traders,  and  freebooters,  which  gave  so  noteworthy
an  extension  to  the  Russian  name.

The  first  discovery  of  those  two  Siberias — European  and  Asiatic — ■
which  lay  north  and  north-east  of  the  primitive  Russians,  as  far  as
the  Polar  Ocean  and  Tobolsk  province,  was  the  work  of  Novgorod.
Probably  about  the  time  of  the  First  Crusade  (1096),  and  certainly
before  the  Second  (1147),  the  Republic  had  already  come  into  touch
with  the  country  just  beyond  the  Ural  Mountains.

Long  ere  this,  perhaps  as  early  as  the  age  of  Cnut  (1000-30),
the  Novgorod  pioneers  had  penetrated  to  Lapland,  the  White  Sea,
and  even  the  Urals.  One  of  the  North  Ural  passes  most  likely
corresponds  to  those  Iron  Gates  where  the  men  of  Novgorod  suffered
disaster  in  1032 — "  Few  returned,  but  many  perished  there.  "'^

In  1079  we  have  the  earhest  reference  of  the  Novgorod  Annals
themselves  to  these  distant  regions:  "  They  killed  Prince  Gleb
beyond  the  Volok  "  (in  the  Northern  Dvina  country)  "  on  the  30th  of
May."^o  /)

xvi  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD'

The  time  of  Henry  I  of  England  shows  Novgorod  communicating
with  the  Asiatic  lands  beyond  the  dividing  range.  Speaking  of  a
year  which  apparently  answers  to  a.d.  1112,  the  Fundamental
Chronicle,  usually  known  as  Nestor's,  tells  how  one  Guryata
Rogovishch  of  Novgorod  sent  his  servant  to  the  Pechora,  how  the
Pechora  folk  then  paid  tribute  to  Novgrad,  and  how  from  the
Pechora  the  messenger  went  on  to  Yugra.  We  may  doubt  the
Yugrian  report  of  a  mysterious  people  enclosed  in  lofty  mountains
by  the  sea,  vainly  struggling  to  break  out,  and  accessible  only  by
an  opening  through  which  they  screeched  their  unknown  lingo,
thrust  out  an  iron  finger,  and  bartered  furs  for  iron.  But  we  need
not  doubt  the  historical  statement  which  introduces  this  legend,
or  see  in  Nestor's  Yugra  anything  very  different  from  the  Yugra
of  later  time — the  north-west  corner  of  Asia,  and  especially  the
valley  of  the  Lower  Ob.*^

Now  this  Siberian  connexion  is  not  a  passing  incident,  like  the
early  Russian  dominion  on  the  Azov  or  in  the  Crimea,  or  the  early
Russian  raids  towards  and  beyond  the  Caucasus.  On  the  contrary,
it  appears  fairly  persistent  throughout  the  central  and  later  Middle
Ages ;  when  Novgorod  is  displaced  by  Moscow,  the  Muscovite  power
continues  and  develops  the  Russian  overlordship  in  Yugra.

A  tribute-gathering  expedition  in  1169  shows  Novgorod  active
in  the  Trans-Volok  or  Northern  Dvina  basin,  and  may  have  been
concerned  with  pa5'ments  as  far  as  Asia;  and  the  foundation  of
Vyatka  in  1174  carries  permanent  Novgorod  settlement  far  nearer
to  Siberia,  along  a  more  southerly  track.  But  in  1187,  on  the  eve  of
the  Third  Crusade,  Yugra  appears  tragically ;  both  here  and  in  lands
west  of  Ural  the  natives  rise  and  massacre  their  Russian  masters  or
customers.  The  punitive  expedition  of  1193-4  ends  in  disaster. *2

How  and  when  intercourse  with  Asiatic  Siberia  is  resumed  we
are  not  told;  but  this  resumption  possibly  took  place  before  the  end
of  the  Crusading  Age,  for  in  the  agreement  of  1264  between  Novgorod
and  Prince  Yaroslav,  Yugra,  like  Perm  and  the  Pechora,  appears
among  the  domains  or  "  claims  "  of  the  Republic. ^^  Sixty  years  later,
in  1323  and  1329,  Novgorod  complains  of  outrages  on  its  citizens
travelling  to  Yugra.**  These  outrages  were  often  the  work  of  Russian
enemies  (as  at  Ustyug)  in  the  Northern  Dvina  basin,  planted  on  the
flank  of  the  north-east  trade-route  from  Novgorod,  and  a  constant
danger  to  its  commerce.  Again,  the  demand  of  Moscow,  in  1332-3,
for  "  tribute  in  silver "  for  the  lands  beyond  the  Kama —
the  first  sign  of  coming  Muscovite  overlordship — probably  has  a

INTRODUCTION  xvii

special  reference  to  the  rrmes  Novgorod  had  long  exploited  in  the
Northern  Ural.^*

Lastly,  in  1445,  within  a  generation  of  the  ruin  of  the  Republic,
we  hear  of  a  last  vigorous  effort  to  assert  Novgorod  rule  in  Yugra.
Again  the  Chronicle  tells  of  initial  successes;  then,  as  before,  victory
ends  in  ruinous  defeat.'**

In  1471  Moscow  crushes  Novgorod,  and  takes  over  the  Novgoro-
dian  empire.  But  even  before  this,  the  founder  of  the  Moscow  Tsar-
dom,  Ivan  the  Great,  on  his  way  to  the  subjugation  of  Novgorod,
begins  the  conquest  of  the  Asiatic  Siberia  with  which  Novgorod  had
dealt  so  long.*'

To  the  connexions  between  Novgorod  and  her  less  remote  pro-
vinces there  are  fuller  references.  We  have  noticed  the  death  of
Prince  Gleb  in  1079,  the  tribute-gathering  expedition  of  1169
in  the  Trans- Volok,  the  foundation  of  Vyatka  in  1174,  and  the
Muscovite  demand  for  "  silver-payment  "  on  the  Trans-Kama  lands
in  1332-3.  The  Northern  Dvina,  the  most  valuable  region
beyond  the  Volok,  appears  more  definitely  in  1337,  when  Ivan  Kalita
attacks  it  to  enforce  his  Trans-Kama  silver  "^laims,  and  is  "  brought
to  shame  there  ";  in  1340,  when  Novgorod  warriors  raid  Ustyug;
in  1342,  when  rebel  adventurers  conquer  all  the  Trans- Volok;  in
1355-9,  when  Ivan  II  of  Moscow  corresponds  with  the  Dvina
Governor  and  notables;  in  1366,  when  Novgorodians  "  coming  from
the  Dvina  "  are  seized  by  Muscovite  forces;  and  in  1393,  when
Moscow  compels  Novgorod  to  yield  to  the  Metropolitan.'*^

Ivan  Kalita  had  first  turned  Muscovite  policy  towards  the  Arctic
Dvina;  besides  its  wealth  in  furs  and  timber,  he  aimed  at  winning
an  outlet  to  the  ocean. *^  Some  seventy  years  later,  his  schemes  are
momentarily  realized.  In  1397  all  the  Dvina  people  are  seduced
from  Novgorod,  and  "  kiss  the  cross  "  to  Moscow.  The  Grand
Prince  issues  ordinances  for  his  new  subjects  (in  1398-9),  which
are  the  earliest  Muscovite  laws  known,  and  the  first  Russian  laws
preserved  since  Yaroslav  (1016-54). ^o  Yet  in  1411,  1417,  1419,
1445,  we  find  Novgorod  again  in  possession  of  most  of  Siberia-in-
Europe.^*

But  finally  the  overmastering  power  of  Moscow,  which  in  1452
chases  an  enemy  through  the  Dvina  lands,  and  in  1458-9  conquers
Vyatka,  achieves  under  Ivan  the  Great  the  complete  destruction
of  Novgorod  power  on  the  Dvina,  as  elsewhere  (1471).^^

Later  Russian  progress  in  the  Kama  and  Pechora  regions  is

62

xviii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

specially  connected  with  the  Russian  Church.  About  1376  the  monk
Stephen,  afterwards  canonized  as  the  apostle  of  Perm  ("  Stephan
Permsky  "),  founds  the  earliest  church  in  the  Upper  Kama.  It  was
a  venture  of  some  risk,  for  a  former  missionary  in  this  country  had
been  flayed  by  the  natives,  "  while  they  were  yet  but  infants  in  the
Faith. "^^  Yet  before  his  death  in  1396  Stephen  had  overthrown  the
local  idolatry  of  the  Golden  Old  Woman,  stopped  the  sacrifice  of
reindeer,  secured  the  triumph  of  Christianity,  and  founded  Musco-
vite influence  in  a  region  whence,  two  centuries  later,  Moscow  over-
runs the  Siberian  Khanate.^'*  Under  Stephen's  successors  the
Russian  Church  took  root  in  the  Pechora  country  (1397-1445) — as  it
did  on  the  White  Sea  during  the  same  period,  through  the  foundation
of  the  greatest  monastery  of  the  Far  North,  in  Solovetsky  island
(1429).^^

Last  among  these  distant  fields  of  early  Novgorod  expansion
comes  Lapland,  the  westernmost  region  of  Siberia-in-Europe.
Neglecting  any  alleged  treaties  of  the  tenth  century,  or  other
evidence  of  Novgorodian  power  here  before  1264,  we  now  find
Kola  included  with  Yugra,  the  Trans- Volok,  and  the  Pechora,  among
lands  of  Novgorod  influence.^*  Again,  the  peace  concluded  between
Novgorod  and  Sweden,  in  1323,  fixes  the  Varanger  Fiord  as  the
boundary  between  the  two  powers  in  Lapland.  As  elsewhere,
religious  influence  accompanies  mercantile  and  political  control;
like  Stephen  in  the  Kama,  Ihya  of  Novgorod  and  Theodorite  of
Solovetsky  appear  as  apostles  of  faith  and  culture  to  Kola  and  the
Lapps.  ^'

We  may  here  remember  that  the  early  Russian  expansion  in  the
North  is  led,  not  by  an  absolute  monarch  and  his  soldiers,  but  by  a
fickle,  half-theocratic  democracy,  whose  chief  activity  is  commerce,
and  to  whom  the  right  of  insurrection  is  sacred.  We  may  also
recall  that  the  free  life  of  Old  Novgorod  has  left  widely-scattered
traces  in  North  Russia.  Thus  the  colony  planted  in  the  well-stocked
and  beautiful  woodland  of  far-away  Vyatka,  in  1174 — though  no
longer  governed  by  elected  civil  magistrates,  sharing  power,  in
Novgorod  fashion,  with  Church  dignitaries — yet  still  keeps  much  of
the  manners  and  customs,  the  domestic  architecture,  the  head-
dress, and  even  the  dialect,  of  the  mother-city.  On  the  other  hand,
when  autocratic  Moscow  displaces  its  liberty-loving  rival,  popular
government  has  clearly  been  found  wanting  in  Russia.  If  Novgorod
had  not  fallen  before  Moscow,  she  would  have  submitted  to  Poland.

INTRODUCTION  xix

Ivan  the  Great  conquers  her,  in  the  name  of  Russia  and  Orthodoxy,
to  save  her  from  treachery  and  Latinism.  And  Moscow  certainly
substitutes  a  clearer  political  reality  for  the  vague  and  fluctuating
dominion,  often  no  more  than  a  commercial  monopoly,  of  the
Novgorod  merchants.

Again,  to  understand  this  Russian  expansion,  the  influence  of
rivers  must  not  be  overlooked.  The  history  of  Russia,  like  that  of
French  America,  is  largely  a  river-history:  her  conquest  is  often  a
progress  from  end  to  end  of  a  river-basin,  from  one  river  system  to
another.  The  slight  elevation  of  the  northern  plains  aids  the
inland  navigator  from  Novgorod  to  Ural,  from  Ural  to  Pacific.

Once  more,  if  the  Ural  were  not  in  some  places,  despite  length  and
breadth,  so  insignificant  a  range,  the  Novgorod  connexion  with
Asia  might  be  cited  as  another  disproof  of  the  fallacy  that  mountain
chains  form  an  absolute  barrier  between  states  and  races.

Lastly,  the  empire  of  Novgorod  is  largely  commercial;  her  dis-
coveries and  conquests  are  often  the  victories  of  a  remarkable  trade-
expansion.  The  mercantile  side  of  history  has  often  been  treated
with  contempt.  But  what  form  of  man's  energy  has  done  more
to  bring  about  the  discovery  of  the  earth,  to  "  clear  the  mind  of
cant,"  to  break  down  the  obstacles  of  ignorance,  fear  and  prejudice
which  once  hemmed  in  mankind  and  separated  lands  and  races  ?

III.  THE  FOREIGN  RELATIONS  OF  NOVGOROD.

The  relations  of  Novgorod  with  its  neighbours,  its  friends,  and  its
enemies,  form  the  last  section  of  our  subject.

I.  And  first  as  to  the  chief  RUSSIAN  STATES.

(a)  Novgorod  and  Kiev.

With  Kiev,  the  so-called  "  Mother  of  Russian  cities, "^^  the  ac-
knowledged head  alike  in  pohtics  and  religion,  during  all  the  early
centuries  (c.  880-1169),  the  relations  of  Novgorod  are  naturally  long
and  intimate.  During  most  of  this  time  the  Grand  Prince  of  Kiev
nominates  the  Princes,  and  sometimes  the  Posadniks,  of  Novgorod,
subject  to  the  popular  approval.  And  the  Metropolitan  of  Kiev,
with  the  same  limitations,  ratifies  the  episcopal  elections.

Oleg,  as  Prince  at  Kiev,  and  chief  of  the  Varangians  in  Russia,
is  said  to  have  imposed  a  regular  yearly  tribute  on  Novgorod,  about
881.  His  successor,  Olga,  "  wisest  of  all  persons,"  the  pioneer  of
Christianity  among  the  Rus,  visits  the  city,  from  Kiev,  in  the  next

XX THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

century,  and  establishes  "  depots  for  commerce,"  and  "  tolls  and
dues"  on  some  of  its  waterways  (c.  947-950?).  Olga's  son,  the
Great  Vladimir,  becomes  Prince  of  Novgorod  in  970,  before  he
reigns  in  Kiev.^^

Through  much  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries,  the  Novgorod
Chronicle  records  events  at  Kiev  (especially  the  succession  of  Kiev
Princes  and  Metropohtans,  or  the  embassies  of  Novgorod  repre-
sentatives) as  matters  affecting  the  metropohs  of  Russia,  and
interesting  to  all  Russians. 6°  The  very  name  of  Rus  is  long  used  to
designate  the  Kiev  region. ^^

Yet  the  downfall  of  Kiev  in  1169,  when  the  Russia  of  the  Forests
humbles  the  Russia  of  the  Steppes,*'^  is  unnoticed  in  the  Novgorod
Annals.  Even  the  final  calamity,  the  Mongol  storm  of  1240,  is  only
mentioned  indirectly.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lesser  disasters  of
1203  and  1235,  when  heathen  Kumans  or  Polovtsi,  aided  by  traitor
Russians,  waste  the  city,  are  properly  bemoaned  by  the  Novgorod
historian. ^^

{b)  Novgorod  and  Moscow.

The  intercourse  of  Novgorod  with  Kiev  begins  with  the  beginnings
of  Russian  history,  and  is  only  important  in  the  pre-Tartar  period,
the  period  of  Kievian  greatness.  But  with  Moscow  the  Northern
Repubhc  does  not  much  concern  itself  before  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury, when  the  White  Stone  City  claims  the  headship  of  the  Russian
principalities.  It  is  in  1238,  when  Russian  allies  are  vainly  struggling
to  save  Ryazan  from  the  Mongols,  and  "  the  men  of  Moscow  ran
away,"  that  we  have  the  earliest  notice  of  "  Mother  Moskva  "  in
the  Novgorod  Chronicle.  The  fall  of  Moscow  itself,  a  few  weeks
later,  before  the  "  lawless  Ishmaelites  "  of  Batu,  is  next  recorded —
but  here,  as  in  1293,  Moscow  is  merely  named,  in  passing,  as  one
of  the  less  important  victims — and  after  this  we  hear  little  of  Mus-
covite interest  from  the  Novgorod  Annals  for  almost  a  century
(1238-1325).«4

But  at  last,  in  1325,  we  find  the  Archbishop  of  Novgorod  visiting
Moscow  "  for  confirmation  by  the  Metropolitan."  For  Ivan  Kahta
had  just  induced  the  Russian  primate  to  move  his  Stol  from
Vladimir,  and  Moscow  had  definitely  taken  the  place  of  Kiev  as  the
Canterbury  or  the  Mainz  of  Russian  Christianity.

In  1335,  again,  we  find  the  Republic,  despite  "  colonial  "  quarrels,
recognizing  the  Knyaz  of  Moscow — this  same  "  John  of  the
Purse  " — as  Grand  Prince,  the  secular  head  of  the  Russian  people.

INTRODUCTION  ^xxi

Ivan  visits  Novgorod  and  "  has  a  friendly  talk  " ;  Novgorod  no-tables
go  to  be  honoured  at  Moscow. ^^

When  the  Moscow  sovereign  or  Metropolitan  visits  the  Tartar
Court  on  any  special  occasion  (as  in  1336),  or  when  anything  un-
common happens  at  Moscow — such  as  the  fire  of  1337,  or  the  death
of  the  Grand  Prince  in  1340 — it  is  duly  recorded  at  Novgorod. ^^
Still  more,  when  (as  in  1332)  the  Muscovite  begins  to  aggress  upon
Novgorod;  and  most  of  all  (as  in  1337)  when  history  records  the
discomfiture  of  the  aggressor,  "  regardless  of  the  kissing  of  the
Cross,"  who,  by  the  "  power  of  the  Cross,"  is  "  brought  to  shame. "^^
In  1346  we  first  hear  of  the  enthronement  of  the  Moscow  Grand
Prince  in  Novgorod,  as  its  Russian  suzerain — though  the  Khan  of
the  Golden  Horde  is  still  "  Tsar,"  supreme  even  over  Semeon  the
Proud,  who  after  enthronement  in  Novgorod  goes  to  "  the  Low
Country  on  the  Tsar's  business."  Yet  Novgorod  still  struggles
against  Muscovite  ascendency,  appealing  to  the  Tartar,  on  Semeon's
death,  to  give  the  Grand  Princedom  to  Vladimir-Suzdal  once  more
(1353) ;  and  though  the  intrigue  is  now  unsuccessful,  it  momentarily
succeeds  a  few  years  later  (1360).^^

But  in  1366  the  Muscovite — now  the  famous  Dmitri  of  the  Don —
is  again  Suzerain  Prince,  and  quarrelling  vigorously  with  the
Republic  about  a  Volga  raid  of  Novgorod  adventurers  who  had
plundered  Moscow  merchants.  Peace  is  made  in  1367;  the
lieutenant  of  Dmitri  is  installed  in  Novgorod;  and  Nov-
gorod helps  Moscow  a^gainst  the  hated  Tver  (1375),  and  accepts  her
decision  in  a  dispute  about  the  Metropolitan  chair  (1376).

On  the  other  hand,  Dmitri  Donskoi  confirms  all  the  old  rights  of
Novgorod  in  the  year  of  his  Tartar  triumph  at  Kulikovo  "  in  a
clean  field  beyond  the  Don,  on  the  birthday  of  the  Mother  of
God,"  when,  "  preserved  by  God,  he  fought  ...  for  the  Orthodox
Faith,  and  for  all  the  Russian  land  "  (Sat.,  Sept.  8,  1380).

As  the  Tartar  flood  subsides,  Moscow  presses  on  Novgorod
afresh,  and  in  1386  the  Republic  pays  Dmitri  a  heavy  fine
(8,000  roubles)  "  for  the  guilt  of  the  Volga  men."^^  Towards
the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century  we  find  Novgorod  (in  1391)
again  struggling  to  free  itself,  if  not  from  the  political  suzer-
ainty, at  least  from  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  of  Moscow.  But
before  the  end  of  1393  (and  this  is  prophetic)  Novgorod  yields,  and
concludes  peace  "  on  the  old  terms."'"

More  serious  trouble  follows  from  the  reiterated  Moscow  aggres-
sions in  the  colonial  field,  as  in  the  Northern  Dvina  basin  (1397

xxii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

1401,  etc.).  Diplomacy  effecting  nothing,  the  RepubHc  makes
vigorous  reprisals,  usually  (till  the  fatal  age  of  Ivan  the  Great)  with
fair  success.'^

II.  NOVGOROD  AND  THE  SCANDINAVIANS. ^"^

The  history  of  Novgorod  and  of  Russia  beging^wkh  the  Scandi-
navian settlement  which  civilized,  and  in  the  hign^  sense  created,
both.  And  during  the  earlier  centuries  the  Scandinavian  con-
nexion is  naturall}^  close  (c.  862-1060).

Novgorod  is  often  mentioned  in  early  Scandinavian  records  as
Holmgarih—"  probably  because  it  stood  on  a  holm,"  or  low  flat
river-bank,  near  where  the  Volkhov  issues  from  Lake  Ilmen."^

According  to  Nestor,  Rurik  settles  first  in  Novgorod,  when  he
enters  Russia  to  rule  the  tribes  that  had  invited  the  Rtis.  "  And  the
Russian  Land,  Novgorod,  was  called  (i.e.  called  Rus)  after  these
Varangians;  they  (i.e.  the  Rus)  are  the  Novgorodians  of  Varangian
descent;  previously  the  Novgorodians  were  Slavs. "'^

The  mastery  of  the  Rus  over  the  Slavs  begins,  therefore,  with
their  settlement  in  Novgorod;  but  the  great  northern  town  soon
ceases  to  be  their  capital.  After  some  twenty  years,  Rurik's  suc-
cessor, Oleg,  takes  Kiev  and  makes  it  his  capital,  and  even  the  name
of  Rus  now  vanishes  from  Novgorod,  and  is  usually,  for  centuries,
connected  with  Kiev.

Yet,  though  abandoned  by  the  sovereign  clan  of  the  Rus,  Nov-
gorod maintains  its  distinctive  position.  In  reality  it  is  the  chief
rival,  and  in  commerce  ultimately  the  superior,  of  Kiev  among  the
early  Russian  states  (880-1220).  In  Novgorod  the  Scandinavian
element  is  stronger  even  than  in  Kiev — so  strong  indeed  that  Nestor
considers  it  a  Varangian  town.'*  Elsewhere  we  hear  of  the  Varan-
gian Church,  of  the  Guildhall  of  the  Gothlanders  in  twelfth-century
Novgorod,  and  of  other  matters  which  prove  the  early  prominence
of  Scandinavians,  and  especially  of  Swedes,  in  Novgorod  traffic.
But  in  the  later  Middle  Ages  the  Scandinavians  gradually  give  way
to  the  Germans,  and  the  Hansa  comes  to  control  Novgorod  trade.

From  the  eleventh  century  we  find  less  evidence  of  Scandinavian
intercourse,  though  Scandinavian  blood  and  spirit  continue  to  work
at  Novgorod.

And  when  we  next  hear  of  Scandinavian  influence,  as  in  1142,  it  is
purely  hostile. '^  Towards  the  close  of  the  Crusading  Age  comes  the

INTRODUCTION  xxiii

decisive  struggle  of  1240,  when,  "  through  the  power  of  St.  Sophia
and  the  prayers  of  the  Mother  of  God,"  Svei  and  Northmen  are
routed  by  that  prince  of  Novgorod,  who,  from  this  day,  is  known  as
"  Alexander  of  the  Neva  "  (July  15,  1240). '^^

After  this  Novgorod  runs  no  serious  danger  from  Scandinavia
for  another  century,  although  at  times  there  are  rumours  of  wars.
Thus  in  1300  the  Swedish  attempts  on  the  Neva  are  renewed:  "  The
accursed  came  in  strength,  with  ...  a  special  master  from  the  great
Pap  of  Rim  (Pope  of  Rome),  and  they  founded  a  town  at  the  mouth
of  the  Okhta,  in  the  Neva,  and  strengthened  it  indescribably  .  .  .
calling  it  Landskrona  (The  Crown  of  the  Land).  But  by  the  power
of  St.  Sophia  .  .  .  that  fortress  came  to  nothing,"  being  captured  by
the  Novgorod  men  in  1301."

In  the  early  fourteenth  century,  perhaps  the  greatest  period  of
Novgorod  power,  the  Scandinavian  states  secure  the  friendship  of
the  Republic,  at  the  cost  of  former  ambitions.  Thus,  while  Den-
mark concludes  a  treaty  in  1302,  Sweden,  in  1323,  acquiesces  in  a
Novgorod  colony  at  the  Neva  estuary  on  Orekhov  island,  and  signs
an  "  everlasting  peace,"  which  is  renewed  in  1338.'^

But  in  1348  Sweden  becomes  threatening  once  more:  "The
Sveiski  King  Magnush  "  invites  Novgorod  to  send  its  "  philosophers"
to  a  congress  to  decide  between  Roman  and  Greek  Christianity.
"  If  your  faith  is  pronounced  better,  then  I  will  adopt  yours;  if
mine,  you  will  adopt  ours."  Otherwise  there  must  be  war.  Novgorod
refers  the  royal  proselytizer  to  Constantinople,  and  dispatches  an
embassy  to  "  discuss  grievances,"  but  in  vain.  "  He  had  no
grievance,"  Magnus  explained,  "  but  Novgorod  must  embrace
his  faith."  Fighting  accordingly  begins,  but  Novgorod  holds  its  own
well,  gaining  the  victory  in  several  encounters.'^

The  slight  revivals  of  Swedish  and  Norwegian  aggression  in
1395-6,  in  1411,  and  in  1445 — in  the  Neva  region,  in  Korelia,  and  in
the  Far  North — meet  with  no  remarkable  success. ^•^

And,  indeed,  the  whole  subject  of  Novgorod's  dealings  with  the
Scandinavian  peoples,  after  the  thirteenth  century,  has  no  special
importance.

III.  NOVGOROD  AND  THE  MONGOL  TARTARS.

The  case  stands  very  differently  with  the  next  of  Novgorod's
neighbours  and  enemies,  the  "  Mongols  whom  we  call  Tartars."

xxiv  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Novgorod  is  the  only  Russian  state,  or  cit3^  of  importance,  which
escapes  full  subjugation  by  the  Mongols  of  the  thirteenth  century.
And  even  Novgorod,  saved  from  siege  and  sack  behind  her  marshes,
in  a  summer  of  providential  wetness,  becomes  the  vassal  of  the
Tartars.

The  great  Asiatic  irruption  which  alters  the  whole  course  of
Russian  history,  and  so  sharply  divides  the  life  and  polity  of  the
Rus,  before  the  age  of  Batu,  from  the  life  and  pohty  of  the  same
people,  after  that  age  (Novgorod  is  the  only  noteworthy  exception)
breaks  upon  all  Eastern  Europe  with  the  force  of  sudden  terror.
Novgorod  is  no  exception  here.  "  In  the  same  year  (1224),  for  our
sins,  unknown  tribes  came.  No  one  knows  accurately  who  they
are  .  .  .,  what  their  language  is,  or  race,  or  faith,  but  they  called  them
Tatary  (Tartars)  .  .  .  God  alone  knows  .  .  .  and  very  wise  men  who
understand  books,  but  we  do  not.  .  .  ."  The  battle  of  the  Kalka
(1224)  is  vividly  described  in  the  Novgorod  Annals,  and  the  dramatic
departure  of  the  victors,  for  a  season.  "  We  know  not  whence  they
came,  nor  where  they  hid  themselves  again.  God  knows  whence  he
fetched  them  against  us,  for  our  sins."^^

And  when  the  Horde  returns,  after  twelve  years  (1236),  and  these
"  accursed  godless  strangers,"  these  "  lawless  Ishmaelites,"  swarm
"  like  locusts  "  into  the  Russian  land,  "  cutting  down  everyone  like
grass,"  the  annalist  traces  their  advance  with  mournful  fidelity  to
within  sixty  miles  of  Novgorod.  Moscow  and  many  another
Russian  town,  greater  than  the  Moscow  of  those  days,  sees  its  men
and  women,  its  priests  and  monks,  yield  "  their  souls  to  the  Lord  "
in  a  "  bitter  and  a  wretched  death,"  but  before  the  Heaven-
protected  Novgorod  the  Mongols  pause.  God,  and  the  apostolic
Cathedral  of  the  Holy  Wisdom,  and  the  prayers  of  the  Orthodox
archbishop,  of  the  faithful  princes,  of  the  venerable  monks,  guard
the  city.  At  the  cross  of  Ignati,  100  versts  away,  the  invader
turns  back  south-eastwards,  weary  and  disgusted  with  the  vast
morasses  and  incessant  rains  which  confront  and  impede  him.  For
all  this  summer  it  "  stood  with  "  wet.^^

But  Novgorod,  though  saved  for  the  moment,  would  soon  have
shared  the  fate  of  other  Russian  cities,  if  she  had  not  averted  the
danger  by  prompt,  ready,  and  undeviating  submission.  The  princes
and  officials  of  the  Republic  now  obey  the  "  Tartar  Tsar  "  in  all
things,  visiting  the  Horde  when  summoned  (as  in  1247),  doing  hom-
age, punctually  paying  tribute,  admitting  Mongol  assessors  and  tax-

INTRODUCTION  xxv

gatherers  (as  in  1257).  The  orders  of  Batu  brook  no  evasion  or
delay;  and  the  hero,  Alexander  Nevsky,  statesman  no  less  than
warrior,  is  specially  prominent  in  his  obedience. ^^

Thus  in  1259,  after  Lithuania  had  been  devastated, ^^  when  "  the
accursed  raw-eating  Tartars  came,  taking  tribute  for  the  accursed,"
the  Republic,  we  have  seen,  bows  to  the  statesmanship  of  its
leader.  Novgorod  rages  and  trembles;  the  greater  men  "  bid  the
lesser  be  counted  for  tribute  ";  the  citizens  gather  in  force — "  they
will  lay  their  heads  by  St.  Sophia  " — but  the  city  submits  at  last,
without  a  blow.^»

In  1315,  after  seventy  3'ears  of  peaceful,  if  hateful,  vassalage,
Novgorod  is  forced  into  momentary  conflict  with  the  Mongols,
through  the  treacherous  ambition  of  the  rival  Russian  state  of  Tver.
The  Republic  suffers  a  serious  defeat,  but  repulses  an  attempt  upon
the  city  (1316).  In  the  retreat  the  enemy  lose  their  way  among  the
lakes  and  swamps  that  protected  Novgorod,  and  nearly  perish  of
hunger,  eating  their  horses  and  leather  shields.  Finally,  an  appeal
to  the  Khan^of  the  Golden  Horde  ends  the  trouble.  In  1327  "  a
mighty  Tartar  host  took  Tver  .  .  .  and  wasted  all  the  Rus  land,
Novgorod  alone  being  spared  " — on  payment  of  a  round  sum.^^

As  we  have  seen,  the  first  victories  of  Moscow,  under  Dmitri
Donskoi,  over  the  Tartars,  are  exultantly  recorded  at  Novgorod
(1380).  Nor  is  the  Mongol  recovery  under  Tokhtamysh  forgotten,
when  Moscow  is  burned,  and  the  hero  Dmitri  flies  before  the  "  god-
less Tartars  "  (1382,  etc.).  And  finally  Novgorod  catches  a  glimpse
of  the  strange,  enigmatic  figure  of  Lame  Timur,  that  champion  of
Islam,  who  by  his  overthrow  of  the  Golden  Horde  prepares  the  way
for  the  liberation  of  Russia  and  the  expansion  of  Slavonic  Christen-
dom, just  as  by  his  defeat  of  thfi  Ottomans  he  gives  a  last  oppor-
tunity to  Christian  Constantinople.  Needless  to  say,  no  perception
of  the  real  benefits  of  the  conqueror's  levehing  work  is  apparent  in
the  Chronicle  of  the  Republic.  There  is  merely  an  account  of  the
triumph  of  Tamerlane  over  the  Lithuanians  (1398-9)  arising  out  of
his  earlier  triumph  over  the  Golden  Horde. ^'

IV.  NOVGOROD  AND  THE  LITHUANIANS.

The  Lithuanians,  the  last  important  pagan  race  of  Europe,  the
"  godless  Litva  "  of  the  Novgorod  annals,  had  something  to  do
with  the  great  Russian  city  of  the  North  from  early  times,^^  but  it  is
only  after  the  Mongol  conquest  that  they  vitally  concern  Novgorod
in  particular,  or  Russia  in  general.

xxvi  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

In  1258  the  Tartars  "  took  all  Litva  land  and  killed  the  people  " — ■
it  reads  like  the  end  of  the  Lithuanian  danger — but  we  know  what
these  great  phrases  mean  to  annalists  of  many  countries.  And  here
it  is  more  than  usually  misleading.

For  in  the  fourteenth  century  the  Litva  first  become  a  serious
political  power  under  their  Grand  Prince  Gedimin  the  Conqueror,
who  in  1326  appears  as  mediating  between  Novgorod  and  the  Ger-
mans, and  in  1331  as  trying  to  appoint  the  bishop,  as  he  had  ap-
pointed the  prince,  of  Pskov,  "  without  regard  to  Novgorod  .  .  .
being  carried  away  with  presumption. "^^

Gedimin  and  his  successors  do,  in  fact,  succeed  in  tearing  away
from  Russia  all  the  west  and  south-west  of  Rus,  with  Kiev  itself.
And  thus  is  enacted  the  first  chapter  of  that  injustice  which  by
the  Partition  of  Poland  is  gradually  transformed  into  a  fresh  wrong
still  more  grievous,  now  weighing  upon  the  old  oDoressor.

Against  this  new  power,  both  before  and  after  the  conversion  of
Yagieloand  the  Union  with  Poland  (in  1386),  Novgorod  struggles
incessantly,  and  not  ingloriously.  Pskov  submits  to  the  Litva  in
1342,  but  the  Elder  Sister  of  Pskov  defies  them.  A  fierce  attack  in
1346  follows  upon  some  plain  language  from  Novgorod  to  Gedimin's
successor — "  Your  Posadnik,"  complains  Olgierd,  "  has  barked  at
me;  he  called  me  a  hound."  It  was  a  dangerous  dog  to  bark  at — •
for  Olgierd  brings  Lithuanian  power  to  its  zenith,  penetrating  (as
in  1370)  almost  to  Moscow,  and  for  a  time  bringing  back  the  Metro-
politan of  the  Russian  Church  from  Moscow  to  Kiev,  now  "  in
Litva  "  (1376).®°  The  abusive  Posadnik  is  executed  by  his  own
fellow  citizens  at  a  Veche — (the  Novgorod  democracy  treats  its  ser-
vants rather  like  Carthage) — "  for  it  is  owing  to  you  that  our  lands
have  been  seized.®^

The  death  of  Olgierd  in  1377,  and  the  consequent  domestic
troubles,  are  a  real  rehef  to  the  Russia  now  pressed  so  hard  between
Tartars,  Lithuanians,  and  Nenitsy.  And  the  union  of  Poland  and
Lithuania  in  1386  does  not  immediately  increase  the  danger.  For
the  federated  state,  though  threatening  the  conquest  of  more  and
more  Russian  land,  is  at  first  chiefly  occupied  with  the  Tartars  and
the  Teutonic  Order — as  in  1399,  when  Vitovt  disastrously  defies
Timur,  or  in  1410,  when  Yagielo  and  Vitovt  crush  the  German
Knights  at  Tannenberg.

With  Vitovt,  the  last  great  Litva  conqueror  (1392-1430).  ends  the
brief  hope  that  Lithuanian  conversion  might  profit  the  Eastern

INTRODUCTION  xxvii

Church.  "  For  Prince  Vitovt,"  the  Novgorod  Annalist  bemoans  in
1399,  "  had  previously  been  a  Christian  .  .  .  but  he  renounced  the
Orthodox  Faith  and  adopted  the  PoHsh,  and  perverted  the  holy
churches  to  service  hateful  to  God.  He  thought,"  continues  the
Chronicler,  "  that  he  would  conquer  .  .  .  the  Rus  land  and  Novgorod,
but  he  thought  not  of  the  Lord's  sa3dng,  A  thousand  shall  flee  at  the
rebuke  of  one."  After  his  ill-starred  conflict  with  Timur,  he  con-
cludes peace  with  Novgorod  "  on  the  old  terms  "  (1400).

Yet  in  the  fifteenth  centur}/  Lithuanian  aggressions  are  again
alarming.  But  for  their  preoccupation  with  the  Nenitsy,  the  Litva
might  have  attempted  the  conquest  of  all  Russia.  In  1404:  Vitovt
gains  Smolensk;  and  in  1415  "  by  the  sufferance  of  God,"  he  re-
organizes the  Church  in  Little  Russia,  under  a  Latin  Metropolitan.
Again,  in  1444,  Vitovt's  successor,  Casimir,  calls  upon  Novgorod
to  submit.  The  Republic  "  did  not  fall  in  with  this,"  but  the  famine
of  1445  aided  his  efforts;  in  their  distress  some  of  the  Novgorod
folk  "  fled  to  Litva,"  or  "  passed  over  to  Latinism."  More  and
more  this  is  the  danger  at  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages — leading  to
the  conclusion,  when  Moscow  destroys  the  Republic  to  keep  it  from
"  lapsing  into  Latinism."^^

\. NOVGOROD  AND  THE  GERMANS.

The  relations  of  Novgorod  with  the  Ncmtsy  are  among  the
latest  in  historical  order,  on  the  political  side — though  of  respect-
able antiquity  on  the  mercantile.  There  is  no  clear  reference
in  the  Chronicle  to  the  Teutons  of  the  Continent,  as  opposed
to  the  Scandinavians,  before  the  time  of  the  Third  Crusade
(1188).  And,  in  the  next  century,  the  stirring  events  of
1201  and  the  years  following- — when  the  Knights  of  the  Order  of
Christ,  better  known  as  the  Brethren  or  Bearers  of  the  Sivord,  are
called  in  as  temporal  helpers  by  Bishop  Albert  of  Riga;  when
historic  Riga  is  thus  founded;  and  when  the  Riga  Gulf  lands  and
the  country  of  the  old  heathen  Prussians  are  conquered  by  these
German  Crusaders  and  by  their  colleagues  of  the  Teutonic  Order  or
Order  of  St.  Mary — all  pass  unnoticed  in  the  Novgorodskaya  Lyetopis.

But  in  1231  the  Novgorod  Annals  notice  how  "  Nemtsy  from
beyond  sea  "  succour  the  city  with  corn  and  flour,  after  a  terrible
famine,  when  "  already  near  its  end."  And  in  1237  the  union  of  the
two German Orders, under the Teutonic title, is apparently

xxviii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

recorded  as  a  piece  of  good  news.  "  In  this  year  the  Nemtsy  came
.  .  .  from  be3^ond  sea  to  Riga,  and  all  united  here  .  .  .  the  men  of
Pleskov  sent  aid  .  .  .  and  they  went  against  the  godless  Litva  ..."

But  soon  the  Nemtsy  appear  among  the  most  dreaded  foes  of
Novgorod  and  Russia.  In  1242  the  Swedish  victory  of  Alexander
Nevsky  is  followed  by  Alexander's  revenge  upon  the  German  Order
on  the  ice  of  Lake  Chudskoe — "  lest  they  should  boast,  saying,  we
will  humble  the  Slovan  race  under  us — for  is  not  Pskov  taken,  and
are  not  its  chiefs  in  prison?  "  (April  5,  1242).

Much  lost  ground  is  thus  recovered,  and  Novgorod  is  saved  from
German  dominion,  in  politics  if  not  in  trade.  But  it  is  a  salvation
which  has  to  be  worked  out  again  and  again  in  the  next  two  cen-
turies. Thus  in  1268  (after  an  agreement  with  the  "  bishops  and
godly  nobles  "  of  the  Teutonic  Order,  in  which  these  godly  men,  in
the  Russian  view,  purposed  only  deceit)  the  men  of  Novgorod  fight
a  desperate  drawn  battle  with  "  iron  troops  "  of  Nemtsy  on  the
Kegola  river,  massed  at  one  point  in  a  "  great  wedge  like  a  forest
to  look  at.  .  .  .  It  was  as  if  the  whole  nation  of  Nemtsy  had  come
together.  "^^

Almost  every  decade  of  later  Novgorod  history  gives  us  some
notice  of  conflict,  negotiation,  treaty,  or  commerce  with  ilieNemtsy,
mainly  represented  by  the  Teutonic  Order  and  the  Hanseatic
League.®*  But  though  lands  and  towns  near  or  within  the  Novgorod
frontiers  are  in  German  occupation  throughout  this  period
(c.  1200-1450)  or  great  part  of  it ;  though  the  whole  Baltic  coast,  from
Danzig  to  the  Gulf  of  Finland,  is  at  one  time  held  by  the  Order;
and  though  such  near  neighbours  as  Pskov  fall  at  intervals  into
the  German  grasp — yet  the  German  peril  is  kept  at  arm's  length,
and  Novgorod  is  never  beleaguered  (far  less  taken)  by  the
Knights,  even  if  her  trade  passes  in  great  measure  under  Hansa
control.

And  from  the  German  fear  Novgorod  is  finally  delivered  by  the
union  of  Poland  and  Lithuania,  and  the  triumph  of  the  new  Slav
power  over  the  Teutonic  Order.  The  Novgorod  Annals,  which  so
constantly  neglect  decisive  events  of  neighbouring  history,  do  not
forget  the  battle  of  Tannenberg,  which  marks  the  ebbing  of  the
German  Drang  nach  Osten,  so  active  and  of  such  consequence  since
the  twelfth  century — first  apparent  in  the  tenth.

"  This  year  (1410)  on  July  15th,  King  Yagailo  and  Prince  Vitovt
fought  with  the  Prussian  Nemtsy,  in  Prussia  .  .  .  and  killed  the

INTRODUCTION  xxix

Master and the  Marshal  and  the  Commanders,  and routed the
whole  Nemtsy  army."^*

Thus  begins  a  Slavonic  Revival  which,  under  Polish  or  Russian
leadership,  lasts  till  the  nineteenth  century;  and  a  Germanic  depres-
sion which  continues  till  the  rise  of  Brandenburg-Prussia  under  the
Great  Elector.

NOTES  TO  THE INTRODUCTION

(^)  The  Novgorod  empire  has  two  chief  parts:  (1)  the  homeland
of  Novgorod  settlement,  including  various  tributary  states,  e.g.
Ladoga;  (2)  the  colonial  and  trade-dominion.  This  homeland  had
five  traditional  sub-divisions  (the  "  Pyatini,"  or  "  Fifths  ") :  I.  Vod-
skaya,  in  the  North;  II.  Shelonskaya,  in  the  West;  III.  Derevskaya,
in  the  South;  IV.  Obonezhskaya,  in  the  North-East;  V.  Byezhet-
skaya,  in  the  East.  A  similar  five-fold  division  is  often  assumed  in
(2) — the  "Colonial  Empire":  I.  The  Trans-Volok  or  Zavoloche,
including  the  lands  between  the  White  Lake  {Beloe  Ozero)  and  the
Mezen,  and  comprising  the  Northern  Dvina  country;  II.  Ter,  Tri  or
Tre,  including  Russian  Lapland  and  extensive  regions  north  of
Lake  Onega  (e.g.  Pomoria);  III.  Permia,  the  Upper  Kama  basin;
IV.  Pechora;  V.  Yugra.

(2)  "  Mais  est  la  ville  fermee  de  meschans  murs,  fais  de  cloyes
et  terre,  combien  que  les  tours  sont  de  pierre,"  says  de  Lannoy
(Louvain  ed.,  1878,  p.  33).

(^)  "...  La  grant  Noegarde  merveilleusement  grant  ville.  .  .  ."
Oeuvres  de  Ghill.  de  Lannoy,  edited  by  Ch.  Potvin  and  J.  C.  Houzeau,
Louvain,  1878,  p.  32.  Lannoy's  whole  description  of  Novgorod
(pp.  32-5  of  this  edition)  is  of  capital  importance.

(*)  An  excellent  general  account  of  Old  Novgorod  is  in  Bestuzhev-
Ryumin's  History  of  Russia,  St.  Petersburg,  1872,  vol.  I,  Ch.  vi.
Sections  iii-v  (German  trans.,  Mitau,  1877,  vol.  I,  pp.  230-74);  see
also  Rambaud,  Histoire  de  Russie  (Paris,  1893),  pp.  103-16.

(^)  We  know  the  Law  of  Novgorod  principally  through  a  late
document,  the  Letter  of  Justice  {Sudnaya  Gramota)  in  the  text  of
1471  (see  Rambaud,  Russie,  1893,  p.  Ill);  but  it  rested  on  the  same
principles  as  the  Ruskaya  Pravda  of  Yaroslav  the  Lawgiver  in  the
eleventh  century.  On  the  early  history  of  Novgorod  (to  Yaroslav)
see  also  the  Chronicle  of  "  Nestor,"  ed.  F.  Miklosich,  Vienna,  1860,
chs.  30,  35,  38,  43,  46-7,  50-1,  53-4  (a.d.  947.  970,  977,  980,  997.
1014,  1018,  1021,  1024-36).

(«)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1125,  1136,  1138,  1141,  1154,  1157-8,  1160-1,
1270.

(7)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1240-63,  and  especially  1240,  1242,  1246,
1250, 1259,  1262-3.

NOTES  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION  xxxi

(8)  Nov.  Chron.  1240-1.

(^)  See  especially  Nov.  Chron.,  1471,  and  pp.  x,  xxii,  xxvii  of  this
Introduction.

(^°)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  under  the  years  mentioned, 1134, 1146,
1167,  1209,  etc.

(11)  Nov.  Chron.,  1209.

(12)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1135  (arbitration),  1214, 1215,  1264  (military
and  political  leadership).

(13)  Nov.  Chron.,  1218-19.

(14)  See  the  Chronicle  of  "  Nestor,"  chs.  54,  56,  57  (1034,  1045,
1052);  also  Nov.  Chron.,  1130,  1156,  1163,  etc.  (on  later  bishops).

(15)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1210,  1215-16,  1218,  1259.

(16)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1218,  1220.

(17)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1153,  1180.

(18)  Nov.  Chron.,  1181,  1192,  1209,  1210,  1255.

(19)  Nov.  Chron.,  1211,  1219,  1220.

(20)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1153,  1195-6,  1310.

(21)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1138,  1160.

(22)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1263,  1308,  1330,  1388,  1414.

(^3)  See  E.  Worms,  Histoire  commerciale  de  la  Ligue  Hanseatique
(Paris.  1864),  pp.  16,81-2.

(2*)  "Torgovaya Storona," see  Nov.  Chron.,  1134,  1345, 1385,
1387,  1392,  1418.

(25)  See  Worms,  Ligwe  Hans.,  pp.  196-7;  also  V.  Thomsen,  Origin
of  the  Ancient  Russ,  Oxford,  1877,  pp.  126.

(26)  Worms,  Ligue  Hans.,  pp.  82-3.

(27)  Worms,  Ligue  Hans.,  83-4,  190-5.

(28)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1137,  1141-2,  1156,  1195;  also  1157,  1178,
1192. ""

(29)  Nov.  Chron.,  1209,  1215-17,  1234,  1299;  see  also  1203,  1207
(foreign  merchants  at  Kiev),  1225.

(30)  Nov.  Chron.,  1317,  1332,  1337,  1363-4,  1366-7.

(31)  Nov.  Chron.,  1410,  1420;  also  1437,  1445,  1446.

(32)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1209,  1214,  1218.

xxxii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

(33)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1125,  1136,  1138,  1141,  1154,  1270.

(34)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1134,  1146,  1156,  1161,  1167,  1171-2
1175.  1189,  1205,  1209.  1218,  1219,  1230.

(35)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1228,  1299,  1342,  1375,  1385,  1388,  1415,
1421,  1437.

(36)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1291,  1316,  1340,  1346.

(37)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1218,  1228,  1270,  1299,  1342  (places  of
meeting,  St.  Sophia  or  Yaroslav's  Court);  1342  (rival  Veches  at
both  places,  ending  with  an  appeal  to  arms  and  the  mediation  of
the  Archbishop— see  also  1384);  1215,  1218,  1230,  1345  {Veches
convoked  or  led  by  the  Knyaz  or  Posadnik);  1214  {Veche  con-
voked by  the  Knyaz,  but  in  vain :  the  Democracy  then  calls  its  own
Veche).

(38)  See  above,  note  (3^) ;  and  Rambaud,  Russie,  p.  114  (Paris,
1893).

(38)  See  the  Chronicle  of  Nikon  {Russkaya  Lyeiopis  po  Nikonovu
Spisku),  Imperial  Academy,  St.  Petersburg,  1767,  vol.  I,  p.  132
(a.d.  1032).  These  Iron  Gates,  not  to  be  confused  with  the  famous
Iron  Gates  of  Derbent  in  the  Caucasus,  perhaps  lay  in  the  Shchugor
valley,  in  about  64°  N.  Lat.,  near  Mt.  Toll  Pos  Is,  the  highest
summit  of  the  Urals.  But  Spruner-Menke,  Hand- Atlas  (1880),
map  67,  Russland  966-1114,  places  them  in  the  Sysola  valley,
towards  the  easternmost  part  of  the  Northern  Dvina  basin.

(*°)  Seethe  Chronicle  of  Novgorod,  A.D.  1079.  The  Za-Volochye,
Trans-Volok,  or  Country  beyond  the  Portage,  includes  all  the  Northern
Dvina  basin.

(*^)  See  the  Pervonachalnaya  Lyetopis  or  Fundamental  Chronicle,
otherwise  the  Chronicle  of  Nestor  {Chronica  Nestoris  textum  Russo-
Sloveniciim),  ed.  Fr.  Miklosich  (Vienna,  1860),  ch.  81,  p.  160.

(*2)  SeeiVof.  Chron.,  1169, 1187, 1193,  U'di;iheChronicle  of  Nikon
{Russk.  Lyet.  p.  Nikon.  Spisk.),  a.d.  1193-4,  vol.  II,  pp.  259-260;
and  the  Sophia  Chronicle  {Sophiiskaya  Lyetopis)  in  the  Complete
Collection  of  Russian  Chronicles  {Polnoe  Sohranie  Russkikh  Lyetopisei) ,
issued  by  the  Russian  Archseographical  Commission,  vol.  V,  pp.
1691-70.

(*3)  See  Nicholas  Karamzin,  History  of  the  Russian  Empire  {Istoriya
Gosudarstva  Rossiiskago),  vol.  IV,  p.  59,  in  Einerling's  ed.  (St.  Peters-
burg, 1842) ;  Knyaz  Yaroslav  is  hereby  debarred  from  possessing  any

NOTES  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION  xxxiii

villages  in  the  domains  of  Novgorod,  even  to  Zavoloche,  Kola,
Perm,  Pechora,  or  Yugra.

(44)  Nov.  Chroii.,  1323,  1329.

(•*^)  Nov.  Chron.,  1332.  Ivan  Kalita  was  Grand  Prince  [Veliki
Knyaz)  of  Moscow,  1328-40.

(46)  Nov.  Chron.,  1445.

(47)  On  Ivan  Ill's  Siberian  expeditions  of  1465,  1483  and  1499,

see  the  Chronicle  of  Great  Ustvug  [Lyeiopis  Velik.  Ustyuzhskaya),
pp.  35-36,  41-42,  44-45,  ed.  A.  K.  Trapeznikov  (Moscow,  1888) ;  the
Chronicle  of  Archangel  [Arkhangelogorodsk.  Lyetopis),  Moscow,  1781,
pp.  141,  1601-61;  Oksenov,  Political  Relations  of  Moscow  with
Yugraland  (in  Russian,  1891) :  and  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia,
vol.  VI,  pp.  176-178,  in  Einerhng's  ed.  (St.  Petersburg,  1842).

(48)  Nov.  Chron.,  1337,  1340,  1342,  1366,  1393.  See  Early  Voyages
and  Travels  to  Russia,  etc.  (London,  Hakluvt  Society,  1886),  vol.  I,
p.  23.

(^^)  Before  the  Moscow  Princes  seized  this  country,  they  sent
their  falconers  thither  every  year  by  agreement  with  Novgorod ;
see  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia  (1842),  vol.  V,  p.  93  and  note  170.

{^^)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1397;  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia,  vol.  V,
pp.  136-137  (ed.  1842).

(^^)  In  1398,  the  Republic  appears  to  recover  most  of  its  Dvina
territories,  storming  Ustyug  and  inflicting  death  and  fines  upon
its  enemies  and  the  Moscow  merchants  in  this  region.  Moscow,
however,  seems  to  retain  great  part  of  the  Vologda  valley,  in  spite
of  a  promise  in  1435  to  relinquish  this.  In  1411,  the  Novgorod
governor  of  the  Dvina  is  ordered  to  guard  against  Norwegian  raiders.
Vyatka  marauders  and  Novgorod  outlaws  burn  Kholmogori  in
1417,  and  capture  several  Novgorod  notables;  in  1419  return  the
Northmen  or  Murnmni,  ravaging  far  and  wide  in  the  Trans- Volok,
and  sacking  the  Michael  Monastery  on  the  site  of  the  present  city
of  Archangel.  Lastly,  in  1445,  the  Swedes  attack  the  Dvina  and
are  driven  off.  See  the  Chronicle  of  Novgorod,  1398,  1401,  1411,
1417,  1419, 1435, 1436, 1445.

(52)  See  AW.  Chron. ,\ill;  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia  (ed.  1842),
vol.  V,  pp.  201,  206,  and  notes  356,  367.

(5^)  Sigismund  von  Herberstein,  Reruni  Moscoviticarum  Commen-
tarii  (London,  Hakluyt  Society,  1851),  vol.  II,  p.  46.

C2

xxxiv  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

(^*)  On  St.  Stephen  of  Perm,  see  also  Voskrcsenskaya  Lyetopis
in  the  Polnoe  Sobra?iie  Rusk.  Lyet.,  vol.  VH,  pp.  69-70;  Wiq  Life
of  St.  Stephen  in  Monuments  of  Ancient  Russian  Literature  {Pam-
yatniki  Star.  Rusk.  Lit.),  vol.  IV,  p.  119;  and  Klyuchevsky,  Lives
of  the  Saints  as  Historical  Material  {Zhitiya  Svyatykh  kak  istoricheskii
istochnik),  p.  92,  etc.

(55)  See  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia  (ed.  1842),  vol.  V,  pp.  64-66,
209-210,  and  notes  125,  126,  137,  232.  377,  378;  Early  Travels  in
Russia  (London,  Hakluyt  Society,  1886),  vol.  II,  p.  190;  Klyuch-
evsky, Lives  of  the  Saints  (as  above),  pp.  198-203;  Stroev,  Lists  of
Russian  Hierarchs  {Spiski  lerarkhov).

(56)  See  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia,  vol.  IV,  p.  59,  and  notes
115-116  (1842) ;  also  The  Collection  of  Imperial  Charters  and  Treatises
{Sobranie  Gosudarstvennykh  Gramot  i  Dogovorov).

(")  See  Antiquites  Russes  (Copenhagen,  1850-2),  vol.  II,  pp.  490-
494.

(58)  A  title  which  surely  belongs  of  right  to  Novgorod.

(59)  See  the  Chronicle  of  Nestor,  ed.  Miklosich,  chs.  18,  30,  35.

(60)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1113,  1118,  1129,  1134, 1145, 1149, 1154-6,
1233.

(fi)  E.g.,  Nov.  Chron.,  1145,  1149.  In  the  later  Middle  Ages  we
find  this  restriction  less  observed  in  Novgorod. See  A.D.,  1263.

(62)  See  A.  Rambaud,  Histoire  de  Russie,  p.  88  (1893).

(63)  Nov.  Chron.,  1203,  1235.

(6*)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1238,  1283,  1293,  1314.

(65)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1325-6,  1332,  1335.

(66)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1336-7,  1339,  1340,  1342-3,  1353,  1389,
1392,  1406,  1412,  1437,  1441-2,  1446.

(67)  Nov.  Chron.,  1332,  1337.

(68)  See  Nov. Chron., 1346,  1348,  1353.  1360.

(69)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1366-7,  1375-6,  1380,  1382,  1386,  1445.

('0)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1383,  1388,  1391,  1393,  1395-6,  1401,  1411,
1415,  1437.

NOTES  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION  xxxv

(71)  Nov.  Chron.,  1397-8,  1401,  1411,  1435,  1437  (Novgorod  yields
to  fresh  tax  demands),  1441.

('2)  See  Vilhelm  Thomsen,  Origin  of  the  Ancient  Russ,  Oxford',
1877,  pp.  80-2,  125-6;  Olaf  Tryggveson's  Saga,  chs.  6,  7,  21;  St.
Olaf's  Saga,  ch.  191,  etc.;  Harald  Hardrada's  Saga,  chs.  2,  15-17.

C^)  Chronicle  of  Nestor  (ed.  Miklosich),  ch.  15,  p.  10.

(7*)  See  iV(?s/or,  ch.  15,  p.  10  (Miklosich);  Thietmar,  C/trontco«,
in  Pertz,  Monumenta  Germ,  hist..  Script.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  871;  V.  Thom-
sen, Origin  of  the  Ancient  Russ,  pp.  124,  126.

('=)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1142,  1164.

(7^)  Nov.  Chron.,  1240.  See  also  Rambaud,  Russie,  p.  134;
Bestuzhev-Ryumin,  History  of  Russia,  St.  Petersburg,  1872,  vol.  i,
ch.  VI,  sections  iii-iv  (German  trans.,  Mitau,  1877,  p.  243),

(")  Nov.  Chron.,  1256,  1292-3,  1295,  1300-2.

(78)  Nov.  Chron.,  1302,  1323,  1338.

(79)  Nov.  Chron.,  1348-50.

(80)  SeeiVow.  Chron.,  1395-6,  1411,  1445.

(81)  Nov.  Chron.,  1224.

(82)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1236  (conquest  of  Bolghar) ;  1238,  etc.
(conquest  of  Russia).

(83)  Nov.  Chron.,  1242,  1247,  1257,  1259,  1262-3.

(84)  Nov.  Chron.,  1258.

(85)  Nov.  Chron.,  1259;  see  also  1293.

(8»)  Nov.  Chron.,  1315-16,  1319,  1322,  1325-7.

(87)  Nov.  Chron.,  1380,  1382,  1398-9;  see  also  1408,  1445.

(88)  See,  e.g.  Nov.  Chron.,  1183,  1198,  1200,  1203,  1210,  1213,
1219, 1234,  etc.

(89)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1258,  1263,  1266-7,  1285,  1323,  1326,  1331,
1335.

(90)  Thus  for  a  few  years  it  is  from  a  foreign  and  hostile  land  that
the  Russian  primate  sends  his  disregarded  orders  to  Novgorod.

(91)  See  A^oy.  Chron.,  1342,  1346,  1370,  1376.

xxxvi  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

n  See  Nov.  Chron., 1377,  1399,  1400,  1404.  1410.  1415,  1436
1440,  1444-5  [1471].

n  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1231,  1233,  1234,  1237,  1240-1,  1242,  1253,
1268.

(^^)  See  Nov.  Chron.,  refs.  in  last  note,  and  also  under  the  years,
1269,  1298,  1328,  1335, 1342-3,  1350.  1362-3,  1367-8.  1370-1,  1377,
1381.  1390-1,  1406-7.  1409-10,  1412.  1417,  1420,  1444-5.

(95)  Nov.  Chron.,  1410.

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  TEXT  OF  THE  NOVGOROD  CHRONI-
CLE BY  PROFESSOR  A.  A.  SHAKHMATOV.  ST.  PETERS-
BURG UNIVERSITY.

Chronicle- WRITING  at  Novgorod  began  very  early,  certainly  by  the
eleventh  century,  for  the  chronicle  of  Nestor  (the  monk  of  Kiev),
called  Povest  vremennykh  let  {Annals  of  Contemporary  Years),
which  appeared  in  1110,  contains  a  number  of  items  from  the  Nov-
gorod Chronicle.  Thus  we  read,  in  Nestor,  that  in  1063  the  Volkhov
flowed  backwards  for  six  days  foreboding  disaster,  and  four  years
later  Novgorod  was  burned  by  the  Prince  Vseslav  of  Polovtsk.  It  is
clear  that  this  information  could  only  have  reached  the  Pechersk
monastery  in  Kiev,  where  the  Annals  of  Contemporary  Years  were

_ composed,  through  the  channel  of  a  Novgorod  chronicle.  The  latter
was  probably  composed  and  kept  in  the  Bishop's  Palace  or  "  Court,"
a  fact  to  which  the  following  data  point:  In  1136  and  1137,  the
entries  were  made  by  Kirik,  one  of  the  clergy  of  St.  Sophia,  well
known  in  the  history  of  early  Russian  literature,  and  the  author  of
several  works,  including  one  of  exceptional  interest  on  chronology.
Again,  the  entries  in  the  Chronicle  from  the  twelth  to  the  fifteenth
centuries  largely  relate  to  the  Vladyka  or  Archbishop  of  Novgorod
and  the  affairs  of  the  See.

1  Several  considerations,  mostly  founded  on  the  text  of  the  Novgorod
Chronicle  in  the  Synodal^  and  other  transcripts,  point  to  the  fact
that  in  1167  the  archiepiscopal  chronicle  was  rearranged  as  an  his-
torical compilation  on  a  larger  scale.  The  foundation  for  this  was
formed  by  the  incorporation  in  it  of  the  text  of  the  Kiev  Annals  of
Contemporary  Years,  to  which  were  added  under  their  respective
dates  all  the  annual  entries  of  events  made  in  Novgorod.  This
rearrangement  was  probably  made  by  order  of  Ilya  (Elias),  first
Archbishop  of  Novgorod.  In  its  original  form  this  rearrangement  of
the  archiepiscopal  chronicle  has  not  survived ;  but  we  can  gain  some
idea  of  it,  first,  from  the  later  historical  compilations,  which  were  no
longer  of  local,  but  of  general,  Russian  character  and  scope,  and
comprised  the  Novgorod  Chronicle  among  their  other  component

^' parts,  and  secondly,  from  the  oldest  existing  transcript  of  the
Novgorod  Chronicle  itself,  viz.  the  Synodal  Transcript  here  trans-
lated. /The  Synodal  Transcript  had,  as  its  foundation,  an  historical
compilation  made  by  a  priest  of  the  Novgorod  Church  of  St.  James,
one  Herman  Voyata.  The  compiler  speaks  of  himself  in  the  entry
for  A.D.  1144,  saying  that  in  that  year  he  was  appointed  priest;
^  So-called  because  in  the  possession  of  the  Synodal  Library  at  Moscow.

xxxviii  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

under  the  year  1188  we  read  of  the  death  of  Herman  Voyata,  forty-
five  years  priest  of  St.  James. ^  Herman  Voyata  prepared  for  his
church  a  copy  of  the  compilation  of  Archbishop  Ehas,  which  was,
however,  very  much  abbreviated  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth
century;  in  this  copy  remarkable  items  of  news  were  sometimes
omitted,  e.g.  the  consecration  of  St.  Sophia  in  1050,  and  the  mis-
adventures of  Bishop  Luka  in  1055  and  1058.

The  entry  concerning  the  death  of  Herman  Voyata  suggests  that
his  compilation  was  continued  at  St.  James's  after  his  death.
This  conclusion  is  strengthened  by  the  mention  of  the  sacristan
Timothy  as  transcriber,  or  compiler,  of  the  chronicle  (in  1230),  and
a  happy  conjecture  has  identified  this  person  with  Timothy,  sac-
ristan of  the  Church  of  St.  James,  who  in  1262  transcribed  an
existing  liturgical  work.  But  the  chronicle  of  St.  James  was  pro-
bably not  carried  on  independently :  it  was  most  likely  a  compilation
of  chronicles  founded  on  the  archiepiscopal  chronicle,  added  to
from  time  to  time.

The  archiepiscopal  chronicle  was  carried  on  uninterruptedly,
being  as  it  were  a  continuation  of  the  compilation  of  chronicles
made  in  1 167.  A  new  rearrangement  of  the  archiepiscopal  chronicle,
undertaken  probably  on  the  initiative  of  Archbishop  Basil,  a  learned
and  enlightened  man,  took  place  c.  1330-5.  This  rearrangement
was  founded  on  the  compilation  of  chronicles  made  at  the  Church
of  St.  James ;  possibly  because  a  few  years  previously  the  compilation
of  chronicles  made  in  the  year  1167  had,  at  the  demand  of  the
Metropolitan,  been  dispatched  to  Vladimir  (on  the  Klyazma).
Abotit  the  year  1310,  the  Metropolitan  Peter  planned  a  pan-Russian
compilation  of  chronicles,  in  which  the  chronicle-writing  of  all
Russia  should  be  concentrated,  and  the  local  annals  be  brought
together.  This  plan  is  connected  with  the  efforts  of  the  Metro-
politan to  conserve  the  unity  of  the  Russian  metropolitan  province,
a  unity  threatened  by  serious  danger,  especially  since  the  beginning
of  the  fourteenth  century,  when  the  Metropolitan,  abandoning  Kiev,
which  had  been  devastated  by  the  Tartars,  migrated  to  Vladimir.
For  this  plan,  then,  the  local  chronicles  must  be  collected  in  Vladi-
mir; hence  the  Novgorod  archiepiscopal  compilation  of  1167  was
transferred  thither.  The  Metropolitan's  pan-Russian  compilation
of  chronicles  has  only  survived  in  a  later  rearrangement  (of  the
fifteenth  century),  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  so-called  Lavr^w-
tcvski  ("  Laurentian  ")  transcript  of  1377,  which  borrowed  from  it

1  See  Nov.  Chron.,  1144.  1188.

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  TEXT  xxxix

the  part  covering  the  period  1240-1305.  The  appearance  in  Nov-
gorod of  a  copy  of  this  pan-Russian  compilation  (or  of  certain  parts
of  it)  suggested  the  creation  of  a  Novgorod  compilation  of  chronicles.
Its  foundation,  I  repeat,  was  formed  by  the  compilation  of  chronicles
of  the  Church  of  St.  James;  it  was  amplified  both  by  data  from  the
Novgorod  archiepiscopal  chronicle,  by  annual  entries  from  it,  and
also  by  loans  from  the  pan-Russian  compilation.  Among  these  are
the  capture  of  Kiev  by  the  sons  of  Oleg  and  the  Polovtsi  in  1203;
the  crusading  capture  of  Constantinople  in  1204;  the  fratricide  of
K nyaz  Gleh  ol  Ryazan  in  1218;  the  battle  on  the  river  Kalka  in
1224;  the  conquest  of  Suzdal  by  the  Tartars  in  1238.

The  Novgorod  compilation  of  chronicles  of  Archbishop  Basil  was
brought  down  to  the  year  1329.  This  compilation  has  not  come
down  to  us  in  the  original.  But  the  Synodal  transcript,  which  we
possess,  is  an  almost  contemporary  copy,  made,  as  is  believed,  for
the  monastery  of  St.  George,  near  Novgorod.  This  copy  was
amplified  by  entries  under  the  years  1331-3,  1337,  1345  and  1352.
It  has  not  come  down  to  us  in  its  entirety,  for  it  lacks  the  beginning
(to  A.D.  1016).  Judging  by  the  total  number  of  sheets,  128  are
missing.  These  probably  contained  the  text  of  the  Annals  of
Contemporary  Years  in  a  redaction  similar  to  those  which  have
survived  (the  Ipatevskvi  and  Hlehnikovski  transcripts),  for  it  is  just
this  redaction  of  the  Annals  of  Contemporary  Years  that  was  fol-
lowed by  the  historical  compilation  of  Archbishop  Elias,  which
formed  the  foundation  of  the  historical  compilation  of  the  Church
of  St.  James.

The  historical  compilation  of  Archbishop  Basil  underwent  fresh
rearrangement  about  1420-30.  It  was  now  considerably  enlarged
by  annual  entries  made  uninterruptedly  at  the  Archbishop's  Court.
But  for  some  reason  that  beginning  of  the  compilation  which  was
the  result  of  the  labours  of  Herman  Voyata  (who  in  his  turn  had
abbreviated  his  model,  viz.,  the  compilation  of  Archbishop  Elias)
came  to  be  considered  unsatisfactory.  No  transcript  of  the  Annals
of  Contemporary  Years  was  to  be  found  in  Novgorod,  but  on  the
other  hand,  a  transcript,  incomplete  it  is  true,  of  the  still  older
Kiev  historical  compilation,  the  immediate  predecessor  of  the
Annals  of  Contemporary  Years,  was  discovered.  This  incomplete
work  ends  abruptly  in  1074,  midway  in  its  account  of  the  death  of
Theodosius,  igumen  or  abbot  of  the  Pechersk  monastery  at  Kiev
(the  complete  work  probably  went  down  to  1093) ;  besides  this  the
sheets  recording  events  from  1016  to  1052  were  lost. From  the

xl THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

year  1075  onwards  the  composer  of  the  new  compilation,  called  the
Sophia  Chronicle,  had  to  follow  the  compilation  of  Archbishop  Basil.
The  Sophia  Chronicle  was  probably  composed  at  the  instance  of
Archbishop  Euthymus,  by  one  of  the  clergy  of  St.  Sophia  in  Nov-
gorod called  Matvei  (Matthew)  Mikhailov  Kusov.

In  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  a  fresh  rearrangement  of
the  pan-Russian  historical  compilation  was  made  at  Moscow,  pro-
bably at  the  Court  of  the  Metropolitan.  Its  basis  was  the  pan-
Russian  compilation  of  1423,  which  largely  repeated  that  of  the
Metropolitan  Peter,  and  to  it  were  added  the  Kiev  Chronicle  and  the
Sophia  Chronicle  of  Novgorod.  This  Moscov/  compilation  has  not
survived,  but  it  gave  rise  to  existing  reproductions  (e.g.,  the
so-called  First  Sophia  Chronicle  and  Fourth  Novgorod  Chronicle,
published  in  vols.  IV-VI  of  the  Complete  Collection  of  Russian
Chronicles).  In  the  fifties  of  the  fifteenth  century  a  fresh  re-
arrangement of  the  Sophia  Chronicle  was  made  at  Novgorod.  The
text  of  this  compilation  follows  both  the  fourteenth-century  com-
pilation of  Archbishop  Basil,  and  the  Moscow  compilation  of  the
mid  fifteenth  century.  This  rearrangement  of  the  Sophia  Chronicle,
which  in  all  its  manuscripts  reaches  down  to  1443,  has  been  pre-
served in  (a)  the  so-called  Commission  Transcript  (belonging  to  the
Imperial  Archseographical  Commission);  {b)  the  Academy  Tran-
script (belonging  to  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences);  and  the
Tolstoi  Transcript  (belonging  to  the  Imperial  Public  Library).
From  their  resemblance  to  Archbishop  Basil's  compilation  there  is  a
close  connexion  between  these  MSS.  and  the  Synodal  Transcript.
In  editing  the  Synodal  Transcript  recourse  can  be  had  to  the  Com-
mission, Academy,  and  Tolstoi  Transcripts  as  auxiliary  transcripts
offering  different  readings.  The  last  edition  of  the  Synodal  Tran-
script was  issued  by  the  Archseographical  Commission  {The  Nov-
gorod Chronicle  According  to  the  Synodal  Parchment  Transcript,
St.  Petersburg,  1888).  The  text  of  the  Commission  Transcript  of
the  fifteenth  century  is,  on  pp.  1-82,  84-117,  provided  with  different
readings  and  additions  from  the  Academy  and  Tolstoi  Transcripts.
On  pages  83-4  (beginning  with  the  words  "  but  you  are  carpenters  ")
and  in  various  passages  between  page  84  and  page  117,  we  have
the  text  of  the  Synodal  Transcript,  while  the  readings  of  the  Com-
mission, Academy  and  Tolstoi  Transcripts  are  given  as  variants.

In  the  Russian  edition  of  1888,  the  difference  between  the  source
is  marked  by  printing  the  Synodal  text  from  the  beginning  of  the
line,  and  the  Cormnission  text  at  a  distance  of  four  letters  from  the

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  TEXT  xli

beginning  of  the  line.  From  page  117  (a.d.  1075)  down  to  page  329
(with  some  sHght  intervals)  the  Synodal  text  appears  again,  while  the
Commission,  Academy  and  Tolstoi  variants  are  given  in  footnotes.
On  pages  330-428  (a.d.  1333-1446)  we  have  the  Commission  text
afresh  till  1443  (p.  423)  provided  with  Academy  and  Tolstoi  variants
(at  1441  the  Academy  breaks  off).  The  addenda  to  this  edition
(pp.  431-90)  contain  a  series  of  supplementary  articles  from  the
Commission  Transcript  which  are  not  strictly  part  of  the  chronicle
(lists  of  princes,  bishops,  posadniks,  and  also  juridical  matter).

A.  A.  SHAKHMATOV.

For  Bibliographical  Note  see  end  of  this  volume.

xlii

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

ALPHABETICAL  LIST  OF  TITLES,  TECHNICAL  TERMS,
ETC..  WHICH  IN  THE  TEXT  HAVE  BEEN  RETAINED  IN
THE  ORIGINAL  RUSSIAN.  TOGETHER  WITH  THE  ENGLISH
EQUIVALENTS.  AND  THE  PAGES  WHERE  THEY  FIRST

OCCUR.

Artug  =  a  Norwegian  copper
coin  (p.  i8i).

Baskak  =  Tartar  official,  tax-
collector  (p.  103).

Berkovets  =  10  puds,  i.e.,  400
Russian  lbs.  (p.  77.)

Boyar  —  noble  (p.  10).

Denga  =  a  small  coin,  216  of
which  went  to  the  rouble  (p.
204).

Detinets-gorod  —  citadel  (p.  7).
/  Druzhina  =  bodyguard  (p.  i).

Gorodishche  =  citadel,  fort  (p.  7).

Grivna  =  pound  (p.  2 ;  cf .  appen-
dix).

Jgumen  —  abbot  (p.  5).

Igumena  —  abbess  (p.  26).

Kad,  Kadka  =  barrel  (a  meas-
ure, same  as  osminka,  q.v.,  p.

23)-
Knyaginya  =  Princess  (p.  20).
Knyaz  =  Prince  (p.  i).
Knyaz, Veliki  =  Grand Prince

(p.  67).
Korohya  —  basket (a measure,

p.  202).
Kima  =  money,  cf .  appendix  (p.

23)-
Kurgan  =  fort  (p.  65).
i Lyakh  =  Pole  (p.  i).
Lyakhi  =  Poles,  Poland  (p.  i).
Nemtsy  =  Foreigners  of  Teutonic

race  (p.  44).
N Ogata,  cf.  appendix  (p.  10).
Osminka  =  11  pecks  (p.  11).
Pochka  =  a  small  weight,  about

one-fifth dram  (p.  204).
Poprishche  —  verst,  q.v.  (p.  215).

Posadnik  —  burgomaster  (p.  9).

Pud  =  about  36  lbs.  (p.  27).

Rezana,  cf.  appendix  (p.  15).

Rouble  =  J  lb.  of  silver,  a  unit
of  money  and  of  weight,  (p.
128).

Sazhen=  ik  fathom  (p.  128).

Schema  —  the  strictest  monas-
tic order  (p.  34).

Smerd  —  common  person,  com-
mon soldier  (p.  2).

Sotski  ==  commander  of  a  hun-
dred (5^0  —  hundred, p. 10).

Starosta  —  elder  (p.  2).

Svei  =  Swedes  (p.  17).

Tamga  =  a  tax  levied  by  the  Tar-
tars; properly  a  seal  on  mer-
chandise (see  p.  95,  n.  i).

Tiun  =  bailiff  (p.  71).

Tsar  =  King,  Emperor  (p.  30).

Tsargrad  —  Constantinople  (p.
20).

Tsariisa  =  Queen,  Empress (p.

95).
Tysyatski  =  commander of a

thousand  (p.  35).  ,

Veche  (pron.  vyetche,  with  the

stress  on  the  first  syllable) =

council  (p.  I).
Veliki Knyaz  —  Grand Prince

(p.  41).
Verst  —  about two-thirds of 'a

mile  (p.  26).
Vladyka  =  Archbishop  (p.  6).
Volok  =  portage  (p.  6).
Voyevoda  —  general  (p.  i).
Zverinets  =  enclosure for ani-
mals, park  (p.  5).

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

xliii

ALPHABETICAL LIST OF TITLES, TECHNICAL TERMS,

ETC.,  WHICH  IN  THE  TEXT  HAVE  BEEN  TRANSLATED,

TOGETHER WITH THE RUSSIAN EQUIVALENTS AND

THE  PAGES  WHERE  THEY  FIRST  OCCUR.

Adventurers  =  molodtsy  (p.  iii).
Army  =  polk  (p.  51).
Bishop  =  cpiskop  (p.  8).
Body-guard  =  gridba  (p.  38).
Charter  =  gramota  (p.  72).
Clan  =  plemya  (p.  38).
Colony  =  sloboda  (p.  169).
Council  =  Veche (p. i). (Pro-
nounced Vye-tche).
Council-chamber  —  gridnitsa (p.

73).

Court  =  dvor  (p.  i,  14,  62).

Courtier  =  dvoryanin  (p.  50).

District  =  volost  (p.  32).

Document  =  gramota  (p.  104).

Fence  =  tyn  (p.  82).

Fines  =  vira  dikaya  (p.  50).

Fortification  =  gorod  (p.  51).

Fortified  town  =  gorod  (p.  8).

Fortress  =  osek  (p.  52).

Fortress,  prison  =  ostrog  (p.  67).

Fosse  —  greblya  (p.  118).

House  ==  dvor  (strictly  speaking,
the  house  with  yard  or
court and fence and gates,

P-  51)-
Lieutenant  =  natnestnik (p.  54).
Lithuanians  =  Litva  (p.  32).

Lord  =  gospodin  (p.  256).
Noble  =  velmozha  (p.  90).
Palace  =  polata  (p.  52).
Palace  =  terem  (p.  130).
Patrimony  =  otchina  (p.  132).
Picture  (sacred)  =  ikon  (p.  43).
Priest  =  pop  (p.  36).
Province  =  oblast  (p.  13).
Russia  =  Rus  (p.  7).
Russian Land, the  =  Russkaya

Zenilya  (p.  5).
Serf  =  kholop  (p.  65).
Serf  =  smerd  (p.  11,  14).
Sire  =  gospodin  (p.  142).
Sovereignty  —  tsarstvo  (p.  90).
Steward  =  stolnik  (p.  90).
Stockade  =  ostrog  (p.  82).
Stockade  =  gorod  (p.  66).
Throne  =  5/0/  (p.  2).
Town  =  gorod  (p.  3).
Town  =  posad  (p.  79).
Tribe  =  yazyk  (p.  64).
Tribune  =  aynvon  (p.  47).
Tribute  =  vykhod  (p.  133).
Usher  =  podvoiski  (p.  42).
Village  =  pogost  (p.  86).
Wall  —  val  (sc.  of  earth,  p.  64).

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD
1016-147 I

The  Chronicle  of  Novgorod

A.D.  1016.  A.M.  6524.  [There  was  a  fight  at  Lyubets,  and  Yaroslav
won;  and  Svyatopolk  fled  to  the  Lyakhi}
And  at  that  time  Yaroslav  was  keeping  many  Varangians^  in  Nov-
gorod, fearing  war;  and  the  Varangians  began  to  commit  violence
against  the  wives  of  the  townsmen.  The  men  of  Novgorod  said:
"  We  cannot  look  upon  this  violence,"  and  they  gathered  by  night,
and  fell  upon  and  killed  the  Varangians  in  Poromon's  Court;  and
that  night  Knyaz^  Yaroslav  was  at  Rakomo.  And  having  heard  this,
Knyaz  Yaroslav  was  wroth  with  the  townsfolk,  and  gathered  a  thou-
sand soldiers  in  Slavno,^  and  by  craft  falhng  on  those  who  had  killed
the  Varangians,  he  killed  them;  and  others  fled  out  of  the  town.
And  the  same  night  Yaroslav's  sister,  Peredslava,  sent  word  to
him  from  Kiev,  saying:  "Thy  father  is  dead,  and  thy  brethren
slain."  And  having  heard  this,  Yaroslav  the  next  day  gathered  a
number  of  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  held  a  Veche^  in  the  open  air,
and  said  to  them:  "  My  beloved  and  honourable  Druzhina,^  whom
yesterday  in  my  madness  I  slew,  I  cannot  now  buy  back  even  with
gold."  And  thus  he  said  to  them :  "  Brethren  !  my  father  Volodimir
is  dead,  and  Svyatopolk  is  Knyaz  in  Kiev;  I  want  to  go  against  him ;
come  with  me  and  help  me."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  said  to
him:  "  Yes,  Knyaz,  we  will  follow  thee."  And  he  gathered  4,000
soldiers :  there  were  a  thousand  Varangians,  and  3,000  of  the  men  of
Novgorod;  and  he  went  against  him.

And  Svyatopolk  having  heard  this,  gathered  a  countless  number  of
soldiers,  and  went  out  against  him  to  Lyubets  and  encamped  there
in  the  open  country  with  a  number  of  soldiers.  And  Yaroslav  hav-
ing come,  halted  on  the  bank  of  the  Dnieper;  and  they  stood  there
three  months,  not  daring  to  come  together  (sc.  in  conflict).  Svyato-
polk's  Voyevoda"^  by  name  Wolf's  Tail,^  riding  along  the  river-bank,

1  Lyakhi  =  th.e  Poles,  Poland.

2  sc.  Scandinavians.

"•  i.e.  Prince.  See  Introduction,  pp.  ii-iv.

*  A  quarter  of  the  town.

5  The  popular  assembly. See  Introduction,  pp.  ii,  viii,  ix.

*  Bodyguard.
"  General.

*  Volchii  Khvost.

.;2.' THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

began  to  reproach  the  men  of  Novgorod :  "  Wherefore  have  you  come
with  that  builder  of  wooden  houses  ?]^

A.D.  1016.  A.M.  6524.  "  You  are  carpenters,  and  we  shall  make
you  build  houses  for  us."  And  the  Dnieper
began  to  freeze.  And  one  of  Yaroslav's  men  was  on  friendly  terms
with  Svyatopolk.  And  Yaroslav  sent  one  of  his  attendants  to  him
by  night,  and  he  spoke  to  him.  And  this  is  what  he  said  to  him:
"  What  dost  thou  advise  to  be  done  now  ?  There  is  but  little  mead
brewed,  and  the  Druzhina  is  large."  And  that  man  said  to  him:
"  Say  thus  to  Yaroslav,  if  there  is  little  mead,  but  a  large  Dyuzhina,
then  give  it  in  the  evening."  And  Yaroslav  understood  that  he
was  advising  him  to  fight  at  night ;  and  that  evening  Yaroslav  with
his  troops  crossed  to  the  other  bank  of  the  Dnieper,  and  they
pushed  the  boats  away  from  the  bank,  and  prepared  to  make  battle
that  night.  And  Yaroslav  said  to  his  Druzhina:  "  Put  a  mark  on
you,  wind  your  heads  in  kerchiefs."  And  there  was  a  terrible  fight,,
and  before  dawn  they  conquered  Svyatopolk,  and  Svyatopolk  fled
to  the  Pecheneg  people. ^

And  Yaroslav  went  to  Kiev,  and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne^
of  his  father  Volodimir.  And  he  began  to  distribute  pay  to  his
troops:  to  the  siarostas'^  ten  grivnas^  each,  to  the  smerds^  one  grivna
each,  and  to  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  ten  each,  and  let  them  all  go
to  their  homes.

A.D.  1017.  A.M.  6525. Yaroslav  went  to  Beresti"; and  St.  Sophia
was  founded  at  Kiev.

A.D.  1018.  A.M.  6526.

A.D.  1019.  A.M.  6527.

A.D.  1020.  A.M.  6528. A  son  Volodimir  was  born  to  Yaroslav.

A.D.  1021.  A.M.  6529. Yaroslav  defeated  Bryacheslav.

1  The  Synodal  MS.  of  the  Novgorod  Chronicle  begins  with  the  words :
"  You  are  carpenters."  The  portion  of  the  chronicle  for  the  year  1016  here
printed  in  brackets  is  from  another  IMS.  and  is  given  here  merely  to  make  intel-
ligible the  remainder  of  the  entry  for  this  year. — Ed.

-  A  nomad  people  in  S.  Russia.

3  Stol.

^  Elders,  captains.

5  Originally  the  equivalent  of  a  pound  of  silver,  it  was  at  this  time  about
\  lb. ;  cf .  Appendix.

6  Common  soldiers  (ht.  "  evil-smelling  ").

.^  Brest,  in  Poland,  now  called  Litevski,  or  "  Lithuanian."

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.

1022.

A.M.

G530.

A.D.

1023.

A.M.

6531.

A.D.

1024.

A.M.

6532.

A.D.

1025.

A.M.

6533.

A.D.

1026.

A.M.

6534.

A.D.

1027.

A.M.

6535.

A.D.

1028.

A.M.

6536.

A.D.

1029.

A.M.

6537.

A.D.

1030.

A.  M.

6538.

A.D.

1031.

A.M.

6539.

A.D.

1032.

A.M.

6540.

A.D.

1033.

A.M.

6541.

A.D.

1034.

A.M.

6542.

A.D.

1035.

A.M.

6543.

A.D.

1036.

A.M.

6544.

A.D.

1037.

A.M.

6545.

A.D.

1038.

A.M.

6546.

A.D.

1039.

A.M.

6547.

A.D.

1040.

A.M.

6548.

A.D.

1041.

A.M.

6549.

A.D.

1042.

A.M.

6550.

A.D.

1043.

A.M.

6551.

A.D.

1044.

A.M.

6552.

their

bones.

A.D.

1045.

A.M.

6553.

There appeared  a sign in the sky  like  a
serpent.

Yaroslav  founded  the  town^  of  Kiev,  and
the  Church  of  St.  Sophia.

The  church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  was
consecrated  by  Volodimir.

Volodimir,  the  son  of  Yaroslav,  went  against
the  Yem^  people  with  the  men  of  Novgorod.

Volodimir  went  against  the  Greeks.

Two  Knyazes,  Yaropolk  and  Oleg,  sons  of
Svyatoslav,  were  buried,  and  they  christened

St.  Sophia  was burnt down,  on a Satur-
day, after  the  early  morning  service,  in  the
third  hour,  on  March  15.

1  Gorod,  sc.  fortified  town.

2  A  Finnish  tribe.

B2

4 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  year  St.  Sophia  at  Novgorod  was  founded  by  Knyaz
Volodimir.

A.D.  1046.  A.M.  6554.

A.D.  1047.  A.M.  6555.

A.D.  1048.  A.M.  6556.

A.D.  1049.  A.M.  6557.

A.D.  1050.  A.M.  6558. Svyatopolk  was  born.

A.D.  1051.  A.M.  6559. Yaroslav  appointed  Larion  the  Russian  to  I
be  Metropohtan.

A.D.  1052.  A.M.  6560. Volodimir,  son  of  Yaroslav,  died  at  Nov- 1

gorod,  on  October  4;  and  Izyaslav  took  his
seat  on  the  throne  in  Kiev.

A.D.  1053.  A.M.  6561.

A.D.  1054.  A.M.  6562. Yaroslav  died.  -1

A.D.  1055.  A.M.  6563.

A.D.  1056.  A.M.  6564.

A.D.  1057.  A.M.  6565.

A.D.  1058.  A.M.  6566.

A.D.  1059.  A.M.  6567. They  [Izyaslav,  Svyatoslav  and  Vsevolod]
released  [Knyaz]  Sudislav  [their  uncle]  from
prison  [having  sat  there  twenty-four  years;  and  they  made  him
take  the  oath  and  he  became  a  monk].^

A.D.  1060.  A.M.  6568. Igor,  son  of  Yaroslav  died.

A.D.  1061.  A.M.  6569. The  Polovets^  people  came  on  February  1
and  defeated  Vsevolod  on  the  2nd.

A.D.  1062.  A.M.  6570.

A.D.  1063.  A.M.  6571.

A.D.  1064.  A.M.  6572.

A.D.  1065.  A.M.  6573. Vseslav  began  to  make  war;  and  in  the  west
there  appeared  a  great  star.

1  Words  in  brackets  supplied  from  another  text.

2  Usually  known  as  Polovtsy,  i.e.  the  Kumans,  a  nomad  people  of  Southern
Russia,  not  Slavs,  who  in  the  centuries  preceding  the  Tartar  invasion  periodi-
cally ravaged  the  country  round  Kiev.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 5

A.D.  1066.  A.M.  6574. Vseslav  came  and  took  Novgorod,  with  the
women  and  children;  and  he  took  down  the
bells  from  St.  Sophia — Oh  great  was  the  distress  at  that  time! — ■
and  he  took  down  the  church  lustres.

A.D.  1067.  A.M.  6575.  They  defeated  Vseslav  at  Nemiza.  The
same  year  they  captured  him  in  Russia  [Rus.y

A.D.  1068.  A.M.  6576.  The  wrath  of  God  came  on  us;  the  Polovets
people  came  and  conquered  the  Russian^
Land.  The  same  year  the  men  of  Kiev  rescued^  Vseslav  from  prison.
The  same  year  Svyatoslav  defeated  the  Polovets  people  near
Snovsk,  and  Izyaslav  fled  to  the  Lyakhi.

A.D.  1069.  A.M.  6577.  Izyaslav  came  from  the  Lyakhi,  and  Vseslav
fled  to  Polotsk.

The  same  year,  in  the  autumn,  on  October  23,  the  day  of  the
Lord's  brother,  St.  James,  a  Friday,  at  the  sixth  hour  of  the  day,
Vse  .  .  .  again  came  to  Novgorod;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  drew
up  their  forces  against  them,  near  the  Zverinets^  on  the  Kzeml^;
and  God  helped  Knyaz  Gleb  with  the  men  of  Novgorod.

Oh !  great  was  the  slaughter  among  the  Vod^  people,  and  a  count-
less number  of  them  fell ;  but  the  Knyaz  himself  they  let  go  for  the
sake  of  God;  and  the  next  day  the  honourable  cross  of  Volodimir
was  found  at  St.  Sophia's  in  Novgorod,  Fedor'^  being  then  Bishop.

A.D.  1070.  A.M.  6578.  [A  son]  was  born  [to  Vsevolod,  and  they
called  him] Rostislav;  and  the  monastery

church  of  St.  Michael  was  founded  at  Kiev.

A.D.  1071.  A.M.  6579.

A.D.  1072.  A.M.  6580.  Boris  and  Gleb^  were  transferred  from  the
Lto  [river]  to  Vyshegorod.

A.D.  1073.  A.M.  6581. The  Pechersk  Church  was  founded  by  the
Igmnen^  Feodos.^" The  same  year  Svyato-
slav and  Vsevolod  drove  Izyaslav  away  to  the  Lyakhi.

1  Here  the  Kiev  region. See  Introduction,  p.  xvi.

2  Russkaya  Zemlya.

3  Vysyekosha=^{).it.)  cut  him  out.

*  An  enclosure  to  keep  wild  animals  {zver).

5  Kzeml,  or  Gzen,  a  stream  near  Novgorod.

*  A  Finnish  tribe.

'  Theodore.  A  colloquial  form  of  Feodor.

*  sc.  their  remains.

*  Abbot,  Superior,  Head  of  a  Monastery,  from  ijyovfievos.
*"  Theodosius.

6 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1074.  A.M.  6582. Fedos,  7^Mwg»  of  Pechersk,  died  on  May  3.  {

A.D.  1075.  A.M.  6583.

A.D.  1076.  A.M.  6584.

A.D.  1077.  A.M.  6585. Fedor,  Vladyka^  of  Novgorod,  died.

A.D.  1078.  A.M.  6586. Oleg  fled  to  Tmutorokan,  and  brought  back  1
the  Polovets  people,  and  defeated  Vsevolod  ^
on  the  Sozh  [river]. The  same  year  there  was  a  fight  at  Chernigov, '
and  two  Knyazes,  Izyaslav  and  Boris,  were  killed.

A.D.  1079.  A.M.  6587. They  killed  Knyaz  Gleb  beyond  the  Volok^
on  May  30. The  same  year  the  Polovets
people  killed  Roman.

A.D.  1080.  A.M.  6588.

A.D.  1081.  A.M.  6589.

A.D.  1082.  A.M.  6590.

A.D.  1083.  A.M.  6591.

A.D.  1084.  A.M.  6592.

A.D.  1085.  A.M.  6593.

A.D.  1086.  A.M.  6594.

A.D.  1087.  A.M.  6595.

A.D.  1088.  A.M.  6596. The  Church  of  St.  Mikhail  was  consecrated.

A.D.  1089.  A.M.  6597. The Pechersk  Church  was  consecrated  by
the  Metropolitan  loan.^
The  same  year  (Vsevolod's  daughter)  died.

A.D.  1090.  A.M.  6598. He fetched Yanek^ the Eunuch Metro-
politan. The  same  year  the  Church  of  Saint
Mikhail  at  Pereyaslavl  was  consecrated.

A.D.  1091.  A.M.  6599. They  transferred  the  Igumen  Fedos*  of  Pec-
hersk into  the  monastery  from  Pechera.^  The
same  year  the  Eunuch  Metropohtan  loan  died.

1  Archbishop — ht.  ruler.

2  Fo^O/%= Portage,  the  watershed  between  two  river  basins,  across  which
the  boats  are  drawn;  "  beyond  the  Volok,"  za  volokom,  or  zavoloche,  is  spe-
cially the  Dvinskaya  Zemlya,  the  land  of  the  Dvina,  the  basin  of  the  Northern
Dvina. See  Introduction,  pp.  ix,  x,  xi,  etc-

3  i.e.  John.

*  sc.  the  remains  of.
^  lit.  the  cave.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 7

A.D.  1092.  A.M.  6600.  A  panic  came  over  the  people  of  Polotsk,
so  that  it  was  impossible  to  walk  in  the
streets,  because  it  was  as  if  there  was  a  quantity  of  soldiers  and  as
if  one  could  see  horses'  hoofs;  and  if  anyone  went  out  of  his  house,
he  would  be  suddenly  and  unaccountably  killed.

A.D.  1093.  A.M.  6601. Vsevolod died; and  Svyatopolk took his
^  seat in Kiev. The same summer the

Polo  vets  people  defeated  Svyatopolk  and  Mstislav  at  Trepol.

A.D.  1094.  A.M.  6602.

A.D.  1095.  A.M.  6603. Svyatopolk and Volodimir went against
David  to  Smolensk, ^  and  gave  Novgorod  to
David. The  same  year  locusts  came  to  Russia  on  August  28.

A.D.  1096.  A.M.  6604.

1  A.D.  1097.  A.M.  6605.  Vasilko  was  blinded.  The  same  year,  in  the
winter,  Mstislav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
defeated  Oleg  at  the  Kulatsk^  during  the  great  fast.  The  same
year  in  the  spring,  the  other  side^  was  burnt  and  two  days  later  the
Detinets-gorod*  was  burnt  down;  and  they  killed  the  Knyaz's
servants.

A.D.  1098.  A.M.  6606.

A.D.  1099.  A.M.  6607.

A.D.  1100.  A.M.  6608.

A.D.  1101.  A.M.  6609. Vseslav,  i^wj'az  of  Polotsk,  died.

A.D.  1102.  A.M.  6610.

A.D.  1103.  A.M.  6611.  All  the  brethren  Knyazes  of  the  Russian
Land  went  against  the  Polovets  people  to  the
Suten,  and  defeated  them,  and  captured  the  belongings  of  their
Knyaz.  The  same  year  the  Mordva^  people  defeated  Yaroslav  at
Murom.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Mstislav  founded  the  Church  of
the  Annunciation  in  the  Gorodishche.^

A.D.  1104.  A.M.  6612. Nikifor,  Metropolitan  of  Russia,  came,

1  "Pitch(town)."

2  sc.  the  river  Kalaksha.

3  sc.  that  part  of  Novgorod  east  of  the  river  Volkhov.

*  The  citadel.

*  A  Finnish  tribe.

*  "  Citadel,"  or  "  fort,"  on  the  outskirts  of  Novgorod,  2  versts  away.

8 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1105.  A.M.  6613. Lazor,  Mina,  and  Amfilokhi  were  appointed
Bishops. The  same  year  they  made  war
against  Ladoga;  and  all  the  houses  from  the  Stream,  past  Slavno,^
up  to  Saint  Ilya  were  burnt.

A.D.  1106.  A.M.  6614. They  defeated  the  Polovets  people  on  the
Dunai. The  same  year  Knyaz  Svyatosha,
son  of  David  at  Chernigov,  father-in-law  of  Vsevolod,  was  shorn.

A.D.  1107.  A.M.  6615. The  earth  trembled  on  February  5.

A.D.  1108.  A.M.  6616. Nikita,  Vladyka  of Novgorod,  died  on  Jan-
uary 30;  and  in  the  spring  they  began  to
paint^  St.  Sophia,  by  the  efforts  of  the  holy  Vladyka.

A.D.  1109.  A.M.  6617. The  water  was  high  in  the  Dnieper,  the
Desna  and  the  Pripet. And  they  finished
the  refectory  in  the  Pechersk  monastery. The  same  year  a  church
was  founded  at  Kiev  by  Knyaz  Svyatopolk.

A.D.  1110.  A.M.  6618. Vladyka  loan  came  to  Novgorod  on  Decem-
ber 20.

A.D.  nil.  A.M.  6619. Svyatopolk,  Volodimir  and  David  and  the
whole  Russian  Land  to  a  man  went  against
the Polovets people  and  defeated  them  and  took  their  children,
and  rebuilt  the  fortified  towns  of  Surtov  and  Sharukan.

At  the  same  time  the  Lower  town^  at  Kiev  was  burnt,  as  well  as
Chernigov,  Smolensk  and  Novgorod.  The  same  year  loan.  Bishop
of  Chernigov,  died. The  same  year  Mstislav  went  against  Ochela.'*

A.D.  1112.  A.M.  6620.

A.D.  1113.  A.M.  6621. Yaroslav, son of Svyatopolk, went out

/against  the  Yatvyag  people,5and  having  come
back  from  the  war  he  took  [to  wife]  the  daughter  of  Mstislav.  In
the  same  year  Svyatopolk  died,  and  Volodimir  took  his  seat  on  the
throne  in  Kiev.  David  Igorovits  died  this  same  year.  In  this
same  year  Mstislav  defeated  the  Chud^  people  at  Bor.  That  same
year  was  founded  in  Novgorod  the  Church  of  St.  Nicholas. That

1  A  quarter  of  the  town,  sometimes  called  the  Slavenski  End.

2  sc.  to  decorate  with  paintings  or  frescoes.

3  Podole.

*  In  the  Chud  country.

5  A  race  in  W.  Russia,  closely  allied  to  the  Lithuanians.

*  Finnish,  f  ri^<^

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 9

same  year  the  whole  of  the  outer  town  on  this  side^  was  burned  down,
from  a  fire  at  Luka's.

A.D.  1114.  A.M.  6622. Svyatoslav died in Pereyaslavl. In the
same  year  Feoktist  was  installed  Bishop  of
Chernigov.

A.D.  1115.  A.M.  6623.  The  brothers  Volodimir,  Oleg  and  David
assembled  in  Vyshegorod,  together  with  the
whole  Russian  Land,  and  they  consecrated  the  stone  church  on
May  1,  and  on  the  2nd,  the  8th  of  the  Indiction  [the  remains  of]
Boris  and  Gleb  were  transferred.  The  same  year  there  was  a  sign
in  the  sun,  as  though  it  had  perished,  and  in  the  autumn,  on  August
1,  Oleg,  son  of  Svyatoslav,  died.  In  Novgorod  all  Mstislav's  horses
and  those  of  his  Druzhina  died.  The  same  year,  on  April  28,  the
foreign  merchant,  Voi,  laid  the  foundation  of  a  church  to  St.
Theodore  of  Tyre.

A.D.  1116.  A.M.  6624.  Mstislav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  out
against  the  Chud  people  and  took  Med-
vezhya  Golovofi  on  [the  day  of]  the  forty  saints.  That  same  year,
Mstislav  laid  the  foundations  of  a  larger  planned  Novgorod  (larger
than  the  first).  That  same  year,  Paul,  Posadnik^  of  Ladoga,  laid
the  foundations  of  the  town  of  Ladoga  in  stone.

A.D.  1117.  A.M.  6625.  Mstislav  went  from  Novgorod  on  March  17
to  take  the  throne  at  Kiev,  and  he  put  his
son,  Vsevolod,  on  the  throne  at  Novgorod.  On  May  14  that  same
year  there  was  a  sign  by  thunder  at  ten  o'clock  during  evening  ser-
vice in  St.  Sophia  in  Novgorod;  one  of  the  chanters,  a  clerk,  was
struck  by  the  thunder,  and  the  whole  choir  with  the  people  fell
prone,  the  people  remaining  alive;  and  in  the  evening  there  was  a
sign  in  the  moon.  The  same  year  the  Igiimen  Anton  laid  the
foundation  of  the  stone  church  of  the  monastery  of  the  Holy  Mother
of  God.

The same year, Dobrynya, Posadnik of Novgorod, died on
December  6.

A.D.  1118.  A.M.  6626. Dmitri Zavidits, Posadnik of Novgorod,
died  on  July  9,  having  been  sole  Posadnik

1  sc.  the  St.  Sophia  or  Western  side  of  Novgorod.

*  The  Bear's  Head ; in  Finnish : Oden-paa,  the modern  Odeppe,  a  village
S.  of  Yurev,  or  Dorpat,  W.  of  Novgorod.
3  Burgomaster.

10  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

seven  months.  The  same  year,  Volodimir  with  Mstislav  brought
all  the  Boyars^  of  Novgorod  to  Kiev  and  led  them  to  the  honourable
Cross,2  and  then  dismissed  them  to  their  houses,  retaining  others  by
him,  being  wroth  with  those  because  they  had  plundered  Danislav
and  Nozdrich,  and  with  the  Sotski^  Stavro,  and  he  drowned  all  of
them.

A.D.  1119.  A.M.  6627.  The  Igiimen  Kyuryak  and  Knyaz  Vsevolod
laid  the  foundation  of  the  monastery  church
of  St.  Georgi  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year  died  Kosnyatin*  Moseo-
vits  the  Posadnik.  The  same  year,  Anton's  Church  in  the  monas-
tery of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  Novgorod  was  completed.

A.D.  1120.  A.M.  6628. Boris  came  to  be  Posadnik  in  Novgorod.

A.D.  1121.  A.M.  6629.

A.D.  1122.  A.M.  6630. Mstislav's  wife,  Christina,  died. The  same
year  Mstislav  married  in  Kiev  Dmitrovna,
daughter  of  Zavidits  of  Novgorod.

A.D.  1123.  A.M.  6631.  Vsevolod,  son  of  Mstislav,  married  in  Nov-
gorod. The  same  year  the  Church  of  St.
Mikhail  fell  in  Pereyaslavl,  and  in  the  spring,  Vsevolod  and  the  men
of  Novgorod  during  the  Great  Fast  went  against  the  Yem  people
and  defeated  them ;  but  the  march  was  terrible ;  [a  loaf  of]  bread
cost  one  nogata.^

A.D.  1124.  A.M.  6632.  On  the  Uth  day  of  August  before  evening
service  the  sun  began  to  decrease  and  it
totally  perished;  oh,  there  was  great  terror  and  darkness !  there  were
stars  and  the  moon ;  then  it  began  to  re-appear  and  came  out  quickly
in  full;  then  all  the  city  rejoiced.

A.D.  1125.  A.M.  6633.  Volodimir  the  Great,  son  of  Vsevolod,  died
in  Kiev;  and  they  put  his  son  Mstislav  on
the  throne  of  his  father.  The  same  year  there  was  a  great  storm
with  thunder  and  hail ;  it  rent  houses  and  it  rent  tiles  off  shrines ;
it  drowned  droves  of  cattle  in  the  Volkhov,  and  others  they  hardly

>  Nobles.

2  i.e.  made  them  take  the  oath  of  loyalty.

3  Commander  of  a  hundred  (5/0).

4  Constantine.

6  cf.  Appendix.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  11

saved  alive. The  same  year  they  painted  the  Anton  chapel  in  the
monastery  (sc.  frescoes).

The  same  year  the  people  of  Novgorod  put  Vsevolod  on  the
throne.

A.D.  1126.  A.M.  6634. Vsevolod  went  to  Kiev  to  his  father  and  he
came  back  to  the  throne  in  Novgorod  on
February  28. The  same  year  they  gave  the  office  of  Posadnik  to
Miroslav  Gyuryatinits.

A.D.  1127.  A.M.  6635.  Vsevolod  founded  the  stone  church  of  St.
loan  in  Novgorod,  in  the  name  of  his  son,
in  Petryata's  Court.  The  same  year  a  blizzard  fell  thick  over  land
and  water  and  houses  during  two  nights  and  four  days.  The  same
year  the  Igumen  Anton  built  a  refectory  of  stone  in  Novgorod.  The
same  year  the  water  was  high  in  the  Volkhov  and  snow  lay  until
James's^  day.  And  in  the  autumn  the  frost  killed  all  the  corn  and
the  winter  crop;  and  there  was  famine  throughout  the  winter;  an
osminka^  of  rye  cost  half  a  grivna.^

A.D.  1128.  A.M.  6636.  Kyuryak,  Igumen  of  St.  Georgi,  died.  The
same  year  loan,  son  of  Vsevolod,  grandson
of  Mstislav,  died  on  April  16.  The  same  year  Zavid  Dmitrovits  was
made  Posadnik  in  Novgorod.  This  year  it  was  cruel;  one  osminka
of  rye  cost  a  grivna;  the  people  ate  lime  tree  leaves,  birch  bark,
pounded  wood  pulp  mixed  with  husks  and  straw;  some  ate  butter-
cups, moss,  horse  flesh;  and  thus  many  dropping  down  from  hunger,
their  corpses  were  in  the  streets,  in  the  market  place,  and  on  the
roads,  and  everywhere.  They  hired  hirehngs  to  carry  the  dead  out
of  the  town ;  the  serfs  could  not  go  out ;  woe  and  misery  on  all !
fathers  and  mothers  would  put  their  children  into  boats  in  gift  to
merchants,'*  or  else  put  them  to  death ;  and  others  dispersed  over
foreign  lands.  Thus  did  our  country  perish  on  account  of  our  sins.
This  3^ear,  the  water  was  high  in  the  Volkhov,  and  carried  away
many  houses;  and  Knyaz  Boris  Vseslavits  of  Polotsk  died;  and
Zavid  Dmitrovits,  Posadnik  of  Novgorod,  died.

A.D.  1129.  A.M.  6637. Daniel  came  from  Kiev  to  be  Posadnik  in

Novgorod.

1  May  1.

2  About  eleven  pecks.

3  cf .  Appendix.

*  sc.  as  slaves  to  the  oversea  merchants,  who  came  up  the river  Volkhov
from  the  Baltic  to  Novgorod  in  boats.

12 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1130.  A.M.  6638.  Vsevolod  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  went
against  the  Chud  people  in  the  winter
during  the  Feast;  them  he  slaughtered,  their  dwellings  he  burned,
and  their  wives  and  children  he  brought  home.  The  same  year  he
went  to  Kiev  to  his  father.  The  same  year  they  finished  the  Church
of  St.  John.  This  year  coming  from  beyond  sea  from  the  Goths,^
seven  boats  sank;  they  themselves  all  sank  and  their  goods;  but
some  escaped,  though  naked,  and  came  from  Donia-  in  health.

This  year  Vladyka  loan  of  Novgorod,  resigned,  he  had  sat  twenty
years,  and  they  appointed  Nifont  Vladyka,  a  holy  and  very  God-
fearing man;  he  came  to  Novgorod  on  the  1st  day  of  January,  on
St.  Basil's  day  to  mid-day  service.  And  they  let  Petrila  be  Posadnik
over  Novgorod.

A.D.  1131.  A.M.  6639.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  in  the  evening
time  on  March  20.  The  same  year  in  the
winter,  Vsevolod  went  against  the  Chud  people,  and  there  happened
a  great  calamity ;  they  did  to  death  many  good  men  of  Novgorod  at
Klin  on  Saturday,  January  23.  Then  also  Vladyka  Nifont  made
Anton  Igumen.

A.D.  1132.  A.M.  6640.  Mstislav  Volodimirits  died  in  Kiev  on
April  14;  and  Yaropolk,  Mstislav's  brother,
took  his  seat  on  the  throne.  This  year,  Vsevolod  by  order  of  Yaropolk
went  into  Russia  to  Pereyaslavl  although  he  had  kissed  the  Cross
to  the  people  of  Novgorod  that  I  wish  to  die  in  your  midst.  And
Georgi  and  Andrei  said:  "  Behold  our  brother  Yaropolk,  after  his
own  death  wishes  to  give  Kiev  to  Vsevolod  his  nephew:  "  and  they
drove  him  out  of  Pereyaslavl.  And  he  came  back  to  Novgorod
and  there  was  a  great  rising  amongst  the  people.  And  the  men  of
Pleskov^  and  of  Ladoga  came  to  Novgorod,  and  drove  out  Knyaz
Vsevolod  from  the  town ;  and  then  again,  having  taken  counsel  they
brought  him  back  from  the  Mouths^  and  they  let  Miroslav  be  Posad-
nik in  Pleskov  and  Raguilov  in  the  town  of  Ladoga.

A.D.  1133.  A.M.  6641. There  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  before  evening

service. And  the  same  year  they  renewed

the  bridge  across  the  Volkhov,  which  had  been  destroyed,  and  they

1  sc.  Gothland.

-  i.e.  Denmark.

3  i.e.  Pskov.

*  Usti,  sc.  of  the  river  Volkhov  in  Lake  Ladoga.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 13

built  two  wooden  churches  in  the  market  place ;  to  the  Holy  Mother
of  God  and  to  St.  George,  under  Knyaz  Vsevolod.  The  same  year
in  the  winter,  Vsevolod  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  against  the
Chud  people  and  took  the  town  of  Gyurgev^  on  the  anniversary  of
St.  Nikifor,  the  9th  day  of  February.

A.D.  1134.  A.M.  6642.  The  people  of  Novgorod  began  to  talk  of  a
war  with  Suzhdal,-  and  they  killed  one  of
their  own  men  and  threw  him  from  the  bridge  on  Pentecost  Saturday.
The  same  year  the  business  side^  caught  fire,  from  the  Carpenters'
brook  to  the  end  of  Kholm,^  as  it  had  caught  fire  before;  and  ten
honourable  churches  were  destroyed  by  fire,  on  August  4.  The
same  year  Vsevolod  marched  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  wishing
to  place  his  brother  in  Suzhdal,  and  at  the  Dubna  they  turned
back;  and  during  the  same  journey  they  took  away  the  Posadnik-ship
from  Petrila  and  gave  it  to  Ivanko  Pavlovits ;  and  Izyaslav  went  to
Kiev:  and  all  the  Russian  Land  was  rent  asunder.  The  same  year
they  cut  to  pieces  some  men  of  Novgorod  beyond  the  Sea  in  Donia^ ;
and  Igumen  Isaia  went  as  envoy  to  Kiev ;  and  he  came  back  with  the
Metropolitan  Mikhail  to  Novgorod  on  December  9.  The  same  year
in  the  winter,  Vsevolod  went  against  Suzhdal  with  an  army  and  all
the  Novgorod  province,**  on  December  31;  and  bad  weather  set  in;
frost  and  blizzard,  very  terrible  !  They  fought  on  Zhdana  hill,  and
much  evil  was  wrought,  and  they  killed  Ivanko,  Posadnik  of  Nov-
gorod, a  very  brave  man,  on  January  26,  also  Petrila  Mikultsits  and
many  good  men,  but  of  the  men  of  Suzhdal  yet  more;  and  having
made  peace,  they  came  back;  and  they  let  the  Metropolitan  go  to
Kiev  on  February  10  on  Sexagesima  Sunday,  but  those  who  were
going  to  Suzhdal  would  not  let  him  go,  but  he  said  to  them:  "  Do
not  go,  God  will  listen  to  me."  And  having  come  [back]  they  gave
the  Posadnik-s]\\p  to  Miroslav  Gyuryatinits.

A.D.  1135.  A.M.  6643.  Posadnik  Miroslav  went  from  Novgorod  to
make  peace  between  the  people  of  Kiev
and  those  of  Chernigov,  and  he  came  [back]  without  having  achieved
anything ;  for  the  whole  Russian  Land  was  in  great  disorder ;  Yaro-
polk  called  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  his  side;  and  the  Knyaz  of

1  i.e.  Yurev,  or  Dorpat.

2  A  town  E.  of  Moscow.

3  The  Eastern  side  of  the  town.

^  A  part  of  Novgorod,  lit.  "  The  Mound."

5  i.e.  Denmark.

6  Oblast.

14 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Chernigov  to  his ;  and  they  fought,  and  God  helped  the  son  of  Oleg
with  the  men  of  Chernigov  and  he  cut  up  many  of  the  men  of  Kiev,
and  others  they  captured  in  the  month  of  August.  And  this  was
not  the  whole  of  the  evil ;  the  Polo  vets  people  and  every  one  began  to
muster  fighting  men.  The  same  year,  Vsevolod  with  Vladyka  Nifont
founded  a  stone  church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  market
place.  The  same  year,  Irozhnet  founded  a  church  to  St.  Nicholas
in  Yakov  Street.  The  same  year  in  the  winter,  Vladyka  Nifont
with  the  best  men  went  into  Russia,  and  found  the  men  of  Kiev  and
the  men  of  Chernigov  ranged  against  each  other,  and  a  quantity  of
troops;  and  by  the  will  of  God  they  were  reconciled.  And  Miroslav
died  before  the  [return  of  the]  Vladyka  on  January  28;  the  Bishop
came  on  February  4.  And  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shvp  in  Novgorod
to  Kostyantin  Mikultsits.

A.D.  1136.  A.M.  6644.  Of  the  year  of  the  Indiction  14  The  men
of  Novgorod  summoned  the  men  of  Pleskov
and  of  Ladoga  and  took  counsel  how  to  expel  their  Knyaz  Vsevolod,
and  they  confined  him  in  the  Court^  of  the  Bishop,  together  with
wife  and  children  and  mother-in-law,  on  May  28,  and  guards  with
arms  guarded  him  day  and  night,  thirty  men  daily;  and  he  sat  two
months  and  they  let  him  out  of  the  town  on  July  15,  and  they
received  his  son,  Volodimir.  And  they  made  these  his  faults:
L  He  has  no  care  for  the  serfs;  H.  Why  didst  thou  wish  to  take  thy
seat  in  Pereyaslavl  ?  HL  Thou  didst  ride  away  from  the  troop  in
front  of  all,  and  besides  that  much  vacillation,  ordering  us  first  to
advance  against  Vsevolodko  and  then  again  to  retreat ;  and  they  did
not  let  him  go  till  another  Knyaz  came.

Then  also  the  monastery  church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection  was
destroyed  by  fire.  The  same  year,  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  Olgovits
came  to  Novgorod  from  Chernigov,  from  his  brother  Vsevolodko  on
July  19,  formerly,  the  14th  of  the  Calends  of  August,  the  Sunday  of
the  festival  of  St.  Euphemia,  at  3  o'clock  of  the  day,  the  19th  day  of
the  moon  in  the  sky.

The  same  year,  already  the  15th  of  the  Indiction,  they  killed  Georgi
Zhiroslavits,  and  threw  him  from  the  bridge,  in  the  month  of  Sep-
tember. The  same  year  they  consecrated  the  Church  of  St.
Nicholas  by  a  great  consecration  on  December  5.  The  same  year,
Svyatoslav  Olgovits  married  in  Novgorod  and  was  wedded  by  his
own  priests  in  the  Church  of  St.  Nicholas;  and  Nifont  did  not  wed

1  Dvor.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  15

him,  he  did  not  let  priests  or  monks  [go  to  the  wedding]  saying:
"  It  behoves  him  not  to  take  her  [to  wife]."

The  same  year  the  favourites  of  Vsevolod  shot  at  the  Knyaz;
but  he  remained  ahve.

A.D.  1137.  A.M.  6645.  On  March  7,  in  the  15th  year  of  the
Indiction,  Kostyantin,  Posadnik  of  Nov-
gorod, and  some  other  good  men  fled  to  Vsevolod;  and  they  let
Yakun  Miroslavits  be  Posadnik  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year
Vsevolod  Mstislavits  came  to  Pleskov,  wishing  to  take  his  seat  again
on  his  own  throne  in  Novgorod,  secretly  called  on  by  men  of  Nov-
gorod and  of  Pleskov,  his  friends:  "  Come,  Knyaz,  they  want  you
again."  And  when  this  was  heard,  that  Vsevolod  was  at  Pleskov
with  his  brother  Svyatopolk,  there  was  great  tumult  in  Novgorod.
The  people  did  not  want  Vsevolod;  and  some  hurried  off  to  Vsevolod
to  Pleskov,  and  took  to  plundering  their  houses,  Kosnyatin's,
Nezhata's,  and  those  of  many  others,  and  besides  that  seeking  out
those  Boyars  who  were  friends  of  Vsevolod,  they  took  one  and  a  half
thousand  grivnas  from  each  and  gave  it  to  the  merchants  to  prepare
for  war;  but  they  also  laid  hands  on  the  innocent.  Then  Svyatoslav
Olgovits  collected  the  whole  Novgorod  land  and  fetched  his  brother
Glebko,  [and  with]  men  of  Kursk  [and]  with  Polovets  people  went
to  Pleskov  to  drive  away  Vsevolod ;  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  did  not
submit  to  them,  nor  did  they  drive  out  the  Knyaz  from  them,  but
they  had  guarded  themselves  and  barricaded  all  the  ways  by
felling  trees,  and  Knyaz  and  people  having  taken  counsel  on  the  way,
they  turned  back  at  Dubrovna,  and  also  having  said:  "  Let  us  not
spill  blood  with  our  brothers ;  rather  let  God  settle  by  his  providence."
Then  too,  Vsevolod  Mstislavits  died  in  Pleskov,  in  the  month  of
February,  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  took  sides  with  his  brother
Svyatopolk;  and  there  was  no  peace  with  them,  nor  with  the  men  of
Suzhdal,  nor  with  those  of  Smolensk,  nor  with  those  of  Polotsk,  nor
with  those  of  Kiev.  And  all  the  year  a  large  osminka  cost  seven
rezanas?-

A.D.  1138.  A.M.  6646.  In  the  month  of  March  on  the  9th  day  [the
day  of]  the  forty  Saints,  there  was  great
thunder,  so  that  sitting  in  doors  we  heard  it  clearly.

The  same  year  they  drove  Svyatoslav,  the  son  of  Oleg,  out  of
Novgorod,  on  April  17,  on  the  third  Sunday  after  Easter;  having
sat  two  years  less  three  months.

1  cf.  Appendix.

16 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  year  they  sent  to  Suzdhal  for  Gyurgi  Volodimirits ;  and
on  the  23rd  of  that  month  the  people  took  alarm:  for  they  had
falsely  said  that  Svyatoslav  was  outside  the  town  with  the  men  of
Pleskov;  and  the  whole  town  went  out  to  Silnishche/  and  it  was
nothing  at  all,  but  Svyatoslav's  wife  with  his  best  men  were  taken
prisoners  in  Novgorod,  and  Svyatoslav  himself  the  men  of  Smolensk
took  on  the  way  and  kept  guard  over  him  in  the  monastery  at
Smyadino,  likewise  his  wife  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Barbara  in
Novgorod,  awaiting  examination  by  Yaropolk  and  Vsevolodko.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav,  son  of  Gyurgi,  grandson  of
Volodimir,  came  from  Suzhdal  into  Novgorod  on  to  the  throne,
on  May  10;  and  they  made  peace  with  the  men  of  Pleskov.  The
same  year  Knyaz  Yaropolk  of  Kiev  died,  and  his  brother,  Vyaches-
lav,  took  his  seat  on  the  throne.

A.D.  1139.  A.M.  6647.  Knyaz  Gyurgi  came  from  Suzhdal  to  Smo
lensk  and  summoned  the  men  of  Novgorod
against  Kiev  against  Vsevolod,  and  they  did  not  listen  to  him.
And  then  Rostislav  fled  from  Novgorod  to  Smolensk  to  his  father
on  September  1,  having  sat  in  Novgorod  eight  years  and  four  months;
and  Gyurgi  was  wroth,  going  back  to  Suzhdal,  he  took  Novi-torg.^
The  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Kiev  for  Svyatoslav  Olgovits,  having
given  their  oath;  and  there  was  tumult  in  Novgorod,  and  Svyatos-
lav was  away  a  long  time.  The  same  year,  Svyatoslav  Olgovits
entered  Novgorod  and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  in  the  month  of
December  on  the  25th.

A.D.  1140.  A.M.  6648.  On  March  20  there  was  a  sign  in  the  sun;
only  so  much  of  it  remained  as  there  is  in  a
moon  of  four  days ;  but  it  filled  out  again  before  setting.  The  same
year  they  sent  Kosnyatin  Mikultsits  and  six  others  after  him  to
Vsevolod  to  Kiev;  having  put  in  chains  Polyud  Kosnyatinits,
Demyan  and  some  others.

A.D.  1141.  A.M.  6649. On  April  1  there  was  a  very  marvellous  sign
in  the  sky;  six  circles,  three  close  about  the
sun,  and  three  other  large  ones  outside  the  sun,  and  stood  nearly
all  day.

The  same  year  they  came  from  Vsevolod  from  Kiev  for  his  brother
Svyatoslav  to  take  him  to  Kiev;  "  and  receive  my  son  as  your

1  Near  Novgorod.
*  lit.,  New  Market.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  17

Knyaz,"  he  said.  And  when  they  sent  the  Bishop  and  many  best
men  for  his  son,  they  said  to  Svyatoslav:  "  Thou  wait  for  thy  bro-
ther, then  thou  shalt  go;  "  but  he,  fearing  the  men  of  Novgorod,
"  whether  they  are  going  to  deceive  me,"  fled  secretly  in  the  night;
Yakun  fled  with  him.  And  they  took  Yakun  on  the  [river]  Plisa,
and  having  brought  him  hither  with  his  brother  Procopi,  they
nearly  did  him  to  death,  having  stripped  him  naked,  as  his  mother
bore  him,  and  they  threw  him  down  from  the  bridge;  but  God
saved  him,  he  waded  to  the  bank,  and  they  beat  him  no  more,  but
took  from  him  1,000  grivnas,  and  from  his  brother  100  grivnas,
hkewise  they  took  from  others;  and  they  exiled  Yakun  with  his
brother  to  the  Chud  people,  having  chained  their  hands  to  their  "^
necks;  and  afterwards  Gyurgi  fetched  them  to  him,  and  their  wives
from  Novgorod,  and  kept  them  by  him  in  favour.  And  Vsevolod
was  wroth,  and  he  detained  all  the  emissaries  and  the  Bishop  and
the  merchants.

And  the  people  of  Novgorod  sat  without  a  Knyaz  nine  months:
and  they  summoned  Sudila,  Nezhata  and  Strashko  from  Suzhdal,
who  had  fled  from  Novgorod  on  account  of  Svyatoslav  and  Yakun;
and  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shvp  in  Novgorod  to  Sudila ;  and  they
sent  to  Suzhdal  for  Gyurgi  to  be  Knyaz,  and  he  did  not  go,  but  sent
his  son,  Rostislav,  who  had  been  before.

The  same  year  Rostislav  went  on  to  the  throne  at  Novgorod,  on
November  26.

A.D.  114:2.  A.M.  6650.  They  did  not  let  the  Bishop  and  the  mer-
chants and  the  Novgorod  emissaries  leave
Russia,  and  they  did  not  wish  for  any  other  Knyaz  than  Svyatopolk;
and  he  gave  them  Svyatopolk  from  his  own  hands;  Gyurgi  having
broken  his  oath,  by  letting  his  son  go  back  to  Novgorod.  And  they
heard  in  Novgorod  that  Svyatopolk  is  coming  to  them  with  all
their  people,  and  they  took  Rostislav  and  put  him  in  the  Bishop's
Court,  having  sat  (sc.  on  the  throne)  four  months.

The  same  year,  on  April  19,  Svyatopolk  entered  Novgorod;  and
they  let  Rostislav  go  to  his  father.

The  same  year  came  the  Yem  people,  and  made  war  on  the
Novgorod  province;  400  of  the  men  of  Ladoga  defeated  them,  and
did  not  let  one  escape.

The  same  year  a  Knyaz  of  the  Svei^  with  a  Bishop  in  sixty  boats
attacked  merchants  who  were  coming  from  over  sea  in  three  boats; /

*  Swedes.

18 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

and  they  fought,  they  accomplished  nothing,  and  they  separated
three  of  their  boats,  and  they  killed  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  them.

A.D.  1143.  A.M.  6651.  All  the  autumn  was  rain}',  from  Our  Lady's
Birthday^  to  Korochun'^  warm,  wet;  and  the
water  was  very  high  in  the  Volkhov  and  everywhere,  it  carried  abroad
hay  and  wood;  the  lake^  froze  in  the  night,  and  the  wind  broke  up
[the  ice]  and  carried  it  into  the  Volkhov,  and  it  broke  the  bridge,
it  carried  away  four  piles,  never  heard  of  more.

The  same  year  Svyatopolk  married  in  Novgorod,  he  brought  a
wife  from  Moravia,  between  Christmas  and  Epiphany.

The  same  year  the  Korel  people"^  went  against  the  Yem  people
and  [those]  running  away,  they  destroyed  two  of  their  vessels.

A.D.  1144.  A.M.  6652. They made a whole bridge across the
Volkhov  by  the  side  of  the  old  one,  entirely
new.

The  same  year  the  whole  of  Kholm^  was  burned,  and  the  church  of
St.  Ilya.  The  same  year  they  painted  fittingly  all  the  porches  in
the  Church  of  St.  Sophia  in  Novgorod,  under  Vladyka  Nifont.
Then,  too,  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shi-p  to  Nezhata  Tverdyatits.
The  same  year  they  finished  the  stone  church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God  in  the  market  place  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year  the  holy
Vladyka  Nifont  appointed  me  priest.

A.D.  1145.  A.M.  6653.  There  were  two  whole  weeks  of  great  heat,
like  burning  sparks,  before  harvest;  then
came  rain,  so  that  we  saw  not  a  clear  day  till  winter;  and  a  great
quantity  of  corn  and  hay  they  were  unable  to  harvest;  and  that
autumn  the  water  was  higher  than  three  years  before ;  and  in  the
winter  there  was  not  much  snow,  and  no  clear  day,  not  till  March.
The  same  year,  two  priests  were  drowned  and  the  Bishop  did  not
let  sing  over  them.  The  same  year  they  founded  a  stone  church,  Boris
and  Gleb,  at  Smyadino  by  Smolensk.  The  same  year  the  whole
Russian  Land  went  against  Galich,  they  devastated  much  of  their
province,  but  took  not  one  town,  and  returned,  and  they  went  also
from  Novgorod  with  Voyevoda  Nerevin  to  help  the  people  of  Kiev,
and  returned  with  love.

'  September  25.

-  The  Winter  solstice.

3  sc.  Lake  Umen,  at  the  north  end  of  which  Hes  Novgorod.

*  A  Finnish  tribe.

5  i.e.  The  Mound,  a  quarter  of  the  town.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 19

A.D.  1146.  A.M.  6654.  Vsevolod  died  in  Russia  in  the  month  of
Jiily,  and  his  brother,  Igor,  took  his  scat  on
the  throne  and  sat  two  weeks,  and  the  people  disliked  him ;  and  they
sent  word  to  Izyaslav  Mstislavich  in  Pereyaslavl,  and  he  came  with
soldiers,  and  they  fought;  and  God  helped  Izyaslav,  and  Izyaslav
took  his  seat  on  the  throne;  and  they  took  Igor  five  days  after  the
fight  and  made  him  captive ;  and  in  the  autumn  he  begged  permission
to  be  shorn ;  and  he  was  shorn.

Then,  too,  they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Kostyantin  Mikultsits,
having  taken  it  away  from  Nezhata.

The  same  year  they  made  four  churches:  to  the  holy  Martyrs
Boris  and  Gleb  in  the  town,  to  the  holy  Prophet  Ilya,  to  the  holy
Apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  in  the  KJiolm  [quarter],  and  to  the  Holy
Benefactors^  Kosma  and  Damyan.

A.D.  1147.  A.M.  6655.  In  the  autumn  Svyatopolk  with  the  whole
Novgorod  province  went  against  Gyurgi
wishing  to  go  against  Suzhdal,  and  turned  back  at  Novi-torg  for
the  bad  roads.

The  same  year  in  the  winter  Posadnik  Kostyantin  died  and  they
gave  it  again  to  Sudila  Ivankovits.

Then,  too,  Igiimen  Onton'  died.  The  same  year  they  gave  the
Igumen-shxp  to  Andrei  in  Onton's  place.

The  same  year  the  people  of  Kiev  killed  Knyaz  Igor  Olgovits.

A.D.  1148.  A.M.  6656.  There  was  rain  with  hail  on  June  27,  a
Sunday;  and  thunder  set  fire  to  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  monastery  of  Zverinets.  The  same
year  Vladyka  Nifont  went  to  Suzhdal,  for  peace,  to  Gyurgi;  and
Gyurgi  received  him  with  love,  and  consecrated  the  Church  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God,  with  great  consecration,  and  released  all  the
men  of  Novi-torg  and  all  the  merchants,  untouched,  and  sent  them
with  honour  to  Novgorod;  but  peace  he  gave  not.

The  same  autumn  Izyaslav  sent  his  son,  Yaroslav,  from  Kiev,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  received  him,  and  he  took  Svyatopolk
away  because  of  his  wickedness,  and  they  gave  him  Volodimir.

The  same  winter  Izyaslav,  son  of  Mstislav,  came  to  Novgorod
from  Kiev,  and  went  to  Rostov  against  Gyurgi  with  the  men  ol
Novgorod;  and  they  made  much  war  on  Gyurgi's  people,  and  took

^ Bestnezdniki=a.va.pyvpoi;  these  two  saints  who  were  doctors  and  gave  their
services  gratis,  are  often  so-called.
*  so.  Anthony.

C2

no  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

six  small  towns  on  the  Volga,  they  laid  waste  as  far  as  Yaroslavl,
and  took  7,000  heads  (captives),  and  turned  back  for  the  bad  roads.

A.D.  1149.  A.M.  6657.  Nifont,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  went  into
Russia,  summoned  by  Izyaslav  and  Klim
the  Metropohtan:  for  Izyaslav  with  the  Bishops  of  the  Russian
province^  had  appointed  him,  not  having  sent  to  Tzargrad;'^  and  to
Nifont  he  spake  thus:  "  You  were  not  fittingly  appointed,  for  you
were  neither  blessed  nor  appointed  by  the  great  council."  And
he  (Izyaslav)  on  this  account  did  not  hurry  to  acquit  him,  but  put
him  in  the  Pechersk  monastery  until  Gyurgi  should  come.  The
same  year  Gyurgi  came  against  Kiev,  summoned  by  Svyatoslav
Olgovits,  and  they  fought  at  Pereyaslavl,  and  the  men  of  Pereyas-
lavl  sat  on  the  defensive,  at  the  bidding  of  Gyurgi ;  and  Gyurgi  took
his  seat  in  Kiev,  and  Izyaslav  fled  to  Volodimir.  The  same  year
tax  gatherers  in  small  number  went  out;  and  Gyurgi,  aware  that
they  went  a  small  party,  sent  Knyaz  Berladski  with  soldiers,  and
having  fought  a  little  at  one  point,  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  stand
on  an  island,  and  the  others  having  taken  stand  opposite,  they
began  to  make  a  barricade  in  boats ;  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to
them  on  the  third  day,  and  they  fought ;  and  many  of  both  were  left
lying,  but  of  the  men  of  Suzhdal  without  number.  The  same
winter  the  Yem  people  came  with  armed  force  against  the  Vod
people,  several  thousand;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  heard,
about  500  of  them  went  with  the  Vod  people  against  them,  and  did
not  let  a  man  escape.  The  same  night  there  was  a  sign  in  the
moon :  the  whole  of  it  perished,  during  early  morning  service  it  filled
out  again,  in  February.

A.D.  1150.  A.M.  6658. Vladyka  Nifont  came  from  Kiev,  released  by
Knyaz  Gyurgi;  and  the  people  at  Novgorod
were  glad.

A.D.  1151.  A.M.  6659.  Izyaslav  with  Vyacheslav  defeated  Gyurgi
at  Pereyaslavl  on  July  17.

The  same  winter  the  Knyaginya^  of  Izyaslav  died.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Nifont  covered  St.  Sophia  all  smoothly
over  with  lead  and  plastered  it  with  lime  all  about.  Then,  too,
they  erected  two  churches:  of  St.  Vasili  and  of  St,  Kostyantin
and  his  mother,  Helen.

1  Kiev  and  district.

*  i.e.  the  Emperor's  town,  Constantinople.

3  Princess,  sc.  wife.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  21

A.D.  1152.  A.M.  6660.  On  April  23,  the  Church  of  St.  Michael
in  the  middle  of  the  market  place  took  fire,
and  there  was  much  damage;  the  whole  market  place  was  burnt,  and
the  houses  up  to  the  stream,  and  hitherwards  to  Slavno,  and
eight  churches  were  burnt  down,  and  a  ninth,  the  Varangian  one.

A.D.  1153.  A.M.  6661. The God-loving Vladyka Nifont went to
Ladoga  and  founded  the  stone  Church  of
St.  Kliment.

The  same  year  Igmnen  Arkadi  built  the  wooden  Church  of  the
Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  established  for  himself
a  monastery;  and  it  was  a  refuge  for  Christians,  a  joy  to  the  Angels,
and  perdition  to  the  devil.

A.D.  1154.  A.M.  6662.  The  men  of  Novgorod  drove  out  Knyaz
Yaroslav  on  March  26,  and  fetched  in
Rostislav,  son  of  Mstislav,  on  April  17.

The  same  year  they  built  a  church  to  St.  Sava.

The  same  year  on  November  14,  Izyaslav  died  in  Kiev.  Then,
too,  Rostislav  went  from  Novgorod  to  [take]  the  throne  in  Kiev,
having  left  his  son,  David,  in  Novgorod.  And  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod were  indignant,  because  he  did  not  make  order  among  them
but  tore  them  more  apart ;  and  they  showed  the  road  to  his  son  after
him.  Then  they  sent  Vladyka  Nifont  with  the  foremost  men  to
Gyurgi  for  his  son,  and  fetched  in  Mstislav,  son  of  Gyurgi,  on  Jan-
uary 30. The  same  winter  Vyacheslav  died  in  Kiev.

Then,  too,  Rostislav  went  to  Chernigov  from  Kiev,  having  sat
in  Kiev  one  week,  and  they  defeated  him,  having  deceived  [him] ;
and  Izyaslav  Davidovits  took  his  seat  in  Kiev.

A.D.  1155.  A.M.  6663.  In  Palm  week  Knyaz  Gyurgi  entered  Kiev
and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne,  and  Izyaslav
Davidovits  fled  to  Chernigov;  and  Gyurgi  received  his  nephews  in
peace  with  love,  and  distributed  proper  districts  among  them;  and
there  was  quiet  in  the  Russian  Land.

A.D.  1156.  A.M.  6664.  The  men  of  Novgorod  drove  out  Sudila
from  the  Posadnik-shi^ ,  and  he  died  on  the
fifth  day  after  that  expulsion ;  and  then  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shx^
to  Yakun  Miroslavits.  The  same  spring,  on  April  21,  Vladyka
Nifont  died:  he  had  gone  to  Kiev  against  the  Metropolitan;  many
others,  too,  said  that  having  plundered  St.  Sophia,  he  went  to  Tsar-
grad;  and  they  said  many  things  against  him,  but  with  sin  to  them-

22 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

selves.  About  this  each  one  of  us  should  reflect :  which  bishop  orna-
mented St.  Sophia,  painted  the  porches,  made  an  ikon-case,  and
ornamented  the  whole  outside;  and  in  Pleskov  erected  a  Church
of  the  Holy  Saviour  in  stone,  and  another  in  Ladoga  to  St.
Kliment  ?  And  I  think  that  God  for  our  sins  not  wishing  to  give  us
his  coffin  for  our  consolation,  led  him  away  to  Kiev,  and  there  he
died;  and  they  placed  him  in  the  Pechersk  monastery,  in  a  vault
in  the  [church  of  the]  Holy  Mother  of  God.  The  same  year  the
whole  town  of  people  gathered  together,  and  decided  to  appoint  as
Bishop  for  themselves,  Arkadi,  a  man  chosen  of  God;  and  the  whole
people  went  and  took  him  out  of  the  monastery  of  the  Holy  Mother
of  God,  both  Knyaz  Mstislav  Gyurgevits,  and  the  whole  choir  of
St.  Sophia,  and  all  the  town  priests,  the  Igumens  and  the  monks,
and  they  led  him  in,  having  entrusted  him  with  the  bishopric  in
the  Court  of  St.  Sophia,  till  the  Metropolitan  should  come  to  Russia,
and  then  you  shall  go  to  be  appointed.  The  same  year  the  oversea
merchants  put  up  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Friday  on  the  market  place.

A.D.  1157.  A.M.  6665.  There  was  a  bad  tumult  in  the  people,  and
they  rose  against  Knyaz  Mstislav  Gyurgevits,
and  began  to  drive  him  out  of  Novgorod ;  but  the  Mercantile^  Half
stood  up  in  arms  for  him ;  and  brother  quarrelled  with  brother,  they
seized  the  bridge  over  the  Volkhov,  and  guards  took  their  stand  at
the  town  gates,  and  [so  did]  the  others  on  the  other  side;  and  they
were  within  a  little  of  shedding  blood  between  them.  And  then
Svyatoslav  Rostislavits  and  David  entered,  and  that  night  Mstislav
fled  out  of  the  town.  After  three  days  Rostislav  himself  entered,
and  the  brothers  came  together,  and  there  was  no  harm  at  all.

The  same  spring  Knyaz  Gyurgi  died  at  Kiev,  and  the  men  of  Kiev
set  Izyaslav  Davidovits  on  the  throne.

The  same  year  Andrei,  Igiimen  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother
of  God,  died,  and  they  appointed  Olksa'^  in  his  place.

The  same  autumn  it  was  very  terrible:  thunder  and  lightning,  and
hail  in  size  larger  than  apples,  at  5  of  the  night,  on  November  7.

A.D.  1158.  A.M.  6666. Rostislav went to Smolensk with his
Knyaginya  and  he  set  his  son,  Svyatoslav,
on  the  throne  in  Novgorod,  and  David  in  Novi-torg.

The  same  year  there  was  great  mortality  in  the  people,  for  our
sins,  and  a  quantity  of  horses  died,  so  that  it  was  not  possible  to  walk

^  i.e.  the  Eastern.
*  sc.  Alexis.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  23

to  the  market  place  through  the  town,  nor  along  the  dike,  nor  out  to
the  fields,  for  the  stench ;  horned  cattle  also  died.

The  same  year  Arkadi  went  to  Kiev  to  be  appointed  Bishop,  and
he  was  appointed  by  the  Metropolitan  Kostyantin,  and  came  to
Novgorod  on  the  13th  day  of  September,  on  the  eve  of  the  Exaltation
[of  the  Holy  Cross].

The  same  year  Mstislav  Izyaslavits  defeated  Izyaslav  Davidovits,
and  drove  him  away  out  of  Kiev,  and  summoned  Rostislav  his  uncle
to  Kiev  to  the  throne.

The  same  autumn  they  appointed  Dionisi  Igumen  of  St.  Georgi
[in  the  monastery].

A.D.  1159.  A.M.  G667. Mstislav  went  to  Kiev  and  took  his  seat  on
the  throne  in  Kiev. The  same  year  Kostyan-
tin, Metropolitan  of  Russia,  died  at  Chernigov.

A.D.  1160.  A.M.  6668.  The  men  of  Novgorod  received  Svyatoslav
Rostislavits  and  sent  him  on  to  Ladoga,  and
the  Knyaginya  they  let  enter  the  monastery  of  St.  Barbara,  and  his
Dnishiiia  they  put  into  a  dungeon;  and  they  fetched  in  Mstislav
Rostislavits,  grandson  of  Gyurgi,  on  June  21.

The  same  winter  they  gave  the  Posadnik-'ihx^  to  Nezhata,  and  took
Svyatoslav  to  Ladoga,  and  thence  he  fled  to  Smolensk.

The  same  j'ear,  in  the  winter,  Rostislav  defeated  Izyaslav  Davido-
vits at  Belgorod,^  and  they  killed  him  himself,  and  a  quantity  of
Polo  vets  people  fell.

A.D.  1161.  A.M.  6669. Rostislav  agreed  with  Andrei  about  Novgo-
rod, and they fetched away Mstislav,
Gyurgi 's  grandson,  having  sat  one  year  short  of  a  week,  and  fetched
in  Sv3^atoslav  again  with  his  fullliberty  on  September  28. Then,  too
they  took  the  Posadnik-shi^  from  Nezhata  and  gave  it  to  Zakhari.

The  same  year  the  sky  stood  clear  all  summer  and  all  the  corn  was
scorched,  and  in  the  autumn  frost  killed  all  the  spring  corn.

But  furthermore  for  our  sins  the  evil  did  not  stop  there,  but  again
in  the  winter  the  whole  winter  stood  with  heat  and  rain,  and  there
was  thunder;  and  we  bought  a  little  barrel  (kadka)-  for  seven  kunas?
Oh,  there  was  great  distress  in  the  people  and  want !

A.D.  1162.  A.M.  6670. Igumen Olksa of the [monastery of the]
Holy Mother of God died, and they ap-

1  i.e.  \Vliite-town.

-  The  same  as  osminka,  cf.  appendix.  ,

^  i.e.  marten-skins,  or  parts  of  them,  used  as  money,  ci.  appendix.

24 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

pointed  Manuil  Igimien  after  him. The  same  year  they  appointed
Sava  Igumen  in  the  [monastery  of  the]  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

A.D.  1163.  A.M.  6671. Arkadi, Bishop of Novgorod, died on
September  19;  they  laid  him  with great
honour  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia.

A.D.  1164.  A.M.  6672.  The  Svei^  approached  Ladoga,  and  the
people  of  Ladoga  set  fire  to  their  dwellings,
and  shut  themselves  up  in  the  town  with  Posadnik  Nezhata,  and
sent  for  the  Knyaz  and  for  the  men  of  Novgorod.  And  they  came
right  up  to  the  town  on  a  Saturday,  and  could  do  nothing  to  the
town,  but  took  more  harm  themselves;  and  they  retired  to  the
river  Voronai.  The  fifth  day  after  this  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  arrived
with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  with  Posadnik  Zakhari,  and  turned
upon  them,  on  May  28,  the  day  of  Saint  Eulah,  on  Thursday,
at  5  of  the  day,  and  defeated  them  with  God's  help,  some  they
cut  down,  and  others  they  took.  They  had  come  in  55  boats,
43  boats  they  took;  only  a  few  of  them  escaped,  and  those
wounded.

A.D.  1165.  A.M.  6673.  Ilya  was  appointed  Vladyka  of  Novgorod  by
the  Metropolitan  loan,  under  Rostislav,
Knyaz  of  Russia,  on  the  28th  of  March,  in  Palm  week,  and  he  came
to  Novgorod  on  May  11,  under  Svyatoslav,  Knyaz  of  Novgorod,
and  Posadnik  Zakhari.

The  same  year  they  put  up  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  in
Shetitsinitsa,^  and  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  another  to  St.  Nicholas  in  the
Gorodishche.

The  same  year  Igumen  Dionisi  went  with  love  to  Russia,  and  the
Vladyka  was  ordered  by  the  Metropolitan  [to  assume]  the  Arch-
bishopric. The  same  winter  there  was  severe  frost.

A.D.  1166.  A.M.  6674. The  Metropolitan  loan  died  at  Kiev.

The same year was founded the stone
Church  of  St.  Saviour  at  the  gates  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Georgi.

The  same  year,  in  the  winter,  Rostislav  came  to  Luki  from  Kiev,
and  summoned  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  a  council:  householders,
guards  and  principal  merchants;  and  here  he  fell  ill  himself,  and

^  i.e.  Swedes.

'^  sc.  Quarter  of  the  Shieldmakers.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  25

turned  back,  and  died  on  the  road;  and  they  carried  him  to  Kiev,
and  laid  him  in  St.  Fedor's.^

A.D.  1167.  A.M.  6675.  Mstislav  Izyaslavits  took  his  seat  on  the
throne  in  Kiev.  The  same  spring  Sedko
Sitinits  founded  the  stone  Church  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Boris  and
Gleb  under  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  Rostislavits,  and  Vladyka  Hya.
The  same  year  Kostyantin  came  to  Russia  to  be  Metropolitan.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  went  out  of  Novgorod  to  Luki,
and  sent  to  Novgorod,  saying  thus  to  them,  that:  "  I  do  not  want  to
be  Knyaz  among  you,  it  pleases  me  not."  And  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod having  kissed  the  picture  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  said  to
themselves  that:  "  We  do  not  want  him,"  and  went  to  drive  him
away  from  Luki ;  and  he,  having  heard  that  they  are  coming  against
him,  went  to  Toropets,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Russia  to
Mstislav  for  his  son.  And  Svyatoslav  went  to  the  Volga,  and
Andrei  gave  him  help,  and  he  burned  Novi-torg,  and  the  men  of
Novi-torg  retired  to  Novgorod;  and  he  did  much  damage  to  their
houses,  and  laid  waste  their  villages.  And  his  brother  Roman  and
Mstislav  burned  Luki;  and  the  people  of  Luki  took  precautions
and  retired,  some  into  the  town,  and  others  to  Pleskov.  Andrei
combined  with  the  men  of  Smolensk  and  Polotsk  against  Novgorod,
and  they  occupied  the  roads,  and  seized  the  Novgorod  emissaries
everywhere,  not  letting  Mstislav  in  Kiev  know;  imposing  Svyatoslav
on  the  town  by  force,  and  saying  this  word:  "  There  is  no  other
Knyaz  for  you  than  Svyatoslav."  The  men  of  Novgorod,  however,
heeded  this  not,  and  killed  Zakliari  the  Posadnik,  and  Nerevin,  and
the  herald  Nesda,  because  they  thought  they  gave  information  to
Svyatoslav ;  and  they  found  for  themselves  a  way  to  Vyatsko-  and  to
Volodar;^  and  Danislav  Lazutinits  went  with  a  company  to  Kiev  to
Mstislav  for  his  son ;  and  Svyatoslav  came  with  the  men  of  Suzhdal ,
and  with  his  two  brothers  and  with  men  of  Smolensk  and  Polotsk
to  Russa'* ;  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Yakun  went  against  them ;  but
without  reaching  [them]  they  turned  back:  and  they  accomplished
nothing.

They  then  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Yakun,  and  the  people  of
Novgorod  sat  without  Knyaz  from  Simeon's  day^  till  Easter  under

'  sc.  "  Theodore's."

2  Vyacheslav.

3  Volodimir.

*  A  town  at  the  S.  end  of  Lake  Ilmen,  at  the  N.  end  of  which  Hes  Novgorod.

*  February  3.

26  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Yakun,  awaiting  his  son  from  Mstislav.  The  same  winter  Mstislav
went  against  the  Polovets  people  and  defeated  them,  and  brought
booty  into  the  Russian  Land  in  such  quantity  that  there  was  no
number  to  it.  The  same  year  the  servant  of  God  Anna,  Iguniena}  of
St.  Barbara,  died;  and  they  appointed  Marmyana  in  her  place.

A.D.  1168.  A.M.  6676.  Knyaz  Roman  Mstislavits,  grandson  of
Izyaslav,  came  to  the  throne  in  Novgorod
on  April  14,  on  the  second  Sunday  after  the  Great  Day,"^
first  of  the  Indiction.  And  the  people  of  Novgorod  were  glad  at
[the  fulfilment  of]  their  wishes.  The  same  j^ear  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod marched  with  the  men  of  Pleskov  to  Polotsk;  and  having
burned  the  district  they  turned  back  at  30  versts  from  the  town.
In  the  spring,  towards  the  end  of  the  same  year,  Roman,  with  the
men  of  Novgorod,  went  to  Toropets,  and  they  burned  their  houses,
and  captured  a  quantity  of  prisoners.  At  the  same  time  the  sons  of
Rostislav  with  Andreyevits,  and  with  the  men  of  Smolensk  and  of
Polotsk,  and  of  Murom,  and  of  Ryazan,  went  against  Mstislav  to
Kiev;  but  he  did  not  fight  with  them,  he  retired  of  his  own  accord
from  Kiev.

A.D.  1169.  A.M.  6677.  Danislav  Lazutinits  went  as  tribute  col-
lector with  a  Druzhina  beyond  the  Volok^,
and  Andrei  sent  his  force  against  him,  and  they  fought  with  them,
there  were  400  men  of  Novgorod,  and  7,000  of  Suzhdal;  and  God
helped  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  1,300  of  them  fell,  and  of  the  men
of  Novgorod  15  men;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  retired  and  having
again  returned,  took  the  whole  tribute,  and  another  one  from  the
serfs  of  Suzhdal;  and  they  came  back  all  well.  The  same  year  in
the  winter  the  men  of  Suzhdal  with  Andreyevits,  Roman  and
Mstislav  with  the  men  of  Smolensk,  and  of  Toropets,  of  Murom
and  of  Ryazan  with  two  Knyazes,  the  Knyaz  of  Polotsk  with  the
men  of  Polotsk,  and  the  whole  Russian  Land  proper,  approached
Novgorod.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  stood  firm  for  Knyaz  Roman
Mstislavits,  grandson  of  Izyaslav,  and  for  Posadnik  Yakun,  and
constructed  a  defence  about  the  town.  And  they  came  up  to  the
town  on  a  Sunday  to  negotiate,  and  parleyed  for  three  days ;  and  on
the  fourth  day,  on  Wednesday,  they  came  up  in  force,  and  fought
all  day;  and  towards  evening  Knyaz  Roman  with  the  men  of  Nov-

1  Abbess.

2  sc.  Easter.

3  sc.  to  the  country  of  the  Northern  Dvina.  cf.  p.  6.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 27

gorod  defeated  them,  by  the  power  of  the  Cross  and  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  and  by  the  prayers  of  the  faithful  Vladyka  Ilya,  on
the  25th  of  the  month  of  February,  the  day  of  the  holy  Bishop
Tarasi,  some  they  cut  down,  and  others  they  took,  and  the  rest
of  them  escaped  with  difficulty,  and  they  bought  men  of  Suzhdal
at  2  nogatas.

A.D.  1170.  A.M.  6678.  There  was  dearness  in  Novgorod;  and  they
bought  a  barrel^  of  rye  at  4  grivnas,  and
bread  at  2  nogatas,  honey  at  10  kiinas  a  pud.'^  The  men  of  Novgorod
having  taken  counsel  showed  Knyaz  Roman  the  road,  and  themselves
sent  to  Ondrei^  for  peace  with  [guarantee  of]  full  liberty.  The
same  year  Knyaz  Rurik  Rostislavits  entered  Novgorod,  on
October  4,  on  St.  lerofei's.  The  same  year  the  God-loving
Vladyka  Ilya  with  his  brother  Gavrilo  erected  a  monastery,  the
Church  of  the  Annunciation  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  The  same
year  Knyaz  Mstislav  Izyaslavits,  grandson  of  Volodimir,  died.
The  same  year  Knyaz  Gleb  Gyurgevits  died  at  Kiev,  and  they
fetched  in  Volodimir  Mstislavits.

A.D.  1171.  A.M.  6679.  Knyaz  Volodimir  died  at  Kiev,  having  sat
on  the  throne  three  months.  The  same  year
Knyaz  Rurik  took  away  the  Posadnik-shi^  from  Zhiroslav,  at  Nov-
gorod, and  drove  him  out  of  the  town;  he  went  to  Suzhdal  to
Ondrei,  and  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shx^  to  Ivanko  Zacharinits.
The  same  yeox  Roman  Rostislavits  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  in
Kiev.  The  same  year  in  the  winter  Rurik  went  out  from  Nov-
gorod, and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Ondrei  for  a  Knyaz;  and  he
sent  with  his  own  men  Zhiroslav  to  be  Posadnik.

A.D.  1172.  A.M.  6680.  Knyaz  Gyurgi  Andreyevits,  Gyurgi's  grand-
son, came  to  Novgorod.  The  same  year
they  founded  the  stone  church  of  St.  Yakov  in  the  Nerev  end.*
The  same  year  Roman  Rostislavits  went  out  from  Kiev  of  his  own
accord,  and  Mikhalko  Gyurgevits  took  his  seat  in  Kiev.

The  same  year  in  the  winter  Vladyka  Ilya  of  Novgorod  went  to
Ondrei,  to  Volodimir,  for  full  justice.

Then,  too,  they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Ivanko  Zacharinits.

1  Kad.

2  About  36  lbs.
'  i.e.  Andrew.

*  sc.  of  the  town.

28 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1173.  A.M.  6681.  Knyaz  Gyurgi  Andreyevits  with  the  men  of
Novgorod  and  of  Rostov  went  to  Kiev
against  the  sons  of  Rostislav,  and  drove  them  away  out  of  Kiev;
and  he  stood  by  Vyshegorod  seven  weeks,  and  they  came  back  all
well  to  Novgorod;  and  Yaroslav  Izyaslavits  took  his  seat  on  the
throne  in  Kiev.

The  same  year,  on  the  14th  of  the  month  October,  Ilya,  Vladyka
of  Novgorod,  consecrated  in  Novgorod  the  stone  church  of  the  Holy
Martyrs,  Boris  and  Gleb,  in  the  town,  and  another  of  stone  to  the
Holy  Redeemer  at  the  gates  of  St.  Georgi.

A.D.  1174.  A.M.  6682.  His  own  favourites  killed  Knyaz  Andrei  at
Volodimir,  on  the  eve  of  St.  Peter  and  St.
Paul,  in  the  night,  when  sleeping  at  Bogolyub's  house  and  there  was
with  him  only  one  young  boy;  having  killed  the  door-keepers,  they
came  to  the  vestibule,  and  the  Kynaz  becoming  aware,  caught  hold
of  his  sword  and  took  his  stand  in  the  doorway,  struggling  with
them,  but  there  were  many  of  them,  and  the  Knyaz  was  alone;  so
they  laid  on  with  force  and  broke  the  doors,  and  entered  in  upon
him,  and  fell  on  him  with  pikes,  and  there  he  ended  his  hfe.  And
there  was  great  tumult  in  that  land  and  great  misery,  and  a  quan-
tity of  heads  fell,  so  that  there  was  no  number  [to  them] ;  and  then
they  set  on  the  throne  Mstislav  Rostislavits  with  his  brother  Yaro-
polk.

The  same  year  Roman  Rostislavits,  grandson  of  Mstislav,  took
his  seat  in  Kiev.

A.D.  1175.  A.M.  6683.  They  led  out  Knyaz  Gyurgi  Andreyevits
from  Novgorod,  and  Mstislav  set  his  son
Svyatoslav  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year  he  himself  entered  Nov-
gorod, having  fought  with  his  uncle  Mikhalko,  and  took  his  seat
in  Novgorod;  and  Mikhalko  took  his  seat  in  Volodimir,  and  set  his
brother  Vsevolod  in  Pereyaslavl.

The  same  year  a  fire  broke  out  from  Deigunitsy,^  and  three
churches  were  burnt:  St.  Michael,  St.  Yakov,  and  the  Holy
Ascension.

The  Posadnik  of  Novgorod,  Ivanko  Zakharinits,  died  the  same
year,  and  they  gave  it  again  to  Zhiroslav.  And  towards  the  end
of  that  year  they  drove  Zhiroslav  out  of  the  Posadnik-sYn^  and  gave  it
to  Zavid  Nerevini  ts.

t  of  the  town.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 29

A.D.  1176.  A.M.  6684.  The  Volkhov  went  again  into  flood  for  five
days.  The  same  spring  Knyaz  Mstislav  married
in  Novgorod  and  took  the  daughter  of  Yakun  Miroslavits;  and
then  the  men  of  Rostov  summoned  him  to  them  and  he  went
to  Rostov  with  his  Druzhina  and  left  his  son  in  Novgorod.
And  he  came  to  Rostov.  And  at  that  time  Mikhalko  had
died,  and  he  went  with  the  men  of  Rostov  and  with  those
of  Suzhdal  to  Volodimir;  and  Vsevolod  opposed  his  forces  with
the  men  of  Volodimir  and  Pereyaslavl,  and  they  fought,  and  a
great  multitude  of  both  fell,  and  Vsevolod  prevailed.  And
Mstislav  returned  to  Novgorod,  but  the  men  of  Novgorod  did
not  receive  him,  but  showed  him  with  his  son  Svyatoslav  the  road;
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  to  themselves  Yaroslav,  the  son  of
Vsevolod.

The  same  winter  Mstislav,  with  his  son-in-law  Gleb  and  with  his
brother  Yaropolk,  went  against  Suzhdal  and  they  fought  beyond
the  Kalaksha;  and  there  the  men  of  Ryazan  defeated  [them],  and
took  Knyaz  Gleb  with  his  son,  Mstislav,  with  his  brother  Yaropolk,
and  made  them  captive.

The  same  winter  the  whole  Chud  Land  came  to  Pleskov,  and
fought  with  them,  and  killed  Vyacheslav,  Mikita  Zakharinits,  and
Stanimir  Ivanits,  and  others,  but  they  killed  a  quantity  of  Chud
people.  The  same  year  Mikhal  Stepanits  put  up  a  new  church  of
St.  Mikhail,  and  Moisei  Domanezhits  another  of  the  Decapitation  of
St.  John  in  Chudinets  Street.

A.D.  1177.  A.M.  6685.  Gleb,  Knyaz  of  Ryazan,  died  in  captivity  in
Volodimir.  At  the  same  time  Knyaz  Mstis-
lav was  blinded,  with  his  brother  Yaropolk,  by  their  uncle  Vsevolod,
and  he  let  them  go  into  Russia.  And  the  two  blind  [men],  being  led
with  rotting  eyes,  when  they  reached  Smolensk  they  came  to
Smyadino  into  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb;
and  there  forthwith  the  Grace  of  God  and  of  our  Holy  Sovereign
Lady  the  Mother  of  God  and  of  the  newly  manifested  holy  Martyrs
Boris  and  Gleb  descended  on  them  and  there  they  saw  clearly.
The  same  year  in  the  autumn  the  Nerev  end  from  Ivankovo  took
fire  and  five  churches  were  burnt  down.  And  in  the  winter  Knyaz
Mstislav  with  his  brother  Yaropolk  came  to  Novgorod,  and  the  men
of  Novgorod  set  Mstislav  on  the  throne,  and  Yaropolk  in  Novi-
torg,  and  Yaroslav  in  Volok-Lamsk,  and  thus  they  arranged  [things]
according  to  their  will.

30 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1178.  A.M.  6686.  Of  the  Indiction  10.  On  April  20,  Knyaz
Mstislav,  son  of  Rostislav,  and  grandson  of
Gyurgi,  died,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia;  and
they  set  his  brother  Yaropolk  on  the  throne  in  Novgorod.  Vsevolod
seized  some  merchants  of  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
showed  Yaropolk  the  road,  and  then  Vsevolod  hastened  to  Novi-
torg  and  took  it.  Then  the  men  of  'Novgorod  sent  for  Roman  to
Smolensk,  and  he  entered  the  Council  on  Sunday  in  Holy  Week.

A.D.  1 179.  A.M.  6687.  Vladyka  Ilya  with  his  brother  laid  the
foundation  of  a  stone  church  of  the  Annun-
ciation of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  began  to  build  the  church
on  the  '21st  of  the  month  of  May,  on  the  day  of  the  holy  Tzar
Kostyantin  and  of  Elena,  and  they  finished  on  August  25,  on  [the
day  of]  the  holy  Apostle  Tit;  and  the  whole  work  of  building  the
church  [occupied]  seventy  days;  and  it  was  a  refuge  for  Christians.

The  same  year  Elisava,  servant  of  God,  Igumena  of  St.  loan,  died,
and  they  appointed  Fegnia  in  her  place.

The  same  year  Roman  went  from  Novgorod  to  Smolensk.  And
the  men  of  Novgorod  then  sent  into  Russia  for  his  brother  Mstislav,
and  Mstislav  entered  Novgorod  on  the  1st  of  the  month  of  Novem-
ber, [the  day]  of  the  Holy  Benefactors  Kosma  and  Damyan;  and
in  the  winter  Mstislav  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  against  the
Chud  people  to  Ochela,  and  set  fire  to  their  whole  land;  they  them-
selves fled  to  the  sea,  but  even  there  plenty  of  them  fell.

A.D.  1180.  A.M.  6688.  Knyaz  Mstislav  Rostislavits,  grandson  of
Mstislav,  died  at  Novgorod  on  the  14th  of
the  month  of  June,  and  they  laid  him  in  St.  Sophia  at  [the  shrine  of]
the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Svyato-
slav  into  Russia  for  his  son,  and  brought  Volodimir  to  Novgorod,
and  set  him  on  the  throne  on  August  17.  Then,  too,  they
took  the  Posadnik-s\i\^  from  Zavid  and  gave  it  to  Mikhal  Stepanits.
The  same  year  the  God-loving  Vladyka  Ilya  of  Novgorod  with  his
brother  Gavrilo  founded  a  stone  church  in  the  monastery  at  the
gates  by  [the  church  of]  the  Holy  Annunciation.  The  same  year
in  the  winter  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  Vsevolodits,  Oleg's  grandson,  went
out  from  Russia  against  Suzhdal  in  force  against  Vsevolod,  and  his
son  Volodimir  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  out  from  Novgorod,
and  they  met  on  the  Volga  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tver,^  and  laid
waste  all  the  Volga,  and  set  fire  to  all  the  towns,  and  not  having
1  sc.  the  mouth  of  the  river  Tvertsa,  where  it  flows  into  the  Volga  at  Tver.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 31

reached  Pereyaslavl  by  40  versts  at  the  Vlena  river,  there  they
turned;  for  there  the  men  of  Suzhdal  had  come  out  in  force,  and
they  made  a  defence  about  themselves  and  did  not  dare  give  battle.
And  the  Knyaz  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  kept  sending  to  them  ask-
ing for  battle,  but  God  by  his  mercy  did  not  shed  more  Christian
blood;  for  they  had  come  together  for  a  little  time,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  killed  about  300  of  them,  and  themselves  all  returned
well;  and  they  took  the  Knyaz  himself  to  Novgorod,  and  they  set
Yaropolk  in  Novi-torg;  and  the  great  Svyatoslav  Vsevolodits
entered  Novgorod.

A.D.  1181.  A.M.  6689.  On  the  3rd  of  the  month  of  June  the  Varan-
gian church  in  the  market-place  was  set  fire
to  by  thunder  at  10  of  the  day,  after  evening  service,  and  the
church  of  St.  loan  in  Ishkovo  was  burnt.  The  same  year  a  fire
broke  out  in  Slavno,  from  Kosnyatin's,  and  two  churches  were
burnt:  that  of  St.  Mikhail  and  that  of  the  Holy  Fathers,  and  many
houses  along  the  bank,  even  as  far  as  the  Stream.

The  same  year  they  constructed  the  wooden  church  of  St.  Yakov
in  Dobrynya  Street  and  of  the  Holy  Benefactors  Kosma  and  Dam-
yan  and  of  St.  Sava  and  of  St.  Georgi  and  of  St.  loan  at  Ishkovo.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  Dryutsk  with  Svyato-
slav, Oleg's  grandson;  and  at  that  time  came  Vsevolod  with  his
whole  force  and  with  men  of  Murom  and  of  Ryazan  against  Novi-
torg;  and  the  men  of  Novi-torg  shut  themselves  in  the  town  with
Knyaz  Yaropolk,  and  they  besieged  the  town,  and  sat  [there]  five
weeks,  and  they  became  exhausted  in  the  town :  because  there  was
no  food  for  them,  others  of  them  ate  even  horse-flesh;  and  they  shot
at  Knyaz  Yaropolk  in  the  town,  and  there  was  great  distress  among
them;  and  the  men  of  Novi-torg  surrendered,  and  he  led  away
Yaropolk  with  him,  having  fettered  [him],  and  all  the  men  of  Novi-
torg  with  wives  and  children,  and  set  fire  to  the  town;  and  the  men
of  Novgorod  returned  from  Dryutsk,  having  set  fire  to  the  town.

Then  also  in  the  winter  they  showed  the  road  to  Volodimir
Svyatoslavits,  and  he  went  to  his  father  into  Russia,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  applied  to  Vsevolod  for  a  Knyaz,  and  he  gave  them  his
brother-in-law.

A.D.  1182.  A.M.  6690. Knyaz Yaroslav, son of Volodimir, and
grandson  of the  Great Mstislav,  came  to
Novgorod.
The  same  year  Vladyka  Ilya  with  his  brother  finished  the  church

32 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

at  the  gates  of  the  Holy  Epiphany. Then  also  they  put  up  th
church  of  the  Holy  Fathers.

A.D.  1183.  A.M.  6691.  Radko  and  his  brother  put  up  the  church  of
St.  Eupati  in  Rogata  Street.

The  same  year  Vsevolod  with  his  whole  province  went  against  the
Bolgar  people,  and  the  Bolgar  people  killed  Knyaz  Izyaslav  Glebo-
vits.

The  same  winter  the  men  of  Pleskov  fought  with  the  Lithuanians,^
and  much  evil  was  done  to  the  men  of  Pleskov.

A.D.  1184.  A.M.  6692.  Vladyka  Ilya  with  his  brother  founded  the
stone  church  of  St.  loan  on  the  market
place.

The  same  year  Vsevolod  fetched  away  Yaroslav  Volodimirovits
from  Novgorod,  sending  his  brother-in-law  for  him,  for  the  men  of
Novgorod  were  indignant  with  him:  because  he  had  done  many
wrongs  to  the  Novgorod  district. ^  And  having  taken  counsel  the
men  of  Novgorod  applied  to  Smolensk  to  David,  asking  for  his  son;
and  he  gave  them  Mstislav,  and  they  brought  him  to  Novgorod
and  set  him  on  the  throne  in  the  month  of  September.

The  same  year  they  built  a  new  wooden  church  of  St.  Vlasi.

A.D.  1185.  A.M.  6693.  On  the  1st  day  of  May,  at  the  10th  hour  of
the  day,  at  evening  bell,  the  sun  grew  dark,
for  an  hour  or  more,  and  there  were  the  stars;  then  it  shone  out
again,  and  we  were  glad.

On  the  6th  of  the  same  month  the  people  of  Luki  founded  a
stone  church  to  the  holy  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul  in  Silnishche.^
The  same  year  Miloneg  founded  the  stone  church  of  the  Holy  Ascen-
sion under  Vladyka  Ilya  and  Knyaz  Mstislav  Davidovits.

And  in  the  winter  David  went  to  Polotsk  with  the  men  of
Novgorod  and  of  Smolensk,  and  having  made  peace  returned
through  Yemenets.

A.D.  1186.  A.M.  6694. Zavid  went  to  David  to  Smolensk,  and  they
gave  the  Posadnik-shvp  to  Mikhal  Stepanits.
The  same  year  the  Greek  Tsar  Aleksa  Manuilovits  came  to  Nov-
gorod. Then  also  some  young  men  went  with  Vyshata  Vasilevits
against  the  Yem  people  and  came  back  again  well,  having  get

1  Litva,  the  collective  designation  of  the  Lithuanians.

2  Volost.

3  Near  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  33

booty.  The  same  year  Ilya,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died  on  the
7th  day  of  the  month  of  September,  and  was  laid  in  the  porch  of  St.
Sophia.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  consulted  with  Knyaz
Mstislav  and  with  the  Igumens  and  priests,  thought  good  to  appoint
for  themselves  his,  Ilya's,  brother  (Gavrilo) ;  and  they  sent  a  request
to  the  Metropolitan  Nikifor;  and  the  Metropolitan  sent  for  him  and
all  the  Russian  Knvazes,  and  accepted  him  with  love.  The  same
winter  they  killed  Gavrilo  Nerevmits  and  Vacha  Svenevits  in  Nov-
gorod, and  cast  them  from  the  bridge.  At  the  same  time  there  was
an  uprising  in  Smolensk,  between  Knyaz  David  and  the  people  of
Smolensk,  and  many  heads  fell  of  the  best  men.
A.D.  1187.  A.M.  6695.  Gavrilo  was  appointed  F/«(^y^a  of  Novgorod
on  the  29th  of  the  month  of  March,  the  day
of  St.  Varikhis  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on  the  31st  of  the  month  of
May,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  Ermi;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
were  glad.  The  same  year  Igumen  Moisei  [of  the  church]  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Anthony  monastery,  died,  and  they
appointed  Volos  in  his  place.  The  same  year  there  was  very  terrible
thunder  and  lightning;  [the  people]  having  come  with  crosses  from
St.  Sophia  to  St.  Michael's  and  singing  nine  hymns,  the  thunder
and  lightning  struck  and  all  the  people  fell,  and  the^  church  caught
fire,  but  by  the  mercy  of  God  and  by  the  prayers  of  St.  Michael,
there  was  no  harm  in  the  church;  but  two  men  were  dead.

The  same  year  the  tax-gatherers  in  the  Pechera  and  Yugra
country^  were  done  to  death  in  Pechera,  and  others  beyond  the
Volok  and  about  a  hundred  men  of  the  notables  fell.^  The  same
year  there  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  at  mid-day;  it  was  like  the  moon,
and  grew  dim,  but  after  a  little  time  it  filled  and  shone  out  again,  on
September  9.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  drove  out  Mstislav  Davidovits
and  sent  to  Vsevolod  to  Volodimir  for  Yaroslav  Volodimirits.  And
he  entered  Novgorod  and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  on  Novem-
ber 20.

A.D.  1188.  A.M.  6696.  Simyun  Dibakhevits  founded  the  stone
Church  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  in  the  Arkadi  monastery.  The  same  year  they
made  a  new  bridge  over  the  Volkhov  by  the  side  of  the
qjd  one.  The  same  year  Herman,  called  Voyata,  servant  of
God, priest of St. Yakov's, died, having served 45 years

1  N.E.  of  Novgorod,  what  is  now  Northern  Russia.

*  cf.  p.  6.

D

\

34  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

in  St.  Yakov's  in  meekness,  humility  and  fear  of  God.  Vladyka
Gavrilo  took  him  with  him  to  Pleskov,  and  having  reached
Pleskov  he  fell  ill  and  the  Vladyka  shore  him  into  the  schema^  and  he
died  on  the  13th  of  October,  the  day  of  the  holy  martyrs  Karp  and
Papil,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  monaster}^  of  the  Holy  Saviour.
Give  peace,  O  Lord,  to  the  soul  of  Thy  servant  Herman,  and  forgive
him  all  voluntary  and  involuntary  sins.

The  same  winter  things  were  dear,  they  bought  bread  for  two
nogatas,  and  one  barrel  of  rye  for  six  grivnas;  but  by  God's  mercy
there  were  no  ill  effects  among  the  people.  The  same  year  the  men
of  Novgorod  were  plundered  by  the  Varangians  in  Gothland  and  by
the  Nemtsy,"  in  Khoruzhk  and  in  Novi-torg,  and  in  the  spring  they
let  no  man  of  their  own  go  beyond  sea  from  Novgorod,  and  gave
no  envoy  to  the  Varangians,  but  they  sent  them  away  without
peace.

A.D.  1189.  A.M.  6697.  On  the  4th  of  June,  the  day  of  St.  Mitrofan.
Gavrilo,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  consecrated
the  church  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the
Arkadi  monastery.  The  same  year  Vladyka  Gavrilo  put  up  a  new
church  in  Zhatun  in  the  name  of  the  three  Holy  Youths,  Anani,
Azari  and  Misail,  and  Danil  the  Prophet.  The  same  year,  on  the
day  of  the  Nativity  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  a  daughter  Knyag-
inya  was  born  to  Yaroslav  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year  they
finished  painting  the  church  of  the  Holy  Annunciation.  The  same
year  they  took  the  Posadyiik-shi^y  from  Mikhal  and  gave  it  to
Miroshka  Nezdinits.

A.D.  1190.  A.M.  6698.  A  son  Mikhail  was  born  to  Yaroslav  in  Nov-
gorod, whose  name^  as  Knyaz  was  Izyaslav,
and  grandson  of  Volodimir.  The  same  year  the  men  of  Pleskov
did  to  death  [some]  Chud  people  of  the  coast ;  for  they  had  come  in
seven  boats'*  and  went  over  by  the  portage  into  the  lake^  round
[avoiding]  the  rapids,  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  struck  upon  them
and  did  not  let  a  man  escape,  and  the  boats  they  brought  into  the
town  of  Pleskov.

>  The  strictest  monastic  order.

2  Nom.  PI.,  lit.  the  "  dumb"  or  "incomprehensible  "  folk,  a  term  applied  by
all  Slavs  to  all  foreigners  of  Germanic  race,  sometimes  including  Scandinavians.

3  sc.  secular  name.

*  Shnek.

*  sc.  Lake  Chud  or  Peipus.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  35

A. D.  1191.  A.M.  661)9.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  in  sailing  vessels*
with  the  Korel  people  against  the  Yem
people,  and  made  war  on  their  land  and  burned  it,  and  cut  to
pieces  the  cattle.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  built  a  wooden
church  in  the  Gorodishche  to  St.  Nikola,  and  the  Vladyka  one  to  the
Purification  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  in  his  own  Court;  Vnezd
Nezdinits  in  the  same  year  also  one  to  the  Sacred  Image;  and
Kosnyatin  with  his  brother  one  to  the  Holy  Friday,  in  the  market
place.  The  same  year  the  God-loving  Vladyka  Gavrilo  consecrated
the  church  of  the  Holy  Ascension  erected  by  the  Tysyatski^  Miloneg.
The  same  year  Kynaz  Yaroslav  went  to  Luki,  summoned  by  the
Knyazes  and  people  of  Polotsk,  and  took  with  him  the  foremost
Druzhina  of  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  they  met  on  the  border  and
put  love  between  each  other,  how  in  the  winter  they  would  all  meet
either  against  the  Lithuanians  or  the  Chud  people.  And  Knyaz
Yaroslav  came  to  Novgorod  with  gifts.  Then  also  was  a  son  born
to  Knyaz  Yaroslav.  And  it  was  in  the  winter,  Knyaz  Yaroslav
with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  of  Pleskov  and  of  his  own  province  went
against  the  Chud  people,  took  the  town  of  Gyurgev,  burned  their
country,  and  brought  countless  plunder;  and  themselves  all  came
back  well  to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1192.  A.M.  6700.  Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  on  St,  Peter's  Day^  to
Pleskov  with  a  few  men  of  Novgorod;  and
himself  took  his  seat  at  Pleskov,  having  sent  his  court  with  the
men  of  Pleskov  to  make  war;  and  having  gone  they  took  the  town  of
Medvezhya  Golova,  burned  it,  and  came  back  well.

The  same  year  the  monk  Varlam,  whose  secular  name  was  Aleksa
Mikhalevits,  put  up  a  church  below  at  Khutin  in  the  name  of  the
Transfiguration  of  the  Holy  Saviour;  and  Vladyka  Gavrilo  conse-
crated it  on  the  [day  of  that]  festival,  and  named  the  monastery.
The  same  year  they  finished  the  church  of  the  Holy  Apostles  in
Silinishche  and  Vladyka  Grigori  consecrated  it  on  Peter's  Day.
The  same  year  Igumen  Marturi  built  a  wooden  church  at  Russa  on
the  island,  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Transfiguration  and  made  a
monastery,  and  it  was  a  refuge  to  Christians.  The  same  year  the
church  of  the  Holy  Apostles  in  KJiolm*  was  burned  down,  set  afire
by  thunder. The  same  year  Igmnena  Marya  of  the  Holy  Resurrec-

1  Loiva.

2  Commander  of  a  thousand  {t\>svacha=\,QOO).  ■,

3  June  29.

*  A  part  of  Novgorod.  See  p.  18.

D  2

36 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

tion  died,  and  they  appointed  Evdokia  in  her  place.  The  same  year
they  appointed  Efrosinia,  daughter  of  Peter  the  merchant,  Igumena
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  Zverinets.

A.D.  1193.  A.M.  6701.  Gavrilo  Vladyka  of  Novgorod  died  on
May  24,  the  Day  of  St.  Simon  of  Divna
Gora}  and  he  was  laid  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia,  by  the
side  of  his  brother,  called  in  monkhood,  Grigori.  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  having  consulted  with  Knyaz  Yaroslav,  the  Igumens,  the
people  of  St.  Sophia  and  the  priests,'^  decided  on  Marturi  chosen  by
God,  and  sent  for  him  and  brought  him  from  Russa,  and  they  set
him  in  the  Bishopric;  and  they  sent  [word]  to  the  Metropolitan
and  he  sent  for  him  with  honour;  and  he  went  with  the  foremost
men ;  and  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  received  him  with  love,  and  the  Metro-
politan; and  they  appointed  him  on  December  10,  the  Day
of  St.  DsLniel-Stolpnik,'^  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on  January  16,
the  day  of  the  Falling  off  of  the  Fetters  of  the  Holy
Apostle  Peter.  The  same  year  they  went  from  Novgorod  with
armed  force  to  the  Yugra  country  with  the  Voyevoda  Yadrei,  and
they  came  to  the  Yugra  country  and  took  a  town'* ;  and  they  came  to
another  town"*  and  they  shut  themselves  up  in  the  town,  and  they
stood  by  the  town  five  weeks ;  and  the  Yugra  people  used  to  send  out
to  them  saying  with  deceit  thus,  that:  "  We  are  gathering  silver
and  sables,  and  other  precious  goods;  do  not  ruin  your  serfs  and  your
tribute,"  while  deceiving  them  and  gathering  troops;  and  when
they  had  gathered  troops,  they  sent  out  from  the  town  to  the
Voyevoda,  saying  thus:  "  Come  into  the  town,  having  taken  with
you  the  bigger  men."  And  the  Voyevoda  went  into  the  town  taking
with  him  a  priest  and  Ivanko  Legen  and  other  bigger  men;  and
they  cut  them  down  on  the  eve  of  St.  Barbara;  and  they  sent  out
again  and  took  30  of  the  bigger  men ;  and  these  they  cut  to  pieces,
and  then  50  [and  did  the  same  to  these.  Then  Savko  said  to  the  Yugra
Knyaz:  "  If  thou,  Knyaz,  dost  not  also  kill  Yakovets  Prokshinits,
but  lettest  him  go  alive  to  Novgorod,  then  he  will  again  bring  troops
hither  to  thee,  Knyaz,  and  will  make  waste  thy  land."  And  the  Knyaz
having  summoned  Yakovets  Prokshinits  he  gave  order  to  kill  him.
And  Yakovets  said  to  Savko:  "  Brother,  God  and  St.  Sophia  shall
judge  thee,  inasmuch  as  thou  tookest  thought  against  the  blood  of

1  The  Wonderful  Hill,  near  Antioch.

»  Popy.

3  Stylites.

*  Gorod — fortified  town,  but  often  was  merely  a  fortified  post.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  37

thy  brothers ;  thou  shalt  stand  with  us  before  God  and  shalt  answer
for  our  blood."  Having  said  this  he  was  killed:  for  this  Savko  had
held  secret  intercourse  with  the  Yugra  Knyaz.]  And  when  they
were  exhausted  by  hunger,  for  they  had  stood  six  weeks  listening  to
their  deceit,  on  the  Festival  of  St.  Nicholas,  having  issued  from  the
town  they  cut  them  all  up.  And  there  was  woe  and  misery  to  those
who  remained  alive;  for  there  were  80  men  left.  And  through  all
the  winter  there  was  no  word  of  them  in  Novgorod,  neither  of  the
living  nor  of  the  dead.  And  Knyaz  and  Vladyka  in  Novgorod  and
all  Novgorod  grieved.  The  same  year  a  son,  named  Rostislav,  was
born  to  Yaroslav  in  Novgorod.  The  same  year  they  built  a  wooden
church  [called]  Zhivoglozha  to  the  Hoi}''  Apostles  in  Kholm,  and
one  to  St.  loan  the  Merciful  at  the  gates  of  the  Resurrection.

A.D.  1194.  A.M.  6702.  A  fire  broke  out  in  Novgorod  on  All  Saints'
Sunday  during  Fast,  on  going  to  early  morn-
ing service;  it  started  in  Savko 's  Court  in  Yaryshev  Street,  and  the
fire  was  bad,  three  churches  were  burned:  St.  Vasili,  Holy  Trinity,
and  the  Holy  Exaltation ;  and  many  good  houses ;  and  they  subdued
it  at  Luka's  Street.  And  for  our  sins  evil  did  not  stop  here;  but  on
the  next  day  it  started  in  Cheglov  Lane,  and  about  ten  houses  took
fire.  And  then  more  arose;  on  Friday  in  the  same  week  during
market,  it  started  from  Khrevkov  Street  as  far  as  the  Stream  in  the
Nerev  end,  and  seven  churches  were  burnt  and  large  houses.  Thence
the  evil  grew:  every  day  it  would  start  unseen  at  six  and  more  places,
and  people  dared  not  feed  in  their  houses,  but  hved  a-field;  and  then
the  Gorodishche^  took  fire.  The  same  year  Ladoga  took  fire  before
Novgorod,  and  then,  too,  Russa  took  fire;  and  in  the  Lyudin  end  ten
courts  took  fire;  and  thus  wonders  continued  from  All  Saints  up  to
Our  Lady's  Day.

And  then  came  the  rest  of  the  living  from  the  Yugra  country.
Their  own  fellow-travellers  killed  Sbyshko  Volosovits  and  Zavid
Negochevits  and  Moislav  Popovits,  and  others  bought  themselves
off  with  money^;  for  they  thought  they  had  held  counsel  with
the  Yugra  people  against  their  brothers,  but  that  is  for  God  to
judge.  The  same  year  they  put  up  the  church  of  the  holy  apostle
Philip  in  Nutna  Street,  and  Vladyka  Marturi  consecrated  it  on
January 29 on the Translation  of the remains of St. Ignati.

*  Near  Novgorod ;  cf.  p.  7.
»  Kunas;  cf-  appendix.

38 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  year  Igumen  Dionisi  of  St.  Georgi  died,  and  they  ap-
pointed Savati  in  his  place.  The  same  winter  Igumen  Gerasim  of
the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Arkadi  monastery,  died,  and  they
appointed  the  priest  Pankrati  in  his  place.

A.D.  1195.  A.M.  6703.  The  God-loving  Vladyka  of  Novgorod  Mar-
turi  founded  a  stone  church  at  the  town  gate
in  the  name  of  the  Laying  Down  of  the  Robe  and  Girdle  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God;  and  they  began  to  make  it  on  May  4,  the
Day  of  St.  Isaki,  and  finished  on  August  2,  St.  Stephen's  Day;
and  the  Vladyka  himself  consecrated  it  on  the  Festival  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God's  Laying  Down  of  the  Robe  and  Girdle ;  and  it  was  a
refuge  for  Christi;ins,  and  a  joy  and  delight  to  the  faithful.  The  same
autumn  Vladyka  Marturi  founded  the  stone  church  of  the  Holy
Resurrection  in  the  monastery,  and  they  made  it  up  to  about  the
doors  by  the  autumn.  The  same  year  the  servant  of  God,  Christina,
of  St.  Barbara,  died,  and  in  her  place  the  Vladyka  and  all  the  Sisters
chose  and  appointed  the  meek  and  humble  Barbara,  daughter  of
Gyurgi  Olekshinits;  and  the  Vladyka  appointed  her  on  the  festival
of  St.  Euphemia.  The  same  year  they  built  a  new  wooden  church
for  Nozdritsin,  to  the  Holy  Exaltation,  to  St.  Vasili  and  to  St.
Dmitri.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Vsevolod  summoned  the  men
of  Novgorod  against  Chernigov,  against  Yaroslav  and  against
the  whole  clan^  of  Oleg;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  not  deny
him:  householders,  body-guards'-  and  merchants  went  with  Knyaz
Yaroslav  ;^  and  they  reached  Novi-torg,  and  Vsevolod  sent  word  and
turned  them  home  with  honour.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
sent  to  him  Posadnik  Miroshka  and  Boris  Zhiroslavits  and  the
Sotski  Mikifor,  asking  for  his  son;  being  indignant  with  Yaroslav;
and  they  returned  to  Novgorod.  The  same  winter  the  men  of
Smolensk  and  of  Chernigov  fought,  and  God  helped  the  men  of
Chernigov  and  they  took  Kyiyaz  Boris  Romanovits,  and  there  was
no  peace  between  them.  Vsevolod  received  Miroshka  the  Posadnik
and  Boris  and  Ivanko  and  Foma,*  and  did  not  let  them  [return]
to  Novgorod,  while  he  himself  sent  to  [for]  the  Polovets  people;  and
Vsevolod  and  David  began  to  collect  forces  for  themselves,  also

1  Pie  my  a.

2  Gridba.

3  Their  own  Knyaz  Yaroslav,  against  Knyaz  Yaroslav  of  Chernigov.
*  sc.  Thomas.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  39

Yaroslav  of  Chernigov  and  Igor  with  their  brothers;  and  there  was
no  peace  between  them,  but  they  stirred  up  war  all  the  more.

A.D.  1196.  A.M.  6704.  The  cousins  Kosnyatin  and  Dmitri  founded
the  stone  church  of  St.  Kyuril^  in  the  monas-
tery at  Nelezino-  in  Lubyana  Street ;  and  they  began  to  make  it  in
the  month  of  April,  and  finished  it  on  July  8,  the  Day  of  St.
Prokopi,  and  the  Vladyka  Marturi  consecrated  it  in  the  winter  on
12th  of  January,  the  Day  of  St.  Tatyana,  with  Igumen  Onisim ;  and  it
was  a  joy  to  Christians  and  eternal  remembrance  for  Kosnyatin  and
Dmitri.  The  same  year  Vladyka  Marturi  painted  the  church  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  at  the  gate;  the  painter  was  a  Greek,  Petrovits.
The  same  year  they  finished  the  church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection
and  the  Vladyka  Marturi  consecrated  it  on  September  13,  the
Day  of  St.  Kornili,  on  the  eve  of  the  Holy  Exaltation,  in  the  presence
of  the  Igumen,  the  Vladyka  labouring,  burning  with  heat  of  the  sun
by  day,  and  troubled  at  night,  to  finish  and  see  the  church  completed
and  adorned;  and  he  received  what  he  wished,  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven  and  endless  joy,  into  the  ages.  Amen.

Towards  the  end  of  summer  the  men  of  Novgorod  applied  to
Vsevolod  on  account  of  Posadnik  Miroshka  and  Ivanko  and  Foma,
for  he  had  let  go  Boris  and  other  men  with  him ;  but  Vsevolod  having
gathered  his  force,  and  having  brought  the  force  of  the  Polovets
people,  went  to  Chernigov,  and  led  Miroshka  the  Novgorod  Posadnik
and  Ivanko  and  Foma  with  him,  and  he  ordered  the  men  of  Novgo-
rod to  go  to  Luki ;  and  they  went  with  Yaroslav,  and  having  sat  at
Luki  they  returned  home;  and  Vsevolod  having  gone  into  their  land,
God  did  not  allow  more  bloodshed  between  them,  and  they  took
peace  between  each  other,  and  all  the  Knyazes  set  Novgorod  at
liberty:  where  it  pleased  them,  there  they  might  take  to  themselves
a  Knyaz.  And  Vsevolod  having  returned,  let  Foma  go  to  Novgo-
rod, but  he  did  not  let  go  Miroshka  nor  Ivanko ;  and  incensed  the  men
of  Novgorod;  and  having  taken  counsel,  the  men  of  Novgorod
showed  Yaroslav  the  road  out  of  Novgorod,  and  drove  him  out  on
St.  Gyurgi's  Day,  in  the  Autumn.

Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  to  Novi-torg,  and  the  men  of  Novi-torg
received  him  with  salutations ;  and  the  good  in  Novgorod  regretted
him,  but  the  wicked  rejoiced.  And  they  sent  to  Yaroslav  to
Chernigov  for  his  son,  and  sat  in Novgorod without  Knyaz  all

1  Cyril.

*  Near  Novgorod.

40 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

winter;  and  Yaroslav  was  Knyaz  in  Torzhok^  in  his  own  district
and  took  tribute  along  the  whole  Upper  Country^  and  the  Msta^,
and  he  took  tribute  beyond  the  Volok^  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  having  ousted  Vsevolod  beyond  the  Vo/ok,  and  in  all
his  land,  he  detained  [their  people],  not  letting  them  go  to  Nov-
gorod ;  but  they  went  about  the  town  of  Volodimir  at  will.

The  same  winter  Vladyka  Marturi  consecrated  the  church  of  St.
Kyuril  at  Nelezino.

A.D.  1197.  A.M.  6705.  Knyaz  Yaropolk  Yaroslavits  came  from
Chernigov  to  Novgorod  in  Palm  Week,  at
the  beginning  of  the  year  in  the  month  of  March;  and  having  sat
alone  from  Palm  Week  to  Simon's  Day,  six  months,  they  drove  him
out  of  Novgorod,  and  sent  again  for  Yaroslav.  Yaroslav  went
from  Novi-torg  to  Volodimir  summoned  by  Vsevolod.  The  foremost
men  and  the  Sotskis  went  from  Novgorod  and  took  Yaroslav  with
all  truth  and  honour;  and  Yaroslav  came  in  the  winter  a  week
after  Epiphany  and  took  seat  on  his  throne,  and  embraced  the
people,  and  all  was  well,  and  Miroshka  the  Posadnik  came,  having
sat  away  from  Novgorod  two  years ;  and  all  came  back  unharmed  in
any  way,  and  all  in  Novgorod,  from  small  to  great,  were  glad.
The  same  year  Vladyka  Marturi  put  up  a  church  to  St.  Nikifor
on  the  island.  The  same  year  Polyuzhaya,  daughter  of  Gorodshinits
Zhiroshkin,  put  up  the  monastery  of  St.  Euphemia  in  the  Carpen-
ter's Quarter.^

A.D.  1198.  A.M.  6706.  The  God-loving  Vladyka  Marturi  founded  a
stone  church  at  Russa  to  the  Holy  Trans-
figuration, they  began  to  make  it  on  May  21,  the  Day  of
SS.  Kostyantin  and  Elena,  and  finished  on  July  31,  the  Day
of  Holy  St.  Ulita,  and  he  consecrated  the  church  on  the  Assump-
tion of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  and  made  an  honourable  festival,
and  made  a  service,  and  he  prayed,  saying:  "  O  Lord  God!  Look
down  from  heaven  and  see,  and  visit  Thy  vineyard,  and  complete
that  which  Thy  right  hand  has  planted;  and  look  down  upon  this
church  which  Thy  servant  Vladyka  Marturi  erected,  in  the  name  of
Thy  holy  Transfiguration :  that  whosoever  shall  pray  in  this  church

^  Little  Market,  the  same  town  as  Novi-torg.

*  Otherwise  Bezhitsy,  Bezhitski  Verkh.

3  A  river  flowing  into  Lake  Ilmen  from  the  E.

^  cf.  p.  0.

s  Ploimki.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  41

with  faith,  hear  Thou  his  prayer  and  remit  his  sins,  by  the  prayers
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  and  of  all  Thy  Saints,  Amen."  And  the
blessed  man  rejoiced  in  soul  and  body,  having  provided  for  himself
eternal  remembrance,  and  an  honourable  monastery  for  all  Chris-
tians. The  same  spring  Yaroslav's  two  sons  died:  Izyaslav  had
been  set  to  be  Knyaz  in  Luki  and  covered  Novgorod  from  the
Lithuanians,  and  there  he  died;  and  Rostislav  at  Novgorod;  and
both  were  laid  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Georgi.  The  same  year  the
Veliki  Knyaz^  Yaroslav,  son  of  Volodimir,  grandson  of  Mstislav,
founded  the  stone  church  of  the  Transfiguration  of  the  Holy  Saviour
in  Novgorod  on  the  hill,  called  Nereditsa-;  and  they  began  to  make
it  on  June  8,  on  St.  Fedor's  Day,  and  finished  in  the  month
of  September.  The  same  autumn  the  men  of  Polotsk  with  the
Lithuanians  came  against  Luki  and  burned  the  dwellings,  bat  the
people  of  Luki  took  warning  and  escaped  out  of  the  town.  The
same  year  they  founded  the  stone  church  of  St.  Ilya  in  Kholni.
The  same  winter  Knyaz  Yaroslav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  of
Pleskov,  of  Novi-torg  and  of  Ladoga  and  with  the  whole  Novgorod
province  went  to  Polotsk,  and  the  men  of  Polotsk  met  them  with
salutation  on  the  Kasopl  lake;  and  having  taken  peace,  they  re-
turned to  Novgorod :  for  God  did  not  allow  the  Christians'  bloodshed
between  each  other.

A.D.  1199.  A.M.  6707.  Vsevolod  having  sent,  he  fetched  Yaroslav
out  of  Novgorod  and  brought  him  to  him,
and  summoned  the  Vladyka  and  Posadnik  Miroshka  and  the  bigger
men  from  Novgorod  after  his  son.  And  when  they  were  on  Lake
Seregeri  the  servant  of  God,  Vladyka  Marturi  of  Novgorod,  died,  on
August  24,  the  day  of  the  holy  Apostle  Barfolomei;  and
they  brought  him  and  laid  him  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia.  People
went  with  the  Posadnik,  and  with  Mikhalko  to  Vsevolod;  and  he
received  them  with  great  honour  and  granted  them  his  son  Svyato-
slav;  and  having  consulted  with  the  Posadnik  he  sent  him  to  Nov-
gorod with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  he  put  into  the  Episcopate
Mitrofan,  a  man  chosen  by  God;  and  all  Novgorod  having  gone  they
set  him  with  honour,  until  there  should  be  a  summons  from  the
Metropolitan ,  and  then  thou  shalt  go  for  installation. The  same  year

1  Grand  Prince;  in  modern  Russian  the  title  is  used  by  male  blood-relations
of  the  Emperor,  and  is  always  translated  "  Grand  Duke,"  though  the  title
'■  ivnyaz"  is  otherwise  always  translated  "  Prince."

*  A  suburb  of  Novgorod.

42 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

they  founded  the  stone  church  of  the  Forty  Saints.  In  the  same
year  Yaroslav's  Knyaginya  put  up  the  church  and  the  monastery  of
the  Birth  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  Mikhahtsa  Street,  and  they
appointed  Posadnik  Zavid's  widow  [Igumena].  The  same  year
they  painted  the  church  of  the  Holy  Transfiguration  in  the  Gorod-
ishche.  The  same  year  they  painteci  the  Vladykas  church  of  the
Holy  Saviour  in  the  monastery  in  Russa.  And  Knyaz  Svyatoslav,
son  of  Vsevolod,  grandson  of  Gyurgi,  came  to  Novgorod  on
January  1,  St.  Vasili's  Day,  and  they  set  him  on  the  throne  in
St.  Sophia,  and  all  Novgorod  rejoiced.  The  same  year  they  walled
around  the  town  of  Russa.

A.D.  1200.  A.M.  7708.  The  Lithuanians  took  the  Lovot^  up  to  [the
village  of]  Nalyuch  from  Belaya  [village]
as  far  as  [the  villages  of]  Svinort  and  Vorch  and  the  men  of  Novgo-
rod pursued  them  to  [the  village  of]  Tsernyany  and  fought  with
them,  and  killed  80  men  of  the  Lithuanians,  and  of  the  men  of
Novgorod  15  [were  killed] :  Raguila  Prokopinits,  with  his  brother
Olksa,  Gyurgi  Sbyshkinits,  Ratimir  Nezhatinits,  Strashko  the
silversmith's  weight  tester,  Vnezd  Yahinits,  young  Luka  Miroshkin,
Mikita"'^  Lazorevits,  Zhiroshka  Ogasovits,  Osip^  the  usher'*,  Roman
Pokt,  and  four  other  men;  they  recovered  all  the  plunder  and  the
rest  escaped.  The  same  year  Nezdila  Pekhtsinits  went  as  Voyevoda
to  Luki;  he  went  with  a  small  Druzhina  from  Luki  into  Lotygola,^
and  they  found  them  in  their  bedrooms,  killed  40  men  of  them,
took  their  wives  and  children,  and  themselves  came  all  well
to  Luki;  and  from  those  who  had  not  followed  them  from  Molbo-
vich  with  some  of  the  Druzhina  they  took  money,®  having  beaten
them.

A.D.  1201.  A.M.  6709.  The  men  of  Novgorod  put  Mitrofan,  chosen
by  God,  into  the  Episcopate  after  Marturi,
and  he  went  into  Russia  with  men  of  Novgorod  and  of  Vsevolod,  to
present  himself  to  the  Metropolitan,  and  he  was  appointed  on
July  3,  St.  Uakinf 's "  Day;  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on
September  14,  the  Exaltation  of  the  Honourable  Cross;  and  the

1  A  river  flowing  into  Lake  Ilmen.

2  Nikita.

3  Joseph.

*  Podvoiski.

*  A  part  of  Livonia,  lit.  "  End  of  the  Letts."

*  Kunas.

~  Hvacinth.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 43

men  of  Novgorod  were  glad  at  their  Vladyka.  On  April  15  of  the
same  year  the  church  of  St.  Nikola  in  the  Gorodishclie^  was  burnt
down  by  thunder;  and  the  whole  summer  stood  with  rain.  And
they  let  the  Varangians  go  over  sea  without  peace.  The  same  year
they  built  a  wooden  defence  in  Russa;  and  in  the  autumn  the
Varangians  came  by  land  for  peace ;  and  they  gave  them  peace  at
all  their  will.

A.D.  1202.  A.M.  6710. They completed the stone church of the
Holy  Prophet  Ilya  in  Kholm,  at  the  Slavno
end,  and  Vladyka  Mitrofan  consecrated  it  on  a  festival.

A.D.  1203.  A.M.  6711.  Rurik  with  the  sons  of  Oleg  and  the  heathen
Polovets  people,  with  Kontsyak  and  Danila
Byakovits  captured  Kiev,  on  January  1,  St.  Vasili's  Day;  and  whom-
ever their  hands  reached,  whether  monk  or  nun,  priest  or  priest's
wife,  these  they  led  off  to  the  heathen;  and  all  foreign  merchants
and  foreigners  of  every  country  shut  themselves  up  in  the  churches,
and  they  granted  them  their  lives;  but  their  merchandise  they
divided  with  them  by  halves;  but  everything  in  the  monasteries
and  in  all  the  churches,  all  valuables  and  ornaments  and  ikons"^
the  pagans  tore  off  and  carried  away  into  their  own  land ;  and  they
set  fire  to  the  town.  [Then,  too,  the  Russian  Knyazes  Rurik,
Roman,  Mstislav  and  many  other  Knyazes  went  against  the  Polovets
people.  And  then  the  winter  was  very  cruel;  and  they  took  much
plunder  and  drove  away  their  herds.  The  same  year  Roman  sent
Vyacheslav  ordering  him  to  have  Rurik  shorn  a  monk.]  The  same
year  the  sons  of  Oleg  defeated  the  Lithuanians,  and  did  to  death
seven  hundred  and  a  thousand  of  them.  The  same  year  Miroshka,
Posadnik  of  Novgorod  died,  he  was  shorn  in  St.  Georgi's,  and  then
they  gave  the  Posadnik-shx"^  to  Mikhalko  Stepanits.  The  same  year
for  our  sins  all  the  horses  died  in  Novgorod  and  in  the  villages
so  that  it  was  not  possible  to  go  anywhere  for  the  stench.

A.D.  1204.  .\.M.  6712. Oleksa^  reigning in Tsargmd,'^  during the

reign of his brother Isak^ whom having

blinded, he himself became Tsar, shut up his [Isaac's] son

Oleksa  in  high  walls  under  guard,  so  that  he  might  not  get  out.

1  Near  Novgorod,  see  p.  7.

»  Ikony.

'  Alexi-s.

«  Constantinople;  cf.  p.  20.

*  Isaac.

44 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

And  time  having  passed,  Isak  ventured  to  pray  for  his  son,  that  he
would  release  him,  to  come  before  him  from  prison,  and  Isak  per-
suaded his  brother,  and  they  took  a  declaration,  he  and  his  son,
that  they  would  not  take  thought  against  the  throne;  and  he  was
released  from  prison,  and  went  about  at  will.  And  Tsar  Oleksa
did  not  trouble  about  him,  trusting  his  brother  Isak  and  his  son,
because  they  had  taken  the  declaration.  And  then  Isak  having
taken  thought,  coveted  the  throne,  and  instructed  his  son,  secretly
sending  to  him,  how  that:  "  I  did  good  to  my  brother,  Oleksa,  I
ransomed  him  from  the  heathen  and  he  has  returned  me  evil,
having  blinded  me,  and  took  my  throne."  And  his  son  conceived
desire,  as  he  instructed  him,  and  they  took  thought  how  he  should
go  out  of  the  town  into  far  countries  and  thence  seek  the  throne.
He  was  led  on  to  a  ship  and  put  into  a  barrel  having  three  false
bottoms  at  one  end  behind  which  Isakovits^  sat,  and  at  the  other
end  was  water,  where  the  plug  was;  for  it  was  impossible  otherwise
to  go  out  of  the  town ;  and  so  he  went  out  of  the  Greek  land.  And
the  Tsar  having  learnt  sent  to  seek  him ;  and  they  began  to  seek  him
in  many  places,  and  entered  the  ship  where  he  was,  and  searched  all
places,  and  drew  the  plugs  out  of  the  barrels  and  seeing  water
running,  they  went  away,  and  did  not  find  him.  And  thus,  Isako-
vits  went  out  and  came  to  the  Nemetski^  Tsar,  Phihp,  to  his  brother-
in-law  and  sister.  The  Nemetski  Tsar  sent  to  the  Pope  to  Rome,
and  they  informed  him  thus,  not  to  make  war  on  Tsargrad,  but  as
Isakovits  said:  "The  whole  town  of  Kostyantin^  desires  my  rule,"
so  setting  him  on  the  throne,  you  will  go  to  the  aid  of  Jerusalem;
if  they  do  not  want  him,  bring  him  back  to  me,  but  do  no  injury
to  the  Greek  land.

But  the  Franks'*  and  all  their  Voyevocias  conceived  lust  for  the
gold  and  silver,  which  Isakovits  promised  them,  and  forgot  the
commands  of  Tsar  and  Pope.  First  having  come  to  the  Sound,  they
broke  the  iron  locks,  and  having  advanced  to  the  town,  they  hurled
fire  into  the  churches,  in  four  places.  Then  Tsar  Oleksa  having
perceived  the  flames,  did  not  take  up  arms  against  them.  Having
summoned  his  brother  Isak,  whom  he  had  blinded,  he  set  him  on
the  throne  and  said:  "  Since  thou  hast  acted  thus,  brother,  forgive

'  i.e.  Isaac's  son.

*  German,  cf.  p.  34.
3  Constantinople.

*  Fryazi.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  45

me;  this  is  thy  throne  ";  and  fled  out  of  the  town.  And  the  town
was  burnt,  and  churches  of  untold  beauty,  whose  number  we  cannot
declare;  and  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia  was  burnt,  where  all  the  patri-
archs were  painted,  and  the  hippodrome  and  down  to  the  sea;  and
hitherwards  it  burned  up  to  the  Tsar's  palace  and  to  the  Sound.
And  then  Isakovits  with  the  Franks  pursued  Tsar  Oleksa  and  did
not  reach  him,  and  returned  to  the  town,  and  drove  his  father  off
the  throne,  and  became  Tsar  himself  and  saying  thus:  "  Thou
art  blind,  how  canst  thou  hold  the  throne?  I  am  Tsar."  Then
Tsar  Isak  full  of  regret  for  his  town  and  throne,  for  the  spoliation  of
the  monasteries,  and  for  the  silver  and  gold  promised  to  the  Franks
and  given  them,  fell  ill,  and  became  a  monk,  and  went  away  from
this  world.  After  Isak's  death  the  populace  rose  against  his  son
for  the  burning  of  the  town  and  the  spoliation  of  the  monasteries;
and  the  common  people  assembled  and  [drew  in]  the  good  men,
taking  counsel  with  them  whom  to  appoint  Tsar;  and  all  wanted
Radinos;  but  he  did  not  want  the  throne,  and  hid  himself  from
them,  disguising  himself  in  monk's  vestments;  but  having  taken
his  wife  they  led  [her]  into  St.  Sophia,  and  pressed  her  much:
"  Tell  us  where  is  thy  husband  ?  "  And  she  did  not  tell  about  her
husband.  Then  they  took  a  man  by  name  Nikola,  a  soldier,  and
put  the  crown  on  him  without  the  Patriarch,  and  remained  there
with  him  in  St.  Sophia  six  days  and  six  nights.

And  Tsar  Isakovits  was  in  Lakherna,^  and  he  wanted  to  bring
the  Franks  into  the  town  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Boyars;
but  the  Boyars  having  learned,  appeased  the  Tsar  and  did  not  allow
him  to  let  loose  the  Franks,  saying:  "  We  are  with  thee."  Then
the  Boyars  fearing  the  introduction  of  the  Franks,  having  consulted
with  Murchufl,-  took  Tsar  Isakovits,  and  put  the  crown  on  Mur-
chufl.  Now  Isakovits  had  taken  Murchufl  out  of  prison  and  he
[Murchufl]  had  taken  declaration  not  to  seek  the  throne  from  under
Isakovits,  but  keep  it  under  him.  And  Murchufl  sent  to  Nikola  and  to
the  people  to  St.  Sophia:  "  I  have  taken  your  enemy  Isakovits;
I  am  your  Tsar.  And  I  grant  Nikola  to  be  first  among  Boyars;
put  off  the  crown  from  thee."

And  all  the  people  did  not  let  him  put  off  the  crown,  but  swore  the
more:  "  Whosoever  shall  turn  away  from  Nikola,  let  him  be  ac-
cursed." The  same  day  having  waited  for  the  night  they  all  dis-
persed and  took  Nikola  and  Murchufl  and  took  his  wife  and  put  her

1  sc.  Vlakherna,  '  Blachernae'  in  Constantinople  (a  suburb  till  Heraclius  I,
610-641).

*  Alexis  V,  Mourtzouphlos.

46 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

into  prison  and  made  fast  Oleksa  Isakovits  in  walls,  and  Murchufl
himself  became  Tsar  on  February  5  hoping  to  destroy  the  Franks.
But  the  Franks,  having  learned  that  Isakovits  was  taken,  made  war  on
the  district  round  the  town,  asking  Murchufl:  "  Give  us  Isakovits,
that  we  may  go  to  the  Tsar  of  the  Nemtsy^  whence  we  were  sent ;  and
have  thou  his  throne."  But  Murchufl  and  all  the  Sfn'ars  refused  to  give
him  alive,  and  having  done  Isakovits  to  death,  said  to  the  Franks:
"  He  is  dead;  come  and  see  him."  Then  the  Franks  were  troubled
for  their  disobedience ;  for  not  thus  had  the  Tsar  of  the  Nemtsy'^  and  the
Pope  of  Rome  directed  them,  and  they  had  done  this  harm  to
Tsargrad.  And  they  all  said  themselves:  "  Since  we  have  not
Isakovits,  with  whom  we  came,  it  is  better  for  us  to  die  at  Tsargrad,
than  to  go  away  with  shame."  Therefore,  they  began  to  take  up  the
offensive  against  the  town.  They  bethought  them  as  before,  with
yards  on  the  masts  of  their  ships,  on  other  ships  they  constructed
battering  rams  and  ladders,  and  on  others  they  bethought  them  to
hang  down  barrels  packed  with  pitch  over  the  town,  and  having  lit
shavings,  they  dropped  on  to  the  houses,  as  they  fired  the  town  before.

And  they  advanced  to  the  town  on  April  9,  on  Friday  of  the  fifth
week  of  the  Fast,  but  achieved  nothing  against  the  town;  but  they
killed  nearly  100  men  of  the  Franks.  And  the  Franks  stood  there
three  days;  and  on  Monday  in  Palm  week  they  advanced  to  the
town  at  sunrise,  opposite  St.  Saviour's  called  Vergetis,^  opposite
Ispigas,^  and  they  took  stand  as  far  as  Lakherna.  And  they  ad-
vanced on  forty  large  ships;  and  they  were  lashed  between  each
other,  and  in  them  men  on  horses,  dressed  in  armour,  their  horses
too ;  and  other  of  their  ships  and  galleys  stood  back  fearing  to  catch
fire,  as  the  Greeks  before  also  had  directed  ten  ships  with  fire  on  to
them ;  and  having  awaited  a  favourable  wind  under  sail  at  midnight
on  St.  Vasili's  Day,  they  achieved  nothing  against  the  Frank  ships:
for  Isakovits  had  given  them  word,  and  ordered  the  Greeks  to  attack
them  and  their  ships ;  in  this  way  the  Franks  did  not  take  fire.

And  thus  was  the  taking  of  Tsargrad  the  Great :  the  wind  drew  the
ships  up  to  the  town  wall;  the  ladders  were  high,  overlooking  the
town,  and  the  lower  ladders  were  level  with  the  ramparts;  the  Greeks
fought  from  the  high  ladders  over  the  town  and  the  Varangians  with
stones  and  arrows  and  javelins,  while  from  the  lower  ladders  the
men  climbed  down  into  the  town ;  and  thus  they  took  the  town.

*  Germans.

*  i.e.  EvepyerTj^.
•*  i.e.  ets  TTT/yds

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  47

And  Tsay  Murchufl  kept  encouraging  the  Boyars  and  all  the  people,
wishing  there  to  make  a  tight  with  the  Franks,  and  they  did  not  lis-
ten to  him  and  they  all  ran  from  him ;  and  the  Tsar  ran  from  them
and  overtook  them  in  the  horse  market,  and  complained  much
against  the  Boyars  and  all  the  people.  Then  the  Tsar  tied  out  of  the
town,  and  the  Patriarch  and  all  the  Boyars,  and  all  the  Franks
entered  the  town  on  April  12,  Monday,  Day  of  St.  Vasili  the  Con-
fessor, and  halted  where  the  Greek  Tsar  had  stood  at  St.  Saviour's,
and  halted  there  for  the  night.  And  in  the  morning  at  sunrise  they
entered  St.  Sophia,  and  tore  down  and  cut  in  pieces  the  doors  and
the  ambo^  all  worked  with  silver,  they  cut  in  pieces  the  twelve
silver  pillars  and  the  four  [pillars]  of  the  ikon-case,  and  the  ikon
bracket,  and  the  twelve  crosses  which  were  over  the  altar,  like  trees
bigger  than  a  man,  and  the  bosses  between  them,  and  the  altar  rail
between  the  pillars,  and  these  were  all  of  silver;  they  stripped  the
beautiful  altar  of  its  precious  stones  and  lar_ge  pearl,  and  it  is  not
known  where  they  put  it  itself;  and  they  took  the  forty  large  cups
which  were  before  the  altar  and  the  censers  and  silver  lamps,  so
many  that  we  cannot  tell  their  number,  with  priceless  vessels
used  on  feast-days;  they  stripped  the  service  copy  of  the  Gospels
and  the  Honourable  Crosses,  and  priceless  ikons,  and  under
the  altar  cloth  they  found  hidden  forty  barrels  of  pure  gold ;  and  in
the  chambers,  walls,  and  repositories  of  vessels  no  knowing  how
much  gold  and  silver,  beyond  number,  and  priceless  vessels.  All
this  I  have  mentioned  [was]  in  St.  Sophia  alone;  while  the  [church  of
the]  Holy  Mother  of  God  which  is  in  Vlakherna,  where  the  Holy
Spirit  used  to  descend  every  Friday,  that  they  also  stripped;  and
[the  number]  of  other  churches  no  man  can  tell,  because  they  were
beyond  number.  The  wonderful  Digitria-  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God  which  used  to  go  through  the  town  was,  however,  preserved  by
God  with  [the  help  of]  good  people,  and  exists  to-day  and  is  our  hope.
The  other  churches  in  the  town  and  outside  the  town  and  monas-
teries in  the  town  and  outside  the  town  they  plundered  all — we
cannot  tell  their  number,  nor  their  beauty.  They  robbed  the  monks
and  nuns  and  priests  and  some  of  them  they  beat  to  death ;  and  the
Greeks  and  the  Varangians,  who  had  remained  they  drove  out  of  the
town.

These  are  the  names  of  their  Voyevodas: — I.  Markos  of  Rome,''

1  Amvon.

*  OSrjyriTpia.

3  i.e.  Boniface,  Marquess  of  Monferrat.

48 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

in  the  town  of  Bern  where  the  pagan  and  wicked  Dedrik^
had  dwelled;  H.  Kondoflandr;'^  HI.  the  bhnd  Duzh^  from  St.
Mark's  island,  Venedik.  Tsar  Manuel  blinded  this  Duzh;  for  many
philosophers  had  begged  the  Tsar:  "  If  thou  lettest  this  Duzh  go
whole,  then  he  will  do  much  harm  to  thy  empire."  And  the  Tsar
not  wishing  to  kill  him,  he  ordered  his  eyes  to  be  blinded  with
glass;  and  his  eyes  were  as  if  uninjured,  but  he  saw  nothing.  This
Duzh  had  planned  many  attacks  on  the  town  and  all  used  to  obey
him;  his  ships  from  off  which  they  took  the  town  were  large.  The
Franks  stood  before  Tsargrad  from  December  to  April,  until  they
took  the  town.  And  on  May  9  they  appointed  Tsar  their  own  Latin
Kondoflandr  with  their  own  bishops,  and  divided  the  power  amongst
themselves:  [they  gave]  to  the  Tsar  the  town,  to  Markos  the  Sound,
and  to  the  Duzh  the  Desyatina.'^

And  so  perished  the  empire  of  the  God-protected  Kostyantingrad
and  the  Greek  land  in  the  quarrel  of  Tsars;  and  the  Franks  rule  it.

A.D.  1205.  A.M.  6713.  The  Moon  shone  eight  nights.  The  same
year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vsevolod  sent  to
Novgorod,  saying  thus:  "Troops  are  marching  to  war  in  your
land;  your  Kiiyaz  my  son  Svyatoslav,  is  young;  I  give  you  my
eldest  son  Kostyantin."  Then  they  took  the  Posadnik-ship  from
Mikhalko  and  gave  it  to  Dmitri  Miroshkinits.  The  same  year
Knyaz  Kostyantin  Vsevolodits,  grandson  of  Gyurgi,  came  to  Nov-
gorod on  March  20,  St.  Gerasim's  Day,  and  the  whole  town  was  glad
at  [the  fulfilment  of]  its  desire.  Vsevolod's  Knyaginya  died  the
same  year.

A.D.  1206.  A.M.  6714.  God's  servant,  Mitrofan,  whose  secular  name
was  Mikhalko,  Posadnik  of  Novgorod,  died
on  May  18;  he  had  had  himself  shorn  at  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  in  the  Arkadi  monastery.  The  same  year  Tverdislav
Mikhalkovits  put  up  a  church  to  St.  Simon  Stylites  of  the  Won-
derful Hill^  over  the  gates  of  the  Arkadi  monastery.

A.D.  1207.  A.M.  6715. The Volodarevitsi and Nosovitsi® put up
the  Church  of  St.  Luke  in  Lubyana  Street,

1  Theodoric  the  Ostrogoth,  whose  Bern  is  Verona.

2  i.e.  Baldwin,  Count  of  Flanders.
^  i.e.  Doge  Dandolo.

*  Tenth  part.

*  Near  Antioch.

*  FamiHes.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  49

having  transferred  it  from  Koleno.  The  same  year  merchants
from  oversea  completed  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Friday  on  August
30.  The  same  year  Fedor  Pineshchinits  completed  the  Church  of
St.  Panteleimon.  The  same  year  God's  servant,  Parfuri,  whose  secu-
lar name  was  Proksha  Malishevits,  died;  he  had  had  himself  shorn
at  the  Holy  Saviour's  [Monastery]  at  Khutin,  under  Igiimen  Varlam.
God  grant  peace  to  his  soul.

A.D.  1208.  A.M.  6716.  Lazor,  Vsevolod's  man,  came  from  Volo
dimir,  and  Boris  Miroshkinits  ordered  Oleks
Sbyslavits  to  be  killed  in  Yaroslav's  court;  and  they  killed  him
guiltless,  on  Saturday,  March  17,  St.  Alexis'  Day.  And  the  next
morning  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  wept  in  the  Church  of  St.  Yakov  in
the  Nerev  end.

A.D.  1209.  A.M.  6717.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  with  Kiiyaz
Kostyantin  against  Chernigov,  summoned  by
Vsevolod;  and  they  came  to  the  river  Oka  and  there  all  the  troops
assembled,  and  the  Knyaz  of  Ryazan  stood  on  the  further  side  of
the  Oka,  come  to  help  Vsevolod ;  and  Vsevolod  summoned  them  to
eat;  six  Knyazes  sat  down  in  a  tent,  and  Gleb  and  Oleg  and  the  men
of  Novgorod  sat  in  Vsevolod's  tent.  And  there  the  Volodimiritsi^
accused  their  brothers  falsely:  "  Have  no  faith  in  our  brothers,
Knyaz:  they  have  taken  counsel  against  you  with  the  Knyazes  of
Chernigov."  Thus  they  denounced  the  Knyazes  of  Ryazan.  And
Vsevolod  took  them  all  and  their  men,  and  having  fettered  them
sent  them  to  Volodimir ;  and  himself  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
and  with  the  two  calumniators  to  the  district  of  Ryazan,  and  he
came  to  Pronsk,  and  said:  "  Surrender  yourselves  to  me."  And
they  were  with  Knyaz  Izyaslav,  the  third  Volodimirits ;  and  Knyaz
Mikhail  ran  on  ahead  from  Pronsk ;  and  took  away  their  water,  and
they  surrendered.  And  he  took  Knyaz  Mikhail's  Knyaginya,
and  countless  merchandise ;  and  took  peace  with  Izyaslav  and  they
went  away  well.  From  Kolomno  he  let  the  men  of  Novgorod  go  to
Novgorod  having  made  them  presents  without  number,  and  he  gave
them  all  their  will  and  the  decrees  of  their  former  Knyazes,  all
that  the  men  of  Novgorod  had  wished  for,  and  he  said  to  them :
"  Who  of  you  is  good,  him  love,  but  punish  the  bad,"  and  took  his
son  Kostyantin  with  him,  and  Posadnik  Dmitri  who  was  wounded
near  Pronsk,  and  seven  foremost  men. Having  come  to  Novgorod

1  sc.  Gleb  and  Oleg,  sons  of  Volodimir,  Knyazes  of  Ryazan.

E

50 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  men  of  Novgorod  held  a  Veche  over  Posadnik  Dmitri  and  his
brethren,  because  they  had  ordered  the  levying  of  silver  on  the
people  of  Novgorod,  for  collecting  money^  throughout  the  district,
lines^  from  the  merchants,  for  enforcing  the  collection  of  taxes  at
fixed  times  and  everything  bad.  And  they  went  to  plunder  their
courts,  and  set  fire  to  Miroshkin's  court  and  Dmitri's,  appropriating
their  effects,  sold  all  their  villages  and  servants,  sought  out  their
treasures,  and  took  of  them  without  number,  and  the  rest  they
divided  so  that  each  got  some,^  at  three  grivn as  throughout  the  whole
town,  and  took  everything.  God  alone  knows  how  much  any  took
secretly,  and  many  grew  rich  from  this ;  and  what  was  on  the  boards*
that  they  left  to  the  Knyaz.  The  same  year  they  brought  Dmitri
Miroshkinits  dead  from  Volodimir  and  buried  him  in  the  monastery
of  St.  Georgi  along  side  his  father;  the  people  of  Novgorod  wanted
to  throw  him  from  the  bridge,  but  Vladyka  Mitrofan  forbade  them.
Vsevolod  sent  his  son  Svyatoslav  to  Novgorod  on  Sexagesima
Sunday.  Then  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shi^  to  Tverdislav  Mikh-
alkovits,  and  Dmitri's  written  documents  they  gave  to  Svyatoslav;
there  was  a  countless  [quantity]  of  them.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
kissed  the  honourable  Cross,  that  we  will  not  keep  Dmitri's  children
by  us,  neither  Volodislav  nor  Boris,  nor  Tverdislav  Stanilovits,  nor
Ovstrat  Domazhirovits;  so  the  Knyaz  sent  them  away  to  their
father,  and  on  some  they  levied  a  countless  [quantity]  of  silver.

A.D.  1210.  A.M.  G718. The  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  Volodimir
and Posadnik  Tverdislav, having pursued
and  found  the  Lithuanians  in  Khodynitsy,  killed  them.

The  same  year  Vsevolod  went  against  Ryazan  and  said  to  them :
"  Come  to  me  and  my  son  Yaroslav  over  the  Oka  to  deliberate."
And  they  went  over  to  him  and  there  he  seized  them  all;  and  sent
troops;  and  took  al  their  wives  and  children,  and  set  fire  to  their
town;  and  thus  he  distributed  them  about  the  towns.  The  same
winter  Knyaz  Mstislav  Mstislavits  came  against  Torzhok,  and  seized
Svyatoslav's  courtiers'^  and  put  the  Posadnik  in  chains  and  whoever
could  lay  hands  on  their  goods  [took  them] ;  and  he  sent  to  Nov-
gorod :  "  I  bow  down  to  St.  Sophia  and  to  the  tomb  of  my  father  and
to  all  the  men  of  Novgorod;  I  have  come  to  you  having  heard  of  the

1  Kiiny.

2  Vira  dikaya.

3  Po  zuJm — per  tooth.

*  sc.  rafts.

*  Dvoryane.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 51

violence  [done  you]  by  the  Knyaz;  and  I  am  sorry  for  my  patri-
mony." Having  heard  this  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  for  him  with
great  honour:  "  Come,  Knyaz,  to  the  throne."  And  they  set
Svyatoslav  with  his  men  in  the  Vladyka's  court  until  the  settlement
with  his  father.  Mstislav  came  to  Novgorod  and  they  set  him  on
his  father's  throne,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad;  and
Mstislav  went  with  the  whole  army^  against  Vsevolod,  and  they  were
at  Ploskeya  and  Vsevolod  sent  to  him:  "  Thou  art  son  to  me  and  I
father  to  thee ;  let  go  Svyatoslav  with  his  men ;  and  all  that  thou  hast
confiscated,  make  good,  and  I  will  let  go  the  merchants  and  merchan-
dise." And  Mstislav  released  Svyatoslav  and  his  men  and  Vsevolod
released  the  merchants  and  their  merchandise;  they  both  of  them
kissed  the  Cross  and  took  peace,  and  Mstislav  came  to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1211.  A.M.  6719.  Dmitri  Yakunits  came  from  Russia,  and
Tverdislav  of  his  own  will  relinquished  the
Posadnik-s\i\]i  to  a  senior,  and  then  they  gave  the  Posadnik-s\\\Tp  to
Dmitri  Yakunits.  And  Knyaz  Mstislav  sent  Dmitri  Yakunits  to
Luki  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  build  a  fortification,-  and  himself
went  to  Torzhok  to  inspect  the  districts;  from  Torzhok  he  went  to
Toropets,  from  Toropets  he  went  to  Luki  and  came  together  with
the  men  of  Novgorod ;  and  to  the  people  of  Luki  he  gave  Volodimir
of  Pleskov^  as  Knyaz  of  Luki.  /  The  same  year  by  the  will  of  God
Vyacheslav  Proshinits,  grandson  of  Malishev,  completed  the  stone
Church  of  the  Forty  Saints;  and  God  grant  him  salvation  through
the  prayers  of  the  Forty  Saints.  The  same  year  in  the  absence
of  the  Knyaz  and  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  there  was  a  great  fire  in
Novgorod;  it  broke  out  in  Radyatin  Street,  and  4,300
houses*  were  burnt  down,  and  fifteen  churches.  The  same  year,
in  the  winter,  on  January  22,  St.  KHment's  Day,  the  evil-doer  who
from  the  first  wished  no  good  [to  man]  put  envy  in  the  people  with
Knyaz  Mstislav  against  Vladyka  Mitrofan;  and  they  did  not  allow
him  to  clear  himself,  and  led  him  to  Toropets ;  but  he  took  this  gladly,
like  loan  Zlatoust^  and  Gregory  of  Akragas;  he  accepted  a  like  wrong
glorifying  God.  At  the  same  time,  before  the  expulsion  of  Vladyka
Mitrofan,  Dobrynya  Yadreikovits  had  come  from  Tsargnid  and
brought  with  him  the  [measure  of  the]  Lord's  tomb,  and  had  himself

1  Polk.

■■'  Gorod.

3  i.e.  Pskov.

*  Dvory.

'  St.  John  Chrysostom.

E2

52 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

shorn  at  Khutin  at  the  Holy  Saviour's  [monastery] ;  and  by  the  will
of  God  Knyaz  Mstislav  and  all  the  people  of  Novgorod  came  to  love
him,  and  they  sent  him  to  Russia  to  get  himself  appointed;  and  he
came  appointed  as  Vladyka  Antoni,  and  he  made  the  palace^  of
Mitrofan  a  church  in  the  name  of  St.  Antony.

A.D.  1212.  A.M.  6720.  Mstislav  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
against  the  Chud  people  called  Torma,  and
made  many  captives  and  brought  back  countless  cattle.  Later,  in
the  winter,  Knyaz  Mstislav  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  against
the  Chud  town  called  Medvezhya  Golova,  and  ruined  their  vil-
lages; and  they  came  up  to  the  town  and  the  Chud  people  bowed
down  to  the  Knyaz,  and  he  took  tribute  from  them;  and  all  came
[back]  well.

A.D.  1213.  A.M.  6721.  In  Peter's  Fast,  the  godless  Lithuanians
came  out  against  Pleskov,  and  set  fire  to  it ;
for  the  people  of  Pleskov  at  that  time  had  driven  out  Knyaz  Volo-
dimir  from  amongst  them,  and  were  on  the  lake^;  they  did  much
harm  and  went  away.

A.D.  1214.  A.M.  6722.  On  February  1,  on  Quinquagesima  Sunday,
there  was  thunder  after  morning  service,  and
all  heard  it;  and  then  at  the  same  time  they  saw  a  flying  snake. ^
On  the  same  day  Knyaz  Mstislav  marched  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
against  the  Chud  people  to  Ereva,*  through  the  land  of  the  Chud
people  towards  the  sea,  he  ruined  their  villages  and  captured  their
forest  fortresses.^  And  he  stayed  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  by  the
town  of  Vorobino,^  and  the  Chud  people  bowed  down  to  him,  and
Knyaz  Mstislav  took  tribute  from  them;  and  gave  two  parts  of  the
tribute  to  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  the  third  part  to  the  courtiers.
There  were  present  also  Knyaz  Vsevolod  Borisovits  of  Pleskov  with
the  men  of  Pleskov,  and  Knyaz  David  of  Toropets,  Volodimir's
brother;  and  all  returned  well  with  a  quantity  of  plunder.  The
same  year  Vsevolod  the  Red,  son  of  Svyatoslav,  great-grandson  of
Oleg,  drove  the  grandsons  of  Rostislav  out  of  Russia,  saying  thus:
"  You  hanged  two  of  my  brothers,  Knyazes,  in  Galich"  as  malefactors

1  Polata.

2  Lake  Chud.

3  Or  dragon.

*  Or  Narova.

*  Oseki.

«  Sparrow- town.
'  Galicia.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  53

and  you  put  shame  on  all ;  and  there  is  no  portion  for  you  in  the  Rus-
sian Land."  The  same  year  the  grandsons  of  Rostislav  sent  to
Mstislav  Mstislavich  to  Novgorod,  "  Behold  Vsevolod  Svyatoslavich
makes  us  no  portion  in  the  Russian  Land;  come  let  us  claim  our
patrimony."  And  Mstislav  summoned  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's
Court,  and  began  to  summon  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  go  to  Kiev
against  Vsevolod  the  Red.  The  men  of  Novgorod  said  to  him:
"  Whither,  Knyaz,  thou  shalt  look  with  thy  eyes,  there  will  we  lay
down  our  heads."  And  Mstislav  went  to  Kiev  with  the  men  of
Novgorod  in  the  month  of  June,  the  18th,  St.  Fedor's  Day;  and  they
reached  Smolensk  and  there  arose  a  dispute  between  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod and  the  men  of  Smolensk,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  killed  a
man  of  Smolensk  and  would  not  go  after  their  Knyaz.  Knyaz
Mstislav  began  to  summon  a  Veche,  but  they  would  not  come  to  it.
The  Knyaz  having  kissed  all,  and  saluted  them,  went;  but  the  men
of  Novgorod  having  made  a  Veche  of  their  own  began  to  deliberate.
And  Posadnik  Tverdislav  said:  "Brothers!  as  our  fathers  and
grandfathers  laboured  for  the  Russian  Land,  we,  too,  will  go  after
our  Knyaz."  And  so  they  went  from  Smolensk  and  having  over-
taken the  Knyaz  they  began  to  make  war  on  the  towns  of  Chernigov
along  the  Dnieper;  they  took  Rechitsa  by  storm  and  many  other
towns  of  Chernigov ;  and  they  came  up  to  Vyshegorod  and  began  to
fight.  And  Mstislav  with  his  brothers  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
prevailed  and  took  two  Knyazes:  Rostislav  Yaroslavits  and  his
brother  Yaropolk,  grandsons  of  Oleg.  And  the  people  of  Vyshe-
gorod bowed  down  to  him  and  opened  their  gates.  And  Vsevolod
fled  from  Kiev  across  the  Dnieper,  and  Mstislav  with  his  brothers
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  entered  Kiev,  and  the  people  of  Kiev
bowed  down  to  him,  and  set  Mstislav  Romano vits,  grandson  of
Rostislav^  in  Kiev.  From  Kiev  they  went  to  Chernigov,  and  having
stayed  twelve  days,  they  took  peace  and  having  taken  gifts  came  all
well  to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1215.  A.M.  6723.  Knyaz  Mstislav  went  to  Kiev  of  his  own  free
will,  and  made  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court,
and  said  to  the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  I  have  arms  [to  work  my  will]
in  Russia,  and  you  are  free  to  choose  your  Knyaz."  The  same  year
the  men  of  Novgorod,  having  deliberated  much,  sent  Posadnik
Gyurgi  Ivankovits  and  the  Tysyatski  Yakun,  with  ten  senior  mer-
chant men  for  Yaroslav  Vsevolodits,  Gyurgi 's  grandson,  and  Knyaz
Yaroslav  entered  Novgorod,  and  Vladyka  Anton  with  the  men  of

54 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Novgorod  met  him.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  seized  Yakun
Zubolomits  and  sent  for  Foma  Dobroshchinits  Posadnik  of  Novi-
torg ;  and  having  put  him  in  chains  imprisoned  him  in  Tver.  And  for
our  sins  Fedor  Lazurtinits  and  Ivor  of  Novi-torg  informed  against
the  Tysyatski  Yakun  Namnezhits.  And  Knyaz  Yaroslav  made  a
Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court ;  they  went  to  Yakun's  Court  and  plun-
dered it  and  seized  his  wife.  And  Yakun  went  the  next  morning
to  the  Knyaz  with  the  Posadnik,  and  the  Knyaz  ordered  to  be
seized  his  son  Khristofor  on  May  21.  And  then  the  Prussians  killed
Ovostrat  on  a  festival  day,  also  his  son  Lugota,  and  threw  them  dead
into  a  pit.  The  Knyaz  complained  to  the  men  of  Novgorod  of  this.
The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  to  Torzhok  taking  with  him
Tverdislav  Mikhalkovits,  Mikifor,  Polyud,  Sbyslav,  Semen,  Olksa
and  many  Boyars,  and  having  given  them  gifts,  sent  them  to  Nov-
gorod, and  himself  settled  in  Torzhok.  The  same  autumn  much
harm  was  done ;  frost  killed  the  corn  crops  throughout  the  district ;
but  at  Torzhok  all  remained  whole.  The  Knyaz  seized  all  the  corn
in  Torzhok,  and  would  not  let  one  cart-load  into  the  city ;  and  they
sent  Semen  Borisovits,  Vyacheslav  Klimyatits,  for  Zubets  Yakun
to  fetch  the  Knyaz  and  he  detained  them ;  and  he  detained  whomever
you  sent.  And  in  Novgorod  it  was  very  bad,  they  bought  one
barrel^  of  rye  for  ten  grivnas,  one  of  oats  for  three  grivnas,  a  load
of  turnips  for  two  grivnas;  people  ate  pine  bark  and  lime  tree  leaves
and  moss.  O  brothers,  then  was  the  trouble;  they  gave  their
children  into  slavery.  They  dug  a  public  grave  and  filled  it  full.
O,  there  was  trouble!  corpses  in  the  m^N|cet::plac2;jCnipIes~Tn  the
street,  corpses  in  the  fields;  the  dogs  could  not  eat  up  the  men!
The  Vod  people  all  died;  the  rest  were  scattered.  And  thus  for
our  sins  our  power  and  our  town went  asunder.

And  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Posadnik  Gyurgi
Ivanovits  and  Stepan  Tverdislavits  and  others  to  fetch  the  Knyaz,
and  those  he  detained;  and  having  sent  Ivor  and  Chaponos  to
Novgorod  he  had  his  Knyaginya  Mstislav's  daughter  brought  to  him
from  there.  And  then  they  (sc.  the  men  of  Novgorod)  sent  Manuil
Yagolchevich  with  the  final  message:  "  Come  to  thy  patrimony,  to
St.  Sophia;  if  thou  wilt  not  come,  then  tell  us."  These  Yaroslav
likewise  would  not  let  go,  and  he  detained  all  the  Novgorod  mer-
chants; and  there  was  sorrow  and  wailing  in  Novgorod.  And  then
Mstislav  Mstislavits  having  heard  of  this  evil,  arrived  at  Novgorod
on  February  11,  seized  Yaroslav's  lieutenant,"^  Knota  Grigorevits,

»  Kad.

-  Namestnik.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  55

and  put  all  the  nobles  in  chains;  and  he  rode  out  to  Yaroslav's  Court
and  kissed  the  honourable  Cross,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  [did
likewise]  to  him  to  be  with  him  in  life  and  death:  "  I  shall  either
recover  the  Novgorod  men  and  the  districts,  or  lay  down  my  head
for  Novgorod."  Yaroslav  had  this  news  at  Torzhok  and  they
erected  a  stockade  and  blockaded  the  road  from  Novgorod  and  the
river  Tvertsa;  and  he  sent  100  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  Novgorod
to  conduct  Mstislav  out  of  Novgorod;  and  they  did  not  undertake
this;  but  they  were  all  of  one  mind,  also  those  100  men.  And
Knyaz  Mstislav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  the  priest  Gyurgi  of
St.  loan's  in  the  market-place  to  Yaroslav  to  Torzhok,  with  some  of
his  own  men :  "  Son,  I  greet  you;  release  my  men  and  the  merchants;
and  yourself  go  from  Torzhok,  and  have  love  with  me."  But
Knyaz  Yaroslav  not  liking  this,  let  go  the  priest  without  peace,  and
summoned  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  a  field  outside  Torzhok  on
Saturday  before  Sexagesima,  and  having  seized  all  the  men  and
merchants  and  put  them  in  chains  sent  them  to  his  various  towns,
and  distributed  their  merchandise  and  horses ;  and  there  were  of  all
the  men  of  Novgorod  over  2,000.  And  the  news  came  to  Novgorod;
and  there  were  few  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  [left] ;  the  biggest  men
were  captured  abroad;  and  the  lesser  had  been  scattered  and  others
had  died  from  famine.  And  Knyaz  Mstislav  made  a  Veche  in
Yaroslav's  Court :  "  Let  us  go,"  he  said,  "  and  recover  our  men,  your
brothers,  and  our  districts.  Novi-torg  shall  not  be  Novgorod,  nor
shall  Novgorod  be  Torzhok.  But  where  St.  Sophia  is  there  is  Nov-
gorod. God  is  in  the  many;  but  God  and  justice  are  also  in  the
few."

A.D.  1216.  A.M.  6724.  On  March  1  on  the  Tuesday  after  Pure
Sunday,  Mstislav  went  against  his  son-in-
law,  Yaroslav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  on  the  Thursday  the
transgressors  of  oath  to  the  Cross  fled  to  Yaroslav;  for  they  had
kissed  the  honourable  Cross  to  Mstislav  with  all  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod, to  be  all  at  one,  Volodislav  Zavidits,  Gavrilo  Igorevits,
Gyurgi  Olksinits  and  Qavrilo  Milyatinits  with  their  wives  and  chil-
dren. And  Mstislav  went  by  the  Seregeri  lake,  and  entered  his  own
district,  and  said  to  the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  Go  out  foraging,  but
take  no  heads."  They  went,  and  took  their  fill  of  food  both  they
and  their  horses,  and  they  were  at  the  head  of  the  Volga.  Svyatos-
lav  invested  Rzhevka,  one  of  Mstislav's  towns,  with  a  force  of  10,000.
But Mstislav  with  Volodimir  of Pleskov  went rapidly  with  500,

56 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

for  only  such  was  the  number  of  all  their  men ;  and  he  pursued  them
and  they  fled.  And  Yarun  had  shut  himself  up  in  the  town  with
100  men  and  beat  them  off.  And  Mstislav  went  and  took  Zubchev,
and  they  were  on  the  Vozuga ;  and  thither  came  Volodimir  Ruriko-
vits  with  men  of  Smolensk.  They  were  coming  along  the  Volga,
making  war,  and  said  to  him:  "  Knyaz,  go  to  Torzhok."  But
Mstislav  and  Volodimir  said:  "  Let  us  go  to  Pereyaslavl;  we  have  a
third  friend."  And  there  was  no  news  where  Yaroslav  was,  whe-
ther at  Torzhok  or  in  Tver.  And  Yaroslav's  guards  attacked  Yarun
behind  Tver,  and  God  helped  Yarun  and  they  killed  many,  others
they  captured,  and  others  escaped  to  Tver.  And  these  got  news  of
Yaroslav  and  they  went  along  the  Volga  making  war,  and  they
burned  [along  the  river]  Shesha  and  also  [the  towns  of]  Dubna  and
Kosnyatin  and  all  the  country  along  the  Volga.  And  Eremei
[coming]  from  Knyaz  Kostj'antin  met  them  with  love  and  with
greeting;  and  they  went  making  war  to  Pereyaslavl  and  were  at
Gorodishche^  on  the  river  Sarra,  at  the  Church  of  Saint  Marina
on  April  9  on  Great  Saturday.  Knyaz  Kostyantin  with  the  men  of
Rostov  came  and  kissed  the  Cross.

And  Yaroslav  went  to  Torzhok  having  taken  with  him  the  elder
men  of  Novgorod,  and  young  men  by  selection,  and  all  the  men  of
Novi-torg.  And  he  came  to  Pereyaslavl  and  assembled  all  his
district  and  Gyurgi  his,  Volodimir  and  Svyatoslav  likewise.  And  he
went  out  from  Pereyaslavl  with  his  forces  and  those  of  Novgorod
and  of  Novi-torg.  How  terrible,  wonderful  and  strange,  brothers !
Sons  went  against  father,  brother  against  brother,  slave  against
master,  master  against  slave.  And  Yaroslav  and  Gyurgi,  with
their  brothers  took  stand  on  the  Khza  river.  And  Mstislav  and
Kostyantin,  the  two  Volodimirs,  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  took
stand  on  the  Lipitsa  river,  and  they  beheld  the  forces  standing,  and
sent  the  Sotski  Larion  to  Gyurgi:  "We  greet  thee;  we  have  no
quarrel  with  thee,  our  quarrel  is  with  Yaroslav."  And  Knyaz
Gyurgi  having  answered:  "  I  am  one  with  my  brother,  Yaroslav,"
they  sent  to  Yaroslav,  saying:  "  Let  go  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  of
Novi-torg  that  are  mine;  and  all  that  thou  hast  occupied  of  my
Novgorod  districts  and  the  Volok  give  back;  take  peace  with  us,
and  kiss  the  Cross  to  us,  and  let  us  not  shed  blood."  But  they  ans-
wered: "  We  do  not  want  peace,  and  I  have  men:  you  have  gone
far,  and  are  come  out  hke  fish  on  to  dry  land."  And  Larion  told  this
speech  to  Mstislav  and  to  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of

1  sc.  Radilov,  q.v.

THE  CHRONICLE  OE  NOVGOROD  57

Novgorod  said:  "  Knyaz,  we  do  not  want  to  die  on  horse-back,  but
as  our  fathers  fought  at  the  [riverj  Kalaksha  on  foot."  And  Knyaz
Mstislav  was  glad  at  this;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  dis-
mounted from  their  horses,  and  thrown  off  their  breeches  ran  for-
ward barefoot,  having  thrown  off  their  boots.  And  Mstislav  rode
after  them  on  horse-back;  and  the  forces  of  Ncn'gorod  came  together
with  the  forces  of  Yaroslav.  And  so  with  the  power  of  God  and
with  the  aid  of  St.  Sophia  Mstislav  prevailed  and  Yaroslav  and  his
forces  turned  shoulder.  And  Gyurgi  made  resistance  to  Kostyan-
tin,  but  seeing  Yaroslav 's  forces  in  flight,  he  also  turned  shoulder,
on  April  21,  the  day  of  SS.  Timofei  and  Fedor  and  the  Tsanisa
Alexandra.  O  great  was  the  victory,  countless  the  number,  my
brethren ;  numberless  the  number  of  killed  so  that  the  mind  of  man
cannot  imagine  it.  And  Yaroslav  having  fled  into  Pereyaslavl,
ordered  the  captives  to  be  cast  into  a  pit,  all  those  who  were  of
Novgorod;  others  into  prison,  and  there  they  expired  in  numbers.
And  Mstislav  and  Kostyantin  and  the  two  Volodimirs  with  their
forces  went  in  pursuit  of  Gyurgi  to  Volodimir,  and  having  come  they
halted  before  the  town,  and  that  night  the  town  and  the  Knyaz's
court  took  fire.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  wanted  to  go  right  up
to  the  town,  but  Knyaz  Mstislav  did  not  let  them.  And  it  happened
the  next  morning,  Knyaz  Gyurgi  sent  out  with  greeting  to  the
Knyazes:  "  Do  nothing  against  me  to-day;  and  to-morrow  I  shall  go
out  from  the  town."  And  Gyurgi  went  from  Volodimir  to  the  little
town  Radilov;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  set  Kostyantin  on  his
father's  throne  in  Volodimir.  And  Kostyantin  rewarded  the
Knyazes  with  honour,  and  numbers  of  the  men  of  Novgorod.  And
Mstislav  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  Pereyaslavl,  and  not
going  up  to  the  town,  levied  gifts.  He  sent  and  took  away  his
daughter,  the  wife  of  Yaroslav,  and  all  the  surviving  men  of  Nov-
gorod, and  all  that  were  in  the  army  with  Yaroslav,  and  all  returned
well  to  Novgorod.  O,  great,  my  brethren,  is  the  Providence  of  God !
on  that  place  of  defeat  of  Gyurgi  and  Yaroslav  there  fell  numberless
soldiers.  The  men  of  Novgorod  killed  in  the  conflict  were:  Dmitri
of  Pleskov,  Onton,  kettle  maker,  Ivanka  Pribyshinits,  cloak  maker;
and  in  the  pursuit:  Ivanko,  the  priest's  son,  Simeon  Petrilovits,  and
a  tax  gatherer  of  Tver.  Mstislav  came  to  Novgorod  and  the  Vladyka
and  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad.  They  then  took  the
Posadnik-ship  from  Gyurgi  Ivankovits  and  gave  it  to  TvxTdislav
Mikhalkovits.

58 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1217.  A.M.  6725.  Mstislav  went  away  to  Kiev,  leaving  the
Knyaginya  and  his  son  Vasih  in  Novgorod;
and  he  took  with  him  Gyurgi  Ivankovits,  Sbyslav  Stepanits,  and
Olksa  Putilovits.  Then,  too,  Volodimir  went  to  Novgorod  on
his  own  business,  and  the  Lithuanians  made  war  in  Shelon.  The
men  of  Novgorod  went  in  pursuit  of  them  but  did  not  reach  them;
and  they  went  with  Knyaz  Volodimir  and  Posadnik  Tverdislav  to
Medvezhya-Golova,  and  halted  before  the  town.  And  the  Chud
people  began  to  send  greeting  deceitfully,  but  sent  for  the  Nemtsy.^
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  began  to  deliberate  with  the  men  of
Pleskov  about  the  message  of  the  Chud  people;  going  far  away
from  their  baggage,  and  the  night  guards  had  come  in  and  the  day
guards  had  not  gone  out,  and  they  [the  Chud  people]  unexpectedly
attacked  the  baggage,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  ran  from  their
Veche  to  the  baggage,  and  having  taken  up  their  arms,  beat  them
off  the  baggage.  And  the  Nemtsy  fled  to  the  town,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  killed  two  Voyevodas  and  took  a  third  with  their  hands;
and  they  took  700  horses,  and  returned  all  well.  And  Knyaz
Mstislav  came  to  Novgorod  without  them;^  and  took  Stanimir
Dirnovits  with  his  son,  Nezdila,  and  having  put  them  in  fetters,
imprisoned  them;  and  seized  countless  quantity  of  goods  and  let
them  go  again.  The  same  spring,  on  May  31,  a  bakery  caught  fire
in  the  middle  of  the  morning,  at  Ivan  Yarishevits's;  by  midday  the
whole  side  was  burnt  as  far  as  the  fishery,  not  a  house  was  left;
and  all  who  had  fled  into  the  stone  churches  with  their  goods  were
all  burnt  there  themselves  together  with  their  goods.  And  in  the
Varangian  church  all  the  countless  Varangian  merchandise  was
burnt;  fifteen  churches  were  burnt;  and  the  tops^  and  the  porches
of  the  stone  churches  were  burned.

A.D.  1218.  A.M.  6726.  Knyaz  Mstislav  came  to  Torzhok  and  took
Borislav  Nekurishinits,  and  after  taking
much  merchandise  released  him.  Then,  too,  the  young  Knyaz
Vasili  Mstislavich  fell  ill  in  Torzhok,  and  they  brought  him  dead
into  Novgorod;  and  they  laid  him  in  St.  Sophia  at  the  head  of  his
grandfather  at  [the  image  of]  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  The  same
year  Vladyka  Anton  laid  the  foundation  of  the  stone  Church  of  the
St.  Barbara  monastery. Mstislav  summoned  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's

»  Germans,  cf.  p.  34.

-  sc.  while  they  were  away.

»  Cupolas.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 59

Court,  and  said:  "  I  make  greeting  to  St.  Sophia  and  my  father's
tomb,  and  to  you;  I  wish  to  go  and  claim  Galich,^  but  I  shall  not
forget  you.  God  grant  that  I  may  lie  by  my  father  in  St.  Sophia."
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  begged  him  much:  "  Do  not  go,  Knyaz,"
but  they  could  not  restrain  him;  and  bidding  them  farewell,  he  went
away.  In  the  same  year,  Vladyka  Mitrofan  came  from  Volodimir;
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  conducted  him  to  [the  church  of]  the
Annunciation  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  Mstislav  went  to  Russia,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Smolensk  for  Svyatoslav  Rostis-
lavits  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on  the  first  day  of  August.  The
same  year,  Gleb  Volodimirich,  Knyaz  of  Ryazan,  being  instigated  by
Satan  to  murder,  having  taken  thought  in  his  cursed  imagination,
having  as  accomplice  his  brother,  Kostyantin,  and  with  him  the
devil  who  seduced  them  and  put  the  idea  to  them,  they  saying  that :
"  Let  us  kill  these,  and  ourselves  take  over  all  the  power."  And
thou  dost  not  know,  accursed  one,  the  Providence  of  God;  he  gives
power  to  whom  he  pleases.  The  Almighty  appoints  both  Tsar  and
Knyaz.  What  did  Cain  obtain  from  God  after  killing  his  brother,
Abel  ?  Was  it  not  a  curse  and  a  trembling  ?  or  your  kinsman  the
accursed  Svyatopolk  after  killing  all  his  brethren  ?  they  received  the
crown  of  empire,  he  eternal  torment.  And  this  accursed  Gleb,
having  conceived  Svyatopolk's  same  idea,  hid  it  in  his  heart,  with
his  brother.  And  all  assembed  at  a  landing  place  for  deliberation:
Izyaslav,  Mikhail,  Rostislav,  Svyatoslav,  Gleb,  Roman;  Ingvor
could  not  arrive  in  time;  his  time  had  not  yet  come.  And  Gleb
Volodimirits  with  his  brother  summoned  them  to  them  as  to  the
honour  of  a  feast,  into  their  tent;  and  they  not  knowing  his  evil
thought  and  deceit,  all  six  Knyazes,  each  with  his  Boyars  and  cour-
tiers came  into  their  tent.  And  this  Gleb  before  their  arrival  hav-
ing furnished  his  nobles  and  his  brothers  and  a  large  quantity  of
pagan  Polovets  people  with  arms,  hid  them  in  the  sleeping  tent  close
to  the  tent  in  which  they  were  to  drink,  no  one  knowing  they  were
there  except  those  two  evil-minded  Knyazes  and  their  accursed  con-
federates. When  they  began  to  drink  and  make  merry,  then
immediately  the  cursed  Gleb  and  his  brother  having  drawn  their
swords,  began  to  slaughter  first  the  Knyazes,  then  the  Boyars  and  a
quantity  of  the  courtiers;  with  their  own  courtiers  and  with  the
Polovets  people  [they  slew]  six  Knyazes  alone  and  many  Boyars
and  courtiers.  These  righteous  Knyazes  of  Ryazan  met  their  end
on  July  20,  the  day  of  the  holy  prophet,  Ilya,  and  received  crowns
'  sc.  Galicia.

60 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

from  the  Lord  God,  with  their  Druzhina,  Hke  innocent
lambs  they  gave  up  their  souls  to  God.  And  this  accursed
Gleb  and  his  brother,  Kostyantin,  prepared  the  heavenly  king-
dom for  them,  but  eternal  torment  for  themselves  with  their
confederates.

And  it  happened  in  the  winter,  Matei  Dushiltsevits  fled,  having
bound  the  crier  informer  Moiseits.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  having
gone  in  pursuit  caught  him  and  brought  him  to  the  Gorodishche;  and
a  lie  entered  the  town  that  Tverdislav  had  given  up  Matei  to  the
Knyaz;  and  the  people  on  the  other  side  [of  the  river]  rang  the  bell
at  St.  Nicholas  throughout  the  night,  and  those  of  the  Nerev  end  at
the  church  of  the  Forty  Saints  likewise  assembling  people  against
Tverdislav.  And  it  happened  the  next  morning,  the  Knyaz
released  Matei,  having  learnt  of  the  uproar  and  tumult  in  the  town.
And  the  people  on  the  other  side,  even  the  children,  went  out  in
armour  as  for  battle,  and  the  Nerev  people  likewise,  but  those  of  the
outskirts  stood  up  neither  for  those  nor  for  these,  paying  no
attention.  And  Tverdislav  looked  towards  St.  Sophia,  and  said:
"  If  I  be  guilty,  may  I  die  here;  if  I  be  innocent  justify  thou  me,
Lord,"  and  he  went  with  the  Lyudin  end  and  with  the  Prussians.
There  was  a  slaughter  at  the  town  gates ;  and  they  fled  to  the  other
side,  and  others  to  the  [Lyudin]  quarter ;  and  they  raised  the  bridge
and  the  men  of  the  other,  side  crossed  in  boats  and  came  up  in  force.
O,  brethren,  the  accursed  devil  wrought  a  great  wonder!  When
there  should  have  been  war  against  the  pagans,  then  they  began  to
fight  each  other.  And  they  killed  a  Prussian  man,  and  another  man
of  the  people  of  the  [Lyudin]  end,  and  of  those  of  the  other  side
[they  killed]  Ivan  Dushiltsevits,  Matei 's  brother,  and  Kosnyatin
Prokopinits,  of  the  Nerev  quarter,  and  six  others,  and  many  of
both  sides  were  wounded.  This  was  on  January  27,  the  day  of  St.
loan  Zlatoust^;  and  then  there  were  Veches  all  through  the  week.
But  the  devil  was  crushed  by  God  and  St.  Sophia;  the  cross  was  ex-
alted, and  brethren  came  together  with  one  accord,  and  kissed  the
Cross.  And  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  sent  his  Tysyatski  to  the  Veche,  and  said :
"  I  cannot  be  with  Tverdislav;  and  I  take  away  the  Posadnik-ship
from  him."  But  the  men  of  Novgorod  said:  "  Is  the  fault  his?  "
And  he  answered:  "  No."  Tverdislav  said:  "  I  am  glad,  that  I  am
not  to  blame;  and  you,  brethren,  are  free  to  choose  Posadnik  and
Knvaz." And  the  men  of  Novgorod  answered:  "  Knyaz!  as  he  is

1  St.  John  Chrysostom.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  61

without  blame,  and  thou  didst  kiss  the  Cross  to  us  not  to  deprive  a
man  without  blame,  therefore,  we  bow  down  to  thee,  but  this  is  our
Posadnik,  and  we  will  not  give  in  to  this." And  there  was  peace.

A.D.  1219.  A.M.  6727.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  Mstislav  Romanovits  sent
his  son  Vsevolod  from  Kiev,  saying:  "  Re-
ceive to  yourselves  Knyaz  Vsevolod,  and  let  the  older  Svyatoslav
return  to  me."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  his  will.  The
same  winter,  Simeon  Emin  went  with  400  men  against  [the  district
of]  Toimokary,  but  neither  Gyurgi  nor  Yaroslav  let  them  through
their  land;  and  they  came  to  Novgorod  in  boats^  and  set  up  their
tents  on  the  fields,  with  evil  intent.  Tverdislav  and  the  Tysyatski
Yakun  took  thought  and  sent  to  Gyurgi  not  to  let  them  go  there,
and  they  stirred  up  the  town.  Then  they  took  the  Posadnik  ship
from  Tverdislav  and  gave  it  to  Simeon  Borisovits,  and  took  the
office  of  Tysyatski  from  Yakun  and  gave  it  to  Simeon  Emin.  Then,
too,  they  finished  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Barbara.  The  same
year  Tverdislav  and  Fedor  laid  the  foundation  of  a  stone  Church  to
St.  Michael,  and  another  small  one  to  the  Three  Holy  Youths  by  its
side,  they  completed  it  in  four  days.  Knyazes  Mstislav  and  Volodi-
mir  went  from  Kiev  to  Galich  against  the  King's  son- ;  and  the  men
of  Galich  came  out  against  them  and  Chekhi  and  Lyakhi,^  Mora-
vians and  Hungarians,"*  and  the  forces  came  together.  And  God
helped  Mstislav,  and  he  entered  the  town  of  Galich  and  they  took
with  their  hands  the  King's  son  and  his  wife;  and  he  took  peace
with  the  King,  and  let  go  his  son,  and  himself  took  his  seat  in  Galich
and  Volodimir  Rurikovits  in  Kiev.  The  same  year,  Knyaz  Vsevolod
went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  Pertuyev,  and  they  met  out-
posts of  the  Nemtsy,^  Lithuanians  and  Livonians,®  and  they  fought ;
and  God  helped  the  men  of  Novgorod;  they  went  up  to  the  town
and  stood  there  two  weeks;  they  did  not  take  the  town,  and  re-
turned all  well.  The  same  year  Anton,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  went
to  Torzhok.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  fetched  Vladyka  Mitrofan
into  the  Bishop's  court  and  on  to  the  throne  again,  and  sent  to
Onton':  "Go  where  thou  wilt."  And  Anton  went  to  Novgorod  to
the  Holy  Redeemer's  on  the  Nereditsa. And  Knyaz  and  men  of

1  Lodya.

*  Korolevich.

'  Bohemians  and  Poles.

*  Ugry.

5  cf.  p.  34.

*  Lib.  ''  i.e.  Anton.

62 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Novgorod  said  to  Mitrofan  and  to  Anton:  "  Go  to  the  Metropolitan;
that  whom  he  send  us,  that  one  be  our  Vladyka."  And  they  let
go  with  them  the  monk  Vasyan  the  priest,  and  another  priest,
Boris.  And  having  retmned  from  Pertuev  they  gave  the  Posadnik-
ship  to  Tverdislav,  and  to  Yakun  the  office  of  Tysyatski  again.

A.D.  1220.  A.M.  6728.  Vladyka  Mitrofan  came  to  Novgorod  on
March  17,  having  righted  himself  through
God  and  St.  Sophia;  and  Anton  the  Metropolitan  kept  by  him  in
honour  and  gave  him  the  Bishopric  of  Peremyshl.  The  same  year,
Knyaz  Vsevolod  went  to  Smolensk  on  his  own  business.  And  in
the  same  winter  Knyaz  Vsevolod  came  from  Smolensk  to  Torzhok.
And  the  devil  wishing  no  good  to  the  Christian  race,  and  wicked
men  neither,  put  sin  into  the  heart  of  the  Knyaz  and  anger  against
Tverdislav,  though  without  fault.  And  he  came  to  Novgorod  and
stirred  up  the  whole  town,  wishing  to  kill  Tverdislav,  and  Tverdis-
lav was  ill.  And  Knyaz  Vsevolod  went  out  from  the  Gorodishche
with  all  his  Court^  in  armour  as  for  battle  and  came  to  Yaroslav's
Court.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  met  him  in  arms  and  took  stand
in  battle  order  in  the  Knyaz  s  Court.  And  Tverdislav  was  sick  and
they  drove  him  out  on  a  sledge  to  [the  church  of]  Boris  and  Gleb
and  the  Prussians  and  people  of  the  Lyudin  end,  and  from  the  out-
skirts, gathered  round  him  and  took  stand  round  him  in  battle  order
forming  themselves  in  five  troops.  And  the  Knyaz  perceiving  their
formation  and  that  they  would  fight  hard  for  their  lives,  did  not
ride  out,  but  sent  Vladyka  Mitrofan  with  all  good  messages  and  the
Vladyka  brought  them  together  in  love,  and  both  Knyaz  and  Tver-
dislav kissed  the  Cross.  Through  God  and  St.  Sophia  the  Cross
was  exalted,  and  the  devil  was  crushed,  and  all  brethren  were  to-
gether. And  Tverdislav  having  come  together  with  the  Knyaz  in
love  was  deprived  of  the  Posadnik-ship,  for  he  was  ill,  and  they  gave
the  Posadnik-ship  to  Ivanko  Dmitrovits.  He  continued  in  that
illness  seven  weeks,  and  greater  illness  took  hold  of  him,  and  he
went  to  [the  church  of]  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Arkadi  mon-
astery in  secret  from  his  wife  and  children  and  from  all  the  brethren,
and  had  himself  shorn  on  February  8.  His  wife  then  had  herself
shorn  in  another  monastery,  at  St.  Barbara's.

A.D.  1221.  A.M.  6729. The men of Novgorod showed Knyaz
Vsevolod  the  road.  "  We  do  not  want  thee,
go  whither  thou  wilt." He  went  to  his  father,  into  Russia.
1  Dvor.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  63

A.D.  1222.  A.M.  6730.  They  sent  Vladyka  Mitrofan  and  Posadnik
Ivanko  with  the  elder  men  to  Gyurgi
Vsevolodits  in  Volodimir  for  his  son,  and  he  gave  them  Vsevolod  with
guarantee  of  ail  the  liberties  of  Novgorod.  Knyaz  Vsevolod  came
to  Novgorod,  and  the  Vladyka  and  all  the  men  [came  back]  with
countless  gifts;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad,  and  there  was
peace.  The  same  year,  Knyaz  Gyurgi  sent  his  brother  Svyatoslav
to  help  the  men  of  Novgorod.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  with
Svyatoslav  to  Kes,^  and  the  Lithuanians  also  came  to  their  help;
and  they  made  much  war,  but  did  not  take  the  town.  And
Yaroslav's  men  from  Smolensk  took  Poltesk^  on  January  17,
under  K^iyaz  Boris  and  Gleb.  The  same  winter,  Knyaz  Vsevolod
fled  by  night  secretly  out  of  Novgorod  with  all  his  Court.  And  the
men  of  Novgorod  were  grieved  at  this.  Then  the  men  of  Novgorod
sent  the  elder  men  to  Gyurgi:  "  If  it  does  not  please  thee  to  hold
Novgorod  through  thy  son,  then  give  us  thy  brother."  And  he
gave  them  his  brother  Yaroslav.

A.D.  1223.  A.M.  6731.  Knyaz  Yaroslav  came  to  Novgorod  and  all
the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad.  The
Lithuanians  made  war  round  Toropets,  and  Yaroslav  with  the  men  of
Novgorod  went  in  pursuit  of  them  as  far  as  [lake]  Vosvyat,  but  did
not  catch  them.  The  same  year,  Mitrofan,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,
died  on  July  3,  St.  Vakint's^  Day,  on  the  dawn  of  Monday,  and  was
laid  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia;  may  God  grant  through  his  holy
prayers  many  years  to  the  Knyaz  and  to  all  the  men  of  Novgorod.
The  same  day  they  led  the  monk  Arseni  from  Khutin  into  the
[Bishop's]  Court ;  a  good  and  very  God-fearing  man.  Knyaz  Yaroslav
came  from  his  brother  and  went  with  all  the  province  to  Kolyvan,"*
and  conquered  the  whole  Chud  land,  and  brought  back  countless
plunder,  but  did  not  take  the  town;  they  took  much  gold,  and
returned  all  well.  Knyaz  Yaroslav  with  the  Knyaginya  and  his
children  went  to  Pereyaslavl;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  made
greeting  to  him:  "  Do  not  go,  Knyaz  " ;  but  he  went  according  to  his
will.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Gyurgi  for  his  son,  and  he
again  gave  them  his  son  Vsevolod.

A.D.  1224.  A.M.  6732. Knyaz  Vsevolod  Gyurgevits  came  to  Nov-
gorod. The same  year the  Nemtsy  killed
1  Wenden.
=  Polotsk.
^  Hyacinth.
*  Revel.

64 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Knyaz  Vyachko  in  Gyurgev^  and  took  the  town.  The  same  year,
for  our  sins,  this  was  not  [all]  the  evil  that  happened:  Posadnik
Fedor  rode  out  with  the  men  of  Russa  and  fought  with  the  Lithu-
anians ;  and  they  drove  the  men  of  Russa  from  their  horses  and  took
many  horses,  and  killed  Domazhir  Torlinits  and  his  son  and  of  the
men  of  Russa  Bogsha  and  many  others,  and  the  rest  they  drove
asunder  in  the  forest.  The  same  year,  for  our  sins,  unknown  tribes^
came,  whom  no  one  exactly  knows,  who  they  are,  nor  whence  they
came  out,  nor  what  their  language  is,  nor  of  what  race  they  are,  nor
what  their  faith  is;  but  the}'  call  them  Tartars,^  and  others  say
Taurmen,  and  others  Pecheneg  people,  and  others  say  that  they  are
those  of  whom  Bishop  Mefodi  of  Patmos  bore  witness,  that  they
came  out  from  the  Etrian  desert  which  is  between  East  and  North.
For  thu?  Mefodi  says,  that,  at  the  end  of  time,  those  are  to  appear
whom  Gideon  scattered,  and  they  shall  subdue  the  whole  land  from
the  East  to  the  Efrant,^  and  from  the  Tigris  to  the  Pontus  sea  except
Ethiopia.  God  alone  knows  who  they  are  and  whence  they  came
out.  Very  wise  men  know  them  exactly,  who  understand  books;
but  we  do  not  know  who  they  are,  but  have  written  of  them  here  for
the  sake  of  the  memory  of  the  Russian  Knyazes  and  of  the  misfor-
tune which  came  to  them  from  them.  For  we  have  heard  that  they
have  captured  many  countries,  slaughtered  a  quantity  of  the  god-
less Yas,  Obez,  Kasog  and  Polovets  peoples,  and  scattered  others,
who  all  died,  killed  thus  by  the  wrath  of  God  and  of  His  immaculate
Mother,  for  those  cursed  Polovets  people  had  wrought  much  evil
to  the  Russian  Land.  Therefore  the  all-merciful  God  wished  to
destroy  the  Kuman  people^,  godless  sons  of  Ishmael,  that  they  [might]
atone  for  the  blood  of  Christians  which  was  upon  them,  lawless  ones;
for  those  Taurmen  people  passed  through  the  whole  Kuman  country,
and  came  close  to  Russia  where  it  is  called  the  Polovets  Wall.^
And  the  cursed  Polovets  people,  the  survivors  of  those  who  were
killed,  escaped  [to  Russia],  Kotyan  with  other  Knyazes,  while  Danil
Kobyakovits  and  Gyurgi  were  killed,  and  with  them  a  quantity  of
the  Polovets  people.  And  this  Kotyan  was  father-in-law  to  Mstislav
of  Galich.  And  he  came  with  the  Polovets  Knyazes  with  greeting
to  his  son-in-law  Mstislav  in  Galich,  and  to  all  the  Russian  Knyazes,

*  Yurev  or  Dorpat.

*  Yazyk,  lit.  "  tongue."

*  Tatary.

*  Euphrates.

^  The  Polovtsi.
«  Val.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  65

and  brought  many  gifts:  b^r^ps  nn''^  ^^mp]'^,  buffaloes  and  girls:
and  they  gave  gifts  [of  these}  to  the  Russian  Knyazes,  saying  thus:
"  Our  land  they  have  taken  away  to-day;  and  yours  will  be  taken
to-morrow,"  and  Kotyan  appealed  to  his  son-in-law,  and  Mstislav
began  to  appeal  to  the  Russian  Knyazes,  his  brethren,  saying  thus :
"  If  we,  brothers,  do  not  help  these,  then  they  will  certainly  sur-
render to  them,^  then  the  strength  of  those  will  be  greater."  And
thus  having  deliberated  much  among  themselves,  they  made
themselves  ready  for  the  journey  because  of  both  the  greeting  and
the  appeal  of  the  Polovets  Knyazes.  And  they  began  to  organize
their  forces,  each  his  own  province,  and  they  went,  having  collected
the  whole  Russian  Land  against  the  Tartars,  and  were  on  the
Dnieper  at  Zarub.  Then  the  Tartars  having  learned  that  the  Rus-
sian Knyazes  were  coming  against  them  sent  envoys  to  the  Russian
Knyazes:  "  Behold,  we  hear  that  you  are  coming  against  us,  having
listened  to  the  Polovets  men ;  but  we  have  not  occupied  your  land,
nor  your  towns,  nor  your  villages,  nor  is  it  against  you  we  have
come.  But  we  have  come  sent  by  God  against  our  serfs ,^  and  our
horse-herds,  the  pagan  Polovets  men,  and  do  you  take  peace  with
us.  If  they  escape  to  you,  drive  them  off  thence,  and  take  to
yourselves  their  goods.  For  we  have  heard  that  to  you  also  they
have  done  much  harm ;  and  it  is  for  that  reason  also  we  are  fighting
them."  But  the  Russian  Knyazes  did  not  listen  to  this,  but  killed
all  the  envoys  and  themselves  went  against  them,  and  took  stand  on
the  Dnieper,  this  side  of  Oleshe.  And  the  Tartars  sent  to  them
envoys  a  second  time,  saying  thus:  "  Since  you  have  listened  to  the
Polovets  men,  and  have  killed  all  our  envoys,  and  are  coming  against
us,  come  then,  but  we  have  not  touched  you,  let  God  judge  all."
And  they  let  go  free  their  envoys.  And  then  Mstislav  having
forded  the  Dnieper  went  across  with  1,000  men,  against  the  Tartar
outposts,  and  defeated  them,  and  the  remainder  of  them  fled  with
their  Voyevoda  Gemya-Beg  to  the  Polovets  kiirgan^  and  there  they
could  not  hold  out,  and  they  buried  their  Voyevoda  Gemya-Beg
alive  in  the  earth,  wishing  to  preserve  his  life ;  and  there  the  Polovets
men,  having  begged  permission  of  Mstislav,  found  him,  and  killed
him.  And  having  heard  of  this  the  Russian  Knyazes  passed  over
the  Dnieper  in  a  body  and  went  all  together,  and  went  after  them
for  nine  days,  and  passed  over  the  Kalka  river,  sent  Yarun  with  the

^  sc.  the  Tartars.

2  Kholopy.

^  Burial-mound,  fort.

66 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Polovets  men  forward  as  outposts,  and  themselves  took  up  position
there  as  an  advance.  And  then  Yarun  came  together  with  them,
wishing  to  fight,  but  the  Polovets  men  ran  away  back,  having  ac-
complished nothing,  and  in  their  flight  they  trampled  the  camp  of
the  Russian  Knyazes,  for  they  had  not  had  time  to  form  into  order
against  them^;  and  they  were  all  thrown  into  confusion,  and  there
was  a  terrible  and  savage  slaughter.  And  Mstislav,  Knyaz  of
Kiev,  seeing  this  evil,  never  moved  at  all  from  his  position;  for  he
had  taken  stand  on  a  hill  above  the  river  Kalka,  and  the  place  was
stony,  and  there  he  set  up  a  stockade^  of  posts  about  him  and  fought
with  them  from  out  of  this  stockade  for  three  days.  And  other
Tartars  went  after  the  Russian  Knyazes  fighting  them  up  to  the
Dnieper,  but  two  Voyevodas  Tsigirkan  and  Teshukan  stopped  at  that
stockade  [fighting]  against  Mstislav  and  his  son-in-law,  Andrei  and
Olexander  of  Dubrovits ;  for  these  two  Knyazes  were  with  Mstislav.
And  there  were  there  men  in  armour  with  the  Tartars  and  Voyevoda
Ploskyna;  and  this  accursed  Voyevoda,  having  kissed  the  honourable
Cross  to  Mstislav  and  to  both  the  Knyazes  not  to  kill  them,  but  to
let  them  go  on  ransom,  lied,  accursed  one;  he  delivered  them  bound
to  the  Tartars,  and  they  took  the  stockade  and  slaughtered  the
people,  and  there  they  fell  dead.  And  having  taken  the  Knyazes  they
suffocated  them  having  put  them  under  boards,  and  themselves
took  seat  on  the  top  to  have  dinner.  And  thus  they  ended  their
lives.  And  pursuing  the  other  Knyazes  to  the  Dnieper  they  killed
six:  Svyatoslav of  Yanev,  Izyaslav  Ingvorovits,  Svyatoslav  Shumski,
Mstislav  of  Chernigov  with  his  son,  and  Gyurgi  of  NeSvezh.
And  then  Mstislav  Mstislavits  having  previously  escaped  across  the
Dnieper,  cut  loose  the  boats  from  the  bank  so  the  Tartars  should  not
go  after  them,  and  himself  barely  escaped.  And  of  the  rest  of  the
troops  every  tenth  returned  to  his  home;  some  the  Polovets  men
killed  for  their  horses,  and  others  for  their  clothes.  And  thus,  for
our  sins  God  put  misunderstanding  into  us,  and  a  countless  number
of  people  perished,  and  there  was  lamentation  and  weeping  and
grief  throughout  towns  and  villages.  This  evil  happened  on  May
31,  on  Saint  Eremei's^  Day.  And  the  Tartars  turned  back  from  the
river  Dnieper,  and  we  know  not  whence  they  came,  nor  where  they
liid  themselves  again;  God  knows  whence  he  fetched  them  against
us  for  our  sins.
The same year, Tverdislav and Fedor completed the stone

1  The  Tartars.

2  Gorod.  3  Jeremiah.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  67

Church  of  St.  Mikliail.  In  the  same  year,  there  was  terrible  thun-
der on  May  20,  the  Day  of  St.  Falalei;  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Tri-
nity was  burnt  down,  and  two  men  fell  dead.  The  same  year,
Simeon  Borisovich  built  a  stone  church  to  St.  Paul  and  St.  Simeon
the  Accepted  of  God,  and  to  SS.  Kostyantin  and  Elena, ^  and  they
consecrated  it  on  November  6,  St.  Paul's  Day.  The  same  year,  they
consecrated  the  Church  of  St.  Mikhail,  on  a  feast  day.  The  same
year,  Knyaz  Vsevolod  went  a  second  time  from  Novgorod  secretly
by  night  with  all  his  Court,  and  having  arrived  took  his  seat  in  Tor-
zhok;  and  his  father  Gyurgi  came  to  him  with  troops,  and  his  brother
Yaroslav  and  Vasilko  Kostyantinovits  with  the  men  of  Rostov,  and
Mikhail  with  those  of  Chernigov.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent
two  men  to  Gyurgi  at  Torzhok;  "  Knyaz,  let  come  to  us  thy  child,
and  thyself  go  from  Torzhok."  And  Gyurgi  said  to  the  envoys:
"  Give  up  to  me  Yakim  Ivankovits,  Mikifor  Tudorovits,  Ivanko
Timoshkinits,  Sdila  Svanits,  Vyachek,  Ivats,  and  Radko;  and  if
you  do  not  give  them  up,  I  have  watered  my  horses  in  the  Tvertsa
and  I  will  water  them  in  the  Volkhov  too."  And  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod collected  all  their  district  and  raised  a  wall-  around  the  town,
and  sent  Polyud,  Vyacheslav  Prokshinits,  and  Ivanko  Yaryshevits
to  G3airgi:  "  We  greet  thee,  Knyaz,  but  we  do  not  give  up  our  own
brothers,  and  do  not  thou  shed  blood;  otherwise,  thine  is  the
sword,  but  ours  are  the  heads."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
placed  outposts  on  the  roads  and  fashioned  forts,  they  wanted  to
die  for  St.  Sophia  in  the  cause  of  Posadnik  Ivanko  Dmitrovits.  And
Knyaz  Gyurgi  sent  his  man  the  Tysyatski  Roman  with  our  own  men
and  with  those  of  Mikhail:  "  Receive  from  me  my  brother-in-law
Mikhail."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  their  men  for  Mikhail,
and  Gyurgi  with  the  Knyazes  went  from  Torzhok,  having  done  them
much  damage  and  he  took  from  them  another  7,000  [grivnas].

A.D.  1225.  A.M.  6733.  Knyaz  Mikhail,  son  of  Vsevolod,  grandson  of
Oleg,  came  to  Novgorod,  and  it  was  easy
throughout  the  district  of  Novgorod.  And  the  same  year,  Knyaz
Mikhail  went  to  Gyurgi  taking  with  him  some  men  of  Novgorod  to
confiscate  the  goods  which  he  (Gyurgi)  had  seized  in  Torzhok  and
throughout  his  district.

The  same  year  having  recovered  the  goods  from  Gyurgi,  Knyaz
Mikhail  came  [back]  and  took  stand  in  Yaroslav's  Court,  and  said  to
the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  I  do  not  want  to  be  Knyaz  amongst  you;

^  Constantine  and  Helen. *  Ostroq.

F2

68  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

I  am  going  to  Chernigov ;  let  merchants  come  to  me ;  and  as  your
land  is  so  is  my  land."^  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  entreated  him
much  and  begged  him,  but  could  not  persuade  him,  and  so  they
escorted  him  out  with  honour.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to
Yaroslav  at  Pereyaslavl.  Vladyka  Anton  came  from  Peremyshl  to
Novgorod,  and  took  his  seat  on  his  own  throne;  and  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod were  glad  of  their  Vladyka.  The  same  winter  the  Lithuanians
came  and  wrought  countless  havoc  around  Torzhok;  but  they  did
not  come  to  Torzhok  by  three  versts;  there  were  7,000  of  them,  and
they  killed  many  merchants  and  they  occupied  the  whole  district
of  Toropets;  and  Knyaz  Yaroslav  and  Volodimir  with  his  son  and
with  the  men  of  Novi-torg,  the  Knyaz  s  Court,  some  men  of  Nov-
gorod, and  the  men  of  Toropets  with  their  Knyaz  David,  went
after  them,  and  they  sent  for  the  men  of  Novgorod,  but  they  having
come  as  far  as  Russa  turned  back.  And  Knyaz  Yaroslav  overtook
them^  on  [lake]  Vosvyat  and  turned  on  them;  and  thus  with  the
help  of  God  and  St.  Sophia  they  recovered  all  the  plunder  and  killed
2,000  of  them^  themselves,  and  the  rest  of  them  fled  asunder.  And
there  they  killed  Knyaz  David  of  Toropets  and  Vasili,  Yaroslav's
sword-bearer.

A.D.  1226.  A.M.  6734.  Knyaz  Yaroslav  came  [back]  to  Novgorod
and  did  not  make  it  a  cause  of  anger  that
they  had  not  followed  him.  Then  they  put  up  the  Church  of  the
Holy  Nativity  of  Christ.  The  same  year  Igumen  Savati  of  St.
Georgi,  Archimandrite  of  Novgorod,  died  on  April  16,  on  Great
Thursday.  Before  his  death  Savati  summoned  Vladyka  Anton,
and  Posadnik  Ivanko,  and  all  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  he  re-
quested all  his  brethren  and  all  the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  Choose  for
yourselves  an  Igumen."  And  they  said :  "  Whom  dost  thou  bless  ?  "
And  he  said:  "  Bring  in  the  Greek,  the  priest  of  SS.  Konstantin  and
Elena."  And  they  brought  in  the  Greek,  a  good  and  very  God-
fearing man,  and  they  shore  him  the  same  day,  March  2,  St.  Fedot's^
Day,  and  they  appointed  him  Igumen  on  March  8,  the  Day  of  St.
Feofilakt*  in  congregation.  And  the  same  year  they  founded  the
Church  of  St.  Yakov^  in  stone,  in  the  Nerev  end.

A.D.  1227.  A.M.  6735. Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  with  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod against  the  Yem  people;  and  ravaged

J  sc.  they  are  one.

*  sc.  the  Lithuanians.
3  Theodosius.

*  Theophylact. ^  James.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 69

the  whole  land  and  brought  back  countless  plunder.  And  the  same
year  they  burned  four  sorcerers,  they  thought  they  were  practising
sorcery,  but  God  knows,  and  they  burned  them  in  Yaroslav's
Court.  The  same  year  Vyacheslav,  Malishev's  grandson,  painted  the
Church  of  the  Forty  Saints;  and  God  grant  him  salvation.

A.D.  1228.  A.M.  6736.  Anton,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  went  of  his
own  free  will  to  Khutin,  to  the  [church  of
the]  Holy  Saviour.  The  same  year  the  Yem  people  came  into  lake
Ladoga  in  boats, ^  to  make  war,  and  the  news  reached  Novgorod  on
the  Saviour's  Day.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  taken  seat
in  their  boats,  rowed  to  Ladoga  with  Knyaz  Yaroslav.  And  Volodis-
lav,  Posadnik  of  Ladoga  with  the  men  of  Ladoga,  not  waiting  for
the  men  of  Novgorod,  went  after  them  in  pursuit  in  boats
where  they  were  making  war,  and  came  up  with  them,  and  fought
with  them.  And  night  came  on,  and  they  retired  to  a  small  island,
and  the  Yem  people  [remained]  on  the  shore  with  their  plunder;
for  they  had  been  making  war  at  the  landings  and  at  Olonets.
And  that  same  night  having  sued  for  peace,  the  Posadnik  and  the
men  of  Ladoga  did  not  grant  it;  and  they-  having  slaughtered  all
their  captives,  themselves  fled  into  the  forest  on  foot  having  cast
the  boats  adrift.  Many  of  them  fell  there,  and  they  burned  their
boats.  The  men  of  Novgorod  remaining  several  days  on  the  Neva
held  a  council;  and  they  tried  to  kill  Sudimir,  but  the  Knyaz  hid
him  in  his  boat.  Thence  the  men  of  Novgorod,  without  waiting
for  the  men  of  Ladoga,  returned  to  Novgorod.  And  the  Izhora
people  who  had  stayed  behind,  met  them  as  they  fled,  and  there
killed  a  great  many  of  them.  And  the  rest  fled  asunder;  but  these
the  Korel  people,  whichever  way  they  went,  whether  by  the  woods,
or  by  the  fields,  or  to  their  tents,  discovered  and  killed.  It  is
thought  that  2,000  or  more  of  them  had  come;  God  knows,  and
few  of  them  escaped  to  their  own  country ;  all  the  rest  perished.

The  same  year,  before  this  war,  Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  to  Pleskov
with  Posadnik  Ivanko  and  the  Tysyatski  Vyacheslav.  The  people
of  Pleskov  hearing  that  the  Knyaz  was  coming  to  them,  shut  them-
selves up  in  the  town  and  would  not  let  him  come  to  them.  And  the
Knyaz  having  stayed  a  little  at  Dubrovna,  returned  to  Novgorod.
For  the  report  had  got  abroad  in  Pleskov  that  he  was  bringing
fetters,  intending  to  put  their  biggest  men  into  fetters. And  having

1  Lodka.

2  sc.  the  Yem  people.

70 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

returned  he  called  a  Veche  in  the  Vladyka's  Court,  and  said:  "  I
had  not  planned  any  harm  to  the  people  of  Pleskov;  but  I  took
presents  to  them  in  chests,  stuffs  and  fruit;  and  they  have  dishon-
oured me."  And  he  put  a  great  complaint  against  them.  And  then
he  brought  up  troops  from  Pereyaslavl,  saying:  "  I  want  to  go
against  Riga."  And  tents  stood  around  the  Gorodishche,  and  others
about  the  courts^  in  Slavno.  And  they  made  all  dearer  in  the
market,  bread  and  meat  and  fish;  and  thence  forward  the  dearness
remained,  they  bought  bread  at  two  kimas,  a  kad  of  rye  at  three
grivnas,  of  wheat  five  grivnas,  millet  seven  grivnas;  and  thus  it
remained  for  three  years.  And  the  people  of  Pleskov  having  heard
that  Yaroslav  was  bringing  up  troops,  became  afraid  and  took  peace
with  the  men  of  Riga  independently  of  Novgorod  saying:  "  You  be
by  yourselves  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  by  themselves,  we  will  have
nothing  to  do  with  either ;  but  if  they  come  against  us,  then  you  help
us."  And  they  said :  "  Be  it  so."  And  they  took  of  them  forty  men
as  hostages.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  learnt,  said:  "  The
Knyaz  calls  upon  us  to  go  against  Riga,  but  he  wanted  to  go  against
Pleskov."  Then  the  Knyaz  sent  Misha  to  Pleskov,  saying:  "  Come
on  the  march  with  me;  I  have  not  planned  any  evil  against  you.
But  give  over  to  me  those  who  have  calumniated  me  to  you."  And
the  men  of  Pleskov  said,  sending  a  Greek:  "  We  greet  thee,  Knyaz,
and  our  brothers  the  men  of  Novgorod.  We  will  not  go  on  the  march
and  will  not  give  up  our  brethren;  and  with  the  people  of  Riga  we
have  taken  peace.  You  marched  to  Kolyvan,  took  silver,  and  then
you  went  back  to  Novgorod  and  you  did  not  do  justice,  and  did  not
take  the  town.  Then,  too,  at  Kes,  and  thus  at  Medvezhya-Golova ;
and  for  that  they  killed  our  brethren  at  the  lake,  and  others  were
captured,  and  you  having  embroiled  [us]  there,  went  off.  If  you
have  planned  against  us,  then  we  shall  resist  you  with  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  and  with  our  greeting.  Then  better  cut  us  to  pieces
and  take  to  yourselves  our  wives  and  children,  no  better  than  the
pagans.  This  is  our  greeting  to  you."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
said  to  the  Knyaz;  "Without  our  brethren  the  men  of  Pleskov
we  will  not  go  against  Riga,  and  we  bow  down  to  thee,  Knyaz."
And  the  Knyaz  urged  them  much,  but  they  would  not  go  on  the
march,  and  then  Knyaz  Yaroslav  sent  home  his  troops.  The  men
of  Pleskov  had  brought  up  the  Nemtsy,^  Chud  people,  Letts,^  and
Livonians,*  and  then  let  them  go  again,  and  those  who  had  bounty

>  Houses.  2  cf.  p.  34.

=*  Lotygola.  *  Lib.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  71

from  Yaroslav  they  drove  out  of  Pleskov :  "  Go  after  your  own  Knyaz,
you  are  no  brothers  to  us."  Yaroslav  then  went  from  Novgorod  to
Pereyaslavl  with  his  Knyaginya,  and  left  his  two  sons  Feodor  and
Alexander  in  Novgorod  with  Fedor  Danilovits  and  the  Tiuri^  Yakim.

The  same  autumn,  great  rain  came  down  day  and  night,  on  our
Lady's  Day,^  and  till  St.  Nicholas  Day,^  we  saw  not  the  light  of
day;  the  people  could  not  get  the  hay  nor  do  the  fields.

Then  the  accursed  devil,  who  from  the  beginning  desired  no  good
to  man,  and  jealous  of  him  because  he  drove  him  away  by
nightly  vigils,  singing,  and  prayer,  stirred  up  a  great  tumult  amongst
the  common  people  against  Arseni,  a  modest  and  gentle  man;
and  they  made  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court  and  went  to  the  Vla-
dyka's  Court,  saying:  "  It  is  warm  so  long  because  he  took  away
Vladyka  Anton  to  Khutin  and  himself  took  his  seat,  having  given
reward  to  the  Knyaz."  And  pushing  him  through  the  gates,  they
drove  him  out  like  a  miscreant,  God  barely  saved  him  from  death;
he  shut  himself  in  St.  Sophia  and  then  went  to  Khutin.  And  the
next  day  they  fetched  in  Vladyka  Anton  again,  and  put  with  him
two  men,  Yakun  Moisevits  and  Mikifor  the  guard.  And  that  was
not  enough  evil,  there  was  more  than  that:  the  whole  town  rose  in
tumult,  and  they  went  from  the  Veche  in  arms  against  the  Tysyat-
ski  Vyacheslav,  and  plundered  his  Court  and  those  of  his  brother
Boguslav,  of  Andrei  the  Vladyka' s  steward,  of  Davidko  Sophiski,  and
of  Sudimir.  And  against  Dushilits,  elder  of  Lipna,  they  also  sent
to  plunder,  and  were  going  to  hang  him,  but  he  escaped  on  horse-
back to  Yaroslav.  But  they  took  his  wife  saying  that:  "These
people  urge  the  Knyaz  to  evil,"  and  the  tumult  in  the  town  was
great.  The  same  autumn  there  was  great  water  in  the  Volkhov;
around  the  lake  and  along  the  Volkhov  it  carried  away  the  hay.  Then
the  lake'*  having  frozen  and  stood  for  three  days,  a  south  wind  drove
it  up  and  having  broken  [the  ice]  carried  it  into  the  Volkhov,  tore
away  nine  stays  of  the  great  bridge,  and  carried  down  eight  by  night
to  the  Pitba  stream  on  St.  Nicholas  Day,  and  the  ninth  it  carried
away  on  December  8,  St.  Potapi  Day.  For  God  wished  not  to  see
bloodshed  among  brothers,  nor  to  give  joy  to  the  devil:  for  the
accursed  one  rejoices  in  bloodshed  among  brothers,  but  the  good
God  so  willed  it.

1  Bailiff.

2  The  Assumption.

3  December  19.
*  Lake  Ilmen.

72 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

They  then  took  the  office  of  Tysyatski  from  Vyacheslav  and  gave
it  to  Boris  Negovich,  and  they  sent  a  message  to  Knyaz  Yaroslav
about  it:  "  Come  to  us;  lay  down  an  oath  not  to  send  judges  about
the  district.  On  condition  of  our  whole  liberty  and  of  all  the
charters^  of  Yaroslav  be  thou  our  Knyaz.  Or  be  thou  to  thyself,  and
we  to  ourselves."

The  same  winter,  Fedor  Danilovits  fled  with  the  Tiun  Yakim  by
night  on  Tuesday  in  Quinquagesima  week,  taking  with  them  the
two  young  Knyazes  Fedor  and  Alexander.  Then  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod said:  "  They  must  have  planned  some  harm  to  St.  Sophia
and  have  run  away;  we  did  not  drive  them  out;  but  have  executed
our  own  brothers,  and  we  have  done  the  Knyaz  no  wrong.  May
God  and  the  Honourable  Cross  judge  them;  and  we  will  provide  us  a
Knyaz,"  and  they  kissed  the  [ikon  of  the]  Holy  Mother  of  God  that
they  would  all  be  united,  and  they  sent  Khota  Stanimirovits  and
Gavrilo  of  Lyubyanitsa  [Street]  for  Mikhail  to  Chernigov.  And  they
came  to  Smolensk  and  the  Knyaz  of  Smolensk  at  the  instance  of
Yaroslav  would  not  let  them  go,  and  occupied  all  the  roads.  But
if  God  be  with  us,  who  is  against  us  ?  And  Mikhail  having  learnt
that  the  emissaries  of  Novgorod  were  kept  in  Smolensk,  for  he  was
then  at  Bryn  with  his  son,  went  in  haste  to  Torzhok  and  came  to
Torzhok  in  Palm  week;  and  all  the  people  were  glad.

A.D.  1229.  A.M.  6737. Knyaz Mikhail came from Chernigov to

Novgorod  on  Holy  Day,  at  the  close  of  St.

Thomas's  Week,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad  at  their  choice ;

and  he  kissed  the  Cross  on  the  whole  liberty  of  Novgorod  and  on  all

the  charters  of  Yaroslav,  and  he  granted  the  serfs  freedom  not  to

pay  taxes  for  five  years,  who  ever  had  fled  to  other  folk's  land,  and

those  who  live  here  he  ordered  to  pay  taxes  as  former  Knyazes  had

fixed. And  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  much  money-  from  Yaros-

lav's  favourites  and  the  people  of  Gorodishche  ;  they  did  not  plunder

their  houses  but  made  them  give  towards  the  building  of  the  great

bridge. The  same  year  they  began  the  foundation  of  a  great  bridge

above  the  old  bridge. They  then took  the  Posadnik-ship  from

Ivanko  Dmitrovits  and  gave  it  to  Vnezd  Vodovik;  and  they  gave

Torzhok  to  Ivanko ;  he  went  to  Torzhok  but  the  Novi-torg  people

would  not  receive  him,  and  thence  he  went  to  Yaroslav.

The  same  year,  Knyaz  Mikhail  said: "Behold, you  have  no

Vladyka,  and  it  is  not  seemly  for  this  town  to  be  without  a  Vladyka.

^  Gramofa.
-  Kuny.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 73

And  since  God  has  laid  his  punishment  on  Anton,  do  you  elect  a
fitting  man,  whether  from  amongst  priests,  Igumens,  or  monks."
And  some  said  to  the  K^iyaz;  "  There  is  a  monk,  a  deacon  at  St.
Georgi's  by  name  Spiridon,  he  is  worthy  of  it !  "  And  others  named
Osaf,  Bishop  of  Volodimir  in  Volynia,  and  yet  others  a  Greek.
"  Whomever  the  Metropolitan  shall  give,  that  one  shall  be  our
father."  And  Knyaz  Mikhail  said:  "  Let  us  cast  three  lots,  whom
God  will  give  us."  And  having  written  out  the  names  they  laid
them  on  the  holy  table  and  sent  out  the  young  Knyaz  Rostislav
from  the  Vladyka's  council  chamber. ^  God  chose  him  a  servant
and  shepherd  of  the  speaking  sheep  in  Novgorod  and  in  all  its  pro-
vince, and  Spiridon  was  drawn ;  and  they  sent  for  him  to  the  monas-
tery and  having  brought  him,  they  set  him  in  the  court,  until  he
should  go  to  Kiev  to  be  appointed.

The  same  year,  Knyaz  Mikhail  went  to  Chernigov  to  his  brothers,
taking  with  him  the  Novgorod  men,  Boguslav  Gorislavits,  Sbyslav
Yakunkovits,  Domash  Tverdislavits,  Gleb,  son  of  the  Posadnik,
Mikhail  Mikiforovits,  and  Mikhail  Prikupov;  and  his  son  Rostislav
he  left  in  Novgorod.  "  God  grant  me,"  he  said,  "  that  I  obtain
justice  for  Novgorod,  that  then  I  may  take  my  son  from  you."
And  he  sent  Nezdilo  Prokshinits  and  Ivanko  Tudorkovits  to  Yaros-
lav,  saying:  "  Give  up  the  Volokr  and  all  thou  hast  that  belongs  to
Novgorod,  which  thou  hast  occupied  by  force,  and  kiss  the  Cross."
And  Yaroslav  said:  "  I  will  not  give  up  that,  and  do  not  kiss  the
Cross;  you  for  yourself  and  I  for  myself."  And  he  detained  the
emissaries  all  the  summer.  The  same  year  Spiridon  went  to  Kiev
for  confirmation  by  the  Metropolitan,  to  be  appointed  on  December
17.  The  same  winter,  the  Lithuanians  came  and  ravaged  [the  towns
and  districts  of]  Lyubno,  Moreva,  and  Serigeri,  the  men  of  Novgorod
pursued  them  and  having  overtaken  them,  beat  them,  and  took
away  all  their  captives,  in  the  month  of  January.

A.D.  1230.  A.M.  6738.  The  earth  quaked  on  a  Friday  in  the  fifth
week  after  Easter  during  dinner,  and  some
had  already  dined.  And  this,  brethren,  was  not  for  good,  but  for
evil;  God  shows  us  his  signs  because  of  our  sins,  that  we  repent  us
of  our  sins.  What  great  mortality  God  brought  on  us  that  spring  [
And  yet  seeing  this  we  understood  not  our  ruin;  but  were  more
prone  to  evil. The  same  year,  on  May  14,  St.  Sidor^  Day,  on  Tues-

1  Gridnitsa.

2  Volok  Lamsk.
*  Isidore.

74 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

day,  in  the  middle  of  the  morning  the  sun  grew  dark  and  became
hke  a  moon  of  the  fifth  night ;  and  it  filled  out  again  and  we  godless
ones  were  glad.  On  the  19th  of  the  same  month  on  [the  day  of]
the  Veche  of  the  318  holy  Fathers,  Vladyka  Spiridon  came
to  Novgorod,  appointed  by  the  Metropolitan  Kuril^;  he  was
appointed  priest  in  Quinquagesima  week,  and  Vladyka  after  Holy
Week  on  Veche  [Day].  The  same  year,  Knyaz  Mikhail  had  his
son  Rostislav  shorn  in  St.  Sophia  in  Novgorod,  and  Vladyka  Spiridon
took  off  his  hair;  and  he  set  him  on  the  throne,  but  himself  went  to
Chernigov.  The  same  year,  Stepan  Tverdislavits  quarrelled  with
Vodovik,  Ivanko  Timoshkinits  siding  with  Stepan,  and  the  Posad-
nik's  servants  beat  Ivanko;  this  happened  in  the  Gorodishche.
And  the  next  morning  he  called  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court
against  the  Posadnik,  and  went  against  his  Court,  and  they
plundered  it.  The  Posadnik  and  Simon  Borisovich  again  roused  up
the  whole  town  against  Ivanko  and  Yakim  Vlunkovits  and  Proksha
Lashnev;  they  went  from  the  Veche  and  plundered  many  houses
and  they  killed  Volos  Blutkinits  at  the  Veche.  The  Posadnik
said:  "  Thou  didst  try  to  set  fire  to  my  Court. "^  Proksha's  Court
they  set  fire  to,  and  Yakim  fled  to  Yaroslav,  while  others  hid
themselves,  but  they  made  these  take  oath  and  then  let  them  go.
And  Vodovik  having  caught  Ivanko,  later  killed  him,  casting  him
into  the  Volkhov.  And  God  seeing  our  lawlessness  and  our  hatred
of  our  brothers,  and  our  rebelliousness  against  each  other,  jealousy,
and  false  swearings  by  the  Cross  which  the  angels  cannot  look  on
and  turn  their  many-eyed  wings  from,  we  holding  it  in  our  hands  kiss
with  foul  lips,  therefore,  God  brought  the  pagans  upon  us  and  they
laid  waste  our  land.  Ourselves  not  watching  at  all,  we  [without
mercy]  lost  our  power,  and  so  it  became  empty:  and  thus  did  the
Lord  God  reward  us  according  to  our  deeds.

On  [the  Day  of]  the  Exaltation^  of  the  Honourable  Cross,  a  frost
killed  the  crops  throughout  our  district  and  from  that  there  arose
great  misery.  We  began  to  buy  bread  at  eight  kunas,  a  barrel  of
rye  at  twenty  grivnas,  or  at  twenty-five  in  the  courts,  wheat  at
forty  grivnas,  millet  at  eight,  and  oats  at  thirteen  grivnas;  our  town
and  our  country  went  asunder  and  other  towns  and  countries  be-
came full  of  our  own  brothers  and  sisters;  and  the  rest  began  to  die.
And  who  would  not  weep  at  this,  seeing  the  dead  lying  in  the
streets,  and  the  little  ones  devoured  by  dogs? And  God  put  into

1  CyrU.

-  House. ■'  September  26.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  75

the  heart  of  Vladyka  Spiriclon  to  do  good.  He  put  a  common  grave
by  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Apostles  in  Prussian  Street  and  engaged  a
good  and  gentle  man  by  name  Stanila  to  carry  the  dead  on  horses
wherever  he  went  about  the  town  and  so  continuously  he  dragged
them  every  day;  and  he  filled  it  up  to  the  top;  there  were  3,030  in  it.

The  same  winter,  the  young  Knyaz  Rostislav  went  with  Posadnik
Vnezd  to  Torzhok,  on  December  8,  on  a  Sunday.  And  the  next
morning,  the  9th,  they  killed  Semen  Borisovits  and  plundered  his
whole  house  and  his  villages,  took  his  wife,  and  himself  they  buried
at  the  Church  of  St.  Gyurgi^  in  the  monastery.  Similarly  the  house
and  villages  of  Vodovik  and  of  his  brother  Mikhail,  of  Danislav,  of
Boris  the  Tysyatski,  and  of  Tvorimirits  and  the  houses  of  many
others.  And  Vodovik  having  heard  this  evil  fled  from  Torzhok
with  his  brothers,  and  the  Tysyatski  Boris  with  the  men  of  Novi-
torg  fled  to  Mikhail  to  Chernigov.

They  gave  the  Posadnik-shi^  to  Stepan  Tverdislavich,  and  to
Mikita  Petrilovits  the  office  of  Tysyatski,  and  Semen's  and  Vodo-
vik's  property  they  distributed  among  a  hundred.  They  laboured
collecting,  and  these  got  the  fruit  of  their  labours;  for  of  such  the
Holy  Spirit  said:  "  He  collecteth,  and  knoweth  not  for  whom  he
collecteth."

And  they  showed  young  Knyaz  Rostislav  the  road  from  Torzhok
and  [sent  him]  to  his  father  in  Chernigov:  "  As  thy  father  said  he
would  mount  his  horse  for  war  on  Exaltation  Day,-  and  kissed
the  Cross;  behold,  it  is  now  St.  Michael's  Day,^  the  kissing  of  the
Cross  has  fallen  from  us,'*  go  thou  away,  and  we  will  provide  a  Knyaz
for  ourselves."  And  they  sent  for  Yaroslav,  with  [reservation  of]  all
the  liberties  of  Novgorod.  And  Yaroslav  came  quickly  to  Novgorod
on  December  30,  and  made  a  Veche  and  kissed  [the  ikon  of]  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  in  [confirmation  of]  all  the  charters^  of  Yaroslav.
And  having  sat  two  weeks  he  returned  to  Pereyaslavl,  taking  some
of  the  younger  men  of  Novgorod  with  him,  and  he  set  his  two  sons
Fedor  and  Alexander  in  Novgorod.

The  same  winter,  Yaroslav,  Vladyka  Spiridon  and  the  whole
of  Novgorod  led  in  Igumen  Arseni,  a  mild  and  gentle  man,  from  the
Church of Saint  Saviour  in  Khutin and  made  him  Igumen  of

*  George.

-  September  26.
3  November  21.

*  sc.  our  oath  is  annulled.
5  Gramota.

76 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

St.  Georgi.  And  they  deprived  Sava  of  it,  and  confined  him  in  a  cell,
and  being  taken  ill,  he  lay  six  weeks,  and  died  on  March  15,  on
Saturday,  before  morning,  and  so  he  was  buried  by  Igumen  Arseni
and  the  entire  brotherhood.  God  grant  [the  fulfilment  of]  his
prayers  to  all  Christians  and  to  me  the  sinful  Timofei,  sacristan;
for  he  was  a  good  man,  mild,  gentle  and  without  anger.  May  God
give  peace  to  his  soul  with  all  the  righteous  in  the  kingdom  of
Heaven !  And  we  will  turn  to  the  preceding,  to  the  bitter  and  sad
memory  of  that  spring.  For  what  is  there  to  say,  or  what  to  speak
of  the  punishment  that  came  to  us  from  God  ?  How  that  some  of
the  common  people  killed  the  living  and  ate  them ;  others  cutting  up
dead  flesh  and  corpses  ate  them;  others  ate  horseflesh,  dogs  and  cats;
but  to  those  found  in  such  acts  they  did  thus — some  they  burned
with  fire,  others  they  cut  to  pieces,  and  others  they  hanged.  Some
fed  on  moss,  snails,  pine-bark,  lime-bark,  lime  and  elm-tree  leaves,
and  whatever  each  could  think  of.  And  again  other  wicked  men
began  to  burn  the  good  people's  houses,  where  they  suspected  that
there  was  rye;  and  so  they  plundered  their  property.  Instead  of
repentance  for  our  wickedness,  we  became  more  prone  to  wickedness
than  before,  though  seeing  before  our  eyes  the  wrath  of  God:  the
dead  in  the  streets  and  in  the  market-place,  and  on  the  great  bridge,
being  devoured  by  dogs,  so  that  they  could  not  bury  them.  They
put  another  pit  outside  at  the  end  of  Chudinets  Street,  and  that
became  full,  and  there  is  no  counting  [the  number  of  bodies  in  it].
And  they  put  a  third  at  Koleno  beyond  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Nativity,  and  that  likewise  became  full,  there  was  no  counting  the
bodies.  And  seeing  all  this  before  our  eyes  we  should  have  become
better;  but  we  became  worse.  Brother  had  no  sympathy  with
brother,  nor  father  with  son,  nor  mother  with  daughter,  nor  would
neighbour  break  bread  with  neighbour.  There  was  no  kindness
among  us,  but  misery  and  unhappiness;  in  the  streets  unkindness
one  to  another,  at  home  anguish,  seeing  children  crying  for  bread
and  others  dying.  And  we  were  buying  a  loaf  for  a  grivna  and
more,  and  a  fourth  of  a  barrel  of  rye  for  one  silver  grivna.  Fathers
and  mothers  gave  away  their  children  into  servitude  to  merchants
for  bread.  This  distress  was  not  in  our  land  alone;  but  over  the
whole  Russian  province  except  Kiev  alone.  And  so  has  God
rewarded  us  according  to  our  deeds.

A.D.  1231.  A.M.  6739. A  fire  broke  out,  starting  from  the  house  of
Matvei Vyshkovits  and  the  whole  of  the

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  77

Slavenski  quarter^  nearly  to  the  Kholm  quarter  beyond  St.  Ilya^
was  burned.  But  God  watched  over  the  holy  churches,  although
the  fire  was  so  fierce  that  it  seemed  to  burn  on  the  water,  passing
over  the  Volkhov  in  the  sight  of  all ;  and  several  people  were  drowned
in  the  Volkhov.  The  same  year,  God  showed  His  mercy  towards  us
sinners.  He  did  His  mercy  quickly.  The  Neniisy'^  came  from
beyond  sea  with  corn  and  with  flour,  and  they  did  much  good,  for
this  town  was  already  near  its  end.

The  same  autumn,  Yaroslav  marched  with  an  army  to  the  Cherni-
gov district,  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  with  all  his  force  against
Mikhail,  and  burned  Sherensk;  and  after  camping  near  Mosalsk
he  turned  back  again,  having  destroyed  many  crops.  And  there,
too,  near  the  town  they  shot  the  commander  [of  the  troops]  Oldan,
and  they  went  away  without  peace.  The  same  year  the  Posadnik
of Novgorod,  Vodovik  Vnezd  died  in  Chernigov.

A.D.  1232.  A.M.  6740.  Boris  Negotsevich,  Mikhal  with  his  brother
Peter  Vodovikovits,  Gleb  the  brother  of
Smen,  Misha  Borisovich  with  the  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  [Trubetskoi,
came  in  mid-Lent  from  Chernigov,  and  reached  the  village  of
Buitsa,  the  village  of  St.  Georgi,  and  thence  they  turned  back  again]
into  Russia,  on  finding  that  these  men  had  lied  to  them.  And  they
pushed  on  to  Pleskov,  seized  Vyacheslav,  and  after  beating  him,
put  him  in  chains.  Meantime,  in  Novgorod,  there  was  a  great
tumult,  for  Knyaz  Yaroslav  was  not  there,  he  was  then  in  Pereyas-
lavl.  And  on  his  arrival  from  Pereyaslavl  he  seized  the  men  of
Pleskov  and  imprisoned  them  in  the  Veche  chamber  in  the  Goro-
dishche  and  he  sent  to  Pleskov,  saying:  "  Let  my  men  go  and  show
those  the  road,  whence  they  came."  They,  however,  stood
staunchly  for  them,  but  said:  "  Send  their  wives  and  goods  to  them,
then  we  will  let  go  Vyacheslav;  otherwise  we  to  ourselves  and  you
to  yourselves."  And  so  all  the  year  they  were  without  peace;
and  the  Knyaz  did  not  let  merchants  go  to  them ;  and  they  were
buying  salt  at  seven  grivnas  a  berkovets'^ ;  and  they  let  go  Vyacheslav.
And  the  Knyaz  let  the  wives  of  Boris,  Gleb  and  Misha  go  to  them ;
but  he  did  not  take  peace.  And  it  happened  in  the  winter  the  men
of  Pleskov  came  to  the  Knyaz  and  did  obeisance  to  him:  "  Thou
art  our  Knyaz,"  and  they  asked  Yaroslav  for  his  son  Fedor,  but  he
did  not  give  them  his  son,  and  said:  "  Lo,  I  give  you  my  brother-

^  Slavno.

*  Elias.

3  cf .  p.  34. *  Ten  puds.

78 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

in-law,  Gyurgi,  that  is  your  Knyaz."  They  took  him  and  led  him
to  Pleskov,  and  they  showed  the  road  to  the  sons  of  Boris,  with
their  wives ;  and  they  went  to  Medvezhya  Golova.

The  same  year,  Svyatoslav  Mstislavich,  grandson  of  Roman,
took  Smolensk  by  assault  with  the  men  of  Polotsk,  on  Boris  Day,
cut  to  pieces  the  people  of  Smolensk,  and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne.

Vladyka  Anton  died  on  October  8  of  the  same  year.  This  blessed
Vladyka  Anton  before  his  exile  had  sat  on  the  Bishop's  chair  eight
years  after  Mitrofan,  and  [was]  in  exile  six  years;  he  then  came  from
Peremyshl  to  Novgorod  and  sat  two  years,  and  became  dumb  on  St.
Olex  Day;  he  was  in  that  illness  six  years  and  seven  months  and
nine  days;  and  so  he  died,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  porch  of  St.
Sophia  in  the  presence  of  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Vsevolodits  and  of
Vladyka  Spiridon.

A.D.  1233.  A.M.  6741.  The  people  of  Izborsk  drove  out  the  children
of  Boris  together  with  Knyaz  Yaroslav
Volodimirits  and  the  Nemtsy.'^  But  the  men  of  Pleskov  sur-
rounded Izborsk,  captured  the  Knyaz  and  killed  the  Nemets^  Danila,
and  the  rest  fled;  and  they  delivered  them  to  the  great  Yaroslav
who  imprisoned  them  in  Pereyaslavl.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Fedor,  the  eldest  son  of  Yaroslav,  died,
on  June  10,  and  he  was  laid  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Georgi;  he  was
still  young.  And  who  would  not  pity  him?  The  wedding  was
arranged;  the  mead  was  brewed,  the  bride  was  brought,  the  Knyazes
invited.  And  in  place  of  merriment  there  was  weeping  and  grieving
for  our  sins.  But  0,  Lord,  glory  to  Thee,  heavenly  ruler;  since  this
was  Thy  will ! But  rest  be  to  him  with  all  the  righteous !

The  same  year  the  Church  of  St.  Fedor  at  the  gates  of  the  Nerev
quarter  was  founded.

The  same  year  died  the  blessed  Metropolitan  of  Kiev  and  of  all
Russia,  by  name  Kyuril,  he  was  by  birth  a  Greek,  and  had  been
brought  from  Nikeya.^

The  same  year,  the  Nemtsy  drove  out  Kyuril  Sinkinits  from  Tesov
and  led  him  to  Medvezhya  Golova  and  he  sat  in  chains  from
our  Lady's  Day  until  Lent,  Knyaz  Yaroslav  not  being  in  Nov-
gorod, but  he  had  gone  away  to  Pereyaslavl.  And  the  Knyaz
having  come  set  him  free  with  the  aid  of  God  and  St.  Sophia,

1  cf.  p.  34.

2  German.
•"  Nicaea.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  79

and  he  brought  his  troops  in  great  numbers  to  Novgorod,  intending
to  go  against  them.

A.D.  1234.  A.M.  6742.  Knyaz  Yaroslav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
and  with  the  whole  district,  and  with  his
own  forces,  went  against  the  Nemtsy  towards  Yurev,  and  the
Knyaz  halted  before  he  had  reached  the  town  with  his  forces,  and
he  let  his  people  ravage  the  land.  But  the  Nemtsy  issued  out  of
the  town,  some  staying  to  guard  Medvezhya  Golova,  and  fought
with  them  right  up  to  the  main  force.  And  God  helped  Knyaz
Yaroslav  with  the  men  of  Novgorod ;  and  they  drove  them  down  to
the  river,  and  several  of  the  best  Nemtsy  fell  there;  and  when
the  Nemtsy  were  crossing  the  river  Omovyzh^  they  broke  through
and  many  were  drowned;  and  some  of  the  wounded  escaped  to
Yurev,  others  to  Medvezhya  Golova.  And  they  laid  much  of
their  land  waste,  and  destroyed  many  of  their  crops  about  Yurev
and  Medvezhya  Golova.  And  the  Nemtsy  did  obeisance  to  the
Knyaz,  and  Yaroslav  took  peace  with  them  on  his  own  terms,  and
the  men  of  Novgorod  returned  all  well,  but  some  men  of  the  Low
country-  fell.

The  same  year  the  Church  of  St.  Luke  in  the  L3mdin  quarter
was  burned  down  from  thunder  in  the  evening  of  June  10.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanians  drove  the  men  of  Russa  nearly
as  far  as  the  market  place  and  the  men  of  Russa  halted ;  and  [there
was]  an  ambuscade;  and  the  citizens  and  body-guard  and  some  of
the  merchants  and  traders  drove  them  out  of  the  town^  again,
fighting  in  the  field,  and  here  they  killed  several  of  the  Lithuanians,
and  four  of  the  men  of  Russa:  the  priest  Petrila,  Paul  Obradits,  and
two  other  men.  And  they  pillaged  the  whole  monastery  of  St.
Saviour,  and  the  whole  church  they  stripped,  the  images  and  the
altar,  and  four  monks  they  killed,  and  retired  to  Klin.  Then  the
news  came  to  Novgorod  to  Knyaz  Yaroslav,  and  the  Knyaz  with  the
men  of  Novgorod  taking  to  the  boats,  and  others  on  horse-back,
went  after  them  up  the  Lovot.  And  when  they  came  to  the  village
of  Moravin  the  boatmen  turned  back  thence  to  the  town;  and  the
Knyaz  let  them  go  because  they  had  not  enough  bread,  and  he
himself  with  the  mounted  men  went  after  them  and  overtook  them

1  Embach.

2  Niz,  Nizovskaya  zemlya,  sc.  the  basin  of  the  Volga,  and  the  country  S.E.  of
Moscow  generally.

3  Posad.

80 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

at  Dubrovna,  a  village  in  the  Toropets  district,  and  there  he  fought
with  the  accursed  and  godless  [Lithuanians].  And  there  God
[helped  them]  and  the  Holy  Cross  and  the  Holy  Sophia,  the  Mighty
Wisdom  of  God,  helped  Knyaz  Yaroslav  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
over  the  pagans,  and  they  took  from  them  300  of  their  horses  with
their  goods  and  they  fled  into  the  woods,  having  thrown  down  their
arms  and  shields  and  lances  and  everything  from  themselves;  and
others  fell  here  dead.  And  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  they  killed
there  ten  men :  Feda  Yakunovich  the  Tysyatski,  Gavrilo  the  shield-
maker,  Negutin  from  Lubyanitsa,  Nezhila  the  silversmith,  Gostilets
of  Kusma-Demyan  Street,  Fedor  Uma  of  the  Knyaz's  household,  a
townsman,  and  three  other  men.  And  may  God  grant  peace  to  their
souls  in  the  kingdom  of  Heaven,  who  spilt  their  blood  for  St.  Sophia
and  for  Christian  blood.

A.D.  1235.  A.M.  6743.  The  accursed  and  all-destroying  devil,  who
from  the  beginning  wished  no  good  to  the
human  race,  raised  discord  among  the  Russian  Knyazes,  that
men  might  not  dwell  in  peace;  for  this  reason  too  the  evil  one
rejoices  in  the  shedding  of  Christian  blood.  Knyaz  Volodimir
Rurikovich  with  the  men  of  Kiev,  and  Danilo  Romanovich  with  the
men  of  Galich  went  against  Mikhail  Vsevolodich  the  Red,  to  Cherni-
gov, and  Izyaslav  fled  to  the  Polovets  people,  and  laid  much  waste
around  Chernigov,  and  burnt  villages.  And  Mikhail  came  out
from  Chernigov  and  having  devastated  much  around  Chernigov
went  away  again.  And  Mikhail  having  practised  deceit  on  Danilo
killed  many  of  the  men  of  Galich,  even  without  number,  and  Danilo
barely  escaped.  And  Volodimir  having  come  back  again,  he  sat
in  Kiev.  And  not  even  thus  was  there  enough  of  evil,  but  Izyaslav
with  the  pagan  Polovets  people  in  great  strength,  and  Mikhail  with
the  men  of  Chernigov  came  to  Kiev,  and  took  Kiev.  And  the
Polovets  men  having  taken  Volodimir  and  his  Knyaginya  led  them
away  to  their  own  country,  and  did  much  harm  to  the  people  at
Kiev.  And  Mikhail  took  his  seat  in  Galich,  and  Izyaslav  in  Kiev.
And  then  again  the  Polovets  men  let  Volodimir  and  his  wife  go  for
ransom,  and  the  Knyazes  took  ransom  from  the  Nemtsy.

A.D.  1236.  A.M.  6744, Knyaz  Yaroslav went from Novgorod to

[take]  the  throne  in  Kiev,  taking  with  him

some  of  the  best  men  of  Novgorod:  Sudimir  of  Slavno,  Yakim

Vlunkovich,  and  Kosta  Vyacheslavich,  also  100  men  from  Novi-

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  81

torg.  He  set  his  son  Olexander  in  Novgorod  and  having  arrived
in  Kiev  he  took  his  seat  on  the  throne,  and  having  kept  the  men  of
Novgorod  and  of  Novi-torg  for  one  week  and  having  bestowed  gifts
on  them  he  let  them  go;  and  they  all  returned  well.

The  same  year  the  godless  Tartars  having  come,  they  captiired  all
the  Bolgar  Land^  and  took  their  great  city,  and  they  slew  all,  both
wives  and  children.

A.D,  1237.  A.M.  6745.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  on  August  3,
the  Day  of  the  commemoration  of  the  Holy
Fathers  Dalmat,  Faust,  and  Isak,  at  mid-day.  The  sign  was  of
this  kind:  there  was  a  darkness  on  the  western  side  of  the  sun;
it  became  like  a  moon  of  five  nights ;  and  on  the  eastern  side  it  was
light,  then  again  on  the  eastern  side  there  was  darkness,  like  a  moon
of  five  nights,  while  on  the  western  side  it  was  hght;  and  thus  it
became  full  again.

The  same  year  the  Nemtsy  came  in  great  strength  from  beyond
the  sea  to  Riga  and  all  united  there;  both  the  men  of  Riga  and  all
the  Chud  Land,  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  from  themselves  sent  a
help  of  200  men,  and  they  went  against  the  godless  Lithuanians;
and  thus  for  our  sins  they  were  defeated  by  the  godless  pagans,^
and  each  tenth  man  came  back  to  his  home.

The  same  year  a  Metropolitan  by  name  Esif,  a  Greek,  came  to
Kiev  from  Nikeya.

A.D.  1238.  A.M.  6746. The  wife  of  Semen  Borisovich  made  a  monas-
tery at  the  Church  of  St.  Paul.
That  same  year  foreigners^  called  Tartars  came  in  countless"
numbers,  like  locusts,  into  the  land  of  Ryazan,  and  on  first  coming
they  halted  at  the  river  Nuklila,  and  took  it,  and  halted  in  camp
there. And  thence  they  sent  their  emissaries  to  the  Knyazes  of
Ryazan,  a  sorceress  and  two  men  with  her,  demanding  from  them
one-tenth of everything: of  men and Knyazes and horses — of
everything  one-tenth. And  the  Knyazes  of  Ryazan,  Gyurgi,"^  Ing--'
vor's  brother,  Oleg,  Roman  Ingvorevich,  and  those  of  Murom  and
Pronsk,  without  letting  them  into  their  towns,  went  out  to  meet
them  to  Voronazh. And  the  Knyazes  said  to  them:  "  Only  when
none  of  us  remain  then  all  will  be  yours." And  thence  they  let
them  go  to  Yuri*  in  Volodimir,  and  thence  they  let  the  Tartars  at

^  Bulgaria  on  the  Volga,  the  present  Kazan,  etc.
-  Lithuanians.
3  I noplemennitsi.
*  George.

G

82 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Voronazh  go  back  to  the  Nukhla.  And  the  Knyazes  of  Ryazan  sent
to  Yuri  of  Volodimir  asking  for  help,  or  himself  to  come.  But  Yuri
neither  went  himself  nor  listened  to  the  request  of  the  Knyazes
of  Ryazan,  but  he  himself  wished  to  make  war  separately.  But  it
was  too  late  to  oppose  the  wrath  of  God,  as  was  said  of  old  by  God,
to  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  when  leading  them  to  the  promised  land,
then  he  said:  "  I  shall  before  you  send  upon  them  perplexity,  and
thunder,  and  fear,  and  trembling."  Thus  also  did  God  before  these
men  take  from  us  our  strength  and  put  into  us  perplexity  and  thun-
der and  dread  and  trembling  for  our  sins.  And  then  the  pagan
foreigners  surrounded  Ryazan  and  fenced  it  in  with  a  stockade.^
And  Knyaz  Yuri  of  Ryazan,  shut  himself  in  the  town  with  his  people,
but  Knyaz  Roman  Ingorovich  began  to  fight  against  them  with  his
own  men.  Then  Knyaz  Yuri  of  Volodimir  sent  Yeremei  as  Voyevoda
with  a  patrol  and  joined  Roman;  and  the  Tartars  surrounded  them
at  Kolomno,  and  they  fought  hard  and  drove  them  to  the  ramparts.
And  there  they  killed  Roman  and  Yeremei  and  many  fell  here  with
the  Knyaz  and  with  Yeremei.  And  the  men  of  Moscow  ran  away
having  seen  nothing.  And  the  Tartars  took  the  town  on  December
21,  and  they  had  advanced  against  it  on  the  16th  of  the  same  month.
They  likewise  killed  the  Knyaz  and  Knyagmya,  and  men,  women,
and  children,  monks,  nuns  and  priests,  some  by  fire,  some  by  the
sword,  and  violated  nuns,  priests'  wives,  good  women  and  girls  in
the  presence  of  their  mothers  and  sisters.  But  God  saved  the  Bishop,
for  he  had  departed  the  same  moment  when  the  troops  invested  the
town.  And  who,  brethren,  would  not  lament  over  this,  among
those  of  us  left  alive  when  they  suffered  this  bitter  and  violent
death?  And  we,  indeed,  having  seen  it,  were  terrified  and  wept
with  sighing  day  and  night  over  our  sins,  while  we  sigh  every  day
and  night,  taking  thought  for  our  possessions  and  for  the  hatred  of
brothers.

But  let  us  return  to  what  lies  before  us.  The  pagan  and  godless
Tartars,  then,  having  taken  Ryazan,  went  to,..y5lodimir,  a  host  of
shedders  of  Christian  blood.  And  Knyaz  Yuri  went~ouftrom  Volodimir
and  fled  to  Yaroslavl,  while  his  son  VsevoloH"  with  his  mother  and  the
Vladyka,  and  the  whole  of  the  province  shut  themselves  in  Volodimir.
And  the  lawless  Ismaelites  approached  the  town  and  surrounded  the
town  in  force,  and  fenced  it  all  round  with  a  fence. ^  And  it  was  in  the
morning  Knyaz  Vsevolod  and  Vladyka  Mitrofan  saw  that  the  town

1  Ostrog.
a  Tyn.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  83

must  be  taken,  and  entered  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God
and  were  all  shorn  into  the  monastic  order  and  into  the  schema,^
the  Knyaz  and  the  Knyaginya,'\'hQ\r  daughter  and  daughter-in-law,
and  good  men  and  women,  by  Vladyka  Mitrofan.  And  when  the
lawless  ones  "had  already  come  near  and  set  up  battering  rams,^
and  took  the  town  and  fired  it  on  Friday  before  Sexagesima  Sunday,
the  Knyaz  and  Knyaginya  and  Vladyka,  seeing  that  the  town  was  on
fire  and  that  the  people  were  already  perishing,  some  by  fire  and
others  by  the  sword,  took  refuge  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother
of  God  and  shut  themselves  in  the  Sacristy.  The  pagans  breaking
down  the  doors,  piled  up  wood  and  set  fire  to  the  sacred  church;
and  slew  all,  thus  they  perished,  giving  up  their  souls  to  God.
Others  went  in  pursuit  of  Knyaz  Yuri  to  Yaroslavl.  And  Knyaz
Yuri  sent  out  Dorozh  to  scout  with  3,000  men;  and  Dorozh  came
running,  and  said:  "  They  have  already  surrounded  us,  Knyaz."
And  the  Knyaz  began  to  muster  his  forces  about  him,  and  behold,
the  Tartars  came  up  suddenly,  and  the  Knyaz,  without  having  been
able  to  do  anything,  fled.  And  it  happened  when  he  reached  the
river  Sit  they  overtook  him  and  there  he  ended  his  life.  And  God
knows  how  he  died;  for  some  say  much  about  him.  And  Rostov
and  Suzhdal  went  each  its  own  way.  And  the  accursed  ones  having
come  thence  took  Moscow,  Pereyaslavl,  Yurev,^  Dmitrov,  Volok,^
and  Tver;  there  also  they  killed  the  son  of  Yaroslav.  And  thence
the  lawless  ones  came  and  invested  Torzhok  on  the  festival  of  the
first  Sunday  in  Lent.  They  fenced  it  all  round  with  a  fence  as
they  had  taken  other  towns,  and  here  the  accursed  ones  fought
with  battering  rams  for  two  weeks.  And  the  people  in  the  town  were
exhausted  and  from  Novgorod  there  was  no  help  for  them;  but
already  every  man  began  to  be  in  perplexity  and  terror.  And  so  the
pagans  took  the  town,  and  slew  all  from  the  male  sex  even  to  the
female,  all  the  priests  and  the  monks,  and  all  stripped  and  reviled
gave  up  their  souls  to  the  Lord  in  a  bitter  and  a  wretched  death,
on  March  5,  the  day  of  the  commemoration  of  the  holy  Martyr
Nikon,  on  Wednesday  in  Easter  week.  And  there,  too,  were  killed
Ivanko  the  Posadnik  of  Novi-torg,  Yakim  Vlunkovich,  Gleb  Boriso-
vich,  and  Mikhailo  Moisievich.  And  the  accursed  godless  ones  then\
pushed  on  from  Torzhok  by  the  road  of  Seregeri  right  up  to  Ignati's/

1  cf .  p.  34.

2  Porok.

3  Yurev  Polski,  N.E.  of  Moscow.
*  Volok  Lamsk.

G2

84 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

[cross,  cutting  down  everybody  like  grass,  to  within  100  versts^  of
Novgorod.  God,  however,  and  the  great  and  sacred  apostohc
cathedral  Church  of  St.  Sophia,  and  St.  Kyuril,^  and  the  prayers  of  the
holy  and  orthodox  Vladyka,  of  the  faithful  Knyazes,  and  of  the  very
reverend  monks  of  the  hierarchical  Veche,  protected  Novgorod.
And  who,  brothers,  fathers,  and  children,  seeing  this,  God's  in-
fliction on  the  whole  Russian  Land,  does  not  lament  ?  God  let  the
pagans  on  us  for  our  sins.  God  brings  foreigners  on  to  the  land  in
his  wrath,  and  thus  crushed  by  them  they^  will  be  reminded  of  God.
And  internecine  war  comes  from  the  prompting  of  the  devil:  for
God  does  not  wish  evil  amongst  men,  but  good;  but  the  devil  re-
joices at  wicked  murder  and  bloodshed.  And  any  land  which  has
sinned  God  punishes  with  death  or  famine,  or  with  infliction  of
pagans,  or  with  drought,  or  with  heavy  rain,  or  with  other  punish-
ment, to  see  whether  we  will  repent  and  live  as  God  bids;  for  He
tells  us  by  the  prophet:  "  Turn  to  me  with  your  whole  heart,  with
fasting  and  weeping."  And  if  we  do  so  we  shall  be  forgiven  of  all
our  sins.  But  we  always  turn  to  evil,  like  swine  ever  wallowing  in
the  filth  of  sin,  and  thus  we  remain;  and  for  this  we  receive  every
kind  of  punishment  from  God;  and  the  invasion  of  armed  men,  too,
we  accept  at  God's  command ;  as  punishment  for  our  sins.
A.D.  1239.  A.M.  6747.  Knyaz  Olexander,'*  son  of  Yaroslav,  married
in  Novgorod,  he  took  the  daughter  of  Brya-
cheslav  of  Polotsk ;  and  was  wedded  at  Toropets  and  the  feast  was
held  both  in  Novgorod  and  in  Toropets.

In  the  same  year  Knyaz  Alexander^  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
built^  a  town^  by  the  Shelon  [river].

A.D.  1240.  A.M.  6748.  The  Svei^  came  in  great  strength  with  the
Murman,  Sum,  and  Yem  people  in  very  many
ships.The  Svei  came  with  their  Knyaz  and  with  their  bishops.and  halted
in  the  Neva  at  the  mouth  of  the  Izhera,  wishing  to  take  possession
of  Ladoga,  or  in  one  word,  of  Novgorod,  and  of  the  whole  Novgorod
province.  But  again  the  most  kind  and  merciful  God,  lover  of
men,  preserved  and  protected  us  from  the  foreigners  since  they
laboured  in  vain  without  the  command  of  God.  For  the  news  came
to  Novgorod  that  the  Svei  were  going  towards  Ladoga,  and  Knyaz

1  About  66  miles.

^  Cyril.

3  sc.  the  Russian  people.

*  Oleksandr,  Aleksandr.

'  Srubi — cut,  because  made  of  wood.

^  Fort. ^  Swedes.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  85

Olexander  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  of  Ladoga  did  not  delay
at  all;  he  went  against  them  and  defeated  them  by  the  power  of  St.
Sophia  and  the  prayers  of  our  Sovereign  Lady  the  Holy  Mother  of
God  and  eternally  Virgin  Mary  on  the  15th  day  of  July,  the  Com-
memoration Day  of  Saints  Kyurik  and  Ulita,  and  the  Day  of  the
Veche  of  the  630  Holy  Fathers  of  Khalkidon.^  And  there  was  a
great  slaughter  of  Svei.  Their  Voyevoda,  by  name  Spiridon,  was
killed,  and  some  thought  that  their  bishop  was  also  killed  there;
and  a  very  great  number  of  them  fell.  And  having  loaded  two  ves-
sels^  with  their  best  men  got  away  first  to  sea ;  and  the  rest  of  them
having  dug  a  pit  they  threw  into  it  without  number;  and  many
others  were  wounded;  and  the  same  night  without  waiting  for  the
light  of  Monday  they  went  away  in  shame.  And  of  the  men  of
Novgorod  and  Ladoga  there  fell  there  Kostyantin  Lugotinits,
Gyuryata  Pineshchinich,  Namest,  Drochilo  son  of  Nezdilo  the
tanner,  twenty  men  in  all  with  the  men  of  Ladoga,  or  less,  God
knows.  And  Knyaz  Alexander  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  of
Ladoga  all  came  back  in  health  to  their  own  country,  preserved  by
God  and  St.  Sophia,  and  through  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints.

The  same  year  the  Nemtsy^  with  the  men  of  Medvezhya  [Golova],
of  Yurev,  and  of  Velyad"*  with  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Volodimirich  took
Izborsk.  And  the  news  came  to  Pleskovthat  the  Nemisy  had  taken
Izborsk  and  all  the  men  of  Pleskov  went  out  and  fought  with  them
and  the  Nemtsy  beat  them.  And  there  they  killed  the  Voyevoda
Gavrilo  Gorislavich,  and  pursuing  the  men  of  Pleskov,  killed  many
of  them  and  others  they  caught  with  their  hands.  And  having
driven  them  up  under  the  town,  they  burned  the  whole  place,  and
there  was  much  damage,  churches,  honourable  ikons,  books  and
Gospels  were  burnt,  and  they  devastated  many  villages  around
Pleskov.  And  they  stayed  near  the  town  a  week,  but  they  did  not
take  the  town.  But  the  children  of  good  men  they  took  as  hostages,
and  went  away  and  so  they  were  without  peace.  For  the  men  of
Pleskov  had  made  treachery  with  the  Nemtsy,  and  Tverdilo  Ivanko-
vich  with  others  had  got  them  to  come  and  himself  began  to  rule  in
Pleskov  with  the  Nemtsy,  ravaging  the  Novgorod  villages.  And
some  of  the  people  of  Pleskov  fled  to  Novgorod  with  their  wives
and  children.

1  i.e.  The  Council  of  Chalcedon,  a.d.  451.

2  Korahl.

^  cf .  p.  34.
*  Fellin.

86 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

In  the  winter  in  the  same  year  Knyaz  Olexander  went  out  from
Novgorod  with  his  mother  and  his  wife  and  all  his  court,  to  his  father
in  Pereyaslavl,  having  quarelled  with  the  men  of  Novgorod.

The  same  winter  the  Nemtsy  came  against  the  Vod  people  with
the  Chud  people,  and  ravaged  them,  and  laid  tribute  upon  them,  and
made  a  fort  in  the  village^  of  Koporya.  Nor  was  this  the  only  evil:
but  they  also  took  Tesov  and  pushed  to  within  thirty  versts  of
Novgorod,  attacking  merchants,  and  hitherwards  to  Luga  and  up
to  [the  village  of]  Sablya.

And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  Yaroslav  for  a  Knyaz,  and  he
gave  them  his  son  Andrei.  And  then  the  men  of  Novgorod  having
taken  counsel  sent  the  Vladyka  with  others  again  for  Olexander;
and  the  Lithuanians,  Nemtsy  and  the  Chud  people  invaded  the  Nov-
gorod district  and  seized  all  the  horses  and  cattle  about  Luga,  and
in  the  villages  it  was  impossible  for  any  one  to  plough  and  nothing
to  do  it  with,  till  Yaroslav  sent  his  son  Alexander  again.

A.D.  124L  A.M.  6749.  Knyaz  Olexander  came  to  Novgorod,  and
the  men  of  Novgorod  rejoiced.  The  same
year  Knyaz  Olexander  went  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  of
Ladoga,  and  with  the  Korel  and  Izhera  people  against  the  town  of
Koporya,  against  the  Nemtsy'^ ;  and  took  the  town  and  brought  some
Nemtsy  to  Novgorod  and  let  others  go  free ;  but  the  Vod  and  Chud
traitors  he  hanged.

A.D.  1242.  A.M.  6750.  Knyaz  Olexander  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
and  with  his  brother  Andrei  and  the  men  of
the  Lower  country  went  [in  the  winter  in  great  strength  against  the
land  of  the  Chud  people,  against  the  Nemtsy,  that  they  might  not
boast,  saying:  "  We  will  humble  the  Sloven  race  under  us,"  for  lu^l
Pskov  was  already  taken,  and  its  Tiuns-  in-prison^:  "Pirv^~ Knyaz
Olexander  occupied  all  the  roads  right  up  to  Plesko v ;  and  he  cleared
Pleskov,  seized  the  Nemtsy  and  Chud  men,  and  having  bound  them
in  chains,  sent  them  to  be  imprisoned  in  Novgorod,  and  himself
went  against  the  Chud  people.  And  when  they  came  to  their  land,
he  let  loose  his  whole  force  to  provide  for  themselves.  And  Domash
Tverdislavach  and  Kerbet  were  scouring  [the  country]  and  the
Nemtsy  and  Chud  men  met  them  by  a  bridge ;  and  they  fought  there,
and  there  they  killed  Domash,  brother  of  the  Posadnik,  an  honest
man,  and  others  with  him,  and  others  again  they  took  with  their

1  Pogost.

2  Cf.  p. 34.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  87

hands,  and  others  escaped  to  the  troops  of  the  Knyaz.  And  the
Knyaz  turned  back  to  the  lake  and  the  Nemtsy  and  Chud  men  went
after  them.  Seeing  this,  Knyaz  Olexander  and  all  the  men  of
Novgorod  drew  up  their  forces  by  Lake  Chud  at  Uzmen  by  the
Raven's  rock^;  and  the  Nemtsy  and  Chud  men  rode  at  them  driving
themselves  like  a  wedge  through  their  army;  and  there  was  a  great
slaughter  of  Nemtsy  and  Chud  men.  And  God  and  St.  Sophia  and
the  Holy  Martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb,  for  whose  sake  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod shed  their  blood,  by  the  great  prayers  of  those  Saints,  God
helped  Knyaz  Alexander.  And  the  Nemtsy  fell  there  and  the  Chud
men  gave  shoulder,  and  pursuing  them  fought  with  them  on  the
ice,  seven  versts  short  of  the  Subol  shore.-  And  there  fell  of  the
Chud  men  a  countless  number;  and  of  the  Nemtsy  400,  and  fifty
they  took  with  their  hands  and  brought  to  Novgorod.  And  they
fought  on  April  5,  on  a  Saturday,  the  Commemoration  Day  of  the
Holy  Martyr  Feodul,^  to  the  glory  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  The
same  year  the  Nemtsy  sent  with  greeting,  in  the  absence  of  the
Knyaz:  "  The  land  of  the  Vod  people,  of  Luga,  Pleskov,  and  Loty-
gola,  which  we  invaded  with  the  sword,  from  all  this  we  withdraw,
and  those  of  your  men  whom  we  have  taken  we  will  exchange,  we
will  let  go  yours,  and  you  let  go  ours."  And  they  let  go  the  Pleskov
hostages,  and  made  peace.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Vsevolodich  summoned  by  the
Tartar  Tsar  Baty,  went  to  him  to  the  Horde.

A.D.  1243.  A.M.  6751.  God's  servant  Varlaam,  in  the  world  Vyaches-
lav  Prokshinich,  died  at  Khutin  in  the
monastery  of  the  Holy  Redeemer,  on  May  4;  arfd  he  was  buried  on
the  morrow  the  fifth,  St.  Irena's  Day^15y  Vladyka  Spiridon  and  Igmnen
Sidor  in  the  presence  of  Knyaz  Olexander.  On  the  18th  of  the  same
month,  the  Day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Alexander,  there  appeared  a
sign  in  the  monastery  Church  of  St.  loan  in  Pleskov,  from  the  image
of  the  Holy  Redeemer  over  the  tomb  of  the  Knyaginya  of  Yaroslav
Volodimirovich,  who  was  killed  by  her  stepson  at  Medvezhya  Golova;
there  came  ointment  from  the  ikon  for  twelve  days,  it  filled  four
wax  cups  as  into  a  glass  vessel,  and  they  brought  two  to  Novgorod
to  be  blessed  and  they  kept  two  in  Pleskov.  But,  O  Lord,  Glory  to
Thee,  who  gavest  us  Thy  unworthy  and  sinful  servants  such  a  blessing !
In  Thee,  we  hope,  O  Lord  Almighty,  who  loving  mankind  dost

'  Voroni  Kamen-
-  Of  Lake  Chud.
^  Theodoulos.

88 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

look  with  Thy  abundant  mercy  upon  us  poor  ones.  The  same  year
on  August  16  died  God's  servant,  Stefan  Tverdislavich,  grandson  of
Mikhail,  Posadnik  of  Novgorod,  on  Sunday  at  1  o'clock  of  the  night,
and  he  was  buried  on  Monday  the  17th,  the  Day  of  SS.  Paul  and
Uliana,  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia  where  lie  Vladykas  Arkadi  and
Marturi,  having  been  Posadnik  thirteen  years  less  three  months.

A.D.  1244.  A.M.  6752. Ihe Knyaginya of  Yaroslav died, having
been  shorn  in  the  monastery  of  St.  George;
and  there  she  was  laid  by  the  side  of  her  son  Fedor,  on  May  4,  the
Day  of  St.  Irina ;  her  name  was  called  Efrosinia.

A.D.  1245.  A.M.  6753.  [Tsar  Baty  killed  Knyaz  Mikhail  of  Cher-
nigov and  his  Voyevoda  Fedor  in  the  Horde
on  September  18.  And  the  killing  of  them  was  like  this.  There
was  an  invasion  of  pagan  Tartars  into  the  Russian  Land;  and
these^  shut  themselves  in  the  towns.  And  envoys  came  from
Tsar  Baty  to  Mikhail,  who  then  held  Kiev;  and  he,  seeing  their
words  of  deceit,  ordered  them  to  be  killed  and  himself  fled  with  his
family  to  Hungary^ ;  and  some  fled  to  distant  parts ;  and  others  hid
in  caves  and  forests,  and  few  of  them  stayed  behind ;  and  these  after
some  time  settled  in  the  towns ;  and  they  counted  their  number  and
began  to  levy  tribute  upon  them.  And  Knyaz  Mikhail  having
heard  this,  he  brought  back  the  people  who  had  fled  on  all  sides  to
strange  lands,  and  they  came  to  their  own  land.  And  the  Tartars
began  to  summon  them  with  insistence  to  go  to  Baty,  saying  to
them:  "  It  is  not  meet  for  you  to  live  in  the  land  of  the  Khan  and  of
Baty  without  doing  homage  to  them."  And  many  having  gone
bowed.  And  Baty  had  this  custom  of  the  Khan's:  If  any  one  came
to  do  obeisance,  he  would  not  order  him  to  be  brought  before  him,
but  wizards  used  to  be  ordered  to  bring  them  through  fire  and  make
them  bow  to  a  bush  and  to  fire ;  and  whatever  anyone  brought  with
him  for  the  Tsar,  the  wizards  used  to  take  some  of  everything  and
throw  it  into  the  fire,  and  then  they  used  to  let  them  go  before  the
Tsar  with  their  gifts.  And  many  Knyazes  with  their  Boyars  passed
through  the  fire,  and  bowed  to  the  bush,  their  idols,  for  the  glory
of  this  world,  and  each  asked  of  them  power  and  they  used  to
give  it  them  without  dispute,  that  they  might  deceive  them  with  the
glory  of  this  world.  And  the  most  reverend  Knyaz  Mikhail  being
then  in  Chernigov,  and  seeing  many  deceived  by  the  glory  of  this

1  sc.  Mikhail  and  Fedor — Michael  and  Theodore.

2  Ugry.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  89

world,  God  sent  grace  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  him;
He  put  into  his  heart  to  go  before  Tsar  Baty  and  to  denounce  his
deceit  with  which  he  deceived  Christians.  And  he  came  to  his
spiritual  father  and  told  him  saying:  "  I  wish  to  go  to  Tsar  Baty."
His  spiritual  father  answered  him:  "  Many  having  gone  have  done
the  will  of  the  pagan  Tsar  Baty,  deceived  by  the  glory  of  this  world ;
went  through  the  fire  and  bowed  to  the  sun  and  to  the  bush,  and
destroyed  their  souls  and  bodies.  And  thou,  my  son,  Mikhail,
if  thou  wilt  go,  do  not  thus,  as  the  others;  go  not  through  the  fire;
bow  not  to  their  idols,  nor  eat  their  food,  nor  take  their  drink  be-
tween thy  lips;  but  confess  the  Christian  faith,  for  it  becometh  not
Christians  to  bow  to  any  thing,  but  only  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."
And  Mikhail  and  his  Voyevoda  said  to  him:  "  By  thy  prayer,
father,  as  God  wills  so  be  it ;  I  would  like  to  pour  out  my  blood  for
Christ  and  for  the  Christian  faith."  His  Voyevoda  Fedor  spoke
likewise.  Their  spiritual  father  said  to  them:  "You  two  will
be  fresh  holy  martyrs  in  the  present  generation  for  the  confirmation
of  faithful  people,  if  you  do  thus."  Mikhail  and  Fedor  his  Voyevoda
promised  to  do  thus  and  were  blessed  by  their  spiritual  father.
Then  their  father  gave  them  the  holy  communion  for  the  journey,
calling  it  pre-sanctified  and  having  blessed  them,  dismissed  them
and  said  to  them:  "  May  God  give  strength  to  you  and  may  God
for  whom  you  are  eager  to  suffer  send  you  help."  Then  Mikhail
came  to  his  house,  and  took  from  his  goods  what  he  needed.  And
going  through  many  lands  they  yet  reached  Tsar  Baty.  And  they
told  Baty:  "  The  Russian  Veliki  Knyaz  Mikhail  has  come  to  bow  to
thee."  And  Tsar  Baty  ordered  them  to  bring  his  wizards;  and
the  wizards  having  come  before  the  Tsar,  the  Tsar  said  to  them:
"  As  it  is  according  to  our  custom,  do  to  Knyaz  Mikhail,  and  then
bring  him  before  me."  And  they  having  gone  to  Mikhail,  saying
to  him:  "  The  Tsar  Baty  summons  thee."  And  he  having  taken
his  Voyevoda  Fedor,  went  with  him,  and  having  reached  the  place
where  fire  was  laid  on  both  sides,  many  pagans  were  going  through
the  fire,  and  were  bowing  to  the  sun  and  to  the  idols.  And  the
wizards  led  Mikhail  and  his  Voyevoda  Fedor  through  the  fire.
Mikhail  said  to  them:  "  It  does  not  become  Christians  to  go  through
fire  and  to  bow  to  the  idols,  to  which  these  bow;  such  is  the  Christian
rehgion,  not  to  bow  to  any  thing  nor  to  idols,  but  to  bow  to  the
Trinity:  to  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  And
Mikhail  said  to  his  Voyevoda  Fedor:  "  Better  it  is  for  us  not  to  bow
to  the  things  to  which  these  bow." And  they  having  left  them  at

90 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  place  to  which  they  had  been  brought,  went  to  tell  Tsar  Baty:
•'  Mikhail  the  Veliki  Knyaz  does  not  listen  to  thy  command,  does
not  go  through  the  fire  and  does  not  bow  to  thy  gods:  he  says,  it
does  not  become  Christians  to  go  through  the  fire,  nor  do  they  bow
to  things,  neither  to  the  sun  nor  to  idols,  but  they  bow  to  the
Father  who  made  all  things,  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost."
And  Tsar  Baty  grew  very  angry,  he  sent  one  of  his  nobles, ^  his
steward-  named  Eldega,  and  he  said:  "  Why  hast  thou  made  nought
of  my  command,  and  hast  not  bowed  to  my  gods?  but  from  this
moment  choose  for  thyself  life  or  death ;  if  thou  keepest  my  command
thou  shalt  both  live  and  shalt  receive  all  thy  princedom,  but  if  thou
wilt  not  go  through  the  fire,  nor  bow  to  the  bush  and  to  the  idols
then  thou  shalt  die  by  a  cruel  death."  Then  Mikhail  answered:
"  To  thee.  Tsar,  I  bow,  since  God  hath  granted  thee  the  sovereignty^
of  this  world,  but  to  the  things  to  which  these  bow  I  shall  not  bow."
And  Eldega,  the  Tsar's  steward,  said  to  him:  "  Mikhail,  beware:
thou  art  dead."  And  Mikhail  answered  him:  "  Indeed,  I  wish  to
suffer  for  Christ  and  to  shed  my  blood  for  the  true  faith."  Then
said  Boris,  Knyaz  of  Rostov,  to  Mikhail  with  much  weeping:  "  My
lord  father,  do  the  Tsar's  will."  Then  likewise  the  Boyars  of  Boris
also  said:  "  We  will  all  receive  public  penance  for  thee  with  all  our
power."  Then  Mikhail  answered:  "  Brothers,  I  do  not  wish  to  call
myself  a  Christian  by  name  only  and  to  do  the  work  of  the  pagans ;
but  on  the  contrary  I  believe  in  Christ  the  only  God."  When
Mikhail  had  said  this,  his  Voyevoda  Fedor  began  to  think  in  himself
saying:  "  What  if  Mikhail  should  grow  weak  by  the  prayer  of  these
men,  remembering  the  love  of  his  wife  and  the  caresses  of  his  child-
ren ?"  Then  remembering  the  words  of  his  spiritual  father,  Fedor  said
to  Mikhail:  "  Dost  thou  remember  the  word  of  our  spiritual  father
which  he  taught  us  from  the  holy  gospels  ?  The  Lord  said :  '  he
that  desireth  to  save  his  soul  shall  destroy  it,  and  he  that  destroyeth
his  soul  shall  save  it.'  And  again,  he  said:  '  what  shall  it  profit  a
man  if  he  receive  the  sovereignty  of  all  this  world  and  lose  his
soul  ?  and  what  will  he  get  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  for  whosoever
shall  suffer  shame  for  me  and  for  my  words  and  shall  confess  me
before  men,  I  too  will  confess  him  before  my  Father  which  is  in
Heaven,  and  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men  I  also  will  deny
him  before  my  Father  who  is  in  Heaven ! '  "  And  Mikhail  and  Fedor

1  Velmozha.

2  Stolnik.

3  Tsarstvo.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  91

saying  this,  they  began  to  pray  them  urgently,  that  they  would
listen  to  them.  And  Mikhail  said  to  them :  "  I  will  not  listen  to  you,
nor  will  I  destroy  my  soul."  Then  taking  off  his  mantle  Mikhail
threw  it  to  them,  saying  to  them:  "  Receive  the  glory  of  this  world
if  you  desire  it."  And  Eldega  having  heard  that  they  were  unable
to  persuade  him,  then  went  to  inform  the  Tsar  of  what  Mikhail  had
said;  for  there  was  a  quantity  of  Christians  and  pagans  in  that  place,
and  they  were  listening  to  what  Mikhail  answered  to  the  Tsar.
Then  the  blessed  Mikhail  and  Fedor  began  to  sing,  and  having
finished  singing  they  took  holy  communion,  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ,  which  their  father  had  given  them  who  had  blessed  them  for
this  to  suffer  for  Christ.  And  those  who  stood  by  said:  "  Mikhail,
the  executioners  are  coming  from  the  Tsar  to  kill  you ;  bow,  and  you
will  live."  And  Mikhail  and  Fedor  answered  as  with  one  mouth:
"  We  will  not  bow,  and  will  not  listen  to  you,  for  the  sake  of  the
glory  of  this  world,"  and  began  to  sing:  "  Thy  martyrs,  O  Lord,
did  not  deny  Thee,  nor  did  they  turn  away  from  Thy  command-
ments, but  rather  suffered  for  Thy  sake,  O  Christ,  and  endured  many
tortures  and  received  perfect  crowns  in  heaven,"  and  so  forth.
And  then  the  executioners  having  arrived,  and  having  jumped  off
their  horses,  the}'"  seized  Mikhail,  they  stretched  him  out  and  holding
his  arms,  began  to  strike  him  with  their  hands  over  the  heart,  and
threw  him  prone  on  to  the  ground  and  struck  him  with  their  heels.
And  when  he  had  been  overpowered  a  certain  man  who  had  been  a
Christian  and  then  become  pagan  having  denied  the  Christian  faith,
and  become  a  pagan  transgressor  of  the  law,  named  Doman,  this
man  cut  off  the  head  of  the  holy  Veliki  Knyaz  Mikhail,  and  hurled
it  away.  And  at  that  minute  they  said  to  Fedor:  "  Bow  thou  to  our
gods  and  thou  wilt  receive  the  whole  Knyazdom^  of  thy  Knyaz."
And  Fedor  said  to  them:  "  I  do  not  desire  the  Knyasdom  and  do  not
bow  to  your  gods;  but  I  wish  to  suffer  for  Christ  hke  my  Knyaz."
Then  again  the}^  began  to  torture  Fedor  as  before  they  had  Mikhail,
and  then  they  cut  off  his  honoured  head  too.  Thus,  these  men
thanking  the  Lord  suffered  for  Christ,  and  gave  over  their  holy
souls  to  the  Lord  into  the  hands  of  God,  new  holy  martyrs.  And
their  holy  bodies  were  thrown  to  the  dogs  to  eat,  but  on  the  contrary
the  holy  bodies  having  lain  many  days  were  by  the  grace  of  God
preserved  and  in  no  way  injured.  And  our  merciful  God  the  Lord
who  loves  mankind  glorifying  His  holy  and  obedient  servants  who
had  suffered  for  Him  and  for  the  Orthodox  faith,  a  pillar  of  fire
1  Knyazhenie — sovereignty.

92  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

appeared  from  earth  to  heaven  over  their  honourable  bodies,  shining
with  exceeding  bright  rays  for  the  confirmation  of  Christians  and  for
the  conviction  of  the  faithless  who  leave  God  and  bow  to  things,  and
for  the  terrifying  of  the  pagans.  And  their  holy  and  honourable
bodies  were  saved  by  some  God-fearing  Christians.  The  kilhng  of
them  was  on  the  20th  day  of  September ;  through  whose  prayers  and
through  the  supplication  of  these  sufferers  of  pain  and  martyrs,
Mikhail  and  Fedor,  we  shall  be  worthy  to  find  mercy  and  remission  of
our  sins  at  the  hands  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  this  and  in  the
future  life,  together  with  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,
now  and  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.]

The  Lithuanians  made  ravages  about  Torzhok  and  Bezhitsy,  and
the  men  of  Novi-torg  with  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Volodimirovich  chased
and  fought  them;  and  they  took  the  horses  from  the  men  of  Novi-
torg,  and  beat  the  men  themselves  and  went  away  with  their  plun-
der. And  Yavid  and  Erbet  with  the  men  of  Tver  and  of  Dmitrov,
and  Yaroslav  with  the  men  of  Novi-torg,  pursued  them  and  beat
them  near  Toropets,  and  the  sons  of  their  Knyaz  took  refuge  in
Toropets.

The  next  morning  Olexander  came  up  with  men  of  Novgorod
and  took  away  all  the  plunder,  and  slew  more  than  eight  of  their
Knyaz' s  sons.  And  from  there  the  men  of  Novgorod  turned  back;
but  the  Knyaz  pursued  them^  with  his  own  court^  and  defeated  them
near  [the  village  of]  Zizech,  and  did  not  let  a  single  man  go,  and
there  he  killed  the  rest  of  the  Knyaz' s  sons.  And  he  himself  took
his  own  son  from  Vitebsk  and  went  with  a  small  company  and  met
another  force  at  lake  Vosvyat;  and  there  God  helped  him,  and  he
destroyed  those  two  and  himself  returned  well  and  his  company
also.

A.D.  1246.  A.M.  6754. [Knyaz Yaroslav Vsevolodits died in the
Horde of the Khan.] Knyaz Olexander
went  to  the  Tartars.

A.D.  1247.  A.M.  6755. God's slave Kostyantin Vyacheslavich,
whose  monastic  name  was  Ankyudin,  died,
and was  honourably  laid  in [the  Church  of] Saint Saviour at
Khutin.

A.D.  1248.  A.M.  6756.

1  sc.  the  Lithuanians.
*  Dvor.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 9S

A.D.  1249.  A.M.  6757. Spiridon, Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died,  and
was  honourably  laid  in  St.  Sophia.

A.D.  1250.  A.M.  6758. Knyaz  Olexander  returned  from  the  Horde,
and  there  was  great  joy  in  Novgorod.

A.D.  1251.  A.M.  6759.  The  Metropohtan  Kyuril  and  the  Bishop  of
Rostov,  also  named  Kyuril,  came  to  Nov-
gorod, and  established  Dalmat  as  Vladyka  of  Novgorod.

[At  this  time  also  Nevrui  came  against  the  land  of  Suzdal,  against
Knyaz  Andrei;  and  Knyaz  Andrei  Yaroslavich  fled  beyond  sea  to
the  land  of  the  Svei,  and  they  killed  him.]

Heavy  rains  came  the  same  year  and  took  away  all  the  ploughed
fields  and  crops  and  hay;  and  the  water  carried  away  the  large
bridge  over  the  Volkhov,  and  in  the  autumn  a  frost  struck  the  crops,
but  a  remnant  was  preserved.  For  the  Lord  God  sends  down  on
us  for  our  sins  at  one  time  famine  at  another  war  and  all  other  kinds
of  punishment;  but,  oh !  His  mercy  is  great!  And  He  is  patient
with  us,  awaiting  repentance,  as  He  Himself  said:  "  I  desire  not  the
death  of  a  sinner,  but  his  conversion  to  life,"  and  He  leaves  us
remnants  for  our  revival.

A.D.  1252.  A.M.  6760. Slavno  was  burnt  down  from  St.  Ilya^  up  to

Nutna  Street.

A.D.  1253.  A.M.  6761.  The  Lithuanians  ravaged  the  district  of
Novgorod  and  went  off  with  captives,  and
the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  VasiU  overtook  them  at  Toropets ;
and  so  Christian  blood  was  avenged  on  them.  And  they  defeated
them  and  took  back  the  captives  from  them,  and  returned  well  to
Novgorod.  The  same  year  the  Neniisy  came  to  Pleskov  and  burned
the  town^,  but  the  men  of  Pleskov  killed  many  of  them.  And  the
men  of  Novgorod  went  out  to  them  in  arms  from  Novgorod,  and
they  ran  away ;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  come  to  Novgorod,
and  having  armed  and  prepared  themselves,  went  beyond  the
Narova  and  laid  waste  their  district ;  and  the  Korel  people  also  did
much  harm  to  their  districts.  And  the  same  year  they  went  with
the  men  of  Pleskov  to  ravage  them,  and  they  put  out  a  force  against
them ;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  the  men  of  Pleskov  defeated
them  by  the  power  of  the  honourable  cross ;  for  they  began  it  against
themselves,  the  accursed  transgressors  of  right;  and  they  sent  to

^  Elias.
2  Posad.

94 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Pleskov  and  to  Novgorod  desiring  peace  on  all  the  terms  laid  down
by  Novgorod  and  Pleskov. And  so  they  made  peace.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Yaroslavich  fled
from  out  of  the  Low  Country,  and  they  set  him  in  Pleskov.

A.D.  1254.  A.M.  6762. It  was  well  with  the  Christians.

A.D.  1255.  A.M.  6763.  The  men  of  Novgorod  led  out  Yaroslav
Yaroslavich  from  Pleskov  and  set  him  on
the  throne,  and  they  drove  out  Vasili.  And  having  heard  this,
Vasili's  father,  Olexander,  went  with  an  armed  force  against  Nov-
gorod; and  Olexander  as  he  was  going  along  with  a  large  force,  and
with  the  men  of  Novi-torg,  Ratishka  met  him  with  treacherous
information:  "Advance,  Knyaz,  thy  brother  Yaroslav  has  fled."
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  put  a  force  in  the  quarter  [of  the  church]
of  the  Nativity  of  Christ;  and  those  who  were  a-foot,  took  up  a
position  opposite  the  Gorodishche  beyond  St.  Ilya's;  and  at  a
Veche  at  St.  Nicholas'  the  lesser  men  said:  "  Brothers,  lo,  how  the
Knyaz  says:  "  '  surrender  me  my  enemies.'  "  And  the  lesser  men
kissed  the  cross  how  that  all  should  stand  in  life  or  death  for  the
rights  of  Novgorod,  for  their  patrimony.  And  among  the  greater
men  there  was  an  evil  counsel,  how  to  overcome  the  lesser  and
to  bring  in  the  Knyaz  on  their  own  terms.  And  Mikhalko  hastened
out  of  the  town  to  St.  Georgi's  how  he  might  with  his  force  strike
our  side  and  crush  the  people.  And  Anani  having  learned  of  this,
wishing  him  well,  sent  Yakun  secretly  after  him.  And  the  common
people  having  learned  of  this,  went  in  chase  of  him,  and  tried  to
get  into  his  house;  and  Anani  prevented  them:  "  Brothers,  if  you
are  going  to  kill  him,  kill  me  first."  For  he  did  not  know  that  they
had  counselled  an  evil  thought  about  him  to  seize  him  himself  and
to  give  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Mikhalko.  And  the  Knyaz  sent  Boris
to  the  Veche:  "  Dehver  Posadnik  Anani  to  me;  or  if  you  do  not,  I
am  not  your  Knyaz,  and  shall  come  against  the  town  in  arms."
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  to  the  Knyaz  the  Vladyka  and  Klim
the  Tysyatski:  "  Come,  Knyaz,  to  thy  throne,  and  listen  not  to  evil-
doers, but  forgive  thy  anger  to  Anani  and  to  all  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod." And  the  Knyaz  did  not  listen  to  the  request  of  the  Vladyka
and  Klim.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  said:  "  Brothers,  inasmuch
as  our  Knyaz  has  thus  taken  counsel  with  our  transgressors  of  the
Cross,^  they  have  God  and  St.  Sophia ;  but  the  Knyaz  is  without  sin."
And  the  whole  force  stood  three  days  for  its  rights,  and  on  the
*  sc  of  the  oath.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  95

fourth  day  the  Knyaz  sent  saying  thus:  "  If  Anani  is  deprived  of  the
Posadnik-sh.\Tp  \  will  forgive  you  my  anger."  And  Anani  was  de-
prived of  the  Posadnik-sh\-p ,  and  they  took  peace  on  all  the  terms  of
Novgorod.  And  the  Knyaz  entered  the  town  and  Vladyka  Dalmat
met  him  at  Prikupovich's  Court  with  all  the  hierarchy,  and  with  the
crosses;  and  all  were  filled  with  joy,  and  the  evil-doers  were  covered
with  darkness;  because  it  was  joy  for  Christians,  and  perdition  for
the  devil,  for  that  there  was  not  great  shedding  of  Christian  blood.
And  Knyaz  Olexander  took  his  seat  on  his  throne.  And  the  same
year  they  gave  the  Posadnik-shvp  to  Mikhalko  Stepanovich.

A.D.  1256.  A.M.  6764.  There  came  Svei  and  the  Yem  and  Sum
people,  and  Didman  with  his  province,  and  a
quantity  of  armed  men,  and  they  began  to  make  a  town  on  the
Narova.  And  the  Knyaz  was  not  then  in  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  sent  to  the  Low  Country  to  the  Knyaz  for  armed  men,
and  themselves  sent  throughout  their  province,  thus  gathering  armed
men.  And  they,  accursed  ones,  having  heard,  fled  beyond  the  sea.
Knyaz  Olexander  arrived  in  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  and  the
Metropolitan  with  him ;  and  the  Knyaz  took  the  road  together  with
the  Metropolitan,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  not  know  where  he
was  going,  some  thought  that  he  was  going  against  the  Chud  people.
And  having  reached  Koporya,  Olexander  went  against  the  Yem
people ;  but  the  Metropolitan  returned  to  Novgorod,  and  many  other
men  of  Novgorod  turned  back  from  Koporya.  And  the  Knyaz
went  with  his  own  force  and  with  the  men  of  Novgorod.  And  the
road  was  bad,  so  that  they  saw  neither  day  nor  night,  and  it  was
perdition  to  many  of  those  on  foot,  but  God  spared  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod. And  he  came  to  the  Yem  land ;  some  they  killed,  and  others
they  captured.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  Olexander
returned  all  well.  And  then  the  Kny azvf ent  to  the  Low  Country,  he
took  with  him  the  Novgorod  envoys,  Eleuferi  and  Mikhail  Pinish-
chinich,  and  set  his  son  Vasili  on  the  throne.

A.D.  1257.  A.M.  6765.  Evil  news  came  from  Russia,  that  the
Tartars  desired  the  tamga^  and  tithe  on
Novgorod;  and  the  people  were  agitated  the  whole  year.  And  at
Lady-day  Posadnik  Anani  died,  and  in  the  winter  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod killed  Posadnik  Mikhalko.  If  any  one  does  good  to  another,
then  good  would  come  of  it;  but  digging  a  pit  under  another,  he
falls  into  it  himself.
1  A  Customs- tax:  properly,  a  seal  on  merchandise.

96 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  winter  Tartar  envoys  came  with  Olexander,  and
Vasih  fled  to  Pleskov;  and  the  envoys  began  to  ask  the  tithe  and
the  tamga  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  not  agree  to  this,  and  gave
presents  to  the  Tsar,  and  let  the  envoys  go  with  peace.

And  Knyaz  Olexander  drove  his  son  out  of  Pleskov  and  sent  him
to  the  Low  Country,  and  punished  Alexander  and  his  company.
He  cut  off  the  noses  of  some,  and  took  out  the  eyes  of  others,  of
those  who  had  led  Vasili  to  evil ;  for  evil  every  man  shall  perish  evilly !

The  same  winter  they  killed  Misha.  The  same  winter  they  gave
the  Posadnik-shi^  to  Mikhail  Fedorovich,  having  brought  him  out  of
Ladoga,  and  they  gave  the  post  of  Tysyatski  to  Zhirokha.

A.D.  1258.  A.M.  6766.  The  Lithuanians  with  the  men  of  Polotsk
came  to  Smolensk  and  took  [the  town  of]
Voishchina  by  assault.  The  same  autumn  the  Lithuanians  came  to
Torzhok,  and  the  men  of  Novi-torg  issued  out.  For  our  sins  the
Lithuanians  ambushed  them;  some  they  killed,  others  they  took
with  their  hands,  and  others  barely  escaped;  and  there  was  mucl>
evil  in  Torzhok.  The  same  winter  the  Tartars  took  the  whole
Lithuanian  land,  and  killed  the  people.

A.D.  1259.  A.M.  6767.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  moon;  such  as  no
sign  had  ever  been.  The  same  winter
Mikhail  Pineschinich  came  from  the  Low  Country  with  a  false  mis-
sion, saying  thus:  "  If  you  do  not  number  yourselves  for  tribute
there  is  already  a  force  in  the  Low  Country."  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  did  number  themselves  for  tribute.  The  same  winter
the  accursed  raw-eating  Tartars,  Berkai  and  Kasachik,  came  with
their  wives,  and  many  others,  and  there  was  a  great  tumult  in
Novgorod,  and  they  did  much  evil  in  the  province,  taking  con-
tribution for  the  accursed  Tartars.  And  the  accursed  ones  began  to
fear  death;  they  said  to  Olexander:  "  Give  us  guards,  lest  they  kill
us."  And  the  Knyaz  ordered  the  son  of  the  Posadnik  and  all  the  sons
of  the  Boyars  to  protect  them  by  night.  The  Tartars  said:  "  Give
us  your  munbers  for  tribute  or  we  will  run  away."^  And  the  common
people  would  not  give  their  numbers  for  tribute  but  said:  "  Let  us
die  honourably  for  St.  Sophia  and  for  the  angelic  houses."^  Then
the  people  were  divided:  who  was  good  stood  by  St.  Sophia  and  by
the  True  Faith;  and  they  made  opposition;  the  greater  men  bade
the  lesser  be  counted  for  tribute. And  the  accursed  ones  wanted  to

^  Presumably  "and  return  in  greater  strength."
»  sc.  churches.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  97

escape,  driven  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they  devised  an  evil  counsel
how  to  strike  at  the  town  at  the  other  side,  and  the  others  at  this
side  by  the  lake;  and  Christ's  power  evidently  forbade  them,  and
they  durst  not.  And  becoming  frightened  they  began  to  crowd
to  one  point  to  St.  Sophia,  saying:  "  Let  us  lay  our  heads  by  St.
Sophia."  And  it  was  on  the  morrow,  the  Knyaz  rode  down  from
the  Gorodishche  and  the  accursed  Tartars  with  him,  and  by  the
counsel  of  the  evil  they  numbered  themselves  for  tribute;  for  the
Boyars  thought  it  would  be  easy  for  themselves,  but  fall  hard  on  the
lesser  men.  And  the  accursed  ones  began  to  ride  through  the  streets,
writing  down  the  Christian  houses ;  because  for  our  sins  God  has
brought  wild  beasts  out  of  the  desert  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  strong,
and  to  drink  the  blood  of  Boyars.  And  having  numbered  them  for
tribute  and  taken  it,  the  accursed  ones  went  away,  and  Knyaz
Olexander  followed  them,  having  set  his  son  Dmitri  on  the  throne.

The  same  year,  on  the  eve  of  Boris  Day,  there  was  a  great  frost
throughout  the  province;  but  the  Lord  did  not  wish  to  leave  this
place  of  St.  Sophia  waste.  He  turned  away  His  wrath  from  us  and
looked  down  on  us  with  the  eye  of  His  mercy,  pointing  us  to  repen-
tance; but  we  sinners  return  hke  dogs  to  our  vomit,  unmindful  of
God's  punishments  which  come  upon  us  for  our  sins.

A.D.  1260.  A.M.  6768. There  was  quiet  all  the  year.

A.D.  126L  A.M.  6769.  Vladyka  Dalmat  of  Novgorod  covered  the
whole  roof  of  St.  Sophia  with  lead.  The
same  year,  on  November  8,  the  Feast  of  St.  Michael,  the  Church  of
St.  Vasih  and  thirty  big  houses  were  burnt  down,  and  on  the  morrow
the  Church  of  St.  Dmitri  in  Slavkov  Street  was  burnt  down,  and
fifty  big  houses.

A.D.  1262.  A.M.  6770.  The  men  of  Novgorod  built  the  town  afresh,
and  took  peace  with  the  Lithuanians.  The
same  year  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Martyrs,  Boris  and  Gleb,  was
burnt  down  from  thunder;  and  it  was  very  large  and  beautiful.
In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz
Dmitri  Alexandrovich  went  in  large  force  to  Yurev.  And  at  the
same  time  Knyaz  Kostyantin,  brother-in-law  of  Alexander,  was
there,  and  Yaroslav,  Alexander's  brother,  with  their  own  men,  also
Knyaz  Tovtivil  of  Polotsk  with  500  men  of  Polotsk  and  of  the  Lithu-
anians, and  of  the  Novgorod  force  a  countless  number,  God  alone
knows. The  town  of  Yurev  was  strong,  of  three  walls,  and  a  quan-

98 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

tity  of  people  in  it  of  all  kinds;  and  they  had  constructed  strong
defences,  but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Cross  and  of  St.  Sophia  always
overthrows  those  who  are  wrong.  And  so  this  town,  its  strength
was  for  nothing,  but  by  the  aid  of  God  it  was  taken  by  single  as-
sault, and  many  of  the  people  of  that  town  were  killed,  others  were
taken  alive,  and  others  were  burnt  by  fire,  and  their  wives  and
children;  and  they  took  countless  booty  and  captives,  and  they  shot
many  good  men  from  the  town,  and  they  killed  Peter  Myasnikovich-
And  Knyaz  Dmitri  with  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  returned  to  Nov.
gorod  with  much  booty.  The  same  year  the  monk  Vasili  built
the  Church  of  St.  Vasili ;  but  God  knows  whether  he  did  this  with  his
own  [means]  or  with  those  of  Boris  Gavshinich ;  but  the  Lord  grant
them  both  remission  of  their  sins,  and  St.  Vasili.  The  same  year
Knyaz  Olexander  went  to  the  Tartars;  and  Berka  kept  him,  not
letting  him  back  to  Russia;  and  he  wintered  with  the  Tartars  and
fell  ill.

A.D.  1263.  A.M.  677 L  Knyaz  Olexander  came  back  from  the  Tar-
tars in  very  bad  health,  in  the  autumn;
and  he  came  to  Gorodets^  [monastery]  and  was  shorn  on  November
14,  the  day  of  the  holy  Apostle  Philip;  and  he  died  the  same  night
and  they  took  him  to  Volodimir  and  laid  him  in  the  monastery  of
the  Nativity  by  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.  And  the
Bishops  and  Igumens  having  come  together  with  the  Metropolitan
Kyuril  and  all  the  hierarchy  and  monks  and  with  all  the  people  of
Suzdal,  they  buried  him  honourably  on  the  23rd  of  the  same  month,
Friday,  the  Day  of  St.  Amfilokhi.  Grant  him,  O  merciful  Lord,
to  see  Thy  face  in  the  future  age,  for  he  laboured  for  Novgorod  and
for  all  the  Russian  land.

The  same  year  there  was  a  tumult  amongst  the  Lithuanians,  God
sending  down  his  wrath  upon  them;  they  rose  themselves  against
themselves  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Mindovg^  was  killed  by  his  own
relatives,  who  conspired  without  anybody's  knowledge.  The  same
year  the  murderers  of  Mindovg  having  quarrelled  over  his  goods  they
killed  the  good  Knyaz  Tovtivil  of  Polotsk,  and  put  the  Boyars  of
Polotsk  in  chains  and  called  on  the  people  of  Polotsk  to  kill  Tov-
tivil's  son,  too;  and  he  escaped  to  Novgorod  with  his  men.  Then  the
Lithuanians  set  their  own  Knyaz  in  Polotsk;  and  let  go  the  men  of
Polotsk  whom  they  had  taken  with  their  Knyaz  and  took  peace.

1  sc.  Radilov,  on  the  Volga.

'  Mindvog,  Grand  Prince  of  Lithuania.  1247-63.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD 99

A.D.  1264.  A.M.  6772.  The  men  of  Novgorod  having  taken  counsel
with  Posadnik  Mikhail  drove  out  Knyaz
Dmitri  Alexandrovich,  because  the  Knyaz  was  still  young.  And
they  sent  to  Tver  the  son  of  the  Posadnik  and  the  better  Boyars
for  Yaroslav  the  brother  of  Alexander.

A.D.  1265.  A.M.  6773.  They  set  Knyaz  Yaroslav  Yaroslavich  on
the  throne  in  Novgorod  on  Januarv  27.
The  same  year  there  was  a  great  tumult  amongst  the  Lithuanians
by  God's  infliction  on  them,  for  our  Lord  God  could  not  bear  to  look
upon  the  unrighteous  and  pagan  seeing  them  shedding  Christian
blood  like  water  and  others  scattered  by  them  over  strange  lands;
then  the  Lord  will  repay  them  according  to  their  works.  Knyaz
Mindovg  of  Lithuania  had  a  son  named  Voishelg ;  him  the  Lord  chose
as  champion  of  the  true  faith;  for  having  gone  to  Mount  Sinai,
away  from  his  father  and  his  kindred,  and  from  his  pagan  faith,  he
acknowledged  the  true  Christian  religion,  and  was  baptized  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  Son,  and  H0I3'  Ghost,  and  studied  the
sacred  books,  and  was  shorn  into  the  monastic  order  on  the  Holy
Mount ;  and  having  remained  there  three  years,  he  went  to  his  own
country  to  his  father.  And  his  father  being  a  pagan  tried  to  per-
suade him  to  renounce  the  Christian  faith  and  the  monastic  order,  and
to  take  up  his  rule.  But  he,  armed  with  the  power  of  the  Cross,
would  not  even  listen  to  his  father's  persuasion  and  feared  not  his
threats,  but  having  gone  away  from  his  father  built  himself  a  mon-
astery among  Christians  and  remained  there,  glorifying  the  Holy
Trinity,  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  after  the
murder  of  his  father,  though  undesirous  to  do  so,  but  God  inflicting
him  on  them,  the  pagan  Lithuanians,  for  the  Christian  blood,  laid
it  in  his  heart,  and  he  taking  off  from  him  his  gown,  vowed  himself
to  God  for  three  years,  when  he  should  resume  his  gown,  and  did  not
leave  the  monastic  order.  He  gathered  about  him  his  father's
soldiers  and  friends,  and  having  prayed  to  the  honourable  Cross,  he
went  against  the  pagan  Lithuanians  and  defeated  them,  and  stayed
in  their  country  all  the  year.  Then  the  Lord  repaid  the  accursed
ones  according  to  their  works;  for  he  took  the  whole  of  their  country
captive  by  force  of  arms,  and  there  was  joy  everywhere  throughout
the  Christian  land.  Then  about  300  Lithuanians  escaped  into
Pleskov  with  their  wives  and  children,  and  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  with
the  priests  and  people  of  Pleskov  baptized  them;  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  wanted  to  slay  them,  but  Knyaz  Yaroslav  would  not  give
them  up,  and  they  were  not  slain.  H2

100  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1266.  A.M.  6774.  The  men  of  Pleskov  set  as  their  Knyaz,
Dovmont,  Knyaz  of  Lithuania.  The  same
year  God  laid  his  grace  into  the  heart  of  Dovmont  to  fight  for  St.
Sophia  and  the  Holy  Trinity,  to  avenge  the  Christian  blood,  and  he
went  with  the  men  of  Pleskov  against  the  pagan  Lithuanians,  and
they  ravaged  much  and  took  Gerden's  Knyaginya  and  two  young
Knyazes.  And  Knyaz  Gerden  collected  about  him  the  Lithuanian
forces  and  pursued  them.  And  when  the  men  of  Pleskov  learned
of  the  pursuit,  they  sent  away  their  captives  and  stood  firmly  against
them  on  this  side  of  the  Dvina.  And  the  Lithuanians  began  to  ford
over  to  this  side;  then  the  men  of  Pleskov  engaged  them,  and  God
helped  Knyaz  Dovmont  with  the  men  of  Pleskov  and  they  slew  a
great  quantity  of  them,  others  they  drowned  in  the  river;  only
Knyaz  Gerden  alone  escaped  with  a  small  Druzhina.  And  the  men
of  Pleskov  returned  all  well.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  the  men  of  Pleskov  again  went
against  the  Lithuanians  with  Knyaz  Dovmont.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  came  to  Novgorod  with  the  forces
of  the  Low  Country,  wishing  to  go  against  Dovmont  to  Pleskov;
but  the  men  of  Novgorod  forbade  him,  saying:  "  Surely  thou  canst
not  go  against  Pleskov,  Knyaz,  after  consulting  with  us."  And  the
Knyaz  sent  away  his  men.

A.D.  1267.  A.M.  6775.  For  our  sins  on  May  23  a  fire  broke  out  in
Kuzma-Demyan  Street  before  evening  ser-
vice and  the  whole  of  the  Nerev  quarter  was  burnt  down.  Alas,
my  brothers !  the  fire  was  so  fierce,  that  the  flames  went  over  the
water,  and  much  good  merchandise  was  burnt  in  the  boats  on  the
Volkhov,  and  several  heads^  were  burnt;  in  a  single  hour  every-
thing was  burnt.  And  many  from  that  grew  rich,  but  many  others
were  made  beggars.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Eleferi  Sbyslavich  and
with  Dovmont  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  went  against  the  Lithuanians,
ravaged  much  of  theirs  and  returned  all  well.

A.D.  1268.  A.M.  6776.  The  men  of  Novgorod  consulted  with  their
Knyaz  Yuri,  they  wished  to  go  against  the
Lithuanians,  while  others  [wished  to  go]  against  Poltesk-,  and  others
beyond  the  Narova.  And  when  they  reached  the  village  of  Dub-
rovna  there  was  a  quarrel;  and  they  went  back  and  went  beyond

1  People.
-  sc.  Polotsk.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  101

the  Narova  to  Rakovor/  and  made  great  havoc  in  their  land,  but
did  not  take  the  town ;  and  they  shot  the  good  man  Fedor  Sbyslavich
from  the  town,  and  six  others ;  and  they  returned  all  well.  The  same
year  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  taken  counsel  with  Posadnik
Mikhail,  called  Knyaz  Dmitri  Alexandrovich  to  come  with  a  force
from  Pereyaslavl,  and  they  sent  envoys  from  Yaroslav.  And  in
place  of  himself  Yaroslav  sent  Svyatoslav  with  a  force.  And  they
sought  out  competent  men  and  began  to  make  the  battering  rams
in  the  Vladyka's  Court.  And  the  Nemtsy  sent  their  envoys,  the
men  of  Riga,  Velyad  and  Yurev,  and  from  other  towns  with  deceit,
saying:  "  We  have  peace  with  you;  deal  with  the  people  of  Kolyvan
and  of  Rakovor  as  you  can,  we  shall  not  join  with  them;  and  we
kiss  the  Cross."  And  the  envoys  kissed  the  Cross.  And  Lazor
Moisievich  having  gone  there  led  them  all  to  the  Cross ;  the  Bishops
and  godly  courtiers,  not  to  assist  the  people  of  Kolyvan  and  of
Rakovor;  and  they  took  into  their  own  hands  a  good  man
Simeon  from  Novgorod,  having  kissed  the  Cross.  And  all  the
Knyazes  having  assembled  in  Novgorod  :  Dmitri,  Svyatoslav,
his  brother  Mikhail,  Kostyantin,  Yuri,  Yaropolk,  Dovmont  of
Pleskov,  and  some  other  Knyazes,  they  went  to  Rakovor  on  January
23.  And  as  they  entered  their  country  they  separated  along  three
roads,  and  fought  a  very  great  number  of  them.  And  there  they
came  upon  an  impenetrable  cave  into  which  a  large  number  of  Chud
people  had  clambered,  and  it  was  impossible  to  take  them,  and  they
stood  (before  it)  three  days.  Then  the  expert  with  the  ram  cun-
ningly turned  the  water  on  to  them,  and  the  Chud  people  ran  away
of  themselves,  and  they  slew  them,  and  all  their  goods  the  men  of
Novgorod  gave  to  Knyaz  Dmitri.  And  thence  they  went  on  to
Rakovor,  and  when  they  reached  the  Kegola  river  they  found  there
a  force  of  Nemtsy  in  position,  and  it  was  like  a  forest  to  look  at;
for  the  whole  land  of  the  Nemtsy  had  come  together.  But  the  men  of
Novgorod  without  any  delay  crossed  the  river  to  them,  and  began
to  range  their  forces:  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  took  stand  on  the
right  hand,  and  Dmitri,  and  Svyatoslav  took  stand  also  on  the
right  higher  up;  on  the  left  stood  Mikhail,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
stood  facing  the  iron  troops  opposite  to  the  great  wedge;  and  so
they  went  against  each  other.  And  as  they  came  together  there
was  a  terrible  battle  such  as  neither  fathers  nor  grandfathers  had
seen.  And  there  a  great  evil  befell;  they  killed  Posadnik  Mikhail
and  Tverdislav  the  Red,  Nikifor  Radyatinich,  Tverdislav  Moisievich^
1  Wesenberg.

102 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Mikhail  Krivtsevich,  Ivach,  Boris  Ildyatinich,  his  brother  Lazor,
Ratsha,  Vasili,  Voiborzovich,  Osip,  Zhiroslav,  Dorogomilovich,
the  usher  Poroman,  Polyud,  and  many  good  Boyars,  and  countless
other  common  men;  and  of  others  there  was  nothing  known,  the
Tysyatski  Kondrat,  Ratislav  Boldyzhevich,  Danil  Mozotinich  and
many  others,  God  knows,  and  men  of  Pleskov  also,  and  of  Ladoga.
And  Knyaz  Yuri  turned  shoulder,  or  there  was  treachery  in  him,
God  knows.  But  as  regards  that,  brothers,  God  punishes  us  for  our
sins  and  takes  from  us  good  men,  that  we  may  repent;  as  the
Scripture  says:  "  Wonderful  weapons  are  prayer  and  fasting,"  and
again:  "  Charity  combined  with  fasting  saves  a  man  from  death,"
and  again  let  us  remember  the  Prophet  Isaiah  saying:  "  If  ye  be
willing  to  listen  to  me,  ye  shall  eat  the  blessings  of  the  earth:  but
if  ye  be  unwilling  and  do  not  listen  to  me,  the  sword  shall  devour
you,  and  thus  shall  one  cut  down  100  of  you,  and  by  100  shall  1,000
of  you  perish."  Yet  we,  seeing  this  terror,  not  in  the  least  do  we
repent  of  our  sins,  but  turned  more  to  evil,  brother  seeking  to  devour
brother  through  envy  and  one  man  another,  kissing  the  Cross  and
again  transgressing  it  not  knowing  what  is  the  power  of  the  Cross,
for  by  the  Cross  are  the  enemies  and  the  powers  of  the  devils
vanquished;  the  Cross  helps  Knyazes  in  battles;  protected  by  the
Cross  faithful  people  conquer  their  foes;  for  whoever  transgresses
the  Cross  receives  punishment  here,  and  in  the  next  world  eternal
torment.

But  let  us  return  to  the  foregoing.

Now  that  great  encounter  having  taken  place  and  the  laying
down  of  the  heads  of  good  men  with  their  heads  for  St.  Sophia,  the
merciful  Lord  speedily  sent  His  mercy,  not  wishing  utter  death
to  the  sinner;  punishing  us,  and  again  pardoning.  He  turned  away
his  wrath  from  us,  and  regarded  us  with  His  merciful  eye:  by  the
power  of  the  Honourable  Cross  and  through  the  prayers  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  our  Sovereign  Lady,  the  Immaculate  Mary,  and
those  of  all  the  Saints,  God  helped  Knyaz  Dmitri  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  on  February  18,  on  the  Saturday  before  Quinquagesima,
the  Day  of  the  Holy  Father  Leo;  and  they  pursued  them  fighting
them,  as  far  as  the  town,  for  seven  versts  along  the  three  roads,  so
that  not  even  a  horse  could  make  its  way  for  the  corpses.  And  so
they  turned  back  from  the  town,  and  perceived  another  large  force
in  the  shape  of  a  great  wedge  which  had  struck  into  the  Novgorod
transport;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  wished  to  strike  them,  but
others  said:  "  It  is  already  too  near  night;  how  if  we  fall  into  con-

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  103

fusion  and  get  beaten  ourselves."  And  so  they  stood  near  together
opposite  each  other  waiting  dayhght.  And  they,  accursed  trans-
gressors of  the  Cross,  fled,  not  waiting  for  the  light.  And  the  men
of  Novgorod  stood  on  the  field  of  battle  three  days,  and  returned  to
Novgorod,  and  brought  their  dead;  and  they  laid  PosadnikMikha.il
in  the  Church  of  St.  Sophia.  Grant,  O  most  merciful  God,  lover  of
mankind,  that  they  may  stand  in  the  next  world  at  Thy  right  hand,
together  with  all  the  Saints  who  have  pleased  Thee  in  the  ages,
who  shed  their  blood  for  St.  Sophia,  having  given  their  life  hon-
ourably. And  they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Pavsha  Ananinich;  and
the  office  of  Tlvsya^skt  they  gave  to  no  one,  in  case  Kondrat  were  alive.

A.D.  1269.  A.M.  6777.  The  Nemisy  came  in  great  force  to  Pleskov
in  All  Saints  week  and  attacked  the  town
and  did  not  effect  anything,  but  suffered  great  hurt  and  stood  ten
days.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  Yuri  pursued  them,
they  went  off  some  on  horseback  and  others  in  boats,  in  haste ;  and
when  the  Nemtsy  learned  about  the  Novgorod  force,  they  fled  across
the  river.i  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  reached  Pleskov  and  took
peace  across  the  river  on  all  their  own  terms.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  came  to  Novgorod  and  began  to
complain:  "  My  men  and  my  brothers,  and  yours  also,  are  killed,
and  you  have  engaged  in  war  with  the  Nemtsy  for  Zhiroslav  Davido-
vich  and  Mikhail  Mishinich  and  Yuri  Sbyslavich,  wishing  to  deprive
them-  of  their  districts."  But  the  men  of  Novgorod  stood  for
them;  so  the  Knyaz  was  about  to  go  out  from  the  town.  But  the
men  of  Novgorod  bowed  to  him:  "  Knyaz,  forgive  them  thy  anger,
and  do  not  go  from  us  ";  for  they  had  not  yet  made  good  their  peace
with  the  Nemtsy.  But  the  Knyaz  did  not  listen  to  that,  and  went
away.  And  they  sent  the  Vladyka  and  the  greater  men  with  re-
quest, and  brought  him  back  from  Broninitsa.^  Then  they  gave
the  office  of  Tysyatski  to  Ratibor  Kluksovich  by  wish  of  the  Knyaz.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  having  consulted
with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  sent  Svyatoslav  to  the  Low  Country  to
collect  forces,  and  he  collected  all  the  Knyazes,  and  armed  men  with-
out number,  and  brought  them  to  Novgorod.  And  there  was  there
the  great  Baskak*  of  Vladimir,  named  Amragan,  and  they  wished  to
go  to  Kolyvan. And  the  Nemtsy  having  learned  this,  sent  envoys

1  sc.  the  "  Great  "  river,  reka  Velikaya,  on  which  Pskov  is  situated.

2  sc.  the  Nemtsy.

'  The  village  of  Bronnitsy,  on  the  river  Msta,  E.  of  Xovgorod.
^  Tartar  olhcial,  tax-gatherer.

104  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

with  the  request:  "  We  bow  to  all  your  terms,  we  withdraw  from  the
whole  of  the  Narova;  but  do  not  you  shed  any  blood  ";  and  so  the
men  of  Novgorod  having  taken  counsel,  took  peace  on  all  their  own
terms.  But  the  Knyaz  wanted  to  go  against  the  Korel  people,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  persuaded  him  not  to  go  against  the
Korel  people,  and  the  Knyaz  sent  his  force  back.

A.D.  1270.  A.M.  6778.  Varlam,  Igumen  of  St.  George's,  and
Archimandrite  of  Novgorod,  died.  In  the
same  year  there  was  a  tumult  in  Novgorod ;  they  set  about  driving
Knyaz  Yaroslav  out  of  the  town,  and  they  summoned  a  Veche  in
Yaroslav's  Court  and  killed  Ivanko,  and  others  escaped  into  the
Church  of  St.  Nikola;  and  on  the  morrow  the  Tysyatski  Ratibor,
Gavrilo  Kiyaninov  and  other  of  his  friends  fled  to  the  Knyaz  to
Gorodishche;  and  they  took  their  houses  for  plunder  and  divided  up
their  dwellings,  and  sent  to  the  Knyaz  in  the  Gorodishche  having
written  out  a  document^  with  all  his  faults:  "  Why  hast  thou  taken
up  the  Volkhov  with  snarers  of  wild  ducks,  and  taken  up  the  fields
with  catchers  of  hares  ?  Why  hast  thou  taken  Olex  Mortkinich's
homestead?  Why  hast  thou  taken  silver  from  Mikifor  Manush-
kinich  and  Roman  Boldyzhevich  and  Varfolomei  ?  And  another
thing,  why  dost  thou  send  away  from  us  the  foreigners  who  dwell
among  us?  and  many  faults  of  this  kind.  And  now,  Knyaz,  we
cannot  suffer  thy  violence.  Depart  from  us;  and  we  shall  think  of  a
Knyaz  for  ourselves."  And  the  Knyaz  sent  Svyatoslav  and  Andrei
Vorotislavich  to  the  Veche  with  greeting:  "  I  renounce  all  that,  and
I  kiss  the  Cross  on  all  your  terms."  But  the  men  of  Novgorod  ans-
wered: "  Knyaz,  go  away,  we  do  not  want  thee;  else  we  shall  come,
the  whole  of  Novgorod,  to  drive  thee  out."  And  the  Knyaz  went
out  of  the  town  against  his  will.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent
for  Dmitri  Alexandrovich,  but  Dmitri  dechned,  saying  thus:  "  I  do
not  wish  to  take  the  throne  before  my  uncle."  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  were  sad.  And  Yaroslav  began  to  collect  forces  against
Novgorod,  and  he  sent  Ratibor  to  the  Tartar  Tsar  asking  for  help
against  Novgorod.  And  Knyaz  Vasili  Yaroslavich  having  heard  this
sent  envoys  to  Novgorod  saying  thus:  "  I  bow  to  St.  Sophia  and  to
the  men  of  Novgorod ;  I  have  heard  that  Yaroslav  is  going  against
Novgorod  with  all  his  force,  and  Dmitri  with  the  men  of  Pereyaslavl,
and  Gleb  with  the  men  of  Smolensk;  I  am  sorry  for  my  patrimony,"
and  he  himself  went  to  the  Tartars,  taking  with  him  Petrila  Rychag
1  Gramota.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  105

and  Mikhail  Pineshchinich,  and  he  turned  back  the  Tartar  forces,
saying  thus  to  the  Tsar:  "  The  men  of  Novgorod  are  right,  and
Yaroslav  is  to  blame."

For  the  Tsar  had  already  sent  off  an  army  against  Novgorod
according  to  Ratibor's  false  word,  for  Ratibor  said  to  the  Tsar:
"  The  men  of  Novgorod  do  not  listen  to  thee;  we  demanded  tribute
for  thee,  but  they  drove  us  out;  and  others  they  killed,  and  plun-
dered our  houses,  and  dishonoured  Yaroslav."  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  raised  a  stockade^  about  the  town  on  both  sides  and
brought  the  merchandise  into  the  city.  And  Yaroslav's  scouts
pushed  almost  up  to  the  Gorodishche,  and  the  whole  town,  great
and  small,  went  out  armed  to  the  Gorodishche,  the  foot  soldiers
stood  two  days  behind  the  Zhilotug,''^  and  the  mounted  men
behind  the  Gorodishche.  Yaroslav  having  learned  this,  went  by
the  other  side  to  Russa  and  halted  in  Russa,  and  sent  Tvorimir
into  Novgorod:  "  I  forego  all  that  caused  your  displeasure  with  me,,
and  all  the  Knyazes  will  stand  security  for  me."  But  the  men  of
Novgorod  sent  to  him  Lazor  Moisievich:  "  Knyaz,  thou  hast  taken
counsel  against  St.  Sophia;  come  on,  that  we  may  die  honourably
for  St.  Sophia.  We  have  no  Knyaz,  but  God  and  the  truth  and  St.
Sophia;  and  we  do  not  want  thee."  And  into  Novgorod  there  were
collected  the  whole  Novgorod  district,  the  men  of  Pleskov,  of
Ladoga,  the  Korel,  Izhera,  and  the  Vod  people,  and  great  and  small,
all  went  to  Golino,  and  stood  a  week  at  the  ford,  and  Yaroslav's
force  stood  on  the  opposite  side.  And  the  Metropolitan  sent  a
document  to  Novgorod,  saying  thus:  "  God  has  entrusted  me  with
the  Archbishopric  in  the  Russian  Land,  you  are  to  listen  to
God  and  to  me;  shed  no  blood;  Yaroslav  foregoes  all  anger,  and  for
that  I  am  guarantee;  and  if  you  will  kiss  the  Cross,  I  will  do  pubhc
penance  and  answer  for  that  before  God."  And  God  did  not  allow
the  shedding  of  Christian  blood.  And  Yaroslav  sent  greeting  to  the
Novgorod  army,  and  they  took  a  peace  on  all  the  terms  of  Nov-
gorod ;  they  set  Yaroslav  and  led  him  up  to  the  Cross.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz  Yaroslav  went  to  Volodimir,,
and  thence  he  went  to  the  Horde,  and  left  in  Novgorod  Andrei
Vorotislavich,  and  gave  Knyaz  Aigust  to  the  men  of  Pleskov.
A.D.  127L  A.M.  6779.  The  sun  grew  dark  on  Wednesday  morning:
in  the  fifth  week  of  Lent,  and  then  agaia
filled  out  and  we  rejoiced.

>  Ostrog.
2  Stream.

106  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

In  the  same  year  Fedor  Hotovich  erected  the  Church  of  St.  Sava;
they  erected  another  in  Kholop  Street  to  the  SS.  Kosma  and
Demy  an.

A.D.  1272.  A.M.  6780.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  of  Novgorod,  Yaroslav
Yaroslavich  died  among  the  Tartars,  and
they  laid  him  in  Tver  in  the  Church  of  SS.  Kosma  and  Demyan.
And  Knyaz  Dmitri  sent  his  envoys  to  Novgorod  with  greeting,
wishing  to  take  his  seat  in  Novgorod.  And  Vasih  Yaroslavich  also
sent  with  greeting,  wishing  to  take  his  seat  on  the  throne.  And
both  envoys  lodged  in  Yaroslav 's  Court.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
with  Posadnik  Pavsha  declared  for  Dmitri,  and  sent  for  him.  Knyaz
Dmitri  Alexandrovich  came  the  same  year  to  Novgorod  and  took
his  seat  on  the  throne  on  October  9.^

[The  same  year  Knyaz  Vasili  came  to  Torzhok  and  burned  the
dwellings  and  installed  his  own  Tiiin^  and  went  back  to  Kostroma.
And  Svyatoslav  with  the  men  of  Tver  began  to  ravage  the  Novgorod
district:  Volok,  Bezhitsy,  and  Vologda.  Bread  was  dear  in  Nov-
gorod, and  they  seized  the  merchandise  of  Low  Country  merchants.

The  same  winter  Knyaz  Dmitri  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  the
whole  district  went  to  Tver,  and  they  sent  Smen  Mikhailovich,
Lazor  Moisievich  and  Stephen  Dushilovich  to  Vasili:  "  Give  back
to  us  those  Novgorod  districts  which  thou  hast  taken,  and  take
peace  with  us."  And  Vasili  let  go  the  envoys  with  honour,  but
did  not  give  peace.  And  while  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  at  Tor-
zhok the  people  rose  and  wished  for  Vasili.  And  Dmitri  retired  from
the  throne  voluntarily  and  went  away  with  love.  And  they  then
took  the  Posadnik-shi-p  from  Pavsha,  and  he  fled  to  Dmitri  with
Roman,  and  thence  they  went  to  Vasili  and  bowed  to  him.  And
they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Mikhail  Mishinich,  and  sent  for
Vasili,  and  at  Torzhok  kissed  the  picture  of  the  Lord  that  they  would
all  be  at  one  with  the  Posadnik  Mikhail.

Knyaz  Vasili  Yaroslavich  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  in  Novgorod.
And  the  same  year  they  took  the  Posadnik-ship  from  Mikhail  and
gave  it  again  to  Pavsha  having  brought  him  from  Kostroma.^

'  From  this  point  there  are  several  missing  sheets  of  the  original,  and  the  ">
continuation  up  to  the  year  1299,  as  published,  is  borrowed  from  another  ^
text.

»  Bailiff.

3  No  record  for  1273.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  107

A.D.  1274.  A.M.  6782. Dalmat, Vladyka of Novgorod, died on
Saturday,  October  21,  at  1  at  night,  and  was
honourably  buried  in  the  morning  of  Sunday. God  grant  com-
phance  with  his  holy  prayers  for  those  kneeling  at  his  tomb  !

The  same  winter  Pavsha  Posadnik  of  Novgorod  died,  and  Knyaz
Vasili  came  to  Novgorod,  they  again  gave  the  Posadnik-shx^  to
Mikhail  Mishinich.  Before  the  death  of  Dalmat  the  Posadnik
Pavsha  with  the  elder  men  had  beat  with  their  foreheads^  to  Dalmat :
"  Whom  wilt  thou  bless  as  our  shepherd  and  teacher  in  thy  place  ?  "
And  Dalmat  named  two  Igmnens:  loan  of  St.  Georgi  and  his
own  spiritual  father,  Kliment.  "  I  will  bless  whomever  you  prefer."
The  Posadnik  went  to  loan's  house,  and  called  the  men  of  Novgorod
together,  and  told  them  Dalmat 's  words.  And  all  preferred  Kliment
nominated  of  God,  and  Dalmat  blessed  him  with  his  hand;  and  on
the  death  of  Dalmat  they  sent  Kliment  to  Kiev  for  confirmation.

A.D.  1275.  A.M.  6783.  A  fire  broke  out  by  night  in  the  Knyaz's
Court  next  to  the  court  of  the  Nemtsy,'^
and  the  market  place  was  burnt,  hitherwards  and  up  to  Slavno
and  hitherwards  as  far  as  Rogatitsa  Street :  seven  wooden  churches
were  burnt  down  and  four  stone  churches  were  damaged  by  fire,  and,
fifth,  the  Church  of  the  Netntsy.'^

A.D.  1276.  A.M.  6784.  The  wall  of  St.  Sophia  fell  to  its  foundation,
at  the  Nerev  end,  at  mid-day  on  May  9.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Kliment  returned  from  Kiev  to
his  bishopric  and  he  was  established  Vladyka  of  Novgorod.  And
they  installed  him  honourably  in  St.  Sophia,  and  all  Novgorod  met
him  honourably  with  crosses  and  chants  on  Sunday  the  second  day
of  August.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Yaroslavich
died,  and  he  was  laid  in  the  Church  of  St.  Fedor  in  Kostroma.  And
the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  for  Dmitri  Alexandrovich.

A.D.  1277.  A.M.  6785.  Knyaz  Dmitri  arrived  in  Novgorod  and  they
set  him  on  the  throne  on  All  Saints'  Sunday.

A.D.  1278.  A.M.  6786. Knyaz  Dmitri  with  the  men  of  Novgorod
and  with  the  whole  of  the  Low  Country,
chastised  the  Korel  people  and  took  their  country  by  conquest.

'  ie.  Petitioned.

*  Nemeiski,  German.

1Q8 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1279.  A.M.  6787. Knyaz Dmitri obtained permission from
Novgorod  to  build  a  town^  at  Koporya  for
himself;  and  having  gone,  built  it  himself.

A.D.  1280.  A.M.  6788.  The.  V eliki  KnyazT)rmix\  going  WithPosadnik
Mikhail  and  with  the  greater  men  encircled
the  town  of  Koporya  with  stone.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Dmitri
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  away  the  Posadni k-shiY)  from  Mikhail
Mishinits,  and  gave  it  to  Smen  Mikhailov  having  brought  him  from
Ladoga.  And  after  three  months  Mikhail  Mishinits  died,  on  Novem-
ber 9,  the  day  of  St.  Paul  the  Confessor.

A.D.  1281.  A.M.  6789.  Knyaz  Dmitri  began  to  make  war  on  the
men  of  Novgorod;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
sent  the  Vladyka  with  entreaty;  and  he  did  not  listen  to  him.  In  the
winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz  Dmitri  came  to  Novgorod  with  an
armed  force  and  did  much  harm  to  the  district  of  Novgorod  and
having  halted  on  the  Shelon  he  made  peace  and  withdrew.

The  same  winter  Kyuril,  the  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia,  died  in
Pereyaslavl  on  December  6;  his  remains  were  taken  to  Kiev  to
St. Sophia.

A.D.  1282.  A.M.  6790.  Knyaz  Andrei  Alexandrovich  with  Smen
Tolignevits  beat  with  their  foreheads-
to  the  Tsar  against  his  brother  Dmitri,  and  raised  the  Tartar
forces  and  took  Pereyaslavl  by  assault.  And  Kjtyaz  Dmitri  rode
out  with  his  men  and  court  and  passed  by  Novgorod  making  for
Koporya.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  out  in  full  force  against
him  to  the  Ilmer^  lake.  And  the  Knyaz  retired  from  Koporya  and
the  men  of  Novgorod  showed  him  the  wa}^  and  they  did  not  seize
him,  but  his  two  daughters  and  his  Boyars  with  their  wives  and
children  they  brought  to  Novgorod  as  hostages:  "  If  thy  men  retire
from  Koporya,  then  we  will  let  them  go  free  ";  and  they  went  each
his  own  way  on  January  1.  On  the  same  day  Domont  drove  the
Ladoga  men  out  of  Koporya  and  they  seized  all  the  goods  of  Knyaz
Dmitri,  and  seizing  also  Ladoga  goods  they  took  them  into  Koporya
on  Vasili  day.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  for  Knyaz  Andrei  and
themselves  went  to  Koporya.  Dmitri's  men  went  out  from  the
town  because  the  men  of  Novgorod  had  showed  them  the  road,
and  they  plundered  the  town. The  same  winter  Knyaz  Andrei

>  Or  fort,  gorod.

*  sc  petitioned.

*  sc  Ilmen.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  109

Alexandrovich  came  to  Novgorod,  and  they  set  him  honourably  on
the  throne  in  Quinquagesima  week.  And  then  Knyaz  Andrei  taking
with  liim  the  Novgorod  men  Smen  Mikhailovich  and  other  elder
men,  went  out  from  Novgorod  and  went  to  Volodimir  and  from
Volodimir  he  let  the  men  of  Novgorod  go  back,  and  himself  went  to
Gorodets.^  And  Smen  Mikhailovich  came  to  Torzhok,  and  he
sat  in  ambush  at  Torzhok  not  letting  Dmitri's  lieutenants  enter
Torzhok,  and  he  sent  all  the  crops  to  Novgorod  in  boats;  for  in
Novgorod  bread  was  dear.

A.D.  1283.  A.M.  6791.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  Pereyaslavl
against  Dmitri,  as  also  did  Svyatoslav  with
the  men  of  Tver,  and  Danilo  Alexandrovich  with  the  men  of  Mos-
cow. And  Dmitri  came  out  against  their  army  with  all  his  forces,
and  halted  at  Dmitrov;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  halted  five  versts
short  of  Dmitrov  and  they  stood  five  days  near  each  other,  sending
to  each  other  envoys;  and  they  made  peace  on  all  the  terms  of
Novgorod,  and  withdrew.  The  same  year  the  N'emtsy^  came  up
into  lake  Ladoga  by  the  Neva  with  an  armed  force ;  they  killed  the
Obonezh^  merchants  of  Novgorod ;  and  the  men  of  Ladoga  entered
the  Neva  and  fought  with  them.

A.D.  1284.  A.M.  6792.  Knyaz  Andrei  came  to  Torzhok,  and  sum-
moned to  him  Posadnik  Smen  with  all  the
Elders,  and  they  concluded  peace,  and  the  Knyaz  kissed  the  Cross,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  to  him,  how  Andrei  should  not  with-
draw from  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  should  not  seek
another  Knyaz;  in  life  or  in  death  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Andrei.
And  the  Knyaz  let  the  men  of  Novgorod  go  back,  and  he  himself
went  to  the  Low  Country,  and  having  gone  there  he  ceded  the
Novgorod  throne  to  his  brother  Dmitri.

The  same  year  the  Nemetski  Voyevoda  Trunda  entered  lake
Ladoga  up  the  Neva  in  sailing  vessels  and  boats^  with  an  armed
force,  intending  to  take  tribute  from  the  Korel  people.  And  the
men  of  Novgorod  with  Posadnik  Smen  and  with  the  men  of  Ladoga
going  out  halted  at  the  mouth  of  the  Neva,  and  having  waited,
killed  them,  and  the  rest  ran  away,  on  September  9,  the  Day  of  the

1  sc  Radilov,  on  the  Volga.

*  cf.  p.  34.

3  i.e.  from  the  shores  of  lake  Onega,  N.-E.  of  Novgorod.

*  Loiva,  shnek.

110  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Righteous  Akim^  and  Anna.  In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz
Dmitri  came  to  Novgorod  with  his  brother  Andrei  with  an  armed
force,  and  with  Tartars  and  with  the  whole  of  the  Low  Country,  and
they  did  much  harm  and  burned  the  districts;  and  having  come
they  halted  at  the  [river]  Korichka  and  made  peace;  and  Dmitri
took  his  seat  on  his  throne  in  Novgorod.

A.D.  1285.  A.M.  6793. The  Metropolitan  Maxim  came  to  Novgorod.
The  same  winter  the  Lithuanians  ravaged
the  district.

A.D.  1286.  A.M.  6794. In  the  winter  they  took  the  Posadnik-sYn^
from  Smen  and  gave  it  to Andrei Klimo-
vich,  and  they  took  the  office  of  Tysyatski  from  Ivan  and  gave  it
to  Andreyan  Olferevich.^

A.D.  1287.  A.M.  6795.  There  was  a  great  tumult  in  Novgorod
against  Smen  Mikhailovich;  all  Novgorod
rose  against  him  without  just  cause,  they  went  out  against  him
from  all  the  quarters,  like  a  strong  army,  every  man  armed,  in
great  strength,  a  pitiful  sight !  and  thus  they  went  against  his  house
and  took  his  whole  house  with  uproar.  Semeon  fled  to  the  Vladyka
and  the  Vladyka  led  him  into  St.  Sophia;  and  thus  God  preserved
him;  and  on  the  morrow  they  came  together  in  love.  But  Semeon
in  a  few  days  fell  ill  with  an  illness,  and  having  lain  some  days,  he
died  on  Monday,  July  16,  the  Day  of  St.  Tikhon.

A.D.  1288.  A.M.  6796.

A.D.  1289.  A.M.  6797. Knyaz  Dmitri  went  with  an  armed  force  to
Tver,  and  summoned  the  men  of  Novgorod;
the  men  of  Novgorod  went  with  Posadnik  Andrei,  and  fired  the
district  and  took  peace.

A.D.  1290.  A.M.  6798. The  men  of  Novgorod  took  the  Posfl^nz^-ship
from  Andrei  Klimovich  and  gave  it  to  Yuri
Mishinich,  during  the  Great  Fast,  towards  the  end  of  the  eighth
year.

The  same  year  they  gave  the  Posadyiik-shi^  of  Ladoga  to  Matvei
Semenovich.  The  same  fast,  in  Thanksgiving  Week,  they  killed
Samoila  Ratshinich  in  the  Vladyka's  Court  after  morning  service,

1  loachim.

*  Eleferevich  (Eleutherius).

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  111

at  the  entrance  to  the  Church  of  the  Nativity  of  Christ.  And  the
men  of  Novgorod  rang  together  a  Veche  at  St.  Sophia  and  at  St.
Nikola,  assembled  in  haste,  took  the  Prussian  Street,  and  plundered
their  houses  and  set  fire  to  the  whole  street,  and  the  Church  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  was  also  burnt.

A.D.  1291.  A.M.  6799.  The  water  was  big  in  the  Volkhov  in  the
spring.  The  same  year  the  Lord  sent  His
punishment  for  our  sins:  the  horses  all  died  in  Novgorod,  and  but
few  were  left.  The  same  year  a  frost  attacked  the  crops  throughout
the  whole  of  the  Novgorod  district.  Thus  God  warns  us,  wishing
from  us  repentance  that  we  might  leave  from  our  wickedness.  Yet
we  are  not  any  more  mindful  of  our  sins ;  but  the  Lord  suffers  long,
awaiting  our  repentance.  The  same  year  rioters  plundered  the
market,  and  the  next  day  the  men  of  Novgorod  held  a  Veche  and
hurled  two  rioters  from  the  bridge.  The  same  year  there  was  a
tumult  among  the  Tartars;  Tsar  Nogui  killed  Tsars  Telebeg  and
Algui.

A.D.  1292.  A.M.  6800.  Alexander,  son  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri,
died  among  the  Tartars.  Kliment,  Vladyka
of  Novgorod  laid  the  foundations  of  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Nikola
in  [the  village  of]  Lipna.  The  same  year  they  began  to  build  the
Church  of  St.  Fedor  which  had  collapsed.  The  same  year  some
Novgorod  braves^  with  Voyevodas  of  the  Knyaz  went  against
the  country  of  the  Yem  people  and  having  ravaged  it  came  back  all
well.  In  the  same  year  the  Svei,  800  of  them,  came  in  arms  to
ravage,  400  went  against  the  Korel,  and  400  against  the  Izhera
people;  and  the  Izhera  people  killed  them,  and  the  Korel  people
killed  theirs,  and  others  they  took  with  their  hands.

A.D.  1293.  A.M.  6801.  The  Svei  having  come  put  up  a  town  in  the
Korel  land.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Andrei
with  other  Knyazes  beat  with  their  foreheads  to  the  Tartar  Tsar
with  complaints  against  Knyaz  Dmitri,  and  the  Tsar  sent  his  brother
Duden  with  a  numerous  army  against  Dmitri.  Oh,  great  was  the
harm  done  to  Christians  !  they  seized  unoffending  towns ;  Volodimir,
Moscow,  Dmitrov,  Volok,^  and  other  towns,  they  laid  waste  the  whole
land.  And  Dmitri  escaped  to  Pskov.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
sent  presents  with  Smen  Klimovich  to  Tsar  Duden  to  Volok:  "  Turn
back  the  soldiers  from  Volok,"  and  they  sent  with  greetings  for

1  Molodets,  pi.  molodtsy.  *.

^  Volok  Lamsk.

112  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Andrei.  Knyaz  Andrei  sent  back  the  army  and  himself  came  to
Novgorod  and  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  on  Quinquagesima
Sunday.

The  same  Lent  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei  sent  Knyaz  Roman
Glebovich  with  Yuri  Mishinich  and  the  Tysyatski  Andreyan  and  a
few  men  of  Novgorod  to  the  Sveiski  Town ;  they  fought  hard  on  Tues-
day in  the  sixth  week  of  Lent,  and  they  shot  the  good  man  Ivan
Klekachevich  from  the  town,  and  many  were  wounded.  The  same
night  for  our  sins  a  thaw  set  in ;  water  covered  all  the  land ;  round  the
town  was  flooded,  and  there  was  no  fodder  for  the  horses.  They
retired,  and  came  back  all  well,  except  for  the  wounded;  and  Ivan
Klekachevich  after  being  brought  back,  died  of  his  wound.

The  same  Lent  Knyaz  Andrei  with  Posadnik  Andrei  and  with  the
greater  men  went  to  Torzhok  to  catch  Dmitri,  but  Dmitri  escaped
from  Pleskov  to  Tver;  and  sent  into  Torzhok  the  Vladyka  of  Tver
with  Svyatoslav,  with  greeting  to  his  brother  Andrei  and  to  the  men
of  Novgorod,  sending  envoys  to  each  other  they  took  peace,  and
Volok  [was  given]  back  to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1294.  A.M.  6802.  Knyaz  Andrei  sent  the  Posadnik  from  Tor-
zhok to  Novgorod,  and  himself  went  against
the  Low  Country.  The  same  year  Knyaz  Dmitri  died  in  Volok;
he  had  been  shorn,  and  they  took  him  to  Pereyaslavl.  The  same
year  Titmanovich  secretly  put  up  a  fort  on  this  side  of  the  Narova,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  and  burned  it  down,  and  they  took
and  burned  down  his  big  village.

The  same  year  they  completed  the  Church  of  St.  Fedor  and
Vladyka  Khment  consecrated  it  on  October  18.

A.D.  1295.  A.M.  6803. The  Svei  under  their  leader,  Sig,  put  up  a
town!  in  the  Korel  land,  but  the  men  of
Novgorod  went  and  plundered  it,  and  killed  Sig  and  let  no  man
escape.

A.D.  1296.  A.M.  6804. Kliment, Vladyka of Novgorod erected a
stone  Church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection  over
the  gates.

A.D.  1297.  A.M.  6805. The  men  of  Novgorod  put  up  the  town  of
Koporya. The  same  year  Igunien  Kiril  of
St.  Georgi  erected  the  stone  Church  of  the  Holy  Transfiguration  over
the  gates  of  the  Lyudin  quarter.
1  sc  Keksholm.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  113

A.D.  1298.  A.M.  6806. In the winter the Nemtsy overran the

country of Pleskov  and did  much harm;

the  town  was  burnt  down,  and  in  the  monasteries  they  slew  all  the

monks.

And  the  men  of  Pleskov  with  Knyaz  Dovmont,  fortified  by  God
and  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  drove  them  away,  giving  them  no
httle  hurt.Ji

A.D.  1299.  A.M.  6807.  On  Great  Saturday,  April  18,  a  fire  broke  out
at  1  at  night,  in  the  Varangian  Street,
and  for  our  sins  a  great  evil  happened;  a  storm  arose  with  a  hurri-
cane, and  soon  the  fire  grew  so  strong  that  all,  taking  what  little
they  could,  ran  out  of  their  houses;  all  the  rest  the  fire  took.  The
fire  leapt  from  the  court  of  the  Nemtsy  to  the  Nerev  quarter.  It
broke  out  in  Kholop  Street  and  there  still  more  fiercely;  and  amongst
the  Nerev  residents  on  the  other  side,  and  the  fire  took  the  Great
Bridge.  And  thus  there  was  a  great  calamity  so  that  only  God
and  the  good  people  on  earth  stopped  it,  and  evil  men  fell  to  plun-
dering. What  was  in  the  churches  they  took  all  in  plunder  without
fear  of  God,  and  knowing  God's  punishment  instead  of  repentance
they  did  worse  evil:  at  St.  loan's  they  killed  the  warehouse  guard,
at  St.  Yakov's  the  warehouse-guard  was  burnt.  In  the  market
quarter  twelve  churches  were  burnt;  they  had  not  time  to  bring
out  all  the  pictures,  nor  books.  And  in  Christ  Church  several  people
were  burnt,  also  two  priests  In  the  Nerev  quarter  ten  churches
were  burnt  with  many  embroideries  in  the  churches,  and  the  good
man  Elferi'^  Lazorevich  was  burnt.  And  on  the  morrow  there  was
grief  and  lamentation  in  place  of  gladness.  All  this  was  for  our
sins;  the  prophecy  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  was  fulfilled  who  said:
"  I  shall  turn  your  feasting  to  tears  and  your  merrymaking  into
lamentation."  For  thus,  brethren,  God  punishes  us  for  our  sins,
showing  us  the  way  to  repentance,  that  we  might  abandon  our
wickednesses;  though  we  may  have  sinned,  yet  do  we  not  despair
of  Thy  mercy;  for  thine  Lord,  is  the  power  to  punish  and  then  to
forgive. Having  chastised  us.  Lord,  be  Thou  merciful.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Kliment  of  Novgorod  died,  at  seven  in
the  morning,  on  the  twenty-second  day  of  May,  the  day  of  the  holy
martyr,  Vasilisk,  Friday  in  the  fourth  week  after  Easter,  having
occupied  the  Bishopric  twenty-three  years,  and  he  was  taken  from
the  Vladyka  s  court  and  laid  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia  by  the

1  Here  the  original  Synodal  Text  is  resumed.

*  Eleutherius.

114  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Archimandrite  Kyuril  and  all  the  Igumens,  the  whole  of  the  hier-
archy, Posadnik  Andrei  and  all  the  men  of  Novgorod.

Dovmont,  Knyaz  of  Pleskov  died  the  same  year;  having  borne
much  for  St.  Sophia  and  for  the  Holy  Trinity.  On  Kliment's  death
the  men  of  Novgorod  after  much  consultation  with  Posadnik  Andrei
chose  the  appointed  of  God,  the  good  and  humble  man  Feoktist,
Igmnen  of  the  Holy  Annunciation,  and  having  rung  together  a
Veche  at  St.  Sophia,  Knyaz  Boris  Andreyevich  with  all  the  men  of
Novgorod  led  him  in  with  greeting,  and  set  him  in  the  Vladyka's
court,  until  they  should  learn  where  the  Metropolitan  was.

A.D.  1300.  A.M.  6808.  The  Metropolitan  Maxim  came  to  Novgorod,
also  Semen,  Bishop  of  Rostov,  and  Andrei,
Bishop  of  Tver;  and  they  established  Feoktist  as  Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod. The  Metropolitan  and  the  Bishops  and  the  most  reverend
Igumens  appointed  him  in  the  Church  of  Holy  Boris  and  Gleb,
on  June  29;  in  the  same  month  on  the  day  of  the  Holy  Apostles
Peter  and  Paul,  they  installed  him  in  St.  Sophia;  and  held  a  great
festival ;  and  there  was  joy  in  Novgorod  at  their  Vladyka.

In  the  spring  of  the  same  year  Novi-torg  was  burnt  down.

The  same  spring  they  founded  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Mikhail
in  Mikhail  Street.  In  the  same  year  they  erected  four  wooden
churches:  those  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  monastery  in
Zverinets,^  of  St.  Lazar,  of  St.  Dmitri  in  Boyanya  Street,  and  of  the
Holy  Boris  and  Gleb  in  the  Podol.^

The  same  year  the  Svei  came  from  beyond  sea  in  great  strength
into  the  Neva;  they  brought  masters^  from  their  own  land,  and
they  brought  a  special  master  from  great  Rome  from  the  Pope,  and
they  estabhshed  a  town  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Okhta  on  the  Neva
and  strengthened  it  with  indescribable  strength,  and  placed  bat-
tering rams  within  it.  And  the  accursed  ones  boasted,  calhng  it  the
"  Crown  of  the  land."  For  they  had  a  king's  lieutenant  with  them
named  Maskalka;  and  having  placed  special  men  in  it  with  the
Voyevoda  Sten,  they  went  away,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  not  being  then  in
Novgorod.

A.D.  1301.  A.M.  6809. The Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei came with the

forces  of  the  Low  Country  and  went  with  the

men  of  Novgorod  to  that  town,  and  came  up  to  the  town  on  May

1  Near  Novgorod,  lit.  an  "  enclosure  for  wild  animals."

*  A  part  of  Novgorod — "  lower  town."

*  sc.  experts.

THE  CHRONICLE  OE  NOVGOROD  115

18,  the  Day  of  St.  Patriki,  on  the  Friday  before  the  Descent  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  they  strove  mightily.  By  the  power  of  St.  Sophia
and  by  the  help  of  the  martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb,  that  fortress  came  to
nothing,  for  their  pride,  because  their  labours  were  in  vain,  without
God's  command.  The  town  was  taken ;  some  they  beat  to  death  and
slew,  and  having  bound  others  they  led  them  out  of  the  town,  and
they  fired  the  town  and  sacked  it.  Grant  rest.  Lord,  in  Thy  king-
dom to  the  souls  of  those  who  laid  their  heads  at  that  town  for  St.
Sophia,  and  multiply  the  years.  Lord,  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei
with  his  men  of  Novgorod  and  of  Ladoga.

A.D.  1302.  A.M.  6810.  They  founded  a  stone  wall  at  Novgorod.
The  same  year  they  founded  the  stone
Church  of  Boris  and  Gleb,  which  had  collapsed.

The  same  year  they  sent  envoys  beyond  sea  to  the  Danish  land,
and  they  brought  them  back  having  concluded  a  peace.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei  went  to  the  Tartars.

The  same  year  they  completed  the  Church  of  St.  Mikhail  in
Mikhail  Street.  May  Saint  Mikhail  be  a  help  to  those  who  laboured
for  this  church.

A.D.  1303.  A.M.  6811.  They  took  the  Posadnik-s\nY>  from  Semen
Klimovich  and  gave  it  to  his  brother  Andrei.

The  same  year  they  built  fi)ur  wooden  churches:  St.  Georgi  in  the
market-place,  St.  loan  Ishkov,  the  Holy  Kosma  and  Demyan  in
Kholop  Street,  and  St.  Georgi  in  Borkov  Street.

The  winter  of  the  same  year  was  a  warm  winter;  there  was  no
snow  all  through  the  winter.  The  people  could  not  get  corn,  and
prices  were  very  high,  great  hardship  and  distress  for  the  people.
But  we  despair  not  of  Thy  mercy;  correcting,  punish  us.  Lord,
but  give  us  not  over  to  death;  for  though  we  have  sinned,  yet  have
we  not  drawn  away  from  Thee;  having  punished  us,  have  mercy
on  us,  O  Lord,  that  lovest  mankind  not  according  to  our  wicked
works,  but  according  to  Thy  great  mercy.  Thou  art  our  God,  and
we  know  no  other  God  but  Thee.

A.D.  1304.  A.M.  6812.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei  Alexandrovich,
grandson  of  the  great  Yaroslav,  died  on
July  27,  on  St.  Panteleimon's  Day;  he  had  been  shorn  into  monk's
orders,  and  was  laid  in  Gorodets^;  and  his  Boyars  went  to  Tver.
The  two  Knyazes,  Mikhail  Yaroslavich  of  Tver  and  Yuri  Danilovich

1  sc.  Radilov,  on  the  Volga.

12

116  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

of  Moscow  disputed  for  the  place  of  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  both  journeyed
to  the  Horde.  There  was  great  commotion  throughout  the  Suzdal
land  in  all  the  towns;  the  people  of  Tver  sent  Mikhail's  lieutenants
to  Novgorod  with  a  force,  but  they  did  not  receive  them ;  but  the  men
of  Novgorod  went  to  Torzhok  to  guard  Torzhok,  and  they  united
the  whole  land  against  them ;  and  sending  envoys  to  each  other  they
separated,  having  made  peace  till  the  arrival  of  the  Knyazes.

A.D.  1305.  A.M.  6813.  Semen  Klimovich  erected  a  church  at  the
gates  at  the  end  of  Prussian  Street.  The
same  year  they  made  a  new  bridge  over  the  Volkhov.  The  same
year  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb  was  consecra-
ted with  the  great  consecration  byFeoktist,^  Vladykaoi  Novgorod,
on  December  29,  the  Conception  of  St.  Anne,  in  the  reign  of  the
Christ-loving  Knyaz  Mikhail.

A.D.  1306.  A.M.  6814.

A.D.  1307.  A.M.  6815.

A.D.  1308.  A.M.  6816.  The  F^/z'^ii^Mjyaz  Mikhail  Yaroslavich,  grand-
son of  the  great  Yaroslav  Vsevolodich,  took
his  seat  on  the  throne  in  Novgorod  on  the  Sunday  of  the  Veche  of
the  630  Holy  Fathers  held  in  Khalkidon.^

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Vladyka  Feoktist^  went  out  from  the
Vladyka's  Court  on  account  of  his  ill  health,  having  blessed  Nov-
gorod, and  went  into  the  monastery  of  the  Annunciation  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God,  having  chosen  a  silent  life.  And  the  men
of  Novgorod  with  all  the  Igumens  and  all  the  hierarchy  chose  his
spiritual  father  David,  the  elected  of  God  and  of  St.  Sophia,  and
they  set  him  with  honour  in  the  Vladyka's  Court,  and  Feoktist^
blessed  him  in  his  place,  and  they  sent  him  to  the  Metropolitan  for
confirmation.

The  same  year  Yakim  Stolbovich's  wife  erected  a  stone  church
in  the  Knyaz's  Court,  to  [the  honour  of]  the  318  Holy  Fathers  at
Nikia.3

A.D.  1309.  A.M.  6817. David, Vladyka of Novgorod was con-
firmed  in Volodimir by the Metropolitan
Peter  on  June  5,  St.  Nikander's  Day,  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on
July  20,  on  Ilya's  Day,  being  met  at  the  Church  of  St.  Ilya  by  the

*  Theoktistos.

2  The  Council  of  Chalcedon,  a.d.  451.

3  i.e.  the  Council  of  Nicasa,  a.d.  325.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  117

Igumens  and  priests  and  all  Novgorod  with  honour  and  with  crosses ;
and  they  set  him  on  the  throne,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were
glad  at  their  Vladyka.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  they  gave  the  Posadnik-sYn'p  to
Mikhail  Pavshinich.

A.D.  1310.  A.M.  6818.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  in  boats  and  in
ships  into  the  lake  to  the  Uzerva  river  where
they  put  up  a  new  fort  of  wood  by  the  rapids,  having  cleared  away
the  old  one.  The  same  year  the  Archimandrite  Kyuril  built  a  stone
church  at  Kolomtsy,^  to  the  Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,
and  they  erected  another  of  stone  to  the  Intercession  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  at  Dubenka,-  by  the  efforts  of  God's  servant  the
monk  Oloni  [surnamed  Shkila ;  and  the  monastery  was  a  refuge  to
Christians].  The  same  year  in  the  winter  they  plundered  the  villages
around  Novgorod.  The  same  year  Feoktist  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,
died,  on  December  23,  the  Day  of  the  Ten  Martyrs  in  Crete,  and  he
was  laid  in  the  church  of  the  monastery  of  the  Annunciation  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God,  honourably,  by  all  the  hierarchy.

A.D.  1311.  A.M.  6819.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  in  war  over  sea  to
the  country  of  the  Nemtsy,^  against  the  Yem
people,  with  Knyaz  Dmitri  Romanovich,  and  having  crossed  the
sea  they  first  occupied  the  Kupets  river,  they  burned  villages,  and
captured  people  and  destroyed  the  cattle.  And  there  Konstantin
the  son  of  Ilya  Stanimirovich  was  killed  by  a  column  that  went  in
pursuit.  They  then  took  the  whole  of  the  Black  river,*  and  thus
following  along  the  Black  river  they  reached  the  town  of  Vanai  and
they  took  the  town  and  burned  it.  And  the  Nemtsy  fell  back  into
the  Detineis^:  for  the  place  was  very  strong  and  firm,  on  a  high  rock,
not  having  access  from  any  side.  And  they  sent  with  greeting,
asking  for  peace,  but  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  not  grant  peace,
and  they  stood  three  days  and  three  nights,  wasting  the  district.
They  burned  the  large  villages,  laid  waste  all  the  cornfields,  and  did
not  leave  a  single  horn  of  cattle;  and  going  thence,  they  took  the
Kavgola  river  and  the  Perna  river,  and  they  came  out  on  the  sea  and
returned  all  well  to  Novgorod.

1  Kolmovo,  near  Novgorod.

2  Near  Novgorod.

^  Nemetskaya  Zemlya,  here  S.-W.  Finland.

*  Chernayareka.

*  Citadel.

118  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  spring,  on  May  19,  a  fire  broke  out  at  night  in  Yanev
Street,  and  forty  less  three  houses  were  burnt  and  seven  people.
Then  in  the  night  of  June  28  Glebov's  house  in  Rozvazha  Street
caught  fire,  and  the  Nerev  quarter  was  burnt,  on  one  side  so  far  as
the  fosse, ^  and  on  the  other  beyond  Borkov  Street;  and  the  Church
of  SS.  Kosma  and  Demy  an  was  burnt,  also  that  of  St.  Sava,  and
forty  churches  were  damaged  by  fire  and  several  good  houses.  Oh,
woe,  brethren,  the  conflagration  was  fierce,  with  wind  and  hurricane !
And  wicked  and  bad  men  having  no  fear  of  God,  seeing  peoples'
ruin,  plundered  other  men's  property.  Then  on  July  16  a  fire
broke  out  at  night  in  the  Ilya  Street,  and  here  likewise  was  a  fierce
conflagration  with  a  high  wind,  and  crashing  noise;  the  market  place
was  burnt,  and  houses  up  to  Rogatitsa  Street,  and  the  churches
burnt  were — seven  wooden  churches:  St.  Dmitri,  St.  Georgi,  SS.
Boris  and  Gleb,  St.  loan-  Ishkov,  St.  Catherine,  St.  Prokopi,  and  of
Christ ;  and  six  stone  churches  were  damaged  by  fire,  and  the  seventh
was  the  Varangian  Church.  And  accursed  men  likewise  having  no
fear  of  God,  nor  remembering  the  judgment  of  God,  and  having  no
pity  for  their  fellows,  plundered  other  peoples'  property.  Repay
them.  Lord,  according  to  their  deeds !

The  same  year  they  took  the  Posadnik-ship  from  Mikhail  and  gave
it  to  Semen  Klimovich.  The  same  year  Vladyka  David  erected  a
stone  church  at  the  gate  of  the  Nerev  quarter,  to  St.  Volodimir.

A.D.  1312.  A.M.  6820.  Knyaz  Mikhail  armed  himself  against  Nov-
gorod, and  withdrew  his  lieutenants  and  cut
off  the  corn  from  Novgorod,  and  he  occupied  Torzhok  and  Bezh-
itsy  and  the  entire  district.  And  in  the  spring,  when  the  roads  were
bad,  the  Vladyka  David  went  to  Tver  and  concluded  a  peace;  the
Knyaz  opened  the  gates  and  sent  his  lieutenants  into  Novgorod.

The  same  year  the  Vladyka  David  founded  a  stone  church  in  the
Nerev  quarter  in  his  own  court,  in  the  name  of  the  holy  Father
Nikola.

A.D.  1313.  A.M.  6821. The  Posadnik  of  Ladoga  with  the  men  of
Ladoga  went  out  to  war,  and  for  our  sins
the  Nemtsy  went  all  over  lake  Ladoga  and  burned  it.

In  the  same  year  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Nikola  in  the  Nerev
quarter  was  consecrated,  which  Vladyka  David  built;  and  he  made
daily  service  in  it,  and  attached  monks  to  it.

1  Greblva.

2  John.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD !]'.>

A.D.  1314.  A.M.  6822.  The  Korel  people  killed  the  townsmen  in
the  Korel  town^  who  were  Russian  and
brought  in  Nemtsy  to  themselves.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  with
the  lieutenant  Fedor  went  against  them,  and  the  Korel  people
surrendered,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  killed  the  Nenitsy  and  the
Korel  traitors.

The  same  year  Fedor  of  Rzhev  came  to  Novgorod  from  Knyaz
Yuri  from  Moscow;  and  seized  the  lieutenants  of  Mikhail  and  held
them  in  the  Vladyka's  Court.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  with
Knyaz  Fedor  went  to  the  Volga,  and  Knyaz  Dmitri  Mikhailovich
came  out  from  Tver,  and  halted  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Volga,
and  thus  they  remained  until  the  frost ;  Knyaz  Mikhail  being  at  that
time  in  the  Horde.  After  this  they  concluded  a  peace  with  Dmitri,
and  thence  thev  sent  to  Moscow  for  Knyaz  Yuri,  with  reservation
of  all  the  rights  of  Novgorod;  and  they  themselves  returned  to
Novgorod.

The  same  winter  before  the  great  Fast  Knyaz  Yuri  came  to  Nov-
gorod to  the  throne  with  his  brother  Afanasi,^  and  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod were  glad  at  their  desire.

Bread  was  dear  in  Novgorod  in  the  same  winter;  in  Pleskov  bad
men  took  to  looting  in  the  villages  and  the  houses  in  the  town  and
storehouses  in  the  town;  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  killed  about  fifty
of  them;  and  then  it  became  quiet.

A.D.  1315.  A.M.  6823.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  Yuri  summoned  to  the
Horde  by  the  Tsar,  went  from  Novgorod  on
Lazar  Saturday,  March  15,  leaving  his  brother  Afanasi^  in  Novgorod.
The  same  year  Knyaz  Mikhail  came  from  the  Horde  into  Russia,
bringing  with  him  Tartars  of  the  accursed  Taitemer.  And  the  men
of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  Afanasi  having  heard,  went  out  to  Torzhok,
and  stayed  about  six  weeks  there  gathering  information.  And  then
Knyaz  Mikhail  with  all  the  people  of  the  Low  Country  and  with  the
Tartars  went  to  Torzhok.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz
Afanasi^  and  with  the  men  of  Novi-torg  went  out  against  them  into
the  field.  It  was  by  the  infliction  of  God :  for  both  forces  having  met
there  was  a  terrible  slaughter,  and  no  little  evil  was  done ;  and  there
they  killed  many  good  men  and  Boyars  of  Novgorod:  Andrei  Klimo-
vich,  Yuri  Mishinich,  Mikhail  Pavshinich,  Silvan,  Timofei  Andrey-
anov,  son  of  the  Tysyatski,  Anani  Meluyev,  Afonasi-  Romanovich

1  sc.  Keksholm.
*  i.e.  Athanasius.

120  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

besides  many  worthy  merchants,  and  God  knows  how  many  other
men  of  Novgorod  and  Novi-torg;  the  rest  of  them  fled  into  the  town
and  shut  themselves  in  the  town  with  Knyaz  Afanasi.  And  Knyaz
Mikhail  sent  word  to  the  men  of  Novgorod  in  Torzhok:  "  Give  up  to
me  Knyaz  Afanasi  and  Fedor  of  Rzhev  and  I  will  conclude  peace
with  you."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  said:  "  We  will  not  deliver
over  Afanasi,  but  will  all  die  honourably  for  St.  Sophia."  Then
Knyaz  Mikhail  again  sent:  "  Give  up  Fedor  of  Rzhev  to  me,"  and
not  wishing  to  give  him  up,  they  gave  him  up,  and  against  their
will  paid  for  themselves  50,000  silver  grivnas,  and  they  concluded  a
peace  and  kissed  the  Cross.  And  after  the  peace,  Knyaz  Mikhail
summoned  to  him  Knyaz  Afanasi  and  the  Boyars  of  Novgorod,  and
seized  them,  and  sent  them  as  hostages  to  Tver;  and  the  rest  of  the
men  in  the  town  he  began  to  sell  for  as  much  as  each  would  fetch,
and  he  took  away  all  their  arms  and  belongings.  The  battle  was
on  February  10,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Kharlampi.  And  Knyaz
Mikhail  sent  his  lieutenants  into  Novgorod  and  they  gave  the
Posadnik-s\\\'p  to  Semen  Klimovich.

A.D.  1316.  A.M.  6824.  The  heutenants  of  Knyaz  Mikhail  left  Nov-
gorod, and  Knyaz  Mikhail  went  against
Novgorod  with  the  whole  of  the  Low  Country.  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  raised  defences  round  the  town  on  both  sides,  and  the
whole  of  the  Novgorod  district,  the  men  of  Pleskov,  of  Ladoga,  of
Russa,  the  Korel,  and  Izhera,  and  Vod  people  came  together.  And
the  Knyaz  halted  short  of  the  town  at  the  village  of  Usti^,  and  so
not  accepting  peace,  he  withdrew,  having  accomplished  nothing,
but  receiving  great  hurt,  for  in  the  retreat  they  lost  the  way  among
the  lakes  and  swamps,  and  began  to  die  of  hunger.  They  even  ate
horse  flesh,  and  others  tearing  off  the  leather  of  their  shields  ate  it
They  burned  and  threw  away  their  belongings  and  arms  and  cam^
back  on  foot  to  their  homes,  having  suffered  no  little  harm.

The  same  year  before  Knyaz  Mikhail  had  reached  the  town  they
seized  Ignat  Besk  and  beat  him  at  a  Veche,  and  then  threw  him  from
the  bridge  into  the  Volkhov,  for  they  thought  he  had  held  traitorous
communication  with  Mikhail ;  but  God  knows.

At  that  same  time  Danilo  Pistsev  was  murdered  on  the  meadow
land^  by  his  own  slave;  for  he  had  calumniated  him  before  the
citizens,  saying  thus:  "  He  tried  to  send  me  with  letters  to  Knyaz
Mikhail."

I  sc.  The  Mouths;  cf.  p 12.

*  Rel,  water-meadow,  near  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  121

A.D.  1317.  A.M.  6825.  The  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Vladyka  David
to  Knyaz  Mikhail  seeking  to  ransom  their
brothers,  who  were  with  the  Knyaz  as  hostages,  but  the  Knyaz  did
not  hsten  to  him.  The  same  year  the  Nemtsy  came  into  lake  Ladoga,
and  killed  many  merchants  of  Obonezh.^

A.D.  1318.  A.M.  6826. When  the  river  was  high  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod went  to  war  over  sea,  and  ravaged
much  and  took  Lyuderev  the  town  of  the  Sum  Knyaz  and  Bishop
and  returned  to  Novgorod  all  well.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Yuri  left  the  Horde  with  Tartars,
and  with  all  the  men  of  the  Low  Country  and  went  to  Tver  against
Knyaz  Mikhail,  and  sending  Telebeg,  summoned  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod, and  having  come  to  Torzhok  they  concluded  [an  agreement]
with  Knyaz  Mikhail  not  to  side  with  either:  because  they  did  not
know  where  Knyaz  Yuri  was ;  and  they  returned  to  Novgorod.  And
Knyaz  Yuri  having  come  with  a  force  to  within  forty  versts  of  Tver,
Knyaz  Mikhail  went  out  against  him  there  from  Tver;  and  they
joined  battle,  and  there  was  great  slaughter,  many  heads  fell  on
Knyaz  Yuri's  side;  and  they  took  his  brother  Boris  and  his  wife,
and  brought  them  into  Tver  and  there  they  put  her  to  death.  And
he  himself  fled  to  Novgorod,  and  summoned  the  men  of  Novgorod
after  him,  all  Novgorod  and  Pleskov  went  with  him,  taking  Vladyka
David  with  him;  and  having  come  to  the  Volga  they  concluded
peace  with  Knyaz  Mikhail,  both  to  go  to  the  Horde,  and  to  release
Yuri's  wife  and  brother.  And  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  returned  to
Novgorod  in  the  spring,  and  Knyaz  Yuri  went  to  Moscow  and  thence
to  the  Horde.

A.D.  1319.  A.M.  6827. The  Tsar  killed  Knyaz  Mikhail  of  Tver  in

the Horde and gave the title of Veliki

Knyaz  to  Yuri,  and  gave  over  to  him  Mikhail's  son  Kostyantin  and

his  Boyars. And  Knyaz  Yuri  sent  his  brother  Afanasi  to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1320.  A.M.  6828. Knyaz Yuri went to war against Knyaz
Ivan of Ryazan; and they concluded a
peace.

A.D.  1321.  A.M.  6829. Knyaz Yuri went to war against Dmitri
Mikhailovich  of  Tver  and  came  to  Pereyas-
lavl  with  his  forces. And  Knyaz  Dmitri  sent  thither  the  Vladyka
1  i.e.  from  the  shores  of  Lake  Onega.

122  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

of  Tver,  and  they  concluded  a  peace  for  2,000  in  silver  and  Dmitri
not  to  take  to  himself  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz.

The  same  year,  on  June  26,  there  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  before
morning  service;  the  sky  being  clear,  the  sun  suddenly  grew  dark
for  about  an  hour,  and  was  like  a  moon  of  five  nights;  and  there  was
darkness  as  on  a  winter  night;  and  it  filled  out  gradually  and  we
were  glad.

A.D.  1322.  A.M.  6830.  Knyaz  Yuri  came  to  Novgorod,  called  by
the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  gave  orders  to
repair  the  battering  rams.

At  the  same  time  the  Nemtsy  came  to  make  war  on  the  Korel
town,^  and  did  not  take  it.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Yuri  went  with  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod to  Viborg,  a  town  of  the  'Nemtsy-;  and  they  beat  at  it  with  six
rams,  for  it  was  strong ;  and  they  killed  many  Nemtsy  in  the  town  and
hanged  others,  and  others  they  led  away  to  the  Low  Country.  And
having  laid  siege  to  it  for  a  month  they  attacked  it,  and  did  not
take  it,  but  for  our  sins  several  good  men  fell.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Afanasi,  brother  of  Yuri,  died;  he  had  been
shorn  into  the  monastic  order,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  Holy
Saviour's  in  the  Gorodishche.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Dmitri  Mikhailovich  went  to  the  Horde,  and
obtained  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz.

The  same  year  a  powerful  envoy  came  into  Russia  from  the  Horde,
named  Akhmyl,  and  he  did  much  harm  in  the  Low  Country;  he
slew  many  Christians,  and  others  he  took  away  to  the  Horde.

And  Knyaz  Yuri  having  come  from  Viborg  went  to  the  Low  Coun-
try, the  men  of  Novgorod  having  much  beseeched  him  to  lead  them
there.  And  while  he  was  at  the  [river]  Urdoma,  Knyaz  Alexander
Mikhailovich  came  from  Tver,  and  there  fell  on  him,  so  that  Knyaz
Yuri  with  a  small  party  ran  away  and  fled  to  Pleskov;  and  they
plundered  all  his  baggage.

And  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Davidko  was  then  in  Pleskov,  and  the
men  of  Novgorod  called  him  from  there  according  to  their  kissing
of  the  Cross,  and  put  him  in  the  deacon  Afanasi's  Court.

A.D.  1323.  A.M.  6831. The men of Novgorod went with Knyaz

Yuri  and  established  a  town  at  the  mouth  of

the  Neva  on Orekhov^  island;  and  great  ambassadors  from  the

'  sc.  Keksholin,  on  lake  Ladoga.

-  Nemetski  gorod,  on  the  north  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Finland.

•'  Walnut  island.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  123

king  of  the  Svei  having  come  there,  they  concluded  an  everlasting
peace  with  the  Knyaz  and  with  Novgorod,  on  the  old  terms. ^

The  same  year  the  Lithuanians  ravaged  the  [valley  of  the]  Lovot,
but  the  men  of  Novgorod  drove  them  out,  and  killed  them,  and  some
escaped.

The  same  year  the  people  of  Ustyug*  quarrelled  with  the  men  of
Novgorod;  they  captured  the  men  of  Novgorod  who  had  gone  to
the  Yugra  country,"^  and  robbed  them.

A.D.  1324.  A.M.  6832.  The  men  of  Novgorod  with  Knyaz  Yuri
went  beyond  the  Volok-^  and  took  Ustyug*
by  assault,  and  came  to  the  Dvina  and  there  the  Knyazes  of  Ustyug
sent  envoys  to  the  Knyaz  and  people  of  Novgorod,  and  concluded
a  treaty  of  peace  on  the  old  terms. ^  And  the  men  of  Novgorod
returned  all  well,  and  Knyaz  Yuri  went  from  Zavoloche  to  the  Horde
by  the  [river]  Kama.

The  same  year  they  completed  Christ  Church  in  stone,  and  Vladyka
David  consecrated  it.

The  same  winter  David,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died  on  February
5,  the  Commemoration  Day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Agafa,  and  they
laid  him  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia  by  the  side  of  Kliment.  Then
the  men  of  Novgorod  with  the  Igumens,  the  priests  and  the  monks
and  all  Novgorod  having  consulted,  chose  Moisei,  the  appointed  of
God,  former  Archimandrite  of  St.  Georgi.  He  had  of  his  own  free
will  gone  out  to  his  own  monastery  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  at
Kolomtsy^;  and  they  led  him  up  to  the  threshold''  and  set  him  in  the
Vladyka' s  Court  till  the  Metropolitan  should  summon  him.

A.D.  1325.  A.M.  6833. Knyaz  Olexander  Mikhailovich  came  back
from  the  Horde,  and  with  him  came  Tartar
collectors,  and  there  was  much  hardship  in  the  Low  Country.

The  same  j-ear  Vladyka  Moisei  went  to  Moscow  to  be  confirmed
by  the  Metropolitan,  and  when  he  was  there  they  brought  [the  body
of]  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Yuri,  son  of Danilo,  grandson  of  Alexander,

>  Poshlina,  lit.  duty,  tariti.

*  See  Introduction,  p.  x,  etc

*  Fo/o A' =  portage;  sometimes  called  Volok  Dvinsk  in  contrast  to  Volok
Lamsk:"  Zavoloche  ":="beyond  the  Volok," sc.  the  basin  of  the  N.  Dvina,  and
N.E.  Russia  generally;  cf.  Introduction  pp.  ix-xi,  etc,  and  Index.

*  i.e.  "  Yugmouth,"  a  town  on  the  N.  Dvina,  at  its  junction  with  the  Yug.

*  Poshlina.

*  Near  Novgorod.

'  ,\  platform  thus  called  {s^«/=  threshold,  or  porch),  specially  placed  in  the
interior  of  churches  for  ceremonies  of  consecration.

124  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

from  the  Horde,  and  the  MetropoHtan  Peter,  Moisei,  Varsonofi,
Bishop  of  Tver,  Prokhor,  Bishop  of  Rostov,  and  Grigori,  Bishop  of
Ryazan,  buried  him  on  Saturday  of  the  first  week  in  Lent;  and
Knyaz  Ivan  deeply  lamented  him  and  all  the  people  with  great
lamentation,  both  great  and  small;  for  Knyaz  Dmitri  Mikhailovich
had  killed  him  in  the  Horde  without  the  Tsar's  word,  and  it  was  not
well  for  himself ;  for  as  a  man  sows  so  shall  he  reap.

A.D.  1326.  A.M.  6834.  Vladyka  Moisei  came  to  Novgorod  on  Tues-
day in  Palm  week,  confirmed.  On  August
23  of  the  same  year  a  fire  broke  out  in  Boyanya  Street  and  all  was
burnt  up  to  half  the  Rogatitsa  Street ;  and  the  Slavkov  Street  was
burnt  from  St.  Dmitri  up  to  the  field,  and  the  Church  of  St.  Khment
was  burnt.

The  same  year  the  Tsar  killed  Knyaz  Dmitri  Mikhailovich  in  the
Horde.

The  same  winter  the  Metropohtan  Peter  of  all  Russia  died  in
Moscow,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God  which  he  himself  had  begun  to  build  in  stone.  Through  his
prayers  God  performed  miracles  at  his  tomb.

The  same  year  envoys  arrived  from  Lithuania,  the  brother  of
Gedimin,  Knyaz  of  Lithuania,  Voini,  Knyaz  of  Polotsk,  Vasili,
Knyaz  of  Minsk,  and  Fedor  Svyatoslavich,  and  they  concluded  a
peace  with  Novgorod  and  with  the  Nemtsy.

A.D.  1327.  A.M.  6835.  There  was  a  tumult  in  Novgorod,  and  they
plundered  the  house  of  Ostafi^  Dvoryaninets
and  entirely  burned  it.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Moisei  erected  the  Church  of  the  Nativity
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Desyatina."^

The  same  year  on  the  day  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God  Knyaz  Alexander  Mikhailovich  killed  a  great  many  Tartars  in
Tver  and  in  other  towns,  and  he  killed  some  merchants  of  Khopyl.
For  an  important  envoy  named  Shefkal  had  come  from  the  Horde
with  a  large  number  of  Tartars,  and  Knyaz  Olexander  sent  envoys
to  the  men  of  Novgorod,  wishing  to  flee  into  Novgorod ;  but  they  did
not  receive  him.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  sent  his  lieutenants  to
Novgorod,  and  himself  went  to  the  Horde.

^  Eustaphi,  Eustathius.
'In  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  125

The  same  winter  a  very  great  force  of  Tartars  came,  and  they
took  T\'er  and  Kashin  and  the  Novi-torg  district,  and  to  put  it
simply,  laid  waste  all  the  Russian  Land,  God  and  St.  Sophia  pre-
served Novgorod  alone,  and  Knyaz  Olexander  fled  to  Pleskov,  and
his  brother  Kostyantin  and  Vasili  to  Ladoga.  And  the  Tartars
sent  envoys  to  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  gave  them  2,000
in  silver,  and  they  sent  their  own  envoys  with  them,  with  numerous
presents  to  the  Voyevodas.

And  then,  too,  the  Tartars  killed  Kjiyaz  Ivan  of  Ryazan.

A.D.  1328.  A.M.  6836.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  with
Kostyantin  Mikhailovich,  and  with  Fedor
Kolesnitsa  sent  by  the  men  of  Novgorod,  went  to  the  Tsar  to  the
Horde.  And  the  Tsar  let  them  go,  commanding  them  to  seek  out
Knyaz  Alexander.  And  Knyaz  Ivan  sent  his  own  envoys  to  Knyaz
Alexander  in  Pleskov,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  on  their  own  part
sent  Vladyka  Moisei  and  the  Tysyatski  Avram,^  bidding  him  go  to
the  Horde ;  and  he  did  not  obey.

The  same  year  Yurev  of  the  Nemtsy-  was  burnt  down,  with  all  its
churches,  and  the  houses  of  stone  crumbled  and  fell;  and  2,000  and
500  and  thirty  Nemtsy  perished  in  the  fire,  and  four  Russians.

A.D.  1329.  A.M.  6837.  The  F^/Z^ji^wya^  Ivan  Danilovich,  grandson
of  Olexander, 3  came  to  the  throne  in  Nov-
gorod on  March  26,  the  festival  of  the  Archangel  Gabriel.  And  the
Knyazes  Kostyantin  and  Vasili  of  Tver  and  Olexander  of  Suzdal,
besides  many  other  Russian  Knyazes,  were  with  him.

The  same  year  they  killed  in  Yurev  an  honourable  man,  Ivan
Sypa,  the  Novgorod  envoy.

The  same  year  the  Metropolitan  named  Feognast,  a  Greek  by
birth,  came  to  Novgorod.

The  same  j'ear  Knyaz  Ivan,  with  all  the  Knyazes  and  with  Nov-
gorod, went  to  war  on  Pleskov;  and  hearing  this  the  men  of  Pleskov
turned  out  Olexander  from  amongst  them,  and  sent  envoys  to
Knyaz  Ivan  and  to  the  men  of  Novgorod  to  Opoka  with  greeting,
and  concluded  a  peace.

The  same  winter  the  Knyazes  of  Ustyug  killed  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod who  had  gone  against  the  Yugra  country.

The  same  year  in  the  absence  of  the  Knyaz  and  of  the  men  of  Nov-

1  Abraham.

2  Yurev  Nemetski,  German  Dorpat,  on  the  river  Embach,  a  tributary  of
Lake  Chud,  near  Pskov,  as  opposed  to  Yurev  Polski,  near  Moscow.

3  sc.  Alexander  Nevski.

126  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

gorod  a  fire  broke  out  at  Ondreshek's  house  in  the  Carpenters'
quarter^;  the  fire  extended  to  St.  Fedor's;  and  on  the  same  Sunday
nearly  the  whole  of  Ilya  Street  was  burnt,  also  the  Lyubyanitsa
Street,  and  the  Churches  of  St.  Saviour  and  St.  Luke  were  burnt.

A.D.  1330.  A.M.  6838.  Vladyka  Moisei  was  shorn  into  the  schema^
of  his  own  will;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
with  all  Novgorod  respectfully  entreated  him  to  retain  his  seat  on
the  throne,  but  he  did  not  listen,  but  blessed  them  and  said:  "  Select
from  among  yourselves  a  man  worthy  of  such  a  thing,  but  I  bless
you."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  dehberated  much  were
without  a  Vladyka  for  about  eight  months ;  and  all  Novgorod  and  the
Igumens  and  priests  chose  Grigori  Kaleka^  nominated  of  God,  a  good
and  humble  man,  a  priest  of  the  Church  of  Holy  Kosma  and
Demyan  in  Kholop  Street,  he  was  shorn  in  the  holy  angelic  fashion
in  January,  and  was  named  Vasili  and  they  put  him  in  the  Vladyka' s
Court  until  they  should  send  him  to  the  Metropolitan.  The  same
winter  Fedorko  and  Semenko  arrived  from  Volynia  as  envoys  from
the  Metropolitan  in  Passion  Week,  summoning  Vasili  for  confirma-
tion.

A.D.  1331.  A.M.  6839."*  The  same  year  Vasili  was  confirmed  in
Volynia  for  Novgorod.  The  same  year  on
November  30,  the  day  of  the  Apostle  St.  Andrew,  there  was  a
darkening  of  the  sun  lasting  from  one  to  three.

[The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  laid  the  foundation  of  a  stone  wall
extending  from  St.  Volodimir  to  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God,  and  thence  to  that  of  Boris  and  Gleb.

The  same  year  on  the  day  of  the  Birth  of  St.  loan,  in  the  month
of  June,  Vasili  departed  to  Volynia  for  confirmation,  and  with  him
went  the  Boyars  Kusma  Tverdislavl  and  Valfromei^  Ostafiev,  the
son  of  the  Tysyatski,  and  they  arrived  in  Volodimir  of  Volynia,  by
the  providence  of  God  and  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they
celebrated  the  great  festival  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  they
confirmed  him  on  the  Day  of  the  Apostle  St.  Titus.  A  sign  then
appeared  in  the  heavens:  a  bright  star  over  the  church.  He  was
confirmed  by  the  Metropolitan  Feognast,  by  birth  a  Greek,  and  the

1  Plotniki.

2  cf.  p.  34.

3  i.e.  the  cripple.

*  For  this  year  the  record  in  different  handwritings  stands  as  follows ;  that  in
brackets  is  supplied  from  another  text.
5  Varfolomei,  Bartholomew.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  127

Vladykas:  Grigori  of  Polotsk,  Afanasi  of  Volodimir,  Fedor  of  Galich,
Marko  of  Peremyshl,  and  loan  of  Kholm.

At  that  same  time  envoys  came  to  the  Metropohtan  from  Knyaz
Alexander,  from  Pleskov,  and  from  Gedimin,  and  from  all  the
Lithuanian  Knyazes,  bringing  with  them  Arseni  desiring  to  appoint
him  to  the  Vladyka-ship  in  Pleskov,  thinking  Novgorod  of  no
account  they  had  puffed  themselves  with  their  pride.  But  God
and  St.  Sophia  always  lay  low  presumptuous  thoughts,  for  the  men
of  Pleskov  violated  their  kissing  of  the  Cross  to  Novgorod,  they  had
set  up  Knyaz  Alexander  on  their  throne  by  Lithuanian  hands;
so  Arseni  with  the  men  of  Pleskov  went  disgraced  from  the  Metro-
politan from  Volynia  to  Kiev.  Vladyka  Vasili  left  the  Metropolitan
on  the  Day  of  Simon  Stylites^;  as  he  approached  Chernigov,  there
Knyaz  Fedor  of  Kiev  at  the  prompting  of  the  devil  set  upon  him
murderously  with  a  Baskak  and  fifty  men.  And  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod were  aware  in  time  and  halted  to  defend  themselves;  only  by  a
little  was  it  not  a  disaster  for  them,  and  the  Knyaz  was  disgraced
and  rode  away,  though  he  did  not  escape  punishment  from  God:
his  horses  all  died.

And  thence  the  Vladyka  went  to  Bryansk  and  reached  Torzhok
on  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  Akepsim.^  And  the  people  of  Novi-
torg  were  glad  of  their  Vladyka;  but  they  were  sad  in  Novgorod,
because  there  was  no  news,  for  the  report  had  spread,  that  the
Lithuanians  had  taken  the  Vladyka  and  had  killed  his  children.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  went  to  the  Horde  with
Knyaz  Kostyantin.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod  arrived  in
Novgorod  from  Volynia  in  the  month  of  December  on  a  Sunday,
the  day  of  the  holy  Father  Patapi,  having  received  the  sacred
dignity  from  the  Metropolitan  Feognast ;  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
were  glad  of  their  Vladyka;  and  this  was  under  Knyaz  Ivan,  Posadnik
Valfromei  and  the  Tysyatski  Ostafi.]

A.D.  1332.  A.M.  6840.  Turbulent  men  rose  in  Novgorod,  and  took
the  Posadnik-shi-p  from  Fedor  Ahmyl  and  gave
it  to  Zakhari  Mikhailovich,  and  they  plundered  the  house  of  Semen
Sudokov,  and  they  plundered  the  villages  of  his  brother  Senefont.=*

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  returned  from  the  Horde
and  threw  upon  Novgorod  his  v/iath,  asking  from  them  silver  for  the

1  September  13.

'  November  16.

3  Xenophon.

128  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

country  beyond  the  Kama,  and  in  addition  seized  Torzhok  and
Bezhitsy  against  his  kissing  of  the  Cross.

The  same  year  they  took  the  Posain/^-ship  from  Zakhari  and  gave
it  to  Matvei  Koska.

A.D.  1333.  A.M.  6841.  Knyaz  Ivan  came  to  Torzhok  with  all  the
Knyazes  of  the  Low  Country  and  of  Ryazan,
and  sent  into  Novgorod  and  removed  the  lieutenants;  and  himself
sat  in  Torzhok  from  Epiphany  till  the  second  week  of  Lent,  despoil-
ing the  district  of  Novgorod.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  envoys
to  him  calhng  him  to  Novgorod:  the  Archimandrite  Lavrenti,  Fedor
Tverdislavich  and  Luka  Valfromeyev;  but  he  did  not  accept  their
prayer,  and  did  not  listen  to  them,  and  he  did  not  grant  peace,  and
went  away.

The  same  year  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  raised  the  stone
walP  in  two  years,  and  the  Archimandrite  Lavrenti  of  St.  Yuri-
raised  the  walls  of  St.  Yuri  forty  sazhens,^  with  embrasures.

[1333]^  The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  covered  the

side  of  Saint  Sophia  with  lead  and  renewed
the  great  cross  on  St.  Sophia  and  took  off  the  coverings  at  the  side
and  put  up  a  stone  wall  by  the  help  of  God,  in  two  years.  And
give  him.  Lord  God  and  Saint  Sophia  in  this  world  and  in  the  next
remission  of  his  sins,  him  and  his  children,  the  people  of  Novgorod !
The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Vladyka  Vasili  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  with  a  request,  and  he  came  to  him  to  Pereya-
slavl  with  Terenti  Danilovits  and  Danil  Mashkovits  and  they  offered
him  five  hundred  roubles^  if  he  would  renounce  his  privileges,  ac-
cording to  the  kissing  of  the  Cross;  and  the  Vladyka  requested  him
much,  that  he  would  take  peace,  and  he  did  not  listen.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  having  come  from  the  Veliki
Knyaz  Ivan,  went  to  Pleskov,  and  the  people  of  Pleskov  received
him  with  great  honour,  because  a  Vladyka  had  not  been  in  Pleskov
for  seven  years,  and  he  christened  Knyaz  Olexander's  son  Mikhail.

1  sc.  and  finished  it  in  two  years.

2  George.

•''  One  sazhen=  \\  fathom.

*  At  this  point  the  Sj'nodal  text  as  a  continuous  whole  comes  to  an  end ;
what  follows  is  borrowed  from  a  text  called  "  Continuation  of  the  Annals  of
Novgorod  "  which  belongs  to  the  Archaeographical  Commission;  the  Synodal
text  has  small  records  for  1337,  1345  and  1352,  but  as  these  are  the  same
in  the  "  Continuation  "  they  have  not  been  printed  separately.

*  cf.  Appendix.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  129

The  same  year  God  put  into  the  heart  of  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz
Narimont,  called  in  baptism  Gleb,  the  son  of  Gedimin,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Lithuania,  and  he  sent  to  Novgorod,  wishing  to  bow  down  to  Saint
Sophia;  and  the  people  of  Novgorod  sent  Grigori  to  Olexander
for  him,  and  called  him  to  them;  and  he  arrived  at  Novgorod,  wish-
ing to  worship,  in  the  month  of  October;  and  they  received  him  with
honour,  and  he  kissed  the  Cross  to  Great  Novgorod^  as  for  one  man.
And  they  gave  him  Ladoga,  and  Orekhov,  the  Korel  town^  and  the
Korel  land  and  half  Koporya  for  patrimony  and  heritage  and  to  his
children.  The  same  year  the  Metropolitan  Feognast  came  back
to  Russia  having  been  at  Tsargrad'^  and  in  the  Horde.

A.D.  1334.  A.M.  6842.  Second  of  the  Indiction.  Vladyka  Vasili
went  to  the  Metropolitan  in  Volodimir.
The  same  year  the  Vladyka  put  the  top  on  the  stone  wall.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  came  back  from
the  Horde,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Valfromei  Yurevich  to
him,  and  he  received  them  with  love.

The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  came  to
Novgorod  in  Sexagesima  Week,  on  Thursday,  February  16,  the  day
of  the  holy  Martyr  Pamphil.

A.D.  1335.  A.M.  6843.  Vladyka  Vasih  founded  a  Church  to  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  in  Zverinets,*  and
Vladyka  Moisei  founded  a  stone  monastery  Church  of  the  Holy
Resurrection  by  the  river  Derevyanitsa.  The  same  year  Vladyka
Vasih  with  his  children,  with  Posadnik  Fedor  Danilovich  and  the
Tysyatski  Ostafi  and  with  all  Novgorod,  laid  the  foundations  of  a
stone  fortification  on  the  opposite  side,  from  St.  Ilya  to  St.  Paul,
under  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich.

The  same  year,  for  our  sins,  there  were  great  fires  in  Russia;
Moscow,  Vologda,  Vitebsk  were  burnt,  and  Yurev  of  the  Nemtsy
was  entirely  burnt  down.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  wished  to  go  with  the
men  of  Novgorod  and  with  the  whole  of  the  Low  Country  against
Pleskov,  and  he  had  a  friendly  conference  with  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod, and  they  deferred  the  march;  but  they  did  not  grant  peace  to
the  men  of  Pleskov.

1  Veliki  Novgorod.

2  sc.  Keksholm,  on  lake  Ladoga.
'  Constantinople.

••  Near  Novgorod.

130  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  completed  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  in  Zverinets,  and  Moisei  the  other  of  the  Holy
Resurrection,  of  stone.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  having  come  to  Torzhok
from  Novgorod,  the  Lithuanians  ravaged  the  district  of  Novi-torg,
while  there  was  peace,  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  having  sent  [a  force]
burned  the  Lithuanian  town  of  Osechen  and  Ryasna,  and  many
others.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  called  to  him  the  Vladyka,  the
Posadnik  and  the  Tysyatski  to  Moscow,  as  well  as  the  leading  Boyars,
to  be  honoured;  and  Vladyka  Vasili  went,  and  saw  much  great
honour.

The  same  autumn  ice  and  snow  drifted  into  the  Volkhov,  carrying
away  fifteen  stays  of  the  great  bridge ;  God  knows  whether  this  was
in  punishment  or  in  mercy.  God  did  not  allow  any  bloodshed  among
the  brethren :  the  people  stood  on  either  side  of  the  Volkhov  having
taken  up  arms  against  each  other  at  the  prompting  of  the  devil,
but  God  guarded  [against  it]  and  they  united  in  love.

A.D.  1336.  A.M.  6844.  Vladyka  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,
founded  a  stone  church,  [in  honour  of]  the
entrance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  Jerusalem,  on  June  25,  St.
Fevronia's  Day,  where  a  small  palace^  had  stood.  The  same  year
they  completed  the  new  bridge  over  the  Volkhov.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  went  to  the  Horde.

The  same  year  the  God-loving  Vladyka  Vasili  fenced  St.  Sophia
with  a  new  fence^  and  put  up  gilded  brass  doors  in  St.  Sophia.

The  same  year  Pleskov  was  entirely  burnt  down;  all  the  houses
within  the  wall,  and  the  churches.

A.D.  1337.  A.M.  6845.  At  the  instigation  of  the  devil  the  common
people  rose  against  the  Archimandrite  Esif,
and  they  held  a  Veche,  shut  Esif  in  the  Church  of  St.  Nikola,  and
the  rioters  sat  round  the  church  night  and  day  keeping  watch  on
him.

The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  quarrelled  with  the  men
of  Novgorod,  and  he  sent  a  force  to  the  Dvina^  beyond  the  Volok,^
not  remembering  the  kissing  of  the  Cross,  and  there  by  the  power  of

1  Terem.

*  Tyn.

3  sc.  the  N.  Dvina.

*cf.  p.  123.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  131

the  Cross  they  were  disgraced  and  beaten.  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit
for  another  shall  fall  into  it  himself.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  went  on  his  visitation  to  Pleskov,
but  the  men  of  Pleskov  would  not  grant  him  jurisdiction,  so  the
Vladyka  left  having  cursed  them.

The  same  year  the  whole  of  Moscow  was  burnt  down;  and  then
there  came  heavy  rain  and  flooded  everything;  both  in  the  cellars
and  in  the  squares  wherever  anything  had  been  carried  out.

The  same  year  Toropets  was  burnt  down  and  flooded.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Olexander  went  from  Pleskov  to  the  Horde,
having  been  in  Pleskov  ten  years.

The  same  year  the  Church  of  the  Entrance  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  into  Jerusalem  was  completed,  and  it  was  consecrated  by
the  most  reverend  Vladyka  Vasili,  on  September  21,  the  day  of  the
Holy  Martyr  St.  Kondrat;  and  it  was  a  refuge  to  Christians.  It
was  nine  weeks  in  building.

The  same  winter  the  Korel  people  having  fetched  the  Nemtsy,
killed  many  Russians  of  Novgorod  and  of  Ladoga,  who  were  trading
amongst  them,  and  all  the  Christians  who  lived  amongst  them,
and  they  themselves  fled  into  the  town  of  the  Nemtsy^  and  then  slew
many  Christians  from  the  town  of  the  Nemtsy.

A.D.  1338.  A.M.  6846.  The  water  was  big  in  the  Volkhov  as  it
never  had  been  before,  three  weeks  after
Easter  Day  on  Wednesday,  and  it  carried  away  ten  stays  of  the  great
bridge ;  at  the  same  time  it  carried  away  the  bridge  over  the  stream
Zhilotug,  and  much  harm  was  done.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  ordered  the  Church  of  the  Entrance
of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  Jerusalem  to  be  painted  by  Isaia
a  Greek,  with  others,  on  May  4,  the  Day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Selivan;
they  began  to  paint  it  the  same  day.

The  same  spring  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  with  Posadnik  Fedor
to  the  Neva,  and  stood  before  Orekhov,  conversing  through  envoys
with  the  Nemetski  Voyevoda  Sten;  and  there  was  no  peace;  and  sa
the  men  of  Novgorod  returned  to  Novgorod.  The  Nemtsy  warred
much  with  the  Korel  people  around  lake  Onega,  and  afterwards,
having  come  up,  they  set  fire  to  the  town^  at  Ladoga  but  did  not
take  the  fort.^

After  that  the  brave  men  of  Novgorod  went  with  their  Voyevodas

1  Nemetski  Gorod,  sc.  Viborg,  on  the  N.  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  Finland.

2  Posad.  3  Gorod.

K2

132  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

and  ravaged  the  districts  round  the  Nemetski  a.nd  Korel  towns^  and
devastated  their  country  considerably,  burning  their  crops  and
kilHng  their  cattle ;  and  they  returned  all  well  with  captives.

The  same  year  the  Nemtsy  came  from  their  town^  to  ravage  the
[town  of]  Toldoga,  and  from  there  they  wished  to  go  to  the  country
of  the  Vod  people,  but  they  took  nothing;  for  they^  had  taken  pre-
cautions. But  the  men  of  Koporya  issued  out  with  Fedor  Vasile-
vich  and  beat  them;  and  here  they  killed  Mikhei  of  Koporya,  a
good  man,  and  wounded  Fedor's  horse  under  him,  but  he  himself
suffered  no  harm ;  for  they  had  gone  out  in  a  small  body.

And  Knyaz  Narimont  remained  in  Lithuania;  and  they  sent
urgently  for  him,  but  he  would  not  come;  he  even  withdrew  his
son  Alexander  from  Orekhov,  leaving  only  his  lieutenant.

The  same  year  the  damaged  bridge  was  repaired  by  order  of
Vladyka  Vasili;  for  he  urged  on  the  work  himself;  he  began  and
finished  it  with  his  own  men;  and  he  did  much  good  for  the  Chris-
tians.

And  Knyaz  Alexander  was  made  a  grant  by  the  Tsar  and  he
came  away  from  the  Horde  to  his  own  patrimony^  in  Tver,  and
having  sent  to  Pleskov,  he  had  his  wife  and  children  brought  to
him.

The  Archimandrite  Lavrenti  of  St.  Georgi  died  this  same  year,
and  they  installed  Esif.

The  same  winter  they  sent  envoys  to  Novgorod  from  the  Nemetski
town  Viborg  from  Voyevoda  Petrik  concerning  peace,  saying:
"  The  Knyaz  of  the  Svei  knows  not  that  a  rupture  had  occurred
with  Novgorod;  but  the  Voyevoda  Smen^  had  done  it  of  his  own
mind."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Kusma  Tverdislavich  and
Olexander  Borisovich  on  a  mission,  and  they  returned  with  a  peace,
having  concluded  a  peace  on  the  terms  agreed  upon  with  the  Veliki
Knyaz  Yuri  on  the  Neva;  but  concerning  the  Kohylich  Korel®  they
agreed  to  ask  the  Knyaz  of  the  Svei.

A.D.  1339.  A.M.  6847. The Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  went  to  the  Horde.

On  his  advice  the  Tartars  summoned  to  the

Horde  Alexander  and  Vasili  Davidovich  of  Yaroslav,  and  all  the

*  In  Finland.
2  sc  Viborg.

'  sc.  the  Vod  people.

*  Otchina.
'  Sten  ?

*  A  part  of  the  Korel  country  or  people.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  133

Knyazes.  And  Knyaz  Alexander  had  first  sent  his  son  Fedor  to
the  Horde,  expecting  news  from  there.  And  the  Tsar  sent  for  him,
and  he  went  to  the  Horde,  and  VasiH  of  Yaroslav  against  whom
Knyaz  Ivan,  his  father-in-law,  put  out  500  men  to  intercept  him,
but  he  beat  them  off.  For  Knyaz  Ivan  had  already  left  the  Horde
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  envoys  to  him.

The  same  year,  on  August  13,  there  was  a  sign  from  the  ikon  of
the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  St.  Lazar  at  evening  service;  tears  as  it
were  flowed  from  both  its  eyes,  and  two  wax  cups  were  placed  under
it ;  the  next  morning  the  whole  town  learning  about  this,  they  and
the  Igumens  and  priests  and  readers  in  their  gowns  went  with  crosses
to  see  it.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Kusma  Tverdislavl  and
Olexander  Borisovich  with  others,  and  the  Vladyka  on  his  part  sent
his  nephew  Matvei,  beyond  sea  on  a  mission  to  the  Knyaz  of  the  Svei;
they  found  him  in  Lyudovl  town  in  the  Murman  country  and  con-
cluded a  peace  with  him  on  the  terms  of  previous  documents;  and
regarding  the  Korel  people  they  spoke  thus:  "  If  ours  escape  to  you,
slay  or  hang  them,  if  yours  to  us,  we  will  do  the  same  by  them;  that
they  make  no  treachery  between  us;  but  these  we  will  not  deliver,
who  have  been  baptised  into  our  faith ;  also  there  are  but  few  of  them
left,  the  rest  have  all  died  by  the  wrath  of  God."

And  to  Knyaz  Ivan  they  sent  Selivester  Volosevich  and  Fedor
Ovramov  with  the  tribute.^  And  the  Knyaz  sent  his  envoys  re
quiring  another  tribute:  "and  in  addition  give  me  the  Tsar's
demand,  what  the  Tsar  has  demanded  from  me."  And  they  said:
"  That  has  never  been  amongst  us  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,
and  thou  hast  kissed  the  Cross  to  Novgorod  on  the  terms  of  the  old
Novgorod  dues  and  according  to  Yaroslav's  Gramota."^

The  same  year  they  finished  the  painting  of  the  Vladyka's  Church.

The  same  autumn,  on  October  5,  the  surrounding  quarter  from  St.
Volodimir  was  burnt.

On  the  29th  of  the  same  month  the  pagan  Tartars  killed  Knyaz
Olexander  and  his  son  Fedor  in  the  Horde.  For  Tsar  Ozbyak^  had
summoned  him  with  deceit,  intending  to  kill  him,  saying  thus:
"  The  Tsar  desires  to  make  thee  a  grant."  And  they  listening  to  the
deceitful  words  of  that  pagan,  and  having  gone,  were  both  killed;
and  received  a  bitter  and  violent  death.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  withdrew  his

1  Vykhod.

'  Charter. "  Uzbeg.

134 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

lieutenants  from  Novgorod,  and  he  was  not  at  peace  with  Nov-
gorod.

A.D. 1340.  A.M.  6848. The Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Danilovich  died  in

Moscow,  as  a  monk,  and  in  the  schema};  and

all  the  Knyazes  went  to  the  Horde;  his  son  Simeon,  Vasili  of  Yaro-

slav,  Kostyantin  of  Tver,  Kostyantin  of  Suzdal,  with  other  Knyazes.

And  some  adventurers  having  gone  from  Novgorod  made  an
attack  on  Ustyuzhna  and  burned  it;  but  going  in  pursuit  of  them
they^  took  back  the  captives  and  plunder  from  the  boatmen ;  and
after  that  they  ravaged  the  district  of  Belo-Ozero.^

The  same  year  on  Tuesday  in  Trinity  week,  on  June  7,  the  day  of
the  Holy  Martyr  Fedor,  a  fire  broke  out  in  Rozvazha  Street,  in  the
field  beyond  St.  Fedor's;  the  Nerev  quarter  was  burnt,  even  so  far
as  St.  Yakov,  and  hitherwards  to  Chudinets  Street,  and  all  the
churches  and  houses;  from  there  it  flung  itself  into  the  town,  and
the  Vladyka's  Court  was  burnt  and  the  Church  of  St.  Sophia;  and
all  the  houses  and  churches  in  the  town,  and  the  Lyudin  quarter,
up  to  St.  Alexis'  Church,  also  churches  and  houses  and  hitherwards
up  to  the  Prussian  Street :  for  so  great  and  fierce  was  the  fire,  with
storm  and  gale,  that  they  thought  it  was  the  end  [of  all  things];
the  fire  went  burning  over  the  water,  and  many  people  were  drowned
in  the  Volkhov;  and  the  fire  threw  itself  across  the  Volkhov  to  the
other  side'*  and  there  by  evening  service  time  the  whole  of  that  side
rapidly  burned,  from  the  Fedor  stream  into  Slavno  and  up  to  the
fields,  *  and.  stone  and  wooden  churches,  and  houses ;  from  many
churches  they  had  no  time  to  carry  out  either  images  or  books,  nor
from  out  of  the  houses;  and  whatever  anyone  brought  out  and  laid
either  in  the  fields  or  in  the  gardens,  or  in  the  fosse  or  in  boats  or
canoes,  all  was  taken  by  the  flames;  and  whatever  else  was  brought
out  wicked  men  carried  it  off,  who  fear  not  God,  nor  expect  the
resurrection  of  the  dead, /nor  God's  judgment,  nor  the  repayment
according  to  deeds;  and  it  was  not  only  that  they  robbed  people,
their  own  brothers  and  Christians,  killing  some  who  were  guarding
their  goods,  and  taking  it  to  themselves,  but  even  in  the  sacred
churches  which  every  Christian  ought  to  protect,  even  abandoning
his  own  house. But  instead  of  repenting,  we  rather  commit  greater

1  cf.  p.  34.

«  sc.  the  people  of  Ustyuzhna,  on  the  river  Mologa,  a  tributary  of  the
Volga.

3  The  White  Lake,  in  N.  Russia.

«  sc.  the  E.  or  mercantile  half  of  the  town.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  135

sin,  even  seeing  the  punishment  of  God  on  them:  in  the  Church  of
the  Forty  Holy  Martyrs  which  had  been  fitted  out  and  adorned  with
ikons,  paintings,  and  metalHc  work  and  ikon-frames;  shutting
themselves  in  the  church  they  plundered  all  the  goods,  whosesoever
they  were ;  and  they  did  not  allow  anyone  to  carry  out  the  images  or
books,  but  when  they  themselves  ran  out  from  the  church  all  was
enveloped  in  fire;  and  they  murdered  two  watchmen.  In  the
Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  market  place  a  priest  was
burnt;  though  others  say  that  they  murdered  him  while  guarding
property;  because  this  church  was  entirely  burnt  and  the  ikons
and  the  books,  but  of  this  man  the  fire  did  not  touch  even  a  hair;
but  they  plundered  all  the  property;  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Friday  the  watchman  was  burnt  with  his  son;  in  consequence  of
that  fire  that  church  collapsed,  also  that  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Boris
and  Gleb  in  Podol^;  and  many  people  were  burnt  in  their  houses;
for  the  fire  took  on  rapidly;  and  the  great  bridge  was  burnt  to  the
water's  edge.  And  they  had  not  time  to  carry  the  image  out  of  St.
Sophia,  and  there  was  much  harm.  The  whole  of  Smolensk  was
burnt  down  in  the  same  year,  in  the  night  of  the  Transfiguration.
They  made  a  new  bridge  again  across  the  Volkhov  the  same  year.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Simeon  came  from  the  Horde,  and  sent  to
collect  tribute  in  Torzhok,  and  began  to  act  violently.  And  the
Novi-torg  people  sent  with  greeting  to  Novgorod;  and  they  sent
Matvei  Valfromeyevich,  Terenti  Danilovitch  with  his  brother,  and
Valfromei,  Posadnik  Ostafi's  son,  and  Fedor  Avramov,  with  armed
men;  and  having  gone  they  came  upon  Torzdok  unexpectedly  and
seized  the  lieutenants  of  Knyaz  Mikhail  Davidovich,  Ivan  Rybkin's
son,  and  the  son  of  the  collector  Boris  Smenov;  also  their  wives  and
children,  and  put  them  in  fetters,  and  they  stayed  in  Torzhok  for  a
month  and  strengthened  it.  And  they  had  previously  sent  Kusma
Tverdislav  to  the  Knyaz  from  Novgorod  with  complaints:  "Thou
hast  not  yet  taken  thy  seat  among  us,  yet  thy  Boyars  are  already
doing  violence."  And  they  sent  messengers  from  Torzhok  to
Novgorod  that  the  men  of  Novgorod  should  take  to  horse  and  come
to  Torzhok,  but  the  common  people  did  not  desire  this.  On  this
the  people  of  Novi-torg,  seeing  that  a  force  would  not  come  from
Novgorod,  the  common  people  rose  against  the  Boyars  crying  out:
"  Why  did  you  call  in  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  they  have  seized
the  Knyaz's  men,  and  we  shall  perish  for  that,"  And  putting  on
their  armour  they  broke  by  force  into  the  houses  and  took  away  from

*  The  "  Lower  "  town,  a  part  of  Novgorod.

136  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  captains  the  Knyaz's  heutenants  and  the  collectors  with  their
wives,  and  turned  the  men  of  Novgorod  out  of  the  town.  And  the
Novi-torg  nobles  fled  to  Novgorod  with  only  their  souls,  those
who  could,  and  they  plundered  their  houses  and  razed  their  dwell-
ings, and  killed  Smen's  grandson  at  the  Veche,  and  then  devastated
their  villages.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  on  December  6,  Nikola  Day,  the
people  of  Bryansk  killed  Knyaz  Gleb  Svyatoslavich ;  at  the  same
time  the  Metropolitan  was  there  and  he  could  not  calm  them,  till  he
came  out  from  the  Church  of  St.  Nikola.

The  same  winter  Knyaz  Simeon  came  to  Torzhok  with  a  force,
with  the  whole  of  the  Low  Country,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  began
to  assemble  the  whole  of  the  district  in  the  town,  and  they  sent  the
Vladyka  and  the  Tysyatski  Avraam  with  other  Boyars  to  the
Knyaz,  and  they  concluded  a  peace  according  to  the  old  charters  on
all  the  terms  of  Novgorod;  and  they  kissed  the  Cross.  And  they
gave  the  Knyaz  a  tax  on  the  district,  and  on  the  Novi-torg  people
1,000  roubles;  and  the  Metropolitan  was  also  there;  and  the  Knyaz
sent  a  lieutenant  into  Novgorod.

A.D.  1341.  A.M.  6849.  Vladyka  Vasili  covered  St.  Sophia  with  lead,
which  had  been  burnt,  and  painted  the
images  and  fitted  up  an  image-case.

The  same  winter  the  Metropolitan  Feognast,  a  Greek  by  birth,
came  to  Novgorod  with  many  people;  the  feeding  and  the  gifts
weighed  heavily  on  the  Vladyka  and  the  monasteries.

The  same  year  the  pagan  Tsar  Ozbyak  died.

The  same  winter  the  pagan  Veliki  Knyaz  Gedimin  of  Lithuania
died.

The  same  autumn  the  Vladyka  built  a  large  palace.^

The  same  winter  the  young  Knyaz  Mikhail  Olexandrovich  came
from  Tver  to  Novgorod  to  the  Vladyka,  his  god-father,  to  be  taught
reading  and  writing.

Bread  was  cheap  this  year,  but  horned  cattle  died,

A.D.  1342.  A.M.  6850.  The  men  of  Pleskov  sent  envoys  with
greeting  to  Novgorod:  "A  Nemetski-  force
fully  armed  is  advancing  against  Pleskov;  we  bow  to  you,  our
masters,  defend  us."  And  making  no  delay,  the  men  of  Novgorod
went  quickly  on  Good  Friday,  others  following  on  Easter  Eve,

1  Terem.

2  "  German,"  here.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  137

having  sealed  up  all  their  communal  property;  and  when  they
reached  Meletovo  the  men  of  Pleskov  sent  greeting:  "  We  bow
to  you;  there  is  no  army  coming  against  us;  there  is  an  army  of
Nemtsy,  but  they  are  building  a  fort^  on  the  border  on  their  own
land."  And  they  wanted  to  go  to  Pleskov,  and  then  they  listened
to  their  request,  and  came  back  to  Novgorod  all  well.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  founded  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Annunciation  in  the  Gorodishche  [in  place  of  the  one]  destroyed,
by  order  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Semen  Ivanovich,  on  Monday,  May  27,.
in  St.  Peter's  Fast,  the  day  of  St.  Kliment,  establisher  of  the  Canons.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  ordered  a  big  bell  to  be  cast  for
St.  Sophia,  and  brought  masters'-  from  Moscow,  a  good  man  named
Boris.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Pleskov  gave  themselves  over  to  Lithu-
ania, renouncing  Novgorod,  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz.  They  fetched
into  their  midst  Knyaz  Olgerd  from  Lithuania,  son  of  Gedimin,
with  the  Lithuanians ;  they  had  first  turned  out  Olexander  Vsevolod-
its.  And  Olgerd  had  his  son  baptised  in  the  name  of  Andrei,  and
he  set  him  in  Pleskov,  and  himself  departed  to  Lithuania.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Pleskov  beat  the  Nemtsy,  pursuing  them
up  to  their  town  Novogrodek  on  the  border,  killing  about  300  of
them.  And  the  Nemtsy  came  in  great  strength  to  Izborsk  with
battering  rams,  and  stood  before  the  town  eleven  days  and  nearly
took  it;  but  they  killed  many  Nemtsy,  and  there  also  they  killed
Voinev,  son  of  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz,  and  several  Lithuanians  and
men  of  Izborsk  fell ;  and  the  Nemtsy  withdrew.

The  same  year  a  fire  broke  out  in  Novgorod  in  Danislav  Street,
extending  along  the  bank  to  the  fosse,  and  up  the  hill  to  the  Churches
of  the  Forty  Saints  and  SS.  Kuzma  and  Damian,  and  three  churches
were  burnt,  St.  Nikola  and  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Yakov;  and  a
watchman  also  was  burnt  there,  and  the  good  man  Esif  Davidovich;
the  third  was  the  Church  of  St.  Georgi;  and  much  evil  was  done.
And  the  people  took  fright,  and  dared  not  dwell  in  the  town,  but
over  the  fields,  others  settled  on  the  water-meadows,  others  along
the  banks,  in  boats.  And  the  whole  town  was  to  be  seen  in  motion ;
the  people  wandered  about  for  a  week  and  longer;  people  endured
much  harm  and  loss  at  the  hands  of  miscreants  who  fear  not  God.
And  the  Vladyka  with  the  Igumens  and  priests  ordained  a  fast,
and  visited  the  monasteries  and  churches  throughout  the  town  with

^  Or  town,  Gorod.
2  sc  experts.

138  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

crosses,  praying  to  God  and  to  His  Immaculate  Mother,  that  He
might  avert  from  us  His  just  wrath.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Simeon  went  to  the  Horde  to  the  pagan
Zyanibek  who  had  taken  his  seat  on  the  Tsar's  throne  after  killing
his  two  brothers,  and  the  Knyaz  came  back  into  Russia.

On  October  25,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Markyan  and  Marturi,
the  servant  of  God,  the  Posadnik  of  Novgorod  Volfromei,  son  of  Yuri
Mishinich,  died,  and  the  Vladyka  Vasili  with  the  Igumens  and  priests,
laid  his  body  in  his  father's  tomb  in  the  Church  of  the  Forty  Saints.
Grant,  Lord,  that  his  soul  may  rest  in  peace  with  all  the  Saints !

The  same  year  Luka  Valfromeyev  not  listening  to  Novgorod  and
the  blessing  of  the  Metropolitan  and  the  Vladyka  collected  a  party
of  peasant  adventurers  and  went  to  the  Dvina  beyond  the  Volok,
and  put  up  the  fort^  of  Orlitsk;  and  gathering  a  number  of  the  Yem
people,  he  took  by  assault  all  the  country  beyond  the  Volok  and  the
villages  along  the  Dvina.  And  at  the  same  time  his  son  Ontsifor^
went  off  to  the  Volga,  and  Luka  going  out  to  fight  with  a  party  of
200,  was  killed  by  the  people  beyond  the  Volok ;  and  the  news  came
to  Novgorod:  "  Luka  has  been  killed!  "  and  the  common  people
rose  against  Ondreshko  and  Posadnik  Fedor  Danilov,  saying  that
they  had  sent  men  to  kill  Luka,  and  they  plundered  their  houses
and  villages,  and  Fedor  and  Ondreshko  fled  to  the  town  of  Koporya
where  they  stayed  all  the  winter  until  the  Great  Fast.  And  at  that
time  Ontsifor  came  and  beat  with  his  forehead  to  Novgorod  against
Fedor  and  Ondreshko:  "  They  sent  men  to  kill  my  father,"  and  the
Vladyka  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  the  Archimandrite  Esif
with  nobles  to  Koporya  for  Fedor  and  Ondreshko;  and  they  came
and  said:  "  We  had  not  plotted  the  killing  of  our  brother  Luka,  nor
the  sending  of  anyone  against  him."  And  Ontsifor  with  Matvei
summoned  a  Vladyka  Veche  at  St.  Sophia,  while  Fedor  and
Ondreshko  summoned  another  in  Yaroslav's  Court.  And  Ontsifor
and  Matvei  sent  the  Vladyka  to  the  Veche,  but  not  waiting  the
Vladyka's  return  from  that  Veche,  they  attacked  the  Yaroslav
Court  and  there  seized  Matvei  Koska  and  his  son  Ignat,  and  put
them  in  the  church.  And  Ontsifor  fled  with  his  confederates.
That  was  in  the  morning;  and  by  mid-day  the  whole  town  was  up
in  arms;  this  side  for  itself,  and  that  side  for  itself,  until  Vladyka
Vasili  with  his  lieutenant  Boris  made  peace  between  them.  So  the
Cross  was  exalted  and  the  devil  disgraced.

»  Gorod.

*  Onesiphorus.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  139

A.D.  1343.  A.M.  6851.  The  men  of  Pleskov  with  Knyaz  Ostafi,
5,000  strong,  went  to  war  into  the  country
of  the  Nemtsy  to  the  town  of  Medvezhya  Golova;  and  the  men  of
Pleskov  ravaged  eight  days  and  eight  nights,  and  it  happened  on
lake  Ostrechno  on  the  day  of  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the
Nemtsy  came  upon  them  and  arrayed  a  force  against  the  men  of
Pleskov.  And  the  men  of  Pleskov  stood  their  ground  and  there
was  a  great  battle.  God  aided  Knyaz  Ostafi  and  the  men  of  Pleskov ;
they  killed  their  Knyaz  and  many  men  of  Velnevik^  and  Nemtsy.
And  of  the  men  of  Pleskov,  they  killed  Posadnik  Korman,  Olufer
and  other  Boyars.  God  give  rest  to  their  souls  among  the  Saints !
And  Posadnik  Danila  of  Pleskov  cut  off  his  armour  and  ran.

The  same  year  the  Metropolitan  Feognast,  the  Greek,  went  to
the  Horde,  to  the  pagan  Tsar  Zhenbek.  And  Kalantai  maligned
him  to  the  Tsar  and  they  robbed  him,  and  took  him  and  tortured
him,  saying:  "  Give  the  annual  tribute."  He  would  not  agree  to
this,  but  put  down  six  hundred  roubles  ransom,  and  he  then  re-
turned safel}^  to  Russia.  The  same  year  on  August  8,  the  day  of
the  holy  Father  Emelyan,  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  completed
the  stone  Church  of  the  Holy  Annunciation  in  the  Gorodishche,  and
it  was  consecrated  on  the  24:th  of  the  same  month,  the  day  of  the
Holy  Martyr  Evtikhi.  Grant  him,  Lord,  many  years  of  life  in  this
world,  and,  in  the  next,  place  him  at  Thy  right  hand,  who  laboured
much  for  Thy  church !

A.D.  1344.  A.M.  6852.  There  was  a  great  tumult  beyond  the
Narva.  The  Chud  people  attacked  the
Boyars  of  their  country  in  the  Kolyvan  district  and  in  the  Rugodiv-
district,  killing  300  of  them;  then  the  men  of  Velnevik,^  with  the
men  of  Yurev  rose  against  them  and  killed  fourteen  thousand  of
the  Chud  people,  and  the  rest  fled  to  the  Island  country^;  and  the
men  of  Velnevik^  followed  them  up  into  the  Island  country,^  and
did  not  take  them,  but  themselves  drew  back  defeated.

A.D.  1345.  A.M.  6853. The  third  of  the  Indiction. Vladyka  Vasili

founded the Church of  the Holy Friday

which  had  been  destroyed  in  the  great  fire,  by  order  of  God's  servant

Andrei,  son  of  the  Tysyatski,  and  of  Paul  Petrilovits. The  same  day

1  sc.  Velyad,  the  town  of  Fellin,  in  Livonia.

*  sc.  Narva.

»  Ostrovskaya  zemlya.

140  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Vladyka  Vasili  founded  the  Church  of  SS.  Kuzma  and  Damian  in
Kuzma-Demyan  Street,  by  order  of  God's  servant  Anani  Kuritski,
the  second  week  after  Easter.  The  same  year  at  the  instance  of  the
Archimandrite  Esif  the  Church  of  St.  Georgi  was  renovated  and
roofed  with  new  lead,  under  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Simeon  Ivanovich,  by
God's  providence  and  with  the  help  of  Georgi  the  holy  Martyr  for
Christ.  The  same  year,  on  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father  Simon
Stylites,^  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Friday  was  completed.  The  same
year,  in  the  Autumn,  on  the  day  of  SS.  Kuzma  and  Demyan,  the
Church  of  SS.  Kuzma  and  Demyan  was  completed.

The  same  year  a  southerly  wind  arose,  with  snow,  and  drove  the
ice  into  the  Volkhov,  and  carried  away  seven  stays,  the  Posadnik
had  only  just  had  time  to  cross  to  the  Commercial  Side  at  mid-day,
with  the  whole  of  the  Veche,  on  the  day  of  the  Archistrates[os
Michael.  2

Then  they  took  the  Posadnik-'^v^  from  Ostafi  Dvoryaninits  and
gave  it  to  Matvei  Valfromeyevich.  By  God's  grace  there  was  no
ill-will  between  them.

The  same  year  there  was  great  confusion  in  Lithuania;  the  town
of  Vilna  expelled  Olgerd  with  his  brother  Kestuti,  and  the  Veliki
Knyaz  Evnuti  flung  himself  over  the  wall  and  escaped  to  Smolensk,
while  Narimont  went  off  to  the  Horde  to  the  Tsar.  Knyaz  Evnuti
took  refuge  in  Smolensk  and  after  being  there  a  little,  went  to
Moscow  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Simeon,  and  here  he  was  baptised  in
the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  Knyaz
Simeon,  and  his  name  was  called  loan.

A.D.  1346.  A.M.  6854.  Vladyka  Vasih  went  to  Moscow  to  the
Knyaz  and  to  the  Metropolitan  to  call  the
Veliki  Knyaz  to  Novgorod,  and  there  the  Metropolitan  Feognast
blessed  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  and  gave  him  a  cross-covered
vestment.

The  same  winter  Knyaz  Simeon,  great-grandson  of  brave  Knyaz
Alexander,  came  to  Novgorod  to  the  throne  on  the  Festival  of  St.
Fedor  Sunday^  and  took  his  seat  on  his  throne ;  and  having  remained
in  Novgorod  three  weeks  he  went  to  the  Low  Country  on  the  Tsar's
business.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Olgerd  came  with  his  brother
Knyazes  and  with  all  the  Lithuanian  land,  and  halted  in  the  Shelon

'  September  14.

2  November  21.

"  1st  Sunday  in  Lent.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  141

country^  at  the  mouth  of  the  Pshaga  river,  caUing  to  the  men  of
Novgorod:  "  I  wish  to  meet  you;  your  Posadnik  Ostafi  Dvoryaninits
had  abused  me,  he  called  me  a  hound."  And  he  took  Shelon  and
Luga-  by  assault,  and  he  imposed  a  contribution  on  the  towns  of
Porkhov  and  Opoka.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  rode  out  against
him  to  Luga,  and  having  returned  to  the  town,  they  summoned  a
Veche,  and  killed  Posadnik  Dvoryaninits  at  the  Veche  saying:
"It  is  owing  to  thee  that  they  have  taken  our  district."

A.D.  1347.  A.M.  6855. Slavno was burnt from  Smenov  Beskov's
house  as  far  as  Nutna  Street.

A.D.  1348.  A.M.  6856.  Magnush,  King  of  the  Svei,  sent  to  the  men  of
Novgorod  saying:  "  Send  your  philosophers
to  a  conference,  and  I  will  send  my  own  philosophers,  that  they
may  discuss  about  faith;  they  will  ascertain  whose  faith  is  the
better;  if  your  faith  is  the  better,  then  I  will  go  into  your  faith,  but
if  our  faith  is  the  better,  you  will  go  into  our  faith,  and  we  shall  all
be  as  one  man.  But  if  you  do  not  agree  to  uniformity,  then  I  will
come  against  you  with  all  my  forces."  And  Vladyka  VasiU  and
Posadnik  Fedor  Danilovich  and  the  Tysyatski  Avraam  and  all  the
men  of  Novgorod  having  taken  counsel  together,  repHed  to  Mag-
nush: "  If  thou  wishest  to  know  whose  is  the  better  faith,  ours  or
yours,  send  to  Tsargrad^  to  the  Patriarch,  for  we  received  the  Ortho-
dox faith  from  the  Greeks;  but  with  thee  we  will  not  dispute  about
the  faith.  As  to  what  grievances  there  may  be  between  us,  we  will
send  about  that  to  thee  to  the  conference."  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  sent  to  Magnush  the  Tysyatski  Avraam,  Kuzma  Tverdis-
lav,  and  other  Boyars.  And  Avraam  and  the  others  arriving  at
Orekhovets  wished  to  go  to  Magnush,  but  Magnush  was  then  on
Berezov*  island  with  all  his  forces.  And  the  men  of  Orekhov  beat
with  their  foreheads  to  Avraam  not  to  leave  their  town,  but  Kuzma
Tverdislav  with  others  went  to  Magnush;  and  Magnush  replied  to
Kuzma:  "  I  have  no  grievance  whatever  against  you  ";  but  he  said
thus:  "  Adopt  my  faith,  or  I  will  march  against  you  with  my  whole
force  ";  and  he  dismissed  Kuzma  and  the  others.  On  their  return
to  Orekhovets  they  all  shut  themselves  in  the  town,  and  Magnush
came  up  against  the  town  with  his  whole  force,  and  began  baptizing

1  West  of  lake  Ilmen.

2  The  places  in  these  districts.
-  Constantinople.

*  "  Birch-tree."

142  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  Izhera  people  into  his  own  faith,  and  let  loose  his  troops  among
those  who  refused  baptism.  And  hearing  that  the  king  had  turned
his  force  on  the  Izhera  people,  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Ontsifor
Lukinits,  Yakov  Khotov  and  Mikhail  Fefilatov^  against  them  with  a
small  company^  and  through  the  prayers  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,
and  with  the  help  of  St.  Sophia  and  of  the  holy  Martyrs  Boris  and
Gleb,  God  aided  Ontsifor;  they  killed  500,  and  others  they  took
alive,  and  executed  the  traitors,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  returned
all  well,  having  lost  only  three  men.

And  Posadnik  Fedor  Danilovich  with  the  lieutenants  of  the
Veliki  Knyaz  and  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  of  Pleskov,  with  the
whole  of  the  Novgorod  district  and  a  few  men  of  Novi-torg  went  to
Ladoga,  and  to  Knyaz  Simeon  Ivanovich  they  sent  envoys,  saying :
"  Come  to  us,  Sire,^  to  defend  thy  patrimony  according  to  thy
kissing  of  the  Cross ;  the  king  oiihe  Sveiis  coming  against  us. "  And  the
'Veliki  Knyaz  Simeon  replied  to  the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  I  come
gladly  to  you."  And  after  long  delay  the  Knyaz  went  to  Novgorod;
but  on  reaching  [the  village  of]  Sitno  from  Torzhok,  he  turned  back
to  Moscow,  and  sent  his  brother  Ivan  to  Novgorod.  And  Knyaz
Ivan  came  to  Novgorod  but  did  not  go  to  the  men  of  Novgorod  at
Ladoga.  In  the  meanwhile  King  Magnush  captured  the  town  of
Orekhovets  on  Transfiguration  Day,  and  he  seized  Avraam  and
Kuzma  with  eight  other  Boyars,  and  let  all  the  others  go  out  of  the
town,  and  himself  went  away  from  it,  leaving  a  force  behind  in
Orekhovets.  And  Knyaz  Ivan  hearing  of  the  capture  of  Orekhovets,
by  the  Nemisy,  went  back  from  Novgorod  without  the  benediction
of  the  Vladyka,  and  not  listening  to  the  petition  of  the  men  of
Novgorod.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  from  Ladoga,  and
halted  by  Orekhovets.

At  the  same  time,  on  the  night  of  the  death  of  loan  the  Theolo-
gian, a  fire  broke  out  in  Volosov  Street  which  was  partially  burnt
down,  also  a  part  of  Dobrynya  Street  and  a  goodly  part  of  Prussian
Street;  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  was  partially  burnt,
also  Chudinets  Street,  as  far  as  the  field,  and  the  Lyudgoshcha
Street  and  four  wooden  churches;  but  before  that,  in  the  same
autumn,  the  Church  of  St.  Flor  in  Lyudgoshcha  Street  was  burnt,
and  one  church  during  dinner-time.

The  same  year  the  God-loving  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,
ordered  the  painting  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection  in  the

1  Theophylaktov.

2  Druzhina.  '  Gospodm.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  143

Derevyanitsa  Street,  and  it  was  completed  on  the  day  of  the  Con-
ception of  loan  the  Baptist.

The  same  autumn  the  men  of  Novgorod  halted  by  Orekhov,
investing  it  from  our  Lady's  Fast^  till  the  Great  Fast  [Lent] ;  then
on  Monday  before  Easter  they  approached  the  town  with  siege-
engines,  and  on  the  dawn  of  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week  they  took  the
town  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  mediation  of  St.  Sophia,  through
the  prayers  of  the  Most  Holy  Mother  of  God  our  Sovereign  Lady,
and  by  the  power  of  the  Honourable  Cross,  in  which  we  repose  our
trust,  also  with  the  aid  of  the  sacred  Martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb,  on
Tuesday,  the  day  of  Commemoration  of  the  discovery  of  the  sacred
and  honourable  Head  of  loan  the  Forerunner,^  and  they  slew  the
Nemtsy  and  took  others  alive,  and  set  their  brothers  of  Novgorod,
Yakov  Khotov  and  Olexander  Borisovich  in  Orekhov.

A.D.  1349.  A.M.  6857. The King  of  Cracow^  with  a  large force
seized  the  country  of  Volynia  by  deceit,  and
did  much  injury  to  the  Christians,  and  he  converted  the  sacred
churches  to  the  Latin  service  hated  of  God.

A.D.  1350.  A.M.  6858.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  war  against
the  Nemtsy,  with  Boris  the  son  of  the  lieu-
tenant, Ivan  Fedorovich  the  Tysyatski,  the  Voyevodas  Mikhali
Danilovich,  Yuri  Ivanovich,  and  Yakov  Khotov;  and  came  to  the
town  of  Viborg  on  Monday  the  2ist  day  of  March,  and  burned  the
whole  of  the  town.^  On  the  next  day  the  Nemtsy  came  out  of  the
town^  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  fell  on  them,  and  the  Nemtsy
fled  into  the  town,^  and  there  they  killed  several  Nemtsy,  and
ravaged  and  burned  the  district  near  the  town^  and  killed  many
Nemtsy,  both  women  and  children,  and  took  others  alive;  and  they
returned  to  Novgorod  all  well.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  Yurev,^  and  made  an
exchange  with  the  Nemtsy  of  the  Swedish  captives  taken  at  Orekhov
for  Avraam  and  Kuzma,  Alexander  and  Andrei  and  the  company
who  had  been  over  sea  in  the  Swedish  King  Magnush's  country.
And  they  returned  all  well  to  Novgorod  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and
by  the  power  of  the  honourable  Cross  in  which  they  trusted  they

1  In  August.

2  March  9.

*  Krakovsky,  sc.  Poland.

*  Posad.

*  Gorod.

*  sc.  Dorpat.

144  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

reached  Novgorod  on  the  9th  day  of  June,  the  day  of  the  Holy
Martyr  Alexander.

On  the  16th  day  of  the  same  month  they  took  the  Posadnik-ship
from  Fedor  Danilovich  and  gave  it  to  Ontsifor  Lukin.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Vasili  erected  a  new  stone  palace  in  his
own  Court,  next  to  [the  church  of]  the  Nativity  [of  Christ].

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  drove  Posadnik  Fedor  out
of  Novgorod,  together  with  his  brother  Mikhail,  and  Yuri  and
Ondreyan;  their  houses  they  pillaged,  and  they  plundered  the
whole  of  Prussian  Street.  And  Fedor,  Mikhail,  Yuri  and  Ondreyan
fled  to  Pskov,  and  after  being  there  a  short  while  they  went  to
Koporya.^

A.D.  1352.  A.M.  6860."  The  nobles  and  the  common  people  of
Novgorod  beat  with  their  foreheads  to
Vladyka  Vasili,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  to  go  to  Orekhov  to  establish
the  fort  there;  he  went  and  established  the  fort  and  returned  to
Novgorod.  Envoys  arrived  from  Pskov  praying  Vladyka  Vasili
thus:  "  It  has  pleased  God,  the  Holy  Trinity,  God  hath  spoken  to
thy  children  bidding  the  men  of  Pskov  to  live  until  thou,  Sire,^
shouldest  come  to  the  [church  of  the]  Holy  Trinity  and  bless  thy
children  the  men  of  Pskov  "  And  making  no  delay  he  went,  taking
with  him  the  Archimandrite  Mikifor,  the  Igumens  and  priests,  and
arrived  at  Pskov  and  performed  a  service  in  Holy  Trinity,  in  [the
churches  of]  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  on  Sneta  Hill,  of  St.  Mikhail,
of  loan  the  Theologian,  and  again  in  that  of  the  Holy  Trinity;  he
went  in  procession  round  the  town  with  crosses,  and  blessed  all  the
men  of  Pskov  his  children.  And  leaving  the  town  and  reaching
Proshchenek*  on  Sunday,  he  stopped  in  the  evening  one  verst
beyond  Proschenek,  by  the  Cherekha  river,  and  here  he  was  taken
ill ;  he  was  taken  into  the  monastery  of  St.  Mikhail  at  the  mouth  of
the  Uza  river,  on  the  Shelon;  here  he  died  on  Tuesday,  the  day  of
the  Holy  Martyr  Uakimf.^  And  they  brought  him  to  Novgorod  on
Thursday,  July  5,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father  Lampad,  Vladyka
Moisei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  the  Igumens  and  the  priests  and  all
Novgorod  attending;  and  they  laid  him  in  the  porch  of  St.  Sophia.*

1  No  record  for  1351.

2  This  is  the  last  entry  in  the  Synodal  text.

3  Gospodin.

*  A  place  near  Pskov.
'  Hyacinth.

"  Here  ends  this  last  entry  of  the  Synodal  text ;  all  that  follows  is  from  the
"  Continuation  of  the  Annals  of  Novgorod  "  text,  of.  p.  128.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  145

There  was  a  very  great  plague  in  Pleskov.  The  same  year  envoys
arrived  in  Novgorod  from  Pleskov  calling  the  Vladyka  to  Pleskov
to  bless  the  people.  And  the  Vladyka  heard  their  prayer  and  went
and  blessed  the  people  of  Pleskov,  and  on  his  way  back  to  Novgorod
going  from  Pleskov  he  was  seized  with  a  severe  illness,  and  died  at
the  Uza  river  on  the  3rd  day  of  July,  Tuesday,  at  nine  of  the  day,
the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Akinf.^

The  same  year  Vladyka  Moisei  erected  a  stone  church  in  the
name  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Volotov
[field]. ^  The  same  year  they  led  Vladyka  Moisei  with  prayers  on
to  his  own  throne  in  St.  Sophia.

The  same  year  there  was  a  great  plague  in  Novgorod;  it  came
on  us  by  God's  loving  kindness,  and  in  His  righteous  judgment,
death  came  upon  people,  painful  and  sudden,  it  began  from  Lady
Day  till  Easter;  a  countless  number  of  good  people  died  then.
These  were  the  symptoms  of  that  death:  a  man  would  spit  blood
and  after  three  days  he  was  dead.  But  this  death  did  not  visit
Novgorod  alone;  I  believe  it  passed  over  the  face  of  all  the  land;
and  whom  ever  God  commanded,  that  man  died,  and  whomever
he  saved,  him  he  admonished  and  punished,  that  the  rest  of  our  days
we  may  live  in  the  Lord  virtuously  and  sinlessly.

The  same  spring  Feognast,  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia,  died  after
a  long  illness.

A.D.  1353.  A.M.  6861. The  Veliki  Knyaz  Simeon  Ivanovich  of  all
Russia,  and  his  two  sons  died.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Moisei  of  Novgorod  sent  his  envoys  to
Tsargorod^  to  the  Tsar'^  and  to  the  Patriarch,  asking  for  their
benediction,  and  for  redress  in  improper  matters  brought  upon  him
compulsorily  by  the  Metropolitan.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Smen  Sudokov  as
their  own  envoy  to  the  Tsar^  to  the  Horde,  asking  for  the  bestowal
of  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz  on  Konstyantin  Knyaz  of  Suzdal.
And  the  Tsar  refused,  and  bestowed  it  on  Knyaz  Ivan  Ivanovich,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  remained  on  hostile  terms  with  the
Veliki  Knyaz  for  one  year  and  a  half;  but  there  was  no  harm  done.
A.D.  1354.  A.M.  6862.  Ontsifor  Lukin  voluntarily  relinquished  the
Posadnik-shi^  which they then gave to

1  Hyacinth.

2  Near  Novgorod.
'  Constantinople.

"  sc.  the  Emperor.

'^  sc.  the  Tartar  Tsar  (Khan  of  the  Golden  Horde).

L

146 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Bakun  Tverdislavich,  and  Olexander  the  brother  of  Dvoryanintsov
was  appointed  Tysyatski.

The  same  year  the  envoys  of  Vladyka  Moisei  of  Novgorod  returned
from  Tsargrad  and  brought  with  them  vestments  ornamented  with
crosses  and  documents,  with  bestowal  of  great  favour  from  the
Tsar  and  from  the  Patriarch,  and  a  gold  seal.  Ivan  Kantakuzin
was  then  the  Greek  Tsar,  and  the  Patriarch  was  Filofei,^  previously
Metropolitan  of  Iraclia.^

A.D.  1355.  A.M.  6863. The  Metropohtan  Alexi  arrived  in  Russia,
having  been  appointed  in  Tsargrad.

A.D.  1356.  A.M.  6864. A  stone  church  to  the  Annunciation  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  was  erected  in  Ilya
Street.

A.D.  1355.  A.M.  6863. Vladyka  Moisei  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.
Mikhail  in  the  Skovorodka.^

A.D.  1356.  A.M.  6864.  They  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.  Georgi
in  the  Lubyanitsa  [Street]  where  formerly  a
wooden  church  had  stood.  The  same  year  they  erected  a  church
to  the  Forty  Saints,  of  stone;  the  previous  one  had  also  been  of
stone,  but  had  collapsed  from  old  age  and  from  the  great  con-
flagrations. The  same  year  three  wooden  churches  were  built:
St.  Nikola  in  Yakov  Street,  St.  Sava  in  Kuzma-Demyan  Street,
and  St,  Nikola  in  Lyatka.^

The  same  autumn  the  water  was  high.

A.D.  1357.  A.M.  6865. Vladyka  Moisei  erected  the  stone  Church  of
the  Holy  Spirit  and  monastery. The  same
year  Vladyka  Moisei  erected  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God
in  Radokovichi.*

The  same  year  there  was  a  great  thunder  storm;  the  Igumen  of
St.  Nikola  in  Lyatka  was  struck,  and  others;  and  in  the  Rogatitsa
[Street]  one  was  struck  dead,  while  others  by  the  mercy  of  God
remained  alive.

A.D.  1358.  A.M.  6866, They erected  the wooden Church of the
Twelve  Apostles.

*  Philotheos.
'■*  Heraclea.

3  Near  Novgorod.

*  A  part  of  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  147

A.D.  1359.  A.M.  6867.  Vladyka  Moisei  erected  the  stone  Church  of
St.  Prokopi  in  the  Knyaz's  Court.

The  same  year  Lazuta  erected  the  Church  of  St.  loan  of  stone
in  the  German  Court.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Moisei  left  his  office  of  his  own  free  will
on  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father  Moses,  on  account  of  his  ill  health;
and  all  Novgorod  implored  him  to  remain,  but  he  would  not;  but
blessed  them  saying:  "  Choose  a  man  for  yourselves,  whomever
God  gives  you."

And  having  deliberated  much,  the  Posadnik  and  the  Tysyatski,
and  all  Novgorod  and  the  Igumens  and  priests  decided  not  to  make
choice  of  any  man  for  themselves  but  decided  to  take  advice  from
God  and  to  trust  to  his  mercy,  whomever  God  and  St.  Sophia  should
choose,  him  let  him^  point  out.  And  they  selected  three  men:
Olexei,  monk  and  almoner  of  the  House  of  St.  Sophia,  Sava,  Igumen
of  the  Ontonov  monastery,  and  Ivan,  a  priest  of  St.  Barbara;  and
they  placed  three  lots  on  the  altar  in  St.  Sophia,  declaring:  "  Whom-
soever God  and  St.  Sophia,  the  Wisdom  of  God  may  desire,  to  have
as  servant  at  his  altar,  his  lot  will  he  leave  on  His  altar."  And  God
and  St.  Sophia  chose  for  high  priest  of  St.  Sophia  and  as  shepherd
of  his  speaking  sheep  the  good,  intelhgent  and  all-discriminating
monk  Olexei,  and  left  his  lot  on  His  altar;  and  all  Novgorod  led
him  honourably  up  to  the  threshold"-^  on  the  15th  day  of  September,
the  day  of  the  martyr  for  Christ  St.  Nikita;  and  then  seated  him  till
the  Metropolitan  should  summon  him  for  confirmation.  For  the
Metropolitan  was  at  that  time  in  Kiev,  and  they  sent  envoys  to
him.  The  same  year  Alexei,  the  itinerant  monk,  was  appointed
deacon  and  a  priest  in  Tver  by  Fedor,  Bishop  of  Tver.

The  same  spring  God  inflicting  it  on  account  of  our  sins,  and  the
devil  acting  with  his  help,  and  by  the  advice  of  wicked  men,  there
was  a  great  tumult  in  Novgorod;  they  took  the  Posadnik-ship  from
Ondreyan  Zakharich,  but  not  all  Novgorod,  only  the  Slavno  quar-
ter, and  they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Selivester  Lentiev.  And
no  small  confusion  arose  in  the  Yaroslav  Court  and  there  was  a
fight :  because  the  Slavno  men  had  come  up  unexpectedly  in  arms,
and  dispersed  the  men  from  across  the  river^  who  were  without
arms,  and  they  attacked  and  robbed  many  nobles,  and  killed  Ivan
Borisov  Likhinin.

1  Sic.

«cf.  p.  123.

"  Zarechane.

L2

148  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

And  then  the  two  sides  armed  themselves  against  each  other;
the  Sophia  side  sought  to  avenge  the  dishonour  to  its  brothers,
and  the  Slavno  side  fought  for  their  hves  and  property.  And  they
stood  opposite  to  each  other  for  three  days,  for  the  Slavno  men  had
dismantled  the  bridge.  And  Vladyka  Moisei  came  out  from  the
monastery  taking  with  him  Olexei,  and  the  Archimandrite  and  the
Igumens,  and  blessed  them,  saying:  "  My  children,  do  not  cause
strife  among  yourselves,  exultation  to  the  pagans,  and  devastation
to  the  sacred  churches  and  this  place;  engage  not  in  battle."  And
they  accepted  his  word,  and  dispersed;  and  they  sacked  Sehvester's
villages,  and  many  villages  of  the  Slavno  quarter  were  seized;
and  also  many  innocent  people  perished  then.  And  they  gave  the
Posadnik-'i\\\Y)  to  Mikita  Matveyevich,  and  so  they  were  reconciled.
God  did  not  suffer  the  devil  utterly  to  exult,  but  Christianity  was
exalted  to  generation  and  generation.

A.D.  1360.  A.M.  6868. Olexei  went  to  Volodimir  to  be  confirmed  as
Vladyka, summoned by envoys from the
Metropolitan, and there went with him the Novgorod Boyars,
Posadnik  Olexander  and  Yuri  Evanov.

And  in  the  Vladyka  s  absence  there  was  a  fire  in  Novgorod;  the
Podol,^  and  the  Gornichar-  quarter,  and  seven  wooden  churches
were  burnt.

The  same  year  there  was  a  great  tumult  in  the  Horde ;  many  Tsars
with  their  wives  and  children  were  killed,  and  the  men  of  the  ranks
fought  against  each  other.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Dmitri  Kostyantinovich  of  Suzdal  returned
to  Volodimir  from  the  Horde  to  asume  the  office  of  Veliki  Knyaz.

And  Olexei  was  confirmed  Archbishop  of  Novgorod  in  Volodimir
in  the  most  renowned  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  of  Vladimir
by  the  most  venerable  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia,  Olexei,  in  the
presence  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Kostyantinovich,  on  July  12,
the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Golendukha  and  Prokl ;  he  returned  to
Novgorod,  and  was  met  by  the  Igumens  and  priests  with  the  crosses
at  St.  Ilya's,  by  the  Posadnik  and  the  Tysyatski  and  all  Novgorod;
and  all  rejoiced  with  a  great  gladness  on  that  day.

The  same  year  the Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  sent  his  lieutenants  to
Novgorod,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  placed  the  Knyaz' s  lieutenants
amongst  them,  and  gave  them  jurisdiction,  having  arrived  at  an
agreement  with  the  Knyaz.
'  Lower  town.
2  "  Potters."

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  149

The  same  year  Semeon  Ondreyevich  with  his  pious  mother  founded
a  stone  Church  to  St.  Fedor  in  Fedor  Street.

The  same  year  there  was  a  great  plague  in  Pleskov,  and  the  men
of  Pleskov  sent  envoys  to  the  Vladyka  with  prayer  and  beating  of
the  forehead,  that,  having  come,  thou  mightest  bless  us,  thy  chil-
dren. And  the  Vladyka  went  and  blessed  them;  and  went  round
the  town  of  Pskov  with  crosses  and  performed  three  liturgies  and
returned  to  Novgorod;  and  thenceforward  the  men  of  Pleskov  were
better  deserving  of  God's  mercy,  and  the  plague  ceased.

The  same  year,  in  Philip's  Fast,^  there  was  a  sign  in  the  moon;
it  appeared  in  the  clear  sky  as  if  covered  with  a  dark  covering.

The  same  year  the  Korel  town^  was  burnt  unexpectedly,  and
much  harm  was  done  to  life  and  property;  and  the  people  of  the
town  had  only  their  souls  left.

That  spring,  during  Lent  [it  was]  as  though  a  fiery  dawn  appeared
from  the  east  ascending  over  the  sky.

A.D.  1361.  A.M.  6869.  They  completed  the  stone  Church  of  St.
Fedor  in  Fedor  Street.

A.D.  1362.  A.M.  6870.  Vladyka  Moisei  erected  a  stone  Church  of
the  Holy  Annunciation  in  Mikhail  Street.

The  same  year  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  erected  the  stone
Church  of  the  Holy  Nativity  at  the  threshold,  and  he  himself  con-
secrated it,  together  with  the  Igumens  and  priests  and  with  the
choir  of  St.  Sophia,  on  September  1,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father
Simon  Stylites.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Pleskov  detained  the  Nemetski  mer-
chants and  those  from  the  sea  coast^  and  from  over  sea"*,  saying:
"  The  people  of  Yurev  and  of  Velnev^  have  taken  from  us  our  land
and  water."

Moisei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died  in  the  winter  of  the  same  year;
and  Vladyka  Alexei  assembled  the  Igumens  and  priests  and  all  the
church  hierarchy  and  a  multitude  of  Orthodox  Christians,  both
men  and  women,  and  immediately  took  him  honourably  and  laid
him  with  his  own  hands  into  the  tomb,  in  St.  Mikhail's  in  the  monas-

1  In  November.

2  sc.  Keksholm,  on  lake  Ladoga.
»  Pomorski.

*  Zamorski.

s  sc.  Velyad,  or  Fellin.

150  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

tery  at  Skovorodka/  on  January  25,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father
Grigori  the  Theologian.

A.D.  1363.  A.M.  6871.  Nemetski  envoys  and  others  from  Yurev  and
from  Velnev^  came  to  Novgorod  for  settle-
ment with  the  men  of  Pleskov;  and  the  men  of  Pleskov  also  came
to  Novgorod,  and  having  deliberated  much,  they  departed  without
having  concluded  peace ;  and  Novgorod  merchants  were  detained  in
Yurev.

The  same  year  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the
Volotov  [field]  in  the  Moisei  monastery  was  painted  by  order  of  the
God-loving  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod.

The  same  year  Novgorod  envoys,  one  Boyar  from  each  quarter
of  the  town,  went  to  Yurev  of  the  Nemtsy.^  And  the  Nemtsy  agreed  in
love  with  the  men  of  Pleskov,  and  there  was  peace  between  them;
and  the  men  of  Pleskov  released  the  Nemetski  merchants,  and  the
Nemtsy  released  the  Novgorod  merchants.

A.D.  1364.  A.M.  6872.  They  erected  a  stone  Church  in  Torzhok  in
the  name  of  the  God-befitting  Transfigura-
tion of  our  Lord  God  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  at  the  instance  of
God-fearing  merchants  of  Novgorod,  and  with  the  aid  of  all  Orthodox
Christians;  and  in  the  winter  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  con-
secrated it  with  the  priests  and  deacons  and  all  the  choir  of  St.
Sophia.

A.D.  1365.  A.M.  6873.  Vladyka  Alexei  erected  the  stone  Church  of
[Our  Lady's]  Meeting^  at  the  gates  of  the
Ontonov  monastery ;  and  in  Lyatka^  Lazuta  erected  a  stone  Church
to  St.  Nikola.  The  same  year  with  the  benediction  of  Vladyka
Alexei  they  began  to  build  in  Pleskov  a  stone  Church  of  the  Holy
Trinity,  on  the  old  foundations.

A.D.  1366.  A.M.  6874.  Young  men  with  the  captains  Esif  Val-
fromiyevich,  Vasili  Fedorovich  and  Olexan-
der  Obakunovich,  went  off  to  the  Volga  without  the  word  of  Nov-
gorod. They  all  returned  safely  to  Novgorod  the  same  year;
and  for  that  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  was  angry  and

1  Near  Novgorod.

2  Velyad,  or  Fellin.

'  Yurev  Nemetski,  Dorpat.

*  i.e.  St  Mary's  Meeting  with  Elizabeth  (Luke  i,  40,  etc.)

5  Near  Novgorod.  _

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  151

broke  off  peace  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  saying  thus:  "  Why  did
you  go  to  the  Volga  and  rob  many  of  my  merchants?  "  In  the
winter  of  the  same  year  men  from  the  Knyaz  seized  Vasih  Danilovich
and  his  son  in  Vologda ;  he  was  coming  from  the  Dvina^ ;  he  knew
not  of  this  and  was  not  on  his  guard.

A.D.  1367.  A.M. 6875. The men  of  Novgorod  sent  envoys  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  and con-
cluded a  peace  with  him. And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  released  Vasili  and
his  son  Ivan,  and  sent  his  own  lieutenant  into  Novgorod.

The  same  year,  for  our  sins,  there  was  no  understanding  between
Pleskov  and  Novgorod;  and  a  force  of  Nemtsy  and  men  of  Velnev'^
came  and  ravaged  about  Izborsk,  all  the  Pleskov  district  as  far  as
the  Great  river,^  and  having  forded  the  Great  river  they  came  to  the
town  of  Pleskov  and  burned  the  town"*  around  the  fort^  and  did
much  damage,  and  then  retired,  suffering  no  harm,  because  neither
Knyaz  Alexander  nor  the  Posadnik  Lenti,**  nor  any  other  good  men
were  in  the  town  at  that  time ;  many  were  away  in  travel.  And  then
the  men  of  Pskov  sent  envoys  to  Novgorod  with  greeting  and  com-
plaint :  "  Brothers,  what  care  are  you  taking  for  us,  your  brothers  ?  "
And  at  that  time  Novgorod  merchants  had  been  detained  in  Yurev  and
in  other  towns  of  the  Nemtsy,  and  A'i?wf'/.y^z  merchants  were  detained
in  Novgorod;  only  the  kissing  of  the  Cross  of  Novgorod  with  the
Nemtsy  had  not  been  broken,  and,  therefore,  the  men  of  Novgorod
did  not  hasten  to  occupy  the  land  of  the  Nemtsy  for  the  men  of  Pleskov.
The  same  winter  the  men  of  Pleskov  sent  their  Posadnik  Anani,
and  Paul  to  Novgorod  and  beat  with  their  foreheads  to  Alexei,
Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  to  consecrate  their  Church  of  the  Holy
Trinity;  and  the  Vladyka  sent  to  them  his  spiritual  father  loan  and
his  archpriest  and  archdeacon;  and  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity
was  consecrated  with  the  benediction  of  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod, on  January  30,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Popolit.'''  They
then  sent  Sava  Kuprov  as  envoy  to  the  Country  of  the  Nemtsy.

A.D.  1368.  A.M.  6876. On  May  12,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyr
Epifani,  there  was  a  bad  fire  in  Novgorod;

1  sc.  the  N.  Dvina.
-  Velyad,  Fellin.

3  Velikaya  reka,  on  which  Pskov  is  situated.

4  Posad.
^  GoYod.

*  Leontius-
'  Hippolytus.

152  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  whole  Detinets-gorod^  was  burnt,  also  the  Vladyka's  Court,  and
the  Church  of  St.  Sophia  was  partially  burnt,  and  of  the  Nerev
quarter  half  the  streets  up  to  Danislav  Street,  and  all  the  Carpen-
ters' quarter^  from  St.  Nikita  to  Radokovitsi,^  and  churches  were
burnt  and  several  people.

And  the  same  year  the  Nemtsy  came  with  a  large  force ;  the  Bishop
himself  came,  and  the  Meister  and  Commanders,  to  Izborsk.  And
the  men  of  Novgorod  went  out  against  them  and  went  as  far  as
Pleskov;  and  the  Nemtsy  fled  from  Izborsk,  having  cut  their  bat-
tering rams.

The  same  winter  Volodimir,  brother  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  came  to
Novgorod.

A.D.  1369.  A.M.  6877. The  Slavno  quarter  was  completely  burnt
from  Nutna  Street  to  St.  Ilya.
The  same  year  they  founded  a  stone  church  in  Yarishev  Street,
and  another  of  stone  in  Rogatitsa  [Street],  to  St.  Eupati.

A.D.  1370.  A.M.  6878.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  with  the  men  of
Pleskov  to  Novogrodek  of  the  Nemtsy,  and
they  withdrew  without  taking  it,  because  it  was  strong,  and  several
people  were  shot  from  the  town.

The  same  year  they  completed  the  Churches  of  St.  Vasili  and  St.
Eupati,  and  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  with  the  priests,  con-
secrated them.

The  same  year  Olgerd  with  the  Lithuanians  was  near  Moscow
and  burned  the  outer  town.^

A.D.  1371.  A.M.  6879.  They  erected  a  stone  Church  of  St.  Nikola
'  in  Russa.^
The  same  year  there  was  a  fire  which  spread  from  Ilya  Street  to
the  Carpenters'  quarter2;  all  the  Podol^  was  burnt  and  the  quarter
as  far  as  Kilova  Street.  These  many  fires  are  because  of  our  sins,
that  we  might  repent  of  our  wickednesses;  but  we  return  to  even
greater.  What  is  worse  than  this  evil,  namely,  to  take  an  oath
falsely  before  God,  to  kiss  the  Cross  and  then  violate  it  ?  and  that  evil

1  Citadel.

2  Plotniki.

»  A  part  of  Novgorod.

■•  Posad.

5  At  the  S.  end  of  lake  Ilmen.

5  Lower  town.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  153

is  often  done  among  us;  and,  therefore,  God  inflicts  the  most  severe
punishments  on  us  according  to  our  deeds.

The  same  year  Yuri  Ivanovich,  Posadnik  of  Novgorod,  Selvester
Lenteyevich,^  the  Tysyatski  Ohsei^  and  Olexander  Kolyvanov  went
to  a  conference  and  concluded  a  peace  with  the  Nemtsy  near  Novo-
grodek.

The  same  year  the  town  of  Torzhok  was  completely  burnt,  for  our
sins;  and  here  was  not  the  end  of  the  evil.

A.D.  1372.  A.M.  6880.  The  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  Torzhok  to
build  up  the  town;  and  they  sent  Mikhail's
lieutenants  away  from  Torzhok.  And  Knyaz  Mikhail  came  with  a
force  to  Torzhok,  and  burned  the  whole  town,  and  the  Christians
suffered  great  distress:  some  were  burnt  with  fire  in  their  houses
with  their  property,  others  took  refuge  in  St.  Saviour's,  and  were
there  suffocated;  very  many  were  burnt,  others  escaping  from  the
fire  were  drowned  in  the  Tvertsa  river.  And  good  women  and  girls
foreseeing  their  violation  at  the  hands  of  the  men  of  Tver,  for  they
were  stripping  them  to  utter  nakedness,  as  even  the  pagans  did  not
do,  from  shame  and  grief  drowned  themselves  in  the  river;  monks
and  nuns  were  all  stripped.  First  of  all  Olexander  Obakunovich
met  them  in  the  open,  and  there  laid  his  bones  for  St.  Saviour  and
for  the  wrongs  of  Novgorod ;  and  with  him  they  killed  Ivan  Shakho-
vich  and  another  Ivan  Timofeich,  and  Grigori  Shchebelkov;  and
several  others  fell  there,  but  some  escaped.  Others  again  were
taken,  and  were  led  away  captives  to  Tver,  men  and  women,  a
countless  number.  They  also  took  a  great  deal  of  property,  what
was  left  from  the  fire,  and  many  of  the  silver  frames  from  off  the
pictures.  And  who,  my  brethren,  can  help  grieving  over  this?
Those  who  remained  ahve,  seeing  how  those  others  suffered  violent
and  bitter  death,  the  churches  burnt  and  the  town  utterly  laid
waste :  for  such  wrong-doing  had  never  been  suffered  even  from  the
pagans.  And  they  filled  five  pits  with  dead  bodies  of  the  killed,
drowned  and  burnt;  and  others  were  burnt  so  that  nothing  was  left,
and  others  drowned  without  being  heard  of,  and  floated  down  the
river  Tvertsa.

The  same  year  they  dug  a  trench  around  the  Lyudin  and  the
Nerev  quarters  and  the  outer  parts  of  the  town.^

'  Leontievich.
"  Elisha.
3  Zagorodie.

154  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1373.  A.M.  6881. Knyaz  Volodimir  came  to  Novgorod  a  week
before  the  festival  and  stayed  in  Novgorod
until  Peter's  Day,^  and  went  away.

The  same  year  the  Volkhov  flowed  back  for  seven  days.^

A.D.  1374.  A.M.  6882. They  erected  the  Church  of  Saint  Saviour  in
stone  in  Ilya  Street,  and  Alexei,  Vladyka  of
Novgorod,  consecrated  it  with  the  Igumens  and  priests  and  the  choir
of  St.  Sophia.

A.D.  1375.  A.M.  6883.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  sun  on  the  29th  day  of
July,  a  Sunday,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr
Kalinnik.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  with  all  the
Knyazes  and  with  all  the  forces  of  Russia  went  against  Knyaz
Mikhail  of  Tver;  and  they  stood  near  Tver  four  weeks  and  occupied
the  whole  district,  burned  the  town^  and  took  away  to  different
parts  a  very  great  many  captives;  and  they  had  raised  stockades*
around  the  town  of  Tver,  and  thrown  two  bridges  across  the  Volga.
And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  sent  for  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  upholding  the  honour  of  their  Knyaz  came  quickly  in
three  days  to  Tver.  And  Knyaz  Mikhail  seeing  the  force  of  Nov-
gorod coming  against  him,  sent  Vladyka  Eufemi  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz
and  surrendered  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  on  all  his  terms.  And  the
men  of  Novgorod  stood  four  days  before  Tver,  and  concluded  peace
on  all  the  terms  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  and  of  Novgorod.

The  same  winter  Vladyka  Alexei  resigned  the  Archbishopric
voluntarily,  retiring  to  Derevyanitsa,^  and  Novgorod  fell  into  great
grief.  After  much  deliberation  they  sent  the  Archimandrite  Sava,
Maxim  Ontsiforovits  with  Boyars  to  the  Metropolitan,  that  he  should
bless  his  son  Vladyka  Alexei  into  the  House  of  St.  Sophia,  with  the
rank  of  sanctity  proper  to  him.  And  the  Metropolitan  blessed  his
son,  Vladyka  Alexei,  and  he  dismissed  the  Archimandrite  Sava  and
the  Boyars  with  great  honour ;  and  they  brought  the  blessing  of  the
Metropolitan  on  Vladyka  Alexei  and  on  all  Novgorod.

And  the  men  of  Novgorod  held  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court,
and  from  the  Veche  they  sent  Ivan  Prokshinich,  the  lieutenant  of

1  July  11.

2  sc.  owing  to  floods  lower  down.

3  Posad.

*  Osirog.

*  sc.  the  monastery  on  the  river  of  this  name.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  155

the  Veliki  Knyaz,  Posadnik  Yuri,  and  the  Tysyatski  OHsei,  together
with  many  Boyars  and  good  men  to  the  Vladyka  in  Derevyanitsa,^
and  the  Vladyka  accepted  their  petition ;  and  they  elevated  Vladyka
Alexei  in  his  own  Archiepiscopal  dignity  into  the  House  of  St.
Sophia  on  March  9,  the  day  of  the  Forty  Holy  Martyrs,  and  the
men  of  Novgorod  were  glad  of  the  Vladyka.

A.D.  1376.  A.M.  6884.  For  the  second  time  in  three  years  the
Volkhov  flowed  backwards,-  seven  days.
The  same  spring  the  Metropolitan  Mark  from  the  Holy  Mother  of
God,  from  Mount  Sinai ,  arrived  in  Novgorod,  seeking  charity.  After
a  while  the  Archimandrite  Vnifanti^  from  St.  Michael  came  from
Jerusalem  also  asking  for  charity.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Alexei  went  to  the  Metropolitan,  and
with  him  the  Archimandrite  Sava,  Yuri  Ontsiforovich,  Vasili
Kuzminich,  Vasili  Ivanovich  and  many  other  Boyars,  on  the  13th
day  of  August,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Confessor  Maxim.  And  the
Metropolitan  received  his  son  Vladyka  Alexei  with  love,  as  did  the
Veliki  Knyaz.  And  he  stayed  two  weeks  in  Moscow ;  and  the  Metro-
politan dismissed  him  with  a  blessing,  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  and  his
brother  Volodimir  with  great  honour.  And  the  Vladyka  returned
to  the  House  of  St.  Sophia  on  the  17th  of  October,  Friday,  the  day
of  the  holy  Prophet  Osea.

The  same  winter  the  Metropohtan  Kiprian'*  sent  from  Lithuania
his  envoys  bringing  documents^  from  the  patriarch  to  the  Vladyka
in  Novgorod,  and  it  said  thus:  "  The  Patriarch  Filofei  has  blessed  me
for^  all  the  Russian  Land."  And  Novgorod  having  heard  the
document^  gave  them  answer:  "Send  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz;  if  the
Veliki  Knyaz  accepts  thee  as  Metropolitan  for  all  the  Russian  Land,
then  also  shalt  thou  be  our  Metropohtan."  And  having  heard  this
reply  from  Novgorod  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian"*  did  not  send  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  in  Moscow.

A.D.  1377.  A.M.  6885. Young men from Novgorod went off to

Novogrodek  of  the  N'eyutsy  on  the  Ovla  river,

and  they  stood  many  days  before  the  town,  and  took  the  whole  outer

town  and  ravaged  the  entire  district  and  brought  away  many

>  sc.  the  monastery  on  the  river  Derevyanitsa.

'  sc.  into  lake  Ilmen,  owing  to  floods  lower  down.

3  Boniface.

^  Cyprian.

^  Gramotas,  Gramoty.

*  sc.  to  be  over.

156  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

captives  to  Novgorod,  and  themselves  returning  all  well  to  Nov-
gorod, with  Voyevoda  Ivan  Fedorovich,  VasiH  Borisovich  and  Maxim
Ananinich.

The  same  spring  there  was  a  fire  in  Novgorod,  it  broke  out  in
Lyudgoshcha  Street  and  extended  to  Yakov  Street,  and  seven  wood-
en and  three  stone  churches  were  burnt.  The  same  year  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Mikhahtsa  [Street]  was  struck  by
hghtning  and  burnt.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Olgerd  died  in  Lithuania.

The  same  year,  on  May  29,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Martyr  Kalinnik,
the  Archimandrite  Sava  of  Novgorod  died,  and  he  was  followed
[to  the  grave]  by  Vladyka  Alexei  of  Novgorod,  and  by  the  Igumens
and  priests  with  lamps  and  candles,  and  they  laid  him  in  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Ontonov  monastery.

The  same  year  they  completed  the  stone  Church  of  the  Holy
Martyrs  Boris  and  Gleb  in  the  Carpenters'  quarter,^  and  Vladyka
Alexei,  with  the  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia,  consecrated  it.

The  same  year  the  Tartars  took  Nizhni  Novgorod.^

The  same  winter  the  Russian  Metropolitan  Alexei  died  in  Moscow.

A.D.  1378.  A.M.  6886.  They  completed  the  stone  Church  of  the
Holy  Effigy  in  Dobrynya  Street;  and
Vladyka  Alexei  with  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia,  on  its
festival  day,  consecrated  it.

The  same  year  the  Tartars  went  to  the  Suzdal  Country  against
Knyaz  Dmitri ;  and  the  Knyaz  sent  out  his  son  Knyaz  Ivan  with  a
force  against  them,  and  they  fought  on  the  Pyana  river;  and
Knyaz  Ivan  was  drowned  here,  and  others  were  killed.

The  same  winter  Knyaz  Ondrei  Olgerdovich  of  Lithuania  fled  to
Pskov,  and  kissing  the  Cross  to  the  men  of  Pskov,  he  went  through
Novgorod  to  Moscow  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  and  the  Knyaz
received  him.

A.D.  1379.  A.M.  6887. Eight  streets  were  burnt  down  in  Novgorod,
the  fire  breaking  out  in  Lukin  Street,  and
twelve  churches,  the  fire  extending  to  Chudinets  Street.

The  same  year  the  Tartars  came  into  the  Russian  Land,  against
the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri.  And  the  Knyaz  went  out  against  them,
and  it  was  on  the  Ovozha  river,  and  there  both  forces  met  and  God
aided  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  the  Tartars  turned  shoulder  "and  fled.

1  Plotniki.  ^

2  "  Lower  Newtown,"  on  the  Volga.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  157

The  same  year  they  founded  two  stone  churches:  one  to  the
Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the  Mikhahtsa  [Street]  and  the  other  to  the
Holy  Frola  and  Lavra^  in  Lyudogoshcha  Street.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Yuri  Narimantovich  came
to  Novgorod.

A.D.  1380.  A.M.  6888.  All  Novgorod  beat  with  the  forehead  to
their  lord-  Vladyka  Alexei,  that  thou  shouldst
undertake  to  go  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich;  and  the
Vladyka  received  the  petition^  of  his  children  of  all  Novgorod,  and
went  to  the  Low  Country  a  week  before  Flower*  Sunday,  and  with
him  went  Yuri  Ivanovich,  Mikhail  Danilovich,  Yuri  Ontsiforovich,
lev  Obakunovich,  Ivan  Fedorovich  and  many  other  Boyars  and
men  of  substance.  And  the  Knyaz  received  them  with  love,  and
kissed  the  Cross  to  Novgorod  on  all  the  old  rights  of  Novgorod  and
on  the  old  charters.

The  same  year,  in  the  month  of  August,  news  came  to  the  Veliki
Knyaz  Dmitri  and  to  his  brother  Knyaz  Volodimir  from  the  Horde
that  the  pagan  race  of  Ishmaelites  was  rising  against  the  Christians;
for  there  was  some  weak  man  Tsar  among  them,  and  Knyaz  Mamai
was  controlling  all  their  affairs  and  he  was  savagely  enraged  against
the  Veliki  Knyaz  and  all  the  Russian  Land.

And  having  heard  this,  that  a  great  Tartar  force  was  coming
against  him,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  gathered  many
soldiers  and  went  against  the  godless  Tartars,  trusting  in  the  mercy
of  God  and  in  His  Immaculate  Mother,  the  Mother  of  God,  the
eternal  Virgin  Mary,  calling  to  his  aid  the  honourable  Cross.  For
he  entered  their  country  beyond  the  Don,  and  there  was  there  a
clean  field^  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Nepryadva,  and  there  the
pagan  Ishmaelites  had  ranged  themselves  against  the  Christians.
And  the  Moscovites,  of  whom  many  were  inexperienced,  were
frightened  and  in  despair  of  their  lives  at  sight  of  the  great  numbers
of  Tartars,  others  turned  to  flight,  forgetful  of  the  Prophet's  saying
that  one  shall  reap  one  thousand  and  two  shall  move  ten  thousand,
if  God  does  not  abandon  them.

And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  with  his  brother  Volodimir  ranged
their  troops  against  the  pagan  Polovets  people,  and  raising  their

1  Florus  and  Laurus.

2  Gospodin.

^  Lit.  forehead-beating.

"  sc.  Palm.

*  sc.  treeless  country.

158  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

eyes  humbly  to  heaven,  and  sighing  from  the  depth  of  their  hearts,
said,  in  the  words  of  the  psalm :  "  Brothers,  God  is  our  refuge  and  our
strength."  And  both  forces  immediately  met,  and  there  was  a
fierce  battle  for  a  long  time,  and  God  terrified  the  sons  of  Hagar
with  an  invisible  might,  and  they  turned  their  shoulders  to  wounds,^
and  they  were  routed  by  the  Christians,  and  some  were  struck  down
with  weapons,  and  others  were  drowned  in  the  river,  a  countless
number  of  them.

And  in  the  encounter  Knyaz  Fedor  Belozerski  was  killed,  also  his
son  Knyaz  Ivan;  and  other  Knyazes  and  captains  went  in  pursuit
of  the  aliens.  The  godless  Tartars  fell  from  dread  of  God  and  by
the  arms  of  the  Christians;  and  God  raised  the  right  hand  of  the
Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  and  of  his  brother  Knyaz  Volodimir
Andreyevich  for  the  defeat  of  the  aliens.

And  this  was  because  of  our  sins :  the  ahens  take  up  arms  against
us,  that  we  might  renounce  our  wrong  doings  and  hatred  of  our
brethren,  from  our  love  of  silver,  and  from  wrong  judging  and  vio-
lence; but  God  is  merciful  and  man-loving;  He  is  not  angry  with  us
utterly,  and  is  not  at  enmity  for  ever.

The  Knyaz  gained  this  victory  on  September  8,  on  a  Saturday,
the  day  of  the  Birth  of  the  Mother  of  God.  And  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Dmitri  with  his  brother  Knyaz  Volodimir  halting  over  the  bones  of
the  Tartars  and  many  Russian  Knyazes  and  captains,  glorified  with
supreme  great  praise  the  Immaculate  Mother  of  God,  having  stoutly
fought  with  the  aliens  for  God's  holy  churches,  for  the  Orthodox
faith  and  for  all  the  Russian  Land;  and  he  himself,  preserved  by  God,
came  back  to  his  own  great  capital  city  of  Moscow,  his  patrimony,
with  his  brother  Volodimir.

A.D.  138L  A.M.  6889.  They  founded  a  stone  church  in  Slavkov
Street  to  St.  Dmitri.

The  same  autumn  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Skrigailo  with  an  army  of
Nemtsy  invested  Polotsk,  and  they  suffered  much  hardship  and  sent  to
Novgorod  praying  for  Christian  aid:  "  You  should  help  us  ";  but
they  received  no  help  from  Novgorod,  they  only  sent  an  envoy,
Yuri  Ontsiforovich,  to  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Yagailo.  And  God
and  St.  Sophia  protected  their  house;  and  they  went  away  and  did
not  take  the  town.

The  same  year  there  was  a  tumult  in  Lithuania,  God  inflicting
on  them  His  anger:  they  rose  against  each  other,  and  killed  the

1  sc.  fled.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  159

Veliki  Knyaz  Kestuti  Gediminovich  and  his  Boyars,  but  his  son
Vitovt  escaped  to  the  Nenitsy.^  Much  mischief  was  done  to  the
Lithuanian  country;  for  Kestuti  had  deprived  Yagailo  of  the
sovereignty.

A.D.  1382.  A.M.  6890.  The  Tartar  Tsar  Tektomysh  came  against
the  Russian  Land  with  a  large  force,  and
ravaged  much  of  the  Russian  Land;  he  took  Moscow  town  and
burned  it;  also  Pereyaslavl,  Kolomno,  Serpukhov,  Dmitrov,  Volo-
dimir  and  Yurev.-

And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  seeing  the  enormous  number  of  godless
Tartars  did  not  take  stand  against  them;  but  retired  to  Kostroma
with  his  wife  and  children,  Knyaz  Volodimir  to  the  Volok,^  and  his
mother  and  his  wife  to  Torzhok;  the  Metropohtan  to  Tver,  and
Gerasim  Vladyka  of  Kolomna  removed  to  Novgorod.  And  who  of
us,  my  brethren,  would  not  be  terrified  by  this,  seeing  such  confusion
in  the  Russian  Land  ?  for  as  the  Lord  said  through  the  Prophet :
"  If  ye  hearken  unto  me  I  shall  put  your  fear  into  your  enemies  and
ye  shall  enjoy  the  fruit  of  the  earth;  but  if  ye  hearken  not  unto  me,
ye  shall  flee  when  none  pursueth  you;  I  shall  send  fear  and  dread
on  to  you,  and  one  hundred  of  you  shall  run  from  five,  and  from  one
hundred  ten  thousand."

The  same  year  they  completed  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Dmitri  in
Slavkov  Street,  and  Vladyka  Alexei  consecrated  it  with  the  Iguniens
and  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia ;  and  in  a  few  days  it  crumbled
to  pieces.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Dionisi  of  Suzdal  came  to  Novgorod  from
Tsargrad^  from  the  Patriarch  Nil  with  a  blessing  and  with  charters,
and  by  command  of  Vladyka  Alexei  he  went  to  Pskov  teaching  the
law  of  God,  and  strengthening  the  faith  in  the  true  Christian  Ortho-
dox religion,  in  order  that  God  might  establish  the  Orthodox  faith
in  the  last  years  untroubled  by  wicked  men  prompted  of  the  devil.

A.D.  1383.  A.M.  6891. They  dug  a  trench  round  the  Sophia  side,
up  to  the  old  earthen  wall.
The  same  year  they  founded  two  stone  churches:  one  to  St.
Phihp  in  Nutna  Street  and  the  other  to  St.  loan  in  Radokovitsi,^
and  they  completed  that  of  St.  Dmitri  in  Slavkov  Street.

1  sc.  the  German  parts  of  the  Baltic  provinces.

2  sc.  Yurev  Polski,  N.E.  of  Moscow.

3  sc.  Lamsk,  N.W.  of  Moscow.
^  Constantinople.

*  A  part  of  Novgorod.

160  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  year  Knyaz  Vasili,  the  son  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  went  to
the  Horde  summoned  by  the  Tsar.

The  same  autumn  Knyaz  Mikhail  of  Tver  went  to  the  Horde,
seeking  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz.

Knyaz  Patriki  Narimantovich  came  to  Novgorod  and  was  re-
ceived by  the  men  of  Novgorod;  and  they  gave  him  for  his  main-
tenance the  town  of  Orekhov,  the  Korel  town/  and  half  of  the  town
of  Koporya,  and  Lusko  village.

A.D.  1384.  A.M.  6892.  The  townsmen  of  Orekhov  and  of  the  Korel
town  came  to  Novgorod  complaining  of
Knyaz  Patriki:  and  Knyaz  Patriki  incited  the  Slavno  quarter  to
rise;  and  caused  confusion  in  Novgorod.  And  the  Slavno  people
sided  with  the  Knyaz  and  they  held  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court,
while  another  Veche  met  at  St.  Sophia;  and  both  were  in  arms  as  for
battle,  and  they  dismantled  the  great  bridge;  but  God  and  St.
Sophia  preserved  us  from  civil  war.  But  they  took  away  those
towns  from  the  Knyaz,  and  they  gave  him  [the  two  towns  of]  Russa
and  Ladoga.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  raised  a  stone  wall  on  the
road  in  Luga,  by  the  grace  of  St.  Sophia  and  the  encouragement  of
the  great  Archistrategos  Mikhail,  and  with  the  blessing  of  their
father  Vladyka  Alexei,  in  only  thirty  and  three  days.

The  same  year  a  fire  broke  out  at  St.  Lazar's  in  the  Nerev  quarter,
and  the  Church  of  St.  Lazar  and  another,  that  of  St.  Peter,  were
burnt.

The  same  year  there  was  a  darkness  for  many  days  and  nights,
and  birds  could  not  see  whither  to  fly,  and  kept  falling  to  the  ground
and  into  the  water,  and  people  dared  not  go  on  the  lakes  or  on  the
rivers;  and  there  was  grief  and  trouble  amongst  Christians.  This  is
God  punishing  us,  brethren,  for  our  sins,  showing  us  the  way  to
repentance,  in  order  that  we  should  repent  of  our  wicked  ways.
Having  punished  us,  have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord !  And  there  was
light,  and  we  were  glad.

The  same  autumn  they  completed  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Phihp
in  Nutna  Street,  and  Vladyka  Alexei  consecrated  it,  and  they  com-
pleted another  to  St.  loan  in  Radokovitsi.^

A.D.  1385.  A.M.  6893. The  town  of  Pskov  was  entirely  burnt  down ;
the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  was  alone

1  sc.  Keksholm,  on  lake  Ladoga.
« A  part  of  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  161

preserved  by  God.  The  same  year,  in  the  month  of  June,  on  the
14th  day,  in  Peter's  Fast,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Prophet  Ehsei,  the
whole  of  the  Commercial  Side  of  Novgorod  was  burnt  down  and  all
the  churches,  God  preserved  only  that  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God
in  the  Mikhalitsa  [Street],  through  the  prayers  of  the  Holy  Mother
of  God.  And  seventy  persons  were  burnt;  for  the  fire  was  very
fierce.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  on  January  1,  there  was  a  sign  in
the  sun,  on  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father  Vasili.

A.D.  1386.  A.M.  6894.  The  town  of  Orekhov  was  burnt  down,  and
the  end  of  Mikitin  Street  in  Novgorod  was
burnt.  The  same  year  they  completed  the  stone  Church  of  St.
Kliment  in  Ivorov  Street.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanians  killed  Knyaz  Svyatoslav  of
Smolensk.  The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  came  to
Novgorod  with  an  army  and  with  his  brother  Knyaz  Volodimir,
being  angered  against  Novgorod  on  account  of  the  Volga  men.
And  he  halted  at  [the  village  of]  Yamny,  and  Vladyka  Alexei  went
and  concluded  a  peace  on  all  the  old  terms;  and  for  the  guilty,  for
the  Volga  men  the  Veliki  Knyaz  took  8,000  roubles  from  Novgorod.

The  same  winter  Posadnik  Fedor  Timofeyevich,  Timofei  Yurievich
and  some  Boyars'  sons  went  beyond  the  Volok  to  get  the  5,000
roubles  which  Novgorod  had  imposed  on  the  country  beyond  the
Volok^  for  it  was  the  men  from  beyond  the  Volok  who  had  been  to
the  Volga.

A.D.  1387.  A.M.  6895.  They  raised  an  earth  rampart  round  the
commercial  side.  The  same  year  Vladyka
Alexei  blessed  all  Novgorod  to  build  up  a  town^  of  stone  at  Porkhov ;
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Ivan  Fedorovich  and  Fatian  Esifo-
vich,  and  they  built  the  town  of  Porkhov  in  stone.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich,  son  of
the  Veliki  Knyaz,  came  away  from  the  Horde.

A.D.  1388.  A.M.  6896.  Vladyka  Alexei  resigned  voluntarily  the
Archbishopric,  retiring  to  the  monastery  of
the  Holy  Resurrection  on  the  Derevyanitsa  on  the  Vladyka's
mid- way  festival^;  having  blessed  his  children,  the  Posadnik
and  Tysyatskis  and  all  Novgorod,  having  sat  in  the  House  of  St.

1  Zavolochkaya  zemlya,  Dvinskaya  zeinlya,  sc.  the  basin  of  the  N.  Dvina,  N.E.
Russia  generally.
*  sc.  town-wall.
^  i.e.,  half-way  between  Easter  and  Pentecost.

M

162 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Sophia  thirty  years  short  of  one  year  and  five  months,  and  all
Novgorod  entreated  him  much  to  remain  in  the  House  of  St.  Sophia
until  they  should  know  who  would  be  Metropolitan  of  the  Russian
Land,  but  he  did  not  listen  to  them,  but  blessed  them,  saying:
"  Select  for  yourselves  three  men  [one  of]  whom  God  will  give  you."
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  so.  And  after  much  deliberation  the
Posadnik  and  the  Tysyatski  and  all  Novgorod,  and  the  Igumens
and  the  priests  would  not  make  a  choice  for  themselves  from  men,
but  decided  to  receive  advice  from  God,  and  to  trust  in  His  mercy,
and  selected  three  men:  loan,  Igumen  of  St.  Saviour  from  Khutin,
Parfeni,  Igumen  of  the  Holy  Annunciation,  and  Afanasi,  Igumen
of  the  Holy  Nativity,  and  they  placed  three  lots  on  the  altar  in  St.
Sophia,  resolving  thus:  "  Whomever  God  and  St.  Sophia  shall
desire  to  serve  at  Their  altar,  his  lot  will  they  leave  on  Their  altar."
And  the  priests  began  to  sing  the  midday  service,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  held  a  Veche  at  St.  Sophia,  and  at  the  end  of  the  service
the  arch-priest  Ismaelo  brought  out  the  lot  of  Afanasi,  then  that  of
Parfeni;  and  God  and  St.  Sophia  and  God's  altar  chose  the  good,
humble  and  meek  loan,  Igumen  of  St.  Saviour,  leaving  his  lot  on
their  altar;  and  all  Novgorod  raised  him  to  the  threshold^  with
honour  on  May  7,  the  day  of  the  Ascension  of  our  Lord,  the  com-
memoration day  of  the  Holy  Father  Pakhomi.  There  was  at  that
time  no  Metropolitan  in  the  Russian  Land.

The  same  autumn  at  midnight  of  October  26,  a  southerly  wind
arose  and  drove  the  ice  from  the  lake  into  the  Volkov,  which  broke
away  nine  stays  of  the  great  bridge.

Also  God  did  not  wish  to  see  bloodshed  between  brothers  at  the
prompting  of  the  devil;  for  three  of  the  quarters  of  the  St.  Sophia
side  rose  against  Posadnik  Esif  Zakharinich,  and  summoning  a
Veche  at  St.  Sophia,  they  went  like  a  large  army,  every  one  armed,
to  his  dwelling,  and  took  his  house  and  demolished  his  rooms.  And
Posadnik  Esif  fled  across  the  river  to  the  Carpenters'  quarter^ ;  and  the
entire  commercial  side  rose  in  his  favour,  and  began  to  strip^  people,
and  to  beat  off  the  ferry-men  from  the  shore,  and  to  cut  up  the  vessels,
and  so  they  were  without  peace  for  two  weeks,  and  then  they  came  to-
gether in  love.  And  they  gave  the  Posadnik-ship  to  Vasili  Ivanovich.

The  same  autumn,  on  December  8,  Vladyka  Ivan*  went  to  Moscow,

icf.  p.  123.

*  Plotniki.
'  sc.  rob.

*  loan,  John.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  163

summoned  by  envoys  of  the  Metropolitan,  for  confirmation  in  the
Archbishopric,  and  with  him  went  the  Boyars  of  Novgorod:  Posadnik
Vasih  Fedorovich,  and  the  Tysyatski  Efim  Faleleyevich,  Yev
Obakunovich,  Timofei  Evanovich,  and  many  other  Boyars;  and  he
arrived  in  Moscow  on  January  10;  and  Ivan  was  estabhshed  Vladyka
of  Novgorod  on  January  17,  on  the  day  of  the  Naming  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  and  Great  Archistrategos  Michael,  on  Sunday,  the  day
of  the  Holy  Father  Antony,  by  the  most  reverend  the  Metropolitan
Pimen  of  all  Russia.  And  Vladyka  Danilo  of  Smolensk  and  the
Vladyka  of  Ryazan  were  at  the  confirmation.  And  they  made
high  festival  on  that  day  with  laudations  and  chants  in  the  presence
of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich,  and  he  returned  to  Novgorod
on  February  8,  on  Pharisees'  Sunday,  the  day  of  the  Holy  Father
Parfeni,  and  the  Igumens  and  priests  of  the  Slavno  quarter,  the
Posadnik,  the  Tysyatski,  and  all  Novgorod  met  him  with  crosses;
and  they  rejoiced  with  great  gladness  on  that  day  for  their  Vladyka.

A.D.  1389.  A.M.  6897.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  Dmitri  Ivanovich  died  in
Moscow  on  May  9,  the  day  of  the  Holy
Prophet  Isaiah.

And  in  that  spring  there  was  a  great  plague  in  Pskov,  the  symp-
toms being  in  the  glands.  Vladyka  Ivan  went  in  the  same  spring  to
Pskov,  and  through  his  prayers  the  plague  ceased  in  Pskov,  and
Vladyka  Ivan  returned  to  Novgorod,  and  all  those  with  him,  in
good  health.

The  same  year  Posadnik  Grigori  Yakunovich  erected  the  stone
Church  of  the  Intercession  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  at  the  gate.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich  came  to  Novgorod  on
the  day  of  the  Assumption  of  the  H0I3'  Mother  of  God,  and  the  men
of  Novgorod  received  him  with  honour.

The  same  winter  Alexei,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died,  on  February
3,  on  the  day  of  St.  Simeon,  the  Accepted  of  God.

A.D.  1390.  A.M.  6898.  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  took  his  seat  on
the  throne  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  the
men  of  Novgorod  took  peace  with  him  on  the  old  terms.  The  same
year  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  a  conference  with  the  Nemtsy,
but  did  not  take  peace.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  war  with
Pskov,  and  the  men  of  Pskov  beat  with  their  foreheads  to  Novgorod
and  took  peace ;  and  they  returned  from  [the  village  of]  Soltsa.
The  same  year  they  erected  a  stone  church  to  Holy  Tsar  Kostvan-

*  M2

164 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

tin  and  his  mother  Olena/  and  Vladyka  Ivan  consecrated  it;  and
they  established  a  new  monastery  of  St.  Nikola  at  the  end  of
Lyudgoshcha  and  Chudinets  Streets  by  the  cemetery.

The  same  autumn  there  was  a  great  plague  in  Novgorod;  all  this
came  upon  us  because  of  our  sins;  a  great  number  of  Christians  died
in  all  the  streets.  And  this  was  the  symptom  in  people :  a  swelling
would  appear,  and  having  lived  three  days  [the  man]  would  die.
Then  they  erected  a  church  to  St.  Afanasi  in  a  single  day,  and
Vladyka  loan,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  consecrated  it,  with  all  the
Igumens  and  priests  and  with  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia;  so  by  God's
mercy  and  the  intercession  of  St.  Sophia,  and  by  the  blessing  of  the
Vladyka,  the  plague  ceased.

The  same  winter  the  Church  of  St.  Dmitri  in  Danislav  Street  was
burnt  down  with  all  the  images,  and  books  and  all  the  church  stores,
and  very  much  property  was  burnt,  for  the  fire  took  on  rapidly.

A.D.  1391.  A.M.  6899.  There  was  a  fire,  and  it  went  from  Borkova
Street  up  to  the  [stream]  Gzen,^  and  on  the
other  side  of  the  river  from  Mikitin  Street  to  Rodokovitsi  [street] ;
eight  wooden  churches  were  completely  and  three  stone  churches
partially  burnt,  and  fourteen  men,  women  and  children  perished
on  June  5,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  Dorofei.  On  the  21st  of
the  same  month,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  Ulyan,  a  fire  broke  out
in  Prussian  Street  at  the  Church  of  the  Presentation  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God,  and  the  whole  of  the  Lyudin  quarter  was  burnt  up
to  St.  Alexei,  when  seven  wooden  churches  were  completely  and  four
stone  churches  partially  burnt.

The  same  autumn  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  envoys  to  a  con-
ference with  the  Nemtsy  at  Izborsk:  Posadnik  Vasili  Fedorovich,
Posadnik  Bogdan  Obakunovich,  Posadnik  Fedor  Timofeyevich,  the
Tysyatski  Esif  Faleleyevich,  Vasili  Borisovich,  and  merchants;
and  the  envoys  of  the  Ne77itsy  came  from  over  sea  from  the  town  of
Lubek,  from  the  Goth  coast, ^  from  Riga,  Yurev,^  Kolyvan,^  and
from  many  other  towns;  then  they  took  peace  with  the  Nemtsy.

The  same  winter  the  same  envoys  of  the  Nemtsy  came  to  Novgorod,
and  took  their  merchandise;  and  kissed  the  Cross,  and  began  to

*  Constantine  and  Helena.
2  In  Novgorod.

*  sc.  Gothland.

*  Dorpat.

*  Yuvev  Nemetshi  or  Revel.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  165

build  their  court  anew,  because  for  seven  years  tliere  had  been  no
stable  peace.

The  same  winter  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian  came  to  Novgorod;
and  Vladyka  loan  met  him  at  St.  Saviour's  in  Ilya  Street  with  crosses
with  the  Igumens  and  priests,  and  with  many  Christians;  and  he
stayed  two  weeks  in  Novgorod:  he  spoke  much  to  Novgorod  that
they  should  tear  up  the  charter^  which  the  men  of  Novgorod  had
concluded,  not  to  be  summoned  by  the  Metropolitan  to  Moscow.
And  Novgorod  did  not  accept  his  word,  and  they  did  not  tear  up  the
charter,  and  the  Metropolitan  departed  from  Novgorod,  nursing
great  displeasure  against  Novgorod.

A.D.  1392.  A.M.  6900.  Yuri  Ontsiforovich  erected  a  church  to  the
Assumption  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  and
established  a  monastery.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  came  away
from  the  Horde,  and  took  Nizhni  Novgorod  and  took  away  the
Knyazes  and  their  wives  as  hostages.  And  Knyaz  Simeon  fled  to
the  Horde.

The  same  year  some  A'emisy-  pirates  came  from  over  sea  into  the
Neva,  taking  the  villages  on  both  sides  of  the  river  to  within  five
versts  of  the  town  of  Oreshek.^  And  Knyaz  Simeon  with  the  towns-
men coming  upon  them,  killed  some  and  scattered  others  and
brought  captive  interpreters  to  Novgorod;  and  then  he  went  to  his
kinsmen  in  Lithuania,  abandoning  the  town.

The  same  year  they  raised  an  earth  rampart  round  the  com-
mercial side.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  went  to  the
Horde  summoned  by  the  Tsar.

The  same  year  Posadnik  Bogdan  Obakunovich  with  his  brothers
and  men  of  his  street  erected  a  stone  Church  to  St.  Simeon  in
Chudinets  Street  and  it  was  consecrated  on  his  festival  day.

The  same  year,  in  the  month  of  June,  Posadnik  Vasili  Fedorovich
died  after  entering  the  monastic  order,  and  they  laid  him  in  St.
Nikola's.  The  same  autumn  Posadnik  Mikhail  Danilovich  died,
having  entered  the  monastic  order.

A.D.  1393.  A.M.  6901. The  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  broke
the  peace  with  Great  Novgorod'^  about  the

'  sc.  treaty,  graniota-

^  Here  probably  Swedish.

3  Orekhov.

*  Veliki  Novgorod.

166  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

charter  which  Great  Novgorod  had  written,^  not  to  be  summoned
by  the  Metropohtan  to  Moscow,  saying  thus:  "  that  you  send  the
charter  back  to  the  Metropohtan,  and  as  regards  your  having  kissed
[the  Cross]  the  Metropohtan  will  absolve  you  from  the  sin."  And
Great  Novgorod  would  not  have  that,  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  took
from  Novgorod  the  neighbouring  town  of  Torzhok  and  its  dis-
tricts, Volok-Lamsk,  and  Vologda,  and  ravaged  many  districts.
And  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  the  town  of  Ustyug,  Ustyuzhna,
and  many  other  districts  from  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  there  was
much  bloodshed  at  that  time  on  both  sides.  And  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod not  wishing  to  see  more  bloodshed  between  Christians,  sent
envoys  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  with  a  petition  for  the  old  terms,  and
they  sent  the  sworn  charter  to  the  Metropohtan,  and  the  Metro-
politan sent  word:  "  I  accept  your  sworn  charter,  and  absolve  you
from  your  sin,  and  bless  you."  And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  received  the
petition  of  Novgorod  and  took  peace  on  the  old  terms.

They  erected  a  stone  church  on  the  Lisitsa  Hill-  to  the  Holy
Mother  of  God.

Knyaz  Vitovt  Kestutievich  took  his  seat  as  Knyaz  in  Lithuania,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  peace  with  him  on  the  old  terms.

Knyaz  Kost}'antin  Belozerski  came  to  Novgorod,  and  they
received  him.

A.D.  1394.  A.M.  6902. The  people  of  Danislav  [Street]  erected  a
stone church to St. Dmitri and Vladyka
Ivan  consecrated  it  on  his  festival  day.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  war  against  Pskov
and  stood  before  the  town  for  a  week ;  and  during  that  time  a  fight
occurred  in  a  raid  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  on  the  men  of  Pleskov,
and  there  they  killed  Knyaz  Ivan  of  Koporya  and  Vasili  Fedorovich,
and  God  knows  who  else  fell  on  both  sides,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
withdrew  from  the  town,  at  enmity  with  the  men  of  Pleskov.

At  that  time  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  away  the  Posadnik-shv^
from  Esif  Zakharinich  and  gave  it  to  Bogdan  Obakunovich.

The  same  autumn  the  Vladyka' s  Court  and  adjacent  premises
were  burnt  down;  and  many  streets  outside  the  town  were  also
burnt  down;  the  top  of  St.  Sophia  was  partly  burnt;  eight  stone
churches  were  partly,  and  two  wooden  churches  completely  burnt.
They  erected  a  wooden  Church  of  St.  Saviour  at  the  end  of  Kuzma-
Demyan  Street,  and  estabhshed  a  monastery.

1  sc.  had  concluded,  and  possessed.

2  "Fox's  hill."

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  167

Knyaz  Andrei  arrived  with  envoys  from  Pskov,  and  left  Novgorod
without  taking  peace.  Vladyka  Mikhail  of  Bethlehem  arrived  from
Tsargrad^  sent  by  the  Patriarch  Antoni,  bringing  to  Novgorod  two
charters-  of  instructions  for  Christians.

A.D.  1395.  A.M.  G903.  The  Metropohtan  Kiprian  came  to  Novgorod
with  the  Patriarch's  envoy  during  the  Great
Fast,  and  demanded  the  right  of  jurisdiction,  but  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod refused  him.  He  stayed  throughout  the  whole  spring  in
Novgorod  up  to  Peter's  Fast,^  and  Vladyka  Ivan  gave  great  honour
to  the  Metropolitan  and  to  the  Patriarch's  envoy.  And  the  Metro-
politan Kiprian  on  departing  from  Novgorod  blessed  his  son  the
Vladyka  loan  and  all  Great  Novgorod.*

The  same  3'ear  Isak  Onkifov^  erected  a  stone  church  to  the  Feast
of  St.  Mikhail  in  the  Arkadi  monastery.

Nemtsy  Svea^  came  to  the  new  town  of  Yam"  and  retired;
and  Knyaz  Kostyantin  with  the  townsmen  killed  some  of  them;
the  rest  took  to  flight.

The  same  autumn  Knyaz  ^^itovt  of  Lithuania  took  the  town  of
Smolensk  and  placed  his  lieutenant  there,  and  Knyaz  Yuri  Svyatos-
lavich  fled  to  Ryazan.

A.D.  1396.  A.M.  6904.  Vladyka  Ivan  went  to  Moscow  to  the  Metro-
politan Kiprian,  summoned  by  the  Metro-
politan, and  remained  in  Moscow  two  days,  and  the  Metropolitan
immediately  let  him  go  with  his  blessing  and  with  honour,  and  he
returned  to  Novgorod  on  Tuesday  in  Holy  Week.

The  same  year  the  Nemtsy  came  to  the  Korel  country,  and  ravaged
the  Kyur  and  the  Kyulola  villages,  and  burned  the  church;  and
Knyaz  Kostyantin  pursued  them  with  the  Korel  people  and  cap-
tured the  native  interpreters  and  sent  them  to  Novgorod.

The  whole  Ontonov  monastery  was  burnt,  and  the  Church  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God,  which  had  been  leaded,  was  destroyed  by  fire,
also  the  Church  of  the  Purification.

There  was  a  sign  from  the  image  of  the  Holy  Sovereign  Lady  in  St.
Eupati'sin  Shcherkova  Street:  wine  appeared  to  flow  from  the  ikon.

1  Constantinople.

2  Gramoty,  sc.  books.

3  In  June.

*  Veliki  Novgorod.

*  sc.  Akinf,  Hyacinth.

*  Swedes.

'  Yamburg.

168  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

By  order  of  Vladyka  Ivan  they  covered  with  lead  the  top  of  St.
Sophia,  which  had  been  damaged  by  fire.  The  Church  of  St.  loan  in
the  Rostkin  monastery  was  burnt,  together  with  the  images  and
books.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Vitovt  of  Lithuania  went  against  Ryazan
and  ravaged  its  districts.

A.D.  1397.  A.M.  6905.  Isak  Onkifov  erected  a  stone  Church  of  the
Birth  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  in  the
Desyatina.  The  same  year  envoys  came  from  Pskov  to  Great
Novgorod:  Knyaz  Grigori  Ostafievicii,  Posadnik  Sysoi,  Posadnik
Roman,  Philip  Kozachkovich,  with  their  friends,  and  they  beat
with  their  foreheads  to  the  Lord^  Vladyka  of  the  Great  Novgorod,
Vladyka  loan:  "That  thou,  Lord,  shouldst  bless  thy  children  of
Great  Novgorod,  that  our  Lord  the  Great  Novgorod  might  forgive
his  displeasure,  and  receive  us  on  the  old  terms."  And  Vladyka
loan  blessed  Great  Novgorod,  his  children:  "  That  you,  my  children,
accept  my  blessing  and  forgive  the  men  of  Pskov  your  displeasure,
and  receive  back  your  younger  brothers  on  the  old  terms;  for  you
see,  my  children,  the  last  days,  you  should  all  be  as  one  brother  in
Christianity."  And  Posadnik  Timofei  Yurievich,  the  Tysyatski
Mikita  Fedorovich  and  all  the  Posadniks  and  Tysyatskis,  the  Boyars
and  the  whole  Great  Novgorod  received  the  blessing  of  their  Lord
Father  Vladyka  Ivan,  and  they  withdrew  their  displeasure  from  the
men  of  Pskov,  and  took  peace  on  the  old  terms,  on  the  18th  day  of
June,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  Lentei.^  Because  there  had  not
been  peace  for  four  years,  and  there  was  gladness  and  rejoicing
among  the  Christians,  and  the  devil  seeing  the  good  of  the  Chris-
tians, lamented,  seeing  himself  discomfited,  and  the  foes  of  the
Christians  were  obscured.

After  this  Knyaz  Vasili  Ivanovich  of  Smolensk  arrived  in  Nov-
gorod and  they  received  him.

After  this  a  fire  broke  out  in  Shcherkova  Street  opposite  the
[Church  of  the]  Forty  Saints;  and  the  whole  of  Shcherkova  Street
along  the  quay  was  burnt,  also  the  Yanev  quay,  except  three
houses,  and  the  whole  of  Rozvazha  quay,  the  whole  of  the  Kuzma-
Demyan  quay,  and  as  far  as  Kholop  Street,  on  the  day  of  the  Holy
Martyr  Andrew  Stratilat.^

The  same  autumn  the  Nenitsy  came  and  took  seven  villages  of  the

*  Gospodin.

*  Leonti.

*  Stratelates,  August  31.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  169

Yam  town^  and  burned  them.  The  Church  of  the  Exaltation-  was
burnt  with  all  the  pictures  and  books.  And  then  Posadnik  Esif
Faleleyevich  died,  having  entered  the  monastic  order.  Knyaz
Patriki  Narimantovich  arrived  in  Nov^gorod  and  they  received  him.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  sent  his  Boyars,
Andrei  Alberdov  with  others,  to  the  whole  Dvina  colony'^  beyond  the
Fo/oA,* saying  thus:  "  That  you  should  give  allegiance  to  the  Veliki
Knyaz  and  leave  Novgorod;  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  will  defend  you
against  Novgorod  and  will  stand  up  for  you."  And  the  men  of  the
Dvina,  Ivan  Mikitin,  the  iJo^'ars  of  the  Dvina,  and  all  the  people  of  the
Dvina  gave  their  allegiance  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  and  kissed  the  Cross
to  the  Veliki  Knyaz;  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  against  his  kissing  of  the
Cross  to  Novgorod  seized  Volok-Lamsk  with  its  districts,  Torzhok  and
its  districts,  Vologda  and  Bezhitsy ;  and  then  put  off  from  himself  his
kissing  of  the  Cross  to  Novgorod  and  threw  up  the  sworn  charter.  And
the  men  of  Novgorod  put  off  from  themselves  their  kissing  of  the
Cross,  and  threw  up  the  charter  they  had  sworn  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz.

And  after  this  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian  sent  his  bailiff  Kliment
to  Great  Novgorod  to  his  son  Vladyka  Ivan,  saying  thus:  "  Come
to  Moscow,  thy  Father  the  Metropolitan  summons  thee  on  sacred
business."  And  the  Vladyka  let  the  Metropolitan's  Boyar  go  back
to  Moscow,  and  himself  resolved  to  go  to  his  Father  the  Metropoli-
tan; and  the  Posadnik, \.]ieTysyatski,d,n6.  the  w'hole  of  Great  Nov-
gorod, beat  with  their  foreheads  to  their  Father  the  Lord  Vladyka
loan:  "  That  thou  give  a  good  word  and  thy  blessing  to  the  Veliki
Knyaz,  for  thy  children,  for  Great  Novgorod."

And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  as  envoys  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Posadnik  Bogdan  Obakunovich,  Kyuril  Dmitrievich,  and  other  men
of  substance,  with  their  Father  the  Vladyka.

And  Vladyka  loan  gave  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  his  good  word  and
blessing,  and  the  envoys  from  Novgorod  a  petition,  saying  thus:
"  That  thou,  my  Lord  and  son,  Veliki  Knyaz,  receive  my  benediction
and  good  word,  and  the  petition  of  Novgorod;  that  thou  withdraw
thy  displeasure  from  thy  free  men  of  Novgorod,  and  receive  them
on  the  old  terms;  that  there  be  no  more  shedding  of  blood  among
Christians,  my  son,  during  thy  reign.  And  what  thou  hast  taken
from  Novgorod  against  thy  kissing  of  the  Cross,  the  country  beyond

1  Yamburg.

2  Of  the  Cross.

3  Slohoda.

*  Volok  Dvinsk,  in  N.  Russia.  See  Introduction,  pp.  ix,  x,  etc.

170  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  Voloh},  Torzhok,  Vologda  and  Bezhitsy,  that  thou  give  up  all
that,  and  that  it  come  to  Novgorod  as  of  old.  And  as  regards  the
common  jurisdiction  on  the  borderland,  forego,  my  son,  that,  for
that,  Lord  Veliki  Knyaz,  is  not  the  old  custom."

And  the  Veliki  Knyaz  would  not  except  the  blessing  and  the  good
word  of  the  Vladyka,  nor  the  petition  from  the  Novgorod  envoys;
and  he  did  not  withdraw  from  Novgorod  his  displeasure,  anji  he
granted  no  peace,  but  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian  dismissed  his  son
Vladyka  loan  with  honour  and  with  his  blessing.
A.D.  1398.  A.M.  6906.  In  the  spring,  after  Easter,  the  men  of
Novgorod  said  to  their  Lord  Father  Vladyka
Ivan:  "We  cannot.  Lord  Father,  endure  this  violence  of  our
Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich;  that  he  has  taken  the  surround-
ing villages  and  districts  away  from  Novgorod,  and  from  St.  Sophia,
which  belonged  to  our  fathers  and  grandfathers;  but  intend  to
recover  the  outlying  parts  and  districts  of  St.  Sophia  which  be-
longed to  our  fathers  and  grandfathers."  And  they  kissed  the
Cross  to  stand  as  one  man  how  to  recover  the  outlying  parts  and
districts  of  St.  Sophia  and  Great  Novgorod.  And  Posadnik  Timofei
Yurievich,  Posadnik  Yuri  Dmitrievich,  Vasih  Borisovich,  the
Boyars,  the  sons  of  Boyars,  the  men  of  substance,  the  sons  of  mer-
chants, and  all  their  soldiers  beat  with  their  foreheads:  "  Bless,  O
Lord  Father  Vladyka,  our  attempt  to  recover  the  outlying  parts  and
districts  of  St.  Sophia;  we  shall  either  recover  our  patrimony  for
St.  Sophia  and  for  Great  Novgorod,  or  we  shall  lay  down  our  heads
for  St.  Sophia  and  for  our  Lord  Great  Novgorod.^"  And  Vladyka
Ivan  blessed  his  children  and  the  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod  and  all  the
soldiers,  and  Novgorod  sent  forth  its  brothers,  saying  to  them
thus:  "  Go,  seek  the  outlying  parts  and  the  districts  of  St.  Sophia
and  our  patrimony."  And  the  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod,  Posadnik
Timofei,  Posadnik  Yuri,  and  Vasili  and  all  the  soldiers  went  off  to
the  Dvina  beyond  the  Volok,  to  Orlets  town,  and  there  met  them
coming  from  the  Vel  district  the  Vladyka's  superintendent  Isai,
saying  to  them  thus:  "  Sirs,  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod,  the  Veliki
Knyaz' s  Boyar  Andrei,  with  Ivan  Mikitin  and  with  the  Dvina
men,  having  invaded  the  Vel  district  of  St.  Sophia  on  Easter  Day,
they  ravaged  the  St.  Sophia  district  and  levied  a  poll  tax;  and
Knyaz  Fedor  of  Rostov  has  come  from  the  Veliki  Knyaz  with  a
column  of  troops  to  keep  garrison  on  the  Dvina  to  guard  the  town,

1  sc.  the  country  of  the  N.  Dvina.  See  Introduction,  p.  ix,  etc.
*  Gospodin  Veliki  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  171

to  hold  judgment  and  to  levy  taxes  on  the  Novgorod  districts;  and
the  captains  of  the  Dvina,  Ivan  and  Konon,  with  their  friends,
have  divided  the  Novgorod  districts  and  Boyars  amongst  them-
selves." And  the  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod  having  heard  this,
said  to  their  brother  Voyevodas:  "  Since  our  Lord  the  Veliki  Knyaz
has  done  this  in  concert  with  the  covenant-breaking  Dyina.V oyevodas ,
better  were  it  for  us,  brothers,  to  die  for  St.  Sophia  than  to  suffer
wrong  at  the  hands  of  our  Veliki  Knyaz."  And  they  went  against
the  Belo-Ozero^  districts  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  and  took  the  Belo-
Ozero  districts  by  assault,  after  ravaging  and  firing  them;  and  burnt
the  old  town  of  Belozersk,  and  the  Knyazes  of  Belozersk  and  the
Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  came  out  from  the  new  town,  and
beat  with  their  foreheads  to  the  Novgorod  Voyevodas  and  all  the
soldiers,  and  they  took  from  them  a  ransom  of  sixty  roubles,  and
they  took  countless  plunder  and  took  a  countless  quantity  of  cattle;
and  ravaged  the  Kubensk  districts  and  ravaged  around  Vologda,
and  ravaged  and  burnt  the  town  of  Ustyug,  and  they  remained  at
Ustyug  four  weeks.

And  then  the  Voyevodas  sent  Dmitri  Ivanovich,  Ivan  Bogdanovich,
and  with  them  sons  of  Boyars,  and  they  ravaged  the  districts  of  the
Veliki  Knyaz  to  within  one  day  of  Galich,-  and  they  ravaged  and
burnt  the  districts,  and  took  a  countless  number  of  captives  and
they  took  ransom  for  the  captives  because  their  boats  would  not
hold  them,  and  other  plunder  they  threw  away.  And  thence  they
went  along  the  Dvina  to  the  town  of  Orlets,  ravaging  the  districts  of
the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  coming  to  Orlets  town  they  stood  before  it
four  weeks,  and  set  up  battering  rams,  and  invested  the  town,  and
began  to  batter  with  them.  And  the  Dvina  men  came  from  out
of  the  town  and  began  to  beat  with  their  foreheads  with  lamenta-
tion to  the  Voyevodas  and  to  all  the  Novgorod  soldiers.

And  the  Novgorod  Voyevodas  and  all  the  soldiers,  at  the  word  of
their  Lord  Novgorod,  accepted  the  petition  of  the  Dvina  men  and
forgave  them  their  displeasure,  and  seized  the  Voyevodas  of  the
country  beyond  the  Volok,  Ivan  and  Konon  with  their  friends,  and
others  they  punished  with  death ;  and  they  put  Ivan  and  his  brother
Afanasi,  Gerasim  and  Radivon  in  fetters  who  had  led  the  Dvina
country  into  evil.  And  from  Knyaz  Fedor  of  Rostov  they  took
away  the  fines  or  taxes  which  he  had  used  to  raise,  but  gave  him  and
his  friends  their  lives. And  from  the  merchants  of  the Veliki

1  "  White-Lake."

2  Galich  Meriazhshi,  town  in  N.  Russia.

172  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Knyaz  tliey  took  a  ransom  of  300  roubles  per  head,  and  from  the
people  of  the  Dvina,  for  their  defection  and  their  fault,  the  Voyevodas
and  all  the  soldiers  of  Novgorod  took  2,000  roubles,  and  3,000  horses,
for  there  were  3,000  of  the  men  of  Novgorod,  or  less.  O  merciful
God !  to  have  traversed  so  much  Russian  Land,  and  at  such  a
strong  town  as  this,  there  was  no  harm  done  to  the  people^;  one  man
alone  was  killed  from  the  town :  the  young  Boyar  Levushka,  son  of
Posadnik  Fedor;  but  the  town  they  plundered.

Vladyka  loan,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  erected  a  church  of  stone  by
the  gates,  to  the  Holy  Resurrection,  and  consecrated  it  himself
with  the  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia.  Mikhail  Krupa
erected  a  church  of  stone  to  St.  Nikola  in  Chudinets  Street  in  the
Lyudgoshcha  quarter.

The  same  autumn  with  the  blessing  of  Vladyka  Ivan  envoys  went
from  Novgorod  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich:  the  Archi-
mandrite Parfeni,  Posadnik  Esif  Zakharinich,  the  Tysyatski  Anani
Kostyantinovich,  and  the  men  of  substance,  Grigori  and  David,  and
they  took  peace  with  the  Veliki  Knyaz  on  the  old  terms.

The  same  winter  the  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod,  Posadnik  Timofei,
Posadnik  Yuri,  and  Boyars  and  sons  of  Boyars  and  all  the  soldiers
returned  to  Novgorod  sound  and  well,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod
were  glad  of  their  brothers ;  and  they  threw  the  traitor  Ivan  Mikitin
from  the  bridge;  and  Gerasim  and  Radivon  beat  with  their  foreheads
to  their  Lord  Great  Novgorod  with  lamentation,  and  Novgorod
granted  them  their  lives,  and  they  had  themselves  shorn  into  the
monastic  order ;  but  Alfan-  escaped  on  the  way.

A.D.  1399.  A.M.  6907.  KnyazViiovt  Kestutievich of  Lithuania  sent
to  Novgorod  a  declaration  of  war  saying
thus:  "  You  have  dishonoured  me;  you  were  to  have  stood  by  me,
and  I  was  to  have  been  your  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  I  was  to  have  pro-
tected you;  whereas  you  have  not  stood  by  me."  And  the  men  of
Novgorod  sent  back  the  declaration  of  war  from  them  to  Knyaz
Vitovt.

The  same  year  for  our  sins  a  fire  broke  out  in  the  Lyubyanitsa
[Street],  and  the  Carpenters'  quarter^  was  burnt  up  to  the  Fedor
stream;  and  the  whole  Slavno  quarter  was  burnt,  and  twenty-two
stone  churches  were  partially  burnt,  and  five  side-chapels,  and  one

^  i.e.  "  and  to  have  suffered  no  harm  in  the  siege  of  so  strong  a  town."
2  Or  Anfailo.
^  Plotniki.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  173

wooden  church,  and  how  many  persons  were  burnt  God  knows,  and
some  were  drowned  in  the  Volkhov,  on  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr
Memnon.^  So  fierce  was  the  fire,  with  a  hurricane,  that  it  swept
burning  over  the  water.

Knyaz  Andrei  Dmitrievich,  brother  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili,
came  to  Novgorod  on  the  day  of  the  holy  Father  Osif,  Vladyka  of
Selun,-  and  he  stayed  in  Novgorod  from  Volodimir  Day  to  St.
Simon  the  Summer-speeder's  Day,^  and  he  departed  from  Novgorod
and  the  Vladyka  loan,  the  Posadnik  and  the  Boyars  gave  the  Knyaz
great  honour.

The  Veliki  Knyaz  Mikhail  Olexandrovich  of  Tver  died,  in  the
month  of  August,  having  taken  the  monastic  order,  and  they  laid
him  in  the  Church  of  St.  Saviour.

The  same  year  the  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  Vladyka  loan,  with  his
sons  the  men  of  Novgorod  erected  a  church  of  stone  of  the  Inter-
cession of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  in  Zverinets,*  and  Vladyka  loan
himself  with  the  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia  consecrated  it
on  October  1,  the  day  of  the  Intercession  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.
O  most  Immaculate  Sovereign  Mother  of  God,  Mother  of  Christ  our
God,  keep  Thy  church  steadfast  in  Thy  name,  O  Lady,  holy  and
indestructible  to  the  end  of  the  whole  world !  Accept,  Sovereign
Lady,  the  prayer  of  Thy  slave  Vladyka  loan,  granting  him  Thy
grace  and  Thy  spiritual  blessing  as  shepherd  of  Christ's  talking
flock;  and  grant  him.  Sovereign  Lady,  long  life  with  all  his  children,
the  men  of  Novgorod,  together  with  those  who  have  served  Thy  holy
house.  Sovereign  Lady;  and  in  the  world  to  come  help.  Sovereign
Lady,  to  place  him  by  Thy  great  mercy  at  the  right  hand  of  Thy  son
our  God !

The  same  year  the  Tartar  Tsar  Temir  Kutlui  sent  his  envoys  to
Knyaz  Vitovt  Kestutievich  of  Lithuania  saying  thus:  "  Deliver  to
me  our  fugitive  Tsar  Takhtomysh;  and  whatsoever  he  may  have
about  him,  that  is  thine."  And  Knyaz  Vitovt  having  heard  this
replied  to  the  Tsar's  envoy :  "  I  will  not  deliver  up  Tsar  Takhtomysh ;
but  I  wish  to  meet  the  Tsar."  And  Knyaz  Vitovt  went  with  all  his
Knyazes  and  with  all  the  forces  of  Lithuania  against  the  Tsar
Temir  Kutlui ;  and  reaching  the  Vorskla  he  halted  there  in  the  Tartar
country.

1  September  1.

2  Joseph,  Bishop  of  Salonika,  February  7.

3  July  27- September  13.
*  Near  Novgorod.

174 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

And  the  Tsar,  having  heard  of  the  arrival  of  Knyaz  Vitovt,  sent
envoys  to  him  with  a  last  word:  "  Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  come  to
fight  us,  and  hast  refused  to  deliver  up  the  fugitive  Tsar,  and  we  have
not  encroached  on  thy  lands,  nor  taken  from  thee  any  of  thy  towns
or  villages;  therefore,  let  God  and  the  truth  be  for  all  of  us."^

And  so  both  armies  came  into  conffict,  and  there  was  such  a  fierce
battle  as  had  never  been  between  Lithuania  and  the  Tartars.  And
no  small  disaster  befell  the  children  of  Lithuania  for  their  sins;  and
here  they  killed  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Andrei  Olgerdovich  and  his  brother
Knyaz  Mikhail  Evnutievich  in  the  encounter,  and  in  all  seventy-
four  noble  Knyazes;  and  of  Voyevodas  and  other  Lithuanians  who
laid  their  bones  there,  only  God  knows  the  number;  and  Knyaz
Vitovt  seeing  this  turned  and  fled,  and  the  Tartars  followed  in  pur-
suit of  them  for  500  versts,^  as  far  as  the  town  of  Kiev,  and  from  the
town  of  Kiev  they  took  a  ransom  of  500  roubles,  and  set  their  own
lieutenants  there;  and  they  took  from  the  Pechersk  monastery  a
ransom  of  thirty  roubles.  For  thus  did  God  bring  the  pagan
Tartars  upon  the  land  of  Lithuania  because  of  the  pride  of  their
Knyaz;  for  God  had  given  Vitovt  to  the  land  of  Lithuania  as  its
Veliki  Knyaz,  for  the  sins  of  the  Christians.  For  Knyaz  Vitovt  had
previously  been  a  Christian,  and  his  name  was  Alexander,  but  he
renounced  the  Orthodox  faith  and  Christianity,  and  adopted  the
Polish^  faith,  and  perverted  the  holy  churches  into  service  that  is
hateful  to  God,  and  he  thought  thus:  he  would  conquer  the  Russian
Land  and  Novgorod  and  Pskov,  but  he  thought  not  of  the  Lord
saying  through  the  Prophet,  how:  "  One  shall  reap  a  thousand;  and
two  shall  move  ten  thousand."  If  God  be  for  the  Christians,  who
shall  come  against  us?  And  this  battle  was  on  the  5th  day  of
August,  on  the  eve  of  St.  Saviour's,  the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr
Eusegni.

The  same  autumn  there  was  a  darkening  of  the  sun;  and  there
was  darkness,  and  the  sun  disappeared,  and  the  form  of  a  scythe
appeared  in  the  sky,  and  then  the  sun  appeared  emitting  blood-red
rays  with  smoke,  in  the  month  of  October,  on  the  day  of  the  holy
Martyr  Anastasia.*

The  same  winter  Vladyka  loan  went  to  Pskov  on  visitation,  and
the  men  of  Pskov  gave  great  honour  to  their  Lord  father  Vladyka

1  sc.  judge  between  us.

2  About  330  miles.

3  Lyadskaya  vera;  Lyakh,  a  Pole.

*  November  11.  •

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  175

loan;  and  they  gave  him  jurisdiction  to  judge  for  a  month,  as  of
old.  And  Vladyka  loan  left  for  Novgorod,  and  blessed  his  children,
the  men  of  Pskov.

A.D.  1400.  A.M.  6908.  Vladyka  loan  laid  the  foundation  of  the
Detineh^  wall  from  [the  Church  of]  SS.  Boris
and  Gleb  in  the  month  of  July,  on  the  Commemoration  Day  of  the
holy  Martyr  Golendukha  [and  the  Church  of]  the  Holy  Resurrection
at  the  gate  was  freshly  painted  by  order  of  Vladyka  loan.  They
erected  a  stone  church  in  Yanev  Street  to  Tsar  Kostyantin  and  his
mother  Olena,^  and  it  was  consecrated  by  Vladyka  loan.

The  same  autumn  Klimenti  Vasilievich,  Posadnik's  son,  went  as
envoy  from  Novgorod  to  Lithuania  to  Knyaz  Vitovt,  and  took
peace  on  the  old  terms.

A.D.  1401.  A.M.  6909.  Vladyka  loan  went  to  Moscow  from  Nov-
gorod to  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian,  sum-
moned by  him  on  ecclesiastical  business,  on  Wednesday  of  the
fourth  week  in  Lent,  March  6,  and  the  MetropoHtan  received  him.

The  same  autumn  the  Vladyka  s  town  at  Molvotitsy  was  burnt.

The  same  year  against  the  peace  and  against  their  kissing  of  the
Cross,  by  order  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  Anfal  Mikitin  and  Gerasim
Rostriga  with  a  force  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  came  against  the  Dvina
beyond  the  Volok;  and  took  all  the  Dvina  country  by  assault  by
surprise,  on  St.  Peter's  Day,^  hanged  some  of  the  Christians  and
slew  others,  and  took  their  cattle  and  their  belongings.  They
seized  Ondrei  Ivanovich  and  the  Posadniks  of  the  Dvina,  Esip
Filipovich  and  Naum  Ivanovich.  And  Stepan  Ivanovich,  his
brother  Mikhail,  and  Mikita  Golovna  collecting  around  them  the  Vod
people,  and  overtaking  Anfailo  and  Gerasim  fought  them  at  Kol-
mogory  and  recovered  from  them  the  Novgorod  Boyars  Andrei,
Esif  and  Naum.  At  the  same  time  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrie-
vich  sent  his  Boyars  Alexander  Pol  and  Ivan  Narin,  with  a  body  of
300  men,  against  Torzhok;  they  seized  Simeon  Vasilievich  and
Mikhail  Felilatov,  against  their  kissing  of  the  Cross,  and  took  their
property  out  of  St.  Saviour's.

The  same  autumn  the  people  of  Smolensk  accepted  Yuri  Svyatos-
lavich  as  their  Knyaz,  and  killed  Knyaz  Roman  of  Bryansk,  lieu-
tenant of  Knyaz  Vitovt. And  Knyaz  Vitovt  came  to  Smolensk  with

1  Citadel.

*  Constantine  and  Helena.

3  July  11.

176  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

all  the  forces  of  Lithuania,  and  remained  by  the  town  for  four  weeks,
and  they  beat  on  the  town  with  guns  [sic]  and  he  withdrew  from  the
town  and  took  peace  with  Knyaz  Yuri  on  the  old  terms.  And  the
people  of  Smolensk  with  their  Knyaz  Yuri  put  to  death  those  of
their  Boyars  who  had  been  in  secret  communication  with  Knyaz
Vitovt.  ^

A.D.  1402.  A.M.  6910.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  sky,  a  tailed  star,
having  a  bright  ray  in  the  west,  which
lasted  all  the  month  of  March.

Knyaz  Roslav^  Olgovich  of  Ryazan  ravaged  the  country  of
Lithuania,  and  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich  attacked  him,  captured
Knyaz  Roslav  and  led  him  to  Knyaz  Vitovt,  and  destroyed  his
force  and  captured  some  of  them.

The  men  of  Novgorod  took  peace  with  Knyaz  Yuri  of  Smolensk.
Knyaz  Oleg  of  Ryazan  died.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  let  Simeon  and  Mikhail,
the  two  men  of  Novgorod  whom  he  had  seized,  go  from  Moscow
back  to  Novgorod.

The  Chudinets  quarter  erected  a  stone  Church  of  the  Decapitation
of  St.  loan  the  Forerunner,  and  the  Chernichinets  quarter  erected
a  stone  church  to  St.  Barbara,  and  the  three  sons  of  Posadnik
Kyuril  Ondreyanovich  built  a  side  chapel  to  St.  Mikhail  in  Prussian
Street.

And  this  winter  from  St.  Georgi's  Day  up  to  March,  horses  could
go  over  the  Volkhov.

A.D.  1403.  A.M.  6911.  The  Novgorod  merchant-butchers  erected
in  [the  town  of]  Russa  a  stone  church  to  SS.
Boris  and  Gleb.  The  Carpenters'  quarter^  as  far  as  Slavkova
Street  was  burnt,  and  Rogatitsa  [Street]  as  far  as  St.  Eupati,  the
Lyubyanitsa  [Street]  as  far  as  St.  Luke,  and  the  entire  Slavno  quar-
ter, and  fifteen  stone  churches  were  partially  burnt;  the  fire  oc-
curred on  August  16,  the  Day  of  the  Holy  Effigy;  but  the  Knyaz
quay  and  the  Gothic^  Court  did  not  catch  fire.

Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich  took  the  towns  of  Smolensk  and
Vyazma,  and  he  captured  the  Knyazes  Ivan  Svyatoslavich  and
Alexander  Mikhailovich.

The  same  year  there  was  a  plague  with  swellings  in  Pskov,  and

1  Rodislav.

2  Plotniki.

*  i.e.  Hanseatic.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  177

the  stone  Church  of  St.  Dmitri  was  burnt  throughout;  the  ikotis
and  books  and  much  property  were  burnt.

A.D.  1404.  A.M.  6912.  Knyaz  Vitovt  of  Lithuania  came  with  all
his  forces  up  to  the  town  of  Smolensk  and
remained  near  the  town  three  months,  and  withdrew.

Vladyka  loan  arrived  in  Novgorod  on  the  15th  day  of  July,  having
been  with  the  Metropolitan  Kiprian  in  Moscow  three  years  and
four  months;  and  Igumens  and  priests  and  the  choir  of  St.  Sophia
and  all  Novgorod  met  him  in  Novgorod  at  St.  Nikola  in  Yaroslav
Court  with  crosses;  and  there  was  great  rejoicing  over  their  Vladyka.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yuri  Svyatoslavich  went  from  Smolensk  to
Moscow  to  bow  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  that  he  might  defend  him
from  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vitovt;  and  at  that  time  traitors  delivered
over  the  town  of  Smolensk  to  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Vitovt;  on
hearing  that  his  town  was  taken,  Knyaz  Yuri  of  Smolensk  came  to
Novgorod  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  received  him.

A.D.  1405.  A.M.  6913.  In  Yanev  Street  fifteen  houses  were  burnt
and  six  persons;  and  then  the  Lyudin  quar-
ter and  Prussian  Street  as  far  as  St.  Mikhail's  were  burnt,  and  in  the
Detinets^  the  lire  extended  to  the  Vladyka  s  Court;  five  wooden
churches  were  burnt  and  two  of  stone  were  partially  burnt,  and  the
Church  of  Boris  and  Gleb  was  entirely  burnt,  also  thirty  people.

Posadnik  Vasili  Ivanovich  died,  having  entered  the  monastic
order.

The  Lithuanian  Knyaz  Vitovt  took  the  Pleskov  settlement  at
Kolozhe  against  the  peace,  and  halted  at  Voronats  two  days,
ravaging  many  of  the  Pleskov  districts,  making  surprise  attacks,  and
killed  many  Christians,  and  took  others  into  captivity.

A.D.  1406.  A.M.  6914.  Knyaz  Peter,  brother  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Vasili  Dmitrievich,  came  to  Novgorod  and
stayed  in  Novgorod  a  week  and  a  half.  The  same  year  heavy
ice  came  from  the  lake-  and  broke  away  a  stay  of  the  great  bridge,
on  Easter  Day,  April  11.

There  was  a  fire  in  Novgorod  in  the  Knyaz's  Court,  on  the
commercial  side,  and  six  persons  perished;  the  fire  extended  from
the  Gothic^  Court  to  Pleskov  Court.

1  Citadel.

*  sc.  Lake  Ilmen.

'  Hanseatic.

178  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  town  of  Pskov^  was  burnt  down  on  the  Day  of  the  [Descent
of  the]  Holy  Ghost;  only  Dovmont's  wall  and  the  Krom-  did  not
burn.

The  Metropolitan  Kiprian  died  in  Moscow.

The  men  of  Pskov  went  to  war  on  Polotsk,  and  they  nearly  took
the  town,  and  after  ravaging  the  districts  of  Polotsk,  they  with-
drew. A  Master  of  Riga,^  named  Korto,  came  up  to  Pskov  with  all
the  forces  of  the  Nemtsy,  and  retired  after  ravaging  the  districts.

Three  churches  were  erected:  the  Nativity  of  St.  loan  the  Fore-
runner, in  the  Rostkin  monastery,  SS.  Peter  and  Paul  in  the  Nerev
quarter,  and  St.  Nikita  in  the  Carpenters'  quarter.

The  same  autumn  Knyaz  Yuri  left  Novgorod  for  Moscow.

The  same  winter  the  men  of  Pskov  went  to  ravage  the  country
of  the  'Nemtsy  under  the  leadership  of  Knyaz  Danilo  Alexandrovich,
lieutenant  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  the  Nemtsy  met  them  beyond
Novogrodek.  And  they  fought  there,  and  God  helped  Knyaz
Danilo  and  the  men  of  Pskov  against  the  pagan  Nemtsy,  and  they
pursued  them  fighting  fifteen  versts  as  far  as  Kiryapiva;  they  took
some  alive  and  brought  them  to  Pskov.

There  was  then  a  plague  with  glands  in  Pskov.

A.D.  1407.  A.M.  6915.  Vladyka  Feodul'*  of  Trebizond  came  to
Novgorod  from  Tsargrad^  for  alms.

On  the  6th  day  of  June  a  great  calamity  befell :  the  Nerev  quar-
ter was  burnt  as  far  as  the  town  wall,  and  St.  Sophia  was  entirely
burnt,  and  the  Vladyka' s  Court  and  Lyudgoshcha  Street,  and  twelve
churches  of  stone  were  partially  burnt  and  six  of  wood  were  burnt
down.

The  men  of  Pskov  invaded  the  country  of  the  Nemtsy,  led  by
Kostyantin,  brother  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz;  and  they  took  their  town
of  Porkh,  and  after  ravaging  many  villages,  they  went  back  to  Pskov
and  Knyaz  Kostyantin  went  away  to  Moscow.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich  came  to  Novgorod,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  gave  him  the  appanages  which  had  been
his  previously.

The  Nemtsy  entered  the  Pskov  country  and  camped  at  Komen,*

1  Pskov  =rPleskov.

-  A  part  of  Pskov.

3  sc.  of  the  German  Order  of  Knights.

■*  Theodoulos.

'••  Constantinople.

«  The  town  of  Kamen-Bely — White  Stone.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  179

short  of  Pskov.  And  the  men  of  Pskov  coming  out  of  the  town
attacked  them,  but  the  Nenitsy  defeated  the  men  of  Pskov  and
killed  three  Posadniks  of  Pskov :  Ephrem  Kortats,  Elentei^  Lubka,
Penkrat,  and  many  others  fell  on  both  sides.  And  the  Nemtsy
went  away,  having  caused  much  evil  to  the  Christians ;  and  there  was
lamentation  and  not  gladness  in  Pskov.

Vladyka  loan  erected  a  stone  church  on  the  [river]  Verenda  to
the  Transfiguration  of  St.  Saviour  and  consecrated  it  himself,  and
he  established  a  monastery.  They  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.
Vlas  in  the  Lyudin  quarter.  The  two  cousins,  Yuri  Dmitrievich,
the  Posadnik,  and  Yakov,  erected  a  wonderful  stone  church  to
Mikhail  the  A  rchistrategos  of  Khony^  in  the  Arkadi  monastery.

A.D.  1408.  A.M.  6916.  Knyaz  Kostyantin  Dmitrievich  came  to
Novgorod  as  heutenant  from  his  brother
the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili.

Vladyka  loan  covered  St.  Sophia  with  lead  and  built  a  large
gold-topped  cupola.

The  same  winter  Edegei,  father-in-law  of  Shadebeg  the  Tartar
Tsar,  went  with  a  great  force  to  war  against  Moscow  on  November
23;  and  the  Tsar  himself  camped  before  Moscow,  and  spread  his
troops  over  the  Russian  Land,  and  they  took  the  towns  of  Pereyas-
lavl,  Rostov,  Nizhni-Novgorod,  and  Serpukhov,  and  they  slew  many
Christians,  and  took  others  into  captivity.  And  they  ravaged  as
far  as  Khn,  to  the  boundaries  of  Tver,  cutting  down  Christians  all
the  time  like  grass ;  and  took  from  the  town  of  Moscow  a  ransom  of
three  thousand  roubles;  and  on  leaving  the  Russian  Land  they  took
the  town  of  Ryazan.

A.D.  1409.  A.M.  6917. Knyaz  Danilo  died  in  Pskov,  and  Posadnik
Timofei  Yurievich  in  Novgorod.

Vladyka  loan  built  a  house  of  stone  where  they  bless  the  water
every  month,  also  a  bakery  of  stone.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Pskov  took  peace  with  Lithuania  and
with  the  Nemtsy,  having  been  at  war  with  the  Ne^ntsy  three  years.

Posadnik  Esif  Zakharinich  died.

The  same  winter,  on  the  30th  day  of  November,  the  Day  of  the
Holy  Apostle  Andrew,  there  was_.a  terrifying  wonder  in  the  Church  j
of  St.  Mikhail  at  Skovorodka^^ :  there'~wa.S  a  rloise  m  the^ome;  and  j

*  i.e.  Leonti.

2  Khony,  near  Hierapolis,  in  Phrygia.

*  Near  Novgorod.

N2

180  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  priests  and  monks  of  St.  Mikhail  heard  this  noise  for  two  days
and  two  nights.

A.D.  1410.  A.M.  6918.  The  Metropohtan  Foti^  arrived  in  Novgorod
from  Tsargrad,  appointed  by  the  Patriarch
Matvei  under  Tsar  Manuel.

Knyaz  Volodimir  Andreyevich  died  in  Moscow,  and  Posadnik
Yuri  Dmitrievich  in  Novgorod.

There  was  a  sign  from  the  image  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  to
which  prayers  were  offered  in  the  Church  of  St.  Georgi  at  the  end  of
Lubyanka^  Street.

The  same  year  on  the  15th  day  of  July  there  was  a  battle^  between
King  Yagailo  Olgerdovich,  named  Volodislav,  with  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Vitovt  Kestutievich  of  Lithuania  and  the  Prussian  Nemtsy  in  their
country  of  Prussia  between  the  towns  of  Dubravna  and  Ostrod,  and
they  killed  the  Master'*  and  the  Morshold^  and  the  Kuntury,^  and
defeated  the  entire  army  of  the  Nemtsy;  and  took  the  towns  of  the
Nemtsy,  only  three  towns  did  not  surrender  to  the  King  and  Vitovt.
The  same  autumn  the  Poles^  and  the  Lithuanians  had  three  battles
with  the  Nemtsy,  and  thrice  they  defeated  the  Nemtsy;  and  in  all
these  battles  many  Christians,  both  Lithuanians  and  Poles,"  were  slain
by  the  Nemtsy.  And  they  stood  before  the  fortified  town  of  Marien^
eight  weeks,  and  took  two  outlying  forts  of  Marien,  but  the  upper
third  fort  they  did  not  take;  and  they  campaigned  in  the  land  of
the  Nemtsy  eleven  and  a  half  weeks.

The  same  yea.v  Ktiyaz  Danilei  Borisovich,  whose  old  patrimony  was
Nizhni  Novgorod,  seized  the  capital  city  of  Volodimir,  taking  its
people  captive,  and  burning  it ;  and  the  Tartars  stripped  the  gold-
topped  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God.

The  same  year  the  Archimandrite  Varlam  erected  a  stone  church
in  the  gateway  of  Lisitsa  monastery,  in  the  name  of  the  most  right-
eous Varlam,  Igumen  of  St.  Saviour  of  Khutin;  and  in  Russa  they
erected  two  stone  churches:  to  St.  Georgi,  and  to  the  Annunciation
of  the  Mother  of  God.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  began  to  trade  among

1  Photius.

*  Lyubyanitsa.

'  The  battle  of  Tannenberg.

*  sc.  of  the  Order  of  Teutonic  Knights.
*•  Marshal.

*  Commanders.
'  Lyakhi.

*  Marienburg  near  Danzig,  the  capital  (since  1307)  of  the  Teutonic  order.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  181

themselves  in  lopatses^  and  Lithuanian  groshes  and  Nemetski  artugs,^
doing  away  with  kunas,^  in  the  Posadnik-ship  of  Grigori  Bogdano-
vich  and  the  Tysyatski  Vasih  Esifovich.

On  December  21  there  was  a  sign  from  the  image  of  the  holy
Martyrs  Guri,  Samon  and  Aviv,  in  the  Church  of  St.  Sophia.

The  same  winter  Posadnik  Kiril  Ondreyanovich  died,  having
entered  the  monastic  order,

Yagailo  and  Vitovt  again  went  to  Marien  town,  and  after  defeating
the  forces  of  the  Nemtsy,  took  peace.

A.D.  1411.  A.M.  6919.  The  Svei  having  come  to  make  war  took  the
Novgorod  town  of  Tiversk;  the  men  of
Novgorod  went  quickly  against  the  Svei  only  three  days  after  this
news,  with  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich;  and  having  come  to  the
Sveiski  country  they  ravaged  and  burned  their  villages,  and  killed
many  Svei  and  captured  others,  and  took  and  burned  an  outwork
of  Viborg  on  March  26,  the  day  of  the  Festival  of  the  Archangel
Gabriel,  and  returned  to  Novgorod  with  a  large  number  of  captives.
And  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Novgorod  troops  were:  Posadnik  Yuri
Ontsiforovits,  Posadnik  Foma  Esifovits,  Posadnik  Alexander
Fominits,  Ivan  Danilovits,  Gregori  Bogdanovits,  Ofonos  Esifov,
Posadnik's  son,  Mikhailo  Ivanovits,  Posadnik's  son,  Andrei  Ivano-
vits,  Ivan  Fedorovits,  Posadnik's  son,  Foma  Troshcheikin,  Dmitri
Ivanovits,  Esip  Philipovits,  Avram  Stefanovits.

And  the  Nemtsy  at  Viborg  killed  only  one  man:  Paul  of  Nutna
Street.

Vladyka  loan  erected  a  miracle-working  church  of  stone  to  the
Holy  Confessors.

By  order  from  Novgorod  the  Posadnik  of  the  Dvina,  Voyevoda
Yakov  Stepanovits  went  from  the  country  beyond  the  Volok
to  make  war  against  the  Murman  people,  and  ravaged  their  country.

The  same  winter  Vladyka  loan  went  to  Moscow  to  the  Metropoli-
tan Foti.

A.D.  1412.  A.M.  6920. They  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.  Nikola
at  Porkhov,  another  of  wood  to  St.  Nikola
by  the  bridge  on  the  [river]  Veryazh,  in  the  monastery,  and  a  third
of  wood  to  the  Holy  Trinity  at  Klopsko.*

1  Properly  lobtsi  or  lobki,  skins  of  the  little  foreheads  of  squirrels,

*  A  Swedish  copper  coin.
'  Squirrel  skins.

*  Near  Novgorod.

182  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Lugven^  went  away  to  Lithuania  and  withdrew  the  lieutenants
from  the  Novgorod  townships.

And  Knyaz  Vasih  of  Moscow  and  Ivan  of  Tver  went  to  the  Horde
to  Tsar  Zeleni-Sultan,  the  son  of  Takhtamysh.  And  King  Yagailo
and  Vitovt  and  Lugven^  sent  a  challenge  to  Novgorod  on  January  2.
And  the  King  and  Vitovt  spoke  thus:  "  You  undertook  to  be  on  our
side ;  if  the  Nemtsy  combine  against  us,  you  would  combine  against
the  Nemtsy;  and  that  we  should  stand  as  one  man  together  and
strengthen  ourselves  on  both  sides  against  all  chances  if  this  should
happen;  but  if  this  should  not  be  necessary,  then  nothing  would
come  of  it;  and  we  moreover  sent  our  Boyars  Nemir  and  Zinovi
Bratoshich  [to  find  out]  whether  you  stand  by  the  aforesaid  word.
And  you  replied  to  Nemir :  '  Novgorod  cannot  do  this ;  we  are  at
peace  both  with  Lithuania  and  with  the  Nemtsy.  We  took  over
Knyaz  Lugven^  from  amongst  you;  and  with  the  Nemtsy  we  have
taken  perpetual  peace,  and  we  are  at  peace  with  the  Ugry  people,^
and  with  all  on  our  borders.'  And  you  having  forgotten  your  word
have  not  kept  it,  to  be  on  our  side;  and  besides,  your  people  have
upbraided  us,  dishonoured  us,  and  put  us  to  shame,  calhng  us
pagans;  and  above  all,  you  have  received  our  enemy  Fedor,  the  son  of
Yuri  Svyatoslavich."

And  Lugv-en^  spoke  thus:  "  You  kept  me  with  you  and  fed  me;
but  now  it  pleases  not  my  elder  brethren,  the  King  and  Vitovt,  and
it  pleases  me  not  because  I  am  with  them  as  one  man;  and  I  re-
nounce the  kissing  of  the  Cross."

And  Knyaz  Fedor  said  to  the  men  of  Novgorod:  "  Do  not  be  at
enmity  with  Vitovt  on  my  account";  and  he  went  off  to  the
Nemtsy.

A.D.  1413.  A.M.  6921.  Vladyka  loan  with  the  Voyevodas  of  Nov-
gorod and  their  soldiers  who  had  been  in
Viborg,  and  by  Christian  help,  erected  the  stone  Church  of  the
Festival  of  the  Archangel  GavriP  in  Khrevkov  Street,  and  he  con-
secrated it  himself  on  his  festival  day.  And  Ivan  Morozov  erected
a  stone  church  to  the  Conception  of  St.  loan  the  Forerunner  in  the
Desyatina.

Tver  was  burnt  down.

The  same  year  in  the  patrimony  of  Knyaz  Andrei  Dmitrievich,
ten  versts  beyond  the  town  of  Mozhaisk,  abundant  grace  and  pardon

1  sc.  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich.

2  sc.  Hungarians.

3  £c.  Gabriel.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  183

to  people  appeared  from  the  image  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God;
to  the  bhnd,  the  lame,  the  feeble,  the  deaf  and  the  dumb;  it  is  not
possible  to  name  or  count  them;  the  mind  of  man  cannot  express
how  great  is  God's  love  of  man  and  how  great  is  his  mercy  towards
men.

And  Vladyka  loan  went  to  Pskov.

A.D.  1414.  A.M.  6922.  The  Metropohtan  Foti  went  to  Lithuania
and  Vitovt  robbed  him.

The  Vladyka  s  house  in  the  monastery  in  the  Derevyanitsa  was
burnt,  and  the  stone  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  was  partially
burnt,  and  a  man  was  burnt.

The  same  spring  envoys  from  Novgorod  went  to  Lithuania:
Posadnik  Yuri  Ontsiforovich,  Ofonos^  Fedorovich,  Posadnik's
son,  and  Fedor  Tryablo;  and  they  took  peace  with  Vitovt  on  the  old
terms.

There  was  a  heavy  sickness  among  the  Christians.

A  fire  broke  out  in  the  Nerev  quarter  on  August  3,  which  extended
from  St.  Volodimir  to  the  [stream]  Gzen;  eight  stone  and  five
wooden  churches  were  burnt.  They  completed  the  stone  Church  of
St.  Euphemia  in  the  Carpenters'  quarter-  the  same  autumn.

Vladyka  loan  was  shorn  into  the  schema."^  Posadnik  Kiril  Dmi-
trievich  died.  The  same  winter  on  January  20,  Vladyka  loan
retired  from  the  Archbishopric,  having  occupied  the  Archbishopric
thirty  years  less  three.

A.D.  1415.  A.M.  6923. The  water  flowed  backwards.^

The  Tartars  ravaged  the  country  round
Elets,  and  Moscow  and  Smolensk  were  burnt ;  and  there  was  a  sign  in
the  sun  on  June  7.

Posadnik  Fedosi  Obakunovich  died,  in  the  monastic  order.  They
erected  a  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  the  monastery  on  the
[river]  Vidogoshch.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  deliberating  in  Yaroslav's
Court,  and  holding  a  Veche  at  St.  Sophia,  placed  three  lots  with
their  names  written  on  the  altar:  Samson,  monk  of  St.  Saviour  at
Khutin,  Mikhail,  Igmnen  of  St.  Mikhail  at  Skovorodka,^  and  Lev,
Igumen  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  at  Kolmovo^;  and  at  the  end  of

1  Athanasius.

2  Plotniki.
2  cf.  p.  34.

*  sc.  into  the  lake,  owing  to  floods  lower  down.

*  Near  Novgorod.

184  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  holy  service  the  old  Archpriest  Vasili  brought  out  to  the  Veche,
first  Lev's  lot,  then  Mikhail's,  and  Samson's  remained  on  the  altar;
then  Posadnik  Ondrei  Ivanovich  and  the  Tysyatski  Olexander
Ignatievich  with  the  men  of  Novgorod,  raised  Samson  honourably
to  the  threshold^  of  the  house  of  St.  Sophia  on  Sunday,  August  11,
the  day  of  the  holy  Martyr  the  Deacon  Eupl.  The  same  day  the
wooden  Church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection  of  the  Lord  on  Krasnaya
Gorka-  in  the  Carpenters'  quarter  was  consecrated,  and  a  monastery
was  established.  The  same  autumn  they  completed  two  stone
churches  in  the  Lyudin  quarter :  that  of  the  Holy  Exaltation  [of  the
Cross]  of  the  Lord,  and  that  of  St.  Luke.

The  same  autumn,  b^'  the  sufferance  of  God,  and  the  will  of
Knyaz  Vitovt  of  Lithuania,  [Vitovt]  by  his  own  wish  having  collected
the  Christian  Bishops  residing  within  his  province — Feodosi  of
Polotsk,  Isaak  of  Chernigov,  Dionisi  of  Lutsk,  Gerasim  of  Volodimir,
Khariton  of  Holm,  Eufimi  of  Turov — over  those  Bishops,  put  as
Metropolitan,  Gregory  the  Bulgarian,  at  Kiev  on  November  15.

The  same  winter,  on  February  23,  in  Sexagesima  Week,  Samson
went  to  the  Metropolitan  for  confirmation  as  Vladyka;  and  with
him  envoys  from  Novgorod:  Vasili  Obakunovich,  the  Tysyatski
Vasili  Esifovich,  and  the  Tysyatski  Olexander  Ignatievich;  and  they
reached  Moscow.

A.D.  1416.  A.M.  6924.  On  March  9,  the  day  of  the  Forty  Martyrs,
after  the  full  service  on  Monday,  and  on
Thursday  of  that  week,  the  12th,  God  granted  grace  in  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  by  the  tomb  of  the  Metropohtan  Peter :
the  shortened  leg  of  a  man  was  made  whole ;  on  the  15th  in  the  second
week  of  Lent,  a  nun's  hand  was  cured.  On  that  da}^  the  Metro-
politan Foti  confirmed  Samson  as  Deacon,  and  on  Saturday  21st,
the  third  of  Lent,  he  made  him  full  priest,  and  on  the  22nd,  on
Sunday  in  Mid-Lent  on  the  day  of  the  holy  Father  Vasili,  he  was
confirmed  Vladyka  of  Great  Novgorod  in  the  Church  of  the  Archi-
strategos  Mikhail,  and  was  named  Simeon  by  the  Metropolitan,  and
there  were  present  with  the  Metropolitan  at  the  confirmation  five
Vladykas:  Grigori  of  Rostov,  Mitrofan  of  Suzdal,  Antoni  of  Tver,
Timofei  of  Sarsk,  and  Isaki  of  Perm ;  and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili
Dmitrievich  was  present  together  with  his  brothers  Yuri  and  Kostyan-
tin;  and  he  came  to  Novgorod  on  April  16,  on  Great  Thursday

icf.  p.  123.
*  The  Red  Hill.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  185

[in  Holy  Week].  And  Posadnik  Ivan  Bogdanovich,  the  Tysyatski
Boris  Vasilievich,  with  the  Ignmens  and  the  priests  and  the  choir  of
St.  Sophia  met  him  with  the  crosses  at  the  end  of  the  Slavno  quarter,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  glad  of  their  Vladyka.

And  on  that  day  Vladyka  Simeon  performed  a  holy  liturgy  in  St,
Sophia,  at  his  own  altar  granted  to  him  by  God.

They  erected  a  church  to  St.  Ilya  in  Prussian  Street.

The  same  autumn  two  stone  churches  were  completed:  that  of
St.  Peter,  Metropolitan  of  Russia,  and  of  St.  Afanasi,  by  the  efforts
of  Vladyka  Simeon.

A.D.  1417.  A.M.  6925.  Posadnik  Yuri  Ontsiforovich  died,  having
been  dumb  one  year  and  three  months.  On
June  10  there  was  a  thunderstorm  and  in  the  Church  of  St.  Eupati
in  Rogatitsa  [Street]  the  images  were  burnt.

Vladyka  loan  died  on  the  24th  of  the  same  month  the  day  of
the  Birth  of  St.  loan  the  Forerunner,  in  the  monastery  on  the  [river]
Derevyanitsa,  and  he  was  laid  in  the  porch  of  the  Holy  Resurrection.
And  Knyaz  Ivan,  son  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  \^asili,  died  in  Moscow.

The  same  year  six  stone  churches  were  completed:  the  Holy
Trinit}'  at  Kolmovo,^  St.  Nikola,  St.  Mina  in  Danislav  Street,  St.
Andrew  in  Shchitna^  Street,  St.  Andrei  by  St.  Saviour's  at  Khutin,^
and  St.  Nikola  in  Kholop  town.^

The  same  year  Gleb  Semenovich,  a  Boyar  of  Knyaz  Yuri,  with
some  fugitives  from  Novgorod,  together  with  Simeon  Zhadovski
and  Mikhail  Rossokhin,  and  with  men  of  Ustyug  and  of  Vyatka,  the
patrimony  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  went  from  Vyatka  secretly  in  boats
to  the  country  beyond  the  Volok;  they  ravaged  Borok,  a  district
of  the  sons  of  Ivan  Vasilievich,  and  also  took  and  burnt  the  districts
of  Yemtsa  and  Kolmogor}^,  and  captured  the  Novgorod  Boyars
Yuri,  Ivanovich  and  his  brother  Samson.  Ivan  Fedorovich  and
his  brother  Afonosi  with  Gavrilo  Kirilovich  and  Isak  Ondreyevich,
having  come  up  with  them  on  an  island  by  Morzh,  rescued  their
brethren  Samson  and  Yuri,  and  all  the  captives  and  the  cattle,  and
let  them*  go  free.  And  Vasili  Yurievich,  Posadnik' s  son,  Simeon
Ivanovich,  Gavrilo  Kirilovich  and  his  brother  Grigori  with  men  from
the  country  beyond  the  Volok  pursued  the  robbers  and  pillaged
Ustyug.

'  Near  Novgorod.

*  "  Shieldmakers."  ^
2  In  Novgorod. ^

*  sc.  the  fugitives.

186 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

At  that  time  the  men  of  Novgorod  took  peace  with  the  Nenitsy.

The  same  summer  and  winter  there  was  a  fearful  plague  among
the  people  in  Novgorod,  and  in  Ladoga,  in  Russa,  Porkhov,  Pskov,
Tver,  Dmitrov,  and  in  Torzhok,  and  throughout  their  districts  and
villages.  And  how  can  I  relate  the  fearful  and  terrible  misery
that  there  was  during  the  whole  plague  ?  What  grief  the  living  had
for  the  dead,  for  the  deaths  increased  so  in  towns  and  villages  that
the  living  had  barely  time  to  make  the  dead  tidy  for  burial;  so
many  died  every  day,  that  they  had  not  time  to  bury  them;  and
many  houses  were  closed  unoccupied.  First  of  all  it  would  hit
one  as  if  with  a  lance,  choking,  and  then  a  swelhng  would  appear,
or  spitting  of  blood  with  shivering,  and  fire  would  burn  one  in  all
the  joints  of  the  body;  and  then  the  illness  would  overwhelm  one;
and  many  after  lying  in  that  illness  died.  But  to  many  Christians
God  was  merciful :  they  left  this  life  entering  the  angelic  order  after
receiving  holy  unction  from  the  Vladyka.  And  two  Posadniks  died
in  the  same  order:  Ivan  Olexandrovich  and  Boris  Vasilievich.

And  Vladyka  Simeon  with  all  the  seven  congregations,  with  the
Christians  and  with  crosses  went  round  the  whole  of  Great  Novgorod,
praying  God  and  His  Immaculate  Mother  to  withhold  the  wrath  of
God ;  and  the  Christians  on  horseback  and  afoot  drew  logs  from  the
forest  and  built  a  church  to  St.  Anastasia  which  was  consecrated
the  same  day  by  the  Vladyka  Simeon  who  performed  a  holy  liturgy ;
with  the  remainder  of  the  logs,  they  erected  a  church  to  St.  Ilya  in
Prussian  Street.  And  the  people  of  Novi-torg  put  up  a  church  to
St.  Afanasi  likewise  in  a  single  day,  and  performed  a  liturgy.

A.D.  1418.  A.M.  6926.  There  was  a  sign  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Martyr  Anastasia:  blood  seemed  to  come
from  both  sides  of  the  robe  of  the  image  of  the  Holy  Mother  of
God,  on  April  19.

The  same  month  this  happened  in  Novgorod  at  the  instigation  of
the  devil:  a  certain  man  Stepanko  seized  hold  of  the  Boyar  Danilo
Ivanovich,  Bozha's  grandson,  and,  holding  him,  cried  out  to  the
people:  "  Here,  sirs!  help  me  against  this  miscreant."  And  seeing
his  cryi  folk  dragged  him  like  a  miscreant  to  the  people,  beating
him  with  wounds  nearly  to  death,  and  they  led  him  from  the  Veche
and  hurled  him  from  the  bridge.  And  a  certain  man  of  the  people,
Lichko's  son,  wishing  him.  well,  caught  him  up  into  his  boat;  but  the
people,  enraged  against  that  fisherman,  plundered  his  house. And

1  Sic.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  187

the  aforesaid  Boyar,  wishing  to  avenge  his  dishonour,  caught  the
impostor  and  put  liim  to  torture,  and  wishing  to  cure  the  evil,
raised  up  still  greater  trouble;  I  will  not  recall  the  spoken  words:
"  Vengeance  is  mine."  And  the  people  learning  that  Stepanko  had
been  seized,  began  to  summon  a  Veche  in  Yaroslav's  Court,  and  a
multitude  of  people  assembled,  and  they  kept  shouting  and  crying
for  many  days:  "  Let  us  go  against  that  Boyar  and  plunder  his
house."  And  they  came  armed  and  with  a  banner  to  Kuzma-
Demyan  Street,  sacked  his  house  and  many  other  houses,  and
ravaged  the  quay  in  Yanev  Street.  And  the  people  of  Kuzma-
Demyan  Street  became  afraid  at  these  robberies  that  w'orse  would
befall  them,  surrendered  Stepanko,  and  coming  to  the  Vladyka
prayed  him  to  send  him  to  the  meeting  of  the  people.  And  the
prelate  heard  their  prayer  and  sent  him  with  a  priest  and  one  of  his
own  Boyars,  and  they  received  him.  And  again  they  became
enraged  like  drunkards,  against  another  Boyar,  Ivan  levlich,^
of  Chudinets  Street,  and  on  his  account  pillaged  a  great  many
Boyars'  houses,  as  well  as  the  monastery  of  St.  Nikola  in  the  Field,
cr\ang  out:  "  Here  is  the  treasure  house  of  the  Boyars."  And
again  the  same  morning  they  plundered  many  houses  in  the  Lyud-
goshcha  Street,  calling  out:  "  They  are  our  enemies."  And  they
came  to  Prussian  Street,  but  there  they  beat  them  off  successfully.
And  from  that  hour  the  mischief  began  to  increase.  Returning
to  their  own,  the  commercial  side,  they  said:  "  The  Sophia  side  is
going  to  arm  against  us,  and  to  plunder  our  houses."  And  they
began  to  ring  throughout  the  whole  town,  and  armed  men  began  to
pour  out  from  both  sides  as  for  war,  fully  armed,  to  the  great  bridge.
And  there  was  loss  of  life  too.  Some  fell  by  arrows,  others  by  arms,
they  died  as  in  war,  the  whole  town  trembled  at  this  terrible  storm
and  great  rebellion  and  a  dread  fell  on  the  people  on  both  sides.
And  Vladyka  Simeon  shed  tears  from  his  eyes  on  hearing  of  the
internecine  war  between  his  children,  and  he  ordered  those  under
him  to  gather  his  congregation;  and  the  Vladyka,  having  entered
the  Church  of  St.  Sophia,  began  to  pray  with  tears,  and  arraying
himself  in  his  vestments  with  his  clergy  he  ordered  them  to  take  the
Lord's  Cross  and  the  image  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  went  to
the  bridge,  and  there  followed  him  the  priests  and  servants  of  the
church  and  all  who  called  themselves  Christians,  and  a  great  mul-
titude, shedding  tears  and  saying:  "  0  Lord,  make  it  to  cease  by  the

»  Son  of  Job  (Yev.).

188 THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

prayers  of  our  lord.^ "  And  God-fearing  people  fell  in  tears  at  the
feet  of  the  prelate  saying:  "  Go,  Lord,  and  may  the  lord  cause  this
internecine  war  to  cease,  through  thy  blessing."  And  others  said:
"  May  this  evil  be  on  the  heads  of  those  who  began  the  fighting."
And  on  reaching  the  middle  of  the  bridge  the  prelate  raised  the  life-
giving  Cross  and  began  to  bless  both  sides.  And  those  who  looked
at  the  honourable  Cross  wept.  The  opposite  side,  hearing  of  the  pre-
late's arrival,  Posadnik  Fedor  Timofeich  came  with  other  Posadniks
and  Tysyatskis  and  bowed  to  the  Vladyka;  and  the  Vladyka  heard
their  prayer  and  sent  the  Archimandrite  Varlam  and  his  spiritual
father,  and  an  archdeacon  to  Yaroslav's  Court  to  bestow  the
blessing  on  the  acting  Posadnik  Vasili  Esifovich  and  on  the  Tysyatski
Kuzma  Terenteyevich,  to  go  to  their  homes;  and  they  dispersed
through  the  prayers  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  and  with  the  blessing
of  Vladyka  Simeon,  and  there  was  peace  in  the  town.

That  same  year  four  stone  churches  were  erected:  All  Saints  in
Chernitsyn  Street,  St.  Sava  in  Kuzma-Demyan  Street,  St.  Ilya  by
St.  Saviour's  in  the  general  monastery  of  Christ's  Resurrection  at
Khutin,  and  St.  Nikola  on  the  [stream]  Pidba.

The  same  autumn  Vladyka  Simeon  went  on  his  periodic  visitation
to  Pskov  and  sat  there  for  a  month  in  judgment.

A.D.  1419.  A.M.  6927.  On  May  1  the  Slavno  and  Carpenters'
quarters^  as  far  as  the  Fedor  stream  were
burnt  down;  twenty-four  churches  were  burnt,  and  that  of  the
Holy  Fathers  was  entirely  destroyed  by  fire ;  a  large  quantity  of  the
propert}'  of  the  Christians  was  burnt,  and  many  people  were  drowned
in  the  Volkhov  and  many  were  burnt.

The  same  year  Posadnik  Ivan  Bogdanovich  died.

During  evening  service  on  April  9,  Sunday,  there  was  a  violent
storm  of  wind,  and  clouds  and  very  thick  rain;  the  water  from  the
springs  ran  like  a  strong  river;  hghtning  flashed,  and  there  was
terrible  thunder,  and  it  killed  the  watchman  Andrei  in  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  by  the  town  gates;  the  chain  of  the
candelabra  from  the  ceiling  of  the  cupola  was  all  torn ;  and  the  Holy
Gates  were  burnt ;  it  caused  damage  in  [the  churches  of]  St.  loan  the
Forerunner,  of  St.  Nikola  and  of  St.  Vasili,  but  by  God's  mercy  the
churches  were  spared,  but  below  the  churches  in  the  gateway  two
men  were  killed,  others  fell  down  as  dead,  and  others  were  struck

*  Gospodin,  sc.  the  Vladyka.

*  Plotniki.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  189

deaf;  some  lost  their  legs,  and  others  were  struck  dumb,  but  by  the
mercy  of  God  they  were  assuaged  with  water  and  carried  to  their
homes,  where,  after  having  Iain  down  a  little  on  their  beds,  by  the
grace  of  God  they  got  up  again;  and  at  that  same  time  the  ikons
in  the  Church  of  St.  Kostyantin  were  scorched.

The  same  year  the  Murman  people^  to  the  number  of  500  men  com-
ing in  vessels  and  boats  made  war  on  the  Korel-  villages  in  [the  dis-
trict of]  Arzuga  and  on  the  villages^  of  the  country  beyond  the
Volok,  namely:  Nenoksa,  the  monastery  of  St.  Nikola  in  the  KoreP
country,  Konechny  village,  the  Yakov  gulf,  the  Ondreyan  shore,
Kig  and  Kyar  islands,  Mikhail  monastery,  Chiglonim  and  Khechi-
nima ;  they  burned  three  churches  and  slew  Christians  and  monks.
But  the  men  from  beyond  the  Volok  destroyed  two  boats  of  the
Murman  people ;  the  others  escaped  out  to  sea.

The  Archimandrite  Varlam  erected  a  church  in  the  Yurev  mon-
astery to  the  Nativity  of  the  Mother  of  God,  and  Mikhail  Yurie  vich  put
up  a  wooden  church  to  St.  Mikhail  at  Kolmovo,  and  Igumen  Fedosi
put  up  a  stone  church  to  the  Holy  Trinity  in  Klopsko  in  sixty  days.

The  same  year  the  Lithuanian  Metropolitan  Grigori  of  Kiev  died,
who  had  been  appointed  by  order  of  Vitovt's  Bishops,  and  not  by
the  Patriarch,  not  in  accordance  with  the  ordinances  of  the  Holy
Fathers  and  the  Apostles.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Kostyantin  Dmitrievich  came  to  Novgorod
from  Moscow.  And  by  the  grace  of  God  and  with  the  blessing  of
Vladyka  Simeon  the  men  of  Novgorod  received  him  with  all  honour
on  February  25  in  great  congregation.  And  they  granted  him  the
appanages  which  had  been  Lugven's,*  and  allowed  him  to  make  a
tax  collection  over  all  Novgorod  districts.  And  this  is  why  he
was  in  Novgorod,  because  his  brother  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  wished
to  make  him  kiss  the  Cross  in  submission  to  his  son  Vasili ;  and  not
wishing  to  be  under  his  nephew,  Knyaz  Vasili,  he^  cast  on  him  his
displeasure  and  deprived  him  of  all  his  patrimony,  seized  his  Boyars
and  appropriated  their  cattle  and  villages.

A.D.  1420.  A.M.  6928. The  men  of  Novgorod  began  to  trade  with
silver coins, and sold the ariugs^ to the
Nemtsy,  having  traded  with  them  nine  years.
'  Northmen,  or  Norwegians.

*  Korilsky.

'  Pogost,  villages,  settlements,  small  colonies  or  outposts.

*  sc.  Knyaz  Simeon  Olgerdovich  of  Lithuania.
'  sc.  the  Veliki  Knyaz.

'  Swedish  copper  coins.

190  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

There  was  a  great  plague  in  Pskov.

The  same  autumn  an  envoy  from  the  Master  Sehvester  from  the
Nemtsy  arrived  in  Novgorod,  the  Commander  Gostilo  of  Velyad,  with
Timofei,  the  Master's  nephew,  and  the  Voyevoda  of  Rugodiv,^  and
they  agreed  with  Knyaz  Kostyantin  and  with  all  Great  Novgorod  to
meet  at  a  conference  with  the  Master  and  Knyaz;  Kostyantin  and
Novgorod  to  send  their  Boyars  and  they  sent  Knyaz  Fedor  Patrikeye-
vich,  lieutenant  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  Posadnik  Vasili  Esifovich  of
Novgorod,  Posadnik  Afonosi  Fedorovich,  Yakov  Dmitrievich,
Mikhail  Yurievich,  and  Naum  Ivanovich.  And  they  met  the  Master
at  Narova  and  took  perpetual  peace  on  the  old  terms,  as  it  was
under  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Alexander  Yaroslavich.

A.D.  1421.  A.M.  6929.  Knyaz  Kostyantin  departed  from  Great
Novgorod,  and  Vladyka  Simeon,  the  Posad-
niks  and  the  Tysyatskis  and  the  Boyars  of  Novgorod  bestowing  gifts
on  him  sent  him  off  with  honour.

The  same  year  the  water  was  big  in  the  Volkhov;  and  washed
away  the  great  bridge,  also  the  Neredich  and  the  Zhilotug  bridges. ^
At  Kolomentsa^  it  carried  away  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  and
in  Shchilova,  Sokolnitsa,  and  Radokovitsi  [Streets]  and  in  the  Re-
surrection in  the  Lyudin  quarter  service  in  the  churches  was  per-
formed only  on  raised  platforms,  and  in  the  different  quarters  it
washed  away  dwellings  with  all  their  stores;  and  it  was  so  great
that  it  poured  out  through  the  town  gates  to  Rybniki.^

The  same  year  on  May  19,  during  Peter's  Fast,  there  was  a  great
storm  by  night  in  the  skies;  clouds  came  up  from  the  south,  and  in
the  north  thunder  and  fiery  lightning  came  from  the  skies  with
frightful  noise,  and  purple  rain  fell  with  stones  and  hail.  And
Vladyka  Simeon  going  at  dawn  on  Monday  into  St.  Sophia  with  the
hierarchy  and  choir,  ordered  prayers  to  be  sung  to  the  Holy  Mother
of  God  for  the  whole  Christian  race,  to  avert  the  wrath  of  God.

The  same  year  the  two  Posadniks,  Fedor  Timofeyevich  and  Olex-
ander  Fominich,  died  in  monks'  orders.

The  same  year  on  June  15,  the  day  of  the  holy  Prophet  Amos,
Simeon,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  died,  he  was  Vladyka  five  years  and
three  months  short  of  five  days,  or  six  years  altogether.  The  same
year  the  men  of  Novgorod  having  deliberated  in  Veche  in  Yaro-

1  i.e.  Narva.

2  Bridges  over  small  tributaries  of  the  Volkliov  in  Novgorod.
»  Kolmovo,  near  Novgorod.

*  The  Fisheries.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  191

Slav's  Court,  and  having  held  a  Veche  at  St.  Sophia  placed  three
written  lots  on  the  altar  in  St.  Sophia;  Igmnen  Feodosi  of  the  Holy
Trinity  at  Klopsko,  Igiimen  Zakhari  of  the  Annunciation  of  the
Holy  Mother  of  God,  and  Arseni,  the  Vladyka's  steward  from  Lisitsa^
Hill;  and  on  conclusion  of  holy  service,  the  priest  Trifan  brought  out
first  the  lot  of  Arseni,  then  that  of  Zakhari,  and  Feodosi's  lot  re-
mained on  the  altar.  And  Posadnik  Timofei  Vasilievich  and  the
Tysyatski  Kuzma  Terentievich  with  the  men  of  Novgorod  raised
Igumen  Feodosi  honourably  to  the  threshold^  of  the  house  of  St.
Sophia  on  Monday,  September  1,  the  day  of  the  holy  father  Simeon
Stylites.

The  same  j'ear  were  completed  three  stone  churches:  the  Mani-
festation of  our  Lord  in  the  Field,  the  Resurrection  in  the  monastery
of  the  Annunciation,  and  of  loan  the  Merciful  in  the  Lyudin  quarter;
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  kissed  the  Cross  to  be  as  one  brother.

During  these  two  years  there  were  great  famine  and  plague,  and
three  public  graves  were  filled  with  the  dead,  one  behind  the  altar  in
St.  Sophia  and  two  by  the  Nativity  in  the  field. ^

A.D.  1423.  A.M.  6931. There  was  a  sign  in  the  sun. The  same  year

they  completed  two  stone  churches:  of  the

Holy  Mother  of  God  at  Kolmovo,*  and  of  St.  Yakov  on  the  Luzhitsa.

A.D.  1424.  A.M.  6932.  The  men  of  Novgorod  sent  away  Feodosi  to
his  own  monastery,  for  he  had  sat  two  years
in  the  threshold-  in  the  House  of  St.  Sophia,  and  in  the  same  year  they
raised  Emelian  by  lot  to  the  altar  in  St.  Sophia.

The  same  year  they  minted  money  in  Pskov,  and  began  to  trade
with  coin  throughout  all  the  Russian  Land.

There  was  a  plague  in  the  Korel  Land.  The  same  year  there  was  a
plague  with  glands  and  with  spitting  of  blood  in  Novgorod.

Eufemi  was  appointed  Vladyka  by  the  Metropolitan  Foti  in  Mos-
cow. Two  stone  churches  were  completed;  St.  Luke  in  Lyubyanitsa
[Street],  and  SS.  Boris  and  Gleb  on  the  [stream]  Gzen.  The  same
year  Vladyka  Eufemi  built  a  church  to  St.  Saviour  the  Merciful
behind  the  altar  of  St.  Sophia.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Dmitrievich  died.

1  "  Fox."

2cf.  p.  123.

3  No  record  for  1422.

*  Near  Novgorod.

192  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

A.D.  1425.  A.M.  6933.  The  commercial  side  was  burnt  and  the
whole  of  the  Lyudin  quarter.

The  same  year  the  people  of  Ustyug  ravaged  the  country  beyond
the  Volok,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  war  against  them  to
Ustyug  and  took  a  ransom  on  that  place  of  fifty  squirrel  skins  and
six  forties  of  sable.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Iva^  Mikhailovich  of  Tver  died.

Igunien  Feodosi  of  the  Holy  Trinity  died  in  his  own  monastery
on  September  29.

A.D.  14:26.  A.M.  6934.  Vitovt  stood  under  Voronach  three  weeks
and  withdrew  without  taking  it.

A.D.  1427.  A.M.  6935. The  stone  Church  of  St.  Saviour  the  Merciful
was  completed  by  Vladyka  Eufemi;  and  it
was  wonderfully  fitted  up  with  pictures  and  with  books.

A.D.  1428.  A.M.  6936.  Knyaz  Vitovt  came  to  Porkhov  with  an
armed  force  and  the  men  of  Porkhov  agreed
[to  pay]  for  themselves  5,000  of  silver;  and  then  Vladyka  Eufemi
went  to  Porkhov  with  Novgorod  envoys  and  paid  Vitovt  another
5,000  of  silver  and  a  sixth  thousand  for  captives.

A.D.  1429.  A.M.  6937.  Vladyka  Eufemi  died  on  November  1,
SS.  Kuzma-Demyan  Day,  having  been
Vladyka  five  years  and  five  weeks,  and  as  monk  he  had  sat  at  the
threshold^  one  year  and  two  weeks.

On  the  13th  of  the  same  month  the  holy  monk  Eufemi  of  Lisitsa
Hill  was  elected  by  lot  and  raised  to  the  threshold^  in  the  House  of
St.  Sophia.

The  same  year  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Fathers  in  the  Knyaz's
Court  collapsed.

A.D.  1430.  A.M.  6938.  They  put  up  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Fathers
in  stone  in  the  same  place  in  the  Knyaz's
Court.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  built  another  stone  wall
round  Porkhov.

The  same  year  there  was  a  summons  to  Novgorod  on  the  people
for  the  building  up  of  a  wall ;  every  fourth  man  furnished  a  fifth.

The  same  autumn  Knyaz  Vitovt  of  Lithuania  died,  and  in  his
stead  there  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  Knyaz  Svetrigailo.^

Jcf.  p.  123.
»  Svidrigailo.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  193

The  same  autumn  the  water  was  exceeding  low;  the  soil  and  the
forests  burned,  and  very  much  smoke,  some  times  people  could  not
see  each  other,  and  fishes  and  birds  died  from  that  smoke;  the
fish  stank  of  the  smoke,  for  two  years.

A.D.  1431.  A.M.  6939. The  Metropohtan  Foti^  died  in  Moscow.

The  Russian  Knyazes  Yuri  Dmitrevich  and
Vasili  Vasilievich  went  to  the  Horde  this  year.

A.D.  1432.  A.M.  6940.  The  Russian  Knyazes  came  away  from  the
Horde,  without  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz.

A  wooden  church  was  erected  to  the  Holy  Apostles  in  Chudinets
Street  by  the  holy  monk  Vladyka  Eufemi.

Knyaz  Yuri  Simeonovich  arrived  in  Novgorod  from  Lithuania
in  the  autumn.

The  Vladyka's  Court  and  all  the  surrounding  quarter  were  burnt
down  in  the  same  autumn.

A  stone  Church  of  St.  Yuri  was  founded  in  Borkhov  Street.

A.D.  1432.  A.M.  6940.-  The  Russian  Knyazes  Vasili  Vasilievich  and
Yuri Dmitrievich came away from the
Horde ;  Tsar  Mahmed  gave  the  title  of  Veliki  Knyaz  over  the  whole
Russian  Land  to  Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich.

The  same  autumn  Knyaz  Yuri  Simeonovich  with  his  wife  arrived
in  Novgorod  from  the  Lithuanian  country.

A.D.  1433.  A.M.  6941.  A  fire  broke  out  in  the  spring  in  Yanev
Street,  spreading  over  the  suburban  quarter
and  the  Lyudin  quarter,  as  far  as  Lukin  Street.

The  same  year  the  people  of  Borkhov  Street  completed  the  stone
Church  of  St.  Georgi.

The  same  year  the  most  reverend  Vladyka-elect  Eufemi  built
himself  a  house  in  his  court  and  it  had  thirty  doors ;  and  Nemetski
masters  from  oversea  made  it  with  masters  of  Novgorod.

A.D.  1434.  A.M.  6942.  Knyaz  Yuri  Dmitrievich  seized  the  town  of
Moscow  and  took  his  seat  as  Veliki  Knyaz.

And  the  same  year,  in  the  spring,  on  April  1,  in  Holy  Week,
the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich  came  to  Novgorod.

And  on  April  5,  at  the  same  time,  in  Holy  Week,  all  Great  Nov-
gorod went  out  in  arms  into  the  country  the  other  side  of  the  river

^  Photius.

2  Year  repeated.

194  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

towards  the  Zhilotug  [stream]  and  Knyaz  Vasili  was  then  in  the
Gorodishche^ ;  and  nothing  happened  to  the  men  of  Novgorod.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Yuri  Dmitrievich  died.

The  same  spring  Eufemi  of  Novgorod  went  to  Smolensk  on
April  11  to  be  confirmed  by  the  Metropolitan  Gerasim,  and  Knyaz
Vasili  left  for  Moscow  on  April  26.

The  same  spring  the  former  house  in  the  Vladyka's  Court  was
painted.  Vladyka  Eufemi  returned  to  Novgorod  on  May  26,
confirmed  and  blessed  by  the  Metropolitan  Gerasim.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Vasili  Yurievich  came  to  Novgorod  when  the
Vladyka  Eufemi  was  there.  That  autumn  Knyaz  Vasili  Yurievich
left  Novgorod,  committing  much  robbery  along  the  Msta,^  in
Bezhitsy,  and  in  the  country  beyond  the  Volok.  Much  mischief  was
suffered  through  him.

The  same  autumn  a  stone  church  was  erected  in  the  loan  Zlatoust^
district  on  an  old  foundation  by  Posadnik  Gregori  Kirilovich  and
Esif  Ondreyanovich,  grandson  of  Goroshkov.

A.D.  1435.  A.M.  6943.  The  following  Voyevodas  of  Novgorod  went
out  in  the  winter ;  the  Posadnik  of  Novgorod
Ivan  Vasilievich,  Posadnik  Gregori  Kyurilovich,  the  Tysyatski  Fedor
Oliseyevich,  Esif  Vasilievich,  Annai  Simeonovich,  Ostafi  Esifovich,
and  many  other  Boyars  and  men  of  Novgorod,  with  Fedor  Ostafev,
Mikhail  Buinosov  of  Russa,  and  others  of  Porkhov,  and  they  went
by  three  different  ways  and  punished  the  men  of  Rzheva,  and
burnt  all  the  villages  along  the  Rzheva  river,  along  the  borders  of
Pleskov,  and  by  God's  help  returned  all  well  to  Novgorod  with
their  plunder.

The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich  kissed  the  Cross
to  the  men  of  Novgorod,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  kissed  the  Cross
likewise  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  to  relinquish  the
Novgorod  patrimony,  Bezhitsy,  and  at  the  Lamsk  Volok,  and  in
Vologda;  and  the  Boyars  of  Novgorod  to  give  up  the  lands  of  the
Knyaz  wheresoever  such  may  be.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  engaged  to
send  his  Boyars  for  the  delimitation  of  the  lands,  on  Peter  Day,*
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  to  send  their  own  Boyars.

The  same  year  Eufemi,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  erected  a  stone

1  Near  Novgorod.

2  A  river  flowing  into  lake  Ilmen  from  the  E.

3  John  Chrysostom.
*  July  11.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  195

church  to  St.  loan  Zlatoust  at  the  gates  of  his  court.  In  that
autumn  they  completed  that  church;  but  the  masters^  only  just
left  the  church  and  in  that  instant  it  collapsed.

A.D.  1436.  A.M.  6944.  Knyaz  Vasih  Yurievich  was  blinded  by
Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich  in  Moscow.

The  same  year  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  their  Posadnik  Gregori
Kyurilovich  and  Ivan  Maksimov  with  the  men  of  property  Kuzma
Tarasin,  and  Ivan  Maksimov  to  Bezhitsy  and  others  to  the  Lamsk
Volok  and  to  Vologda  to  carry  out  the  delimitation  of  land,  but
the  Veliki  Knyaz  did  not  send  his  own  Boyars,  and  he  did  not  cede
any  of  the  Novgorod  patrimonies  anywhere  to  the  men  of  Novgorod,
nor  did  he  make  any  reparation.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  again
finished  the  Church  of  St.  loan  Zlatoust  and  he  put  up  a  sounding
clock  over  his  palace.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  founded  a  stone  church  to  St.
Nikola  at  Vezhishchi.^

The  same  autumn  by  God's  sufferance  a  frost  struck  the  crops
during  harvest  throughout  the  entire  Novgorod  province;  and  in
the  same  autumn  the  water  was  big,  and  on  a  frosty  night  the  ice
carried  away  seven  stays  of  the  great  bridge,  and  the  little  Zhilotug'^
bridge  was  carried  away.

The  same  winter  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  their  Posadnik
Gregori  Kyurilovich  to  Zhidimont,*  and  Knyaz  Zhidimont  of  Lithu-
ania kissed  the  Cross  to  the  Novgorod  envoys,  and  they  took  peace.

A.D.  1437.  A.M.  6945.  Knyaz  Yuri  Patrakievich  arrived  in  Nov-
gorod from  Moscow  demanding  on  behalf
of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich  a  tax  on  the  common  people,
and  the  men  of  Novgorod  gave  him  the  tax,  and  Knyaz  Yuri
Patrikievich  left  Novgorod.

The  same  spring  the  Church  of  St.  loan  Zlatoust  at  the  gates  of
the  Vladyka' s  Court  was  painted.

The  same  spring  the  Metropolitan  Sidor,  a  Greek,  arrived  in
Moscow  from  Tsargi-ad  from  the  Patriarch  Joseph,  as  Metropolitan.

1  sc.  builders.

-  Near  Novgorod.

3  A  stream  in  Novgorod.

*  Sigismund,  King  of  Poland.

02

196  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

The  same  spring  the  water  washed  away  the  wall  of  the  Deiineis}
and  the  earth  from  the  wall  slipped  down  and  the  stone  wall  fell
together  with  the  belfry  [undermined]  by  the  Volkhov.  The  same
year  the  Church  of  St.  Nikola  collapsed  at  Vezhishchi.

The  same  year,  at  a  Veche,  Vladyka  Eufemi  in  his  vestments
blessed  with  the  Cross  the  Posadniks  and  the  Tysyatskis  and  all
Great  Novgorod  on  Sunday,  and  on  July  7,  on  the  holy  Father
Thomas'  Day,  he  went  to  Moscow  to  the  Metropolitan  Sidor.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.
Peter  at  the  gates  of  his  court,  and  he  demolished  the  old  church.
The  same  year  they  completed  the  great  bridge.

That  autumn  on  October  9  the  Metropolitan  Sidor  the  Greek
arrived  from  Moscow  in  Novgorod;  and  the  Vladyka,  and  the
Posadniks  and  the  Boyars  and  the  merchants  and  all  Great  Nov-
gorod honoured  him;  and  in  the  winter  the  Metropolitan  went  to
Pskov  on  his  way  to  Tsargrad.  And  in  Pskov  he  appointed  Gelasi,
the  Archimandrite  [as  their  Vladykd\,  and  gave  him  Vladyka' s
jurisdiction  and  all  the  taxes.

A.D.  1438.  A.M.  6946. Knyaz  Yuri Simeonovich  arrived  in Nov-
gorod in  the  spring  on  March  3.
The  same  year  the  Church  of  St.  Nikola  at  Vezhishchi  was  again
erected  of  stone  on  the  old  foundations.

A.D.  1439.  A.M.  6947.  Vladyka  Eufemi,  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,
built  a  stone  granary.  The  same  year  he
plastered  the  whole  Church  of  St.  Sophia  with  lime.  The  same
year  Vladyka  Eufemi  erected  a  stone  belfry  on  the  wall  on  the  old
place  where  it  had  fallen  to  its  foundation.

The  same  year  the  body  of  the  Vladyka  loan  was  found,  in  whose
time  the  men  of  Suzdal  had  been  before  Novgorod.^

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  gilded  the  tomb  of  Knyaz
Volodimir,  the  grandson  of  the  great  Volodimir,  and  had  it  in-
scribed, and  also  had  the  tomb  of  his  mother  inscribed,  and  a  canopy
was  raised  over  it ;  he  ordained  a  commemoration  of  them  to  be  held
on'^October  4  every  year.

A.D.  1440.  A.M.  6948, The  Veliki  Kttyaz  Zhidimont^Kestutievichoi
Lithuania  was  murdered  in Lithuania  by

1  Citadel.
*  sc.  at  war.
^  Sigismund.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  197

Olexander  Chertoriski^  and  his  brother  Ivan:  he  had  ruled  nine
years.  This  Knyaz  was  cruel  and  unmerciful,  and  moreover  a
covetous  man;  he  ruined  many  Lithuanian  Knyazes,  drowning  some
and  putting  others  to  the  sword.  And  he  destroyed  not  a  few  of  the
Boyars  and  landowners  mercilessly;  for  that  reason  did  God  send
him  this  cruel  death.  And  so  because  of  his  wickedness  they  did
not  support  his  son  Mikhail,  and  all  the  Lithuanian  and  Russian
towns  chose  Kasimir,  Yagoilo's-  son,  for  their  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  they
set  him  on  the  throne  in  Vilna  quietly  and  without  any  disturbance.

The  same  year  Poltesk^  was  entirely  burnt  down.

And  Knyaz  Yuri  Simeonovich  left  Novgorod  the  Great  for  Lithu-
ania, and  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Kasimir  gave  him  back  all  his  patri-
mony :  Mstislavl  and  Krichev,  and  not  a  few  other  towns  and  dis-
tricts; but  having  grown  proud,  he  occupied  Smolensk  and  Polo-
chesk^  and  Vitebsk,  which  brought  him  no  advantage,  and  the
people  broke  out  in  great  tumult  and  conflict.  The  same  autumn
he  took  fright  seeing  his  own  audacity,  that  he  had  acted  unwisel}',
and  fled  to  Moscow.

The  same  year  the  Vladyka  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.  Anas-
tasia,  and  he  built  a  smaller  stone  house.

A.D.  1441.  A.M.  6949.  In  the  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasih  Vasil-
ievich  of  Moscow  turned  his  wrath  on  Nov-
gorod the  Great ;  he  sent  a  declaration  of  war  and  ravaged  many  Nov-
gorod districts.  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  out  Vladyka
Eufemi  with  Boyars  and  men  of  property  who  fell  in  with  him  in
Dereva  near  the  town  of  Demyan,  and  concluded  peace  with  him
on  the  old  terms,  and  gave  him  8,000  roubles.

And  the  men  of  Pskov  aided  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  in  ravaging
the  Novgorod  lands  and  they  did  no  little  damage.

At  that  same  time  Novgorod  Voyevodas  with  men  from  the  countn.^
beyond  the  Volok  ravaged  many  lands  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  for  those
he  had  ravaged  of  the  districts  of  Novgorod.

The  same  winter  the  Metropolitan  Isidor  returned  to  Russia  from
the  Eighth  Veche  in  Rome,  and  began  calling  himself  Legates  from
the  rib  of  the  ApostoHc  seat  of  Roman  power,  and  Roman  Metro-
politan: he  also  began  the  naming  of  the  Pope  of  Rome  in  his
services,  and  other  new  things  which  we  had  never  heard  since  the

1  Alexander  Czartoryski.

2  Jagiello  Olgerdovich,  King  of  Poland.

3  Polotsk.

198  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

baptism  of  the  Russian  Land;  and  he  ordered  Russian  priests  to
perform  his  services  in  the  Pohsh^  churches,  and  chaplains  to  serve  in
Russian  churches. But  Lithuania  and  Russia  did  not  support  this.

The  same  year  by  order  of  the  most  holy  Vladyka  of  Great  Nov-
gorod, Vladyka  Eufemi,  the  Church  of  St.  Nikola  at  Vezhishchi  was
painted,  the  same  year  the  large  palace  of  the  Vladyka  was  painted,
and  the  front  porch  was  painted.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  erected  the  Church  of  SS.  Boris
and  Gleb  in  the  Okolotok,^  on  the  old  foundations,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  were  his  helpers.

A.D.  1442.  A.M.  6950.  The  Metropolitan  returned  to  Moscow  from
Lithuania,  and  the  Veliki  KnyazV^.'iiW.  Vasilie-
vich  ordered  him  to  serve;  and  hearing  him  in  the  service  cite  the
Pope  of  Rome  and  not  the  Patriarch  of  Tsargrad,  and  many  other
things  not  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Russian  Land,  the  Veliki
Knyaz  said:  "  Under  our  brethren,  the  Veliki Knyazes  of  the  Russian
Land,  this  has  never  been,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  hear  it."  And  he
ordered  the  Metropolitan  to  live  in  a  monastery  and  ordered  warders
to  guard  him ;  but  he  escaped  to  Tver  and  thence  to  Lithuania.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  of  Moscow  cast  his  displeasure  on
Knyaz  Dmitri  Yurievich,  and  pursued  him;  and  he  escaped  to  the
Novgorod  [territories  of]  Bezhitsy,  and  he  did  much  harm  to  the
districts,  and  sent  an  envoy  to  Novgorod:  "  Receive  me  on  your
own  conditions."  And  the  men  of  Novgorod  replied:  "  Thou  mayst
come  if  thou  wilt,  or  not,  Knyaz,  as  thou  likest."

The  same  year  the  pious  Vladyka  of  Novgorod,  Vladyka  Eufemi,
erected  the  church  and  monastery  of  the  Transfiguration  of  the
Holy  Saviour  on  the  old  foundations  in  Russa,  and  the  men  of
Novgorod  and  of  Russa  helped  him,  and  it  was  completed  on
September  13.  On  the  same  day  the  Vladyka  came  from  Nov-
gorod and  ordered  an  all-night  vigil  because  of  the  Lord's  Festival,
and  put  on  his  full  ecclesiastic  vestments,  and  attended  by  all  the
clerics  of  St.  Sophia,  he  commanded  the  Igmnens  and  priests  of
Russa  to  perform  service  with  him;  and  he  himself  consecrated  it  on
the  Festival  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  honourable  Cross,  and  finishing
the  holy  liturgy,  the  holy  (man)  rejoiced  in  his  heart  and  soul  in
beholding  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Saviour  and  the  beginning  of  his
work  brought  to  good  completion,  which  he  had  built  to  his  own

^  Lyadski.

2  lit.  "  District,"  a  part  of  Novgorod.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  199

everlasting  memory  and  for  the  remission  of  sins,  a  refuge  and  a  joy
to  all  Christians  and  a  joy  and  gladness  to  the  faithful,  and  a  cause  of
praise  of  the  Vladyka  by  the  people  entering  the  house  of  the  Holy
Saviour,  beholding  the  church,  saying:  "  Blessed  be  God  who  put
it  into  the  heart  of  our  lord  to  create  the  supremely  first  temple  of
the  Holy  Saviour."  And  he  ornamented  it  well  and  had  the  pictures
well  painted  on  gold  and  other  requisite  places  well  finished,  as  is
proper  for  the  beautifying  of  a  church;  and  he  had  church  vessels
made  of  silver,  and  other  silver  vessels  for  use  in  the  monastery.  At
that  time  Ivan  Vasilievich  was  Posadnik  of  Novgorod  and  held  the
Posad}iik-shi-p  of  Russa,  and  was  consecrated  under  Igunien  Ivan
of  the  Holy  Saviour.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  erected  the  stone  Church  of  St.
Nikola  in  his  court.

The  same  year  they  erected  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Prokopi  in
Belaya.^  The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  built  a  stone  kitchen  and
a  stone  room  in  his  court.

The  same  year  a  fire  broke  out  in  the  Carpenters'  quarter. ^  The
fire  began  in  Shchitna^  Street  on  May  4.  A  half  of  Konyukhov*
Street  was  burnt  and  the  whole  of  Zapolskaya^  [Street],  and  passing
beyond  the  town  the  fire  extended  to  the  Antonov  monastery.

And  again  on  the  11th  of  the  same  month  of  May,  the  day  of  the
holy  Martyr  Moki,  a  fire  broke  out  in  Podol^;  and  it  was  terrible  and
people  suffered  much  harm,  and  twelve  stone  churches  were  burnt;
and  God  knows  how  many  Christian  souls  were  burnt;  and  the
entire  quarter  was  burnt  as  far  as  St.  Georgi;  and  here  the  fire
stopped  at  the  Lyub3^anitsa  [Street].  After  a  short  time  in  the
same  month  Mikitin  Street  in  the  Zapole  quarter  was  burnt,  and
great  harm  was  inflicted  on  people  who  went  into  them^  with  their
belongings.  These  fires  occur  because  of  our  sins,  in  order  that  we
might  repent  of  our  evil  ways.  At  that  time  some  people  in  their
distress  at  those  great  conflagrations  seized  some  men,  saying  to
them  in  the  confusion  of  their  fury:  "  Ye  walk  secretly  and  do  not
show  yourselves  to  men  and  set  fire  to  the  town  and  destroy  people."
And  some  of  them  they  burned,  and  others  they  cast  from  the

1  "  White,"  a  place  on  the  river  Msta,  q.v.

2  Plotniki.

3  "  Shieldmakers."
''  "  Grooms."

=  "  Beyond  the  fields."
'  The  Lower  town.
'  sc.  the  churches.

200  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

bridge. But  God  knows,  who  tests  the  hearts  of  men,  whether  that
is  true  that  was  said.

A. D.  1443.  A.M.  6951. F/flri^_y^aEufemi,  F/fl^_y^a  of  Great  Novgorod,
built  a  sacristy  of  stone  and  a  warder's  room
of  stone  in  his  court.

In  the  same  year  they  erected  a  stone  church  to  St.  Nikola  at
Krecheva  in  Russa.

A.D.  1444.  A.M.  6952.  Knyaz  Ivan  Volodimirovich  came  to  Nov-
gorod on  September  14  at  the  invitation  of
Novgorod,  to  [take  possession  of]  the  dependencies  which  had  been
held  by  Lugven^  and  his  son  Yuri ;  and  Knyaz  Yuri  Lugvenich  went
to  the  Nemtsy  and  the  Nenitsy  gave  him  no  road,  and  he  went  away
to  Moscow.

The  same  autumn  the  Nemtsy  came  to  Yam,^  burned  the  outskirts
and  ravaged  the  coast,  and  sent  to  Novgorod:  "  We  are  not  warring
against  you ;  it  is  Knyaz  Gregori  of  Kiev  from  oversea  to  avenge  his
Voyevoda  Itolk  of  Rugodiv."^ But  the  Nenitsy  lied  in  all  this.

The  same  autumn  people  from  the  Veliki  Knyaz  s  patrimony  of
Tver  ravaged  many  lands  and  villages  of  Novgorod,  Bezhitsy,  the
country  beyond  Borov,  and  all  the  districts  of  Novi-torg.  And  from
Lithuania  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Kazimir  sent  to  Novgorod,  saying  thus:

Receive  my  lieutenants  into  the  Gorodishche;  I  shall  defend  you.
And  on  your  account  I  have  not  taken  peace  with  the  Knyaz  of
Moscow." And  the  men  of  Novgorod  did  not  agree  to  this.

The  same  winter  the  men  of  Novgorod  went  to  the  country  of  the
Nemtsy  beyond  the  Narova,  with  Knyaz  Ivan  Volodimirovich;  and
took  much  plunder  and  burnt  much  round  Rugodiv^  as  far  as  the
Purdozna  river,  along  the  Narova  and  up  to  the  Chud  lake.^

The  same  year  the  Nemtsy  with  the  Master  and  all  his  forces  came
to  Yam^  town  and  bombarded  it  with  guns  for  five  days ;  they  also
plundered  and  burnt  the  Vod  lands  and  those  along  the  Izhera  and
the  Neva.  But  God  and  the  l^oly  Archis^raiegos'MilCiidal  protected  the
town,  so  they  did  not  take  it;  but  a  great  many  Nemtsy  fell  before
the  town,  and  others  returned  to  their  own  country  wounded.

At  that  time  Knyaz  Vasili  Yurievich,  one  of  the  Suzdal  Knyazes,
was  in  the  town  of  Yam. And  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  the

1  Simeon  Olgerdovich  Knyaz  of  Lithuania.

2  sc.  Yamburg.

3  Narva.

■*  Lake  Chudskoe  or  Peipus.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  201

Luga  villagers  and  the  Vod  and  Izhera  Boyars  in  advance,  them-
selves intending  to  march  with  them  and  with  Knyaz  Ivan  Volo-
dimirovich  beyond  the  Narova.  But  for  our  sins  at  that  very  time
the  horses  began  to  die  in  great  numbers  in  the  town  and  in  the
districts,  so  the  men  of  Novgorod  returned  and  did  not  go  beyond
the  Narova.

At  that  time  the  men  of  Pskov  sent  envoys  to  Novgorod  about
peace,  and  saw  that  horses  were  dying  in  Novgorod  in  great  numbers,
and  that  the  men  of  Novgorod  had  not  gone  beyond  the  Narova,
and  left  without  coming  to  terms  of  peace.

The  same  year  the  Korel  people  attacked  the  Murman  people,
slaughtered  them,  and  ravaged  their  lands,  and  returned  with
plunder  in  good  health.

A.D.  1445.  A.M.  6953.  VladykalLniemi.Vladykaoi GredJi^ovgovod,
erected  a  stone  church  at  Khutin  to  St.
Varlam,  with  a  belfry  on  the  top.  The  same  year  Eufemi,  Vladyka
of  Great  Novgorod,  founded  the  monastery  of  St.  Georgi  in  Gorodok;
he  repaired  the  stone  wall,  and  renovated  the  Church  of  St.  Georgi
in  parts  which  had  fallen  away,  and  had  it  painted,  and  roofed  it
with  shingle;  and  it  was  a  refuge  for  Christians.

The  same  year  Knyaz  Yuri  Lugvenevich  came  to  Novgorod  from
Moscow,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  gave  him  maintenance:  grain
from  the  districts,  but  they  gave  him  no  appanages ;  and  the  Knyaz
went  away  to  Lithuania.

The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  sent  two  Tartar  princes^
against  the  Lithuanian  towns  Vyazma  and  Bryansk  and  others,  by
surprise;  and  they  made  great  havoc,  burning,  and  taking  many
captives,  nearly  up  to  Smolensk.  And  hearing  of  this,  Knyaz
Kazimir  of  Lithuania  sent  out  his  Boyars  and  soldiers  against
Mozhaisk  and  other  towns;  and  they  took  five  towns  and  seized
much  territory,  and  there  was  great  ruin  to  Christians.

The  same  winter  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  went  against  the  Tartar
Tsar  Mahmed ;  many  Christians  died  from  cold,  others  were  slain  by
the  Tartars  who  laid  waste  the  country.  But  God  aided  the  Veliki
Knyaz  Vasili,  and  the  Tartars  fled,  others  being  slain.

The  same  winter  Knyaz  Boris  of  Tver  seized  fifty  Novgorod  dis-
tricts, ravaging  Bezhitsy  and  the  country  about  Torzhok,  and
he  took  Torzhok.

The  same  winter  the  men  of  Novgorod  sent  Knyaz  Yuri  with

1  Tsarevitsc^.

202  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Boyars  and  merchants  to  a  conference  with  the  Nemtsy  and  the
Master ;  but  the  Master  wanted  the  town  of  Ostrov,  so  they  all  dis-
persed without  peace.

Bread  was  dear  in  Novgorod,  and  not  only  this  year  but  during
ten  whole  years:  one  poltina^  for  two  korobyas^;  sometimes  a
little  more,  sometimes  less ;  sometimes  there  was  none  to  be  bought
anywhere.  And  amongst  the  Christians  there  was  great  grief  and
distress ;  only  crying  and  sobbing  were  to  be  heard  in  the  streets  and
market  place,  and  many  people  fell  down  dead  from  hunger,  chil-
dren before  their  parents,  fathers  and  mothers  before  their  children;
and  many  dispersed,  some  to  Lithuania,  others  passed  over  to
Latinism,  and  others  to  the  Besermeny^  and  to  the  Jews,  giving
themselves  to  the  traders  for  bread.

At  the  same  time  there  was  no  law  or  justice  in  Novgorod;  calum-
niators arose  and  turned  obligations  and  accounts  and  oaths  to
falsehood**;  and  began  to  rob  in  the  town  and  in  the  villages  and
districts;  we  were  exposed  to  the  rebukes  of  our  neighbours,  who
were  around  us.  There  was  much  confiscation,  frequent  demands
for  money,  throughout  the  districts,  with  weeping  and  anguish  and
with  outcries  and  curses  on  all  sides  against  our  seniors  and  our
town:  because  there  was  no  grace  in  us,  nor  justice.

The  same  year  Vladyka  Eufemi  erected  a  warm  stone  church  to
St.  Eufemi  at  his  Court,  and  he  painted  it  and  decorated  it  with
pictures ;  and  all  that  was  done  in  four  months.

The  same  year  the  people  of  Knyazhna  erected  the  stone  Church  of
the  Holy-Women-who-brought-Myrrh,  on  the  old  foundation.

The  same  year  the  stone  Church  of  St.  Dmitri  was  built  in  Russa.

The  same  year  Vasili  Shenkurskoi  and  Mikhail  Yakol,  Voyevodas
of  Novgorod,  with  three  thousand  men  from  beyond  the  Volok
went  against  the  Yugra  people,  and  after  capturing  many  Yugra
men  with  their  wives  and  children,  disbanded.  And  the  Yugra
people  succeeded  in  deceiving  them,  saying  thus:  "  We  will  pay  you
tribute,  and  we  will  count  our  numbers  and  show  you  our  camps,
settlements  and  islands  and  natural  boundaries."  At  the  same
time  they  collected  and  attacked  Vasili's  fortress,  killing  many
good  men,  Boyars'  sons,  and  eighty  other  brave  men.  It  was
terrible  to  hear  their  destruction,  but  Vasili  escaped  with  his  son

1  Half- Rouble.

2  "  Baskets."

^  sc.  Mussulmans.
*  sc.  repudiated.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  203

Semeon  and  a  small  party,  and  others  fled  into  the  forest  and  dis-
persed. The  other  Voyevoda  Mikhail  Yakol  was  then  on  another
river,  and  coming  to  Vasili's  fortress  and  finding  it  demolished  and
his  fellows  killed  and  others  scattered,  he  set  about  seeking  his  own
people  along  the  river.  And  Vasili  and  his  son  and  the  others
joining  him,  they  all  returned  to  their  own  country.

The  same  year  the  Murman  Svei''-  came  in  force  by  surprise  to  the
Dvina^  beyond  the  Volok,  to  Nenoksa,  plundering  and  burning,
killing  people  and  making  many  captives.  And  the  people  of  the
Dvina  having  heard,  came  up  quickly,  slew  some  and  sent  about
forty  to  Novgorod,  putting  to  death  their  Voyevodas  Ivor  and  Peter
and  a  third  one;  a  few  others  jumping  into  their  boats  escaped.

The  same  year  there  was  a  great  sign  in  the  town  of  Suzdal  in
the  Cathedral  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  on  April  20,  the
eve  of  the  Wednesday  of  the  fourth  week  after  Easter,  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  Vasilievich  and  of  Avram,  Bishop  of
Suzdal :  the  tombs  of  the  Saints  began  suddenly  to  burn  inside  and
to  fall  to  pieces ;  and  on  the  morrow,  the  very  day  of  middle  term,^
the  Cathedral  Church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  collapsed.

The  same  year  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasili  gathered  his  forces  and  went
against  that  same  Mahmed;  he  reached  Suzdal,  and  while  he  was  in
the  Eufemi  monastery  the  Tartars  came  upon  him  by  surprise,  and
the  Veliki  Knyaz  had  a  fierce  fight  with  the  Tartars,  and  for  our  sins
the  Veliki  Knyaz  was  defeated;  and  having  captured  him  the  Tar-
tars took  him  to  the  Horde  and  with  him  Knyaz  Mikhail  Ondreye-
vich  and  a  great  many  Boyars  and  monks  and  nuns  and  young
people,  and  many  others  they  slew.  And.  Knyaz  Ivan  Ondreyevich  and
Knyaz  Vasili  Yaroslavich  escaped  wounded,  with  a  small  following.

And  after  this  defeat  by  the  Tartars  there  was  the  following  calam-
ity: six  days  afterwards,  when  from  all  sides  the  remainder  of  the
people  had  hastened  into  Moscow  with  all  their  possessions,  the  inside
of  the  town  of  Moscow  took  fire:  and  was  entirely  burnt,  and  about
seven  hundred  Christians  perished  and  all  the  property  was  burnt,  and
the  cupola  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  St.  Mikhail  fell  in,  and  another
church  collapsed,  that  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  honourable  Cross.

The  same  year,  on  August  7,  the  Vladyka  of  Great  Novgorod,
Vladyka  Eufemi,  having  blessed  his  children  the  Posadniks  and  the
Tysyaiskis  and all Great Novgorod, went beyond the Volok

1  Norsemen.

2  The  Northern  Dvina  (White  Sea).

^  i.e.  half-way  between  Easter  and  Pentecost.

204  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

to-  bless the  patrimony  of Novgorod  and  his  children  and  his

diocese.

The  same  year,  on  August  22,  Knyaz  Boris  of  Tver  sent  his  Voyevo-
das  against  Torzhok,  and  drove  out  the  remainder  of  the  people  to
rob  them,  others  he  destroyed,  and  from  others  he  exacted  ransom.
He  took  away  to  Tver  forty  cartloads  of  goods  and  belongings  of
people  of  Moscow,  of  Novgorod  and  of  Novi-torg;  other  cartloads
of  goods  were  lost  in  the  river.  And  in  two  years  he  ravaged
Bezhitsy  and  eighty  districts  beyond  Borov.

A.D.  1446.  A.M.  6954.  Tsar  Mahmed  let  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Vasih
return  to  the  Russian  Land,  taking  a  ransom
of  two  hundred  thousand  roubles;  and  what  else,  God  knows,  and
they.

That  same  year  the  people  began  to  find  fault  with  the  silver
coinage,  till  all  the  men  of  Novgorod  looked  one  at  the  other;
there  was  tumult  and  rebeUion  and  animosity  amongst  them.

And  the  Posadnik  and  the  Tysyatski  and  all  Novgorod  appointed
five  minters,  and  they  began  to  re-mould  the  old  coins  and  to  mint
new  coins  of  the  same  value:  of  the  same  weight  of  four  pochki,
and  half  a  denga  was  taken  off  the  new  grivna.  There  w^as  much
distress  and  loss  among  the  Christians  in  the  town  and  in  the  dis-
tricts. And  this  will  not  be  forgotten  even  in  the  last  generations.

The  same  year,  on  January  3,  there  were  heavy  clouds  with  rain,
and  wheat  and  rye  and  corn  were  beaten  down  altogether,^  both  in
the  fields,  and  in  the  forests,  all  round  the  town  for  five  versts  from
the  Volkhovets  [river],  and  as  far  as  the  Msta  river,  for  fifteen
versts.  The  people  bore  into  the  town  whatever  they  could  gather
up;  and  the  townspeople  collected  to  see  this  curious  marvel,  whence
and  how  it  came.

The  same  winter,  on  January  23,  the  Vladyka  returned  to  Nov-
gorod from  the  country  beyond  the  Volok,  and  on  the  30th  of  the
same  month,  the  day  of  the  three  holy  Bishops  Vasili  the  Great,
Grigori  the  Theologian,  and  loan  Zlatoust,^  Vladyka  Eufemi  in
congregation  consecrated  the  warm  Church  of  St.  Eufemi.^

A.D.  1446.  The same year three Knyazes: Dmitri

Yurievich, Ivan Andreyevich of Mozhaisk

and  Boris  Alexandrovich  of  Tver,  with  two  of  the  Tsar's  envoys,

1  sc.  the  autumn-sown  crops.

*  John  Chrysostom.

*  Here  this  text  ends ;  the  following  is  added  from  another  text.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  205

conspired  together;  they  ordered  the  levy  of  a  contribution  and
took  the  money.

The  same  year  those  same  three  Knyazes  caught  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Vasih  Vasihevich  in  the  Trinity  monastery,  behind  the  Sergiev
tomb,  and  bhnded  him;  and  Dmitri  Yurievich became  Veliki  Knyaz.^

[a.d.  1471.  A.M.  6979.  The  Veliki  Kttyaz  loan  Vasihevich  marched
with  a  force  against  Novgorod  the  Great
because  of  its  wrong  doing  and  lapsing  into  Latinism.^

Concerning  these^  this  is  a  copy  of  the  introductory  words  to  the
narrative  of  the  first  taking  [of  Novgorod]  by  the  Veliki  Knyaz
loan  Vasihevich  of  all  Russia,  the  grandfather  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
loan  Vasilievich*  of  all  Russia,  when  there  were  dissensions  in  Great
Novgorod.

King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  God  supreme  and  ruling  and
strong,  Owner  and  Creator  of  all,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  keep  ever-
lasting kingdom,  having  neither  beginning  nor  end.  That  one  only
is  all  powerful  whom  the  Creator  of  Heaven  and  earth  and  all  else
may  create  of  His  own  will ;  power  and  glory  he  is  pleased  to  give  to
him,  the  sceptres  of  empire  He  entrusts  him  with,  and  by  His  merci-
fulness estabhshes  all  virtue,  and  pours  his  grace  on  all  who  fear  him.
It  is  written  in  the  old  books  as  it  was  said:  "  A  country  wishing  to
be  ruled  in  the  face  of  God  sets  up  a  prince  who  is  pious  and  just,
regardful  of  his  kingdom  and  of  the  governing  the  land,  and  loving
justice  and  truth."  Of  those,  it  is  said,  who  in  goodness  build
earthly  [kingdoms]  receive  also  a  heavenly  one.  Truly  has  the  Lord
God  of  His  unspeakable  mercy  with  His  life-bearing  right  hand
raised  a  chief  over  the  God-loved  Russian  Land,  who  maintains  it  in
truth  and  piety,  whose  honourable  head  is  filled  with  wisdom,  who
has  organized  it  hke  to  a  lamp  of  illumination  of  piety,  a  promoter
of  truth,  a  guardian  of  godly  law,  a  strong  champion  of  Orthodoxy,
the  honourable,  pious  and  trusty  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasihevich  of  all
Russia.  The  Lord  God  and  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God  by
their  unspeakable  mercy  have  committed  to  him  the  prosperity  and

1  Here  ends  the  Chronicle  proper.  The  record  for  the  year  1471  (edited
in  the  sixteenth  century,  under  Ivan  the  Terrible)  has  been  added,  because  it
gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  final  suppression  of  the  independence  of  Nov-
gorod by  Ivan  III  '  the  Great'  of  Moscow.

2  From  Number  Two  Chronicle :  Ivan  Vasihevich  the  Veliki  Knyaz  came  to
Novgorod  with  an  armed  force;  he  camped  on  the  river  Shelon,  and  took  a
ransom  of  16,000  Roubles.

3  sc.  the  people  of  Novgorod.

*  Ivan  IV  "the  Terrible,"  {Grozny.)

206  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

the  strengthening  of  all;  extending  their  godly  mercy  through
shedding  the  hght  of  rehgion  over  Russian  Lands.

Likewise  it  is  written :  Length  of  days,  and  long  hfe  and  peace  shall
be  added  to  thee,  and  he  found  favour  and  was  beloved  for  his
righteous  acts,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia,  loan  Vasilievich;
yet  the  deceitful  people  would  not  submit  to  him;  stirred  by  a
savage  pride,  the  men  of  Novgorod  would  not  obey  their  sovereign
Veliki  Knyaz,  until  they  were  reminded  of  the  great  piety  of  old
times  told  to  them.  For  that  reason  did  their  fame  abate,  and  their
face  was  covered  with  shame:  by  reason  of  the  men  of  Novgorod
leaving  the  light  and  giving  themselves  over  in  their  pride  to  the
darkness  of  ignorance,  saying  that  they  would  draw  away  and
attach  themselves  to  the  Latins.

Thus  have  these  inchned  away  from  their  sovereign  the  Veliki
Knyaz,  wishing  to  give  themselves  over  to  the  Latin  king,  bringing
evil  to  all  Orthodoxy.  The  pious  sovereign  and  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all
Russia,  loan  Vasilievich,  has  frequently  sent  his  messengers  to  them,
calling  on  them  to  keep  his  patrimony  from  all  harm,  to  improve
themselves  in  all  things  within  his  ancestral  estates,  and  to  live
according  to  old  custom.  He  suffered  much  in  these  things  from
their  vexatious  ways  and  contumacy  within  his  paternal  domains,
while  he  expected  from  them  a  thorough  amendment  of  their
conduct  towards  himself  and  a  respectful  submission.

And  again  when  the  Novgorod  Posadnik  Vasili  Ananin  came  as
envoy  from  Great  Novgorod,  the  patrimony  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,
laying  before  him  all  the  affairs  of  Novgorod,  he  did  not  say  a  single
word  of  the  ill-behaviour  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  of  their  failure
to  amend  their  ways,  but  in  reply  to  the  Boyars  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
Vasili  he  said:  "  Under  that  head  I  have  no  instructions  from  Great
Novgorod,  and  I  have  no  orders  to  speak."  The  sovereign  Veliki
Knyaz  was  sorely  aggrieved  by  their  churhshness,  who,  while
sending  to  him  men  from  his  patrimonial  domains  to  implore  favours,
bear  themselves  with  insolence  and  are  unmindful  of  their  mis-
behaviour. Therefore  has  the  Veliki  Knyaz  laid  his  anger  upon
them,  upon  the  land  of  his  inheritance,  upon  Great  Novgorod,  and
he  has  commanded  Vasili,  the  Novgorod  envoy,  to  teU  Great
Novgorod:  "  Mend  your  ways  towards  me,  my  patrimony,  and  recog-
nize us ;  encroach  not  on  my  lands  and  my  waters,  and  keep  my  name
of  Veliki  Knyaz  in  strictness  and  in  honour  as  of  old;  and  send  to  me,
the  Veliki  Knyaz,  representatives  to  do  homage  and  to  make  settle-
ment. I  desire  to  keep  you,  my  patrimony,  in  good  favour,  on  the

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  207

old  conditions."  With  that  he  dismissed  him,  informing  his  patri-
mony that  his  power  of  endurance  was  exhausted,  and  that  he  would
not  suffer  their  misbehaviour  and  contumacy  any  longer.

The  Veliki  Knyaz  sent  also  to  Pskov,  his  patrimony,  repeating
the  same  words  and  with  commands  to  acquaint  Pskov  with  the
opposition  to  him  of  his  patrimony  Great  Novgorod,  and  to  say:
"  H  you  send  to  me,  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  with  due  homage,  then  I
will  hold  them  in  my  favour;  but  if  my  patrimony.  Great  Novgorod,
fails  in  so  doing,  then  must  you  be  ready  to  act  against  them  with
me."  And  after  this  the  Vladyka  lona  of  Great  Novgorod  and  of
Pskov  died  amongst  them,  and  the  men  of  Novgorod  chose  the
monk  Feofil^  as  their  father  to  occupy  his  place,  without  reference
to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia.  And  it  was
after  this  selection  that  they  sent  their  Boyar,  Nikita  Savin,  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  Ivan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia  to  ask  on  behalf  of  Great
Novgorod,  the  patrimony  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  for  letters  of  safe  con-
duct ;  and  Nikita  in  the  name  also  of  all  Great  Novgorod  prayed  Filip
the  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia  and  the  spiritual  father  of  the  Veliki
Knyaz,  as  well  as  the  Knyaginya  Marya,  the  mother  of  the  Veliki
Knyaz,  to  intercede  for  them  with  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  in  obtaining
guarantee  of  security  in  submitting  their  petition  for  Feofil  whom
the  men  of  Novgorod  had  nominated,  for  the  Posadniks  and  Tysyat-
skis  and  Boyars  who  would  come  to  Moscow  to  do  homage  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  and  to  obtain  confirmation  of  Feofil  as  Vladyka  of
Novgorod  the  Great  and  of  Pskov,  with  the  white  hood,  that  they
might  all  depart  again  in  freedom.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  acceding  to
the  solicitations  of  his  spiritual  father  the  Metropolitan  and  of  his
mother  the  Knyaginya  Marya,  granted  letters  of  security  and  with-
drew his  displeasure  from  his  patrimony  Great  Novgorod.  Yet  the
men  of  Novgorod,  gone  mentally  astray,  and  forgetful  of  this,
went  not  in  fear  of  God's  words  spoken  to  the  whole  congregation
of  the  children  of  Israel.

Those  ancient  Israelites  hearkened  not  to  the  words  of  God,  and
they  did  not  obey  his  commandments ;  they  were  therefore  deprived
of  the  promised  land  and  were  scattered  over  many  countries.
Thus  also  the  people  of  Novgorod,  enraged  by  the  pride  in  them,
followed  in  the  ways  of  the  old  desertion  and  have  been  false  to
their  sovereign  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  choosing  to  have  a  Latin  ruler  as
their  sovereign,  and  having  before  that  accepted  from  him  in
Great  Novgorod  the  Knyaz  Mikhail  Alexandrovich  of  Kiev,  keeping

^  Theophilus.

208  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

him  a  long  time  in  Novgorod,  doing  offence  in  this  wise  to  their
sovereign  Ivan  Vasilievich  the  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia.  By  their
artful  devices  they  won  over  evilly  inclined  men,  who  were  thus
caught  in  the  nets  of  the  snarer  and  destroyer  of  the  soul  of  man,
the  many-headed  beast  and  cunning  enemy,  the  devil;  like  a  living
hell  has  he  devoured  them  by  his  evil  counsel.

That  tempter  the  devil  entered  in  their  midst  into  the  wily  Marfa^
Boretskaya,  widow  of  Isaak  Boretski,  and  that  accursed  [woman]
entangled  herself  in  words  of  guile  with  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz
Mikhail.  On  his  persuasion  she  intended  to  marry  a  Lithuanian
Boy ar,  to  become  Queen,  meaning  to  bring  him  to  Great  Novgorod
and  to  rule  with  him  under  the  suzerainty  of  the  King  over  the  whole
of  the  Novgorod  region.

This  accursed  Marfa  like  to  them  beguiled  the  people,  diverting
them  from  the  right  way  to  Latinism,  for  the  dark  deceits  of  Latinism
bhnded  her  soul's  eyes  through  the  wiles  of  the  cunning  devil  and
the  wicked  imaginings  of  the  Lithuanian  Knyaz.  And  being  of
one  mind  with  her,  prompted  to  evil  by  the  proud  devil  Satan,  Pimin
the  monk  and  the  almoner  of  the  old  Vladyka,  the  cunning  [man],
engaged  with  her  in  secret  whispering  and  helped  her  in  every
wickedness,  seeking  to  take  the  place  of  his  lord  as  Vladyka  of  Great
Novgorod  during  his  life,  having  suffered  much  punishment  for
his  rogueries ;  his  desire  had  not  been  gratified,  inasmuch  as  the  Lord
God  had  not  favoured  him  in  the  drawing  of  the  lot,  and  he  was  not,
therefore,  accepted  by  the  people  for  the  high  office.  That  wicked
man  is  hke  Peter  the  Stammerer,  the  first  perverter  of  the  faith,  or
like  the  ancient  Farmos,  those  originators  of  the  Latin  heresies ;  and
they  were  followed  in  our  time  by  the  apostate  Metropolitan  Isidor
who  attended  the  eighth  Veche  of  Rome  at  Florence,  tempted  by
the  Pope's  gold  and  coveting  a  cardinalship,  seceding  to  Latinism.
Among  these  is  also  Grigori,  his  apostate  pupil,  who  is  now  in  Kiev
called  Metropolitan ;  but  he  is  not  received  into  our  great  Orthodox
church  of  the  Russian  Land,  but  excluded.

This  cunning  monk  Pimin  sought  his  appointment  by  the  apostate
Grigori,  spreading  it  among  the  people  that  he  should  be  sent  to
Kiev  where  he  would  receive  his  confirmation,  being  unmindful  of
the  words  in  the  Holy  Gospels  spoken  by  the  lips  of  our  Lord:  "  He
that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheep-fold,  but  climbeth  up
some  other  way,  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber."  Now  this
cunning  man  not  only  sought  like  a  wolf  to  climb  over  the  fence
into  the  sheep-fold  of  the  house  of  Israel,  but  to  scatter  and  to

'i.e.  Martha.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  209

destroy  God's  church;  and  he  in  this  wise  ruined  the  whole  of  the
Novgorod  land,  the  accursed  one.  According  to  the  Prophet:
"  He  made  not  God  his  strength,  but  trusted  in  the  abundance  of
his  riches  and  strengthened  himself  in  his  wickedness."  This
Pimin  did  similarly  trust  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches,  giving  of
them  also  to  the  crafty  woman  Marfa,  and  ordering  many  people
to  give  money  to  her  to  buy  over  the  people  to  their  will ;  and  this
accursed  wicked  serpent  fearing  not  God  and  having  no  shame
before  man,  has  spread  destruction  throughout  all  the  Novgorod
land  and  destroyed  many  souls.

The  most  venerable  priest-monk  Feofil,  their  spiritual  father,
nominated  to  the  Vladyka-ship,  exhorted  them  to  refrain  from  their
wicked  ways,  but  they  would  not  hearken  to  him,  and  he  tried  many
times  to  withdraw  to  his  cell  in  his  own  monastery,  but  they  would
not  let  him  go,  while  they  persevered  in  their  wicked  design.

The  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich,  hearing  of  what  was  doing  in
his  patrimony,  Novgorod  the  Great,  of  the  uncurbed  outrages  of  his
people  who  were  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  bethought  him  of  these
occurrences  in  the  goodness  of  his  heart,  yet  he  did  not  hasten  to
show  his  wrath,  but  quieted  his  most  honest  soul  with  a  goodly
patience,  filled,  like  the  Apostle,  with  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  remem-
brance of  the  holy  light  of  the  righteous  Son,  of  Christ's  merciful
long-suffering,  when  the  word  of  God  came  down  from  heaven  and
humbling  himself,  he  descended  to  the  earth,  taking  the  form  of  a
servant  for  the  salvation  of  mankind ;  the  Veliki  Knyaz  allowed  them
sufficient  time,  saying  to  himself:  "  Thou  art  just,  O  Lord,  and  thy
judgments  are  correct;  and  as  the  Lord  is  just,  so  may  I,  loving
justice,  be  just  in  His  sight."  Thinking  thus,  being  favourably
incHned  towards  his  patrimony',  and  not  being  desirous  of  witnessing
the  shedding  of  Christian  blood,  he  said  to  himself:  "  Even  as  the
waves  dash  into  foam  against  the  rocks  and  come  to  naught,  so
also  our  people  the  men  of  Novgorod  have  more  than  once  acted
treasonably  towards  us,  and  the  Lord  God  will  subdue  them."
With  this  view  he  commanded  his  [spiritual]  father  Filip,  the
Metropolitan  of  all  Russia,  to  write  to  them  in  his  name,  admonish-
ing them,  and  instructing  them  not  to  draw  away  from  the  light  of
piety,  to  abandon  their  evil  designs,  and  to  withstand  the  darkness
of  the  Latin  allurements.  The  Metropolitan  of  all  Russia  did
repeatedly  write  to  Novgorod  the  Great,  sending  his  blessing  and
writing  instructions  from  the  sacred  Book:  "  It  has  come  to  my
hearing,  my  sons,  that  some  among  you  are  endeavouring  to  cause

210  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

a  great  rebellion  and  to  produce  dissent  in  God's  holy  church,  to
renounce  the  Orthodox  Christian  faith,  and  to  pass  over  to  the  Latins.
You  must  disadvise  those  wicked  people  among  you  from  their  evil
inclinations,  for,  my  sons,  theirs  is  false  and  godless  work;  for  by
abandoning  the  light  of  piety  they  wiU  unwittingly  bring  down  upon
themselves  the  future  judgment  of  God  and  many  eternal  tor-
ments; let  them  be  guided  by  a  godly  wisdom  and  by  God's  com-
mandments. Stand  in  fear  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  in  dread
of  the  awful  scythe  which  was  seen  by  the  great  prophet  Zachariah
descending  from  heaven  upon  the  unruly;  you  must  punish  those
who  make  tumult  and  sow  dissension  among  you,  and  teach  them  to
walk  in  the  old  ways  of  their  fathers  and  to  dwell  in  the  former  ways
of  peace  and  piety.  Cruel  and  irremediable  will  be  the  effects  of
these  beginnings,  if  you  neglect  the  new  law  of  piety  and  salvation
of  the  testament  of  the  living  God,  and  adhere  to  Latinism.  The
Lord  God  will  call  to  account  all  the  godless  perverters  of  the  faith-
ful, so  that  you  must  restrain  the  evil-doers  according  to  the  words:
'  Fly  from  sin  as  from  a  foe;  fly  from  deceit  as  from  the  face  of
a  serpent,  that  it  may  not  sting  thy  soul  with  the  barb  of  eternal
perdition.'  You  know,  my  sons,  how  many  cities,  countries  and
places  of  mighty  kingdoms  have  been  ruined  and  desolated  in  former
times  for  breaking  the  law  and  for  disobeying  the  Prophets  and  for
not  following  the  teachings  of  the  Apostles  and  the  holy  Fathers;
that  countries  and  cities  which  did  not  submit  to  God  and  to  their
sovereign  were  destroyed.  The  once  pious  and  great  Imperial  city
of  Constantinople  perished  because  of  that  same  Latinism;  it  fell
through  impiety,  and  is  now  possessed  by  the  heathen  Turk.  Fear
the  wrath  of  God,  ye  sons  of  God's  world,  it  is  not  only  one  or  two
among  you  who  are  working  to  depart  from  the  truth  and  to  turn
from  the  right  way,  forgetting  your  past  greatness  and  the  laws
of  your  fore-fathers;  but  the  whole  multitude  of  your  people  are  in
commotion.  Submit  yourselves,  my  sons,  to  him  under  whose
strong  arm  God  has  placed  you  and  the  God-serving  land  of  Russia,
the  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  our  hereditary  ruler,  according  to
the  direction  of  Christ's  Apostle  Paul  the  teacher  of  the  universe,
who  said:  '  Whosoever  submits  to  the  power  of  God,  obeys  His  ordi-
nances, but  whosoever  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance
of  God;  '  and  again:  '  Fear  God  and  obey  the  king.'  The  minister
of  God  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain  as  an  avenger,  but  also  in  de
fence  of  the  godly.  Ponder,  therefore,  my  children,  over  these  things,
and  humble  yourselves,  and  may  the  God  of  peace  be  with  you."

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  211

They  remained,  however,  not  only  implacable,  but  also  stone-
hearted,  and  gave  no  attention  to  the  above  writing,  and  were  as
deaf  as  adders,  closing  their  ears  to  the  voice,  as  it  were,  of  the
charmers.  So  these  men  of  Novgorod  giving  no  heed  to  the  writ-
ing, nor  accepting  the  benediction,  and  continuing  in  their  evil
courses,  could  not  be  compacted  [in  the  right].  The  pious  sovereign
and  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia  loan  Vasilievich  being  still  gracious
to  them,  sent  to  Great  Novgorod,  his  patrimony,  his  servant  loan
Fedorovich  Tovarkov  with  fair  words,  saying:  "  His  patrimony
should  not  abandon  the  Orthodox  faith,  but  cast  the  evil  thought
from  off  their  hearts,  and  should  not  adhere  to  Latinism;  that  the
great  sovereign  holds  the  men  of  Novgorod  in  favour  and  in  his
regards  as  of  old."  But  the  wicked  people  minded  him  not,  and
clung  to  the  intention  of  abandoning  Orthodoxy  and  giving  them-
selves over  to  the  king.  We  will  state  the  accusation  against
them.

The  Veliki  Knyaz  being  informed  of  the  unceasing  evil  doings  of
the  men  of  Novgorod,  dispatched  to  Novgorod  the  Great  a  chal-
lenge in  writing,  exposing  the  malpractices  of  the  people  and  their
treason,  and  announcing  that  he  was  himself  marching  with  a  force
against  them.  The  Veliki  Knyaz  had  first  sent  his  Voyevodas
Vasili  Fedorovich  Obrazets  and  Boris  Matvej'evich  Tyushtev  with
his  men  of  Ustyug,  of  Vyatka  and  of  the  Vologda  district,  to  the
Dvina  and  the  country  beyond  the  Volok,  and  into  all  the  ter-
ritories of  Novgorod  in  those  parts.  In  advance  of  his  own  force
the  Veliki  Knyaz  sent  an  army  under  his  Voyevodas,  Knyaz  Danilo
Dmitrievich  Kholmski  and  his  Boyar  Fedor  Davidovich,  accompanied
by  many  others  of  his  court ;  they  were  ordered  to  scour  the  country
around  Novgorod,  towards  Russa  beyond  the  Ilmen  lake  and  to
burn  all  places  of  habitation.  To  his  patrimony  Pskov  the  Veliki
Knyaz  sent  to  say  that  the  men  of  Pskov  should  release  themselves
from  their  engagement  on  oath  to  Great  Novgorod,  and  take  to
horse  in  his  service  against  Novgorod  which  had  abjured  Orthodoxy
and  was  giving  itself  to  the  Latin  king.  They  issued  forth  at  once
with  all  the  men  of  the  country  of  Pskov,  and  at  the  instance  of  the
Veliki  Knyaz  they  revoked  their  oath  on  the  Cross  to  Novgorod  the
Great.

The  pious  sovereign  and  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  prayed  to
God  and  to  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God,  shedding  many  tears  before
them,  beseeching  their  mercy  for  the  pacification  of  the  world,  and
for  the  well-being  of  God's  holy  churches  and  the  Orthodox  faith.

P2

212  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

His  heart  filled  with  sorrow,  he  said  to  himself:  "  It  is  known  to
Thee,  Almighty  God  and  everlasting  King,  who  knowest  the  secrets
of  all  men's  hearts,  it  is  not  of  my  own  desire  and  will  that  I  dare
to  do  this  which  may  cause  much  shedding  of  Christian  blood  upon
this  earth.  I  stand  by  the  godly  laws  of  the  holy  Apostles  and  holy
Fathers  and  for  the  true  Orthodox  faith  of  the  Russian  Land,  also
for  my  patrimony  and  against  their  renunciation  of  the  true  faith
and  adoption  of  Latinism."  And  praying  thus,  the  pious  worker
invoked  to  his  aid  the  great  defender  and  speedy  helper  in  war,  the
Voyevoda  of  the  celestial  forces,  the  Archistrategos  Mikhail,  and
the  great  unconquerable  sufferers  for  Christ,  Dmitri  of  Selun}
Georgi  the  Brave  and  Feodor  Stratilat,^  also  his  saintly  and  Orthodox
ancestors  St.  Vladimir  and  his  two  sons  Boris  and  Gleb;  and  putting
his  trust  in  the  prayers  of  the  Saints,  of  the  great  sanctifier  loan
Zlatoust,^  the  Bishop  of  Tsargrad,'^  the  miracle- worker  Nikola,
Peter  the  Russian  Metropolitan,  Alexis  the  miracle-worker  and
Russian  Metropolitan,  St.  Leonti  the  miracle-worker  and  Bishop  of
Rostov,  and  the  Saints  and  miracle- workers  Sergei,  Varlam,  and
Kiril,  and  Nikita  the  almoner  of  the  miracle-worker  of  Pereyaslavl.
By  their  prayers  might  he  be  strengthened  and  established  for
many  years  by  the  Lord  God  with  His  help  from  on  high.

And  so  putting  his  trust  in  God,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  mounted  his
horse ;  and  in  the  house  of  the  Most  Pure  Mother  of  God  and  of  the
great  Sanctifier  Peter  the  miracle-worker,  he  left  his  son  the  faith-
ful and  pious  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  loanovich  to  sit  in  his  throne  in
Moscow  in  guard  of  his  patrimony  and  to  govern  the  land  of  Russia ;
he  left  his  younger  brother  Knyaz  Andrei  Vasilievich  with  him,  and
he  commanded  his  son  to  retain  by  him  the  Tsarevich  Murtasa,
the  son  of  Tsar  Mustafa,  with  his  Knyazes  and  Kazaks,^  to  serve
him  on  any  emergency.

The  Veliki  Knyaz  took  along  with  him  his  younger  brother
Knyaz  Yuri  Vasilievich  and  his  youngest  brothers  Andrei  and
Boris  Vasilievich,  also  Knyaz  Mikhail  Andreyevich  with  his  son  Vasili,
with  a  large  number  of  other  Knyazes  in  his  service,  and  Boyars
and  Voyevodas;  he  took  with  him  also  the  son  of  Tsar  Aldayaras
Kasimovich  of  the  Meshcher  country  with  his  Kazaks  and  retinue. The
men  of  Pskov  joined  their  forces  from  the  borders  of  their  country.

1  Salonika.

-  Theodore  Stratelates.

*  John  Chrysostom.

*  Constantinople. ^  Bodyguard.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  213

Thus  did  the  Veliki  Knyaz  advance  with  all  his  host  against  his
patrimonial  domain  Novgorod  the  Great  because  of  the  rebellious
spirit  of  the  people,  their  pride  and  their  conversion  to  Latinism.
With  a  numerous  and  overpowering  force  he  occupied  the  entire
Novgorod  country  from  border  to  border,  visiting  every  part  of  it
with  the  dread  powers  of  his  fire  and  sword.  As  in  ancient  times
Jeremiah  prophesied  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Jerusalem:
"  From  the  rumbling  and  thunder  of  his  chariots  and  from  the  neigh-
ing of  his  horses  the  earth  shall  tremble;  "  and  so  by  the  mercy  and
aid  of  God  shall  the  same  prophecy  be  fulfilled  in  our  time  over  the
wicked  men  of  the  Novgorod  country,  through  the  pious  sovereign
Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia,  for  their  abjuration  of
the  faith  and  for  their  wrong-doing.

The  Novgorod  country  is  filled  with  lakes  and  swamps,  for  which
reason  mounted  forces  were  never  employed  against  Novgorod  by
former  Veliki  Knyazes  and  the  wicked  people  in  their  wonted  con-
tumacy dwelled  in  security  during  the  summer  after,  following  their
own  evil  ways  from  the  autumn  to  the  winter,  and  even  up  to  spring
time,  by  reason  of  the  inundation  of  the  lands.

By  the  beneficence  of  God,  vouchsafed  by  God  from  on  high  to  the
Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia  to  the  detriment  of  the
Novgorod  land,  not  a  drop  of  rain  had  fallen  during  the  summer,  from
the  month  of  May  to  the  month  of  September  the  land  was  dry  and
the  heat  of  the  sun  had  dried  up  all  the  swamps.  The  troops  of  the
Veliki  Knyaz  found  no  impediments  and  could  ride  in  every  direc-
tion over  the  country,  driving  the  cattle  over  dried  ground;  thus
did  the  Lord  God  through  this  desiccation  punish  the  men  of  Nov-
gorod for  their  evil-doing  and  subject  them  to  the  strong  hand  of
the  pious  sovereign  and  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia.
When  the  men  of  Novgorod  heard  that  the  Veliki  Knyaz  was  march-
ing upon  them  with  a  large  army,  those  cunning  men  sent  to  him
professions  of  duty  and  again  asked  for  guarantees  of  security  while
proceeding  with  their  evil  doing.  At  the  same  time  they  sent  forces
from  Novgorod  the  Great  by  the  Ilmen  lake  in  boats  against  the
advancing  columns  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  fought  them ;  but  God
aided  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  and  500  men  of  Novgorod
were  killed  and  others  were  captured  or  drowned,  while  others  fled
back  to  the  town  informing  the  townsmen  that  they  had  been
defeated  by  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz.  Thrown  into
great  agitation,  the  men  of  Novgorod,  after  deliberation,  dis-
patched another  messenger  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  Posadnik  Luka

214  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Klementievich,  doing  homage  and  again  asking  for  guarantee  of
security  and  ignoring  the  defeated  force  which  had  passed  down  in
boats,  declared  that  as  yet  no  men  from  the  town  had  fought  with
those  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz.

Without  waiting  for  the  return  of  their  venturesome  envoy  the
crafty  people  conceived  a  great  wicked  design ;  the  rebel  Posadniks
and  Tysyaiskis,  the  Boyars,  well-to-do  men,  the  merchants  and  the
whole  of  Great  Novgorod  collected  together  forming  a  fighting  body
of  fully  30,000  men,  being  unaware  that  the  sword  of  God  was  sharp-
ened against  them,  and  mounting  their  horses,  rode  quickly  out
of  the  town  to  fall  upon  the  advance  force  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
which  was  led  by  Knyaz  Danilo  Dmitrievich  and  by  Fedor  David-
ovich.  Here  befell  what  was  said  by  David  the  Prophet:  "By  the
morning  shall  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  be  slain ;  I  shall  destroy  all
the  lawless  of  the  city."  When  the  watchers  and  the  scouts  in-
formed the  Voyevodas  that  a  large  force  of  mounted  men  was  ad-
vancing from  Novgorod,  and  that  an  auxiliary  force  was  coming
in  boats,  into  the  Shelon  river,  then  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki
Knyaz  began  to  acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  Knyaz' s  cause  and
the  perfidy  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  and,  praying  to  the  Lord  God
and  to  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God,  and  reposing  their  trust  in  God,
they  said  to  their  compan}^:  "  It  is  our  duty,  brothers,  to  serve  our
sovereign  the  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia,  and  were
they  300,000  strong  we  should  all  the  same  lay  down  our  lives  in
fighting  for  the  cause  of  our  sovereign  Veliki  Knyaz;  and  God  and
the  holy  Mother  of  God  know  that  the  cause  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
is  a  just  cause."

Early  on  the  morning  of  July  14,  the  day  of  the  Apostle  St.  Kuld,
the  entire  force  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  was  ranged  on  the  Shelon
river,  and  the  opposing  armies  faced  each  other  across  the  river.

When  they  saw  the  forces  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  the  troops  of
the  Veliki  Knyaz  precipitated  themselves  into  the  river  on  their
horses,  not  one  of  their  horses  stumbling  in  descending  the  steep  bank,
nor  floundering  in  the  water,  and  closing  up  they  rushed  upon  the
whole  body  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  and  they  joined  in  battle.  And
here  was  fulfilled  what  was  said  by  the  Prophet:  "  Like  drunken
men  did  they  stagger  and  fall  into  confusion,  and  all  their  under-
standing was  swallowed  up;  "  and  again:  "  As  in  drowsiness  they
mounted  their  horses,  terrible  art  Thou,  O  Lord;  who  can  stand
against  Thee  ?  "

Thus  was  God's  favour  bestowed  on  the  troops  of  the  Veliki

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  215

Knyaz,  maintaining  his  just  cause;  even  as  God  helped  Gideon
against  the  Midianites,  and  Abraham  against  the  king  Hodologo-
nwr  of  Sodom,  so  did  he  aid  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
against  these  unrighteous  backshders,  the  men  of  Novgorod.
Although  they  rebelled  and  arrayed  themselves  against  the  troops
of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  yet  they  could  not  raise  strong  hands  against
them,  but  themselves  fell  into  confusion  from  the  stretching  of  their
arrowed  bows,  and  from  the  weapons  of  their  hands.  Thus  likewise
did  God  in  his  goodness  turn  their  faces  in  an  hour's  time,  as  they
threw  down  their  arms  and  fled  back  whence  they  had  come;  they
ran  in  disgrace,  casting  away  their  armour  to  relieve  their  horses  of
weight,  and  a  great  number  of  them  fell  dead,  for  their  lawlessness
and  for  their  rebellion  against  their  sovereign  the  Veliki  Knyaz.
It  did  not  appear  to  them  that  they  were  stricken  by  men's  hands,
but  by  the  invisible  power  of  the  Living  God  and  by  the  aid  of  the
great  Archistrategos  Mikhail,  the  leader  of  the  heavenly  forces.  All
were  in  great  terror  and  many  fell  dead  with  their  faces  to  the  earth,
while  others  throwing  themselves  off  their  horses  ran  into  the
forests  where  they  strayed  like  cattle  in  their  separate  ways, — being
there  no  married  men  amongst  them, — but  hearing  on  all  sides  the
shout  of  "  Moskva  "^  from  the  troops  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz.

So  did  the  Lord  fill  their  wicked  souls  with  dread  that  they  strayed
in  the  forests  not  knowing  their  own  country.  The  troops  of  the
righteous  sovereign  and  Veliki  Knyaz  triumphing  over  them  by
God's  mercy,  chased  the  wicked  men  of  Novgorod  tv^&niy  poprishche'^
killing  many  and  taking  others  alive,  while  others  were  drowned  in
their  boats  in  the  Shelon  river.

The  troops  on  the  field  of  battle  proclaimed  their  victory  by
trumpet  sound  and  kissed  the  sacred  images,  glorifying  God  for
their  victory  over  their  presumptuous  enemies.

And  searching  in  the  transport  they  found  a  writing  which  was
the  draft  of  an  agreement  between  Novgorod  and  the  king.^  This
was  a  surprise,  and  it  caused  astonishment,  and  the  papers  were
forthwith  sent  to  the  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  by  the  hand  of
the  Boyar  Ivan  Vasilievich  Zamyatin;  he  was  to  report  that  a  large
army  of  Novgorod  men  had  advanced  against  them  with  banners
with  the  best  men  among  them,  and  had  fought  desperately,  but
that  God  had  aided  the  Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  that  the
great  Novgorod  army  was  completely  defeated,  that  many  Nov-

1  Moscow.

■  About  20  versts. "  Of  Poland.

216  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

gorod  men  had  fallen,  and  many  had  been  captured,  to  the  number
of  1,700;  that  here  were  the  copies  of  a  treaty  with  the  King  of  Po-
land, and  with  these  they  sent  a  prisoner,  the  man  who  had  written
out  the  draft,  to  serve  the  Veliki  Knyaz  in  his  accusation  of  the
crafty  men  of  Novgorod.

The  pious  Veliki  Knyaz  was  gladdened  by  the  unspeakable  mercy
of  God  in  the  aid  given  to  him  from  on  high  against  his  cunning
enemies.  Praising  God  and  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God  for
having  frustrated  their  wicked  design  of  corrupting  the  sacred
churches  of  God,  of  causing  agitations  and  of  producing  hostilities
between  great  sovereigns  to  the  utter  discomfiture  of  all  Orthodoxy.
He  found  among  the  documents  the  draft  of  a  treaty  with  the
king,  by  the  terms  of  which  the  men  of  Novgorod  agreed  to  sur-
render all  the  towns  and  districts  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  with  his  lands
and  waters  and  with  all  the  taxes  of  Novgorod  the  Great,  setting
forth  the  names  of  the  envoys  to  be  sent  to  the  king — Panfili  Seli-
fontov  and  Kurila  Ivanov,  son  of  Makar — and  naming  him  "our
honourable  king  and  sovereign."  It  is  written,  that  their  sickness
shall  turn  upon  their  heads  and  their  untruth  shall  descend  upon
them. So  may  it  be  with  them  for  their  craftiness  and  evil  counsels.

The  pious  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia  loan  Vasilievich,  having
prayed  to  God  and  to  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God,  went  forward
in  his  great  work  to  Novgorod  the  Great,  with  his  younger  brothers
Knyaz  Yuri  Vasilievich  and  Knyaz  Andrei  Vasilievich  and  Knyaz
Boris  Vasilievich,  with  the  [Tartar]  Tsarevich,  with  all  his  Knyazes
and  Voyevodas  and  with  all  the  people  of  his  lands,  hastening  to  his
Voyevodas  and  to  his  advance  army.

When  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  brought  before  the  Veliki
Knyaz,  he,  the  pious  one,  with  a  godly  wisdom  accused  the  crafty
men  of  their  cunning  and  dishonourable  proceedings,  of  departing
from  the  light  of  true  worship  and  giving  themselves  up  to  Latinism,
of  surrendering  themselves  to  the  Latin  king  while  being  the
patrimony  of  him  the  Veliki  Knyaz;  and  of  surrendering  to  the
Latin  king  according  to  the  draft  of  a  treaty  with  him  all  the  towns,
districts,  lands  and  waters  which  belonged  to  him  the  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Moscow,  together  with  the  taxes.  Having  found  them  guilty  of
all  this,  and  being  thus  stirred  against  the  men  of  Novgorod,  he
ordered  them  to  execution  by  the  sword,  the  chief  Posadniks,
among  whom  was  Dmitri  the  eldest  son  of  the  charming  Marfa,
the  town  Posadnik;  and  she  was  also  to  lose  her  life  by  decapitation ;
together  with  these  Vasili  Seleznev  Guba,  Kiprian  Arzubiev  and

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  217

leremia  were  also  beheaded  for  their  conspiracy  and  crime  in  seeking
to  take  to  Latinism.  Many  other  Posadniks,  Tysyatskis,  Boyars
and  men  of  substance  of  Novgorod  were  sent  away  to  various  towns
or  thrown  into  prisons,  while  others  were  retained  in  the  fortress
under  charge  to  bide  their  time.

When  God's  aid  came  down  from  on  high,  with  the  leader  of  the
heavenly  host,  the  great  Archistrategos  Mikhail,  in  that  hour  Great
Novgorod  trembled  before  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  Posadniks,
the  Tysyatskis,  the  men  of  substance,  the  Boyars,  the  merchants,  and
all  the  land  of  Novgorod  turned  their  hearts  towards  good.

So  did  those  men  of  Novgorod  come  unanimously  to  one  decision ;
taking  with  them  the  priest-hermit  Feofil,  nominated  Vladyka  of
Novgorod  the  Great  and  of  Pskov,  the  Archimandrites,  and  Igumens,
the  worthy  fathers  and  hermits,  the  priests  from  all  the  seven  cathe-
dral churches,  and  a  great  number  of  the  best  men  of  the  town,  they
went  to  the  pious  sovereign  and  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia  loan
Vasilievich,  and  all  of  them  prostrating  themselves  before  him,  they
repented  them  with  tears  and  in  great  sorrow  of  their  crimes,  pray-
ing: "  Merciful  lord  and  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia  loan  Vasilievich,
for  the  Lord's  sake  pardon  us  guilty  men  of  Novgorod  the  Great
your  patrimony;  grant  us.  Lord,  your  favour,  withdraw  your  anger,
hold  back  your  sword  and  extinguish  your  fires,  silence  your  thun-
ders, spare  the  land  from  ruin,  be  merciful  and  let  your  irresponsible
people  see  the  light."

And  they  all  came  on  many  days  to  his  brothers,  Knyaz  Yuri
Vasilievich, iiTw^'a^;  Andrei  Vasilievich,  and  to  Knyaz  Boris  Vasilievich,
humbling  themselves  before  them  and  praying  them  to  plead  for
them  to  their  elder  brother,  the  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich ;  and
on  many  days  they  likewise  visited  the  Boyars,  the  Knyazes  and
Voyevodas,  beseeching  them  because  of  the  sorrows  of  all  Great
Novgorod  to  plead  for  them,  before  the  Veliki  Ktiyaz.  The  gracious
brothers  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  Knyaz  Yuri  Vasilievich,  Knyaz  Andrei
Vasilievich,  and  Knyaz  Boris  Vasilievich,  favoured  them  as  of  their
patrimony,  and  compassionating  them,  and  together  with  all  the
Knyazes  and  Boyars,  did  plead  for  them  before  their  brother  the
Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia,  praying  him  to  have  regard  for  them  of  his
patrimony  and  to  lay  aside  the  wrath  in  his  heart.  The  gracious
and  intelligent  sovereign  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia,  loan  Vasilievich,
seeing  before  him  such  a  multitude  of  penitent  people,  and  among
them  his  own  priests,  the  hermit  priest  Feofil,  the  Vladyka-elect
of  Novgorod  the  Great  and  of  Pskov,  who  had  grieved  sore  many

218  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

days,  as  also  his  brothers  and  the  Boyars  and  Knyazes  in  supphca-
tion  before  him,  and  the  righteous  Veliki  Knyaz  being  also  mindful
of  the  writing  he  had  received  from  his  spiritual  father  Filip,
Metropohtan  of  all  Russia  in  which  as  pastor  and  teacher  of  Christ's
flock  the  Metropolitan  entreated  the  Veliki  Knyaz,  with  his  blessing,
to  be  merciful  to  the  people  of  his  patrimony,  those  many  Orthodox
Christians  for  whose  souls  he  grieved,  and  for  the  sake  of  Christian
peace  to  accept  their  petitions,  and  remembering  also  the  words
which  came  from  the  mouth  of  our  Lord:  "  Be  merciful  even  as  our
Father  in  heaven,  forgive  man's  trespasses  as  your  Father  will
forgive  yours,"  and  again:  "  Blessed  is  the  merciful,"  so  because  of
these  words  spoken  by  God,  and  of  all  these  intercessions,  the
Veliki  Knyaz  granted  grace  to  his  patrimony,  to  Feofil  the  Vladyka-
elect  of  Novgorod  the  Great  and  of  Pskov,  to  the  Posadniks,
Tysyatskis,  merchants  and  to  the  whole  of  Novgorod  the  Great :  he
withdrew  from  them  the  anger  of  his  heart,  withheld  his  sword  and
his  menace  over  the  land,  and  commanded  that  all  the  captives
should  be  freed  without  ransom.  He  put  a  termination  to  the  war
and  to  plunder;  and  as  to  taxes  and  tribute,  he  settled  them  all  in
writing,  on  oath,  after  which  the  Veliki  Knyaz  withdrew  from  his
patrimonial  domains  of  Novgorod  peacefuUy  with  his  brothers,  his
Boyars,  with  the  Knyazes  and  Voyevodas  and  with  all  his  armed
forces.

From  his  Voyevodas  operating  on  the  Dvina  the  Veliki  Knyaz
received  communications  to  the  effect  that  they  had  defeated
Knyaz  Vasili  Shuiski,  the  servant  of  Great  Novgorod,  who  with
mfen  from  the  country  beyond  the  Volok,  from  the  Dvina  country
and  from  the  Korel  region  had  advanced  in  large  numbers  and  had
fought  with  them  great  battles  from  morning  to  night  on  land  and
on  water,  but  that  God  had  aided  the  forces  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz
under  Voyevoda  Vasili  Fedorovich  and  his  comrades,  that  a  large
number  of  the  men  of  Novgorod  were  slain  and  others  captured;
so  were  the  men  of  Novgorod  overcome  with  fatigue  and  staggered
in  battle  that  they  could  not  move  their  hands  or  turn  their  heads ;
that  their  Knyaz  was  wounded  by  an  arrow  and  was  taken  away  in  a
boat  by  his  men,  being  barely  ahve,  and  that  the  towns  on  the  Dvina
had  been  burned  and  demolished.  Thus  did  God's  grace  and  mercy
descend  from  on  high  in  aid  of  the  right  of  our  sovereign  the  righteous
and  pious  Veliki  Knyaz  loan  Vasilievich  of  all  Russia.  On  receipt
of  this  intelligence  the  pious  Veliki  Knyaz  gave  praise  to  God  and
to  the  most  pure  Mother  of  God  for  those  great  mercies,  and  re-

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD  219

turned  to  his  throne  in  the  God-protected  city  of  Moscow  on  the
1st  day  of  September  of  the  new  year  6980  (1472).

Having  received  their  Hberty  from  their  sovereign  loan  Vasihevich
the  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia,  the  men  of  Novgorod  at  once  dis-
persed from  out  of  the  town  to  their  several  homes.  A  large  number
of  people  proceeded  to  Russa  in  big  vessels,  and  to  the  Volkhov
river  with  their  wives  and  children  and  possessions;  their  cattle  and
with  their  movable  houses,  going  to  the  places  of  their  residence  by
the  Ilmen  lake,  or  by  way  of  the  Russa  lake,  the  breadth  from  shore
to  shore  on  all  sides  being  sixty  poprishche.^  When  their  numerous
big  vessels  reached  the  middle  of  the  lake,  a  storm  with  a  hurricane
of  wind  broke  suddenly  upon  them,  and  tore  their  sails;  there  was
terrible  thunder  and  heav}^  rain  with  hail,  and  waves  of  mountain
height,  and  dreadful,  broke  up  their  barges  and  all  their  big  vessels
in  the  middle  of  that  frightful  lake.  There  was  in  that  hour  an  over-
whelming terror  and  a  raging  storm,  with  shrieking  and  crying,
many  people  clinging  to  each  other,  bitterly  bewailing  their  peril,
and  in  their  agony  tearing  their  clothes;  mothers  embracing  their
infants,  fathers  their  sons,  while  shedding  many  tears  and  praying :
"  Lord  save  us,  in  the  hour  of  our  destruction  and  of  our  separation
from  the  evils  of  this  world."  Sadness  and  woe  to  those  who  take
to  evil !  This  was  not  within  sight  of  their  friends,  and  they  got
no  help  from  them;  unless  it  came  from  on  high,  because  of  the
straits  of  the  great  city  and  the  angry  spirit  pervading  it ;  the  while
that  the  big  vessels  were  being  shattered  and  wrecked,  and  all  the
men  and  women  with  their  children  were  perishing  in  the  deep  waters
separating  from  each  other  and  tumbling  about  at  the  will  of  the
waves  which  left  nothing  living  in  the  waters,  but  all  drowned  and
put  to  death.  It  was  heard  afterwards  that  the  number  of  drowned
in  the  lake  was  7,000.  Thus  did  God  punish  his  people  of  the
Novgorod  country  for  their  wicked  imaginings,  those  evil-minded
men,  even  for  relinquishing  their  faith  and  inclining  to  Latinism.
When  it  came  to  the  ears  of  Great  Novgorod  that  on  the  Dvina  the
Voyevodas  of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  had  beaten  Knyaz  Vasili  Shuiski
and  the  Novgorod  men,  while  a  large  multitude  had  been  drowned  in
the  lake,  then  tears  were  added  to  tears,  and  wailings  to  wailings,
realizing  that  the  whole  of  the  Novgorod  country  was  by  the  wrath
of  the  Veliki  Knyaz  of  all  Russia,  loan  Vasilievich,  burned  and  laid
waste  by  war,  with  its  best  men  driven  out,  which  had  never  hap-
pened to  them  before.  But  all  this  evil  and  ruin  they  had  brought
1  About  40  miles.

220  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

upon  themselves  by  their  cunning  and  faithlessness  and  for  their
going  over  to  Latinism,  having  allowed  themselves  to  be  misled  by
cunning  people  and  rebels;  and  that  civic  disaster  and  human  blood
shall  they  be  made  to  account  for  by  the  Almighty  God,  according
to  the  writing:  "  Lord!  destroy  the  provokers  of  strife;  and  let  the
consequences  fall  on  the  heads  of  the  traitors  and  on  their  souls  in
this  world  and  in  the  next,  amen."

APPENDIX.

Grivna  was  the  old  Russian  equivalent  of  "  pound  ";  the  word
originally  seems  to  have  meant  a  circular  ingot  of  silver.

Kuny  (nom.  pi.  from  Kuna  =  a  marten)  came  to  mean  money  in
general,  which  took  the  form  in  earliest  times  of  the  heads  of  martens
or  squirrels;  grivna  kun  (gen.  pi.)  meant  a  monetary  pound,  a  pound
of  martens.

The  grivna  contained  twenty  nogaty  (nom.  pi.  from  nogata),  or
twenty-five  Kuny,  or  fifty  rezany  (nom.  pi.  from  rezana) — all
names  of  monetary  units  in  the  shape  of  paws,  heads,  or  skins  of
various  animals.

There  existed  also  metallic  Kuny,  and  2|  of  these  equalled  one
fur  nogata  in  the  twelfth  century.  The  grivna  in  the  tenth  century
was  actually  about  \ ,  in  the  eleventh  and  earlier  twelfth  centuries
about  i,  and  in  the  later  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  only  a  } ,  of
alb. "  '

The  Rouble  was  in  the  fifteenth  century  a  bar  of  silver  weighing
about  \\h.  and  was  worth  approximately  ten  roubles  of  the  present
day,  i.e.,  about  £1  sterhng.  One  rouble  coniQ.\ne6.  100  dengi,  a  small
silver  coin  worth  about  ten  kopeks  of  the  present  day,  or  2|d.
One  denga  (a  Tartar  word,  meaning  "  money  ")  contained  four
pochki  {pochka,  lit.  kidney,  the  smallest  unit  in  old  Russian  weights).

Kad  is  the  same  as  the  osminka,  which  latter  contained  four
chetveriki,  equal  to  about  11|  pecks.

A  Verst  or  poprisftche  is  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile,  or  1,067  metres.

NOTE  ON  THE  BIBLIOGRAPHY

The  best  general  critical  accounts  of  the  Republic  of  Novgorod,
its  organization  and  its  life,  are  perhaps  by  (i)  V.  O.  Klyuchevsky
History  of  Russia,  Vol.  I,  Chs.  xix-xx  (English  trans.,  C.  J.  Hogarth,
1911,  pp.  319-368  of  Vol.  I);  (2)  K.  Bestujev-Ryumin,  History  of
Russia,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  vi  (German  trans.,  T.  Schiemann,  1877,  Vol.  I,
pp.  230-274).

The  reader  may  also  refer  to  N.  Karamzin,  History  of  Russia,  and
S.  Solovev,  History  of  Russia.  Karamzin,  after  his  manner,  does
not  devote  any  particular  section  to  Novgorod,  but  refers  to  the
history  of  the  Republic  in  nearly  every  chapter  of  Vols.  II,  III,
IV.  V  (e.g..  Vol.  II,  Chs.  2,  7,  9,  10,  12-16;  Vol.  Ill,  Chs.  i,  3-8;
Vol.  IV,  Chs.  i-ii;  Vol.  V,  Chs.  1-4  [only  4  chs.  in  vol.]  See  also
references  in  notes  to  the  Introduction  of  this  vol.,  e.g.  pp.  xxvii,  xxviii.)

The  following  works,  additional  to  those  cited  in  the  text,  and  in
the  preceding  paragraphs,  in  many  cases  studies  on  particular  aspects
of  Novgorod  life  and  history,  mostly  un-translated,  are  among  the
chief  authorities :

Andreevski,  On  the  Trade  of  Novgorod  with  the  German  Towns
frovi  i2jo;

Antiquitds  Russes,  esp.  Vol.  II;

Barsov,  Materials  for  the  Historical  Geography  of  the  Slavs;

Belaev,  Narratives  from  Russiaji  History,  1863 ;

Documents  of  Russian  Livonia,  1868;

Eugenius  the  Metropolitan,  Discourses  on  Old  Novgorod;

Kazan  Academy  Journal,  1863,  Remarks  on  the  Organization  of  the
Old  Novgorod  Hierarchy;

Kostomarov,  North  Russian  Communities,  1S63,  and  Origins  of
Russia;

Krazov,  On  the  Position  of  Old  Novgorod,  1851;

Kunizin,  History  of  the  Old  Law  of  Russia;

Malkovski,  Critical  Researches  on  the  Origin  of  Great  Novgorod;

Muravev,  Historical  Researches  on  Old  Novgorod,  1828;

Nikitski,  Pictures  of  the  Life  of  Great  Novgorod;

Passek,  Independent  Novgorod;

Slavenski,  Survey  of  the  Trade  Relations  of  Novgorod;

Solovev,  Relations  of  Novgorod  with  the  Grand  Princes  of  Russia;

Zamyslovski,  Russian  Historical  Atlas.

224  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

All  these  are  only  to  be  had  in  Russian. To  them  add :
Behrmann,  De  Skra  von  Nougarten;

Ewers,  Studien  zur  grundlichen  Kenntniss  der  Vorzeit  Russlands;
Lindner  (Theodor),  Die  deutsche  Hanse,  Leipzig,  igti ;
Miiller,  Kurze  Nachrichten  uber  die  Anfiinge  Nowgorods;
Riesenkampf ,  Der  deutsche  Hof  zu  Nowgorod;
Urkunden  iiher  die  Beziehungen  des  N.-W.  Russland  .  .  .  wid  den
Hanse-Stddten,  1857.

225

INDEX

Afanasi  (Danilovich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod),  119,  120,  121,  122.

Alexander,  Aleksander  (Dmitrie-
vich,  Knyaz  of  Moscow),  1 1 1 .

—  (Mikhailovich,  Knyaz  of
Vyazma),  176.

—  —  Veliki  Knyaz  of  Tver),
122-125,  127-129,  131-133.

—  (Vasilievich,  Knyaz  of  Suz-
dal), 125.

—  (Vsevolodovich,  Knyaz  of
Dubrovits),  66.

— - — ifrtya^  of  Pskov),  137.

—  (Yaroslavich,  called  "  Nev-
ski,"  Veliki  Knyaz),  71,  72,
75,  81,  84-87,  92,  94-98,  125,
140.

Alexei,  Aleksei  (Metropolitan  of
Russia),  146-148,  154,  156.

Alexei,  Aleksei  [Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod). 147-151.  154-157.  159-
163.

Alexei,  Aleksei  (Alexis  Manuilo-
vich,  Emperor),  32.

—  Ill  (Emperor),  43-45.

—  IV (Isakovits, Emperor),

43-45-

—  V  ("Murzufl,"  "Murchufl,"
Emperor),  45-47.

Anani {Posadnik  of  Novgorod),

94.  95-
Andrei (Aleksandrovich, Alex-
androvich, Veliki Knyaz of
Vladimir),  108-112,  114,  115.

—  (Dmitrievich,  Knyaz  of
Mozhaisk),  173,  182.

—  (Georgievich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Vladimir),  23,  25-28.

Andrei  (Olgerdovich, Knyaz of

Polotsk  and of Pskov), 137,

156,  167,  174.
— • (Vasilievich, Knyaz), 212,

216,  217.
— ■ (Yaroslavich, Veliki  Knyaz

of  Suzdal),  86,  93.
Antoni {Vladyka  of  Novgorod),

52,  53- 58,  61,  62,  68,  6g,  71,

73,78- ■
Arkadi (Vladyka  of Novgorod),

21-24,  88.
Arseni {Vladyka  of Novgorod),

63,  71.

Baldwin (Count of Flanders),

48.
Baty,  Batu  (Tartar  Tsar),  87-91.
Belgorod  ("  White  Town,"  town

near  Kiev),  23.
Belo-Ozero  (White  Lake,"  lake

and  district  in  N.  Russia),  134,

171.
Belozersk  (town,  on  Belo-Ozero),

171.
Besermeny  (sc.  Mussulmans),  202.
Bezhitsy  {Bezhitski  Verkh,  "  the

Bezhits  Upper  "  district  and

town,  E.  of  Novgorod,  N.  of

Moscow),  40,  92,  106,  118,  128,

169, 170, 194, 195, 198, 200,

201.
Black  River  v.  Chernaya.
Bogdan  (Obakunovich,  Posadnik

of  Novgorod),  164-166,  169.
Bohemians  v.  Chekhi.
Bolgar, Bulgar (country and

people),  32,  81.

O

226

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Boniface (Marquess of I\Iont-

ferrat),  47.
Boris  {Aleks-[ex]-androvich,  A'wy-

a2of  Tver),  201,  204.

—  (Andre^^evich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod),  114.

—  (Danilovich,  Knyaz  of  Mos-
cow), 121.

—  (Romanovich,  Knyaz),  38.

— e  (Vasilievich,  Knyaz  of  Ros-
tov), 90.

—  (Vasilievich,  Knyaz),  212,
216,  217.

—  (Vseslavits,  Knyaz  of  Po-
lotsk), II.

Brest  (town  in  Poland),  2.
Bryacheslav  [Knyaz  of  Polotsk),

84.
Bryansk  (town,  S.W.  of  Moscow,

on  the  r.  Desna,  a  tributary  of

the Dnieper), 127, 136, 175,

201.
Bryn  (town),  72.

Chekhi,  Chekhs,  Czechs  (Bohe-
mians), 61.

Cherekha  (river),  144.

Chernaya  ("  Black,"  river),  117.

Chernigov  (town),  6,  8,  13,  14,
21,  23,  38-40,  49,  53,  66-68,
7--75.  77.  80.  127,  184.

Chertoriski,  Czartoryski  (Princes
Alexander  and  Ivan),  197.

Chud  (or  Peipus,  lake),  34,  52,
87,  200.

—  people  (a  Finnish  tribe),  S,
9,  12,  13,  17,  29,  30,  34,  35,
52.  58,  63,  70,  81,  86,  87,  95,
loi,  139.

Constantinople,  cf.  Tsargrad.
Cracow (King of, sc. Poland),
143-

Dalmat  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
93-95.97.  107-

Danil  (Aleksandrovich,  Alexan-
dre vich,  Knyaz  of  Moscow),
109.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Pskov), 178,

179-

—  (Borisovich,  Knyaz),  180.

—  (Romanovich,  Knyaz  of
Galich),  80.

David  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz  of
Toropets),  52,  68.

—  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Vyshegorod  and  Smolensk),
21,  22,  32,  33,  38.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Kfiyaz  of
Chernigov),  7-9.

—  (i^«y«2  of  Lithuania),  122.

—  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
116,  118,  121,  123.

Dandolo  (Doge),  48.

Desna  (river,  tributary  of  the
Dnieper),  8.

Dmitri  (Aleks-[ex]-androvich,  Ve-
liki Knyaz  of  Vladimir),  97-99,
loi,  102,  104,  106-112.

—  (Ivanovich,  loannovich,
called  "  Donskoi,"  "  of  the
Don,"  Veliki  Knyaz  of  Mos-
cow), 150,  154,  156-159,  161,
163.

— •  (Konstantinovich,  Veliki
Knyaz  of  Suzdal),  148,  156.

—  (Mikhailovich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Tver),  119,  121,  122,  124.

—  (Romanovich,  Knyaz  of
Bryansk),  117.

—  (Yuiievich,  or  Georgievich,
"  Shemyaka,"  Knyaz),  198,
204,  205.

Dmitrov  (town,  N.  of  Moscow),
83,  92,  109,  III,  159,  186.

Dnieper,  Dnyepr  (river),  i,  2,  8,
53,  65,  66.

Don  (river),  157.

Donia,  Denmark,  12,  13,  115.

Dorpat  (town)  v.  Yurev.

Dovmont [Knyaz  of Lithuania

THE  CHRONICLE

and  of  Pskov),  loo,  loi,  io8,
113,  114.

Dryutsk  (town),  31.

Dunai  (river),  8.

Dvina  (river,  sc.  Western,  flow-
ing into  the  Baltic),  100.

—  (river,  sc.  Northern,  flowing
into  the  White  Sea),  123,  130,
138,  169-172,  175,  181,  203,
211,  218,  219.

Elets  vtown  and  district,  S.E.  of

Moscow),  183.
Eufemi  I  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),

191,  192.

—  II  {Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
192-204.

Evnuti  (loan  Gediminovich,
Knyaz  of  Lithuania),  140.

Fedori  (Aleks-[ex]-androvich,
Knyaz  of  Tver),  133.

—  ( —  Aleks-[ex]-androvich,
/■^wya^  of  Rostov),  170,  171.

—  (Georgievich,  Knyaz  of
Smolensk),  182.

—  (Yaroslavich, Knyaz), 71,

72,  75.  77.  78

—  (i^wya^:  of  Kiev),  127.

—  (F/adyAa  of  Novgorod),  5,  6.
Feodosi,  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),

191,  192.
Feofil {Vladyka of Novgorod),

207,  209,  217,  218.
Feognast (Metropolitan), 129,

136,  139,  140.  145-
Feoktist  {Vladyka  of  Novgorod),

114,  116,  117.
Foti (Metropolitan), 180, 181,

184,  191,  193.
Franks,  The  {Fryazi),  44-48.

Galich  (town  in  Ruthenia,  Red
Russia, or Galicia, and dis-

1  Pronounced F;'drfor=  TTieodore, similarly
Feof il=  Theophilus,  etc.

OF  NOVGOROD  227

trict  W.  of  Kiev  called  Galich
Chervenski),  18,  52,  59,  61,
64,  80,  127.

—  (town  N.  of  the  Volga
called  Galich  Merski  or  Volo-
dinierski),  171.

Gavrilo,  Gabriel  {Vladyka  of
Novgorod),  27,  30-36.

Gedimin  {Veliki  Knyaz  of  Lithu-
ania), 124,  127,  129,  136.

Georgi  (Gyurgi  or  Yuri  Andreye-
vich,  Knyaz  of  Novgorod),
27.  28.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Novgorod  and
Suzdal),  100-103.

—  ( — Danilowich, VelikiKnyaz),
115,  119,  121-123,  132.

—  (—  Dmitrievich,  Knyaz),
178,  184,  185,  193,  194.

■ —  ( —  Igorevich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  81,  82.

—  ( —  Mstislavich,  Knyaz  of
Pskov),  77,  78.

—  ( —  Narimontovich,  Knyaz
of  Lithuania),  157.

—  ( — Patrikievich, Knyaz),

195-

—  ( —  Simeonovich  or  Lug-
venich,  Knyaz),  193,  196,  197,
200,  201.

—  ( —  Svyatoslavich,  Veliki
Knyaz  of  Smolensk),  167,  175-
178,  182.

—  ( —  Vasilievich,  Knyaz),
212,  216,  217.

—  ( —  Vladimirovich,  called
Dolgoruki  =  "  Long-arm,"
Veliki  Knyaz),  16,  17,  19-22.

—  ( —  Vsevolodovich,  Veliki
Knyaz),  56,  57,  61-64,  ^7-
Si-83.

Gerden {Knyaz of Lithuania),

100.
Germans,  v.  Nemisy.
Gleb (Georgievich, Knyaz of

Pereyaslavl),  27.

Q2

228

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Gleb  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  29.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Smolensk),
104.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod),  5,  6.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  o  Bryansk),
136.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  49,  59,  60.

—  (Vseslavich,  Knyaz  of  Po-
lotsk), 63.

Gorodishche  ("the  fort,"  or  "cit-
adel," near  Novgorod),  7,  24,
35.  37.  42,  43.  60,  62,  74,  77,
94,  97,  104,  105,  122,  137,
139,  194,  200  (of.  also  Radilov).

Goths,  Goth  Coast  (so. Gothland),
12,34,164.

Great  river,  v.  Velikaya.

Greeks,  3,  46,  47,  141.

Greek  (land,  the),  44,  48.

Gyurgev,  v.  Yurev.

Gyurgi  =  Georgi,  q.v.

Holm  (see  Kholm)

Horde,  the  [Or da,  "  the  Camp,"
the  Tartar  headquarters),  87,
88,  92,  105,  119,  121-125,
127,  129-135,  138-140,  148,
157,  160,  161,  165,  182,  193,
203.

Horuzhk  v.  Khoruzhk.

Hungary,  Hungarians  [Ugry),
61,88,  182.

Igor  (Olegovich,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev),  19.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod-Seversk,  near  Kiev),

39-

Ilmen  (lake  at  the  N.  end  of
which  lies  Novgorod),  18,  71,
108,  177,  211,  213,  219.

Ilya  (sc.  Elias,  Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod), 24,  27,  28,  30-33.

Ingvor (Igorevich, Knyaz of

Ryazan),  59,  81.
loan  (sc.  Ivan,  John,  Vladyka  of

Novgorod),  8,  12.

—  ( —  Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod), 162-170,  172-175,  177,
179,  181-185.

— • ( — ■ of  Novgorod).  207.

—  (VI,  Cantacuzene,  Emperor)
146.

— -  (Ivan  Andreyevich,  Knyaz
of  Mozhaisk),  203,  204.

—  ( —  Danilovich,  called
"  Kalita,"  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Moscow), 124, 125, 127-130,

132-134-

( — Dmitrievich,  Knyaz  of

Nizhni  Novgorod),  156.
— • ( — Ivanovich,  Veliki

Knyaz  of  Moscow),  142,  145.

—  ( — — Knyaz),  212.

—  ( —  Mikhailovich,  Knyaz  of
Tver),  182,  192.

—  ( —  Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz
of  Vyazma),  176.

—  ( —  Vasilievich,  Knyaz),
185.

—  ( —  — ,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
all  Russia,  sc.  Ivan  III  "the
Great  "),  205-219.

—  ( —  Vladimirovich,  Knyaz
of  Lithuania),  200,  201.

—  ( —  Yaroslavich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  121,  125.

Isaac  II  (Emperor),  43,  44.
Isidor (Metropolitan), 195-197,

208.
Isles  [land  of ,Ostrovskaya  Zemlya)

139-
Izborsk (town near Pskov, at

the  S.  end  of  lake  Chud),  78,

85.  137.  151.  152,  164.
Izhera (river, country and

people),  69,  84,  86, 105, in,

120,  142,  200,  201.
Izyaslav  (Davidovich,  Knyaz  of

THE  CHRONICLE

Chernigov, Veliki Knyaz of
Kiev),  21-23.
Izyaslav (Glebovich, Knyaz),

32.
• — (Ingvorovich,  Knyaz),  66.
• — ■ Mstislavich, Veliki Knyaz

of  Kiev),  13,  19-21.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  49,  59.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Seversk),
80.

—  (christened  Dmitri,  Yaros-
lavich,  Veliki  Knyaz  of  Kiev),
4-6.

—  -Mikhail  (Yaroslavich,  A'ny-
rtz),  34,41.

Jagiello (Yagailo Olgerdovich,

King  of  Poland),  180,  182.
Jews,  202.

Kalaksha  (river),  7,  29,  57.

Kalka  (river),  65,  66.

Kama (river, tributary of the

Volga),  123,  128.
Kashin (town  near  Tver,  E.  of

Novgorod),  125.
Kasimir-Andrei (Yagailovich,

King of Poland), Veliki

Knyaz of Lithuania), 197,

200,  201.
Kasog  (people),  64.
Kavgala  (river),  117.
Kes (i.e., Wenden, town in

Livonia),  63,  70.
Kegola  (river),  10 1.
Keksholm ("  Korel town," on

W.  shore  of  lake  Ladoga),  112,

119, 122, 129, 132, 149, 160.
Kestuti (Gediminovich, Knyaz

of  Lithuania),  140,  159.
Khan,  the,  88,  92.
Kholm,  127,  184
Khoruzhk  (town),  34.
Kiev (town), 1-5, 7-16, 18-28,

OF  NOVGOROD

229

43, 53. 58, 61, 66, 73, 76,

80,  81,  88,  107,  108,  127,  147,

174,  184,  189.
Kiprian (Cyprian, Metropolitan

of Kiev), 155, 165-167, 169,

170,  175,  177,  178.
Kiril I (Cyril, Metropolitan of

Kiev),  74,  78.

—  II  (Cyiil,  Metropolitan  of
Kiev),  93,  95,  98,  105,  108.

Kliment  (Clement,  Vlaydka  of
Novgorod),  107,  108,  110-114,
123.

Klin  (town),  12,  79,  179.

Kolmogory,  Kholmogori  (town
and  district),  175,  185.

Kolomno,  Kolomna  (town),  49,
82,  159.

Kolozhe  (town),  177.

Kolyvan  (Revel,  Reval,  town),
63,  70,  loi,  103,  139,  164.

Komen  [Kanien  Bely="  White
Stone,"  town),  178.

Konstantin  (Dmitrievich,  Kny-
az), 179,  184,  189,  190.

—  (Ivanovich,  Kyiyaz  of
Belozersk),  166,  167.

—  (Rostislavich, Knyaz), 97,

lOI.

—  (Mikhailovich,  Knyaz  of
Tver),  121,  125,  127,  134.

(Vasilievich,  Knyaz  of  Suz-
dal), 134,  145.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  59,  60.

—  (Vsevolodich,  Knyaz  of
Rostov),  48,  49,  56,  57.

Koporya  (town  on  the  S.  shore
of  the  Gulf  of  Finland),  86,
95,  108,  129,  132,  138,  144,
160,  166.

Korel  (district  and  people,  Finns)
18,  35,  69,  86.  93,  104,  105,
107,  109,  III,  112,  119,  120,
129,  131-133.  167,  189,  191,
201,  218.

230

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

"  Korel  Town,"  v.  Keksholm.
Korichka  (river),  no.
Kostroma (town,  N.E.  of  Mos-
cow, on  the  Volga),  io6,  107,

159-

Kostyantin = Konstantin, q.v.
Krichev  (town),  197.
Kuman  (people),  v.  Polo  vets.
Kursk  (town,  S.  of  Moscow),  15.
Kyuril  (Metropolitan  of  All  Rus-
sia), 108.  [See  Kiril.]

Ladoga (town and lake, N. of

Novgorod), 8, 9, 12, 14, 17,

21-24,  37.  41.  69,  84,  85,  96,

,102, 105, 109, 118, 120, 121,

125, 129, 131, 142, 160, 186.

Letts  (cf.  Lotygola),  70.

Lithuania,  Lithuanians  [Litva),
32,  35,  41-43,  50,  52,  58,  63,
64,  68,  73,  79-81,  86,  92,  93,
96-100,  no,  122-124,  127,  129,
130,  137,  140,  152,  155-159.
161,  166-168,  172-177,  179-
184,  189,  192, 195-198,  200-202.

Livonians  [Lib),  61,  70.

Lotygola  (or  Letgola,  country  and
people,  the  Letts,  part  of
Livonia),  42,  70,  87.

Lovot  (river  flowing  into  lake
Ilmen  from  the  S.),  42,  79,
123.

Low  Country  (Niz,  Nizovskaya
zemlya,  sc.  the  basin  of  the
Volga,  especially  the  Middle
Volga,  and  the  country  round
Suzdal,  q.v.),  79,  86,  94-96,
100,  103,  106,  107,  109,  no,
112,  114,  119-123,  128,  129,
136,  140,  157.

Lubeck  {Luhek.tovfa  in  Germany) ,
164.

Luga  (river  and  district,  N.W.
of  Novgorod),  86,  87,  141,
160,  201.

Luki (Velikiya, between Nov-

gorod  and Smolensk, town),

24.  25,  32.  35.39.  41.  42.  51-
Lutsk  (town,  W.  of  Kiev),  184.
Lyakhi  [i.e.,  the  Poles,  Poland),

I, 5, 61, 180 (cf. also 143,

198,  216).
Lyubech  (town),  i.
Lyuderev  (town),  121.
Lyudovl  (town),  133.

Magnus,  Magnush  (King  of
Sweden),  141-143.

Manuel  II  (Palaeologus,  Em-
peror), 180.

Marienburg  (town  in  Prussia),
180,  181.

Martha  (Boretskaya,  Posadnitsa
of  Novgorod),  208,  209,  216.

Marturi  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
36-41,  88.

Medvezhya Golova ("  Bear's
Head,"  Chud  town,  the  modern
Odenpaa,  near  Yurev-Dorpat),
9.  35.  52.  58.  78.  79,  85,  139.

Minsk  (town,  W.  of  Smolensk  and
of  Moscow),  124.

Mikhail  (Aleks-[ex]-androvich,
Veliki  Knyaz  of  Tver),  128,
136,  153.  154,  160,  173.

— - ( — Knyaz),  207.

—  (Andreyevich,  Knyaz),  203,
212.

—  (Davidovich,  Knyaz  of
Yaroslavl),  135.

—  (Evnutievich,  Knyaz  of
Lithuania),  174.

—  (Georgeievich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Vladimir),  27,  28.

—  (Sigismundovich,  Knyaz  of
Lithuania),  197.

—  (Vsevolodovich,  Knyaz  of
Pronsk),  49,  59.

—  (Vsevolodovich,  Knyaz  of
Chernigov),  67,  72,  73,  75,  77,
80,  88-92.

—  (Yaroslavich, Knyaz), 10 r.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

231

Mikhail  (Yaroslavich,  Veliki  Kny-
az  of  Tver),  115,  116,  118-121.

Mindovg,  Mindvog  {Veliki  Knyaz
of  Lithuania),  98,  99.

Mitrofan  [Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
41,  42,  50,  51,  59,  61-63,  78.

—  (Bishopof  Volodimir),82,  83.

—  Moisei  {Vladyka  of  Nov-
gorod), 123-126,  129,  130,  144-
149.

Molvotitsy  (town),  175.

Moravia,  18.

Moravians,  61.

Mordva  (people,  Finns),  7.

Morzh  (island  in  the  White  Sea),

185.
Mosalsk  (town,  S.W.  of  Moscow),

77-

Moscow,  82,  83,  109,  III,  116,
119,  121,  123,  129,  131,  134,
137,  140,  142,  155,  156,  158,
159,  162,  163,  165-167,  169,
176-185,  189,  191,  193-198,
200, 201, 203, 207, 212, 219.

INIouths,  the  {Usti,  village  on  Lake
Ladoga),  12,  120.

Mozhaisk  (town,  W.  of  Moscow),
182,  201.

Msta  (river  flowing  into  lake
Ilmen  from  the  E.),  194,  204.

Mstislav  (Davidovich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod),  32,  33.

—  (Georgievich,  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod), 21,  22.

—  (Izyaslavich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Kiev),  23-27.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod), 43,  50-59,  61,  65,  66.

—  (Romanovich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Kiev),  53,  61,  64,  66.

—  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Smolensk),  25,  30.

—  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz),  23,
28-30.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz  of
Chernigov),  66.

Mstislav  (Vladimirovich, Knyaz

of  Novgorod),  7-12.
Mstislavl  (town  near  Smolensk),

197.
Murman {i.e., Northmen, sc.

also the coast W. of the

White Sea facing  the  Arctic

Ocean),  84,  133,  181,  189,  201,

203.
Murom  (town  on  the  r.  Oka,  E.

of  Moscow),  7,  26,  31,  81.

Napryadva  (river),  157.

Narimont  (Gleb  Gediminovich,
Veliki  Knyaz  of  Lithuania),
129,  132,  140.

Narova,  Narva  (Ereva  or  Rugo-
div,  town,  river,  and  district  on
the  S.  shore  of  the  Gulf  of
Finland),  52,  93,  95,  100,
loi,  104,  112,  139,  190,  200,
201.

Nemetski  gorod  v.  Viborg.

Nemsty  (Germans,  but  sometimes
also  other  foreigners  of  Ger-
manic race,  e.g.  Swedes),
34,  58,  61,  63,  70,  77-81.
85-87.  93.  loi.  103,  109,  113,
117-119,  121,  122,  124,  131,
132,  136,  137,  139,  142,  143,
149-153,  158,  159,  163-165,
167,  168,  178-182,  186,  189,
190,  193,  200,  202.

Nesvezh  (town),  66.

Neva  (river  flowing  from  Lake
Ladoga  into  the  Gulf  of  Fin-
land), 69,  84,  109,  114,  122,
131,  132,  165,  200.

Nifont  {Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
12,  14,  18-21.

Nikita  {Vladyka  of  Novgorod),  8.

Niz,  Nizovskaya  Zemlya,  v.  Low
Country.

Nizhni  Novgorod  ("  Lower  New
Town,"  on  the  Volga),  156,
165,  179,  180.

232

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Novgorod  ("  New  Town,"  town
and  district,  the  subject  of
this  Chronicle)  passim.

—  First  time  called  "  Great
Novgorod,"  129  '>  see  also
197.

Novitorg  ("  Newmarket,"  town),
V.  Torzhok.

Novogrodek  (Novy  Gorodok  Ne-
meiski,  or  "  Neuhausen,"  town
in  W.  Russia,  on  the  r.  Pivzha),
137,  152,  153,  155,  178.

Nukhia  (river),  81,  82.

Obez  (people),  64.

Okhta (river, tributary of the

Neva),  114.
Oka (river, tributary of the

Volga),  49,  50.
Oleg (Ingvorevich, Knyaz of

Ryazan),  81.

—  (Ivanovich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  176.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz  of
Chernigov),  6,  9.

Oleshe  (town),  65.

Olgerd,  Olgierd  (Alexander  Gedi-
minovich,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Lithuania), 137, 140, 152,

156-
Olonets  (town,  N.  of  Novgorod),

69.
Onega  (lake),  131  (cf.  also  121).
Omovyzh  (Embach,  river),  79.
Opoka  ("  the  Rock,"  town,  near

Novgorod),  125,  141.
Orekhov(ets) (island  and  town,

at  the  mouth of  the  Neva),

122, 129, 131, 132, 141-144,

160,  161,  165.
Orlets (town), 138, 170, 171.
Osechen  (town),  130.
Ostrechno  (lake),  139.
Ostrov ("  Island,"  town, S. of

Pskov,  on  the  Velikaya  river),

202.

Ovla  (river),  155.

Ovozha  (Vozha,  river),  156.

Patriki  (Narimontovich,  Knyaz
of  Lithuania),  160,  169.

Pecheneg  (people),  2,  64.

Pechera,  Pechora  (river  and
country),  33.

Peremyshl  (town,  S.W.  of  Mos-
cow, on  the  r.  Oka),  62,  68,
78,  127.

Pereyaslavl  (town  near  Kiev),  6,
10,  12,  14,  19,  20.

—  [Zaleski,  i.e.,  "  beyond  the
forests,"  town  N.  of  Moscow),
28.  29.  31,  56,  57,  68,  70,  71,
75.  77.  78,  83,  86,  101,  104,  108,
109,  112,  121,  128,  159,  179.

Perm  (town  in  N.E.  Russia),  184.
Perna  (river  in  Livonia),  117.
Pertuyev (Pernov, town in

Livonia),  61,  62.
Peter  (Dmitrevich,  Knyaz),  177.
Philip (German Emperor, Ne-

metski  Tsar),  44,  46.

—  (Metropolitan  of  all  Ru.ssia),
207,  209,  218.

Pleskov  (Pskov,  town),  12,  14-
16,  22,  25,  26,  29,  32,  34,  35,
41-  52,  55.  58,  69-71,  77,  78,
81,  85-87,  93,  94,  96,  100-103,
111-113,  119-121,  125,  127-
132,  136,  137,  139,  142,  144.
145,  149-152,  156,  159,  160,
163,  166-168,  174-179,  183,
186,  188,  190,  191,  194,  196,
197,  201,  207,  211.

Poland,  V.  Lyakhi.

Polotsk  (town  on  the  W.  Dvina),
5,  7,  15,  25,  26,  32,  35.  41,  63,
78,  84,  96-98,  100,  124,  127,
158,  178,  184,  197.

Polovets  (people,  Polovtsy,  Kitm-
any).  4-8,  14,  23,  26,  38.  39,
43,  59,  64-66,  80,  157.

Porkh  (Pirkel,  town),  178.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

233

Porkhov  (town  between  Nov-
gorod and  Pskov),  141,  161,
181,  186,  192,  194.

Pripet,  Pripyat  (river,  tributary
of  the  Dnieper),  8.

Pronsk  (town),  49,  81.

Prussia,  180.

Prussians,  Prussia  Street  (in
Novgorod),  54,  60,  62,  III,
142,  143,  180.

Pshaga  (river),  141.

Purdozna  (river),  200.

Pyana  (river),  156.

Radilov  {Gorodets  or  Gorodishche,
i.e.,  "  small  fortified  town,"
on  the  Volga),  56,  57,  98,  109,

115-

Rakovor  {i.e.,  Wesenberg,  town
near  the  S.  shore  of  the  Gulf
of  Finland),  loi.

Revel,  cf.  Kolyvan.

Riga  (town),  70,  81,  lor,  164,
178.

Rodislav  (Roslav  Olegovich,
Knyazoi'Rya.zs.n),  176.

Roman  (Glebovich,  Knyaz  of
Smolensk),  112.

■ —  (Igorevich,  Knyaz  of  Rya-
zan), 59.

■ — ■  (Ingvorevich,  Knyaz  of
Ryazan),  81,  82.

■ —  (Mikhailovich,  Knyaz  of
Bryansk),  175.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz  of
Galich),  26,  27,  43.

—  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Smolensk,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev),  25,  27,  28,  30.

■ — (Svyatoslavich, Knyaz of

Tmutorokan),  6.
Rome,  Rim,  47,  197.
Rostislav  (Georgievich,  Knyaz  of

Novgorod),  16,  17.

—  (Mikhailovich,  Knyaz),  73-
75-

Rostislav (Mstislavich, Veliki

Knyaz  oi  Kiev),  21-24.
— ■ (Svyatoslavich, Knyaz of

Ryazan),  59.

—  (Yaroslavich,  Knyaz  of
Snovsk),  53.

—  ( — Knyaz),  ^-j,  41.
Rostov  (town,  N.  of  Moscow),  19,

28, 29, 56, 67, 83, 114, 124,
170,  171,  179,  184.

Rugodiv,  V.  Narva.

Rurik  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev),  27,  43.

Russa  {Star  ay  a  Rusa,  "  Old
Rusa,"  town  at  S.  end  of  Lake
Ilmen),  25,  35-7,  40,  43-43,
64,  68,  79,  105,  120,  152,
160,  176,  180,  186,  194,  198-
200,  202,  211,  219.

Russia  {Rus,  in  earlier  time,
usually,  the  basin  of  the
Dnieper  and  the  country  of
which  Kiev  was  the  centre,
but  later  also  used  to  include
Moscow,  and  all  Central  Rus-
sia, 5,  7,  12,  14,  17,  19,  20,
22,  24,  25,  29-31,  42,  51-53.
59,  62,  77,  78,  95,  98,  119,
122,  129,  131,  138,  139,  145,
146,  154,  163,  185,  197,  198,
205-214,  216-219.

Russian  Land  {Riisskaya  Zemlya,
usually  used  to  denote  all  the
Slavonic  inhabitants  of  Great,
Little  and  West  Russia  and
the  country  occupied  by
them),  5,  7,  9,  13,  18,  21,  26,
53,  64,  65,  84,  88,  105,  125.
155-159,  162,  179,  191,  198,
204,  205,  208.

Ryasna  (town),  130.

Ryazan  (town,  S.E.  of  Moscow,
on  the  r.  Oka),  26,  29,  31,  49,
50,  81,  82,  121,  124,  125,  128,
163,  167,  168,  176,  179.

234

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Rzheva  (town,  river  and  dis-
trict, S.E.  of  Novgorod),  55,
119,  120,  194.

Serpukhov  (town,  S.  of  Moscow),

159,  179-
Shelon (river  which flows into
Lake  Ilraen  from  the  W.,  and
district), 58, 84, 108, 140,

141,  144,  205,  214,  215.
Sherensk  (town),  77.
Sidor,  V.  Isidor.

Sigismund  (Zhidimont  Kestu-
tievich,  King  of  Poland,  Veliki
Knyaz of Lithuania), 195-

197-
Simeon (Dmitrievich, Knyaz  of
Suzdal),  165.

—  (Ivanovich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  All Russia), 134-138, 140,

142,  145.

—  (Olgerdovich,  Knyaz  of
Lithuania,  called  Lugven),
163,  165,  176,  178,  181,  182.

—  (F/arfyAa  of  Novgorod),  184-
190.

Sit  (river),  83.

Skirigailo (Olgerdovich, Knyaz

of  Lithuania),  158.
Smolensk  (town  on  the  Dnieper),

7, 8, 15, 16, 22, 23, 25, 26,

29,  30.  32,  33.  38.  53.  56,  59,
62,  63,  72,  78,  96,  104,  135,
140,  161,  163,  167,  175-177.
183,  194,  197,  201.

Snovsk  (town),  5.

Sozh  (river),  6.

Spiridon  (Vladyka  of  Novgorod),
73-75.  78,  87,  93-

Sum  (people),  84,  95,  121.

Suzdal  (Suzhdal,  E.  of  Moscow,
town),  13,  15-17,  19,  20,  26,
27,  29-31,  83,  93,  98,  116,
134,  148,  156,  159,  184,  203.

Svei  (Swedes,  Sweden),  17,  24,
84,  85,  93.  95.  III. 112,  114,

123, 131, 132, 141  143, 167,
181,  203.

Svidrigailo  (Olgerdovich,  Veliki
i^wyaz  of  Lithuania),  192.

Svyatopolk  (Izyaslavich,  Veliki
Knyaz  oi  Kiev),  4,  7,  8.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz),  15,  17-
19-

—  (Yaropolkovich,  Veliki  Kny-
az oi  Kiev),  I,  2,  59.

Svyatoslav  (Ivanovich,  Knyaz
of  Smolensk),  161.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz),  28,
29.

—  ( — Knyaz),  59,  60,  78.

—  (Olegovich,  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod), 14-17,  20.

—  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod),  22-25,  59-

—  (Vladimirovich,  Knyaz  of
Pereyaslavl),  9.

—  (Vsevolodovich,  Knyaz),  30,
31.36.

—  (Gavril  Vsevolodovich, /?«j'fl^
of  Yurev),  41,  42,  48,  50,  51,
56,  63.

—  (Yaroslavich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Kiev),  4,  5.

—  (Yaroslavich,  Knyaz  of
Tver),  99,  loi,  103,  106,  109,
112.

Swedes,  see  Svei.

Tartars,  Tatars  [Tatary),  64-66,
81-83, 87,  88,  92,  95-98,104-106,
108,  no.  III,  119,  121,  123-
125,  132,  133,  156-159,  173,
174, 179, 180, 183, 201,  203.

Taurmen  (people),  64.

Tesov  (town),  78,  86.

Tmutorokan  (town  on  the  coast
of  the  Black  Sea),  6.

Toldoga  (town),  132.

Toropets  (town,  S.  of  Novgorod),
25,  26,  51,  63,  68,  80,  84,  92,
93.  131-

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

235

Torzhok  ("  Little  Market,"  often
called  otherwise  Novi-Torg,
"  New  Market,"  town,  S.E.  of
Novgorod), i6, 19, 22, 25,

29-31.  34.  38-41.  50.  51.  54-56.
58,  61,  62,  67,  68,  72,  75,
80,  81,  83,  92,  96,  106,  109,  112,
116,  118-121,  125,  127,  128,
130, 135, 136, 142, 150, 153,

159,  166,  169,  170,  175,  186,
200, 201, 204.

Tovtivil  {Knyaz  of  Polotsk),  97,
98.

Trepol  (town),  7.

Tsargrad  (or  Tsargorod,  "  Em-
peror's town,"  Constanti-
nople), 20,  21,  43-48,  51,  129,
141,  145,  146,  159,  167,  178,
180,  195,  196,  198,  210,  212.

Turov  (town,  near  Kiev),  184.

Tver  (town  on  the  Volga,  be-
tween Novgorod  and  Moscow),
30,  54,  56,  83,  92,  106,  109,
112,  114,  115,  119-125,  132,
134, 136, 147. 153, 154, 159,

160,  173,  179,  182,  184,  186,
192, 198, 200, 201, 204.

Tvertsa  (river,  tributary  of  the
Volga,  into  which  it  flows  at
Tver),  30,  55,  67,  153.

Upper  Country,  v.  Bezhitsy.

Usti,  "  the  Mouths,"  q.v.

Ustyug  (town  on  the  N.  Dvina,
N.E.  of  Novgorod),  123,  125,
166,  171,  185,  192,  211.

Ustyuzhna  (town  and  district,
E.  of  Novgorod,  on  the
river  Mologa,  a  tributary  of
the  Volga),  134,  166.

Uza  (Yuza,  river,  tributary  of
the  Shelon),  145.

Vanai  (town),  117.

Varangians  (Scandinavians),

Varangian Street, Church in
Novgorod), I,  21,  31,  34,  43,
58,113,118.
Vasili  (Aleks-[ex]-androvich,

Knyaz  of  Novgorod),  93-96.

—  (Davidovich,  Knyaz  of
Yaroslav),  132-134.

—  (Dmitrievich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Moscow),  160,  161,  163,
165,  166,  169-173,  175-179,
182,  184,  189-191.

—  (Georgievich,  Knyaz),  194,
195,  200.

—  (Ivanovich,  Knyaz  of
Smolensk),  168.

—  (Konstantinovich,  Knyaz  of
Rostov),  67.

—  (Mikhailovich,  Knyaz  of
Tver),  125.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz),  58.

—  (Vasilievich,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Moscow),  189,  193-195,  197,
198,  201,  203,  205.

—  (Yaroslavich,  Knyaz  of  Kos-
troma, Veliki  Knyaz),  104,
106,  107.

—  ( — , Knyaz),  203.

—  (Grigori  Kaleka,  Vladyka
of  Novgorod),  126-133,  136-
142,  144,  145.

Velikaya  {reka,  the  "  Great
River,"  which  flows  into  Lake
Chud  from  the  S.,  and  on
which  Pskov  is  situated),  103,
151.

Velyad  (Velnev  or  Fellin,  town  in
Livonia),  85,  loi,  139,  149-151,
190.

Viborg  (called  Nenietski  gorodok,
sc.  "  Swedish  town,"  on  N.
shore  of  Gulf  of  Finland),  122,
131,  132,  143,  181,  182.

Vilna  (town  and  river  in  Lithu-
ania), 140,  197.

Vitebsk  (town,  S.W.  of  Nov-
gorod), 92,  129,  197.

236

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

Vitovt  (Kestutievich,  Veliki
/^ttyaz  of  Lithuania),  159,  166-
168, 172-177, 180-184, 192.

Vladimir  =  Volodimir,  q.v.

Vod  (people,  Finns),  5,  20,  54,
86,  87,  105,  120,  132,  175,
200,  201.

Voishelg  {Knyaz  of  Lithuania),
99.

Volga  (river),  20,  25,  30,  55,  56,
119,  150,  151,  154,  161.

Volkhov  (river  flowing  out  of
Lake  Ilmen  through  Nov-
gorod into  Lake  Ladoga),  11,
12,  18,  29.  33,  67,  71,  74,  77,
93,  100,  104,  III,  120,  130,
131,  134,  135,  140,  154.  155.
162,  173,  176,  188,  190,
219.

Volodimir  (Vladimir,  town  in
Volynia  in  S.W.  Russia),  19,
20,  73,  127,  184.

—  ( — ,  Zaleski,  i.e.,  "  beyond
the  forests,"  town  on  the  r.
Klyazma,  E.  of  Moscow),  27-

29.  33.  40.  49,  57,  59,  63,
81,  82,  98,  105,  109,  III,  116,
129,  148,  159,  180.

—  ( —  Andreyevich,  Knyaz),
152,  154,  155,  157-159.  161,
180.

—  (—  Glebovich,  Knyaz  of
Minsk),  25.

—  ( — Mstislavich,  Knyaz),

27-
■ — ■ (— — Knyaz  of  Pskov),
50,  52,  55-58,  68.

—  ( — - Rurikovich, Knyaz),
56,  57.  61,  80.

—  ( — -  Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz
of  Novgorod  and  of  Chernigov)

30.31-

—  ( —  Vsevolodich,  "  Mono-
tnakh,"  Veliki  Knyaz),  7-10.

—  ( —  —  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod). 14.

Volodimir  (Vladimir  Yaroslavl ch,
Knyaz  of  Novgorod),  3,  4.

Vologda  (town  and  district,  N.
of  Moscow),  106,  129,  151,
166,  169-171.

Volok  (sc.  Dvinsk,  the  portage
or  watershed  between  the
basin  of  the  Volga  and  of  the
Northern  Dvina,  otherwise
called  Zavoloche,  the  country
beyond  the  Volok  or  Dvinskaya
Zemlya,  the  Dvina-Land),  6,
26,  33,  40,  123,  130,  138,  161,
169-171,  175,  181,  185,  i8g,
192,  194,  202,  203,  211,  218.

Volok  (sc.  Lamsk,  town  and  dis-
trict, S.E.  of  Novgorod,  N.W.
of  Moscow),  29,  56,  73,  83,
106, III, 112, 159, 166, 169,

194. 195-

Volynia  (in  S.W.  Russia,  dis-
trict), 126,  127,  143.

Voronach  (town),  177,  192.

Voronazh,  Voronezh  (river  and
district,  S.  of  Moscow),  81,
82.

Vorskla  (river),  173.

Vosvyat  (lake),  63,  68,  92.

Vseslav  {Knyaz  of  Polotsk),  4,  5,

7-
Vsevolod (Borisovich,  Knyaz  of
Pskov),  52.

—  (Georgievich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Vladimir),  28-33,  38-42,
48-51.

—  ( — Knyaz),  62,  63,  67,  82.

—  (Mstislavich,  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod and  Pskov),  9-15.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Pskov,  Nov-
gorod, and  Smolensk),  61,  62.

—  (Olegovich,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev),  14-17,  19.

■ — (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz),  52,

53-
- — (Yaroslavich, Veliki  Knyaz
of  Kiev),  4,  5,  7.

THE  CHRONICLE  OF  NOVGOROD

237

Vyacheslav  (Borisovich,  Knyaz),
64.

—  (Svyatoslavich,  Knyaz  of
Polotsk),  25.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Knyaz  of
Turov),  16,  20,  21.

Vyatka (town  in N.E. Russia),

185,  211.
Vyazma  (town,  W.  of  Moscow),

176,  201.
Vyshegorod (town near Kiev),

5.9,28,53.

Wenden,  cf.  Kes.

Yagailo  (Jagiello,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Lithuania),  158,  159.

Yama,  Yaniski  gorodok  (Yam-
burg,  town  near  Narva,  N.W.
of  Novgorod),  167,  169,  200.

Yaropolk  (Rostislavich,  Knyaz
of  Novgorod),  28-31.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Veliki  Kny-
az oi  Kiev),  12,  13,  16.

—  (Yaroslavich, Knyaz), 40,

53-
Yaroslav (Georgievich, Knyaz),
16.

—  (Izyaslavich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev),  19,  21,  28.

—  (Svyatopolkovich,  Knyaz  of
Vladimir  or  Volodimir  in
Volynia),  8.

—  (Vladimirovich,  Veliki  Knyaz
of  Kiev),  1-4.

—  ( — ,  Knyaz  of  Novgorod),
31-42.

Yaroslav  (Vladimirovich, A'wya^),
78.

—  (Vsevolodovich,  Knyaz  of
Novgorod,  Veliki  Knyaz  of
Kiev  and  Vladimir),  29,  50,
53-57,  61,  63,  67-73,  75,  77-80,
86-88,  92,  116.

—  ( — , Knyaz of Chernigov),

38.  39-

—  (Yaroslavich,  Knyaz  of  Nov-
gorod), 94,  97,  99-101,  103-106.

—  [Knyaz oi'^lurom),  •].
Yaroslavl  (town  on  the  Volga),

20,  82,  134.
Yas  (people),  64.
Yatvyag  (people),  8.
Yem  (people,  Finns),  3, 10, 17,

20, 32, 35, 68, 84, 95, III,

117,  138.
Yugra (country and people in

N.E.  Russia  and  Siberia),  33,

36,  37,  123,  125,  202.
Yuri  =  Georgi,  q.v.
Yurev  (Gyurgev,  i.e.  Ytirev  Ne-

metski,  sc.  Dorpat,  town,  W.  of

Novgorod),  13, 35,  64,  79,  97,

loi, 125, 129, 139,  143, 149-

151,  164.

—  [Polski,  so  called  because
situated  in  open  treeless  coun-
try {pole),  town,  N.E.  of
Moscow),  83,  159.

Zarub  (town),  65.

Zavoloche, the country beyond

the  portage [Volok), v. Volok

(sc.  Dvinsk).
Zubchev  (town),  56.

Letchworth:  At  the  Arden  Press

J

t £ T-V A  •«»■ -•'—  —

REl
TO

ci^v^w  J^TiON  DEPARTMENT

198  Main  Stacks

LOAN  PERIOD  1
HOME  USE

"4

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  ARER  7  DAYS.

Renewls  and  Recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  the  due  date.

Books  may  be  Renewed  by  calling  642-3405.

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW

FORM  NO.  DD6

IIMIVFRSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA.  BERKhLbY
UNIVERbllY  ^g^g^^^^LEV.CA  94720-6000

"CBEBKELEyUBB/JBIES

B0030lbS7g

•• 399680

UNI  i-ERSlTY  OF  CAI^IFORNIA  LIBRARY
