THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU: THE MOTHERLAND OF MAN
by Col. James Churchward
New York: William Edwin Rudge, 1926

[Transcribed from the Internet Archive scan (the-lost-continent-of-mu; Google scan). Raw OCR, not proofread. Public domain: published 1926 (1st ed.; the 1931 ed. copyright was renewed — this is the 1926 text). NOTE: the originator text of the Mu hypothesis; included as such.]

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Photograph by Bachrach, Inc.

The Lost Continent
of Mu

The Motherland of Man

BY

COL. JAMES CHURCHWARD

Illustrated

NEW YORK

WILLIAM EDWIN RUDGE
1926

Unlv. Library. UC Santa Cruz 2006


All Rights Reserved

PRINTED IN THE U.8. A,

DEDICATION

THIS WORK IS DEDICATED TO G. L. TANZER OF SEATTLE,
WASHINGTON, AS A TOKEN OF THE GREAT REGARD IN
WHICH I HOLD HIS BROAD MIND, HIS HIGH IDEALS, AND

HIS GREAT LOVE OF NATURE AND HUMANITY

PREFACE

All matters of science in this work are based on the.
translations of certain ancient Naacal tablets which I dis-
covered in India many years ago.

These tablets were written either in Burma or in Mu,
the lost continent, and their extreme age is attested by the
fact that legendary history says that the Naacals left
Burma more than 15,000 years ago.

Some of the subjects embodied in these tablets are: An
account of the creation of the earth; Life and its origin;
the origin and workings of the Forces.

With the aid of the high priest of the temple I deci-
phered and translated these tablets, which unfortunately
were only fragments of the various subjects. I spent many
years proving, as far as possible by experimentation, that
the facts set forth were true. This work represents over
fifty years of investigation and research and embodies
what I have found written on these ancient and intensely
interesting tablets.

The gist of them indubitably establishes to my own sat-
isfaction that at one time the earth had an incalculably
ancient civilization which was, in many respects, superior
to our own, and far in advance of us in some important
essentials that the modern world is just beginning to have
cognizance of. These tablets, with other ancient records,

bear witness to the amazing fact that the civilizations of
India, Babylonia, Persia, Egypt and Yucatan were but
the dying embers of this great past civilization.

I desire here to express my appreciation and thanks for
the courtesies and contributions received for the benefit of
this book from: The British Museum, London; The Dear-
born Independent, Dearborn, Michigan; The American
Weekly, New York; and The World, New York.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER PAGE
I, ALPHA—THE BEGINNING . . . . . ... I
.2. THE LOST CONTINENT . . . . . . . . + +20
3- THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENTON EARTH . . . «355
4. RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT . . . ... S51
5. THE EGYPTIAN SACRED VOLUME, BOOK OF THE DEAD. 92
6. MU, THEEMPIREOFTHESUN . . . .. . . III
7. AGEOF MU’SCIVILIZATION . . . . . ...—.-”sid8
8. SIMPLESYMBOLS . ... So. w e.
Q. SYMBOLS . . . . . . . . . se GO
10. NORTH AMERICA’S PLACE AMONG THE ANCIENT
CIVILIZATIONS . . . . . . .) .SS«S'
II, NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIEDCITIES. . . . . . 206
12. YUCATAN’S PLACE AMONG THE ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS 234
13. THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU. ws wtiwsti«‘“!:té«i HD
14. THE ORIGIN OF SAVAGERY . . . ........_—s.:—Ss- 266
15. ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS . . . . . 272
16. ANCIENT SACRED MYSTERIES, RITES AND CEREMONIES 300

OMEGA—THE COPING STONE. . . . .. . . 308

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE
The Author .. . Frontispiece
Some of the iterating ‘Symbols iad Vignettes Found on the
Naacal Tablets... 2. 7
Narayana, the Seven-Headed Stipene + ¢ = 2 @& & & we
The Destruction of Mu .. oh 4h ep at ce. ee
The Geographical Position of Mu < we et oe oe te a me «6G
Map of Mu. . 2 2k fo oe & et ee x. 38
The Last Magnetic C.téelyain N-+ds chy A we
Princess Arawaliof Arorailsland . . . . . . . . 47
Agingan, Saipan, Mariana Islands . . . . . . . 48
The Fan Carried by the Princess Arawali . . . . . . 9 49
Troano Manuscript Recounting the Destructionof Mu . . . 50
Plate from the Codex Cortesianus . . . . . . . . ~ 54
Plate from the Codex Cortesianus .. 55
The Distribution of Prehistoric Stone Remaingo on the South Sea
Islands: 2 em & Ok tO ea Gs s. : 62
Easter Island Statuary . . . . . . . . . ~~ 65
Eastern Island Tablet . . . b. set a om Oe | POF
Pictured Slabs from Houses on Buster leand % « t& “eo ge O69
Stone Arch on Tonga-Tabu . . . . . . . . . ~~. ~ Ji
House of Taga, Tinian Island . . . . . . . . . 76
Latte, Hinapsan Island . . . . . . . .) hh. O76
House of Taga, Tinian Island . . . . . . . . . # 97
A Sample of the Art of PrehistoricMan . . . . . . . 80
Greek Alphabet in Hieratic Charactersof Mu . . . . . 90
Greek Cross and Mu’s Escutcheon . . . . .. . «~ -~Sts«&OY
A Central American Obelisk, Quirigua . . . . . . . 103
Map of the Great Uighur Empire . . . . . . . . 105
An Uighur Queen and Her Consort ._. oe ee «08
Scepter Carried by a Monarch of the Uighurs . . 109
Symbols in Ancient Writings and Inscriptions Referring t to Mu . N4
The Road-Cut, Capital Hill, Smyrna, Asia Minor . . . «121
The Oldest of the Symbols . .. ¢ % “We wis ye 127
The Tau : So we. et co Se as mR. OEE
The Tau from a Maya Manuscript Coe . . 132
Return of the Rainy Season, from the Troano Manuscript — 2 32

Ancient Sacred Symbols . . . . . . . «© . « «136

Hieratic Letters from Various Ancient Alphabets .
A Few Simple Symbols Used in Ancient Writings
The First Book Ever Written . & 3
Symbolical Carving

The Great Seven-Headed Serucal of Agiier Gimbodia

Carvings on the Great Seven-Headed Serpent
Ganesha, the Lord of the Fields and Crops

A Hindu Naga Knife...
Symbols on the Handle and Sheath of he Knif e.
Tat Pillar... bok

The Great Monolith z at *Tiahaanaco

Head-Dress of an Inca High Priest, Peru .

One of the Symbolic Stones, Anarajapoora, Cavin
Symbols Found Among the Cliff-Dwellers’ Writings .

Ground Plan of a Temple at Grapevine Canyon, Nevada

Another Writing in Grapevine Canyon, Nevada .
Found in Gould Gulch, Beatty, Nevada .
Cliff-Dwellers’ Guidepost ;

Colorado River and Tributaries .

Painting of Mastodon in Hava Supai Ciayon, heeane
Rock Carving, Hava Supai Canyon, Arizona .
Gilder’s Discoveries, Nebraska :

Cliff Writings, Nevada

Cliff-Dwellers’ Guide-Posts in Three Fort sf Writing

Niven’s Mexican Buried Cities

Present Conditions Surrounding Niven’s Mexican Buried Cities ;

Relics from Niven’s Lowest City .

Tablets from Niven’s Mexican Buried Chics: Second City
Tablets from Niven’s Mexican Buried Cities. Second City .

An Old Maya Temple in Yucatan
A Volcanic Cataclysm

Prince Coh in Battle .

Owl Vase from the “Treasures of Priam”

A Hawk-Headed Sphinx ._.
Conditions of the Earth before Land Appeared

The Probable Condition Underlying Mu before Her Subnicrion
Probable Position of Gas Chambers Underlying Mu before Her

Submersion
Present Gas Belts across a acound ‘he Pacific Oiesn
After the Submersion of Mu .
Interior of the Great Pyramid

PAGE
138
139
141
146
149
150
152
154
155
159
162
163
167
174
178
178
181
182
184
186
192
198
202
203
208
209
214
221
222
236
242
245
251
251
253
253

256
256
271
306

@@® OSSOSCO@® OOO @OEO
I

Alpha—T he Beginning
@@ @OSOCOOGS2D@LOE®

ae Garden of Eden was not in Asia but on a now
sunken continent in the Pacific Ocean. The biblical story
of creation—the epic of the seven days and seven nights—
came first not from the peoples of the Nile or of the Eu-
phrates Valley but from this now submerged continent,
Mu—the Motherland of Man.

These assertions can be proved by the complex records
which I discovered upon long-forgotten sacred tablets in
India, together with records from other countries. They
tell of this strange country of 64,000,000 inhabitants,
who, 50,000 years ago, had developed a civilization su-
perior in many respects to our own. They described, among
other things, the creation of man in the mysterious land of
Mu.

By comparing this writing with records of other ancient
civilizations, as revealed in written documents, prehistoric
ruins and geological phenomena, I found that all these
centers of civilization had drawn their culture from a
common source—Mu.

We may, therefore, be sure that the biblical story of the

J

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

creation as we know it today has evolved from the impres-
sive account gathered from those ancient tablets which
relate the history of Mu—history S00 centuries old.

The manner in which this original story of the creation .
came to light forms a tale that takes us back more than
fifty years.

It was a famine time in India. I was assisting in relief
work the high priest of a college temple. Although I did
not know it at first, he was exceedingly interested in ar-
chology and the records of the ancients, and had a greater
knowledge of those subjects than any other living man.

When he saw one day that I was trying to decipher a
peculiar bas-relief, he took an interest in me that brought
about one of the truest friendships I have known. He
showed me how to solve the puzzle of these peculiar in-
scriptions and offered to give me lessons which would fit
me for still more difficult work.

For more than two years I studied diligently a dead
language which my priestly friend believed to be the orig-
inal tongue of mankind. He informed me that this lan-
guage was understood by only two other high priests in
India. A great difficulty arose from the fact that many of
the apparently simple inscriptions had hidden meanings
which had been designed especially for the Holy Brothers
—the Naacals—a priestly brotherhood, who were sent
from the motherland to the colonies to teach the sacred
writings, religion and the sciences.

One day, when he was in a talkative mood, he told me
that there were a number of ancient tablets in the secret
archives of the temple. What they consisted of he did not
know, for he had seen only the chatties which contained

2

ALPHA——-THE BEGINNING

them. Although he was in a position to examine the writ-
ings he had never done so, as they were sacred records not
to be touched.

In discussing these secret writings he added something
that sent my curiosity up to a new high point. He had
already mentioned the legendary motherland of man—
the mysterious land of Mu. Now he amazed me by the
admission that these precious tablets were believed by
many to have been written by the Naacals, either in Bur-
ma or in the vanished motherland itself. I became im-
patient to see them when I learned that the writings were
only fragments of a vast collection that had been taken
from one of the seven Rishi (sacred) cities of India. The
bulk of them was believed to have been lost. Still, how-
ever, there remained this opportunity to see what I might
of the ancient fragments of antiquity that lay dust-laden
in the dark. :

Day after day I attempted to discover some method by
which I could obtain access to these hidden treasures, but
my friend, although extremely courteous, was adamant in
his refusal to let me see them.

“My son,” he would say, with a touch of sadness in his
voice, “I would that I could satisfy your desire, but that
may not be. They are sacred relics that must not be taken
out of their containers. I dare not grant your wish.”

“But think—they may not be packed properly and may
break and crumble in their boxes,” I urged. ‘““We should at
least look at them to see if they are safe.”’

But this argument was of no avail.

Six months passed. Curiosity or anxiety about their con-
dition had won the contest over my priestly friend, for one

3

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

evening on the table in front of him two of the ancient
tablets were lying on a cloth.

I examined the long-hidden tablets with curiosity. They
were apparently of sun-burnt clay and extremely dusty.
With great care I cleaned them and then set to work de-
ciphering the characters that were in the same dead lan-
guage that I had been studying with my friend.

Fortune was with me that evening, for these two pre-
cious forms of clay revealed facts of such import that we
both realized that here indeed were the genuine records of
Mu. The history, however, broke off abruptly at a most
interesting point at the bottom of the second tablet. Not
even the high priest could restrain his curiosity to see the
rest.

“It is impossible for us to leave off here, my son,’’ he
said. “I will get the next tablets out tomorrow.”

Fortunately, the next tablets that he procured were not
of the same series, but had to do with an entirely different
subject, and in order to find the consecutive tablets all had
to be brought out. It was well, for many of the tablets had
been so badly packed that they were broken. These we re-
stored with cement. When I repacked them, I wrapped
each tablet in tissue paper and cotton wool.

“My son,”’ said the priest, “I feel that a sacred warning
was sent to me through your voice to safeguard these
relics.’

Months of intense concentration in translating the tab-
lets followed, but the reward justified the effort. The
writings described in detail the creation of the earth and of
man, and the place where he first appeared—Mu.

Realizing that I had unearthed secrets that were of

4

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

great importance in the elucidation of that eternal prob-
lem, Man, I sought the other lost tablets, but without suc-
cess. I carried letters of introduction to high priests of
temples throughout India, but in every instance I was re-
ceived with coldness and suspicion.

“I have not seen any such tablets,”’ each would declare,
and doubtless they were telling the truth. Like my friend,
they had probably only looked at the containers.

Once in Burma, I visited an ancient Buddhist temple
in my search for the missing records.

“From where do you come?” asked the high priest,
looking at me with veiled suspicion.

“From India,” I replied.

“Then go back to India and ask the thieves who stole
them from us to show them to you.”’ And, spitting on the
ground at my feet, he turned and walked away.

These rebuffs disheartened me somewhat, but I had
already obtained so much valuable information from the
tablets that L determined to study the writings of all the
old civilizations and compare them with the legends of
Mu.

This I did, and found that the civilizations of the early
Greeks, the Chaldeans, the Babylonians, the Persians, the
Egyptians and the Hindus had been definitely preceded
by the civilization of Mu.

Continuing my researches, I discovered that this lost
continent had extended from somewhere north of Hawaii
to the south as far as the Fijis and Easter Island, and was
undoubtedly the original habitat of man. I learned that in
this beautiful country there had lived a people that col-
onized the earth, and that this land of smiling plenty had

5

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

been obliterated by terrific earthquakes and submersion
12,000 years ago, and had vanished in a vortex of fire and
water.

Also I learned an original story of the creation of the
world. It was on the continent of Mu that man first came
into being.

I have traced this same story from Mu to India, where
colonizers from the vanished continent had settled; from
India into Egypt; from Egypt to the temple of Sanai,
where Moses copied it; and from Moses to the faulty
translations of Ezra 800 years later. The plausibility of
this will be apparent even to those who have not studied
the subject carefully, when they see the close resemblance
between the story of the creation as we know it and the
tradition that originated in Mu.

Before commencing to relate the writings on the tablets
I will give a page of the vignettes found on them, with
their decipherings and translations:

NAACAL TABLETS

Vignette 1a. Fine, straight, horizontal lines. Symbol for
space.

Vignette 1b. Symbolizes the Seven-headed Serpent mov-
ing inspace. The surrounding circle is the universe.

Vignette 2. Wavy horizontal lines. Symbol for earthly
waters.

Vignette 3. The circle is a picture of the sun. The sun was
the collective symbol of all the attributes of the deity.

Vignette 4. Fine vertical lines from the sun symbolizing
his forces which are affinitive to the earth’s light force,

6

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

SOME OF THE INTERESTING SYMBOLS AND VIGNETTES
FOUND ON THE NAACAL TABLETS

7

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

which, being set in movement, gives light upon the
earth.

Vignette 5. Vertical wavy lines from the sun symbolize
the sun’s forces which are affinitive to the earth’s heat
force; they meet and the earth’s heat force becomes
active. .

Vignette 6a. Vertical dotted lines from the sun symbolize
his forces which are affinitive to the earth’s life force.
Vignette 6b. Symbolizes the sun’s affinitive forces striking
the earth’s life force in cosmic eggs, which are in the

water, and bringing them into life.

Vignette 6c. Symbolizes the sun’s affinitive forces striking
the earth’s life force in cosmic eggs, which are on the
land, and hatching them into life.

Vignette 7. This is the geometrical symbol that was as-
signed by the ancients to Mu. It is also the hieratic
letter M and reads: ‘‘Moo, Ma, mother, land, field,
country” and “mouth.” |

Vignette 8. The Tau was the symbol of resurrection in
Mu. It is a picture of the constellation, the Southern
Cross. The Tau also symbolizes “bringing forth,”
“emerge,” etc.

Vignette 9. The lotus flower was the floral symbol of Mu.
Tradition says that the lotus was the first flower to ap-
pear upon the earth, and for that reason it was adopted
as the symbolical flower of the motherland.

Vignette 10. Three was the symbolic numeral adopted to
represent Mu. This was because the continent consisted
of three separate areas of land divided from each other
by narrow channels or seas.

Vignette 11. Keh—the leaping deer—is frequently found

8

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

in the Naacal tablets; it is the symbol of “‘first man.”
This animal was selected to symbolize the first man be-
cause of its leaping power. Man came on earth fully
and perfectly developed; he “leaped” upon the earth
in his first and original form without going through
nature’s development of life. In other words, he was a
special creation.

Vignette 12. This was the ancient symbol for fire in Mu.
The lines began thick at the bottom and wave and taper
toa fine point.

Vignette 13. This vignette appears on a tablet describing
the raising of the mountains and the formation of gas
belts. Therefore, we see where the Egyptians obtained
their symbol of fire; also the scarab. The Naacals from
India carried them to Egypt. The Egyptian fire symbol
is only a modification of the Naga. The Egyptians put
a handle on the Naga and turned it into a sword.

It is not hard to find the reason for the Egyptian
change or modification. In their hieroglyphics they
wanted to depict two forms of fire: the fires of the
underneath and actual flames. This they did to record
the destruction of the motherland, which they say “‘sank
into a fiery abyss” and ‘‘was enveloped in flames as she
went down.”

This symbol is shown in our chapter on the Egyptian
sacred book, the Book of the Dead.

Vignette 14. I consider this one of the most interesting of
all those found on the Naacal tablets. It depicts man’s
advent on earth in the land of Mu. I will first dissect it
by showing separately each symbol:

A is the lotus, the symbolical flower of Mu.

9

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

B Three pieces of foliage, giving Mu’s numeral.

C The hieratic letter M, Mu’s alphabetical symbol.

D The Tau symbol of resurrection, “emerging,” ‘‘com-
ing forth,” and “to appear.”’ The head of the Tau,
being the hieratical letter M, also means land; so
land is emerged.

E is the water symbol. The emerged land is surrounded
by water.

F is Keh—the first man.

This vignette three times tells the name of the land,

Mu, by the symbols A, B and C. Man, symbol F, is in

the act of appearing on earth, leaping in the exuber-

ance of his spirits.
This vignette was the cause of my world search for
information regarding Mu.

I found that the tablets included several subjects and
that it required a series of tablets to explain each subject.
Each series ran from two tablets, the shortest, to sixteen,
the longest. Fortunately for us, we found two tablets that
were keys to the various symbols and hieroglyphics. I ar-
ranged the tablets as follows:

Series 1. A description of the creation down to and in-
cluding the advent of man.

Series 2. The raising of the mountains by the “fires of
the underneath” (gases) ; and provisions for the disposal
of future gases.

Series 3. The origin and workings of the great forces
throughout the universe.

Series 4. The origin and workings of the earth’s great
primary force, showing two divisions and differentiating
between the two.

10

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

Series 5. The origin and workings of the earth’s great
atomic force—a subdivision of one of the two principal
divisions.

Series 6. The origin of the force that creates and sus-
tains life, with its workings. A subdivision of one of the
two principal divisions.

Series 7. The origin of life, showing what life is, the
changes in the forms of life—imperative as the earth de-
veloped.

Series 8. The creation of man, showing what man is and
in what way he differs from all other creations.

Series 9. The advent of man upon earth and where he
first appeared, which was called in the tablets “the Moth-
erland of Man.” Unquestionably these were only the
commencement of a long series—probably the early his-
tory of Mu.

Series 10. This series consisted of two tablets, but each
was double the size of the others—possibly larger. They
served as a key to the writings and vignettes on the other
tablets.

It was the first two tablets of this series which started
the work that ended in the translation of all. However,
had we not possessed the key, our chances for deciphering
the rest of the tablets would have been exceedingly small.
Without the key, I do not believe that we could have de-
ciphered one-half of the writings. Our work was made
simpler by the old priest’s amazing knowledge of the past.
If he only grasped the first line of secret writing he knew
what the rest of the tablet contained. He told me that it
was believed that certain other temples had many such
records that had been saved when the ancient cities were
destroyed.

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Taking them in the foregoing order, the tablets start by

saying:
‘ “Originally, the universe was only a soul or spirit.
Everything was without life — calm, silent, soundless.
Void and dark was the immensity of space. Only the Su-
preme Spirit, the great Self-existing Power, the Creator,
the Seven-headed Serpent, moved within the abyss of
darkness.

‘The desire came to Him to create worlds and He cre-
ated worlds; and the desire came to Him to create the
earth, with living things upon it, and He created the earth
and all therein. And this is the manner of the creation of
the earth, with all the living things upon it :—

“The seven superlative intellects of the Seven-headed
Serpent gave seven commands.” (I shall use the Naacal
esoteric meanings as they are the most intelligible to the
reader. The demotic are all symbolical and not easily
understood. )

The first intellectual command was:

“‘ ‘Tet the gases which are without form and scattered
through space be brought together, and out of them let the
earth be formed.’ The gases then assembled themselves
into the form of a whirling mass.”

The second command was:

“Let the gases solidify to form the earth.’ Then the
gases solidified; volumes were left on the outside, out of
which water and the atmosphere were to be formed; and
volumes were enveloped within the new world. Darkness
prevailed and there was no sound, for as yet neither the
atmosphere nor the waters were formed.”

The third command was:

12

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

“ ‘Tet the outside gases be separated and let them form
the atmosphere and the waters.’ And the gases were sepa-
rated; one part went to form the waters, and the waters
settled upon the earth and covered its face so that no land
appeared anywhere. The gases that did not form the
waters formed the atmosphere, and:

“The light was contained in the atmosphere.

‘And the shafts of the sun met the shafts of the light in
the atmosphere and gave birth to light. Then there was
light upon the face of the earth; and (Fig. 4):

“The heat was also contained in the atmosphere.

“And the shafts of the sun met the shafts of the heat in
the atmosphere and gave it life. Then there was heat to
warm the face of the earth.” (Fig. 5.)

The fourth command was:

‘* Let the gases that are within the earth raise the land
above the face of the waters.’ Then the fires of the under-
earth lifted the land on which the waters rested until it
appeared above the face of the waters, and this was the
dry land.”

The fifth command was:

“ ‘Let life come forth in the waters.’ And the shafts of
the sun met the shafts of the earth in the mud of the
waters and there formed cosmic eggs (life germs) out of
particles of the mud. Out of these cosmic eggs came forth
life as commanded.” (Fig. 62.)

The sixth command was:

“* ‘Let life come forth upon the land.’ And the shafts of
the sun met the shafts of the earth in the dust of the land,
and out of it formed cosmic eggs; and from these cosmic

13

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

NARAYANA, THE SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT. THE SYMBOL
OF THE CREATOR AND CREATION

Nara means the Divine One; Yano—creator of all things; Naacals—seven superla-
tive intellects; Vedanta—seven mental planes.

14

Digitized by Google

ALPHA—THE BEGINNING

eggs life came forth upon the earth as was commanded.”
(Fig. 6c.) And when all this was done, the seventh intel-
lect said: ‘‘Let us make man after our own fashion, and let
us endow him with powers to rule this earth.”

“Then Narayana, the Seven-headed Intellect, the Cre-
ator of all things throughout the universe, created man,
and placed within his body a living, imperishable spirit,
and man became /ike Narayana in intellectual power.
Then was creation complete.”

The seven commands are, without doubt, also indicative
of seven periods of time. A period of time is not measured
by any particular number of years. It may mean a day, a
year, or millions of years. Thus these tablets do not assign
any particular length of time to creation. It may have
taken millions or tens of millions of years to accomplish
what was recorded in the tablets. It is merely stated that
the earth was created in seven periods of time, not in seven
days, as recofded in the biblical legend.

The general resemblance of the opening part of the
Naacal record, as regards the story of the creation, to the
account as found in the Bible is remarkable, and it is also
remarkable how great are the divergences thereafter.
Legends of the creation are prevalent among peoples
throughout the world, and in all instances I have found so
much of the material identical that the only conclusion to
be drawn is that they are of common origin and their
genesis was in Mu.

The seventh command was the hardest of all to trans-
late. The actual deciphering was easy, but we found it
impossible to find modern words that would convey identi-
cally the same meanings as the ancient. For instance,

15

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

“soul” or “spirit” were the nearest words we could find to
represent what was put into the body of man. The word
“living” may or may not be exactly what was intended in
the original. The word “‘imperishable”’ is, without doubt,
absolutely correct. But what does the phrase “after our
own fashion” actually mean? Certainly not “in our own
image.” It, in some way, refers to mentality and mystic
powers, and this is substantiated by the words: “endow
him with powers to rule the earth.”

The Bible uses a good symbolical example when it refers
to “the breath of God.” At any rate, it is clear that the
meaning is special powers received from God, and may
therefore be looked upon as a part of God, as a leaf is a
part of the tree. Man came from God and must return
whence he came.

The Naacal tablets were exceedingly difficult to deci-
pher, there being so many vignettes and tableaux and so
very little hieratic writing. Some of the parts were also so
worn and obliterated that we could make nothing of them.
Words also appeared for which we could find no equiva-
lent in modern languages.

At the commencement of our studies my priestly friend
informed me that it would be impossible to decipher
ancient tablets and inscriptions without a knowledge of
what he called the Naga-Maya language; as all of the
ancient writings that have to do with Mu are in this lan-
guage; and, all Naacal writings have an esoteric or hidden
meaning, known only to the Naacals and to those whom
they taught. To this hidden language he held the key, and,
after he had taught me its use, it proved a sesame that
unlocked for me many strange doors.

16 |

ALPHA——THE BEGINNING

For more than two years I studied this ancient lan-
guage, with intermittent decipherings to test my progress.

My old Hindu friend and teacher remarked when we
had completed our task: “(My son, we have got the gen-
eral meaning but not the perfect detail.’”’ I must candidly
admit that without this dear old gentle friend the tablets
could never have been deciphered by me, I was totally
incompetent.

I find the reflection of the teachings of these tablets, or
other similar ones, in the old Hindu literature; also in old
literature other than Hindu. As an example:

Hinovu: The Manava Dharma Sastra, Book 2, sloka 74:
“In the beginning only existed the Infinite called Adite.”
Book 1, sloka 8: “This germ became an egg.” Book 1,
sloka 10: “The visible universe in the beginning was only
darkness.”” Book 1, sloka g: ‘He first produced the waters
and in them deposited an egg.”

Rig Veda, sec. 3, 1. 2, v. 4, pp. 316-317 (2000-2500
B.C.) : “In this egg was reproduced the intellect of the
Supreme Being wnder the form of Buddha, through whose
union with the goddess Maya, the good mother of all the
gods and man. . .” (This corresponds with Adam and
Eve 1,700 years later.) Page 3: “Other than Him nothing
existed ; darkness there was.’’ Page 4: ““He who measures
out the light in the air.”

Aitaréya-A’ram-’ ya, slokas 4 to 8: “Originally this uni-
verse was only a soul, nothing active or inactive existed.
The thought came to Hin, ‘I wish to create worlds,’ and so
He created the worlds, the light, the mortal beings, the
atmosphere that contains the light, the earth that is perish-
able, and the lower depths, that of the waters.”

17

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Yucatan—Nahuatl: ‘The particles of atmosphere on
being hit by the divine arrows became animated. Heat,
which determines the movement of matter, was developed
init.” —

There is no question whatever, and both written and
legendary history say, that these books were written from
ancient temple records, and that the Naacals wrote the
temple histories, and taught religion and science.

In southern India the temples have libraries of ancient
writings, but none, apparently, go back beyond the San-
skrit. I worked over several of these with high priests and
they were all in Sanskrit and on religious subjects. As none
of them contained any facts of historical value, I was not
sufficiently interested to continue their study.

There are considerable variations of the legend of the
creation in different sections of the world, which no doubt
is due to the manner in which it has been handed down to
generation after generation. Startling as it may appear,
the most scientific version, and the one above all others
except the Naacal that can be sustained by geological re-
search, is the version found among the semi-savages and
cannibalistic races of the South Sea Islands, especially the
Marquesans.

The Hindu, Chaldean, Egyptian, Maya and the
Greek in later times, describing the creation, eliminated
the scientific sections and recorded, by the use of symbols,
the facts without the whys and wherefores. The reason for
this is well told by Clement of Alexandria, who said:

“The Egyptians neither entrusted their mysteries to
every one nor degraded their secrets of divine matters by
disclosing them to the profane; reserving them for the

18

ALPHA——THE BEGINNING

heir apparent to the throne, and to such of the priests who
excelled in virtue and wisdom.” In other words, the eso-
teric meanings were not given out publicly.

It is a certainty that the Egyptian legend of the crea-
tion, from which Moses wrote the biblical account, came
from India when the Naacals went to Egypt as mission-
aries to teach the seven sacred inspired writings, religion
and the sciences. Therefore the dramatic story that is
taught in Sunday schools throughout the Christian world
today originated in the lost continent of Mu.

GOO ® OO O®BODOLOO8 @8
2

The Lost Continent

DIO ® BOO @OHLOGO8O ©8

Lae record of the destruction of Mu, the Motherland
of Man, is a strange one indeed. From it we learn how the
mystery of the white races in the South Sea Islands may
be solved and how a great civilization flourished in mid-
Pacific and then was completely obliterated in almost a
single night. A few decades ago scientists would have been
very doubtful about the possibility of the former existence
in the Pacific Ocean of a huge continent such as Mu. But
since then, records have come to light and comparisons
have been made which prove that such a land did at one
time exist. The proofs are of several types.

First, as I have already explained in the opening chap-
ter, there are the sacred tablets found in an Indian temple
and deciphered with the aid of a learned priest. These
tablets gave me the first hint about Mu and sent me on a
world-wide search. They had been written by the Naacals,
either in Burma or in the motherland. They told how the
Naacals had originally come from the motherland, the
land in the center of the Pacific. They also told the story
of the creation of man and his advent in this land. Rec-

20

THE LOST CONTINENT

ords of later date written in Mayax, Egypt and India tell
and describe the destruction of this land of Mu, when the
earth’s crust was broken up by earthquakes and then sank
into a fiery abyss. Then the waters of the Pacific rolled in
over her, leaving only water where a mighty civilization
had existed.

Second, there is confirmation of Mu in other ancient
manuscripts, including such a classic as the Hindu epic
Ramayana, written by the sage and historian, Valmiki,
from the dictation of Narana, the high priest of the Rishi
temple at Ayhodia, who read the ancient temple records
to him. In one place Valmiki mentions the Naacals as
“coming to Burma from the land of their birth in the
East,” that is, in the direction of the Pacific Ocean. Other
documents confirming the story of the sacred tablets and
Valmiki are: The Troano Manuscript, now in the British
Museum. This is an ancient Maya book written in Yuca-
tan. It speaks of the “Land of Mu” using the same sym-
bols for Mu that we find in India, Burma and Egypt.
Another reference is the Codex Cortesianus, a Maya book
of about the same age as the Troano Manuscript. Then
there is the Lhasa record, with hundreds of others from
Egypt, Greece, Central America, Mexico, and the cliff
writings in our western states.

Third, there are existing ruins which, by their location
and the symbols with which they are decorated, tell of the
lost continent of Mu, the motherland of man.

On some of the South Sea Islands, notably Easter,
Mangaia, Tonga-tabu, Panape, and the Ladrone or Mari-
ana Islands, there stand today remains of old stone temples
and lithic remains which take us back to the time of Mu.

21

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

At Uxmal in Yucatan, a ruined temple bears inscriptions
commemorative of the ‘Lands of the West, whence we
came”; and the striking Mexican pyramid southwest
of Mexico City, according to its inscriptions, was raised as
a monument to the destruction of these same “Lands of
the West.”

Fourth, there is the universality of certain old symbols
and customs as discovered in Egypt, Burma, India,
Japan, China, South Sea Islands, Central America, South
America and some of the North American Indian tribes
and other seats of ancient civilizations. These symbols
and customs are so identical as to make it certain that they
came from one source only—Mu. With this background,
then, we can follow the tale of the destruction of Mu.

We find that this continent was a vast stretch of rolling
country, extending from north of Hawaii, down towards
the south. A line between Easter Island and the Fijis
formed its southern boundary. It was over 5,000 miles
from east to west, and over 3,000 miles from north to
south. The continent consisted of three areas of land,
divided from each other by narrow channels or seas.

Basing my description on the records shown in Chapters
IV and V, I will try to picture her as she was.

Back, far back, into very remote times — many, many
thousands of years ago, and yet, on the very edge of what
we call historical trmes—there was a great continent in the
middle of the Pacific Ocean where now ‘“‘we find only
water and the sky,’ and groups of small islands, which
are today called the South Sea Islands.

1. Lhasa Record.
22

THE LOST CONTINENT

It was a “beautiful’’ tropical country with “vast
plains.’’* The valleys and plains were covered with rich
grazing grasses and tilled fields, while the “low rolling
hill-lands’’* were shaded by luxuriant growths of tropical
vegetation. No mountains or mountain ranges stretched
themselves through this earthly paradise to give an irregu-
lar, jagged, yet soft and graceful sky line. Mountains had
not yet been forced up from the bowels of the earth.

This great rich land was intersected and watered by
many broad, slow-running streams and rivers, which wound
their sinuous ways in fantastic curves and bends around
the wooded hills and through the fertile plains. Luxuriant
vegetation covered the whole land with a soft, pleasing,
restful mantle of green. Bright and fragrant flowers on
tree and shrub added coloring and finish to the landscape.
Tall fronded palms fringed the ocean’s shores and lined
the banks of the rivers for many a mile inland. Great
feathery ferns spread their long arms out from the river
banks. In valley places where the land was low, the rivers
broadened out into shallow lakes, around whose shores
myriads of sacred “lotus flowers’”* dotted the glistening
surface of the water, like vari-colored jewels in settings of
emerald green.

Over the cool rivers, gaudy-winged butterflies hovered
in the shade of the trees, rising and falling in fairy-like
movements, as if better to view their painted beauty in
nature’s mirror. Darting hither and thither from flower to

2. Easter Island Tablet.
3. Greek Record.

4. Troano Manuscript.
5. Various Records.

23

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

flower, tiny hummingbirds made their short flights, glis-
tening like living jewels in the rays of the sun.°

Little feathered songsters in bush and tree vied with
each other in their sweet lays.’

The chirpings of lively crickets filled the air, while
above all other sounds came those of the locust as he in-
dustriously “ground his scissors,” telling the whole world
all was well with him. |

Roaming through the primeval forests were herds of
“mighty mastodons and elephants” flapping their big ears
to drive off annoying insects.°

All this great continent was teeming with gay and happy
life over which ‘64,000,000 human beings” reigned su-
preme.” All this life was rejoicing in its luxuriant home.

Broad “smooth roads” ran in all directions “‘like a spi-
der’s web.” These roads were laid with smooth stones, so
perfectly matched that “grasses could not grow between
them.’

At the time of our narrative, the 64,000,000 people
were made up of “ten tribes” or ‘‘peoples,”’ each one dis-
tinct from the other, but all under one government.”””

Many generations before, the people had selected a king
and added the prefix Ra to his name. He then became the
hieratical head and emperor under the name “Ra Mu.”
The empire received the name “Empire of the Sun.”

6. S. A. Record.

7. Easter Island Tablet.

8. Indian and Maya Records.

g. Troano Manuscript.

10. Easter Island ‘Tablet.

11. Troano Manuscript.
12. Lhasa Record and others.

24.

THE LOST CONTINENT

All followed the same religion, a worship of the Deity
through symbols. All believed in the immortality of the
soul, which soul eventually returned to the ‘“‘great source”’
from whence it came.”

Their reverence for the Deity was so great that they
never spoke His name, and in prayer and supplication al-
ways addressed Him through a symbol. ‘Ra the Sun”
was used as the collective symbol for all His attributes.’’**

As high priest, Ra Mu was the representative of the
Deity in religious teachings. It was thoroughly taught and
understood that Ra Mu was not to be worshipped, as he
was only representative.

At this time the people of Mu were very highly civilized
and enlightened. There was no savagery on the face of the
earth, nor had there ever been, for all the peoples on earth
were children of Mu and were under the suzerainty of the
motherland.

The dominant race in the land of Mu was a white race,
exceedingly handsome people, with clear white or olive
skins, large, soft, dark eyes and straight black hair. Be-
sides this white race, there were people of other races,
people with yellow, brown or black skins. They, however,
did not dominate." These ancient people of Mu were
great navigators and sailors who took their ships all over
the world “from the eastern to the western oceans and
from the northern to the southern seas. . . . They were
also learned architects, building great temples and palaces

13. Lhasa Record and many others.

14. Maya and others.
15. Troano Manuscript, Codex Cortesianus and others.

25

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

of stone.”** They carved and set up great monoliths of
stone as monuments.

In the land of Mu there were seven great or principal
cities, the seats of religion, science and learning.*’ There
were many other large cities, towns and villages scattered
throughout the fhree lands.

Many cities were built at or near the mouths of the
great rivers, these being the seats of trade and commerce,
from which ships passed to and from all parts of the world.
The land of Mu was the mother and the center of the
earth’s civilization, learning, trade and commerce; all
other countries throughout the world were her colonies or
colonial empires.

According to records, inscriptions and traditions, man’s
advent on earth was in the land of Mu and on this account
the name “land of Kui” was added to that of Mu.”* Great
carved stone temples without roofs, sometimes called
“transparent” temples, adorned the cities. These temples
were roofless to permit the rays of Ra to fall on the heads
of those in supplication and prayer, a symbol of acknowl-
edgment by the deity. “The wealthy classes adorned
themselves in fine raiment with many jewels and precious
stones. They lived in imposing palaces attended by many
servants.”

Colonies had been started in all parts of the earth.

Being great navigators, their ships were constantly car-

16. Va)miki.
17. Lhasa Record.
18. Troano Manuscript and inscriptions.

19. Lhasa Record.
26

THE LOST CONTINENT

rying passengers and merchandise to and from the various
colonies.”

During cool evenings might be seen ships on pleasure
bent, filled with gorgeously dressed, jewel-bedecked men
and women. The long sweeps with which these ships were
supplied gave a musical rhythm to the song and laughter
of the merry passengers.

While thus this great land was at its zenith, while it
was the center of the earth’s civilization, learning, trade
and commerce, and while great stone temples were being
erected, and huge statues and monoliths were being set
up,” the land of Mu received a rude shock; a fearful
visitation overtook her. Rumblings from the bowels of the
earth, followed by earthquakes and volcanic outbursts,
shook up the southern parts of the land of Mu.”

Along the southern shores of the continent great cata-
clysmic waves from the ocean rolled in over the land, and
many a fair city went down to destruction. The volcanoes
belched out their fire, smoke and lava. The country being
flat, the lava did not run, but piled up, forming cones which
subsequently became igneous rocks, and are to be seen
today on some of the southern islands.** Eventually the
volcanic workings ceased. The volcanoes died out, and
have ever since remained silent.

After the cessation of these volcanic workings, the peo-
ple of the land of Mu gradually overcame their fright.

20. Valmiki.

21. Remains on the islands.
22. Easter and other islands
23. Easter and other islands.

27

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

THE DESTRUCTION OF MU
“Temples and palaces came crashing to the ground.”

28

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT

The ruined cities were rebuilt and trade and commerce
were resumed.

Many generations after this visitation, and when the
phenomenon had become past history, Mu again became
the victim of earthquakes. “The whole continent heaved
and rolled like the ocean’s waves. The land trembled and
shook like the leaves of a tree in a storm. Temples and
palaces came crashing to the ground and monuments and
statues were overturned. The cities became heaps of
ruins.”’** |

As the land rose and fell, quivered and shook, the fires
of the underneath burst forth, piercing the clouds in roar-
ing flames three miles in diameter.”* There they were met
by lightning shafts which filled the heavens. A thick black
pall of smoke overshadowed the land. “Huge cataclysmic
waves rolled in over the shores” and extended themselves
over the plains.’’ Cities and all things living went down to
destruction before them. ‘‘Agonizing cries of the multitude
filled the air. The people sought refuge in their temples
and citadels only to be driven out by fire and smoke, and
the women and the men in their shining garments and
precious stones cried: ‘Mu save us?’ ””"

As the setting sun showed himself on the horizon be-
neath the pall of smoke that overhung the whole land, he
was like a ball of fire, red and angry looking. When he
had sunk below the horizon, darkness intense prevailed,
relieved only by lightning flashes.

24. Troano Manuscript, Codex Cortesianus and Lhasa Record.
25. Hawaii, Niuafou and others.

26. Greek Record.

27. Lhasa Record.

29

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

“During the night”’”* the land was torn asunder and rent

to pieces. With thunderous roarings the doomed land
sank.”’” Down, down, down, she went, into the mouth of
hell—“‘a tank of fire.” As the broken land fell into that
great abyss of fire, ‘flames shot up around and enveloped
her.” The fires claimed their victim. “Mu and her
64,000,000 people were sacrificed.’””°

As Mu sank into that gulf of fire another force claimed
her—fifty millions of square miles of water. From all
sides huge waves or walls of water came rolling in over
her. They met where once was the center of the land.
Here they seethed and boiled.

Poor Mu, the motherland of man, with all her proud
cities, temples and palaces, with all her arts, sciences and
learning, was now a dream of the past. The deathly
blanket of water was her burial shroud. In this manner
was the continent of Mu destroyed. This catastrophe was
the first step in the destruction of the earth’s first great
cevilization.

For nearly 13,000 years the destruction of this great
civilization cast a heavy pall of darkness over the greater
part of the earth. The pall is being lifted, but many spots
yet remain covered by it.

When the continent was rent asunder and went down,
for geological reasons which IJ shall hereafter explain,
ridges and points of land here and there remained out of
water. These ridges and points were thus made islands
and groups of islands, but were very jagged and broken up

28. Codex Cortesianus and ‘Troano Manuscript.
29. Egyptian.
30. Troano Manuscript.

30

THE LOST CONTINENT

by the volcanic workings which had occurred beneath
them.

All these ridges and points were covered to their capac-
ity with humanity that had escaped from the sinking land
—their land, the motherland of man—which now formed
the bed of seething, steaming, muddy waters around them.

Having swallowed up the land with all thereon, the
waters rested as if satisfied with their grim work of de-
struction, and this is the Pacific Ocean. Was ever a name
more ironically applied to anything on earth?

On these islands, in the midst of the boiling sea, the
remnants of Mu’s population huddled, waiting for the ter-
rific quakes to abate. They had seen their temples and
palaces, their ships and their roads go crashing down, to
be swallowed by the ocean. Nearly the entire population
had been engulfed by this catastrophe. The few that re-
mained alive, all that were left of the motherland of man,
the ruler of the world, discovered that they were destitute.
They had nothing—no tools, no clothing, no shelter; little
land and no food. Around them hissed and seethed the
boiling waters that had rushed into the center of the fiery
pit when the continent sank; above them dense clouds of
steam, smoke and ashes cut off the friendly light, and they
were in an impenetrable darkness. In their ears still rang
the despairing shrieks of their comrades who had perished
in chaos when the seemingly solid ground had given way
beneath their feet. It was a scene of horror for the sur-
vivors, who found themselves facing death by starvation
and exposure. Few were able to survive the dreadful or-
deal and most of them perished miserably.

Only small islands were left. Some of them we know

31

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

today as the South Sea Islands, and some of their inhabi-
tants can claim, as remote ancestors, the people of ancient
Mu.

After a period of days the atmosphere was somewhat
cleared of the smoke and sulphurous fumes that had turned
the place into an inferno. The sun broke through the veil
of clouds and looked down upon a scene of death and deso-
lation. The newly formed islands might be seen thronged
with appalled men and women—those who were lucky or
unlucky enough to be still alive. They must have been
pitiful looking beings, these survivors of the world’s great-
est catastrophe since the flood of biblical fame. One can
picture some wringing their hands in despair while others
huddled together, dumb and motionless, reason gone, star-
ing with unseeing eyes at the spot where a continent had
been.

Where now was their once fair land? It lay deep be-
neath the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Where man once
reigned supreme was now the abode of fishes and the haunt
of uncanny, creeping things. Seaweeds would grow where
flowers had once raised their faces to the sun, and the coral
insects would build their reefs on the spots where man’s
busy hands had once reared palaces. Out of the tens of
millions of human beings that had once swarmed the
streets of the vanished cities, only a pitiful handful re-
mained on the newly formed islands that were otherwise
barren of all life.

As these wretched beings gazed out over the vast desert
of seething water, let us try to re-create, if we can, their
feelings of horror and despair. Everything was gone! All
was lost! What remained for them? Nothing except slow

32

THE LOST CONTINENT

starvation. They were crowded and huddled together on
tiny specks of land in the midst of an immense ocean, thou-
sands of miles from the mainland, without boats, ships or
food.

Under such circumstances it may easily be imagined
what happened. Many of them, of course, were hopelessly
insane, driven mad by the sheer horror of it all; others
prayed for death to relieve them from a strain that was
intolerable. To exist, one thing alone was left to them: fo
go down into the lowest depths of savagery, and, for a
time at least, live upon one another.

Skins of animals, if any were left, and the leaves of
coarse foliage must, in future, be their only dress. Stones,
spears and arrows must be their weapons of defense and
offense. Their cutting tools must be fashioned from flints
and shells. But the primary question was where to get
food? No doubt many of them died from exposure, fright
and hunger, and as these died, their bodies became the
food of the survivors. In this manner, began the first can-
nibalism and savagery. Thus these survivors of the high-
est civilization descended to the lowest savagery which has
continued on through the ages to the present time. Were
they to blame for their fall? This is a question for each
reader to answer for himself.

One may readily imagine the loathing and repugnance
that these cultured beings must have had for such food,
and we may feel comforted in believing that many died
before they could force themselves to partake of it. Grad-
ually, however, as generation followed generation through
the long procession of years, these poor islanders sank
lower and lower until even traditions of their past, which

33

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

at first were religiously kept and handed down to posterity,
became dim and at last forgotten. Their former greatness
was erased from their minds as completely as the treach-
erous waters of the Pacific had wiped away their mother-
land, but, although this past is forgotten by the islanders,
marks have remained among them for future identifica-
tion, thus carrying out an unvarying law.

I have previously mentioned that a veil of darkness was
cast over mankind by the destruction of Mu, but I mean
this in a comparative sense only. The colonial empires,
for a time, carried on the civilization of the motherland,
but without her aid they gradually declined, then flickered
out, and from their ashes the new and present civilization
has arisen.

BSOSSOO @ OOO ®@ OO
3

Lhe Land of Man's Advent
on Earth

@@ @OSSCOO® G®VOOa0

Ix the land of Mu we have unquestionably found where
man made his advent upon the earth. Various records con-
clusively prove that the land of Mu was the biblical
Garden of Eden. The records show that the land of Mu
lay to the west of America and to the east of Asia, and
therefore in the Pacific Ocean.

Data that I have examined also show that the mother-
land was in the Pacific Ocean, because much of this data
consists of the actual remains of this vanished continent.
On parts that were not submerged there still remain
vestiges of temples, traditions, statuary and sacred sym-
bols, and the written evidence and inscriptions show that
these mute mementoes of a vanished race originated in
Mu. The authenticity of these remains is corroborated in
every possible manner—by written records, by inscrip-
tions, by customs, by language and, finally, by traditions.

I have established by this indisputable evidence the
place where there was a prehistoric civilization. Much of
this evidence is concretely furnished by stone temples,
stone monuments, stone statuary, cut and dressed stone

35

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

NW dO NOILISOd TVOIHdVUDOAS AHL

ONY 147
MAN a
N¥ 40 ay

VOIMAWY TUIHVL nevi-voxo. @
yorvs@ e 9
H.L.IOS sysadyvn® NOAYNIN Se aes
Iv¥ouny @ © apa Ps, Ne"
q \\
Oy f
I
Sas IIVAYH @

J
l| f
t| 1
| ,
F didalovVd
l y . ;

YOIMAWY
: y
i i
I - 2 it

HLYON
I Y it
| J il
20

Y f
' — = ————— calli: |

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

waiting shipment, and the quarries from which the stone
came. In these quarries unfinished statuary has been
found, and as these discoveries have been made in the
South Sea Islands, it demonstrates beyond the shadow of
a doubt that these islands were once parts of the submerged
continent of Mu.

The records and data based on the supposed age of the
Troano Manuscript show that the land of Mu was in exis-
tence up to the very edge of historical times. The land of
Mu was in existence up to within 12,000 to 12,500 years
ago. Taking the islands upon which remains and traditions
have been found, I have sketched a map showing where
Mu was situated in the Pacific Ocean. There is nothing
upon which to base either a western or a northern coast
line. From various records it would seem that this conti-
nent was made up of three separate lands, divided from
each other by narrow seas or channels, but where or how
these divisions were made by nature there is nothing to
show, except, possibly, an Egyptian hieroglyphic which
represents three long, narrow lands running from east to
west.

For various reasons, the principal one being coloniza-
tion, I think the land ran much farther north than has
been shown. I have given Easter Island as the southeast
corner, Tonga-tabu as about the southwestern corner, the
Ladrones as the northwestern corner, Hawaii in the north,
and no defined northeastern corner. As will be seen, I have
made many large bays and estuaries, because records show
that the land was low, without mountains. As the land
was so low and rolling, with immense plains, it would nat-
urally have a coast line similar to the one I have drawn.

37

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Both the Troano Manuscript and the Codex Cortesianus
refer to the land of Mu as the land of hills of earth or
“ridges of earth.” The Greek record refers to it as “‘plains.”
I feel convinced that all three of these records are correct,
because up to the time that the continent vanished beneath
the Pacific, there were no mountains. The volcanic work-

ee

>. ee

‘f 2
<7 ‘ nna

S .
= iM
re

u = i CC

MAP OF MU
The Lands of the West from the Egyptian Book of the Dead

ings which sent Mu down beneath the waves were pre-
paratory to mountain raising.

Frederick O’Brien, who has written most interestingly
of the South Sea Islands, says:

‘“‘Darwin’s theory is that these islands are the tops of a
submerged continent, or land bridge, which stretches its
crippled body along the floor of the Pacific Ocean for
thousands of leagues. A lost land, whose epic awaits the
singer; a mystery perhaps forever to be unsolved.

‘There are great monuments, graven objects, hiero-

38

Digitized by Google

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

glyphs, customs and language; island people with sug-
gestive legends, all perhaps remnants of a migration from
Asia or Africa a hundred thousand years ago.

“Here, three centuries ago, they were discovered by the
peoples of the great world, and, rudely encountering a
civilization they did not build, they are dying here: with
their passing vanishes the last living link with our pre-
historic past, and I was to see it before it disappeared
forever.”

Where we find specks of land out of water with incon-
trovertible evidences of continental resources, we are made
doubly certain that these specks are parts or remains of a
continent. These bits of land are, as I have already said,
little islands peopled by savages. They are thousands of
miles away from any mainland, and it is therefore the
strongest possible proof, stronger than any record, inscrip-
tion or tradition, that back in prehistoric times there was a
continent and that the continent was peopled by highly
civilized human beings.

The ancient records and remains found on these South
Sea Islands show us that man was created a civilized being
but untutored and uncultured. He was created with a
knowledge of his own soul and he believed in and wor-
shipped the Deity. It is revealed by the presence of certain
figures used as sacred symbols that man, generally, was at
that time in an undeveloped intellectual state and the
simplicity of the first sacred symbols was necessary in
order to convey ordinary subjects to his mind that he might
grasp them more fully. When, however, we first get in
touch with man, thousands upon thousands of years after
his advent upon earth, we find that in spite of his original

39

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

lack of intellectual development he was then in a highly
enlightened and civilized state—and that was more than
50,000 years ago!

Certain archeologists have, in their writings, touched
the subject of the land of Mu and the Lands of the West;
but, as they took no pains to verify various records that
came before them, but simply made deductions, and, as
these deductions have seen their way into print, it is time
that readers who are interested in the early appearance of
man on earth should be informed of certain positive facts
based upon my own careful investigations.

Schliemann, on apparently two records only, the Troano
Manuscript and the Lhasa Record, asserts that Atlantis
was the land of Mu. These records do not state that Mu
and Atlantis were identical ; it is mere surmise on the part of
Schliemann. Other records which he might have consulted
would have told him plainly that the land of Mu lay to
the west of America and not to the east, the location of
Atlantis. However, both Atlantis and the land of Mu
were destroyed by volcanic eruptions and submerged. Sci-
ence has proved that beyond the shadow of a doubt.

Le Plongeon advanced the theory that Central America
was the Lands of the West and therefore the land of Mu,
basing his deductions on the contour of the land around
the Caribbean Sea, but forgetting entirely that all records
establish the fact that the Lands of the West were de-
stroyed and submerged, while Central America to this day
is, of course, unsubmerged. This is as plausible as saying
that a certain man is dead while he is arguing some point
with you. -

Possibly some of these errors arose from the fact that

40

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

certain records were read in Europe that were written in
America, and the readers, without thinking, based their
calculations from Europe instead of from America. This
would be in keeping with the reference to Atlantis made
by the old Greek philosopher: “The Land beyond the
Sea—the Saturnian Continent.”’ The Saturnian Conti-
nent, by the way, was one of the ancient names for
Atlantis.

The exact difference between the records is—the Lands
of the West from America and the Land beyond the Sea
from Europe. Evidently the writer of the Greek record
wished to avoid mistakes, because he qualified his state-
ment about the Land Jeyond the Sea by designating it
clearly as the Saturnian Continent, which was Atlantis.
Surely this is plain enough to satisfy the most exacting!

The Troano Manuscript places the sinking of the land
of Mu as having occurred approximately 12,500 years ago.
(I think 12,000 is nearer correct). However, the figures
must all be approximate only because the exact age of the
Troano Manuscript is not known.

Sanches, high priest of the temple of Sais, told Solon
that Atlantis sank 11,500 years ago and that the passage-
way to the Lands of the West was blocked on account of
the sinking of this great country, and the destruction of
the intervening country beyond Atlantis by cataclysms,
which made that country impassable. This clearly elimi-
nates the possibility that Atlantis may have been the land
of Mu or the Lands of the West.

Those who have hitherto written about the land of Mu
have ignored the most important records connected with
this prehistoric continent, namely, the remains on the

41

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

THE LAST MAGNETIC CATACLYSM. THE BIBLICAL “‘FLOOD”’
AND THE GEOLOGICAL MYTH, THE GLACIAL PERIOD

42

Digitized by Google

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

South Sea Islands and the inscriptions on the walls of the
Temple of Sacred Mysteries at Uxmal, Yucatan, to which
may be added the astounding traditions that are to be
found among the South Sea Islanders.

From the remains found on the South Sea Islands
backed by records and traditions, it is shown that the South
Sea Islanders, in spite of their present savage and semi-
savage state, were not always in that condition; it is
clearly established that they are the descendants of highly
civilized and enlightened forefathers. Looking at their
present condition it is self-evident that far back, in the
prehistoric past, some great calamity overtook their an-
cestors.

In their anxiety to sustain their monkey theories, scien-
tists have tried to prove that man did not appear upon the
face of the earth until the early Pleistocene Time, but a
pin-prick can dissipate this scientific bubble. The remains
of man have been found in the gravel beds of Europe
which were made by the settling waters of the last great
Magnetic Cataclysm, the geological Glacial Period, an oc-
currence that marked the end of the Pliocene. The den men
of Nebraska were also wiped out by this same cataclysm.

Niven’s upper city was built before the mountains were
raised at the beginning of the Pleistocene; his lowest city
was built tens of thousands of years before this and goes
far back into the Tertiary Era. (Page 122.) This is also
corroborated by the cut on Capital Hill in Smyrna, Asia
Minor. (Page 120.)

Would it help modern man to know the trials and trib-
ulations that were endured by prehistoric man? It might,
and then again—it might not.

43

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Scientists have always tried to maintain the theory that
the white races originated in Asia, yet they have not a ves-
tige of proof to sustain it—not a single record of any de-
scription. Their deductions are only surmises. I will un-
dertake to show in this book where they originated and
trace them to Europe.

One of the most startling discoveries, due to Frederick
O’Brien, is that the natives of the Polynesian groups of
South Sea Islands are a whzte race. Further, they are an
exceedingly handsome people, a link that joins perfectly
the white races of the earth.

Records show us, as I have established, that man un-
doubtedly made his advent on this earth in the land of
Mu, and the Polynesian Islands are jagged remains of the
ill-fated continent that went down in a maelstrom of de-
struction. Records also show us that Mexico and Central
America were colonized and settled by people from the
land of Mu. Traditions also establish the fact that these
first colonizers from Mu were blond-whites, that these
blond-white people were driven from the land by another
white race of more swarthy complexion—brunettes: that
the blond-white people sailed in their ships to a far-off
land in the direction of the rising sun—east—and there
settled, in the northern part of Europe—Scandinavia of
today. It is also made plain by these same records that
southern Europe, Asia Minor, and northern Africa were
colonized and settled by the brunette race by way of
Mayax, Central America and Atlantis.

I will quote, with his permission, some passages from
Frederick O’Brien’s fascinating book, ‘““White Shadows in
the South Seas.” The passages referred to are as follows:

44

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

“Over this land bridge, mayhap, ventured the Cau-
casian people—the dominant blood in Polynesia today—
and when the continent fell from the sight of sun and stars,
save in those spots now mountainous islands like Tahiti
and the Marquesas, the survivors were isolated for untold
ages.

“Here in these islands the brothers of our long-for-
gotten ancestors have lived and bred since the Stone Age,
cut off from the main stream of mankind’s development.
Here they have kept the childhood customs of our white
race, savage and wild, amid their primitive and savage
life.”

It is evident from the foregoing that O’Brien based
these paragraphs on the theory that the white race origi-
nated in Asia. It is an accepted theory and O’Brien cannot
be blamed for the error.

On page 112 of his book, O’Brien writes:

“My savage friends with their clear features, their
large, straight eyes and clear olive skins, still show the
traces of their Caucasian blood. Their forefathers and
mine might have hunted the great winged lizards together
through primeval wilderness, until, driven by who knows
what urge of wanderlust or necessity, certain tribes set out
in that drive through Europe and Asia towards America,
that ended at last when a continent sank beneath their
feet in the South Seas.”

Let us now leave the white Polynesians and visit one of
the brown races found farther west, in the group of South
Sea Islands called Micronesia. We find the brown, as
well as the white races of the South Sea Islands, are today
splendid specimens of physical manhood. They resemble

45

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the finest of the old Greek bronze statues. The Fijians, a
brown race, are said to be the most skilled of the South Sea
Islanders.

The accompanying picture is one from a brown race,
Arawali, a native of Arorai Island of the Gilbert group,
which lies about 4,000 miles southwest of Hawaii.

The picture shows a young lady with an extremely well
shaped and well developed head, of pleasing countenance
and gentle expression. It has been said of her that “‘she is
a very gentle, lovable woman, but quick-tempered and
slightly jealous, but very dignified notwithstanding her
wretched surroundings. She is the daughter of the King
of Arorai Island.”

Arawali’s head and face belong to the representative of
a high type of civilization, although her dress is that of a
savage. Poor Arawali! She is one of a tribe of cannibals,
but, strangely enough, she herself has never tasted “long-
pig,” the euphemistic name applied to human flesh by the
natives. In her hand she carries a fan, the ornamentation
of which is the royal escutcheon of Mu—the Empire of
the Sun.

No ancient record has ever been found that mentions
savagery as existing on any spot of the earth’s surface
prior to the destruction of Mu. Then why did such mag-
nificent specimens of man as the forefathers of the South
Sea Islanders become degraded cannibals? Our story of
the great calamity that overtook the first race of man
answers this question.

46

THE LAND OF MAN’S ADVENT ON EARTH

Aud 7 4

Ls rT

Loaned from the Collection of the American Weekly Section of the New York Sunday American

PRINCESS ARAWALI OF ARORAI ISLAND, GILBERT GROUP, CARRYING
FAN, THE ORNAMENTATION OF WHICH IS THE ROYAL ESCUTCHEON
OF MU——THE EMPIRE OF THE SUN

47

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ee rn rs
a

‘\ i
Co: Set

SANVISI VNVIUVAW ‘NVdIVS ‘NVONIDV

mimsouors ‘umacnrr doused +3 anusac Ksarsimoy

' : ie, .

Le - =
** . a
7 . x
“~ var i
yt x
; c .
, A i

Digitized by Google

re

}

¢

Melt
i:

is
aS =i UI

=
OF We i
as. Din ah K
@ ey
f Ge
@2 fo
UMMA LL SI TCT YL

ee
/ Ose

Bat
Lis E

——

~ m.

Traced from the Troano Manuscript

TROANO MANUSCRIPT RECOUNTING THE DESTRUCTION OF MU
The arrow points to the Maya hieroglyphic for the Land of Mu

50

@ © OVOSGOO ® GOO ®OGO

4
Records of This Lost Continent

@ © OSSLOOO @ COO ®@OGO

Tae records referring to the land of Mu are many and
various. Among the written records are some that tell us
man made his advent on earth in the land of Mu—the
Naacal tablets for instance.

Other records give us the geographical position of this
lost continent.

The American written records, which are many, tell us
that the land of Mu lay to the west of America. The
Asiatic records all say Mu, the motherland, lay to the east
of Asia—“towards the rising sun.” Therefore the mother-
land of man, being between America and Asia, lay in the
Pacific Ocean, and here we find on the islands stone re-
mains of her great cities and temples, and also, a white
race.

I will first take the American written records, commenc-
ing with the Troano Manuscript, an ancient Maya book
written in Yucatan. Its age has been estimated to be from
1,500 to 5,000 years old. I think it is between 1,500 and
3,000 years old. I base this on the form of its writing.

I herewith present several extracts from the Troano

91

4

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Manuscript that will conclusively prove the correctness
of my contention regarding Mu:

Extract 1. “In the year 6 Kan, on the 11 Muluc, in the
month of Zac, there occurred terrific earthquakes which
continued until the 13 Chuen without interruption. The
country of the hills of earth—the land of Mu was sacri-
ficed. Being fuzce upheaved, it disappeared during the
night, being constantly shaken by the fires of the under-
neath. Being confined, these caused the land to rise and to
sink several times in various places. At last the surface
gave way and the ten countries (or tribes) were torn asun-
der and scattered. They sank with their 64,000,000 in-
habitants 8,060 years before the writing of this book.”

Geologically, it will be positively shown that the de-
scription “the country of the hills of earth” is absolutely
correct and accounts for the quarries that are to be found
on Easter Island.

Extract 2. “The birthplace of the sacred mysteries.
Mu—the Lands of the West. That land of Kui. The
motherland of the gods.”

ae.
i (i Me
1, Be Be

1. Is one of the letters M in the hieratical alphabet of
Mu and is her alphabetical symbol ; thus we have Mu.

2. Is one of the letters T in the hieratical alphabet, and
often used as the word ‘“‘the” in the spoken language.

3. Is the universal geographical symbol for the Lands
of the West.

The characters being in block designate the past tense;
thus, ‘““Mu was the Lands of the West.”

§2

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

=
2, | we </) aa:
Rada (. </ . 3.

1. That.
2. Land of Kui or Kui Land.
3. Lands of the West.

The Lands of the West were the Land of Kui.

This extract is the most important passage known re-
ferring to the Motherland of Man, for it has already been
shown that the geographical name of the Motherland of
Man was the Lands of the West, and as the Troano Manu-
script was written in America, it also shows that the Lands
of the West lay to the west of America. Many records
will be brought forward confirming the fact that the
Motherland of Man lay to the west of America.

“That land of Kui’ means the land of departed souls.
The Egyptian Ka with its extended meaning comes out of
the Maya Kui.

In ancient times “god” did not mean the Deity. It re-
ferred to the soul of a departed one. Thus, the Mother-
land of the gods, mentioned in the manuscript, means, by
extension, the Motherland of Man.

Sir Gardner Wilkinson, the great Egyptologist, in his
book, “Manners and Customs,” Volume III, page 70,
says:

“Kui-Land or the Land of Kui, according to the Maya
language, was the birthplace of the goddess Maya, the
mother of the gods—and of man.”’

Extract 2, by the way, is corroborated many times in
the Egyptian Book of the Dead.

53

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

“Sa

orp ‘
CLG

pe

PLATE FROM THE CODEX CORTESIANUS
National Museum, Madrid, Spain

54

Digitized by Google

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT
ul Ca) GOs: eae

re |

i _———

(We YF _

PLATE FROM THE CODEX CORTESIANUS
National Museum, Madrid, Spain

55

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Copex Cortesitanus.—The Codex Cortesianus 1s an-
other of the old Maya books that escaped the eyes of the
fanatical Bishop Landa. This book is now in the National
Museum of Madrid, Spain. The characters, figures and
writings would indicate that it is about the same age as the
Troano Manuscript. The language of the Codex Cortesia-
nus, however, is much more symbolical than that of the
Troano Manuscript. Here are some extracts from it, bear-
ing on our subject:

“By his strong arm Homen caused the earth to tremble
after sunset and during the night Mz, the country of the
hills of earth, was submerged.”

“Mu, the life of the basin (seas), was submerged by
Homen during the night.”

“The place of the dead ru/er is now lifeless, it moves no
more, after having fwzce jumped from its foundations:
the king of the deep, while forcing his way out, has shaken
it up and down, has killed it, has submerged it.”

“Twice Mu jumped from her foundations; it was then
sacrificed by fire. It burst while being shaken up and down
violently by earthquakes. By kicking it, the wizard that
makes all things move like a mass of worms, sacrificed it
that very night.”

It is self-evident that both the Codex Cortesianus and
the Troano Manuscript were written from the same tem-
ple record. The Codex Cortesianus gives the land its
hieratical name only, while the Troano Manuscript gives
both its hieratical and geographical names.

Tue Luasa Recorp.—This record was discovered by
Schliemann in the old Buddhist Temple of Lhasa, Tibet.
Schliemann deciphered and translated it. It very evi-

56

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

dently does not come from the same original record as do
the Troano Manuscript and the Codex Cortesianus. It is
more modern and is not written in Maya characters. |

Here is an interesting extract from the Lhasa Record:

‘“‘When the star of Bal fell on the place where now is
only the sky and the sea, the seven cities with their golden
gates and transparent temples, quivered and shook like the
leaves in a storm; and, behold, a flood of fire and smoke
arose from the palaces. Agonies and cries of the multitude
filled the air. They sought refuge in their temples and
citadels, and the wise Mu—the Hi%eratic Ra Mu—arose
and said to them: did I not predict all this? And the
women and the men in their precious stones and shining
garments lamented ‘Mu, save us!’ and Mu replied: ‘You
shall all die together with your servants and your riches,
and from your ashes new nations shall arise. If they forget
they are superior not because of what they put on but what
they put out the same will befall them.’ Flames and smoke
choked the words of Mu: the land and its inhabitants were
torn to pieces and swallowed up by the depths.”

Bal is a Maya word meaning “Lord of the Fields.”
“Transparent temples” is, without doubt, a mis-transla-
tion. These temples were not built of glass or any other
transparent substance. They were open or roofless temples
so constructed that the rays of Ra—the sun—could fall
upon the heads of those who were in prayer and supplica-
tion within the temple, like the Parsee temples of today.

Le Plongeon found records in Yucatan stating that
“the Hieratic head of the Land of Mu prophesied its de-
struction, and that some, heeding the prophesy, left and
went to the colonies where they were saved.”

57

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Le Plongeon’s death occurred many years before
Schliemann published the Lhasa Record.

UxmaL TemMpLe.—This temple is situated at Uxmal,
Yucatan, and has been named by Le Plongeon ‘““The Tem-
ple of Sacred Mysteries.”’ On its walls there is an impor-
tant inscription which reads: “This edifice is a commemo-
rative monument dedicated to the memory of Mu—the
Lands of the West—That Land of Kui—the birthplace
of our sacred mysteries.”

This temple is built facing west, where the Mother-
land once stood.

The inscription quoted is a full corroboration of the
second extract from the Troano Manuscript, and con-
firms other records which state that the Motherland lay
to the west of America. Further, and this is most impor-
tant, it tells us that the religious teachings of this temple
came from there. So that whatever we find here we know
originated in Mu, the Lands of the West. With this in-
formation, we can trace the Egyptian religion and learn-
ing back to its source.

Mexican Pyramip.—This pyramid is at Xochicalo, to
the southwest of Mexico City. There is an inscription on
it which Le Plongeon has translated as follows: ‘This
pyramid ts a commemorative monument raised to perpetu-
ate the destruction of The Lands of the West among
coming generations.”

AxaB-Dz1s.—In the city of Chichen Itza, there is a slab
which forms the lintel of the door of the inner chamber
at the southern end of the building called Akab-Dzib.
Here we have “‘the awful, the tenebrous record.” This slab

58

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

is a description of The Lands of the West being shaken to
her foundations by earthquakes and then engulfed.

Maya Be.iers.—The Mayas of Yucatan regarded the
West as ‘‘the region of darkness, the place where the souls
of the dead returned to the bosoms of their ancestors,” as
shown in Codex Cortesianus.

GreeEce.—A few references to the Motherland of Man
are to be found among the writings of the old Greek
philosophers.

In the year 403 B. C., during the archonship of Euclid,
the Greek grammarians rearranged the Athenian alphabet
in its present form. The Greek alphabet today is composed
of Maya vocables forming an epic that relates the destruc-
tion of Mu. The translation of the Greek alphabet is as
follows:

THE Greek ALPHABET

The alphabet of the Greeks is an epic composed of Kara-
Maya vocables, and is a commemorative memorial to their
forefathers who lost their lives at the destruction of Mu.

In Plato’s ‘“Timeus Critias” we find this reference to
the lost continent : ““The Land of Mu had ten peoples.”

Proclus wrote: ‘The Lands of the West had ten peo-
ples.”

Here we find two of the old Greek philosophers writing
about the Motherland of Man. One uses its hieratical
name while the other uses its geographical name, but both
assert that there were ten separate peoples.

VaLMIKI. Ramayana. Vol. I. Page 342.— “‘The
Maya adepts, the Naacals, starting from the land of their
birth in the east, as missionaries of religion and learning,
went first to Burma and there taught the Nagas. From

59

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Burma they went to the Deccan in India, whence they
carried their religion and learning to Babylonia and to
Egypt.”

Burma.—At Angkor Thom, Cambodia, may be seen
conventional beasts that have been called by archzologists
“lions.” All are placed facing the east, looking toward
the place where the Motherland once stood. That these
beasts refer to her there can be no question, as they are
saying “Mu.” This is shown by their conventional
mouths, elongated squares, one of the forms of the letter
M in the hieratic alphabet of Mu, and, one of her sym-
bols.

Prurtarcn. Life of Solon.—‘Sanches, the High Priest
of Sais, told Solon [600 B. C.], also Psenophis, a priest of
Heliopolis, that 9,000 years before, the relations of the
Egyptians with the inhabitants of the Lands of the West
had been interrupted because of cataclysms destroying the
intervening country, and—the mud that had made the sea
impassable since the destruction of Atlantis by earth-
quakes and submersion.”

It is here shown beyond controversy that the Lands of
the West were to the west of America, because America
was the “intervening lands” that prevented travel to them
when she was made impassable by cataclysms.

Again it is clearly shown that neither Atlantis nor the
intervening country was the Lands of the West, nor was
Atlantis the intervening land, because the intervening
land was made impassable only, while Atlantis was sub-
merged.

I will now make a survey of the South Sea Islands and
note the stone remains found on them, also the extraordi-

60

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

nary and astounding legends found among the savages and
semi-savages on these islands.

In going out on the Pacific Ocean from America we
shall be traveling west—from America. The reader will
kindly note that out on the Pacific Ocean we are West—
of Yucatan; remembering this, it will enable him to ap-
preciate certain records that hereafter appear.

Among the tiny specks of land forming the Polynesian
and other groups, we shall find links that joined, in pre-
historic times, the civilization of America with the civili-
zations of Southern and Eastern Asia, and, eventually, the
various civilizations throughout the world. Although the
journey is a long one, it will be interesting and full of
astounding surprises. Where we shall look for the remains
of an ancient civilization, and where we shall find it, will
be on islands that within the memory of living man were
inhabited by cannibalistic savages, many of which are
cannibalistic to this day.

Yet these cannibals, as I have already shown, are the
descendants of highly civilized peoples. The forefathers
of the present Polynesians, who are now savages and
semi-savages, were once the center of the earth’s civili-
zation.

VaLMIKI. Ramayana. Vol. I. Page 353.—‘“The Mayas
were mighty navigators, whose ships traveled from the
Western to the Eastern oceans, and from the Southern to
the Northern seas in ages so remote that the sun had not
yet risen above the horizon.

“That likewise, being learned architects, they built
great cities and palaces.”

61

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

SGNVTISI VAS HLNOS AHL NO SNIVWAY ANOLS OIYOLSIHAAUd AO NOILONAIMLSIG AHL

e@ugisva
‘ VIVONVW @

¥YONOLVUYY © NaVL-VONOL

e ifta

ILIHVL @ VORWVS ©

SYSZIDYVAN @
YOLYOIAYN @

waalID @
= % Ivsax

MOTIVAS @ Cz BdVNXV¥d

TIVHSUYH @
TIIWSONIN @ @ NVNIL

IJiradtoavd

62

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

THE GREAT STONE REMAINS OF THE
Paciric IsLanps

Throughout the whole length and breadth of the Pa-
cific Ocean are scattered groups of small islands. On
scores of them are the remains of a great civilization.
There are great stone temples, cyclopean stone walls,
stone-lined canals, stone-paved roads and immense stone
monoliths and statuary—works that required continental
resources and workmen of skill. Yet we now find them
not on a great continent, but on tiny specks of Jand inhab-
ited by savages and semi-savages.

These great ruins appeal alike to both layman and
scientist as being the work of a great past civilization that
existed ages ago, about which we know nothing.

In attempting to enumerate and describe these remains
I have undertaken a monumental work, for they are so
many, and so scattered, that it is hard to tell where to
begin or how to end. It would require many volumes to
describe them all, instead of a few pages, so that I can
give only a mere glance to that which deserves a long and
detailed study. My description will be popular, not tech-
nical,

On many of the islands the remains are so overgrown
with vegetation and covered up with soil, that it is difficult
to find them. I do not believe that one-half of the stone
remains on the South Sea Islands are visible; they are
covered up, they are overgrown mounds.

Another difficulty the explorer has to contend with 1s
the savage inhabitants; they all appear to have a supersti-
tious dread of going near any of the great ruins. They be-
lieve them to be haunted by ghosts and evil spirits, which

63

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

they call mauli, so that it is next to impossible to get any
of them to guide you to these ruins or even to tell you
where they are. A good way to discover their whereabouts,
however, 1s to have a native show you over the island; but,
go your own way and do not follow him. Simply take him
along to tell you the best road home. If you are approach-
ing a ruin he will try to make you go in an opposite direc-
tion. Should you persist in going on, when you get near the
ruin, he will run away and leave you. Then you will know
you are close to the object of your search.

I will make my start with the remains on Easter Island.
They are better known than any of the others.

Easter Istanp. — Easter Island is situated at the
southeastern extremity of Polynesia, 2,100 miles from the
coast of South America. Its greatest length is 13 miles and
its greatest width 7 miles.

On this little island, all told, there are at present 555
carved stones, colossal statues, as well as other examples
of the art of a great prehistoric race.

W. J. Thomson, whom I believe to be the best authority
on what 1s found on Easter Island, says:

‘The largest image is in one of the quarries in an un-
finished condition and measures 70 feet in height; the
smallest was one found in a cave, and was about 3 feet
long. The majority of them are from 15 to 18 feet high.
It is supposed these images represent distinguished per-
sonages, and are intended as monuments to their memory.”

The tops of some of these towering stones are capped
with huge spheres, which show red in the distance. Many
of these spheres were carved from the red igneous rock
forming the sides of the now silent volcanoes. One of

64

EASTER ISLAND STATUARY

65

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

these spheres, which is carved out of a red sandstone,
measures 12 feet in diameter. It is to be seen at the quarry
at Terrai Hills.

Besides the statuary on Easter Island there'are several
immense platform-like accumulations of cut and dressed
stone.

These piles are about 30 feet high and from 200 to 300
feet in length. They are awaiting shipment to some other
part of the continent for the building of temples and
palaces.

Near the extinct volcanoes Rana Roraka and Rana Rao
are the remains of what was once a large stone temple. As
the fallen stones lie, they outline a structure of about 100
feet long and 20 feet wide.

Walls are still standing 5 feet high and 5 feet thick.
Some of the stones of this structure have carved upon
them figures which were the sacred symbols used in the
first religion of man.

W. J. Thomson: ‘There are in existence about 7 tab-
lets, all that are left of a vast mune, bearing the written
story of Easter Island.”

Thomson, with the aid of an old native, the only one
on the island that knew the meaning of the glyphs on these
tablets, deciphered and translated some of them. Here-
with is Thomson’s translation of two:

Tablet 1. ‘“‘When this island was first created and be-
came known to our forefathers, the land was crossed with
roads beautifully paved with flat stones. These stones
were laid together so nicely that no rough edges were ex-
posed. Coffee [mistranslation] trees were growing close
together along the borders of the roads. They met over-

66

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

itt REET kL 4 oon

LATAVL GNVISI UILSVA
Se ndH3, PS cid
iba
Ve A Nn Sica Gi bien Pa
at is

HIE UD AY! MeL
pice BATT Payee

Pl aR aR UY aH eis Pee eel

—

estate Shisiok wheiiese un! ph

7

gi aie

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

head and their branches were laced together like muscles.

‘“Heke was the builder of the roads, and it was he who
sat in the place of honor, where the roads branched away
In every direction.

‘In that happy land, that beautiful land where Romaha
formerly lived with his beloved Hangarva.

“Turaki used to listen to the voices of the birds and
feed them.

“In that beautiful land governed the gods from Heaven,
who lived in the waters when it was cold.

“There the black and white pointed spider would have
mounted to heaven, but he was held back by the bitterness
of the cold.”

Remains of these roads are to be seen on Easter and
many other of the South Sea Islands.

Tablet 2, entitled ‘“The Great King’’: “What power has
the Great King on land? He has the power to make the
plants grow and to change the color of the sky.

“All hail the power of The Great King who makes us
lenient to the young plants, to admire the different colors
of the sky and to behold the clouds that rise.

‘All hail the power of The Great King who enables us
to appreciate the blessings of bright stars, the lowering
clouds, the gentle dew, the falling rain and the light of
the sun and the moon.

‘What power has The Great King on land?

“He has the power to populate the earth to create both
kings and subjects.

“All hail to the power of The Great King, who hath
created the human beings, given authority to kings, and
created loyal subjects.

68

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

‘“‘What power has The Great King?

“He has the power to create the lobsters, white bait,
eels, ape-fish and everything in the sea.

‘‘What power has The Great King over the seas?

“He hath the power to create the mighty fish that swim
in deep water.

‘‘All hail the power of The Great King who enables us
to withstand the attacks of the maggots, flies, worms, fleas
and all manner of insects.”’

A LEcENp tells the following:

“This little island had once been a part of a great con-
tinent of land, crossed with many roads, beautifully paved
with flat stones. The roads were cunningly constructed
to represent the plan of the web of the gray and black
pointed spider, and no man could discover the beginning
or the end thereof.”’

PICTURED SLABS FROM HOUSES ON EASTER ISLAND

69

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

W.J. Thomson: “At the south end of the island there
are from 80 to 100 stone houses, built in a regular line
against a terrace of rock or earth, which in some cases form
the back walls of the building. The walls of these peculiar
houses average 5 feet in thickness and 4)4 feet in height.
They are 414 feet broad and 13 feet long.

“The doorways are tiny affairs, not more than 20
inches high and 19 inches wide. The walls are formed by
layers of irregular stones. These latter are often painted
red, white and black, showing birds, faces and figures.

“Near the houses the rocks on the banks of the sea-cliff
are carved in strange shapes, resembling human faces, tor-
toises, birds, fishes and mythical animals.”

The history of Easter Island since the white man dis-
covered it forms one long scene of tragedies.

Coox Group.—The Cook group of islands lies directly
south of Hawaii about 40 degrees. It is also about half
way between Tahiti and Fiji, but south of a direct line.
I shall note two islands of this group.

Raratonga Island.—On this island there is a small sec-
tion of the road referred to in the Easter Island tablet and
legend.

Mangaia Island.—This is the southernmost island of
the Cook group and about half the size of Easter Island.
On it are remains similar to those on Easter Island. As
there are no quarries, or evidences of their being chisled on

this island, it is presumable that they were brought here.
_ ‘Tonca-TaBpu.—Tonga-tabu is a coral atol belonging to
the Tonga group. There is not a particle of natural stone
upon it, nothing but corals. Here on this patch of coral
we find an immense stone monument, set up in the form of

7O

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

NAVL-VONOL NO HOUV ANOLS

a apt r «

va ba

‘

Peva Ze .

~~ © |

71

as

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

an arch. It consists of two huge uprights weighing about
70 tons each, which are bound together at the top with
another stone weighing about 25 tons.

There being no native stone on the island and the near-
est available stone being over 200 miles away, it leaves
open a wide field for speculation as to what sort of ships
the ancients had to carry such enormous weights, how
they landed them from the ships, and what contrivances
they had to set them up in place, as we now find them,
after they had been safely landed.

THE GILBERT AND MarsHALit Groups.—On several
of the islands composing these two groups are found tall,
slender pyramids built of stone.

The natives use the sacred symbols of the Motherland
as ornamentations without knowing how they obtained
the designs, or their meanings. I have shown a very
prominent ornamentation from Arorai Island—the fan
of Princess Arawali with the royal escutcheon of Mu.

Tue Caro.ine Group.—As regards prehistoric re-
mains, nowhere throughout the Pacific Ocean are there to
be found such astounding ruins as on the Caroline Islands.
An added interest is that they lie “one moon’s journey
towards the rising sun (from Burma),” where according
to the Naacal Tablets and Valmiki, the Motherland of
Man once stood, the spot whence came the first settlers in
Burma and India.

Panape.—On Panape stands what I consider to be the
most important ruin in the South Sea Islands. It consists
of the ruins of a great temple, a structure 300 feet long
by 60 feet wide, with walls still standing (in 1874) 30
feet high, and at the ground § feet in thickness.

72

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

On the walls are the remains of carvings of many of
the sacred symbols of the Motherland.

This temple is connected with canals and earthworks,
and has vaults, passages and platforms. The whole is
built of basaltic stone. ,

Below the pavements of the great quadrangle, on oppo-
site sides, are two passages or gateways, each about 10
feet square. These are pierced through the outer wall with
passageways leading down to the canal. Within the great
quadrangle is a central pyramidal chamber, unquestion-
ably the holy of holies.

According to the natives, many generations ago this
temple was occupied, for a time, by the shipwrecked crew
of a Spanish buccaneer. Relics of these outlaws are still
being found in one of the vaults which they used as a
storehouse.

The natives cannot be induced to go near this ruin, be-
cause they say it is haunted by ghosts and evil spirits,
which they call mauli.

Other ruins also are on Panape, some of which are close
to the seashore, others are on tops of mounds or hills, and
some are to be found on cleared spaces towards the center
of the island, but all command views of the ocean. On
one of these cleared spaces there is a ruinous heap of
stones covering between 5 and 6 acres; it is situated on a
sort of tableland. Around it appears to have been a ditch
or a canal.

At the corners, which were at the cardinal points, the
ruins assume tall mounds, indicating by the various distri-
bution of these mounds that the building was square.

To my mind the various ruins on Panape are the ruins

73

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

of one of the Motherland’s capital cities, one of the Seven
Sacred Cities. It is impossible to estimate the population,
but it must have been very large—a hundred thousand at
least.

Swallow Island, 12° east of Panape.—On this small
island is a pyramid of similar construction to that which
will be found on Guam and Tinian.

On the west side of this island is a vast quadrangular
enclosure of stone, containing several mounds. Probably
if the coverings of guano and soil were removed edifices
of some kind would be found.

Kusai Island, southeast corner of the group.—On this
and the surrounding islands are found similar ruins to
Panape, but not nearly so extensive.

On the south side of the harbor of this island are sev-
eral canals lined with stone. They cross each other at
right angles. Between their intersections are artificially
made islands, which originally had buildings on them,
One tower still remaining is about 35 feet high.

Native traditions of this island say: ‘“The people who
once lived here were very powerful. They had large ves-
sels in which they made voyages far distant, east and west,
taking many moons to complete a voyage.” Does this not
entirely agree with Valmiki when he says, ‘““The Mayas
were mighty navigators, whose ships passed from the east-
em to the western oceans and from the southern to the
northern seas” ?

Lele Island is separated from Kusai Island by a very
narrow channel. On this island is a conical hill sur-
rounded by a wall 18 or 20 feet high and of enormous
thickness. The whole of this island presents a series of

74

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

cyclopean enclosures and lines of great walls. Some of
the enclosures are parallelograms 200 by 100 feet in ex-
tent. There is a very large one between 300 and 400 feet
in length and over 150 feet wide.

The walls generally are 12 feet thick, and within are
vaults, artificial caverns and secret passageways.

The natives of this corner of the Carolines were ex-
tremely hostile to the white man and were cannibals of
the worst description in 1874. Possibly they have been
tamed down a bit since then.

KINGsMILL Istanps.—On Tapiteau Island of this |
group are found the same tall, slender pyramids of stone
as are found in the Gilbert and Marshall groups.

Navicator Istanps.—On these islands are found
great stone structures. On one of the islands there is a
remarkable structure on the top of a 1,500-foot hill, and
near the edge of a precipice which has a sheer drop of 500
feet. The structure is a platform built of huge blocks of
igneous stone. It is 150 feet in diameter and 20 feet high.
On one side of this structure is the precipice and on the
other a ditch, which originally might have been 18 or 20
feet deep. |

Laprong, or Mariana Group (Guam ).—The relics
on these islands are of a character of their own. They
consist principally of solid stone, truncated pyramidal
columns, usually about 20 feet high, including the hemi-
spherical stone or capital, and ten feet square at their
bases. Some are capped with a stone hemispherical in
shape, in other cases these stones lie on the ground as if
they had been shaken off by some seismic disturbance. On
the Island of Tinian they are arranged in columns.

75

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

iy apn
3 Pe road 2 ‘
, OSES vet
ee
Loy -

~

Courtesy Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu
HOUSE OF TAGA. TINIAN ISLAND, MARIANA GROUP

LATTE. HINAPSAN ISLAND, MARIANA GROUP

76

Digitized by Google

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

dNOUD VNVIAVA SANVISI NVINIL ‘VOVL 40 3SNOH

njnjouoyy “wnasnpy doy
: ‘>
ay call 3

;

Mg “d ausag Ksajainoy

77

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Extract from article by Larrin Tarr Gill: ‘Three of
the latter have fallen with their tasa still intact; three
are completely shattered and the capitals of two lie as
though shaken from their supports by some violent shud-
der of the earth. Shaped like truncated pyramids and
capped by hemispherical stones, the pillars are 18 feet in
circumference at the base, 11 feet high, and taper at the
top to a little over 15 feet around, on which the capitals
stand 5 feet high and 6 feet thick. Hewn from rough,
hard, sedimentary rock, each monument weighs close to
30 tons and the two parallel lines of columns, which
originally stood 7 feet apart formed a ground plan almost
54 feet long by 10% wide.

Hawan.—‘‘About 30 miles from Hilo there is a great
ruin on a hill called Kuki. There are no stones on this
hill except those which have been carried there.

“The summit was leveled and squared, and the building
laid aut according to the cardinal points and the floor
paved. Two square blocks of stone in an upright position,
about 15 or 16 feet apart, range exactly east and west.

‘The upper part of the hill was terraced, and the terraces
had been faced with hewn stone. The stones were perfect
squares, the smallest three feet in diameter, while others
were larger. Every stone was faced and polished on all
sides, so that they could perfectly fit together. There is
still about 30 feet of facing left on the lower terrace
partly in position.

“On the western side there was a stairway running from
the base to the top of the hill, a height of nearly 300 feet.

“On Kona is another ruin.”’

Tue Marguesas.—There are several noteworthy ruins

78

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

on the Marquesan Islands. Apparently no one has ever
felt inclined to make an examination of them. I believe
the fact that they are there has never been published.

The foregoing is a long list of Titanic stone remains,
and yet I have not enumerated one-half of what are to be
found on the South Sea Islands. From this evidence can
be formed only one conclusion to the logical mind, and
that is: At one time in the earth’s history there was a great
continent of land in the Pacific Ocean which embraced all
of the groups of islands where prehistoric remains are to be
found. This great continent had an exceedingly high
civilization. |

That continent was Mu, the motherland of man. That
her name was Mu and her geographical position are attest-
ed by the records of India, Uighur, Egypt, Mayax, Peru
and of the cliff dwellers of North America.

These cyclopean remains are her pathetic withered
fingers that refused to go down with her broken back and
mangled body. They are her “footprints on the sands
of time.”

New ZEALAND.— Lhe Maoris, the natives of New Zea-
land, are rich in legends and traditions of the dim past.

Many of the ancient sacred symbols are also found
among them. The most prominent of all is the Tat or
Totem Pillars, which they erect at the entrance of their
villages. In using the name Tat I am using the Egyp-
tian. These pillars were used by the Mayas, Incas, Atlan-
tians, Egyptians, Chaldeans, and other ancient peoples.
The meaning of the Tat or Totem Pillar is given in my
section on the ancient Sacred Symbols.

AustraLia.—Australia appears to be particularly bare

79

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

of ancient records, legends and traditions, which is not to
be wondered at if my geological deductions about Austra-
lia are correct.

Geometrical figures have been found rudely carved on
some of the boomerangs of the Northern tribes. The bush-
men of Northern Australia are probably the lowest type
of humanity on earth, lower than the ordinary forest
beasts.

This sketch is a reproduction of an Australian cave
painting which, without doubt, antedates their low
savagery.

There are three remarkable objects in this painting:
the first is Ra—the Sun—and the second is the numeral 3,
symbol of Mu, shown twice, and the third is an axe.

When the English first settled in Australia, axes of any
description were unknown to the savage natives.

ps det:
’ —_ -
a“ : '
! ‘pat Fi ar
tL hes 3s
7) ig “a2.
Hey i ‘ 22 =
ae ett ecet eS
te is 4 a ae =
tht
Pe mit i A pene
ere Poa i re
a* “SN mee OOF 3 ae a ‘\
Whe tes ie nee —
xe “Ges a NN ~~ -_
WNs® —e eas re ‘
we j “ oN
oes we Sas oe ane Ns ME
er ee 2a ee il
ee | \
F885 I
226504: 4% Ny
FELT EG 0 MN
ae oe ae : \v
a ayy , i 5 ys
~~) 2 Es ~<a
J | # =
4, 4 3 i is
oa A; a fy JN = ~“ =
f 4 . LL. . a : 4 \' Ss NN ,
a Ge GF" * Be : ‘S

A SAMPLE OF THE ART OF PREHISTORIC MAN
Hands, Feet and Weapons Printed in Colors on the Walls of an Australian Cave

80

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

I have never heard of any legends or traditions having
been found among the native Australians.

After deciphering and translating the symbols found
carved on the stones of the ancient Polynesian remains of
the temples and statuary, and in the quarries among the
unfinished work, I felt at the time that among the South
Sea Islands, and especially in the division called Polynesia,
traditions might be found that would prove of the great-
est value in connecting the past civilization of the South
Sea Islands with a civilization of a later date, of which
we have at least some fragmentary records.

The great stone monuments found among the South
Sea Islands have always been a puzzle to ethnologists.
All have been convinced that a great civilization once
existed among the South Sea Islands, and then, ‘the
shadow of time that was, became darkness; the new day,
the beginning, as civilization now calls it, dawned there-
after.”

While I have been able to decipher and explain the
meanings of the symbols found among the South Sea
Islands, it has fallen to the lot of Frederick O’Brien to
have the honor of bringing the world in close touch and
sympathy with the Islanders and their traditions and thus
drawing back the veil of darkness which has for so many
thousands of years overshadowed a great race.

I will now take extracts from O’Brien’s “Mystic Isles
of the South Seas,” capping each legend with the corre-
sponding biblical legend.

Page 21—‘‘The great god Ra of the Polynesians.”

In Ra we have a connecting link between the Polyne-
sians and our known ancients. Ra was the symbol of the

81

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Sun, and the Sun was the collective symbol of the Deity
among the Mayas, Quiches, Incas, Hindus, Chaldeans,
Babylonians, Assyrians, Egyptians, etc.

Easter Istanp (Pages 64-06)—‘‘Huge stone gods
that had been thrown down. Some were 37 feet high, and
had red stone crowns ten feet in diameter.”

The Easter Island Statuary were not meant as gods.
They were statues to be set up elsewhere in memory of
some important personage who had passed away.

This view is also taken by Thomson, the Easter Island
authority.

Red Circles, Red Discs and Red Spheres have been,
from the beginning, universally throughout the world, and
among all peoples, a sacred symbol. It was a picture of —
and represented the Sun, which, in the mother tongue, was
called Ra.

As Ra was the symbol or representative of the Great
God among the Polynesians, including the people of
Faster Island, and, as red spheres are one of the pictures
or representatives of Ra, it leaves no question for doubt.
As to the meaning of the great red spheres and the statu-
ary itself, the red spheres in conjunction with the statues
correspond with what we see today in our Christian burial
grounds—a figure associated with the Christian Cross.

The Easter Islanders possessed a complicated religion
of the pantheistic character having a triune Godhead.

Tue Marguesas.—Among the Marquesas and other
groups of Polynesian Islands O’Brien has found descend-
ants of the original white race from which the Aryans
sprang.

Although today these white Polynesians are savages

82

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

and semi-savages, they are, unquestionably, our distant
cousins, having come down from the original white stock.
The Marquesans are today one of the handsomest races
on earth.

The Marquesans and other white Polynesians clear up
one of the great mysteries connected with early man, and
form an unbreakable link which completes the chain,
showing from where and how the whole earth was
peopled.

O’Brien’s deductions that they came down from the
original white race seems to be more than confirmed by
records and traditions found in various parts of the earth:
Mexico, Central America, India and Egypt.

There are traditions in Central America and Mexico
stating that the first people who inhabited those countries
were a white race.” The Mayas of Mayax, those who
built the great edifices whose ruins now dot the land, were
a white race. Temple inscriptions in Yucatan say they
came there from lands that lay to the west of America.
Polynesia lies to the west of America.

The Guatemalan tradition also shows the White Race
advancing to the east from America.

Hindu records tell us that the central parts of India
(the Deccan) were first colonized by a white race called
Mayas, who came to India via Burma, and that their
motherland was one moon’s Journey towards the rising
sun, East of Burma. Polynesia lies to the east of Burma.
It is thus shown that those coming to America came from
the west, and those coming to India, came from the east.
This is conclusive evidence that the original home of the

31. See Guatemalan tradition quoted on page 247.

83

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

white race was a land that lay geographically between
America and Asia.

O’Brien has adorned his writings with many interest-
ing and astounding traditions which he found among the
South Sea Islanders. I will quote some of them:

THe Creation.—‘“The Marquesans said that in the
beginning there was no light, life or sound in the world,
that a boundless night called Po enveloped everything
over which Tanaoa (darkness) and Mutu-hei (silence)
reigned supreme.

“Then the god of light separated from Tanaoa (dark-
ness), fought him and drove him away and confined him
to the night. Then the god Ono (sound) was evolved
from Atea (light) and banished silence. From all this
struggle was born Atauana (dawn). Atea (light) mar-
ried Atauana (dawn) and they created earth, animals and
man.”

This is not the cosmogony of savages or semi-savages,
yet in Polynesia we find it among those who fifty years
ago were cannibals. O’Brien seems to think that there are
among them today some that are not adverse to the taste
of “long pig.”

Among these people I find a tradition of the Creation,
corresponding in all material details with that of the an-
cients throughout the world:

“Polynesian Researches.” Ellis. Vol. I. Page 100.—
“In the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) there is a tradition
that in the beginning there was nothing but water, when
a big bird descended from on high and laid an egg in the
sea; the egg burst and Hawaii came forth.”

This is the cosmogony of all the ancients. All say water

84

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

covered the face of the earth, and that life started from a
cosmic egg laid in the sea.

Samoa: The Samoans have a tradition that: ‘In the
beginning the whole earth was covered with water.”

Tue Frioop.—O’Brien says in “Mystic Isles of the
South Seas”:

“In most of Polynesia there are legends of a universal
flood from which but few escaped.”

ADAM AND Eve.—‘The Polynesians had very fixed
ideas upon the origin of the universe and man.”’

In Hawaii: ‘“Taaroa made man out of red earth Araea
and breathed into his nostrils.) He made woman from
man’s bones and called her Ivi.” (In the Polynesian
language Ivi is pronounced Eve-y. )

Cain anp ABEL.—A Tonga tradition states that “the
son of the first man killed his brother.”

New Zealand: A tradition of the Maoris, the natives
of New Zealand, states “that the son of the first man
killed his brother.”

Tower or Baset.—‘In Fiji is still shown the site
where a vast tower was built because the Fijians were
curious and wanted to peep into the moon to discover if
it was inhabited. .

PoLYNESIAN CosmMoGONY.—Tahiti: ‘‘Taaroa, whose
name was spelt differently in separate archipelagos, was
the father of Tahitian cosmogony. His wife was Hina—
the earth, and his son Oro was the ruler of the world.
Tane the Hualine god was a brother of Oro and his
equal.”

This corresponds with the cosmogony of the most an-
cient namely a Trinity or a Triune Godhead.

85

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Mystic Forces: During the time of the earth’s first
civilization, many abstruse sciences were known which
today are not known. They have been lost between the
two civilizations.

The adepts of the ancients could walk through fire with-
out being scorched, as related in the Bible and Popol Vuh.

O’Brien gives a thrilling account of a Tahitian adept
walking bare-footed on red-hot stones, without being
burnt. The same thing has been shown in Hawaii and I
have personally seen it done in the F'1j1 Islands.

A few years since a report was made that in Samoa the
blind were made to see through their flesh. The report was
sneered at by scientists, and the public generally looked
upon it as a newspaper story, a traveler’s lie.

The following from the New York World, reporting
from Paris the accomplishment of the same phenomenon,
answer, I think, the scientific sneers that were handed
out when the report came from the savages of Samoa. This
article is as follows:

“Not only have you eyes in the back of your head, but
your body is simply covered with them, and they can all
be used if trained properly.

“This conclusion is reached by several scientists here
who have witnessed experiments by Jules Romain, writer
of a book on the subject. They contend, with M. Romain,
that just beneath the skin are ‘ocelles’-—microscopic or-
gans united to the central nervous system—and that these
are dormant eyes.

“M. Romain, it is claimed, has succeeded in training a
number of persons to use these eyes effectively. They can
distinguish colors and read while heavily blindfolded.

86

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

Some can see with cheeks and fingers, some with their
noses. One subject was able to distinguish a hat four
yards away.

“These results, it is asserted, are accomplished after the
subject has been placed in a state of great mental concen-
tration not allied to hypnotism.

“While the first experiment is not apt to show much
result, second tests have shown in some subjects an ability
to ‘read’ playing cards blindfolded after three hours of
concentration. The ability of the subject, it is said, im-
proves with each succeeding test.”

Thus it is now demonstrated that the blind can be made
to see through the skin, but the Samoan practised it thou-
sands of years ago.

The foregoing traditions and legends are astounding,
and at first glance must stagger one, for here among
savages who have been shut off from the outside world
up to within 300 years and most of them within 200 years,
we are met with the fact that they have among themselves
legends and traditions about the creation and the early
history of man that are identical with the legends and
traditions found in the Bible.

THE GREEK ALPHABET

The Alphabet of the Greeks is an epic composed of Kara
Maya vocables, and is a commemorative memorial to their
forefathers who lost their lives at the destruction of Mz.

87

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

THE GREEK ALPHABET

AND ITS ESOTERIC MEANINGS

-

Greek | Kara Maya. English meanings.

Alpha Al, heavy; péa, break; ba, water

Beta Be, walk; ¢a, where, place, plain, ground

Gamma Kam, receive; ma, mother, earth

Delta Tel, deep, bottom; éa, where, etc.

Epsilon Ep, obstruct; 2i/, make edges; onom,whirlwind

Zeta Ze, strike; ¢a, where, ground, etc.

Eta Et, with; ba, water

Theta Thetheba, extend; ba, water

Tota Io, all that which lives and moves; ¢a, where,
ground, etc.

Kappa Ka, sediment, obstruction; pda, break, obstruct

Lambda Lam, submerge; de, go, walk; ta, where, ground,
etc.

Mu Mu, Mu

Ni N1, point, summit, peak

Xi X14, to rise, to appear over

Omikron Om, whirl; 1k, wind; /e, place; on, circular

Pi P1, to place little by little

Rho La, until; bo, come

Sigma Zi, cold; 1k, wind; ma, earth, mother, etc.

Tau Ta, where; u, bottom, valley, abyss, etc.

Upsilon U, abyss, etc.; pa, tank; 2%, cold; /e, place; on,
circular

Phi Pe, come, etc.; 4, mud, clay

Chi Chi, mouth opening

Psi Pe, come, out, etc.; 2%, vapor

Omega O, there; mec, whirl; ka, sediments

88

Greek

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

Free Reading

Alpha
Beta
Gamma
Delta
Epsilon

Zeta
Eta

Omikron
Pi

Upsilon

Phi
Chi
Psi
Omega

Kara Maya

Al-péa-ba
be-ta
kam-ma
tel-ta
ep-zil-on-om

ze-ta

et-ha
thetheha-ha
10-a
ka-pda
lam-be-ta
Mu

ni

xt
om-tk-le-on
pt

la-ho
Z1-ik-ma
la-u
u-pa-zi-le-on

pe-hi

chi

pe-zt
o-mec-ka

89

Heavily break the waters

extending over the plains

they cover the lands

in low places, where

there are obstructions, shores
form and whirlpools

strike the earth

with water.

The waters spread

on all that lives and moves

obstructions give way and

submerged is the land of

Mu.

Peaks only

appear above the waters

whirlwinds blow around

and little by little

until there comes

cold air. Before

where valleys existed, are

now abysses, cold depths. In
circular places

mud formed.

A mouth

opens, vapors

come forth and volcanic sedi-
ments.

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

STRAIGHT READING

Heavily break the waters over the plains. They cover
the low places. Where there are obstructions shores form.
The earth is struck with water; the waters spread on all
that lives and moves, the foundations give way and sub-
merged is the land of Mu. The peaks only appear above
the water, whirlwinds blow around until gradually comes
cold air. Before where existed valleys are great depths,
cold tanks. In circular places mud banks formed. A mouth
opens, out of which vapors pour forth and volcanic sedi-
ments.

The Greek Alphabet written in the Hieratic Characters
of Mu

QL EIA gA- Ol GA. AATT G- BID BA,

[SS OIL Gwe GF. OI ONL IO GA, agiogs fA.
“4 AN- AN DAA. LAT ES) GAN. CI. OM SM.
Pon 7A £1 For. OM. LN §G. OU 1A TIN, Qn
UY. (ODA cM 219—~- Gl B#. & Bu. GI ge. F
iw AA.

This is written to read from left to right. The ancients
generally wrote to read from right to left, when the writ-
ing was in horizontal lines.

RECORDS OF THIS LOST CONTINENT

GREEK CROSS MU’S ESCUTCHEON
ORIGIN OF THE GREEK Cross

The Greek Cross as it is known has always been an
enigma and a puzzle to scientists on account of its being
found in so many inscriptions which are unreadable to
our archeologists. It appears in inscriptions in Yucatan
and Central America especially.

Winter, in his work “Guatemala,” page 156, says: ‘The
mysterious symbol of the Greek cross, which has also been
found on the stones of Quirigua and Copan, has been the
cause of much speculation among scholars.” No one, ap-
parently, can solve this simple problem.

The Greek cross, Fig. 1, was the central figure of the
Royal Escutcheon of Mu—the Empire of the Sun. The

hieroglyph is a phrase in the mother tongue of Mu,
' reading U-luumil (pronounced Oo-/o0'-oom'-il). Trans-
lated into English it is: ‘the land of, the country of,” and
by extension, “the Empire of” or “the Kingdom of.” So
that in all of the inscriptions where it appears, it represents
one of the foregoing phrases, depending on what comes
before and what comes after it.

The Greek cross confirms the accuracy of my decipher-
ing of the Greek alphabet; the Greek alphabet confirms
the accuracy of my deciphering of the cross; and the two
confirm the existence of Mu—the Empire of the Sun—
and that she was the Motherland of the Greeks.

Ql

@ © OBSOEOOO DOOD @OGO

The Egyptian Sacred Volume

Book of the Dead

PER-M-HRU

@ © POSOSOO ® OOO @OGO

In the preceding chapter I have referred to the Egyp-
tian Book of the Dead. It contains many records that prove
that the Motherland of Man, the submerged continent of
Mu, was, indeed, the original habitat of the race of men,
and that other countries were merely orbits for bodies that
moved about a center of attraction, which was the highly
civilized continent of Mu, colonizer of the worlds that
lay beyond its immediate ken; consequently it does not
appear to me to be out of place to say a few words about
the Book of the Dead at this point.

The Book of the Dead is the common name by which
this sacred volume is known. In Egyptian hieroglyphics
the name is written: Per-m-hru. According to Egyptolo-
gists, per means “coming forth,” hrz means “day” and
m is a preposition meaning “‘from.”’

Q2

BOOK OF THE DEAD

But Egyptologists are not all in accord on the exact
meaning of the title of this book. Dr. Pleyte in his
“Chapitres Supplementaires du Livre des Morts,” says
the name should be read, “going forth from the day.”
Brugsch Bey in his “Steinschrift und Bibelwort,”’ page
257, maintains that the correct meaning is, “Book of the
outgoing by day.” Lefebure, Maspero and Renouf say
the reading is, “Coming forth by day.”

While these great Egyptologists are in dispute, who
shall say which 1s correct? The only way the problem can
be solved, it appears to me, is to show what the book actu-
ally refers to, and what it actually means; for, all the
writings composing it are symbolical, and it is therefore
necessary to know what they symbolize. This has not been
shown by any Egyptologist up to the present time.

The Book of the Dead is a sacred commemorative
memorial, dedicated to the multitudes of people who lost
their lives at the destruction of Mu, the forefathers of
the Egyptians and all mankind. These are the “dead”
referred to. This feeling of love and devotion to the
Motherland, this feeling of love and respect for fore-
fathers, is the origin of “ancestor worship,” so common
throughout the world in past and present ages. Have we
not a reflection of it among ourselves? Do we not lay
flowers on the graves of those who have passed away?

I entirely disagree with all Egyptologists on the mean-
ing of Per-m-hru. Per means “gone forth”; hrz means
“the day” and m means Mu.

The letter m, which Egyptologists term a preposition,
is nothing of the kind; it is a symbol, the symbolic letter
and also the name of Mu; therefore: Per-m-hru reads,

93

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

“Mu has gone forth from the day.” This is in accord with
what I have previously said: The Book of the Dead is a
sacred commemorative memorial to the 64,000,000 people
who lost their lives at the destruction of Mu.”

My many years of study in the Orient with some of the
most capable of Oriental scholars have enabled me to read
many of the esoteric meanings appearing in the Book of
the Dead; for it must be remembered that there is a very
close connection between the ancient learning of India
and that of Egypt. Upper Egypt was colonized and set-
tled by Mayas from India, and when their settlement
Maioo was firmly established, a party of Naacals left
India and went to Egypt, to establish the teachings of the
“Seven Sacred Inspired Writings,” religion and the
sciences; thus it is seen that the teachings I received in
India, to an extent, applied also to Egypt.

At what date the Book of the Dead was first formed is
unknown; apparently, however, the first copies contained
only a few chapters, which were subsequently added to
until it assumed the proportions in which we now find it.
In this respect it has been a duplication of the Hindu
book, Maha-bharatta, which commenced small and grew
large with time.

Every chapter in the Book of the Dead either directly
or indirectly refers to Mu, and the book is permeated with
symbols wich were assigned to Mu before the foot of man
trod the soil of Egypt.

As already stated, Mu was first torn to pieces by earth-
quakes and then sank through the flames of the under-
neath into a fiery abyss or caldron.

I will now take a few vignettes from the Book of the

04

BOOK OF THE DEAD

an gion rar

=

I

§.

Dead, decipher and translate them, to show the connec-
tion between the Book of the Dead and Mu, the Mother-
land.

Vignette 1. This is an Egyptian compound symbol or
vignette describing the destruction of Mu. Found in the
Book of the Dead.

1. Is the Egyptian symbol for flames of fire.

2. Is the hieratic letter M of the Motherland and her
alphabetical and geometrical symbol, and one of the most
commonly used symbols for her.

3. Is an ancient symbol, depicting an abyss, a tank or
a pit.

4. Is this tank or abyss filled with fire.

Thus the vignette reads: ‘‘Mu has gone down into an
abyss of fire, and, as she sank, flames of fire shot up around
her and enveloped her.” This is told by flames being set all
around Fig. 2—Mu.

One of the most prominent symbols, on account of its
being so oft repeated, is a conventional altar, over which
is a set sun, and above the sun a dead closed lotus.

This compound symbol is found scores of times among
the vignettes of the Book of the Dead, and a notable fact

95

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

a1) S
§

is that the lotus is invariably depicted as dead and closed.
throughout the book.

I will decipher and translate this little vignette:

1. Is the Egyptian conventional form of an altar.

2. Is the sacred lotus flower, the sacred floral symbol
of Mu.

3. Is the sun without rays, symbolizing that the sun has
set, gone down beyond the horizon. Being placed below
Mu, the lotus, it symbolizes that the sun has dropped
below the horizon of Mu. The sun has forever set on dead
Mu. All is darkness. Mu is in “‘the region of darkness.”
Before the submersion of Mu her common geographical
symbol was a three-pointed figure (Fig. 4), reading, ‘“The
Lands of the West,” the three areas of land which com-
posed the Motherland. |

After Mu was submerged, her geographical location
was called ‘‘the region of darkness,” and in this condition
she was symbolized by placing a sun without rays over the
center point (Fig. 6). Occasionally the center point was
cut out altogether and a rayless sun substituted (Fig. 5).

Tue VIGNETTE OF CHAPTER 81 _
In the Book of the Dead, Egyptologists have described
this vignette as ‘‘a head peeping out of a lotus flower.”

96

BOOK OF THE DEAD

The last line of the eighty-first chapter reads: “I am a
pure Lotus sprung out of the Field of the Sun.”

The deciphering of this vignette is:

The head represents an Egyptian and Egyptians, as
shown by the head-dress.

The head has arisen out of a lotus.

The lotus is shown as dead and closed.

In this vignette the lotus is dead Mu.

Translated it reads:

“The Egyptians came from Mu, a land which is dead
and exists no more.”

The last line is the crux of the whole chapter.

“IT am a pure Lotus” means: “I am a pure descendant
from the people of Mu.”

“Sprung from the Field of the Sun” corroborates the
lotus. “The Field of the Sun” also means the Empire
of the Sun, the imperial name of Mu.

Mu in the tongue of the Motherland meant: “mother,
land, field, country, empire” and “mouth.”

A free reading of this vignette would be: “I am an
Egyptian of pure descent; my forefathers came from the
motherland Mu, the Empire of the Sun, which is now
dead and gone.”

Space will not permit me to decipher more vignettes
from the Book of the Dead. A large volume could be
filled with them.

I- will make one more note, which is all Egyptian, but
only partially from the Book of the Dead.

All ancient peoples, including the Egyptians, believed
in the reincarnation of the soul. Our old Oriental tablets
showed us that the ancients understood the origin and the

97

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

workings of all the forces: they knew that when a force
had done its allotted duty, that which had been assigned
to it by nature, it became exhausted, but not dead. A
force cannot die any more than an element can die. An
exhausted force is drawn back to the source of generation
for regeneration, then to be passed into nature’s store-
house, there to await the next call from nature. This is
what the old tablets tell us.

Man’s soul is the greatest force connected with the
earth except that of the Deity. The soul of man was in-
carnated in the land of Mu, the Lands of the West. When
man’s body sleeps its last sleep and decomposes, his soul
does not die with the body, but, the ancients believed,
returns to the place of incarnation, Mu, there to await
reincarnation.

From the time of Menes, when Upper and Lower
Egypt became one kingdom, down to about 2700 B. C.,
there were two religious cults in Egypt, known as the West
cult and the East cult. The belief of the Lower Egyp-
tians was that the soul traveled west to reach the place
of reincarnation. The Upper Egyptians claimed that the
soul must travel east to reach a celestial paradise. Both
cults claimed that the soul must travel back over the same
road, to the place of reincarnation, by which their fore-
fathers came to Egypt.

When looking at the foregoing and reading the specu-
lations of professional Egyptologists concerning these
diametric cults, one is tempted to smile, for I have failed
to find a single Egyptian authority who explains the origin
and cause of these two cults, which at one time existed in

98

BOOK OF THE DEAD

Egypt; yet the problem is easy to answer, as the follow-
ing will prove:

Lower Egypt was settled from the motherland via
Mayax and Atlantis, both of which lay to the west of
Egypt; therefore to reach the place of reincarnation from
Lower Egypt, and to travel back over the same road by
which their fathers came, the soul had to travel back to
the west.

The Upper Egyptians came to Egypt from the Mother-
land by way of Burma and India. Both of these countries
lie to the east of Egypt; so that for the souls of the Upper
Egyptians to arrive at the place of reincarnation and to
travel back over the same road by which their fathers
came, they had to travel back to the east. So it is seen
that both cults were right, although it took them many
hundreds of years to find it out.

Donald A. Mackenzie: ‘“The fusion of the two ancient
Egyptian cults, that of Osiris, which originally believed
in a paradise in the west, and that of the sun-worshippers,
who believed in a celestial paradise in the east.”’

“Osiris, an ancient deified king, was identified with
the gods of the western cult.”

‘The early conflict between the two cults is echoed in
the mortuary texts, dating back till about 2700 B. C.”

Like all Egyptologists, Mackenzie is sadly deficient in
symbolology. All fail to differentiate between the symbol
and what it represents. They fail to remember that the
ancients used a special symbol for every attribute of the
Deity, and that the sun was the collective symbol of all
the attributes of the Deity, and therefore represented the
Diety Himself.

99

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The Upper Egyptians were not sun-worshippers, as
stated by Mackenzie. Ra, the sun, was their collective
symbol for the Deity. Temples were dedicated to Ra as
representing the Divinity, Just as the cross today repre-
sents Christ.

A symbol is an intimate reminder, mentally concen-
trating and bringing in closer touch with the eyes of the
mind, bringing in closer touch and mental view the object
addressed. With the use of symbols many encroaching
outside thoughts are driven away. A symbol permits of
greater concentration.

Mackenzie asserts that Osiris was an ancient king.
What people he reigned over Mackenzie does not say, but
by inference it would be the Egyptians; if so, he is wrong
again, because when Thoth started the first Lower Egyp-
tian colony at Sais, he taught the Osirian religion, as vari-
ous papyri show, and that was 16,000 years ago. From
two different sources I find it stated that Osiris lived in
Atlantis 18,000 or 20,000 years ago, and that he was a
great religious teacher—a master.

The two Egyptian cults form another convincing proof
that the advent of man on earth was on Mu, and that Mu
was situated in the Pacific. The geographical position is
thus positively established as east of Burma and west of
Mayax and therefore in the Pacific Ocean.

The destruction of the Motherland was also commemo-
rated in their religious ceremonies. The advancement of
the novice through the second degree was by symbolically
submerging him in a tank of fire to remind him of the fate
that befell his forefathers in the beloved Motherland, and
also to hint where his soul must go for reincarnation. This

100

BOOK OF THE DEAD

is reflected in the Book of the Dead, Chapter 22, where
it says: “I come, I do that which my heart wishes on the
day of the Fire, when I extinguish the flames as soon as
they appear.”

Before closing my section on records, I think it advis-
able to show corresponding records from all areas sur-
rounding the Pacific Ocean. This will help readers to
fuly grasp the situation and the facts.

I will first take the symbol, the Royal Escutcheon of
Mu, the Empire of the Sun—a sun with eight rays.

The particular design here given was found on the dress
of a Kooteney Indian living in British Columbia. The
border of the dress of another Kooteney Indian was com-
posed of a continuation of one of the symbols of “Mu
submerged.” See page 139. The garment with the sun
symbol was black, the sun is in pale yellow, the points
of the rays in pale indigo blue and the intervening space
between the sun and the points of its rays a pale reddish
pink.

Among the Indians of the northwestern section of
North America are found the now famous totem pillars,
the original meaning of which I give on page 159.

On page 49 I showed a picture of the Royal Escutcheon
of Mu painted on the fan of one of the savages of the
Gilbert Islands, 7,000 miles from British Columbia.

101.

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

On page 79 I noted the totem poles of the Maoris of
New Zealand, 12,000 miles from the Kooteney Indians.

On page 174 I will show symbols among the Nevada
cliff writings that referred to Mu, also in New Mexico,
and again in Niven’s “Mexican Buried Cities,” page 208
and in “Yucatan,” page 237.

A great impenetrable forest of dense tangled tropical
jungle growth covers the southern half of Yucatan and
extends far into Guatemala, which is half covered by it.
It extends into Chiapas and Tabasco, and stretches into
Honduras. This great forest is not primeval, for once the
land was densely populated with great cities and highly
cultivated fields. Throughout this now impenetrable wil-
derness are ruins, great imposing ruins, in every part of
the forest, and, if we can believe the tales of the Indians,
Copan and Quirigua, which are on the outer edge of this
tangled jungle, are only samples of still greater ruins
hidden away in the depths of these forests, and lying be-
yond the present reach of the white man.

Personally I believe the tales of the Indians to be true,
for they talked about these ruins with superstitious awe,
which lent credence to their tales. Beyond the tales of the
Indians, we have Egyptian records confirming them.

This great forest is a part of “the country beyond,”
which was made a ruin and ‘“‘impassable”’ with the loss of
“nearly all the people,” by great ‘‘cataclysmic floods
which rolled over the land.”

This civilization was wiped out and their cities wrecked
between 11,500 and 11,750 years ago, when the gas belts,
which run under and around this area, were being forged,

102

BOOK OF THE DEAD

Ag

A CENTRAL AMERICAN OBELISK

QUIRIGUA

103

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

with the attendant mountain raising, a little while before
the submersion of Atlantis.

For the Egyptians to say the country was impassable,
after such devastating phenomena, is certainly a mild
way of describing the conditions.

At Copan in Honduras, Quirigua in Guatemala, Opico
and Cirraca-Mecallo in Salvador, there are vast pre-
historic ruins. Among each of these ruins there are sym-
bols referring to Mu.

At Quirigua there are some notable stelai or obelisks,
13 in number, which have symbolical human figures
carved upon them, each wearing a triple crown, thus
showing their allegiance to the Motherland.

Each of these stelai has a different totem symbol, show-
ing that they refer to various dynasties of kings. Each of
the ancient dynasties had a different totem, such as the
Elephant, Tiger and Serpent.

I will next take the great monolith at Tiahuanaco, on
the shores of Lake Titicaca, South America, which I
show on page 162, with its decipherings and translation.
Thus it is shown that a continuous string of records exists
from end to end of the western parts of North, Central
and South America, all telling us that Mu was their
Motherland.

I have noted symbols among the savages of the South
Sea Islands and on the stones of the ruins among these
specks of land, then I went from the South Pacific to New
Zealand, so that nothing remains but Asia to complete the
circuit around the ocean. Burma and India are full of
records about Mu, as I have heretofore prominently
shown, corresponding in all details with those of America.

104

BOOK OF THE DEAD

FUIdWa YWNHOIN LVAUO AHL IO dvVK

sg aby chum parish

NVA90 JIdA1DVd

\

N¥AHDO NVIGNI

* visuaa Wg

5
v ¥
— (/
=) (]

4d04049

105

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

I think the Uighur records will be all that is necessary
to convince the most skeptical mind that it is clearly
proven by symbols alone that Mu was the motherland of
man; but, as an old Hindu saying goes:

“It is easier to snatch a pearl from the teeth of a croco-
dile, or to twist an angry, venomous serpent around one’s
head like a garland of flowers, without incurring danger,
than to make an ignorant or an obstinate person change
his mind.”

The Uighur was the principal colonial empire belong-
ing to Mu at the time of the biblical “Flood,” which
destroyed its eastern half.

Chinese legends tell that the Uighurs were at the height
of their civilization about 17,000 years ago. This date
agrees with geological phenomena.

The Uighur Empire stretched its powerful arms from
the Pacific Ocean across Central Asia and into Eastern
Europe from the Caspian Sea on. This was before the Brit-
ish Isles became separated from the continent of Europe.

The southern boundary of the Uighur Empire was
along the northern boundaries of Cochin China, Burma,
India and Persia, and this was before the Himalayas and
the other Asiatic mountains were raised.

Their northern boundary extended into Siberia, but
how far there is no record to tell. Remains of their cities
have been found in the southern parts of Siberia.

Eventually the Uighurs extended themselves into
Europe around the western and northern shores of the
Caspian Sea, as related in a very ancient Hindu record;
from here they continued on through Central Europe to
its western boundary, Ireland.

106

BOOK OF THE DEAD

They settled in northern Spain, northern France, and
far down into the Balkan region. The late archzological
discoveries in Moravia are Uighur remains, and the evi-
dences on which ethnologists have based their theories
that man originated in Asia, have been marks left by the
advancing Uighurs in Europe.

The history of the Uighurs ts the history of the Aryans.

Ethnologists have classed certain white races as Aryans
which are not Aryans at all, but belong to a totally differ-
ent line of colonization.

The capital city of the Uighurs was where the ruins of
Khara Khoto now stand in the Gobi Desert. At the time
of the Uighur Empire the Gobi Desert was an exceedingly
fertile area of land.

The Uighurs had reached a high state of civilization
and culture; they knew astrology, mining, the textile in-
dustries, architecture, mathematics, agriculture, writing,
reading, medicine, etc. They were experts in decorative
art on silk, metals and wood, and they made statues of
gold, silver, bronze and clay; and this was before the his-
tory of Egypt commenced. |

About one-half of the Uighur Empire was destroyed
before Mu went down, the other half subsequent to Mu’s
submersion.

Professor Kozloff unearthed a tomb 50 feet below the
surface at Khara Khoto and in it found wonderful treas-
ures, which he photographed, not being allowed to dis-
turb or take anything away. Through the courtesy and
kindness of the Sunday American I have obtained the
loan of some of these pictures, two of which I here repro-
duce with their decipherings, as they are symbolical. I

107

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

-
J
+~*
4

LYOSNOO WAH UNV NAAN ANHOIN Nv
UDI aup KDpUuNns x40 4 MIN 24s fo KO8I29S Kjyxsa yy WO4smuP 943 Jo %013991]07 943 moss pauD0]

— > s OW wa

4

) —

TA :
WS

Wd (Fm

ee wr, ' 3 Sah ‘=>
io. ee — ts <7,
TY ; SS — ’
; =
< ~
, ren

fi
)

(

108

BOOK OF THE DEAD

ene SP
A <=
i! a=
JI48

A

SCEPTER CARRIED BY A MONARCH OF THE UIGHURS
Of later date than that shown in the hand of the Queen. Both show the trident

—
>
‘*
y

think I am safe in believing that these pictures represent
a time between 16,000 and 18,000 years ago.

These pictures are symbolical, the various symbols tell-
ing who they are, and what they are. In the original they
are paintings on silk and represent a queen and her consort
in a sitting posture. I will now pick out the symbols of
the Queen. On her head is a three-pointed crown with a
disc in the center with three sets of rays emanating from
it. Behind her body is a large disc, the sun. At the back of
her head is a smaller disc, an inferior sun. The large disc
symbolizes Mu, the small disc the Uighur Colonial Em-
pire. The crown on her head, a sun with rays on one half
only, shows the escutcheon of a colonial empire. In her left
hand she carries a scepter, the ends of which are in the
form of a trident—three points—the Motherland’s nu-
meral.

Her seat is a full-blown sacred lotus, the floral symbol
of the Motherland, so that she is depicted as sitting in the
lap of and being upheld by Mu, the Motherland. Her
consort does not carry a scepter, nor has he a sun with rays,
but in its place a sphere. His crown also shows the
Motherland’s numeral.

Kozloff had pictures of various scepters. This illustra-

109

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

tion is of a different pattern to the one held in the queen’s
hand, and of later date, but symbolically reads the same,
the ends being divided into three giving the numeral of
the Motherland.

Thus we see the symbols of Asia, America, South Sea
Islands and New Zealand all agreeing in the tale they tell.
Could anything be more definite or convincing—unless
we could get our old forefathers to rise from their graves,
and tell us by word of mouth what happened to them in
the land of Mu?

‘

/
i

B
4

= —=—— = — a ee |

YOO SS0O 8 OOO @@OO
6
Mu, the Empire of the Sun

@ © CPOSEOCOO ® OOO @OGO

Many students of the ancient have noted the fact that
the ancient kings and emperors assumed the title, “Son
of the Sun.” They have, however, entirely failed to give
the reason for these ancient monarchs assuming this title,
except that in many instances it is asserted that they
claimed to be sons of the celestial orb.

od

To find the actual reason for the assumption of this
title we must go back to the earth’s first empire or king-
dom, the Empire of the Sun. This empire was formed in
the Motherland of man, and a royal emblem or escutcheon
was devised for it.

111

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

THE Royvat EscutcHEON oF Mu

The Royal Escutcheon of Mu, the Empire of the Sun,
was in no way a haphazard device, for every line in it has
a particular meaning, as the deciphering and translation
show:

A. The form of the shield in a conventional letter M, one
of the letters in Mu’s hieratic alphabet. It was her
symbolical letter; besides, the letter was her actual
name, as the letter M was pronounced Mu and Moo
in the language of Mu.

B. This hieroglyphic is the central figure in the escutcheon
and reads: U-luumil—pronounced Oo-loo-oom-il,
which, translated, is: ‘“The Empire of —”

C. The circle inclosing the glyph is a picture of the sun,
so that this compound glyph reads: “The Empire of
the Sun.”” Then prefix the shield and it is: ‘“‘Mu, the
Empire of the Sun.”

D. The sun has eight rays, symbolizing the eight cardinal
points, thus saying that the whole earth was domi-
nated by her.

E. The circle enclosing the rays is a symbol of the uni-
verse. This universe as applied to man—man’s uni-
verse, the earth. It is thus shown again that her rays,
her influence, fall on al] mankind.

Thus, the Royal Escutcheon of Mu tells us that all
mankind on earth was under her rule. Mu was mistress
of the whole earth, and this is confirmed by the Codex
Cortesianus, where Mu is referred to as The Ruler.

Traditions say that when Mu was turned into an em-
pire the Hieratic Head was selected to be the king or

112

MU, THE EMPIRE OF THE SUN

emperor. The Hieratic Head represented the Deity in
religious teachings. The sun, called Ra, was the collective
and highest symbol of the Deity. The sun was therefore
the symbol of “‘the King of Kings.”

When elected to be the king, the Hieratic Head as-
sumed the title of Ra—the sun—Ra being the king’s sym-
bol. To this title was added the name of the land Mu, so
that the king’s full title was Ra Mu, or Sun Mu. Then a
new name was added to the land and it was called The
Empire of the Sun.

When the Empire of the Sun began is unknown. Em-
pires and kingdoms which were under her suzerainty are
traced back for more than 35,000 years, so that the com-
mencement of the Empire of the Sun antedates 35,000
years ago by a long time; how long no one can say. It
might have been only a thousand years and again it might
have been tens of thousands of years. Nothing in the
shape of an old record, writing or tradition has ever
turned up to give us the slightest clue on this point.

Apparently, as the various colonies of the Motherland
became large and sufficiently able to govern themselves,
‘they were turned into empires or kingdoms, but under the
control of the Motherland, so that the whole world was
a great family under one control.

When a colony was turned into a kingdom or empire,
the first king was one of the royal family of the Mother-
land, or possibly, in some instances, an appointee. When
appointed, the new king assumed the title of Son of the
Sun. This was not intended to imply that he was the Son
of the celestial orb, but the Son of the Sun Dynasty of
the Empire of the Sun, or Son of the Empire of the Sun.

113

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

AW OL ONIMAIATA SNOILdUIYOSNI AGNV SONILIUM LNAIONY NI STIOMWAS

MU, THE EMPIRE OF THE SUN

The emblem of the new king was still the sun, but in
order to show that he was a subject of the Motherland,
or a part of it, only one-half of the orb was shown above
the horizon, with rays ascending from it.

Valmiki, the ancient Hindu historian, speaking of the
works of the Mayas in India, says: “Before the sun rose
above the horizon,” meaning before the Hindu colony
was turned into an empire.

When the Maya colony of the Deccan, India, was
turned into a kingdom, the first king was called Ra Ma.
His emblem was the rising sun, with only one-half of it
showing above the horizon. He assumed the title Son of
the Sun.

The present Maharajah of Udipoor is said to be a direct
descendant of Ra Ma. If so, his forefathers were kings
more than 30,000 years ago. Unquestionably his is the
oldest royal family on earth.

The rising sun is the emblem of various nations today,
among them being the Japanese, the Persians and some
of the Central American republics.

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

To differentiate between the rising sun and the setting
sun, the ancients were accustomed to depict the rising sun
with rays and the setting sun as a plain disc or orb with-
out rays. |

After the Empire of the Sun came to its untimely end,
the sun whenever shown in connection with the Mother-
land, always appears as the setting sun.

SYMBOLS REPRESENTING Mu UseEp IN ANCIENT
WRITINGS

A. Is a Maya vignette, telling of the submersion of Mu,
the Lands of the West.

DECIPHERING AND LRANSLATION

Fig. 1. The three points on the top of the glyph are
Mu’s symbolical numeral, therefore the writings below
refer to Mu.

Fig. 2. The three-pointed crown is the Imperial crown
of Mu—the Empire of the Sun.

Fig. 3. Is the sun without rays, therefore Mu is in the
region of darkness.

Fig. 4. This symbol shows Mu submerged and in dark-
ness, ‘“‘peaks or points only appear.”’

Fig. 5. This is the ancient symbol for an abyss, tank or
depth.

Fig. 6. These symbolize the other two Lands of the
West which were carried with Mu down into the “tank of
fire.”

Free Reading.—‘Mu, the Empire of the Sun, has fallen
into an abyss; she is in the region of darkness, where the
sun never shines upon her. The other Lands of the West

116

MU, THE EMPIRE OF THE SUN

were blotted out with her. Her crown no longer rules the

earth.” The form of the hieroglyphic itself is a conven-

tional abyss.

B. Is hieratic writing reading, “Mu, Lands of the West.”

C. Is the Motherland’s numeral, three—assigned to Mu
as her numeral symbol.

D. Is the hieratic letter M of the Motherland’s alphabet.
It is also a geometrical figure. It was Mu’s symbol,
both alphabetical and geometrical.

E. Isa three-pointed geometrical figure, and was the sym-
bol used for Mu, showing her geographical position.

F. Is a symbol for Mu after her submersion.

G. Is the same. Sometimes one is used, sometimes the
other. |

H.Is the lotus flower in conventional form, the floral
symbol for Mu.

I. Is a Maya vignette telling of the submersion of the
Lands of the West.

K. Is another form of the lotus symbolizing Mu.

L. Is the lotus, closed and dead, symbolizing that Mu
no longer exists.

M. Is a lotus bud, used as ornamentation.

N. Is a Maya vignette telling of the submersion of the
land of Kui.

O. Is an hieratic writing reading, ‘Land of Kui.”

P. Is an Egyptian vignette symbolizing the destruction
of Mu.

117

@ © OSSEGOO ®@ OOO ®@OGO
/
Age of Mw 5 Crvilization
@ @ ©OOOSOO @ OOO @OGO

Lane made the assertion that the civilization of Mu
dates back to more than 50,000 years ago. Now let us see
on what foundation I base such a date.

Le Plongeon found in the center of the mausoleum of
Cay, the high priest and eldest son of King Can, at
Chichen Itza, Yucatan, a carving of a serpent having
twelve heads, with an inscription saying that this serpent
was a symbol of the twelve Maya dynasties that had
reigned over Mayax previous to the Can dynasty, and
that their combined reigns covered a period of 18,000
years.

The last King Can lived 16,000 years ago, as proved
by the Troano Manuscript. Add 16,000 to 18,000 years
and we find that kings reigned over Mayax 34,000 years
ago.
The length of the Can dynasty is not known. There
were, however, at least six kings, and there might have
been a dozen or more, so that an approximate time of
35,000 years may be reasonably accepted as the time when
the first Mayax king reigned.

118

AGE OF MU’S CIVILIZATION

Mayax was one of Mu’s colonial empires and had ad-
vanced to that status from a mere settlement. Such a
radical step takes time, so that Mu’s civilization must
necessarily be much older than 35,000 years.

These twelve dynasties of kings reigning 18,000 years
are confirmed in the Chinese book “Tchi.”’

Japan also has a record stating that twelve dynasties
of kings reigned 18,000 years ago, and an old Hindu tab-
let refers to twelve dynasties of kings whose combined
reigns aggregated 18,000 years, and the same fact is men-
tioned in an acient Hindu manuscript.

In addition to these records, there are numerous legends
both in India and China, which refer to twelve dynasties
of kings whose combined reigns aggregated 18,000 years.

Not one of these records, however, except the Chichen
Itza inscription, gives the slightest idea where these kings
reigned.

Manetho, the Egyptian priest-historian, in one of his
papyri, writes: “The reign of the Sages of Atlantis was
13,Q00 years.”

Atlantis was submerged 11,500 years ago. Now let us —
add 11,500 to 13,900 and we find that Atlantis was gov-
erned by kings 25,000 years ago. The first king of At-
lantis commenced his reign 25,400 years ago, and the first
king of Mayax 34,000 years ago. Time between the two
—8,500 years. Granting the same time to have elapsed
between the first emperor of Mu and the first king of
Mayax, we can figure approximately that Mu was at the
height of her magnificence 50,000 or more years ago.

The scientific world may possibly say that the fore-
going is merely speculative, so let us bring geology in to

119

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

help us, and, to quote John Tyndall’s favorite expression,
“clinch the point.”

When were the mountains that succeeded the great
magnetic cataclysm raised? If we believe the myths of
geology, we should say hundreds of thousands of years
ago, and some of them millions of years ago.

Now I am going to show you seven civilizations that
were in existence before the mountains were raised, some
of them thousands upon thousands of years before a single
mountain appeared upon the face of the earth. So, accord-
ing to geology, these civilizations which came out of Mu
would date her civilization back hundreds of thousands
of years. However, they do not, and geology, as usual, is
wrong.

In the Capital Hill, Smyrna, Asia Minor, 500 feet
above the level of the sea, are to be seen the remains of
three prehistoric civilizations, one above the other, with a
stratum of sand, gravel and boulders intervening between
each civilization. These civilizations are not lying hori-
zontally, but at an angle of 45 degrees, as shown in the
accompanying picture.

Were it not for the fact that the civilizations are at an
angle, following the angle of the mountain, our scientists
might assert that they were built on top of the hill and
had not been raised. Their angle, however, proves beyond
all controversy that they existed before the mountains
were raised. What are the ages of these civilizations? I
leave it to the scientific world to say; also the age of these
mountains in Asia Minor.

Twenty-nine miles north of Mexico City, Niven has dis-
covered three civilizations, buried one beneath the other,

120

AGE OF MU’S CIVILIZATION

—_——--

PIsies J1IM GUIEJUNOUT JQ IJ0Jaq Paysixa ‘[aaa] vas DAogE 399z OOS “suOIJEZITIAID Bd1y 7,

YONIW VISV SWNYAWS STIIH TVLIdVO SLAD-dVOuU AHL

"SBSE-cuyjnpolonep. 3.

- ¥
he. \
‘ |

temae'
98)
wt

§

RPI Ga

\
; "
a
> . .
; ie
. ste 7

\

121

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

with strata of sand, gravel and boulders between each.
These cities are more than 1,000 feet above sea level, with
mountains of from 5,000 to 15,000 feet in altitude inter-
vening between them and the sea. I have traced the boul-
ders to a formation on the west coast of Mexico, and the
lowest mountain between the cities and the source of the
boulders is 5,000 feet in height.

Did the ocean raise waves that were more than 5,000
feet in height in ancient times, when multitudes throngd
the streets of these cities, so that these boulders could be
formed and hurled along to their final resting place? Or,
did Mexico borrow a glacier for the occasion in order that
these boulders might be deposited where they now lie?

However, nothing of this sort happened down in Mexi-
co. These cities were built before the mountains were
raised, and, as is shown by tablets coming from them
which I have deciphered and translated, they were Mu’s
colonies.

Geologically, the lowest city dates far back into the
Tertiary Era and was in existence more than 50,000 years
ago as a colony of Mu. Pictures and details of this
archeological discovery will’ be found in Chapter 11,
page 223.

The last example is Tiahuanaco on Lake Titicaca in
the Andes. Irrefutable evidences are present in and
around this ancient city, which prove that when it was
built, the ground on which it stands was just above sea
level. Now, however, it is 15,000 feet above the sea.

These facts are conclusive proofs that the civilization
of Mu dates back more than 50,000 years.

122

& @ @SSEOOO ® COO @OEO
&
Simple Symbols

@ @ OSSOSOO @ OOO @OGO

Te minds of primitive man, generally, were in such
an uncultured state that they could not be brought to
understand the meanings of such words, for instance, as
“infinite,” “everlasting” , “almighty,” without some special
form of teaching. To enable man to grasp and understand
such meanings he was first taught that there was a Deity
and a heaven hereafter; that he had an everlasting soul
which did not die; that the Deity had many attributes
and was all-powerful and everlasting. Then symbols such
as primitive man could understand were selected to repre-
sent each attribute of the Deity and heaven. Thus was
laid the foundation of the many pantheons, with their
variouus symbolic meanings that have crept into and per-
meated all religions down to and including the modern
Christian religion.

The most primitive forms of symbols were lines and
simple geometrical figures. At first these symbols were
few in number, but as time went on the number increased,
also their intricacy, until we reach the period of the Egyp-
tians, when they had become so numerous and so complex

123

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

that not more than one-half of the Egyptian priesthood
understood them all.

Hermes Trismegistrus in his writings said: “Oh,
Egypt! Egypt! of all thy religion, fables only will re-
main, which thy disciples will understand as little as they
do thy religion. Words cut into stone alone will remain
telling of thy pious deeds. The Sythians, or the dwellers by
the Indus, or some other barbarians will inhabit thy fair
land.”

Moses fathered the doctrine of monotheism, as an out-
growth of the Osirian religion, yet he continued the use
of many of the original symbols in his teachings. In fact,
some of these symbols are to be seen today in Jewish
synagogues.

Christ’s teachings were always in parables. He dis-
tinctly stated that he preached in parables because it was
the only way the people could be brought to understand.
Parables are phraseological symbols.

Max Miller writes: ‘“‘As soon as we know aught of
the thoughts and feelings of primitive man, we find him
in possession of a religion. A religion of faith or worship,
of morality or ecstatic vision; a religion of fear and hope,
or of surmise, or reverence of the Great God through vari-
ous symbols.” :

When primitive man used a symbol it did not mean the
object in sight, but what it represented in his mind.

This primitive and ancient custom remains very dear
to us: we still use symbols, as, for instance, the cross sym-
bolizing Christ.

The symbols on the walls of the Temple of Sacred Mys-
teries at Uxmal, Yucatan, are most valuable as applying

124

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

to this work, as an inscription on the temple walls tells us
that they came from the fountain-head—the Lands of
the West, the Motherland of Man. Therefore we may
safely say that these symbols are exact duplicates of the
symbols first used in the religious teachings of man, a
statement that is further confirmed by the fact that many
of them are to be found carved on the stones of the South
Sea Island ruins. These symbols connect mankind through-
out the world with the Motherland of Man—“‘That Land
of Kui’—Mu.

As before stated, among the fallen ruins on some of the
South Sea Islands will be found many of these symbols.
I have no doubt that if the walls were still standing intact
all would be found on them, as these temples and ruins
were on the land of man’s first earthly domain.

It must be fully appreciated by the reader that the com-
plex cosmogonic figures could only have come into exist-
ence after man’s mind had been sufficiently educated to
understand them. Probably thousands upon thousands of
years elapsed between the time when primitive man was
first taught that the circle represented infinity, and the
time when the intricate and complex cosmogonic diagrams
were intelligible to his more enlightened mind. Thus we
find, however, that tens of thousands of years ago man
was so advanced intellectually that he could master these
intricate symbolic problems.

These sacred symbols have been found among all peo-
ples throughout the world. By this I do not mean to imply
all have been found among savage as well as civilized
human beings, but I do mean that some of them are found
everywhere, even among savages and semi-savages.

125

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The wide scope of these symbols and their common
meanings prove them to have been of common origin.
Records in Yucatan show that they came from the land
of Mu. Egyptian records show that they originated in
the Lands of the West, and Hindu records show that they
came from the Motherland in the East.

Therefore I think that I have established clearly in the
mind of the reader this one salient and dominant fact:
The land of Mu, the Lands of the West, that land of Kui
and the biblical Garden of Eden are one and the same.

I will now review a number of these ancient symbols,
commencing with a group which were the first symbols
used in man’s religious teachings.

Fig. 1a on Page 127. The Circle.—The circle was one of
the first three symbols used in man’s religious teachings.
It was looked upon as the most sacred of all symbols. It
was a picture of the sun, called Ra, and the collective
symbol of all the attributes of the Deity. Ra, the sun,
was looked upon as the symbol only and not the Deity
Himself. The Deity was worshipped and the symbol was
merely used to represent him.

The Deity was treated with such reverence that His
name was never spoken. The Hindus and the Mayas
spoke of the Deity as The Nameless. The circle has no
beginning nor has it an end. What more perfect symbol
could have been devised or selected to teach an uncultured
mind the meaning of infinity and the everlasting?

Evidently the reason for selecting the sun as the em-
blem of the Deity was because it was the most powerful
object that came within the sight and reasoning power of
primitive man. It well represents the All-Powerful.

126

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

7
/
A
7

7. 8,
il wedw/p no, 1685.

THE OLDEST OF THE SYMBOLS

These were the first used in man’s religious teachings

127

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The circle is found on the stones of the Polynesian ruins
and on the walls of the Temple of Sacred Mysteries.

Fig. 1¢. Red Spheres—The red spheres found on
Easter Island statuary were representative of the sun and
were used in ancient times as we us the cross today in con-
nection with the dead.

In all of the Egyptian symbols connected with the

. Deity the heads of the figures are crowned with a red disc
representing the sun. /b.

Egyptian Papyrus Anana.—Here is an interesting quo-
tation from the Egyptian papyrus, Anana, which is dated
1320 B.C.:

“Eternity has no end, therefore no beginning; conse-
quently eternity is a circle.

“If we live on we must continue forever, and if we con-
tinue forever, like the circle and eternity, man had no
beginning.

‘“‘Man comes into being many times, yet knows nothing
of his past lives; except occasionally some day-dream or a
thought carries him back to some circumstance of a previ-
ous incarnation. He cannot, however, determine in his
mind when or where the circumstance occurred, only that
it is something familiar. In the end, however, all of his
various pasts will reveal themselves.”

“The spirits or souls of one incarnation possibly may
meet again in another incarnation, and may be drawn to-
gether as if by a magnet, but for what cause neither
knows.”

Christ said: ‘Except ye be born again ye cannot enter
the kingdom of heaven.”

Fig. 2. The Equilateral Triangle-—The origin and

128

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

meanings of the equilateral triangle are exremely inter-
esting. The equilateral triangle is one of the first three
symbols designed for the religious teaching of early man.
It dates back more than 50,000 years. It was designed to
symbolize both a Trinity and Heaven.

Its origin came out of the geographical makeup of the
Motherland, which consisted of three separate areas of
land, which were geographically called the Lands of the
West. Apparently they were supposed to have been
emerged at different times, one following the other. To
explain this to the then undeveloped minds of the greater
part of men, it was taught to him that three separate at-
tributes of the Creator were instrumental in the emerging
of the three lands, but only one Creator was involved.

The equilateral triangle was selected as a visible figure
through which man could see and understand the concep-
tion of a Triune God. These three attributes formed the
first Trinity and were the original conception of a Trindty.
A conception which has come down to us through all these
eons of time, it can never die, although from age to age
its vestments have been changed, and it has been known
under different names and guises among different peoples.

In connection with its symbolizing the Trinity it was
used to symbolize Heaven. As the Triangle symbolized
the Triune Godhead, and God’s house was Heaven, it
naturally followed that where God was, that was Heaven.

The conception of a Triune Godhead has come down to
us from our forefathers of more than 50,000 years ago,
and today, among many, it 1s held sacred.

Fig. 3. The Four-Sided Square-—The Four-Sided
Square is the third of what are believed to be the three old-

129

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

est symbols that were used in the teaching of religion to
primitive man. It symbolized the earth. The four corners
represented the four cardinal points—North, South, East
and West. At each corner a keeper was assigned.

This conception has also been brought down to us from
early man, for are we not guilty of saying occasionally
“the four corners of the earth’ ?

All of these sacred symbols are found carved on the
stones of South Sea Island ruins; also on the walls of the
Temple of Sacred Mysteries at Uxmal, Yucatan.

This completes the list of the simple sacred symbols.
The others are compound symbols, with one or more of
the foregoing three as the foundation. As we move down
through time they become more complex and compli-
cated, ending with the well-known Cosmogonic Diagrams,
which symbolize the whole of the religious conceptions as
they stood at the time.

Fig. 4. Triangle with Three Stars.——The equilateral
triangle with three stars within the triangle symbolizes
heaven with the Triune Godhead within.

Various peoples had various names for the Triune God-
head according to their language.

Fig. §. Triangle with Five Stars.—The equilateral tri-
angle with five stars within the triangle is simply an ex-
tension of the triangle with three stars. Five stars symbol-
ize a full Godhead of five members. *I have been able to
find but one mention of the five names of the full God-
head, and the attributes they represented, and that was in
the Egyptian. The symbol, however, is quite common
among all ancient peoples, and in many instances its
meaning 1s given without including the names.

130

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

Fig. 6. Triangle Above the Square.—This is a com-
pound symbol made up of Figs. 2 and 3 and symbolizes
“Heaven above earth,” a very old conception, but one
that still remains with us. Above did not refer to altitude;
it meant perfection. The perfection of Heaven was above
that of the earth.

Fig. 7. The Triangle Above the Square with Three
Stars.—This cut is a compound of Cuts 3 and 4. It is
found at the end of the north room of the Temple of Sa-
cred Mysteries. This was the room of initiation.

Fig. 8. The Triangle Above the Square with Five Stars.
—This is a compound of Cuts 3 and 5. It is found on the
end of the south room of the Temple of Sacred Mysteries.
This was the room where the initiate was raised. From
the room of raising, the initiate passed on to the central
room, where he became a master or adept. In the north
room he was initiated into the mysteries of the Triune
Godhead and in the south room he was taught the mys-
teries of the full Godhead of Five.

THE TAU

The Tau.—The Tau is not only one of the most inter-
esting, but one of the most ancient symbols. It is found
in the earliest writings of the Motherland. It symbolizes

131

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ateey
SO ea

SSS NL |
ia al oe

J}
pmb sw ri)
— Ee
52 6G

THE TAU FROM A MAYA MANUSCRIPT

—_
——S
. F
~ > SN
, = -
: ~ Ss P
a : : Ne
4 ry = enue
Yyfj > 3 E ‘ne Ay!
LY AD FE
“4 4 =
Z ~
0 se 2
~ ;
Pa ~ .
: :
a > 2
= 1 ae
/ Ce = Wrevse rrr! LL >
. a . ”
Oo a ; = STity Try 7
‘) > = - a9 . e
Wy, ~
>

RETURN OF THE RAINY SEASON, FROM THE TROANO MANUSCRIPT

132

Digitized by Google

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

resurrection, a springing into life, and in the ancient writ-
ings of Mu is used to symbolize the emersion of land.

The Tau is a picture of the constellation Southern
Cross. The reason for its adoption as the symbol of resur-
rection was that when the Southern Cross appeared at a
certain angle in the heavens over Mu, it brought the long
looked-for rain. With the rain seeds in the ground sprang
into life, drooping foliage revived and sent forth fresh
shoots, upon which there were flowers and fruit; then it
became a time of plenty and rejoicing in Mu—new life
had been resurrected.

The Tau is very prominent in the old Maya writings
and is generally depicted as a tree with two branches upon
which there are flowers and fruit.

This Vignette (Page 132) is from a Maya manuscript
in the British Museum—No. 9,78g—and represents the
arrival of the rain in Yucatan. The two figures are alle-
gorical, representing the divisions of Mayax. It is also
a prominent symbol in the ancient writings of the Hindus,
Chinese, Chaldeans, Incas, Quiches, Egyptians and other
ancient peoples.

Tau is a word of the Motherland, meaning resurrection.
It played an important part in ancient religions. Altars
in temples, on which were made offerings of fruit and
flowers, were shaped like the Tau, and, quite frequently
the double triangle (Page 134) was associated with
it, a double triangle being carved under each branch of
the Tau. The double triangle is the symbol for an
offering.

This symbol is one whose name has never been changed.
It was Tau in the Motherland and it is Tau with us today.

133

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

oA
®.
&, O-
©,
XN AX

(Pt ay
O o> DY HY

Ms
= YY
~ NK SS
6 e es
g ~ & &

fic AWARD. 1925,

ANCIENT SACRED SYMBOLS

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

I now come to a series of symbols that followed those
shown on Page 127. As will be seen, some did not originate
in the Motherland, although the conceptions came from
that source.

Figs. 9a, 9b, 9c and 10. The Eight Roads to Heaven.—
It would appear that almost every ancient people had
their own idea as to how the Eight Roads to Heaven
should be symbolized. From the Hindu we learn that the
eight roads were: Right belief, right speech, right living,
right adoration of God, right thought, right action, right
exertions and right meditations.

Fig. ga comes from Central America; gb, Egypt; 9c,
is Oriental, and 10 is from the Pueblo Indians.

Fig. 11. The Ka. This symbol appears on a cornice
above the lintel to the entrance of the Holy of Holies of
the Temple of Sacred Mysteries at Uxmal. On this cor-
nice it is many times repeated.

These emblems of mortality were used in the ancient
religious ceremonies to impress upon the adept what will
be his end and the end of us all, and to fix firmly in his
mind the necessity of living a life that will bring no ter-
rors when the soul releases itself from the mortal body to
pass on into the world beyond.

The Egyptian was a reflex of the Maya, so that from
Egypt we can get the original ceremonies. In the Temple
of the Great Pyramid there was found a sarcophagus with
the emblems of mortality arranged alongside it. The
adept was placed in the sarcophagus to remind him of
what he must eventually come to, and when he emerged
from the sarcophagus he was reminded that after his soul
left his mortal body, another life awaited him.

135

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Fig. 12. Double Triangles.—A pair of double triangles
bound together at their bases was the ancient symbol for
an offering.

Fig. 10.—This symbol, beyond showing eight roads to
Heaven, is a cosmic diagram. The center is a square—the
symbol for the earth. The extension of the sides of the
square forms eight arms—the eight roads to Heaven. To-
wards the end of each pair of the arms are triangles—the
symbol of Heaven.

Fig. 20.—This is a Pueblo Indian symbol and the only
one I have ever found of this particular design. The out-
side triangle symbolizes heaven, the three small triangles
at the base symbolize the Triune Godhead, and the dia-
mond above, the full Godhead.

After deciphering it I asked the chief if I was right. He
told me I was as far as I had gone, but that I had omitted
something. The three inner triangles have three points
which gives the Motherland’s numeral, which indicates
that the origin of this symbol and the people who use it
was in Mu.

. Fig. 21.—This is one of the most astounding symbols
I have found among the North American Indians—two
pairs of equilateral triangles interlaced, and placed one
pair within the other. This is the central figure of the Sré
Santara—the cosmic diagram of the Hindus—and con-
veys identically the same meaning to the Pueblo Indian
as it does to the Hindu.

Fig. 16.—Taking their learning and religious concep-
tions from the Uighurs, the Chinese have replaced the
equilateral triangle with the figure Y. The Chinese at the
time of Confucius had ‘“The Great Term,” ‘“The Great

136

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

Unit,” the great “Y.” “The Y has neither body nor
shape, all that has a body and shape was made by that
which has no shape. The Great Term or The Great Unit
comprehends Three: One is three and three are one.”

Fig. 17. Two Triangles Interlaced Within a Circle.—
This is one of the most ancient of compound symbols,
originating at an early date in the Motherland. It is the
most wonderful and far-reaching of all the sacred sym-
bols and gives proof of the great and advanced civiliza-
tion of man more than 50,000 years ago. This figure will
be deciphered in the following chapter.

137

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

HIERATIC LETTERS FROM VARIOUS ANCIENT ALPHABETS

138

SIMPLE SYMBOLS

SD
|O|@
NIB,

SYMBOLS USED IN ANCIENT

ti
=
O
=
=
~”

=
fx)

139

@ © GOSSOSCO YD OOO @OBO

9
Symbols

@ © OSOEOOO DOOD @OCO

VIGNETTES, | ABLEAUX AND DIAGRAMS

Tae Cosmic Diagram of the land of Mu was the first
book ever written by man. I have traced this diagram back
to more than 35,000 years ago. Just how long it had been
in use before that, no one can say or even estimate.

All of the ancient nations copied the Motherland’s dia-
gram—the Mayas of Yucatan, the Naga-Mayas of India,
the Babylonians, the Assyrians, the Egyptians and the
Pueblo Indians of southwestern North America.

Only one retained its simple character with its original
meanings: the Yucatan Mayas. The rest, except the
Pueblos, added figures and introduced dogmas. They gave
some of the original figures different meanings, so that the
simple and beautiful symbol of the Motherland became
sadly distorted. This was brought about by the unscrupu-
lous Egyptian priesthood. They first invented the devil,
then they had to find an abode for him, so they invented
hell. Five thousand years ago the devil and hell were un-
known. The priesthood of India, seeing the effects on the
people of these inventions, were quick to follow Set with
Siva.

140

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

In Mu the novice was taught to learn this book thor-
oughly and to repeat it as his belief in God and the here-
after. Just as children are taught their Bibles today, so
was the child of this lost continent instructed in this book
in ancient times. |

In deciphering this cosmic diagram it will be seen that
there is a central circle enclosed within two interlaced
equilateral triangles. They form one single figure, having
but one meaning. These two triangles are enclosed within
an outer circle, which leaves twelve divisions between the
two circles. Again, this outer circle is enclosed within
twelve scallops. Falling from the main figure and down-
ward is a ribbon that has eight divisions.

The central circle is a picture of the sun, Ra, who is the
collective symbol of the Deity, and as the Deity is in
Heaven, the Deity and Heaven are symbolized by this
circle. .

The twelve divisions formed by the two interlaced tri-
angles, between the two circles, symbolize the twelve gates
to Heaven. Each gate symbolizes a virtue, so that the

soul must possess the twelve virtues in order to enter the ©

gates of Heaven.

The outer circle symbolizes the intermediate world, the
world beyond, the Amenti of the Egyptians.

The twelve scallops surrounding the intermediate world
symbolize twelve temptations. The soul must prove that
it has overcome the twelve earthly temptations before it
can enter the twelve gates of the world beyond.

The ribbon falling downward symbolizes that the soul
must ascend in order to reach Heaven. The ancient mean-
ing of the word “ascend” as used here did not signify

142

SYMBOLS

rising to an altitude. It meant to rise to a higher level to-
wards perfection. The ribbon has eight divisions. These
signify the eight roads that man must traverse before his
soul may enter the world beyond.

I have given a description of what the eight roads to
Heaven are in the previous chapter.

What the twelve temptations and the twelve virtues
were I was never able to discover collectively.

This ancient religious belief of the people of Mu, freely
given in modern language, would read:

“I believe there are eight roads which I must travel in
order to reach Heaven. After having traveled the eight
roads (mentioning them), I arrive at the twelve gates
leading to the world beyond. Here I must prove that I
have overcome the twelve earthly temptations (mention-
ing them ). I shall then pass through into the world beyond
and reach the gates of Heaven. There I must show that I
learned and practised the twelve virtues on earth (men-
tioning them). Then I am taken through the gates of
Heaven to the throne of glory, where sits the Heavenly
King.”

Have we today among all our sects and religions any
that is purer and more simple than this of the lost people
of the Motherland of Man?

Figures with Many Arms.—During the years that
followed the translation of the tablets, we found the solu-
tion of many characters which we could not read in the
tablets themselves. When deciphering old symbolical fig-
ures, which writers and archeologists call “grotesque
gods” and “grotesque goddesses,” also bas-reliefs, we
found the undeciphered symbols mixed in such a way in

143

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

these carvings that their meanings became perfectly ap-
parent. Chandler and others have written: “Some gro-
tesque Hindu goddess.” The following is a specimen of
these “grotesque gods’’ with the decipherings and transla-
tions of it, by which it will be seen that the figure is a
tableau, depicting the advent of man in the land of Mu.

In India, especially, one is constantly finding carvings
and paintings of the figure of a man having more than one
pair of arms. These figures are found on temple walls, in
illustrations in old Hindu manuscripts, and are exten-
sively used at the present time in Hindu native jewelry.

All sorts of names are applied by writers to these figures.
On one occasion I came across the following description:
‘These figures are grotesque idols and are worshipped by
the poor, wretched, uneducated, unenlightened Hindu
idolators.”” Fanatics who write that sort of stuff would
without compunction, destroy these precious, I might say
sacred, relics of the earth’s first civilization.

These figures are not idols. They are sacred symbols of
the Great Creator and Creation. They are of a very intri-
cate design and character, the sort that one meets with
occasionally when studying the first writings of man.
They symbolize the Infinite, the Creator as having seven
great or principal forces, attributes, powers, desires, com-
mands or intellects. I have found each of these words
used in various ancient writings, such as: “The Serpent
with seven heads, which are intellects or powers.” “The
Serpent covered with feathers, whose seven commands
brought the world into existence and created man to
govern it.”

The many-armed figures to which IJ refer undoubtedly

144

SYMBOLS

originated in the Motherland, although I first found them
among the ancient Brahmins. It is a well-known fact in
India that the Brahmins obtained their cosmogony, science
and arts of civilization from the Nagas. The Mayas in
India, first called Nagas and afterwards Danavas, came
to India from the Motherland many thousands of years
before the Aryans became known in India. The Brah-
mins and the Nagas also used the Seven-Headed Serpent
to symbolize the Creator. The figure of a man instead of
the figure of the serpent appears to have been used, espe-
cially for depicting special creations.

I have selected a carving of one of these figures which
appears in the Temple caves of Ajanta near Bombay, to
decipher and translate. It is especially interesting from
the fact that it symbolizes the raising of the Motherland
above the waters, making it fruitful and productive, with
man about to appear upon it. The central figure is in the
form of a man, having seven points, the numeral of cre-
ation. In this instance a higher type of symbol is used—
man, instead of the serpent. It was repeatedly said that
man was a special creation and endowed with powers to
govern the earth. This tallies in many respects with the
tableau I am about to decipher.

The central figure wears the ancient sacred crown, a
crown of pearls, which was assigned to the Deity, showing
him to be a king. He is placed in the midst of creation,
therefore he is the king of creation. In the upper left hand
he carries a fruit and in the right hand the royal lotus, the
symbolic flower of the Motherland, thus denoting that the
Motherland is habitable.

The figure is shown standing in water. Two distinct

145

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ee

oy ;

.
nie "ve *'
4 * @8hs
Sa =
~ =

' ; sw — ~ = .
nik t. ee Ant Seas ~~
”~ 1. eo one Al) - Ce ee * Mart
wee : ~ ¥ ~ rs
. > be wr we FAQ ? - at wO-s ne
_ = a. © Whe crs ae , ra -
- ote!

U.GUT

)

v7? mo :

~' Mery):

_

eT
—

-

‘*
+ onus 06

~ Phen yet Wan peolles “RR
byes = Nes

iS ee

SYMBOLICAL CARVING

146

Digitized by Google

SYM BOLS

symbols tell us this. First, the horizontal, irregular lines
across his legs and the lower part of his body. Second, the
single-headed serpent held in the lower right hand. Be-
low the hand holding the serpent’s head the body of the
serpent becomes a pod from which seeds are seen rolling
down. These symbolize nature’s germs or the cosmic eggs
of the ancients. These seeds or eggs have yet to break
forth into life. Life still lies dormant in them. In time
the Vital Force brings these seeds into life. The first of
nature’s life is thus depicted as coming forth in the waters.
That is why the ancients called the sea “the Mother of
Life,” and this ancient conception has been proved to be
correct by the tales of the early Paleozoic rocks.

Thus far it has been shown how nature’s life appears
and is created; it also shows that a habitable land exists
above the waters. What is this land? At the lower left-
hand corner is seen a deer in the act of leaping to the land.
The deer, as we have shown, was the ancient symbol for
first man. Therefore, this tableau is describing the
Motherland, with man about to appear upon it.

The tableau is careful in differentiating between na-
ture’s creations and the special creation of man, for
nature’s creations are shown as seeds to be developed and
brought into life, while man is shown as appearing fully
developed without having to go through any evolution-
ary changes. It shows that man was not considered to be
of nature’s making. |

This beautiful symbol does not look much like an idol
when one understands it. It is a symbol confirming our
biblical teachings, only this symbol originated tens of
thousands of years before Egypt was peopled. It is not

147

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

only wrong but wicked for religious fanatics to express
opinions on subjects about which they know nothing.

This deciphering, by the way, is not complete, on ac-
count of the mutilated condition of the lower left hand.
This mutilation makes it impossible to tell what it was
supposed to depict.

THE SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT.—This is one of the
most interesting of all the ancient symbols. Its origin was
in the Motherland and it symbolizes the Creator and
Creation and is very far-reaching in its esoteric meanings.

In various writings it will be found under different
names, but in each instance the seven heads are referred
to. I have been unable to discover its original name in the
Motherland, but in Hindu works I find it called both
Caisha and Narayana. In the Yucatan Maya it is called
Ah-ac-chapat, and today in Cambodia the name for it is
Naga. This last appellation, however, is a modern chris-
tening, for it gives to the serpent the name of the people.

The Seven-headed Serpent permeates all ancient writ-
ings because it symbolizes the Creator and Creation.
Whenever and wherever we see it, we know it says: “I
am the symbol of the Deity, the Creator. Looking at me
compels you to think of Him. I am the vehicle which car-
ries your thoughts to God.”

At Angkor Thom in Cambodia, which is a part of
ancient Burma, there are the remains of a magnificent
temple that may be classed among the architectural won-
ders of the world. The Seven-headed Serpent appears in
many places among these ruins, but the principal one is the
approach to the temple. On either side of this approach
are carved Seven-headed Serpents, their heads upraised

148

SYM BOLS

VIGOGNVS SYOMONV JO LNAIdUAS GAACVAH-NAATS LVIUD AHL

“osgsaS Ajyaa fy ‘uDmMsaup 4404 MIN! ay} Jo uUor}Ia/10 ayy mo4f pauDOT

a

~ Pees ah A”
ee SS oe
ae + whoa. ey r via Fi * .
i ry . ad pres ; :

149

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

from eight to ten feet. Their tails end at the temple walls.

These two Seven-headed Serpents have been an enigma
to the many archzologists who have examined them, and
all have placed themselves on record in saying that the
builders of this temple were serpent-worshippers—all ex-
cept one. A lady who does not claim to be an archeologist,
Helen Churchill Candee, in her fascinating book of travel,
“Angkor the Magnificent,” felt the heart-beat of truth
about these magnificent conceptions. She writes: “It is
Naga. It is like nothing else. The form is the result of
centuries of legend and belief, the tangible evidence of
past religion and story. It is not the fantastic creation of
artist or architect, but the symbol of a demigod. His at-
tributes, his history, are matters to dig out of inscriptions.”

Madam Candee is absolutely right and all the others
are wrong. These serpents are symbols, but she did not

CARVINGS ON THE GREAT SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT

AT ANGKOR THOM AT ANGKOR VAT

Central Figure—Lotus flower. Outer Circle—The Sun.

First Circle—Picture of Sun surrounded 3 Inner Circles—Mu’s numeral; also
by rays. colonies and colonial empires.

Rays divided into three sections. Symbol- Central Figure—The Royal Lotus, the
ical numeral of the Land of Mu. symbolical flower of the Land of Mu,

the Motherland.

150

SYM BOLS

carry her symbol high enough. Instead of symbolizing a
demigod, they are symbols of the Great Creator of all
worlds.

In front of their necks, and also at the back, are deli-
cately carved symbols of the Motherland, which are
indistinctly shown in the beautiful picture kindly supplied
to me by the American Weekly. I have, however, separate
sketches of these symbols which I made many years ago
before the French got possession of Angkor. Then it was
a hard, dangerous journey to get to Angkor from the coast,
and I had some quite thrilling experiences; but that is the
usual thing with all explorers—it is what is bound to
happen.

With the Sunday American’s picture I am giving cuts
of two of these carvings, with the deciphering and trans-
lations. |

How did the Seven-headed Serpent get the name of
Naga in Cambodia? I can see only one possible way—
the design came to Burma from the Motherland tens of
thousands of years ago, brought there by the Nagas. The
Nagas were wiped out by a cataclysm, a new people occu-
pied their land when it became habitable again. They
gave the name to the serpent, calling it after the people
who first brought it.

And while we are at Angkor, let us consider another
carving. There are conventional beasts there called by
archeologists “lions.” That they are conventional and
symbolical is shown by the shape of their mouths, an elon-
gated square—one of the symbols given to Mu. These
beasts are carved in a rising position, with their faces look-
ing towards the east, the direction of the burial ground of

151

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Mu. From end to end in Angkor one meets the constant
cry from the stones, ““Mu, Mu the Motherland!”

The illustration shows Ganesha. He has been called a
lot of bad names by those who did not know who he was.
The Hindus, however, knew who this god was and adorned
his likeness with flowers, for Ganesha was the symbol of
the god who cared for the fields and crops and whose
ancient name was “Lord of the Lands and Crops.”

This symbol came from the land of Mu. I do not know
what his name was in the Motherland, but should judge
it was either Ra-Ma (God of the Lands) or Ra-Mana
(Lord of the Field and Crops). The Yucatan PPeu
dynasty of kings adopted him as their symbol, claiming
they were the lords and owners of the land.

GANESHA, THE LORD OF THE FIELDS AND CROPS

Ganesha the elephant. The symbol of that attribute of the Deity which cares for the
fields, gardens and crops

In Yucatan, on the buildings erected during the PPeu
dynasty, elephants’ heads are found carved in prominent
parts of the structures. In ancient times it was always
usual to carve the symbol of the reigning kings on all
palaces and governmental buildings.

152

SYM BOLS

A Naca-Hinpu Knire.—I have in my possession an
extremely ancient knife, which I believe to be the oldest
knife in the world and is said to have been worn at one
time by an ancient Naga king. As I have stated elsewhere,
the Nagas were Mayas, who came to India from the
Motherland by way of Burma. They settled in the Dec-
can and eventually turned this settlement into a colonial
empire known as the Naga Empire. Their capital city
was on the spot where the city of Nagpur now stands.

It is not known when the Naga Empire ended. Legends
point to about 5,000 years ago. There are innumerable
Hindu records, legends and traditions. Valmiki does say,
however, that it was the First Hindu Colonial Empire of
the Motherland.

A careful examination shows that the present blade of
this knife is not the blade originally fitted to the handle.
The blade now attached is not of steel at all, but of hard
iron. It is riveted to the handle by a hardened copper
rivet. To make the blade fit the sheath, an overlaying ring
is put on the blade, close to the handle. Everything points
to the probability that the original blade was of either
bronze or tempered copper and that it was thick enough at
the handle to fit the sheath without the ring. The handle
of the knife and the scabbard are of silver, richly carved
with symbols, hieroglyphics and Maya tracings.

Apart from the interest that may be taken in the age of
the knife, there remains a greater interest in the hiero-
glyphics and symbols which are carved upon the handle
and scabbard. One symbol opens up an immense field for
research work.

The symbols which appear on the handle of the blade,

153

a

=|

.

oe

wa
»*

iG

:
¢
7

- ef
8 ph le

ais”) “St be
oo od ns “a
~~

A HINDU NAGA KNIFE

154.

Digitized by Google

SYMBOLS

SYMBOLS ON THE HANDLE AND SHEATH OF THE KNIFE

front and back, are conventional tableaux, telling us who
the people were that wore this knife and whence they
came.

Fig. 1—I will first take the symbol on the front of the
handle. This is a tableau both symbolical and conven-
tional. That it refers to the Motherland is plainly told
by the many times that the number fhree is repeated—
three being the symbolical number of the Motherland.

The face depicted is a conventional face, in which two
elongated squares form the mouth and the nose. This
symbol reads ‘““Mu, the Motherland.” I can prove this
statement because it is substantiated in the tableau. First,

155

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

in the crown and plumes which adorn the head. The head-
dress is composed of three—three times repeated. Second,
with an ancient water jar with a bud of the royal lotus on
either side, thus denoting that the land stood in the midst
of water and that it was the land of the royal lotus—Mu.
On each side of this triple figure is a conventional plume
which makes the main three. Each of these plumes is
trifurcated so as to produce three points.

On each side of the conventional nose is the hieratic
letter “‘k,” which is used to denote the four cardinal points
thus: North, South, East and West. These are conven-
tional eyes looking east and west in the direction of the
two main lines of colonization, as will be shown in the
next tableau.

The cheeks are arched to symbolize the horizon. On
both horizons are seen three suns appearing as semispheres
without rays. The sun appearing on the horizon without
rays symbolized a colony; with rays, a colonial empire.

The lower part of the figure is put there to balance the
whole and give an artistic effect. At each side of this
tableau is engraved a fully open royal lotus, thus empha-
sizing the fact that Mu—the Motherland—is indicated.

From the foregoing it seems evident that this knife was
of the date of the Naga colonial days.

Fig. 2—On the back of the handle is a tableau showing
the Motherland standing in water, with two fish jumping
along on top of the water, one traveling east, the other
west. This symbol shows that India was separated from
the Motherland by water and that the Nagas crossed the
ocean to get to India. Their mode of travel is amusingly
and very effectively told by the fish being out of water

156

SYMBOLS

and neither flying nor swimming but hopping along the
surface. Berosus, the ancient Chaldean priest and his-
torian, spoke of the Akkad-Mayas as being half fish and
half man.

The rest of the handle is carved in artistic Maya pat-
terns.

Fig. 3—The scabbard commences with five bands of
very pronounced Maya traceries. Below these bands is a
tableau, a compound hieroglyphic which no doubt will be
astounding to all students of archeology. It is most amaz-
ing to me to find it in India. The central figure in this
tableau is a scarab rising through rays of glory. Beneath
is the symbol of earth, or mother earth—the hieratic letter
M—which is shown to be productive by the conventional
leaves drooping from each end of the symbol. Beneath the
surface of the earth are two young scarabs still unborn to
light. On each side of the risen scarab is the symbol of
first man, Keh, the deer, both in the act of adoration. This
shows first man in adoration of the scarab beetle.

What does a scarab beetle symbolize?

This is the first time I have come across the scarab in
India, either in writings or carvings. The scarab has
hitherto been looked upon as being a purely Egyptian
symbol. It was selected by the Egyptians as the symbol
of the Creator, who was called Kephera. On the head-
dress of Kephera, the scarab always surmounts it.

Anani, the king’s scribe and companion of Seti II, in
one of his beautifully illustrated papyri, gives the follow-
ing reason why the Egyptians selected the scarab to sym-
bolize the Creative God:

‘The scarab rolls up little balls of mud with its feet

157

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

and in these balls deposits its eggs, there to hatch out.
The Egyptians think this a perfect example of the Creator
rolling the world around and causing it to produce life.”

This italicized sentence would be startling to the mod-
em scientist if he understood anything about the origin
and workings of The Forces, because here it is shown that
the Egyptians, 3,000 or 3,500 years ago understood the
origin and workings of the Great Forces, which I shall
hereafter explain from the Hindu translations. Anani
carries us back 3,500 years only, but the carvings on this
knife’s scabbard will carry us back to a time before the
Egyptians came to Egypt.

The symbol on the front of the handle tells us that this
handle and scabbard were made when the Nagas were
only a colony in India.

Now I shall try to fix an approximate date of the Naga
colony in India before it became a colonial empire.

One very prominent figure in the Naga or Maya Em-
pire in India was Prince Maya. The time of Prince Maya
is doubtful. Although I have come across many records
about him, not a single one even estimates the date when
he lived; but according to traditions, and these traditions
are as plentiful as leaves on a tree, Prince Maya lived
15,000 tO 20,000 years ago.

In Ramayana, we find this reference to him: “In olden
times there was a prince of the Nagas whose name was
Maya.”

Prince Maya was the author of the Sourya Siddhanta,
the most ancient treatise on astronomy in India. Its age
has been variously estimated at from 10,000 to 22,000
years.

158

SYM BOLS

At the time of Prince Maya, the Nagas were an empire.
When the handle and sheath of this knife were made, the
Nagas were a colony antedating the Empire. That they
were only a colony is clearly shown by the suns without
rays on the horizon. This proves the extreme antiquity of
the handle and sheath.

PILLARS

Pillars as sacred emblems are, without doubt, of ex-
tremely ancient origin. It is my firm belief that they date
back to the first temple that was erected for the worship
of God.

‘| al la

TAT PILLAR
Papyrus Ani B. C. 1500. British Museum
Pillars in ancient times were placed in the porches or
entrances to temples. The oldest record of their use as
such comes from Niven’s ‘‘Mexican Buried Cities.”
In Egyptian mythology, pillars were placed at the en-
trance to Amenti. Above on this page I give a cut taken

159

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

from the Papyrus of Ani, showing one of the two pillars at
the entrance to Amenti. The Egyptians called them Tat
Pillars, but they are more commonly known throughout
the world as Totem Pillars.

As the Egyptians got them from the Mayas, I will give
the Egyptian conceptions concerning them.

One pillar is called Tat, which means “in strength.”
The other pillar is called Tattu, which means “‘to estab-
lish.” When combined, these two words mean: “In
strength this place is established forever.”

The Tat in Egyptian is considered a figure of stability.
It also represents four corners and is equal to a square.

Two Tats form the entrance to Tattu. Tattu is the
gateway to the region where the mortal soul is blended
with an immortal spirit and “established in the mysteries
of Amenti forever.”

In the porch, or entrance to King Solomon’s Temple,
two special pillars were erected (I Kings, Chapter 7, 21st
and 22d verses): “And he set up the pillars in the porch
of the temple; and he set up the right pillar, and called
the name thereof Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and
called the name thereof Boaz.”

In Hebrew the word jachin means “to establish,” and
the word Joaz means “‘in strength.”

At the entrance of King Solomon’s temple and also at
the entrance of the Judgment Hall of Osiris, two pillars
were erected, standing perpendicularly. In each case the
two pillars have identically the same name, language con-
sidered, and with identically the same meaning. Also the
ornamentations on the pillars, down to the lily work, were
identically the same, showing that King Solomon made a

160

SYM BOLS

complete copy of the pillars at the entrance to Afnenti for
his own temple in Jerusalem.

Pillars are erected by the Maoris of New Zealand at
the entrances to their villages, and similar pillars are used
by the Indians of the Northwest.

Plato.informs us, speaking of Atlantis: ‘““There the peo-
ple gathered every fifth year and sixth year alternately,
and with sacrifices of bulls, swore to observe the sacred
inscriptions carved on the pillars of the temple.”

Java is one of the large islands of the Malay Archi-
pelago, and in writing of it, Forbes says:

“In Java is a tribe called the Karangs, supposed to be
descendants of the aborigines of the island, whose old men
and youths, four times a year, repair secretly in procession
to a sacred grove in a dense forest, the old men to worship,
the youths to see and learn the mysteries of their fore-
fathers. In this grove are the ruins of terraces laid out in
quadrilateral enclosures, the boundaries of which are
marked by blocks of stone, or fixed in the ground. Here
and there on the terraces are prominent monuments, erect
pillars, and, especially noteworthy, a pillar erect within a
square. Here these despised and secluded people follow
the rites and customs that have been handed down to them
through their forefathers from vastly remote ages (12,000
to 13,000 years ), repeating with superstitious awe a litany
which they do not understand or comprehend. This very
litany is found in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.”

I have emphasized a pillar erect within a square be-
cause that, too, is found in the Book of the Dead.

161

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

THE GREAT MONOLITH AT TIAHUANACO

162

Digitized by (Goo

eC

SYMBOLS

HEAD-DRESS OF AN INCA HIGH PRIEST, PERU

163

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU
THe Great Mono.itu at Tianuanaco, Peru

This immense stone has been one of the great wonders
and enigmas to all archzologists who have ever looked
upon it or its picture. To the archzologist it is one of the
wonders of the world. Perched up on the shores of Lake ©
Titicaca, 13,500 feet above the level of the Pacific Ocean,
it rests as a part of a ruin of a temple.

Much has been written about this stone, and the con-
census of opinion among the various writers is: “If it
could only be deciphered and read, what a wonderful tale
it might possibly tell about the ancient past!’ This stone
does tell a wonderful tale, for it takes its readers back
16,000 years, when Mu, the Motherland, still held her
proud sway throughout the earth, before she sank into
that fiery abyss to be mourned by mankind for many thou-
sands of years. It tells about the times when the first
settlements were being made in Egypt on the Nile Delta
under Thoth—the dawn of Egyptian history.

At the time the temple was built with its magnificently
carved stones, the Andes Mountains did not exist; they
had not yet been thrown up through the plains of western
South America. It was the raising of these mountains
that destroyed the country, most of the people and this-
temple, in doing which this great monolith was fractured
into two pieces.

Many writers, I find, assign this stone to the work of
the Incas. The Incas did not come to Peru for about
15,000 years after this temple was built. When the Incas
(Quiches) arrived in Peru, the Andes Mountains had
been in existence many thousands of years.

164

SYMBOLS

It is a wonderful old stone, for although a hieratic
alphabet had been used for a long time, not a letter ap-
pears on it. This carving follows along the lines of the
first forms of writings ever used—a combination of sym-
bols forming a picture, the picture forming a writing. It
is most unusual to find a carving of this date without hier-
atic writings forming a part of it; yet, without these writ-
ings the picture is as easy to read as a present-day printed
book. All that is needed is a knowledge of the meaning
of symbols.

The excellence of this stone shows great mechanical
skill and artistry.

Now, with the aid of the symbols of the Motherland
and those specially used in her colonial empires I will
decipher it and read it to you. |

On looking at the picture of the carving the most promi-
nent object which strikes the eye is a conventional head
of a human being; and the most striking point of this head
is the number of times the numeral ¢hree is woven into it.
Three, as previously stated, was the numeral assigned to
Mu. I will now dissect the head.

It consists of three superimposed layers forming an
escutcheon, the uppermost of which is sculptured so as to
represent the human face. Above are three feathers form-
ing a plume, and beneath a /riple throne, which the figure
surmounts. On each cheek there are three dots. The
breast plate, if it can be so called, contains three oblong
squares ("__~] , which is one of the symbols for Mu
(the geometrical and alphabetical symbol ).

The scepter at its end is adorned with three macaws’
heads. The shape of the mouth is also conventional, an

165

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

oblong square (___] . Here nine times it says Mu. The
head is surrounded by rays divided into groups of four.
This makes a complete circle of rays, and is a part of the
symbol reading, “‘Mu, the Empire of the Sun.” The ter-
mination of each ray is ©, Ahau—King of Kings; thus
saying: ‘“The Emperor of the Empire of the Sun was the
king over all of the earthly kings.”

The macaws’ heads at the end of the scepter are a
colonial symbol, the totem of Queen Moo of Mayax, and,
being attached to the scepter, designate that Mayax was
a vassal state or colonial empire. On the rays of the upper
angles are leopards’ heads, also appearing on each side of
the escutcheon. The leopard was the totem of Prince Coh,
the brother husband of Queen Moo. At the lower angles
are serpents’ heads, the symbol of the Can dynasty. Thus
the central figure tells us that Queen Moo with her hus-
band Coh of the Can family are reigning in Mayax, and
that Mayax was one of Mu’s colonial empires.

On the lower band are sculptured seventeen small heads
over each head and on either side are the symbols for land.
The definite meaning of this I cannot state. It may mean
that Mu has seventeen colonies; again this may not be the
actual meaning.

Above this band are three bands of winged figures.
Those in the middle row have macaw heads, indicating
their allegiance to Queen Moo. The figures in the other
two rows have human heads, but wear on their crowns
Queen Moo’s totem, showing that they recognize her as
their sovereign. —

All these figures are ornamented with twelve serpents,

166

SYMBOLS

symbolizing the twelve Maya dynasties who ruled over
Mayax.

The whole picture combined shows that the inhabitants
of this land, where this temple was built, were vassals to
or a sub-colony of Mayax at the time Queen Moo and her
husband Coh were reigning in Mayax.

Queen Moo visited the Maya colony at Sais on the Nile
Delta during the first century of its existence and there
met Thoth, its founder, according to the Troano Manu-

«script. The Nile colony was started 16,000 years ago;

»\ \ \ ya

( perom 1Gid.
ONE OF THE SYMBOLIC STONES, ANARAJAPOORA, CEYLON,
CALLED BY ARCHAOLOGISTS “‘MOON STONES”

therefore this great monolith of Tiahuanaco was carved
just 16,000 years ago.

CaRVED STONE AT ANARAJAPOORA, CEYLON

On account of the shape of this stone, which is a half
sphere, it has been called by archeologists who have
visited Anarajapoora, “the Anarajapoora Moon Stone.”
There are several of them and they are placed at the foot
of the steps leading into the temple.

That this is a symbolical stone, telling who the Cinga-

167

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

lese were and whence and how they came to Ceylon, has
been overlooked by all the archzologists, yet the writings
are quite plain and distinct.

The center of the stone is carved as a conventional but
elaborate lotus in full bloom. This, of course, is the sym-
bol of the Motherland, the land of Mu. It was adopted
as such, so Oriental traditions say, because it was the first
flower to adorn the earth’s surface. There is every reason
for believing that these traditions told the truth and that
the lotus was the first flower to appear on earth.

Carved on the stone is a series of half-circles, one of
the symbols of a colony of the Motherland. On account
of the bad condition of the outside band beyond the ani-
mals, I am unable to say whether it was an ordinary
colony or a colonial empire.

Beyond the lotus is an ornamental band. This has no
symbolical significance, unless it symbolizes water. It 1s
also too indistinct to warrant any definite conclusions.

The next band consists of a procession of ducks, indi-
cating the manner in which the colonists came to Ceylon.
Like ducks they came on the surface of the water; that is,
they came in their boats.

Outside of the procession of ducks is a band which,
without doubt, is ornamental only, carved there as an
artistic dividing line between the procession of ducks and
a procession of animals. This procession of animals is
divided into sets of three, the symbolic numeral of the
Motherland. |

Freely read, the symbols on this stone say:

“These people who came to Ceylon came there from a
colony of Mu, in their boats, the road being across the

168

SYMBOLS

ocean; and their forefathers came to that colony from the
Motherland.”’

Anarajapoora was not an old city, about 2,200 years
only, but before it was built, Ceylon had been occupied by
a warlike race for at least 10,000 years, as recorded by
Valmiki, the Hindu sage and historian.

@ © PSOGOCO@ OOO @OBO
IO

North America § Place Among the
Anctent Civilizations
© BOSOSCO POO ®@OB®

‘Tee of the most interesting questions of the day, both

to scientist and layman, are these: Where did man first
appear upon the earth? At what date did he appear—
how far back?

The first of these questions I can answer and give all
reasonable proofs, which consist of written documents,
inscriptions on historic ruins, traditions, and geological
phenomena.

The second question cannot now be answered, and prob-
ably never will be, because the records and proofs which
were once written now lie in the bed of one of our deepest
oceans. There is a possibility, however, that in unearth-
ing the ruins of ancient Hindu Rishi city temples, there
may be found complete copies of ‘The Seven Sacred In-
spired Writings of Mu.” The seventh writing, or chapter,
tells the tale and gives the history of man from his advent
upon earth. |

We have a biblical statement that says man first ap-
peared on earth in the Garden of Eden, but where the
Garden of Eden was, no two authorities agree. I main-

170

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

tain that the biblical Garden of Eden was the Egyptian
Lands of the West, the Maya’s Land of Kui, and the
Hindu’s Motherland. The hieratical name for all of
these was the Land of Mu.

Now I shall follow ancient man around the world and,
by the written records which he has left behind in every
country, show beyond controversy the geographical posi-
tion of Mu. I shall make the start from the United States
of North America, because North America and eastern
Asia were the two countries where man made his first
settlements away from the Motherland.

In their excitement over the discovery of a few old
human bones, such as the Neanderthal, Piltdown, and
Heidelberg man, scientists, in both Europe and America,
have completely ignored and cast aside the remains of
ancient man in North America. That the European re-
mains were those of idiots and degenerates is obvious from
the abnormal shapes of their skulls. Doubtless they were
outcasts from civilized communities. From Valmiki,
Druidical works, the Popol Vuh and other ancient writings
we learn that such characters were driven into the forests,
there to live and die like the beasts. It would appear from
many ancient writings that the usual method of disposing
of bodies was by cremation, consequently there remained
no trace of those whose bones had been consumed by fire.

The mere bones of man do not show the degree of civili-
zation which he has attained, or the manner in which he
lived—dut his works do.

The remains of ancient man’s bones found in North
America are few, but his works are many.

All of the scientists who became excited over the dis-

171

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

covery of ancient bones in Europe agree that they are of
the Pleistocene Time, or subsequent to the geological Gla-
cial Period.

North Americans were highly civilized and were ex-
perts in the arts and sciences tens of thousands of years
before these idiots and degenerates of Europe existed.

A scientific boom was given to Egypt, by way of change,
by the assertion that Egypt was the mother of civilization,
whereas there are numerous ancient documents telling us
that the soil of Egypt was first trod by colonists from
America and India, and that these colonists ‘brought the
learning and civilization of the Motherland with them.”
Many of these documents were written by the ancient
Egyptians themselves. As Schliemann has shown, the
great civilization of Egypt declined with the loss of the
support furnished by the Motherland.

Now the evolution craze has a firm grip upon our scien-
tists, a theory which is impossible and untenable in the
face of “The Sacred and Inspired Writings of Mu.”
These writings tell us what life is, how it originated and
the forces which govern it. Although written more than
50,000 years ago, these writings inform us as to the nature
of the force which our scientists call the electron; its
origin, how it works, what it does and its final disposition.

There are the remains of highly civilized men in North
America which date far back into the Tertiary Era and
antedate the geological Glacial Period tens of thousands
of years.

The “Sacred Mysteries” of Egypt tell us what the so-
called Glacial Period was, what caused it, and give a scien-
tific description of everything concerning it.

172

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

Many of the North American remains of man date back
to a time before our great western mountain ranges raised
their imposing heads above the level of the plains.

In our western states there are traceable four civiliza-
tions of human beings who occupied the land before the
Cliff Dwellers and the present red Indians.

It is quite possible that the actual Cliff Dwellers and
the red Indians may be races that have descended from
remnants that were saved during the raising of the moun-
tains. The four civilizations are shown by their different
forms of writings and the remains of their houses. These
writings are on boulders and cliffs and give to us an im-
perishable history of the race that inscribed them. True,
it is a fragmentary history, but it is sufficient to tell us
whence they came, how they came, and of their religion
and accomplishments.

The keys by which these writings may be read come
from the Motherland and they consist of a hieratic alpha-
bet and a system of symbols or picture writing. The pic-
tures form an alphabet of words instead of letters, and
they are quite easy to read with the aid of the keys and a
knowledge of the language in which they are written.

Following are a few of the most prominent of the
ancient civilizations in North America:

Orecon.—In Oregon, at a place called Fossil Lake,
the remains of a very ancient civilization have been found.
Fossil Lake is the dried-out bed of what was once an
ancient sheet of water. From the remains of the prehis-
toric animals found there, it has been proved that this
lake existed in the Mesozoic Age.

Fossil Lake stands in the midst of the great Oregon

173

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

BR ©, &

\/ 7
X ; is “ YY.
sae Ms

“ge

SYMBOLS FOUND AMONG THE CLIFF-DWELLERS’ WRITINGS

174

\ a‘ es

¢

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

Desert, which was once a fertile plain, but was made
waterless by the raising of the mountains, which diverted
the surface water. Around the dried-up bed of the lake
the fossils of ancient animals have been unearthed. In the
lower strata the bones of dinosaurs and other Mesozoic
animals have been found. In the upper strata the bones
of mastodons and other mammal life of the Pleistocene
Time have been found. Among the bones of the masto-
dons have been found arrow and spear heads made of vol-
canic glass. | |

Nevapa.—Some of the most valuable data relative to
ancient man in North America have been discovered
through the work of archzologists in this state.

Hundreds, yes thousands, of writings have been found
on the rocks and cliffs of our western states, involving
thousands of symbols, hieratic letters and vignettes. I
have selected a few from Nevada, sufficient to fill a page,
as much as I can give in this curtailed work.

Symbol

A. This is one of the symbols of Mu, The Empire of the
Sun. A sun in mid-heaven surrounded with rays.

B. This is the symbol for the rising sun, and was so used
by all ancient peoples.

C. This is the symbol of the sun at its meridian commonly
used by all ancient peoples.

D. This is the sun shown as gone down beyond the hor!-
zon, set. Usually it is depicted as a plain circle with-
out rays. In this case it is a black disc, which says it
is referring to something that has forever passed
away from the sun’s rays.

175

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

E. This symbolizes Mu forever in darkness. Mu’s name
is given by her numeral, three, placed on the top of
the black disc.

F. This is a vignette saying that Mu lies across the ocean
in the direction of the setting sun.

The serpent is Can, symbolic of the ocean Canab,
the great waters. The semi-circle above the serpent
is a picture of the western horizon. Here again Mu’s
name is given by her symbolic numeral three. She is
shown by three feathers on the horizon.

G’. This is a hieroglyphic reading, U-lummil, ‘“The Em-
pire of —.” This is the central figure on the royal
escutcheon of Mu.

H’. This is a bud of a lotus, the royal and sacred flower of
the Motherland.

G’. A single-headed, unadorned serpent, the symbol of the
waters among all ancient peoples.

H’, Another symbol used for water, in place of the serpent.

I. The ancients sometimes used a plain cross instead of
the usual symbol, the four-sided square. Both show
four cardinal points.

K. This is the first letter in the hieratic alphabet of the
Motherland, pronounced ah. It is also the numeral
one, pronounced hun. Its meaning was extended to
cover King Ahau, the King of Kings.

L. This is the letter 7 in the hieratic alphabet.

M. This is the symbol for an abyss, a valley or hole.

N. This is the letter x in the hieratic alphabet.

O. This is the letter z in the hieratic alphabet, reversed.

P. Pages might be written about this symbol of the ser-

176

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

pent and the tree. It came into existence, however,
after the submersion of Mu.

Q. This symbol has both plain and esoteric meanings. It
symbolizes creation, also the numeral nine.

R. This is an Uighur-Maya religious symbol.

S. This is the Uighur hieratic letter h.

T. Is this a feather or shrub? I don’t know.

U. This is the ancient symbol for a hundred.

V. This is a symbol for mountains, not very old.

W. This is an interesting symbol, as it is a map of the west-
ern coast line of North, Central and South America.

X. This picture has no symbolical significance. Such
hands are found painted on cave walls throughout
the world.

Y. This cross reads and refers to the active and passive
elements in nature. It also has an esoteric meaning.

Z. I doubt if this symbol means anything beyond artistic
effect.

AA.This is the picture of a skin of an animal.

BB. Similar heads are found in Egypt and elsewhere. The
horns are adorned, showing that the animal ts in-
tended for some function or ceremony. It is not a
very ancient symbol.

CC. A three-pointed figure symbolizing multitudes. It 1s
generally found with the points pointing downwards.

DD.A guide-post telling the traveler the direction and
length of his journey.

These cliff writings prove that the writers came from
the Motherland and that they were intimately connected
with the Mayas of Mexico and Central America, as their
language is a branch of the Maya.

177

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ANOTHER WRITING IN GRAPEVINE CANYON, NEVADA

178

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION
PAINTING. GRAPEVINE CANYON, NEVADA

1. Is the ground plan of a temple.

2. Is the symbol for submersion. Having gone down
with myriads of inhabitants. -

3. Is the symbol for the sun having set forever on the
land or lands submerged, and includes the sunset, the life
cross and submersion.

The details in this ground plan (1) say: “This temple is
erected to the memory of Mu, the Motherland of Man,
which has been submerged with myriads of souls.”

The central figure (4) represents a shrine or holy of
holies. Within this shrine is 7 reversed—m, Mu, Mother-
land, showing to whom it is dedicated and that she is no
more. She is dead.

On either side of the central figure are three taus—T—
the symbol of resurrection. This is a common way of refer-
ring to the Motherland all over the world.

On the moon stones of Anarajapoora, Ceylon, the sym-
bolical animals are in groups of three. On the great mono-
lith of Tiahuanaco, Peru, the thrones are in groups of
three. On the heads of the figures in Central America are
three crowns—and so on, ad infinitum.

The three devisions about the shrine represent the three
rooms, where the devotee receives his three degrees in re-
ligious knowledge. This is the usual construction of an-
cient temples. The three rooms are confirmed by the treble
figure (5) at the entrance. This is the shape of the ends of
all the rooms, representing heaven and earth. In the room
itself the degree is shown by the number of stars within the
triangle.

179

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

At the right of this temple is the glyph (2). This is a
compound symbol and reads “land or lands submerged.”
2a is a symbol meaning multitudes. Thus the glyph shows
multitudes of souls submerged. ’

At the left is another compound symbol —(3); a is the
sun, & lands submerged. Translated, it reads, ‘‘the sun
shines no more on these lands which are submerged.”
Therefore, the whole tableau says: ‘Mu, with myriads
of souls, has been submerged. The sun shines no more
upon her. She is in darkness. She is dead.”

The second stone is adjacent to the previous one. It
represents a sacrificial scene: 1. The animal on the altar.
2. The fires to consume it. 3. The symbol of submerged Mu.

I have included this drawing to corroborate the previ-
ous one and furnish additional proof that the temple was
dedicated to Mu and that Mu had been submerged.

There were no burnt sacrifices previous to the destruc-
tion of the Motherland. Burnt sacrifices were introduced
as a religious ceremony, to commemorate Mu and her peo-
ple being consumed by fire as she sank into the fiery abyss.

Go.tp Gutcu, Beatty, NEvapa

This rock is one of nature’s freaks that was utilized by
man many thousands of years ago as a guide to travelers,
and a commemorative monument to Mu.

Roughly, the stone resembles the squat and bent figure
of a man in a posture of grief and mourning. He is heav-
ily cloaked in the ancient Manchu style, with arms folded
across the knees. On the top 1s a weather-worn stone,
which represents the head of the figure. In place of eyes
are pecked and painted two symbols, both very pronounced

180

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

FOUND IN GOLD GULCH, BEATTY, NEVADA
>Os ©).
/. 2.6 os ae

181

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

as to meaning: 1 reads, chi-pe-z?, which, translated, means
‘“‘A mouth opened, fires came forth with vapors, the land
gave way and went down.”

2a. This is the escutcheon of the Empire of the Sun,
the land of Mu. A sun with eight rays. Instead of the
center being a symbol reading, ‘““The Empire of—,”’ this
has in its place: 24, “Ahau, the King, the Great King, the
Great Ruler.”

Freely read, the writings on this face say: “A mouth
opened, volcanic fires and vapors came forth, the land
gave way, and Mu, the Great Ruler, the Empire of the
Sun, sank into that abyss of fire.”

On the left arm of the figure, the first symbol is (3) the-

>» ng eae
a a $
at hee ~ 7

sT

the-ha, which, translated, reads: ‘Toward water, or in
the direction of water.”

From the main symbol are shown streams joining each
other. The characters on this picture are all Uighur-Maya.
These people may have been Mongols.

This is a guide-post, nothing more, telling the way to

182

Digitized by Google

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

water. It is a crudely drawn ancient, conventional face
looking in the direction of water. The first water to be
found in this vicinity, by the way, is a spring, pond or
lake, and farther on, a river. The ground is intersected
with trails, and the figure shows which road to take to the
pond or spring.

The first settlers in the United States made their settle-
ments along the southwestern states. These settlements
were wiped out by cataclysms at the same time that con-
temporary settlements in Mexico were also destroyed.
These were of a very early date, probably during Plio-
cene times.

A second civilization, and probably a third, followed
them. These were destroyed by cataclysms and by the
raising of the great ranges of mountains. The raising of
these mountains, by the way, made deserts of many fertile
lands in Colorado, Arizona and Nevada. The Cliff Dwel-
lers were the last colonizers to arrive from the land of Mu.
When the first settlements were made in the southwestern
states, it was before the mountains were raised. When the
Cliff Dwellers entered America, the mountains probably
had been raised, for we find their houses in the cliffs of the
mountains.

The Cliff Dwellers spoke the Yucatan-Maya language,
as is shown by their use of the Maya hieratic alphabet,
which I have found in Nevada. One would judge, from
the points where we find the remains of the Cliff Dwellers
in Colorado, that the mouth of the Colorado River was
their port of entry into America.

It is quite apparent that, after reaching their objective
point from the Motherland, which was the mouth of the

183

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

OREGON

NEVADA

N(EW \MEXICO

- Cliff House writings
ooep All-water route from Mu
orp Possible land trail

COLORADO RIVER AND TRIBUTARIES
The gateway of the Cliff Dwellers into the United States

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

Colorado River, they proceeded to work up the river and
inland. From remains of them found in various states, it
is shown that they did not confine themselves to the main
river, but worked out on all of its branches and smaller
tributaries, some even going beyond the water route by
trails on land, such as the old Zufii trail. Generally, how-
ever, they seemed to choose water routes in preference to
land routes.

Working inland from the Colorado River’s mouth, they
would first pass through Arizona, which state is full of
their remains. Their old homes and remains show that
they worked out on the Gila, Little Colorado and Grand
Rivers. In New Mexico their remains are also very abun-
dant.

After passing through Arizona, up the Colorado River,
they wound their way into Utah. Utah is rich in their re-
mains. Branches of the Colorado continue into Nevada and
Wyoming and in both states there are remains of these
ancient people. |

Leaving the main river and working out on the
branches, the Grand, San Juan, White and Yampa Rivers,
the Cliff Dwellers would, naturally, enter Colorado, a
state which 1s extremely rich in their remains.

Basing calculations on these not only possible but prob-
able routes, the great figures which are pecked and painted
on the rocks, in peculiar positions, with extraordinary
hands and feet, were unquestionably guide-posts; a dumb
language, guiding and telling the traveler about the jour-
ney ahead of him. I know this is true, because I have de-
ciphered and translated some of them.

All of the regions surrounding the Colorado River are

185

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

literally filled with the works of the old Cliff Dwellers.
These remains consist of cliff houses, rock paintings, rock
writings and various utensils and instruments. The fact
that these works are only found in the vicinity of the
Colorado River and its tributaries, is the strongest sort of
evidence that the Colorado River was the gateway through
which the Cliff Dwellers entered America, and possibly
their predecessors as well.

At what time the Cliff Dwellers came to America is
problematical. There is no positive evidence, nor, in fact,
is there anything to give us any intimation. They or their
ancestors, however, were here before the mountains were
raised, which would fix their date at 12,500 years ago.

Arizona.—Dr. Walter Hough of the Smithsonian In-
stitution made an examination of the petrified forests of
Arizona and reported that he had found the remains of
four distinct peoples there. This find corresponds with my
own discoveries in our western and southwestern states,

186

Digitized by Google

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

as well as Mexico. Three of Hough’s civilizations existed
before the mountains were raised.

The accompanying illustration is a copy of an ancient
rock picture found in the Hava Supai Canyon, Arizona.
It is more than 12,000 years old and shows that man was
living in Arizona contemporaneously with the mastodon.

New Mexico.—The ancient history of New Mexico is
the ancient history of the Pueblo Indians, whose past con-
stitutes one of the most fascinating tales ever told about
the ancient men of North America. The Pueblo Indians,
when they first came to America, were a very highly civil-
ized and enlightened people. Their traditions and the
data found among them prove this fact. They have the
oldest records and traditions of any North Americans who
came to this continent from the Motherland.

In our western and southwestern states are many an-
cient ruined cities and structures — rock pictures, rock
writings, pottery and traditions. Our famous scientists
and archeologists have been particularly bashful about
telling us anything about the people who occupied this
land before the present inhabitants. The most that they
tell us is that these writings are from 3,000 to 5,000 years
old.

It is from the Hopi and Zufii Pueblos that the most
information is to be obtained. To me these tribes are the
most interesting of all the North American Indians living
today. Possibly this is because I know them better than
any of the others. Their connection with the Mother-
land is perfectly established, and their traditions also tell
us that they originally came to America from Mu. All of
their religious inspirations are traceable back to the first

187

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

religion of man, and their sacred symbols are virtually
those of Mu.

I have a Pueblo ceremonial blanket, the ornamentations
of which are sacred symbols derived from the Motherland.

Their traditions are interesting and far-reaching. An
extremely fascinating tradition of theirs is about the crea-
tion of the first man and woman—the Adam and Eve of
the Bible. It is most valuable by reason of the fact that
the language of the Motherland is found in the esoteric
meanings of some of the words.

The Zufiis and the Hopis have two special gods who
are supposed to shape the destinies of mankind. These
gods are held sacred, but are not worshipped. In other
words, they are comparable to our saints. The names of
these two gods are Ahaiinta and Matsailema. These were
the first children of the God of the Sun.

This sentence will bear careful analysis. The Hopi In-
dians have differentiated between the Sun, the collective
symbol of God, and God Himself. They point out that
the first man and the first woman were the children of God
Himself and not the children of His symbol the Sun.

I have found in ancient writings, especially in those of
the Hindus and Egyptians, passages where the sun is
called the father of life, and the waters, the mother of life,
but in each instance they are speaking about nature’s prod-
ucts and not the special creation called man. They also
speak of the sun’s forces working on the earth’s affinitive
forces.

The Hopi Indians hold that man and woman were the
children of God, the Great God who rules the sun, there-
fore, they are not the offspring of nature. A further cor-

188

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

roboration of this lies in the esoteric meanings of the
names of man and woman. Their names are composed of
vocables of the mother tongue, and, like al] ancient re-
ligious writings, have a hidden meaning. For instance:
Ahatinta is composed of the Motherland words A-hai-in-
ta, and Matsailema is composed of Ma-tsai-le-ma. Con-
joined, they read: ‘God created the first man and the
first woman to occupy the earth. These first children of
God were the parents of all mankind.”

The language of the Pueblo Indians contains many
words of the mother tongue, as I have pointed out, and
many others find their roots in the same source. Another
legend reads as follows:

“Their forefathers came to America in their ships from
across the sea in the direction of the setting sun.”

Thus it is shown that they came to America from the
west, in ships, not over the much abused and much 1m-
posed upon Bering land bridge.

When the Pueblos first came to America they were in
a very highly civilized state, which is corroborated by
their wonderful knowledge of geology, their cultivated
language, and their use of the sacred symbols of the
Motherland.

A peculiar coincidence that I discovered among the
Pueblo Indians was this: they had Seven Sacred Cities ot
Cibola. This is a pure copy of the Motherland and a cus-
tom that prevailed among her colonial empires. For in-
stance, the Motherland had seven sacred cities of religion
and the sciences; Atlantis had the same, and India had her
seven Rishi, or sacred cities.

Lieutenant Cushing lived among the Hopi Indians for

189

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

a long time while he translated what has been called the
Zufii Myths, which are myths only because the people into
whose hands they have passed have failed to understand
them. These Pueblo traditions have been handed down
orally from father to son for thousands of years, but a
tradition is actual history, not a myth.

I will take some extracts from Lieutenant Cushing’s
translations, which, added to my own personal knowledge
of the Pueblos, makes interesting reading.

For example, a Zufii tradition says: “Once the earth
was covered with water, no land appeared anywhere.” Is
this a myth? Not at all, for it has been corroborated by
the sacred writings of the Motherland and by geology.

Another Zufii tradition says: ‘“‘Just before man ap-
peared upon the earth, the ground was so soft and watery
man could not have walked upon it, his feet would sink
into the ground, therefore he could not live upon it.” A
description of what sort of footwear a man must have had
to enable him to pass over the soft, watery ground without
sinking into it, Is very amusing.

Although geological works do not mention this kind of
ground as having been in the world at any time, yet that
such was the case 1s clearly shown by the shape and char-
acter of the feet of the early Tertiary animals, who had
long, spreading toes like the feet of our present-day wad-
ing birds who frequent the muddy shores of rivers, ponds
and lakes.

Another so-called Zufii myth—The ancient Zufiis, thou-
sands upon thousands of years ago, had a perfect knowl-
edge of the great reptilian monstrosities that frequented

190

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

the earth from the Carboniferous Age down to the end of
the Cretaceous Period. These traditions say:

“They were monsters and animals of prey; they were
provided with claws and terrible teeth. A mountain lion
is but a mole in comparison to them. Then Those Above
said to these animals: ‘Ye shall all be changed into stone,
that ye be not evil to men, but that ye may be a great
good to them. Thus have we changed ye into everlasting
stone.’

“Thus was the surface of the earth hardened and many
of all sorts of beasts turned into stone. Thus, too, it hap-
pens that we find them throughout the world. Their forms
are sometimes large (in shape), like themselves; some-
times they are shriveled and distorted out of shape, and
we often see among the rocks many beasts that no longer
live, which show us that all was different in the days of
the new.”

I think Cushing hardly caught the exact translations in
the words I have italicised. My changes, however, in no
way alter the meanings.

The foregoing has been passed along as another Zufi
myth. Yet, in order to prove that it is not a myth, one has
only to stroll through one of our museums in order to see
on every side the truth of the Zufii tradition. Go to the
Museum of Natural History in New York and look at the
fossil of the crested trachodont, or visit the United States
National Museum at Washington and gaze at the com-
plete and perfect skeleton of the Jurassic dinosaur, Stego-
saurus, crushed and flattened.

There may be readers who will say that these have
nothing to do with the Pueblos and that they do not prove

191

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ROCK CARVING, HAVA SUPAI CANYON, ARIZONA
Reptile Tyrannosaurus. Hopi legend refers to the great reptiles

192

Digitized by Google

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

that the tradition is not a myth. For the benefit of such
doubters let us consider the Hava Supai Canyon in Ari-
zona. There, drawn.and carved on a rock, is a picture of
the most terrible carnivorous dinosaur that ever existed on
earth, the grewsome Tyrannosaurus of the late Cretaceous
Period. This picture was probably drawn more than
12,000 years ago.

It is only within the last hundred years that this form
of reptile was known to our scientists. Cuvier found a
part of a skeleton and out of it made a reproduction—a
great lizard walking on all four legs. I think I am correct
in saying that it is actually only within the last fifty years
that the true form of the Tyrannosaurus became known,
although it had been faithfully depicted in rock drawings
by ancient man thousands of years ago.

The Zufiis also have various traditions about the
“Flood.” I quote herewith the tradition about this catas-
trophe, as published by G. W. James:

“In the long, long ago, the Zufiis were very wicked, and
in spite of the continued warnings of Those Above, they
persisted in their evil doings until the Shadow people de-
termined to destroy them from the face of the earth. Ac-
cordingly the ‘wo great water sources of the world were
opened: the reservoir of the above from which all] rains
descend, and the reservoir of the below from which all
springs, creeks and rivers receive their flow.

“The very plugs were withdrawn and the rain poured
down and the floods arose, until the Zufiis knew the wrath
of the gods was falling upon them. Hastily they fled to
the summit of Tai-yo-al-la-ne (Thunder Mountain),
where the younger ones of the wicked and profane laughed

193

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

at the fears of the others, and openly scoffed at the idea
that even the floods of heaven and of the underworld be-
neath could ever rise so high as to reach them.”

“But slowly the water arose; higher and higher it came,
until even the scoffers were silenced, and dumb dread
filled their souls. In vain the priests of the various
brotherhoods danced, sang, prayed and made big smoke,
made medicine and offered gifts. The anger of Those
Above would not be turned away. At last the Chief of the
Priests went away to a quiet part of the mountain sum-
mit, where he could meditate and pray and more espe-
cially intercede for the people. He finally came back and
said that Those Above could have their anger turned away
from them only in one way. The choicest of the young
men and the fairest and sweetest of the young maidens
must be sacrificed, and then, with appropriate ceremonies
be flung into the waters. Thus could the wrath of the gods
be appeased and their anger turned away.

“Sadly the people listened and then discussed as to who
should be offered as the needful sacrifice. A youth was
found as handsome as a young god, athletic, healthful,
radiant, fine featured and beloved by all. Then while no
one dared to whisper it, the thought went through the
minds of all that the only maiden worthy was the beloved -
and only daughter of their revered Cacique. When he
looked up to see whom the people had chosen, there was
no maiden there. Tears sprang into his eyes. Calling his
sweet daughter to him he said a few words to which she
reverently bowed her head. Taking her stand beside the
youth, those present knew that the sacrifice would be com-
plete. Carefully robing them both in their finest ceremo-

194

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

nial costumes, placing suitable decorations in their hair,
around their arms, and in their hands, the young pair were
made ready. Then, slowly and quietly, but increasing in
volume and agony, the death wail was sung, after which
the Cacique blessed them both; and, invoking the pardon
of Those Above, to be gained at so great a cost, he flung
them headlong into the seething waters.

“It was done not a moment too soon, for already the
throng were standing on a small piece of high land left on
the mesa-top with the waters completely surrounding
them.

“Tn less than an hour the waters had gained their height
and began to subside. Days and weeks passed, however,
before the valley was dry and the chastened people could
return to their homes.

“Not long after this one of the youths who had been
foremost in wickedness happened to look up towards Tai-
goallane and there saw two figures standing out clear and
plain on the mesa-top. Calling to his people, they were
soon gazing in wonderment and awe at the sight, know-
ing that Those Above had given this to them as a sign.
This was confirmed when the Cacique solemnly assured
them that these were the heavenly made images of their
loved ones given as a sacrifice. The outer, larger one, was
the youth, and the inner and smaller one was the maiden.”’

As a matter of fact, there are six of these shafts on
Thunder Mountain, two large ones and four small ones.
James, after thanking his Zufi narrator, pointed out this
fact to him, whereupon the Zuii replied:

“Ah! the youth and the maiden cried out to Those
Above that they were lonesome, so the gods married them,

195

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

and by and by four children came, two boys and two girls,
to make them happy.”

In this tradition it will be noted that the word cacique
is used to designate the head or principal of the tribe.
Cacique is a Quiche-Maya word, meaning the principal
head. In Peru, the Quiches, who originally came there
from Central America, are now known as Quichuas, and
their word for principal or head is cacique. It is the same
in Venezuela among the descendants of the Kara-Mayas
from Central America.

The Zufi tradition of the flood is a particularly valu-
able piece of geological information from the fact that it
proves that the waters of the last magnetic cataclysm
extended far beyond the geological drift line in America.

Various Pueblo traditions, their language, their sacred
symbols and other evidences prove that the Pueblo In-
dians originally came to America from Mu. As I have
already shown, Mu was submerged some 12,000 years
ago. Therefore, as these Pueblo Indians came directly
from Mu, then they must have been in America at least
12,000 years.

The Pueblos have many of the Quiche-Maya words in
their language, in addition to which many of their orig-
inal conceptions are identical with those of the Quiches,
proving that either in the Motherland, or on their first
arrival in America, they were geographically in close prox-
imity.

The Pueblos have been little influenced, if at all, by the
white people of today, and live now as their ancestors did
for many centuries, preserving with great care not only
the purity of their language, which they teach their chil-

196

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

dren to speak correctly, but also their customs, traditions
and ancient rites and ceremonies.

Another connection with the Quiche-Mayas and the
far-distant past is their prominent symbol, the bearded
serpent Quetzalcoatl found principally in the Parjarito
Park region. —

In confirmation of the foregoing, Professor E. L.
Hewitt of the Las Vegas University reports that he has
found in the homes of an ancient people, fossil remains
of the mastodon and sabre-tooth tiger; also utensils made
out of /ve, not fossil ivory, thus corroborating the Hava
Supai Canyon picture.

Cotorapo Desert.—In the Colorado Desert there are
some famous remains of a great past civilization. These re-
mains have been a puzzle to scientists, but they merely
substantiate the old tale of ancient man and his original
habitat. The Colorado Desert, like the Oregon and most
other deserts, was once fertile land made waterless by the
raising of the mountains. It is conclusively proved, how-
ever, that the people who lived where the Colorado Desert
now stands, lived there before the western mountain
ranges were raised.

NesraskKa.—Professor R. W. Gilder of Omaha, Ne-
braska, has made one of the most remarkable and one of
the most valuable archzological discoveries ever made in
any part of the world. His discovery shows uncontro-
vertibly that man was living in North America, in a
highly civilized state, back in the Tertiary Era.

Gilder has discovered a civilization that was wiped out
by the waters of the last magnetic cataclysm, which was
the biblical “Flood” and the geological Glacial Period.

197

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

GILDER’S DISCOVERIES, NEBRASKA

1. Pipe—glazed clay; 2. Fishhook—bone; 3. Clay head; 4. Pink soapstone head;
5. Ornamental shell; 6. Comb—elk-horn

198

Digitized by Google

c

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

Gilder reports that: “the familiar buffalo wallows of
the west were never made by buffaloes; they are, instead,
the entrances to ruins of underground dwellings, in which,
thousands of years ago, lived a race which has vanished
from the earth. There is no indication of who the people
were or how they were wiped out.”

Among the ruins of these long-filled burrows Gilder has
found various works of art of the vanished race.

Fig. 1. Isaglazedclay pipe. _

Fig. 2. Isa fish-hook made of bone.

Fig. 3. Isa clay face with prominently sloping eyes.

Fig. 4. Is a small pink soapstone head. Gilder says of
this: “The pink head is Egyptian in every feature. It is
delicately carved and highly polished. It is Egyptian in
head-dress, having even the rectangular ear-guards worn
by the Egyptians. It is more than Egyptian; it resembles
the face of Rameses II himself, if the marble busts in
Oriental museums today are images of the Egyptian
king.”

Fig. §. Is an ornament made of shell.

Fig. 6. Is a comb made of elk-horn.

“The floors of these underground burrows are strewn
with charred sticks, reeds, coarse grasses and corncobs. In
the floor of every cave is found a cache, where most of the
domestic utensils and other valuables were kept hidden.
Sometimes there are several in the same cave. The mouths
of the caches are always found plugged with layers of
burnt clay. On top of this is a layer of ashes. Beneath all,
the cavity widens like a jug or bottle, often the size of a
hogshead.”’

These artificial caves were filled in with the soil and

199

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

drift torn up by the waves of the cataclysm as they rolled
down over the plains. In time this filling packed and left
a hollow at the entrance, which has been called a “buffalo
wallow.”

Gilder’s civilization was wiped out by the last mag-
netic cataclysm. Therefore it was a Tertiary Era civiléza-
tion.

Kentucky.—lIn Kentucky are found the remains of a
civilization that was contemporaneous with Gilder’s Ne-
braska civilization.

At Blue Lick Springs, Kentucky, several years ago, an
excavation was being made. Twelve feet below the sur-
face of the ground the workmen came across the bones of
a mastodon; further down, they found a stratum of gravel,
and underneath the gravel, a stone pavement. The stones
forming this pavement had been quarried. Their upper
surfaces had been cut and dressed, while their lower sides
were in the rough.

The mastodon found in this excavation belonged to
the Pleistocene Period, as it lay above the gravel. The
gravel was formed by the waters of the last magnetic cata-
clysm, and the stone pavement, being below the gravel,
shows that this civilization, like Gilder’s, was a Tertiary
Era civilization.

George W. Ranck, the Kentucky historian, in his ‘‘His-
tory of Lexington,” wrote:

‘The city now known as Lexington, Kentucky, is built
of the dust of a dead metropolis of a lost race, of whose
name, and language, and history not a vestige is left.
Even the bare fact of the existence of such a city, and
such a people, on the site of the present Lexington, would

200

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

never have been known but for the rapidly decaying rem-
nants of ruins found by early pioneers and adventurers to
the ‘Elkhorn lands.’ But that these remains of a great city
and a mighty people did exist, there can be not the shadow
of a doubt.

“Who, then, were these mysterious beings? From
whence did they come? What were the forms of their
religion and government? These are questions that will
probably never be solved by mortal man, but that they
lived and flourished centuries before the Indian, who can
doubt? Here they erected their Cyclopean temples and
cities, with no vision of the red men who would come after
them, and chase the deer and the buffalo over their leveled
and grass-covered walls. Here they lived, and labored,
and died, before Columbus had planted the standard of
old Spain upon the shores of a new world; while Gaul,
and Britain, and Germany were occupied by roving tribes
of barbarians, and, it may be, long before imperial Rome
had reached the height of her glory and splendor. But
they had no literature and when they died they were
utterly forgotten. They may have been a great people, but
it is all the same to those who came if they were or not, for
their greatness was never recorded. They trusted in the
mighty works of their hands, and now, indeed, are they
a dead nation and a lost race.”

True, the mighty works of their hands, so far as build-
ings are concerned, “are one with Nineveh and Tyre,” but
their hands left other records upon the imperishable rocks,
and it is by these records that we may identify them as
colonizers from Mu, the Motherland.

Therefore, by the foregoing facts that I have recorded

201

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

CLIFF WRITINGS, NEVADA
202

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

CLIFF DWELLERS’ GUIDE-POSTS IN THREE FORMS OF WRITING

Fig. 1. Arizona. Directions about an overland trail. Fig. 2. New Mexico. Directions,
land trail. Different language to Fig. 1. Fig. 3. Utah. Directions, land and water
route to a settlement. Not the same people as either 1 or 2

203

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

about discoveries in North America, we have positive
proofs that the whole of western North America was peo-
pled by highly civilized races during the latter part of the
Tertiary Era and before the geological Glacial Period.

Hundreds of rock writings, confirmed by many legends,
also tell us that these first civilizations of North America
came from acountry called Mu, and that “Mu lay to the
west of America, beyond the horizon of the great water.”

This is positive because the Nebraskan and Kentucky
- civilizations have now been shown fo have existed during
the Pliocene Period. Oregon, Nevada, Utah, Colorado,
Arizona and New Mexico show us civilizations that ex-
isted before the mountains were raised. As these civiliza-
tions antedate the mountains, they also went back into
the Tertiary Period. How far back into the Tertiary Era
these civilizations went is not known, as no date has so
far come to light to tell us. This remains an open question.

Those ancient dwellers in our western states known as
Cliff Dwellers were represented by several distinct tribes
and it is possible that, instead of being merely tribes, they
were distinct nationalities. I surmise this from their rock
writings and rock paintings, which show that different
tongues were spoken. The writings are also in varying
forms of symbols and alphabets.

A close examination discloses the fact that some of the
rock writings and pictures that have been assigned to the
Cliff Dwellers of North America are thousands of years
older than others which appear within a stone’s throw of
them. These very ancient writings and pictures were exe-
cuted before the mountains were raised, which is proved
by the fact that some of the rocks on which they are writ-

204

NORTH AMERICA’S CIVILIZATION

ten are fractured and displaced. In some instances the
fracture divides the writing, and in others, characters are
found that have been split in two, one part appearing on
one side of the fracture and the remainder on the other.
This indicates that the rock was fractured and displaced
as the ground was being elevated. Other writings clearly
reveal that they were written affer the land was elevated.

It is impossible to give a detailed account of the rock
writings and rock pictures of North America in this
volume. I have, therefore, been compelled to confine my-
self to a few that cover two important points: First, those
that give an approximate date of the civilization; and,
second, those that tell us the origin of the people, where
they came from, and how they came to America.

It is quite doubtful if all those classed as Cliff Dwellers
actually belonged with that people; that is, certain writ-
ings assigned to the Cliff Dwellers were probably written
by people who were not Cliff Dwellers at all.

That the Cliff Dwellers came from Mu is absolutely
and undeniably certain, for every one of their pictures that
are used as guide-posts contains a reference to Mu. In fact,
the rock writings and pictures of the Cliff Dwellers, except
those drawn for artistic effect, are permeated with refer-
ences to Mu, both before and after her submersion. In
addition to this, they invariably used the symbols that
were in vogue in the Motherland.

Among the rock writings I have found four different
branches of the Maya language that were in use; also the
evidence that these ancient Americans used three differ-
ently arranged alphabets.

205

@ © BOSGSOO @ GOO ®@OGO
a

Niven’s Mexican Burted Cities
&@ OSSQVECO@O®O®@2OB®

Orr first step on leaving the United States will be to
pass into Mexico by crossing the Rio Grande.

In Mexico our first stop will be about 29 miles north of
Mexico City. There we shall find a wonderful treasure.

One of the most remarkable, and, without doubt, one of
the most valuable geological and archeological discoveries
ever made has been achieved by William Niven, mineralo-
gist of Mexico, who recorded it some years ago; but like
all other American discoveries, it was apparently not con-
sidered in the slightest way by the scientific world.

Niven’s most wonderful discovery has a twofold sig-
nificance; for, in addition to enlightening the world about
prehistoric man, and dating his civilization far back into
the Tertiary Era, thousands of years before the majestic
ranges of mountains raised their imposing peaks above the
plains, it also gives a clue as to when the great gas belts
were formed and mountains raised.

It shows that highly civilized races struggled through
the most appalling and terrific volcanic workings the earth
has ever known.

206

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

It shows that man was in existence and in a highly civil-
ized state tens of thousands of years before the geological
Glacial Period, and the European Pleistocene ape-man.
It also adds links to a chain of evidence which shows that
the earth’s civilization can be divided into two parts or
periods:

BEFORE AND AFTER

Before and after what? The future will disclose.

Niven’s discovery being so valuable geologically and
archeologically, I cannot do better than to give his own
wording about these ruins:

“Over an area of about 200 square miles in the Valley
of Mexico, from Texcoco to Haluepantla, there are hun-
dreds, yes thousands, of clay pits.

“After serving the City of Mexico as sources for build-
ing material for more than 300 years, these pits have en-
abled me to make an extensive examination of a vast ruin.
Recently my efforts have been rewarded with some remark-
able and startling discoveries, which seem to open up a
new field for archzological research on this continent.

“My operations have been confined to an area some 20
miles long by 10 miles wide, in the northwestern portion
of the great valley. There I have found traces of two
civilizations and three well preserved concrete floors or
pavements, each one at some time underlying a large city.
These pavements are at depths of from 6 to 25 feet from
the surface. Above the first there is a deposit of small
boulders, pebbles and sand covered with a foot-thick coat-
ing of the rich soil of the valley. The great age of this
upper or younger floor must be plain, when every layman

207

Q FEET OF BOULDERS,
GRAVEL, SAND WITH BROKEN
POTTERY

<— FIRST PAVEMENT

L 6 FEET OF SMALL BOULDERS,
GRAVEL AND SAND

<— SECOND PAVEMENT

AS
AE Cae Ae

ae *
-—* .
>
Sah Y S “
d
aeN
as,
Oat
i *.eF. et

14 FEET OF SMALL
BOULDERS, GRAVEL, SAND

@e———_ ~*VOLCANIC ASHES

<“——BURIED CITY

THIRD PAVEMENT

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

Now 7,000 feet above the level of the sea. Mountains of 5,000 feet higher
intervening

208

Digitized by Google

se Nuver’s Puvrced bidies
oO Mextco dy.

CONVENTIONAL SKETCH. PRESENT CONDITIONS SURROUNDING
NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

209

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

stops to consider the number of years required to deposit
one foot of earth on a level plain. Everywhere in this de-
posit of boulders, pebbles and sand above the first floor I
found fragments of broken pottery, small clay figures,
diorite beads, spear and arrow heads, spindle whorls and
other artefacts, mostly broken.

“The second concrete floor is from 4 to 6 feet below the
first, the difference in distance between the two being ac-
counted for by the broken condition of the lower pave-
ment, due probably, to seismic disturbances. In the inter-
vening space between the two pavements, one and two, I
have failed to find a single piece of pottery, or any other
trace to indicate that people had once lived there.

‘‘Underneath the second pavement, however, came the
great find of my many years’ work in Mexican archzology.
First I came upon a well defined layer of ashes from two
to three feet in thickness, and since proved by analysis to
be of volcanic origin. Just below the ashes I found traces
of innumerable buildings, large, but regular in size, and
appearing uniformly in more than 100 clay pits, which I
have examined during my recent investigations.

‘All of these houses are badly ruined, crushed and filled
with ashes and débris. In the past week’s work I found a
wooden door, the wood of which had petrified and turned
to stone. The door was arched with a semicircular lintel,
made by bending the trunk of a tree about five inches in
diameter or thickness. This is the first curved arch ever
found in the ruins of Mexico; and, as the walls of the
house were laid of stone, bound together with a white
cement, harder than the stone itself, this wooden arch
must have been put in as an ornament. Cutting through

210

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

the door, I came into a room about 30 feet square, filled
with almost pure volcanic ash, apparently about the only
room strong enough to withstand the terrible weight of
soil, ashes and stone above it. The roof, which had been
of concrete and stone, and flat, had caved in, but around
the lower edges of the room great flat fragments of this
roof had formed arches, little caves in the ashes, in which
were preserved many of the artefacts of the dead race
shown in the accompanying illustrations. With the arte-
facts were bones, numberless bones of human beings,
which crumbled to the touch like slaked lime.

“Above their tomb the waters of a great flood had
raged, wiping out another civilization. Flood and the
crashing boulders had not disturbed the sleep of this
mighty race.

“The doorway was over six feet deep, and on the floor,
thirteen feet from the door, I came upon a complete gold-
smith’s outfit. It consists of a terra-cotta chimney 25
inches in height, tapering upwards from a round furnace
15 inches in diameter. On the floor around the furnace, to
which still adhered bits of pure gold, I found more than
‘200 models, which had once been baked clay, but which
had been transformed into stone. All of these were dupli-
cations carved on figures and idols which I found later in
the same house. Evidently this had been the house of a
prosperous goldsmith and jeweler of the better class in
this ruined city.

“Some of the models or patterns were less than one-
twentieth of an inch in thickness, and were used for the
manufacture of the gold, silver and copper dress, head,
breast, arm and ankle ornaments which the statuettes

211

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

_ show the people to have worn in those days. Each model
was thickly coated with iron oxide, bright and yellow,
probably put on there to prevent the molten metals ad-
hering to the patterns while in the casting pot. Later on
a thin gold plate made for the breast, and ornaments with
characters unlike any found in Palenque or Mitla re-
warded my search, and I have since found several of these
results of the labors of the goldsmith. The work is fine,
beautifully polished, and shows a height of civilization
fully as great, if not greater, than that possessed by the
Aztecs when the Spaniards under Hernando Cortez first
invaded Mexico.

“But what struck me most as the remarkable feature
of the room was the mural decorations.

“Evidently there had once been a slight partition
through the center, while from the rear walls the dim out-
line of the door appeared to lead into another room, which
is now so complete a ruin that I doubt that anything other
than bones will be found in it.

‘In the front part of the present room, however, the
goldsmith evidently had his workshop, while in the back
was the entrance to his residence. Here are wall paintings
done in red, blue, yellow, green and black, which compare
favorably with the best photographs I have ever seen of
Greek, Etruscan or Egyptian works of the same kind.

‘The ground color of the wall was a pale blue, while
six inches down from the fourteen-foot ceiling a frieze
painted in dark red and black ran all around the four sides.
This frieze, owing to the fact that it had been glazed after
painting, with a sort of native wax, is perfectly preserved,
so far as colors and patterns go. It has been, however,

212

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

broken in three places by fragments of the falling roof,
but otherwise it is almost as legible as the day when first
painted. It depicts the life of some person, evidently a
shepherd, bringing him from babyhood to his death bed.

“Beneath the room I found the tomb of some one of
importance, possibly of him whose life was portrayed in
the frieze above. In this vault, which was only three feet
in depth and lined with cement, were seventy-five pieces
of bone, all that remained of a complete skeleton. One
large fragment of the skull contained the blade of a ham-
mered copper ax, which had evidently dealt death to the
occupant of the tomb, and which had not been removed
by his relatives or friends. The bones crumbled to the
touch, so long had they been in the tomb, but there were
other objects more interesting than the bones.

“One hundred and twenty-five small clay terra-cotta
idols, mannikins, images and dishes of all kinds were
ranged around the bottom of the tomb.

‘The most wonderful and striking of these is the terra-
cotta figure shown on page 214, Fig. 3. It has the form of
a man in a sitting posture; his legs are crossed Japanese
fashion, and the hands on the knees.

“The type is strongly Phoenician or Semitic, while the
head is hollow and movable and can be removed from the
image at will, being set on the neck by means of a cleverly
devised truncated tenon, which fits into a mortise at the
base of the skull.

“One must remember that the examination of this room
is but a step on the edge of the mystery of this great
ruin 200 square miles in area, and reveals nothing of the

213

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

RELICS FROM NIVEN’S LOWEST CITY
1. Egyptian head. 2. Ancient Grecian vase. 3. A toy. 4. Little Chinaman

214

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

history of this wonderful people who have been com-
pletely lost to the knowledge of mankind.

“Less than three miles from this locality which I have
just described I found an ancient river bed now dry, in
the sands and gravel of which were thousands of terra-
cotta and clay figures having faces representing all of the
races of southern Asia.

“The pottery and figures found at a depth, the lowest
eighteen feet below the surface, are the best, and it is
reasonable to suppose that a people of such culture and
of such manifold numbers had imposing temples and gov-
ernmental edifices comparable with those of Mitla, Pa-
lenque and Chichen Itza; if so, when they are uncovered
by future generations of archzologists, the ashes which
overlie this vast city will have preserved every ruin as
perfectly as they did Pompeii and Herculaneum.

‘“‘To my mind here will be found data that will prove
the Aztecs the least important of the races which have
peopled Mexico, and quite probably the latest to enter
Mexican boundaries in that wonderful emigration that
peopled North America in forgotten ages.”

Subsequent to the publication of the foregoing, Niven
wrote further on the subject of the buried cities. Follow-
ing are notes from this second publication:

Tue LittLte CHINAMAN
‘This image proves with indisputable evidence that the
people who lived ages ago in the Valley of Mexico knew
and were familiar with the Mongolian type. The ruin in
which I found the Chinese image was in the remains of
the third or lowest civilization thirty feet down from the

215

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

surface in the pit which I had dug at San Miguel Amantla,
near Haluepantla, nineteen miles from the national palace
in Mexico City. The first (upper) civilization, marked by
a cement floor, and walls of a concrete building I found
at a depth of eight feet. Eleven feet below this was the
second (middle) civilization of about the same grade of
development as the first, and 30 feet 3 inches from the
surface of the ground I came on a bed chamber, or tomb,
I do not know which, in the third stratum of ruins, which
contain the finest artefacts I have ever seen in Mexico. I
am inclined to think the room was thirty feet square, its
walls were made of concrete and crushed down to within
a foot of their bases. Below was a tomb. In the center,
on a raised rectangular platform, also of concrete, lay the
skull and some of the bones of a man who could not have
been more than five feet in height. His arms were very
long, reaching almost to the knees, and his skull was de-
cidedly of a Mongolian type. Around his neck had been
a string of green jade beads. Green jade is not a Mexican
mineral.

‘Lying beside the body was a string of 597 pieces of
shell. I say string, but the buckskin thong which had once
born them was long since rotted to dust, and the wampum,
or money, lay as if it had fallen from a string. With this
money lay the greatest find of all—the little Chinaman.

“Tt is the first of its kind ever found in Mexico, though
Mongoloid types persist in sufficient numbers among the
Indians of all Mexico to convince any one that the
Indian blood of the country originally came from Asia.

“His oblique eye-slits, padded coat, flowing trousers
and slippers make him a present-day Chinaman in all re-

216

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

spects, except for the queue which is lacking. The Chinese
did not, however, adopt the queue until they had been
_ conquered by the Tartar hordes from the north.

“The little statuette is about 7 inches high, and where
the arms are broken off, the clay of which the image 1s
made shows red and friable in the center; outside, how-
ever, the clay has metamorphosed into stone, so that it
can be chipped with the hammer only with the greatest
difficulty. It is about 31% inches in width across the chest
and 114 inches in thickness through the abdomen. In
the ears are huge rings similar to those worn by the Chinese
today, on the head is a skull cap with a tiny button in the
center, almost exactly like the caps of the mandarins of the
Empire, which has now become a republic. The coat, which
is loose and of a type still worn by the Chinese, is shown
fastened with a frog and a button, while on the breast is a
circular plate or ornament, evidently covered with a layer
of beaten gold, but worn bare by contact with the earth of
unknown ages. Each arm is broken off at the shoulder, and
the opening of the entire tomb has failed to disclose the
missing hands. This Chinese image was not made by
Aztecs. It had been buried in the earth in the Valley of
Mexico for thousands of years before the Aztecs set foot
on the plateau. The Aztecs were newcomers in Mexican
history, the blood-thirsty conquerors of the great civilized .
and organized races of Mexico, who ravaged with fire and
sword the cities built by the Toltecs, Ohmecs and Mayas.
The Aztecs did not build; they took buildings from the
builders by force of arms.

“The little Chinaman furnishes exactly the link for
which we have been searching. He says without speaking

217

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

that the most ancient tribes of Mexico were offshoots of
the Mongoloid.

‘Near the skeleton, but off the platform, lay a flower
vase about 15 inches high, undoubtedly filled with
Xochitl, the yellow sacred flower of practically all of the
ancient races of this country.”

I will now review Niven’s report of his discovery of
the remains of three prehistoric civilizations, where one
is buried underneath the other.

Geologically it is shown that Niven’s discovery is the
discovery of the most ancient works of man that have yet
been found. The youngest, or upper civilization, dates
far back into the Pliocene Period, Tertiary Era.

The character of the buildings and other evidence show
that the oldest of the three civilizations was a highly
civilized people. Geologically, it is shown that they lived
tens of thousands of years before the European Pleisto-
cene degenerates lived.

Niven notes that he found iron oxide in use in casting
ornaments out of precious metals. This is the oldest rec-
ord of the use of iron ever found and antedates the bronze
age by tens of thousands of years.

Niven says that the characters on the gold and silver
ornaments are different from either those of Mitla or
Palenque. Le Plongeon has called attention in his works
to the fact that the characters found at Palenque, Mitla
and Copan are different from and totally unlike the Maya.

Niven found that the life of the man who was buried in
the vault below was depicted on the walls in the chamber
above in frescos and paintings. When Prince Coh of the
Can Dynasty of Mayax was buried 16,000 years ago, his

218

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

life was depicted in frescos on the walls of his mausoleum.
Thousands of years later we find the same custom fol-
lowed in the burial chambers of the Egyptian kings. So
that we find this custom among the first prehistoric people
yet known. Niven mentions that the copper ax he found
in the skull of the man was very highly tempered, so that
this now lost art dates back far into the Tertiary Era.

In the second vault Niven opened he found an immense
number of articles which had been placed around the
corpse—mannikins, statuettes, etc. I find this a custom
among all the ancients and it is still practised by some
peoples.

Niven appears astonished that he found images of all
the southern Asiatic races. It would have been a greater
astonishment if he had not, because the people of southern
Asia and the people who built these now buried cities both
came from the same Motherland.

Niven notes that he found green jade beads and that
green jade was not a Mexican mineral.

Le Plongeon discovered in the tomb of Queen Moo of
Mayax a green jade ornament which he called “Queen
Moo’s Talisman.”: I have examined this ornament and
can safely say it is not New Zealand jade, so that the
green jade found in Mexico must have either come there
from China or the Motherland.

Niven, like the rest of the scientists, for want of a more
plausible explanation, has fallen back on the old thread-
bare theory that the first men to come to America came
from Asia.

His statement that “‘the most ancient tribes of Mexico
were offshoots of the Mongoloids” needs qualification.

219

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Along the shores of the Caribbean Sea, the original
settlers appear to have been mixed, with Mongoloids pre-
dominating. Through Yucatan and the inland parts of
Central America a white race predominated. They were
called Mayas, and the white races of Europe, Asia Minor
and northern Africa are easily traced from them. North
of the peninsula of Yucatan every record and detail points
to the fact that the great bulk of the original settlers were
Mongoloids, and possibly in these northern regions all
were Mongoloids. Eventually, however, the northern
hordes of Mongols overran and conquered the whole of
Mexico and Central America. They put the men to the
sword and made slaves of the women, so that now, as
Niven says, Mongol blood is traceable in all of the Mexi-
can Indians.

Niven notes that yellow flowers were found in the
second tomb and states that this was a custom among all
the ancient races of Mexico. Yellow has ever been the
sacred color. It was so among the most ancient peoples
and is today among certain peoples.

Continuing his work among these most extraordinary
ruins, Niven has been further rewarded by finding other
treasures, including written tablets, probably the most
valuable works of man from 35,000 to 40,000 years ago
that have ever been brought to light. Through the great
courtesy and kindness of the Dearborn Independent,
Dearborn, Michigan, who have supplied me with cuts of
these tablets, I am enabled to give what I believe to be
some very valuable information about early man in North
America. These tablets are in two forms of writing: pic-
tures composed, of symbols, and some Uighur-Maya hier-

220

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

4sit ARR Mis ug a
Rea: ' avi sce pan Az; wy sth

Sasi Sst

Pe _ ace Lanes

Oe

NRA a
CAO ants §
SH ARCS Hos cad

cay = 214 = * 4
: ray Ine
ce Np a el 8

Courtesy of the Dearborn Independent
TABLETS FROM NIVEN s MEXICAN BURIED CITIES. SECOND CITY

221

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Courtesy of the Dearborn Independent

SECOND CITY

S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES,

TABLETS FROM NIVEN

222

Digitized by Google

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

atic sentences. The Uighur-Maya hieratic alphabet came
out of that of the Motherland and includes many of the
Motherland’s letters without change.

The tablets were found in the remains of the second
city and are made of volcanic rock and lined in red.

Tas Let 1.—Fics. 1, 2, 3 and 4

This tablet refers to one of Mu’s colonies. It does not
give the name of the colony, only its shape.

Fig. 1 is three circles, a very common way of writing
“Mu” with the ancients. It gives the symbolic numeral
three, so that to start with on the top we read “Mu.”

Fig. 2 is the central figure and reads, ‘“‘Ahau, the King
of Kings.’’ Here we find the monarch using his symbol of
the Motherland.

Fig. 3. The foregoing is here confirmed by eight con-
ventional rays emanating from a sun, as the eight rays
symbolize the eight cardinal points, and the eight cardi-
nal points form a circle. It says that this king is the ruler
of the whole earth.

Fig. 4. This is a symbol of an area of land, either a
colony or colonial empire, and of a somewhat triangular
shape.

TABLET 2.—Fics. 1, 2 and 3

This little tablet is an exceedingly interesting one and
is a picture of the hieratic head of Mu. The temple was
called the Temple of Truth and dedicated to the sun.

On his head he wears the crown of the King of Kings,
showing him to be the Supreme High Priest.

Adorning the crown in the front are three feathers.

Fig. 1. The feather was the symbol of truth, and being —

223

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

three, it again gives Mu’s name by numeral, so that this
tells us he is the king high priest of Mu.

Fig. 2. Around his left eye and connecting with his
mouth is a circle, a picture of the sun, and symbol of the
Deity, thus symbolizing that the eye of the Deity sees
truth and from his mouth issues truth.

Fig. 3. Around the right eye is a circle. This symbol-
izes the moon, thus saying that both by day and night the
eyes of God are ever on us.

TABLET 3.—Fics. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6

At the top of this tablet is a face with the two hands
outspread in benediction and blessing. This represents
the hieratic head of Mu.

Fig. 1. Beneath the right hand is seen the symbol Ahau,
King of Kings. |

Fig. 2. Beneath the left hand is the symbol of the sun,
therefore the King of Kings of the Empire of the Sun.
Thus the top of this tablet reads, ‘“Benedictions and bless-
ings on your temple and people from Ra Mu, the king high
priest of the Empire of the Sun.”

Fig. 3. This is a compound Uighur symbol and appears
in the holy of holies of the temple. It reads, “A temple of
truth, dedicated to the Sun and under the jurisdiction of
the Motherland.”

Fig. 4. In this cartouche is shown a colony of Mu. At
the top and at the bottom a colony with the word, I think,
‘“‘Max,” but I am not sure about one of the letters.

Fig. 5. This is the symbol of a pillar, reading “In
strength.”

Fig. 6. This is the symbol of another pillar, reading

224

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

“To establish.” These evidently compare with the Tat
Pillars of temples of later date.

TABLET 4.—FIcs. 1, 2, 3, 4, § and 6

This is by far the most interesting tablet of all. It de-
picts colonizers leaving Mu, the Motherland, to go to
Mexico, there to join a colony already established, and to
make their settlement to the north of the present settle-
ment.

Fig. 1. This is the letter # in Mu’s hieratic alphabet
and is the alphabetical symbol of Mu.

Fig. 2. Beneath Mu, on which she is resting, is a circle
with seven dots, symbolizing the creation and advent of
man in Mu.

Fig. 3. To the right (east) is placed abird flying to the
east. A flying bird and a jumping fish were the two sym-
bols of colonists leaving the Motherland.

Fig. 4. This symbol says that the colonists came from
each of the three lands of Mu in three different lines.

Fig. §. Is a symbol of the colony already established
and shows that they also came by three routes.

Fig. 6. This symbol shows where the colonists are go-
ing to settle, and—

These tablets were found at the place indicated by Tab-
let 4.

When prehistoric cities are found buried one under-
neath the other, archeologists use the terms first, second
and third civilization to designate the order in which they
are found. This is apt to be misleading to the layman, for
he might assume that the first is last, and the last is the
oldest. They are numbered from the surface down; thus,

225

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the first one found, the one nearest to the surface of the
earth, is the youngest civilization, and the one deepest
down is the oldest civilization. Again the word “civiliza-
tion” is out of place, for the layman might assume that
there have been several civilizations, whereas there have
been only two since man first appeared on earth. These
two will hereafter be designated ‘The First and the Pres-
ent Great Civilizations.” The better word to have used
would be: Colonization or settlement, such as the first,
second and third settlement of the land.

Generally speaking, buried cities are prehistoric. The
prehistoric cities belong to the First Great Civilization.
Niven’s “Buried Mexican Cities’ and Schliemann’s “An-
cient Troys” are examples of prehistoric cities, while
Pompeii and Herculaneum are the exceptions. Although
Pompeii and Herculaneum are buried, their histories are
known, therefore they are not prehistoric. Again, while
many cities of the First Civilization lie buried beneath
the ground, there are remains of others which lie about the
ground, but heaps of ruins: Baalbek in Asia Minor and
the old Maya ruins in Yucatan are such examples, also
the old ruins on the Polynesian and other South Sea
Islands.

Niven’s prehistoric cities all belong to the First Civili-
zation and lie close to Mexico City, which was built dur-
ing the Present Civilization.

During the First Civilization, Niven’s prehistoric city
was thrice built. I wish this carefully noted, because here-
after I shall quote records stating that another prehistoric
city only a few miles away was also “thrice built.” These
records state why and how the destruction of this last city

226

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

occurred. One geologically shows us the cause. The other
states it in records, but both agree in every detail. The
altitude of the present City of Mexico is 7,400 feet above
sea level, therefore the present altitude of Niven’s cities
is the same. As a geological problem, an extraordinary
field has been opened up by Niven’s wonderful discovery.
One has only to look at the following facts to see that a
great part of our geological teachings must be rewritten:

1. A prehistoric city lies 7,400 feet above sea level.

2. The city lies 30 feet below the surface of the ground.

3. A layer of volcanic ash covers the city.

4. The city is on a plain surrounded by mountains.

5. The mountains are many miles distant.

6. Above the remains of this city are the remains of
another.

7. Over both cities are deposits of boulders, gravel and
sand.

8. Above these cities are the remains of a third—

g. Also covered with boulders, gravel and sand.

At the present time the remains of Niven’s cities are
7,400 feet above sea level. Niven reports that the lowest
city is covered with volcanic ash, but does not record the
presence of lava in any form, so it is presumable that the
lava from the volcano did not reach the lowest city. That
the volcano or volcanoes were near is self-evident, from the
fact that their ashes fell in sufficient quantities to bury the
city. This being the case, it shows that then, as now, the
land was a plain around about. Being a plain, this vol-
cano, like all ancient volcanoes, piled up around the cra-
ters and formed cones, similar to those seen in South Africa
and among the South Sea Islands today. Again there is

227

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the possibility that very little lava was ejected. This was
the case with many of the ancient volcanoes.

Ashes alone would not cause such destruction as Niven
depicts, so we must look for some other agent as being the
force which caused the walls to crumble and the roofs to
fall. One of the probable causes was earthquake shocks,
preceding and accompanying the outburst of the volcano,
which caused the land to rock, rise and fall until the struc-
tures came crashing down.

The Troano Manuscript, describing the earthquakes in
a later period of the earth’s history, says: “Being con-
stantly shaken by the fires of the underneath, and con-
fined, these caused the land to sink and to rise several
times.”

The Codex Cortesianus says: “The land trembled and ©
shook like the leaves of a tree ina storm.” The Lhasa Rec-
ord repeats the same.

I will now pass up to the second city 14 to 16 feet under
the surface of the earth. Over this city there is a layer of
boulders, rocks, pebbles, gravel and sand of from four to
six feet in thickness.

In his report Niven does not state whether the lowest
city, in addition to the volcanic ash, was also covered with
boulders, gravel and sand. Volcanoes do not pile up layers
of boulders, gravel and sand, so I must refer to geology to
find out what agent does. We must ascertain the known
agent that forms strata of boulders, gravel and sand.

Geologically, it is known that deposits of boulders,
gravel and sand are the works of water—huge tidal or
cataclysmic waves, which gather up the stones along their
paths, and roll and tumble them along until the force of

228

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

the water can carry them no further. Then they settle and
form a deposit—the biggest and heaviest dropping first—
and then gradually diminishing in size until sand only is
carried in the dying wave. The strata of boulders, peb-
bles and sand which cover the first and second cities was
therefore brought in by tidal waves or cataclysms—from
the ocean.

The waves which brought in these deposits certainly
came from an ocean; now we find the cities 7,000 feet
above the level of the ocean, with mountains thousands of
feet higher surrounding the plain in which they have been
found.

No tidal waves or cataclysms could assume a height
that would reach the plateau forming the Valley of Mexi-
co, much less pass over the mountains surrounding the val-
ley. Such a wave or waves would destroy the whole earth;
not a vestige of life would be left upon it. It would be
impossible to form a wave even 200 feet high from vol-
canic workings.

As we proceed, the situation becomes more complex. I
should say that tidal waves or cataclysms from oceans
swept over and overwhelmed the Valley of Mexico at
least twice if not three times.

It is distinctly shown that two great overwhelming
waves from an ocean swept over this land at varying inter-
vals, possibly, and probably, thousands of years apart, but
each time destroying all life on the land.

I doubt if any trace of the volcano which destroyed the
lowest city with its ashes can be found today except by an
accident. The crater no doubt was filled in and obliterated
by the two cataclysms that followed.

2209

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Let us for a moment consider the loss of life when the
first city was destroyed, a city of 200 square miles. Mil-
lions must have perished in the city alone, without taking
into consideration other cities and the surrounding country
destroyed by the cataclysm. The earth’s greatest tragedies
have never been recorded.

The cataclysmic waves which overran cities one and two
started a long distance away and had lost much of their
force when they had arrived at the cities. This is demon-
strated by the size of the boulders, which Niven says are
small. The boulders are corroborated by the thickness of
the deposit. It must be remembered, however, that what
is found covering the cities is not all that the waves car-
ried on their errands of destruction; all large boulders had
been dropped before arriving at the cities, and much was
carried on beyond them. The deposits over these cities
show only what was dropped en route.

These deposits of boulders, rocks, gravel and sand ab-
solutely and most conclusively prove that at the time they
were made the land was only a few feet above the ocean’s
level.

During the time that these cities were in existence there
were no mountains or mountain ranges between Mexico
City and the oceans, and the plateau on which Mexico
City stands had not at that time been raised to its present
altitude of 7,400 feet above the level of the sea.

The probability is that all Mexico, at the time of these
cities, was flat land less than 100 feet above sea level.

Had the present mountains existed then, or had the
Valley of Mexico been at its present level or elevation, it
would have been impossible for any tidal wave or cata-

230

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

clysm to have reached the doomed cities, much less carry
along boulders with which to bury them.

The foregoing is one of the many examples that verify
my contention that:

Mountains and mountain ranges are of comparatively
recent origin in the history of the earth because the moun-
tain ranges were formed by the gas belts. That up to the
time the earth went into final magnetic balance at the end
of the Pliocene, the gases were not controlled, and until
they were controlled, mountains could not be raised.
Thus, up to the beginning of the Pleistocene no mountains
or mountain ranges existed on the earth’s surface.

I notice from various publications that the European
geologists are wavering in their opinions regarding the age
of mountains.

As these ancient Mexican cities existed before the
mountains were raised, it is clear that they antedate the
Pleistocene Period. Therefore they are Tertiary Era cities.
If the last one, the upper one, was built and destroyed be-
fore the Pleistocene dawned, according to geological calcu-
lations, which, as I have pointed out, are absurd, the upper
city must be over 200,000 years old. If the upper city 1s
Over 200,000 years old, what must be the age of the third
or lowest ? All three cities date back to the Tertiary Era. I
think the lowest city is at least 50,000 years old.

It is impossible to say what volcanic workings took place
in this vicinity before gas belts were formed, but judging
from geological phenomena (corroborated by old Maya
traditions) they must have been very violent. Mexico,
Central America and the West Indies have one of the
greatest gas belt junctions that have been formed within

231

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the earth’s crust. Here various belts not only join each
other, but some pass over and under others. It is one of
the earth’s greatest volcanic danger spots. Anything may
happen in this vicinity if one or more of the belts become
choked.

The volcanic workings in this area during the formation
of the gas belts were extremely violent. Violent upheaval
of lands both above and below the waters took place. The
raising of submarine lands naturally caused tidal waves,
through the displacement of the waters. Parts of all the
principal gas belts are underneath the beds of the ocean.

There is no saying how much land was submerged or how
much land was emerged by these volcanic workings. Four
continental stretches we know were submerged. The rais-
ing of the ocean bed displaced the waters above. These
displaced waters took the shape of great waves, which
rolled in over adjacent low-lying lands, destroying every-
thing that lay in their paths. The size and height of the
wave and its power of destruction would naturally be
governed by the area and height of the submarine land
raised. As soon as the gas belts were formed and the moun-
tains raised, such destructive cataclysms were prevented.

It 1s geologically admitted, as we have previously
pointed out, that the European ape-like beings—the Pilt-
down man, the Heidelberg man and the Neanderthal
man—lived some time during the early Pleistocene, or
after the date of Niven’s upper city. Thus Niven’s dis-
coveries emphatically show that man was in America in a
highly civilized and cultured state tens of thousands of
years before the European ape-like men lived, and proves
beyond question that they were individuals and not types.

232

NIVEN’S MEXICAN BURIED CITIES

Niven, while showing, and distinctly stating, that two
of the cities were overrun and destroyed by cataclysms,
apparently does not take into consideration that cata-
clysmic waves can come only from oceans, and that ocean
waves could not possibly reach the Mexican Valley.

The two concrete pavements above the lowest city
show the handiwork of two subsequent colonizations.
These two colonizations were destroyed by cataclysms. As
boulders, pebbles and sand are the covering, it shows that
the volcanic workings, the result of which destroyed these
cities, were underneath the ocean far away.

An exceptionally great geological value is attachable
to this discovery from the fact that the phenomenon 1s
twice repeated.

The thickness of the deposits of boulders, gravel and
sand does not in any way intimate the time that elapsed
between the building of the cities. It only intimates the
size and scope of the waves that brought in the material.
I have received information that it has been determined
that the boulders which cover the upper and second city
originated on the Pacific coast of Mexico.

What happened between this ancient civilization and
our own that only the merest fragments of the great past
remain? I have already answered this question in previ-
ous chapters. Niven’s discoveries merely prove that my
answer Is the correct one.

233

@ @ GOSOGSUO @ OOO ®OGO
12

Yucatan’ s Place Among the
Ancient Crvilizations
E@ PO SSV@OO@ O®O2OEQ

Ox leaving Mexico City with Niven’s treasures, I shall
proceed to that part of Mexico called Yucatan.

Yucatan is situated in the southeastern part of Mexico
and forms a peninsula stretching out from the mainland
in an easterly direction. It is bounded on the north by the
Gulf of Mexico and on the east and southeast by the Ca-
ribbean Sea.

Yucatan is literally filled with the remains of ancient
civilizations, although none are as old as Niven’s buried
cities. Central America and Yucatan formed one of the
first colonies established from the Motherland. Eventu-
ally it became an empire and was called Mayax.

What are thought to be the most ancient of these ruins
I shall deal with first. They consist of temples, tombs and
governmental buildings all of stone, and are either par-
tially or completely covered with earth. Next I shall take
the structures completely above the ground, the ages of
which have been variously estimated to be from 2,000 to
15,000 years. Quotings from ancient writings would seem
to show that the youngest of these structures is at least

234

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

1 5,000 years old, and there is every reason to believe that
most of them are more than 15,000 years old; some of
them, I am sure, are.

I think my readers will agree with me that it was not
the hand of man that caused the walls of these massive
buildings to crack and split and the stones to fall. It was
the result of volcanic workings when the great central gas
belt was forging its way under Yucatan. Up to that time,
these buildings stood intact.

As a guide, every building that has carvings on it of the
feathered serpent (Kukul Khan) is 15,000 or more years
old. These buildings were erected during the Can (ser-
pent) Dynasty. The Can Dynasty ended with Queen
Moo. Queen Moo lived during the first century of Egyp-
tian history.

The late Dr. Le Plongeon and his wife, Alice D. Le
Plongeon, very dear friends of the writer, were the first
archeological explorers to delve among the buried parts
of Yucatan ruins. Their works which have been pub-
lished give many interesting details of their discoveries.
Not one-half of their discoveries, however, were published.
Before the death of Dr. Le Plongeon, he gave the writer
his unpublished notes and translations for copy; so that
what I say about Yucatan comes principally from the re-
sult of Dr. Le Plongeon’s twelve years among the ruins,
much of which, however, I have corroborated by a per-
sonal examination.

My first notes on Yucatan remains will concern some
archeological records unearthed by Le Plongeon.

235

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

STOMWAS GNV SNOILdIYOSNI NI HOI SNVLVONA NI JTMdWAL VAVW 10 NV

ti a

236

fal
d
VU

ViIgitizer

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

THE TEMPLE OF SACRED MysrtTERIES

At Uxmal there is an ancient Maya temple which Le
Plongeon has called in his works, ‘“The Temple of Sacred
Mysteries.”

The inscriptions on the walls, combined with the pro-
fusion of sacred symbols carved thereon, are themselves a
chapter of prehistoric history. They connect very ancient
man with the early history of Babylonia and Egypt.

This building, which is an emblem of the Lands of the
West, is composed of three compartments. The door of
the central chamber, the holy of holies, faced west, in
the direction where once the Motherland stood; in this
respect, corresponding to the temples and statuary found
at Angkor, Cambodia, which all face east, towards the
vanished land. From the central chamber a small stairway
led to a terrace formed by this sanctuary. The doors of
the other two rooms faced east.

The ceilings formed a triangular arch. Inside the tri-
angle formed at each end of the two rooms facing east, by
the converging lines of the arch, are semispheres. Those of
the north room, three in number, form a triangle, as shown
in Chapter 8, Page 127, Fig. 7. Those in the south room
consisted of five, as shown on Page 127, Fig. 8. A few cen-
timeters above the lintel of the entrance to the sanctuary is
a cornice that surrounds the whole edifice. On it are sculp-
tured and many times repeated a skeleton with cross-bones
shown in Chapter 8, Page 134, Fig. 11.

The most remarkable of all the symbols found in the
Temple of Sacred Mysteries is the cosmogonic diagram of
Mu (Chapter 9, Page 141, Fig. 1), the diagram of

237

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

man’s first religion, which I have already shown. The
Temple of Sacred Mysteries is more than 11,500 years
old, and this age is verified by the following: Plutarch
relates that the priests of Egypt told Solon that com-
munications with the Lands of the West had been inter-
rupted 9,000 years before, in consequence of the sinking
of Atlantis, which made the Atlantic impassable on ac-
count of the mud and seaweed and ¢he destruction of the
country beyond by overwhelming cataclysms.

Solon visited Egypt 600 B. C. Atlantis sank 9,000
years previous to this. Thus, by adding A. D. 2000 to 600,
plus 9,000, we get a date of 11,600 years ago.

Further proofs of this destructive cataclysm are given
in the writings of the Spanish historian, Dr. Aguilar, who
relates: “In a book which I took from the idolaters there
was an account of an inundation to which they gave the
name Unuycit (flooding ),” and this is geologically further
confirmed by the strata around the bases of these old struc-
tures.

How long the Temple of Sacred Mysteries had been
standing beyond the period I have assigned to it no one
can say, but certainly not very long, because this temple
was a memorial commemorating the loss of the Lands of
the West and they disappeared only a short time before
the disappearance of Atlantis. Le Plongeon found an
inscription on the temple walls, which reads as follows:
‘This edifice is a memorial commemorating the destruc-
tion of Mu, the Lands of the West, whence came our
sacred mysteries.”

This inscription I had verified by a native gentleman
who thoroughly understood the Maya writings.

238

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

Being a memorial, emblem or monument to the Lands
of the West, it follows that this temple was erected after
the Lands of the West had disappeared.

Le Plongeon also found an inscription on one of the
buildings saying that “Uxmal had been destroyed by
earthquakes three times and had been three times rebuilt.”
It is today known among the educated natives as the
“Thrice Built City.”

Niven’s Mexican buried cities are, comparatively
speaking, only a few miles away from Uxmal, so that
there remains the possibility that the disturbances which
caused the ruin of Niven’s upper cities might, and prob-
ably did, extend as far as Uxmal.

Some of our scientists who have been picnicking at
Chichen Itza come back with the tale that these old struc-
tures were built only 1,500 years ago.

As a matter of fact, most of them were standing 11,500
years ago and some of them are certainly older than that.
I refer to those built during the PPeu dynasty, which
immediately preceded the Can dynasty.

One great authority on the antiquity of the Yucatan-
Maya ruins was Bishop Landa, who accompanied the
Spanish under Cortez in the sixteenth century. Bishop
Landa, in his work, “‘Relacion de las Cosas,” page 328,
written 400 years ago, says:

“The ancient buildings of the Mayas at the time of the
arrival of the Spaniards were already heaps of ruins, ob-
jects of awe and veneration to the aborigines who lived in
their neighborhood.

“They had lost the memory of who built them and the
object for which they were created.

239

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

“The Maya priests wrote books about their sciences and
imparted their knowledge to others whom they considered
worthy of enlightenment.

“They had books containing the early history of their
own nation and that of other people with whom they had
friendly intercourse or war.

“In these volumes there were complete records of what
had taken place in different epochs, of the various wars,
inundations, epidemics, plagues, famines and every um-
portant event.”

Landa burnt thousands of these books and twenty-seven
large manuscripts on parchment. He destroyed 5,000
statues and 197 vases.

Cogolludo, in “Historia de Yucathan,” Book IV, Chap.
III, p. 177, says:

“Of the people who first settled in this Kingdom of
Yucathan, or their ancient history, I have been unable to
obtain any other data than those which follow:

“The Spanish chronicles do not give one reliable word
about the manners and customs of the builders of the
grand antique edifices that were objects of admiration to
them, as they are now to modern travelers.

‘The only answer of the natives to the inquiries of the
Spaniards as to who the builders were invariably was, ‘We
do not know.’ It is not known who the builders were and
the Indians themselves have no traditions on the subject.’

Lizana (“Historia de Nuestra Sefiora de Ytzamal,”
Chap. II): “When the Spaniards came to this country,
notwithstanding that some of the monuments appeared
new, as if they had been built only twenty years, the In-
dians did not live in them, but used them as temples and

240

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

sanctuaries, offering in them sacrifices sometimes of men,
women and children, and that their construction dates
back to great antiquity.”

Le Plongeon says: ‘“‘These buildings were neither con-
structed by the present race nor their ancestors.”

Pedro Beltram (‘‘Arte del Idioma Maya”): “In the
Maya sculptures, particularly on the trunks of the masto-
don heads that adorn the most ancient buildings, the name
is written ‘that which is necessary.’ ”

Le Plongeon: “Among the symbols sculptured on the
mastodons’ trunks that at a very remote period in Maya
history embellished the facades of all sacred and public
edifices, these signs are occasionally seen: [ Figs. 1, 2 and
3]. Taken collectively they read, Chaac (‘Thunder’ ).”

The great Maya edifices did not totter and fall from
age and decay, nor was their ruin wrought by the hand of
man. Their destruction was first due to volcanic workings
and completed by water.

During the forging of the great central gas belt under
Central America and Yucatan 11,500 years ago, huge
cataclysmic waves were formed. These rolled in over the
land. All during the time of the splitting and rending of

241

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

‘DO ‘€ 00$6 Yno padim Ayyenqata aiam
—SIOPTING syI—sekv URNA IY], “sUOIEpUNo; 4I19yY) 07 Way UayeYs pey sayenb
“Yases ay Jayze “uryeonX Ul saoyipa ede ay) JO UONINIYs9p ay) pajyatduio> se yong

WSATOVLYS OINVOTIOA V

2

24

Digitized by Google

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

the rocks in forming the belt, “earthquakes shook the land
like the leaves of a tree in a storm,” the “land rose and
rolled like ocean waves.” The shocks and rolls from the
quakes shook the Maya structures into ruins. The great
waves of water following blotted out all life (including
the white Mayas of Yucatan). Thus not only were the
structures destroyed, but the builders as well.

On the opposite page I have made a sketch showing one
of the waves overwhelming a city.

The work of these cataclysmic waves is to be seen to-
day in the form of sand, gravel, and small boulders around
and against the old ruins, and in some cases, where the
buildings were completely shaken down, this specialized
stratum covers them.

Some old Egyptian Papyri refer to these cataclysms,
which are confirmed by the Greek philosophers, Plato and
Plutarch (Plutarch’s Life of Solon).

After these cataclysms had passed over Central America
and Yucatan, wrecking the structures and wiping out the
whole population, the country for a long time was un-
inhabitable. As soon as the land became fit for man again,
surrounding peoples drifted in and took possession of it.
These were brown races speaking the Maya language.
These brown races were not a part of the white Mayas.
Although they spoke the Maya tongue, they were totally
different, and without doubt came from a long way off.
They were a new set of colonizers. This would account for
there being no traditions found among them at the time
the Spaniards conquered the country.

These newcomers were neither Nahuatls nor Aztecs.

The Nahuatls came from the south and conquered them.

243

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The Aztecs also came from the south and in turn con-
quered the country.

The brown races of Central America and Yucatan of to-
day are the descendants of these various peoples, a mixture
of the three tribes, mostly Mongol.

The forefathers of the present people who call them-
selves Mayas were not the builders of the old Yucatan
structures.

The principal structures at Chichen Itza are still stand-
ing, but in ruins. These were built during the Can dynasty
and the PPeu dynasty. The structures of the PPeu
dynasty are easily recognizable by their having in some
prominent position the PPeu totem, which was an ele-
phant, or, as shown on the structures, the head of an ele-
phant.

Pedro Beltram (“Arte del Idioma Maya’): “In the
Maya sculpture, particularly on the trunks of the mas-
todon heads that adorn the most ancient buildings.”

On all buildings erected during the Can dynasty their
emblem, the feathered serpent, was many times carved
upon its stones. This accounts for the numberless feath-
ered serpents found on the buildings at Chichen Itza.

In battle and on state occasions the feathered serpent
appeared on the royal banner. As an example, on page 245
is a drawing of Prince Coh, the youngest son of the last
King Can, in battle, with the royal emblem surrounding
and protecting him.

This is one of the murals in Prince Coh’s funeral cham-
ber, Memorial Hall, Chichen Itza. In this chamber the
life of Prince Coh is shown in pictures from his boyhood
days to the day of his death.

244

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

PRINCE COH IN BATTLE, SURROUNDED AND PROTECTED
BY THE FEATHERED SERPENT

From a mural in his burial chamber, Yucatan

245

Digitized by Google

— &t

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Here in Yucatan, tens of thousands of years afterwards,
we find a custom retained which was observed in Niven’s
lowest buried city, described by him as the life of a “‘shep-
herd.”

Wherever the feathered serpent is seen carved or
painted, it will always be found to be in some way con-
nected with the royal family of Can. The Can Dynasty
was the last reigning line of Maya monarchs of Mayax.
The last of the dynasty was Queen Moo. She visited the
Maya Nile colony in Egypt during the first century of its
existence, 16,000 years ago, as related in the Troano
Manuscript.

The present natives of Yucatan are not pure-blooded.
What remained of the Maya stock after the great cata-
clysm had destroyed the country were conquered by a
Mongol race. The men were put to the sword and the
women enslaved, and the forced marriages that followed
introduced the Mongol blood in their veins. Thus when
the land was again settled, after the cataclysm, it was
by races that knew nothing of the builders of the vast
structures which lay all about. This is verified by the fact
that when Cortez invaded Yucatan, Bishop Landa, who
accompanied him, asked the natives, ‘“Who built the old
ruins?’ The answer he received was, ‘“The Toltecs.” Tol-
tec is a Maya word meaning “‘builder.” Therefore their
answer was “the builders.”” But who the builders were
they knew not, as Landa has stated in his writings. It will
be interesting to note here that the word To/tec means
not a race, but a builder.

In Mexico there is a very ancient Aztec tradition which
says that “the first settlers in Mexico were a white race.”

246

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

The tradition continues, saying: “This white race was
conquered by a race with darker skins, and the darker
skinned race drove the white race from the land. The
white people then took their ships and sailed to a far-off
land in the East, towards the rising sun, and there settled.”

A prophesy accompanies the tradition, which is: “At
some future time this white race will return and claim
and reconquer the Jand.”’

Rider Haggard must have found this same tradition,
for in his work, ‘‘Montezuma’s Daughter,” he says:

‘Quetzal, or more properly, Quetzalcoatl, was the di-
vinity who is fabled to have taught the natives of Anahuac
all the useful arts, including those of government and pol-
icy. He was white-skinned and light-haired. Finally he
sailed from the shores of Anahuac for the fabulous country
of Hapallan in a bark of serpent skins.”

The Guatemalan tradition about the blond-white race,
the first inhabitants of America, is without doubt the
clearest of all, because in Guatemala was Quetzal’s capi-
taf city. The Guatemalan tradition is as follows:

‘When King Quetzalcoatl, with the very white race,
was conquered by the invading darker race, he refused to
surrender, saying that he could not live in captivity; he
could not survive. He then, with as many of his people as
his ships could carry, sailed to a far-off land in the direc-
tion of the rising sun. He reached, with his people, this
far-off land, and there settled. They prospered and be-
came a great people.

“During the great battle many escaped and fled into
the forests and were never heard of again. The rest were
taken prisoners and enslaved by the conquerors.”

247

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The Quetzal today is the national bird of Guatemala.
The name Quetzal was given to it in memory of their last
white king, Quetzalcoatl. This bird was selected because,
like King Quetzal, it cannot be made to survive in cap-
tivity.

The wonderful old sacred book of the Quiches, the Po-
pol Vuh, was written in Guatemala.

The Aztec tradition about the white race, like all Aztec
traditions, is very much garbled and filled in with priestly
myths and inventions. I will point out a few prominent
inventions and additions. I say they are inventions and
additions because they do not appear in any of the other,
dozen at least, traditions. All, with this exception, agree
with each other in all material points.

These Aztec changes have been the cause of leading
some of our prominent archzologists away from the
straight and narrow path of truth and reason.

The Aztecs began to drift into the Mexican Valley
about A. D. 1090, but it was not until about the year
A. D. 1216 that they made an actual settlement in the
valley.

The Aztecs originally formed a part of the Empire of
Mayax and Kukul Khan, the feathered serpent, was their
symbol for the Deity. It was also the symbol of the
Quiches, who were their neighbors.

The exact date of Quetzal’s reign is unknown, because
he was driven out by the darker people, whom we know as
Mayas. Evidences seem to show that he lived more than
34,000 years ago. Again, other evidences would seem to
point him out as belonging to one of the eleven dynasties.
Whichever way it is taken, it answers my purpose, as it

248

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

shows Quetzal to have lived far back beyond 16,000 years
ago.

One of the Aztec changes was made in their southern
home, before they settled in the Mexican Valley. They
abandoned a symbol used for the Deity and adopted the
great white King Quetzel as their god. They then in-
vented a son for him, which they called Tescat.

The said Tescat was then made to escape with his father,
Quetzal. The next step was to invent a prophesy, so the
prophesy was invented which ran: “‘Tescat’s spirit will re-
turn in the body of a white man with many soldiers. He
will conquer and retake the country, putting the men to
the sword and enslaving the women.” With this they pro-
ceeded to awe the people from the king down. Constant
sacrifices were demanded to propitiate Tescat; human
sacrifices commenced, then the priestly power was com-
plete—priesthood was in absolute control.

The people lived in dread, for any one might be the next
one called upon to stretch upon the bloody stone.

At the time Cortez invaded Mexico, the Aztec human
sacrifices were going on at the rate of from 30,000 to
40,000 a year, if we can believe Spanish writers.

This spark of savagery flew to all parts of the world—
Egypt, India, Phoenicia, etc.

Our archzologists have apparently found something
Aztec dating 1100-1200 A. D. (the period during which
Quetzal was made the god of the Aztecs), and have pub-
lished the erroneous statement that Quetzal lived only a
few hundreds of years ago.

The name Quetzal is very much intertwined with the
very ancient history of Mexico and Central America. It

249

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

even extends to our southwestern states, Arizona and New
Mexico, for there the Pueblo Indians used in their re-
ligious rites and ceremonies the feathered or bearded ser-
pent and called it Quetzalcoatl.

Joining and comparing the various traditions, it would
appear that far back there was a white race dominating
Mexico and Central America; that they formed a kingdom
and the name of their last king was Quetzal. Why Quet-
zalcoatl] was used in their religious ceremonies and rites,
the Pueblo Indians of today apparently cannot tell. Each
one has a different tale. The true import has been lost, it 1s
now solely traditional.

The Empire of Mayax was made up of at least seven
distinct peoples, all coming from the Motherland and ap-
parently all speaking the Maya tongue. All the kings and
queens of Mayax during the twelve dynasties were of the
white race.

The last white race was the forerunner of the Latins.
The forefathers of the white Polynesians of today, the
forefathers of the white Mayas of Yucatan and the fore-
fathers of all our white races were one and the same.

YUCATAN’S CIVILIZATION

OWL VASE FROM THE “TREASURES OF PRIAM”

The inscription reads: From the King Chronos of Atlantis.
After Schliemann

A HAWK-HEADED SPHINX

A relic from Atlantis discovered by Schliemann among the “Treasures of
Priam.” Ancient Troy

251

© © COSCO ® OOO @OGS
13
The Geological Eiistory of Mu

& © OSOSOVOOO DY OOO @OO

Arter having read thus far, it will be of interest to learn
the geological history of Mu and to know the scientific
cause of her destruction.

I have already shown how the subterranean foundation
of this vast continent was undermined by the volcanic
gases. Granite, the primary rock in the formation of the
earth’s crust, appears to have been honeycombed with huge
chambers and cavities and these were filled with highly
explosive volcanic gases. When these chambers were emp-
tied of their gases the supporting roofs caved in and the
submersion of the land above logically followed.

My investigations have proved that the calamity that
overtook this early civilization was due to the emptying
of a series of isolated upper gas chambers that were up-
holding the land and which were probably connected with
each other by cracks and fissures.

In order to make clear to the reader what I mean when
referring to upper, middle and lower chambers and iso-
lated chambers, I have made a sketch of groups of Archzan
gas chambers, together with an explanation. I have inten-

252

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

SURFACE

DIVISION
oO

§ MILES

SERIES

DIVISION
xX

10 MILES

UPPER

DIVISION
Ww

1§ MILES

‘

GG) MIDDLE. SERIES

: 1§ TO 70
MILES

FIG. A. CONDITIONS OF THE EARTH BEFORE LAND APPEARED

FIG. B. THE PROBABLE CONDITION UNDERLYING MU
BEFORE HER SUBMERSION

253

Digitized by Google

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

tionally drawn the chambers higher than was actually the
case in order to emphasize them.

SKETCH OF ARCHAZAN Gas CHAMBERS

Fig. A. There give the upper and part of the second se-
ries, each division showing groups of chambers at varying
depths from the earth’s surface. This sketch depicts a
somewhat similar condition to that which existed below
the surface of Mu before that ill-fated continent vanished
forever beneath the waters of the Pacific. The upper se-
ries is given as being fifteen miles in depth, the middle
series will be from fifteen to thirty miles and the lower
series from thirty miles to the earth’s molten center.

The upper series is arranged in three divisions (O, X
and W ). Division O runs from the earth’s surface down
to a depth of five miles. All chambers in this division are
represented as being of the isolated variety. By “isolated”
I mean that they have no connections wth the chambers
below, or with the earth’s center, from which they might
obtain additional gases that would overcompress and blow
them out. As they stand, no new gases can be driven into
them, and, unless additional gases are forced into them,
they will stand as they are through all eternity.

Division X runs from five to ten miles below the earth’s
surface. These are live chambers, constantly receiving
fresh gases from Division W, which passes from chamber
to chamber through cracks and fissures.

To drive additional gases into the isolated chambers of
Division O, volcanic workings must first open cracks and
fissures from Chambers X to O’ and then from O* to O*.

Gases coming from the chambers of Division W, which

254

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

are in communication with the earth’s center, must first
flow into Chambers X and overcompress them. This would
necessitate the raising of the roofs of these chambers to
make room for the new gases.

In raising the roofs, the rocks forming them would be
split and fractured, forming passageways for gases from
Chambers X into Chambers O*. In time Group O* would
become overcompressed. This would necessitate the rais-
ing of their roofs. Then the roofs of Chambers O* would
have to be raised to accommodate the ever increasing pres-
sure from new gases. Their roofs would go up, split and
be punctured by the gases, which in the form of volcanoes
would empty the chambers down to a point where the bol-
stering gases could no longer uphold the roof. What would
be the result? Their roofs would crash down to their
floors, the remaining gases would assume the form of huge
flames and envelop the land as it went down. The sur-
rounding waters would flow into the enormous hole and
the land would be submerged.

Gas belts run at irregular depths below the earth’s sur-
face. From various observations of certain phenomena
covering a peroid of over fifty years, I have come to the
conclusion that, generally, the great gas belts have been
forged along the upper half of the middle series and the
lower parts of the upper series. Gas belts do not run at
regular distances below the earth’s surface, as I have indi-
cated, but vary considerably. A section may run through
Division W. The next section may be through Divi-
sion X and then back again into Section W. In short
stretches they come to within a mile or two of the earth’s
surface. This happens most often when they are approach-

255

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

FIG, C, PROBABLE POSITION OF GAS CHAMBERS UNDERLYING MU
BEFORE HER SUBMERSION

FIG. D. PRESENTGAS BELTS ACROSS AND AROUND THE PACIFIC OCEAN

1. Great central gas belt. 2. South Pacific cross belts. 3. Japanese-Ladrone belt.
4. Great Pacific circuit belt.

256

Digitized by Google

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

ing their safety valves, the volcanoes, as may be noted in
Hawaii, Ecuador, Central America, and several other lo-
cations. It is safe to say that no belt runs below twenty
miles from the earth’s surface, usually much less. My ob-
servations lead me to believe that their average depth is
from fifteen to eighteen miles below the earth’s surface,
except when they are approaching their volcanoes.

Fig. B. This shows the probable condition that under-
lay Mu before her submersion. A series of isolated cham-
bers lay very near the surface of Mu and their bolstering
gases were upholding her. The next line of chambers were >
many miles below.

Fig. C. shows a series of chambers, O’ corresponding
with O* in Cuts A and B. These are connected with each
other by fissures and passageways.

Fig. D. shows the principal gas belts that now run under
and around the Pacific Ocean.

During the forging of the belts, Chambers /O, Fig. B,
became overcompressed, causing cracks and fissures in the
rocks above. Then the gases entered Chambers O*, where
the same situation developed, and from there they escaped
into Chambers O*. When this happened, the roofs of
Chambers O? were punctured, the gases escaped, the land
crashed down to the floors of the chambers, the waters of
the Pacific flowed in over and Mu was no more.

It is my belief that the supporting chambers which up-
held Mu were very near to the surface of the land. I base
this opinion on the depths of the Pacific Ocean, the Troano
Manuscript, the Codex Cortesianus and the Lhasa Rec-
ord. None of these records speaks of the land having been
raised to any great height before sinking into the Pacific.

257

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

They do say, however, that “the land was rended and torn
to pieces ;”’ “quivering like the leaves of a tree in a storm;”’
“rising and falling like the waves of the ocean,” and “dur-
ing the night went down.” All of which would indicate
that no great elevation of land took place, which would
have been the case had the sustaining chambers been deep
down. From the fact that the records say that Mu was
“twice upheaved,” “twice kicked from her foundations,”
it may be taken for granted that another or second series
of isolated chambers lay below those supporting Mu, as
shown in O* and O’. The first upheaval was when the
gases entered O* from JO and the second was when O°
broke into O’.

That the chambers sustaining Mu were near the surface
and not deep down is proven by the fact that had they
been deep down, the land would have been sufficiently
thick to form retaining angles to uphold it after it had
been raised like our mountain ranges.

Lands and continents have thus been submerged since
the beginning of time. We have instances of this through
the pre-Cambrian Time, the Paleozoic Time, the Meso-
zoic and Cenozoic Times, through the Pleistocene Period,
and down, in fact, to the very edge of history. This elimi-
nation of gas chambers and the resultant submersion of
lands went on until a sufficient thickness of the primary
rock was effected to permit of the rocks forming retaining
angles when they were lifted, thus opening huge tunnels
between continuous chambers and forming belts. When
these gas belts were formed and completed it practically
put an end to this destructive submersion of land.

It is geologically certain that the gas chambers which

258

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

upheld Mu were eliminated during the forging of the Pa-
cific division of the great central gas belt and the Pacific
cross belts with their many ramifications. From the pres-
ence of certain geological phenomena I have thus come to
the conclusion that it was a serées of chambers that under-
lay and upheld Mu, and not one huge chamber, as was the
case with Atlantis. I base this belief on the following evi-
dence:

1. The difference in the depths of the Pacific Ocean be-
tween the various groups of islands shows that with each
varying depth there was a different chamber, or one cham-
ber under another that was eliminated. Had there been
only one chamber the bottom of the Pacific Ocean would
be comparatively level.

2. We find that certain islands were once parts of the
continent. Had there been only one chamber these could ©
not have remained above water.

3. These islands lay over the passageways between
the chambers and not over the chambers themselves. As
there was no chamber beneath them they did not go down.

4. That the chambers were connected is shown by the
islands, revealing volcanic workings. The gases worked
under them from chamber to chamber. This naturally
changed their contour and they became mountainous and
jagged.

My remarks on this subject are based upon careful in-
vestigations and observations on volcanic disturbances re-
ported in the Pacific during the last fifty years. The
islands and their characteristics have also been taken into
consideration. There appear to be two main belts with
many cross belts and ramifications. It is not only possible

259

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

but probable that other ramifications exist which I have
not shown. In fact, I believe there are, but I have never
been able to define them.

But how, will probably be asked, does this affect the
story of Mu? If the reader will go back he will recall that,
in a previous chapter describing the destruction of Mu, it
was shown how these treacherous gas belts were the direct
cause of the submersion which sent the Motherland of
Man down in an abyss of scorching flames and rushing
waters. There is no question in my mind but that the land
of Mu was upheld by a series of upper isolated gas cham-
bers, marked in the diagrams O*. These gas chambers
were the final assassins of Mu.

The exact location, area and height of each chamber ts
unknown. On surmise, based upon the positions of the
islands, I have given the location of several of these cham-
bers. I do not presume to say that they are absolutely cor-
rect in all minute details, but they do show the honey-
combed condition of the rocks directly under Mu and the
shallow depths of many parts of the Pacific Ocean show
that they were near the surface.

As a geological proposition, my next step will be to note
a few of the many large extinct volcanoes that are to be
found among the Polynesian Islands. Up to the present
time, nowhere upon the face of the earth are to be found
evidences of volcanic outbursts equal to those found in
Polynesia. These tremendous gaping mouths bear evi-
dence of the compressed forces deep down within the
earth’s core that finally became unleashed and burst forth
with a fury of destruction unequaled in the history of the
world.

260

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

Kilauea is an extinct volcano on one of the Hawaiian
Islands, the crater of which measures three miles in diam-
eter. Imagine a mouth of this size taxed to the fullest
capacity suddenly vomiting forth its destructive fire,
smoke and lava! A flood of fire, smoke and lava three
miles in diameter! To what height did it ascend? With-
out doubt, thousands of feet, when we take into considera-
tion the tremendous motive power behind it.

Awe-inspiring as Kilauea was, nevertheless there were
undoubtedly others still larger. This appears to be a cer-
tainty when the following facts are considered: The size
of the chamber that was being emptied of gases, the im-
measurable quantities of gases in the chamber, the force
exerted by the overcompressed gases forming the belt, and
the weight of the land above that rested on them and
which finally forced them through the craters and re-
leased the demons of destruction that sprang at the throat
of Mu and throttled her.

Taking these facts into consideration, there is little
cause for astonishment at the size of these extinct craters
of Polynesia. The only astonishment is that there are any
craters at all. With such forces working underneath the
land, the wonder is that the earth was not hurled into the
sky by one mighty blast and dissolved like mist instead of
being punctured and checker-boarded with volcanoes.

When the northern main division of the great central
gas belt was completed through the Pacific, a safety valve
was formed to take care of future accumulations of the
belt in this section. A new crater was pierced through the
center of Kilauea. This new crater is only 300 yards in
diameter and is called Halemaumau. While Halemaumau

261

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

only one-eighteenth of the diameter of Kilauea, it never-
theless ranks among the largest craters of today and gives
an idea, by comparison, of the enormity of its predecessor.

The northern main Pacific division of the great central
gas belt runs directly under the Hawaiian Islands. At the
Hawaiian Islands it is nearer to the surface than at any
other point along its whole course, which encircles the cen-
tral part of the earth.

The Niuafou Crater is another famous crater that is of
interest to the archeologist. Niuafou is a small island to
the northeast of the Fiji Islands, nearly midway between
Fiji and Samoa. The Niuafou extinct crater is two miles
in diameter. Since the time it helped in the work of sub-
merging the land of Mu it has filled up with water and
now forms a lake. |

The foregoing are only conspicuous examples of the
‘many immense extinct volcanoes that are to be found
among the Polynesian Islands. We doubt if anything in
the nature of volcanic disturbances has ever before or since
in the earth’s history happened that would compare in
horror to the appalling cataclysm that befell the race of
man when these volcanic workings blew off the lid of the
earth and destroyed the land of Mu some twelve or thir-
teen thousands of years ago.

Geology tells us that the western shores of North
America were once raised. Geology has ever been guilty
of putting the cart before the horse and this is only one
more instance. Instead of the western shores of North
America having been raised and the shore line thus ex-
tended, it was, as a matter of fact, the lowering of the
level of the Pacific Ocean that extended the shore lines.

262

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

The land of Mu was an immense continent covering
nearly one-half of the Pacific Ocean. In some places the
ocean went down thousands of feet. In order to fill up this
vast hole, which was from 5,000 to 6,000 miles long and at
least 2,000 or 3,000 miles broad, to the present depths of
the ocean, the surrounding waters had to be drawn upon.
To have maintained the original level of the Pacific Ocean
after Mu went down, twice as much water would have
been required as was then contained in the whole of the
ocean. This could not be possible except by drawing the
waters from surrounding areas and shores, and when this
was done there was still not enough water to bring the
ocean up to its original level. Mu was not the only land
that went down into the Pacific Ocean. An immense
northern area was also submerged, and also a smaller area
to the west.

It may be asked: How did it happen that the waters of
the Atlantic Ocean did not flow around Cape Horn into
the Pacific Ocean and thus level off the waters again with-
out drawing them away from surrounding shores? In an-
swer to this I will say that the Atlantic Ocean had its
own troubles to attend to during this period of the earth’s
history, as the following list of submerged lands will
show:

The land of Mu in the Pacific Ocean, which was sev-
eral thousands of miles long and thousands of miles wide.

The Bering land bridge in the north Pacific Ocean, con-
necting America with Asia. This bridge was not the nar-
row strip of land assigned to it by geology. Its southern
shore line ran from Alaska to Kamchatka by way of the

263

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Aleutian Islands. Its northern shore I am unable to trace,
but it was in the Arctic Ocean.

This submerged land has furnished scientists with a
scapegoat to account for all the unaccountable things in
America. Whenever anything has come up that could not
be understood by the scientists, and that is quite frequent,
it was always agreeably settled among themselves that it
undoubtedly came to America from Asia by way of the
Bering land bridge. Why Asia should have been selected
to account for what is unaccountable I cannot imagine
except that, as nothing is known about eastern Asia, there
was no fear of contradiction.

Then there are the Pacific minor submersions. A stretch
of land running down from California to the northwest
corner of Colombia went down. This, apparently, was a
narrow strip. Land was also submerged where the Malay
Archipelago now stands, but the extent of this land is
not known.

Atlantis was situated in the center of the Atlantic
Ocean. It was an immense continental island, and at the
time of its submersion it was the center of the earth’s
civilization.

Then there was the overland route to Europe, in the
north Atlantic Ocean. This was land between America
and Greenland, and Greenland and Norway, together with
a great, triangular piece whose western line ran from Ice-
land to Cape Finisterre in the northwest corner of France.

A small area of land also went down off the coasts of
Central America, which before submersion -was a part of
the mainland.

All of these submersions were caused by the volcanic

264

THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF MU

workings during the forging of the gas belts. The great
central belt submerged Mu and Atlantis. The Pacific cir-
cuit belt submerged the Bering land bridge. The Appa-
lachian-Iceland-Scandinavian belt submerged the over-
land route to Europe.

By the lowering of the levels of the ocean, many lands
emerged from the water, and the shore lines of remaining
lands were extended.

Apparently all of these great areas of land were thickly
peopled, so that the loss of life was appalling. Without
doubt hundreds of millions perished miserably. Mu,
alone, accounted for 64,000,000.

This geological cycle is a complete confirmation of all
the data previously furnished about the land of Mu. It
provides the connection that might be termed a missing
link. Geologically, it proves beyond question the exist-
ence of a great prehistoric continent of land in the Pacific
Ocean.

Much of the present elevation of the islands of the
Pacific Ocean is due to the lowering of the ocean’s level.

I have made a somewhat rough calculation as to how
much the earth’s diameter has been reduced by the blow-
ing out of gas chambers and the compacting of the rocks,
and find that it totals between 17 and 21 miles.

S75 3

Zi} AT | vin Js

mort fit3??, HEATHER ATER TEUTHTTGTENG AURELIO ATATTOT (AARP ACUUERLULTAT

ik a

265

Digitized by Google

& © OS OOOCO @ OOO @OSO

7,
The Origin of Savagery

@ © OSOCOSCO ® OOO @OGO

In the chapter on the destruction of Mu I showed how
the first savagery originated upon earth. Man was created
a civilized being, and the destruction of the Motherland
affected only those who survived the catastrophe and
made their homes on the barren islands which were left
out of the water after the proud cities and buildings had
vanished forever.

A nation loses the place which it once held in the
worlds’ history when money becomes more precious to the
souls of its people than honesty and honor. A universal,
widespread greed of gain is the forewarning of some great
upheaval and disaster. Civilizations have been born and
completed and then forgotten again and again. There is
nothing new under the sun. What is, has been. All that
we learn and discover has existed before; our inventions
and discoveries are but re-inventions, re-discoveries.

The orthodox theory among scientists of today is that
man came up from a brute beast to a savage, and from
savagery traveled on by degrees until he reached civiliza-
tion.

266

THE ORIGIN OF SAVAGERY

I do not stand alone when I say that savagery came out
of civilization, not civilization out of savagery. It is only
those who know nothing of savages who maintain that
civilization emerged from savagery. .

Baron Von Humboldt, in speaking of the wretched
groups of Indians he met along the Amazon and Orinoco
Rivers, naively remarks:

“They are not the crude material of humanity; nor
from this state have we arisen. These hapless beings are
the last degraded remnants of some dying race which has
fallen to this state. Man in a state of nature is a doomed
being, doomed to death.”

A savage, left to himself, does not rise. He has fallen
to where he is and is still going down. It is only when he
is brought into contact with civilization that an upward
change in him becomes possible. The savage when brought
into contact with civilization does one of two things: he
either absorbs civilization and rises, or he absorbs only the
vices of civilization, adds them to his own savage vices,
becomes more brute-like and falls still lower. Such are
doomed to early extinction.

There have been two causes that have evolved savag-
ery among various peoples, and both were due to geo-
logical phenomena.

At the end of the geological Tertiary Era, the earth’s
crust had been cleared of old Archean gas chambers to a
sufficient depth for the gases to form belts and to raise
mountains. The foregoing is explained in my geological
work. Before this time there were no mountains or even
high hills. The habitable earth consisted of immense fer-
tile plains thickly populated. In forming the gas belts,

267

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the land above was lifted into mountain ranges. A belt
passing under a thickly populated plain in lifting the land
fractured it and broke it up, killing most of the people. A
few, however, survived among the broken-up mountains.
Those which were left on the plains, on the land which
had not been raised, suffered a worse fate, for all were de-
stroyed by great cataclysmic waves which rolled in over
the plains from the oceans. This not only destroyed all
life, but for a time the productiveness of the land as well.

These survivors could not return to the plains, for there
all was desolation. There was nothing to eat, and so great
became their sufferings that they ate one another, and
thus, through one of the two geological changes—moun-
tain raising—cannibalism was born into the world. In
some instances when the mountains went up, large flat
areas were carried up with them, and on this land lived
the men and women who had once known all of the luxu-
ries of a great civilization. In time, they lost all knowl-
edge of the higher arts and sciences. They became savages
and lived as such.

The most conspicuous instance of this sort was the great
Uighur Empire of central Asia. The eastern half was de-
stroyed by the waters of the biblical ‘‘Flood” and all
thereon perished. Afterwards the western half went up,
forming the Himalaya and other central Asiatic moun-
tains. Among these mountains were many plateaus, where
the people survived and finally worked their way back into
various flat countries. Those of the Uighurs who survived
were the forefathers of the Aryan races. Both in India
and China there are traditions relating to the raising of
these mountains, the great loss of life that ensued and the

268

THE ORIGIN OF SAVAGERY

survival of many who lived in the mountains following
the great upheaval.

Among the Zulus of South Africa there are traditions
that their forefathers were a company who survived dur-
ing the raising of the mountains in the north.

In South America the whole city of Tiahuanaco went
up with the great plateau that now exists between the two
ranges of the Andes. This is told by the inscription on the
great door that is so well known to archzologists, on the
shores of Lake Titicaca.

In most mountainous countries there are traditions con-
cerning the raising of the mountains. The raising of moun-
tains is referred to in the Bible, in one of the psalms
of David, called the Song of Moses (Psalms xc: 2).

Scientists of today, in judging the character and ad-
vancement of a civilization, lay great stress on flint arrow
and spear heads. Thus they say that, because the arrow
and spear heads of Neolithic Times were of a higher type
of manufacture than these same articles during Paleolithic
Times, the Neolithic men were more civilized than the
Paleolithic men.

I do not say that our scientists are wrong: but this evi-
dence does not appeal to me as showing the state of a civil-
ization, except in the reverse way, namely: the Paleo-
lithic men were more civilized than the Neolithic men, and
there are many opposing facts arrayed against the scien-
tists’ theory.

It is quite within the realms of reason to believe also
that, at the time the flint arrow and spear heads were be-
ing fashioned, conditions were somewhat similar to those
of today in this respect, that all individuals were not

269

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

equally expert in manufacture. A trained mechanic turns
out a perfect article, a novice, an inferior and crudely
formed one. The men of the Paleolithic times were nov-
ices, but were they less civilized? Personally I think not.
These novices were the remnants of highly civilized peo-
ple, suddenly thrown on their beam-ends by one of the
many convulsions of the earth during what is called
Paleolithic Times.

The assertion that the more crude and primitive a stone
arrow or spear head is, the more highly civilized were the
people who made them, may seem illogical on its face; but
think—carry your mind back to ancient times, and see
how man repeatedly was robbed of everything except his
bare hands, and thrown entirely on nature’s resources.
Tools and everything else were gone; absolutely nothing
was left except their brains and their fingers. Without the
slightest knowledge of mechanics, these remnants had to
commence making tools out of nothing but the stones at
their feet. Could anything but the crudest forms be fash-
ioned by them without experience and without knowl-
edge? I think not. To me, these crude arrow and spear
heads do not show savagery or a low civilization. They
show a high civilization passing down into savagery. Thus
the scientist’s Paleolithic men were of a higher civilization
than the Neolithic men who followed them, and as the
manufacture improved these human beings went down.

THE ORIGIN OF SAVAGERY

ie ties

271

Digitized by Google

@ @ CPOSEGOO @ COU @OO

5
Ancient Religious Conceptions

@ © POSOSCOOD COU @OSO

Max Miu ter says: “Religion is a mental faculty which,
independent of, nay, in spite of sense and reason, enables
man to apprehend the Infinite under different names and
under different disguises. Without that faculty no re-
ligion, not even the lowest worship of idols and fetishes,
would be possible; and yet if we will but listen atten-
tively we can hear in all religions a groaning of the spirit,
a struggle to conceive the inconceivable, to utter the un-
utterable, a longing after the Infinite, a love of God.

‘The intention of religion, wherever found or wherever
we meet it, is always holy. However imperfect, however
childish a religion may be, it always places the human soul
in the presence of God; and however imperfect, however
childish the conception of God may be, it always expresses
the highest ideal of perfection which the human soul, for
the time being, can reach and grasp.

“Every mythology appears as the result of the earliest
efforts of the human mind to explain the mysteries of the
Universe: the sky—the sun—the planets; the winds and
the clouds, the summer and winter, the dawn and dark-

272

@

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

ness, and the varied elemental phenomena which are of
supernatural significance to the simple fancies of uncul-
tured people.”

A myth starts from a conception, an idea. The mind
invents facts to embody and present it. Myths are the
expression of the way primitive man represented things
to himself under the influence of naturalism.

Miller in ‘Early Religions” says:

“In one sense every religion has been a true religion at
the start; they were the only religions that were possible
at the time, which were compatible with the language, the
thoughts, and the sentiments of each generation, which
were appropriate to the age of the world. We ought there-
fore to put the most charitable interpretation on the ap-
parent absurdities, the follies and the errors of ancient re-
ligions. As soon as we know anything of the thoughts and
feelings of man, we find him in possession of a religion, a
religion of faith or worship, of morality or ecstatic vision,
a religion of fear and hope, or surmise, a reverence of the
so-called gods.

“In order to approach the religion of primitive peoples
we must, so to speak, get at its heart, and feel its life cur-
rents. We must place ourselves in sympathy with these
ancient peoples, listen to their hymns and prayers, and
witness their rites and ceremonies; we must endeavor to
know their religious ideals. When Thales declared all
things were full of gods, and when Buddha denied that
there were any other gods except the Supreme Being, both
were stating their religious convictions.

“The external aspect of a religion as presented to
strangers is not one often to be trusted. In the earliest and

273

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

purest days of Christianity, if we were to believe the most
enlightened of the heathen writers, the Christian religion
consisted of the worship of animals. This idea possibly
arose from the fact that the earliest pictures of Mary nurs-
ing Christ show the cow’s horns of the Egyptian goddess
Sati on her head, and sometimes the horns of Hathor.”’

From the Book of the Dead: Hathor in Egyptian means
“the house of horns.” Hathor is frequently represented
with the attributes of Isis. Hathor symbolizes and per-
sonifies not only all that is beautiful, but also all that is
true. Isis was the personification of the female or creative
attribute of the Deity.

Sati had the same attributes as Hathor. She wears the
crown of Upper Egypt with cow’s horns, and symbolizes
motherhood.

Miller, in “Ancestral Worship,” says: “Ancestral wor-
ship sprang out of the universal faith of primitive peoples
in the persistence of human responsibility after death.
This form of worship seems to have been almost universal
among mankind during a certain stage of development.
Traces of it are found in all parts of the earth. The re-
ligious ideas of the Hebrews present traces of ancestral
worship. The indication is strong that the special God of
the Hebrew patriarch, the family God of Abraham, with
whom he conversed and held personal relations, repre-
sented an ancestral divinity.” |

From the reading of a number of ancient writings I
have come to the conclusion that ancestral worship origin-
ated through the destruction of Mu. Ancestral worship
or the reverence shown to forefathers appears very promi-
nently in the Egyptian sacred rites and ceremonies, where

274

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

their forefathers of the land of Mu furnish the principal
theme.

It is also reflected in the inscriptions on some of the
Maya monuments; also in the Greek alphabet.

Miller, in “Origin of Religious Laws,” says: ‘“The be-
lief that the religious law-giver enjoyed some closer in-
timacy with the Deity than ordinary mortals pervades the
ancient traditions of many nations. According to a well-
known passage in Diodorus Siculus, the Egyptians be-
lieved their laws to have been communicated to Mnevis by
Hermes. The Cretans held that Minos received the laws
from Zeus. The Lacedemonians held that Lykurgus re-
ceived his laws from Appolon. The Aryans believed that
Zathraustes received them from the Good Spirit. Accord-
ing to Gatel, Zamolscis received his laws from the goddess
Hestia, and according to the Jews, Moses received his laws
from the God Iao.*”

‘There was a primitive Aryan religion, a primitive Sem-
itic religion, and a primitive Turanian religion, before each
of these primeval races was broken up and became sepa-
rate in language, worship and national sentiment. The
highest God received the same name in the ancient myth-
ology of India, Greece, Italy and Germany, and had re-
tained that name whether worshipped in the Himalayan
mountains, or among the oaks of Dodona, on the Capital
or in the forests of Germany. He shows that his name was
Dyaus in Sanskrit, Zeus in Greek, Jovis in Latin and Tiu
in German.

“They bring before us with all the vividness of an event

32. Unquestionably the Seven Sacred Inspired Writings of the Moth-
land are the foundation of this universal belief.

275

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

which we witnessed ourselves but yesterday, the ancestors
of the whole Aryan race, thousands of years it may be be-
fore Homer and the Veda, worshipping an unseen being
under the same name, the best, the most exalted name they
could find in their vocabulary — under the name Light
and Sky. Let us not turn away and say that this after all
was nature worship and idolatry. No, it was not meant for
that, although it may have been degenerated into that in
later times.

‘“‘Dyaus did not mean the blue sky, nor was it the sky
personified ; it was meant for something else. We have in
the Veda the invocation Dyaus Pitar, the Greek Zeus
Pater and the Latin Jupiter, and that means in all these
languages what it meant before these languages were torn
asunder. It means ‘Heaven Father,’ or ‘Heavenly
Father.’ ”

Owen, writing on the ancient religion of China, says:
“The oldest classics in China, going back to the time of
Abraham, show a wonderful knowledge of God. There
are passages in these classics about God worthy to stand
side by side with kindred passages in the Bible. God was
omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent; the moral gov-
ernor of the world and the impartial judge of men.”

Man’s first religion was a simple, pure worship of the
Deity. The extravagances which later crept into and dis-
figured the records of man’s first religion were the results
of that inevitable degradation which priesthood always
inflicts upon great ideas committed to its charge. The
original religion became discordant in many particulars,
and sorely overlaid by corruptions, inventions and miscon-
ceptions.

276

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

Manetho, the Egyptian historian, tells us that ‘‘animal
worship was introduced into Egypt in the reign of the
second king of the Eleventh Dynasty.”

In all my Egyptian research work I have been unable
to find any traces of animal worship during the early
dynasties, and it is rarely ever referred to between the age
of Kufu and the reign of Rameses II. What is shown,
however, is that quite early the Egyptians apparently be-
gan to worship the symbols instead of what they repre-
sented, which was the first step that led to animal worship.

Manetho says: “It was not until the Eighteenth Dy-
nasty that animal forms of gods were depicted in the
memorial chambers of the departed. Under Thotmes III
these figures are constantly met with, having the head of
the symbolic animal that was embalmed. After the reign
of Rameses, the worship of animals grew and expanded
greatly.”

Here is an example of an unscrupulous priesthood,
craving for power and control of wealth, degrading the
pure, simple, beautiful Osirian religion, as taught by
Thoth at Sais, to accomplish their ends.

From ancient records it would appear that, about
2000 B. C., religions all over the world became degraded,
dropping in many places to fiendish human sacrifices.
Only Moses stood up against it and kept his people in the
true road. They have been called ‘“‘God’s favored people.”
They were favored when they were selected to retain and
carry on the worship of the Deity; they were called upon
and were not found wanting.

The creation of the world and man has ever held a
prominent place in the mind of man; for as soon as we

277

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

know anything about the thoughts of man we find he has
a conception about Creation.

It matters not whether it is the acne of the pre-
historic sages, the more modern philosopher, or the present-
day cannibalistic savages—all conceptions of the Creation
are substantially the same. They may vary a little in
phraseology, and do; but the main points are identically
the same, showing that they all have a common origin.

This subject, the Creation, permeates the writings and
traditions of prehistoric and ancient peoples. These tradi-
tions have been handed down to us and have been ac-
cepted by us, because science and geology prove them to
be correct.

All of the prehistoric writings are written in symbolic
phrases, and symbols are used in place of the names of the
actual objects. Knowing the import of these symbols,
however, makes reading of them very easy, so that we
’ arrive at their true meanings and they become perfectly
intelligible and understandable.

Throughout all ancient traditions, even down to the
time of Moses, we see “water above the firmament and
waters below,” a distinction being thus made by pluraliz-
ing. Water in all these cases refers to the ether which fills
space beyond atmosphere.

There can be no question about it; all traditions of the
Creation, wherever found, came of a common origin. It
matters not whether it is our biblical traditions, the tradi-
tions of the Hindus, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Mayas, Poly-
nesians or others; their original source was the same and
dates back to very early man, tens of thousands of years
ago, and maybe even more.

278

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

A dissection of all of the traditions brings some aston-
ishing facts before the eyes of the reader. Probably the
most astounding of all is the fact that the Polynesians,
who have been shut in from the rest of the world for over
12,000 years, should have among themselves traditions of
the Creation identically like the biblical account, such as
the names of the first man and woman; and that the first
woman was made out of man’s bones; that man was a
special creation of God. The Marquesans and other Poly-
nesians could not possibly have got these traditions from
the outside world. The traditions of the Polynesians start
from 12,000 years back, and how much more no one can
surmise. The biblical tradition started with Moses some
three thousand years ago, which proves that it was handed
down to Moses in some form. The Naacal and Egyptian
show us in what form it was handed down and from whom.

Plato amusingly recounts a legend telling how the
human race became divided into man and woman.

Human beings, according to Plato’s story, were origin-
ally created with the man and woman combined in one
body. Each body had four arms and four legs. The bodies
were round, and they rolled over and over, using the arms
and legs to move them. By and by they began to treat the
gods badly. They stopped their sacrifices and even threat-
ened to roll up Mount Olympus to attack and overthrow
the gods.

One god said, ‘‘Let us kill them all. They are danger-
ous.”

Another said, ‘‘No, I have a better idea. We will cut
them in half. Then they will only have two arms and two
legs; they won’t be round. They won’t be able to roll.

279

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Being multiplied by two, they will offer twice as many
sacrifices, and what is the most important, each half will
be so busy looking for the other half that they will not
have time to bother us.”

The second god was the wise one. His theory turned
out well. Each human half, male or female, has been so
busy looking for the other half that it has neglected other
things.

From the most remote times, the Serpent has been held
by every people in the greatest veneration, as the embodi-
ment of divine wisdom.

In my research work I have invariably found that all
myths have a foundation, and that the foundation is some
legend or tradition. The myths, inventions, legends and
traditions about the Serpent are exceedingly numerous.
The fact that it is conceded by all that the Serpent was
held in great veneration by the ancients at once shows that
there is some legend, or some foundation for it.

Let us now see the result of a little research. Eusebius
tells us that the Egyptians called the Creator Kneph, who
was symbolized by a serpent. Here at once we see why
the Serpent was held in such high veneration by the an-
cients—the Serpent was their symbol for the Creator.

The Mayas in their sculptures represented the Creator
of all things as being protected within the coils of a ser-
pent.

Much is to be learnt from the Hindu on the subject.
Manava Dharma Sastra, a Hindu book, refers to the Ser-
pent as the Creator.

In Aytareya Bhramana, a Hindu book, we find: ‘“‘Sarpa
Rajni, the Queen of the Serpents, the mother of all that

280

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

moves.” And again: ‘‘Caisha, the Seven-headed Serpent,
the Creator.” ,

The Mayas of America symbolized the Creator with
A h-ac-chapat, the Seven-Headed Serpent.

In Popol Vuh, the Quiche sacred book, we have: “The.
Creator, the Maker, the Dominator, the Serpent covered
with feathers.”

After many years of research, including an examination
of what has been written about the Serpent by modern
writers, the perusal of many ancient writings and inscrip-
tions, considering legends, traditions and myths, and not-
ing where and how the ancient carvings of the Serpent
have been placed and used, the following are my deduc-

tions:

1. Much of what has been written in old works about
the Serpent consists of myths growing out of legends and
traditions. Much of what has been written by our present-
day scientists and authors is worse than mythical, because
there is not a particle of foundation for it. It is pure specu-
lation, fiction and invention.

2. The Serpent adorned, as with feathers, wings or a
plurality of heads, is a symbol only of the Creator and
Creation.

3. The Serpent unadorned was the symbol of the
waters.

4. The circular Serpent was one of the symbols used
for the Universe.

Now let us see what grounds there are for my various
deductions:

1. The Serpent Adorned.—This has been shown to be

281

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

the symbol of the Creator among the Mayas, Hindus and
Egyptians.

2. The Serpent Unadorned is the ancient symbol for the
waters. From the Maya we find that it was selected be-
cause the movements of its body were a duplication of the
ocean’s roll. It originated in the Motherland, and from
there was carried to Burma, India and Babylonia—and
from the Motherland to Yucatan, to Central America,
Greece, Asia Minor and, Egypt.

The Serpent being the symbol of the waters, and the
waters being the mother of nature’s life, the Serpent natu-
rally in the ancient mind was associated with Creation.
The ancients, however, appear to have been very careful
to differentiate between the Deity and Nature’s Creative
Forces by adorning the Serpent that symbolizes the Great
Creator.

In all the ancient writings the Sun is always symbolli-
cally shown as fighting and overcoming the serpent of the
waters—the single-headed one.

In dealing with this symbolism, many writers have
erred; they have failed to differentiate between the symbol
of the waters and the symbol of the Creator, both being
serpents. Ihe Sun is not fighting the Creator; as a matter
of fact, he is not symbolized as fighting at all. The spear
is a symbol of the Sun’s Forces penetrating the waters and
bringing into life the cosmic eggs that are contained
therein.

In Egypt we find Horus the Sun piercing the head of
the serpent Aphophis—the waters—with a spear.

In Greece Apollo, the Sun, overcomes Python the Ser-
pent, symbol of the waters.

282

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

In India Vishnu, the Sun, overcomes Anatha the Ser-
pent, the symbol of the waters.

The Christians in some way received this conception,
for to this day the Church of Rome pictures the Virgin
Mary with a serpent at her feet.

3. The Serpent Circular—A circular serpent having
its tail in its mouth is one of the oldest symbols for the
Universe. I found it in Naacal pictures. The Egyptians
adopted it as a part of the head-dress of their symbols for
the Deity.

The Seven-headed Serpent, the symbol of the Creator
and Creation, has already been fully explained.

One of the reasons why the ancients assigned so many
symbols to the Deity was because they thought themselves
unworthy to mention His name, and always referred to
Him as ‘“The Nameless.” The various symbols repre-
sented his various attributes.

We now come to a subject that has generally been
placed before the public in a manner that has caused false
impressions to be entertained—ancient religious rites and
ceremonies. Whether the writers have been incapable of
translating correctly, or because of their ignorance of the
subject, I am not prepared to say, nor does it interest me;
but the writings on these subjects that have found their
way into print have generally attempted to cast a blot on
ancient religions in the minds of the readers instead of
reverence for our forefathers who so faithfully tried to
apprehend the Deity. It is the true understanding of the
ancients that makes Max Miiller’s writings so fascinating
and charming. I most envy his power of concentration
and his ability of allowing his soul to carry back his mind,

283

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

and to mentally associate with and live in the hearts of
the people he is writing about.

All rites and ceremonies practised in the ancient tem-
ples were symbolical—not literal, as is generally thought
by writers on this subject. They were symbolical of the
life a man must lead to attain perfection, so that in the
end, when the time came for him to pass into the Great
Beyond, he would do so with a clear conscience and with-
out trepidation. They tried to symbolize to him what
Heaven was, what God was, and the glory that awaited
him if he was not found wanting.

Many of their conceptions would appear ridiculous to
us today, were it not for the fact that we can mentally
place ourselves beside them, appreciate their untutored
mentality and realize that at that time the teachings, and
the mode of teaching, were as complex as could be com-
prehended.

When one comes across any literary matter referring to
the bat as a Maya symbol, we invariably find it stated
that the Mayas looked upon the bat as a god and wor-
shipped it as such. The Mayas dd not look upon the bat as
a god, nor did they worship it. This is so clearly shown in
the Seventh Trial, the House of the Bat, that it is beyond
controversy. How can it be called bat worship when it
is distinctly stated: ‘““The Lord comes down from on high
to see and to finally pass the candidate.”

The whole ceremony is a symbolical one, showing the
candidate how he must be prepared to meet the end when
it comes. |

Max Miller was absolutely correct when he wrote:
“One should never judge any of the ancient religions from

284

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

appearances.’’ We must first remember that all we see is
symbolical and not literal.

A great blot, however, came upon and disfigured the
escutcheon of ancient religions. The Mayas, Egyptians,
Phoenicians, and other of the ancients, about 3,000 years
ago, turned the pure worship of God into horrible forms
of idolatry. They were taught by the unscrupulous priest-
hood to worship first the symbols, then fetishes of wood
and stone and finally—the crowning horror and disgrace—
human sacrifice.

It is known that the early books of our Old Testament
were written by Moses from Egyptian Temple records.
Hieroglyphics and symbols were the common form of
writing in ancient times. A hieroglyphic or a symbol is an
emblem of something, and therefore must not be taken
literally. They must be taken as representing something,
but oz as that something itself. The failure to differen-
tiate between the symbol and what it represents has caused
many decipherings and translations to be erroneous, and
often, in religious matters, leaves the impression of idola-
try where there is a profound reverence for, and a worship
of, the Deity. This has been especially prominent in de-
ciphering and translating records relating to the Osirian
religion. By Osirian religion I mean that taught by Thoth
at Sais, at the commencement of Egyptian history, and
not as it was preached and taught and practised by the un-
scrupulous Egyptian priesthood of a later period, which
commenced during the reign of the second king of the
Eleventh Dynasty and reached its climax during the
Eighteenth Dynasty.

According to the Old Testament, Moses wrote that man

285

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

was a special creation and made his advent on earth in the
Garden of Eden. Where was the Garden of Eden? The
biblical boundaries of the Garden of Eden are geographic-
ally impossible, as anyone can see by consulting an atlas
and tracing them. Rivers are made to run over mountains
and across oceans. Here is a biblical error; how did it oc-
cur? Moses was a Master—he had attained the highest
degrees in religion and learning. It would have been im-
possible for him to have suggested such impossibilities ; so
that we must look elsewhere to find the origin of the many
biblical errors.

What Moses wrote, without doubt, were plain facts, in
symbolical language—a symbolically written history, true
in all respects. Subsequent translations perverted his
writings.

The writings of Moses were in Egyptian hieroglyphics
and hieratic characters. I have been informed by Hebrew
scientists that some were on clay tablets, others on papy-
rus: this point I pass on as I received it.

Eight hundred years after the Israelitish Exodus from
Egypt, Ezra, with a body of co-workers, collected all the
tablets and writings of all descriptions which were con-
nected with the family history of the Israelites, and put
them into book form, which became the Bible.

Those written by Moses were in Egyptian hieroglyph-
ics. Is it any wonder that so many mistranslations were
made by Ezra and his associates, when none of them were
capable of thoroughly understanding the Egyptian writ-
ings of Moses? Only a Master could understand them,
and neither Ezra nor any of his associates were Masters.
Their incapability is clearly shown by comparing their

286

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

translations with the original records which we find in the
Egyptian, Chaldean, Hindu and Maya. Moses wrote
sense; his translators made nonsense out of many of his
passages. Moses wrote in the symbolical style of his day
and his translators tried to translate literally. In this they
only half succeeded, and when they came across a set of
hieroglyphics they did not understand, they added a myth
to sound history. The boundaries of the Garden of Eden
is one of their myths.

From incontrovertible evidences gained through my re-
search work it is shown that Moses wrote the first books of
the Bible from the temple records brought to Egypt from
the Motherland by the Naacals via Burma and India; and
that these Egyptian temple records were copies of the
“Seven Sacred Inspired Writings” of the Motherland—
Mu. These were written on clay tablets and referred to
the Creation. The legends of the Garden of Eden, the
“Flood,” the last magnetic cataclysm, and the raising of
the mountains, are records of later date.

Moses could have made no mistake in copying these
writings, so they undoubtedly left his hands perfect copies
of the originals. Eight hundred years after, an attempt
was made to translate them into Hebrew by men who did
not understand the old Egyptian esoteric temple writings,
hence the difference between what was produced and the
original.

So little did Ezra and his associates understand these
writings that I doubt if there is a single Hebrew today
who knows the meaning of the burnt sacrifice and what it
symbolized.

Before the submersion of Mu, the word sacrifice was

287

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

unknown in any language. It was coined to describe the
way in which Mu was destroyed; and a fire upon an altar
symbolizes the remembrance of the beloved Motherland.

ANCESTRAL WorsHIP

The worship of ancestors, or ancestral worship, is so
universally acknowledged to be of common origin that I
think it unnecessary to prove it here; so I shall confine my-
self to showing what land it was that first fathered this
custom. In order to do this, I shall quote from records of
many countries.

Ecypt. Papyrus IV. (Boulak Museum ).—“Bring offer-
ings to thy father and to thy mother, who rest in the valley
of tombs; for he who gives these offerings is as acceptable
to the gods as if they were brought to themselves. Often
visit the dead, so that what thou doest for them they may
do for thee.”

Inpia. The Dharma Lastra.—“‘The ceremony in honor
of the Manes is superior, for the Brahmins, to the worship
of the gods; and the offerings to the gods that take place
before the offerings to the Manes have been declared to
increase their merit.”

Cuina. Confucius in Khoung Tsen——The whole of
Chapter XIX is dedicated to the description of the cere-
mony in honor of ancestors, as practised twice a year—in
the spring and in the autumn. :

In Lun Yu Confucius says: ‘It is necessary to sacrifice
to the ancestors as if they were present.”’

Japan.—On the fifteenth day of the Japanese seventh
month, a festival is held in honor of their ancestors, when
a repast of fruit and vegetables is placed before the Itays,

288

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

on wooden tables of peculiar shape, on which are written
inscriptions commemorative of the dead.

Peru. “Fables and Rites of the Incas.” (Pages 36 to
50).—“‘These festivities were established to commemo-
rate deceased friends and relatives. They were celebrated
with tears, mournful song, plaintive music, and by visit-
ing the tombs of the dear departed, whose provision of
corn and chicaha they received through openings arranged
on purpose from the exterior of the tomb to vessels placed
near the body. The Peruvians had great festivals in honor
of the dead in the month of Aya-Marca.”

Le Plongeon, in his book, ‘Central America,” says:
“Even today the aborigines of Yucatan, Petan and other
countries of Central America, where the Maya language
is spoken, are wont, at the beginning of November, to
hang from the branches of certain trees in clearings of the
forests, at cross roads, and in isolated nooks, cakes made
of the best corn and meal they can procure. These are for
the souls of the departed.”

R. G. Haliburton, who is considered one of our best
authorities on ancestral worship, in writing of the ‘‘Festi-
val of Ancestors,”’ says:

“It 1s now, as it was formerly, held at or near the be-
ginning of November, by the Peruvians, the Hindus, the
Pacific Islanders, the people of the Tonga Islands, the
Australians, the ancient Persians, the ancient Egyptians
and the northern nations of Europe, and continues for
three days among the Japanese, the Hindus, the Austra-
lians, the ancient Romans and the ancient Egyptians.”

This startling fact at once drew my attention to the
question: How was this uniformity in the time of ob-

289

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

servance preserved, not only in far distant quarters of the
globe, but also through that vast lapse of time since the
Peruvians and Indo-Chinese first inherited this primeval
festival from a common source?

Between the columns in the Temple of Sacred Mys-
teries at Uxmal there was a grand altar, and on this altar,
placed at the door of the inner chamber, they were wont
to make offerings to their Manes.

This decides the land of common origin. The offerings
to ancestors was a sacred rite and was practised in the
Temple of Sacred Mysteries. It has already been shown
that the sacred rites and ceremonies practised in this tem-
ple came from the Motherland. Therefore the land of Mu
originated ancestral worship.

The custom remains dear to us today, though in a modi-
fied form; for do we not visit and place flowers on the
graves of our dear departed ones? Little do those who thus
place flowers on graves know that the ceremony originated
more than 12,000 years ago, and that they are practising
a very ancient ceremony.

LANGUAGE

Language is admitted to be the most accurate guide in
tracing the family relations of various peoples, even when
inhabiting countries which are separated by vast expanses
of water and extents of land.

A startling fact is that we find Maya words in every
language of the world. In Japan, one-half of their lan-
guage is Kara Maya. In India, a very large proportion of
the languages spoken came, without a doubt, from the
Naga-Maya. The proportion, however, varies in each lan-
guage.

290

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

The Kandian Cingalese is full of the original Maya
words, and all of the European languages are permeated
with them, especially the Greek, whose alphabet is com-
posed of Kara Maya vocables. Fully fifty per cent. of the
Mexican Indian language is Kara Maya. A Mexican In-
dian and a Japanese can converse intelligibly without the
aid of an interpreter, so many words are common to both
languages. The same may be said of the Incas. The old
Akkadian and Chaldean languages were largely Naga-
Maya; also the Egyptian. One might, with research, go
on indefinitely to prove the common origin.

Naturally time has made many changes in words. This
is inevitable, of course, but the root still remains in many
of these changes. For instance, in Greek we often find the
letter g replacing the Maya &. D often replaces the Maya
t, and r often replaces the Maya /. This last replacement,
by the way, occurs in many languages.

In all words where the letter ¢ is sounded &, the word
will be found to come out of the Maya. The greatest
changes in language, however, are found where the art of
writing is unknown, and where the grammar has been lost
or is unknown.

Max Miller says: “There was an original language.”’
This statement is confirmed wherever a study of language
and its origin is made.

In all languages are to be found some words, roots of
words, and vocables, which are identically the same; and
in all instances they are found to convey substantially the
same meanings, thus proving a common origin.

In ‘Six Thousand Years of History” we find this state-
ment: ‘The comparison of words in Sanskrit, the ancient

291

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

language of the Hindu; Zend, the old speech of Persia;
Greek, Latin, English and other tongues, has shown that
all these languages came from a distant common original,
spoken by some race yet unparted by migration. In all, or
nearly all of these tongues, the names of common things
and persons, the words expressing simple instruments and
actions, the words for family relations, such as father,
brother, daughter and son, the earlier numerals, the pro-
nouns, the very endings of nouns and verbs, are substan-
tially the same. Accident could not have caused this phe-
nomenon, and, since many of the nations speaking thus
have for long ages been parted from each other by vast
stretches of the earth’s broad surface, they could not learn
them in historic times from one another. Borrowing and
imitation being thus excluded, the only possible account
is that these words and forms were carried with them by
the migratory Aryan tribes as part of the possession once
shared by all in their original home.”

Each of these universal words may be traced back to
the ancient mother Maya language. The natural deduc-
tion, therefore, is that the Maya tongue was the mother
tongue, or one of the very earliest offshoots from it.

It must be understood that the present Maya language
is no more like the Maya language of five or ten thousand
years ago than the English of today is like that of five
hundred years ago. The Maya language of today is, very
much like the English language, made up of various other
languages that are intertwined with the original, these
changes being brought about by conquests. Much Aztec
and Nahuatl has been added to the original Maya.

The original language was, without doubt, very con-

292

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

tracted and short of words, so that one word had many
meanings. As far as I have been able to decipher ancient
writings, I should say that the meaning of a word would
somewhat depend on its position in a sentence and how
the word was accented when it consisted of more than one
syllable.

For instance, the Maya word ma means “mother, earth”
and “country.” In the Egyptian, the word ma also means
“mother, earth” and ‘country’; but when prefixed to
nouns, verbs or adjectives, it is the sign of negation. This
also occurs in the Greek and Cingalese languages.

To show how the ancient Maya words had more than
one meaning, I have selected a few from Brasseur’s trans-
lations:

NAGA-MAYA ENGLISH

Be, to go, to leave, to walk, to move, to progress.
Chi, a mouth, an opening, a border, an edging.
Ka, the soul, barriers, sediments, anything ejected.
Kaachac, exceedingly, abundant, plentiful.
Kab, a hand, an arm, a branch, anything extending.
Kak, to finish, a fire, to burn, to destroy.
Kul, to worship, the seal, the rump.
Lal, to empty, to take away, to dispose of.

' Ni, a point, a ridge, a summit, a mountain.
On, circular.
On-onx, circular, whirling, whirlpool, a tornado.
Paa, a break, an opening, to open.
Ta, where, a place, smooth, ground, level ground.
Tan, towards, near, before, in the center.
Tel, deep, depth, bottom, abyss.

293

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Zi cold, frozen, vapor, smoke.
Ha, water, moisture.
Pe, come, from, out.

On account of the ancient words having so many mean-
ings, it becomes an exceedingly difficult task to translate
the ancient writings and inscriptions so as to convey in
modern language the thoughts of the ancients. Although
the general meaning may be set forth, I doubt whether
the exact meaning in all details is ever obtained.

Translations are, to a great extent, dependent upon the
temperament of the translator. If, for instance, he has an
Oriental mind, his translations will be figurative, flowery
and often exaggerated; whereas, if the translator be of a
phlegmatic nature, his translations are apt to be of a cold,
blunt, abrupt, curtailed nature.

Tue Four GENII

“The Four Genii” is another very ancient conception.
We find it associated with all histories and traditions of
the Creation. I say, without reservation, that they were
purely symbolical. The oldest account of them we find
among the Mayas of Yucatan, and it came there from the
Motherland.

The ancient symbol for the earth was a four-sided
square. The four-sided square has four corners or points—
the cardinal points: North, South, East and West. The
Maya interpretation is that ‘“Heaven is sustained on four
pillars, placed one on each corner of the earth.” Each
pillar had a keeper. The Maya keepers were their Four
Genii:

Kan-Bacab the Yellow Bacab, placed in the South

204

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

Chac-Bacab, the Red Bacab, placed in the East
Zac-Bacab, the White Bacab, placed in the North
Ek-Bacab, the Black Bacab, placed in the West.
Ecyprian.—According to the Egyptians there were
four Genii of Amenti, one placed at each of the cardinal

points:

Amset, the genius at the cardinal point in the East

Hapu, in the West

Tesautmutf, in the North

Quabsenuf, in the South.

CHALDEAN.—Lhe Four Protecting Genii of the human

race, as believed in by the Chaldeans, were:

Sed-Alap, or Kirub, represented as a bull with a human
face

Lamas, or Nigal, represented as a lion with a man’s
head

Ustar, after the human likeness

Nattig, represented with the head of an eagle.

Hinpvu.—Four gods or genii who presided at the four

cardinal points:

Indra, the King of Heaven, placed in the East

Rouvera, the God of Wealth, placed in the North

Varouna, the God of the Waters, placed in the West

Yama, the Judge of the Dead, placed in the South.

CHINESE.—The four mountains, Tse-Yo, of the Chi-

nese four quarters of the globe (as they were wont to des-

ignate their country) are:

Tai-Tsong, being the Yo of the East

Saing-fou, being the Yo of the West

How-Kowang, being the Yo of the South

Chen-si, being the Yo of the North.

295

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

IsRAELITES.—The conception of the four gods, pillars
or genii, or whatever they may be termed, was not entirely
rejected by the Jews. Although there is no mention of
them in the books written by Moses, that 1s no criterion,
because some of the books written by Moses are lost, and
the reference to the four cardinal points may have been in
one of these lost books. Later we see the conception among
the Jews in Ezekiel, 1:10—‘‘They four had the face of a
man, the face of a lion, the face of an ox and the face of
an eagle.” And in x:14—“The first face was that of a
cherub, the second that of a man, the third that of a lion
and the fourth that of an eagle.”

The foregoing is given as a vision of Ezekiel. At the
time he wrote these lines he was a captive among the Chal-
deans. Let us compare his vision with the then Chaldean
creed, which had been in existence for thousands of years,
because these conceptions came from the Motherland
through the Caucasian colony, or through the Naacals,
who came to Babylonia from India.

Chaldean—Four Genii. Human face, bull, lion, eagle.

FE zekiel—Four beasts. Man, ox, lion, eagle.

If Ezekiel’s vision was not an embellishment of the
Chaldean creed we should like to know what it was. Four
of these very beasts are now in the British Museum, hav-
ing been brought there from the ruins of Nineveh. Eze-
kiel was without question familiar with them, as among
the common architectural embellishments of buildings.

THE TrRIUNE GoDHEAD

The conception of a Trinity or Triune Godhead has
been handed down to us from the beginning of man. It

296

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

was preserved in the works of the philosophers, and is still
held sacred by many today, among them being the Chris-
tians and the Brahmins.

The ancient symbol for the Trinity was one of the old-
est of the sacred symbols—the Equilateral Triangle.
Whenever or wherever this symbol is found, in any form
of record or inscription, it is either in reference to, or rep-
resents, the ancient Trinity and Heaven.

Maya.—The equilateral triangle representing the
Trinity is constantly found among the temple carvings of
Yucatan. I have, however, been unable to satisfactorily
determine the original names of the Maya Triune God-
head. Le Plongeon and others have given sets of three,
and even five, which form the full Godhead, but to me all
of them appear incorrect from the fact that names are
given of people who lived tens of thousands of years after
the Triune Godhead was conceived.

GuaTEMALA. Popol Vuh.—“‘All that exists is the work
of Tzkol the Creator, who, by his will, caused the universe
to spring into existence; and whose names are Bitol the
maker; Alom the engenderer and Quhalom, he who gives
being.” Tzkol is shown as the collective God.

Preru.—‘‘The Incas of Peru worshipped a mighty un-
seen Being who they believed had created all things, for
which reason they called him Pacha-Camac—he being
incomprehensible. They did not present Him under any
shape or name.

‘‘Pacha-Camac stood at the head of a trinity composed
of Himself, Pacha-Camac, Con and Uiracocha.”’

Hinpu.—In the Sri Santara of the Hindus the Great

297

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

Aum, the ‘“‘nameless,” is figured as a trinity by the equi-
lateral triangle.

In the Hindu book Niroukéa it is three times affirmed
that ‘“‘there are three gods only, and that these three gods
designate one Sole Deity.”

“The Gods are three only.”’

“‘Pradjapati, or, as He is sometimes called, Mahatma,
the Lord of all Creatures, is the collective God.”

CHALDEAN.—The Chaldeans symbolized ‘“‘Ensoph the
Great Light” as a trinity, by the equilateral triangle.

Ecyptian.—The Triune Godhead of the Egyptians
consisted of ‘“‘Shu, Set and Horus.”

GrEEK.—Plato and Orpheus refer to the trinity as
three kings—‘‘Phanes, Ouranos and Kronos.”’

Proclus asserts that “the Demiurgos or Creator is triple.
The three component parts of the Deity are three intel-
lects or kings—He who exists, He who possesses, and He
who beholds.”’

Pythagoras taught his disciples that God was “numbers
and harmony.” He caused then to honor numbers and the
equilateral triangle with the name of God.

CHRISTIAN CHURCHES.—We see in the ancient Catho-
lic churches, over the main altar, an equilateral triangle,
and within it an eye. The addition of the eye to the tri-
angle originated in Egypt—‘the all seeing eye of Osiris.”

For many years I searched in India, trying to find out
what the origin of the conception of the Trinity was. I
traced it back to the Motherland—without finding its
origin. One day, talking about it with my old Hindu
friend, he said: ‘There is a legend about it; it may be
truth or it may be a myth; I cannot say. The legend tells

298

ANCIENT RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS

that the Motherland consisted of three lands, that each
land was raised by a separate god, so that it took three
gods to raise the whole continent; but that the three gods
were only one after all, all being joined together like the
sides of a triangle.”

I will say to you as my dear old friend said to me—“‘It
may be the truth, or it may be a myth; I cannot say.”

TERR ELERERZ EE * KK KK

299

2 POSE@eGO OBO ®@OBO
16

Ancent Sacred Mysteries,
Rites and Ceremonies

QOOVECO @GOO @OGO

By the aid of the Popol Vuh and the decipherings of the
writings within the Great Pyramid at Cairo I am enabled
to describe some of the ancient mysteries, rites and cere-
monies. Le Plongeon translated the Popol Vuh into Eng-
lish from Brasseur’s French translation, checking it him-
self with the original Maya. This copy he kindly lent me
to make notes from. The following from the Popol Vuh
therefore comes through Le Plongeon.

In Guatemala the Quiche Mayas disclosed their sacred
mysteries to the applicants in seven steps or degrees. After
the first step or initiatory degree, the balance were con-
ducted in six chambers or houses.

Some of these trials or degrees are exceedingly inter-
esting, as we find them practised later. by the Egyptians
and reflected all through the Old Testament.

First Init1atory Step.—lIn this step the applicants
for initiation to the Sacred Mysteries were made to cross
two rivers, one of mud, the other of blood, before they
reached the four roads which led to the place were the
priests were awaiting them. The crossing of these rivers

300

MYSTERIES, RITES AND CEREMONIES

was full of dangers that were to be avoided. Then they
had to journey along four roads—the white, the red, the
green, and the black—that led to where the Council, com-
posed of twelve priests, veiled, and a wooden statue
dressed and wearing the ornaments of a priest, awaited.

While in the presence of the Council the initiates were
told to salute the King, pointing to the wooden statue.
This was to try their discernment. Then they had to salute
each individual, giving his name or title without being
told, after which they were invited to sit down on a certain
seat. If, forgetting the respect due to the august assembly,
they sat as invited, they soon had reason to regret their
want of breeding and proper preparation; for the seat,
made of stone, was burning hot. Having modestly de-
clined the invitation, they were led to the Second Trial—

Tue Dark House.—In the Dark House they had to
pass the night and submit to the Second Trial. Guards
were placed all around to prevent the candidates from
holding intercourse with the outer world. Then a lighted
torch of pinewood and a cigar were given to each. These
were not to be extinguished, still they had to be returned
whole at sunrise, when the officers in charge of the house
came to demand them. Woe to him who allowed his cigar
and his torch to be consumed! Terrible chastisement, even
death, awaited him.

Having passed through this second trial successfully,
the Third Trial was to be suffered in—

Tue House or Spears—lIn the House of Spears they
had to produce four pots of certain rare flowers, without
communicating with anyone outside, or bringing them at
the time of coming. They had also to defend themselves

301

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

against the attacks of the best spearmen, selected for the
purpose, one for each candidate. Coming out victorious
at dawn they were judged worthy of the Fourth Trial.
This consisted in being shut up a whole night in—

Tue Ice House.—lIn the Ice House the cold was in-
tense. They had to prevent themselves from being over-
come by the cold and frozen to death. Their Fifth Trial
then took place.

Tre Ticer House.—In the Tiger House they were
exposed to the danger of being torn to pieces or devoured
alive by ferocious animals. Emerging safely from the den
of tigers, they were ready to sumbit to the Sixth Trial—

Tue Fiery House.—This was a burning fiery furnace
where they had to remain from sunset to sunrise. Coming
out unscorched, they were deemed worthy to undergo the
Seventh and Final Trial, the most severe of all—

Tue House or THE Bat.—This was the House of
Camazotz, the God of the Bats, and was full of death-
dealing weapons. Here the God himself, coming from on
high, appeared to the candidates, and beheaded them #f
found off their guard.”

The foregoing is a synopsis of Le Plongeon’s transla-
tions. He says these rites were practised at Xibalba, a
place in the heart of the Guatemala mountains.

I am afraid Le Plongeon has failed to give the correct
impressions as regards these trials. He should have told
his readers that they were all symbolical; whereas he has
tried to leave the impression that they were literal, thereby

33. Do not these initiations vividly recall to mind what Henoch said
he saw in his vision? ‘That blazing house of Creptal, burning hot and
icy cold. The habitation where one appeared in great glory sitting upon
the orb of the sun.”

302

MYSTERIES, RITES AND CEREMONIES

attempting to produce a blood-curdling, awe-inspiring,
supernatural mystery. Le Plongeon, however, forgot him-
self on one occasion; for he states in the First Trial that
the candidate is prepared beforehand, therefore knowing
what to say, what to do, and how to act. In other words,
the candidate has been previously taught his lessons, and
these trials were examinations to ascertain whether he
knew them.

The aforesaid is fully borne out by what is found on the
walls of the temple within the Great Pyramid at Cairo.
Here it is stated that the candidate is prepared beforehand
_and that a friendly spirit (an instructor) accompanies him
and guides him through all his trials.

When one comes across any literary matter referring to
the bat as a Maya symbol, it is found invariably that the
writer says the Mayas looked upon the bat as a god and
worshipped it as such. The Mayas did not look upon the
bat as a god, nor did they worship it. This is so clearly
shown in the Seventh Trial—‘“‘the House of the Bat” —
that it is beyond controversy. How can it be called bat
worship when it is distinctly stated that “The Lord comes
down from on high to see and to finally pass the candi-
date’?

The whole ceremony is a symbolical one, showing the
candidate how he must be prepared to meet the end when

it comes.
THe PyRAMID TEMPLE

I will now compare the ancient Egyptian Sacred Mys-
teries, as disclosed by the temple within the Great Pyra-
mid near Cairo, Egypt, with those of the Mayas as dis-
closed in the Popol Vuh.

393

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

The entrance door was placed in the north, and was a
single stone in the form of an equilateral triangle sur-
mounting a square and revolved on a pivot or apex. This
was symbolical of Heaven and Earth. Through these the
postulant must pass, for they symbolized the passage from
this to the future life. There were twelve entrances to pass
through before attaining the Grand Orient, with secrets
and trials restricted to each.

The first could not be seen; it was apparently a blank
and was guarded by Horus. It was a blank or nothingness
because the postulant was blind and bereft of his senses
except motion. This portal had to be passed through with
the aid of a friendly spirit.

Having passed through the portal, he was conducted
down these passages by a friendly spirit that he could
not see, and was taken to the place of initiation, where
his Manes were regenerated by the descent of the Soul to
the expecting postulants. He was then conducted to the
chamber of Central Fire, which he extinguished.

Book of the Dead, Chapter XXII.—‘I come; I do that
which my heart wishes on the day of the Fire, when I ex-
tinguish the flames as soon as they appear.” And Chapter
X .XV.—“T make the man remember his name in the Great
House. I make him remember his name in the House of
Flame.”’ References to the Tank of Fire are constantly
met with throughout the Book of the Dead and are gener-
ally accompanied by the foregoing glyph or vignette.

From the Chamber of Central Fire (the Tank of Fire)
the postulant was conducted up the grand Horizon of
Heaven, and came to a portal. Questions were asked,
which he answered, and then he passed through and was

304

MYSTERIES, RITES AND CEREMONIES

able to see—light was given to him, and he then saw his
guide and friend who conducted him. He was next con-
ducted into the Chamber of the Shadow, Judgment of the
Justified, Truth and Darkness, the Seven Halls of Death.

Here he had to pass an examination, and words were
given to him which he had to remember before he was led
on to the second portal, where he had to give answers
before he was permitted to enter.

Having passed through the second stage, the adept was
allowed to enter the hall called the Tenth Hall of Truth,
or Trial Scene, which was depicted in a black-and-white
tessellated pavement—Right and Wrong, Truth or False-
hood.

From this hall he was conducted to the Chamber of
New Birth, or place of coming forth with regeneration of
soul. In this chamber were found the emblems of mor-
tality with the sarcophagus empty. A small opening ad-
mits the light of the bright morning star Sothis into
this chamber. All of the rest of the chamber reminded the
adept of what he passed through. He now emerged from
the tomb.

Next he was taken to the Throne of Regeneration of the
Soul, and Investiture of I]lumination took place. Then he
passed through more ordeals to attain to the Chamber of
the Orient, to the Throne of Ra, to become a Master. The
uncreated light, from which was pointed out the whole
happiness of the future, he could see for himself in the
distance. After passing through another portal where he
had to bend, he was conducted to the Chamber of the
Grand Orient.

The initiate had to pass through the fiery ordeal to be

305

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

SOTHIS

LIGHT OF GRAND ORIENT

GRAND ARCH OF
THE APEX

TO NOTHINGNESS <{——————

CHAMBER OF
CENTRAL. FIRE

INTERIOR OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, EGYPT,
SHOWING CONSTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE

Digitized by Google

MYSTERIES, RITES AND CEREMONIES

approved as an adept. The adept had to become justified.
The justified must then become illuminate. The illumi-
nate must then be consummated Master before he could
obtain the innermost mansion of the Divine House.

Comparing the Egyptian with the Maya: In the Pyra-
mid Temple™ there were twelve rooms or portals—in the
Maya seven houses. The Egyptian had a Dark Room, so
also the Maya. The Egyptian had a Tank of Fire—the
Maya a Fiery House. The Egyptian had Seven Halls of
Death—the Maya House of the Bat corresponded with
them.

After Mu was destroyed, the peoples of the earth sym-
bolized in some way her destruction, so that “her memory
should not be forgotten among coming generations.”

The Mayas of Yucatan erected a pyramid as a monu-
ment for her, which stands to this day. They also erected
temples to her memory.

The Quiche Mayas introduced it into their religious
ceremonies in the form of a symbolical ‘‘Fiery House.”’

The Greeks symbolized it by forming a Maya epic,
which forms their alphabet today. This epic describes the
manner of her destruction.

The Egyptians, like the Quiche Mayas, symbolized the
destruction in their religious ceremonies. As the initiate
advanced in religious mysteries he symbolically passed
through the scene of the destruction of his Motherland—
thus, through life, to keep her in memory.

Moses in a very abstruse manner symbolized it in his
writings, as we find in our Bible today.

34. Much of the detail concerning the Pyramid Temple comes from
Dr. A. Churchward’s work.

3°7

2 @© POSECOO @ OOO @OSO

17
Omega—T he Coping Stone

© © ©OGOG0O HOOD OOOO

I F the question is asked, ‘How long ago was it that man
first appeared on Earth?” My answer would be—‘“‘With-
out question, in the Tertiary Era.”

I cannot state the number of years; no one can. Man
today has no more conception of how many years ago the
Pleistocene commenced, or the length in years of any geo-
logical time, era or period, than the ancient fossil on my
library table.

Under the great law of Creation, there must first come
a condition, and, with it, a suztable life to live init. A con-
dition has always been subject to the workings of the
Earth’s Primary Force.

Throughout the history of the earth this has been so,
and at no time do we find the new Creation behind the con-
dition, because the condition is the parent of the Creation
or development.

When was the condition for man’s appearance on earth
perfected? The condition for the welfare of man was far
advanced at the end of the Oligocene, and was well ad-

308

OMEGA—THE COPING STONE

vanced if not absolutely perfected during the later half of
the Miocene or the beginning of the Pliocene.

This was long before the great gas belts were formed,
long before the mountains were raised, and long before the
geological Glacial Period. I have placed before my readers
such reasonable proofs that it is clearly shown that—

First: At one time in the earth’s history there was a great
continent of land in the Pacific Ocean where now we find
only water and groups of small islands.

Second: This land in ancient times had two names, a
geographical and a hieratical. The hieratical name was
Mu; the geographical the Lands of the West.

Third: In this land man made his advent on earth.

Fourth: Man was a special creation and not of nature’s
making. He came fully developed in form, but required
education and mental development.

Now what is man?

The late James D. Dana says: ‘‘Man is not of nature’s
making; he is a special act of the Infinite Being, whose
image he bears.”

I cordially agree with Dana, but by an irresistible force
I am compelled to go further.

All endeavors to determine when man first appeared on
earth must be futile. It has always been a veiled secret,
and always must remain so, because man’s first home on
earth, with this secret, now forms the bottom of the Pacific
Ocean. We can, however, hope, through geological and
archzological research, some day to be able to get toa
point that is near the date of his first appearance on earth.

Many scientists have declared their belief to be that
they are descended from some forest beast, some monkey of

399

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

prehistoric origin. Their contention must therefore be that
man, having descended from a monkey, is a monkey still,
in a developed state.

I have shown that man was on earth and in a high state
of civilization during the later part of the Tertiary Era,
from the quality and perfection of his works. It is shown
that he must have been in existence an immensely long
time before the end of the Tertiary Era. This would cer-
tainly carry him back contemporary with the first apes who
resembled men.

If evolution were possible—which the old Naacal Tab-
lets show it is not—the reverse would have occurred; that
is, monkeys would have come out of man, and I am not at
all certain that some men are not making monkeys out of
themselves today. This tendency of some men is very
strongly pointed out in the Maya, Hindu and Egyptian
writings, so that it isnothing new. Man, the most complex
of all forms of life, and the most perfect form of life, was
created for a special purpose, as pointed out in the Naacal
Tablets.

Man is an animal of the order of mammals, distinct and
different from all other animals, due to the fact that he has
associated with his body a force or soul, for the purpose of
ruling the earth. This great gift has been bestowed on no
other form of life, which proves conclusively that man 1s a
separate and distinct creation, possessing a divine force. It
is impossible that he can have come out of, or evolved from
some animal not having that force.

Man with this force has been given the power, when he
learns how to use his force, to place himself next to the

310

OM EGA——-THE COPING STONE

Infinite Being, a part of which he has within himself.
Man is therefore a son of God.

Like all other creatures, man was started at the foot of
the ladder; but, unlike all other creatures, he was given the
power to rise. Man has always been surrounded by influ-
ences striving against each other for good and for evil.
Man’s actions are governed by these influences. For easy
explanation I will call them affinities. The soul’s affinities
can only suggest that which is good. Evil suggestions
come from the material affinities or elementary parts.
Material suggestions are not all evil—only some. The
material affinities can suggest evil—the soul’s affinities
cannot.

The soul and its affinities suggest to the mind; the mate-
rial affinities also suggest to the mind. The mind deter-
mines for the body which suggestions shall be followed.
Conscience is the mouthpiece of the soul to the mind.
Bodily actions and words from the mouth are the indica-
tions of the powers or influences that are controlling the
mind. The material interests or affinities may control the
mind of man for a time, but before the earth can end her
existence Man’s Soul must reign supreme over his mind
and body.

At the commencement of man’s existence the material
affinities were very powerful, owing to the lack of experi-
ence, so that advancement was necessarily slow. Time
went on, one generation followed another, and man began
to rise step by step towards his preordained goal, the as-
cendency of the soul’s affinities over the material affinities. -
The time must come when all of men’s actions and
thoughts will be governed solely by the dictation of the

311

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

soul. This was the task given to the soul to perform when
it was placed within man’s body at his Creation—‘‘To
govern this earth.” |

By the advancement of man as indicated by science and
learning, he is now only approaching the threshold of
knowledge. When knowledge is complete — which can
only be when man understands and can control certain
earthly forces which will eable him to understand his own
greater force—then, the works of man will be beyond our
present comprehension. With his soul force thoroughly
understood by himself, man will be incapable of evil
thoughts or actions. Man will then be able to accomplish
anything that may be dictated by his soul, because the soul
will have no influences working against it. Then the works
of man will be good, because his soul will be incapable of
evil. We have as yet been looking only at man’s past; let
us for a brief moment Jook into his future and see what
destiny holds in store for him. All things point to a time
when man will have perfect control over all of the earth’s
elements and many of her forces; a state to which he 1s
now advancing. The power of his soul force is only now
beginning to dawn on present man.

There are many strange phenomena, or apparently so,
where objective points are reached through working the
soul force. And yet, the one accomplishing them 1s not
aware that he is doing so by the aid of a force. He dis-
covers he has a power, but does not know what that power
is; he only knows the results. In some way he has been
advanced far enough to work his soul force in a limited
direction, yet does not understand it. The great mysteries
of the Hindus, Polynesians, Egyptians and biblical mira-

312

OM EGA——-THE COPING STONE

cles are and were the results of working the soul force.
Both the Hindu and Polynesian knowledge are peculiar.
They appear to be somewhat proficient along certain lines,
but extremely inefficient in others. It would seem they
have no conception that the force they are using can be
used in any other direction except along certain lines.

Christ was the perfect example of the soul force being
in perfect control over the mind and body. He appeared
on earth as others did before him, in fulfillment of the
Great Divine Law. Man’s mind had arrived at the con-
dition. Christ was placed on earth as an example for man
—to teach and to show what man eventually must become. ©
The development is now going on; man must become per-
fect, otherwise the Great Divine Law will have miscar-
ried. As the law is divine, it cannot miscarry.

It is regrettable, yet a notable fact, that many of our
greatest scientists became atheists, and have been, as a
rule, advocates of the theory of evolution; and the fact
remains that a ¢rve evolutionist cannot be anything but an
atheist. It is yet more regrettable that they became athe-
ists, when they were struggling in the opposite direction;
for, science, fully understood, cannot but impress the stu-
dent with the power and mystery of the Great Supreme—
the Deity.

Science is the twin sister of religion. Science properly
studied cannot help making man a better being; for, it
teaches him that he himself is a higher and a grander crea-
tion than he has ever before appreciated; it gives an
impetus and determination to his soul force to gain its pre-
ordained ascendency over the mind and the body’s mate-
rial affinities. It teaches him that within his house of clay

313

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

there is an everlasting life, at every step the hand of God
is revealed; and, above all, it teaches him that by follow-
ing the suggestions of his soul everlasting glory and happi-
ness await him.

The rock on which many scientists have wrecked their
ships is materialism. In their studies they have eliminated
forces and their workings, saying, ‘“‘A force is the result of
atomic movements.” True—all forces are—except the
force which First starts atomic movements.

This is the force the atheist has never found, conse-
quently he built his structure without considering it. He
found only the minor forces originating from atomic move-
ments; he never came in direct touch with God.

The movements of atoms are cogwheels in a piece of
machinery. One turns the one it is meshed into, this one in
turn turns others, and so on ad infinitum. But — what
turned the first wheel? Not any other wheel, beecause zt was
the first. Therefore there must be something at the back of
it. What is it? A force independent of all atoms.

The universe is a set of atomic cogwheels. What turns.
the first wheel in the universe? A force—the Great Pri-
mary Force, the Great Infinite Force—God. The atheist
has never discovered that God is the Great Primary Force,
working all things through subsidiary forces, and that the
atomic forces are only subsidiary forces to the Supreme
Force.

Thus the atheist has only studied the material side. His
deductions would therefore naturally be: Elements govern
forces, because without the elements the forces could not
exist. This being so, forces are cast aside as being imma-
terial, and are virtually obliterated from consideration.

314

OMEGA-——-THE COPING STONE

The rudder is taken from his ship, and she is cast on the
rocks.

Throughout all of the deductions and conceptions of the
atheist his mind has been governed absolutely by his mate-
rial affinities. His material affinities have persuaded his
mind that they are the allpowerful. Nothing now remains
in the mind of the atheist, except that he is a mere chemi-
cal compound of elements—no soul, no God—chaos!

Had the atheist given as careful study to forces as he
did to elements, constantly working back and back, fol-
lowing one force back to another, he would have even-
tually come to the’ origin of movement. It would then
have been disclosed to him that he himself contained a
force other than physical, and that that force was a living
soul. With this knowledge he would realize what he 1s:
not the poor brute beast he is trying to make himself out to
be, but one who has within himself an actual part of the
Supreme, and is therefore a son of God—just as the leaf
of a tree is a part of the tree itself.

Both Christ and Gautama declared they were ‘only
what other men might become.”’

By his chemical knowledge of elements the scientist ap-
preciates that the chemical] elementary compound of his
body must eventually decompose, and that this decompo-
sition must release the soul. As he knows the ultimate
finality of his elements, he knows that the soul, like the
elements, cannot die. All must continue on forever; for
elements decomposed pass on into other forms.

It is pre-ordained that all chemical elementary com-
pounds must eventually decompose, separate, return to
original form, and go back whence they came. The ele-

315

THE LOST CONTINENT OF MU

ments having released the soul from its bondage, the soul
—being governed by the same Divine Law as the elements
—must also return whence it came. Coming from “The
Great Source’ the glorious triumphant end of man’s soul
must be—ifs return to God.

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

ee 7. ice = ee,
. ——_— —

Gf

oll
