Implications of the Fall of Nam Tha NamM Tha Seized by Communist Forces May 6;
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000024488, dated 3 April 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000024488).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

seett EA aed

ate

SNE 58-39-62
9 Moy 1962

1,

NATIONAL, INTELLIGENCE. ESTIMATE:

Sune neg ARE az

a

all of Nam Tha

PGES

i
Ai

m

“¥
WATR Le

oa

ae : Concurred in by the. -
“UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD ~

AS “Indicated overted
g May 1962

we .
dike Breet stata tad Be

ce aepce Aang ate FEM PIETY LeotitZ re ie Rie aS

. ‘ha
‘ - 7 e :

ion of
toa
ae tl

a The following intelligence orgonizatio rficipated in the preparall
2 this estimate, [2.380238 ye Ee a wang 3

rr a bei ag

eee "3, : ad eee
rganizations of the Deport ©"
Force, The Join! Staff,

Jar ee

The Central fotelligence Agen
ments of State, Defense, the Army,
ay Meee RS
“s Concyrrings,

howe ‘

a ;

ei " Dicector of intelligence and Research, partment of State

re

" Director, Defense Intelligence Agency wile MS eT
Assistont Chief of Stoff For Intelligence, Department of the Army Aes
Assistant Chief of Nayat Operations (Intelligence), Deportment of the N
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF. Sete t , ps 4 a
‘Director for Intelligence, Joint Sto 7? ea Ree
Director of the National Security Agency

é ’ Peer a

Abstaining: * wat ee eee ae ate oe oeae

ie .

The Atomte Energy Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant
Director, Federal Bureay of Investigation, th avtside

t a TE oe

+

- :

aah ee =

floct ; ‘Defense of ree

er! saeran bes
_ | This material ¢
eee oN
within the meaning
“mission or revelation of

Soe nahn A SEP EP PRO
SEPT eer ey Vp si alta

sity hse!
ig

a
is

er eg

tk,

aura gta! F
Pe eee
toad ied

IMPLICATIONS OF THE
FALL OF NAM THA ©

THE FROBLEM
To assess the implications of the Comraunist capture of
Nam Tha.

THE ESTIMATE

1. On 6 May, Communist forces attacked and quickly
seized the provincial capital of Nam Tha in northern Laos,
forcing the retreat of the garrison of approximately 4,500
Laotian Army troops—-5 infantry and 3 parachute battalions
and supporting artillery units. Available evidence indicates
that the attacking force consisted solely of Pathet Lao and
North Vietnamese troops and that it was a smaller force
than that defending the town. There are indications that
the “neutralist” or pro-Souvanna forces were not directly
involved and were not under orders to act by Souvanna
Phouma or Kong Le, both of whom were out of Laos.

2, There is no evidence that Chinese Communist troops
participated in the attack, and we believe it unlikely that
any were present. However, Communist China probably per-
mitted the transit of Pathet Lao and/or North Vietnamese
troops through a salient of Chinese territory to participate
in the 3 May attack on Muong Sing and the subsequent
attack on Nam Tha. Logistic support for the attacking
forces, as for other antigovernment forces in Laos, was almost
certainly furnished by the Soviet/North Vietnamese airlift.

3. The withdrawal of Royal Laotian Government (RLG)
forces from the Nam Tha area virtually eliminates RLG
authority in all of northern Laos and opens western Luang
Prabang Province and all of Nam Tha Province, which borders
on Burma and Thailand, to Communist domination. The

segnet 1

aaa

OED

ORIENT
Bee

ae

sent

combat effectiveness of the retreating RLG troops is probably
nil, end in the absence of effective resistance the Communist
forces will press their advance and render untenabis any
remaining cutposts in the area, including the port of Ban
Houei Sai on the Mekong, towards which the RLG forces
are retreating. :

4. The attack on Nam Tha was @ flagrant violation of
the May 1961 cease-fire agreement and a departure from the
past pattern of limited and small-scale military attacks.
Whatever utility the cease-fire agt «ment had in restraining
hostilities may now be destroyed. ‘he Communist forces
in Laos could defeat the RLG Army, piecemeal as at Nam
Tha or by seizing the major towns along the Mekong. We
do not believe that the Nam Tha attak marks the opening
of a general offensive throughout Laos; on the contrary, the
Communists may await the impact of this move on the

RLG and the US before initiating additional majcr breaches ©

of the cease-fire. In the absence either of an effective mili-
tary response to the Nam Tha action or significant progress
toward a coalition goverr.ment, there will be an increasing
likelihood that the Communists will undertake offensive op-
erations on the scale of Nam Tha elsewhere in Laos.

5. General Phoumi reinforced the Nam Tha garrison sev-
eral times, despite MAAG and embassy advice, and he had
just finished the transfer of an additional parachute bat-
talion a week before the attack. His efforts to strengthen
the defenses, however, also offered the Communists a tempt-
ing target in both military end political terms. The Laotian
garrison lost considerable amounts of equipment and sup-
plies. The Communist victory, soreover, will further weaken
the Loation Army’s remaining self-confidence and willing-
ness to fight. In view of the importance General Phoumi
publicly attached to Nam Tha, and his investment of troops
and equipment in its defense, the Conman'vt victory may
cause him considerable loss of prestige within. the Laotian
Army and government.

§. On the other hand, Phoum! would lite t bring about
a reassessment of the US policy of installing * coalition
government under Souvanna or, failing that, to delay as

2 SECRET

Fi EP PL TT sya 8 PT OT yr peepee
see OF Roe ee a Ps

samiaehec wee ye ea ote? aad
yeh Se a ee es aa

cpeeertie narttge Jobat ees
REE ee

CEE

*

spel

o

“Jong 28 possible the implementation of such a policy. He
can now point to the Nam Tha attack as proof of Commu-

nist duplicity and disregard of the May 1961 cease-fire agree-
ment, He will be able to cite the Nam Tha action as conclu-
sive evidence ei Souvanna’s inability or unwillingness to
influence Souphanouvong and the Pathet Lao, and reiterate
his argument that Souvanna is uncer Communist control
and that negotiation of a coalition government under
Souvanna would be tantamount to giving Laos to the

Communists.

7. The attack and the manner in which it was conducted
provide further proof of the decreasing military role and
strength of the “neutralist” forces in Laos and the increasing
tendency for the Communist troops to assume exclusive juris-
diction. The attack underscores the weakness of Souvanna’s
political influence. It also reinforces the view previously
expressed’ that Souvanna would be increasingly unlikely to
be able to prevent Communist control of a coalition govern-
ment2 His announced intention to “disapprove completely”
of the Nam Tha action will leave the door open to renewed

?See SNIE 58-39-61, “The Situation and Bhort-Run Outlook In Laos,”
dated 28 September 1961 {SECRET}. :

‘The Director of Intelligence and Research, Lepartment of State, be-
Neves that the prospects of # coalition government under Souvanna
depend upon too many varlables to be dealt with In 50 categorical &
fashion. In the first place, 6 coalition goverrment Immediately after
its inception would probably be presiding over @ Laos still divided. The
PL and the present RLG puthorities probably would continue to control
their respective territories, whether and when they allow the Souvanna
government to exercise authority over thelr domains will probably depend
largely upon their day-to-day observations of his actions and thelr assess-
ment of the direction i Which he was headed. Assumption of real
puthority over Laos by a Souvanna government wil most probably depend
upon the integration of the three military forces. gudging from past
experience, this may take a long time, during which the de facto situation
would remain much as It is now, but be distinguished by the facade of &
coalition government governing in name only.

Among the variables which will delermine whether a Souvarnna coalition
government can prevent Communist acquisition or gontrot will be the
posture and stated intentions of the US. Both Phoum! end Thal Prime
Minister Sarit have pressed the US hard for a ecmmitment on this matter
since they realize its importance to the survival and strength of the anti-
Communist elements In Laos. Whether the US makes such commitments
to the present RLG and what American deterrents are maintained in the
grea will affect the chances for survival of a truly neutral government in Laos,

SECRET 3

oe

nS EGE TEPER TM
cae . es
: "

poe ae ae

Er ERAT EP EY

se bn

ats e

Se

set

it

cng singin

a

negotiations but almost certainly will have no influence on
Communist military operations or plans.

8. Events of the past year have almost certainly convinced
the Communist side that the risk of US intervention has
lessened significantiy and that they can increase the level
of military operations in seeking to achieve their interme-
diate objectives—a negotiated ‘neutralist” coalition govern-
ment in Laos which they could soon dominate, or the dis-
integration of the Royal Laotian Government and Army.
With rumors of a Souvanna-Phoumi rapprochement in the
air, and aware of US pressures on Phoumi to negotiate, the
Communists probably calculated that the seizure of Nam
Tha would not of itself foreclose possible forthcoming talks
on the formation of a coalition government, while it would
at the same time enhance their political and military posi-
tion in such negotiations.

9. Although Bloc reaction has so far been extremely lim-
ited, there seems io be no clea: distinction between the
initial interpretation given the capture of Nam Tha by Mos-
cow, Peiping, and Hanoi. Almost certainly the Chinese Com-
munists and the North Vietnamese have actively encouraged
the renewed military activity against a ripe target of oppor-
tunity and an area of direct security interest to the Chinese.
While the Soviets may have had some reservations over the
political implications for US-Soviet relations of a violation of
the cease-fice, we believe that they concurred in the opera-
tion. We continue to believe, however, that the Soviets still
prefer a political settlement in Laos.

CENTRAL INTEL

UGENCE AGENCY,

a

ate was ‘disseninaied by the Central Antelli gence’ A Agency. This

Bee Sg .F This estim

ere eet ees © copy 1s for the information and use of the recipient and of penens under his)
Cee Keohane? Je. Jeristiction on o need to know bass. Additional essential dissemination | may |
mero here at | be authorized by the following officiate within their respective: peers re

Dg Director of Intelligence and Reseorch, for the ‘Dapartinant of State”
fer: the ote a ts Secretory of

b. Director, Defense intelligence Agency.
: wee uw vat

<r te,

ae Defense fF UU Rs
"ge Assistant Chief of Stoff ‘for intelligence, Departed ‘a a Am, fof
Log the Deporiment of the Army 2) 28 ales span
i ae aes ee d. Assistant Chief of Noval Operations  Gatatigenced, for the Deparinent of
a th os : ‘the Navy = Pde | SR ee re
wate, ee tea » Anlstont Chief ‘of Stafi, Intetigence, USAF, for te Deporte of the bik
SO eg aly eh SOE ; Force 8” created on

“4 Director for intelligence, Joint Stoff, for the Joint ‘Sioft
g. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission, x
h. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federot Burecy of Investigation -.

<i Director of NSA, for the Notional Security Agency ~ ” =
, j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CA, for any other Deporte ‘or “=:
= Agency ee 7 Ae ate : ; : a
2. th sopy may be " petained, or “gesioyed by burning in jeccordancs with :
opplicoble security regulations, oF returned to the Certral pag Fane by
arrangement with the Office of

on +

Central Reference, CLA. : Jahn,

9. When aon estimate is disseminoted overseas, the overseat recipients moy *:
retain ¥ for o period not In excess of one year. At the ond of this period, the - nee

evimate should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, OF po
mission should be requested of the forwarding ogency, fo retoin it in accordance |
with AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. pe ee Weta

4. Tha title of this estimate when used seporely hom
neds Lica Or. USE ONLY ae

fie.

he text ot shoud be dae.

od mettre

beiriae Security Council ce.
Deporiment of State (7°, “ee
Department of Defense * Ae
Atomic Energy Commission *: .
Federal Bureov of lavestigotion a

tow ihe Ee er tes
