Prospects for Stability in the Caribbean Basin Through 1984
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000117893, dated 4 March 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000117893).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4 ee m . - se re Os nee ee .
npker
fo, ROYORN AN PRAC so

Central bitignne Apnyy oe

. : .
.

. Tay

Feryancrnn |
DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE

42 April 1982

Prospects for-Btabilit in the Caribbean Bas Through 1984

Overview

There have been sone favorable trends tn Central America in recent
months. Phe Salvadoran armed forces’ adilit

steps to curd official violence and has s
the possibility of reducing that country's Inte
strengthening tts domestic Political base,
successful transition to clivi2fan rule,

supporting efforts to intentict arma ahi
demonstrating an increased willingness
military. In Costa Rica, Predominantly pro-Neatern and
Sentiment is coalescing in the face of threats to its

and the country can expect more stable Jeadership when
assumes office next month, :

anti-extremist public
democratic institutions,
President~elect Monge

At the sane Cine, however, radical leftists

have decome more active in
most of the countries—markedly ao in Guatemala--

and are intensifying their

«
i
‘
t

ean oe

cee eT ee tee meen . . : one ; aan ane
ce , NOPSRN Ne RACT aR

. ’ a, of, *,

attempts to exploit conditions already receptive to insurgency and :
revolutlonary growth, Cuba and Nicaragua have increazed support to guerrillas
din Guatemala and their assigtance remiins crucial to sustaining the insurgency
fa ¥2 Salvador. Meinwhile, Kavant and Nanagua are working to build the
infrastructure for radical leftlat forces in Nonturaa and Costa Rica and
trying to divide am! intimidate those governments, Qi .

Especially in El Salvador, the atrategy of the guerrillas and their

\ foreign dackergz may change for tactical reasons over the near term. fhese

; groups may atep up attempts to explore political solutions that will enable
them to make gaing that have not deen pusatble on the battlefield. Such an
approach would allow dnsurgente to buy time to regroup, rears and mold anity,
while simultaneously ¢rying to build grassroots political aupport. Metther
the gucrrillas nor Cuba and its allies have altered their: fundamental assess-
ment that power ultimately can only de won through military strength, This
Prescription and ongoing radical leftist efforts point to expanding
challenge to OS interests in the region through 1984. PY

cwr * ' In the Caribbean, Cuba will continue attempting to exploit econoaic

instability to assist the radical left and cause prodleas for the US. While
opportunities for covert activities will not be ignored, Havana is likely to
emphasize overt approaches. Meanwhile, one particularly encouraging

develorzent ig that Cuban actions in the Cariddean Basin have led Venezuela
and Colombia, who perceive a growing threat to thelr own security, to decome
increasingly active in sponsoring diplomatic efforts on behalf of dencecratic
governrents. . a

Bl Salvador |

we

Barring a negotiated solution, the leftist ineurgency in El
Balvador is likely to remain a threat to regional stability
through 19684. Tha recent successful election haa dealt a major
political and psychological blow to the insurgent cause, but
depending on the makeup and policies of the provisional govern-
ment, these effects may be only temporary. In any event, the
military balance is not likely to shift quickly or decialvely in
the government's favor, since the insurgents retain atrong
military capabilities and continue to be well supplied by Cuba
and Nicaragua. =a 7

Pe eae 8 hae ane enreg he on bae Rae enhatrl eo wit

The growing interest in negotlations on B1 Salvador that
Cuba has recently demonstrated reflects the Castro regime's
chagrin over the failure of the gucrrillas to win a military
victory, and a belief that maintenance of the status quo there is
not to the guerrillas’ advantage. Regotlations, on the other
hand, provide time for the guerrillas to regroup and rebuild,

. a ee
> tnel eneat on

| y . oo , oo ae

offer the chance of political gainn For insurgents, and--by .
Prolonging the confrontation-=--buy time in which public opinion in

: the us can be explotted to undercut Washington's resolve on

further military support for B) Salvador, a?

As long as there ia no political solution, however, the flow
of arma via Cuba and Nicaragua is ilkely to continue. The insur-
genta are likely to get additional automatic rifles and heavier.
anti-alrcraft weapons, and ma “even get ‘light afr defense
missiles as well. There has been some improvement in Salvadozan
militacy capabilities to interdlet the arms coming overland or
ri - through shallow water, but the capabllity to reduce the air and
Mi deep sea traffic remains poor. Sp

com government that undermines reforms would swell the 1 of

effect. The condition of the economy will play a similar role,
as will the success of the government's counterinsurgency
-Campaign, .

Ono factor that could more clearly hurt insurgent fortunes |
is the lack of cooperation among the various guerrilla fac-
tions, There have already been reoriminations over the failure
to disrupt the elections, and furthor splita in leftist unity are
likely in the near term, A rightiat-dominated government, how-
ever, would provide a rallying polnt for the insurgents and help
to restore leftist coordination. a>.

For its part, the Salvadoran military hopes to continue to
improve its counterinsurgency capabilities over the next few
years. The strength of the army and security forces is projected
to rise from 28,000 to nearly 40,000 men, Providing that suffi-
clent arms can be obtained to equip them. The number of quick-
reaction battalions is planned to reach five or gix, one for each
brigade area. This wil provide a large enough central reserve
greatly to Increase the frequency and scale of offensive opera-
tions. _

The Afr Forco plans to get additional helicopters and i
special counter{innurgency aircraft Buch ag A-378 or Argentine . ;
Pucaras, The helicopters will aid mobility, and the counterin-
surgency aircraft will be more effective against inaurgent

ee ee

atrongholds and base aceas than the old French Ouragans and
Fougas currently in the inventory, '

Armed forces improvements in leadership, command and
control, and intelligence, however, are likely to be alow in
Coming. US training of junior officer candidates will alleviate
a_shortage in this area

Furthermore, communications security ie not Y

ve
significantly, but recent deception tactics by the Army regarding
=

planned operations may help offset this weakness,

Guatenaia

The guerrillas’ major advances in building their ranks and
Geveloping sn infrastructure have enabled them increasingly to
challenge the Guatemalan Government. Although insurgent capabil-
Sty will almost certainly continue to improve, we do not expect
the guerrillas to gain sufficient strength over the next year or
so to launch warfare on the same acale as in El Salvador, Beyond
that time frame, the abllity of the insurgents to topple the
government will depend on events in El Salvador, the extent of
Cuban backing--which ia already increasing--and policies pursued
by the Rios Montt government and any Successor regimes, =

Longstanding and careful efforts by the Guatemalan radical
left to lay the foundation for @ successful insurgency are ;
peazing fruit. Prom a force of some 1,000 armed guerrillas in
1979, neurgent ranks have grown to an estimated ¢,000-§,000--an
increase which reflects patient guerrilla attempts to recruit
among the Indfan masses of the Western Highlands. The guerrillas
-have also oningeacantly improved their internal suprort network
by establishing extensive arms caches and underground tunneling
in their rural base areas. In some isolated highland areas,

where government presence has always been tenuous, the enn

- are exercising de facto control over the population,

The guerrillas have demonstrated their improved military
capability over the last year or so by initiating a new level of
wioloence, they have concentrated on small scale Operations, such
as terrorist killings and bombings, economic gabotage, and
ambushes of security forces, to further inaurgent goals of
bolstering international credibility, discouraging foreign
investment and tourism, and weakening armed forcest morale. The
insurgents" expanding military prowess also has enabled them
temporarily to occupy important provinclal towns, and for the
first time a guerrilla unit was able to overrun a military ©

SS STE pri
1 Jo) | ee

Reet een mem ne no mle ne cee ee ere

—— ns

- | — YSrORN ROGPNTRACT (ED

garcison, which is located in the heart of a region sympathetic
to the innurgenta. Generally, however, the guerrillas have
recognized that they are not ready for decisive confruntations
and have avoided pitched battica with the military, even when
retreat has forced them to abandon significant caches of -
materiel. :

PD Cbeehai BE I

Incecased external assistance from Cuba and Nicaragua is
also bencfitting the guerrillas. The need for skilled insurgent
cadre will be partially met by the more than 300 guerrillas who
are recetving--or have recently. completed--trai n Cuba,

in Guaterala. caraguan atms -—

via Honduras, Mexico, Belize, and possibly Costa Rica--are

beconing more frequent and the methods of concealment more

sophisticated. Moreover, Ravana's keen interest in accelerating

- arms shipments was underscored by its role in promoting renewed
efforts carlier this year to strengthen guerrilla unity.

ne meee eewmnee

Although the Cubans persuaded Guatemala's four active
guerrilla organizations to form a new umbrella organization in
January, overall coordination among the groups remains elusive.
Lack of unity apparently was partly responsible for guerrilla
failure to follow through on plans to disrupt the 7? March
election. The Organization of People in Arms (ORPA)--the second
largest group and the most {deologlcally diverse--has been ~~
especial recalcitrant. Its maverick leader refused to attend
meatings in Ravana, and @ome mombers reportedly favor trying to
negotiate with the Rioa Montt government. Pressure from the
Boviet Union and Cuba finally has caused the old-line faction of
the Guatemalan Communist Party to make preparations for Joining
the insurgency» but the party has not reconclled differences with
a militant splinter group. Although internal bickering will not
be guickly ovorcome~-even threats from the USSR,
Cuba, and Nicaragua to withhold arms--local cooperation is gradu- .
ally improving becaune of the growing dominance of the largest
group, the Guerrilla Army of the Poor, which has especlally close
ties to Havana,’ , ; .

Guerrilla disunity is partly a reflection of improved per-
formance by the 17,000 mombcr Guatemalan military following a
shift in counter inaurgency tactics last summer. An aggressive

; " Btrateay of small unit mobliity combined with large scale sweep
‘operations has led to the destruction of'a number of guerrilla
camps, the dinmantling of some support facilities, and the dis-

TPMT TP ob pss

a} do} | | |

FFE pey

I

ee ee tos ts

akin iedbtetementnettenmtaeradi

ruption of guerrilla Plant to expand operationa, The armed
forces have alao made strides in improving their acquisition and
exploitation of intelligence, pr ross in this area has enabled
the tilttacy to cripple the urban Infrastructure of ORPA, and
continuing improvement should be facllitated by the recent
Creation of a joint intelligence center. The military's decision
to organize and arm local elvilian militia is also helping to .
atem guerrilla advances,

- Deopite these gainn, however, continuing defielencles--
erpectally in manpower=-will hamper the armed forces, The
military recently created five new infantry battalions and plans
to train some 5,000 new recruits this year. The armed forces

southern neighbor, Armed forces leaders recognize that greater
alr mobliity could helo offset limited troop atrength and have

"*recently increased thelr purchases of us civilian helicopters.

Nevertheless, the me eaey has only 32 helicoptera--fewer than
half of which are designed for heitborne Operations, and lacks
Spare parts and navigational equipment for them. The armed
forces also continue to experience difficulties in coordinating
air, infantry, and artillery during sweep operations--a situation
that underscores the need for improved training,

Gaining the allegiance of the rural population remains
.erucial to the outcome of the insurgency, but Guatemalan authori-
-tles have beon slow to establish a multifaceted counterinsurgency
program. The Lucas administration made some halting steps
through fairly extensive land distribution and an incipient
amneaty effort, These initiatives wore largely offset, however,
by lack of commitment to prohibiting security force brutality and
to checking death squad activity. Government officials can take
heart that, despite some insurgent success in exploiting local.
grievances, the ‘guerrillas continue to meet indifference and even
resistance in many communities, Guatemala's bleak short-tera
economle prospects will favor the insurgents, however, by forcing
the govornment to out back social programs and services at a time
Of mounting unemployment. gi

Bince taking power Jast month Rios Montt has temporarily
consolidated hia position by taking steps popular with the public
and junior officers who inatalled Aim in office, Ris measures
againnt corruption and official violence: have helped set a ;

“reformint tone that, if sustained, would broaden the ‘government's
political bane and reduce Guatemala's international isolation,

‘Central America militar

yo Re ee me ee ee eee

epthsi-
" N ACT
NWORN K 3 k —

tary coheston. Nost aignificantiy, the new assertivences of
junior officern--and the concomitant unease and resentment of
many senior officers--ta undermining military disct line, A
RaJOr shakeup in the piiitary!s chaln-of-comaands highlighted by
ahifts of commanderca in all but four major units, will prove
isruptive in the short term. Moreover, the removal of the Chief
Of 8taff, who played a key role in Promoting the shift to mobile
tactics last yoar, may deprive the military of aggressive
leadership. Although intensified activity by the guerrillas will
Prereety force the military to gaubmerge internal squabbles,
nfighting may drag on wit detrimental consequences for the
counterinsurgency effort, =

Nicaragua

"s -- Nicaragua fea building an armed force that is intended to

Surpass the combined strength of its Central American neigh-

bors. The Sandinistas Probably will be ina position to dominate
ly by at least 1984--sooner but for a

shortage of trained officers and NCOs, financial and logistic

Problems, and a lack of proficiency with newly acquired

Weapons. Even now, the Sandinistas could probably beat back an

_ attack by any ‘one Potential adversary in the region,

--- Managua already outstrips its neighbors in military man-

, Power, armor, and artillery Capabilities. over the next year.

Micaragua will widen its margin, although {ts principal manpower
{sation of its reguiar forces. I¢£
a8 expected the Sandinistas receive MIG fichter afroeraft this

7. year, they will at least match Honduras! alr Force, the best in
‘..7 the region. .In addition, Nicaragua’ is expected to receive addi-

tional 1-54/55 tanks in 1982, enabling it to deploy two armor

+. women,

traincd militia, Porhaps as many ag 100,000 to 150,000 men and

;
4
i
H
3
i
i
!
i
j
]
i
t
|

The continued military bul dup
the region and encourages the Bandin
risks in authorizing hot pursuit Operationa against Nicaraguan

neurgents based acrosn the bordor in Honduras. Pcessures for a
retaliatory strike to destroy anti-Sandiniata campa in Ronduras.

Eullding among Nicaraguan leaders for some time. B80
far, Managua is attempting to ‘show restraint--a course also advo-

ara that such a move would provoke

a major US military action against Nrcacagua. The Sondinistas
prefer. instead to retaliate against Tegucigalpa by stepping up
covert activities in support of violent Honduran leftists. Aa
thelr military atrength grows, however, the Bandiniatas probably
will become more belligerent. r¢ so, the danger of a major

intimidates governments {n-
fatae to take much greater

conflict im likely to grow over time,

Nicaragua is more directly
through ita aUPport for armed in
Guatemala and x

responsible for regional turmo!?
surgents in BE) Salvador and

P Nicaragua's
armed struggle in
countries will disrupt any plans 1 these governments and the US
“to overthrow their own regime. th
between Central American revolution
means that Nicaragua is
regional subversion over

Nicaragua is likely to
advanced weaponry. The:
number of Cuban military personnel robably will grow beyond the
Ourrent leval of nearly 2,000 and the Soviet and Eastern Bloc
presence may increase also, Much will depend on whether the
Boviets are willing to take a more @irect role in the Nloaraguan

military buildup or. continue to rely on Cuba or other
“aurrogates, _

Konduras ,

While Honduras is not in immediate @anger of destabili-

sation, it is bein increasingly drawn into the turmoil in the .
Fegion. Most afgn freantly, tension between Honduras and
Micaragua has intensified in recent months and an escalation of
border clashes into major hostilities {

The domestic radical left remains weak and splintere

Nieeeeeeapired terrorism--somo of which ig Supported by
Wicaragua--

t
q
an increased, Although Cuba hae stepped u training
of Honduran loftists and is if

|
1
|
H

promoting leftist un

tye it may
prefer to dolay the onset of an active insurgency because major

supply routen for guereillasz -in El Salvador and Guatomala run-
through. Honduras, The Honduran military would probably not be;
able to suppress a sorious domestic inrurgency supported from
Cuba and Nicaragua, however, without major assistance from the | -
Us. = : _ ae u : . ;

Relations between Honduras and Nicaragua have doteriorated |
markedly in. recent montha and trends point to continuing
animosity and a deatre on both sides to atrengthen military
capabilities, The flight of an eatimated 10,000 Miskito Indian _
refugees to Honduras since December to escape Sandinista reloca- aw
tion efforts has swelled the ranks of anti-regime accure already °°
based in Honduras. fo retaliate for Honduran armed forces! =~ -~
collusion in cross-border raide by Nicaraguan exiles, the UCIT LI yp
_Bandinistas reportedly: have increased: arns deliveries to Honduran-- > ope:
‘ padical leftists who are carrying out terrorist activities.
Ricaragua. and Honduras have aignificantly increased-troop.- - es
atrength in the border region, and both armies have been placed --.~
at a high state-of readiness. Qa . :

’ Phe Honduran araed forces would be-at a disadvantage ina
major clash with Nicaragua and thus do not want to provoke one.
fhe Honduran ground forces, numbering some 13,000 troops, are
poorly armed and lack the communications and transport necessary
to meet anything but afnor internal and external threats. The é
2,000 man Air Force--at this point still the best in Central
America--is the mainstay of Honduras! defense and deterrent
capabliity. Its inventory of aircraft, both fighter and
transport, is ing, however, and in need of replacement. The
: Air Force also js deficient in the important area of radar Re pare
_ > @apablility. a: i Ca ac eri ee ne
2 "Rnhaneing Honduras! ability to fight a conventional war with

Nicaragua would require major weapons deliveries, including ;
replacement of the Air Force's 14 Super Myzterez, > Commander-in- |. -
‘Chlef Alvarex has already asked that the 0S provide either F-4 or. |
Y-SE fightera free of charge and has requested Us help in financ-_.._-.-
ing new Canadfan-bullt transport aircraft. The Rondurans also.
need artillery and antitank missiles to offset Ricaragua's ~~
- growing armor and artillery inventories. «Bven with US “dona-
tions," however, Alvares' overall plan to build up ailitary aad
-strength would have serious economic implications. since Bass
continucd IMP assistance is tied to a limit on total government | ;
ppend ings any increases in military purchases could only come at
the enronss of social apena ings Gown some 20 percent in real
e are = .

terms from last yoar's ievel. Qi

a V

Jeg

at

*

eos “oe tt

“4
Fara heen A slo eel oo

reportedly are funding a propaganda network in Honduras whose

“operations will put additional pressure on them,

Costa Rica

Cuba continues to asalst Honduran radical leftists in laying
the groundwork for an Insurgency, but ita methods suggest a pre-
ference for a gradual a

Increasing concern about foreign threats to
the Sandinf{stas, however, reportedly has led the Cubans to
endorge a recent decision by Honduran revolutionary groups to
accelerate their preparations for a prolonged guerrilla war.

Meanwhile, Cuba is stepping up its paramil tary instruction of

- Honduran radical leftists and alao is relying o Nicaragua and
Libya to assist in providing training. a ;

In addition, Havana-is trying to provoke divistons within
the Honduran military by encouraging some senior officers to
gupport a policy of neutrality toward Nicaragua and El .
Balvador. The Cubans hope especially to pressure Honduras into
backing away from active support for the Salvadoran military and
for anti-Sandinista groups.

andinistas have identified Alvarez as a major enemy and

goal is to discredit him,

On balance, however, the armed forces are united behina
Alvarez, and his cordial relations with president Buazo have

- @ased concerns regarding posible olvil-nilitary atrains. The -

Balvadoran insurgents have already been hindere by increased

-Konduran arms interdiction efforts, and the growing willingness

of the Hondurans ‘to assiat the Salvadoran military {n blocking

Like Honduras, Costa Rica is increasingly being drawn into
the Central Amorican poritical cauldron, The country's severe — -
economic slide is giving domestic reft late opportuni ties to unify -
and build basons of support. Those leftists have grown more —

*Fadical and an unprecedonted rise in terrorist actiona over the

past yoar or 80 presages further disruptive efforts. . The radical

TP Lb peepersp op
Pu pp Tp py

a

left in still embryonic, however, and--given the fact that the
Costa Rican people are strongly anti-Communist~-early attempts at
domentic destabilization would be counterproductive. Neverthe-
less, over the longer term Costa Rica's continuing economic
ecunch, porous borders, and lack of a viable military force wilt
make it increasingly vulnerable to the radical left, whose
disdatn for democratic processes is growing.

. Costa Rica, which has no standing army, relies on its 7,000-
man Civi irst line of defense. The Guard, how-
ever, is nd generally armed with only pistols and
carbines. Few of its ew-served weapons are in working condi-
-tion, almost all ordnance is uns viceable annibalization |
of weapons d

At least some Guard members probably are loyal to fccmer
Security Minister Johnny Echeverria,

Echeverria and his backers in Havana anticipate that San
Jose's unprecedented economic problems will severely challenge
the incoming government of Luis Alberto Monge, and they hope to
be able to capitajize on attempts from any quarter to interrupt
the constitutional process. Efforts at destabilization are most
likely to come from the more radical elements within the
country's small Communist coalition, who, smarting at their poor
.. ghowing in the February _glections, may be ready to engage in

terrorist activities.

Monge and other officials of his National Liberation Party:
aware of at least somé of the potential threats to security, plan
to inercase the preparedness of the Civil Guard. The President-
elect has also indicated that he will rely on an OAS peace force
to protect Costa Rica's frontiers in any Central American war.

Masten

‘poor sécurity, and during the last year havevattempted bombings

‘17 Guatemala, ~ it has a‘seriously unsettling effect

te

Buch a course, he has privately auggeated, proceeds from his fear
that a regional conflict tnvely tng Nicaragua could spark irceden~
R

tiat clalms by Managua to Costa ca'a northwestern province of
Guanacaste, ‘and thus lead to a Sandinista invas{on.

We have received a number of unconfirmed reports of
Baniinista incuraions into Guanacaste during the last few months,
presumably caused by re rted anti-Bandiniata activity in the
area, More significantly, Guanacarte--where manly of Costa Rica's
approximately 10,000 Balvadoran refugees are sheltered and where
pro-Sandinista sentiment allows Nicaragua to’ maintain plausible
dental--appears to figure prominently as a aupport base for the
{naurgency in El Salvador. gince Beptember 1981, there is
increasing evidence oft

-- Training campe and weapons shipments by aea and air {n
this area.

~~ Sandinista ‘reorultment of land aquatters and others for
eventual deployment to El Salvador.

-- Salvadoran guerrtila or Bandiniata attempts at gaining
control of the refugee Camps, which are suspected by
Costa Rican security offic als as being support bases for

- -- + dneurgents.--
' peftist terrorists are also taking advantage of Costa Rica's

and kidnappings with increasing frequency. Recent security force

.-paids on safe houses in San Jose have uncovered large weapons

stockpiles‘and other indications of. a sophisticated and well-
financed gun-running operation. Costa Rican security officials

n: webelieve that a number of additional cells continue to operate in

‘the capital and elsewhere.” Much of this activity appears
-dosigned to ald the {nsurgencies in Bl Salvador and egy
n Costa Rica

as well.
anana

Tho prospects appear favorable for continuéd political and
socio-oconomic stabi ty in Panama during the period leading up
-to prenidential and legislative elections ‘in 158
domestic terrorism probles, political diasidence is well-

. controlled, and economic problems are'genorally less severe than

those of most countries ‘in the Caribbean Basin. ‘fhe death of
Omar Torrijos in July 1981 raised immediate and serious concerns

64, Panama has no

Aree
ee we we

i
:

De ee eee ne ee parereaanand

an ee tne be a eee meee ter see gina mame we Oo
2 “ sen, a .
° . eect s;

a ae

ee anne iRiieeeiaeeteee ete ee
apetier pe,
—- - wopentn NON DERAGT =>

about possible dentablliaing power struggles within the National
Guard--which holdn most power in Panama--or between officers and
eivilians, but inntead woat Panamanian leaders have agree? to
maintenance of the statua quo,

Panama has modestly
n the last year, but will likely

coo relations w

maintain diplomatic tiles out of concern that
fore{gn radicals in Panama m @ employed against the host
overnment. Regional inatability and ita potential for spillover

nto Panama clearly have incroased security concerns among some
military officers, and this could lead to greater competition
between military and elvilian loaders for resources and decision-
making authority.

the Caribbean

“fhe Caribbean countries, except for oll-rich Trinidad and
Tobago, have been hard hit by the escalating coat of of] and
other imports and declining prices for thelr major exports--
sugar, coffec, bauxite. This, in turn, has exacerbated the deep-
rooted structural problems of such countries as Jamaica, the

‘s ~pominican Republic and the mini=states of the Eastern

Caribbean. The result has boon high unemployment, serious
inflation, declining GDP growth, huge balance of payments
deficits, and a pressing ii uldity squeeze.” fhis economic crisis
threatens political and socfal stability throughout the region

- and creates conditions which Cuba and others seek to exploit.

--fortunes of the rad

‘Cuba is certain to continue its efforts to take advantage of
economic abr eeaial | in the Caribbean aa a means of promoting the
cal left and causing problems. for the US.

“While opportunities for covert activities will not be ignored,

:

“ government with tho technica

the main thrust of these efforts will probably be overt, with
Havana depending heavily on sports and cultural contacts, the
media, and direct liaison with the area's political, social,
intellectual, and religious leaders as well as radical leftist
groups. Cubats purpose in donating a 75-kilowatt tranamitter to
Radio Pree Grenada, for bay papel art was to provide a friendly
faciiities for disseminating Cuban
prcpagands throughout the Leaner Antilles. The Castro regime
will persist in promoting its own politico/economic system ag a
model for orereon ng underdevolopment, - But as Cuba's economic
problems mount, it is likely to have increasing difficulty hiding

A Ne Ape et ce ere

act dia seas ils Aponipcrns easton
~ eaten =

\
1

e

ee ee Oe
3 7 : :
Es :

the fact that the massive amounte of Soviet ald are crucial to |
the survival of tho Cuban economy--ald that would aot be range de [awe
avatiable to other nations in the region. i. nite) an WR hot Tes ata

Yenexucha and Colombia i a ee ee Ss
Increasingly peasinistic about trends in Nicaragua, the j
Merreca government in Venegueta im trying to stem ra toalisation
$n Central America by fostering reg lonal cooperation among
democratic regimes and by offering substantial economic -
assistance. ; eye ae a te Sots, io hiegunnl es

“so Qubat a growing: involvement in Central America and the ---- 0 oo":
Caribbean particularly has aroused Yenexuela's apprehension. d
Most Venexzuelana believe that their basic political, economic, |.
and security interosts require undercutting Bavana's influence in
the area. Hardline elements in the government favor directly
challenging Cuban initiatives, fearing that Cuba's ultimate
-objective is Venezuela'a ofl reserves. The. overnment's policy-
is, howover, ese aggressive, aeeking instead to minimize
polarization in the Caribbean. Herrera does not want to provoke
Cuban meddling in Venezuela's dnternal affairs or assisting small te
- domeatic insurgent groups. Me foe : : Sue

selenatesane tg ote 4 veneguela's concerns have been heightened dy the econoalc

2 and political implications ofa prokoages slump in oi) prices and.
+ prodvetion--factors that would seriously hamper its abi ity to fe

_~ S-eontinue to provide “gach ‘extensive: economic aid.“ the government

-- . fears that dropping of] revenues will worsen already serious

+a. e@gonomie and social problems. if the econonic situation markedly

aut? ageclines,’ extremist groups could exploit latent discontent and

nt aoe,
H

ney ened As newt oe ot

:

3 Be
ea

ra
¢

,- 3. gould eventually once ag | Le ,
Berane cares Genocratic political system.

we wean-- -COlombian authorities believe that ‘the Boviet Union and | 7

Al

fo eeces are trying to ‘establish Communiat. regimes throughout Central”
- America-and the Cacibbean, They cite Nicaragua as the first
- ‘puccess and the insurgencies in El Salvador and Guatemala as
o further evidence of the threat that they believe will reach
tourine: Colombla.: fhe Turbay | eae that Pi arked on‘an activist eee
policy that combines limited economic assistance with ‘coordinated —_
action by democratic regimes in the area. : ace

- challenge Venezuela's. oe

Bie ogh Ae Sere as + Pen an). emma ign’ set

" ‘ * Bharply indroased avtivity by Cuban-supported revolutionary

~ + “groups in Colombia is another reason for the -governmont's
activisa, The incurgents 8d far have had fairly Limited success
put the persistence of the insurgency underscores the chronic

robluma that face Colombia. Extreme soctal and econoaleo

{epacitles feed altfenation and protest; large, increasingly
unmanageable eftles offer a favorable environment for urban |
terroclats; Lsolated and neglected rural areas provide hospitable
havenn, qi

The guerrilla threat im not new to Colombia and it ts
unlikely that the ingurgentea could defeat the Colomblan armed
forces. Most Colombians reject the politioal alternative
prescnted by the guerrillan and prefer their present Litieal
syatcem, however imperfect they believe it to be, —_

xf ineurgencies Bucceed eleewhere in the region, Colombian
officials believe that domentic guerrilla ‘groups will seek a
wider confrontation with the government. They also worry that
Cuba will increase its support to these groupa, which would
enhance their ability to challenge the government, especial)
during the transition to a new administration in August. eo

|

eee Ce ere et Mee eer
.
