Memorandum - What Should We Do About the Russians?
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000097981, dated 4 May 1984.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000097981).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

UNCLASSIFIED . ‘ NIC #03770-84

The Director of Central Intelligence
Washington, D.C. 20505

28 June 1984

National Intelligence Council

MEMORANDUM FOR: “Director of Central Intelligence

FROM: Herbert E. Meyer, Vice Chairman
National Intelligence Council

SUBJECT: What Should We Do About The Russians?

1. For nearly forty years now, we and our predecessors in the
intelligence and foreign-policymaking communities have devoted the bulk
of our time and energies to the search for an answer to one single
question: What should we do about the Russians?

2. This search has taken on a special urgency during the last
several months, as Soviet events, actions, and attitudes have combined
to focus unprecedented attention on the superpower rivalry and, once
more, raised the specter of a serious US-Soviet collision: The Soviets
have walked out on three sets of arms-reduction talks, buried Yuri
Andropov after a brief but violent reign that included the shootdown of
KAL Flight 007, admitted publicly that for a year they had been lying
about Andropov's state of health, and selected the visibly ailing
Konstantin Chernenko as their new leader. The Soviets have harassed
Western commercial flights to and from Berlin, fired on a US Army
helicopter/“along the German-Czech border, and announced the presence of
ieleatoarned: Soviet submarines off the US East Coast. They have
launched a set of military exercises that scared the wits out of some
Western observers, boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympic Games in Los
Angeles, unleashed an anti-US propaganda barrage more strident and
sustained than any in recent memory, and generally tried to whip up a
war scare that in tone and substance bears an uncanny resemblance to the
one that occurred in 1927, which historians now believe Stalin cooked up
as part of a (successful) effort to quash domestic enemies.

a QO

3. As a participant in the current flurry of meetings, brain-
storming sessions, water-cooler conversations, working lunches, even
dinner parties--and as an avid student of earlier such flurries--I am
struck of a recurring flaw: We always focus on the need for a policy;

APPROVED FOR RELEASE sov 195

qHUIet AOCKCTO ICN

Int

UNCLASSIFIED

r

we never focus on the need for a strategy. But without a strategy--the
deployment of a nation's political, economic, psychological, and
military forces to afford the maximum support to its adopted policies--
any policy regardless of its merit will lack the strength to survive
when trouble strikes. Little wonder that so many of the Soviet policies
we have pursued during the last forty years--under Republicans,
Democrats, liberals, and conservatives--have ultimately been blown away
like flimsy buildings by tornados.

4. An effective strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union is now
within our grasp, and it is the purpose of this memo to spell it out.
The key to this strategy lies in a new, almost revolutionary perception
of the Soviet Union itself that is taking hold among specialists,
scholars, and observers throughout the West. This perception is one
that I share--in part because it goes a long way toward explaining
current Soviet behavior--and which I detailed in an earlier memo

entitled Why Is the World So Dangerous? To briefly recapitulate:

-- After 67 years of communist rule, the Soviet Union
remains a nineteenth-century-style empire, comprised of more
than 100 nationality groups and dominated by the Russians.
There is not one major nationality group that is content with
the present, Russian-controlled arrangement; not one that does
not yearn for its political and economic freedom.

-- Since the imperial system is itself fatally flawed,
all empires eventually decay. And at long last history seems
to be catching up with the world's last surviving empire.
Decades of over-emphasis on military production have wrecked
the country's civilian industrial and technological base.

More precisely, the Soviets have failed miserably to generate
the kinds of innovations on which modern economies are
increasingly dependent: robotics, micro-electronics,
computerized communications and information-processing
systems. Even if the Soviets could develop such systems, they
could not deploy them without losing the political control on
which the Communist Party depends for its very survival. For
after 40 years of fear among Western intellectuals that
technology would lead inexorably to Big Brother societies
throughout the world, it now turns out that technology, in the
form of personal computers and the like, has put
communications and information processing beyond the control
of any central authority. Unwilling and unable to develop and
deploy innovations like these--as we in the West are doing
with such robust enthusiasm--the Soviet Union now can produce
little but weapons. As a result, the Soviet economy has
become stagnant and may even be starting to shrink--a trend
that already has begun to make even the production of weapons
more costly and inefficient. ’

-- At the same time, The Soviet Union has become a
demographic basket-case. Today only about half the country's

2
UNCLASSIFIED

tee

“ bie UNCLASSIFIED © ~

population can speak Russian; for an industrialized,
technologically-advanced society, this is intolerable.
Moreover, so low has been the Russian birthrate that in coming
years the able-bodied working-age population of the Russian
Republic, which contains roughtly two-thirds of the Soviet
Union's total industrial production capacity, will actually
decline. This is not merely a drop in the growth rate; it is
a drop in the total number of warm bodies showing up each
morning, drunk or sober, for work. Moreover, high birthrates
in the Moslem republics have begun to soak up vast amounts of
investment for schools, hospitals, roads, and so forth. Thus,
fewer and fewer Russians must work harder and harder to
support more and more non-Russians. This sort of thing cannot
go on indefinitely. Nor can the trend itself be reversed in
less than several decades.

-- All this is compounded by a growing contentiousness
and disarray within the communist world itself. Moscow's
efforts to ease domestic economic pressures by shifting the
burden to its East European satellites are meeting with
growing resistance from satellite leaders, who rightly fear
for their own grips on power. One reflection of this fear is
the rising level of opposition among East European leaders to
Moscow's plans for higher levels of defense spending by the
satellites; another is these leaders' unprecedented vocal
efforts to coax the Soviets back to the arms-reduction
tables. Obviously the Soviets have sufficient military power
to get their way, but now the chances are increasing that the
Soviets will need to use this power. And elsewhere in the
communist world--against every tenet of Marxist philosophy--
communist nations are waging war among themselves. More
precisely, the Sovéet Union and China, having fought one
another along their common border, are now fighting against or
through their respective surrogates: China versus Vietnam;
Vietnam versus Kampuchea.

5. From Moscow's point of view, history could not have chosen a
worse moment to catch up with the Soviet empire. After a period of
drift, the US is once again leading the West forward:

-- Our own economy is recovering--growth has lately been
running at an annual rate of more than 9 percent, a level that
delights everyone except the gloom-and-doom mongers on Wall
Street--with the only argument among serious economists
focusing on the size and breadth of the boom.

-- US defense spending is up, with the debate in
Congress and on the campaign hustings focusing only on the
proper size of the increase.

-- We and our allies have begun to limit the flow of
credits to the Soviet Union.

3
UNCLASSIFIED

tei

UNCLASSIFIED

-- We and our allies have begun to staunch the
hemorrhage of technology to the Soviet Union.

-~ With initial deployment of Pershing IIs and cruise
missiles, NATO is at last beginning to change the balance of
power in Europe back to its favor.

-- With the emergence of five anti-communist
insurgencies--in Nicaragua, Mozambique, Angola, Kampuchea, and
Afghanistan--the Soviet drive for Third World dominance has
been slowed. And, of course, our own country's use of
military power to set free Grenada has shattered the myth that
communist revolutions are irreversible. Now it is their
dominoes that are toppling.

6. Moreover, we now stand on the threshold of an.historic change
in the very nature of warfare. Technology is shifting the advantage
from offense to defense. Since the US is a defensive power while the
Soviet Union remains an offensive one, the long-term edge is now moving
in our direction. This, of course, is why the Soviets are so worried by
our own emphasis on high-technology weapons such as cruise missiles and
precision-guided munitions; it means that the US has both recognized and
acted upon the new reality. This also explains why the Soviets are
having fits over the President's Strategic Defense Initiative, although
this is a longer term project. Given our country's awesome record of
success when we combine our scientific and technological prowess with our
industrial strength--the Manhattan and Apollo projects come to mind--the
Soviets must assume that eventually we will succeed. And when we do,
Soviet rockets will cease to be a threat to anyone.

7. From the moment that the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
seized power back in 1917, the primary thrust of its propaganda has been
to convince not only its own people but also those of us in the West
that the Party's revolution is irreversible; that the Soviet Union as
organized by Lenin &Co. is a stable, permanent state. So successful
has been this propaganda effort that for decades the conventional wisdom
here in the West has been just this: that the Soviet Union is here to
stay. One corollary of the conventional wisdom is that the US-Soviet
rivalry is itself a permanent feature of life on earth.

8. Yet the new perspective that I outlined in Why Is the World So
Dangerous, and which I have briefly recapped here, fundamental ly
challenges both the conventional wisdom and its corollary. This
perspective recognizes the Soviet Union for what it  is--an empire--and
accepts that like’ all empires this one must eventually decay. Moreover,
this perspective holds that the beginnings of this decay are now
evident. Indeed, since publication of that earlier memo information has
continued to accumulate which suggests that the decay is progressing:

4
UNCLASSIFIED

tre

UNCLASSIFIED z

-- The selection of Konstantin Chernenko as Andropov's
successor indicates strongly that the bureaucracy could not
stomach even the modest economic reform efforts that were
begun after Brezhnev's death. The political leadership has
virtually ceased to talk of reform; stagnation thus is likely
to continue.

-- Living standards in the Soviet Union are beginning to
decline. Marshall Goldman, the Harvard University Soviet
specialist, now reports that food is in short supply outside
the Moscow-Leningrad area and that rationing has been imposed
in 12 cities. According to recent issues of published Soviet
medical literature, five of seven key communicable diseases
are now out of control: polio, diptheria, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, measles. Georgetown University demographer
Murray Feshbach--among the most competent and reliable
students of Soviet life--reports that according to published
Soviet statistics, so high is the incidence of measles that it
now stands fractionally below the level at which
epidemiologists attribute the problem to mass malnutrition.
Feshbach's earlier research has shown that throughout the
Soviet Union infant mortality is rising and life expectancy is
falling.

-- A sense of deep pessimism has taken hold among the
Soviet people. One reflection of this is the abortion rate,
which for the Soviet Union as a whole is between 60 percent
and 70 percent, and which for Slavs and Balts is 75 percent to
80 percent. We simply cannot attribute these staggering rates
entirely to the low quality of available birth-control
products and to decisions by sensible, practical parents to
limit the size of their families because their apartments lack
sufficient space for comfort. Rather, we must view these
rates, at least partly, as an indication of the average
couple's judgment of life in the Soviet Union. As Frank
Shakespeare puts it, these abortion rates reflect a vision of
the future that is bleak and despairing almost to the point of
national suicide.

-- Artistic works are often a leading indicator of a
society's perception of its own prospects, and Soviet artists
are turning now to themes of looming decline. A singer/poet
named Bulat Okudzhava has lately been serenading audiences at
a Moscow cabaret with a little number that strikingly compares
today's Soviet Union with the Roman empire in its last days.
Here's the first verse:

"The Roman Empire at the time of the decline
Maintained the appearance of firm order.
The-leader was in his place, with his comrades in
arms at his sides, °
Life was wonderful, judging by reports.

5
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

But the critics will say that the expression
‘comrade in arms' is not a Roman detail,

That this mistake deprives the whole song of
meaning.

Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps it isn't Roman...."

-- For the first time ever, articles are appearing in
Soviet newspapers and magazines that talk about "the
contradictions of socialism," and vaguely suggest the need for
basic structural changes. Given the limits of what one can
say in the Soviet press--and remain at large to say again--
this is explosive stuff indeed. Clearly, commentators are
sending strong signals that in their view fundamental changes
are needed, and the sooner the better, if the regime is to
survive in its present form.

9. This growing sense of pessimism and looming decline may well
account for much of current Soviet behavior. In a vague but very
profound way, Soviet leaders are starting to recognize that something
has gone hideously wrong. We are not talking here about merely a bad
stretch in relations with the US or a temporary run of bad luck; we are
talking here of a perceived fundamental shift in the balance of future
power. History is no longer on Moscow's side--if ever it was--and
Soviet leaders sense they lack the wit, the energy, the resources, and
above all the time, to win it back. Thus the current burst of vicious,
vitriolic rhetoric and action. It is like the first reaction of a very
nasty man whose career has been soaring from triumph to triumph over the
broken bodies of his enemies--and who with final victory in sight has
just learned he has a terminal illness.

10. The implications of all this are staggering. If indeed the
Soviet Union is an empire at the beginning of its decline, one of three
courses is likely:

-- The Soviets could undertake fundamental reforms.
This remains a possibility, and obviously we must be alert to
any indicators. But it seems probable that the Soviet
leadership will not make the changes necessary to either
reverse these trends or cope with them. Kremlin leaders could
boost their country's economic growth rate only by slashing
the defense budget or by enacting massive economic reforms.
Either remedy would threaten the Communist Party's grip on
power, and this is a price that Kremlin leaders have always
been loath to pay. The demographic nightmare is equally
difficult to end. Moscow cannot transfer industrial-
production capacity from the Russian to the non-Russian, and
especially non-Slav, republics. Doing so would give these
republics more power over Moscow than Moscow is willing to
risk. And Moscow cannot import workers to Russian factories
from Moslem republics because these workers (a) don't speak
Russian, (b) don't want to come, and (c) would be bitterly

6
UNCLASSIFIED

; : UNCLASSIFIED

resented by Russian workers, who would be required to share
scarce housing and food with individuals they view as racially
inferior.

--~ The Soviets could blow it. That is, they could fail
to stop their empire's decay and, over time, allow the Soviet
Union to drift into a downward spiral from which would emerge
a different sort of society. To be sure, we have no idea of
what this successor society would look like. It might be a
“better" society, which is to say a freer and more democratic
one. Or it might be different from the present society but
every bit as mean and repressive. And we can only guess at
the future relationship between the Russian Republic--the
imperial power, so to speak--and the fourteen non-Russian
republics that now comprise the Soviet Union. But clearly,
any sort of imperial free fall would produce a political
structure that, at least for a while, would be less
threatening to the West than the current regime.

-- The Soviets could decide to go for it. Faced with a
“use-it-or-lose-it’ situation, Soviet leaders could choose a
high-risk course designed to change the correlation of forces
before it is too late to do so. As you recall, it is this
option that was the focus of Why Is the World So Dangerous?
The thrust of my argument there was that as Soviet leaders
perceive that time is no longer an ally, the range of options
they would be willing to consider will inevitably widen. Thus
we must prepare for the possibility that the Soviets will do
something very, very dangerous--for instance a grab for the
Persian Gulf, an attack on Western Europe, even a first strike
on the US. Again, as in that earlier memo, I emphasize that I
do not predict any of these actions. I merely point out--and
this is worrisome enough--that to some Soviets these actions
may no longer be too risky to consider. Thus my concern that
the coming years will be the most dangerous that we have ever
known.

Ll. IT IS PRECISELY BECAUSE THE COMING YEARS WILL BE SO DANGEROUS
THAT WE NEED TO DESIGN, ARTICULATE, AND IMPLEMENT A STRATEGY FOR DEALING
WITH THE SOVIET UNION THAT WILL AVOID WAR. THE THRUST OF THIS STRATEGY,
SIMPLY PUT, SHOULD BE TO DENY THE SOVIETS AN EXTERNAL SOLUTION TO THEIR
PROBLEM. The logic runs like this:

-- The Soviet Union is the world's last empire, and

after 67 years of communism it has entered its termina

hase. We should be no more surprised, or alarmed, or
relieved about this than by the sunset at day's end; it is
merely inevitable, and our choice is not whether to accept it
but how best to respond. The only operational question is the
rate of descent.

-- We will do nothing whatever to try and “bring down"
the Soviet regime. More bluntly, we are not going to charge

7
UNCLASSIFIED é

UNCLASSIFIED

in there throwing bombs at them. Any effort of this sort, by
any country, would be dangerously stupid. We won't engage in
this sort of activity, and we will stop anybody else who
tries. We will let the Soviet Union's rate of decline be
managed by our strongest ally: history.

-- By the same token, we won't go out of our way to
prop up the faltering Soviet regime. It s easy to see why in
coming years the Soviets will seek massive amounts of Western
financial and technical assistance. But we and our allies
have learned the hard way that the Soviets use whatever help
we give not to improve their country's standard of living but
rather to build and deploy more weapons. You don't loan a man
money--at any rate of interest--if you know from experience
that rather than feed his family he'll buy a gun and rob your
own bank. Putting aside common sense and morality--which
bankers have been known to do--this sort of business is
financially dumb. The tiny profit is more than wiped out by
the expense of additional robbery insurance and physical
security measures. When Soviet officials come calling for
economic and technological help, we should politely but firmly
turn them away. And we should keep them from stealing what
they want.

-- Our hope is that Soviet leaders will turn their
considerable skills and energies to reforming their system.
We and our allies would like nothing better than a stable,
secure, prosperous, free Soviet Union. If Moscow will display
even the smallest sign of moving in this direction, we and our
allies should and will help in every way we can. Indeed, we
yearn to negotiate seriously with the Soviet Union across the
entire spectrum of contentious issues--arms reduction, of
course, but also the sorts of economic, scientific,
technological, and environmental agreements that would help

improve standards of living and lessen the dangers of war
throughout the world.

-- Qur concern is that Soviet leaders will prove
unwilling, or unable, to undertake fundamental reforms. And
if they can't, or won't, well that’s too bad. The decline of
an empire is never a very pleasant thing for those who live
within its borders, and we wish all Soviet peoples the best of
luck as they go about the difficult business of coping with
the transformation of the current political structure into
something else--something we hope and pray will serve them
better than the structure they have now.

-- Qur goal is to make absolutely certain that at no
time during the coming years do Soviet ‘aadars conclude that
they can somehow save themselves by destroying us. This iS
more than merely protecting ourselves from falling bricks.
That's easy. We need to anticipate the sorts of aggressive

actions that a faltering empire might be tempted to take and
which, if successful, would either reverse the decline or slow

8°
UNCLASSIFIED ®

UNCLASSIFIED 2

it down. And we need to establish. a set of conditions under
which, should in fact the Soviets be tempted, they will in the
end resist on grounds that it just wouldn't work. It's a bit
like establishing conditions in a neighborhood so that a
hungry drifter who peers through the kitchen window of a house
and sees a twenty-dollar bill lying on the table decides, in
the end, to leave it there for fear he couldn't get away with
it. Perhaps in time we could even get that drifter to knock
politely on the door, and to ask if there is any work that
needs doing.

o

12. Obviously, we will need a strong defense to make this strategy
work. More precisely, we will need to prevent the Soviets from cutting
off access to oil and other raw materials that we and our allies import
from Third World countries--as they are attempting to do now in the
Persian Gulf and in southern Africa. We must continue to resist Soviet
efforts to gobble up fragile countries, and by doing so turning these
countries into bases for the re-export of revolution--as they are
attempting to do now in Central America. We must be sufficiently strong
to block the Soviets from driving a political wedge between ourselves.
and our allies--as they are attempting to do now in Western Europe.

And, at all costs, we must be so strong defensively that even in their
worst moments, Soviet leaders won't be tempted to let their missiles fly
in some sort of desperate, last-ditch gamble to destroy everybody in
hopes that they will emerge in control of the wreckage.

13. A strategy of denying the Soviets an external solution to
their problem will generate support for a strong defense because it
offers the one thing people rightly demand for support of any
sacrifice: hope. Remember that by convincing people the Soviet empire
will last forever, Moscow's propaganda network has also convinced people
that the US-Soviet rivalry is a permanent feature of life on earth.
This, in turn, has led to a growing perception that all our defense
spending achieves nothing. They spend, we spend, weapons become more
and more deadly, and the cycle goes on forever; the chances inevitably
grow that something awful will happen, if not by design then by
accident. So depressing and so genuinely frightening is this prospect
that more and more people no longer have the will to face it, and
instead they turn toward silly and sometimes dangerous schemes they are
told will somehow break the cycle. In this category I would include the
idea of a nuclear freeze, and the various proposals floating around
that, in one guise or another, would amount to unilateral disarmament.
In despair, people forget the lesson that Paul Nitze and Dean Acheson
stated so eloquently back in 1950, in their famous memorandum, NSC-68:
"No people in history have ever survived who thought they could protect
their freedom by making themselves inoffensive to their enemies." This
strategy of denying the Soviets an external solution to their problem
will sustain and even generate support for a strong defense--not only
among Americans but among our allies as well--because it suggests that
if-we can hold on for a while longer, the need for such sacrifice will
decline.

)
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIF LEU

14. Bear in mind that what I outline here is a strategy, not a
policy. It is meant to serve as a guide to the formulation of specific
policies, and as a foundation for those policies we choose. Should we
engage in ASAT negotiations with the Soviets? Should we seek a
summit? Should we put a new START proposal on the table in Geneva?
Should we sell them grain? How should we handle the leftward drifts of
Suriname and Guyana? No strategy can--or should--dictate the answers to
questions like these. Too much will--and should--depend on
circumstances of the moment and on our national needs and interests at
the time. A strategy of denying the Soviets an external solution to
their problem is ’a long-term venture, with zigs and zags inevitable and
even useful along the way. Flexibility is not an antonym of strength,
but rather a source of it.

15. In pursuing this strategy through the policy battles that
inevitably lie ahead, nothirg wil] be more vital than a precise
knowledge of the Soviets' state of readiness and, even more important,
their state of mind. In essence, we need to put that country and its
various elites in a sort of intensive-care monitoring system. We must
do even more than we do now--which is a lot--to track the development
and deployment of weapons and troops, the state of the Soviet economy, .
and the prospects for Soviet science and technology. And to an extent
that we have never done before or needed to do, we must track the mood
of Soviet elites--political leaders, industrial chieftains, military
figures, scientists, indeed all members of the Soviet intelligentsia.
For when all is said and done, it is the mood of these people--the
degree of their pessimism and their judgments of their country's
prospects--that will warn us either that the Soviet Union is preparing
for major reforms, edging toward a dangerous, "use-it-or-lose-it"
decision, or merely giving up and accepting its descent into history.
At the same time, we need to make certain that these Soviet elites
understand us more accurately than they have ever understood us up to
now--our military strength of course, but more importantly the strength
of our will to survive as a free people and our willingness to assist
them if only they will cease to threaten our own survival.

16. Let me give you some indication of how people will react to
all this. I have tried out my proposed strategy on several dozen
political figures, journalists, Soviet specialists, and public-affairs-
minded friends and acquaintances. The professional doves reject my
proposed strategy on grounds that it requires continued high levels of
defense spending, provides a rationale for our current efforts in
Central America, encourages support for our Strategic Defense
Initiative, and in general points the way toward a post-Soviet world in
which the US would likely be the only superpower. The professional
hawks reject my proposed strategy on the grounds--so help me--that it
will be viewed as a godsend by the professional doves. As the hawks see
it, this perception of the Soviet Union as a declining empire will give

10
UNCLASSIFIED

ae ea : = ee UNCLASSIFIED

doves the rhetorical ammunition to defeat many of our current
initiatives. “For heaven's sake, let's not poke sticks at a wounded
bear. He's dangerous, so let's back off and do nothing--nothing--the
bear might possibly view as threatening," the doves will say. Or so
fear the hawks. My own view is that hawks and doves have been making
the same arguments for so long, and have become so proficient at making
their respective arguments, that these negative reactions are an
instinctive response to something new. On the other hand, there is a
school of thought which holds that any strategy opposed with equal
vehemence by extremists on both ends of the political spectrum is
probably just right.

17. One immediate benefit will derive from this long-term
strategy. It will help to dampen one of the most bitter and corrosive
debates that has ever raged among Americans and among our allies, and
one that I fear over time will tear the fabric of our societies. On the
one side are those of us who want peace so badly that we are willing to
pay any price for it. On the other side are those of us who also want
peace badly, but who believe that peace without freedom would be
intolerable and, in the long run, violently unstable. With the strategy
that I have outlined here, this debate will peter out as people come to
understand that it is not necessary to choose. We will have peace. And

we will be free.
1A

Herbert E.

ll
UNCLASSIFIED
