Guyana BritishH Guiana)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119171, dated 4 March 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119171).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LIGENCE

the

ant
if

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTEL

Concurred in

NATIONAL:

.

evie
Y-

RARY =

Mandatory

LB) LIB

Case # NLJ_4

Document # 3

NCE BOARD .:

; aie

icated overleaf

by

UNITED STATES INTELLIGE

SF

28 APRIL “1966

ey
“+ at

ED DISSEM

* As Ind

USIB
CONT

. .
\ , <
ta
LL
<q &
w a
roc a ¥ —-
cy 4
yo = Rm
. ” . 00 Ro
3 Vi a.
3 ia are
ao) 0 u &
c Z ™‘
£ —
5 U
< <

The following i
this estimate:

array

Dr. R. J. Smith, for Deputy Director of sent Intelligence.

ment of State eee . Se
Lieutenant General Joseph F. Carroll, “USAF, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency ee
Lieutenant General Marshall S. Carter, USA, ‘Director of the ‘National | Security Fle Te 4

Agency . . : we ; ;

Abstaining: ae a

Energy Commission ; : : ; :
r. William O. Cregar, for Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Oo oe
subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

ing the National Defense of the United States
laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans- .

This material contains information
within the meaning of the espio
mission or revelation of whic

a

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 87.2-66

Guyana (British Guiana)

po

NORTHS

— JwWwesT

Matthews Ridge

™

t
7 Pun
MAZARU IMNPOTAR‘O

ESSEQUIBO

j BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION If
NOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

53012 3-66

Dadanawa
™~

SN

Spring Garde

GUYANA

international boundary

Administrative district
boundary

National capital

Administrative district
capital

Surfaced road

Unsurfaced road or track

100_300 500 700

f

GUYANA (BRITISH GUIANA)

THE PROBLEM
To estimate the prospects for Guyana over the next year or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. British Guiana will probably make a relatively smooth transi-
tion to independence, but racial suspicions between East Indians and
Negroes will continue to dominate Guyanese politics.

B. When (or whether) these tensions break out again into violence
will depend in large measure on the conduct of Prime Minister Forbes
Burnham, leader of the Negro party (the PNC), and of Cheddi Jagan,
leader of the East Indian party (the PPP). For over a year, Burnham
has governed with considerable restraint and Jagan has refrained from
violent opposition. But new elections are due by late 1968, and
between now and then tensions will rise and may at some point get
out of hand.

C. Even after British troops depart in October 1966, Guyanese
security forces can probably cope with sporadic violence. If violence
got out of control, Burnham would probably call for a return of British
troops. If US consent were forthcoming and British troops were avail-
able, we believe that London would comply.

D. The governing coalition of Burnham, a professed but prag-
matic socialist, and the conservative United Force leader, Peter
D’Aguiar, will continue to be a tenuous one. Friction between the
partners over patronage and fiscal issues will probably be intensified
after independence, but chances are that a common fear of Jagan

will hold the coalition together.

af |

~~

E. Guyana’s economy will need substantial foreign capital, much
of it from the US. The need for aid will keep Burnham on tolerable
terms with the US, UK, and Canada, though his administration will
incline toward a neutralist posture in foreign affairs. If Jagan came
to power, he could, because of his Marxist sympathies and his con-
nections in Communist countries, count on some help from these
countries. However, they probably would fumish only token quan-
tities of aid.

ail

DISCUSSION

I]. THE SITUATION

Background

1. After years of political and racial strife, British Guiana will become inde-
pendent on 26 May 1966, Although the UK had long desired to be rid of
this underdeveloped, unprofitable, and often troublesome colony, it wanted to
leave a reasonably stable government behind. The coalition which took office
in December 1964 persuaded the British that it gave promise of such stability,
and in November 1965 terms for independence were agreed to. The new
country will be called Guyana; it will be a member of the Commonwealth;
it will have a governor-general, at least until early 1969; thereafter the new
National Assembly may vote to change the country to a republic. The consti-
tution specifies that new national elections must be held by December 1968.

2. Isolated from its mainland neighbors by roadless expanses of forest and
grassland, Guyana is in many ways like an island. Over 90 percent of its
650,000 inhabitants are concentrated in the intensively cultivated coastal region.
This constitutes less than 10 percent of the total area and in it the major agri-
cultural commodities, rice and sugar, are grown. Bauxite deposits, which pro-
vide Guyana’s most reliable source of foreign exchange, are located in the
interior. The economy suffers from ills that plague other underdeveloped
countries—heavy dependence on a few exports, a high rate of unemployment,
limited investment, inadequate transportation facilities, and a shortage of tech-
nically trained personnel. Zs

3. The two predominant ethnic groups are the East Indians (who comprise
about 50 percent of the population) and the Negroes and mixed strains (about
44 percent). The remainder consists of Amerindians, whites, and Chinese. The
East Indians have a high birth rate and are the fastest growing part of the
population. With the exception of an increasing number of business and
professional men in Georgetown and other towns, they live in the country,
working on their own small rice fields or on large British-owned sugar planta-
tions. Most of them have remained Hindu or Moslem. The Negroes are gen-
erally Christian; they tend to live in the towns and to work in the sugar
factories and bauxite mines. They hold most of the positions in the civil service
and the police.

The Politics of Race

4. Guyanese political life is dominated by considerations of race. The People’s
National Congress (PNC)—the party of Prime Minister Forbes Burnham—is
largely based on the Negro population, while the People’s Progresssive Party
(PPP), led by former Premier Cheddi Jagan, depends on East Indian support.
A small third party, the United Force (UF), cuts across racial lines to appeal

ot

ff

to conservative businessmen as well as to most voting Amerindians. It is the
political vehicle of Peter D’Aguiar, the present Finance Minister and Burnham’s
partner in the coalition.

5, The dominant political figures continue to be Cheddi Jagan and Forbes
Burnham, once political allies in the PPP, but since 1955 bitter rivals. Jagan’s
appeal to the East Indians, combined with the organizational talent of his
US-born wife, paved the way to PPP victories in the elections of 1953, 1957,
and 1961. When first in power, Jagan’s general demeanor and ties with inter-
national Communist organizations antagonized the British, who removed him
from office. He regained their respect by his moderate behavior, but after his
1961 victory, his policies frightened the businessmen, and his open espousal of
East Indian interests exacerbated racial tension. Burnham broke with the
PPP in 1955, and by 1957 had succeeded in organizing the PNC. In 1962,
political opposition to Jagan’s programs was transformed into interracial violence.
That year, as well as in 1963 and 1964, this violence became so serious that
Jagan had to appeal to the UK for troops.

6. Under these conditions of turbulence, the parties were never able to agree
on a political system for an independent Guyana. Finally in October 1963,
D’Aguiar, Burnham, and Jagan signed a joint statement agreeing to accept
whatever political solution the British Colonial Secretary might devise. The
latter, to Jagan’s dismay, issued a decree changing the electoral system from
plurality elections in each constituency to country-wide proportional representa-
tion. In the December 1964 election, the PPP received 45.8 percent of the vote
and 24 seats,! the PNC 40.5 percent and 22 seats, and the UF 12.4 percent
and 7 seats. By joining in a coalition, the UF and the PNC were able to form
a government which commanded a majority of the legislature.

The Present Coalition

7, After the turmoil of the Jagan years, the coalition government has provided
greater stability than many observers had dared hope for. Burnham has exer-
cised considerable restraint in the political field and has taken a number of
steps to mollify the fears of the East Indians. The confidence of the business
community has been largely restored, and economic growth, which had declined
sharply with the 1963 disorders, seems now to have started up again.? While
the Jagan government's policies discouraged private investment, Burnham has
actively sought it to help underwrite his recently drafted seven year develop-
ment plan. Though Burnham's hopes are over-optimistic, his plan envisages
around $300 million in private investment, chiefly foreign. It also calls for
foreign aid to help finance public sector expenditures of approximately $195
million.

Though three of these PPP members now list themselves as independents, they continue
to vote on many occasions with their former party.

* Gross domestic product declined from about $178 million in 1962 to less than $161 million
in 1963; it rose to $175 million in 1964 and to nearly $190 million in 1965.

) a

fe

8. Within the coalition itself there are strains. Significant personal and
political differences separate Burnham, a professed but pragmatic socialist, from
D’Aguiar, his conservative, business-oriented Finance Minister. Their coalition
is largely held together by a common fear of Jagan’s return to power. D’Aguiar’s
devotion to a balanced budget has clashed with Burnham’s schemes involving
deficit spending as well as his continuance of subsidies to the East Indian rice
growers. D’Aguiar fears that Burnham will be harder to deal with after the
British leave.

9, At present, public order is maintained by a police force of about 1,650
men, with a 400-man reserve. They are supported by a battalion of British
troops which is scheduled to leave on 31 October 1966, after which a few officers
and other ranks will stay on to train the new Guyana Defense Force (GDF).
The GDF will eventually consist of a battalion of about 530 men, which the
British hope will be fully trained by 31 October 1966, and a reserve battalion
of around 730. These units are to be racially balanced and eventually under
indigenous officers, but at present no Guyanese are sufficiently trained to serve
as senior officers in the GDF. Until they are trained, the British will supply
the necessary officers, including the commander.

10. The strength of the police force is scheduled to increase to about 1,800 by
the end of this year, and to 2,200 in five years. It has traditionally been about
80 percent Negro. Although it has generally been impartial, the East Indians
have tended to look upon it as a Negro-dominated body which cannot be trusted
to protect them in emergencies. To rectify this racial imbalance the current
enlistment program (adopted on the recommendation of the International Com-
mission of Jurists) aims at enrolling three East Indians out of every four
recruits. Burnham presumably hopes to insure the loyalty of both forces by
political control over their commands.

The Opposition

1]. Since losing the general election in 1964, the PPP has been in a state.of
considerable disarray and the country has enjoyed a period of relative tranquility.
This is in part due to Burnham's detention of the more extreme PPP leaders, and in
part to his moderate policies toward the East Indian population. But beyond
this, Jagan’s party has been beset by the troubles that often accompany a fall
from power. It has been torn by disaffection and dissension and split over
tactics and strategy. Some important party figures have resigned, others have
been suspended or fired, and still others have been replaced.

12. Nevertheless, despite serious dissension and continuing criticism within
the PPP and Jagan’s inability to disburse patronage as he could when in power,
there is no substantial evidence that the loyalty of the vast majority of the East
Indians has been diminished or that Jagan’s control of the party organization
has been significantly loosened. Jagan continues to be an outspoken Marxist
leader and maintains connections with Castro’s regime in Cuba and with other
Communist governments. But inside Guyana this posture has little to do with

a 5

SRBRET

his political standing; there his appeal is that of a strong racial leader. Jagan
still commands the support of most of the East Indians because they continue
to fear and distrust Burnham and the Negroes, because they prefer to be gov-
erned by one of their own race, and because they still find Jagan more attractive
than any other Indian leader.

13. PPP policy has also been shifting and inconsistent. Up to now, Jagan
has eschewed major violence; such violence as has occurred has been directed
far more at property than at individuals. Jagan presumably recalls the effective-
ness of the Negroes in the disorders of previous years, and he fears that Burnham
needs scant excuse to bear down ruthlessly on the PPP. The PPP members of
Parliament, having originally refused to take their seats, have long since returned
to the legislature. The evidence to date leaves us uncertain whether Jagan has
decided to carry on the opposition by “parliamentary” or by “revolutionary”
means, or by a combination of the two.

ll. THE OUTLOOK
Political Prospects

14. Burnham’s performance to date, combined with Jagan’s current indecisive-
ness, has improved the prospects for a relatively smooth transition to independ-
ence. But the formidable array of social, political, and economic ills that have
plagued the country in the past will persist. With the departure of British troops
at the end of October 1966, the likelihood of an outbreak of violence will be
increased.

15. Independence will also probably bring the suspicions and hostility between
the coalition partners into clearer focus. These might lead D’Aguiar to resign
from the cabinet or Burnham to dismiss him. But even in this event, the fear
that Jagan could again come to power would probably keep the other UF mem-:
bers from leaving the coalition. D’Aguiar’s departure would be a blow to busi-
ness confidence, but so long as the coalition holds together we do not think
that there would be a serious effect on the economy.

16. Although Jagan has not adopted a policy of violence, we do not believe
that he has completely ruled out the possibility of doing so eventually. In reach-
ing a decision he will be influenced by his estimate of several factors: the sup-
port he could muster among the East Indians for a resort to violence; the prob-
able effectiveness of the Guyanese security forces (possibly reinforced by the
British); his chances of coming to power peacefully; and the aid he could hope
to receive from Communist regimes. He may adopt a more moderate course
for a limited time, perhaps ending the PPP’s sporadic sabotage and taking a more
constructive attitude in the legislature. He may repeat his offer to enter into a
coalition with Burnham, an offer that Burnham would regard with suspicion and
would almost certainly spurn. At any rate, Jagan will probably continue quies-
cent until he can spot some exploitable vulnerability in the Burnham government.
Flare-ups could be sparked by a few independent extremists, but without Jagan’s

fi

a

backing these would amount to little. A more systematic effort, if Jagan at-
tempts one, would probably take the traditional form of widespread disorder and
terror rather than an organized guerrilla movement.

17, Even after the British troops depart on 31 October, the local security forces
will probably be competent to deal with violence on the limited scale experienced
since the 1964 elections. However, it is unlikely that they could control a situa-
tion of near anarchy like that in the worst days of 1963 or 1964. If violence did
get out of hand, Burnham would probably call for a return of British troops.
If US consent were forthcoming and British forces were available, we believe
that London would comply. _ os 4

18. The foregoing suggests that Burnham’s control of the situation is not likely
to be seriously challenged for some months, But in the longer term, he con-
fronts the fact that the East Indians are becoming a majority of the population
and that he must cope with the implications of this development in the 1968
elections. This is a very tricky problem, and how Burnham will seek to deal
with it is by no means clear. He will certainly keep a wary eye on the Jagans
and be alert for an opportunity to detain or exile them, in the hope that other
East Indian leaders would lack their wide appeal. At the same time, Burnham
will continue his efforts to mollify East Indian fears. He will probably continue
to subsidize rice crops, but this will be impeded by considerations of cost. He
may also make it somewhat easier for East Indians to get government jobs.

19. Since Burnham will find it difficult to win substantial and reliable East
Indian support, he may turn to measures designed to overbalance them in the
electorate. He has already suggested encouraging the immigation of Negroes
from the West Indies, or joining in a federation with some of the predominantly
Negro islands. If he became convinced that these schemes were inadequate to
offset the growth in the East Indian voting population, he would probably seek
to postpone, or to rig, the 1968 elections. Any such attempt to perpetuate him-
self in power would alarm the East Indians and increase the chance of out-
breaks. All things considered, the pre-election period is likely to be a turbulent

one in Guyana.

Economic Outlook

90. Economic growth will depend to a large degree on Burnham’s success in
obtaining private and public capital for his government's seven year development
plan. He will press ahead with efforts to get it from the US, Canada, and the
UK. While the climate for foreign investment will probably remain favorable
under Burnham and capital flight is not expected to be serious, financial de-
mands on the government, both for current and developmental expenditures, will
probably grow faster than revenues. Hence, Guyanese requests for foreign
assistance are likely to exceed even the sizable ones already planned.

91. In the short run, the rice industry poses a major problem to the Burnham
government. A way of life to the majority of East Indians, rice is inefficiently
produced on small family farms and is generally of inferior quality. To insure

gf

ff

the loyalty of his East Indian followers, Jagan encouraged the increased pro-
duction of rice. He found a new major outlet for it in Castro’s Cuba, which
was willing to pay cash at prices above the world market. These terms have been
denied to Burnham, who has accordingly had to sell rice where he could at
world prices. Yet he has felt compelled to continue the high payments to the
rice growers in order to avoid serious disaffection, as well as the possible dis-
orders that could result. This subsidization places a strain on the budget—
and on the relations between Burnham and D’Aguiar.* To diversify agricultural
production is an obvious solution, but it is an expensive and long-term one, on
which little progress has been made.

29, The long-term future of Guyana’s economy will continue to be clouded by
the problem of employment. Unemployment is estimated at 21 percent of the
labor force. Underemployment is difficult to quantify, but it is extensive,
especially in the rural areas. Planned expansion of investment in bauxite and
other extractive industries will improve the government’s revenues and foreign
exchange position but will not provide a large number of additional jobs. The
same is true of investment to mechanize agriculture.

Foreign Affairs

23. Burnham will seek to maintain a neutral posture on the international scene.
He may trade with and accept aid from Communist regimes, but he will continue
to recognize his country’s ultimate dependence on the US, UK, and Canada.
Jagan received a considerable amount of help from Cuba in years gone by, but
even were he to return to power he would probably now find Castro less able
and Castro’s foreign sponsors less willing to provide much assistance, though
token aid would probably be forthcoming.

94. Guyana inherits border disputes with Surinam and with Venezuela. The .
former involves little territory and can almost certainly be amicably resolved.
The latter is more troublesome; it involves over half of Guyana’s area and is an
emotional political issue in Caracas, which claims that the settlement made 70
years ago was fraudulent and is hence invalid. In February 1966, the parties
agreed to refer the case to a joint commission which has four years to reach
agreement, failing which the parties are pledged to seek a solution through the
UN. We think the matter will be dormant for the next couple of years, though
it could be revived during the 1968 Venezuelan presidential campaign.

*In 1965, the Rice Marketing Board, the government's purchasing and marketing agency,
incurred a loss of nearly $2.5 million.

. of

a 4. This ‘document was + disseminated byt the Central 1 Intelligence Agency. This « copy a
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a !
-* ‘need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be ) Suthorized by the

, following officials within their respective deportments: 4 EY

= a. “Director ‘of Intelligence ‘and Research, for the ‘Department ‘of State
“ b Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
_ Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ~~ .--

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the :
Department of the Army . - an
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (teligence, for the Department of the.
: 7: Navy ; 7
e. - Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air a

. Force . .
mo A Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Eneray Commission .
' _-g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation 7
h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency — : oe
i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency _

co 2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with ”
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. .

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may ~-.> : °°.
retain it for @ period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the ss.
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per- we
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency # to retain: it in accordance with 7
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. a. ae

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas- a
sified: FOR Opgenetse ONLY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State ; ;
Department of Defense , Se , oan
Atomic Energy Commission oS
-Federal Bureau of Investigation
