BlankK) Meeting with BlankK) at Fourth of July Reception
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012359, dated 5 June 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012359).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4.3(a\(4

COPY

$5 July 1962
TO: Chief, SR

FROM: Chief of Station, Moscow
SUBJECT: MEME Mecting with NNN at Fourth of July Rece ption 1.3(a)(4)

REFS: A. DIR 0067
B. DIR 0072
Cc.

l. Forwarded herewith is ae report of his meeting with { a(a)(4).
in Spaso House during the Fourth of July reception held there. Here follows an
account of the action taken here in preparation for this meeting and brief comment on
the meeting itself.

2. The possibility of the meeting and the various contingencies with which .
we would be concerned if and when it took place were discussed with
when I returned from London, We decided that would scout Spaso by 1.3(a)(4)
himself for dead drop possibilities; this he did, for the last time on 3 July.
The dead drop site finally selected was on the underside of the cover of the water
tank of the only toilet in the men's room, and suitable preparations were made
to accommodate a 9" x 4"'x F package from us to ME and a similar
package from him to us.

3. To be included in the package from us to ME were: 1, 000 rubles
in 25 ruble denominations; the operational note delivered here by ME the 1.3(a)(4)
operational note received via reference A; and the addendum to the latter received

via reference B.

4. and I met, using the pretext of a security briefing by 1.3(a)(4)
jn the secure room on Z July. The entire meeting plan was reviewed
with Mequis and, because we would not meet again until the morning of the 4th,
he was briefed on the required action for a two-way pass via dead drop.

5. Imet MEE on 3 July as agreed upon in London. He. reported that,
up to that time, there had been two meetings between cc ee
and that there would be no need for a two-way pass at Spaso; might
have something for us but he doubted it. Iasked what had been passed by -
: and, from ccount, it was clear that
had received everything we had for him. ae also reported

that would not be available in the West per references A‘and B,
apparently for the same reason which squelched his two earlier planned trips.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE —

1MAR 1992

ae
ee 1.3(aN4

page 2

6. Ata second meeting with MMMM ©m the morning of 4 July (with [x

and also present), the final plan for identification of JNJ to
and, as an outside possibility, a pass from him to us, was gone  1,3(a)(4)
Over and made firm.

s
L,

7. EE and PETROCHENKO of reference C (hereafter refered to
as Identity) appeared in the reception line at 1225, the reception having been
scheduled 1200-1330, With stragetically stationed in the immediate 1.3(a)(4
area of the reception line (Minister Counselor and wife) to recognize
as he entered, the latter was immediately recognized and the signal given to
As the attached report and wference C indicate, there never was a
problem in recognition but only in managing some sort of separation, at least
temporarily, between ME and his companion, Identity. This was
never accomplished to our ‘Satisfaction, chose a less-than-one-
minute-long interval to turn completely aside from Identity in order to tell |
that he would have som ething for him next time and to receive
reply in kind, but this was apparently as far as he wished to go. From
and my Own observations, he was seen at no time during the reception
without Identity. While this was a bit of a disappointment to us, since
had been briefed to touch on future contacts if this became Securely feasible,

that we are not yet certain how his name found its way to the invitation list. It
does not appear on the "working invitation list'! and, when I briefed the Minister
Counselor this morning on the happenings. on the 4th, he was unable to account
for Identity's pressence. It is quite possible that the name was placed on the final
list by after the Minister Counselor had indicated to him that

should be invited (one name was apparently deleted in order to
accommodate PETROCHENKO; we are forwarding both the working and the final
list by the next pouch.) The calli g card which PETROCHENKO gave to 1.3(a)(4)
would indicate that he belonged on the list, and we do not necessarily view it as
sinister that he and remained glued to one another during the
reception (we cannot be entirely certain of who was watching whom); however,
this behavior does fit the unfortunate pattern of BN interest in
and to this extent we find it disturbing.

1.3(a)(4)
6 July 1962
page 3

9. I have the following comments on MME contact report: 1.3(a)(4)

a. Para 2: (ED involvement with was coincidental 4 3(a}(4)
rather than contrived, , He happened to be standing near when Mrs.

JONES when Mrs. J GNES decided the time had come to spend some time with
the Soviet guests, and forthwith introduced herself and to
and his companion. (It is entirely possible that, recognized both
names as connected with the MN dead drop.) I should add that I observed
at one point in the reception, in animated conversation with
and his companion; I have not yet had the opportunity to debrief but I.
will apprise you of any significant results as soon as I do. I find the coincidence .
which pushed WJ into contact and whatever it was that prompted the ’
contact, unfortunate, but there was. so much mixing of the various
groups and individuals wi thin the groups that I do not believe the se contacts. should
necessarily be viewed with alarm.

b. Para 3: From the limited opportunity I had for observation of

he was certainly in complete control of himself and on top of the 1.3(a)(4)

excellent health. I last saw him and PETROCHENKO drinking whiskey from sh¢
glasses on the veranda at 1335, by which time the bulk of the Soviets--by no means
all--had departed.

c. Para 3: The tobacco delegation mentioned here represents our first 1.a{ay(4

opportunity to get NN and MMM together; we shall pursue it and keep you
advised of any significant developments.

a 4.3(a)(4)
Attachment: 3 Report” | |

1.3(a}(4)

Attachment to MMI 6 July 1962 1.3(a)(4)

SUBJECT: Meeting with MMMM at July 4 Reception

le. | was among the last to arrive at the reception, not coming
until about 1225, He was with PETROCHENKO. WE, spotted him an

a
gave the signal (a wink) to "After about five minutes JB) began 1.3(a)(4)
moving in direction, talking briefly to Soviets, as he had been

doing during the whole reception. _ He introduced himself to PETROCHENKO and
then 7 | had his coat unbuttoned and tie-clasp showing, -The
three chatted briefly and then PETROCHENKO said he was looking for W Se
PETROCHENKO and invited BMJ to come into the barroom
(next door) and have a drink. said he would just look for WOODS. He
could not find WOODS, so went in to have the drink. Then he was introduced
toD. M. G and Ye. I. LE - (Note: PETROCHENKO did most of

the talking. © was, thought MJ slightly deferential to him.
“All, of course, were deferential to GVISHIANI.

1.3(a}(4)

te Be ’ then walked away, going into the other room, ostensibly to look 1.3(ay{4)
again for WOODS. He came back perhaps fifteen minutes later and saw .

and Mrs, Bill JONES —a and PETROCHENKO. 4°
approached the group, but as said "let me introduce you" era
3was pulled away by a somewhat drunk TIMIR EVs Agricultural” 670%
‘Academy official, and asked to drink to their new friendship. [NI returned in
a few minutes, at which time took glass to fill at the
bar. Thus had his first chance to talk to alone. The |
conversation was innocuous for a minute or so, when said, "I will
have something for you next time." replied, 'We will have something
for you next time." BE thinks may have preceded his remark |
with something about "yesterday" but can't be sure. It might have been "Because
of yesterday" or something like that. After this brief exchange the conversation .
returned to the social level. tried to say something else, that we would
try to arrange social meetings, but could not, as turned the
conversation back to pleasantries immediately. did not get anything said
except the one sentence above. The whole exchange was very brief.
did not change expression or give any indication of a variation in the conversation.
The room was noisy, but there were people as close as four feet away, namely
PETROCHENKO who was talking to someone else. MB could hardly hear
from 1 1/2 feet away, either in his social conversation or in the one
sentence noted above, tried to move so that ME could talk to
him further (i.e., ae back to a nearby serving table a couple of times.
did not follow or even turn around, After perhaps five minutes more
talk with PETROCHENKO and others who wandered by,
left. He did not see again. (Note also asked
while they were talking alone, if his wife were here. said yes, but he did

was at the other

not know where. They probably did not meet, as Mrs.
end of the house the whole time.)

Attachment to paged 1.3{a)(4)

3. Bess VEN oH seemed relaxed, not at all nervous, but rather morose and
not very lifely. There was no indication that he wished to cut short his talk with
nor that he did not want to talk to Americang generally. He talked freely
with many, and, at least with always in English, even if ME spoke
Russian. He drank a fair amount but was not at all drunk, (PETROCHENKO
also talked only English.) They both Suggested MM come to see them at 4.3(a)(4)
work, and Said he might have business with them because tobacco
delegations were to be exchanged. nS

talked more to PETROCHENKO than to, 1.3(a)(4).
eemed to be superior SC eo apparently

stayed with PETROCHENKO the whole time » never

straying from his Presence. (It might have been vice-versa, At any rate, they

were always together.)

may have spent somewhat more time with and 4 3(a\ta}
PETROCHENKO than with other Soviets, but not much, if any. He talked to at

least two other parties for about the same amount of time, and with Many others

for briefer Periods. He talked to Soviets the whole time of the reception (1200-
1330). He does not believe that his conversation with PETROCHENKO and
; were out of the ordinary, They, in fact, were far more forward

6. BWM is positive the brief operational conversation went unnoticed by
others. At any rate, initiated it, apparently preferring to say a 1.3(a)(4)
few words under those circumstances than to try to get alone with even

aaa 1.3(a)(4)

Wh

1.3(a)(4)
