El Salvador: Government and Insurgent Prospects - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049407, dated 4 January 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049407).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Director of
Central
Intelligence

a
,

wee. cite cit Ae WY Ba”

Sia Sor ay Ty Up: e 3 ”

ea os :
an She ft ra

Pastas t'and
) t'Prospects :

ae ea ‘ nr ad

eR, AUP RS” Te a ees ane ee Oe

te sleep

aan ee “by? gins abernye cs.
vm, aa
i

Warning Notice

National Security

Information

Dissemination Control

Abbreviations

Intelligence Sources
or Methods Invalved
(WNINTEL)

Unauthorized Disclosure

Subject to Criminal Sanctions

AK

NOFORN (NF) : Not releasable to foreign nationals
NOCONTRACT (NC) __Noat releasable to contractors or contractor /consultants
PROPIN(PR) Caunon—propnetary information involved

ORCON (OC) Dissemination and extraction of information

ade ae. controlled by onginator bo, vam ihake eek seen
REL This information has been authorized for release 0...
WN WNINTEL —Intelligence sources or methods involved

ment Is available from OFR /
DLB (482-7) 772), printed copies
from CPAS /IMC (482-5203. or
AIM request to userid
CPASIMC,

All materia] an this page _
is Unclassified

Derived (rom muluple sources
wt oe

Sey Onmector of
2 ai. ‘ Central
ie |» | -) Intelligence

Lae

E| Salvador: Government and
Insurgent Prospectsqquay

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparauon of this Esumate:
The Central Intelligence Agency
The Defense Intelligence Agency
The National Secunty Agenty
The Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
Deparment of State
’ The Office of Intelligence Suppor.
Deparment of the Treasury

also parucipaling:

The Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence.
a Department of the Army

The Director of Naval intelligence,

Depanment of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff. Intelligence.

Deparment of the Au Force

This Estmate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign intelligence Board

ce

February 1989

~.
te
Aw
a
7
r
‘
Pe
(
S!
~
=

re

—-— Department boundary

‘~—e

ined: oo

Key Judgments _

~e

E! Salvador faces an increasingly unsettled political environment in the
coming year—marked by a presidential election in March and changing
strategies by the guerrillas. Events could have dramatic effect over the next
12 months or so on El] Salvador's political landscape and the position and
influence of the United Sta ich has been key to the country’s political
stability during the 1980s.

The resurgent rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) appears
likely (60 to 40) to capture the presidency from the incumbent Christian
Democratic Party (PDC), which has been weakened by popular disillusion-
ment with economic stagnation, corruption, incompetence, and deterioral-
ing urban security. The Christian Democrats could still stage a comeback
by combining a more aggressive campaign with smart tactical alliances,
but the odds and momentum are against the party.

ARENA's candidate, businessman Alfredo Cristiani, is a capable moder-
ate, but party President Roberto D’Aubuisson has taken an increasingly
prominent campaign role, lending substance to suspjcions that he and other
extremists will be the real power if ARENA wins

f
The guerrilla-allied Democratic Convergence continues to participate in
the campaign, but apparently has been making little progress. There is a
fair chance-(I in 3) that it will pull out if it appears headed for a dismal
showing, is pressured by insurgent commanders, or if the government fails
to deal seriously with the guerrillas’ latest peace proposal. If it pulls out,
the FMLN (Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front) could make a
More concerted——and at least partially successful—effort to disrupt the

election

The election is likely to be reasonably fraud free, and, although the turnout
will probably be lower than in 1984, it should nonetheless be sufficient to
buttress legitimacy.

The war itself is a complex arena where shifting insurgent strategies have
allowed the guerrillas to mask a weakening military capability overall with
more visible and politically successful efforts in the cities. The guerrillas
have lost 15 to 19 percent of their force over the last two years, their base
areas are less secure, and their attacks on military targets have been less
effective. To compensate, they have tripled inetdents in the capital,
attacked previously unaffected areas, and assassinated and forced large

Wii

numbers of officials to abandon their posts; they are increasingly likely to
target US nationals and facilities. The insurgents have the capability to
boost less resource-intensive terrorist activities to a higher Jevel and are
likely to do so; they alter the psychological and political rather than the
purely military dimension of the war ie

External support supplies more than 70 percent of all guerrilla ammunition
needs and is critical to sustaining FMLN operations at current levels.
Suggests a recent increase in external supplies,
probably through Nicaragua QB
Salvadoran military performance has improved markedly since 1984,
although the armed forces’ efforts are still too piecemeal and not yet tied
effectively to civic action. Assuming current trends, we believe that the
government is likely to grind down the insurgency as a military force over
the next three to five years, perhaps reducing its personnel size by one-

third. ay

f
Nevertheless, the guerrillas—while unable to seize power—will still be able
to conduct a prolonged war, depending ever more heavily on terrorism,
sabotage, and small-scale attacks. The terror campaign has the potential to
destroy the always weak civil administration in large parts of the country,
while further undermining civil defense and civic action programs. The
government's inability to counter these tactics is a major weakness of its
counterinsurgency program. ;
We believe political trends in El Salvador—the weakening center and
rightward drift of the electorate—could further polarize politics, enhance
oligarchic influence, and encourage increased insurgent support. There is a
better-than-even chance that an ARENA victory would signal some
rollback of reforms, a tougher political and military posture against the
left, and less inclination than the PDC to investigate human rights
violations—attitudes that probably would encourage vigilantism.

For their part, the guerrillas are likely to continue to pursue a more violent
and headline-grabbing military strategy to make cooperation with the
government too dangerous, convey the image that momentum favors their
side, and provoke the military into further human rights abuses. If the hard
right clearly dominates the new administration, the left would probably
pursue an even more violent strategy—mrore assassinations of high-level
officials and the acquisition of more advanced weapons. (s NF)

In the last year, there has been some increase in armed forces’ and
probably rightwing killings, pointing to the potential for éscalation under
an ARENA administration. In such an atmosphere, the government could

re

lose legitimacy at home and abroad, resulting in pressures for a curtailing
of US assistance and growing sympathy—and tangible assistance for the
insurgents |
Because Salvadoran Government performance is so heavily dependent on

US aid levels, decisions in Washington will continue to be crucial for the
country. The Salvadoran economy will maintain positive growth only by
virtue of US economic assistance and emigrant remittances. A 25-percent

wer cut in US nomic aid, for example, would translate into a GDP loss of

perhaps 3 to 5 percent:‘Some observers believe that a deep decline in
annual US military aid levels would push the army toward a bloody now-
or-never offensive against the insurgents or alternatively promote a highly
conservative defensive posture—either of which would have negative
consequences for the government

Regional peace initiatives are likely to present growing problems to a new

Povernment, especially if ARENA is in power. Only a border verification
mechanism capable of interfering with Sandinista assistance to the guer-
rillas—a highly unlikely eventuality—would be perceived as beneficial.
Otherwise, regional initiatives threaten to force negotiations with the
FMLN, which the armed forces are likely to resist.

The guerrillas clearly want to shift the political battle to Washington and
reinvigorate US politica] opposition to continuing military and economic
support for the Salvadoran Governmént, and their recent peace proposals
are part of that effort. Although there are probably some linked with the
guerrilla left who wish seriously.to pursue these negotiations, the insurgent
leadership intends the peace proposals principally to stave off military
pressure and it e rejection of the proposals to legitimate intensifica-
tion of the i

- Should the insurgents offer a proposal that has genuine promise for a
political settlement, US involvement and pressures will be crucial to
overcome institutional resistance to compromise and keep the renegade
right wing from destroying the political environment. For such involvement
to be effective, however, Salvadoran authorities will have to remain
convinced—via US aid levels—th commitment to preventing a
guerrilla takeover remains firm

A negotiated agreement to postpone the election for six months in response
to recent guerrilla proposals would not affect our judgment of the likely
election outcome. Jn addition, we doubt that it would lead to a lasting
settlement because, at a minimum, hardline insurgent elements would

-_

renew the guerrilla strugele :

: ay

Contents

The Economic Equation

Impact of the War ere ee, ees
Future Aid Levels Seite eet Sedeaitle ures _

The Challenge From ARENA Ble. eA ae ee ee ee

The Leftandthe Election  =—§s_—s——> ee pila MA te Dt on cd
Role of the Smaller Parties _ See oes

cde The Military and the Election — ET eee et er ee,

= The Balloting AN it fo Mea Sh ats we neat TT ee poe NOs td
The Insurgents—Shifting Political-Military Strategy —__
Implementing the Counteroffensive Plan oe

FMLN Problems

Likely Insurgent Adjustments in 1989 :
External Support 12
Government Counterinsurgency Performance S
Armed Forces Performance Over the Longer Term _ 20
Impact of the Election on the War Be Tee lilt, Dect teint OS A 3 am

An ARENA Victory: Two Scenarios 22
The Left's Postelection Strategy 23

External Factors eebath bene. eno: eoiphte pode 4

Nicaragua oe oy Pedal ae

__Implications for US Interests . ee 2) eee

i

|
|

OP hwy isla uo

'o oo oo |

|
|

wo

-j|Oj};O

—_
mo

ce

Discussion ‘

The halting performance of the economy and a guer-
villa war that threatens to drag into a second decade
have escalated political tension and fed popular disen-
chantment in the runup to the March 1989 election.
At stake in the election are political, ecanomic, and
strategic issues—potentially including the bilateral
relationship with the United States that has been key
to stability in El Salvador during the 1980s. The
country’s primary political actors—the incumbent
centrist Christian Democratic Party (PDC), the right-
ist Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA), and
the guerrilla and political left—dispute even the basic
realities of the situation. Each of them secks to
persuade not only the domestic population but also
important foreign actors to embrace its perspective
and support its solutions for the economy and the war.
Dramatically different scenarios are possible for the
country—and US interests—depending upon who tri-
umphs

The Economic Equation

E] Salvador, in coping with its myriad economic
problems, faces the irony of relative success—due, in’
large part, to US aid and emigrant remittances—that
nonetheless falls substantially short of popular aspira-
tions. In 1988, El Salvador's economy registered a
sixth consecutive year of GDP growth—1.5 percent—
despite warecosts and losses of about $130 million.
Still, economic advances have not kep! pace with the
rapid population growth (currently at 2.6 Percent),
and per capita income has declined to 75 percent of

' This Estimate prajects economic, political, and military trends in
El Salvador largely over the next year. although analysis outlines
developments in some instances that look beyond 12? months In
addition, it places judgments within the framework of the 19 March
presidential election, assessing the implications of a win by eather
the Christian Democrats or the Nationalist Republican Alliafice for
the prosecution of the war and economic management. and for US
interests in the reg

1980 levels. Again this year, we expect real GDP
growth al the outside will not exceed 3 percent, and
will probably be lower—truling oul any i ement
in living standards. (See figures | and x]
Tight credit and foretgn exchange liiaited mvestment
and production in both 1987 and 1988. The financial
constraints damping agricultural and indestrial pro-
duction were compounded by disturbances m power
and water supplies, transportation shutdowns, infra-
structure damage, bad weather, bureaucranc delays
in construction contracts, and high investment risk
due to the war and elections. Last year, implementa-
tion of structural economic adjustments—inacluding
utility rate hikes, a federal hiring freeze, aad curtail-
ment of capital expenditures—mitigated a 30-percent
fall in coffee tax revenue. Nonetheless, both under-
employment and unemployment remain very high,
totaling as much as 50 percent of the work force, and
nutrient intake for most ¢ population is below
international standards

a
"Even modest growth rates remain highly dependent
on revenue from external transfers. Salvadaran remit-
lances from the United States totaled $300-400 mil-
lion last year, contributing significantly to consumer
purchasing activity. Total US aid—$395 million for
FY 1989—is equivalent to about 50 perceat of El Sal-
vador's budget. (See table |.) Disbursemeat of

FY 1989 funding has been delayed due to program-
matic difficulties, however, and, if the holdup is
extended for several months, it could elimimate posi-
tive economic growth this year

Impact of the War

Without significant change in the domestic situation
that would allow a reallocation of resources away
from the military and war-related destrucaon and at

Figure |
FE) Salvador: Selected Economic Indicators, 1982-88

Note wale change

Reat GDP Per Capits

Real GDP
Percent change index: 1040 = 10g
4 {00

1982 93 94 85 06 87 a8" ©

1982 83 94 85 06 87 88°
* Estumaced

the same time improve the investment climate, the
government probably will continue its high levels of
external dependency through the early 1990s. Indeed,
much of the foreign aid is consumed as an offset to
the direct and indirect economic damage done by the
war. Since 1979, total economic losses are estimated
at nearly $2 billion. We estimate that in 1989 the cost
of such repairs will pe in the neighborhood of $150
million (see figure 3), owing to the insurgents’ more
intensive econamic targeting. In addition, the war has
prevented a needed influx of foreign investment and
led to a deterioration of industrial and agricultural
productive capacity that hks serious long-term impli-
cations.

Future Aid Levels

If US economic aid levels were cut significantly, this
would force the government's budget deficit higher
and compel a further restriction of credit and imports.

Secret

Foreign ead [omesnc
Private lavestpent
ladexs 1974 = 100
ao eran 100

18

O yon2 a3 84 85 86.87 88° 9 «(1982 83 84 8S Bo 87 S

In addition, since most of the budget goes for salaries,
the administration would also be confronted with the
noed 4b make politically unpalatable redactions in the
public-sector work force. In rough terms, if the US
economic allotment were slashed by about 25 percent,
then a +2 percent growth rate would probably be
driven to a GDP loss—perhaps in the neighborhood of
3 to $ percent—in the year following the aid cut. In
addition to attendant political and social difficulties,
there would be an immediate psychological impact.
Left, right, and center would see it as a step toward
US disengagement, and the guerrillas would redouble
their efforts to sever the remaining bonds between
Washington and San Salvador Sa

aera :

a

Figure 2
BE) Salvador: External Trade, 1985-88

Current milion US $

Trade Balance

nL

1.200

400
O 1985 %6 9 as )
The Current Political Dynamic

The flagging economy, along with war weariness and

government corruption, has helped shift political

ends in El Salvador—a strengthening right; a weak-
ening, more fractious center; and a newly formed -

proguerrilla, but legal, left. The national leadership of
the ruling PDC has been tarnished by scandal, inter-
nal divisions, and, most important, by the lack of clear

success with the insurgency or the economy. The

Exports fed Cofle

[7] suger
es eae
600

om

xX)

400

rightwing ARENA party, cultivating a more moder-
ate image, is the key beneficiary of rising dissatisfac-
tion with the Christian Democrats On the left, the
growing realization that military pressure has little
near-term chance of overturning the existing political
structure probably contributed to the decision of
guerrilla allies like Guillermo Ungo and Ruben
Zamora to return from foreign exile and reenter

Salvadoran politics. (s NF)

a

Table 1 Millian US $
US Economic and Military Aid

to El Salvador, 1980-88

Direct Security Total
bconamic Asustance
__ Assistance # eee

1980 x) Xe Ce
1981 1163 : 105 los
1982 ese HS ieee
1983 261.9 Te 43.2
1984 2231 a7
1985 4288 WM) S48
986 HT 9 439.0
1987® S065 116 618.4
1988 3324 tle 414.0

* Includes Economic Suppon Fuads, Development Assistance,
and PL-480

* Includes $52.9 million in earthquake assistance and $147.3
million in supplemental appropnavons.

This table is Unclassified.

PDC Prospects

The divided Christian Democrats face an uphill strug-
gle, and we doubt they can finish on top in the first
round of the election unless they energize their cam-
paign and overcome the political trends evident in the
last legislative and municipal elections, where they
were convincingly beaten. (Gee figure 4.) Because they
occupy the political center and because the dying
President Duarte is still a charismatic figure, the
Christia mocrats could still make a comeback.
Their best Phénce is to deny the rightwing ARENA a
first-round majority and then attract some of the
smaller parties in a second round of balloting. With
astute alliances and an aggressive Campaign, the
second round could be a dogfight too clase to call.

To do so, however, the Christian Democrats will have
to demonstrate that they are more responsive to the
legislative and municipal protest votes stemming from
mismanagement and corruption charges. They will

also have.to wip bac riers from the majority
bloc that show want a new party in
government. we cannot fully assess the

pervasiveness of official cocruphien, failure to do mare
over the last few years than reassign a few cabinet
ministers for alleged misdeeds has seriously damaged
the party’s image and fueled the popular belief that
PDC corruption is rampant. p>

The Challenge From ARENA

ARENA is now the country's largest and best orga-
nized party, and its new, more moderate image,
embodied by candidate Alfredo Cristiani, is enhanc-
ing the party's election prospects. ARENA's founder
Roberto D’Aubuisson and others linked to past death
squad activities have allowed the moderate faction a
widened public role while still exerting significant
influence. Most party leaders, including Cristiani,
admit that the party's appeal to conservasive peas-
ants—and the businessmen who are bankrolling the

campaign—would wane significantly without the
presence’of the charismatic D'Aubuisson.

In addition to hammering the Christian Democrats on
the corruption issue, we believe a major plus for
ARENA will be its successful attack on the govera-
ment’s inability to provide public security in the face
of increased leftist violence and its failure to deliver
promised development programs. In contrast to the
perceived inability of the Christian Democrats to
remedy the security situation, we judge that the
public perceives an ARENA government as more
willing to take a tougher posture toward violent
demonstrators and thase suspected of terrorism and
sabotage. ARENA also has spent the last several
years organizing on the local level and using party
regources to provide a range of services to lower
income voters in the countryside. a>

i

]

nes es
Figure 3
Direct and Indirect Guerrilla Damage to Infrastructure, 1987 and 1988

vat

Million US 8

© GB pec power symem
@ Water cyveom
a Telecom munrcanons

"Includes cost of matenal replacement. as well as
= profics, wages-end producuvity
a _ : ‘

Sens aia

The Left and the Election

The emergence of a legal leftist party, Democratic
Convergence, lends gseater legitimacy to the current
political system, although its activities also assist the
insurgent cause by facilitating leftist opposition
groups and serving a3 8 vehicle for insurgent propa-
ganda. Two of the three parties in the Democratic
Convergence coalition are allied with the insurgent
movement, and presidential candidate Ungo already
has asserted that his campaign is not a ferious quest
for the office, but a vehicle for mobilizing popular,

ro] for negotiations—a key insurgent, objective.

Secret

Whether the Convergence stays in the presidential
race depends upon how jt—end the guerrillas—read
the campaign. Intimidation from rightwing extremists
or the prospect of being embarrassed by its own
lackluster performance at the polls could prompt 8
pullout. In addition, the Convergence would likely
have to withdraw if pressured by guerrilla command-
ers. On balance, there is perhaps 8 }-in-3 chance it
will pull out of the presidential race before election
day, and, to the extent that neither the Christian
Democrats nor ARENA treats recent Convergence-
Backed guerrilla negotiating proposals seriously, the
odds probably |

The Presidential Contenders ead TAzir Platforms.

Fidel Angel CHAVEZ Mena
PDC Nominee

ce

Key plaVorm elements:
* No preconditioned negotiations with FMLN.

: * Continuation af regional peace process.

* Agrarian refarm: no further land expropriations and greater self-manage-
ment af cooperatives.

* Fiscal and trade policy: reduce deficit, crackdown on tax evasion and no
new taxes, selective import substitution and aggressive export policy.

* Supports close ties to the United States. (C NE)

Alfredo CRISTIAN! Buckkard
ARENA Nomiace

ee

4

Key plaVorm elements: |

* Open to negotiations with FMLN.

* Continuation af regional peace process, but make certain El Salvador is
not seen.as US lackey.

* Agrarian reform: no further land expropriations, provision for private
ownership af cooperative farm plots.

¢ Fiscal and trade policy: reduce the deficit, simplify tax code, reduction af

be nominal rates, expansion af tax base, export-led development.
* Considers US involvement in domestic policy excessive. (C NF)

(continued)

: The Presidential Contenders and Their Platforms (coatinued)

Guillermo Manuel UNGO Revelo
Democratic Convergence Nominee

eee el eee

~~

Key plaVorm elements:

© Peace process: seeks negotiated political solution to the war based on
guerrilla peace proposal, with cease-fire and agreement to deescalate war
as first steps. Meanwhile, both parties to the war are morally and legally
bound by the Geneva Accords.

¢ Fiscal policy: “An economic plan to help the people.”

© Sharply critical af US involvement in El Salvador >

Role of the Smaller Parties

Other than the main contenders and the leftist Demo-
cratic Canvergence, only the PDC splinter group, the.
Authentic Christian Movement, could play a poten-
tially significant role in the election. While a reunifi-
cation of the PDC could enhance Chavez Mena's
chances in a runoff, we believe the bitter party split
last fall will make a conciliation difficult, Neither the
Authentic Christian Mavement—nor the leftist Con-
vergence—is likely to win more than 10 percent of the
vote. but each is vying for third place, which will
entitle the winner to a coveted seat on the powerful
Central Election Council. The remaining smaller par-
ties realize that they age not likely to attract signifi-
cant support, and most appear inclined to back the
front-runner, ARENA, in a projected second round.

The Military and the Election

We believe the armed forces will remain impartial,
despite reported attempts by some civilians to solicit
military support for their party. Only in the unlikely

event of uncontrollable domestic violence by the left’ ;
or the right would the gojlisary)ae odast sesart, ster dys Re
to restore order. In our view, however, “tiethilitary is
well aware that their involvement would discredit the
election and jeopardize prospects for international aid.
/
The Balloting
The election itself could be turbulent, especially if the
left pulls out and the guerrillas ratchet up their
disruptive activitiee—which is within their capabili-
ties. Given restrictive voting regulations and some
disillusion with the national contest, the turnout may
be somewhat lower than in past years, but high
enough to buttress legitimacy. The presence of inter-
national observers will also lend credibility to the
process.

The Insurgents: Shifting Political-Military Strategy

More than ever, the guerrillas’ strategy is also focused
on the political and diplomatic arena. This is partly
because of necessity forced upon them by improving
Salvadaran military performance and partly because
ra that their own declining but still
s milifary capabilities are better comple-
ented with o talk/fight strategy ‘that boosts their

legiti t ae same time, their more sophisticated

target 0.7 = gl not only for maximum
pee isc c impectibut also to exaggerate

thelr military prowess. Especially effective psycholog-

ically has been the boost of attacks in urban areas and
traditionally safe locales in the countryside.

The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front
(FMLN) guerrilla coalition has undergone major stra-
tegic shifts. (See inset, page 10.) Following its unsuc-
cessful “final offensive” carly in 198), the insurgents
attempted to ma A red forces’ growth and
tactics in an attempt to defeat them in conventional
warfare. FMLN strength peaked at 9,000 to 11,000
combatants in 1984, as the guerrillas were unable to
keep pace with the government’s growing superiority
in firepower, mobility, and strength. By the end of
1985, the insurgents had reorganized and shifted toa .
strategy of prolonged warfare that concentrated on
, attrition of the military and the economic infrastruc-

é ture. During this period, insurgent strength fell to

‘ 7,000 to 8,000 combatants, and the FMLN force

— . . «structure stressed a greater reliance on smaller, more

mobile units.
More troubling and problematic will be whether the
loser accepts the results. Both the PDC and ARENA In late 1986, while continuing to fight a prolonged
have claimed publicly that the other is preparing to war, the insurgents again shifted emphasis, this time
steal the election, and, while some of the rhetoric is preparing for a strategic counteroffensive. Although
only propagandizing, there are elements in the parties this strategic counteroffensive planning contained un-
willing to cry foul, no matter what the process or realistic elements, at its heart was a military offensive
autcome. Although it is not the mast likely scenario, if | in which local insurgents and a greatly expanded
one of the major candidates were to denounce the BB ringent of militia forces would conduct widespread

returns, the left would reap a propaganda windfall ambush and sabotage activity to tie down government
that could contribute to wider polarization and vio- forces. FMLWN strategic and special forces would
lence. meanwhile attack major armed forces facilities.

Q ay

; Farahuade Marti National Liberation Froat
(FMLN)

The FMLN is generally Marxist-Leninist, pro-
Cuban, and decidedly anti-US. All five guerril-
la groups comprising the F. MLN trace their
origin, directly or indirectly, to the Salvadoran
Communist Party. Many in the leadership of
these groups drew their political training from
Salvadoran student politics af the early 1970s:
Marxist, violence prone, and antagonistic
toward the United States

Despite the dominance of Marxism-Leninism
within the FMLN, there are periodic differences
af opinion over strategic priorities and revolu-
tionary tactics. The People's Revolutionary
Army, for example, has long stressed the pri-
macy af military action in bringing about revo-
lution. while the Armed Forces of National
Resistance has placed more emphasis an politi-
cal organization. These differences do not, how-
ever, represent fundamental divisions regarding
the FMLN's Marxist-Leninist ideological un-
derpinnings. In this regard, the FMLN shares
many similarities with the Sandinista National
Liberation Front (FSLN) in Nicaragua. Were
the FMLN to ever come to power, we believe
that—as with the FSLN—it would coalesce
around a Leninist domestic policy of one-party
control and ultimate socialization af the econo-
my and a foreign policy centered on close
relations with Cuba and hostility toward the
United State

Implementing the Counteroffensive Plan

Tactically, FMLN operations are influenced by both
the strategic counteroffensive strategy and by gavern-
ment operations and capabilities. The insurgents con-
tinue to emphasize low-risk actions to wear down both
the economy and the armed forces, and mass only for
significant operations such as attacks against garri-
sons. (See figure 5.) In 1988, the insurgents staged

12 attacks against large- and medium-size targets—
the same number as 1987. However, 1988 attacks

were less effective in terms of casualties inflicted
C8 percent es

EMLN military activity did increase dramatically in
major urban centers during 1987 and 1988 with more
visible and violent actions, especially in San Salvador
where actions tripled between 1986 and 1988. (See
figure 6.) The use of vehicle-Jaunched “rampas”-——a
locally manufactured mortat-like device —bas permit-
ted the FMLN to conduct headline-grebbing daylight
attacks on major government facilities without a
significant risk of insurgent assets

Local government presence is a major, continuing
target for the insurgency with attacks against town-
halls and civil defense ynits rising over the past (wo
ycars. Following the assassinations of nine mayors in
1988, large numbers of local officials have received
death threats and some 49 mayors have resigned in

the las resenting 18 percent of the municipal
ah

FMLN Problems

Despite its aggressive activity in several areas, howev-
er, the FMLN has been able only partially to mitigate
the effect of increasingly longer government incur-
sions into its base areas. (See figure 7.) Diversionary
operations and greater exfiltration of key support and
command elements out of home areas by the guerril-
las have stil] left them vulnerable to armed forces’
disruptiogs of their operational _

recruitment, and training activities

We assess current FMLN combatant strength to be
6,000 to 7,000 (see figure 8)-—* 15- to 19-percent drop
from 1986 strength figures. Because of the counterof-
fensive philosophy, there has also been a major reor-
dering in the composition of troops, reflecting FMLN
emphasis on local forces and militia at the expense of
strategic forces. Although this reordering is a sophisti-
cated adjustment to government combat effectivencss,
the drop in overall combatant strength indicates that
the FMLN has been unsuccessful in its goal to

increase greatly the number of local and militia forces
through new recruitment

raed

10

Ae A

Figure §

E] Salvador: Insurgent-lnitiated Incidents by Type, 1982-88

" A forceful hostile
fares (aleo called aa
*A military action agsinet 6 moving government force
e
Milikary actions euch as eniping,

shells, or elmilar actions thet ene in
gpverument operations rather than 10 defeat tham.
* Dissemination of information by means wch os

ee

aK

w hamper

leafless and Dramatic actions withow verbel
@antent are sot considered propaganda.

The FMLN's military emphasis on the urban theater
is designed to be complemented by an increasingly
militarized and active front group apparatus, but here
the guerrillas have made little headway. While front
group demonstrations have become more violent, they
remain small—an indication that popular support is
not expanding in the cities. More important, they
have not drawn a repressive response from govern-
ment security forces. Furthermore, in spite of continu-
ing FMLN penetration of labor unions, the FMLN is
not significantly closer to being able to call an
effective general strike

11

Likely Insurgeat Adjustments in 1989

We judge that the FMLN cannot launch a political-
military offensive along the lines of its propased
strategic counteroffensive in 1989:

¢ Although the FMLN has developed new militia |
units, these forces are concentrated in or near
FMLN base areas, do not operate independently,
and would be of only marginal value in a strategic
counteroffensive.

a

re
Figure 6

Insurgent-Initiated Military Incidents *in

San Salvador Area, 1984-88

180

° The FMLN has not greatly increased the pace of its
purely military operations nor has it been able to
bring about a lasting strategic dispersion of govern-
ment forces.

¢ FMLN front groups and penetrations of the armed
forces are not able to foment a popular or military
insurrection.

Although the FMLN #s unlikely to abandon its
strategic counteroffensive strategy largely because of
concerns about internal morale, we believe the insur-
gent leadership reslizes that a near-term political-
military victor is nw possible. Without abandoning
preparations for an eventual strategic counteraffen-
sive, the FMLN now apparently believes its best
opportunity is to euphut the existing domestic and
international political climate to force a decrease in
US aid to the Salvadoran Government and pressure
the government to neguusic

We believe FMIN political: military operations over
the next year will focus on boosting the percepuion of
the viability of the insurgency. Militarily, this means
a heavy volume of high-visibility, low-risk Operetons.
The insurgents already are conducting coardinated
harassment sprees of up to eight actions in a single
department in a single night. Electrical sabotage also
is being conducted in concentrated spurts to enhance
impact. The insurgents are capable of combining @
harassment and sabotage spree with a significant
altack to create the impression of military initiative.
In terms of logistics and manpower, the insurgency
probably can sustain e heavy volume of low-risk
operations with only brief lulls (15 to 30 days}. (See
figure 9.) We judge that these operations, in spite of
heavy publicity, will not significantly alter the present
military balance. They will, however, result in a
somewhat greater threat to US facilities and persan-
nel—particularly since the FMLN is becoming in-

creasingly less hesita ploy terrorist tactics and

to attack US on

In addition, we believe the FMLN may publicly
announce a shift from the preparatory phase to the
preliminary phase of tbe strategic countgroffensive.

This rhetorical leap will mean nothing in terms of
insurer military capsbilities, but may receive inter-
national attention and bolster insurgent norte ny

External Support

Still key to insurgent strategy and current force
structure is the continuing flow of external support.
Such support—especially ammunition—remains the
critical factor in allowing the FMLWN to conduct
military operations at current levels.

een cece tee

Boundary repreresiaion «

Figure 1 _ ul ROL ODSErTy ewInomieine
El Salvador: Guerrilla Operating Areas ‘ 80 Kubmetere
t a ; BO bdes

1986

GMD Base aves
GEE Disputed area

1988
GMB Base aren
GRA Dieputed area

Base areas Areas where strategic mMonile forces, Desputed areas Areas m wtech ihe guerrillas are

local guerrilla units, major command eiements, and Contesting the military tor contro! Such an area may
semce and support organizations ae consistently . endence same of (he charactenstics of a base area
located In addition, (hese areas normally contain c 7 te wncjude having command elements and local querrills
8 sophisticated, well-established guerrila intrestructure umts based in the area. wah an occasional strategic

mobile force until being camped in it

xz —— reer

13 ==:

Figure 8
EJ Salvador: Relative Military and Insurgent
Force Levels

Thousands

ow) Carverameni
forces

Salvadoras Government Milita Expendit
Percemtage of the Central Govermecat Bedget

The insurgents have attempted to alleviate their con-
tinuing dependence on external materiel support by
locally manufacturing “populsr” weapons. These
eflorts have produced an impressive number of home-
made weapons that the insurgents are using with
Increasing success, but the programs produce little
small-arms ammunition-~the most critical insurgent

requirement aa

the FMLN must
Inhitrate at least 70 percent of its basic ammunition
needs—and 100 percent for such items as AK-47
rifles and RPG-2/7 rocket launchers. In addition, the
insurgents murt infiltrate large numbers of fuses and
blasting caps to make homemade mines

In 1987, the rebels captured only 82,000 rounds of
rifle ammunition from the government—compared to
the 300,000 rounds stored in a single guerrilla ware-
house. The insurgents have set up small ammunition
manufacturing facilities, but these have done little to
Clase the big gap between expended ammunition and
domestic sources of supply and acquisition. t year,
army patrols uncovered more large caches of ammu-
nition than‘previously, also pointing toward major
external flows.

Weapons of various types also continue to be infiltrat-
ed into El Salvador. While weapons infiltration is ata
lower level than in 1983 and 1984, the insurgents need
to replace older Vietnam-era M-16s, arm their new
forces, and replace weapons lost to the government.
Currently, the insurgents are losing two weapons to
the government for every one they capture. (See table
2.) Captured guerrillas also are reporting that some
units are now being equipped with AK-47 rifles vice
the M-16/AR-15. We believe that Nicaragua—often
acting in concert with Cuba —-continues to be the
logical conduit for much of the insurgents’ logistic
necds.

14

Figure 9
FMLN Force Structure, Strength by Faction, and Type of Force

| | Special Forces | Strawgn Forces GEE axa Force: [ __] Armed Militua
Best trained insurgent Serves as the mayor FMLN Consists mainly of guemils Low-level forces which
force, serves as the pn- Maneuver force, pnmaniy unis which operate within Operate in and near their
Mary penetration farce for assigned wa specif specific areas conducung home villages. responsible
significant FMLN attacks zone, but can operate both political expanwon for conducting, low-level
throughow: the country and low-level military sabotage and limited
Operations. persion: with bocal
orces

Force Structure — 1984. 1986. and loge
Percent

0 10 20 w 4 sx 60 n CU 90 100

1984

(988

Strength by Faction and Type ef Fotce. 1908 ; Strength by Faction, 1988
Number '
Faction Type of Force -

Special Forces Strategic Forem Local Forces Armed Militia Total
ERP 100 900- 1.000 1.240-1.390 300-250 2,500-2.800
FPL 164-218 401-504 1.096- 1,304 436-537 2.197-2,563
FARN 1-95 200-236 353-400 33-40 ro Te
FAL 26-30 0 364-440 Unknown 400
PRTC "15-20 26 239-291 053 nsw
Toul 437-523. (7H) 1.527-1,750 C2FRLA912-LM4S (95%) 796-900 (1TH) DITTO
People's Revolsmonary Army (ERP) dammed Forces of Liverenon (FAL)
Popater Lieyreuce Fare: (FPL) Rewaboucnary Party of Conical American Warten (PRTC)
Aruaed Forces of Nasneal Rewsiance (FARN) Fessbendo Mare Nauonal Libersison Front (FMLN)

— Tn EEE
Figure 10

Seaborae Logistic Deliveries to

Salvadoran Insurgents, 1987-88 *

0 JFMAMJJASOND

* Like 1987, 1985 end 1986 deliveries averaged
a tonal of 28 per year.

Last ta Captured Net Loss
Mibtary © From
Miliary *
1985 1.235 1M 981
1986 119 3% 38)
1987 48 426 $22

Note: This table chews that, in the last two years alone, the FMLN
searty 1,100 weapous more than It bas captured from the
. These figures de net take late account the edditions!

the guerrills lnventery dee to norma! weer and tear of

— =
Monetary donations from Western organizations.
including some in the United States, continue to meet
po all a of insurgent financia| needs.

the dimensions of financial sid is scat-
tered, but sufficient to underline its continued impor-

tance to the war efor! ae
QR revealed that one of the largest guern

factions—but stil] only one of five—acquired $2.5

edi dhcnnamuasmmnmanasacciigs

courier admitted to carrying from $40,000 to $70.000
per month, which would equate to $480,000 to
$840,000 per year transported by a single individual
from one faction:

Various ruses are used to attract and diver funds GB

a guerrilla-dominated labor coalition sought
in funding for a new building. and. while
organization estimated this was three

times the necessary amount, othe organt-
zations serviced the request’ the
guerrilla-dominated human rights grou
COMADRES Qgagaabonat o one of

the insurgent factions, although the money had origi-
nally been provided b organization to aid
displaced children.

Government Counterinsurgeacy Performance

Over the past few years, the government has imple-
mented 8 two-track counterinsurgency strategy to
defeat the still well-supplied and reasonably well-
funded FMLN. It is based on large-scale sustained
military operations and a nationwide civic action/civil
defense program; the military ¢ been much
more successful than the latter

Salvadoran military performance has improved mark-
edly since 1984, and the armed forces are now able to
Conduct more frequent and effective large-scale sweep

, ion

16

Seabome Deliveries

is

‘Vente Aas
Aduachapée’

\?

“Goasonate

(3) Logistic distribution/
transshipment point
tap Maritime delivery
e— = Supply corridar

a W Kiometers

Qo 3) Melee

ole cote well ie

wrt Be Bie ee

0 e
o ~~

- [ cerstepe

—o aa ‘de

Fonseca

North
Pacific Ocean

Soundery ‘epreceaiation a
eet aecenserty autheriatrre

708441 (#00203) 2 Oy

Y neg

Figure 12S
Salvadoran Military and Insurgent
Casualties, 1981-88 '

Total ESAF "Casale,
4,000

O 198) 2 83 &

operations throughout the country. Further, the mili-
tary has become somewhat more aggressive offensive-
ly, and its development and use of tactical intelligence
also has improved measurably, contributing to a
greater effectiveness in defensive operations as well.
(See figure 12.)

Government casualties are relatively high in absolute
terms, but the army will probably have little difficulty
in replacing its losses in the next year or two. The
morale of the armed forces is good and likely to

5 7) 87 Bs

remain so. Officers are generally optimistic about the
course of the war, although for mast this is predicated
on continued support from the United States.

We do not expect this situation to substantially
change in 1989. The military can continue to main-
tain pressure on the insurgents, to temporanily disrupt

guerrilla hase areas, to preempt insurgent prepara-
lions for major attacks, and to incrementally reduce
guerrilla strength. (See figure &.) Its manpower and
firepower superiorities will lead to continued mea-
sured progress that is likely to reduce the military

effectiveness of the insurgency without dramatically
reducing its scope. on

Military operations tend not to be guided by overarch-
Ing goals, however, but to be piecemeal. A good
example are the multibattalion offensives that disrupt
guerrilla base areas but only on a temporary basis
since they do nol result in a permanent expansion of
government presence and contro}. Uneven leader-
ship—because of an overreliance on seniority rather
than merit for military promotion—leads to inconsis-
tent application of the kind of aggressive small-unit

tactics necessary to decisively engage and defeat the
insurgents.

Perhaps more important, the civic action/civil defense
program has never had strong government or military
support and continues to founder. The civic action
program targets key rural areas with projects de-
signed to extend government services and security,
but, despite its ostensible importance, military and
civilian support waned in 1988. Overall progress has
been uneven over the years because of civilian bureau-
cratic ineptitude, inadequate funding, and the failure
of a sometimes indifferent military to provide ade-
quate security

Within the past year, there has been increased rhet-
oric and emphasis on a new “hearts and minds”
strategy, but operations have had mixed and some-
what limited results. The government and military
attempted to effect a coordinated campaign in Chala-
tenango Department to displace the guerrillas both
militarily and politically; the operation has been
plagued with delays and has been short on results.
Colonel Ponce, the new Chief of Staff, also initiated a
concerted campaign in eastern FE] Salvador by under-
taking military /civil operations to establish a perma-
nent military presence in cerlain FMILN zones. (See
inset.) The campaign provoked an intensive and ongo-
ing guerrilla campaign of threats and assassinatzons
against civilians and elected officials, however, which

the military was unprepared for and largely unable to
counter

The FMLN's use of terror and assassinations against
mayors and other government officials, while distaste-
ful to many Salvadorans, has underscored the govern-
ment's inability to protect those who support it. The
terror campaign has the potential to destroy the
always weak civil administration in large parts of the
country, while further undermining civil defense and
civic action programs. The government's inability to

counter these tactics is a major weakness of its
counterinsurgency poem

With military assistance declining and the Salvadoran
economy stagnating, 1 1s doubtful the government

could expand current programs. Even when US assis-
tance was bigher, civic action programs foundered

. tae

ls Rightwing Violence Growing? *

The human rights situation appears to have wors- early 1980s. Three new groups have recently an-
ened during the past year, although the overall nounced their existence—the Revolutionary Ant-
level af politically inspired murders remains far Communist Exterminanon Action, the Central
below that af the early 1980s. While the Marxist | American Anti-Commumst Hand, and the Eastern
insurgents continue to account for the majority af — Anti-Communist Command—and are threatening
killings, we believe that rightwing extremists and to kill leftists in retaliation for guerrilla terrorism.
some members af the armed forces increasingly Rightists no doubt have perpetrated some af the
are reacting to the government's seeming inability political killings, but we have no evidence they are
to control insurgent terrorism. (See figures |. and acting with the explicit sanction af ARENA lead-
14 y ers. Even party hardliners like Roberto D’Aubuis-
son probably are reluctant to risk negative politi-
None of the confirmed cases af political killings cal fallout through the reckless use af legal
has been attributed to the right, but vii violence Rp on

re responsible for some af what th ee ees
haracterizes as “suspicious” killings, in contrast =: « egarding rightwing

ch no clear motive can be established. Circum- killings, there has been a discernible increase in
stances surrounding many af the crimes—torture, confirmed political killings by the armed forces.

assassinations by groups, and bodies being We attribute these mastly (0 low-ranking soldiers
dumped some distance from the scene of a crime— and policemen, rather than to a broad, high-level
are trademarks of death squad killings in the conspiracy. The afficer corps generally is aware of

the political sensitivities associated with the

* Note on data’ A number af organisations gather and publicize wants to avoid a cutag af
stauisucal information on political killings and other human Auman rights ike and

rights abuses in El Salvador. Some of these groups employ vital US military assistance. Many afficers proba-
questionable methodologies, and others have been revealed 10 bly do. cover up such crimes to avoid damage to the

be fronts for the insu : Cd ined . 1 1 :

es armed forges prestige and legitimacy eS
While the Agures probably are uat

precise, we believe accurately reflect trends in political esas

violence.

because of inadequate funds. In addition, although course of the war just as they have had a cumulative

there are few officers who advocate death squad effect to date. Assuming current trends, we believe
methods, there is still no indication that the officer that the armed forces is likely to grind down the
corps is ready to investigate and punish human rights insurgency militarily over the next three to five years,
violations by officers. above the rank of lieutenant. perhaps reducing its personnel size by one-third. This
This tends to undermine efforts to win and retain would sharply reduce the FMLN’s capability to con-
support in contested areas. (See inset and figures 13 duct medium- to large-scale attacks on strategic

and 14.) a> targets. Nevertheless, the guerrillas will still be able

to conduct a prolonged war, depending ever more
heavily on terrorism, sabotage, and small-scale

Armed Forces Performance Over the Longer Term attacks. The guerrillas, while unable to seize power,

will continue to threaten seriously the security and
The efforts to remedy deficiencies and pursue re- stability of the country. Gee figure 1s <>
forms, while not likely to have a dramatic short-term pee

impact, will have an important bearing on the broader

ea 20

Figure 13
El Salvador: Human Rights Situation

Nate scule change

Confirmed Political Killings Outside of Cormbet

10.000

§.000

87

Most critical to any projection remains the level of
external aid to the government. The military is highly
dependent on assistance from the United States, . .°
which provides nearly all its arms, munitions, spare
parts, maintenance, training, end medical supplies.

US military aid has been dectining since 1984—in
part due to a leveling off in the growth of the armed
forces. The military was able to cope with a sizable
reduction in FY 1988 by utilizing unspent funds from
the previous year. The present level of aid is sufficient
to meet day-to-day operational needs, but further
reductions would threaten to cur into combat capabili-
ties and to provoke morale problems. Some observers
believe that a deep decline in annual assistance would
push the military toward a bloady “now or never”
offensive against the insurgents and their sympathiz-
ers or a highly conservative defensive posture. Fither
would have clearly negative consequences for human
nights and the prospects of democratic government.

21

ge’ 9

JFMAMJJASONDIJIFMAMJJASON
1987 088

é Impact of the Election on the War

Regardless of which party wins the presidential elec-
tion, the general prosecution of the war will remain
the province of the armed forces, which tolerates little
interference from civilians. A new Christian Demo-
crat government would be especially unlikely to devi-
ate from the way the war has been conducted. While
many individual—and perhaps even the majority of —
officers and soldiers are pro-ARENA, we do not
believe the military would surreader very much of its
authority or sublimate its institutional interests even
to archconservalive politicians. The armed forces will
also continue to have a de facto veto over concessions
the guerrillas may demand in any future negotiations
regardless of the governmeat in power. In a more

ce
Figure 14

E:| Satvador: Confirmed Political Killings

Outside of Combat, 1987-88

GRE by Gverntios (7) by Right
GE by Arincd Forces GHB by Uaiacwn
emuileaws

general sense, however, the weakening of the political
center threatens to interrupt the momentum of sacial
and economic reforms, which could further polarize
Salvadoran society, enhance oligarchic interests, and
simultaneously encourage increased support for the

insurgents.

An ARENA Victory: Two Scenarios

We believe that an ARENA victory could have an
indirect—but profound—impact on the course of the
war. The prospect of a government firmly in the hands
of the right signals a tougher stand, politically and
militarily, against the left. An ARENA government
would be less inclined than a PDC administration to
investigate political crimes by the right and to punish
offenders—a process complicated in any event by

[1 Salvador's corrupt and inefficient judicial system.
It is also likely that the ascendancy of ARENA would
be perceived by some extremists as giving tacit en-
couragement to anti-left vigilantism. Failure by the
next government to demonstrate & commitment to
democratic values and human rights could result in
the loss of vital US assistance and undermine the
government's popular legitimacy. An ARENA
government dominated by extremists like Roberto
D’Aubuisson or Sigifredo Ochoa might, in the name
of nationalism, move to curtail or minimize US
influence. It also could seek quick, dramatic gain
against the insurgency by resurrecting death squads,
prompting international condemnation of the govern-
ment, and generating sympathy— ibly even tangi-
ble support—for the guerris y

Alternatively, an ARENA administration cither dam-
inated by moderates, or in which the hardliners curb
their behavior, probably would not try to alter the
current approach to the war. Such a government,
recognizing the importance of continued US assis-
tance, would attempt to maintain reasonably good
relations with Washington. Should US economic and
military aid levels remain relatively constant and the
new government do nothing to jeopardize its own
political standing, we would expect a further weaken-
ing of the itsurgency, albeit at the current measured
pace. ARENA, which already has contacts with rebel
jeaders,anay continue talks in the hope of building

domestic support, improving its own intern i

image, and maintaining US funding cl
At a minimum, however, we would expect an
ARENA administration, whether moderate or ex-
tremist, to reestablish legislation —which tapsed in
early 1987—limiting civil liberties for suspected guer-
rillas. Such a move would facilitate operations by the
military and police but also would provide ammuni-
tion for human rights critics. Any ARENA govern-
ment is also likely to crack down on guerrilla front
groups and pursue an aggressive legislative agenda. It

probably would not move wholesale to undo all of
Duatie's social and economic reforms, but the party's

ot ot

22

. that could overwhelm other interests.

Figure 15
E} Salvador: Key Indicators
O Low @ Maderaie @ High 4 lncreaung W Decreaung
Strength of the Government Strength of the Salvadoran Insurgeacy
ena: iad 1984 1988
Political Political ren eee
Foreign esustance e @ Saal forage sian ; @ Oo
Foreagn mcogruuon/sate of releuom e@ @ = - i Popelar suppari/onoperauon @ oO
Government internal unity e e re eas lnewrgen! cohewon and unity e ®&
—___ bagel legal mmagratson @ © cl orgy ss Ce
Local government contol/ presence e@ ev ____Payeholagical opersions @ Gas
Cec: ecuon/ prychological aperaucns O eo | Jomrnawonal image @ oO
_—__ Popular muppan/epumary natty
Exar pefermanc oo peu oy
Military ; — ~ Combat | profinsency 7 ae e @
Sarmeegy sad tacucs “O° @ Wespone/Ingrixs seh kes e ©
Mauary Oggresavencss ee o @e. ~ ___Tronp ducapline/moralc @ @
QGyvil-miluary relenons ro - ie Racrenmcat/number e® @
Miltary presence in rural areas “oO @s : ___ Gangraphec scope of operations @ @a
Urban control eo! Secwe aes @ or
Availability of weapane/lagssuics “@ @ a Urban effecuvences Oo @
Teoop morale oe @
Use of inset Oo @
Respect far human nghss Oo CYy ,
;
aqoeen 1.28
strong ties to conservative businessmen and landown- The Left's Postelection Strategy

ers will incline it to shift the country’s economic
program to boosen state contro] of marketing and

probably to roll back at least some of the agrarian
reform.

The future role and agenda of ARENA hardliners,
most notably D'Aubuisson, remain the critical vari-
ables in how far and fast ARENA would try to move.
D’Aubuisson is politically savvy, and the moderate
tone of the ARENA campaign reflects his apprecia-
tion for the practical need to distance the party from
its extremist reputation. He probably understands the
value of continued US assistance but is rash, and

harbors deep resentment against the oak States

23

We beliove the insurgents and their allies will persist
in their efforts to delink the United States from the
Salvadoran Government, regardless of which party
wins the presidency. An ARENA administration
would sharpen the existing polarization in Salvadoran
politics and enhance the effectiveness of insurgent
propaganda. Nonetheless, we believe the insurgents
will pursue essentially the same pastelection guide-
lines against an ARENA or a PDC government,
albeit with some diflerences in degree and emphasis.

Resources have been a primary determinant of
leftists’ tactics and so limit their options. We expect
they will attempt to intensify their urban campaign of
sabotage, terrorism, strikes, and demonstrauions in the
capital and other cities. Militarily, the guernilas will
opt for additional high-visibility, low-risk attacks on
military targets, similar to those carrjed out in the
capital in late 1988 and early cy

An ARENA administration, however, mught also
prompt the guerrillas to heighten a dirty war with
efforts to assassinate high-level targets. The guerrillas
would reason that the real and imagined reputations
of ARENA party chiefs provide both better justifica-
tion and offer greater likelihood of sparking the
hardline response they have unsuccessfully sought
during the Christian Democrats’ tenure. In addition,
the guerrillas and their Cuban and Nicaraguan bene-
factors might come to believe that increased or more
sophisticated arms were a more justified gamble in
such an environment where international scrutiny
would be directed more toward the government than
the guerrillas.

External Factors

Nicaragua. Under most likety scenarios for Central
America, the Sandinistas will be able to devote
increased attention to their goal of promoting revolu-
tion in the region:

© In the event of a regional political settlement, the
Sandinistas would continue to support the FMLN
with logistics and materiel, even if they were bound
by the settlement to cease such support.

¢ Absent a settlement, a winding down of the Nicara-
guan Resistance effort would have limned, but
positive, effect for El Salvador's insurgents, princi-
pally through freeing up some Nicaraguan military
supplies for ultimate provision to the FMLN. Some
Resistance weapons might also find they way to the
FMLN.

Managua—in conjunction with Havana~-would,
however, carefully assess increased support of the
FMLN, balancing its impact in El Salvador with
likely US and other international reaction. (See inset.)
Managua would probably regard moderate increases

in the supply of equipment currently in the FMLN
inventory as a relatively safe risk, although this would
probauly not have a decisive impact on the fighting.
The Sandinistas probably would avoid dramatic mea-
sures-—such as the introduction of new and more
sophisticated weapons—that it beheved could trigger
a reestablishment of US lethal aid to the Resistance.
But if the Resistance were completely neutralized—or
if the Sandinistas did not regard US military action as
a credible possibility—Nicaragua would be positioned
to expand the scope of its assistance. The FMLN
would become a substantially more dangerous adver-
sary were this assistance to include SA-7 surface-to-
air missiles and crew-served weapons such as heavy
mortars. The effect would nat simply be the military
impact but the psychological one. The Salvadoran
military, like their counterparts in Nicaragua, would,
after initial losses, adjust to the provision of SA-75 to
guerrilla forces. The momentum, confidence, and
morale of government forces could be substantially
croded, however, especially if such escalation went
unanswered by Washington.

The Peace Process. Prospective regional peace agree-
meats are a double-edged sword for the Salvadoran
Government that on balance are likely to present
growing pojitice! and public relations problems rather
than practical solutions. This is likely to be especially
true if an ARENA government is in power. In almost
all the guerrilla left is the most obvious benefi-
es

The only regional peace initiative the government
would welcome is a border verification mechanism
capable of interfering with Sandinista logistic assis-
tance to the FMLN—2 highly unlikely outcome given
demonstrated problems in terms of practical imple-
mentation and lack of political will. Otherwise, the
Esquipulas IJ peace process and related regional
initiatives threaten to force the government into nego-
lations with the FMLN, which the armed forces are
likely to resist strongly, adding to civil-military prob-
lems. Indeed, if the Sandinistas and the Resistance
resufne talks under the Sapoa Agreement or a new

24

Cuban, Soviet, and Sandinista Perspectives
on the insurgeacy

Cuba and Nicaragua have long been the principal
supporters of the Salvadoran insurgency Mana-
gua, probably reflecting Havana's guidance, open-
ly promotes a political sertlement in El Salvador
while continuing to surreptitiously provide the
guerrillas with military aid. Nicaragua's role con-
sists primarily af providing transportation, ware-
housing, and coordination for deliveries of supplies
from Cuba, including arms and ammunition sup-
port. It also encompasses training, safehaven. safe
transit, and secure communications facilities to
Support the insurgent military network. We have
no convincing evidence that the Soviets are provid-
ing direct military assistance to the Salvadoran
guerrillas. However, Moscow does give faancial
assistance and military training to the Communist

Party af which is included in the
FMLN

We believe Cuba and Nicaragua over the short
term will try to keep both the political and mili-
tary options open. Havana's interest in the politi-
cal track could begin to wane in the months ahead,
however, and military pressure could be stepped 7
up U the political environment changes—for exam-
ple, if the Central American Peace Plan diginte-
grates or Uf a radical rightist government is elected.
Similarly, U the insurgency began to pase a

framew8rk, international pressure for E! Salvador to

pursue a parallel pr uld enhance the FMLN's
bargaining paxin. a

The recent FMLN negotiating proposal suggests the
possibility that the guerrillas are under pressure to
consider more seriously a political settlement. The
proposal——-presented to the government by the
church—involves postponement of the election; re-
spect for its outcome and elected officials, and drops
longstanding demands for power sharing and resiruc-
turing of the armed forces. (See inset, page 26.) [1 is

26

credible threat of a military overthrow, we believe

Havana and Managua would throw their weight
behind the |

Havana alse provides military training, arms, and
logistic support (0 the FMLN, in addition to more
visible medical and propaganda aid. Fidel Castro,
who helped the disparate factions that comprise
the FMLN 10 unite in 1980, also  contin-
ues to mediate disputes within the group and to
afer tactical advice.

For their part, the Soviets see political action as
the most promising means for the left to increase
influence and to avoid being held responsible for
any escalation in the fighting. While TASS cover-
age af insurgent activity is favorable, Moscow is
critical of the guerrillas for being inflexible and
thinks them naive for believing they can defeat the
government militaril
turned down an FMLN re

the Soviets have expressed interest in the prospects

af the Democratic Convergence and have invited
CEE Nos-ov. 2)

trying to build relationships with such leaders, the
Soviets hope over the longer term to broaden their
influence in San Salvador.

intended at least as much for international as for
domestic impact. Although there are probably some
linked to the guerrilla left who wish seriously to
pursue these negotiations, indicates the in-
surgent leadership views the peace proposa! principal-
ly as designed to stave off military pressure, and it

expects rejection = to legitimate intensi-

fication of the war

particular, the armed forces’ commitment to demac-

racy and acceptable practices in the field continues to
hinge on their dependence on US support. P 7

Given the strong antigringo streak in D’ Aubuisson
and his cohorts, if ARENA were in control of the
government, a substantial reduction of US aid could
spark a brutal military effort to wipe out the guer-
rillas and their supporters, along with reciprocal]
FMLN atrocities. The quick result might be a tempo-
rary but pyrrhic gain, which would be eliminated as
new insurgent recruits and higher levels of external
aid would gradually turn the war back to 1983-84
inves gale

Should the FMLN offer a proposa] that has genuine
promise for a political settlement, US involvement
and pressures will almost Certainly be crucial in
overcoming institutional resistance to compromise and
keeping the renegade right wing from destroying the
political environment. For such involvement to be
effective, however, Salvadoran civil and military
authorities will have to remain convinced that US
commitment nting a guerrilla takeover
remains firm.

Other scenarios could include:

Fs

* A negotiated agreement to postpone the election in
response to recent guerrilla proposals. This would
nat affect our judgment of the likely election out-

come. In addition, we doubt that it would lead to a

27

lasting settlement because, at a minimum, hardline
elements in the FMLN would renew the guerrilla

struggle

* The splintering of the FMILN, with some factions
Pursuing Interests through the system and others

fighting on.

* A degenerative weakening of the system caused by
increased politica! polarization and intraparty fac-
vonalism combined with more rapid economic de-
cline, enabling the FMLN to exploit the ensuing
political chaos.

In the last case, uncertainty about the reliability of
US economic and military support would be a key
factor contributing to government Paralysis and a

deteriorating military situation, possibly facilitating a
Sandinista-style revolution led by the run ah
