Indochina: Current Situation and Probable Developments
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008006, dated 5 November 1950.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008006).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

et we ee cre em, Deen OO

ne
> fan ee

eee

NIEW-.

shed 29 Decembertt950

oo Confent UNCLASSIFIED”

1: The French position* in Indochina is criti-
cally endangered by the Viet Minh, ‘a Com-

“nationalism, “fhe Chinese Communist re- .
gime is“ already furnishing the Viet Minh

Communiss troops are already present in
Tonkin in some strength.
tinves and French strength and military re-

those presently programmed, the Viet Minh |
yrobably can drive the French out of North
4 Viet Nam
months. French loss of Tonkin, even assum-

anny

French position in the remainder of Viet
Nam, Laos, and Cambodia. 8

2. (Under these circumstances there is only @
stignt chance that the French can maintain
their militery position long enough to build
ug an independent Vietnamese government.
and an effective national army which might
win the support of non-Communist national-
ists, and, in conjunction with French. forces,
contain the Viet Minh. For these and other
reasons. there ave grounds for questioning the
®yench wili to remain in Indochina. oe de

ES

words “French position” refer to that of the
Associated States supported by the French

saurniamp Cork

CONCLUSIONS

munist. movement that has exploited native

materiel, training end technica) assistance. .
Offgial French sources report that Chinese —
50,000) would enable the Communist forces
If this aid con-..

sources are not substantially increased above |

(Tonkin) within six to nine.

ing the evacuation of French forces in sub-. .
stantial numbers, would jeopardize the

. support of the Viet Minh.

* intervention,
. the transformation of Indochina into 8 Com-

The intervention of Chinese Communist :
ps in force in support of the Viet Minh ©

roughout this paper, for purposes ‘of brevity, ;

| INDOCHINA: CURRENT SITUATION AND PROBABLE
ee _ DEVELOPMENTS | oo

,
.
f

would render the military position of the

French’ untenable. At present there are

about 185,000 Chinese Communist troops in
the Tonkin border area, and approximately

‘jalf of these could be committed to opera-

tiovis in Indochina. Even a relatively small
number of Chinese Communist troops (25,000- .

to crive the French out of Tonkin in a rela-

_ tively short time.

A. Direct intervention by Chinese Communist

troops may occur ab any fime. It may have

already begun (see para. 1). It is almost

- gertain to occur in strength whenever there is

danger either that the Viet Minh will fail to
attain its military objective of driving the
French out of Indochina, or that the Bao Dai
government is succeeding in undermining the
The scale of Chi-
nese Communist intervention, however, would
be limited mainly by anti-Communist activi-

- tles in Ghina and by Chinese military commit-

ments elsewhere.

'5. "The expulsion of the French by the Viet
Minh, with or. without Chinese Communist
would almost certainly lead to

mounist satellite.

6. We believe that control of Indochina Dy the
Viet Minh would-eventually entail Communist
control of all mainland Southeast Asia in, the
pbsente of effective Western assistance to

» other countries of the area.

carious, Confronted with rebellion by a strong
Communist movement that has exploited na-
tive nationalism (the Viet Minh, led by Ho
Chi Minh), the French have tried to weaken
it by winning over non-Communist nationil-
ists to support a semi-autonomous, pro-French

government under native leadership (the Viet
Na m government under Bao Dai). Conces-
sions to nationalist sentiment, leading toward
full sovereignty for the Bao Dai Gov ernment,
have been forthcoming so slowly and with
such seeming reluctance on the part of the

any quarter. As a ‘result, the French so far
have been unable to undermine the political
strength of the Vieb Minh.

2. At the conelusion of the Pau Conference
in late November 1950, the French made 2
new, intensive effort to convince the Vietna-
mese that the pewers of government would bs
turned over to them as rapidly as possible.
The French agreed. to establish an independ-
ent Army of Viet Nam with Bao Dai, in “su-
preme command,” responsible only to the
French Hish Command in Indochina.
cording to this plan French officers and cadres
-would be employed by the Vietnam. Govern-

ject to Eao Dai’s command. It is too early to
judge what the effect of this new French bid
for native support will be. Even though Viet-

namese suspicions of French good faith
snowld be overcome, and Bao Dai should de-

effective Vietnamese army could be organized,
trained, and. equipped and before broad politi-
cal support for Bao Dal could be consolidated.

nroximately 225,000 troops, of which 93,000 are

successfully contesting French military con-
trol in meny regions of Indochina and re-

es, _ DISCUSSION ~

J. The French position in Indochina is pre- “-eontly have captured key ¥F French outposts and

French that the Bao Dai Government has not.
in fact won a strong nationalist following in’

tain 200, 000 native forces engaged in security,

. (b) the regular army in Indochina comprises
49% Of France’ Ss career enlisted personnel,
20% of its regular army officers,

Indochina operation.

Ac-.

ment, wear Vietnamese uniforms, and be sub- ably are already serving with the Viet Minh

* forces.

velop qualitics of leadership hitherto unre.

vealed, it would be well over a year before an :.

. distinct superiority over present French forces.
Viet Minh capabilities continue to be enlarged _

. The armed forees of the Viet Minh (a -
: (ap “resources are substantial

those presently programme
slight: chance ‘that the Frene

well-armed regulars) have for some time been :
thelr ay seen in me fa fe) tendily

inflicted: heavy losses on French: forces in’ ‘the
northern : border: area adjoining China. In -
the critical area, Tonkin, where the French: -
now hold mainly the Red Riyer Delta area:
and a narrow strip along the coast, 55,000
French regular Army troops are opposizig:
62,000 Viet Minh regulars. The magnitude .
of the French military cffort currently re-—
quired in the whole of Indochina cari.ve in-

ferred from the following facts: (a). the .
French have 147,000 army regulars deployed
throughout Indochina, and in addition main-

tasks, para-military duties, and local defense;

and 28% of its
eareer NCO's; (c) French officer losses in In-
dochina currently equal the annual output of -
graduates from St. Cyr; and (a) 37% of the.
1949'French military budget was ere on the

4, The Chinese Communists have been tiiatn-
ing and equipping large numbers of Viet Minh
troops in Chine and are supplying the Viet
Minh considerable amounts of materiel. A
small number of Chinese Communist advisory \
personne) weering Vict Minh uniforms prob- °

In fact, official French sources: re-
port thet Chinese Communist troops are al

ready in Tonkin in.some strength. Although —
the ability of the Chinese to furnish military
equipment is limited, they should be able to
make available to the Viet Minh enough small
arms and ertillery to‘give the Viet Minh a=

faster than the French have expended thelr”
own. Unless French strength and military ”

V

4ot Ais own party and his prospects for sup

wou . ‘ \
« *

increasing Viet Minh pressure during the pe-
rlod of about a year that would be required
to strengthen Bao ‘Dal’s Government pollti-
cally and to orgenize an effective Vietnamese
army, For these and other reasons, there are
grounds for questioning the French will to
remain in Indochina. oe

5. The French position is further jeopardized
by the fact that Viet Minh strength can be
increased by successive increments of Chinese
Communist troops (as well as materiel) as a
counter to any increase in French capabili-
ties. In particular, if the Vieb Minh shows
signs of failing to attain its military objec-
tive of driving the French out of Indochina
or if the Bao Dai government begins to show

4 considerable promise of Winning nationalist

supporters away from the Viet Minh, we be-
lieve that the Chinese Communists will resort

to direct substantial military intervention ‘in

4 Indochina by committing “vclmteer" troops
for service with the Viet Minh Unless other ©

Similarly, if US or

other non-Comraunist military forces inter-

tonsiderations intervene.

veed directly in support of the French, the
Chinese Communists almost certainly would
intervene, : : = .

6. The Chinese Communists may well be-
-ieve that they can intervene in foree in Indo-

q china without too Great a risk of causing
4 either US or UN military intervention or of
4 precipitating a general war, From the Soviet

4 point of view, there might be substantial ad.
j vantages in involving the US in a full-scale

4 war with the Chinese Communists, US

q strength would be further dissipated In a Yar

{ astern military operation, and the US might

j lose or alienate some of its alles and poten-
{tial allies. There are considerations, how-

jJover, that would tend to deter the Chinese _
4 Communists from direct intervention in the -
, wer, Chinese Communist intervention (a)
 genight bring certain Asian countries into Op~
{position to Communist China; (b) might
-geulagonize nationalist elements in Indochina

yond thereby weaken Wo Chi Minh’s control

jv ort from the rest of the country; (e) would
favolve the use of Chinese troops in a situa-

q Jon: already developing favorably from the

jomanuuniss point of view simply asa result of

‘

supplying equipment and training for Viet
Minh troops.

7 The intervention of Chinese Communist
troops ba foree in support of the Viet Minh
Would render the military position of the
French untenable. At present there are
about 185,000 Chinese Communist troops in
the Tonkin border area, and approximately
half of these could be committed to opera-
tions in Indochina. Iven a relatively small
number of Chinese Communist troops
(25,000-50,000) would enable the Communist
forces to drive the French out of Tonkin in
a relatively short time. French loss of-Ton-
kin, even assuming the evacuation of
French forces in substantia) numbers, would
jeopardize the French position in the re-
mainder of Viet Nam, Laos, and Cambodia.
The scale of Chinese Communist intervention,
however, would be limited by anti-Commu- :
nist activitis in China and by Chinese Com.
munist military cornmitments elsewhere.

-8. In addition to a report|

~~. that Chinese Communist troops
are already-in Tonkin in some Strength, there

reat present many other indications of m-
pending intervention fu Indochina by ‘the
Chinese Communists. These include numer-
ous reports of the recent movement of Chi-
nese Communist armics to the Kan ssi-

' Tonkin border end of the concentration of

armor in South China, the closing of French
‘consulates in China under Chinese Commu-

‘nist pressure, Peiping charges of French

border violations, Viet Minh and Chinese
Communist accusations of persecution of the
Chinese minority in Indochina, and the gen-

- era). Chinese Communist propaganda line

that names Indechina, together with Korea,
Janan and Formosa, &s a base for “impertatist
aggression” against China,

9. There is little doubt that a Viet Minh vic-
tory wouldMead to the transformation of In-
dochina into a Communist satelite, Ho Chi
Minh is a Moscow-trained professional revolu-
tionary ond there have always been Commu-
nists In his government. At the present time,
the Viet Minh regime Is openly Communist
in ideology and pro-Soviet in statements on

foreign affairs, The recognition of the Ho

:
‘ 3
\ 4

,

regime by ‘vartoug international Communist
STOUDPS OS & full-fledged “people’s democracy,”
formal recognition of the regime by Commu-
nist China and the Soviet bloc, and the failure
of the Viet Minh to acknowledge the recog.

ably clear indications of the alignment of the
Viet Minn leadership with the USSR, with

Communist Movement,

10, The strong prebability is that the Joss of
Indochina to Communist contro} would mean
the eventual loss of ail mainland Southeast
Asia, in the absence of Western assistance to
the other countries of the area. Without such
assistance, the proximity of well-trained Viet
Minh forces would place nearly irresistibie
pressure upon Thailand, increasing the pro-
Clivity of Thai oflicialdom te accommodate

nition tendered by Yugoslavia, all offer reason.

Communist China, and the international

itself to the Winning side. 3? Thatland were |
under Communist control, the Communist
rebels in Malaya could be furnished military
assistance that would be very likely to cause
the British to lose control of the area, The.
Burmese government, already plagued by in.»
ternal Communist problems, would find it di¢-
ficult to resist diplomatic pressures backed up
by both Chinese and Indochinese Communist

_ forces on the borders of Burma, In addition,

in Indonesia and the Philippines, the princi.
bal effect of Communist control of Indochina
would be to strengthen indigenous Commu-
nist movements, Moreover, there might be a»
trend in Indonesia toward accommodation
with the Communist bioe in Asia. As each
successive country came under Communist in-
fluence, the non-Communist resistance in the
remaining countries would be weakened.
