Consequences of Communist Control Over South Asia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010597, dated 5 September 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010597).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MAIEV 32

ne COPY NO.1
~SECREF FOR THE PRESIDERT .

+ SECURITY INFORMATION “OF THE UNITED STATES

SPECIAL ESTIMATE

a ~ CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNIST CONTROL
‘hs OVER SOUTH ASIA

SES 92.2
Published 3 October 1952

The following member organizations of the Intelliyence —
Advtsory Committee participated with the Central Inteli- .
gence Agency tn the preparation of this estimaze: The =~.
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,

the Army, the Navy, the Alr Force, and the Joint Staff.

All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
concurred in thls estimate on 25 September 1952.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY: -

igs

pectansifed by xpi

bee date Se a
 ? papers OF HARRY Se “TRUMAN
| PRESIDENT'S SECRETARY FILE

1
LE I oF Na MN ate
ow Bolas yt wet aca

yr? le the
be be

MN PMN UE ATA eB oye ots

he

ve : eat :
f ae a A
2 FORA Gp wth wait piyinn won ” . aA a

CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNIST CONTROL

OVER SOUTH ASIA‘

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the strategic consequences, to the West and to the Soviet Bloc, of

“-. the establishment of Communist control over South Asia without either the Middle
East or Southeast Asia having previously core under Communist control.
__or not South Asia is likely to come under Cornm»nist control, or whether there is any
likelihood that South Asia would fall under Communist control prior to extensive
at Communist victories in Southeast Asia, is excluded frorn consideration.

Whether

CONCLUSIONS

~~ 1) The most serious effects of the loss of.

South Asia to Communist control would __

be psychological and political. It would

add to the Soviet Bloc five countries, two

~ of them potentially powerful, and would
_ extend Communist control to. include -

nearly half the world’s population. In

the absence of decisive Western counter- ~

action, Communist control over South

loss of much of Southeast Asia. Loss of

South Asia would greatly reduce the effec-.
. tiveness of the UN to the West, and would

greatly reduce confidence in the capacity --
of the free world to halt the expansion of

Communism.

2. In present circurnstances, denial of
‘Western aceess to South Asia would
necessitate serious readjustments in the
foreign trade and exchange pattern of

_ the UK and the other Commonwealth

* a For the purposes of this estimate, South Asia will
be taken to Include India, Pakistan, Ase
eer and aide

countries and would increase the cost of
European commercial communications
with the Far East.

3. Communist control of South Asia

_would probably make the principal strate-—

~ gic materials of the area increasingly dif-
ficult to obtain under cold war conditions
and certainly unavailable to the West in
wartime. . Of these mica, graphite, man-

_ Asia would be speedily followed by the. ~ ganese, jute, and shellac are of particular

_Strategic importance to the West.

4. Although denial of South Asian re-
sources would not necessitate any signifi-
cant reduction in defense and essential
civilian consumption in the US, the over-
all effect, in terms of the magnitude of

the readjusfments required, would almost ~

certainly be serious at any time up
through 1954. US stockpiles would have
to be drawn on pending the development
of generally inferior and more expensive
alternate sources and substitute mate-

ials. Moreover, the West would have to

2,

accept some reductions in quantity and
quality of output until these substantial
adjustments had been made.

5. In the short run, Communist control
_ of South Asia would provide few economic
benefits to the rest of the Soviet Bloc.
The strategic value of the commodities
rendered available to the Bloc would he

meager, except with respect to monazite —

and rubber.

6. Although the Communists would face
serious difficulties, they would probably
have considerable success in gradually

_- mobilizing and exploiting th¢ substantial .

economic resources of South Asia. How-
- ever, the development of an industrial
complex of the order of that existing in

Japan and Manchuria at the start of

World War II could be accomplished only
~ over a long period of time.

7. The most important effects of Com-
munist contro] of South Asia on Western
military capabilities would be: (a) the
elimination of any prospect of the even-
tual availability of South Asian forces and
facilities; and (b) the diversion of West-
ern strength required to meet the new
strategic situation in the Indian Ocean
area.

8. In addition to imposing these disad-

vantages upon the West, the Soviet Bloc —

would gain access to strategically located

-gir and submarine bases and would gain

control of the military potential of South

Asia. The Soviet Bloc’s development of

this potential would probably be limited

-to the forces and facilities required to -

maintain internal security, to defend

‘South Asia itself against Western attack, ~

and to attack Western communications
in the Indian Ocean area. ae

DISCUSSION:

POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
CONSEQUENCES Pe oe eee
'@. The establishment of Communist control
over South Asia would be a major advance for
the USSR in its efforts to communize the
“world. It would add five countries, two of
them large and potentially powerful, and
~~ nearly a fifth of the world’s population to the
Soviet Bloc. With the acquisition of South

Asia Communism would have gained control -

of nearly half of the world’s population. . In

~ the absence of decisive Western counteraction,~

the Communist seizure of South Asia would
- precipitate the rapid transfer of much of

Southeast Asia to Communist control, suppos- ~

~- {ng this had not already occurred. The coun-
tries of the Near East, Japan, the Philippines,
~ and Indonesia would be under great pressure
- to accommodate themselves to the neighbor-
ing Communist regimes.

—<BEERET oe

10. India, Pakistan, and Ceylon are former

colonial areas which have achieved independ-

- ence and considerable prestige as free nations

while maintaining beneficial political and eco-
nomic ties with the West. As such they con-
stitute a concrete refutation of the Commu-
nist thesis that the national aspirations of ©
colonial and semi-colonial countries can be
realized only through Communist “liberation.”
The fall of these countries to Communism
would seriously impair the position of the
‘West in relation to the national and social
_ aspirations ernergent in Asia and Africa, and
‘would eliminate the example set by the efforts
of the present regimes to curb Communist
subversive activities.

41. The loss of the South Asian members of

the UN (India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan) to-

the Soviet side would greatly reduce the effec-
tiveness of the UN to the West either by
enlarging the obstructionist bloc or, if the new

regimes were not recognized, by weakening portant items of which South Asia is now a
any UN claim to be a truly world organization. major source. The principal commodities in- -
volved are as follows: ?

12. A Communist victory in South Asia would .
greatly reduce confidence in the capacity of a. Manganese ore —India currently sup-
the free world to halt the expansion of Com- _— Plies about 25 percent of the non-Communist
munism. The communization of South Asia World's consumption of manganese ore, in-
coming on the heels of the Communist victory cluding about 35 percent of that used by the
in China would create the impression through- US. Since the Indian product is markedly
out non-Communist Asia, Africa, and Europe _Superior in grade to that obtainable elsewhere,

~ that the advance of Communism was inevit- its importance is greater than these percent-

able. age figures would indicate.
b. Mica — India is virtually the sole sup-

- ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES ==———“‘iC‘C:CS™SCS#@péier to: the West off the moore critical classes of

_ block and sheet muscovite mica, which is used- ——

“= Effect on the Economic Position of the West = “in manufacture. of vacuum tubes and other

13. In general, the economic consequences of communications equipment, boiler gauges,

~ Communist control over South Asia would de- and oxygen breathing equipment.

pend on conditions in other areas at the time___ ¢, Graphite — Ceylon is now the only sig-

~- Such contro] was attained. At-the present —: nificant nonCommunist source of high grade-——

~UK and the remainder of the Common-
-wealth. The British would lose their sub- --
- Stantial investments in India,.a loss which

. probable cancellation of the UK’s obligation to

time, Communist accession to power in the —~ amorphous lump graphite, which is used in

_____ region would necessitate the diversion of West-—. manufacture of carbon brushes for electrical
__ ern resources to the Middle East and South- equipment..

east Asia, as well as serious readjustments in = _

the foreign trade and exchange pattern of the Me Jule Ong ut products -- tnd and Fey Ss

_.. istan furnish virtually all the jute and jute _.
products which enter world trade. Jute is the
principal material used in bags and bale cov-
“erings for transport and storage of bulk com-
modities like grain, fertilizer, cement, and
cotton.

would, however, be in part balanced by. the

repay the remainder of sterling balances

"earned by India during World War Il._The_. _¢€. Other products — India is the chief world

the effects would be as serious at some future

rs ber of widely used though less critically im- legis amounts.

UK, Australia, and New Zealand would, in-~ supplier of premium quality kyanite, which is . ..
itially at least, be hard pressed to find substi-._ & high-grade refractory used in electric fur- ~~
tutes in dollar markets for many goods now nace linings, electrical and chemical porce-

- obtained from South Asia and similarly would _Jain, and spark plugs; furnishes about 75 per-

have to develop new markets for goods now cent of the world’s supply of high-grade shel-

_exported to India. The loss of South Asian - -lac; exports considerable quantities of castor ~~~

bunkering and drydocking facilities and civil _ beans and castor oil; and provides about a
air transit rights would substantially increase — quarter of the world’s supply of opium for

“the cost of British trade with the Far East, medical purposes. India and Ceylon together

particularly with Australia and New Zealand. produce close to 85 percent of the tea enter-

~ To what extent the Communists would infact ing international trade and about two-thirds

’ “e the above restrictions, and whether
enforce: THe BUOVG: TEStiae . "India also has unequalled reserves cf monazite

- sands, frcm which thorium (of potential use for

date as they would be at the moment, cannot atomic energy) and rare earths can be obtained,
be estimated. and also Is a source of beryl, of some strategic

: importance in berylum copper. Although In-

_.14. It is possible, however, to estimate the con- dia has thus far prohibited the export of mona-
i sequences of the loss of Western access to the rite, it has entered into negotiation for its sale

to the US. India restricts the exportation of
several strategic raw materials and the num- beryl and the US has been able to obtalp only

~ Sure to give financial assistance to Western

oo

of the black pepper. Ceylon is a relatively - looking increasingly to South Asia for indus- -
minor source of rubber for the non-Commu- trial raw materials. ;

nist world. In addition, India is a potential 17. The impact on the West of the denial of

aource, OF Coxing coat and tron. ore-tor Japan. South Asia’s strategic materials would depend
15. Communist control cf South Asia would on the extent to which stockpiling goals had
probably make these princinal strategic ma-  — been achieved and alternate sources expanded
terials listed above increasing... difficult to .. at the time that South Asia’s resources were
obtain under cold war conditions and certainly cut off. Although denial of these resources
unavailable to the West in wartime. The would not necessitate any significant reduc-
Communists would probably initially be will- tion in defense and essential civilian consump-

ing to continue supplying strategic materials . tion in the US, the over-all effect, in terms of
_like manganese, mica, and graphite to the the magnitude of the readjustments required,

West if the latter did not apply to South Asia would almost certainly be serious at any time
the export controls now in force against Com- — up through 1954. The present outlook with

~“Tnunist countries, since the loss of the petro- — respect to the principal strategic commodities
’ eum: products, machinery, and other con- named above is as follows:
--trolied items which South Asia now obtains a. Manganese ore — The US could initially =~

from the West in the course of trade would maintain its own steel production by drawing

_- impose a considerable strain on the South — on its manganese stockpile. Significant re-
_ Asianeconomy. In addition, the Communists — ductions in the output of other Western coun-

would probably continue to export less critical tries, where little stockpiling of manganese -
items like tea, black pepper, and possibly jute has taken place, could also be averted if US

-- In exchange for foodstuffs and other products " reserves were made available in sufficiently
not now subject to Western export controls. large quantity. The US stockpile of metal- ~~~
However, @ gradual drying up of South Asia’s lurgical manganese, which was 45 percent

trade with the West would almost certainly complete at the end of 1951, is probably suffi-~

take place, because the West would seek to ‘cient to cover US import requirements for

‘develop alternate sources of critical materials about two and a half years. In the long run, —
and the Communists in South Asia would at- . adequate supplies of manganese could be ob-

tempt to move toward greater self-sufficiency. tained from other sources— notably Brazil,

: see the Gold Coast, South Africa, Belgian Congo,
16. Denial of South Asia’s products to the gna Angola — where some expansion of aL

_ West as @ result of a Communist accession . ties to meet the increasing demand for man-

to power would require substantial readjust- _ ganese is already taking place. However, an.
ments on the part of the US and even greater — increase in cutput sufficient to make up com-
readjustments on the part of its allies. The pletely for the loss of Indian manganese would .-
West would have to spend time and money __ require several years in view of manpower and

in developing generally inferior alternate equipment shortages, transport and loading

sources, would have to develop substitute ma- facility bottienecks, and various other prob-
terials in some cases, and would have to accept es aoe cur iene of rps aaa
some reducticns in quantity or quality of out- ROM Might be requir prevent Geprenol

put until these adjustments had been made. Pe stockpile before these other sources had

Moreover, the US would be under greater pres- - Cores eaeel Vi PECo aC HOD: PANY event 1088

‘ i : justments in metallurgical practice entailing
Europe to the extent that this area's already some loss in rate of production and higher

"~~ meager dollar resources would have tobe used costs.

for the purchase of those substitute materials b. Mica—Loss: of the Indian ‘supply of

~~ available only in dollar areas. Also, the eco- block and sheet mica would require drastic

nomic attraction of the Soviet Bloc to Japan —_ conservation measures in the US, where stock-

~~ would be greatly increased, since Japan is piling is about 25 percent complete, and even

BECKET

of the superior Indian ore would require ad- ~~

}
i
ie
i

&
Ba
z
e
a.
a
ig

more stringent curbs on consumption in the
other Western countries, where stockpiles are
virtually nonexistent. Present US stocks of
these critical classes of mica represent about
&@ year’s supply. Development of new sources
would be very costly and the efforts being
made to develop substitutes cannot be ex-
pected to show usable results for several years.

c. Graphife—Since Ceylon is the only

‘source of high-grade amorphous lump graph- .

ite, the US. would have to draw on its stock-
pile, notably for such uses as carbon brushes
in high-altitude aircraft, and would have to

_. Modify specifications for other. end-items
~ where inferior grades of graphite might pos-
sibly be used. At the end of 1951; the US ~

Stockpile was close to its goal, which was

oso" would probably exploit India’s thorium-

sac. ment purposes, and the Bloc as a whole could

about three times the amount consumed an-

_.nually by the US during the latter part of
“World War I.

measures and costly adjustments,. especially ©

“for countries like those of Western Europe
where substitutes are less readily available.

ite, iron and manganese ores, beryl, and jute
“products. Transporting these products to the
Soviet Bloc would present serious problems,
however, and in any event the amount of
' goods that the Soviet Bloc could absorb would
be relatively small, in terms both of South
Asia’s present exports and of total Soviet Bloc

- consumption. Moreover, the strategic value
of these materials to the Bloc would be
meager, except with respect to monazite and
rubber,

19. Conversely, the Soviet Bloc probably

could and would provide only limited assist-_.
-- ance to a Comraunist South Asia struggling

with the major internal readjustments arising

“from the transfer of economic and political
power to a Communist regime and from the

probable cutting-off of major Western im- -
ports. Just as South Asia’s principal exports.

are commodities for which the Soviet Bloc has

present imports — notably petroleum prod-

ucts, machinery and other metal manufac- .
“tures, industrial chemicals, and foodstuffs— ~

are items which the Communist world cannot

-. cotton, and cotton textiles available for export,

e. Other products —— Development of syn-. ¢@sily spare. The USSR's willingness and ©

- thetic substitutes for Indian kyanite is well- ~ ability to make up for the loss of Western

under way, and the loss of the Indian product ~ Products would be sharply limited by com-_ ~~
. peting demands within the Bloc and by the —

_ Indian shellac would involve higher costs and —=. Bloc’s grave shortage of shipping facilities.

should cause no serious Gifficulties. Loss of

_ Widespread inconvenience since different sub- 99, Initially, the shortages of food and petro-

stitutes would have to be developed for most —“jeym would be major problems toa Commu- __
South Asia now imports about __.

of the various uses of shellac. Loss of Indian jet regime.
opium would inconvenience the UK, which has sour million tons of grain annually. This

obtained most of its supply from the subcon-.. - deficiency would probably be met by a variety

tinent. The Joss of India would cut_off_@ — o¢ measures including some imports from the _..

potential supply of coking coal and fron ore — ygsp, ruthless rationing and crop collection
for Japan.

F ia ciently well entrenched to clash with religious

_ Effect on the Economic Position_of_the sentiment, use for human consumption of
~ Soviet Bloc:
sumed by monkeys and cattle. Much of

= ae = pe one ee -- South Asia’s food deficit could be provided by
uth Asia would provide few economic pené- mainland Southeast Asia if that aréa were

fits to the rest of the Soviet Bloc. The USSR Communist. ‘Leas of the six million tons of

petroleum now imported from the Middle East
- would almost certainly cause an initial decline
in industrial output and for some time create
bottlenecks in production. However, the ef-
fects would probably not be crippling. Some

bearing monazite for atomic energy develop-
probably use the limited amounts of rubber,

as well a5 moderate amounts of mica, graph-

SESE T

methods, and, if the Communists were suffi-.

“ho. great immediate need, so its principal __.

approximately a million tons of grain now con- ~~~

~ the largest industrial plant in Asia outside of

petroleum could be obtained from the Soviet MILITARY CONSEQUENCES

Bloc and much oil-burning equipment could

be converted to coal. The denial of spare The Existing Situation ..
parts and other capital equipment, industrial 23. Forces. The nations of South Asia possess
chemicals, and Miscellaneous metal prod ucts forces in being of approximately 650,000, some
Previously obtained from the West would im- 500,000 trained reservists, and a vast reser-
pose further curbs on industrial output. voir of manpower. The armies of India and
21, Despite these difficulties, the Communists Pakistan, comprising more than 90 percent of
would probably have considerable success in _ the above active Strength, are trained and dis-
gradually mobilizing and exploiting the sub- _ciplined forces of good fighting quality. Both

_.. Stantial resources of South Asia-— Although => countries have small air forces designed pri-

the area is predominantly agricultural and marily for support of ground operations and
characterized by widespread poverty, it has. a few light naval surface vessels.
Japan, a huge labor supply including a con- 24. Facilities. South Asia's other military

“siderable number of skilled and semi-skilled  #SSets include:
workers, and basic raw material resources suf- a. A large number of excellent airfields and

ficient to support an extensive industrial air base sites (notably in West Pakistan) with-

expansion. During World War II, Indiadem- in medium and heavy bomber range of major
onstrated considerable potentiality for capital industrial and governmental centers in Soviet

~~ formation, and the Communists in other areas Central Asia and the interjor of Communist
have shown their ability for effective mobiliza--. China... The rail and highway net and port -

- tion of resources in predominantly agrarian facilities are adequate for maintenance of
areas characterized by low per capita produc-~ large-scale operations from these bases.-—-
tivity. . Thus, production in certain key indus- b. Major ports, air bases, and other facilities

tries, particularly steel, would probably rise which could be used: (1) for maintenance of ~

after the initial period of readjustment, and .. communications between Western Europe and
there would probably be a gradual improve- the Far East and for logistical support of pos-
ment in agricultural output. However, the — giple military operations in the Middle or Far
development of an industrial complex of the East; or (2) for the support of alr and naval
_ Order ot that existing in Japan and Manchuria — action against these communications.

at the start of World War II could be accom- e. Limited facilities for production of arms

plished Only ve a long period of time. , and equipment. Although these facilities can
22. In terms of support for a military effort, supply significant amounts of small arms and
therefore, South Asia could probably, with . ammunition, South Asia is dependent on out-
- Only minimum Soviet Bloc assistance: (a) side sources for most other major items of

- supply small arms and ammunition and some “material.

artillery for @ large ground army; and (b)... . .- ;
provide logistical support for whatever addi- 25. Western Interests. At present the mili-
tional Soviet forces and equipment were neces- ~ tary potential of South Asia is not available
Bary to defend South Asia against Western to the West, with certain exceptions such as
-altack and to attack Western communications British base rights in Ceylon. ‘There is, how-
in the Indian Ocean area (see para. 29). A  C¥er, an obvious Western interest in denial of

Communist South Asia could not, however, this potential to Communism and in the poset:

; e ; ble future availability of some of these forces
without substantial outside assistance and a _and facilities in certain contingencies. In

__ long-term capital investment program, pro-— particular, it is considered that, if relations’
/Guce more than Insignificant amounts of between India and Pakistan can be improved, —
heavy artillery, tanks, armored vehicles, com- the military strength of Pakistan might be-~
" Munications equipment, naval vessels, and air- come effective as a stabilizing factor in the
—, . Middle East and that Pakistan! air bases

.

-- eraft.

iyigeee

might become available to the West in the
event of war with the Soviet Bloc.

Effect on Western Military Capabilities: a

26. The most important consequences of Com-
munisi control of South Asia on Western mili-
tary capavilities would be: (a) the denial of
any prospect of the eventual availability of
South Asia’s forces and facilities; and (b) the -
diversion of Western strength required to meet

-. the new strategic situation in the. Indian ..

Ocean area. Denial of access to South Asia’s

_—_ ports and airfields would, in itself, greatly

ninder Western sea and air communications in
that area. Even in time of peace, the fall of |

“the subcontinent to Communism would re-~

quire a diversion of Western military re-

- gources to the Middle East and to Southeast

bat forces for their protection dispropor-

tionate to the diversion of Soviet strength to _

such operations.

Effect on Soviet Bloc Military Capabilities

27. The immediate military advantages which
the Soviet Bloc would derive from Communist
control of South Asia would be: (a) relief

from the potential danger of Western air at-_

tack from Pakistani bases; (b) denial of the
facilities and military potential of the subcon-

tinent to the West; (c) diversion of Western ~

military resources to the support of the Middle
East and Southeast Asia; and (d) access to
bases from which Soviet submarines, surface
raiders, an4 aircraft could attack: Western -
-commur’zations in the Indian Occan area in
the event of war. . Ms

98. The Soviet Bloc would also gain control of »

-South Asia's military potential, but this con-
trol would not immediately constitute a net

- gain in Soviet Bloc military strength. South -
Asia’s existing military establishments would

_ probably have been demoralized and disrupted

in the process of Communist accession to

_ power, new Communist-controlled military .

~ 0. We believe that the Soviet Bloc would de-

establishments would have to be created. In
any case, any indigenous military forces
would, for some time, be fully employed in
maintaining internal security, or committed
to the defense of South Asia in the evert of
war. LT

99. The extent to which the Soviet Bioc would
eventually build up Communist military
strength in South Asia would probably be
limited by the following considerations:

__ a. A large-scale build-up of military forces

and installations would require a heavy invest-
ment in technical and material assistance,

- either through direct supply of military end-

items or through development of South Asia’s

- now limited war industry. This investment

could be made only at the expense of military
and economic requirements elsewhere in the
Bloc which are likely to remain pressing for

entirely by sea and air. In the event of war,
the South Asian military establishment's sup-
ply lines would thus be gravely vulnerable to
Western naval interdiction. ee
__@, There would be slight strategic advantage
in building up South Asia's military strength
“beyond that required for internal security,
defense of the subcontinent itself, and harass-
ment of Western communications in the In-

~dian Ocean area. Barring a marked change ~~~

in the global balance of naval power, any

— gurplus military strength in South Asia could

be used only against adjacent continental

= areas, the Middle East and Southeast Asia,

and even there its employment would face ex-
treme logistic difficulties, while Soviet and
Chinese Communist forces are already avail-
able for such operations. :

velop the military potential of South Asia only
to the extent required to maintain internal
security, to defend South Asia itself against

_ Western attack, and fo attack Western com-

munications in the indian Ocean ares. z

oe nae 5 T
