El Salvador Performance on Certification Issues
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027650, dated 3 June 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027650).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ce armas teeter alee Balt a hes

we ye ey tte 7
wee ee EP eel eee

4

Director of
Ceatral Intelligence

El Salvador: Performance
on Certification Issues

Interegency Intelligence Assessment

NIC Ad 83-10018
#3 Suly 1983

foproved Por Be-ess 098
nate . B4 OCL.B84

ay

aa

: "NIC M 83-10011

EL SALVADOR: PERFORMANCE
ON CERTIFICATION ISSUES

aid

Inforination available as of 11 July 1989 was
used in the preparation of this Assessment.

a Se or ee ee

*
f

RE RET RE ee
z ‘ .

'
toy apt PRT ERE We ET ee FEET pre rein ge

te ell had! FS SSC TREN TES ET ee

KEY JUDGMENTS

The government of El Salvador has made continved progress on
most certification issues during the past six months. Progres: in achiev-
ing substantial control over the armed forces and prosecuting those
responsihif
however.

Improvement has been most evident in the area of government
reforms. Agrarian reforms have made steady advances, particularly in
the distribution of land and titles to thousands of new beneficiaries.
Recent banking laws also have completed a process begun in 1980 to re-
organize financial institutions and reallocate credit to the general

public.

Cooperation among moderate elements in the government has
increased over the last six months, with an attendant erosion of extreme
rightist influence. This has enabled the administration to step up the
process of democratization, especially evident in the enactment of an
amnesty law that has reduced the number of political prisoners by 70
percent. Other advances include the creation of a Peace Commission
charged with seeking political reconciliation with the guerrillas and
completing the draft of a new constitution fx

Major weaknesses remain, however, in the government’s ability to
safeguard human rights, particularly in the countryside, Killings by
rightwing death squads and elements of the armed forces continue.
Efforts by the military high command to instill respect for human rights
among the yank and file have had some effect in elite units, but little in
poorly trained garrison units and civil defense forces;

The cases involving the murder of the six US citizens have yet to
reach trial stage because of continued legal and procedural bottlenecks
in the weak criminal justice system. Conspirators in the killings of two

Note: This Interagency Intelligence Assessment. approved by the Netional Foreign [utelligence
Board, was prepared under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for Latin America. The
Amsessnent was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligesoe Agency, the National
Security Agency, and the intelligence orgenization of the Department cf State. Also participating were the
intelligence organizations of the Anny, the Nav y, the Air Force, and the Marine Corza. (uv)

1
SECRET

TA Sa se me I ICT SE RT RO Pg PE OPE eee

US labor advisers, moreover, continue
appellate court decisions to drop curren

be developed

Ve Bas ARs pis Ae DE ee i Toe ee a

a ee REN I en Se lil

to avoid prosecution following
t charges until new evidence can

ene

pe.

4 --
i mh

ry

we
Oe he oe

rere.
>

an

oe see

tab At
=,

i» wh,

DISCUSSION

Human Rights

“Making @ concerted and significant effort to
comply with internationally recognized human
rights.” (Criterion for judging Salvadoran Goo-
ernment’s performance.) (v)

1. During the past six months, the Magana edminis-
tration in El Salvador has continued to make progress
on some human rights issues, particularly as evident j
the recent i ~ amnesty law:
ANS Ge owever, the measure-
ment of progress in El Salvador is a relative thing,
complicated by abuses of prisoners before detention in
@ government facility and the we of violence by
extremists against their perceived political opponents.

ee

@ The insurgent war has intensified this year es the
guerrillas have stepped up efforts to broaden their
areas of control and inflict major damage on the
country’s already crippled economy. The rate of com-
bat deaths on both sides has increased, but the rate of
civilian political deaths ' has not changed substantially.
According to US Emtassy reports, figures for the first
six months of 1983 show a slight increase over those for
the last six months of 1982—178 civilian political
deaths versus 160. The average 50 far this year,
however, is well below the monthly death rate of 247
for all of 1982. (See accompanying chart.

3. The trend toward improvement is also reflected
in the recently enacted and swiftly implemented
amnesty law. Since it went into effect in May 1983,
the authorities have released more than 500 cf the 733
political prisoners in jail at the time amnesty went into
effect—querrillas and labor leaders as well as leftist
intellectuals suspected of subversion and detained
under the emergency decree. Most of those released

' Political deaths are those that take place culside a mone of
combet and which clearly suggest & political motive-—for example,
civilians murdered because of suspected complicity orith the Lisur-
gents. Civilians killed af p result of being cought ip # crossfire or
other militery-related activities are classified as combat deaths

had been held at the relatively modern Mariona Prison
outside the capital

4 US Embessy officers visit the facility frequently
and report that the prisoners are well fed and are
receiving excellent treatment, including access to
schooling and rights to conjrgat visits in private dormi-
tories. In addition, US officials who recently visited
the Hopango Women’s Prison indicate that more than
half of its 92 oclitical prisoners have been released
under the amnesty. Conditions there are reported es
good, and some of the common criminals stated they
are denied privileges that are extended to political
detainees

5. We believe the government may extend the
amnesty beyond its mid-July cutoff in en effort to
attract political exiles and disenchanted meinbers of
insurgent groups inside the country. Despite the unex-

ee a
El Salvador: Insurgency-Related Civilian and

Military Deaths, 1981-June 1983

Totai Number of Civ lian Deaths
Manthty Avcrage Number ol Milder Killed or Wounded

1.400

Or: stp ems oo 5 eimaialels ome oat Semele Sa aad ee .

pectedly high number of political prisoners who have
benefited from the law, it reportedly has attracted so
far onty about 200 guerrillas and camp followers.
Nevertheless, the president of the government's Hu-
man Rights Commission—which is currently Investi-
gating reported cases of abuse of civilians by both
guerrilla groups and armed forces units and attempt-
ing to locate over 100 missing persens—appears opti-.
mistic that others will take advantage of the law. He
notes that guerrillas are required only to sign & formal
request for amnesty, and that they are not interrogat-
ed of required to provide details of their past actions.
Like the released political prisoners, insurgents sceking
amnesty are free to remain in the country of to leave.
Meanwhile, the Amnesty Commission's recently estab-
lished rehabilitation committee is assisting beneficia-
ries in finding work or in resettling on lend belonging
to the agrarian reform agencies. These desiring. te
leave El Salvador are offered free passports}

6. Despite these and other efforts—including a
massive publicity campaign—we believe that fear of
reprisals from the extreme left or right will inhibit
most guerrillas and political exiles from taking advan-
tage of the amnesty. The government hopes that fair
treatment of insurgents turning themselves in will
spark additional defections, but this may be offset by
accounts of former political prisoners of abuses before
their internment.

7. These abuses apparently are continuing. Accord-
ing to the US Embassy, government and militery
officials disavow responsibility for actions employed
by the Army in combat situations before prisoners are
transferred to detention centers. The positive effects of
the amnesty program could be further offsel by recent
death squad activity against some prisoners who had
been released before the amnesty.

Control of the Armed Forces

“Ip achieving substantial control over all ele-
ments of its own armed forces.” (v)

military remains mixed. The military is stepping up

efforts to professionalize its ranks and instill respect for

human rights. Nevertheless, the intensity of the guer-
rilla war—particularly recent massacres of captured
eoldiers—and its influence on domestic lawlessness
probably have generated continued abuses by armed
forces elements against the civilian population. ©

9. Military leaders aré maintaining their efforts to
reduce human rights violations within the ermed
forces. Moreover, reporting indicates more precision in
the last six months in fire control during fighting in
populated areas, particularly on the part of combat
pilots and artillery uni

10. Improved fire discipline also has been notewor-
thy among US-trained infantry battalions that have
been engaged in heavy counterinsurgency campaigns
in San Vicente and Morazan Departments f According
to US defense a:tache reports} troops moving into
guerrilla base areas and occupied towns are treating
local inhabitants with greater consideratio oon

11. Treatment of captured prisoners—whose pum-
bers remain small—continues to improve. According
to the US defense attache, the Army increasingly is
treating wounded guerrillas and interrogating them
humanely. They are then evacuated to San Salvador
rather than being teft in the hands of local command-
ers. Some of those captured have related the concern
of guerrilla leaders over the superior performance of
UStrained units and their ability to generate more
positive attitudes among peasants toward the govern-
ment.

12. In eddition, the new Defense Minister has
issued 9 human rights manual to all military units in
the country. Similar guidelines have had only limited
impact within the security forces over the past two
years. Nevertheless, this action helps reinforce the
commitment to curb abuses by field commanders and

their. troops §

L} Moreover,

ya

a aM

ie ew
.

et il wp aN ete i A  e E te ne ee ee ed

military institution itself frequently reduce the avail- , destroy missions against “LV nown subversives.” Accord-
ability of information. US officials have found that 7 ing to US Embassy sources, civil defense personnel
military personnel are regularly discharged from the | attached to Araujo’s command have threatened wit-
service for human rights offenses and other criminal | nesses with death, thus prompting peasant leaders to
acts, pending trials in civilian courts. These cases cease geek protection from the National Guard. The local
to be the responsibility of the military and quickly Guard commander has promised to patrol the Indian
become buried in the labyrinth of civil and criminal cooperatives and provide them with weapons for self-
justice proceedings. In one eastern department, for protection.

example, US Embassy officials identified 17 civilian

court cases involving fermer military personnel, All 16. es
had been separated from the armed forces for serious | ° Rabie ities Ba jome mili-
crimes such as assault, rape, kidnaping, and murder. tary elements continue to engage In random acts of
Most cases were still pending, although two had violence. Disappearances and unidentified bodies still

resulted in acquittals, and a few others in convictions | ae reported in area! controlled by specific units of the
‘armed force er 7

14. Government efforts to investigate mass slayings
that occurred last fall have stalled because of a lack of
witnesses—a frequent problem that underscores the
continuing climate of fear and polarization in_E}
Salvador. "

Progress on Reform

“Ia making continued progress in implement-
ing economic and political reforms, including
land reforms.” (v)

17. The Magana administration has made steady
> progress in econcmic, political, and land reforms

15. Anciher widely publicized mass killing under during the last six months. This period has been
investigation occurred in February 1983 in Sorsonate characterized by Increasing cooperation among the
Department. According to US Embassy sources, at major parties in the government, reflecting « growing
feast 18 peasant farmers were shot mt and around the maturation of the still-fragile democratic system &s
farm cooperative of Las Hojas; there is one report that Well as the erosion of power of some extreme right
as many as 6 more may have been killed. According stements.
to peasant spokesmen, the victims were members of
the National Salvadoran Indian Association who were
targeted by local cattle ranchers following land dis-

18. The continuing movement toward reform was
pot affected by the recent power struggle in the
putes. Individual members of the local civil defense military, which resulted in the resignation of Defense
forces and some 200 regular troops led by an Army = Minister Garcia in April. Although Garcia had been 5
captain were involved. The captain was placed under primary force for moderation and had earned the
military avtest in April pending further investigations enmity of extreme rightists for his support of reforms,
by government prosecutors of charges that his depart- his replacement by General Vides represented both
mental commander, Colonel Araujo, ordered the kiJl- _—the transition of power through established procedure
ings. He has since been released. Araujo has publicly and the continued dominance of the pragmatic mait-
admitted sending his troops tc Las Hojas on search and = stream of the officer corps. Furthermore, the impact

eer) Qe te FOR Se OOD SURE TorEEe gi — ~~
Pind to” " T

—

> amet “MEE

rs

mf!
=, ttn Boe:
ad
mm
Ce |

cy

EEE TINS NAG FY WTP ED

ania"

4

of the crisis in the military was defused by the
intervention of President Magana, who, in requesting
Carcia’s resignation, asserted his civilian authority as
constitutional head of the government!

cognizant of the need to rei ~ the moderate
policies of Magana—in part to salisfy US policy
requirements— and we believe that the military under
his command will continue to support the govern-
ment’s efforts to strengthen reforms

20. Neither factionalism in the military nor escalat-
ing insurgent attacks have deterred the armed forces
trom keeping agrarian reform on track. According te
the Agency for International Development, as of 47
June there were some 194,000 beneficiaries in Phase I
(redistribution of large tandholdings to peasant cooper
atives), while Phase 11 (land to the tilles) has benefited
some 305,196 formerly landless peasants.* Since Octo-
ber the government has exceeded most of its immedi-
ate goals with regard to title application nd distribu-
tion. Applications for new titles, for example, have
climbed from a cumulative total of 38,615 in October
to 64,637 as of 17 Fune 1983. During the same period,
cumulative distribution of permanent titles to Phase Tt
properties has grown from 400 to 2,453, suggesting
that changes made last year in management of the
program are now paying dividends. While the govern-
ment is still behind in its schedule for distributing
provisional titles, the rate of distribution has increased
markedly since January from a cumulative total of
94,674 to 42,415

21. Progress on tand reform continues to be clouded
by rumors and allegations of large-scale _evicti f
De

This number includes direct beneficiaries and their dependents
based on a formula of six individuals per family

ts abuut to undertake & survey to determine the
number of illegal evictions, and it recently began &
nationwide publicity campaign to discourage such
actions. Meanwhile, US Embassy reporting indicates
that the armed forces continue their efforts to return
evictees to their new lands. Ase result, any heretofore —
unreported evictions are now mere likely to come to
the attention of the authorities i

92. The ability of Magana to continue reforms in
the face of rightist opposition has been reflected in his
handling of economic issues. This spring, for example,
the administration implemented the final step in
reforming the banking system by offering up to 49
percent of the equity in nationalized banks to private
investors, with limitations on the amount an individual
investor can purchase. The offer capped a three-year
struggle to take control of credit out of the hands of a
few wealthy families. In a further sign that extreme
rightwing influence is waning, the Assembly recently
defeated a campa‘an by major coffee groweit to
weaken the powers of the National Coffee Institute,
thereby contributing to equitable returns for small
producers. .

23. The inability of the far right to prevail on
economic issues is mirrored in its overall reduction of
power in the government during the past six months.
In February a dispute in the Assembly concerning rule
changes and a cabinet appointment sparked increased
cooperation by moderate right and liberal deputies
against obstructionist parliamentary tactics by far right
leader DY Aubuisson and his party. This enabled Presi-
dent Magana to replace a rightwing minister with a
moderate [rem 4 nongoverning political party, thereby
reducing the share of power for D’Aubuisson’s faction
and strengthening executive leverage with the Assem-
bly. Subsequent maneuvers by moderates succeeded in
eliciting D'Aubuisson’s public declaration to resign
upon completion of the new constitution.

Elections and Negotiations

“Is committed to holding free elections at an
errly date and, to that end, has demonstrated
.., good-faith efforts to begin discussions with
all major political factiuns in El Salvador.” {v)

24. Planning for elections has been hampered by
partisan differences over posts to be contested and the
eligibility of candidates, as well as disruptive changes
in the electoral timetable. Nevertheless, the US Em-

* nn ee een asl SU ee wre ee ope a ee

pe ae yg

2%

4
i?

¥
ia
a

“

bassy reports that the major parties in the government
have informally agreed to hold the presidential baflot-
ing on 13 November. A major hurdle, however, will be
the promulgation of the constitution, without which an
electoral code cannot be developed nor the structure
of a new government determin

25. Other problems such as funding and organiza-
tion for the electoral contest finally are being ad-
dressed by the five-man Election Council. *though
the Council remains insistent on devising a new
registration system before November, some political
leaders now acknowledge that such a program almost
certainly is not feasible. Officials of the rightist Na-
tional Republican Alliance and the liberal Christian
Deimocratic Party, for example, recently have indicat-
ed that they will accept open registration—such as
existed during the March 1982 elections—for the sake
of expediency. @

26. O.en registration may inspire postelection
charges of fraud among partisan groupings, but it
should help encourage another large turnout on the
part of voters unable or unwilling to return to specific
municipalities as would be required with formal regis-
tration. Turnout will still be determined lo a consider-
able extent, however, by the ability of the five guerril-
la factions to coordinate their efforts to sabotage the
balloting more effectively than in March 1982 re |

27. The government's Peace Commission reported-
ly has made recent contacts with political spokesmen
for the insurgent alliance in an effort to determine
their interest in the amnesty program and participa-
tion in elections #

28. We believe, however, that efforts to generate
positive leftist interest in the balloting are likely to
prove ineffective. The insurgents continue io reject the
electoral process in favor of negotiations leading to a

power-sharing arrangement. Having increased their
military pressure, the insurgents now are engaged in
major diplomatic lobbying for a dialogue with the
governments of El Salvador and the United States

Murders of US Citizens:

“Cood-fatth efforts to investigate murders of
atx US citizens and bring to Justice those respon-
atble for those murders.” (U)

29. The case of the five National Guardsmen
charged with killing four US churchwomen in 1980
has again been set back by judicial procedures. A
lower court decision to begin triaf proceedings was
overturned this spring by an appellate court, which
cited irregularities in the presentation of physical
evidence. Technically, this only postpones an inevita-
ble jury trial and allows prosecutors more time to
organize their case ame

Two other National Guardsmen have confessed
to murdering two US representatives of the American
Institute for Free Labor Development (AIFLD) in
1982 and are due to stand trial following an appellate
review of the evidence. The court, however, has
rejected formal requests by the Attorney General to
prosecute two other participants in the crime, Lt.
Lopez Sibrian and businessman Hans Christ. Accord-
ing to US Embassy sources, the government has one
year to introduce new evidence of the case will be
officially closed. Reporting indicates that the Magana
adminstration is pressing for prosecution and probs bly
will appest to the Supreme Court. 4

$i. Lopez Sibrian, meanwhile, remains on active
duty but in edministrative detention and i t al-
lowed to travel ovtside the country

Another conspirator, Captain Eduardo
Avila, remains in hiding subject to arrest as & murder
suspect and Army deserter. (

EEE ET LIE ELE TAS vag 2 a renee =o

ro
aoe *

ee a i alae S el Teen gO, ee hs Py se. cqerre woe

ree

12MAR 1985
Penny Bevis ms :
Center for National Security Studies

322 Maryland Avenue, NB
Washington, oC 20002

Dear Ms. Bevia:

This is in response to your letter of 29 duly 1983 in which
you requested, under the Freedom of Information Act {FOIA),
records fron the files of this Agency in connection vith the
‘preparation of the certification on Bl Salvador, signed by
Secretary of State George P, Schulte on 20 vuly 1983.

‘Enclosed is a sanitized copy of HNIC M-83~10011,. —
"Zl Salvador: Performance on Certification Issuza." Deletions
were made on the basis of exemption provisiens (b)(1) and
(b)(3) of the POTS. Also enclosed is an explanation of the
exefiptions. | - = :

The CIA official responsible for these determinationa is.
Mr,» Paul Marr; Information Review Officer for the Directorate
GE Intelligence. You have the cight to appeal the above
decision: by acdéressing your appsal to the CLA Information |
Review Committees, in my care. Should you decide to do this,
please expiain the basis of your appeal. —

We apologize for the length of time it has taken us to
complete the procesaing of your request, but we have been inun-.
dated by a large numbér of requests over the past several years,
Under the circumstances, we have done our best to be fair te

ali of cur requésters, Thus, we established some years ego the
policy of first~received, first-ansawered, Thank you for your
patience and consideration while we were progesaing your request,

Sincerely, |

‘Joho HL Wright
2 gs John H. Weight - alt
Information and Privacy Coordinator

y r
‘ '

Enclosures

1P0/SuR/ALb/23 Goterd se. ge. Hae Ae ee Po ee ee ae
pec ada eee ok po ee) re ng eee ee a a aes ae

od. = Chrono i . $i ee

1 - IPD/F83- -0715, Grp (b) 0) 307 Denier: tare sor Bee Stes

~ DECAL ee

a DI (Coord). Note DOs. conéurs’ in ‘Peconmeneed deletions: a

- Additional deletions Le DIA on Be Ay panos Me nS uae We As

Ves tae ie. Shas : st 2 yD ste OE , eg : seine

2 “
+ i
ae ae ’
1 . , “ 4
aa az H ‘ % :
a. a i
+ '. “ .
a ‘ame s ’
‘ 5 ci %
'
" 4
fe
‘ t *
: ‘ + r et
te 3% ’
: a oo 7 4 *
> Z we et io
4
a he, a . e33
2 2
: “h, = :
z *
= ¥
i =
74
, bar .
: {| ¥ q
a a
hing .
a F «
i? ;
*
os as
” : ‘os
" ‘4
ri -
s . + ’ ?
ge :
“ke . “ » + x
rT f
é3 “)
B :
, ‘4 4
4 ‘ 3
i : ng 250
~ -. : # “
¥ é »
oo
| ® oo oa
1 4 a ‘ ia
é : ae t ¢
» ‘ oe i ~~ gr *
* * ‘-
% : we a
* z 5 Ea
: Sich J f -
a € c
ss , a
‘ %. ® ete
. ae
id na
co
ie :
y
x
