Growth and Prospects of Leftist Extremists in el Salvador -- Interagency Intell
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115452, dated 1 January 1980.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115452).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DANE
WAS t
4

Tethys
pal
a ttt

5
ey

‘a
a ‘
; rl

fy
e
4/9

dy)
‘
,

patpanat
ea e

GROWTH AND PROSPECTS
OF LEFTIST EXTREMISTS
IN EL SALVADOR

KEY JUDGMENTS

The continued rapid growth of leftist extremists in El Salvador
signals a sharply increasing threat to political stability and portends the
outbreak of large-scale revolutionary warfare_over the next year—
possibly over the next several months. s

The extreme left appears determined to seize power in El Salvador,
although its timetable and tactics may not yet be fixed. It has been
expanding its numbers of trained, armed guerrillas and of political
activists and organizers. At the same time, it has made significant strides
‘fication and coordination on both the military and political fronts.

The extreme left is very well funded (through ransoms). It has
expanded its military capabilities through training in EI Salvador and in
Nicaragua and Cuba and through increasingly sophisticated hit-and-run
raids both on government security posts and on rural and urban “‘soft”
targets. On the political front, it seems to be well led, and_ its
propaganda and other activities are winning support from educated and -
unsophisticated Salvadorans alike ;

_ ./ ‘The'extreme left has not yet demonstrated a capacity for extended
combat against government forces, and the firmness of support for its
cause’ among the masses is open to question. Nonetheless, in view of the
lack of unity and indecisiveness of the government and of the forces in
the political center and on the right generally, the potential of the
eme left to control the course of events in El Salvador is formidable.

DISCUSSION

Guerrilla Growth

The rise of the left in E] Salvador is reflected in the
growth of membership in militant organizations, in the
size, frequency, and sophistication of operations, and
in the armaments utilized over the last two years.
Hardcore insurgents have grown from 200 to 300 in
1977, to about 700 in late 1978, and to more than
2,000 today. In 1978, a country that had been free of
any sustained guerrilla activity two years earlier faced
three principal insurgent groups whose revenues from
kidnaping in two years’ time totaled $26 million;
ransoms in 1979 alone yielded an additional $40
million. We now estimate the terrorist war chest, after
ational expenditures, to total about $20

Terrorist-incited violence surged in 1978, and Sep-
tember of that year was one of the most active periods
of insurgency. Of 87 security-related incidents that
month, 19 were clearly terrorist initiated, although
they resulted in a total of only eight dead. September
1979 witnessed more than double the number of such

incidents, however, and left 40 dead and 10 wounded.

Front Group Activities

Membership in E) Salvador’s extremist-controlled
front groups likely exceeds 60,000. The FPL (Popular
Liberation Forces), the largest guerrilla organization,
has effectively controlled and utilized its front groups,
and, ona smaller scale, the other guerrilla groups have
had similar success. Since 1977, militant group activi-
ties—marches, strikes, and occupations—have caused
monumental problems for the governments in power.
Frequently confronted with extreme demands, the
administrations have alternated between military re-
sponse—and an inevitably bloody aftermath that ac-
celerated leftist recruitment—or drawn-out negotia-
tions that ed to undercut and weaken their
control

The FPL's gradual takeover .of the largest front
organization, the BPR (Popular Revolutionary Bloc)
has intensified the government's problem. The BPR,
with 30,000 to 50,000 members, grew out of a bloody
1975 confrontation between students and security
forces, with university groups, some peasant organiza-
tions, and the militant teachers union forming the
the FPL, the dramatic.

between:

as - >= ASTI housh so = i
inks An dual: r ae 5 -be
SFPL and BPR in 1978,"out

1979, the rate quadrupled, with 300 '_. the BPR became a well-defined and attainable FPL |
x . TU AT 7 a wot } . active. -, a. Be ee = 20S: eS ear os .

Insurgent boldness and the ability to field larger
groups of men reflect similar growth. In September
1978, terrorists carried out coordinated attacks on
three police posts, but the largest group of attackers
numbered only a dozen men and they were lightly
armed. A year later, six National Guard posts—a
somewhat tougher target—were attacked in one week,
with 40 guerrillas involved in the largest firefight.
Significantly, these were combined operations by the
two largest guerrilla groups, who employed automatic
rifles. handgrenades, and in one instance a bazooka.
Today, 50: and 60-man terrorist units, such as those
that temporarily seized outlying towns in late 1979,
are no longer uncommon

groups and their front organizations is beginning to
blur. The assassination campaign under way against
lower-level officials is in part a joint effort by the two
largest front groups. The second largest guerrilla organi-
zation—National Resistance (FARN)—and its front—
United Popular Action (FAPU)—reflect a pattern
similar to the FPL-BPR merger. The front has stock-
piled large quantities of arms in El Salvador and has
increased military training for its members, both at
home and in Cuba. Even the traditionally softline
Communist Party and its front group have turned to
more aggressive tactics. ¥

Moreover, through the the FPL is stepping up
its involvement in labor and is laying the groundwork
for deeper penetration in this sector. In 1978, it

formed a labor coordinating committee which, despite

_ BPR formally established _ the Revolutionary (aber
d ration to assist in widening its labor ia

Unification

The tactical alliance formed this month by the two
leading terrorist groups and the Communist Party—
paralleled by the merger of their front groups—is the
Salvadoran extremists’ most significant effort at coop-
eration. Despite ideological and persona! differences,
several of the Salvadoran groups have been inclined
toward tactical cooperation for several years. As early
as 1977, some of the groups developed an informal
liaison; in 1978 and 1979, they jointly engineered

‘several kidnapings and shared safehouses and arms. By

In short, the distinction between parent giiertilla

and Seeceen in Latin America and oe ese 1.

’

November of last year. all of the leftist organizations
were seriously exploring tactical unification

The uneven history of guerrilla cooperation in
Central America suggests that the new alliance may be
troubled, but the Salvadorans have evidenced more
cooperative tendencies than other Central American
groups. Moreover, they have the added impetus of the
Sandinista success in Nicaragua that followed the
unification of rival factions. Recent Cuban urgings
toward unity and the prospect of additional external
support from Havana are further inducements On
balance, greater tactical cooperation—and more effec-
tive antigovernment operations—are in the offing in
EI Salvadodeag

Arms and External Support

Just as more sophisticated armament—and a guar-
anteed source of resupply—played a critical role in the
Nicaraguan struggle, so too will these factors be pivotal
in El Salvador. An increased arms flow to Salvadoran
insurgents since mid-1979 has boosted guerrilla confi-
dence and affected strategic planning for 1980. Last
August, the guerrillas assessed their weapons stocks as
inadequate for 'arge-scale or prolonged operations, but
the groups have budgeted more funds and have had
increased success in tapping sources of arms supply

sleet certainly of Cuban

OnE were: Panishinoed through Honduras to El

Salvador. Amns, including antitank weapons and sub-
machineguns, have also been received from Sandinista
elements in Nicaragua and from Guatemalan guerrilla -

me in late 1978,
uba; the tempo

FARN/FAPU had sentj

spa ae

- aggressive elements_in Castro's circle may gain §

| men to Havana by January 1950 and plans to send
more. The Cubans have also played an important
brokers’ role, both in organizing increased cooperation
between Sulvadorans and Honduran Communists and
in facilitating Salvadoran. ‘j j

The Salvadorans’ need for a guaranteed arms supply

and other support, however, will have to be solved
closer to home—from Cuba via Nicaragua, Honduras,
Panama, and Costa Rica. Governments or leftist
groups in each of these countries hold out the prospect
of greater help for the Salvadoran insurgents

Fidel Castro's personal intervention and call for
unity at a Havana meeting with Salvadoran leftist
leaders in December parallels his role in fostering an
alliance among rival Nicaraguan Sandinista factions
last year and underscores his belief that El Salvador is

he Satvadorgirmu it
‘arly Japuaryannd chargés thatth ar “contint
to block any real reform, the arguments of the more

Drawing on the success of the regional strategy that
channeled support to the Sandinistas, Castro hopes to
use neighboring leftist organizations—principally the

Honduran Communist Party—as a support apparatus oe
The transshi ment in p id-December 1979 ar

eee CS was apparently the first
major Honduran operation on behalf of
ans. The Hondurans also have agreed ¥ 2 3
Te 23 cae tO establish satehay
Tonduras for Salvadoran groups. In addition, the
Cubans last year arranged for indirect purchase of a

smal] Costa Rican airline that they are planning to use
for covert arms shipments to the Salvadorans, in a
manner similar to that which they used to ship some of

the Salvador-

estimated 300.000 tons of arms funncied to the San-
dinistas during the final offensive against the Somoza
regime.

Although Nicaragua's Sandinista leaders remain of
two minds—committed to their revolutionan: breth-
ren but concerned that their involvement might jeop-
ardize the badly needed flow of economic assistance
from the United States and other Western sources—we
believe they are willing to lend some assistance now
and to give more extensive aid if the situation should
become critical The Nicaraguans provided some
training for Salvadoran insurgents after the overthrow
of Somoza, and the Salvadorans have received arms
from Nicaraguan sources. The December arms deliv-
ery is believed ,aueaeaeeee Perutmeee to have
transited Nicaragua. In a yearend meeting in Mana-
gua, Salvadoran leftists reportedly reached agreement
with both the Cubans and Nicaraguans for further

a

delivery of war materic®

Panama is keeping its options open, fostering con-

tacts with both Salvadoran Government authorities...

and insurgent groups, and offering advice to both
sides. But, while General Torrijos claims to be a
mediator with no brief for either side, he views the rise
of “progressive” forces in Central ‘America’s -both -
desirable and inevitable, and he is most likely to _

i ell ete

The Costa Rican Comm

minor supportive role. me eh

salvadorans also reportedly have a communications
post in San Jose with a radio network linked with
stations in E] Salvado sa

Strategy and Prospects

Ir. the final quarter of 1979, the strategy of the
Salvadoran insurgents began to reflect a pattern of
plans for a total offensive within the’ next month or
so—the outgrowth of their increasing strength and
perception of a weak divided government. This pat-
tern of predicted “final offensives” is likely to persist
in 1990 and translates into gradually increasing terror-
ist and front-group activities aimed at a flashpoint
when the combination of violence, economic disrup-
tion, and political divisiveness spark anarch ;

oe

If the Salvadoran left can remain tactically united,
it will decrease the chances for success of any moder-
ate civilian-military junta, because it would frustrate
dialogue with elements of the extreme left and in-
crease civilian-military frictions over repressive tactics.
Through intimidation and political pressure, it could
prevent much of the center left from cooperating in

The extreme left. increasingly better equipped and
engaging in larger scale actions, has developed the
capability to directly challenge the Salvadoran estab-
lishment. although much still depends on outside
actors. In the absence of external aid that substantialh
strengthens the military-government structure. the ex-
treme left—if its own external support grows at the
pace it has over the last six months—will be strong
enough in 1980 to topple the government formed in
January.* If external support for the insurgents is half
of what it was in Nicaragua, the extremists in Ei
Salvador have a better-than-even chance to seize and
ter the anarchy and violence they will
