EstimatedD Pub Date) the Sherwood Tapes
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135031, dated 5 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135031).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PBSUCCESS

The SHERWOOD Tapes

~ OVERVIEW &
' GENERAL NOTES

teopicne- 2

OVERV DEWis eich tb oh wh tie Seta tend geil a peer ge SA eos See 1

PERIOD OF OPERATION. .......0.-.c eee sete eee eee 4
STATION IDENTIFICATION... 0... se ae 4
PREQUENCGIES#. uch ldele 2 oc55. 4 ate dieu deh tele) 4
BROADCAST HOURS........ 0. e eee eee eee eee ee eee 4
ANNOUNCERS 8 si). iot en PL Se sb eS 4
RECURRING PROGRAM SEGMENTS..........-....--.-005- 4
SIGN ONS: ohse oi avetuietetanticlnae ae hapa sats Pema SS 7
STON MOPE: 4. cw weet tle hae a brid deere Aaege See 10
THE “IDEOLOGICAL DECALOGUE”.........-...000005 11
THE “MILITARY DECALOGUB”...........2+-022-00-- 12
REPRAING oka edo foo skciin, Ceylon aang ented d 15

THE: SONGS 3h. scuie eed Scarce cP aed ee a OS 2 Bante 29.

OVERVIEW

SHERWOOD was the cryptonym assigned to Radio Liberation, the clandestine
radio operation encompassed by the PBSUCCESS program. This review of the
SHERWOOD operation was conducted solely by listening to cassettes onto which the
original broadcast reels had been transposed. Some use was made of collateral
information which occasionally helped establish the sequence of tapes and broadcast
dates/times. There were a total of 324 cassettes, most of them containing
approximately 30 minutes of broadcasting. An additional 34 tapes were reviewed that
contained only the recording of one full day (December 30, 1953) of broadcasting by
TGW, the Guatemalan government's official station. These 34 tapes do not appear to
have had anything to do with the SHERWOOD operation.

The SHERWOOD transmitter was located in a country neighboring Guatemala,
and the studio in which the programming was recorded was located in southern Florida.
Tapes were couriered from the studio to the broadcast site, but by the time armed
hostilities broke out, this system had become too cumbersome and the actual program
production was shifted to the broadcast site.

The SHERWOOD tapes were clearly recorded at the transmitter site, rather
than from a receiver. They are devoid of the interference and distortion that would
have been present had they indeed been recorded off the air.

The cassette numbers used in this review do not imply any sequence; Cassette
#2 does not necessarily follow Cassette #1. The numbers were assigned arbitrarily in
the sequence in which they were transposed from the original reels. The dates, times
and general sequence provided in the review were generally derived either from
notations on the original reels, or from the contents of the broadcast. Reels pouched
from the Florida studio generally contained annotations indicating the date and time
they were to be broadcast, and there is no indication that these directions were not
followed. After the outbreak of armed hostilities, circa 15 June, tapes were apparently
produced at or near the broadcast site and contain few such notations. Where the date
and/or time of broadcast can be established, they are noted at the top of the page.
Where the date is an approximation derived from content, the date at the top of the
page is preceded by the notation [c.].

The themes employed in this propaganda operation are what might be
expected. Communism is the great evil. It is anti-God, anti-religion, anti-fatherland.
President Arbenz is depicted not as a communist, but as a witting instrument of the
Kremlin who has sold the country out to international communism, and who will be
betrayed and destroyed by the communists whenever he is no longer useful to them.
He is directly accused of having participated in the orchestration of the assassination of
Armed Forces chief Col. Francisco Javier Arana in July, 1949, the price he purportedly
was required to pay international communism in order to be given the presidency.
Arbenz is regularly vilified throughout the broadcasts.

The army is a primary target of the propaganda. The “Military Decalogue,” a
statement of military values, is referred to several times in the effort to persuade the

military to take action against the communists. The broadcasts regularly stress that
Arbenz is building up and arming the “popular militia” and the “communist shock troops”
for an eventual confrontation with a military that he does not trust. The station is
careful not to attack the army as an institution, nor the officers and soldiers that
comprised it. Rather, it relentlessly attacked the betrayal of the army by its top leaders.

Other clear targets of the propaganda are intellectuals, women, workers, and
peasants. Various program segments are clearly tailored to these groups.

The original Spanish scripts are available for many of the regularly broadcast
program segments. In those instances, [*] appears in the account of each such
segment.

The synopses of the broadcasts in this review wiil appear dry, but the reader
shouid bear in mind that the operation made excellent use of music. In addition to its
musical programs, the station made liberal use of music to introduce its programs (the
Guatemalan anthem), as filler, and as background to dramatic presentations. The
actual music programs covered the spectrum from classical to opera to North American
pop hits to native Guatemalan marimba music, and, of course, every broadcast began
and ended with the national anthem. More importantly, perhaps, the operation made
dramatic use of martial music, frequently interwoven with repetitions of the refrains
which were the sharp tips of the station’s propaganda spears. A compilation of the all
the refrains used is provided below. The martial music was effectively used, particularly
when blended with news reports from the battle fronts. John Philip Souza was clearly a
featured star of this whole series. The music helped considerably in making various
appeals, calls to arms and resistance proclamations quite stirring. The blending of
music with script was well done.

In trying to assess what might have been the effectiveness of this operation, the
review is constrained by having been limited to the tapes themselves, with no
yardsticks to measure actual impact. The reviewer concludes, however, that if the
SHERWOOD transmitter was powerful enough to get through clearly, and if there were
enough short wave receivers in Guatemala (apparently they were quite common), then
this operation must have been highly effective. It may not have had the impact on
military officers that the specter of an invasion by US Marines might have had, but it
surely must have energized some military personnel to resist, and influenced important
sectors of Guatemalan society against communism, against the Arbenz regime, and in
favor of the “Army of Liberation.” The ability of the radio station to provide up-to-date
military information (always cast in the rebels’ favor), and to combine broadcasts with
leaflet drops (Cassette #163), surely must have had considerable impact. Its regular
transmission of operational messages to purported agents in Guatemala (including one
named Cicero), as well as the representaton of a raid on the broadcast site
(Cassette #97), must, at a minimum, have attracted widespread interest and been the
subject of considerable speculation. This was a very confident-sounding station which
continually raised credible doubts about the regime’s durability, while at the same time
lionizing Castillo Armas and the rebel army, and stressing the inevitability of the
liberation.

A fairly reliable chronological sequence can be established for the broadcast
tapes up through 5 June. From that date until 28 June, it is more difficult to place them

in precise order, but the sequence provided is believed to be generally accurate. After
28 June, however, it appears that the speed of events may have precluded the
recording of the broadcasts, for none of the tapes seem to fit well for the final days of
29 June through the station’s closing on 2 July.

GENERAL NOTES

Period of Operation

Radio Liberation first came up on the air on 1 May 1954. It closed down on 2 July
1954.

Station Identification
On the air, the station variously identified itself as:

Radio Liberacion [by far the most commonly used name]
La Voz de fa Liberacion para fos Guatemaltecos

La Voz de fa Liberacion Guatemalteca

La Voz de la Libertad

Frequencies

Throughout its period of operation, Radio Liberation used 6360 kilocycles as its daytime
frequency. It initially used 3530 kilocycies at night, but on 8 May switched to 3420
kilocycles and remained there at night until the station was closed down.

Broadcast Hours

Initially, Radio Liberation broadcast from 0700 to 0800 and from 2100 to 2200. On 13
May it switched the first broadcast to 1300, and extended the second broadcast to two
hours, from 2000 to 2200. On 29 May it cut the second broadcast back to one hour,
starting at 2100. After the armed hostilities began, the station came up on the air more
frequently, often changing its scheduling, and often coming up every hour or every 45
minutes.

Announcers

The station regularly used the services of three announcers, two male and one female.
Ali three had excelient radio voices and elocution, and were abie to read scripts with
apparently genuine emotion. The woman sounded particularly effective when
addressing the women of Guatemala.

Recurring Program Segments
During its normal broadcasts prior to the beginning of actual armed hostilities (circa 15

June), Radio Liberation featured recurring program segments, each running for-about
15 minutes:

1) Acusamos de Alta Traicion [We Accuse of High Treason], featuring a recurring

introduction, in fairly lofty language, about the virtues of the liberation movement's
cause, the evils of communism and the treason committed by Guatemala’s leaders.
The introduction was always enhanced by dramatic background music.

2) Baile al Compas [sometimes Son] que le Toquen [Dance to the Rhythm They Play
for You], musical programs with satirical “sponsorships” of various figures in the
Arbenz regime, particularly police/security personalities and institutions. The
language tended to be “slangy” with a local flavor.

3) Comunismo al Desnudo [Communism Disrobed], political commentary generally
attacking communism.

4) Pegando Centro [Hitting the Bullseye]. This appeared only occasionally and lasted
for just a minute or two. In each one a warning was given to a specific person, fully
identified, for having hoarded illegal arms. The person was warned to turn the arms
over to the nearest army installation or, in most cases, the arms would eventually be
used against that person.

5) Miscelanea Musical del Aire [Musical Miscellany of the Airwaves], music
interspersed with [low-brow] jokes; probably targeted at the less-educated sectors of
Guatemalan society. Segment on which the verses of La Profesia and Los
Trinqueteros (see below) were taught.

6) Nuestra Campana Radial [Our Radio Campaign], featuring relatively sophisticated
discussions of communism and its impact on religion, labor, agriculture, land reform,
etc.

7) La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion [The News Through Radio Liberation], quick
news items selected and presented to support the station’s political posture.
Broadcasting of this segment began on 27 May.

8) Que Somos y Adonde Vamos [What We Are and Where We're Headed], political
program which switched between attacking communism and explaining the goals of
the liberation movement.

9) Rompiendo las Cadenas [Breaking the Chains], another relatively sophisticated
segment frequently concentrating on economic issues.

10) En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras [On the Wings of Music That
Knows No Boundaries] (20-30 minutes), music from around the world.

11) La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Sobre ef Problema Comunista
{Women and the Fatherland: Feminine Opinions on the Communist Problem], a
segment targeted at women, and always featuring the same female announcer
speaking in the first person. She addressed women in their roles of the period, as
Catholic wives and mothers. Strong religious content. Probably very effective.

12) Descanso En Ritmo. [Musical Rest], top hits of North America.

1)

2

Sad

3

=

4

pears

5)

6)

7)

8)

9)

Acusamos de Alta Traicion [We Accuse of High Treason], featuring a recurring
introduction, in fairly lofty language, about the virtues of the liberation movement's
cause, the evils of communism and the treason committed by Guatemala’s leaders.
The introduction was always enhanced by dramatic background music.

Baile al Compas [sometimes Son] que le Toquen [Dance to the Rhythm They Play
for You], musical programs with satirical “sponsorships” of various figures in the
Arbenz regime, particularly police/security personalities and institutions. The
language tended to be “slangy” with a local flavor.

Comunismo af Desnudo [Communism Disrobed], political commentary generally
attacking communism.

Pegando Centro [Hitting the Bullseye]. This appeared only occasionally and lasted
for just a minute or two. In each one a warning was given to a specific person, fully
identified, for having hoarded illegal arms. The person was warned to turn the arms
over to the nearest army installation or, in most cases, the arms would eventually be
used against that person.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire {Musical Miscellany of the Airwaves], music
interspersed with [low-brow] jokes; probably targeted at the less-educated sectors of
Guatemalan society. Segment on which the verses of La Profesia and Los
Trinqueteros (see below) were taught.

Nuestra Campana Radial [Our Radio Campaign], featuring relatively sophisticated
discussions of communism and its impact on religion, labor, agriculture, land reform,
etc.

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion [The News Through Radio Liberation], quick
news items selected and presented to support the station’s political posture.
Broadcasting of this segment began on 27 May.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos [What We Are and Where We're Headed], political
program which switched between attacking communism and explaining the goals of
the liberation movement.

Rompiendo las Cadenas [Breaking the Chains], another relatively sophisticated
segment frequently concentrating on economic issues.

10) En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras [On the Wings of Music That

Knows No Boundaries] (20-30 minutes), music from around the world.

11) La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Sobre el Problema Comunista

[Women and the Fatherland: Feminine Opinions on the Communist Problem], a
segment targeted at women, and always featuring the same female announcer
speaking in the first person. She addressed women in their roles of the period, as
Catholic wives and mothers. Strong religious content. Probably very effective.

12) Descanso En Ritmo. [Musical Rest], top hits of North America.

13) Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia [On the World Paths of

Music and Poetry], poetry and classical music. Targeted at intellectual levels.

14) Sangre de Martires [Blood of the Martyrs] , dramatized accounts of abuses
committed against anti-Communists. Some are graphic enough to be difficult to
listen to.

15) Nuestra Lucha Al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia - Tribuna de la Libertad
[Our Struggle in the Service of Freedom and Democracy - the Freedom Tribunal],
dramatizations of various facets of developments within Guatemala.

16) Alma Chapina, a musical program featuring marimba music.

Humor

Most of the station’s humor is used in Miscelanea Musical del Aire, a segment clearly
targeted at workers, peasants, and the generally less well-educated. The station did
not run the risk of having any of its humor go over its listeners’ heads. A sampler:

“Oh, what a beautiful mule!”
"That's a picture of Jacobo.” [Cassette #3]

[Secretary of the Presidency, Jaime Diaz] Rozzoto says to a friend, “My
secretary really has me tired.” “Well,” says the friend, "don’t chase her
around so much.” [Cassette #3]

Economy Minister Roberto Fanjul sees a beautifully trained horse perfectly
obeying the commands of its trainer. “How do you train your horse like that,”
he asked the trainer, “I tried it with my horse and it didn’t work.” ‘Well, Mr.
Minister,” said the trainer, “the problem is the trainer has to be more intelligent
than the horse.” [Cassette #11]

Arbenz says to his wife, “I’m going to fire my driver. Today was the third time
he almost gets me killed.”

“Don't be that way,” she responds, “why don’t you give him another chance.”
{Cassette #11]

Maria Arbenz is reading the paper and says to her husband, “Wow, | never
realized a woman could weigh that much!” “How heavy?” Arbenz asked. “It
says here an English woman lost 3,000 pounds!”

[Cassette #19]

Chief of staff at the palace: “Is the president drunk again?”
President's valet: “I don’t know, but it is unusual to see him try to take his pants
off over his head.” [Cassette #19]

“Jaime Diaz Rozzoto, you talk like a perfect idiot!”
“Mr. President, | have to speak that way for you to understand me!” [Cassette
#23]

“Mrs. Arbenz is chatting with one of her husband’s new aides, lvan Noskapop.
“l understand you were wounded in WWII,” she says.

“Yes, ma’am.”

“And where were you wounded?”

“In the Dardanelles, ma’am.”

“My, that must have been terribly painful!” [Cassette #34]

Q: How are the revolutionaries similar to the most modern aircraft?
A: Ever since they first heard Radio Liberation, they are jet-propelled!
{Cassette #66]

Communist leader Jose Fortuny visits a friend, and notices that the friend’s son
stares at him unblinkingly.

“Why do you stare at me like that?”

“Because your father told me you are a self-made man.”

‘Well, yes, that’s true, | am a self-made man.”

‘Well, why did you make yourself so ugly?” [Cassette #66]

Fortuny: “Do you permit your wife to do whatever she wishes?”
Guerra Borges: “No, she does it without my permission.” [Cassette #195]

Public Health Minister Julio Roberto Herrera was touring an insane asylum, and
spotted an inmate holding a fishing rod out the window, with the line going down
to the garden below.

“What are you fishing for, my friend?” asked Herrera.

“Idiots, “ said the inmate.

“| see, and how many have you caught so far?”

“You're the ninth.”

Sign Ons

The standard Sign Ons (Sign On | and Sign On II) intersperse the national anthem with
the following refrain:

Sign On|

Atencion Guatemala! Atencion Guatemaltecos!

Radio Liberacion [occasionally inserts frequency here] /es habla. Esta es la emisora
clandestina Radio Liberacion, operando en su frecuencia [occasionally inserts
frequency here] de onda corta y desde algun lugar secreto del territorio nacional.
Escuchenos Usted y sabra Ia realidad del momento politico por que atraviesa
Guatemala, y los progresos irrefutables del gran movimiento libertador. Durante ef
transcurso de nuestras transmisiones diarias, damos a Ustedes musica, comentarios y
noticias en general, y demostramos palpablemente el crimen de la dominacion
comunista y la fuerza incontenible de! movimiento libertador guatemaiteco. En el aire
[frequently inserts frequency here] /os transmisores clandestinos de Radio Liberacion!

[Attention Guatemala! Attention Guatemaians! Radio Liberation [occasionally
inserts frequency here] speaks to you. This is the clandestine transmitter Radio
Liberation, operating on its short wave frequency (occasionally inserts frequency
here) from a secret place in the national territory. Listen to us and you will know
the reality of the political moment that Guatemala is going through, and the
irrefutable progress of the great liberation movement. During our broadcasts we
bring you music, commentaries and news in general, and we demonstrate clearly
the crimes of the communist domination and the uncontainable force of the
Guatemalan liberation movement. The clandestine transmitters of Radio
Liberation are on the air (occasionally inserts frequency here)!]

Sign On tl

Atencion Guatemala, Atencion Guatemaltecos. Esta es Radio Liberacion, la emisora
clandestina de la oposicion anticomunista organizada del pais, dirigiendose a toda la
nacion. Despues de un larga noche de buitres y de serpientes, se anuncia ya la aurora
de un nuevo [glorioso] amanecer. Sol, redondo y nuevo, al levantarse sobre las
montanas es saludado por nuestra eterna primavera. Guatemala esta en visperas
trascendentales cuando sus cadenas forjadas en los yunques comunistas se fundan
Para convertirse en campanas. La hora esta llegando en que fos altares cubiertos con
crespon de luto, florezcan gloriosamente en el repique de Ia victoria. Guatemalitecos!
La aurora de redencion se asoma a los honizontes de [a patna. EI gozo llena ya este
valle de lagrimas. En fas llanuras del espiritu, alinean los simbolos y las aspiraciones.
Y en albo torsel galopa revisando sus legiones, el dueno del patrio lar, Santiago de los
Caballeros. Una Guatemala embalsamada, cubierta con los harapos de fa miseria
politica, del fatrocinio, de fa mentira y del crimen, va a resuscitar muy pronto,
enarbolando su bandera azul y blanca, y anunciando a los cuatro vientos de la vida,
que no morira jamas. Guatemala ha sido secuestrada en los sotanos de [a verguenza
y el delito, y nosotros estamos prestos a pagar el rescate con la sangre de nuestras
venas, para verla libre y honrada. Y cada minuto mas es, Guatemaitecos, un minuto
menos, un minuto mas hacia la libertad y hacia la paz, un minuto menos de esclavitud
y de vendimia, las horas de los rufianes estan contadas. Sobre sus cabezas vuelan ya
los buitres famelicos, tienen miedo, tiemblan, y sera el pueblo integro el juez de los
Sicarios. Y ala tierra le da verquenza sufrir [cubrir] los despojos de quienes la
traicionaron, Guatemaltecos! La hora llega, esta proxima, escu..... los honzontes,
preguntad a los sentinelas de la patria. Pedimos a todos, hombres y mujeres, jovenes
y viejos, pobres y ricos, que nos presten su atencion, que mediten sobre ef contenido
de nuestros programas, que compacten sus filas bajo nuestra bandera que ostenta los
simbolos de Dios,, Patria, Libertad! Que se dispongan al sacrificio en aras de la
redencion. En el aire los transmisores de Radio Liberacion, la emisora clandestina de
Guatemala.

[Attention, Guatemala, attention, Guatemalans. This is Radio Liberation, the
clandestine station of the country’s organized anti-Communist opposition,
addressing the entire nation. After a long night of vultures and serpents, the glow
of a new and glorious dawn is upon us. A sun, new and round, rises above the
mountains and is greeted by our eternal spring. Guatemala is on the eve of
transcendental events, when its chains, forged in the communist sweatshops, are
melted and transformed into bells. The hour is arriving in which the altars, draped
in mourning, sprout gloriously in the glow of victory. Guatemalans! The aura of
redemption sweeps across the horizons of the fatherland. Joy is spreading
through this valley of tears. Our symbols and aspirations are aligning in our
spirits. And the patron of our homeland, Santiago de las Caballeros, gallops on
his white steed reviewing his legions. An embalmed [sic] Guatemala, draped in the
rags of political misery, thievery, lying and crime, will soon resuscitate, flying her
blue and white flag, and announcing to the four winds of life that she will never
die. Guatemala has been kidnapped and sequestered in the bowels of shame and
crime, and we are ready to pay the ransom with the blood in our veins, to see her

free and honored. And every minute more, Guatemalans, is one minute less, one
minute toward liberty and peace, one minute jess of slavery and exploitation; the
hours of the ruffians are numbered. Already the starved vultures fly over their
heads; they’re afraid, they tremble, and it will be the whole people that judges the
assassins. The earth is shamed by the disdain of those who betrayed it.
Guatemalans! The hour is coming, it is near, scan the horizons, ask the sentinels
of the fatherland. We ask everyone, men and women, young and old, poor and
rich, to give us your attention, that you ponder the content of our programs, that
you join ranks under our flag which bears the symbols of God, Fatherland,
Liberty! That you be ready for sacrifice in the quest for redemption. The
transmitters of Radio Liberation, Guatemala’s clandestine station, are on the air. ]

10

Sign Off
The standard Sign Off is as follows:

Contra el comunismo!

Contra los vicios del pasado!

Por una democracia verdadera!

Radio Liberacion operando con su transmisor clandestino de onda corta en [inserts
frequency here], desde a/gun lugar secreto en la Republica de Guatemala. Es
en esta forma, guatemaltecos y amigos simpatizantes de nuestra noble causa,
como hemos Ilegado al final de una transmision mas de Radio Liberacion.
Hemos operado con muestro transmisor clandestino de onda corta en [inserts
frequency here] situado en algun lugar secreto de la Republica. Y con la ayuda
de Dios, y si las cicumstancias nos lo permiten, volveremos a estar con Ustedes
y donde ahora marca el cuadrante de su radio, en nuestras transmisiones del
dia de manana, en la noche y al medio dia como de costumbre. Gracias por
hoy, y no olvide recomendar que escuchen estos programas. Colabore asi con
la mas noble de las causas guatemaltecas.

Contra el comunismo!

Contra los vicios del pasado!

Por una democracia verdadera!

Dios, Patria, Libertad!

Radio Liberacion se retira del espacio. Muy buenas noches.

[Against communism!

Against the vices of the past!

For a true democracy!

God, Country, Liberty!

Radio Liberation operating with its clandestine short wave transmitter on
[occasionally inserts frequency here], from some secret place in the
Republic of Guatemala. In this way, Guatemalans and sympathizing friends
of our noble cause, we have arrived at the end of another broadcast of
Radio Liberation. We have operated with our clandestine short wave
transmitter at [inserts frequency here] situated at some secret place in the
Republic. And with the help of God, and if circumstances permit, we will be
with you again on this same spot on your radio dial with tomorrow's
broadcasts, in the evening and at midday as usual. For today, thank you,
and don’t forget to recommend our programs to others. Collaborate in that
way with the noblest of Guatemalan causes.

Against communism!

Against the vices of the past!

For a true democracy!

God, Country, Liberty!

Radio Liberation withdraws from this space. Good night.]

11

The “Ideological Decalogue” -- Why We Cannot Be Communists

This is a creed of sorts that is read, or quoted from, at various times over the air.

“\WWe cannot be communists because communism....

_.denies the existence of God as beginning and end of the purest ideals of the
human being, and attempts to instill the antithesis of historical materialism,
confusing effects with causes.

...places the values and interests of the party over those of the fatherland, and
the fatherland has a primacy which no one can change without engaging in the
most vile treason.

_.cannot allow that freedom is indispensable for human life, nor does it
recognize the majesty of the law.

_..destroys faith, ideals and the spirit of individual self-improvement, without
which human progress is impossible. Communism does not understand that
faith, ideals and the spirit of improvement have been the fountains from which
have sprung prosperity, well-being, greatness and civilization.

.. ignores the existence of moral values. And man without morality is no better
than the animals that exist in his natura! world, and lacks the capacity to
distinguish between good and evil.

_.. destroys the formative school of the home, the foundation of all social life, of
morality, cooperation, humanitarianism.

__is based on absurdities. It imposes ideological equality and of satisfactions, an
equality which even natures denies us. Communism believes it essential to pull
back those in front, so those behind can catch up with them. It destroys the
existent, to create a new order, rather than improving what is considered
unsatisfactory.

_.has as its only visible achievements to date the enslavement of millions of
workers, thousands of concentration camps, and millions of cadavers shouting
from the afterlife that they preferred death to misery, death to the subjugation of
man to a ration of bread on one hand, and the specter of the whip on the other.

_..exploits envy, and all the low passions that the inept holds for the capabie,

that the lazy man holds for the working man, the vice-ridden holds for the
virtuous, the haves hold for the have nots.

12

...considers work to be an instrument of enslavement, and not a noble attribute
which permits the human being to satisfy his aspirations, closing the door to the
initiatives of the worker, and demanding from him a total subjugation of ideas
and actions.

The “Military Decalogue”

The Military Decalogue is read in its entirety on Cassette #42, 16 May, and then quoted
from in subsequent broadcasts

EI Decalogo Militar comprende honor, patriotismo, lealtad, caracter, disciplina,
dignidad, companerismo, fe, valor, abnegacion.

Honor, sintesis de las virtudes militares y ef mas alto atributo en la escala de los
valores virtudes humanos....es una religion sin cuya practica no se concibe Ia
existencia del verdadero militar.

Patriotismo. Amor, el mas puro hacia el suelo que nos vio nacer. Concrecion
del que nos une a /os padres y a Ios hijos, y a todo cuanto es vida de! pueblo y
porvenir de la patria. Sin su permanente ejercicio, jamas podra el militar cumplir
los sagrados fines de la institucion, y los inpostergables deberes de |a
nacionalidad.

Leaitad. Llave de seguridad de quien nos entrega el tesoro de su confianza, y
el don invaluable de su amistad Een el militar es condicion consustancial
porque sin ella no podria ser garante del orden, defensor de fas instituciones,
sentinela de fa patria.

Disciplina, Rigurosa observancia de las normas que justifican las jerarquias
morales. El grado de su perfeccion estriba en la correlacion que debe existir
entre la jerarquia de esas virtudes y la escala de los grados militares. Sin esa
correlacion no existe fa disciplina militar.

Caracter. Distintivo inconfundivel de quien es firme en sus propositos y fiel a
sus deberes. En el ejercito, el trasunto del alma nacional. Genuina expresion
de fa institucion armada. No se concibe un militar falto de ese distintivo.

Companerismo. Vinculo indestructible que une a los hombres forjados en
identicas disciplinas, y en la realizacion de los mismos ideales. Ese ......
espiritual fortalece el animo, eleva la moral, y caracteriza al ejercito como el
hogar del soldado.

Dignidad. E.... conducta en los fines esenciales del hombre. En el militar provo,
es antorcha que guia su espintu y calidad que enoblece sus actos.

13

Fe. Luz que ilumina el espintu, fortalece la voluntad y mantiene pereniamente
encendida fa antorcha de la esperanza. Sin ella, ef militar carece del escudo
que hace invencible el espiritu, inquebrantable el proposito.

Abnegacion. Integro y voluntario sacrificio para defender las grandes causas, y
ralizar los mas caros ideales. En el militar, es motivo de honda satisfaccion y
legitimo orgullo.

Valor. Fortaleza del espiritu frente al peligro. Dignidad en la derrota.
Generosidad en Ia victoria. A su poderoso influjo, el militar cumple con su
deber. Elude la complicidad. Muere antes que rendirse.

{Martial music.] Honor, patnotismo, lealtad, caracter, disciplina, dignidad,
companerismo, fe, valor, abnegacion. Este es el Decalogo Militar. [Martial
music. ]

[The Military Decalogue includes honor. patriotism, loyalty, character,
discipline, dignity, camaraderie, faith, valor, abnegation.

Honor. Synthesis of military virtues and highest attribute on the scale of
human values...it is a religion without the practice of which true military
existence cannot be imagined.

Patriotism. The purest of loves for the soil on which we were born. That
which joins us to parents and children, and to everything about the life of
our people and future of the fatherland. Without its constant practice, the
military man can never meet the sacred tasks of the institution, and the
imperative duties of our nationality.

Loyalty. The security key from he who gives us the treasure of his
confidence and friendship. In the soldier it is a vital condition because
without it he could not be a guarantor of order, defender of institutions,
guardian of the fathertand.

Discipline. Rigorous observance of the norms which justify moral
hierarchies. Its degree of perfection depends on the correlation that must
exist between the hierarchy of those virtues and the military grade scale.
Without that correlation there is no military discipline.

Character. . Distinguishing feature of he who is firm of purpose and faithful
in his duties. In the army, the basis of the national soul. Genuine
expression of the armed forces. A soldier without this attribute in
inconceivable.

14

Camaraderie. Indestructible link that unites men forged in identical
disciplines, and in the realization of the same ideals. That spiritual .....
strengthens enthusiasm, raises morale, and characterizes the army as the
soldier's home.

Dignity. .....of man’s essential purposes. For the soldier, it is the torch that
guides his spirit, the quality that ennobles his acts.

Faith. The light that illuminates the spirit, fortifies the will and maintains the
torch of hope permanently lit. Without it, the soldier lacks the shield that
makes the spirit invincible, the will unbreakable.

Abnegation. Integral and voluntary sacrifice to defend the great causes
and to attain the most precious ideals. In a soldier it is motive for profound
satisfaction and legitimate pride.

Valor. The spirit’s strength in the face of danger. Dignity in defeat.
Magnanimity in victory. Through its generous influx the soldier does his
duty, eludes complicity, dies before surrendering.

(Martial music.) Honor, patriotism, loyalty, character, discipline,

camaraderie, faith, valor, abnegation. This is the Military Decalogue.
(Martial Music.)]

15

Refrains

The station made libera! use of recurring refrains throughout its broadcasts. The one tabeled Refrain 2
was clearly the station's clarion call, and was featured on virtually every air appearance, usually severai
times. Occasionally an announcer would stumble over a refrain (as well as in the regutar program
segments), making its meaning somewhat obscure. The fact that the time was not taken to turn back the
recorders and do it again suggests that the station's programming was produced under tight time
constraints.

Refrain 2 Todo Guatemalteco debe tener en su lucha contra el comunismo por simbolos Dios, Patria y
Libertad; por aspiraciones Justicia, Verdad y Trabajo. El engrandecimiento de la patria
merece sus mas hondas preocupaciones. Contra el comunismo! Contra los vicios del
pasado! Por una democracia verdadera! Esta es Radio Liberacion [para los
Guatemattecos] operando con su transmisor clandestino de onda corta [occasionally inserts
frequency here], y desde algun lugar secreto de la Republica de Guatemala.

[Every Guatemalan should have as symbols in his struggle against communism,
God, Country and Liberty; as aspirations Justice, Truth and Work. The
aggrandizement of the country merits your deepest concern. Against communism!
Against the vices of the past! For a true democracy! This is Radio Liberation [for
Guatemalans] operating on its clandestine short wave transmitter [occasionally
inserts frequency here], from some secret place in the Republic of Guatemala]

Refrain 3 Obrero [sometimes trabajador] guatematteco, despierta a la realidad. La Patria reclama tu
amor y tu esfuerzo. No permitas que lideres comunistas malogren tus derechos.
[Guatemalan worker, wake up to reality. The fatherland calls out for your love and
your effort. Don't let the communist leaders spoil your rights.]

Refrain 4 La lealtad se debe a fa patria antes que a los hombres. Combate a los comunistas y su obra
traidora. [Loyalty is owed to the fatherland before it is to men. Combat the
communists and their treasonous work.]

Refrain 5 Ciudadano! Que el azul y blanco del cielo reflejado en tu bandera no sea suplantado por la
ensena comunista de la guerra y la barbarie. [Citizen! Let the sky's blue and white
reflected in your flag not be supplanted by the communist symbols of war and
barbarity!]

Refrain 6 Guatemaiteco! No legues a tus hijos la vergonzosa herencia de una patria esclavizada.
[Guatemalan! Don’t leave to your children the shameful legacy of an enslaved
fatherland.]

Refrain 7 Verdad, Justicia y Trabajo. Formula teologal y social. Triangulo equilatero de los ideales de
fa patria. Trilogia sagrada de un Ivigoroso que quiere levantarse sobre el imenso sepulcro
abierto por los rojos. Verdad en ef hombre, justicia en ef pueblo, trabajo en la republica.

Tres franjas de una bandera que ya empieza a hondear en las almenas de la esperanza.
[Truth, Justice and Work. A theological and social formula. An equilateral triangle of
the ideals of the fatherland. Sacred trilogy of a vigorous people that wants to rise
above the immense sepulchre opened by the reds. Truth in man, Justice in the
people, Work in the republic. Three stripes of a flag that already begins to wave in the
spirit of hope. ]

16

Refrain 8

Refrain 9

Refrain 10

Refrain 11

Refrain 12

Refrain 13

Refrain 14

Refrain 15

El gobierno traidor de Jacobo Arbenz vocifera histericamente a cada momento y y en cuanta
oportunidad tiene a mano, que Guatemala no es una colonia de los Estados Unidos. Pero lo
interesante seria saber si Guatemala es, en cambio, una colonia sovietica. Porque no
despejan esta incognita, camaradas, y evitamos asi que las naciones libres del concierto
continental digan que nosotros somos la verguenza de America. [The traitorous
government of Jacobo, whenever it has the opportunity, hysterically shouts that
Guatemala is not a colony of the United States. It would be interesting to know, on
the other hand, if Guatemala is a soviet colony. Why don’t you clear up this mystery,
comrades, so that we can avoid having the free nations of the continent saying that
we are the shame of America.]

Los espias comunistas polulan por donde quieren en nuestro ferritorio. Los guatemaitecos,
concientes del espionaje que los acecha, deben abstenerse de ser demasiado
comunicativos. [The communist spies go wherever they want in our territory.
Guatemalans, aware of the espionage that surrounds them, should refrain from being
overly communicative.]

EI gobierno de Jacobo Arbenz, impulsado por el partido comunista, va hacia el contro!
absoluto de la economia. Y como en Rusia sovietica, por la supresion de los hombres de
negocios, apropriandose de sus haberes y suprimiendo la libre empresa, lo que detiene ef
progreso y perjudica de hecho los intereses def pueblo. [The government of Jacobo
Arbenz, impelled by the communist party, aims for total contro! of the economy. And,
as in soviet Russia, for the suppression of men of business, appropriating their
goods and suppressing free enterprise, all of which detains progress and afflicts the
interests of the people.]

Cuando los lideres se enriquecen a costillas del pueblo y cuando ya estan hartos de dinero
abandonan la causa y salen del pais. Fortuny ya anucia viaje a Moscu. [When the leaders
enrich themselves behind the backs of the people and then get tired of the money,
they abandon the cause and leave the country. Fortuny has already announced his
travel to Moscow.]

A pesar de que el partido comunista guatemaiteco, una rama al servicio de fa rusia sovietica,
es un pequeno grupo en la masa electoral de la nacion, controla sin embargo ef gobierno de
Jacobo Arbenz. [Even though the Guatemalan communist party, a branch in the
sevice of Soviet Russia, is a tiny group in the electoral mass of the nation, it
nevertheless controls the government of Jacobo Arbenz.]

La carceles de Guatemala estan repletas de anticomunistas, especialmente de estudiantes
universitarios, porque asi lo ordenan tos lideres comunistas. [The jails of Guatemala are
full of anticommunists, especially university students, because it is so ordered by the
communist leaders.]

Nosotros pugnamos por el sindicalismo libre, para la organizacion de trabajadores para
obtener mejores condiciones de trabajo y un mejoramiento efectivo economico y social. Pero
nos oponemos y luchamos contra la mentira, la falsedad y el fraude. [We fight for free
trade unionism, for the organization of workers so they can enjoy better working
conditions and economic and social improvement. But we oppose and fight against
lying, falsity and fraud.]

Guatemala es ef unico pais americano donde el comunismo ha echado raizes, pero es
preciso adoptar providencias adecuadas para erradicario y evitar asi que ef pulpo rojo
extienda sus tentaculos a los otros paises de America. [Guatemala is the only American
country in which communism has laid roots, but it is necessary to to take measures
to erradicate it and thereby prevent the red octopus from spreadings its tentacles into
other American countries.]

17

Refrain 16

Refrain 17

Refrain 18

Refrain 19

Refrain 20

Refrain 21

Refrain 22

Refrain 23

Refrain 24

Refrain 25

El comunismo es el imperialismo mas voraz y sanguinario que haya conocido la humanidad,
pues no tiene Dios, no tiene patria, no tiene hogar. [Communism is the bloodiest and
most voracious imperialism ever known by humanity, for it has no God, no
fatherland, no home.]

Influenciado por sus amos en el Kremlin, los lideres comunistas guatemaitecos han estado
predicande fa violencia como medio de lograr objectivos practicos, ya que a ellos poco les
importa fa vida de los guatemaitecos. {Influenced by their Kremlin patrons, the
Guatemalan communist leaders have been preaching violence as the means to attain
practical objectives, for they have no concern for the life of Guatemalans.]

EI pueblo de Guatemala no se ha dejado embriagar por el opio del comunismo, pero algunos
guatemaitecos han sido enganados y miltan en esas traidoras filas. [The people of
Guatemala have not allowed themselves to be intoxicated by the communist opium,
but some Guatemalans have been fooled and have joined those treasonous ranks.]

Los trabajadores libres consideran al comunismo una fuerza regresiva, que representa la
opresion politica mas brutal que puede suponerse, y una explotacion economica iniqua en
beneficio de un estado insensible y totalitario. [Free workers consider communism to be
a regressive force that represents the most brutal political oppression imaginable,
and an unfair economic exploitation in benefit of an insensitive and totalitarian state.]

La felicidad futura de la America Latina depende del debido aprovechamiento de sus
recursos naturales mediante la cooperacion armoniosa de los trabajadores y las empresas.
[The future happiness of Latin America depends on the proper exploitation of its
natural resources through harmonious cooperation between workers and
enterprises.]

La satisfaccion solo de haber servido a la patria sera para vosotros una recompensa mas
gloriosa que todos /os titulos y laureles con que se premia el merito. [The satisfaction that
comes just from having served the fatherland will be for you a compensation more
glorious than all the titles and laurels with which merit is rewarded.

Hombres y mueres de Guatemala. Un soldado de /a libertad vale mas que mil esclavos def
comunismo. Si crees en Dios, si crees en tu patria, si amas tu libertad, lucha contra el
comunismo. [Men and women of Guatemala. One soldier of liberty is worth more than
a thousand slaves of communism.] ;

Verdad en el hombre, justicia en el pueblo, trabajo en la republica, tres franjas de una
bandera que ya empieza a flamear en las almenas de la esperanza. [Truth in man,
justice among the people, work in the republic, three stripes of a a flag that is
beginning to wave in the breezes of hope]

Los guatemaltecos no aceptamos fa direccion de Rusia en nuestros asuntos internos, y no
queremos ser una dependencia politica y social de la Union de las Republicas Rusas (sic).
Por eso luchamos para exterminar con el regimen del gobierno de nuestra patria. [We
Guatemalans do not accept the direction of Russia in our internal affairs, and we do
not want ot be a political and social dependency of the Union of Russian Republics
(sic). That’s why we fight to exterminate the regime of the government of our
country.]

Por mi patria, y por mi palabra de honor, y ello es juramento para mi, declaro solemnemente
en mi nombre, y en el puebloc anticomunistas del pais, que no tenemos, no contraeremos,
ningun compromiso, ni haremos cosa alguna que atente contra los sagrados y supremos
intereses de fa nacion, Palabras def Coronel Carlos Castillo Armas. [On my country and
on my word of honor, and that for me is an oath, | solemnly declare in my name, and
in that of the anticommunist people of the country, and we have not and will not
contract any commitment, nor do anything that would be against the sacred and
supreme interests of the nation. Words of Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas.]

18

Refrain 26

Refrain 27

Refrain 28

Refrain 29

Refrain 30

Refrain 31

Refrain 32

Refrain 33

Refrain 34

Los partidos comunistas son en todas partes la vanguardia de Ia politica sovietica. Los
partidos comunistas en todo ef mundo instrumentos de fa politica exterior del Kremlin, de
tanta importancia para Malenkov como para sus servidores en e/ extranjero

Guatemaltecos! No nos prestemos a servir los designos de /a rusia sovietica y su ambicion
de poder y de sometimiento del mundo. [Communist parties everywhere are the
vanguard of soviet policy. Communist parties around th eworld are the instruments
of the Kremlin’s foreign policy, of such interest to both Malenkov and to its servants
abroad. Guatemalans! Let us not serve the designs of Soviet Russia and its ambition
por power and world submission.]

E] maquiavelismo del movimiento comunista al eludir actitudes abiertamente religiosas ha
obligado al Vaticano a recordar a todos los catolicos que hacen cuatro anos promulgose ef
decreto del santo oficio excomulgando a los adherentes del comunismo. [The
machiavellian communist movement's avoidance of openly religious attitudes (sic)
has forced the Vatican to remind all catholics that four years ago a Vatican decree
excommunicated all adherents of communism.]

Los comunistas no publican fotografias de sus campos de concentracion donde trabajan
como si fueran ya no esclavos sino peor que bestias de carga. [The communists don’t
publish pictures of their concentration camps where people work as if they are no
longer slaves but worse than beasts of burden.]

Los comunistas guatemaitecos quieren para Guatemala los campos de concentracion
sovieticos donde los seres humanos son sistematicamente asesinados encuanto ya no
sirven para producir, ya sea porque envejecen o porque se debilitan sus fuerzas agobiadas
por sufrimientos y la enfermedad. [Guatemalan communists want for Guatemala the
Soviet concentration camps where human beings are systematically assasinated
when they are no longer productive, be it because of old age, or because they lose
their strngth as a result of suffering and sickness.]

El comunismo ha convertido en esciavos a millones de seres humanos, y sistematicamente
quiere borrar el nombre de Dios y la dignidad humana sobre fa tierra. [Communism has
converted millions of human beings into slaves, and wants to systematically erase
the name of God and human dignity from the Earth.]

Dios, nuestro senor, una vez dominada esa bestia apocaliptica del comunismo, en su infinita
misericordia, hara que el mundo pueda tener la paz de Cristo en el reino de Cristo. [God,
our Lord, once the apocalyptic beast of communism is dominated, will let the wortd
have the peace of Christ in the reign of Christ.]

EI comunismo fomenta la carestia de alimentos y de los mas necesarios medios de
subsistencia para exasperar al pobre y hacerle creer en tan angustiosa situacion, que ef
regimen comunista podera mejorar su estado de vida. [Communism encourages the
shortage of food and other basic necessities of subsistence in order to to exasperate
the poor and make them think, in such a painful situation, that the communist system
can improve their standard of living.]

EI dique historico anticomunista es, y ha sido la palabra y accion social de /a iglesia.
Guatemaltecos, /a iglesia os da esa alerta en ororas, que no hay nacion en Ia tierra sana de
la peste comunizante.

La iglesia, por medio de sus prelados, pide enfrentarse al comunismo con el arma que

posee, justicia social, y caridad cristiana. [The church, through its prelates, asks to
confront communism with the weapons it has, social justice and Christian charity.]

19

Refrain 35

Refrain 36

Refrain 37

Refrain 38

Refrain 39

Refrain 40

Refrain 41

Refrain 42

Los lideres comunistas de Guatemala se han aprovechado de fa reforma agraria para
enriquecerse. Esa organizacion esta plagada de una burocracia rutinizada y corruptora, que
solo favorece a los adherentes rojos ya que es un instrumento politico del comunismo. [The
communist leaders of Guatemala have taken advantage of agrarian reform to enrich
themselves. That organization is plagued by a routinized and corrupting bureaucracy
that only favors communist adherents because it is a political instrument of
communism.]

La iglesia en materia de justicia social es intransigente en favor del proletariado , y desde
tiempo immemorial viene predicando alos poderosos, no solo su obligacion de dar al que no
tiene, sino fa justicia social que reconoce /a iglesia sin regateo. [In matters of social justice
the church is intransigent in favor of the proletariat, and since time immemorial has
been preaching to the powerful not only their obligation to give to those that have

not, but the social justice that the church recognizes unhesitatingly.]

Con la reforma agraria, aplicado de acuerdo con los sistemas sovieticos, lo que e!

comunismo guatemalteco pretende es convertir a fos ............ a la condicion de parias o
#otas. [With agrarian reform, applied in accordance with the soviet systems, what
Guatemalan communism intends is to convert the ........ into pariahs or serfs.]

Guatematteco, si quieres a tu Dios, si amas a tu patria, si defiendes tu libertad, lucha contra
ef comunismo. [Guatemalan, if you love God, if you love your fatherland, if you defend
your freedom, fight against communism.]

Dios, Patria, Libertad, vamos a conjurar esos tres creative verbs (sic), y de ellos brotara una
nacion perfectamente gramatical y perfectamente filosofica, la oracion eterna de una
Guatemala libre, justa, soberana e independiente. [God, Fatherland, Liberty, we’re going
to conjugate those three creative verbs (sic), and from them will sprout a perfectly
grammatical and perfectly philosophical nation, the eternal prayer of a free, just,
sovereign and independent Guatemala.]

La campana que estamos fibrado no obedece a otro interes que arrojar a los sovieticos del
poder publico de nuesgtra patria. Es la campana de todos los guatematitecos. [The
campaign we are waging has no interest other than to throw the soviets out of public
power in our country. it is the campaign of all Guatemalans.]

Guatemaltecos, hay que salvar ala patria. Poco a poco se acerca el momento. Poco a
poco, pero seguramente. Todos los guatemaltecos deben aprestarse a salvar a la patria,
arrojar a los comunistas, y al nefasto gobierno que encabeza Jacobo Arbenz somo su
representante. Guatemaltecos, muy cerca esta ya el dia, la voz de fa liberacion fo anuncia, y
el ejercito libertador legara en sus corceles triunfadores. Alerta, pueblo de Guatemala. Muy
pronto seremos fibres. [Guatemalans, the country must be saved. Little by little the
moment nears. Little by little, but surely. All Guatemalans should get ready to save
the fatherland, throw out the communists and the nefarious government headed by
Jacobo Arbenz as their representative. Guatemalans, the day is now near, the voice
of liberations announces it, and the army of liberation will arrive on its triumphant
steeds. On the alert, people of Guatemala.]

No hay compromisos con nadie. Quien diga fo contrario tendra que ser un mentiroso.
Guatemala sera salvada con la sangre de sus hijos y confortada con ef amor de su pueblo.
[There are no commitments with anyone. Whoever says the contrary is a liar.
Guatemala will be saved by the blood of her sons, and comforted by the love of her

people.]

20

Refrain 43

Refrain 44

Refrain 45

Refrain 46

Las enciclicas papales Rerum Novarum, Divina Redentoris, y Cuadragessimo Anno,
contempian ampliamente el problema obrero y campesino del mundo, y proponen como
medios immediatos para combatir la pobreza y el atraso de esas clases sociales, la reforma
agraria, mejora de los salarios, en tal forma que se contempia el problema familiar, ademas
de las necesidades personales de /os obreros y campesinos. [The papal encyclicals
Rerum Novarum, Divina Redentoris and Cuadragessimo Anno amply contemplate the
problems of the world’s workers and peasants, and propose agrarian reform and
improvement of salaries as immediate methods to combat the poverty and
backwardness that afflict those social classes, in such a way that the problem of the
family is contemplated as well as the personal needs of the workers and peasants.]

Es falso que fa iglesia cristiana este en favor de fos intereses de ios capitalistas, como fo
afirman los Guerra Borges. Todo fo contrario, los grandes jerarcas de fa iglesia como Leon
Xill, Pio Xi y Pio XII, promulgaron las famosas enciclicas Rerum Novarum, Divina
Redentorius y Cuadragesimo Anno. [itis false that the Christian church is in favor of
the interests of the capitalists, as claimed by the likes of Gerra Borges. On the
contrary, the great hierarchs of the church like Leo XIil, Pius XI and Pius XIl,
promulgated the famous encyclicals Rerum Novarum, Divina Redentorius and
Cuadragesimo Anno.]

No tenemos compromisos con nadie. Ni con gobiernos, ni con monopolios, ni con extranos.
Solamente los tenemos para a patria, la que queremos libre, soberana, e independiente y en
fa que anhelamos ver nacer y florecer una verdadera democracia, donde el respeto al
derecho de los demas nos permita vivir tranquilamente. Y esta es la gran conspiracion en la
que estamos juramentados. El pueblo guatemalteco se levantara, y empunando la espada
de /a justicia los arrojara del poder. Ya sabra Arbenz y comparsas de donde saldran los
aviones, las bombas y los fusiles, y sabra que ef pueblo de Guatemala no negocia su
dignidad, no pone en peligro su soberania para salvar a la patria. Ellos, los vendidos a
Moscu, los traidores a la democracia, los liberticidas y verdugos, tendran que rendirse a esa
hermosa realidad. Guatemala sera liberada con la sangre de sus hijos, y dignificada con el
amor de su pueblo. [We have no commitments to anyone. Neither to governments,
monopolies or strangers. Only to the fatherland, which we want free, sovereign and
independent, and in which we aspire to see born a true democracy, wherein respect
for the rights of others permits us tolive tranquilly. This is the great conspiracy in
which we are involved. The people of Guatemala will rise and, wielding the sword of
justice, throw them from power. Arbenz and his cronies will find out where the
planes, bombs and rifles come from, and they will find out that the people of
Guatemala do not negotiate their dignity and don’t endanger their sovereignty to save
the country. They, those sold to Moscow, the traitors of democracy, the killers and
thugs, will have to surrender to that beautiful reality. Guatemala will be freed by the
blood of its sons, and dignified with the love of its people.}

Es falso que nosotros hayamos contraido compromisos que menozcaben la soberania
nacional, o que estemos al servicio de alguien que no sea /a causa noble de fa salvacion de
Guatemala. Por mi patria y por mi palabra de honor, y ello es un juramento para mi, declaro
solemnemente en mi nombre y en el del pueblo anticomunista del pais, que no tenemos ni
contraeremos ningun compromiso, ni haremos cosa alguna que atente contra los sagrados y
supremos intereses de fa nacion, y que no dejaremos Ia lucha sino hasta liquidar
definitivamente la antipatria, implantada y representada por Jacobo Arbenz, y su grupo
marxista, y que con igual empeno y determinacion, lucharemos hasta consolidar una
autentica democracia en nuestro sagrado suelo a cuyo amparo se viva sin temores y en el
goce de una legitima justicia social que haga verdaderamente efectivas las aspiraciones de
mejoramiento de la clase trabajadora. -- Palabras del Coronel Carlos Castillo Armas.

21

Refrain 47

Refrain 48

Refrain 49

Refrain 50

Refrain 51

Refrain 52

Refrain 53

[It is false that we have contracted commitments that undermine our national
sovereignty, or that we are at the service of anyone who isn’t the salvation of
Guatemala. On my country and my word of honor, and that for me is an oath, !
declare in my name and in that of the anti-Communist people of the country, that we
do not have and will not have and commitment, nor will we do anything against the
sacred and supreme interests of the nation, and that we will not quit the struggle until
having definitively liquidated the anti-fatherlandism implanted and represented by
Arbenz and his Marxist group, and that with the same determination we will struggle
until consolidating an authentic democracy on our sacred soil under whose
protection one can live without fear, and enjoy a legitimate social justice that will
truly reward the working class’ aspirations for improvement. -- Words of Colonel
Carlos Castillo Armas.]

Los comunistas pretenden convencer a la clase obrera y campesina que solamente ellos
son los unicos que se han preocupado con Ia solucion de sus problemas y angustias, fo cual
es totalmente falso porque |a iglesia catolica lo ha hecho de primero. [The communists
intend to convince the worker and peasant classes that they are the only ones
interested in solving their problems and anxieties, which is totally false because the
catholic church was the first so interested.]

Los catolicos guatemaltecos rechazamos ahora y siempre la nefasta doctrina del dolor, la
doctrina de la miseria, la doctrina de la esclavitud, fa doctrina de Ia prostitucion, fa doctrina
def ateismo, y en resumen, rechazamos fa doctrina comunista. [We catholic Guatemalans
reject now and forever the nefarious doctrine of pain, the doctrine of misery, the
doctrine of slavery, the doctrine of prostitution, the doctrine of atheism and, in
summation, we reject the doctrine of communism.]

Los lideres comunistas, si hasta ellos mismo se despedazan entre si, como va a producirse
nada noblemente humano entre un pueblo dirigido por tal clase de gente? [If communist
leaders even tear each other apart, how can anything nobly human be produced
among a people led by that class of people?]

EI comunismo ha escandalizado a la humanidad precisamente por su odio ala religion, por
su fe ciega en la materia, y por su negacion al espiritu. [Communism has scandalized
humanity precisely because of its hatred for religion, its blind faith on the matter, and
its denial of the spirit.]

EI gobierno comunista de Jacobo Arbenz ha recibido armas del soviet para utiizarlas contra
ef pueblo anticomunista de Guatemala que lo repudia. Tambien seran usadas proximamente
para contra el fuerte sector del ejercito anticomunista de nuestra patria. Per aqui estamos
nosotros para impedirlo. {Jacobo Arbenz’ sommunist government has received arms
from the soviets that will be used against the anticommunist people of Guatemala
that rejects it. They will also be used soon against the strong sector of our country’s
anticommunist army. But we are here to prevent it.]

“Todo se hace en ef Soviet bajo los emblemas de fa nueva religion del odio, y es esa la
religion que los comunistas criollos han transplantado a Guatemala.” [Everyting is done in
the Soviet under the emblems of the new religion of hate, and that is the religion that
our native communists have transplanted to Guatemala.]

“El fraude comunista muestra al mundo lo que no existe para enganar a las masas de otros
paises, ensenandoles el camino de Ia traicion a su patria y a sus propias tradiciones.”

[The communist fraud shows the world what doesn’t exist in order to fool the
masses of other countries, teaching them the road to treason against their country
and their own traditions.]

22

Refrain 54

Refrain 55

Refrain 56

Refrain 57

Refrain 58

Refrain 59

Refrain 60

Refrain 61

“Para el comunismo fa religion tiene que desaparecer cuando, segun ellos, se hayan
transformado las condiciones economicas y la tierra se haya convertido en el cielo hacia ef
cual avanza el comunismo.” [For communism, religion must disappear when
according to them, economic conditions have changed and the Earth has become
the Heaven toward which communism advances.]

Los comunistas quisieran que todos, absolutamente todos, bajaran la cabeza ante ellos, que
nadie dijera nada en su contra, y que muertos de miedo dejaran que Atila avanzara por
sobre /a Hanura de las conciencias que frente a los problemas sociales creen encontrar en el
comunismo la panacea de todos sus males. [The communists would like for everyone,
absolutely everyone, to lower their heads before them, say nothing against them, and,
dead from fear, allow Attila to advance across those consciences that in the face of
social problems would believe communism to be the panacea of all their ills.)

Los comunistas criollos no es que ayuden y apoyen sinceramente al traidor Arbenz, sino que
lo utilizan y que lo flevaran al patibulo cuando se Jes resista a algo. Y ellos ya tienen la
suficiente fuerza para hacerlo. [It's not that our native communists sincerely help and
support the traitor Arbenz, rather they use him and they will dump him whenever he
offers any resistance. And they have the strength to do it.]

Ef comunismo guatemaiteco trata de insinuarse ocultandose bajo la capa de
reinvindicaciones sociales para las clases menesterosas, a las que hoy llaman para que le
ayuden en su campana devastadora para manana mandar a trabajos forzados y ala peor
de las miserias a los mismos trabajadores que fes ayudaron a escalar al poder.
[Guatemalan communism tries to insinuate itself under the cover of social redresses
for the unfortunate classes, which they call upon today to help them in their
devastating campaign, so as tomorrow be able to send the very workers who helped
them climb t power them to forced labor and the worst of miseries.]

Porque si el comunismo para reinvindicarse tiene que dividir, y a los que le favorece hoy los
manda a la horca manana, como ha sido la negra y tragica historia de Rusia, pais que desde
el principio del mundo ha asesinado al mayor numero de trabajadores. [In order to justify
itself communism must divide, and send those whom it favors today to the gallows
tomorrow, as has been the black and tragic history of Russia, a country that from the
beginning of the world has murdered the greatest number of workers.]

“La politica sindical comunista ahoga al sindicato. Lo deforma, y acaba por matario. Lo liga
a aventuras ajenas a sus propios fines, lo liga a Moscu. Con esa politica sindical comunista
va a terminar el movimiento de la liberacion de Guatemala.” [Communist trade union
policy suffocates the trade union. It deforms the union, and ends up by killing it. It
links the union to adventures incompatible with the union’s purposes, it links it to
Moscow. The Guatemalan liberation movement is going to put an end to that
communist labor policy.]

En el paraiso sovietico todos los hombres se convierten en pobres piezas de una maquina,
fa que cuando no funciona bien, son arrojadas sin compasion al basurero y sustituidas por
otras. [In the Soviet paradise, all men are converted into poor pieces of a machine
and, when it doesn’t work well, they are thrown into the trash and replaced by others.]

Ni Dios, ni religion ni patria ni amor ni sentimientos, nada noble goza e/ esclavo de ese
regimen comunista, cuyas celulas se han multiplicado en Guatemala, y pretende como
gigantesco pulpo a errojar a nuestra patria, [Not God, nor religion, nor fatherland, nor
love, nor sentiment are enjoyed by the slaves of the communist regime, whose cells
have multiplied in Guatemala, and which intends, like a giant octopus, to squash our
fatherland.]

23

Refrain 62

Refrain 63

Refrain 64

Refrain 65

Refrain 66

Refrain 67

Refrain 68

El gran problema del obrerismo guatemalteco afiliado a la CGTG es la confusion
premeditada que el comunismo hace de /os sindicatos con Ia politica. El trabajador de carne
y hueso se convierte asi en un numero, en un perdano, para que trepen por encima fos
lideres, los politicos oportunistas al estilo Victor Manuel Gutierrez, Pellecer, Fortuny, etc.
[The great problem of Guatemalan trade unionism affiliated with the CGTG is the
premediated confusion communism creates between unions and politics. The
worker of flesh and blood is thereby converted into a number, into a [perdano], so
that the leaders, the political opportunists in the style of Victor Manuei Gutierrez,
Pellicer, Fortuny, etc., can climb over him.]

Estamos contra ef comunismo fos guatemaltecos que somos enemigos de cuanto signifique
engano, intriga, y sobre todo, capacidad de adaptacion para sobrevivir mezquinamente a
ambientes donde ef hombre goza de /a libertad de cumplir lo que le ordenan. [We're
against communism, we Guatemalans who are enemies of anything than means
trickery, intrigue and, especially, the capacity to adapt to survive in deprivation in
environments where man enjoys the freedom to do what he is told. (sic)]

En el paraiso sovietico ningun trabajador puede exijir aumento de salario, ni dejar una
herencia a sus hijos, cambiar de ocupacion, y salir a viajar afuera de su pais, ni rezar, ni
creer en Dios. [In the Soviet paradise, no worker can demand a salary increase, or
leave an inheritance to his children, change his occupation, travel outside his
country, pray, or believe in God.]

Una banda de miserables desalmados dirigen los mas altos dstinos de la Rusia sovietica.
Esa banda tiene sus representantes en Guatemala, cuyo gobierno esta controlado por ellos.
Esa es /a situacion en nuestra patria. {A band of miserable people without souls direct
the highest destinies of soviet Russia. That band has its representatives in
Guatemala, whose government is controlled by them. That’s the situation in our
country.]

En enriquecimiento de fos lideres en continuos viajes al exterior en compra de armamento
comunista, porque el que la debe fa teme, se ha invertido el dinero de fos contribuyentes
guatemalitecos. Ese dinero ha desaparecido de la noche a la manana y sigue
desapareciendo. [The money-of Guatemalan contributors has been invested in the
enrichment of leaders in continuous trips abroad to buy communist weaponry,
because he who owes it fears it (sic). That money has disappeared from night to
morning, and is still disappearing.]

Ya fos lideres comunistas guatemaitecos estan planeando nuevos impuestos contra el
pueblo guatemalteco. Esas gentes nunca se conforman. Ya dilapidaron los millones
desaparecidos en las arcas nacionales. Recuerden que por eso a nuevas fuentes
economicas el dinero, y tiene que salir del pueblo guatemalteco. [The Guatemalan
communist leaders are already planning new taxes on the Guatemalan people.
They're never satisfied. They've already squandered the millions that have
disappeared from the national coffers. Remember that because of this new
economic sources the money, and it has to come from the Guatemalan people.
(Ungrammatical to the point of not making sense, believe this was misread. )]

La mentalidad de todos fos pueblos no puede concebir la enorme facilidad que tienen los
comunistas para mentir y para simular. En el soviet, parece que se esta en otro mundo,
casi podria decirse que en otro planeta. Tal es la farsa y la mentira en que se vive, y se
obliga a vivir a ese pueblo. Eso quieren para Guatemala los comunistas. [No mentality
can conceive of the communists’ enormous facility for lying and pretending. In the
Soviet, its seems they are in another world, one could even say another planet.
That’s the farce and lying in which they live, and in which they make the people live.
That's what the communists want for Guatemala.]

24

Refrain 69

Refrain 70

Refrain 71

Refrain 72

Refrain 73

Refrain 74

Refrain 75

Refrain 76

Refrain 77

EI sindicalismo comunista, que es e! que funciona en Guatemala, es un sindicalismo
constrator de estimulos que ha llegado hasta destruir las fuentes del trabajo. [Communist
trade unionism, which is what is practiced in Guatemala, is a trade unionism devoid
of stimuli and which has even destroyed the sources of work.]

Ei sindicalismo comunista, 0 sea el que han establecido los camaradas en nuestra patria, ha
destruido al propio trabajador guatemalteco, quitandole ef estimulo de fa emulacion,
enpobreciendo ef ambiente con la anemia perniciosa de todas fas actividades. [Communist
trade unionism, the one the comrades have established in our country, has destroyed
the Guatemalan worker, depriving him of the stimulus of competition, impoverishing
the environment with the pernicious anemia of all activities. (sic)]

Ef comunismo ha conducido a Guatemala a la mas grande de las miserias, y a la esclavitud
social, {Communism has led Guatemala to the greatest of miseries and to social
slavery.]

Es necesario terminar con el sistema comunista sindicalista, y como punto fundamental
incrementar la produccion que es ef medio unico de elevar el poder verdadero de compra
para las masas. [It is necessary to end the communist trade union system, and as a
fundamental point, to increase production as this is the only way of truly raising the
purchasing power of the masses.]

Nosotros evitaremos que se conserven en el futuro las causas que condujeron a Guatemala
a la dificil situacion que vive. Por eso desterraremos de nuestra patria a los comunistas.

[We will avoid conserving in the future the causes that led Guatemala into the difficult
situation that it is experiencing now. That’s whay we will throw the communists out
of our country.]

La “V” de la victoria fue el simbolo de fos pueblos sojuzgados por Hitler y por Mussolini, fue
el simbolo de Ia lucha de las democracias contra el totalitarismo. El “32” es el simbolo del
pueblo de Guatemala, sojuzgado por los totalitarios del Kremlin. [The “V” for Victory was
the symbol of the peoples oppressed by Hitler and Mussolini, the symbol of the
democracies’ struggle against totalitarianism. The “32” is the smbol of the
Guagtemalan people, oppressed by the totalitarians of the Kremilin.]

Guatematteco, ef cumplimiento de cualquier consigna comunista es traicion a tu patria.
[Guatemalan, following any communist order is treason to the fatherland.]

En la Union Sovietica existen fabricas de ideas como de locomotoras, aviones o tornillos.
Son fabricas oficiales. Hay de aquel que se atreva a producir por su cuenta, tornillos,
aviones, locomotoras 0 ideas? Es lo que pretenden para Guatemala los lideres comunistas?
[In the Soviet Union there are factories for ideas as there are for locomotives,
airplanes or screws. They are official factories. Is there anyone who might on his
own dare to produce screws, airplanes, locomotives or ideas? Is this what the
communist leaders intend for Guatemala?]

Lo que los comunistas pretenden en nuestra patria es que nuestros trabajadores se unan a
los de la Union Sovietica o, fo que es lo mismo, que hagan entrega de nuestro pais atado de
pies y manos a que Io dirija ef genio de la humanidad, ef camarada Malenkov. [What the
communists intend for our country is that our workers join those of the Soviet Union
or, and this amounts to the same thing, that they deliver our country bound hand and
foot to be run by that genius of humanity, Malenkov.]

25

Refrain 78

Refrain 79

Refrain 80

Refrain 81

Refrain 82

Dicen los voceros del gobierno comunista de Arbenz que Guatemala es un pais
independiente de los Estdos Unidos. Es una verdad, como lo es que tambien Io son los
paises de America. Pero lo que no dicen esos voceros es que el gobierno moscovita de
Jacobo Arbenz ha convertido a Guatemala en un pais dependiente del Kremiin.
[Spokesmen of Arbenz’ communist government say that Guatemala is independent of
the United States. That is true, as it is that the countries of America are also. But
what those spokesmen don’t say is that the Muscovite government of Jacobo Arbenz
has converted Guatemala into a dependent country of the Kremlin.]

En Ia lucha contra ef comunismo los guatemaitecos debemos tomar en cuenta que los
planes comunistas se desarrollan con gran reserva, y que el movimiento rojo opera
subterraneamenteen en forma tan oculta a veces que solo fos miembros de la jerarquia
superior del partido fos conocen. [In the struggle against communism, we Guatemalans
must remember that communist plans are developed in the greatest secrecy, and that
the red movement sometimes operates underground in a way so occult that only the
top party leaders are aware of them.]

El comunismo es una absurda ideologia intrinsicamente perversa que estriba en un brutal
materialism, que niega a Dios, niega el alma y su immortalidad, desprecia la dignidad
humana, destruye la familia, y transforma fa conciencia individual en una conciencia
colectiva. [Communism is an absurd and intrinsically perverse ideology that instills
brutal materialism, denies God, denies the soul and its immortality, disdains human
dignity, destroys the family, and transforms the individual conscience into a
collective conscience.]

Tenemos que destruir al comunismo, tenemos que erradicarlo de nuestra patria, tenemos
que destruir fa atea filosofia moscovita que no reconoce leyes ni moral. [We must destroy
communism, we must eradicate it from our country, we must destroy that atheist
Muscovite philosophy that acknowledges neither laws nor morals.]

Si el gobierno tiene perfectamente controlada la situacion en el pais, entonces porque habria
que decretar la restriccion de garantias? Si Jacobo Arbenz cuenta con ef apoyo de las
grandes mayorias, y con el consentimiento del ejercito nacional, entonces para que armar
hasta fos dientes a las fuerzas de choque del partido comunista? A que tanto preparativo
belico, que no es suficiente ef concurso del ejercito nacional, o es que a este ya se le ha
relegado a segundo termino? [If the government has everything under control in the
country, why was it necessary to decree the restriction of guarantees? if Jacobo
Arbenz has the support of the masses, and of the national army, then why arm the
communist party's shock troops to the teeth? Why so much war preparation that
excludes the national army, or is it that the army has already been relegated to the
second level?]

Refrain 83 Crearemos una patria en la cual la unica razon de estado sea /a justicia humanizada por ef

Refrain 84

Refrain 85

cristianismo. Ni ef asesinato, ni la ley fuga, ni ef encarcelamiento injusto, ni la deportacion
seran mas razones de estado. [We will create a country in which the only reason of
state will be justice humanized by Christianity. Neither murder, nor the law of flight,
nor unjust imprisonment, nor deportation will be reasons of state.]

Guatemala ha sido hasta hoy un pais profanado por la mentira. Nosotros confortaremos a la
patria con la verdad que hace libres alos hombres. [Up to today Guatemala has been a
country desecrated by the lie. We will comfort the fatherland with the truth that
makes men free.]

Ya no es cuestion de meses nide semanas. EI reloj de la liberacion de Guatemala marco la
hora. Llego el fin de fa mas cruel de /as tiranias que ha usurpado el poder publico de
Guatemala. [It is no longer a matter of months or weeks. The clock of the liberation
of Guatemala has struck the hour. The cruelest of tyrannies that has usurped public
power in Guatemala has come to an end.]

26

Refrain 86

Refrain 87

Refrain 88

Refrain 89

Refrain 90

Refrain 91

Refrain 92

Refrain 93

Refrain 94

Mujer guatematteca, ya no circula sangre en las arterias de la patria. Ef comunismo fa
succiono. Brinda la tuya si necesario fuere en holocausto de tu salvacion. [Guatemalan
woman, there is no more blood in the fatherland’s arteries. The communists have
suctioned it all out. Give yours if necessary (in the holocaust?) of your salvation.]

Madre guatemaiteca, no desvirtues ef sagrado destino que Dios te diera, guiando a tus hijos
por fos sarios {phon.] senderos def ateismo. [Guatemalan mother, don’t dishonor the
sacred destiny given you by God, guiding your children through the (perilous) paths
of atheism.]

Adelante pueblo de Guatemala, la libertad toca tu puerta y hay que recibirla en el nombre de
Dios.” [Forward, people of Guatemala, freedom is knocking on your door, and she
must be received in the name of God.]

EI enemigo de Ia patria , el vil comunismo que tantos males ha ocasionado a Guatemala, ha
recurrido ya a las mas espernibles medidas dictatoriales. Son las medidas propias de fas
nefandas tiranias que se durrumban, que ya ven contados sus dias. [The fatherland’s
enemy, the vile communism that has caused so much harm to Guatemala, has
resorted to the most vicious dictatorial measures. They are the measures of

nefarious tyrannies that are collapsing, that see their days as being numbered.]

Despues de muchos sufrimientos y de incontables penalidades ocasionados por los
traidores a la patria, por esos tiranos que nos han desgobernado, se acerca el dia de la
fiberacion nacional. Guatemala sera arrancada de las garras del criminal comunismo. [After
so much suffering brought on by the traitors to the fatherland who have so
misgoverned us, the day of liberation nears. Guatemala will be torn from the claws of
criminal communism.]

Ya estan contados los dias de sufrimiento para el viril pueblo guatemalteco, llego ef glorioso
dia de fa liberacion, el enemigo esta ya en los ultimos estertores. [The days of suffering
for the virile people of Guatemala are numbered, the enemy is on his last gasps-]

EI pueblo guatematteco, fiel a sus tradiciones, se ha mantenido siempre erguido ante la mas
horrible de las dictaduras que ha dominado a nuestra adorada patria, y de nuevo erguido,
soportara los contados dias de los traidores que han recurrido a las mas sangrientas
arbitrariedades en su afan de mantenerse en el poder. [in keeping with its traditions, the
people of Guatemala have stood tall in the face of the dictatorships that have
dominated our revered fatherland, and again standing tall, they will survive the
numbered days of the traitors who have resorted to the bloodiest arbitrariness in their
effort to stay in power.]

Campesinos guatemaltecos, vuestros verdugos, fos llamados lideres comunista, os arman
para conduciros a la masacre del pueblo guatemaiteco. No sirvais de instrumento a esos
satanicos malos hijos de Guatemala. [Guatemalan peasants, your executioners, the
communist so-called leaders, arm you to send you to the massacre of the
Guatemalan people. Do not be an instrument of those satanical bad sons of
Guatemala.]

Trabajadores guatemaltecos, ef gobierno traidor de Arbenz no esta defendiendo ninguana
integridad nacional, porque ese gobierno entrego a Guatemala al comunismo. Nosotros,
nuestro movimiento va a reestablecer la soberania nacional. [Guatemalan workers, the
traitorous Arbenz government is not defending national integrity, because that same
government turned Guatemala over to communism. We, our movement, will
reestablish our national sovereignty]

27

Refrain 95

Refrain 96

Refrain 97

Refrain 98

Refrain 99

Refrain 100

Refrain 101

Refrain 102

Campesinos guatemaitecos, empunar un arma sovietica significa cooperar con fos traidores
para asestar la punalada falaz al propio corazon de nuestra querida Guatemala.
[Guatemalan peasants, to take up a Soviet weapon is to cooperate with the traitors in
delivering the treasonous stab to the heart of our beloved Guatemala.]

Incontables han sido los sufrimientos. Hemos soportado por muchos anos, que han sido
eternos, a fa mas negra tirania que haya dominado a nuestra patria. Un esfuerzo ultimo
para terminar completamente con ella. Asi lo reclama la patria. [The sufferings have been
countless. For many years, an eternity, we have put up with the darkest tyranny to
ever dominate our fatherland. One final effort to completely end it. So demands the
fatherland.]

Todo buen hijo de Guatemala tiene una mision que cumplir en esta gloriosa gesta
fibertadora. Madres, esposas, hijas, jovenes, a formar filas en ef movimiento de liberacion de
Guatemala. Vuestro esfuerzo Dios os premiara, y la patria os lo agradecera. [Every good
child of Guatemala has a mission to fulfill in this glorious liberation effort. Mothers,
wives, daughters, youths, all join ranks in the Guatemalan liberation movement. Your
effort will be rewarded by God, and the fatherland will thank you.]

Guatemaitecos, Guatemala reclama la cooperacion de todos sus hijos en la mas
trascendental lucha que registra nuestra historia. Estar con el traidor de Jacobo Arbenz y
Sus Secuazes es apoyar la entrega de Guatemala a la Rusia sovietica. Estar con ef
movimiento libertador qu jefea Carlos Castillo Armas es terminar de una vez por todas con
los traidores a ta patria. [Guatemalans, Guatemala calls out for the cooperation of all
her children in the most transcendental struggle of our glorious history. To be with
Jacobo Arbenz and his gang is to support the delivery of Guatemala to soviet Russia.
To be with the liberating movement led by Carlos Castillo Armas is to put an end,
once and for all, to the traitors of the fathertand.]

Guatemaiteco, que vuestros nombres figuren en las paginas de nuestra gloriosa historia, en
la lista de los patriotas no en la de los traidores. Apoyad entonces el movimiento de la
liberacion, y combatid la tenencia [phon.] entreguista que es la que defiende ef regimen
moscovita de Arbenz. (Guatemalan, may your names appear in the Pages of our
glorious history on the list of patriots, not the list of traitors. Support, then, the
liberation movement, and fight the deliverance tenets which are the ones defended
by Arbenz’ Muscovite regime.]

Los comunistas estimulan ef odio de clases a fin de que este odio culmine en la debacle total
como unico camino para lograr el poder absoluto de Guatemala. [The communists
stimulate class hatred so that that hatred might lead to a complete debacle in the only
way for them to seize total power in Guatemala.]

£1 “32” es para Jacobo Arbenz, para su gobierno marioneta y para los comunistas, como fo
@s la cruz para el diablo. Guatemaltecos, adelante con el simbolo del “32.” [The “32” is

to Jacobo Arbenz, his puppet government and the communists, as the cross is to the
Devil. Guatemalans, onward with the “32” symbol}

Mediante la seguridad social instalada cientificamente e inspirado en alcanzar el bienestar
general, se erradican la miseria y el abandono en que viven miles de ciudadanos. Pero
como eso perjudica los planes moscovitas, los comunistas guatemaltecos han impedido que
fa seguridad social funcione en Guatemala. [The misery and abandonment in which
thousands of citizens live are best erradicated by social security, scientifically applied
and inspired by the quest for general well-being. But since that works against the
Muscovite plans, the Guatemalan communists have not allowed social security to
work in Guatemala.]

28

Refrain 103

Refrain 104

Refrain 105

Refrain 106

Con la suspension de las garantias quedo sin efecto el articulo 27 que establece que todos
los servicios deben ser remunerados. Como en ef futuro ya no lo seran, los guatemaltecos
no deben pagar en consecuencia sus impuestos pues no tendrian de que vivir. [The
suspension of guarantees rendered Article 32, which establishes that all services
should be subject to compensation, inoperative. Since in the future there will be no
compensation for services, Guatemalans should not pay their taxes because
otherwise they will have nothing to live on.]

La cesacion en el pago de los impuestos trae como consecuencia la cesacion en ef pago de
las garantias y servicios. Los guatemaltecos no estan obligados a pagar ningun tributo
porque asi lo establece la suspension de garantias. {Stopping payment of taxes brings
as a consequence the stopping of payments for services. Guatemalans are not
obliged to pay any tribute as a result of the suspension of guarantees.]

Los comunistas obligaron a Arbenz a suspender las garantias individuales, con el objeto de
que ef mundo ignore ef proximo acontecimiento, la sustitucion de Arbenz, pues ya sirvio
demasiado a los moscovitas. [The communists forced Arbenz to suspend individual
guarantees so that the world will ignore the next event, the replacement of Arbenz,
because he already served the Muscovites too much.]

Miserias fisicas y morales, torturas intimas y colectivas, persecuciones y hambre, desnudez,
salvajismo, arbitrariedades y crimenes, esa es la situacion sovietica. A esa situacion tratan
de flevar a nuestra patria los lideres moscovistas. [Physical and moral miseries, intimate
and collective tortures, persecutions and hunger, undress, savagery, arbitrarities and
crimes, that is the Soviet situation. That’s the situation to which the Muscovite
leaders try to take our fatherland.]

29

The Songs

Two songs were featured on the broadcasts, and the words to them were taught, verse by verse,
on the musical program Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Both are played by the Los Trinqueteros group
La Profesia was first heard on 6 May (Cassette #3), and Los Trinqueteros on 22 May (Cassette #1 05). The
latter came to be referred to as the song of the Army of Liberation. The lyrics of the two songs follow.
The reviewer apologizes for the translations: the words and syntax are uniquely rural Guatemalan and do
not lend themselves to easy understanding or translation.

30

Ojo por ojo, diente por diente,
Jacobo Arbenz, vas a pagar.
Cuando te boten de presidente,
Y ef mero diablo te va llevar.

Como cobarde mataste a hierro,
Tambien a hierro debes morir.
Van a matarte, tal como un perro,
Y ef mero dia ya va venir.

Paciencia, piojo, larga es la noche,
El comunismo te hace sonar.

Pero recuerda que a todo coche,
Su dia sabado le ha de llegar.

No olvida el pueblo de Guatemala,
Que has masacrado a la poblacion
Y va cobrarte bala por bala,

Ahora que llegue la tronazon.

Porque Dios tarda, pero no olvida,
Como subiste por fa traicion.

Si entre asesinos pasas fa vida,
Vos para muestra sos un boton.

Paciencia, piojo, larga es la noche,
Ef comunismo to hace sonar.

Pero recuerda que a todo coche
Su dia sabado le ha de llegar.

Paciencia, Piojo, tene paciencia,
Dormi tranquilo con tu mujer.
Aunque en el fondo de tu conciencia,
Te este acusando chico Javier.

Con estos versos ya te anunciaremos,
Que /a justicia pronto se hara.

Que a los traidores castigaremos,

Y Guatemala libre sera.

Ojo por ojo, diente por diente,
Jacobo Arbenz, vas a pagar.
Cuando te boten de presidente,
Y aemerito te han de votar.

“_a Profesia”

An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,
Jacobo Arbenz, you are going to pay.
When they throw you out as president,
And the devil takes you away.

Like a coward, you killed by iron,

And by iron you will die.

They're going te kill you, just like a dog,
And the mere day that will come.

Patience, louse, long is the night,
and communism makes you dream,
but remember that for every coach,
Its day Saturday will arrive.

The people of Guatemala will not forget,
For you've massacred its population.
And it will make you pay, bullet for bullet,
Now when the [tronazon] arrives.

Because God may delay, but he does not forget
How you rose by treason.

If you live among assassins,

As a sample you are a button.

Patience, louse, you carry the night,
Communism makes you dream.
But remember that for every coach,
His Saturday is sure to come.

Patience, louse, have patience,

Sleep tranquilly with your wife.

Although in the depth of your conscience,
Chico Javier is accusing you.

With these verses we will let you know,
That justice will soon be done.

That we will punish all traitors,

And Guatemala will be free.

An eye for an eye, a tooth fora tooth,
Jacobo Arbenz, you are going to pay.
When they throw you out of the presidency,
And elect you to emeritus.

a

Canta un solo corazon,
Guatemala por si mismo.
Que tiene como mision,
Luchar contra el comunismo.

Ya un nuevo sol lumina.
Selvas, montes y potreros,
Porque hoy en tierra chapina,
Entramos los Trinqueteros.

Abajo al crimen y al robo,
Vamos a echar de Ia silla,
Al comunista Jacobo,

Y a su maldita pandilla.

Adentro que estan torteando.
Y a hechar varniz en paleta,
Adelante que ahora es cuando
Les demos en la maceta.

Ef pueblo de Guatemala,
Sufre con resignacion,.
Porque sabe que muy pronto,
Tendra su liberacion.

EI dedo jala que fala,
Batiendo a las hordas rojas.
Vamos para Guatemala,

A ver a nuestras patojas.

Abnir puertas.y ventanas,
Somos fos meros, meros,
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen los Trinqueteros.

Quien Quilete, Yo machete,

Adentro que estan torteando,
Liores cuando, llores cuando,
Los Trincan los del Trinquete.

“Los Trinqueteros”

32

One sole heart signs out,
Guatemala for itself,
Which has its mission
To fight communism.

A new sun now shines its light,

On jungles, hills and fields.
Because today in the land of Chapin
We, Los Trinqueteros, are entering.

Down with crime and thievery,
We're going to throw from the chair,
The communist Jacobo,

And his damned gang.

Inside where they are [torteando],
And putting varnish on the pallette,
Forward, because now is when
We will hit them on the head.

The people of Guatemala

Suffer with resignation,

Because they know that very soon,
They will have their liberation.

The finger that pulls and pulls,
Hitting on the red hordes,
We're going to Guatemala,
To see our [patojas].

Open doors and open windows.
We are the [meros, meros].
[Echar repiques y dianas,}

Los Trinqueteros are coming.

[Quien Quilete, Yo machete}
Inside where they are [torteando],
Cry when, Cry when,

Those of the Trinquete [trincan].

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Somos los meros, meros.
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen los Trinqueteros.

Guatemala ya _sufristes,
Crimen, calumnia y robos,
Pero te queda una gloria,

De haberte volado a Jacobo.

Quien Quilete, Yo machete,

Adentro que estan torteando,
Llores cuando, flores cuando,
Los Trincan los del Trinquete.

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Somos los meros, meros.
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen los Trinqueteros.

Cantaron, Patria Querida,
Sus hijos Los Trinqueteros,
Que luchan con alma y vida,
Contra el comunismo_atreo.

33

Open doors and open windows.
We are the [meros, meros].
[Echar repiques y dianas,]

Los Trinqueteros are coming.

Guatemala, you have suffered,
Crime, calumny and thievery,
But you still keep one glory,
Of having blown out Jacobo.

[Quien Quilete, Yo machete]
Inside where they are [torteando],
Cry when, cry when,

Those of the Trinquete ftrincan],

Open doors and windows,
We are the [meros, meros].
{char repiques y dianas,]
Los Trinqueteros are coming.

They have sung, beloved country,
Your sons, Los Trinqueteros,
Who fight with heart and soul,
Against the [atreu] communism

ROSTERS OF CASSETTES

Two rosters of Cassettes follow.

The ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES lists all those cassettes for which a broadcast
date is available, or for which an approximate date can reasonably be established. They are
listed in choronological order.

The ROSTER OF SOURCE CASSETTES lists those cassettes which appear to be source
cassettes, cassettes which were drawn from to put together some of the broadcasts. They do not
appear to be recordings of actual broadcasts.

On both rosters, the columns represent the following:

Column I:

Column !1:
Column Ill:
Column IV:
Column V:

Column VI:

Column Vt:

Scolumn VII:

Column {X:

The page, in the appropriate section, on which the cassette is found.
The number of the box in which the casette is stored.

The number of the cassette.

The first program segment appearing on the cassette.

The second program segment appearing on the cassette.

An asterisk in this column indicates that the date assigned to the cassette is an
approximation based on content.

Date of broadcast.
Time of broadcast.

Notes made by the reviewer.

34

ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES

1 ol ul IV voi Vil Vil
Box Cass Program’ Program 2 Date Time Notes
195 288 1-May box: special, no. 1, very first.

194 165 SIMBOLOS 1-May first Simbolos episode. Reel: Special - Inauguration - No. 2
194 166 1-May End of inaugural broadcast, Reel; Special - inauguration - No. 3 - only 6 min
479 26 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 2May 7:00
479 25 COMUNISMO REMANSO 2May 7:30
179-24 BALE ROMPIENDO 2May 21:00
479 18 QUESOMOS ALMA 2May 21:30
179 23 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 3May 7:00
179 22 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO 3May 7:30
17924 BAILE ROMPIENDO 3-May 21:00
479 20 QUE SOMOS ALMA 3-May 21:30
479 19 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 4May 7:00
479 18 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO 4May 7:30
179 47 BAILEO3 ROMPIENDO 4May 21:00
179 16 QUESOMOS ALMA 4-May 21:30
480 11 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 5-May 7:00
180 6 COMUNISMO REMANSO SMay 7:30
180 5 BAILE ROMPIENDO S-May 21:00
180 4 QUESOMOS ALMA SMay 21:30
480 3 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 6-May 7:00 PROFESIA1
480 2 COMUNISMO REMANSO 6May 7:30
180 1 QUESOMOS ALMA 6-May 21:00
480 14 BAILE ROMPIENDO 6-May 21:30
180 13 ARBENZ SPEECH 7-May box: Arbenz Especial
480 12 [SNIPPETS] T-May
180 10 BALE O7 ROMPIENDO 7-May CONTINUES ON TO TAPE 9
480 9 QUESOMOS ALMA T-May PICKS UP FR TAPE 10; TOMORROW SWITCH TO 3420
180 8 MISCELANEA NUESTRA &May 7:00 PROFESIA2
480 7 COMUNISMO REMANSO aMay 7:30
181 10A BAILE ROMPIENDO &May 24:00 THURSDAY NOTICE.

181 41 QUESOMOS ALMA &May 21:30 START 3420 TONITE. THURSDAY NOTICE, Box: 3420 kes:
481 40 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 9-May 7:00 THURSDAY NOTICE. PROFESIA 3/6
181 37 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO @-May 7:30 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000. Box: 6360 kes.
481 36 BAILE ROMPIENDO @-May 21:00 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000
181 35 QUESOMOS ALMA @May 21:30 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000
481 34 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 10-May 7:00 PROFESIA4
181 33 COMUNISMO REMANSO 10-May 7:30 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000
181 32 BAILE ROMPIENDO = 10-May 21:00
181 31 QUESOMOS ALMA 10-May 21:30
481 30 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 14-May 7:00 PROFESIA 5S
181 29 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO 11-May 7:30 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000
182. 9A BAILE ROMPIENDO —14-May_21:00 THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000
182 200 QUESOMOS ALMA 11-May 21:30
482 199 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 12May 7:00 PROFESIA6
182 198 COMUNISMO REMANSO 12May 7:30
182 197 BAILE ROMPIENDO = 12-May 21:00
182 196 QUESOMOS ALMA 42-May 21:30 “forced to suspend time changes.”

182 195 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 13-May 13:00 PROFESIA7
182 194 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO 13-May 13:30
482 193 EN ALAS LA MUJER 13-May 20:00 FIRST EN ALAS.

182 192 DESCANSO SENDEROS 13-May 20:30 FIRST SENDEROS
182 191 BAILE ROMPIENDO = 13-May 21:00 Hours 1-2, 8-10.

182 189 QUESOMOS ALMA 13-May 21:30 Back tomorrow at 1300
182 190 43-May Chng tmirw to 1-2 PM and 8-10 PM. Just that and music. Reel: “Special - announces change. Box: 414 and 43A"
182 188 MISCELANEA NUESTRA 14-May 13:00 Hours are 1-2 PM and 8-10 PM. PROFESIA8
183 55 COMUNISMO_ REMANSO 14.May 13:30
183. 54 EN ALAS LA MUJER 14-May 20:00
1483 53 DESCANSO SENDEROS 44-May 20:30
483 52 BAILE ROMPIENDO- 14-May 21:00

35

51
50
49
48
47
46
45
44
43
42
BA
61
60
59
58
57
56
68
67
66
65
64
63
62
7A
213
212
2it
210
209

207

204
203
202

106

151
180

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUN!ISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
Special
Special
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS
DESCANSO
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
ALAS

LA NOTICIA
BAILE

QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
COMUNISMO
EN ALAS

LA NOTICIA
BAILE 16
QUE SOMOS
MISCELANEA
NUESTRA
COMUNISMO
NUESTRA
EN ALAS
ROMPIENDO:
ALMA

COMUNISMO
NUESTRA
EN ALAS
ROMPIENDO.
ALMA

BAILE

COMUNISMO
NUESTRA
EN ALAS
ROMPIENDO.
ALMA

BAILE
SPECIAL

ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO:
LA MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO
ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO
LA MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO:
ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO
LA MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO
ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO
LA MUJER:
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO
ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO:
LA MUJER 19
SENDEROS
Special
ALMA
NUESTRA
REMANSO
LA MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO
ALMA
MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO.

NUESTRA
REMANSO
LA MUJER
SENDEROS
ROMPIENDO
ALMA

LA MUJER

LA MUJER
MISCELANEA

SENDEROS
QUE SOMOS

LA MUJER
MISCELANEA

SENDEROS:
QUE SOMOS
LA NOTICIA

LA MUJER
MISCELANEA

SENDEROS
QUE SOMOS
LA NOTICIA

14-May
48-May
15-May
15-May
15-May
15-May
15-May
16-May
16-May
16-May
16-May
16-May
16-May
47-May
17-May
17-May
17-May
17-May
17-May
18-May
48-May
18-May
18-May
48-May
18-May
19-May
49-May
19-May
19-May
19-May
19-May
20-May
20-May
20-May
20-May
20-May
20-May
21-May
21-May
21-May
21-May
22-May
22-May
22-May
22-May
22-May
22-May
24-May
24-May
26-May
26-May
26-May
26-May
26-May
26-May
27-May
27-May
27-May
21-May
27-May
27-May
27-May
28-May
28-May
28-May
28-May
28-May
28-May
29-May

24:30
13:00
13:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
13:00
43:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
43:00,
13:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
13:00
13:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
13.00
13:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30
13:00
13:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
21:30

43:00
13:30
20:00
20:30
24:00
21:30
13:00
13:30
13:00
13:30.

13:00
13:30

13:00
43:30
20:00
20:30
21:00
24:30
13:00

PROFESIA 9

FULL PROFESIA, NO SPECIFIC VERSE TAUGHT. Box 6360 kes.
BACK TONITE AT 2000 HRS, 3420 KCS
ALSO ‘MILITARY DECALOGUE’

CICERO.

CICERO MESSAGE. MILITARY DECALOGUE.

CICERO MESSAGE.

CICERO MESSAGE. NO PODEMOS SER COMUNISTAS...
CICERO.

CICERO.

THIS CASSETTE IS OUT OF SEQUENCE, SCRIPTS SAY DAY 7, REEL 21. PROFESIA 2

SCRIPTS SAY DAY 7, REEL 22. Gives hours as 7-8 and 21-22.
BACK IN SEQUENCE. “DECALOGUE”

COMMENTARY ON MAY DAY PARADE (/}
COMMENTARY ON MAY DAY PARADE (Il)

"6360
alas: 1st part romeo & juliet, 2nd part tmew.

baile script day 92, reel 91. See LINC 2953 (sherwood files 1-3).
see LINC 2953 {sherwood files 1-3).

alas: finishes (pt.2) ballet suite #1, toscanini

NEW REFRAINS:

NEW REFRAINS

OFFICERS’ MESSAGE

4ST PLAYING OF TRINQUETEROS. 1ST VERSE TOMORROW. DAY BEFORE TRINQUETEROS 1

LAST REMANSO

TRINQUETEROS 1

EXPLOSION? DISRUPTION. TAPE ENDS 111 MONDAY. [Per colateral, Monday, 24 May.)

COMES SOON AFTER CASSETTE #97
TRINQUETEROS 2

FIRST BROADCAST AFTER CASSETTE 97 EVENT.
NEXT PROGRAM WILL BE ALMA...

Leaflet drop warning. Reel: Especial Blanca

4-2: 8-10. LAMUJER: NEXT PROGRAM IS "NUESTRA..."

BACK AT8PM.  TRINQUETEROS 3 (SEE #135)

NEXT PROGRAM IS ROMPIENDO

NEXT PROGRAM |S ALMA

Yetrdy's Que Somos was on Soc Sec inst (#95). Tmrw’s will be on “syndicalization ”
BACK TOMORROW AT 1:00

ONLY 3-MIN, DEGRIPTION OF LEAFLET DROP. Reel and Box. XYZ

MUJER: SOON AFTER CARACAS CONF. NUESTRA IS NEXT PROGRAM
TOMORROW MISCELANEA WILL JOIN W/BAILE. TRINQUETEROS 4

TIME CHANGE TOMORROW.

YSTRDY'S QUE SOMOS WAS ON CODIGO DE TRABAJO (#158). TC TMRW
TIME CHANGE TO 1 AND 9 STARTS TOMORROW.

CCA manifesto to the army.

36

Not prgim is Baile

179
178
v7
176
183
187
186
225
185,
184
181
182
135,
134
133
132
131
430
429
128
127
126
125
424
123
122
236
235

AA
234
23
232
23

7:

72
276

7

7

69

gs
275
68A

80

79

78

i
116

1A
229
228
227

76

75
287
4
413
119
170
472
173
421
447
148

88

92
136
145
ohn
115

i)

ag

3

gq

SPECIAL
SPECIAL
SPECIAL
COMUNISMO:
NUESTRA
ROMPIENDO.
ACUSAMOS
COMUNISMO,
MISCELANEA
PEGANDO
NOTICIA
COMUNISMO,
NUESTRA
ROMPIENDO.
ACUSAMOS
COMUNISMO
NUESTRA
SANGRE
ACUSAMOS
LA MUJER
QUE SOMOS:
SANGRE
ROMPIENDO:
LA MUJER
QUE SOMOS
PEGANDO.
ACUSAMOS
LA MUJER
QUE SOMOS
PEGANDO.
ACUSAMOS
LA MUJER
QUE SOMOS:
MISCELANEA
SANGRE

LA MUJER
NOTICIA
MISCELANEA
SANGRE
PEGANDO
ACUSAMOS

SANGRE
ACUSAMOS
SANGRE
ACUSAMOS:

SPECIAL

LA MUJER
QUE SOMOS

LA NOTICIA
LA NOTICIA

ACUSAMOS

LA MUJER
MISCELANEA
QUE SOMOS
NOTICIA.

LA MUJER

LA MUJER:
MISCELANEA
QUE SOMOS
LA NOTICIA
LA MUJER
MISCELANEA

LA NOTICIA
NUESTRA
MISCELANEA
ACUSAMOS
NUESTRA
MISCELANEA
SANGRE
NOTICIA
NUESTRA

NUESTRA
NOTICIA
NUESTRA

NUESTRA

NOTICIA

LA NOTICIA

NUESTRA
MISCELANEA

29-May
29-May
29-May
30-May
30-May
30-May
30-May
31-May
31-May
31-May
31-May
4-Jun
4-Jun
1-Jun
1-Jun
2-Jun
2-Jun
2Jun
2vun
3vun
3Jun
3-Jun
3Jun
4-Jun
4-Jun
4Jun
4Jun
SJun
SJun
S-Jun
S-Jun
6-Jun
6-Jun
6Jun
6-Jun
6-Jun
7T-Jun
T-Jun
7Jun
7-Jun
&Jun
8-Jun
8Jun
8-Jun
Qua
QJun
9-Jun
40-Jun
410-Jun
40-Jun
40-Jun
43-Jun
43-Jun
44-Jun
46-Jun
46-Jun
18-Jun
48-Jun
18-Jun
18-Jun
49-Jun
49-Jun
19-Jun
20-Jun
20-Jun
20-Jun
20-Jun
20-Jun
20-Jun

Tae
21:00
21:30
13:00
13:30
21:06
21:30
13:00
13:30
24:00
24:30
43:00
13:30.
21:00
21:30
13:00.
43:30
21.00
21:30
13,00
13:30
21:00
21:30
13:00
13:30
21:00
21:30
43:00
13:30
21:00
21:30

Special program for the military. Exhortations, Military Decalogue.
CCA manifesto to the people

TOMORROW BACK TO NORMAL PROGRAMMING.

Comunismo script: 131. Comunismo: 7 paints, part 1. Part 2 tomorrow,
nuestra script: 132

both scripts: 133

acusamos script: 134

box; comunisme , la mujer. ok-2,

only miscelanea. Leaflet drop last Wednesday. Trinqueteros “Abajo.
only pegando

only noticia

pegando: salguero (same as #184). no scripts

PEGANDO: TREJO-

FIRST SANGRE: POSADAS. PEGANDO: VICENTE
PEGANDO: VICENTE.
PEGANDO GIVES GOOD CLUES.

PEGANDO: VELASQUEZ SANGRE: CONTRERAS. per cassette#280, this was played on 3 June.

PEGANDO: VELASQUEZ, NEXT ANTIGUA. NEXT NUESTRA KOMSOMOLSKAYA
TEACHES TRINQUETEROS' “ABRIR PUERTAS..". TRINQUETEROS 5

reel: nothing. box: 3420, acusamos, noticia. ok-4

box: cunas, ta mujer, nuestra. ok-7

NOTE QUE SOMOS NOW ON 6369.

box 3420, pegando, nuestra. nota complete b/c. hodge-podge. pegando: franco. ok-5
box 3420, acusamos, noticia. new morse sound. tape cuts off abruptly before end

reel: 6360, box: 6360. pegando: franco. ok-10

features cca delaration. reel: 3420. box 6360, Que somos, dec. de cca. ok-6

Reel: Dramatizacion

box: 6360. la mujer, nuestra. ok-3.,

PEDRO MESSAGE.

AGENT PEDRO.

box: 3420. acusamos, noticia.  ok-9
BERNARDO MESSAGE. Box: 6360 kcs.

15-MIN BROADCAST

COL, MENDOZA'S MESSAGE, REGULAR PROGRAMMING NOW ENDED.
refrains. not a regular broadcast.

reel; 6360, box: no. 2, 6360. no programming, only music and refrains.

box & reel; 3420. music & refrains.

box & reel: 3420. music & refrains.

Collateral: Played 13 June @ 1300 with #188

“X-27 TO LIBERATION." Collateral: Played 13 June @ 1300 with #187

special bulletin re army reaction to arms shipment. box: “extra special, ‘C’" collateral: 14 june.

16 JUNE. TOMORROW WE GO TO 9,12,17,22. Box: 16 June. 16 jun
CCA EXHORTATION. Box: 18 June, 18 jun

War developments. This tapecomes right after #136 and is related to#88, 15-minute broadcasts.

CCA speech. Exhortations. broadcasting every 45 mins. text: 18 jun
Exhortations.

REPEATS CCA SPEECH FROM 119. Box: 19 June. 19 jun

JUNE 49

NEWS BULLETINS, 18 TOWNS UNDER CONTROL. 5:00PM. 19 Jun
CALL TO ARMS. 15-MIN BROADCAST.

MESSAGE TO MILITARY.

MESSAGE TO ARMY. MILITARYACTIONS

SEVERAL MILITARY ANNOUNCEMENTS

2ND DAY OF MIL. OPERATIONS, 25 TOWNS UNDER CONTROL.
EXHORTATIONS, FIGHTING UNDERWAY

37

191
191
191
195
197
197
198
198.
198
198
194
198
198
198
198.
198
198
198
198
196
198
4193
198
491
196

120
118
U7
286
215 SPECIAL
216 SPECIAL
291
294
289
290
110
299
301
302
292
293
300
296
295
243
297
137
298
12
241

I Ul

Cass. Program 1

74 MONTECRISTO
SA

39

38 EN ALAS
224 ACUSAMOS:

138

139

141

142

143

144

146

2A CRIMENES
4109

162

164

167

168

169

474

474

175,
221 ALL MUSIC
220 ALL MUSIC
219 ALL MUSIC.
218 ALL MUSIC
217 ALL MUSIC
222 ALL MUSIC
223 ALL MUSIC
230

Vv

Program 2

QUE SOMOS

21-Jun WAR BULLETINS.

21-Jun WAR BULLETINS. EXHORTATIONS.

241-dun REFUTES GOVT LIES, ABANDON THE CAPITAL.
21-Jun hourly bic's. vehicles now targets (like #68A). Tribuna: fe

ad up to Aurora iid. box. s-7

22-Jun 12:00 box’ 6360 kes” military announcements, messages & exhortations. next up 5:00pm

da-Jun 17:00 box: "reel no, 1, 8360 kes." military announcements, messages & exhortations, next up 10:00pm
22-Jun 22:00 war news, bulletins. back tomorrow at 0900
22-Jun box: June 2200 (sic)

23-Jun 9:00 announces great offensive. 23 june

23-Jun 12:00 military reports. canceling 1700 b/c. next up 2200

23-Jun WARNING RE PHONY TGW 8'CAST. TIMES NOW 0900,1200,1700,2200. Box; Special June 23. 23 jun

24-Jun 13:00 military reports. next up 2000
24-Jun 20:00 desertions at chiquimula/zacapa. next up 2300
24-Jun 23:00 chiquimula captured. next up 1300 tomorrow. 24 june

25-Jun 17:00 25-Jun

25-Jun 23:00 matamoros bombing. nextup 1300. 25 jun

25-Jun BOX: "SPECIAL - ROSARIO" post-chiquimula, post-matamoros dectaration. 25 jun
26-Jun 17:00 7 points. CCA msg to catholics. nestup 2300. coralia. s-26

26-Jun 23:00 communique 27. coralia, - nextat 1300.26 jun

26-—Jun substantive wartime activity prob. jun 26 or 27

26-Jun 7 points, prob, follows #293, prob. 1200. back at 2000. 2300 will be trilingual special
27-Jun SPECIAL - ARBENZ HAS RESIGNED

27-Jun day after #293 (638 inductees) communique 27. next at 2000. 27 jun s-24
28-Jun ULTIMATUM TO COL, DIAZ, Box: June 28 13001800 L217 28 jun

28~Jun response to col. diaz’ non-response prob. jun 28 5-15

ROSTER OF SOURCE CASSETTES

Vili

Notes

MONTECRISTO, 9, 10, 11.

MICROPHONE ADJUSTMENTS, NOTHING ELSE
BACK ON AIR ANNOUNCEMENTS

FIRST TIME FOR “EN ALAS..."

box acusamos, que somos. box: ok-B

CONGRESS
CONGRESS
CONGRESS
CONGRESS.
CONGRESS

SIGN ON. SIGN OFF. NOTHING ELSE.
CASTILLO ARMAS MANIFESTO

2X TRIBUNA DE LA LIBERTAD

NO BROADCAST. POEM AND TRIBUNA ONLY.
INAUGURATION. WIMZ MIAMI

MONTECRISTO 2,3,4

CRIMES OF THE COMMUNISTS...(SGT POSADAS)

ALL MUSIC
ALL MUSIC

ALL MUSIC - TESTING TRANSMITTER. Rel: “test roll”

TEST TRANSMISSIONS. Reel: "test tape"

MONTECRISTO 12, 13, 14

ASSAULT ON LA AURORA

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE'S PROCLAMATION. Reel: Especial Miriam
Toriella speech at Caracas conference,

Arms cache discovery warning. Box. Isabel

Arbenz May Day speech

Informs of destruction of arms shipment. Reel: Just in case the “thing happens
Many repeats af Los Trinqueteros, nothing else

Exite's one-minute statement,

3.x Tribuna de fa Libertad

2x Tribuna de la Libertad

box reel #2, marimba #2

box: reel #3, rotlo 3er, canciones populares.

box canciones populares

box: canciones populares

box: no. 6, Canciones populares,

pox: reel 7

box. una tarde en la opera

two fregs. box 3420,

hodgepodge. ends abruptly. pegando: delgado

38

26 jun . s-25

226 ACUSAMOS
285
284

239
238
237A

267

[SNIPPETS]
[SNIPPETS]

ROMPIENDO:

no freq given. irregular endings

TGW's “la hora nacional.”
poetry readings box: s-8

CEUAGE - box. fernandez and quinones chaps II, (days 8,9,10)
quinones Chaps IV, V,VI_ box CEUAGE chaps 13,14,15. (days?) 4.5,
“communist crimes: margot desler" soap opera partion

box: Special 2A, very first day

crimes in guatemala - orellana
crimes is guatemala - posadas

Music
Arabic or slavic voice?

CCA speech (same as 238, 239)
CCA speech (same as 238, 240)
CCA speech (same as 239, 240}

music
music
T points

open microphone, possibly inadvertent recording at studio

dupficate of #116

39

reel and box: ok-1

39

s-14
8-12
8-13
14

6, and Bros Quinones

. CASSETTE ROSTERS |

z
\ 1 i? and a . ve or

ROSTERS OF CASSETTES

Two rosters of Cassettes follow.

The ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES lists all those cassettes for which a broadcast
date is available, or for which an approximate date can reasonably be established. They are
listed in choronological order.

The ROSTER OF SOURCE CASSETTES lists those cassettes which appear to be source

cassettes, cassettes which were dra

appear to be recordings of actual broadcasts.

On both rosters, the columns represent the following:

Column I:

Column Il:

Column lil:

Column IV:

Column V:

Column VI:

Column VII:

Scolumn VIII:

Column Ix:

The page, in the appropriate section, on which the cassette is found.
The number of the box in which the casette is stored.

The number of the cassette.

The first program segment appearing on the cassette.

The second program segment appearing on the cassette.

An asterisk in this column indicates that the date assigned to the cassette is an
approximation based on content.

Date of broadcast.
Time of broadcast.

Notes made by the reviewer.

3.3

wn from to put together some of the broadcasts. They do not

ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES

Vv Vv vi

vil Mill ix

Page! Box|Cass.}_ Program 4

Program 2 Date | Time Notes

1_| 195] "268) 1-May box: special, no. 1, very firs .

2 [194] 165|simBoLos May first Simbolos episode. Reel: Special - inauguration - No. 2 ;
3 [194] 166] 1-May End of inaugural broadcast, Reel: Special - Inauguration - No. 3- only 6 min.

4 | 170] 26|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 2-May| 7:00 i, 7 53 5
5 | 179| _25|/COMUNISMO [REMANSO 2May| 7:30 a

6 | 173| 24/BALEO1 ROMPIENDO 2-May| 21:00 ea Se Te x
7_[ 178[ 15|aueE somos [ALMA 2-May| 21:30 Si ee em nee no eae :
8 | 179| _23/MISCELANEA [NUESTRA SMay| 7:00 - 2 coin

3 | 179] 22/COMUNISMO [REMANSO 3-May| 7:30 PRs Re |
10 | 179| 21[BALEO2 _ [ROMPIENDO 3-May| 21:00 Ait _ |
11 | 179|  20/QuE Somos _[ALMA. 3-May| 21:30 7 =. on

12 [179| _19[MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 4-May| 7:00 ae POR ee

13 | 179| _18[comMUNISMo_|REMANSO 4-May| 7:30 meee

14 | 179|17[/BALE 03 [ROMPIENDO 4-May| 21:00 as.

15 | 179| _16[QUE Somos [ALMA 4-May| 21:30 eee Se

16 | 180[ _11[MISCELANEA [NUESTRA &May| 7:00

17 |-180[ _6|/COMUNISMO_[REMANSO S-May| 7:30 bs!

18 | 160} S[BAILE ROMPIENDO 5-May| 21:00

19 [ 180) _4laue somos [ALMA S-May| 21:30

20 | 180| _3|MISCELANEA {NUESTRA 6-May| _7:00/PROFESIA 1

21 | 480f _2/COMUNISMO_[REMANSO 6-May| 7:30 im

22 | 180| _1/QueE somos _[ALMA’ 6 May| 21:00 =

23 [160] 14/BALE ROMPIENDO 6-May| 21:30

24 | 180] _73|ARBENZ SPEECH 7-May box: Arbenz Especial

25 { 180| _12/[SNIPPETS| 7-May oa

26 [180] 10|BALEO7 __[ROMPIENDO 07 | 7-May CONTINUES ON TO TAPE 9

27 | 180} slave somos [ALMA 7-May PICKS UP FR TAPE 10; TOMORROW SWITCH TO 3420

28 [ 180| _8|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 08 &May| 7:00[PROFESIA 2 = ;

29 | 180] 7[ComuNIsMo _{REMANSO &May| 7:30

30 | 181] 10AjBALEO3 —_[ROMPIENDO 8 May| 21:00| THURSDAY NOTICE

31 | 181] _41]Que somos [ALMA 8-May| 21:30|START 3420 TONITE. THURSDAY NOTICE. Box: 3420 kes.

32 | 181] 40|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 09 9-May|_7:00[THURSDAY NOTICE PROFESIA 3/6

33 | 181] 37|comunisMo_[REMANSO @-May| _7:30|THURSOAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000. Sox. 6360 kes.

34 [181] 36[BALE ROMPIENDO 09 | 9-May| 21:00/ THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000

35 | 181] _35[QUE somos [ALMA 9-May| 21:30| THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000

36 | 181] 34|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 10 | {10-May| 7:00] PROFESIA 4

37_[ 181|_33|comunismo_[REMANSO 10-May| _7:30/THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000

38 [181] 32[BAiLE 10 [ROMPIENDO 10_[10-May| 21:00!

39 [ 181] 3t|aue somos [ALMA 10-May| 21:30

40 [181] 30|MiscELANea [NUESTRA 11 | _[14-May|_7-00| PROFESIA 5

41 | 181] 29|comunismo [REMANSO 11-May|_7:30/ THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000

42 | 182] 9A/BAILE 11 ROMPIENDO 11 [11-May| 21:00/ THURSDAY START NEW TIMES, 1300, 2000

43 | 182| 200]QUE SOMOS [ALMA 14-May| 21:30 Pa

44 | 182|_199[MISCELANEA {NUESTRA 12 | _[12-May| 7:00| PROFESIA 6 “i is

45 [| 182|198/comuNisMo _[REMANSO 12-May| 7:30 = :

46 | 182[ 197/BALE 12 [ROMPIENDO12_|12-May/ 21-00

47 | 182] 196|QUE somos [ALMA 12-May| 21:30| Yorced to suspend time changes.”

48 | 182[ 195[MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 13 | _[43-May| 13:00] PROFESIA7 =

49 | 182| 194|comunisMo [REMANSO 13May] 13:30

50 | 182| 193/EN ALAS [LAMUJER 13 | _[13-May| 20:00/FIRST EN ALAS.

51 | 182! 192|0ESCANSO _{SENDEROS 13-May| 20:30] FIRST SENDEROS.

52 | 182| 191[BaLE 13 [ROMPIENDO 13 _[13-May] 21:00|Hours 1-2, 8-10.

53 | 182] 189/QUE SOMOS [ALMA 13-May| 21-30 |Back tomorrow at 1300 =

54 | 182| 190 13-May Chng tmrrw to 1-2 PM and 8-10 PM, Just that and music, Reet: “Special - announces change. Box 41A and 43A
55 | 182[ 188|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 14 | _|14-May] 13:00|Hours are 1-2 PMand8-10PM. PROFESIA8 ~

56 | 183] 55|ComuNisMo_[REMANSO 14-May| 13:30 a ~

o7 | 183) SalEN ALAS [LA MUJER 14-May| 20-00 me — pe

58 | 183] 53[DESCANSO _[SENDEROS 14-May| 20:30 - tS oes a

59 | 183] 52/BALE ROMPIENDO 14 _[14-May| 21-00 3 r . ans

60 | 183| st/que somos [ALMA 14-May| 21:30 ; mc

61_| 183| _SO|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 15 15-May| 13:00 a ae

62 | 183] 49|comunismo [REMANSO 15-May| 13:30 Z aia

63 | 183[ _48[EN ALAS LA MUJER 15 May| 20:00 Ane ~ a

64 | 183| 47|DESCANSO _[SENDEROS 45-May| 20:30 <— es ~

65 | 183] a6/BaiLE ROMPIENDO 15 _[15-May] 21:00 = Poe ;

86 | 183| _45/Que Somos [ALMA 15-May| 21:30 is ="

87 | 183] 44|MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 16 | |16-May| 13-00/FULL PROFESIA, NO SPECIFIC VERSE TAUGHT. Box 6360kes.

68 | 183] 43/COMUNISMO_[REMANSO T. ES =

16-May| 13:30|/BACK TONITE AT 2000 HRS, 3420 KCS

Page 1

ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES

vo v vi [vm | ; IK

Program 4 | Program 2 Date _| Time Notes
EN ALAS LA MUJER 16-May| 20:00 ALSO ‘MILITARY DECALOGUE™ f
DESCANSO _ |SENDEROS 16-May| 20:30 . .
BAILE 16 ROMPIENDO 16__|16-May| 21:00 _
QUE SOMOS _|ALMA 46-May| 21°30

MISCELANEA NUESTRA 17

17-May| 13:00:CICERO

ICOMUNISMO_[REMANSO

+:7-May| 13:30| CICERO MESSAGE, NILITARY DECALOGUE:

EN ALAS LA MUJER 17-May| 20:00]CICERO MESSAGE. 4 *
DESCANSO __|SENOEROS 47-May| 20:30/CICERO MESSAGE. NO PODEMOS SER COMUNISTAS..
BAILE 17 ROMPIENDO: 417-May| 21:00 |CICERO.

QUE SOMOS _|ALMA

47-May| 21:30/CICERO.

MISCELANEA |NUESTRA 18

18-May| 13:00

5 |COMUNISMO_|REMANSO.

18-May] 13:30

EN ALAS:

LA MUJER:

48-May| 20:00

DESCANSO__|SENDEROS

18-May| 20:30

BAILE

ROMPIENDO.

18-May| 21:00

QUE SOMOS _|ALMA

18-May| 21:30

MISCELANEA [NUESTRA 7

19-May} 13:00|/THIS CASSETTE IS OUT OF SEQUENCE. SCRIPTS SAY DAY 7, REEL 21. PROFESIA 2

COMUNISMO_[REMANSO

19-May] 13:30|/SCRIPTS SAY DAY 7, REEL 22. Gives hours as 7-8 and 21-22.

EN ALAS

LA MUJER 19

19-May| 20:00/BACK IN SEQUENCE. “DECALOGUE.”

IDESCANSO __|SENDEROS.

419-May| 20:30

Speciat

Special

19-May| 21:00|COMMENTARY ON MAY DAY PARADE (I)

[Special

ALMA

19-May| 21:30 |COMMENTARY ON MAY DAY PARADE (li)

MISCELANEA |NUESTRA 20

20-May| 13:00

ICOMUNISMO_|REMANSO:

'20-May| 13:30|6360

EN ALAS:

LA MUJER 20

'20-May| 20:00|alas: 1st part romeo & juliet, 2nd part trew.

DESCANSO _|SENDEROS

[20-May| 20:30

BAILE 92

ROMPIENDO 20

20-May| 21:00|baite script: day 92, ree! 91. See LINC 2953 (sherwood files 1-3)

QUE SOMOS _|ALMA

20-May| 21:30}see LINC 2953 {sherwood files 1-3)

ALAS MUJER 214 21-May: alas: finishes (pt.2) ballet suite #1, toscanini.
LANOTICIA__|SENDEROS 21-May| NEW REFRAINS

BAILE 21 ROMPIENDO 21__|21-May NEW REFRAINS

IQUE SOMOS 21-May' IOFFICERS' MESSAGE

MISCELANEA |NUESTRA 23

'22-May| 13:00|1ST PLAYING OF TRINQUETEROS. 1ST VERSE TOMORROW. DAY BEFORE TRINQUETEROS 1

ICOMUNISMO_|REMANSO

22-May| 13:30|LAST REMANSO.

EN ALAS LA MUJER 22 '22-May | 20:00.
LANOTICIA_|SENDEROS 22-May| 20:30
BAILE 16 ROMPIENDO 22 _|22-May| 21:00
IQUE SOMOS _|ALMA 22-May| 21:30

MISCELANEA |LA MUJER 23.

24-May| 13:00|TRINQUETEROS 4

NUESTRA 23

24-May| 13:30 |EXPLOSION? DISRUPTION. TAPE ENDS 111. MONDAY. [Per collateral, Monday, 24 May.]

COMUNISMO [LA MUJER

26-May| 13:00|COMES SCON AFTER. CASSETTE #07

NUESTRA __|[MISCELANEA | _|26-May] 13:30] TRINQUETEROS 2
EN ALAS 26-May, FIRST BROADCAST AFTER CASSETTE 97 EVENT.
ROMPIENDO_|SENDEROS 26-May NEXT PROGRAM WILL BE ALMA.
ALMA, TQuE somos 26-May|
| 26-May Leaflet drop warning. Reel: Especial Sianca

ICOMUNISMO_|LA MUJER

27-May| 13:00|1-2; 8-10. LA MUJER: NEXT PROGRAM IS “NUESTRA...”

NUESTRA MISCELANEA '27-May | 13:30| BACK AT 8PM TRINQUETEROS 3 (SEE #135)
EN ALAS 27-May| NEXT PROGRAM IS ROMPIENDO:
ROMPIENDO |SENDEROS 27-May NEXT PROGRAM IS ALMA
ALMA IQUE SOMOS 27-May' Ystrdy’s Que Somos was on Soc Sec inst. (495). Tmrw’s will_be on “syndicalization.” Nxt prgrm is Baile.
BAILE LA NOTICIA 27-May BACK TOMORROW AT 1:00
27-May [ONLY 3-MIN, DECRIPTION OF LEAFLET DROP. Reel and Box: XYZ

COMUNISMO [LA MUJER

28-May| 13:00] MUJER: SOON AFTER CARACAS CONF. NUESTRA IS NEXT PROGRAM.

NUESTRA MISCELANEA 28-May| 13:30 | TOMORROW MISCELANEA WILL JOIN Wi BAILE, TRINQUETEROS 4

EN ALAS 28-May| 20:00 :
ROMPIENDO |SENDEROS 28-May| 20:30|TIME CHANGE TOMORROW.

ALMA QUE SOMOS 28-May| 21:00/YSTRDY'S QUE SOMOS WAS. ON CODIGO OE TRABAJO (#158). T/C TMRW,
BAILE LA NOTICIA '28-May| 21:30)TIME CHANGE TO 1 AND 9 STARTS TOMORROW. 3

SPECIAL ts 29-May| 13:00|CCA manifesto to the army.

SPECIAL 29-May| 13:30|Special program tor the military. Exhortations. Military Decalogue.

SPECIAL 29-May| 21:00|/CCA manifesto to the people.

SPECIAL 29-May| 21:30) TOMORROW BACK TO. NORMAL PROGRAMMING.

ICOMUNISMO [LA MUJER:

30.May| 13-00|Comunismo script: 131, Comunismo: 7 points, part 1. Part 2 tomorrow.

NUESTRA

MISCELANEA

30-May| 13:30| nuestra script: 132

ROMPIENDO |QUE SOMOS

_[30-May | 21:00 [both scripts: 133.

ACUSAMOS __|NOTICIA

30-May| 21:30|acusamos script: 134

COMUNISMG |LA MUJER

31-May| 13:00|box, comunismo , la mujer._ok-2

185|MISCELANEA

31-May| 13:30 only miscelanea. Leaflet drop last Wednesday. Trinqueteros “Abajo.”

Page 2

ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES

|

rn Vv vw vw | vin | ik 42S
cass.| Program’ | Program 2 Date | Time Notes __}

184[PEGANDO 31-May| 21:00 [only pegando [=o 2 tet
761 [NOTICIA 31-May| 21:30] only noticia : 7 7 a
182|COMUNISMO_|LA MUJER J-Jun] 13:00) pegando: salguero (same as #184). no scripts. es
335|NUESTRA _[MISCELANEA |__| _1-Jun| 13:30 7 =
134|ROMPIENDO [QUE SOMOS edun] 21:00 _ =
133|LOS AGUSMA |LA NOTICIA tJun| 21:30 ; . = : |
432/COMUNISMO_{[LA MUJER 2-Jun| 13:00] PEGANDO: TREJO 7
1Bi|NUESTRA __[MISCELANEA | | 2-Jun| 13:30 : F
130 [SANGRE 2aJun| 21-00 [FIRST SANGRE. POSADAS. PEGANDO: VICENTE ; 5 _
129|ACUSAMOS _ LA NOTICIA 2-Jun| 21;30|PEGANDO: VICENTE ;
128|LAMUJER__ [NUESTRA 3,lun| 13:00|PEGANDO GIVES GOOD CLUES. |
127|QUE SOMOS [MISCELANEA |_| 3-Jun| 13:30 2
126| SANGRE 3-Jun| 21:00/PEGANOO: VELASQUEZ SANGRE: CONTRERAS. per cassette#280, this was played on 3 June. 7
4125|ROMPIENDO |ACUSAMOS 3Jun! 21:30
124|LAMUJER [NUESTRA ‘@-Jun| 49:00 |PEGANDO: VELASQUEZ, NEXT ANTIGUA. NEXT NUESTRA KOMSOMOLSKAYA
1231QUE SOMOS IMISCELANEA |__| 4-Jun| 13:30/TEACHES TRINQUETEROS' "ABRIR PUERTAS.”_TRINQUETEROS 5
122|PEGANDO __ [SANGRE 4Jun| 21:00 7 _|
236|ACUSAMOS _|NOTICIA ‘Jun 21:30|reet nothing. box 3420, acusamos, noticia. ok-4
235|LAMUJER [NUESTRA S.jun| 13:00|box. cunas, Ja mujer, nuestra. ok-7

190| _4A/QUE SOMOS 5-Jun| 13:30 NOTE QUE SOMOS NOW ON 6360.

799| 234|PEGANDO _NUESTRA S-Jun| 21:00 |box. 3420, pegando, nuestia. nota complete bic. hodge-podge. pegando: franco. ok-S

499| _233|ACUSAMOS _ [NOTICIA 5-Jun| 21:30|box 3420, acusamos, noticia. new morse sound. tape cuts off abruptly betore end.

199) 232/LAMUJER NUESTRA [*_| 6-Jun reel: 6360. box: 6360. pegando: franco. _ok-10

j99|_231/QUE SOMOS | + | evun features cca delaration. reel: 3420, bax: 6360, Que somos, dec. de cca. ok6

90| __73|MISCELANEA | 6sun Reel: Dramatizacion

90] _72|SANGRE | 6vun

200| 276/LAMUJER [NUESTRA |* | 6—Jun box 6360, fa mujer, nuestra. ok-3

y0[_ 71 [NOTICIA > [ 7-Jun

190 70|MISCELANEA + [sun

790| _69|SANGRE | 7-Jun PEDRO MESSAGE.

192| _91|PEGANDO. «| 7-dun [AGENT PEDRO. .

200/ 27s|acusamos |NoTicia —[* | B-Jun box. 3420. acusamos, noticia, ok-9

90] 68a > | evan BERNARDO MESSAGE, Box: 6360 kes.

90] 80/SANGRE = | evun

190|__ 79|ACUSAMOS. + | Buun 15-MIN BROADCAST

t90|_78|SANGRE | 9dun

190/ _77|acusamos |LANoTICIA_|* | oun

rot] 116 >| Sun COL, MENDOZA'S MESSAGE. REGULAR PROGRAMMING NOW ENDED,

jeo| tal SPECIAL =| 40-Jun refrains. not a regular broadcast.

igo| 229 + |0-Jun reel, 6360. box no. 2, 6360. no programming, only music and refrains.

199] 228 | 10-Jun box & reel: 3420, music & refrains.

tga[_ 227 + {oun box & reel: 3420. music & refrains. .

190| _76|PEGANDO _|LA MUJER/NUEST] 13-Jun Collateral: Played 13 June @ 1300 with #168 5

too! _75|QUE SOMOS |MISCELANEA |_| 13-Jun "X27 TO LIBERATION.” Collateral: Played 13 June @ 1300 with #187

195| 287 ‘4-Jun special bulletin re army reaction to arms shipment, box: “extra special, ‘C’" collateral: 14 june.

jot] 114|LA NOTICIA a 16-Jun |

391[_113[LA NOTICIA 16-Jun TO JUNE, TOMORROW WE GO T09,12,17,22, Box. 16 June

yori} 119 18-Jun ECA EXHORTATION. Box. 16 June zl

494| 170 + [esun War developments, This tapecomes right after #136 and is related to #88. 15-minute broadcasts

j94| 172 18-Jun CCA speech. Exhortations. broadcasting every 45 mins. text’ 18 jun

yoa[_173 + [tasun Exhortations. :

agi 121 19-Jun REPEATS CCA SPEECH FROM 119. Box 19 June. 19jun

193] 147 19-Jun JUNE 19 |

193] 148 19-Jun NEWS BULLETINS. 18 TOWNS UNDER CONTROL, 5:00 PM._JUNE 19

192 88 * | 20Jun CALL TO ARMS. 15-MIN BROADCAST. _

y92|__ 92 + | 20-Jun MESSAGE TO MILITARY. = z

193] 136 + {20-Jun MESSAGE TO ARMY. MILITARYACTIONS. :

193|_ 145|ACUSAMOS. + [20-Jun SEVERAL MILITARY ANNOUNCEMENTS: : “ "

jot] 1m 7 + | 20-Jun 2ND DAY OF MIL. OPERATIONS, 25 TOWNS UNDER CONTROL. c

qi] 115 = [20-Jun EXHORTATIONS, FIGHTING UNDERWAY,

tat] 120 + [2t-Jun WAR BULLETINS. : _

yor] 118 > [24-sun WAR BULLETINS, EXHORTATIONS : -

rot] 117 i + [2t-sun REFUTES GOVT LIES. ABANDON THE CAPITAL

195] 286 . Bes * | 2t-sun hourly b/c's. vehicles now targets (like #684). Tribuna lead up to Aurora raid, box s-7 7

197 215/ SPECIAL : 22-Jun| 12:00 box "6360 kes" military announcements, messages & exhortations._nextup 6:00pm :

197| _216|SPECIAL 22-Jun| 17-00 box: “ree! no. 1, 6360 kcs."_ military announcements, messages & exhortations. next up 10:00pm.

198] 291 22-Jun| 22:00 {war news, bulletins, back tomorrow at 0900 7

198] 294 22-Jun box: June 2200 (sic) i oy

198! 289 23-Jun]_9:00 announces great offensive. 23 june 7

Page 3

ROSTER OF BROADCAST CASSETTES

Vv

Vv

vi

vit

Vill

Ix

Program 1

Program 2

Date

Time

Notes

23-Jun

12,00

military reports. canceling 1700 b/c. next up 2200

23-Jun

WARNING RE PHONEY TGW B'CAST. TIMES NOW 0900, 1200,1700,2200. Box: Special June 23. 23 jun

24-Jun

13:00

military reports. next up 2000

24-Jun

20:00

ldesertions at chiquimutafzacapa. next up 2300

24-Jun

23:00

25-Jun

17:00

25-Jun

25-Jun

23:00

matamoros bombing. next up 1300.25 jun

25-Jun.

BOX: “SPECIAL - ROSARIO” _post-chiquimula, post-matamoros declaration. 25 jun

26-Jun

7 points, prob, follows #293 prob. 1300. back at 2000. 2300 will be trilingual special. 26 jun.s-25

296

26-Jun

20:00

7 points, CCA msg to catholics. nest up 2300. coralia. s-26

26-Jun

23:00

communique 27. coralia. next at 1300. 26jun_

243

27-Jun

substantive wartime activity. prob. jun 26 or 27

137

27-Jun

SPECIAL - ARBENZ HAS RESIGNED

27-Jun

day after #293 (638 inductees) communique 27. next at 2000. 27 jun. s-24

112

26-Jun

ULTIMATUM TO COL. DIAZ. Box: June 28 1300 1800. L217. 28 jun

241

28-Jun

tesponse to cal. diaz’ non-response. prob. jun 28. $-15

Page 4

ROSTER OF SOURCE CASSETTES

I ul al Vv Vv i 1X
“Page| Box [Cass.[ Program’ | Program? 7 Notes - s
1 190 74|MONTECRISTO | _ MONTECRISTO, 9, 10, 11 7 v4
2 181/39 - BACK ON AIR ANNOUNCEMENTS: 7 ~ ~
3 781] _38/EN ALAS FIRST TIME FOR “EN ALAS...” a ~ |
4 7198] 2241L0S ACUSAMOS|QUE SOMOS [box acusamos, que somos. box: _0k-6 ‘ a ¥
‘3 792| 81 ‘: 23 ‘CONGRESS i 7 Z
5 t92[ 82 ° ~"|CONGRESS : :
5 j92[ 63 : [CONGRESS we
3 792[ — 94)- : 7 |CONGRESS 2 : { os
“Ss 192| 84 “CONGRESS ° : ~ i
6 792, 85 ‘SIGN ON, SIGN OFF, NOTHING ELSE. 7.
7 192{ 86] “TEASTILLO ARMAS MANIFESTO _— ‘
8 92; 87, [2X TRIBUNA DE LA LIBERTAD i = -
9 792| 89 “|NO BROADCAST. POEM AND TRIBUNA ONLY. a
io | t92| 93 INAUGURATION, _WIMZ MIAMI :
im 11 | 193[_ 138 MONTECRISTO 2,3,4 - ;
12 | 193 139 CRIMES OF THE COMMUNISTS...(SGT POSADAS)
43 | 193[ 141 ALL MUSIC |
b 14 193] 142 ALL MUSIC :
15 | 193) 143 ‘ALL MUSIC - TESTING TRANSMITTER. Rel: “test roll” 7
16 [193] 144 TEST TRANSMISSIONS. Reel. “test tape" : °
17 193{ 146 MONTECRISTO 12, 13, 14 oe
78 | _193[_2A|CRIMENES [ASSAULT ON LA AURORA. 3
19 | isi] 169 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE'S PROCLAMATION. Reel: Especial Mitam
20 | 194] 162 Tarielfo speech at Caracas conference.
aif i94| (164 ‘Arms cache discovery warning. Box. Isabel
22_{| 194] 167 ‘Atbenz May Day speech.
23} 194|_ 168 Informs of destruction of arms shipment. Reel: Just in case the “thing” happens
24 | 194] 169 ‘Many repeats of Los Trinqueteros, nothing else.
25 [| 194| (177 Exile’s one-minute statement
26 Te4[ 174 3x Tribuna de fa Libertad. ° - 7
27_ | 104| 176 2x Tribuna de la Libertad.
26_| 197} _221/ALL MUSIC box reel #2, marimba #2
28_| _197| _220/ALL MUSIC box. reel #3, rojlo Ser, canciones populares. “ 7 |
28 | 197|__279[ALL MUSIC box canciones populares :
28 797| _218/ALL MUSIC box. canciones populares ~ ~
28 | _197|_217[ALL MUSIC box. no. 6, Canciones populares.
28 197[__222{ALL MUSIC ae box: reel 7
28 197| _223[ALL MUSIC ‘box. una tarde en la opera °
29 [| 199] 230 Iwo reqs. box 3420. hodgepodge. ends abruptly. pegando: delgado.
39 171951” 226]LOS ACUSAMOS|ROMPIENDO [no freq given. irregular endings. real and box ok-1
31 | 195| 285 TGW's “la hora nacional.”
32 495] 284 poetry readings box s-8 .
33] 195] 263 CEUAGE - femandez & quinones bros. box. femandez and quinones chaps lll (days 8.9,10)
34_| 405/262 Guinones Chaps lV, VV box CEUAGE chaps 13,14,15. (days?) 45.6, and Bros Quinones case
35_| 196| 281 Fcommunist crimes. margot dresler" soap opera portion.
35_| 178] __27 [SNIPPETS]
36 | 179] __ 28|[SNIPPETS) box Special 2A, very first day ?
Fu 795} 280 crimes in guatemala - orellana : a
38 | _195| 279 jerimes is guatemala - posadas
39 | 195! 278 Music
40_| 196| 5A Arabic or Slavic voice?
a 796| 240 CCA speech (same as 238, 239) s-9 eo
42 | 196/239 CCA speech (same as 238, 240) s-11 2 F
43 [ 196| 238 ICCA speech (same as 239, 240) s-12 :
44 | 196| 237A music $13 :
a | 196| 2378 music s14
a6 | 196] 24a T points |
48 200; 271 duplicate of #116 a *
ao | 200| 267 blank J

~ BROADCAST CASSETTES.

eit ek Ma gs ject

Pa :
i

SYNOPSES

OF

BROADCAST CASSETTES

006

033

082

155

165

371

1 May
CASSETTE #288

National Anthem

Guatemala, dear country. Brother Guatemalans. We have begun the work of this clandestine
radio.

[Refrain 2.] [No freq.] Radio Liberation, broadcasting from a secret place with the Republic, will
on the air twice a day. From 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM and from 2100 to 2200 during the first weeks
Later, and when technical circumstances permit, we will increase our broadcast hours. Morning
broadcasts will be as follows. After coming up on the air, we will offer a segment of popular
music with jokes about the personalities of our sad political situation. Then there will be two
serious segments exposing the Arbenz government, and finally a segment featureing exquisite
music. The night broadcast will begin every day at 2100 and will carry the following programs:
Baile al son que fe Toquen, modern music and good humor with satirical sponsorships; the two
programs Rompiendo las Cadenas and Que Somos y Adonde Vamos, attacking the government;
the closing will feature marimba music.

[National anthem again.]

[Refrain 2. ] [No freq.]

Nuestra Aparicion en Escena, y Nuestro Saludo. [Music.] Gives some backgroound on the
opposition movement for which the radio speaks, noting it is comprised primarily of exiles,
university youth, honorable military officers, and fugitives from persecution. They are
professionals, students, farmers, industrialists, peasants and workers. The people of Guatemala
want to know more about this opposition, who they are and what they propose to bring. They
deserve answers, and we are going to provide those answers. [Goes on to explain about the
opposition, its goals, the evils of communism and the Arbenz regime, and the shame they have
brought to Guatemala.] [Music. Ends at Counter 371.]

No Sign Off. Music ends at 371.

006

015

1 May
CASSETTE #165

No Sign On. Refrain 2. [No frequency given.]

Por Los Simbolos a fa Realidad. God, Fatherland, Liberty, the symbols adopted by Guatemalan
University Youth in Exile. We will speak of these symbols in this inaugural program of our
transmissions. [Enters into an extended discussion of the meaning of these symbols. Goes on

to Counter 400.] [Music.]

Music fades out. No Sign Off.

41 May

CASSETTE #166
005 No Sign On. Refrain 2. [6360 and 3530 kcs, gave both frequencies. ]

017 [Anthem.] The song of the Fatherland fills the airspace as the special broadcast through which
Radio Liberation, on 6360 and 3530 kcs, has begun its broadcast activities, comes to an end. As
we end our work for the day, we thank you for your attention. We will repeat this broadcast that
you have just heard, that lasted for one hour, throughout the day so people can become
accustomed to us. Our regular programming will begin tomorrow from 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM, on
6360 kcs, and from 9:00 PM to 10:00 PM, on 3530 kes. Radio Liberationnow leaves the airwaves
for one hour. [Music.]

075 Music ends. No Sign Off.

003

035

044

205

2 May 0700
CASSETTE #26
Sign On |.
Announces the schedule for this program:
1- Miscelanea Musical de! Aire (15 minutes)
2- Nuestra Campana Radial (15 minutes)
3- Comunismo al Desnudo (15 minutes)

4- Musical Program (15 minutes)

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Perez Prado, Que Rico el Mambo, Perdido.

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Why we must fight against communism. ...importance of these
broadcasts....censorship by the government....we're for democracy....we now conclude the first of
this new series [note: this suggests this is the first broadcast to include the Nuestra Campana
Radial segment]. [Music.]

Music stops. Off the air.

004

011

2May 0730

CASSETTE #25
Sign On |.

El Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] Attacks agrarian policies of the government....invasions of
property... confiscations.... Moscow driven....calling peasants to civil war, per Kremlin
plans....Alfonso Martinez Estevez named....cites abuses on Duice Nombre farm in
Esquintla,...also La Industria, La Esperanza... Fortuny's recent return from USSR, prepped to
start civil war on behalf of Soviet interests....communism is on the march....but we will turn
Guatemala back into a nation of God which will return to its tradition and civilization.

{Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Mario Lanza opera selections.

005

042

204

2May 2100

CASSETTE #24
Sign On |. Refrain 2.

Baile al Compas Que le Toquen. ["] Satirical sponsorship of Rogelio Cruz Wer's G.C. Beauty
Salon, located at 6th Avenue South and 14th Street, Tamborera, “Yo Quiero Verla Esta Noche,”
Jarochas “La Bamba,” “Carioca.” The magnificent personnel of Don Lelo (Cruz Wer), trained
behind the Iron Curtain...will apply specialized massages (both manual and electric)...
permanents, etc.... they will even change your way of walking. [ Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [“] Quotes from a manifesto published in issue no. 11 of Ef Combate,
published in El Salvador... We must all join together against international communism in
Guatemala....forget past differences and join in the common cause....our symbols are God,
Country and Liberty, and our aspirations are Truth, Justice and Work....Join the front, the
organized opposition....we speak to you from exile....from countries that have true institutional
liberty....our missions is to expose the crimes of the current govérnment and combat it
actively....we reject Arbenz's charges of a planned foreign invasion....these are false, designed to
disrupt the Caracas Conference (Xth Interamerican Conference)... We quote the words of Carlos
Castillo Armas, chief of the organized opposition, that there is indeed a conspiracy - a conspiracy
of Christianity and civilization against communism and barbarism. The hour of liberty is near!

002

016

2May 2130

CASSETTE #15
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Attack on the evils of communism. Ten points on why we can
never be communists, our “ideological decalogue’”:....communism denies existence of God....puts
party before fatherland... does not recognize liberty....destroys, faith, ideals and aspirations of the
individual... rejects moral values....destroys the home....is based on absurdities, imposes a
purported equality which even nature denies, forces equality by dragging the front-runners
back....its only achievement is to have enslaved millions of workers and created thousands of
concentration camps....exploits envy and aill the other lower passions against the
successful....considers work to be an instrument of slavery. Personal attack on the “traitorous
deliverance [entreguismo] of Jacobo Arbenz and company.”

Music (including Dean Martin, “When the Moon Hits your Eye Like a Big Pizza Pie")

Alma Chapina. Musical program.

Sign Off.

005

043

192

3May 0700

CASSETTE #23
Sign On |. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Cumbia, “Casi, Casi,” tamborera, “Cogelo Suave.”
{Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. (*] How the Arbenz government spends its money....high life of its
Officials, including Cadillacs, houses, furs, jewelry....personal overseas accounts of its
officials... heavy costs of the propaganda apparatus....internal espionage services....support of
USSR objectives around the world (200,000 quetzales per month on propaganda programs within
the USSR, mandatory annua! contribution to Soviet fund for building atomic bombs). [Refrain 2.]

Off the air. No Sign Off.

005

015

3May 0730

CASSETTE #22
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Comunismo al Desnudo. {*] The long night of vultures and serpents is almost over....daybreak Is
coming....the pain has lasted for years, but is nearly over....return to the meaning of the flag and
cross....only current symbols are the hammer and sickle....bunch of miserables have converted
the altar of the nation into a stable of international beasts....Guatemalan diplomats have no right
to speak in the name of the Guatemalan people....Mexican Communist influence in
Guatemala....the time is coming. [Refrain 2.]

{Music.] [Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Paul Taylor, “Song of Delilah,” Johnny Mercer, “Autumn Leaves,” “Au Revoir
Again.” [Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. [Refrain 3.]

009

042

222

3 May 2100
CASSETTE #21
Sign On |. Refrain 2.
Baile al Compas que le Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of Humberto Gonzalez Juarez’ leather
shop Curtiembre 20 de octubre, located at 6th avenue south between 10th and 11th. Today's

songs are the guaracha “Ni Picha, ni Cacha, ni Deja Batear,” the tamborera “Tengo Una Novia"
and the Peruvian vals “Nube Gris." [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] “The Betrayal of the Army and the Most Recent Pastoral Letter.”
Quotes extensively from Archbishop Mariano Rosell y Arellano’s pastoral letter ordering the
faithful to combat communism....denounces total subjugation of Guatemala to USSR - illegal,
unconstitutional and immoral.

End of music (no Sign Off).

10

005

014

3May 2130

CASSETTE #20

No Sign On. Refrain 2.

{ Music. ] [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina, marimba music. “Vals de Paris,” “El Hidalguense” and “El Gato Montes.” ;

11

005

050

230

4May 0700
CASSETTE #19
Sign On!. Refrain 2

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. {*] Musical program featuring “Los Chorumbeles de Espana.” Juan
Legido's “Tres Veces Guapa,” “La Boda de Luis Alonso” and “La Leyenda del Beso.” (Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Assault on Alfonso Martinez Estevez, director of the National
Agrarian Department, Jose Manuet Fortuny, SecGen of Communist Party (sic) and Victor Manuet
Gutierrez, SecGen of CGTG, and general attack on acts of oppression and cruelty of government
- wave of terror.....several instances of killings and torture cited. [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

12

005

014

4May 0730

CASSETTE #18
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Comunismo al Desnudo. {*] Soviet generals are now happy because whereas before no Soviet
aircraft had the range to bomb Los Angeles and return safely home, now planes can take off from
the USSR, drop nuclear bombs on Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle or other US cities, then
continue south to safety in Guatemala....these generals are delighted that Guatemala now hates
Uncle Sam and loves Uncle Joe.....Guatemalan communists are few but controi government and
administrative bureaucracy.....more virulent than communists in Moscow..... practically own
Guatemala, but not for long....criticism of Guatemalan diplomats and their voting pattern in
international bodies....Guatemalan agrarian laws against landowners more severe than anything
Moscow would dare impose....criticism of importation of Mexican labor leader Vicente Lombardo
Toledano, citing letter from him to Mao Tse-tung....account of how communists had found it
necessary to machine gun women who opposed them....account of how Arbenz and cronies
ordered the assassination and butchery of Armed Forces chief Col. Francisco Javier Arana, who
opposed them....red control of Guatemala is now virtually complete....defense of United Fruit Co.
which continues to operate in Guatemata but is gradually being forced out....employees of United
Fruit and Pan American have been manipulated by communists to act against their own self-
interests by striking for outrageous wages and benefits....criticizes performance of Foreign
Minister Guillermo Toriello in recently concluded Caracas conference [X iInteramerican
Conference]....the great day of liberation is coming. (Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical, musical program featuring opera selections from “Carmen.” [Refrain 2.]

13

010

045

219

4May 2100
CASSETTE # 17
Sign On |. Refrain 2.

Baile al Compas que le Toquen. [*] Musical program satirically sponsored by “don Jaime
Rosenberg, proprietor of the G.C. Soap Factory [note: although the announcer clearly says G.C.,
a written transcript says G.J. The latter is probably correct since Rosenberg was chief of the
Guardia Judicial], located at 6th avenue south and 14th street, and producer of the wonderful
soap “Lialio en marquetas.” (Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas, Attack on Arbenz and denial that Guatemala can be a beachhead for
Soviet communism..... Guatemala has a religion and a tradition which cannot be taken
away.....Guatemalan people are ready for the end of the regime of Arbenz and the other
“communist pigs.” “The moment of liberation from the communist yoke is very near.”

14

005

030

217

402

4May 2130

CASSETTE #16
No Sign On. Refrain 2.
Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Proving the case that Arbenz, his party and his government are

communist... they are, but the people of Guatemata are not....their days are numbered, the great
day is arriving...."the great day of liberation is not far away.” [ Refrain 2.}

Alma Chapina. 15-minute musical program featuring marimba group “Alma de Guatemala.”
Boleros “Ay Mi Vida” and “Corazon.”

Sign Off.

15

003

042

048

222

5 May 0700

CASSETTE #11
Sign On |. 6360 kcs. [Mornings 6360 kes, evenings 3530 kcs.] Refrain 2

Los hombres de a revolucion temen una revolucion.
(The men of the revolution fear a revolution. ]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. {*} Los Tres Diamantes, “Luna Llena,” Patti Paige, “| Went to your
Wedding,” Los Tres Diamantes, “Dos Cruces.” [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The “revolutionaries” are going about saying that those who oppose
the Arbenz government are sponsoring an “intervention,” and that the people of Guatemala should
repudiate any “intervention.” Let's look at the facts. The first real intervention of this sort
occurred in 1944 when one |. Rodriguez turned this country over to the USSR. Arbenz has
continued this policy. We are living under that intervention to this day. If there is another
intervention, it will be to liberate us and it will come from a group of countries from this
hemisphere, or perhaps only from one...And this is what Arbenz fears. And he should be aware
that no country or group that today lyrically proclaims its support to him will engage in a war of
idiots to defend him. We anti-Communists are pained by the current intervention and by the
prospects of still another, and we blame both on the puppet Arbenz. Compares Arbenz to Louis
XVI. [ Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

16

004

014

5 May 0730

CASSETTE #6
No Sign On. Refrain 2. 6360 kes.

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] Corruption in the government...we are all ashamed when we read in
the newspapers of the scandals in the government and disgusting machinations of the political
parties....political parties that maintain Arbenz in power, just groups of ambitious, opportunistic,
amoral and vicious individuals....they think only of enriching themselves at the cost of the people,
and of orgies with women of the worst kind. Just recently scandalous fights surfaced within the
National Party, caused by the secretary of the Presidency, Jaime Diaz Rozzoto....there have been
continuing rumors of embezzlement of 150,000 quetzales by Diaz and Jaime Barrios
Achila....goes on to cite other scandals and rumors....Diaz claimed that the fights in the PN were
caused by individuals with premature presidential ambitions, which only proves that ambition is
what drives that party....we have seen internal fights destroy the Frente Popular Libertador, then
the Partido Accion Revolucionaria, then the Party of the Guatemalan Revolution, and now we see
divisions surfacing within the Guatemalan Labor Party, that is, the Communist Party....the people
are sick of all this thievery, scandal, lying and embezzlement....through our voice the people are
saying Enough!...now it's our turn to clean up this country and rid it of Arbenzism....

[Refrain 2.] [ Music.] [Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical, Jean Pierce, “Torna Sorrento," “Valencia,” “Amapola." [Refrain 2.]

17

004

042

213

5 May 2100

CASSETTE #5
Anthem, Refrain 1. 3530 kcs. Refrain 2.

Baile al Compas Que le Toquen. [*] Sponsored by the National League of Tuberculars, and its
great lottery on the forthcoming 15th of May. Arbenz, Fortuny, Guerra Borges, Castillo Flores,
etc., 50 valuable prizes, tickets for only one quetzal...house with comfortable cells, exquisite
torture chamber, artistic security fences, can be yours!.... Bolero, "Ya Se Que Tienes Novia,” “La
Profesia,” “Ya Vamos Llegando a Penjamo,” bolero “Te Quiero Mas que Nunca.”

(Refrain 2.)

Rompiendo Jas Cadenas. The Arbenz government is clearly communist...turning country over to
the Kremlin's sovietism....the great masses of peasants know this is a farce....10 years of national
energy have been wasted... all peasants and workers know this now....despite malevolent
preachers....lets stop just talking about communists...let's close ranks and recruit those who are
on the margins of the struggle....recover those who have succumbed to defeatism....join the
struggle now....words no longer work, only deeds work....deeds will bring democracy, peace and
freedom from fear. Radio Liberation will announce the timing, the great day of liberation is near.

{ Refrain 2.] [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

18

005

015

146

192

363

5 May 2130

CASSETTE #4
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Good evening....we're on 3530 kilocycles....the communist goal in
Latin America is not the redemption of the poor....agents in the Soviet embassy set the ultimate
destiny of the masses... the communist goal is to capture Latin America’s prime resources and
the power of its labor force, through trickery.....the US asked the Xth Conference in Caracas to
investigate communist penetration in the hemisphere, and Guatemala was the only vote
against....agents of the Soviets wage an ideological war that is more dangerous than an armed
war....it is advantageous to them because they need shed no blood of their own, only that of
foreign peoples....their dream is of a Soviet Union of Popular Republics of Latin America....the
insurrection in British Guyana and the nationalization of the tin mines in Bolivia were the reaction
to errors which must be corrected and avoided in the future....we must combat communism, but
also avoid errors that help Soviet penetration efforts....goes on to detail how the USSR penetrates
communist countries: recruit agents; divide and confuse:...destroy church, army, patriotism,
international friendships... This communist government must disappear forever....we are not
asleep, we have profound aspirations for Guatemalan happiness and liberty....the nine years of
communist oppression are coming to an end....the hour is near, Guatemalans, and the Arbenz
regime is beginning to tremble! [Refrain 2.]

“You Belong to Me.” [Patti Paige?] [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina, featuring group “Alma de Guatemala.” Two-step “Valencia,” son chapin “El
Pataneco,” porro “La Llorona.” [ Refrain 2.]

19

6 May 0700

CASSETTE #3
005 Musical overture. Sign On|. Refrain 2.

041 Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Bolero, “El Bolero Cabretera,” Los Trinqueteros’ san Chapin “La
Profesia.” (See General Notes section for words to this political, anti-Arbenz song. After the
playing of this song, announcer teaches the first verse, and says one verse will be taught each
day.] Vals peruano, “Estrellita del Sur.” [Refrain 2.]

226 Nuestra Campana Radial. ["] Denunciation of newspaper ad taken out in Mexico by “Society of
Friends of Guatemala,” defending the Arbenz government....nothing but a band of communists
placing ads paid for with Guatematan money provided by the Guatemalan
government....involvement of these people in the “society” is further proof of Arbenz' service to the
Kremlin....the “comrades” are effectively unmasking Arbenz and company....these ads cost the
people of Guatemala 100,000 quetzales....in the name of the 99% of Guatemalans who are anti-
Communist, we say to this stupid society, leave us in peace!....Guatemalans, not Mexican

20

005

015

6 May 0730

CASSETTE #2
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] Broad, sweeping attack on communism, Arbenz and several other
leaders... government full of people loyal to communists, but unqualified....false technicians and
intellectuals are glorified... whatever masks they wear, Arbenz, Jaime Diaz Rozzoto, Gonzalez
Juarez and all the others are bourgeois, the very group which Vladimir llich Utianof [sic] attacked
with the greatest viciousness.... ultimately these people will be the victims not of the opposition
which they have persecuted so avidly, but of their very comrades, the “tovarich” whom today they
receive at “the banquet of the national historic monstrosity”....communist elimination means
torture and assassination, and that's what awaits these people (at the hands of today’s
comrades)....but if the communists don’t even the score, we are here to claim this debt of
honor....the lethargy of Guatemalans has dissipated....the civil war that the communists have
been nurturing is perhaps near....what awaits these communist pigs (cerdos comunistas) when
the hostilities start?....the people of Guatemala (army, labor, peasants, students, professionals)
will not let them go unpunished..... “Honest anti-Communist Guatemalans have the right to the
truth, and we will soon inform as to the date of the liberation.” [Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. “The Barber of Seville,” “Waltz of the Merry Widow." [ Refrain 2.]

21

004

014

6 May 2100

CASSETTE # 1
No Sign On. Refrain 2.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. We continue to explain the reasons for our struggle through these
broadcasts....analysis of last couple of weeks....persecution of citizens....arbitrary abuse...,. PGT
and PC abusive, along with smaller parties....but we want everyone to be calm and ready for the
coming struggie...inevitable conflagration....a new democratic Guatemala....once we get rid of
these assassins led by Arbenz and his Moscow sponsors.....these communists have abused,
humiliated and attempted to destroy everything that belongs to us.... motherland, religion,
personality, dignity, honor, etc.....we must crystallize our ideology and define the basic principles
of the political program we are prepared to defend and implement once the current mess has
been cleaned up....our political creed is democracy....social rights of the people....health,
alimentation, housing and culture....we have adopted the symbois of God, Country and
Liberty....and the postulates of Justice Truth and Work....each of the six....we'll combat
communism with all available resources.... must create public conscience....human dignity....need
new laws....freedom of speech, religion, meeting, residence and movement, and all other
freedoms proclaimed by democracy and defended by law....provides all other tenets of their
philosophy... modernization of penal institutions, respect for human dignity,
tehabilitation....respect for private life, family, residence, correspondence, hone and reputation will
be guaranteed....right to participate in government through free elections....access to public
functions. . Tomorrow we will speak of capital and labor, the economy, cooperative and
landholdings. [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Marimba music featuring the group “Alma de Guatemala.” Boteros.

22

004

043

221

340

375

6 May 2130
CASSETTE #14
Sign On |. 3530 kcs. Refrain 2.

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. [") Satirical sponsorship of Casino Come Nacional where you can see
the great magician Jorge Toriello, who can make a whole lot of jewels disappear into thin air, and
get 250,000 quintales of sugar into his pocket. Amazing! You will also see the great ventriloquist
Georgi Malenkov and his dummy Jacobo. Elia y Paloma, “El Chachacha del Tren,” “Maria la ©,”

“Barquito de Vela Vela.” [Refrain 2]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] A call to all anti-Communists, to all those who don't want to see
Guatemala, bound hand and foot, turned over to the Kremlin, to unite. The opposition continues
to organize for the coming struggle... we urge Guatemalans not to attend congresses and labor
and peace conventions organized by the communists....where the submission of the working
class is requested, and where class warfare is fomented....time has come to form a single front,
where we are all brothers....the hour of great decisions is getting closer....when it comes, fight
with all your strength against communism....help destroy their propaganda apparatus, don't buy
red newspapers.

Colabore Ud. tambien con su minima parte, divulgando ef contenido de nuestros programas, sus
horas de tranmision, y las frecuencias en que operamos — 6360 kcs onda corta durante ef dia, y
3530 kcs onda corta por las noches. Gracias por hoy y hasta muy pronto. Siga Ud. en nuestra
sintonia.

[Cooperate with us. As a minimum, pass on the contents of our programs, our
broadcast hours and our operating frequencies -- 6360 kes short wave during the day, and
3530 kes short wave at night. Thanks for today and until soon. Keep listening. ] (Music. ]

Music ends. No sign off.

23

7 May

CASSETTE #13

004 This is a speech before the Congress, probably by Arbenz. It is something of a “state of the
union” address.

436 [Speech cuts off in mid-sentence. Nothing further on tape.]

24

7 May
CASSETTE #12

004 Music. Ne Sign On

056 Music ends, and narrative cuts in..... actividades politicas, para darse importancia pero tambien lo
son entre los miembros menos discretos de nuestros grupos....cemember - the government and
the communists have spies everywhere, don't discuss anything about your political work in bars,
restaurants, theaters, athletic fields, and in general in no public place where there is any other
person near you...[cuts off at 061, then picks up again at 069).

Some members of our groups are very careless... [cuts off again at 075]

[Nothing further on this tape. The cut above appears to be
from the Nuestra Campana Radial program on cassette 30.)

25

004

042

183

7 May

CASSETTE #10

Sign On |. 3530 kes. Refrain 2.

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of Mayatecu industry [not clear to what this

refers]. Paul Weston, “This Cannot Be Love,” [tomorrow you can hear us on 3420 kes.]
“Pennies from Heaven,” “Why Couldn't 1?” [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] Deals with recent attacks on anti-Communist radio stations in
Guatemala, in direct violation of Article 36 of the Constitution. Physical attacks on owners and
employees are cited, including one who now lives in exile, an invalid as a result of the tortures
suffered in prison in Guatemala. Radio Universal, La Voz de las Americas, Radio Giro’s, Radio
Continental, and Radio internacional are all cited.

[Goes into the case of Radio Internacional in great detail, but cassette ends in mid-text at 427.
The narrative on Radio Internacional is immediately picked up at the beginning of cassette 9.
There is nothing further on this tape.]

26

004

7 May

CASSETTE #9

[begins immediately, cuts in. This is the continuation of the Rompiendo las Cadenas segment on
cassette 10.]]....desde luego fue una Propaganda indirecta para dicho programa
anticomunista....Speaks of a radio station (apparently called Radio Internacional\having been
jammed in Guatemala. However, the jammings was done with a transmitter that was too small,
so the jamming was only effective in the capital city. The jammed station could continue to be
heard in he countryside. The radio station protested, and some lame theories of explanation were
offered by potice authorities which anyone could see were totally false. Finally, “the intelligence
service of the committee of anti-Communist university students, using of high fidelity and
chronometric exactitude, were able to locate the Jamming signal as emanating from the garage of
the Civil Guard. Cruz Wer then proceeded to threaten the station, saying if they didn't cancel their
anti-Communist programming, it would be canceled for them. Such threats were ignored, as the
Station managers never dreamed they would be implemented. But the whole country saw what
happened, the station was the victim of armed assault. This is the kind of liberty Arbenz makes
Such a point of. The police are the biggest thugs and criminals in the country, and they
committed the assault.

{In closing this segment, announcer states that although they are at this moment transmitting on 3530 kes,

075

084

beginning tomorrow the evening broadcasts will be on 3420 kes.]
Refrain 2.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [NT] Yesterday we clearly established our symbols God, Country
and Liberty, and the aspirations of Justice, Truth and Work, and spoke generally of the state and
the individual. Today we will speak of the importance of capital and work, the economy, land and
cooperativism..... in our political program which will be implemented after the fall of Arbenz, work
will be considered the right of the individual....speaks of rights of the workers... capital and work
will be protected by the state... there will be an educational campaign denouncing the class
struggle concept....free trade unionism will be legalized, and centralized confederations will be
prohibited....everyone will have the tight to medical treatment....inexpensive housing construction
will be encouraged by the state...quality of life will be raised at all levels, ...capital and specialized
technical skills will be protected...a new industrial taw will be promulgated....agricultural
development will be encouraged-and aided by-the state. ...the new system of agrarian reform will
not harm larger tracts which have proven themselves productive....land owned by the state will be
distributed to families via a system to be carefully worked out....the modern humanized capitalist
system is the best system for us, Marxism destroys us.....a system creating a large number of
landowners without falling into the minifundio trap will be considered. ..it is not acceptable that the
majority lives in poverty while a few are rich....the mining industry will be encouraged, particularly
in the hydrocarbons field. ...[program continues going into considerable detail on the economic
and social reforms which will take place after the overthrow of communism]....tomorrow we will
speak of the political reforms to come.

Starting tomorrow, you can hear us on 3420 kes.
Refrain 2 [3530 kes].

Alma Chapina. Marimba music with group Maderas Que Cantan, “Anton,” “Santiaguito.”

Sign off.

27

004

043

201

8 May 0700

CASSETTE #8
Sign On|. Refrain 1. 6360 kes. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Xavier Cugat, ‘Begin the Beguine,” “El Marijuano” (specially
dedicated to Arbenz, interspersed with cryptic remarks and jokes about “32,” apparently a
reference to “Article 32” which purportedly prohibits the existence of foreign or international
political parties in Guatemala, specifically the communist party. Teaches second verse of La
Profesia. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. {*] Through this series of programs we are not only unmasking the
principal communist leaders of Guatemala, but also exposing their disgusting treasonous
machinations....the Organized Opposition combats Soviet totalitarian ideas from within
Guatemala and other Central American countries... The communist publication Tribuna Popular
recently and stupidly referred to anti-Communist students of the republic as “expert conspirators.”
Nothing could be further from the truth....we have publicly announced our goal is to eradicate
communism from our country....through our brethren in El Salvador we have now launched our
publication E/ Combate....this is no conspiracy because we act openly....our crusade is legal and
completely popular....they have also called us feudalists, but none of us is a landowner....as
opposed to the Tribuna Popular traitors who have transformed themselves into the possessors of
Cadillacs, chalets and lovers....finally, they call us *yankee-philes” who hope for divine
intervention from abroad....this too is false because we have always said that Guatemalan
problems must be solved by Guatemalans....total contrast with communists’ pandering to
Moscow....the Kremlin has opened up a subsidiary just a couple of blocks from the national
palace - at communist party headquarters....didn’t we all see it this past May 1st, when all the red
banners dominated the parades and demonstrations?....our patience has ended....Guatemalans!
Radio Liberation incites you to be ready for the struggle which is coming, and let us together
throw all the traitorous communists out by force, since reasoning has not prevailed....remember
what our anthem says, “better dead than enslaved.”

Refrain 2. Music ends 407. No Sign Off.

28

003

013

121

138

8 May 0730

CASSETTE #7
No Sign On. Refrain 2. 6360 kes.

Comunismo af Desnudo. [*] This morning we will explain why Russia is interested in having
Guatemala be one of its satellites....people don't understand why there is a pseudo-democratic
government under Arbenz in place.... these people are not well-informed....it is our duty to teil
them the truth.... then we will see if they respond to our cause. ...Russia is interested in
Guatemala because it can house strategically placed air bases....from which attacks can be
launched against USA and Argentina and others....only two hours to Panama, three hours to the
Texas oil fields, these are the bases needed by Russia....imagine Soviet planes dropping atomic
bombs on San Diego, Texas or even New York....now can you see why the Soviets are so
interested in Guatemala?....We Guatemalans must impede at all cost this continuing communist
penetration... we must save all America....Russia must die in Guatemala....we can wait no
longer...the traitors at the head of the government of the degenerate Arbenz have disgraced the
concept of liberty and democracy....either the Arbenz government dies, or we die....Guatemalans!
To the struggle! The Guatemalan cause for freedom and democracy must survive....Our total
liberation is only a few days away!....be ready for the struggle, Guatemala must be free!

Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.

Music, “| Want to go on a Loving Spree.” [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3.
Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Opera selections. [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.]

29

004

033

051

211

236

sagtnonh

400

8 May 2100

CASSETTE #10A
Sign On I. 3420 kcs.

Important Notice. Repeats notice re broadcast time changes starting Thursday, per
Cassette 36-041

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. {*] Satirical sponsorship of “X Pharmacy.” Ranchera, “La
Zandunga,” “Chapinita," “Et Punto Guanacasteco.” [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5.
Refrain 6.]

Important Notice. Repeats 033 above. [Refrain 2.)

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*} How the Arbenz government is gradually eliminating the right to
freedom of thought and freedom of the press. Although there is a gag law in effect, the
government uses several other means to suffocate the free press....control of newsprint, sabotage
by employees directed communists, false employer-employee problems, huge increases in
production costs, control of operating licenses, visits by threatening agents, thinly veiled
threatening calls from public officials, and finally the easiest and most effective - nighttime
assaults on radio stations and newspaper offices trying to create the impression of being common
criminals when in fact they are policemen or police agents. The bottom line is that there is no
opposition press in Guatemala.

Don't forget we operate daily from 7 to 8 on 6360 and at night on this frequency of 3420 kes.
[Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

30

003

012

033

8 May 2130

CASSETTE #41

No Sign On. [Later in cassette they say that starting tonight they are at 3420 kcs.] Refrain 3
Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.

important Notice. Notice of broadcast time changes coming up this Thursday, same as
Cassette 36-041 ef af. [Refrain 2.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [Says this is first night for 3420 kcs. Daytime freq. of 6360 kcs
remains the same.] In other broadcasts of this segment, we have spelled out several principles of
the political program we will implant after the fall of Arbenz. Today we will deal with the portions
of that program that deal with family, culture, social assistance, economic and financial structure
of the state, economic and cultural support to the municipalities, army, and finally, foreign policy.
Goes on to provide the details of these various parts of their program. Remember your duty to
pass along what you hear on this station.

Important Notice. Repeats 012 notice. {Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Featuring Maderas Que Cantan marimba group. [Refrain 2.]

31

9May 0700

CASSETTE #40
004 Sign On {. 6360 kes. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.

040 Important Notice. Notifies listeners of program time changes that will take effect this coming
Thursday. [ Refrain 2. ]

062 Miscelanea Musical del Aire. {*} Los Panchos, “Vaya con Dios.”
Teaches third verse of La Profesia:

Paciencia, piojo, larga es la noche,
El comunismo te hace sonar,
Pero recuerda que a cada cosche,
Su dia sabado le ha de llegar.

Los Panchos, “El Negro Zumbon.”
200 Important Notice. Repeats 040 above. [ Refrain 2.]

220 Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The Guatemalan embassy in Managua is a center for communist
subversion....the embassy in Tegucigalpa is another one....it has become a center for meetings of
communists where assassinations are planned....the Guatemalan ambassador in Tegucigalpa
hosted a meeting of the noted leftists of the Legion de/ Caribe to make the final arrangements for
the murder of Nicaraguan president Somoza....this showed the world that the government of
Guatemala is a Moscow satellite, just like Costa Rica, with the two presidents being responsible
for the criminal assault on Somoza. A coming youth congress in Central America is just an
attempt by the communists to enroll our youth in their movement, and taking the youth of Accion
Catolica away from the Catholic church....the communists already control the labor movement,
now they want to steal the youth....we cannot let this happen....we must defend our sacred
principles of faith and religion... did you notice police chief Rogelio Cruz Wer'’s cynicism in
carrying our Christian symbols during a Holy Week procession? A coup is being prepared
against the government of Guatemala, by the government. Arbenz, MacDonald, Toriello, Cruz
Wer and others have been working for 10 years to overthrow the government they control....their
weapons are purchased behind the tron Curtain - incompetence, embezzlement, rape, injustice,
assaults, tortures and treason, among others....it may seem like a joke, but it's true.

369 We remind you the Radio Liberation has changed its nighttime frequency. You can continue
hearing them on 3420 kilocycles from 2100 to 2200. Don't forget your moral obligation to pass it
on. [ Music.]

400 Music ends. No Sign Off.

32

004

033

9 May 0730

CASSETTE #37
No Sign Off. Refrain 2.  \mportant Notice, repeats time changes beginning this Thursday.

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] Carries on about how the Arbenz regime has betrayed Guatemala’s
sovereignty... Arbenz himself recently declared publicly that there is a strong communist party in
Guatemala which participates actively in the affairs of state....contrast this with the fact that the
Constitution specifically prohibits the existence of political organizations “of an international or
foreign character.” Closes by noting that everyone's “minimum duty” is to spread the message
sent by this station.

Reminder about coming broadcast time changes. Glenn Miller music. [Refrain 4. Refrain 2.]
Remanso Musical. Madrid Chamber Orchestra. “Goyescas.” [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5.]

Reminder about coming broadcast time changes. {Refrain 2.].

33

005

041

060

187

208

9May 2100
CASSETTE #36
Sign On |. 3420 kes. Refrains 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.

Important Notice, again reviews Thursday's time changes. Thursday, 1300 on 6360 kes, 2000 on
3420 kes. [Refrain 2.]

Baile al Son que le Toquen. Satirical sponsorship of the Guatemalan Armed Forces.
Deutschmaster's Band, “March of the 84th Regiment,” another march.

Reviews Thursday's changes. [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*] in this hour of depravations, the masters of the lie and of propaganda
must be rubbing their hands with glee as they contemplate their successes....not even the
greatest magicians could achieve such incredible transformation.... a simple tool of labor, the
inoffensive machete, converted into a means of extermination....the hand that once worked the
soil now converted into a claw that strangles or a dagger that murders....this is the Marxist
dynamic....the machinery of the Kremlin....the man of the land, devoid of any malice, not
accustomed to analyzing events, is easy prey to the false friends who tell him, the land belongs to
those who work it....that is the spark, and the false redeemers then have only to fan the
flames....the field worker doesn't understand that this is breaking social morality...we
Guatemalans must return to social morality, ignoring the demagogues, the false apostles....the
key elements here are the worker himself, respect for property, neighborly solidarity; the
consequences are peace, satisfaction one’s basic needs, fulfillment of duty to family and
fatherland. Goes on to explain how communists are bringing about a horrible chaos, particularly
those like Carlos Manuel Pellecer....they are preaching hatred and calling for slaughter. But the
reign of terror and anarchy are reaching their end....we're going to put an end to all these
communist abuses....the day is getting closer, be ready, Guatemalans, be patient, it is just a
matter of waiting.

Goes off the air at end of this segment, no sign off.

34

a

Q9May 2130
CASSETTE #35

005 No sign on. 3420 kes. Refrain 3. Important notice [same as cassette 29}. Gives a somewhat
clearer description of the changes starting this Thursday. There will be two daily broadcasts, one
at 1300 on 6360 kes, and one at 2000 on 3420 kes. Apparently the evening broadcast will now be
two hours long, but that is not entirely clear. [Refrain 2.}

030 Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Contrasts the “anti-fatherland,” lying and slavery of communism
with the three symbols of the liberation - God, Fatherland and Liberty, and the three aspirations of
the movement - Justice, Truth and Work. It's necessary to get rid of the communists through the
only means they understand - force. Death to Traitors! Guatemala will soon be free!

180 Further clarification on programming changes: starting Thursday we will suspend our morning
broadcast and move it to 1300 hours. The evening broadcast will be “increased” one hour and
will start at 2000. [ Refrains 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

211 Alma Chapina. Idea! Ciub group. Bolero, “Recuerdos,” and one other.

382 Sign off.

35

004

042

197

220

10 May 0700

CASSETTE #34
Sign On |. 6360 kes. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. (*] Carlos Gardel, “Mi Buenos Aires Querido,” Jorge Negrete, “Ojos
Tapatios.”. Teaches fourth verse of La Profesia:

No olvida ef pueblo de Guatemala,
Que has masacrado a la poblacion,
Y va cobrarte bala por bala,

Ahora que llegue la tronazon.

Tomorrow on this segment we will begin a new feature taking you through ail the tortuous paths
of the communist policies of the Arbenz government during the past year, don't miss, Sabia Ud.
Que...? [Did You Know That...?] [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.]

Important Notice [same as cassette 29]: Attention, listeners, this is an important notice. We
remind you that this clandestine station, Radio Liberacion de Guatemala, for obvious reasons, will
change beginning this Thursday its hours of transmitting during the morning, and we request you
to make note of this change. Our regular programs that have been broadcast from 0700 to 0800
in the morning will be transferred, starting this Thursday at 1300 hours, and our evening
programs have been increased by one hour, that is, they will be broadcast at 2000 hours, exactly
8:00 PM. Our frequencies are the following: at noon and during the morning, this same
frequency to which you are now listening, 6360 kes. At night, 3420 kes short wave. Please take
note so you can inform other people who listen. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] “The Fish by the Mouth Dies.” [A lengthy warning to everyone to be
careful of loose talk, government spies, provocateurs, they're everywhere.] Tomorrow we will give
some tips on how to avoid the errors that play into the hands of the traitors. If you know someone
who needs this kind of guidance, have him listen tomorrow.

Refrain 2. Music. Music ends 395. No sign off.

36

005

024

10 May 0730

CASSETTE # 33

No Sign on. 6360 kes. Important Notice [Same as cassette 29}:

Attention, listeners, this is an important notice. We remind you that this clandestine station,
Radio Liberacion de Guatemala, for obvious reasons, will change beginning this Thursday its
hours of transmitting during the morning, and we request you to make note of this change. Our
regular programs that have been broadcast from 0700 to 0800 in the morning will be transferred,
starting this Thursday at 1300 hours, and our evening programs have been increased by one
hour, that is, they will be broadcast at 2000 hours, exactly 8:00 PM. Our frequencies are the
following: at noon and during the morning, this same frequency to which you are now listening,
6360 kcs. At night, 3420 kcs short wave. Please take note so you can inform other people who
tisten. {Refrain 2.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. {*] How Arbenz’ communism consistently lies to the people....the lie is
their biggest weapon....they all do it, the supreme court, the police, foreign relations.....it all began
in the Arevalo regime, and continues to this day....from the chief executive down to Rogelio Cruz
Wer's lowliest torturer, they're all liars....Arbenz lies every day when he says his regime is not
communist, even as his congress honors Stalin posthumously and its presidents and deputies
visit the USSR and its satellites.....but lately foreign minister Toriello has taken the cake by
insisting he never claimed any foreign government was conspiring against the Arbenz regime.
Goes on to detail several more purported lies. Guatemalans!.. don’t believe the government's
lies!...when the great day arrives....meanwhile, strengthen yourselves and wait...the Arbenz
government is about to fall... patience, Guatemalans!

Repeats important notice from 005 above. [Refrain 2.)
Remanso Musical, Pablo Luna, “La Picara Molinera.” [ Refrain 2.}

Sign off.

37:

004

040

201

10 May 2100

CASSETTE #32
Sign On |. 3420 kes. Refrain 2.

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of the Civil Guard. Special notice from the
Givil Guard: there's a terrific radio station out there that’s telling the truth, and we cannot tolerate
that. So everyone is prohibited from listening to it. Besides, being hidden like that isn’t fair,
because we can't assault it like we did with Radio Internacional.

Los Incaicos, unnamed song, “Punales,” “En Brujas no hay que Creer.” [Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] Long discussion of Article 32 of the Guatemalan constitution which
says, in part, that political organizations of an international or foreign character are banned.
According to the announcer, this clearly outlaws the communist party. Reference is made to the
number 32 appearing throughout the country {in other segments there have been references to
the number being painted on house fronts). ‘The 32 Campaign” is reaching across the entire
country, showing broad public support. "32° is now the symbol which identifies our noble cause.
Contrasts the “drunk Cruz Wer's" crackdown on those who paint the number 32 on walls with total
official tolerance of communist graffiti painters who are defacing the city.

Closes with exhortation not to believe the government when it claims not to be worried about this
radio station....this station is sounding the alarm and alerting the people of Guatemala....but, don’t
rush into things!....in our liberating campaign the innocent will not suffer, only the communists will
be punished....we don't want you rushing into the streets armed, as the police are claiming....we
don’t want the communists to be able to capitalize on the climate that we are preparing....just
wait, Guatemalans....if someone tells you that on a certain day you have to do something, like
paint a certain slogan, don't do it, it will just be some trick by the governing mafia....when the
great day that is approaching arrives, you will know it.... meanwhile, speak with no one....and
when the day arrives it will be us, pay attention, only us, who will give the signal to attack....and
you, the people of Guatemala who are also engaged in a secret struggle against communism,

constantly informed....and don't believe the government's absurdities when they tell you we are
outside our borders.....we operate here in Guatemala, under their very noses, and that's what
drives them crazy....Guatemalans! this is the voice of patience and hope....be teady for when the
day of our beloved liberation arrives!

Music ends. No sign off.

38

004

013

10 May 2130

CASSETTE #31
No Sign On. Refrain 2. 3420 kes.
Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Quotes extensively from public manifesto sent by Col. Carlos

Castillo Armas to the Guatemalan army, rejecting Congress's branding him a traitor. Manifesto
had been published in &/ Combate. [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Los Hermanos Paniagua. Guaracha, “La Enganadora.” [Refrain 2. ]

Sign off. [Will be back tomorrow at 0700 on 6360 kes]

39

004

041

184

205

11 May 0700

CASSETTE #30
Sign On |. 6360 kes. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*) Makes fun of government for insisting that Radio Liberation is in
a neighboring country, and surely they will launch some official protest soon. Anyway, we
continue to encourage you in your daily struggle, but be patient, paciencia, piojo, que todavia no
es ei mero mero dia, you will have your fun, but not yet. And speaking of that, the government is
preparing another “Salamatazo” to entrap our supporters, so be careful, don't do anything silly, it's
not liberation day yet, we will fet you know when it is. Cueca, “Corazones Partidas."

Teaches fifth verse of La Profesia:

Porque Dios tarda, pero no olvida,
Como subiste por fa traicion,

Si entre asesinos pasas la vida,
Vos para muestra sos un boton.

Danza chilena, “La Resbaloza.” [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.]

Important notice. Reminds about changes in broadcast times per cassette 29, starting Thursday.
[Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Yesterday's program was entitled “The Fish by the Mouth Dies,” and
today's carries the same title since it is a continuation of the previous one. Long discourse on
security, not speaking in public, being careful of government spies, not trusting anyone not totally
known, etc. [Music.]

Music ends. No sign off.

40

004

028

41 May 0730

CASSETTE #29

No Sign On. Attention, listeners, this is an important notice. We remind you that this clandestine
station, Radio Liberacion de Guatemala, for obvious reasons, will change beginning this Thursday
its hours of transmitting during the morning, and we request you to make note of this change.
Our regular programs that have been broadcast from 0700 to 0800 in the morning will be
transferred, starting this Thursday at 41300 hours, and our evening programs have been increased
by one hour, that is, they will be broadcast at 2000 hours, exactly 8:00 PM. Our frequencies are
the following: at noon and during the morning, this same frequency to which you are now
listening, 6360 kes. At night, 3420 kcs short wave. Piease take note so you can inform other
people who listen. Refrain 2 [6360 kes].

Comunismo al Desnudo. Commentary on the vicious attacks by officials of the Arbenz regime on
Archbishop Rosell y Arellano's recent Pastoral Letter. Attacks Victor Manuel Gutierrez, SecGen
of the PGTG, in particular, for referring to the letter as a political manifesto. Commentary justifies
the archbishop’s silence during the dictatorship of Gen. Ubica, for which Gutierrez had attacked
him. Also gets after Guerra Borges for his attacks on Rosell. At the end, commentary states that
“in our programs we do not incite you to go into the streets, but rather to join up with us for when
the day of liberation comes. But communist tactics require the twisting of our actions, in order to
disarticulate the opposition.”

Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3.
Important notice. Repeats 004 above. [ Refrain 2.}

Remanso Musical. Excerpts from “The Nutcracker Suite.”
{Tomorrow we will continue with more of these same selections. ]

Another reminder on time changes. [Refrain 2.]

4.

005

042

183

206

11 May 2100
CASSETTE #8A
Sign On|, [3420 kes.] Refrain 2
Baile al Son Que le Toquen. {*} Satirical sponsorship of "the Jorge Torielfo Jewel” [La Joya de

Jorge Toriello). Percy Faith, “La Negra Consentida,” “El Capullito de Alheli,” “Bahia,” all
interspersed with a very slangy comic script making fun of Toriello “jewelry shop.”

Important Notice. We remind you that for obvious reasons this station will change its morning
broadcast schedule starting this Thursday, and we ask you to take note. Our programs which
have been broadcast between 7:00 AM and 8:00 AM will be switched starting Thursday to 1300.
And our evening programs have been increased by one hour, that is, they will begin at 8:00 PM.
(Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*] Our fire today is focused on Augusto Charnaud MacDonald, a
strong communist who aspires to the seat now occupied by the traitor Jacobo Arbenz. The Party
of the Guatemalan Revolution (PRG) is nothing more than a bastard organization that houses
communists led by Charnaud MacDonald, a communist, a man of mediocrity, degenerate and
false, like his colleagues in the government. He's one of that group of politicians who had their
birth on 20 October 1944 as the result of the disorder brought by Arana Castro's military coup.
[Goes on to further attack Charnaud MacDonald and the PRG as communist stooges who would
lead the country to disaster, especially since they don't take seriously Margaret Chase Smith's
threat not to buy Guatemalan coffee until the communists are out of power.] Another program of
this series will be presented tomorrow at the same time. [Music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

42

005

015

41 May 2130

CASSETTE #200
Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]
Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Yesterday we provided the text of Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas'

dynamic manifesto to all members of the armed forces. Today, we provide the text of his
manifesto to all the people of Guatemala. [Proceeds with reading of the manifesto.] [Refrain 2. ]

Alma Chapina. \dea\ Club marimba group, “Rayito de Luna,” and others. [Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 0700 on 6360 kes.

43

006

043

175

194

12 May 0700

CASSETTE #199
Sign On |. [6360 kes.] Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Sabia Ud. Que...? section. Here's a special bulletin from the
Guardia Civil...[a woman's bloodcurdling scream is heard]. Eartha Kitt, “Loving Spree.” Teaches
next verse of La Profesia (verse 3/6):

Paciencia piojo, larga es Ja noche,

Y ef comunismo te hace sonar,

Pero recuerda que a todo coche,

Su dia sabado le ha de Hlegar. [Plays entire song.]

Important Notice. We have recently undergone some irregularities in our broadcasts due to the
fact that the police and communist elements here in Guatemala City have gotten close in their
desperate search to find us. Therefore we are not going to implement the changes we told you
about for a prudent period. Meanwhile, keep listening. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. {*] Today we continue the series we began two days ago on the errors
frequently committed by the opposition, often leading to arrests and persecution....the fish dies by
the mouth. [Proceeds with more guidance on resisting the urge to brag about involvement in the
opposition, not speaking with strangers, remembering that the governments has not only its
official forces like the Guardia Civil and Guardia Judicial, but a network of spies infiltrated in the
population, etc.] Remember, this is not a game, you are involved in a serious and dangerous
activity....if we do our job right the people will win, if we don't they will suffer the consequences.

[Refrain 6. Refrain 4. Refrain 2.] [Music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

44

006

016

12 May 0730
CASSETTE #198
Refrain 3. Refrain 2. [6360 kcs.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] The nefarious Russian plan is to convert our beloved country into
the first Soviet republic of America....the band of traitors headed by Arbenz is busily setting the
traps designed to implement this plan....they are already working with the notorious Panamanian
blackmailer and forger Jorge Isaac Delgado to produce a series of falsified documents which will
lend credence to Arbenz’ claim of an impending foreign invasion....all this serves the master plan
cooked up in the Russian politouro by which Arbenz himself will eventually be betrayed as a full-
scaled communist government is installed.....Arbenz will make his claim, produce the “evidence”
fabricated by Delgado, and use all this as a pretext to unleash a wave of terror against military
and civilian officials who are known to not be full supporters of his government....as the army's
top leaders are so eliminated, they will be replaced by red militia members so as to implant full
communist control....a!l this can come true if the Guatemalan people are not alert, united and
determined not to allow themselves to be so subjugated. ...We will not permit, Guatemalans, that
the communist dictatorship take hold on our beloved soil! The great battle is nearing..,.do not
listen to the government's lies....when the moment comes, you will know it... we have many ways
of letting the people know when it has arrived.... meanwhile, the minimum collaboration is to pass
the word on about our broadcasts and frequencies....take careful note of where you are on your
radio dial, we will be here every day. Patience, Guatemalans, we will let you know! [Music.}
[Refrain 4. Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Radio Moscow Orchestra [yes....Radio Moscow!], Rimsky Korsakoff
selections. [Refrain 6. Refrain 4. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back at 2100 tonight.

45

005

045

250

387

42Nay 2100

CASSETTE #197

Sign On |. [Both frequencies are given - 6360 kes and 3420 kes. Should be the latter]
{Refrain 2.]

Baile al Son Que fe Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of the Ministry of Finance and Public
Discredit. Orestes Menendez, “Media Granadina,” “Canto a Triana.” Carmen Rivas, “Ojos
Negros." [Refrain 2. ]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] We all know about the great quantities of communist propaganda
that Guatemala smuggles into countries in the region, especially Honduras....the source of the
material is in the epicenter of communism in the Americas, here in the Guatemalan capital....the
Honduran police recently captured a large batch of such propaganda in San Pedro Sula....they
were able to ascertain that the remitter was one Abel Cuenca....Abel Cuenca is a notorious
Salvadoran communists who has resided in Guatemala for years, protected by the local
communists....he is a distinguished member of the Guatemalan Revolutionary Party, and has his
offices right in party headquarters, so he can send surreptitious propaganda to other countries.
He's on our black list for eventual purging. . The liberation is on track and nearing.....we only ask
that you wait, and trust us....don’t listen to those who propose things in our name, it’s a
trick....when the great day arrives, you will know it....for now, spread the word about our times and
frequencies.

Sign Off process begins, but is interrupted by two announcers who in conversation ridicule the
government's efforts to find Radio Liberation, particularly the blackout in the city. [Music enters
and fades. ]

No Sign Off. Music fades.

46

007

021

132

190

358

12 May 2130

CASSETTE #196
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. The ringing voice of Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas has been
heard from Honduras, the voice of the man whom the traitor Arbenz describes as “the leader of
the great international conspiracy” to overthrow him. CCA speaks not as a prisoner, but as a
Judge; he does not defend himself, he accuses. He lists a series of charges against the current
government. [Goes on to detail these charges, and to quote several other portions of CCA's
manifesto.] [Music.] [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.J

Attention Guatemalans. For reasons beyond our control, our transmitters had to go off the air for
a few programs, and are now back with you again. However, we are also forced to suspend the
changes in our broadcast hours we had earlier given you. Nevertheless, we will give at least one
day's notice on any changes. [Music.] [Refrain 2]

Alma Chapina. Alma de Guatemala marimba group, “Aretes Dorados,” ‘No, no y no.” Hermanos
Paniagua group, “Cien Anos.” [Refrain 2]

47

006

042

214

13 May 1300
CASSETTE #195
Sign On |. [6360 kes.] Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical de! Aire. [*] So much investigation, so much searching....well, we're going
to end the mystery and jet them know where we are. Attention police, attention news media,
attention people, do you know where Radio Liberation is? No? Well, Radio Liberation is
at....6360 kes at noon and 3420 kcs at 8:00 PM, starting today! Sabia Ud. Que....? Jorge
Negrete, “Ay, Jalisco, No Te Rajes." [Continues teaching the verses of La Profesia, with verse 7:

Paciencia, Piojo, tene paciencia,

Dormi tranquilo con tu mujer.

Aunque en el fondo de tu conciencia,

Te este acusando chico Javier.] [Plays entire song up to that point.]
Carlos Gardel, “Por Una Cabeza.” [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Central America was shaken by the news of the most recent
attempt on the life of the president of Nicaragua, carried out by members of the nefarious
Caribbean Legion. [Goes on to provide details of the April attempt, as well as other instances of
the Legion's subversive activities around the region.] But the communist Arbenz knows full well
that no Caribbean Legion or any other traitorous organization can prevent the fall of his regime.
Together with Arbenz, all Legionnaires will be leaving Guatemala. The day is ever closer! Keep
trembling,, traitors! Your hours are numbered! [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 3.} [Music, “Make
Love to Me.” ][Music ends at 393.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

48

005

013

180

356

13 May 1330

CASSETTE #194
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [6360 kcs.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. We have discussed earlier the pastoral letter of Mariano Rosell Y
Arellano, and it has been the subject of much commentary in the anti-Communist press....
indeed, the expressions of support ring with sincerity, not like those phony allegations of
adherence that are so often sent to the traitor Arbenz....[goes on to quote extensively from the
pastoral letter, and comment on it]. Guatemalans, your support to our highest prelate is the true
response of the honorable and conscientious men of our country, it is another blow in the
communists’ face! Out with communism! Guatemalans! The hour is near! Be ready!

[Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, Johann Strauss selections. [Refrain 6.
Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.) [Music.]

Sign Off. Next broadcast will be at 2000 on 3420 kes.

49

005

042

302

422

143 May 2000

CASSETTE #193
Sign On |. (3420 kes.] Refrain 2.

En Alas de fa Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Beginning a new series of programs. Madrid

Chamber Orchestra, “La Torre del Oro,” “Intermezzo de Geronimo Jimenez,” “El Preludio de
Roberto Chapi,” “Et Tambor de Granaderos,” “El Baile de Luis Alonso,” “La Boda de Luis Alonso.”
[Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. [*] This is the first of a
new series of programs....many of you no doubt have been tempted to join the communist party,
enticed by their promises of honor and favors....listen now to one Latin American woman who fell
into the trap: “'m convinced that there is one sector of humanity for which communism is a
plague, and that sector is women”....our traditional role is in the home, caring for our houses, for
our men, for our children....what can this have to do with going out to assist a bricklayer, to sweep
the streets?....well that is exactly what awaits us under communist collectivization.... communism

We too will fight with our men to cleanse our country! [Music.]

No Sign Off. Music fades out.

50

005

017

170

365

388

43 May 2030

CASSETTE #192

No Sign On. Refrain 4. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Descanso en Ritmo. Glenn Miller and Les Elgart numbers. [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4.

Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

Por fos Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia. Reading [with violin in background] of and

late 19th century Ismael Cerna poem, this time dedicated to Jacobo Arbenz.
_..and so ends the first program of this series. [ Music, fades out at Counter 388.]

No Sign Off. Music fades out.

51

005

015

168

13 May 2100

CASSETTE #191
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Baile al Son Que fe Toquen. [*) Satirical sponsorship of Elizabeth Arden and Rogelio Cruz Wer,
proprietor of the “G.C." [Le., Guardia Civil beauty salon, where one can obtain wonderful
treatment from technicians trained behind the Iron Curtain, for example the massages of the soles
of the feet. Machito, “Antesala del Mambo a la Reina.” All those who visit the GC salon are
enchanted by the permanents received there - permanent hangings, permanent garrotings,
permanent electrocutions. Just listen to the comments of one of our customers...[recording of
horrific screams is played]. Machito, “Serenata del Burrito,” “Atardecer.” [Refrain 6.

Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*] Glory to the army, the shield of our sovereignty. It is the army that
defends us from demagoguery, that purges us of crime and aggression. The development of
communism had three stages, first the Marx period, then Lenin, then the WWII communism.
Philosophers, politicians and then the military, in that order. In the first two stages the
communists were anti-military, because the military was an obstacle in their path. Today the
militarists run communism, but always behind the veil of peace. They have transformed the
military into their instrument. Lacking thinkers, Guatemalan communism omitted the first stage,
relying on the foreign masters. Their anti-militarism was manifest when they mass-deported army
generals and assassinated their leader. Since then, the small band which ran the army have
become a red horde. That assassination brought Arbenz to power. That leads us to the next
important step in our military evolution, the response of CCA to his cashiering, which turned out
to be the highest order of decoration. CCA will return to that army when it is cleansed of the
traitors within it. [Radio Liberation is on the air daily from 1300 to 1400 and from 2000 to 2200.]

Music, “Cross Over the Bridge.” [Ends at 385.]

Ends. No Sign Off.

52

007

016

13 May 2130

CASSETTE # 189
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes ]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. This time we will talk about justice. The communists base what
they call their justice system on lies....it is characterized by the official murderers, political exiles,
a people dying of hunger, misery, collective fraud, secret thefts, etc... We will create a system of
justice based on truth and liberty....our system will have two phases, negative and positive....the
first will accomplish to destruction of the creator of the anti-Fatherland, the second will create a
Guatemata worthy of being lived....as a result, Guatemala will also be just in its international
relations, we will not export lies..... the love of Guatemala will be our justice. [Unannounced
song.] [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 3. Refrain 2. ]

Alma Chapina. Marimba Panamericana, “Tu No Comprendes,” “El Relicario.” [Refrain 3.
Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back.tomorrow at 4300 on 6360 kes.

53

007

016

031

416

43 May

CASSETTE #190
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [No frequency given.]

Attention, Guatemala. Radio Liberation announces a change in programming. Starting
tomorrow, we will begin our day at 1:00 PM with our programs Miscelanea Musical del Aire,
Nuestra Campana Radial, Comunismo al Desnudo y Remanso Musical, and at 8:00 PM we will
begin a 2-hour broadcast which will include our anti-Communist commentaries designed to
combat international communism and its representative in Guatemala, the puppet government of
Jacobo Arbenz Guzman. During the evening broadcast we will also be offering interesting
musical programs. [Gives frequencies as 6360 kes and 3420 kes.]

Radio Liberation now offers a spectal program of danceable music. “Reunion de Gala.” [Repeats
above programming change.] “Chattanooga Choo Choo.” [Refrain 3.] [Repeats above changes.]
“Mambo No. 2.” [Refrain 5.] “Mambo No. 6.” [Refrain 4.]_ Los Tres Diamantes, “Ayer Me
Hablo el Corazon." [Repeats time changes.] Jorge Negrete, “Ella.” [Repeats changes.] Tango,
“Silencio.” [Repeats changes.] “Oigo Musica.” [Repeats changes.} And so we come to the end of
this special program alerting you to our broadcast changes. [Music fades out.]

End. No Sign Off.

54

006

043

207

14 May 1300

CASSETTE #188
Sign On |. [6360 kes.] Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*| Hope you're receiving us clearly although there has been
interference....they're looking for us high and low, but we know how to escape. . however, if we
don't come up on the air one day, you can be sure we'll be back up soon. Sabia Ud. Que...
Pedro Vargas, “Noche de Ronda.” [Teaches verse 8 of La Profesia....Con estos versos ya te
anunciamos.....Plays La Profesia up through verse 8. } Tomorrow we'll finish, and then you'll

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] As everyone knows, the Arbenz government has flooded the
country with orejas, [informers}.....nervous as he is, he tries to find out everything about the
liberation movement, all for naught....government officials in El Salvador have warned everyone
to beware of Guatemalan emigres, many of whom are orejas, spies and propagandists....also the
international media has reported that two of Arbenz’s orejas were apprehended in the US and
then deported....another oreja, Baudilio Avila, was arrested in Honduras after trying to penetrate
exile groups.....all Guatemalans in exile should beware of these little spies who are being
dispatched ever more frequently by Arbenz....it is the duty of all Guatemalans to denounce these
people whenever they are found.

Radio Liberation operates from 1:00 PM to 2:00 PM on 6360 kes, and from 8:00PM to 10:00PM
on 3420 kes.

Song, “Oh Mein Papa.”

Song ends. No Sign Off.

55

005

020

14 May 1330
CASSETTE #55
Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [6360 kes. ]

Comunismo al Desnudo. (14] The Guatemalan peasant is inexorably linked to the soit he

works. ...the soil moistened by his sweat is part of his life....he caresses the soil that provides him
and his family with the most basic necessities of life....nevertheless, the peasant seldom owns the
land he works, mainly because he did not know how to conserve what was passed on to
him....today there is uncultivated and unproductive land all over the country, just as there are
thousands of peasants who own no land....but the problem is vast, complex, and requiring of
great intelligence, good will and love of country to resolve....it has to be recognized that the
peasants themselves were in part responsible for their loss of land.... many current landowners
abused the peasants’ ignorance to gain large tracts of land at ridiculous prices....the peasants
now are in great danger of succumbing to the propaganda of the communists....some are being
seduced....a responsible government will attend to the peasants’ ends in an honorable and
patriotic way, not by ripping land away from owners who have legitimate right to it and cultivate it
effectively, but by distributing the land owned by the state and by owners who do not effectively
work and develop their land.....fortunately the peasants are beginning to see through the lies of
the false apostles, and they are tired of the brutality which has drenched their soil in blood....the
new government will provide the peasants with land in a legitimate way, with rights of inheritance.
the new government will institute a new agrarian reform law, just and fair, and will provide all the
necessary technical assistance to the new owners....and that new government will need the
support of you, the peasants, so be ready for the day which is near. Be ready, peasants! Soon
you will be free! [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.)

Remanso Musical, Radio Paris Symphony Orchestra, Rimsky-Korsakoff selections.

56

004

042

207

14 May 2000

CASSETTE #54
Sign On |. (3420 kes.] Refrain 2.

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Strauss’ “The Blue Danube,” "The Emperor's
Waltz,” “Tales of the Vienna Woods.” [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria. The proper role of women in the struggle against communism....it is not to
go out into the streets in violent confrontation....not to take up arms and kill peopie....that’s the
communist way, because they have no respect for human life....but there are better ways for us to
act....our job is to alert people to what awaits them if we fall into the grips of the
communists....[goes on to say what each group of people should be told about communism and
how it will affect them in particular - the peasants, small merchants, etc.]....we must spread the
alert....combat the communists with the most potent weapon we have: the truth.

Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2. Music, “Young at Heart.”

Music ends. No Sign Off.

Si

043

018

169

190

392

14 May 2030
CASSETTE #53
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.

Descanso en Ritmo. Les Elgart, “Coming from Scotland,” “Sophisticated Lady,” “Honeymoon
Stroll," “Time to Go."

[Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Por fos Senderos Mundiales de fa Musica y la Poesia.
Jose Carioca y Sus Brasileiros, “Carioquina,” “Esta Noche Seremos,” “Para Jaiba.” Music.

Music ends. No Sign Off.

58

005

013

176

14 May 2100

CASSETTE #52
Refrain 2. [3420 kcs]

Baile al Son Que fe Toquen. [*] {Radio Liberation broadcasts from 1:00 to 2:00 in the afternoons,
and from 8:00 to 10:00 in the evening.] Vicente Gomez, “Sevillanas y Panaderos,” “Alegrias,”
“Granada Arabe.”

“The purpose of Radio Liberation is not to incite the people to go out into the streets in a
combative, disorganized and unproductive mode, no, our objective is to avoid sporadic and
desperate actions, through which the communists gain strength and the opposition is
weakened....we are informing all conscientious Guatemalans that the day of liberation is near,
and that that is when to make use of the efforts and even the blood of all good patriots, to throw
out the traitors and the foreigners who have us captive by order of Soviet Russia......” [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] Despite all the abuses of the police and their cohorts, the
Guatemalan woman continues her unstoppable fight against the Soviets. As proof of her
courage, we have in hand a copy of the magnificent Open Letter of the Feminine Anti-Communist
Committee, which we will now read. [Reads the letter, which denounces Foreign Minister
Toriello’s recent walking out of the X Interamerican Conference in Caracas while the Dominican
foreign minister was giving a speech. The Letter proceeds to describe this action as symbolic of
the communist government's attitude. }

Refrain 2. Music: “Wanted, Someone to Kiss Me.”

Music ends. No Sign Off.

59

005

017

135

152

355

14 May 2130

CASSETTE #51
Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Truth, nothing cannot operate without truth....communism is the
expression of the lie.... there can be no liberty without truth... Juan Jose Arevalo began by
creating his regime of farce....and now the lie is our country’s principal statute....the empire of the
lie....[then goes on the contrast the lies of communism to the truths of the opposition]through truth
we will be free, and through freedom we will be happy....Guatemalans! There is a great crusade
of liberation going on. Arbenz’ days are numbered!

[Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Ideal Club group, bolero, “Recuerdos.” Mario Bolanos Garcia, “San Antonio
Palopo. [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off.

60

005

042

242

15 May 1300

CASSETTE #50
Sign On |. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Nestor Chairez, “Por Si No te Vuelvo a Ver." Teaches final verse of
La Profesia:

Ojo por ojo, diente por diente,
Jacobo Arbenz, vas a pagar,
Cuando to boten de presidente,
Y a emerito te van a votar.

Maria Griver, “Alma Mia.” [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The Union of Free Workers of Guatemala (UNTLG) was founded to
counteract the hegemony enjoyed by the General Confederation of Workers of Guatemala
(CGTG), directed by the communists....our workers, unfamiliar with labor unionism but desirous
of regaining his rights trampled on by inhuman bosses and despotic governments, were easy prey
for the communist demagogues....there had really been no choice, only the CGTG was
available....but when workers began to see what a corrupt organization it was, serving non-worker
interests, more and more left it....yet there was no alternative organization, and the communists
tried to bully them back into the CGTG....they then banded together and formed the UNTLG....

Music ends, no Sign Off.

61

004

022

15 May 1330

CASSETTE #49

No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. 6360 kcs

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] How communism instills servility in youth...young people everywhere

are rebellious and challenge all that is bad and rotten.... but under communism they lose their
autonomy and are directed to simply chant slogans and support the party....Guatemalan youth
have a long tradition of actively opposing tyrannies.....but, whatever happened to them?....where
are those rebellious youth who used to go to the streets to protest any injustice?.... Young people!
It is the time to defend the fatherland and the soil on which your children will be born! Time to
shake off inertia and passivity! Be ready for the great coming day! [Refrain 2.] JMusic.] [Refrain
3. Refrain 6. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 2. ]

Remanso Musical. Two selections from Verdi's “La Traviata.” [ Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4.
Refrain 3. Refrain 2.}

62

004

045

267

15 May 2000
CASSETTE #48
Sign On |. 3420 kes. Refrain 2.

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Brahms’ Hungarian Dances. [Refrain 2. ]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Sobre el Problem Comunista. Virulent attack on
communism....system created by lunatics....a hateful disease.....has failed everywhere... brutality
is the common element of all communist regimes...denial of all human rights....betrayal is their
first impulse....has been corrupting the world, worse than cancer....threat to our health and
safety....victims in Russia and Eastern Europe's concentration camps are warning us before it is
too late, as it is for them. [Music]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

63

004

019

221

15 May 2030

CASSETTE #47
Bells. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Descanso en Ritmo. “we present again...15 minutes of the best orchestras of America” Glenn
Miller selections. [Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia.

[On the World Paths of Music and Poetry] Good evening. We present, as is the case every night
starting with the day we increased our broadcast time by one hour, a program designed to divulge
the music of the universe and the poetry of the great bards. Reading of Guatemalan poet Antonio
Jose de Rizzari's poems “To a Leader,” and “Bochinche.” [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

64

004

020

209

45 May 2100

CASSETTE #46

No Sign On. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 4. Refrain 3.
Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. (*] Satirical sponsorship of the "inventors of the Fu note” [inventores
de fa Nota Fu]. Los Chorumbeles de Espana, “Islas Canarias,” “Tres Veces Guapa,” “Lisboa
Antigua.” [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. The police are constantly after our transmitters, and consequently on
occasion we have had to suspend our daily broadcasts....the government foolishly tries to make
people believe the transmitter is in Mexico, then they say Honduras, then the say a Ship....how
foolish they are....the only time they came close to us was when they increased the patrols in the
city, but we simply moved to the western part of the country....when they started to get close to us
there, we simply moved to where we are now....they even turned off all the electricity in the city
when we were operating there in hopes of finding us....fools! do they really think we would rely on
the Guatemalan electrical company?....we must admit we were a bit concerned when they sent
planes after us, but within a day we had moved and the threat was over....the government's
communist station stupidly decries that our clandestine transmitters are illegal....of course they
are!....or did they want us to ask their permission?....the government even gets our frequencies
wrong, so let's tell them the right ones: 6360 between 4:00 and 2:00 in the afternoon, and 3420
between 8:00 and 10:00 at night. The great day of liberation is planned, and we're going to throw
out Jacobo Arbenz and his gang of traitors! [Music.]

65

004

015

18 May 2130

CASSETTE #45
No Sign On.. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.}

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos, The communists are the enemy of all retigions....they lie when
they say they fight on behalf of the masses....they lie about everything. ...their biggest lie,
however, is when they say they defend freedom of worship and that they don’t persecute
religion... however, things that have happened in Russia and some European countries cannot be
repeated in the western hemisphere....{explains how Karl Marx became an atheist and was
influenced by Hegel and by the League of the Just, and how the Communist Manifesto came
about]....this is why no religious person can become a communist....[cites several anti-religious
quotes from Marx]....keep listening to us, and don't believe the government's false communiqués.
[Refrain 2.] [Music.] [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Nina de Guatemala marimba group, “Santiaguito.” Refrain 5. Alma de
Guatemala group, “Indias Chapinas.” [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

66

005

042

214

16 May 1300
CASSETTE #44
Sign On |. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Xavier Cugat, “Babalu.” The entire “La Profesia’ is played.
[Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] A magnificent publication is being put out in Tegucigalpa called “The
Voice of the Army,” an expression of the authentic army of Guatemala....a recent notable issue
printed a full page image of the Esquipulas crucifixion of Jesus Christ, along with an article which
is a profession of faith in God....the great Catholic majority in Guatemala must have been
delighted to see that the army is not only disposed to defend our national sovereignty, but also
shares the people’s religious convictions....even in the USA, standard bearer of Democracy, there
are military chapiains, and soldiers are free to kneel, in uniform, before Christ....in other countries,
particularly in Europe, armies honor Christ....our Army has great traditions....we still remember
when Francisco Javier Arana carried a religious image in a solemn ceremony, for which he was
scorned by a few, but applauded by the populace....in a Catholic country like ours, the army
should be the defender of the national spirit, and the soldier should be a man of faith... for this we
must salute our military companions in Tegucigalpa....we are no doubt at the gates of a true
revolution....we are sure that the entire army of Guatemala, less the chieftains corrupted by
money, vice and ignominy, supports the signified, honest and Christian gesture of our colleagues
in Tegucigalpa. Honored soldiers of our glorious army! You also have read this beautiful
message....make now your decision in favor of a free, sovereign and independent
Guatemala....we’re going to get rid of the communizing, traitorous elements in the army....the day
is ever closer. [ Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

67

004

020

16 May 1330

CASSETTE #43
No Sign On. Refrain 1. Refrain 4. Refrain5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.

Comunismo al Desnudo. {*] The government's principal propaganda mechanisms - the PC and
supporting parties and organizations, have been flooding the country with their disgusting
product....they reach you through official broadcasts, public meetings and even private
conversations, in which salaried agitators try to win people over by using the word “revolution” in
he communist-Soviet manner....at the same time, the government tries to silence the opposition
and any independent views....as a citizen, you must resist this onslaught....although they have the
advantage of being highly trained in the Stalinist methods of trickery and lying....but you have the
huge advantage of being in defense of your liberty and your right to know the truth... you can
combat them by making counter-speeches and writing letters to editors, etc., as long as you don't
feel unsafe in doing so....you don't always have to sign your name to your letters....just asking
questions of a communist public speaker can be effective...it shows him there is resistance, and
he will find this disconcerting....your questions may also serve to force him off the track and thus
diminish his effectiveness. ...most importantly, your demonstrated resistance will strengthen the
will of others in the audience to resist....ask questions of speakers like, “How do you know that?”
“Can you prove that?” Where did you get that information?” “Who instructed you to say that?”
[Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Mexican Symphony Orchestra, classical selections. [Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. [6360 kcs.] [Back tonight at 2000 hours, 3420 kcs.]

68

004

044

220

16 May 2000

CASSETTE #42
Sign On |. 3420 kes. Refrain 2.
En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. “Everyday at this hour Radio Liberation

presents this program, 20 minutes of musical masterpieces.” Strauss’ Opus 316, Vida de Artista;
Vino, Mujeres y Musica; Opus 388, Rosa de! Sur. [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Sobre ef Problem Comunista. Female announcer says
she is here once again to continue these talks we have been having about communism. Goes on
to explain how and why communism is the enemy of women....it views women only as producers
in its society, kept in a state of near prostitution to produce illegitimate children for the state, to
work to produce whatever they can and receive what meager benefits might be available to them
from their communist masters....living in filthy huts and working the fields, totally separated from
their husbands and children...but they don't understand the female mentality....women,
particularly Latin American women, have comprised the wail against which the communists have
crashed....we've uncovered and exposed them... women know that to combat communism is a
sacred duty!

[The “Military Decalogue” is tead.]

Music ends, no Sign Off.

69

005

014

180

16 May 2030

CASSETTE #8A
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes]

Descanso en Ritmo. Les Elgart, “Sophisticated Lady,”
Men and Women! One soldier of liberty is worth more than a thousand slaves of communism. lf
you believe in God, if you love your country, if you love your freedom, fight against communism!
Les Elgart, “Love of My Life.”
The satisfaction of having served your country will be for you a more glorious compensation than
all the titles and laurels which are awarded for merit.
Les Elgart, “Bendix Bounce."
On guard, soldiers of the fatherland! Don't let the responsibility fall on you for having allowed the
destruction of our country , and its subjugation to a foreign Asiatic power! The people of
Guatemala have faith in you!
Les Elgart, “Soon.”
[Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica yla Poesia. Augusto Cohen orchestra, popular Latin
selections.
As huge as a tree might appear, do not put blind trust in its strength, it can be rotten inside.
Bolero, “Quien Te Puede Olvidar."
The army should not let itself be dominated by partisans of the popular militias.
Peruvian waltz, “Estrellita del Sur.”

Music ends. No Sign Off.

70

003

021

158

16 May 2100

CASSETTE #61
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain S. Refrain 6 Refrain 2. [3420 kcs]

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of “Ritz, the purest and tastiest cigar."
Agustin Lara, bolero, “palabras de Mujer,” “Mensaje.” [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain
3. Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. (*] Denounces medical doctors in the service of the Civil Guard who
examine tortured anti-Communists to see if they can take more torture. Describes alleged recent
meeting Arbenz held with his military chiefs stating their downfall was imminent, that all
Guatemala was against them. Finally, cites their “ideological decalogue, “ ten reasons why they
can never be communists [same as Cassette #15]:.... communism denies existence of God....puts
party before fatherland....does not recognize liberty... destroys, faith, ideals and aspirations of the
individual... rejects moral values....destroys the home....is based on absurdities, imposes a
purported equality which even nature denies, forces equality by dragging the front-runners
back....its only achievement is to have enslaved millions of workers and created thousands of
concentration camps....exploits envy and all the other lower passions against the
successful....considers work to be an instrument of slavery. [Music.]

71

006

020

194

16 May 2130
CASSETTE #60
No Sign On. Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Yesterday we started a series of programs of authentically anti-
Communist commentaries. We touched on an important theme - the abomination the
communists make of all religions, and particularly ours - the Catholic religion. The communists
deny the existence of heaven in the afterlife. What is certain, however, is that the transitory
paradise they proclaim here on earth is reserved for a very few comrades....communists deny the
existence of God, but they fear him....]quotes Cardinal Spellman on Chinese communists]....the
defeat of communism will be largely attributable to the resurgence of faith and religious
practices....more than by any international action or armed struggle....women have strong
religious faith, and no mother can accept her son being a communist....women must retain their
faith, even while their husbands are swept away by the communist propaganda....communism’s
tools are force labor and the whip....they have taken more human life than all the world wars,
plagues, floods and earthquakes....they have put 15 million in forced labor....thousands of their
victims have died with their thoughts on the cross and their eyes focused on Heaven....[goes on
with attacks on communism’s inhumanity and atheism.] [Refrain 2. ]

Alma Chapina. [Announcer says this is the last program of this series.] Marimba Panamericana
group, “Adios,” “El Relicario," “Tu No Comprendes.” [Announcer ends by asking listeners to be
present tomorrow for the next program in this series. (!) Above he must have meant “most
recent” rather than “last”]

72

004

022

17 May 1330

CASSETTE #58
No Sign On. Cicero message, per Tapes 56 and 57. [Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] Today we will discuss the central axis around which the entire
communist apparatus spins - the treasonous president Jacobo Arbenz....his behavior at the recent
Caracas conference was disgusting....and he recently declared before the congress that the
communist party is well organized and respectable and is working in Guatemala and participating
in national events....with that statement, the traitor showed he is clearly lined up with the
communists, in total violation of article 32 of the constitution which specifically bans foreign
political groupings...and what is the army going to do?....is it going to let this treasonous president
get away with this behavior?....the army knows that an aim of the communists is to disband legal
and patriotic armies, and that they have the popular militias ready to take over the army's role....it
also knows that top army chieftains are following orders from abroad....the army knows all
this.....will it continue to obey its current commander in chief, a true traitor to the fatherland?

Cicero message, per 004 above.
The Military Decalogue. Text is read, as on Cassette #42. [Refrain 2.]

Remanso Musical. Ernest Arsemit, Ravel selections.

Cicero message, per 004 above. [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

73

004

034

051

278

17 May 2000
CASSETTE #57
Sign Oni. [3420 kes.]}
Message to Cicero (same as cassette 56-164). [Refrain 2.]

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Strauss selections. [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria. My son, you were born into a beautiful country....the climate, landscapes,
rivers, mountains, takes, a thing of beauty....the people of this country are God-fearing, family
people....and you were given the gift of intelligence, to recognize this....and beyond intelligence,
you were given a spirit....ours is a country of beauty....but this beautiful country also attracted to
our shores men who are traitors, perverse men who in their hunger for power would destroy your
love of God, your human condition....those who call religion the opium of the people, are
communists who try to dehumanize mankind, convert men into automatons at the service of the
materialistic state....lies, false promises....destroy our ancestors’ life work....as a Christian, as a
Guatemalan, you must fight to the death to destroy the monster of communism!

Repeats urgent message to Cicero, per 034 above. [Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 3.]
Repeats Cicero message, per 377 above.

Off the air. No Sign Off.

74

004

012

164

190

377

389

413

17 May 2030

CASSETTE #56
Refrain 2. [3420 kes]
Descanso en Ritmo. Jo Stafford, “Make Love to Me.”

Et pueblo de Guatemala debe de levantarse como un solo hombre contra ef enemigo de Dios y de
la patria. Nuestra lucha debe ser por consiguiente una actitud catolica y nacional. {The people of
Guatemala should rise up as one against the enemy of God and the fatherland. Our struggie
should be of Catholic and national character.] Perry Como, “Wanted.”

El comunismo contiene en si una idea falsa de redencion. Promete al campesino, al obrero, al
pobre, repartir las mal distribuidas riquezas del mundo, hacer creer al proletariado que no hay mas
bienes que los materiales, que sale sobrando /a vida eterna porque no hay Dios. [Communism
contains a false sense of redemption. It promises the peasant, the worker, the poor, to
redistribute the badly distributed riches of the world, it persuadés the proletariat that the only
goods are material goods, that there is no eternal life because there is no God.] Frank Sinatra,
“Young at Heart.”

EI paraiso sovietico es un campo de concentracion donde tras la fuerza de jos tanques y los
canones, se obliga a trabajar a todos por el amo estado. [The Soviet paradise is a concentration
camp where, under the threat of tanks and cannons, all are forced to work for the patron state.]
The Four Knights, “| Get So Lonely.”

Important Notice. Urgent call for Cicero. Radio Liberacion with an urgent call for Cicero. Do not
carry out tonight's plan. Await further instructions tomorrow. Pedro or Dolores will be in touch.
[Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de Ja Musica y la Poesia. Federico Garcia Lorca poems.

Important Notice [repeats message to Cicero, 164 above].
Quotes from the “Ideological Decalogue.”

Off the air. No Sign Off.

DS

003

011

195

213

47 May 2100

CASSETTE #68
No Sign On. Refrain 2. {3420 kes]

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. Satirical sponsorship of “your servant’ {the announcer himself], as |
decided to take this time for myself so lt can say whatever occurs to me....the government blamed
us for fomenting a bloody incident that occurred in April....since we came on the air on May ‘st,
we could predict that event....but today we can predict that 1,000 such bloody events will
occur.,..even though we have no connection with them....for although we are not wizards, we have
a head that can reason....and we know that Arbenz and company have been pushing for a long
time now to get a civil war going because the communists like to fish in troubled waters...

Tin Larin, “Farolito.”
Some say that the opposition should just quit, but that’s what they said to Jules Verne...

Agustin Lara, “Contraste.”
You should be keeping track of all the communists in your neighborhood....we know they are
stockpiling arms without the knowledge of the army, although with the collaboration of a few
traitorous high chieftains....you can contribute to locating those caches so that at the right
moment, those arms can be at the service of the true patriots, and not of the traitorous
communists....be sure of your neighbors....are any communists?....where do they meet, what do
they do, where do they sleep?

Agustin Lara, “Piensalo Bien.”
The interference you have been hearing on the Radio Liberation frequency is coming from a 500-
watt transmitter located installed in the National Palace.

Urgent message for Cicero [same as Cassette #57-034] [Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*] The traffic in contraband arms to help defend the communist
governments of Central ‘America has been increasing as of late....recently a submarine, clearing a
Soviet one, was spotted off the north coast of Guatemala....Soviet submarines are moving
secretly in waters of the Americas....obviously with the connivance of the Guatemalan
government....there are regular such sighting, suggesting a traffic in arms....Guatemala is being
used as a supply base to support theaters selected by the Kremlin....this is the reason Arbenz has
given such priority to construction of the Atlantic highway, it will be able to move [Soviet] troops
and arms-from one ocean to the other in 22-hours....now we not only are importing totalitarian
ideas, but also arms and the use of Soviet transport means....Guatemalans! Have faith and wait
patiently. Communists! if you want to escape certain death, buy your passage now for your
beloved soviet paradise.

Music ends. No sign off.

76

003

020

140

163

17 May 2130

CASSETTE #67

No Sign On. Urgent message to Cicero. Last call. Repeats message from Cassette 57-034.
(Refrain 2.] [3420 kcs]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] In previous programs in this series, we have discussing the fact
that communism is the enemy of all religions....communism is one hundred percent
destructive....has no humanitarian aspect and doesn't even know what it is to extend a helping
hand....on the other hand, all religions have ministers whose sole objective is to console and help,
always inspired by faith....in 1921, the US congress voted 25 million dollars in relief of the
Russian famine, and private Americans sent another 25 million..... 50 million which saved 10
million people....proving the goodness of a nation which is great because it was founded on the
principle of promoting the common good, and which complied with the Christian ethic of feeding
the hungry....then we can compare East Germany and West Germany: the first, under Russian
control, suffering hunger, misery and religious persecution; the second, under imperialist mandate
[yes! that’s what he says’), achieving a true economic miracle with full freedom of worship....we
don't want that kind of “peace” that the Russians preach....we want an authentic peace which is
the hallmark of the American nations....Guatemalans! Your collaboration on the day of liberation
must be effective! Be ready, and fight against the communists to defend our true rights.

Repeats Cicero message from 003 above. [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Bonampac marimba group, “El Moline Rojo.” We can’t be communists
because...communism puts party above country. Bonampac, “Danzones en Marimba.” We can't
be communists because...its only achievement is to have enslaved millions of workers.

{Refrain 2.]

77

003

039

257

18 May 1300

CASSETTE # 66
Sign On |. [6360 kes} [Refrain 2]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Fernando Fernandez, “Cabaretera,” “Estrellita del Sur, “El Plebeyo.”
[Refrain 2. ]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Every cormered rat becomes dangerous, and that holds true for the
communists...they are now seeing that they are trapped and are going to lose....now that they are
desperate, they will try the most nefarious tricks, and we feel compelled to inform you about
them....first there is provocation, an effort to drag people into compromising situations....be
careful of strangers, for instance, who try to coax you into agreeing with anti-government
statements, it is probably an entrapment....always be sure you know well who you are with before
expressing your true thoughts....if you want to belong to our movement, don't let yourself be
entrapped like this....then there is the way the communists try to ensnare entire groups, or even
towns... like the way they blamed this station for the most recent incident in Chiquimula....even
though our first broadcast was on May 1st, and the incident occurred on April 30th... watch out
for tricks like that....for instance, the government radio could announce there is an insurrection in
some town, for the sole purpose of provoking oppositionists into going there to help the
rebels....these, of course, are not native tricks, they are the methods of the Russian secret
police....we can't predict all the little tricks the government might come up with....we just want you
to resist their provocations!

Broadcast ends with brief flurry of music. No Sign Off. [Apparently because this broadcast was
going beyond the allotted 30 minutes, the last couple of paragraphs of the written script were
omitted.]

78

004

014

18 May 1330

CASSETTE #65
Refrain 2. [6360 kes]

Comunismo al Desnudg. {*] Program comments on three recent news items:

-- arrest in Nicaragua of well-known international terrorist Jorge Ribas Montes, and his
statement regarding his involvement in assassination of Francisco Javier Arana, and what he said
about the role of Arevalo and Arbenz.

-- comments of the communist press in Italy and France concurring the Pope's recent
appeal against the use of atomic weapons.

—~ anti-Communist street rallies in France upon the news of the fall of Dien Bien Phu.

Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.

Remanso Musical. Victor Orloff, ballet selections. [ Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6.
Refrain 2.]

79

18 May 2000

CASSETTE #64
003 Sign On I. [3420 kes] [Refrain 2.]

040 En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Victor Orloff waltzes. Madrid Chamber
Orchestra, “La Dolores.”

278 La Mujer y la Patria. Woman speaks on the evils of communism, and how the communists have
used false pro-peace campaigns to fool not only Guatemalans but so many other countries as
well. The need to resist. [Music.]

399 Music ends. No Sign Off.

80

18 May 2030

CASSETTE #63
004 Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes]
022 Descanso en Ritmo. Paul Weston, “This Can't Be Love.”
Refrain 6. Paul Weston, “Pennies from Heaven.” Refrain 4. Paul Weston, “Why?” Refrain 6.

Stan Kenton, “You're Adorable." [Refrain 2.]

188 Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia, Franz Winkler trio, Tyrolean folklore tunes.
Announcer apologizes for not being able to pronounce song names.

400 Music ends. No Sign Off.

81

18 May 2100
CASSETTE #62
003 No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2, [3420 kcs]
020 Baile al Son Que le Toquen. {*] Satirical sponsorship of the Presidency’s Office of Press and

Propaganda. Pedro Vargas, “La Borrachita,” Manuel Ponce, “Estrellita,” bolero “Flores Negras.”
[Variant of Refrain 2.]

205 Rompiendg las Cadenas. [*] The government will eventually be brought down by the “32”
campaign, through which the number 32 is appearing in graffiti across the country [32 refers to
Article 32 of the Constitution which prohibits foreign-oriented political parties, i.e., communist
party]....they are so desperate that Civil Guard chief Cruz Wer even had to arrest, jail and then
fine school children from the San Sebastian school for painting the number on walls....well, that
can’t stop the campaign, 32 is sprouting up everywhere, and Cruz Wer will have to send his police
to every school in the country....they are so desperate that they are censoring foreign newspapers
that come into the country, because the world media is reporting on this heroic campaign....the
most recent trend is for homeowners to pain the number on their own houses, and there is
nothing the police can do because it is perfectly legal to do this....so, on with the campaign!
[Refrain 5. Refrain 2 (variant).] [ Music.]

366 Music stops. No Sign Off.

82

006

020

134

311

48 May 2130

CASSETTE #7A
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] We have been analyzing in previous programs how the
communist traitors want to abolish our Christian religion....the communist doctrine that science
offers a better understanding of the laws of nature and society is like throwing a stone and hiding
your hand....this is typical of communism, making a flat statement which appears sensible, but
which after analysis is clearly an attempt at trickery....it is surprising for someone who wants to be
a thinker to make such incomplete expressions as Marx did....they deny the existence of miracles,
but the thousands of Chinese and North Korean prisoners who denied repatriation, despite never
having had exposure to anything but the communist doctrine, is a miracle in itself! How does
science explain the sense that exists in humans that enables them to reject trickery? But
communism is not a phantom created in the imagination, it is a reality that must be defeated by
all the weapons available to those who love liberty, family and country, and respect religion. The
science so touted by Marx and the communists can never replace the three theological virtues of
faith, hope and charity! [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Hermanos Paniagua marimba group, “Bonito y Sabroso,” “La Enganadora’”
{Refrain 5}, “El Jinete.” {Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 4300 on 6360 kes.

83

006

043

202

372

419 May 1300

CASSETTE #213
Sign On I. [6360 kes.] [Refrain 2.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [“] Joke about the Toriello brothers. Wil Glahe, “Small Boat in a Big
Ocean.” Then teaches second verse of La Profesia:

Como cobarde mataste a hierro,

Tambien a hierro debes morir.

Van a materte tal como a un perro,

Y ef mero dia ya ha de venir.

Wil Glahe, “Black Mountain.” {Refrain 2.

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The army's collaboration with communism is cause for deep worry
among conscientious Guatemalans, as it signifies that a sector of the population has not fulfilled
its civic duty. The army's morale is now so low that all we can do is give all our moral and
material support to the honorable elements remaining in it so that in a patriotic reaction they can
raise the banner of dignity, vindicate the army, and punish the traitors. {Goes on to develop this
theme, calling on the loyal elements in the army to take the necessary action.] [Refrain 2.]
[Music, ends at 372.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

NOTE: The scripts for both of these segments say they are to be played on Day #7 and are
on Reel #21, whereas the markings on the reel says it is for Day #19 and the box says it is
Reel #81. The fact that Miscelanea teaches the second verse of La Profesia suggests Day
#7 makes more sense that Day #19. Note that the second verse was also taught on
Cassette #8. (See similar note on Cassette #212.)

84

005

015

195

351

49 May 1330

CASSETTE #212
No Sign On. Refrain 2. (6360 kes.)

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*} As we look at the misery and chaos into which our country is
sinking, perhaps we can take solace is noting that it is the communists, it is Arbenz and his gang,
who are doing this horrible thing. And in a sense we would be right. But who is really
responsible? What can we say of those who stood by and let this happen? Let's face the truth -
we are responsible! We totally misjudged Arbenz and the communists, and we let them take
power. So what can Guatemalan anti-Communists do now? We know of anti-Communist
merchants, industrialists and farmers who actually contribute to the communists’ coffers as some
sort of insurance in case the communists gain a total victory. We know of public servants who
carry out communist orders because they are afraid. We know of many others who keep their
mouths shut in the hope that they will be spared. These people are digging their own graves!
Yes, we are the responsible ones, and we call on all those who collaborate actively or passively to
change their ways before it is too late. We are going to have to even score with the communists,
and we want to avoid having to go after collaborators once victory is attained.

And remember that for now, collaborate with us by passing on our frequencies and
broadcast times - 7 to 8 in the morning and 9 to 40 at night, 6360 kcs and 3420 kcs. [Refrain 2.]
[Music.} [Refrain 3. Refrain 2.)

Remanso Musical. Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, playing Johann Strauss, overture to “Los
Murcielagos.”[Refrain 6. Refrain 5, Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Up again at 8:00 PM on 3420 kes.

NOTE: The script for the above Comunismo al Desnudo says it is to be played on Day #7
and is are on Reel #22, whereas the markings on the ree! says it is for Day #19 and the box
says it is Reel #82. The fact the next broadcast is announced for 8:00 PM is aclue, since
that time slot was not being used on Day #7. {See similar note on Cassette #213.)

85

005

043

237

378

427

19 May 2000

CASSETTE #211
Sign On|. [3420 kes.] Refrain 2.

En Alas de la Musica Que No Recongce Fronteras. Westminster [?] Symphony Orchestra,
Brahms’ Hungarian Dances, 7, 11, 12 and 17. [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. [*] Many people have
asked us how it is that communism, as the bearer of death and destruction, can ever gain power
in a country against the will of the majority of its inhabitants. We believe that you, as women and
as voters, should know how a small group of communists can gain power, when the voters are
not alert, through sheer trickery and hypocrisy. Communism is international, and has members in
all countries. They are not all Russians, in Peru they are Peruvian, etc. The day they enter the
party, they renounce their country and cast all their loyalty to communism. To take power ina
country, they start by forming a Popular Front [explains how this is done]. Then they gain control
of the police, which they then convert into a secret police organization. The final step is the
liquidation of the opposition leaders by using the police that they now control. Once this is done,
they can come out from cover and form their party openly.

We Cannot be Communists Because....[reads the “Decalogue.”] [ends at Counter 427.]

No Sign Off.

86

005

015

195

386

49 May 2030

CASSETTE #210
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Descanso en Ritmo. Eartha Kitt, “The Bridges of the Seine,” “Let’s Do It,” “The Blues,” “My Heart
Belongs to Daddy.” [Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica ya Poesia. Jose Flamenco poem, “A la Patria.”
[Refrain 6.]

Radio Liberation began its broadcasts on May 4st this year. On that occasion we broadcast an
account of the May Day parade. We now have the pleasure of retransmitting that account for
those who my not have heard it. You will hear it in an instant, [Martial music comes on and then
fades, at Counter 426.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

87

006

015

49 May 2100

CASSETTE #209
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Dear friends, when we first came up on the air on May 1st, we presented a special program with
an account of the festivities carried out in the capital by the red labor unions with the support of
the puppet government of Arbenz. We have now been told that a large number of people were
unable to receive us on that occasion and have asked for a rebroadcast. We are happy to
comply. {A tape is then played wherein the familiar voice of one of the Radio Liberation
announcers comes on and reports that he is standing “at a strategic point somewhere on 6th
Avenue South,” observing the parade. Crowd noise (sounds more like a cocktail party) is heard
in the background. Sounds of trucks parading by are also heard. Announcer comments on what
he “observes,” focusing on communist control and on fact that most people there were forced to
come or lose their jobs. Uses each poster or banner “seen” as pretext for commentary on the
subject. At Counter 227, the announcer cuts back to the studios for a musical interlude, then at
242 he comes back on for more commentary. *Man-on-the-street” type interviews of an illiterate
attendee at the parade who says he came because he would be given work there. Another studio
music break at Counter 428, and music plays until cutting off at 448.

No Sign Off. Music ends.

88

005

151

10 May 2130

CASSETTE #208

No Sign On. [Cuts right to the announcer at the May Day Parade (see Cassette #209), apparently
back from the musical interlude. More man-on-the-street interviews. Victor Manuel Gutierrez
speech in the background. Announcer turns down speech and reports what the speech will
“predictably” say. “Returns to studios” for music at Counter 148.]

You have just listened to a special broadcast, a reproduction of our broadcast of 1 May covering
the May Day Parade. [Continues with an editorial criticizing the cynicism of the May Day Parade.}
{Refrain 2.] [3420 kcs.]

Alma Chapina, \deal Club marimba group, “Sol en la Tarde," “Hi Lily, Hi Lo.” (Refrain 6. Refrain
5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.}

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 4:00 PM on 63660 kcs.

89

005

043

220

377

440

20 May 1300

CASSETTE #207
Sign On |. [6360 kes.}

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Perez Prado mambos, “Pepita de Oro,” "Un Pueblito Espanol.”
Sabia Ud. Que...? section. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. ["] The communists use all kinds of trickery and deceit to conceal their
actions....they even seem ashamed of their own party because they call it the Workers Party
(PGT)....even in Russia only 3% of the population is in the party....it is an elite which relies on
using other organizations to gain total control of the masses....that's why it is important to learn to
distinguish between honest organizations, and those that merely serve the commurists....these
latter, “front” organizations have some things in common: they change their line when the
communist line changes, they are affiliated with some umbrella organization controlled by
Moscow, they always have propaganda funds and never reveal the source of those funds, among
their leaders you can always find some who have held similar posts in other organizations of the
same ilk....a good example of all this are the “pro-peace” organizations....they try to monopolize
peace as if they were the only ones in favor of it....but they exploit this omnipresent desire for
peace with seemingly unlimited funds for propaganda activities.....[goes on to provide clues on
how such communist organizations can be identified]....in our struggle we must bear in mind not
just the open Communists, but the rest of the iceberg beneath the surface, those hiding behind
another name....we urge all Guatemalans to do all possible to expose all those who work for
communism behind the mask of some other organization or purpose. We must all work to
cleanse these traitors from the ranks of our government....strengthen yourselves while we await
the great day....remain patient..... the panic of the communists is clearly visible as they realize
their end is near....wait with faith and hope, we will triumph behind our symbols God, Fatherland
and Liberty!

Refrain 52. Refrain 53. Refrain 54. Refrain 55. Refrain 56. Refrain 57. Refrain 58. [Ends at
Counter 408.}

No Sign Off.

90

005

014

20 May 1330

CASSETTE #206
No Sign On. [6360 kcs.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. Pope Pius X11 recently published a letter in “U’Observatore Romano”
which strongly supports the statements which have been made by Archbishop Rosell y Arellano
about the threat from anti-religious elements in our society. [Goes on to details what each man
said about the threat from communism.] [Musical break.]

The Honduran Foreign Minister has confirmed the charge of SecState John Foster Dulles that the
government of Guatemala is involved in the Honduran banana workers strike, and has said that
the recent expulsion of three Guatemalan Consuls was due to their active participation in that
strike. The Guatemalan communist press, as usual, insulted Mr. Dulles when reporting his
remarks, calling him a liar. Now Honduras has confirmed Mr. Dulles’ statement and it turns out
that, as usual, the liars are the communists. [Musical break.]

The persecution of Catholic bishops and priests behind the Iran Curtain continues. The Roman
press has reported the death of a priest in a Lithuanian prison, the expulsion of Catholic
missionaries in China, the arrest of all Catholic bishops in Romania, the fact that Bulgaria is down
to one bishop for the whole country [goes on to cite other such instances]. [Musical break.] Fifty
Mexican labor unions have accused communist leader Vicente Lombardo Toledano of making up
false anti-government plots, and of manipulating labor unions for his political purposes. Mexican
workers are clearly fed up with Lombardo. Guatemalan workers should realize they are in the
same position as the Mexican workers.

Refrain 59. Refrain 60. Refrain 61. Refrain 62. Refrain 2.
Remanso Musical. Arturo Toscanini and the NBC Orchestra “Ballet Suite No. 1.” (Refrain 2.)

Sign Off. Back again at 8:00 PM tonight on 3420 kes.

91

06

044

243

20 May 2000

CASSETTE #205
Sign On |. [3420 kes.] [Refrain 2.

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, “Romeo and
Juliet,” first part. Tomorrow we will play the second part. [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. [*] Thinking of you, my
friends, | am reminded of the gentleman who went to the opera and was later asked how he had
liked it....his response was, “sing, sing, sing, but no opera.” Many of you may have thought the
same about Radio Liberation....talk, talk, talk, but no action. But don't lose faith, my friends,
because the hour is near and there is going to be some great opera. Have you ever thought how
much is need for a movement like this? Just like in an opera, everyone has a role, everyone.
Even those who don't sing, like the costumers, have to know their role perfectly. The Guatemalan
opposition also must be perfectly organized. Every one of us must know what her role will be. If
you have any doubt about yours, ask someone of confidence and talk about it. And our
broadcasts will be giving you instructions and notices, which is why we ask you to be sure to
listen every day, from one to two, and eight to ten. The fatherland is in danger, help us to save it.
[Musical break.] We've spoken before about how the communists use trickery to enlist us in their
ranks. A recent instance was the creation of the Infant Protection movement. This came about
after the communists decided their worldwide recruitment efforts had failed with us women. They
thought that be hiding behind this noble concept of infant protection, they could lure us into their
ranks. That is why we must always be alert to their trickery. In the end, they always misjudge us.
In this case they forgot how much we love our children, and how we will never let our children
become spies against their families, as they are in Russia. Women of Guatemala, let’s form our
own Infant Protection program, to protect our children from the evils of communism!

[Refrain 52. Refrain 53. Refrain 54. Refrain 56. Refrain 57.] (Marimba music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

92

005

015

20 May 2030

CASSETTE #204
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]
Descanso en Ritmo. Lionel Hampton All Stars, “Stardust.” [Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia. Carlos Gardel, “Silencio,” “Mi Buenos Aires
Querido,” “Melodia de Arrabal.”

No Sign Off. This has been a production of Radio Liberation of Guatemala.

93

006

014

162

20 May 2100
CASSETTE #203
Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]
Baile al Son Que le Toquen. Satirical sponsorship of the National Agrarian Department and its

chief, As E. Sino [Assassin]. Agustin Lara, “Piensalo Bien,” “Amor de Mis Amores.”
[Refrain 52. Refrain 54. Refrain 53. Refrain 2]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] Have you heard of that communist group recently formed in Mexico
called the “Society of Friends of Guatemala?” We wonder of whom they are friends, the people
of Guatemala or the government of Guatemala. The people who comprise this society are of al!
walks, but they have a common aspiration - liberty with respect for the human person, worthy of
the state’s protection and the care of the rule of law. But we have a concern, inspired by the
same principles and democratic ideals that inspire the generous friends of Guatemala who, living
in a democratic society, in good faith think the same situation exists in Guatemala. (Note: This is
a considerably more charitable characterization of this group than the one given on Cassette #3.]
[Announcer then traces Guatemalan history from 1944, promulgation of the new constitution, the
Violations of the constitution first by Arevalo and then Arbenz, then gets into how they blame
American imperialism for everything and even talk of foreign invasions.] And so we have, given
the good will and even better faith of the friends of Guatemala, laid out the real situation in our
country [Note: It appears the new, charitable characterization is more based on sarcasm than had
earlier appeared to be the case], in hopes they will in turn identify the subject of their friendship,
oppressed people or oppressive regime. [Refrain 55. Refrain 53. Refrain 63. Refrain 62.
Refrain 64.]

No Sign Off. [....en Dios.]

94

005

014

20 May 2130

CASSETTE #202
No Sign On. [3420 kes.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Through this series of programs we have been showing how the
communists intend to destroy the Catholic religion in our country. Nowe continue. Marx said
religion and science are diametrically opposed, mutually exclusive. This is a false assertion [goes
on to present the philosophical arguments on why this is the case]. The communists have one
final objective - demolish religion, demolish the main pillar of support for the human soul. Should
we just ignore this effort? No. Communism should be combated in every place and in any every
way. Only with their defeat can there be progress and peace. [Goes on to describe how
communists are rate followers of Marxist doctrine, that doctrine that holds that refigion is the
opium of the people, and how communist leaders and orators never express an original thought of
their own, only repeat the doctrine, much of which even they don't understand.] Will we opt for
religion or for communism? Thousands of years and millions of faithful, undeniable miracies,
faith in the divine being, in truth and in human justice; or the words Marx, Lenin and Stalin, a
century of existence, 15 million slaves in Russia and who knows how many more millions in red
China and the satellites, hands stained with blood that demands revenge? [Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. Hermanos Paniagua marimba group, “Ruega por Nosotros.” Tecomateros de
Chinaupla marimba group, “Cien Anos.” [Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 1:00 PM on 6360 kes.

95

005

042

238

21 May

CASSETTE #201
Sign On 1. [3420 kes.] {Refrain 23
En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Tonight we present the second and final part

of Ballet Suite No. 1 which we began yesterday. Toscanini and the NBC Orchestra.
{Refrain 63. Refrain 64. Refrain 65. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y fa Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. ["] Today we would like
to help you understand how communism harms your children, and to show you a few ways to
help protect them from this destructive force. One of the communists’ principal objectives is to
separate children from their mothers, because only then can they fully indoctrinate the child and
convert him into a blindly obedient communist rote before he has the capacity for independent
thought. One of the most glaring examples of this was a 12-year-old Russian peasant's son who
was duly indoctrinated, then reported his father for “hoarding” enough food to feed his family over
the winter. For this, the father was executed, and the son declared a hero. When a woman
comes to realize the consequences of communist indoctrination of children, her duty becomes
quite clear. [Refrain 66. Refrain 67. Refrain 64. refrain 63. Refrain 68.) [Music.]

96

006

015

21 May

CASSETTE #108
No Sign On. {Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

~- Financial scandal in a communist-run labor union in Mexico. Same thing happens
here in Guatemala.

-- Communist experts will meet soon in Warsaw to discuss further ways to destroy
religion. Our government, as a Soviet satellite, will send a delegation. The coming youth
congress soon to be held in Guatemala is part of this movement.

— Trial of communists in Managua, who say the subversive material they had came from
the Guatemalan embassy.

-- Reds in Europe continue to attack the church, including Monsenor Rosell y Arellano.

_- Another communist meeting will be held on 25 May, World Congress of Workers.
This will be the Soviet response to the Caracas Interamerican Congress’ anti-Communist posture.

-— Communists arrested in Mexico for subversive activities. But in Guatemala
communist hoodlums still run free, protected by the government, but this will be ending soon.
(Music.]

[Refrain 65. Refrain 68. Refrain 67. Refrain 66.] The next program you hear will be musical.
Within exactly 15 minutes, we will provide you new programs of commentary and attacks on the
communists.] [Refrain 2.]

Por fos Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia. Cuban music. [Refrain 65. Refrain 67.]
{Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off

97

005

020

181

21 May

CASSETTE #107
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.}

Baile al Son Que fe Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of the Authors’ Rights Revenue Office
{Oficina Recaudadora de Derechos de Autor). Machito, “Te Para Dos,” “El Mundo Esta
Esperando.” [Refrain 65. Refrain 67. Refrain 2.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] The forces of communism have come into our country and torn it

apart, our most revered institutions, our scruples, our most cherished spiritual values were all

brought down....and the army has not escaped this onslaught....this institution which reflects our

national makeup so well, since it draws from all social classes, has also suffered through the

assault of a terrible, antimilitary, anarchist enemy....the army remains the best hope of the people

to recover our national dignity....it is natural that within the army close attention is paid to these

things and there is constant vigilance, even though there can be no public manifestation of their

thoughts and unease....because the army cannot be isolated from the danger confronting

Guatemala....within the armed institution their are older and younger element, both in the country

and out, who honor the institution, and who are contemplating how to respond to the

threat,...those outside have crystallized their thoughts and will be conveying them inside, using

this very transmitter....for those of you in the army inside the country, you must be aware of the

purchases of soviet weaponry, weaponry which arrived last Saturday on the Alfhem, followed by

two other ships....not all of that weaponry is being provided to the army, it is being given to 3
communist organizations including Cruz Wer's Civil Guard, the PGT, PC and various

unions....why do you suppose Jacobito felt compelled to make such a secretive arms |

purchase?....the answer is clear, they are panicking as they see their days coming to an end.

98

006

016

238

284

21 May
CASSETTE #106
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] [Features a speech by Carlos Castillo Armas, possibly in his
voice, or possibly read by an announcer, probably the latter. A flowery introduction is made. The
Speech cites the evils of communism, the liberation movement's “decalogue” which spells out
why they cannot be communists, and speaks a great deal about agrarian reform and agricultural
production.] [Refrain 2.]

Attention Guatemala! important Notice! We have just received a bulletin from the Liberation
Committee of Active Duty Military Officers: President Arbenz has declined to respond to our letter
of yesterday in which we asked him to disassociate himself from the communist conspiracy and
from the nefarious act of introducing soviet weapons into our country. Through his silence,
Arbenz has identified him as a member and instrument of the communist conspiracy and has
betrayed his duty to the Constitution whose article 32 specifically prohibits the existence of foreign
parties in Guatemala. Arbenz is no longer our chief! He is a usurper! An agent of the Kremlin.
Brother officers and members of the Armed Forces, remain united for the well-being of our
fatherland! Be alert for new messages, the hour of action is coming quickly!

We know for certain that the shipment of arms which entered our country through Puerto Barrios
in recent days is being distributed among peasants and foreigners associated with the Caribbean
Legion. This is another slap at the army, as it shows that the lack of confidence in the armed
forces is growing. This time there is a groundswell of discontent among officers, because the
entire operation has been conducted behind their back. The army has had no role in this
distribution, even though it is their responsibility. But the bright side is that many of those
weapons will be used to bring freedom back to Guatemala, because many of those they think are
members of the popular militias are actually firm anti-Communists and Christians who have
learned to be quiet and wait. We'll find them with their own weapons and in their own cave!

Repeats bulletin from 238 above. [Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. We'll be back at 1:00 PM tomorrow on 6360 kes.

99

006

045

208

22 May 1300

CASSETTE #105
Sign On|. (6360 kes.] Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Today we're going to bring you a new song by the Los Trinqueteros
trio, to go with their earlier one which became so popular - La Profesia.

Has a Sabia Ud .Que....? section. Unidentifiable musical selection. Plays Los Trinqueteros for
the first time. Explains that the song and trio have the same name. Tomorrow we will start
teaching the verses of this song. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial, [*] [This segment features an interview conducted by Radio
Liberation’s “correspondents” with Carlos Castillo Armas in Tegucigalpa. It also reports on and
criticizes some recent “abuses” by Cruz Wer — the arrest of Rodolfo Rehwoldt, the insulting of a
woman employee who went o to the airport to pick up a shipment of “El Rebelde” magazines. ]

In closing, announcer reminds that broadcast times are 1:00 - 2:00 in the afternoon, and 8:00 -
40:00 at night. No Sign Off.

100

006

016

181

22 May 1330

CASSETTE #104
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [6360 kes.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. {*| Today we will speak of misery....we are all familiar with the report
President Arbenz presented to the National Congress, detailing the prosperity of our people and
the great progress of his “democratic” regime....as oppressed as it is, the people can only smile
softly in response to such jokes....but we can speak out....the government has a plan, based ona
prefabricated model....the plan is to reduce all individuals to a state of poverty, and to break the
National Treasury....once people are poor enough and desperate enough, and the treasury
empty — and we're almost there -- then they will impose communism on a people too poor and
too desperate to resist.....[goes on to discuss at some length the cost of living, inflation, the
national debt, the bloody implementation of agrarian reform, the perils of collective farms (when
the peasants are poor and desperate enough, they will accept collectivization, believes the
government)}.... Jacobito!....we're sick of your betrayals....we're about to get rid of your regime,
and very soonl....the communist pigs will disappear!...we're very: close to national liberation....we
will give the signal....the people to arms! will be the battlecry! [Refrain 3. Refrain 5. Refrain 2.)

Remanso Musical. {announcer seems to say this will be the last program in this series, and that
tomorrow’s time will be devoted to news bulletins.) Classical selections. [Refrain 6. Refrain 4.
Refrain 3. Refrain 5. Refrain 2. Refrain 19.]

101

006

047

288

300

22 May 2000

CASSETTE #103
Sign On |. (3420 kes.] Refrain 419. Refrain 2.

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. The Martial Band of Guatemala plays Johann

Strauss selections.
Our next program is ...La Mujer....[Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problem Comunista. We've spoken before of
how children are induced to enter communist organizations and trained to obey party
orders....you’ve asked many times, why do they need these children?.... The reason is that
children don't remember the days before communism, they can’t recall a free Guatemala...you've
seen that in every country where communism takes over, they immediately insert their children
into these groups, clubs, federations, etc....any tendency toward love or loyalty is quickly
destroyed....religion, virtue and fatherland are ridiculed....but there is still time for Guatemalan
mothers to save their children....only you can teach your children the ideals of love, honor,
freedom and truth. [Refrain 19. Refrain 5. Refrain 20.] [Ends.]

Ends. No Sign Off.

102

005

015

435

22 May 2030

CASSETTE #102
Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

_- What were Toriello, Charnaud MacDonald and Communist Party leader Alfredo Guerra
Borges discussing the other day while enclosed in Toriello’s office from the 5 to 8 the other
evening?

-- The truth about Chiquimulas. After investigating this incident, over land holdings.
There was no other motive other than this purely local problem. The strong government reaction
was caused by their great fear of an invasion. The local garrison commander mistook the
gathering peasants for invaders, and ordered that they be fired upon.

-- Toriello says he cannot comment on the US Dept of State’s report that an arms-laden
ship, the Alfhem, has arrived in Guatemala. In any case, he said, “| am not aware of any
international law that prohibits countries from buying arms wherever they please.” Defense
Minister Jose Angel Sanchez is in Puerto Barrios today receiving the shipment. {Refrain 3.
Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 19. Music. Refrain 22.]

Reading of the military “decalogue” with martial music background. [Refrain 2.]
Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y la Poesia. Jose Jorda, accompanied by Juan

Martinez’s guitar, reads from Garcia Lorca poetry. {Much distortion. ] [Just the guitar is worth a
listen.] [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

103

006

025

186

22 May 2100

CASSETTE #101
Refrain 19. Refrain 6. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 3. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. Satirical sponsorship of the lottery (La Loteria]. Yes friends, by a
ticket, because the lottery — the revolution -- will give you a prize of 15, 20 or more years, with no
trial necessary. Manuel S. Acuna, “La Jarana.” [Enactment of a raffle ridicules Arbenz, Tariello,
Cruz Wer, etc.] Acuna, “Las Mananitas." [Refrain 19. Refrain 20. Refrain 2.)

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] To defeat communism it is necessary to be organized, to be willing
to confront communism, to conspire, to speak the truth, like Monsenor Rosell just did.....the red
publicity machine constantly refers to a “foreign intervention” threatening the regime....this is
because they are panicking....all the fuss is about the patriotic activities of our exiled

around the city....what's the reason for all this?..... Marxist materialism which always try at
whatever cost to suppress any type of propaganda which tends to elevate spiritual concepts....that
is what accounts for all the savagery....that's why they are so infatuated with destroying the
opposition’s symbolism — God, Fatherland and Freedom.....the essence of communism could be
said to be anti-God, anti-fatherland, anti-freedom....but the people of Guatemala are 90% anti-
Communist, and there is nothing they would like to see more than the fall of that government of
traitors which has sold the country out to soviet imperialism.

Refrain 22. Music. Refrain 21. Ends at 411. No Sign Off.

104

006

015

22 May 2130

CASSETTE #100
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. The Army in the Face of the National Problem. Had it not been
for the ineffective leadership of the Ministry of Defense for the last 10 years, the Army could have
tackled and largely solved some of our country’s most pressing problems. One of these is
iliteracy. The Army has had a magnificent opportunity, through the enlistment process, of
teaching thousands of citizens, not only to read and write, but civic responsibilities and duties.
But Jacobo Arbenz and Jose Angel Sanchez have been ineffectual Ministers, driven by pure
inertia. The Army Under the Red Guillotine. The communists have vilely assassinated members
of the army because they were manly enough to oppose the reds...the case of David Pivaral,
brother of one-time presidential candidate Col. Ovidio Pivaral....and then the obvious case of Col.
Arana....Major Absalon Peralta....the November 1950 assault, whose perpetrators were brutally
massacred, with only Carlos Castillo Armas surviving...we will not soon forget the blood that was
shed, or the tears. [Refrain 6. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.]

Alma Chapina. {refers to this being today’s last program.] Maderas Que Cantan marimba group.
[Refrain 21. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 49. Refrain 20. Refrain 2.

105

005

049

228

243

24 May 1300

CASSETTE #99
Sign On I. [6360 kes.] Refrain 3. Refrain 19. Refrain 5. Refrain 2)

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [“] Hopes everyone had a good weekend, and that they don't feel as
one generally does on this day...[must be a Monday]. Los Tres Diamantes, “Dos Cruces.” Sabia
Ud. Que...? section. “Ayer Me Hablo el Corazon.” “Los Trinqueteros.” Then teaches the
opening refrain of Los Trinqueteros (Canta un solo corazon) and the first verse (Ya un nuevo sol
ilumina).

Our next program will be....La Mujer y fa Patria... {Refrain 6. Refrain 2]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. (*] What is the
Fatherland, my friends?....it is the cradle that rocked our sweetest dreams, the garden where our
most beautiful illusions flower, the loving and caring mother who blesses us when we leave and
welcomes us with loving arms when we return....but this mother’s bad children have betrayed her
and plan to deliver her, manacled, to the communist monster.....foreign criminals, with no
fatherland, God or home, have come to our country to fill their pockets with money, and to
humitiate, torture and vex the good children who love their country..... many of us have been
negligent and apathetic while this happened, but it is not too late. On of the features of the times
in which we live is the way propaganda has been used as a way to influence public opinion and
induce the people to act ina predetermined way....we women, to meet our civic responsibilities,
must learn to distinguish among the various types of propaganda which reach our eyes and ears,
distinguish between those that lead to social disintegration from those that struggle in the triumph
of liberty and justice in the world. [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain

19. Refrain 20.] [Ends at 389. No Sign Off.

106

005

017

098

24 May 1330
CASSETTE #97
No Sign On. [Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs]}

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*} To be anti-Communist is a serious matter....it is not just a matter
of being negative, it is not just to not be a communist, it is to be profoundly contrary to everything
communist. A communist is materialistic, atheistic, cold, a slave, stubborn, denies the
sovereignty of God, believes the republic of the proletariat is the Messiah, focuses his aspirations
on the class struggle, places the state above all men, negative, . An anti-Communist is
spiritualistic, a believer, a flame in the breeze, free, driven by justice ternpered by charity,
proclaims God's sovereignty, believes Christ is the only redeemer, seeks harmony among
classes, believes the family to be the basis of society, affirmative. All our country’s pain, angst
and bitterness is soon the be converted in glory, joy and national rejoicing. Even the men of the
government know this is to happen, and are busily preparing the fruits of the their rape of the
nation to take them elsewhere and enjoy them in a more favorable climate. [As the two
announcers who alternate in the reading of this script are attacking Arbenz, Fortuny,

Cruz Wer and others, at Counter Point 098 a loud noise, like a door slamming, is heard in
the background. Then there are many loud voices in the background, some of children, all
agitated. The announcers are agitated, and one sounds out of breath as he returns to read
his portion. Then there is another loud noise similar to the other, the voices rise, there is
a loud scream, and the recording abruptly stops at Counter Point 111. ]

[Nothing further on this cassette.] [Per Cassette 98-046, this was a Monday broadcast]

107

005

048

213

268

26 May 1300
CASSETTE #6A
Sign On |. [6360 kces.] Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] We have recently received the confession, which we have since
verified, of a man who until just a few days ago was a PGT militant....although we initially thought
this was just another communist provocation, through verification we now know this is a sincere
defection....we cannot give his name because he remains in country, determined to fight the
communists.....he was able to inform us of the Kremlin's orders to the PGT issued during a trip to
Moscow by Gutierrez and Fortuny in late 1953....the PGT was instructed to play down the PGT's
activities in favor of action through the United Front, so as not to highlight the communist
role....increase control and influence within the military.....use adulation and other tricks to seduce
military leaders....but at the same time form clandestine, “progressive” cells within the
army....order PGT peasants to enlist in the armed forces.....provoke conflicts between workers
and ordinary citizens, and insert arms into the disputes....continue inserting agents in the police,
the supreme court, radio stations, newspapers, banks and all important government
agencies....use them to launch propaganda campaigns against the US, painting US as
warmongering and Russia as the defender of the peace. Many of these instructions have already
been carried out, therefore it is more urgent than ever to cleanse our country of these
communists, before it is too late. We urge everyone, especially those in the army and the
government, to take a stand, a clear stand, and denounce and reject the instructions from
Moscow. [Refrain 46.]

Important notice. We inform our listeners that our last broadcast, last Monday, was interrupted
by circumstances beyond our control. [Same statement as Cassette #98-046.] [Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. [*] Women can play a
strong role in our political life....bur no woman can do this without a solid understanding of what is
going on in the world around us....cannot be confused by the modern forms of propaganda....one
of the world’s greatest institutions, free government, is in danger of being destroyed by
propaganda....through great struggle we managed to defeat the totalitarian forces of nazism and
Fascism, only to confront an even worse totalitarianism, that of communism....we must defeat it
also, but do so we must understand how its propaganda works and expose its lies....a case in
point is Toriello's recent performance at the Caracas conference when he accused foreign
countries of crimes which are only committed by the communists, then walked out of the
conference when a delegate from a sister nation rose to refute him....these are the new
communist tactics....any doubts we may have had about Toriello were dispelled at this
conference....we apologize to our sister nations for his behavior....our government has bathed us
in shame....but we know our friends understand and will forgive us. [Refrain 50. Refrain 44.
Quotes from Refrain 46.] [Ends at 406.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

108

005

018

187

203

006

046

26 May 1330

CASSETTE #161
No Sign On. [Quotes from Refrain 45 and Refrain 46.] [Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The National Army and the Popular Militias. At this moment, when
the arms recently imported from the tron Curtain are being distributed, not to the Army but to the
communist shock troops, in other words the popular militias, we want to pass on this alert to the
armed institution. In a constitutional democracy, an army cannot be sectarian, “revolutionary” or
“liberal,” defender of some and abuser of others: it defends the country, sustains the constitution,
and serves the people. tn contrast to that legal establishment, there is an armed organization that
represents a social class, and sustains a political and sectarian creed; it is the popular militia.
The militia is antidemocratic, antipatriotic, criminal and treasonous. Such substantially different
armed institutions cannot coexist. The popular militia is receiving the recently imported arms,
arms brought in to unleash a civil war. If the agrarian hordes could do so much damage armed
with just machetes, we can just imagine the carnage that will flow when the militias are armed
with machine guns. The army, 75% anti-Communist, will be eradicated by the communist shock
troops if it does not move decisively. But what action can an apolitical and non-deliberative body
like an Army take? The path is clear, the action legal, the purpose patriotic. The sentry who
discovers the enemy need not deliberate, to inquire of ideology; instead, he must fire to defend his
post. He attacks so as not to be defeated. [Includes an epic poem, and closes with a quotation
from CCA]

Next program is Miscefanea Musical del Aire. [Refrain 2]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] [Announcer says they are back after a small fright, a forced
interruption which nevertheless does not deter them from serving their people and their country.
This may refer to the Cassette #97 incident.] Includes Sabia Ud. Que....section. Jorge Negrete,
“La Feria de las Flores.” Teaches second verse of Los Trinqueteros. Plays full Los Trinqueteros.

Sign Off. Next broadcast will be at 8:00 PM.

CASSETTE #98
Sign On |. [3420 kes] [Refrain 2]

Notice to all our listeners. Before beginning our programming, we want to inform you that our last
broadcast, on Monday, was interrupted by circumstances beyond our control. Cruz Wer's thugs
who are forever searching for and trying to destroy our transmitters, almost succeeded. But
since we are prepared to shed our blood in defense of the Fatherland, their plans were frustrated.
[See Cassette 97-098.]

En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Manuel Defalla (ph.) tunes played by the
Madrid Symphonic Orchestra.

Music ends. No Sign Off.

109

005

026

166

345

408

26 May
CASSETTE #96

No Sign On. [Distortion on this tape.} The following program, Rompiendo las Cadenas, attacks
the Arbenz government. [Attacks communism. ] [Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] The people who hold power in Guatemata today are unhindered by
constraints of morality or reason....it is impossible to persuade them of anything, they do not
accept evidence....they are totally subjugated to the Soviet yoke....their purpose is to destroy
democracy and to destroy one's identification with one’s country - nationalism....that is why our
anticommunism is innately nationalistic....that is the anti-Communist objective, to consolidate
nationality and democracy, not only in our country, but throughout the world,....by squashing
communism and eradicating it we defend individual liberty, equality before the law, honor,
property, and institutions and traditions of democracy, as well as the independence and
sovereignty of our country, as well as its territorial integrity. [Refrain 21. Refrain 2)

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica yla Poesia. French songs by Danielle Darrieux.

Our next program will be Alma Chapina.
[Refrain 23] [Refrain 22] [Refrain 24] [Refrain 25] [Refrain 26]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

110

005

012

220

26 May

CASSETTE #95
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]
Alma Chapina. Marimbas Los Hermanos Paniagua, Alma de Guatemala.

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] Discusses the abuse of the social security system by the
Arbenz government, the usurpation of the Social Security Institute by the communists who use it
to place their members in all the jobs, replacing the true experts. They insist that workers and
employers ali pay, but fail to meet the government contribution. The government claims it lacks
the money to pay its contribution, but it has no trouble financing the communists’ travel to
Moscow and other communist states, financing the party, its espionage services, radio stations,
journals and the other elements of its mind control program. When we throw out the communists,
the Social Security Institute is going to once again be what it was set up to be, the government
contributions will be made, and the institute will be staffed not by communists but by patriots.

Music ends. No Sign Off.

111

006

051

095

180

26 May

CASSETTE #163

No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.] Special important notice only for residents of the capital city.
We have prepared this special program of martial music to keep the residents of the capital
informed about an important event that will take place tonight soon after this program ends.
(Music. }

At the end of this program go out into the street, or go to your window, to watch a demonstration
of this movement's strength. Pass the word to your neighbors, call your friends and neighbors,
and tell them that after this program ends, after 10:00 PM, Radio \|beration will sends a special
message. No matter where you live in the capital, you will get it. [Music.]

Another alert per above, to go to the street after this program ends, after 10:00 PM. This
repeated several times, interspersed with martial music.

We have received a leaflet at Radio Liberation that we are passing on to you. It has the Honor
Guard on top, then on the left it says “Fight for God, for the Fatherland, for Liberty, for Work, for
Truth, for Justice.” On the right said its says, “Fight against Communist atheism, communist
interventionism, communist oppression, communist poverty, communist lies, communist police.”
On the bottom it says , “ Fight with you patriot brothers, fight with Castillo Armas .”

Notice for those outside the capital, in the departments. You will receive the important message
immediately after the capital does, or perhaps early tomorrow.

Go out into the street four minutes from now, and wait for a few moments. [Anthem.]

Sign Off. We’ll.back tomorrow at 1:00 PM on 6360 kes. Good night and we hope you like the
surprise.

112

bese Moda 2

006

043

175

187

215

27 May
CASSETTE #156
Sign On |. [6360 kes.] [Refrain 2.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] We have just been informed by our observation agents, confirming
our previous report, that the Alfhem arms, are for delivery to the communist shock troops and for
Cruz Wer's Civil Guard, and not to the army. Here are the facts. On 30 April, two Cominform
agents, using the false names Anton Refregier and Asa Zata and false American passports,
entered the country and were received by Jaime Diaz Rozzoto. They told Rozzoto they had come
to supervise the unloading of the arms coming from Poland and their distribution, and that they
would instruct the shock troops and some police officials in their use. Now that they are being so
distributed, their has been outrage among many army officers who currently are planning
countermeasures. We hope this report puts an end to the nefarious activities of the two foreign
communist agents, and we suppose they will be severely punished by their Soviet bosses for
having indiscreetly spoken too much at the Guerolt pension where they were staying. We also
want to apologize to all our observers and reporters for not always broadcasting their reports, but
this is necessary so the traitors will not realize how well-informed we are. But please be assured
that every report is carefully studied. [Music.]

Two weeks ago Arbenz was informed by his advisors of the negative reaction by almost
all Latin American countries to his aggressive communist agenda, with the result that Mexican oil
shipments would be suspended, and two diplomats would be expelled from Honduras (these two
events have of course now occurred). But there was also good news for Arbenz in the meeting:
the Soviet government continues to support him, and several regional communist parties,
including those of Mexico and Brazil, are prepared to come to the aid of his government if
requested. We know that the government, increasingly panicked, is planning a series of
provocations to force the opposition’s hand. So, as the hour of liberation nears, we ask all of you
to be careful and discreet, and beware of government provocations and agents.

We work one hour in the morning [sic], from 1:00 to 2:00 in the afternoon, and two hours at night,
from 8:00 to 10:00 at night. [Gives regular morning and night frequencies. ]

Next program will be La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista.
[Refrain 24. Refrain 21. Refrain 40. Refrain 22. Refrain 25. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. [*] “Where women are
involved, everything is lost,” is the theme of men who like to think they are real He-men. And
there is some truth in that. Because we women are in this battle against communism, and
everything is lost....for the communists. Guatemalan women are brave, and tough, as invincible
as death. Women of Guatemala! We must give our children of tomorrow and Christian home, a
sacred home, a great and prosperous country!

Next program will be Nuestra Campana Radial. (Quotes from Refrain 46] [Music.] [Refrain 22.
Refrain 24.] [Music.}

Music ends. No Sign Off.

a3

005

018

414

276

27 May

CASSETTE #155
No Sign On. (Refrain 23. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. The communists follow Lenin's dictum that religion is the opium of the
people, in the service of the owners of goods and against the workers. it follows that all
communist leaders, including Arbenz and his gang, are atheists. Not only must they be atheists
in order to be communists, they must give up whatever sense of patriotism they might have had.
They must give it up in the name of patriotism, which is why they insist on selling out our country
tothe Kremlin. They are against religion and against patriotism, but we tise up against them, and
cannot rest until they are thrown out and returned to where they came from, never to return again.
[Music.} {Refrain 23. Refrain 39.]

Mala senal.....{long, semi-poetic, patriotic, exhortative essay with stirring musical
background]....de buena voluntad. [Refrain 2.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Next verse of Los Trinqueteros [explains they will repeat this verse

a number of times because it is the chorus]:
Adentro que estan torteando,
Y a echar varniz en paleta,
Adelante que ahora es cuando,
Les demos en fa maceta. [Note: This verse also taught on Cassette #135]
[Plays entire song.]

114

005

044

327

363

27 May
CASSETTE #160
(Highly distorted.] Sign On |. [3420 kes.] {Refrain 2.]
En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Toscanini and NBC Orchestra play Liszt's

Piano Concerto No. 1. {Starts highly distorted, but clears up.| This program offers 30 minutes of
the music of the great masters. ]

The next program is Rompiendo Cadenas. [Refrain 23. Refrain 19. Refrain 22. Refrain 21.
Refrain 24. Refrain 40. Refrain 51.]

Important notice. As we have repeated in previous programs, our last broadcast, last Monday,
was interrupted . Cruz Wer’s thugs almost had their way. But they were frustrated. Now they
know that here there men and women who will fight. (Same blurb as on Cassette #98-046. This
is probably one day later.] [Music.] [Refrain 49.] [Ends.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

115

005

019

135

180

27 May

CASSETTE #159
No Sign On. [Quote from Refrain 46. Refrain 26. Refrain 2.] (3420 kcs.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] In Russia and all communist countries, military service is based not
on honor and patriotism, but on terror. Horrible punishments, including forced labor in Siberia,
are handed out not only to soldiers but to their families for the slightest violation of rules. Even
having an opinion that is not perfectly in line with party doctrine can draw such a punishment.
This frightening system is maintained not only through military channels, but also through an
elaborate network of political espionage. Every military unit has its spy who reports not to his
military superiors, but to the secret police. Nevertheless, the desertion rate among Russian
soldiers is much higher than anywhere else, even in peacetime when escaping is more difficult
than it was during WWII when thousands crossed over to the Germans. Those who flee today
are not really deserters, since they are moved by serving a higher cause, and join with their ex-
comrades in exile to fight the communist oppression at home. Our own army is in the process of
being converted into a popular militia. The alert is before you, soldiers of Guatemala. This is
your opportunity to shake off the communist oppression. We know you will be with us when the
great moment arrives.

Next program is Por los Senderos Mundiales de fa Musica y la Poesia. [Refrain 23. Refrain 39.]

Refrain 25. Quote from Refrain 46. Refrain 2.]

Por los Senderos Mundiales de la Musica y/a Poesia. Three poems written especially for this
Guatemalan liberation campaign by Jose Calderon Salazar.

The next program is Alma Chapina. [Refrain 26. Quote from Refrain 46.] [Ends at 408.]

No Sign Off.

116

005

027

211

229

27 May

CASSETTE #158
No Sign On. [Quote from Refrain 46. Refrain 22. Refrain 24. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.) [3420 kes.]
Alma Chapina. Alma de Guatemala's Chapinita, Usted, Sin Ti. Ideal Club's Recuerdos.
Next program is Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. (Refrain 50. Refrain 2.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] Yesterday [Cassette #957] on this program we were talking
about the Social Security Institute. Today we will deal with an equally important subject, the
Labor Code [which makes this the day before Cassette #152]. Arbenz and the communist party
converted the Labor Code into a political weapon to serve their interests, to the detriment of the
workers’ interests. The formation of the Confederacion Unica de Trabajadores was one result, the
labor central totally controlled by the communists. Written by the communist leader Victor
Manuel Gutierrez, the Labor Code allowed workers to strike, with full benefits, for any capricious
reason. The communist abuse of this system, with constant work stoppages, has led to severe
capital flight. They are using the code to destroy the middle class and its industries because
these are inconvenient for the communists. Our movement is not against the Labor Code, but
against its manipulation by the communists. We support the gains of the proletariat, and will
crystallize them under the rule of law that we will implant. Our labor code will protect the rights of
both capital and labor, and will create a climate in which all can live. Not like today, where only
the communists benefit. We will eliminate the labor central, and allow as many unions as
necessary to operate freely. Only in Russia and Guatemala does one find one sole central. And
related to the Labor Code issue, we have the issue of “syndicalization,” which we will discuss on
the next episode of this program tomorrow.

Next program is Baile af Son.... [Refrain 44. Refrain 47.] [Ends at 408.)

No Sign Off.

117

005

017

190

211

27 May

CASSETTE #157
No Sign On. [Refrain 43. Refrain 2.] [3420 kcs ]

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. Sponsored by “me.” Music, “Spanish Adventure.”
Joke: “Oh, what a pretty mute.”
“That's a picture of Jacobo.”
[More music.] The government Says we have been “recruiting” people to form an army of
liberation. They wish. Just so they know, we do not recruit people, we accept them into our
ranks. Because, like us, they want to fight for Guatemala. {More music. ]

The next program is La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion. [Refrain 44. Refrain 50. Refrain 48.
Refrain 2.]

La Nolicia Atraves de Radio Liberacion,

-- The government organ Tribuna Popular referred for the first time to the arms shipment
from Poland. “The yankees made no scandal,” it said, “when Nicaragua imported
arms from West Germany for Castillo Armas.” Radio Liberation Comment: The
West German firm has already denied any involvement....the Arbenz government
is seeing ghosts again.

-- We have reports that a Central American ambassador has sold himself to the Arbenz
government after losing 5,000 quetzals in casino. Radio Liberation Comment:
The Arbenz government continues to expand via the usual means. We will soon
provide the name of this diplomat.

-- Soviet agents continue to arrive in Guatemala to advise the treasonous government of
Arbenz. The most recent arrival is a Czech radio expert brought in specifically to
locate our clandestine transmitter. We hope he has fun, we're waiting for him
right here.

- Ateam of employees of the Soviet embassy in Mexico will arrive in Guatemala in the
next few days. They will stay at the Colonial Hotel and their cover will be a trade
mission, but their real mission will be to train the chiefs of the army and the
popular militias in the use of the arms recently received from Poland.

-- A Reuters item notes that the riffes recently sent from Poland to Guatemala are the
same as those that caused.so much damage to Chinese and North Korean
troops. Many troops were permanently blinded as a result of the poor quality of
these arms.

~ Boston. Jorge Toriello is in the US for medical treatment. However, it is only because

of the special diplomatic passport given him by his brother Guillermo that he has
not been arrested by the Boston police for the drunken rampage he has been on.
The government is sending a known communist agitator to Honduras as a vice-consul,
despite two Guatemalan consuls having been recently expelled.
-- Anew scandal in the congress relating to lifting the tax liability on vast materials stored
in certain warehouses.
~ [A few other news items.] [Refrain6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 2.]

i

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 1:00 PM.

118

27 May

CASSETTE #90

005 No Sign On. Martial Music. Announcer: Attention Guatemalans! Radio Liberation addressees
you. Last night you saw what the anti-Communist forces can do at any given moment. Last night
everyone in Guatemala learned of the message delivered by Radio Liberation during its nightly
broadcast. Everyone in the capital has received the message sent by Radio Liberation, the flying
leaflets we dropped over the capital from our planes Jast night while they flew low over the city.
The leaflets say, “Fight for God, Country, Freedom, Work, Truth and Justice. Fight against
communist atheism, communist intervention, communist oppression, communist poverty,
communist lies and the communist police. Fight with your compatriot brothers. Fight with
Castillo Armas.” This is just a small hint of what the organized anti-Communist opposition can do
at any given time. Tomorrow, it may not be leaflets, it may be something else.

034 Background music to above fades. Off the air. No Sign Off. Nothing more on this. The above
ran for about 3 minutes.

119

006

054

206

241

28 May 1300

CASSETTE #150
Sign On |. 6360 kes. [Refrain 27] [Refrain 28] [Refrain 29] [Refrain 2].

Comunismo al Desnudo.[*] The communists strive to gain control over organizations that affect
the daily lives of those who need to ear a living. The control the principal labor confederation, the
CGTG, through its SecGeneral, Victor Manuel Gutierrez, a CP member. The main peasant
organization, the CNCG, is controlled through Leonardo Castillo Flores. Alfonso Solorzano
Fernandez does the same in the Social Security Institute. But it is important to remember that
Communist tabor leaders have seldom ever been workers. Marx, for instance, was a Jew,
philosopher and writer, but not a worker. Engels was a businessman, Lenin the descendant of
aristocrats, and Stalin a theologian before becoming a professional revolutionary. The point is
none ever identified with worker needs, but rather saw the workers as a political tool. Proof of this
is that the communist party is for the elite of the vanguard only, and one will see very few
workers, real workers, as party members. Workers, beware the sinister plans of the communists
to use you for their own ends. Join the great liberation movement to rid our country of the
communist plague.

Next program is La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista.
[Refrain 30. Refrain 31. Refrain 32. Refrain 33. Refrain 34. Refrain 35. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y fa Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista, [*] Today we have
excellent news for you, and for your brothers and sons who are fighting against the communists -
the abject failure of Minister Toriello in Caracas. His inability to implement Moscow's agenda at
the Conference has left him wanting in their eyes, and it is rumored that Moscow is pressing
Arbenz to remove him. His orders had been to establish a communist base among the countries
attending the meeting, but all his proposals were roundly rejected by the conference. All the
nations came together in a resolution to censure Toriello’s maneuvers, and warn Soviet Russia to
desist from its aggressive methods against the other nations of the hemisphere. So Toriello was
disgraced, and the communists suffered a huge defeat.

Next program is Nuestra Campana Radial. [Refrain 36. Refrain 37.)

Music ends. No Sign Off.

120

005

015

157

200

28 May 1330

CASSETTE #149
No Sign On. Refrain 2. 6360 kcs.

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The communists are even ashamed of their name, they've changed
it from Communist Party to Guatemalan Labor Party (PGT), to pretend to be an honest, patriotic,
Guatemalan not directed from abroad. However, this is nothing but a front for the Soviets, one of
the 70 or so international branches of the international communist conspiracy, directed from
Moscow, funded from Moscow. Until two years ago Cuba was the general headquarters for the
communists in Latin America, but now it has been supplanted by Guatemala. A sign of the
importance of this is the recent formation by the Panamanian communist party of a Society of
Friends of Guatemala, which follow the communist blueprint used around the world. Further
evidence of the Communist infiltration is the Youth Festival scheduled for Guatemala next
September, another communist hallmark, These communist penetrations must be resisted. Do
not enter any of the communist organizations. don't buy their publications, do not go to their
rallies, and resist their lies. Be careful of provocations - do not participate in an individual act of
violence. We need democratic discipline. Be alert and await our instructions, you are one of us!
You are part of the glorious army of liberation that will free Guatemala from the communists
claws! For every honorable Guatemalan who has been vexed, tortured, humiliated, tortured and
torn from his home, we will claim the lives of five communists. We will destroy them all with their
own weapons.

The next program will be Miscelanea Musical del Aire - political jokes. [Slogan: Guatemailteco,
legara el momento de actuar..... cuidado con los orejas.] Starting tomorrow we will be
broadcasting the special manifesto Col. Carlos Castillo Armas has sent to the Guatemalan army
and people. Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Sabia Ud. Que...? section. Marimba tune, “Vals de Paris.”
Teaches fourth verse of Los Trinqueteros, “E/ dedo jala que jala...." Plays full song. Join us
everyday because we have a few modifications in our programming. This program will be
modified, because it will and “associated production” of Miscelanea Musical del Aire with Baile al
Son Que le Toquen, featuring Dr. | Que and Los Catedraticos Forfritz, Don't miss it.

Tomorrow on our regular programming we will present a recording of Col. Carlos Castillo Armas.
Refrain 2.

Sign Off.

121

28 May 2000

CASSETTE #154
005 Sign On |. [3420 kes.] {Refrain 2.]

043 En Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Berlin Symphony Orchestra, Copeltia ballet.

365 [Music.] [Refrain 21. Refrain 41. Refrain 42.| [Music.]

415 Music fades. No Sign Off.

122

eT

005

012

038

211

404

28 May 2030
CASSETTE #153
No Sign On. Refrain 4. Refrain 3. Refrain 5.

Attention, everyone, across the country. The program that normally begins at 8:00 PM will,
starting tomorrow, begin at 9:00 PM. So there will be two broadcasts per day, one at 1:00 PM on
6360 kes, one at 9:00 PM on 3420 kes. [Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*] There is no doubt that the history of the Guatemalan worker has
been a spotty one, and he has undergone very difficult, even cruel, periods. That in itself made
the worker somewhat vulnerable to the preaching of the communists who flooded his ranks with
reams of propaganda through the most modern methods of social penetration. Initially, many
workers fell prey to this evil seduction, and as time passed more and more began to see the
falsity of it all, and began the return to the sacred principles of old - God, Fatherland, Liberty. Our
workers have always been noble of heart, and have always risen to defend the Fatherland. And ,
thank God, they are seeing through that communist barrage and are understanding that social
vengeance does not equate to social justice. We applaud their return to the old values, we
applaud their faith and their courage.

The next program will be Por los Senderos Mundiales de fa Musica y la Poesia . [Refrain 6.
Refrain 5.] [Repeats time changes starting tomorrow.) [Refrain 38. Refrain 2.]

Garcia Lorca’s bullfight poem “Llanto por Ignacio Sanchez Mejias,” supported by Juan Martinez
on guitar. [Fantastic.] [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

123

006

021

248

28 May 2100

CASSETTE #152
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.}

Alma Chapina. Marimba Bonampat, “El Gato Montes’ and others. Notice, starting tomorrow our
8:00 PM program will begin at 9:00 PM, so instead of 8:00, you can hear us at 9:00 PM. So
there will be two broadcasts, the first at 1:00 PM on 6360 kcs, and at 9:00 PM on 3420 kes. More
marimba music. [Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] As we said yesterday in commenting on the Labor Code, the
communists put all labor organizations in this country under one confederation, controlled by
them, a political instrument of the Kremlin. Article 62 of the Constitution provides that the state
will regulate and inspect business enterprises. In Guatemala, the state is the communist party.
And if the enterprises do not toe the state's line, they are immediately hit by labor strike
promulgated by the same communist party through its labor confederation. The Constitution also
bans foreigners fro involvement in the labor movement, but the Arbenz regime violates this just by
having the labor confederation depend on advisors sent by Moscow. The confederation also
controls teachers’ unions, which means that only communists are certified as teachers and our
children are learning about communist history but their grades are going down in the basic school
subjects. Our movement stands for free trade unionism and against dictatorial leadership. We
are against politica! intervention by the unions, especially communist intervention. We will truly
reform the Labor Code to make it a truly Guatemalan, not Russian, document. [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

124

005

020

202

230

28 May 2130

CASSETTE #154

No Sign On. [3420 kcs.] Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2

Baile al Son Que le Toquen. [*] Satirical sponsorship of Ticututico y Butaca presenting the Los
Catedraticos Forfritz quiz show. Quiz show format, featuring an abundance of untranslatable
Guatemalan slang, interspersed with music.

{mportant Notice. Tomorrow we will begin a modified schedule in the following way. We will start

in the afternoon at 1:00 PM until 2:00 PM on 6360 kes, and at night at 9:00 PM on 3420 kes.
[Refrain 2.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- Agrarian Department chief tells El Salvador that 2,000 peasant families can
come to Guatemala and have land. [Goes on to criticize this move from
both Guatemalan and Salvadoran perspectives. ]

— Yesterday we were informing about the new case of bribery/blackmail in
the Congress. Communists were caught by surprise and initially opposed

a certain bill, but then got cut in, and now they're ail for it since they will

get their share.

What we predicted has come through - the break in relations between

Guatemala and Nicaragua, because of Guatemalan government

involvement in the attempt against Gen. Somoza.

-- [Various other “news” items. ] [Repeats changes noted at 202 above.j

125

29 May 1300
CASSETTE #180
005 Sign On |. [6360 kes.] [Refrain 2. Refrain 23. Refrain 39.]

049 As we announced during yesterday's programs, at this time we present the voice of Carlos
Castillo Armas, chief of the opposition, by means of a special tape sent to our studios. [Martial
music introduction. } [Fairly extensive biography of Castillo Armas is given.] And now we present
Castillo Armas delivering a virite manifesto to the Guatemalan army. First words: “Companeros,
el congreso de la republica con fecha primero de febrero en curso, emitio ef decreto....” [This is
same speech as on Cassette #86.] Final words. “que no han fogrado pisotear Arbenz y sus
socios, de vuestro amigo que os quiere y os estima, CCA.” [Martial music.]

On tonight's program we will present another recording of the voice of Carlos Castillo Armas, this
time addressing the people of Guatemala. [Music, end at Counter 415.]

415 No Sign Off. Music ends.

126

29 May 1330
CASSETTE #179

005 No Sign On. {6360 kes - see 225 below.] {Refrain 23. Refrain 39.] This is Radio Liberation with
a special program dedicated to the Guatemalan army. A script is read with martial musical
background describing the virtues of the “Sentry of the Nation.” But the sentry appears to have
become petrified for it does not act in the nation's hour of need. it stands by idly and watches the
communists rape the country. However, the vast majority of its members are fine patriots, who
have only been deceived by the top leaders who have made their pact with the communists.
These honorable and loyal sectors see what is going on, and understand the consequences, but
they are hidebound by an exaggerated sense of obedience. Will they stand by and permit the
continued disruption of the social order? the continued threat to the national dignity and
independence? the continued smashing of our sovereignty? These grave questions must be
answered by the worthy officer, the patriotic soldiers. And they must do so quickly, before it is too
late. [Goes on with further patriotic exhortations to the military.]

090 [A woman announcer comes forth with further exhortations to the military.]
137 This is Radio Liberation. {Male announcer returns with more exhortations.
225 [Refrain 23. Refrain 39. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.]

255 EI Decalogo Militar is read with martial music background.

351 [Refrain 23. Refrain 39. Refrain 2.]

368 Sign Off. Back up at 9:00 tonight on 3420 kes, at which time we will give you Carlos Castillo
Armas’ second manifesto, addressed to the people of Guatemala.

127

006

049

388

392

29 May 2100
CASSETTE #178
Sign On |. [3420 kes.] [Refrain 23. Refrain 39. Refrain 2.]
As we announced during this afternoon's program, we will now bring you a tape recording of a
vibrant manifesto from Col. Carlos Castillo Armas to the people of Guatemala. First words:
“Compatriotas, el gobierno de Guatemala, despues de acalorada junta de gabinete..." Final
words: “Todo, absolutamente todo, por la salvacion de Guatemala.” [Ends at Counter 325.}

[Martial music.]

You are listening to Radio Liberation, with a special broadcast to all the anti-communist people of
Guatemala. [Ends.]

No Sign Off. Ends.

128

005

032

124

238

29 May 2130

CASSETTE #177

No Sign On. [3420 kes, see 104 below]. [Refrain 23. Refrain 39. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.J
This broadcast is dedicated to alt the people of Guatemata, and especially to those brave boys
who for more than a year have been incarcerated in the Guatemalan Siberia - Salama.

Juventud Universitaria y Ejercito: Dos Brazos de un Solo Cuerpo. (University Youth and the
Army: Two Arms of the Same Body.) Extensive and emotional piece on how the military and
students are joining together to free the country from communist oppression. [Refrain 23.
Refrain 39. Refrain 19. Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

Editorial attacking the injustice of the Salama case, and the continued incarceration of 100
innocent youths. [Refrain 19. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 2.]

Another, more emotional, piece on the 100 prisoners at Salama. [Refrain 23. Refrain 39.
Refrain 19. Refrain 2.) [Martial music.]

Tomorrow, we will return to our normal programming. Today's special programming has been
dedicated to all Guatemalans. [Refrain 2)

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 1:00 on 6360 kes.

129

005

042

224

400

30 May 1300

CASSETTE #176
Sign On |. [6360 kcs.] [Refrain 2.]

Comunismo al Desnudo, [*] Communist propaganda leaflets recently made another appearance,
again under cover of darkness, under the doors of Guatemalans. These leaflets ignorantly
grouped alt anti-Communists into one amorphous group with seven characteristics. Now we are
going to go over those characteristics one by one, and see whether they characterize anti-
Communists, or the communists themselves. [Then cites the seven points, and shows how the
communists are guilty of them, not the anti-Communists:

-- sellout of the country to foreign companies,

-- elimination of democratic liberties,

~ illegitimate use of religion for religious purposes,

~ placing Guatemalan youth and territory at the service of yankee monopolistic war
plans, “...and tomorrow we will finish up with the other points.”] (Refrain 69. Refrain 70.
Refrain 71. Refrain 72. Refrain 73. Refrain 74. Refrain 2.] (Music.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. [*] In this program |
want to specially address the wives of peasants, and anyone who can pass the word on to them.
Due to the difficult times the Arbenz government is experiencing, they are making extra efforts to
get the people to join the communist party, and this in turn creates the need for caution. They
plan to use terror to force the people into a United Front. One method they are using is to give
sick cattle to peasant who have already accepted parcels of land. Therefore peasant should be
very wary of accepting any cattle distributed by the National Agrarian Department (DAN), because
this sickness is very contagious and fatal for both animals and people, and their milk can be fata!
for children. They are also distributing inferior seed which will require double work and produce
less. As peasants are accepting loans from the government, once their cattle die and crops fail,
the government will use this as a pretext to confiscate their lands and distribute them to the
communist party. The peasants then will be allowed to live on them only as tenants, with the fruit
of their labor going in fees and taxes to the government. This is how the DAN plans to begin the
collectivization which has caused so much misery in the world. That's why we advise peasants
not to sign any government papers. [Music.]

130

005

016

163

183

195

30 May 1330

CASSETTE #183
No Sign On. Our next program. Nuestra Campana Radial. [Refrain 2.] (6360 kcs.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*) Communist infiltration of our country, which began in late 1944,
gained momentum in March 14945 when Arevalo took the presidency. Since that time, Arevalo,
and then Arbenz, have worked tirelessly in facilitating the communist agenda. On of the more
obvious moves was Arevalo’s acceptance of, and generous support of, a band of Spanish
communists representing an absurd and imaginary Spanish government in exile. That band had
the run of our country, and that event, and many others, led to the formation of small groups
determined to rid our country of communism. The years went by and these noble groups fought,
but without the cohesion necessary to achieve success. Then Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas
carried out his raid on the base at La Aurora. This heroic act, in which he was severely wounded,
coupled with his cruel treatment at the hands of his captors, his dramatic escape, and then his
total dedication to the cause of liberation, catapulted him into the position of natural leader of all
opposition forces. Thus all these forces came together under the symbols God, Fatherland and
Liberty, and the aspirations Justice, Truth and Work, including the exile groups CEUAGE, FAGE
and CEGAM. The personality of Castillo Armas, and the vibrant manifestos he has issued, and
these we have brought to you via recorded tapes, have jelled into an opposition which, following
the Plan of Tegucigalpa of last December, is ready and able to bring and end to the rule of the
puppet Arbenz in the very near future. No one can stop this anti-Communist avalanche. [Music.]

Attention, Guatemala! Last Wednesday night some of our planes reached the capital and
dropped the messages that Radio Liberacion had told you were coming. This is a small taste of
the power of organized anti-Communist opposition. Attention, Communists! The next time it may
not be papers we throw out of our planes, it may be something else! Attention, Guatemalans! Be
ready for our next message!

“The number 32 is, for Jacobo Arbenz and his gang, like the Cross is for the Devil. Guatemalans,
forward with the 32 symbol.” [Refrain 2.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [Slightly different format than usual, with a fairly long commentary

ridiculing the panic and disarray being experienced by the communists and allied forces, including
the Caribbean Legion (fraught with racial conflict), with the conclusion being that when the bullets
start flying, no one on their side is going to stay the course.] Sabia Ud. Que...? section. Arturo
Nunez, ‘Mambo No. 6." And now it’s time to continue with Los Trinqueteros, but | must confess
that since we haven't heard this song for two days now, | don’t remember which verse we were
on, so let’s just play the whole thing. [Plays Los Trinqueteros.] {Refrain 2.]

1.331

005

043

230

256

30 May 2100

CASSETTE #187
Sign On I. [3420 kes.] [Refrain 24

Rompiendo las Cadenas. [*} It's time to provide our listeners with a few more bits of evidence of
how the Arbenz government, the continuation of that of Arevalo, is in the service of Moscow
masters, thereby threatening continental security and domestic tranquillity. [Goes on to detail
instances in which the Arbenz government has derailed efforts at continental or regional solidarity,
starting with the formation of QDECA, and then OAS votes and the Caracas Conference
Describes how communism improved on Goebbels’ “big lie” technique to achieve its ends, but this
is a double-edged sword that frequently backfires, as it did when the communists tried to accuse
UN troops of using germ warfare in Korea. This is why the opposition’s tactic is to provide only
the truth. Somehow manages to progress into the “32” campaign, and the illegal imprisonments
and kidnappings by the police.]

[Refrain 72. Refrain 69. Refrain 70. Refrain 74. Refrain 2.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] Cooperative organizations work in favor of the workers by
enhancing their standard of living, and our government is constitutionally obligated to direct our
economy so as to achieve just that. However, the communists are not really interested in this ,
because their strategy for increasing their ranks is to create misery, not prosperity. The
communist-run government is not interested in fomenting cooperativism, but rather in
unconditional servitude to the plans for the sovietization of Guatemala. The communist tactic is
to create complete misery so that the desperate workers then turn to the communist party and
look for the soviet paradise which Moscow promises will come once they achieve total power.
Fortunately Guatemalans, anti-Communist in their immense majority, see thorough this strategy.
But while Arbenz remains in power, Guatemalans cannot even hope for any economic
improvement because that would be against Moscow's orders We are not supporters of having
a capitalist regime, as we consider that to be a system in decline. We believe the world will
evolve toward a more fair and human condition which will favor the greatest number. If we were
asked what we are and where we are headed, we would respond that we are with neither
communism nor inhuman capitalism, that we aspire to an economic democratic cooperativism.
In accordance with our movement's postulates, we will orient the economy toward benefiting the
greatest number. We will organize Guatemala into being strongly productive, raising the standard
of living of all social classes, especially the workers, and attracting domestic and foreign capital
and technical assistance from the UN to develop new sources of wealth. [Music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

132

005

016

280

296

30 May 2130

CASSETTE #186
No Sign On. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [3420 kes - given below at 280.]

Acusamos de Alta Traicion. [*] [The script provides only the opening of this segment ] Good
evening. [Goes into a long, rambling, emotional homage to the Guatemalan flag, so heinously
dishonored by Arbenz and his gang who have replaced it with a dirty red cloth, with multiple
accusations of high treason. Stirring musical background.

Refrain6. Refrain 5. Refrain 4. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- Nicaraguan president Somoza has proposed an interamerican conference to
discuss the evidence of a vast communist plan in Central America to subvert the region.

_- Brazilian senator has charged that Guatemala has become a Soviet military
base in Central America, threatening the security of the continent.

— The pilots of the planes who bravely flew over the capital and dropped
messages from Radio Liberation have been the subject of laudatory comments across
the nation. The pilots, who until recently were members of the Guatemalan Air Force,
were close friends of Air Force Chief Col. Giron. Giron refuses to give their names to the
Army High Command. We thank Col. Giron for his valuable collaboration.

--The government has delayed the arrival of Russian diplomats whom we said
publicly would be arriving on a commercial mission. Our bulletin on this ran like wildfire
across the country, and the government was forced to delay the arrival. We will advise
the date for which the visit is rescheduled.

-- The bulletin we put out recently about the arrival of faulty weaponry from
Europe has been confirmed. The defective rifles that inflicted such harm on Korean and
Chinese soldiers may well do the same to our peasants to whom they are being
distributed.

-- The republic lacks the funds to pay for the enormous arms shipment that
arrived on the Alfhem. This is not important because the Russians did not sell them, but
them to their first military base in America. But government officials, eager to line their
pockets, are already preparing plans to tax liquor, cigarettes and coffee to pay this
enormous debt.

— Commercial pilots have complained that the anti-aircraft weapons at La
Aurora airport point at them threateningly every time they land there, making them very
nervous. This has happened because a squadron of planes evaded the Guatemalan
defense to drop leaflets from the anti-Communist opposition movement all over the
capital.

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 1:00 PM on 6360 kes.

133

006

051

244

31 May 1300

CASSETTE #225

Sign On |. [6360 kes., “from third secret place in the republic.”] (Refrain 71. Refrain 72.
Refrain 2.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. Oncea Comic, Always a Comic. Many years ago a comical
production for the benefit of the poor was put on at the Lux Theater called “The Fifteen Million,”
starring one Guillermo Toriello, also known as “Willy.” Later, in 1945, the comedian attended the
San Francisco Conference Sponsored by the Revolution of October, not yet contaminated by the
red virus, apparently. He later was the personal courier of a message from the newly-seated
president Arevalo to the Russian ambassador in Mexico. And recently was the chief Guatemalan
delegate to the Caracas Interamerican Conference. Once again Torielto had the opportunity to
be the comic, and once again in a benefit performance. But this time the beneficiaries were not
the poor, but the gang that has delivered our country bound hand and foot to international
communism. Toriello could afford to play David against Goliath at Caracas, because democracy
reign in America, and the US was not about to eat him alive. After all, they like ham and bacon,
but from healthy pigs.

Free Trade Unionism Against the Red Threat. Just as there can be no democracy without free
trade unionism, there can be no free trade unionism without democracy. Totalitarianism calls for
the total destruction of free trade unions. Under communism, unions are only instruments of the
dictators that make no effort to serve the interests of the people. In Russia they are used as a
means to coerce the workers. Under totalitarianism the rights to strike, to collective negotiations,
to changes of employment, to protest against reductions, disappear entirety. [Music. }

[Refrain 74. Refrain 100. Refrain 101. Refrain 102. Refrain 69. Refrain 71. Refrain 73.
Refrain 3. Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs, “third secret place”.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. [*] Arbenz has been
living the life of a schizophrenic, declaring publicly that his government is not communist, while all
the insiders have known all along that the government is controlled by Russia. After the
embarrassment of the Caracas conference, Russia ordered that the communists step to the
forefront, and let Arbenz be branded a liar. So it was that Fortuny declared that the Communist
Party constituted the real power in Guatemala. Around the world, communist parties said the
same and called for support to the Guatemalan Communists, all of which puts Arbenz in a difficult
situation. Meanwhile, it appears that Khrushchev and Molotov are getting ready to dump
Malenkov, so Fortuny and Gutierrez don't know whose orders to follow. All of which leaves
Arbenz very much alone and isolated. Neither the communists nor the Army, after the
clandestine arms shipment was uncovered, support him. Rumors are running that every day he
feels mentally less stable. Our complete faith in the triumph of justice and freedom is about to be
rewarded. [Music.]

No Sign Off. “Radio Liberacion, the clandestine statio

134

005

015

31 May 1330

CASSETTE #185

No Sign On. The next program will be Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [Refrain 75. Refrain 2.
[6360 kes. “operating from a third secret place in the republic.”]

Arbenzists like the most modern airplanes? It's simple. They're alike in that since Wednesday
night, after the visit of our planes, they're jet-propelled. Sabia Ud. que....? section.
Glenn Miller, “I've Got Rhythm.” Lots of joking built around jast Wednesday's leaflet drop. Now
we continue with the verses of Los Trinqueteros:

Abajo al crimen y al robo,

Vamos a echar de Ja silla,

Al comunista Jacobo

Y a su malaita pandilla. {Plays whole song.]
[Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 2.]

135

31 May 2100
CASSETTE #184
006 Sign On I. [3420 kes. “from a third secret place in the republic.”] [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

060 Pegando Centro, [*] Our intelligence agents have completed compiling their list of traitors who
are caching communist arms, and from this moment we are starting to denounce them.
Attention, Alvaro Hugo Salguero. Your house in Ciudad Nueva has a scandalous amount of
illegal weapons stashed in it. Eight men stand constant guard over them. If you don't turn them
in to the nearest Army installation and obtain a receipt, our people will seize them at an opportune
moment and use them against you. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

108 No Sign Off. Ends.

136

005

005

31 May 2130

CASSETTE #181

No Sign On. [No frequency given here, but 3420 kcs given below.] Goes straight into...

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

— Archbishop Rosell y Arellano has told a reporter that reiations between the
church and the government are totally broken. His comments have been published in
the most important papers of the Americas, receiving the most favorable of comments.

_- Guatemalan communists, directed from abroad, have been little by little
cornering the traitor Jacobo Arbenz, putting him in a political situation in which he will
become increasingly dependent on them. He is virtually the hostage of the triumvirate of
Jose Manuel Fortuny, Victor Manuel Gutierrez and Carlos Manuel Pellecer. They're the
ones who forced him to issue his ridiculous warning about an invasion from abroad.
They are the ones who engineered the importation of arms from Russia. Having seized
this control, the communists have also taken the reins of the foreign propaganda
machine. Their instrument in this cause is the puppet foreign minister, Guillermo
Toriello. The communist government of the traitor Arbenz threatens the peace and
tranquillity of all America.

— The cynical Toriello told the foreign press that it is untrue the government is
expecting more arms from abroad. But at the very time this bit of news was being
published, the Panama Canal Zone and US Navy authorities unloaded a French ship that
was indeed bringing more arms to Guatemala.

— Again the Honduran foreign minister has made clear the involvement of
Guatemala in the labor strike affecting his country.

~- Toriello continue his soviet-style lying, but nobody believes the cynical
traitor's lies. As is known, the Haitian government has declared the Guatemalan charge
d’affaires in Haiti persona non grata and expelled him, but Toriello insisted on saying that
the man was just returning to Guatemala on a personal visit.

— The former president of Costa Rica has warned current president Jose
Figueres not to let the country join a bloc with Guatemala in opposition to the Central
American bloc, as that would be against the wishes of the people. Figueres has not
responded , and not denied his intent to do just that.

— Carlos Salazar, leader of Guatemalans in exile in Mexico, provided
documentary evidence of the communist penetration of Guatemala to the anti-
Communist congress being held in Mexico City.

--A high level source in the government has informed us that the Arbenz gang is
preparing a simulated military coup so as to be able to accuse foreign countries of
interfering in our domestic affairs. An effort is underway to cache arms, with markings of
a friendly foreign country, so as to be able to later accuse it of having smuggled those
arms in. But by now all America knows how the reds specialize in developing this false
coups.

-- Asa further part of their overall plan, the government has sent its thugs to
take advantage of the recent attempt against the train that carried the red arms from
Puerto Barrios. The plan is for them to place explosives on the tracks to blow up
passenger trains in a traitorous and criminal act. We declare emphatically that we have
nothing to do with this, that we have not and will not attack passenger trains in any way,
that our only attack was on the train carrying the red weapons. Our only targets are
military and communist ones. [Refrain 8.] [Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

Sign Off. Back at 1:00 PM on 6360 kes.

137

005

050

104

276

1 June 1300

CASSETTE #182
Sign On |. [6360 kes.) [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

Pegando Centro. Attention, Alvaro Hugo Salguero. Your house in Ciudad Nueva has a
scandalous amount of illegal weapons stashed in it. Eight men stand constant guard over them.
If you don't turn them in to the nearest Army installation and obtain a receipt, our people will seize
them at an opportune moment and use them against you. [same as Cassette #184]

[Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

Comunismo al Desnudo. \|n our last program [Cassette #176] we were discussing the seven
characteristics which the communists attribute to us, but we that we have been showing pertain
more to them, the communist pigs of the government. We showed in the last program that it is
they who sold the country out, rid it of democratic freedoms, have used religion for political
purposes, placed our youth at the service of soviet military plans. [Announcer now finishes
developing this latter point, then proceeds to citing and refuting the fifth point:

— attacking agrarian reform and wanting to return the lands to the earlier feudal owners.
Tomorrow we will continue developing these points. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria; Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. The government
continually berates you about the glories that will abound under the “New Guatemala.” We think
an appropriate antidote to this giant lie will be to tell you the story of a city that has been under
communist rule for twenty years. [Goes on to describe a city, apparently mythical, where all the
buildings are falling apart, the people are demoralized and miserable, etc., but where the
peasants remain defiant and claim they will never succumb to the communist evil.]

[Refrain 76. Refrain 77. Refrain 78. Refrain 79. Refrain 80. Refrain 81.] {Music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

138

005

022

180

1 June 1330

CASSETTE #135
Refrain 8. Refrain 2. [6360 kes]

Nuestra Campana Radial. Every day the government of Arbenz becomes more desperate,
depending ever more on the brutality of Cruz Wer and his police... we have seen so many recent
examples....the treatment of the Salama prisoners, the assault on Radio Internacional, the
persecution of the those who paint the “32” slogan, etc....the police will become even more
brutal....to help those who might be victimized in coming days, we offer some guidance... you
have every right to ignore the government's censorship...but when you read banned newspapers,
do it alone, pass them anonymously, putting them under doors, leaving them in public
places....speak of what you read, but don't Say where you read it....don’t hold on to these papers
but circulate them securely.....don't have Political discussions with strangers.....be careful of what
you say on the telephone and what you write in letters, government agents monitor these
communications....if they try to arrest you, demand to see the arrest warrant....if they don't have
one, make every effort to escape....if you fail, draw attention by Screaming....make sure your
family and friends know they should get a lawyer if you are arrested....and they should alert the
independent press....say nothing without talking to your lawyer first....be careful of tricks when
they are interrogating you....always have a plausible explanation for anything you really may have
Gone....for instance, if you transported banned propaganda materials, have a story ready with
innocent reasons for having taken that trip....the day of liberation is coming, have patience and
hope, Guatemalans! [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.)

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. The government is upset with our radio station because we did not
seek permission to operate....well, our airplane didn't seek permission either! nor did our other
planes....they want us to tell them when, how, what, etc....the government is planning to
announce that after investigating they know to whom the planes belong -- the army of liberation —-
and that they flew without permission. Sabia Ud. Que... Did you know the government has a
powerful military base at Potun [phon.], in Ei Peten Department? Did you know that although it is
a military base it does not belong to the army but rather to the communist party? Did you know
that the Arbenz government violates the Constitution starting with Title |, Article 1? [Glenn Miller,
“In the Mood”] [More joking about government's reaction to airborne leaflet drop. ]

Teaches the next verse of Los Trinqueteros’ Cancion de Guerra [War Song):

Adentro que estan torteando.

Y a hechar varniz en paleta,

Adelante que ahora es cuando

Les demos en la maceta. [Note: this verse is also taught on Cassette #155. ]

And follows with the bomba,

EI pueblo de Guatemala,
Sufre con resignacion,.
Porque sabe que muy pronto,
Tendra su liberacion.

{Plays the entire song.] And nowa special announcement: you need have no fear of our
actions....our actions are aimed at military and communist targets, not at civilians....there is no
need for worry. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2]

Sign Off.

139

006

050

100

280

1 June 2100

CASSETTE #134
Sign On |. [3420 kes] Refrain 8. Refrain 2

Pegando Centro. Warning to Dra. Trejo in Antigua, Guatemala [see Cassette #132].
Tomorrow we will identify another person hiding weapons in Guatemala. [Refrain 8.

Rompiendo fas Cadenas. [*] Arevalo was responsible for opening the doors of Guatemala to
international communism....Arbenz is responsible for having continued that treasonous
activity....both are responsible for the tragedy, both material and spiritual, which affticts
Guatemala today....in today's program we will refer to the spiritual aspect... Archbishop Rosell y
Arellano has been the subject of much consternation in the councils of government....they are
undecided as to what to do about him, although the threat of expulsion from the country is
alive....the ladies of the marketplace, aware of the danger to him, have surrounded his palace with
a human protective wall....his much-heard radio transmitter was shut down by the
government....the contract through which his program rented time on the official station TGW was
abruptly canceled by the government, and the time slot given to the communists....in late January
a cleric was arrested and tortured by the infamous Cruz Wer's Civil Guard, and deported to
Honduras, and his tiny radio station closed down....last year the archbishop was vilified in the
congress of the nation....Arbenz-communism has systematically harassed the Sisters of
Charity....there are hundreds of such examples of oppression....and the antipatriot and renegade
communists continue to plot the expulsion of Rosell y Arellano....this is a warning call to all of
Us....if we want to retain our faith, we must fight, we must break the chains of slavery! [Refrain 8.
Refrain 2.]

failed....then, and only then did Arbenz cynically proffer the idea of a non-aggression pact, only
after the Honduran ambassador had been recalled, only after Honduras received an arms
shipment from the US....the Hondurans are not naive, they fully understand the tactics of the
Arbenz government and the reasoning behind the peace proposal. {Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

140

005

031

247

1 June 2130

CASSETTE #133
Refrain 8. Castillo Armas statement from Cassette #128. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs}

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Fatherland and Antifatherland. All men are the children of two
mothers, one who gives him birth, the other which offers him the ampie breast of its land in which
our spirit was forged (sic)....who doesn't love his mother, who doesn't love his
Fatherland?....unfortunately there are deformities of souls....there are children who turn their back
on their mother, and renegade children who deny their Fatherland....communism has created the
antifathertand....antifatherland is a nest of snakes, pack of jackals, potful of hatreds, a place in
which consciences are prostituted....these people want Guatemala to be a slave of Russia....our
mottoes sprout from the fatherland: God, Fatherland, Liberty...the mottoes of Arbenz and his
gang sprout from the antifatherland: Impiety, Lies, Slavery....the symbols of this satanic motto are
the hammer and sickle....our symbol is the Cross, symbol of redemption....God, Fatherland,
Liberty, the trilogy that nourishes our spirit. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2. ]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- the Arbenz regime has drafted a law which places the control of alt coffee exports in
hands of INFOP, and which has been kept secret by communist leaders. INFOP
will get 35 quetzals for every ton exported.

-- Honduras and Nicaragua have been receiving in recent weeks large amounts of

American goods thanks to trade pacts signed with the US.

~ APRN official in Chiquimulas states there is a reign of terror in that department
because the communists deny responsibility for the recent incident there in
which nearly 80 people died.

- the Arbenz government used to be able to count on support from another
communist government in the region, Costa Rica, whose ambassador in the
US told Mr. Dulles his government supports the anti-Communist Declaration
of Caracas.

-- [several other news items]

-- the Mexican army, sensing the forthcoming fall of the communist regime in
Guatemala, is patrolling the border and preparing to stop any influx of Guatemalan
communists. [It seems the only country that will accept them is Russia, and that’s
where we will send any who.survive the liberation, if in fact any do survive.

{Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back at 1:00 PM tomorrow on 6360 kcs.

141

006

037

055

093

274

2June 1300
CASSETTE #132
Sign On I. (6360 kes]
Castillo Armas statement from Cassette #128. [Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. Warning to Dra. Trejo in Antigua, Guatemala, who has arms hidden in her
home which she intends to distribute to communists, communists who have orders to go to her
house at any given time. Turn those arms in, Dra. Trejo, to the nearest army installation or you
will regret having had them. Tomorrow we will identify another person in Antigua concealing
weapons. We have already identified two: Alvaro Hugo Salguero, and now Dra. Trejo.

Comunismo al Desnudo. [*] In yesterday's program we spoke of how the soviet ko/khozes are
constituted, and how the Guatemalan communists are trying to do the same thing here. [Goes on
to give production figures for a specific kolkhoz that was written about by a Spanish emigre, and
how the fruits of production are divided among the state, the bureaucrats, the party officials, and
finally, the actual workers. Proceeds to compare salary figures of Soviet military and political
chiefs with those of average workers. Says these injustices can only be corrected by free
enterprise. Criticizes British socialism which brought the nation’s economy downhill. Then cites
example of Guatemala’s nationalized farmland which now lie in disuse. }] How sad that
Guatemala, which we thought to be an independent nation, is merely a province of Russia, where
our rulers must go to get their instructions. Soon, however, although they will continue to travel
there, it will be a one-way trip. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. [*] The hour in which
we can all feel free is not far away, but until then patience, discretion and prudence are called
for....we must remain united to fight for God, fatherland and liberty... “he who is not with me is
against me.”....these words of Christ are relevant today....every believer should renounce
communism and fight it actively....to remain passive helps communism destroy religion....
everyone must take a position....God or communism, there is no other choice... Religious
persecution has always existed, but before it was less insidious because it was more open....in
any case, people came to learn that atheistic materialism led to misery, and they returned to their
religious beliefs which were strengthened by the persecution they had experienced. The
Communists claimed they would let the Russian Orthodox Church continue to exist, but they took
it over and ran it as an instrument of the party....here in Guatemala, as in other countries,
communist orders are to not attack the church head on, but infiltrate it and form a pseudo-clergy
that will preach the communist doctrine....therefore all believers should renounce this false clergy
and its machinations or run the risk of excommunication....the line is drawn, for God or for
Communism, there is no other choice. [Refrain 2.] [Music]

Music stops. No Sign Off.

142

005

020

090

140

2June 1330

CASSETTE #131
Refrain 8. Refrain 2. 6360 kcs.

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] Guatemala has a history of being afflicted by amoral political
systems, from the dictatorships of the past to the communism we encounter today. “Reasons of
state" is the driving force behind today's political system, replacing morality. Actions are taken
based on “reasons of state” rather any analysis of right and wrong. Any political system without
morality will always be a danger for the Human Person, which will inevitably be sacrificed “for
reasons of state” whenever necessary. The liberal systems of the 19th century are at the root of
these problems, for the doctrines of those days subordinated morality to politics. Today the lack
of morality is expressed in the “reasons of state” phrase, which was used, for instance, to justify
the assassination of Col. Francisco Javier Arana by the Arbenz regime. Only when we manage
to establish morality as the only “reason of state,” will we be able to have a true Christian
democracy. Our immediate task is to eliminate communism from our system and implement a
morality which will be the basis of a public life that we will implement immediately after the
overthrow of the current regime.

The ideological Decalogue, “Why We Cannot Be Communists..." is read.
Reads Castillo Armas’ statement from Cassette # 128. [Refrain 2.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] No music, format of quiz show featuring “Dr. |. Que.”
Satirical sponsorship of “Forfritz” (reference not clear). (Refrains 15, 16, 17, 18.) [Music]

[Refrain 8. Refrain 2.} Sign Off.

143

005

044

097

300

2 June 2100

CASSETTE #130
Sign On I. [3420 kcs] Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. Warning to Macedonio Vicente of San Mateo Milpas Altas, Suchitepequez
Department. We have evidence that the Partido Accion Revolucionaria - PAR - is stashing arms
in your house. We suggest you return them or turn them into the nearest army base, or else we
will capitalize on them when the coming day of liberation arrives. We continue our campaign of
exposing those who are keeping arms for the communists. We have previously identified Alvaro
Hugo Salguero in the capital and Dra. Trejo, in Antigua, and today Macedonio Vicente in San
Mateo Milpas Altas. Tomorrow we will send a warning to another person in Suchitepequez, this
time in San Bartolo [see Cassette # 124]. [Refrain 2.]

Sangre de Martires. This is announced as the inaugural episode of this new series of political
programs. This one is the case of Sgt. Carlos Enrique Posadas, accused of treason, beaten and
tortured by Civil Guard, falsely confessed and falsely imprisoned. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.4

Rompiendo las Cadenas. Attacks the policies of the former Arevalo regime, particularly its
economic approach. Nationalizations were the order of the day, but they inevitably were
economic failures. Potun and La Blanca are two prime examples, the latter being a huge
agricultural property which became horribly inefficient when nationalized. It is true that peasants
and workers now have better wages than before, but this increase is offset many times over by
the increase in cost of life's basic necessities. Evidence of the bad shape in which workers find
themselves can be seen in the slums in the suburbs of the capital city. Everything is in economic
ruin, even the hospitals, which lack the basics such as bandages. What Guatemala needs isa
new system of social justice, not the current one which is leading everyone to a common misery.
[Music]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

144

006

019

184

215

2 June 2130
CASSETTE #129

No Sign On. Refrain 8. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. At one time Guatemala was a peaceful place, where people
toiled the land and had plenty....and there was virtually no crime...it is true that the dictatorial
regime that ruled the country constrained the rights of the people, supported only the lords and
nat the people, and frequently and cruelly abused the people....the along came the false prophets,
preaching class warfare, social revenge, the invalidity of property....corrupted the country...crime
and violence the result....the government is a full accomplice, betraying the national
interests....we accuse Jacobo Arbenz of high treason.

[Refrain 46. Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- a large shipment of arms has left for the Pacific coast, where they will be distributed
among peasants of the popular militias.

~— Since mid-May there has been an influx of Europeans into the country, they are in
touch with the communists, they are international communist agents.

-- Russian ambassador to Mexico has sent Arbenz a large amount of money.

-- Arbenz has offered the Mexican president a petroleum concession if the latter
agrees to influence Colombia, Brazil and Chile to support the Guatemalan govt. He
is selling out the sovereignty of the country.

-- 7-18 European technicians are staying at the home of Major Alfonso Martinez
Estevez, chief of National Agrarian Dept, and among them are several instructors in
Soviet arms.

-- Salvadoran ambassador recently said it is tue Guatemalan army is patrolling the
border with Honduras. A government spokesman said the reason for this is that they
have information of a Castillo Armas invasion from there. Government leaders were
observed by reporters to be pale and trembling with fear. When the time comes,
they will undoubtedly flee and seek diplomatic asylum.

-- Several drunks in an interior city shouted communist slogans from trucktops,
but police did nothing.

~ A peasant was injured while being trained to use Soviet arms as a result of their
poor quality.

-- Anti-aircraft battery at National Palace have been reinforced as a result of our air
force's incursions. Also a new regulations prohibits planes from flying over
military installations.

-- Several military officers determined to defend the honor of the armed forces recently
met in a restaurant. Known as the “Legion of Honor,” it accepts only officer truly
identifying with the Guatemalan cause. They have informed us of their desire
to participate in our crusade. (Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

145

007

050

101

219

3 June 1300

CASSETTE #128
Sign On|. [6360 kes] Refrain 8. Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. Warning to Macedonio Vicente, of San Mateo Milpas Altas [same warning as
Cassette #130.] [Refrain 2]

La Mujer y La Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista, [*] It seems like the
communist leaders have finally realized that we are not going to support them....they are
desperately seeking the good will and support of a small minority....since they continue with their
lies, we must again repeat the truth....it is not difficult to reveal the betrayals of the communists,
one need only look at their record....let’s just examine their record of brutality, for instance, their
method of breaking the human spirit and mind by means of psychological torture....the break the
will to resist by forcing everyone to abandon their beliefs and aspirations, patriotism and love of
family, religious sentiments, etc... party aspirants must break relations with their families and old
friends....must fill out endless forms and answer endless repetitions of questions.....until confusion
is total....then begins the second phase of psychological torture....indoctrination in communist
theory....forced to repeat lie after lie and admit that previous utterances were lies....until finally the
distinction between truth and fie no longer exists... a slave has been created...the communists
have failed here but they keep trying...but the battlelines have been drawn, and the final battle for
the souls of our people must be fought now. [Refrain 46. Refrain 2.)

Nuestra Campana Radial. Attacks the government for its audacity in calling the armed forces
the “army of the revolution." The army does not belong to the revolution, but to the nation....it is
the national army....this effort of the communists is even more audacious than their renaming the
National Stadium the “Stadium of the Revolution”....and the army should be more vigilant of what
is going on in the government, a government that regularly violates the Constitution. ...if it doesn't
pay more attention, it must recognize that the day of accounting is near....army and communism
are incompatible....the army is an eminently democratic organization, whereas the Marxist
popular militias are thoroughly totalitarian...anyone who avers that these two can march arm in
arm is a cynical liar....as guardian of our sovereignty and of democracy, the army toust not
underestimate the danger it confronts and the traps laid before it...it has the obligation to clean
communism from its ranks, and tomorrow may be too late. [Martial music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

146

006

016

152

3 June 1330

CASSETTE # 127
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [6360 kes]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Discussion unemployment and vagrancy....vagrancy isa
loathsome feature, but the onslaught of unemployment under the current regime has made it
difficult to distinguish between lazy, parasitic vagrants, and unfortunate individuals who are
simply denied work....our program will deal appropriately with each, punishing the parasite,
helping the unemployed. Although unemployment is rampant in Guatemala today, there is much
potential everywhere for producing the needed jobs....all that is needed is an honest government
to realize the potential....the only party responsible for the current disarticulation of the
Guatemalan economy is the communist party....so many businesses have shut down because
they are unable to withstand labor demands and obstacles fanned by the communists, and by the
avalanche of taxes imposed on them....the government of honest and capable people that we will
bring will solve this preblem. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.)

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Begins with Sabia Ud. Que...? section, citing several recent
historical facts. Plays La Profesia. Describes how the government has routinely violated
Articles 1 and 2 of the Constitution. Teaches another verse of Los Trinqueteros.

EI dedo jala que jala
Batiendo a las sordas rojas.
Vamos para Guatemala,

A ver a nuestras patojas.

{Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

147

005

049

090

3 June 2100

CASSETTE #126
Sign Ont. [3420 kes] Refrain 8. Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. Warning to Gilberto Velasquez. We know there are arms stored in your
house, brought there by communists. Return them or turn them in to the nearest army
installation, or we will use them against you. Next warning will be for a person In Antigua,
Guatemala. [Refrain 9. Refrain 2.]

Sangre de Martires. The saga of Major Manuel Contreras Orellana, retired military officer
dedicated to farming, whose only crime was to be an Anti-Communist. He relates the tale of his
arbitrary arrest, allegation of involvement in the uprising [levantamiento] at Salama, his torture at
the Civil Guard headquarters in search of confession, his shooting as he “attempted to escape.”

[Note: Per Cassette #280, this Contreras case was played on Thursday, 3 June.]

Off the air. No Sign Off.

148

007

022

150

372

CASSETTE #125

Refrain 8. Refrain 2. (3420 kes]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. {*} Countries ruled by communists no longer are governed by law, but
rather by communist slogans....a constitutional framework may be allowed to continue to exist as
long as it does not get in the way of the Kremlin's dictates..... Guatemala is no exception....we
have in our Constitution Article 32, banning political organizations of international or foreign
character....and the Electoral Law of 1947 bans any political party that forms part of, or acts in
accord with, or in subordination to, any foreign or international organization....but there we have
the PGT (the communist party), there we have Tribuna Popular, the communist party's
instrument, both generously funded from the nation’s coffers....but there is more... not a month
goes by without a delegation from the PGT traveling to the Soviet Union to render homage and
obtain the current instructions for Guatemala....Let us warn Jacobo Arbenz right now, that sooner
than he can imagine, all the evil of his government is going to fall on top of him and squash him.
[Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Long, melodramatic harangue, with musical background fading
in and out, attacking all the evils of communism, and extolling all the virtues of democracy,
freedom, justice, religion, etc. Ends with the usual accusation of Jacobo Arbenz of treason
against the nation, and numerous other heinous activities. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off.

149

005

047

095

196

4June 1330

CASSETTE #124
Sign On |. [6360 kes] Refrain 11. Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. This time the warning is to Gilberto Velasquez, San Bartolo, Department of
Sacatepeques [phon. Suchitepequez?]. We have reliable information that in your house you are
storing a sizable amount of arms taken their by communists. Either return them, or turn them into
the nearest army installation, or we will use them against you when the time comes. The next
warning will be for a person in Antigua, Guatemala. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante al Problema Comunista. {*] The loyal,
honorable citizens are full of hope these days....those who have suffered through the communist
persecutions anticipate a new dawn....the communist government is being destroyed by its own
corruption....internal corruption is the destiny of all communist governments....because
communism is an inhuman system imposed on the citizens....we now know that our plans for
building a new government based on freedom, justice and equality, are about to be
implemented....the imminent communist fall is a tribute to the spirit of the Guatemalan
people....they cannot be conquered by communism, because they have 1,000 years of faith and
stoicism....the agents of communism have used all the strategies and tactics of their world
revolution methods, and their failure here has made them the laughing stock of the western
world,...we the women of Guatemala have a profound understanding of the words of our national
anthem....the words “better dead than enslaved" are engraved on our hearts.

[Refrain 12. Refrain 13. Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. [*] The communists, all atheists, know perfectly well that almost all
Guatemalans are fervent Christians....so they try to avoid the theme of religion if at ail
possible....sometime they display their anti-church feelings, as in their attacks on Rossell y
Arellano, but generally they prefer to speak of something else....here is some recent evidence of
the true communist position on religion, articles from Komsomolskaya Pravda on the
subject....[quotes from articles, on incompatibility of science with religion, on religion being the
tool of the dominant social classes, on how religion degrades, science, knowledge and the human
mind, how in a truly socialist society, conditions exist for the total conquest of religion] ... and this
is just an example of how the communist hatred for religion is at work everyday. Tomorrow we
will take about another shameful article from Komsomoiskaya Pravda. [Refrain 14.

Refrain 10.] [Music.]

150

007

025

168

379

4June 1330

CASSETTE #123
No Sign On. [Refrain 9} [Refrain 10] [Refrain 11] [Refrain 2] [6360 kes]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. [*] The Arbenz government is an instrument of the Soviet
communists....Arbenz and Guillermo Torielio are the principal actors, inspired by the country's no.
1 communist, Jose Manuel Fortuny....Guatemalan foreign policy follows Soviet instructions....thus
the Arbenz government's efforts in El Salvador, Costa Rica, Luperon, Cayo Confites, Nicaragua,
Cuba and Honduras....they failed everywhere except Costa Rica.... now the Arbenz strategy is to
lull these countries to sleep with false protestations of friendship... Toriello most recently
demonstrated this tactic in Honduras, but the Hondurans saw through it....Arbenz has now
converted our country into the nerve center of Central American discord...not satisfied, the Arbenz
regime reaches into the Caribbean, with active participation in the assassination plot against the
Cuban president....Arbenz is trying to convert our four sister Central American republics into
Soviet satellites. ...it is against this international policy of the red government that the liberation
movement fights. ...we are for solidarity with our brothers in America, in the West....the
Guatemalan people reject the traitors who currently govern the country, and only await the
moment, very near now, to eradicate communism from the country. [Refrain 8] [Refrain 2]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Ridicules a few 1953 acts by the Arbenz government. Plays La
Profesia. More ridicule. Then teaches another verse of Los Trinqueteros:

Abrir puertas y ventanas....... [Same as Cassette #4A]
Plays entire Los Trinqueteros. More ridicule. [Refrain 2]

Sign Off.

151

006

048

093

4June 2100

CASSETTE #122
Sign On |. [3420 kes} Refrain 8. Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. This time the warning is for the owner of the Hotel Rancho Nimajay (ph) in
Antigua. We have been informed that the government has cached a substantial amount of
communist arms at this hotel. You should turn in these arms to the nearest army installation, or
we will use them against you when the time comes. [Refrain 2]

Sangre de Martires. Another chapter in the series about “the inhuman acts of the Arbenz regime
against Guatemalans.” This time it is the story of Captain Rene Fernandez Alfaro who, after
avoiding an entrapment effort, is arrested, tortured by Cruz Wer and associates, and expelled
across the border to Mexico. [Refrain 8] [Refrain 2] {Martial music]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

152

005

023

193

209

4June 2130
CASSETTE #236
No Sign On. [Refrain 83. Refrain 84. Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]
Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. [*] [Extended harangue with musical background accusing

Arbenz of betraying the country to the communists and embarrassing the nation before the
Americas and the world. Long quote fram Castillo Armas. }

[Refrain 84. Refrain 83. Refrain 2.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- All news agencies have discussed the sovietization of the Guatemalan armed forces.

Travelers from Guatemala to Panama told the Star-Herald that military officers fear that the
arrival of the arms shipment from Russia signifies the beginning of total communist control of the
armed forces. These same officers revealed that a Russian or Polish military mission will be
established in Guatemala, and that Guatemalan officers will be replaced by officers from Eastern
Europe. [Continues on to develop this theme. ]

-- As Toriello awaits a response from Honduras to his cynical proposal for a non-aggression pact,
President Galvez has sharply criticized the Guatemalan government. {Details press reports on
Galvez statements. ]

— The First Congress Against Soviet intervention in Latin America, held these past days in Mexico
City, was a success. [Provides some details on the congress. ]

— Panama. Public indignation is rising against petty little “friends of..." groups that are sprouting.
This is particularly true in the case of former “friends of Russia” who have now come out as
“friends of Guatemala.”

—~ [Other items, including one on the alleged Guatemalan government-inspired attack on Radio
America in Tegucigalpa, relates it to the attempt at capture of Radio Liberation on 24 May.”

[Refrain 83. Refrain 84. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Back tomorrow at 1:00 PM on 6360 kes.

153

006

049

202

5 June 1300

CASSETTE #235

Sign On I. [6360 kes.] Refrain 8. Refrain 2.
La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. [*] Is Guatemala
destined to become a second Korea? In the last several weeks, ever since their nefarious plans
were uncovered, the ominous statement “Guatemala is another Korea” has been mouthed. Even
some members of the opposition, possibly in good faith, have warned the Liberation Movement,
“Don't do anything now, for you will give the communists the pretext for starting a war like Korea.”
Let’s analyze this situation. [After a description of the Korea situation, cites several conclusions:
--If the communists are threatening a new Korea, it is because they are preparing an aggression. -
-The aggression was possible in Korea because those in the south stood by idly while the north
stockpiled weapons and formed divisions. And we have witnesses the arms shipments coming
into this country.

—The communists rely on threats. We should be intimidated neither by the communists with their
threats, nor by the false pacifists with their fearsome warnings.

_-We must act now to stop the communists in their tracks. [Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. Ever since the advent of the communist influence in Guatemala,
beginning in the Arevalo regime, the courts have been prejudiced in favor of the communists and
against anti-Communists. Specifically, the dockets are full of labor cases in which the courts’
judgments are inevitably against management, and civil and criminal cases in which the
judgments are inevitably consonant with the PGT political line. The appeals process never seems
to work for anyone who is identified as being anti-Communist. No effort was made by the courts
to prosecute those guilty of murder, of genocide, during the incident at La Aurora base on 5
November 1950. On the contrary, the courts only investigated and prosecuted those who
survived that ordeal, including Carlos Castillo Armas. No investigation was made of the murder
of three anti-Communist prisoners at Salama prison on 2 April 1953. No one was prosecuted for
the murder of Col. Francisco Javier Arana on 18 July 1949. No one has ever investigated any of
the crimes committed by the Guardia Civil and the Guardia Judicial against the citizenry. And the
courts have never moved to come to the rescue, the just rescue, of the 100 anti-Communist
prisoners at Salama. [Music - ends at Counter 371.]

154

012

028

140

185

230

302

5 June 1330
CASSETTE #44

Brief sarcastic notice that Arbenz will be meeting with President Eisenhower, according to world
press reports. [Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. A critique of the Arbenz government's approach to economic
cooperativism. This simply doesn’t work in totalitarian societies. All have failed. Such
institutions in this type of regime end up serving the bureaucratic interests of those in power, and
not those they are supposed to assist. But this does not mean cooperatives don’t work. On the
contrary, they are an integral part of our political program. They do not require a huge
investment of capital. The basic necessities of life can be offered through cooperatives, without
the human exploitation we see today. [Refrain 2.]

More notes on how the Arbenz government violates articles of the Constitution. This time it is
Title 2, article 9, which states that illiterate people have the option of voting or not voting, but
everyone knows that illiterate people are being herded into trucks and taken to the polls and
forced to vote, not just once, but many times over. Cites other ways electoral rules are being
broken regularly.

La Profesia

Continues teaching the “new song” of Los Trinqueteros. Here's another verse:
Abrir puertas y ventanas,

Que somos los meros meros.

Echar repiques y dianas.

Que vienen Los Trinqueteros.

Plays the entire “Los Trinqueteros song:”

Attacks government, specifically the Guatemalan military attaché in Honduras, for having
accused a local radio station, simply for the crime of having sold us time on their scheduling.
Obviously they are concerned because they know ail the emigres in Honduras are with us.
Combines this with commentary on Arbenz effort to develop a mutual non-aggression pact with
Honduras. They do this because they want to believe we are operating out of Honduras, but this
is nonsense, we are right inside Guatemala. But they will never be able to find us because one
day we're here, one day we're there, we move all about.

155

005

050

090

096

108

5 June 2100
CASSETTE #234
Sign On |. [3420 kes.] Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.

Pegando Centro. Attention, Major Marco Antonio Franco, President of the Congress. We have
been able to establish that you are caching a vast amount of communist arms. We are warning
you, Major Franco, that those arms should belong to the army, because that is the only entity
authorized to have them. Either you turn them over yourself, or they will be used against you
when the moment comes. The next warning will be for another person in the capital. [Refrain 2.

[Music begins, but suddenly cuts off. A moment of silence, then...]

Refrain 73. [Refrain 2 - “on 6360 kes from the third secret place in Guatemala.”] [Since this
last phrase was not used in the renditions of Refrain 2 at 005 above, and the frequency is
different, this must be a different broadcast.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. The subject today is from our political program, the Plan of
Tegucigalpa: public health. [This editorial criticizes all aspects of the current regime's public
health program, and states the oppositions plans and goals. Although these are very generic and
banal (“construction of the Roosevelt hospital should be completed quickly,” “medical personnel
should be well-trained,” “hospitals should have all the equipment necessary,” etc., it is probably
an effective political presentation.] [Here, at Counter 250, the four bells sequence begins, the
usual lead-in to Refrain 2, but suddenly there is silence. ]

Ends. This cassette is not a full broadcast.

156

006

016

284

374

5 June 2130
CASSETTE #233
No Sign On. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.}

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. \t is interesting to see how the communists try to portray the
anti-Communist forces of the opposition as traitors at the service of “yankee imperialism.” But
the real traitors are the communists and their tools like Arbenz and his gang. They are the one
who act in response to the dictates of a foreign power, Soviet Russia. They make all this talk
about democracy, but their democracy is unilateral democracy, where only they have rights, only
they are protected by the Constitution and the government, only they can think what they want
and say what they want. They go to incredible lengths to oppress the free press, accusing it of
being a too! of foreign intervention. Journalists are arrested, tortured and killed for speaking cut,
for speaking the truth. This is the kind of democracy they want us to have, one in which only they
can say anything, everyone else is a traitor. But they are the traitors. We are sounding the
warning, this is only the beginning, a wave of terror has been unleashed. And it falls upon the
Army to put a stop to it. The army must be anti-Communist and defend the principles of
democracy. The more the army goes along with the communists, the more it fails to stand up
and do its duty, the more difficult the solution will be. But let them go on harassing the
independent press, torturing innocent citizens, calling us traitors. The earthquake that is going to
shake them loose is on its way. The people begin to clamor for and to opprobrium, crime and
injustice. We accuse them of high treason! [Refrain 2.]

La Noticja Atraves de Radio Liberacion. [The telegraphic sound that is the trademark of this
segment is different this time. Previously it has been a traditional Morse code keying sound.
This time it sounds like it is trying to sound like a Morse key, but sounds more like an old

WW | single-engine plane cranking up.]

~- The anti-Figueres press in Costa Rica (and that’s most of it) has recently published
photographs of Carlos Castillo Armas, as well as an interview with him. [Quotes extensively from
this interview. ] [At the end of this section, the regular “Morse sound” comes on, the announcer
Starts to speak and then cuts off abruptly at Counter 374. Nothing more on this cassette. ]

No Sign Off. Cuts off abruptly.

157

006

047

088

184

307

c. 6 June

CASSETTE #232
Sign On |. [6360 kes.] Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 2

Pegando Centro. Attention, Major Marco Antonio Franco, President of the Congress. We have
been able to establish that you are caching a vast amount of communist arms. We are warning
you, Major Franco, that those arms should belong to the army, because that is the only entity
authorized to have them. Either you turn them over yourself, or they will be used against you
when the moment comes. The next warning will be for another person in the capital. [This is the
same as Cassette #234.] [Refrain 6. Refrain 5. Refrain 2]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. [*] We want to thank
you allt for the excellent information campaign you have been carrying on by spreading the
messages that we broadcast, and we're sure you are probably not even aware of how successful
ithas been, But it's incredible how the communist party, in a country that is 99% against
communism, continues to recruit people. But it recruits on the basis of lies and deception.
Today we will describe for you one of the party's latest little deceits. As we have said before, the
party is aware the Arbenz regime is collapsing, and has been preparing for that eventuality. It has
been laying the foundation of the “United Front,” which they expect to take power after Arbenz’
fail. This is their classic method for seizing power. For some time now they have been placing
their members in key positions in various organizations so that they can use them as the nucleus
of a United Front when Arbenz falls. Women of Guatemala, this has to be stopped at all costs.
The solution is simple. We must eliminate these communists and their sympathizers from our
new government. Let's act now before it is too late - make sure everyone knows about these
nefarious communist plans. [Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. “The great corrupting casino -- plenty for casinos, but not for hospitals
and schools.” At the National October Fair of Guatemala, there exists a casino run by foreigners
of the worst sort. It features foreign women brought here to corrupt our youth, and it serves
Perfectly the designs of international communism. This is the brainstorm of Jorge Toriello, the
traitor who will have to answer to the mothers of Guatemala for the sons who are lost in that
temple of moral putrefaction. Just a few weeks ago, one of our youth, urged on by Toriello, was
put in a position where he had to embezzie 14,000 quetzales from the casino. The communists
who tun this casino have no shame in Persecuting youth who fall into their trap, and this poor
young man had to flee, abandoning his home and shaming his family. This sort of thing happens
daily, with innocent youth being drawn in and lose their money to the point where they must sign
!OU’s, which is how the communists trap them in their nets. Young women also have
succumbed, falling prey to a life of vice at this casino to the despair of their tearful mothers. But
these artists of corruption will one day pay a price to all the defrauded youth, corrupted young
women, and broken homes. [Music.] [Goes on to describe the critical lack of supplies at
hospitals and asylums, while the governments spends vast amounts on Marxist propaganda,
foreign weapons, political espionage apparatuses and...casinos. While the poor and sick suffer,
Arbenz and his hoodlums drive Cadillacs and entertain themselves with orgies typical of men of
their low moral caliber. [Music begins, then cuts off abruptly at Counter 307.]

No Sign Off. Ends abruptly.

158

005

020

108

125

c. 6 June

CASSETTE #231
No Sign On. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. (6360 kcs.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. “The Social Content of Democracy.” Latin American countries,
due to the natural existing circumstances, have been stow in developing the type of democracy
that is seen elsewhere. The principles of democracy evolved from the French Revolution, and
were developed into their most beautiful form in North America, a result of the thinking of the
patriots of the 18th and 19th centuries. In Guatemala, as elsewhere in LAN America, we have
been slow. The principles emanating from the French Revolution were incorporated in the
Constitution, but a series of despotic and corrupt governments managed to largely ignore them to
eventually bring us to the point where we are now, ruled by an undemocratic and totalitarian
regime. But we retain our faith in democracy, and we include in our political program the
statement that our political creed is essentially democratic, recognizing the social rights of the
people.

[Refrain 39. Refrain 74

Lt. Col, Carlos Castillo has said: “Compatriots, the truth is there is a great conspiracy against the
communist government of our country...[long statement]....por la liberacion nacional.”

[Refrain 39. Refrain 7.] [3420 kes, despite what it says above. Believe this cassette is a meld of
two broadcasts.] [Musical theme not heard before, fades out at Counter 4198.]

159

005

021

c. 6 June

CASSETTE #73

Opens with critical comments about Jose Manuel Fortuny’s upcoming trip to the USSR for a sinus
operation. [Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 2.] (6360 kcs.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Includes a Sabla Ud Que...? [Did you know that...] section as
basis for linking government leaders to the communists. Then teaches “the rest” of the
Trinqueteros' song:

Quien Quilete, Yo machete,

Y adentro que estan torteando,
Llores cuando, llores cuando,
Los Trincan los dei Trinquete.

Now we repeat a verse that you already know:

Echar repiques y dianas,

Que somos fos meros, meros,
Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Que vienen los trinqueteros.

Tomorrow we will play almost the entire song, complete with the final “bombas."

Ya un nuevo sol ilumina
Selvas, montes y potreros,
Porque hoy en tierra chapina,
Entramos los Trinqueteros.

Abajo al crimen y al robo,
Vamos a echar de la silla,
Al comunista Jacobo,

Y a su maldita pandilla.

Adentro que estan torteando,
Y a hechar varniz en paleta.
Adelante que ahora es cuando
Les demos en la maceta.

Ef pueblo de Guatemala,
Sufre con resignacion,
Porque sabe que muy pronto,
Tendra su liberacion.

EI dedo jala que jala,
Batiendo a las hordas rojas,
Vamos para Guatemala,

A ver a nuestras patojas.

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Somos los meros, meros,
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen jos Trinqueteros.

160

CASSETTE #73 (cont'd.)

Quien Quilete, Yo machete,

Adentro que estan torteando,
Llores cuando, llores cuando,
Los Trincan los de! Trinquete.

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Somos los meros, meros.
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen ios Trinqueteros.

Guatemala ya sufristes,
Crimen, calumnia y robos,
Pero te queda una gloria,
De haberte volado a Jacobo.

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Somos los meros, meros,
Echar repiques y dianas,
Que vienen los Trinqueteros.

Narrator goes on to cite several instances of how the Arbenz regime violates various articles of

the constitution.

Plays the entire La Profesia. [Refrain 2.)

161

004

200

c. 6 June

CASSETTE #72

[Cuts in] ... Sangre de Martires.
Eulogizes those who have died in the defense of Guatemala.

The case of the student Federico Paes Herrera, student arrested 1 March 53 on way
home from an anti-Communist congress, subsequently abused and tortured. Dramatizes arrest,
laments of his wife, protest demonstration before the National Palace, government response,
judicial proceedings, seven days of torture, false accusations. [This case also discussed on
Cassette #69.] [Refrain 2.] [3420 kcs.]

Yes, there is a conspiracy, a conspiracy against the evils of communism. We are proud to be
conspirators, conspiring to save the fatherland. Extended harangue against the lies of
communism, the need for truth, justice, work. Martial music background.

Martial music ends. No sign off.

162

006

051

162

179

c. 6 June

CASSETTE #276
Sign On |. (6360 kes.] [Refrain 39. Refrain 7. Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante el Problema Comunista. To understand why we
must act now, we must know the kind of life women would have under the traitor Arbenz’
communist regime.....once we know that, | doubt there will be a single one of us who would
hesitate to use her influence to speed up the fall of this nefarious government....[goes into a brief
historical account of the struggle of man to find an equitable system of government based on the
principles that all men are created free, and that they are all brothers....two hundred years ago,
governments based on these premises had come to life in parts of Europe and the Americas, and
were spreading....in central Europe and to the east, however, where the people had not had the
opportunity to experiment with new forms of government, the political system that took hold, the
basis of communism, was predicated on the facts that man is not free but a slave of his
environment....therefore, this theory holds, this environment must be forcibly changed through the
power of a dictatorship, controlled by very few, that could control environments and people....the
communist dictatorship spread and defeated terrible dictatorships that rose to confront it - Nazism
and Eascism....with their defeat, communism achieved huge power and has managed to conquer
large parts of the world....the Arbenz government is just a small part of that international
movement. Fortunately, free people have awakened to this threat, because they know that life
without freedom is intolerable.....and they have discovered enormously powerful allies - the
people who have lived under communist oppression....these people who have lived under
communism will be the cause of its downfall, just as our people are now causing the downfall of
Arbenz.]

{Refrain 7. Refrain 2.]

Nuestra Campana Radial. Communist Penetration of the Trade Unions. Trade unions play an
important role in our country, not so much as advocates for workers’ interests, but more as
political instruments. Before the 1944 revolution there were no labor organizations of any
significant type. After the fall of the Ubico regime, the communists took the Jead in developing
unions. During the brief period when Gen. Ponce was in office, Accion Civica was formed.
Although comprised of elements from across the political spectrum, it was controlled at the top by
Jorge Garcia Granados and Guillermo Toriello Garrido, two pro-Communists who were closely
linked to the Mexican Russophile Vicente Lombardo Toledano. The extreme leftist Vanguardia
Nacional was also formed. This group was disbanded by its leaders so that its key people could
establish themselves in other political parties and lead them on a pro-Communist path. Some of
them were split off to form the communist party, whose name they quickly changed to PGT.
These movements featured well-known people such as Cruz Franco, Fortuny, Pellecer and
Gutierrez, but another important one, now dead, was Enrique Munoz Miani. He held key
positions in all governments up through the current Arbenz one, always pushing the pro-soviet
line, and converting Guatemala into a refuge for communists from all over. During this period,
workers were organizing, forming unions, and melding into two distinct larger groups - the free
Union Sindical, and the communist-controlled CTG. Arevalo and Arbenz eventually managed to
dissolve the former, leaving the CTG as the sole labor central. In the peasant area, a parallel
organization, the UNC, was formed, in close collaboration with the CTG. [Eases into a short
commentary along the “yes, there is a conspiracy in Guatemala, a huge conspiracy of all anti-
Communists conspiring against the traitorous Arbenz regime” theme.] [Music.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

163

004

005

c.7 June

CASSETTE #71

No Sign On.

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

-- Police ordered to capture anyone distributing pamphiets dropped by our aircraft over
the capital on the 19th of May.

-- On 30 May all government planes were in the air in response to rumors of another
incursion by mysterious aircraft. All in vain.

-- Honduran police captured a communist clandestine radio in San Pedro Sula. At first
Guatemalan government thought it might be us, but their hopes were dashed. On the
subject, let us remind that we have only two daily transmissions, one from 1 to 2 in the
afternoon on 6360 kes, and the other from 9 to 10 at night on 3420 kes. Any other
hour or frequency, if not pre-announced by us, is a government hoax.

-- Bogota paper “La Republica” article on Caribbean Legion and Guatemala.

_- First Anti-Communist Congress in Mexico. Proclamations against the Arbenz
government.

-- Colombian Foreign Minister's statements on communist government in Guatemala.

-- Phony expressions of support for Arbenz as announced every day by TGW, all from
communist organizations.

— Guatemalan communist involvement in Honduran labor strife.

— TGW statements on Toriello’s demand for a pact with Honduras.

Refrain 2. [3420 kcs]

164

004

025

c. 7 June

CASSETTE #70

[Cuts in]...another of the interesting programs in this series has reached a happy ending, ladies
and gentlemen. [Music] [ Refrain 7. Refrain 2.] [6360 kes.]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [*] Commentary in very colloquial Guatemalese makes fun of
constant claims by government that there are foreign conspiracies against it. The truth is that
there is a conspiracy, but it is a genuine home-grown conspiracy.

Sabia Ud. que.....? [Cites several recent historical facts which reflect badly on the
government.]

Teaches the final verse of “the song” by Los Trinqueteros (does not give the name of the

song].
Quien quilete, yo machete,
Y adentro que estan torteando.
Y ahora es cuando, y ahora es cuando,
Los trincan los del trinquete.

Abrir puertas y ventanas,
Que somos los meros meros.

Echar repiques y dianas
Que vienen los trinqueteros.

En seguida viene una bomba, que dice de esta forma:

Guatemala, ya sufriste,
Crimen, violencias y robo.
Pero te queda una gloria,
De haberte volado a Jacobo.

[Plays entire song.| Tomorrow we will finalize the verses of the Trinqueteros [he had
said the above was the final verse]. You already know La Profesia. This the second song of the
trio Los Trinqueteros, and very soon we will give you another song.

[Speaks of the incompetents in the government. Gives example of Romulo Reyes Flores, a judge
in Salama. Says this in violation of Article 2 of the Constitution. Goes on to provide other
violations of the Constitution by the current government] [Refrain 7. Refrain 2.]

Sign Off. Next program at 9 PM tonight.

165

003

157

181

c.7 June
CASSETTE #69

No Sign On. Cuts in with music, “...sangre de martires...” Music and introduction: Here isa
tremendous, electrifying chapter of our radio-theater series, “Sangre de Martires” [Blood of
Martyrs}.

The case of the student Paes Herrera, a student who was falsely accused and abused by
police and judicial authorities. Includes narrator, music and dialogue. Not clear if this a real
case or fiction. Ends with a stirring speech by Paes Herrera. [This appears to a segment
subsequent to that on Cassette 72.]

Radio Liberation calling Pedro, its agent in Brigade 410 in the capital. Starting tomorrow, Pedro,
we will start giving you the list of all the people who are distributing arms and communist
propaganda in the interior of the republic. [ Refrain 2.] [3420 kcs]

An acknowledgment that there is indeed a conspiracy against the communist government, 95% of
Guatemalans are involved...

Martial music.

Music ends. No Sign Off.

166

005

055

087

110

c.7 June

CASSETTE #91
Sign On Il. Refrain 2. [3420 kes.]

Pegando Centro. This message is for Minister of Government Augusto Charnaud MacDonaid.
Our intelligence service reports that you are transporting large amounts of arms to your private
house and farm, that you have advised your friends to leave the country because you expect a
revolution to occur this month of June. We also know that you are sending your children to the
United States. Listen closely, Augusto Charnaud MacDonald. Those arms belong to the Army,
Return them, or we will use them to kill you like a dog when the coming liberation bell sounds.
Act now before it is too late.

Radio Liberation to its agent Pedro in Brigade 410 in the nation’s capital. Tomorrow, Pedro,
through these very microphones, we will begin to provide you with the complete list of all those
communists who are distributing arms and propaganda throughout the republic, so that you can
proceed following the instructions you have already received. [Refrain 2.]

Music begins, then cuts off abruptly. No Sign Off. Nothing more on this tape which runs for
about 9 minutes.

167

a

005

014

190

198

367

c. 8 June

CASSETTE #275
Refrain 2. 3420 kcs.

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. After the message delivered by President Arbenz to the Congress
his past March ‘st, there can be no doubt that the Communist Party is alive and active in
Guatemala participating in government functions at all levels, or that the President made clear
that he himself is the protector of that Party and its activities by declaring that the party is
Constitutional. So, discarding his mask, he openly and in defiance of the law advocated the
legality of the Communist party. [Goes on the describe how all along Arbenz has been caught in
the communists’ web and has been serving their interests even since before the murder of Col.
Arana, how as a loyalist to the Comintern he has betrayed the Nationa! Army, but how the Army
still has loyal patriots ho will not serve these communist interests.] We accuse Jacobo Arbenz of
high treason!

Refrain 2.

And now the news:
— The American missions that have been in our country wince WW II will now be forced
to leave. That information is confirmed, as we have a very reliable report that Jose
Manuel Fortuny is carrying out an order to that effect from the Soviet Union and offering
to replace them with Soviet missions. To that effect, a Guatemalan army officer dined
last night in Mexico with the Soviet military attaché at Sanborn’s restaurant.
-- A corpse was found in recent days outside the town of San Antonio, Suchitepequez.
The authorities said he had been involved in a fight and was killed as a result. The truth,
however, is that he was the second victim to date of the faulty weapons recently
imported from behind the Iron Curtain. The government ordered a cover-up of the true
cause of this incident.
-- Minister of Government Augusto Charnaud MacDonald has ordered reprisals against
any person who propagates the notion that the day of liberation is arriving, which has
caused housewives to stockpile foodstuffs. Despite his orders, the housewives are
continuing this practice, just in case.
- The reason for the recent cashiering of many officers from the armed forces is that
Arbenz-has leatned of the existence of the Legion of Honor, and organization of worthy
officers, which has a current membership of 32 active duty officers.
— Montenegro Paniagua is reportedly furious with Arbenz, because it was Arbenz who
ordered him to send the circular in the name of the National Confederation of Peasants,
inviting the popular militias to unleash the national massacre whenever they felt
disposed. Montenegro Paniagua has taken the public blame for this, while Arbenz
declines to assume any responsibility. It is Arbenz’ plan to assassinate Archbishop
Rosell y Arellano and other prominent church leaders.
-- The Paris daily Le Soir has editorialized that if the above reports on Arbenz' plans are
true, Guatemala is certainly a country of savages. Then they say it is us, the anti-
Communists, who are discrediting the country.
-- Flash! The military police in the capital in recent days raided the homes of Alvaro
Hugo Salguero and Hector Castaneda, where they found submachineguns, rifles and
grenades. Thus they confirmed our reports on Pegando Centro [see Cassette #184]
-- The news items you receive on this segment are not published in any newspaper.
Today we have for the anti-Communist people of Guatemala a new statement from the
chief of the Liberation Movernent, Col. Carlos Castillo Armas. [Reads message from
CCA that says recently imported arms are not for the army but for the popular
(communist) militias, and are further evidence of communist plans to subjugate
Guatemala and a huge offense to the military. Goes on to provide results of an interview
of CCA by foreign correspondents. ]

[Anthem.] (Ends with longer than usual harangue against the communists, before cutting
off at 423.]

168

005

046

o71

095

118

216

247

252

c. 8 June

CASSETTE #68A
Sign On Il.

Soon , on the 18th of July, it will be five years since the vile assassination of the chief of the
Armed Forces, Colonel Francisco Javier Arana. This was the price Arbenz paid to international
communism in order to gain the presidency. [Cites names of actual assassins, in the service of
Arbenz and Juan Jose Arevalo. Eulogizes Col. Arana, who refused to sell out to Communism.
Let us now throw out the assassins, judge them, and punish them.

Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Accuses Arbenz of treason and a long list of related crimes.

important Notice, The High Command of the Liberation Army announces that it has declared as
a military target any motorized vehicle appearing on the nation's highway beginning yesterday.
Any such vehicles will be strafed by our air force. We warn inhabitants of the capital that they
should abandon the city as soon as possible, but in doing so should not use the highways leading
to the south and west because we anticipate movement of the communist militia in these regions
in an attempt to thwart the liberation forces. Consequently, any movement noticed from the air in
these areas will be considered a military target and will be attacked without hesitation. [This
message is similar to one on Cassette #286-006.]

Attention, Guatemalan Army. Units engaged with liberation forces led by Col. Carlos Castillo
Armas. Surrender immediately. Those who do so now, without offering further resistance, will
be respected and freed immediately. Those who join the liberation forces will have earned the
gratitude of their country and the admiration of their countrymen. Those who persist in suicidal
resistance to the superiority of the liberation forces will be destroyed without hesitation. We are
speaking in particular to Zone L3. You are surrounded, you have tasted our air power. !f you do
not sutrender before 2400 hours today, you will suffer the consequences of your foolishness. We
are decline responsibility for what might happen. We do not want to shed blood needlessly, but
we will liquidate anyone who persists in defending an anti-Guatemalan cause, betraying the
country. Surrender immediately, or you will be squashed.

A luchar Guatemaitecos, a luchar todos bajo los simbolos Dios, Patria, Libertad, y las
aspiraciones Verdad, Justicia, Trabajo. A luchar por Guatemala y para Guatemala. Muerte al
comunismo! Luchemos con Carlos Castillo Armas!

The communist government and organizations are receiving pledges of support in Guatemala,
just as happened during the Estrada Cabrera and Ubico tyranny of the past. Nothing has
changed. “Voluntary” offers of support, signed by workers who would lose their job if they did not.
We will find out who was a voluntary and who was a “voluntary.”

They claim one of our planes was shot down, and say it was piloted by Americans. What
cynicism. This is totally false. We have not lost a single plane.

TGW has become very nationalistic, playing “Chapin” music and accusing us of using mercenary
troops. [Goes on to accuse TGW and all other government figures of high treason, selling out
their country. But now Col. Castillo Armas’ forces are here to confront them.]

Guatemaians, many of your compatriots have sacrificed themselves for the country. What have
you done? Join our forces.

The liberation forces under Col. Castillo Armas have been trying to employ the minimum of
violence necessary in this struggle for the country. However, in many places, the enraged

169

310

338

363

CASSETTE #68A (cont'd.)

populace has cruelly punished many lower level communists as liberation sweeps the country.
We deplore this, and urge that such measures be stopped. The truly guilty parties are those at
the top, and they comprise our Black List. They really should be punished. [Reads long list of
names, “to be continued tomorrow,” of those who should not be forgiven, those traitors whom we
should kill, when the opportunity arrives, after being tried by tribunals which will be created for the
purpose, wherever they may be. We should not let these people flee from the country because
{hey are accused of high treason.

We accuse them of high treason!

Radio Liberation calling agent Bernardo. Tomorrow, at nine thousand three hundred hours [sic],
you will receive the requested equipment, wait at the agreed place. Two hours later, launch the
attack in Sector R25, the map shows the exact location of the target. Good Luck. Signed, the
High Command.

Attention everyone. Tomorrow at 0900 everyone should be listening to us on 6360 kes to hear the
exact results of the operation which will be carried out tomorrow. All details will be provided
when the operation is over. We do this to preempt the usual lies from the government.

Sign Off. We'll be back tomorrow at 0900 with very important news.

170

007

073

419

332

340

c. 8 June

CASSETTE #80
Sign On |i. Refrain 7. Refrain 45. Refrain 2. ][3420 kcs]

Pegando Centro. This time exposes one “vo Schlesinger,” at the northern racetrack (hipedromo
del norte), as hoarding arms at his home in support of a possible communist coup. Either return
them where they came from, or turn them in at the nearest military base, or we will use them on
you when the day of liberation arrives. [Refrain 7. Refrain 2. j

Sangre de Martires. More on the case of the brothers Quinones, brutally tortured in the presence
of Rogelio Cruz Wer, Rodan Roca Dominguez, Nicolas Turki, Ricardo Chavez Natman, and the
demoted [rebajado] sergeant Reginaldo Archila, principal torturer. In the previous chapter we
saw how Cruz Wer exploded several sticks of dynamite to squelch the protest of Anti-Communist
students. The last chapter ended when one of Cruz Wer's assassins took Mario Quinones from
the bathroom and took him into the living room where his mother, his wife and his brother Edgar
awaited. This chapter leads up to the brothers’ being taken to the local Civil Guard, each placed
in a separate cell, and being warned that their torture will start at 6 PM. [Stay tuned...]

Refrain 6 (Lucha con Castillo Armas).

“another example of the kind of people who govern our country....” a discussion of Minister of
Economy and Labor Roberto Fanjul. The commentary stresses his personal friendship with
Arbenz, and claimed he has deposited 4 million quetzals in City Bank of New York, which will
serve as a cushion should he and Arbenz suddenly have to leave the country. The piece tries to
drive a wedge between Fanjul and the rest of the government. [Music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

171

006

025

040

123

158

165

W777

c. 8 June

CASSETTE #79
Sign On [variant].

Refrain 2. [transmitting from its improvised studio in the headquarters of the liberation army, ina
secret place in Guatemala]

Guatemalans! The great day has arrived! Death to Communism! Viva free Guatemala! Details
past interventions of the Guatemalan “revolutionaries” in the affairs of other countries, thereby
putting the lie to statements by FornMin Toriello that Guatemala respects the sovereignty of all
foreign nations. Says government is fighting with mercenaries from communist countries,
fiberation army is all-Guatemalan. We will triumph in the name of the fatherland

The traitorous Jew Jaime Rosenberg, chief of the Judicial Guard, has just released a disgusting
statement accusing our planes of having fired on poor neighborhoods in the city. The residents of
the city know perfectly well this is a lie. For the information of the rest of the country, our planes
have fired on no one and will not do so. We have not even fired on military targets, but if
communist arms fire on us we will level them. But the civilian population has nothing to fear
because this is their cause too. Viva free Guatemala! Death to the communist traitors! All
Guatemalans to fight with Castillo Armas!

Today has been filled with lies by the government. Don't believe the red lies. Listen to Radio
Liberation for the truth!

We are reminding everyone, Radio Liberation is broadcasting 15 minutes at the beginning of
every hour, frequencies 3420 kcs at night, 6360 kcs during the day.

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Starts with the usual attack on Arbenz and his “gang.” Then
states the liberation air force, commanded by Col. Rodolfe Mendoza, has run more than eighty
resupply missions to the liberation army throughout the country in the past few days. It is not true
that the government has captured any arms. All the resupply missions, in which we drop
machine guns, grenades, ammunition and rifles from the air, have been fully successful with the
sole exception of one meaningless drop which was captured by the communist militias.
Insignificant compared with what has been distributed. Now that you have weapons,
Guatemalans, fight with them and kill communists!

Col. Bogey’s March. Repeats above notice on times and frequencies. Look for us at the
beginning of every hour.

Sign Off. We'll be back within 45 minutes.

Lene

010

060

108

327

c. 9 June

CASSETTE #78
Sign On il. Refrain 2. [3420 kes]

Pegando Centro. A program in which we bring to you the names of the traitors uncovered by our
intelligence service working throughout the country. Repeats warning to leadership of communist
party of Chiquimula (see cassette 76-067). Pay attention to these broadcasts, your neighbor may
be a traitor. Refrain 2.

Sangre de Martires. Musical background to emotional introduction and presentation. This
chapter is “a continuation of the story of the Quinones brothers, anti-Communist Guatemalan
students brutally and savagely tortured by the bloody Arbenz regime.” The previous chapter
ended with the two brothers being taken to the Guardia Civil and placed in separate cells. This
chapter provides a gruesome and extremely detailed graphic account of tortures practiced in the
jail on the brothers. Not for weak hearts.

Plays an alleged interview of an Anti-Communist Army major by a Radio Liberation reporter,
which purportedly took place the previous day in the major’s home. The major repeatedly asserts
the army is anti-Communist, and that he speaks for many other officers and soldiers. Asserts
the Army believes Arbenz is a communist.

Off the air. No Sign Off.

173

006

024

195

231

c. 9 June

CASSETTE #77

No Sign On. Refrain 3.(Lucha con Castillo Armas) Refrain 4 (Lucha con Castillo Armas) Refrain
5. (Lucha con Castillo Armas). Refrain 2. [3420 kes]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Accuses Arbenz and his “gang” of high treason for having sold
the country out to the Soviet Union and a long list of other offenses. Highly dramatic.

An emotional piece on the army's responsibility to defend the Constitution. Quotes from the
Constitution regarding the role of the military. Clearly an appeal to the military. Musical
background to dramatic presentation. Repeatedly downplays left/right conflict, speaks rather of
being “above.” References to flag and cross as symbols.

Again accuses Arbenz and his “gang” of high treason, with flair. (Refrain 2.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.
-- Suspension of guarantees. But Radio Liberation will not be silenced.
- International reports on Arbenz seeking meeting with Eisenhower. A desperate effort
by Arbenz.
-- Eisenhower rejects meeting with Arbenz. Quotes JF Dulles.
— Castillo Armas quoted and praised in majority of hemisphere's media. Quotes from
several Central American outlets.

Refrain 6 (Lucha con Castillo Armas). Refrain 2.

174

007

050

095

126

260

c. 9 June

CASSETTE #116
Breaks into... Sign On Il. Refrain 2. [No frequency. |

Pegando Centro. Attention Jaime Rosenberg, chief of the Judicial Guard, pay close attention.
You have unleashed a reign of terror and torture against the Guatemalan peopie. The blood you
have caused to be shed, we will claim back from you, drop by drop. Your punishment will be
exemplary.

Attention all of Guatemala. We are on the eve of liberation. It is no longer a matter of months or
weeks. It may not even be days, it may be just hours. Be ready. Be advised that Radio
Liberation has made some changes in its programming due to the fact that we have improvised
new studios in a secret place in the republic. We are now operating in a campaign mode, the
great day is coming, possibly in hours. Patience and faith, Guatemala!

Since the liberation is so near, we ask everyone to keep tuned for important news. We may
broadcast at unscheduled times. Keep listening for us. If you don’t hear us, check up a few kes
on your dial because we may have moved to avoid the interference from the government stations.
Our regular programming has ended , and we will be providing only messages, News, and martial
music so that you can identify us immediately. [Music.] [Keeps promising an important news
item.] (Refrain 2.] [Music.] [Slogans.] [Refrain 5. Refrain 6.] [3420 kes]

Here is the important news item we have been promising. We have Col. Rodolfo in our
improvised studios at this very moment. You all know of Col. Mendoza's spectacular feat of just a
few days ago, when he evaded all the government's controls with just a fragile private airplane.
He sought freedom in order to fight for the country's freedom. Mendoza then speaks to his former
colleagues, clearly reading from a script. [Refrain 6. Refrain 2.] {Music.] [Slogans] {Woman
announcer exhorts with slogans.] (Refrain 6.] [Ends at 420 just as the woman

announcer ends a slogan.] No Sign Off.

aly fis)

005

100

c. 10 June

CASSETTE #1A
Sign On Il. [Refrain 45. Refrain 82. Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.] [Music.]
(Music.]

[This tape has no regular programming, but contains a series of vignettes and refrains that are
frequently repeated, all interspersed with music.}

Be sure to identify Radio Liberation. Our programs carry only military marches. Be alert, we
have news bulletins for you. [Music, ends at Counter 411.]

No Sign Off. Music ends.

176

006

077

082

217

291

341

361

c. 10 June

CASSETTE #229

No Sign On. You are listening to Radio Llberationon 6360 kcs. Refrain 45. Refrain 85. Refrain
3. Refrain 2. [Music.]

You are listening to Radio Liberation on 6360 kes.
[Music.] Keep tuned, we have more news bulletins for you. [Music.]
Refrain 3. Lucha con Carlos Castillo Armas! Refrain 5. Refrain 2. Refrain 86. [Music.]

Refrain 87. Refrain 88.
You are listening to Radio Liberation on 6360 kes. [{Music.]

Refrain 3. Lucha con Castillo Armas. Refrain 4. Lucha con Castillo Armas. Refrain 5. “One
must die with honor, rather than as a slave.” Refrain 2.

Sign Off. “The era of thievery will be followed by the era of honesty. The era of crime by the era
of justice. The era of the international market by the era of nationalism based on love of country.
The era of the abysm by the era of the pinnacle. From that pinnacle where the flag and the Cross
are always aloft. [Goes on about the flag and Cross, and then about the communists, and then
about how the new nation will be built on the ashes of the old.]”

177

c. 10 June

CASSETTE #228

005 Sign On Il. Refrain 45. Refrain 4. Lucha con Castillo Armas. Refrain 5. Combate al lado de
Castillo Armas. Refrain 6. Luchemos con Castillo Armas. {Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.] [Music.]

197 Refrain 89. Refrain 90. Refrain 91. Refrain 92. Refrain 2. [Music.]
273 Refrain 93. Refrain 94. Refrain 95. Refrain 96. Refrain 97. Refrain 2. [Music.]

379 No Sign Off. Music ends.

178

006

153

c. 10 June

CASSETTE #227

No Sign On. Refrain 93. Refrain 94. Refrain 95. Refrain 98. Refrain 2. [3420 kes}
[Music, lots.}

Refrain 96. Refrain 97. Refrain 99. [Music.]

Refrain 96. Refrain 99. Refrain 95. Refrain 94. Refrain 2. [Music.]

Refrain 93. Refrain 96. Refrain 2.

Sign Off. “The era of thievery will be followed by the era of honesty. The era of crime by the era
of justice. The era of the international market by the era of nationalism based on love of country.
The era of the abysm by the era of the pinnacle. From that pinnacle where the flag and the Cross

are always aloft. [Goes on about the flag and Cross, and then about the communists, and then
about how the new nation will be built on the ashes of the old]

179

006

067

100

132

264

287

13 June

CASSETTE #76
Sign On II. [Refrain 2.] [6360 kes.]

Pegando Centro. Radio Liberation addresses the leadership of the communist party in
Chiquimula, cites several names of leaders. You are responsible for the massacres recently
carried out in that department and for the distribution of arms to peasants whom you have
instigated. Either stop your activities now or pay the price. Every day at this time, and at the
other broadcast time as well, we provide one of these warnings.

Several political quips. (Refrain 2.]

La Mujer y la Patria: Opiniones Femeninas Ante ef Problema Comunista. Female announcer
comments on forthcoming youth festivals, in Guatemala and Chile, sponsored by WFDY.
Describes the WFDY, and says congresses are purely political in nature, to recruit more
communists. !dentifies communist leaders of these festivals. Mothers of Guatemala! Don't let
your children attend these communist events which have as their only objective the corruption of
their minds and souls!

Refrain 103. Refrain 104. Refrain 105. Refrain 2.

Nuestra Campana Radial. Talks of continuing to expose “red infiltration’ in Guatemala, citing
several instances of anti-Communists having been ejected from labor unions and other
organizations. Promises to continue these exposures.

Song, “Johnny Guitar.”

Music ends. No Sign Off.

180

006

034

13 June

CASSETTE #75
Various slogans not heard before. Refrain 2. {6360 kcs.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. Presents the "Tegucigalpa Plan.” With suspension of individual
guarantees, the communist dictatorship of Arbenz and his red band have abolished all the rights
inherent in a democracy. Describes failed communist plot to take over Honduras, with result
that the frustrated Arbenz now can do nothing but take it out on the Guatemalan people. The
people will not follow these communist traitors because they know they are falling, and they will
be the first to try to flee when the great day comes. Like all traitors, they are cowards who will
unhesitatingly abandon those they now exhort to action. The time has come to decide — Castillo
Armas, or the communists.

Everyday we are on at 1300 to 1400, and from 2100 to 2200. Frequencies 6360 kcs at noon and
3420 kes at night.

Refrain 6. Refrain 4. [Both now end with "Fight with Castillo Armas!"] Refrain 2.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. Starts off with political quips. Plays La Profesia. More quips.
Ends with “friends, there are x-27 [equis menos 27] days left till the liberation of Guatemala.”

Refrain 3. Sign off. (with a new, more strident rallying cry.)

181

00S

14 June

CASSETTE #287

We interrupt our regular programming to bring you a special message from a group of active duty
officers in our [meaning “national”] army. The news of the shipment of Soviet arms has caused
violent protests by the majority of the members of our armed forces. We are embarrassed by the
government's apparent belief that we need to resort to this sort of surreptitious importation of
soviet arms. All this seems to confirm the long-rumored connections between international
communism and the Arbenz regime, and that our country has been selected by Moscow as a
base of aggression in the western hemisphere. We are further embarrassed by the fact that no
local news organ was allowed to publish news that was published around the world. We ask the
commander in chief to repudiate this shipment, and immediately remove these arms from the
control of Cruz Wer and turn them over to the army where they belong.

And now we return to our regular programming.

No Sign Off. End.

182

16 June

CASSETTE #114

006 No Sign On. Refrain 45.

020 Important message. You may not even know what it means , but pass it on to everyone:
“Our house....has.....seven doors.....All are green......except one... which is yellow.” (Refrain 6.]

035 Very soon the world press will have on its first page, “News item of the Year! Revolution in
Guatemala!” [Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.] [Col. Bogey's March]

082 We have in our possession documents which prove what the communists’ next step will be. Not
satisfied with the plundering of the national treasury by the local communists in the Arbenz
government, the Kremilin has issued new orders: the quetza/ will be devalued this coming July
4st. We know that along with the arms smuggled in from Czechoslovakia, great amounts of bank
notes printed in eastern Europe were also smuggled in, and these will become the nation’s new
currency starting July 1st. To avoid disaster, all Guatemalans should immediately withdraw all
their savings from banks. As much cash should be moved abroad as possible. And quickly,
because hearing this warning, the Arbenz government might move up its schedule.

160 (Refrain 45. Refrain 6.]
170 Several new refrains, by male and female announcers.
189 Attention anti-Communists. Pass this message [repeats 020 above}. [Refrain 2.]

222 La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

— Cuba has instructed its embassies to issue no visas to any Guatemalan who
is not clearly an anti-Communist.

— A Guardia Civil bulletin on the murder of the well-known businessman
Alfredo Algurarach (ph), claims that he committed suicide. However, our

penetrations of the G.C. report he was murdered by G.C. thugs after yelling
“Viva free Guatemala!”

— [repeats 189 above codeword message]

-- the laws permitting free gatherings are suspended, but the communists are
allowed to do this at will, Our people will be watching these events and
taking notes on participants. Anyone attending the forthcoming
communist parade will be punished.

[Refrain 45.}

326 Repeats 189 above codeword message.

183

005

015

039

130

16 June

CASSETTE #113

No Sign On. Women of Guatemala! {Woman announcer calls on women to support the
liberation.]

Attention, much attention. My house......nas....six....doors....All.....are green...... except.....for
ne....which is.....red. Repeating, my house.....has.....six doors....All....are green.....except

one.....which is...... red. [Refrain 6.] [Refrain 2.] [6360 kes. from its improvised campaign studio at
some secret place in Guatemala.]

La Noticia Atraves de Radio Liberacion.

— Costa Rican and Salvadoran ambassadors in Guatemala return home to
report.

— Anti-Communists seeking asylum in Guatemala are fired upon.

-- Guatemala. 16th. Newspapers opposed to the Arbenz government report that
workers belonging to communist organizations are receiving military
training on the property of Jose Manuel Fortuny. The arms used are from
the Alfhem shipment.

-- Mystery trip by Arbenz. At 0600 on Wednesday, people were shooed away
from Aurora airport, then the presidential car appeared. It is believed
Arbenz boarded an air force DC-3 and took off. It is thought he may have
gone to Costa Rica to meet with Figueres.

— Parachuters dropped on the Pacific coast. There has been no official
comment on this report, but we know for a fact that they are well.

[Refrain 2.]

Starting tomorrow, we will begin transmitting four time a day: 0900 on 6360 kcs, 1200 on 6360

kes, 1700 on 3420 kes., and 2200 on 3420 kcs. Be ready for tonight's broadcast at 2100 on
3420 kes.

184

007

158

164

18 June

CASSETTE #119

No Sign On. Hello Guatemalans. We interrupt our programming because we have received a
news item. We are now in contact with Col. Carlos Castillo Armas thorough our remote system,
and we now present Cal. Castillo Armas who speaks to the entire country from inside Guatemala
[A recorded speech of Castillo Armas comes on. Calls on everyone to fight. Capture the
communists, they are cowards. Take their weapons and use them against them until they are
exterminated. Go into the streets to fight them. Capture Arbenz. Exhorts all to take arms and
fight the communist menace.] [3420 kcs.] [Returns to studios.] [An exhorting, patriotic, rallying
editorial. Date announced as 18 June 1954, a historic date.}

[Martial music. ]

Radio Liberation congratulates Col. Rodolfo Mendoza and colleagues whose aircraft struck in
Guatemaia in this afternoon. Special recognition to the two pilots who flew over the capital.

Attention Arnoldo. The High Command congratulates for this afternoon's work against the
gasoline dump [gasolinera]. [Music.]

Attention Guatemala. Interesting Notice. The summer has arrived and the roses are in bloom.
We repeat, the summer has arrived and the roses are in bloom.

Sign Off. We're going off the air, but will be back on this same 3420 kes frequency momentarily,
perhaps 30 minutes, perhaps and hour, but keep tuned in.

185

004

027

044

123

155

160

180

196

235

384

c, 18 June

CASSETTE #170

Sign On (variant). [6360 kes.] TGW constantly says everything is normal, but TGW is
constantly calling for firemen to go put out fires which arise everywhere. At 4:20 this morning
there was another big fire, but maybe it was just coincidence. We know the truth, congratulate
the boys on their good work, and urge them to keep it up.

Attention Guatemalans, we're going to be providing some combat instruction, especially for
private citizens. Stay tuned. For now, we announce that the liberation army is now in control of
Sectors D, F, H, |, N, Y and P. [Cassette #136-065 listed all these less Y, so this cassette
probably comes right after #136 in sequence. #136 also mentions the 4:20 fire and includes the
sarcastic remark about TGW-- see above.]

Combat instructions: tie up telephone lines. [this instruction is included on Cassette #88-037].
Housewives, convince your maids to work against communism. Maids, you do the same with
your employers. [Repeats the other instructions from Cassette #88-037.]

Radio Liberation passes on an appeal from CCA for the enthusiastic support of everyone in the
defeat of communism in Guatemala.

Radio Liberation is broadcasting for 15 minutes every hour on the hour, 24 hours a day.

TGW and the government continue to fie by claiming our aircraft are bombing civilian targets.

Our planes are not attacking cities and are not destroying private properties. They are attacking
military targets only when obligated to do so, and are equipped only with machine guns. Viva free
Guatemala! Viva Carlos Castillo Armas.

Radio Liberation now leaves the air. We will be back in 45 minutes.

Attention Guatemala. Radio Liberation is on the air again, from its improvised studios with the
high command of the liberation army. Attention. The liberation army now controls Sectors
D, F,H, 1, Nand P. [Omits Y, see 027 above.] [Col. Bogey March.]

The moment of decision is here. Fight today, or you will weep tomorrow for having missed the
opportunity to fight for your country. [Several further exhortations to battle.) [Calls on
Guatemalan women not to let their men fight on the government's side.] [Calls on the military to
fulfill their duty.] We will leave the air now, but will be back at 1300 hours, still on 6360 kes. [A
moment later he says they will be back up at 1200 noon.] [384]

Breaks straight into an editorial attacking the evils of communism and extolling the principles and
Virtues of the liberation movement. There is considerable man-made interference at times on this
segment (Morse code keying). It cuts off in mid-phrase at 430.]

Ends per above. No Sign Off.

186

002

060

172

18 June

CASSETTE #172

Sign On (variant). 6360 kcs. Back again, as we are every 45 minutes. We are going to bring
you a recording of a speech made by Cal. Carlos Castillo Armas last night at 8:30 from
headquarters of the liberation army, located at some secret point in Guatemala. Meanwhile this
bulletin. The Arbenz government announced yesterday at 3:00 PM that the pro-government rally
scheduled for 5:00 PM would not be held. They said that because of rain, the rally would be
postponed to another date, a date that we know will never arrive. The real reason for the
cancellation was that the government knew there was no public support for rally and it would have
failed miserably.

The CCA tape is played. First words: “ Pueblo heraico de Guatemala. Queridos companeros de
armas. La aurora de Ia liberacion ilumina nuestra patria. Se ha iniciado Ia lucha gloriosa contra la
tirania, la traicion, el engano y la verguenza...." Final words: “Marchemos hacia Ia victoria
inspirados por nuestros simbolos, Dios, Patria, Libertad. Vuestro compatriota y companero en la
lucha, Carlos Castillo Armas, jefe de! movimiento libertador.” [Exhortations follow....this is zero
hour....it is time to fight, etc. Today's date is given as 18 June.]

The government is claiming our air force has bombed the port of San Jose, Guatemala City and
other towns. All this is totally false. So far, the air force has not dropped one bomb, it has only
fired a few machine gun bursts to show that we are serious. However we have news of a major
firefight in the capita! just 30 minutes ago, we are confirming this report now and will let you
know.

Anthem. Attention Guatemala, Radio Liberation will now go off the air for a few moments. We
will be back at 9:00 AM on 6360 kes. [Music ends at 232.]

187

005

120

c. 18 June

CASSETTE #173

Sign On (variant). [Exhortation to the army to fulfill its duty in this hour of crisis.] (Stirring,
patriotic exhortations to everyone to join the struggle which has now erupted and which will soon
end. All supported by martial music.] On your feet, Guatemalans, your country calls you to
combat!

Announcement to our companions in the liberation army, from headquarters: the liberation
army's forces now have under their control Sectors D, F, H, |, N, Y and P. Onward and forward,
ete. [Exhortation to women] [Exhortations to all.] [Exhortation to the army - we are not fighting
you, but if you follow the orders of your communist officers, you are the enemy.] [Refrain 2.] [No
frequency given.]

188

005

023

051

070

088

206

232

19 June

CASSETTE #121
Sign On (variant).

Ridicules police bulletins and TGW reports on military incidents which never happened, such as
rebel aircraft attacks on civilian neighborhoods. Radio Liberation is the only authentic
broadcaster, the only one that tells the truth.

We will shortly be transmitting Col. Carlos Castillo Armas’ address to the nation last night. This is
a recording made on magnetic tape. [Col. Bogey's March.]

The liberation force, under the command of Col. Rodolfo Mendoza, has flown over 80 missions in
recent days, supplying ground troops all over the republic. All missions have been successful,
with the exception of one which was captured by the communist militias -- this is totally
insignificant.

[Castillo Armas speech is broadcast per 051 above. It appears to be the same as Cassette 119-
007.] [Announcer says speech was given last night, 18 June at 8:30 PM.] (Long, stirring
exhortation. ]

Sign Off. We'll be back in 45 minutes. We're working day and night, with lapses of 45 minutes.

Breaks into a historical account of how the Arbenz regime came to power and how communism
infiltrated the country. At the end, it is learned this was a chapter of Nuestra Campana Radial,
and that it was broadcast on 6360 kcs. Everything ends at 404.]

189

005

054

080

145

160

340

19 June

CASSETTE #147
Sign On jl. Refrain 2. Operating from Headquarters in Guatemala (no frequency given.)

Attention Guatemalans. Col. Carlos Castillo Armas thanks the population for their support, as
the support of all will be needed to eradicate the communists. Only the communist reds have no
place in the new Guatemala.

Several slogans supporting the troops of liberation which “are fighting throughout Guatemala.”
The heroic citizens are fighting heroically. Arbenz and his gang are trembling! The time has
arrived! On your feet, Guatemalans! The Fatherland calls you to combat!

Arbenz tried to speak to the nation at 8:00 PM last night via TGW. However, there was
interference on the station's frequency which prevented his being heard. This was payback for the
interference TGW has tried to put on Radio Liberation.

Call to the army to fulfill its constitutional duties. News items:

— Tegucigalpa, June: a communiqué informs of the initial successes of the invading army in
Guatemala. P-47s attacked the capital three times in the last 24 hours.

-- the only response to the air attacks has been in the capital, otherwise there has been no
opposition.

-- the government called for a blackout in Guatemala City.

-- Washington. Dept of State rejects Guatemalan claim that they are the victims of aggression.
Just an internal uprising, said State, speaking through ambassador John Peurifoy.

_- Guatemala has called for a meeting of the Security Council in the UN.

-- Mexico, June 19th: Guatemalan ambassador says all is calm in Guatemala, the people stand
behind their president, the problem is with the army. Radio TGW also says all is calm but then
denounces air attacks by-the invaders. For his information, the rebel air force has three bases in
full operation in Guatemala. :

--Rio de Janeiro, June 19th: Victor Raul Haya de !a Torre, Peruvian Aprista leader, calls for a
meeting of all Latin foreign ministers to study the Guatemala situation.

_- several other news items commenting on Guatemalan situation.

— the Guatemalan government insists there will be no devaluation and that gold reserves are at a
high level. We know this is a lie and that the major part of the gold reserves have been
transferred overseas in the names of government officials. By the middle of next week
Guatemalans will see the devaluation occur.

Today there will be three broadcasts, at 0900, 1200 and 1700 on 6360 kes. And tonight at 2200
on 3420 kes. There can also be special bulletins at any time. Here’s one now: Carlos Castillo
Armas at this moment is meeting with the High Command to discuss the response that will be
given to Arbenz’ message to the people. We will let you know what the response is tomorrow.
Radio Liberation will be with you again at 0900 on 6360 kes.

Signs off with patriotic slogans and attacks on the communist traitors.

190

007

030

065

078

126

139

195

228

245

285

292

300

19 June

CASSETTE #148
Sign On, variant. Radio Liberation bringing news bulletins.

Important Notice. The High Command has declared as a military target any motorized vehicle on
the public highways, starting today. inhabitants of the capital should evacuate it as soon as
possible, but should avoid the highways leading to the south and west, because movements of
the communist popular militia are expected in those areas. Any such vehicles will consequently
be attacked from the air.

Three of our brigades have just informed us that they have captured four more towns in Sector H,
making for a total of 18.

[Reads communiqué from the Executive Committee of the Liberation Movement in response to
Arbenz's message to the people of the day before. Although to date we have attempted to avoid
bloodshed, we will now wage full-scale warfare. The air force will respond to any attack on it.
Anyone residing near a military base is warned to leave the area. It is a lie that the liberation
army is comprised of mercenaries or financed from abroad. Residents of the capital should leave
it immediately. Promulgated at 0600 on June 20th, 1954, at General Headquarters. ]

important Notice. We advise Carmelo that the 50,000 rounds he requested are on the way and
may be arriving right now for a full attack on Sector R1-6. Proceed per plan, and good luck!

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Attention Army. Soon, on the 18th of July, it will be five years
since the vile assassination of Col. Francisco Javier Arana, commander of the Armed Forces, the
price paid by Jacobo Arbenz to international Communism for the Guatemalan presidency.
[Eulogizes Arana, attacks Arbenz and the communists.]

News bulletins confirm that town after town is rising in support of our troops. The liberation forces
now have three air bases operating in the country, and control 18 important towns, without
counting those that have risen on their own account. Everyone should collaborate in this
movement. Tomorrow will be too late. Out with the Muscovite communists! Now is the time for
Guatemalans to fight!

Important Notice. Repeats 030 above.

Pegando Centro. This is for Leonardo Castillo Flores, leader of the National Peasants
Confederation. After your speech saying the peasants will rise up to defend the government, does
this mean you will lead them in combat, or will you go hide like all other cowards of your type. Be
advised, if you don’t lead them, they will kill you for sure. {If they don't, we will.

Warning to anti-Communists. You should be very careful when you try to steal official vehicles
because our sabotage groups have placed bombs in them that are set off by ignition.

Attention farmers and peasants. You too can help the cause by placing cables across highways
to impede communist movements.

Here's another notice further proving how everyone is rallying to the cause of liberation. We are
advised that another Air Force plane has deserted to our general command and is now in our
service. We cannot give the name of the pilot yet so that ‘Arbenz cannot take revenge on his
family.

{cont’d.)

191

CASSETTE #148 (cont'd)

323 Attention news reporters in Guatemala. We will have important news bulletins for you on our
2200 hours broadcast tonight. Attention government radio operators. You too can help our
noble cause just by delaying government bulletins of transmitting them incorrectly.

192

005

023

037

122

138

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #88
Sign On {variant].

Refrain 2. [3420 kcs, from its improvised studios with the liberation army, at some secret place of
the republic. ]

Combat Instruction for Civilians. Men, women and chifdren.

Women, you can help , too. Make long telephone calls, leave the phone off the hook. This
works against the communists.

Drivers, you can help, too. Taxi drivers can have their vehicles break down when carrying
communist officials. Bus drivers can evade carrying large groups of people who help.

Army mechanics, you can help too. Make the materials under your control unserviceable to the
communist traitors All those who work in telecommunications can easily block
communications that reveal the location of anti communist forces, and also thwart the
issuing of orders and instructions by the communists.

Children, you can help, too. Obstruct communist troop movements. Throw nails in the streets.
Shine lights when you hear our airplanes. Cut power cables or telephone lines.

Railway and portworkers, you can help too. Obstruct loading and unloading operations. Keep
the convoys from arriving at their destinations. This can easily be done by breaking
rails or weakening bridges.

Roadworkers, A backhoe, a bulldozer or any other heavy vehicle abandoned on a roadway
makes a great roadblock.

Peasants. If your employer is anti-Commurist, help him in everything, and ask him for progress
reports on our movement. Form your own groups to fight for liberty. Send all
information on communist troop movements, and stop those movements. We will
supply the groups you form.

Attention, all anti-Communists everywhere! To arms! Colonel Castillo Armas has called the
national anti-Communist movement to arms! Attack all communists and take their arms. Many
of the arms brought by the Alfhem are in the hands of anti-Communists. Take away all the
communists’ weapons and use them against the forces of the traitor Arbenz. Viva free
Guatemala!

All Guatemala has arisen and the liberation army has seized much ground. We cannot give
details right now because they are a military secret, but we can tell you that the whole country has
responded to our battlecry! All Guatemalans behind Castillo Armas to overthrow the tyrants!

Be wary when you try stealing the vehicles of communist officials, because our sabotage teams
have placed bombs in many of them that go off when the motor is started. Be careful!

Sign Off. [We withdraw now, but will be back at 4:00 AM sharp on 34200 kes again. Hour by
hour, we will be with you!]

193

006

058

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #92

Martial Music. No Sign On. Attention Guatemalan Army. This is a message for all officers and
soldiers. [March Music and sound of marching boots.] You are surely aware that the freighter
Alfhem, bearing no standard and no documentation, and which is believe to be Swedish-
registered, arrive in Puerto Barrios from a Polish port. This ship brought 2,000 tons of communist
weapons. Do you think the clandestine introduction of these arms is consistent with the
traditional honor and pride of our army? The origin of these arms adds weight to the charge that
this government has sold the country out to the Soviet imperialists. The purchase of these arms
was arranged by Major Alfonso Martinez Estevez during his recent trip to Europe. We also know
that the first shipment was delivered to Cruz Wer's Civil Guard, since the communist leaders have
more trust in him than in you, the army. At least part of this shipment will probably also go to the
police or to the workers which are being organized by the communists, or else part of them may
be transshipped to neighboring countries, thereby helping destroy our friendly relations with them.
We also Know that some of you are concerned that Arbenz and Defense Minister Sanchez plan to
post units at various border points under the false pretext of the fear of invasion. The only
invasion being planned is that by the Soviets, as iNustrated by the Alfhem affair. The Arbenz
conspiracy doesn't want a strong and responsible military around the capital, hence the support to
Cruz Wer and the border-postings. The situation is grave. The day of great decisions has
arrived. Clean out the communists. Be ready to defend the constitution. The nation is in peril,
the communists have infiltrated your ranks. {More martial music and marching boots.}

Music fades out. No Sign Off. Nothing more on tape which runs for five minutes.

1.94

005

022

053

065

074

085

410

150

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #136

Special Sign On. Alo Guatemala! Alo Guatemaitecos! Radio Liberacion, fa emisora del
movimiento libertador guatemalteco, nuevamente en el aire.

Alo Guatemala. Alo Guatemaltecos! Alo Ejercito de Guatemala! “Radio Liberation has an
important message for the Guatemalan Army. Thje army of liberation, commanded by Colonel
Carlos Castillo Armas, has risen up against communism in Guatemala. We are fighting to expel
from our country the communism which has penetrated it. We are not fighting against the army,
which we know has Guatemalan and anti-Communist sentiments. We do not want to fight with
you. We want the Guatemalan army to be on our side. We want the Guatemalan army to
contribute with the army of liberation in the cleansing of communists which must be done on our
soil. We have not bombed wither the capital or the port of San Jose or any other population
center. The military are witness to this fact, as are the civilian populations of all towns over which
our aircraft have flown. We do not want to attack, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Nevertheless, military forces have fired against our aircraft, which have not returned the fire. We
do not want to fire on military targets unless forced to do so. Attention, Army. We have not
responded to the attacks made on our planes. Our planes will not respond to these attacks
unless forced to do so.”

Attention, Genaro. The high command of the army of liberation effusively congratulates you for
the success of Operation Canary. Keep it up, Genaro. That's the way to serve Guatemala. Your
work facilitates the advance of the liberation army. Viva free Guatemala!

We inform our companions that the army of liberation now has under its control Sectors D, F,H,
|, Nand P. Continue the struggle, companions, sooner or later you also will attain your
objectives. Forward for God, for Fatherland, and for Freedom!

The official station TGW likes to proclaim that everything is normal and calm, but nevertheless is
constantly calling out firemen to put out fires that are cropping up all around town. This morning
there was one in the capital at 4:20 AM, for example. Congratulations, boys! Keep up the good
work! [Martial Music.]

Government spokesmen continually claim that our planes are attacking civilians and civilian
properties. This is a lie of desperation. Our planes, which are flying throughout the republic,
attack only communist/military targets, although if forced to, they will attack military targets.
Don't believe the communist government's lies! We invite the people and the military to join our
fight against the communists! [Martial music.]

An exhortation to the army to fulfill its duty and come to the support of the people who have risen
up against the communists. [Martial medley here includes “And Those Caissons Keep Rolling
Along...”

Series of emotive rallying cries suggesting the armed struggle has begun and nothing can stop
the forces of liberation until the communists are thrown out. “On your feet, Guatemalans! The
Fatherland Calls You to Combat!’

Repeats notice from 065 above.

Sign Off. Special sign off, saying the station goes off the air now, to return at exactly 10:00 AM.
Listen to us today all day long on our frequency of 6360 kes .

195

005

022

038

088

110

128

150

160

240

246

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #145
Sign On (variant).

Attention, Guatemala. The charge made yesterday by the Arbenz government before the UN
Security Council, was discussed by the representatives of the world's nations. All the
representatives agreed that the case of Guatemala should be discussed within the Organization of
American States (OAS), the appropriate forum for intra-continental charges of this sort.
Nevertheless there was one country that defended the Arbenz position, one country, the only
country, making use of its right of veto. To repeat, one country, one solitary country. Which
country? The Soviet Union.

Attention, Guatemala. Carlos Castillo Armas invites the people to participate in the liberation of
Guatemala. in the liberated Guatemala, only Muscovite red has no place. Otherwise there will be
no color difference. Plays Los Trinqueteros’ War Song.

Attention, Guatemala. Last minute war news. One of our pilots sends greetings to the
passengers of the commercial airliner “Luxton” which had to land at the Esquipulas field this
morning. Our pilot had buzzed this aircraft twice, saluting it with machine gun bursts, because
he thought it was a plane defecting to our cause. He subsequently found out that the plane’s
Passengers were international photographers. He sends them a hearty greeting, hopes they were
not frightened, and hopes they get many fine pictures.

Attention, Juan. In Sector S, leave position 17 and assume position 5 [music interrupts as the
message is repeated].

Attention Guatemala. The forces of liberation march victoriously throughout Guatemala.
Naturally a few pockets of the government's counterattack remain, but we want to give you a
bulletin: Attention, inhabitants of the town near where “the thing of the bridge” occurred this
morning at 7:00 AM. Surrender, otherwise you will suffer the consequences of a suicidal
position. We can provide no further details because these are military secrets, but the liberation
army marches on to victory.

Attention. Attention 12th Brigade. Congratulations for your accomplishments. Today at 1800 we
will get together with you at the appointed place.

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion, Attention, urgent message for the inhabitants of the capital. We
have already asked you to abandon the capital city, but do not do so in motorized vehicles
because as of yesterday they are considered targets. Also, do not leave by the South or West
highways, because if our aircraft see movement on them they could confuse civilians with
members of the popular militias. Until today the government has lied when they said we have
bombed cities and public buildings. Until this moment our posture has been to invite to surrender,
so as to avoid bloodshed. But Arbenz’ position is about to force us, in the very near future, to
deploy explosives from our aircraft. Therefore we warn all Guatematians to get away from all
communist-military targets. Better still, leave the capital entirely.

Attention electricians. Be advised it may be dangerous to attend the rally which has been
proposed for tonight.

ft is consistently rumored that Col. Carlos E. Diaz, accompanied by 40 other officers, have sought
diplomatic asylum in various embassies. This is what communism leads to. We regularly
warned the military that when Castillo Flores began to form the militias, this meant the military
would be liquidated because Arbenz has no confidence in them. If the rumors of the

196

CASSETTE #145 (cont'd)

armed forces chiefs asylum are true, we urge the military not to permit replacement by elements
of the militia. Act rapidly, before you find yourself dead or in Jail.

280 And so ends another program of Radio Liberation. Today, with almost the entire country under
our control. We have operated on 6360 kes. We will be back again at 5:00 PM on the same
6360 kes. Music.

307 Goes off the air, but recording quickly begins again, breaking into a statement....’if the reds react
with violence, we will use violence. If they surrender, it will be better for Guatemaia...[music:
..and those caissons go rolling along...]

329 We interrupt this program for an interesting bulletin. We have just received a bulletin. We invite
the entire country to tune us in at 5:00 this afternoon, when Col. Carlos Castillo Armas will speak
before our microphones. [Music.]

355 Those who deliver their country to communism are traitors. You are listening to Radio Liberation,
the clandestine transmission.

360 Sign Off. We will be back on the air at 1:30 PM [they said 5:00 PM above].

t9'7

006

024

088

104

113

140

167

182

224

250

283

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #111
Sign On (variant). Radio Liberation on the air again on 6360 kes.

Attention, Guatemala. For the first time since we began military operations, we are able to inform
that the town of Esquipulas is in our hands. The wick that was lit two days ago is now near its
final objective. Today a mass was held in Esquipulas with the entire brigade present. [Religious
music and prayers which may be attempt to replicate this mass.]

Women, do your part. Follow up on the action begun by the men by not letting your men come to
the support of the communist gang.

Guatemalans, now is the time, now or never.

Army, attention. You know our army's power. You are defending a foreign intervention by
international communism. For your own good, for that of your families, you should join ranks with
the army of liberation. Decide now.

Attention army troops engaged with the liberation forces. Surrender immediately. Those who
persist will be destroyed. Zone L3 in particular. You're surrounded. You have tasted our air

power. Surrender immediately.

Guatemalans. Now is the time. Now or never. It will do no good later to cry like women for not
having fought like men.

You've waited for the great day. It's here. So now is the time to fight. Death to communism, viva
free Guatemala!

[All these exhortations interspersed with much martial music. ]

The government lied when its news bulletins said we bombed public buildings. our position until
now has been an invitation to surrender so as to avoid bloodshed. That's why we originally just
dropped leaflets. But given the government's response to this, we have now decided that force
must be fought with force. The Communist bulletins now will be based on the truth.

Attention Group 17 of the Liberation Army in Sector 045. Advance to the northeast 12 kilometers,
the area is clear. Await Patrol 8 from the Arcadia Group. Good Luck.

Attention Guatemala. Radio Liberation proclaims we have 25 towns under our control at this
moment.

Attention army. [Repeats message from 113 above.]

In closing, we repeat we have 25 towns under our control. Sign Off.

198

005

033

139

155

180

206

220

245

260

276

c. 20 June

CASSETTE #115
Sign On (variant). [0600 broadcast, see Sign Off at 180 below.]

This is the moment of decision. Fight with the army of liberation, with Colonel Carlos Castillo
Armas, or forever five in communist chains. (Further slogans and exhortations to combat.
Cowardice is tantamount to treason. ]

Attention, Guatemala. Attention, Guatemalans. The summer....has arrived.....and the
roses.....are in bloom. [Repeats.]

[Denies government allegations that liberation army aircraft have been bombing civilian targets.
Asserts that this is a tie because their planes have not even begun to carry bombs..... yet. The
civilian population has nothing to fear from us. Col. Rodolfo Mendoza, our air force commander.
He was one of the pilots that flew over Guatemala yesterday, and over these very microphones he
denied the government's charges. Col. Mendoza’s words will be retranslated today

More exhortation. Sign Off. Radio Liberation will be back with you in 45 minutes at 7:00 AM
sharp.

Sign On (variant). [3420 kes]

We have received important messages from all over the country. The entire country is in arms,
and much of it is under control of the liberation army. Today will be filled with lies by the teetering
Arbenz regime. Don't be taken in by their lies, listen to Radio Liberation.

Attention anti-Communists. Be careful when you steal government cars, our sabotage teams
have installed explosives set off by ignition.

Our next broadcast, at 8:00 AM sharp, will be on 6360 kes. Pass this word on. We are going to
go now from the 3420 kes on which we are operating to 6360 kcs on the 49 meter band.

Once again rumors have reached us that a yellow fever epidemic has broken out. Other rumors
have it that the capital's water supply has been poisoned. We categorically deny these rumors,
there is no yellow fever, and no poison in the water. These rumors are from a desperate
government.

[Exhortations.]

Sign Off. We'll be back at 8:00 AM sharp on 6360 kes on the 49 meter band. This time they do
go off the air.

199

005

020

048

c. 21 June

CASSETTE #120
Sign On [variant, from improvised studios with high command, 6360 kcs.]
Government lying about our aircraft now flying over Guatemala, saying they are not after military
targets, but civilians and their belongings. This is a lie. Our planes will attack only communist
militia targets, although if provoked, it may be necessary for them to attack military targets as

well.

Exhortations to the army to do its duty by saving Guatemala. The hour of liberation has come,
and Guatemalans are fighting heroically. Stirring exhortation to everyone to rise up.

Attention Genaro. The High Command congratulates you for the success of Operation Canary.

Exhortation to women to not let their women enlist in the government's ranks. Report on alleged
fire and gunfire at TGW. More exhortations.

Sign Off. We will be back at 11:00 AM on 6360 kes. [At 218 a recording begins of a local
Guatemala commercial station, Radio Bolivar. The reception is marginal. Mostly music.,
sponsored by Farmacia Regia. Announcer gives the time as 7:30 AM shortly after this recording
starts. Everything ends at 430.]

005

068

080

212

224

258

357

c. 21 June
CASSETTE #118

Sign On Il. Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 6. Refrain 2. [No frequency] We advise
our listeners that our frequencies of 6360 kes and 3420 kcs will be modified in that we will be just
to one side or another to avoid the interference which is being put on us. So always look for us in
those vicinities.

Woman announcer calls on women to support the coming liberation struggle.

Pegando Centro. Repeats the warning given to Judicial Guard chief Jaime Rosenberg in
Cassette 116-050. [A crowing rooster can be heard at 097.] [Repeats message of 005 above, and
announces that regular broadcast hours at 1-2 PM and 9-10 PM. Also says that as of today
regular programming will be suspended and only news and messages will be transmitted.

Attention Group 21. Attention Group 21 of D Zone. Effusive congratulations for the
achievements. The High Command sends this message via Radio Liberation . Forward!

Within a few days you will hear this report. Moscow wants to eliminate our loyal Army. To that
end, they have offered Jacobo Arbenz a huge farm and a substantial bank account in far-away
Argentina if he will turn power over to the Guatemalan Supreme Soviet. This communist
government has already been put together under the presidency of PGT chief Jose Manuel
Fortuny. They are just waiting for Arbenz to deploy the army to the borders and coasts so that the
communist shock troops can seize power under the command of their Soviet chiefs. Army
soldiers and officers! Prevent this treason at all cost! Pass this message on to anyone you know
in the military.

Editorial on the treasonous collusion between communists and senior military officers.
Slogans and exhortations. Reminders that regular programming is suspended as of today and

only news bulletins and messages will be broadcast, and that listeners should look around the
normal frequencies to find Radio Liberation ‘s signal. Repeats 224 from above.

Ends. No Sign Off.

200

006

034

160

325

385

c. 21 June
CASSETTE #117
Sign On (variant).

The Guatemalan government imposes severe censorship, so that the peopie cannot hear what is
being said about the country. But Radio Liberation is not affected by this censorship, and we are
free to report to you what is said around the world about our country. [Quotes from “yesterday's
Sunday editions” of the New York Times and Herald Tribune editorials. Also an unnamed St.
Louis paper, and statements by former Guatemalan Col. Roberto Barrios Pena in a New Orleans
paper.]

Message for foreign correspondents in Guatemala. Your reporting from Guatemala as published
in your foreign papers has been very inaccurate, because you have accepted news from
government officials, or even lifted it from government handouts. For your benefit we are now
going to provide you with some facts, and you, as professionals, can draw your own conclusions.
Can you really accept the coincidence that when our planes overflew the capital for the first time
dropping bombs, so says the government, that the house of the mother of Col. Rodolfo Mendoza
was hit? Can you accept the further coincidence that on the second bombing run, the house of
Col. Mendoza himself was hit? We also inform you that Col. Rodolfo Mendoza is now
commanding our air force. In any case, do you really believe bombs were dropped? Look around,
ask people on the streets, and you will find no signs of any bombing. The Arbenz government is
using you to fool the world. [Goes on urging correspondents to check out all government
information bulletins for lies.]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. Attention, people of Guatemala, especially residents of the
capital. At this very moment the official radio station TGW is calling for merchants to open their
shops and for everyone to lead their normal life. This is suicide, people! It is terribly dangerous
for you to go out in the streets, for children to go to school. No one should stay in the city.
Everyone should evacuate it. If you look to the skies you can see our smoke, smoke coming
from fires. The great campaign of liberation is coming to a successful end. The liberation forces
have already made their first offering of thanks to the Lord of Esquipulas, who marches at the
head of our victorious forces.

Sign Off. This ends today's first broadcast. We will be back on the air at 12:00 PM.

201

006

084

108

122

133

150

156

168

187

205

232

c. 21 June

CASSETTE #286

Attention, people of Guatemala! To close our broadcast we have received an urgent message
from the High Command of the Liberation Army. The High Command announces that from this
day onward, any motorized vehicle of any type moving on any highway will be considered a
military target. [Repeated several times.] [Martial music.] Man-drawn or animal-drawn vehicles
may be used to evacuate the capital. But the highways to Antigua or Matitlan cannot be used
because any such vehicle on those highways will be viewed as transporting troops in disguise.
We know that because of our attacks on the zones south and west of Guatemala City, heavy
reinforcement will be sent there. The capital should be abandoned., but not via those highways.
{This message is similar to one on Cassette #68A-095.]

Attention owners of motorized vehicles of all types. In order to prevent the commandeering of
these vehicles, and their consequent destruction by our forces, you should render them inoperable
for the time being. Otherwise they run the risk of total destruction by our air force if they are in
the hands of the communists or the Arbenz government. Furthermore, any Guatemalan who
want to aid the cause of liberation should place obstacles on the highways, be it tacks, rockslides,
tree trunks, or weakened bridges.

Repeats above notices. We'll be back again at 5:00 PM on our frequency of 6360 kcs.
Sign Off (variant). Back at 5:00 PM on 6360 kes.

[....cuts in....] [they]...lie when they say our pilots have bombed cities, public offices and
defenseless persons. Where are the impact craters, where are the dead and wounded? Pay no
attention to the lies of a government in its death throes.

[Brief exhortation to the army to “due its duty.”]

All Guatemala is in arms. Many places are under control of the Liberation Army. We cannot yet
give the names of places because that is a military secret. But we soon will be able to give great
news. All Guatemala is following Castillo Armas!

Attention anti-Communists, be very careful when you steal official vehicles because our sabotage
teams have emplaced explosives in many of them. Let the communists explode with them, not
you!

[Refrain 2.] Tune in at the beginning of every hour. Our frequencies are 3420 kcs and 6360 kcs.

Sign Off. We're going off the air for just a few minutes. Look for us at the top of the next hour.
Good afternoon.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y 1a Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents, Jribuna de la Libertad. \t was in the 1950's,
when the country was suffering the terror of communism, that a group of civilians and military
people banded together to try to liberate the country....[goes into a dramatization of the group's
activities, its plans to capture the La Aurora military base, the events of 5 November....cuts off
abruptly at Counter 415 just after the rebels have captured the front gate of the base and are
advancing inward.]

No Sign Off. Tape ends per above.

202

005

022

047

093

122

160

186

216

295

22 June 1200

CASSETTE #215
Sign On (variant. )

Attention People of Guatemala. Attention Army of Guatemala. Special Bulletin. The High
Command of the Army of Liberation reports that the first defections from the national army have
occurred in the sector of Gualan, a fine example that we call on the national army to emulate.

Attention National Army, Attention People. itis known for a fact that the communist party has
distributed arms among peasants of the popular militias, gotten them drunk, and incited them to
bloody acts against the civilian population. We warn the army, which must put a stop to this
practice. If the National Army asks for, or requires, a truce to allow it time to clean up this
situation, the liberation army is disposed to grant it.

Attention Guatemala. We deny the charges broadcast by TGW that we are trying to imitate their
transmissions. First of all, we're just to busy to be doing that. Secondly, we would never imitate
a station so discredited as TGW.

Attention everyone. The Guatemalan government accuses Honduras of permitting us to operate
on its territory. We challenge the government to use its enormous espionage network in that
country, and the communist party of that country to which it provides vast financial support, to
locate us there and then prove it before an international news conference. [Goes on to “prove”
how false these charges are.] Radio Liberation is too high to be reached by the spittle of the
reptiles!

Attention, everyone. Attention electricians, radio operators, telegraphers! Collaborate with the
liberation movement by cutting telegraphic and telephone cables. You will run no risk, because
as you know, these cables carry no current. Cutting these cables is the call of the moment!
[Exhorts people to carry out this patriotic act.]

Attention national army troops engaged with the liberation army troops! Surrender immediately.
Those who do so will be respected and freed immediately, and those who join our forces will have
the gratitude of the country. We address this message especially to Zone L3, in Sector D4. You
are surrounded! You've seen our airpower! -If you don't surrender immediately, you will suffer the
consequences.

TGW is charging that we imitated one of their broadcasts, but that the government has everything
under control. The truth is, they are panicking. If they have everything under control why don't
they say anything about our air action over the capital this morning, why don't they admit they are
just about out of fuel, that the Zacapa bridge exists no more, that hundreds of their soldiers have
defected,...[etc., ete.] ? Our pilots returned this morning reporting no resistance to their flight over
the capital, and no troops in the garrisons. The conclusion is simple - the city has been
abandoned by the army. [Goes into a long harangue against the government, and the signs of
panic they are showing.]

And now the news from Radio Liberation, news bulletins published all over the world, which the
people of Guatemala are not allowed to read or hear because of the traitorous communist
government's censorship.
— New York. The Guatemalan army is restricted to quarters, and at least three of its
pilots have deserted and are with their families in the Salvadoran embassy, which is full
of refugees.
_ Miami. The Las Americas newspaper has editorialized that the US should support the
liberation forces in Guatemala. [Announcer reads the editorial.]

203

CASSETTE #215 (cont'd)

denied charges that Costa Ricans
uatemalan liberation movement, saying
Communist Guatemalans.

-- Tegucigalpa. The Honduran government has
resident in Tegucigalpa are spearheading the G
that this movement is comprised entirely of anti-

204

005

034

088

123

153

169

204

226

259

278

331

348

364

380

22 June 1700

CASSETTE #216

Sign On (variant). [No frequency given. | Attention. Special Message. Special Message.
Attention Brigade 48. Attention Brigade 48. thas been decided to attack Position L-10 tomorrow
at 10,000. Proceed in accordance with Valentina.

Attention, People of Guatemala! The Liberation Army marches forward, to the tune of Los
Trinqueteros, which we will play now! [Plays Los Tringueteros.]

Attention, Guatemala. We have received information, from a former member of the National
Army who has come over to our side, about the death of a young girl that the government
attributed to our airplanes. The truth is that the poor girl was actually killed by bullets fired by the
Guardia Civil, which was in pursuit of a group of anti-Communists. One more crime by the
traitors. But the score will be evened.

University students! University youth have the obligation to fight against the traitors. Students of
the University of San Carlos have always responded to national emergencies, and we are
confident they will do so again. [Goes on the exhort university students to rally to arms.]

[Repeats the call to Brigade 48, per Counter 005 above.]

Attention People and Army. It is known for a fact that the communist party has distributed arms
to peasants of the popular militias, given them liquor until they are drunk, and then incited them to
commit violent acts against the civilian population, focusing on anyone who is not in full
agreement with the red regime. We alert the army to these events. [Goes on to exhort the army
to respond to this threat and not to allow the government to do these things.]

The liberation army has received statements of support from free people all over the hemisphere.
These are honest pledges of support, not the phony ones the government likes to propagate.

The liberation army does not use mercenaries, because the population of Guatemala is Anti-
Communist. The Anti-Communist demonstration of 23 March featured 80,000 people in the
capital, and thousands more in the interior, Viva free Guatemala! Viva Castillo Armas!

[Repeats call to Brigade 48, per Counter 153 above.]

Attention Guatemalan! Here are more names to include on the black list of traitors to the country.
Angela Porras Alfaro, in Market No. 1; Gonzalo Andrade Guzman, Sindicato Avance Caminer;
Antonio A. Sandoval F., School of Agriculture, Jorge Enrique Oliva. The people will be judged by
special tribunals to be set up, so they can be given exemplary punishment for high treason.
[Plays the Acusamos de Alta Traicion introduction.]

The Republic of E! Salvador today inaugurates the great hydroelectric dam on the Lempa River,
giving a fine example of what a people can accomplish when it wants to work. An excellent
example for our “revolutionaries.”

Attention all foreign correspondents. Radio Liberation will be providing accurate reports so they
can be retranstated around the world.

[Final message to Brigade 48, per Counter 259 above. }

Sign Off (variant). We invite everyone to listen to us again at 10:00 PM on 3420 kcs. Viva free
Guatemala! Viva Castillo Armas!

205

007

035

069

140

190

273

312

338

22 June 2200
CASSETTE #291

{Anthem.} Attention Guatemala. Radio Liberation, the clandestine station of the liberation
movement, on the air again.

Attention eastern Guatemala. Attention drivers of vehicies in eastern Guatemala. Listen carefully
to what might save your life. Our sabotage squads, for the purpose of destroying the military
vehicles of the Arbenz loyalists and of the popular militias, have planted high-powered mines in
practically all roads leading from the capital to Zacapa. If you must transit those roads, go very
slowly. You won't be able to avoid the mines, but you may cause the major impact to hit the front
wheels rather than the driver's area.

Attention Guatemala. A few days ago we reported the departure from Guatemala of Arbenz’s
mother and two sons, who were taken to Mexico City in an army plane, escorted by two fighter-
trainers. We have been informed by one of our intelligence agents who was present to see the
lady off that Arbenz himself had his bags with him and was preparing to board. He was stopped
from doing so by communist leaders present, including Fortuny, Guerra Borges, Diaz Rozotto and
Charnaud MacDonald. This has led to rumors that Arbenz is under the complete control of the
communist chiefs. Further, Arbenz’ wife left the country today on a military plane to El Salvador
with a great deal of luggage. Arbenz, hostage to the communists, might manage to evade his
captors any day now and also flee. All his money is abroad. And what about his bragging about
dying with his boots on?

Hello press and radio reporters, hello Guatemala. The High Command has decided to reveal the
names of some of the towns currently under its control, towns that are cooperating fully with the
liberation forces. These are Jocotan, Morales, Camotan, Quebradas, York, Bananera, Olopa,
Losamates, Iguana, Lodechina, Tenedores, Labarca, Esquipulas, Champona, Quirigua, Santo
Tomas, Elestor, Gualan and Puerto Barrios. There is still resistance from some small groups in
Puerto Barrios, but this will not last long because the communists cannot supply them. And in
Gualan, troops sent to combat our forces, Joined them instead, to cries of Viva Guatemala! and
Viva Castillo Armas! Reinforcements were sent , and our forces are currently bombarding them
heavily as a result of their not having responded to our offer to join us. Today before 1900 hours,
another offer was made to them, the results of which we will give you tomorrow.

What the Arbenz-Communist Regime Doesn't Publish. [Reads a long editorial from the Mexico
newspaper Uitimas Noticias de Excelsior, dated 14 June, criticizing Toriello for making so much
of a telegram sent by Lazaro Cardenas on 29 May. The editorial considers Toriello presumptuous
for comparing Guatemala’s current actions to those of Cardenas when the latter nationalized the
Mexican oil industry. For one thing, it says, Cardenas presided over a country with internal peace
and no external conflicts, and he had the full support of the people when he took that action. This
is hardly the case in Toriello’s country. ]

Attention, reporters and people. The High Command has decided..... [repeats 140 above. ]

TGW has called a meeting for 1600 hours tomorrow of several news organs to discuss the
current situation. Just take a look at the list of those invited - every one of them a member of or
closely associated with the communist party. Don't be fooled by this attempt to organize the
communist propaganda machinery to make the most of a lost cause.

Attention, Guatemala. The government continues its slanderous campaign born of desperation.
Now they say our planes this morning shot up an evangelical mission in Guadalupe, and a north
American barely escaped death. The people know our symbols are God, Fatherland and Liberty,
and that we would prefer to die before attacking one of those symbols. This charge by the
communists is ridiculous, and can no longer fool the people. We have very specific targets that
we will take out one by one -- Matamoros, the Honor Guard, the Presidential General Staff, the
National Palace, Presidential Palace, the Command of the Armed Forces, etc. etc.

(Cont’d.)

206

378

CASSETTE #291 (cont'd.}

Despite the government's claims that its complaint to the Security Council of the UN had been
accepted, UN radio today reported that this is absolutely false, since the motion had been rejected
by a vote of 10 to 1, so that it would Pass to the OAS, the appropriate forum for such matters.
The fact that the Soviet Union was the only member to support Toriello's complaint against
Honduras and Nicaragua has led many Latin American delegates to the conclusion that
Guatemala has become a Kremlin satellite.

Attention, eastern Guatemala. [Repeats 035 above. ]

Radio Liberation now leaves the airwaves. We will return tomorrow at 0900 hours on 6360 kes.

207

007

026

060

095

112

137

148

162

195

228

257

22 June

CASSETTE #294

{Anthem.] Attention Guatemala. Radio Liberation, clandestine station of the great liberation
movement, transmitting from operations headquarters at a secret place in the republic, on the air

Attention free world. The following news item was obtained from a short wave broadcast from
Honduras. All Honduran stations are making the following announcement. The tottering
communist government of Jacobo Arbenz, in the desperation caused by its imminent fall, is
sending mercenary planes piloted by European communists to bomb border towns in Honduras.
Another communist trick to provoke international incidents.

Attention Guatemala. Attention Army. We have confirmation from our intelligence services that
Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz and 17 other officers have been arrested and are being held at the
Palace of Honor, and that Col. Carlos Aldana Sandoval is also being held at the military hospital.
Nevertheless, the Arbenz regime is continuing to distribute messages signed by Diaz and Aldana
in the name of the General Staff. If any of you doubt this report, have you seen either of these
officers recently? This is further proof of how the Arbenz regime is replacing the army with the
popular militias consisting of hundreds of ignorant and drunken peasants, irresponsibly armed to
massacre the civilian anti-Communist population, which is 100% of Guatemala. Are you going
to allow this to happen?

Hello, Brigade 62. Final details for Operation Magda are ready. Carry out the assault per
instructions already received by your radio operator. You will have strong air support. Success is
assured. Good luck.

The battle is won from the start. [Explanation of why this is inevitable given that Arbenz
government fights for atheistic communism, and the opposition fights for the Cross and the
Fatherland. The Devil never beat God.]

This is Radio Liberation . (Refrain 2.]

Flash notice! According to news received over our radio, the first free government of America has
recognized the first government of liberation of Guatemala, has recognized Col. Carlos Castillo
Armas as president of Guatemala. Ladies-and gentlemen, Cuba has recognized the triumph of
the liberation!

What's Happening in Guatemala?

Attention eastern sector of the country. Urgent bulletin from the High Command. Any motorized
vehicle operating in the eastern sector of the country will be considered a military target and will
be destroyed, since the regime is trying to transport arms via these means. Any citizen who for
whatever reason cannot abide by this warning, should use only private vehicles and go very
slowly, since our sabotage teams have planted mines in those highways.

For obvious reasons we cannot divulge the exact location and activities of our forces, nor cite all
the places that have been liberated, nor all those who have joined our ranks. We will do that
when the High Command considers it advisable. Meanwhile, be one of those who has come over
to fight for freedom, and be on the list of those who helped save the country from communism.
Viva Castillo Armas. [Station ID and Refrain 2.]

Attention Guatemala. We have information that TGW, acting on orders from the communist
party, will attempt to imitate a Radio Liberation broadcast in order to confuse the general
population. You know our voices, we only have three Guatemalan announcers. Radio Liberation
does not depart from its broadcasting schedule and frequencies. After this program, we will
broadcast no more tonight. Radio Liberation cannot be mistaken - its music, its friendly voices,
its frequencies. Radio Liberation will return to the air tomorrow at 1:00 PM sharp. Any other
broadcast you hear before that using our name is not us.

And now, ladies and gentlemen, we present the song, the hymn, heard across the country — Los
Trinqueteros. [Plays song.]

208

311

333

CASSETTE 294 {cont'd.)

Attention Guatemalans, radio stations of the continent, reporters: Radio Liberation has an
important message that we will read in a moment. It is of great importance for the United
Nations.

Attention reporters, attention radio commentators, please pay attention to the following message
and ensure it arrives at the UN. It is a message from Col. Castillo Armas’ high command: As we
do not yet have a delegate before your organization, and because we know the lies put out by the
current regime probably reach you, we want to provide you the truth on several issues:
first, they say we are foreign-inspired, and therefore represent an international problem.
The truth is that our movement is purely Guatemalan, inspired only by he
people.
second, they say we are mercenaries. The truth is we are purely Guatemalan.
third, they say our air force has committed atrocities. It's true that we are now on the
attack, but until the 21st of this month we dropped only leaflets of truth.
fourth, the regime is so desperate it is even striking out at friendly bordering countries.
We want you to know we are Guatemalans fighting for Guatemala.

Radio Liberation leaves the air. Back at 1:00 PM tomorrow. Anything you hear before that is not

209

006

028

058

073

107

175

202

241

249

290

326

23 June 0900

CASSETTE #289

{Anthem.] Radio Liberation on the air, with a 30-minute report on the progress being made by the
great Liberation Movement.

Attention, reporters, attention, people. The High Command has decided....[repeats
Cassette 291-140 report on liberated towns; says will provide results of yesterday's offer to the
enemy forces at Gualan “later on").

Radio Liberation station identification. [6360 kcs.]

Attention Guatemala. The government's mercenaries are about to provoke an incident with a
sister nation. The ignorance of their European pilots of the local terrain led to yesterday's attack
on Copan, Honduras. They wanted to attack our headquarters at Comitan, but attacked
Honduras by mistake. We intend to knock out the government's air force so this kind of incident
will not be repeated.

Attention Guatemala. [Repeats 073 above.]

Attention Guatemala. Today is a day of great joy. The reds, taking advantage of our desire to
avoid shedding blood wherever possible, have turned on the anti-Communists and their families,
assassinating great numbers of people in the capital and the provinces. Today, with the
realization that the people are Paying the price for our passive policies, we announce the
Liberation Army's great offensive by land and by air. Guatemala, June 23, 1954.

Attention National Army, attention people. it is known for a fact that the communist party has
given vast amounts of arms to the popular militias, comprised of peasants, given them liquor until
they are drunk, and then incited them to acts of violence against the civilian population, targeting
them on anyone who is not in full accord with the red regime. The Army must put a stop to this
practice before it is too late.

Units of our air force left this morning to attack communist military targets. We will inform on the
results of these missions when they return.

[Repeats 175 above.]

Attention Guatemala. Arbenz knows he is to be defeated. But he is so determined to stay in
power that he is prepared to unleash a civil or international war and bathe the country in blood.
This communist massacre must be stopped at all costs. [Plays the boilerplate theme from

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion }

This is Radio Liberation, transmitting on 6360 kes and 3420 kes, with four daily broadcasts at
0900, 1200, 1700 and 2200. 6360 kes for our three daytime broadcasts, and 3420 kes for the
nighttime broadcast. [Anthem. Back at 1200 hours. Good day.]

210

006

039

065

077

130

182

199

272

313

23 June 1200
CASSETTE #290
{Anthem.} [Station identification. ]

Attention Guatemala. [Repeats Cassette #291-140 message, adding Vado Hondo to the list of
towns under control.] There is still resistance at Puerto Barrios, but it is expected to collapse
soon. The government's reinforcements at Gualan have been routed and are now in flight
pursued by our forces.

[Station identification. ] [Refrain 2.]

Across the battlefront, only one voice is heard! The Hymn of the Liberation Army! Los
Trinqueteros! [Plays Los Trinqueteros.] [Station identification. ]

Denunciamos. News comes from Mexico that the Popular Anti-Communist Front has reported
that the Arbenz regime, through its Cuban agents Eufemio Fernandez and Aureliano Sanchez
Arango, is trying to buy arms to equip the Guatemalan communist party's shock troops. The
Secretary of Defense has ordered a complete investigation. [Gives background on the two
Cubans.] These two are typical of the mercenaries at the service of the Arbenz regime, typical of
the foreign thugs who torture our citizens in Cruz Wer's dungeons.

Attention Guatemala. Arbenz’ mercenaries are about to provoke international incidents with sister
nations. [No further details.] [Station identification. ]

Attention Guatemala. The great offensive has begun.

Our air units this morning attacked important communist targets, destroying fuel storage
sites in the capital.

The army of liberation is advancing to the rail and highway center of Zacapa in three
columns -- the north, commanded by Col. Ernesto Nider Jaiman [ph.], encountering no
resistance, the east, commanded by Col. Jorge Barrios Solares; the south, commanded by Col.
Guillermo Flores Avendana, supported by the Division under the command of Colonel Miguel
Mendoza.

The air force, commanded by Colonel Rodolfo Mendoza, has begun its offensive,
spreading panic and disorder among-the enemy.

Colonel Castillo Armas, Commander of the Liberation Army, is headed with his general
Staff to the front to take personal command of the final assault on the “key to the country," the
city of Zacapa.

Meanwhile, brigades of the Liberation Army have begun operations in the western zone,
taking control of the town of Nuevo Progreso.

Anti-Communist forces have begun to surround the capital city, cutting electric and
telephone cables, and bringing down railway bridges. Sabotage teams are effectively isolating
military installations so they cannot help each other.

In Puerto Barrios the action is diminishing, resistance is weak, and the forces of Colonel
Gustavo Torres Verganza have been ordered to surround the enemy forces, compelling them to
surrender for total lack of provisions. Total control of the situation there is expected momentarily.

In Guatan, government troops are withdrawing under pressure from our troops and from
their former companions, today members of the Monja Blanca Brigade.

Great numbers of volunteers are joining our forces in all areas, forming real legions.

Guatemalans! The Liberation Army marches triumphantly throughout the country! Viva
free Guatemala! Viva Castillo Armas! (Follows with an emotional description of the liberation
movement's rescue of the country. ]

[Boilerplate theme from Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion.]

Attention National Army. Attention officers and troops. Attention families of members of the
National Army. There is still time. You can still Join the Liberation Movement. Very soon the
army will know what happened to its forces in Zacapa. Very soon you will know it, and you still

(cont’d.}

211

335

364

373

CASSETTE #290 (cont'd.)

have time to avoid another such occurrence. When you hear what happened in Zacapa, think
about it, and begin to fight for Guatemala with the Liberation Army headed by Colonel Carlos
Castillo Armas. There is stili time.

Flash! Flash! We have reports from our intelligence service that Col. Carlos E. Diaz and
seventeen other senior officers are being detained at the Honor Guard. They are all prisoners of
the communist government, even though messages are still being sent around the country in the
Diaz’ name. Col. Carlos Aldana Sandoval is also being held prisoner at the military hospital. The
Liberation Army will soon liberate all these officers who tried to fulfill their duty to their country.

Attention Guatemala. In its final desperate throes, the crumbling Arbenz regime is preparing
grave international incidents. We are sounding the alert. [No further details. ]

Attention Radio Liberation listenership across the country. In consideration that important military
developments are about to take place, Radio Liberation will not come up for its usual 1700
broadcast. Radio Liberation will next visit your homes at 2200 hours. [Anthem.]

212

23 June

CASSETTE #110
005 No Sign On. Music.

018 Attention Guatemala! Important Notice! Hello, Guatemala! Our intelligence services have
informed us that TGW and the Arbenz government, are trying to imitate Radio Liberation
broadcasts. be alert! If you don’t hear my voice, and the other announcers well-known to you, it
is not Radio Liberation. They will try to air their program on our frequency or very close to it.
Listen closely to the voices. [This is all repeated several times over in different ways.]
Remember our frequencies are 6360 kcs and 3420 kcs, and our broadcast times are 9:00AM,
12:00PM, 5:00PM, and 10:00PM. We have only three announcers and you know our voices well.

162 We are operating from Liberation Army Headquarters [no frequency given]. [Music]

170 Music ends. No Sign Off.

213

007

068

087

414

129

148

178

187

24 June 1300

CASSETTE #299
Sign On Il. [Station identification.) Refrain 2 {no frequency].

Attention Guatemala. Attention radio operators, electricians, telegraphers. Cooperate with the
liberation movement severing telegraph and telephone cable. There is no danger because these
cable carry no current. Cutting these cables is the call of the moment. The communist
government must be isolated from the rest of the country.

Attention Guatemalan people and free peoples of the world. Our troops had contact yesterday at
2000 hours with a brigade of peasants and easily disarmed it. Our troops recovered arms which
have been distributed to the peasants by the communist leader of Zacapa, Dr. Selva, a
Nicaraguan citizen. The arms, ten 7.65mm rifles with 50 rounds each, bear the hammer and
sickle emblem, and were manufactured in Czechoslovakia. Even though the army has declared it
does not need the popular militias, communist leaders do what they want in order to shed as
much blood as possible behind the army's back.

Attention Civil Guard and Judicial Guard. We know from our intelligence service that many of
you are anti-Communist and Christian. You can be of great help to the liberation forces because
you are well-armed. As a minimum, you can abandon the communist ranks when you are sent
on any kind of mission, or tel! the anti-Communists of any action planned against them. Those
who direct you today to commit acts of barbarity against the people are the same ones who
chased out at gunpoint your predecessors in the service. This is the hour of liberty. You can
help. Viva free Guatemala!

Attention. We announce now that very soon the national army will be unable to move anything,
including, troops, food, weapons or vehicles, because all fuel deposits in the republic have been
destroyed by our air force and sabotage teams. Further, highways and rail lines have been cut at
vital points. Just yesterday, a military rail convoy was destroyed near Zacapa.

Victory is ours because we defend the just, the divine, the human. [Carries on in lofty terms.
Victory is ours, and God is our guide.

Attention journalist and radio stations of the continent. We have an important notice that we will
read in a few moments, very important for the United Nations.

Attention reporters, radio commentators, governments of free nations, please take note of the
following message so that it arrives at the UN. The message originates at the High Command of
the Liberation Army. Please present it to the UN the name of free Guatemala. [Reads same
message as Cassette #294-333. Includes phrase, “it is true that in the last two days we have
begun our offerisive.”]

(Cont'd.)

214

282

337

385

CASSETTE #299 (cont'd.)

People and Army of Guatemala. Editorial starting with the traitors’ assassination of Francisco
Javier Arana and their betrayal of the army that didn’t know what was happening. Today the
traitors continue their lies about our movement. But we are spreading the truth, so no one can
say tomorrow that he didn't know what was happening. We are Guatemalans struggling to
liberate Guatemala. Don’t believe TGW when it says we have been defeated and are fleeing. We
are fighting, haven't taken one step backwards, and we're gaining ground. We're fighting for you
and the country. Join us. Rise up! Fight!

Another member of the National Army who has joined our ranks has confirmed the reports that
Gol. Carlos Enrique Diaz and Col. Carlos Aldana Sandoval and 17 other officers are prisoners of
the reds. This is all part of the plot to replace the army with Castillo Flores’ popular militias,
groups which, under orders from the international communist movement, are already committing
acts of terrorism throughout the country. We appeal again to the members of the army to join the
forces of liberation. Three more pilots of the air force have sought refuge in the Salvadoran
embassy, and will soon be in our ranks. The Liberation Army opens its arms to the National
Army.

Attention Guatemalans. Our next transmissions will be at 2000 and 2300 on 3420 kes. Any other
broadcast that does not feature the voices of your friendly announcers on the known frequencies
and at the known times is apocryphal. Back at 2000 and 2300 on 3420 kcs. Good afternoon.

215

007

038

096

145

170

491

241

267

293

24 June 2000

CASSETTE #301
[Station identification.] [Refrain 2.]

Radio Liberation thanks all the free stations of the world that have offered their support to the
movement. The movement does not solicit such expressions because it knows that it fights on
the side of justice and that the new, glorious day is near. The army of liberation needs no
mercenaries, because the republic is Anti-Communist. Didn't 80,000 people march for the cause
of anticommunism on March 13, 1952? We don't need mercenaries because the people march
with us. Viva free Guatemala! Viva Carlos Castillo Armas. Guatemala has suffered the darkest
tyranny of its history, betrayed by Arbenz and his gang. Therefore....[plays boilerplate theme of
Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion).

Flash! We have received word just seconds ago from the front that great numbers of government
troops at the front of Zacapa and Chiquimula have joined our forces. We cannot provide details,
but we can asset that our army has tripled in recent days. A good example, Guatemalan army!
[Station identification. Refrain 2.] [Repeats this message. ]

Attention Guatemalan army. Attention officers and soldiers in the Zacapa-Chiquimula region.
We are going to respect ambulances and trucks marked with the traditional red cross that are
evacuating the wounded. Our air force today permitted the free transit of these vehicles. But
don't try to fool us. If we fund out you are using these Vehicles to transport troops, we will have
no other course than to fire on them. Having heard Taw's request for blood donations for the
wounded, we will also permit vehicles bearing blood to pass. However, we regretfully must report
that hospitals in the area have yet to receive one drop of blood from the workers and peasants.

Attention army officers and air force pilots. We call on you to join our Liberation Army, following
the example of the many who have already done so, and who have sought asylum. The
Salvadoran embassy has given asylum to three more air force pilots and has said it will welcome
any others. The Mexican Defense Ministry has said it will provide asylum to all who request it.

The combat hymn of the Liberation Army is....Los Trinqueteros. [Plays Los Trinqueteros. }

Radio Liberation operates on 6360 kes and 32420 kes with three daily transmissions, at 1300
hours (6360 kes), and 2000 and 2300 hours (3420 kes). Our next broadcast today will be at 2300
hours. However, at the conclusion of these broadcasts we will replay recordings of them in the
intervals so everyone can hear them. Pass this word on.

Attention! Last minute Flash! Last minute Flash! [Repeats above 096 message about desertions
at the front.]

Attention army officers and soldiers in Zacapa-Chiquimula zone. [Repeats above 146 message
about respecting ambulances. }

Attention, our next broadcast will be at 2300 hours on 3420 kes.

Another army officer who has joined our ranks has confirmed....[repeats message of Cassette
#299-337 on imprisonment of Col. Carlos E. Diaz et al].

We know that Radio Nacional, on instructions of Arbenz’ red government, will try to broadcast
transmissions imitating Radio Liberation. If you don’t recognize the voices, and our particular
broadcasting style, you're not listening to Radio Liberation.

Anthem. We will be back on 3420 kes tonight at 2300. (Repeats broadcast schedule per 241
above.] Good night.

216

007

036

064

155

169

24 June 2300
CASSETTE #302
[Station identification.] Refrain 2.

Attention listenership. Attention listeners around the continent, we have a sensational news item
that we will be giving in a few minutes. Attention journalists of the continent! Stop your presses!

Here’s the news item. News from the front indicates that the forces of our Liberation Army have
taken the city of Chiquimula, thanks not only to our forces, but to those of the National Army that
came over to our side, thereby avoiding a useless shedding of blood. Chiquimula has fallen. Our
troops continue their advance to the capital. This is a memorable day! Ten years ago the Ubico
dictatorship was brought down. Today, on the eve of that great day, 25 June 1944, the Liberation
Army has captured Chiquimula as an offering to the heroes of that glorious event. 24 June 1854,
a glorious day in our history! [Anthem.] The High Command congratulates the “15 September”
column that has written such a glorious page in our history. We also open our fraternal arms to
the members of the national Army who joined our victorious army.

[Station identification. ]

Here's the news.
-- TGW says the enemy air force has been carrying out operations in Chiquimula and
Zacapa, and says the government troops are preparing the final blow to eliminate the final
tebel groups. TGW congratulates the government forces for their effectiveness. An
interesting report, but how can they give the “final blow,” when we have already delivered
the first one? Chiquimula has fallen!
— The army has reported from the capital that the enemy's resistance has been broken in
Puerto Barrios, Gualan and Chiquimula, and that the rebels are in retreat to the border
under a full offensive from army troops. The government troops launch an offensive, and
we capture the target! Chiquimula has fallen!
-- United Nations. Guatemala claimed that rebel forces have threatened to bomb the
capital within 24 hours, and called fora Security Council meeting. Guatemala does not
have the means to repel such attacks, the government said, adding that the rebels’
clandestine radio announced the coming bombing. This acknowledgment of the
government's problems is surprising, but the red regime twists the truth. We announced a
genera! offensive against communist military targets, but we have never given warnings of
24 hours to the civilian population.
-- On the contrary, the government claim says that during the 22nd and up to noon of the
23rd, more than 45 cities and towns have suffered air attacks featuring machine gunning
and 100-pound bombs. The government says it lacks the means to repel such attack,
adding that formations of P-47 airplanes have been conducting reconnaissance around the
country.
-- The Honduran protested the bombing last Tuesday of the air base at San Pedro Coman
by Guatematan government aircraft.
-- United Nations. Russia requested an emergency meeting of the Security Council to
consider Guatemala's complaint. To complement this, TGW said it was very proud to
announce the support of communist China to Jacobo’s government. Tell me who your
friends are and I'll tell you who you are.
-- Mexico. TGW announced the Guatemalan government is prepared to deliver the coup
de grace to the rebels. It said the government forces are well armed and supplied. We
repeat: Chiquimula has fallen!
-- San Salvador. The four-person UN inspection team met in that capital to enter
Guatemala. At last, people will know what is really going on in Guatemala.
-- Central American embassies in Guatemala have granted asylum to numerous officers
of the Guatemalan army who repudiate the government. That's one way. The other is to
join ranks with the Liberation Army.
-- For the first time the government didn't lie when it said the rebel air force is under the
command of Col. Rodolfo Mendoza.

(Cont'd.)

217

300

373

CASSETTE #302 (cont'd.)

Chiquimula has fallen, and the people are in arms! [Attack on the crimes and evils of the
communists and the Arbenz regime, and on how patriots must respond to this threat by rising up
in arms.] Chiquimula has fallen!

Repeats first part of 064 above. [Anthem.] Will be back tomorrow at 1300 hours on 6360 kcs
Good night. Viva free Guatemala. Viva Carlos Castillo Armas.

218

005

038

049

055

069

079

101

161

184

205

25 June 1700

CASSETTE #292
[Station identification.] Refrain 2.

In its Bulletin No. 8 yesterday, the Army noted that for the first time Guatemalan pilots were
attacking their brothers, forgetting to tack on the “mercenary” word so in vogue these days. But
this oversight was remedied [? - chaputeado] today, when the phrase was added, “and worse still,
assisted by mercenary pilots.” Chamarrines. [?]

Castillo Arriola, Guatemala delegate to the United Nations, has sent a protest to Guatemala,
threatening to leave his position because of the arrest of Carlos Enrique Diaz, with whom he has
a family and friendship relationship.

Attention Colonel Juan Bolanos. We know you are a good man and good Christian. We know
you are Anti-Communist, and fail to understand your defense of the communist and antipatriotic
Arbenz government. Your place is with us, Colonel Bolanos. There is still time.

Communist organizations around the world, following their Kremlin masters, are sending
solidarity messages to the puppet Arbenz regime. Similar messages from communists in the
Americas, carbon copies of the European versions, also arrive. A clear demonstration of
worldwide communist organization. And to think that in this continent there are blind people who
just don't want to see.

The international thugs of the Caribbean Legion are about to increase their ranks. These thugs
are about to arrive to unleash a new wave of crime. We have reliable reports that the Aviateca
C-47 aircraft, No. 1154, letters ETGASA, is in Mexico ready to leave any moment for Guatemala
bearing the likes of Eufemio Fernandez, Aureliano Sanchez Arango and the Nicaraguan
communist Manuel Pinto Osaga, who have been contracted by Arbenz to help him control the
situation here. Be careful, Guatemalans, the remains of the Caribbean Legion are ready to
assassinate the people.

A distinguished member of the Guatemalan forum [foro guatemalteco - 2] that marches with the
column led by Col. Miguel Mendoza that continues its advance at the Esquipulas front, has sent
to Radio Liberation a letter containing his impressions at the beginning of the action. We're going
to read this letter so ali Guatemalans can feel the same spirit that has driven our compatriots in
the Liberation Movement.. The letter reads...."Esquipulas, 23 June 1954...... [reads full letter,
purportedly from a participant in the battle of Esquipulas.]

Our army has captured Chiquimula, and is dominant in Zacapa and Gualan. Forward, for God
and Liberty! [Station identification.]

People of Guatemala. A few days more and we will be in the capital. A few more days of
sacrifice, and do not lose your faith. The taking of Chiquimula will be historic - 24 June 1954.
Viva Guatemala. Viva Colonel Carlos Castilio Armas. For the first time the two forces met. This
time, as in all future times, we won. Forward, Liberation Army.

Radio Liberation calling out to all members of the armed forces, army and air force, all armed
persons who can join the fight against Arbenz at this crucial moment. Radio Liberation presents a
special message for the members of the armed forces. This has been a day of action for us, and
should be for you also.

These are the facts that led up to our actions of today. The government has betrayed
our people. Arbenz has delivered himself to the communist movement and made his country just
another satellite of the Soviet Union. Many of us raised our voices in protest so that the 20
October 44 revolution would not be distorted. But for that we were persecuted. From abroad we
planned the way to liberate the country from the Kremlin's puppets.

Today our army marches securely to victory. Only a few hours ago we defeated the
government troops that tried to stop us at Chiquimula, Gualan and Zacapa, now all under our
control. We are now moving on the capital.

(Cont'd.)

219

372

CASSETTE #292 (cont'd.)

The national army should not be embarrassed by this defeat. We won because we have
reason on our side. We won because we are on the side of God, Fatherland and Liberty, rather
than on the side of Arbenz and communism. The National Army troops, as their arms were
pointed and ready to fire at their Guatemalan brothers, took a rapid decision which will bring glory
to our history. They chose Liberty, God, Country. They all came over. The troops of the Honor
Guard, until yesterday our enemies according to Arbenz, joined our ranks.

But unfortunately, in the capital the army is supporting communism and helping the
atheists. To all members of the armed forces in the capital: We know you're not communists,
that you don't want to support communism. But Arbenz knows that he can no longer carry on his
charade. Any moment now, he must declare himself dictator at the service of Marxist
totalitarianism. He will order all the communist controlled unions to convert themselves into the
popular militia. This popular army is ready to act. You've seen in the fields the last few weeks,
ready to unleash terror on the order of its leaders. And you know what that means. And it is for
that reason that we senior officers of the Liberation Army decided to bomb military targets in the
capital today. Today we bombed one target in the capital, one military target. Our main purpose
was to show you that we are ready to go to any extreme to bring-down Arbenz. We will annihilate
communism. We will bring down the man who would destroy the army.

We call on all members of the armed forces. We call on you to save the country.
Today. You should today throw out Arbenz. Throw him out of his office, today, 25 June 1954.
We will fight to the end all those who support this regime. Members of the armed forces: we
must look at you as we look at the regime's thugs if you do not carry out your responsibility.

Residents of the capital, brothers. Today, 25 June 1954, we bombed one target in the
capital. We want to protect civilians. Don’t go near military installations. But we demand the
removal of Arbenz. Detain the communists so they can be tried for their crimes. We will not
stop until we see our Guatemala liberated.

You have just heard the vibrant message of Radio Liberation to all armed institutions in the
republic, the National Army and the Army of Liberation, a vibrant message reflecting the views of
the Guatemalan Army of Liberation.

220

007

037

052

064

091

115

137

149

174

231

253

25 June 2300

CASSETTE #293

[Anthem.] [Station identification.) On this broadcast we will give the world press and the people of
Guatemala an update on the current situation in Guatemala.

According to international news reports, the Arbenz regime has denied entry into Guatemala to a
an investigative mission of the Interamerican Peace Commission, a dependency of the OAS.

Despite Soviet protests, the UN Security Council has resolved that the Guatemalan complaint
should be transferred to the OAS.

Our regular programs are reproduced by tape throughout the day so all the free world will know
what is going on in Guatemala.

Victory is ours, because we defend the just, the divine, the human....[elaborates on how the
opposition is on the side of right, on God's side].

From Mexico it is reported that travelers arriving from Guatemala, including a reporter from
Boston, report that the Liberation Army has achieved victory, and that more than 400 injured
government troops have arrived in the capital from the fronts.

Large numbers of National Army officers and soldiers continue to join ranks with the Liberation
Army. Col. Oliverio Casazola and all his troops have now joined our ranks in Morales; Casazola
ig now with our troops attacking Puerto Barrios. A worthy example for the soldiers of the nation.

A Reuters reporter who overfiew Chiquimula today reports it is not true that liberation forces
bombed civilians, but rather he did see a huge white flag flying at the military installation there.
Yet TGW continues denying that Chiquimula is in our hands.

Attention, SL-4 sabotage group. Remember your instructions well. We must regretfully report the
death yesterday of our companion Enrique Ramirez del Cid, who died as the result of an accident
while mining a highway in the East. Careful, SL-4 saboteurs, be careful and follow instructions.
[Station identification. Refrain 2.]

On all fronts, the Liberation Army advances to the tune of Los Trinqueteros [plays Los
Trinqueteros].

Reports from Puerto Barrios indicate government officers and troops there are demoralized, with
their supplies and support cut off, and they fearful of coming bombing attacks by rebel aircraft.
Ships appearing on the horizon lead them to believe there will new offloadings and
bombardments soon.

And now the news:

-- Communique #26 of Radio Liberation reports. From the early evening hours yesterday
and throughout this morning we have been reporting our intention to bombard military targets in
the capital city so as to avoid imperiling civilians, against whom we are not fighting. Today, in the
early afternoon hours, our aircraft bombed the principal military target in the suburbs of
Guatemala City, the Matamoros Fortress. The fortress blew into a thousand pieces. Fires and
explosions extended around the area, also destroying Santa Barbara, where the majority of the
Alfhem arms were being stored. The government has not informed of the destruction of Santa
Barbara, probably so as not to destroy the morale of its troops in the interior, but everyone in the
vicinity knows of it.

-- The Liberation Army's air force this afternoon attacked three military rail convoys
which were traveling on the few tracks remaining in the vicinity of Zacapa. The convoys were
bring war supplies from the capital and were totally destroyed. Our troops commandeered one of
the trains and traveled on to Zacapa firing on government troops, spreading panic among them.

-- Reports from the field this afternoon indicate that our columns advancing victoriously
on the capital are encountering little resistance.

(Cont'd.)

221

CASSETTE #293 (cont'd.)

-- Ina solemn ceremony today in Chiquimula, 538 civilians were sworn into the ranks of
the Liberation Army. The ceremony featured the playing of Los Trinqueteros, the song which has
become the battie song on all fronts.

-- One of our planes in this afternoon's action attacked the National Palace. Since the
palace was not a target in the plans, the pilot later explained, “I only wanted to leave my calling
card with Jacobo Arbenz, because / will visit him again very soon.”

-- Attention residents of the capital. As we have been repeating all day, we urge
everyone who lives near military targets to abandon their homes immediately. We now repeat
that warning, because another attack might be launched this very night. All civilians should stay
away from military targets.

This program will be repeated throughout the morming. Our next regular program [programa
matriz] will be at 1300 on 6360 kes.

[Repeats Casazola item from 115 above.]

[Refrain 2. Anthem.]

222

007

023

25 June

CASSETTE #300

[Anthem. Station identification. 6360 kcs.]

Radio Liberation calling all members of the National Army. This is a special broadcast. We have
a joint message from the Council of officers and senior chiefs of the Liberation Movement which
are now leading our victorious to the capital after yesterday’s capture of Chiquimuta.

These are the facts that ied up to the actions that we will be announcing in a few
seconds.....[delivers same message as Cassette #292-205, except that this one says the bombing
of a military target in the capital is imminent today the 25th of June, whereas 292-205 said it had
already happened. ]

This message will be repeated throughout the day. Tell everyone to listen.

{Anthem.] Tell everyone to listen on 6360 kes.

223

007

036

074

127

138

159

175

216

26 June

CASSETTE #297
[Anthem. Station identification. ]

The High Command informs the National Army and the populace of the necessary conditions for
the restoration of peace and order [gives same conditions as Cassette #244]:

first, the Army is not our enemy and we are not the Army's enemy, The enemy of both is
communism, personified by Jacobo Arbenz, Cruz Wer, etc.

second, we appeal to all members of the army to arrest ail known members and
sympathizers of the communist party.

third, we appeal to senior army officers to capture Arbenz and establish an interim
military junta.

fourth, the interim junta should immediately instruct should instruct all units to arrest all
communists and prepare to join forces with the liberation army to restore order.
These orders should apply to Civil Guard units under army control.

fifth, the interim junta will establish the hour for a cease-fire, giving all commanders at
least three hours notice. Immediately thereafter, the decision to form a new
government should be announced over TGW or Radio Morse. The Executive
Committee of the Liberation Army will immediately establish contact with the
interim junta.

sixth, this call is made to the army in the name of humanitarianism and before God, to
thereby avoid the useless shedding and blood and the devastation of our
beloved Guatemala.

seventh, until these conditions are met, the Liberation Army will continue increasing its
attacks using all its human and military power to destroy communism and alli
those who make common cause with it.

General Headquarters, 26 June 1954.

In a solemn ceremony yesterday in Chiquimula, 538 civilians were sworn into the Army of
Liberation, Our soldiers joyfully sung the strains of Los Trinqueteros. [Plays Los Trinqueteros.]

Reports from Puerto Barrios received from one of the many soldiers who have joined our
movement, indicate morale is low among government forces, without provisions or
communications. Ships on the horizon have them fearful of new disembarkments or
bombardments.

Attention sabotage group S-4. The High Command congratulates you for the brilliant work on the
radio transmitter.

One of the planes that yesterday attacked the capital attacked the National Palace....[same item
as Cassette #293-253, para 5].

Flash! Flash! According to reports from our intelligence service, all governors have received
orders from the Guardia Civil director, Col. Rogelio Cruz Wer, to arrest all anti-Communists who
hold key positions, even if they belong to governmental parties but are known as anti-
Communists from their actions of prior years. According to the orders, they should be shot as
soon as the town is attacked. National Army! There is still time to save the country. Otherwise
you will be victims of this reign of terror that you are defending. During tonight's broadcasts we
will read the text of Cruz Wer's message. {This appears to be the first of the several bulletins on
the purported Cruz Wer order: see Cassette #s 243-270 and 295-040. The sequence appears to
have been 297, 295, 243.]

Communique #26 of Radio Liberation informs: From the first hours of the night before last, we
were warning about the bombing we carry out on a military target in the capital, a warning that we

repeated all yesterday morning. Accordingly, early yesterday afternoon, our plans bombed the
Matamoros Fortress that was destroyed. [Continues with text as given Cassette #293-253.]

(Cont'd.)

224

241

254

276

328

333

340

CASSETTE #297 (cont'd.)

From Mexico it is reported that eight travelers arriving from Guatemala....[repeats #283-091.]
A Reuters reporter yesterday afternoon. ...[repeats #293-137, which obviously came first.]
Flash! Flash! [repeats 175 above.]

Attention SL-4 sabotage group. {Repeats 138 above, in which group was referred to as $-4.]
Attention. Our next broadcast will be at 2000 hours on 3420 kes. And at 2300 hours, we will
have a special broadcast in three languages por all journalists and radio producers around the
world.

Guatemala. The taking of Chiquimula is a historic event, 24 June 1954, glorious date which

marks the moment our Army opened the first breach in the government's ranks. Viva Guatemala!
Viva Colonel Castillo Armas! Viva the National Army!

225

006

037

092

26 June 1700

CASSETTE #296
[Anthem. Station identification. ]

Attention Guatemala. Attention National Army. We now the Special Communique from the High
Command of the Liberation Army which was broadcast several times today. The High command
informs that the following are the conditions for re-establishment of peace and order throughout
the country.
first, the Army is not our enemy and we are not the Army's enemy, The enemy of both is
communism, personified by Jacobo Arbenz, Cruz Wer, etc.
second, we appeal to all members of the army to arrest all known members and
sympathizers of the communist party.
third, we appeal to senior army officers to capture Arbenz and establish an interim
military junta.
fourth, the interim junta should immediately instruct should instruct all units to arrest all
communists and prepare to join forces with the liberation army to restore order.
These orders should apply to Civil Guard units under army control.
fifth, the interim junta will establish the hour for a cease-fire, giving all commanders at
least three hours notice. Immediately thereafter, the decision to form a new
government should be announced over TGW or Radio Morse. The Executive
Committee of the Liberation Army will immediately establish contact with the
interim junta.
sixth, this call is made to the army in the name of humanitarianism and before God, to
thereby avoid the useless shedding and blood and the devastation of our
beloved Guatemala.
seventh, until these conditions are met, the Liberation Army will continue increasing its
attacks using all its human and military power to destroy communism and all
those who make common cause with it.
General Headquarters, 26 June 1954.

Arbenz, in his desperation at being unable to control the public fury and the relentless advance of
the Liberation Army, is planning with his thug Cruz Wer, the genocide of anti-Communists. Cruz
Wer has already ordered all governors to shoot all known anti-Communists. On our 2300 hours

program tonight we will give all details of this criminal machination of Arbenz.

Attention Coralia, Tonight you should blow up the bridge located in Sector H-21. Leonardo taking
oral instructions. Then proceed with Plan Mercedes. Good luck.

Attention Guatemala. “Measurement. Rafael. Factory. Forty days. Artist should arrive. Olga.”

The Army of Liberation continues its march on all fronts. Tonight at 2300 hours on 3420 kcs we
will give a full report on today's developments.

Message from Col. Carlos Castillo Armas to the Catholic people of Guatemala. [A lengthy
message is read in which CCA associates the political objectives of the liberation movement with
ideals of the Catholic Church, and calls on all Catholics to join the holy fight against communism.]

Radio Liberation signs off. Next up at 2300 hours on 3420 kes.

226

005

107

120

148

163

181

207

271

26 June 2300

CASSETTE #295

[Anthem. Station identification. ] Attention. “Medida. Fabrica. Rafael. 40 dias. Artista debe
llegar. Olga.” ["Measurement. Factory. Rafael. 40 days. Artist should arrive. Olga.” Purports
to be a military or agent message.)

040 Attention Guatemala. As we promised in our last broadcast, here is the complete and
literal text of the urgent message sent by the assassin Rogelio Cruz Wer, Director
General of the Police [sic] to the governors throughout the republic. We obtained this
message through the collaboration of one of the many senior officers who have joined
our ranks today.

"June 25, 1954. Time: 1940. Frequency: 3400 kes. From Guatemala. To all
Department Governors in the Republic. Capture immediately all mayors and
other anti-Communist city officials currently affiliated with parties of the revolution
who in your areas have been previously identified as anti-Communists. Keep
them in prison, and at the first shot fired when you are attacked, shoot them
immediately. Acknowledge receipt. Signed, Cruz, Director General of the Civil
Guard.”

Attention Coralia. Tonight you should blow up the bridge located in Sector H-21. Leonardo
carries oral instructions. Then, proceed with Plan Mercedes. Goad fuck.

Attention chief of the Jutiapa military zone. You have seen our enormous power. You have seen
our air force in action. You have seen our more than 41,500 men. You have seen just this
afternoon how we can blow up a bridge in seconds. You know your time is coming. And you
know what will happen to you and your troops if you do not choose the path of honor, joining the
forces of the Liberation Army. Think of your country, think of your troops, think of military honor,
think of the flag to which you swore allegiance. The Liberation Army opens its arms to you.
Raise a white flag tomorrow. Think about this.

Attention Four White Feathers. Congratulations for your brilliant work in Tilapa, Coatepeque,
Agua Blanca and El Retiro. Keep up the good work. You will receive reinforcements.

We remind everyone to stay away from possible military targets. Anyone close to them is in
danger. Also, we remind that all motorized vehicles have been declared military targets.

Attention Aviateca pilots. We have reliable information that Aviateca planes are being used to
transport mercenaries recruited in Mexico by the ambassador, Roberto Alvarado Fuentes. You
are therefore warned that Aviateca planes are declared military targets. Any Aviateca plane
disobeying orders from our fighters will be shot down.

Attention Guatemala. [Repeats Cruz Wer item in 040 above. ]

Attention Guatemala and reporters. Here is the Liberation Army's Communique #27:
“4. The military front remained calm as no enemy troops were encountered except for the Zacapa
sector, where a couple of obstinate and suicidal groups presented some resistance.
2. Today the air force made several attacks, principally in Zacapa. In the last three days our
planes have stopped ail train traffic to the northeast, and our saboteurs have isolated Zacapa
from the capital by cutting telegraphic lines. Puerto Barrios is in the same situation.
3. Inthe southern part of the battle zone, two of our columns march on the capital. Advance
parties are at the moment about 60 kilometers from the city.
4. Despite government threats, anti-Communists throughout the country continue their sabotage
activities by cutting lines.
5. Yesterday, 25 June, the High Command gave many hours’ advance warning of the air attack
that left Matamoros Fortress in flames.

(cont'd. )

227

CASSETTE #295 (cont'd.)

6. Today, 26 June, the High Command announced that the only way to achieve a quick peace
would be the arrest of Arbenz and gang.
7. Col, Carlos Castillo Armas met early today with air force commander Col. Rodalfo Mendoza
Azurdia to discuss plans and results. They met by the Chiquimula church which, despite
government claims to the contrary, is in perfect condition.

These have been the most important developments in today’s war news. Tomorrow we
expect to provide very important news which, for now, cannot be revealed for reasons of military
security.

Attention chief of the Jutiapa military zone. [Repeats message from 120 above. ]

[Reminder to stay away from military targets, and that motorized vehicies are targets.]

Refrain 2. [Anthem.] Next regular broadcast at 1300 on 6360 kcs.

228

006

025

042

067

082

100

133

152

190

26 June

CASSETTE #243

Sign On (variant). Attention, Guatemala. Radio Liberation, the clandestine station of the great
Liberation Movement, taking news to all parts of the republic, broadcasting from operations
headquarters at a secret place in liberated territory. [Music.]

The Brazilian foreign minister , referring to the resignation presented by the Guatemalan
government to the Security Council of the UN, said the current Guatemalan situation is an
American problem that should be aired in the Organization of American States (OAS). He said
the case presented by Guatemala before the Security Council has been liquidated before our very
eyes by the sudden solidarity and veto of the Soviet Union. [Music.]

News item! For the first time since the beginning of the liberation action in Guatemala, the free

world is realizing what is happening in that country. Foreign correspondents are arriving in San

Salvador, Tegucigalpa and Mexico City after having witnessed events there, and have started to
write reports that could not be sent from Guatemala because of the Arbenz regime's censorship.
The famous Mexican photographer Jesus Diaz was expelled from Guatemala on the 23rd of this
month after having four ribs broken by army troops. [Gives other purported accounts of foreign

journalists. ]

United Nations. The Soviet delegate is not a gentleman, according to his own words. “Il am nota
gentleman, | am the representative of the Soviet Union,” he said, during a debate on the
Guatemala issue.

Flash! Flash! The Mexican government has announced the results of its investigation of the
Guatemalan government's claim that it had hit and forced a rebel airplane to land in Mexico, and
that the plane's two American pilots were in a Mexican hospital. The Mexican report says the
plane was a single engine tourist plane, on a flight to Bogota, that it had not been hit by anti-
aircraft fire, and was not equipped to drop bombs or conduct reconnaissance.

Attention, residents of the capital. We repeat our oft-expressed warning to abandon residences
near military installations, communications centers and militia training grounds. This is our last
warning. Arbenz government officials: when the government uses the TGW to make sucha
scandal ofan old-man anda child having been killed on a train near Zacapa, why is it that you
permit women, children and old people to travel on trains laden with troops in combat zones? Is it
because you cannot acknowledge the situation that exists in those areas? If indeed there have
been innocent victims of our air force, this has been due exclusively to their having been in
combat zones or near military targets. The fault lays solely with the salaried propagandists of the
TGW who cannot acknowledge the disarray that exists among government forces in Zacapa and
allow innocent people into combat areas.

Attention, residents of Quetzaltenango. Because of the Arbenz government's stubbornness, we
must continue our military campaign to the end. All residents of Quetzaltenango should avoid
going near the studios of Radio Morse, because as of this moment Radio Morse is considered a
military target. [Sound effects: bomb explosion.}

Flash! Flash! Our intelligence service's sources report that Jacobo Arbenz has refused to follow
the advice of a group of senior military officers to withdraw his support from communist leaders
ensconced in his government. ‘If we rid ourselves of the communists, we will have peace in the
republic,’ said the military officers, ‘otherwise much blood will be shed because the Liberation
Army has complete control of the air and ground.’ Arbenz responded that he preferred suicide to
surrender. This information was provided by a senior military officer who, along with many
others, fights along with the force of national liberation.

Attention, residents of Quetzaltenango. [Repeats 133 above. ]

[Cont’d.]

229

213

270

316

331

355

CASSETTE #243 (cont'd.)

Attention, members of the National Army. Many times we have warned you of how the Arbenz
regime and the communists are taking our country to ruin, and how they intend to destroy the
national army. Evidently this fell on deaf ears, but now you can see for yourselves

You have now seen how, after you were sent to Zacapa to confront our victorious forces, you
were replaced by peasants and workers comprising the popular militia, people who are loyal to
their communist bosses and who hate the national army. {tis incredible that you support the
designs of international communism. Even if the government forces were to win this civil war,
which is impossible because they have been cut off from their communications and supplies,
these peasants would have the power in their hands upon your return from the front. There is still
time. Tomorrow will be too late, because you will die at the hands of that infuriated gang that has
no country, no ideals, but fights only for the defense of international communism. Do your part.
Join the forces of liberation, come join the fight in defense of our Fatherland, our people, our
homes, justice and liberty.

Attention, people of Guatemala. We have for you the text of a message sent by the assassin
Rogelio Cruz Wer to all the governors of the republic. We obtained this text thanks to the
collaboration of one of the many senior officers who have joined our forces in recent days. The
message reads as follows:
“June 25, 1954. From Guatemala. To all Department Governors in the Republic.
Capture immediately all mayors and other anti-Communist city officials currently
affiliated with parties of the revolution who in your areas have been previously identified
as anti-Communists. Keep them in prison, and at the first shot fired when you are
attacked, shoot them immediately. Acknowledge receipt. Signed, Cruz, Director
General of the Civil Guard.”
This message speaks clearly of those who say they govern our country democratically. It proves
once again the righteousness of our struggle. And it constitutes still another warning to members
of the national army, on whom we have called on innumerable occasions, since they are the ones
responsible for stopping these cowardly assassination. We promise now that these killers will
be placed in the hands of the judicial system, accused of war crimes, accused of high treason!

Lt. Col. Oscar Mendoza Azurdia, brother of Colonels Rodolfo and Miguel Mendoza, has joined the
ranks of the liberation army. He has resigned his position as military attaché to Cuba because he
does not want to continue serving a regime of blood that suffocates the Guatemalan people.
Follow the examples.so.worthy of imitation, soldiers of the Fatherland! Welcome, Col. Oscar
Mendoza, the Army of Liberation opens its arms to you.

Despite our humanitarian instincts, we wil! not be able to pardon those killers of the people who
have already committed the most abominable crimes in areas that have fallen under our control.
Many Guatemalans have fallen to the machetes of communist leaders, for the mere fact of being
anti-Communists. All those who have committed these crimes will be put in the hands of the
judicial system and tried as war criminals. Assassins! Barbarians! Traitors! That's what they
should be called!

TGW of Guatemala, nest of lies! TGW spews out lie after lie. While the government insists that
it has everything under control, its bulletins put out on TGW suggest otherwise. TGW today told
residents of the capital that the shots heard in the city are from training being conducted by its
popular militias. Training? Could that be true? Or is it that the government has already ordered
the cowardly execution of all anti-Communists, as Cruz Wer'’s order to all governors did? Or is it
that our advance troops are already in view? But if it is true that it is due to militia training, this is
irrefutable proof for the armed forces that they are already being replaced by the communist
shock troops. TGW also said today that the situation is “variable” at the Chiquimula and Zacapa
fronts, despite having announced a few moments earlier that they had complete control. The truth
is that Chiquimula has been definitively liberated, and the proof is in the reporting of war
correspondents who have already interviewed Col. Castillo Armas at that location. And Zacapa is
totally

(Cont'd.)

230

CASSETTE #243 (cont’d.)

surrounded by our troops and totally isolated. Didn't, in fact, the army bulletin of the 26th report
that Zacapa and Chiquimula were martyr cities? Why call them that if they are under government
control? TGW has also reported the call-up of reserves. If reserves are called, is it because
everything is under control? Why hasn't TGW reported that the Matamoros Fort was totally
destroyed by our air attacks, and that that happened after the civilian population had been warned
by our broadcasts throughout the entire previous day? Why does TGW continue trying to fool the
entire country and the army by using worn-out propaganda techniques employed during

World War 1? They're the only ones being fooled!

425 So ends another Radio Liberation broadcast. Important news today at 11:00 PM sharp. Viva free
Guatemala!

231

005

029

174

27 June

CASSETTE #137

Special Sign On. Attention, Guatemalans! This is Radio Liberation, voice of the liberation
movement, transmitting from liberated territory! Here's the news. [Anthem plays out.]

We joyously announce that one of our objectives in our struggle against the communists who sold
out our country has been attained: Jacobo Arbenz has resigned! The resignation demonstrates
the power of the army of liberation. There is more to be done - we are fighting international
communism on our soil. This announcement gives us joy, but we are not satisfied. We are going
to suspend our programming for this moment to await communication from the high command of
the liberation army, which we will then pass on. For now, we will say the people demand more
than this. Be alert, we will be passing on the communication from the high command. [Anthem]
{Repeats above twice.]

Music stops. Off the air. No Sign Off.

232

006

023

036

070

083

119

143

160

207

218

234

254

274

291

27 June

CASSETTE #298
[Anthem. Station identification. 6360 kes.]
Women of Guatemala. Don't let your menfolk fight on the side of the communists and traitors.

Since early yesterday afternoon, the unions in the capital have been summoned to the labor
centrals in order to receive weapons. The government claims it only wants to have sufficient
reserve force, but the truth is even the Foreign Ministry staff people are being forced to receive
weapons.

Attention electricians, radio operators, telegraphers - collaborate by cutting cables. There is no
danger because these lines carry no current.

Attention Guatemala. As promised in earlier broadcasts, we are going to repeat ....[repeats Cruz
Wer order of Cassette #295-040. It was obtained from a senior officer who came over “in recent
days.”]

Attention chief of the Jutiapa military zone. [Repeats message of #295-337.]
[Reminder to stay away from military targets, and about motorized vehicles, per #295-163 et al.]

Attention Guatemala. Here is Communique #27 [repeats message from Cassette #295-271.]
These have been the most important items from the war actions of yesterday, 26 June. Tonight
at 2300 on 3420 kes we will give report on war news that we cannot give today for reasons of
military security [sic].

Radiograms continue to arrive at this headquarters reporting that hundreds of Guatemalans are
joining the great Army of Liberation. 538 were sworn in yesterday in Chiquimulas. Today the
number of volunteers is more than 1,150. Real volunteers, who have joined the march to the
capital.

Lt. Col. Oscar Mendoza Azurdia, brother of the colonels Rodolfo and Miguel, has joined our
glorious movement. . [Same report as Cassette 243-316.]

Communist organizations continue to summon their followers to receive arms and training.
These, members of the National Army, are the popular militias we have been warning about for so
long. This is the popular army called up to replace the national army. You must stop this crime!

Message of support for the Arbenz regime are coming from communist organizations around the
world. The reds have issued the order to use the Guatemala issue as a basis for agitation. The
more such messages are received, the more clearly everyone sees how the government is a tool
of the Kremlin.

Even though we want to keep to our humanitarian line, we will not be able to pardon the
executioners and torturers of the people who have already committed the most abominable
crimes in the areas that have fallen under our control. All those who have committed such crimes
will be put in the hands of the judicial system and tried for war crimes.

Reports continue to come in from all over the country reporting uprisings everywhere. That's

(Cont'd.)

233

CASSETTE # 298 (cont'd.)

because they've had it! They're fed up with all the crimes and abuses! The cry is unanimous
across the nation. Out with the communists Viva Guatemala libre! The chains are breaking!
[Anthem.]

322 Attention commander of the Jutiapa military zone. [Repeats message from Cassette #298-119.]

350 All Catholics around the world have prayed today, Sunday, for God to bring peace and tranquillity
to Guatemala.

365 [Anthem.] Next regular broadcast will be at 2000 hours on 3420 kes. And on the 2300 hours
broadcast we will give you a summary of the military activity of today, Sunday.

234

anne

007

023

084

28 June

CASSETTE #112
Sign On (variant). Radio Liberation broadcasting from Liberation Army Headquarters.

Attention people, army. We have listened carefully to the words of Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz, in
whose hands Arbenz left the presidency. Just more of the same, same theater as when Arevalo
left. But this time we will not be fooled. Our fight was not just against Arbenz, but against the
system, international communism. We do not recognize this government. Army - you owe no
allegiance to Diaz. The time to choose is now.

We inform the people and the army. The bases and conditions for our actions remain as before:
first, the army is not our enemy, our enemy is communism...
second, we appeal to the army to arrest all known communist party members...
third, we call on senior army officers to prevent the flight of Arbenz, and establish an
interim military junta...
fourth, the interim military junta should direct all military units to carry out the arrest
of all communist leaders, and prepare to join forces with the liberation
army...
fifth, the interim junta should announce the time of cease-fire, notifying all field
commanders three hours before the fact, and then immediately announce this
action over TGW....the liberation army will then immediately establish contact
with the interim junta...
sixth, this call is made to the national army in the name of God and Fatherland to avoid
useless bloodshed....
seventh, until these conditions are accepted, the liberation army will continue
increasing its pressure.
These are the only conditions for peace for our country. Colonel Diaz, you have until 0800 hours
to accept. Our air force is poised to act today and will bomb military targets in the capital, and
will do so continuously until you, Colonel Diaz, accept these conditions. Respond before 0800
via TGW, we await your decision....... we will repeat this message constantly until 0800 hours.
This is Radio Liberation, operating from Headquarters in liberated territory. Thanks to the world's
stations that are rebroadcasting us. [ Music]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

235

006

067

256

285

311

324

28 June

CASSETTE #241

Sign On (variant). Transmitting from the Liberation Army's headquarters at some secret place in
Guatemala, in liberated territory, Radio Liberation on the air. [Long and spirited exhortation built
around the three theme-words Truth, Justice and Work.]

Attention Guatemala. Attention Guatemalans. The High Command of the Liberation Army
waited until 0800 today for the response of the new government headed by Colonel Carlos
Enrique Diaz in order to reestablish public order and tranquillity throughout the nation, thereby
avoiding the useless spilling of blood. The response from Col. Diaz was not heard on The Voice
of Guatemala or any other government station, with the result that the High Command and
Executive Committee of the Liberation Movement inform the entire nation that our struggle will
continue forward until returning to the people their rights and liberties. We will not vacillate in
continuing our bombing of military targets, in the capital as well as the various battle fronts, until
achieving the total elimination of international communism from our national soil. The transfer of
power from the traitor Jacobo Arbenz to Col. Diaz does not signify any change. The same
systems are functioning. They will allow the escape of war criminals who should be tried by the
nation’s tribunals, and Col. Diaz himself has said he will continue the battle against the liberation
movement with the support of the revolutionary political parties and popular organizations that
back the Arbenz regime. In July of 1950 [(Counter 091) goes into some history illustrating other
acts of deceit by the Arevalo-Arbenz people, but insisting that the people will no longer be fooled
by this behavior.} With their changes they want us to think they have moved to moderation. But
it is not Jacobo Arbenz, the man, that we want, we want the entire system. We want justice,
justice and justice, and punishment as well. Replacing Rogelio Cruz Wer with a thug just as bad
or worse, like Jose Luis Morales Melgar, hasn't fixed anything. Cruz Wer must answer for all the
horrendous crimes he committed. We regret that Col. Diaz did not respond to our offer. Our
bombings will increase. We need a quick victory to avoid further bloodshed. Civilians should
stay away from military installations as we continue on to the capital, and remember that alt
motorized vehicles are military targets. We will soon be with you! We thank the stations of the
free world that are rebroadcasting our statements. Attention, National Army and Civil Guard.
Now is your opportunity to shake off the tyrants. Today or never. Capture Jacobo Arbenz and
his colleagues. Arbenz’ retreat is nothing but a trick, he is stilt running everything. [Goes on to
attack Morales Melgar and Col. J. Antonio Saravia, respective replacements for Cruz Wer and
Judicial Guard chief Jaime Rosenberg.] Colonel Carlos Castillo Armas, commander of the
Liberation Army, invites all officers and soldiers of the National Army to join the ranks of the
Liberation Army which is marching to victory in the nation’s capital. He calls on the people not to
be fooled by the government's recent acts.

The Liberation Army’s air and ground forces continued this morning to pummel the defenders of
the government. You are listening to Radio Liberation, the station of the Liberation Army.

Attention, residents of the capital. We warn all those who live near military installations to
abandon their homes immediately to avoid the bombing attacks that we will carry out starting
today. It is possible that we could attack this very afternoon or this evening one of the many
military targets which are marked on our plans. Every citizen should avoid these military
installations.

Flash! Flash! A news bulletin from Mexico reports that Mexico City authorities today captured a
shipment of two million bullets and several hundred rifles, pistols, etc., that were en route to
Guatemala.

A brief biography of Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz, the puppet replacing Arbenz on Moscow's orders.
Diaz is a pure communist, trained by Moscow's agents in Prague. He is not a true soldier, but a
puppet of the Kremlin, as was made clear by his words of last night. He has formed a
government of personal friends and communist agents. This is the new Kremlin puppet

(cont'd.)

236

356

366

CASSETTE #241 (cont'd.)

The latest! We have learned of a change in the government of Col. Diaz, as he agrees to share
the presidency with Colonels Jose Angel Sanchez and Elfego Monzon. There are also rumors of
the resignation of Foreign Minister Toriello, and of a sudden trip by Arbenz to Argentina. We'll
give you all the details on our next Program at 11:00 PM sharp on 3420 kcs. Be listening!

There is a game currently going on in Guatemala , with the effort being made to convince people
that the reasons for the people having risen up in armed revolt have now been eliminated by the
nominal replacement of the president and apparent closing of the communist party. But nobody
is fooled, we Guatematans know about those tricks and we are not biting. Either the demands of
the High Command are met, or we will continue our invincible march to the capital. If they are not
met, we will consider the current de facto government as just a masquerade, nothing but a
prolongation of the previous one. And we will not accept that.

Sign Off (variant). Will be back at 11:00 PM on 3420 kes.

237

SOURCE CASSETTES

SYNOPSES

OF

SOURCE CASSETTES

005

040

160
191

200

415

CASSETTE #74

(Badly distorted signal.) Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia, apparently
presented by a student federation. Garbled to the point of being targely indecipherable.

Tribuna de fa Libertad. E/ Montecristo del Siglo Veinte. (Signal is now clearer.) 9th episode. Lt.
Col. Carlos Castillo Armas recovered after being “executed” by a firing squad. Provides details of
his subsequent incarceration. Dramatizes prayers offered by Castillo Armas, a visit by his wife,
conversations with other prisoners. The year is 1950.

Sloganeering around the symbols God, Fatherland and Liberty (very garbled again)
Martial music (garbled).

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de fa Libertad y la Democracia. Tribuna de la Libertad.

Ei Montecristo del Siglo Veinte. 10th episode. Debate in the Congress over the request for
amnesty presented by Castillo Armas on behalf of all political prisoners. Congress denies the
petition. Castillo Armas tells other prisoners to develop an escape plan.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Students of Guatemala presents Tribuna de fa Libertad. E&f Montecristo del Sigio Veinte. (chapter
number distorted, unintelligible). Congress has denied the amnesty petition. Castillo Armas
again speaks to other political prisoners, telling them to develop several escape plans from which
they will choose. Some are presented, but rejected by Castillo Armas, who presents one of his
own. It is accepted by the others, and they all sign a pact of secrecy.

Tape finally ends. No Sign Off.

004

018

067

112

CASSETTE #39

No Sign On. Refrain 2

Hello, Guatemalans. Radio Liberation returns to the airwaves after a prudent withdrawai caused
by circumstances. We are persecuted by the communists and Arbenz, and as a result we are
occasionally forced to miss some of our regular contacts with you, either to evade their
surveillance or to change our broadcast site. The need to reconnect the equipment has
occasionally forced us to miss some broadcasts, and this will happen again. {Music.]

Again notifies they have had to find a new broadcast site. {Music.]

This is Radio Liberation. Again asks forgiveness for irregularity in their recent programs. [Music.]
[Refrain 5. Refrain 6.] [Music.]

This is Radio Liberation. Again explains the problem. Now we're back on schedule. [Music.}
[Refrain 3. Refrain 4. Refrain 5. Refrain 2.] [Music.]

Radio Liberation back on the air. Again seeks forgiveness. [Refrain 2.] [Martial music.]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

NOTE: From the context, this tape may have been played in the aftermath of the
purported attack on the transmitter site on 24 May (Cassette #97)

005

233

CASSETTE #38

No Sign On. Refrain 2. Announcement of a special 30 minute program of classical music, En
Alas de la Musica Que No Reconoce Fronteras. Announcer reminds listeners that police are
constantly on the search for their transmitter; in order to thwart police, they have recently moved
to a new secret site and are now readjusting their equipment; hence this special musical program.
It is clear that the station has missed at least some transmissions. Plays Paris Radio Symphonic
Orchestra, Ravel's “Bolero” and others.

Radio Liberation is pleased to reinitiate its broadcasts which were interrupted due to the need to
evade police and communist groups’ search for the transmitter. We are constantly eluding this
chase, and as a result we may have to cancel one or another transmission. If you don't hear us
on a given day on our frequency, be sure to tune in the next day because we will be there. Also,
in order to elude the government's effort to jam our transmitter, we are occasionally forced to vary
our frequency a bit from our standard 6360 kilocycles and 3420 kilocycles. So, if you don't find
us there, go up or down a few kilocycles and you will find us.

Continues with the special musical program. NBC Symphony Orchestra, “Waltz of the Flowers"
from The Nutcracker Suite.

Repeats above notices.

Abbreviated Sign Off.

006

929

148

CASSETTE #224

No Sign On. Refrain 8. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion. The conduct of the Guatemalan delegation to the International

Conference of Caracas was a defense of the role of communism in the Americas, to the extent

that it voted against a Panamanian resolution against racial discrimination just because it was

phrased in a way that the communists disliked. Even Arbenz declared that the communist party

played an active role in Guatemala, thereby willfully violating article 32 of the Constitution. And

we must await the response of the army to this treason. Will it remain passive, submissive? Or

will it assume its role of national sentry. Sentry! Alert! The enemy is in sight! Your commander
in chief is its accomplice! We accuse him of high treason!

[Refrain 8. Refrain 2.] [3420 kes.]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. It's too late, comrade Guerra Borges. We have already discussed
the sad state of the Social Security Institute. Ever since the communists seized control of it, it
has been characterized by bankruptcy. The international communists Alfonso Solorzano and
Abel Cuenca have played a key role in this. Even Guerra Borges has written that the Institute is
based on a major mistake in the beginning, and further weakened by a series of subsequent
errors. The communists have been responsible for these mistakes. And Solarzano and Cuenca
have been personally responsible. And it was the communists who ran the bill through congress
removing the government's obligation to the Institute the debt it is owed. Guerra Borges tries to
blame others, but the people has its eyes open and sees communist responsibility everywhere.
And very soon it will pass judgment. There is no money to pay the Institute what it is owed, but
there is money for propaganda and for funding foreign interventions and vast espionage networks.
[Music, fades out at Counter 297.]

No Sign Off. Music fades out.

CASSETTE #81
CASSETTE #82

CASSETTE #83

CASSETTE #84

CASSETTE #94
These five cassettes contain a recording of the events at the “First Continental Congress Against
Soviet Intervention in Latin America,” held at the Cervantes Theater in Mexico City, sponsored by
the Popular Anti-Communist Front of Mexico. Various telegrams to the congress are read, and
many speeches made. Rousing welcoming speech by a Mexican delegate at 140 on side 2 of
Cassette #81, declaring the congress officially opened on this the 27th day of May 1954. Several
samples of good old-fashioned anti-Communist oratory, a particularly good one being by a
Guatematan labor delegate at the beginning of Cassette #84.

CASSETTE #85

005 Sign On I. [No frequency given}

CASSETTE #86

009 Speech by Castillo Armas to his [former] fellow officers, responding to the Congress’ act of
1 February [year not given] declaring him a traitor, and his subsequent cashiering by the Superior
Defense Council. Not clear whether it is Castillo Armas speaking, or someone reading his

manifesto, presumably the same manifesto referred to in the Que Somos y Adonde Vamos?
segment on Cassette #31.

530 Speech ends. Recording ends.

008

185

CASSETTE #87

This is not a broadcast tape, it contains no sign on, sign off, refrains, etc. It simply contains two
episodes of the below program.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de fa Libertad y la Democracia. _Tribuna de la Libertad. Dramatic
presentation of three incidents illustrating perfidious communist infiltration of the peasantry, and
the way the communists instigate the peasants into violent crime against legitimate landowners.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. _Tribuna de la Libertad. Dramatic
presentation on conditions at the Salama prison, built for 20 prisoners but housing more than one
hundred - “the Siberia of Guatemala.” The cases of anti-Communist student leaders Mario
Sandoval Alarcon and Oscar Cobar Castillo are highlighted.

014

124

CASSETTE #89

This is not a broadcast tape, it contains no sign on, sign off, refrains, etc. It contains the following
items:

A long patriotic poem extolling the spirit of the fatherland and attacking the communists.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. _Tribuna de la Libertad. A long series

of patriotic slogans and appeals, read alternately by male and female announcers, and
interspersed with martial music. It ends at 338 and there is nothing further on the tape.

013

169

CASSETTE $#93

No Sign On. [Cuts in]......with a soft, slow music, to sweeten the hours of sadness of our beloved
Guatemala which these days finds itself dominated by the reds. We're going to offer you , as a
moment of tranquillity, Musica Delicada [Delicate Music]. Soft music ensues. Then a satirical
commercial sponsored by Jaime Cruz Wer's “massage parlor." More music. More satire of Cruz
Wer, this time about his quiz program, and the massage parlor again. More music.

With the anthem as background, the announcer very dramaticalfy pronounces the inauguration of
Radio Liberation. After a lofty description of its patriotic aspirations, the music fades out. After a
moment of silence....

....JazZ music breaks in. This is a recording of a disk jockey show on Miami station WIMZ, in
English, commercials and all.

Recording ends.

10

004

008

205

480

CASSETTE #138

No Sign On. [Very distorted recording] Music leads directly into...

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de fa Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents Tribuna de fa Libertad. The Montecristo of the
20th Century. Does not give chapter number. Starts with the 5 November 1950 assault on the La
Aurora military base. Castillo Armas is reported dead, with others. Scene with his weeping wife.
Scene in the ambulance, Castillo Armas recovers and is rushed into the operating room at the
military hospital where he and the other corpses were taken by the ambulance. Tune in tomorrow
for the next chapter.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents Tribuna de /a Libertad. The Montecristo of the
20th Century. The third episode. Picks up where above chapter ended, in the emergency room at
the military hospital. Taken to military jail at La Aurora still anesthetized. Wakes up on jail floor.
Tune in tomorrow for next chapter.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents Tribuna de fa Libertad. The Montecristo of the
20th Century. The fourth episode. Interrogated, Refuses to talk. Threatened with execution.
Transported to Judicial Guard. Tape ends abruptly while interrogator is trying to get him to admit
he was the leader.

11

008

CASSETTE #139

No Sign On. The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents The Crimes of the Communists in Guatemala. Listen now to the story of the martyrdom
of Sergeant Carlos Enrique Posadas [see Sangre de Martires on Cassette #130]. Listen
tomorrow at 3:00 PM to this same Radio America [sic] for another report on The Crimes of the
Communists in Guatemala. [Music and off the air.}

No Sign Off. Off the air.

12

CASSETTE #141

005 Breaks into a mambo...Cita en ef Tropico....Pobrecita....... this tape is all music, probably made so
that selections could be drawn from it to insert in the various programs like. Miscelanea Musical
del Aire.

426 Recording ends.

13

CASSETTE #142
005 Breaks straight into music. Atl music on this cassette.

429 Music ends.

14

005

065

323

CASSETTE #143

Breaks straight into music. To the fistenership of Guatemala and the republic. These are the
clandestine channels of Radio Liberation, clandestine transmitter, to present in your homes, a 30-
minute program of North American music, as a test. The transmission you are about to hear,
friends, to test the clandestine transmitters of Radio Liberation, the clandestine station of
Guatemala...{sentence doesn’t end, straight into music....the signal is very distorted, and gets
worse].

You are listening to Radio Liberation, the clandestine transmitter of the Guatemalan liberation
movement, testing its transmitters. [More music, still distorted.}

You are listening to Radio Liberation, the clandestine station, testing its transmitters. [More
music, now distortion-free.] Radio Liberation on the air, testing transmitters.

Radio Liberation thanks you for listening to this 30-minute program testing transmitters. [Music.]

Music ends. Off the air. No Sign Off.

15

005

039

078

CASSETTE #144

Straight into music.

Attention Guatemalans. This is Radio Liberation, operating secretly with its clandestine
transmitter in some place in the republic of Guatemala, in a test mode. Listen to us and you will
know the reality of the political moment that Guatemala is going through, and the irrefutable
progress of the liberation movement through this clandestine radio which will begin to function
very soon. During our daily broadcasts we will bring you music, commentaries and news in
general, and we will demonstrate clearly the crime of the communist domination and the
uncontainable force of the Guatemalan liberation movement. This is the clandestine transmitter
Radio Liberation operating on its short wave frequency in a test mode, and from some secret
place in the national territory. [Music.]

Attention Guatemala. You are listening to Radio Liberation....Our message to the entire anti-
Communist public in the Guatemalan republic: The moment will come to act in support of this
cause of liberation for Guatemala. We urge caution on everyone involved in the cause, and
everyone should be very careful with the orejas [government informants] . Several governments of
America for the implementation of the anti-Communist declaration of Caracas, in view of the fact
that he influence of international communism is clearly visible in the government of Jacobo
Arbenz. The Guatemalan government does not permit publication of this news item, which is

being published all around the world. [More Station identification.] [More music.]
Station identification. [Music.]

Station identification. Don't believe TGW or the Guatemalan press. Listen to Radio Liberation,
which will be coming to you soon. [Music.]

Off the air.

16

006

180

410

CASSETTE #146

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de fa Libertad y la Democracia. [As usual with this segment, there is
severe distortion.] The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents Tribuna de la Libertad, The Montecristo of the 20th Century. Chapter 12. After the
amnesty is denied, Castillo Armas proposes to the other prisoners an escape plan based on
excavating a tunnel. The prison warden offers his assistance. E| Charro, a common prisoner,
volunteers his machine shop expertise. The digging begins.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de fa Libertad y la Democracia.. [As usual with this segment, there is
severe distortion.) The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents Tribuna de la Libertad. The Montecristo of the 20th Century. Chapter 13. The
difficulties encountered in digging the tunnel, Castillo Armas’ inspiration to his companions. He
is visited by his wife, she frets over his dirty hands, he tells her the secret, she worries. He
refuses to give up.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Demoeracia._ [As usual with this segment, there is
severe distortion.] The Committee of ‘Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exiie
presents Tribuna de Ja Libertad. The Montecristo of the 20th Century. Chapter 14. Castillo
Armas reiterates to his wife his determination, she supports him. The digging continues. He
deals with the discouragement of his companions, inspires them to further effort. [The cassette
cuts off abruptly mid-chapter at 659}.

[Picks up on reverse side.]

014

Picks up with further digging. Chapter ends at 051.

17

005

CASSETTE #2A

No Sign On. The Committee of Anti-Communist Gu
presents Los Crimenes Comunistas en Guatemala.

atemalan University Students in Exile
Dramatic presentation - meeting of anti-

Communists in Nov 1950 deciding to throw out the communists. Plan to attack La Aurora base,
led by Carlos Castillo Armas. The failure of the assault on the base is detailed. Massacre of the
wounded attackers. Execution of the prisoners. Castillo Armas survives the firing squad.
Operated on and transferred to Guardia Civil. Tortured. Transferred to penitentiary. Escapes.

Music ends, no Sign Off.

18

006

035

254

CASSETTE #109

No Sign On. Guatemaltecos, atencion! Guatemaltecos, fa ola de terror que e/ gobierno
comunista de Arbenz ha desatado sumira en la desesperacion a millares de hogares patrioticos,
cubrira de luto a muchas familias honradas, pero muy pronto devolveremos golpe por golpe, y
finalmente conquistaremos para Guatemala la libertad y el bienestar que todos sus hijos
deseamos. Paciencia, guatemaltecos. Solamente pedimos fe y esperanza, no por mucho tiempo.
Ya las ciudades, ya los montes, ya todo Guatemala se agita con las legiones libertadoras que
dentro de muy pocos dias se alzaran al grito de la redencion nacional, al lamado de Ios clarines
de fa patria. Aprestados a combatir, Guatemaltecos! Resistid con estoico patriotismo unos dias
mas. El gran momento de /a patria esta ya muy cerca. Vuestros sufrimientos terminaran con el
estampido de los canones de Ia libertad de Guatemala. Guatemaltecos! Alzad fa cabeza!
Guatemaltecos! Elevad los corazones! Guatemaltecos! Dispuestos al sacrificio! Guatemalitecos!
A luchar con las armas en fa mano por la libertad de fa patria! EI ejercito libertador os dara la
senal! Viva Guatemala libre! (Guatemalans, attention! Guatemalans, the wave of terror
unleashed by the communist Arbenz government will subject thousands of Patriotic homes to
misery, bring mourning to many honorable families, but very soon we will be returning blow for
blow, and finally we will conquer for Guatemala the liberty and well-being that all its sons desire.
Patience, Guatemalans. We ask only for faith and hope, and not for long. Already the cities, the
hills, all of Guatemala are alive with the liberating legions that within a very few days will rise up
to the cry of national redemption, responding to the clarions of the fatherland. Get ready to fight,
Guatemalans! Resist with stoical patriotism for a few more days. The great moment of the
fatherland is near. Your sufferings will end with the booms of the cannons of freedom for
Guatemala. Guatemalans! Raise your head! Guatemalans! Raise your hearts! Guatemalans! Be
ready for sacrifice! Guatemalans! To the fight with weapons in hand for the liberty of the
fatherland! The Army of Liberation will give you the signal! Viva free Guatemala!]

You will now hear a transcendental decision taken last night by the Liberation Movement’s
Executive Committee in a secret session held just a few kilometers from the National Palace.
This is an important message, and we ask you to listen carefully and repeat it to your family and
friends, especially to those in the armed forces or the Arbenz government. Here's the decision:

[After detailing the crimes of the Arbenz regime, the following is proclaimed:

--the presidency is vacant.

--the National Congress is dissolved.

--the military are absolved from following any orders from he Arbenz regime.

--a National Convention is convoked, to be held very soon.

~any person collaborating with the regime will be held accountable.

--civil disobedience.

—the army should decommission and guard any weapons distributed to shock troops
and other elements that have usurped the duties of the military.

~peasants, do not be party to this treason.

—Civil Guard, Judicial Guard, Military Police - refuse to follow the orders of the
Kremlin's agents.

— Guatemalans, the night is nearly over, dawn is only a few hours, a few days, away.
(Music. }]

Music ends. No Sign Off.

[NOTE: The box containing this reel was marked, “Special, Miriam.” Such reels were
usually made to be played at a specific point in time, keyed to a specific event. This one
could well have been broadcast at some point in late June, perhaps keyed to Arbenz’
resignation, but it is impossible to specify the date.]

Lg

008

CASSETTE #162

Begins with the reading of a speech, possibly one given by Toriello at the Caracas Conference.
Then there is a reading of a text describing events at the conference, taking the Guatemalan
government's point of view. At one point [Counter 302] there is a reference to the plenary
session of March 5, so this indeed probably was the Caracas conference. Overall, this is a
defense of the Guatemalan position at the conference. Ends [340] with a portion of the anthem.

20

005

CASSETTE #164

No Sign On. Goes straight into a flourish not heard before, and the announcer [supported by
some great drum rolls] reminds listeners that Radio Liberationhas been warning that the Arbenz
regime, following orders from Moscow, has been preparing a series of moves as a pretext to
unleash its criminal plans. We've warned you that the regime is about to “discover” a cache of
American arms that will be the excuse for a wave of crimes that is already underway. Our agent
in army intelligence has informed us that army intelligence has prepared several crates of
American arms for this purpose. The crates will have “United Fruit Company” and “machinery
replacement parts” stenciled on them. The government has planned appropriate fanfare to follow
the “discovery” of these crates buried on United Fruit property. The first discovery will take place
on the Chinook [ph.] plantation. The second will take place on a banana plantation near Morales.
We are putting everyone on alert, even though the government will change its plans as a result of
this exposure. [Ends at 095].

21

CASSETTE #167

005 Breaks into a pro-government speech at some sort of rally. Appears to have been recorded from
a short-wave radio broadcast, given the fading, humming, and interference. At one point speaker
says “we have arrived at another 1st of May...” so this may have been a May Day tally. Speech
ends at Counter 369 with “Viva el 1° de Mayo, Viva Guatemala’ and then calls of “Arbenz!
Arbenz! Arbenz!” It was probably Arbenz giving the speech. The anthem begins at 385 and
everything cuts off at 388. At the end an announcer confirms this was a radio broadcast and that
the event was the closing ceremony of the May Day festivities.

388 Anthem cuts off. No Sign Off.

22

003

050

CASSETTE #168

Flourish but No Sign On. Attention people of Guatemala! We interrupt our normal programming
to give you a sensational news item. Our troops have managed to block the passage of a train
from Puerto Barrios en route to the capital bearing Soviet arms purchased by Major Alfonso
Martinez Estevez on his recent trip. The background to this event is that on Saturday 15 May the
ship Alfhem arrived in Puerto Barrios laden with Soviet arms purchased by Martinez....no flag, no
shipping documents, everything very secretive. Defense Minister Sanchez was there ordering
immediate unloading of the arms and shipment to the capital. The arms on that train have been
destroyed. The people should take no action yet, the time has not yet come Say your prayers,
Communists.

Attention, Guatemala. Sensational Notice. Repeats the news item, says the attack unit was

Brigade 17. Rail service to the capital has been interrupted until repairs can be conducted.
[There is a bad echo on this broadcast.}] Radio Liberation congratulates Ciceron, Pedro and

Dolores and members of Brigade 17. [Ends at 077.]

23

CASSETTE #169
009 A few false starts, mike seems to come on in a roomful of people and then cut right off again
013 This is Radio America broadcasting a special program of CEGUAJE. [Plays “Los Trinqueteros.”

Again some faise starts, then plays “Los Trinqueteros” again. Then it is played again. And
again. And again.] [Ends at 290.]

24

005

CASSETTE #174

No Sign On. Breaks right into a statement by an apparent exile: “Compatriots, the decisive
moment is near. Our country will be liberated soon, with the cooperation of all good patriots. Be
alert. All of us in exile are working without rest to reach the final goal. Confidence, courage and
God be with us.” [This statement ends at Counter 010 and there is nothing more on this
cassette. ]

Ends per above. No Sign Off.

25

007

199

460

CASSETTE #174

No Sign On. Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad 1 y la Democracia. El Comite de Estudiantes
Universitarios Anti-Comunistas Guatemaitecos en el Exilio presents, Tribuna de fa Libertad. [As
usual with the introduction to this segment, the recording is distorted.] Today we present the
story of the heroic student Edgar Lenke [ph.], killed by the communists on 19 July 1950 in
Guatemala City in the wake of the Francisco Javier Arana assassination. [Dramatic presentation
of the story.] [Music.] [Ends at Counter 195,]

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. El Comite de Estudiantes Universitarios

Anti-Comunistas Guatemattecos en el Exilio presents, Tribuna de /a Libertad. Today we present
the story of the burning of the Constitution, the symbolic destruction of the records of the National
Constituent Assembly of 1945 in the wake of the dismissal of the Supreme Court Justices. Let's
return to 1953... [tells the story}.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. El Comite de Estudiantes Universitarios
Anti-Comunistas Guatemattecos en el Exilio presents, Tribuna de la Libertad. [Dramatizes
several instances of abuses by the Arevalo and Arbenz regimes against the Church and the press.
Specifically cites the cases of Radio Pax, Radio Continental, Roberto Vizcaino Rubio and Oscar
Conde.] [Ends at Counter 686....continues on reverse side.]

[Reverse side]

005

[picks up with case of Oscar Conde from front side.]

[Segment ends. Nothing more on this side. ]

26

006

158

CASSETTE #175

Nuestra Lucha al! Servicio de la Libertad y Ja Democracia. El Comite de Estudiantes Universitarios
‘Anti-Comunistas Guatemaltecos en el Exilio presents, Tribuna de fa Libertad, Once again the
Caribbean Legion is in action, with the recent attempt on the life of Nicaraguan President
Somoza. Arevalo started the Legion in 1845, and we have since seen it in action in El Salvador,
Honduras, Costa Rica, and the Dominican Republic. [The attempt on Somoza is then
dramatized, beginning with Arbenz’ instructions to Eufemio Fernandez. As the planning in
Nicaragua is being dramatized, the announcer says, “tune in tomorrow at 9 PM on this same
station for the end of the adventure of how the Caribbean Legion, with the communist
Guatemalan government, tried to kill President Somoza. Good night."}

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de a Libertad y la Democracia, El Comite de Estudiantes
Universitarios Anti-Comunistas Guatemaltecos en el Exilio presents, Tribuna de la Libertad [picks
up from the previous episode above on the Somoza assassination attempt. The Guatemalan
ambassador, Colonel Santizo, gives instructions to the attack team. The plan is to ambush
Somoza as he leaves a party at the American Embassy. But the wily Somoza gets wind of it,

27

005-406

Nothing but music.

CASSETTE #221
CASSETTE #220
CASSETTE #219
CASSETTE #218
CASSETTE #217
CASSETTE #223
CASSETTE #222

28

005

018

054

066

071

086

199

CASSETTE #230

No Sign On. Refrain 7. Refrain 2. [3420 kcs.]

Pegando Centro. Attention Chaco Delgada. Attention Jorge isaac Delgado. We have evidence
that you, cooperating with the traitorous Arbenz government from the Secretariat of Publicity in
the Presidency, are compiling apocryphal documents and false testimonies to involve hundreds of
innocent Guatemalans in a alleged plot against the government. Jorge Isaac Delgado, Chaco,
get ready. Your days are numbered. Treason is paid for with death, and we're going to set a
precedent in Guatemala beginning with you. We will kill you like a [sarnoso -- possibly rabid]
dog.

[Refrain 39. Refrain 2.} [3420 kcs.]
[Begins a musical introduction, then shuts off. Pause, then...]

Refrain 7. [Refrain 2.] [6360 kcs.] [Change of frequency, this is a different broadcast from
above. ]

Que Somos y Adonde Vamos. “The Urgent Need to Establish the Family Salary” is Recognized” -
- taken from our “Plan of Tegucigalpa.” The economic liberalism that has ruined our social
structure sees men as units, with no regard for the environment that surrounds them. For that
system, any man is the same as another, regardless of whether this wife is ill or his children
starving. That's why our program incorporates the concept of the “family salary,” a salary
sufficient for a man to support his family. Nothing can strengthen social development more than
family security, the very basis of the nation. And now for another point from our Plan of
Tegucigalpa — “The Guatemalan School.” The school should be an extension of the home, not, as
it is under the communists, a place where the teachings of the home are undermined and
challenged, and where disrespect for parents is fostered. In our schools the children will learn
and live by Truth, Justice and Work. [Music, ends abruptly at Counter 199.]

29

006

018

245

CASSETTE #226

No Sign On. Refrain 7. Refrain 2. [doesn't finish, intro to Los Acusamos breaks in.]

Los Acusamos de Alta Traicion.

We accuse Carlos Aldana Sandoval of having divided the officer corps of the army. In earlier
times, officers graduated from the military academy - the Polytechnic Institute - and those who
acquired their commissions through the ranks, got along perfectly well. The graduates wore the
distinctive academy emblem on their uniforms, and it was respected by the non-grads. The
cohesion between the two groups was excellent. But then Col. Carlos Aldana Sandovai, then a
member of Arevalo’'s staff, decreed that the emblem was no longer to be worn. This set off a
conflict between the two groups based on the resentment felt by the graduates. Once he saw the
problem that developed, Aldana compounded his crime by letting it be known that the thing had
been Co. Francisco Javier Arana’s idea, thereby bringing false discredit on this patriotic officer.
The problems created by Aldana remain alive today.

The Army Under the Red Guillotine. Sometime very soon, an accounting will have to be made of
the many cold-blooded heinous crimes committed by the two “revolutionary” governments. The
top leaders of the Army have never wanted to open their eyes to-these crimes. Let's review just
some of the victims of the red guillotine. There is the case of David Pimaral, murdered at the
Central Penitentiary for the sole crime of being the brother of presidential candidate Col. Ovidio
Pimaral. Then there are is the well-known cases of Col. Francisco Javier Arana and Absalon
Peralta. And Carlos Castillo Armas at La Aurora. We will never forget this spilt blood. We will
never forget the tears. [Refrain 39. Refrain 7. Refrain 8.} [Refrain 2 is interrupted by musical
intro to Rompiendo las Cadenas.]

Rompiendo las Cadenas. The recent statement by Monsignor Mariano Rosell y Arellano to the
New York Times that relations between the Church and government in Guatemala no longer exist
underscores the extent to which the communists have tried to intervene in religious matters.
Because of all the injustices committed in earlier days, communism found fertile ground in
Guatemala. Workers and peasants, downtrodden for years, were easy captives of the
communists’ false preachings. But the Archbishop's statement is a clear call that the time has
come to confront the evils of communism. Itis a battlecry which has opened the eyes of many.
For us it is a renewal of hope, because we know the people will rise up as one single man to
throw out the communists. [Refrain 8. Refrain 2 stops haif way through (at Counter 397} and only
silence follows. ]

No Sign Off.

30

CASSETTE #285

006 .. [breaks into music...}....La Hora Nacional. The Hora Nacional orchestra plays the classical
piece, “Salome,” and others. {Occasional drifting of the station as other stations drift in, then out
The timing of the broadcast is Holy Week.] [A notation on the box of the original reel indicates
this is a recording of the official station TGW.} [Music cuts off at Counter 448.]

31

006

074

140

169

CASSETTE #284

Starts off directly with a reading of Jose Flamenco's poem “A la Patria” with marimba musical
background.

Marimba music leads into reading of poem, “A Jacobo Arbenz.” Typical passage, “You who have
corrupted our youth, you who carry poison in your entrails, you, murderer, you, thief, you who
have earned the noose a thousand times over..... your mission is to kill....satiate yourself, kill and
bathe yourself in fratricidal blood....here, take my blood, | don’t want your pardon, it would insult
me....| would rather be a martyr than a slave....| want to see you closely so | can spit in your face,
and say to you as | die, “Damn you!"

Marimba music leads into reading of poem, “A Guatemala.”
Marimba music leads into reading of poem, “Ode to a Leader.”

Marimba music leads into reading of poem, “E! Indio.” Recording cuts off at Counter 254, before
the end of the poem.

Ends, per above.

32

007

193

380

611

010

136

CASSETTE #283

No Sign On. The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents, “Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” “The Expulsion of Rene Fernandez Alfaro.” [Tells
the story of Fernandez, just as it was told on Sangre de Martires on Cassette #122.)

The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents,
“Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” “The Case of the Brothers Quinones’ [this is chapter 1)
[‘Listen day after tomorrow for the next chapter.”}

The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents,
“Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” “The Case of the Brothers Quinones’ [this is chapter !1] [this
is the same chapter as played on Sangre de Martires on Cassette #80). [“Listen day after
tomorrow for the next chapter."]

The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents,
“Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” “The Case of the Brothers Quinones” [this is chapter Itt]
(this is the same chapter as played on Sangre de Martires on Cassette #78 [tape ends at Counter
666 just as review of the last chapter is ending,] [continues on reverse side of cassette....]

[picks up from first side.] [Tune in next Monday at 7:15 in the morning the next chapter of the
Case of the Brothers Quinones. This Program was produced by....CEUAGE. [Music, ends at
136.]

Ends. No Sign Off.

33

009

177

412

CASSETTE #282

No Sign On. [Very poor recording at beginning.) Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la
Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents, Tribuna de la Libertad. [Continuation of the Brothers Quinones Case.} Our last chapter
ended with Mario Quinones being taken to his cell in a virtual coma as a result of the tortures [see
Cassette #s 283 and 78]. [In this current chapter, the fourth, Edgar is tortured, to the extent that
he must be treated by “a well-known proctologist.” This is definitely not for the queasy.] [Ends
with brothers about to be brought before a habeas corpus hearing brought by their father. They
are warned not to say anything.]

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents, Tribuna de la Libertad. The next chapter of the
Quinones brothers case, but the audio is so weak it is barely discernible.

Nuestra Lucha al Servicio de la Libertad y la Democracia. The Committee of Anti-Communist
Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents, Tribuna de la Libertad. The next chapter of
the Quinones brothers case. The Arbenz government was prepared to lay the last card to impede
the release of the brothers. Prohibitive bail is set, but the father comes up with it, and they
escape to El Salvador before they can be rearrested. [This appears to have been the final
chapter, the sixth.]

And so ends another program of Tribuna....[cuts off at Counter 663]. [Continues on reverse side
of cassette....]

[picks up from front side]...the end of the above chapter. Nothing more.

34

007

178

CASSETTE #281

No Sign On. The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile
presents, “Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” The case of Margot Dresler Jonama, an anti-
Communist candidate for mayor of Antigua in January 1951, and the “first Guatemalan female
victim of communist cowardice.” Although she won the election, she was denied office. This
eventually led to a street demonstration in July, ted by market women. An unfair tax was then
levied on them which they protested at city hall. Demonstrators led by Dresler in the market
were set Upon by the police with truncheons and rubber hoses. Dresler went into hiding in the
capital, winding up in the Salvadoran embassy.

[....breaks in....] [this is about a man speaking to his weeping daughter Maria Elena who is ruing
having to be away from him and her mother and sister. He tells her it was her fault, but not to
worry because 6 months will pass quickly. He departs, apparently leaving her on a coffee farm in
the care of a maid, Maria Dolores. [Then a commercial for Fab laundry detergent.| The
announcer comes back with, “What will happen to Maria Elena, left on that miserable coffee
farm? Will her child, the fruit of sin, be born there?"] [This is a real soap opera.] [Ends here at
Counter 228.]

003

143

332

CASSETTE #27
No sign on.

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. {Same as Cassette 26]

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [Same as Cassette 23]

[cuts in]....case of the president. Once again, the president is drunk.....now Los Chorumbeles de
Espana return, this time with La Leyenda del Beso”....[but then cuts out, no music, Cassette ends
with no sign off.]

[This cassette contains snippets from Tapes 26, 23 and 19.]

35

CASSETTE #28

07 Sign On 1.

034 Announces program schedule:
1- Miscelanea Musical del Aire (15 minutes)
2- Nuestra Campana Radial (15 minutes)
3- Comunismo al Desnudo (15 minutes)

4- Musical Program (15 minutes)

Miscelanea Musical del Aire. [Same as cassette 19.]

240 Nuestra Campana Radial. [Same as cassette 26.]
315 Station identification. Off the air.

[This cassette contains snippets from tapes 26 and 19.]

36

CASSETTE #280

008 The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents,
“Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” The case of Major Manuel Contreras Orellana. [Note: the
reel box says this was already played on Radio Llberationon Thursday, June 3. It was played on
Sangre de Martires on Cassette #126 -- see that Cassette.] [Ends at Counter 252.]

37

007

CASSETTE #279

The Committee of Anti-Communist Guatemalan University Students in Exile presents,
“Communist Crimes in Guatemala.” The case of Sgt. Carlos Enrique Posadas. [This was played
on the Sangre de Martires segment on Cassette #130.]

And now, the odyssey of Major Manuel Contreras Orellana. [Details the case of Contreras -- see
Cassette #280-008.] {Ends at Counter 432.]

38

CASSETTE #278

0 a few marimba songs, then to recordings of
top American hits, including “Oh Mein Papa,”
" “Cross Over the Bridge,”

005 Starts with a few bars of Glenn Miller, then goes t
the “Bill Sullivan” disc jockey radio show featuring
“The Man with the Banjo,” “Make Love to Me,” “Wanted,
“| Get So Lonely,” and others. All music. Ends at 361.]

39.

CASSETTE #5A

005 {Music blended with distorted, echo-laden recording of a Middle Eastern-sounding third language.
Arabic? Cuts off at Counter 225.]

40

010

CASSETTE #240

“Compatriots. It has come to my attention that the government's press office has denounced a
plot which purportedly is headed by me. The people of Guatemala are familiar with the acts of a
government which, supported by international communism......... Compatriots, it is true that there
is a great conspiracy against the communist government in our country........ May our slogan be,
for the salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala!”

[Ends at Counter 071.] [This is a Castillo Armas speech, same speech as Cassette #s 238 and
238.}

41

006

027

CASSETTE #239

{Breaks into a US news program detailing the history of J. Edgar Hoover's FBI, but switches
abruptly at Counter 027 to....]

[Breaks into a Castillo Armas speech.....the hour of national liberation nears. The government
itself is showing its weakness, its pathological fear its panic. It senses that its hours are counted,
and its terror in the face of its fall takes it to dementia....Compatriots, it is true that there is a great
conspiracy against the communist government in our country.... May our slogan be, for the
salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala!” [Ends at
Counter 071.][Same speech as Cassette #s 240 and 238.]

42

013

CASSETTE #238

“Compatriots. it has come to my attention that the government's press office has denounced a
plot which purportedly is headed by me. The people of Guatemala are famitiar with the acts of a
government which, supported by international communism........- Compatriots, it is true that there
is a great conspiracy against the communist government in our country.. May our slogan be,
for the salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala! for the salvation of Guatemala!”
[Same speech as Cassette #s 239 and 240. Ends at Counter 074.}

43

CASSETTE #237A

002 (cuts into music, then some brief speaking recorded at the wrong speed, then at 010 cuts into
music program, La Voz de la Radio Latinoamericana, which plays the bolero La Ultima Palabra.
More music. Probably recorded from a short-wave broadcast, given the occasional interference.
At 025 goes back to the wrong speed again, At 037 back at correct speed again, more music.

44

es

CASSETTE #237B

002 Cuts into music, recorded from short wave broadcast, station identification reveals this is the
official station TGW. There is much dial switching from one station to another. Occasionally the
recording speed is off -- too slow. At 068 plays the same recording as on Cassette #237A, the
bolero La Ultima Palabra, but at the wrong speed setting - much too slow. At 098 goes back to
the right speed, records music from short-wave broadcasts. Dial-hopping. Everything ends at
Counter 124.

45

004

007

020

084

CASSETTE #244
[Anthem cranks up, ever so sloocoowly.]

Attention, people of Guatemala. Attention, radio and press correspondents. While the High
Command of the Liberation Army formulates a decision in response to the new series of
developments, we bring you this special program. This is Radio Liberation, the clandestine
station of the great Guatemalan liberation movement.

Attention, people of Guatemala. Attention, radio and press correspondents. We have listened
attentively to the words of Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz, in whose hands the presidency was left by
Jacobo Arbenz. From those “communistoid” words which sound so much like those of his
predecessor, we conclude that we have just one more effort to fool us by those who have sold out
to the Kremlin. This is no different than when Arevalo turned power over to his armed forces
chief, Carlos Paz Tejada, who then betrayed the people. But we're not buying this one. It is not
Arbenz we have been fighting, but the entire system. Diaz is betraying the people when he says
he will fight with the forces of the proletariat against the anti-Communists, who comprise 95% of
the population. We do not recognize this Diaz government. National Army - you owe no
allegiance to Diaz, this is the opportunity to throw out the communists. Our fight is with the
communists, and we won't rest until they are out. If Toriello said, “The Battle of Guatemala has
begun," we say, “the Battle of Guatemala hasn't finished yet!” Arbenz resigned. Now we
demand that ail communist leaders and their sympathizers be brought under control so that the
judicial system can determine the punishment they deserve!

The High Command of the Liberation Army announces to the people and army of Guatemala the
conditions necessary for the restoration of peace and order across the nation.
first, the Army is not our enemy and we are not the Army’s enemy, The enemy of both is
communism, personified by Jacobo Arbenz, Cruz Wer, etc.
second, we appeal to all members of the army to arrest all known members and
sympathizers of the communist party.
third, we appeal! to senior army officers to capture Arbenz and establish an interim
military junta.
fourth, the interim junta should immediately instruct should instruct all units to arrest all
communists and prepare to join forces with the liberation army to restore order.
These orders should apply to Civil Guard units under army control.
fifth, the.interim junta will establish the hour for a cease-fire, giving all commanders at
least three hours notice. immediately thereafter, the decision to form a new
government should be announced over TGW or Radio Morse. The Executive
Committee of the Liberation Army will immediately establish contact with the
interim junta.
sixth, this call is made to the army in the name of humanitarianism and before God, to
thereby avoid the useless shedding and blood and the devastation of our
beloved Guatemala.

(Cont'd.)

46

135

148

161

CASSETTE #244 (cont’d.)

seventh, until these conditions are met, the Liberation Army will continue increasing its
attacks using all its human and military power to destroy communism and all
those who make common cause with it.

This program is being rebroadcast throughout the free world via the following stations...La Voz
Dominicana, in the Dominican Republic, Radio Mundial in Managua, two local stations in Mexico
City, nine stations in the US, two Cuban stations, 11 stations in South America, and three more in
Central America. Thank you, free nations of America.

We appeal to the people of Guatemala and the rest of the continent to stay tuned to Radio
Liberation to hear the truth during this period of national suspense. We are on 6360 kes during
the day and 3420 kes at night. We broadcast all day and all night with brief intermissions.

While the High Command formulates a decision in response to the new developments, we are
offering these special programs. Listen to Radio Liberation. Until we return to our matrix
programming, we will be reproducing this program for all of you, be listening to all our
broadcasts. We will have great news for the people of Guatemala.

Radio Liberation leaves the air for a moment. We'll be back in a few instants. [Ends at Counter
173.]

[NOTE: THE PHRASES IN BOLD ABOVE WERE NOT INCLUDED IN THE VERSION
PROVIDED ON CASSETTE #112, PRESUMABLY THE VICTIMS OF EDITING. IT CANNOT BE
DETERMINED FROM CONTENT WHETHER BOTH THESE TAPES WERE BROADCAST, OR
WHETHER THIS ONE IS SIMPLY THE FIRST AND UNEDITED VERSION OF #112.]

47

005

CASSETTE #271

Sign On Il can be heard under much distortion and noise. [Refrain 2, no frequency given.]
[3420 kes, provided later in the broadcast. ] [There is much interference, suggesting this recording

was made off a receiver, not the transmitter.]

[This is a duplicate of Cassette #116, except that this one was recorded off a receiver, with lots of
interference, whereas #116 is a clean recording off the transmitter.

48

CASSETTE #267

[Cassette is blank on both sides. The presence of a hum on side 1, and its absence on side 2,
suggests the recording of a blank reel on side 1.]

49

The TGW Tapes

Rien, Seren poe he
Sarpy aie

The TGW Tapes

The TGW Tapes

On 30 December 1954, FBIS recorded one full day's transmissions of the official Guatemalan
station TGW, from 06:30 to 24:00. This was probably done so the SHERWOOD planners could see what
they were up against and target their programming accordingly. The 34 broadcast reels, as well as the 34
cassettes onto which the reels were transposed, are numbered 245-266 and 303-314. They were recorded
off a short-wave receiver and are affected, often seriously, by natural and man-made interference (noted
as QRN and QRM below). At the station’s signoff at 24:00, the announcer tells us that TGW broadcasts
on four frequencies:

TGW on 640 kes

TGWA_ on 15170 kes (19M) and 9760 kcs (30M)
TGWB on6180 kcs (49M)

TGWC on 1520 kes (LW)

Cassette #259 is the first in the sequence, beginning the recording at approximately 0630
Guatemala time.

-- Tape begins with strong interference (QRM, QRN), obviously recorded from a short-wave receiver.
_- National Anthem. This is “Voz de Guatemala” broadcasting on 30 December 1953. Announcer gives
various frequencies of transmission, but these are unintelligible.

— Plays marimba song, during which interference remarkably disappears.

-- Announcer then says time is 6:39 AM.

_- Announcer cites three historic events that occurred on 30 December: 1691, death of Dutch chemist
Roberto Doyle [ph.], 1814, dueling banned in Argentina, 1865, birth of Rudyard Kipling.

-- More marimba.

— Time: 6:44:30.

— More historic 30 Dec events: 1878, death of the Marquis of Casa Brussi, director of the Diario de
Barcelona; 1879, death of Spanish politician Abelardo Lopez de Ayala; 1895, Culanite battle in Cuba
during which Cuban patriots are defeated by Spanish forces. 1896, execution of Jose Risal in Manila,
4993, assassination of Romanian president.

-- Time: 6:46 am.

-- Marimba.

-- Time: 6:50.

-- 24-hour drugstores for week of 26 Dec - 2 Jan: Lourdes, El Aguila, Rodriguez, San Carlos, Cle #1,
Sarda, Bayer, gives addresses and phones.

-- Marimba.

_ 6:58 am. Reminds that this program begins every day at 6:30. To all, a good morning, and a day of
well-paid work. Marimba.

--7:00 am, Guatemala time. Cuts off at Counter 427.

CASSETTE #258 has minimal interference, but enough distortion to make listening a bit difficult.]
—Starts by announcing Great Artistic Festival tonight at 8 PM at the Palace Theater.

—This is TGW in The New Guatemala, Central America.

— News. Truck driver innocent in death of female pedestrian, Guatemalan ambassador in Honduras offers
reception, machete murder, and other stories.

-- And now we give you Voz de Guatemala programming for today, 30 December 1953, starting at 7:15.
7:15- Tiempo en Musica de la Loteria Nacional {The National Lottery's Music Time]

7:45- Recortes de Prensa [Press Clippings]

8:00 - Concierto Matinal [Morning Concert]

9:15- Melodias de Juventud (Melodies of Youth]

9:45- Radionovela, Ef Visitador [Soap Opera, The Visitor]

40:00 - Musica en Miniatura [Music in Miniature]

40:15 - Cantares de America (America’s Popular Songs]

10:45 - Festival de Ritmo [Festival of Rhythm]

11:15 - Obras Maestras de fa Musica [Music Masterworks]

11:45 - Arregios Populares [Popular Arrangements]

12:00 - Programa Especial de la AEU [Special Program of the “AEU")

42:30 - informador Diario de Centroamerica (Daily Central American Report]

42:45 - Radionovela, Memorias de un Medico [Soap Opera, Memoirs of a Doctor]

43:00 - Guatemala y su Marimba [Guatemala and her Marimba]

43:30 - Radionovela, Bienaventurado los Pobres [Soap Opera, Blessed Are the Poor]

43:45 - Paginas Immortales, Obras de los Grandes Maestros [Immortal Pages, Works of the Masters]
45:00 - Por los Caminos del Arte (On the Paths of Art]

15:15 - Bel Canto, canto clasico [Bel Canto, classical singing]

15:30 - Musica de las Americas {Music of the Americas]

15:45 - Guatemala y su Marimba [Guatemala and her Marimba]

46:15 - Musica Folclérica Argentina (Argentine Foikloric Music]

16:30 - Los Grandes Solistas [The Great Soloists]

17:00 - Saludos Felices [Happy Greetings]

47-30 - Solidaridad con Santo Domingo [Solidarity with Santo Domingo]

47:45 - Musica en Miniatura [Music in Miniature]

48:00 - Radionovela, Bienaventurado los Pobres {Soap Opera, Blessed Are the Poor]

18:15 - Poemas [Poems]

18:30 - Recital de Organo [Organ recital]

18:45 - Informador del INFOP [INFOP’s News Report]

19:00 - Radionovela [Soap Opera]

19:15 - Trios de Guatemala [Trios of Guatemala}

49:30 - Momento Deportivo [Sports Moment]

19:45 - Radionovela, El Visitador [Soap Opera, The Visitor]

20:00 - Patronato Antialcodlico [Anti-Alcoholic Program]

20:15 - La Hora Nacional [The National Hour]

21:00 - Recortes de Prensa [Press Clippings]

21:15 - Nuevos Valores[New Talent]

22:15 - Pulso def Mundo [Pulse of the World]

22:30 - Club Rapsodia [Rhapsody Club]

23:00 - A Tiempo de Vals [Waltz Tempo]

23:15 - Orquesta Casablanca [Casablanca Orchestra]

24:00 - Cierre de Trasmisiones [Sign Off]

Now, Tiempo en Musica. (Music.] 7:20:10 is the time. The 6 January 1954 lottery has a first prize of
420,000 quetzales, second prize of 20,000 quetzales. [Music.] 7:26:10 is the time. Write to us with your
requests for songs. Just address the envelope to La Voz de Guatemala or Loteria Nacional, Tiempo en

Musica. [Music.] 7:31:35 is the time. Reminds about the 120,000 quetza! prize coming up, cites the
lesser prizes as well. [Cuts off in mid-sentence at Counter 443.]

The remainder of the tapes then follow the sequence below. By the end of the day, however, two major
changes had been made to the schedule:

A decision was made to read off the day's lottery results, and this took one and a half hours, from
40:30 to 12:00. As aresult, Cantares de America was cut to 15 minutes, and Festival de Ritmo,
Obras Maestras and Arreglos Populares were not heard.

Nuevos Valores, a talent show that was broadcast live from the Palace Theater, ran way over

schedule to 23:25. Consequently, Club Rapsodia, A Tiempo de Vals and Orquesta Casablanca
were not broadcast.

In the chart below, Column A is the cassette number, Column B is the first time of day mentioned on the

cassette, and Column describes the contents. The numbers in parentheses in Column C are Tape Counter

points. Bold indicates the time of day or program title was either not on the tape or could not be heard

because of interference, but was deduced from the context. |

252
251
250
249
314
313
312
311
310
309
308
307
306
305
304

303

Sign On. 6:39. Historic events.

Schedule for the day. 7:20. Tiempo en Musica...

Tiempo en Musica (cont'd). (156) Recortes de Prensa. (370) Concierto Matinal - Festival Bertioz....
Concierto Matinal (cont'd).

Concierto Matinal (cont'd).

Concierto Matinal (cont'd). (185) 9:25. (200) Melodias de Juventud...

Melodias de Juventud (cont'd). 9:45. (048) Radionovela TGW. (233) Musica en Miniatura.

40:16 Cantares de America (145) 10:30. Transfers mikes to lottery center, reads prizes....
Reading lottery prizes (throughoul)....

Reading lottery prizes (throughout)...

Reading lottery prizes. (085) music. 12:01 (140) (qrn/m) Musical program, can't get title...

Music. qrn/m. 12:30 (098) Diario de Centroamerica. 12:45 (285) Radionovela - Memorias de un Medico....
Radionovela - Memorias de un Medico (cont'd.) 13:00 (067) Guatemala y su Marimba (ends)

13:29 Radionovela - Bienaventurado...13:46 (269) Paginas Immortales - Festival Berlioz...
Paginas Immortales - Festiva! Berfioz. all qrn/m. ]

Paginas !mmortales (cont'd.) solid opera, no voice

Paginas Immortales (cont'd.) ends Berlioz festival. (185) 15:15. Por tos Caminos del Arte. 15:30. Musica de las Americas...

Musica de las Americas (cont'd.) 15:45 (145) Guatemala y su Marimba...

Guatemala y su Marimba (cont'd). 16:18 (152) Musica Foiclorica Argentina. 16:30 (310) Los Grandes Solistas.

Los Grandes Solistas. Dial switching. 17:00 (285). Saludos Felices....

Saludos Felices (cont'd). Severe qrn/m to end...

Severe qrn/m. 17:45 (062) Musica en Miniatura. (261) Radionovela - Bienaventurado fos Pobres....

Radionovela - Bienaventurados..(cont'd.) 18:16 (051) Poemas. 18:30 (222). The Andrews Sisters...

Andrews Sisters (cont'd.) 18:45 (015) Informador def INFOP. 19:00 (1 92) Radionovela - Memorias de Un Medico. 19:15
Trios Guatemaltecos....

Trios Guatemaltecos (cont'd.} 19:29 (145) Momento Deportivo. Heavy qrm. 19:46 (365) Radionovela - E/ Visitador....
Radionovela - Ef Visitador (cont'd.} 20:01 (164) Patronato Anti-alcoolico. severe qrnim 20:16 (382) La Hora Nacional...
La Hora Nacional (cont'd.)....

La Hora Nacional. 21:02 (135) Recortes de Prensa. severe distortion, then (340) is in Nuevos Valores.....
Nuevos Valores (cont'd.) (throughout)

Nuevos Valores (cont'd,) (throughout)

Nuevos Valores (cont'd.)

Nuevos Valores (cont'd.) (follows 306) (ends at 230) 23:25 (369) Pulso dei Mundo...

Pulso def Mundo (cont'd.) 23:35 (071) (088) and now...dance music (not on schedule)(366) Sign Off. Anthem...

Anthem (cont'd.} (022) (off the air)
