Chances for a Stable Government in South Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008444, dated 2 August 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008444).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CERTRAL THTELLIGENCE AGENCY

8 September 1964

~ SUBJECT: SHIE 53-G6h: CHANCES FOR A STABLE GOVERMMENT IN
SOUTH VIEGTAM
_ . THE PROBLEM
Zo assess the chances for th2 erergence of a stable non-
———- == Communist regime in South Vietnam.
COICILSTON |
Scns A -- At present the odds are against the emergence of a stable
See ee fikeg verrnent capable of effectively prosecuting the var in South
" ""Vietnom. Yet the situation is not hoveless: if a vieble regime
volves fron the present confusion it may even gein strength
from the release of Jong-pent pressures end the ecbering effect
of the current crisis.

Of the men on the scene, General Kh

—— ___. _+.__-:: probably hes the best chance of mustering sufficient support to
|
t

- restore a reasonably stable end vorkeble government.

GROUP,
bach eo Laphrere

downey i457
e$857 1S deolissifica
Declassfied by C28 252-——— ELC
wip. ‘iy .
date ped at

6 @ scrertacime
Fe Ty

| LYN DON BAINES Jonson LIBRARY

e
* e

aati

DISCUSSION

1. he dcvefell of the Diem regime released poverful
political forces previously suppressed or underground. Religious
grovys, princimlly the Buddhists, the students, Jabor, ond the
Giverse ezray of intellectuals end peliticdeng both at hone end
$n exile moved qaiczly to voice their aspiretions end nake than-
seives felt. These cross currents vere reflected vithin the
military esteblichtert, particnlerly enong the sentor officers.
whe struggle anovz these various forces can be expected to

=== =. continue until en eccepteble balance is struck, oue group proves
strong enough to doaimate the others, or -the febric of centrai

—--. goverment is torn apart.

“@- Whe convulsions of recent weexs have surfaced and exacer-

“>>> ——“yated these deep-seated divisions and strains.. They have “inten-

sificd reciprocal suspicions between the military leadership and
segnents of the populace, et least In urban areas, increased
__- disunity vithir. the militery estcblishrent itself, ani
prodvce@ serious Giscora, including religious etrife, smong
the civilicns. The present situation is far nore serious then that
of Yoverber 1963, for the Vict Cong ere now stronger, end in
1983. popular enthusiasa over Bien's ouster gave his iImuediate
‘guccessors e degree of generel sugpert end period of grace the

pracentus hazy goverrment does not have. Furthermore, the events

ee

COPY

«
* 7 6

Fe

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

gto epee ss
rere maces aif ten
of

Pe Aan RR

( 1 Se OK LAL ud

—

of the past nine months have tinevitebly increased sentiments of
wer veeriness ond frustration, end probably caused “neutralisia”
(i.e., an end to the constant struggle) to appear increasingly

ettractive to many. Also, the factors inherent‘in the us/GVN rela-
tionship have caused some rise in anti-Americcn foeling, which

probably will grov.

3. The situation is fragile ani walnerable to attack or
exploitation from ell sides. It e?fords obvious opportunities to
eny person or group reckless or embitious enough to undertake a
coup. There are indications of such plotting by at least tvo
groups: disgrmtied Dai Viets allied with officers vho presently

comand key .litery units, and another group influenced by

~ CoLonel Pham Kgoe Theo. Among the civilian population some

Buddhist and Catholic leaders appear to be trying to avoid new

=" vtolence, but the ssectre of religious strife has not been laid

_to rest.— Recent Buddhist deronds have alarmed the Catholics and

_... . militants of either persuasion ray provoke fresh crises. Wirile

Sone civilian politicans wish to ple a constructive role, moet -
remain more concerned vita perconal pover and prestige than
national unity. The students seen to be calning dem, but this
volatile group yevains vulnereble to manipniation fron verious

SS ? including the Viet Cong end, perhavs, the French.

PO CON FE ee ee toe ©

COPY

LYNDON es 5 JOHNSON LIBRARY

ME @ eco eres geet ee ts eee,

s SR Se A re

s & e

a

.

crisis over goversuental arrongerents, however, there is the question of

k, The present governnental arrangements are likely to
undergo several changes curing the next few weekse The shaky solu-

ticn evolved anid riot ond discord -- a sixty-doy caretaker govera-

went headed by en ostensible triunvirate of rival generels -- vas

yatently a stepgap. Sone other orranzecerts will be tried -- perhaps

in ecanection with the proposed National Congress, Beyond the imasdiate

whether any stable regine can emerre, cap ble of effectively

prosecuting the var. On present evidence, chances of this out-

ome must be rated as less than even.

5. The situation in South Vietnem is so fluid and complex,

~-hovever, that those developnents vhich appear most likely will

rot necessarily occur -- as, indeed, they have not on many

occasions in toth ancient an@ recent Vietnamese aaa Ag There

is a chence, even if it be slight, that the experiences of the last
week or so msy ultimately prove salutery, that the situation had

to get vorse before 1t could get better. In the political chaos

and conflict, some longstanding pressures have been released, ,
sone smoldering Prielences end quarrels have been aircd and possibly

encliorated, and the dengers implicit in continued arift have

_been rade more real, It is not Impossible that acroit leader-

- shin could turn ShESe conditivas to edventeze In convincing

-&.

nN NEA
eer ane mae tt mm RE > en i Sen en ne ee mre eee Wie

oC 608 em On oe ewes © eee arate oe
SARS SEND ER SH AO Sars

me
£ 7 pare
spirk ge er 4

~
ry
oo

LYNDON oe Joxttson LIBRARY.

Sp Sees eee

a
. a; ©

.
«

nS aE ecm

involved in the present situation are gbscure.* It is not clear

_ Weakness in the face of Budéhist and student disorder. On the

other hand, his manifest reluctance to use force against pro-

$nfluential figures of the need for national unity under avail-

able leaders, inperfect as they mey be.
6. The real relotionships of the persons and groups
how much pover General Khernh actually reteins or what role he

will play in forthcoming weeks. In seme respects, recent events

beve damaged him politically. At least ecte of his military’

Cn nn ce emeanemananammnntanaiitiedada

colleagnes are Oovicutly unhappy at vhat they regard as his

testing civiliens may ley to rest longstanding civilian

suspicicrs that he is a neo-Diemist emcious to reverse the ver-

~ Aiet of Kov exber 1963 and restore a Can Lao dictatorship. His

ee willingness to stand alone end unarmed amidst demon-

etrating crowds von him personel respect.

Te In the context of present realities Khanh probably has

a better, chance than any other pbstous figure of providing

Ris success in this venture, hovever, is fer from assured. Even

the ‘leadership eround vhich a stable govermrent could be buflt.

if he himself shovs the necessary astuteness and villingness

’
LL LOT ORES ot RR RIN A 2 NE A I I NN “enuY POM men oe sip ve eminem IY Mtoe bse ta

FASTENER EOL et Oe Ue le GW tnt ap eaten ee, panes ree rena ne er Sateen na

COPY s

LYNDON BAli JOUNSON LiBeaRy

te stearate eae dee ed get,
enim,
é .
* cE € He
.

to tackle the task his success vill depend to 9 great degree
on the willingress of other influential figures (e.g-., General
Khien, General. Hinh, end Tri Quanz) to lend him support or, et
ee A ninimim, to refrain from working ectively for his damfell.

_..-.-. Gensrel Minh in varticular probably retains enough prestige so

that e goverment which did not have his participation, or

et least his approval, vould have considerably lessened chences

z ___ then a government in which Khanh ploys the peramount role.

Some new fimure may erise or some elready prominent ‘personality
__ hey prove to have hidden talents or unsuspected support. How-
ever, at the moment every likely alternative candidate has
individuel drevtecks or enough knoun opposition to cast serlous
doubt on his ability to provide unifying lcedership. Several
groups or figures seem strong enough to exercise vhat amounts
to a ge facto veto in the business of creating e government,
Although it is possible that soue individual or faction my
succeed in overthrowing the present government, none +-~ ieee

than Fhath -- presently seems capable of holding powere

ree _ . .... 9. The longer the present vastable situation lasts, the
__mpre eifficult it will be to fori & governzent which can

Gis

i
1

of survival.

~ 8. ‘There are, of course, several possibilities other
|
|

SOE SE Cae OW EF One ieee ee oles So ae cast
(ect Sig sete et eS Tae a

ee ee ae 3 ys ieee
— cele COPY. :
| LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

Me fete eset pee

* . . . +e z
*

increase, together with the danger that a loosely organized
coalition vould energe vhich could teke advantage of frustration
end var weariness to seek a neutralist solution. In the pro-
Jonged ebsence of firm central direction from Saigon, the morale
end effectiveness of indivicval unit cormenders in the field
will decline, and there is even the Ganger that some might make

“their own accommodations vith the Commmist enemy. There is

e@lso a chence that sone province or region vill secede, and

eae a --_. {here ere alreaty rumors of SCparatist tencencies in Huce

20. On the other hend, except for tensions in Hue, there
~~ 4s es yet Little sign of the imminerce of such dire develop-
nerts.-- Furthermore, in veighing the situation in South Vietnan

it is inportent not to focus exclusive attention on events in

urven arces. During the past month, the war in the provinces
hes been carrying on, the amy shows no signs of slackening
ee its efforts end, indeed, has recently scored tvo major successes.
~~ Inga officials have yrobcbly edopted the traditional Vietnenese
yeit end see attitude rather then taking actions which might

° preserve even the appeararce of unity and determination. In :
such circunstences, neutralist sentiment vould almost certainly
gue jeopardize their ovn position. Prolonged discord in the cities

CE 4 EO are OF HA ON ew IES &. 2 nen

1, a q | j
-_ k i i. :
LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

ae ote es ee te 2

OES
.@ *
« ‘a . «

( oR CCT a Hie (
: will inevitably effect ‘the rural pacification effort, tut so
: fer the Micited oceentun’ which the counterinsurgency effort bad

in the provinces h:s not diwinished,

11. The Viet Cong obviously are not indifferent to South
Vietnam's current troubles. Hanol and Viet Cong propaganda
emphasizes that the Commmnists expect victory to come prinarily

from South Vietnazese political feilures end instability. There

yhich led to urban upheaval, but the Cormunists have almost
certainly been actively encouraging discord end violence (eleven

_of those arrested as directly responsible for the worst of recent

disorders in Saigon were cleimed ty the police to be known vc

agents). ‘Militarily, recent weeks have been marked by an actual

decline in VC attacks, though this "luli" is probably a normal

"phase end there are signs thet the VC may now be preporing to

‘step up their ectivity. Judging from past experience, it will

=... -.-_ eke sone tine for the VC to ready themselves to teke full

j- advantage of recent developments, Also, the Communists may wish
ae to_avoid the risk of increasing the obvious VC threat to a point

See oe -yhere it night unify anti-Commumists presently engaged in intexnecine

political strife.

H
4
i
|
i
|
ers is no evidenee that the Viet Cong triggered the recent actions
|

esawe® 4ge eure Ot ae Ocoee qwloune eS

a CR LO LTCC OER: = erRnTT | flerenNp ne Sn tm—penenenee” Sntue rater —R Pe TP HNRNP sei
i, = a a enenmnmanenmmnnaamnenmntanile

Silat nal

COPY.

LYNDON BAINES JOHNS

EO dee se ee a

ON LIB

“*

fa

we
-
«

cay

RE aot oe eg

a

12. Some of the recent egitation against Kharh's govern-
ment has head enti-Amcrican un@ertones. In same circles there is

e belief thet the US prodécd Khanh Into atterpting to eliminate

“Minh ab chief of state and Into resiming the kind of tight con-

trols formerly exercised by Dien. Minh himself is manifestly
resentful of vhat he regards as US undercutting of his posttion
(though Khanh too has been uneasy about vhat he considers US
enieavors on Minh'e behalf). There has been a groving anti-
Aaerteen feeling enong sone Catholics vho blame the US for
Diea's overthrow and resent vhat they consider US favoriticnm of

the Buddhist cause. In sone militery quarters (e.g., General

_ Kaien) end probably in some civilien circles as well there is

resentrent at what is inevitably viewed as US "meddling" in

internal Vietnomesee affairs.

33. Cormaaist --‘and possibly also French -- egents

have enccuraged and exploited anti-US sentinents. The idea is

aleo being cirevlated thet South Vietnem is really a battlefield

on which tvo elien powers, the US end Cocuunist China, are

waging var by proxy. It is ltkely that enti-Aericon sentiment

will grow.

AEE ns AONE Ftd ae no ete meet Ree ne aesent nie em me nt

{

os
PECTS ee Ure OG me GIR ee felines & Cee EE EEE A

Cory.

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIGRAR

68 gees sito rsag ey iiahaiaitedaiieneaaaidiataeainrmatan
EER

ANNEX

POLITICALLY INFLUENTIAL INDIVILUALS AND PRINCTPAL
POWER FACTORS IN SOUTH VIEINAM

i. General Neuyen Khanh: Ehanh, who remained titular

Frenier ard a nember of the ruling triunvirate in the governmental

_ structure devised on 23 August, hos come ovt of seclusion and

taken over the reins of control agzin -- at least temporerily.
Qn 1 September, leading rilitery officers swore allegiance and

<etened loyalty pledges to Khanh, but Khanh's military support is

not es solid as this would indicate, end mach of it might evapo-

yate in a serious coup challenge. Khanh currently seems to have

the ‘support of Buddhist leafers, partly because of his willingness

= to sccnacants their demerds. This susport, hovever, could
ee)¢ ? ?

ewiftly dissipate if Khanh's general political influence should

vene or if be should fail to make good on Buddhist demands, In

essence, Khanh is the first choice of few but, apparently, the

acceptable second choice of many. He probably has little remaining ;

Catholic svpport at present. His break with the Dai Viets seens

irreparable. Khonh's unsuccessful mid-August attempt to ecquire
plenary powers has caused him to lose much face, especially among

the nilftary, end probably eliensted rost students ond traditional

i as
SAE NEE HCI ES Oe EO MR & este,

rss,
COPY.

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

eC deere gio gee a eee
= pe i ets oily

é

&

FAA OND a RL ART eR NERS AI ENN RN any TNO ot Ne hr a oe

ne
‘ :

-€opeheRedde
ANTEX
politicians, even though some of the letter privately acknovledge
ek present need for a stronz central soverrment. One of Khanh's
“strongest cards fo his obvious US backing, though this in itself
js else causing some resentment end could be used against him in

—--~- = - - Certein contexts.

' Khanh's confidence in his ebility to outmaneuver his rivals ond
sapped his will to continue the struggle in the political arena.
After a brief rest, he seems to have re-entered the fray, but it

= is still not entirely clear hoy he intends to play his hand.

3. General Duong ven Mirh: Minh rey secon regain his
former position es titular Chief of state. Meany officers
have become disenchented vith Minh's lack of leadership quelitics
end en increasing nuzber of senior officers (e.g., General Khien)
ere bececning ennoved et Hirh's reluctance to accept responsibility,
despite his appetite for prestige. Nonetheless he still renains
&@ cenerelly popular figure with the troops aud many segeents of
the civil populace, his nate has considerable magic, and he could
easily be used es a cat's pay by seme faction. Syxbolically,

he is & hevo to the Buddhists chiefly because of his role in ousting

*

if
i
2. For a tine, it looked es if recent events had undermined

a

FREED TRE CO HE Cee GST me awoke @ eae once eS eet arm,
a Et

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY’

We @ és ee eg
e .

. hin enatheva to the Catholics.

Dien.

Budéhist lea@ers avparently want Minh retained in a key
position, though they recognize his personal shoricemings. The
same reasons which make Minh attractive to the Buddhists make

At the noment he seens to be
playing ea fairly constructive role, but given his past performance
und personality, Minh is more likely to become ea divisive than

e unifying element in the Vietnamese political scence. He does
not like Khanh, resents vhet he consider the letter’s usurpation

.

of pover, end is unlikely to give more then lukewarm support,

at ‘bast, to eny goverment In vEEch Khanh plays a predominant role.

-h,. Generel tren Thien Kien: With his customary political

_egility, Generel Khiem has clung to power through the recent crisis

end still appears to be in control of the arzei forces -- though

he has eppercntly submitted his resignation as Minister of Defense.

_Fhica zerticirated in both the Hovexker end Januory coups, ard

pony officers ove their jobs to him. His penchant for iIn-

trigue, hovever, scans inconsistent with true leadership,

ene he je a principe. target of Buddhist end student critics.

~ ¥hien has vreferred to vork through Kherh end in ellegiance vith

“Pat Vict officers -- inoludins his depaty, General Thien -- vho

“—=¢ernend much of the striking pover in the Saigon. area.

He has

- Aj -

Penecene Ree

ee

ot

KO SS CRE CRT AM Bee me ee weet aren eee en nen

COPY

> JOHNSON LIBRARY

LYNDON BAINES

te femroco mes 99 eee

e
6 . *

°
*

ide ace
* «
.

ANNEX

called Yhenh a “US punpet", end seid he vas tired of having the

fmericens peddle in internal Vietnamese affairs. His degree of

influence and authority in the military establishment gives him con-
- siderable political pover, but he yrebably has too meny poverful

ogponents to be able to serve as the head of a stable povernuent.

a. Cther lilitery Figures: The military establishnent

still holds the key to stability in South Vietnam, but its leaders

nov ere probably shaken by en avareness that they cannot dictate
to a recalcitrant whlic. Furthermore, the milltery renains

fection: alized around vorious generals. Most of the. genexals,

including the three discussed above, may prefer to bide their time

while trying to voxk out a base of pover or a political alliance

vith various groups. ‘There is a good chance, hovever, that

“gore nilitery faction -- the Dei Viets, perhaps with Khicn, or

_ Hou, or others -- rsy try to seize control by a military coup.

|

\

iia ‘¢eonstant Intriguers such as Colonel Phew Egoc Thao, General
6. Zhe Delat Generals: Generals Le van Kim, Tran ven Don, |

Ton thet Dinh, and Mai huu Xuen -- the quartet arrested when Khanh
oo = hidelines. Kharh's ettexpt to have then participate in the

-Hilitery Revolutionary Committee meetings of 26 and 27 August was
~ Ab «

tool: over tn January 1054 -- still secu to be on the political
t

ERE CRE ar BE ek SR ee eee oo,

, COPY:

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

We geckos pen eet a
ee tng a
oe .
* e *
4

voted down by e majority of the MRC. Nevertheless, there ere

still friends end forner vroteges of these officers vho feel they

i
|
have been unjustly trzated end the fact that their status has
not really ocen resolved to anyone's entire satisfaction constitutes
“@ continuing political irritent, especially in the military establish-
ment. If, instead of cooperating, the present yerumount generals
(especially Kherh, Khien,end Minh) shovld knock each other out of
the ring, the Delet quartet (particulorly Kim or Don) might assume :
& more active role. ‘They are unlikely to lend much support to Kharh,
_ but might well form en ellience with Minh, particulorly if the

object of thet alliance vere to unseat Kharh.

7.  Meerven Xmwe Conh: Vice Prenier Uguyen Xuan Oenh, a
Sone re eng gee Se a ?

=== Kheth's absence, now seens to have step, ed down, but could still. .

|
|
wo Fae Fo Marverd-treined economist who served as "eeting premier" in . |
pee . energe In a key position. Garh is a technically conpetent ednin-
istratox not known to be allied with any political or military |
fection. As such, he may prove to be a neutral figure vho can

keep th: government machinery running until the situation is

eccehos stabilized. Qarh is probably deemed acceptable to the

Americans 2 although Generel Khanh personally docs not like hides |
Oerh's Political ebilities eve questionable, end he seems unlikely

to emerge es a real leader.

SAS

ad . eG Cote Lan

BREN Kee cramer te ne acer pens we im ernment ee
i

CUPY.

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY

MES oti see,
Aotereeminn erate cnmefee eo ty meant

« a oy « ‘
= *
€

? ware:

a teen ne att A ER tN NEESER

1
ee RpONAt As MRR RE NE REC MERTEN HEE RAEI ENN OE ENEMA TAS NT AARC END “METRE ey “OIA TY
i ‘

AWEEX

i
&. Eeuyen Ton Hoan end the Dai Viets:* Nguyen Ton Hoan, |

Vice Pronier for Facificaticn, end leader of the southern f stdon -
= of the Pui Viet Party, has tercered his resignation from the
government and is now on “vacation” in Hong Kong. His political

~ future is uncertoin. All Dai Viet elenents, particulerly Koan's

fection end to a lesoer extent the predominantly northern splinter
group to which Foreign Minister Quet belorgs, exe critical of

Kherh. Khanh's public denunciation of Hoan has almost certeinly

reeled out exy future eccommodation with the southern Pai Victs.

fais group has only a sieol2 populer base, but has been using its

semi-officiel position to recruit in the provinces. It retains
echerents in scme key militery commands end security positions.
The Dei Viets now secm to be allying with Generel Khiem, with Hoan
hoping UPLInEtehy to becure prine minister. ‘the Dal Viets do not
epoeer wedded, however, to e solution syvely ing leadership by
either Kniem or Koen. They probably vould support Minh if he
vould pormit the perty an influential role. In eny cvent, the
Dei Viets, particulerly Hoan's Faction, seem more Interested in

obtaining pover then in contributing fo nationel unity.

+ eae
*

She Nationalist Perty of Greater Vietnam, commonly called the
Det Victs, vas rounded during the 1930's end reached its

height weiter the Boo Fai regins (1929-2954) with its

chief influence in Uorth Vietnam. It sphintsred Into

nuwicrous fections efter 195, enong vhich vere the northern

> factions heeled by Drs. Fram Huy Quat and Dang Van Sung end

e smaller but more militant southern faction headed by Dr. Hoan.

- £5 «

: Z ia
ese Rae GO Ee om ee me MBE i occreeticeb abe eeinoed ness

Panam caste COPY.

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRAR

OE pete peesaermaee aman
pe aes deieto
+s :
* a

9. The Reddhist. Leadership: The goels of the Buddhist

Jeadership are still unclear. There are signs of contiming
internal divisions smong them despite the fact that the militant
Thich Tri Quank obviously has been thelr peremount spokesman
in the current crisis. Quang hes a low personal yegari Tor
Generel Hirh, but is prone to give Minh public racking ap 4
counterpoise to other generels the Buddhists do not like. He con-
spiders Khiea encthena, more becouse of Khien's association with
the Dien regine then because of his nominal Catholicism, even
“though Guang equates the two. The Buddhists vere Jukevarm tovard
Sfrensteaegnat _ Khenhts te takeover last January, end enbittered by his 316 August
— . charter. — Nevertheless, they are presently back jing Khenh's leader~
ship partly beceuee of his apparent willingness to come to terms
with then in an effort to curd his om rivals, and partly because
the Suddhists fear the consequences of his overthrow. The Buddhists

apperently vent to retain their new-found politicel leverage and

fear nre-omergence of Diea's follovers end of Catholic influence.

10, Thich Tri Queng: Tri Quang may symbolize Buddhist ains,
but his personal rotives ave more complex. He is the head of the
oo Association of Buddhist Morks in Central Vietoon and one of the

most influcntiel and militant menbers of the Buddhist hierarchy.

its |

CRO SE ERE KU FE Ore Gi e eee OO =. aie

CUP py : “s.

LYNDON BAINES Joison LI BRARY

ee cee
ae Se

*

ae

se . ba
‘ x Z % - ‘ *

er" ey

ANTEX

There Sele taes to be no firm evidence thet Tri Quang is pro-

Communists, Of pro-nentralist. There is little question, hovever,

that he aspires to be - poverful behind-the-scenes political
force. Shere 1s considerable question ebout the compatibility of

his vitinate aims with US Interests.

Jl. She Catholics: Catholics have been epprehenisve since
the overthrow of the Dien regine. Althouagn more favorably inclined
toward Khenh then towerd Minh, they remain vary of Khanh's in-
-tentions: They strongly endorsed the 16 August charter, vhich

SS peemed to promise a firmer direction of the var against the flet

Cong, but they now seem to regerd Kharh as having capituleted com-

=: : : pletely to the Seddhists ani students. They apparently ‘ock to

__ General. Khien es their preferred leader andi they may be incre singly

symathetic to elements of the Dai Viet Party, elthough up to now

- “the Buddhist lebelling of the Dai Viet as a pro-Cetholic party has

been unjustified. Most Vietnamese Catholics vould probably be

satisifed with .-s government giving promise of effective leader-

ship and guaranteeing then equal rights end equal participation. "A.

pilitent minority identified with Father Hoang Quyrh, fearing both
‘Buddhist vengeance end loss of Catholte. privileges, continues to
GA strust alnost all Boddnists end to press for a Catholic-
oriented regime. This ninority has complicated the events of

SI yecent days exd is capsble of creating fresh crises et any tine.

~ AB -

astereentmee aaa si dh at a a eh ae oe
C; ° 3M .

COPY. :

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY.

wee goum =
Sa gama ag ae are ate ee a a

* oe
.

le. The Students: Buddhists, end Tri Quang in perticular,

exercise a strozg influence on Victnenese students, vhose sympathy

‘with the Buddhist campaign ageinst Diem brought thon fer the first

time into a national political role. Students vere the first to
agitate egeinst Khonh's a a of “dictatorial power." They
seem to have been moved by e@ yartety of factors: fdcalisn, Tear
of a return of Dienist rule, ver-weariness, ani opposition to
conscription. They may elso have been manipulated by rival
political factions, by Buddhist lesders, by politically winced
professors, by the Viet Cong, by the French -- or, nost likely,
by all of these ct various times end in various ways. The students \
ere almost certainly not under full control of Tri (veng, despite
his boasts, and e few of them now beck Khanh. There are several
resteensible student leaders, but students represent a potential

feoter for instebility.

13. Other Non-Communist Political Groups: The only other
political party with eny dissesnible influence, the Kationalist
Perty of Vietnem (VEQDD), has a base of strength primarily in the
northern provinees of South Vietnam. There is some evidence that
the Buddhists, en? some of the bore radical Rue University vrofes SOPs
vho opposed both Khanh end Khiem, have ViQUD ties. Many of the
traditions] Seigon politicians aspire only to positions of personal

« AD -

oe

Pome Cus War Be ms Bote me RE We EE NEE ED aI pape

LYNDON i on uhany

E86 gees eee

SE RE a Ene
.

. ® a .
*

tee

pover, elthough they cre nore favorably inclined towerd Ninh than

Kheuk or Khien.

Ih. ime religtous sects, the Cuo Def end Hoe Hoo, have taken

‘no Btend in the recent crisis. Their military cooperation vas

first sought by Minh, but brought to vruition under Khanh, end
they probably still support Kharh. The gruving Importance of
the sects as a source of recruits for Regional Force conpanies
in several delta provinces may make then en increesing political

force.

15. Whe Viet Cong: There is no evidence that the Viet Cong

instigated or are responsible for recent actions which have led

os

to urdan end political upheaval in South Vietnem, though some of

the recent violence end some of the anti-fueriecn manifestations

were probably due to, or intensified by, Viet Cong agent

activity. Tne success of the Budéhist campaion against Diem has

“Jed the Cocummists increasingly to eaphasize the inportance of the

"political strugsle" in the cities; end provegenda from both Hanoi

‘and the - “Kational Léberation Front" emphasizes that the Communists

expect victory to come primarlly from political paralysis in

~8aigon.- In a fluid confused situation, the Commmists obviously

= have considerable coreity for mischief meking. There are some

7 « ALO -

ap TO tee mw ne og oe me. ww ioee Mace ae meena teenage

‘f CUP bah

|
|
:
{
i
'

i °

LYNDON BAINES ; JOHNSON LIBRARY

EO 6 ee ee
Si ales a oo eereneecearceneeentent aie
SSP.

‘. . .

AUINEX

grounds for susnecting thet, in eddition to contributing to urban .

violence in Saigon and elcevhere, the Coermmnists moy be In same

neasure behind current political tensions end manifestations of

seraratist tendencies in Bre. (Le Khee Cuyen, the Hue professor who

__hes recently foméed a “Kational Salvation Council" and seers to

be actively opzosing all conpronfises reached In Saigon to defuse

the current situation, hes long been eccused by his opponents of

ee ‘having Conrentst effilfetions.) Commmists opportunities for maneuver,
pressure, end Gisruption villi obviously increase if political
irstability and uncertainty in Saigon is prolonged and if popular

——-————-- passions continze to be eroused over religious cifferences.

__ 6. Khe French: Ve have no evidence of any direct or indirect

|
|
{
ry 4 French hand in recent South Vietnasese political difficulties, which
axe being vievei in Paris as en "inevitsble" development. Hovever,
the volotile students certeinly constitute the element of South
Vietnenese society to which the French have the greatest access |
(through their educations influences, especially the teachers |
France provides). At ant nina, it is evident that recent South |
Vietnamese difficulties have been helpful to the French policy of
eévocating neutralisn era recotiation by creating an atmosphere which |
lends eupport to the arsurent on vhich this policy is ostensibly | i
; based e~ dete, the axrgment that the politicel situation in South |
Victron is bound to deteriorate and that no anti-Communist group :
fe capable of gererating enough popular support to be eble to defeat
|

the Vict Cong.

Ca Ln
Al. % SED CG LTE EE Org MEER ee ER EmS © MEMES yen
= =

LYNDON BAINES rieesi ON LIBRARY

me © sate ee

e *
.
