Ore 55-49 Theory and Practice of Communist Subversion
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000042667, dated 2 January 1950.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000042667).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

li

Se
a?

+e: hog 1.
$ ~ vn ?
i eS. ee Se
<< ee
¢ 3.
he
aN
* :
ova. ke

"Membership, Recrui tnent, and iecthieee os bavecccceneccsccees
pe Recruitment cere daa wants we piawiewen Dene Cae leurs peace cues

: g. Merger of Parties, Blogs

ORE 52-49 .

(ge

THEORY AND PRACTICE OF COMMNIST SUBVERSION

poenanny

TABLE OF CONTSNIS

I. INTRODUCTION .

Commmnist Dectrine1 Basis and Growth Cos ccerevwcceveoeseost 1
e Orthodox Theory SOHO H CES HHEH HEHE SEEDERS SHEE SESE OLCTELOOE 2
b. Deviationist Theory eeeeseesnoaeereovnesceeeeesenconuseaanvre 8 Oce 10
The Cormunist OnewParty State csescecccceveesscvcccseccecee 13

Inter-relationship of Cormmnism with USSR Foreign Policy «.’ 16
ce re

$2002 — ay

. TI. RATIONAL COMMINIST PARTIES

‘ : se
a. kL.

Be Membership OPeree TTT eer rere rere rererer est ett err eerie .

€: Treining PTOTTTTTTTTLETTT TT TTT TT Trt 7%
ormmumist Party Organisation othe recommen cnnscceseecesones
a. Principles of Organization ..cscccscscnsscernvcsscsevene
be Organizational StPUCTUTE cccercnsscevesscsrecsesscaseses
Organization for Secret ami Underground Activities ...csoee
fe Organization for Secret As tivities @reesreeenaeeoeeaneasve cs
be Organization for Underground Activities sceecsecegaeoece
g. Organizational Problems: Adjustment to Dlegal Conditions - & .
Auxiliary Orgenizations i a ae hd id |
B. Labor OVE er eee eT ae eee ee aN cE a a aR i
b. Intellectuals ig Bsa ate walk dn 6 REMARRIED Oe Sb OG Meda RS ES
Se Other Organizations SS Se OS BiS 8 SES W(8: 666.4: 5:62:44 6' 4:00 0,068: 0/0’

Irr. COMMUNIST TACTICS (Generel)

Rep
*
Ps
7 &
-_
t
‘ sallicta hain i wan, otdipamenstlis Abie eines Al SACI ct ABB Dn

\ ; a

p>
+
‘y
os

.
wf :
nh endearrat SE n—AelhaMctaionen Sail. aati

Politdaal ply Ueimes iuadisont asec wiv usdaaseuwiientes cece
Be Perlianentary Maneuvers Pome ore me eeesneeeeaserseseenese?
b United Front Tactics Oe seseroereseresgeascsenscestnges
Ea Coalition Tactics SLES E LM EE SS C82 SES Oe S O68 Ot 0 8 O80 88 Ok Se
Cee esata betes ee eeseebes eee heces
ase Action wencetbocecsevcccaccecseneaescacessbsentsosases ;
"Be Demonstrations Sgip Wain wages ele nin gail pin oa diese.e's ocis yb-s'o win seis
: -Picketing ssseKavccesccrentaccsebencerereecsedpeneecess.
‘. Street Fighting -° Gb oe reeccvenracsececessescauccseeoeseres

Riets st eeatenconheseccsseeccsseecisnesevebaseuanss eesen

Ta Argel Farting AS oa Le Nama idl
4 ws a ~ Viger ue

~

va Por?
Sees - a

3. Cormmnist Party Intellirence ACtIVAtLCS ecocevecosccsecssesece

Be Introduction Sere ere cea eesreseeses roses sss DessISH TS SeHHaH eee

{ p. General Organizational and Operational Principles «.ecccess
\ ge Overt Intelligence Seer enasaseecees es eeeeeasesessraseeresrae
g- Covert Informetion wre cheresses gees eseasgssreesessecsessse?
Bs Communist Intellipence for USSR cecccsvccoscceresescocssess

Z- The Commmist Party Intelligence Appare tus eeeccovccercoonen

i) Industrial and Technological Intelligence ecesreceonecenete

h. Training err rrrrrerrrs ERE rr Terre leit ee eld

i. Commmi st Counter Intalligence Sree rereeeneeesserseeseesese

be Subversion in the Arned Forces amd the Police ceccsccovensscsee
Be Infiltration at High Levele eee reser seedseveeseregsesereses

b. Capture of Control Positlond cescercccvecacesssessoverocens

$e Infiltration into the Ranke ecccccvccesnsgeewesesensesseees

Iv. COMHIST TACTICS (Revolutionary)

EFREERSReeeeeee

1. Theory of Revolutionary Botlon cocsceccccsvenscevescessseneees
Be General Theory rrr rrrTrTererrrrerrrrec irises ed
he Insurrection, an Art cocccecececssecsesseesceessseteeessees
ge Timing eee sere ee eee ree ee seadensseHes ees resesrssseesesssoes
g- The Offenslve ecesacascesccsnseases esse esse esesesgssHerseoe
Se Superiority Of Forced ev ccccvccscaseececssosecerererssrenee
{. The Principle of Concentration OL Forces escccocssesscccece
&e The Klement of Surprise Sco see eseSOSDORASHESEHSEHELEHEBSCHEE
pb. The Armed Forces (Dispersal, Disarming, and Prevention of

Concentration) PPMP oem SH SEHT OSES EETHETE HEHEHE HELOHOSEEOD

2. Practice of Revolutionary Mertlon coscvesccccsocscccesesescrser
B- Military Instruments Used sesscceccnncesscvcnesccccosssvces
bd. Political Instrunenta Used COeSeSRHEHSSEHSHEHEHESH SH SCEDEEHS

BSR RERBBEEE

V. COALITIONS I! NON—ORBIT COUNTRIES In?

werd

. f= |

CENTRAL INTSTLIGENCE AGLINY

ORE 55-49
THEORY AND PRACTICE OF COMMUNIST SUBVERS JON

I. INTRODUCTION

. 1. Commmist Doctrinal Basis and Growth.

Aa arama

| CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGBRICT z8 February 1950
Althouch the first major step 4n the growth of Communism as a political

force occurred as a result of the Russian October Revolution of 1917, the
! doctrinal basis of Communism had its bepinnines as early es 1848 when Merx

and Engels published the Communist Manifesto. Although these two men were
by no means the first propagators of a new social order based upon state or =-—
society-controlled ownership of national resources and means of production, tos Ces
; they discarded the compromise of democratic evolution and, for the first

time, "scientifically" developed a theory of social revolution.

t {here are several Marxian axioms, the understanding of which is necessary

sate

for an appraisal of the present Commnist doctrine. By and large, these ere
propositions that have recained unaltered by successive theorists. It is

true that Lenin, Stalin, Trotsky, and even Tito have chanced the inter-

stat ipa of Marxist theories, have enhanced the importance of some, re-

-

] legated others to the background, and created now ones. Essentially, however,
= s . Marxism remains based upon the Cormunist Manifesto, the: Wheres of Harx' Kapital

anid

ws This report is in process of coordination with the intelligence
Pe wn organizations of the Departaants of State, Army, Navy, and the
Sg Bae, pdr Force. It contains information avetiene to CIA as of

es be : _ + - RE: net

ey ,
are rN peer .

a |
and the varicus other rritings of both Marx and Ensels.
a. Qrthodox Theory.
(1) Marxism.
The most important pillars of the edifice of Mamdan thcught are

the principles of dialectical materialism, the econonic interpretation of
history, and the doctrine of the class strurgle. Deeply affected ty the

: Hegelian methods of dialectics, but supplanting its historical slanting with
materialistic interpretation, Marx reasoned that nothing was established
once and for all, that every development had its climax which would be
followed by decay, and that it 1s beyond anybody's power to retard this

sequence. The object of this system of reasoning was to disprove the r=e-

vailing idealism and replace it with a material view of civilization.

i Civilisation, Marx reasoned, has created certain conditions, not so much
through influence of ideas, 48 throuzh actual facts of life.

This dialectical thought process opensd the way for a new
interpretation of history. Measurable material forces, Marx clained,
exclusively determine the development of human affairs. If such forces have
grown up within an established system, conflicts are bound to arise which, in
the end, initiate a social revolution. The victory of such a revolution would
“3 impose new (economic) principles upon society and change the whole complex of
a civilisation. In other words, these forces would work themselves out by way
of a dialectical process or, by the *oonflict of contradictions" or opposites
inherent in nature and society, resolve themselves into a new and “higher®

status 2 Tee

=~

ee

=
NN

CO

The conflicts producing the stimii for suoh conflicting

processes in human society do not stem from ideasper s¢, but operate in terms
of the changing forces of production (tools, machines) which place men in
certain relations with other men (production relations). It is these
relations which determine the social, political, and intellectual processes
of life and, therefore, will result ina defined relationship between the

clesses. The nature of this relationship cannot help but lead to a series

of continued class struggles, for "the history of all hitherto existing
society is the history of class strugrles."
! The fundanental cause of all class struggles is to be found in
the economic structure of capitalist society. Marxist economic theory arrives —
7 | at the conclusion that the value of all commdities (goods) is determined by
the quantity of human labor expsnded on their production (the labor theory
of value). The only source of a capitalist's profit, therefore, lies in the
excess of labor-time he forces labor to work beyond the hours needed to
) produce the necessities such as food and clothing, required to maintain the
labor (the theory of paris value). Capitalist profit, accordingly, varies
in direct proportion to the amount of time the laborer is forced to work

z beyond that required to earn the subsistence wages he is paid for his labor—

power (the theory of exploitation) .
Marx thereby sets forth a series of premises which he utilizes

to explain how the capitalist structure will collapse. Because of constant

technological advances and the compatition of fellon-capitelists, he seys,
the capitalist 4s compelled to turn Snto additional capital ( "save" and
"invest") the greater part of the surplus value he has wrested from his ©
workers (the theory of accumulation). This constant increase in the
machines (capital) diminishes the capitalist's profit (which varies solely -
with the amount of labor power exploited). The capitalist compensates for
these amaller profits not only by constantly increasing the exploitation of
his employees, but also by cheapening commoditics through increasing the
size of industrial plants and units of control (corporations, holding
companies, trusts, cartels). In this life-and-death struggle of competition,
the capitalists tend to destroy each other by concentrating capital into
fewer and fener hands. This development of highly mechanized large-scale

industry inevitably creates large-scale unemployment -— 4 permanent "surplus
population," as well as the transfer of countless small and medium-sized
capitalists into the proletariat, who gradually become more and sore
impoverished and miserable.

In the advanced stages of capitalist development, recurrent
crises or depressions are created as a result of the inability of the masses
to buy the ever-increasing flow of goods. These crises are periodic, in-

escapable, and of Sncreasing severity until they finally culminate in a break-

down of the capitalist syster: a breakdown produced by the system's onn

economic contradictions and by the revolt of the increasingly miserable

proletariat.

eee aeml alesse

Sonmnism the state will "wither away,”

me

ae
cs pal ee

The class struggle is not only an aconomic but also a political
con*liot since the state is primarily an organ of olass-cogroicn on behalf
of the "ruling” class. In modern capitalist society the political and
economic conflict between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat has reached
the staze where ihe productive power of sooiety has outgroun the syatem of
private property, the exploited proletarians can liberate themselves from
the yoke of the bourgbodsie only through the direct séigare of the (bourgeois)
state power and the transformation of the capitalist to s socialist systen.

This development is dnavitable inasmuch as the capitalist systes is doomed
to fall bacause of the "contradictions" inherent in it.

In order that a new social and economic system may be achieved) -.=
and capital ian destroyed, a struggle to the death between capitalists and
workers wild éngue because the capitalists, acoording to Marx, will not give
up their prerogatives. Therefore, once the workers have succeeded in over-
throwing a capitalistie regime, they saat not test on their laurels but mst
establish a "dictatorship of the proletariat" which, representing the workers!
interest, will see to it that all the remnants of the bourgeoisie are liquidated.
Only after this has happened. will the transitery "socialist" period be re-
placed by the final stare of the Gere pent, the Commnist “classless” apcieny:
The task ot the ‘state under a proletertan dictatorship, “ahich is eocentially

"the elimination ‘of opposing éledents, will then have bean completed and under .

f 7 . * zr

{Z) Leninisn.

Lenin conceived methods and tactics designed to implement
Marxian theory. Marx had remained a theorist with little concern for the
practical execution of his ideas except in very general terns. Lenin
prevented any moderate faction from compromising with bourgeois elerents,
carrying out politically and organizationally what Marx had demanded in
principle. Lenin also adapted Marxism to chanzed socio-political conditions
es as nell as to its use in Russia; Marxist theory was based upon revolution
in tha cost highly developed industrial nations while the Russian Revolution
Sacucced 4n an economically undeveloped ae

“Lenin's main contributions to both the nature of the Soviet ~~ “"™*F_
‘
state and the development of international Cormunism are the following:

(a) A eingle disciplined and united party must be organized
7 to implement the theary end postulates of revolution, This party mst be the
4 vanguard of the working class. It mst select 4te nenbers with care and be
7 the political leader of the working classe It is to be a "Party of a class, and

therefore alnost the entire olass (and in times of war, in tae period of civil war,

the entire class) should act under the leadership of our Party as closely as

“sige ay: possible.* in other ee the Party is also an. “organized detachment of the —

ene ‘ nt us ae to te Sided Sat ree
“working Glass." aaa ee ae es e ba :

oa we et @). _Bven more important, the pay ie ‘the: Anstrunent of the *

-*% pictatorship of the Proletariat inasmuch as it ‘fe the ignite form of the ast
cont imously + aa
ee a prabags or ee :

oe ak : = _ 2 oe a.

afm

Sa ay. <p,

. dmminent. . -¢,

strencitened by the purging cf opportunists and deviationists, the Party is
bound to become the monolith upon which not only the Communist movement is
built but 4g also to be the state which it will create or has created,

(c) With the help of the Party, the doctrine which brought
about its establishment mist be carried to the masses. The importance of
grievanoes will be used when opportune, but the belief in the secular
religion of the Commnist ideology mst be inculcated, for "without a
revolutionary theory, there can be no revolutionary movecent.*

(d) Marx basod his theories upon the social, political, and
economic consequences of capitalism in individual countries. Lenin developed
the thought by jailing into consideration the developments during the second - - ---
half of the nineteenth century. He looked upon capitalism not as a national
phenomenon but as a “world system of financial enslavement and colonial
oppression." This imperialism he regarded as the “highest stage of capitaliam.*
This would be followed, he concluded, by social revolution and the collapse
of capitalism. "Imperialism is the eve of socialist revolution."

A country can be imperialistic without having hishly developed
industry; therefore, revolution, according to Lenin (as contrasted with

Marx's concept) need not necessarily occur in industrially developed countries. 7

>
4

Lenin cane to the latter conclusion with reluctance because for many years he

had looked upon industrialized Germany as the country where revolution was ws:

ted

(e) As against Marx' culti-netional concept which was not
nepated by his stress on proletarian solidarity throughout the world, Lenin
created the cancept of the world divided into two camps: that of oppressors,
and oppressed. Therefore, Lenin developed strategy and tactics to be
applied in the struggle of the oppressed against the oppressors both on the
national and international scale. Herein lies the cost pronounced difference
of Marx' and Lenin's character: Marx was a theoretioian, Lenin a
practitioner of revolution. Lenin's theses about strategic and tactical

jeadership are more than a mere 4mplementation of a dootrine; they are

doctrine themselves.

“Ae

then Lenin died in 1924, the Rusaian Revolution was just
beginning to be consolidated, The position of the Soviet Union, built upon
the Marxigt-Leninist doctrinal bases, was meok, At this point, Stalin began
to reinterpret Leninism for the main purposé of strengthening the USSR
internally as a base of revolution.

(3) Stalinisn.

Since Lenin's death, new and unforeseen problems in the
Communist world have arisen which have required modification and extension
of Conmmnist theory, Stalin has been credited with all of these
developments. In some instances he has adopted the theories of Lenin, Marx,
and Engels to the current problem; in many instances he has evolved new ©
theories as the new problems arose. In the main, Stalin has, with qitnipsenese”
and singleness of purpose, eliminated all oppositional elements, and modified
all doctrine which conflicted with the followins four objectives:

(a} To establish permanently his personal power and the pre-
eminence of his viexs in the soviet Commnist Party;

(b) To ake the Soviet Communist Party the absolute and un-
disputed instrument of ruling the USSR;

(c) To achieve pre-erinence of the Soviet Cormunist Party
throughout the Soviet orbit as well as over all Communist parties in the world;

(4) To establish the USSR as the only Commnist power center

from which can be undertaken the conquest of other parts of the world to te”

pressed into the Commnist orbit. we - seh: 1 3

| =a

In order to attain these ends, Stalin has irtroduced various
revisions of Marxist-Leninist theories. His main contributions to the
modification of the doctrine are: )

(a) Precedence must be given to building socialism in the
USSR. This is discussed at greater length under "Trotskyism", pare 10 -)

(bv) As a corollary: The foremost task of the foreign (non-
Soviet) Commnist Parties is to defend and support the USSR in this "building
period" in order to prevent capitalism from erushiny the Soviet state; this
is referred to as the "Bolshevization” of Communist parties.

(c) Collectivization of arriculture is a major requirement
in the consolidation of power in @ Soviet type of state and rust be achieved
rapidly and ruthlessly. Stalin has formulated a detailed plan for preparing
a country for collectivization and has outlined the methods to be followed
in achieving this phase of socialism. These techniques are non being applied
in the Satellites.

(4) In coloniel areas, Communist cooperation with bourgeois
groups and parties is permissitle and recommended, provided the Comrunist
Farty retains undisputed leadership, and provided that the bourgeois groups
are nationalistic and anti-foreign.

In Aasition: Stalin has initiated the formation of the theory

of unification of national states fn preparation for the formation of the

monolithic forld Coormnist State. This provides for the eventwal in- eee

ae

corpcration of the Setellites into the Soviet Union. In the present stage of
development, the theory calls for common economic and political structures,
to be followed by a common social structure culminating in a cormon language
_- Bussian, With the "dying anay” of national languages, other national
differences will disappear, and nations, as knom in the capitalist world,
will cease to exist.

As symbolized by the three pillara of Cosmunist development,
the line from theory to national revolution, and fror there to rorld
revolution seems logical enough. Interpretation of basic doctrine is
flexible and opportunist; but this does not mean that the doctrine ea
factor may be disregarded.

Important as the differences between the theories of 'arx,
Lenin,and Stalin may be, for the West they must be regarded as one concert
out of rhich revolutionary stratery and tactics will be developed and in
plemented.

b. "Deviationist" Theory.
(1) Trotskyisn.
Trotsky's disagreement with Stalin's interpretation cf Yarx
and Lenin has resulted in a modified Communist theory which is actively, but

ineffectively, propagated by a small group of adherents. Affiliated with

,, bhe Fourth International, the national Trotskyite Communist groups, while

professing much in common with Soviet Comnunisn, nevertheless are in bitter

opposition to the Stalinist leadership in both the USSK and the People's

we

vO a P %

-10-

aches : "S a
wo we SONS

Bee Reg ges tege weg
a eee : rs ea Laan fj Pm +
: ; gh gete ES * : aera bac ae.

“=f.

Democracies. Trotskyism is the first modified Comaumist doctrine opposing
Soviet doctrine which has persisted in any force; Titoiam is the second.
Against Stalin's belief that it nas necessary to consolidate
the power of the Commnist Party in one country - the USSR ~ before.
proceeding with the world revolution, Trotsky contended that Communism could
never be achieved in one country as long as hostile, capitalist governments
existed elsewhere. Therefore, the task of the USSR was to promote world
rev>lution, and only after it had succeeded would it be in a position to
transform the USSR and other countries into a genuine Cormurti st society.
The conflict between Stalin and Trotsky involved a difference
in timing and not a theoretical schism over the ultimate objective of the
revolution. As a matter of fact, Stalin himself has modified his thesis

that "socialism is possible in one country" by stating that "the final

_ victory of socialism is possible only with successful revolutions in at

least several countries" and that “the task of the victorious revolution
consists in doing the utmost attainable in one country, for the development,
support, and achievement of the revolution in all countries.®

Although this difference of opinion between the tuo nen and
their followers was an important reason for their conflict, another
escent sa) factor was their struggle to succeed Lenin. Such other assues

as the problem of the position of peasants in the wevolutien were aciaatt

The importance of Trotskyiam is not that it represents a theory

superior or inferior to stalinism (in some respects Trotskyisdi ‘is even less rd

.

compatible with Western concepts thar is Stalinism), but that it helps to
discredit the practice of Commmisn in the USSR and that it challenges the
soviet-Commnist oyth of infallibility.
(2) Titoisa,

Although Titoism at present is the only other important
Conraunistic element in opposition to Soviet Cormnisn, dit hag little in
cornon with Trotskyism other than its hatred for the Soviet Union. As a
potential force combatting Kremlin Communism, Titoism is far more important
than Trotskyism because it challenges one of the most vulnerable Stalinist
concepts — the subservience of national interests to the Soviet state. The
fact that Titoism is represented by 4 nation and a regime in power adds
{measurably to its prestige, both in the Comeunist and non-Commmnist world.

Te theoretical tenets of Titoism are not as yet fully

developed, Basically, however, the Tito regime believes that there must be

complete equality ancng all Commmnist nations. The USSR is willing to

concede this in theory, but not in practice. Furthermore, Titoists regard
Communist theory (Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism) as e flexible guids to the
application of Commniam in a specific state, not as a strict dogma which
must be applied in every detail regardless of the local conditions. This
the Soviet Union will concede neither in theory nor in practice.

Titoiam greatly surpasses Trotskyism in its potentialities

for the alienation of Coummists from the Soviet Union. Titoism has”
So ae

7 aN Ota
devaloped in several Communist parties outside the Soviet orbit. However,
it has yet to become an effectivs force in am area other than Yugoslavia.
Its support among Conmunists at present atens nostly from party intellectuals.
In the Satellites, the charge of Mtoism is levelled against any element
which the Soviet Union wants to diimdicdee: Usually it is difficult to sub-
stentiate the charge of collusion with Tito, or the charge that these leaders
advocated a Tito-like policy for their respective parties.
2e The Communist One-Party State.

The Bolshevik attitude toward the function of political parties
determines the structure of the Communist one-party state. Stalin, in
"Problems of Leniniam,” explains that "the Party is part of a class, its
leading part. Several parties, and bkseensntrs freedom for parties, can
exist only in a society in which there are antagonistic classes, the interests
of which are contradictory and irreconcilable. . . . .Hence, in the USSR
there is no ground for the existence of several parties, and consequently for
the freedom of these parties. In the USSR there is ground only for one
party, the Cocmunist Party.°

However, during the period of socialist transition, other parties

‘ sre tolerated and used by the Communists until Communist control is strong

enough to warrant the elimination of the other parties. This elimination is
accomplished by mergers of parties with the Communist Party, purges of strong

leaders in the opposition parties, and various other minor measures, which

wart, Fe

¥
JF

nn

culminates in undisputed control for the Communists.

In a coalition government, where the Cormunist Party mst tolerate
other politicel parties, there are certain key positions which Conomunists
consistently seek to control. Lixewise, once a one-party state has beer
established, these positions are given to the mst trusted leaders who are
under constant surveillance by the executive organs of the party. Because
of its control of the repressive instruments of the state, the first
Comanist target is the Linistry of the Interior. Wext are the Ministry of
Defense, the Kinistry of Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of Education.

There is a tight interneshing of organization and function between
the party and povaeinent organs in a Communist one-party state. Roughly, it
ean be stated that the Party determines policy (very often on minor as well |
as major matters) and the correspending fovernrent unit executes the policy anc
carries out the administrative details related to it. Control cf the
povernzent apparatus in the Soviet Union, the most advanced form ofa
Cormunist one-party state, is diffused through three organs of the Central
Committee:

1. The Oreburo

2. The Politburo

3, The Secretariat
(The fimetions of these organs and their relationship to other Party bodies
are described in "National Party Organization", page 40.)

A graphic representation of the operation of the central governmental

stp Ne

apparatus in a Communist one-party state shows the constitutional organs
ne a ‘ oy gg SO ate! sy < gees zs wee ee he.

subject to two different and distinct chains of command that meat at the top,
The winistries operate under orders from the council of Ministers and repert
back to them. At the sane tine, the ministries are subject to constant
supervision by Party organs.

The salient features of ea Communist one-party state are the un
disputed supremacy of the Politburo in the formulation of policy, the
frequent resort to “interlocking directorates” (called in the Swiet Union
sovmestitelstvo) in staffing agencies, and the dual gubordination (4i.e., to
poth Party and superior governmental Sceneteay: of the organs of the
constitutional administrative apparatus. Sometimes the Party even publishes
{mportant economic directives in its own name. More often, the Council of
iiniaters ig associated with the party in issuing important directives. :

The use of “interlocking directorates" is seen in Stalin's position
as head of the Politburo, the Secretariat, the Orgburo, and the Council of
Ministers. Similarly, all tut tro other nembers of the Politburo are also
Deputy Chairmen of the Council of Ministers. "Interlocking directorates"
are advantageous because they saferuard Party control against challenge, they
economize on personnel, and 4nsure coordination between policy-making and

policy—imrplement ing, agencies.

The dual subordination of the agencies of the feonstitutional®

*

governtent results from the need for specialized Party control over specific

activities. Thus a governzent agency 43 controlled first by its superior

ad

ay

a : ee

povernmental department (such as the Ministry of Internal Security), by a
superior constitutional body (such as the Bureau of the Council of Winisters),
and, in addition by the appropriate Party section. Party administrative
philosophy prefers dual subordination to fusion between the Party and the
constitutional organs because it facilitates separation of control and
administrative functions.

Thus, in a Communist one-party state the actual and ultimate power
rests with the Politburo, often in the hands of the Secretary General of the
Party, although the fiction of at least partial autonomy for the constitutional
organs of governnent is maintained.

3. Inter-relationship of Communiar with USSR Foreign Policy.

After a brief period during which the interests of a world Commnist
revolution were held pre-eminent, Soviet leaders have consistently re-
legated the world Commnist movement to the role of an instrument of Soviet
foreign policy. They have rationalized this course by saying that the
vuitimate truimph of Conmunism demands that Communists throughout the world
subordinate every other consideration to the "defense of the Soviet Union —
Communism's main bastion. At present, the Kremlin, in an all-out effort to

maintain its control over the world Cormunist movement in the face of the 2

challenge of Mtoism, is trying to isolate Tito and is purging other parties

of nationalist tandencies.

The relation between the Conrunist concept of the place of the
Soviet Union in history, and their broad theory of history in general, is
not made entirely clear in any of the classical Commmist writings.
Lenints Theses on the Conclusion of a Separate Peace of January 191°, how-
ever, offers a first suggestion on the character of the Soviet State and
country as the rreat capital asset of the Communists in the orld Revolution.
It 43 made clear that considerations of self—determination for smaller areas,
such as Finland, mst be entirely subordinate to the survival of the Scviet
Communist State. A cormon factor underlying all matters of policy is a
resard for the Soviet Union as the main force in the "Army of the revolution,"
and not based upon mere patriotism or national expansion, even thouvh they
may be cloaked in the language of nationalism, The defeat of thse Soviet
Union would be decisive for the course of Communist history, whereas all
other Cozrunist defeats sould be merely lost skirmishes.

The establishzent of a Commnist state, which must not only conform

to international standards for the conduct of nations, but which is also the

base of the orld Communist movement, presents an obvious problem of
coordinction and organization. The Communist International (Comintern) nag
the temporary solution of thie problem. It was a league of Commmnist

parties, having a Secretariat in ‘oscow and governed by a Central Executive

Comittee with full executive powers betveen the meetings of its infresuent~

ra a £5.

Congresses. Its Consresses, and its Central Executive Committee, rere
always dominated by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. This provided
a solid link in personnel and organization between the Soviet Union and

the members of the Comintern. ‘There was always extensive interlocking

authority, through leading personnel, betwean the Council of People's
Comissars (the cabinet) of the Soviet Union, the Politburo, and the

Central Executive Committee of the Communist International (Comintern) .

An international organization of Commnism, to give common direction
to Communist activities in all countries, is very necessary in periods of
sharp antagonism. It is not so much needed in periods when collaboration
with "liberal" and “prosressive” elements in other countries is predominant.
The Comintern was, therefore, an essential instrument immediately after the

Russian revolution. Jt was scarcely needed in the time of the People's

Front in 1935 to 1939, and in the period of the alliance against Hitler, from

1941 to 1945. The period of the Nazi-Soviet alliance was tco short for any

complete reorientation. The directing organization of the Comintern had be-
come so unnecessary after 1935 that abolition of the top organization
structure (the USSR claimed this liquidation to be complete abolition cf the

functions of the Comintern) was simply a gesture, convenient to suggest the
loyal acceptance by Communism of the collaboration against Nazism.

Although the lower administrative machinery of the Comintern probably

~18 -.

wag never abclished it has been te:.tatively concluded that it nas absorbes
by the Bolshevik Party Secretariat. Nevertheless, at the conclusion of
world war Il, the necd for a central directing union, at least in name, was
asain evidenced. Therefore, in September 1947 nine Communist parties
comprising the USSR and the Satellites (less Albania, France, and Italy),
set up the Communist intoeaataen Bureau (Cominform). Theoretically this
orsanization wos to be the clearing house for exchange of information among
member parties. Practically, it is used by the USSR as a front to direct,
not only the eight member parties (Yugoslavia was expelled in 1948), but also
Communist parties in other areas. Soviet direction of the international
Con-uniam movement ean thus be camouflared under the name of the Cominforn,
an organization of supposed ejuals. In fact, however, it must be kept in
mind that the UUSR directs the international Communist movement chiefly

through its diplomatic consular and economic representatives abroad.
In support of Soviet objectives, the following general lines ere

the principal ta xs of foreign Comunists at the present tine:

(a) In the Satellites: to integrate their countries with the USSR's
military, political, and economic interests.

(b) In Asia: to advance Soviet influence and neaken that of the
Western Powers b: armed force or other neans in China, through a puppet
government 4 Northern Korea, propaganda in Japan, and by attempting to sub-
vert nationalistic and anti-colonial moverents in Southeast Asia, This

program is to be applied when possible in the Near Bast, Latin America, and

Africa.

ln =

(c) In aestern Europe: to underrine the .arshall Plan and the
North Atlantic Pact by propacanda attacks, political agitation, calls for
rejuction of armanents, and wheneyer possible, by strikes and disorders.
(d) In all areas: to pledge the readiness of Communist parties
and their followers to support the Soviet Union in case of war, and,
- at the same time, to carry on the Soviet "peace offensive." This
propecanda campaign is designed to advance Soviet influence among war-

weary casses by depicting the Soviet Union as peace-loving and the US and

its allies as arpressive warmongers.

Ti, (AYIGUAL COLLUNIST PANTIE
lo Henbership, Recruitment, and Trainings.
ae Uemberships
(1) Classe

The menbership of the Ceznmmisit partict is not necessarily
identical with the class those interests it purport: to represcit,
the vroletariet. hile the supporters of Commnison, :itside thi
Soviet orbit, are prodominantly workers ond landless rusaats, vie
history and developnont of the parties reveal that only iy. son
instances has it truly represented the worliing class whore speariad
it claims to be. |

ibrxism, Laninism, and Stalinisn have considred the
Commmist partiss to be the spearhead of the revol-tionary oroletarist,
i.ee., of the industrial workers tho are singled out as the nost reli.ble
ard loyal followers of the ideology. Saccnd, rank ise larvless persamts;
anc third. the intellizentsla, ‘the veight of those (roups, howror, .
varies in different countrics. In such industrialz2d nations as
Germany, the industrialized prolotariat corstituted thu nain force af
Cormunism in Lenin's tims. Both the poasantry and inteTigentsia vere
predominantly antiCommmnist. In france, next to the wikers, a com

siderable mmber of “bourgeois” intallectuals were enlistds; in postr

te

~V; large sections of dissatisfied >oasonts nade possible the
dx verporary Jains of Commnmism during 1947 and 1948, In China, support
= — for Comminisn tas derived mainly from the psesants, It should be
added that western trade unioiisn is not necessarily an instrunont
Comunisn can use for its om purposes. In fact, recent events such as
the esiablishnent of a non-Commnist Internation Trade union = orcanized
in opposition to tho Commnist-dominated World Federation of trade
Unions = have shown that Lenin was justified in foaring that econaric
trade unionism would adjust the workers to capitalisn rather than
Ns destroy it.
: (2) Leadership,
4s in all one-party states, the Camnnist parties, wherever
they are in oover, are kept low in membership so 2s to constitute an

elite responsible for leadership. Selectivity is also the practice in

nomvormnist statos even though to a lessar extent. Where Canmunian
is not in powar, the party will be opportunistic and adtt, temporarily,
many candidates which nay at a later date be purgode
the leaders must demonstrate a rather hich intellectual
leval because the party is, in Leninist terms, a guidins elite of
professional revolutionaries capable of a "scientific? analysis of the
4 , Uarxist dialectics and the historical process fron capitalisn to a

classloss scciety. Cnly this understandin; enablesthe party cortneely
to interpret and apply its 2rinciples, Wile the original loaders of
the party were chiefly fron amonz the intcllijontsia, and bourgeois
intellectuals have contimed to be admitted into leading party positions
hore and there, they have been ousted, with minimal axceptions, as soon
as leaders with proletarian baclc¢rounds wore devaloped to replace them
(Soe study of leaders in Appendix.)
(3) Stability.

| Menbership grows rapidly in tines af economic depression, but
drops off then the party suffers a major defcat or supports neasures which
even the normpolitical recognize as promoting Soviet rather than mtional
interests, Such lesses of canbership have occurred taroughout pastern
Surope because of the CP campaions against the Uarshall Plen and the NAP,
It has boen cstimated that the party is sure of only 5 percent. of its
mocbers. xcept fo: this "hard core" there is usuzliy a constant shirt of
mecbership, the avaraga maober leaving the party within three ysars of
joining, while a camplete turmover occurs within a five to seven-year
periods

Lewin stressed the necessity of mintaining a “hard care of

rovolutionaries® to guard the continutty.of tho movement. The more widely

masses are dramm into the party, the nore stable this small group of

militants must bes

(4) Stronsth.
The global nonbership, ostinmited at twenty million, is

no idication of tie party's strength which 1s also manifested in
(1) the Commmist's enthusiasn for a "cause" similar to rolizious
fervor thich nakes an active zealot of every nanber conbined ith
the discipline that pemzits no difference of opinion to weaken the
party's effectiveness, and (2) the party's ability to influence non
netbers. This latter vas illustrated in the 19h6 national electdons in
France where a Commmist membership of about 600,000 polled a wte of
5,175,000. lot only from organized "front" groups anong the youth, wonen,
and labor is this strencth dram, but also fron the following unarganized
elouents?

(a) Concealed mecbers who spread Comrumist doctrins
but are unimowmn rer deceptive purposes;

(b) fellow-travelers tho suport the Camunist progran
bat do not join the party;

(c) sympathizers tho entertain kindly feelings towards
the party, protect its viows but do not joins

(a) opportunists tho cooperate with the party fer thetr
ow salfish reasons and advantages but do not join for the same roasons}

(e) confused liberals tho beliove it possible to work

with tho Commumists for social ands although they are tho first elLininated

ae c4
wie oy ae
.
Sat
stat ae ee
ane
re : :
2 2 ee de: Z : ee gr Weta, x d dal q
oe + en as PG : 2 et Par vied Hg : 2 M SB ee
Rea po a i aay at me OE
aig, Meena ou Rs co A eey we Soe a ee a
Ar eee oe e " PETE PIE ag ee OPEN 2
. . Piatt ay * . “Ww. ag 2 ht ees = 2 Rlen”
SEN 2 aes oe Wirale ae Trot edit get Se yee oa pa RE ee” :

.
oy Praes:

when the party comes to poner, as indicated by the suppression of Social
Democratic Parties in burope; and,
(f) nell-meaning citizens who are deceived by Oommnist

proparanda., (See Membership and Electoral Potential, Appendix.)

b. Recrultnent.

Recruitment is a matter of prime interest and planning to the
CP because (1) the party is aware that size strength are its main guards
against suppression and (2) a history of membership fluctuations and
periodic "purges" of the inactive or suspected elements requires constant
replenishment of these losses. However, 48 previously indicated, the CP
has never aimed at size. The bulky, hard-tc-manaze numbers other parties
strive to attain in order to exert influence are replaced in the CP by a
militant, deployatle sexbership trained to provide leadership for the masses.
That this system works is impressively illustrated in the USSR where a CP
membership of 6 million holds a population of 200 million under complete
ecntrol and in all the other countries dominated by a Communist party.

A chief medium for recruitment is propaganda slanted to

foster unbelief in the ideals of democratic, Western society, and to

= 25 =

“> ae las

build up the belief that Commnisnm will clininate poverty and achicve
many of the aspirations of the "underdog" by freeing hin of competition,
To this end, Cammmist propajanda is prolific and widespread. The Com
munist press has univercal circulation, underground if need be, in which
case it is distributed in devious and incemious ways. Songs, flamboyant
posters, slocans, picket lines bearing popular apneals on tieir banners,
even street fighting, have proved to be effective neans of attracting
prospects. A successful act of insurrection, as in Czechoslovaldia, brings
in a heavy band-vazon type of recruitmont.
(1) Contacts. |
Clubs devoted to literature, music appreciation, foreign affairs,
sports or even those of a puraly social character are often used to im
fluence mass croups, All of these finally get around to includes discussion
of the ideology of -arx, lenin, and Stalin through the clever manipulation
ef the leaders. Jt is fron such groups that "front" orzanizations grow,
often tichout the Imodledge of sone of their nembers. Anon: individuals
attracted br the Co-nunist provram are: |
(a) the econcrically dom-troddan;
(b) persons pre~disposed to Commmism through personal
frustration;
(c) the young, those spirit of contradiction, fired by
critician, makes it secn sanshow clancrous to be a Commmist. ‘Thus nany

~

pee ene) ie. Ss
aie < wes 2 eee < sae =
(oe See Na eer ntion of bLenporatic Teta; 25 ¢ pogor
ime cmon’ of Jcruaurist actucns

(a) raciol and rimoriizy groscs semsitive tv ciscrimins-
tien: stuicS 2hs mogeoss cf the United States;

(6) people of colonial areas those interest in and
Imowicoccze of larxcisn is nopligible put those acivicns fer notionéaL
indepencamse are aloited by the party;

(2) pecple tiith a likiny Yor i> censplrataicl otarc-
phere of Cormmrism, its seerecy and reckless disvesard for li-e.: these

are cften of 2 corbative nature, tdth a touch of infericrity complex; cr

pararciz: Tentwelity.

tena cena: Se makgoah. nese echt sytieg, . oe = ra a

per ees eee GS ee ee ees beh a woe

ni oxen rae tactonwrics sen BAD AAS ne Sane ow, mlm RR te ee mess
i ee ~yN 2 moclLon wy NC Gl a eta Cee oe ary: Di ree eee Pate ON ree at ab
~ laa s prt oe TA Ay i mewn Annas Pere wers eee ™ SP RA ee ee : PRD co aa

Soman. 2 Con vir wrach roc se Se POTICS LHI DeVSCO I UStlcls He.

wn ~ be EV eh adit ial amos Pat Gott «cet a Ql we EN agen diica cL} +t od ak ~

TaWei — a2CZ SaCcruilte- Cael ae 4h Saveur eure 2e VWs OAL Glo c VYeve or

(2) Aindoctrinction of Recruits.

Dxperts pick out for coccishl ovvancatn ticee pers -.e Poms.

guscertible to the Cormunist ideoicgy amu program. raese procose hive

a

menbers are subfected te a calculated, xethedical indoctrination mt

incluuGs 3 Sbudy af pcaisticcl and mullosopiiuical voris scelectcd to dovalep

the belief in tho student that western darocracy is incapable of progress

or improvamamt. Lined to this is am interpretation cf an "international

ideal" tarich merges the nmeational interests of the USOR tith tho doctrines

aml pcoliciss of the Commmist partios all over the world until they becom
ticci. Caution is taken not to reveal doctrines likely to revolt a

beginner. “hen "party loyalty" replaces the princinles vhich first attracted

him, tho recruit is sufficiently "developed" for maxmpership and training.

& Training. -

Al] mature and organized Comrmmist parties have inte-rated
educational and training programs designed to create a tell-disciplined
army cansble of specific duties, aodle to keen its collective morih shut,
naturilk sympatnetic with the werkers. with kmovwledse of the use of fire
ams an. now to dircet 3 creml, anc with devotion tc the revoluticnary

ce 0 fuis traizin: mr he rowzhiy divided into thres catocories, 1.de,
general. on-the-job, ana instituticnal, in ail of tiuch discipline plays
an important role.
(1) Discipline.

The Carmmmnist Party momber accopts 2 rigid discipline quite
unimotm to democratic parties. Once the party has handed dom its decisions,

it allows no deviation, Uot only those in tho public eye are farbidden to

dissent, but even the least of the necbors must accept in detail the
rulings of the party or be subjected to reprinand, suspension, or Ge
pulsion. The active Cammmist mist adhere to conspiratorial rules
yiuich affect his thole life. No matter how mich idealism, op ortunisn,
advamburisn or lust for power goes into the milking of a Commmist, the
strouzer notivation of LarxeLenin-Stalin ideology offering a Utopian
solution for every political, social, or philosp!iical problen is needed
to make hin accept this rigid discipline. ‘he longer he is under this
discipline, the less he is able to think in any bot Comnmistic terms.
He permits no criticism of his views but is "victimized" thereby and
misumderstood by "class enemies" who are any persons not sharing the
party's point of viet.

(2) General Trainin.

All members receive saneral training which in some
countries is the only effort ever made to bring political education, het
ever biased, to the masses, While varxist doctrins, Soviet propazanda,
and an international point of view are the basis of this instruction,
Coumurism as applied in the particular country with special techniques
to be usod there are emphasized. Llyriads of "study circles" dealing in

a wide range of subjects including literature, history, science, scanomics,

aa
problais of youth, vonon, und forming, all as interpreted by Larx,
Lenin,<nd Stalin, are set up. This saneral training tals on unique
agpocts in cortain countries. in Chile tho party at ono tine taught
its nembers to read anc write before launching them into doctrine, and then
aftor electin: sone of then to the Iecislature,the party taught its
leislatore parliaiontary lov. Sons af the nore than 200 rural schools
in Italy aro socialized farns where the novices do the work, thon advance
to the tow schools where they live in the hanes of fellow Commnists.
In Delyium each old nexber takes on a recruit to traine A special re=
indoctrination school in Czechoslovalda admits only old necbers those
forvor has cooled. Cuban schools ara so well orgamized that one of than
is used for observers froa other Latin American countries, thile in
‘csentina, no form:l orsanized instruction in theory is cttomted but

e:ports lecture to Commmists en stroct fichtins, commande tectics, and

When the student in ~oneral trainin; aspires to crocter
authority and responsibility in tho party, he is given further trainin,
“on-the-job” or in CP institutions.

(35 On-the-Job Training.
teh effactive on-the-job training is accomplished by

expericnes gained in penotratin; labor unions, clubs, schools, and even

sovernnents, where Communists are ordered to assume that Lenin named

atte a ie

"lLoadorship of tie massec" py vorlsing long hours on the legitimto
projraas of the groups. ‘hey take any job, attond all the nsetings,
out—ait the oprosition in order to pass rosolutions after the
najority goes hone, introduce party camaims, and keep at 4t until
Communist control of the organization is veined. Conferences held
prior to scheduled neetings work out in sroat detail ths tactics to be
uscd. ‘these trainees becam acquainted with the organizations, and make
thenseives fartiliar with very piase of their operation in order to
be ready for quick, decisive action at the exact nonont the party asks
for ite ‘they are often assigned to the staffs of high officials or sent
on international missions while developing nastery of their jobs. Good
leaders can use their groups for demonstrations, picketinc, recruiting
now leacers for the CP press, or for spreadirg prepacanda, They werk
hard to gain the confidence of their associates and are ver successful
in odtainin’ olective oflicos. Thus, for oxamle, 111 Cammnist officials
aro qin, the 170 electod officers ci the US iaritine Union althouch
there are less than 500 Communists in the 80,006 monbers.

(4) Instituticnal Training,

Lost top-flicht Caammist leaders attend schools in the

USSR at sone timc. Zach national party ut one tim ms assigned a quota
by the forner Comintern thich paid the traveling expanses to UOSCOW, @

function now porforned probebly by tho Soviet Commmnist Pariy since that

orcaucotien bus cpnarontly taker over Comintern duties. -ccording
te fornor students in oscow tho havo since left the party, tho
Central Caxittoo of each national party chose the individuals to
attend Soviat schools fron anong those nanbers tho had bean active
in tho party Por at loast Live yoars and had an olenontary Imonledce
of Communist theory. Altiough most of the information concerning the
operation ond curricula ef those schools is cated befare viorld war LU,
it cun be presuned that this important nothod for incoctrination and
trainin; of Commnists still exists, ilile these schools nay have
chanjod their nanes and my now be auphasizing different phases of train=-
ing, a brief description of the nost important ones bofore 1939 will be
useful.

(a) The Lonin Institute.

The Lenin Institute was the nest important of the Scevict
schools to train Commimists. -Ithouh called a school for political
trcinin:, mnamy of its courses were of a nurely tilitary nature; riuich
was nev Vo sicel in view of the Comnist definition of wer as ©
extonsion of political conflicts. At one tins, ten parcant of the
stuconts ware Ttussians; the rest vere foreign Communists later to be

assizned to work in intormational phases of the party such as the

International Section of the Soviet CP, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,

or the national parties. The LVD was said to have had priority in tho
cisposition of these studants and concarned itself with part of thoir
training.

The courses were taught in five lancuavos, anglish, French,
Spanish, German, and Mussian, and dealt in political, economic, and nilitary
subjects, stripped to the utilitarian objectives of ways and means of
attaining the party's scals and providing it vith leadorship.

Political courses included studies of the works of Larx,
ingels, Lenin, and Stalin, ith sone attontion to thoes of a fav othar
Commnist writers, There rere coursos on tho official histary of ths
Belshevik Party, but most concentrated on basic ideological concepts.
Courses in political warfare included techniques of other parties and
nethods of consolidation of pmax, tio formar, certain tochniquses
of Camcunisc wiich have bean successfully anployed by specifi-- narties
yare studied; ecc., the Srench Party axcelled in infiltration of the arned
forces, the Gerson Varty in organization, amd the Chinase Party in
Juerrilia varfare; therefore thoir nsthods becane « standard for the classes.

ilitary ccurses tore many anc detailed, The revolutiomary
military section of the Lain institute can best bo described in the vords

of an Anerican ex-—Comuniist leadar, Gitlow, who studied there.

“There is no othor school in any part of tho world that

oa
eivee such a therouga, well-rounded training im the nethods of fonsnting
revolution, gaining power, settins up a dictatoraidp, and handling tho
forces of opposition. During the three yoars the student remins there
he is drilled and trained in military science, espionage work and sabotage.
The course ineludes orvtanisation of conbat groups, how to induct people
into their formations, and tho training techniques tiuich must be used."

(b) Far Zastern University (The Carmmist University for the
Wording People of tho East).

This was commonly callod the Stalin University and ms
founded in 1919 in Loseow, It vas reported that until 1929 Stalin hin-
self tought courses there on questions of Leninian and colonial problens.
Both Soviot citizens and foreigners of oriontal descent wore trained
thore oxesyt the Chinece sto avtanded the Sum Y2t Sen University, ‘the
rar Jastem Universit, feculty consisted larvely of mecbers of the Comintern.

{c) Acadaxy of isd Trefessars.

This school tas strictly for intoliectuals and required
soven years of intencive study with emphasis on theory. The training
vzs designed to mike the aprroximtely 200 students najor political
strctovists. The students wore not chocen fron tha national parties but

iron the clite of a preliminary tio-yeor course; therefore, a Red professor

vas nice yoars in the naking.

(d) Sun Yat Sen University.

About 5000 Chinese vere said to attend the Sun Yat Sen

eg

™-™™
)
an

az
Univorscitye aie students wore formed into spocial ‘cd Drivades when
anrolliod and were wiven tis bost military courses the Party had to
offer, with amphasis on guerrilla ficthtins.
(e) The eee ldlitary Jcadeny.

While a main school for training the soldiers of the USSR,
it is said to have had a special sabotage division for carefully sereaned
intemational Commnists,

(£) The lid~Suropean University.

This school catered to Commmnists fram tho Ballan countries,
and to a specifiod mmber fron Surope, the US, and Canada, The US Con-
runists sant many negross there. It has a student body af same 2,000
Conomunists and was Imomm as Stalin's pot school where ho bean laying
plans for a Pan—-Slavic bloc of Commmist nations as carly as 1926.

(¢) Conrmmist Schools in the US,
There is 3 chain of Camamist schools stretching across the
US beardn: such honorad nanes as The Abraham Lincoln Sehool, the walt
vaitoan School, the Sammel ..dans, and the Jefferson School of Social
Science. Some of these schools have [one underzround after being naned
as subversive by the jttorney Gancral's office. ‘ihe Daily Soricar deseribes
those schools as "part af tho contiming process of recruiting and training

new youthful forces for leadership in the CP.*

(n) The Jofferson -chool cf vocia. -ccne3 »

This is the bizcoct of the US schools amd anrols 3,000
stuseats anmally at its location im Uow York on the -ivamie of tho
Apericas, Sntrance requiramants do not exist and foes aro very low
Students are obtained fron tho Party (bout half of then carry party
curds) and "front" groups. Advertising, articles in the party press,
and word-of—nouth promotion in legitimate universzitics and unions are
used to attract other studants.

2. Coanmnist Party Organizaticn.

The Communist Party is a well-dtscipline, higily trained elite
corps of revolutionaries who seok to cain and maintain control of a
sovorment through either leal and parlianentary, or subversive and re-
volutionary nethods.

The Comrmmist Party is the "vanguard", the "organized detachnant” of
the prolotariat. Ita purpose is to exorcise "4.0. systastic an) organized
leadorsitip in the strugzle of thavorking classe" Tt recognizes no
autiority other than its om. This concept of a single, all-poarf party
is the nacation of party in the Western danocratiic, porlianentary sense
of the vord. But in a Commnisi state only the party of Larx, Lenin, and ~
Stalin is fit to forge the tay to tho classles< society of tho Putures

The Party can fulfill its various taals only,

a - m. . eif it 4s organized in the mst centralised mamor, only
if iron discipline bordering on military disciplins prevails

ir ity Gn@ Sito Forty conver is = peveriul ono
autioritetive or an, wielding wide powers, and
enjoyin:s tho universal conficence of tho nenbers
of the party." (Lenin, 2)
(11 Commnist parties, tuorefore, adhere to strict discipline and
follow certain basic principles of oryanization, viiich were set
forth by Lenin and interpreted by Stalin.
ao Principles of Orzanizations
(1) "Denocratic Contralisn''.
The cardinal princinle according to wich the Party is
crganized is described officially as "democratic cemtralian." This
is doctrines, expounded by Lenin when the Party mas still an undersround,
revolutionary organization, anphasized the necessity for centralized
control, “democracy” enerting hen the Party becane lezale then fres
elections by ballet could cstermine the policy of the ational Porty
Congress, This, however, is as faras the "democratic process" Coss’
the decision of the majority of tho panbers of the Uauional Party
Con:ress is binding upon all, no question can be, or is, entertained.
After a decision has beo: reached, no vocal minority is permitted. The
; Central Committee prescribes the nethods to be followed in elections:
ve and usually restricts the voting to a single list af "approvod" nominees,

oven in the election by the congress of narbars of the Central Corrittee.

it is :t-arent thet an “deawersey" within the Peart; is ever-
3 .céa.ca Ut the rersonm.l contri of its leacers cmd by the tre: encous
sertreLizatieon cf ;o.er The rurtcse cf this centrilization has been

suv arized as follows:

In order to functicn ;rcperly and to juide the : asses
systeitically, the arty sust le crgunized cn the ;rincirle

ef centralism, havin: une set cf rules uns uniforn larty

disei; line, one le:dine ort.n —— the Party Con ‘ress, und in

the intervals between con:re.ses --- the Central Co:sittee of

the Party, the rincrity must bubmit to the cajority, the vorious
organizaticns must subcit to the centre, and lower cr sanizations
40 hicher ortunizations. Failin: these conditicns, the ;arty of
the workin> class cuurnot be a real party and curnot carr; out its
tasks in guiding the class. ~

(T} Disciz:line,

Co-runists luve beer tiuucht tc believe that tloir Party can

oun effective instrumant for the wiruin> of the proletirian revciue

we med

ticn only if "unity of will" vrevails, nie that this cannot ve acideved

without the practice of "iron uisci: line" cron: lurty mercbers. Stalin

— has elaborated this princi,le es f[cllous:

n .. eiron diseinlinc., . .presup:oses ecnscicus one voluntary
sub-issicn, for only conscicus Ciscipline cun be truly iron
discipline, Put after « contest of cpdnion has been closed,
4a after criticism has beer exhausted snd a decisicn has been
arrived nt, unity of will und unity ef action of 311] ITurty
i -erbers are the necessary cordition without which neither the
; Party unity nor ircn discisline in the Party is ecnceivable."

If "tron ciseiyline" c'd not prevall, 2:.ctions yould devolop, resultinz in

.the breakine up of the unity of sill, the weakenin> and disintecraticn

rei
fa Ls .

wa

- pf

wae To EEE Ps! At

Discipline is .aiptaines tr means of specific punishzents for
particular infractions of varty statutes and directives. For such breectes,
for non-payment of dues, mishanllin: cf funds, or for conduct reflecting
adversely on the Party, a werber nay te punished by reprisand, susrensicn
from cf fice or merberstip, or by expulsion.

The executive eee of the crsanizaticn concerned decides
such cases, but convicted menters may ay;eal to the next higher echelon.
Cniv the Central Comittee can order expulsion; its decisicn my te appealed
tc the Central Cocmission or to the National Congress.

wore important and altogether more persuasive is the
disciplinary influence exerted by those agencies thut maintain a constant
surveillance of 411 the activities, asscciations, ethics, and ideolosical
attitudes of all ~erbers. This work, whether it be done ty cuch regularly
constituted Party organs as the Control Commissicns, or vy such informs}
avents as the militants, "watchers," and travelins inspectors, preserves the
Party's purity arainst deviationisiz, and its intecrity azainst factionzlism.

(3) The Cadre irinciyle.

One cf the most important aixs of the Conmmunist Party is tc
develop a hifhiy trained and reliable cudre. A cadre is: small nucleus of
fully indootrinated, trusted members who have a monopoly of policy-making

and organizational direction. Althoush this "living framework" is

— ~ 89115 418

ee

” eer omg Kn Fae
a dete TP ‘ oe
Pesca’ © cit eee Gi a aias 2)

constantly revitalized throuvh = + ret lacerent cf vic cerkers, it is
su(lleiently stable to assure crounizaticral centincity, ideclo-ical
orthcdoxy, and discipline.

b. Organizational Structure.

The pattern of organization of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union has, with slisht modifications, been iitposed on all other Communist
partigs.

The basic unit in the hierarchy is s group of at lezst three
reliable censbers, known as “cells,” or "primary purty crgans." Organized
in factory, mine, village, cooperative farm or university, these bodies are
charved with the duty of propagating the ideas anil policies of the Farty.
Althouzh fror the cell level upward the committees and conzresses are
elective, each organ, elected by those im ecdiately beneath it, hes full
power over its subordin.tes. Thus, while there is the arpearance of
representative expression, the lower Party organs actuilly serve as
ecrvenient instruments for carryinz out the "party line."

The leading crgans of an overt national party are: the !.etional
Party Conctess, Central Committee, Control Cornissica, Political Rureau
(Politburc), sometines an Urganization Bureau (Orsburo), and a Secretariat
controllins the activities of a rroup of adcinistrutive depurt ents

(1) The Nationa? Party Concress is the supreme crgan cf the harty.
Its delecates are elected by pau cna Wekepanees in proportion to the

numerical and strateric importance of each resion, and according t. rules and

240s
a

eye Fey ee ae wae poe ee
ae hae eg es ese ae as Oo mata
fe oa 7 rs aa .

=

+

Q)

> the Sentrsel Cocrittee. The statutes of ms
provide for . censress every two yecrs, but the actual convocation by the
Central ccrittee 1s usually much less irecuent. (The last All-Unicn
Concress cf the CPSU was in 1939.)

(Zz) The Central Comittee’ is the leading organ of the Party ir

the intervals between Conpresses. Numberinc between 25 and & members, plus
alternates (or candidates, whe have a ccensultative vote only, the CC is
res.onsible for the elaboration of the Party policy, the enforcerent of the
statutes, and the execution of the prorran - in shert, for the whole
operation of the Party. It directs its political and organizaticna? work,
controls its finances, and represents the l’arty in its dealings with non-
Communist organizations. The CC comprises most of the important Party

.

leaders. and is hence the arena in voick siznificant verscnal struzgles and
> 12 ui

clashes cn policy cecur.
Because of ita size, the CC is called into plenary session by
the Politburo only two or three times a year. Between sessions, the Parvy
4s run ty the thecretically subordinate podies of the Central Committee, tne
Politburo, and the Secretariat, which ere elected from the CC menbersnip
_ In addition to its ceneral policy-makine and executive functions,

the CC convokes national congresses and conferences and subrits to these

conzresses the program which the Politburo has drafted. Finally, the CC is

* Hay also be called the "National Comnittee," as it is in the US and Brezad.

responsible for the caintenance of discipline and the decizion to expel acy
Party merber. lost of the work put cut in the name of the Central Committee
4s actually done by otrer bodies such as the Politburo, Secretariat, anc
Org>uro.

(3) The Political Bureau Politburo (sometimes called Executive

Comittee, Dircctorate, National Board) consists of e few top leaders who
really direct the Party’.

Specificielly, the Politburo 4s charred by the CC with the direction
ef party affairs in the intervals between sessions of the sarzer body. It
$s responsible for the preparation and supervision of the political line.
Venbers of the Folitburo habitually assume direct supervision over the
“cst ispertent adrinistrative jerartrents cf tre secretariat. Occasionally,
as in Caine, Jaran, and Yuscsiavia, smaller orginizaticr.al univs j.ave been
formed within the rolitburo.

(4) The Grpani saticr Bureau Orgbure, when it exists (as it does in
the USSR, Pulgaria, and Italy}, ic technicaily a subcornittee of the Central
Comittee. It is responsible for the elaboraticn and promulgation of the
Party's organizational policies. The most important function of the Orgburo
4s to supervise the selection, traininc, and assipnnent of functionaries
throughout the Party.

Vany national Communist parties apparently omit vhe Orgburo.

aay eee -

+

Ir wat case, policies affectinc orfaniz tion are prebably deterrined ky the
Politburo, and the current business of organization is handled by the
Orcenization Department of the Secretariat.

(5) The Central Control Commission 4s elected in mst ccuntries by
the National Concress, and supervises the raintenance of discipline and the
execution of the Party line. Its importance is itibriehaiay very creat.

In the CPSU the Control Commission operates through boards on the top levels
of all Party and governmental interests; it has froups for heavy industry,
licht industry, naval affairs, food und trade, education and public health,
foreign relations, and many others. The boards ensure the er.forcement of
Party decisions, investirate the work of all Party organizations, and
presecute those accused cf violations of Party statutes and discipline.

In some parties the power of the Sentral Control Commission is
apparently linited. It may be charged merely with financial supervision. In
Italy, it a: parently serves as & court of ajseal from decisions of lover
party crganizctions. In any event, sirce the probler. cf security is a
delicate one and an internal security systen is nenerally unrerular, the wOrkK
of the Control Cormission is always carouflaged.

(6) The Secretariat consists cf a Secretary General and cone or two
Vice-Secretaries elected by the National Congress. It directs the current

administrative business of the Party-

Por the administration of specific areas of Party interest, the

dG <

.
fe

Secretarist tiintains Valious ue arinents, which Full orcauly ante tac eate ori.
trose cene2rned with the internal effeirs of the Fartr, sucn a5 finances and
ovranization, and those which advdrister Party affairs touching the life of
the ecuntry, such as labor, africulture and acitation-propazanda.

The Secretary-General, because of his ciose supervision of all
Party activities, is usually the mest powerful of its leadens. Stalin dren
his initial authority from this source. The Secretary, as well as the heads
of the most important aduinistrative departments, is always a member of the
Politburo.

(7) he Administrative Departments, which are most cbviously

essential to the operation of the party machine and the achievement of its
political program are:
{e) Orranizetion,

This departrent is responsible for aduinistrative
auestions surroundine the establishment, reorganizaticn, reallocation, de
activation, and recsroupin~ cf Party organizations; also, for the machinery
and technijues of recruitment, selection, distribution, and pronotior. of
functionaries. \then a Party has no Cadre Department, as is usually the case,
the Organization Department also handles personnel matters.

Organizational matters invclve not only the Farty itself,
but the structure and activities of auxiliaries, fronts, and fractions as

well. The Crganiz:tion Department must work very closely with other

adidnistretive departoents (e.g., Youth, somen's, Labor, Acitprop), which are

co teined with various Party Front and auxiliary creups, in craer to ¢.7-,
cut tre Party prosram and to draw as many sympathizers into the Party orbit
23 yocsible .

(b) Cadre.

Althouch every Conmunist Party hes its cadre, rost perties
have re separate cadre departrent. when one exists, it has two general
functions: (1) it is responsible for the collecticn and collation of
perscnnel statistics of the Party; (2) it ;lays a larze part in the selection,
train’n7, and prometicn of functionaries in the maintenance of rarty esprit.

(c) Agitation and Propaganda; Sgitprou*

This derartment is resronsible for the preperation and
disserinetion cf actitprop materials and procrans on a national scale (such
as the rational Party newspcrers) and to lower Party crzans, whose aritrrop
work the nationsl derartrent supervises. its activities inc_ude the
cr-anicin? ant supervisicn of the Party schoo. syste~, and the publication of
ve ‘jous varity newspapers and other rrinted matter.

Other edrinistrative depurtzents of considerable importance

clude !abor, Colonial Affairs, Finance, Youth, and women.

Subcrdinate to the central directinn rechinery are rerion,
district, and cell creunizations. The territorial organization reflects

closely that of the nation.l party.

ee
E In Communist terminolory, "acitation" refers to recruitment activities.
"Proparenda” refers to the continuous indocrination progras: for Party
members

; ~ 4b -

x ~~
é »
€- ‘ { »
‘
. ran

Awe

re enczeation. lor Secret and Under‘rcund Activities
T.. organization cf a Communist Party lends itself eceily te secret end
underzround activities. The secret activities, arisine fren and conditicned
by the nature of the party's general approach to politics] questions, are
woven into the normal and cvert activities of the Party and are usually
carried on within the fracework of the Party's overt organization. ‘hen a
Co:runist Party is outlawed, its underground activities can be undertaker.
through the existing forms of organization to illegal conditions.
a. Organization for Secret Activities.

The secret activities of Communists are facilitated by certain

characteristics inherent in the crganizational structure of all Comuunist

Parties:
(lL) The Cadre Principle.

The cadres hold the prcfessionsl secrets of the Party anc uce
the lower Party rank and file as mere irstruzents in carryine our their
policy. Thus, even under conditicns cf le-ality, the sisnificant uspects
of Party work are tightly sealed off fre:. the rest of the Party.

(2) Intra-Party Police Organs.

Communist Parties cenerally raintain intra-Party police organs,
which are frequently identical with the Cadre Department and the Control
Commission, and which are designed to preserve ideolocical and security
control. Thus there usually exists a confidential corps cf Party "detectives"

who perform counter-espionage duties. Clearly, the existence of such a Farty

eA
a ea ag

aur >

F

pelice Zerea must be conce:led, not oniy to prevert Knowledge cf the extent
to which these activities leak in to non-Party scurces, but also to aviid
alar:nin” Party members.

(3) Front Organizations.
The relationship of the activities of a Communist party

to its front and auxiliary organizations is in many ways parallel tc the
relationship of the cadre to the party. Both relationships involve a
high: trained select group, who through this training and the use of secrecy
maintain control over the respective larrer organization. A Cormunist party
constantly directs its fractions, i.e. amall units of party members, into
non—Commnist mas8 organizations in an attempt to gain control of the
organizaticn. In all these cases of penetration the major problem is to
concezl Party control and influence over the fronts, [ractions, and otner
groups.
It is thus apparent that the secret activities of
Cozmunist parties are an orginic part of Communist political met>ods. They
rest cn the Party's attempt to maintain internal control, and tc convert part
of the rasses to Cormunism without actually preaching it.
b. Organization for Underground Activities.

4 Communist Party prefers to operate as a legal political party in

order that it may better carry on propaganda and recruitment. It will, there-

fore, firht desperately to maiftain its legal status, and, once driven under

ground, will make every effort to regain legitimacy... shen it is outlawed,

however, it is not particularly handicapped because the sare forn of

C a oa
: af
orc nization serves for beth legal and {llenal ccnditions and because tre
cad-es cen be trusted te undergrceuno activities.
(1) Discicline and Security.

The maintenance of disciplines and security by special
Party organs (Control Commission, Cadre Commission, and other specialized
sections) is a traditional feature of Party organization which can be
conveniently adapted to underground conditions. (The main factor which
endancers the successful preservation of discipline and security in the Party
underground is that, in the course of extremely severe police eetion, morale
may disintegrate and resu.t in factionalism, mass defections, and
penetreticns.)

Discipline under ilierai conditions zeans not cmly strict
adherence to the political and organizational direction cf the center, but
also riforous conformity with underground security rules governins the
* conspiratorial behavior of cadre and militants. A functionary who has be-

trayed Party secrets under severe police pressure 43 punished by the

competent organs of the Party for a breach of discipline,with no regard for

5 pee.

3 extenuating circumstances.
oe ae. (2) Cell Systez.
ee : Systomatic exploitation of the cell member's normal pati tee
ok ss gide contacts for propaganda and recruitment purposes is an all-important

ee a ieee task when the Party is underground, The importance of illegal ceil activity
% 2 4 " we cn ae ae ie
oy is intensified by the fact that internediate echelons are usuelly reduced to”

~

sKe_¢blons; hence, Lor “-ractice purpoces tre Party unlercsroune Cheer

consists erly cl the ce ter and the numercus "front line” cell crgenizations.
(3) Conspiratorial bxperience.
Throich the Comintern, the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union has shered the organizational policy of all foreign Cormunist Parties,
and has passed on its cwn considerable experience in undergrcund work.
Throughout the sears of its existence, the Comintern exhorted and oblive:
its sections to prepare adeyuately for periods of §llerality. The conditions
created by Nazi occupation in World war Il contributed much to the under-
standing of the fundamental problems of illegal activity.
c. Organizetional Problems: Adjustment tc Illegal Conditions.
The party going underground must find means of carrying on
raxirun activities without risking exposure to the police. To this end, a
reorganization of the bureaucratic apparatus is necessary.
(1) Reduction of party Apparatus.
The extent of reorganization is deterzined by the size of
the jegal Party, the severity of repressive acticn upon it, and reneral
policy considerations. A srall or underdeveloped Party apparatus cannot
be drastically reduced; a mass Parfy my find it necessary to run the

risk of preserving an extensive organization. Within the limits of such

considerations, action nay be take along the following lines:

|

Sepsolidztien ef territeriwvt Orzanizations .

The territcrlal orgenizstion of the Party, particularly
in a large ccuntry, can be conveniently censolidated and reduced. Staff
persenne. ay then be utilized with creeter econcry, and the Party may
eoneantrate on cormunications with the center. All levels of territorial
orrar ization (region, district, subdistrict and section) may be reduced
simply through unification of the various steff comrunds, and the combining
of their orizinal areas of jurisdiction.

The Party center may te less affected by the rrocess of
consolidation, since a large Party may ned a laree central orcanization.
Gn the cell level, consolidation is not seaeiean although for security
reasons, cells must be broken up into sxzll units if they are te escare
police attenticn. Hence, at the same tine that territorial orzanizations
may decrease in nuzber or disappear altocether, the nutber of cell orsaniz2-
tions in the Party underground my Grow.

(2. Reduction of Staffs.
In addition to the ccnsolidation of territorial organiza-

ticns, the number of staff positions throuchout the Party is usually re-
duced in the underground. The local Party committees are apparent ly

strongly affected by this. According to a Cosintern 4nstruction, the

committees of illesel Parties should, as a rule, consist of no -cre than

on ae a

five ~ecple each and « secretary should tine the place of the executive

fp

bureau, in practice, the compesition of dileval Fart: cormittees appee-ss
tc be more elastiz, depending om preveilings conditions. Sometimes they
are eliminated entirely and the actual erganizational and political work is
assirned to the executive-administrative apparatus.

(4) The Command Function: The Triad System.

Consolidation of territorial organizations anc reduction
of staff personnel can, in some cases, be corbines with a special organiza-
tion of the cogssand function observable only in underground Parties.
ote Acecrdinz to this system, groups of three functionaries may be established

at all echelons, froa the national down tc the cell level, with the two-fold
responsibility cf supervising and directin: the rarty work, and rainteining
vertical liniscn ameng then. In this latter capacity the trizds represent
the live chein ci co-z and in the illezal Party. thenever cvserved, these
trisds nave consisted of specialistsfor: (a) political werk; (b) organiza-
tionel protiams; and (c) agitation and rropaganda for labor union work.
The triads, honever, do not necessarily replace whetever
other Party organizations may remain effective. They are soretines merely
‘ superitposed on the illeral Party machiinery in order to direct pclicy.
Triads at national and territorial leveis have been known to direct the work
of the various administrative and executive departrents and cormissions of

the Party. However, it carnot be clearly determined at present to what ex-

- oe

-}. ... tent the national triad may combine executive comand with policy-making

ngittae 5. oy

+ ee. © ropa,
ee

,
 —_'.

.

ruretious, Tneoreticully it remains res onvible tc the Felitturo, but in
fact it ray becore the actual leadership of the Party. The triad ;rinc:;~2
may been be applied to ceil organization. Cells can be censtituted as three-
man croups, each member recruiting and directing another rroup of three who
are not cell mexbers and who comprise sub-cell basic units.

The triad represents an effective concentraticn of the
cor-and function in the hands of 2 comparatively few individuals. It
permits greater centralization and corpartmentalization.

(5) Compartmentalization.

Waintenance of tight compartmentalization is an crganiza-
tion and security problem of the first order, since it is necessary to pre-
vent the police from learnins tco much when Party members or functionaries
are arrested. Compartmentalization is applied to Party operaticns as
follors:

(2) Party and Military Branch.

“henever an underrround Party is in a position to create
a military organization, the latter's staff composition is kept distinct
fron the Perty's political mechanism, The two structures merely coordinate
on policy and recruitrent problems at their hichest echelons.

(bo) Party and auxiliary (Front) Orgsnizaticns.
As in legal periods, various Party auxiliaries rerain.

connected with the Party through interlocking staff personnel only. They

_ function as independently as possible.

(c) Party and auxili Tlleral Creunizaticns.

Party orfanizations, or tears for the performance of
suck speciulized tasks as espionage, sabotace, clandestine penetration
of police and other government agencies, and liquidation and terror
groups, are established as largely independent and self-contained groups
even in legal periods. They are maintained on this basis in tines of
dilegality.

“ (d) Internal Party Compartmentel ization.
within the political mechanism of the Party proper, the

desired effect can be achieved by the following measures:

(i) Elimination of horizontal liaison. No cell and no
territorial organization is permitted to maintain contact with any other
Party orgen operating on the same level. Liaison mav only be ccncucted
vertically with the designated functionary of the superior Party
organization, ahose task it is to direct the lower organizations under
his jurisdiction.

(44) Restriction of contacts. The fewer comrades a
functionary knows and meets in the course of his work, the better.

(4ii) Functional restrictions. An attempt is made to
ie : define closely the job of each functionary and t. prevent hic from learning
anything pertaining directly to his work.

(6) lection of Party Committees.
qe The reorganization applied to the illegal Party organization

‘may not always be extensive, and the direction of the Party may actually
: - lithe ot F * le, 7 - Dea ete. eee wh

i>
*

Li- in the hinds of the raticnal ana territcrial committees and their
adviristrative crsans. ‘hen this is the case, the election cf Party
co.mittees represents an organizational problem. The Comintern acvised
» its merber Parties that in an undercround situation Party elections
should take place in restricted conferences and should be conducted in such
a way that even the conference mexbers would not know ok was elected.
(a) Election cf Central Comrittees.

Electing a CC at a conference abroad is one way of

circumventing anti-Communist laws. Anotier possible way is convcking &

amaller national conference.

(b) Territorial Party Committees Electoral Commissions.

There is some evidence that special electoral commissions
are created under illegal conditions for the purpose of electing members
of territorial Party Committees.

(ce) Co-optation.
Co-optation is the process whereby merbers of a

specific committee (e.g., Central Committee) appoint Party members to

vacancies of that committee without the usual party elections.

(7) Party Organizations Abroad.

Wien repressive measures become severe, the central Party

_oxgarms and special support centers often are established abroad end wrk

from the outside into the "illegal" territory. The types of central
ee : cS Sage

2

G: -cigations treseferrec tc, or set ur on, foreigr yoil are:

(a) Central Cormzittes znd Central Departments.

The Sentral Committee and its adzinistrative-executive
apparatus (Politburo, Secretariat, Separtmsents, Control Commission) may
be partizlly or ccnpletely transferred. The central organs abroad rust
pertorm not only 4s co:saand function but must also provide the Party at
nev with proparanda and indoctrination mater‘al, printinz equipment,
funds, specialists in underground work, a central repository for files and
archives, trainins facilities fer tne cadre, conrunicaticn services, ams
and ammunition, safe haven, and pnencat suport for exiled Party workers.
In short, the central Party crganization abroad becomes the chief
operaticnel support center for the home Party. (It mist therefore
frequently create new types of auxiliary and administrative organizations.)

(b) Foreicn Bureau
There is evidence that in some instances a Foreign

Bureau has been set up. This is a central administrative-executive erercy
charged with the direction of support functions such as corrunications,
production, and distribution of press propaganda. thile, theoretically,
the supervision of the Foreign Bureau rests with the Central Comittee, =

there have been cases where the Bureaus have been the real directing

centers.
aS ie
re a Se ee a Sy py S ;

§

(c) Rericnal Support Centers
The apperatus of the Central Committee abroad may

preve unable to handle all its workload, particularly shen it must
extend into a country with long frontiers. Consequently, the command
and suppert function may have tc be decentralized, and several support
centers, operating from vatious countries into sectors of the horeland,
may be created. Coordination with the Central Committee may be effected
through the assignment of CC members to the regional centers.

(d) Party Organizations for Emigrants.

' Special Party organizations for exiled Communists my
be created. They render assistance to exiles and carry out the in-
doctrination and trainin= functions of basic Party organizations. They
also furnish personnel for special underground assignments (sburiens,.
border muides and the like.)

Party organizations for emifrants should not be confused
with front organizaticns created b: the Party abroad. The latter, some-
times set up instead of special Party organizations for emigrants, serve
political propazanda purposes from which the home Party may benefit. They
are convenient money-raising instruments for the Party under the pretext
furnished by the Front's ostensitle purposes.

(e) Special Service Organizations.

The party Center abroad usually has to create special

organs to facilitate communications with the horeland. Communications may

a —_

aatipe treeul) 4 berderseressiar "achances. eiteer uncer Clnest
contro of the center cr carirulated by a reriom2 sucport station. The
preductic:, of printed materials and their distribution via special
communication routes may have to be entrusted to a separate organization,
ugu°tly referred to as a Technical Service or Apparatus.
4. avxiliary Organizations.

én auxiliary Conmunist organization is one whose contrcl by the
Party is usually disguised by placing prominent non-Commnists, or those
whe scrupulously disguise their party affiliations, in the nominal
positions of leadership.

Communist auxiliary organizations comprise all the front organizations
which attexpt to eroup together large nurbers of social, economic, and
political segments of a population to further Comunist aims. There are,
of course, varying degrees of Communist control of these units. any
organizations exist which contain Communist membership, but, for the
most part, are not controlled by the Party. Only those organizations
which are utilized by the Communist Party for major Party activities will
be considered in this discussion of auxiliary organizations.

Communist parties, whether weak or stronc, place ereat emphasis on
setting up and utilizing auxiliary organizations. For a weak party, the
auxiliary groups serve prizarily to further Communist propaganda, to

acquaint particular elerents of the population nith the Communist progran,

and to recruit outstandinz individuals for membership in the party. In

a stronp party, the front groups will actively campaign for Commmists tc
be elected to parliamentary positions and will contribute funds for the

printing of Communist propapanda.

= “ It has become increasincly difficult for the Communists to disruise
“3 their control of these organizations. The general public is now much

S better acquainted with the Comminist program and can identify at least the
a pro.inent Communist leaders. The usefulness for Communist purposes, how
e ever, does not end when an organization has been "unmasked." Although

non-Cormunist adnerents to such slogans as "peace" and "labor unity", may

meee ad a so =
ee: the enthusiastic activitics of the front groups stimulate at

Vie} mG least the confirmed Communists to greater activity. : coum ro ‘
The most useful classification of auxiliary orzanizations is one which
lists them according to groups of population to wh.ch they appeal. Iiost
of the crganizations have both national and interntional counterparts but
for brevity only the international units are mentioied here.
a- Labor. |
2 By far the most important auxiliary groups which Commnists either

control or seek to control are the labor organisaticis. The Cocmnist-con- __

rere,

trolled World Federaticn of Trade Unions attempts to aeld both Communist

ey a : and non—Commnist unions into a cohesive unit to suppert Soviet Poleey ee

fe a the wit! rdranal of the Western non-Communist uniors from the en, ‘ ie
Doce eR ES are

ie niet sounitaes have inoreased their activities in «hat they “call th

ites

“Rg
AES

Trucs Departments: international orcanizations cf rorkers by crafts. Tous,
while the British TUC has discontinued its affiliation with the FTL, the
“wPTU continues to attempt to establish contact with Rritish labor through
affiliation of British metal workers, lumber workers, and others with
appropri ate "international trade departments." Further dusthientional
developrent of the WFTU is indicated by the establishment of a permanent

liaison presently in Peiping, to facilitate Communist penetration into the
Far East.

ee : d. Intellectuals.

The past year has witnessed a revival of Communist interest an

4ntellectuals. In the fall of 1948 in Poland, the et ‘organizers onan .~. ™
international level, as many intellectuals as would give active or paccige :
suprort to the propaganda line of the Soviet Union. Superimposed on this
organization of intellectuals has been the Soviet "peace propaganda

cazpaign,” which has led to the formation of Commnist~controlled national
"reace comittees," with a directing "Liaison Bureau" in Paris. So far,

the peace congresses (heavily attended by intellectuals) and the peace

committess have been used primarily as propaganda vehicles in an attempt

o, ‘ 5
: ca

to recoup the recent Soviet Losses in European mass support.

Ly

i ey eerceee eae

oe c. Other Organisations.
Se re e
ie “ Other organizations now sonteoiiea by the Soviet Union which

%

ae es a
ee exploit various social groupe are the vorld Federation of Democratic ‘Youth,

eo

4 ae
oS
afi the Injernat ional Federation of Democratic Women, the International... 2.

bs ; . we diy a ‘ae oh ais spate oe ana i ete ad ; cf

2 xa awe

ne a
(9 : Bee ae ca ee Pare ae

Ae , can

Acscelation ef Decocretic Jurists and the isterrational Organization cf
Journalists. Additionally, in certain ares, Cormunists have attexrpted
te organize the peasantry, although since the war these national organiza-

ticns have never been aualgamted into an international unit.

Front organizations of this type play an important part in the
consolidation of Communist power. Cormunist Party membership in countries
with Commnist regime mst be kept relativey small, with a high degree of
political consciousness and activity. Front groupe can penetrate into
groups who engare in little political activity, acquainting then with the
Commnist program and ferreting ‘out possible dissidents. Recently, an in- ~
crease in front work, particularly with regard to women, labor, stoasnt;
and peasant groups, has been noted in the Far East, partly to aid in the

ecsnsolidation of the Chinese Cormunist regime, and partly to develop

avenues of contact with Far tastern non~-Communist areas.

III, ComUnIST TATTICS (General)

l. Political.

' ae Parliamentary Maneuvers.

a. Yor the Communists, as for the Nasis, oarticipation in a freely

elected pa¥itacort has always been nrimarily for the purpose of sub-
verting democratic government. In pre-Hitlerite Germany the Commnists

- . often combined with the Nasis in the Keichstsg and the Prussian Diet

= to cause situations which would efacrentt the parliamentary system and

| hasten its eteruperees At the sane ‘tine they used the parliamentary ~

rostrum as a principal stage from which to advertise their aa end

program.

Postwar Czechoslovakia affords an illustration of the Communist
attitude tovard, andexploitation of, narliamentary system. Csechoslovak.
Communists first demonstreted their essential contempt for parliamentary
government by contriving to delay the trensition to parliamentary pro~
cesses for nerrly six months after liberation of the country, in order to
na : _- prolong the eme-gency systen of povernment by decree, This pve then Ree

more opportunity ‘o push mirougn certriin parts of their propram. They

Bors 2 clas permitted the convocation of a “Provisd onal eae Assenbly on 26 October

Ae:

,

aghs or ly Pree President banee had warned ce that he would sign no more
oe dey Eade teoataed te She

eee cfter 2 Seteanaes * 3 ete etme oo Me,

Pee . _ Fheir attitud tova liamenta vebLons waits

a Pe BO og ty rd Pe ae elev eee!

on the eve of the first nostwar election which was held 26 May 196.

For the purpose of intimid-ting the electorate with a reminder of
Soviet power to intervene, they were party to a plan to permit the
povenent of a lerpe body of Red Army troops across Czechoslovakia from
Austria to Cermany on 22 May. The plan did not succeed because
President Benes, upon learning of it, acted firmly to cancel it.
Communist unwillingness to acquiesce is the free trend of the electorate
was still nore strongly demonstrated in the February 1948 coup, which
found much of its 4mmedicte motivation in an anticipated decline of Com
munist strength in the imminent elections-—«a development which the

coup forestelled.

During the two-year life of parliamentary government (19446~19L8),
the Communists often attempted to use extra-legal end extra-parliamenta ry
means to force the adoption of lorislative measures which would strengthen
their hold on the country. An example of this was the attempt of tha
Comunist~controlled Ministry of Apriculture in the winter of 19l6 to
force the edoption of six decrees designed to increase state control
over farsers and pave the way for Collectivization. Knowing that these
decrees would be blocked by the non-Commmnist parties, Lhe Ministry
distributed drefts of them to local Communist-controlled branches of the

United Farmers’ Ansociation before introducing them in the National

Assembly, in order to generate ®popular® pressure for their adoption.
oy a

= 62 =

Py we
Pris

-- a psa G

At that. time the Assembly was still powerful enough !..” defy such

Communist tactics, and its Agricultural Committees refused to con=

sider the decrees and censured the Minister for resorting to "uncon~

stitutional action." Thereupon, at the instiration of the ministry,

Communist—doninated farmers’ commissions made protests to the Assembly

in person in an attempt to force the latter to reverse its stand.

bo United Front Tactics.
Postwar Czechoslovakian history similarly illustretes Communist

united front tactics, The Czechoslovak united front was primarily a
ae : Communist creation, though the other parties agreed to it. Creation of
fe: such a front was insisted upon by the Czech Communist leaders in Moscow
at the time of President Benes’ first visit to the Soviet capital in
December 1543, when the groundwork was laid for a postwar poverment
of both the Moscow and London emigre groups. The Commnists' ulterior
aim in insisting upon @ united front was that of using it as a fneade
behind which to outmaneuver and eventually subvert the other parties,
In practice they also used it 28 an apparatus by which, through aktlled
manipulation, they could force their own minority demands upon the other
parties,

This was accomplished in the following mamer, Within the united

eg ges Seto) is overt ——
ORR MS Te Bs BRAS on
rhe ek RAR MAINE a ora eA ete,

Paki at ea aaa - : :

ws

C sw =

front (called National Front) of all the parties, the Commnists in-

duced the Social Democrats and the National Socialiste (the latter

reaily a liberal centrist party) to join with them in a narrower

coalition erlled the Socialist Bloc of Workers. Owing to the betrayal

of socialedemocracy by the left-wine Socialist leaders, headed by

FierJinger, the Social Democratic Party became completely subservient
= to the Communists, who were thereby able to outvote the National Socialists
_ in the Socialist Bloc. The decisions of the Bloc (actually Communist
| decisions) could then be presented to the other parties as the decisions
ae of the dominant bloc, so that the Communists were in a position to force
| their acceptance as part of the program of the entire National Front.

This strategy succeeded only part of the time, and in November

1947 the Commmists sought to creczte a more dependable majority for
themselves in the National Front. To this end they demanded the broaden-
ing of the Front to include representatives of political organizations
other than parties—-namely the trode unions, the youth movement, the
farmers‘ union, and the pertisans. This proposal was vetoed at that
tims by the other parties.

So Coalition Tactics. |

oe 8 Since the war Canmunist tactics in participating in coalition

cas

fake -- ‘
* Wa ee

6 ~~ 6

govenxmonts hnve been determined by the internal situation in a piven
country and by the status of Soviet-Nestern relations. During and
iemediately following the war, Comvunist poliay, reflecting Soviot-
Westem amity, called for colleboration with other parties in coalition
governsents. Ag tension between the East and West has mounted, Con-
monists in comtries outside the Soviet orbit have been forced out of
the governments and into increasingly bitter opposition; within the
orbit, they have gradually dropped the fiction of coalition governmenta
ard have taken over more direct and exclusive control of these countries.
The Communists in many European oountries directly after the
wer participated in coalition governments. As a long-range objective they
hoped to gain enough strength to wrest control from the other parties;
short of that objective governmental participation offered them an
oppertunity to influence both internal sea foreicn policies to increase
their prestige and thus incrnase their mass support. At the same tins,
however, the Communists bolstered their position in lebor and front
sieandetieas end sometimes used extre-parliamentary pressure arainst the
governments in which they participated, These tactics, along wth the
increasing Erst-West tension, eventually forced the Commmists out of

every fovernment in Westem Europe.

In orbit countries where they have been in e minority, the
Communists have used bogus coalitions as the means to takes camtrol
of all branches of the government, eliminate political opponents,
transform the social and economic structures of the countries, build
up non-governmental structures to facilitate their control, and force
extremely pro-Soviet and anti-Nestem policies upon all other parties.

a. Merger of Parties, Bloos.

The ultimate foal of Communists is the single~party state under
Communist rule; elimination of competing parties is therefore of first con-
cem. ‘The means used vary from simply declaring all other parties abolished
(as in Russia in 1919) to various tricks for getting other parties to
rezounce their own independent functions (as has happened in most of the
Soviet satellite states since the war).

One of the first steps in the elimination strategy is usually
the applicetion of pressure on the other working-class parties to form
a united front with the Commmists and then to merge Wth them, With
the aid of betrayal by some of the other party leaders who are secretly
Communists, the merger ip accomplished amid a creat fanfare aynbolizing the
Sunification" of the working-class movement, In the resultant monolithic

party, the former Socialists are thereafter eliminated as unreliable

Or os

(which they are, insofar es they represent in part the patriotic
interests of their comtry in contmst to the Communists! invariabls
subordination of national interests to the requirements of the
power politics of the USSR), and the party leadership becomes, in
practice, completely Communists
This pattern of post~liberation relations between the Com

mmnists and the Scoial Democrats was followed most clearly in ths
case of Poland, where the Communists found the left-wing Socialist
leaders willing allies in 19); and inveigled the latter into becomirg
partnere in a united front for electoral purposes in November 196.
Then, in December 1918, aided by the capitulation of the weak Socialist
leader Cyranklewicsz arainst the wishes of the majority of his party,
the Coamunists maneuvered the Socialists into an agreement to merge,
which resulted in complete absorption of the party and relegetion of
most of its leaders to unimportant positions,
2. Mass Action.

Commmists rely on the support of large mmbers of the population
who are either non-mam*ers or relatively untreined party members inoapable
of playing leading roles in the insurrection. The technique of making

use of these elements to further Commmist ends is known as mass action.

-=6T=

wre

Cc ga a

Mass action my be both lepal and illoral, rnd in addition to the positive
Objective of promoting the Commmist cruse, it also has the negative aim
of deroralising sizeable segmonte of the population in order to neutrelize
what Conmunists term the "counter-revolutionary forces."

The types of mass action which Commmnista employ are extremely varied,
ranging from the simple distribution of propaganda leaflets to orpanization
of sqcads of armed street fighters directed to seize a strategic objective
fin the case of an armed insurrection. Types of mass action are grouped
under the following broad categories: Comunist-sposored Congresses
(Peace, Youth, Women); Communist propapandas demonstrations and picketing;
strikes, both political end economics generel strikes; astreet fighting and
riots: and preparatory techniques for the armed uprising.

Seldom d any of these types of miss action occur alone. Strikes are
some times conbined with demonstrations and with picketing and very often
lead to rioting and street fighting. Furthermore, few of the techniques
listed are exclusively Communistic, although Commmists more consistently
and entmsiastically make use of then.

The theory of mass action was developed in detail by Lenin, and has
been the subject of Commmist studies ever since. The Sixth World Congress

of the Third International (in 1928), for example, called for the pro-

letarian farty to lead the masses in a frontal attack apainst the bourgeois

CC m= o
state by the orpanization of mass action. "Such mass action includes
strikes, strikes in connection with demonstrations, strikes in connection
with armad demonstrations, and, finally, the generel strike canbined with
the armed rising against the povernment authority of the bourgeoisie.”

8. Demonstrations.

Communists regard danonstrationses en opportunity to call public
attention to their program, to train Party menbera in the discipline of
damenctration and in the technique of influencing large proups of ><ople,
and also ag @ morele builder for the Party members, giving them the
inpression that the Party is an active, fighting organizetion. Since all
Communist parties (with the exception of the Titoists and the Trotskyites)
are completely mubservient to the Soviet Union, most of the large-scale
demonstrations are staged primarily in support of some Soviet objective.
If it is @ demonstration motivated by purely local conditions, the scope
of the grievance is usally broadened to include support of the USSR,

‘Communists avoid direct identification ef the demonstration and .
the cause with the Commmnist Party, thus attracting to the demonstrations
those elenents who may sympathise with the objectives, but who are either

antagonistic or apathetic toward the Communist cause,

Demonstrations may be staged: (a) locally; (b) simultaneously
at esparated points of a larve metropolitan centers (c) nationally, in

fii :
en &>

ali orecs where the Cormunists have 3." 0° 4 strength tc organize the-:
or (ca) internationally, such 4s interrst.cn¢) "peace" demonstrations.
Once it has been decided that a demonstraticn will occur and its scope has
been determined, details such as slos:ns, posters, speeches, and
literature are selected by the Politburo of the respective CPs. These
decisions are made known to Party functionaries in the regional organiza-
tions, in the various labor unions, anc in front group factions. The
decisicns can be communicated by special mailed 4nstructions, by radio,
(either lepal or clandestine), or by publication in the party journals.
Instructions for the annual May Day demonstrations, for example, are
published in the Party journals several days before the date of the
deronstration. These announcements are written in conformity with the
plogans published (and broadcast) by the USSR. In executing instructions,
Communist leaders apply techniques learned by participaticn in similar
past deronstrations, or which they have been taaneat Party schools,
There are many considerations involved in the staring of a
Gemonstration. The issue or occasion must be decided upon, and the type
of cathering (parade, indoor or outdoor meeting) determined. The date
mist be selected to avcid competing events. If the deronstration is to
be an indoor affair, a hall mst be rented; if it is to be an outside

deronstration or a parade, a perrit must be secured from the proper police

authorities. Then, efforts must be divided between the careful financing

ey

8 ue Oe

and planning of the affair and the recruiting of "sass" attendance. Poth
of these mst be successfully accomplished 4f the denonstration is to be
successful. The fcrmer includes the development of a vell-belanced
propran of speakers, m:sic, or entertainment; the planning of decorations
for indoor gatherinzs; the preparation of sloran placards to be hung on
the walls or carried in the yarade. Imagination and a sense of dramatiza—
tion are necessary for effective mass appeal. Every available channel of
eye and ear mist be put to work to recruit an audience fron as runy
persons as possible; not only must the party be thorouchly aroused to action
but also the affiliated organizations mist be stimulated into participation.
If the affair is to be successful, attendance must be good, and
every part of the procram effective: the speakers, the cerenony, the cclor,
and the entire staging of the dramatic performance.
Specific Communist procedure for orgenization of a deronstration
is as follows: cell and district ieaders will asserble the dezonstratcrs
in their own neighborhoods. They will provide sufficient Conmrunist
literature and placards. The demonstrators will assemble and then parade
through the central part of the city. If a large nurber of organizations
participate, their places in the parade line will have been predetermined.
There are, of course, many adaptations of this technique dictated
by local conditions. In countries uhere the Comunist Party is weak, there

4s usually not more than one desisnated gathering center.

Pe ales

Local ecnditions ray allow the Somunists to stage disturbances
with the polices. If trouble is expected, Coomunists organize "defense
eroups," usually consisting of five men strategically placed either among
the crowd or at its edge. Their assignzent is to take advantage of the
action of the police, or to start fights with individual police officers
with the objective of urging the mass to overvhelm the police, This
occurs st often after incendiary speeches have aroused the anger of the
masses and prepared them for such action.

In such cases, instructions call for the disarming and disabling

of the police, The "defense proups” usually carry concealed light arms .
such as lead pipes, blackjacks, spiked sticks, or small firearrs. They
have been known to throw marbles under the horses cf the mounted police
and to slash the horses with tiny, concezled knives. Large numbers of
placards carried by deronstrators are nailed to solid sticks, for use
azuinst the police in cese of a riot or hostile anti-Communist elements.

The following examples typity instructions issued to Communist
defense  zroups:

Nignbers of the Defense Corps in ection at deronstrations must be
divided into eroups to surround the Communist speakers. The defense corps
members must face outward as they surround the speakers in order to be more
effective in corbatting the action of police officers trying tc cet to

the speakers.

2-72

ay a

Merbers faniliar with the use of clubs and brickbats are to arz.
thenselves with these and other blunt weapons but all members not
experienced in the use of such weepons are not to attempt to arr then
selves but to use their fists instead and should try to take the clubs
away froz the police officers and use ther on the police.

"Under no circumstances are clubs to be used in an ‘individualistic
or terroristic manrer.' Their sole use is for the defanse of the
speakers.

‘chen the members are hoisting the speakers to their shoulders,

they should see that they are close to a wall or somes background that sould

leave one side less to defend, also, the defense menbers are instructed
to divide themselves into two groups, one directly circling the speaker and
the other circling around the speakers at. little distance, the objective
beine to sork as many of the workers in between the twc defense sroups as
possible to form a sort of cushion and force these workers into action.

The moment the police make an attempt tc break up the meeting and seize
the speaker, the defense corps merbers are instructed to shout and yell. If
one group of police consisting of, suy, six officers, makes an attack

upon a speaker, a cordon of workers is supposed to stop the police groups

‘by getting. them sandwiched in between defense corps members. *
{

~ © gm" a

b. Picketinc.
Picketing is frequently used by the Communists as ea mass action

technique, particularly in the crowed urban areas of the United States.

If Commnists set up a picket line, the objective is chiefly propacanda —
to acquaint a segment of the population with the question at iesue and to
present forcefully the Communist point of view. Setting up of picket
lines also provides experience in cass action for local Communist

organizers — experience which may be useful in more disorderly situations
leter.

Attempts are made to establish picket lines in the mst
conspicuous places available. The local Commmist press usually announces
the tine and place of formation of the picket line and in an accompanying
article will give the slogans to be used. These slogans link the
particular local problem with the larger issues of the day, thus attempting
to secure the nidest possible following. Panphlets outlining the
Commnist procram are distributed to persons in the vicinity of the
picketing.

Commnists usually attempt to keep their picketing orderly end

only in rare instances does violence occur.

c. Street Fighting.

Communist paramilitary forces ordinarily are not adequately armed

to carry out large-scale street fighting. Therefore, in order to achieve
‘ >" 2 ae ies - igre

their objectives in the face ef forces possessing superior aris, they
rust resort to deceptive stratagems’

Communist planning for street fighting takes into account the
fact thet the Communist groups probably cannot echieve superiority in
arus and equipment, at least not at the outset of the insurrection, The
entire Communist paramilitary apparatus 4s organized so that arms may be
procured and hidden secretly. Preparation and training for street fighting
can take place under the guise of other organizational work. For example,
eluts will be organized which will engage in calisthenics, shooting, cross-
country marchins, map reading, or similar paramilitary activities. Under
the cover of the club functions, lectures are given on the use of firearns,
handgrenades, bombs, mines, and res. The calisthenic clubs teach ju-jitsu
and the disarming of police pickets.

(1) Organization.
Preparations for street fighting usually take place within

the existing Communist organization. Special secret sections of the Party
are often organized for specific tactical work in street fighting. For

example, in Germany, in the latter part of 1932, there nere such groups
desipnated es Z- and T-groups. The Z-groups entered hostile organizations

to pain information and influence from within. Intellivence 90 obtained

was used to plan attacks on opposition party meetings and demonstrations.

cf. I, 2, b.

vo oat
aol,

Cc hU—mMZ__ 6 —(~(®

T-sraryc2 (terreristic) more aan sabota.e missions. Thoy were forned
into wits of five oon tho ware to talo the initiative in street fizhting.
They were specialists in hit and run tactics designed to disrupt lazi
Lormaticnse

The T~zrovps wore asSignod special duties in street fisute. In
ono instance, thoy forned a roadblock a;ainst police intervention wile
2 stroct battle was in progress against the iacis. In another case, thay
mined a liasi parade route.

Cases are imomm in which T~groups placed snipers on roof tops
comarndtin; the route of a lazi parade. A barricade consisting of three
coal cars mas erected and then the Storm Troopers marched into the blind
alley ths snipers opened firo, A streetcar comandecred by the Conmmists
vas scrt -areening into the milling street tron.

(2) Procuring Arms,

Although Commmists do not oxpect to obtain arms and equipment
in e:lity with the forces which oppose then, nevartholess they are com
stantly attemptins to acquire naterial woich will aid then in insurrection.
Camminist rorkars at muitions factories, for eo: » Ta11 scmzcle out
enall qiintitics of arms and arus parts. ‘Those are then hidden, often

in the houses of individual Party nerbers. Bocause af the socurity problen,
Comminists rarely risk the storace of arns and ammunition in large, |
central supply amps. As the mocant for the insurrection approcches,
Coreniate siay 01d joverment supply dumps in an effort to obtain

.
VR é = sane Me gee pote 7 -
a . Wey in f®>. aa ee
. eC \
c . Bl .

Commnists aro extrensly ingenious in natcing arns fron readily
aS available soteriols. In Germany, for oxample, than firearms and os
ae plosives ware found to be ineffective, Commmiste used accesible chemicals.
“{ Instructions ware to pour strong amoniwi chloride, eulpturic acid, or
giniler chatioale on tho police as they jumped fren cars. Bottles filled
with cescline, benscls, or other inflammble Liquids vere throw into
ernored polise care. Gagoline~goaled burning rage ware also throw into

ee whicles. As the police cars attccpted to nove out of the area, the re-
ts gulting drafts fanned the flames. Porfurated nilk cans ware used to
oe spread conbustibles ingide of police stations, mmitipal buildings, ani
= the attackers along the strestse
. Biote of planned origin are usod by the Caxumists to make
impossible the legal functioning of the authorities, create axnitenent
eni mass hysteria, ani drive the mass instinct to destruction of public
and private property. The Cocremists will also use spontaneous riots
: vhenaver possible for their om purposes and will channel the rioters
accordingly» Plamed ricte will be uscd to cpread unrest ani to sabotage
“7 -.  ide axons foe the purpose of @lsoredtting the sutboritias in pow.
ras a nethods for ricte and strest fighting are not essentially
“| @iffenents If any Gistinction exists it 1s contained in these criteria!
Haq ™ © wioting say te, Tose viclent than street firhtinas Andivisdoate' who ane

a, ., ‘hotdng may nob mocsssarily use firearms; rioting is often nore localized

. a | EN ore
re F Lc =

rie 4 ab ch. 3 rhlotin:; is . teecumique «2c ominarily to create
May. wiete.g street fightin, -ay lave as ts objective the captu’s
: of ccr* on areas, buildings or ccaters, for specific Communist purposcs.
: -icts ary used by Commnists to call attertion to their cause,
ane end ic cvcote Hsorder and discor.:ont without rendering the Communist
rs

Part; -linernbie to physical and logal actdone Riots also sorve to

— . troin Gumzuists, ae vell as to erouse persons apathetic tovard the causes
ae . trrical Comunist-instizated riot occurred in Lonteviceo,

= 5 Uruguz, at the Trocadero theatre in 198. The pelice investigation

previi-: 2 good iMlustration of to preparation for an execution of 6
riot cii.ca teok place as a Commmist protest azainst the showing of the
2 5 - ;

a filn, the tron Ortain".

“0 gays before the riot. the leading nacbors of the Urucuayar.
Comaitic. Fart, ret at their heac--artors and outlined the plan of action.
Lt wl |. sited lust the disturbarse wes to take plsce on a saturday wisht

ang

a canter Scminist -led briaces sere to stroll along the sidewalks in

a6 the vliislt,y of% the theatre anc tian wore to concentrate in front of ube
ns tae@at>. 2. Ube agrecd hour, Gthor Cemmmiste care to station themselves

a Sree ae.

od ‘. .

Ss gerne Zs@ incident began when some of the spectators in the theater

= notdec a peretratinzly bad odor. At the same tins, two wonen and ane
= main le? their seats in the fourth row of the lower orchestra and hurried
‘5 Te

ae outeice. This was the signal a:reod upon. Aliost -imniodiately nore than.

ae
oy . ee 5 5 es bog

a7
‘aig ue 2 wa DOYgete who hae gtith..ned theaselyves i: front of wie
theatr.. . cuter ekevans Like "Dor.. tith Yankee i peria » “Long
Live tie vostes Gai ntl, and "Dasocracy -= Yes; ‘'ascasi -- Loe"

Fart of the group inside, “ze theatre created disorder and confusion
amen. the gneectators by stomping cavily on the ficor, and shouting and
vhistlin: leudk;. This tas synchronized vith similar action cutside the
theaire The mob broke into the auditorium and rushed through the
aisles s.ovting awd zesticvlating violontly. Uefore the police wore
able t: cuell the riot, the glass panels on tha doors at the antrance
had te.n broken, many scats had bean damaged, the rugs had bean burnod
with asic, and the screen had been dostroyed by a pail of pitch rich
vas tire ajainst it, Beneath the chaiss of the fourth row the police
later 7: ni esovexal small class tubes diuich contained whe residue of the
chezis:: vérch .enerated the odar..

t20ts require the congregation of sizeable groups of people, and,
thers”... an expscially vigilant solice force can usually prevent then
Ir, Chi oc, gor amoole, Curing tue depression, the police methods vere
auite -“tottive against Commmist agitators. there nolice neasures are
expeci:-., Commaiists try to conceal the fact that a larce croup of poople
is zeit: to congregate, usually by havin; enall croaps "wander" into the
eres. atoiving at precisely the same moment.”

“yontanzo1s riots, of course, cannot be ctopped by pre-arranged
“counter <2agures. A fev militant Comamists can turn a highly charged

Situati:” into a riot. Hence, in spito af highly vigilant police forces, ..

meas ot

au

Commmists oftan succeed in precipitating a nob disorder,

Commnist tactics are highly flexible. This is especially tros in
their instigation of riots, Therefore, no attempt has been made to exhaust
the situations thich nicht lead to Communist exploitation of potential mb

: violencey
a e- ‘tho Armad Uprising.

A Conaunist~inepired arned uprising may be carried out either inde=
ae pomently by Communist parties with little or no outedde help, or as an aid
a

to, or din consequence of, an advancing Red Arry.

7 In the larrist interpretation, armed uprising is the revolt of the

72 magses against a reactiomry regime, aimed st seizure of pover by the rev
“4 elutdonary ranks. It 1s, also, the first phase of civil mr. A differen-
tiation mst be made betveen armed revolt ani civil wr, During a revolt, it is
impossible to maintain a coherent lins of cemarcetion between the revolu~
tionarics and their opponents. The rsvolutionary groups are scattered, un-
equal in armenant, and not free from wavering elerents. The opposing
Spourgeocis"” feroes, being in control of police, armed forcos, and sources

ef supply, are in a far bettar position to create favorable conditions. On

the other hand, in a civil war the fronte would be more clearly dram, both
2° politically amd geographically.
ee ~ Before seiging power, the revolutionary elements do not prepare for

‘elvil var as such but for armed revolt, where the “front” is evoryrhere,

a ee , * s es

there both sides are threatened overyifero, or are supp>-rted on all
sides. Thorefore, armed revolt is not nerely the struzjlo betreen
two orczacized armies thich are isolated fron the rest of the population
but is rather a fight botween two scgnents of the entire population in
which there are no "outlookers"s all are participants: even woman, old
3 men, and childran.
| In his treatise on "Revolution and Countemticvolution,” Liarx

ie est forth the following rules for armed revoltt
3 1) An uprising should never be attenpted unless there is firm
a  gasolve to endure all its consequonces.
By 2) Once the revolt has started, the offansivo mst be taken ani
; ae action mst be resolute. Defensive action 1s the death
AS of any armed uprisings

3) Clear and simple rulos for the struggle should be established, -

AGte

the nest important of wiich is "coura;o, courase and nore
3 couracgee”
; 4) Uunarical superiority should be atteapted because "the arned
es forces that must be fought have all the advantages of organise-
a i tion, discipline and traditional mutiuority on their side." In
cs his article "Advice of a Stranger", Lenin wete that "a erase
ae euperiority of forces mst be concentrated at tho decisive

Pay
7
2

~

“i ea “place and the decisive nonente”

« . “s werent. . :

Po ee 5) Anti-Cocmmnist forces must be surprised as lon: as their troops
Ame “ve . ia : ‘ - ee

wet

ie era" are scattered,

an)
“ya

&
“A
mae ee

= SR gig” esa se
soe

° ~~ °

Péfferant fron "ordinary" var where the final victary counts,
the victory of the revolution may well depend on the initial successes
of an arsed uprising, If it is quelled, the pending civil war may be
prevented and the uprising liquidated,

(1) Proparatory Techniques.

(a) Long-range Preparations .
Training in proparetion for an insurrection is directed

ty an arned forces committee ani ty its sub-camittee, which instructe
the members in the use of arms. Rifle, sporting, ani hunting clubs are
organized for this purpose, often under the sponsorship of a labor unions
An attenpt may also be nade to have Commnists join the lational Guard,

_ beth for purposes of infiltration and as a means of acquiring practice

in the use of wapons.
(b) Prelininary Action Practioe.

Preliminary action practice, essential for the develop-
nent of eventual conbat units, is orgariged through creation of "defense
groups", These unite take part in demmstrations, mass mestings, parades,
marches, or picket committees. They may act as a protective farce acainst
the police, or may help to transform any of these forns of nass action
into a riote They nay also assume leadership in any tecporary occupation
of goverment buildings or, in tims of mass unemploynent, in the occupation
of relief stations ani in the escking of food stores, All swh qperetions ,
while sorving a specific purpose, are interdod to give the Mafense groups”

Comunist groups trained fer insurreciicn are expected to
mrus.:. vor thenselves a consicareble amount of the necessary arrament.
Each -<sber of the rroup is left to his own devices tc obtain a revelver,
gun, or rifle. A certsin ouentity of arms is usually secured throuch
direc. curchase,or is taxen over from rifle, sports, and hurting clubs.
Souv-*..r eras brought home by war veterans are reconditioned, and usable
surciu. emmy stocks are procured. If sufficient small type armanent cun-
noi }: cttained in this ranner, the best arred groups will then be in-
seraiead to carry out raids on hardware stores, National Guard posts, and
suppiy stations. In addition, each group is taught to make bonbs, hand
pren.des, and "Molotov cocktails." The hiding of arms and ammunition is
generrily left to the initiative of the various groups and their com.anders.

Since the striking power of the groups and the consolidation
of their conquests depend, to a large extont, upon their equiprent, it is
eons“.zered desirable to provide then with a certain amount of heavy equipment.
In counties adjoining the Soviet Union, such eguipcent can be smuggled
acres: the border, often with the help of Communist-contrclied maritime and
dcckaureccc' unions. In more distant areas, arms =ay also be smuggled by
pleclzg Commnists in strategic jobe in comercial aviation.

(d) Direct Preparation. |
When the situation in a country becomes such that, in the~ -

7

opinicn of the leaders of the party, an armed uprising for the purpose of ._.

seizing power has become feasible, or, in case of war, if such activity
would be of aid to an advancing Red Army, .the party will create an under-
ground paramilitary organization. The Armed Forces Committee might then
be reinforced by specialists from Moscow. This Coumittee vill plan a
program of action and prepare for the insurrection.

Groups will be organised for combat, consisting of five men,
with a sixth in command. It is felt that, in action, no man can command

; effectively more than five, and that, in the preparatory stages of an

a uprising, the group-of-five system is best because of concealment advantages.
- (The group of five is called a command. Five groups headed by one commander
a is a company, and five companies thus formed under one comand is a

ee battalion, A numerical combination beyond that is considered impractical

a for this type of fighting, although with the development of speedy

Eee commmications, later innovations may have been made by Commmist leaders.)
: a In addition to the five-men combat unite, special groups may be forned for
a the purpose of operating captured radio stations or newpaper plants.

= Special groups may also be created to capture the principal leaders of the
a goverment. (This capture is usually accomplished in the early hours of

; the morning.)

2, (2) Bode and Dee of Mobs.
= The modern plansed insurrection has become a specialized

= se affair; it generally required speqific elements for specific missions:

we

bee Re. ey To

whee’. Ree ae, oR: ge tee OS Tat ee dake
7 : ; Bad (oes salty.

tatty, < 7 re
BE ; RY od ae
Re = . . fie Sere ‘a 2 £
, 7 gee e a é
Pie Pee 2) “ os - ee

| < a 868

(2! the mob, organized ana led by professional rabile-rousers, to fachy,
froternize, and ce cnstrate, to fili the streets end crecte the impression
of insuperable strength; (2) the shock troops, trained rilitary forces tc
combet loyal armed forces at strategically vital points; and (3) the
technicinns, to decenmission vital utilities or to divert their use to the
insurrection. A fourth element, the famous personelity, is also a useful
but no. essentiel] force in insurrection.
The purpose of usinc mobs in the insurrection varies widely
. in differing circuastances. The use of the mob creates for the insurrection
the myth of the common will, it gives the uprising the appearance of
popularity, it draws in the politically inert, and swetis the chorus to
deafening proportions. The weight of numbers aprarently united in a
corron purpose can hypnotize a people, unite thes behind the demagogue,
cause ther tosverifice their individual wills and reasoning and to fcllow
blirciy, In addition mob-soldier fraternization ray cause the dis-

inte:rztion of an crganized armed force, the loss of its will to fight.

Tne rob may also be used as a screen behind which the pro-
fessior2’ insurrectionists uay cove with relative impunity; ‘ -
it mov be used to capture the s;mbols of power after the power itself has
fallen.

The use of the rob has ite difficulties. Once armed, it rust

be diserned. It is undisciplined and difficult to control; when set in

~ 85 -

a ra Te

BITE 21

- —=_ ce

motion it is a weapon of chaos and power for the would-be revolutionaries.
But its place in the insurrection is as old us scciety itself. Soreti.cs,
indeed, it is the mob itself which sets the insurrection in motion.

Te particular mb action which staets a revolution generally
gains its initial successes because everybody, except a Len "reictionaries,"
agrees that reform must come, and elmost nobody realizes that it is
revolution instead of reform that is coming. This opening ect of
revolution also gains popular support because there is cenerally at the
tire some special cause fer discontent (such as shortage of food) .

There is one important reason why sons quite ordinary act of
mob violence generally proves to be the start of revolution. It is help-
less incompetence revealed by the governing class in the emergency. This
incompetence hss long been a fact, but it is advertised in a particularly
spectacular wey by the circumstances of the first outbreak.

Ordinarily when the action by the ..cb has a decisive effect
on the course of insurrection it is because it is led to the decisive act
by professional crond leaders acting on erders from insurrectional
commanders. The 1cb's activities are carefully planned and the whole
procedure, far from being a spontaneous outburst of violence, is the exact
opposite. On such occasions mob violence is used sinply for strate 21ic
purposes or because more effective forces, such as 4m army movement, or a

legislative decree, are not available at the soment.

o Be

891154,

D eade
{To ep ee

aaa :

:
of

;

“obs whose actions ore decisive in revolutionary crises are always tocls.

(a) The Lob as a Political weathervane.
The mb ivy an excellent instrument with which to test the

direction of political winds, to determine when the time for insurrection
is ripe. Probably no chapter of modern history gives one clearer in-
sight into the rorer and behavior patterns of the revolutionary nob then
the Barch insurrection in Petrograd in 1917. This was one of these
extremely rare instances when the peorle were able to dezonstrate in a
conclusive manner that the state no longer had the assent of the governed.
Without any direction, even witout any incitement to rebellion, the
people of Petrograd won for their cause almost the entirety of the state's
armed forces. This incident is worth a critical examination.

By March 1917, the war effort hai created an utter disruption
of Russia's economic life. Transportation had virtually broken down;
the large cities were faced wit’. serious coal and bread shortages. The
garrisons in such towns a9 Petroprad could hardly be called soldiers.
Trained cadres had been all but exhausted by the incredible casualties
which the Russian Arcy had suffered since 1914. Most of the officers were
young and inexperienced, the private soldiers were raw recruits and formed
in draft battalions. Long years of adversity had undermined the discipline
of the arny as a whole, bad treatment had given the private soldier a

common cause with the civilians, the officers had lost faith in the

conventional military virtues. There was no coordinating command, no

ay , ae
‘Ae, ne Cegire fsr°action,

Tiere are, then, several specific uses tc which the mobs crn
be ict. They vay be used for fretemnizii* with the zovernnent's arze2
forces for the purpose of noutrelizing them or winning then (Paris, 1871;
Petre -rad, arch 1917).

The cob tay also xe formed into end used as the
insurresticnal erned force if the conditions and duration of the uprising
and the universality of its appearance are sufficient (Hoscow 1905). They
may be used as the instrument of chaos by whose destructive actions the
powers cf the sovernment are so: .ewhat paralyzed, and whose actions fors a
serec: ushind which the organized forces of insurrecticn cay work with re-
lat:-': freedom from detection (Bogota, Colombia, 194f).

They may also be used purely as an instrument of intimidation,

23 iivised algost always occurs where mass perticipaticn is extensive and
the razine weak.
{b) Limitations.
There are several limitations and sdccieeniences in the
use of mobs in an ansurrectional operation. One of the createst rasters
ec: insurrectional technijue of the twentieth century, Leon Trotsky,
put the question of limitation in this manner; "Tou can inquire of all
the passengers as to what type of cer they like to ride in, but it is
impossible to question them as to whether to apply the brakes when the

train is at f21l speed and accident threatens. If the saving cperation

ial 8 . es | ee eae
Poe ore Bong rs atl, =

2 ee. BE eee > SR OO leg *
* * okt é

7.

| - —_ }
is curried out skillfully, however, and in time, the apjroval of the
passercers is cuaranteed in udvince." In sl.crt, Trotsky believed that
populer assent to insurrection is u necessity, but that popular
participation is an impediment, that the people shiculd delerate the porers
of insurracticnal tactics to the leecers.

itis vas in stron? contrast to the theories of DzerSinsxi, Sverdlov,
and probably Stalin. "In order to et possession of the state," gaid.

Dzer jinski on the eve of insurrecticn, "we mist hurl the .asses arzainst the
eovornnent.' Honcver, Tretsky won his point and all the practical work of
organizin: the insurrection was done under his direction. The misses, the
unemployed, and the deserters who miiled throush the Petrocrad streets by

the tundred thousands in those November days unrittincly served as Tretsky's
screen fer the movement of shock troops and tecelinicians.

Tyo clear lesscns ezerge concernine the use cf unorganized ~obs:
first, the desir:bility cf encouracine acts ahich +i] prevent tie mob fron
turnin’ back; secord, that conduct of mob acticn is controllable to 2
predictatle extent orly wheh the uob can be broken up inte small, manageable
eroups.

(3) General Scheme of seizinz a City.

The follouins general scheme of sejuin- a city has been developed

Us the Co:smnists:

(cz) Seizure cf police head werters, includinz tne jolice
conzissioner and otier Leadinc officizls (e.7., the “‘ayor},
Police cormrissiorer, muyor, ena otner officials
usually zido to sicn or read 4 stateuent in suprort
of the Connunists,

(b) Seizure of the City Hall.

(ce) Seizure of the power houses for purpose of paralysing all
' transportation and industries dependent on power.

(d) Scdsure of the main railway stations, bus terzinals, air-
perts--including derailing of trains, and overturning of
buses to inpede the sovernuent forces.

(e) Seizure of the chief co:runication centers: teleyhone,
telegraph, radio.

These mousires are intended to peralyze the povernient und its forces,
and to serve as a psycholomical wespon tc create sunte and disorder among
the populetion, A maximum effort is expended against the so-called "living
forces." & "living force" is un available armed force which has not been
infiltrated cor dexoralized and on which the government can absolutely rely.

Gnce & city has been seized, a new rilitary orgarization is set up to
held it, recruit more men, and lay plans for the seizure of neighboring

centers. All re:airine resistance is liquidated as raridly as possible.

The seizure of a city or the stazine of a Cormunist uprising vould be
almost impossible «ithout the element of surprise. The Cocmmunists frequently
staze a number of trial mobilizations before they rake their zenuine effort.
The rovernment, respondinz to these false alarms, will become weary and may
thus be unprepared when the real attack takes place.

The actual insurrection usually oceurs in the early rorninz hours and

groups strike their pre-determined objectives simitanecusly.
- 90 -

Spe came: | 8 ded 5 4 it

— | ee

3. Communist Party Intelligence Activities.
Be Introduction.

The Communist Farty, 4f it is to be effective as s political and rer
elutionary organisation, gust have quantities of factoal informetion in oder
to: (e) make 8 reascoed estinate of ite om cepsbilities in relation to the
more of less hostile envircnment in which it operates, and of the resources
of the organised forces mbich oppose it; (b) Gevise @ practical plan of action
dn the light of external conditions and of internal capabilities; and (c) dis-
pose ite forces in the nost econcaical way for carrying out the plan, adjusting
dite tactics to changing conditions.

The Party aust know what ereae are most immediately important upen
which to work; what possibilities are open there; what political, economic,
and other circumstances will have # bearing on the success of its plans;
what obstacles in the form of individuals, groups, or governmental agencies
dt will encounter; what the strength and weaknesses of the opposition ere;
what support it can eqpect to raise from among the neutral masses; and what
issues may be exploited most profitably.

be General Organisational end Operational Principles.

General’ orgenisational and operational principles followed by the
Party in the procurensnt of intelligence include the following:

(1) A clandestine intelligence Procuresent program is not undertaken
without justification, The need for secret inforsation must be great to jus-

tify the risk involved to Party personnel end prestige.

~ gm -

(2) Orgmised Party intelligence networks are set up separate fron
the political mechanisn for reasons of security. There may be some individ-
ual contact with the lower ranks of the political apparatus, but it is kept
to a siniaus, and direction passes dom the chain of the network itself from
a fmctionary in the top Level of the Party. Personal contact within the net,
gach as between the net and other Party organisations, is kept to a mininun.
Personnel involved in intelligence procurement stop their overt Party soti-
vitdes and in ecme cases may withdraw their Party membership altogether.

(3) Commmications and metings are carefully screened by strict
security measures and by the use of cut-outs (intermediaries), letter-drope
(elected locations for passing information), and couriers.

(4) The first instrument of procurement is the Communist who has
penetrated s hostile organisation or who works in an organisation selected
as an espionage target. There may be some systematic “planting* of inforasnts,
but the basis of Party organisation lends itself quite naturally to the siaple
recruitasnt of informants who are already “on the inside.” The penetration

agent is also a more efficient instrunent for the procurement of intelli-
gence then the outside informant, who must depend on personal observation.
-@o Qvert Intelligence.
fo agitate with profit, and to conduct its political smeuvers with
skill, the Party requires volumes of precise information.
Meny of the Party's information requirements cen be met by the ex
ploitation of overt sourees. ‘The Party machine, incluting ite aucilisries,

froote, and circles of sympathizers, is an information system and at the
sane timo an action organisation, From the individual member of a factory
cell--aho reports to his cell secretary on conditions of work in his fao-
tory, on the political inclinations of his fellow workers, and on their
grievances, needs, and attitule towards the leaders of their umicns—-to the
Central Comittee seaber who sits in the national parliasent and who reports
to the Political Bureau on matters of high governmental plans and activities,
the Party apparatus is one of individual reporters.

Much information is passed along the channels of the political
apparatus in the form of periodic statistical, organisational, and person-
nel reporte made by the secretaries of committees on the various terri-
torial levels. Such periodic end routine reports, funnelled into the Or-
ganisation Departaent or Cadre (personnel) Departasnt of the Central
Comittee, provide much of the basic information requirement. They may be
supplezented by special studies and surveys om particular problezs of eco~
nogics, social conditions, or politics.

Sone Parties have set up special research or economics departasnts
to direct information collecting efforts on the overt side, to make analyses,
and to process reparte for the benefit of the policy-making elements of the

Fertyo

The network of Party newspapers, reporters, and correspondents con-
stitutes an invaluable information service. Comaunist reporters and cor
respondents, like those of any political affiliation, normally have ready

access to repositories of data, They know whore to go for information, and
they usually have at least some “inside sources" which may be tapped for
some of the information the Party must have.

a. Covert Inforgation. |

Covert intelligence includes such inforzation as: intimate data on
hostile personalities; "inside" details on the plans end capabilities of
hostile political parties; information on the plans and activities of the
police, security services, armed forces, end the internal adainistration
of governzent offices as well as data on industrial capacities and develop
mente and on technical progress.

It is often difficult to distinguish between the numerous Party
operations directed at the collection of overt date ani the Party's clan=-
destine procurement program. The two activities overlap, and individuals
are often found to be engagod in both, Mevertheless, it is a fact that the
Party sometines organises epecial secret intelligence operations and nete
for the procurement of necessary information which it cannot obtain openly.

@. Communist Intelligence for USSE.

In addition to its occasional direct intelligence effort, the Coa-
mumist Party can generally be relied upon to assist Soviet intelligence
agencies operating abroad. Such assistance is usually in the fora of per~
sonnel and facilities. The Party provides the Soviet representatives with

meabers and sympathisers who are willing and able to serve as agents, couriers,

o We

‘Pires % s
:

TERS =r

.

Sori

.
+ e

4

cut-outs, and technicians for particular Soviet~directed intelligence opera
tions. Party seamen and other waterfront elements are particularly suited
far clandestine commmication services.

In an eaergency, the Party may furnish money, technical equipaent,
and communicetions facilities. Refuge, escape facilities end safe=conduct,
safe meeting places, and falee documents my also be provided for meabers
of a Soviet network in case of necessity.

The product of direct Party intelligence operations in matters of
especial interest to the USSR is also passed on to Soviet intelligence.
Special operations asy be taken up by the Party's intelligence systen at
the request of the Soviet intelligence representatives. At times, informe-
tion procured by the Party is used to verify the accuracy of that obtained
by Soviet intelligence operations.

General security considerations, however, dictate that intelligence
groups orgmised end controlled directly by the Party should be carefully
insulated from the activities of the Soviet intelligence systens. Thus,
the exposure of one of them will not endanger the operstions of the other.
The diplomatic risk in the exposure of Soviet intelligence activities is
cbvicus, and it will csually enforce a studiously secure separation from
compr oxi sing personal or orgenisatical connections with any branch of ao=
tivity of the local Commnist Party.

Many factors bear upen the extent, the methods, and procedure that
direct Party intelligence efforte will foliar. fhe current political line,

89

Bg
or ee
*

1154 -A~4

ae y
“}

Am om

orgenisationsl end operating tactics and plans, the attitude taken toward
the Party ty the government and by other groups, the effectivenses of civil
sectrity controls, the availability of capable personnel, ani many other in-
ternal end external circuastances al) infloence the way in which the Farty
will organise, plan, and direct its om intelligence operstions, if it ude
takes then st all, Sach complex influences make it mest difficult to anti-
cipavé, at eny one tine, how and where the Party may be expected to engage
in intelligence operations.
At tines, assistance to Soviet intelligence needs and opsraticns
takes precedence over those of the Party. This is particulerly truv when
the USSR believes ite security imperiled. The findings of the Bayal Com
mission in Canada, based on the testincny of Iecr Gusenko and other investigations,
Genonstrete that at least es large pert of the Party's intelligence ectivity
consists of gathering technical and intustrial information.
£. The Commtnist Party Intelligence Apparatus.
It is difficult to detect Party intelligence nete at work because
of the thorongh security, both organisatianl and operational, which is put
wpon them,
Q) Sontrel.
feo types of besic orgenised caver are available for the exam
cise of controls (a) the net may be planned and directed secretly by the
ortinsry depertsente snd offices of the politics) spperatus along with ell a
the other, overt, activities, which they support; (>) a net my be sot ws.
a ae eg 23 ies 20

: a bs @
ME ABI td at

: Rah corns

ari cosrated independently of the overt political apparatus, with conts>*
and control carefully maintained only et top levels. Generally, the por~
scan;l in this second type of organisation have no ostensible connection
with the Perty. They are drawn from among the ranks of those who have no
reccrd with the police, or from among sympathisers who are not known, as
such, outside the organization, Ocoasionally, Party member who has for-
mally, and with some publicity, severed his Party allegiance, will ehce up
as a neaber of a Party intelligence net. Obviously, such persons are pac-
tirzulerly useful against hostile political groups, which may accept then
into their own ranks, because of their alleged defection from the Comuist
cause.

Control of Party intelligence activities is usually to be
{fount ~»ntered in some office at the headquarters level of the Party. Se
curl‘: there is usually strong, the handful of leading Party functionaries
having been tested over long years and their loyalty having beer: streng*hened
two litetime of indoctrination and by their personal stake inthe future of
the Party, The Secretary General, as well as the responsible heeds of the
Orgex.sation or Cadre Departments, are believed to be frequently concerned
with the organisation and control of Party intelligence operations, With
their card files, indexes, wide contacts, and comprehensive knowledge of
the porsmnel, deployment, and organization of the Party, the Organisation
and Cazre Department heads are in a good position to plan operations, to

r154294 Te

Jest suitable reerits, ani to vive detuiled crerationil directions. They
have .lso had a lon conspiratcrid exjcrionce; mar’ cf ther have been
trained in the US5%, ond they have sc uired ecnsiderable orgunizine sill.

“her. these functicnaries are tco busy with other vxatters or are too
exposed to police surveillance, the fob of directinz intellicence work my
be entrusted te other ;ersurel. Such Commnists specizlize in clandestine
nork ("43lecai work" in Communist parlance). They have had special training
in it or have a naturel urtitude for it. In some Parties, such « peculicrly
talerted yarson has been charzed with the control cf «ll clandestine work,
zhich includes itexzs other than intellizoncs.

(z) Tarets. .

The coercive instruments of the state (arced forces, police,
security services), the state adnrinistrative apparetus, ang hostile politic.)
ercucts are the chie? inteilicence tarrets of the Parts. These are the
or-2rized powers th.t will uneven’ 6 hinder a Comamist revolution, and
they <ust be arashed or zde uscless if the party is ever to succeed.

xcept when such concerns becozs of strateric icyortance to a Farty
encaged in direct ~ilitary effort, the industrial or technical esp-ionace it
undertakes sees tc be prisarily for the benefit of Soviet irntellicence
avcneies rather than for its own use.

Gandestine and controlled penetration of the target crganization

is the busic rlen of Part; intelligence operations. It is effected by

incividr.ls or ere ys aie are secret seviers cf the Part: cr ci cre of its
auxilizries. Ther are supported, guided, and ccntrolled tr speci:l personrel.
Penetration follows the line of lest resistarese. “herever an opportunity is
presentec it is likyly to be taken. Acvantace is taken of rerson:il friend-
ships, and ;rofession21 and social ccr-tacts. Secret Party menbers Join
hostile crganisations; they ere elected, eppeinted, or fina e:.rloyment by
therselves in covernoront21 instituticris. Defectible elezents inside the
tarset crganization are subverted (bribed, coerced, cr ecnverted) ,

It is eve sinpler to penetrate the ar:ed forces. Secret sreubers
are crafted cr they enlist. In addition, the Fart: cenerelly erzanizes
youth creanizations ond soiith: trots to attract and subvert yvouns persons
whe are jiable to cilitery duty. In the 1930's special attention nes paid
to relief organizations and to wouth labor corcnnizations, suc’ as the CCC in
the United States. Fart: interest in the :.aritive industry is portialir
accounted for by the fact trut the rerchint arine is ¢revn uren heavily by
the nave durin: an emergency. Pro:. arons, such elesents poternti:l] recruits
for Party intellirence work can be scrutinized, screened, and yicked.

Direction and control of peretraticn of the arrec forces rests with
a secret crreor set up at the rational Jevel, often culled the "Vilitur;
Comittee” or "Anti-"dilitary Corcittee," with a netvork of directinr
functionaries at lower Party echelons. The functionaries may ccntrol the
syste of cells thet has beer, built up in the Army directly (but throurh

secure cut-cuts) or indirectly, throuvh the ivcz]l Party politicel erg_niza-

-9-

e-& ; ney te

tions cicssest is the militar: unit involved.

Inteliicence proecure:ent, honever, is ord> cone of several purposes
bDohind the Party's military work. The central directin: crran, cucl: es the
m41itar Comuittce," also adrinisters tho crdinary political and asitaticn-
propurcnd: activities of Cormpunist nezbers of the militar:. It ds at least
cf euual importance that as many mecbers as possille cet some training in
the use of artis and in infuntry tactics, that the :orale end efficiency of
the arny be reduced as for as possible, and thet the Party extemd its
politics) ‘tufLuence by organizing cells o7 newly recruited rombers.

‘Direct penotration operations into the armed services is suyrlecented,
as it is in the case of hostile political croups, by sul.vertin” ordinarily
leyal ele-wnts. It is e ecrnen practice te employ young wonen mesbers cf
Part; youth organizations to sct as “beit". They frecuont public places
ground a military or nuvsl installation, picsine up service men as the
opportunity arisus, and atterpt to interest them in Corrtunist ideas.

Govern:ent agencies concerned in cne tay or another with the aduinistrée-
tion of the erred services are alsc profitable targets for penetration, rore
usually nith the intent of gettin= control of the cilitary fro: nithin than
of procuriny intellivence. Penetraticn at this hiri level, of course, is
particularly feasitie when the Party has Lecore a rajor political force,
provided it 4s not ctherwise hozpered in its political sctivities. It con
nse cerbers whc have been elected to public office, or its patronage, or

other political influence to secure the uppointrent cf secret L canbers and

sipathizers te key positicns. Tre postwar history ¢f several European
ecuntries nas shorn that a mmerically large or stratevically inportant
Corrunist vote will be seized upcn te put Party mexbers into cabinet or
cther positions. Then nore and rore Communists vill be siven jobs in which
intellizence and subversive activities can be sracticed on a larze scale in
relative safety.

During periods cf "revolutionary calc," when the Party is on the
defersive, or when it is concerned rainly with extending its political
and creanizaticnal iniluence, its “cilitary work" 4s likely to be aived
chiefly at organizational and acitaticn-proparands activities. The

intelli:ence function is usually relegated to a secondary position at such

Wa

tines.

On the other hand, shen th» Party arrives at the conclusion that it

{s ebout tc enter upon a yeriod o/ revolutionary possibilities, or when it

otaukaee

ig uctually eneaped in revolutior, civil war, or rilitary resistance, then
it can le expected to put such of Stg effort into collectin: nilitary
irtelirence. It will, in such a "revolutionary sutuation,” systenatize its
penetraticn and organize e special military intellirence service.

- fhe use of a special clandestine Party auxiliary directed tonards
the ;enetration of the enezy armed services for intellizonce and subversive

purposes during 3 Comunist revolution is illustrated by the activities of a

at

"Party in Southeastern burope:

é tf \ pa ae a

{ay when the party ererzea frei. res’stunce activities follorinz
the war, larce nuzbers of its axpericnced ‘uerrisle richters were drafted
inte the armed services, pelice, ans security services of the state.

% (b) In urder to ensure ticir continued alleciance and the ory .niza-
tional control wich the Party had over them, end to draw és fany new nen
into its rachine us possible, the Party fat up a special auxiliary
organizaticn, consiotine entircly of Cormmists in the services, plus a
directine skeletion of functionaries dram from the political apperatus.

(c) Ineffect, the military organization was « separate Corn-unist
organization, with an "interlocking directorate" with the Party proper. It
had ite own Central Committee, consisting of o fen responsible functionaries
of the Part«'s Central Comittee, plus a responsible functionary for each of
the several rezions into which the Party divided the ccuntry for its own
adrinistrative end organizational convenience. The rezionel heads of the
auxiliary were each resyonsible for the direction and control of :enbers cf
the cuxiliary shose military, police, or cther units sere stationed in the
rezion.

2 | (ad) tithin the Ang, the sexbers of the uveiliary were org:nized

eo | into three-man cells. The leader of each cell in a corzand (1.-., platoon

ate: ‘ or co~pany) was responsible to another functionary who directed two or rore
-"* additional cell leaders. For eeeuriey reasons, these cell leaders sere the

only persons under his control with whom he had any contact, - The sane

Sq.

ee : sn ET.
- 102 - . -

+ ‘ é

+

princiyles of control and Linitea ecntect were repeated up the chain cf
the nilitary comand to the brigade level, at which point the responsiile
leader of the Communist auxiliery was responsible to the regional Party
functicnary, who was ordinarily not a member of the Army, but a functionary
of the rerional connittee of the political apzaratus of the Party. His
contact with the leader of the brigade auxiliary was carefully sercened by
the use of one cr more cut-outs.

(e) A Party memler who was about to be called into service
reported that fact to the leader cf his cell in the ;olitical apparatus.
Notice was then passed up the channels of the Party proper to the resional
organization in the area in which the prospective recruit was to serve.
Here, it was passed by the regional head of the autiliary to the apprepriate
brigade head, who, in turn, passed it down through the channels of the
auxiliary. Finally, the new recruit mas met at his station, and drawn into
one of the cells of the amiliary.

(f) ‘Menbers of the auxiliary were engared in acts of sabotage,
aritation and propaganda, drawing in sympatiizers «here practical to do
so, and undermining the rorale of the other troops. When the Party began

- its revolution, they attenpted to subvert their fellow soldiers, and
organized several cutinies and mass desertions.
=, <'- (pg) By reporting from personal observation ard by stealing docuzents,
a menbers of the auxiliary kept the Party informed on personalities,

a Se ~ 103 = ah

strerzth, disposition, morale, and equipment of the troops; armaments and
installations; technical and mechanized equipment; surrly; plans and
operations of units; and on security regulations. |
An example of a military intelligence organization under

Party control, created under conditions ‘of resistance warfare, is furnished
by arother Communist Party in the Balkans during world “ar Ils

(a) The Party organized, controlled, and directed a resistance
army that fousht the German occupation. It had to set up an organization
for the procurement of rilitary intelligence. |

(b) Since the Party was illegal and had to operate underground
except in areas which it controlled by its oun arns, 4t had to mke some
provision for ccunter—intelligence against the police and security agencies
of the occupying power. It also had to provide for other clandestine
services behind the enemy lines: a secret communications system, an
escape and safe-house system, preparation of false documents, and a program
of sabotage. All of trese clandestine activities, in addition to the
_strategic and tactical intelligence functions, the “arty put under the
control of a special organisation of Information Centers.

(c) The Central Information Center, set up directly under the
Central Committee of the party, was the organizing and controlling center
for Informstion Centers set up in each of the regions of the country.
The regional Centers directed district Centers, each of which, in its turn,

had several city or village Information Centers under its direction.

ay

Th, soeten invelligence _roups at the buse of tne 26% carried cut actual
operat icne.

(dj at each levei of organization, the Aead of the Information
Center sas also e cemer (usually the Political cr Oreanization Secretary)
of the local Comittee ef the (underground) Party's political apparatus.
For the functicnins of the Centers, however, direction was taken, not
fro: tne political ecamittee, cut from the next higher Infor7ation Center.

{e) As the strength of the Party's army grew and it tcok over
increasinrly wider territcries, the duties of the Inforreticn Centers
likewise expanded. Sach center was then divided into faur sections, cne
for eech of these functions: (1) military espionage and control of the
political security of the resistance urzy; (2) espiona.e directed asainst
the Gestapo and azainst the intelligence and security services of tne
puppet government; (3) sabotare, freparation of false documents, and
intellizence missions into enemy-held territory; (4) clandestine
cocnunications: a courier system.

(f) Each major corzand of the resistance arny had its own
tactical military intellicence organization. These operated larpely in
the actusl combat gone: but they also sent sissions into enemy areas on
occesion. The network of the Party Information Centers also operated in
all three zones, and in the zone of corbat it paralleled the intellirence
orgardzition of the resistance army. In higher commands, the unit
intellirence officer wis also the responsible functionary of the

corresponding Information Center.

- 105 -

walin 8

Ca Ce ee ee Ie ee eA ode BS Sere be Sess
vigtuts, esen Infornition Corter vis assirned 2 g7ecinl suerrilia unit,
rude up cf hane-,issed Commz:tcts. These units protected the personnel
ard the instellatluns cf the Inform.tion Centers en: carried out watever
li widation or other stronc-arr. missions were thoucht necessary hy the
Inforration Centers, which by now Lad berun to concentrate on civil
security Gaties, but which could not yet afford tc corprorise their
gecuri‘y by overt coercive activities,
g. Industrial ard Technolocical. Intelli-ence.-

The procurement of industrial and technolorical intellizence by
a Commniet Party is facilitated by the fact that the cells are con-
ceutrated in industrizl establishtents, technological research centers,
and .aritine centers. The cells are always useful for the spotting and
recruiting of arents. Experience has shown, hov.ever, that this potentiality
has been :ore often exploited by Soviet intelli:ence erencies directly
than by the Comcunist Parties themselves. The interest of the Soviets in
industrial and technolorical matters is obviously more ‘rmcdiate than that
of the Party. Occesionally, honever, the Party has enzaced in such
operztions fer the benefit of soviet intelligence. A Central European
Party did so in the early 1930's. The crganization was set up, staffed,

and controlled by the Party. The intellirence produwt was forwarded to

representatives of the soviet intelligence. -

- 106 -

gu

(1) The "Industrial Reporting" organization was established by
the Party to srocure industriai anc technological inteiligence and to
keay the Party informed on labor-munagezent. relations for organizational
and avitation use. It was responsible tc the Central Cormittee of the
Party, tut was organizec as & separate network independent cf the political
apparatus below the top level. The country; nas divided into several
resicns, and the Industrial Reportin~ chief for each of these had several
subsidiary nets of azents.

(z} The asents of the Industrial Reportinz organization re-
cruited sympathizers and members of the Party and its auxiliary to steal
plans, ~ake photorraphs, write reperts, and compile statistics on
industrial and technolowical developments and processes at their places
of ene Armament plants received special attention.

(3) The product of these informants was passed up the network
through tne resional chiefs to the nutional chief. At the national level “
the creinization had Yacilities for collating and evaluatins the inforration
and for fhctosraphine documents. Luch of the product was then turned over

to Soviet intelligence representatives.

h. Training.
Party members received professional training for intellisence work

befcre »orld var Ii in special Soviet schocls. Intelligence agencies in

- 107 -

7 891154 Bi

| em NG = nn re me mre re me sme a re ee tee

hy

OO ge OO

the US-R achieved thereby not only the expert trainin: of key personnel
slated to worx for Soviet intellicunce directly, but also a considerable
dezree of professicnalism amon; the personnel assigned to work under the
control of the various national Parties. Since there has been no
evidence to show that the national Parties are presently operating their
own intelligence schools, it is reasonable to conclude that euch training :
4g still beine carried out within the USSR or, possibly, in satellite areas.

i. Commmnist_Counter-Intellizence.

qhe Party must protect its cadres and organisations fron the

effectsof penetration by agents and informants of the polis and of hostile
intellirence agencies. It must also preserve strict ideological and
organizational discipline and cperational security. This is of prine
importance when the Party is illegal and is forced to operate undergrcund.
To cover these needs, the Party charses a particular office or organ with
responsibility for defensive escurity. These must not be confused with the
organs set up to handle the direct intellirence functions. Unquestionably,
the experience that some Party members gain in the course of their work in
one or another of the internal security organs may fit thec for service in
the direct intellirence organization when the letter is actually put into
operation. Nevertheless, the existence of a security organization is not

of itself proof that the Party is engaged in offensive intellizence

activities.

7 —_ :

The Party organs usually charged with the naintenance of inter.ci
gecurity are the Cadre (personnel) Department and the Control Commission.
The functions of the two overlap and vary from one Party to another, The
Control Conmission (or Security and Disciplines Commission, as it is sam-
tines called) seems to be devoted chiefly to investigating the efficiency
of other Party organisations and the efficiency and political reliability
of Party functionaries. It may initiate an investigation as an outoase of
a routine analysis of intemal reports, or in response to allegations made
by one meaber against another, or at the suggestion of the Cadre Department.
The Control Courniseion is traditionally the "high court" of the Party, and
4% heare cases in which it may have had a hand in the preparation ef charges.
Tt passes sentence on offenders of Party discipline and security, including
the sentence of expulsion.

The Cadre Department (or Commission) has broader functions. It
collects and collates biographical informtion on all fimotiona riss-—data
on their political, personal, economic, religious, educational, and occu-
pational background=end it collects reports made by their superiors and
other associates on the way in which they have handled their jobs. It

“ selects, assigns, and deploys the militants as best to suit their talents
and the intereste of the Party. It may also be explicitly charged with
ae the preservation of intemal security. To this end, it keeps a close
check on the accuracy and truth of the biographical data. It may also

h ~" aywange for surveillance of meubo re suspected of treasonable connections
‘pags, ond take testinony of the suspect's associates,

Eee < pee
ate Seo Sa
Sees “

ee ew

3 ee

yr

c our

Partiss that have no Cadre Department either assign the persomel
function to other appropriate organs (such as the Organization, Youth,
Wonen's, Labor Department), ar center it within one of these, the Organi-
gation Department being the most likely spot. The investigative function
in such a case is also given over to one of the other offices or to ons
of the Party's auxiliaries, the Youth organisation being frequently assigned
the tesk.

In seme cases, special commissions my be appointed to investigate
the security of individual Party members and entire Party organisations.

h. Subversion in the Armed Foross and the Police.
Any armed force wiich the Comsmnist Party does not omtrol is consi~

‘dered by the Party to be a mortal enemy, and therefore the subversion of

the armed forces and of the police receives a top priority. It should

be noted that the police force is usually the first although not ‘necessarily
the most important target. In the ayss of the Communists, military organi-
gation is the strength of the ruling classes and it is, therefore, the re-
sponsibility of the forces of revolution to attempt infiltration long

before the actual hour of insurrection. Also, according to Marx and lenin,
preparetions must be made to achieve a "superiority of forces" to be “conoem-
trated at the decisive place at the decisive manent" (lenin). The Can-
moniote realise that the "armed forces which must be fought have all the

. advantaces of organization, discipline and traditional authority on their

side; unless ‘greater counter=forees can be mobilised against then, defeat
and annihilation are inevitable” (Marx).

~ 110 -
rs 3 ; | fo
are ee ne
* : sey ae?
Te ate Leite $$ 6: aM reas,
os. eae Pg i tig
sate poe _ =. Yo.
oe. ee penny) YS TORN TE ET ae ahs bate
oie Caer at, « 2 ‘% el ae ate : 2 vee

r . -
Sete = Ss ae E .
+t fy ete . ¥ . as ce wate

Senlizing that Orem a military rcint of view, the revolutionary
forces stand no chance in compariscorn with their opponent, the Communists
believe that they must make up for their Jack of trainine, organization,
and armament, This can be done, they reason, not only by numerical
superiority, but first of ell, by methodical infiltration, The Party,
therefore, places the preatest importance on the Ministries of Defense
anc Interior which usually supervise the armed forces and the police.

The methods by which the Party seake to attain its objectives are
varied, fore than one of these sethods, however, may be enployed
simitaneously, dependent upon the country and the particular situation

involved.

a. Infiltration at liigh Levels.
Infiltration is desirable chiefly because Communists in high

offices can hire their own personnel for key posts and arrange for both
supvei'sion and intelligence collection. The activity of the French
Communist Party in employing the method of infiltration before World War IT
4p of interest as an example of these techniques. Only after the USSR

was attacked by the German army in June 1941, did the French Communists
becin to take an active part in the mar azainst Germany. They began to
infiltrate French resistance groups and by the end of the war had
effectively penetrated large portions of the movement. Thereupon they
disseminated highly exacgerated propaganda about the prominent role played

by the Commnists in the underground and demanded a veice in the postwar

ms ob ee

oe eS : = x
¥ a Pra
. gee
eat ee on x. See ee
: eRe = . Ss <7 RE .
Oe oe ae, ee ;
4 t et of im
or Sace <a ae P2.., a id ‘od = 7,
eas ce .” Ce ; ‘ sag
2 ¢ = x ma *. = = ne a es yaa ‘. a oo
+ ae . se * ee See NS one - *
3 (mth be to Se -, eo p et Airy ie ae
eee Shape Se : TP re tg oe : phamaea te lie iat eariaie
‘ 6 EP a yes BA ks Seen a eee ORE PT Mae ot ae.
3 caer Socata ee : Poe at ee gee > ;
; : oF ha re . f a ae z

( fg mem

sovernment of France. The Communist Charles Tillon sas arpointed ‘diister
for Air in De Gaulle's provisional povernnent (1944-45). During his
tenure, the French air forces were extensively infiltrated.

b. Capture of Control Positions.

Althoucrh the standard procedure for capturing control positions
has some similarity with the foregoing method, it differs somewhat in
thet it is designed to capture key posts without disturbing the top level
positions. This tactic may be applied to police organizations. The main
effort of infiltration is directed toward the middie and lower echelons.
Attempts are made to convert them to Communism so as to drive a wedge
between the higher and lower levels. This method has been successfully
used in Prance and pre-Hitler Cermany.

In the armed forces the non—cormissioned officer is an important
Communist target, He is more easily accessible to Communist revolutionaries
than cormissioned officers and can be of infinitely greater value than the
private, who is untrained in leadership.

c. Infiltration into the Ranks.

The methods for infiltration into the ranks apply equally to armed
or police forces. This method requres two phases of development: (a) in-
etilline the Communist ideology in the minds of soldiers or policemen;
and (b) recruiting those individuals who seem "ripe" for party or espionage

work,

“ethods used for Commnist infiltration in the ranks include

- sm
exvleiteticn of srievances; spreading of defeatist spirit; anc attenrts 2.
destruction of loyalty and patriotism by undermining the beliefs in a
nation's pcaliioast Saente: Primarily, the objectives of infiltration
are to paralyze the armed forces before they are called to strike arainst
Communism, or before Communism comes to poxer, A Communist repime roud
not rely upon an armed force which was organized under non-Commnist
leadership. It vould first liquidate the officers’ corps, then purge
the ncn-commissioned officers and, finally, mold the rank-and-file according
to the prevdiling Cormunist formia. It is understood that any such
Communist-reorganized army would be under more or less direct orders of

the Kremlin and of the Soviet Army.

~ 113 -

7 mcocrnan wen
iv. te

ba a ol 2) nm: a *
ao Vata i awd ord Repewern wa

Sete TPMT NW QY
Tacha ey

1, Theory of evolutionary Action.

Cormunist. theoreticians heve developed s sizable body of doctrine on
the general aspects of revolution and revolutionary activity. Specific
theory, however, is somewhat scanty in the published materiol, and there
is ecod reason to Lelieve that Cossmnist writers have cone little further
in the development of the theory cf revolutionary activity than is
readily available from published works. Commnist theory, for example,
calls for the use of mass action, for agitation, and for sabotage; but
the manner in which these plans are to be, executed 4s left to the judgment
and experience of the local Communist groups:

Cne of the reesons for the sparsity of detailed theoretical treatnent
of revelutionary actior. is the complex nature of the political-socizi-
economic problems involved. To develop broad and general plens for a
revclutionary situation is relatively easy, but to draw up specific
rewuirenents in the day-to-day developments of revolutionary action misht
easily lead to mistakes and tissuidance. To interpret and pen
revolutionary activity primarily in terns of cast experiences 4n other
areas would handicap the noverent of rigidity.

As a German Communist pointed out in the late twenties, "Revolution
in various countries, or in the same ccuntry at various times, always

taxes place under new conditions. For tris reason it is impossible to

devise any general formulas for methods to be applied during revolt; it

-

891154 -2g.

¥ . be

ic tmocssille to compose a ‘airective for revclution' in this sense. Rules
to be applied in any case rust of necessity be extremely general. The
eipnificance of these ‘rules' lies in the fact that they can shed licht on
the nature of uprisins, that they may permit proper insight into the
problems of uprisings and thus provide a key, a method for practical
evaluation." The detailed check list for the process of insurrection, there-
fore, is lacking.

To a large extent, then, interpretation of the events leading to an
insurrectional situation depends upon the judcoment of the Party leadership.
The timing of violence beara a relationship to the political astuteness,
imate. courage, and amount of information rossessed by the national
leaders. When attempting to anticipate the moment for Communist violence,
consideration must be given to the fallibility of the Comunist interpretion
of the political events. History has shown that Communists have mis-
interpreted the political and economic climate of an area as frequently as
they have judred it correctly.

a. General Theory.
The Commnist theory of revolution rests on the basic premise that

Communist ascension to power is impossible without violence. Lenin
developed this thesis at some length (in State and Revolution) :
"There is no denying that the state is the organ of class
domination, or that class antagonisms are irreconcilable. But.

what is forgotten is this: if the state is the product of the

: Geae . i.

tpreconcilable character of class antagonis=, if it is a4
force standing above society, and increasinsly separating it-
self from it, then it is clear that the liberation of the
oppressed class is impossisule, not only without violent re-
volution, but also without the destruction of the apraratus
of state power, which was created by the ruling class in

which this ‘separation’ is embodied." (emphasis added)

Once the inevitability of violence is estal lished, there are certain
concrete methods prescribed for the development of Communist parties to a
point where they are capeble of precipitating an insurrection.

Two general conditions have been set forth as prerequisites for
revolution: (1) preparation of the proletariat for its dictatorship; and
(2) the existence of a general crisis in all ruling and in al! bourgeois
parties. In order to achieve the first of these general conditions,

Co: unist theoreticians emphasize that the proletariat must be trained and
educated to take over the organs of state power. As Lenin explains:

"The proletariat needs state poner, the centralized orsanization

of force, the organization of violence, both for the purpose of

crushing the resistance of the exploiter and for the purpose of
guiding the great mass of the population -- the peasantry, the
petty-bourgeoisie, the semi-proletarians -- in the work of

organising Socialist economy. .- ar

- 116 -

a +891 15 4 At

Netcare
ee engi ees ee ea ee eo oe

: —

Te second gereral condition, a preresuisite to 4 ‘revolution sr,
situation,” concerns the lack of capability of the "uprer classes" to rule.
As a result, they would "pass through a rovernnent crisis of a dezree which
would draw even the most backward masses into politics (a symptom of every
real revolution is a rapid, tenfcld and even hundredfold increase in the
number cf members of the toiling and oppressed masses —— hitherto
apathetic -— who are capable of waging the political struggle), weaken the
government and make it possit-ie for the revolutionaries to overthrow it
rapidly.” (Lenin)

In preparine the proletariat for its role in the revolution, the
Communist Party is constantly engaged in a process of educatins and training -
this class. In developing the techniques for mass action, minor
preraratory demands are rade ane denonstrations, strikes ani acvitation are
cerrieo out, in the same manner, but or a sraller scale than if the
insurrection were im inent “Every strike and every other rass action

must Le made use of in orcer to stimiate the revcluticnery feelin- ame.

the <asses, in order to encourare the masses, in order to orzsanize then
better, in order to weld them together to united fronts and to create a
million strong revolutionary arry. . it is. . . & question of organizing
a continuous militant movement. . oin every case to ap, eal to troad

masses. . ." (Kussinen).

- 117 -

891154 -a4A

e.

> Insurrection, an ary

Communist doctrine teaches v2t insurrect.on is an art which mast
be studied and practiced in anticivation of its use and is different fron
the conventional technique of war. In the words of a German Communist:

"In armed revolt the 'front' is everywhere. Both combatant parties
are threatened from all sides, and at the same time are supported on all
sides, because everywhere they arc surrounded by friends and foes of the
revolution. Whichever side cannot draw the logical conclusicns from this
fact will be beaten and annihilated, according to Langer.

"The broad masses of the working people, including women, old men
and children will not play the role orf non-participatinc, curious onlookers
but must be engaged in active participation; they will attack the enemy
wnerever they encounter him and beat hin ty whatever means are at their
comcand."

Mis entire struzgle "is not a purely military affair but a
political fight. The indivisibility of the military aspect ef the strugzle
from the political aspect is one of the vasie characteristics of arned
revolt." The principle rule of insurrection, according to Lenin, is that
an "audacious anc determined offensive mst be weced, The first success
must b2 won, and that one ms*% proceed from success to success, never
ceasing the offensive against the eneny, taking advantace of his confusion.”

The winning over of the masses at the nement of armed revolt is

not merely a matter of verbal and written agitation, but depends essentially

- 118 -

urca the degree of success attairec in tre eari; armed attacks In orau.. ve
assure those vacillatinr elenents ‘who always follow the strongest force

ane who always veer to the safest side" it is necessary, according to

Karl lMarx, to cain “constant nen victories, even though they be relatively
unimportant, and to publicize these victories amonc the rasses, as widely
as possible, in order to raintain moral equilibrium."

Marx established definite principles for the conduct of the
revolutionary class during revolution:

"First of all, an uprising shouid never be attezpted unless there
4s firm resolve to endure all its consequences. In revolt ore deals with
hichly uncertain quantities whose value may chan-e from day to day: The
ferees which must be fought have a.l tie advartase of crganizaticr.,
eciniine and traditional autherity on their siue; unless creater counter~
forces can he opposed ts them, defeat anc annihilation are inevitable
Secondly, once a revolution has started, the offensive must be taken and
action mst be resolute. Defensive acticr is the death of any armed up-
rising; the battle will be lost tefore it has began. The opponent aust =
taken by surprise while his troops are scattered; there must be constant
new victories, even if they are not significant; the moral superiority of
the first successful uprising must be maintained; those vacillating elements
who alays follow the strongest force and who always veer to the safest side

mast be attracted; the enemy must be forced to retreat befcre Ne can con

- 119 -

pepe ~~, re te 7 ee et er per pre ee 8

ecntrate his forces in a counteret'rust; in short, to quote Danton, the
preatest master of revolutionary tactics knoun so far: ‘Courage, couras:
and more courage’."
g- Timing

The conditions necessary for a revolutionary situation cannot, of
course, be completely fulfilled when the decision to launch an insurrection
is taken. For this reason, the actual moment when hostilities begin depends
on the judgment of the local Communist leaders. Communists recognize that

some unusual act such as a parlianentary crisis, an isolated act of

violence or a general strike ofteo is the imredjate cause of an insurrection.
"Timely action is of decisive significance in armed revolution,

and the choice of the precise moment 4s one of the most important problems

of the strategy, the art of revolution. It is up to the political leader-

ship to appraise the situation and to determine the proper moment for overt

action. In armed revolt, as in any other struggle, the chances for success

are spasmodic. They come and go, if they are allowed to slip by."

a. The Offensive.

Once the "insurrectionary career" has been entered upon, however,
Communists mot "act with the greatest determination, and act on the

offensive, Surprise your antagonists while their forces are scattering,

prepare new successes, however small, but daily; keep up the moral

- 120<

ascencant which the first success’ul rising has piven to you; rally those
vacillating elements to your side which always follow the strongest
impulse and which always look out for the safer side; force your enenies
to retreat before they can collect strength against you. « « In armed
reyolt retreat is always coupled with heavy sacrifices, Retreat from a
revolution,once it has begun, {inevitably leads to ruthless extermination
by the white terror of the revolutionary class's best forces, regardless
of whether retreat followed on the hell of frenzied battle or whether the
armed workers capitulated without a struggle. Counter-revolution knows
no mercy." (Stalin)

Lenin, in his critique of the 1905 Moscow uprising, berates the
leaders of the strike action for not forcing the offensive and developing
the struggle into an armed uprising. None of the organizations which
called the strike was prepared to lead an uprising. "The strike grew into
an uprising » primarily as a result of the pressure of the objective
conditions that were created after October 1905," Then, the unorganized
street crowds, quite sporadically and hesitatingly, set up the first
barricades without orders from the organizations. The mass proletarian
struggle then developed from & strike to an uprising. In 1905, according
to Lenin, the proletariat sensed the change in the Nobjective conditions"
of the struggle before the leadership. Practice marched aheac of theory?

"A peaceful strike and demnstrations immediately ceased to satisfy the

ET re fa ge Lee cw ee ee cote tee ee
< $ . eS ae woo 2 nena Gera —_

a 4 ae
-
.

workers; they demanded mere riesciute action, Tho eeprudtions to set ur.
berricades reached the districts axcecdingly late, when barricades were
already being erected in the center. . .But even this did not satisfy
then —- they demanded active meae'ires. . ebut they failed to receive
instructions for resolute mass action." Lenin concludes: "Ve should have
explained to the masses that it was impossible to confine ourselves to a
peaceful strike, And now we mast openly and publicly admit thet political
strikes are inadequate; ne must carry on the widest agitation among the
masses in favor of an armed uprising and rake no attempt to obscure this
question by talking about ‘prelininary steps'. . .The Impending revolutionary
action mst take the form of a desperate, bloody, war of extermination."

‘On the other hand, it is "senseless" to want to force the struggle,
"to accelerate it, to wip it fornard, precisely because the struggle 1s
inevitable, *

The proper evaluaticn of the fighting spirit of the masses is

esible only if the Party organizing the uprising is in close; day-to-

day contact with the masses, constantly active among them, living their
life, and, to quote Lenin, "has become merged with the masses." In other
words, the Party mst be “irmly rooted in the masses, particularly at the
points where the everyday life of the wasses is lived, t.e., the factories

and plante, the unemployment bureaus and the workers’ district.

e. Superiority of Forces.
Lenin wrote: "A great superiority of forces must be concentrated

at the decisive place at the decisive moment."

- 122 ~

- : 991154 -at

meh mere
4 < { Set stat gles sign! te Z

Proz a military point cf v.cx, tre auetnessee class siands no chence
in comparison with the opponent. "Tne armed frees which must be fought
have all the advantages of organization, discipline and traditional
authority on their side; unless greater counter forces can be opposed to
then, defeat and annihilation are inevitable." (Marx). Hence the
sup-ressed class must make up for its lack of training, organization and
armament by numsrical superiority.

However, it is the over-all situation and not that prevailing at
local points, which is decisive for the beginning of the struggle ~— the
moment chosen to start the armed rebellion, On a country-wide scale the
power ratio met naturally be favorable to the rebels before the contest

can begin,

proletariat must be superior in armament to the opponent in order to begin
a successful rebellion; that superiority may be caused by the diversity of
elements not usually employed in "coznon" warfare.

In nearly all attexpts at insurrection the same phenonenon could
be observed: after the presence of national defense battalions became
known, troops of workere assembled from all nearby towns, mre or less
poorly organized but ready to go into action against these battalions.
This converging from all sides created the necessary superiority at the

decisive spot where the opponent had taken position.

=-

f. The Principle of Concentration c ef Forces.

The principle of concentration of forces mesns that in armed rebellion
the revolutionary party sust knox how te assign its entire machine, all ite
work, and all its forces to the armed conflict. It does not man that every
party nesber must actually shoulder @ gm and participate in the physical
fighting, although all should be ready to do 80. The entire activity of the
Party during rebellion should, however, exclusively serve the interests of
armed combate

In the hour of rebellion, the Party of the proletariat becomes 8 partial
party. Consequently, the entire Party, not merely & part of it, must be firnly
growudcd in the conduct of war. In the Party there can be no divisions of
functions, such as between statesmen and generals, Every Party penber must
be both “political” and "military."

Tho concentration of proletarian forces in armed struggle should be
characterised above all, by ths simultaneous ccemitment of forces @ & coutry=
wide scale and by mutual support of various areas of rebellion.

g: The Element of Surprise.

Although ths element of surprise is very tetsu in staging rebellions,
especially uhen the enanies* troops are scattered, these moves must not be such
as to surprise the proletarian elements. Under no circunstances most the sum
prising of the enexy be pernitted to lead to the isolation of the fighters.
"The masses must realise that they are entering an armed, desperate struggle,
with much bloodshed ahead." Communists believe that surprise is possible to .

- 12h =

pgtioe a

fort ee 5 I sper SS er,

—o

a lirtted extent-—-es to the exact time of the becinning of the fighting; as
the resolutenses and tempo of section on the prt of the revoluticnary messes;
and as to tactics in the various combat episodes.
be The Armed Forces (Dispersal, Disarming, ad Prevention ef Concentration).
The technique of revolution provides for the prevention of concentrations
and the dispersal end disarming of the opponent's armed forces. It should
be the aim of the revolutionaries to defeat the enexy even before the form-
tion of a re-uler front. If a frat is formed, however (for example, if
because of inadequate political work among the peasants in certain rural areas
a condition favorable to couter-revolutionary activity 1s created), every=
thing should be done to harass the enezy on such a front. He should be left
with as little space, sanpower, and material as possible, all of which are
vital to the development of an arsy; dn no case must the enemy's hinterland
be left "clear"; bebind the eneny's front the forces of revolution must always
be active and seek disintegration of hostile strength.

The proletariat must wage a energetic, ruthless bettie for the vacilisting
elements of the armed forces. It must strive to win over to the militant pro-
Jetariat ao many of the armod forces personnel as possible.

lenin cites ecme examples of the “most desperate, violent battle between
the reactionary forces and the Revolution for the vacillating military" during
he rebellion of the Moscow proletariat in December 1905. "The Governnent
resorted to the most diverse and desperate measures to keep the wavering
soldiers on its side: flattery, bribes, distribution of watches, money, etc.

= 125 -

891154 a

i ce ke

ou

Tne saldicrs were given brandy, they were cccelved, intimidated, locked up
dn the barracks and disarmed, and those who were considered the most mreliable
were torn from the midst of their comrades by farce and treason." The reason
the Government succeeded in keeping the upper hand with the soldiers was,
according to Communist interpretation, that the revolutionaries did not know
hor to comter "the desperate, brutal measures of the Government with an
equally active and ruthless struggle for the wacillating military"; and that,
specifically, thay hesitated to ain their bombs at the counter-revolutionary
officers (who incited the soldiers against the people) and to exterminate then.
A documnt distributed in the etreets of Moscow during the days of the
Moscow "December Revolution" set dom the missions of the "battle for the mili-
tary": "Draw a sharp line between your acknowledged enenies and your involuntary,
accidental eneniss. Destroy the former, spare the latter. Spare the infan-
try inscfar as possible, The soldiers are children of the people and do not
attack the people of their own free will. They are being incited by their
officers and superiors, Every officer who leads soldiers in the Slaughtering
of workers will be declared an enery of the people and an outlaws, Kill his,
uherever you encounter hir, In combat with the police proceed as follows: When-
ever possible, kill all superiors up to the rank of Kommissar, Disarm snd
arrest al] supervisors end kill those knom to be particularly vicious and
teutal, As for ordinary policemen, disarm them and make them serve you instead

of the Government."

~ 126 «

891154 -96

7 7
oo eee a HS ay Se er See ee ee ee ey en ee or
Be . cy 2 toe vom nae as oan 3 .

2. Practice of Revolutionary Action

Qo Military Instrurents Used.
(1) General.

Cosmrmist use of military forces and weapons is no less
scientific than the military science practiced by modern armies, Com
munist practices reveal the principle of integrating all elements of
force which can be applied, just as an amy and the industrial power of
a ration are mobilised for war. There is, however, no rigid rule that
has and can be applied insofar as Communist use of military instruments
4s concerned. The principle to be applied, fron the Commmnist view=
point, 1s embodied in the following statement by Lenins "To have at the
decisive moment, at the decisive erat. an overwhelming superiority of
forces << this law of military success is also the law of political
success."

Ths exact nature of the military instruments is determined
by the specific conditions existing at the tize and place of the revo-
lution, These include the locale of operation, the time of year the
4nsurrection takes place, and whether the society is industrial, agri-
cultural or nomadic, Terrain, climate, and the sise of a country are
aleo influencing factors.

The instruments available for use in the seisure of state
power are usually of the same type. First, there is the power of an
organised and trained revolutionary ae whose personnel may be drawn
from either the government armed forces or fran the civil population, or

@ 12 =

au

sb, Second is the quisiemilitary force, without the som organi

f

tion of an amy; and the guerrilla and partisan units.

(a) Armed Farces.

In the very few instances where Communists have
gained power through the use of a formally organised amy, this army
has followed more or less orthodox patterns with regard to organisation,
fmotiens, and methods, Commmist possession of a well-organized and
equipped smy ie rare, and if 4t does exist, it follows the known tech-
nigues for the use of armed farce, ©

(b) Quasi-Military Forces.

The development of quasi-ailitary groups has been
exphasised by the Comnmist Party. The potential of such groups can ve
relatively great, as has been dewonstreted in Italy, France, snd Germany.
A nazter of these foretions now in existence such as the partisen groupe
dn Itely are largely an outgrowth of World War I.

A quasiemilitary force is usually organised in
a country through the formtion of Cormmiet eclls in which militancy is
both encouraged and demanded by the Party, followed by the formation of
additional cells along more functional military lines. For example, in
the armed forces, or in unions in heavy industries, until the stage is
reached where mabers of the union may be organized along strictly mili-
tary lines, such forces may be considered to be quasi-nilitary forces.

In the early stages of development, the organisation
of the quasi-military force is very loose, in many respects being largely
a “paper” organisation, with a staff composed of trusted Party militants.

~ 328 «
— _ 891154 -288

Te see i ots te a edi ae cee : eas 75

SRI TT TTT
tle ? a oF : : oe” .

oat

As the orgetisation precrosses 1t becomas more formlised, enbodying
what is in effect a functioning general staff, tranamitting its orders
to cazponents of the force.

Such forces develop also along other lines, as in the
Italian Communist Party's quasi-military organisation which is commonly
known as the Apparato, The Apparato has a military head who is responsie
ble to the Italian Communist Party for military ection. This leader has
a staff organized into recognised military staff sections, pereomel,
intelligence, operations, and supply. The Apparato is organised by
regions, each regional command having jurisdiction over Apparato personnel,
in its area.

(2) Strategy and Tactics.

In a situation in which the Commmist Party has not been able
to seise the power of the state by political maine 4% is possible that
power may be eoised through armed action. Thie method was studied ex-
tensively by Coamumist and Soviet leaders in the period fron epproximately
1920 to duly 1942. Although there is not yet available complete and con=
firmed evidence on the strategy and tactics of quasi-military forces such
as were developed and used by the Soviet Unico, there exists sufficient
information from which certain deductions may be made concerning the use
ef such strategy and tactics. Much of this information is interwoven with
the political, propaganda, labor, sigtclage, and caltural aspects of Coa-
wonien, Therefore these aspects also have a bearing on the organisation
and uso of armed forces. .

~ 129 =

891154 -ast

ae

(a) Communist Tactical Doctrine.

It 4e the custom of the Cossrunists to hold critiques
after each insurrectional effort in order to diagnose the action and its
results and to formulate generel principles to be observed in future
attempts, Until 3923 these conferences were held openly, but thereafter
the strictest security measures were cbeerved, and information conceming
then became difficult to obtain.

. Ccemmumiam's experiences with insurrections were cam
municated to the neophyte leaders primarily through the elaborate train-
ing school system maintained in the Soviet Union, the principal institution
having been the Lenin Institute in Moscow.?

This and several other schools of revolution typified
one method of disseminating the lessons learned from the critiques. Party
nasvals summarising lessons learned in critiques are distributed to Party
meube rs.

A German Coammist attempted to synthesise the broad
principles of the conduct of revolution in general and the insurrection
4n particular, His tenets boar a etriking resenblance to certain of the
recognised principles of warfare: (1) the choice of the right mamont;

(2) concentration of forces; (3) the attack at any costs; and (lh) prevention
of the conoentration of the eneny.
(b) Specific Tactics Azainst Armed Forces and Police.

From these general principles ancther Cersan Cocmmmist

formulated specific tactics to be used against most of the cosrcive

2) Cf po 32, -~1% -

med 891154 -AsS

ee ee re
“ =e

a

avcotetus of the borrgoois state. Froz the Commmist point of view tr:
most dangerous element of this apparatus is the armed forces. His formu
lations described how the proletariat will be able to daninate the regular
amy, the fleet, the various polic: organizations, and the voluntary
military organizations (leaguss). =

"The Regular Army:

"The regular amy, if it is not demorelised, is the mort
powerful arm avoilable against the proletarian revolution. It is obvious
that the amy operates to the best advantage in the fields and in the
daytime. Fighting within the cities, especially at night, hinders the
operations of the various units. These units as listed below are to a
greater or lesser degree dangerous in the Commmistic fight:

"Infantry:

"Constitutes the majority of effective personnels it
uses fire power as well as the bayonet; it takes over buildings and
quarters; it mops up insurgent territory and occupies conquered positions.

"The weak points of this arm, which the Communists must.
know how to use, are:

" “Their firearms can be used within the cities only at
relatively short range.

PAt the begiming of the battle, the peculiarities of the
tom are little known from the point of view of using them for cperations
(difficulty of orientation).

"There is always the danger of being attacked by hidden
insurgents (in basenents, on roofs, in windows, or in attics).

-1l--

Jiceeiaog ON Ee Ae

a7

"The infantry is composed principally of peasants and
workers, This mass is not interested . o » © in defending the ruling
clesses or the middle clacees; as a result of this, fraternization and
agitation can demoralise the company and swing then over to the side of
the insurrectionists. The necessity of operating by Little groups in the
sist; which are not any longer under direct command, causes certain
groups of soldiers to cease to be reliable. With « little good work o . «
4t Js relatively easy to swing them over to the Red side. There is also
the necessity of putting out of combat the commandant.

artillery:

"This arm o « « o is the one which makes the most
d=pression on the masses. However, the material danger to the insurgents
who knoe how to make use of cover is quite insignificant. There are the
sam possibilities of disarganising here as we saw in the case of the
infantry.

“Armored Cars:

"These are very dangerous to the insurrection. To fight
them the insurgents would use: Artdliery, if they are in porsession of
anys hand-grenades and high=powered boxbs throm under the tenks and cars
4n groupe of 5 or 63 ditches which are both wide and deep enough to go
across the street (width, 14 meters to 3 meters; depth 14 meters to 2 meters).

"Cavalry:

"This arg is the moet vulnerable in street fighting. Also
ite role in case of insurrection is insignificant.

891154 -as7

. se en ere coe meee

“Aviation:

“An aerial reconnaissance can only give important resuits
if the insurgents fron the beginning have applied only the most elementary
means of canouflage.

"Chemical Weapons:

"The best offense against chemical arms is the seisure
of apparatus by insurgents (gas tanks and equipment) and the destruction
of personnel.

"Fleet:

"The artillery of the fleet can be used by the govemment
only for the purpose of firing on certain buildings or quarters, How]
ever, the crews from the fleet, it they are behind the government, can
be used as forces of infantry in the form of small detachments. The
Communists must look to the disintegration of these elements."

"Police Agencies"

The Lenin School teucht a few precautions to be observed
in attacking police stations or posts:

"Police forces are notoriously umreliable (from the Cam=
munist vierpoint) for insurrections, Consequently, the city's riot
squad, sure to put up a fight, is studied. If it is on three shifts, the
weakest one is picked for attack. If there is suspicton that police
officers are alert to what is brewing, the advice is to telephone them on

aa77

891154 -A5é

au ”

a phony pretext to le:m whether they are at hone or or duty."

Communist tacticians listed some of the advantaroes
of the insurrectional troops: familiarity with the city, ease of
sacntatien. awareness of existing conditions, In short, they have the
means “to insure themselves of a rapid attack, to appenr wmexpectedly,
to execute successful raids, etc."

(co) General Tectics.

Conclusions which would serve as a rule in establishing
a plan of insurrection which have been stated by the Conmunists include:

"Among the troops whose thoughts are counter-revolutionary,
we are to disarm them by a surprise attack. In those units where there
exists a Comanist cell having some influence on a por tion of the .
soldiers, we must organize the insurrection so as to eliminate the
commandant urd later on use these soldiers against those units which
have not yet been demoralized,

"In the case there the surprise attack has not been

successful, these troops must be kept in their berracks and must be
prevented from approaching the city. In this case, we must uss barricades,

we must organize the siege of the barracks and cantonments until such

time as the insurgents will have formed their amed forces and reinforced
eny conquered positions,

"If regular troops have entered the city to fight the
insurrection, we must aprly the tactics of barricades, keeping then
thus on a front and at the same time orpenize to attack tham from the

rear, from the windows and rooftops, organize fratemnisation and thus

~ 134 -

7 891154 OF

[a Ror sat bh

denoralize the soldiers."
In addition to a roncral strategic plan embracing
the entire country, there should bo a detailed tactical plan for
each city which would indicate, among other things:
“a, An appreciation of the circumstances and the
relation of the forces within the town itself.
">, The date the insurrection is to be set in motion.
"9, The principal objectives where the insurrents
must succeed.
"ad. The distribution of forces among various objectives.
"@,. The missions the detachments must accamlish
after executing their primary mission.
"f, Some indication of alternative conduct to be
followed in case of failure of one detachment or another.
"e. Measures to be taken to prevent loyal troops
from other cities or regions from caning in.
"h, The formation of rerular units of tho Red Amy
during the course of the fighting.
"1, The organization of communications during the
insurrection.
"je The location of the general military commander
and other comnanders.
"ke <A social map of the city indicating favorable
quartersaccording to their social cheracter, |

891154 ~2teo

oS oes
re) ay AG a Cee oa .

NL. The detailec disposition of and degree of
loyalty within the police orpanization and military associations
which are countererevolutionary.
"m, The location of armories and the force of
their guard.
"n, What counter-measures the forces of the city
may logically employ.
“o, Information on garages, automobiles, trucks,
etc., belonging to the state which will be removed.
">. The use, during the insurrection, of urban lines
of communication.
“aq, The personnel and armarent of the revolutionary
forces." | |
The attack on a city is visualized as beginning in the
suburve in the early morning in 2 general and cencentric att:ck on the
central quarters, with diversionary attacks to begin in other quarters.
While the main attack is going forward, special recornaissance squads
recruited from soldiers, young Communists, and specially trained Con-
munist scouts (Pioneers or Red Falcons) would asce: «in the distribution
of government forces at armunition magazines, bridges, passages, rail-
roads, etc,, and who would also attack and disarm small groups of soldiers,

organize revolts in the troops, and circulate rumors favorable to the

=. 891154 -Qul

Qala chore, Aw Rees ee es ——
we = a . cei a ar Pa a or.

4rsurvents. The intelligence missions were to be partially fulfilled by
wonen and children.
Instructions on street flighting gave emphasis to the
maintenance of conmunicationa and liaison both laterally and from
the front to rear, by telephone,couriers on foot, or using motorcycles
and autanobiles.
Enphasis was placed on offensive operations, but the
defensive action was to be based on the following principles.
fa, To rain time in concentrating forces and resources
with a view to taking the offensive.
"b, To contain the adversary to certain points so that
%,..° the main blow may be struck at others.
®"c, In order to maintain lines of cormmication and
occupied points.
"d,. To maintain the disposition of those units which
are resting.®
The primary objective of the Communist tactical doctrine is
that of overcoming the government's armed forces by a combined aseault
and fraternisation technigus. Their tactics are based on probing the
enemy's weaknessses and exploiting them to the utmost. Planning, sur

prise, and the maintenance of commmications for maximum coordination

ee eg
S2 at les © ra a es .

ne 2 _ *

891154 -20a

Vs :
aa

arm stressod. A weamesc of Cammmist technique lies in its tendency
toward standardisation which, in tum, may easily lead to advance
knowledge of procedures.

The plan for fighting government forces may take varied
forms. There may bo a general offensive with the object of conquering
an aszea. There may be an offensive directed against strategic points
with the object of controlling an area without physically occupying all
of it. There may be a purely defensive action of the barricade type.
These actions may be used singly or in various combinations, As else-
where, local situations will govern the tactics. An open, general offen-
give designed to occupy and capture an area or city may deviate only
slightly fram orthodox warfare.

It is a characteristic of city and house fighting that the
function of control is extremely difficult, so that the individual
soldier must. be thoroughly trained in the operation. (United States Arny
Field Manual 31-50 comments that such fighting requires "the highest
degree of initiative, akill, coming, and courage on the part of the . « ©
individual soldier").

(d) The Internal Assault.

When the attack originates from inside the city and is an
uprising in the proper sense of the word, the tactics will differ to san
extent in that the insurgent forces are able to go directly to the pointe
they wish to assault, and often. even arrange their dispositions before the
assauit is begun. In this way the objectives may all be taken simultansously.

oum 994154 -Al2

Ee EE NE SRT yee cee emi “4

891154 Aw

ne

a

form gangs of workers arned with rifles and hand grenades who will march
on eneay positions and on the officers’ training schools and surround
then,*

Actually, Lenin's plan was not executed because the masses
in Petrograd etaged a successful spontaneous uprising.

(e) Attack on Key Objectives.

Often the situation will be such that it will not be necessary
to fight to ocoupy the entire town. The insurrection can be consummated
by attacking one or several key military objectives in tow, which will
automatically eliminate resistance. This is more likely to be the situ-
ation when the revolution enjoys wide popular support.

The Bolshevik rising in Petrograd, for which Lenin had planned
&@ grand sssault, is an instance where capture of a specific objective, the
Winter Palace, was the only major armed engagement necessary to assure the
capitulation of the goverment. Kerensky hed made the mistake of assembling
his goverment at Single point end trying to protect it with the meager
forces available. By 7 November 1917, Trotsky's seisure of the city’s techni-
cal services, caabined with what Neuberg later referred to as "scouting
action," gave the insurgents control of Petrograd without casualties. One
achool of thought maintains that the capture of the Winter Palace and the
goverment therein was an entirely superfluous gesture sincs the government
wes isolated and hence incapable of seeding, yet even were the Winter
Palace to be considered a mere symbol of power, ite capture was necessary,
for the capture of such symbols of power has an important psychological effect.

(f) Guarritis Action (General).

Fighting the arsed forces of the government may be carried
on by guerrilla action, with the purpose of demoralizing government forces.
Ooviously, where the aim is victory through Senchslteation, revolutionary
conditions must exist to an extreme degrec before such tactics have even
a chance of succeeding. At the same time, guerrilla warfare is the only
practical means of fighting organised government troops when the latter's
strength is relatively unimpeired.

The soldier's discipline and training show to best advmtage
when he has a definite and visible enemy to cimbats sniping, attacks on
dndividuals or small groups of soldiers by a “oe who strikes suddenly and
disappears into nowhere doss not offer tre orginized military force a
target, it nage him and saps his noiale, deprives him of his will to fight.
Therein lies the advantage of guerrilla ection. In iissbeu: December 1905,
the rebels combined barricade tactics with gisrrille warfare so effectively
that they wn the city from the garrison, and held out until fresh govern-
went troops, with heavy artillery, were brought against thea fraz outside.
Small, ewiftly moving equads ambushed polios prtrols to get their ars.
Posters were prominently displayed for the instruction of civilian fighters:
"Do not form clusters, but attack in small groups with lightning speeds Do
not entrench in fortified positions but use thorcughfares and street
comers to fire a volley and disaprear again; Buiid barricades to hamper
troop movement rather than for defsnse .*

- 1h) -

en a
| = .

These principles are still besic doctrine, They were uso0d
4n Germany during the early 1920's and as late as July 1932.

The success of underground resistance movensnte in occupied
comtries, for example, the Chetniks, Tito's Partisans, the Ustact in Tuzo-
slavia, and the French Maquis, indicates that tactics of guerrilla fight-
ing have a universal application.

(g) The Sovist Partisan Movement in World War IT.

Since World War IT the Soviet Union has sponsored meetings
of Camunist-controlled partisan organisations in omer to control and
further indoctrinate and strengthen such partisan organisations. Lessons
in military tactics, which oan be used for guerrilla warfare, have been

ins published in Party propaganda distributed to Cammist Party nembers.

| Diagrans and sketches have appeared in French Communist Party propaganda—
@ exetoh showing a eal) infantry wit in the attack, the under portion
Pe an pee aneey erin ren even re
and advice on how to esek the best firing positions from cover or conceal~
ment.

During World War IT partisan activity provided a great deal
of assistance to the Soviet Union, Although this partisan activity occurred
in the years 19ki-l5, it demonstrates Soviet-Commmist methods of guerrilla
warfare.

Organisation.

In the fall of 1911 when the German forces had already seized
— a considerable slice of Russia, the Council of Peoples’ Commissars peseed,

= 142 =

cs oer g9t154 -AGl ;

‘ = ;

uncer Stalin, a decres providing for the creation of a partisan movement
in the rear echelon of the enemy forces. The center of the partisan
movement was established in Moscow, Appointed to head the Central Staff
(CSPD) was P. PONOMARENKO, the Secretary of the CKVKP (b) (Central Cos-
mittee of the All-Union Communist Party-Bolshevikes) of Byelorussia, who
occupied the position until the end of 1913.

The Central Staff of the Partisan Movement was directly sub=-
ordinated to the CKVEP (b) (Staelin). Ona military level it was likewise
olosely coordinated directly with the Red Army General Staff, and indirectly,
with the Peoples Commissariat for Internal Affairs (NKVD). In Gucig,
the coordination of these agencies at a top level was to provide comple te
hermony of policies and operations. In practice, however, it resulted quite
frequently in friction, antagonism and, occasionally, in hostile rivelry
batween ths Generel Staff and the NKVD.

The mission of the CSPD consisted of organising partisan
activity in the rear of the eneny armies, both within the USSR and in out-
lying territories. The purpose of the partisan movement consisted not only
of operations of a purely strategic nature, but also of political, divere
sicnary, and terroristic activity on a large scale.

For the organisation of these activities, the CSPD was
supplemented by the following sections:

ao Intelligence and reconnaissance

bo Diversion and terror (including sabotare, provocation, etc. )

C. Proparanda

dG. Idaison and communications

= 143 =

oo tiod au)

2 \ |: ca .

Several schools and tre‘ning ccurses were esteblished under
the Centrel Staff for the purpose of training leaders and rank workers
in political, diversionary, and terroristic methods and tactics.
Attention was devoted almost exclusively, in view of the urgent need for
immediate ection, to practical questions. The course lasted from one to
three months in most cases, after which period the student was considered
qualified. One Central Staff school existed for more thorough preparation
of personnel with a two-year training periods; only the 1913 class was
ever graduated, however. Among the graduates were partisan leaders
with training in all aspects of underground activity.

Each school and training course specialized in one particular
phase of work, such as propaganda, diversion, sabotage, intelligence,
radio, etc. Persormel consisted chiefly of former NKVD workers,
militia men and Soviet administrative amiss evacuated from ensxy-
occupied territories. Their families were usually forced to remain in
the rear. The teaching staff in each case was determined by the nature
of training. For exemple, intelligence and reconnaissance were taught by
Soviet intelligencs agents; NKVD officers were used as instructors for
diversion, terrorism and sabotage; propaganda was taught by officials of
the propaganda apparatus of the CKVKP (b).

The occupied territories were divided into sectors of partisan
influence, with a staff for each, subordinated directly to the Central

Staff in Moscow, for example, SPD Kalininsko! Oblastd, and SPD Byelorussia.

Cg 8

All partisen abet involved as they were in a system of cross
chammels and more or less twosmay waketsiniicn, carried out a practically
parallel series of nissions along the lines of intelligence political and
terroristio work; particular autonomy was enjoyed by the Special Groups
and the NKVD. All partisan organs established their om underground groups
among the looal civilian population in the enexy-ccoupied territories
which were used almost exclusively for operational work in wnformity with
instructions issued by the corresponding partisan organs. These undere
ground groups may be classified structurally according to the following
types: |

a. "3-5" Groups, a type employed chiefly by the Konsascl, Each
Group consisted of three to five men, with one contact man whose duty was
to make hie way at regular intervals into partisan-controlled territories,
find the instructor and receive all instructions fran hin.

be Chain-type groups, exployed chiefly by partisan detachnente,
These groups, which varied extensively in ube, were organised according
to a system whereby each member imew only the individual by whom he was
recruited and one member in turn recruited by hizself.

c. NKYD groups, organised according to the agent systen, whereby
a resident chief was appointed for each sector and placed in charge of
separate groups of agente. |

d, Underground groups of the ordinary type, consisting of any
number of members up to 30, each of whan was informed as to the identity of
ali other members in the same group.

A sncothiy functioning system of liaison and commmication existed
between the purtisan movenent, the Party and the NKVD in the enemy rear and
the Central Organs in Moscow, Principal means of commmication were radio
and aviation for the transmission messages, intelligence vepeite: directives
and the like. Personnel were transported to and from the enexy rear by
air exclusivaly. Planes landed in assigned areas of partisan activity on
landing strips specially constructed by partisans,

Diversion.

The Soviet Command devoted considerable attention to the
work of partisan organs along diversionary lines. Partisan diversion
played a predexinant role in the activities of the Soviet userground —
4n eneuy~oocupied territory; its significance, while primarily militery,
extended as well into the political and econozic sphere.

The CSPP threw an enormous amount of materials, money, and
monpower into the field for the purpoees of Sivereton, sacrificing in
meny cases some of their most able workers in the line. Losses, to be
gare, in time and life were proportioately heavier than in any other lino
of partisan activity.

Means of Diversion: ;

Diversionary work was accamplished primrily by means of explosives,
wateh, like all other supplies and materials, were delivered by air to
tho area of partisan activity. Those materials were also suuggied into
cities and areas under enemy control, usually with the aid of well-

camouflaged courlers, disguised as peasants travelling fron rural districts

ey
% @ m

a. Pre
ou eae “ Yier

eee De
Pa alk

eae as :
Teepe

Y ieee * ‘

EN aie Ga

io ed

+o town. Veepons cnd explosiveg were concealed in wagons and certs,
in sleigh runners, in milk cans, under women'a clothing, ete.

Explosives were used to prepare toluene and ammoniac mines weigh-
ing anywhere fron 0,20 to 45 or 50 kilograms. These mines were set off
by a time mechanism with special electric or mechanical fuses.

Among ready-made war materials used for diversionary work the
following vere most frequent:

gp Magnetic mines = Fnglish and /.merican models, with slowaction
fuses. (In 1944, 8 Soviet-made magnetic mine appeared, copied
almost exactly fron the ~merican model. English and American
delay fuses continue to be used hovever.)

be. Thermite grenades —- used chiefly for incendiary purposes. Out-
standing for force and effectiveness.

g, Phosphorous pills - likewise used for incendiary purposes. The
user had a good chence to reach security, in th: t the pills
burst into flame only after a specific time interval.

In addition to the above, other mteriais were also used, however
to a lesser extent, due to limited effectiveness: Gless-sand powder,
gasoline tanks, and toluene candles with incendiary wicks.

Basic diversionary work, in particulrr thet which involved conspiracy,
was accomplished largely by means of the magnetic mine, which by virtue
of ita convenient form and delayed action, proved to be the most effective

and practical type of material.

._* . »
Sua we?

he e . esse zi
AE ee! Slag SE ep
ee ee ke ee
.

FFT A
paneer

CGE te seme,

Qperational tlethojs of Diversion.

Every diversionary mission was preceded by meticulous reconmaiesance
for the purpose of studying the target and the surroundings, checking the
amount of material available, and determining the most favorable time for
accomplishing the act. Reconnoitering wos usually done by persons not
initiated into the subsequent phases of the mission, Then, on the basis
of all available data, a plan wes drawn up with the participetion of the
persons who were picked to cerry it out.

As soon as the plan of action vas composed, the diversionary mterial
wes immediately brought to the appointed spot, or as near as conditions
permitted. Material was selected according to the nature of the target
and the circumstances umier which the act must be accomplished. Thus,
for blowing up 8 reilroad track at the moment wher a transport should press,
or for demolishing a highway, heavy toluene mines with electric or auto-
matic mechanical fuses were used. These mines ware installed at the pre-
scribed points anc left there. Most important military transports were
destroyed at railroad stations by means of magnetic éAnes installed in
edvance near the station. |

In the former instances the chief purpose was destruction of road~
bede and tracks, while the trensport merely represented a convenient mediun
for the explosion. The executors themselves had no knowledge of whet the
transport contained.

Diversion in factories, warehouses, bases, gasoline dumps, tank parks
and motor pools, as well as theaters and other public places, was accomplished

~ 148 -.

ag 8941

“4 . * ’
ines / : 2 r CEPR : : 7 er x * . : rg 5
. & Stew See . Pas ‘wl br <, * Se aes i Sv pee Liem Pedr ar, é- oA
r, iy ae ie a ie , eo eee a ae sw x mi
g a we TE ES

waur porsetic pinta, tine “nec, thermesecnd phosrionsaus, In mort

easce, the expioaives vere brought in ahead of time, sometimes eeveral
duys in cedvance; there were casea, to be sure, of explosion being pro-
duced immediately after the installation of the meterial, For example,

& diversionist entered e theater with a briefoase containing several
maipnetic mines, with the fuses set in advance. Tsn mimites before the
explosion. he left the theater, having placed the briefcase under the seat.

In another instance, a movie~house electrician connected a magnetic
mine with electric fuse to the motion picture projector. This he did
during the morning. In the evening, when the nouse ws full, the lights
were dimmed, the projector turned on, and the explosion oocurred.

Power lines and telephone networks in the enemy zone were demolished
by means of small thermite grenades, and in the Zone 4 by means of saws
and axes

Arter accomplishing large-scale diversion in the area of enemy control,
the executor, if he were under suspicion, or generally in danger, withdrey
into the partisas-controlled zone. When further activities reqrired his
preeence in the erec regardless of security threats, another method of
retreat wes followed, whereby a different member of the same underground

group withdrew instead of the executor. The other member, probably a
non-perticipant or only a partial perticipant in the recently accomplished
diversion, may have been under suspicion himself; or, he may have tried

to draw attention away from the real culprit by leading the enemy to believe
he wes the guilty person. As soon as he had thus placed himself in a

dangerous position, he retreated into the pertisan-controlled sree,
leaving the rest of the underground group free to contimue operations,
unimpeded by persecution, and the executor remained in the shadows.

Sabotare.

It ia clear that this diversion represented all the
military aspects of partisan activity, directed toward weakening the
eneny'g mterial strength and potential in key spots, destruction of
enemy personnel, and consolidation of partisan control by direct means.

The primary purposes of sabotage, on the other hand, consisted
of encouraging discontent among the local population, incurring the
wrath of the enemy, undermining his authority, and inciting reprisals,
which in turn, further provoked the population and promted a spirit of
resistanee. The effective mintenance of this vicious circle, which
could be brought to the point of self~perpetuation by a minimm of
effort on the pert of the partisans, was the result of sabotage.

A correlated purpose of sabotage ws the organic preservation of
the Soviet system in its fmdamental structure, which was often as in
the case of farming technique and agricultural organization, a task in
which the enemy occupational euthorities unwittingly assisted. The wide
network of agents which enveloped the enemy administration needed only
to profit by existing policies and to provide the necessary correctives
wherever such policies did not conform completely to partisan aims.

Thus, by contrast to diversion, the methods of sabotage were of an
indireoct nature, with political and economic considerations taking pre-
cedence over the military.

1154

Ts 2s
Rape ae an

= = re
ery Sete Ny iy

Oe Be

ey oa ) ac

Subotece activities were initiated br all of the pertisan organs.
These include the NKVD, SPD, Brigades, partisan detachnents, Party
end Kongomel centers, and special groups. The leading role in the
delineation and initiation of most missions, was, however, perforned
by the Party organizations at Oblast and Raion levela, a fact which
further emphasizes the political significance of this type of work.

Sabotage missions were executed mainly by local inhebitants. A
giecibes attempt was made to enlist persons cecupying key positions
of responsitility. | Interpreters and advisers attached to the nilitary
administration and the economic apparatus were usually unfavorably
disposed toward the new regime; even such persons as may have suffered
under the Bolsheviks or been violently anti-Commnist saw that the
Nagie intended to proserve the existing conditions of slavery in
Russia, merely changing the slogans and exploiting the people for their
our ends. As a result, many such employees could be draum into the net-
work of partisans, and they made good use of their opportunity for
committing setotage in the corresponding agencies and institutions.

The entes of saboteurs among the local population was swelled by
an influx of special partissn agents into key institutions. These
agent~saboteurs were usually left in the area in the wake of the Red
Army where they posed as political persecutees, enemies of Bolsheviks,
former concentration camp inmates, ex-Bulaks, and Red Army deserters.
The Gernans on the whole were inefficient in the matter of distinguishing

gemuine persecutess from the small contingent of imposters who were

mrerically vastly infericr to the macs of people who hated the Sovict
regine so violently that “2. > welcomed the invaders as liborators in
the first months of tho var.

Agent=sabotewr's equipped with falsified documents panetrated the
occupational administrative apparatus and the local adninistrative
agencies. For example, muny Oblast administrative chiefs, bourgomeisters,
village overseers (starosty), doctors, agricultural technicians, and
local chiefs of police were active partisan sabotage workers.

Mention should also be mde of the sabotage work done by former
menbere of the Conmmist Party and the Konsomol who remained in the
occupied gone either intentionally as gemine refugees or under force
of circunstance.

These people vere usually recruited by the underground groups after
they had already obtained employment on thoir own initiative in importent
agencies. Recruiting was done by threatening to expose thelr pest to the
German authorities unless they consented to cooperate with the partisans.

Wonen played a particular part in sabotage just as they did in
certein phases of diversionary work. On the pretext of amorous inclinations,
they entered into the confidence of prominent enemy officials, whom they
induced by "friendly advice" to carry out various missions. The officials
in question rarely realized that they were being used, or that their
subsequent actions fitted into a plan which was not apparent in the beginning,

In addition to the types of workers deacribed above, the CSPD sent out
trained saboteurs vhose duty wee to rezain in the feld and to direct
sabotage on the spot.

-1in-*

os 891454 aT

mt te Be . -
Se ce : . erin Santa

Scbotape vas carried out in all areas of the cecupied territory$
however, like diversion, it was concentrated in the areas of eneny control.

Jerre
In partisan usage, terroristic acts refer to assassimtion

of important persons or groups of persons.

Terrorietic acts vere carried out on the initiative of local
partisan organs or in special cases, by direct order from Moscow (CSPD).

Terroristic activity was lergely conducted by the NKVD from the
Oblast level on down, with the other mrtisan organs usually playing
@ secondary part.

The majority of missions were exccuted by former NKVD workers, or
Party members vho had been subjected to special training in terroristic
methods and operations under the CSPD school system in Moscow and other
lerge cities. Only in exceptional eases were local inhabitants employed
for this type of work, and even then, their functions were usually
of an auxiliary nature, vhereby they lent indirect assistance to the
person coun! tting the act.

Operations involving the seizure of specific objectives, such as

cormmications, utilities, and supply depots differ from fighting the
; earned forces of the goverment in that the purpose is not to defeat an
= armed force bat rather to take posreseion of a physical object or series
of objects. This may obviously involve fighting, but it is the occupation
that matters, and umecessary fighting is to be avoided if possible.

Pag . Pa
“Sy 3 Pa
ay ere :
an . ,
! e %
* aren . ores y 4°
. £8 94154 7K
ge ee, ee
as (ite 27 oui

TE Pe
e a

1

cueh otjeeiives ot telen.one and teleeranmi avetere, ruilrotds;
elcctzic power stations, weter and ras works ore highly complica*ed
mchines cepable of being operated only by highly skilied personnel,
Therefore, unlees the purpose is to destroy, rather than utilize such
objectives, the personnel assigned to take them must be of a different

7 type entirely fren those able mercly to fire a rifle. These men must
be specialists and technicians, and their recruitment often presents
& major problem to Commnist forces.
| There are four different methods by which key objectives may be
taken. Onc, the nost obvious and safest, is hy prior infiltration of
revolutionery personnel, so that when the insurrection ocours, the use
of the objective automatically passes to the rebels.

A second method is by means of the peneral strike.

& third and obvious method is the talking of the obfectives by direct
assez.t., a methcd which may or may not be edvisahle, depending on the
eircumstances, Where the insurrection begins with a degree of maecloe,
it often happens thct the objectives are only lipktly gpunrded or oom.
pletely unguarded, so that e handful of arned men may overcome any re-
sistance with ease.

The fourtn method is the capture of the assigned objectives by en
®invisible army," a nethod perfected by Trotsky.

= Trotsky deseribed such an operation as follows: The operational
seizure began at two o'clock in the morning of 7 Novenber 1917, vhen smil

a P5h =

ae

se BOLLTA AT

rartiea of Petrograd rebels, coordinnted undsr an over-oli plan, oecupied
simultaneously, or in prearranged order, the railroad otations, electric
plant, mimitions and food stores, the waterworks, the telephone exchange,
the state bank, the large printing plants, the telegraph station, and
the post office. Trotsky based his tactics on the theory that the
insurrection is an art; technical experts are required to start it

and they alone can stop it. Ke had gathered together about 2,000 men,

e mixture of soldiera and sailors (many with technical skills) and
civilian technicians, and had selected « special staff to lead then:
Antonov-Ovsienko, the leader and a former Czarist officers Podvoisky, a
civiliang Krylenio, a soldier; and Dybenko, a sailor. The amall groupe
were organized according to their skills in reference to the objective
to be taken, All were selected for agrressiveness and complete reliability.

The intensive preparation of these small, tightly orgenized assauit
squzds has been described as follows:

"Trotsky’s Red Guard had been rehearsing in the very center of the
town during the past ten days prior to Novenber 7. AntonowOvsienko, it
was, who organized these tactical exercises, this sort of dress rehearsal
of the coup d’etat, in brood daylight, wherever the streets were thronging
with movement, and around buildings which were of the rreatest strategic
importance in the govermmental and political strongholds. The police
and military authorities were so obsessed by the idea of a sudden revolt
ty the proletarian masses and so concerned with meeting the danger, that
they failed to notice Antonov-Ovsienko's gangs at work.

- 155 -

es 891154. -2W

an *

C3 pe , C.

"Arid such widespread disorder, who should notice the little croup
ef unarned workers; the soldiers and sailors who wardered about in the
corridora of the telephone and telegraph exchanges, in the Central Post
Office, in the Government offices and generel headquarters, taking note
of the arrangement of the offices and seeing how telephones and lights
were fitted? They visualised and renembered the plen of these buildings
and studied the means of getting into then suddenly and at a noment's notice.
chey reckoned with their chances of success, estimating the opposition,
and looking for the places of least resistanoe, the weakest and nost
vulnerable places in the defensive organisation of the technical, nilitary,
and secreterial services of the State. In the general confusion, who should
notice sone three or four sailors or a couple of soldiers or stray wrk-
men wandering around some buildings. going in or elinhing the steirs;
people who did not even lookat each other when they met? [No one even
suspected these people of obeying precise and detailed orders, of carrying
out a plan or of undergoing exercises directed against the strategic points
in the state's defense. Later the Red Cusrds wold strike effectively

beecanse they had conducted their invisible maneuvers on the very ground
where the tattle would shortly begin. ‘Trotsky succeeded in getting hold
of the plan of the town's techrionl services. Dybenko'’s sailors, aided
by two engineers and engine room artificers, mastered the underground
gas and water piping, the electric power cables and the telephone and
telegraph system. ‘Two of them explored the drains under the headquarters
of the Generel Staff.

C: gum Or

"The isolation of the whole district or even a cere creup of houses
bad to be made practioable within a fev mimtes; so Trotsky divided the
toun into seotions, determined vhich were the strateric points, and allotted
the work, section by section, to gangs of aoldiers and skilled workers.
Technicel experts were necessary as well es soldiers. The capture of
the reilwy station in Mosoow ves allotted to two squnds consisting of
25 Latvian soldiers, 2 sailors, and 10 reilwey men. Three gangs of
sailors, workmen and reilway officials, 160 men in all, were ordered to
take over the Warsaw station. For the capture of other stations, Dybenko
essigned a mumber of squads of 20 men each. A telegraphist attached
to every squad controlled movenents on the railway lines. On October 21
and Novenber 3, acting under orders from Antonov-Oveienko who was in
close touch with the maneuvers, all the canvas rehearsed the capture of
the railway stations, and the ¢eneral rchcersal was perfectly well
ordered and precise in every deteil, On that day, three sailors went
to the lmin Electricity Plant near the ports the Plant, run by the city's
technical services, we not even guarded. The mnager asked the sallors
whether they were the men when he had asked the commander of the squsre
to send to him, He had been wanting ae guard for the last five days. The
three sailors took over the defense of the Electric Plant, in oase of
insurrection, they said. In the same way, a few gangs of engine roan
artificers took over the other three municipal plants.*

*In order to overthroy the modern state," Trotsky bad aoid, *you need
e storming party, technical experts and gangs of armed men led by engineere."

=, 891154 -ae

ni *. tgs aE y 7 Ny ght POS ae
Le TIRES SND Ae RT at ET
ne 1 RRR Oe Pe ecg aise Ee re

The Stalin thesis.

Trotaky's tactics were applicd on a oity scale, Mussolini trensposed
then to a nationwide scale, and both Hitler and Stalin endeavored to
apply the pattern to a world-wide scale, The Nazis, of course, failed;
but Stalin hes built, through the systen of Comnmist Parties in all
countries, a corps of insurrectional technicians trained to seize the
technical apperatos of a mation at a signal from Moscow if conditions
are favoreble. .

An example of how this organization is to work is contained in the
alleged instructions civen at the Lenin School in Moscow for the capture
of such cities as Chicago. Commnist operations arc performed not by
peratroop technicians but by local Cormmnist organizations. The airborne
troops are to be the army of occupation.

The plans call first for a high degree of preperation and a thorough
knowledge of the technical services of the city, dow to the most mimte
detalii, The organization and routine of the police is studied mimitely,
Lists of politically "undesirable" citizens provide for the liquidation
of some and the use of others while their fanilies are held hostage.
Squads essigned to capture each objective are trained in each particular
operation. Their final instruction will be the announcement of the hour
and mimte for the strike.

To prevent calls for outside help, communications are interrupted
immediately. Railroads are wrecked several miles outside of the city,

~ 15 -

either by sending out unmanned locomotives or by blowing up incoming
trains. Jrmed squads seize and hold the airports, awaiting incoming
troops.

Captured radio stations order a general strike efter pover plants
are seized. The mayor ; chief of police, and all leading officials
are immediately captured, The myor is "persuaded" to read a previously
prepared proclamtion over the captured radio. If he refuses, which
orans his immediate death, someone with a voice similar to his reads it.

The entire operation tekes 48 hours, at the end of which time a
previously selected government is in operation.

The Earentiel Neture of Seizure.

The role of the technical facilities of the state are vital to
goverment. These met be seized by the insurrents in all cases where the
goverment does not readily abdicate and hand then over, or where the
workers in these installations may be hostile to the new revolutionary
governnent. The well-organized uprising will take pains to allocate
persomel to positions giving control of the technical facilities before
the operation, or, as & very minimm, strike at those facflitiss
immediately ao that surprise will provide their capture intact. lo
goverment, revolutionary or otherwise, is safely entrenched without
complete control of the technical apparatus of the state,

Although errest or assassination alone does not accomplish the coup,
except under rare circumstances, there is no question of the necessity of

cca _
om, BILLEA -abt

Me.

rns we
SEE te ee tt tere

ly aay ce

Lointiicing the percormel of the goverment, Not only do these pconle
Pessuse varying degrece of actual pover, bt, perhaps more inportant
frou ths viewpoint of the publio at lsrce, thay are symbols of power
ard ci the state. Thus, even efter iroteky's Reé Guards had captured
Petrourcd, they etill found it nocessary t- capture the Winter Palace
an! ssccre a written deputation fron the ministers before they could
ccayiaso even the leaders of thoir own Party thet the insurrection
bic sxcceded. No violent insurrection or coup suoceeds unless the
raling figures are arrested, killed, or driven into exile.

Often, the entire success of the plot vill hinge on a successful
asscesiration or arrest, as in the case of the Revolt of the German
Genevais in 1944. Many of the key figuree necessary to the plans
orf2e¢ thelr cooperation (or thoir benediction) only on the proviso
the: U.tler was dead. When the bomb intended to kill him failed, the
ingureotional machine ground to a creaking helt and many of the pivotal
figcte: desorted the csuse. Conversely, in Septenber 1940, uben the
ent->s country of Rumania wos in the hands of the rebels, it was not
untis King Carol had actually signed his abdication thet the tattle
was gonsidered won.

= 160 -

ran) | Ce

an the event arrest is to be .scd to neutralize or elininate the
fovern.antal leaders, the followin: aspects are pertinent:

Aside fron the fact that a man arakened from sleep 4s urdinarily
not su*ficiently alert or perpared tu offer resistance, there appears to
be sonething psycholorically demoralizing atort beine attired in night
clothes while facing a wellearmed man. The averare person whose prestice
rests on his public impression will ordinarily take pains to avcid any
ecbarrassing situation in public and when he is taken off ruard, he is, to

a certain extent, morally disarmed and humiliated.

The Technique of Assassination and Terror.
In certain situations, particularly where the revolution attempts

a change in the rulinre class, the fovernmental leaders will be considered
implacable fo-s and a menace to the revolution as long as they live. Here,
murder or assessination replaces arrest. This method also has the
advantacse of creating terror and thus breaking the resistance of those
leaders who are spared.

Assassination requires careful planninz. There should be several
sets cf alternitive plans in case the first one fails, as well as a plan of

action in case of failure of the entire operation.

| The first task of the mass terrorist is tuo destroy group solidarity,
which he accomplishes by labelling as social crimes all acts with which he

disagrees. Propaganda, which publicizes terroristie acts so as to make the

-16l-

ey gu vee
populace more amenable, bas often been employed by the Communists.
Surcease is offered if the populace accedes to the terrorists! demands,
namely, joining the Communist Party.
bo Political instruments used. The case of Czechoslovakia, where a
Communist coup d'etat was carried out in February 1948, illustrates this
type of Communist maneuver.

A principal determinant of the ti:.ing of this coup — probably the
main detercdnant — was the steady decline of Conmnist prospects in the
Tortheoring elections (scheduled for May 1948) together with the Commnists'
increasine difficulties in outmaneuvering their fellow-parties in the
National Pront, particularly the Social Democrats. At a meeting of the
Commnist Central Committee on November 27-28, 1947, the party head,
Klement Gottwald, served notice thas the Party would not acquiesce in this
trend of affairs. He raised the accusation that the other parties had been
penetrated by secret agents of reaction and were conspiring to brine about
an early governmental crisis in which a rovernment of technicians, omitting
the Commnists , would be formed.

The succeeding steps leading up to and through the Commnists'

seizure of power were the following:

(1) Abandoning all pretense of hoping tocain a majority in the
forthco:dinr, election, the Communists prepared a grandiose progran of
raiical legislation, going far beyond anything agreed to by the parties vith-

in the National Front, The program left the non-Coumunist parties with

Zi sit
; | 891154 aw

ae ee ea page FE

wet

only two alternatives: to accept this program which would have completely
undercut their influence, or to resicn from the government.

(2) Attemptine deliberately to provoke the other parties to choose
the second alternative, the Communists in February 1948 arranged for
ponster reetinss of their adherents. A nation: concress of factory
councils wa: called for February 22 to dentnatrate for Conmmist demand
for further nationalization, A national congress of the Comunist~
controlled farmers’ commissions was called for February 29 to demand the
enactment of Communist-sponsored agricultural legislation that had been
steadfastly rejected by the non-Communists. Both congresses were to press
for acceptance of the draft constitution sponsored by the Communists, to
which the other parties were opresed. |

(3) At the same time the Communists continued to strengthen their hand
in the security police (which they controlled at the top), and prepared the
Workers' Militia for action. Large-scale replacements were «ade of non-
Communist personnel in the Security Corps; activity of agents provocateurs
on the looal level was increased, and discoveries were cade of alleged
. "reactionary" plots, These moves convinced the coderate parties that the
Coscunists were determined to use all available means to gain an absolute

pajority in the elections.
(4) By this means the Communists provoked the National Socialists (the

leading woderate party) into taking the initiative against them, In an

ie 3 "

Eee SNE aw a
meee rag al ed

2a1t 5A -Ave

d SUS.
G9 eo

effort, aprarently, to sidetrack tre cebate on the Constitution, the
National Socialist Party introduced the issue of Communist control of the
police at a.reetine of the National Front on February 5 -— with the
additional aim of forcing a showdown with the Comminists which would
either force them to back down or provide the pretext for holding
elections im.ediately. The National Socialists introduced the police
issue in the Cabinet on February 13. They dexanded that the Communist
idnister of the inte-dor rescind an order for replacement of all regional
Security Corps officers by Conmunists. then the Communists evaded this
demand, the National Socialists nithdrew from the governnent, precipitating
a cabinet crisis.

(5) The Cormmistes seized advantage of this crisis to croate mass
disturbances and seize power, They waives they would not consider re-
forming a governnent with the National Socialist ministers wi had left.
Their nrethods of forcine the appointment of a predominantly Communist
povernzent included: (a) prevailing on the Social Democrats to support
them; (b) holding rass demonstrations to intimidate the moderates; (c)
seizing by force all government offices and preventing non-Communist
erployees and even ministers from attending to tteir duties; (d) searching
the epacsacess of the National Socialist Party throurh the security

police, on charges of an anti-state plot; (e) preventing all non-Corrunists,
4noluding President Benes, from broadcasting by radio to the nation; (f)

breaking up meetings of non-Commmnist parties and seising their printing

plants; and (.°) lettine it be understood that the USSR stood ready to
intervene acainst reappointment of a moderate government. In the latter
connection, it is notenorthy that the Soviet Yeputy Foreign ‘inister,
Valerian Zorin, arrived in l’razue on February 19, ostensibly on other
official business, and remained there ttrouchout the erisis, It seers
indubitable that his remrks to various Czech covernnent officials played
a port in influencing President Benes and the zoderates to capitulate.

The result of these pressures was that President Benes appointed
a predominantly Cormunist cabinet on February 25. |

(1) The Pattern of Cocmnist Participation in ition Governments
Since the ifar.

Communist participation in coalition cabinets with bourcecis _
parties has become an integral part of Comumist tactics since World war II.
The nature and purposes of this participation have been determined by two
factors: the intornal alignments facing the Conmmists within a given
country and the demands of Soviet foreign policy at a given moment. These
factors, in turn, have varied acccrding to two types of countries: |

(s) Non—orbit, where Western influence is ascendant and the
Comminist chances for obtaining control are limited; in these countries,
the Commmists have participated only in genuine coalitions in uhich the

Communist Party has been merely ons among several equal or stronger parties;

- 165 -

. 89

1

“<

15 4-340

ti aa7 ” 6

(b) Orbit, where Soviet occupation or predominance has assured
Communist domination of a bogus coalition in wich otter parties have only
nominal equality,

After the German attack in June 1941 had brought the USSR
and the west torether as Allies, developments in both t:pes of countries
followed a sindlar pattern as Conrunists everywhere emphasized the
riecessity for the joint efforts of all parties and groups ag::inst fascisna,
The Cormmnists took part in alleparty national committees which later became
national sovernments. They propagated nationalist slocans, contributed to
national resigtance movements, and denied their dependence on ibsocow, a
chance symbolized by the formal dissolution of the Comintern in 1943.2
In the period immediately following liberation and Allied
occupation, the Communists continued this policy of participating in
coalition povernzents. On an international level, Big Three agreements
called for the formation of governments representing al] democratic elements
in the defeated and in some of the liberated countries. Internally the
Commnists were too weak outside the orbit to seise poner and not strong
enough inside the orbit to carry out their program. ‘Sreover, in
contrast to the prewar Comminist policy of non-participation in cabinets
THovever, despite this emphasis on unity, it should be noted that the
‘ Communists tried wherever possible to build up their own forces, some-

times even at the expense of the fight arainst fascism. In Yugoslavia

and Greece, for example, Comminist-led partisans fourht rightist groups

as well as Germans and Italiana. The problem of armed Communist groupe

cee continued to vex the governments and occupation forces in France and Italy
following their liberation,

= oo 7 ee 891154 Al

oe Ane,

vee

-_ om...

or of parliamently alliances with other parties (Popular sonia). the
Communists apparently decided that it 1as more advantaz-eous to work as
a governmental party — rather than in opposition - in order to expand
their national stren:th and influence the country's foreign policy.

, Te history of Communist participation in coalition governments
since the war has reflected the transition from the wartire Soviet-\estern
alliance to the rraduil widening of the chasm between ast and test,

In non-orbit countries, as a result of the stresses which East-
West tensions, together with internal developments, have caused in
Corzunist relations with other parties, the Communists have been pushed out
of the former coalitions and into increasinrly bitter opposition to their
respective governcents. As relutions between the USSR and the Weet have
deteriorated, the Commnists have had to consider the alternatives of
coalition or of opposition. The other possible alternative, a coup d'etat,
has now been precluded at least in Nestern Burope, both because of internal
weakness and because of the serious international repercussions of such a
move. By the sumer of 1947, the Commnists were forced out of every

covernnent in Western Duropse. In October 1947, as a result of Loscow’s

2 Alt!oucth the Cormunists foreswore takin: part in bourgeois cabinets, they
did not preclude participation in cabinets in which the "Working class
parties" had a najority, as in the case of local German governments in
' 1023. However, it should be noted that Communist weakness and the
‘ reluctance of the other parties to give Conrmmnists cabinet posts made
the question largely academic before the war. Spain, where the Communists
* did take posts in 1936 represented a special case because of the civil war.-

ag! «A

insistence at the meeting of the Comin’orm, the Freneh and Italian
Cormunists had ta give precedence to the Soviet carpaign against the
Marshal) Plan rather than to their loca) aspirations. They have since
attempted tc redefine their nationalism {in more openly pro-Soviet terms,
have become more anti-vestern, and ‘seen deteri.ined to force the political
situation into a Left-Right dichotomy in which they hope to assume the
leadership of a leftist coalition,

In the orbit countries, worsening East-tlest relations
accelerated Moscow's desire to consolidate its position in the territories
under Soviet influence. As a result, the Communists gradually dropped the
fiction of coalition government, and general Cormc-unist predominance has
been or is being transormed into exclusive Commmnist control. At the
Cominform meeting of dctober 1947, it was decided that even the bogus
coalitions in which the other parties had only nominal autonomy were to be
replaced by unified mass People’s Fronts under Communist direction. The
tempo has varied from country to country. In Czechoslovakia the formation
of a cogus coalition was not possible until after the Communist coup of
February 1948. In Northern Korea and Eastern Germany, Cosmunist tactics
have been conditioned by the possinility of eventual union between the Soviet
and Western Zones and by the desire to maintain contact with parties in
Western Zones and to build up the impression that Soviet Zone parties nore

representative of the whole country.

; - 368-<.

a Fg ee

Since the Tito rift in June 1948, Soviet Coninform goadii, as
pushed the Coumunists into assuming more vine and exclusive leadership
of the nass popular fronts. The obliatory orientation of all parties
toward the USSR has been civen greater emphasis. At the sane time, the
Tito affair has hichlichted the question of hon far Moscow can dictate
Cormunist tactics sererally and with respect to the orranization of
Communist control. It is important to note that Yucoslavia nas the only
country of any size in Eastern Burope where the Communists rained poner
mainly by their onh efforts. In other orbit countries, the prevalence of
toscowm-trained personnel who arrived in the wake of the Red Army and the
dependence of Communists on the USSR for the attainment of power have made
it easier for Ibscow to determine the nature of Communist activity in
these coalitions,

V. COALITIONS IN NOR-ORBIT COUNTRIES.

The hich point of postwar Communist participation in non-erbit
coalition governments came in the period immediately following the war
when the Conmunist parties were operating as "national" parties in a period
of comparative Soviet-festern anity. Not being stronr ane to assume
power, the Commnists identified themselves with specific national tasks
on which they could work jointly with other parties: for exanple, purges in
various countries under fascist and oollatorationist influences, the struggle
in Belgiun and Italy against the esharchy: and reconstruction everywhere.

By thus operating as a national party within a bourgeois coalition, the

89115 a- aa

oe ache Fear 2s, i
ie ie to oS wk. ia
ae REESE N ae 7 a ae oe

Si ee ra eed adem 2 3

| Pont A Std * pe

Communists hoped to reap several benefits.

(1) They hoped to increase their mass support for the first
post-liberation elections. They wanted to take advanta-e of the "respect-
ability" they had gained by their disavowal of revolutionary aims, by
their work in the resistance movements, and by Soviet prestige that came
with victories in the war. They aimed at widening their appeal among
middle-class and arrarian elensnts. In this period when reconstm ction
was a national issue, they did not want to alienate the support of non-
Communist workinc-class elements. Moreover, when British and American
troops were still present, as for example in France and Italy, the
Comcunists felt the necessity of convincing the US and Britain that the
Communist Party nas not revolutionary in order to insure participation in
the postwar elections in which they expected to make gains.

(2) The Commnists, by their very presence in the government, were
able to influence foreign policy. The other parties were oblired to neigh
the consequences for social stability and international prestice should the
Communists be forced into opposition. Such considerations were particularly
important in the case of France, for example, during the ltoscow discussions
on Germany in March 1947. While the Communists micht not have expected to
orient toward the USSR countries in which they nere still a ininority, they
may have hored at least to neutralize these nations in the risin7 fastest
conflict. ‘breover, participation in the cabtnet cpered up to the Corunists

sources of information and new avenues of esrionare ressrding foreicn nolicy

«

~ 170 -

{4 aaa i

e

matters. It ahould be noted that the Conmunist attitude toward assuminz
the responsibility for foreign policy has depended on the individual
situation, Thus, din Italy, during 1946 and 1947, the Communists showed
no predilection to accept any blame for the peace treaty being necotiated.

(3) They attempted to infiltrate whatever ministries they did
procure and to use their position in the -overnment to enhance the position
of the party. The tempo of their operations depended on the opposition
they net from the other parties. Perhaps the best example of Communist
infiltration was provided in Czechoslovakia, which, though in the Soviet
orbit, before the coup d'etat in February 1946 resembled the non-orbit
countries politically, Here the Commniets placed their men in the aray,
the secret police, and in economic positions which facilitated the
execution of the February coup.

(4) In several instances the Commnists tried to correlate their
participation in coalition cabinets with proposals for United Fronts with
Socialist parties in the hope of being able to establish Communist
supretacy over the working class. Such unified action was aimed at en-
hancing leftist parliamentary strength against the center and right and --
although their attacks azainst the Socialists at the time were muted — to
dominate Socialist policies and to wean the Socialist rank-and-file from its

leadership. However, Communist policy in this connection has varied

891154-24L

(° oo
i .

considerably, The United Front did not last lon- in France, In smaller

western turopean etates, the Cormurists were not anxious for such unity

since it often meant that they would be subordinated to the more powerful

Social Democrats. Moreover, it should be noted tiiat since their elimination

from the Western European povernments, and following the formtion of the

‘ Cominform, Conmunist professions of a desire to re-enter various coalition
governments have been accompanied by stronc attacks against the Socialists.

As long as the Communists have considered participation in the

governnent efficacious for the achievement of these aims — and while they

have been too weak to seize power -—= they have often buen willing to
attenuate temporarily both their political and economic objectives. while
they have been sisbcialiy anxious to receive cabinet posts such as those
of the Interior, Justice, National Defense, and Information, which would
place them close to the sources of power and persuasion in a modern society,
they have been willing to accept less. Thus in France, their apprehension
ever the initial successes of the all-Socialist Blum government in
January 1947 and their general fear of beinc isolated led the Commnists
to accept a National Defense post hedged by restrictions, alone with re-
cS latively unimportant ministries. In addition, actuated by the desire to
prolong their participation in government, the Communists have temporarily
laid aside certain aspects of their economic program. In France and other

countries, for example, they tempered their insistence on nationalization

7 4 ij

@#17Z =

| | 891154 -2a7

NE eS ~ ete yee gees

ry
fn re emmy 1 we eee es

fn eran
( - & wth Leeda}

weer 2° seeced that pressing the issue :inht split the coalition.

Co: =unist tactics, however, have usually been subtle, when
Communist cabinet ministers have voted for mensures which were at
variance with their stated airs, the Communists have agitated atcinst
these : easures in other ways. For exanple, early in 1947, French Commnist
cinisters ostensibly supported the covernment program on price reduction,
while the Corrunist-led General Confederation of Labor carried on extra~
parliamentary apitation against it. Thus along with their activity in the
government, the Communists have attached primary importance to organizing

mass support outside. They have been especially eager to secure control of

‘the trade-unions and to create fronts or infiltrate already existent mass

organizations of all types — women, youth, war veteran, peasant, cultural
societies. Strikes or the threat of strikes have been used to exert
pressure on the government, The front organisations have participated in
deronstrations to show alleged popular approval of Communist demands,
Another Communist mechanism for potential extraparliamentary use has been
the naticnal committee such as the anti-De Gaulle "vicilance committee" in
France, which may represent the equivalent of the action comuittees used by
the Gocmniate- tk the Czech coup. These Conmittees were formed following

Comrunist exclusion from the government in France and apparently have not

gained mass support.

28 Os
