Political Prospects in Peru
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013615, dated 3 April 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013615).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

y

i NIE 97-63

1 May 1963

LBJ LIBRARY
Mandatory Revie
Case # NLJ 2.2
Document #_1 2

‘ Submitted by the |
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overledt

1 MAY 1963

this estimate: =i

The Central fggelliagnee. renee one the i intelligenc
ments of State, Deter: the Army. v the Navy, th

Dep rimen

" rhe

De artment of the Nowy”

cine ae ; ae as ee Bee :
"The Atomic Energy Commission Teese” to the USIB, and the Assistant Di”
“the subject’ being outside of their

jurisdiction.

e atonal: Defense a she United States

aws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
ohibited.

This material contains information

within the meaning of the espionag

mission or revelation of which in any manner fo an i GUNG RES person is pr:

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 97-63

Political Prospects in Peru

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM........ gr wie thevce cee hoe, SC ea BE OS feu? cok
CONCLUSIONS ........ a eels 6 2hb aie JE
DISCUSSION oe bis kA we OS ee x 2
I. BACKGROUND ....... ef cetanhe, Wc ihe Ap sy 2

A. Basic Factors. . 2... .0.0.0400 28 es She 2

B. Political Background ............. eA ee 3

C. The Election of 1962. . . 2... 1. ee ee ee 4

II. THE MILITARY REGIME ........... 5
III. COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE CAPABILITIES... 6
IV. ELECTION PROSPECTS ..........46+2.. 7
V. POSSIBLE SUCCESSOR GOVERNMENTS. . 9

VI. THE ECONOMIC ASPECT OF THE POLITICAL PROBLEM . 10

APPENDIX A: POLITICAL PARTIES CONTESTING THE 1963
BLECTIONS ... 1... 6. ee ee ee ee ew es 1D

APPENDIX B: EXTREMIST POLITICAL GROUPS IN PERU... 15

or.

POLITICAL PROSPECTS
IN PERU

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for the establishment of an elected
civil government and the basic problems which would confront
such a government.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Peru’s present political difficulties are the result of pressures
for political and social change generated in a long static society
undergoing industrialization and urbanization. These pressures
have been building up for a generation. A resolution of the con-
sequent political tensions is not likely to be accomplished for
many years. (Paras. 1-6)

B. The present Military Junta seized power in July 1962 in
order to prevent direct or indirect accession to power by APRA’
as the result of the 1962 presidential and congressional election.
It has failed in its efforts to develop a political coalition which
would ensure the defeat of APRA in the new election which it is
committed to hold in June 1963. An election with the candidates
now running could be as close and inconclusive as that of 1962.
(Paras. 7-11, 20-24)

C. Inasmuch as the military are in a position to control the
outcome of the election, they will probably carry out the Junta’s
commitment to hold it. If, contrary to expectation, Haya should
win an undeniable victory, they could still intervene to prevent
his inauguration and to establish a military government which

1 Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana, a radical leftist but anti-Commu-
nist party established in 1924. In its earlier days APRA was violently revolu-
tionary and was repeatedly suppressed by the conservative military. However,
in more recent times its program has been considerably moderated and it has
sought to achieve power by political action.

would retain power for an unspecified period. There is no doubt
that the military have this capability or that they would exercise
it if convinced that it was necessary to do so in order to prevent
APRA from coming to power. (Paras. 25, 28-29)

D. The Peruvian Communist and pro-Castro groups have little
prospect of achieving power in the near future. The Peruvian
armed forces and security services are capable of controlling sub-
versive activities short of a well-organized guerrilla movement
or a revolutionary uprising on a national scale. (Paras. 16-19)

E. In the past, Peruvian Governments have been unwilling
to make the sacrifices or to risk the political liabilities of pro-
grams aimed at bringing about fundamental social and economic
change. Now, however, Peru faces a situation in which political
stability is becoming more and more dependent on the ability
and disposition of governments to respond effectively to popular
demands for economic well-being and security. This situation
augurs a breakup of the existing structure of the Peruvian society
and economy. Unless the forces of moderation are able to bring
about orderly change, radical leadership will probably get the
chance to try its methods. . (Para. 34)

DISCUSSION
1. BACKGROUND

A. Basic Factors

1. Peru has neither a broadly based political system nor even effective
national unity in the sense of a common language and culture. The
highland Indians, about half the population, still exist outside of the
mainstream of national life and in precarious circumstances. Political
power is monopolized by a small oligarchy composed of agrarian, com-
mercial, mining, and industrial interests allied with the military and
the church hierarchy. In the factional struggles for power within
the oligarchy, the decisive factor has been the military, which is still
the ultimate arbiter in Peruvian politics.

2. The massive Andean mountains divide Peru into three distinct re-
gions and make transportation and communications facilities difficult
to construct and extremely costly to maintain. The modern sector of
the economy is largely confined to the narrow coastal plain in which
are concentrated about 30 percent of the population and the commer-
cial agriculture, petroleum production, manufacturing, and trade that

2 ——

We aes a

together account for over half the country’s gross national product
(GNP). The Sierra (about 27 percent of the total area and 55 percent
of the total population) supplies mineral and some agricultural products,
but most of its more than five million inhabitants live in primitive con-
ditions outside the money economy. The Selva, the vast, sparsely settled
region east of the Andes, is still largely isolated from the rest of Peru.

3. The Peruvian economy benefits from a pattern of exports which is
more diversified than that in most Latin American countries. In re-
cent years decreased world market prices for zinc, lead, copper, and
petroleum have been compensated for by increased revenues from ex-
ports of silver, cotton, and sugar, and by development of other exports
such as iron ore and fishmeal, a particularly important new product.
As a result GNP, which has grown an average of four to five percent
annually over the past two decades, is estimated to have increased
by 5.5 percent in 1962. ,

4. The bulk of the population, however, does not share in the eco-
nomic progress indicated by these increases in GNP. On the contrary,
real income for many is probably declining. Per capita income in the
Sierra is about the same as that of stagnant Bolivia; that in the Selva
is about the same as that of poverty-stricken Haiti. Even in the coastal
region, where per capita income is about average for Latin America,
there are great disparities of wealth and well-being. In Lima and other
cities, conspicuous consumption exists in the presence of abject poverty.

B. Political Background ?

5. The dominant Peruvian elite has been successful in barring popular
forces from exerting independent influence in the national political
system. However, pressure for political and social change, to make the
government more responsive to the electorate and to ameliorate the
condition of the masses, has been mounting with the growth of the
urban middle class, the rising importance of organized labor, the in-
creasing participation of mestizos in political activity, the migration
of highland Indians to coastal areas, and the rapid increase in popula-
tion, which has reached a rate of three percent per annum.

6. The established order in Peru was first challenged by the Alianza
Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA), founded by Victor Haya
de la Torre in 1924. Haya drew inspiration from Marxist doctrine, but
also from the Mexican Revolution—his movement was always explicitly
native American (i.e., Latin American) and came to be vigorously anti-
Communist. APRA gained considerable support in organized labor and
in intellectual circles, and developed the only effective “precinct-level”
political organization in Peru. It was greatly feared by the oligarchy,
who considered the Apristas more effective and therefore more danger-

?For details regarding APRA and other political parties, see Appendix A.

ous than the Communists. APRA was repeatedly suppressed by the
military, with consequent violence and bloodshed by both sides which
still embitters Peruvian politics,

7. Haya de la Torre was probably elected to the Presidency of Peru
in 1931, but was counted out by the incumbent government. APRA
eventually came to realize that it could gain political influence only
by making its voting strength available to ambitious oligarchs in re-
turn for promised favors. On this basis it helped to elect Jose Busta-
mante to the Presidency in 1945. In 1948 Bustamante’s government was
overthrown by an anti-Aprista general, Manuel Odria, who ruled as a
dictator for two years and then arranged for his election as President
for six more. Under Odria’s rule Peru enjoyed relative prosperity and
economic progress. This success led him to suppose that his chosen
candidate could be elected in a fair election in 1956. To his surprise
and chagrin, his man ran a poor third and Manuel Prado was elected
with the support of APRA. Prado’s close competitor in the election of
1956 was Fernando Belaunde, a demagogic member of the elite who
preached reform and drew to himself the support of some of the bitterest
opponents of APRA, including the Communists as well as middle class
reformists and elements of the oligarchy.

C. The Election of 1962

8. On the basis of its relations with President Prado, APRA believed
that in 1962 it could at last elect Haya de la Torre to the Presidency of
Peru in a free and fair election. Haya was opposed by both Belaunde
and Odria. These three ran virtually a dead heat. Because of the
vote for minor candidates, none of them gained the one-third plurality
required for direct election? An APRA dominated coalition, however,
gained almost a majority of the congressional seats, and consequently
would have had the principal voice in the congressional selection of a
President from among the three leading candidates, in accordance with
the Constitution.

9. The leaders of the armed forces privately made it clear that they
would never permit APRA to come to power, suggesting publicly that
APRA could win the election only by the Prado administration’s toler-
ance of electoral fraud. After the election the military brought against
APRA formal charges of “massive fraud” which were rejected by the
National Election Board. Despite the now imminent threat of a mili-
tary coup, the civilian political leaders were unable to negotiate a
formula which would serve to preserve constitutional government, prin-
cipally on account of the intransigence of Belaunde, who expected the
military to install him in the Presidency. When Haya and Odria finally

*Haya received 557,047 votes (32.9 percent); Belaunde, 544,180 (32.1 percent);
and Odria, 480,798 (28.4 percent).

4 ee

reached an agreement pursuant to which Congress would elect Odria
(believed to be seriously ill) to the Presidency, with an Aprista as his
Vice President and probable early successor, the military deposed Presi-
dent Prado, installed a military junta, and annulled the 1962 election.

10. The military were moved by their ancient enmity toward APRA
and by fear that APRA, in power, would try to deprive them of their
privileged position in public life and subordinate them to civil control.
In this judgment they were probably correct. They acted with the ap-
proval or acquiescence of most political elements, which foresaw that
no stable civil government could be established on the basis of the in-
conclusive election results and were more concerned to have order pre-
served by an authoritative military regime than to maintain constitu-
tional processes. Even the Aprista rank and file had no stomach to
oppose the military with a general strike called by the APRA leadership.
With the collapse of the strike even APRA accepted the situation in re-
turn for promises of no persecution and a free election in June 1963.

Il. THE MILITARY REGIME

11. In July 1962 the functions of the Peruvian Presidency were as-
sumed by a four-man junta composed of General Ricardo Perez Godoy,
President of the Joint Command of the Armed Forces, and the com-
manding officers of the three services—General Nicolas Lindley Lopez
(Army), General Pedro Vargas Prada (Air Force), and Admiral Juan
Torres Matos (Navy). As primus inter pares, Perez Godoy occupied the
Presidential palace and assumed the ceremonial functions of the Presi-
dency. The other Junta members took charge of their respective service
ministries. Other military officers were assigned to take charge of the
other ministries.

12. In March 1963 Perez Godoy was ousted by his colleagues in the
Junta. The charge that Perez Godoy tended to arrogaté to himself
too much of the prestige and powers of the Presidency covered a multi-
tude of his personal and policy conflicts with other members of the
Junta and influential military leaders. It was clear, nevertheless, that
Perez Godoy had in fact become a man his colleagues could not trust.
By his acts and statements he had even aroused fears that he was
coming to see himself as the leader of the country’s popular forces.
None of the remaining members of the Junta is devoted to the demo-
cratic process, but in ousting Perez Godoy for personal presumption,
they renewed their own commitment to hold elections in June.

‘The initiative came from Vargas Prada, who apparently took umbrage when
Perez Godoy refused to countenance the wholesale proscription of APRA. The
decisive factor was the delayed adherence of Lindley Lopez, a strictly professional
soldier who feels that the military should not be involved in ordinary politics and
consequently that the earliest feasible establishment of an acceptable civil gov-
ernment is desirable. The role of Torres Matos was passive.

ee. 5

13. Despite its authoritarian character, the Junta has permitted free-
dom of speech and of the press, including the right to criticize the
Junta’s decisions, and has been slow to take forceful measures to control
popular unrest. It has tended to yield when specific measures have
aroused strong opposition from powerful vested interests. Neverthe-
less, some of the measures which it has adopted presage fundamental
changes in the traditional relation of the Peruvian Government to the
economy and the society. It has established an elaborate system of na-
tional economic and social planning which could lead to a better uti-
lization of resources, but which also has strong overtones of economic
nationalism and statism. It has actually begun to distribute land to
landless peasants, particularly in the La Convencion area. It has also
begun drafting a comprehensive labor code.

14. Such measures are revolutionary in their implications and in-
consistent with the Junta’s professed caretaker status. They partially
reflect the activity and purposes of subordinate officials determined to
transform Peru. This tendency derives important support from grad-
uates of the Centro de Altos Estudios Militares (the Peruvian War Col-
lege), where authoritarian-minded but reformist professors (including
one known Communist) are highly influential.

15. The Junta has had such an anti-APRA fixation that it was blind
to the potentialities for Communist subversion. It welcomed and sup-
ported Communist efforts to wrest the control of labor unions from
APRA. There ensued a rash of Communist-instigated labor violence
and agrarian unrest which the Junta blamed on APRA, refusing to
take effective action against the Communists. Finally the Communist-
instigated destruction of $4 million worth of US mining property at
La Oroya in December 1962 brought the issue of Communist violence
to a head. Under the pressure of a widespread public reaction against
its coddling of Communists, the Junta in January carried out a roundup
of over 600 radical activists, mostly Communists. Since then labor
violence and sabotage have subsided and most of those arrested have
been quietly released.

Hl. COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE CAPABILITIES

16. The Communist and pro-Castro movements have been fragmented
as a result of the personalistic nature of their leadership and sharp
differences over tactics. The Peruvian Communist Party (PCP), with
an estimated 8,000—9,000 members, is the largest group. Its support
comes mainly from among industrial workers, professional people, and
intellectuals in the Lima-Callao area and the central and southern
Andean regions. The PCP has utilized various front activities to attract
numerous sympathizers, particularly in labor and student groups. Com-
munists and sympathizers now lead most of the important student fed-
erations formerly dominated by Apristas.

6 was

17. The national leadership of the PCP has generally favored coopera-
tion with the incumbent ruling groups against APRA. Communists and
Communist sympathizers were included in the lists of congressional
candidates of all parties except APRA and the Christian Democrat Party
(PDC) in 1962. They are campaigning for seats in the 1963 elections on
all major party lists, except APRA, and as independents. Within the
PCP, however, a group of younger members have cited the party’s in-
effectiveness as grounds for advocating more aggressive policies and tac-
tics. Their program, advocating violent revolution and closer identifica-
tion with the Castro and Chinese Communist positions, thus far has
been rejected by the old-line PCP leadership. The PCP leadership in
southern Peru, however, follows a more militant line and cooperates
with dissident Communist elements.

18. Castroite, Trotskyite, and other dissident splinter groups advocate
“activist” programs stressing immediate revolution and guerrilla ac-
tivities.» Except during the July-December 1962 period, however, when
their operations had the forebearance if not the blessing of the Junta,
they have not been effective.

19. In short, the Peruvian Communist and pro-Castro groups have
little prospect of achieving power in the near future. The Peruvian
armed forces and security services are capable of controlling subversive
activities short of a well-organized guerrilla movement or a revolutionary
uprising on a national scale. Over the short run, the Communists’ best
chances for increasing their influence appear to lie in continued co-
operation with and infiltration of anti-APRA groups, particularly in the
event of an open conflict between APRA and the military. Over the
longer run the government’s continued failure to meet substantially
the increasing aspirations of the mestizo and Indian masses could pro-
vide the extremists with an opportunity to foment widespread disorder
and possibly a chance to attain power.

IV. ELECTION PROSPECTS

20. Thus far the Junta has failed signally in its efforts to bring about
such a combination of political forces as would ensure the defeat of
Haya de la Torre in the presidential election now scheduled for 9 June
1963. The three major presidential candidates are the same as in 1962;
none of them has been willing to yield to any other or to a fusion can-
didate. The Junta was not even able to limit the number of candidacies
to three, in order to ensure that someone would receive the one-third
plurality required for election. The 1963 election, if held, will therefore
be a rerun of the abortive election of 1962, with little chance of produc-
ing a clearly decisive result.®

°See Appendix B for more information on these groups.

°See Appendix A for further detail regarding the parties participating in the
1963 election.

ag 7

21. Meanwhile, however, there have been some shifts in the political
lineup which could affect the result. Some of these are favorable to
Belaunde’s prospects. He has secured the support of the Christian Dem-
ocrats, whose candidate received 49,000 votes in 1962. He is also likely
to get many of the 59,000 votes cast for minor leftwing parties in
1962. On the other hand, Belaunde has some new obstacles to overcome
this year. To many people he is now the government candidate. Many
of those who were with Belaunde in 1962 remember his irresponsible
antics after the last election and will be reluctant to support him again.
In addition, even within his own political organization there are people
dissatisfied with his concessions to the PDC and with his juggling of
the party’s congressional lists. The fourth candidate in the new elec-
tion, Mario Samame Boggio, is likely to draw more votes away from
Belaunde than from anyone else.

22. Odria’s prospects have improved. A physical injury curtailed his
campaign in 1962. He is now in apparent good health and is cam-
paigning vigorously. The tensions and violence since the 1962 elections
will enhance his appeal as a “strongman” who gave Peru order, progress,
and prosperity, 1948-1956. For these reasons most of the Pradistas who
supported Haya de la Torre in 1962 are now supporting Odria. These
gains, however, may be somewhat offset by the cavalier manner in which
Odria has treated aspirants for places on his congressional lisis.

23. Haya de la Torre’s electoral prospects have been reduced by the
loss of Pradista support, including the financial support required to meet
campaign expenses, and by the alienation of some Apristas, including
Manuel Seoane, one of the party’s most effective campaigners. Many
voters may also have concluded that the military will never permit
Haya to take office—that a vote for him is a vote thrown away. Never-
theless, APRA still has the only effective precinct organization in Peru
and has regained the advantage of running in opposition to the status
quo. Haya has launched his campaign ahead of his rivals and has
engendered enough early popular enthusiasm to alarm his military
and political opponents.

24. The election, if held, is likely to be close; the outcome cannot be
predicted with confidence. For this reason, there are signs of increas-
ing nervousness among the military and some elements of the oligarchy,
which could lead to a move to preclude the possibility of an APRA
victory by excluding APRA from participation in the election on a
legal pretext or by cancelling the election. Since the present Junta
could not take such action with good countenance, its replacement would
probably be required. The idea is under active consideration within
the high command of the army and the air force.

25. Inasmuch as the military are in a position to control the outcome
of the election (unless the vote for Haya should be overwhelming, which
is unlikely), they will probably carry out the Junta’s commitment to

8 “_

hold it. If, contrary to expectation, Haya should win an undeniable
victory, they could still intervene to prevent his inauguration.

V. POSSIBLE SUCCESSOR GOVERNMENTS

26. If the election should be held and Belaunde should be elected,
he would initially have the support of the military, of important elements
of the oligarchy, of many middle class reformists, and also of the Com-
munists. The short-term prospects for political stability would be rea-
sonably good, although some die-hard Apristas might cause some dis-
turbances. In some respects, Belaunde’s conduct in office would be
likely to resemble that of President Goulart in Brazil—suspected crypto-
Communists would be appointed to some offices, Communist infiltra-
tion and control of organized labor would be facilitated, and an ardent
nationalism would generally characterize the attitude of the new ad-
ministration. Right as well as leftwing supporters would urge the
adoption of policies inimical to foreign investments in Peru, particu-
larly to the US oil companies operating there. At the same time, Bel-
aunde’s extravagant designs for the development of the Peruvian hinter-
land would require him to seek enormous amounts of foreign, princi-
pally US, financial and technical aid. These inconsistencies would be
likely to produce confusion and strain in US relations with Peru. Over
the longer term, the virtual impossibility of satisfying the conflicting
interests of Belaunde’s heterogeneous following and the probable im-
piacable hostility of the hard core of APRA would be likely to lead to
considerable internal tension and political instability.

27. Odria, if elected, would almost certainly provide a stronger and
more realistic administration than Belaunde, but would tend to rely
upon authoritarian controls. He would be keenly interested in the
further development of the existing Peruvian economy, but unlikely to
expend significant resources on the less immediately profitable develop-
ment of the hinterland. He would pay lip service to social reform, but
would probably not do much in that direction.

28. If, perchance, Haya de la Torre should win the election, the mili-
tary would almost certainly intervene to prevent his inauguration. Even
if he were allowed to take office, he would have to face not only constant
political obstruction and agitation, but also the constant threat of a
military coup. Haya is committed to the reformist goals of the Alliance
for Progress, but, in these circumstances, it is unlikely that he would
be able to accomplish much in the way of effective reform.

29. If the armed forces should again intervene to prevent the election
or the inauguration of Haya de la Torre, they would almost certainly
do so under new leadership free of any commitment to hold early elec-
tions. Such a coup would have substantial civilian support, or at least

a

: 9

acquiescence, although it might encounter more resistance than was
the case in 1962. There is no doubt that the military have the power
to impose their rule, should they decide to do so.

30. A new military regime established in these circumstances would
not be a temporary caretaker government. It would have to face up
to urgent problems of economic development and social amelioration,
and it would have to seek to establish a broad base of popular political
support. Almost certainly there would be differences within the regime
regarding the measures of reform and development to be undertaken.
The circumstances, however, would tend to favor the eventual develop-
ment of a Peronist-type regime—that is, an authoritarian government
military in origin but catering to the urban proletariat for political
support. Such a government would be highly nationalistic as well as
radically reformist.

Vi. THE ECONOMIC ASPECT OF THE POLITICAL PROBLEM

31. Given reasonably stable political conditions, the Peruvian economy
should continue to expand at about the present rate of growth, five
percent of GNP per annum. This expansion, however, has been of
little benefit to the Peruvian people.

32. A critical economic problem arises from the pressure of population
on the land in the Sierra. Although the inhabitants of the Sierra are
not a present factor in Peruvian politics, their increasing unrest is a
matter of great potential political significance. A simple redistribu-
tion of large landholdings cannot solve the problem, since the land
presently under cultivation is not sufficient to provide adequate farms
for all the landless peasants and subsistence farmers. Moreover, to
break up the plantations which now produce major export crops, notably
sugar and cotton, would reduce the foreign exchange earnings required
for further economic development.

33. Satisfaction of the growing popular demand for a greater measure
of economic security and well-being, upon which fundamental political
stability depends, will require the extensive development of new areas
of cultivation, principally through irrigation in the arid coastal area
and through opening access to the trans-Andean region. It will also
require the development of employment opportunities, housing, and
sanitation for rural migrants to the cities, and the general education
and technical training needed to qualify them for urban employment.
Such developments, particularly those related to irrigation and trans-
Andean transportation, will be technically difficult and highly expen-
sive. The accomplishment of such a program would require not only
an effective mobilization of Peruvian resources, but also large amounts
of foreign (presumably US) financial and technical aid over a long
period of time.

10 ae

34. In the past, Peruvian governments have been unwilling to make
the sacrifices or to risk the political liabilities of programs aimed at
bringing about fundamental social and economic change. Now, how-
ever, Peru faces a situation in which political stability is becoming more
and more dependent on the ability and disposition of governments to
respond effectively to popular demands for economic well-being and
security. This situation augurs a breakup of the existing structure of
the Peruvian society and economy. Unless the forces of moderation
are able to bring about orderly change, radical leadership will probably
get the chance to try its methods.

i a

APPPENDIX A

POLITICAL PARTIES CONTESTING THE 1963 ELECTIONS

1. The Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA) was
founded by Victor Raul Haya de la Torre in 1924, while in exile in
Mexico City. APRA was originally conceived as an international Latin
American political movement. Under Marxist and Mexican influences,
it advocated resistance to “Yankee Imperialism,” the political unity of
Latin America, the integration of the Indian and Europeanized elements
in Latin American society, and the nationalization of land and industry.
The movement took root only in Peru, where the Partido Aprista Peruano
(still commonly called APRA) was established in 1931. However, the
Peruvian party does have loose associations with other democratic-
reformist parties such as Accion Democratica in Venezuela. Because
of its historical origins, it is vulnerable to proscriptions against interna-
tional political parties designed to curb the Communists.

2. In 1931 Haya de la Torre apparently won the Peruvian presidential
election, but the incumbent government manipulated the returns so as
to deny him the victory. Since that time APRA has been forced to oper-
ate underground, except during the period 1945-1948 and from 1956
to the present. It was the decisive factor in the election of Jose Busta-
mante in 1945 and Manuel Prado in 1956, but fell just short of electing
Haya de la Torre in 1962.

3. In the course of 30 years there has been a notable evolution in
APRA’s political character. It responded with revolutionary violence
to its suppression in 1931, but by 1956 had concluded that its goals
could be achieved only by evolutionary political means. Its original
anti-US attitude has been reversed—it is now in full accord with the
Alliance for Progress, although it would probably still seek to assert
some nationalistic and socialistic control over the operations of major
US private corporations in Peru. Since 1945 APRA has been vigorously
anti-Communist. Except when hindered by anti-APRA governments, it
has proved itself to be the only effective competitor of the Communists
for the leadership of Peruvian labor and student organizations.

4. The relatively moderate attitude of the aging APRA leadership,
particularly the expedient decisions to collaborate with Prado in 1956
and Odria in 1962, has alienated some of the younger party militants.
APRA Rebelde, composed of admirers of Fidel Castro, broke off in 1959.
Continued political frustration would be likely to cause a further erosion

12 a:

of such elements, unless the party itself should turn again from political
to revolutionary action. In that case, it would probably lose its more
moderate elements.

5. The Popular Action movement (Accion Popular—AP) was formed
in 1956 to consolidate the various groups that had supported Fernando
Belaunde Terry’s strong bid for the Presidency as an independent. Its
diverse elements include members of the oligarchy, intellectuals, dis-
satisfied Apristas, and extreme leftists, including Communists, seeking
a vehicle to defeat APRA and attain power for themselves. Its program
is nationalistic and leftist, with something for every constituent group.
In his attempt to capture APRA’s mass support, Belaunde has appealed
for agrarian reform, a nationwide program of community action, and
a vast program of roadbuilding to open up the Selva and break down
Peruvian regionalism. In his appeal for conservative political and fi-
nancial backing, Belaunde stresses the threat APRA poses for Peruvian
society and advocates moderate economic policies. Belaunde professes
friendship for the US, where he has traveled and studied, and seeks
US financial and technical assistance. While Belaunde and the AP
leadership have refused to make any statement that would alienate
Communist support, their present electoral alliance with the small but
strongly anti-Communist Christian Democrat Party has worked against
Communist infiltration of the AP-PDC congressional lists.

6. The Christian Democrat Party (Partido Democrata Cristiano—
PDC) differs from the other contending parties in not following the
traditional Latin American pattern of personalized leadership. It has
a program based on the papal encyclicals. Since its founding in Are-
quipa in 1955, the PDC has gained little numerical strength outside that
area. The party has shown a strong bias against US private investments
in Peru and tends to condemn both the US and the USSR in its pro-
nouncements on international affairs.

7. The National Odriista Union (Union Nacional Odriista—UNO) of
General Manuel Odria is a purely personalistic organization formed to
support the ex-dictator (1948-1950) and former President (1950-1956)
in the 1962 elections. It draws support from all sectors of Peruvian so-
ciety and depends heavily upon the relative prosperity and order
achieved under Odria’s control in the 1948-1956 period. The lower
classes, particularly in the urban areas, benefitted from the public works
programs carried out by Odria and the upper classes have confidence
in his ability to control the Communists and the trade unions. The
UNO program advocates reforms similar, in the main, to those urged
by APRA and the AP, with perhaps greater emphasis upon public works
and industrialization. Odria’s appeal is typified by his campaign tactics
of stressing “deeds, not words.”

8. The Union of the Peruvian People (Union del Pueblo Peruano—
UPP), was founded in the latter part of 1962 by a group of young leftist-

ga 13

oriented professionals. The UPP’s appeal is to groups dissatisfied with
the candidates and programs of the other Peruvian parties, and particu-
larly to ex-Belaundistas. It follows the AP’s opportunistic line in prom-
ising all things to all people. The UPP strategy appears to be based
on the expectation that its presidential candidate, Mario Samame Bog-
gio, Rector of the National Engineering University, will attract support
as the only new candidate in the scheduled 1963 elections. APRA has
tried to build up the UPP and its candidate, in an obvious attempt to
split Belaunde’s following.

14 og

=

APPENDIX B

EXTREMIST POLITICAL GROUPS IN PERU

1. The Peruvian Communist Party (Partido Comunista Peruano—
PCP) had its origins in the Peruvian Socialist Party (PSP) formed in
1928 by a group of Marxist intellectuals and labor leaders. The guid-
ing spirit of the group, Jose Carlos Mariategui, one of Peru’s most
brilliant intellectuals, died during the crisis within the PSP that orig-
inated, in 1929, over affiliation with the Comintern. While most of the
PSP members agreed to change the party’s name (to PCP) and affiliate
with the Communist International, a minority group withdrew and
established the present PSP. The PCP has survived subsequent fac-
tionalism and purges in its continued adherence to whatever line Mos-
cow dictates. The PCP secured, first, official toleration for its labor
activities competing against APRA (1930-1934), and then considerable
freedom, though not legal status, in the 1939-1945 period, in return for
helping elect Manuel Prado to his first term in office. Whenever the
PCP has not had official encouragement, as in the 1945-1948 and
1956-1962 periods, it has lost ground to APRA in the labor movement.
The PCP leadership, following the defection of Eudocio Ravines in 1940,
has been plagued with personalism. The present principal PCP leaders
are: Raul Acosta, the Secretary General; Jorge del Prado, Secretary for
Press and Propaganda; Enrique Flores, Secretary for Finance; and Dr.
Jorge Veldez, head of the party’s Control Commission. Genero Carnero
Checa, editor and author of numerous pro-Communist and anti-US
publications, may have an even greater influence in the party than
the nominal PCP leadership, despite his reported expulsion from the
party in the mid-1930s.

2. The other extremist groups in Peru have considerably smaller
memberships than the PCP. The Revolutionary Workers Party (POR)
and the Revolutionary Workers Party (Trotskyite) (POR (T)) are both
Trotskyite, have an estimated total membership of about 1,000, and
are strongest in southern Peru and in the Department of Lima. During
1962 one of their members, the much publicized “guerrilla” leader Hugo
Blanco, incited rural unrest and encouraged peasant invasions of large
estates in the La Convencion area of the Department of Cuzco. The
Peruvian Leninist Party (PCPL), an offshoot of the PCP, has about
500 members, mostly in the central region. The Peruvian Communal
Movement (MCP) is an even smaller group primarily active among the
Indians in the central Andes. The Movement of the Revolutionary

wa 15

om

Left (MIR) is the former APRA Rebelde, a radical offshoot of APRA.
It has limited support in Trujillo, the traditional APRA stronghold in
northern Peru, and some adherents in Cuzco. The National Liberation
Front (FLN), established to unite these fragmented Communist elements
in the 1962 elections, polled only about 35,000 votes for its candidate,
General Cesar Pando. The two Communist paramilitary fronts, the
National Revolutionary Front (FNR) and the Trotskyite Leftist Revolu-
tionary Front (FIR), formed in early 1961 and 1962 respectively, have
not been notably successful in coordinating the subversive activities of
these various groups.

16 as

PERU
ETHNIC GROUPS
ano RURAL POPULATION

| Areas of predominantly
Indian population

| Areas of predominantly
white-mestizo population

wjaé

» Rural population*®

“Each dot represents 2,500 persons,
including persons in cities of less than
25,000 inhabitants.
oem International boundary

@ National capital

Oo 25 50 100 150 200 Miles
i 50 100 160 200 Kilometers

28070 8-59

Bovadaries ere not! necessarily thase
LS.

CIOLOMBIA

Puerto |
Maldonado?

!

PACIFIC.

PERU

—-+— International boundary
e National capital

Railroad

200 Miles

- jurisdiction’ ‘on’a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may _
2 be aut oneed ae ame picid comical) wtiin their epee doecren:

aes “ars: the Navy” = -
a ee Assistant Chief of staf, intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air ‘

DISSEMINATION Nomice

a be This ‘document was disseminated ts the “Central fectiosns ey This
“copy is for the. information and use of the recipient and of persons under his _

en er are

a

b. Director, Defense Infeligence Agency, i Office of the Secretary of. o
case tee Defense ~~ x: é aa
c. Assistant Chief ‘of Staff Foe Intelligence, Department of the Army, for
7) the: Department of the Army ae
d. Assistant Chief of ‘Naval oe Cuteligencs): for the Department of,

ae) » Force, - uke

: Director for vaeligaacx Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff nee.

. Director: of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

. Assistant Director for Central ne eenee! CIA, for any atnes Department or
Agency

2. This document may be eiainaa: or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain if in accordance
with [AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
sified?

DISTRIBUTION: >
White House

National Security Council

Department of State

Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission

Federal Bureau of Investigation

T | |
DISSEM

# a
a ie ee ; . 7
” 7 | | |
. : pa ; . | |
E c ‘ eo |
2 : | | |
«
.
