Status Report on Hungary Given by the Director at the White House to a Bi-parti
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119754, dated 5 October 1956.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119754).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Status Report on Hungary given by the Director
at the White House to a bi-partisan Congressional

group, 9 November 1956,

a
. Approved for Reldaeg:
‘ = Date
@ Ero wa, |

9 November 1956

TRAGEDY IN HUNGARY

Since the so-called thaw in the Soviet Union,
Moscow has been playing a dangerous game with
its Eastern European Satellites.

A. After World War II, the USSR installed Com-
munist regimes in a belt of Satellite states,
and insisted on Satellite loyalty to Soviet
foreign policy and Satellite contribution to
Soviet economic and military aims. Under
Stalin, it enforced this policy with an iron
hand, through local Communists backed by the
presence or threat of Soviet military force,

B. About a year ago, Moscow began a program of
cautious "liberalization" in the Satellites
in line with the general "de-Stalization" in
the USSR and the so-called "peaceful coex-

istence" policy.

C. This involved risks because people in most of
the Satellites, especially Poland and Hungary,

are still overwhelmingly anti-Soviet and anti-

Communist.

© D, The first serious sign of trouble came at the
end of June in the Poznan riots for "bread and
freedom."
E. This situation we recognized as explosive.
Our evaluation of the situation dated 21
August 1956 said:
"Even though the Kremlin is
assumed to intend retaining
real control over the Satel-
lites, recent more flexible
policies have set in motion
a certain social and political
| i @ trends toward independence,
personal freedoms, and rep-
resentative governments
. which may become irrevers-
= ible, short of forcible
repression,"
4 | II, This explosive situation began to rumble ominously
in Poland on 19 and 20 October.
A. Gomulka, a tough Communist but a nationalist
Communist rather than a Moscow stooge--a man
who had been purged by Stalin--came to power.

He denounced the bad economic conditions in

-~2-

® Poland, particularly in agriculture, mining,
and housing, and implied that the Soviets and
Communist bureaucratic inefficiency were to
blame.

B. His program--which was very popular--called
for "equality" and "national independence"
for Poland, plus political "democratization."

C. Khrushchev flew to Warsaw and flirted with
the idea of crushing Gomulka and his sup-
porters with military might. (Later a Soviet
leader said the USSR could have crushed them
like flies but showed great restraint.)

& D. Despite the strong anti-Soviet overtones of
the popular demands, Gomulka insisted his
regime was loyally Communist and friendly to
Moscow.

E. The Soviet Union decided to play ball with
Gomulka, appeasing Polish national sentiment
in order to keep Poland in the bloc.

III. The powder train set fire by Poland's successful
bid for "independence" spread to a powder keg--
Hungary.

A. We had long known the Hungarians were

violently dissatisfied with their Communist

=3e

t
7

@ ; regime, its subservience to Moscow and the
economic mess in the country.

B. Rakosi, a hard-line Stalinist, was sacrificed
by Moscow in July, probably to please Tito.
His successor was another Moscow stooge--
Gero,

C. National Communists still kept pressing for
a more "liberal" political and economic line,
We had many intelligence reports indicating
development of this move away from Moscow. —

D. A surge of popular anti-Soviet, anti-Com-
munist feeling in Hungary arose within a

6 few days of the Polish defiance of Moscow. |

E. Thus the Hungarian revolution began on 23 Oc-
tober,

I¥.. The revolution started with peaceful but highly
emotional mass demonstrations by students, laborers,
white-collar workers and off-duty troops.

A. Organized to show: support for Polish leader
Gomulka's defiance of the USSR, the demon-
strations led to a demand for the return of
Nagy, a “national Communist!’ and the with-

drawal of Soviet troops.

The demonstrations became violent during the

night of 23 October and.

1. security police clashed with the crowds.

2. the Hungarian leadership panicked, called
in Soviet troops, and announced a governp-
ment and party reorganization with Nagy
as premier,

Open fighting between Soviet troops (elements

normally stationed in Hungary as well as some

from Rumania) and “insurgents” continued in

Budapest.

1. A Soviet massacre of unarmed demonstrators
in Budapest on 24 October intensified the
bitterness of the nationalist opposition,
Fighting continued for four days and

2. the losses were heavy on both sides,

3. statues of Stalin, Russian symbols such
as the hammer and sickle, and Soviet
bookstores were destroyed.

The fighting spread into the provinces. Most

of the Hungarian army joined the insurgents,

1. Revolutionary councils composed of both
Communists and non-Communists formed in

all regional areas,

=

|

© VV. By 1 November, an uneasy coalition between the

multiple "revolutionary committees" and the Nagy

regime took over, with the revolutionaries Clearly
having the upper hand.

A. Nagy promised to meet more and more rebel
demands,

1. Initially he granted "liberal" Communist
demands for increased living standards
and a greater role for the workers,

2. As certain demands were met, additional
ones were levied by the regional revolu-
tionary councils and by forces within
Budapest.

3. Nagy promised an end to security police,
immediate negotiations for a Soviet troop
withdrawal and a virtual "declaration of
independence,"

B. In addition to the basic demands--Hungarian
independence and a Soviet troop withdrawal--
an increasingly large number of insurgents
Called for:

1. An end of all symbols of Soviet control
and their replacement with national symbols,

. for example the Kossuth coat-of-arms,

-6-

_

2. the liquidation of the Communist security
and secret police.

3. a coalition government.

4. free elections, and

5. freedom for Cardinal Mindszenty.

Nagy~-under continued pressure from all

forces-~had promised all these demands by

30 October, although dodging the date for

the Soviet. troop withdrawal and the date for

free elections.

Nagy--by 30 October had pledged what appears

to be the absolute limit allowed by Moscow

in a "national Communist" state.

On 30 October Moscow announced a policy

favoring "liberalization" in the Satellites

and offering to negotiate the withdrawal of

Soviet troops from Budapest,

1. The USSR admitted past errors in handling
the Satellites and

2. stressed co-operation among the "common-
wealth" of Communist countries, It seemed
that the patriots had won.

In Hungary, in face of this conciliatory

Soviet policy, the non-Communist elements

-7-

q
*4

VI.

oie
continued to grow in strength at the national:
and regional levels.
G. On 1 November Nagy went past the point of no
return:

1. He declared Hungarian neutrality and
asked for UN protection.

2. At the same time Nagy announced uni-
lateral Hungarian withdrawal from the
Warsaw pact.

3. The revolutionaries controlled large
areas of the country--despite the presence
of Soviet troops--and Nagy was committed
to policies, which, if implemented, would
have established a neutral and non-Com-
munist state,

The Soviets were faced with two alternatives:
accept the situation or suppress the Hungarian
nation by military means. At this precise time,
the Anglo-French ultimatum to Egypt captured
World attention. The Soviets decided to crush
the revolution. (Who knows if a Soviet leader

or two lost position or power as a result of this

fateful decision?)

3S A. Soviet troops began to maneuver within

Hungary, cutting off the Austro-Hungarian
border, circling Hungarian airfields, and
surrounding Hungarian cities and military
units.

B. All the while, negotiations sputtered along

over the withdrawal of Soviet troops from

Budapest and subsequently from Hungary.
C. At dawn on 4 November, Soviet units jumped

off--attacked Budapest and other cities.

D. Hungarian military leaders were arrested in
the middle of negotiations with the Soviets

r) for the withdrawal of their forces.

E. By 0800 that morning, the Soviets had seized
most of Budapest and captured Nagy and several
other ministers. Resistance continued, how-
ever, and as late as 9 November, fighting
continued in several regional areas.

F. The new Hungarian regime~--"Workers and Peasants
Revolutionary Government," under Janos Kadar--
was proclaimed by the Soviets simultaneous
with their attack.

G. Soviet troops stationed in Hungary prior to

hostilities totaled 27,000 men (two divisions).

-Q—.

: ; ,
coe =

o When hostilities began, these had been in-

creased to approximately 200,000-~-elements of

seven divisions--by Soviet troops stationed

in Rumania and the USSR.

H. Soviet repression has been ruthless and
brutal. Atrocities have been reported.

1. According to unconfirmed reports, a
number of Hungarian rebels--treated as
prisoners of war--are being: deported to
‘the USSR.

2. Officials of the American legation in

Budapest witnessed the Soviet slaughter

a @ of women and children. The legation
reports that despite protests of Western
diplomats, Soviet troops burned down a
children's clinic while storming one
rebel stronghold,
VII. Although the new Communist government in Budapest
ag claims it is going ahead with "liberalization"
7 and independence on the Gomulka pattern in Poland,
it is clear that the regime rests entirely on
Russian bayonets.
In essence, the Soviets have lost a Satellite and

acquired a conquered province. They will almost

e -10-

VIII.

certainly have to run it by a military government
for want of enough Hungarian Communists sufficiently
traitorous and sufficiently daring to do the job.
Large-scale transportation of elements of the
population to central Asia, as took place in
Baltic republics, is possible. And the suffering
of the surviving Hungarian people this winter as

a result of the destruction and breakdown of all
normal government and economic functions (already
half-wrecked by Communist mismanagement) will be
intense.

In Europe outside Hungary, the most telling
effects have been the destruction of the myth

of "peaceful coexistence" and the new era" of
sweet reasonableness on the part of the Kremlin.
The hopes that grew for a year and a half after
the Austrian peace treaty and the Geneva confer-
ence have been rudely shattered, according to
reports from most European and some Asian capitals.
Communist Party members in Western Europe are
tearing up their cards, In Paris, the party head-
quarters and the office at its newspaper

(L'Humanité) were gutted. Woolly fellow-traveler

Nenni in Italy, prone to collaborate with the Com-

-ll-

munists, are denouncing them. Also the Daily
Worker in New York,

As for the Satellite armies, the Soviets now know
that after ten years of investment, they are as
likely to fight against them as for them,

Thus the line in Europe is sharper than ever
before: on the east--naked Soviet-Russian
military might; on the west--far greater awareness
of the realities of the Communist menace; and the

present Soviet regime has taken off the mask,

-12-
