Japanese Nuclear Energy Program
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107977, dated 3 October 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107977).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a)

SE ET | i 7
NO FOZBIGN DISSEM . ‘.
L3]J LIBRARY : a
Riandatory Review
Caso # Ni oo U- 59

Dee ee ys
Sczentific
Intelligence
Report

Japanese Nuclear Energy Program

- SR/64 - 55
18 November 1964

peer SA GATT UE TT

sgl

ORMATION AFFECT-
yp OF THE UNITED STATES
F THE ESPIONAGE LASS,
NS 793 AND 794, THE TRANSMIS-
N OF WHICH IN ANY MANNER TO
D PERSON IS PROHIBITED BY LAY.

THIS MATERIAL CONTAINS
ING THE NATIONAL DEF
WITHIN THE MEANIN

AN UNAUTHO

Formation in this publication repre-
re subject to modification in the light
alysis.

Interpretations of intelligen
sent immediate views why
of further information

SE T
NO FO N DISSEM

Scientific Intelligence Report
JAPANESE NUCLEAR ENERGY PROGRAM

OS:/SR/64-33
1S November 1964

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Office of Scientific Intelligence

S T
NO F N DISSEM

Project Officer

Ste)
3.4(b)(1)

Brief

~ iii -

SE Ls
NO FO N DISSEM

JAPANESE NUCLEAR ENERGY PROGRAM

Summary and Conclusions

The Japanese nuclear energy program is limited by law to peace-
ful purposes. Major applications to date have beenthe use of radio-
isotopes in research, medicine, and industry. Interest has been
shown in nuclear marine propulsion and nuclear electric power. The
first nuclear-propelled ship is being designed now. Current plans
for power production are 1400 megawatts (electrical) by 1970. One
station is now being built with British assistance.

SE
NO FO N DISSEM

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

SE T
NO FO N DISSEM

Discussion
Introduction

The Japanese nuclear energy program, which started in 1956, is
based on a national policy for the development of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. The Government has established an extensive
nuclear research and development program; industry has made at
least an equal effort in applied fields. and both are cooperating in
programs for nuclear power and propulsion.

The shortage of funds and trained personnel andthe lack of basic
nuclear raw materials are being overcome by larger governmental
appropriations and contributions from industry, establishment of
training programs, and the importation of the necessary materials
from other countries. Cooperation with other countries has partic-
ularly benefitted Japan in the construction of a number of research
reactors and its first nuclear power reactor.

The major Governmental organizations are the Japan Atomic
Energy Commission (JAEC; for planning; the Atomic Energy Board
(AEB) for administration; and the Japan Atomic Energy Research
Institute (JAERI), the Atomic Fuel Corporation (AFC), bothat Tokai-
mura, and the National Institute of Radiological Sciences (NIRS) at
Chiba for research and development.

Research Reactors

Japan currently has 12 reactors in operation or under construc-
tion, d critical assemblies, 63 accelerators, over 70 installations
for radiation research. and 17 facilities for fusion research. The
major research site is JAERI, where most ofthe research reactors
and a prototype power reactor have beenconstructed. All of the re-
search reactors, except one, have been constructed with U.S. as-
sistance and use enriched uranium fuel supplied by the United States.
The one exception is the Japan Research Reactor-3 (JRR-3), a 10
megawatt (MW) natural-uranium-fueled, heavy-water-moderated
reactor. which went criticalon 13 September 1962. This reactor was
constructed by the Japanese; however, Canada provided uranium for
fuel through the IAEA and the United States supplied the heavy
water -~ both with safeguards. Construction of additional research

-2-

SE T
NO FO N DISSEM

S T
NO FO N DISSEM

reactors is contemplated. but all those presently planned will re-
quire enriched fuel. which Japan cannot provide.

Nuclear Materials

Extensive exploration for uranium has been conducted. but no sub-
stantial deposits of uranium have been discovered. Three areas have
been found to contain low-grade deposits of uranium. The most
promising area is Ningyo Pass. where mining has been started and
construction of an ore concentration plant was begun in 1963-1964.
Both AFC and industrial organizations have conducted considerable
research to find an economic method to process the low-grade do-
mestic ores. The AFC has a pilot plant for refining uranium and
facilities for the production of uranium metal and fuel element
fabrication.

While Japan has produced a limited amount of uranium. most of
the fuel has been purchased from other countries. Over 25 tons of
uranium concentrate have been purchased from Canada through the
auspices of the IAEA. This concentrate has been processed into
metal and fabricated into fuelelements by the Japanese. The natural
uranium fuel for the first nuclear power station. now under construc-
tion. will be supplied by the United Kingdom. About 750 tons
of uranium metal are expected te be imported over the ten-year
period at an estimated cost of $27.8 million. The United States has
supplied about 24 tons of natural uranium and over 12 tons of en-
riched uranium with enrichment ranging from 1.5percentto 90 per-
cent. All of the uranium supplied by the United States, United King-
dom, and Canada is safegi:arded.

For a number of years researchhzs beenccnducted on the devel-
opment of processes for the product:on of heavy water. Although
pilot plant3 were constructea. the Japanese were unable to produce
heavy water ataprice comp:r2ble to that of the United States.
Therefore. heavy water needed in the Japanese nuclear energy pro-
gram has been obtained from the United States under safeguards.
The Japanese have produced sufficient reactor-grade graphite for
the research reactor pregram, bt the amount required for the first
nuclear power station wis beyond domestic capability. The graphite
for the British-suppliel power reactor has been purchased from
France. Most of the other basic materials for the nuclear energy

N DISSEM

program either are produced in Japan or can be purchased from
other countries through normal commercial channels.

Applications

1.5(c)()
3.4(b)(1)6)
Only small quantities of plutonium can be produced by the research
reactors in operation or under construction, but the British- supplied
power reactor will be able to produce significant amounts of pluto-
4.5(¢)(}
3.4(p)(1)(6)

Research on plutonium has been carried out at both
JAERI and AFC to study theuse ofplutonium for advanced reactors,
Construction of a fuel reprocessing plant for the separation of pluto-
nium at the AFC Tokai-mura site began in June 1964 and will not be
completed until at least late 1965. The plant is expected to be able
to process 0.7 to 1.0 tons of irradiated fuel per day and to handle
several types of fuel and cladding.

Japan is interested in developing a method of isotope separation
for the production of uranium-235 which would be less expensive
under Japanese conditions than the gaseous diffusion process. In 1959
the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research began basic re-

~4-~-

Ss T
NO FO N DISSEM

S T
NO FO GN DISSEM

search on the molecular distillation of uranium-235 and the ultra-
centrifuge process of isotope separation Two ultracentrifuge
machines were constructed for developmental research. but nothing
is known of this work since 1962 when it was transferred to AFC,

The major application of nuclear energy inJapanto date is the use
of radioistopes in research. medicine. and industry. The principal
organization for radiation research is the NIRS, but a number of
governmental. educational, and industrial organizations also are
conducting research using radioisotopes. A considerable quantity of
radioisotopes are used for gauging, process control, and nonde-
structive testing by industry. By 1963, industry had invested over
$15 million directly in isotope work. About one-thirdof this amount
is used for industrial production while the other two-thirds is used
for research.

Considerable interest has been shown in developing nuclear pro-
pulsion. Since 1956. conceptual designs of more than 20 nuclear
propelled ships have been made. In 1963, the Nuclear Ship Develop-
ment Corporation was established to construct the first Japanese
nuclear propelled ship ~- an oceanographic research vessel. The
long-range program called for design of the ship to begin in 1963
and final testing to be completed in 1973. The present plan is for a
6.350 ton. 10,000 shaft horsepower ship powered by a light-water
type reactor having a thermal power of 35 MW.

Japan possesses limited natural energy resources and a long-range
plan for the development of nuclear power has been made which calls
for the construction of 1.400 MW (electric) of nuclear electrical
generating capacity by 1970. and 6,000 to 8.500 MW (electric) by
1980. Japan Atomic Power Company, Ltd. (JAPCO), ajoint govern-
mental and industrial company. was establishedin 1957, and a con-
tract for the construction of Japan’s first nuclear power station was
concluded with Great Britain inDecember 1959. Construction of this
station, called the Tokai Nuclear Power Station, was started in 1959
at Tokai-mura and is expected to be in operation in 1965. The power
station consists of one reactor of the British Calder Hall type and
will have an installed electric power capacity of 166 MW (electric).
The second JAPCO nuclear power station is to have a U.S. light-
water type reactor with an expected installed power capacity in the
range of 250 to 300 MW (electric), The reactor probably will not be

SE
NO FO N DISSEM

in operation until at least 1970. In addition, three power companies
have programs for the construction of nuclear power stations. These
programs are still in the early stages ofccnceptual design, and the
stations, if built, probably will not be in operation until 1970 or later.
