Prospects for Argentina
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013612, dated 3 May 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013612).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LBJ LIBRARY |
Mandatory Review

Case # NLJ_13-5%
Document # OF

oe +

Prospects fo

‘Submitted by the Pak’
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Coneurred i in by the.
UNITED STATES. INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As. indicated overleaf

9 JUNE 1965

VNIE 91-65
9 June 1965

ganizations ‘of the Depart-

5 eo

re
aw ee : ee:

"Director of intelligence and Research separ nt
ee

%, ap ise :
a Representative: to the USIB td the Assistant to the

b ct being « outside of their

areata?

o

~janseton: a

This material contains information ¢
‘within the meaning of the espicgl
mission or revelation of which i

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 91-65

Prospects for Argentina

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

TELE: PROBIGENT§ techs ti allstars ate, pipes ane ading arc een tape tits Stes Meet ne aes. re 1
CONCLUSIONS: oceeneeeais wl oan er rnne eran I
DISCUSSIONS £33 -5ce thea u WIN Md hee Sect bere! Sa bead she ceethadienari chins g 3
I. INTRODUCTION 22. oo ce eee cence eens 3
Il. THE PRESENT SITUATION ...... 0.0.0 ee eee 4
MACs POUCA FORGES: 1s suite bu. uns to Mo aad ahaa iis C1 4
The Illia Administration 0.0.0... 00.00 0c cece cee eee ee 4

The Peronists .......0.0.0 0.002 e cece ee eee eeee ee err 7

Other Political Elements ............... 0.00. c eee eee eee eee ees 8

‘Be Role:-ob the Malay «3.4i4.55 50 Ahi oye Cicgat tt late Goat eh, 8

Ms Te TCOnOT ies va laeiett ca des coir apeal IRA olde Saale cre el bee MN tO Seed elas 9

TET: "THEVOUTE OOK soils & See aoa a ath dnig le egind x gecauets bb neds Sate oa doa I 10
Ae Economic: Prospects: <c.2<isniteea saree ee ea eee as ete ... 10

B. The Political Outlook 20.00.0000 ccc cee tenn ee anes IL
Illia’s Political Prospects ...................00. uceakeuuimnteer anno. 11
Subversive Potentialities ......0000 0000. cc cece eee eee 2. 13

The Likelihood of a Military Coup ................0.0..0. 0000. .. 13
APPENDIX sae. aeeee ot ride dg sentra eer lea Moka Sab us stiles ie AL caw ule sty 15

PROSPECTS FOR
ARGENTINA

THE PROBLEM

To assess the situation in Argentina, and to estimate the prospects
for the Illia administration through the congressional elections sched-

uled for the spring of 1967.

CONCLUSIONS

A. During its nearly two years in office, the Ilia administration has
achieved for Argentina the longest period of political stability in its
recent history, but has failed to develop a strong base of popular and

congressional support. During the same period the Argentine econ-
, omy has experienced a recovery, but only to the level it had achieved
in 1961. The Illia administration has failed to cope effectively with
inflationary pressures or to make headway with the measures required
to promote balanced economic growth. (Paras. 7-30)

B. The March 1965 congressional elections marked the return of
the Peronists as a major legitimate political force. The trend toward
a political polarization around the Illia administration and the Peronist
opposition will probably develop further in the congressional and
gubernatorial elections in 1967. (Paras. 12, 34)

C. To avert a Peronist landslide in the 1967 elections, President
Illia will have to act more vigorously to create an attractive political
alternative to Peronism. We believe it unlikely that he can do so.
Alternatively, he will have to devise some way to restrict Peronist par-
ticipation in the election. This would, of course, frustrate the en-
deavor to reintegrate the Peronists into the normal political system.
The reaction of the die-hard Peronists would be violent, but could
almost certainly be contained. (Paras. 34, 37)

D. The Argentine military remain the only element capable of
overthrowing the government. The officers now in control of the
military establishment would prefer to preserve the constitutional
regime. However, the military leadership in general has been an-
tagonized by the frustration of its desire for Argentina to play a lead-
ing role in the OAS peacekeeping force in the Dominican Republic.
Some officers who. have long regarded the Illia administration as weak
and ineffectual are now less disposed than ever to make due allowance
for its political handicaps. Whether the Argentine military will over-
throw the Illia administration within the period of this estimate re-
mains highly uncertain, depending almost entirely on their own esti-
mate of the developing situation in Argentina. (Paras. 33, 38-40)

E. If the military should conclude that the Peronists under ex-
tremist leadership were likely to prevail in the 1967 elections, they
would first urge upon the government the necessity of restricting
Peronist participation in the elections. If not satisfied in that respect,
they would almost certainly intervene to impose their will, or to pre-
_ vent or annul the elections. (Para. 41)

F. Most Peronist leaders recognize that the movement is on pro-
bation in its resurgence into the national political arena. If, during
the next year or so, the Peronist leadership, or some elements of it,
should establish a reputation for reasonableness and moderation, some
of the military might come to discriminate between “good” Peronists
and “bad” Peronists and to tolerate the former. Thus a Peronist
electoral victory under moderate leadership might-precipitate a divi-
sion among the military, with some calling for immediate counteraction
and others seeking to preserve the constitutional regime at least until
the presidential election in 1969. In such a case, a period of recurrent
military crises, like that which occurred in 1962-1963, might ensue.
(Paras. 32, 42)

G. The Argentine Communist Party is the largest in the Western
Hemisphere (60,000-65,000 members), but is not an influential politi-
cal force. The Communists and Castroists have no significant sub-
versive potential in Argentina except insofar as they may be able to
act in conjunction with a mass reaction of frustrated and embittered
Peronists. (Paras. 18, 35)

DISCUSSION

I, INTRODUCTION

1. Argentina is well endowed with both human and material resources. It
has an extensive and very fertile agricultural area, a developed industrial base,
and adequate petroleum reserves and hydroelectric power potential. Its popula-
tion, nearly 22 million, is homogeneous, being almost entirely of European stock;
some 90 percent are literate. The moderate rate of population growth (1.8 per-
cent) exerts no serious pressure on available resources. The Argentine people
are foremost in Latin America in terms of both technical skills and a generally
high level of living. Nevertheless, Argentina is plagued by deep-seated eco-
nomic, social, and political maladjustments. These result from the inability of
its political leadership to resolve strong social antagonisms and to achieve «
basic political consensus. °

2. Argentina was long ruled by a corrupt and complacent oligarchy which
ignored the rising expectations and dissatisfactions of growing urban middle
class and labor elements. This oligarchy was replaced by the quasi-fascist re-
gime of Juan Perdén, a military leader who won strong popular support by cater-
ing to nationalistic and working class interests. Perén’s program of rapid in-
dustrialization and his provision of economic and social benefits for the working
class were accomplished at the expense of agriculture, the principal interest of
the ousted oligarchy and the chief source of foreign exchange. Mounting in-
ternal and external debt, together with the regime’s waste and corruption,
brought Perén to political bankruptcy. In 1955 he was overthrown by the
military.

3. Since 1955 successive Argentine governments have failed to solve two basic
problems: (a) how to get the economy straightened out and growing again—
the per capita domestic product, high by Latin American standards, is probably
no greater than it was in 1957; and (b) how to permit the Peronists to participate
in the political life of the country without opening the door to a return of
Peronism through democratic processes or provoking a military overthrow of
the constitutional system. The measures required for the first purpose bear
most heavily upon the working population, in contrast to the favor which they
enjoyed under Perén, and this contrast tends to confirm them in their Peronism
and their alienation from the rest of the society.

4, Prior to the 1963 elections the Argentine military were united in their de-
termination to prevent any Peronist return to power, but were divided on how
best to accomplish that purpose. Some, called “Reds,” advocated a long period
of authoritarian rule without elections, as necessary for a thorough reconstruc-
tion of the country. Others, called “Blues,” insisted upon the restoration of
constitutional civil government—with appropriate safeguards. The military
permitted the election and inauguration of President Frondizi in 1958, but re-

garded with suspicion his relations with the Peronists, whom he was trying to
integrate into his own political organization. They were also critical of his
administration of the government and his “softness” towards Cuba. When
Peronists won important offices in the provincial elections of 1962, the military
overthrew the Frondizi government. Then, after a sharp struggle between the
“Reds” and “Blues,” the “Blues” prevailed and permitted the election and
inauguration of President Illia in 1963.

5. Frondizi had been the leader of the UCRI, a branch of the middle class
Radical Civic Union (UCR) which had dominated Argentine politics from 1916
to 1930. (The Argentine middle class, comprising about 30 percent of the popu-
lation, is one of the largest in Latin America.) [Illia was the nominee of the
UCRP, a combination of Radical factions formed in 1957 to oppose Frondizi.
There are many other parties and factions involved in Argentine politics,’ but
the recent trend has been toward a polarization around Illia’s UCRP and the
Peronists.

6. Despite notable gains in 1964, the Argentine economy remains sluggish.
Industrial production costs are unrealistically high, inflation is chronic, real wages
are probably no better than they were eight years ago. Foreign capital is
needed to stimulate economic growth, but nationalistic predilections have mili-
tated against obtaining it. Operating within a constitutional system and from
-a minority political base, Illia’s difficult task is to fashion congressional majorities
in support of unpopular economic measures. Meanwhile, the military is watch-
ing the situation carefully and is sensitive to signs of ineffectuality in civilian
leadership.

Il. THE PRESENT SITUATION
A. Key Political Forces
The Illia Administration

7. The factions which coalesced in 1957 to form the UCRP were united by
little more than their common hostility to Frondizi. Illia’s selection to be the
party’s candidate in the 1963 election resulted largely from bitter rivalries
among the better-known party leaders and the general supposition that no
UCRP candidate could win anyhow. Indeed, Illia’s election was made possible
only by the fragmentation of other political parties and the exclusion of Peronist
candidates—he won a plurality with only some 25 percent of the popular vote.
His subsequent victory in the electoral college was accomplished by a series
of deals with other political leaders who were unenthusiastic about the man
but eager to end active military direction of the day-to-day operations of the
government. He entered the presidency with a narrow UCRP majority in the
Senate, but only a plurality (72 out of 192 seats) in the Chamber of Deputies.
Since the UCRP came to power without a nationally prominent president, a
carefully developed economic and political program, or an effective majority in

* See the Appendix for a detailed description of Argentine political parties and movements.

congress, its legislative successes have required skillful performances by the
UCRP congressional leadership.

8. Most of the UCRP leaders maintain strongly statist and economic national-
ist views which hinder solution of the administration’s fiscal problems. These
attitudes and the party’s internal differences have been key factors in delaying
issuance of the administration’s economic plans.

9. In contrast to his predecessors, particularly the charismatic Perén and the
dynamic Frondizi, President Ilia has stressed compromise and gradualism.
His guarded pronouncements and tendency to hope that time will at least
mitigate administration problems have caused some Argentines to dub him “the
gray fox” while others depict him as a tortoise. Partly because Illia’s assumption
of office coincided with an economic upturn, his “quiet” style and conciliatory
tactics were particularly effective in keeping the Peronist problem under wraps.
By obtaining for organized labor, the principal Peronist base, minimum wage
and price control legislation, by using restraint in measures to prevent Peronist
unions from occupying industrial plants, and ‘by refusing to panic at Peronist
efforts to secure the return of Perén from exile, Illia has helped Argentina to its
longest interval of political stability during the last decade. Also important,
however, has been the influence of Lieutenant General Juan Carlos Ongania,
Commander-in-Chief of the Army, who has established a good working relation-
ship with President Illia and has insisted that the Armed Forces refrain from
interfering in day-to-day politics despite military distrust of some administration
leaders.

10. In its foreign relations the Ilia administration has followed traditional
lines in emphasizing its support for nonintervention, self-determination, trade
with all nations, and the peaceful settlement of international disputes. It has
stressed the need for Latin American unity, especially to solve development
problems. Despite the internal political importance of maintaining an inde-
pendent foreign policy, the Argentine Government has generally supported the
US position on critical issues between the US and Communist powers. Except
for occasional minor incidents, Argentina continues to maintain friendly rela-
tions with all other Latin American countries except Cuba. It has agreed to
submit a longstanding border dispute with Chile to arbitration.

1l. The principal irritant in US-Argentine relations is a dispute between vari-
ous US petroleum companies and the Argentine Government. Upon taking
office the Illia administration, in accordance with its campaign promises,
promptly cancelled certain petroleam development contracts made with foreign
companies during the Frondizi administration.? Settlement with these com-
panies has been delayed by basic disagreements within the administration, by
involvement of the dispute in Argentine domestic politics, and because the prob-

* The development under these contracts enabled Argentina to become virtually self-sufficient
in petroleum production, by the time they were cancelled, but rising demand has again out-
stripped production. Since the contracts were not submitted to the Argentine Congress for
its approval, they have been attacked in Argentina as unconstitutional, tainted with corruption,
and an invasion of the prerogatives of the state petroleum monoply (YPF)—a sensitive point
with the Argentine public.

lems involved are so varied that each case requires an individual settlement.
This delay has caused a slowdown in the US economic aid program.

12. During his first 18 months in office Illia did succeed in reducing some of
the sharpest political tensions, in maintaining good relations with the military
leadership, in keeping civilian government functioning, and in moving Argentina
through an initial stage toward restoration of constitutionalism. But during
this period the Illia administration was not strong enough to come to grips with
some of its most difficult economic and political problems. The results of con-
gressional elections in March 1965 have probably reduced its chances for devel-
oping a consensus on key policy decisions. The UCRP increased its popular
vote, but lost two seats in the Chamber. At the same time the Peronist bloc
gained 35 seats, the only net gain made by any political group. Its 52 deputies
now constitute the second largest group in the Chamber. The UCRP, with 70,
still remains the largest party there, but, whereas UCRP legislative leaders could
formerly operate among many fragmentary political elements to construct ma-
jorities for specific legislative proposals, their ability to do so is now reduced by
the emergence of a major opposition bloc. In some cases, the residual minor
parties are disposed to oppose the UCRP and to court the Peronists. Moreover,
relatively few Peronist seats will be at stake in the 1967 election, which will
probably reflect a further polarization of political support around the UCRP
administration and the Peronist opposition.®

® See Figure 1 which follows for a recapitulation of the March 1965 election results and a
summation of the seats which are to be contested in the elections scheduled for March 1967.
Figure 1

COMPOSITION OF THE NATIONAL CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES
Seats won (+)

or Lost (—) SEATS TO BE
IN THE Marcu CONTESTED IN
PARTY SEATS 1965 ELecTiIons Marcu 1967
People’s Radical Civic Union (UCRP) ......... 70 —2, 35
PELONIS Es cesgee doicd needa e teas a Oe antes (52) (+35) (8)
Popular Union ........-..-..--0:e sees 36 +36 —
Neo-Peronist ........ 00.0 cece cece cree ee 16 —l 8
Movement for Integration and Development
(MID) vo neicp oc oeaet tage Eee eyes 15 —4 9
Federation of Center Parties (FNCP) .... .... 10 -2 4
Intransigent Radical Civic Union (UCRI) ..... 10 —10 9
Progressive Democrats (PDP) ............... 9 3 6
Union of Argentine People (UDELPA) ....... 6 —9 6
Argentine Socialist Party (PSA) ...........-. 5 =2 3
Christian Democrats (PDC) ................. 4 —3 4
Democratic Socialists (PSD) ................. Dw. 2 _ 73 2
Others once kb ee tttedte Meck cbt tee ret natn 9 —3 9
192 96"

"Includes various parties organized primarily on a provincial basis.
» Plus whatever vacancies occur prior to the election. Elections for the governorships of
the provinces and the provincial legislatures will also be held in 1967.

The Peronists

13. Argentina’s primary political problem continues to be the integration of
the Peronists into the political processes on the same footing as other parties
without provoking a serious military reaction. The Peronist movement retains
its mass support because labor groups are convinced that it is the only effective
vehicle for satisfying their needs and aspirations. They still recall the social,
economic, and political gains organized labor made during the Perén era
(1943-1955) and resent the less favored treatment which they have received from
subsequent governments. Consequently, Peronist political movements retain
the allegiance of more than one-third of the electorate and Peronist leadership
controls about two-thirds of the Argentine labor movement. Among the Peron-
ists there are many political and tactical differences and there is a continuing
struggle for leadership as the chances for the return of the aging (70) former
dictator diminish.

14, The bulk of the rank-and-file remember Perén as the dynamic, all-powerful
leader of 15 years ago. Some Peronist leaders publicly profess their determina-
tion to secure Perén’s return and make periodic trips to Spain to maintain rap-
port with him. Even avowed neo-Peronists (e.g., those provincial leaders who
contested the 1963 congressional elections despite Perdén’s order to abstain and
who have effective control in their local areas) seek to avoid an open break
with Perén and his lieutenants. Some of the neo-Peronists did cooperate with
the Ilia administration prior to the March 1965 elections and may provide a
moderating influence on the newly-elected Peronists who, for the most part, have
trade union backgrounds.

15. When in power the Peronists were a heterogeneous lot held together by
Perén’s dominant personality. They had no rational program for resolving
Argentina’s economic problems then, nor do they have one now. Peronism was
a mass protest movement antagonistic to other social groups and contemptuous
of democratic processes of government. Its social and economic program,
Justicialismo, is largely a potpourri of high-sounding phrases drawn from welfare
and corporate statism and papal encyclicals. The present leadership of the
Peronist bloc includes representatives of four distinct Peronist factions and its
declared intent to behave as a “responsible opposition” has yet to be tested.

16. Although Perén and most of his lieutenants profess friendship for the US,
Peronism’s main stress is on an “independent” foreign policy in line with the
opportunistic “Third Position” emphasized by Perén in the 1946-1955 period.
Thus far neither the Castroites nor the Communists (despite supporting Peronist
candidates in the 1962 and 1965 elections) have had much success in their efforts
to establish a “Popular Front” with the Peronists. However, there are small
extremist Peronist factions, including the pro-Castro group led by John William
Cooke, a former Peronist congressman, that are willing to cooperate with the
extreme left.

Other Political Elements *

17. The recent polarization around Illia’s UCRP and the Peronists has seriously
weakened other parties. In the March election the Movement of Integration
and Development (MID)—the vehicle of former President Frondizi—was a
poor third with only 6.4 percent of the popular vote. Other left-of-center par-
ties got even less support. On the conservative side, although there were some
gains in individual provinces, most of the conservative political groupings have
become so badly fragmented that they are important nationally only when there
is a close, important vote in Congress.

18. The Argentine Communist Party, with some 60,000-65,000 members, is the
largest in the Western Hemisphere, but is not an influential force on the Argen-
tine political scene.* The party leadership has continued to prefer legalist
political tactics to the risks of violent action. From time to time, it has made
overtures to certain Peronist leaders in the hope of enlarging its own influence
through joint political efforts. There are two small Communist splinter groups
in Argentina, the Movement of Revolutionary Action and the Revolutionary
Vanguard, both of which adhere to the Communist Chinese line on the need
for direct action. Older and more firmly established is the Argentine Trotskyite
movement, which in its various organizations has a membership of perhaps
10,000.

B. Role of the Military

19, Early in the nation’s history the Argentine military pre-empted the position
of final arbiter in Argentine politics. Generally, it has exercised that prerogative
only during periods of crisis and only after the nation’s civilian leadership had
proved inadequate. Since 1930 the military have intervened in the political
system on several occasions, most recently in 1962-1963. Each time, however,
those military leaders advocating withdrawal of the Armed Forces from con-
tinued direct participation in day-to-day politics have prevailed. Nonetheless,
the idea that an extended period of military rule may become necessary to pre-
pare the way for “responsible civilian government” still has some support among
active as well as retired officers.

20. Although attitudes toward national politics differ and there are inter-
service and personal rivalries, the Armed Forces are united in their determination
that Perédn and traditional Peronism shall not return to power in Argentina.
Genera! Ongania, however, accepted President Illia’s decision to permit Peronist
participation in the March congressional elections. Ongania has had some suc-
cess in encouraging the military to focus attention on professional military

‘For a discussion of these other political parties and movements, see Appendix.

* As a result of the Illia administration’s repeal of certain restrictive decrees and legislation,
the Argentine Communist Party is no longer outlawed. However, through his use of the
electoral courts, Illia has kept the party from presenting candidates in the national elections.
In the only provincial election the party did contest—in Mendoza—it failed to elect any of its
candidates to the provincial legislature and polled only some 7,500 of more than 240,000 votes.

8

matters, and in particular on a program for streamlining and modernizing the
Argentine military establishment.’ But the overriding problem of the military-
Peronist relationship has by no means been resolved. The conduct of the Peron-
ists in months to come will be a factor influencing the Armed Forces position
on the question of Peronist participation in the key 1967 congressional and
gubernatorial elections.

C. The Economy

21. The Argentine economy shows mixed tendencies. The basic resources
of the country are certainly adequate for a high rate of development. The
condition of much of the industrial plant and equipment is good. Moreover,
a large part of the cultivated land is so fertile, even with little use of fertilizer
or expenditure on other improvements, that Argentina’s agricultural sector pro-
duces enough for the population and usually for very substantial export.

22. In view of these assets, Argentine economic performance has been dis-
appointing. Since 1950 the economy has followed a boom-and-bust pattern,
with the depression phases of the cycle wiping out most of the gains of the
prosperous times; the average annual rate of economic growth has been only
about 2% percent, and the per capita growth rate less than one percent. Most
Argentine industries continue to be high cost producers, heavily dependent
on official protection from outside competition. The railroad, highway, and
port facilities remain in sore need of rehabilitation and modernization. Agri-
cultural methods remain technologically backward in many respects; there is
even a shortage of such simple facilities as roofed storage places for wheat.

23. In 1964 the economy experienced a substantial recovery, but the growth
of some eight percent merely brought it back to the level reached in 1961.
Moreover, much of this improvement was the fortuitous result of good crops
and good export prices. There was no appreciable progress in the government’s
handling of financial and budgetary affairs; indeed the budget’ deficit, which
had risen to US $500 million in 1963, increased in 1964 to $1.2 billion. Inflation
has now become chronic, and has,run at 20-30 percent a year for the past three
years,

24. The public external debt inherited by the Illia government still amounted
to some $2.4 billion after the payments made to the foreign holders in 1964.
(Private debt not guaranteed by the government comes to another $800 million.)
In meeting the 1964 payments, the government had to draw down its interna-
tional reserves.’ It is presently seeking debt renegotiation, which would stretch
out a portion ($380 million) of the large payments on the public debt now

“In May 1964, Argentina signed a military assistance agreement with the US which pro-
vided the Armed Forces with more than $20 million in grant assistance during 1964 and 1965
and the right to purchase additional equipment on credit.

“This brought the level of reserves to an estimated US $192 million, as compared to the
post-Perén peak of $698 million in 1960 and $322 million at the end of 1963.

scheduled to come due in 1965-1966 (nearly $1 billion), but it has shied away
from an accord with the International Monetary Fund, whose financial assist-
ance would ‘be contingent upon a more rigorous domestic stabilization policy.

‘25, Private capital inflows have slowed since 1962, partly owing to political
and economic uncertainties and partly because of the Illia administration’s action
in cancelling the petroleum contracts with US firms and its delay in reaching
settlements with them. At the same time, the inability of the Argentine state
petroleum monopoly to meet growing domestic demand has forced the import
of petroleum in growing amounts—at a cost of almost $70 million in 1964.

iil. THE OUTLOOK

A. Economic Prospects

26. During the past six months or so, the Illia administration has shown an
increased awareness of the serious economic situation it faces. It has taken
some steps to bring revenues and expenditures into closer alignment by order-
ing government enterprises to cut waste, by revising the tax structure and the
supervision of tax collections, and by increasing the prices charged for state-
supplied goods and services.* Through such measures it has hoped to reduce
the budget deficit for 1965 to about 10 percent below 1964 levels and to cut
in half the amount of the deficit financed through inflationary bank borrowing.
Because of such factors as wage raises and currency devaluation, however, we
believe that the government will find it difficult to achieve these goals.

27. A five-year National Development Plan (1965-1969) has been prepared
under administration auspices, but its issuance was delayed, partly by dis-
agreement within [lia’s own party. The Plan calls for about a five percent
rate of annual economic growth, a gradual reduction of inflation, a rapid ex-
pansion of agricultural output and exports, an increase in the production of
intermediate goods (steel, pulp and paper, and petrochemicals) and a. large
expansion in public power, fuel supplies, transport facilities, and new construc-
tion. The Plan calls for financing through the rescheduling of part of the
existing external public debt and through new long-term and medium-term
foreign credits.

28. Much of the Plan seems sensible and well-adapted to the country’s needs,
but the fulfillment of its goals depends to a very important degree on the
willingness and ability of the government to legislate and administer a series of
painful anti-inflationary measures. These include reduction of the number of
excess public workers, much greater restraint in the granting of wage increases,
improved debt management, tighter control of the budget, and perhaps some
further reduction of non-essential imports. The administration’s reluctance to
go along with recommendations of this kind by the IMF will make more diffi-

* These price increases, however, will be largely offset by recent wage raises granted workers
in the transportation and other state enterprises.

10

cult the task of lining up the large amount of foreign financing envisaged for
the Plan. Although Illia will almost certainly be able to renegotiate part of
the heavy foreign debt payments due this year and next, such relief will not
provide the new money needed to carry out the Plan.

29. Even a maintenance of present economic conditions will necessitate official
decisions which will incur political opposition, particularly from the resurgent,
labor-based, Peronist movement. And the measures required to support any
sustained and balanced pattern of economic growth will entail substantial politi-
cal risks, especially in view of the political polarization apparent since the
March 1965 elections.

30. We believe that, in these circumstances, Illia will not pursue a strong and
vigorous economic program, but will continue his policies of compromise and
adjustment. Inflationary pressure will probably continue to rise; we estimate
that the actual increase in cost of living will exceed the government’s 20 percent
goal for 1965. The recent partial devaluation of the peso (in April) from about
150 to 171/173 to the dollar, when the “parallel” or black market was about 220
to the dollar, is an example of the temporary, partial measures the administra-
tion is likely to take. Policies of this sort provide little chance for sustained
economic growth, but avoid decisions of the kind that brought the Frondizi
administration’s political demise. Nonetheless, even a month-to-month program
could be adversely affected by certain variables beyond the administration’s
control, such as unfavorable weather and fluctuations in world commodity prices.

B. The Political Outlook

Ilia’s Political Prospects

31. The gains of the Popular Union Party in the March elections marked a
major step forward in the reintegration of Peronists into the political system.
At the same time it underlined the failure of IIlia’s attempts to attract a sizable
number of Peronists into the UCRP. The UCRP’s leadership is still debating
what strategy it should employ in the months ahead. Illia may have increasing
difficulty in controlling his own party with relation to the selection of new partv
leadership next fall and to politically unpopular measures such as. economic
stabilization. The administration will probably gain some legislative support
from non-Peronist parties, depending on the issues involved, but some leaders of
these parties can be expected to oppose UCRP measures that seem to threaten
the prerogatives of private business and commercial interests.

32. Most Peronist leaders recognize that the movement is on probation in its
resurgence into the national political arena. Thus the more moderate elements,
and particularly the neo-Peronist political leaders from the provinces, will at-
tempt to restrain the movement’s extremist labor-based Congressmen and to act
as a “responsible opposition.” However, while cooperation between the
Peronists and the administration might be feasible on certain issues over the next
few months, such cooperation would be very difficult to maintain on a broad

front and would be virtually impossible in the months preceding the key March
1967 provincial and congressional elections.» Thus Illia is likely to become even
more dependent upon ad hoc combinations to secure passage of essential legisla-
tion.

33, Illia’s delicate relations with both the congress and the military have been
complicated by the crisis in the Dominican Republic. Illia was predisposed
to support the US in that matter. He prepared legislation authorizing Argentine
participation in the OAS peacekeeping force, but was deterred from submitting
it by the vehemence and virtual unanimity of the congressional reaction against
the US military intervention and by growing confusion regarding the actual
situation in the Dominican Republic. This adverse congressional reaction re-
flected not only traditional Argentine opposition to such interventions, but also
a presupposition that the US had intervened to suppress democratic elements
and to sustain an unpopular military regime. If in the end the US should
develop and support a political solution of the Dominican crisis that appeared
to be popular and constitutionalist, much of this adverse political reaction would
be assuaged, although there would remain 4 hard core of Argentine antagonism
toward the US intervention. Meanwhile, however, Argentine military leaders
in general have been frustrated by the disappointment of their strong desire
for Argentina to play a leading role in the OAS force—a desire prompted by
a combination of their anti-communism with their professional pride, their
interest in earning continued US military aid, and their jealousy of Brazil, Some
officers who have long regarded the Ilia administration as weak and ineffectual
now deeply resent its failure to act decisively in this case and are less disposed
than ever to make due allowance for its political handicaps. Indeed, there is
some reason to believe that these officers are now seriously engaged in con-
tingency planning for a coup.

34. Illia’s limited room for maneuver within the constitutional framework will
be further restricted, as the 1967 congressional and gubernatorial elections ap-
proach, by military sensitivity regarding the political prospects of the Peronists.
On present form, the Peronists, in a free election, would be likely to win at
least a plurality in Congress and the governorships of such key provinces as
Buenos Aires and Cérdoba.’° To avert that, Illia would have to act more
vigorously to create an attractive political alternative to Peronism. Given both
the character of his administration and the weakness of his position in Congress,
it is unlikely that he can do this. Alternatively, he would have to devise some
way to restrict Peronist participation in the elections. In deciding on this, he

® One-third of the Senate seats will fall vacant during 1966. Filling these seats, in most
cases indirectly by vote of provincial legislatures, may impose certain additional strains, if
the UCRP loses its present narrow Senate majority. ;

* These provinces, with the Federal District, make up a large part of the important central-
eastern section of Argentina, which, although comprising only one-third of the national terri-
tory, has three-quarters of the electorate. (See Map—“Argentine Regions and Population
Distribution.” )

12

will have to weigh not only the relative electoral prospects of the UCRP and
the Peronists, but also the likely reaction of the Peronists to such restrictions and
the likelihood of a military coup if the Peronists are not restricted.

Subversive Potentialities

35. An incipient guerrilla operation discovered in a remote area in north-
western Argentina in 1964 failed to win any popular support and was suppressed
by the National Gendarmerie. Hardline Communist elements probably have a
considerable potential for sporadic acts of sabotage and terrorism, particularly
in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area, although they have yet to demonstrate
this capability. In general, the Communists and Castroists have no significant
subversive potential in Argentina except insofar as they may be able to act in
conjunction with a mass reaction of frustrated and embittered Peronists.

36. During 1964 Peronist labor leaders sought to. foment public repudiation
of the Illia administration through a concerted program of strikes and mass
demonstrations. They hoped to make political capital of their championship
of working class interests, no matter what the outcome. If the administration
submitted to their economic and political demands, the political credit and
advantage would be theirs. If Illia suppressed the movement by force—or if
the military were provoked to cast out Illia and take charge themselves—the
Peronists would have established their leadership of the masses against a
repressive regime. Illia defeated this Peronist strategy, however, by a judicious
- combination of conciliatory measures, firmness in the maintenance of law and
order, and avoidance of violent repression. Non-Peronist labor organizations
declined to support the Peronist campaign and the participation of even the
Peronist rank-and-file dwindled away.

37. If denied a fair opportunity to participate in the 1967 elections, the more
extreme Peronist leaders would almost certainly retaliate by again attempting
to arouse the people against the government through a campaign of strikes and
mass demonstrations. In this case, they might enlist more popular sympathy.
Their initial objective would be to compel the government to permit their par-
ticipation in the election. Failing in that, the die-hard Peronist fringe might
resort to terrorism and calls for popular revolution. The more moderate Peronist
majority would almost certainly oppose such action as inviting violent suppres-
sion. The security forces would almost certainly move in to suppress any
Peronist threat to public order.

The Likelihood of a Military Coup

38. The military remain the only element in Argentina actually capable of
overthrowing the constitutional government. Whether they will do so within
the period of this estimate remains highly uncertain, depending almost entirely
on their own estimate of the developing situation in Argentina.

39, General Ongania and the other officers now in control of the military
establishment would prefer to preserve the constitutional regime, but, if they
came to regard the Illia administration as intolerably ineffectual, they would
act to reconstruct or remove it. This judgment might apply to a failure to cope
effectively with either the economic problem or the Peronist political problem.
The military would also be highly sensitive to any imputation of softness toward
communism, at home or abroad. It goes without saying that they would react
strongly to any attempt to impair the unity, independence, and prerogatives
of the military establishment.

40. A military coup might also be initiated at a level below the high com-
mand. If, in that case, the present senior commanders concluded that they
could not stop it, they might go along with it, in order to retain some control
of the situation in the ultimate interest of constitutionalism.

4]. If the military should conclude that the Peronists, under extremist leader-
ship, were likely to prevail in the 1967 elections, they would first urge upon
the government the necessity to restrict Peronist participation in the elections.
If not satisfied in this respect, they would almost certainly intervene to impose
their will, or to prevent or annul the elections.

42. There is one contingency in which the military reaction might be more
complex and less certain, If, during the next year or so, the Peronist leadership,
‘or some elements of it, should establish a reputation for reasonableness and
moderation, some of the military might come to discriminate between “good”
Peronists and “bad” Peronists and to tolerate the former. Others would deny
the validity of any such distinction. Thus a Peronist electoral victory under
moderate leadership might precipitate a division among the military, with some
calling for immediate counteraction and others seeking to preserve the con-
stitutional regime at least until the presidential election in 1969. We cannot
predict the outcome in such a case. There might ensue a period of recurrent
military crises, like that which occurred in 1962-1963.

APPENDIX

ARGENTINE POLITICAL PARTIES AND MOVEMENTS

The parties are listed in order of their political party strength as indicated by
their representation in the National Chamber of Deputies.

1. The Peoples Radical Civic Union (UCRP)

a. Origins

The UCRP was formed in 1957 when the Radical Civic Union (UCR), founded
in the early 1890s, split into pro-Frondizi (the UCRI) and anti-Frondizi organiza-
tions. The UCRP has three main factions and other smaller ones, all of which
tend to group around one or more political personalities.

b. Principal Leaders

Arturo Illia was a relatively unimportant figure in the UCR in Cordoba for
many years, despite his service as federal deputy (1948-1952), provincial congress-
man, and vice-governor. In 1962, however, he was the only UCRP gubernatorial
candidate to defeat a Peronist opponent, and thereby gained national attention.

Ricardo Balbin, a long-time close associate of Frondizi’s in the Intransigente
faction of the UCR, was the UCRP presidential candidate in 1958 and is the
President of the UCRP National Committee. His influence in UCRP councils
is about as great as President Illia’s. During the Perén regime Balbin was a
symbol of resistance to the dictatorship, opposing Perén as UCR presidential
candidate, in 1951, after having been jailed for disrespect (desacato) the previous
year. The principal bases of his support are in Buenos Aires Province and in
the party organization in certain other provinces.

Both Vice-President Carlos H. Perette and Minister of Foreign Affairs Miguel
Angel Zavala Ortiz are former Federal Congressmen and members of the third
main faction (Unionist) in the UCRP. They are also nationalistic (although
Zavala Ortiz shows some signs of having moderated his views) and politically
ambitious. As a result of Perette’s opportunistic attempts to advance his career
by pronouncements on foreign policy, by political manipulations in the Congress,
and by supporting reincorporation in the Armed Services of expelled “Colorado”
officers, the present Armed Forces leadership distrusts him and its support for
Illia has been strengthened thereby.

c. General Party Doctrine and Program

The UCRP stressed the following points in its 1963 campaign, has adopted
them as integral parts of its program, and has already acted on certain individual
measures (these are marked with an asterisk).

(1) Repeal of the proscriptions of political parties.*

(2) Annulment of all petroleum contracts with foreign companies.*

(3) Restoration of public confidence by payment of back salaries and pen-
sions to retired state employees.*

(4) Establishment of an Economic and Social Council responsible for de-
velopment planning.*

(5) Release from government control of trade unions associated with the
CGT.*

(6) Severance of Argentina’s agreement with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) if the agreement inhibits national economic development.

(7) Decentralization to restore greater autonomy to provincial governments
and to assure a more equitable distribution of wealth between the
Federal Capital and the provinces of interior.

(8) Granting to municipalities the right to limit the profits of public utility
companies while ensuring the communities better public services.

(9) Mechanization of the agricultural sector and improvement of transporta-

tion to enable Argentine products to compete on more favorable terms
in world markets.

The UCRP is opposed to communism and to Castro’s Cuba and, in power,
has cooperated with the US and other Western nations, despite its deep-rooted
nationalist views. In and out of power the UCRP has been vociferous in its
defense of Argentina’s claims to the Falkland Islands (occupied since the early
1830s by the UK) and to territories in Antarctica.

2. The Peronists

a. Origins

The Peronist Party (PP) was formed by General Juan D. Perdn from the
various political groups that had carried him to the Presidency in the 1946
national elections. Later, a Peronist Women’s Party was founded by “Evita”
Peron (d. 1952) and the two parties dominated Argentine politics until Perén’s
overthrow in September 1955. Since the Provisional Government outlawed the
Peronist Parties (1955) the Peronists have formed various political organizations
that have been subjected to political proscription and reorganized under various
names. For the March 1965 elections the Popular Union (Unidn Popular)
served as the principal vehicle for presenting Peronist candidates and programs.
There are also various provincial parties controlled by neo-Peronists, generally
more moderate than the trade unionist Jeaders elected as Popular Union candi-

16

dates, and several extreme left splinter groups, formed by Peronists who would
forego participation in elections and attempt to seize power by force.

b. Principal Leaders

In addition to the aging former dictator, Juan D. Perdén, who serves as a
rallying point for the divergent Peronist groups and remains the idol of the
Peronist masses, there is a coterie of top leaders whose membership and in-
fluence has fluctuated as Perén has sought to keep control in his own hands.
These include Alberto Iturbe, once Secretary General of Peronism’s Coordinating
Council; Jorge Antonio, Perén’s partner in exploiting the Argentine treasury for
their mutual benefit; Rati] Matera, a respected neurosurgeon who also was Secre-
tary General of the Coordinating Council and was expelled for disobeying Perén’s
instructions that Peronists vote blank in the July 1963 elections; Augusto Vandor,
a long-time leader of the Metallurgical Workers Union with moderate views and
solid trade union support; Andrés Framini, head of the Textile Workers and
a hard-line “insurrectionist” who was élected governor of Buenos Aires Province
in the elections of March 1962 which were quickly annulled; and José Alonso,
a veteran leader of the Garment Workers Union who was Federal Deputy
when Perén was in power and, as Secretary General of the General Confederation
of Labor (CGT), exerts a moderating influence within the Peronist Movement.

c. General Party Doctrine and Program

The essence of the Peronist doctrine, Justicialism, is contained in Perén’s own
definition: “Neither right nor left nor in the center, but wherever the particular
circumstances indicate.” In power, Perén followed his prescription by granting
organized labor extensive economic, political, and social gains and belaboring
the US until deteriorating economic conditions forced him to seek a rapproche-
ment with the US and to tighten down on labor. His trumpeted “Third Position”
foreign policy was a brazenly opportunistic attempt to exploit traditional Argen-
tine policies. Although Peronism is basically anti-Communist and anti-Castroist
there are sectors of the movement that fear and hate the US even more than
the Communists.

In its domestic policies Peronism is essentially statist and opposed to the
austerity-type programs the Frondizi administration (1958-1962) enacted in co-
operation with the International Monetary Fund. While Peronist spokesmen
now declare themselves favorable to foreign investment, they have attacked the
petroleum development contracts negotiated under Frondizi, and make much of
the need to preserve the “national sovereignty.” As a movement with its primary
support in organized labor, Peronism’s main emphasis is upon economic and
social welfare measures designed to benefit Argentine labor.'

"Jn addition to dutiful calls for Perén’s return the Peronist leaders also insist that Evita
Perén’s remains—removed from CGT headquarters by the victorious anti-Perén forces in
1955—be restored.

3. The Movement of Integration and Development (MID)
a. Origins

The Movement of Integration and Development (MID) developed from a
split over policy within the Intransigent Radical Civic Union (UCRI). When
former President Arturo Frondizi sought an electoral alliance with the Peronists
in the July 1963 elections, Oscar Alende refused to go along and, having gained
control of the party machinery, did not withdraw his own candidacy for the
presidency. The Frondizi faction left the UCRI and formed the Radical In-
transigent Movement (MIR) which later became the MID. Its limited strength
(6.4 percent of the total 1965 vote) is in middle class groups and is scattered
throughout the country.

b. Principal Leaders

Arturo Frondizi, the principal leader of the MID, is a complex political per-
sonality obsessed with his mission to realize Argentine’s economic and political
potential for hemispheric leadership. Although his long opposition to Perdn,
while the latter was in power, and his courting of the Peronist masses after
Perén’s overthrow, have resulted in repudiation of Frondizi by both Peronists
and anti-Peronists, he retains a loyal and even devoted personal following.

. Frondizi’s only slim chance of regaining power is an alliance with other, more

popular, political groups.

Sylvestre Bagnis, once prominent in the UCRI, and Rogelio Frigerio, the
alleged “grey Eminence” of the Frondizi administration, are Frondizi’s principal
lieutenants.

c. General Party Program and Doctrine

In general, the MID program defends the Frondizi administration’s policies,
which stressed free-enterprise in the economic field and a foreign policy that
was an admixture of basically anti-Communist and extreme non-interventionist
views. The MID foreign policy is in the mainstream of traditional Argentine
attitudes toward foreign relations, but its opposition to statism is the result of
Frondizi’s own shift from his former economic nationalist outlook during his
term as the nation’s Chief Executive. That shift reflects Frondizi’s pragmatic
analyses of Argentina’s needs and his adaption of tactics to serve his primary
goal—the attainment of the eminent position to which he believes Argentina
is entitled in Latin America.

The MID program provides a clear alternative to the Illia administration’s
statist policies. It stresses the maximum use of free enterprise and private
capital to achieve national development through industrialization, and urges
restoration of the annulled petroleum contracts and conclusion of the Investment
Guaranty Agreement to facilitate an inflow of foreign private capital. The MID
also proposes that the national budget be balanced by eliminating the deficits

of state-operated enterprises. In its political planks the party emphasizes restora-
tion of full political freedom for the Peronists and their integration into national
political life.

4, The National Federation of Center Parties (FNCP)
a. Origins

The FNCP is the lineal descendent of the traditional conservative parties
that dominated Argentine politics from 1874 to 1916 and returned to power in
1930 through an alliance with the military. The 1930-1943 era is known as the
“Infamous” period from the conservatives’ resort to the widespread electoral
fraud to keep in power. During the Perén era, 1943-1955, the national organiza-
tion of the conservative forces disintegrated, but the movement was maintained by
provincial parties. In a few provinces, such as Mendoza, Corrientes, and
San Luis, where they won in the March 1965 elections, the FNCP parties have
regained considerable strength; elsewhere they have little effective popular
support. The movement has respected leadership, but suffers from extensive
factionalism.

b. Principal Leaders

Emilio Hardoy, President of the FNCP National Committee, is a respected
moderate who generally has supported the Illia administration. On the other
hand, Emilio Olmos, the Conservative presidential candidate in 1963, attacks
the Illia government’s statist policies as anathema to Conservative principles.

c. General Party Principles and Programs

The FNCP has consistently advocated limitations on state intervention in the
economy, particularly in fields formerly open to private enterprise, a balanced
budget, a sound currency, educational reforms, development of rural activities,
protection of new industries, improved transportation facilities, and reduced taxes.

Traditionally the Conservatives have been anti-Communist and more closely
oriented toward Western Europe than toward the US. Since World War II
their ties with the US have increased and they have become supporters
for the imposition of strong sanctions on Castro’s Cuba. In line with their gen-
erally pro-US tendencies, the FNCP advocates renegotiation of the cancelled
petroleum contracts with US companies.

5. The Intransigent Radical Civic Union (UCRI)

a. Origins

The UCRI resulted from the split in the old UCR following Perén’s overthrow
and was itself split in 1963 by the loss of the Frondizi faction (see 3a above).
The faction that supported Oscar Alende in his 1963 presidential campaign won
legal possession of the UCRI label by a subsequent electoral court decision.

b, Principal Leaders

Oscar Alende, UCRI presidential hopeful and former governor of Buenos
Aires Province, is the party’s major leader. Alende’s presidential ambitions are
probably responsible for the flexibility of his political principles. In view of
the UCRI’s poor showing in the March 1965 elections, he probably will over-
look no opportunity to form a political coalition that appeared likely to further
those ambitions. Celestino Gelsi, long-time Radical stalwart in Tucuman Prov-
ince, is perhaps Alende’s principal rival in the UCRI. Gelsi also is likely to
be looking for a political combination to further his own political ambitions.

c. General Party Principles and Program

The UCRI is basically a moderate, left-of-center party whose attitudes are more
likely to represent Alende’s opportunism than any fixed list of party principles.
The party’s statements generally are designed to appeal to economic nationalists
with a statist orientation. Nonetheless, the UCRI refrains from attacking the
more moderate policies of its former caudillo, Frondizi, and opposes the Illia
administration’s cancellation of the petroleum contracts. It urges rapid in-
dustrialization and pays lip service to the idea of a balanced budget without
indicating clearly how these goals are to be attained. The UCRI has also
‘wooed the Peronists enthusiastically, but with very little success. Although
basically friendly to the US, the UCRI stress on its “independent” position on
foreign policy reflects its efforts to appeal to potential anti-US leftist supporters,
Alende’s own suspicions of US policy, and the influence of the traditional
“independent” foreign policies of Argentine Radicalism.

6. Other Legal Political Parties

There are several other long-established Argentine political parties with
strength in one or more provinces, but none of whom is likely to regain national
prominence in the foreseeable future. The Progressive Democrats (Partido
Demécrata Progresista (PDP)), for example, was founded over half a century
ago, but retains a dominant position only in Corrientes Province, through its
electoral coalition with the provincial Autonomist Party. Even with its support
in certain other provinces the PDP secured only 5.8 percent of the total vote
in 1965. Another moderate party, the relatively new Union of Argentine People
(UDELPA), the vehicle of former President Aramburu, lost heavily in the 1965
elections. The UDELPA failed to elect a single candidate and lost the nine
seats it had up for election.

The Socialist movement in Argentina has repeatedly been split since its found-
ing in the 1890s. At present there are two Socialist Parties represented in the
National Congress. Neither the Argentine Socialist Party (PSA) nor the Demo-
cratic Socialist Party (PSD), has much more than a modicum of support in the
metropolitan area (Buenos Aires) and virtually none outside of it.

Concepcion

51060 465

a

jos
jloche “#2

ATLANTIC

OCEAN

FALKLAND [ISLANDS
«+ (ULK.)

(Claimed by Argentina)

by Argentina and Chile)

ARGENTINA

wemcommms § [nternational boundary

————-_ Railroad

Road

0 100 200 300 Miles
Q 100 200 300 Kilometers

The Christian Democratic Party (PDC) is also split by factionalism. It failed
to elect a single one of its candidates for the National Chamber of Deputies,
losing the three PDC seats up for re-election. Its chances of emulating the
PDC successes in Chile are remote indeed.

The various provincial parties of the interior that won seats in the National
Chamber of Deputies are preoccupied with local issues and have almost no
chance of broadening their appeal. Even if they formed a coalition they would
have little chance of doing more than influencing close votes in the National
Congress.

7. The Argentine Communist Party (PCA)

The PCA, one of the oldest Latin American Communist parties (founded in
1918), has undergone recurrent repression, particularly in the 1930-1943 and
1959-1964 periods. Although the decree outlawing it was repealed in late
1964, the Ilia administration has kept the PCA from participation in national
elections through Electoral Court decisions that the PCA could not qualify
because of its anti-Argentine orientation and subservience to non-Argentine
influence.

The PCA membership is estimated at from 60,000-65,000 and in 1958 its
candidates for a constitutional convention received almost 230,000 votes, or 2.6
percent of the total vote. Its numerical strength is concentrated in the city
of Buenos Aires and the adjoining metropolitan area, but the PCA does have
some limited support in several provinces.

The principal PCA leader is still Victorio Codovilla, party President and one
of the party’s founders. Jerdénimo Arnedo Alvarez, the party’s Secretary Gen-
eral, Orestes Ghioldi, Rodolfo Ghioldi, Victor Larralde, Benito Marianetti,
Vicente Marischi, and Alcira de la Pefia are veteran PCA leaders but no one
of these appears to approach Codovilla’s position of leadership.

The PCA draws the bulk of its membership from urban manual workers and
lower middle-class white-collar workers. It also lias supporters in professional
and intellectual circles, including some university and secondary school students.

The PCA has closely hewed to the Moscow line, as one of the most faithful
and monolithic of Latin American Communist parties. Individuals and small
groups disagreeing with Codovilla’s policies and tactics have split off from time
to time without noticeably effecting PCA membership. These have included
groups opposed to the anti-Perén stance of the PCA leadership in the 1940s,
and more recent desertions of “activists” favoring the Castroite or Red Chinese
approach to gaining power. Nevertheless, the PCA continues to plump for the
parliamentary route in the apparent hope that it can inherit Peronist mass
support.

8. Communist Splinter Groups

There are two small pro-Chinese Communist organizations in Argentina, the
Movement of Revolutionary Action (Movimiento de Accién Revolucionaria
(MAR)) and the Revolutionary Vanguard (Vanguardia Revolucionaria). Both
groups are led by former PCA or Communist Youth Federation (FJC) members
expelled for protesting the PCA line vis-a-vis the Chinese Communists.

The Trotskyite Communist Movement has a much longer history and is more
firmly established than the pro-Chinese Communist groups. The largest ele-
ment is the Trotskyite Labor Party (Partido Obrero Trotskista—POT). Its most
important leaders are Roberto Mujiiz, secretary general of the Party, Angel
Fanjul and Jorge Posadas. Another Trotskyite organization Labor's Word
(Palabra Obrera), operates within the Peronist movement and, unlike POT, is
not hostile to the regular Communist Party. The Revolutionary Movement of
the Left (Movimiento Izquierda Revolucionario—MIR), more commonly known
as PRAXIS, is a small group, mainly intellectuals, seeking to provide guidance
to the Peronists. All together, the Argentine Trotskyite movement probably has
a total membership of under 10,000.

9. Extreme Rightist Groups

Since the May 1960 kidnapping of ex-Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann, in
‘Buenos Aires, by Israeli agents and his subsequent execution in Israel (May
1962), the latent anti-Semitism in Argentina has surfaced in terrorist acts di-
rected against Argentines with Jewish ancestry (some 450,000 in number).
Several organizations have been involved, but the most influential ones are
Tacuara, also known as the Nationalist Civic Union (Union Civica Nacionalista),
and the Nationalist Restoration Guard (Guardia Restauradora Nacionalista—
GRN). In the main the members of both organizations are young men from
middle and upper class groups. In addition to their anti-Semiticism, both
organizations are extremely nationalistic and seek to seize power by violence.
Both reveal Nazi influence in their ideologies, organization, and training, and
have established paramilitary organizations.

Tacuara has been split by factionalism between two of its original leaders,
Alberto Excurra Uriburu and José Baxter. Although Tacuara membership is
nominally Roman Catholic, it is more leftist in its orientation than the Nationalist
Restoration Guard, whose leadership works closely with the Reverend Julio
Meinvielle, a controversial Roman Catholic priest long active in anti-Semitic
circles in Argentina.

Neither organization has much prospect of seizing power by force, but they
have been able to create considerable disturbances and, in view of their anti-US
orientation, are capable of affecting US-Argentine relations by attacks on US
installations and individuals.

NORTH
16% Territory
11% Population
9% Electorate

ANDEAN
27% Territory
14% Population
14% Electorate

CENTRAL-EASTERN
33% Territory

73% Population

75% Electorate

Rio NEGRO

ARGENTINA

Territory 1,100,000 square miles
(excluding Antarctic and Atlantic
SOUTH islands)
24% Territory Population 21,500,000 (approximate, 1965)
2% Population Electorate 12,000,000 (approximate)-
2% Electorate Gross National $12,000,000,000 (1964)
Product

Persons per square mile
Oo 2.6 13 65 260 1300

(o] ! 5 25 100 S00
Persons per square kilometer
Data from 1960 census.

51063 4-65

TIERRA DEL FUEGO
=

ee en ne a 7 a a

~ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ; AGENCY

Kae
oy

4 This document was disseminated by* "the Cent ln nce : “This copy
is for the information ‘and use.of. the Tecipient and of So ine his jprisdiction | ona

need to know basis.” = ‘Additional essential issemination.-m may be- ‘authorized by ‘the ”
es
“3 following officials within | Ree

hg oh wath

e oe ‘the “ Office ice. : af, the — a

ei oe A
erations s_ (Int
aoe i

Spek enh,

he Department of the

2. This ee may ‘be retained, ° ares by pos
applicable security ee or retui

‘tain it for a period not in excess of 6 year he end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed; returned to ‘the forwarding agency, or per-

mission should be requested of the forwarding’ agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the: text | should ne clas-
sified? z

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission ae ee Ps ee
Federal Bureau of Investigation e
