Need of Czechoslovakia for Western Economic Support
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119580, dated 1 March 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119580).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LBJ LIBRARY

Mandatory ry Review
Case # adie
Document ame

Need of Czechoslovakia for Western Economic Support

Lc 8 APR 1968 ~

vl he ?

The new leadership in Czechoslovakia probably will seek large-
scale economic support from the West. The USSR may furnish a size-
aole hard-currency loan, which would provide adequate operating
ere erceu, Cue chos lovaleia preven ly mugt Vien ee Ne ee

- for long-term help in overhauling the economy. The government will .
peeeced CePIGUeAs TRE Hee 1cade cern erence to avoid difficul-
ties with the USSR over foreign policy. It also distrusts Western
political intentions. In all probability, Czechoslovakia will first
look for offers from Western business’ firms and international organiza-
tions. To support this-effort, the government doubtless will seek
improved relations with Westerm countries, including’ West Germany and
the US. At present, however, it would be politically risky for Czech-
oslovakia to seek large-scale aid from the West German government.

And Czechoslovakia cannot expect help from the US so Pe as the war
in Vietnam is going on. :

Possible Soviet Economic Pressure

Soviet deliveries of materials to Czechoslovakia apparently
‘have continued on schedule during the. recent political turmoil.
Unlike Rumania, Czechoslovakia is utterly dependent on these deliver-
ies, as pointed out by a Czech radio commentator last week:

Let us not forget that among other differences
between Czechoslovakia and Rumania, our cars run on
Soviet gas, two out of three rolls are baked from So-
viet flour, and our gigantic metallurgical combines
would come to a standstill within a few days after So-
viet ore supplies stopped. Nothing of the sort is
happening here, as is common knowledge: cars are run-
ning, rolls are baked, and so forth. :

The commentator went on to quote tne minister of Foreign Trade,
Frantisek: Hemousz, who said that Soviet crude oil (practically the
entire supply of Czechoslovakia) had been coming in on time, that

. hard winter weather and a.shortage of trucks had somewhat delayed
iron ore shipments (two-thirds of Czech consumption), and that the
USSR had offered an additional 5,000 tons of cotton to make up for
shortfalls in Egyptian deliveries.

In all likelihood, the USSR will fulfill this year's commitments
to Czechoslovakia and will agree to further increases in deliveries
next year. It is clear that it would not be in Soviet interest to
exert economic pressure that would weaken the new government and lead

\eeR0NEDFORRELEASE fy M viscry
| COMBADILEA RISSES

5g SEP 1997

Co NO EAN GISSE
Cee oO ORMBRALED DRSEE

to’ popular uprising. Ft must be noted that the USSR has no accept-
able candidate to sponsor in place of Dubcek. . .

The Need for Short-Term Credit ; ;

Even if Soviet deliveries continue as expected, Czechoslovakia
may still want immediate with ‘the balance of payments. The
USSR, which has provided such help in the past, may well come
through once again -- if it has not already done so.

Czechoslovakia's net reserves of gold and hard currency are ;
very small relative to the size of its hard currency trade, which
ran at some $800 million in 1967. Estimates of the balance of pay-
ments back to 1948 indicate that Czechoslovakia has not, added sig-
nificantly to its reserves over the period. This conclusion is borne
out by evidence that the YSSR has on several occasions extended short-
term credit to Czechoslovakia to relieve’ balance of payments pressure. .

The hard currency position of.Czecheslovakia improved in 1967, |
slightly easing the Czech short-tern payments position. Nevertheless,
the new leadership probably will ask the USSR for a substantial line
of new credit, so that Czechostovakia can stop trading on a. hand-to-
mouth basis. There has been a rumor that Czechoslovakia asked for
‘ and was promised a large hard currency loan from the USSR and East
Germany at the Dresden Conference. Short-term difficulties have
weakened the bargaining position of Czech foreign trade representatives,
contributing to the unfavorable price and credit terms that Czechoslo-
vakia has had to accept. ,

Western European banks may perhaps be willing to help. A group
of eight West German b § recently provided a line of snort-term
credit to the State bank of Tagee te ee tera
tion_of foreign trade that Hungary 15 undertaking whiee ite ee
econoaié mechanism.”
— eee? . .

Czechoslovakia also could get a substantial line of credit by
reactivating its membership in the Intemational Monetary Fund, as
the government may intend to do. Usecnos lovakia belonged to-UHe IMF
until the end of 1954, when it was suspended for failing to supply
the required fiscal information to the IMF. But the economic steps
required to meet minimum IMF requirements will take time, to which
must be added tHe time for passing on Czech qualifications. Thus

rejoining the IMF is not an answer to the immediate foreign exchange
problems facing Czechoslovakia. ;

"rongPOllsD ISSE

The Need for Long~Term Loans and Foreign Investment

in twenty years of Communist rule the economic growth rate of
Czechoslovakia has fallen far behind that of the Western European
economies. In 1948, Czechoslovakia was better off than West Germany
A and Austria; now it is backward in Comparison With e1ther COMM=Ey——
‘\ne Czech economy has grown under Communist manageuent; bu less
{rapidly than the West German or Austrian and at higher cost. More-
iover, € output of goods and services is inferior. by Western

standards. It does not meet the demands of domestic consumers and
foreign buyers. ‘

These deficiencies are widely recognized in Czechoslovakia.
Economists generally agree that the deficiencies can be corrected
only by basic changes in institutions, practices, and policies, and
with a massive infusion of Western technology and know-how. ‘The
economists have so recommended to the new leadership. ——

What the new leadership will do remains to be seen. Such sweep-
ing changes obviously cannot be made overnight. But Czechoslovakia
presumably will investigate the possibilities of getting large-scale
Western help. Ota Sik, the leading reformer, recently stated that
Czechoslovakia already was looking for a large foreign loan -- he’
would not say in what quarter or.for how large an amount. According
to clandestine reports, the government already has turned down one
loan -- source and amount unspecified -- because of the political
strings attached.

Very likely Czechoslovakia will for some time avoid seeking
loans from Western governments. As various Czech officials have ‘
indicated, the new leadership recognizes that the USSR is extremely
sensitive on the matter of solidarity within the Warsaw Pact. The
internal reforms in Czechoslovakia are in themselves unpalatable
enougn to the Warsaw Pact allies, and it is obviously prudent for
the Czech leadership to go slowly in foreign affairs. In particular,
the USSR, East Germany, and Poland have been concerned over any
approach that would move Czechoslovakia closer to diplomatic relations
with West German,, although they probably can only delay and cannot:
prevent such a move. ' ‘ .

Czechoslovakia probably will begin by seeking loans from inter-
national grganizations and by exploring the possibility of accommodating
foreign investment and making more use of "joint ventures" with Western
businessmen. Among international organizations, the best bet would
seem to be the IMF. As a former member, Czechoslovakia could perhaps
get ‘special consideration for ve-admission. If re-admitted, it would
be eligible to acquire drawing rights from the IMF and to apply to the

World Bank for long-term credit. A recent report suggests that
Prague may be planning to approach the World Bank. :

Possidle US Action

The immediate possibilities for US action are limited, as the
government of Czechoslovakia realizes. Not only is Czechoslovakia a
Communist country; it is also heavily involved in supplying arms to
North Vietnam and is both North Vietnam's and Cuba's third largest

» vrading partner.*° The US government, ‘therefore, is prohibited by
law from taking most OF the steps that could help Czechoslovakia —
or guaranteel ioans through the Export-Import Bank, or offerin
Hol easiatender ceethe: 1naidia uraaitedly woul we lege ene

granting of MFN status by the US as a step in “normalizing” rela-~

tions, although: the Czech economy would gain little in the short,

run. Only 4 percent of Czechoslovakia's trade with developed

Wester countries is with the US. The Czechs probably would be.

even more grateful to receive guaranteed credits and PL-480 aid if
US help should become available. —

Czechoslovakia has long demanded that the US release $20.2
million in gold seized from Czechoslovakia by the Germans in World
War Ii. This gold, recovered by the Western allies at the end of
World War II, was awarded to Czechoslovakia by the Tripartite Com-
mission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold. France and the UK,
the other two members besides the US, have agreed to the release
of the Nazi-looted gold to Czechoslovakia. France had no significant
claims aginst Czechoslovakia, and the UK early reached an agreement
on its claims. The US, however, has substantial claims outstanding
--ichiefly for property of US citizens nationalized by the Communists
-- which it has insisted on settling as part of any over-all agreement
on claims. The two issues have long been considered by the US to be
inseparable.

To complicate the matter, US representatives in 1961 negotiated
‘and initialed ad referendum a draft agreement extremely favorable to
Czechoslovakia. After review, this draft was rejected by the State
Department. Negotiations were resumed in 1967, and in November the
US submitted a new proposal, on far less favorable terms. Although
the proposed settlement would release to the Czechs the $20 million
in gold and give them a net $3 million on other accounts, the re-
mainder of US claims and debt payments to be paid in the following
seven years would run just over $30 million. The Czechs have not
responded to the US proposal officially. Individual Czech officials
have reacted with indignation.

* The USSR is the. largest trading partner, Communist China second.

. The new leadership in Pr
the time being to leave th
