Scientific - Electronics
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124298, dated 30 December 1957.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124298).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

INTELLIGENCE. AGENCY

755 nae REPOR
: 4 INFORMATION FROM .
FOREIGN OOCUMENTS Of RADIO BROADCASTS CO NO}
COUNTRY west . OATE OF os
“ INFORMATION 3957 .

SUBJECT Actentifie - Electronics
DATE DIST, | 30 Deo 1957

HOW 4
PUBLISHED Monthly periodical
WHERE 3
PUBLISHED Moscow NO. OF PAGES 9 LC

* £ .
DATE : 2
PUBLISHED Jul 1957 NS

SUPPLEMEMT TO

LANGUAGE —«- Russian REPORT NO.

.
iB <

THIS (S UNEVALUAIED INFORMATION

SOURCE

tae

4 NS 5 Sei

ed

= aay ea bed -

h

Aap nave Release:
) (SEP __ ASEP “1995

i

aie

DIRECTION-FINDIMG AD‘OTER

¥. Dubroris

Figures referred to en: appended.]}

\
\

Among the assignments vhich can be carried out by redio amateurs
during the obeervation of signals from the artificial Earth satellite ie
the determination of the instant when the satellite will pass over an
observation point. The instant of transit can be determined by varfous
methods, in particular, by the stift cf the received frequency dua to
Doppler effect, or else dy the method of equisignal sone (widely used in
radar for determination of angle cc ordinates). This article descrives the
equisignal-zove wothod and a simple adapter for observations of the eatel-
lite by this method.

The Equisigneal Zone Method

What an equisignal zone is can be seen froe Figure 1. This figure
shows schematically two identical antennas, A) and Ao, which are located
some distance from each other. Z

Radiation patterns of the antennas in the vertical plane are abown |
here by a solid line. For observations by this method, the radiation
patterns of the antenms are formed in such a manner that the direction
of beat reception of the antenms is somevhat displaced in space. Let us
menume thet the vatellite is passing over the antennas in euch a way as to
occupy positions one and two successivaly. Let us observe the changes of
the signal strength in the antennas during the movement of the satellite.
As fa seen from Figure one, when the satellite is located et position one,
the signal in antenna Aj will be at ite maxim and will considerably ex-
ceed the amplitude of the signel inantennaAs. As the satellite moves to
the right frou point 1, the signal level increases in antenma Ag and aa-
creases in antenna Ay. Therefore, in position two, which the satellite
will occupy several instants later, the signal amplitude in the antennas
will not differ as much as.1t did in position one.

In its further movement, tha satellite will occupy position three,
vhen the afgnal becomes equal in both antennas. In this case we can say
that the satellite is located in the equisigml tone.

In space, this zone comprises a vertical plane between the antennas,
wkich the satellite should necessarily intersect when pascing over the
point of observation, except when the trajectory of the satellite is par-
allel to the equisignal plane. Registering the instant of transit of the
sateZlite over the equisignal plane can serve for the precise determina-
tion of its orbit. For a determination of this instant both cntennas (A)
and Ag) are connected to the recelver through a special direction-finding
adapter, the basic element of which is an electronic switch. The twitch

a)ternately connects the antenms to the recefrer at a rate of several hun--

dred times per second (Figure 2), which affords opportunity to observe the
oscillations at the output of the receiver (Figure 3) to determine the
ratio of the signals induced in antennas A) and Ao.

If the satellite is outside the equisignal zone, then the signal
strength in, the two antennas is different; therefore, the amplituie of the
oecillations 4t the input of the receiver changes with the frequency of the

ary

. Ani

ie

antenna ssitching (Figure 3). Detection of these oeciUations will produce
square pulees, reproducing the signal envelope at the input of the receiver.
qhees pulses can be heard as a tone vith @ frequency equal to that of the
antenna svitching (vith local oscillator diaconnected). In the course of
the rovesent of the satellite, the signal in antenna A) will decreese and
vill increase in antenna Ag; ae & result tone loudnese st the output will
decrease. At the instant the eatellite transits the equisignal tone, the
signals in antennas A) end A; will be equa}, and the tone of the switche
ing frequency will not be heard (Figure 3). To gectye én equisignal plane,
the antenpas should be completely identical and have ‘symmetrical (with
respect to the vertical axis) radiation patterns The required shift of
the direction of vest, reception with respect to vertical axis can de

attained by 4 proper positioning of the antennas.

of the described direction-finding adapter (Figure

4) is a symmetrical multividrator (L4,15) which controls two identical
nigh-frequency amplifiers (L2,L2) with « common plate load (circuits Le,
C5,C6)- The signal from each cotenns is transmitted to the correspond ing

input (A) Ag) of the amplifier by means of a coaxial cadle.

The basic element

To the screen grids of tubes L} and Ie ts supplied a voltage in the

form of square pulses, which change the potential of the screen grids in
steps froa 0 to 4120 volts. In accordance with this, there occurs an al-
ation stages, and frog

tervate connection of the bigh- frequency amplific
the common plate load to the output stage of the adapter (L3), the empli-

fied signals alternate from each of the antennas.

The multivibretor, built with an electron coupled circuit, generates
pulses which are alnost square. Tha avitching frequency is deternuined by
the capacitance of the capacitors C7, Ca and resistance of resistors ree
Rig. For the magnitudes of these ¢ ewents in this circuit, the evitching
frequency is 270 cycles. For the couplete cutoff of tubes Ly, Ig, & suall
positive (with respect to the catzodes of tubes ly, Is) voltage of about
10 volts {a applied to the cathodes of tubes Ly and Io, whieh is bullt up
by the current in the circuits of thr cathodes of tubes Ly, lo» ly across

the resletor Ro-

Autotransformers are used to match the characteristic impedance of
the cable (75 ohms) at the input circuits. ;

The cathode circuit of the output stage, which comprises @ com_|on
cathode follower, is closed oa the direct current through the incoming
circuit of the receiver. C
ignal tone method, it is necessary that

ification. Adjustment of
the grids of tubes

For observations by the equis
poth high-frequency stages herve the same amp.
amplification ts accomplished by changing the bias at
Ly, lo with the «1d of resistor R3-

The capacitors C3 and Cio, each 100 micronicrofarads, decouple the
screen grids of the high-frequep:y explifier tubes and do not affect the
form of evitching voltage: The adapter is instalied close to ths antennes;
therefore, a low voltage of 12.6 volts is selected for its pover supply.
This voltage is supplied directly to the heating cireuite of the tubes,
divided into tvo, ter ies-conzected groups.

The middle foint of the primary winding of the powsr transformer ie
and sérres to equalize the beater voltage (6.3 volts) in both
groups. For power supply to plate circuits, ® common Kerotroa rectifier

jad

5

1

Fess

57353 (15) 18 used. A potential of 12.6 volte {fe obteined from a special
transformer tostalled in the vicinity of the receiver; this transforesr
tually bas to be designed for a potential of 13-14 volta to compensate
r tbe potential drop in the connecting vire.

Structurally, this direction-flnding adapter ig built on @ sepirate
cLassis having the dimensions 190 by 150 by 60 am. The location of the
taste components on the chassia in seen in Figure 5. To Reduce the mutual
effect of stagee, copper, brass, or Slumimum screening sections [tube
shields} are placed between tubes 1), Ip and L,. On the side of the
chaseia are three terninal-Blocks for coexial gable (two for antennas A
and Ay and one for the coanection to the receiver).

ac
5
Fie)

Wiring of both stages of high frequency emplification should be carried
cut according to the same wirlng syatem. The groundizng of all components
belonging to the same stege is dove at oom point near the corresponding

tube.

Trimming capacitors Cy, Cy and C,5 are mounted in such a manner that
the tuning of the circuits can be achleved without resoving the lower

lid of the direction-finding edapter. ww”

High-frequency cotis Ly, Le, L3 are mounted at the output of the
correspooding trimaing capacitors. These colls are made with siivered
wire with a diameter from one to 1-1/2 am, wound on an S-em mandrel, and
cortaining seven turns. After winding, the coil is stretched to a length
of 18 am. Cotis L) ani 13 bave taps from the secomi turn, counting from

tha grounded end.

Tr, bas a core of plates Sh-19 (thickness of the assembly, 20 mn).
Winding cos has 2 ty 110 turns of PEL-l wire, 0.74, three secomary- I~
2 by 4.900 turns of PRL~l, wire, 0.12.

The choke of filter_Dr, bas a core of Sh-15 plates, baring an ascenbly
thickness of 25 mm. The winding is done with PEL-] wire, 0.15, covering
the whole form. A step~down transformer for the power supply to the adapter
(not todicated in the figure) ia built with a core of Sh-19 plates; the
thickness of the assembly is 50 ma. The primary winding of this transformer
is dealgned for connection to a power line of 110, 127, and 220 rolts and
contains, accordingly, 550 turns plus 83 turns of PEL-1 wire, 0.44, 9 470
turna of PEL-1, wire 0.33. The step-down winding coasista of 87 turna of
PEL~1 wire, 1.2, aod baa taps from the Tai, T]th, and G24 turns for selec-
tion to the adapter of a norwal voltage of 12.6 volts. Between the pri-
mary and the secondary winling is a screen mde of a etogle layer of PEL-1

wires, 0.15 ta 0-2.

Adjusting ta the direction finding edapter 1s usually begun by check-
img tube performance. The operation of the multivibrator 1s checked with
the aid of an oscillograph; the pulses should be practically square at
the plates of tubes ly, lg. When there is a considerable difference in
the duration cf the two half-periods of the generated oscillations, it is
pacessary to change somewhat the value of leak resistance m “be capacitance
of the separation capacitor in the eircult of the control grid of one of
the tubes. It 1s desiradle to check the frequemy of the sultivibrator-
generated oscillations with the ald of sn audiogenerator (vith respect to
Lissajous figures on the screen of tha cacillograph). If it is necessary,
the frequency can be changed by the selection of capacitors C7, Cg ar the

resistors Ro, Rio;

ond fa Pas Sass a eae ee

For tuning the high-frequency eaplifier, geserater S0-]1 and voltacter
DES-7 can be used. For thie purpoee, a 7T5-ohm resistance is connected
temporarily at an output of a cathode follower.

Th: tuning of each stage of the high-frequency explifier is repeated
several times.

The finel tuning stage fa balanced through a balancing and ‘equalizing
of the amplification of both arma of the emplifier (with the aid of R3).

aa Snare
\,

‘\

Nealf-wave eplit dipoles, similar to those which are used for the
reception of TV programs, can be used as the antennas. To secure the
desired direction fom the best reception, the antennas should be placed

t a height of a quarter of a wave above the earth's surface. In contrast
to television reception, the diameter of the dipoles can be Jzelected only
on the basis of constructional considerations; the antenna bandwidth is
of no algnificance. The antenna structure should be sufficiently rigid

eo that it will not be swayed by a atrong wind.

For measurements by the equisignal sone method, two identical dipoles
are used, placed exactly parallel to each other at a distance of the order
of half a wave length. (In the future, thia distance will be more accu-
rately defined.)

The dipoles are oriented (see Figure 6) eo that the line connecting
their centers will coincide with the east-west direction and so that the
equisignal plane is in the direction of the meridian. The direcntion~
finding adapter {s installed on the ground between the antennas, ia covered
with a protecting jacket, and fs connected to the antennas by cables of
equal Jength (with an accuracy up to one to 2 cm).

Because the earth's surface participates forming the antenna radia-
tion pattern, the antenna should de located on a level site; any consider-
sble unevenness of the relief at the site of the entenna will distort the
equisignal sone and vill cause errors in observations. For the same ree-
son, for a distance of up to ten wayelengths, there should not be any
large metallic masses and other shielding objects. It is also objection-
able to use metal guy rods for fastening the antennas. As already men- _
tioned, using the equisignal method ia impractical in cities. The con- -
struction of one of the possible antenna variants for a wave length of
7-5 meters (40 megacycles) ig shown in Figure 7. Coupling the antenna
to an unbalanced 75-cohm coaxial cable is done with the aid of a balancing
U-shaped bend. The dipoles are located at a height of 18.75 meters above
the earth's surface, and the distance between then ie 3.75 meters. The
radiation pattern of a single antenna for this particular case is shown

in Figure 9.

For operations without the switch, one of the antennas is or
connected to the input of the receiver.

{Appended figures follow. }

TrajectorP of Satellite Flight

+ siepshonal

Figure 1

‘

: ‘
‘
j )
if
'
t
H
:
é
2 0s ry +
° ae
Lj6Zns yeh Ls6Zn5 _
sé “2
Gas - eee
= ’ ct
tel ‘4 fo & x Meith i.
‘ a ‘

Ke

R,
: ! tt Suwa G

Soldered to dipoles
Solder the shield

eable rk-1, rk-3,
rk-59

‘

we .
Bolder inside wirea_.
