Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961-1963, Volume Xxii, Northeast Asia,
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013675, dated 3 September 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013675).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

x
Sak a Ue

3
{a y
week

: OOPAROATHT OF IMATE Slater!
PROVED Fon ates in erie
ae LEE LIAR. You Lt Is cratered emisa ga shown

BOG Se Bee a tefl ae

Bet : “oT JI PE+ GZ

rf eS te
Ete: ed

wp h hy

By aes, te

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 41-63

Japan's Problems and Prospects

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
SEEMING! gsi shrote aati asta tian n dilate chs. 1
Se a OOM i ahold ick nt tt oe, 3
II. POLITICAL PORT ECTS wig iiiauteteunie safes pele. 4
III. ECONOMIC UP CEO Uae etalk etie Maik ol Pas iy 7
IV. INTERNATIONAL PATIONG weit ore tN aos dace tae 12
V. MILITARY PRES i> occ fest srk eyy se nd 15
pec een ee 17
Pan PEIN ae RRR Neate saad ion da 9. 17

wm SA Tle

JAPAN’S PROBLEMS
AND PROSPECTS

CONCLUSIONS

A. Japan’s postwar political institutions, although not yet
put to the test of adversity, seem to be taking root, and the out-
look for continued political Stability appears favorable. Although

: the leftist political vote has been increasing, to the particular

benefit of the Japanese Socialist Party, the conservative Libera]-
Democratic Party will Probably retain power over the next few
years. (Paras. 5, 7-9)

continue to expand, but probably not at the remarkable rate of
recent years. (Paras, 1 6, 33)

C. Japan can be expected to move toward a greater involve-
ment in world affairs and a more self-confident and independent
Posture during the next few years. Relations with the US will

34-36, 40, 41)

D. The US-Japan Security Treaty will almost certainly remain
the keystone of Japan’s defense and military planning under con-
Servative rule. US bases in Japan will be a sensitive subject and
the Japanese would be particularly edgy about their use in con-

SECRET 1

TA vfs

SEGREF

nection with hostilities which Japan did not see as an immediate

threat to itself. As economic prosperity increases and national

self-esteem reasserts itself, Japan may show a greater interest

in such issues as national defense and a more impressive military

establishment. Strong antimilitary sentiment will, however, con- .

: TA 2e/h

I. INTRODUCTION

1. Thé postwar Period has seen Profound changes in Japan’s politica]
institutions. A number of elements in the Prewar scene—the military,
the aristocracy, and the Special bureaucracy surrounding the Emperor—

Servative voters by an anti-traditional postwar generation as it came
of age, Moreover, in the Postwar period, not only the youth, but all
elements of Japanese Society have been exposed to the teachings and
writings of a predominantly leftist intellectual community which was
released from past suppression under & tolerant Occupation,

3. These changes have been conducive to the development of leftist
Political forces, Nevertheless, the left has found it difficult to exploit
its opportunities. Prosperity under capitalism, high employment, a

national self-esteem which renders it increasingly advantageous for
all elements to think in terms of national rather than class goals.

diminution of local autonomy. Such revisionist trends as exist, how-

5. Thus, the Prospects for continued moderation in Japan's political
institutions and policies seem Teasonably good. There appears to be

ern orientation.

I. POLITICAL PROSPECTS*

8. Liberal-Democratic Party. The ruling Liberal-Democratic Party
(LDP) carries with it the prestige of success and the advantages of
money and power, The LDP, however, is increasingly aware that it
cannot rest on its oars, Many of its leaders realize that it must strive
to replace the widely held view that the LDP is a party of “old-guard”
politicians, steeped in corruption, enervated by factionalism, and respon-
Sive to the wishes of big business. These leaders recognize that the
LDP must make the transition from a party based primarily on class
to one based on broad popular appeal and gain the support of the grow-
ing body of independent voters who Support whatever party offers the
most attractive programs and candidates,

7. The LDP has proven adept at exploiting favorable economic and
social conditions in postwar Japan and wil] Probably continue to do
so for some time. The party appears to understand what steps it

for the rest of this decade.

8. Japanese Socialist Party. The Japanese Socialist Party (JSP) will
almost certainly continue to be the only major opposition party during
this decade. It is supported by Sohyo, the principal trade union federa-

* See Table I for relative electoral strengths of Japanese political parties,

4 SECRET

ee

:

ry to the whole nation Many Japanese fear that the JSP would fol ow
I radical economic Policies which might jeopardize continued economic

growth and rosperity. The Party will have to attune its presently
‘ neutralist foreign policy to the main trends of Japanese nationalism and

the Japanese, since it equates Japan with the backward nations of Asia
| and Africa; and its “American imperialism” theme no longer serves as
& convincing explanation for all the world’s ills,

emphasis on class w.
these lines. The degree to which the Socialists will have moderated

forces undoubtedly favor moderation, and some perceptible changes
in JSP orientation are likely to occur over the next several years.
However, the Socialists as a party have a capacity to cling tenaciously
to anachronistic doctrines, and temporary returns to more radical} posi-
tions cannot be Tuled out. Thus far, there is little sign the JSP is under-
going the same process of moderation which has characterizeq many
Western socialist Parties,

Japanese Communist Party (JCP) will Probably continue to attract
attention disproportionate to its size. When it seems politically profit-
; able, it will act with other leftist groupings in demonstrations, directed
primarily against US bases and the introduction of nuclear weapons in

12. Soka Gakkai. Efforts of both the JCP and the Socialist parties
to increase their shares of the Popular vote will Probably be undercut

13. The Soka Gakkai may eventually. decline to the Status of relative
unimportance that has been the fate of numerous postwar quasi-religious

neither great political responsibility nor initiative. Greater legislative
strength, however, could lead them to develop a more comprehensive
political action program. If this should occur, the Soka Gakkai’s au-
thoritarian methods and organization, and its nationalistic doctrines,
would probably cause it to move to the right; its political Philosophy
could evolve into a uniquely Japanese form of totalitarianism, which

6 SECRET

i
_ If B/jo

might eventually pose Serious problems for moderate conservative forces
in Japan.

14. Right Extremists, The number of right extremists is small and

they are divided into Several hundred Broups. There js widespread op-

Position to the tactics of assassination and terror which Some pursue

and they are viewed with distrust by the g0vernment, They will con-

i tinue to be a disruptive element on the Political scene. However, barring
an unlikely coalescence of their forces, they will almost certainly not
have a significant influence in government, military, or business circles

1958 and 1961, it exceeded that of any other country in the world.* A
number of factors have contributed to these successes. Postwar govern-

17. Japan’s consumption of energy will Probably nearly double in the
next 10 years. Most of the useable hydroelectric Power sources have

Over 90 percent of its crude oil. The development of the Japanese oil
Concessions in the Persian Gulf will eventually reduce the foreign ex-
change costs of oil, The cost of developing these concessions and re-
quired royalty payments are now, however, resulting in a net drain on
Japanese foreign exchange resources, Japan is Pushing ahead in the
development of nuclear power as an energy source, but the effort has
been hampered to some extent by a lack of funds for both basic and
applied scientific Tesearch. By 1970, Japan plans to have five nuclear

* Bee Table If for Statistics on Japan's economic growth.

SEGREE 7

1
|

most of its wool, and faces critica] shortages in timber for construction |
and industrial Purposes,

19. Through a highly successfu] program of intensive cultivation,
multiple cropping, and extensive use of chemica] fertilizers, Japan has
made impressive gains in agricultural output, but it stil) must import
about one-fifth of its requirements of foodstuffs. A uniquely effective
birth control program has reduced the annual rate of population growth
to about one percent, but the slowly expanding population and higher
consumption standard will keep Japan a major food importer,

22. Facts no longer support the popular view of Japan as a low-wage J
country whose exports have an unfair advantage in other markets.
There has been a definite shift in Japan’s exports away from labor- .
intensive towards capital-intensive goods, and Japan’s current export
industries consist mostly of large firms whose average wage levels are
relatively high. The role of traditional Japanese export industries such
as textiles, toys, and ceramics in Japan’s overall foreign trade is declin.
ing and low-wage areas such as Communist China, India, Hong Kong,

8 SECREF

Taiwan, and South Korea are now competing with and, in many cases,
underselling these traditional Japanese products in the Far East and in
other world markets.

A nomic policy for at least this decade. In recent years, the US has ac-
counted for nearly one-third of Japan’s foreign trade, with only Canada
i having greater imports from and exports to the US. Trade between

by Japan of restrictions on imports should increase US sales to Japan
and Japan will probably continue to be the leading purchaser of US
farm products and an important customer for coking coal, iron ore, and

import surplus. The Suspension of US offshore procurement, the cur-
tailment of US defense expenditures overseas, and the implementation

25. Trade with Communist China. Trade with mainland China con-
tinues to have considerable appeal to the Japanese, who recall the large
trade with this area up to World War ITI. Although developments over

the past years on the mainiand have weakened the lure of the China
f market, certain business and government circles in Japan and much of
the public look forward to China’s eventual economic recovery and the
} expansion of Peiping’s trade with non-Communist countries. The Sino-

26. The current pact provides for trade of about $100 million annually
for five years. Actual trade, however, will almost certainly exceed this

ducted for cash or short-term credit at trade fairs or through “friendly
firms"—mainly Small, leftist-oriented companies and some dummies of
large trade concerns. Nevertheless, mainland China's Share of Japa-

West European competition for the China trade; and it meets minimum
demands among the conservative business community for entry into the
China market.

27. In the long run, it is possible that Japan’s trade with mainland
China will grow to an extent not now foreseen—whether due to improve-
ments in the Chinese €conomy, a@ persuasive softening in Peiping’s
Policies, a decision by Communist China to look to the Free World for
large-scale Support for its industria} program, or other factors, Until
the end of this decade, however, it seems likely that Japan will move

market, exercising caution and avoiding unacceptable economic or polit-
ical risks in its relations with the US.

already has stable and advantageous trading relationships in such goods
with non-Communist countries, In all these circumstances, it appears
unlikely that Soviet-Japanese trade will increase greatly over the present
three percent of Japan’s total trade.

10 SECREF

JA 2y4

29. It is possible that Soviet plans for the development of Siberia could,
Over time, give a Significant boost to Japan-Soviet trade. The Soviets
have dangled such perspectives before the Japanese since 1957, but so

SEERET

Ports of Soviet crude oi} in repayment, and Japan’s reluctance to breach
Western restrictions on Selling large-diameter pipe. The recent exten-

31. Trade with Latin America. A favorable climate exists for an in-
. Crease in Japan’s political and economic relations with South and Cen-

i colonies -there, especially in Brazil. Japan is making greater publicity

32. Trade with Non-Communist Asia. Japan’s trade with non-Commu-
nist Asian nations {s as large as its trade with the US (about one-third
of total trade). It has, however, shown little recent growth and, with

SECRET 1]

SEGRE

the exception of a few countries, will probably not rise
the next few years. Inhibiting factors, particularly

Communist nations are developing home

grains, and coking coal, and may also become o
of iron ore, Otherwise, however, prospects
in this area’s share of Japan's trade do not

33. The Economic Outlook. Japan’s pheno
and its success in dealing with the business

IV. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

34. In the next few years, Japan will Probably move gradually away
from its postwar insularity and toward a greater involvement in world
affairs. This development will almost certainly take place within the
framework of a fairly firm commitment to association with the Free
World, Particularly the Us. At the same time, there will be a trend
towards greater independence of posture and less inclination to follow
the US lead on outstanding international questions.

12 SECRET

ee

& full and equal Partner, and by heightened concern over continued
access to the US markets. To Japan, partnership will principally mean

37. Japanese attitudes towards military relations with the US are
ambivalent. On the one hand, there is general public acceptance of

would almost certainly create considerable uneasiness and mistrust in
Japan, particularly among government leaders,

submarines to make resupply visits to Japan.

39. Continued US administration of Okinawa will probably not become
an active political issue in Japan during the next few years. The present
government and sophisticated Opinion recognize the importance of

SECRET 13

SECRET

whip up popular resentment, and the question of the return of the
islands to Japan could become a major issue.

40. Relations with Communist China. The present LDP leadership
feels that recognition of Peiping and advocacy of its admission to the

a8 possible. The government is not now under strong Pressure to adopt
this view as its own.

41. Relations with the USSR, Whereas the Japanese Tecognize cul.
tural and historical affinities with China and believe they can somehow

Superficial manifestations of friendship and a greater response to Soviet
Culture and trade initiatives than in the past, This will be Particularly
the case if Soviet Policy persists in its current effort to seek a general
relaxation of East-West tensions,

43. Relations with Other Countries. Prime Minister Tkeda has pub-
licly committed himself to attempt a settlement of differences between
Japan and the Republic of Korea (ROK). In past years, domestic po-

sides have made the Solution of outstanding issues very difficult. More
recently, some Progress toward ameliorating relations has been made,

14 SEGRET

_ JA Tg

and this movement will probably continue. Japan is informally com-
mitted to extend grants and loans to the ROK of around $600 million
as Part of an overall settlement. Even if there is no early Settlement,

44. The Japanese will be concerned to preserve and build up present
and potential markets in underdeveloped areas, especially in non-Com-

financial contribution will almost certainly be small when compared to
the programs of other industrial countries. The Japanese have at
various times floated Tather vague Proposals for regional groupings.
The motivation has apparently been to better trade prospects, to emulate
the economic Broupings in Europe, and to enhance Japan’s world posi-
tion. Similar initiatives may be expected in the future,

V. MILITARY PROSPECTS

45. Barring hostilities directly threatening Japan’s security, the next
few years will almost certainly see no major changes in Japan’s defense
policies, military establishment, or assessments of the Soviet and Chinese

for the rest of this decade. As economic Prosperity increases and na-
tional self-esteem reasserts itself, it is likely that Japanese concern over
Such issues as nationa] defense and the desire for a more impressive
Military establishment Will slowly grow. Nevertheless, Strong antimili-
: tary sentiment wil] continue to prevail among the Japanese Populace.

46. Jap
in the world, and in Past years has not kept pace with the growth of
either the budget or GNP. There is little prospect for drastic change,

SECREY 15

countries currently devote about five percent of GNP to defense; the US,
about 10 percent; Japan’s defense outlay in 1963 was under 1.2 percent
of GNP.)

Progress in various aspects of advanced weaponry. The Defense Agency
will push development of a variety of Japanese missiles. Japan’s re.

clear program to the threshold of a weapons capability, a point which it
would take severa] years to reach, but it would be much more reluctant to
cross that threshold than most other countries, The Japanese military
will continue to prepare for the Possibility of a change in Japan’s anti-

tems. Nevertheless, it seems likely that Japan will continue to rely on
the US nuclear deterrent and not try to develop its own nuclear weapons
at least during this decade.

16 SECRET

sete JA Gey,

TABLE |

RESULTS OF LATEST JAPANESE GENERAL ELECTION
House of Representatives, November 1960

PERCENT or
Party SEATS GarveD POPULAR VOTE

Liberal-Democratic lg R GM Shea haed Sh Ge etes AN Hite tsar Sf 296 57.5
BC ONS wien uitiiaae eee) 145 27.5
Democratic OCIS Tit oias Glau aoe Maly cee 17 8.7
Reeth essa ese tatge cee gat 3 2.9
Minor and Independent 000. 6 3.4

467 100.0

TABLE I!

SELECTED STATISTICS ON JAPAN'S ECONOMIC GROWTH
TARGET
GOALS
1958 1959 19680 1961 1962 1979
Gross National Product (Billion Us

dollars) 1961 Prices 6... 30.7 363 411 | 472 50.3 814
Industrial Production Index... 67.0 80.3 100 119.3 128.6 260
Exports F.O.B., (Million US dollars) ... 2877 3456 4055 4236 4916 9320
Imports C.F, (Million US dollars) .... 3033 3599 4491 5810 5637 10150

} SOURCES: AID Data Book, Washington, D.C., 1963
Japanese Economic Planning Agency

te
aay Bee
“Nes aOBETs Soo and
+ FERRE A te =
yt .
aN aaa
4 ff

cer

a!

NTELLIGENCE.

Pe

Directo? of Intell

Assistant Director, FBI,

eta ;
‘,, ry is f
rae! .
EPI SIMS Pe
i. : KK nf
: ey re
Tee : ‘ 1 -

edge eg

as
pyry

e
