Bulik Interview with Cox
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012386, dated 2 August 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012386).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tht Glow: ne CR 97 &//by

Ye proshu vas mne pomoch. As I recall.
Ya proshu .
Vas mne pomoch. .....and then he says ....

time. We asked hin vy ani his onsver vas probably that he was tired of the regine.

what life,

Tn fact, we asked/nin axe’ you  Oonmntet. Just right out point blank, are you
& Comnunist? And he says byl.

Si 7 APPROVED FOR RELEASE

Byl. 8 1MAR 1992

Tt means ke was, Wax What ves the iupression there--that he was a Commnis

in spirit or actually a member of the CP?

C:

Wy impression vas thet be vas a communist in spirt. I don't think he was a

Party member. But this was the impression that I got. But Henry just turned to
him and said point blank are you a Commmnist? And he says byl. And then he
Beked then be said he had very important information that to give to the
goverment and he asked a possible for us to give--these are not
his exact words--but if it would be possible to give the information

to a eoooee AL

B:
C;

Did you respond?
Yes, I said if we could be of assistance we don't care, as I recall, I said

that we didn't want to create trouble. Because at some time in the firture we
might want to come back to the Soviet Union but I think he sala something about
- that he. Wetk We hiet: didn't have to know the knowledge ourselves or some

he had to give us mictie and he mde reference to these two letters: And then
he started describing the U-2 incident ang the RB-k7 incident both. . give us
all the details of ...

Bs
C:

Could you repeat this? . :
Yes. He said he described the U-2 incident (fret. Be said the U-2 was shot

down and there was never a direct hit. He said not one but ¢ 14 rockets vere
fired and in the Process well they destroyed one of their own planes that was
tracking, following him. And it was some Lt. Be didn't give the name. I asked
him, did he know the name of the lieutenant and he said no. Therewes a lieutenant
though killed in that flight,

B:

oN

What kind of a plane was it?
nerves
It was a fighter plane. I asked we

mber tighter. Sait srenter 1.3()(4)

but he didn't give me the type. I don't know.
B: Are you sure he didn't mamsonex say Mig?
for the fact
C: Ko he didn't say--he didn't give the type. Except/that he said it was a

ak cag TT OCH NO”

B: But he said f fourteen?

C: Fourteen. 5 esked hin thomenerxtancctioan tvo or three tines sbout it.
I said are you sure. He said yes.

Bs All right. May I ask you this now.

C: He said "chytirmatsad raket".

Bs He didn't say what kind ef “raket*,

C: Ne, And he said that ....

B: Ground to air er air te air?

Cs I asked him that - air to air? ~ I asked him "From the plane”, He said
No, the plane wasn't equipped vith rockets. Or, wait a while- did he say -
no, I believe he said the plane wasn't equipped with rockets. That he had
machine guns but the reckets - were any of them from the plane. He said no,
they were all from the ground.

oertainly
B: He, had a specific figure - 14. Not many or several or few but exactly 4.
C: This I couldn't understand either. He _kept repeating the figure Ue
B:: Did he say where he had the information from? Oo
C: I said Do you have direct access to this and he said no, from a friend,
B: Did he describe his friend - from the air force, military or anything?
C: No, he said he was a ~ how did he put it? - thet's all he said "An
officer friend", But he wouldn't ‘tell me what service he was in or whet his
rank was. |
B: He said there were no direct hits?
Cs: No direct hits, dppacexkix He said that apparently either the concussion
from one of the rockets cane close and either the concussion caused the engine

pur

te malfunction a else som shrapnel - at least at came clese and this - there

was no direct hit. : .

B: Did he refer to engines or are you forming impressions now?

C: No, let me think now - most of this was in English except the RB*47. On
the RB-{7 he reverted to Russian, But when he came to the nuxber, I asked him

to repeat it in Russian and he verified this, he said exactly 14 rockets.

ons 3

ae

V3{a){4)

Bs Did he use the English work "rockets"?

C: Yes, but he said it both in English and in Russian but re the RB-47, I don't
believe he used one word of English cn that ~ he used all Russian - he spoke
English fairly well, In fact, I'd say almost - as far as military language,

he knew more English than we did Russian,

B: let me read this "One rocket burst near the U-2 causing it to go out of
control and fall spinning to earth",

C: Yes, that's right. He said the pilot lost consciousness so he acutally knew
nothing about the thing- what happened,

B: The pilot lest consciousness ~ right after the burst?

C: Yes, he said it went out of control and they claim the pilet made a statement
as to sex tent on but he says he couldn't know because he lost sonscibtsness.

B: Next statement is "As the U-2 went spinning to earth Powers ejected", That
Sounds as if he was conscious. You see » I don't have much faith in the transmission
of information from individual A to B to C, That's why I'm asking you these
questions. ;

C: This I couldn't understand either. How could he eject if he was unconscious,
He said the pilot - how did he say it? - this may have been the case where he
made the statement and we didn't understand it and he had to say it in English.
B: Is this correct then- the first statement I read “One rocket burst near the
U-2 causing it to go out of control..." — why? The U-2 is a very delicate instru-
ment, as I understand it. Was it just out of control by being throm off just
like a fellow who is running very quickly -~give him a little nudge and he'll
fall to the ground. Whereas no actual damage was received,

C: This is what I couldn't understand. Was it shrapnel or concussion or what?
But he did say that Powe-s was unconscious - he was unconscious the whole time,
But this had ms puzzled too. How could he eseck? Unless - is there an automatic
mechanism that could kick the pilot out or - I don't know.

Bs He was ungonscious when he hit the Exum ground?

Cz He said that he was unconscious all the tims whole time - he couldn't have

e

known what went on. we :
B: Did he say anything about the altitude best Powers was flying? —_
C: Yes, he waid i+ was strictly high - that the plene could not get up to hin, ——
B: Buyt the rockets-reached at that altitude?

: whistling on tape
C: I can't tell you. . a _
B: What else did he tell you dout the U-2?
Cz: He did make the comment "How cou =2 receive a direct hit if it wasn't

1.3{a)(4)

torn up. He said ir it would have received a direct hit - then it would have
disintegrated,

B: There a statement here "There was a MIG-19 trailing the U-2 at a lower altitude",
C: MIG~19? Did he say that?

B, Did he say MIG-19 or MIG-17 or what. Before it was said that the RB-47 was
shot down by a MIG-19, |

C: This I remember — that the 19 was connected with the 47 but I don't remember .
that the 19 was connected with the U-2, He mentioned thé the MIG-19 was at a
lower altitude to the 47 fork WHY secee

B: Were those his exact words “lower a%titude",

C: Yes, yes. In the case of the 47, he said the 47 was out of the range of the
19. Which seams odd to me, I thought the 19 could go as high as the 47. But

he made out like it could not. It was too high or it and couldn't use his machine
guns. He had to use his rockets, And it the rockets that brought him down,

B: The RB-47 was brought down by rockets?

C: Yes but he said it was not over the mainlgnd Beuhers I asked him how far,

He said many kilometers from the shore. Then I said "It glided to shore or what",
He said yes-it was hit but it was not destroyed. I guess there were two or three
survivors,

B: This is what he said OT aman?

C: I asked him if anyone lived from it -- he didn't know,

B: But he did say the RB-47 glided to land.

Cs Yes, I don't know if he said "glided" - I remember the reference im of

being hit, the plane was lower, and that the aircraft was hit but I can't

remember whether he said it glided all the way to land or not.

B: Did he say the RB-47 was over piece tana

Cs; Yes, mezhdunarodnaya vodoi, T believe these were the words but he did use

the word "international", though, Yes, and he said there = no question it was :
not over Soviet territory, i
B: Was there anything else that during this whole conversation—-did he?

Sixx Well, he was on the train from Kiev, he said. Did he say that was his
home? Did he give any clue? Why was he on the train? Was he en a vacation?
Cs He was ona vacation aoe Tone remember wheather he was on vacation, fron
Moscow or from Kiev. Seens to me he was on vacation in Moscow.

- Bs This we'll havo to establish,

1.3(a}(4j

4

.

€ Ican't, I absolutely cannot recall.

B: Well wait awhile he had been carrying these letters since
;
C: «ecce Yes he was. It seems to me he said he had--no-~-I'n just kicking around

weren't
thoughts here. If he kuutxkurx on leave in Moscow then how could hex set up a
?
date to be met. The wixkioxsmuse runs in my mind that he wanted to be met on th

fifth day. ....and advised him of.
B: Met by whom?

‘C: A representative of him. And he said it's not to take place on the xtxtk 16th

Grim, not to take place on the mmxumtinctwie 17th, $6th and on and on but how could

he do that if he didn't live in the ares. |

B: Did he say these exact words that he would like to be met on?

C: Yes, he said it describes io axa Guid ratmre deren I was to be met and at

what time. And he said the sixteenth is the date. But apparently he didn't pu

inside there that he would be there. He said that if everything is set up for

the (sounds like) sixteenth.

B: And it's not the fifteenth, he said the sixteenth?

C: Yes, he said the sixteenth or the day after or the day after and kmpautt

kkxkx I could almost swear that he said forever.

B: Oh really.

C: He said that the sixteenth, if it's not the sixteenth, the seventkeenth then

he says ani so forth. I could almost swear he said ns-veegda. //'-1 sea la,

B: Na eases :

C: I could swear he said that but I cannot remember for sure. But my impression
to this same place, keep coming back =

was that he was going to keep coming back/unéil he made his contect.

B: Well this would lead you to believe that he lived in Moscow?

C: Yes. The leave mst mve been in Kiev but with his Ukrainian accent he mst

have been there at some time or cher. But it runs in my mind that he must hav

been on leave in Kiev.

B: Did he give any indication as to who he was? eee eee

C: It runs in mf mind that he was connected with the military but vhat wank,

he never quoted his name or like hux I say I could almost swear that I heard the

word colonel used once but he said--oh--now I remember. He said. I said who

are you-and ell these things, what is your rank and mmber. He these questions’ 2
will all be answered at the Embassy when they see what is inside here. He said

you"won't have any trouble knowing who I am. He said they know me. And ve asked

if any time in the futre would he care to come to the West? He said he thought so

maybe in a couple of years.
B: Did he give the impression that

out. A wish or fond desire or did ssion that he might go out

come out ti or that he hoped to come

on 0 kumuxumrs koomandirovke or with somef Soviet Embassy? ;
0: Mo. Tt was permanent. Flee to the West. I used the word pobezhat.
Pobezhat.
B: Defect in other weeiha: jeaa: And he said maybe in a couple of years.
B: And he didn't give any indication as to how?
C; Wo. And, of course, the thought that came to mind was his family. Maybe
he would want--what would he dowth his family if he himself came to the West
and I think I asked him what ebout his family and it runs in my mind that he
was going to try to get them out with him but the question dropped. He said
well this is not important--the important thing is to get this information to
authorities? Then I asked may I give you our address. If you ever get outside
and you need help
the Iron Curtain/you can write me or call or a anything. Call long distance collect
or whatever could we help. He said no. He was afraid to write, to record it,
because if it was ever found that would be it. ‘But he said you won't have any
trouble knowing who I am because when you deliver this, everybody will know who
ZI am.
B: He gave you two envelopes?
C: Two envelopes.
B: They were sealed.
C: Yes. He said one contained a letter from himself, instructions and that sort
of thing, and the other contained & very importaht document.
B: What color was the envelope? |
C: It was sort of an off color green or ....green turquoise, or light blue.
B; Anything written on the envelope? |
C: Nothing. Just sealed blank envelopes and there was no seal or writing?. He
was very very careful and Iput the letters in my pocket ani I never took them out
or looked at them until I got to the Embassy, He asked that we not open them.
Br And you didn't?
C: And we didn't. We discussed at length and it was right near the mmt end of
the rendez-vous thet he finally did give us the envelopes. As far as the possibility
of being photographed, if we were, it would have been fron one of the buildings :
across the street. We walked along the path right next to the stele and if ix on
we ine photographed, it would have been from across the street where the
telephon: lines interran through--
B: You accepted the envelopes at what point now? You said you walked here and

€x then you retraced. Did you retrace the whole time?
C: No, just once. ae
1.3(a)(4)

B: Ani then where ———

Ya

e

: 7 ae ie =

' G: Around here & I think. We went down and ‘I think right slong in there. In
other words, we went down a ways and then back and then the path comes out there.

B: You received it then and then you walked a couple blocks.
C: Yes.
B: Coming back to his motiviation you pressed #n it a bit--were there any
personal reasons that you could detect? How did you phrase that before--
fed up?
C: Yes. Let's see how did he --
B: Now this is the _, & now this is the bridge Mmemqummr you were talking
about here. . |
C: (Mutttint Portion mffled). ....cigarette here on that corner there. ‘The

A The bridge was here? Yes.
Balchuk was right in here. That doesn't seem bight though./ There was a street
ewxx here. There was s street car that runs along here.
B: You don't remember the names of the street or the street you went up?
C: No.
B: But you would say it was may how many blocks from the bridge?
C: Well we didn't go anymore than--to this street here--no more than two blocks.
B: Maybe one?
C: It would have had to been an erBul dene block. I think that it was about
two blocks unless it was an awful long one. I believe it was two.
B: Do you know where the British Extessy is?
C: No, Sir, I've never been there.
B: In Moscow?
C: No. If we I was ever there, I don't remember it.
B: Well coming back to this motivation agein--try to recall what he said.
C: I'm trying to remember if it was some single incident or process of years or
be had a personal grudge or someone in his family suffered or what. I am at
@ lost here. ...e.e-eee- I don't think that I hed indicated anything to the
Embassy{tx either as I recall. é
B: Now this Soviet citizen claims to be an infantry officer. Did you say that,
Infentyy. Who was formerly a Commnist but is no longer one. We'll clarify that.
C: Yes. Infantry--no, I don't recall that at all. Im fact, I don't even recall
the word for infantry. What is the word for infantry?
B: I don't recall either. You see why I don't trust the .xcRmbarmy Could he
have said Red Army?
C: I don't recall.

B: Well we're coming close to the end. tape. Are you hungry. (Discussion

about stopping for lunch).
Well did you have a feeling of confe: guy? 1.3(a)}(4)

~

I gather that you dia.

C: Yes, I did, In the case of Mr. si, : I was more confident.

B: You had more time with mim?

C: Yes, more time. The ee Of a halfhour meeting was more difficult, I milled
over in my mind and before I took those envelopes, I said well this is it.

1s it worth the risk? I seid well if the information is there then it is worth
the risk. I took the envelopes. In other words if it had been a propaganda
buildup well they just kickea a couple out and it vas a defintte cakeulated risk.
But I decided that if the information vas there (END OF TAPE).

1.3(ay(y
