Memo from Richard Helms to Director, DIA Concerning 'the Organizational Structu
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012295, dated 1 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012295).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  1.3(a)(4)
WASHINGTON 28, D. C.

4 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : "The Organizational Structure of Field
Command of a Front", by Colonel
K. Pashuk

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"The Organizational Structure of Field Command of a Front", by
Colonel K. Pashuk, which appeared in a special TOP SECRET issue.

of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya. Mysl (Military Thought).

2. Requests for extra coples of this report or for utili-
zation of any part of this document in any other form should be
addressed to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS
Enclosure j Bfay(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 3 0 suv tg

cece

Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. 8. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Se .....:

1.3(a)(4)

Pee 4.3/a)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR
 §UBJECT (4

"The Organizational Structure of Field
Command of a Front", by Colonel
K. Pashuk

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE: A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article
titled "The Organizational Structure of Field Command
ef a Front", written by Colonel K. Pashuk, Chief of
the Operational Directorate of the Headquarters of a
Military District.

This article appeared in the 1861 Second Edition
of a special version of VOYENNAYA MYSL (Militar
Thought) which is classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets
and is issued irregularly. The 1961 Third Edition went
to press in July 1961.

ee

Pe ie

-1,3(a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

The Organizational Structure

of

Field Command of a Front

by

Colonel K. Pashuk, Chief of the Operational
Directorate of the Headquarters of a
Military District

The very great changes which have been taking place
in the postwar period in the means and methods of armed
conflict and, under the influence of these, in the
organizational structure of troops have not, in fact,
affected command elements (organ upravileniya). The
organization of field command of an army and of a
front has remained essentially the same as it was in
the years of World War II. Certain additions and
changes which have taken place in recent years have
brought nothing basically new to the organization of
field commands.

The organizational structure and equipment of ~
operational staffs (shtab) which exist at the present
time have resulted in a certain contradiction with \
modern requirements. They limit the combat capabilities
ef troops, and they are in fact a brake on the achieve-
ment by the troops of high speeds in the conduct of
operations. This is evident if only from the following.

The presence of nuclear-missile weapons in a front
permits the fulfillment of operational tasks, not to
mention tactical tasks, in a matter of minutes. Yet
to collect and collate the facts of the situation in
the headquarters of the front takes several hours,
and is even then an excessive strain on its officers.

eg
gm

~2-

wee

4.3laVAy

£3(aNe)

At the present time, combined-arms large units
(soyedineniye) are at constant combat readiness, ~
determined by the time necessary for the assembly of
a large unit when the alert is received and for .
its movement out from its permanent disposition .
(dislokatsiya) points. Army headquarters (shtab)
however do not possess such a degree of readiness
and, in general, are insufficiently adapted to work
under field conditions, which, naturally, limits the
combat capabilities of army formations (obyedineniye) .

The most important conditions for ensuring firm ~‘
control of troops are high mobility, the maneuverability ,
of headquarters (shtab), and their effective anti-atomic
protection. But how can there be talk of anti-atomic
protection, of mobility, or of the maneuverability of
the headquarters (shtab) of a front and an army if they
are billetted in a tent camp on exercise? This
situation is considered normal, for during critiques
of exercises one can hear observations and objections
only to the fact that there are very many tents and
that they are not in the right order.

A broad discussion of the questions of organization
and equipping of the elements for the control of troops
and of the organization and equipping of control points
(punkty upravieniya) is necessary. It seems to us that
without the correct solution of these questions it is
impossible to achieve a significant increase of the
combat readiness of troops.

In our article we deal with several questions of
the organizational structure of a field of a front.
First of all, we will attempt to define the basic
principles upon which this structure must be based. \

In our view, the organizational structure of a
field command of a front must proceed from the release
of the commander of troops of a front, to the maximum
extent, from the decision of questions which are not |
directly connected with the combat activity of the troops.

1.3fay(a)

The commander must have sufficient time for study and :
for the choice of the best methods of deciding the
basic current and future (perspektivnyy) tasks of the
operation.

With the existing organization, this requirement
is not met. In the front field command there are 18
independent directorates, staffs (shtab), and depart-
ments (otdel) subordinated directly to the troop
commander. Under such an organization, the troop
commander is compelled to cut himself off systematically
from the immediate direction of operations and to
decide a mass of questions of secondary importance. It
is completely understandable that he is not in a
position to listen to all those making reports and to
give them exhaustive and concrete instructions. Besides
this, with the existence of such a quantity of
departments in the front field command, the solution
of ‘any question by one of the departments requires its
coordination with numerous other departments, which leads
to a great waste of time and effort. In consequence,
the front field command works for a considerable time
not for the troops but for itself, which does not help
the operational efficiency of the direction in any way.

In order to ensure stable and continuous control -y
of troops, given the present means and methods of combat,
the front field command must be streamlined to the
maximum, The large and unwieldy headquarters (shtab),
with the complements we use at present, would be unequal
to the tasks of firm control of troops in the first
serious test. Clumsy and immobile, they provide a
system of no more than superficial and seeming control
of troops, to say nothing of their vulnerability, and
of their consequent short tenure of life. How can one
talk of the operational efficiency and mobility of the
front field command, if its composition, not counting
servicing personnel, considerably exceeds 1000 men? In
our view, the strength of the command of a front should
be reduced by at least 3-4 times. However, this will
be possible only if the maximum use is made in the

x

1 3fayt4)

4.3(a}{4}

front field command of the various means of automation.
Without this, under present conditions, it is, in
general, difficult to achieve real operational
efficiency in the work of headquarters and to eliminate
multiplicity in the control of troops.

In speaking of the means of automation, we have
in view, first of all, those means whose introduction
is already entirely possible at the present time;
selector communications (selektornaya svyaz), portable
recording equipment, facsimile telegraphy, television
communications, speech secrecy apparatus, duplicating
apparatus, the simplest computing apparatus, etc.

Let us take one of the duties of the headquarters
of a front - the collection and collation of factsy -
about a situation. How many channels do one and
the same set of facts pass through before they reach
the troop commander of the front, and how much effort
does the gathering of these facts cost? The troop
commander of the front hears the reports of the army
commanders (komandarm) or of the commanding officers
of large units by high-frequency (VCh) telephone or
other communications means, The chief of staff of
the front hears the reports of the respective chiefs
of staff by telephone (normally also by VCh)or, more
rarely, by radio. The operational department (otdel)
collects the facts of the situation through chiefs
of directions (nachalnik napravleniya) and their
assistants by telephone, radio, and telegraph, with
the help of the communications officers. Commanders
and officers of troop arms are engaged in the collection
of the facts of the situation through their channels
of communication. All these people receive the data
at various times, in varying completeness, and with
varying authenticity; the obtaining of the complete
facts wastes too much time. It goes without saying
that such methods of operation do not correspond to
present-day requirements. The facts of the situation
should pass from the troops to the front headquarters
by the shortest possible route, and all work on collection
and collation of these facts should occupy a minimum of
time,

7,3fa\{)

The organizational structure of a front field
command should reflect the specific nature of the
functions of this control link (zveno). As is known,
the front troop commander, the army commander, and
the corps commander decide questions which are
essentially different from one another.

The corps commander is interested in the progress ‘
of combat operations directly on the field of battle;
he is concerned primarily with changes in the progress
of these operations. The army commander is interested
in the ways in which combat operations are likely to
develop over several days. Using the resources of
operational intelligence (razvedka), he follows the
movement of the enemy's reserves and means for nuclear
attack and thus comes to understand the situation more
deeply.

The front troop commander has available intelligence vy
resources which allow him to follow the situation in
the entire depth of a strategic direction or of a
theater of military operations. His fundamental efforts
are directed to the solution of long-term questions which
will ensure the successful development of the whole
operation. In conjunction with this, in the command
of the front, the questions of the use of nuclear-
missile weapons and of rear support of the operation
are decided in their full scope, demanding of the
staff and command of the front, as a whole, long-term
Planning, foresight, and, consequently, work of a
completely different scope and content from that of
an army headquarters.

At the same time a front headquarters cannot
limit itself to a purely general knowledge of the
operational situation. It should ensure that the
front troop commander is constantly provided with
facts about the entire current situation in the area \
of the front, because the front commander has at his
disposal nuclear-missile resources which enable him
to influence vigorously the successful decision not

aes 1 aaa

4 3faylay

only of operational but also of tactical problems at
any time.

The organizational structure of a front field
command must reflect completely the decisive role
of nuclear-missile weapons in the achievement of
the aim of an operation. The front troop commander
should have an element which concerns itself both
with the solution of questions of the use of missile
troops in an operation and with the assurance of
direct control or command of units and large units
of these troops.

Besides this, since nuclear warheads (boyepripas)
are at present delivered to the target not only by
missiles but also by aircraft and by other means,
and also in view of the fact that the radiation
situation will exercise a considerable influence on
the progress of combat operations, the front field
command should include an element which is concerned
with the general and specific planning of the use of
nuclear weapons, with careful study of the radiation
situation in the area of the front and of its
influence on the progress of the operation.

In the interests of stability of control of troops,
the organizational structure of the front field command
should ensure its division into several echelons
(echelon), the real independence of each echelon in
the control of troops, rear units, and establishments,
and the ability of the second echelon if necessary to
take upon itself the control of the troops of the
front and to exercise this control, even if onty for
a short time.

The front field command should be able to detach
a small operational group of officers with means of
control, which could ensure control for the troop N
commander during his movement to an advanced or
auxiliary control point. This operational group
should be constantly welding itself together even
while performing its district (okrug) command functions,

J

1.3fayfay

4.3(a)(43

and should have special field headquarters equip-
ment and corresponding means of communication.

It is clear to everyone that the existing
structure of the front field command does not fully
meet the requirements enumerated above and needs
considerable improvement. Which are the main changes
which need to be introduced into this structure? .

First of all, the organization of a front
headquarters as the basic nucleus of field command
must be changed. The new organization of the head-
quarters should ensure anew the solution of such
problems as the collection, collation, and recording
of all data on the operational situation. In our
view, a special element should be set up for this,
which would be free from all other commitments. This
can be the operational center of the operational
directorate of the front headquarters. Only this
center must be concerned with collection and collation
‘of all the facts on the situation and with their
uninterrupted transmission to the commander, to the
chief of staff of the front and also to other interested
persons and establishments, about which we will speak
later. All remaining directorates, departments, and
services are freed from carrying out this function and
concern themselves with their particular questions.
The operational center should be equipped with modern
means of communication, with radio speech-secrecy
apparatus, facsimile telegraphy sets, receiving and
transmitting sets (teleustanovka), sound-recording
apparatus, and selector communications. In the future
it must have electronic computing machines which would
automate such processes as:

- the collection and storage of facts on the position,
state, and actions of enemy troops, and about the
enemy's nuclear resources and their capabilities;

- the collection and storage of facts on the position
and state of friendly troops;

ae
MR

1.9194)

- the systemization and collation of information on
the operational situation for reports to the command
and the higher staff; ;

- the processing of data on the radiation situation,
the determination of areas contaminated by radiation,
and of the levels of radiation for a given time.

The facts received by the operational center about
the position of the troops (friendly and enemy) should
be disseminated continuously by television sets or
by telephones with visual presentation (videotelefonnaya
Svyaz) to the troop commander, chief of staff, and
the department of operational planning. If necessary,
the front troop commander or the front chief of staff
can be at the operational center personally for the
detailed solution of the most important questions of
control of the troops.

Regular information about the position of the
troops in the detail necessary for the solution of
questions by the arms of troops must be passed by a
special relay network for the remaining directorates
(departments).

The operational center must have at its disposal
several shifts (smena) of trained officer—operators.
Each shift should also include an officer of engineer
troops, one from the chemical troops, one from the
hydrometeorological service, and representatives of
the VVS and PVO control points. The shift should be
headed by a responsible officer-operator (chief of
the operational department) who can make an evaluation
of the operational situation and pass it on at the
proper time to the chief of staff or to the commander
so that a decision can be made. With three working
shifts and one reserve (for the forward command post-
PKP, or auxiliary control point-VPU/there may be no
more than 25 officers on the staff of the operational
center.

4 BfAylAy

1.2iayl4)

The operational center cannot concern itself with
questions of planning an operation; for this a special
element is necessary - an operational planning department.
Receiving systematic data about the current position of
the troops from the operational center, the operational
planning department analyzes and checks the fulfillment
of tasks by the troops of the front, prepares suggestions
for the command on the conduct of combat operations, and
passes on the necessary operational tasks to the troops.
In the future, the department of operational planning
should also be equipped with an electronic computer,
which would lighten the performance of such tasks as:

- the production of estimates related to determining
the relative balance of forces and the regrouping of
troops; '

- the determination of the requirements for combat
means either for a complete operation or for part of
one and the distribution of these means to directions;

- the distribution of nuclear means by targets, the
determination of the best alternatives for destroying
enemy targets with the means available, and others.

When modern means of control are available, the
execution of the functions entrusted to the department
does not call for a large number of officer-operators.
The staff of the department can be within the limits
of 10-12 men.

The operational center and the department of
operational planning should be united in a single
element - the operational directorate, which would “
ensure unity in the work of these two bodies.

The intelligence directorate does not lose its
significance, but remains a component part of the v
headquarters of the front. But since a part of its
functions (the collection, collation, recording, and

storage of data about the enemy which comes from the
troops) is carried out by the operational center,

4.3(4a){4)

-10-

1. Waa)

the complement of the intelligence directorate may

be reduced and its structure changed. At the same
time it is necessary to bear in mind that data

about the enemy reaches the front headquarters not
only from the troops but also from other sources:

from the Chief Intelligence Directorate, from the
intelligence directorates of neighboring fronts,

from agent intelligence, from special diversionary-
reconnaissance groups, from front radio and radio-
technical intelligence, etc. This data should be
checked, compared, and evaluated by the intelligence
directorate before being passed on to the operational
center, and for this it is expedient to have a special
element - a control point for operational intelligence,

This control point, like the operational center,
should work round the clock, and should therefore have
three duty shifts and one reserve shift. Each operation-
al shift should include two operational intelligence
officers, concerned with the collation and analysis of
all intelligence data, one officer from agent intelligence,
one officer of radiotechnical intelligence, one aerial-
Eee eres officer, and one special communications
officer.

To direct combined-arms reconnaissance and the
planning and control of all types of intelligence
activity in the intelligence directorate, besides the
control point for operational intelligence, it is
necessary to have another department for planning and
control, with a staff of officers of combined-arms and
operational intelligence, agent-intelligence officers,
and radiotechnical intelligence officers.

We see no need for basic changes in the structure
of the other departments of a front headquarters
(replacement, communications, or topographical). How-
ever, the strength of each can be reduced considerably
in connection with the possibility of automating and
mechanizing their work. The role of the cipher
department obviously will decrease with the introduction

mee

“112

4,3{a)(4)

T.d(al(A}

of apparatus for ensuring the secrecy of radio,
telephone, and telegraph conversations and, ~
consequently, its strength, too, can be reduced.

The questions of the control of artillery ina
front should be decided anew. The trend of develop-
ment of combat means shows that the role of artillery
in the solution of operational tasks is decreasing.
Clearly, artillery will perform only tactical tasks.
As a consequence, the need for the presence in the
front field command of an element which would concern
itself specially with the operational use of artillery
is disappearing. Questions of the combat use of
artillery can be settled successfully at the tactical
level (zveno). Clearly these questions will be decided
in exceptional cases in the front command.

At the same time, the ever-increasing role of
missile troops in the resolution of operational tasks
requires the presence in the front field command of
a special element, which would concern itself with
their direct command, not only operational, but also
tactical control. Furthermore, we believe that this
element must concern itself with the direct command
of missile large units and units. Such an element can
be the control point of the missile troops of the front.
It should have direct radio, telephone, and telegraph
communications with all missile large units and units
of the front, and also selector and visual telephonic
‘communication with the operational center and the
operational intelligence control point.

The personnel of the control point of missile
troops must ensure its unbroken work round the clock
and also the detachment, when necessary, of a small
but harmonious group of officers for the control of
the missile troops during trips by the chief (nachalnik)
of the missile troops to the PKP or VPU with the
front troop commander. Hence, the control point of the
missile troops can consist of three duty and one reserve
operational shift. Each shift would consist of two

~12-

4.3(a)(4)

operators for the preparation of data and two
control officers. The work of each shift can be
headed either simultaneously or in turn by the chief
of missile troops, the chief of staff of the missile
troops, and by the deputy chief of staff of the
missile troops (he is the chief of the control point
and chief of the operational department).

The operational department of the staff of the
missile troops has @ Tunctions of planning e
utilization of the missile troops, of supporting
them, of organizing reconnaissance, and of overseeing
their combat activity. In view of this, besides the
chief of the department, the operational department
needs a deputy chief of department (he is the chief
of reconnaissance), three senior planning and control
officers, two senior intelligence officers, the chief
of communications, and his deputy.

It is clear that no one will doubt the need for
‘the presence in the front field command of an element
which is concerned with questions of antiaircraft
defense. However, its organizational structure must
also be changed somewhat. The development in the
capabilities of antiaircraft missiles and of radio-
technical troops and the use of nuclear weapons to
combat means of air attack, call for still more
centralization of the control of the forces and means
of PVO at front level. The need is growing continuously
for their direct command by the front PVO commander.
Hence, we consider it expedient to have a PVO control
point in the front field command, equipped with modern
means of control, which performs all tasks, beginning
with the planning of air defense and ending with the
direct control of PVO troops in battle. This point
must be commanded by the chief of PVO troops of the
front or by his deputy and should be set up on the
principle of continuous operation by three shifts and
should have a reserve shift for the control of PYO
troops during trips to the PKP or VPU.

eee
aaa

13lay{a)

1,.3(a}{4)

1.3(a)(4"

The controlling bodies of the engineer and
chemical troops must, in our view, remain in the
front field command. Their numerical strength can
be reduced considerably since a part of the functions
which previously belonged to these departments will
be performed by the operational center, and also because
of the possibility of equipping these departments
with means of automation. However, there is no need
to have these departments in direct subordination to
the front troop commander. They decide questions of
support of the combat operations of the troops, and
their work should be more closely linked with that
of the operational and intelligence directorates of
the front headquarters. The operational center will
concern itself with the collection, collation, and
recording of data on the position, bringing up to
strength, and condition of the engineer and chemical
troops and of engineering and chemical equipment,
and the front headquarters will also deal with the
preparation and delivery to the troops of orders
concerned with the combat use of engineer and chemical
troops. All this points to the expediency of including
engineer and chemical departments in the make-up of the
front headquarters.

It is expedient that the unification in a single
directorate of the elements dealing with questions of
automotive servicing and of tank armament which has
now taken place in the command of a district (okrug)
should also be retained in the front field command with
direct subordination to the troop commander.

It is expedient to concentrate all questions of the
organization and structure of the rear, and of the
material and medical support of the combat operations
of the troops in one body ~ the directorate of the
front rear services, headed: by the deputy commander of
troops for the rear services. The organizational
structure and numerical composition of the directorate
of the rear services should be examined with a view
to cutting them down considerably. The nucleus of
the directorate of the front rear services should be
the rear-services operational center organized in

13fa}{4)

4.3(a)(43

a manner similar to the operational center of the

front headquarters. The rear operational center

must decide all questions of collection, collation,

and recording of data on the position and state of

rear units and establishments, supplies of equipment,
support to the troops, the structure of the operational
and troop rear areas, and others.

It should be constantly ready to pass this data
to the chief of the rear services and also to the
operational center and to the chief of staff of the
front. The chief of the front rear services is the
person who reports to the front troop commander on
questions about the rear services. In the future the
rear-services operational center should be equipped
with means of automation, which would facilitate the
sOlution of such questions as:

- recording the availability and movement of
material-technical means and the compilation of
estimates of the requirements of the troops for
these;

- planning supply and evacuation of all types, using
the various types of transport yiseen. in the front,
armies, and large units;

- recording medical losses, the degree of fullness
of the medical establishments, the movements of
wounded and sick, and others.

The strength of the political directorate of a
front, whose subordination should remain as before,
can be reduced because of the transfer of the functions
of supply to the chief of the front rear services and
of the functions of recording, appointing, and moving
Party-political worker cadres to the chief of the
directorate of cadres of the front. The strength of
the directorate of cadres can also be reduced considerably
because of the availability of computers which allow
the automation of work on the registration of the cadres
by the officer complement.

azar
ce |

1.3(a}(4)

Such, in our opinion, are the changes which it
is necessary to introduce into the organizational
structure of the front field command,

Proceeding from this structure, it is by now
already possible to define in its general outlines
the composition of the command post of a front.

It, obviously, will consist of two basic groups and
one reserve group.

The first group: the commander of troops and
the chief of staff of the front, the operational
center, the department of operational planning of the
operational directorate, the operational intelligence
control point, the department of planning and control
of intelligence, and the 8th department.

The second group: the headquarters of the missile
troops, the SoneFol point of the PVO, the department
of engineer troops, the chemical department, and the
signals department.

The reserve group of the command post includes -
the reserve shift from the operational center, the
reserve shift from the control point of missile
troops, the reserve shift from the intelligence control
point, and the reserve shift from the PVO control point.

The reserve group serves to man the PKP or VPU.
It can serve as the nucleus for a new front field
command, if the command post goes out of action as
the result of a nuclear strike by the enemy.

In conclusion, we shall dwell briefly on the

organization and movement of the control points.

The organization, disposition, and movement of
the control points must meet the requirements for
stable and uninterrupted control of the troops under
any enemy coercion. However, the present material
base of our Operational headquarters does not allow
these requirements to be met. The experience of

4.3(a}(4j

1.a{a}{4y

exercises shows that even if the control of troops

is maintained on a sufficiently high level in the

period of preparation of an operation, it very often

breaks down during the course of the operation. As

soon as the troops of the front are set in motion,

control over them becomes insufficiently stable and
the control points become helpless.

The relief of control points is carried out by
old methods, by the dispatch forward of operational
groups to organize control points in a new place,
because, since they are on the move, operational
headquarters are not in a position to control the
troops. Censequently, when an operation is moving at
high speed, headquarters fall behind the troops already
by the second day. '
In modern operations, the headquarters of a front
should assure the commander reliable control of the
troops irrespective of whether it is stationary or on
the move. The control resources of a front headquarters
must ensure reliable communications and the conditions
necessary for the work of officers on the move, and its
staff and material base should ensure the rapid establish-
. ing, closing down, and movement of control points.

Unfortunately, questions of working convenience and
of rest for the officers of the operational headquarters
have not yet been solved by us. Even the experimental
models of radio trucks which are being developed for
operational headquarters at present do not allow
officers to work in them with a map. In consequence,
there can be no talk of any control on the move or
during a short halt. We have not one acceptable
production model of a staff vehicle for operational
headquarters. Attempts by the headquarters of
districts and armies to get out of this situation by
their own efforts and resources lead to the unreasonable
waste of considerable sums and to the weakening of
other links of the military machine.

’

F,.3(83(45

ie 4.3(a)(4)

-17-

1.3(2)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

In our opinion it is advisable to perform the
task of developing a staff vehicle in a centralized
way. The design bureau of any automobile plant
could do this successfully within a few months. The
establishment of normal conditions for the work of
officers of operational headquarters will raise the
quality and operational efficiency of their work and,
consequently, will improve the control of troops as

a whole.

4.3(a)(A)
