Guatemala--general Plan of Action
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135872, dated 5 August 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135872).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

7 es EN oo

n September 1953: ene be abeate 32

MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
THROUGH: : DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)

SUBJECT: Guatemala --General Plan of Action :

1. Attached is the requested general plan of action and
summary budget estimate concerning proposed operations against

Guatemala, prepared Jotatly by ver [ | cater of

Operations | Jana 54 the WH
. > 25

Division specially assigned to the project.

2. The plan was given proviafonal approval by the undersigned ‘

and submitted to the working group connected with the project, whick

-

(ncludes Meears. C ‘) and [ 3 of the aE
a

State Department and Mr. [ ] , at a meeting on 4

5 September 1953.

Y
After thorough discussion, all members of the group concurred
in the general plan.
o
an

Chief,

es ee
Lu

RU

11 September 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Guatemala.

During the past fow years Guatemala has become the leading base
of operations for Moscow influenced communism in Central America.

Ruled by powerful, anti-US President Arbens supported by a
leftist coalition government, with all key positions below cabinet level
thoroughly controlled by a Communist dominated bureautracy, Guatemala
now represents a serious threat to hemispheric solidarity hnd toour |
security in the Caribbean area.

Essentially a primitive, rural country the size of Louisianna with
&@ population of 31/2 million, Guatemala is currently engaged in an in-
tensely nationalietic program of progress colored by the touchy, anti-
foreign inferiority complex of the Banana Republic".

With labor to a large degree organized according to communistic
methods, and a land reform plan benefiting the peasantry, the present
Arbeng government commands substantial popular support in spite of
evidence of opposition in the capita!, Guatemala City (Popuiation 180, 000).

With an army of 7000, the well-trained, and quite well equipped,
hard core of which fs stationed in the capital city, Guatemala miaintains the
balance of military power in Central America. This, coupled with com-
munist subversive activities extending across the Guatemalan borders, ie
a matter of increasing concern to nearby States including Nicarague,
Honduras and El Salvador.

The disturbing and subversive influence of communist dominated
Guatemala within the Pan-American orbit, as well as an aggressively

hardening anti-US policy targeted directly against American interests in

the country, has recently caused the United States Government to adopt
a@ somewhat ;firmer attitude towards Guatemala than heretofore. Based
on NSC 144/1 and up-to-date PSB policy guidance, “CIA has placed top
operational priority on an effort to reduce and possibly eliminate Com-
munist power in Guatemala. Appropriate authorization has been issued
to permit close and prompt cooperation with the Departments of Defense,
State and other Government agencies in order to support CIA in this task.

a

A study of available intelligence estimates {most recently NIE-84)}

reveals no internal conditions that could be Seyeloped into a vital threat

to the present Arbens adminfetration without determined support {rom the

em ees Be Re ne ate a ee ee 2A TI TLE 2 en er

gut ides,

Though it is pointed out that the main political opposition to the
government is located in the capital city, it is also atated that, although
the dissatisfaction of important urban elements will probably increasc,
effective political unity among these elements is not likely to be achieved.
The political union of urban and rural interests is even less likely.

Additional information appears to indicate that previously available

active resistance to ) the ‘government is decreasing rapidly « due to ) to general

discouragement, especially after an abortive uprising earlier this year,

which resulted in the imprisonment and/or exile of important opposition
leaders.

It is further estimated that the army is the only organized element

in Guatemala capable of rapidly and decisively altering the political

under the direct and indirect influence of Communist officials in key

government poste and firmly entrenched within pro-Administration
political parties.

Military units outside the capital are reported to have Httle
potential for effective revolutionary action due to poor equipment,
lack of training and the vigilance and security measures of trusted
area commanders.

The police force (3500) could neither defeat an army coup nor
iteclf overthrow the government without army support.

Another of the few organined elements of any consequence, the
Catholic Church, is reportedly handicapped by the meagerness of its
resources, the small number of priests in proportion to population, the
fact that most priests are aliens subject to deportation, and the lack of

a program capable of competing with the Communist-led labor movement

or with agrarian reform.

A study of a recent evaluation of CLA's political and psychological
warfare operations indicates that past efforts by the Agency to combat
Communism in Guatemala have been hampered by a policy of extreme
caution adhered to by State Department representatives in the field. As

exioting CIA assets personnelwise and otherwise. in|

a result of this, g pe
respect to psychological warfare and political action within Guatemala are
negligible.

The main operational asset immediately available to CIA is a group
of revolutionary activists numbering a few hundred, led by an exiled

Guatemalan army officer {RUFUS) and located in Honduras. More than a

year ago, some planning within the Agency contemplated the implementation

gepnnan

of an ambitious militant plan of revolutionary action on the part of RUFUS. _ pe Bes
and hie group. For a variety of reasons this operation was indefinitely
postponed; meanwhile RUFUS has received financial aid from private
American interests, He allegedly controls considerable clandestine
elements and contacts within Guatemala; in fact the above-mentioned
operation would have deponded for its success on immediate eegulate
support of RUFUS and his revolutionaries, backed by activo assistance

of an extensive maderereend resistance organization and certain outiyns

army garrisoas, aa e0on as RUFUS and his men entered the country.

: wee ee ees | ‘
i oe ) |
In Ught of existing conditions in Guatemala, with the government

Meee te mtn er ee me te ee ee

QVED

, AS SANITT2ZED, BY

nf

steadily strengthening i its | position, and active opposition deteriorating,

tae nem ren eee ee eee ee

Bens

the ‘original RUFUS plan is now considered substantially obsolete: It is

disturbing that reports from the CIA case officer indicate that unlass the

ON

RUFUS asset js oporationally activated within e vary short time (maximum
120 dayr}, it will be subjectod to a serious morale problem, and RUFUS

alleged clandestine support organization within Guatemala is likely to

csr

disintegrate along with other govarnment opposition.

THIS DOCUMENT RAS BEBN APPR,
FOR RELEASE

Undoubtedly there arc means and ways of maintaining the RUFUS

group on a stand-by este —~ UO Ghee ¢ a os

=. Ay thy teed + { The KUFUS plan

would in any case have to be radically readjusted to meet a more adverse

situation, Also, any: major action on the part or RUFUS anid ae stppontes é

would bave to be preceded by elaborate covert paywar, political ; action,

sabotage ang similar operations that would Eeauies a time-coneuming

SHaSeaae

build-up of Agcy assets of various kinds, including the placement of

qvalified personnel in the field.

In this connection, it would be the primary concern of CIA to

ascertain the existence, scope and potential of alleged Guatemalan covert

resistance elements, and alleged clandestine contacts suitable for psycho- / 7%

nett -

logical warfare and political action purposes, 28 well as for possible

aaa meget griwen ere PIO!

active support of a para-military effort at a later date.

*

There is a general feeling of urgency in respect to action against

NS

Guaternala on the part of State and Agency officials comected with this
priority task, but also a growing realization of the fact that existing opera-

tional assete do not permit any optimistic viewpoints relative to speedy

success within a relatively short period of time.

It is recognized that the task headed by CIA calls for a general,
over-all plan of combined overt and covert action of major proportions.
Some steps have already been taken to initiate certain preparatory measures
in regard to supporting overt action and other US government sponsored
pressure aimed at off-setting the leading position of Guatemalan military
strength in Central America.

A general outline of a contemplated course of action follows:

(a) Military Aid to other Central American States: In order to isolate ~
the target country (Guatemala), military aid agreements will be con-
cluded with Nicaragua, Honduras and £1 Salvador. Implementation of
such aid programs will be expedited on a priority basis and US military
miesions will proceed to the countries in question to supervise de-
liveries of military equipment and offer technical assistance. Nego-

tiations with Nicaragua are progressing (ACTION: State and Defense),

Stsee e Qeee ice : & we pre hen: .
C blarel, (be).

(b)

(c}

(a)

(e}

Aetest sade
audicatss G-
Aree dls ad lenal
Penencneds .

(ACTION: Defense and FOA). Preliminary steps to encourage

and it is expected that erms shipments will commence shortly

Honduras to follow suit are in progress {ACTION: CIA, subsequently
State and Defense), and El Selvador is expected to join up without

delay (ACTION: State and Defense). (Marck, 19s)
Cessation of Military Aid to Guatemala: US military missions will

be withdrawn from Guatemala at an appropriate time. Deliveries

of arms, heavy equipment and other industrial products. of military

use have been stopped (ACTION: Defense and State}. Efforts should

be made to curtafl or stop similar deliveries ‘fram foreign sources
wherever possible (ACTION: State).

Supporting Official Pressure: The US Government must from here

in adopt a strong, critical attitude towards the Guatemalan Arbenz
Government. Every opportunity to crack down hard on Guatemala

in response to official correspondence or statements must be fully
exploited and subsequently followed up by active measures wherever
feasible. (ACTION: State). \

Official Discrediting of eaehesears The threat of a conference of OAS
or of Foreign Ministers should be made and reiterated in due course.
The objective of the conference is to consider evidence that Guatemala
constitutes a menace to Hemispheric solidarity and the internal security
of friendly nations through aggressive Communist subversion. (ACTION:
State). Collection of evidence, or fabrication of same, will be attended
to accordingly (ACTION: CIA and State).

Economic Pressure: Considering that Guatemalan Government economy
is susceptible to pressures, covert economic warfare methods targeted
against oil supplies, shipping and vital exports and imports, where

’

feasible, will be applied. In this connection, an already cleared group

~'
e

; _ A with -

extensive experience in Latin American banking, shipping, publicity,
general investmente and ofl, will be asaigned the task of preparing

a plan of covert action. This will be augmented by advice frorn

7.
} __ynided by three of ble most trusted advisere in economic

“wm fo ow

(f)

affalre who have Just arrived from Guatemala for coneultation. These
men occupy high positions in Guatemalan business and industrial life.
Real, or when necessary fabricated evidence re. aggression and
Tupvereton, Will be used at an OAS conference to obtain approval of
the ‘American States for multilateral economic action against Gustemala,
particularly in respect to coffee. A study ie under way to determine
what phases of the coffee industry may be attacked which will damage
the Arbens government and its supporters without seriously affecting

anti-communist elements (ACTION: CIA and State).

Psychological Warfare: Pseywar activities

but targeted against Guatemala, will be stepped up forthwith
through the exploitation of exile groups and intornal anti-communiet
organizations presently ongaged in active operations (ACTION: CIA).
A complete psychological warfare campaign for internal implementation

in Guatemala is in the planning stage. ) Lc Chief organizer

of an extensive clandestine resistance movemont, recontly joined RUFUS
in Honduras after being exiled from Guatemala,

Contrary to current

+
intelllgence reporte, | yews contro] over substantial asacte

that would be capable of covert Paywar activities and black operations
using contacts within the press, radio, church, army and other organizeé

clomente susceptible to rumor, pamphlieteering, poster campaigns and

other subversive action. [ a ay presently in Washington assisting

in preparations for Psywar activity and political action. It will be

ee 2 aero

Pik

seA

. g ‘THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN APPROV&D
cot '-' pom permase, AS SANITIZED, BY
~ “CSE /HRG OM Rey TST

(g)

mecessary to strengthen me CIA field etation in Guatemala forthwith

ee ee

me em

verify the capabilities of the : Jie /RUFUS clandestine organi-

sem eS eee

Le ae ES a eM NE rt ee Fn eT

zation in cos enae City aod elsewhere (ACTION: © (CIA).

: a eee
ann ue >

ae

Political Action: Preparations for subversion and defection of Army
leaders as well as government officials and political personalities are

in progress. Hero again, | ds assisting and offering capabilities
.

for operational exploitation. (ACTION: CIA),

—

(h) Para-Military Action: As described in the foregoing, RUFUS and his

armall revolutionary group in Honduras (300) is the revolutionary nucleus
around which last year's operational plan was formulated. Success
depended entirely on immediate popular support inside Guatemala and a
month-long military campaign gaining momentum through a series of
complicated maneuvers and rendex-vous climaxing in an irregular assault

on Guatemalsz City. This plan is now considered obsolete: howover, it is

ean costemiplatre to make proper use of the RUFUS asset in appropriate

ee se

coordination with an overt end covert “softening =p" offort Mescribed in

eee ee ee epee em ee ee en ee nes

the foregoing.

°

Current thinking singles out Guatemala City as the key target upon
which all efforts must be concentrated including a swift, climactic

military action sparked by a reinforced RUFUS group with ila asap

ce arena eran ret 5

resistance ‘groups backed bys a weriee of wellsprepeted isco ventional

warfare operations. Tie: must include the neutralisation of £ key military

ets ere tee ee fA ee erent oe fe Steet

figures and control of power: and conan cee centers.

See non abe ooo lo eres oe

Much preparatory work has already been completed to ensure

logistical support of RUFUS. He and his group should take early

—aw

4

|

,
i

— . - .

advantage of the offered use of a military base] : a . |

—3 on

Supplies now available {n the Carribsan should

[———\

be sont forward without delay to support an oxtensive covert traineng
program. RUFUS and) _ymust at once take scope to
strengthen thelr force by arranging for exfiltration of additional re-
volutionary personnel from Guatemala; leader and organizer lypes
should be selected initially for intensive training, and some of those
should be re-infiltrated to resistance elements within Guatemala.
RUFUS’ basic nucleus should eventually be built up to match as cloeuly
as practicable tho numerical strongth of the garrison of Guaternala

City (appraxdmately 3000).

t

The proposed expansion of the RUFUS group would in itself provide

_sottimates and

claims of control of resistance elements currently dopendable in Guatemala

Further proof of the existence of organ

ere ee.

ixod clandestine resistance

should be obtained by the gradual activation of one selected pyroup after
another within Guatemala commenaurate with the dovelopmoant and in-
creasing momentum of the psychological warfare aud political action

campalgn, Some subvorsive operations should likewise be carried out ic

further testify to the existence of the alleged RUFUS “rapa -
ee mt eee ee : a —- —_

ad

bilities Inaide the target country, and in order to stimulate popular

interest and support. (Suitable target for one of those operations:

disruption of a 1$-man communist delegation scheduled to leave Guatemala
City on 10 October 'S3 by commercial alr carrier for a Cormmunist

Labor Congress in Viennz.)

Th A

AY

.

i

¢
s
~i_t
t -
\

é

ay

Steps will immediately be taken to review the RUFUS plan
according to concepts set forth in the above and progressively geared
to take advantage of operational developments resulting from the
before-mentioned overt and covert course of action, (ACTION: CLA
supported by State and Defense as appropriate).

Strengthening of CIA Station in Guatemala: . As previously indicated,
CIA assets in the field personnelwise and otherwise are negligible.

No time should be lost in order to reinforce the station with a senior

FI operator and an experienced senior PP operator. The current PP

and FI effort is considered far short of even beginning to tackle the

oe a a ee ENE

task at hand. Expert leadership is required to supervise the clan-

oa ee Haan  e

destine build-up in Guatemala without which no RUFUS plan involving

en er ae ee em ee ie me

a tes eee ee ere

ae

revolutionary action a sparked from the outside can be implemented

er ~—m - eer

witha reasonable chance of success, (ACTION: CIA - Priority.)

ee ee ee ae er nate mae

It is estimated that the contemplated operation can be mounted

and completdd over a period of not'less than eight months. A .
provisional estimate of expenditure aggregates $2,735,000. as per

attached specification.

WO

a

BUDGET SUMMARY

(PBFORTUNE)
Psychological Warfare and Political Action $ 276, GO
Subvereton 230, O55
iitelligence Operations 153, 90¢
a
Maintenance of present cadre {8 months) 160, O92
Expansion of cadre to 500 £6, 20C
Arms and Equipment 400, 060
Operation of | -raining center 10, 369 g
™“ .
a:
Support of internal organization (estimate) (so, an¢ 2 .
a fa
Transportation, storage and travel (cstirnate) 55,6090 an
. &
Transport Aircraft and maintenance ea a Be
° a
Current Habilities “9, 96 $9
Contingencies 300, USK.
TOTAL $2,735, vou

|
THIS DOCUMENT

2aeS
