Communist Influence in Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132455, dated 2 February 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132455).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

woke se@ at ured st ;
ae - SNIE=-85~60
22 March 1960

tr RTI RR

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL 1997 -s::02%.

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 85-60

5° Ger Bo#

Whascc lt oe:
Poe eet os

COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN CUBA

ee Ee Host
AC -- f : i
SO EE » Ie 5

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the nae
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency ** 4%. !
and the intelligence organtzations’of the Departments of Mets
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. :
Concurred in by the . _—
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD : ARSE 3 feat ot eg
on 22 March 1960. Concurring were the Director of Intelli-

* gence and Research, Department of State’: thé Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assist-
ant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department
of the Navy; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; :

gdotnt-Stag,; the Assistant -

the Director for Intelligence, T.
to the Secretary of Defense; Spee ; and the Di-
y Agency. The Atomic Energy

eer eree

rector of the National Securit.
Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant
a Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained; the sub~: 7652
ject being outside of their jurisdiction. ass a:
aaa ae eS Rn a

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
eae TON NOTICE

pte hey > ~

RG,

"1. This eats was ; disseminated by the Centre :
is for the information and use of-the recipient“ “And of-pe
i a need to know basis. Additional essential “alSseminetion.

following officials within their respective departments.
a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

ek b. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department.c a3 Bah Pea c's
MaS™"o, Assistant Chief df. Naval Operations Ke or intelligence for the partment of —

A et
f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for’. the Ato Energy Gomnmissen
. o> g.gAssistant Director, FBI: for th ederal- Bureau of Investigation};
fe RRS od h. Assistant to thé; Se of nsex§ operations, £ JO the Debate
i. Director of NSA for. the Nation: Security “Agency’* ete:
j. Assistant Director for Central Reference CIA, Jor any her oe or

Agency vas Se co ae

2. This copy may be retained
» security regulations, or returned ¥6 the Cent
the Office of Central Ane

or sd esetaied by a in saree ith
en acy by ae Csee PARE age
bs = & a4 .
rg ape : a

be requested of the forperding,
_ 22 June 1953.

>

eee ae y s
d eparately tama the bet. should be classified:

the National. Defense otitis
pi

’ Operations Coordinating ‘Board
Atomic Energ gy

nt

COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN CUBA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate present and probable future Communist control or influence over
the leadership and policies of the Castro regime in Cuba.

THE ESTIMATE

1. The trend of events in Cuba is a source of
deep satisfaction to the leaders of interna-
tional communism. Fidel Castro is embarked
on a bitter and virulent anti-US campaign di-
rected not only at the Cuban population but
also at public opinion throughout Latin
America. In the domestic field, Castro is pur-
suing an increasingly radical program employ-
ing techniques used by the Communists them-
selves in other countries. The government
has expropriated without adequate arrange-
ments for compensation or has otherwise as-
sumed control over a wide range of business
enterprises, ranging from sugar plantations
and cattle ranches to mines, factories, airlines,
and hotels, in many of which US investors
have had a considerable stake.1 Castro has
declared that his goal is the elimination of
private enterprise, foreign or domestic, from
all major sectors of the economy. He recently
stated that private foreign capital will hence-
forth be accepted for investment in Cuba only
if delivered to the government to be used as
it sees fit. Economic power has become cen-
tralized in the recently established Central
Planning Board, the National Bank, and
the National Institute for Agrarian Reform

>Private US direct capital investment in Cuba
amounts to about $900 million, of which a consider-
able proportion is already under some form of con-
trol by the Cuban Government. The entire US in-
vestment is threatened. There is also a considerable
amount of commercial debt due to US firms.

(INRA). The Central Planning Board is
headed by Fidel Castro himself. The Bank
is directed by “Che” Guevara, a staunch pro-
Communist, the INRA by Nufez Jiménez, a
known Communist. The INRA is a virtual
state within a state and has sweeping powers
over agriculture, industry, and commerce.

2. Local Communists have been readily ac-
cepted by the regime as participants in the
process of remaking Cuba. At the same time,
the administration has been purged of anti-
Communist elements, including not only pro-
fessional personnel who had served under
Batista, but also even those adherents of the
26th of July Movement who have sought to
moderate the pace of change and to curb Com-
munist influence. Under the direction of
Fidel Castro’s brother Raul, and under the
influence of “Che” Guevara, the armed serv-
ices, police, and investigative agencies have
been brought under unified control, purged of
Batista professionals as well as other out-
spoken anti-Communist elements, and sub-
jected to Communist-slanted political indoc-
trination courses; a civilian militia composed
of students, workers, and peasants is being
trained and armed. At least nine of the most
prominent anti-Communist leaders of the Con-
federation of Cuban Workers (CTC) have been
eliminated from the labor organization and
others effectively silenced. Although Com-
munists probably constitute a small propor-

—Ster=s-r.. 1

tion of the CTC membership, at least five ac-
tive pro-Communists have been elevated to
the 13-man CTC Executive Committee, some

in key positions. Although CTC Secretary
General David Salvador was “expelled” from
the Popular Socialist (Communist) Party
(PSP) in 1951, he has been active in pro-
moting Communist influence in the labor
movement and has become a prominent
spokesman for the government’s policies.

3. All the old-line, non-Communist political
parties have been disrupted or cowed. The
PSP now is the only effective political body in
Cuba except for Castro’s own 26th of July
Movement, a loosely organized vehicle of popu-
lar support for Castro which lacks most of
the characteristics of a political party. Re-
legalized in effect by Castro on his assumption
of power, the PSP occupies no Official role
in the government and has deliberately
avoided the appearance of seeking power for
itself. Although the party has openly sought
to develop its base in labor, education, and
the entertainment industry, its overt appa-
ratus, press, and front organizations have gen-
erally concentrated on drumming up support
for Castro and his policies; top PSP leaders
have generally remained in the background,
and party strength has probably not risen
Significantly above its estimated June 1959
total of 17,000.2 However, the PSP has had
considerable success in penetrating the mili-
tary, INRA and other parts of the govern-
ment, and the 26th of July Movement—and
in utilizing the government’s tendency to
equate anticommunism with counterrevolu-
tion and treason. Fidel Castro’s chief lieu-
tenants, Raul Castro and “Che” Guevara, have
long records of association with Communists
and a marked affinity for Communist eco-
nomic and political concepts; they are strong
pro-Communists if not actual Communists.

4. Meanwhile, the Castro regime has also de-
veloped significant contacts with the Bloc.
Although formal diplomatic relations have
yet to be established with any of the Com-
munist powers, a $100 million Soviet credit to
Cuba and a five-year trade agreement were

?The PSP claim of 27,000 members probably in-
cludes the Communist youth organization.

concluded during Soviet Deputy Premier
Mikoyan’s visit to Cuba to open the Soviet ex-
position in February 1960. The agreement
calls for Soviet purchases of one million tons
of Cuban sugar annually, at world prices, of
which 20 percent is payable in hard currency
and the rest in merchandise and services.
Early in March banking arrangements for the
exchange of over $4 million in commodities
with East Germany were concluded. Czecho-
slovakia has also expressed interest in a trade
deal. The joint Cuban-Soviet statement
issued upon Mikoyan’s departure from Cuba
called for close collaboration by the two coun-
tries in the UN. Cuba is currently seeking a
seat in the Security Council and will probably
receive considerable support from the Soviet
Bloc as well as from the Afro-Asian countries.
The Cuban-sponsored Latin American news
agency, Prensa Latina, which is a major ve-
hicle of anti-US propaganda, has working re-
lations with news agencies from the Sino-
Soviet Bloc as well as from neutralist coun-
tries and is using Bloc materials in its output.
The Chinese Communist news agency has
established a branch in Havana. In contrast
to Cuban fulminations against the US, official
statements in the press have been generally
favorable to the Bloc.

5. These developments obviously raise serious
questions as to the degree to which Cuba
may now be or may become subject to inter-
national Communist control. Certainly the
local Communists have taken advantage of
the opportunities afforded them to influence
the course of government policy and to de-
velop their own position within the armed
forces, INRA, and other key elements of the
Cuban political structure. Prolongation ,of
the present situation will result in even
greater Communist influence in Cuba and
will further encourage Communists and other
anti-US elements throughout Latin America.

6. However, Fidel Castro remains the domi-
nant element in the regime and we believe
that he is not disposed to accept actual di-
rection from any foreign source. His sus-
ceptibility to Communist influence and sug-
gestion and his willing adoption of Communist
patterns of action springs from the paral-

STCRET

 laeieendaatedenaumenenante an coemtnahantenmemtediacemenadane aan

CECT 3

lelism of his revolutionary views with the
current Communist line in Latin America,
from his conviction that communism offers
no threat to his regime, and from his need
for external support. He almost certainly
has no intention of sharing his power or of
abandoning his announced objective of de-
veloping a neutralist “third force” position
for Cuba and other nations of Latin America
in association with the Afro-Asian world.
Moreover, his fanatic determination to direct
the course of the revolution and the pre-
ponderant popular support he commands
would make it difficult at this time for the
Cuban Communists or their Bloc supporters
to force Fidel Castro in a direction contrary
to that of his choice. We consider it ex-
tremely unlikely that the PSP, which has little
broad support among the Cuban people, could
soon develop sufficient strength to make
openly an effective bid for power on its own.
Although development of pro-Communist
strength in the armed forces and elsewhere
may eventually give them such a capability,
we believe that Fidel Castro’s appeal to the
Cuban masses, rather than the coercive power
of the armed forces, represents the present
mainstay of the regime. In the event of Fidel
Castro’s death, Raul Castro and “Che” Gue-
vara would assume the leadership of the re-
gime. Under these two, the Communists
would be given an even greater opportunity
to perfect their organization and to influence
the policy of the government. Raul Castro
and “Che” Guevara, however, would not com-
mand the popular support which Fidel Castro
now inspires.

7. We believe that for some time Communist
leaders will continue to concentrate on in-
fluencing the formulation and implementa-
tion of policy and on covert infiltration of the
government—and that they will avoid any
challenge to Fidel Castro’s authority or any
claim to formal PSP participation in the gov-
ernment. Particularly in the light of Soviet
experiences with Kassim and Nasser, the So-
viet leaders are well aware of the need for
caution in dealing with messianic nationalist
leaders. They probably believe that the pres-
ent state of affairs is weakening the US posi-
tion and advancing their interests, not only

in Cuba, but throughout Latin America. The
Communists probably also believe that the
US will lose in influence and prestige so long
as Castro’s successful defiance of the US (in-
cluding his acceptance of Bloc assistance)
continues, and that the US is faced with
the dilemma of tolerating an increasingly
Communist-oriented Cuba or of arousing wide-
spread Latin American opposition by inter-
vening. Above all, the Soviets probably wish
to avoid a situation in which the US could
secure broad Latin American support for
action to curb Castro. While Castro’s regime
has lost prestige in Latin America, particularly
among government officials and the upper and
middle classes, few popular leaders in the area
are prepared to dismiss Castro as merely a
pro-Communist demagogue. For many Latin
Americans, especially the masses, Castro re-
mains an important symbol as a destroyer of
the old order and as a champion of social revo-
lution and of anti-US and anticapitalist
feeling.

8. We believe that Fidel Castro and his gov-
ernment are not now demonstrably under
the domination or control of the international
Communist movement. Moreover, we believe
that they will not soon come under such de-
monstrable domination or control. We reach
this conclusion in part because we feel that
under present circumstances International
Communism does not desire to see a situation
arise in which it could be clearly demonstrated
that the regime in Cuba was under its domina-
tion. Yet, we believe that the Cuban regime
is in practice following the line set for Latin
American Communist parties at the time of
the 21st Party Congress in Moscow in February
1959 and that it will continue to pursue policies
advantageous to the Communists and to &c-
cept Communist assistance and advice in
carrying them out. Cuba may give increasing
appearances of becoming a Communist society.
Although Castro may for tactical reasons seem
at times to moderate his relations with the US,
he appears intent on pressing ahead with his
anti-US campaign, which might come to in-
volve attempted expulsion of the US from its
Guantanamo Base, abandonment of Cuba’s
privileged position in the US sugar market, a

Sse RR Ap PO aR PS ca Re ae SSN eh oe aca Sot

17 RRR TT* ——rememnnrpreraee ene = = ere rte A PR 7 RR TRAP OY eH I

a eee nee 2 meaner on aint

SHCRES- 4

complete diplomatic rupture, and danger to
the lives of American citizens. The more he
becomes embroiled with the US, the more he
will look to the Bloc for support, including pro-
vision of military equipment, although both
the Bloc and the Cubans would probably seek
to avoid any accusation that Cuba was being
made into a Soviet base. Should the Castro

regime be threatened, the USSR would prob-
ably do what it could to support it. However,
the USSR would not hesitate to write off the
Castro regime before involving itself in a
direct military confrontation with the US over
Cuba, or, at least during the present state of
Soviet policy, in a major diplomatic crisis with
the US.
