Health Research in East Newly Funded, Focused
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098736, dated 3 October 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098736).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Page: 1 of 4
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
Document 1 of 1 Page 1

BRS Assigned Document Number: 000018234

AFS Number: 92GE0056B Entry Date:
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED Status: (STAT]
Language: German Country:

Document Date: 25 Oct 91 Category: {CAT]
Report Type: Daily Report Report Date: 27 Nov 91
Report Number: FBIS-WEU- 91-229 UDC Number: ;
Report Series: Daily Report Start Page: 24

Report Division: GERMANY End Page: 26

Report Volume: Wednesday Vol VII No 229

Dissemination:

City/Source of Document: Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE

Author(s): ‘'GHA.’’: ‘‘A Special Program To Stimulate Health
Research in the New Laender’’]

Report Name: West Europe
Headline: * Health Research in East Newly Funded, Focused

Source Line: 92GE0056B Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in
German 25 Oct 91 p 6

Subslug: [Article by ‘‘GHA.’’: ‘‘A Special Program To Stimulate
Health Research in the New Laender’’]

FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1. [Article by ‘‘GHA.'’’: ‘'‘A Special Program To Stimulate Health
Research in the New Laender’’]

2. [Text] Bonn, 24 Oct-With the help of a special program the
Federal Ministry of Research plans to stimulate health research at
the new medical schools and academies and at the non-university
institutions of the new laender. Within the next three years, 100
million German marks [DM] are to be allocated for this purpose. The
Health Research Council has sanctioned the program. It is supposed to
serve to develop research priorities as integrated systems that
possess sufficient ‘‘critical mass’’ to become competitive.
Ultimately, they might be established, for example, as clinical
research groups or special research divisions. The laender want to
assist this initiative with the remodeling of buildings and with
appointments. When introducing the program in Bonn, Research Minister
Riesenhuber said that especially the new generation of scientists
should also be included in leading positions. Trips to other
countries, international events, and invitations to guest scientists

Approved for Reizase,
Date. Bi pee iggzj’

UNCLASSIFIED

+

Page: 2 of 4
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
Document 1 of 1 Page 2

are being supported as well. The subjects of the focal points are a
continuance of previous research in the colleges and academies in
Berlin, Greifswald, Rostock, Leipzig, Dresden, Halle, Magdeburg,
Jena, and Erfurt and link them to the government program, ‘‘Research
and Development Devoted to Health.’’ The projects are primarily
concerned with the areas of neurology, heart-circulatory diseases, as
well as rheumatism and diseases of the connective tissue, also the
treatment of newborn infants, metabolic problems, cancer research,
and the prevention of dental disease. The schedule of projects
conveys a positive picture of the frequently underestimated
university research in the new laender.

3. Scientists presume that the cause for the close link between
psychic and physical processes lies in analogous systems of chemical
carriers. One of the priorities at the largest clinical center, the
Charite in Berlin, is called ‘‘Disorders of the Central
Neurotransmission Mechanisms’’ and focuses on the study of structure,
function, and interaction of these carrier mechanisms within the
central nervous system. Mental degeneration, particularly Alzheimer’
s disease, is the focus of the grant priority, ‘‘Clinical and
Neurobiological Aspects of Degenerative and Regenerative Changes in
the Central and Peripheral Nervous System,’’ at the Paul-Flechsig
Institute for Brain Research at the University Leipzig.

4. The subsidy of two priority projects is intended to reinforce the
bridge between the Medical Academy Magdeburg and the Institute for
Neurobiology and Brain Research of the former Academy of Sciences of
the GDR, thus creating an efficient neurobiological research focus in
Magdeburg. ‘‘Clinical Neurosciences’’ and possibly ‘'Basic Mechanisms
of Neuropsychiatric Diseases’’ are under preparation. Environmental
problems, among others, which are associated with the heavy pollution
from industrial emissions in the Magdeburg region, are to be an
essential component of clinical and epidemiological studies. The
other priority is the question of nerve adaptation during the aging
process.

5S. Ever since the electroencephalogram (EEG) was developed in Jena
in 1924, neurological research has been a focal point at this
university. This tradition is to be continued, particularly the study
of cerebral physiological processes. The closeness to industry is an
advantage. Physicians at University of Greifswald are in the lead
worldwide with their ideas and approaches regarding blood pressure
regulation. In their main study, ‘‘Chemoreceptors-Sodium Chloride
Sensitivity- Primary Hypertonia,’’ they are now striving to
comprehend the precise control of blood pressure with sensors
(chemoreceptors) in the arteries.

6. A research alliance for the differentiation of the

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 3 of 4
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
Document 1 of 1 Page 3

arteriosclerosis risk associated with disorders of the blood fat
metabolism has as its long-range objective to develop the center for
fat metabolism disorders at the Medical Academy Dresden into a
national center for this field. Interdisciplinary research work
established at the Martin-Luther University in Halle has for some
time been devoted to the significance of biocatalysts (mediators) in
pathophysiological processes in the heart-circulatory system.

7. The research at the Medical Academy Erfurt concentrates on
advancements in the prevention, early diagnosis, and controlled
therapy of thromboses in veins and arteries. The effect of cellular
and humoral mechanisms is being explored. Microinvasive surgery with
minute probes and instruments started at the Charite and at two
American institutes as early as the 1960’s. The Berliners now intend
to apply this therapy at a lower cost, with less pain, and more
frequently.

8. The complexity of the bone disease osteoporosis is still a long
way from being completely understood. There is no sure evidence yet
as to the patient’s individual risk of suffering a fracture. The
medical community in Rostock wants to close this gap. Most of the
participating scientists belong to the younger generation. Based on a
long tradition at the Medical School in Leipzig, 20 study groups from
an about equal share of clinics and theoretical institutes plan to
combine their research work on the questions of prevention, genesis,
diagnosis, and therapy of rheumatic diseases. A special research
branch is the effort of scientists who have a grant from the BMFT
(Federal Ministry of Research and Technology) for their work
concentrating on ‘‘Connective-Tissue Metabolism and Fibrogenesis in
the Case of Therapy-, Environment-, and Autoimmune-Dependent
Pulmonary Fibroses’’ at the Medical Academy Dresden.

9. The medical school of the University Jena coordinated the
rheumatism research in the former GDR. The Federal Health Ministry
plans to open Thuringia’s first rheumatism center here. The
interdisciplinary collaboration there is now being exploited in the
key study, ‘‘Rheumatism and Autoimmune Diseases’’; here the work is
concentrated on the analysis of inflammatory and noninflammatory
damage to cartilage and various organs-to cardiac valves, for
example.

10. At the center of the third research priority at the Berlin
Charite (in all other clinics the BMFT subsidizes only two key
studies) are high-risk children. In existence for years, a group
there is involved in the research of injury to premature infants’
central nervous systems and lungs. Extensive data from earlier years
are evaluated epidemiologically so that delayed damage and its
possible causes can be analyzed with future treatment strategies in

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 4 of 4
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
Document 1 of 1 Page 4

mind.

11. The research efforts of the ‘‘Gerhard Katsch’’ Institute for
Diabetes-named for a former health minister of the GDR-in Karlsburg
near Greifswald, are to be integrated-as recommended by the science
council and as planned by the federal minister of research-into the
medical school of the University Greifswald, so that a concentrated
research project, ‘‘Endocrinology and Metabolism,’’ can be developed
there. The institute plays a pioneering role in diabetes epidemiology
research, for example.

12. Drug therapy for frequently fatal pancreatitis has made but
little progress during the past years. A growing number of medicines
is found to be ineffective. Five study groups of the Rostock
University want to dedicate themselves to this subject in the
BMFT-subsidized key research on ‘‘Pathogenesis and Therapy of
Inflammatory Diseases of the Pancreas.’’ They investigate the path of
endogenous and exogenous substances from the blood through the
pancreas into the pancreatic juice, the interaction among these
substances, and the pancreas as a total organ. Extensive related
preliminary studies are also taking place in cooperation with clinics
in Magdeburg and Erlangen, and with other western partners. Based on
a tumor center scheduled for the end of 1991, the Institutes for
Biochemistry and for Pathology of the University of Halle are
striving to make oncology a focal point. And finally, at the Medical
Academy Erlangen the BMFT is subsidizing a key project in dental
medicine, ‘‘The Health-Oriented Concerted Preventive Effort To
Preserve One’s Teeth for Life.'’

UNCLASSIFIED
