Statement on el Salvador -- Certification Issues Before the Senate Committee On
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049413, dated 1 July 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049413).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

¢

DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY |

STATEMENT ON
EL SALVADOR -- CERTIFICATION ISSUES a

BEFORE THE
:

SENATE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS

2 AUGUST 1982

Approved for Release
NOV th33

/

2 August 1982

DDCI STATEMENT
SFRC HEARING ON EL SALVADOR — CERTIFICATION ISSUES

Mr. Chairman, thank you for this opcortunity to discuss with you today the
intelligence Issues that bear on the President's recent certification that El Salvador is

making progress fn Its human rights program. I have with me today

who are prepared to discuss any of the {issues J raise in more details, if you so desire.
Representatives from the DIA and from the State Department are also here.

Mr. Chairman, Certification issyes for El Salvador are not areas that the Central
Intelligence Agency specifically has targetted for elther collection or analysis. |
Nevertheless, based on reporting largely from ’ but also from
a variety of other services Including will give you the Intelligence

Community's assessment of that country’s performance concerning certification

questions. This assessment was agreed upon by the National Foreign Intelligence Board
during a meeting chaired by the DCI on 27 July 1982.

#.Ithough some abuses continue to occur, the monthly rate of political deaths Is
declining and the Salvadoran government and military leaders continue to work toward
curbing human and civil rights abuses, and to respond to the public's Interest in
participatory government as underscored by the 28 March constituent assembly
elections. Nevertheless, thelr efforts continue to be hampered by the weaknesses of El
Salvadoc's unsophisticated body politic. These Include arrinabllity to separate partisan
and personal goals from common national priorities, and a failure to put aside ideological
conflicts that {n the past have thwarted the democratic process. .

Despite the rigidity of the political system and the myopia of certain of Its key

_

participants, the prospects for continuing progress—while slow and arduous—seem

generally positive. The civilian government has so far been characterized generally by

pragmatic compromise, with the result that political, economic, and social reforms are

continuing and violence has been reduced. This position has been reinforced by the

military high command, which distinguished itself as the major moderating force during

the fractious political negotiations that followed the election. Led by Defense Minister

Garcia, the armed forces appear increasingly aware of the pescholyeer dimension of the + -:
g War and cognizant that the Insurgents are the ultimate benefic les! any abuses.

On the issue of El Salvador's efforts to comply with internationally recognized

human rights:

- We have no infor mation AAA. ! Sapien on El
Salvador's civil and criminal fustice system, but some progress apparently
has been made In strengthening the courts and improving enforcement of
existing laws that protect a eltizenry. TE constituent assembly hes, for
example, unanimously appointed an independent supreme court and is

| preparing to write a new constitution. Political prisoners remanded to civil
authorities, meanwhile, appear to be well-treated ond gully ere
visited frequently by family members, church organizations, international
relief agencies, and foreign diplomats. Persons are also held inf acilities of
the military and the security forces; their treatment varies from
reasonable to harsh.

- Although violence remains endemic, the number of political killings is

declining and is now at its lowest level since the insurgents’ "final

re

‘

eee:

offensive" of January 1991.! The monthly average of political deaths for

that year was 510, while the 1982 rate stands at 285—a decrease of 45
percent. In our judgment, this downward trend reflects the greater
emphasis on large engagements between bonafide combatants—more in
rural than urban areas—since January 1981, measures taken by government
and insurgent leaders to reduce indiscriminate violence in an attempt to
build greater popular support, extreme rightist death squads which have
been less active in 1982 than previously, and some potential victims on both es

the extreme left and right going underground or into exile,

~ Senior military leaders have repeatedly demonstrated public and

private concern over the need to improve the human rights conduct of their

troops. We believe they recognize that official excesses alienate the

civilian populace, damage the government internationally, reinforce the

position of the Insurgents, and most importantly jeopardize U.S. military

and economic assistance.

On the issue of El Salvador's progress In achieving control over all elements of its
armed forces: . |

~ The military leadership is continuing its efforts to punish human

rights violators within armed fore: s ranks and to curb abuses by rightwing

paramilitary forces. We believe this resolve likely has been strengthened

by recent Indications that the emphasis on human rights is aiding the effort

against the insurgents. During 1980 and 1981, the Army and the security

Inpolitical deaths", includes deaths of civilians and ee military personnel
with reports of circumstances which conform to the follo ng basic criteria: (1) not
reported as criminal deaths; (2) attributed to the extreme left or government forces;

(3) vietim reported apprehended (that is, taken from home or vehicle) and killed on the
spot or later found dead. In addition, "political deaths" takes Into account the modus

operandi of armed forces of the extreme left and e ight. It is a partial
nterpretatlon since press reports—the basis (oll chee reports—do not
attribute deaths to "political violence." On oec : violence may be
intentionally disguised as political violence.

wee

[or ces qa pe: cin anded to civiltan courts some 215 enlisted men

charged with assault, rape, or murder. Since January of this year, an
additional 50 personnel have been arrested for these crimes and are in jail
awaiting trial by civilian courts. Moreover, several civilian members of
rightist death squads have been apprehended and charged with specific
political killings.

~ The human rights doctrine that is now part of the curriculum for
new cadets in El Salvador's military academy underscores the armed forces?
growing sensitivity to the political fallout of continued abuses. The
military's decision to modernize its policies and methods complements the
efforts of U.S. trainers, who are schooling Salvadoran officers and enlisted
men to respect the rights of civilians and improve their treatment of
prisoners and defectors. We belleve the performance of U.8.-trained units
is not only tactically superior to that of regular troops, but that their
sensitivity to civilians has diminished popular support for the guerrillas in
certain areas of the country. _

~ Other military units, meanwhile, have begun using improved human
relations techniques to inspire defections among the insurgents and enlist
the confidence of the local population. Although the number of defections
appears modest so far—due largely to the insurgents! strict control over
their cadre and support elements—some villagers are returning to their
towns and fields because of the improved image of the local armed forces.
In a few cases, Army commanders have ordered their troops to spare
settlements known to house guerrillas in order to provide civilian refugees
with a home to return to. aa

~ The military's growing awareness of the psychological aspect of

warfare has been particularly pronounced in Cabanas Department. Last

year, this northern border region was the focus of intense sruerrilla activity,
and government forces appeared as politically isolated from the local
populace as they were militarily from the insurgents. Through
humanitarian and material support to peasant communitles—combined with
& new strategy of small unit patrolling and stricter control over civil
defense groups—the department commander has all but eradicated guerrilla
operations in the region and has won the confidence of the local papulace.

~ Abuses continue to occur in all parts of the country, of course,
particularly with regard to taking prisoners, treatment of non-combatant
guerrilla supporters, and fire discipline in populated areas. Nevertheless,
on balance we believe the trend toward improved control over the armed
forces has continued this year. ;
On the issue of implementing essential economic and political reforms, including

land reform: . | |

~ Progress on political reforms clearly is evident jn the succesful
transition from a four-man civil-military junta to a civilian governnent
comprising a populsrly-elected 60-man constituent assembly, an
independent civilian executive branch, and a supreme court. In accition,
banking and commercial programs are being implemented. Implementation
of agrarian reforms has continu this year, with a full third of all Isnd
titles under the two-year-old Phase III program having been distributed
since January. Phase | is on track, with compensatory payments to a few
former landowners beginning. Nearly 180,000 beneficiaries of the program
are preparing for a third successful harvest in the fall. |

~ Prospects are favorable for further advances in socio-economic and
political reforms—though with occasional lapses and problems with

‘implementation. Reform [ssues are subject to heated disputes, almost as

onciiicn,

much within parties as among them. Moderates and hardliners seek in

varying degrees to maintain, expand, limit, or reverse the process of all
reforms. Nevertheless, the final referee will continue to be the military,
whose leaders appear convinced that the agrarian and other programs must
continue if the government is to receive the domestic and international
support necessary to rebuild the economy and defeat the insurgents.

- The military has demonstrated {ts commitment on the political front
by honoring its pledge to initiate democratization. Senior military officers
were instrumental in breaking the political deadlock in the weeks following
the 28 March election. Their prescription for building a government of
national unity has resulted in securing a share of power for the liberal
Christian Democrats end has helped reduce the influence of far right
groups in the government. The military recently formed a six-man
committee to help the executive over major policy hurdles and to mediate
serjous partisan disputes.

- The military's commitment to reforms seems borne out by the
strong response of the armed forces to the confusion caused by the
assembly decree of Ir May revising implementation of Phase Ill of the
agrarlanreform. At tat time, President Magana, in an attempt to bolster
sagging export production caused by landowners’ fears that renting their
lands would be tantamount to forfeiting them to tenant farmers, sent a
proposal to the constituent assembly. The proposal stipulated that peasants
seeking to cultivate new cash crop lands in the next growing season would
not be eligible to receive titles to those lands for that time period. The
conservative majority in the assembly, however, expanded the proposal to
_ include lands used for livestock and basic food crops, thus effectively

postponing new claims by renters to most land available under Phase II.

Domestic and international reaction to what was viewed as a potential
rollback in the whole reform process inspired immediate action by the
Christian Democrats, peasant organizations, the military, and the Magana
government to ensure that no such rollback would take place.

~ Senior military officers thus pressed far an acceleration of the land
titling process. Since early June, members of the high command—in
tandem with leading government officlals—have distributed some 2,000
provisional and permanent titles to peasant beneficiaries. Moreover, the
armed forces have quickly intervened to reinstate about half of some 3,800
peasant renters whom landowners had illegally evicted.

~ Prospects for continued progress in the land reform seem
favorable. The recent appointment of an Army colonel to head the
government agency in charge of distributing titles to peasants underscores
the military's resolve to accelerate the process. Moreover, a senior -
military officer has been appointed to the new five-man presidential
committee that will oversee any further legislative action on land reform.
A top leader of the country's largest peasant organization also serves on
the committee. .
On the issue of El Salvador's commitment to hold free elections and begin

discussions with all major political factions:

~ All political parties, including those allied with the extreme left
(FMLN), were invited to participate in the constituent assembly elections
of 28 March 1982. The 1.5 million ballots cast constituted a severe
political and psychological setback to the far left. Though a few
allegations of electoral fraud have been made, {ttle or no evidence has
been produced to substantiate these, and we share the broadly held

judgment that the integrity of the electoral process was maintained. The

eer

military showed professionalism in safewturding the integrity of the
balloting by providing effective logistical suppart to the elections
commission, accommadating over 200 foreign observers in their trips
around the country, and ee the voters against insurgent attacks.
~ For months guerrilla leaders had sald they would kill anyone who
participated in the elections. When it was evident that the elections would
occur as scheduled, Guillermo Ungo and other political leaders of the
extreme left coalition made pledges that they would not hinder the
balloting. Nevertheless, the guerrillas launched a long prepared, major
_ Inilitary campaign to disrupt the electoral process; they succeeded only in
pre-empting the voting in certain eastern towns where they concentrated
thelr largest forces. ‘ |
~ In our judgment, the massive turnout was attributable to a number
of factors, including: |
- Unprecedented open registration, which enabled participants to
case thelr ballots anywhere in the country while reducing the chances
of reprisals by the extreme left and right.
~ Higher than anticipated public confidence in the fairness cf the
soonedligs:
~ Public anger and frustration over the economic and social impact
of two years of guerrilla violence.
~ Fulfilling the mandate of the electorate, however, will be difficult.
Alleviating E! Salvador's traditional socio-economic disparities and political
backwardness would prove challenging even in the absence of a guerrilla
war—and it is our judgment that a protracted struggle will continue for
some time, probably into the period of the next elections. Nevertheless,

the government appears relatively stable, and we expect that the elections
