1. Use of Forced Labor in Mining, Railroad and Construction Enterprises 2. Loc
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000102946, dated 3 September 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000102946).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

‘ . DOMESTIC COLLECTION DIVISION
Foreign Intelligence Information Report
WARNING NOTICE— INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED

Nex STATE/INR « _/-@IA) NSA st _ DDI

N ;

eiMkerOkAtecoe soins: DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT TO CONTROLS
ovteanions STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE1OF 5 PAGES

THIS 1S AN INFORMATION REPORT, NOT FINALLY EVALUATED

REPORT CLASS,

COUNTRY USSR - DATE CiSTR. 5 October 1983

SUBJECT 1. Use of Forced Labor in Mining, Railroad and Construction Enterprises
2. Location of Prison Camp and Exiled Ukrainian Mationaltece Near Yamal
-~"Gas Field and pape Ares

DOT 1967-1979

f ~ ° srantin eines: in lieu of seacue ion
aad that they’ iasually died: from leukemia within two years. During
1978 or 1979 summer workers on the BAM railroad line reported that
thousands of: ‘prisoners: were. used: for construction project work on the
line. Prison labor was used. at’ an industriel construction site in
Uglich in 1971. There were numerous prison lumbering work camps in
Gorkiyskaya Oblast as of the 1970s. Some prison wrk colonies on the
northern Dvina’ River have been relocated to remote areas further north.

es

7m : Tess pee

TEXT: 1. In 1967 a gasphyeickd. team dispatched to the Tyumen gas field area from Moscow
to assist in axing * out a route for the. — 248. a observed an popereces. pee

Approved for Raiease
Date, BT Mae i997

WARNING NOTICE
INTELLICENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE 2 OF 5 PAGES

uranium mining work camp in the Polar Ural Mountains, a large operating prison
in Labytnangi, and a large population of former Ukrainian nationalists (Banderas)
in Salekhard, near the mouth of the Ob River. The uranium mine was pointed out
by the geophysicist who headed the permafrost sounding section of the team as

the train they were riding passed by the site. The mine was adjacent to the
railroad line and numerous prison workers were seen working with unmechanized
equipment. The site was roughly 80 kilometers east of what the Soviets refer

to as the Europe-Asia border and about 320 kilometers west of Labytnangi on the
Moscow-Labytnangi railroad line. The team members who were told by the geophysicist
that the men were prisoners assigned to forced labor at the camp assumed he knew
this from earlier visits to the area. The geophysicist had spent considerable
time in the Yamal gas field area and thus had travelled the route by train on
humerous occasions.

2. The prison camp in Labytnangi was located on the western bank of the 0b
River on the outskirts of the municipality. It was clearly visible from the train,
and probably was not more than 200 meters avay from the tracks. The prison consisted
of a square compound about the size of an average city block in the United States
that was enclosed by a wire fence and a second electrified fence and concertina.
There were several guard post towers around the camp and there were machine -gun
emplacements in the towers. When the casp was viewed from a passing train ia
1967 the towers were manned ‘and the prison appeared to be in full operation. Zhere
was a patrol boat lying: offshore in the river that was armed with a heavy sachine

gun and appeared to be guarding the riverside boundary of the camp compound. =

3. As of 1967 a large Ukrainian nationalist population of Salekbard was. ' !
indicated by the presence of many wooden houses with white walls. “Entire streets :
« weretaken up by such*housig end’one.of the geophysical ‘' ‘genders counted ats
least 50-60 such houses -in- Just: one part: ‘of -the towns” Coament: “Any
‘wooden house painted white and having the appesrance of those seen in
was a clear indication that ‘the residente were from the Ukraine. Ethnic Ruseiens !
do not paint wooden houses inthis manner.) One Salekhard resident born in about ,
1905 stated to a visiting team member in 1967 that he had completed a long prisoa
term in Labytnangi or environs and had lived there for 10-15 years as a free worker,
but that he and other Ukreinian nationalists were forbidden to leave the Salekhard
area. Team menbers assumed that the prison facility observed from the train in
Labytnang;was one of those to which exiled Vereintas Battonaisece nad been sent
to serve their peteon: terms. IY: oe ee a = - le

4. The geophysical: ‘teaa had bees “afepetehed’ by! an “enspect fied geophysical

institute in Moscow. Some of the tean meanders, including the group leader on the
permafrost sounding section, were reguler;institute employees but others were.
university students or other personnel casually hired for the duration of a two
month expedition for: completing assigned route preparation tasks. The permafrost
sounding section used ultra-long radio wave electronic equipment to take soundings

Pe am

a
nnn EME Irae tl, Rg _—=u. <
.
a

<a, a A :
RES: fate
Aiba sin kate

sok : " WARNING NOTICa
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE 3 OF 5 PACES

that determined the depth of permafrost layers, Transceivers with ratings of 100 watts
were used to transmit radio waves into geologic formations. The same gear was used
to record the echoesand register the data. Their team had a core sampling section
made up of geologists who took ground samples on the oiveline route. The team
spent its first week of the tour in Salekhard and the following seven weeks

in the field. They spent an additional three or four days in Salekfiard at tne ~~
end of the tour before returning by train to Moscow. The team consisted of about
22 people, 10 of whom were geologists and 10 of whom were geophysicists by training.

5. Theqgg@g geophysicist stated to one of his team members in 1967 that
convicted murderers were hardly evar executed anymore, and that in 99 percent of
the cases people guilty of serious crimes such as murder were sent to work in the
uranium mines in lieu of execution. He said that usually they lasted for about :
two years in the uranium mines before they died from leukemfa. The team member, z

who lived in , subsequently heard similar accounts from several residents of ;
that city. Comment: Source cannot recall any further specifics on such ais-

treatment of prison laborers, but the information correlates with that provided by
another Soviet egggmmwho in about 1968 observed a prison = off the north coast of

the Poluostrov Kenin peninsula on the Barents Sea. The 8 serving aboard a
Soviet military ship that was taking on fresh water at emote radar and port facility.

A radar operator stationed at the facility disclosed to him that the vessel vas a ~
civilian prison ship that made regular runs to Novaya Zealya to deliver prisoners

who were to be assigned to work tasks described as very haxardous to their lives. Pre- -
sumably, the hazard came from radiation on Novaya Zemlya, either from past nuclear |
testing or from uranium or other hazardous mining activity. The clear implication of _. .
the remark was that the’ ;prisoners, were likely to die ‘as a result of the: ‘forced: Tabor.) -

6. During 1978 and 1979 three recent high school graduates disclosed to a
senior scientific worker at the Institute of High Temperatures (IVT) in Moscow
that they had worked alongside prison laborers during summer construction jobs on
the Baykal-Amur Mainline (BAM) railroad in Siberia. Several of the stadents said
that many thousands of prisoners were used for construction projects on the line.
The disclosure came during a discussion in which the former high school students were :
complaining about the cerrible working and living conditions they suffered while working
on the project. They had volunteered for a summer work program where they earned 500
rubles par month for their efforts. They lived in tents while working on the project.
The former students complained that the food they received was terrible. They acded
that, while their living conditions were bad enough, the prisoners lived under auch
worse conditions. They did not elaborate. At least one of the former high school
students was a laboratory assistant at IVT who took that job after returning froa t
the summer camp. It seemed implicit from their remarks that they had performed the
g Work the previous year but they did not peered. the time frame involved.

reas: NAAR caged 0 Wit Ns Bing tat een We ed be ok we &
2

WARNING NOTICE
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE4 OF 5 PACES

7. A Moscow visitor to the city of Uglich, on the Volga river in Yaroslavkaya
Oblast, observed an industrial construction site in 1971 that was utilizing prisoners
for forced labor. According to a local resident at the construction site,- prisoners
from unspecified locations were brought .to the site under armed guard each morning
and were taken back again in the evening. The construction site consisted of one
unfinished factory building about 40 metera long and less than 25 meters wide that
took up an area of about one-quarter of an average U.S. city block. There was barbed
wire and concertina around the worksite and a guard post at the only entrance. The
site was viewed on a weekend when there were no workers present. A resident of
Sharanga municipality in Gorkiyskaya Oblast, RSFSR, stated to a relative in 1978
that he. had seen numerous prison work camps in Western Siberia during the 1970s.

She said that the camps were all in wooded areas and that the prisoners were engaged

in woodcutting activity. A male resident of Sharanga stated to a Moscow visitor to

the town in 1979 that he had served a five-year term for hooliganism in a prison

work camp on the Karelian Peninsula in about 1975. The Sharange resident, a farmer

born in about 1940, said that he had been sentenced for stabbing another men with a

knife in an argument after the two had been drinking. The knife wound was not serious.
t: It was not clear if the man had completed his term in 1975 or if

he had been sentenced st that time and had served scmecntee less then the five years

prescribed.in the sentence.) | on Me ee oh

8.. During. 1979 a. ‘Moscow visitor to the village ‘of Sharange in Kirovskaya “
Oblast met numerous residents. of the village who were former prison laborers at
lumbering camps in forested areas of the oblast. At least some of the former

prisoners-had- been sentenced for ‘hooliganisn. . if. there were political crimes ~
. involved with any: Sipepes prison, corms, the. individuals dtd | Bot reveal it to the

fords 9.- ie. 1968. or: 1969 a local regidack. ata — Satie. recreation

area on the North Dvina River near Arkhengelek told.a vacationer that there were

active forced labor prison colonies in the extreme northern reaches of the area.

The remarks were prompted by comments made by the vacationer who had noticed

a number of ruins from old pre-1953 prison labor camps in the ereas where he

fished along the Dvina. The local resident said that he remembered when the camps

were disuantled after. 1953, but. that new camps had been constructed further north in

uninhabited areas where: they: "would not become known’ to ‘civilians. Because he had

travelled in these remote areas, apparently for fishing and hunting, the local

resident said that he had sran these camps. He noted that Soviet citizens had been

told that che camps were destroyed after the Stalin era, but he had observed that they

simply had been moved out of sight. . Comment: Source did net actually see any
ver area.)

operating prison colonies in the Dvins

~~ ee hm

eer 2s WARNING NOTICE ’
eee as INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND MEI.JODS INVOLVED

i FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE 5 OF 5 PACES
