The Outlook for Lebanon
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011980, dated 2 April 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011980).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

coves oh ep NE TAI

e

63

. * · . *. sae
„

0

Washington, may 10, 1960. f

SNIE 36.4-60.

THE ouriooK FOR LEBANON.

THE PROBLEM

2 for Release
Date

n estimate the political outlook in Lebanon, partiulaey the implications of the.

prospective elections.

7.

V,. THE ESTIMATE

.

1. It will soon be two years since virtual
civil war, threatening the integrity of
Lebanon, led to the Lebanese request for
US military intervention. The period
since the end of Chamoun’s administra-
tion has been relatively tranquil. Under
President Chehab and Prime Minister

Karami, Lebanese foreign policy has.

taken a middle direction, avoiding both

the outspokenly pro-West course followed:

by Chamoun, and the strong pro-UAR
tendencies exhibited by Chamoun's more

the present regime's orientation reflects
the preference of most Lebanese, There
is little desire for a recurrence of the
violent outbreaks of 1958, and most fac-
tions, since the restoration of order, have

accepted a kind of political truce under
& cabinet of moderates who have Jargely a

avoided provocative issues,

: 2. This tone has been set by President

Chehab, former commander of the armed

forces. Chehab has so far employed a

combination of compromise and firmness
in his determination to avoid a repetition
of the 1958 strife. He has shown himself
willing to use force against occasional

threats to public security. 8 and has guc-
cessfully employed pressure against both.
Christian and ‘Moslem political factions

wken he considered It necessary. Ai -
m ol con- 2

Christian, he favors the s

ernment. However, he is unsympathetic - 8

to Chamoun, whom he regards as 4 dan-

gerous extremist. He clearly hopes to =

prevent a resurgence of Chamoun’s politi
cal power, in part by bringing about a

larger and more balanced representation
ardent opponents at the time of the 1983
troubles. In general, we consider that

in parliament of the various Lebanese
factions than that resulting from the
1957 elections, which Chamoun rigged.
Prime Minister Karami; a leader of the
pro-UAR Moslem faction in 1958, has
gone along with Chehab's policies, and
substantial cooperation between them 13
likely to continue. Karami has removed
many Chamoun sympathizers from the
government—including the gendarmerie
and police—-but he has avoided replacing
them with Moslem extremists. He, like
Chehab, has sought to avoid identifica- N
tion with any one Arab reglonai faction.

which theacwriousLaba-, .
EE a Ye eee

entatlomin the-géverninent: -

Merde,

\|/ source: Department of State, INR Piles.4 A covering note

indicated that this special estimate, submitted by the Director of
Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA, and the intelligence
organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the
Air Porce, and the “Joint. staff. ail members of the United States
Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on May 10, with the
exception of the representatives of the AEC and the FBI who
abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their
jurisdiction.

Arne complex system by which the var ious Lebanese religious

groups are apportione ? representation in the government. [Footnote
— the sauce cent.

course, essen
tral issue of Moslem-Druze-Christian ten-
sions is inevitably coming to the fore with
the approach of elections, planned for
this June. Chamoun, in particular, feels
that he and his followers are threatened,
and that a combination of outside pres-
sures from the UAR, together with Che-
hab’s maneuverings, will destroy his po-
litical power. There is considerable ap-
prehensicn, not only among Christians,
that the next parlfament will be domi-
nated by Moslem extremists bent on
destroying the delicate balance of the
confessional system. Many Christian
politicians fear that UAR influence and
money, chiefly originating in Syria, will
be used to bring this about, with the aim
of controlling Lebanon if not actually
absorbing it. They insist that strong
Western support is needed to enable their
forces to rally and to counter the trend.
Many Moslem and Druze. elements, on
the other hand, take Western support of
the Christians for granted and seek UAR
assistance to counter it.

4. While there is already evidence of UAR
interference in pre-election maneuvering,
we doubt that the UAR Government is
intent on a massive campaign of inter-
vention or that Nasser presently enter-
tains serious ambitions of absorbing Leb-

anon or establishing UAR hegemony |

there. Nasser clearly wants a Lebanese
government sympathetic to the UAR and
the broad aims of Pan-Arab nationalism,
and is prepared to contribute money and

Influence to this end. He almost cer-
tainly ‘beliéves that the Western Powers

will provide support for pro-West Leba-
nese factions. If he came to believe that

LE 3¥2/2

outside forces were attempting to foster
a Lebanese government which would fol-
low the strongly anti-Nasser policies Cha-

moun pursued, UAR counterefforts would
‘be stepped up strongly. On the whole,
however, we think it likely thet Nasser’s .

actions will stop well short of the kind of
blatant interference which characterized
UAR activities against Chamoun two
years ago. Syrian Region Interior Min-
ister Sarraj may try to interfere on a
scale and by means not sanctioned by
Nasser, but we believe that Nasser can
probably control Sarraj’s activity.

5. We base this estimate on the belief

that Nasser himself is fully alive to the
unique conditions governing Lebanese
affairs. Lebanese policies under Chehab
and Karami have been essentially satis-
factory to Nasser. Nasser is aware of

Western interest in Lebanon's continued
independence and Is not desirous of add-
ing to his troubles with the Western

Powers—at least with the US—at a time
when he is heavily engaged with his own
problems. He probably belleves that the
Western Powers under certain circum-
stances Would again intervene in Leb-
anon. Moreover, he has been impressed
with the difficulties of governing Syria,
and is aware that Lebanon’s peculiar
domestic institutions and international
position would present even thornier
problems if he tried to take them on.

6. Nor do we believe that any substantial
Lebanese faction seriously wants the state
to be joined with or subservient to the
UAR. Certainiy President Chehab and
Prime Minister Karami have shown little
of the extreme pro-UAR sentiments which
some of Karami's fellow-dissidents dis-
played when they were in arms against
Chamoun two years ago. The moderate’

19
5
1
5
.
:
i

he were 80 inelined. The Western Powers

Moslem factions, which were prampted to
turn to the UAR as the only available

support against Chamoun in 1957 and

1956, now feel reasonably secure under
Chehab and Karami. Having seriously

' weakened Chamoun and strengthened

the Moslem position, Karami and his
sympathizers give every indication of
wanting to consolidate these gains, but
to do so far short of following the Syrian

- politicians into dependence on Nasser,

7. They will find support in this course
from Arab leaders other than Nasser.

' King Saud, once u heavy financial con-

tributor to various Lebanese. political
factions, no longer has the funds for such
purposes. However, such influence as he
and his family retain will be exerted
against the spread of Nasser's influence.
The Iraqis, Jor „ and
Turks will also back candidates opposed

bo Nasser. On the whole, these attempts

are not likely materially to affect the out-

come of the elections.

8. Neither the UK nor France is Akely to
be as active as in the past. Both will
probably attempt to hold Pro-UAR influ-
ences to a minimum, through covert sup-
port of certain Christian and modetate
Moslem elements, but they will probably
avoid, as unfeasible, attempts to bring
about the kind of clear pro-Western orien-
tation which British and French influence

fostered in previous Lebanese govern-

ments.

9. As the elections approach and tensions
mount, interested outside powers are
likely to become more deeply involved

than they may now plan. Nasser will be

under pressure from pro-UAR elements
for greater Support, and he will find it
difficult to reject these demands even if

1

2 357

will encounter growing importunlties
from pro-West elements to take more
Vigorous actin.

10. In any case, the elections will be hard

fought, with considerable risks of Serious
clashes, On the whole, we believe that
Chehab’s control of the security forces

is strong enough to enable him to cope
with the kind of localized armed clashes
which are a normal feature of Lebanese
elections, This is particularly true since
the elections will be held on four suc-
cessive Sundays in different parts of the
country, thus enabling the security forces
to be moved around. A more serious
Ganger is that disorders might become
widespread. Further incidents such as
the May bombings in Beirut, for example,
unless decisively dealt with by Chehab,
might cause both Christians and Moslems
to drop their present internal differences
and close ranks against each other.

Such a development would divide govern-

-

ment and country alike and place critical
Strains on the unity and discipline of the
Security forces, As a last resort the gov--
ernment might feel compelled to postpone
the elections, but this now appears un-
likely... ; :
11. The elections are likely to résult in a
parliament more accommodating to Nas-
ser and his policies than the recent one.
In an effort to bring all political factions’

unity, while the Christian camp ts divided into
various sects, with Maronites In the majority,
foliowed by Greek Orthodox end various others. -

ences equal or even overshadow the simple dis-
Unetion between Christians end Moslems.

[Foctnete it, the

S

. 4 . .

1
a *

*

i
i
:
|
H
;
:

extra-parliamentary maneuvering by dis-
gruntled “outs,” 33 new seats are to be
added to the parliament, now composed

of 66 members. In accordance with cus-

tom, confessional representation is to re-
main in about the same proportion.
However, mest. of the new seats will
probably be won by. politicians unsympa-
thetic to Chamoun. Finally, many pres-
ent pro-Chamoun deputies will probably
encounter much stiffer opposition in their
own districts, .

12. We do not, however, believe that ex-
tremist Moslems are likely to gain suffi-
cient strength in parliament to attempt
drastic changes in. Lebanon's 5
middle of the road foreign policy or to
upset the present confessional balance.
Any such effort would be opposed not only
by the Christians, but also by many mod-
erate Sunnis, most Shias, and the Druzes,
An additional measure of protection is

uament and discourage
„ kact that President Chehab's term ef

offloe has four more years to run. ehe-
Moslem extremism in: parliament.

afforded the Christians by virtue of the

hab will probably attempt to prevent any =

13. Long-term trends in Lebanon 0
favor some increase in Moslem influ
and greater identification with Arab

no foreseeable Lebanese governm
would have much chance of survivin

theless, it remains unlikely that ‘Moslem
influence will lead, even in the longer run,
to unification of Lebanon with the JAR
or the effective suppression of pro-West 2
or Christian elements. For the foresee- e
able future most Lebanese, Christian
and non-Christians alike, would have too
much to lose by such a development.

AT — pe enn enone
