Strategic Importance of Japan
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000009376, dated 1 April 1948.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000009376).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

EPORT

Mi

3

‘

ru

ed

oe ae, ae na
tafe Sal Be : : i

aaeed Pras : ee : Waites eta rs, os
cathe hatcle tie a Na Lt a ea Tie abe!

RAY 2 UI AE RIAN OSIRIA ENN Lle M2 “AR POU iL AE Pe TOO ARON

i he we
2 a bet ie .
fa af’ ie, oh
aoc a A ha .
tes ac Ee
: ak i ae
PG ete Sa eck &
‘ Bhs es Jay is A
My r ‘yp bA! me tg tits
‘ a, Oa by oo So: ep Jy ha
aig Ag a at ec 7
‘ee 42 yo ae. ee cae Mee 2 east
Ss Bane by Oe" fa peat 7 a0 * a
Uy cea asin Bring Ee ee Red: r”
} 4 os ass , & “a3 ; : asi a e Eanl
ob yYo Fsw¢ x Get has = ater en
WSO EE thas Op nS OS Or i as ie =.
a wees ea 4 wend + < ar ey Aig. ye
Them & © Ere Dr ; (a) poy pote =
Wg a QO ci anes fies
“3s aR! iit Peas Mei Ve ot a
Eas ee By A St pts i wu
OSS tet SG 1S a TS Qt Dicds Ay
ae aq Hcy eee Rad Hegre
ge we ae med ; Frege eG Oi a i.
eB SAS Da Ay 4 at ven ov tate
sng bebe ‘of eBay D Se. a ae
dS ok aha Eien os eae aha 3
‘ ‘Tk Pea (Se ors, of om es aeteleed © pbs SE
1g BIE Bkg ea SP a athe si eatetet
SIO 5. 29 a a igs tas ety 3 'B
Bog S’ gina Bey Sid Sigal Vela Le RoprehO
ae eet oft 4s.) g Brorg: Legh Bi She
SS Ogi oo eal ie! “pee Sh G re
eho Diu : oN, 4s : Bien ani Cop sg wet OA
wesc aa! eke a “a Cae 1S tip fre
ie PS eA A: bas my lD) iQ Pie
s Be aera vena = a
ee a ee oe “. ne Be
i pt, Sees e ot e -

at
od

rel

Fag Sak a8 ‘ : : : Spt
hab ale SERA os feta aata tide oN alta caDlastiaeht i UE atl ina datz Sat sSaannsls

ORE 43-48 PIS

STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF JAPAN ~

SUMMARY

Japan's defeat in World War II has created a vacuum of power in the Far East
where the extension of Soviet influence and US strategic interests have been brought
into direct conflict. From the point of view of either the US or the USSR, control of
Japan is important to the control of the Far Eastern area, both because of the island’s
geographical location and because Japan, while militarily defenseless at present, pos-
sesses @ large reservoir of trained manpower, which, if mobilized and provided logistic
support, could become a potent factor in determining the outcome of any future armed
conflict embracing the Far East. ,

The US as principal power in occupation presently controls Japan, the stability
of whose new democratic government cannot be determined completely until the with-
drawal of US occupation troops. Given a viable economy, however, present Japanese
stabilily and pro-US orientation should continue so long as the Occupation remains.

On the other hand, there are certain possible developments which would greatly
weaken the US position in Japan and througheut the Far East, and to this extent

" strengthen that of the USSR. Principal among these are:

1. Disgurrion or tHE Present Starus Quo in Noxrseast ASIA.
Extension of Soviet control or domination over North China, Manchuria, and
the whole of Korea would result in an incalculable Joss of US prestige throughout the
z=. EarEast. Such acondition might greatly facilitate further Soviet extension into Japan
itself, which in turn would expedite Communist expansion in Asia against diminishing
resistance. .

2. Serrous Dererioration or Japan’s Economic Systrem.

The key factor in the postwar development of Japan is economic rehabilitation.
As in the past, Japan, for normal economic functioning on an industrial basis, must
have access to the Northeast Asiatic areas—-notably North China, Manchuria, and
Korea—-now under direct, indirect, or potential control of the USSR. It is believed
that the Kremlin, without serious effect on its own position in Northeast Asia, could
refuse to allow Japan economic access to these areas if political or strategic considera-
tions so dictated.

The short-term loss of Northeast Asia trade, though it would make economic re-
covery of Japan difficult, would not render it impossible. It could be compensated for
in part by trade with Southeast Asia and the Philippine Islands where, however, there
would be, in addition to US and European competition, the possible development and
expansion of indigenous industries. :

Note: ‘The information in this report is as of 21 May 1948.
The inteligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, and the Navy have con-
curred in this report; the Directorate of Intelligence, Air Intelligence Division, Department
of the Air Force had no comment. Sn

1 -SECREL. |:

“SrCreT

Over the long termn,-exclusion of Japan from Northeast Asia trade would so dras-
tically distort Japan's natural trade pattem that economic stability could be maintained
only if the US were prepared to underwrite substantial trade deficits on a continuing
basis. Shouid such aid be withheld or unavailable, the ensuing economic distress might
easily force Japan to align itself with the USSR as ae only means of returning to
economic normality.

So long as this Japanese rehabilitation is under US control, it can be cssumed that
Japan of itself, with its basic economic weaknesses, cannot in the foreseeable future
become a threat to US security. Only as an ally of the USSR, or as part of a large anti-
US coalition could Japan become once again dangerous.

So long as a viable economy for Japan can be constructed and maintained, the diffi-
culties facing the USSR in attempting to force Japan’s acquiescence would be consider-
able and could be largely offset: tegh the Ce by the us of available counter-
measures, Lutte eee 9 Seen pee

4

tne arenes ani

DS tT oe hee Seen ae ee ae aarp Raines eeenemntra pareve
ates WAC DaL eer me eras Semaine oe

STRATEGIC iMPORTANCE OF JAPAN ree

Japan’s defeat in World War II and subsequent occupation has freed the US,
its possessions, and potential allies from the threat of Japanese aggression and has
given the US the opportunity to exert a major influence on Japan for the foreseeable
future. At the same time, Japan’s defeat has created a facuum of power in the Far
East which has only partially been filled by the US and the USSR. Moreover, the ex-
tension of Soviet imperialism in Northeastern Asia has brought the interests of the
USSR into direct conflict with those of the US in that area. Tb. remainder of the
Far East is at the same time in a state of dynamic flux, while these forces working to
restore as much as possible of the order existing in the Far East prior to Japanese ag-
gression are in retreat under the attack of indigenous nationalist moveinents and
Communist-cominated forces.

Japan’s entire political, economic, and social structure has been subject to drastic
reforms, which, however, have been neither formalized by a peace treaty nor firmly
adopted by the Japanese. Nevertheless, as a consequence of the instability in the
Far East, Japan, despite its defeat, is in a relatively stronger position politically and
econoinically than are its immediate neighbors. Fear on the part of other Asiatic
countries of resurgent Japanese military penetration may, however, hamper Japanese
recovery while the degree of Soviet contro! over Manchuria, China, and Korea will

_ necessarily influence Japan's stability and future alignment.

Bice 2

t
k ae Be crn hd te
“1.7 Basic Conswerations.
a The geographic location of Japan renders it of strategic importance to all Powers
whose interests in Asia are large, particularly at the present time, to the United States
_- andtothe USSR. Any Power controlling Japan holds a vital position across the trade
i routes of the North Pacific and is in a position to dominate the exits and entrances of
the Sea of Japan and the East China and Yellow Seas, and control the ports of Asia
from Shanghai north to include Vladivostok. From the Kremilin’s point of view, US
- oceupation of Japan or even Japan’s political and economic orientation toward non-
d Soviet Powers, not only threatens the eastern territory of the USSR but also denies that
country a strategic outpost for future defensive or aggressive action. Conversely,
Japan under Soviet control would serve to complete a chain of offshore defenses the
northern segrnent of which consists of Kamchatka and the Kurile Islands. If used by
the USSR as a base for aggressive action against the US, Japan’s geographic position
could threaten US Pacific bases from Alaska to the Philippine Islands and might serve
i as a Soviet stepping stone to the southern regions.

Militarily, Japan is now defenseless and must rely for protection from aggression
upon the armed rnight of some other nation or nations having sufficient strength
and willingness to guarantee Japanese sovereignty. Japan’s manpower, however, if
mobilized and assured of logistic support could contain hostile forces of large size on

| the Asiatic Continent. Conversely, Japanese manpower, mobilized and allied with

the USSR, would, in case of war, force the deployment of larger US forces in Alaska
and on the West Coast of the US than would otherwise be necessary. The utilization
of Japanese armies in offensive action, either in Asia or in North America, would involve
the conduct of a major war effort. This would be particularly true if Japanese forces
were to be directed against the USSR in Asia.

2. Economic Facrors.

The key factor in the postwar development of Japan and the relationship of that
development to US security is Japanese economic rehabilitation. It is noteworthy that
the Potsdam Deslaration, while it provides for complete disarrnament, also provides
specifically that Japan should be permitted to retain such industry as is necessary to
sustain its economy. The Far Eastern Commission has determined, as a matter of
policy, that the peaceful needs of the Japanese people should be defined as being sub-
stantially the standard of living prevailing in Japan during the period 1930-1934, and
that in estimating the nature and size of the industrial structure within that level,
account should be taken of such factors as technological developments, balance of pay-
ments and employment. Factors which will influence the implementation of this de- .
cision include: (a) the question of reparations; {b) the dependence of Japanese
economic rehabilitation upon surrounding areas (China, Manchuria, Korea, Formosa,
and Sakhalin) for markets and raw materials; (c) the extent to which these markets
and raw materials ean be made available to Japan; and (d) the availability of other
markets and sources of raw materials if presently and potentially Soviet-dominated
areas should be closed to Japanese trade.

. _, she problem of reparations has not yet been solved and may have to await the

“results of a peace conference for final decision. Present indications are that industrial
facilities to be raade available for removal as reparations may be considerably less than
originally anticipated. However, until the question is settled definitely, the process of
rehabilitation may be slowed down.

Japan's pre-surrender economy was integrated with and dependent upon those of
China, Manchuria, Korea, Formosa, and Sakhalin. However, in the decade prior to
surrender, Japanese economy was progressively being distorted fo give increasing sup-
port to a large military establishment which was on a war, or semi-war, footing. Al 9 <4!
though implementation of the Potsdam Declaration and the terms of surrender have $+"
resulted in the complete liquidation of the Japanese miNtary establishment, thus
rendering tue Japanese economy free from this burden, it is nevertheless evident that
Japan still must depend heavily on trade with Northeast Asia if a self-supporting econ-
omy is to be sustained without continuing US support. Geographical proximity and
the character of its economic development make Northeast Asia complementary to the
economy of Japan. In the prewar period, North China, Korea, Formosa, Manchuria,
and Sakhalin supplied approximately 35 percent of Japan’s imports and tock about 40
percent of Japan’s exports. The principal commoditics obtained by Japan were food-
stuffs and raw materials such as coal, iron ore, lumber and pulp, and salt, which Japan

" exchanged for exports of machinery, metal manufactures, and textiles. In spite of the

4 | BLERET™

*tenemearore eames mummers se-atmasatanttn aie metecn cats henson, ame mata tA ONAL SREY MRRP AORTA ANA NO ATH PE RR

poem wererrereny ne me

pe A TT EOOL I AERO CE IEA OE,
T  astaaiatabesaieeememaenshell

“BSCR

separation of this area from Japanzse domination and aggressive development, trade
with this area, if the USSR does not itself deny or cause others to deny such trade to
Japan, might be expected to be resumed eventually at levels approaching those of the
prewar period.

Since the surrender, Japanese trade with these areas, with the exception of US-
fostered trade with South Korea, has been negligible. The prolongation of present
political conditions in North China, North Korea, Manchuria, and Sakhalin, moreover,
will continue to impede the resumption of such trade. Complete Soviet control or
domination of these areas would give the Kremlin the capability of prohibiting trade
between Northeast Asia and Japan altogether, should such action, from the Soviet
point of view, appear advantageous. .

The various areas of Northeast Asia are themselves mutually supporting. For
example, Manchuria, a food surplus area, also has large quantities of iron ore which
in conjunct‘+n with North China’s coal and North Korea’s ferro-allcys could constitute

the basis for an integrated heavy industry. ‘These areas, together, with the Far East-_ ne :
ern USSR, could provide the largest industrial potential of any area in the Far Fast.’

Xt is believed, therefore, that should polit'cal or strategic considerations so dictate, the
USSR could, without serious effect on its own position in Northeast Asia, refuse to allow
Japan economic access to those reas under Soviet control.

‘Yhe loss of access to the markets and raw materials of North China, Korea, Man-
churia, ‘and Sakhalin to Japan could be compensated for, in part, by trade with South-
east Asia and the Philippine Islands. However, if all trade with Northeast Asia were

’ to be cut off for an extended period, Japan would have to obtain from the United States

and Canada many essential raw materiais—e.g. lumber, wood pulp, and coking coal—
that otherwise would have come from Asia. Japan would also have to compensate

_ for the loss of this area as a food supplier by obtaining from Southern Asia and the

United States considerably more food than wou'd otherwise be necessary. Costs
of such imports would be increased substantially by shipping over long hauls. More-
over, the loss of Northeast Asiatic markets for Japanese exports would have to be offset
by continued austere living standards and by expansion of exports either to distant
Western markets, where Japan faces strong competition, or to Southern Asiatic markets,
where, in addition to US and European competition, the development or expansion of
indigenous industries may limit the market for Japanese goods still further.

It can be concluded that a short-term loss of trade with North China, Manchuria,
Korea, and Sakhalin would make the economic recovery uf Japan difficult, but not im-
possible. Long-term exclusion from trade with these areas would, however, distort
*<pan's natural pattern of trade so drastically that economic stability probably could be
maintained in Japan only if the US were prepared to underwrite substantial trade def-
icits on a continuing basis. Should such outside aid be withheld and Japan be denied
the trade of Northeast Asia, the ensuing economic distress, with its attendant political
instability, might force Japan to align itself with the USSR. Moreover, it is by no
means impossible that Japan may tend to trade with this area, either in the normal
course of exploiting the trade and commercial advantages arising from the proximity

5 7 SUCRE Le

werkt eee sa mine ile tina antes ees senha cnp Latame ene

BEEP LAY rane enienmresearanpen mien eemnmanait

renner oe

Gli cl ela Cala ee lrat o—t rre eet

CCRT
:

of the Soviet Far East, or as a matter of government policy calculated to gain for
itself even larger benefits from the US.’

3. Potrrica, Factors.

Since its emergence as a modern nation, Japan has made little use of its parlia-
mentary institutions to develop. ‘democratic methods and techniques of government.
After 1930, the Jonanese accepted without serious question. the despotic politico-mili-
tary rule imposed on them in the name of the Emperor. Perhaps not an endorsement
of military policy by the Japanese people, it was a demonstration of the fact that any
Japanese governrnent after 1930, ,Tegardiess of political flavor, would have to be solidly
Set on a military foundation. Since the surrender, Japanese armed forces have ceased
to exist, and Japanese deniocratic government has been established. By the expedient
of party coalition, a fair degree of government efficiency has been roaintained. It must
not be overlcoked, however, that the existence of SCAP and the occupation forces pro-

port be removed, it is questionable. that the present degree of political maturity and
acceptance of democratic ideals.on the part. of the Japanese would result in a stable
government in Japan. It will be difficult, therefore, to determine the degree to which
Japan has been “democratised”, or the permanence of its post-surrender political struc-
ture, until the occupation forces have been withdrawn and a J apanese Government has
had an opportunity to solve its own problems without military guidance and support.
Assuming the continuance of the political status quo in Northeast Asia (an exist-
ing Chinese Nationalist Government, an independent South Korea, and Japan in US —
= hénds) there seems, in the prédictable future, to be no likelihood of the Japanese gov-
ernment’s being overthrown by yevolution or violence from domestic sources. ‘This
condition would probably, be maintained, even after the withdrawal of the Occupation
- forces.

On the other hand, the axteriston of Soviet control or domination over North China
and Manchuria, and the loss of all Korea to Soviet domination would result in an in-
calculable loss of US prestige throughout the Far East. Domination of Japan by the
USSR, following such an extension of control over North China, Manchuria, and Korea,
would cause political repercussions threatening US security throughout the whole
of Asia. The remaining Asiatic Powers would be forced to conclude that the US was
neither able nor willing to meet commitments, actua! or implied, to protect free and
independent peopies from Soviet aggression. ‘Thus, Communist expansion throughout
_ the Orient would be expedited against diminishing resistance.

In Japan itself, Soviet domination would be opposed initially by traditional Japa-
nese anti-Communist sentiment and antipathy to the USSR. It is believed, however,
that this opposition would prove no serious obstacle to the implementation of Soviet
policies once the facade of a “legal government” had been estabiished. Traditional
Japanese respect for authority, plus the strong support afforded the "legal govern-
ment” by the presence of Sovict armed forces in nearby areas, would be sufficient to
insure relatively complete Japanese “cooperation” with the USSR.

2 ee eee

2 Ao GF ARUN ALU meearRNRMmRET Ein? RRS NORTE TEMALAR EAI EBS CoN ree mpi é Nearest iol Pen ieeh
ornament om Aan eee nats me Shean: ea oe
CONT tee EEE ETT ELEY ED. . ENR SUPA STI A OORT RAT ITER LT TT Se
oe 2 ENE CRO AE A eae els an = AR RPL Eat RIP TE é o

vide support for the stability of the present Japanese government. ‘Should such sup- apie

Sb ancien + alt il anloen d+ ie Ae manne appt Mt Ee

Ane mentenatten oe me ne

A ed eA rd it at mts we alata ee marie ae
ee ee ee ae 7

Pn neem nenamemenens

SEORST

In the final analysis the political stability and the cooperation of Japan with US
depends largely on the attainment of a viable economy. Under present conditions, if
such an economy can be attained, it is quite probable that Japan will Ccvelop into a free,
independent nation capable of exerting a stabilizing influence in Asia. Furthermore,
even though the Kremlin should be able to exert complete domination over Northeast
Asia, Japan could still resist Soviet domination provided it were assured of economic
security as well as political and military support by the US. Conversely, under con-
ditions of continuir.. acute economic distress and with Soviet control extending over
all of Northeast Asia, Japanese political stability.could probably be maintained only by
strong action on the part of the occupation forces, and should those forces be with-
érawn at such a critical period, the probability that Japan would eventually succumb
io Communist domination would become almost a certainty.

4. INFLUENCE OF FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS,

Bersuse of the factors set forth above, the relationship which Tecan will — to
the security of the US can be determined only in the light of future developments and
will be based generally on one af two economic conditions: Japan ~vill either continue
in its present state of economic maladjustment, eventually degenerating to a state of
economic colla pse, or attain a viable economy. Continuing economic maladjustment
would presuppose insufficient outside economic aid to Japan or none at all. In this
case the ensuing econornic distress would eventually demand that occupation forces

; take strong measures to maintain political stability. Furthermore, should occupation

forces be withdrawn from Japan, strong pressure could be exerted upon Japan to force
its orjentation to the Soviet Union.

It remains, then, to determine whether or not Japan could constitute a threat to

“US security if given a viable economy. For purposes of discussion it may be assumed
YuUS y

that the following conditions, based on the terms of the Potsdam Declaration and de-
cisions made in the Far Fastern Commission, would be implemented:

a, That Japan will be permitted to retain sufficient industry to sustain its economy mes

(Note: It may be necessary to accon.,’ sh this through the agency of continued US
subsidization accompanied by any necessary reorientation of Japan's trade pattern to
areas other than Northeast Asia);

bo. That Japan wi. not be permitted to maintain a military establishment (Note:
It follows that Japan will be dependent on either the US or on a multilateral trade pat-
tern for the products of those industries which are capable of direct military utiliza-
tion).

It is implicit in the assumptions, as given, that Japan would be incapable, by itseif,
of constituting a threat to US security. It could serve as a threat only as part of a
coalition of powers oppesing the US, most probably as an ally of the USSR. The means
available to the USSR for effecting the integration of Japan into the Soviet orbit may
be classified into three general headings: ideological penetration, policeman co-
ercion, and economic penctration.

pee em oe

‘ = 3% Fintegration of North China, Manchutia, and Korea. into the Soviet Far Fastern industrial

With a viable Japanese economy, it is highly improbable that Soviet efforts at
ideological per.etration would have any substantial prospect of success. Traditional
Japanese Russophobia, together with continued economic aid from the US, would
_ probabl y serve as insuperable obstacles t to the achievement of Soviet objectives by idec-
logical techniques alone. :

On the other hand, the degree of success attained by the Soviets in attempts to
coerce Japan, by means of political and military pressures, into joining an anti-lS
coalition would Gepend on the existence of effective guarantees against Soviet aggres-
sion. Without such guarantees, Soviet politico-military pressure might prove irresist-
ible. Conversely, the efficacy of such possible. Soviet. tactics could be effectively coun-
tered and minimized by the existence of US military guararitees of Japanese security and
by continuing US demonstrations of its willingness actively to enforce such guarantees.
In any event, Soviet politico-military maneuvers Calculated to alter Japan's strategic
alignment would have to be supplemented by efforts in other fields in order to overcome
Japanese antipathy to the USSR, and to insure Japanese economic survival in the face
of a possible rupture of Japan's. economic fe Zelationship with the US and other areas AN
outside the Soviet sphere. ~

Soviet efforts to undermine the assumed economic relationship between Japan and
the US for the purpose of laying the economic pasis for eventual political capture of
Japan would be subject to serious. limitations. “The quantity of agricultural and in-
dustrial raw materials available for export to Japan: from Northeast Asia would*be |
limited by the requirements of the European t USSR and by current Soviet plans for ex-
tensive industrialization of the’ Soviet Far East. Assuming that Soviet plans for the

complex cculd inchide provisions for making available to Japan those goods and markets
essential for forcing Japan Into economic subordination through a bilateral trade re-
lationship, the USSR would still have to contend: with possible US countermeasures
in this type of economic warfare. “ a

From the foregoing it can be concluded that in the foreseeable future Japan is in-
capable, by itseif, of constituting a threat to US security but could offer a serious threat in nee
as an ally of the USSR in ah anti-US coalition. » Tt fs also evident that Soviet efforts to ioe
‘secure Japan would have to be carried out concurrently jn the ideological, politico-
military, and economic spheres in order to have any prospect of success. Furthermore,
the difficulties facing the USSR in the conduct of an offensive designed to force Japan's
orientation to the Soviet orbit are considerable, and these difficulties ‘could be largely
offset by US adoption of available countermeasures,

The USSR, aware of these difficulties, must realize that its final objective, aeentuel
Soviet domination of Japan, is pres*ntly unobtainable. The Kremlin, however, can
be expected to use all available means to neutralize Japan as a potential threat and at
the same time to prepare for the eventual absorption of Japan.

In order {0 accomplish this objective, every effort will be made to discredit the oc-
cupation forces and to force their withdrawal. Propaganda attacks will be increased.
The specter of the resurgence of Japanese military and economic aggression will be

8 BECROL

cee ne en ne Rey ERG PRE nk Mm mag etetamR mnie OF Ope age tatiana NER oeMeememnme eceemeenee mummmEeR re cee eee RRR RARER: BFR EAT MeN

BB et nr en RE ae te nine eo ne em a emcee neem nenemmte tr tsteagenmamnisenaanunte nt anahmaninininensnertnerrennerraray nants fae ner anger une nasrdnruramtugn parmdreattncnieh

<SECR Me

eraphasized ta Japan’s Asiatic neighbors, while US “colonization” of Japan will be
vigorously pointed out to the Japanese. .
Continued Soviet obstruction in the Allied Counell and in the Far Eastern Com-
mission to efforts to effect Japanese ecoriomic: rehabilitation can be expected. By
means of continued demands for high-reparations and refusal to participate in a peace
conference except on Soviet, terms, the Kremlin will hope ‘to cause maximum confusion
and to impede Japanese recovery. - In addition, all possible support will be given to the
Japanese Cornmunists in their efforts to dominate the trade unions for the purpose of
instigating strikes and. ‘work ee appar to, and oes of, roinority
groups will be increased.
Attempts at ideological. penetration will be continued é through’ the repatriation of
“indoctrinated” prisoners: of war. The Kremlin will undoubtedly . exert maximum
psychologicei pressure on the Japanese by strengthening and cor.olidating its military
position in Northeast Asia, ‘and EY using’ as shoslages’. those Eerie still remaining
in Soviet hands. ;
The USSR can be expected to exploit, as a politica weapon, i control over Biorth:
east Asiatic markets ani w

ment of political stabilit jana ‘ecor sae ilitation, ; and will remain anti-Soviet.
Under these conditions. Japan will: eventually. ‘be able to contribute to the peaceful
"3. 2 4:Stabilization of Asia. Should suich support be ‘withdrawn before Japan has attained
recovery, the graduai dri “pan into the Soviet orbit would be a foregone con-
clusion. Japan, awar.<.l. : -Soviet conflict, ‘can be expected to use its strategic po-
a ‘bargaining ea to obtain maximum concessions

sition between the contestan
from either, or both.

-

SIE SIS

OF JAPAN

$B aran
RS USSR

CONTROLLED BY USSR.
(Cy CONTROWLED BY NARKENG COVERNMENT

EE] CONTROLLED BY CHINES? CORA RaSTS

Pod 18 ocoUTATION tom
Phas iemation boundaries showe ca tha map do sat aecenanly

comespond te hose recog ined by the Unceed Senses Goremeneet. .

PE! LRAT IETS

Zz
©
-
6
=
2
é
fs
wn

a9 ~

STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF JAPAN

Fe ee ee io
