Memorandum for the President - Threat of Full Chinese Communist Intervention
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000121494, dated 4 September 1950.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000121494).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Tg RsITRE mre, Mou. 3 P

Wes I ee ee ee eee Tithe PES oh, a
THROGS

FROM Pe Erserus A. Klomen, Jr.

smc; C14 Exhinete of lkuhian oe (OE
Ths came’ ty shirt, hArfore bine
y
aAnNwe/ on ee P/POL scone. Yea. have
feu ty fF, Shantol be oy cuteust x
* aR ay RNS SE

“hy be clesindl.
/

———
weet 7 at

vf o

— Gress: «ef -
an

gu \

Approved for Reieasd,
Date rer 1999

re i a 2

32515

2 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

12 Octodar 1950

MSWORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

In accordance with your instructions, I submit herewith esti-
mates regarding five critical situations in the Far East. The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the druy,
the Navy, and the Air Force participated in the preparation of
these estimates and concur in thea,

The estimates follow in the following order:

Enclosure A - Threat of Full Chinese Communist Intervention

in Korea

B - Threat of Soviet Intervention in Korea

C - Threat of Chinese Commmist Invasion of Formosa

D ~~ Threat of Chinese Commmist Invasion of
Indochina

E - Communist Capabilities and Threat in the

Philippines
RRR F - General Soviet and Chinese Communist Intentims -

and Capabilities in the Far East

Inasmuch as the conclusions reached with respect to these par-
ticular situations depend in part on the possibility of a Soviet
decision to resort to global war, the latest agreed estimate m
that subject is also attached as Enclosure G,

WALTER B,. SMITH
Director

CC (a

931227372

a Wah: 12 October 1950
8 yprcliawn. THREAT OF FULL CHINESE COMMUNIST INTERVENTION
R IN KOREA
s/s 1. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM
S/ P 1. To estimate the threat of full-scale Chinese Communist
_ FE- ? ee intervention in Korea.
see GOk- CAPABILITIES
fP- ner 2. The Chinese Communist ground forces, currently lacking ;
requisite air and naval support, are capable of intervening effec- V
ot R/ tively, but not necessarily decisively, in the Korean conflict.
W pet,
Ill. FACTORS BEARING ON INTENT
NRF
RE 3. Indications of Intentions. Despite statements by Chou En-lai,
RR v troop movements to Manchuria, and propaganda charges of atrocities i
KS and border violations, there are no convincing indications of anactual
l€ . Chinese Communist intention to resort to full-scale interventionin |
Korea.
4. Factors Favoring Chinese Communist Intervention.

|  ——_

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

a. Intervention, if resulting in defeat of UN forces, would:
(1) constitute a major gain in prestige for Communist China, con-
firming it as the premier Asiatic power; (2) constitute a major

gain for WorldCommunism with concomitant increase in Communist

China’s stature in the Sino-Soviet axis; (3) result in the elimination

93122022,

of the possibility of a common frontier with a Western-type
democracy; and (4) permit the retention of sources of Man-
churian electric power along the Yalu River.

b. Intervention, even if not resulting in a decisive defeat
of UN forces, would: (1) enable the Chinese Communists to utilize
foreign war as an explanation for failure to carry out previously
announced economic reforms; (2) be consistent with and furnish
strong impetus to anti-Western trends in Asia; and (3) justify a
claim for maximum Soviet military and/or economic aid to
China.

saad c. Intervention, with or without assurance of final victory,

ae might serve the cause of World Communism, particularly the
cause of the Soviet Union, in that it would involve the Western
ploc in a costly and possibly inconclusive war in the Far Hast.

d, The Communist cause generally and the Sino-Soviet
bloc particularly face the prospect of a major set-back in the
struggle with the non-Communist world if UN forces are per-
mitted to achieve complete victory in Korea.

aosgee 5, Factors Opposing Chinese Communist Intervention,

a, The Chinese Communists undoubtedly fear the con-
sequences of war with the US. Their domestic problems are of
such magnitude that the regime's entire domestic program and
economy would be jeopardized by the strains and the material
damage which would be sustained in war with the us, Anti-
Communist forces would be encouraged and the regime’s very
existence would be endangered.

b, Intervention would minimize the possibility of Chinese
membership in the UN and of a seat on the Security Council.

9347202

NAAR

c. Open intervention would be extremely costly unless
protected by powerful Soviet air cover and naval support. Such
Soviet aid might not be forthcoming because it would constitute
Soviet intervention.

d, Acceptance of major Soviet aid would make Peiping
more dependent on Soviet help and increase Soviet control in
Manchuria to a point probably unwelcome to the Chinese Com-
munists.

e. If unsuccessful, Chinese intervention would lay Peiping
open to Chinese resentment on the grounds that China would be
acting as a Soviet catspaw.

4. From a military standpoint the most favorable time for
intervention in Korea has passed.

g. Continued covert aid would offer most of the advantages
of overt intervention, while avoiding its risks and disadvantages.
Covert aid would enable the Chinese Communists to:

(1) Avoid further antagonizing of the UN and reduce
risk of war with the US;

(2) Promote the China-led Asiatic peoples’ ‘“revolu-
tionary struggle,’’ while ostensibly supporting
peace;

“ae

(3) Maintain freedom of action for later choice between
abandonment of aid or continuing such covert aid as
might be appropriate to Chinese Communist needs in
Korea;

10406 AAR
o

- s 2 .
ry : .
.
~ .
‘ 5

(4) Satisfy the ‘‘aid Korea’’ demand in Communist
Fa ‘circles in China and Asia generally, without
fod: risking war with the US.

IV. PROBABILITY OF CHINESE COMMUNIST ACTION

6. While full-scale Chinese Communist intervention in
Korea must be regarded as a continuing possibility, a consid-
eration of all known factors leads to the conclusion that barring
a Soviet decision for global war, such action is not probable in
1950. During this period, intervention will probably be confined

to continued covert assistance to the North Koreans. Lig *
Ss

93122771

i

RES

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

12 October 1950

B. THREAT OF SOVIET INTERVENTION IN KOREA

I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1. To estimate the threat of direct Soviet military inter -
vention in Korea during 1950.

ll. CAPABILITIES

9. Soviet armed forces now in the Far East are capable of
intervening overwhelmingly in Korea ‘virtually without warning.

IU, FACTORS BEARING ON INTENT

3. Indications of Intentions. The Soviet Union to date has
given no indication that it intends to intervene directly in Korea.
Since the beginning of hostilities the Soviet Union has sought
in its official statements and in its propaganda to give the im-
pression that it is not involved in the Korean situation. More-
over, the USSR has taken no political or military actions that
constitute direct armed intervention in Korea. However, the
Soviet Government for some months has been increasingly
improving its military capabilities in the Far East as well as
in other strategic areas.

4. Factors Favoring Soviet Intervention. The defeat of
North Korea would constitute a major set-back for the USSR.
It would involve:

a. The loss of a Satellite, and the establishment of a
Western-oriented state on the frontiers of Communist China
and the USSR.

a

a

931221 7%

b. Giving the Western Powers a potential strategic
bridgehead which the Kremlin would always regard as a threat
to the industrial, communication, and military centers of
Manchuria and the Soviet Far East.

. & Weakening the Soviet military and political position
vis-a-vis Japan.

d. A loss to Soviet political prestige in that it would

. demonstrate that the Kremlin is not willing to support its fol-
lowers effectively ina Soviet-instigated action.

Eater. e. A loss to Soviet military prestige in that it would lead
suit to a tendency, whether or not justified, to re-evaluate the éffec-
tiveness of Soviet military equipment and tactics. .

f. A reduction in the prospects of the Soviet Union for
expanding its political control by means short of war in that
it would demonstrate. the determination and capability of the
non-Soviet world to resist effectively Soviet-inspired aggression.

5. Factors Oppos ‘

a. In weighing potential gains and risks of intervention,
the Soviet leaders must calculate, as an overwhelming cmsider-
ation, that their open intervention would lead to direct hostili-
ties with US and other UN forces over an issue on which the
Western world has achieved a new degree of unity. Soviet
leaders would have no assurance that combat between Soviet
and US forces would be limited by the U8 to Korea or to the
Far Eastern theater. Consequently, a decision to intervene
openly in Korea, in the ultimate analysis, involves a decision
to risk immediate and probably global war with the US.

931227.

_b. The Soviet leaders may estimate that it will be
possible, without assuming this all-critical risk, to salvage
some of the losses suffered from the Korean situation. US -
military activities could be obstructed by extensive guerrilla
action, which might involve the US in an extended and costly
occupation and which could contribute to Soviet efforts to
develop in Asia a racial enmity toward the US and the Western
Powers.

IV. PROBABILITIES OF SOVIET ACTION

6. It is believed that the Soviet leaders will not consider
asi that their prospective losses in Korea warrant direct military
BS intervention and a consequent grave risk of ‘war, They will-
intervene in the Korean hostilities only if they have decided,
not on the basis of the Korean situation alone, but on the basis |
of ‘Gver-alt considerations, that it is to their. interest. to pre-
cipitate’a global war ‘at this time, ..

—

9312277,

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

12 October 1950

C. THREAT OF CHINESE COMMUNIST INVASION OF FORMOSA

I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1. To estimate the threat of Chinese Communist invasion

of Formosa during 1950.° ;

Of. CAPABILITIES

2. Despite certain definite Chinese Communist deficiencies
in naval and air forces and probably in amphibious training and
doctrine, the Communists are now capable of launching an in-
vasion against Formosa with about 200,000 troops and moderate
air cover. The USSR could ata minimum furnish tactical advice
and technical and logistic support.

3. Although Chinese Nationalist forces are sufficient in
number and materiel to defend Formosa, lack of staying power,
poor command structure, lack of inter-service coordination,
questionable morale and shortages of some types of ammunition
make their defense capabilities questionable.

4, Without direct Soviet participation and given strong naval
and air assistance by the US armed forces, the Chinese Nation-
alist defense forces are capable of holding Formosa against a
determined Chinese Communist invasion.

MW. FACTORS BEARING ON INTENT
5. Indications of Intentions. Frequent official statements of

the Chinese Communists have clearly indicated their intention
to seize control of Formosa, However, available intelligence does

se

a

93122734

reeeres etsy

“et sith

not indicate their intention to do so in the immediate future.
An unknown factor bearing upon the intent to invade is the
degree of control the: USSR is capable of exercising over the
Chinese Communists, and the Soviet intent with respect to
Formosa.

6. Factors Favoring Invasion of Formosa.

a. The occupation of Formosa would remove the

—

‘ symbol of Nationalist resistance; eliminate a potential ~~

source of coordinated opposition to the Chinese Communist
regime; and would seriously diminish continued anti-Com-
munist resistance in China and throughout Southeast Asia.

_b, Abandonment or continued postponement of an
attack on Formosa would result in a loss of “‘face’’ to the
Chinese Communists.

c. Formosa would provide the Chinese Communists
with a small but significant source of foreign exchange, and
a potential source of rice, thereby contributing somewhat to
Chinese Communist capabilities for economic reconstruction.

7. Factors Opposing an Invasion of Formosa.
a. Success would be improbable.

b. An attack involves the risk of war with the US as
long as US-forces are interposed between Formosa and the
mainland. The Chinese Communist leadership would be re-
luctant to jeopardize its popular support, domestic achievements,
and internal program by an attack on Formosa that could lead
to retaliatory air attacks on Chinese cities, to a strict block-
ade of the Chinese coast, to strong economic sanctions, and to
protracted warfare that could sap Chinese economic strength,

93122775)

c. The Chinese Communists face serious domestic
problems, including banditry, widespread unrest, guerrilla
opposition, economic stagnation, agrarian maladjustments,
and the problems involved in consolidating the Communist
Party’s political control. For these reasons the danger exists
that, if attacks should fail or prove unduly costly, the present
apparent solidarity of the Communist regime would be subjected

to a severe strain.

d. In view of current UN interest in Formosa, the
Chinese Communists have some reason to hope for a favorable
political solution.

IV. PROBABILITY OF CHINESE COMMUNIST INVASION

8, It is believed that barring a Soviet decision to precipi- |
tate global war, an invasion of Formosa by the Chinese Com-
munists will not be attempted during the remainder of 1950.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

12 October 1950

D. THREAT OF A CHINESE COMMUNIST INVASION OF
INDOCHINA

I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1. To estimate the threat of a Chinese Communist invasion
of Indochina in 1950.

Tl. CAPABILITIES

2.- From forces presently deployed near the Indochina
border, the Chinese Communists could commit 100,000 troops
_for an invasion of Indochina without appreciable forewarning.
Approximately 150,000 additional Chinese Communist troops
could arrive at the border in support of an invasion within ten
days. Reinforcements and supplies might be moved by sea to
rebel-held sections of the Indochina coast. It is also within
Chinese Communist capabilities to furnish air support for an
Pivastons ;

3. These capabilities could be exercised without ee
to other possible Chinese Communist military operations in the
Far East, except to the already inadequate air support for a
simultaneous North Korean or Formosan intervention.

4, If the Chinese Communists should invade Indochina, it

is almost certain that the defending forces under the French
would soon lose all of Vietnam, except Cochin China,

93122727

Tl. FACTORS BEARING ON INTENT

5. Indications of Intentions.

a. The construction and improvement of roads, railroads,
and air ‘facilities: the provision of technical and training assistance
and advisory personnel; present logistic support from the border
provinces of Kwangtung, Kwangsi, and Yunnan--al]l these might be
construed as positive indicators of an impending invasion. These
activities, however, might also be indicators of an increase in >
the flow of Chinese Communist aid to the Viet Minh Communists,
rather than of Chinese invasion.

b. Although Chinese Communists have given propaganda
support to the Viet Minh, there has been no public Chinese Com-
munist statement which could reasonably be construed as a com-

mitment to invade or as justification for invasion.

6. Factors Favoring Intervention.

a. A Chinese Communist invasion of Indochina would be
the most rapid means of establishing a Communist Indochina,

b. The fall of Vietnam to the Communists would facilitate
establishment of Communist control over Burma and Thailand.

c. An early Communist victory in Indochina would in
part offset the loss of International Communist prestige occa-
Sioned by Communist reverses in Korea.

d. The Chinese Communists, operating on behalf of
International Communism, might invade Indochina with the hope
- that, even if UN intervention should deprive them of complete
victory, Western bloc forces would be involved in inconclusive
warfare in the Far East.

= 2 =

—--

931227 3%

Bveaee

7. Factors Opposing Intervention.

a. A Chinese Communist invasion of Indochina would
greatly increase the risk of Chinese Communist involvement
in war against the Western Powers or the UN, as well as the
risk of global war.

b. Recent Viet Minh military successes have increased
the probability that Communist control of Indochina can be ulti-
mately secured without resort to Chinese Communist invasion,
providing there is no major increase of presently planned ex-

ternal assistance to the French and their supporters.

c. Viet Minh capabilities can be substantially increased

without resort to open intervention.

d. Invasion of Indochina by Chinese Communist troops
would arouse local anti-Chinese sentiment and could be a
serious source of command conflict between Peiping and Viet
Minh leadership.

e. A Chinese Communist invasion would tend to antag-
onize the presently neutral states of Asia, particularly India..

f. Communist China’s prospects for membership in the
UN and UN-sponsored organizations would be jeopardized and the
opportunity for the establishment of diplomatic relations with
powers outside the Soviet orbit would be curtailed.

g. Chinese Communist invasion of Indochina might provide
the US with an impelling reason for retaining in the vicinity of
Formosa--a major objective of the Chinese Communist government~--

.the US Seventh Fleet,

9312277

IV. PROBABILITIES OF CHINESE COMMUNIST INVASION

It is estimated that an open Chinese Communist invasion--
while possible and capable of being launched with little or no
preliminary warning--is improbable in 1950. ° It is highly prob-
able, however, that the Chinese Commninists will increase the
substantial military assistance already being given to the Viet

Minh forces.

SE --

9312272337

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

fe 12 October 1950

E. COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES AND THREAT IN THE
PHILIPPINES
I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1. To estimate the Communist capabilities and threat in
the Philippines. '

II. CAPABILITIES

2, The Huks. The Huks (Hukbong Mapagpalaya Ng Bayan)

are today the army of Philippine Communism, led by avowed
Communists who follow the policies and seek to further the
objectives of World Communism. Their armed strength is
estimated at no more than about 10,000. The Huks are essen-
tially a guerrilla organization, utilizing ‘‘ hit and run’’ tactics;
making: maximum use of the elements of surprise, choice of ©

BRR terrain, and mobility; and avoiding frontal engagement with
government forces. The Huks, who are limited almost exclu-
Sively to infantry weapons, have the capability of mounting
several comparatively large-scale (300-500 men) coordinated
attacks simultaneously against widely separated targets. During
1949-50, they have expanded their areas of operation throughout
Luzon and to other islands of the Philippines. In recent months
they have carried out better coordinated and more widespread
attacks, The Huks have terrorized local communities and inter-
fered with travel. They can extend and intensify their operations,
particularly in weakly defended provincial areas, and may well
stage another series of coordinated attacks before the end of
1950.

931227007

RETR

3, Supporting Elements,

a. Support of the Huk movement, apart from that derived
from unorganized lawless elements, is found among large numbers
of peasants, who willingly or by force and intimidation contribute
to the Huk movement, Another source of support is found in the
Philippine labor movement, where low real wages and poor conditions
of work permit exploitation of the union movements by Communist

iz . . C/A
OTM tye ut be — eoruchin, motel te Pinlenpene be an

(>. since the Communists have achieved power in China,

it is believed that!approximately half.a million Philippine Chinese
have already aligned themselves with the Peiping regime. Such ~
Chinese are probably facilitating Communist communications,
providing financial support, and otherwise rendering aid to the

Huks,

c. Available intelligence does not indicate that the Huks
have received, or are likely to receive, sufficient assistance from
external Communist sources to alter their military capabilities
significantly during 1950,

4, Government Countermeasures. Government efforts to
deal with the Huk problem have been ineffective thus far. Govern-
ment forces have been and are able to maintain over-all internal .
security but are unable to control local areas where dissident
groups are strongest. Recently reorganized armed forces may
be able to deal more effectively with Huk activities, but little
improvement is anticipated during 1950, Disillusionment with
the government’s ineffectiveness has caused many persons who
are not active Huk supporters to become ‘indifferent and unco-
operative toward government efforts to stamp out the dissident
forces. The government, moreover, has shown little disposition
to adopt and implement basic agrarian and social reforms which

a

a

931227237

‘
fi

might reduce considerably the miumber of peasants who sup-
port the Huks. Such a reduction would lessen measurably
Huk capabilities and the intensity of their operations, ‘but
would not eliminate the hard core of the Huk movement which
would continue to pose a burdensome security problem.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

5. While the Huks are capable of conducting widespread,
coordinated raids particularly in central Luzon, and creating
some disturbances in the Manila area, it is estimated that they
cannot overthrow the Philippine Government in 1950. .

93122777

!
{
,
t
f
4
'
'
‘

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

12 October 1950

¥F, GENERAL SOVIET AND CHINESE COMMUNIST INTENTIONS
AND CAPABILITIES IN THE FAR EAST

I. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1, To estimate general Soviet and Chinese Communist inten-
tions and capabilities in the Far East in 1950.
II. OBJECTIVES

2. The Soviet Union and Communist China share the common
objective of establishing Communist control throughout the Far

‘East, Logically, both would prefer to secure this objective with-

out resort to general war. The Soviet Union includes in its objec-
tive. Kremlin control of a commmnized Asia, including China. While
Chinese Communists may well object to such Kremlin control, they
have given no overt indication that they do not accept the primacy
of Moscow in International Communism,

Il. CAPABILITIES

3. Short of Direct Employment of Armed Forceg. The Soviet
Union and Communist China have the capacity, through a continua-

tion of measures short of war, further to develop the strength of
Communism in all areas in the Far East except those occupied by
US or UN forces. It is estimated, however, that in no area of the
Far East, except Tibet and possibly Indochina unless presently-
planned external assistance is increased, do they have the capa-
bility of establishing complete Communist control during 1950
through such measures,

—$31227-y/

With Full-Scale Employment of Armed Forces. In

the oe of war beginning in 1950:

The Soviet Union acting alone has the capability
of rapidly occupying Korea, Hokaido and Okinawa; of launching
a substantial amphibious -airborne invasion of Honshu; and of —-
conducting harassing attacks .on the Aleutians, Kyushu, .Formosa, |
the Philippines, and other islands in the adjacent waters, and
lines of communication.

b. Communist China cdae alone possesses the sanabitity

‘to overrun Tibet and substantial portions of the mainland of
Southeast Asia, and to make a strong attack on Korea..

£. In combination, the Soviet Union and Communist China .

have the capability of overrunning practically all the Asiatic matte
land and possibly of occupying all Japan and Formosa.

IV. INTENTIONS

5. Both the Soviet Union and Communist China have clearly
indicated that they intend to pursue without pause their goal.of-
‘extending Communist control over every vulnerable area in the
Far East by every means open to them short of direct use of
their armed forces. Neither has given concrete indication of
‘an intention to employ during 1950 its own armed forces outside
its own boundaries. ;

6. It is estimated in particular that, barring a Soviet deci-
sion to precipitate a global war, the Soviet Union will not during
1950 intervene directly with its armed forces in Korean hostil-
ities, and the Chinese Communists probably will not in 1950
attempt to invade Korea, Formosa, or Indochina.

7. With respect to a possible Soviet decision to Heedinitate.
global war, the latest agreed conclusions are set forth in
Enclosure G.

931227742

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.

12 October.:1950.. --

G, CONCLUSIONS REGARDING A POSSIBLE SOVIET DECISION. ~
- TO PRECIPITATE GLOBAL-WAR .

1. The Soviet rulers are simultaneously motivated by Marxist-..
Leninist-Stalinist doctrine and by considerations affecting the posi-
tion of the Soviet Union as a world power. They have made clear -
that ‘their long-term object is to establish World Communism under -

' the domination of the Kremlin. Their immediate concerns, however,

are:

a. To maintain the control of the Kremlin over. the peoples. .
of the Soviet Union.

_ b. To strengthen the economic and military position and
. defend the territory of the Soviet Union,

Cc. To consolidate control over the European and Asian
Satellites (including Communist China),

dad, To make secure the strategic approaches to the Soviet
Unipn, and to prevent the establishment, in Europe.and Asia, of
forces capable of threatening the Soviet ‘position.

e. To eliminate Anglo-American influence in Europe and
Asia.

i, To establish Soviet domination over Europe and Asia,

g. To weaken and disintegrate the non-Soviet world generally.

931227747

The Soviet Union will try to pursue these objectives
Simultaneously. In case of conflict between one and another
of these objectives, however, it may be expected that the
Soviet rulers will attach greater importance to the first
four listed, and in that order.

2. On the basis that the long-term object of the Soviet
rulers is immutable and dynamic, and that the Western Powers
are not prepared to succumb to Soviet domination without a
fight, there is, and will continue to be, grave danger of war
between the Soviet Union and its satellites on the one hand,

- and the Western Powers and their allies on the other.

3. The Soviet Union will continue relentlessly its aggres-
sive pressures on the power position of the Western nations.

.4, The Soviet rulers could achieve, and are in a fair way
towards achieving, the first three parts of their object (see a,
b, c above) without risk of involvement in direct armed conflict
with the Western Powers.

5. Parts d,e,f,and g of their object are improbable of achieve-
ment without the employment of armed force, though there are
still factors in the existing situation which might well lead Soviet
rulers to consider that, in certain circumstances, and in the
absence of effective armed opposition by the Western Powers, they
might ultimately attain these parts of their object without the overt
involvement of Soviet armed forces.

6. In pressing to achieve parts d,e,f, and g of their object,
the Soviet rulers will, at certain stages, inevitably impinge upon
the vital interests of the Western Powers and so incur the risk
of involvement in a general war precipitated vere the necessary
reactions of the Western Powers.

—

93122774

7. le the belief that their object cannot be fully attained
withost tavelyement in a general war against the Western
Powe!s, the Soviet rulers may decide deliberately to pro-
voke such a war at a moment when, in their opinion, the
strergth of the Soviet Union vis-a-vis the Western Powers ©
is at its maximum. It is estimated =t such a period exists
now and will extend from the presets through 1954 (Note 1)
with its peak at about halfway, i.e., 1952 (Note 2).

8. From the point of view of military forces and economic
potential, the Soviet Union is in a position to conduct a general
wat of limited duration now if Soviet rulers thought it desirable
or expedient,

9, While intelligence is lacking to permit a valid prediction |
as to whether or when the Soviet Unipn may actually exercise
its initiative and capability to launch a general war’, in view of
the foregoing it must be recognized that the risk of a general
war exists now and hereafter at anytime when the Soviet rulers
' may elect to take action which threatens, whojly or in part, the
vital interests of the Western Powers.

en ee

NOTE 1: 1954 being the date by which it js assumed that North
Atlantic Treaty Organizatipn forces in Europe will be
built up to such a strength that they can withstand the
izitial shock of surprise attack; and when the gap between
the relative strength of the Western Union forces and those
of the Soviet Union will have begun to contract.

NOTE 2: i.e., when the Soviet Union has made good some essential
deficiencies in atomic bomb stock pile, and in certain
types of aircraft; and before the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization economy is fully geared to the war effort.

a er

931227 34

Ls

— ©

ERRATA for Central Intelligence Agency Top Secret
Memorandum of 12 October 1950 #32615

A phrase has been omitted from Enclosure E, Communist

Capabilities and Threat in the Philippines, The phrase

“a number of the ”’ belongs in paragraph 3.b, thus making

the first sentence of 3.b. re “Since the Communists have

achieved power in China, it is believed that a number of the

approximately half a million Philippine Chinese have already

aligned themselves with the Peiping regime.”’

ee
~
‘
~
aa)

031227 746
