Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000039954, dated 4 July 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000039954).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

19 August 1965

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 85-65

Cuba

Submitted by |the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by th
UNITED STATES neni CE BOARD
As indicated overlex
19 AUGUST) 1965

N? 500
Approved for Releass
sig as 3 /

cpap

Mags Se CR 2
en ee a re

Hod
bm
je -
Ano
ay.
‘%

‘s

‘yt

sp iliies TPT SEB

S

iw

Ay

ea.

PAG

.
By

4é
‘

wes

f.

nied

4 wr, iy
C

AR ,:

4 ie et os

aoa

4 a
4

wae

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the Cuban situation and] outlook over the next year

or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Castro's hold on power is sai ere is virtually no chance of
fu

his overthrow in the foreseeable

B. His regime has abandoned its
industrialization and is concentrating

e.

i lconceived program for rapid

on|what Cuba can produce most

readily—sugar. The economy is making some progress, though not

enough to advance living conditions

much during the next few years.

C. Recognizing that he has no altdmative to further large-scale
aid from the Soviet Union, Castro has oved politically closer to the

Soviets and has cooled toward the

D. He no longer views all Latin
lution, and will concentrate his c
tHonaries are already active—in p

Chinese Communists.

herica as on the brink of revo-
destine support where revolu-
itular, Venezuela, Guatemala,

Colombia, and Peru.

“y

RTI: aoe ae v

pane

ja

1a

Thee ae i ae | ne
a, | Cc ; | ' unitap pal ‘ts

STATES

ems
a ' fe .

siitienn *
Nonouaas —

mp RICARAQUAG

Pad eS oe TV PNRICA
os PA CIFIC be. 8

Moceay

—_—e

~-oved for

Re
£07
Pee

veers eae eye :

mepeh pee yy TET

(Co eBr te

Th aba Tes

SO eee us
ENE} 1 ;
ft

na

swrs

ae

USP RT
yi

te

7.
AR af

ag bn Bae
¥3 49 gear
Pte he

DISCUSSION

1. PRESENT SITUATICN

A. The Economy

1. After a period of marked decline.
latter part of 1963 and has since made

sugar production. Industry and basic services
though overa

of parts and replacements,
Cuba remains a client economy, heavily
the Communist camp, particularly the

and services—including aid from

ee ee ee

th
so)

Ciban economy leveled of in the
© gains, owing chiefly to increased
ontinue to suffer from shortages
output has improved in 1964-1965.

ent on economic assistance from
viet! Union. In total availability of
munist countries—the economy

d

has moved somewhat above the level reached |before the Castro revolution, but

this has been offset by increase in population.

SELECTED ECONOMIC [INDICATORS

Note: The Agures which follow are

of 1965, preliminary estimates.

(In Millions of Dollars)

our best estimates and, In the case

19st 19d1_| 1962 «= 1863 1641965
Communist Ecunomic Aid to
Cuba® ......----> Ad Sl wes None : 240 370 260 225
Cuban hinports ....---6--+5° 895 7 TA 835 985 950
Availability of Goods and Serv-
wes (1957 prices) ....---- 2913 | 2,860 3,000 3250 3,220
Cross Domestic Product (1957 ie
prices) ....22eeeeeereeeee 3 28200 2645 2845 3,050
Population (in millions) ....-.. 6.4 3 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1

—EE

* Estimated on the basis of annual

Does not include technical assistance or the

2. As the economy has taken on the attrib

administration, the distribution of
The govern
the revolution. Much of this increase
the extensive education program, and
about an improvement in the economi
students, party members, some of the
Investment expenditures also now a

although the increase has not been

now probably 20 percent lower than in 1957.
sae srahly worse off. Poor quality and

among the urban middle class, are

shortages of many foodstuifs and consu
goods is nearly as long as ever.

ment’s share (now more tha:

deficits with the Communist countrics.
q subsidy.

es of central direction and socialist
ind services has changed sharply.
20] percent) has almost doubled since
oes to the large military establishment,
andkd social services. This has brought
lot| of certain groups (e.g, scholarship
ilitary, and those formerly very poor).
b al lerger share of goods and services,
t.| Private consumption per capita {s
Numbers of people, especially

cr ¥ ods persist, and the list of rationed

PENT ee ee Cry mea eh eee

“i 3. Having drastically scaled down its overly ambitiops scheme for industriali-
zntion and diversification, the Castro regime is | concentrating on expanding
Ta production of Cuba's traditional agricultural commodities, particularly sugar.
Sugar accounts for about 85 percent of the value of Cuban exports and repre-
sents some 25 percent 3 gross national product. | Thus the prices obtained in
es any given year—along with the quantity produced—jare a major determinant
of the overall state of the economy. Cuba's vulnerability to low sugar prices
as se on the world market has been reduced, though) by |no means eliminated, by

ae the commitment of the USSR and certain other minist countries to purchase
eh large and increasing amounts of sugar at six cen ¢ pound.'

4. Tis year’s sugar crop of six million tons was a|notable achievement. To
“Daan meet this dificult goal,. howev.r, the regime was forced to divert land and
py labor—often by coercion—from other production. Ironically, world sugar
is prices are so low that the total earning power af harvest is no more than
Kos aire that of the smaller 1964 crop, and hard-currency ings from Free World
= & markets are considerably lower. Thus, although Cifba’s overall economic per-
‘a 5 formance is improving, the total supply of goods| and services probably will nut
Tae increase in 1965, and the economy's gains will \do fittle to diminish consumer
“Sooes dissatisfaction.

B. Internal Political Matters

5. Castro's hold on power remains firm. Hig revolutionary party (PURS) is
only beginning to take on significance at the hatignal level; at the local and
ovincial levels, however, it plays an increasingly| active and important role.
Within Castro's entourage, Raul Castro and President Osvaldo Dérticos have
gained stature; the former controls the mit 3 is second to Fidel in the

is PURS, the latter has assumed control of the Ministry of Economy and of the
a Central Planning Board. Early in 1065, Fidel| Castro took personal control of
Bee the Agricultural Ministry (INRA), replacing Carlos Rafac! Rodriguez, a leading
5 Old Communist. Che Guevara, once the ait ’s number three man and

—_—_———

1 Sugar Output (in million metric tons):
F: eS 1957 196t «1968 1963 964 1965 (estimated)
t . 5.7 6.8 48 38 4.4 6.0

Cube’s internal ragar consumption i 4 to 5 “in ons a year. Since 1961, Cuban

exports to Free World customers have been abou
nior} and other Communist countries

Cuba {s conditioned by the prices an the Soviet) g Communist China is scheduled

countries. we

TS ee a ee ee St Reise es ce enee eae a ae

revolutionary ideologue, has been out of sight since Murch and is no longer func-
tioning as Minister of Industries.

6. Political infighting between the Did |Commmuists and Fidelistas has con-
tinued, with the Old Communists cleagly getting the worst of it. The demotion
of Rodriguez represented a blow to olehine induence. Joaquin Ordoqui, another
important Old Communist, was ousted
last November. He has been accused
has not been brought to trial. The Old
play an important role at the local and pre

7. Opposition to the Castro regime
ment propaganda and njass mobilizs

bn his party and governmental posts
treason and is being detained but
ommunists continue, nevertheless, to

jal levels.

nins fragmented and feeble. Govern-
OUT have had some success.

C. The Milita

he great jbulk of Cuba's military equipment is
Soviet-supplied; for the past year shipments have not been large and have
consisted mostly of replacement items, spare parts, and ammunition. Addi-
onal training has probably slike e overall cffectiveness of the Cuban
military. As a result of the general co gscription put into cffect in 1964, there
now exists a growing and trained ready feserve force. Nonetheless, the Cubans
luck actual combat experienc. They remain dependent on the USSR for
material support and advanced cao 4. We continue to estimate that about
9.000 Soviet military personnel remain [n Cuba though the number may have
declined somewhat; some of them are military advisers, most are technical and

maintenance personnel,

PL emencrena ce Lover bos
aes eee OL ine Wl
pyres Choad ad OORT S

eeeSey | JAN 49g ‘

eg
.

macau

7
i

ay NET Ea

Hee

’

SE WY RT SEE,
ee Pasi Ag!

oth

Pe Ey Ce ee SPE NT eT SS he Pe Re RT

10. Castro continues to be primarily a

who exaggerates Cuba's importance—and his ¢

D. Castro's View of the World Situatidn and Cuba's Position

revdlutionary. Hic is also an cgotist
in world affairs. He clearly

feuls that the mutual deterrence between a two great nuclear powers gives him

room for maneuver and opportunity to w

eld influence out of all proportion to

Cuba's size. In sum, Castro attempts to play three roles simultancously: of a

member in good standing of the Communist

mp; of a fraternal figure among

Approved for Release
Date JAN. 1994

ET PEED AT er EA IE IS

the non-aligned countries; and of a supporter 0 olutionary inovements—
Communist or non-Communist—which oppose “capitalist imperialism.”

Cuban-Saviet Relations

LL. Cube's nced for substantial economic assistance provides the USSA with
its main leverage on Castro. We believe that the new Soviet leaders are some-
what more inclined than Khrushchev to use or threaten to use that leverage—
but not to the point of actually withholding aid. (Although a substantial number
of Russian technicians continue to work as advisers to ban industry, the Soviets
probably feel that much of their large investment in uba has been squandered
by the administrative bumbling of the Castro regi They have undoubtedly

ed Castro to straighten out Cuba's confused egonomic practices. Negoti-
ations for the 1965 Cuban-Soviet economic a: dragged on from October
to February. Ultimately the Sovicts agreed to a leyel of aid approximately as
in 1964.

12. During the past year, the Castro regime has oved closer to the Soviets
in the Sino-Soviet dispute. At the conference jof Latin American Communist
es in Havana in November 1964, Cuba agreed tojcooperate with the Moscow-
oriented parties and condemned factionalism within the Communist ranks.
Cuba, in what China considered yet another direc affront, also attended the
meeting of Communist parties in Moscow in March 1965. In addition, Castro
has criticized Peiping for the damage which its polemics have indicted on the
Communist movement. The shift toward Mostow|redects in part Sovict pres-
sure, but it alsa redects Castro's own present asseysment of the situation. He
ie! has probably become convinced that China is mainly responsible for the split,
ate and has rebuked it for divisive propaganda a¢tivities in Cubs itself. He also

waRBhAT MTT

4

probably views Peiping as a competitor in La merica for the allegiance of

Lp TEN ae
vt

ane __ revolutionary forces.
iatoe Efforts to Foment Revolution
: ct 13. Cuba has continued to provide propaganda bs cking, training in subversion
Sao and guerrilla warfare, and limited financial aid tq Communist and other Latin
aria American revolutionaries. But, Castro now sito believe that local elements
eee should bear the principal burden of revolutionaty effort, with Cuba playing
ae a supporting role. He has apparently abandonec his belief that all Latin
3 e America is poised on the brink of revolution. |Corsequently, he is concentrating
Pe ae or those countries where revolutionaries are dctivp, €.3.. Venezuela, Guatemala,
cH oan Colombia, and Peru. Elsewhere he appears ready to wait for targets of oppor-
lass tunity. Along with this change in ere stro has at least temporarily
- need muted his opposition to the old line Communist partics in Latin America; in
a retum they arc pledged to give “active aid” to revolutionary clements in &
e is =~ specific list of countries.’ They have done little to date to honor this pledge.
im -

approved for Releas®

i - pate JAN 1994

Lig?
ae

ayn Boy

ny Saal

ci
$

—

Paes
peo inguiig

3
oy tt

SU PAT He.
tA :

‘ecg ty ‘
1

WD Ye tee
AG Tae
or <a!

a

anal Mee geine
eae wig i “

arts <4;

oy Tr

yee

‘,

S

Biel tinate tet tiers pice eri

astro has ass various
, however, the Cuban effort in

the overthrow of Castro's friend

revolutionary movements in/ Africa.
Africa is small. and it ived a setbac
Ben Bella in Algeria.

Sea has also provided guerrilla training
for a number of African natignal a arid has sent some military equipment

to Algeria and Tanzania.

Relations with the non-Communist WwW

16, Through his support of various
anti-imperialist posture, Castro has had
ence among the non-aligned netions.
ties with various non-Communist arce
circumvent the US economic denial progr

htionury elements and his consistent
2 success in increasing Cubu's influ-
ba has also sought closer economic
rimarily to expand exports and to
_ In this Cuba's success has varied
I sugar at good priccs. When Cuba
suean traders were willing to extend
ba’s convertible exchange holdings
e goods Castro needs avoid all but

had money, as in 1963-19@4, some E
small amounts of trade credit; when
are low—as at present—miost traders

cash dealings.

17. Castro has maintained his gen ropagunda attacks on the US, but,
since the overthrow of KHrushchey, has not exerted pressure on a number of
Issues involving direct US interests. Cubans have, for example, set aside
their public and diplomatic cam aig to| compel the US to cease U-2 aver
flights of the island.

‘But they have got gone so far us to renew overtures
for a normalization of Cuban-US relatio :

ll. OUTLOOK

18, For 1965 as a whole, the Cuban
about the rate of 1964. Beyond 196). hq

onomy will continue to increase at
vever, prospects are clouded hy sev-

eral factors. The efforts to expand sugar output are cutting into the cultiva-
tion of some other crops. Thus the prospects for an incrense in total agriculture

~~

7

=
| i in 1966 and 1967 are limited, even though there may Bp further improvement
bee in sugar production. The outlook for 1966, in partiquiar, is dimmed by a current

& reduction in the supply of fertilizers. In the industria} sector of the economy.
| 4 it seems doubtful that the fow of raw materials equipment will increase

significantly over the next two years. Measurable gains will proLably be made

in some sectors, but total industrial production will probably rise very slowly.

19. The Cuban economy could make significant progress if mismanagement
and poor labor morale could be reduced. Pro ih administration is slow,

_ however, in part because so many of the most let and best trained Cubans
have left and are leaving the country. In addition, Castro has clearly empha-
sized revolutionary zeal over competence. Labor mdrale. on the other hand,
may improve as & result of Castro's recent recognition of the need for material
incentives. If the current economic improvement cpntinues beyond 1965, it

. will probably not suffice to make an appreciable diff¢rence in living standards

PROMOS,

oe aie

wt
a

4 within the next two years. In any case, the Cu donomy will remain highly
ar. dependent upon trade with and aid fron. the Cornmunist countries. Any large
25 expansion of Cuban trade with the West is anlikely

pee 20. Despite sporadic frictions, the Castro regimes political and economic
te: relationship with the Soviet Union is almost ss to remain close, at least
pe. during the period of this estimate. Castro has ng p {ctical alternative to Soviet
‘ae assistance, and the Soviets have an important die in preserving the Castro
‘gta in prwer. Castro will almost certainly continue his efforts to increase
a Cuba's influence among the non-aligned nations, byt major successes aF6 un-
pa = likely. We believe that both the Soviets and Cuba will proceed cautiously
Pe: in their attempts to undercut the US$ position im Latin America.

ang

raed

en irdmatic improvement in US-
ae Cc ly. Therefore, he would probably not offer
sae any significant concessions to achieve It.

Pe 92. Castro's commitr.znt to the “export of revolution” will remain a key
Ee policy of his regime. We believe that within! his|limited capabilities he will
ae continue to provide training and same clandestine jaid to active revolutionaries
Ss Ss in several Latin American countries and to a | extent in Africa. He {s
ee likely to display caution in most of these eff ough he will continue his
Jagedl extensive propaganda backing of insurgents. Morpover, we think that he «will

also give increasing emphasis to longer range po teal tachct, such as closer

—

10

Approved for Release

sf Se Wet mR a elvan AAD FANE RBI 272 RE Pees ser a

cooperation with Moscow-oriented Communist p
with more moderate leftists as weil. Nevertheless.

breaking vut of his present isolation in the hemi

ties and in some countries
we believe that Castro still

here.

lel revolutions elsewhere. in Latin e ca as his best hope of

23. Castro's administration of Cubua internal ;

airy will remain highly per-

sonal, although some political and ecoriomic decentraliiation is occurring.* The

institutions which

izations based on Soviet
eventually becoming more effective und perhaps uct
muking, But we believe that over the next year

te as Castro's personally controlled vehicles, t
Fidelismo will be far more important than Marxism-

to his dictates, and that
Leninism in their ideology.

24, Castro's personal predominance will remai
regime. Although we see virtually no chance
next year or sc. there is alwavs the possibility of h

tion.

TL t
*In this year's 26 July speech, Castro particulrly
responsibilities of the local party organizations.

he has created—the party, economic, social, and security
vill continue to develop gradually.

juiring a major role in decision
or two they will continue to
they will be responsive

h a (major vulnerability of his

of his overthrow during the
death by illness or assassinu-

ls his Intention af Increasing the

VW
Approved for Releas>
Date san 1994
