84


Wednesday
C: 1 November 1972


of productivity measurement systems and whether or not they should be
done on a decentralized basis or on a more centralized basis. PPH's
general. omment was that although he saw value in such systems he did
not like to see them become too elaborate or too stringent since they
inevitably ended up in collection of inaccurate data. At the end of

the session, RPH indicated his interest in hearing how other elements
ef the Center are measuring their productivity. QM is to schedule
a briefing by qm on what 1EG is doing. Following this Qe
WEEP i 1) be asked to present the PSC/RSD productivity measurement


system. (Api)
Me 7. Study of a CIA ADP Career Serv


vice
: (Aron Qs met vith 8P today to review the status of the
Agency study of an AOP career service. He prepared a pan*r oa this
subject which pointed out that the representative of the Office of
Personnel who serves on the study group is in the process of preparing
’ { a draft paper on the subject which reportedly will favor a centralized
“ ADP career service. The MMB paper went on to point out the advantages
and disadvantages of such a system. There ensued a discussion which con-
cluded that NPIC would not be in favor of a centralized system and that
we should begin to take steps to counter such a recommendation. It was
agreed that Hazzard would meet with qi and their ADP contro}
officers to discuss this issue in an attempt to develop a O0S8T con-
census on this fssue. (9 Nev


8. Support to EPA
(py) AEM talked to QD by telephone taday checking on the


status of our request for approval to prepare a set of briefing boards
for EPA. (See memo to DDS&T dated 25 October). WifBMesaii that he had
signed otf on this memo and it was in the mail. AEM called (MB today
to say that the briefing boards could be released.


9. Sens{tive Document Control


(U  ) AEM called QM today and requested a copy of the Qi
report which was mentioned in a “Notes from the Ofrector”, No. 33 which
stated that such a report had been produced which presented new con-
cepts for compartmentation in codeword systems. Ward safd that he pad
not seen a copy of this but he would make inquiries for us. (QNe


10. Rotational Assignment Program -- Deputy Chief, CSO


(U ) AEM called SMM today to find out whether or not there
had been any applicants for the Deputy Chief, CSD position which was


‘Approved for Release,


_ 1m 2. | Date, oy = 697. -
