Probable Developments in East Europe and Implications for Soviet Policy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119716, dated 2 September 1956.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119716).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 12-2-56_

‘PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EAST EUROPE
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SOVIET POLICY

Subnittted by the ..
DIRECTOR OF. CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE _ i ROPE Ue oe
The following intelligence organizations . partictpated in the ee a
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency .- ;
and the intelligence organtections of the Departments of .
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.
~ Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE. | :
on 30 October 1956. Concurring were the Spectal. Assistant,
InteRigence, Department af State; the Assistant Chief of
Steff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of.
Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and.
, the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. ‘The -
7. + Atomic Energy Commission Representative tothe IAC,andthe © _
ae Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, i :
: ei ’ the Sa iad pegs outside of eet eeeeeens bt

pe)

| CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY *

"DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons under his jurisdiction on a need te know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

a. Special Assistant to ‘the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State . .
. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, for the Departmenit of the Army
. Director of Naval Intelligence for the Department of the Navy
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for‘any other Department or
Agency . =
2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-
cable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returzied to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested ofthe forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC—D-69/2, 22
June 1953. ; ;

The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, should be classified:
, FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WARNING
s material contains information affecting .
v 8 tes
ws,”

etinauthorized person {s prohtbited Byte

_ pISTRIBUTION: . This document has been _
White House : mo approved for release. through |
National Security -Counctl. the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of
Department of State > the Central. Intelligence “Agency.
. Department. of Defense - a. . Tee
Operations: Coordinating: Board ; Date j fi q

Atomic Energy Commission... - ste ee LAS OS

Federal Bureau of. Investigation

a

ease atyhes:

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EAST EUROPE
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SOVIET POLICY

{, PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
THE ‘SATELLITES

1. Events in Poland and Hungary have dem-
onstrated the strength and vitality of anti-
Soviet sentiments in these Satellites. Par-
ticularly in Hungary, there have been man-
ifestations of strong anti-Communist senti-
ment as well. The Soviet strategic position
jn Eastern Europe has been weakened. Soviet
policy is now confronted with serious dilem-
mas: (a) the need to make some accommoda-
tion with the increasing pressures of national-
ism in the Satellites without losing the essen-
tial minimum of control over them, (b) the
difficulty of using Soviet armed might to put
down nationalist and anti-Communist revolt
in the face of world opinion. ~

Poland

2A new Communist regime, considerably
more independent of Moscow than the pre-
vious one, has been established in Poland, with
reluctant Soviet acquiescence. This regime
is pledged to maintain the alliance with the
USSR, including the retention of Soviet forces
in Poland as long as NATO forces remain in
Germany, but reserving the right to choose
whether or not Soviet specialists and military
advisors will remain in the Polish army. It
is also pledged to introduce certain democratic
procedures (presumably compatible with par-
ty control), to stop coercive collectivization,
and to raise standards of living.

3. The stability of the Gomulka regime rests
on its ability to strike a balance between pop-
ular Polish aspirations for independence and
economic improvement, on the one hand, and
the minimum requirements of the USSR with
respect both to the maintenance of the Com-
munist system and to Soviet military security,
on the other. Developments in Hungary may

REE

make a middle road course difficult for Go-
mulka.

Hungary

4, In Hungary concessions were made so slow-
ly and reluctantly as to intensify rather than
satisfy the pressures for change. The regime
of the Communist Imre Nagy, once purged
from the party for deviationism_and only
recently restored to party membership, took
over with the outbreak of open revolt and the
employment of Soviet forces. Nagy promised
drastic reforms and announced a government
which included non-Communists. The Hun-
garian army does not appear to have been
employed on a large scale, and its allegiance
in the struggle is unclear. There have been
widespread desertions to the rebels, particu-
larly in the west, and the rebels are in pos-
session of some tanks in other areas; but at
least elements of two Hungarian divisions are
known to have participated in the repression
‘at the outset.

5. It is unlikely that any Hungarian govern-
ment will be able to reach a compromise be-
tween Soviet security requirements and Hun-
garian nationalist sentiment. Certain rebel
groups appear willing to accept Nagy tem-
porarily and it seems possible that he can
gradually establish control if he can reach an
accommodation with the rebels with respect to
their principal demands: abolition of the
secret police, complete withdrawal of Soviet
troops from the country, and changes in the
composition of the government. If the rebels
refuse to make an accommodation with Nagy,
the Soviet Union will be faced with the alter-
natives of risking the development of a non-
Communist and independent Hungary. or of
intervening with large scale military forces
to take over the country by force. ~

eae ge PSMG
Taree es ee *
ENE ETL, RRC ee A

OAD dette Bea tie ee an tant ts ale Baga

Pi 7:
RSS SMES eb saess, f
ib bh lindas csc sanoannich nina

ote TENS MS Eat a roche ok ese ete, te Mec he natetes.

SEGRE ~ ig 2

Other Satellites

6. Signs of nationalistic ferment were seen
during the spring in Czechoslovakia. Begin-
ning late last year, a number of non-Com-
munist politicians were released from prison
in Czechoslovakia, Rumania, and Bulgaria;
in the spring a number of prominent Stalin
purge victims in Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
were cleared of Titoist charges; and concili-
atory personnel changes were made, partic-
ularly in the Czech defense ministry and the
Rumanian police apparatus. But there have
been no challenges to Soviet influence by the
governments of those Satellites,“and few in-
dications of sharp divisions within the local
parties. However, in the absence of a Soviet
return to 4 policy of repression, a more auton-
omous and nationally-oriented regime will
probably be evolved for Czechoslovakia and
possibly Rumania and Bulgaria. This likeli-
hood would be increased if the Hungarian
rebels win most of their demands. Albania,
on the other hand, is less likely to press vigor-
ously for independence.

7. Hast Germany is a special case. Regard-
less of East German desires, the USSR will
almost certainly not tolerate any substantial
weakening of controls or the introduction of
effective nationalist influence into the govern-
ment. The USSR regards East Germany as
vitally important to Soviet security and main-
tains a garrison of 22 line divisions there.
Moreover, fear among the Poles and Czechs of
a reunified Germany with irredentist claims
is a factor serving to persuade them of the
need to cooperate with the USSR and to pre-
vent them from supporting an East German
independence movement.

Economic Considerations

8. Longstanding economic grievances con-
tinue to be an important factor behind unrest
in the Satellites. Reduced use of repressive
measures and an increased candor in discus-
sing economic problems have recently en-
couraged more overt expression of discontent.
In an effort to alleviate the situation, the
USSR has recently negotiated modest aid
agreements with Poland, Hungary, East Ger-
many, and Bulgaria.

9. The Polish and Hungarian governments
will almost certainly attempt to lessen their
economic dependence on the USSR, by in-
creasing trade with the West, and probably
also by seeking economic assistance, especial-
ly in the form of credits.

10. The most serious immediate-problem for
East Europe may be the fuel shortage which
will probably result from underfulfillments in
the Polish, Czech, and Hungarian coal indus-
tries. A severe winter would increase fuel
demands and might freeze up East German
open pit operations, causing serious shortages
which the USSR, with its own coal difficulties,
might not be able to alleviate. The bumper
Soviet harvest could compensate for the poor
Satellite crop of this fall and assure food sup-
plies. nas

if. IMPLICATIONS FOR SOVIET POLICY

ll. We believe that the Hungarian rebellion
came as a surprise to the Soviet leadership.
On the basis of the evidence presently avail-
able, Soviet policy through the Polish and
Hungarian crises appears to have been vacil-
lating. It is too early to be confident on this
matter, but we believe that Soviet leadership
may be in a state of confusion, and until basic
decisions are made, may be unable to conduct
policy with sureness of touch. A crisis in
Western relationships over the Middle East
might make Soviet leaders feel that they had
greater freedom of action in the Satellite area.

12, There has for some time been difference
of opinion among Soviet leaders about the
post-Stalin policy of seeking to reduce apathy
at home, disaffection in the Satellites, and
distrust in the non-Communist world. Soviet
confidence in this policy, generated by gains
in morale af home and an improved position
in international relations, must now have
been shaken by the need to make concessions
in Poland and especially by the events in Hun-
gary. It is possible that the Hungarian rebel-
lion will precipitate changes in the composi-
tion or structure of the Soviet leadership. If
the Hungarian rebels are able to achieve
a substantial political victory, pressures for
policy changes will almost certainly make the
position of the Khrushchev leadership increas-

-

a a me or a ol

ingly difficult. The position of advocates of a
harder line may be strengthened. Changes
in the leadership would be even more likely if
the professional military under Zhukov insist
that basic Soviet security is being jeopardized
by current policies.

Domestic and Foreign Policy

13. Irrespective of any action which Soviet
leaders may feel forced to take in Hungary, it
is unlikely that they will wish drastically to
reverse the course of domestic relaxation
which was undertaken largely. for pressing
internal considerations and has significantly
improved party and popular morale. It is
also unlikely that Soviet leaders will abandon
the effort to woo the uncommitted areas of the
world and to weaken Western alliances. So-
viet armed action in the Hungarian crisis will
have an adverse effect on the credibility of the
USSR's propaganda exploitation of anticol-
onial movements, but the ultimate effect in
this area, as well as on the attitudes of the
Yugoslav and Chinese Communists promoters
of Satellite autonomy, will be determined more
by future Soviet policy than by the present
emergency action.

Policy Toward the Satellites

14. Evidence at present does not permit an
estimate of whether or not the USSR will oc-
cupy Hungary with additional military force
sufficient to quell the rebellion, in the event
that present measures to establish control are
unsuccessful. Unless it does so, however, we
believe it unlikely that the USSR would find
it feasible to impose for any long period a
Stalinist system of rigid police and ideologi-
cal controls over the Satellites. For the pres-
ent, the USSR will probably endeavor to pre-
yent further outbreaks in the Satellites by
insisting on precautionary police measures
and the suppression of anti-Soviet ferment.
These closer controls will probably be accom-
panied by ameliorating measures such as So-
viet help in meeting food shortages, moratoria
on collectivization, and relief from some other
economic pressures. East Germany will be
watched with particular vigilance.

he

ECR

15. If confronted by strong nationalist pres-
sures in the other Satellites, the USSR will
probably attempt to establish Communist re-
gimes which possess a larger measure of in-
ternal autonomy but which maintain military
and foreign policy solidarity with the USSR.

Military Implications

16. We believe the Soviet leaders estimate that
the minimum military requirements for their
national security include the maintenance of
effective early warning capabilities on the
Satellite borders, of powerful Soviet forces in
East Germany, and of secure lines of com-
munication from the USSR to East Germany.
The developments in Poland and Hungary will
probably result in a substantial downward re-
vision in the Soviet estimate of the reliability
of most of the Satellite armed fofces.1 We be-
lieve these circumstances will dictate a keen
Soviet desire to retain its own military forces
in the other Satellites in which they are now
stationed, especially in Poland. For the im-
mediate future, the possibility of new Satel-
lite rebellions will reinforce this desire. There-
fore, the Soviet leaders will almost certainly
retain the Warsaw Pact organization in order
to preserve the rights which they enjoy un-
der it.

17. It seems unlikely that US action short of
overt military intervention or obvious prepa-
ration for such intervention would lead the
USSR deliberately to take steps which it be-
lieved would materially increase the risk of
general war. The Soviet leaders probably rec-
ognize that the US nuclear-air capability re-
mains superior to that of the USSR, and have
probably concluded that at present the USSR,
even if it launched a surprise attack, would
receive unacceptable damage in a nuclear ex-
change with the US.

18. Soviet suspicions of US policy and pres-
ent circumstances which involve Soviet troop
movements and alerts probably increase the
likelihood of a series of actions and counter-
actions leading inadvertently to war. Sucha
series of actions could most readily originate
with respect to East Germany.

1See Annex. -
-

f
1
H
|

Line
divisions
Satellite forces
Albania 0 (7 brigades)

Bulgaria 12
Czechoslovakia

East Germany
vis

Soviet forces in
East Europe
East Germany

2 (mech.)
2 (mech.)

Hungary
Rumania
28

Albania
Bulgaria
Poland
Rumania

East Germany

Soviet naval forces in

East Europe
(Not including Baltic
and Black Sea Fleets)

East Germany
Poland

| Gncl. 3 mech.)

16 (incl. 2 tank, 3 mech.)
10 (incl 1 tank, 1 mech.)

Hungary
Poland 18 (incl. 6 mech.)
Rumania 14 (incl. 1 tank, 1 mech.)

22 (incl. 8 tank, 10 mech.)

Poland 2 (1 tank, 1 mech.)

Destroyers Submarines patrol vessels

o 2 NM Oe

Jet Jet ght Ground attack
fighters bombers ~ aircraft

40 0

225 5 100 (piston)
505 40 250 (piston)
220 20 115 (piston)
490 80 275 (piston)
240 35 126 (piston)

__40 _0 8

1,760 180 866

500 18 0
25 (recon) 21 (recon)
234 18 114 (jet)
21 (recon)
212 1 0
128 _9 0
1,099 276 114

Mine warfare and

0 1T

ow fo
