Current Developments in Iran
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028298, dated 2 April 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028298).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

es

YC he Po ,
‘we Nek see Sener bon tes. w ana a

Vd

CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN

. ey ee toe
Re ee Ee epee wee ee
A ee
pyres

bee

+e!

Apis

* WD naciae y,

SE-6
Published 22 May 195%

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

a
I
f
I
i
i
{

‘ ' 1

j Approved for Howse
| i Date 2.9 s1AN 19G game
{
iL

f :
‘ -: _
Se eS nares aa rer ey a 8 ‘ cS is fe peek Ne RE A Se ge mere, Bitar are 0s Se ee Se 5° reer or
% - Eee ' 4p" ae
Gey “ Pa sce - ez wo 4 5
- ee a wate) Be te ad ene ee hae ee a A at te eh mm a ae a Capt

Z

ot cae Poa apt idles gel Caled atte, Maal,

SAINT SOOPER soe a ae a ao
E

|
} YE
i :

*

id Fi
Zi SPECIAL ESTIMATE 5
q CURRENT DEVELOPMFNTS IN IRAN

: Number 6

] Published 22 May 1951

a

'

The Intelligence organizaticns of the Departments of Sate,
ihe Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Stalf pare
ticipated in the preparation of this est{inale, All members
of the intelifgcence Advisory Committee concurred in this
‘@ailmate on 18 May £951, except as noted by the Director
ef Intelligence, USAF, on page 2,

4
Si eee be iit ar PE OS ee er SO Arak eS Seren
¥

a: Ree peae a ee a ST eee ‘ge Vad earns 2 bet a ata alee a ae an a le

.

PS oe oe oe ee +

CURRENT DEVELOPMENT IN LRAW

CONCLUSIONS

1. The clash of interests hetween fran and the UK over Tran’s ofl
resources has reached a tritical stage with the elevatior. of Muhammad
Mossadeq, ihe Jeader of the ullra-nativnalist National Front group,

to ihe premiership. Although @ real effort will undoubtedly be made

fo reach a compromise satilement, 2 solution will be achleved only
with great difficulty, In any event, there ts little indicakion that
Mossadeq and the Anglo-Jrarian Ol] Company (AIOC) will modily

their respective stands In sufficient time to permit an early Rettiement
Gf the .ssue.

2, Although there are important elements opposed to Mossadeq, It is
untikely that he can be removed from power so long #5 the oil question
remains a burning issue, exsept by violence OF by the establishment of
a semi-dictatorial regime under the aegis of the Shah. In the present
highly inflammatory state of franian public opinion, an attempt to fet
up a non-parligmentary regime would involve grave risks which the
Shah has thus far shown ho willingness to take.

5, Asa result of the present tmpasse, tLe following eritical develop-
ments may occur before & getiiement is reached,

a. Mossadeq might take physical possession af the of! instal-
lations now onerated by the AIOC. He may =is0 require the British
employees of AIOC to Jeave the country.

Derdibeime auasls mach sett enki tap akee come

&. There is a Serious possibility that the tanding of British
troops in southera Iran, for whatever reason, would be taken by the
USSR as a pretext for sending its troops into northern Ira,

d. Inthe event of further de monstrations and violence, which
may well occur at any time, the Tuden Party might be able to seriously
undermine internal security, This danger would be increased if, as |
{5 possible, Moss2deq legalizes the status of the Tudeh Pa:ty or is
unwilling to use iranian armed forces to maintain order.

e. The Mow of Iranian oil to Western markels, which was
recently curtailed for avout two weeks, might be again interrupted by
an recurrence of strikes in the oll field area or by a, b,c, OF d above.

4. Any intensification of the current crisis would give the USER added
opportunities for exploiting the local unrest and might eventuatly
enable the USSR to deny a large part or the whole of Bhe Iranian ou
supply to the Westerh Powers.*

a
* it is the view of the Director of Intelligence, USAF, that this para-
graph should read as follows:

“4, A continuation of the current crisis would greatly
erhance the capability of the Soviet Union to deny mere and possibly
ail the Iranian of] to the West through exploitation of the activities
ot non-Soviet elemen's. whether or not the British attetnpt to resolve
the current issue by the use of armed force, possible realization of
an important Soviet objective -- acquisition of more oll -- will have

Seen greath faciiltated.”

=
Ps ee ek

a
*
TE NT TT of ae ae Pe oe arte ma Ae 4
ae pei RSINORAT EET TG Sy WEA eee ee Ter Se
B 7 pune | ath

ae Pea a ei eg ae Ne re pee seem cara ee ee ee a ce

DISCUSSION

1. Mohammad Mossadeq, Iran's new Price Minister, Is an extreme
nationalist. He will attempt to curtail severeiy fureign influence in
iran and lo adopt a neutralist policy toward she East-Wresi struggle.
As he is also an impractical Visionary an? s poor eda-inistrator, it

is unlikely that he will do very inuch to sotve ihe country’s critical
economic and sociz! problems. Nevertheless, because he i5 an astute

. politician and has strong popular Support on the olf issu» at least,

he will probably not be easily displaced while that issue is still un-
Settled. In internal affairs Mossadeg has ¢riticized former Iranian
governments for their failure lo achisve social benefits for the people
and has cpposed measures designed to restrict freedom of speech,
assembly, and the press, Politically, he has urged that the Shah be
Stripped pf power and that the Majlis become the dominant factor in
the government, However, he does not believe that the present
members of the Majlis truly represent the interests of the Iranian
people and advocates electoral reform,

2. Mossadeq Is at present Ina strong political position, despite the
dacts that he has few personal followers fn wie BRiajtis or in the
traditional ruling class as a whole and that he Is disliked and dis
trusted by the Shah. Untike his predecessors, he is not dependent on
the Shah's favor or on factional politics in the Majlis, He his come

fo power as the leader of a national movement which has aroused
intense popwar support. This circumstance has caused the Majlis

to nominate him lo the Shah and compelled the Shah to appoint hin te
office. Fundamentally his strength derives from, and is in direct
Proportion to. the intensity of feeling against the Brilisa over (he oll
issue. Although other critical problems wilt Piague his adm:nistration,
they are not likely to cause his downlal! so forg as the oil crisis
remains a burning issue, Mossadeq'’s camprizn against the AlOC has
had ite support not only of his National Front group but also of the
FedayanIsiam (the Smailterroristgroup of religious fanatics who were
tesponsihle for Razmara's assassination), the ihe cal Tudeh Communist)
Party, and probably the great majority of Iran's laborers, trades»
men, and students, who can Significantly affect political developments

eee a ee

het

ceo eee ee * 45,

a

aie UAP EAC "
stead the in oetaibete! Oi dks Sitting pina ns oe al bie “meee ces dan |

|
:
|

Pid

in Lran th-gugh Strikes, demonstrations, and violence, Both the Fedayan
Islam acdithe Tudeh Party, however, are con ifantly attempting to
coerce Mossadeg into adopting more extreme measures against Western
interes’:. Fedayan Istam has apparently unscated its more moderate
leacer ated nas threatened Mossadeq’s life, Meanwhile, the Tudeb Party
has gore wesond nationalization of the ol] industry to demand ousting

of the US mclitasy mission, refusal of US aru.s assistance, and closer

relatio:s w.ih the USSR,

3. Because of the wide support for Mossadeq’s chauvinistic crusadz,
few Iranian leaders dared opeose him publicly, His influence in the
Majlis was largely responsible for Razmara’s faifure to obiain a revised
AIOC agreemeni and loans from the Export-Import Bank and the IBRD,
He condoned the assassination of Rarmara on the grounds that the latler

a was traitprousiy fensent in hs negotiations with the AIOC. Finally, be
pushed the oil nationalization bills through the Majlis against the wishes
of the Shah and Prime Minister Ala. Many of the Majlis deputies

4 probably voted for the meszsu:es against their better fudgevent, Suc-

i cumbing Io the emotionali¢m of Mossadeq’s appeal or fearing (he conse~

quences (possibly including assassination) of opposing the measure.

nee eee er aie sl A

4. When nusseia Ala Was Prime Minister, B.ossadeq was chairman of

the Majlis Ol Commission appointed to dram up recommerdations for

faking over the AIOC installations. The Shah, Prime Minister Als,

and moderate members of the Majlis probably hoped that rome agree-

ment could be patched up with the AlOG before Mossadeq could com-

plete his work. Bossadeq, however, reported to the Majlis more than

a month ahead of schedule, Locreased bitterness toward the UK, rein-

forced by the intervering sirikes and violence tn the ott field area, kept

emofioas high throughout the country and simplified Mossadeq’s job Tr)

obtaining prompt Majlis approval for his recommendations, The new

law sets up a government ecmmmilttee to act as Crustee for {he cil prope

erties util ac franian Company can be established and provides for

getting aside 25 percent of oi] revenues to mee! future claims of the 4 :
*former company.” Mossadeq’s precipitate move to force action on :
the oF issue resulted in the Immediate resignation of Ala.

ape: ee ee,
cp tah ae Eat tar ae nt ai

$. Although the responsibilities of office may t> some extent act asa
sobering iniluence on Mossadeq, he will almost certainly attempt to
Implement the nationalization law and gain effective control of the ot
lastaliztions tn southern Eran, He might be willing to corclude a man-
agement contract with AJOC, under which the latter would operate the
oil installations under the direction of an Iranian comping, However,
he would probably prefer to obtain the technical assistance Iran needs
by means of separaie contracts with individual rpecialists, Lf, in fact,
Mossadeq is able to reach s settlement with the AJOC which will sub-
Staatially increase Iran’s ol] revenues and provide for Iranian super-
vision of the oil Installations, he will have achieved Ais purpose. Al+
inough Als prestige would be high, his position would protably be
rapidiy weakened by any considerable decline of anti-British feeling
or by his inabllity to cope with Iran’s fundamental economie and social -
problems, Unere is Some dange> that he might attempt to maintain
himself in power by turning his chauvinistle crusade agaiist the US.
He might even refuse to accept further US military aid and request the
US military missions to leave the country,

§. In view of the fact that both Iran and the UK Aave a very great —
interest in the uninterrupted production of Jranian ofl, « real effort
Will undoubtedly Ge made to reach a compromiss Settlement, How-
ever, in view of the attitude of both governments, a settl2ment ean
Probatly be reached only with great difficulty, The Il-maa Oil Com-

mittee fas already threatened to revoke the residence permits of
AIOC’s foreign staff unless the AlOC turns aver Ks off installations

to the Iranian Government, The UK has taken the position that Iran has
no right unilaterally to abrogate its contract wilh AIOC and, therefore,
no righi to expropriate the oil installations under the guise of national-
ization, The UK has proposed the establishment of a new British com-
pany to Fun operations in Tran, which would include Iranians on the
board of directors; equal sharing of profits: and a progressive Increase
in the number of Iranians employed by the company. Mossadeq will
undoubtedly turn down this offer, for 1 manifestly fails to meet the
requirements of the oll nationalization law. The proposal certainly
does not represent the final British position. However, a serious
danger exists that critical developments will occur before the parties,
particularly the British, have sufficiently modified their respective
positions to permit initiation of genuine negotiations,

9. The present impasse in the oil situation may fead to any one oF
more of th. following critical situations:

a. Mossadeq is committed lo a policy of expropriation. On the
basis of his past actions, Mis extremely unlikely (hat he will accept
anything less than effective Iranian control of the oll industry, Con-
sequently, if there ts no early relaxation of ‘he British position, he
will probably attempt to take phy sical possession of the ol] instalia-
tiors even al the risk of closing down the whole industry.

ubli¢ pressure lo adopt

: i pas lf British troops
landed in Southern fran ane [ranian forces weré already ir the area -
or were Subsequently sent into the area, fur wnetever reason, there
might be clashes between British and Iranian troops with inevitable
serious conseqvences, probably including an Interruption Ln the flow
of ofl. Mcreover, the landing of British troops in southers Tran might
be taken by the USSR as a pretext for sending troops inlo northern

iran.

c. Antl-British feeling will remain strong, and the danger of
de monsirations and violence wil continue. Mossadeq has consistently
opposed martial law and restrictions on the freedom of speech, assembly,
and the press. One of his first acts in office was to remove a ban on
May Day demonstrations in Tehran, and martial law cay soon de lifted
in the Abadan area. Furthermore, althougi, the ‘fudeh Party has begun
fo atlack Mossadeq, he may yleld to its demand for legal status. There
fs a danger that the Tudeh Party may attempt to lake aavantage of
Mossadeq’s leniency to foment disturbances throughout the country and
that Moss*deq will be unwilling to use Iranian armed forces to maintain

cere cry te TLS, A *

order. In view of the tension and general unrest in the country, Tudeh
activity might seriously undermine internat Sécurlty,

o. B Mossadeq takes physical possession of the of! installations,
he will undoubtedly seek foreign assistance in Operating the oll industry.
A tumoer of US oil companies have already shown some interest in the
Bituatio.s, and Mossadeq might weil be able fo persuade some company
to operate in Iran on bis terms. Such s development would creale wide-
Spread British antagonism against the US, There Is also a possibility
tha’ io ono. might atLempl to obtain Soviet specialists to run the oil
ins alictions,

8. There is little doubt that sooner or later efforts will be made by the
British, the Shah, and deputies in the Majlis to undermine Mossadeq’s
position. However, in view of Mossadeq’s popular backing, it is
unlikely that the Shah and the Majlis would dare oppose him while
tension over the oif issue remains high, Mossadeq is more likely to
force the oil Issue by extreme action than permit himself to be under-
mined by the Shah and the Majlis on other internal issues. It is (here-
fore unlikely that Mossadeq can be overthrown during this critical
period except by violence or by the establishment of 2 semi-dictatorial
regime under the aegis of the Shah. Such a course of action would
involve risks which the Shah has thus far shown no willingness to take,
