Meeting no 32 on 22ND September 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012413, dated 5 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012413).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

@& Evojoct was met os the RV point’ which is at the ond of the

Solterino Pootbricse at LO.50 hours bir Roser and Harold, The party

~

a 249 a ms met pee gt eeee =P deste? UES ek cre) 5 7
CYVOVEG QU. WS Hava te ae Te neers. fhe pick-up was
at mp TTS Bite gue, ote ATE gel tet a 5 3 ema te 5
covers by licheel and it went off with is imeidents, : : Loe a

Zo Ges Please let mo kano all docenonts wndch | chor uid. ‘be photogzaphed:

; new, £o that you con have the. ord eae w back before tne end of this

meetint.s We have arrancoc ts have them phot tonvaphed.

(Subject gave his list of éclogatca cendiéates out of which a number

would be arriving in PARTS. Mhis wos a list of Pour sheats including +

89 names, The other Gooumonts was his GRU Administrative Travel Order. )

Sot Loter Iwill she you which people on the atee are KGB.
\nemgees took out bin netes end sat a) ~ Aithougt ch we are fairly

asoful with cur frlenés the Pronch, IE found cut cuite a bit of : yor

tae el meg Srich sho: bs od eed rom cons of Zarobile

ents areas St te meme Aten eee UE at An? wwe mene te #

ntcrest to them and of

'

cours? to use fowl mow iovhew whit IT heve done in this respect

Since E have arcived lowe. Vosterzogr at 09. 09 hours on the second

on Ds roeny zs 4 ie ae he heal Soden Od an, oe) Sande Tea?
a cay of my arrival in BUAIS EZ want to the Soviet Exabassy. t Was

; fi

vory well by the Risotdent Gen. Halo or ty eke) CHEREDEYEV who had
guat returned from MOSSCT whose ho wo. on temmorary duty. He imows me

wo wood tegetvias tin “ius Msnéate Commission which

HAS WW AE aus aenawie Ua Gin Si sys Toss twitsh which IT was involved
TOD DROSSSSanS SCUCGVS LOY VAS fiesetes CANSS Who Wnaconh tL Wa, o.
oe. : 3 es 4 tebe, om, ee ane acta we 5 ~ om . 4:

Ez ocoras a& Goleonsclh thane 2 02s as his aftabie and direct .

Bavtlcure tows m2. Ee goverai eathile ad come in about my

avrivel om © emlelnoaii thet Fowas doloycd by the vise a plication.

fem Pe das en

Fe said that he wanted vo tals to mo ab length Later but that he was
Mow te heave cn gyore tional s:soetineg with his case officers on
intellisencs matters cond he wentec mc to paxticinate at this: mectinge

Hs said thwt he would welcome my cpinion on various matters at this

feeetings sas

t

“8 AMAR 1992 s 4 | a oT

i
| APPROVED FOR RELEASE _ P
:

Et een

ww Dw

niseting and Ir Sorticd that = would be glad to be as hetpted as I. was :

able to bee He added thet since r have come for treitySetve “dag ‘end

vite!

WiLL be under his jurisdiction, in addition to resolving my On missions

he would Like mo to help then.

he

eee eg Ret Gey baat TERA ewe ee
dye a2 Their ROGAGSNUTA is on the second floor of the Exbassy a

puilding., Only the Military Intelligence people of GRU aré on the

second floor ~ Strategic Int selligence ~ and ail of the rooms have been .

ahete ny do

checked. oute  Sccret matters may be Giscussed there cztspt thay names,
éates once are not to be renticned. T immediately saw two aaa
there with whom I had stuct : a a&% the MDA. and who graduated wh th me | ;
in 1953. Tho Military Attache who was introduced to me was surptisingly
Gen. Mator SOKOLOY who was ths former oe of. the Poreign Relations See S
Scetion in MOSCO¥., Formerly Gen. Maior ‘Michal MASLOV Wes ‘the Military
Attache here ond ke is nov the Chief of the Foreign Relations Section ae
in MOSCOW, while SOKOLOV kas replaced hin since a month and a hakte
The Navel Avteche is also here, who is a Ca stein ist Ranke and. who was the;
Assistent Novell Attache in Turkey walle I was there. ae is Mioataie |
PROKEOROV. There Ore many opsraticnal case officers ‘undo? cover “and”
T wast snot every one cl then who is here in FARIS. TI will also epot ”
all EG3 officers, of vhon Tf heave clroady noticed severals
Ge), Set We cat at this meeting from about 09.30 until 15400 hour's. Mes
The Dirst ‘der muy te the Resident, Igor AL eksang-ovich ananeEt was. “also -

them. He is under covore Tee other deputy is actually sqcond deputy,

KUDRIAVISEY, . the Counsellor, who is concerned with seience and technology

and whom I met two G27 AZO Lowas introduced as a GRU Hea sdquarters

officer on TDY in PARTS who would participate in the meeting. ‘The topic

of the mooting was to review the missi of GRU to the Residehture dn

~~

Brones om the acauwisi

~

Fay

tion of military materiol samples and ante.
(€obyventyu voomylkh cbraztsov vo Frentsii). Thes e@ military samples
consist of weapons and documents on their technology. Then tess

/missionsess *

i ee

ra

very intelligent mans for example, when one case officer reported , - oo ok.

thot he had assigned his agent the mission of eens hag veene out

agent, “ CRREDEYEY called in case officer a fool, gaging ‘tat he. ee
already compromised himsc? £2 ee me tro weapons (or essdublies

a —— thercof) and had he given the - agent ‘tho entire fourteen items, podeibly

by now some of these items could have been procured instead of waiting

.

for the procurement of the tw0 requested and holding back the other
\

an

welve until the first two were obtained. The officers are efraia of hin

particularly since ha has been promot ted to General. Previously he hae

beon the Chic of a Na aprovienie ani later the députy to KONOVALOV, ‘the

: Direct corate Chief in GRU. | .
ee AS
(2) Se: The Communists are sitting all around and Bey penetrated .
VEXLYVMCLS o I oh sure that thoy arc pringing great harm to our mutual y

ot

work and are hurting De GAULEE's Gomestid and foreign policy,: °°", ne

C) S.: The missions to obtain military weapons and material in
France by the Eozidentura is cuplicated in the Rezidenturas of all
capitalist countries. Ths emphasis here is not so much 6n French

military numarent but on U.f. and British armament. In the list of

Stems dosived thove is s. Gvenenéous mmbor.of items of U.S. manufactures ovine.
They now the nomenclature oF oil lavest items of equipment and weapons.
They could chly know this @ue to come leak out of U.S.A. About 9075 of
the items listec wore of U.S. manufacture but these overlapped. military

~~

equipment mitally used by thoricens, French and West Germans, in short

all NATO ecuiczcnt.

é) ot CHEREDEYEV said that the Resiée eee in the UeSs “A has

t ve

given them the leats regarding the weapons which were the. basis ‘fox the,

missions in France. One item was the smal calibre U.S. morte. Which Ge *
se has a very well Gcveloped system for targetting (tsent trirovenya Fs navodle). ae

~~.

it can be well orientated aiong three Planes. The mission is to obtain:

Ai Ese CE

the mortar itscl? or, if that is not re its photograph and full

/ technical.. see

BO tenn meee

-5o' |
technicel data. nother mission was to obtain the U.S. "niaTo" rifle. E f,

ana the cartridges for this rifle. They also vented the latest | models. | 7 ‘
of the eee adit Abeeloned U.S. and British gas masks. “they are ™ a)
particularly interested in tne piltert NE substanees which have a very |

effective edsorbtion quality. Specifically they are concerned ae
what I believe is technically called the breathing cassette in vinich the _
filtsring segments are placed. A great priority is placed on obtaining “
the secrets for anti-corrosive treatment of submarines and the submerged
portions of Maval vessels. “fhis is a repeat mission since they, have. :
been after this for a long time, This is a chemical type mission end e

our vessels require much more frequent dry~aock repair than the NATO ~~

~ ere Rhen there are tvenmby to tuomty~five detailed missions " na
involving various items in electronic technology applicable in rocketry. — é os :
They’ ax tutions oste ed in all tyoes of electronic units and assemblies of oe :
U.S., English or French manufacture, that are used in , radio, radar at “ . a
measuring instruments end guidence systems. Sketches and dtaprons are cae ol
re ofits
particularly desired. ‘nother item is a small U.S. rocket Launched a a a

airerats which is caneble of croating atmospheric disturbances against > oS. eis

sofar actions poem thess rociets emanate some electro-magnetic sia ie ia
weves which cause this @isturbences. Thais serves #8 jam enemy radar beams. A

‘
N

Me way thoy explained it was that. atte a firing this instrumsnt descends
slowly on a parachute end jams vadio apni radars

S.2 A univ versal mission for all Rezidenturas, but parti souleriy

en here in Prance is to visit all chemical factories poesia tO detennine..

the composition of the new solid fuel for rockets which has been developed”

iby the French. They say that the French already have Hunee reds of: SOLA

roridges which are suitable for Pir ring rockets. The Prenéh are" :
considered to be world leaders in this field. Another requireront is ‘te ec
cysein 211 possible data on heat resistent steels. In this connection I . :
foun wd. cut that the nimonic series ive ‘been developed in VoSeite and nom in ,

Envlond. However, it seems that they are working together with the

/Britishe e00

Britis h dn ‘the CON eCERESY of heat resistant steels. . In gaat

n i ah te!

ete, Soteee . ere iach f ae

coupes nea the aoe items listed as ose ‘and 2 Pi ees sé' ‘otticer had |
a considerable number of missions to fulfil. But from the ve

chat I heard by the individual case officers only a few missions ‘have’
t is

“been accomplished and no case of Pficer had fully accomplished all his es

missions. Another item I forgot to mention was the acquisition Of 00

’

ol ectronic Nevol. depth gauging instruments. These were of U.S. and

er

witich monufacture. Hissions socarding 2oowne tation consis ted of

td

technical data on steel production, rocket fuel production and all
cocumsntary Gata covering the items listed BpOWs These misesons for . he
“the obtaining of documents were also distributed ty CHEREDEYEV to his
case officers, . a
12. °Gsi How many case officers were present? _ | a4
Se: There were ton officers present yesterday put these were
not the whole contingent. WMoriy were not permitted to ektenes Let mo
see, CHEREDEYLVY was there, his Deputy ANANYEV, the Military etna
SOXOLOV, the Naval Attache FROXEOROV - he has been here maybe four or e
five months - then Mikheil Kus'mich SCLOVIEY ~ he is a GRU’ offices Who”
wes previously in GENEVA ea he wos transferred here with his wife and. te °
children; he is in the technical ie where there ere also two KGB
en There were five cther officers present whom I will identify -
vr you from photographs when you shov them to me. I also visited the on

%

individual offices of the other GRU men who were not at this meeting and

I knew several of them and greeted them, for examnle CRIGORTYEV rolentint, ;
oS 2 a 3 > ij 3 te

Captain 2nd Rank, who had studied at the MDS as my classmate. He works
’ ‘ Bae ape SF

n

for DROKEOROV.  CHEREDSYEV asked one of the five officers I did not nane _

to sond a gable to GRU stating that I hed arrived safely. As a summary
of this meating all officers ‘stated that they had assigned all of their
réissions far exccution to their aronts. They heve a large number of

agents and, as I mentioned before, they are greatly helped by the Communists

7 Pad : ,
ACTrSe : a

/13-6 e200

ve

eae ran AE SG Ge.

Ro oe Ga) S.: At the meeting I was asked to speak and I told them of what

Se: After the mecting X spoke to the Rezident and his ‘deputies a
end detailed ny mission, I said that I will try to find sue, nex _
acquaintances by visiting the Soviet Exhibition and using the few |
acquaintances I have met in MOSCOW at the French Exhibition, “should, a

2 contact vrove to be of interest ‘to the Resident I would tum, him overs.

wae

i mentioned that I hed the mission of obte. ining some technical data, ss a
end to find dsed drops. The Rezident said that ia had many dead atops
in PARIS and that I was not to waste my time here but when my Stiverary
for travel through France would be established, then the Resident would -
cell we in what tors dead Grops would be Gesirable. He even offered

E2 an operational car and chauffeur for my trip’ through: jana!

items were purchased at the French E:position in MOSCOW. # The purchasing
ccmmissiion was the same one that had been to LONDON and at the French |

ixposition they purchased items totalling 2,600,000 new roubles. » We’

purchased much of the elect tronic equipment which | wes “shown there and for

rf

GRU consi optical equirzent was purchased. There were x70 officers:

from the GRU in this comission. One was Gen. Mator of Eng gineers who”
works in the Inforzeticn Directorate, VYSOTPSXIY, and there was “another”

Colonel from the Infoxrraticn Directorate in the Commission. For GRU”

3 tt

they purcnased automatic pilots which can operate in the far ey

-

7”

clectronic equipment and optical equirzent. The one who ee a

cuthorisead this larce purchase was GVISHTANT's father-in-law, a Deputy .
of KHRUSHOHEV’s and a memoor of the Presidium KOSTGIN« = also mentioned

os,
>

Vhich of the items they had listed, GRU considsred to be of prime
importance, since I was briefed on this prior to my departure end £ also.

4. if
montioned the symposium to be held at OXFORD on paver production. Z ‘also ‘
supported CHEREDEYEV's statement that Cuplicate samples are necessary, : ;

FeO ae it hes been reportea that a certain item had already been ae
obtained in another country. :

15. Se: CHEREDEYEV wes very please with me anal was most courteouss j

Ke gave me French cigarettes and said that operational funds, ‘widen,

fhad Aotess °

ood

had not been given in MOSCOW, were available at any time should ae
need to entertain anyone. He escorted me to the door, asked ins. to
come back any time and T went to dinner with ANANYEY bnd sonora,
the TORGPREDSTVO where they heve'a dining room, near the Bois de See
Boulogne. After that I vested and-wont out with IWNNE and had avery {|

mice time.

H.t Do they know thet WYNNE is here?

St No. Let us telk about this now. TI have a proposal vinieh ae

Pi
.I think will simplify things for us considerably, Let me finish first -

describing circumstances leading up to this proposal, Today zi went 0 cs

+

the Exbassy again, then I went to the B Exposition with SOLOVYEV by 2 metro, Pa
“> Dscause he wanted to show me how the metro runs. There SOLOWEN,

introduced me to the aeputy director of the Exhibition. The. Director _

t

"D but pee Desuty is our man from GRU. His name —
a MA £ rr aE

is Lsonid Vasscilyovich ‘NELnLY, a Colonel of GRU, under ROGOV Like nyself, “3

is a clean mon fo0m the ? iN

vho Wor rks under cover of MVD. TI spolxe to him for a short while and he |
:

eaid that an important Cclosc;tion would be coming at 3 or & that

texnoon and would I please retura at thas time. I had dunch with
WENS and I went back to the Eschibition. There I spoke to =e sbout
my missions ena I mentions’ that en Enclishmsn who has close ties inith |
the GNTX an@ who had been at thé French Exhibition in i HOSCOW will

bran!

possibly come to the Soviet D:shibition in PARTS for two or iaee caves:

Ir Brees that this man hes mony contacts with firms ani is planning to

Gl pes

organise a mobile exhibition in U.S.S.R. in 1962. I told you ‘that WENN

had menéioned this when he was at ee in Kosocov, ‘a there is .
& record of this discussion. thore. WYNNE also officially stated in the
Committee thet he would come to PARTS for two or three dayse'. ‘This is 7
ales on record. Therefore it would be very good if WYNNE Saas to:
the Exhibition poe two or three dayse if He sheuld not go off to ae
on Tuesday. in about ten days the Exhibition \ Will close and after that
we do rot necd WYNNE Kens at all. It is going to close on the 3rd of.

[oot ober. aie,

rw

anal
my

“~- has brought me a package of some material. This material z will doliver

ry

October. VEIN cen even coms to the Exbassy to ask for me.

Siniply mect him at the Exhibition. In that case Ir wil tell the

Enbassy thet the representative of many British firms ‘who has close’
contact with our Comittee has arrived here and in addition I can: aay” .
that VYNNS kas promised to bring me some worthwhile documentary "
materiel. This would be most vlausible and in ny view very coptecte,
Of course ag you say no, then WYNNE can go to BELGRADE, but please”
consider this. It is a fact that people come to this hibition ‘m
many countries, end WYNNE did soy as the Committee that he would. coins
heres :If I met WYNNE at the Esthibition I could take him to a private “

office tvith NEGREV, pour him out opera tional wine and he can say, that he!

to the Iubsassy. I am Just giving you a rough plen and. you can strange:

the details as you see Cite But this would simplify our work: and be”

on a 1 se gabe

very good for me.
17. Set I alveady met one businessman through NEGREV; I have his’
name written @om in my notebook which is in ny coat pocl cote’ the nin .

et throuch NE AREY is Linvrocl WACHSERESS from the Society of Pranco=
Fussicona Friendship. Hs speaks Enclish, though poorlye He even ,

criticised the Exhibition, he aske ed ms why ¢ here were certain technical

ws

items there which could te of intone t to specialists only and nothing !
from the counts itself, There is nothing’ from Sovi et life heres on
NEGREV told xs today that the KGB are overywhere, no matter in whet -
Cirection one spits. They: aro in the stands, amongst the interpreters - “3

2 the guides. That's ell I have on the Exhibition end with re cspedt to.
WYNNS I again repeat that if ho was to work with me for two days at would i
be very cood for us and it vould elso strengthen WNNE' s position with ©
the Cormittce since I would revors thet I met WYNNE here and that he _ “
broucht me something.’
28. 8.2 Tomorrow morning I am going directly to the Exhibition with oe -
Iven Favievich KUDRYAVISEV, the Doputy for Science and Technology,

. . ; /bScausesess

ret ; ~ 10+

because one of our Minis ters is arrivi ngtheré,*T believe fron the.

é

“Ministry of the River Pleet. i genoral up to the ‘tine ee. ths ‘ohdatng

of the Exhibition t will be going there and to the “Rybassy every ey, “end

after that I wi21 take a short trip een Frances “Haye. eould pict’

something up either Giréctly along ths line of my miasion or. sonothing
similar to the niss sions I mentioned earlier. “Sons. eile ter iaterial | fox;
the gas mask even if it isn't the real thing, or a shell ‘cartridges
I heed your support in these things because it wild help me attain’

4

nee stature and as a result I will be sent out more often, on peers

ve

19. Sst. The problem of my room has not yet Beets solved. “What has

happened is that they moved me out of my room to another one: di the sate

hotel with the price just the same. ¢ It was decided ‘that ane youl

get subject | room at the Falsis @'Orsay and move subject sate ade, |
room is available. The price there is 34. francs per dave) “This :
all that I have to report. | | a % |
(20.] Ge: We have lots of questions. let's begin with the

Clarification of the information you gave us the day before festendayy, |

S.: Yes, and ies ese let me have my owm re ference: notes. .
G.: Hore is the moss duportent question. at the very beginning, :
of your report you uscd the expression "if necessary -GRUSHOEEY wait strike!
at the time of the sinning of, the Peace Treaty. _ By whom eS tis specific.
avement made and what were the circ unstances?

“This:

S.: This expressicn was not told to me by only one person *

This is all tied uo wit th ¢% foneral there I sesoutes that’ ie you" Sis

foon BERLIN then things will be quiet again for a year or & hae aae a =
half until KHRUSECHEV starts yelling again that we have achieved ¢ a victory,

and that KENNEDY had been a afraid.

Gas What was the context (of the circumstances when igs Was: said?’

8.: Specifically BUZINOY 2 if I had oon: roubles with which |

to get some supplies of butter and sugar because he felt that things
would be very bad in October. rT asked him ir he were not being pantoky.
He said "No. ‘I am an ola soldier but I have a fe eling from what I nee) nek
and you must through your chonnols, how difficult things can be an,
‘October. I have been running from one lane to another and sending |
officers to all Icinds of bases where preparations to ‘the point of conbat

readiness | are being made. Ari know that if the West. begins to fire’

after the ‘Pekes Treaty we must be ready to strike them a hard blow and :
wo do not eave sufficient reserves of rockets. oa
Ge: What specificelly does KURUSHCHEV lack to follow through an =
attack on the West? | _ rae
5.3 He does not have sufficient wonnes of atomic warkeada,, "
They publishea in our press that we have 30,000 atomic ‘weapons of various
yields and many fools believe this; they have vérdous size yields, put” :
fow ~- they are still making them. Similarly, although the R11 and R12. ree
rockets have becn found to be aneeantowy and arc being mass Hesadced, .
the R-l4. is still not ih serial production. ne 7 : _ Ca
26 : Get What else docs ho Lack? : . . | ‘ue noe "
«Bek Trained personnel cndres. Several. years more are requireds
Is it not significant to have 2, 500 ptudonts at one time inte one Acadenys". |
the DZERZHINSKIY Academy in peacetime? - And these can be seen ga to. i
their studies every day. . : et a Fag eo - . aaa.
Ge: "Any .other fundarantal items - how about submarines? a é
Sot ‘There aro insufticiont. submarines. However, they. do have,

be aero: plen for attaci ing the United States and Pogson using -

Sia submarines and aviation. This WAS announced at ane reooption, oe 2

of one (aio) megaton. ;

Got Ana who told you opecitically about es of f the other
; deficiencies? oe ie ee - oes ee
Bes ees OV told me many times: bout all these deficiencies 1,

/NavVeovee

have monbtionsd aborra. On this I sveare

notes, since you just said that KHRUSHCHEV spoke of this at. the . ee

reception you referred to.

S.: Thot is correct. I also forgot to mention that there is at -
a@ lack of derieeted electronic guidance systems. There has beer a. . ‘
little quantity of rockets deve Sauea and with this small amount,
KHRUSEOHEV is atten pbing to scare us. | However this Gaviad before the
end of his life ney desire to meke this tremendous attack and that is :
what all the Russian people are afraid of and that is why - made ‘the.

eo

‘ ' suagesti on that it would be worth while Ee: assassinate hin. We would

. relax for a year or two before a new leader emerges and there would Bee

~
é pig fight for control of power. ‘The most outstan anding candidate hor
the smartest, is MIKOYAN, whe is still an old Leninist. MOLOTOV: is an:
and will not compete, KOZrOV and BREZHNEV are complete fools and these: _
two doq't like eee nee they are eeaeres of KHRUSHCHEV. . they E ;
would not move o cones ither, he is a second rate man and he is 4115 ' OE a

x

he is 57 years of age end he aimost died recently - £ must tell ies ese

apout this. oe >

S.: ast May Ist when I was in LONDON CHURATEV was at the, ay 5

Day Parade anid caught a severe gold ard on the 2nd May ve was a ‘

serious mine cave~in at KRIVOI~-ROG and many miners were kilied and |
KHRUSHOREV ordered CHURAYEY to go there personally to eee stiaate: the: i
disastez, Sines te wes -eOhier ae the RFSFR. Sick or not CHURAYEV had as
to go and he was teken back from there with extreme pneumonias “He alnost'’
died end he was practically Geed clinically until a medical colonel + ae

succeeded in giving him sufficient transfusions to bring him back ‘te :
ive.  CHURAYEV related al2 this at the birthday party. | _

25. G:- On these genere] exercises. in October What SoupSDen eS of the

satellite forces Will participate?
9.2: Evidently I didn't make this sufficiently clear in py report.

Jin tieseocus:

po aa.

in these goneral menocuvres there’ is not a single ante visio 1 wi, not
have its wartime military mission to essai an ALL will, partibipate
since a mock war WiLL be declared. Irrespe: wive of where, one aits in
vhet headquarters, all elem onts of broop' deployment Ker haus ‘auch as.
Ds5, D+10 etc. will be undergone, even to the point of establishing -
pakeries, laundries: and field hospitals.
Get And will these exercises be done 2s fully as you say ty the
satellite forces?
8. Yes, just as completely. Of course, firing will be
ease niceua or simulated and atomic pursts will be simulated also, but
VARENTSOV and BUZINOV told me that there will ‘also be rocket firing. By Pilot ub
5, exercises. Phese may be done in the KAPUSTIN-YaR area. or in some isolated “
place. This exercise ‘36 to train the rocket crews in target aimings :;
though there will not bs a gen eral mobilization, | this mass aciiaynent:
of the entire standing amy as it.passes throug oh its manoeuvre pases
will put it into combat reaciness to the extent of the foress now wader. |
arms. The Air Force and all services will participate end offensive as.
well as defensive phases will be sche anled. I forgot to mention another
thing ~ all forms of signal communication will be intensively used 4 to.
train those units proverly. a
Ges Please explain how many prominent commanders such as re 2
MALINOVSHY and VEPENTSOV, who will be delegates to the Party contests & gait
attone both the Congress and pe at the manoeuvres.

Sot Tois is very simple. TI nyself participated at the party!

mooting in the Kremlin when ZHUXOV wes pusbeds KHRUSHCHEV ne the eit, ‘
Linister made a speech end in half an hour hey left the Assembly which’

continued to make other spseches and cheered KHRUSHCHEV's policy ait aay
Longte I gnerefore we this Forty Cong ress they will Listen to “KERUSHOHEV's

ope ening speech which will be the programme for the Congress, end Eo . =
Mhe rest of the delegates will make § peeches for seven to ten ays. ie
The big ‘people will not attend discussions by arpieatae from Kol khozes« cae

/they iMasis: :

~~, , ‘

: combat alert.
276 . Get. How about’ China?

Set China will poe a separate role in this. “they vant chins |
the possible hostile direction of American attack from Japan: ‘Chine,
will ate 2 be represented at the Gouivees but it is still not imnovel”
whother AO TSS TUNG wi 1 come piece iota, or note | They very much ‘want
to have him come to MOSCOW as a popularity gesture for the Congress. oe a a
When I find out I'il sore all this to you because I propose to make
& personal visit -on CHURAYEY. :

Sei TI would like to ask a question ak this time te I mays °
Get Go ahead. . 4 o |

Sis I havé been thintcing for a long ine: that it would, be | Bee;

great advantage for us to invoke a small local conflict with the Soviets

he
at

in some remote area, something like the Finnish War or the conflict in ‘the ;
Fax Hast in the past. XPRUSHOESY docs not want thiss It shoula’ 7
demonstrated that KARUS. CHEV is the sole proponent of nucléar warfare and “ ve
the only Wermoseet amongst cil nations. He says that a local conflict -
would develop into a muclear were This is not true and a conflict using,
conventional weapons in Korea se Vietnam could he made. ‘if a Local

conflict was created on the borders of Izan or esate or Turkey, ena

@ Soviet Army group of clmont fifteen divisions were to be dupleyed ak -

this direction, soy 500,COO sen, and both sides were employing. 9.0. '

conventional wocpons, you would be surpriscd to see how many mass ©
% : " een peace cat so ernie ne
deservions by officers and men would take place from the Soviet Aray to,

NORE Cone eee wert ee OO ty ea tneenanr oer AO tee. ar ya stan is

:

your sido. Then this svoloch would see himsel? Ne weak his position is

and he would have to cease all hostilities tol ateh - up his omy, ‘The amy

CT A

today is seething, KHRUSECH?V has abuscd at severely by his extensive
rien Qe casey

cischarges in the past, which is wbistaiae that STALIN aid not dos

KGRUSHCHEV is called "the abuser of the Army’ Our Leaders should.

[/TOCOMLBCseee |

Zesseads how much @issatisfaction there ig- amongst the btficers of the i
Soviet Army. Of course 4% is not for baie particularly for me, to. > suggest
‘political action, wiser people will do- ‘this and it is not even. our .
concern, “However, I mention these things because I feel you ‘shoula | .
repo=t the extent of the dissati sfaction in the Soviet Arny. | RERUSEOHEV |
is today the new HITLER, an atomic HITLER and with the 98 help of his j _ stooges

who support him he wants to start a world conflict so pat prior to “his De

death as he has said, "I will bury Capitalism" | | ayo ; : . io a
(23.) Ges Will you explain very carefully this very important statement. ie :
you made. You stated that on the Sth seuteaen there was a nuclear’
aetonation using a rocket as a delivery means with a waeheed of 16, 000 - Oa

- _ _Kilotons. Do you realise ‘that this is , 000,000 tons or 16 megatons?

S.: Yes, 36,000 kilotons -- wait, I beg your pardon, 16,000 ai
kiogrems. | “ae

Geo: That makes sense because that would be 16 Ic:otons. : |

Se: Yes, of course, that's whet I had in mind.

Get Then, Will you tell me why was it soeci Pieally 16 ddlotons,
since usually your terms refér to 5, 10); 15 ete. . ieee

Sis Yes, that is true, they usually go by fives ‘but evidently’ they :
have invented this part sievlar yield and see is what ines tested, “but ‘ony
I do not have eny idea.

302 Gz Hevo you ever heard even from rumours what is the largest. **

Soviet nuclear weapon in TNE equivalent?
Set I have heard of astronomical ficvres and it was. announced that”

_ there is a 1 megaton bomb, which a kydrogen bonb could produce; however’. “i

I do not believe that they have tested this yet and they are still working

7 " cis

on it. VARENTSOV never mentioned this, nor did any other person with whom
Ihave talked, . - ee a

a

3l. 0 Gt Axe the Rel? and the R-Uy rockets now VARENTSOV's rockets?.

S.t Yes, they are VARENTSOV's rockets, 9 = ae
Ei) Lat us go a little further te this one, — Tn VARENDSOY's

. Jaxticlerses .

erciclo written at the beginning of am he complained that ‘he Was |
not being given en operational tactical rocket with a range gieater

than a thousand kilometres, but ‘these’ wockets have ranges, viiich are tnuch

” whe ae

greater, | Does he kmow when this change took ple BCCe (é. translates)

Ses At that time thoxre were ‘no Rl. rockets, - they were only, ‘boing.

,

”

née and now they do exist, but now he has been given them.
Hes But the article was written in the second issue of 1961 | 7 .
and thesé rockets mist have peen vel. advanced SO VARENTSOV inist have a
knowm that they were to be produced. Does he kmow if there has ‘been atiy
‘change in the subordination of missile control during this 2 poridd “

-  ‘petween May and September? (G. Translates) we | 7 .
. S.: This 3s entirely possible. ; fnd it is possible that they mo s
have given a portion of MOSKALENKO!s rockets to VARENTSOV. |

Je: Eow does he kmow that the R-12 and the R-lk are VARENTSOV' 2? a
Het. Even though VARENTSOV went to their testing ground he might

have gone there es an observers

ra
.

S.t When VARENTSOY wont to KAPUSTIN YeR for the rocket tests he.
vweat there to accept them into his command from indus trys He would not
have gone there if they wers not his rockets. He went there ‘udder the an
Gixective of the General Staff end of the Ministry of Defence. oe

Get Did VARENTSOY tell you this?

S.: Yes, he said "I en § going to K CAPUSTIN YaR" and at the samé ,

tins BUZINOV told me that there are such rockets.
32. He: But the R-l. is still in the strategic range since it can”
go 1.,5C0 kilometres with on atomic v rarnead and much further with a :
conventionsl warhead, Therefore it can't be called a tactical weapons ae
Sos But none of us know that the R-l4 will not be allotted to. 2

A

MOSKALENKO to fulfil his missions and also to V. ARENTSOV to. pelea his
In a24ision it is a very closely mit ove reall commer nd, both are “under
' governmental control end particularly in a budgetary sense and’ if in the! 4

earlier stages VARENTSOY ts rockets necded a greater range, MOSKALENKO |

/NIOVLAs 060 a a

would have ‘turned. over some of his _rodkots fox VAREREESOV'S unit
Zaunch. The +10 commands are vebe ol osely coordinated, ‘and 3 wid ‘
contimie to be this way and in case of war there vould be. a tot of
' rockets which meee be turned over from one comand to the others;
This :wa: snpoeeneen and the commands ere well controtied contratiy.
ee Is it not true that a long @ range rocket, euch as the RAD

could ‘be used by VARENTSOV at shorter rangese. | | :

Set oF course ‘it can. Any rocket can be fire at shorter
or ee its maximum but it is efficient to use a see att ats -
mascimum ‘renge. It would not be a to use such a large eecket with
a 2,500 kilometre ranges to fire at a target a thousend iitometes, “aia 5.
_when an R-1L1 could do this. However if there are no Rls then. 4 a A Laitger
rocket would be usede ;
33. Het But he did not say that VARENTSOV at any time haa
specifically stated that ‘is is taking over command of the Bele ona Rel

rocket units. |

S.¢ No there was no occasion for VARENTSOV to cay this “$6 ind a

those terms directly. He only mentioned that he Sasida ‘this ‘and that |
end that MOSKALENKO has this and that, but the R-lL may be aiiocated, to
both VARENTSOV and MOSEALENKO by the High Commnd. I reported to you
in LONDON thet there is a ton@ency to unify both commands. — .
He? Bas he heard sny more about this unification fox singis’

command, ‘since he last told us ebout it in LONDON? | (Ge translates),
: Yes, I hed a conversation about this with ‘BUZINOY only.
recently. | | PUZINOV does not eiew to ) leave ‘YaRmNTSOv's connand and; the ia
now working as the Deputy to the Chief of an OLDEMs * “Hes said ‘that af
VARENTSOV becomes the eealt unifi ed. commander his Aajutant would have

a MojorGeneral's slot and BUZINOV is hoping for this sinee he has been, a
Colonel for a oe time. He hopes that this unit pication will take place
quickly so that he can be with VARENTSOV and become a coneral/sajutents
this time the General Staff considers that this extensive "reorganisation

Ss difficult to do when the present political situation is so eritical.

/TE thevesiss

4

If there wore 2 relief of this tens ion they would push “through this i

Spero tin three or four months, BUZINOV imo; oy the situation"

‘
.

scause he is very close to it and they are not doing this “now because

ae

of the present situation. | However, the concept has not ‘been rejeoted,

mor has it been considered incorrect end it will umdoubtedly gO throughs | ‘

im casa of war now both comma 8 wil il be very closely co-ordinated.
Ble So! As you lnow VARENTSOV is now a delegate to the eoneree and

will be momaneees for a cendidate for the Central Com mittee. Me cant

me
’

tell what will happen but he is in good. standing. The Minister cari

: to his birthday party, and he didn't go there because he loves VARENESO"

+ ite 3

but at was probably suggested by the Central Committee, of which .

~.MALINOVSKY is a member. CHURAYEV, however, came of his ow free wis:
» 3 Be
In the past VARENTSOV had called MALINOVSKY a fool and ‘trom, my wrt :

fos
observation I Gid not think he was very bright and when Wwe vale tine E.:

; Will tell you more about hin ‘later - that is, how ue behaved at ‘this
party. Now VARENTSOV is being kept in a prominent: role. They made
him a Chief Marshal, gave him the Order of Lenin and ¢ he Kinister cane
to his party; this is rare for the Minister to ao particularly: as he

had to go to LVOV the next a: Incidentally to this birthday party,

ZARHAROV, the C Chis? of Start, FLRSKIY, CHUIKOV, the new Chier or “Givi

Defence and ZHDANOV were also invited, bus none of them were an oscow
on that dey. : eens
Get Wasn't KARTOOUT IT there?
5.3 es, he was, Gidn't I mention him?

Get Who told you that the atomic warheads were all ready. at. the.

‘
ql

daunching site

—

‘

S.: That was BUZINOY. 4nd VARENTSOV said this also, he told’‘it
to POZOVNYY and to me.
He: That's ell richt for NOVAYA ZEMLYA where they are doing the

7

Vs8ting, but how do you mow that the atomic warheads were delivered to

these other places such as NORILSK and Frants-Josef Land. Be dew OES se

[Se3. Gee28

i

there.
H.: Tad thing to determine is whether these “gaatieaas were |
Fi
et Le Me ak
always at these bases or were they recently moved there. . DS 6 5 nay Sheen "ss

‘there from all of their specific storage areas wherever. they may have Pcs

J ‘Get nd this is also true for NORILSK and ee

S.: I imow that there were

BUZINOV mentioned meny officers who were being sent fox ‘one snd td:

months duty to the bases I mentioned because there were atomic warheads

‘ : oh!

, ah; =) Be,

S.:. Tunéerstand. The atomic warheads were recently moved 900) ee

D ‘ : tact y , oe oe
“been, because they were to be placed in a position of combat readiness:

‘$0 suptort KERUSECHEV's belligerent policy. .
A short pause was made to change tapes. ,. Ata, Seah

Ges Did Sergei Serreievich by any chance merition the vange

ee

cispersion (the Va) of the R-12 rocket?
S.: No, he did not and T couldn't very well ask him, but it,
seems to me that the Vb of 160 metres” is a more Si sgnitioant figure for
s.gince it is the atest Gispers one . te .
Ge: Is the constant travel of VARENTSOV's and ci =
representatives to the miss sile bases a recent development’ ox have they

always been seat there? uo eed .

even before... | If that :

8
{9
a
fo
ta
a
Q
Go
ie
eS)
a
Dy
@
ty
7]
e

S.: They have beon

= ny ‘. a Coeds ren he Feiner Ol
ware mot the case NEDELEY would no
“

have Been killed. They are how. a
@ testing of nuclear cstonations delivered by rockets: and :
intensively end eyequently nov, peceuse KHRUSHOHEY..
the lemohing of rockets with atomic warheads shoul
be apourately worked out as soon as possible. "ARUSHCHEV even insists’
thet they Senssnaliy rele insecetions. Therefore ‘poth FIRSKEL end
SEMENOV heave been sent ont and vhon necessary VARENTSOV goes also, ‘hues
there are many sites at which tests are being made end many types. of
LOCILIS GO te tested. Trips are being made continuously by ‘the |
off.cers concomed. This intoneive testing is a. ehene Suk exangle vot _ :
the preparedness of which I have mentioned. : a

S.: Yes, and to give m example VARENTSOV said at Be party

20 recor.

wy

that he had just roturned from SVERDIOVSK Where he ‘visited factories.

Iwill send you a recent picture I have of VARENESOV. a You wi bee 4

waa

yourselves how tired he looks.. But though he limps and moves: around

rye ;

with difficulty, he is constantly flying around like a young ‘boy beoause,

ICIRUSECHEV will have it mo other we ay = just Look at the ae comple at :
Cz URALEV who almost dled. | They are all afraid of KERUSHOREY and mist.
obey his orders ox they will lose all they have. cHuRaray pragg ged. that
he had a dacha given to him with 12,000 roses growing there, that is how :

these paras sites lives on the workers bloods A capitalist doesn't. live a

that Way'e .

. (=) Hee Io would like to get this absotubely" right - ~ whe told. bin

~~,

oa

the missile bases? (ce: tra ranslates) an

th the support of the Central Committee ordered that these atomic | ee ue

warheads be placed on a ready states and be delivered to the launching os wo
site in order to support his political poli oy with ‘Poree’ and, _RERUSHOEEY
realises that we moy strike him first.

Ge: But who told you this?

ond

Ses First of all BUSTNOY, then, when I was in Headquarters of

éxtillery, I heard from the various officers that they were being sent |

‘

*

macties hor long 2% takes to move up!

4
<

out to Getermine accurately in

atomic weapons to their proposed Taunchine po fons, how Lo: g it takes to
2 PLE ’

‘.

assemble and mowmt them into fileing positions a what the reactions of ‘the’
troops are to the concept of enploying buch weapons ; in short, a _
previous paper calculations were nov veing. checked out in practices | | am
Ab the samo time they ars bringing the: nedves into a position that if fe .
atomic Weapons are necessary to use they will be in position to we useds ve

Ks: Did he hear about the movement of these warheads before thé.”
hase of etemie testing or efter this period? oe | a oe : aan

So: | They were moved up before this period and then the decision

was wade to test them by using rockets. a

hO. Hes But they are not being tested at ‘alk missile sites. ;
They have tested them at ‘NOVyA ZBLTN A but not at every missile sites
: How éoes it work out when they move these atomic varhesds to the
various other sites when they have not already tested then? "1 : i
things seem illogical. It is logical to take warheads to the places |
where you es pode to NeBe them, but Ste testing is ue get ready for
war and there may be minor sajuatneabe on parts that they: haven't -
tested pefore. How can they in pieé thes move iasack to these other. areas
to be ready to be fired when they have not tested them? ‘This appeats

to be a contradiction. ‘

Be

‘

: 8.3 There is no contradiction. Unfortunately we do not ule

. the co-ordinates of the sites where they are being test ted and. the com

ordinates of the sites from which they will be launched. | And I ant sure.
that the testing is done at
sites that would be used in case of were All we know are ihe e deriva
’ F . areas but it is a Pact ‘that these sites are not the Bane for example;
even on NOVAYA ZEMLYA there are concealed st s0rage aréas and Lawhohing
sites all prepared for use in case of war but the Roba testing ‘that,
PYRSKTY is ruming may be several hunéred kilomstres: aay on NOVAYA met

: Therefore there is no contraciction,

; hi. He: Can I ask the cuestion another Heat Did he kmow in advanee

ef | Yes, T lmew in ag@vence that ECMOV was flying of? and that ‘the
BERLDY porder was to be closed four days before it happened,
about wo weeks ago that it was indisn meaole for us to test
th rockets as the celivoery meane. I kmew £his from’ suamior
ae

ened ad said "Rockets sist be tested because we are Hot sure how mS

shey will work with atomic warheads." This, I lmew after. WYNNE ‘et

?

MOSCGY.

Hes How many days did it start after WYNNE left? It coula only

have been one or tivo days.

cary
,

, f Ses oee50

: . |
Se? No, it was about the same tims, let me look at the’ .- nt
. . . . : H

calendar. The BERLIN borer wos closed on 13 august, I kmew about -
it cbout the 9th or 10th of August and I wanted to pass this ‘
information via the dead-drop on Monday. But already I heard the

raclo announcemen’ thats KONEV had Slow off so the news Was no. Longex

eserct. fhe fact that it was necessary to test nuclear weapons with

xocket carriers I found out only after WYNNE left. I found it out the -

-

following week and it was clear then thet KHRUSSOHEV was using the oe , “y

cisagreement over the BERLIN status a3 an excuse to untie his honin with

respect to nuclear tests. Obviously if T hed kmown of this earlier I

. . ‘ |
iba? — 2 y ii = 2 . s . . '
would have given this to WANE as a first priority instead of the _
cassettes. Tater I considcred vutsting the information in the dead-drop
"and calling and then I would have observed to see if it were picked up |
within one hour and if not I vould have retrieved my message from the
|
Gead~drop.e Eowover, you warnagd me net to do this miless it ware a case |
_ a 7 ; 4
of great urgency and I wos not sure how ursent this wase ne ‘S
Ge: Before you leave we will establish for you clearly what is |
. t
4
{

urgent and what is not.

42e Ge2 Now on NOVAYA ZELIXA is thers a polyvcon there or operational

aaunch sites, or both?
Set % is a fully equdused Lounehine site for wartime as well
as a testing area, and I have heard in our hoadouarters that our people

.

Jn 7 m7 . 4 f= Tex * ,
tenes Since your submerine was in that arede

G.: dnd PYRSKIY is in charge of rumning the testa? . poe Sx

Ss: Yes, he is. Ee is the first Depwsy to VARENTSOV.. en re
S.: How €ces he lnow that ho is actually running the tests? :

fais is something that I think needs a lot of definition. First of all
at ons stage he did say that eners foom FLPSKIY running the tests, Os

TOA ee

LVSHLESNKO would be represented theres, Then surely there are the atomic

people who would be interested in the atomic part of it, then-who is in — O

over-all charge?

[Se ‘Owoe

8.3: On NOVAYA ZEMEYA FYRSETY is xesponsible for everythings d

» And the fact that a, representative sain ee is “there end:

vow te bas

Beat)

representatives ‘trom the Central, conmitice, ‘the counedl. of ddnisters

himsolt about FPYRSHNIY. r wish I had a _ recorder 80 that you could
listen yourselves. — “S » oe deat |
Hit If PCRSKIY is in charge of it, does this in fact near that,

oaly tesbing or rockets as carriers for atomic warheads in the tactical,

, range and. not within he strategic range is being done and if touting,
is being done in the stratcsic range, where is this being done?”

eee " Ses This question is not correcte What is being

om

action of nuclear weapons using rockets as a delivery meanse What is: -
important to dstermine are the deficiencies end errors in 1 the rockets*

operations etc. etc. All are eosesris ‘those who wi a11 Launch rockets:

at great renges and those who will use POR ene ‘at smaller rengese .

those who plen to fire at shorter renges may tomorrow be assigned a

‘mission to fire at greater ranges. The main thing is ‘to make the tests, oe
it is not important who is in charse, even though. PURSKIY is VA RENTSOV's

representative, there are other roprescntatives there from MOSKATENKOs

Ghere is after all a centralised co ontrol by the Party and & centralisation -

of the ALL Unicn militazy and political organisation. Ana therefore ths AD

decided to assien PYRSETY, first of all he is an eee a Colonel

Genorsi, a representative of a Chist Marshal. He is an engineer by

Dpackersund and a specialist in atomic matters, and:he is ‘coricernéd with
ants which proéuce fisionable material, After all Here ‘plants may
produce atomic warheads one day for Vz RENT 50V and enother day for |

MOSKALENEO, the plants are the same. So they apvointed PYRSKIY end ae te

there is nothing unusual about that MOSKALENKO was not offended by ;
this at alle And if MOSKATZNKO personally had not been there his deputy

could possibly be of lower rank than V- LRENTSOV's representatives

[30 oo

_~enexgy and equirment as well, He is an engineer by education mheieas

Ge: Hut does VARENTSOV have an over-all control, since

YYRSKTY is his deputy in deciding what and how should. be tested?

Se: No, PIRSKIY reesived a composite ordex fran ait ootoeined’
end he will submit his report to the Council of itinisters,
Conmittesand the Minister of Defence. ‘He is there as a Govermient

. representative and anyone else could have been Boadivived if he’ were

considered to be qualif Piece oie
Het He stated that PYRSKIY was the expert on atomic matters, ie

Can he give us any information on PYRSKTY's backm crouna?

Se: I don't mean that he is an aioe aid as such. He is iia

all-round 3 intel2icent and is aw fell educated man. He understands nucleax.

MOSKALENKO and VARENTSOV are not. FYRSKIY hed bean the: Commander of
Artillery in a Bey mission in ROSTOY the North Caucasian adlitery
District. He was aise the Commander ‘of Artillery of an pee ‘then he Was,
made the Deouty to VAREN@SOY, - In this way VARENTSOV Was strongly a
supporsed by PYRSKIY beceuss he is an engineer. FYRSKTY does have: many,
personal Geficiencies, hovev ver, cE eTOOY docs not ; get: along vith him
well. hey co nas heve close ser Shani relations. He does’ his work very
well but as en individusl he is alwors intriguing, he wents to be | a
Larshal of Artillery and he is ‘jealous of VARENTSOV because he eonsiders’
VARENTSOY to be a fool in technical matters. He is mere! ty a: strong |
administrator. VARENGSCY can orsrate massed artillery tnits oftectivedy
but from the viewpoint of Suehuad: ogy, DYSSXIY is far above thats
d, Get Is this base on NOVAYA ZEMIVA the most recent one?

Ses It's construction has been eoine on along nies
az entioned the North Rego ms to you but at that time did 3 not So
exactly where.

G.: How about the other bases such as s NORILSK, VORKUTA ena 5 Freng
Jose? Land?

ae _ They 5 wers also Bones prepared for | a eres times, zt know. phat

/ooridianss eo”

«

were refused permission. There is even an article by ‘opmscv | in

4

which the extensive work ty numerous engincer forces in. the fae nowth

‘

are described, ALL kinds of underground shelters and fortifications have « a

.

been constructed in the far north, par vicularly in the area of YORKUTA.

All this underground work is done because of its extrene cold temperature . re:

ani I am sure that there are many other bases in the far north., I wild
Pind out the locations of all the sites that z can but in the meantiine
you should expect that thers ars many more there. | The principle to,
keep in mind is that they ere building as many dispersed bases as possible.
. avoiding large concentrations, These aréas are being extensively |
prepared as launching sites fox nuclear strikes, On the other’ hand rox

the cefensive viewjoint thanks to dispersion and the isolated ature’ ‘ot

from eneny attacks.

452 Get Now, with respect to armies, when you said that there are.

only tivo Soviet armies within the D.D.R., who told you this? -

a] tat rr
Does MOCROV told ms this at wha

soute for training his battali Zon at ! ik ASUSEEN YaR. BUZINOV went there

’

elso ané he is visiting PEDOROV now ant when he svoturns he will ted. me |
all chout it.
$65 Bofore you stated that there were two tank armies ‘thee.
Sy: No. That is a misunderstending; I aia not say that there
were two ten armies there in their entirety. It is the same eonidept
ag woon I said there are ten amiles & a in the general direction
of uns D.DUR. Those are echoloned throucnout the enti re territories:
edjacens to end reaching far back Prom th »DoRo They are part of the
over-all, Font commanded by Marshel KONEV. Some forces even lie in the :

U.8.S.R, territorys The tank armios and other ames are also echelonea

baclre Their main elements may be in the D.D.Ro There are lots of

t

tanks concentrated in thc D D.R. and when I said that there were. two

. ,

r . . - farmieSecoe

ave bg

ann mentors

,

‘
VAs,
.

S

Ear OS Sane EEN GEE SiO

. . - A
Le . G
a . —s 7 . f
) . “ ]
é 4
i _ $B z
r ‘ 2 “s o A
. = = $
: : 2 he o i ;
ayo . . . . + 5 v fi. f ‘ . te
ivy ayy f +
+ rad «. rs
. f .
3 By :
. : 3) i
. . 3 t
. +:
, Se fe *
. t .
. S , i fy of
¢ M '
. i ¢ 2
. . * tte
, . e S 5 aa i
. b.
: Hf
" 5 t s, t .
. : t
cal ‘ a g " . fao>
. ne wy Bt oy } . - 4
. -- ,. fo
a ; 7 2! ¢
my iC “s rr *
. | : . ok
, e Je re .
a) ; , 2
bar's
3
. 7 ' : *
. G iF .
: . . _ t : :
. . 7y : . +
G .
. . . “4 je 8 § : a
Tee rata eet na oa . ard wep Pt _ - a

. ermies within the territory and now a Hoa aes is.being moved. Any” ’
this moans that their combat clements aay be there but their rear
services may be far back in Poland or in the Baltic areas to determing
this exactly we would necd armap leying out the entire setae of. patties

But in oxder to estimate the strength of ane forces opposing us in this

in his command ami row he has ten with the addition of the highth : a

Mechanised Arny.

1 : a sca ieee ca me

46.° Ge? In other words only portions of the armies are y actually in ‘the
D.D.R.? a : 3 : : 7 5 ae Be

' fees ,

‘8.3 Of course, and FEDOROV told me that the local Sanat ck: wes

. not pleased to see large Soviet troop units in their territory. “Foi

ae, a card
- + estimating purposes we should consider that there have been ‘two Soviet |

armies in the D.D.R. and now the thind has been brought ine Te is a

2

© entirely possible that DDR. Givisions may be att tached. to these arniéss

L7?e Ges Now with respect to this battalion which is the expérinontel

ms.

enti~missile battalion, where is this bet¢elion sctually located? . ee

y

S.: The Institute its colt is in HOscoy ond I believe at is n't the
area of Bokroyskiy-Streshnevo but I will find owt the exact losation laters u
The battalion, however, is looated at a sesting = ite, but which one ¢ do
mot know. It is not in the MOSCOW avoa, meybe it is in K CAPUSTIN vars :

186 Gt: Here is a question ae your item No. 1h. - “Who told
you about this?

Sv: The Daet that MARUSNCHEV said that there can be no :
exclusively local war is generel converzati che entire General Start.”
~ cannot sintlo anyone out, everyone snesits of this. |

(85) Got nd who told you. about tho | delay in the fr ae of | :
1,00,0CO zon? a oo ee

So: This is lmomm exactly to BUZINOV. He said this tvice to més.

:

ar} Yay is he in a ,osit tion to know this? - es
Set eeaiioss VARENTSOY also has an orgenisational-mobilisation, e

otdel and they know the total personnel strength with respect tO gt one

fartillervesco  ;

Nowadeys the KGB has arain raised ite head. “One mist again

we

pe careful of what is sai@. This is another of KURUSECHEV' s strong,

control policies; after all, ist look at the stat ture of: the heads that?

rolled. nd he is both the author ‘end the initiator of all “the rouble

that the whole world is now so anxious about.

51. Get . Regarding the items about closing the ‘BERLIN border; eho

wives. And FPOZOVNYY seid "Don't: talk about this, t but we have ‘preyared) to

shut the bordors in BERLIN at

Six

o'clock 5 the mor

August."

‘to c up and tell you about this in open poke or té put te in ‘the deaae ;
, : . - drop. ; : 3
. 52. Get You mentioned that in KREMENCHUG ers: is this brigade. an
bateslions of Rls and B-12s. . = ee = me a +
: 5o3 Yes, and if vou aan “m3 my graduating Siges Photograph a

will shot the de uty commander, Lisut. Col. BONDARENKO. |
he Ges Of what use, are the R-ll battalions in KRERENCHUG?
. Ses nat is only a rear areca, they train there but if the
brigade is necded it may even be transferred to Cormany} - ‘this is .
miy a home station, & garrison, and there is a training schéol theres

It is simply a

oO
t
pa
@
ed
re)
tu
P)
I
fy
i+

do not know its number end it isa second

echelon unit which is in the process of training, it may be even”

transferred to the Far Fast, to face Jenan.
Ge: That is very clear.

53. Ger Tow, please tell us the pro noper title and the official,

ms cial

position of the other persons who were at VARENTSOV's party. , Let us, ;

take Gen. Polk. FOMIN, Gen. Polk. SAMSONCY. and Prez essor RYABORIXOVs a
‘ 4 wt ee

[se fe ee c

See

ae
u

i understand, let us first take Gene Polke ‘8

ia is ine former chief of starr. of Artillery anes vaRENASOV, Jast!

as KARTOPILLE is nove The Chiet of ‘Staff of GUILART (Crameye . a

aie &..

_Uptevientye Kenenduyesichegs Ast leis) of the Ground Horcess,

cesignati on of VARENESOV's: comand. Today SAMSONOV | is the hier: of

a Faculty (Kathedra) of the VOROSETIOV Academy which has Just recently
been amalgamated with the Frumzé isa osar He is the’ aiithor oF tang
artillery studies; he has weitten many articles and he participates. in’
reviewing artillery manuals. He is an outstanding artillery theoretdodan

VARENTSOV made a special toast to him.’ He is a email bala MeN.

Be = Set Now Gen. Doli. POMIN of Artillery. "He is ethan fet ‘these
~ dayse He is also an excellent artillery theorétician. | His piesent ”
ae “he is in this Council reviewing inventions, the Chief NI of |
GRAU, which suvervises the work of other NIIs. At one time he wl
SAMSONOV now, was Chier of a Faculty in the VOROSHILOV Acadeny, » Row Aa at
the FRUNZE Academy. At me tins he was also a prominent artillery. |
commancer Guring the war. Ris is a very close friend of Rodion Yakovlévioh : “~
MALINOVSKY because at one tine they both served together in ONITA. Thee “¢
yaoping at the table at which they sat toxother. .
55. 6S. Now, Gon. Folk. HIRISSIUIT. we ds very i112 and he vshes | to"
retire. | £ just remembered, the deputy to KARTOPTING ts Gens Ligute e
VOSKRESENSICY, who also met VARENTSOY at. the LENINGR LAD Railroad ‘Station,

greated him end immediately Slew off together with BUZINOV to, the, Dba.

on an inspection trip. He is a smell % ordain te he aian't have: to
Go he would probably have been invited to the party because VARENESOV. nae
high hopes and reliance on YOSKRESEN ee cT¥ and hopes that one day he: wil”
bo his Chief of Starr. | | te: e

Bet Now as to Professor RYABCHTXOV. He is about sixty years ‘of a
age end a very prominent chemist, a professor ani a doctor: of cheitical ‘

sciences and he works on bact teriolosical weapons. When he made his _ 7

é

toast he said "I lnow Sergei Sexgeievich not as well as the others

 Paauent cobs

~ 29

present,. since I met hin caly at KARISBAD and I.have 1 stened. to ;

verything g sata about him > 4 those wao have known hia for decades and”

thouch I have only kmown him for several months rt subsoribe sully to.

wnat has been said about his being a preat- many, ut in aaaition he is Ge

a most aniuble person ard thori:s to his Ictndness and eriendship I am a i

gacst amongst you here." Although the professor was not drinking too) :

much he @id let it slip that for some time now he had been working’ ¢ on

the preparation of der toin artillery charges for the Generals present. 2

said since the man seactae

MALINOVSKY frovmed a bit when this was

specifically "Sergei Sern ssheyiely, Z also load thé items es: you eunch

end fire." I already told you about this SEMENOV who was & former.

H
Deputy to VARENISOV end who is now retired. | oe ee
57. Get  Explein more about the GUXIRT. “3 ee

S02 Ticst of ol} uncer this Directorate ell artillery schools |

ana academies for grounc. “orces. are under VABENTSOY through this

ars. KUPIYEV was the Chief of the

ma he ae haa Py
Givectorate, Pravious iy Gone Lie

has been retired. Now the Chief is Colonel LEBEDEV,

Uoravieniye, but ke

no Lc whe Chief of Milivacy Proining in CUKART. There is an.

ance section ucder Colonel ZATXO. They have an ousensser at

Renning seotion which. works as é2 orcenisational mobi lisation section

“e

There is a technical “section;

we

fe - 4 cee
to as a Maceric. suPoLy Ss

19)
c
[de
g
a)
°

9
Ds
p>
ied
a

eer rcsecicL section. There is also a editorial

section Which forserly rablished the Avtillery Journal which is ‘no +

aA. tvs they luve other publications to be aansevand <

Leager being pe lished, but they -.0e <
| aes |
“writhe | : ; “ i Be, : : a
Ges tod undoubtedly they have a cersomel sect ion. ae Eee ; ,
ee
Set Yes, of courses, and thay ncvo an acmisistrative offices | . |
| |
Get  Eow obouts on omumition sunoly ssction? eS

Set No, they would not heve' this, that would be under GRAV.

58. S.t What other questions co you have? mee

Ges Just a monont and fT will get out the questions we have for

‘ [Yooes

s
caida ERMA: Tau 3 lee Le Bie NS eee ee eed Brig igh eR
peste ie Be ee ae

ease Bt
ESM eye, Thu es
the BERLIN cituation. | Nov, alt chough , events axe oving 5 fant “aa

situation has changed, please olari fy’ “the following.

Set On basic mtters eauane oe changeds. eke wenesee C

rite t

problem of Iran will be linked to thet of BERLIN.

596 Get To what & een? ai satellite leaders iow and, accept

~ KERUSECHEV's plen? and also snolade e@ what the Chinese attitude ise,
mae Sot Let us consider the Chinese separately end the othe! |

satellites on the other kend. I was not able to produce the exact a

~~ Letter ifferonces in views with. sense,”
the —

satellites

They agree with every vce £ KHRUSECHEV's3

FERENC and others said soncthing different on their om oO, ond ss “é

overyshing wins straigivs imbo tie himes of HADAR, Anyone ‘who says the .

‘*

siichtest thing different from what KHRUSHOHEV decides or Btates ,18 \
irmociatscly removed.  TDven GOMUI. vo at one time attempted to run an’

t
’

Sndecemdens course of sorts hao now calmed down. ALL of these leaders:

— if ae

excoute XGRUSECHSY ts wishes, they cven malte the sane type of aggressive .

ta
fn
e
i

eneéches to impress KERCSHCHEY. The Chinese apparently independent of” “

4

the Sovies Union still weave to stond in the forefront of the Cominist

oe

- ovement. MAO TSE TURD ond his extire clique, stated that: after the:

Geoth of SEALIN the influence of the Central Committee of the Communist "
Party of the U.S.S.R. has become veake But the time ais still too soon

. oie Rs
for the Chinese to scize the position of + @ vanguard. of the Communi st

* wend Se ca

noyvement, even though the popula tion is three times that of the conbined :

apenas
i

othor Communist countries. From the viewpoint of numbers, and maburity,

any

tn the Party sense as well as strength ami correct thinleing they

. /CONSIGELs ees

*? S.:

now very little is said about Gnines judging from the reports in the,

'considembly. However, there is a great deal in common in the polioy

me

other support going to China from us all aes tine , “and ae wi not
distury the entomardonid position of Commminm. © Cortadnty not as
openly as TITO has done. ARESO LORS KHRUS ‘CHEV maintains a Liberal

toward the U.S.S.R. They don't want to | sharpen their aitterenges:

always supports and appro 2s of Y what has been said and opvtousty. China

‘48 closer ne us than any non-Communist countrys uke mean ‘by ‘this the:

so~called wascillating countries. Therefore, dssvite' ontatiaee else:

China must be consiéored to be a first rete friend and a reliable helper. © eis Se al

of the U.S.S.R. in any situation or aifficulty. If a difficult situation,

Gevelops, China will not insist on its om @cmands but will support the '
common cause or Communism. To what degree and on what scale is another mee
matter; this ig a problem which deserves thinking about - But the!

contradiciions are not as cri ayicat aS it may seem, each ats is going

conside-ed as any other satellite of the U.S.S,R. China is not jugostavias,
Jugosiavia is really under our control alt though it is vascillating
of TITO and MAO TSE TUNG.
60. Get From whom did you find ovt sbout KARUSHCHEV's statements ‘hich’
were quoted as what he would say at a hich level conference. This

/informationss.¢

oe 33 2

information was tola by KORE ENEVSEKIY to 2ASORIN. _HORBISVSRTE

with KHRUSHCHEV about the German problem, KHRUSHCHEV wi take hie om
position on the German problem. Ara let us look at this pais a.
viewpoint of actuality. What else that is new, can KERUSHOHEY state :
concerning the German problem? All he can say is "Very well E. agiee |
not to sitn a ud tréaty for another year" and this he aces not want
TO Os But so far as the justification of his post tion and. his views:
on the German problem, there is bothing more that he can oe he haa 7 ve
said everything about it. Therefore, he will take the paatidien that |
if a Conference on the German problem comes about but the conversations’
“will also smvolve other matters, then he will discuss everything _ :
together. But if our leaders meet with him to ESCuSe only wee German
problem to avoid a eogsinis war over i¢ and if scares KENNEDY, lori

end De GADLIE state thet they are willing to accept a certain flexibility

‘
,

concerning the German problem, on certain matters and will accept some"

points ana not others, this
fina therefore they would ask NHRUSSCHEY to make cert tain. s sgestions aba

, : te
éelay the ase of his peace treaty wmtil everything was resolved, | - : me

«

thet is where KHRUSHOHSV would set up end ‘les ave the conference and ‘bey,

"T have nothir: more to discuss." nc this would be a complete repetition

or PARTS vaero Mr, BISENEGISE met with KARUSHCH This. Game from the!

Central Committee to HORS RUNSVSKE who is a very big man and is ‘the’ Chics

the Tnformation Directorate of GRU.
Gert! Please explain this contrad

the position that: he i :

arty Bibesnente, Can you explain’

sferencing, what brourht ) I refer to ‘TERUSHOHEV's
ora contradictory words.
S.: Lunéerstend you perfectly. Everything is Renae: . .
intexcvovene Even DARITIN was a A aleseictans When KHRUSECHEV wae Ye : —
poet ct
/speakingeces

2)

7, 2,

8s Wate og dee,

. ~ 33 - ae
sneaking about something env tirely different to what - he is “saying nov."

in fact he was setting specific time dates when he would sign the German

ute e

like swinging a chub end the

Peace Treaty and then denounced them, it is:
seeing that the reaction is not in his favour, so he stopd’ ‘sifinging.

+ time there were no military forces capable of supporting the ;

dde BY
ae CAA

‘0licy he now advocates. Now he is sitting on a nilitary BONS. end

7
“

aithous he is not fully equipped to the maximum fe is peginning to > taille,

in a different waye Vay has ne kept quiet for so many yours and now he

i

is spealing loudly. He ceases that there are weaknesses in our - westem

countries end he also considers that we are not fully Breperecs “He aise

knows some of our potential strengths in Betail through his Communist :

fecls that KENNEDY, MACMILLAN a and, De CuvLIE must take him into: esounts’

Now that we are shoving hin firmness he: is a at Sas, but he | stint hopes: i
that we will swallow the second pille What you refer to as a
contradiction is actually a dielectic deviation and as military steht

increases he wishes to use this means to gain a a saa An the rm

Germen ¥ problems dnd now if we folve
additioncl time for himself. However, if Renee ey is "struck at athe:

woe he may recoil and think aQscut it for a year or 8 year riage a. halts

OF course he will arm during whiz period, as will we, and then ‘this will

ye reclly a war of nerves. IT revceat comin that any concession a6

IHRUSESERY based on pure reason and humanitaxien considerations $22, be
remaréed py KHRUSECHEV as a wealmioss on our parte And incidentally, an
this stems from the problem that you invoked yourselves in, ni956 in:

he

Zzypte in fact now that you still tolerate CASTRO in Cuba, he considers »
>

‘
!

iv an accomplishment on his parte You see, the contradiction is hiss
waereas we use complete reason and humanitarian thinking an our Egeeonch

to hin, he translates this as an indication of wealmess.

62. G.t Were these high level command changes made in connection: 3.

’
” é

[ithe 600

work for. KERUSEDESV, but 2 RUKOV as yet has not, but there are nunours .

Ge: Does KHRUSECHEV actually rély on the satellite arties in

With the Geran situation, or were these changes wh ch were. planned’

earlier?
Ses
wielding a stick. “He had sent KONEY out

just like he had SOKOLOVSEY, but when he needs thom he calls | thei aut

should for the Farty an@ Coumtry. SOKOLOVSKY has already agreed to” a

that he will and) the KONEV situation is a repetition of ‘the same 2 stil

h ,

as when ROKOSSOVSKY went down, south to the Cauca. sian district. : Tite! a
- nothing but proneganda and I an

we must avait this.

case of war? . | For ES

Set He is completely confident in the polita cal nucle ‘of. the

political leaders in the satellite countries. He is. sure of this ‘aiid.

’ »

KADAR 3 is as mach a stooge of his as a Secretary of an 1 Obleom ao

Ges How a about the troops?

= obey want to live and eat to curvive

Ba,
they hod 7

conflict will Gevelop into an atomic ware It is absurd and “indicates
,

absolute aggressiveness. And he-is trying to frighten people by’ this,

both curs ani his om, Fs nt

.

640 Get Can you explain clearly axectly what is meant by a vost
se) J So
mechanised axmy?

. . . . . . é ¢ . :
Sef iLohave probably not clarified this sufficiently befores o
The word "mechanised" means zy eying on wheels, ‘that moans thers | Jare 20.

foot soldiers and no horses, they nave eaten all the horses. In addition .

]

all of these mechanical transports have been given moe fire power’ such.

— as tanks and self-propelled artillery. ALL other artillery is ‘either,

. : O , , fer ronsported. +s a

‘

ae oe

hee We ae
t
'

4 transported in a mounted fozn or is ¢t

cee - have steel plate protection, ALL infantry rides on one tox sof

equipment or another. A mechanised ae may have varying composition; :

t .

it may have four, five or six ivisions, but all of them would be.

wy

mechanised divisions ’ insofar as the infant try componerit is concomeds

There can, be variable numbers of tenk divisions and mechanised ‘divisions

ates.

in the mechanised army. There is no set pattern,

65. Ge: What is your concent of what is often referred ae in vous

nee ey a

*

So3 They arc the same. Take for example the Sub-Corpathian |

~. Military District. Tour ar: ies were stationed there,. Now, with ‘the

redeploymant of the Bighth Mec?anised Army there will be hiwes.. ~ “wo ao
. - oF these are Fisld Armies ani one is en Air Army. _ When they speak or"

it is primarily an infantry amy, oe

.

but different from a Mechanised Aray. However, it is exactly, thé same

(as a Combined Aces Avny ~ a Pielé samy cen have varying nunibers of | : a .
visions dependins on the mission as signed to the- “amy ond all
Get Would the divisions be notor-rifle divisions?

Se: No, the rive Civ 8ions here would be Loot soldiers,

G.: Therefore, the concept of a Combined Arms Amny woula 1 rea’

that the rifle divisions you just spoke of have had engineer, take and

ete

artillery units attache’ thereto and therefore the word "Oonbined. rma!

S32. That is ebsolu utely rig ab 5

Get Zn case commlications Cavelop in connection with the «,

German situation will Soviet Troops be sent into Roumania, Bulgaria’: |

and Czechoslovakia?

. ‘ -
S.2 Without question and they will assume the prime combat. 7

role in these countries, KHRUSHCEEV would never permit independent *

satellite

troops in front of them anid b

then KHRUSHCHEV start a general war?

‘Set  KHRUSE

defeat the

possible that he may strike first.
SERIE RET ETRE ETT TTF TT oe "

BEV goes not weave

army action for political reasons.

abe inne PF

Staff and our foreign

at cack

Buch as Hitler

that there is a great a

attack first and

enemy coumtries

tot

they

. im te ‘, May .
as his attack tarrets

éue to di~fcrences Bmore

allies 5 Locally,

conclusion we can dra

othaswise he may
684 Ges Vroat

d69%,

Do the

completely, although to bim

embark on such 2 risk.

simply removed.

>

strik:

- o®
ave the

trenks to-his high p

with his

go wo in flames and go up themsely

opposition now and be removed.

Co Get

tivelve thousenk roses?

Ss

used, but now they have gone. around to the’ ‘riempoint

chind. thom.

but if he

He 3 wild hive eos

to knock out the USA and England, who are the leaders of prren it, oo aes .

ven though in the past our General: ;

policies had condemned. the concept of aurpriss: aa

' yf

‘ “
ro

évantage to the side that mens a saaden massive,

sixultvaneccusly he is

3 ge epet te To
OM AROS ELILe

C UGE -

vy agree or encoure

SLt

Cres
keen

6 KERUSECEZE? he e ' a

No-one con openly

ach one is a

LON

Who gave you the information that you reported regain

from this ia thet

8 MAXINCYSETY agrees with KER USHOHEY

‘

: :

SANS TANe out the U.S. and Britain:

e a”

tinetine that the ot cee atiter would. disintegrate
26 themselves and be eee to beé alive.’ he oe

oo de OF

£ he does not retreat ron his’

comiitions we should strike him fixst,

?.

mnt views of parti cular high-ranking;

he may say that it may be see borne to

~aied of

Do you thirk

TER ay

4

They a rather see S everything

*

rea with it than eay anythiie 4

“tne launchings were made from i SKALENKO' s bases. Possibly HOSKALENKO : 3

_it has been yet achieved. Of course, a flight once around ean be |

(a) Hi I'd like to. come back to one of the questions, Bande ‘there is’)

TITOV's Plight? |

' 8.2 These are the rumours going round all over “the, _domtzy,

no prominent person has told me ene about TILOV. | The. srunouis, going

around are that TITOV only went around ones: just like Gacarm. > “the

scientists, however, who have mde these elaborate preparations ee run <
sess secrotly and to some degree they have had success. KERUSHOHEV
P . : }

Se tied

Hany

likes to bring’ forth milit ay men as a screen. there are 10, versions

£ these rumours; one version is that TITOV made ue same ‘type. of & a:
vertical flight as the American did; the other version. is that mor
onl nly « circled the world once a tried to bring this up but VARENESOV'
says nothing, even though he must know the facts. ee does not” iniow ©
anything either because these thi ings were Sous with ‘great seoreoy and *
has nothing to do with cosmic flig hts, but unquestionably his ‘bases were.

te
A

used for this. The Soviet psople think: that this was propaganda. and ,

thouga they understand that such feats are possible they do not believe | - se

roloited for delivering an attack against BU US6

i"

around a number of times in another vehicle, snstead of rrTOv, thet in

itssif would be an accomplishment, so why would “SRUSHOREV not ennoutice’ ae?

Sv: The devil kmows why. Maybe it is because Bey as So" ask ow

4
ae

orescating military men... There is much that is weiead about this’ and

“1 other words ‘unose are co more than low level TUEROUTS | ie

bare

Se: That's right, but if everything had been 50 well perfected as

LHEUSECEEV clleges, then why @id he not invite westerners ; ‘even ENNEDY,

.

ce

but at least news correspondents to witness ‘the launching and results of

,

p

slight @ifference here between what he said before and what Be nays: now,

.

and I would like to know exactly how he got it. When he wrote us before :

ho said that KHRUSECHEV was going to do some thing about: ‘Turkey and Iran .

PS 2

+33 -
* ratte cyseatt nt . v7. oo. : ’ ‘
an Septesber or Octeber., Ho nov Says 20 is going to be in

conjunction with BERLIN, '@ Wile to get th

arse hae

vhs story absolutely

vse told him about Iran and Turk rey which

was after he lett us tn Loo Whay was said at that time and when
Was vac position chanted?

Morn Porm amy

important to knov that
to do this.

planning to solve

Eentioned to ms the month of September at that time.

~,

that it could al
Consxcss they woulé

ed wet .
Clarijying this end an

simultaneously with the Gervan problems

our troops entered Iran thoy were not badly receive

oe ibe Eo

Inetamorphosis in an opposite Airection,

SO happen in Cotcber

San a. ean
- S2gn & woace Treaty with Germany.

opulation and our troops oven hellved the
ur invcllicence resorts that the emir oF

oo oociy received by th

AY. The politics of the Central Committee and the

Sond ate enn OF
S contralised amd they can ebay on any alternate routes and’

First of all it is
such 2 policy existed against Iran and continues
reported to your At that time they were.
problem in an isolated fashion and they only

Then, I was told

Now I am

sayine that shis problem will be resolved

iver the end of the war when

a by the local

veasants harysst their CrOopS.
Soviet Troops now would not

& boon population. KHRUSECHEV contemplated _

rene TAROT means geet

Giving an ultimatum similar to the one ha Gave a short time ago to

Turkey and to Palistan

oH, = 1» whe GL a)
Would, state thet ic srs

Srocn2s would move in.
FO RE TT NT Berne

28 ee .
movea in his trooms the

Dut Uhey bezan to chink more cceply cbout this, Possibly a conflict
.
wosuiting from this would not work ous well since there are also UsSe
pases in Turkey and Pacis: canj therefore ib would be better to delay
this vor a month until October and in i xe meantime build up preparations.
fa the meantime the course of the extensive manoeuvres would be checked
and ticops deployed advantageously and since the Party Congress is
meeting on 17th October, “this problem can be handled simultaneously
[ithithoece

a ft, an 2 en, ae bal ont ”
Girgielcs those airfields would be attictras,

thet if any more U.2 flights were sent from their

The ultimatum to Tran
exiorn bases were not removed from Tran, Soviet

Govieusly no-one would remove anything and if he

mowar vould begin. That was ene line of actiorl,

7

ond I told you that after the Party. .

ee

wit h the German problem. A third possibility is that eae ‘the Gemma

guestion will be considered, and. our troops can be concentrated ia dhe Yt

Sores frye Peg tag doy

Girection of Iran but would not go in. ‘The important ‘thing is to be ™

preparcad for any oventuclity and to adopt that course of action tind’
: \ a eae
would be the most expediont politically, but of course all courses'of —

action must be developed 46 for, possible use. Therefore this does not
“mean if Shey plan such a move for September thet they would necessarily
heve to follow through. Preparations are aethe on intensively in. ‘the :
Caucasus in terms of troop training and preparations for possible’ os *
military action, The island of ARTEMA has been closed. ‘Thad to . ;
report to you that preparations for this ection in Septembex were peing
~made but one cannot tell when KHRUSECHEV may decide that enother course
of action is more advantarcous. |

72. j4Het I understand all that and it is perf BeCesy clear, but z

would Like to Imow who told you exactly about the plans for Iran in “the”

first instancs.

Se3 It was ZASORE Oo is hnief of che Napravleniye against
Tran and now ke has : i ye the ent from Tran PANPELRIMONOVs-
As seon so LT return Twill specie with. 2 Ox ra find + wh. t has

[een O L Yeo 1 a AP 27) ou 2.

tation 2 c fo is the one wv Sold m mbsr or October and then

y would be in Cotober together with the German problem “

shat you wrote this Ouse also said that they were

send CEUIOY dowm there, but since then that has beet

a

was CHUIZOV connected with the Iran problem?
the time that KHRUSECHEY sent KONEV off he wentee to place

Messhals in every border military (3 ‘ Therefore he was ‘gonsiaselay ae

*
.

CE mY together with a whole group of Marshals for an assignment, sinte :

then he has ccoided mn ayers him the Chief ‘of Civil Defence instead put:

AMG

4 does not mean that CHUIKOV may not be again the Commander of Ground

Forces pOeee is pean rumoured. ALL these moves are tentative  ecnalaerations,

‘but I assure you ae if host badat tic

very border military district.

<a iy

: -. GVoday even though Marshals are not actu

commands a #yont
t

: : : . ce bairae ny ea 8
there that does not mean that preparation is not going on and possibly"! ©
they have been already designated but have not gone there.’ When”

ae: . hostilities begin they will appear because the troops morale and prestige. =

' of a front is enhanced by the presence of a prominent Marshal who isa.”

proven rilitary leader.

Tie Get Yen @id KBRUSEGEEV make this statement about chopping down, .
the tree ond then the branches will fall off themselves?

Seo: He said this in the Kremlin during a reception. I don't mow —

Fae

which one, he has thomal the time but 16 was about the time that I

wrote cbout it. You ove mo don’t heard Prom a Western ambassador |

oneut the incidents when FHRUSHOHEY was deumk at a Reception and was .

suveling about a megatcn bows aut although his people were trying to

correcsS him he was misting up INT eauivalents with actual weight. ID think |

s - on ee = ss . ; i, Bie clears tek i
. Zé must have been the “ronch Ambassador. eae oe in ae
an Beh : * Sieg 2 Uh

eo *
(5.) Ge: Since THRUSECEEY 19h DGeWtOA de BY BTS Qi Western military. =

superiority over soviet sunsment. Wom Can Be be so arro ee

Se: You sce he feels that the West is not fully prepared and

there are many contradicsions between the members of NATO. He féels thé

Pt ‘
*

if the West werebetter organised then it would be stronger but since’

ws

.

there are contradictions in NATO it is possible that some of the nations

would pull out of it end therefore it is weak.

i Get Does he not vrecoznise the West's superiority in armament? 2 “ae
: Se: He recognises that there is armament strength, but he feels’?

that the contradictions in NATO are strong enough to justify his position 4|

‘

and he anticipates winning because of thise

{/716. ooa0

75. Het I think it is time that we should be packing up cee go *
it is getting late. (Subject stood up and suena the ee
journals which he had photographed in onder to spot the section on
geode’ tie preparations for firinz).
au By the way there will not be any more artillery Re
published in 1961 the last issues are in 1960, from now on artillery.
articles will be placed in special peony but I have pat away ton
left there in order to photograph it when I return. The new artitiony
articles will be placed in the sbornik of the Voyennaya My31 but it is’ ae

‘possible that en entire issue can be devoted to ‘artillery articles. =

‘ 77.. (Subject reviewed his mission assignments and again requested: our.

~~, Btls
. a ot

heip in introducing Ain to é. French businessman. With respect to
stober meetings with Jemst in MOSCOW the entire month was cancelled
because Subject planned to fo on Leave immediately on his return and
in ac2ition not only would the time clement be éo: short in October for’
his accumulating any material or photography immediately after leaving
us but since he himself had stressed that the KGB activity during October :
and up to 15 Rovenber would be exceptionally heavy it would be wise to. ; sa, cat
avoleé contacts with Janet during this period. )
Sot However, we must arronge meetings for November.
told that it would.be possible for him to meet again with’ Janet here ee
he Gee
PaRIS end at that time the mesting plans for the future would be ‘worked.
oute ) -
S.: As long as I am in the Cemmittce meeting oo
Janst at Receptions are fine but we must keep in mind that it I am ote

transferred back to GRU then ve must establish a system fox future ee

commmications which would be exclusively on a clandestine basiss. In

+

.

addition to that we must work out a method for me to pass on urgent, <
information to you, that is for that kind of data that you must have

within twenty-four hours.

: ; Got We will work all this ous vrior to your departure. on

/718+ ound

RV point through WYNNE. Sunjects was told that prist to wd
departure it would be well to take cdvantare of WYNNE and. his’ ae 6

male a short trip around PARIS. Subject agreed. dees was shown

work it takes to waahoe the noctings with him.
to do this in order to rezort to our Governments what he has ers as, <
eccurately as we came In connection with the official meeting . with ;

WYNNE that Subject contemplated, he requested that WYNNE woute bring”

him some material, scuothing like technical broctiures, ‘he was show"! ch

‘ ome very fine French business firms brochures and he was quite pleased

wi th some of these which he would select later as having notdonaly! |
ecauired through WYNNE or a Pronch businessman. Subject's docurients
Which were taken cut by Roger to be paceee ens were now returned a
hime Subject fs at 2).,00 hours ard was delivered by car oo the -
Thee wre

vicinity of his hotel, but a few Dplocks away by M.G. and s, ‘

no incident involved.

: mmm QOCO0D0—~——

Q
