The Pacification Effort in Vietnam InfoO on the Phoenix Program and Viet Cong I
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022669, dated 4 January 1969.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022669).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee ee te ee

el
| sateen |
3 * 4 ‘ x om esta are eae aa ae at
. So get 4 : ‘ Pa
a *
‘4 Py :
v

Ro tas a enenek are SNE 1449
ee ee ae 18 daruay FE
CONTRA coerce |

*
*

é é

SPECIAL -
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE. =
me ad NUMBER 14.69
‘ 2 ; i t
TI Pocifj a iff ‘gi fa Vi ae
le Pacineaen mitcrt in Vietacm
a te ee ee Shamed by”
* c C nr
-" ne:
Or ¥ Sis BoA NN or
ms 4) ¢  RURECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE
> oe es | Seonaccd In by foe
a |" UNFYED STATES INTELLIGENCE BCAPD -
er ry oe — AB Det evateat ee
: 86 Jonueey 1888 ngae"
2 a. rar , ~~ Ge ee
aig Ye > ae ne

4 a "

Authenticated: - 2 f ; ve es haa

P AA BD eA pita oe " % Be te gt te a arc
ECUTIVE SECRETARY/ ph Eom oy
- a ee ae

Reece er ee TT os
ee ete ne

cheek ek 28 EP ee He Se
soar The folowing intelligence erponizstions  participsted 3 in ie e poration of aoe
a Fis estiocte: eas eee S “a. A eee Oe eS
a * c ;
|

The yar 1 Inet geno Agexy and fh teMigence ergestzaticm of fire Beat Soh
oth of Sate and Dereon, = the res : x
, . ‘ ‘

us Concurring: 2 >. : ae : ea a. ead oe ae ef eer, ea
» «Vion Aas. Befun Taylor, wee Diectot, atral Fitelligence et . : See des
Ae, Googe T. Deancy, By for the Director of intel rgence and Reward, Oe; MOR al 2 ’
mont of Stcte +" ws =e ~ ar ; Bote (aes .

Oak Gen Soup Porat, the Dieter, ‘Defers fecathigence Age: ee ae
— “Dy, Louk W. To: a, for the Director, Nefor: af Security Ageacy -. “+ 2 ee, Sah cs s See ge :
* 7 zs eee . Pe ; ee) !
% : Ay Pe Eire eRe ate can hh SSeS a + Pi . an Bae es
; Abstatning: wr Vuee a as : a el : : : ‘

ve br, ee H. Re! ai ah, tor the Assistant Sasccat Nanee: ’ monic Energy Com” a aes ,
“y  S ms end Mr, William ©, Crogat, for the Assistant Divetor, Taderal Ln
. , Burese aie ‘vestigation, tthe subject being ovtfde of thelr Poodidien . FOG. rae

. oat oad ‘ oe : ee ‘
Ps « So ge ee i 7 i ¢ eS on ae a Sa sak ot Pte , eds ,
7 . - é : a F a a8 # a * 7 . co
~ . i 2 & : a ‘ ony a , : v z é a : f St : ; .
ee a eee ee ae a ee ee ee ee
* : “tw = ‘ . * . oe
"OY This mererial geataing Taformation affecting the ae bans of tha Unted States ;
wuhin fie mezaing ef Sp. esplonage low, Title 18, USC, Secu 773 ond 774, the Wun - >
__ mission pr revclation of which in any manner to on vaouthorized perscn b ales. a ie ;
. ' ae : 7 : “s ar ae . : * te 7 4 _ a . “s . 4 ‘ soe i be _ . ° < D : i t "*% ee
. 7 . z e he ' . ae oe : ie so » 4 + = soo . sy

ee Magee gee fee eee

F teah entice mont nme een aed
saa torent toate tented cheedaaettnnheaeliac iieth tes Miaen fc mealies abate ahaiidaietatneneine i tentahe adh, bameandien tabhes —ins Lon. edimenrintentaktns taint, on. san demea*aated P=

03 2.12.)...
Ly eeretrerre
soy IS ee :
dit3 wh4 ney <i.=<

THE PACIFICATION EFFORT
IN VIETNAM

CONCLUSIONS

A. The pacification program as a whole has made a significant con-
tribution to the prosecution of the war and strengthened the political
position of the Government of South Vietnam (GVN) vis-a-vis the Com-
munists. Thus far the GVN's principal success has been in expanding
its presence into the countryside. Froviding permanent security for
these gains has been more difficult, Security conditions continue to
fluctuate with the intensity of combat. Low level terrorism, political
agitation, and propaganda efforts by the Viet Cong (VC) continue to
hamper progress, particularly since no more than a promising start
has been made in reducing the effectiveness of the VC infrastructure.
A large part of the countryside is still contested and subject to the
continuing contro! of neither side.

B. As for gaining the allegiance of the people, this is almost im-
possible to measure. The turnout in the 1967 elections and the failure
of the Communists to gain popular support at Tet suggest progress.
Apprehension over the settlement of the war and the finnness of the
American commitment tends to reduce popular confidence. The most
common attitude among the peasants, however, continues to be one
cf war-weariness and apathy,

C. Saigon now seems finally to have accepted the need for a
vigorous pacification effort. However, progress may still be hampered
ky the political situation in Saigon, continuing inefficiency, corruption,
and the parochial concerns of the GVN.

D. Another major uncertainty is how much time is left to make
up past deficiencies and consolidate current gains. Over the next sev-
eral months, further progress in pacification will almost certainly not
make the GVN much more able to cope with the VC, given peacetime

Gite aacnnnnees ie ntevai or aie Sakae

Gans

conditions, than it would be today; a significant advance in this re-
spect would probably require at least a year.

E. Finally, there is the question of how the Communists will react
to the growing pressures on them. Despite improvements in the oyer-
all security situation, gains in pacification are still vulnerable to ad-
verse military developments. The chances are good that the Com-
munists will attempt to make an intensified effort to counter the gains
in pacification and they will probably have some success. Thus, con-
solidation of gains is likely to continue to be a very slow and uncertain
process.

DISCUSSION

1, BACKGROUND

1. Since at least 1959 a pacification program of some Kind has been in
existence in South Vieam. Underlying philosophies, relative priorities, specific
programs, and the allocation of resources have ebbed and flowed; the ultimate
objectives, however, have remained fairly constant. As most recently defined by
the Government of South Vietnam (GVN) these are: to improve security in the
rural areas and protect them from enemy military activity, to engage the sympa-
thies and loyalties cf the peasant and create a viable countrywide administra-
tion, and to neutralize the effectiveness and appeal of the Communist political
apparatus.

2. Until 1967, the pacification effort was overshadowed by an overall strategy
which placed primary emphasis on defeating the enemy's conventional forces,
GYN and Allied efforts to secure the countryside were clearly subordinate to
the large-unit war; in part this necessarily followed from the character of the
war, as more and Jarger units from North Vietnam were committed to battle.
In any event, by the end of 1966 the goals of pacification were still remote.

3. In 1967, significant changes were made in the doctrinal and organizational
aspects of pacification. It was finally recoymized in practice that there was no
single solution to pacification, and that, in fact, thers was close interdependence
between all aspects of the military and politica! srugele. For the first time,
significant numbers af specific Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN? units
were assigned defined roles in support of pacification. Move large Allied opera-
tions were coordinated with follow-on pacification efforts. The Regione! and
Popular Forces (RF, PF) were expanded as a critical component of territorial
defense, helping to £ll an immense void. Plans were laid and implen:e: ted to
expand the Revolutionary Development teams, to intensify their trainiug, and
more clearly to define their security missions. A systematic plan to attuck the
Viet Cong (VC) political infrastructure (ie, leadership and organieetis .) was
worked out and even‘ually accepted by the Saigon authorities, F inally, % system

SUNG AORRRTRERIEREINI ee Bie Ban ot arty = ne ae eect «yee ee emia! enn: andi singel

of evaluating various aspects of pacification was tested in pracice and accepted
(the Hamlct Evaluation System—HES).

4. As a result of all of these efforts, progress was made during 1967, The
principal thrust was in expanding the presence of the government and making
its inBaence felt. In terms of security, however, progress wis deceptive. Overall
ratings based on HES statistics indicated a rapid expansion of G¥N presence
throughout the country. Some of this progress, however, was the result of changes
in the accounting system. More important, the detailed statistics showed that
VC military and political activity in hamlets classified es “relatively secure”
was actually increasing in the six months before the Tet offensive of January
1968. The bughty fragile nature of GVN control was, of course, dramatically
demonstrated by the Tet attacks; not only was the government presence in the
countryside severely contracted for several months, but the confidence of poten-
tial government supporters there must have been badly shaken.

5. Ir. effect, it took most of 1968 to regain lost ground, and some residue of
psychological and political damage probably remains. Nevertheless, some progress
was made even though Communist forces were engaged in continufng military
“offensives” through August. Progress has been much more rapid during the
relative lull in cc ibat since then; this is another manifestation of the fact that
pacification cannot be separated from the total military situation.

6. Since 1 November, an Accelerated Pacification Campaign (APC) has been
underway with the proclaimed goal of adding, by 31 January 1969, 1,200 hamlets
to the 5,500 already classified as “relatively secure.” Simultaneously, the attack
on the VC infrastructure (the Phoenix, or Phang Hoang program) has also been
accelerated, after 2 promising start in 1963,

7. In evaluating these programs, certain basic questions remain: what con-
stitutes “progress,” and how permanent is it? In the next section we deal with
these questions in terms of the three objectives menticned at the outset: security,
the allegiance of the people, and the effectiveness cf the enemy's political-
administrative apparatus.

HN. EFFECTIVENESS AND WULNERABILITIES

A. Security

8. It has long been recognized that pacification is first of all a question of
security. Without continuing protection against Communist military and political
forces, there is little chance of winning over an apathetic, war weary peasantry
to the side of the CVN. Until recently, the prevailing concep: had heen to secure
limited areas and gradually expand the perimeter of protection. New, in the
APC the GVN appears willing to spread its resources mor2 thinly in order to
extend its presence into more and more areas at an increasingly rapid pace. This
is partly because the more favorable military position sf the Allies has made
an expanded eflort msrs feasible. Equally important, the GVN has felt it neres-
sary to respond to the iatensified VC efforts to establish Liberation Committees

throughout the country. In effect, both sides want to be in a position to make
maximum claims of control over a wide area and a high percentage of the
populaticn, should there be an early end to the Bghting. The HES currently shows
that 76.3 percent of the entire population falls in the “relatively secure” catepory,
12.3 percent under VC domination, and the remainder “contested.” By way of
comparison, statistics far February 1967 showed 66 percent of the total por ulation
in “relatively secure” areas and 19 percent in those controlled by the VC.

9. These statistics must be regarded with considerable reserve. For example,
while the GVN claims that about 65 percent of the rural population is “rela-
tively secure,” over half of these live in hamlcts where there are varying degrees
of VC activity. Thus it is possible to argue that some could be considered as
“contested,” in which case the overall evaluation would change. Moreover, ‘

eel

progress in security as measured by the HES system represents a sum total of
reporting on a wide variety of activities related to security, including the level
of VC military and political operations. if these latter indicators were con-
sidered in isolation, one could conclude that very little progress has been made
in the past two years. :

10. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that since the introduction of large US
forers in 1965 the ovezall trend in security has been basically favorable to the
GVN. Moreover, the Allied side is in a better position to protect pacification
gains than it was a year ago. The forces involved in security (RF, PF, Police,
Revolutionary Development teams) have increased in numbers and effectiveness.
The balance of conventional forces is much more favorable as a result of the
heavy Communist losses at Tet and in the following months. Especially since
Tet, there has also been a decline in the quality of the Communist guerrillas,
& principa} instrument for attacking the pacification effort. At present, Commu-
nist forces are almost certainly incapable of mounting an offensive on a scale
that would permanently reverse overall trends, In selected areas, however,
intensified military operations will almost certainly damage the pacificaticn pro-
gram and set it back; terrorism in particular is likely to increase.

B, Revolutionary Development Se

il. Engaging the positive support of the peasant for the government is an-
other matter. Many people in the rural areas have been subjected to a series
of programs and false starts over the years and, no doubt, are inured to new
appeals from Saigon. In any case, the political and psychological attitudes of the
hamlet dwellers are not susceptible to statistical measure. There are, however,
some general indicators of progress in this phase of pacification First, there
was an impressive turnout of voters in the national elections of 1967; even
allowing for some coercion and dishonesty, this suggests that a large part af
the rural population is at least partially responsive to the GVN. Second, the
rural and urban masses conspicuously failed to rise up and support the VC
during the ‘ret offensive. Finally, there was some popular revulsion to Com-
munist excesses at Tet, and this was reflected in the large number of people

4 PREC RTI

WGA

who have since been willing to enlist in the ARVN and in th: People’s Self-
Defense Corps.

12. During 1968, however, new uncertainties have arisen which ace bound to
have an impact on Revolutionary Development. With the beginning of negotia-
“sions and the end of the bombing of North Vietnam, there is a growing belief—
at least among informed Vietnamese~—that the war is coming to an end, sooner
rather than later. Among these people, there is growing apprehension over the
shape of a final settlement ard the firmness of the American commitment. To
the extent that this uncertainty may be reflected in the countrysice, it would
tend to undermine the gains of Revolutionary Development. Morcover, any
weakening of the central government, whether real or imagined, would magnify
the uncertainties of officials involved in Revolutionary Development programs
and thus pose a growing threat to this aspect of pacification.

13. Even leaving aside such general uncertainties, progress in the field of
“nation building” or Revolutionary Development is likely to be painfully slow
for several basic reasons. As noted, security is an indispensable prerequisite. In
areas where there is a decline in sccurity conditions, even temporarily, the
resulting damage to confidence and respect for the government mcre than off-
sets gains from developmental projects, Even if security conditions remain good,
the administrative capability of Vietnamese officials is weak; Revolv tionary De-
velopment is beavily dependent on American advice, assistance, and inspiration.
Pervasive corruption is a constant threat to the entire system.

C. Neutralizing the Viet Cong Infrastructure

14, Of all the aspects of pacification, the most neglected—and until quite
recently the least effective—has been the effort to eliminate the pervasive politi.
cal infrastructure of the VC. Until mid-1968 the GVN gave no more than Inke-
warm support to the effort. In part this has been the legacy of a long era of
political insecurity, during which intelligence, security, and police activities
were often directed against non-Communist groups rather than against the VC.
Another reason was the reluctance of the army and other governmental groups,
especially the police, to work effectively together. In any case, unk] 1968 the
only organized counterefforts were the Chicu Hoi program to rally VC to the
government and a small, American-sponsored guerrilla effort, now called Provin-
cial Reconnaissence Units.

15. Because of the presence of large US forces it has become more difficult
for the VC infrestructure to operate, and its effectiveness has declined. Eliminat-
ing the infrastricture itself, however, is another matter and presents ¢ formidable
Jong term problem. Important steps to remedy the situation were taken in 1968,
with the initiation of a countrywide effort, called Phoenix, to collect informa-
tion on the VC's infrastructure and to plan various operations against jt. The
record of the new program is fairly promising thus far. Better intelligence,
funneled into district and provincial centers, has meant that both conventional
and paramilitary operations can be targeted against known VC leaders.

16. The Phoenix program is one additional pressure, and is directed against that
of the system which the VC have long considered crucial. However, it cannot
yet be credited with aa appreciable countrywide impact on the integrity or gen-
eral effectiveness of the VC infrastructure. About 13,000 members of the VC
infrastructure ace claimed to have been killed, captured, or induced to defect.
This total may include individuals improperly identified as members of the
infrastructure; it certainly includes large numbers of tow level cadres who can
be replaced fairly easily. The numbers of key cadre eliminated is quite snuall,
since they are the most difficult to find. Moreover, it is not at all clear what
hsppens to those captured. A recent check suggests that a large number are
Gisappearing into the quagmire of the GVN administrative-judicial system and
some are probably retuming to their farmer activities. A long, patient effort will
be required before the VC infrastructure can be crippled.

MI. PROSPECTS

17. Pacification is far too complex, covers too many individual programs, and
is geographically too diverse to permit clear prognoses, All things considered,
the program as a whole has made a significant contribution to the prosecution
of the war and to the political struggle. It has been most successful in expand-
ing the presence of the GVN in the countryside; it has been less successful
in establishing permanent security or stimulating genuine loyalty and commitment
to the Saigon government. And it has been laggard in coping with the political
threat posed by a well-organized and disciplined Communist infrastructure.
This has been a significant weakness, threatening and undermining other gains.

A, The GYN ond Pacification

18. Much will depend on the attitude of the GVN It cannot be said that the
various Saigon governments have shared the American enthusiasm or dedica-
tion to pacification. Results obtained during 1966 and 1967 were largely because
of constant American pressures. The skills, funds, and motivation have been
overwheimingly American; the GVN has provided manpower and occasional
high level endorsements, but has been far from committed to the programs.
Too often GVN officials have participated or cooperated simply to please their
American counterparts, or to share in the spoils of the’ inevitable carruption.

19. Saigon now seems to have accepted the need for a vigorous pacification
effort. Thieu's preference would probably be to move more deliberately, con-
solidating GYN control in selected areas rather than establishing a less firmly
based presence over a broader range. However, he is increasingly concerned
over how much time is left to the GVN before the fighting ends, Fear that
peace will come before the GVN is in a strong position to compets with the
VC has caused Thieu to support the APC. Moreover, Thieu is taking a new
interest in the possibilities of using aspects of the -pacificution program, such
as the People’s Self-Defense Corps, as the basis for a countrywide political
organization.

6

sn

eo re ee Tet

:
i

20, The GYN still does not have the skills and resources to asrume a sig-
nificantly greater role in the management aad execution of an effective pacifica-
tion effort in 1969. US assistance fs still vital to success, but gaining popular
acceptance will depend finally on a growing effectiveness of the GVN's per-
formance in the program.

8. Political Conditions

2). A major uncertainty is how much time is left to make up past deficiencies
and consolidate current gains. Pacification has already strengthened the GVN
position vis-a-vis the Communists. Over the neat several months, further progress
in pacification will almost certainly not make the GYN much more able to cope
with the VC in peacetime than it would be today. A significant advance in this
respect would probably require at least a year. And the terms of a settlement
could undo virtually all that has been accomplished, especially since progress
has been minimal in reducing the political threat.

C. Communist Counterefforts

22, A second area of uncertainty is “ye response of the Communists. We
believe the overall situation in Vietnam is such that pacification is less vulnerable
to Communist counterefforts than in 1967," A principal conclusion about the
entire pacification program, however, is tha: its gains are tentative and can be
adversely affected by military setbacks; this is especially true of the gains
registered during the APC. It is also true, of course, that Communist military
wetbacks or reduced levels of operations would facilitate gains in pacification.

23. There are a number of ways the Commmnists could attack the pacification
program, If they are willing to pay the price in casualties and capabilities, they
can mount attacks large enough to inflict considerable damage on the pacifica-
tion effort, at least temporarily. Similarly, they could concentrate their efforts
against the pacification security forces (RF, PF, and the Revc'utionary Develop-
ment teams), and increase terrorism and propaganda in the hamlets. The VC
launched a concerted propaganda campaign against the APC, almost immediately
upon its implementation, The chances are good that they will also attempt to
counter the gains in pacification in other ways and they will probably have some
success; such an intensification of fighting would, in any case, set back the
pacification program. Thus, consolidation of gains is likely to continue to be
a very slow and uncertain process.

‘Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
believes that the estimate does not support the conclusion that the pacification situation is
less vulnerable than it was in 1967, but rather tha: it is essentially as vulnerable now as it

was then.
