Probable International Reactions to Certain Possible US Courses of Action Again (0000132652)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132652, dated 6 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132652).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

By, a

Oe 3 —PeP-GEeREE— TS# 142225-0 £m
pee é

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CENTRAL
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

LL February 1961

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL 1997

MEMORANDUM FOR THE UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

SUBJECT: Probable International Reactions to Certain
Possible US Courses of Action Against the Castro

Regime

“up eD see

The attached Memorandum for the Director 4s forwarded

for your informatione

aoe ae 3
3 es Ce fo L- Par he Hig fe
we z lt
CHESTER Le COOPER -
Deputy Assistant Director
National Estimates

&
DISTRIBUTION A MINUS
Loner i—
sich: - 2 GgT gie os RS
SO = oe

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
11 February 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR

SUBJECT: Frebable Internativunal Reactions to Certain Possible
US Courses of Action against the Castro Regine

introlucticn

i. he purpose of this nenorandun is to assess the principal
international reactions to various types of actitn thets niet 2'~
take to bring down the Castro governsent in Cuba -- especially
the nature and mammitude of possible Bloc counterm:ves and the
~vssivility of serivus adverse reacticns cn the yvart of Latin
Anerican ccuntries or others in the Free World. The pcssible
actions here considered are: (a) provisicn of active support,
wf varying degrees cf mngnitudce and overtness, te an attempt
by Cuban ojposition elements, internal cr in exile, to overthrow
Castro; (b) nilitary invasion of Cuba with US forces; or {c)
establishnent of a neval blockale cf Cube in international

waters.

§ am

2. We oust enzhasize that actual internatiunnl renctions ri
right be greatly fafluenced by circuristences which cennst be
accurately foreseen ~~ by the precise nature cf the US acticn; by
the manner, sjeed, ani success with which it was carried out; by
the extent tc which drastic US acticn might appear to be justifies
vy possible new Cuban provocations; or by possible chanzes in
Cuban relations with other Latin Aperican countries. However,
we believe that sone valid generalizations can be rade on the
basis of the situoticn as it bas developed so far ond of the

x

nature of the possible US actions considered,

on

Sino-Goviet Bloc Reactions

3- Bloc leaders fron the start have recognized the value
of a revoluticnary, pro-Ccmmnist Cuba as a source cf irritation
and enbarrassnent tc the US, as an exan le fcr revolutionary
covenents elsewhere in the henis,here, and as a center for
Communist as well as Cuban agitation ani propaganie threughout
Latin America. The Bloc has provided Castro with extensive

political, econonic, and nilita supyort.
Qr , it

kh, Moreiver, the Cuban exatiple has assure] increasing pron-
inence in Cirmmnist assessnents of the worl’ situaticn. Cuba is

being cepicted as a prime example of the thesis that colonial

~ 2 -

ny Ww

or nett

regires ore inevitably tourling unler the iopact of revolutionary
nationalisno, and that Llce strength can prevent the imperialists
from iutervening to reverse this process. In the Bloc's view

the Castro regive is farther along toward the next stage +=

the advent of Conozunist rower -- than any other Free Waid
country. While nore recent Seviet pronouncenerts have tended tc
vininize specific cilitery corcmitments to Cuba as well as
Khrushchev's implied threat of last summer that Cuba was under
the protection of Soviet nissiles, the Scviets have if anything

reinfcrced their political alignnent with the Castro reine.

CARR tga Bee RS Se SE RR ee
5. For these reasons, the Bloc would regard Castro's downe
fall os a substantial political defeat ond would respond
vigorously tu any major US nove -- overt or covert and whether
or not supported by others -- to bring it about. Its efforts
woul’? probably be afrected prinarily at heading off the Anerican
threat to Cuba by political neans, utilizing in the process all
vsppcrtunities to arouse sympathy for Cuba es a victin of colo-
nialist agureesion, and to depict the US action as a threat to
the peace, To this end, it would ,robably stimulate and support
mass denunstrations against the US in various countries of Latin
Armerice ond elsewhere. It would probably dermard action by tke

UN tc censure the US an preserve Castro, nost likely through

a a

+1 We.
oe

q strong resolutions calling on the US to desist but possibly also
through establishment af some sort of UN presence in Cuba. The

USSR would firmly oppose any US move to getabiten a blockade and
would use all diplomatic and legal means at its disposal to deny

it international acceptancee

6e In the event of a prolonged military struggle between
Castro and US-backed opposition forces, the Bloc would almost
certainly seek to continue or even to increase its military aid
to the Castro regime. However, we believe that “ths” b1dé“would™
| avoid a direct military confrontation with US forcese The Com-
munist leaders almost certainly recognize that they Tave little
or no capability to counter US military power in the Cuban area
and that US sensitivity regarding Cuba is very greate Certainly they
would not wish to risk general war over this issue. Although

the Soviets would probably seek to test a US blockade, for

exanvle, they would alr.cst certainly do sco with a nerchant vessel,
verhars announcing that it was lceded with foodstuffs on? other

ccusuner requireuents, rather than with 4 warshi;:.

7. Even if the US succeeded in bringing: Castre down, Blse
leaders probably believe that they could offset this defeat to
sore extent by depicting Castro as o rartyr to American inperi-
olism, which took adventaze of Cuba's small size anc closeness
to the US. The Blcee leaders would probably also feel thenselves
impelled to increase ; iressures elsewhere in order to restore the

EES ae . pa eNews ok SRE. aigiaten
imee of Communist advance, A decision about what to do woula

_devend on nany factors, such as the local circumstances at what~
ever ect was under consideration ani their apyraisol of the new

pelitical situation create by the US action, including cny

reassessment of US willingness to resist Bloc hoves elsewhere,

8. Especially if the US action were obvious or acknowled ed,
Khrushchev would be under yressure es,ecially fron Cormunist
China to give uz his present conciliatory line and to shift to
a nere izilitant :olicy. The atoosphere would coke it cifficult,
for a time at least, tc hola any US-Soviet discussions Lecking

toward an imperoverent cof relations, *

-5.

ee cae ewe

or—-sHesee

sotin Averican Reocticns
SA ePIC NEE EMIT

% Castre's atature in Latin America has markedly declined
over the last year, although he still cornonds a good deal of
sya.athy anong lower incope grouzs of the area. His dictatorial
methods, his uolitical neddling in other countries, and his close
collaboration with world commumnisno have progressively alienated

mony who initially felt that Castro was bringing a long needed

social revolution to Cuba. “Official opinion, at least privately, .

has generally crystallized agninst Castro, and the earlier tendency

..,0f pany,secretly to applaud his: Yankee-baiting has? subsideds?  -¥*

The majcrity of Latin American governzeats apparently felt that
the US econcsic enbargzo was Justified and virtually all have at
least _rivately synathized with the US decision to break dizlo--
matic relations. Feru ani five lesser cuuntries -- anong then
the authoritarian regires -- have alsc broken or susrenced dinlo-
ratic ties with Cuba, and f.ur others have withdrawn their

arbassacurs fron Havana,

10, Must Latin Arerican leaders still are reluctant to take
a yubdlic stand against Castro fer fear of stirring uz. the vocif-
ereus and sunetines strateyically Jlsaced otnurity of pro-Comme-
3

nists and other leftists who look to Castry as a syubol of their

~ 6.

ere

sue oeeste ee

vwn revolutionary aspirations, Moreover, these leaders thenselves
continue to be influenced by traditicnal fears of US éori nation
of the herisphere. One or two Latin Anerican governrents (e.g,
Ecuador and ;-erhays Mexico) are still inclined to wark frra
negotiated settlenent between the US and Castro. The stand of
Brazil's new president is uncertain, Thus, we see little likeli-

heod as natters now stand that the OAS can be induced to partici-~

2 the he ARSE - ee

vote in or officially sanction anti-Castre measures of the drastic

nature considered in this cenorandun, However, many Latin Anerican

leaders probably expect that the US by itself wilf@oener or SET”

later feel conuelled to take increasingly strceng weasures agginst
Castro. Indeed, sore sectors of Latin Arerican o;inion already
criticize the US fcr not dealing sufficiently forcefully with

the Cuban reine,

ll, Desjite the likelihood of outeries fron the far left,
nest Latin American ccovernnents would at leost erivately appreve
of unobtrusive US suvzort for an Opposition move against Castro
which they believed likely to win broad populer su, ort in Cuta.
Perhavs a few governrents such as those in Venezuela and Colcubiea
would be nore inclined to a:prove if they had been consulted by

the US in advance. Scne, indeed, woulé ,robably be willing to

~T ~-

cree

TOP-GHERHE-

provide covert assistance of their own for such a move, pearticu-
larly if they were assured that the US would participate in ef-
forts to overthrow the Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Re-
public. This last issue is eritical to Venezuelan President
Cetancourt, whose moderate leftist government is widely respected
in the hemisphere. If Betancourt supported new US moves against
Castro in return for US commitments regarding Trujillo, a mumber

of other Latin American governments probably would fall in line.

120 Willingness to go along would. be greatly weakened if the

PEGE ~e Dnt CES ins
US role were such as to suggest that the US was imposing a mew

regime rather than assisting the Cubans themselves to settle their
own destinies. Direct participation of US combat forces in over-
throwing Castro within Cuba itself would cause a bitter reaction
throughout the hemisphere, reflected in strong opposition in the
QAS and UN. These reactions would be especially deep and lasting
if it appeared that the US was attempting to install another re-
actionary Latista-type regime in Cuba; in the long run, the re-
actions woul: be somewhat mitigated if the new regime appeared

clearly to be supported by .a representative of the Cuban people.

130 The Latin American reaction would also be adverse if
the US established a blockade of Cuba in international waters,

though it would probably be less intense than in the case of

+ ae,
ore

POr-geenet—

US combat operations within Cuba. At least in the absence of new

and persuasive Cuban provocations, most Latin American countries
would condemn a blockade unless it were in support of an armed

insurrection within Cuba of which they otherwise approved,
Reactions Elsewhere in the Free World

le The other Free World nations have for the most part not
been deeply involved with the Cuban issuee,.. The.Westerm Europeans...
have preferred to let the US handle Cuba as it sees fit, and the
Afro-Asians have taken little note of Gubay which is far from

PE REE L,. drsaesieg SaaS «ner ear epee eae ca sae
their sphere of interest. Ggseer. drastic US actions (and

Soviet counteractions) might create strong opposition by stim-
lating fears of general war and by creating (especially for the

Afro-Asians) an impression of rampant colonialism.

15. The reaction would be minimal in the case of unobtrusive
US support for an op »sition attempt against Castro. This might
produce a good deal of cynicism throughout the world about the
US role, but if quickly successful little other lasting reactione
However, an operation in which US participation was marked, or
one which resulted in prolonged an inconclusive fighting, would

probably generate widespread pressure for moves to jnternatiofalize

and control the situation.

16 Actual US uilitary interverctica in Cuba would alnest
certainly evoke wiles reat anc vehenent voliticcl vpposition,
even if carried sut st: ra.idly as to - resent the world with a
foit accerm:li, It would renini mony peorle cf the Scvict
intervention in Hungary. It would vrovoke a seetieotaeay une
favorable respcnse auons the AfridAsian nations, who are, like
the Latin Americans, extremely sensitive to what they consider
great yvower disregard for the rights of srallergnations, par-
ticulorly in colonial or former cclonial areas, In sore re-
sects the US right be idaced | ina situation Soar orap le. fo that

Te gee ER ene 00" SRR ia oe Teena
of the Tritish and French at the tine cf Suec, with even many

of sur NATO allies likely t:: take the nesition the US dic at

that tire.

17% Although US ingzcsiticn of a raval blockade in intere
national waters would vrebably cause senewhet less internationel
fur:re than an overt US rilitary invasion of Cuba, there would
be witespreead rece-tivity, rarticularly in the afro-Asian world,
ts the likely Castro argunent that the US was trying te starve
the Cuoan ,ecple ints submission. Since =ost trade with Cuba

is carried cn dy shiys cof ether nations, Gereover, a blockade

2 * =
woull -ose the question of icternaticral acce, tance in a particularly

tn
Cmege

acute fert. Even among these nations ctherwise not vorticularly
sy, athetic ts Castro, there would wrcvbauly ve wides:read resent.
rent at having their ow shi-s halted and Jenial of the US risht
to do so. Althwouch we would not expect military counteraction,
even by the Bloc, there would be Great Lressure on the US,

divlomatic anc leral, to abandon the blockade,

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

a ee
ene u 7 4 ured ee *

ABBOT SMITH
Acting Chairman
