Prospects for North and South Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000024387, dated 2 July 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000024387).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

twa

NATIONAL

PROSPECTS FOR NORT!-

NUMBER 14.3/53-61

(Supersedes SNIE 63.1-60 ond
NIE 63-59)

SOUTH VIETNAM

* a

* : !

Sw milled by fAc
DRECTOR OF CENTHAL INTEC LICENCE
Jae toheing enreluigeh ¢ pregmicsthers parte psfed im the
preparation ef th evi Te The Central fatlelige a7e Iver cy
and fhe entedig ICe OF CEN alin of the Depertirenls af
stgie Pre Ac y De Nore the Av Force, and The font Staff

ven nered am by the
EAELED STATES ENTELEAGE ACF bor
ade dog  196F Con rring bere Tie Brereton ot Int he
gee atthe oA, Depo rimepn tot Store, (he As fant Cae?
et SS? ft por Pneetiges. @, ie patter. af the Acmy. fae Asecre-
eat Ce epul Na at pete feo spateiiewe = Depertine fet
the Nuie, the daada OG epoap sear fateigouce USAF, TAe€
ines tor foo Estettigense font Stuf the Agstiant ft whe
Secetar, of inten. S ede Geo as wd oe Ourestier
uf (he Saltemal Sere Ue ageucy TAs AP ne Energr Coats
misweer Recce reiaice 6 he Csr ttf oe @: fou Bee
roefee Pele os dred. op Pare eg 6M, ane ed ees
terig aur mcs? fhe Serog: Fue

-_ see eee

4480 .0 4.51939
T N

ue

NIE 14.3/53-61
15 August 1961

INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

AND

ee ETON

age on Pt

ai

ahem hey we OD Senza

¥ ‘
ave a
we end

ne NTS odie, Te
‘eri Redes HF YF:

vie
w

0s, 5 Daibore atte AW

APY Ee ol
me is
ek ree
vert

> ie. TORT. - aris
i ll ie lS lal

ry
’
‘+
= of

Ta

a0
“ants A

means ov
a;

te
you”
a “e “
ear,
— > Se

tad

aes

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

; Lod’ ete tute was die ated by the Central Intellicence Apency “Tats copy
Soba theangemanon and ose et the recisert and of per ans wider Nia purisdic th OR
ace fb te Ghote basi Ad ioctl eaocntial cisemination Mer te gatherized by the
oh Wen, Oi cals win ther rospective departments

a Dir-rtor of Inteligesce .nd Reorat ‘fh. for the Department of State
b Asst tant Chief of S'o1. su Inteltige ace, Department ef Une Army
Asitant Chicf at Navel Operators Untelbgencer, for tie Da puriment 03

fe 4

oe toe Navy
Ou od. Director of Inte Higence, USAF. for ‘he Dep.rime at of the Aur Force
© Des tor for dete Prgence Jumnt Stath for Tov Joust Stat
of L Dineetat of Intelsgeice, AEC, te ne Atemic Fnergy Commission
, KE A sistant Director, FGL tor t..e Fd oral Burress of Investazction
+ h. Asal fant to the Sevictary oi Dern ¢, Special Operations, for tne Departm ni
3 t of D: fense
. oa) Director of NSA for '6 4 National fecunmtly Arency
‘ } A-stetanh Pieeeter for Central Pefrenes, CHA for any other Di purtment oF
: (Oo Agency
2 This copy may be retain oan destrove!l by burning in accondance with appheable
se curity regu anions, Ar Peburns dito the Central Intellyence Agency by arrangemont
_ wih the Oltne of Central Reference, CIA -
aa 3. When af estimate is disseminated overseas. the overseas racipients may -¢7ain ot
for a peried not in excess of ome year AY the eod ef this period, the cotimate sheuld F
rithes be destroyed, relurn: d to the forxarding ageacy. or permin-ien heuld be requested
ef the fovaarding #,enes to retain it in accordance with [AC-D-69 2. 22 June 1933.
: § The the oibhsebmae wien usd wparately from the test sioukld be clas -lfied:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

ae os WARNINO :
: ae The mates. contains infermaton afechag
zi : the Natoma Gefeme of the Usted Starter :
aiey Be j ian (he neanuns of Ue espionace bas.
tot, - | Me 1B USE, Sees Ty3 and “54 the trans:
ge re ‘ : m ‘lon op ney Laer. af cchieh In aay manner
“oy ae Lo bn urautheneet pow as prohtited by haw ats
Bi ae ; . .
= * eee
- +
ria Ota ae BE
cree | Cea
ty ap eatin Or ae
- foam oof Bae
! ce rr ne
es a Ae er) Le
- 8 eee thea of fe cestivattes
in! Oe : .
aca gts
pal ‘a! -

?

TABLE OF CONTENTS

T4E PROBLEM . eS ea ce le Bie ib* Gi ee bye Me ie we te Bose S Pare
CONCLUSIONS: = 44 Go d.08 Go Ree ee me Se ea ee ee ES
DISCUSSION. 6 SiS ble Oe pri Oe S Src Sd Bee Ds
I INTRODUCTION . . Be tS aay Ue ese font See

fi THE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK IN NORTH VIETNAM
A Introduction. .. «2. wa te. eee eke eal te a ie
B. Politwal Situation und Qutlook . 2... . 2... +--+
© Economic Situation 2... 2 1 we ee ee

HI S.fUATION AND PROSPECTS IN SOUTH VIETNAM. . .

A. Political. tes te AS ee ce

B Economic... . fe ie eek rath teh tern

= on # 8 # 8 wn we

IV THE COMMUNIST THRE.T TO SOUTH VIFTNAM. . . .

A The Military Threat. 2... a.
B. The Guerrilla Threat. . 2... .
c. Pohtkal and Psychological Warfare

|

" W¥. OUTLOOK FOR THE STRUGGLE IN SOUTH VIETNAM . .

‘

&

Fy WANE 1 ggg? Peta Me ech stg sh tore

A Democratic Republi of Vietnam...
i The Government of Vietnam...

t
r
a 3
~
F
’

_ Intraparty strife.
_. active there will probably be a struggse
“ for power between the Moscow-onented
. and the Peiping-oriented elements of the

_ party. (Paras. 13, 15, 21, 23- ~25% g

THE PROBLEM ee - ae

To assess the situations in North and South Vietnam, to ce the nature ‘and ;

scope of the Communist threat to South Vietnam, and to estimate the Prospects ‘for

_ the next year or so.

%

CONCLUSIONS 2 0.

1. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam

(DRY) has thoroughly conslidated its
political control in North Vietnam and,
with extensive Bloc assistanci, will prob-

‘ably continue to make rapic economic

progress. Regimentation and food short-
ages have increased public unrest and

' dissutisfaction and resultec in some

slackening of discipline among ‘ocal ~ffi-
cials. However, there is no sizificant
organized opposition. The mo fterating
inftuence of the aged Ho Chi Minh has

- prevented policy differences ameny: top

DRV leaders from erupting into serious
Whea Ho is no longe:

2. There is surne dissatisfaction in South
Vietnain with Diem’s leadership armor g
members uf the cabinet, the bureaucauy,
and the militag,, ari: ing out of the serbous
internal security situation and itritation

with Diem’s systen of family rule. Diem

tate 8 EB 7 .
oe Nae cate SEC T o rc ae ns i ai Cr
. ou ee te . . m * - 3
a es . * . ba fe = ro

has Initia'ed a number of pol'tical reform
measures, but probably will not relinquish
his hiphly centralized method of govern-
rient control The c-gree of dissatisfac-
tion will probably be directly related to -
the success or failure of the Government
of Vietnam (GYN) efforts against Com- ©
munist guerrilla and subversive activity. -
(Paras. 31, 34, 39) .

3. The army will continue to be a major

factor in future political developments in
South Vietnam. We believe that the
chances of a inilitary coup have been re- ©
duced by recent manifestations of US
support of the Diem government and bj
the substantial increase in US aid to help
South Vietnam meet its internal security
problems. Although there has been a de- —
crease in indications of coup-plotting
within the military in recent monchs. cer-
tain basic dissatisfactions with the na-
tional leadership persist. If_the fight
against the Viet Cong goes poorly during
the Next year or the Suuth Vietnamese
Army suffers heavy casualties, the

fh chance: ofa military coup would substan-
tially increase.

tPara. 37»

4k major Hanoi-directed Communist
' offensive against the Diem government

and directed toward reunification of Viet-
f.am under Communist control is wider

. way. The Communist apparatus In
_Scuth Vietnam, the Viet Cong, now prob-

ably has me+. that, 12,000 hard-core

+ * members and s..eral thousand supporters
engaged in guerrilla warfare, terrorist
_ Operations, politica] and propaganda ac-
; tivity, sabotage and intelligence activities,
" This campaign is intended to assert Com-

munist authority over increasingly large

- parts of the countryside in anticipation

|. of setting up fully “liberated areas”
~ which GVN authority is eftectively deniect.

_ trol of the Communists.

in

cr of so weakening the Diem government
6s te precipitate its overthrow, or both.
Al present, more than half of tne rural
area In the productive and high‘y popu-
lated region South and southwest of Sai-
Gon, as well as several areas to the north-
west of Saigon, are under extensive con-
(Paras, 50-51)

5. We believe tha! the Hanai regime will

..» , increase the pace and scope of its para-
_. military activity during the next few

months. South Vietnam's verban centers

"will probably be subjected to increasing

iet Cong terrorism. Further Viet Cong

_" gttempts to assussinate Diem are likely.
“. However, we believe that with continued

high levsts of US ald and a strenuous and

_ ehecune: GVM afiert, the problem of Viet

ET i

gfe

Cony contro! of large areas of the coun-

tryside can in time be reduced.
$869)

6. Even if the GYN dces reduce Viet Cong

(Paras.

Strength. it will require continues maxi-

mun effort—military, political, and eco-
nomic—to maintain its authority. South
Vietnam will not be able to sea! eom-
pletely its burders with North Victnan.
Laos, and Cambodia to the infiltration of

material and personnel from hon viet: :

nam. tPares. 60-61)

for a prolonyed and difficult struggle with
the Viet Cong inzurgents. At the same

time that the government 1s prosecuting |

the military campaign in the war a-ainst
the Communusts. it will have to act to pre-
vent internal weaknesses and strains fram
causing its collapse Pathet Lao and

North Vietnaniese forces already control -

most of southern Laos except for towns
along the Mekong. and if a

Laus the GYN struggle against the Viet
Cony will take on new, more perilous dt-
mensions. If there is a serious disrup-
tion of GVN fteadership as a resolt of
Diem’s death or as the result of a military
coup any momentom GVN's countermn-
surgency eiTorts hac achieved will be
halted or reversed, at least for a time,
The confusion and suspicion attending

a coup effort coukl provide the Cummu- -

nist an opportunity to seize control of
the guverninen’.

Communist ”
or leftist government comes to power i

.

(Parnas. 61-67) i tec

yh

. 7. Thus. the outlook in South Wiethaac i. -

INTRODUCTION

ho After the partion of Vietnam in 195
ihe DRV with Blu uid. set about consolidat-
Ing ifs wontfol in (he north, reconstructing
2 badly damuzeu econ. my, and organizin,
smiety oulong Communist fines. At tn
same. time, the aagime
achieve its ulimate objecuve, the untfication
f the country under a Communist govern-
sent During this early penod. @ cover’
Communit subversive and guetrila appa
ratus. knoan as the Viet Ceng. remained at
the south after the regioupment of Com
num forces called fur oy the Geneva Ac-
cords. [1 resurted only occasionally to guer-
rufa oor te .+est action, and concentratec
primarily upun political activ:hes designed
ino part to influence the natio.al elections
provided fur by the Geneva Accords The
Comminst teaders in Hanoi probably
siewed the fulure with conidence. contra st-
ing the chaos prevailing in the south with
ther own tilt eontral in the north

# However, by carly 1957 at had becom:
clear ty tie Communist leaders that the Dien:
fovernmeat, with US ussistance, was making
considerable progress toward consolidating
Its position ond disrupting’ the Viet Cong
clandestine | Ocpanmidath a. Morec-cr, the
Communists ha’ ¢unchited that Diem wouic
peveroopermit: emtons under condition:
oe would assu.e a Communist majority
As a cesult) "he Haro: authorities began to
reurganize and vevitatize ihe Viet Cong ap-
poratus and to :hift Communist tactics in
South Vietnam foward increased terrorism
subsersios and small cae yuercilla attacks
in the countryside By fae 1959 a gencral
anerdineted Cominunist offensive was
+ eelb under cxuy Stace that time the V:ct
Cay guerava-terrorist ‘pparatus hax mare
nan tripled in size ta wer 12.000 and the
aren Yooper. apd elfectieniess of its activities
hoe teen preally expanded

te The GVS. ander the deter ained deade-
shiplot Pres. dent Diem has bera confionteu

*

3

took measures to .

DISCUSSION ei

by serious economic. pobticai, and security
probiems since the end of the Indochina War.
Alhough it has made remarkable progress
in some respects, it has not been able to
bring the Viet Cong under control. or thes
far rese.se the recent deterioration of in-
tern:* security This has caused a gradual
eros.on of public support, frustrated many
of the governmer.t’s economic and sist .
programs, and created a serious pohtse:.: |
problem of dis-2tisfied military officers and.
ena) servants

12 Communist paramilitary ang sudver-iwe
efforts against Laos end South Viet aam are
probably closel. related In both countries
there were endications in 1958 and 1939 that
the governmen:s were becoming bekier and
more effective in their anti-Communist ef-
forts and that Communists assets were oc-
ginning to te cut back The shift in Cons-
munist tactics to emphasis upon paramull-
tary activity became noticeable in both Laos.
ant South Vietnam at about the same tint
The Communsts probably now svicw Lacs
and South Vietnam as two perts of a
single broad political-mstitary strategy The
Pathet Lao and the Viet Cong are both in-
struments of the Lao Dong. the North Vieina-
mexe Communist Party. Hano! the im-
pamentng agency for Bloc activity ir both
countries, and i probably is abew-e vonsic-
erable focal freedom in conducting the Com-
munist guerrilla and subversive campaign

fl, THE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK IN NORTH

VIETNAM :
A. introduction
12. Th North Vietnamese leaders are long-
term 3 Commun:st revolutionaries — closely

united by thes profor ged amied s*rugeic
against the French By the time thes tock
over North Vietnam in 1954 they had ac-
quired extensive practical experience im or-
panization, controb techniques and guerrilla
watfare, They had at their command a
Lerse, luyal. and victorious army = They had

LT pet

Ps : 4 consideruble support among the peasants

r , and Intellectuals. Their Ieader, ho Chi
oh .. Mink, .w2s widely known and respected
ae _ hroughout Vietnam as a nationalist leader.

“43. However, the regime lost much of its na-

ae tionallst appeal as it quickly and ruthlessly
Fe 4. 27 set about consolidating ‘ts control and re
wh cg » 7 ducing centers of potential ‘fissidence, par-
% % 3 teularty among the Catholic and tribal mi-
os . ‘horities. These measures, along with the
vot : ee privations and hardships of the
a om “ peopie, cesalted tm a waning of public en-

: " thusiasm and a rising unrest and dissatis-

itso 1, , faction among the people. There has been

ee 2. fome slackening pf vigilance and disciptine

“yw 4) among the security forces and local officials,

ae ce and there heave probably Ocen some local

; r . peasant uprisings in the wake of last year’s

ee ee + disastrous crop failures. However, in the

Cee past two years the regime has accelerated its

oa effcrts to strengthen the party apparatus,

pa eviatly at lower and middle tevels, anJ

; ita instruments of controi—the party. the

eke Tr "army, and the pellce—remain Annly estab-

pat a ae . ~ lished and responsive to its command The

ee, ) prevailing pudtic attitude ls one of apathy

ne #. . and passivity, and there ls no significant or-
vole 7, Ganked opposition movement.

te Sy Ye

SO ree ao te ae og

+t < B. Politicol Sitvation and Outlook —

GE 44. The DRV's leadership hat been remark-
“2.0%... | ably stable; the elite group, Uke that of Com-

munist China, gained its status and cohesion
™“ im years of clvil wactarc. Ho Chi Minh’‘s In-
', termational reputation, his unique standing
ith’ the Vietnamese people and the rank
nd flie of the Lao Dong. and his ability to
* oderate intraparty disputes from a position
“above factionatism continue to make him the
most tmportant man in the DRY. Ho fa
“Chairman of the Lao Dong and President
of the DRY. It is not certaln, however, just
chow achively he wlelds his power, He la 73
Jae old and there are several strong
, younger men in lop operative posts in the
rtys government. and army.

Ag During the past two years the regime
" hae ‘substanUlally reorganized its governing
apparatus. it has had new electlora for the

ey
iu t
eae ee
A

te

ait) ama ag the first aince 1946, new

leaders have been selected at eee middie and
lower echelons of the party: and the gov-
ernment structure has been further ceon-
tralized. The National Party Congress told
in September 1940, the first in mine =~ 7a.
adopted a new perty constitution. Ts g..>
emmenta)] machinery. still under Ught parts
control, is now probably better prepared ta

cope with ils administrative problema >» _

16 During this period the party leadership
has been confronted by serious domestic eco
nomic and porutical problems and by the
questions of Bloc tactics and leadership af
issue in the Sino-Soviet dispute. The Party

Congress resulted In a reorganization of the .—

party and in aome shifts In individual! rank

ing and power amony the Lao Dong leaders .
These developments almost certainly.
brought to the surface tensions and policy

differences among the “moderate” and “rad- >

kcal” elements within the top party leades-
ship. Thus far, however, these differences
have been kept under control. probably as
tne result of Ho's abilities to moderate party -
disagreements and the general appreciation .
among the Lao Dong leaders of a special
need for party unity under sag circum- | Ss
stances. hy

17. Differing tendencies within the’ Lao
Dong leadership are represented by Le Duan
and Truong Chinh. Over the past two years ©
or so Le Duan and his “moderate” followers
have dren in the ascendancy and Ho prob-

ably considers him to be the helr apparent. -.

Le Duan holds the key position of First Sec-,

retary of the Lag Dong and controls an ef- -°

fective following within the party. He led

the southern guerrilla forces for several

years prior to the establishment of the DRY,
and almost certainly & playing a major role

. in planning the current Viet Cong effort to.

overthrow President Diem snd hls govern-—
ment in South Vietnam. General Ve,

Nguycn Giap. Minister of Defense and Com: : 7
mander in Chief of the Armed Forces, tends .

fo side with the “moderaie” group. The

* Premicr, Shyear-old, Moscow-tralned Pham

Van Dong, is very cinse to Ho and is some.

what of a fence straddicr, but he ts sympa. -

thetic to the eee of Le Dien, ke 2

ET.

‘> - eolleagues and within the party

48 Deuter of te “radical” group is Chinese-
 trwred Truong Chinh wha had served as
22 Seeretary General of the party for 15 years

- until he was relieved by Ho in 1956' Truong
Ciunb’s fall lrcm grace was probably the re-
+ tt af his close identification wlth the regime's
copid and ruthless agrarian reform program
whuch created muny economic problems and
fot the regime much of its early enthusi-
“astie support front the peasantry However.
the Lao Dong probably sts! considers Truong
Chink as a Jeading ide ulogist, and he retains
-consiferable stivngth among his politburo

He ¢on-

. finues to rank third in the Lao Dong polit-
- buro

19 So long as Ho Chi Minh remains active.

he will probably continue to moderate intra-

portly disputes and prevent serious strife

When he is gune it will be much more 72,

ficult to keep factional rivatries and disputes

under control At present. Le Duan is prob-
ably strong enough to gain control of the
party and thus of ihe regime. Howev-1,
serious setbocks tn South Vielnam or in-
creased pressure from Piping could swing

P party strength dchuind Truong Chinh’s more

radical! group In any case the govern-
mental succession would probably appear

-r.. superficially orderly with innocuous, elderly

¥ Vice President Ton Duc Thang succeeding to
the Presideney until the real struggle for
power within the party had been decided.

1,20 Sino-Soviet: Relations North Vietnam
.s° accupies an intermediate positica in the
.. BnoSoviet depute The Vietnamese have

a historic distixe and distrust of the Chinese
- to whom they paid tribute for mary cen-
| tories and they deeply fear Chinese domina-
= don, On the other hand. the state of their

eulture and society and the ‘nature of their
political and economic problems are closely

akin fa those of Communist Chins. and the
‘ RMS revised constitution, Land reform, tax-

At this fame Ite anuied the ‘tte of Serzetary-
AGeneral In addition te hia post as Chairman of the
party In iA che pet af Se retary Geterab Was
sboheted, moging Le Duan ae First Searetary rack

: a ee brhied the Chairs

ation, and ayricultural proprams are el ary.
baset on Chinese expenence tn addition.

the proximity of Chin: makes Pesping’s ied 2 :
nupiic and miltary inficence sirongiy roe :

21. Ho himself ts Mostuw-treined and he at: :
most certa.nly appreciates that only 2 <frin |
relationship with Muscow can prevent. the ae
DRV from becoming completely subordinate
to Peiping He has kept the DRY and the 3
Lao Dong in B generally neutral pasition a.
the Sino-Soviet diopute and Is credited by | -
some observers with having played a key roe!

at the Novemter 1960 Moscow Confertace in > ~
bringing the Sovicts and Chinese sufficientiv a€,
together to produce the compromise Com- 75
munique The North Victnamese leaders > ‘f
particularily Ho, will probably continue to 7 >
maintain a middle pasition in SinaSoviet |.
differences, while pressing for militant Bloc |
Support of “wars of national) tiberatworc” 2 F
such a5 Horai is waging in South Vigtoare wok

CG. Economic Situation ~ ae oer
22. introduction, North Vietnam's recom. 7 *
emy is one of the most backward of ahi the.
Cummunist countries Agneulture is the 5
chief occupation. and about 90 percent of the
popviation lives in rural areas North Viet-_
nar) has considerable development poltentuil.
however, since it possesses rich mineral. for-

est, and fishery resources” Moreover, al- . : ®
thouzh nearly all of the good uralle land >
is mow under production, per acre yirlds ace vs
lew and can be greatly raised.

a id ;-

23. The Communist Bloc has invested heavily 2.
in economic aid to North Vielnam. first -to -,
stabitiz: tts war-torn economy and thet fo |
help its economy develop Total Bloc _ O80

nomic aid committed so far amounts to ae

ees oe : ae
The poacipal source for ecenomic data im Notrh
Vietniuin is the ORV The rektively smats ageun’
ef jofermation from other sawces tends .A raw “a
cases fo support the offic! DRY chime — ‘ ?
interted mineral rescrves cnctude | Pich-gradw -
pathracste foal, 20 Bilhon tone funparsble oA
mognitude to the reserves of Japan of Crechosto-
vakiar ufo ore, $SC miftion fons. gether ats: nak
Ptithon tons and cbrnnite. S aan tens. Cae
fapped hydrordect. ir ene is fetimated at Nd
fuflen kw . . Aces 4 4

1

supe oe

at

a.

Lag kA EN PRA RITA

7+

we

~

.

abort SY90 million. of which about $400 mil-
bon hud been utilized by the end of 1960
With Uhis assistance and its vwn concentra-
tion of resources and effort, North Vietnam
has made rapid economic progress, raising
its uress national product 1GNP}) by 13 per-
cent annually feorn «9F3 to 1960. North
Vietnam’s gross domestic investment as a
proportion of total resources rose from &
percent in 1955 to 22 percent in 1960 indi-
cating that the ecanomic base [Ib being
‘strengthe:ed Jur continued rapid growth.

24 Agriculinre. The DRV has been having
serucus Uifficulties in agriculture as a result
of udserse weather, mismanagement, and
rapid. forced collectivization. The regime
clans that the value of agricultural output
increased 21 percent from 1956 to 1960, de-
spite the 1960 drought, and that North Viet-
nam has become a net exporter of fond
Most uf the increase in agricultural nroduc-
tion, however, was in livestock. particularly
draft animals = Rice production increased at
a slower rate than the poputation, and pro-
duction of subsidiary foods actually dechned.
Sinre 1936 per capita consumption of food
has gerevally been beluw prewar levels. and
in 1960 the per capita production of food
was Iess than in [956 The fact that the
DRV was a net exporter of food in 1969 was
made possible cnly by the regime's firm
control of distribution and ~-onsumption
The people generally are on a subsist nee
dict und in some areas shortages are critical
JEnesitubly (his has created widespread dis-

Acontent with the regime. -

23. The prospects for alleviating these short-
ages are only fair Assuming average
weath =r, the DRY mipht be able to increase
food proguction at about 3 percent annually
for sume years to come. At this rate, food
‘output by 1995 would reach about two-thirds
of the 9 million ton goal for Unat year and

. barely remain ahead of the 25 percent rate

.
rT

of population increase The acceleration of
rural colicctivization, which took place in the
latter half of 1340, may gencrate suMcient
atdstional prasunt resistance tu ptace even
Us aclieverment an doubt

*

28 Industry Because of the DRV'$ rudi
mentary economy. the Three-Year Plan
(1958-1960) devoted neurily 70 percent of
total industrial investment to light n.dus-
try Loght manufacturing accounted for
two-thirds and mining and heavy manufac-
turning for one-third of al} industral output
by value in 1960. Over the next five years
hight industry will continue to grow rapidly
although proporlionaliy greater stress will
be jaid on heavy industry and mining. .” |

23. Mining accounts fu" 15 percent by value of
DRV industrial oufpul and nearly one-quar-
ter of sts industria! exports
fold increase ir. output since 1955. ¢oal pro
duction in 1969 was barely up to the pre-
war (193°) high of 26 million tons Quer
the next Ave years caal proguction will ¢on-
tinue lo rise. but there will almost certainly
be move diversification as othe: North Virt-
fam mineral resources are exploited. Com-
munist China will probably become an im-
portant customer for the mch supplies of
phosphate rock. :

28. The current Five-Year Plan shifts prior-
ity lo heavy industry. particularly electric
power, machine butlding, steel. and chemf-
cals The machine industry will be onented

toward suppert of agriculture and the chem- ~

ical undustry will emphasize fertilizer pro-
duction The plan calls for the productign
of 500,900 tons of pig irom a year (60 per-
cent guung Into stcelp.*
to meet original Three-Year Plan goats for
several important items
cement, electric power, and cotton cloth}
suggests thal the present Fiv+-Year Plan
goals should be appraised with caution. .

22 Transporfefwn. In spite of the em-
phasis given since 1954 to the rehabilitation

Despite a four- .

The regime's failure ©

(including coal. °

*

of transportation, the rail net {fs not quite .

back to its prewar size in terms of mucage;
however, overall tonnage has | increased _
Emphasis is also beirg placed on restoration

Coneructon of the DRVs first prom ard viel
plant cegmpment apd terhnatagy Being suppiied
by Comimaast China) was scheduled for cus pictier,
111960 with an anitial anneal capacky vf 100 000
ton . but ao jae behind whedute ; >

ef the mead wet to ats prewar stufus Re-
arihation of water sransport has lapged
Trott) has been conadercble development of
strateye oroaek- beward the border of Laos
and the I7¢h Paraiht  Dorng-dist sed plans
to widen (he DRV's cath network from metce
faige tothe 4 fost Bt, inch stundard gauve
thataus cain Communist Chena main dues
tay De cared out be 1965 The Kano
Dore Dang and the Hano-Lao Kas radway
pes lines are operate: wo virtuudy imnfegral parts
aa of the Chew Communist radway aster
A lane part of the freiga’ moving on thes:
. lines ih Chintae Cuomnuntst freight oon
»* transit across Nuh Vielnam between Nag -
hing apd Kunming

“|W. SITUATION AND PROSPECTS IN SOUTH
7 VIETNAM

A. Political

30 Situation and Problems Despite its
Muny remarkable achieveme:ts, South Vaet-
nint's natlowut leadership never has gener-
fied much active public support During
the past year and a halt, Presides:t Diem and
his posernpmeat have been mcre seriously
criticued and challenged. particularly by
menilers of the buresucracy and the mill-
tary estaldishment, than at any tine smce
he cunsohdated bus authorty im 13955-1956
The criticism and dissatisf. "bon stem prin-
Jeipally from serious concern with tbe in-
ternal security situation and from Prem’s
‘system of family rule. Despite his continu-
ing personal prestige and reputation for in-
“tegrity and courage. Diem remains an atoof
and uninspinng fizure to the Victnamesc
- Communist propazanda intensifics public
wy, = dissatisfaction with tne Diem government,
‘'partientarly among the peatonts and urban
_daboning groups.

3 Within (he framework of a democrati
“eonsUtution. ‘Diem and a small circle of rel-
atsses and confidants exercise supreme na-
* tienal power Most members of the execu-
“tye branch ate personal agents of Diem,

igs Hw
*

a ff. *

mote.

Bec is fearful of assuming Fespensivility oF of take

Beinitatne The legistatie powers af ihe
Natwnal Assen.bly are strictly circum-
serpzed The press ad rudio are larg . con-
trestet by the goverament, and opportion
E:O'1ps and critics cf the gourmny nt bate
Ite opportunity to make their wews witeiv
knewn This hicks crntralized tegune hus
pievided resolute and stable leadership, but 1
Kas sheaated many pelitically conscious
South Vietna:nee and inhiciied the grmwih
of stron? gacnmental and political astitu-
ions which could provide stadilits and ds-
rectien if Diem wer to leave the seem

32) Anumoe: of of 13s tavluding Vice Presi
a ni Nguyen Npoo Tho, and some inuport.unt

“ors Of the cobinet, the bureaucracy, and
i fe uutaey ha ¢ qevstioned scriously Doem s
abinty to lead the goverrment and rally the
pecple apumst the Communists during what
they tegard as the most critica: penod since
the end of the Indochina War 3 Theat officials
al-+ erstiuize Diem's failure to delevate re-
spon-ibihty and his reliance largely on imem-
kers of his family, particularly his brother
Ngo Dinh Nhu. for advice in the conduct sf
govrsnment affairs. Moreover, the fact that
the Can Laon, a semicovert pobtical apparatus.
bas been used by Diers and his brothers. Nha
and Ngo Dinh Can not on!y to insure the sm-
pienentation of policy bul also to police the
att-tucdes and loyalty -f the governmenta. a;>-
paratus has created conciderable rarer
within the militury hierarchy and the on
SeTVICE.

33. The Dim regime was given a reprieve by
the national elections of April 1961, In which
Dirm and Vice President Tho received nearly
90 percent of the total vote. Voter furnout ©
was high, despite Coinniunist efforts to Intumi-
date the voters However, the election can-
not be considered an accurate manifesta-
lion of support for Diem of his regune Diem
and Tho enjoved overuhelming advantages in
the campaign, there almost certainly was
some meddiing with the returns, and the op-
povition candidates were politice! nonentities. -

34 Since the April elections. Diem bas imdi-
raced an intent to rectify some ef the causes
mf dissatisfaction He has reorgaruied Ins

cabinet in an eflurt to improve eS ectiveness
and coordina’iwn. He has instructed his min-
isters to spend mere time in the countryside,
secing thal pro.rams are followed through
and secking to win over the popula’wn. He
has begun @ consolitation of his intelligence
servicers and has made a number of moves de-
signed {9 provide the mililary greater free-
dom of action He has experimented with re-
laxing ¢ mLrol the press and opposition
gruups = Rowever, most of these moves have
- been initialed only because of urging from
the US. Diem iimost certainly has not
changed tus view that his kind of paternalis-
tie authoritananism ix best for South Viet-
ham, particularly while the country is at war.

35 Diem hap fittle resps-t for his dumestic
political upponents, whom he tends to view as
dupe, Communists, or agents of the French.
The oppo-itin is in fact, largely a disparate
assoriment of disgrunticd intetcctusls. bust-
nessmen, and ensuccesstul politicn:nas, who
have for one reason or another fallen out with
the povernment. Nune of them has a na-
tivnal following of consequence, and few have
any controetive ideas to offer. Although
they are a source of annuyance to Diem and
al times a disruptive factor in Saigon, they
are not by themselves & significant present
thieat to the goverment.

38 The continued existence of restiveness and
divcatisfaction among military officers and
olfur government officials is much more ser-
ous Diem has long recognized that the
greatest threat to hes government—aside
from the Viet Cong—tics in the possibilty of
a military coup The abortive coup eifort by
paratioop units in November 1960, which
came very near sucteeding. increased Diem’s
suspicions of the military. As yet no new
_ coup Rroup appears to have taken shape.

$7. Political Prospects The army will con-
tinue to be a major factor in future pobtical
- developments in South Vietnam. We betieve
that the chaaces of a military coup have been
reduced hy recent manifestations of US sup-
_ portef the dem gavernment and by the sub-

stantial increase in US aid to help South
Vietnart meet its internal security problems >
Although there has been a decrease in Indi-
cations of coup-plotting within the military in
Fecent months, certain basic dissatisfections
with the national leadership persist. If the
fight against the Viet Cong goes poorly dunng
the next pear of the South Vietnamese Army
suffers heavy casualties. the chances of a
military coup would substanUally increase

38. There fs always a chance that Diem may

be assassinated or Icave the scene as the re

sult of accidental cr natural cases. Such a

development would provide an opportunity.
and steong motivatin for a group of mili-
tary officers to size contro! On the other
hand. the Viet Cong would be very likely to
increase greatly their effor’s to take over in
such an emergency situation and this rilght
cause the military to close ranks in support
of constitutional processes, at least through
the iransition period. In such event. Vice
President Tho would succetd to the Presl-
dency. and Nguyen Dinh Thuan, the Secre-
tary of State for the Presidency and Assistant
Secretary of State for Natiwnal Defense,
would probably continue te play a key sup-
poring role However. the Ngo famuy, prob-
ably led by Niu and Can. would probably at-
tempt to retain real political power and a
contest for power might ensue. .

39 In mere gencral terms. the chief problena
confroaviing the GVN is how ‘o rescive the
conficting needs of highly centralized gov-
emmeat control fur effective antiguerrilla
Measures on t*- one hand and of hberalizes,
more democ-abe political attitudes for greater
pubhe support of the government on the
other. Tt is unlikely that Diem will under-
lax real pohtical reforms in an effort to meet
the complain's of the non-Communist opposi-
tion groups in Saigon, the peasants, and the
military and civilian officiats In ANY Cast,
Diem prebably could not make enough politi-

.

NIE 50 61. "Outirvok in Mrin'snd Southeast Ast: *
dated 25 March 1961. paragraph 37. stated that an
View of “Diem'’s prerarious political sttwalivn aad
the streneth pf Commonnt guerrilla and sub.erave
Presures, we believe that the odds favor a serond ,
roup attempt someime in the orab gear or «3

y . ’ i
Fecal changes to satisfy the dimands for teform
py Nn Oppastion groups amunyg the urhan its-

thy

ye  teNectuals Tra degree of dis-atisfaction

L) amieng the peasants ad the military and
J, fivihan offic tals os related Jfurcetly to the suc-
: * " .e85 or failure of GVN e:forts against Viet
Saton . gong gseriila and sevbversive avuvity  Ln-
provements in the sinlemal security situation

Gs —weuld Go more, at least in the short run, to-
“oo. 4. * ward reducing discontent among the peasants
oO et the military. ind the fv semants than po-
(ue fitneal refornis at the national level,

zs ee : ae 4 ay
- B. Economie -

e2 Un 40 Evanumie Situation’ The economy of
4, South Vietnum was sovercty wrake ned by the
_ + years of recurrent warfare after 1940 and its
: subsequent oseparittion from the north

Sources of suppty and markets were disrupted
In the count: yside. vila’ water contiel works
_ were damaged or neglevted and lurce areas of

ree land wen abandoned as peasants moved
- turban areas in search of sccunty The m-
Sux of almost a pullin rtugecs from North
Vietnam in 1954 and 1955 further burdened
the economy. , .

"al Backed by substantial US support. the
. GVN bas bern able to achieve appreciable &co-
4, pmomic progress Be-:des building wp a
"+ modern military force and relocating the refu-

t .
Mb.
. * u ae &
he
%

+
f94

sis

4 a

Sars a
seers
aa

t

SERRA ape fae TSS
. =

=v
it

ee
*
aw
*

.
eal se
t

ae -' * pees. South Vietnam has repaired and ex-
ssh Oo tende!’ its badly damaged transportation net-
ty me “work. initiated an exteuave land relorm pro-
Ne ae Oey ‘grgn, Festored ats agricultural production,
2 1:7 :and established ihe foundation for industrial
o fdgrowtn
ee ane; By 1959, the GVN was beginning to move
aes os ehead on expanding economic developme:.t.

“43> However, the sudden, marked rise in guernila
“4 4 “warfare widely affer'ed GVN cconcmic plans
tt and, Since late 1960. there has been a notice-
 Shte slackening in the momentum af eco-
: Raine” - progress Communist interference
28 with the flow of nce from the countryside to
Une urban centers has caused a decrease in the
atneant avanable far export and contnbuted
wari in pace Figen merchants have ep-
7  Panunitorcd wiereasing difficulty in delvering
aaa i their megrhandirr ty the sifages Domestic
: a hago ted eel : mo.

» #*

;
:
—
Oe
‘
f
s

a SA a oo ¥ Pes
‘ ‘ .

ecommerce in reneral has declined in pact be-
cause of the uncertainties of the political sit-
vation Communist sabage of .cads and
bridzes and control of certain areas have set
back government recenstructhen and agrarian
reform programs. Although Uhere has been
an increase in the production. of rubber, the |
leading sourn of foteign exchange. rubber”
plantations ate unde. constant harassment
by Commun:st terror st. Te 2

43 Despite South V.etnam'’s economic Fe ’

covery, the country cortnure 20 de highiy de-
pendent upon the US. From 1935 through |
1909, US econ-mic aid to the GVN came to
about $14 bilkon: most of this has been for
defense support. Exports from the GVN
tchiefly rubbe: und mee) pay for only ebout
& quarter of the consumer and other gots

that are imported. The remainder of the im- :
ports ere largely financed by the US cum: *

merciat import program under which picoters
are made avaliable to the GVN throngl. the
local sale of imported googs fritially put-
chased wilh US aid dollars France has been
Seuth Vietnam's prncipal buyer and sup
pher The US & second in boih buying froma
and selling to South Vietnam Japan is be-
coming increasingly important as a supplier.

H. Zcomumic Prospects
men. it the GYN's economic position over the
next few years will depend largely on the
course of the war against the Vie’ Cong In-
surgents Morcover. if the GVs Is to main-
ta.n larger military and security forces HS
dependence on US aid will increase. The se-
curily situation also will continue to affect

_adversely the willingness of the OVN to under-

take fiscal reforms, urged by the US, aimed
at increasing lax revenues. ’

Continued improve- ©

45. Agrarian reform and land distribution °
programs. together with highway and canal |

reconstruction, will continue to suffer as Jong
as the GVN ccntrot of much of the cauntry-
side, particulaty in the Mekong deita area,
remcins as tenuous as it is at present. The
effect of prolonged. wnrehiered Insecunly in
the countryside would be a cevline of agei-
cultural output, a farther decline In domestic |
camineree, and a lsuering of business confi-

thrice in Sown Vietnam. The cumulative -

te 2 : -

degre eys

ral

4,

ry

ie

Ar

wh.

Ca

rflec: of all these developments could be infia-
tion, particularly if the OVN were to under-
taxe large-scale deficit financing of its budget.

46 Sout Vietnam's sabstantial trade gap

‘can be decreased In the short run only by

* able futn

further rises In the availability of rubber and
rice for export. Over the longer run, however.
South Vietnam will bave to rely increasingly
on ceveloping new capart possibilities through
Agricultural diversification and on increasing
its production of many lght consumer gs0ds
that are im ~rted at present. In any event.
South Vie’ will continue for the furegre-
require extensive US ald to
finance its urge balance of payments deficit.

IV. THE COMMUNIST THREAT TO SO‘TK
VIETNAM

47. The Communist thicat to South Vietnam

tonsists of three intersefated elements the

external military thre2i posed by the Nonh

Vietnamese Army: an *.papting program of

guetniia warfare and .errorism throughout

_ South Vietnam; and an intense political,

psychologica! effort designed to demoralize
the South Victnamese public and the military
and security forces, and to discredit Diem’s
government.

A. The Militory Threot”

48. The North Vietnamese Army is almost
Lwice the size of (he South Vietnamese Army.
The threat pugd by the large northern forces

-, has put constant psychological pressure on

“the GVN. South Vietuam has been obliged

me
“ag ogi

+

7

re
*

"
.
2
we

*
.

s

oy <

to maintain a substantial part of its forces
along the 17th Paraliel und more recently the
Laotian border. despite the need to combat

-* the growing Communit guerrilla strength

in the south.

49. However, the immediate threat to South
Victnam is not from an overt Invasion. In-
stead, the current North Vietnam campalgn
to bring South Vietram under Communlst
gontrol is basal upon a combination of

*
cee

The Mulary Annex prvices additiunal pifarma-

re thon raspectina Une Barth Youtnamese and South

A.etanese acre] Curees

i

BECKER

gucmils warfore and subversive activit, of 8
“pativnal Uberstion” character in doth South
Victncm and adiecent Lacs. It is probubly
the Communist view that such tactics
g-eatly reduce the risk to North Vietnars. ci
US military intervention and. at the samc
tine, provide good prospects of succeds at -,
relatively little cast. ae

B. The Gverrilia Threat STB MEE aa

50. Cummunist asets for guerrilla and ter-
rorist action agaizst South Vietnam are,

formidable. In spite of substantial losses. * | °

the Vict Cong have increased thelr har¢-core

atrengte from an estimated 4,000 in April :
1960 to more Uhan 32.090 by mid-1961 This
Increase was acee” plished by local recruit-
ment and oy infi' ..fon by land and sca from
North Vietnam We estimate that about ha°

of the imported Viet Cong Weapons are
brought in by sea. The guerillas are aug-
mented by several Urousand supporters who
ostensibly are Innocent cilizers but who join
the organized insurgrnt bands te assist in in-
tcltigence, savotage, propaganda, and ter-
rorist operations. By relying ea tactics of
surprise, concentration for altack and dis-
persal upon withdrawal, the guerrillas achieve
maxinum cficctiieness) They apprar to
have good intelligence on the plans and move- °
ments of government forces sent on ant:-
guerri'la missions. Viet Cong morale is prob-
ably g2od and there are few defections from
their ranks to GVN forces.

St. Viet Cong guerrilla and terrorist activity
is Intended to assert Communist authority
over increasingly larze parts of the country-
side in anticipation of setting up fully “liber-
ated areas” in which GVN aufhority is
effectively denied, or of so weakening the
Diem government as to precipitate its over-
throw, or both AL present, more than isalf
of the rural urea in the product ve and highly
populated fphen south and soulherst of
Saison, as well as several areas to the north-
west of Sargon. are under extensive control
of the Communants In these areas the gov-
ermment’s authority i efictive only by day
and shen backed up by military reinforce-
ment, The Communists levy and coticet

. *
.

“tases, direct the harvesting. control the dis-
anbution of rice and other farm products,
‘cunduct indoctnnation programs, and ¢on-

“ sript recruns, Recently, the Viet Cong have

nieseae bepw) to set up overt party organizations and

provisional local government units in South
Vietnam similar to thee established during
the Indochina War.

’ "$2 Vict Cong contro! in the countryside is

based primarily upon organized coercion and
-ferrorism. The number of Communist cadres
and converts is probably small in most ttl-
.lages. but in the absence of GVN forces suM-

. eclent to protect the village against reprisals.

’ those inctined ta support the gavyernnmient and
‘Quen ayuinst thy Communists are effectively
contained. The tugh rate of assassinations of
local officials and retahiatory murders is a con-
tinual reminder of the penalty of noncoopera-
tion with the local Vict Cong authorities *

0° 83. The GVN Is in the carly stages of prepar-

ing an all-out ¢ffo-4 based on a US-sponsored
vountcrinsurgency plan to neutralize and Uf
possible dvfeat the Viet Cong threat. Al-
though action of a military nature dominates

the pan, it also envisages coordinated actions

ay bs
tT:

let
Be
*

‘in the political, economic, and psychological
fietds Some aspects of the plan have already
bren initiated, Including a mcw emphasis
(upon anticucmnila warfare in army training
and tactics and a reorganization of the com-

* mand structure fo provide centralized direc-

a
oo

tien for the entre military effort. Moves
have also been taken Lo reorganize the intelli-
gence apparatus a reduce rivalries and
duphcation of effortZamong the various in-
felligence Services.

54. At present, the South Vietnamese Army
numbers slightly over 150,000 men, of whom

: ‘more than halt have been continuously en-
‘TT gaged In security operations. This is to be

bos! inereased to 170,000 n.en under the counter:

*  Snsurgency plan Awing the army in the

aie

untiguerrilla vampaign are the focally re
- Arcording tu official GVN sources during 1940,
Cymmundst terrefists awisinated at feast £400
feat goiernment officials and other cavitans and
Fidnapped at dea? aneatirs 100 white Comismemest
» writes killed al feast $200 nulitary and securlty
Feat fom May te December of that year.

ers CT wor

Pe? 2 eS . Pe

re omaan | . ones

cruited aad controlled sa urty forces. (a) Ue

Civd Guard, an artncd rural militle of some
60.000 whose poor levels of training and
equipment may bmprove under recently be
gun army programs, and 1b} the 45.000- man
Self-Defense Corps, a willage constabulary
with Hive tralning and few arms and heavily
penetrated ty the Viel Cong. Then two
secunty forces have suffcred most of the
South Vietnamese casualtes during the past
year. Scattered about through the cousitry-
side, with poor communications and coureins-

tion, they often fall prey to Vet Cong am-"

bushes and raids for arms and ammunition.

98 GVN military capubdilitics and other te. *
sources for fighting the Communists are con- *
The military lvadership ix among -

sideratie.
the Ovst in Southeast Asia and the rank and
file troops have the spirit and willingness to
Alt. Tae cly.han bureaucratic leadership is
giso strongly anti-Communist, but its effce-
tiveness Is impeded by inadequate delerauthea
of authority. Yhere are no senous trends lo
ward neutralism or toward a peltical accom-

modaticn with Hancl. Finaliy. the Vietnam- —

ese peasants, however politically apathetic
and discuntcnied with the government, are
by no means ready to surtender themselves
to the Viet Cong. given a geeater effort by the
g.vernment fo protect them from Commanist
intimidation. : are

C. Political ond Psychelogical Worfare |

56 In September 1960, at sts Third Nations!

Congress the Lan Dong announced that Its
“immediale task” was to overthrow President
Diem and form a ‘coalition” government in
the south with which Hanol could cooperate.
To serve these ends, Fanol has established a
“National Literation Front,” with its own
news agency and mobile. clandestine radio
transmitters As part of the campaign to
overthrow the Diem government. the Viet
Cong has stepped up its political and psy-
vhological warfare socking to capitalize upon
South Vietnanrs probicms >

$7 The combination of the Communist po-
biical and p-yhological assault and the in-
vreaving non Communist dissatisfaction with

Dum and bis government fs as much & cause

. oe

na me a

ae
a akee aa a

Lice #9 fur cumin at the Viet Cong paramilitary

-, ‘efert oo the Conunusists have tied to iden-
fs then: ches wh phe nen-Copmunist oppe-
oe sition and te dint Noo finaly rule To
° _ tne ened Uies ate svking taintepafy the real
and ibapued poevanees of the peusunts, Une
ih tectuals, end military and civilian of-
fivials Thew National Jaorratiun Front
-Juvoabls intended to provide a rallying pant
“for The maths and disenctanteds non-Com-
mainist oalenents From the Communist
 opomntof suew it contd serve as the vore either
‘ofa govemnwnt sel up ina “Oberated area,”
aa orof 8 government to replace the GN in the
of. Ceomiusion whier weld attend Diwns asta.
Mnwtrog ar a suceeolol nen Communist coup

“~ SE ys

? .
“VV, OUTLOOK FOR THE STRUGGLE IN SOUTH
ce “VIETNAM
aoe 58. The Hanoi regime ts probably accking to
. bing ts campaiki of subversion. terrorism,
cand gucrrila warhire apumoet South Vietnam
fo an early and sucessful comefasion, al-
though Yous proubly not operating on ony
rygd, presonecived limetable Wei ocheve
oto, thatut will almost certainsy Increae the pace
and scope of ita paramutiy actiaty during
‘ © the opext few months. North Vietnam's
weareness of US intentions to merase its aid
and assistance to South Viefoum silk stimu-
_ fa rantensafied Viet Cong effurts to make max-
eee IMI guns before US assistance cate make
; ‘oa significant pnpact on the GVNo« counter.
é msurreney capability Thi mereascd Viet
Cong -pataniditary acte ty will be accom.
ete phied by inereaseg political and psycho
_ dogiewl warfare efforts desipned) to de-
2 ntgiate Diem personally and te encourage a
2) popular front oppesition These efforts: are
7, kely tea be coordin ted) sath international
“political efforts by the farses Bloe powers

.

a

wt

: 59 South Vie than’s urbin enters particu
larly. Suigan. ‘eill probably be increananply
Lo eS subpdted te Vict Cong acts of terrosism de-
227 0 signed to demoratize the public, disrupt the
‘2 yoverument. ant merease the posstility of a
. . pon-Cuminuntist voup effort The Viet Cong

.. er)! probably make further atte mipts to assus-
t Sitate Dae tn

Aincrrans oi probably con:

Lars. south of Route * Be a Re

EEERET pe he ee ae

=

tcrronst activity Hoacver. capanding ats
area: of contndd on the countryskle will pred
ably remain the must important elemrnt of
the Viet Cony paramniitary ¢ flort 2

60 We Setiese that woth continued high levels
of US aid ano a strenuvus GVN effort, the
problem of Viet Cong cuntrul of large areas of
the counteyside can intume be reduced. How.
ever, at feast 12 to 18 months o: effort will
prebsbly be nquired before much improve-
ment begins ter apyrcue.
retuce Viet Cuong strengih, it will require con-
tinued maximum effort —militany, politiet.
and economime--to maintain its authority, and
potentially troublesome pockets of Viet Cong
resistance will probably resain tur many
years South Victnum will not be able to
sumpletely acgi its borders with Norin Viet-
natn, Laas, and Camedia tu the mnfilteraton
of maternl and personnel from North
Vietnam : -

6) Communist advances in Lavs* have had
the doutle sdvantsge, from the Communist
pont of view, of increasing the ability of

Ever of the GVN sloxs |

the DRV to step ep its guerrilla pressures on |

the GVN and of rroding GVN confidence In

US determination to resist Communist en-.

croachment in Southeast Asta Mountain
Qeark. in southern Laos have ben ual freely
by the Communist. for sears tor movement of

men and suppics otween North and South’

ViefDam Now. however, arth Pathet Lio and
North Vietnamese forces in control of most of
southern Lacs excerpt for towns along the Me-
kong. forces and supplics may be moved along

the roud nets, which the Communists prov- .
ably are improving  Morcover. the crosion of.

the Royal Lan Government's cuntrol over

southern Laos increases greatly the probh ms

of cbferding South ¥uinam and intessifles
poycholog-eal pressures upon South Vietnam's
leadezs, whe hate long feared the exposure

ef the Jett Sank of Uheir forces deployed to”

defend he With Parallel The GYN has re-
acted by sendin small special force units inte
southern Laos for reconnalsance purposes

“Comnnina’ forves inp Lins now tetat abut 2 ba
Heese WOU GAT Fors of sapp ies aforkpied Ap.
prosameate ' ASUD af Sieg Rrowpes “are dep mutter

+. .

~ oe

fe ae ny
"wep outpests on the South Vietnam side of

"ruption of GVN
.Dicm’s death or pst the result of a military
coup, ans momentum thy GVN's counterin-

a ae
ee | o"y

64 The fact that the US as
=  enuree af significant support and assistance
oe 2 rte. as the contedbnap factor an the GVN's rela

"almost: certainly

the Vout Cong strend te wa, cel

ca
eg
.
tad
+
+
+
*

preceding ty establish adsitienal

thie frogter

2 Thus, Uh outlook in South Vietnam ts for
oe proned and ditcule struggle with the
Viet Cong insusgents At the same time that
the yoveroment is prosecuting the military

“+ kAMpaign in the war upatnst the Communists,

will have to art to prevent internal weak-
esses and straits from cansing its crollapse
Ve Laos becom es dominated by the Conmu-

Wits of uy a estist regime, the GVN struggle

ayainst the Viet Cong will take on new, more
perious dimensions. Uf there is a «rious dis-
leadership us a result of

surgeney ¢ffurts had achleve! will be halted
or reversed. af least for a time The con-
fusion and avaprjon attending a coup effort
could provide the Cummnunists an oppurta-
nifty tooceize control of the povernment

MW US-GVN Relufions The course of US-
GYN relations will Be an unportant element

-in the strugple against the Vat Cong and in

sustaining South Veetnames: morah  Re-
éent increases In US assistance, a tointly
" apreed phun to cembat Viet Cong msurpency.
“ghd manifestations to Dien ot US symoathy
and hacking —sich as Une Vice Presicent's
visit — hove provided «basis for a continuire
tloso relationship between fla twee povern-
meats However, the streucule ahead will be a
tong aneiedtiMcult one invalving many rustea
trod and dimecuryes for both South Vietnam
and the US, and itis tikely many disagree-
ments cancerning the incsph mentation of the
PouAteonsurgencs plan wall arse

the GVNs only

bons ard atotudes toward the US | Diem ait
continue te press for in-
creamed ald. further eapansson of the armed
forces, and a cleat priortty of military over

Y politie. shard economie e forts te aiaereat Uhe

{Viet Cong Diem will be ad.mant in his
Views a8 fu how the GYN canmpargy onaiast
fle with tend
fo regard US difterenees wath his sews of

eiitiewm of his inner circle as Indications of
weakening US ronfidence in hun.

65 Diem proba bly stall has some lingering su
picion of the extent of US confidence in ard
support of fis leadership. resulting from Ihe
paratrooper «oup effort of November 1960 and
urgent US mn presentations made during that
year for bbeval political reforms In the event
of anoter coup effert against Diem’s gorern-
inent, he would probably expeet quick and
ateung manifestations of US support and
wourl ice] that he did not have US confidence
1 suc manifestations were not forthcoming.

43° There is considerable an .cty within the
OVN concerning the general US posture with
tespect fo communism in the Far East. Diem
probably regurds US policy toward Laas as an
indicator of US resolution in standing against
Communist advances in Asia, and US policy
dunng the past year has almost certainty.
tused doydts in his mind Other indicators
probebly would be Die.n’s interpretation of
{'S poticy toward Nationalist China and te-
ward th: issce of Chinese Communit repre-
acntation inthe UN = Diem has no alternative
‘o US support and assistance Nevertheless.
af he concludes that the US is weakening its
antiCemmurust posture in the Far East, he
wil almost corta:nly make strong protests te
the US and become increasingly assertive and
‘tubbin in hus relations with the Us.

“7 Interaufwnal Attitudes, In providing the
GVN a maxunun of encouragement and cx-
icnsive suppert in ity struggle against the
Cammenists, the US will inevitably become
Mentfird arth ine GVN's success or failure. .
She US will be under heavy pressure from °
thee members ef the non-Communlst world,
many of won siew the Victnam struggle in
difcring tern § For ¢xample, the nelghbor-
ing countries such as Thailand, Cambodia,
Furma, Indonesia. the Ph:ippines, and Na-
Hozabst Chane have all fo .ome extent viewed
developments in Laos as a g.tuce of US wilhng-

ress and ability to help an anti-Communist -

Asian puvcrnment stand asainst a Communist
“nation hberation” campaign. They will
afygest certvints look upon the strusple for
Vietnam as a ciaticel test of puch US willing. *
eos aad alntity  Ailof them. including the

erie : t«
ee re
ait tee OT Beg 507. . y = , “ lL ee
ae fgetee ie 5 te Mee oF F -
le i Peiited als, would prot | ° uffer Jemoratization in Vietnam in terms of another potential. Lace
oo yg 408 toss of confidence os Une prospects for The French with shew memories of the Indo

a mamtun.ng their independence if the Com- china War and the British with their expert-
“>, ,munists were to gain control of South Vlet-" ence in Malaya tend to be pessimistic regard-
ae onam. , This loss of confidence might even ex- ing GVN prospects for coping with the Viet °
a bend to: India. : ‘ “ Cong Uveat. Both France and the UK are
Ge Amotig the Western ‘allles, the UK and Probably fearful that the US may become
ae France are expecially concerned by the Viet- ¢mbroiled In w crisis in Vietnam at a Ume-
7 nae Ham procter. Roth wovernments have had When in their view full Western strength and
ae -SCriuus resetvaticns over asperts of US policy attention saould be directed toward problem:
“throughout the crv ls In Laos and almost cer- its V'rstern Europe, and (hey will probably seck
a ; Landy tend to view the coven situation = to Influence the US to avoid such a situation. -

Bee ls Suerte
¥ -4 * . . oa, - 2
oo» , r ‘s = - . ee ae =
Bote : a . . . : ore. Tle
i a ss » t - = * 7. we + -
- my « 2 Fa ooo
ge ee z i . = ena :
fe . ‘% “s . Z pick Le
= . QL a aie
- ° he an] .
4, < ~ - ! a Ba le, ile
. ot - 2 :
. 7 7 e é ar
f mee cee
= . ae 3g
* 5 .
° = . eye lt
, +: . caf
: - eit La .
: PO) Beg Be
- et woe
* ‘i B oe ae
. © - x . a P e, o me
rt e. . = ‘4 RP ®
? s - ee i 5
. i La
# Pa * * - *
- - Fo bs -
” : 4 an
ao "s pe a . * es
wos * Ps ate ~
See 5 : 7 t chet
Lg * roy
i. . r ee pow
Pe Re * « caer ae "- :
mF . . er ee | a = f % 7
tt. 4 7 3 : . Z :
he Aeon baba aro toe a ts or P= - in soe
e. pe ae ge - fete: F * o +3, ‘s iments
els, anae id -~? * 7 * eof - . « ‘ee
Wats Se es . . s oie Se ne
a EE . Fo
Pe | “ 7 3 ee hee
aie * Pd re.
ray 4 * mee vane
ig-> 4, . Ps
we e¢
ge Ae e's . . "4 ,
eee e ee
My. ? ee
ae ea "go: oe
. ‘ 7
- 3 = = ae
=. a ae
a a . Sage ners
“4 . we
we g-
: ” Se Ee ned
: * + bh get ce a Ate
x 7 ae ae
. A »
é “08 * ” “+ wees 4 .
a : o
a * as o . a
- “ eran ‘i Pes aay
: te : Pear He Le nak
pe euF . -.@¢ "se
. ace . re
*, * K "6 ane rhe,
Pe BN OE he
-* er - . ~~
~ << Fer c oe
ae Ah om ae Se a ibe
- 7 ‘ Ps - 7 mee
i? el , oe
* . _- 1;
Lt - fe of s*. ‘
eg " = ron
r Bini. ee 7 * me eae é
of -
Bee Aue = of eine
SU eu et are
- 4
ns - aE cen oe
a . 2 rhe BS ae
» . . ene ae
. . eae.
* . * - .
. eR .
- .
on . ma haa!
« _ *
. $ t +
r + Ls
- BP OE a aed
n £ on *. = rake ead
. a aaa? >
ae ee Py

cs ‘ %
= s
of * oe
7 2
" a.
5 ‘os . . a
-. ¥ . oe
oan ‘ ‘ as ‘
' ‘ :
1 4 2 -
<* Ls mee TQ A wey : \
Pre ell wed o "; 4
i +
+
e oat ‘ . .
- = .
L 3 at ft as
‘ . - ‘ . a . a
a mig OR os oe bomeghhe es
: uf ; ‘ . ay .
f ‘ ;
. \ ¥
ws ie ane ve Bs. Aber : .
J a* ¢ a a ’
‘! . owe, bog . i : ” . os
ra) . ‘ ee bi ot
wi ¢
’ 4
7 mek
. ‘ a. t * ‘ 1 . % roe ot
+ 2 ‘ ' at “ ee _ .

- STRENGTHS AND CAPABILITIES OF THE ORV AND GYN

7 5 ‘
: . ‘ ‘ « ‘ aha :
oe * Lae ‘ . . 3 : > an Se :
ths me - aa : : ;
. F
‘< ee. ‘ 4 of F z Se as
A , 7
: arte a , wt :
. a i e. ;
. ‘ ;
@ . . : .
‘ : :
zi . ; fee |
ts . F : . 3
me . . ' :
e 1 5 Sok : '
a Pe al . 2 . ott “a 2
a! ce
+ . h sa] . Fa hb ey
wie aoe oy meee a TE ar :
; i ate .
. . an) Wea! :
be isk Gs 2 ; ”
. + . . ‘ roe a ¥ 1 sgt , f
‘ ‘ se os Fd fee Rate Ss =
A fom, ie oa « .
: mea ; ue
ee Z ake ac, 4 wet :

veuna

: * aaaet abe SR .

,

Ye
7s o&
oa be
ae

ato

STRENGTAS AND CAPAUILITIES OF THE ORV AND GVN ARMED FORCES -

A Demerintic Republa of Vietnam

240 Tne North Voetnaiie se a ined forces const
vt the 275.000-un Peode a Army of Vietaam
WPAVN) = fu0.000 anped anita, 8 small
beastie) natal force, and an ineepient ar force
The FAVN boa Boe ied usfantes army.
atlapted fo Ghe ferais and chinate of Indo
Hand and experienced ine puddy muun-
fain gtd pungie warfar, With hep frum
Con joy sat Ching, the PAYN Bas us reasd
considerably at. capebthities since the Indo
China War bn 2954. Bs coieateating its en-
tise ce cuter o8 8 sngle objective the PAVN
co! ounk &O atten of duntited diusation
ng Tiree division. suppeected te direct ar-
Hhew fire -Tothay io Caplole of depuoying
foro atte Road Boast Ove at sts 14 cfs takon >
aD ot prUeting sub fantially greater logists
ahd combat ruppurt, including mdi erty
lov five) The PAVN Ras cacethen. tc moopity on
feta cbesfenave oaprieme with fe ANUS
Of loti support by primitne means The
fiend inp the trang and organiascion of Uhe
PAVN 1s Goward (he development of @ conren-
fienal forte, ie cunteast wills ats essengially
punt Ha character ane early 1850's

9 The avaiable evidence ind: ates that the
inoraty of the armed furees us good and (hat
sHher bevalty fo the regime dy fet open to
serieas question The waving standard of the
weetage widier b gicerally higher than his

" aiithan counterpart The PASN considers tt

g teiv

ig ;
“s.
< ‘
‘ ns
a '
fe +
Py
4 .
: ‘
oF
' “ff oa
' e
‘ 2
:
a .
mas --
ee
ate % 7
-_
‘
T ® *
a
‘a
,
woo

Mia tictorke.s qemy shich has won is
lausels by defealiog ao modin Europear
pewerarbattie Tt has a simple, popular mus
Mon fo unify Vietnam under a Comriunist
remit, endian this aim, a us ted by a nat onal
: Uenetal Vo Nguyen Ge Potentiat

sources of division and didovalty within tas
armed fotees. such as (he presence of both
‘pre Soviet and: pro-Chinese factions, do not

i appear te have developed There Save been -

miatively few desertiens of de ection. from the
North Vietnamese armed forces The te:
gime's present economic prebiems. pa7ticu-
farly. the shortages of food could in time

. ee -

abe ‘

"a . : iJ ay, .
asnificaraly efiect Uhe morsie and loyaty of. -

the North Virtnanieee armed forces. howests, |
aroyet Them hate Bin Ae wmdications of such

an triest. a ba Gh ee.
3 The PAV us aimost competely dependent
Upon form gn senso foc the supoly o: arta
fients endinaternc. nd fe techniwal and spr-
chlpt UW asing

tens faciitucs, arneiied whivirs, and au sujr -

part Mast anita y ad haa cume frain
Samant Chins. In the ec ent of o¢ert mil-
ifat) opera sons egant Souk Vietnam, the
PAV smetue. ct. Seed Jur esptinee Buu
town the falda -* tranapoftathay and cof
municaten. The provistoa of adcitusipl alc
tranapert capadilts ty (he USSR or Conupu-

nest China gould le aes. the PAYN's bytstics

provi|\em ee .

4 In tecent gean Sorts: Vietnam hea acqeared
a luvited ar capetebty ath eunsiicrable mil-
tary potential Tie Non Vietnames re-
gime Ras maintacned and renovated formers
Fiench alrficids and hss acquired several new
types of amidti (rangewte Noth Vietnamese

penoounel bave probs. y taken part tn the .

Set auhit, even Wo ahe eatent of proting
UrSR supphec aircraft
IL fu proper Aybte:s have been observed
In North Vetnan and may have bees turned
ove to the GRV Thea developraen tu
gethet with the o gan,at.aa of ap ale ote
headqueriersin the Defe we Munbtry, sup gest
that the re, ime fa develoong « tactical sir
arm) Repardles. of hew r.cudly North Viet-_
nom éevek-« ah ar .ote . however, ifs alr
fa wnes her already betes, as demu
siogod by the Soviet eri t: from Bune: into
fact ausefule tjunct toc: muni f aly power

nay far Eas’. use pst
, ; ad

B Government of “Setnom Say B se

5 At present, the GVN's Advy sumbers io

150,000, it is in process of being increased by
20.000 The $.30 fan nary. rquipped sith
patrol bats and .ninesweepers, provides the

*

fin addition 9 few |

%

Yio sha on camnunica-. |

a Fo

GVN sine capability for ner and coasta)

pateel and detrctuion. The ay force of about
314) min 6215 pilots) hes 146 propctler-driven
wireraft of Ghich about 1IS are asagned to
faeth al units Must of the aircraft are trans
fart 1C 473) ind haison oL-19) types The
we foie figh ef squacrun fying ADs has
protium d welt in support of ground opera-
ions and the tiansport group a combust reacy
and has deinen’ rated its ability in supply and
paratioag Sn STs j

6 The South Veevnaniee osm d furces are

“fuly d-pendeat up om US initary manstance
The US Sifitary A ustance Advisory Group.

which numiniad shoul 685 officers and men
0 Apel 1961) provids § advisors ta the armed
forces in addition to furnphing fogustical and
framing supp US idvisors have reenthy
begun G accompany wits in the Bed US
military aid an Fiseal Year i902 ws proveci+d
at about $16) mulfien for S4AP and $99 sadhon
for supporting ansistamee Substantial eacts-
honat tunds for supporting avustance are be
ing cobsudeced to implement the new vounter.
Mourgency peteck.

7 The nmiaor strength of Gs South Viet.
names Army Les in its extena ve combal ex-
yerence in coustercecnnas wartare Tt bas
been very iagels trained unver Bre ko
cleasinaly officune #ith eorsbat records ae
Moving wity command af rote a niog levey..
Tie troops generat: hase a goad knee tage
of the ternun in shich (hey Apht and Aave

developed, through traning and eaprrience,

“and broadened ringer

the abiity to move and Apht uader diffe st
conditions Leadership at the jower .-trls is
odequate and it is improving as the result of
intensive deadersbip training

8 The mnorale of (he South Vielnamese armed
forces sacged in early 194) when the now Viet

. - Cong oflensne was resulting in bumihating

defeats and frustrating. ineffectual countecr-
avtions = Since then, the artoy bas rallied ort,
in late 100 and early 1961, Drean Lo scom

‘ativvesss In the Aeld against the euertilas,

Tae achivation of additional ranger companies
{raining will prot
‘ably increase the army's counterguersilla

Pa

segett . 1 16

capatihties Moreover, in revrat operates
agains: the Vk Cong. the arnied forces have
demoaustrated improved ability to lagach and
carry out coordinated operated, using ecrn-
taned arn, ro fa ks

§ Wraknenes and defcwncws of the South
Virtnamee Army include lack of technical
¢cuinpetenoe among the troo,s, inadequate
coinmunh atbans and tran-~po.taveal and in-
effective logisica. Toe army techs effovine
inteliigerhe, and there are mot enough qialt-
fied offers above the baltalion levels No
efectie s-stem of rotating Cumeat trop. has
Pet been estabipded, with the result thal some
urute hare been committed to anduly pro-
Merged perads of anteVkrt Cong operatiana
without peel, The Communists are o.chist
* Mainly sceking to penetrate and subvert the
South Vetnane< armed forces.
try litte eridenice that they hare nade any
wynifh ant headesy

*

10 Bsen af proaenily projected programs tu
timnd the OVA armed farcea and tu incr oc
Nz antelburgem ¥ capabilities Werte Cally re-
ahaa, Sou h Vietnam euaid afl be area able
oo pean ting full-scale weit attack by the Not os
Vietpames Army vithout si botantial outide

Theie te -

astiitance At the mee? th: armed forasoaf _

South Vietnam, by thems ves, would br able
to tontain &@ gunos FAWN nenetration across
the patwonal Qoundirces. in ihe event of »
ful-tcale PAVN uies-ion across the IT1h Par
allel of through [4as, the South Vietnamese
arped fore-a could probally conduct effective
delaying acGens for one to two wteks before
taking up clore defensive positions grovad the
Tourane bes area. With US ar and pera!
support, this area probably couk! be held for
another 13-30 days In tne erent of overt |
invasion, te Viet Cong insurgent guerrillas
would hunch attacks on iy armed forers and *
thelr facthues throughout South Vietnam |
With the & uth Vi-tnames forces thus under

+

attack from the tee sdeg, the Viet Cong prob- :

ably could gain contrel of the plateau region |
and large parts of the defta ates. causing
consk’crabkh: South Vietnamese troops to be
tied dc on in the def-nse of Saigon. - -

aval C8 bat et
: ne a)

é
4

 , «tg gee

1 Maen I
gb ve at

ane any .

fitetot 2! ‘ers
