Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible US Actions with Respect to Lao
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013497, dated 3 April 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013497).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

| = protch - Mh

MH Ee

- SNIE 58-5-62
23 May 1962
Advance Copy
TS #14257

SPECIAL

RECEIVED
N.S.C
May 23) 4 41 R62

‘NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE .
NUMBER 58-5- 62 |

PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO
CERTAIN POSSIBLE US ACTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO LAOS

~ RPPROVED FOR RELEASE

war 1993
Submitted by the

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overlcaf

23 May 1962
JFK LIBRARY
MANDATORY REVIEW
EAT CASE + NLIC- Od

DOCUMENT ect ae

The Pollowing intellirence organizations participated in the
' preparation of thig estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intellizence
“Organizations of the Depertnents of State, Defense,
the Arny, the Navy, the Air Foree, and The Joint Staff.

Concurring:

Director of Intelligence and Research, Departnent of State

Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intellisence, Departuent of
the Arny 1G el

Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence),
Department of the Navy

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF

Director for intellivence, Joint Starr

Director of the National Security Agency

‘Dstaining:

The Atomie Erergy Commission Representative to the USIB,
and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction,

«

WARNING

This material contains infornation affecting the Notional
Defense of the United States within the neaning of the espi-
Onage laws, Title 18, USC, Sees. 793 ana 794, the transmission
or revelotion of which: in any manner to an unquthorized person
is prohibited,

. GROUP 1.
Excluded fron autonatic
| downgrading and
declassification

TS# We5h7

CENTRAL ty TELLIGENCE AGE NC Y

23 May 1962

SUBJECT: SNIE 58-5-62: FRORADIE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO CERTAIN
FOSSIDLE US ACTIONS WITT RESPECT TO LLOS*

‘

ve THE PROBLEM

To estinnte Conmunist reactions to certain courses of action

by US and allied forces in Inos,.

NOTE

The assumptions and courses of action here considered were
‘provided by the Laos Task Force for the burpose of this estimate,

The paper is organized to respond directly to the considerations

raised by the given courses of action. It will be printed in

final forn after consideration has been glven to a variation of

Course C to be discussed under Assunption Two.

* Other recent estinates bearing on the situation in Laos are:
SNIE 10-62, "Communist Objectives, Capabilities, and Intentions
in Southeast Asia," dated 21 February 1962; SNIE 58-2-62,
“Consequences of Certain US Courses in Laos," dated 11 April
1962; SNIR 58-3-62, "Inplicationgs of the Fall of Nan Tha,"

dated 9 May 1962; and SNIE 58-462, "The Current Military
Situation and Outlook in Taos," dated 14 May 1962,

THE ESTIMATE

I. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

l. We believe that up to the present there have not been
fundanental differences enong the veamunt st powers concerned -.
Moscow, Peiping, and Hanoi ~~ with respect to the Communist can=
paign in Laos or in Southeast Asia as a whole. There nay have
been disagreenents as to tactics and tining, with Hanoi and
Peiping tending to be nore militant and less patient. The Sino~
Soviet dispute Concerning Bloc leadership and tactics has not
appeared to prevent effective coordination of Communist policy
in Taos. We believe that Sino-Soviet differences are not likely
materLally to affect the Communist responses to the courses of
action discussed in this paper. If, however, the situation
threatened to reach a point of serious arned conflict, directly
involving US and Chinese Communist PORES Sy, latent differences

night becoue acute.

2. It is inportant to note that the Communists do not
consider Laos in isolation fron their other objectives in

Southeast Asia. In fact, the Viet Cong in South Vietnan and

the Pathet Ino in Laos are both integral parts of North Vietnanese
Communist military and party organizations, and both take their
guidance from Hanoi. Hanoi, in turn, is supported and counseled
by both Moscow and Peiping who, to sone extent, are competing for
influence over Hanoi. For thig reason, Moscow probably feels
under certain linitations in counseling phtienx and restraint

on Hanoi, for the Soviets would not want to appear less willing
than the Chinese to support the "national liberation struggles"
in Laos and South Vietnon. The USSR has played the key diplomatic
role for the Bloe and has provided extensive material support,
including the airlift Operation. We do not believe that the
Soviets are likely to abandon their influence in Laos {and to

that extent in North Vietnan) to the Chinese.

5

3- All the Communist bowers probably suspect ns US of
insincerity or at least of procrastination in its proclained
effort to bring General Phount to serious negotiations. The
Communist side has probably lost sone of its earlier interest in
a coalition governnent, particularly as the Communist military
situation in Laos has steadily improved at the expense of both
the “neutralist" forces and the Laotian Government forces. They

probably share our judgnent that the Forces Arnees Royales (FAR)

Ke

cannot by themselves effectively defend any point remaining in
Goverrnent hands, and that the Pathet Ino, assisted by the North
Vietnanese troops now in Iaos, could quickly seize all the najor

towns still held by the FAR forces.

4k, The Comrmnists probably interpret the current US troop
novenent to Thailand as an attempt to deter them fron further
military action in Laos, They recognize that the nove puts the
US in an improved position to intervene if fighting is resuned,
but they probably believe that the US has not yet taken a firn
decision on the particular circumstances which would require it
to intervene. They probably have revised upward, however » their
estinate of the chances that sone major violation of the cease-

fire in the future would produce such an intervention.

9- In these circumstances » we believe that the Conrmnists
will not alter substantially their current tactic of suspending
major military action while waiting for the Royal Laotian
Governnent (RLG) to accept their terns for a political settle-
ment. They are unlikely at this point to nove any Chinese conbat
forces or additional North Vietnamese troops into Laos. If the
RLG does not make some substantial movement toward Communist :

terns, the Communists will probably renew their military pressures.

<b

de

However, the Cormunist side will probably seek to keep the level
and incidence of its military operations below what it believes

would prompt US intervention, particularly since it probably cal-
culates that US intervention night ‘5 at some juncture, involve air
Operations against the highly important Courunist bases of supply

and LOC "safe-havens" of North Laos and North Vietnan,

II. ASSUMPTION oNE

Neither side has openly repudiated the cease-fire or the
principle of a negotiated settlenent » but continuing Communist
military activity constricts the territory under RIG control.
US policy remains to seek a negotiated settlenent based upon a

neutralist coalition government.

COURSE A: The US provides the RLG and the FAR
with assistance of the type and up to
the level of that provided to South

Viietnan,

6. If the US initiatea this course of action, it is possible
that the Communist side would see this as no nore than a US ate

tempt to strengthen the RLG negotinoting position. We believe it

<<

DE

more likely, however » that they woula suspect that the US had
decided, whatever it night say publicly, to abandon the effort
for a coalition governnent. They would probably believe that

the US intended to establish effective non-Communist control

over a substantial part of Laotian territory. They night even
believe that this was a first step in a US plan to buttress the
FAR, if necessary, with us combat forces. The Commmist side
would alnost certainly incrense its nilitary investment in Laos ;
perhaps acknowledging openly the presence of North Vietnanese
troops and inereasing their mmber, providing then and the Fathet
Lao with increased Logistics Saunek » Hore artillery, and, perhaps :
Qa greatly expanded airlift, The Coummists probably would not
hesitate to respond to FAR encroachnenta on areas under their
control in Laos with counteraction up to the scale of the Nan

Tha operntion. They would also probably increase sharply their
infiltration and subversion efforts in areas under RIG control

but would alnost certainly not attempt to seize the Tajor towns

along the Mekong remaining in RLG hands.

f

( CCURSE B: In addition to the actions assumed in
Course A, the US carries out a sub-
stantial buildup of its conbat forces

in Thailond to about 20,000 troops.

Te Although this additional course of action would not pre-~
sent any greater immediate threat to Communist interests in Inos 5
the Communists would probably take es nore serious view of the
situation because of the nearness of US forces capable of inter-
vening in laos. The North Vietnamese would probably reinforce
their troops in Taos and the Chinese night move forces to their
border with northern Taose At the sane tine » the Commmists would

probably move for a resumption of negotiations.

COURSE C: Troops from the US and Thailand, and

fron those SEATO nenbers willing to
: ; participate, are statd oned in RLG-held
. areas to preserve the cease-fire and to
Prevent further Pathet Lao/North Vietnanese
nilitary advances. The US and allied

troops would initiate no offensive action

against Concunist-held positions. The

-7-

linited US nilitary intentions would be

conveyed to the Communist side both

privately and publicly. *

8. Under the assumption given, the cease-fire would still
have been generally in force when the US took the given action,
although linited Communist military encroachnent continued, In
these circumstances » the Cormunist side would probably suspect
that the US intent went farther than the stated purpose -~ preser~
vation of the cease-fire, Their judgment of the real US intention
would rest to sone extent on the size and disposition of the allied
forces moving into Laos and the size and composition of the forces
backing then up in Thailand. In any Caso, they would probably be-
lieve that the US » though still prepared to accept a satisfactory
political settlenent y Was willing and ready to participate directly

in the event of subsequent Communist military activity in Loos.

a en

* A lesser voriant of this course would involve stationing

- allied forces only in the Mekong valley towns to free FAR
troops from garrison duty for active operations against
the insurgents (SEATO PLAN 5).

T. S-= R-E-T

rere.

9. North Vietnan would alnost certainly introduce addi-

tional forces into Laos. The Chinese Communists ulght take this

opportunity to nove "volunteers" into the northern provinces ;
and the North Vietnanese and Soviets, although they night not
welcone this development » would probably accede. Soviet logis-
tical support would be stepped up. The Pathet Tao, with North
‘Vietnarese participation, would probably step up the scale of
their nilitary actions throughout Taos with the intent of con-
fining US-ollied control of the specific areas occupied, They
would probably harass US lines of communications, outposts, and
patrols. Communist agents would probably undertake terrorist and
sabotage activities within the US-oceupied towns.

10. We do not believe » however, that the Communist forces
would attempt to drive the us troops from the areas they occupied.
The Communists probably would consider that over the long run,
confinenent of US and allied forces to these areas would place
the US in an awkward nilitary-political position, and might cause
the US to withdraw. Meanwhile » they would probably revert to
pressures for a negotiated settlenent with the withdrawal of us
troops as the initigl objective of any agreenent,.

Tit. ASSUMPTION two

The Communist side resumes military activity with offensives
against the najor towns remaining in RIG hands. US policy shifts

from seeking a neutralist coalition governnent to seeking a de

facto partition of Inos.

COURSE D: Troops fron the US and Thailand, and
fron those SEATO nenbers willing to
participate, enter Laos to establish
a de facto partition of the country
which would leave in RIG hands onLy
that part of Laos south of approxi~
nately the 17th parallel. ‘The allied
forces would take offensive action to
clear and secure southern Inos to the

border with South Vietnan.

ll. The assuned Communist military operations against the
major towns remaining in Lactian Goverment hands would mean
that the Communists bad abandoned the idea of a neutral Taos
under a coalition government and had determined to end the

Laotian conflict by military veans. Their intent would be to

~< *

Zoe >So

bring Iaos wnder direct Corrunist control by achieving oa quick

and complete victory over the RIG.

12. The Communist decision to conduct such a general offen-
sive would mark a major new step in Conrunist policy regarding
Laos. We believe that such a decision, marking a substantial
shift in Bloc policy, would have been based on a belief the US
would not respond by intervening and would have been preceded by
considerable debate anong the. Communist partners. When the US
intervened, the Conrmnists would be concerned to prevent the con-
flict fron spreading beyond THbas Nevertheless, they would take
such steps as they deened necessary to protect themselves and
their positions in Laos against further US deployments and a
US counterattack, They would case strenuously a US effort to
clear the area to the South Vietnanese border. They would alnost
certainly initiate a rapid logistical buildup, further strengthen
North Vietnamese forces, and possibly introduce Chinese Communist
"volunteers." They would probably assure that the US would not be
willing to wage a prolonged and unpopular war, and that the US

would in due course be prepared to negotiate a settlenent.

COURSE E: In addition to the areas occupLed

under Course D, allied forces occupy

Dery

><i><:

' Sayaboury Province and, with the ex~
ception of the city of Luang Prabang,

the major towns along the Mekong.

13. Moverent into these additional areas would increase
the apprehension of the Communists about US intentions. They
would offer vigorous resistance at points they had already
occupied, alnost certainly with North Vietnamese reinforcenents.
Further, the Chinese Communists would be nore likely in this

circumstance than under Course D above to commit their own

forces, probably under the fiction that they are "volunteers."
