Meeting no 10 - London England, 30 April 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012398, dated 1 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012398).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Meeting No, 10 at Lendon, England, 30 April 1961

‘Subject arrived at 20U5 hours on Sunday, 30 April 1961,

After creeting Subject

» he sat down and sald~~

(i) St Today we went sightsee!ng. We saw Windsor Castle.
1 hav® some questions to ask you. Let us assume that I arrive
in Moscow on 6 May. Let us assume that 1 have arrived with no
Incident, and Jn any case you will give me a telephone nce. to,

call In Moscow, I will

ring it at a designated hour and just Tet

the phone ring--say 3 times--and engage in ne cenversation.

This would signtfy tha
‘hake 3 rings again and
side booth. If I make

tall is in order. In a minute I willl
‘that fs all. I will call from an out-
mere rings than 3 that will eigntfy that

a

“something I not tn order and I will attempt to advise yru tn
rome other way as Iocan. Possibly survelllance en me of seme

sort = as an example.
lo can call sp at any -t
G:  Frior to your deya

G: Translates abeve fnto Englith. &:
ime “n the evening frem a phone booth.
rture we wlll provide you with the number

and tell you when to call. S: 1 should think that you would

want to know that all
'? Things could be wa
thing from you rrier t
it. Anyone speaking R
agphene booth and say
petnt ts that we do ne
bnewledgs ef you, %:
for this, That ts pro

2. Please cons'd

dead drop site and the
wee te meet on this NABERF
I know every neok ther

Americans acted very w
.ccacional rassers<by
changed the conversati

3y £: _ My sacond
te A3 TREE

you hel) me tn this?
:ovlet Embassy and wil
time. L'il alsn have
basic personal data on
mea to get this tn Mesc

| APPROVED FOR RELEASE

fe well with me. G: Of ceurse, we would,
rhed ott simply: (f I did not get every
omy departure or ¢f WYNNE cruldnitt bring
ussian, man ¢r woman, could call me from
anything !rrelevant. Gr Yes, but the
t wish t> cut In unnecessary people to have
I understand this and am grateful to Vou
per.

er the two places 1 gave yeu. Cne, the
ether, the meet'ng site. It is very geod
“HNAYA near the ThEr 7X KOVSRAYA Gallery.

e and even the wemen custrdians. These
ell. When we were talking In RussJan and
tame near, mostly women, they cleverly

on, adniring the moon, atc,

question: I am trying to find cut a way
Thus far 1] simply have had no chance. Can
Temerrow, I have an appointment at the

l probably meet the RESIDENT fer.a shert
adrink er two with’ SHAPOVALGV. JI need

; . There was ne opportuntty for
ow. Gt You mean data as evidenne that

= ae

| Pe a

i

#10 en 7

you have studied the man. S: Yes, I need only a Little, not
much, Gs: You know, Just looking at his visiting card. All
sorts of titles, decoration, etc. are listed on it, and you
need te report such data as 'f you got {t yourself. S: Yes,
that's all and some bas'c blographic data, date of birth,
marital status, children, address, telephone number.

®) St Tomorrow morning I will not ge with the delegation.
Tiiey Knew I have to 6° to the Embassy to arrange for money al-
lowances and mate all other arrangements for our extended stay’.
If tl net go there unt!] 1100 hours. In the morning will go to
stores with WYNNE. My delegation members are all very herpry.
They will be able to buy all sorts of Juni with the money they
saved on thelr per diem since they were fad everywhere. I'll
meet them at 1560 tc 1600 heurs, They are happy with me since
they feel I have organized everything well for them personally.
There hasn't been one word of criticfzing to date. 1 even told
them that !f they write good reports on the!r work here and do
good work they will come here with me again tn October. This ts
very attractive to them. I tceld them I weuld also write a fave
efable report and they are all happy.

» St 1 need this material on MERRIMAN - just brief in-
formation. G: Very well, when can you drop fn tomorrow morn! ng?
st I am gofng to the stores with WYNNE. Yesterday we already
made the arrangements. I will leave my purchases with him md
what he can't bring to me cn bis coming trip he can bring me
later, in 2 or Jmonths., However, I want to purchase everything
myself since I have a whole notebook full of Stems to get. This
will take me 2 or 3 days. Then I will go to the Embassy to
rece've funds, The approving caible has come [n as welll as
cable approving funds lese WO pounds: they are econemizing. The
cutgoing cable was wall worded. It stated that the delegation
Will look into electronics, and the approval went through the
Central Committee.

©) St They want tc learn about every Little electronic
detail. J have seen many reports made b visiting delegations,
Copies are duplicated for dissem! nation ts the various inst'tutes
and academies, I will get you coples from the erfginals and
your scfentids can see what our delegates are after and what

they get. Your people are not shown our factories of signi fi-
cance. Only certa'n ones are cffered for ‘nspectfon, We
Were supposed to take 33MM to see a cement factory. At

a

| nae

#10

first they said, onty the electric train can be used not the
highway, since too many PVO Installations can be seen from _

e highway. ater they cancelle e trip saying the area ts
too aaddy In Winter, They show very little or things of Little
value. Why do you not restrict our delegations? Of course, not
the ones which I lead, (Laughter) Serfously, you should ree

og i3bup strict this, the Americans are already doing this on a reci-
ayer precal basis only. On-the Sth of Fay 8 seven-man elegation
S| on-holsting and transport equipment Js coming here. SCHWART?
Ye, | will be the Interpreter who Ts co-opted by KGB. “He 1s on our
vs Committee and ts a half Jew. There will be a conference here -

and they will be recelved by BERGER who operates like WYNNE, ant.
goes to Moscow often. This delegation has been given numerous.
Gu | $pectfic misstons and the personnel come from interested induse-

whe | for 7effreeting ‘selent fic tts

patents for

go vate
synthetic rubber from Canada. s is vital for war material,
KHRUSHCHEV has understood this and has made a powerful committee

of the GNTK.

GN TK, 7. Ht Who ts the GNTK subordinated to? Gt: We wuld Lfk-
to ask you abeut the GNTK, but ftrst of ail ~ excuse me - tell
me when can you drop In, tomorrow? You see we have to contact
MERRIMAN because he may be out of tewn and yeu will not he able
to reach him, St Then {ft can be the day after tomerrwy Gt
That fs all welt and goed but [t fs necessary to determine when
he will be available. S: What ]} need, from MERRIMAN, {38 to
speak to him. Of course, we have trouble understanding esch
ether, AI1 I need 's to speak to him for S minutes, then I will!
go to the Embassy and pass them the basic data on him. I believe
they may even assign the man whe {5 returning, PAVLOV, to contact
MERRIMAN. Or they may assign GENERALOV. I have not met him yet,
but he {# a case officer working In the technical group, The
group consists of three: PAVLOV, SHAPOVALOV and GENERALOV. Gs
We will get this Information on Merriman for you. St I can
then simply Introduce him on the hth or Sth of May. G: At thts
introductory meeting, MERRIMAN can give you some materials and
promise to deliver the rest to you via the case officer yeu have
Just Intreduced, 3: Thatts right, just half the matertal and

_ promise to deliver the balance fater. The contact will drag cn
for several months. hen 1 told SHAPCVALCV how old MERRIMAN
was, he sald that we don't work with old men as agents, The
requirement here {s that the contact he a resident ef London,

a British citizen and younger. The old man weuld not be recrul!t+
ed, but treated as a trusted informant.

ae

#10 7 ae eee
Ki?

Garrte x 8. 8: Now about the newly organized committee. KHRUNI-
ss CHEV, a deputy of KHRUSHCHEY and a minister of USSR has more
Gt4- stature than PETUKOV, the former chief, KHRUNICHEV has 5
= deputies and he has the Committee under his control, The
Comaittes ig like Soviet of Scientiste like a Praesidiun,
There are about_15 Comeittee members. These will include
Hy ehief specialists, chiefs of directorates. This is the top
> echelon. Thus he has undér him the Directorate of Forsign
: Relations, the Chief of which is GVISHIANI -- who remains as
Gostun w chief, If they made me hie deputy, then I would have greater
freedom of action since I could attend meetings, receptions ;-
etc. to all countries not only those I have te do with now.
G: This is a Directorate? 383: It will be by the new Table
of Organization, It is now an OTDEL, The Directorate (Up-
ravieniye) has three OTDELS: The OTDEL of Foreign Relations
the Information OTDEL and the Foreign OTDEL, like a Protocol
L. @: What do these do?

knee} 9. 8! The OTDEL of Foreign Relations consists of sectors

tern, | Sieh as the American Sector which includes al1 American Countries
wee’ | CNORBO); the English sector, under BERDENIKOV, which includes
Canada and Dominions; the third in the Africa-Asian sector
including the Near, Middle and Far Kast. Each OTDEL has a chief
inspector and an expert who is in charge of one or two count~
ries — thus each sector would have 12-15 experts. Lt, Col.
TRAVKIN, who worked in the UN in New York, is a Strategic Intel~
ligence officer. He wag there six sonths and was renoved,
that is normally, and he was appointed as an expert in the
American sector. He is subordinate to the Sector Chief, Denis
POLYAKOV. I graduated from the Academy with POLYAKOV and he
had teen in America with a delegation just as I an here now,
One by one, I am renembering ny classmates. Originally there
were 100 but 2 were dismissed. One had s father who was 4
KULAK and the other was dismissed for some reason that I can't
remenber. I may be in a similar situation now but they must
suffer me there or shoot me, one of the two.

Are ee poncems raee

10. G: You say that you expect to be the Deputy of the
Directorate? 38! Yes, if nothing happens, the Deputy +o
' GVISHIANX, Hie full name ie Pohermen MIXHAILOVICH and his is
ic -4- married to the daughter of KOSYGIN. He is a member of the
Committee and is not a stupid man; he is well liked, and he
' is very pleasant to me

fovrg,
etd ut

Grit, ;

i TEN eRe

#10 : ~5-

He is a Geergian., Of ceurse, he is alse feared because ef
his father-in-law. One cemplaint te him and the man is gene.

11. G: Hew abeut theether OTDELS? 8: The Infernatien
OTDEL has in it 15 chief specialists. These specialists are
experts in their industrial fields such as electric pewer,
black metalurgy, electrical equipment, steel, ete., in shert,
ail ef the main industries. But ef thése, the mest

_Sutheritative specialists are alse members ef the Cexnittes.'

Whenever delegations bring in material, it is turned ever te the
Infermation OTDEL and the specialists will determine where it
sheuld be sent. Yer example, te « specific industry if it is
needed at ence; te an institute er academy, or te a ministry,
They alse evaluate the material. G! De they alse have military
specinliste? 8S: Yes. These whe are cencerned with war
preductien. All eur peeple are civilians but they ceerdinate
their werk with the military. :

12, S! The Fereign OTDEL Uensists ef the Pretecel
Secter which deals with the reception ef fereigners and are
agents fer their accemmedations, etc. Preuinent visiters are
eften granted all accemeedations at gevernuent expense, Anether
secter plans the teurs fer visiting delegations; determines whe
will accempany the fereign delegatiens and sets up cenferences.
Then they determine whe will sttend the return invitations te the
varieus embassies. These secters are really called werking
greupe in this OTPEL. Twe er three peeple de the planning fer
teurs; they call the chiefs ef industries where visiting
delegations weuld like te ge and get pernissien te visit
whatevor im permitted. Anether greup arranges fer the guides
and interpreters. A third greup takes care ef pretecel fer
cenferences, etc. In shert, 211 ef the persennel in this Fereign
OTDEL service fereign delegations. Each ares secter is
represented by a greup which acceapanies fereigners frem these
countries. G: What is the tetal persennel strength? 3: I can —
tell yeu exactly. There are twenty persens in this OTDEL in
which there are three greups and each greup has five efficers
net ceunting the chiefs.

¢
lat ijle

od

#10 | -6-

13. 3S: In the future, the Infermatien OTDEL will alse

‘be a greup ef OTDELS headed by eur specialists te whem all

materials will be given fer evaluation and whe will give
directives fer matters ef scientific interest nccerding te
orders frem KHRUNICHEV and the higher cenmmittee, They alse
Pe evaluate the materials received and pass them en as
directed.

14, J:(In English) Semething is net clear te me. I a
have seen Anerican delegatiens ge te the USSR. Fer example,
agricultural delegatiens -- and they dealt directly with the
Minister ef Agriculture. 8: But new they will ge threugh us.
Our specialist en agriculture will arrange fer all the visits

‘te Kelkhezes and arrange all cenferences. Fer example, eon the

13th ef May the Ontarie Prevince agricultural chief, Mr.
SPOONER, will arrive. Prier te my ceming here I gave
instructiens te the Pretecel OTDEL, specifically te ULYANENKO
whe had been here befere. Everything gees threugh us but we
erder the fereign section of the Ministry ef Agriculture te
prepare an itinerary te visit ferestry research centers fer

the things SPOONER is interested in, i.¢., ferest fire
pretection, insect centrel and fisheries. We de net erder
these sub-sectiens ef Agriculture but deal threugh the Minister
ef Agriculture, which has its ewn fereign sectien. |

iS. J: Dees this include the pure sciences and the
Academy ef Science? 38! The Academy ef Sciences has all kinds
ef cemparable activity, but we ceerdimte everything. They will
aise examine materials ebtained frem yeu and will reselve
centradictiens and determine where prime interests lie,

16, G: What is the everall strength ef yeur OTPREL?
The OTDEL ef Fereign Relatiens. 3! Kew we have seventy
pergeng, but in the future we will have between 120 and 130.
G: Are yeu speaking ef the Directerate ef Fereign Relatiens er
just ef your Fereign Relations OTDEL? §: I misundersteed.
The Yereign Pretecel OTDEL -has twenty; then the Infermatien
OTDEL has, in additien te the fity specialists, abeut twenty-five
REFERERTY. This may include seme stenegraphers. The largest
OTDEL is eur OTDEL ef Fereign Relations, se there weuld be

| eee

#10 a.

about sixty there. Abeut ten ef these wauld be chiefs ef

werking greups and deputies and abeut fifty werkersa. A greup

eof 3 er 4 ef these may be cadre persenne] whe maintain linisen

with eur Ministry ef Fereign Affairs. In additien, there will

ie) be a greup ef abeut 5 persens, new there are enly 2, whe will

— preject plans fer eur visiting delegatiens. They maintain

liaisen with the Seviet Travel Cemmissien ef the Central
Committee. First ef all, they censult with us and ask which
individual members of a prepesed delegatien we recemnend
on a quarterly basis.

fie
yes

’

17. 8: Fer example, I planned twe delegations fer
Canada thia Spring. This is submitted te this greup which
reperts te the Central Comittee. Fer example, we have
planned te send 22 delegatiens in the first quarter. Of these,
3 are te ge te Canada, se many te England, etc. At the same
time, we already have tentative plans fer delegatiens te be
sent during the ether 3 quarters ef the year. All this is
subaltted te the Central Cemmittee fer analysis and in the
prepesed delegatien are included KGB efficers and GRU officers,
but if the delegation issmall and only a few specialists can
ge, then there will be ceepted specialiats ef GRU and KGS
ex beth. This greup is really an OTDELENIYE. All ef this is,
first ef all, based en the acientif£ic intelligence missien
Plan. Specific items ef infermatien are than set forth as
minssiens fer selected specialists but, ef ce@urse, this is te
supplement intelligence ebtained threugh agents since delegatiens
cannet answer 211 questiens ef interest.

a 5 aan Bizarre te eH
wee ott ten canngre ear Me te ae

on eta,

soe te ees,

Ev 18, G! Since this greup is aise under GVISHIANI, is it
ae correct te say that the Directerate censista ef three OTDELS
; and this planning OTDELENIYE? 8: Yes. Thim Planning OTDELENIYE
} er Greup is alse called the Planning Center and they sit in
: & reem ali by themselves and select members ef eur delegatiens
j by name. ; |

ge 19, Ht Hew is this ceerdinated with the agent werk? 8:
| After the name is submitted te the Central Cemmittee Exit
; Ceommissgien and they check him eut cempletely threugh KGB and
( _j Party recerds, and grant him permissien te ge abread, if we
trogen FY as GRU have specific intelligence infermatien which we want
{ the delegatien member te ebtain, he will be called directly

Neen ener ee eeee eee cence eee ee ee

.
oY oo

#10 * .8-

he enters the mission, which we always call the Scientific-
Military Mission, he then signs a secrecy agreement under
penalty of punishment. This man would now be called a special-~
ist coopted by GRU,

Tlt 20, 8: I, myself, and others like me in the Committee, also
bh + have a mission of spotting young, promising scientists in
Sest4uy (¥ |  @dvilian status who could be used as illegals by BEKRENEV.

‘a

Sptunisrh oo | He would have to be a specialist, however, and this is an ,

into GRU Headquarters and be given a mission briefing. When
| indication of how intensively they are stressing scientific
“Thu

|

Hingedy” fut intelligence. Thus far we have not Yound even one such ~~~
easel ‘| “specialist. At least not since I've been with the Committee,
deadet fe but we are still looking.. Should we find an acceptable person,

Suteld;qenee he then would be taken fox illegals training and this is, from
" their viewpoint, a desirable thing since after all in the GRU
we do not train specialists or scientists.

Ie Gk 21, G! What does the KGB do? §: They do exactly the
jos | game thing. G: What are the functions of the KGB personnel

{mr y who are directly assigned to your Committee? 8: The Chief
— | 2 am. His Deputy is a liéuténant colonel, whose name I don't

recall, and he also sits in the same OTDEL where I do. They
have a:total of about 15 people in the Committee and, in
addition, they have about 20 KGB coopted persons,

{

VL Level >of the KGB group there is LETIN, who is a colonel, just as

|

|

|

| G! Do they report on the others? 58: Absolutely.

Vr relt The coopted ones are all conformists who will report if any-
titer thing is said against KHRUSHCHEY. I cannot go to a reception

without one of them accompanying me. This KGB officer will
watch me but he will do stupid things a hundred fold more than
A IT will, He will get drunk and he will behave in a non-KULTURNA
: manner. He will still report on me, however, even if he
eee ee doesn't know the local language. G! In addition to this do
wee ‘they not have intelligence missions? 8: Of course they do.
Moen And I believe that this man who came with me, LOPATO, is a
coopted KGB worker. Their mission is primarily political
intelligence, although they do have secondary missions of
general intelligence and, of course, they report on all others
of the Soviet delegation. For example, last December when I
invited Wynne to a reception, I also invited some of our
specialists, Since the food and drink were free, they got

#190 ~§-

drunk. The KGB repert said that these specialists sheuld
net be invited again since they den't knew hew te behave

, befere fereigners.

oe
vie. Chak

23. J: There is a State Committee fer Defense

_Technelegy. What is the relatienship between that cemmittee

and yeur cemmittee? 3: Abselutely right, there is such a
cemmittes. And it is under the Ceuncil ef Ministers -~
entirely separate. J! There is alse n Cewnittee fer Radis
Rlectrenics. 8: These cemmittees are purely scientific ’

‘and they centact us fer information in their fields. They

may previde ene ef their menbers Yer Inclusion in ene ef
eur delegations. They give ue this man fer training te
ebtain intelligence infermatien desired by the committee. The

‘committee itself censists ef yery highly trained and trusted.

Andividvals but we handle their intelligence requirements fer

them, Our efferta are saving the Seviet Unien much meney and

are giving them very valuable infermatien. I weuld suggest

that yeur big peeple censider this preblem, I realize that

it im net pessible te cut eff 211 delegations, since they fit
inte the scheme ef things ef diplematic relatiena and pelitics,
but ways sheuld be revised fer making eur visiting delegatiens

ineffectual. That is by systematically limiting them te very
ineccueus infermation.

Chis pefeig | absphet Fr. 5S: New IJ will send yeu an erganizatienal chart ef
: 8 K

the GNIK and s classified telephene directery, which I can
get with esse, There yeu will find the full name and telephene
munber ef 211 the members. In addition, I have lecked up

in the right~hand drawer ef my desk reperts ef all my agent
material, I weuld have breught it this time ii ny suitcase
but"T was afraid te de this, I knew it weuld net £it inte my
pecket. I weuldn't like te trust it te 2 suitcase and,
theugh they weuld never search unless I was under duspicien,
it is pessible that they may request te see the cantenta ef ;
my suitcase. Altheugh te date, that has net been dene, since
they knew that I am a celenel. If they ever did I'd have te
run te ene embassy er the ether, I den't knew which ene.
Oni G! I weuld suggest yeu run te the nesrest ene.
(Jekingly}) 8: It irritated me te realize that I live en

#10 ~10~-

the same atreet where the British Embassy is lecated,
and that I sat acress frem the U.S. Embassy, and nebedy
weuld walk eut te when I ceuld give wy material.

25. G! Chalk eff yeur netes, you will receive 2
telepheng number te call upen yeur srrival in Hescew and
we will set a preper time. 8: Presumably yeu will give me
ali kinds ef inatructiens and requests befere I leave. G!
Of ceurse we will, 3: I ceuld very easily meke a phene call
after I arrive. 1°11 walk eut te get a glass ef beer and gs
te a phene beeth. Thon yeu will net werry if all is well er
net. Regarding Merriman, I will drep in temerrew. G! What
time will yeu ceme? 8: Let me figure it @ut; Z will tell yeu
befere I leave tenight, I ceuld even arrange it that if later
sencene weuld call Merriman in my name that weuld be sufficient
te receive materials which I have arranged fer. G: It weuld
be better if yeu had intreduced hin permenally. &: Of ceurse
it weuld, I enly suggest this other means as a variant.
G? Have yeu studied yeur ene-time pads yet and inetructiens
fer coding by numbers? S$! Yes, but we shall review this
again, H: Let ue de the small things new because the
decter will be here in 15 minutes. (G translates.)

3: Please explain te me the signal plan precedure fer
radie“fransmissien. Why 1s the number repeated egain after
the first tranemiasien? G! That is an erder t¢ repeat the
entire message the secend time and te indicate te yeu that |
it is the secend tranemissien., 3! Oh, X see; I did net
understand that yesterday. When the inetructer cenes again
and brings the ene—time pads which I requested, I'd like te
review the precedures ef which greaps cane first. G! As
seen as the larger pads are ebtained, { will shew yeu this.

It is very simple. (G illustrates te Subject hew the beek
indicoater and the line indieaster is used. Subject understeed.)

(a7) 8: I have written eut certain: juestiens fer the
decte?hbeut medicine that I have ts bring back. These are
net fer me, In it alright te give them te hin since I wrete
them in my ewn hand? G! We will translate tt all. 8! Is
it alvight that I teek my ewn phetegraph with the Minex while
i was practicing? G: Of course, it is, The phetegrapher

' is eur ewn man and we have the negative, 3: I was werried,

G: Well, I'm trying te resesure yeu that there is nething te
fear frem that directien.

ao

#10 _ -Ll-

2 5: When E was leaving te ceme here, the Chief
ef the Persennel Section ef the GNTK asked me te bring back
the fellewing medicine fer him! “It is called cripaneza in
ampules. It is a medicatien inthe treatment fer cancer.
Seme ene ef his relatives needs this. We can get it in the
USSR but with great difficulty and it is said te be very
effective. G! What quantities de yeu need? 8: Just a small
quantity. It is used as an injection. Anether man asked me
te get tablets te restere vitality. I alse need a medicine,
fer relief ef kidney stene pains. G: This sheuld be simple;
what type ef treuble. Is it stene er infectien? 5: It's
fer stenes and it is called Reeatinex. It is manufactured
in West Germany. We get.it in small quantities in the USSR.
3: The Chief ef the Pretecel Secter ef eur cemmittee is
suffering frem headache spasms. He used te werk fer KOLOTOV
at ene time. He requests hydrecertecene. This is fer
exzema. There are seme tablets ene takes fer this. Alse
there are salves. ;

@) 8: New fer myself ~~ I need seme effective salve
fer c@fijmetivitzs. This may be in liquid ferm er a salve.
The decter can leek at me and see what I need. My eye sight
ims perfect but I get this red inflammatien which I picked up
in Turkey. I alse need seme dental plastic plates. When I
was wounded, my jawbene breke, andhere I have seme plastic
teeth which have breken. If I ceuld get a dental plastic
plate te match the celer ef my teeth, I have an excellent
dentist in Mescew whe can replace the breken pieces. G: In
ether werds, yeu need the material te match yeur teeth and yeur
dentist will de the werk? 8! That's right. G: De yeu knew
the kind ef dental material. Ia it acryllic? 8: I den't knew.
What my dentist said was that there is a set ef plates in a bex
and when the preper celer is matched frem these the preper teeth
shape is étamped eut and that is all there is te it. One mere
small faver ~~ I need a supply ef these little checelates,
G: That is very simple. That is enly Ex-Lax, 8: Yes, but we
have mich difficulty getting it in the USSR. “This is*what f
request. G! We'll get it fer yeu. The decter will write eut
& presecriptien fer whatever can be ebtained directly. 8! But
I can't get a prescriptien myself. G! We will get it fer yeu.

a
{
'
’
'
}
i

|

#10 ~12~

St This is my entire medical list. We have all ef these
things fren time te time in the USSR but they are hard te get.
Anyway this is what I've written eut fer the decter. Sergey
SERGRYEVICH (VARENTSOV) asked me te get him the vitality pille.
X alae have te get a light filter and a heed fer a Leica.

Yeu den't knew hew it is. When they knew yeu are geing abread,
evoryene aska fer a particular item. Se I am henestly telling
you what they requested me te de and I ask yeu te help me.

Hi: Very well, we will get it fer yeu.

30, St I weuld like te express my sincere appreciation
fer the way yeu have supperted Wynne materially. Yesterday,
he mentiened it te me and appeared te be very very pleased.
I thank yeu fer this and it indicates te me that yeu value
me highly fer having dene this. I can't imagine saying farewell
te yeu and net meeting again with yeu inthe near future. Pessibly
X'11 fly te Canada and yeu will meet me there, er in Canberra
in Australia, I knew what te de new. I will send back with
Wynne the material that I have and I will be able te phetegraph
many desuments and manuale with the Hinex. Then your peeple
will have ne deubts about me whatseever. If eniy Wynne will
make ne mistake. G! Den't werry abeut him. He will pass
the material te the Embassy at ence and it will be in safe
hands. But we want te advise yeu net te take necdlessz chances
and if yeu see that it ia tee risky te get cemplete material,
take eanly what is saafe te got and jet the rest ge. Yaur
persenal security is ef greater value te us than every last bit
ef infermatien. We are net greedy fer intelligence if it
invelves unnecessary persenal risk fer yeu. $! Thank yeu fer
that and if I de my werk in an eutstanding fashien and Wynne
fulfills his part, will yeu give him a deceratien? G: That
is pessible but that would be determined after he has accenplished
his werk. We den't premise ene semething prier te his having
dene it. 3! He leeked very pleased yesterday. He is making a
small additien te his effice. It's very neat and medest but he
deesn't even have meney te finish it. He hag a neat piace

‘but lives en a medest scale; his wife is alee medest. Yesterday

they teek me eut te three clubs. and then she. prepared a very
fine dinner and we had lets of teasts. G! Where de yeu get
11 this energy and at the same time ne sleep? 3: I even

ee Smee ene ane eee wes oe com ean een eee ES ne een ees eee
r

#10 ~13- . .

danced yesterday but then I relaxed and bad a fine dinner. .
When I saw what was served I ceuldn't help but think hew
impessible it is te get these things in the USSR. Even tematers:
are extremely expensive. Everything there is built ena
pack ef lies and the peeple are surpressed by a pewerful ferce
which is nething but demageguery. If we had a denecracy an
eppesitien party weuld develep at ence but it ia a pelice state
and when MOLOTOV, whe was supperted by a number ef intelligent
peeple, said senething ngainst the regime they were all squeezed
#ut at ence and they were net far frem being shet. Altheugh
these days that is net dene, as it had been befere. G: The
decter will arrive in a few minutes. 3: SHSPILOV was a very
intelligent man. :
‘31. @: Since yeu mentiened him, a very impertant questien
comes te mind. Tell mo, in analyzing intelligence missions
on ® werld-wide scale, with respect te GRU and KGB, at what
level are the missiens breught tegether fer analysis and
assignment? Where is the level and whe participates: in
determining the assignment ef missiens; the review ef missien
pregress periedically; the assignment ef persennel ef GRU
and KGB accerding te prierities? §: It's like this -— KGB
dees not knew abeut eur agent nets and we de net knew absut
theirs, All infermatien ebtained frem clandestine seurces
gees ferward te the apprepriate interested committees ef the
Central Committee ef tha Cemmunint Party ~~ That is mattérs
denling with specific Industries, war preductien, etc.
Pelitical infermatien gees te the Pelitical Cemaittee ef the
Central Ceonmittee, The everall Contral Cemmittee is an
enerneus erganizatien. They decide everything since they
centrel the entire industrial structure ef the USSR. All
decisiens are made by then and by the Praesidiun.

32. G! Is there a committee called the Ceerdinating
Committee fer Intelligence Activities? 8: Ne, net as euch,
but since the individual cemmittees ef the Central Cenmaittee
are the brains fer each particular field ef interest. They
decide what missions sheuld be assigned te the GRU and<which
te the KGB and in case ef a dispute between the GRU and HOB

ee ee ee
.
+

#10 | Ts

regarding slets, the Central Conmittee makes the decisien.
The Central Cemmittee has a leuder veice than KGB and
KHRUSHCHEV had reerganized the XOB as a Cennittee te keep
cleser centrel ef the KGB under himself. Previeusly under
BERIA many matters were hold up by the KGB witheut the
knewledge ef the Central Cemaittee. '

33. G! Let us take an example ~~ assume that in
Lenden the GRU REZIDENTURA has 20 men and the XGB has 15;
whe had determined this allecatien ef slote as well as the
specific cevers given te exch? 8: The Central Cemmittee
determined this and the slets were previded by the Ministry
ef Fereign Affaire as directed by the Central Committees,
Everything is dene by the Central Cemmittes; fer exanple,
when McClellan was te came and they wanted te allet gay
3,000 rubles fer his expenses including autenebiles, etc.,
the Central Cammittee decided this. If SRROV wanted a
slet ef ceunseller in seme embassy fer a GRU efficer, he
weuld request the Central Committee te instruct the Ministry
ef Fereign Affairs te previde this, The Central Cennittee
is enermeus; there are 5,000~6,000 peeple there.

#106 ~16-

34.G:Whe dees the Central Comittee call fer censultatien en
such matters, the Directerate chief er KAPRAVLENIYE chief? 3S: Ke
here's hew it werks. The Central Ceamittee werkers cencerned with the
GRU ceme directly te the GRU headquarters. These are eet the chiefa
in the Central Cenmmittee effices but they are called instructors,
Remember that the instructers, however, frem the Central Cemnittes
enjey the privileges and pewer ef a regiensl committee menber ef the
Cermunist Party. They have vehicles, DACHAS, and all kinds ef fancy
feed alletments. They have tremendeus stature due te their Party
pesitien, The werd ef such an instructer is everything fer even
a minister. It is law. Since the instructer represents the epinien
ef the Central Cemmittee. This is particulaxly true fer ministers
whe are straight gevernnent peeple and net members ef the Central
Committee themselves. SEROY cannet demand three ceunseller silets;

‘he must submit his request te the Central Cemmittee whe will make

the decisien.

35. HS Hew de they trace agents? S$: If « prespective agent
is contenplated by the GRU, they check his name with the KGB. if
there is a prier KGB interest, the KGB simply states that there
is ® prier interest in him and te break eff centact. G! De
they check their prespects with yen? 3! Ne, because they knew
if we have an interest er net since we have aiwaye checked eur
agents with them earlier. If we have an agent and they appreach
him then wo may send a repert ef complaint based en eur prierity.

36, (The phene rings and the decter whe has entered the
lebby is being met by agent.) (Subject speaks abeut his heart
and G@ reassures him te tell the decter a1] his symptems and he
will have hig examinatien. There is ne security preblem since
the decter belengs te the intelligence service. While waiting fer
the decter, Subject speaks further en the tepic abeve.)

37. 8: All name traces are cenducted in Nescew by the KGB.
Remember that all intelligence persennel, whether they are GRU er KGB,
attempt te get all ef the infermatien, as well as recruits, that
they can, They have ene cemmen missien and that is te determine as
seen as pessible any indicatiens en the part ef a petential hestile a
country ef any preparations fer hestilities. This includes, ef ceurse,
treep mevements, redepleyment ef treeps, ete. Cenversely, thia is
new my missien with respect te yeu. I will advise yeu any way I can
ef any impending meves which may indicate hestile intentiens,
think we'll be able te de a great deal for yeu in the future. G: We
will ge slewly and yeu werk ever a leng peried ef time but when the
time cemes fer yeu te meve eut, we will censult with yeu eniprelimin-
inary measures te get yeur family inte a pesitien frea which they
can escape easily. Fer example, if they ceuld get te the DDR and visit

#10

~bLo—

Eost Berlin it would be simple to croas to West Berlin by subway. But,
of course, with no euiteanses, since the Rast German police could stop
anyons with o suitease. That is just one means ani we will figure out
others as time goes on. 8S: In case of hostilities, I would like to know
several months beforehsent so I could move my family ont of the area
where the Moscow Militery District Heedquarters is, ani would be blown
Wp. ms ;

B32. (Ab thie moment the doctor entered and was introduced to
Subject.) Hto tr: FE shell leave you for a short while to George and
the patient. De: First of all, I'd like to enk him a few questions.
G: He mentioned two pertioeuler things that he 4s concerned ahout. One
was a question of getting a dental plate for his teeth, He was wounded
during the wer onl needs some teeth to replece the broken ones on his
“prosthetic. De: Fine, we cen‘get together on that later. G: The
other matter is that he thinks he hes conjunctivitue. Dr: How old are
you? (@ trensiates ell questions.) §: 42. Dr: Did you heve any serious
tlinessea since you were 4 years old? 8: Pneumonia at 10 years old.

Dr: Since then? &: Ko, Dr: What cleet S: Momps, I never hed typus
or enything elee. Dr: Any operations? a8: Only on the jew anil nose
after being wounded. I was also shell-shocked. Dr: Any nergous i11-
negsest 8: I an nervous by nature byt not as on iliness. I heve bad
angina, bub since my tonsils were removed 6 years ago f heve not hed it
any more. (Further mefiienl date es follewa: 6 teeth lost after being
ywourrted in jew; hed carmincle removed. Sta cerbuncle on arm which Borlet
medies ebtribate to melmtrition in youth. Smokes rerelys does not in-
hale. Drinks normelly, not to excess. Mother ie alive; father killed
in revolution. Both were healthy. Is married. Wife healthy; daughter
15, healthy. Wo syoptome at the moment; occasionally hee slight spasms
of heart, (showing left side of chest, not where heart is), which Soviet
doctore told him wae early eymptom of arterial sclerosis. The apasus
began itregulerly since the war -. for 15 years. Spams begin when highly
ten: nerrously. He good eppetite, mo imilgestion, sleeps well. No
shortnesa of breath.) 8: My only trouble now is the redmees tn my eyes.
I contracted this § or 6 years ago when fT was in Turkey. It canes and
goes. Leck of gleep sggrevates it. (Dr. exemings hie eyes.) Dr: Tht
is ell I need for questions. Now I'd like to exemine hin. .

39. (Subject wae asked to. disrobe to hie underwear. ant to ley dow
‘on the bed for examination. While Subject was diercbing, the coetor
wes shown the List of milicines requested by Subject for others and the
List of allege! perrposes tha medicires were requested for. Subject was
very thoroughly exanined by the denhor primertly for any symptoms of
heart trouble. Blood pressure wes ténen en stethoscopie exeminetion

| et

fio tee.

male, With the lights out, Subject'apptls were examined with an eye in-
strument.) 8: (Returning after dressing himeelf egain) ‘Thank FR Very mach
for your attention to me. Dr: Will you explain these requests for mdicires
which I see on this chart (prepared by H). G1 ‘these are the medietnes re~
quested ond these exe the reasons given. Dy: I'LL check on this TRIPAMZA.
- It may be an [telian prepermtion. x davbt if it is meade in Englamt or the
UGA. I'll cheek on this but it mey teke tise to omer it. Gd: ‘The next
item is ROVATINEX for kidney stones. ‘his te a Veet deren preparation.
tr: We will try to get these two medicines Intt it mey be d4fttevit. 6G: The

that. No trouble. Thies ie for external use. G: We aske Le there is any
medicine thet can be teken internally, ss drops, for axteme. Ir: This
cannot be teken Internally for exzenm but I will get some trenquiliver pilis
to reduce nervoun tension which he says produces the exzena and then apply-
ing the salve my alleviate it. I'll elso get him an eye selye which may
not eure hie condition completely but will alleviate it ant in time it my
hates I cad ie T'Li. heve to see a dentist ebout the dentel materiel
he reque f. :

“40. Dee So fer an my exemination can tell, tell him this. He de-
finttely hae no wrteriel sclerosis ent whatever doctors told him thet he did
' Wert very masty. Firet of all, wime he felt his spseme on the left 15 years
ORO, he would heve been only &7 years of age at thet tine. Arterial sclerosis .
never sterta eb euch an early age et he certainly shows no algo of it nov.
Secondly, I looked into hig eyes, not only to examine the redness which is
completely externn) end whieh will go amy in time, but there 48 no sign of
blood disturbamte in the retina of his eyes whieh de o strong initestor.
in general, his blood preseure, pulee and everything elec 4s entirely norms],
Thirdly, for his information, his heart is not where he thinks it is, +t
is right in the middie, not on the ler, The gpaan he feels when nervous
ere not ebrormel. Other persons feel reaetions from nervoue stress in the
form of herdnches or indigestion. He feels a yervyous spaan or twitch on
his left aide, het ts all normel. I'LL have a report on the urinelysis
later bit everything looks quite normal to me. Subject thanked doctor for
“his attention ani H eseorted the dogtor out. - |

”
Pe

‘ve

i
t

by Kye otf

#10 | ~18~

Hil. St Well, I guess we should get back to work. G: I'd
like you to look at some pictures of rockets taken from the parade
@ year ago. But I'd like to wait for H to return. S: Yeu under-
stand everything about the work of my committee then? G: Yes,

S: You should gradually restrict the activities of our delega-
tion. G: Let us start from this very important question. What
did VARENTSOV say on the subject cf, ICBMs after KHRUSHCHEV made
the statement that you had all kinds of ICBMs in readiness? J?
This fs a very Important question. That Is why we are geing,
over it again. S: The basic idea of this on the part of KHRUSH-
CHEV Is to take the Initiative and to impress upon the minds 4f
Western leaders that he already possesses in large quantities
these mis's*tes which he either does not have at all, or has only
a few of. : aN

— «ly? ‘St Gften there are tests of one character or another
which {n many cases are even successful, but he already yells
about this as an accomplished thing. Thus the whole idea of

-KHRUSHCHEV and of the PRAESIDIUM Is to demonstrate and to /1-

Justrate in one way or another such as launching of a SPUTNIK,
even of a man in space, tn order to impress your military leaders
that the Soviet Union has everything. This is to force your go-
vernment leaders and military people to do their planning on

the assumption that the Soviet Union already has a tremendous
military potential, when_In reality it is only being developed.
And even Sergey Sergeyevich (VARENTSOV) remarking directly on
the ‘words of KHRUSHCHEV said to me, “Oleg, we are only thinking
about these things, only planning, even though we have had some
successes here and there. But In order to get anywhere one has
to increase production tremendously and to train cadres."

v3. St Thus beginning with the idea of training cadres,
the Artillery Academy (now Rocket Academy) Dzerzhinskogo has a
student complement cf 2,500 and the annual graduating class wll

-vary between 50-600. And even though this its only this one academy,

the graduates will still require several years of practical ex-
perience and training before -they can be effective. With res-~

pect to this the effort is significant and the scale of operations
is also significant, Billions of ruples are being econ: mized
elsewhere In order to develop rocket technology. I mentioned this «3

earlier and gave pre6f and Indications thereof and I also know
what_to seek for further proof, .and despite the fact .that” VAR-
ENTSOV has constantly sald that there is an enormous amount cf

#10 aa oe i

work to be done not only with cadres, but also with equipment,
rocket~types, etc. KHRUSHCHEV is yelling that we already have
H all: this. He says all I have to do is to wave a hand and he
can fire rockets in the direction of Cuba----but why Is he not
doing this? This is a bluff - :.

i

P EX cere dy S: Sergey Sergeyevich (VARENTSOV) sald that they can
I hit the continent of North America, but to hit a target at this
great distance, no. Gs: Exactly when did VARENTSOV tell you this?
, BA St He told me this at dinner and at his dacha; this year alone
he mentioned this three or four or even five times. He said
teal that we have in our arsénal operational, that is, tactical r-ckets,
7 | and we have rockets that can reach South America, the United
‘ wy
i : t

ing lok States, or Canada, but not-accurately. Gt Are such rockets
ef ce dh

t
!
|
]
|
deployed at missile bases already? S: These test rockets, which |
arg. still undergoing further tests are not on bases. They do
‘not have the capabilities of even firing one or two. They do
not even have hundreds in a testing status. They may have only |
tens Jn that category. Even in 8éndThg up a SPUTNIK or a man tn
space they have all of the scientists and rocket technology
mobilized for the effort, and before a SPUTNIK is launched they
|

, have several failures. Several men were lost in their éfforts
“qr to put a man in space. You probably éven heard that the dogs
were lost somewhere in the ether. I was told that there were
) several unsuccessful tests with humans. J: When did you say
that VARENTSOV said this? 5S: Several times this year in 1961 __
and also a number of times in 1960. He also complained that
more money ‘is needed for rocketry. ,
F Lie St: The main !dea now of KHRUSHCHEV's statements is ta
create an effect on external ears, but the preparations are heing
carried out jntensively.” The tendency is to attain mass production.
Those tactical rockets which have already been developed are being
| producdd. ih great quantities, and they can be launched at any
time to the extent of their operational ranges. But with respect
to ICBMs, they have had one failure after another, They \remain
silent and they ccntinue to throw mtilions into the effort and
if they have one success then it is used to impress you:\ people
by pretending that thwre are hundreé of these. But theré are
no such hundreds. That js only idle talk. However, keep in
mind that ene day they will be there. This must be assumed since
the entire economy and politics are geared for such development.
The basic prebiem {8 to develep a huge rocket with respect t

- _

]

; | . i

= BOW

see #10

vent? tap

diuntl the war head. mize, but Raghei a high « calerie _fvel which requires

spusefrt little s apace... r they even have seme success there and when
TERE )

¢ po one considers: phe Succ

liens ef men's efferis are directed in *!::
this werk and that the entire eceneny ef a natien as directed by
® ene-party system te which all is suberdinate, they can de this.
And eventually they will werk eut such reckets and they will be
made ultimately in mass preductien. In my ewn epinien, and

| my epinien here plays a very insignificant rele because these

| are very inpertant matters and my epinien dees net ceunt even

| theugh I am an efficer inthe general staff ~~ efter all, I

breathe this air ef recketry and I weuld say that in twe er
three years they will have such reckets develeped. There will

he definite develeped types in preductien. re rodate gira:

|

i

j

i]

!

46. G: What was the thinking back in(1957/ when NEDELIN
| was put in charge ef the se-called Recket Directerate? 3! Simply
ah fer the purpese ef centralizing centrel and te separate the
if Greund Ferce weapens frem the Strategic weapens and that
; | NEDELIN weuld have ne interference in his werk fer which he
h ~? wa AlLStted billions in meney as weli as fecteries and
scientists te de this work. Even new it may be pessible that
- gemewhere in the Far Eset er in Kapustin Yar there may be seme
- peckets which deuld reach ether centinentsa and even detenate

t
e
pel with an atemic, even hydregen-type explesien, But such launch-

ings weuld be cenpletely unplanned, uncentrelied, and certainly net
ef o moss variety. OF this I am entirely sure, bat 4 in twe er three
‘years there Will be a different picture. This is because such
® tremendeus effert is being deveted te this. I even saw with

my @wn eyes at the ond ef 1959 an erder which said that the

. menies te be ecenemized as the resuit ef varieus dismissals

u ue frem the army and peeple put en pensien weuld be designated

for'kindergartens'(Nete - This is slang fer recket senstructien.)

| a. 47. G: De the students at the artiller Acadeny wear
‘| @istinctive insignia’ 8: Ne, under ne Circumstances. All wear

\
hecefnnnt the basic military branch insignia, Mest ef them wear the plack
| insignia ef artillery treeps, that is, the cenventienal rif
\ artillery. De yeu remember the data I gave yeu about atenic
artillery? That is, the technical data I passed yeu cencerning
“Thre an atemic cannen and s saree ia the gaia in Mescew a

os

| Po

#10 =

, p he dragged eut twe cannens. They were enermeus. These

arate were the 310 ma cannens. It was a rifle cannen. There

= was even an erder by KHRUSECHEY te impress the Americans
wlX® | end the British and te shew these cannens as if they were in

oc | mass preduction. They de net usually take eff the cevers.,

Cae | Anyene whe dees net have » permit te enter House He. 1 cannet

—_— see these weapens unless they are cevered. But at this

parade the cevers were reneved and phetegraphy was permitted
te impress the ebservers. After all, the technical details °
were net revealed. These were shewn at « tine when there

ichye b were very few ef them te give the impressien that there were Xx

mere ef them, but since then quite a number have been preduced
o~ ;Gt Dees yeur ‘leng range air ferce have any durisdictienal
Keel” eontrel ever reckets? Si Ne, they den’t, but they will have

ee: /Contrel ever the atemic bembs that they can carry.

20 Nh eete ey samme

Vi4¢ A 48. G: That ia clear. New in erder te clarify a
ie / questien en the V-75. Remember yeu said that the cembat
ner table ef equipment censists ef 96 units. 8: Let me mee ny
abies Sl eriginal netes. (Subject was shewn netes.) I wrete here
nae that at the launching pads and te the immediate rear there
are 96 cembat—ready reckets. This im fer a battalien,
G: Hewever, hew is thiz allecated? The battalion has six
launching pads. There is a meunted recket and ene ready te
fire. 8S: Thet's right and the rest ef then are echelened back
ready te meve up as needed, but the tetal is 96.  H: ow
is it then that if there are six on the pads and six ready,
tetalling 12, hew is it that they manage te get eff 14 shets
as he reperted? In ether werds, with six firing and six ready
te fire, hew ceuld they have time te get the ether twe inte
; .| | place? (G translates.) 8! That's easy. In the first place,
J Belts’ | , dn the Sverdievsk area there were twe battaliens, net ene,
aii ‘; and beth fired at POWERS. It a6 happended that the new
battalien that was Just depleyed there was the ene which hit
POWERS but the ether was firing alse.

Crus

(rectlont

49. G: That makes it clear. But tell me, are there enly
; twe battalions fer the Sverdlevsk area? 8! That's all there
} sre and they cever a wide space but when yeur planes flew by
| five er six times befere, they were far eneugh away frem the
recket installatien te be eut ef range se they were net fired at.

:
|

Ping ‘ ye |

y

Leese Lnlud
Sate

cits

”

eo A ANNU eH crm ene
ee tnt Fe es er prtance ngs MOREA Rete Sen, pa, Sar ere eeeans

A and ZH mean? 3: Pess

a

50. Gt Let me cever these small details, which are
very impertant en reckets. Then we'll shew yeu the Pictures.
When the designatien 8AG1 is in ad, what dees the 61 .
mean? 8S! Whenever the prefix "8" in written, that is the
designation fer 2 giided missile, and the cerrect designatien
but classified is the RII fer the Missile yeu mentioned,

But the G1 has reference te seme Ppreductien medel serial,
exactly I de net knew hew it refers te this. Bim

the Rl is called the 8A1}1, and the R2 is the 8ZH33, Ve
What 11 and 38 mean? 9: There is ne way ef determining

the relationship ef these numbers te the reckets. a: Hew

abeut the R-5, R-7, and the @thers ~~ Ds they have similar
equivalent designatiens?  §: Of course, they have definitely
simitar designations, but I den't knew what they are. The
Significant thing te remember ig that the prefix ‘gt

designates guided missiles, G: What de the letters, such as

2H sibly they mean shep design i indexes,
but I de net knew. a: i think I have feund a cepy er
typegraphic errer., Please tell me which is cerrect. I8 the
T,.G.-02 fer R~1l the same aw TGO-2 &f the Y~75? This deals .
with fuel and legivcally weuld be the same.” 3: That is [es
Clearly a cepying errer., It sheuld be TG-02 fer beth ef them, “
Senetimes thig fuel ig Himply called TONGA with a number Pre,
behind 1t. G: Here ix anether questien. Yeu wrete here akeut
the weight sf launching fuel, PUSXOYOGO GORYUCHEVO; exactly ||

‘feet is it? &: This is an igniter Tuel which is first set

off and which, in turn, threug ~set sequence, ignites

the main fuel mixture,’ 14 is called the initial fuel and NA

has its ewn separate tank. 6: Is it used te heat up the Bieard
ether fuel prier te movement ef the recket? S! That is

j

y pre Sele

exactly right,

- a Ct
rene a z
. >

bat }

eres

bors 2

#10 as~

51. @. You give a range here ef between 2290 - 300 —
kilemeters, but enly 150 kilemeters when the recket has an a teu
warhead. Why is the range cut down with the atomic warhead?

8: That is simply because of the weight of the atomic warhead,
whether it's of one plutonium type "or of a hydrogen type, is
much heavier. But the fuel quantity thrust and the fuel qual-
ity is the same. Therefore, it is simply a matter of physical is
principles and the same charge is used in all of these free—7
rockets. Therefore, the range is cut down almost by one-Half  §./.
when atomic warheads are used instaad of conventional ones. — ii
In order t6 have the longer range using warhead, either the

sive of he rocket must be increaced to permit a greater

i

$82. G: Ia the warhead container the same “an construction

ve size for atomic as well as for conventional warheads? 58!

They are different because they require different shapes.

This im primarily due to the temperature regulating equipment
which is required for atomic, as compared to conventional,
warheads. There are all kinds of intricate heating and cooling
instruments and piping for Winter and for Sumer use.

$3. G: Another sinall correction -- at the launching site.
you gave a designation for the oxidizer as OK-201. Later you
wrote AK~201, Presumably the AK should be an OK. 3: It
should be OK, since OK stands for OKISLITEL, Incidentally,

all of the data in chart form are exact since 1 copied them
directly from manuais.

34. G: How many launch points can he served by one
supply depot? 58: Say the main supply depot is 100 Kilometers
away and brings up the rockets by rail to a point 50 } kilo-

:. meters away, This is the immediate supply base for ® given {
‘gize unit such as a battalion, ere ig no limit after the

number of rockets held in reserve at this supply base. They
would have the minimum organizational rockets for the unit

‘supported but the tactical situation or the expected rate of

fire will dictate how many rockets are at the supply base at
any given time. This is determined by the higher command.

85. ‘Gt On your sketch an element of doubt came up —-
the R-11 rocket information says that the battalion has three
batteries of two pade each for a salvo of six rockets, bu
on the sketch only three launching pads aré shown. $8: (Ex-~

‘amining his notes) I made this aueteu to illustrate the de-

ployment distances between pads, the technical ition and

the supply base. There are three other pads further off but
I did not show these.

1 .
fears oe

i
fi rocket, dry fuel propulsion ami looks like the 3R1. .
ai 23f\
i 62. (looking at photograph no. 5) S! This is also a
2 ' free rocket, dry fuel propellert‘and looks like our "Mare or
(BA the 3R2. Now the rocket does not have its basket-like cover
but the launchers are the same as in the earlier models.

Ka - |
ie 56. G: With respect to the R-2, the minimum range is
ig” 200 kilometers and maximum is 610 kilometers. ~ An average of
Vange 560 is also given. What does this mean? 8: This is the
/} exact design range which is computed on the basis of the fuel
|| and its thrust, The rocket can be fired at shorter ranges
| - and it can attain a maximum of 610.
2th $ . . :
| es : 57. Gt: Is this done by varying the volume of the pro-
| pt .| Pellant? 8: Mo. The quantity is always constant and so is
| WX. | the operation, but it can be cut off at an earlier point in
UC / j ite active phase and the rocket will then fall at a shorier
Vacs \wange. The balance of the unused fuel is simply wasted.
v4 :
58. H! Can we show the ney photographs of rockets now?
Pretos, : G: I only have one photograph here to be rechecked and we
ee can add this to your others. §: (looking at photograph no. 1)
rs This is a free rocket and I believe it is the "FILIN", the 3R2.
eee er
[ 59. (looking at photograph no. 2) §! This. is the typical
Ke} Ree, ee i
60. (looking at photograph no. 3) §8:. This is a develop-
ee mental model. It is a rocket that had been constructed but
Be had been Wejected after tests. It had never been produced in
gerne | quantity nor given to troops. It is not the R-11 and it
fpret : appears to be some intermediate experimental rocket which wag
Be, shown to confuse the observers and to pretend that such rockets
' exist. I don't know its exact designation. If think I have
yp seen it before and it appears like a development of the R-2.
“ay 61. (looking at photograph no. 4) 8: This is a free

63, (looking at photograph no. 6) 8! This is a free
rocket with dry fuel charge. It is nota two-stage rocket

is

{

i reeks consistsof two sections, There are nozzles emerging at
: wo sections of the rocket ’

64. Subject looking.at photograph no. 7) Ht This one
he has seen before but there is some doubt about it since he
said it was the 3R1) before. 8: This is a free rocket with

(Zl

! #10 7 a ~25- | |
|
|

a dry fuel charge and it is the 3R1,

“ 65. (Subject's notes were examined together with him
>fwele pnd the following clarifications were made. The expresgion
K i 4 Cal. was explained by Subject to mean Ka heat coefficient
\ AP 4 coke gram multiplied by calories per gram.) 8! Generally,
A cde Russian lettera and terms are used throughout except when
ae oz 7, internationally accepted Latin abbreviations are used such as

al Vv "Q" here for a heat value.

es Seb. 66. Gt On the 3R2 and 3R3 reports there is » missing
ye or illegible word in connection with the magnitude of the od wv
H k .powder .charge. How should this value read? 8: This should —
%[m[b, be kilogram meters per kilogram. I'm sorry it isn't clear, § [if+

You should have seen how furtively I had to write this when
I heard footsteps coming. G! , 3 am not balling you out, I Sere
_only want you to Clarify i1t.ZG: When atomic warheads were

ah mentioned, were their yields stated? 5: This depends on
* what the tactical misa on is and how far removed ground zero
Ja, is from friendly troops. G! What I mean when they give you

oa the R2, Rl etc., did they state what atomic yields each rocket
ia designed for? 38: They have variable yields. I'm giad
you asked this. Although we have not yet developed a ver
emall zaae atomic weapons such as 1 and 2 kilotons, we do

same space. I remember working problems with the same rocket
| Which had two different atomic yields. They are now working -
: On having numerous atomic yields for the sane sine warhead,

_Y: By the way 1 got photos of the Jaunching installations be-
A cause the instructor Who was ah expert on these had been at
‘ OD the test sites and had taken a humber. He had some extra
oa coptes and told me to pakte nto my working folio as an
annex, At the end of the course our working foldos were

picked up and destroyed but I did not paste in the photos,
and kept them.

i 67. G to Ht I just have two more short lists to ask
‘| him about. Please find his notes on the TRA and on miscellany.
i ? To what extent are Spear‘ste components of missiles provided |
|

TAA a by industry and to what extent does the army build the missiles?
pine 8: Everything is built by industry. They then assemble the
Uw

yy Pparts.at the rocket bases and store them as dry rockets

~,
yo
rs -
|
N

#10 Reo

| (unarmed). The army conducts all repairs and maintenance.
Cw This is done at the GAU bases but nothing is manufactured
\ by the army. We receive everything completely. Very exten-
sive repair would also be done by the factory.

{ ’
F ody
| 68. G:! You wrote about arsenals and mentioned the 3rd it, Fe
: os? type as & mortar arsenal and the 4th type as a storage arsenal; .,
; and then you gave an example of this aystemn in a military We Pur Yuen
district. Is that correct? 4: (reading his notes) Yes, you wn.
-, read that correctly and this refers only to free rockets and ie
ee. - there are entirely different bases for guided missiles, (This & 9+
oP question was to clarify the writing in Subject's notes) bared

erate,

; J Yes re was. G: When was it operational? S! This is an
ey old model which we had at the end of the World War II and it
no conducts slow fire but the 420 is a new one. @! ‘Is the 400
bye now obsolete? $$: No, they are still being used but they are
not making them any more.

70. Gt. Where did you get the information under the

| 3 heading "miscellany"? S: Mostly from documents. That is
* the specific document for the specific rocket the note refers

| to.

. 71. Gt What is this anti-tank missile — PYURS? The "y"
infers that it in guided. Si That's right; It is ex guided
missile which is guided a wire. The wire is rolled off of
a drum and guides the missile. I will give you all the details

of this miggile later. It is a very powerful missile bat it”
is clussy to use with the wire. G! What is the purpose of

0
bs
Me
zB,
eres

pes
eg | using the wire? 8: That is to get a perpendicular hit on
| ms tank instead of a glancing blow. It is still being developed;
| it is not perfected yet. |
: Gare + 72. G: What is a DURS? 2&8: This. means long-range guid-
“Uf ed missile and to this class belong not only strategic mis-—
US | silea but pilotless missiles.

rit
\

Cringe “hy pt

73. G?: Are there any other sircraft-miasiles besides
the P-$? 8: No, they are still being developed. G: Are
there special missiles? Doesn't that just mean atomic? 8:
Yes, of course. It is sometimes said that way.

eect ctaeemeenes =

Pelee ,

Sik ae Ser a

te Ree cere

ase: > Bae
hee re renee es eee

ool eee weed Oe ems Oe a cnee Pat

- | | | |

#10 = 27 =

74. @: How about free anti-aircraft rockets? 8: We
do not have them yet but they are also being worked on.

75. G: Do you recall when they were firing long range
missiles from Siberia or from Kamciatka to some point in the,
Pacific Ocean where they even requested an area cleared in
the impact zone? What was the success of this? 8! That

was nothing elise but luck. A complete fake. This seems to
be KHRUSHCHEV'’s policy. I believe that some of these wild

statements not only are not believed by our military people

but also not believed by your scientists and leaders. But
the idea is to impress the people of England and America. wi

76. Gt Bo you know a young designer named SUKEOV?
8: No, I don't. G! What happened to YEVICH? Remember
he was the partner with MIKOYAN as the designers of the MIG.
8: I don't know. a

77. @! Did you ever hear of a YAK 27? $1: There is
such a plane; I have heard of it. It is a jet and it is des-
igned by YAKOVLEV. Remember I told you that once I was ordered
to destroy a MIG-15 when I was in Turkey. I rode all over
What happened was this ~~ Just after being repaired in ROSTOY
this plane, a MIG-15, was en route to BAKU. It followed the
wrong railroad tracks near the Turkish border and crashed in
Turkey. A cable from Moscow ordered me to investigate the

i wreckage and to remove the "SRO" equipment if any was on

board (IFF equipment for identifying friendly planes). I
went down there with & colonel from the KGB and found out

that no such equipment was aboard, so he left and made the
report. Then I was ordered to destroy the plane, so I arrang-
ed to do this after having had the flyers released and escorted
back to our territory.: After the fires were out the plane

was #till whole; a11 it did was to get charred. The cable
from Moscow told me not to worry since the Americans had
already obtained a MIG-15 out. of Korea but that I should des-
troy it anyway. 80 I got TNT, wired it up and set it off and
again the plane was whole even though the individual parts
were scattered, Finally, after removing 211 parts of any
value, I only had 5,000 lire left to complete this job so I
hired local workmen to hammer: the remaining pieces and the
pieces were then put ona’ small barge and towed out to the
Black Sea and dumped. Even then the fishermen complained

that the nets would be torn... Of course, before I sank the

#10 ee a

pieces I photographed the remnants and sent them to Moscow.

78. Gt Do you have any special questions for hin or
do you want to show photographs? IX still have some questions on

Vo the PVO that it would be well to ask 1f we have time before

} going to the pictures. In considering the PYO districts,
Ltt i | first of all they definitely go across boundaries of the
ES ao, OBLAST military districts, do they not? S! Of course they
do. They encompass a number of military districts. G! Do
you know how they are orgahized? 8: Let me tell you those
I remember by name. The Noscow OKRUG, then the Leningrad *
OKRUG, the Sub-Carpathian OKRUG ~- there is no Baltic OKRUG.

te,

have a PVO with the troops there. The PVO with troops are
subordinated to the commander of the military district but the
PVO OKRUGs are independent.

79. G: Do they have their own organic aviation? 8!
Yes, they do and they are part of their tables of organization.

Sree hig Sar EO a a a
et
py
>
eo
$
<
6
be
a
@
@
io
e
we
ba
ts)
5
b--]
pas
J
ef
e
J
tag
6
%
mJ
ec
8
3
@
:
3
pe
et
R
3
oe
3
@

Cle type,

: 80. Did you ever hear of the latest fighter planes with
designation SU -~ the numbers are low, such as 2, 3, 4, 9 or:
T3? S: I have never heard of these. G! Are the factories

at KOMSOMOLSK, OMSK, NOVOSIBIRSK, GORKY and TBILISI? 8! These
factories aré all in operation but in addition they have factory
departments which also manufacture rockets. After all much of

the structural Work is the same,

81. G! Does the PVO still depend largely on_anti-air-
craft guns? 8! Absolutely, and they have guns with a pretty
high effective ceiling but in addition they are reinforced.

82. G: Is the 130 millimeter anti-aircraft gun the
largest caliber? Bt I know we have developed the 100 mil-
limeter gun to a high degree of efficiency and I know there

' is a gun of a larger caliber but I don’t want to gttess what

. that caliber is. There are none larger than 130, however,

; and another very effective gui is the 57 millimeter anti-air~

: craft gun which is automatic and operates effectively against

; low-flying aircraft,

fhe a

wom
eta Khon
2 U tata f. 5

of clandestinity.

ambassador, He is considered to be a very intelligence man.

#10 ~29~
=

83. G: What do you consider are the weaknesses of the
BYO of the land?/ First of all, they do not yet have suf—
ficient numberssof trained personnel. Now they have their own
schools -~ a technical and a command school. Two years. ago,
in KALININ,, they opened an academy for the PVO of the land.
This s the old installation formerly occupied by the rear
services academy imeni KALININ. The old academy was broken’
up and its cadres were gent to various other institutions.

For example, the quartermaster service had a portion sent

to Leningrad and another portion to ‘the FRUNZE -academy. The
new PVO academy is under BIRYUZOV and hae both a man and
technical faculties, (In discussing how the names of towns

are changed at the whim of the Soviet chief of the time, Subject
mentioned that CHKALOV was removed at the whim of STALIN just
as recently MOLOTOV was renamed PERM. Subject then drew a
sketch of bewhiskered circles indicating a Soviet joke about
the progression of Communist leaders since MARX.)

84, 8! I now know what you would like to cbtain about
rockets and if you have a very tiny wire-type tape recorder
I could even copy down everything VARENTSOV says, but it
should work perfectly. We have such but they are not perfected.
G! We would rather work effective communication means and
remove compromising material from you as soon as possible.
An instrument such as you describe would be certain evidence

85, Gt Since it's getting late, let us look over a. few
more photographs and we'll end this meeting with that.

86. (looking at B-2) 8S! He's a colonel in strategic:
intelligence. He is now working in KONOVALOV's Second Direct-
orate, the European Directoate in Moscow. | I don't remember
his name. He graduated before I did; he is much older.

87, (looking at M-6) 8! This man is from the KGB.

88. ° (looking at M-12) 8! This .1s .PERVOUKHIN, the en>cascc”?

89.° (looking at N-5) 8: This is one of our people in
GRU; he is in Strategic Intelligence.

90, (looking at N-4) 8S: This one is also ours and is
also in Strategic Intelligence. I-saw him in Moscow but that
was; sometime ago. He may have been gent overseas since.

te mete oo Rate ee otag ae PE

| ne

#10 -30-

91. (looking at ¥-31) 8: This is KOSITSIN. He was
replaced by SESKIN, who is now the REZIDENT in Japan and is
also military attache, which job KOSITSIN formerly had. Now
KOSITSIN has become a chief of NAPRAVIENIYE (Anglo-American)
under BEKRENEY, and he replaced Colonel IVANOV. IVANOV was
sent to the MDA as an instructor and he formerly had been
in Istanbul as the REZIDENT,

82. (looking at F-60) 8! This is our GRU man an
Strategic Intelligence.

93. (looking at F-63) §: This is also our GRU wan in
Strategic Intelligence. .

64. (looking at F-64) 81: Here is this SERGEYEV who has
two names. He is a colonel and SERGEYEV is not his right name,
He is a Ravy man, very experienced, and is now in GRU.

94. (looking at F-~65) 8: And here is Mr, SESKIN! He
is the former chief of the Illegals school and is now military
attache in Japan and is the REZIDENT.

95. (looking at F-~67) 8: And this is SESKIN's asgis-
tant. He graduated from the RDA.

96. (Cleoking at F-74) 3: This man is in the KGB.

97. (looking at F-78) 3: Thig man ig in 8trategic
Intelligence GRU in Japan, but he is not an assistant to SESKIN.
He is under some other cover.

98. (looking at F-85) $: Here is A very dangerous man.
He is now working in GRU in Strategic Intelligence, 1 don't
see the assistant to SESKIN who is the air attache. He's a
lieutenant colonel and he has already left Japan,

99. (looking at Q~14) 8: This is a Strategic Intel-~
ligence Officer of the GRU.

100. (looking at Q-24) 3s: He im a naval officer working
in GRU in Strategic Intelligence and he graduated from the MDA
but is not my classmate.

101. (looking at Q-31) 8: This is the second time that
he has gone to France. He is a Classmate of mine. -He graduated
' from the MDA with me. He is anvval officer. His wife is an

rene ad

a

#10 i -31- -

instructor in foreign languages at the MDA. He married her
there and she is five or six years older than he is.

102. (looking at Q-32) 8S: Here is a Hero of the Soviet
Union. He is now a colonel and he studied at the MDA with
me and graduated in the class of ‘53. He was the senior
assistant to ZOTOV when ZOTOV was the military attache to
¥rance. He is now a sentor instructor at the MDA in the
tactics department.

103. Clooking ms Q-44) 8: This man is KGB; I have -
seen him often,

104. (looking at Q-89) 8! He is an intelligence office,
GRU. 7 : :

108. (looking at Q-109) 8S: Here is an aviator. He
had been in Paris; now he is working in Moscow. . He is in
the section of Foreign Relations of the GNTK. He is a GRU
apg colonel and is working for the little ROGOV Aust
as I am.

106. (leoking at Q-113) 8: Here is a KGB officer. f
believe he is working under newspaperman cover,

107. (looking at Q-116) S: He is a Strategic Intelli-
gence Officer of the GRU.

108, 8S: Let me look at gome other pictures during the

daytime tomorrow when my head will be fresh. Now about tomor-

row, I will drop in to see you in order to pick up the infor-
mation on MERRIMAN, and I'll have to go to the embassy in the
evening. Ia it alright if we do not meet tomorrow evening?
G: Of course it ia. If you're expected at the embassy,
you'd better be there. 8B! I will drop in a little after 3
tomorrow afternoon but I can't tell you the exact time, 4G!
We will wait for you. 8: I'11 be able to stay a half an
hour or maybe as long as one hour. .Let us work yery. inten~
sively on the second of May. G! Since you plan to go shop-
ping tomorrow in order not to be squeezed for time would you
rather come at 4 o'clock inatead of at 3 o'elock? 8: No,

3 o'cldck is alright. ~~

109. g: By the way, did you take an advance for me
from my account so I would have enough to make my purchases?
I want to leave everything with WYNNE. I only plan to take
with me one suitcase with purchases. WYNNE can bring me one

3 ie
| Pe

#10 ~32~

. suitcase next time he comes to Moscow and possibly the other

- one on a later trip; however, I want to buf all the things
myself. What I want to take back with me now is this: a
whole mass of small inexpensive items, then an-expensive |
gift for VARENTSOV and the items which E promised to bring
back to my wife. For this reason, I request an advance from
my account. H! How much do you want now? 8: (laughing)
How much is there? What I want to buy now are some earrings,
aosmall dianond --. G! Remember that we also plan to give
you a fairly good sized quantity of rubles to take back with
you. 8: Very well, at least I'll have my debt covered and
have you thought any further about the désirability of my
purchasing a DACHA? G: How do you plan to do this? On a_
gradual basis; to pay it.off piecemeal; or what? We think’
4t could be conspicuous for you to show up with a large sun
of rubles suddenly. - 8: Nobody would know that I did not
have it saved up from earlier days. G: However, if you
have thie immediately upon your return from England... 8!
E would not buy it at once. I would be looking around for
an economical DACHA for a period of two to three months.

is I can even register it in my mother's name. G: Well, as

you receive income from your monthly earnings with us, you
wan put aside partial sums to pay for this. In fact, I'11
tell you in advance that we had planned to give you 3,000
rublea @xt of this you can settle your indebtedness and put
away a pertion, Later as we give you more money you can
gradually save. 8: I hate to get money gradually because
money melts away from me. I was thinking of getting a modest
DACHA, possibly an old one repaired or a new one with time
payments. In my present condition by rank and age, it is
perfectly normal to have a DACHA. Maybe I don't understand
the situation; tell me quite frankly how you are planning ~~
are you awaiting for additional materials from me on the
basis of which you will evaluate how mich to pay me? Or
possibly I am not authorized to make the request that I am
making. Please explain this to me.

110, G: In the first place, ever since we have been
working together you have been put on a regular monthly
income basis, This has nothing to do with the quantity or
value of materials that you bring. 8: Very well, that
part of it I understand, and you have been generous in the

- galary you allocated and .I thank you. -But the material
which I passed to you you do not regard in terms of any

| eo

|

#20 7 ~33-

financial remunerative value? G: Thus far we have simply
established an escrow account for you on a continuing basis
and your account will grow, less your withdrawale, as time
goes on. It makes no difference whether you are here or in

Moscow. $8: So this has been the decision with respect to

my request to evaluate ny materials. G: Yes, but that does
not mean that a bonus or a reward that we may @valuate for
you, based on your overall work with ua, would not be given
you at the time that you feel you should come over to us to
stay. 8! However, when I come to America I will have to
have something az a nestegg to start from, I'11 have to -
buy a house and a car and a yacht. (laughing) I understand
you, but right now I need a certain minimum sum in order

to buy the things I should. I must buy a few very omall
diamonds, two watches and a decent gift for VARENTSOV.

HR: How much has he got now of that which we have
given ? G! Remember we want you to buy what you need but
you must get rid of every pound here before going: back. How
many pounds do you have now? 8! I have &00 now. H! Isn't.
that enough for just tomorrow? Will he be able to spend the.
480 in one day? 8: If I have ty buy diamonds, £90 will not
be enough. Even 2 emall ring and a couple of earrings will
cost more than that. Is it difficult for you to provide
pounds? Did you already give WYNNE what you promised to
give him? H: It must be explained to him that our paynents
to WYNNE must be done very carefully because there is the
matter of taxes, We hrve to account gor this so we have
arranged for a way so that he doesn’t pet taxed. 8! You
see I'd like to buy just a few things, but good things are
expensive. G: Well, teli me exactly what you mean? 8:

I feel 111 at ease at asking for the money just like that.
But tell me if I'm doing this right oxy not. G: We'll give |
you another 850 now and we'll see how you get along with that
and what you have, thon you can tell us what else you need
later. 8: Fine, £'11 bring you all my receipts and you can .
wee for yourself. (Subject then bade farewell and left at
6045 hours on 1 May 1961)
