The Current Situation in Italy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008669, dated 1 January 1948.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008669).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ORE 47/1
"THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ITALY © * ee

Because of its position on the edge of the Soviet sphere, Italy is important in terms
of US security. ‘The present Italian Government, composed of centrist Christian Demo-
crats and a few representatives of the moderate Left, is anti-Communist and Western~
oriented. Mainly because of Vatican support and popular association with US aid,.-
Premier De Gasperi’s Christian Democratic Party stands out as the strongest opponent’ '
_ Of Italian Communism. Certain members of the Moderate: Left, however, are also :
' attempting to form an electoral combination to’ ‘combat the Communist-led. People’s

Bloc in the spring elections. Rightist factions in Italy have no leader: comparable to
De Gaulle but are unanimous in their opposition to Communism and, pean cee ie:
expedient to support a Western orientation. : :
fhe present Government will continue without radical scenes until the: national
elections in April, the outcome of which will be influenced by the results of US interim
‘aid and the prospect for the ERP. It appears that neither the Communist-led bloc
- | mor the Christian Democrats will gain a clear-cut majority and that the moderate Left

" will probably do poorly. Asa result, the rightist parties will hold the balance of power. - -

' ‘Having failed to win dominance through the elections, the Communists are.
Eee ot IESE BEES 2 ie oe ee ree ee Te :
tion should the Kremlin find such extreme measures necessary, ° 2
In the event of a2 Communist uprising, the Italian ian Government's armed, forces:
would d be capable of maintaining internal security/pro 4 (1) the current reorgani-

Sit initégrated-deferise system; (2) additional modern equipment
had been secured; and (3) the Communists had not received appreciable outside aid.
The armed forces are incapable of offensive and could fight only a limited defensive war.

The Communists are believed to possess the military capacity of gaining temporary -
control of North Italy. If they recelve material assistance from Yugoslavia and/or.
France, the Government will require foreign aid to regain control of the area. eh et
; Although US interim aid totaling some 200 million dollars will provide food and . :
fuel to prevent extreme hardship until 31 March 1948, miost Italians are still enduring -
privations and are dissatisfied with their working and living conditions. The conten, _
of essential imports from abroad would lead to a politically explosive situation. ‘ :

_ Current foreign policy is basically influenced by problems of economic rehabilita-
tion. The country looks to the US for necessary economic aid and protection against - .
Soviet and Yugoslay. demands. Because mae a continues its attempts to gain. Be

Note: The information in this report is as of 26 January 1948, at which time the report was submtt- ,
ted to the member agencies of the Interdepartmental Advisory Council for coordination.

The intelligence organizations of ba ices of State, Asniy: motte and Air otee have r oS,
concurred in this report. “

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ataey

1. Invorrance or Iraty. Da eee i a _ pn SS -
‘It is of vital strategic importance to prevent Italy trim felting under Conummantst _

control. Such a development would have demoralizing effect throughout Western <« .:

Europe, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East. In particular, it would greatly facili-

' tate Communist penetration in France, Spain, and North Africa. Militarily, the avail- an:

ability to the USSR of bases ia Sicily and southern Ttaiy would pose a direct.threat to —
the security of communications through the Mediterranean. italy, however, is of rela- .
. tively little direct value to the United States, ‘The present and prospective political, ..
econon.ic, and military weakness of the country is such as to render it a strategic lia~
JET fates Hans 90 nian evn nectar es fs tarsttaey constitutes «potential tase of :
Operations.

; Cuitestiy; tia Skngartomos of Stkly in tacos ofS sassy i:dn ty poutine Ga tus
edge of the Soviet sphere and im the non-Communist and Western. orientation of its.’.’
Government, Furthermore, the successful implementation of the European Recovery fe:
Piraeus na ered
tries and surplus workers.

2.' Porrrican SrrvaTioON,

The present Government consists of a coalition of the centrist Christian Denoisats se ;

(the majority party) and the moderate Left (the Republicans and the Saragat —rxight-|
wing — Socialists) plus a few independents. Because of its substantial parliamentary ie :
_ majority, the parliamentary position of the Government is secure until the April elec- -

tions, Furthermore, its prestige has been relatively improved in recent weeks by evi- ..-: f

; dence of US aid and interest in Italy’s recovery and independence. - The Government = -_
a ee

- recent wave of strikes and agitation. et
The Christian Democratic Party, led by Premier Alclde De Gasper stands out as: cod

the principal opponent of the strong leftist bloc. Its political assets are essentially —

the following: its possession of necessary US friendship and. of promises of aid for 7

Htaly’s recovery, its calm and firm insistence on law and order against Communist -

violence, its centrist position, and its support by the Church. Furthermore, in recent : - cae

months the Party tarongh Premier Le Gasperi has cooperated with progressive elements’ .
in inaugurating several essential economic reforms and in granting concessions to

workers. The Party, however, suffers from the onus of responsibility for a huge gov- -:
ernment deficit and failure to close the gap between wages and the cost of iiving —
despite some progress in its anti-inflationary program. Its prospects in the national -
elections are good, mainly because of Church support ant the Pa association of

the Party with US aid. ms

The leftist block is led by the Communists: and includes the Nemni Geet 6 Social- a

ists, the Labor Democrats, and remnants of the Action Party. Their combined popular -
strength is believed approximately equal to that of the Christian Democrats. The

. Communists are using the same political device so successful in other countries, namely
the People’s Front—recentiy called: the Popular Democratic Front for Liberty, Peace, -
and Work—to gather all “the forces of democracy” in the campaign against “the forces |

’ of reaction.” To this end they have also organized.a strong “labor-management”

movement among industrial and ‘agricultural workers, and a “League of Communes,”

an association of towns and villages which have Communist or Socialist Mayors and

Councilmen. The Communists are So ping the expansion of women’s ee

’. and youths’ organizations.

Between the two major opponents are 5 the Saragat Garietaey Socialists, x and the

Republicans. These two left-of-center parties, which joined the Government in mid- *’.
December, have not been in a position to assert themselves or impress the public either 2

: with a specific attractive program or with dir-ct tangible results of their governmental. .
Participation. At present, both parties have proposed to join in a “Democratic League” |:

.. as'@ counter-weapon to the Communist “Popular Democratic Front.” Untess this --
* Republican-Socialist bloc should attract many dissident elements from Left and Right, .
; ee ee 0s eemmiaey
vote.

ste igo tie Cfriaibon Deenceste i « paaty Seiad “nesta Be” gee
a the leadership of aged ex-Premier Nitti, who has temporarily, at least, brought together
followers of his National Reconstruction Union, the Liberal Party, Giannini’s much

ne “reduced fellowing in ihe Common Man Front, and some splinter rightist groups. On.

the extreme right are two neo-Fascist organizations, the Italian Social Movement. and |
the Nationalist Movement for Social Democracy. It is quite apparent that as yet no.

"leader comparable to De Gaulle in France has appeared to unite the various rightist.”

‘factions, An, Maia. cS
fore, find it expedient to support a Western orientation... .

’ Despite the variety of political parties and views, the position of the eae Gov- ie

ernment is secure at least until April because US interim aid has assured enough food
and fuel to alleviate the hardships of the winter months. Basic.adverse economic con-

- , ditions and widespread unemployment continue to stimulate popular Aizcantent which

tae Coreramaus ean allay only by holding out the cia of the ERP.
' 8. Economnc Srrvation. he ees :
: The Italian economy, normally Hevesi. upon imports, sient ‘Tequires sub- ..
stantial imports of fcodstufts, fuel, and certain raw materials from the US in order to

‘Maintain minimum food rations and enable production to attain a higher level of

recovery. US interim aid totaling about 200 million dollars will provide food and fuel
to prevent extreme hardship until 31 March 1948, but the Government may be con-

_ fronted with the politically disastrous necessi“y of root bread rations hance aaa a

. forthcoming elections,

In recent months the Ttaliar: Ghovernilit: Nak tabs sbsbeat slog 16 gal eo

: Italian economy on @ sounder basis. Tight restrictions have been placed. upon bank | .
credit; exchange controls have been improved for the marshaling and allocatior. of :

. Working and living conditions. More than a million workers are completely without. -

. the size of the Pubblica Sicurezza (security police), which is expected to reach 80,000 -
~ by the end of February 1948, The Government has also appealed to the US for addi-

' taining internal security. They are incapable of waging offensive war. . If attacked by

. 5B. - Moreren Pour.

foreign exchange, and the exchange rate of the lira has been adjusted to realistic
levels. Considerable success has been achieved, through tight credit controls, in check-
ing rising prices, particularly of raw material and semiprocessed goods prices, and the
cost-of-living rise has been slowed. .Although the antiinflationary measures have -_
caused some increase in business failures, this result undoubtedly is more than ofises
by the benefits of the program. ee a ee
"The strikes and demonstrations of November and December 1947, while disruptive, oale
were not of sufficient duration to set back appreciably industrial production. Which, -
during 1947, increased approximately 35% ever that of 1946. Concessions to strikers
and unemployed, however, are placing an increased burden on the budget which is still ~
running a substantial deficit... hase SP a hm eh
Most Italians are still enduring severe privations and are dissatisfled with their

work and many others are only partly employed. - Lack of adequate wheat supplies have.
already caused the suspension of the pasta ration and the substitution of rice. nan, i in

_ Fhe general economic situation, therefore, is still conducive to agitation and ° us
unrest. The cessation of essential imports from abroad, Particularly from the US, < ~.,.
‘wonld Jead to 2 politically explosive situation highly favorable to the Communist cause,. nes

especially with national elections impending. .

The Italian armed forces are limited by treaty ‘to an over-all strength of 300,000
‘men. For economic reasons, their actual strength is only 286,000, including a recent
increase in the Carabinieri (internal security troops) from 65,000 to 75,000. ‘The armed
forces are loyal to the Government and generally anti-Communist in sentiment. Train-
ing is fundamentally good, and morale is improving. Say te Se nee oe

‘The Italian Government, fearful of a Communist uprising, has recently increased

tional equipment to supplement obsolescent and insufficient material, and negotiations . ~
are in progress. Provided Italy is able to secure additional equipment and to achieve |
an integrated defense system (organization of which is now in progress), and provided .

the Communists do not receive appreciable aid, the armed forces are capable of main-

a relatively well armed power such as Yugoslavia, for example, Italy could at best fight
2 brief delaying action. i aoe i ;

italy’s post-war policy is basically influenced by its immediate problems of economic .
rehabilitation. It looks primarily to the US for aid in regaining its prewar interna- a
tional position and resisting any future Yugoslav and Soviet demands and threats,
When reparations payments begin in 1949, Italian economy will be brought inevitably
into closer relationship with the USSR. More immediately the USSR can use partof
its present wheat surplus to bolster the position of the Italian Communists before-the  --

national elections this spring. Hence, eventual aster orientation through o economic .

necessity cannot be entirely discounted... oo
Italy has already resumed diplomatic relations with all the coat and many of the s

minor powers of the world and has concluded commercial and/or emigration agree- |

ments with numerous countries, With active US sponsorship, italy has applied for .

membership in. the UN. ee. rie ihn gated for & revision

of “punitive” peace terms. a

wt. is Sishsattinaicl ees ttielaw @ eucinis td Gud aoe: aa nee :
'. Italian Constitution contains a clause which permits limitations on the national:
sovereignty; Foreign Minister Sforza is an outstanding exponent of the idea’ of 4.

| United States of Europe; ON ee eee
ee ae ee

6. ‘Pronaitn DEVELOPMENTS.

ia . ‘ : the present Government wil otis without rel change wal the natn
“4 : elections in April.

; sfisn Casemecadeta ic aid Wabi Boctallata will atttoe, aa Uday tid Dring 1oey: to ities, ia
ca 6FSstiéiséi‘( reddit the Government and interfere with Italian economic recovery under the ERP. |
wh Hunger and inflation will continue to afford many opportunities for valid strikes.”
ae) --> " Such strikes, if concluded advantageously for the workers, will enhance the prestige
of the Communist leaders of the Italian General Confederation of Labor. ‘These strikes — °
will also financially embarrass the Italian Government whose budget needs all available...
revenue. The Communists will continue to devote considerable money and all their >.
organizational energies to activities and maneuvers which may be concomitantly”...
; SS 1a
_ Improve Communist prospects in the national elections. : a

- ‘The outcome of these elections will be influenced by the results of US interim aid
and the prospects for successful implementation of the proposed European Recovery:
. Program, Favorable developments in this connection would operate to the decided —.. .
advantage of the present Government, led by the Christian Democratic Party. °. :

Despite the granting of US aid and other evidence of US support, the leftist bloc ©. -
has not fost strength and the Christian Democrats (and their allies) have not gained = |
any considerable political following. Hence, it appears that neither will gain a clear-cut _.

- majority in the April elections; the leftist bloc and the Centrists will each probably _
xeceive approximately 30 to 40% of the vote. The balance of power will thus be held by ©.
the rightist parties witi approximately 15 to 25%. Hence, the next Government would |
probably be headed by the Christian Democrats wita rightist support. Because such
a coalition would be bound together largely by common opposition « pam! ba

. would suffer frou clashing policies and programs.

. Following the failure of the Communists to win power at the eibationn dad con-
ceivabiy before the elections are held, the Communists are expected to launch a cam-
paign of general strikes. Should the Kremlin decide an insurrection in Italy necessary

to the fulfiliment of its primary objective-recking the ERP—an armed uprising c= ,
might be ordered. te :

Se ee a *

. control of North Italy. If the Italian Communists receive material assistance from .

‘Wagoslavie and/or France, bah panen: Government. will siegenda fomiga sid aid to regain. ae ;

” control of the area. -

oy A ‘Servammon ns Taresrs, -

ie Srarievist efits bo pats corepiete cotesl ofthe Been Toettory of ‘elec hve
~ not diminished in recent months, and consequently the area remains a potential source:
of Great Power conflict. Since the Yugoslav Army's unsuccéssful attempt to penetrate
the DS-UK Zone on 15 September 1947, the Yugoslay-directed Communist Party in.
‘Trieste has continued its intensive campaign to undermine the authority of the Allied
_, Maltagy Government (ABIG) ad to tay the groundwork for Cemmyoxiat cunfeal of the
area after the appointment of a governor by the Security Council. i .

: “The Communist effort has been directed primarily against Trieste’s precariois eco-

. nomic condition. ‘Trieste’s economic recovery has been retarded by the general eco-:. .

* ‘nomic depression in Europe and by the reluctance of Italians end others to risk invest ae

ment in Trieste business in view of the Territory’s uncertain future.. The Communists © nae

have exploited this situation through continuing pressure on labor to strike for higher — ‘

wages, the purchase of business establiskments in the city, and the diversion of traffic ‘ o
- to the rival Yugoslav port of Fiume. AMG’s ability to combat this Yugoslav pressure is

dependent on its ability to finance an adequate public works program and to develop =
the city asa transit port. This in turn is dependent upon the continued willingness of _ .
the Italian Government to supply Trieste’s currency needs and finance its balance-of-
payments deficit. Although Italy is reluctant to. assume this obligation, failure to do :

” so would tend to undermine AMG’s authority, make later UN control ses eae aa
assure eventual Yugoslav domination. a

: Politically, the Communists are actively preparing tor the aubeenl elections that
raust be held after the appointment of a governor. In addition to attempting to make
political capital of the economic depression, the Communists have conducted a violent
and unrelenting propaganda campaign against the US and UK. Because theCommu-
nist Party in Trieste is now so openly associated with Yugoslavia, however, the pro- :
Italian non-Communists have strengthened their political organization, probably with
some clandestine aid from within Italy, and are in a better a, to combat the
" Communists in any future elections.

The Yugoslav Government, meanwhile, realizing that the presence of US-UK —

in Trieste not only thwarts its aims in that city, but acts as a strong stabilizing influence
on Communist intentions in North Italy, is now pressing vigorously for early appoint-
ment of a governor by the Security Council. Although the US and UK are prepared _
if necessary to postpone appointment of a governor indefinitely, the USSR and Yugo-
slavia may agree to a US candidate in the hope that even a strong governor would not
be as great a deterrent to Yugoslav designs on oe as continued US-UK maili-
as control. ’

Soe mies

“to the fulfilment of its primary objective—wrecking the ERP—an armed uprising
might be ordered.
The Communists are believed to possess the military capacity of gaining temporary
control of North Italy. If the Italian Communists receive material assistance from
’ Yugoslavia and/or France, the Italian Government will require foreign aid to regain
contro! of the area.

%.  SXTUATION IN TRIESTE.

Vugoslavia’s efforts to gain complete control of the Free Territory of Trieste have
not diminished in recent months, and consequently the area remains 2 potential source
“of Great Power conflict. Since the Yugoslav Army's unsuccessful attempt to penetrate
the US-UK Zone on 15 September 1947, the Yugoslav-directed Communist Party in
Trieste has continued its intensive campaign to undermine the authority of the Allied
Military Government (AMG) and to lay the groundwork for Communist control of the -
avea after the appointment of a governor by the Security Council.

The Communist effort has been directed primarily against Trieste’s precarious eco-
nomic condition. Trieste’s economic recovery has been retarded by the general eco-
nomic depression in Europe and by the reluctance of Italians and others to risk invest-
ment in Trieste business in view of the Territory’s uncertain future. The Communists
have exploited this situation through continuing pressure on labor to strike for higher
wages, the purchase of business establishments in the city, and the diversion of traffic
to the rival Yugoslav port of Flume, AMGs ability to combat this Yugoslav pressure js
dependent on its ability to finance an adequate public works program and to develop
the city as a transit port, This in turn is dependent upon the continued willingness of
the Italian Government to supply Trieste’s currency needs and dnance its balance-of-
payments deficit, Although Italy is reluctant to assume this obligation, failure to do
so would tend to undermine AMG’s authority, make later UN control impossible, and
assure eventual Yugoslav domination.

Politically, the Communists are actively preparing for the general elections that
must be held after the appointment of a governor. In addition to attempting to make
political capital of the economic depression, the Communists have conducted a violent
and unrelenting propaganda campaign against the US and UK. Because the Commu-
nist Party in Trieste is now so openly associated with Yugoslavia, however, the pro-
Italian non-Communists have strengthened their political organization, probably with
some clandestine aid from within Italy, and are in a better position to combat the
Communists in-any future elections. : :

‘The Yugoslav Government, meanwhlle, realizing that the presence of US-UK troops
in Trieste not only thwarts its alms in that city, but acts as a strong stabilizing influence
on Communist intentions in North Italy, is now pressing vigorously for early appoint-
ment of a governor by the Security Council. Although the US and UX are prepared
if necessary to postpone appointment of & governor indefinitely, the USSR and Yugo-
slavia may agree to 8 US candidate in the hope that even a strong governor would not
be as great a deterrent to Yugoslav designs onthe Territory as continued US-UK mili-
tary control,

REM Dhe apneer ia

DISPRIBUGLON

Tas President
Seeretary of State
Saab to coumander in Chief
oH td GY Rakanse
ty ee ths Api
Novy .
2 Att Force —
4s, National Seourlty Counch *
Chatr: “Ou, Watlonal Security Resources Board
Chiet of Gta, US Army
Clint of Naval Oporn tions ‘
Chicix of Stati, US Ale Porco |’ ‘
Director of Plans and Operations, General St at Us:
Deputy Chief of Noval Operations (Operations)
_ Bivector of Pla 23 and, Operations, . “US Alr Poree
“Special Sasistont to tha Seoretary of Stato, ‘Resoareh
Director of Intelgehes, Genoral Staci, US army |
Chie! of Nevel uatolliganto ” ice eae:
Directoy of IntolGennes, US Air Force :
Seeretury, Joint Chios of. Start aid
Secrotiury, Jobat intelligences Groups. ‘
Seoreiasy, State-Aan; yNavy-Ar Foreo ‘Gooratnatin
Exeoutive Secratary, J Miery sinison Committes to the Atomie Barry Gouatison
Dirseter of Cavurity ond Intelligence, Atomis Enegy Commission : :
Gaief, Sorulsition and Distribution, OL6D, Department of State,
