Stability of the Present Regime in Iran
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028304, dated 1 July 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028304).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

HATICHAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE 0
MUMBER 34-5300 °° 7D

Superzeces NUE 34-57) edge a 2 : ~ ne oe

Seemed | * betel. 2 ve ot, ay cf ey ors, “oh, wes A ee me Fier ar ile
a ‘ i - 4 “aap os a .
te! Ve aa “ re ee * Gopal nis See ed weer 4 wt lc? WG
Fay Soe Seg |
ed eee

fatuties Ov the

CURECTGT OF CLNTRAL INTELLIGENCE ok ag “eee:
Thi jolivcing mystcerce ersanizaiions particinat:d in sho : a

Brewardcton of at estimate: Tie Central Iniedigence Agen y
one she indigenes organizations of ine Desarimiay of :
Shave, the Anay, he Novy, the air Porce, und The Joint Sie ae a

Concurred tn By the - oe sie

QiISLLIGENCE Acvisony COMMITTES Be ER AE BE

or. £6 August 1958. Concurring were The Director oj Intew- aaa

gerce and Rescarca, Devarinent of Stata: the Assistant Cheep 7 Y 2 ais

of Saf for inteltipence, Cepcrrmert of the Army: she Liree- > : vate

tor of Nuval inteliizewe,; ihe Acsstant Chcef of $ia4, iateil- d wee

gence, UVEAF; and the Cevaty Director for Inteliigesve, Tie .

Teint ofa ute Atom Bucroy Commission Revresen{ tire 5 7

“9 wie LAC and tia Assigtuné Osrestor, Federal Bureau of in. . tes
ecliyctlon, ebsaived, the autvect beirg cutstde of thar - a ere?
ade. : ed

Approv d for Rel ase
Date B3 JA i :

se CHT ARQOAD

Brest pe yc piey PO

a . ee |
SPE SC eVES, BLA atid

eD A oy . : '

ae:

Ee

STABILITY OF THE PRESENT REGIME IN IRAN

THE PROSLEM

abet i fe crespects for stability of the present regime in Iran.

SUMMARY

i. tay iwult cna vrutal ovesthrow of the
mnenarchy in traq shocked and frightened
the Shah of Iran and almost certainly
caused him to reappraise the future of
his personal position and his program in
Iran. There is basic and widespread dis-
satisfaction with his regime, both in the
a.my and in the urban population gen-
erally. If he were to take dramatic and
effective steps to reform the corrupt So-
cial, political, and economic system, he
might be atle to maintain his position
for some time to coime. We believe, how-
eves, that his character and situation are
such that he is unlikely to take such
drastic actions.

2. We believe that the present political
situation in Ivan is unlikely to Jast very
lon. The most probacle development is
een ph uv certain eulitees elements,
poss ty in collaboration with civilian ele-
ments desiring liberal reforms, to force
the Shah back into the role of 2 constitu-
tional monarch. In its initial stages at

SE

least, such a movement would almost cer-
tainly not aim at the overthrow of the
monarchy, nor would it te ultra-nation-
alist in character. Although this move-

” ment would probably effect significant po-

litical reforms, it is doubtful whether it
would be much more effective than the
Shah in satisfying the expectations of the
people for broader economic and social
reforms. Its leaders would probably con-
template no basic changes in Iranian for-
eign policy. It might cause the Shah to
flee the country, even though it was not ~
intended to have that effect.

3. The possibility of a coup to overthrow
the monarchy cannot be disregarded. On
the whole, wa think such a coup unlikely
in the immediate future, because we be-
lieve that the army does not now desire
it. But if in the reasonably near future
there are no substantial reforms of the
Tranian political, economic, and social
structure, we think that the overthrow
of the monarchy is likely.

a ae 3

4. During the rast two tears the Ghat oi Iran
nas succeeded in consolidcting all power un-
der ais norsonal authority, and today he con-
trols even the day-toniay iunctions of govern-
meni. «At the same time, his personal prestige
has provressive-y declined. He is criticized
for the continuance of near-Jeudal economic
and social conditions in the country. In spite
of his well-intentioned public pronouncements
concerning social and economic rerorms, there
is today little beller in the country that his
ule will bring such refornss.
&. Although a facade of representative gov-
ernment has been pressived it is regarded by
the vast majority of politically conscious
Traniangs as 2 inrce. Etecticns are strictly
comroited, debate in the Maitis is united, and
hous senositie elegtents are suppresicd
aimed divests and ecsasership. Osnortuni-
dea Jog colitical chpressien and responsibilty
have dvcvecsed over the past wo 'ears.
g. At the same time basic eecnomje and politi-
cal dissentent hus mounted as the total wealth
ef che country bes increased. It is the pop-
cher > bef, Ircn that the country's growing
Jbavsehues dave gone muuuy to enricn tne
ruling class. Actuclly « sizeable proportion
ur these revenues has gone into the Plan Or-
ganization, but the results, although not in-
significant, have fallen so far short or the
optimisiic expecLlations of the pecple that the
ne? political impact has been adverse. Wealth
is concentrated in the hands of a smal! group.
Tine growing exnectations of the urban musses
for an improverment in their standard of Hv-
ing, which are not being met, constitute an
Increasing source of discontent. Flagrant
corruption and nepotism continues through-
our the government, and the predatory eco-
nemic activities of the rovai family and of the
cvurt vircle evoke widespread resentment and
disgust,
7, In tais situation & majority of the politi-
cully articulate population of Tran has little
faith in the regime. Many, including some
conservative military Jeade:rs oad memvers of
the ruling tings. feel that the Shah has been

inconsistent and Indecisiva, and has shown
himseif Incangole of running tie couniry em.
cicsntly. Some feel that the institution of the
Tonarchy is cutmeded and that a diderant
form of government is needed to make Ivan
a dynamic and pregvessive country.

$. Although itis clear that there is widespread
disafiection, we have only limited knowledge
of the organization, membership, and military
suppecst of existing oppcsition grouss, Former
Prime Minister Mossedeq remains a sjmool of
nationalist opposition, although he is not new
politically active and is unlikely again to as-
sume a position of reel leadership. Several
diferent nationalist croups are known to est
and to Have been in Loison from time to time.
We do not know of any group of any political
complexion which is now capable of effecting
a successful coup. Yet it is entirely pessibie
that such @ group exists, especially in the
military.

9. The egal Tudeh (Communist) Party, and
the Arab and Kurdish minorities will probably
remain potential sources of trouble for any
Tranian government. The Tudeh, though
greatly weakened since the fall of Mossedea,
remains covertly active. It could probabiy
disrupt ol] operations in the Abadan arca if it
was Supperted by radical Arab nationalist
pressures. Pan-Arab sentiments In tha Aba-
dan area and 3 revived Kurdish independence
movement in the northwest could contribute
substantially to chaos in Tran if the central
government icst contre] of the situation.

10. Role of the Military. The stability of the
Shah’s government depends, in particular,
upon the loyaity of the army and its active
support in a crisis, We belleve that there are
gome senior officers who weuld be willing to
initiate a movement reducing the power of the
Shah. and many who would support such @
movement if it gave promise of success. Above
all, these officers desire a strong man to head
the government of Iran. As for the junior
officers, the existence in the services of the
same type of ¢crruption and favoritism as

~

the eivil wovernmicnts Mmases it Vis port “or him in the event of MDL 19
vin toat there is ecagiderapie al. cee his power, "Ve pelleve may
sfaction among thim. We seleve that US military asuistance will in ivseif 72 oF tittia
Wve to the @hen in the armed earvices is effest in changing the clritude of the army
wet Bitung €MOUgh fo insure their aulivea supe igtvard the Shah
OUTLOOK

ne present stagnant situ-

iiast very long. ‘The
oGNs ha altompt by
ova yusal. yoinm col.
TOULS lies sisi boeral

t We veliewe that t
stron ds andl

' 1
boy 1+

gate eth bY
‘ mr atta syle
rarorms, to Mirce the Shalyto vetien to the
relz of vonstitutional monarch. We do nut
believe that the leaders of such a move would
end to overthrow the monarchy. They
Sekt preaably aim to aecunolsh some im.
duaihs political sefouns, though it is douot-
hub whecher they would be much more effec-
tive than the Shah in satisfying the expecta-
lions of the people for broader economic and
social reforms. The movement would not be
ultva-nationalist; its ais would not be the
same as those of Mossedeq. I%-would prob-
ably not change the gencrally pro-Western
alignment of Iran, thoegh its foreign policies
would tend to be more independent ci West-
ern influence than those of the Shah. We
believe that any of the varlous military
“coups” which have lately been rumored

ould probavly be of this mature. The possi-
pili. cannok be disregarded, however. that
sted a movement, initially modeiate in its
dans and pereles, might in the course of time
be impelled into mors exireme courses, Includ-
cg an atterapt to ciiminate the Shah.

12. Ancther possible devciapment, which we
cungider unlikely, is that the Shah Aimself
a tod te Lae) fon ful and detormnincd
eal pataste A Sreupe! wn hi Ga ern nent,

. avagitrade deanoinle veformss. and to estab-
fish af least the beg:nalings of genuine popu.
lar participation in the government. If this
eere to occur, there would de a fair chance of
orderly political evolution. But the character
of the Shah is such that ‘t would pe extremely
4ficult for him to relinquish absolute conticl
’ the government and to give political re-

oy
sponsibility to those he thinks of as eneinics.

Furthermore, he would nave to cay througa
programs which vould damage the special in-
terests of the royal family, the Court, and the
ruling ciass. We believe the Shah will be ex-
tremely reluctant t¢ take such actions end
weld be iikely to do 30, if at all, ony under
heavy and continuing pressure from the US.

43. The possibility of a coup ta overthrow the
monarchy cannot be disregarded. On the
sole, we think such a coup unlixely in the
iramediate future, because We balieve that the
army does not now desire it. But if in the
reasonably near future there are no substan-
tia] reforms of the Iranian political, economic,
and social structures, we Unink that the over-
throw of the monarchy is likely.

14. Assassination of the Shah remains an ever
present possibility. He has established no
clear succession to the throne. Uf he should
die, we believe there would probaly ensue a
chaotic struggle for power which would pro-
duce a period of unrest and instability in the
country until some group or individual couid
establish dominance.

15. The Roie of Econginie Development. The
wealth of Iran should grew sitnificantiy dur-
ing the next few years <5 ol] revenues increase
and other developmeri contin. -3. However,
we do not beliove that this growth will much
improve the Shah's capaoilities for remaining
in power, if current social condit:ons remain
unchanged. And as long a5 there is a general
belief that the benefits ef aconemie develop-
ment and Joreign aid are going principally
to the ruling class, the bnorovements which
accrue to the majority of tha population will
be looked upon as Jess than their rightful due.
Tn this situation US eccnomic assistance — ex-
cept as a stopgap in & period of Anancial
crisis + would have little effect upon the basic
stadility of the political situation,
