EstimatedD Pub Date) Situation in Nicaragua -- Interagency Intelligence Memoran
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115490, dated 2 August 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115490).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ence

1g

Director of
Cestral

fatell

G

Ne
reste

= -aot—TraW

Nicaragua

a

we
_

‘ .
fe ‘
~The
fo 8
L Ff

Pas Cader
nF

=o

‘ N
x, . Dra a,
oe

CARIEBEAN

Rie Ged
oan

Sanaderts

7 - . > . My 6 te

"ficial - : "2

PACIFIC
OCEAN

yAy~
COSTA RIC )
-

WKS ~ ; Avigh KC
Pustiwase?A Sea Jess

D

9024701 70 9410088
Lowber Coatoann! Prejoctee

Sweaderd pacatets 8°20 206 145s

Sate 1 3.200.008 — Road
Sewsdary ee-verew ees ©

nat nec e Mere be Dorie tee + Airport

SITUATION IN NICARAGUA

es GREE |: mT: | 0 wenenwe cane.
eee

eee

SITUATION IN NICARAGUA

Military Situation

On 9 September Nicaragua's Sandinista National Lib-
eration Front guerrillas launched a series of attacks in
Managua and four other cities. The National Guard in the
capital responded effectively to what were little more than
hit-and-run strikes against five police posts. In
Masaya, Leon, Esteli, and Chinandega, however, the guer-
rillas were able to gain control of major sections of the
cities and rally support from local youths.

The Guard set about restoring control of Masaya the
next day. It employed well-trained combat forces from the
capital, and cleared out the city systematically one sec-
tion at a time. The fighting was heavy for three days,
but on 13 September Masaya was secured and the bulk of the
troops moved northward to Leon.

The latest reports indicate that Guard troops are
making headway in Leon, but they have not concluded the
operation. Guerrillas still hold major portions of
Chinandega and Esteli, where the existing Guard garrisons
are engaged in holding actions only. One Guard officer
reported that Esteli would be especially difficult to re-
capture. For this reason, and because of geography,
Chinandega will probably be invested following Leon.

In addition to the three towns where the guerrillas
still have some continuous control, there are reports of
sustained clashes in Diriamba, and sporadic fighting in
Rivas, Jinotepe, and Penas Blancas. These strikes on
Wednesday and Thursday were evidently repulsed by the
Guard garrisons.

4
Managua has been tense, but calm since the first at-
tacks on 9 September. [iiRs@s sia ysyi pian nn ag ipnnrrmae

This memorandum was prepared in the Office of Regional and
Political Analysis and was coordinated with the Directorate of

Operations, INR, in the Department of State, and with DIA in th
rtment of Defense . (aime mirssan een sete nist ier sek ieaeaeeses cpa nenieinnen

wm all indicate that a major guerrilla strike will
place on 15 September or soon thereafter.

Armed osition - Nature and Stren

Armed opposition is centered in the guerrilla San-
dinista National Liberation Front (FSLN). Even in areas
such as Matagalpa and Masaya where significant numbers
of the local populace have taken up arms against the gov-
ernment, a large majority of the rebel force has been
pro-FSLN youth--and trained Sandinista cadres have been
an instigating element helping to touch off the violence.
This FSLN tactic, acting as a catalyst for violence in
urban centers, has been evident since the first general
strike against President Somoza in January. Although
anti-Somoza sentiment is strong at almost all levels of
Nicaraguan society, it general y has not reached the flash
point where popular upr sings have been generated exter-
nal to FSLN action.

The FSLN

With Cuban support, the FSLN was founded in the
early 1960s out of the remnants of several other revolu-
tionary organizations. By the mid-1960s, after two small
invasion attempts from Honduras, the group settled into
a pattern of predominantly rural operations by scattered
bands and occasional acts of urban terrorism. Prior to
the surge of activity that began late last year, the FSLN's
most spectacular success was in December 1974 when it
seized a government minister's house and a number of hos-
tages, extorted a ransom, secured the release of 14 fel-
low guerrillas, and gained safe passage to Cuba. During
1975 and 1976, the government's proclamation of martial
law and its more active pursuit of the guerrillas put the
FSLN on the defensive, with most encounters being ti-
ated by the National Guard.

Following the lifting of martial law in September

“1977, the FSLN carried out several dramatic strikes

against National Guard units. The increased anti-Somoza
sentiment over the last year, given major tus by the
assassination of opposition leader Chamorro in January,
has spurred FSLN recruitment because of the organization's

image as the only active opposition to Somoza. A year
ago, we estimated that there were only approximately 250
FSLN activists in the country; Nicaraguan intelligence
estimated last month that there were some 600 guerril-
las within the country and an equal number abroad--a _
cane we find credible, & Be : Se SE
BS An FSLN leader's public boast

: 1,100 guerrillas are now involved in the
creugele against Somoza in Nicaragua could well be ac-
curate; over the last few weeks a large number of FSLN
members staged outside the coun , principally in Costa
Rica, have probably crossed back into Nicaragua. The
number of active sympathizers and supporters is much
larger and growing, but impossible to determine exactly.

, intensifying. I
a a = Sotaeteee new adherents
aken on board sta Rica’so quickly that
they are being incorporated directly into FSLN urban and
rural units without training. Indicative of the de-
creased emphasis on ideology by the leading FSLN faction,
the new recruits are given little screening other than
to determine that they are anti-Somoza.

FSLN recruitment is, if an

Traditionally, the FSLN has been a Marxist, pro-
Castro, revolutionary organization that, like other Latin
American guerrilla groups, has increasingly shifted its
focus to the urban front.

Throughout most of its existence, the FSLN has been
plagued by factionalism. In recent years, the organiza-
tion has split into three primary groups--Terciario, Pop-
ular Prolonged War, and Proletarian Tendency--all espous-
ing variations of Marxist ideology. The chief reason for
this splintering was disagreement over strategy and tac-
tics.

The Terciario faction--estimated a month ago at 550
members--has generally been the largest of the three. It
has undertaken most of the urban guerrilla actions, in-
cluding the capture of the National Palace on 22 August.
The Terciarios are the least doctrinaire of the Sandin-
istas, and for the past year have downplayed Marxism in
favor of nationalistic, anti- ~imperialistic, anti-US, and
anti-Somoza themes. The Terciarios also have shown the

greatest willingness to cooperate with other, non-Communist

opposition groups for the expedient of bringing down the
Somoza government as quickly as possible.

The Sandinistas' chief link to other anti-Somoza or-
ganizations has been through the Group of 12, a collection
of prominent professionals formed in Costa Rica last year
put now openly campaigning against Somoza in Nicaragua.
Members of the group have lobbied for acceptance of the
Sandinistas as a legitimate element in the overall oppo-
sition movement. At least two of the Group of 12 have
peen members of the FSLN, and others have sons who are
Sandinistas. While in Costa Rica, members of the
Terciario faction worked closely with the Group of 12 in
planning querri tig operations ag well as propaganda and
‘fund-raising activities.

The Popular Prolonged War (GPP) faction is largely a
military organization. The Nicaraguan intelligence ser-
vice's current estimate of 550 members is higher than pre-
vious reporting had indicated. The GPP hopes to mobilize
a people's war to force Somoza out, but only in the con-
text of a "socialist revolution" that will require a more
protracted struggle than that envisioned by the Terciarios.
Specializing in guerrilla operations against National Guard
personnel and installations, the GPP has generally avoided
such terrorist tactics as kidnaping and assassination. As
the FSLN offensive has gathered strength, there has been
increasing cooperation between the GPP and the Terciarios
at the upper echelons, but stopping well short of a unified
command. Each group reportedly maintains its own leadership,
and working-level members of the two factions function in-
dependently.

The Proletarian Tendency (TE). with only about 100
members, 18 clearly the smaiies SLN faction. It is also
the most doctrinaire and insular of the three. Its pri-
mary activities are infiltrating worker, peasant, and stu-
dent organizations and promoting strikes. It carries out
some guerrilla actions, but does not work for the immediate
overthrow of Somoza. Rather, it sees a need for his con-
tinued presence to catalyze mass discontent, paving the
way for a socialist government fo succeed to power. During
the most recent guerrilla activity, its only participation
appears to have been to act as a propaganda support mechanism.

ESTAR Seta Ra Ws LS ETN rly PETES RN A RICE RY ep RE RTE GR tree on TET a OL ee Ee

Terciario members in genera] appear to have little respect
fo. this group.

General Resistance

Resistance is spreading in the sense that more towns
have been the sites of serious antigovernment attacks and
violence, but there is only a random geographic pattern.
The worst problems have been in those cities that have been
centers of discontent from the outset, such as Matagalpa
and Masaya. The FSLN has chosen urban targets of oppor-
tunity, in concert with attacks on National Guard outposts
by bands that range across the borders from Costa Rica and
Honduras. The objective is to demonstrate the government's
vulnerability and at the same time to stretch the National
Guard thin--and so encourage conditions propitious for a
general uprising or a major FSLN attack in the capital
once Somoza's forces are wearied and depleted.

Thus far, we have evidence of only one other organi-
zation that has joined with the FSLN in its military cam-
palgn, but contacts and cooperation, at least on an in-
formal or individual basis, are clearly wider. One of the
factions of the extremist Nicaraguan Socialist Party has
engaged in joint planning with the Terciarios for a major
armed action in the capital that is still expected. Mem-
bers of other organizations have probably also cooperated--
likely candidates include the other Socialist faction as
well as the Revolutionary Student Federation--which for
years has been the FSLN's primary source of recruits. In
addition, radicalized businessman Alfonso Robelo, one of
the opposition's principal leaders and head of the
Nicaraguan Democratic Movement, recently indicated that
members of his group had been active in the most recent
outbreaks of violence. Similarly, a prominent opposition-
ist has related that the head of the Union for Democratic
Liberation, one of the political coalitions within the
opposition front, has also been involved in FSLN planning.

Outside Support = Cuban Involvement

Since their information in the early 1960s, the
Sandinistas have looked to Cuba for ideological inspira-

tion, strategic guidance, tactical training, material sup-
port, and sanctuary. In the last few years, however, Cuba

pe er ek la - . :
OE Ne RS at

ROE YG tt Ee

w Sega get Ny

appears to have declined repeated Sandinista appeals for
money, arms, and increased training outside Cuba. Havana
has apparently concentrated its material support on training
in Cuba and related expenses, including transportation and
documentation. The bulk of our reliable evidence to date
points to a role, put we believe it would stop short of a
direct military participation.

The Cubans were cautious in their dealings with the
FSLN because they have been skeptical about the group's
capabilities and sensitive to international opinion.
Havana has insisted that the FSLN first purge itself of
factionaliem, establish a unified leadership base, and
prove itself under fire.

The Cubans have, however, apparently increased their
contacts with Central American groups. At least three
times this year, a high-level Cuban representative has
tried to meet in Costa Rica with FSLN leaders to help iron
out their factional differences, but there are no indica-
tions that he succeeded in bringi e groups to-
gether. Late la
ey fad

a a s Active
promoting insurgency in Latin America, particularly in
Nicaragua and El Salvador. More recently, a member of the
Guatemalan Communist Party related that Havana intends to
hold a meeting before the end of the year of all the Com-
munist parties of Central America to plan a coordinated
campaign against Somoza, but details of the campaign were
not spelled out.

Some aspects of Cuba's support role have long been
documented. Throughout the FSLN's existence, Cuba has
been a training site; even two years ago there were 60
Sandinistas there in various stages of training. Cuba is
also both safehaven and propaganda base; one of the
guerrillas flown to Cuba after the December 1974 operation
remained in Havana until earlier this year to act as FSLN
liaison with the Cuban Government, to direct Sandinista
propaganda over Radio Havana, and to contact representa-
tives of other radical organizations. Sandinistas in Cuba
may also correspond with support groups in the United
States and other third countries.

Such Cuban support is clearly continuing. The leader
of the recent assault on the National Palace appears to be
one of Ree oem FSLN members who were supplied with
Cuban passports in alias by the Cuban Embassy in Panama.
Last year, a Cuban Prensa Latina official in Venezuela was
reportedly trying to help collect money for the FSLN.
Occasional reports alleging that Cuba ii providing the
Sandinistas with funds to purchase weapons and ig sending
selected members to the Near East for training by the
Palestine Liberation Organization cannot be confirmed,
however.

Similarly, there have been two recent reports of a
Cuban presence in Nicaragua, both of which are suspect.
zs re S tear alleged in
August that three Cuban advisers were aining Sandinistas
in underground sites in a town 50 kilometers (30 miles)
from Managua. So one also reported that the
FSLN planned to bomb vehicles with diplomatic. license
plates--a change in FSLN strategy that would seem counter-
productive to FSLN efforts to isolate the Somoza government
diplomatically. ae ne Te

woh

Cuba has been trying to play down its direct involvement
with the FSLN. On 6 September, for example, Fidel Castro
said that the Sandinistas know how to obtain arms and money
and do not need Cuba's help. However, a member of the Group
of 12--which serves as the FSLN's political arm--reportedly
visited Cuba recently to request that Castro provide arms,
money, and even direct military intervention. We believe
that the Cubans may well increase support to the Nicaraguan
guerrillas in the weeks ahead but stop short of sending
Cuban personnel into Nicaragua. Both we and the Cubans
would reassess if there were some dramatic turn in the
Nicaraguan situation--for example, if the FSLN secured an
area and established a provisional government recognized
by some Latin American regimes.

.

Costa Rica's Role e de

Costa Rica continues to be the FSLN's principal, and
critically important, staging area.

De ae eee ee Sy Res poN SS APL LAP AaR SBS Sea POL EOE geet ET

i EF aang AE Eten RCN ARR ARR ROT

The FSLN attacks last October that began the offen-
sive against the Somoza government were staged by groups
that quickly fled into Costa Rican and Honduran territory
before Nicaraguan National Guard forces could react. In
November, there were some 70 well-equipped Sandinistas
operating from Costa Rica. A member of the FSLN high
command has publicly acknowledged that the group uses that
neighboring country as its principal training ground and
safehaven. The Group of 12, prior to ret ng to Managua
earlier this year, functioned out of San Jose.

The FSLN's continued reliance on its safehaven was evi-
denced by the raid launched from Costa Rica on 12 September,
as well as the fact that the guerrillas have intensified
their recruitment drive there. In addition, the spectacular
FSLN August raid on the National Palace was planned and staged
from Costa Rica.

The Sandinistas receive material aid from the Costa
Rican Committee of Solidarity With the Nicaraguan People
and are provided safehavens and false documents by the
Costa Rican Communist Party. Sandinistas have occasional
contacts in Costa Rica with Cuban officials and--according
to unconfirmed reports--with Soviet Embassy officials as

well.

The FSLN has been able to operate from Costa Rica with
virtual impunity for a variety of reasons. The government
is militarily incapable of policing the border and, in any
event, may lack incentive because the Somoza government is
unpopular in Costa Rica. Some government officials may also
fear retaliation from the FSLN. When Sandinistas do fall
into government hands, they are deported to Mexico,
Venezuela, or Panama.

E Game Costa Rican
President Carazo has decided to "stiffen" his policy on
FSLN activists apprehended in his country--by deporting
non-Costa Ricans and giving short jail sentences to
nationals. At best, this 1s only a slight shift that is
unlikely to have any appreciable effect on FSLN tactics.

FSLN raids from across the border have been a con-
tinuing thorn in the side of Somoza's counterinsurgency

effort and a very important asset to the guerrillas and
will likely remain 80.

Other Significant External Support

The Somoza government is unpopular in Venezuela, and
President Perez 18 waging a personal campaign against it.
Perez ‘Aa with members of the F dq Group

Past reporting has conflicted on the question of whether
Perez is providing money to the anti-Somoza movement in
general and to the Sandinistas in particular. In the most
recent reports, however, Beams wate
BOEME said that Perez is providing money and unsop isticated
arms to the guerrillas, and he is kept apprised of their
plans as well as the extent of support they receive from
Cuba. Venezuela also has a Committee of Solidarity With
the Nicaraguan People, which lobbies against Somoza and
raises funds for the Sandinistas.

In mid-August Panamanian Chief of Government Torrijos
told Ambassador Young that he was giving some support to
the FSLN, but not much. This week, 5 pe

that he was providing

nothing but hotel accommodations for the guerrillas who
staged the operation against, Nicarag a's National Palace.
Earlier this month, however , Raxaemeas ara 5

ee Bee Torrijos promised to provide 7
guerrilla training to the FSLN unit that went to Panama
following the National Palace operation, but that the
Sandinistas departed before any training took place.

mates ae ae 7 aiscovered
pro=FSLN cadre Training in Panama! s western Chiriqui
Province and Aid not interfere with the group’ s- return to
Nicaragua. oe ; aa

=: ee MNicaraguan President. Somoza is evi-
dent y aware Of thie incident. The guerrilla commander of
the National Palace operation reportedly was seen in

Chiriqui on Monday loading what appeared to be munitions
onto a plane flown by a Panamanian Air Force pilot. The
aircraft supposedly had been making two flights nightly to
Costa Rica for the previous four days. In addition, two

top FSLN commanders visited Panama in the past few weeks
ihn no : ech a

pes of meeting with Torrijos, §

The FSLN operates out of sanctuaries in Honduras, but
finds the atmosphere less hospitable than in Costa Rica.
As many as 60 guerrillas were staging regular raids from
Honduras into Nicaragua late last year, but the Honduran
Army swept the border region in May to suppress these ac-
tivities. Like Costa Rica, Honduras deports captured
Sandinistas to third countries.

Honduras also has a Committee of Solidarity With the
Nicaraguan People, which provides aid to the FSLN. In
addition, students and faculty members of the national
university and a new leftist organization, the Popular

Unity Movement, reportedly give added moral and material
support.

elleves that the Mexican
Government 1s sympathetic to and probably provides “sup-
port” to the Sandinistas, but WR has no concrete informa-
tion beyond these previous reports.

-- In early 1978, Joaquin Cuadra Chamorro, of the
Group of 12, said that he had met with Mexican
President Lopez Portillo and Secretary of Govern-
ment Reyes. Cuadra said the Mexican Government:
was providing important political and propaganda
support to the effort to remove Somoza from power.
Cuadra said the Mexicans had not yet provided
any financial support, and he did not indicate
that support to date had specifically included
the FSLN.

~- Ernesto Castillo, also of the Group of 12, in
early January 1978 "intimated" that the FSLN had
the sympathy of and a good relationship with the
Mexican Government. He hoped that the Chamorro
assassination would generate concrete assistance.

Gutierrez Sotelo, whose farm near Cuernavaca ig

used for training and recuperation by Sandinistas,
Because of Mexico's traditionally tole

rant atmos~

~- The FSLN has members in Mexico, including Carlog
|

phere, many far-left Latin American groups have
chosen to set up such exile Operations there.

Cohesiveness of the National Guard
RE OF the National Guard

Pie peas 8 cohesive.

yaity to Somoza remain intact. This unity de-

rives from 40 years of cultivation through financial

J incentives; screening of enlistees; use of informants,

- Checks, and balances; and other classic patron-client

2 techniques. In the current crisis, this cohesion does not
come strictly from blind devotion, but from the

+ hm Ot OO oe oe
4
1]
i?)
9)

3
eM.
ct
-.
°
3
o
*¢
re
D
Sa
a
a
g
o
ro
c
ie")
ct
£
~
f
re]
Cc

Nats on ate. ary

Os w teeee

enlisted men's level, could be stretched
point.

Somoza's Strategy

agua area, including the best
combat units as wel] as virtually all of the heavy weapons,
armor, and Air Force. The rest of the Guard i i
persed, with half stationed in each of the 16
capitals and half occup

Somoza evidently believes he can ultimate

ly control,
from the military perspective,

anything short of a mass

11

civil uprising in the capital. He does not seem to feel a
need for haste in recapturing the provincial cities, and
consequently is willing to dispatch only limited reinforce-
ments from Managua. He may also believe that such extended
operations will cause the guerrillas to expend their pre-
sumably limited supplies of ammunition.

Nevertheless, there is a sense of urgency, if not
haste, in Somoza's current strategy. The tenacity of the
guerrilla offensive has probably surprised him. Declaring
martial law gives the Guard the freer rein it has wanted.
The troops are taking harsher measures and using weapons--
such as M-79 grenade launchers,. recoilless rifles, and air-
craft--that had not been employed in the past. The Air
Force has engaged in hot pursuit of guerrillas into Costa
Rica, their chief sanctuary. In short, Somoza is taking
the gloves off. .

. ‘
Somoza's political strategy is unchanged. His objec-
tives are to retain power until his term officially ends

in 1981 and to protect his financial and family intérests
beyond that time. Clearly he does not envision relinquish-
ing all personal power even after his rétirement. At pres-
ent, no one in the opposition will negotiate on his

terms, and he stands firm. If he comes to feel that his
back is to the wall militarily, he would agree to nego-
tiate and make concessions as a tactical fallback in the
hope of buying time, drying up popular support for the
guerrillas, and splitting the opposition. Even
acquiescence to the demand that he step down is conceiv-
able as a final tactical retreat, with the intent to

renege or in hopes of coming back some years hence.

Somoza's diplomatic otrategy is to thwart inter-
national initiatives by unfriend y countries, such as
Costa Rica and Venezuela. If he is unable to restore

order in the next two weeks or so, he would be more in-
clined to accept outside mediation, but without precon-
ditions. Again he would hope to turn the process to his
advantage and buy time. Particularly if the United States
were somehow involved in the mediation, Somoza could be
expected to appeal to influential friends:‘in:- this country
to buttress his negotiating position. _

Somoza's Prospects for Success

Barring a substantial increase in external materia}
support for the FSLN, Somoza's military “get tough*
strategy may well succeed in the short run. The
guerrillas are low on ammunition and militarily out-
classed, while the Guard has been given a freer rein.
Somoza should be able to restore systematically some
semblance of control.

Circumstances in Nicaragua have changed, however,
and, over time, Somoza will probably fail to reverse the
tide of active opposition. He may manage to suppress in-
dividual uprisings, but the guerrillas will reappear in
other cities in a matter of days or weeks. Since he can-
not jeopardize Managua's defenses to subdue the rest of
the country, only the most draconian measures and a mas-
sive increase in the size of the Guard would permanently
eliminate the Sandinistas and their growing reserve of
young followers. Even if by these measures he managed to
stay in power until 1981--and the odds seem hedged against
it--the dynasty could continue only as a police state.

Presumably, Somoza's political strategy--accepting
some form of outside mediation--would enter the picture
before the military situation slipped from his rasp. The
opposition would agree to such mediation expect ng that
the United States would take a hand in assuring Somoza's
retirement from power. Somoza's strategy would be to
marshal all his political savvy and influence to resist
his ouster as well as any ban on political participation
by his relatives. Even if ultimately compelled to yield
his offices and dismantle his power structure, he would
probably never quit maneuvering for a return to power.

Government Shortages

Major “Tachito" Somoza acknowledged on 12 September
that the Guard was rapidly exhausting its ammunition but
said it had found sources of additional sppiies in other
Central American countries. He indicated that his rapid-
reaction forces, however, were in urgent need of C-rations.
Savina ee rim there is some concern
in the Guard over the adequacy of munitions reserves and
other materiel. Inability to replenish stocks of small-
arms ammunition and field supplies could weaken the

13

regime's military position, but Somoza probably has the
sources and connections to avert a shortage.

Of more serious, if not immediate, concern is the cur-

rent financial crisis compounded by the national strike
and wave of violence. Facing a serious liquidity crisis
and capital flight, the government requested advance tax
payments and imposed currency controls. Most foreign
firms are expected to comply with the tax request, which
will ease but not eliminate the economic squeeze. The
government has already had problems meeting public
teachers' salaries, and if the business strike and
nonpayment-of-taxes movement continue, the government's
position could be undermined.

ee ae
