Gary Powers NorwayY Involuntarily Became Party to US Spy Participation- Family
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022364, dated 4 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022364).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

YoY.

THTERDATLONAL AFSAIRS

Moseaw, Soviet European Service in Finnish, Avg 36, 1960,
31900 Q@Ete-L ;

fyoloaia ecumentary? +

foyeerats) Norway jpyoluntarily bets a party to te H,8. prevacation,
wot aa becehs apparent fron Eowers? confecsicn® and from the flight

gap, bbe U.S. espionage (Airectives?) also provided for tee violation
of she sovereignty ef Finland and gsvedene” TF could have Tlown

across Piniend to Bodoe is Moyway, " Fowers gaid. "the word Sodapkylae
giong the Line d-ewn in green ch the map means that 1 could Land

et Sodanky lee girriela." ~ ¥ eg ee gee veh

Cervteia Finnish papere have axpresses fastouisnmect? st Powers!
ber a \ .

confessions and have woudered whether the U.6. pitot might have
iptenied te Jand at the Godankylae aivfiela, which is io aisrepsir
t

and ig aiffiewlt to Lend one wus. sucMt, wnicn earbies tried to
divert sot -pbien from the ut fiiant, ig now dispieasee that
hes number

Scdaveyise B35 become notorious airfield. Finlané a

of very good works of gonstruction, ‘but ib is nolizely thst uel

SUOME bas pivyertised any one of them a8 gealously && Zt bes advertised
s.

—

_ the poor condition of Sodankylee airfield. fhe paper has sought, to

‘east Goubta on powers’ ‘genfessiow that he gould end ‘in Finland.

pos let us consider dhe following: Reports om the condition of thé |

airfield publisnes in the Finnish press only eonfirg that the U.i.
intelligence service yeally 4atended to use qt. For thres yeports
tally with the information given to Powers. Fowers said thet Colonel
Skelton had agsured Rim thes Sodankyles airfield was in poot sondit Lon
As ve can S62, U.S. intelligence yas es well aware ov the condition

of the sirfield ag the Finnish presse The fact is eather eloquent.

Agtention is also oravn to tHe arrogance of the words of the U.S.
pilot: . “1 could have serded-in Bueden- I gould hee flows over
Finland and landed at Sodankyiae? Why sould he have done go?

after all, the swedish foreign ministr, bes, 88 is Enown, announced
thet the U.5. pilot hed not heen given permission te isnd in Sueden.
A similar gecleration vss made bY Binnish authorities. The only
ansver cen Ge, to quote the words of inister FoerngrTey, that
Mmenmisalon to land had bean piven bY the U.S. Government."

‘Tins, even the neutral countries of Horthern Europe ars made tc

feel the aggressive policy of the United States at firet. hand. 7

be ae Release

Pa eae

4% relingsish:
position af being

the govercim

Powers?) conre
the Wee flick

nos heve needed to complain of the wmerited notoriety earned oy

Sodaniyylae airfield, a

5
o

Moscow, Soviet Buropean
? neOy

es

tyejai, seid.
fliyer's father said the
Me. Sol Cary, iand
said he “ag,
ioded mgettally and phy

: eerenbre Li ty + Ana 4

eagteatad The Greasy advantage OF
5 4 ow ‘ uae ~

ei this policy of news tity, Forwey Wi

pesioust

fam.

a

yun Se : :
passions reveal taht hed all the Nordic countries been newbral,
% enuid not neve been oryanized. And then UUST SUOME vould

giroyed by the Gernans.

Foweré Fenily Refutes U-8. Claims
sexvice in English, Ave- 17, 2960, 2150 GMr--L

(Text) In Liogtow the parents ar Branoie Powers, who are present 4% his
Shey did not +pink that toeir son had been traimmszned. The

‘ avery word. his 30m pronounced va

of the Povers fanily Woo, ig eccompanysng then, alsa

bovineed Powers pad not bean pub under any pressure. Powers

sieally besithy at the trial. Tne

pedutyt.S. press claims sanctioned by the State Deperte
legit authorities are pressuring pavers - ; ‘

mesh COFERAGE OF ave J uq7 TRIAL SESSION

Home Service Report

Mosconi, Soviet Heme gervics, 4use IT 1066, 1629 @M--i

(Recoréed reportage by

Viadinis Treguhoy, Yuriy KherlLamoy), and Vyacheslav Cherny:
Trade Union House, eonsisting of recordings of the
hm commentators ' comments }

Hell of Columns oF the

first day of the powers § trial, imperspecsed Wit

(mest) Question: Pegendant Povers, have you wnders to

Answert Tes

apecial gorrespondents Yalentin Zorin,

od

Question: Lo you plead gailsy to the charges?

Answer: ‘Y25, £ plead audlty.

s his owe.

se statements
nt that Soviet

nov Drow the

this indictiest?

ee Tae eit

Jet keel dad

‘on that bench--Eor those who Feht hin--for the leaders of the U.S. Aray,

“44 is trembling. But thet band dita not tremble when, in the early

-.ago, the hand. of the U8. aimea who dropped atom ‘i mbes on Hiroshima

be - ht - VSGR TNEEREATION 2
ESS ag. 1d, 1920

Demrmentatozr; And so ne hss pleade’ guilty. It would have bee aiff touwlt
to expest anything eice. The guilt of Francie Gary Povars, whe cormithed
the gravest crime against our peonie, bas been proved, mes only Dy
volumes of documents accumulated during the preliminary investigation, nob
onhy ‘ty material avyidence; his crime vas admitted by leaders oF the
Usdeed States, including President Disenhower himself, Sricence about
eras erine hag eiready been given in the U.S. Sanate by Allen Pulies,
enie® U.S. sy. Trug, in contrast to bis subordinate, Tulies Tailed to
blnsh in stume and bis volea did not tranble. The ball in vnieh Dulles
apoxe was insulated from the outside werd, carefully sheckea by agents of
the secret service, whoo lenks4s for microphones under the senators! armchairs. 4
The U.S. legislaters gave. their word that they would carefully guard the 7
geerets revealed by Dulles. And nov these secrets have been nade public at
an open trial. & Soviet court is trying pilot Powers, [ulies’ handyman.

am

tut let us follow tue order of eyants: The Hall of Columns of the :
Trade Unien House is Filled to cepacity. Representatives of the Mosccov
public, foreign parliamentarians and imyers are here, (us are?) noisy .
and exoited neyauen. Powers’ relatives are in a vou: bis nothar, nis
father--not yet an old man--in 4 bow tie, his wife. And now it i#

1oCO Bours. Even the newswen have fallen silent. ;

Officials. Wii the eourt risé for the ehtrane ‘Lethe judees. Please sit
down. he military collegiua of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union is
in session. Tse session will hear the case of Powers, Francis Gary, &
nitizen of the United States. He has. been- committed to trial: under Art. Two”
ef the USOR lay on criminel responsibility for evines aguinst the state.
Gommentator: The defendant is brought inte the court. He is wearing &

blue suit and a white shirt, He ts obviously nervous, and takes, a seat on..
the defendant's bench, right at the enc. Ghere is sti.l a int of room

“Intelligence and diplomatic services. He puts hig; hand tn the rail;
“morning of May 1 a U-2 airplane veu. rising. 4nto the ait, just. 4s 15 years”

and Hacasaki Zid nat tremble, Por Povers, like those vho saqc nin,
bnew that thet epy Plight aoulé becoue 4 trenendous world provocation,

Answ

Qua sont 'Ptbot,” yea, @ for pilot pub now &
in the dock, Zt was Soviet rooketeers who made Rim e@
on May Lo near Sverdlovsk.

rats near the 3

aa abibl oniats,

e peripnera: ris 3
‘ tha yary gee Adame cass that the
2 eophes of ITA, the UAR, and
Lebanon. How the ehadirmain pwts the question: Doss Powers adnit 21s
miley Of course be does; ik is impossible to deny it.

telephone booths
eterna vedio.
is having

An intermission is announced.
and Gypewriters. One of them,

F

network, Shouts 4&8 he rumesy
perder tine then me--the accused, —

A his guilt and is now aval bin

» The acoused has eamitie
etionary papers and

Whe can one Say% &
a deserved punighmest, but the representatives of re
padio netuerks will heve simply anc literally to pertorn acc
wenders to try and whitewash Povers and his masterse
merely dizfiowt: Tt is quite impossibie.

after the intermmissicn, the procuratcor general of the Soviet Union,
Roman Andreyevich Rudeoko begins crosé questioning the accused. Silence
reigns in the tell. Fowers ansvers the quections of the prosecution,
albeit with evident reluctance end through ‘clenched teeth. Hew gould

he fail to ensver~-he has been eaucit, (vord indistinet}, and convieted
by the evidence, and no refusal 40 speak can help. Fovers underatands
this nerfectly. The evidence of the acoused draws a picture arousing
just indignebion et provocation and espionage, at the whole sinister

net that American imperialists, ave spread near the frontiers Jf The
Soviet Union--airflelds, special planes, means of communication, -
imdreds of thousands of Ameri#en servicemen. (Facts?) shov they ere
spies, and they know what they arp about. As the Rev York HERALD TATBUNS
admitted, three U+-2 pllote before Powers hed met death fulfilling

esplona je duties, -Powera, however, was never tod thie (at Peshawar
paset); he was so14 fairy tales abowt ‘the wonders of American technology.

Atwhat altitude were you dnatructed to fy.

Answers AX auproximately 68,000 feet plus oF minus ea fev.

cate oe

é
4
x
El
*

told that 2% Wee abgolutely sate to°Phy over &
ee OR
£

Guesvien: ap whet altitude was your plane at the moment it vas bit
hy the rocket?

Th was at a maximum af about 68,000 feet. + don't nov the

exact Figure. ee

Cemmentater: Tne questioning continues; aad the faces of the pourgeols
nevenen becané ge-comier and #locaies. Vell; they've having 4 herd tine
today, Yes, Ore can no longer tell a story mbout the ouyEen acpara tus
vhgeh went wrorg of minimize the Soviet antiairerar? defense! Tt was
tnown in Vashirgton where Powers Veo sent, and Vashin geo. hopec thst the
pilot would unbesitatingly fulfils any extminal commant.

Question: (Sentence indistinct) with the game (word indistin =} you could
have turned @ switch and yeleased an atomic bomb which might have peen
carried in yout (plane?}?

Answer: I+ could be, but I'm sure shat is not that type of airplane.
Tt has mo neane of carrying oF aropping panos. . ,

Qomentater: The wiecd freezen, at such cynmicien! These cre the
cutthroats American generals reer, on whom they count Zor pneatening their
eriminal plane. 2 ¢

The chairenan addresses counsel Gwiney, asking whether he has any questions
to ask the accused, The ecumsel asks tha acuused & punter oF Ques Tons +
Questions Uhat vere you inatewueted to do in case of an anergency 1: yaing?-
Answer: IT Wes sol@ that is wes very unlikely thet anything itke this
would happen. Bas ,

Commentator Though intruding }ike a thief into foreign skies; yoth
Powers and those who gent bim were convinced oF their impunity. Benne their
dmpudence » tat they bave not suaceedad and will not succeed in the Pirie»

~

PS ed

moni eben eter ne
TH eorrespond ent ts

lowing excerpts vary slight

Rofenko: You don't deny that by intruding into USSR airapace you
bave Violated the law?

Powers: Yes, 2 donmtts deny it-

Rudenko: Therefore, this intrusion was & reconnaisgance ani spying

Powers: ~T think 1t wes.

Rudenko: You steted (at your exe nation?) thet you switched your
equipment on end off at definite points over Russia.

Powers: I did ali that twas ordered to do.
Bedenko: Wibhouwt knowing avout the special equipment?

Powers: i never saw this special equipment.

Rudenko: You could just es suceasefully hove palied the trigger and ;
dropped an atowic bob? = :

1

Powers: This eould have happened peut this ian nét the right
aircrara (for carrying bones?) 7

These words whtered 2 Powers With surprising enidhlooiedness caused
indignation in the hall.

Tt was confirmed during the etamioation that whe masters who dispatehed
Powers on the spying Flight equipped their hireling «ith all the aqui pment
necesgery in case of aceident and with all necessary instructions.

me + SSR TEPER ATIORAL WEPATES

AUZ, 1,

ing iructed not only

Tne a

a te

Lethal t

ig betas more cea

the sot ornare of the Pentagon's

yec oning aewhe. Proeura bor Geners

clear an mga tions whick help ia fally |ets

puiit and coe. u wergans behind bia Kho Tryepoer
in fees, bave declared espionage bo be at

C

heace “OWGy
conversation is enoming direct and frank.

; Roderko: is Cardinel Speliaen gisc antersst= in military eampst

one personne’ of

e
id
ss
a
A
i}
fw
a
Fi

Fowers: He ia
as

a military vase.

Rudenke: ‘That very sane personnel whieh carries ous
(teughter 12 the hall)

The wllitery comand had adopted measures to conceal phe
of the detachment? in which Powers served. ARBOR etner things, tos
fefendant had two certifies tes~-che vrom the US. Derense Departnent
ani snother froa the National heronautics and Space Administration.
Powers admitted Ghat these eertificstes gave tin the right to fly
military plenes and, at the same time, to eonceal the peoonnaLesence

gasignuents of the detachment.

unfortunate penetratioa into Soret

Jignts along the gowthern fr- ers

Povers pdeltted that before bis
ard. Those whe dent

alrepace he carried aut several f

of the Soviet Union with special eghipment on be
P all interested in the Black Sea area and, as Powers

Powers were mest of

@eciared, the isunching of rockets. The defendant declared theb during
these flights ne switched on dnd off qartein (apgaretust) in the plane.
: just as you switebed tien on aad oft awring your flight of

The state prosecutor asked Whether other pLiots
detachment carcied ¢ ve similer flights.
that work among: the pilots was distyiLbeted

Powers; Yes, Lf would say

pretty equally. -

’
4

wo Bay RW may

a amps
4 a4ysmin
i

9 Berope, Auge io, 1960,

Mosecw, TASS, Radioteletype in Fi piish t

OS20 GMT--1.

4ah a sey Blict Pranels Powers is very
4 ners pupLish 2 communique 9 the
noLiegbus of ama Court of the.
detuiled reper the trial.

tye

Ys

oy

Wepomnyascoly euvess in PRAVOE thet the foul sent
ranters is being prouge to Light at the tries,
ao its atark ugliness. nankwand-Tile Muscovites
who have come nearly-: from ah parts ag the vorkd”
to athend tha hearines, the earresponderts write, aS well Be many
, veprecentatives of the plagest news services and newspapers » egnbinuously
" express their amazement at the utter moval degradation of the pourgecis
world whieh pays ligeesvice to freedom and democracy but in point :
fact serves the “rellow devil." ‘

Gg, Dadyants points cut in SOVIET RUSSIA that Lb was not che mark
publicized love of pourgeoLs Yersadon” bub the gecursed rereenary
moraia- of capitalist. gociaty Im, waich everytaing cen or seid and

bought,. including life, noner, end the consciences C+ people ae
meade Powers comms his orien

+ ue
fea

2 tus atkev and V. Zuko? write ia RED
Span, But he is just 2 pee nin the gambie of the overseas warmOnges |
peain’ ulm thera stand d_oge who divecte’ ote fligot, whe oper Ly cali
for somtinuatLon of aeplounge agtinities against other states by als
yossiole omaus.

fie papers also report foreten ccuments on powers! triais In bis

dispatch from Loudon PHAYDA correspondent yiapeer writes that Britien

correzpondents in their reports irom Moscow could not put point out

; that the aggressive acklons of the United Shabes ynieh sens ibs Ue
plage on an espionage flight over the USSR arouse tha tried grevhbad and
Vath of the Sovleb people. ‘ _

ral ne

ce

."Z suspose that most cf us here would want to see capital wunisnness

a Sa 5

e soe AiR eset
- EBL - UAER TATERTATIONBL A

igs 16, 1966

since Be voluntarh

the method: ib used.
agency would stop at noth
espionage and sanctege against other ©

At GOS CMT on Aug. 16 the North-American service carries 9 cocmentary
winich says im pert; "Powers persomaliy violated Soviet SGvaTehEnsy
and carried out asplonage potivity here. He is a criminal and as such ;
is being tried, But he is not the leading star in khe show, Of greater’
importance is American policy ani the people dietating 4t, The Powers
trial shows thet he and his Lik ar ,
fpranda?), aad they are ready to ¢
bold relief as the triel.”

Phe Harhh American service at 2300 GME om Augy iT, anewering © 2
from @ Listcoaer im Montreal, says that under Soviet lew, Capit. |

5 A ee et of sag
punishment is reserved for a very oat? aw range of the gravest OPP SENSES «

A member of the panel adds;

abolished, and I suppose we will sbolish it when society rids ipsalt
for sll practical purposes ofthese grave erimes. Bat wotil that time;
society must, of course, protect Etaelf against such things ®5 bloody
murders and edplionage." eo

a yee.

YASS BRPORTAGE OW AW. 18 PROCEEDINGS

Meseuw, TASS, Redictelatyps in Eogiish to Europe, Auge 18, igb0,

O73 GME--L

(text) Moscow—-At today's morning sesuion of Powers" trial cefens?
counsel Michail Griorv montinued examination of nis nlient. The dawyer
wanted to kucw Whether, when Fowars Was signing the contract with ad
the Tentral Intelligence Agency, he jmew thet he would have to perrors
fijehts over the Soviet Union. The defendant augwerad thab be add act
knew that, and he found it out for the first Gima six or seven montis
after he had signed the contract.

*
%

Ae
R
*

7
aye

Sowers samitted the
4
ns

sashuwir ila @ Une De

bbe rat Colonel 3 1
Ser x eat
the say sate. The
bape lore of the plane:
Mikheil Crinev asked Powers aen given 4 pois
neadle before, and the dete it was the first gine--
aie ae

that he ves given euch & needle. Fowers replied in the =
B +

wines Sho

bo Mixhail Grinev's question of yhether Cobenel
hoy to use the needle. This ented Grinev's gues*

Phen the prosecuvor saperal, Roman pudenue, tack

cefendsnt.

Asked who hed § anng the U-2 in Paahever iP 2959,
Bowers sxid thes gon from tb ines lL gontrel
center, ‘The Bro che poln . fakistan authorities imev
aoont Powers’ flight 3 59. Mo this Fowers replied trat 5e SeLieved

this wag exactly the cece.

powers testified that & special xegine hed been intreduced at the 10-10
asa in Pashewar in 2999-1960. We were not allowed to isave ©He bese
Powers said. He believes thst the reason pehind tis Was that tae

planes and the instramentetion on then were seorete

: : _ 3 doen
Replying then to the questica by the procure tor general, Powers sanitted
x a 7 a o eee 4 tg 4 apr d Ie 2 snet
that by flying over Afghan stan he hed viels red fhe soversigney’ of Snes
state. ar a
+ follews from Eoveris testitony thet no sarmission ved bean obtt ined ;
ered

from the countries over whose territories he hed FlowD- Powers decwBs
that, aa he believes, no permission nad been received for the fliigey
over the USGa. Fowers seid that this is nonfiraed by his pein in the

dock net.

In reply to a question from Roman Ridenke, powers testified that he hed
nrossed the border of the ussR at 66,000 feet and then, continuiré |

nis flight, rose to 68,000. feet. He gaia thet it was at this altituce
that he was shot dowa.

ia

wwe he

as om,
~ BR iG - GOS

unit commander,
desttey the U-2.

with & single

tr explaining why ne aid not @

and Tesnewar eases during his May + 4 , PG

equipnent on bis plane aculd insure communicath + @ distance not
exceeding 300-400 miles.

The state prosecutor then asked whether the sbsence of radio contests

was due to the secrecy of his flight, Fovers thes even if he bac
paen able to uaintalo radio cauteach with tne base gould not have

done so because of the possiollity of detection.

% of the state prosecuLor, the court again sonfrosted
with bis Plight wep. The procurator general asked why Was it
shat on that map the routes were marked in red and blue. Powers replied

t

that the red line indicated the roube ke was to Follow with uunost
ageuracy, wille the blue tine indicated the general civection of the
fitect, A ;

Further, in reply to the procurator general's questioo, Powers admitted
thet the route indicated by the red Line was of speczal interest to
persons who hed given him the map and, since he nad been working for Cray
it was parsons trom this agency who were interested in this.

In nis testimony about the route from Rendelakeba to Gedes, marked in
prown on the chart, Powsrs saig thet was the route he vould have sd
to Toliow in case of wiforeseen circumstances. Powers said thet in
that case he would have arosaed the Soviet Union, Fimiend, Sweden, end
Norway Te ie eat! .

= en

The procurator general asked o.wers the purpose of the plece of plack
elath given him by Colonel Shelton before bis flight. Powers tried to
evade this question, pleading thst he did know. He claimed that it
yas not aA recognition sianal. ;

Specifying the countries over which he psd flown in 1958 in transfering
the U-2 from Incirlix to Bodoe, Zowers, ia repiy to the procurator
general's question, named Turkey, Greece, and Tzaly. Ee pelieved that
the toute went across Frence oF Switzertend. After shat he flew across
West Gerdany and “perhaps Denmark," bub of this the defendant is not
mre. His Plight ended ta Norway s mgt’

Tale

sent es enable Mode aT ee

xt ane oF the Soviet Tren
oUt oy amen, These maps were
5a: mich cuts are in the two
nbs nS.
pal trat the pieces cut From the
. thes vers clegsified sectes- the

5 were made to conceal to jinom these
ere igsued. He said thet the topographic
r

2 racy cats 3 *
rate given to nim were part or bis sme geney bit, end in the case of
: @ forced Landing vere To helo hin make his way cut of the Soviet Union.

7 - Twc maps with cuts were tn be destroyed at the order of the commander
of detachment 10-10, ae

, The promucstor general said that an appeal in 14 languages was
Aigcoverr’ among Powers! gea?, and asked the court to show this appeal
to Powers. The defendant sdmitbed thes the appest ned been found on
bin but alleged that he dia act know be had it.

At the request of tre state procurator the text of this appeal was
yead in Ruaeian and English. The appeal reads: "T am an Americen aor.
T do not speak Russieo. tT need food, shelter, and help. Tf snail do
you no harm. If you help me, you will be revarded.”

Pevers again claimed thet this appeal ned not beer &
nad been included in hie geer by these who heined him dress before the

flight.

The procurater general asked whether money and gold were given Powers
for bribing Soviet citizens. The defendant replied that thie was to

help him get out of the counsry by all mesos and, if possible, Lo
resort to bribery. : :

en

When the procurator general seld that aptamctis to orthe Soviet citizens
ould be Fruitiess, Powers replied: “I alse think So. "(Laughter

tn the bali) 2
z The procuretor general gaid that he would ike te get more precise
information on Some mest ions pertelaing bo the ey received by Powers.
te saked the defendant what big monthly salary wss during ole sérvice

with the air force.

™

fo.
:
:3
£
r

iven bim asd apparently

a chine

i
oO

Powel metner he would nave
the fligmt on May. i. Powe
z

Po
Sd have besh ragerded a5
a *

The examinaviton of Powers Wae taken up bY
He asked Powers vhat his main task wes OF
1 3 t snl

m ano

VAR

Powers + . arfimeative when asi
whebhe e interested is

tell veat.intergsted the persone who 3

5]

7. soverelgety

by the presiding
cat)

g country oy

ned that joy Lebruéeing

The presiding Judge asked Powers whether he res lia
into the airspece of the Soviet Union he ¥ 3)
of the USSR. Bowers replied "ves, I did.” =
juice whether Le shought he had yenefited or harmed hy
his flight, Porers said he had harmed bis country &Te
The presiding Judge then asked vhether Powers thought that bis fligh®
could nave led to a military conflict. Powers replied: ‘phore WHC

gent me showld have thoognt apert that.” : :
; s
= epeatly regretted bls

Tn reply to anctaer question PaKers apid thet he are
aotiong. * a oF

ashinns by peoples assessor Aviation Hajar

ws Lb Tallowed that he had flown planes ot
wg in the air. Powers seid fast during
missile sabes

From the G@erendagt's answer

several types aud logged Beacy hou
preparations for his May 1 fligny possible Locations of
in the Soviet Union, pertain airfields, and some other things he aid

not mow Were indicated to hin.

When General Zakbarcv asked what ccurces of action hed neen planned is
ease cP encounter with Soviet #ighter -baanes Powers replied tnat He
Fou s al

had teen told that ther danger of this. Be giso said that the
‘plane carried no special devi b a2 aking fignter plane»
2

ies to let bie S66 an gitecRL :
But @ down-turties periscope renabled hin to see & plane if it appeared undies
the U-2. :

said that a special device to jam tacer and sign

fighter plenes and rockets was aetiveted on the place pefore

tave-of? May 1 and throughout his fhsget aver the Soviet Union. fee
Powers explained that he

reply toa question by a peopled assessor,
meant air-to-air rockets. 3

In reply to Generel wakharoy's question, Powers testified that dering
the May 1 flight he hed used the signals of two or trreé padic stations
in the Soviet Union. Powers further said that during night flights
along the berders of the Soviet Union he bad used adettional equipaent
instelled on the piace, but claimed he aid not know what xind of
equipment thet WES. Aas d ne

oor ta people's a5ae5

sor General
while ‘eigmd

Then the presiding jodge granthd the f
Vorciyey, ceneral Versbyey agked. Powers whether, ng the
eomtract with CIA, he was ware ar the nature of his future intelligence
ackivity. Fowers replied that he knew of the flights alone the border
of the Soviet Union. He was told that ne would proterly have to fuifilt
other sseignuoents 28 wail.

powers replied in the affirestive to Gineral yorobyer's question BS to
wheather while signing toe aontract far the second time he knew that he
would have to maxe Tiights over the Soviet Union. Je also replied in
the affirmative when asked whether he mew that these flights would ‘be
mde for intelligence purposes. Powers elaimed that. he thought that
we would nob have ta waka flights within she boundaries of the Soviet

Union. a .

gta re

4

ft s ee >
rs gong irmes that
5

4
‘
nize Purposes pat that

the c cmaand

around Lise boars on the morning of

Witness Petr Aasbin tes ui
Nay Lhe wes at home and neerd A youd noise, bize 4 jet plant, and Then

an explosiem. When Agabin © a up og the roof, 36, ag be said, Sav
4 dust pillar acne five kilogeters from the village. Ab phe S806 time,
he sighted a parachutist in the exy. Thinking thas it was some acerden?
and that she plloe was broubie and reedes help, Asabin ran 50

2 =
the spot where the paracnatist world lane.

a
-
=)
oC
ib

ten Asavin stated that he and witae

Chaghakin reached the parachutist ang he
reelized he was 4 foreigner since 4o their
ye replied in 4 girange language ani shook
wore B helmet with a white tcp, °F woich Wa

tnesses Suri, Cheregisia, and

A be im to hia feet. vhey
wastion of wheat bec ne ppened
The paracautis®

Asabin testifed that attached % the parechutist's pelt was a Lone-
warrelizd pistol and 4 waite, These weapons were resoved fro nim.

Asabin testified that he remesbered this parachutist quite weil. He:
was of more than medium height, strongly puilt, nig dark hair ewt anort,
and with some grey bair on the senples. He had a oole mm the nett ide
of his neck. Asavin tagbified that whe gGatained parachitist and
defendact Powers nc¥ pefore the court is the game Persces

—_

The presiding judge asked jf thera were any -questLons far the derense-
befense counsel Grinev asked if Powers yesisted or atteaptead to ote
pagtstanes woen he was beia aetagned. Witness Asabin repLied that he
aid uch, and that Le behaved calmly» =

The presiding judge essed the Sefendamt whether he had any questions -
Powers replied that be had no Questions. Asked by the presif ing jeage
whether he wandte: to mage ary vramarks eonacerning the witness! test Lacy ,
Bowers said thet the testimony waa true, He alse aie that he would
like to thank the witness for What he di@ for bim ay the time be wes
getained. Thia caused @ sviz in the bell,

villace, On the way there he meade signs that he wanted to driuk,

p
i

pirach
Sowhieh Was

. the paraahuts
vag loaded

j wtinke Arcuslay keen interzat =
ives of Zore.co eountried wha are pre
= the Hall of Coluere vas filied wi
rises, representatives of the intelligents
Jesters, and lewyers From many cOURTE aE + | ALL
by Soviet and foreign newomen.

re

Witness Cirahakin testified that when he and Cheraniain rath We to the
" & they sew that Asabin Was niready theres They Fel ei] the Plier
“Gp rejeased hin from his parachute harness, G-Oves, and mash, -
audi askel what pappened to wim. Eu he replied in & ianguage they
unerstani, Chushsitin said thet alerted hin. They seated the parachutist
4m the car and put the parechute, nelmet, and giores in the Lrunk.
Caushalcin peatified thas ther took tie perachusiss to a neigh> ring

Fis request Was gatigfied. The parachutist was then handed over to
security officiars. é

3

+

As tes 26 by witness Yiadimit Surin, on May’ 2 at L100 bours he
a loud noise, like & jet plane but shorper, end vent out inte tne great.
A Loud explosion 8s peard and Surin ssw a descending parachutist:

Wath Chughelkia, who drove wp in 8 ¢3F, they weot to the spot vhere th:

"y

yeard
:

parachutist was axpected to Jand, To help iin. When Surin, Cruchezin,
and Cheremisin ran Up to ‘the pesackebist they eav Peto Asabin standing
near the mate 7 ‘4

arin sata that someone asked the_parachutdes, wRae ned hapne
But he replied in @ language that Sura could not understand and shook
hig head, Surin and other witnesses suv that he was a foreigner and

deci@ed to detein him.

ae

ii AFTALES

wiseeg
GLa Se Se

met

aviet and panded ov

wihuded.

jitoute Tete: Mosse’ Tass Radiot pe ink lish to Evrope 4+
tor Aug. LP Canes the expert aa masses as Col. uy 2, Alexseyey,
dernces

Te. Gol. Y» Ve Tyutiin, docsor of technical 5¢
n, E A. Andreyev, yenior scientific

Anear Lt. Cols

eLor oF medical sciences

singer Lt. Co
yorirs TOV + ZUyey
. Brororevexy-

ao

id

he court that the cormasion af experts
tg and the flight map had @ Warse munkes
i Those daguments were aiviéed into three
satab lishing Powers ' identity: xy

the seal of the ug. Lefevre Depa sent, | :
a medical certificate issued in Poyers? name and indieasitg that he

served with the U.S. Air Force, to nartifieates giving hin she right

+o Ply Ppianes. This group of Socuments confirae that Powers bolLonged

to the U.S. Atv Forse.

2
OR

groups. ‘he first ere docubens
ineiuse pewers.' ID card. bear lie

They inc iude,

to the flight on Hay 1.
a from

flight map on yhoieh we rout
ef whien 4,70

The second group of documents refers
epecifically, separate parta of the
Peshawar to Norway, ® kotel of G,100 wilcmeters<*
liemeters are over the Soviet Union --Was marked.

Points in the Soviet Union over which Powers was
invelligencte equipment are marked along the. route om the ghert. The
3 4 ar, average gpeed

flight wes made along ® course Biatted an advance, &
of 750 kalosic .2PS _per how. :

The sane group of documents ine .uaes 23 af the fog paok,
jes meade ducing the flight, at m the synoptic chart,
ene rowse, whieb conPirus that the fligh=
apests of U.S. AL Force
serzitory of furope and the

with ante
yich a veecher forenust along
had been ‘thoroughly prepared, and four
aerouavigetional nherts Weick include the
ySsR anc geryed as reserve papers in casé of

forced landing.

eviation from the coute oF of

-”

Ee

weniios Lon of

. Col. Yurly
ho whether the downe
the U-2 Was rlaced. petore the commas)

a Ps

on Pox ansam inet ic

4 well geegerved on th

Colonel tyufilin said or
partioulariy ont ani Paselagt, Wee | - ea gurfage whico
4 experss 7 agtaplish whether tae a

ay meacually was: ing ¥ i
the U+2 plans do ontification mecks spe
thas they red never Doe

Powers triad to east aspersions on the findings of the expere

commisa ion and claimed that he allegedly sav jidentificasion marks on
all the U-2 plancs based at Incirlik. Es said he eould not BErse With
tha commission's conciueion. Ghe presiding jucge told Powers $bat i
vas his riget to egres oF disagree, but the axpert invastigation nad
srown that the U-g plene is qhich Powerd flow May 1 dia not buar
jéentification marks - ‘
Prof. Glev Istowia, aocter of engineering ecignces informed the
court of the commission's cong jus ions on tne ghotogrephis ‘ecnipment
found on the downed plene- Tstomin sada thet separate preken ,
elements of the gerial eemere. Film ¢s5es; and vila wer placed

before the goumiss ion.

a TE

fe

Tstomin said that the photographic gamera waa 4
focal Length, of the "73-3"
pistes gud, on the
that the

Tt was estorlished,
special wide-angle cAmeate wits a long
type. This name ie tris sevorad trade wack
pody of the cancers. also an inseriptics ghowhig

camera was anda in the United States -

The "73-B" is an intelligence serial camera, in dus tagtical and
technical specifications , Glevy Tetomin said. Ths camera is dus igmed
+o phetograth vast areas during @ flight. Te insures maLhicours®

_ photographing. During the Mey 1 Flight the photographing Was done
through seven batches , anvering ao Barca arvoss, tee course which
equalled almost each) KBLIPOMeTOTE »

ALOTORAL, AFPATES

permitted “EK
platy 7 tH 8, PHotes ge course of 3,500

vars, gtresged that » Long dans cowld take rela

Lover
ge ta doveraine ahe

The expert posted out thst carried nignly sensitive Filz,
intended for high altitude 1 men, wstomia sated
shat this film was in several weys superior to thet used in Anerican

recomnaissancs balleons.

The Pils u-e, in eaif, WAS devoelones, te
nmegeti ed and pridaed with the flight map. It was
Pound r veg carriid on along & course which bessn
west © touard Everdlovss. ne course of the
shotopr the route oa the flight map.

The deciphered photos, taken from some 21,000 meters, yielded certaio
iopelilgence information. They show iarge populated iealities,
industrial and military ohjectives, airports, antieir faciiicsies,

and depots. — :

The photographs made dusting the fiigb of the U-2, Iatomia pointed
out, sould be utilized for intelligence purposes: an@ eilso for compiling
cul, maps and rendering them more accurate.

The woudy of The «/ecxege of the U-2 aircraft and the aerial
paotography materials lead ta the conclusion that the equipment of
the U-2 was For intelligence enddts flight for “splonage;
Brofessor Istomin declared. ‘ &

&

dat

The expect findings om tae yadiotecinical. cquigment, presented to -
tha court by engineer Lt. Col. Rostislav Andreyev, snow that ell
toe radio u,iipment had the indexes "MP" (military procuromnt--TASS)

snd conventional musbers on thom? These indoxes ahow that the equipnen’

ig the property oP the v-5. Defense Tenartment and ia class.fied top georat.

The serisis, accerding to expert opinion, are typical of radio-
datelligence: instrumentation. Thay have the necessary wide bands
and can be vesmed toward yadiotechnical facilities.

The expert further reported that intelligence meter band receiver
MP 21048, which he axyamined, was am automatic intelligence eecelver.
Tes cirevis is typical of automatic radiolnteLligende reoaivers .

auagtapeg sae

a
re

= of the signals regiatered bY
Powers’ plene ghowed that they belonged
rong ana Longerange spoteing 62

Ainge the eperts Ge

ans Oe) aeri
fn their Das
tel

joatelt

for
vanpies. faciLit whe ort
Th is aise in ie) ermatica seo the 3%
aysten in andividval cities; pig ingustrial and administrative
and also qadividual pader and yediotechiical sha tions

a the antiaireraft defense sexvice-

compris in
This data was recorded ferrouagnetically + Th was aisecoversd that ahe tepe
eoviet Union's

contained signals of ground radar, gtetions of the
iadrovert defense radiolpention syatet. .

“4
ct
He
2

:
fF
2

At the end of the morning 925
Supr me Court, Whieh is heering the eriminel case
Fouers, menterr af the defendant's femily--Bis parents, is

and the percons eccompanying then--were given an ommertunity te vier
themeterial evidence whieh comricts Powers of esf2O0aCe and is anv iD
the qourtroctis j PL

ton of the military eollegimm of the USSR
or Ameriosin SPY pilot
Rye, Powers,

Lt, Gol. fonsiantin Yorosniior announced at the trial the anperts'
findings concerning the pistol and other acticles. Powers earried on
his May 2 flight. As & result of expert anyvestigetion it has been
esteniened that tae pistol sarried by Powers wes the letest type of
noiseless sidearm. tt has greah penetrating power and normal Tangs
and accuracy. ‘The trademarks and inseriptlons on the pisvel iniiea te
* 44 wad node In the nized States. Liewts ant Colonel yorosniley
jeciared that the features af the noiseless pistol taken from Powsrs
andicated it was not @ mmbing, or conventional personaly weapon eatried

Ry offi¢gers « =

Liew nant Colonel Yoroskiley aeclared that the pistol was designed for
noiseless ase on pumans. He added thet the 205 cartridges Ppovers had
carried could be used in the piatol. {he carurbiges were alsa of
Amentican melee . ‘ ‘
The expert ccumission bad also examined the five ampules end eylindrical
‘ein gontainer with tao Lids. Lieutenant Colonel Yorosbiloy said that
the ampules vere for use when it was necessary Tor & flame to DUET for 8
emmperatively long time on an object to set it on fire, and the .
oyLindrical box contained eombination day and night signal flares.

ane eae

wot

;
£
A
:

a re

opitac:
*

hd

~ BD 2 +

ang pe reac the instructions ;

asked tne court Te be ghoun the sipuie ar
a canpPrire.

Bp.
Powe
: wow Les: gupule was to be used to Light
% this the pepose of the aes

bed that tat pistol

‘
at an eliitude o* G8,000 feet.

Bnginges Gh. Gol. Fikulay Pura trey - Guyer reporved to the aourt the

experts * Fin CANES concerping the exouosive aearies Tounc io the U-2

wreckage. He said that qacnicel experts had egtapLisnes het the Gevice
xplos ive gyfostance and

Tt contained an ©

wes ingtalled near she cockpit. 2
detonating fsqilities. The zevice could be set of? fran the cockpit.

st gubstance ¥AS hewogeny

Ts has been egtabpLisned thet the explosive
imixed with?) wast. Phe total weiget ao? the explosive Was some ie} kiLegre:

As noted by the exper b, Rexogen Wes a yery powerful euplosive used by the
U.S, Arny. he quaxtity ef hexogen on the plane was quite enougn fo
aesiroy the sireratt, insieuments, and equipment f

The expert pointed out thet evistien bistery was canes where
explosive devires lixe the one the U-2 carried bed be: 3 in
civilian or military planer. “¥F ecplosive devices were installed, they
yere much w2aler and intended only +o wreck sperial instruments and
dndividveally iemportent sections « he explosive Sevice in the Yee,

Nikolay purmistroy-Buyev stressed, Was intended to destroy the entire

planes

pref, Yinter Procarovesiy, preninent Soviet specialist in forensic
meaicine, informed the aourt of the results af tne investigation oF
the poisoned pin with which FPovers was cupplied to commit auieide
in case af imprisonment. THistis an ordinery straight pin of White
metal with & head end 4 ghenpsend 13° 27-asliimeters,. in pens nas
illineter in aiameter.- =

The pin has & complex structure. It 36 pollaw inside except for the
sharp end. 4 neadie 1s inserted in the hollow, The needle can be
extracted by pulling the head of the pin with the fingers with sone
force, Deep, oblique grooves on the sharp end of tho needle are

completely movered With a jayer of sticky thick substance OF bravmish
eolor.

devoid of
nm installed 4

an i

and Lu

Be

: Pa Ms) ' uy 24 .

aad

UEERSAT IONS AFSATRS

1h, 1960

wel he
meade

4 the abe
> observed @ Sha

: ¢ 2230

Foe mouse Wes

sed thet analysis hed shown thet the needle 4
4. e eerie, 4
: ?

wre
wostance which, congizer jus action cn a4

3

t

a
“4
ur
es
as
a
+
|
a
a

a
4

copexties, can D2 placed in the curere groupes f

no
cho
gQ
Pome)

of al) snewn POULSCUEs
é

qt
ws
iy
re,
c
pe
ot
6

tn view of the vary high texielty ond pature of the aoiso

ypon animals, @5 yell as the relatively large apouit of this polsun on 1
the needle, the panel of forensic medicine etiperts considers phet ir
as in

nen was pricked with this oeedis, deeth would Follow 86 quickly
the case of anicels.

The presiding: dodge euncunead that the eourt bad decided te stmmon “s
Col, Ivan Zhdanove Colonel Biden said a speeial comissics had studied
the cape, photoes, apd other documents caken frog the American plane arter
its arash near grerélovsk. According to the commission's findings,
ghaancy said, the flight of the American piict is the U+2 Plane showed
that it was daliverate and peepared in advance Tor Sntelligence purposes.

Colonel Zoaancy further sadd chat the commission examined the cis. dee
stances and studied the eonfiscated documents. This provided ground
for tha conclusion that the Aserican J-2 plane was 4 specially equipped
aerial spy désigned to eross the boarders of the Soviet ,Uaicns The
purpose of the Plight wae to-recomnoiber military and fodustaial
anetabiations Jn important aread of the Sowhet Unions ;

Colonel Zhdaacv said thet among otaer thing® photographed we
and certain obner jagtallations which constitute siete and

of the Soviet Union.

5
.
ps
ot
to
Ww
td
al
fa
fe}
ta’
fi
wr
fa

This romded off the examination of the expexts &t 17kG houra, THE next

session WLLL begin Frisey; Aug. 19, && LOGO hours Moscow tine.

Wied ou ecnaaned Linsaiat te, Lala

|

itn

gp

an

woe aa fied

“gf tre Communi

eo

fae

ole
sovereign state,
shanze diplomatic :

oO) ocho fh

held « reception Aug mark
wsary of the PB
jusetes Mikoyeo, paitriy Polyanskiy,; @

of public organizations, geientists, and ou
were Ecreiga diplomats and newspapars corre
tag8, Englieh, Aud. LT, 4900, LY22 GMI--L}

anv

‘

SUSLOV-GCLLAN Ta ca--Miknail Sushov, @ oor of the Fresiatur
of the CPSU Central Committee, received Jot: Gollan, genera. secretary
nist Party of Great Britain, Aug. 17, During their talk, held
in a friendly atmosphere, they exchanged opinions on the urgent questions
of the imbernational labor and communis movement, (Text) tuoscow, TASS,
Singlish, Aug. a, 1900, 1605 GwI--L} : .

DELEGATION IN ETHEOPTA--David Cgbag2ys minister of sate for foreign

affairs of Ethiopia, last night received the dele ation of Soviet

journalist. headed vy T. cnpranberdyye? > secretary of the poarg of the
woe visLeing im Addis Anaba, During the

ry
+

ae
™

Unioa af Soviet Journalists, nar
ensuing friendly conversation the minigter noted with prafound gatidfaction
. relatious,

(mal-friendly Sov jet-Eihiopian

aspecially in the tothe Soviet Uaios of Haile
Selessia L, smperor of Ethiopia. The minister said thes the Ethiopian
people woulda be nappy to weleame the heed of the Sovie® Government,
Nikita En ughenev, and vers j king formard to his return visit
to Einiop.a. {Moacow, TASS, Eogiish, Aug. 16, 1960, 1340. CME--L)

the develorment of the traditi
period following the visit

wae er

wave

wnat

ie

3

ww

a Shed

ere ese

Ruvonean Serv ict in Buglish, Aug 2

prow in San dec:
om te GES 5, although mt
the U.S. actions, the U.d. 6
an policy apnroved by the

23
ch, ore
ad Ts

cr

out to have their a

~~ rf o ae:
and prepare the ground for new aggreasion against ©
georet that the United Staves hag an overwne ing i
organization, waien ia also Ss, eolon.e

it ie one - in Thig some nen, TE

minigters conferencé WRS aisousse: khe OAS ecmistee,

did not allow Cube's complain ut ite aggresaive aetions to be

in the egenda, although in the vrei] Mr. Zedge had insis' ad
that the compaaint ghowkd be di yged in the OAS.

i

As ig evidenced, Src Ug. press reports spe Uolted States nag failed %o
secure the support of Latin American eountries is sondemning $h¢ quban
Seyerment at the conference. The papern of these countries have 0%
forgotten that ooly six years ago the U.3. Government resorbed to
intervention and suppressed the natioaal Liberation novenent in guatemala.
That is why letin Amerieaa governments eannas disregard the fac> tnat bY
aporov ing ane U.S. intervention against Cubs toaey wokd crease 8 gregedent
weiech may in the future pe used by the United Sratee for open fyterference®
tn the internal affairs of any tatin american eountry- 2% 13 ult accidental
that several Latin Ameriaan nountries aid act recognize tae Monrot Doctrine,
which was aushored during the Vaat century and bas since pecome an

{ngtrument of U.S. dominetion in Latin America. iP

Taking into acsount the sentiments in Latta Rogrican countries, the United
States changed its taabies when drawing up the agenda of the conferanee
in dan dose. 1% decided to discuss the Guten queation in terns oF alleged
peneirabhion of international com aniim imbo Latin Ameries with the :
meat of the Gaoen

Thig talk about semmunist penetration ig shear nongenue. wee Tnited Ghates

4
tries to present any national Liberation moremeut aa comumist. The
rayolution in Egypt which qvershrew the Faro regime wart ALA declares
to kaye Ted Vited Pecan comma Tat penelrations “

eS ule

is
i
#

g alse

. pears

a

an) or
Pfeirs
the existence of Th eed

it ig impossible to davis
who side with Cuba and the Cuban sevobwt ion.
revolution their ow fuuume, free from bhe py
monopolies. ——

U.S. BUYS SPIES, SOLDIERS WITH MONEY

Wi

Moscow, Soviet Home Service, Aug. 17, 1960, 1200 GMI¥-L “ UNCLASSIFIED)

{mext) In his concluding speech at the Fifth dession of the wes
Sugrene Soviet, Comrade Khrushchev reported that the epy piidt Powers
reneived YOO doliers a month Giwing service in the U.G- Air Force, pus
when he vant over to Sncelligesice work--in other words 2 carry out Spy
jobs ccllacting secret informetiog--he started to get eys00 dollare

= month. This is how capital buy Life, Buys people, said

Nikita Sergeyevich. In this euauple, a8 in a arop of verter; We see
rerlected the Teasures of the qapitelist world, its wercentry oheracter «
Bverything is bovugat and sold there,even man's most preclons pogsese ions
mis Life.

RED p publishes an © nicle by candidate oF @corm

telling how cepital buys soldiers. Wo other yvord but "purchase" fences
desevibe the process by Which the wanks of: the U-5. arued forces are
filied, American imperialists are resorting more aml more to the aethod
ef bribing personnel in puilding up an obedient army, the methoe of speosal
material initiatives for soldiers and. officers fox enre ying out the
commands of the reactionary sop erass. nak

. : an : ;
Hot long ago; the gemiorficial orgen of the U.8. Departnen® of Defens¢,

_ for setting rich.

7
i

ober
G fy

ch

{6

neh an army creates in the soldiers and saliers, pought Tor money, the
fe of pDLindily obeying commands frou above: th makes it easy to train
servicemen a5 Kiliers, phunderers, and spies whe can be easly wbilised,

as nappened in Sowers! case, Tor aggressive ‘purpes 4 arpinst otner SEATtaS »

ita
A

y
ir

ant aad constant aeprehension for the morrcv,
5 5

Tremented ‘by unenpLoym Pp

ni iy, the army. The ARMY TIMES requierly F ints
2
2

many Americans seek reruge

righ

a big advertisement giving WO reasons why ix is 4 niageous for Americans
to serve in the arued forces, and ell these reasons poll down to one
ad

snove a wai ot dollars
a4

thing-~neney « gms of the ilivustrations in the .
with the capticn "This Is Your Zoney and You Wilt Receive It Reguiacly +
The paper co sidera that there is not and cannot be & more vWeLgnty

Argent

U.S. ruling cireles pay prime attention to the intens ith
> ib as .
intelligence activity. Gest sums are spent in acc eRe Ss

clauses (po seEretayn gtabyam) in venuneration for the s¢

subyarsionists, and agents. Me Tew York TIMES reported in May thet

Allen Dulles! Jeparament spends 2 biilion joliars yearhy on th8, maintenance
of wp to: 19,009 American spades, not inelnding man} Shousents cf foreig
AGen=S . : ; ; i “oe

4

the APLIY, NAVY, AND ATR FORCE REGISTER, printed an artifle with the plain
title: “The Army Needs More TotelLligence Men. and Agenté." Tae article
emphasizes the intensification of intelligence activity against the
Soviet Union and the people's democracies +

On the conditions of the pourgecis syetem, relations benresn people are
determined by the desixe for proPit, by mutnal distrust, by the desiré to
elimb, to get rich at other peoples" cipense. Capitaliat society Kills
the noble qualities in people, forcupts and defcams ¢he human soul.

Tt is in such a social system that nen Tike Powers appear; i¢ ig guch a
systen that is capable of bringing forth and that brings forth plundearers
and killers fur whi there is nothing sacred "bub money and the thirst
oe

a

ect aT
if
=
ww
a

usar THESRHAT TIONAL APP ATRS”
ms ne
Ane. 16, 1960

“oceow, Soviet oan Service, Gage 16, 1960, age GME--E ULOLAS Te 22}

wry arbiole: “qe Fentages Ta on the xoon}

Pr
fRapert oo fe

‘i

(fext) Eofore our ayes, GeTaguncy grites, the moot, Srom an object
of postry, 35 vapLlaly ‘pecoming 6 objec’ of soientific yeoesrch=
Yow, many BES waiting wits rapuure and impebience tre time #hen the

: first cosmonaut will step onto the surface of our natural gatellLite.
Wao wilh be this First pold explorer agyoting bis lite co ecience?

In the United States they nave geriously gOSsvVered bis questiote
Seienhists nave decided feo explore as followat/: A landing group Will
dand on Ghe moon and will jameadiately antrench shemselves sirosgly=
This is What representative of the U.S. war minissry Col. necnard -

Hageman seid. 28 ampnas Lace that they would bave $e atrtrench bat
in the arse of hoe dopammicus Crater, where (few words indistinct).

: Bet tn case oF ceed Jaseman bad tisser 76 axveas for antrencumen t+
: 7 The colonel was silent about further ideas of subsequent eventi«

: : fewever, coe must assume that tre lending group would then et up
eiroular cefense without fail, Then 2 Logical developaent would be
the building of trenchas, gugouts, and (passage indistinct} >
mhe United States, as the influential New York SIMES announced OF
dug. Ly, is choosing places for arly ‘pases On the MOK. The gssertica
of the paper refers to the statement by wat geeretery BMCeST >
Becretary Of Interior Seaton, snd the spov! -nentionedt Coldnel Basements

in the discussion of plans an active part is pert is aisc being,
played by Cols Lloyd Rali, head of the technical peconmalinsanc? ant
ghobograghic aepartiment of tie almy. His participatioe is)
absolutely essentials Tt ig notfor aobhing that they gay Fegaonnalssance |
jg the eves and ears of the amy." ;

in what treater should cue entrench oneself? On wha ridge should one

take up defense positions? and ahold there furD out to be inhabitants,

moon GQwellers, thea question arises abou 4 formal soldier's handeock,

_gueh ag “Mooniaa, Answer, or f Firep"” One must qsaume that 20 discussion

of where to put military bases OF the moon phese questicns were not

(oypassea?)- Grew words indistinct) were qualified and with great F
axperiercee One need only pamepber with whet geal they monthly: trails ‘3

”

é

ie ee égeores of landirg troops in Japso; Greece, Taiwan, everywhere
ie sg where they have military bases« By the way, in phese cases american =f
% ,
a ;

i soldiers are issued handbooks of qhich I spoka above~

we
