Meeting no 31 - Phase III-PARIS-20 Sept 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012412, dated 3 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012412).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Phase III ~ PARIS oe fay

Meetinz No» 31

20th September, 1961

: MD - Subject signalled properly in MOSCOW as directed on 19th September

s

at 21.50 hours indicating that he would arrive on the second day. Actually
he came on the following day, the 2Cin September, on the AEROFLOT flight,

@ TU~i04 via COPENHAGEN. TARRY met him at Le Bourget but did not approach
subject. Subject contacted TARRY outside the terminal end was driven by
him to his hotel, the Cayre. During this ride subject passed TARRY a
package of eleven cassettes of undevelovzed Minox film, the contents of which
were mentioned at the meeting later. TARRY notified Roger who picked up
the cassettes from TARKY ard sent them off via courier to LONDON for
processing. Roger instructed TARRY to drop off subject at 1930 hours on
the opposite side of the Solferino fcotoridge from the RV point at which
Like and George planned to pick up subtest by car. Subject crossed the
bridge to the RV point et exsoriiy 42.30 and he spotted George, He folloved
George along the river bonk tc the vart:d car and was driven to the safe

apartment arriving there at 19.50 hours,

7
a.
After preliminary heacar eroctinzs, during which subject presented
v ~ wes

~

Joseph, Hike and George witn coviar end a Georgian "Horn of Plenty" the
party waited for the arrival of Harold, who came about 20.20 hours from
Orly Airport where he had just arrived from LONDON, He was also presented

with the same gifts.

G.) Prior to Harold's arrival subject stated that his trip was delayed

until he had received his visa from the French on 19th September. His
T.D.Y. was authorised for tyenty-five (cys. He left his Travel Order with
us to be photographed, Subject enquired if his previously passed material |
via TASRY in MOSCOW turned out vell photographically ond he vas reassured

cnat it had.

veves/he

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

g UMAR 18

O#Z/
ade

«) Se: In the KREMDEVKA telephone directory it states that only secret
material may be discussed but not Top Secret. Of course, this doesn't mean
a’ thing and they speak of Top Secret mitters because who can classify
mentally where the borderline is,

6.) At this point subject vas introduced to Roger and subject presented
Roger with a jar of caviar. Ee also brought a package of select cigarettes
and caviar for Janet in the event that she would be in PARIS, ° During the
toasting with wine, while waiting for Harold, subject stated that his wife

was expecting in seven months and was culy congratulated,

S.: This is exactly the fifth month anniversary of our having met
on the 20th April. I vant to wait for Parola so I will not repeat myself,

but I have mich significant material to tell you about, some of which comes
directly from the mouths of MALTNOVSYY ana a prominent worker of the Central
Committee, CHURAYEV. I regret that I aid not have a small tape recorder,
as I could have given you the tere just like the film cassettes, It would
have saved me much work but I tried to remember exactly what was said and
have written it down. The situation ovar 211 looks very bad. This old
man is striving to accomplish some fontastic coup during his lifetime.
KHRUSHCHEV 4s stirring up all of the trouble that there is. He is the
instigator of everything, Ee is the formiator and the executor of all
this dirty business and adventurisem, If he died or was killed it would

fe ger Aden ta qe -
relieve end change the situation considerably, a it seems that he knows he
has not many years to live enc he wants to do something like a maniac » which

stems from his scnility.

‘¢ “hile we are waiting, let me rencrt on what I have photographed.
I have photographed the card index lists shich | include the military manuals |
and regulations of the U.S.A. » Great Britain, France, Federal Germany and
a little on Italy, There vere about iCO items listed, At ‘eee
you only a few extracted titles as a guidc> for the article I wanted you to

qi-cie , :
prepare for me, but reecutly I had the opportunity of photographing the ey ge

eeee./vhole card

. a ou 38 oe oe eee
-~3- i ee ee aS

whole cara file and this included about a hundred items, 1 did this at
GRU. I laid out the lists and took up to three shots of each one according
to what would fit in the exposure frame. Now you ¢an sélect any theme for _

mm.

G.: Will all of those manuals be available to you a8 a reference ;

the future? °

8.: Absolutely. Any one of them at any time. . Mt é0 as to kak: a |
for an item by our catalogue index number. 7 : a

Get. On which country were there the most materials? ae . : a

S.: The majority were on U.S.A., then on England and the Federal as
Republic. There wes less on France and only a little on Italy, I only
photographed the materials which were dated 1958, 1959 and 1960 because the s
older ones such as 1952 or 1955 are already obsolete. I would say that the
sources producing this are located in neutral countries such as the sergeant

in Ceylon about whom I spoke before.

Me: What else did you photograph?

Se: I photographed all remaining articles completely in the first

two issues of the sbomil te for both the years tee and 1961. In addition. a

| to this I photographea « some new w articles (there. were three issues of the © Bees
. sbornik in 1960 end thus far i in "4964 . ‘there may be another issue » the ‘fourth, ?
in 1961 which has not yet been published), In addition I photographed _ se
artillery articles which evened: esoastis: ee computations and artillery : ts var
reconnaissance. There were four articles and I covered those published . |
in 1958, 1959 and 1960 on the above subjects, but there were many, many more =
which I have not yet photographed. I did not yet have a chance to get ny cs
hands on strategic intelligence lectures at GRU. I useda total of eleven | as
cassettes for all this photography and I have left exactly forty cassettes, 2

Ge: You photographed the sbornik articles at GRU, but where did you &

saat ated the artillery articles?
Se: At VARENTsOV's Headquarters. At that place I was worried

because a ray of light was coming through the window vhen I photographed,

erry I could not

.? ae P

I could not go closer to the window for fear that someone would spot me and
in moving back it was too Caric, There could be a sunspot on the pe and
I would like to know if they come out clear, JI also photographed the
telephone directory of the Soviet Government,

Ge: Do not many people also appear in the KREMLEVKA?

S.: Yes, but the KRELLSVKA has many other lower officials in it.

“: Se: . at: necessary I éotlda Te-photogrash them’ “put 2 hate *» repeat,

Ges We will see how ey coms out but it seems that they may be

legible because you had a sunspot on several sheets of your last photography

but it could be read,

10, S.: I have two cassettes which cover the proposed plan of the
Committee for sending delegations all over the world during the first quarter
of 1962, This shoulda be of great interest because it states exactly from
which organisation how many individuals are designated for each delegation;

e.g. from the Ministry of Defence ¢, from the Committee on Electronics etc,

wim tb:

an It designates all of their postal nimbers and categories “of specialists.
That is all of my photography, but in addition I stole our Committee telephone
directory and passed it to you. There vere nine hundred copies published,

. Ge: Have any officers such as yourself been designated as memberg
or the delegations you mention?

Se: Mo. No-one is mentioned by name, All ‘that is state is that

Onz Or more people from our Conmnittce will te sent in such and such a
Czlegation and similerly a nurber of perscns from all other scientific or
industrial organisations, That is the formulated and approved plan but the
peimibanor will be selected later, ‘ es

11. G.: That are your om future prospects now?

Se: It all depends on the Sues tude of the Central Conmittee, Just

prior to this trip they reavested a nev (Kharakteristika) on
m3. There has even been 2 Prorssal approved ty tro ceherals in GRU that
I be sent for a tour to TASER IOON as a Counsellor, However, all this

Cepends on the Central Conmnittec,

Ge: That slot woulda Shis be?

weceseec/So: GRU of course, i,

S.: GRU of course. ‘Two generals called m to talk about it but
how at would go on from there will cep2nd how they regard the story of my
father. I have only come on this trip because no negative statements were
submitted by the "neighbours" against me personally. In addition I had
some good results from my last trip and received a commendation, They say
that I can produce some results ani that I make a good effort and in addition
I bring them presents, about which I will tell you later.

Me: What did your wife say when you vere coming here?

S.: She was crying end screarting because she speaks French and
she would be in Seventh Heaven here.

Ge: . Yho vrote up your Iharalcteristika?

Se? I read it, GRU vrote it up and submitted it to the Central
Committee, They merely called up GVISNIANI ana he said on the telephone

that he agreed that I should be sent.

(12,) So: Even though the situction looks very bad I am very glad that
our governments have displayed such firmmess end decisiveness. The Soviets
did not expect such a firm stand, This has placed them in a position of
concern and HIKOYAN dees not set aleng at all with KHRUSHCHEV. They are

_ still not sure of themselves end they know they do not have everything that

yeep]

they need. They can launch a/nuclsar attack and destroy several cities
and 10 million people but thet will not solve all of their problems. fT
won't go into that now and jump nrcund from one topic to another, I will wait

till Harolcé comes.

Se: We can worl: tonisht until we become tired and tomorrow at 0900
hovrs I ust be at the Embassy where I must have a talk with the Rezident,
a Gen. Maior. Today I sccke to the Deputy Rezident Colonel KUDRYAVTISEV,
who is alco the Counsellor for Scierce end technology. Ye will review my
missions ond plans here and after that I will be free. I will be here for
twenty-five days and here are my oriers, You cen photograph them.
Incigentally among the films which ZT posed today there is an elaboration
of my missions for this trip. They urs ell written out on two pages and
I photographed them, This vos sigsced by Gen. Liceul Povov, using the

pseudonym DCSE0V. I will need a lot of help from you to accomplish ny

af

A 3h

er ae
missions since I must come back with something substantial,

Ge: What is difficult to see is on vhat basis your headquarters
expected you to make ccntacts here and accomplish your missions when you
don't have the French lanmece,

Se: They consider that 90% of the French businessmen kmow the
English language at least to some degree. I have been at the French
exposition in MOSCOY ané at the reception at their Embassy, but I have few

acquaintances,

Ez) 8.3: “ith respect to this little book written by BUZINOV which I
sent you, if you could work up a similor article for me and with a preface
ey Voytuigoler
such as he made I could sinsly take a girl in the translation office, and

A
check her translation into Rusz:ian end submit the work which vould be to my
crecit. However, it would be a simple mtter now for me to submit an article
using any of the manuals, cf schich I heave photographed thse titles as a
reference. My contacts and relations with peczle, such as with SEROV about
whom I will report later, ars setting on so well now that possibly by the
end of next year they may rssonmend me for promotion to General. Whether .

they would give it to ms or not is exother matter, but the recommendation

would be socd to have on my record,

(5,) At this moment Harold entered and was warmly greeted by subject,

Se: Fine, let us start to worl: now, we have a lot to do. I will

try to tell you everything accurately, but of course you will have questions
on everything I report and it risht tehe the next two meetings to clarify
them, Let me review - I have rass2d cleven cessettes. I have photographed
completely all the articles in all the sborniks vhich I k-ve begun before,
for 1960 ané 1961. ‘There are also nev articles in additional ae for
1960 end 1961. I also Pees ee peep eee ab Ries as Artillery
Journals; they came froin 1958, 1959 and 1960, I included 1958 tecause I
found there an article on gsod:tie preraratlon for rocket forces. There

are many other artillery articles whieh I wtil photograph in the future end

I also have issue No.3 to photosrarhn of the sbomiilk ef the Voyennsya Mysl'

for both 1960 and 1961 and there igy bo a fourth desue in 1964,

Are eey A 17. ie

#3)
ey a

S.: Now I will relate te you the report which I have prepared and
which you should immediately report to your superiors, VARENTsOV's birthday
party was celebrated not on the 15th but on Saturday 16th in order to permit
more time, On the 15th September at 0900 hours I met VARENTSOV at the
Leningrad Railroad station where he had just arrived from LENINGRAD,

After having left you I had given him his razor but on the 4 5th at the

railroad station I brought him a packeze containing the cornac, about which
bo Rogrt we thwwr Tauresy fv yw,

I will tell you in a moment, and which hos creat simificance, as well as

the rocket-shaped lighter and the cigarette box with inscriptions thereon,
He kissed me as he greeted me at the station. He was also met there by
General Lieut. VOZNESSIISKIY and General Lieut. NIKOLAYEV. VARENT sOV haat
been in LENINGRAD because a Party con*erence was held there and he was elected
as the delegate to the 22nd Party Oo sctess, and very probably VARENTSOV at

this 22nd Party Congress \i1l be elccted a member of the Central Comittee

of the CPSU. He will be elected as a cendidate or a member of the CC, in

other words he will receive 2 promotion along the Party line. Having given

him the packages I went to the Cormittce, whose car I had at my disposal,

an
o

while he went to his Directorate there he was greeted and where a ceremony
took place in which he was averded the Order of Lenin. He told me to be

sure to come on the 16th et 16,00 hours together with my entire family,
including my daughter and aerren to his dacha. ' He said that he had invited
many people but many would not be thers because they were out of town concerned

with military matters. “ho and with that military matters I will relate in

& moment.

Se: He said that the Minister : WALINOVEY would be there and CHURAYEV
=p
Viktcy Mikhailovich, who is a member of the canes Committee and the Head
[iene tac

of tha Party organisaticn of the RFSFR ~ one of HHRUSHOHEV ‘s right hand men,
Gen. Folk. FOMIN will be there, Gen. Polk, SALSONOY » Gen. Fol. GS. KARIOFILLI,
RYABCHIFOV, a Professor of Chemistry and Lieut, Gen, SaLENOV, who was

VARENT CO's Deputy on the First Ukrainian Front, Incidentally one of
VAREKTSOV''s tzo present Geputice, the one tho replaced COrF2 is also Gen,

Lieut. SHENOY, that is a nersenke of the ether. Ina rorent I ti11 tell

eeee/you the details

3 /
= Ge

you the details of the party. Since I left you in England I have hed the

opportunity of spealing with VARENTsSOV, ZASORIN, BUZINOV and many others,
eh ig what I mist relate te vou ak ones,

S.: In the beginning of Octoker this year there will begin extensive

e

Strealtyag on

general (vse-obshchiye) manozuvres. There were never such manoeuvres in

the history of the Soviet Arce This is bee cause all headquarters of all

militery districts will participate and slso all headquarters of groups of
forces, Even all rear serviecs in the military districts will participate
in these mnoeuvres,. In other words every ae foviatilicn will execute its
assigned mission in thess ranczuvres futt as they would be called upon to do
in case there was a war. In addition all headquarters of all countries of
People's Democracies will also take part in these manoeuvres, These
strategic manoeuvres will tevin in early October and will take place
throughout the entire US&R cné throughout all of the countries of People's

Democracies all based on covhattine e. hyoothetical enemy in the direction

of Germany.

20. Set I wil] now try to expinin to you in detail vhy these manoeuvres
will take place end whet their objective is. Later I will tell you who,
why end when Save me this information. These manceuvies are called strategic
bectuse they involve very great pase Ltorial depth and all military districts
and #11 groups of forces vill verticipate as well as all the headquarters of
the ccuntries of the People's Democracies, These manoeuvres will continue
VPgo OF
for 2 period ob A Tanth. tne ebgective of these manoeuvres is to examine
everything as a whole and to determine what units heve specific capabilities,
They will examine who can best fulfil offensive missions shock action,
defensive operations and to exemine the state of training and combat
readiness of 21] units, as vell as their joint action, Through these
manoeuvres deficiencies in training can be corrected and experience in joint
operations gained. Put this is only one purpose, the second purpose is to

have these huge forces in « state of combat rea@iness exactly at the time

*

walticin owe a + pe aca ha th, ce,

thet the Peace Treaty vith In-:it Gerreny vill be sired, so bee if. any SZ
difficulties occur issrtistely uf eee
be in a position to strit-- a huovy low In other wer3n what KRUSECHSV
rants to do is to backstop with actuel large-sesle military preptrations

seen /enmoutl aoed

ee pit) JA nasal m4 tft
yn’

a

Rae . | “f 7 3/

t
‘9
t

campiflared as manoeuvres his sismming of the Peace Treaty with East Germany,

Se: IARUSHCHEY considers thas if NATO syzllows the second pill and
& considers that the first pill, which was the closing of the borders of
East and West Berlin, has already been ewolloved, ~ that is the action of
15th August - incicantally, I Imew abcut this closing four days petbelas the
fact and I wanted to pass this “cformstion on to you but had no mans for
| doing this, since the Prone call arrenrerent ms only sood fox Monday and
this took place on a different Gayo I did not vant to risk putting the.
information into the dead drop end calling by chance, Te will have to work
out a system that will perrit me to pess critical tnt ova bica to you quickly
in future.

Se: KHRUSHCHEY, his Certzrel Committee and his government plan to do

this - on the 47th October to open the 22nd Party Congress, This conference

?

tT? sculda call Cenfcerenes “Acicecasive", Phat is because a very aggressive

a

attitude will be prevalent, 211 sorts of propeganda speeches are being
prepared asiting decisive action against imperialism and colonialism, Ana

by firing up the Congress with such syceches KHRUSECHEV hopes to untie his
honds for aggressive action by placing the responsibility for the decisions
suuich support KHRUSHCHEY ana his sovermront's positicn on the Congress. Even
if a var takes place after the Congrezs, KIRUSSCEEV can refer to this situation
as a decision of the Congress, Sor Bolsheviks the Congress represents their
programne foe the immediate future. ATT secretaries of Central Committees
will be present at this congress as vell as secretaries of the Farties of
other People's Democracies and Ce:iamnist Parties from capitalist countries

as well, mony of the latter will cone fseretly, It will be of interest to
see how the Communist leaders threughouts the world react to the concept of
military action at this time as proposed by the leading Communist Party,
namely that of the Soviet Union. I suggest for your consideration and that
cf our leaders hov advantaceous it would Le to introcuce some sort of split in

views at this congress, It is inortant that there be no unanimity of views

betrveen all of the Communist leagers of the various countrics,
250 S.:  Alsmady there have been orders issueé thet during the month of

eee ./Cotober no of

eee Moe:
mony

+
ahs . rot. -
Shr tee eg 8 oe Rem NEE ON OF BY Hic gett elles 8 bee POD ny tier Wat vpeud a alee

Pa ern ed

re a ce os

~ 10 =

October ne foreigners should be admitted to the Soviet Union, » All MOSCOW

hotels are now being retained for the use of Central Committee members and : ;
Party delegates. They are even fumi gating the rooms to be sure that ae

foreigners previously living there have not left pacteriological contamination, sf
Even in our Committee we have turned down all requests for foreign visitors ; ee
during the month of October by saying there is no room, and that they will be : ae
busy with the Party Gongrese, This will continue until the 15th November” c us

since many Party delegates will stay after the Congiens to attend the

celebration and parade of 7th November, In addition they are now ene a
to set up very strict Sountee intelligence procedures in MOSCOW end the Voscow a
oblast during this time, Therefore, I request you to have all of our agent ak
operations in MOSCOW suspend activity during this period, Tt wii be very: ae
difficult to work in MOSCOW during this time and the KGB from other ‘olties

have also been called in, | :. aid ee

S.: Let me review. Immediately after the Party Conference

KHRUSHCHEV wants to sign the Peace Treaty; at the time of the signing he

N
law Tae be
Sn Sete ede ety BY

af . Seat Se aa
cu Ee te a
whe lees wie elimes, “bee

wants to have alt possible military units in a state’ of ecaee readiness. _
If necessary he will strike. If it is only a local attack by us then at

will be parried, but of course if a lerger conflict develops that is why ae
combat readiness is needed, KURUSHCHEV, our General Staff and the GRU mow *”
prefectly well ‘that secret preparations in modern times are not possible ane. he
to intelligence techniques. But under the pares of manoeuvres, concerning i
which he will insist that they are only MANCCUVTES their extent and | duration :
can easily be extended, if the allies swallow the second pill and ey. a
"very well since you have signed a treaty with East Germany we will deal with a
East Germany", then the strain will be relieved and the manoeuvres will oN

terminate and the result of these will still serve as a valuable training ~
exercise for joint operations. If not the oe is still ary and military a
action can be employed. This is the dual purpose for which these manoeuvres

are planned for the early days of October,

3 S.: Right now MOSCOY is boiling with all kinds of representatives

from the hesdquarters of the countries of People's Democracies » both in

oseee/military and

vA

GT on

military and oivilian dress, I have seen them everywhere and anyone ean spot
‘them, Secondly, all prominent military commanders are in the field with .
troops, for example, at VARENTSOV's birthday party his deputy PRSCY was not

present.

S.: There are two deputies, PYRSKIY and SEMENOV, who replaced COFFE.
PYRSKIY is now at NOVAYA ZEMLY{A where they are expatinenting with atomic ye # fey
detonations. There is a large base there on which are rockets with atomic 4
warheads, the details of which I will give you shortly. ‘The other deputy 3
SELENOV is now attending the atomic bomb tests in Central Asia, Here is how
I found this out. At VARENTsOV's party, Viktor Mikhailovich CHURAYEV asked *
VASENTSOV ~ where is PYRSKIY? and HALINOVSKY said that PYRSKIY is doing a
fine job in running | the tests and the training programme at NovATA ZEMLYA,

. Se: I can now report to you about the atomic tests being conducted |

now since KHRUSHCIEVY felt thet it was impossible for him not to run these oe

tests. These tests have two phases; in the past years the first phase - ws :
consisted of testing the in@ividual TNT equivalent weapons. Teey were raised’

on towers, from masts and dropped from aircraft. ee now ‘KERUSHCHEV and hi

military commanders ere testing nuclear err es delivered by rockets. i
This is phase II. These tests are conducted by means of firing a& rocket |
with a conventional charge eemangt the selected target and then assenblying |
an atomic warhead and firing it against the same target. Both MALINOVSKE: ace
and VARENTSOV answered CHURAYEV that Gen, Polk. PYRSKIY is now at NOVAYA :
ZELLYA running the tests and will continue to remain there because there walt a

be additional tests.

S.: There is a huge rocket launching base at NOVAYA ZEMLYA which is

aquivpad to fire the R-12 and the R-14 rockets. There are no R~i1s there}.
this was all told to me by BUZINOV. Now with respect to these rockets the ">
R-12 is already adopted and is being serielly produced, Its range is two and
a half thousand iireusies. . The J R414 is now being prepared for serial e os
production but it has not vet been produced a8 quantity. The range of the

ree

R-14. is four and a half thousand kilomet Fee “Both ranges I have given ere
those for tnese Pockets carrying an atomic rurhead, Of course the ranges
are greater with eran ttewe varheads,.

4

v

. @oese Gs 2 Approximately :

a» 12 =

G.: . Approximately how mich greater would the range for rockets with F oo
conventional warheads te? on vee

S.: They should be about twice the range of akeuilic shiens ‘rockets hes

29. Se: . Before we proceed further let us look at the conclusions we can

w about KHRUSHCHEV's plan to have troops in combat readiness for either
one or the other eventuality after he signs a peace treaty with East Germany.
I will try to draw three conclusions concerning these preparations, - First
of all he is preparing nine armies as I reported in and adjacent to the
immediate East German theatre and now he has ordered a penth army to that
area about which I will tell you shortly. ' ‘This overall area includes East —
Germany itself and the areas immediately adjacent to it. In East Geney
itself there are only two armies but the others are nearby in a supporting
role. This first purpose is to frighten us. However, if the commune at
world expresses complete approval et the Congress for his policy ‘na he also
feels that world opinion is with him he may strike us. He wants ‘to take ae
advontage of any indecision on the part of the Free World and my actually
attack the leaders which are the United States and England. He does not
have all available means for carrying through such a strike to a final
conclusion, ‘The military people lmow this but they act meekly before
KHRUSHCHEV. And if he orders the beginning of hostilities they will seneay: : *

(At this point subject was asked to halt because the tape was to be changed) .«

/ 30. Ge: Before you continue ve would like you to state who your sources . :
were for all of the information you have given us, by individual item. ©
Se: I suggest that you take notes on the items I report and ask me
to clarify them later. Now regarding PYRSKIY that came out of the
conversation brought up by CHURAYEV who asked where is PYRSKIY and he was
answered by MALINOVSKY and VARENTsOV. BUZINOV told me about the R-12 and
the R-the ALL rocket materials of VARENTSOV's concern passed through his
hands, he told me that certain officcrs were at various bases seats there are
rocket launching sites, I will list these for you in a moment. These
officers have all been sent to the bases as representatives of VARENT sOV and.
similarly there are representatives of MOSKAL™ SNKO there where the bases have
@ strategic designation. In addition in conversation with VARENTsOV he

7 > : : sense ./mentioned . “}

-~43-

mentioned a number of times that the R-12 a R~14, rockets exist. With .
respect to the Party Congress and preparations therefore all had sonething

to say about this, so I am not singling out any one source,

(a) Ges Was KHRUSHCHEV criticised by anyone at this birthday party?
S.: No, they drank a toast to him, ‘They are all people placed in
their positions by KHRUSHCHEV. ee

32. (Subject now showed his list of the 89 members of various delegations

who were tentatively selected to go to PARIS during the Exhibition and who
were the people processed by subject into. delegations which he would meet in

PARIS). §: You see the ones crossed out in red have allready been approved af

for travel here but out of this group of 89 probably no more than 20 will |
actually come, In four or five days I will meet one &roup and arrange for
their hotel and itinerary together with the Assistant Rezident who is |
responsible for science and technolory,

Jo:  Woen will the Exhibition close?

S.: 5th October.

Jes Will you be tied up with your delegation as you were with the - 2

‘§roup in England? : aor . : ee ee

S.:, Nog Not at all, I will just meet with them and arrange things. .
for them, but you will have to help me with my missions. I do not know :

anybody here and a lot of my essignments will fall on your shoulders, , .

ow So: Let me give you the exact einer ieee under which these

conversations took place. we all got topether at 16.00 hours on 16th

°

.

September at BABUSHKINO. when I cam: there with my family RYABCHIKOV, the ©

Professor of Chemistry was already there. (VARENTSOV had been on vacation © "

with him previously.at BADEN). Then Gen. Lieut, SEMENOV came, then Gens

Polk, FOMIN, then the Minister MALINOVSKY came with his wife. The presents

~

we brought were the best nel most sensible cf the lot. _ MALINOVSKY brought
& magnum of champagne and also a big cake shaped like the Horn of Plenty.
CHURAYEV brought a large wooden eagle on a stand, VARENTSOV said that ;

my boy (me) had really tried to co everything “from his heart. I wanted to

eee -/tell him
| 10

boy ae he &: 5 a S. te iB
ne es er Tee bas teeter OPER? Aes ore ads arty : wat ge ttre
Lee. lea a NS,

tas

Bes

Bn oe ee Sale ethene eet eee tet eet Eo!

?

tell him that there were five boys doing this. MALTNOVSKY and coRANE
arrived in Ghailes, there were el] kinds of Zims there and guards, ; “te took.
@ walk in. thé camten and then came to the table. The only one in ‘uniform - 4
was the Minister and when I was “presented to him he asked if I aign'+ have a. ‘
"relative in the Far East, to which I replied that I had @ shirt-tail ee 9
of sorts, . VARENTsOV said to MALINOVSKY that I was one of SEROV's boys. d
MALINOVSKY's wife is a pretty woman and her name is Raisa Yakovlevna hereaa
he is Rodion Yakovlevich and my mother's name is Taisa Yakovlevna. . When .
we sat down VARENTSOV told me to do the honours so I épensd our eopneds - reo
turned out to be out of this world (60 years o14). The Minister vented to A
drink only that conte. ‘ I made it gO around for everyone ee ‘tinea :
hovever, I gave full glasses only to the Minister, VARENTSOV, s onuRAEY and :
myself. They ees to feel tipsy after the first Peand Lacaise’ the iinister e
made a toast to VARENTsOV and everyone drank bottoms Upe the cognac was BO oe
good and everyone was so delighted with it that they talked about at for aif. ;

an hour, out of the six hours that the party lasted. — op? ee. Sate Q |

8: After that there were toasts by VARENTSOV and SEMENOV and finally”:
it came to me. I remembered that no-one mentioned the fact thet VARENT sOV . :
had just been presented with the Order of Lenin. So I said that I Sroceest
to drink a toast of congratulations to Sergei Sergeievich for his having been. as
the recipient of ths highest governmental avard, the Order of Lenin. : As deine
began to applaud I thought I would pull a fast one on the Minister, BO - _? )
continued by saying that this award represents the high esteem for ee reet

Sergeievich by the Party, the Government and personally by the Minister of

Defence, After that he beamed png. I could talk to him asa Comrade.

He continued to drink copnec in sips all along and then requested that roe 7 i
bottle of champagne be opened and all drank champagne. The others were :
drinking other cognac and vodka and frankly the other cognac was junk,

CHURAYEV, about whom I will give you details Tatar drank a lot and Wes getting : -
tipsy. After this the men went to the next room to smoke and I Jeapt my ears ‘

open as you would expect en intelligence officer to do.
ase aoest

S.: Even my mother innocently contributed to the conversation by

asking the Minister if there will be 2 war, The Minister replied that it

sy ; : éeaeur is hard to Ge |
, i ve t its

“45 =

is hard to say and that he dces aot even went to talk about it because he has .

to think about it all the time, namely, will there be one or not. However,

I can say that the situation is difficult (polozheniye' tyazheloye). Our ~

enemies are not giving in to us although st is true that they have svallowed |

one pill, ‘Ye handled this one vell (sealing of East-Yest Berlin border) but
how will 4t be in the future. - All I can say is that we are keeping
everything in readiness. This was really a general question for all to hear

the answer to,

WA 5.3 Later. CHURAYSV who was drinking a lot and seemed to be a good
fellow, called me aside and asked me to get him all kinds of things here,

. which you will have to help ma with, and he said many things about which I
Will report later, I have twenty-six items here and thus far I have only
covered two (Note: on his acsenda). Others also asked qusettona; but. Ir
did not, I had to keep modest end ren around pouring drinks. ‘We continued

‘later to drink tea and eat fruit and MALINOVSKY was the first to leave because
he had to fly on the next day at 10.00 hours to LVOV. On Monday there was .
to be a Party meeting there and he vas to be elected as the delegate ‘to the
22nd Congress from there and in addition he had to review matters of military

training in relation to the coming manoeuvres.
a

S.: <All high ranking commanders are concerned with preparations for
these manoeuvres. VARENTsOV is constantly travelling as well as all other

big commanders, and they are very seriously training and preparing for these

manoeuvres. Peginning with the headquarters in MOSCOv, all other headquarters

throughout the land are also busily engared in this. ‘We must pay particular
attention to these manceuvres and study all developments by all means at ‘our
6isposal. These manoeuvres Will involve political censiderations affecting
the entire world and they serve as the military becking for the policy
KARUGECHEV is trying to push through, I have already reported to you what
their objective is and have not only told you where I found out but
confirmation of this on a Ryall scale is evident everywhere in the GRU where

every little officer has his ovm small mission to perform in support of this.

/ *
eooee/hepresentatives

78
|
oa
{

r
'

‘

I

|
|
a
|
'
:
|
=
|
;
i

= 16 - . — |
|
if

Repreeentatives from both VAUEIYstyu ond MOSKALTHNKO are ecnstantly sitting
at the rocket bases since these bases have now been supplied with atomic

varhoadg. — |
Then exoctly will these :2acecuvres begin in October?

Fotueen the 3rd and the 5th and will continue untal the end of

the month. On the 17¢a the Party Cenpresn begins and efter that will be the

sissine cf a Pence Treaty fy this tise the mnocuvres will have gone into

“ye

gome advanced pns

to detercine vhether the troars vill continue to stand at comknt readiness or

af thoy vill terdnate the mancsuvres. I rill continue to report, to you

en ke wre @

to vhat extent this vill ta:e rlacs Svorrthing is not established in a

ELL be combat ready. At least they

|

|

al

ase and the world situatica at that coment will be the factor |
porfect way, bit to iouo cegiee thoy wlll
|

|

vill net have to drag cub seliiers tr the ears froa the garrisons, since they
will siready be in ezrtain deployrunts depen ding on vhat phase of manoeuvres

<

they have reached, This is tho cimiviconee of manoeuvres end this 4s that

£, Soni Some aa

Jo must exnect Tree thine

, / 33. Se: Asa staff offiear of our co onmand allI can suggest ‘is that we
pointing to the argressive nature of KHRUSLUCHEV

H
fox bepin a propaganda car rein '
gna the co:ing Party Congress to ctiow that we are not @eluded, Kany effective ©
counter weesur:s can be talon and from vhat I read about firmmess expressed
vy the Tent I Imow that vais is cousing: HINUSHCUNY anxiety. Your leaders

should take full ceminance cf shot I kave reported ree rarding, these manocuvress

Se Spi ee eo ee eee et ces 2

thoy showld cheek from other csurecs vit I kevo said and take appropriate

comter measures, the nature of vinich is of course their business. :

3530 Se: New both fri: foocrments ond fron ecayercations I have Al souyerwa

‘hore there ere reeliet Lawrciing chien about thes I vill tell you, They

te

have atemic tarhesds avelivhie there. I reutionsd alrency NGVAYA ZENETA

hore FURGHTY is sintic:.c: Whe won Gis is NORILSH, there is a base in that

areas) then in Fr JOSIE Land, bo. Dodo not hnew the ex.ct Location.

In the area of the town ef Vu Mera, Hane sre ie morvhom: bacoge In the

South tide ds rlab These fow:d ows da (ubPL Ling your mission assirncd to
couver went I could about ree'ish Levnechine sites. The ara of

Frye

MRAMUOVONAR and also in the arca cf ZIROVALAD. ‘Suece face Tran 2.4 Toscistan

aides, pace

Sten tn the

Also in the South, literally tvo days ago we were getting permission for a a. ny
Japanese seuntyeisint: - his name is SATA (probably SATO) - to show him the >
island of ARTEVA which is near BAXU. He was concerned with the technique iia
of producing oil under water. Our committee submitted a request to ‘the

Ceneral Staff and we received a paper with an official Top Secret answer to

the effect that no foreigner my be admitted to the island of ARTEMA. “There oy
is a rocket pase there. Either it is a PVO place or a rocket Launching ihe

Snstallation.

40. S.: There are elso atomic tests being conducted in Central Asia.

Theat is where SSMENOV, the second dematy to VARENTSOV is sitting. t do not

lmow who the officers are from HOSKALENKO, who are at the Strategic sociee

pases. BUZINOY and KARIOFIULI told me that many of their officers are |
constantly going to the bases and they serve as the eyes and ears ‘of the

artillery command because there are atomic varheads at these bases. There

are also conventional warheads there and the positions are “kept under constant ; yy
combat readiness, and there are representatives there from both MOSKALENKO :

and VARENTsOV.

Se: Now here is anothe rz important item eh you. . You probably are
: of and know that on the 8th of September, possibly by your time zone —

the 9th, an atomic detonation took place, This was the first detonation

of a 46,000 kiloton (sic; but see leeting No.32) yield, In the past they a
had detonated ten, fifteen end larger kiloton yield, but this was the first

one of this magnitude. This detonation ad 16, 000 iciLotons was performed ty
means of the R-12 rocket. This recket was launched from KAPUSTIN YaR, ea

its impact area was in Central Asia. The detonation took place at the

highest seine in the rocket's trajectory. It was 2S high air burst and
VARENTsOV was present at this test. VARENT sOV personally told me about this, —
he hed been at KAPUSTIN YeR. When i vas eating in a restaurant with BUZINOV:
he also confirmed this. Prior to yormonias a rocket with an atomic warhead,
et first a rocket of the same type with a conventional werhead is launched +6

determine the range and devistion €YTO2B. For the rocket that carried a

16 000 kiloton warhead the conventional varhead rocket had a v/b of #60 metres.

esee./Let me emphasise

a Gee!) ae

eee ee ee op eee wl ate

_ warheads, realising that the bursts can be made. at a desired point. : oe

ca 48 = | . : - . es ae : Poa

Let me emphasise that these tests using cust aah atomic ‘caceahis were
mandatory for KHRUSHCHEV to make because the headquarters demanded this to | ae
study how these rockets would perform with atomic warheads. This was hever . ae
done before ana therefore KHRUSICHEV used all political menceuvrings end. .
false arguments to get eavay from the non-testing agreement » because he has a of
great need to make these tests himself, This is the only way to understand -

the matter because all he did was ree twist political facts ane

42. Ge: Till ydu explain how the conventional warhead rocket worked? | : be .
S.: The conventional warhead rocket had a v/b error of. only 160 metres.” “3

But it was of course detonated on the ground on its impact area targets and | Fs

on the basis of this trajectory the atomic warhead rocket was fired, . You Bee ;

when we discussed rocket accuracy last Spring such precision had noe yet been 2

approached but now that they have developed accuracy they can use atomic a

43. - Get then you gave the range of the R-i2 at 2,500 kilometres and you .
saia that the burst took place at the height of its trajectory, this would |.’

make it a very high airburst.

S.: Yes. It was a high airburst in the interests of surface 4 nae

protection and even so the burst took place over wastelands, We will return

.
s

with conclusions to these matters and please preserve ny notes while I go on

to the next point.

be Ge! Before you do that, one small clarification, Exactly from whom ° 2

a@id you find out about each specific launching site?

Set I repeat, about NOVAYA ZEVLYA, MALINOVSKY end VARENT SOV pateered ae
CHURAYEV's question. - I found out about ea Franz Joseph Land and yee
VORKUTA from KARIOFILLI, VARENTsOV and PUZINOV. About RRASNOVODSK and
KIROVABAD I found out from both BUZHIOV and POZOVNYY. Regarding ARTEMA there” a

was this document. In addition yhen POZOVNYY was working with the PvVO in

BAKU he also visited PRTEKA end there were bases there then.

‘”

ee fs oo we

7 :

Sees

- 419 =

-

Le S.: Right now BUZINOV is in the D.D.R. with FEDEROV.’ FEDEROV has

had 2 lot of trouble there. His son vho is not mentally normal was beaten

by FEDEROV and this thirteen-year cla boy ran away in the direction of IBIFZIG. |
He was brought back ané headquarters called in FEDEROV and told him that his
son was persona non grata in the D.D.R. Right after this incident. one of

his officers lost a secret document and again FaDEROV was on the carpet. .
However, he is still at his post although his wife, daughter and son oan sent
hom at once. She was even at VARENTSOV's birthday Sane but in a separate
room for the younger people, where my daughter sat and VARENTsSOV's daughter

also set.

Get Have they begun a general evacuation of Soviet dependents from

DDR. yet?
S.: No, not yet, but there have been indications that this would be

done in September, I heard rumours about this but did not pay much attention.

4Te Ge: By the way was the heicht of the atomic burst given to you?
Se: That is very simple to determine, because according to physics .
the epicentre would be one tenth of the trajectory range. This is a law of

ballistics.

Se: Ky next point is very important, I obtained this information from

CRIN. He was on duty during the night of 7/8th September in GRU in SEROV's

office, I met him when I brovght some medicine he requested, and he told me

that during the night of 7/8th September a cable from PARIS came to GRU

stating that the President of France, De GAULLE sent a message to WASHINGTON,
LONDON and BONN giving the decision of the French Government to allocate 230 {

military planes to participate in the defence of Yestern interests in BERLIN.

496 Bot The Regident here in France, General Maior Ivan Nikolayevich

te FDGYEV. enece
C.: Wheat official position does he hold? n*

ra

S.: He has a cover job, but I don't lmow which one. I will see him

tomorrow, CHER EDTYEV haa a comment in the cable atating, that the information .

3
ec 4

eesseee f vas obtained

: -4 | 2 a ee
25. gar
was obtained.from French Communists. The informtion I have just given you |
was not announced anywhere, neither in TASS or anyvhere els¢. It ‘arrived
in a Top Secret classification. There is clearly a leak somewhere in the
. arrived at night and because of its nature was inmediately delivered to

|

|

|
: :
French Government through which this information was obtained. The cable . |
HALINOVSKY, the same night. He read it at home and ordered that the contents
be given at once to all members of the Presidium and to all the commanders |
of combat arms, in addition to a number of commanders of military districts |
which are adjacent to the theatre concerned. The ‘next day SEROV was advised |

of this. Note that the chief Duty Officer must be at least a chief of a :

ZASORIN is very friendly to m2 and gives me much. information verbally. I
strive to maintain this good relationship. My conclusion to this matter is
that investigetions should be made to determine who could have access to high

level correspondence from Gencrrl De GAULLE. This man should be found.

naprevieniye, in order to rake spot Gecisions on the significance of a cable.
|
|
i

Set IL have already written to you earlier giving the name in full
Of the Frenchman who succested te the Soviets that they should not permit |
fmericans or Englishsen to visit certain seetions of an aluminium factory in
which there was an adverucd teclnolcrical precess. @nis was the factory |
in SPALTIGRAD. This tnformition cane from officiel yapers of the KGB in :
wich it was stated that this Prenchman mace that suggestion. TI couldn't
copy this document, but I kad it in m hanés for two minutes and copied the
name of this Frenchman letter for letter. Naybe he is a KGB agent, maybe
he is co-opted by them or is soms other type of svoloch, This statement — : 4

of CUERICEYEV's that the information cane from French Communists again

confirms ny statement that Communists in all Western countries are being

meta nore,

actively used for espionage.

1. Ce: Did the cable. classify what type ef please or from where they |
¥. pe re-deployed? . =: _ | 5
Se: Ho, all it specificd was thot they were 230 military combat

planes. Incidentally I caught ZAUING in a very favourable situation. I

, F . 2 : map
asked him if he was not given 2 decesotion for the information he obtained in :

aeeee-f/ his Middle East

as , 9

Mm

wt cacy Pe

- 22 o

position of Chief of Civil Defence is important they cannot find a suitable
replacement for CHUIKOV as Commander of Ground Forces, and that position is |

still vacant.

So: At present reserve officers are being called back to éptive auty ~ . ae
© serve in Civil Defence De ere ee This is a ‘very interesting new :
organisation, |
| Ge: How ie this organisation set up in terms of Local subordination? .
Sot Like this, there is a. central command and then the snoueinate |
headquarters are ‘organised in military districts. Their functions are closely
co-ordinated with the Oblast Party committees, the Oblast. Executive comnitttees
and all the way down to rayons,. At any rate one of these days you will get ee
a photocopy of the whole seventeen page document. One exists in the Gonmittee

and there is one in GRU.

(3 >» ’ Me: To whom did you sey it was gaveraiate?

ais Sot To the Ministry of Defence, ; but also to the Council of Ministers
since it is partly a military and partly a civilian organisations Reserve

officers are being taken to fill out the headquarters cadrese

Get You say it is a military éistrict Dreaksort> but not by oblast? |
So: It is by militery districts because as you will see later ‘when oe
I report on this, there are many problems which are the concern of the commander . 1

of the military district, particularly in terms of military support and supply. :.::

56. Se: Next on the 12th or the 14th September PANTELEYMONOV vas receliea)
to MOSCOW to GRU to report on Iran, He is the GRU rezident in Trane . He -
was told that his T.DeYe would be for a period of one weele and that aecroula :
have no leave, This is in connection with what I have already vepocted to”
you concerning Tran, ‘They went his report there now as the rezident of GRU.»

I did not see him but I know that he cams on the specific instructions of -

SEROV and that he will work with ZASORDY vho told me about this.

of who told you about the original informsicn concerning Iran? ,

Se3 ZASORIN told me and olso BUZINGV who nnd been dovm South. He

eo0 ./tolda a that

i
t
Bi

told me that extensive militery préparations are being. made in the military a
districts adjacent to Iran, Another point I wuld Like £0 moxnition now is :

that KHRUSHCHEV is going to tie in Iren to the German problem, | - He plans to
send troops into ae when complications develop in Germany. ‘This is planned ;

to be done in October, KHRUSHCHEV pLeHs to localise this matter in “Tran on

the basis of extensive Amerioan military bases there. ZASORIN also told me

that other regidents in the Middle East are being called in for sal tae eae

in MOSCOW but vhich specific ones I do not ee

Bot By the way another thing I have heard about KHRUSHCHEV'! s daneae
policy is that he wants to have a short period of quiet particularly prior ‘GO |
the convening of the Party Congress. VARENTSOV told me that KERUSHCHEV seems
to be sitting on the brakes right now end is not agitating now which VARENTSOV
considers to be very correct. This is heing done so that during the Cerignees Cs
everything can be carried out in a militant manner with all kinds of inLitary
demands and reinforced by the fox “theoming manoeuvres, to give the best possible
climate to the signing of the Peacs Treaty. ‘And in case of ivounte to be in |
a position to deliver a blow. This could be a local conflict or a large one, .

_ KHRUSHCHEV is ready to strite us first. | However, if the West is aseay to oe
swallow the second pills nomeLy recognis se the D.D.R. then the tension. will be

eased, KHRUSHCHEV has now high a of a split in NATO.

e

(f So: The Soviet Coumend est sinabe that the Americans “have three rocket
bases in the territory of Tren.

Set Two persons told me this, the first one to tell me us was

BUZINOV since this information is plotted on military maps to which he has

|

Get Who told you this? ¥ a. oh ee .
ACCESS. Later vhen I was feeling out aie on this topic he confirmed. it,
|

and said "Yes, that's about right’. BUZINOV isis this more accurately since 7

militery dispositions and installations, In addition VARENTsOV has his om _
Sntelligence unit, which is coneermed with studying the relative ‘strengths

of opposing forces in each theatre of ee ection.  BUZTHOV added that

eoee/tha pochets

he is concerned with operetional mitters and they have their map showing enemy :
|
|
t
j
1

a Die a

the rockets deployed or the three American bases in Tran can only reach 2s far : ‘
‘as the South Urals. This is evidently from the ealculations of the Soviet —

Technical rocket analysts.

60. S.: In reference to the photograph of my graduation dias from the . F :
rocket academy which photograph I request that you show me later g0.that I
may identify the individual students and instructors, shave ig a class-mate ;
of mine, Lieut. Col, BONDARENKO who was recently in MOSCOW ae when I went to : .
the Artillery Headquarters to photograph, and of course I walked around there.
and ate etc., to act normally, although ny photography was woverea by. a visit
to the secret library for reference material for the article I am presumably .
writing, I met BONDARENKO there. ‘ ,

Ges “hich Headquarters was this ~ the DzeRZAINGRTY Acadeny? .

Se: No, it was VARENTSOV" s Wsaduievtees: but it is located on the oe

Academy premises,

61. Se:  BONDARENKO told me that he had just been appointed as the Deputy

Conmander of a rocket brigade in KREIEHCHUG for engineering matters, © ‘This . :

brigade contains mixed battalions of ovr old friends the R+=11 and one or two gal 4
oe . e 7 4

I do not mow exactly the number, of R-12 battalions. _ So you, see hexve isan Be

,

.

exemple that the R-12 is an adopted weapon issued to troops and specifically ate

such a battelion exists in KRTRENCITIC,

626 Set I now want to report to you various other. items which could be

of interest or significance, In the cities of LENINGRAD and WOSCOW there ;

i are shortages of vodka, They are not. producing vodka now and are using up ..
ola stocks, Alcohol is being stored in veserve for rockets. They: are; :
drinking cognac and wines and if vodke. from old stocks is to be thrown out. iC

it results in all kinds of fights.  fleohel is being stored as a strategic

reserves
656 So: VARENTsOV replied to a question wWaich was very cleverly brought q
2p by CHURAYEV reperding Little aes ebout MIKOYAN, CHURAYEV asked if i
MIKOVUIN were 211 since so Little is heard about him VARENTSOV replied to ~~ |
o+-o/CHURAYEV!s query’
” 4 4 Paes f |
44 |
o?., 1
foo¥y

295s

CHURAYEV'! s query that ‘despite the eens good results achieved by MIKOYAN
during his trip to Japan that MIKOYAN was arguing with KERUSHCHEV and not:

agreeing with hig policy. In addition at much Lower levels. rumours are heard :
that MIKOYAN does not agree with KHRUSICHEV's néLitent position regarding ‘

‘ ee 4
and his general foreign policy. ° . ae se 2
i

Se:  CHURAYEV gets drunk quickly, which vas not appreciated by either
@ Minister or VARENTsOV because they were astounded that such a prominent ae
man would permit himself to rake the statements he did at the dinner tables, oe i vk

CHURAYEV personally told the following: "Only yesterday" (this would be 1 sth .

Te TT ee

September) "the Central Conmittee" (and remember he is the Chief of the reson) |
"received a report that in the town of PESLANI a large centre not fax from . oe ;
ORDZONIKHIDZE, hooligans attacked Militia men and killed aver of them,

A similar case cccurred recently in the town of ALEKSANDROV in the oscow |

eee ané their situation vas even more severe since not only were wiittie b

a!

men attacked but also representatives of the local MVD. This As: similar ta .

| what happened in MUROVO" (and you have read in the papers that there were ass
executions by shooting there) "and a similar situation ocourred in TVANOVO =
where the second uprising occurred, baking the form of an extensive, hunger:

‘strike. In IVANOVO up to 400 3 men attacked the Militia when they attempted - pte

‘
j to disperse the crowd vho came to Pyke & mass appeal for better food Sonne. Ons ba

tut collected peaceably without sticks and stones to make ‘their plea, They
complained that workers in MOSOC’. ond LS RAD had sufficient food ration 7 no
| Whereas they and their families were starving, Mhen the Militia attempted
| to disperse them from the areas of the OBAQU and the Ispolkom they they | .
attacked the Militia, The Militia fired warning shots at the ground and nies
| not at the crowd, but neither they nor the Chairman of the Obkom could quiet =
| the crowd so troops were called in who succeeded in dispersing the crowd and
| :

“les arrests were made,"

AD ga: In general there is much unrest within the country, ALL kinds of

banditry is breaking out including assaults, Inifings, all kinds of theft ‘and
murder, These numerous attacks on the Militia are not only done by heoligans

but by elements of the civilian population, ag in IVANOVO, who wish to express

...../their anger at

. at a
CA? a es
.

ears,

their anger at the unsatisfactory situation, ‘Even the Niniatiy of Defence ee
has published orders for punishment of cases of m.88 rape in the Minsk BLA» *
One of the guilty was eee the Party ee Even in the, MOSCOW area in
towns such as RAMINSKOYE there have been numerous hold-ups at knife point.

Poe

This has even taken place in electric train lines when few people travel.

Se: The Arvy morale is bad since there is little faith an KHRUSHOHEV! 8
itant policies, ‘Reservists called up and those retained who, have been |

scheduled for discharge feel that they are only Pepe temporarily to sult
KHRUSHCHEV's , policy and should the SL Un DLO. result in less tension they would |
be throvn out. But in the meantime they mae risk their lives for this policy. 2
This situation is lnovm to KER USHCHSV and to his commanders, This is why
RKHRUSHCHEV is maintaining such a stern policy when he says that any ocak, ;
conflict may develop into an atomic conflict. He does not want to. deploy“
his entire conventional army because he fears mass desertions. - Many officers
and men will go over to the vest, after all look at how many Soviet soldiers:

and officers deserted from the D.D.R. to Yest Gsieerye

_@) Se: There are many instances like those I mentioned about
dissatisfaction and one example is one that SEROV personally told me about.
I have teen at SEROV's house twice and will report in full on this shortly.
On the 9th September there was a Party conference in the FRUNZE District of.
the city of MOSCOW, A Chief of a Departrent of the FRUNZE Academy, Colonel .
LAZAREV made a speech at this Conference as a delegate to this District Party
Conferences. He made a speech asainst the cult of KHRUSHCHEV, He said that
KERUSHCHEY had correctly criticised the cult of SPALIN and now he is himself
Geveloping more and more the cult of KURUSECHEY, The Colonel was datennted
and imnediately the Chairmen of the Raykom proposed a censure of the Colonel's .
Speech. The speech was called apolitical and incorrect and it vas proposed — :
that his mudate as a delegate be taken exay. This was done by vote at once
and he was thrown out of the Party Conference for daring to criticise KFRUSHOHEV.
It must be assumed that he will also be throw out of the Party and ee a |

his position in the PRUNZE Aceeumy.

‘pahss 6Ge

vA 70. Se: Let me go on to my next point. You requested and gave me the: 7

st Fe
ZL

“63. ' A brief pause followed and subject said:- We have mich work to do.

ry

I am only giving you the highlights of my report now, then we will get into” : ee

detail and after you have studied and reached definite conclusions you. can

Be pane stiee me for clarification,

Got Thile we are waiting for your next items, although we age: no
Y ime to go into the questions we have preparcd for you now, just tell me one ;
thing - who in general was the source of the information you gave us ‘on BERLIN
in the material that you passed through WINNS in MOSCOW? | . |
Set It came from Gem Lieut. KCRENEVSKIY. He had visitéed“his close
friend a member of the Central Committee whose name I do not now. ZASORIN .
is very friendly with KORENSVSKIY, who, as you know, is the Chief of ‘the
Information Directorate, and he told me that KORENEVSKIY told him about this
order that KHRUSHOCHEV received from the Presidium and the Central Rotidcese: ; :
and what KHRUSHCHEV wants to propose when our oniges eeaene exclusively to : Susan!

consider the BERLIN question.

fSsion that I find out by all possible means what is being done in the USSR
about the development of an anti-missile missile. I can tell you exactly
and. this information was told me by Sergei Sergeievich, BUZINOV and POZOWNYY. oes
POZOVNYY has jing wide and important contacts and he is a prominent political, . 4
worker himself. In MOSCON KIRUSHCHEV has established a teas end spacial oo
NIT and there is a special experimental rocket battalion which is developing -
by means of all kinds of electronic guidance assemblies rocket control which .
ig capable of intercepting a Westie missile in flight and destroying it. 7 -
Right now there is just a special NII and the experimental pattalion. | ‘The .
Army has nothing. Everything else KHRUSHCHEV may Say is foolishness, bluff © = f

and propaganda, However, experimental work is being done.
li

Set Another mission you gave me I have fortunately accomplished is =:

wy thé following, there is a prominent roeket designer in HOSCOV whose name is —

CUBLOMEY. This man is listed in the Kremlevka Telephone Directory,

see 0/CHELOMEY is

Yeas.

CERLONe is 43 or 4) years old, his first names are Viledimir Nikolayevich;
he is a prominent specialist on XERUSMICHEY 's rockets, very intelligent and
talented and has two laboratories under his direction in MOSCOW, - In one of | ote i
CHELOMEY's laboretories KERUSICEEV's son is employed.  KERUSHCHEV has a gon |

who is a civil engineer, CHELCLEY is the one who worked out the employnent on te
of the rocket "Krylatka" which was used on submarines for snieuient with a

ground forces, He is algo perfecting the "Krylatka" which is being used on

500 metres per second, ook

|
submarines, BUZINOV confirined for ne that the velocity of this rocket is - p
720 So: he next point is: There are 400,000 men in all services ‘vho are oO
Jaf for normal discharge from the Army and the decision has been made to postpone .
_ this discharge until sometime in the Spring end to retain these men on active |
duty. This data I read in iim General Sheff, You see this is Haat another
element in KHRUSHCHEY's plan to have a militant decision made at the Party
Congress and to sign the Gerson Peace Treaty ond ke supported by these troops
. on ostensible manoeuvres which are combat ready and here he is retaining men.

who are scheduled for discharge as a further element of support of his plan,”

S.: Next item, A Third Soviet Army is being moved into the territory | ©

Che D.D.Re There are only tyvo Sovict armies there now not counting DDR.
troops. The Army being brougit im is the Eighth Mechanised Army. This doy
was mentioned to ms by MALINOVSEY who left VARENTSOV's party early because he
was flying to LVOV the next day. He said "Ye shall see how our number Bight | — a
will stage its transfer of bases to Germany". It is being moved there from’.
the Sub-Carpathian Military District, This Army is composed of three tink i‘

divisions and two motor-rifle divisions,

Se: In addition, although I do not know where the exact locations “iy Se

be, six regiments of the TVO type V-75 rocket regiments are being. moved

into the D.D.R. Keep in mind that these are independent regiments of the : oe ‘
EVO.
Tie oa it is interes ting how this can be conTimred, here is an example.

The cay before yesterday I vas in VNUECYO with a pirl friend that I sse from

evees/time to time -

ra eee

= 29 —

time to time, Irina. I went there to take her to a restaurant vecauise 48 :
everybody knows me in. towm and VNUKGVO is" ah internal airport. |. There the
deputy head of the ncerenae is an old friend of mine an ex-officer who had’
aad worked at the Aragvi, I told you about an, BONASIENKO , Voloaya,” x
Re told me that vhen he was on duty on Sunday the Minister and his wife arrived,
there was delay in getting the plane ready and that the Minister finally flew

off to LVOV. _ Can you imasine this? Here I cet a confirmdétion from a civilian,

that vhich I heard on the 16th at VAPEN?sOV's party.

/ Get What will these FYO regiments of V-75s protect in the DDR, eS
Sot I dontt know exactly but I presume they would protect our troop
units and undoubtedly there are other units there already which will be - .

supplemented by these six.

77. Se: Remember there are a total of ten various armies in that theatre:
even though now the Third Army is in the territory of the Dd. Deke itself, this
will serve to increase the Soviet troo op density in the D.D. Re » but the other" "
armies are in the second echelon and their function is to serve as |
reinforcements and a source of replocements when needed for the first echelon, |
Of course in case of a peneral offensive these armies could.also be commiteee:

and in fact if necessary not ten ee tventy armies could be used.

® » So: VARENT SOV told me enother thing of interest and he even cursed : ;

when he said it: "Ne are doing things in a one-sided way. Ve are placing | i
emphasis on rockets end it is proper that we should do this but we are, beginning a
to forget about conventional artillery. This conventional artillery is of | a
course organic in all rifle Givisions, We noe have a shortage of Benyentional
artillery." He said that there were deficiencies in certain types of artillery : i.
thanks to the inclusion of rocksts. He did not tell me what types of weapons.
they were deficient in, The armies that are deployed in the German direction —
are not up to strength in equipment cr in armament. The deficiencies are ae

being reduced every day,

730 Set IT believe I have already written to you that in PARIS on the
18th October there will be a Confcrence of the Inter-Governwrental Oceanographi¢

Commission, The Central Committee has confirmed sending Vice-Admiral CHEKUROV

é

: sktees 7 fond the te

and the intelligence officer f rom Gol, Cantain tat rank RYSHKOV,.

Gos Yes, we as received this information,
y

80, Se? Well IT have already tolked about this s¢ ech of KHRUSHCHEV's saying
that there could not be & local wor on its am, Tt is sack this which is the
dreadful thing about the rnole Situation and it is felt. both in the country

and within the Army ~ hence his insidious policy which we should note and

understand - this desire te strike Liest and to destroy atomically everything

that he can, as far as his atomic s “wength will alley him - to seare us and
3

n

those in his country who disasree with him ~ if T (KERUSHOE HEV) destroy with
the atom - you understand that ell yi. 2 atssaararies ~ and many in the

country are ~ will immediately be Silents

Sot These are the questions which I wanted to report ou from this
st - the most dmportant. But a nuvker of them must be expanded upon to a

eared

certain extent end I will allow mrself tc continus with this during the course

of our work, I ask you to keep this list.

Sos “While we drink our wine I will tell you some new political
suecdotes which the Russian people have made up = this is done with a. purpose,
not by chance.... Two Soviets meet, One asks ~ "How do you live? Well,
aa you go to the cinema?t "Yes, rt Live well, I: go to the cinema' eiwhaay

"Eo you go to the theatre?" "Yes T go to the SEES I live well. ....05 | |

"Do you read the newspapers?" "Yes 8, I read the newsrapers ~ if not how would

I know that I Live well?"

830 Set Another one, One Soviet asks another "Will there be a war?"
"No" "thy"? “Because KHRUSHCHEY's battle for peace will not leave « one

£Sorne on another." ; 2. eee a

came Se: A Jew is asked eee KEB man “Way have you concealed the fact that __

you have rel etives apeea apn "I have never concealed the fact that I have
relatives abroad ~ I wrote the ¢: truth, I heve no relatives abroad. "You .
cvcloch - you are concealing the fact that your brother lives in Isracl."

"nan it is my brother who really lives at hom: ~ I am the one who is Living

”

ahroad,"

Seatac 85 % ; oe

Sy tig ree tetas, Gacy, eta Sy ea

EERUSHCHEV gave a questionnaire to everyone "Nhat will you do ae

when we reach (dokhodit') America?" Someone wrote "when we reach America

_ . oe al
4 you can go on, but I will stop right theres...” _ ‘This is 5 the ‘Lite of the mo

| ; : an i : j
{people - humour through tears - rouch humour, .

:

86. S.: (Checking his list) Now I must show you on the photograph the .-

teschers and: students. You rercwnber thet you asked me who studied in the

VDA with me ~ one vas Colonel BALAXTREV, Nikolaj. He finished at the Aoadeny

‘with me, was in Italy for a long tim, is a senior officer under the head of. .
the Second Directorate Lt. General KONOVALOV. Another one, Major KESHILOV,
kolai too, also works for KONOVALOY. IT ment tioned C Colonel FUKOVSIIS ‘who
has gone to Iran. Colonel BOKAREV, denuwty to Si. *OLIKOV for internal cadres

> ‘the GRU. There is alsd a Colonel EYC CHAO, Aleksandr Nikolaevich’ who was in : a
Canada, then worked as a senior officer in the Operat ional. Directorate with
SOKOLOV, the Third Directorete. Now he has als so been transferred, to General.

SCKOLOV, the second one, whe is in the  Obeded of foreign relations, ‘Then T

rentioned the name of Colonel CHERKUNOV ~ an airman,. working in the 0¢ working, | —

on our GRU cadres - he has written a new personal report on me (tharaldertstita).

=

Colonel KOLIBANOV works in the CO in this sar ciiministratire department which |

ry

is concerned with GRU cadres. I mentioned them already - this is just a

confirmation that they are still in the some place, Cod o

‘ chek ee ce

.

Yeo Se: Now I will tell you in short and then in detail, about ‘the ‘SEROVE,

Thay received me very nicely at their hom. They live on cranovskogo street,

opposite the Kremlin hospital next to the Voentorg.

G.: How was contact made ~ did you ring them up?

Se: No, they searched me out - his wife rang for me at home -. haa “
Oleg Vladimirovich coms, ack, ant’ so on, They expected me back from you,
from LONDON, about three days earlier. | C Hranovslo zo ‘Street, Noo second
easrance, flat 71. I came alone as a guest, talking their things with me in.
a small grip ~ there is such a watch on the place, downstairs, but they rang whe 7

up to say I was to be allonzd in. a

coeee/ 88. a . _ —

88, Set Marshal of the Soviet Union ZHUKOV lives in the building, below

the SEROVs, who has not so far gone to work for KMRUSHCHEV. SOKOLOVSKIJ is_

working as a chief adviser in the Glavkom, ZHUKCYV has not yet agreed to do so.'

Set Marchal of the Soviet Unicn GOLIKOV lives on the first floor,
opposite ZHUKOV, Head of the Main Political Directorate - all in this house .
where Iwas. Cpposite SEROV on the same staircase (2nd floor) lives, the -
Chief Prosecutor of the U.5.5.R., PUDENKO, Above SEROV Lives SUSLOV, member
of the Presidiun of the CC and above SUBLOV is the Plat of FURTSEVA: - all in ,
No.3 Granovskogo Street to which your obecient servant goes as a quest!.

ALL these people are in the second entrance - there was no conversation about

the people who live in the first,

Os So! Well, I arrived, gave him his shirt and all the little things.
ley were all very pleased. They laid the table. I was alone as a guests
He arrived, asked me how ry duty trip bad gone and then went to the reception

for the Kox ean National Day. IT stayed with the family. then I said that I

was going to France they gave me a list of requests -— I have got them all ; oo 7

written out. Then I went kone - the caviar I have brought you is from the

SEROVs ~ they gave me caviar and kolbase - ‘tr heve not brought the kolbasa
because they have it in France, ve sot on very well. SEROV Was the first.

who signed the first paper authorising me to come here on a duty trip for the os

GRU. After Mrs. SEROV and his daughter Svetlana had telephoned several times:
to my homes without reeching me, one day SEROV rang CHEZHOV, SOKOLOV's deputy
in the 3rd Dirsctorate ~ SOMOLOV wes on Leave "Where can I find (subject's
name)?" "I will go end find him dmusdiately", He called me out of the:
Committes, asked vihnat it was about and be told me to call SEROV urgently at .
his howe number Granovskogo Street ~ he has a telephone at home and one at

| his dacha. This CHEZHOV as the deruty to SOKOLOV who is sitting in SOKOLOV! s
office gave me the key and said that I could telephone from there, - what:
trust! The safe was closed it is time, but not sealed, I closed the door, .
sat dowm and telephoned, He caid "You seem to have disappeared - we want

to see yous" I said "Comrade Generel of the Army wien should I come?"

He said "Come tomorrow at 6 o'clock." I went to his house, he went off to

a ~. , seeee/the Korean

af

ff

ve
t
$
t
f
‘
3
i

,
moat

the Korean reception and I stayed on with the fomily. Their attitude was pao

excellent,

91. Ses Soon after this, I was sumnoned by IYEVLE Vy, ; the Head of the. oe
Direction under SOKOLOV - a Captain ist rank — we have come across him,

IYEVLEV is concerned. directly with America as VORONIN does with: ? Bngland, ”

He asked me: "That would you think if we sent you to America as a Counsellor?" ,

I said that it was an attractive idea ~- "I am still capable, nawithy and wilings
The country is very interesting and important for intelligence work, | r would
willingly agree. This is my open answer to your open question. I agree,"

fuen, two or three days after T had seen SEROV I was summoned. by CHEZHOV. --

He said "We are thinking of sending you there. We will aback in every detail,
You would go as a Counsellor ~ 5 straightforvard Gounselioy to the Ambassador - oF

but your work would be for the G2U. That is where the conversation stopped -' me

what will come of it God only mora. They may of course take me, SEROV may,
of course, give the order "Take him ont of this Committee and put him £0: worl

in UR then we will see where they will send’ me - either to Hogiand: or to -
usin z for there were conversations abcut England tod. Thus during my me

with you here we must think in detail about my communications with you” - only

along the line of agent comamications - excluding the Committee and my visits :

to Embassies etc, - only throush arent channels - DLBs, meetings with Janet
Jo rar La > & :

and so forth, We must be prepared for this - this is a real problem, ‘The’

scond question which affects vs — when I leave here I should have instructions. |

from you on how to pass on to you immediately this or that importent material é
for our High Command - as for instance I knew for four days beforehand that

the ESRLIN frontier would be clased on August 43th, and that KONEV was flying .

out. T ask you to think about this, This is all so that ny ideas and

‘requests are in your heads already, ‘

a : _ : ; . ; = sh State Ted 2

( 926 } S.: My missions in France are on two sheets which I have photographed
and which you have not yet seen, Ioask you to select a route waich I can.

travel through France after the closing of the Exhibition, .. Somehow we shall
have to work for France, for General de GAULIZ - I shall have to work through

you if they will not hel». I ask you from your deep knowledge and experience, :

oeee ./to think : . * Vd i: : pet

ay

to think out something interesting so that I can achieve something. on this =
haa y

duty trip - so that once again I go home with results. You read my" report,

and know that I received thanks for my work reporting on ‘that base | “ ‘for Pen a

ny photographs. They show the new onti-airera % ey stem in England = . people
from the Embassy have not been along this route recently and have not ‘seen.
this base.

oa The photographs were good, vere they?

fad
Se: Yes.

S.: Incidentally, ‘abouts Karl Mara's graves I submitted a letter,’ '

for the payment of the caretaker of the cenetry to clear the grave up and

jnatruoted people working in the Embassy, to go and check on this ana to go mo,

‘

ch went to the Central Committee whe told the Enibassy to allocate money _

there more often. They can see that I am alert ‘from the military and | polstiond

point of view, as an intelligence officer.

name and show you some docrrents. - I went with WYNNE, and once by myself and
I was at a reception at the Freon ach Ttkassy, given by ‘the Ambassadors. I have"
no acquaintances -— I could not 2cq quires them ~ I did not Look for them. and :

there was not enough time, . But.no one lows whether r have any guch

ae

n

Russian and some French and vho were in HOSCOW. Or pick out someone from 7
firms vhich might go..... Ve must think about thisescsecs any of the French

who were in MOSCOM

Ho; This is not so casye
S.: He should be one of our people. If you read you will see that

the GEU has given me the task of putting two or three Frenchmen in ‘touch with -

Paar ot

our Rezidentura, Two or three arc not necessary — this is Utopia ~. give me_
ones Give me a man who can fool them and do whatever is necessary for use.

People vho can work with Kuseien representatives - we can achieve something

interesting through this lick. T have Leen given the job of choosing DLB

woso/ sites and.

S.: I should also report that I did not have time to spend much time

@ French Exhibition (in MGsce7). I lmow of someone -~ I will give you the:

acquaintances in NOSCcOT. Give me gome acquaintances of Frenchnen who ‘speale: .

eee aa . oa : : (oo, wn
x ? feo . : ~
i ’ euge ..
ve de Co & ” ’ :
4 x 3
35 -
sites and meeting points in 211 the towns where I am. We shall know them. aoe

- then - two ox three in a toxne Is that bad? _ And then, ag you give: me

4

something big I will get a decorations,

io Hes T think that we ought to explain to him at ‘this aise thet Francs |
“is not quite the same as England and that we do not want to bring the French in

in any way - we want to keep this entirely secret from them and therefore we can *

not set the co-operation of the French in the same way as we could do in ing and
P

and, although we will do the peat to help him in every wy we can, it is: going’:

to be very mach more difficult for us whilst we are here, You had better v5}

explain this to him. ; ee tyse

a ie ae

Get You must remonker that you are in France, not in England ‘andy as” :

paar
a]
. ra

you remember, you yourself told us about a Frenchman who has been in the vss

and tho seer the aluminiiua factory, No one knows where ‘there are Leaks. ae
So: But surely there are steadfast people in French intelligence who |

can be told and vho are working wholeheartedly for the French and for us?

Get "e do not want to share our Inowi. adge about yous

2

:

Se: I understand that you are clever and experienced case-officers :

(rukovoditel' ) but surely Ironce ia our comtry?

Ie: Yes, But if ve were to tell the French what we are doing here a

‘

this would complicate matters. i ey would want to be here £00. We at rou
not be able to get security and therefcre although we are quite Berane to"

do anything within our ov powers we are not prepared | Ee ao enything which

aye

would involve bringing in the French. © (c. explains). ,

Bos Evidently they have few Seana tencae: ven because tbe: senior,

1 ee of

+o)

fficers in KONOVALOV's operational section (uchastok) sey "For goodness sake
get us two or three people some show" = you can read. this in ny brief pute

know, in England they onl aye me B mission for ma ene One ‘contact | ~ at, the’
3 &+ a Rises

same time we can infiltrate our people here, We can do ‘something profitente

heres Yell, I ask you to think about it - what you do should earn me thanks: ree

nate

this is your business as case OLPLCers.

Het You mist understand thet we will do everything in our power, but’

rn)

our powers are net so grens rare in Frauc@esessee | a - uel

* taf OOu

96. 3.: Do you think that we cowld arrange that = find something ‘- this is

primitive » 4s 16? Or that T steal some thing again Like the Nomonic 445 = you

stion fos that from KORSNEVS SETY end for the

food evalust ort ,

remember - I got a
electronic wannal, wil them ceo mast think out something good. s0 thet. I get

ra, GS Than you will get a map % with all the

‘a decoration aud an pro 2 Gene

* g ad
Cases C2 Lve

tle:
pty hands after 25 days

Sot Z po back wt th er

tne ewbout and has done nothinge

“YORI GL

they will

Ho You wont’ go bik with empty hands.

: |
So: well, let us think some things ous - they aid not give me money for
nothninge “ie should talk abet “yam - T have 4 question I would Like to discuss

with yous “» must think somthiag cute

He? Yes T would Like to talk about W

fontt Iaow whet he has talle:d about, bet ve es got to bear in mind that ie

ration it is frightoully

‘He has

“YNNE is going to be iunportant For Wiss future of this ope

i
INE with him et this stages = - ¥
|
z
j
|
|

important that he does something for the firms which he represents.
already spent e long time hancing avowide He has not carried out his tesks —
he is due to go to Vuposlevie end 2. though he is here now, he cannot stay ; -

bo lese his, job snd bis potentialities for the future

ghould certainly go to Yugoslavia -

so: He mentioned the come to me, he
ne is not necessary here. Tt was very good that we mete He said at the 4

‘Cormittee thst he was going to vis it our Exbibitiones+ss

i, |
vinta. t shall not be going to England. od

Se: “Yell, to go GA, SO Twrote, T san %
are none of those sort of dele gestions. At the beginning of 1962

“UNS ene visit the Soviet Union with & delegation. +I may be able to
accompany TIKUCHOY - on the motballurgice GelLegation to aaeaends ' But WHNS

Go He 1 R vil,

i
faa NSB. ali yhot whew (NEB? He tells me that his firms are
he de Loring touch with them, of cnurse, as I feel |

;

eored

. 6 /7ou know » he

you know, he ‘would be ready to work exclus ively for us and with re ‘ss | end’ to, i

receive money for this - a monthly salary - this is Sica In general TONNE Hee
has many suggestions - he wants to bring his wife here but what use would that ok e
be. “e visited a restaurant gust now - an hour ago - he nag changed and hod
forgotten sll his money. I expected this and I lad 224108 and I kave him eA
to pay - I hed already changed all ny dollars into french. veri we imow’ a mE Poe
VANNS 's psychology. He isa good fallow end we are fond of him = he is a. |

little self-seeker, of courses, but he is an honourable man ue has done 4 Lot .
for us. He must be supported in the future - how, is your concern not mines j

He should stay here for a couple cf days - to show me PARIS.~ there was. no |

Fy

point in going out with him tonight - I am “tired and thi Ls is more Pon =

Pnen he can fo and come back Later during my staye 7 ee Te ee
vv ; ‘ : : = ‘

Subject hands over envelope, and letter given to him in OSLOM, with |

gements for PARIS meeting. He was given telephone number of safe. fet.

*

and told that one of case officers will always be Jeuadtiatus on: this: munber’
Be is told how to use a telephone - given saeteng told always to speak in get
English and never to telephone fron his hotel or from the Soviet Bmbassy.

S.: I will check the number with you later ace below).

«

400, Gace On 2hth -3Oth Eeptemh her in Oxford. there will. be: a cymposiiun on , aS :
the structure and making of paper, on’ the theoretical ‘asia technical aspects”
of paper production, The symposiun will be se eenaed and addressed ee leading:
peper experts from many comm tries.

The Head of the ist Director’ 6 BEKRENEV, is very interested in: this: |
symposium and the head cf the Otdel cf SHELIGANOV.,  PRKRENEV is very ? a :

ote

interested in paper from the point of view of "pa coporticatsia'.: “here vil,

be no delegation from use T have asked TYNNE to st me peak material | on

He: Yes, I showld think we could get that. We will try that.

Jeo: Here are teluplione tokens - (further digcussi jon of use of

™ ‘

During the Yiench Estat icon LOPATENKO, the head of the Department

7 . eee ‘ in the Committee

Ft bw ee Deas

‘Golonel for twelve years now and it is time that he ‘should be proposed | for

in the Committee, got to now a Frenchworan Marie Paule LACHAUK..+4 ane works "

in the Bedsration of Mechanics. She wrote this with her own hand os eee

SYNNE and I met her in MOScoy - she speaks English and French, of course. ie

We must take a look at her - perhaps ve can arrange some Links through her eo

the company she works for is interesting.o... a ee, t

y

Het I'll have to look it up.

: Now further, the electric razor with batteries which was given
as a nuceent created a furore, All Ministers and prominent leaders vented ae
one, for example SEROV anc GVISHIANT. It would be nice if we could finda 7
Prench firm which memifactures thes se razors and build in the legend that this |
firm has made a gift of a munber of een to the Conmittee with an accompanying —
letters :
Met How many razors do you ne2c?

Sat Six, 3Mext since on the Tht Wovenber they will celebrate the!

Lath anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution Lt would be nice ae somé “wine.

or cognac could be Pie ked up with the ag 1947. This would make a hit.

and especially since CHURATEV requested this specifically. Be “He: even ‘asked for
a bottle of cognac like VAREHTsOV's and his year of birth is 19048 plan
to bring CHURAYEV the odds and ends he as sked for aion asa ae pocket beck
socks, etc. Ana Towill get ee of wine, wantege 1917, for ‘SEROV, uALTNOVSKE
and CHURAYEV. ra ask VANENESOV to take the bottle to MALINOVSEY. and when he 2

is told that it is from the Colonel he had mst who is walking eee a evil. -

‘

General, I am sure that SGhov will not cbject. MALINOVSEY | will probably say.
"Go ahead and write the resolution." I am not losing by ‘the fact that I being
thei presents, it is a prima facie evidence that they ‘trust me by the fact. that |
they accept my gifts. . Hy legend is very simple, I get along well abroad, they,
feed me and give me smell pesents and I buy other odds and ends out. of the :

moriey that I save. They even write letters and notes to me with their

requests of what they want. Next, I would Like to have some records by 7”

wd
a

o te CUNT : ° > 1. .
VERTINGETY and LESHCHENKO, T gave ons to SEROV and he is listening to it

all the time, It is 3 a yority fox fovie ot peeers to toes these records, - Next: *")

tte ig coveo/ I need personal ly
oy

I need personally a small gold ii watch either DEves or Longines but, the

c

numbers should be on the dink, Then I need a whole lot of Little bottles pee
perfume, the Serova and CHURAYEV asked for this as well as others, : "such as -
' Chanel NOs 5, Mitsuoko and Arpece, ete. But only little bottles; further ee

- CHURAYEV requested as well os FOMIN and KARAFTLLI, sets of bill-folds; pocket= ae

books and watch straps to match, And I need about trenty cheep, ball poirit -

“pens. And I need three swoll briefcases far CHURAYEV, VARENTSOV and BUZINOVS:

,In addition many reques sted a me dicins ‘called Sustanon which is taken ty
injection. I think it is xenufactured in Holland, maybe your doctors could

eis obtain it. In addition the insecticide you gave me Sahar wad isis: ; =
favourably received and they request more, I also need a Lot of batteries: of.
30 volts and 15 -=*I think the brand name is Vertrixe T wit Leave. the List.

with you end please get me more of these Ex~Lax tal iets as well as others wtih”

are similar, : ake” 3 se

105.) The safe house telephone number was checked with subject to be ‘site, he:
ad it written correctly, He was tela how to use French automatic teléphones |

sees 7 s

and was given tokens. Subject then reviewed his financial positions

FOL, 5e3 Iwas given 507 collars in each, 254 dollars ae have been computed, ;
‘for my food and for ny lodging Iam only pay a maximum of 36 francs daily,
‘The room I now have cos sts 53 fr BOB. iI don't care what the cost is as Jong. es

as my receipt will read 36 franes per dey for lodging, (After di iscussing | 2

‘the possibilities of moving to another hotel it ms ees idee that the easiest)

ay would be for subject to request another room in ths same hotel the price. ee © Oe:
of which would be under 36 frencs a day. Subject was told thet this should

+

be no problem since very ademiuate rooms cowld be ha

5

well: within his Limit, =
Subject ei. sold that arrengcements such as were made in _ LONDON were not
eesiis in PARIS because it would risl: seouxrity and falsification of a “hotel
bill could also be a problem and in addition the proximity of his hotel, to the.
Soviet Embassy would make it likely that the Soviet Embassy would: Ge. vat

the normal prices of that hot<1 ave),

tie ooe We adeition

i
1
i
f
|
I

oD es

Des In addition they pave we 370 frencs or 75 dollars for my travel
money, witich would last five days throughout #rance. Please arrange “an
itinerary for me ren “ould be consistent with my cost allowance for such .
travel,

a than enough to cross the length and breadth

et This sum de

. 4 / 2 ; tae
of France if one were to travel uy bus. (Subject showed an additional
travel pass prepared by his ASministrative Section. This will also be

the este house sine: he must have this document on his

photographed, but in
persone Subject showed 21.
to the USSR).

fad

Bo They wanted mo to take a train back so that I could look around

ae

wt, Cepreangy on my vay home, However, I have

and veport what I coukd es. gn

2 Garmany ond I will speak about this at our

to have visas for Beloiu «2.

IL his othar papers including a rail ticket back
ai
FT
1

Consulate tomorrav. TL tes Go thie, fine - if not I will certainly
pey the difference in prt Sls Dace

105. So: This list of the posnitle 69 members of delegations who had been

ed to cone here and of vhom oaly a few will come should also be

proper

photegesvhed, The nanes streok through jin red have already been approved

for corvlnes here, The otc hoccaphy should be ene here, however, since I should -
have the list on ay oars da éage onyone asks me about ite When I was at

wae peoeived ly KUDRYAVPSSY, Ivan Favlovich. He is a

Cclouel., He ia a freb ivy fullew and is one of the two deputies to the

Renlient, Tomorrow T will be roocdved either by the Rezident or by his .

Devutyo Té seems thot the Resident is travelling throughout the country

nov, but T am not sure, ALL this je wheat I wanted to report to you today
and I request that you Lock over cienything end en your further questions

xe
GN
‘7
Ry
?
ae
m4
wd
03
m2
i)
jae
Fos)
¢

that in a few days a deleration will arrive here that he
imrs weet. To what extent wih) he te tied up with this deleration?
Met ALL IT have te aéo is to meet them sr scot them up in a hotel and
Pp,

4 of interest for

|

1

i

4

|

loter I will be able to recollect surplamentary details. |
|

1

i

|

then bogecher vith this '
{

i

to LONDON? - : Bo ae ae ees

_ the inevitable interest or the part of the aacnce who must nad know that

“ant and we can meet on the day ater.

- rv, “2

each of the delegation members to visit.

.

Ge: Will you have to go to these points with them? -. AS
So: Yes, that is possible, but it igs really up "bo nee i.

Je: Bus he will not be tied up as he was with the test é

Se: Wo, not at all, and I must also mention that at is possible’ that

no-one at all will coma. There may be a decision to ‘save money and ‘not’ ‘to

send them or only to send very few.

107. So: Ry the wey, here is the CZROV family's request. (Reads dene List:

and leaves with us to purchase for him, Subject then showed a sual] note 7

beck full of purchase requests for his own family).

Je? I can see now why you need 25 days in PARISs Te a oe
Ge: They must have taken three or four days of planning jst, to white:
this out. | ' * ws

Se: They took more then that. (Subject was explained that due to
' f : : : ee

he had at one time heen an intelligence officer pos sted in Turkey, ’ it would

not be wise to meet too rraquentli and even if short avers between,

meetings at the very beginning 2a these

as time goes on).

be best for us to meet in the

is too easy to be spotted, Although we would like to meet ressenahly

frequently to resolve all of our current business which is so > Amportant, dn.

‘et

the early stages oe, your stey we will meet at longer intervals laters

Se: That is rigivt; I ages >

Ge: How about our next mee ting? You have laid out your scheduile |
for the day and what do you propess? | |

Se! How about six ot clock?

Ges That is too warily, it is too light yet.

_

ould he not hav s. free de ey tomorrow .and go”

Jes He is tared, why

™ “ , Lisle Ces Then:

j i a art ! 20s
ee ae I as oer é
ke ee ; ; :
~h2 —
1 * - oe : ae)
“Get Then we will met the day after tomorrow at 19.30 because it Al"
be dark then and zou can go out. with WWNNE ‘tomorrow. | : oe . a x - ee
Sot Very well, Gast AL you arrange to have somecne drop me off at ae
. the other end of the bridee h«cause IT don't ‘mow how to find it very well yets 3
| Het We will do this. ase
108, S.: Will the materials that I brought Ue ovailable tomorrow?
He: No, not tomorrow, but possibly the day after.
Bet Io wish you to lve a chance ta look at it, since there is Hie
about it we should discuss, ; a be « =
Fo Thet is exactiv what we want to do and that is why ‘a want t6
meet the day after tomorrow. -s .
Seo: That's fine, then you will study everything tomorrow and the day‘!
after I will meet you at 49.30 at the other side of the bridge. - . a oe a a
_ Get Do you want to loak at the map of PARIS to see ex otly where, you 3
; live in relation to the bridpe? . ae at ae

St Wot tonight, I am very tired and you can show me next ‘time,

Ho? We will drop you off in the vicinity of your hotel.

4

ii,: Georre end I will go with hin and George will drivé to that.aréa °

Cotegpt ew meee

’

- Since he knows the route,

Me’

me HOOD mmm , oot
