The Potential for Revolution in Latin America
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011841, dated 4 February 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011841).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fie (oF a
NIE 80/90-68 *-
ee a)

PRR Mier occ ere eat Vv
~ bs
ae

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 80/90-68
RY
(Supersedes NIE 80/90-64 ESy Lee”

datory Review ~
aa NL gio

| and NIE 80/90-66)
? Document #

The Potential for Revolution in
Latin America

Submitted by

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE . 2

Concurred in by the ee

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD a ; a =
| As indicated overleaf a oe E
28 March 1968 : tb OE

RU ge ee ame Eee. er

eee APPROVED FOR RELEASE

: = 8.9 JUL 1992

eee

CUTIVE SECRETARY, MSIB Ss eee RG et oe an ee

= pNP Fyne

name nme ee name ee am eel nell lane oy eeeemmeetlien ai eat Ene ee ete a OR eet i ens mwa rtiint Nenmiea ntl cin

tO et

Ae.

ee ee eee ae

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State ,

Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Lt. Gen. Marshall S. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William C. Sullivan, the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

1.3(a)(4){5)

ae tes. 4,8(a)€4)5)

z tecra,

~

2 east tes = : & . She EE Be
+ Ae em ene ermwrek s ne atrrte  Set e tee s em RR  ele Femnnle, AE ct oe a Ab eA ce ete

CONTENTS

Page

NOTE Aiea Lo ; 1
CONCLUSIONS a ae ; ; 1
DISCUSSION Bonk +e idee | : 4
I. THE CURRENT INSURGENCIES . «8 ee:
I]. SOME GUIDELINES FROM THE PAST 5
Ill. DEVELOPMENT OF REVOLUTIONARY CONDITIONS 7
IV. SOME PROPOSITIONS ABOUT FUTURE REVOLUTIONS . .. 9

ANNEX A:

1.3(a)(4)(5)

ANNEX B:

Ciudut puter”

Monterrey,

Havana
By

MEXICO
18.1%

CUBA

Condalajara

HAITE DOMINICAN

"Mexico Oty r
7

REPUBLIC
GUATEMALA HONDURAS =
(outtemals ae . ca Het
i) ‘NICARAGUA varhe
EL Sav on Barraneiila re’ oe c ;
costs, By eucaie ° fe mg traeals
i
' AVENEZUELA
Medellin ——~_ 3.7% 7 GUYANA
Bogota , 7 z
cai, ® re P
COLO > oy
LOM BIA ” SS
Ecuapor JY
Camas al? = es) Fortalesa
hoy: al :

= Recife,
€
: BRAZIL
PERU
49% ee 34.3%

_ €
Lim: .
ai : } ~~ salvador

? BOLIVIA

Belo Honzozte

eRio de Janeiro
r *Sa0 Paulo
iS

a

oPertu Alegre

Share of Major Countries in A
Latin America’s Total Population aie eee

Santiago, } Rosano, / :
* Buenos Airesg UR ae es
These seven largest countries account for 81.5 percent f ARGENTINA
of the total population of Latin America and 86.4 9.2%

vee

percent of the land area.

Population figures are for mid-1967 when the total
was estimated at 252,000,000,

ta
4
ies
a :
The 26 ct'es shown ore the fastest - growing urban ; ces
Centers: by 'Q80 even the smaitese of them wil Acve - |
i
more than @ muii.on residents, Ry

BOUNTaASyY REPRESENT aT T™! =
NOT NEZDESSAS Uv ALM er wae wE

58483 2-68 a .

a E

THE POTENTIAL FOR REVOLUTION
IN LATIN AMERICA

NOTE

This estimate treats the question of revolutionary development in
Latin America more broadly and over a longer period of time than has
been customary in previous estimates.

There are many defensible definitions of the word revolution, and
many traditional applications of that word to events in Latin America,
where in the past 40 years there have been more than a hundred suc-
cessful golpes, insurrections, and other violent or irregular changes
of government. Our subject here is not simply the sudden overthrow
of regimes but the pressures in Latin America for fundamental change.
In an effort to assess the potential effects of those pressures, we define
revolution as a series of decelopments which, in a relatively short time,
produces profound and lasting change in a nation’s political, economic,
and social institutions. Among other movements to bring about such
change, we survey the current status and future prospects of the
several Communist insurgencies. — =

Some of the judgments we reach in this paper are quite specific
and apply to the next year or two. Some, considerably more general,
pertain to the next four or five years. Still others describe emerging
trends which will be felt in the area over more than a decade.

CONCLUSIONS

4. The focus of attention in most discussions of this subject- has
been on insurgency movements supported by Castro. Such move-
ments are still active in three countries: Colombia, Guatemala, and
Venezuela. In all three cases they are relatively small, have attracted
little sympathy among the local populace, and are encountering strong
responses by the security forces. In no case do insurgencies pose a

SEQRET 7]

serious shortrun threat to take over a government, though they are
troublesome, difficult to deal with, and likely to remain an unsettling
factor on the political scene.

B. Even over a much longer period, we do not believe that these,
or similar insurgencies which may become active. will be the main
engine of revolution in Latin America. The factors and forces which
bring revolutions will be more complicated and will vary widely from
country to country in form and character.

C. Because discontent has not yet become organized and acute,
and because there is a lack of appealing radical leadership, revolution
seems unlikely in most Latin American countries within the next few
vears. Over a longer period, however—certainly within the next-
decadle—we see conditions developing throughout the area which will
be much more conducive to revolution. Whether and when these
conditions actually produce revolutionary changes will depend upon
fortuitous combinations of factors within individual countries.

D. The establishments which now control the seven largest Latin
American countries (Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Colombia, Peru, Vene-
zuela, and Chile) are much stronger than any proponents of revolu-
tionary violence. Though the government of such a country might
be displaced during the next year or two, the change almost certainly
would not be revolutionary. In Chile, the government which comes
to power in 1970 may follow revolutionary policies. In a number
of the smaller countries, there is greater likelihood of a sudden over-
throw of government and also more chance that a revolutionary gov-

ernment might come to power. ©

E. Elements on the political left will be in the forefront of most
future revolutionary movements, but we do not believe that the Com-
munist organizations in Latin America have, or will develop, the
strength to plav the central role. We do not rule out the possibility
that they might attempt on their own to seize power in one or more
countries, but we think it far more likely that they would make. common
cause with other stronger revolutionary elements, settling temporarily
for an influential voice in a new government and hoping to progress
from there.

1.3(a)(4)(5)

F, While we do not conclude that Castro-style insurgency is of
no importance, we do believe that the forces which undertake future
revolutions will develop and operate primarily in the cities. They will
require—or wish to have—mass support, and such support will be
more readily obtainable in the cities than in the countryside. The
influx of people from countryside to city in Latin America is striking,
and most of it swells the population of the slums. In 1940, there
were five Latin American metropolitan areas with more than one

million residents; in 1960, there were nine. We estimate that in 1970
there will be 18, and in 1980, 26.

4.3(a)(4)(5)

H. Varied as they may be in other respects, we believe that revolu-
tionary movements will have one important common feature: a
nationalistic, independent attitude with strong overtones of anti-US

sentiment.

SE

DISCUSSION

1. Latin America! has often been thonght of as revolution-prone, and this
is true enough simply in the sense of frequent changes in governments. But
few of these changes have led to revolution in the broader sense of pro-
found and lasting change: moreover. the Latin American Communists. outside
Cuba, have not had much suceess in making revolution of any kind. The Castro
takeover in Cuba led to predictions of a rash of revolutions elsewhere in the
area. But such attempts as have been made—have failed.

4.3(a)(4)(5)

2. We propose in this paper to consider the revolutionary processes in Latin
America in the recent past, as well as the kind of changes which may be con-

ducive to revolutions in the future. We will discuss at the outset the Castro-

supported insurgencies: their present status, and what relevance they have to
the broader questions about revolution,

Il. THE CURRENT INSURGENCIES

3. There are three active insurgencies in Latin America—in Colombia, Guate-
mala. and Venezuela. Other attempts to sustain insurgencies, in Bolivia, Nica-
ragua, and Peru for example, have not succeeded. Despite Castro’s aid, train-
ing, and exhortations, and despite the propaganda of his Latin American Soli-
darity Organization, even the active— insurgency movements have,--
speaking, lost rather than gained ground over the past vear.

generally

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4. A basic reason why the insurgencies have not gained momentum has been
the lack of backing for them among the very people thev purport to cham-
pion—the impoverished peasants in the countryside.

4.3(a)(4)(5)

* Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile. Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba. Dominican Republic. Ecuador,
EI! Salvador, Guatemala. Guyana, Haiti, Honduras. Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,

Uruguay, and Venezuela, Omitted are British Honduras. French Guiana. and Surinam, as well
as various islands in the Caribbean.

4.3(a)(4)(5)

The ability of most of the countries to cope
with problems of insurgency and guerrilla warfare has markedly improved over
the past few years. And Castro’s embrace of communism, his ‘compulsive calls
for revolution. and the knowledge that Cuba is continuing to train and aid
insurgents, serves to keep other governments on their guard. At the same
time, ~ Castro's dependence on Soviet aid and the failure of his revolution in
Cuba to show any dramatic economic progress have detracted from his po-
tentially broad appeal in the area.

6. We do not conclude that Castro-stvle insurgency is of no importance.
It is troublesome, difficult to deal with. ‘and an unsettling factor on the po-
litical scene, and in one or another country is likely to remain so. In the
case of a government badly weakened in some other way, an insurgency move-
ment could be the straw which brought it down. And it is possible for a
government and its security forces, by overreacting to an insurgency threat.
fo contribute to a breakdown of law and order and eventually to drive other
elements of the population into making common cause with the insurgents.

In sum, we think that Castro-supported insurgency may be-part of the broader
revolutionary pattern in a few countries; but we do not believe that it will de-
velop either the potency or the appeal to play a leading revolutionary role in
the area as a whole.

7. The Soviet Union and Communist China have been the other principal
outside-forces promoting the development of revolutionary movements in Latin
America. The Soviets, however, have sought to discourage tactics of insurgencv
and to shift the emphasis of the Communist parties to peaceful, political means.
This is an emphasis which we expect Moscow to continue; it seems to reflect
a strong Soviet belief that the displacement of US influence and the extension
of Soviet influence in Latin America can only be a gradual, long-term process—a
process in which diplomatic ties, expanding economic relationships. and local
Communist Party actions are all to plav a role. The USSR may. at some future
point. turn back to the- encouragement of violent action, but we believe this

is unlikely in the next few years. For their part, the Communist Chinese will

do what they can to foster and assist insurgency movement

But because the parties and splinter groups they can work with in Latin
America are few and weak, and because their efforts will be in sharp conflict
with those of the Soviets—and often with those of the Cubans—we do not
believe that the activities of the Chinese will add much to the overall potential
for insurgencv even over many years.

li. SOME GUIDELINES FROM THE PAST

8. A part of the misapprehension about imminent revolutionary danger has
stemmed from a tendency to equate Latin American political, turbulence with

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

3(a)(4)(5)

susceptibility to revolution. Of course, there can be no question that the region
has had its full share of turbulence in recent decades. Coups. assassinations,
putsches, barracks revolts, pronunciamentos, and assorted power grabs have
been commonplace. Over the last 40 years. only in Chile. Costa Rica. Mexico,
and Uruguay have presidents normally succeeded one another by constitutional
means. In Latin America as a whole there have been since 1929 more than
a hundred irregular changes of government.

9. The surprising thing, however, given all these overthrows of

{ government,
is how little they have had to-do with revolution.

Some have made
significant achievements, but, generally speaking, they have merely modified
existing institutions or machinery.

10. In this paper, we use the term revolution to mean a series of devclop-
ments which, in a relaticely short time, produces profound and lasting change
in a nation’s political, economic, and social institutions? Our interest is not
in construing the definition very narrowly, but in considering those cases in
Latin America’s recent past where revolutions either actually took place or were
so seriously attempted as to leave a lasting political/social imprint. Since the
beginning of the Mexican Revolution in 1910, we find only six other cases
which qualify: + |

a, Vargas’ establishment of full control in Brazil in the late 1930’s and the
broad changes under his administration;

b. Perén’s assumption of one-man rule and the impact of his policies on
Argentina after the mid-1940’s;

* Similarly, in her book, On Revolution, Hannah Arendt emphasizes that revolutions are more
than successful insurrections and that we are not justified in calling every coup d’état a revolu-
tion or even in detecting one in each civil war. And Alfred Meusel’s classic definition in the
Encyclopedia of Social Sciences contains the following: “Thus, a recasting of the social order
is, at least in modern times, a far more important characteristic of revolutions than a change of
political constitution or the use of violence in the attainment of this end,”

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4,4

c. Actions of the Arévalo and Arbenz regimes in Guatemala during 1944-
1954. a decade in which revolutionary changes took place—rolled back in
large part after the overthrow of Arbenz, but leaving a significant residual
effect.

d. Revolt against dictatorial government in Venezuela in 1945 and the
emergence of Betancourt as leade r of the democratic forces which established
a Felnite ork for representative ¢ government;

e. Victory of the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement in Bolivia in 1952
and the improvement of the position of the. masses, particularly during Paz
Estenssoro’s first term as president:

f, Takeover in Cuba by Fidel Castro in 1959 and the subsequent applica-
tion of his version of Marxist-Leninist policies.

11. We see in this pattem a number of guidelines for thinking about revo-
lutions of the future—guidelines always subject to factors and forces peculiar
to each country. We are well aware of the problems of generalizing about a
region as fundamentally diverse as Latin. America; indeed we note in Annex B
six small countries. mostly in the Caribbean area, which may, in one way or
another, be exceptions to our best generalizations.

12. Here then are the key points which we derive from the experience of
the recent past:

a. Revolutionary impetus has not been very strong in Latin America in

relation to the prevailing inertia. The old ways and systems
2. shown quite a lot of staying power.

~b. The revolutions which have occurred have differed sharply in character.
This has been true of the situations they faced, the goals they were trying
to attain, and the way they were carried out. Each was keyed closely to
conditions in its own country; no two had the-same ideology.

c. Each of these revolutions was internal to the country where it occurred.
In no case did the revolutionary elements have significant outside assistance.
(In the Cuban case, the local Communist Party “hid under the bed,” as Castro
has put it.)

d. The revolutionary movements tended to be highly personalistic, headed
by a single leader with great popular appeal.

e. All these revolutions had a heavy content of nationalism.

f, All, in various fashions, aimed to improve the lot of one or another group-
ing among the lower or middle classes at the expense of one or another part
of the upper class.

Il, DEVELOPMENT OF REVOLUTIONARY CONDITIONS

13. Having these points in mind, let us consider the Latin American revolu-
tionary climate at the present time. In most Latin American countries—and in
all the major ones except possibly Chile—we judge that the factors impeding
revolutions are appreciably stronger than the factors conducive to them. This we
think is especially true of the immediate power factors .e.g., governments and

T 7

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

od

security forces acting together), but will also be true for some time of -the
broader underlying conditions (e.g., popular dissatistactions still at a tolerable
level). Nor is it likely that any of the three insurgencies now active in Latin
American countries will, within the next year or two, seriously threaten to over-
throw a government.

14. The fact is that the establishments which now control the larger Latin

American countries are-much stronger than anv proponents of revolutionary
violence.

15. We do not mean to imply that there will be no future revolutions in Latin
American countries; only that the factors and forces likely to bring them about
will be some time in developing. What we foresee is a period of little or no
improvement in the basic economic conditions of many Latin American coun-
tries. and a gradual worsening in social conditions. Some unrest is alreadv evi-
dent, and this lack of progress will add to it. Disappointment in expectations
will play a part, but we think the unrest will center more on a growing conviction
that the existing governments, systems, and institutions offer no hope of rapid
forward movement, of achievements beneficial to most of the people..-Economic
advances in the next several years will, at best, be slow and painful in most coun-
tries of the area. The need to increase investment and the restraints imposed to
curb inflation will severely limit any gains made by labor or the peasantry. The
economic gap between Latin Americans and the advanced nations of the world
will continue to widen, and more and more Latin Americans will recognize and
resent this fact.

16. Continuing high rates of population growth and the massive movement of
people from country to city will exacerbate the problems of unemplovment and
of slums. At least in some countries: animosities which stem from social and
economic differences

will take on increasingly strong racial overtones. The lower

1.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

classes, especially those in the big cities, will become gradually more conscious
politically than they have been. and then more vocal and more active.

17. We would caution, at this point, that the development of conditions con-
ducive to revolution does not mean that revolution will automatically follow.
Sume more or less accidental combination of broad dissatisfaction, specific rally-
IN CAUSC, boid leadership. and organized revolutionary force is likely to determine
the precise when and how of anv particular revolution.

IV. SOME PROPOSITIONS ABOUT FUTURE REVOLUTIONS

1S. We eannot now identify the specific groups (or combinations of groups)
and leaders who are likely to make revolutions in Latin Amcrican countries four
years or seven vears or ten years hence. Indeed one of the things that convinces
us of the unlikelihood of revolutions soon is that forces and leaders capable of
undertaking them are not vet in evidence. ~ What we can do now is to put forward
some propositions about the probable nature and shape of such forces.

19, Our first proposition is that the Communist parties, the Custroist parties,
and the splinter movements of similar genre will not play the central role in this
recolutionary process. ~ The fact is that the total capabilities of the Communist
movement in Latin America are small, at the present time, and the movement
itself is seriously fragmented. Moreover, we believe that many of the practical
factors which have so far limited Communist accomplishments will continue to
be operative for some years. There has been a strange dichotomy in Latin
American attitudes toward the Communists: Marxist ideas, historical and eco-
nomic, are widely taught in the universities and largely-accepted by many non-
Communists as well as party members; at the same time, the parties as organiza-
tions have generally been regarded with suspicion—and often with hostility. To
some degree this has had to do with a feeling that the Communist movement
is alien—controlled by orders from abroad. To some degree, it has resulted from
the unattractive leadership and cadres the parties have had in many countries.®

90. The Communist movement might have compensated for some of these
shortcomings had it been able to maintain a reasonable unity. But the reverse
has been the case. Old men, including original founders, have held on to the
leadership of a number of parties. ‘and this has caused younger elements to split
off into their own groups. Personal quarrels among leaders have led to further
splintering. And finally, the influence of Castro, and his exhortations for immedi-
ate revolutionary action in the form of guerrilla warfare, have caused additional
factions to break away.

21. Despite all their present weaknesses, we do not intend to rule out the
possibility that Communist organizations might. particularly over a period of
some vears, attempt on their own to seize power in one or more Latin American
countries. But we believe it far more likely that-they would make common

®’We would except from this generalization the regular Communist parties in Chile and
Uruguay. In both these countries, the Communists have been reasonably well led and have
been gradually gaining strength and respectability. ;

,

a

cause with other stronger revolutionary elements, aiming to gain an influential,
if not the major, voice in a new government. Such a strategy would embody
their hope of a repeat performance of the developments in Cuba; it would also
entail the risk for them that they might be squeezed out entirely—as happened
in Venezuela in the late 1950's.

22. This brings us to our second proposition: that the forces which undertake
future revolutions will develop and operate primarily in the cities. In general,
we believe that the revolutionary forces will require—or in any event will wish
to have—mass support, and such support will almost certainly be more readily
obtainable in the cities than in the countryside. This is true partly because of
the staggering influx of population from countryside to city. In 1940 there were
five Latin American metropolitan areas with more than 1,000,000 residents; in 1960,

there were nine.

table below. )

1940 Estimate 1960 Estimate

Rio de Janeiro ~ RIO DE JANEIRO

We estimate that in 1970 there will be 18, and in 1980, 26.

Growth of Large Cities in Latin America

2 meena Bae

1970 Projection

RIO DE JANEIRO

1980 Projection

RIO DE JANEIRO

(See

Sao. Paulo SAO PAULO. .. SAO.PAULO - SAO PAULO"
Mexico City ‘MEXICO CITY ae Belo Horizonte
Bganos, Aired BUENOS AIRES Parto Alegre io cee (Brazil)
Santiago Bogot& Salvador Salvador
aa MEXICO CITY . Fortaleza Ln
Gace Guadalajara MEXICO CITY
Menerey GUADALAJARA
we Santiago . BUENOS AIRES Money (Mexico)
Montevideo BOEOUA Ciudad Juérez
Modells
ie BUENOS AIRES.
: ae vane oe: Lima Cérdoba 2 ‘
Key CARACAS Rosario ole)
BUENOS AIRES 8.0 million or more ~| SANTIAGO - oat :
BUENOS ALRES 8.5 to 49 million __ Montevideo Cai” (Colombia)
Buenos Aires 1.0 to 3.4 million - Havana Barranquilla uf :
SE Sy Ee ne | mene e™ ——~" Guayaquil LIMA (Peru)
CARACAS Ge
Maracaibo (Venezuela)
SANTIAGO (Chile)
Projections and estimates based on average _ MONTEVIDEO... : (Uruguay)
rates of growth during 1941-61 for Lima, Havens (Cubs)
1948-60 for Argentine cities, 1951-64 for Gua- Guayaquil... (Ecuador) _
temala City, 1952-64 for Colombian cities, (Guatemala)

1984-64 for Havana, 1958-63 for Montevideo,
1961-65 for Santiago, 1961-66 for Brazilian and
Mexican cities, 1962-68 for Venezuelan cities
and 1963-65 for Guayaquil.

58484 2-68

RET

Guatemala City

23. This is not merely a matter of population growth and movement; it is
also a matter of what is happening to the swelling populations of the city slums.
Most of the new slum settlements are made up of people who brought with
them from the countryside their own community ways of administering joint
affairs, They do not participate much in the broader political affairs ‘of the
city and the nation except through the arrangements their leaders make with
the officials of government—and ‘these relate ‘chiefly to basic needs like water
supply. We cannot. however, expect that these people will hold indefinitely
to their old ways: the verv decision to leave all they knew in the country and
to risk the new life of the city was a “revolutionary” act for manv of ‘them.
Almost inevitably, they will be drawn gradually into wider community activities.
We believe that of even greater potential significance will be the attitudes
and the actions of their children—voung people who were born and brought
up in these urban slums and who lack other roots. Unlike their parents who
remember the hovels and hunger of pexsant life. the new generation will compare
its unhappy surroundings with those of the more prosperous people in the cities.

24. The task of ameliorating the conditions of the slum dwellers rapidly is
bevond the resources now available to Latin American governments,

4.3(a)(4)(5)

With the rapid increase in population, the migration to the cities. and the relatively
slow increase in per capita income, this situation is almost certain to become worse
before it becomes better. Housing needs are running farther ahead of housing.
availabilities with every dav that passes. Rates of economic growth are inadequate
to alleviate the severe unemployment. Thus we expect revolutionary raw ma-
terials to develop in these slums.

25. It is possible that the slums will also provide the future revolutionary
leaders. but we are inclined to think otherwise. Our third proposition is that
the source of leadership will vary from country to country; the personality, mag-
netism, courage, and machismo of individuals will be of much more importance
than the class or profession they represent. As in the recent past. we would
expect to see the caudillo principle repeated—that is, one strong man clearly
predominant in a revolutionary movement.

26. In some cases. the revolutionary leader will probably be a military man—

perhaps someone who is now a vounger officer, or even a noncommissioned
officer.

1.3(a)(4)(5)

Such a militarv figure
might have the backing of part—or even most—of the military establishment:
as well as support among the masses.*

1.3(a)(4)(5)

S)

27. In other cases. we think revolutionarv Jeadershi
Catholic priesthood.

might come from the

A number, fccling that they were circumscribed in these efforts by their
superiors, have left the Church: in Colombix and in Guatemala, priests have
gone to assist the insurgents. thus demonstrating their conviction that adequate
change is impossible without resort to violence.

28. In still other cases, revolutionary leaders will probably come from one
or another intellectual grouping. The upper social strata have in the past
shown a remarkable ability to absorb and neutralize many of the brightest middle-
class voung people. We believe. however. that this is becoming much more
difficult. and that there probably now are among university students some who
will play important revolutionary roles in the future. Certainly there are a
number of professors and artists who are willing to lend their names and prestige
to revolutionary movements. Communist ideology continues to have considerable
appeal for Latin American intellectuals; this appeal may constitute the Com-
munists’ best opportunity to exercise influence on a revolution.

29. It is likely, in some instances, that revolutionary leaders will come from
existing political parties or from some new version of existing parties. One
possibility here would be a figure from an extremist faction of a moderate leftist
party.

30. Despite the amount of discussion we have given to that side of the subject.
we do not believe that all future revolutions in Latin America will be the product
of the political left. There might. for instance. be a charismatic revolutionary
leader who preached goals of egalitarianism and social change, who attracted

12

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

wide leftist support, but who then ran his revolutionary regime verv much as
a rightist dictatorship.

4.3(a)(4)(5)

31. As our last proposition, we believe that there will be one common feature
of these various future movements to achieve revolution that makes a particular

difference to us: a nationalistic, independent attitude with strong overtone

s of
anti-US sentiment.

1.3(a)(4)(5)

13

4.3(a)(4)(5)

| 1.3(a)(4)(5)
SS

4.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(S)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

22

1.3{a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

4.3(a)(4)(5)

27

tng 7 >

28

1.3(a)(4)(5)

nie Se ete

4.3(a)(4)(5)

29

: ie ; we ae Ey a han 8 att sone ee Shaheen
ee et ee Til! A ee Eee rotten ee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY |
DISSEMINATION NOTICE Bee

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction ona = ™
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the = = -.
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the

Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency ;

. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

a

mm TO on

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with |
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the .
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should: be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-~D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

aaa  13(2)(4)()

DISTRIBUTION:
White House as
National Security Council . ot ee
Department of State S
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission oe
Federal Bureau of investigation

' ae

>
