Egypt-iraq: Iraqi Treatment of Egyptian Workers Sours Ties
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000103319, dated 3 October 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000103319).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

foreien
Broadcast
Internation
Service

MICRO (NUMBER)

t COPY

dn this i issue Se

eo: “Sepe toward. igi V. i iltiparty system
@ USSR. nniversary $I

ma Progress ¢ on: k ISSR

e.. Beijing: ‘On -Sovie tities

‘Raspes

, » Jordan: eléction, results’
‘e ° Egyptian workers feaving’

eet

Pay WS

ut

ah Me tee ey

Se sta
=

a et: fe ns 058 WES See Te FE Mt ag eG es
2) ce ee .

ak St EARS = ONES GF Be 2 vee oe RT SES NR Re

Foreign Broadcast Information Service
P.O. Box 2604
Washington, DC 20013

The analyses in this report are based exclusively on the content
and behavior of selected foreign public media. They are issued
without coordination with other U.S. Government components.

This publication is intended
for official use of the U.S.
Government only. ‘This con-
trol expires six months after
date of publication.

“eo

“t. ove peg 3
are

bode Se eo
Fae aS Fb Oe

Sag xt Tost = 5p Ae OAS Sh TIO yg = Sg Se as
Te Fal oto 7 Se atk ay 3 : PR eh ar
ree ee Rag TRG eee Te a SASHES TERE SE per loins

FOR OFFICIABRISE ONLY FBIS TRENDS

15 November ee

Contents

East Germany

SED Accelerates Pace of Reform Under Pressure .......... ead: A
Restive Party Adds to Pressure for Change ....... ree tel ed,
Yugoslavia

Party Opens Door to Possibility of Multiparty Pluralism .......... 13

USSR
Revolution Day Slogans Reflect Ideological Change ............. 18
Supreme Soviet Committees Liberalize Draft Press Law......... «23
China-USSR

PRC October Revolution Observances Reflect Improved Ties ..... 26
Jordan

Muslim Brotherhood Electoral Showing Prompts Concern ........ 28
Egypt-Iraq

Iraqi Treatment of Egyptian Workers Sours Ties .............. sec oe

ee

Decontrolied six months
after date of publication FOR OFFICIALWSE ONLY

SPSS a bay ISON

ae

ve
by
:
$
2
3
-7

FBIS TRENDS FOR OFFICIAQUSE ONLY
1S November 1989 °

Egypt-Iraq

Iraqi Treatment of Egyptian Workers Sours Ties

Egyptian media have stepped up their criticism of Iraq for its
reported financial and physical hurussment of Egyptian workers
and their consequent mass departures in recent months. At the
Same lime, however, Cairo’s restrained official statements,
combined with the government-owned media's limited coverage of
the most sensational allegation —about the shooting deaths of more
than a hundred Egyptians in Iraq—suggest an effort to prevent the
issue from seriously damaging bilateral ties. Official restraint
notwithstanding, the crisis seems to strip the Arab Cooperation
Council (ACC) of much of the substance that Egypt had hoped it
would have and imposes on Egypt's already overburdened economy
the additional strains of newly returned unemployed workers.

A spate of recent press accounts indicates that the Egyptian workers in Iraq are
returning home in increasing numbers.' reportedly because Iraqi obstacles
make it difficult for them to obtain their legitimate earnings and transfer them
back to Egypt. The international edition of the government-owned Al-Ahram
on 7 November claimed that 10.000 workers are returning to Egypt every week.
While the figures are less than reliable (the same report claimed that a million
workers had already returned since June—representing a far higher rate than
10.000 a week), the reports indicate that a massive influx has been taking place.

This migration. which has apparently been continuing for some months,
appears to have reached massive proportions more recently with the
implementation of new Iraqi regulations that severely limit the amount of
money that can be transferred out of the country (Al-Ahram international
edition, 7 November: Al-Jumhuriyah. 11 November). ‘The new regulations
come on top of longstanding but apparently growing delays by the Iraqis in
implementing permitted transfers of funds to Egypt. Taken together, the delays

"Published figures on the number of Egyptians employed in Iraq vary: a report in
Al-Ahram on 20 August put the figure at about a million, while another in the paper's
international edition on 7 November claimed there were twice that many.

Decontrolled six months 32
after date of publication | FOR i

FOR orricialgg ONLY FBIS TRENDS

15 November 1989

and the new restrictions seem designed to encourage Egyptian workers to
return home without issuing a formal expulsion order that would fly in the face
of recent efforts to facilitate economic movement and other aspects of relations
between ACC member countries.?

A report in the government-owned daily Al-Jumhuriyah on 5 September cited
the head of the Arab-African Development Bank in Egypt. one of several
banks engaged in processing remittances from Iraq. as saying that Iraqi
authorities had attributed the nearly year-long delays to depletion of hard
currency needed for postwar reconstruction projects. In any event. the return
of hundreds of thousands of demobilized Iraqi troops to a now glutted labor
market gives Iraq a strong reason for inducing Egyptian workers to leave.

Reports on the bleak situation for Egyptian workers in Iraq have recently
expanded to allege other forms of abuse. ranging from mass dismissals without
notice or proper compensation to a sensational accusation in the 8 November
issue of the government-owned daily Al-Akhbar that 102 bodies of Egyptian
workers—most of them bearing bullet wounds—had arrived in Egypt in
October. While no government-owned media other than Al-Akhbar have been
observed to report the allegations of shooting deaths. neither have they been
denied by the media or through official statements.

Public Airing of While some of the problems being cited—such as
Tensions delays in the transfer of workers’ remittances—

have existed for some time and have been reported
in the press. Cairo recently stepped up pressure on Baghdad with an unusual
airing of grievances in the government-controlled media. The move is a
departure from Egypt's usual practice of glossing over such tensions with Iraq
in public and portraying instead only the positive aspects of their relationship.
The official Middle East News Agency (MENA) on 3 November reported at
length on comments by the chairman of Egypt's official trade union federation,
who said he had appealed to the Foreign Ministry “to quickly intervene with the
Iraqi authorities” over the plight of Egyptian workers. Still more unusual was
an editorial in the 6 November Al-Ahram —generally considered the most
representative of official policy among the government dailies—that called on
Iraq for an “urgent” solution to the problems facing Egyptian workers there.
The editorial appeared to pave the way forthe subsequent blitz in media

?The ACC, comprising Egypt. Iraq. Jordan. and North Yemen, was founded in February
1988 primarily to bolster economic relations.

Decontrolied six months 33
after date of publication FOR OFFICIARYSE ONLY

FBIS TRENDS FOR oFFiGDA use ONLY
15 November 1989

coverage of the issue in the government-owned media, as well as in the
opposition press.

This public airing of the problem probably reflects Egyptian officials’
heightened fears of the potential social. economic, and political impact not only
of delaying remittances but also of the increasing numbers of newly
unemployed workers arriving back in the country. The timing may also reflect
Cairo’s frustration over the failure of past efforts to prod Baghdad through
private channels.

Moreover, the deteriorating situation depicted in media accounts has already
subjected the government to criticism—albeit primarily in the opposition
press—for inaction on the issue. A columnist in the government-owned
Al-Ahram on the 11th claimed that “a veil of silence” surrounding the issue “is
not appropriate” and called on “the responsible authorities in Egypt” to take up
the matter with Iraq. Media coverage has undoubtedly helped to heighten both
popular resentment against the Iraqis and pressure on the Mubarak
government to solve the problem. The opposition newspaper Al-Wafd. for
example. has stepped into the issue with scathing accounts of Iraqi
mistreatment of workers and combined criticism of both the Cairo and
Baghdad governments. An editorial by Al-Wafd’s chief editor Jamal Badawi
onthe 6th concluded: “If political and diplomatic restrictions prevent the
‘Atif Sidqi government from raising the issue, the democratic institutions in
Egypt . . . should raise their voice against the wave of racist persecution of
Egyptian workers in Iraq.”

Official Restraint Even while publicizing the issue, however, Cairo

has taken a measured approach in an apparent
effort to prod the Iraqis without allowing the matter to undermine bilateral
relations. Accordingly. the initial allegations of mass shooting deaths—the
kind of development that might be expected to draw extensive media coverage
and certainly far more than the remittance issue—have since been virtually
ignored in the government-owned media. with the exception of a followup
Al-Akhbar report that the embassy in Baghdad has received instructions to
investigate the matter (MENA, 10 November).

Moreover. an Al-Jumhuriyah report on the 9th cited Minister of Manpower
and Training ‘Abd-al-Haqq as calling the problem of Egyptian workers a
“transient one” that “will not affect the close brotherly relations between the
two countries.” Numerous press reports have cited contacts currently under

Decontrolled six months 34
after date of publication | FOR orric/Atyse ONLY

r]

FOR OFF; USE ONLY FBIS TRENDS
15 November 1989

way to resolve the problem, and Egyptian Foreign Minister ‘Abd—al-Majid has
stated that the issue will be discussed in a previously scheduled meeting in Cairo
on the 18th of the Higher Joint Egyptian-Iraqi Committee. cochaired by
Egyptian Prime Minister Sidqi and Iraq's First Deputy Prime Minister
Ramadan (MENA, 14 November).

Implications Although the fabor issue has soured the

atmosphere of the Egyptian-Iraqi relationship.
Cairo’s handling of the problem and its continued stress on good relations
clearly represent an effort to contain the crisis and prevent it from seriously
damaging bilateral ties. The Egyptian Government has prided itself on having
restored and maintained close relations with almost all Arab states and on the
central role these relations have afforded it in the inter—Arab and international
arenas, and it probably continues to value the benefit of military and economic
cooperation with Baghdad. Nonetheless. the crisis undermines one of Cairo’s
primary objectives in forging close ties with Iraq both bilaterally and through
the ACC—namely. preservation of its role in the Iraqi labor market.

Perhaps more significant are the social and economic burdens facing Egypt asa
result of the diminishing labor market in Iraq and the accompanying
constriction of the flow of foreign currency. Cairo appears intent on pressing
the Iraqis to resolve the labor problem in some fashion, but it is probably
resigned to a less than ideal solution—such as arrangements to expedite
remittance transfers and compensation plans for the dismissed workers—that
will not stem significantly the continued flow of returnees. Accordingly. the
Al-Ahram editorial on the 6th, as well as other press reports and commentaries.
focused less on the displacement of workers than on the long delays in making
permitted transfers of funds and qualified their grievances with recognition of
Iraq‘s circumstances in the aftermath of the Gulf war.

Decontrolled six months 35
after date of publication FOR OFFI USE ONLY
