DIRECTOR'S COPY
"NSC BRIEFING 31 March 1960


CUBA


I. Trend continues toward Cuba's becoming base for Communist activity
in rest of Latin America.
A. Communists or pro-Communists from at least 15 of the other 19

Latin American countries were in Havana last week for "Week

of Solidarity With Struggles of Latin American People."

1. Cuban speaker announced plans for a “great Latin American
congress to create the apparatus to fight the common
enemy." (No date set.)

a. Meetings stressed plight of Puerto Rico--"still under
the bondage of the common enemy."

2. Manifesto published 26 March, last day of "Solidarity Week,"
vowed an "“anti-imperialist and anti-feudal revolution in
all Latin America."


‘2. Cuban labor leader announced that Cuban groups will leave


on 1 May for other Latin American countries, "to give them

help and to request aid for the Cuban revolution."

a. "Friends of Cuba" societies, virtual Communist fronts,
now identified in 13 Latin American countries.

B. Veteran Communist labor leader Lombardo Toledano of Mexico,
in Havana for "Solidarity Week," reportedly met phate with
other labor leaders to prepare constitution for new "inde-
pendent" hemispheric labor movement.

1. An "independent" labor movement to replace discredited
Communis planned at clandestine meetings of


Latin American Communists in Moscow early last year.


. aECRET


II.


2. Increased liaison among Latin American Commur:» .5 Dow
taking place in Cuba and the hemispheric "peace"
conference planned for May or June in Havana were also
parts of program developed at the Moscow meeting.
East German newspaperman says Cuba and GDR will exchange
permanent tenee missions in next two months, after which it
will be easy for GDR to open "ambassadorial" office in
Havana for Latin America similar to one it has in Egypt.
Meanwhile, Cuban TV commentator Luis Conte Aguero, whose anti-
Communist broadcasts drew expressions of approval from thousand:
of Cubans, announced 26 March he forced to give up broadcasts
because of charges that he was sowing division in the revolu-
tion. (He has since gone into asylum in Argentine embassy.)
1. Broadcasts had led to riots on 25 March between pro- and
anti-Communist students. _. ghe ent USED BY Gure A everacs
2. Cuba's last independent ry channellikely to be seized by
regime following 30 March freezing of bank accounts of owne.


of best known radio-TV network.


Efforts to whip up anti-US fervor continue, with emphasis on allege


threat of US-directed invasion.


A.


Speeches by Fidel and Faul Castro on 27 March obviously intende

to give impression invasion is virtual certainty.

1. Both insisted Cuba will not be "another coat ona and
both referred to "volunteers" in other countries.

a. Raul said: “Brigades of volunteers to defend the Cuban
revolution are forming in Venezuela and Bolivia because
these people know that by defending the Cuban revolutic
they are defending the LA revolution. They know...Cuba


is the first nation to start the second revolution."


_-SECRET~


The "first revolution" was for independence from
Spain and Portugal; the “second” is against US
"imperialism,"
b. Other reports have mentioned groups in Venezuela and
Chile volunteering to fight in Cuba against expected
“imperialist aggression."

B. Foreign Minister Roa, in 24 March Ty appearance, charged US has
had designs on Cuba ever Since Pres. Jefferson's 1805 statement
that US would seize Cuba in the event of an Anglo-Spanish war.

C. Sugar workers' delegates meeting on 26 March accepted freeze in
wages and said they would even accept wage reductions if
necessitated by "the aggression which the imperialistic forces
of international reaction are preparing."

III, In 27 March Speech, Fidel Castro reiterated his complete rejection
of all forms of private investments as help in solving Cuba's
economic and social problems.

A. Moa Bay nickel mining and refining company (valued at $75 millio
a subsidiary of Freeport Sulphur Co.) plans to close down by 8
April if Cuban financial restrictions not eased.

Iv. Meanwhile, defections of Castro officers continue.

A. Naval attaché in Mexico and two aides defected 25 March.

B. Capt. Chinea, commander of air base in Pinar del Rio, and two
other officers defected and took asylum in Brazilfian embassy on
23 March,


1. Before going to Brazilian embassy, Chinea told a US embassy
officer that although discontent is Spreading, especially
among junior officers, there is still no cohesion because


of the lack of a leader and rallying point.
-3s
