The Election Outlook in el Salvador - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049404, dated 5 May 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049404).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Ditse tor at
Central
Intelhyence

\

relserboa Oaerhoes

wet Sosnby custo

&

se 2h ea ie er ee
o

SNIE 83.1-82

THE ELECTION OUTLOOK
IN EL SALVADOR

Information available as of 10 March 1982 was
used in the preparation of this Estumate.

Warning Notice
Sensitive Intelligence Sources and Methods Involved
(WNINTEL)

NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
Unauthorized Disclosure Subject to Criminal Sanctions

DISSEMINATION CONTROL ABBREVIATIONS

NOFORN- Not Releasable to Foreign Nationals

NOCONTRACT-— Not Releasable to Contractors or
Contractor /Consultants

PROPIN- Caution—Proprietary Information Involved

NFIBONLY- NFIB Departments Only

ORCON- Dissemination and Extraction of Information
Controlled by Originator

REL.. - This Infprmation Has Been Authorized {or
Reledse to...

FGF Foreign Government Information

THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security
Agency, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and
the Treasury.

}

Ako Participating:

The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
The Director of Naval intelligence, Department of the Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps

da I aa ie oe ska ead ahaha nated 1.» wnonitndid.satbihsh tied neem

queen

KEY JUDGMENTS

We believe that the 28 March elections in El Salvador wall take
place on schedule Although a sudden shift ur the balance of power
between the military and guerrilla forces, or a military coup, could
result in cancellation or postponement of the vote, neither appears

likely.

The vote is for a 60-member constitutent assembly that, on paper
at least, will have the power to reconstitute the political system
completely. The assembly will be empowered to draft a new constitu-
tion, appoint a new provisional government to replace the present junta,
and set dates for subsequent elections.

The “quality” of the voting on 28 March will be highly significant.
An election process perceived by most Salvadorans and foreign observ-
ers as legitimate could pravide a turning point for El Salvador. The
legitimacy of the electoral process, of the assembly, and of the political
reforms it could set ingmotion will depend, however, on such factors as
voter turnout, the impact of violence, the manner in which the election

results are tabulated and announced, and international perceptions of
the process.

The guerrillas will try to disrupt the election with an escalating
series of military assaults and assassinations. They will probably try to
knock out electrical power and take over towns. They will attack
military outposts and interdict highways. We believe, nonetheless, that
the guerrillas are incapable of seizing and holding simultaneously a
large number of small towns or even a major city. Nonetheless, they
have the capability to launch widespread disruptive and violent actions
during the election period.

The violence will inevitably cause some voters to stay home, but it
is possible that the guerrilla campaign will prove counterproductive.
The extreme left and its international supporters will undoubtedly
denounce the election no matter what the outcome.

If the turnout is large‘atd the electoral result is widely accepted as
legitimate, a blow could be dealt to the extreme left, isolating it and un-
dermining its internal support. The chances for success may be
enhanced by indications of increasing papular interest in the elections,

Swe ee

<n

by the presence of a large and diverse yaoup ab forergn observers. ated
hy the government's promise to bald (rand: free elections Other factors,
in particular the threat of extreme: leftist wialence, will make sucha
positive outcomne Uneertain, howevel

It appears unlikely that any of the three mayor parties will emerge
wath an outright majority in the assembly While the Chintan Demo
erats are likely to win the largest number at seats, any thing less than a
majority would leave them vulnerable to the conservalive prarties

A Christian Democratic victory would be a strong affirmation of
the balanced political strategy the government has followed over the
last two years. It would also validate the Salvadoran military's efforts to
work with progressive civilians A Christian Democratic landslide,
however, could exacerbate strains between the party and military
leaders.

There is a chance that a coalition between Roberto D' Aubuissan’s
ultrarightwing National Republican Alliance (ARENA) and the conser-
vative National Conciliation Party (PCN) could emerge. A government
dominated by D'Aubuisson would he highly destabilizing, it) would
remove modercte leaders from the political scene, isolate El Salvador
internationally, and probably boost the strength and credibility of the
guerrillas. ‘i

The most stable outcomes would be a narrow Christian Democratic
victory or a Christian Democratic coalition with the PCN. If the
Christian Democrats miss by only a seat or two, they could probably
strike a deal with individual PCN or other representatives. If Duarte
needs more than a few additional votes to form a majority, however, his

only likely remaining alternative would be to form a coalition with the
PCN.

The Salvadoran military will probably continue to support demo-
cratic processes as long as its critical interests are not threatened. It
would, however, move swiftly to prevent any civilian challenge to its
corporate identity and prerogatives. It would also seek to exercise a veto

aver any negotiations between a civilian government and the guerrillas.

as

ne

DISCUSSION

The Electoral Process

1 Withanly about two weeks coming before the
28 March elections in El Salvador, campangning os
accelerating and violence is at high levels, as groups
across the political spectrum become more prevecu-
pied with the promise and perils of the vote The
stakes are tieh for the political parties that have
fielded candidates and for the insurgent groups that
are trying to disrupt or abort the voting through
sabotage, intimidation, and guerrilla actions The
stakes are high, too, for the military, which has stood
at the apex of political power in EF! Salvador for the
‘last 50 years, but which has promised to hold and
honor the elections and open the political system to
broader participation. Leaders of all these groups
probably recognize that the electoral process has al-
ready begun to alter the country’s political landscape,
and that developments over the next few weeks could
result in decisive changes in the balaace of political
forces. d

2. Salvadorans are scheduled to vote for a constitu-
ent assembly that, on paper at least, will have the
power completely to reconstitute the national political
system. The 60-member assembly, with representa-
tives to be elected from each of the country's 14
departments (see map), will be empowered to draft a
new constitution, to appoint a new provisional govern-
ment to succeed the present four-man junta, and to set
dates for presidential and other elections. Its formal
authority will be so sweeping that it could confirm or
enlarge the junta, replace it with another, appoint an
interim president, or convert itself into a parliament.
Thus, if the elections are conducted without major
scandal or disruptions, the assembly will become the
official governing power in El Salvador soon after the
votes are counted, and the country will come under
the rule of popularly elected officials

3. The “quality” of the voting on 28 March—
measured by the presence or lack of fraud, the size of
the vote, the impact of violence, the manner in which
the results are tabulated and announced, and other
intangibles—will be highly significant. An election
process perceived by most Salvadorans and foreign

observers present as degitumate could provide a tumng
point for a nation that long has been wrackec 2,
political fragmentation and polarization, and save
1980 by savawe civil war. Tt could also deal a muaur
blow to the extreme left, isolating it and undermmng
its sources of internal support. Legitimizing electums
would strengthen US interests and bolster demacnnc
forces in Central America and elsewhere in the regu,
while reducing the appeal of violent methods and
groups If, however, the elections are seriously marred
by violence, fraud, or low turnout, the legitimacs of
the process would be underm:ned

4 The credibility of the elections will denend
significantly on their fairness and absence of maor
fraud. They have been planned and will be supensed
by a three-man elections council, ane member of
which was appointed by the governing junta, and the
others chasen by the junta from lists submitted by the
Supreme Court and the political parties. The elecnan
law provides for poll oversight committees compard
of party representatives who may observe the vating
and the counting of ballots. The government has abo
indicated that international observers may do the
same. Elections council chairman Bustamante clams
that 300 polling places with 4,500 voting tables will be
open. The government intends to set up voting stations
in 230 of the country’s 261 municipalities amd to
provide protection.'

‘The election council has taken pains to prevent freedalent
voting and isregulerities in voting tabulations Each bellot & ammn-
bered for purposes of ballot inventory control, end only thse
properly validated are counted. The voter wers off the wumber
before voting. marks the perty of his choice on the ballot, aad dps
it into the bellot bos. As the balloting proceads, official of each
voting table {ill out report forms. Upon closing of the polls, the ballot
hoses are broken open, votes counted, and the results entemml on
repost forms. The ballots and the form—which is signed by elections
council representatives and witnessed by poll watchers—are sled
in @ pouch, which is then carried to the departmental earnons
council: From there pouches are sent to council headquarters = Sen
Salvador Furthermore, at the time the form is signed, the wating
table officials send o telegram with the results to the central exmacs|
The telegram, however, will not be officiel, only the form regmeaents
the official count The council will use the telegrams on election
night to announce preliminary results. We expect that the exreme
left will try to disrupt these processes. The extreme right ana elso

~ MeMint to dow

Burden) op ceerlebon @
Pet ecepee ty sr date

Guatemala

ibs,

ke

Ahutus hapan > os a her
\ Senvadn
~ SAlWADOR 13,
~ Sonsanate
, ba Libertad

"EN Sa

la Paz

3 Electoral seats per department
—.— Department boundary
@® insurgent concentrenon

Q a
————Piiemeiere

631370 302

5. For many Salvadorans and foreign observers, the
size of voter turnout on 28 March will also be a key
measure of the election's legitimacy. Approximately
1.5 million people—gxcluding those under 18 and in
the military—are theoretically eligible to vote, though
the number who have the necessary identity cards will
be smaller. Many people throughout the country,
however, have a lined up to acquire proper
documentation. Others, including rural women who
have little need for identity cards, probably will not
get them and will not be able to vote. Thus, the
requirement for proper documentation, although it

will help to minimize fraud, will also tend to reduce
the size of the vote

6. Furthermore, the guerilla and front groups have
a major campaign under way to discredit and nullify

Cabanas

- -y San

‘ea Oo r can * ,

2 RN ree weg ee et

ban Salvapos®
€1 Salvador

¥
dion
vied? OWT «a

a ig

Mee. At ss
a

cyt i

i Morazan

fied ‘
\

)
Miguel ta Union

: [er ; 5 y
é.

Pacific Ocean

the elections. They hald that the process is intrinsically
fraudulent because they are not represented, and
claim that voting will be manipulated by the govern-
ment. The strategy of the extreme left to disrupt the
elections and keep voters from the polls is meant in
part to provide it with polentially powerful propa-
ganda to use later in debunking the results. The left
hopes to keep large numbers from voting and then to
claim that they abstained voluntarily because they are
in its camp. Unless turnout is broadly perceived to be
high, that position will be credible to many in El
+ Salvador and in influential sectors in other countries.

7. Criticism of the elections could also center on
claims that voter turnout: an 28 March compares
unfavorably with past Salvadoran elections. Official
statistics show That between 41 and 68 percent of

RN AA TLS TNO

rlanble Valens cust Jicdlerts tTr thre emt Comressretiad ire
hea presidential elections between (9.2 aad Ts, bout
marty of the vates were fared Phe actual tamneut cn
those elections was probabl between 45 and 4
percent Tnthe 1975 congressional elections an ow tied
anly one minor patty opposed the goverment, nearly
a third of the votes counted are beliesed to have been
Fraudulent The offic! tiguns fer past eleetians
though inflated, could be used by the extreme lett and
other critics of the elections to caun that this month's
elections had a comparatively small turnout and there
lore lacked legitimacy

8 We lack rehable data about the voters awareness
of and interest in the elections and about the prefer:
ences and likely choices Opimon polls in EL Salvador
have been based on small samples and may be highly
biased because of the voters’ fears. the disruptions of
the last few years, and improper sampling methods
One group of pollsters found, for instance. that many
people would not answer thew doors, much less state to
strangers their political preferences and intentions
Any assumptions based on past party, personality, or
philasophical preferences would also be highly ques-
tionable because of the distinct possibility that events
since 1979 have dramatically direst old attitudes.
Thus, there is little basis on which to predict either the
nize of the turnout or the outcome of the vote

9 Despite past electoral fraud, violence, threats
from the left, and other reasons for uncertainty,
countervailing forces could contribute to a large turn-
out. The government has taken a number of steps that
should facilitate voting. Electoral laws have been
revised so that citizens—many of whom have been
displaced by revolutionary violence—may vote out-
side their home departments. In response to guerrilla
threats tu kill those who vote, the government has also
stipulated that personal identity cards will not be
stamped and that invisible, instead of indelible, ink
will be used to mark voters’ thumbs both to ensure
against multiple voting and to preserve their anonym-
ity. The Catholic Church hierarchy has repeatedly
supported the elections and emoined the populace
concerning its “moral obligation” to vote

ihe
10. QR suggests tha popular interest in the

elections is growing as the parties intensify their
campaigning and step up spending. With three major
Parties and a few minor ones competing, voters are

presented with the ty pesofdearchowes that Ferm] ayy
other pobtieal settings ab least, te anerease turnout
Junta President Jose Napolesn Duarte, leader of the
Chistian Democrate Party and Raberto D'Aubuss
won, the cightwink AHENA party leader, represent
diametrically different philosophies styles. and values
Asthey ane thet parties become more active over the
Heat two weeks, prestousl undectded and apathetic
voters probably wall he stunulated to vate Interest in
the election may alieady have ren in recent weeks
because there has been less quernfla-inspired violence

than expected

1] The legitimacy of the elections should also be
enhanced by the presence of a large and diverse group
of foreign observers So far. about 20 governments
have indicated that they will send observers, and there
will also be a large contingent of media representatives
from the United States and other countries, as well as
visitors from independent political and labor groups
from Europe and Latin Amenca The recent vote by
18 members of the Organization of American States to
send observers marks a significant break with the
majority's preference over the last several years to
avoid appearing to line up with the United States on
controversial issues that invowe the internal affairs of
member states. The OAS vote—with three abstentions
(Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, and Grenada), no
digsents, and four countries, including Nicaragua, ab-
sent—demonstrates an increasing resolve by member
states to resist external subversion and to SUPDort
efforts to stem the spread of regional violence.

The Political Parties

12. Christian Democratic Party (PDC). Founded
in 1960, Duarte’s progressive reform party grew rapid.
ly over the next dozen years. Its support, centered in
San Salvador and the major provincial cities, has been
derived in large part from Duarte’s enduring popular.
ity. In 1972 Duarte ran for the presidency in a
coalition with the social democratic party of Guil-
lermo Ungo, who was the vice-presidental candidate
that year and is now head of the far left’s political
front group. Though they won a plurality of the vole,
the results were overtumed by the military and the
Christian Democrats were forced underground or into

srilewatil late 1979.

: 7

Do) LT CET Teste a Re on eel a o's 0 int ot Dn nin J nent bein nb nn toe ines ee PE

oo Senee then, Clrostian Democnath leaders base
wooeed hard wath support fromi uiternational Chia
tan Democratic movements

mpeciilly Venecuclas

role COPED party -to rebuild cadre and geassroals
support Although there 1s 1a REEEBIN the
derttool the Chistian Democrats support, (he party
aeeenuinely cational one that in the past, at least. has
attracted voters (rom diverse backgrounds and uberest
gaps Christan Democrats serve as mayors of mary
towns across the country, and others are department
governors ftois Duarte, however, who remains the
party's greatest asset He probably as the best known
and most respected) political figure an the country,
even though his standing may no longer translate
automatically inte votes for the party and its assembly
candidates

14 The Christian Democrats are handicapped,
however, hy their participation since early 1980 in the
present government, which has been beleaguered by
soaring violence and steady economic deterioration
Ecenomic activity fell by about 10 percent in 108),
matching the previous year's dismal performance “As
lasses mount and businesses fail, unemployment havers
around 35 percent in the cities and is higherin the
rural areas. The widespread perception that the gov-
emment is unable to contain the guerrillas or to end
the violence has contributed to a continuing serious
flight of capital and to a IS-percent drop in real
investment in 198). Regardless of the election out-
come, we believe that prospects for improvement in
the economy remain bleak.

15. The Christian Democrats’ chances on 28 March
could be significantly affected by a serious genera
tional split it has suffered over the last few years. Some
of the best and brightest of the younger generation of
party leaders joined with the estreme left in late 1979
and 1980 after Duarte moved to ally the party with
the military. At 56, Duarte’s age and long visibility in
public life could work either strongly for or against him
and the Christian Democratic candidates for the assem-
bly. He could be seen alternatively as a relic of the past
and the scapegoat for failed policies and turmoil, or as a
familiar and trusted father figure. On balance, the fact
that most of the Christian Demacratic leaders are in
their forties and fifties probably works to their disad-
vantage in a country where in the late 1070s about 84
percent of the people were under 40

Ib idicates

that leading Christian Democrats are lacreasuigly

concer nec about thet election prospects ne
ei. that nplib nog Parties Cay WIT a majorly oO

assembly seats and born 4 coalibon that would dictate
Hahonal poley changes ‘harac
terized the party s Canpaignig as lac
thal its support) had precipitously declined in one
department that had once been solidly behind the
party He complained that the Christan Democrats
have been unable. perhaps for security reasons——lo
organize mass meetings Party official’ are also con:
vanced that semor military leaders and regional troop
commanders are secretly assisting the rightwing

uster, and said

parties

17 National Conciliation Party (PCN). Like the
Christian Democrats, the PON has existed for 20 years
and stl! commands the allegiance of many traditional
and conservative volers, though its support probably
has dwindled significantly since it left’ office. The
party is no Jonger directly tied to the military estab-
lishment, with which it ruled from 1962 through
October 1979, but still probably maintains solid sup-
port with retired and active-duty military, business,
and middle class voters and with rural peasants pre-
viously accustomed to its paternalism. The party has
moved over the last two years to broaden its support
and shed its old rightwing, promilitary image. The
present party leader, Raul Molina, has publicly
claimed that the PCN is a centrist party, and he
reportedly has approached the Christian Democrats
concerning the possibility of an alliance. There are
increasing signs that after the elections the PCN could
be in position to tip the balance of power by choosing
either of the other major parties as a coalition partner.

18. National Republican Alliance (ARENA). The
ultrarightwing ARENA is the personal vehicle of
former Army maior Roberto “Bobby” D'Aubuisson. It
was founded in late 1980 and has grawn so rapidly
through nationalistic appeals and by attracting former
PCN stalwarts that it has outpaced all of the minor
parties combined, and is now challenging the PCN for.
the conservative vote. Some analysts even suspect that
it has already surpassed the PCN.

QED claimed that ARENA was making “great
strides” and that it had acquired “momentum.” There
is qa. support his claim, and concern has been

oar

LER YER RST ern RmrE EET Se BEST FERC SRS ST

ws

roomie anh oe CHM an Demorrati aad PON lead
ers recent weeks that ARENA is expenencuipg a
surge tn publk opimien ARENAS appeal me based on
the chansmate and youthful leadership of the 38
year old D Aubusson, and on the simplistic law and

one e .
order salutior that he proposes for bl Salvador’s
Compiles prodkems

19 D'Aubarson’s platform is strongly influenced
hy his antipathy for the Christan Democrats and the
agrarian and other ceforms they bave enacted in
cooperation with the military Una televised appear:
aace last moath, for example, he once again accused
the Christian Democrats of being “the right wing ol
the Salvadoran Communist Party” and of being “trai-
tors” directed by international Marxist forces He
often describes Duarte and his colleagues as “water:
melons’ —green on the outside, and red inside His
slogan, “El Salvador will be the tomb of the reds,” and
his promise to liquidate the insurgents in short order
are probably intended to recall the savage “matanza”
of 1932, when the military put down a small Commu-
nist Party upnsing by massacring more ‘than 10,000
peasants. D’Aubuisson seems to command the almost
blind loyalty of his subordinates )

20. D'Aubuisson’s reputation for violence has been
well established over the last few years. He is widely
believed to have been involved in the assassination of
Archbishop Romero in March 1980 and to be a key
leader of nghtwing death squads that have been
responsible for thousands of murders in recent years.
In 1980 he was arrested by the junta for organizing a
coup attempt, and had his US visa revoked after
threatening a US deputy assistant secretary of state
and accusing him of “playing the Communist game.”
D’Aubuisson has been highly critical af US policy in
Centradt America and, if he gains power, would be
likely to seek military and ather support from non-US
sources. He probably has some clandestine support in
the Salvadoran military, and will benefit from the help
of regional commanders on 28 March. He also report-
edly receives lavish funding from conservative Salva-
doran exiles.

21. The Small Parties. Three rightwing parties
have also fielded candidates and one on the left may
also be running. One or two are believed to have
pockets of support and thus may be able to win a few
seals. Their chances may be enhanced by the propor-

Honal repeesentation system: that ail be tse owe
apportion assembly seats The extreme nghtist Popa
Onentanon Party (POE) is headed bY retured genes 4]
Jose C hele Medrano, a hero of Eb Salvador’s war
with Honduras in (969 and the mentor of Robern:
PD Aubusson He noedoabt still hi the backing ot
some traditional rightwing elements and of ste
peasants The Henewal Acton Party (PAR), headed >,
Kinesto Qyathide, has attempted to altract voter
fram the aen Christian Democratic left who othe,
wise are unrepresented in the elections iim,

Qi would like to offer his party's presidency tw
former junta member Adalfo Maiano, who for a tae
was the leader of progressive military officers. It 1 mot
certain, however, that the PAR has met all the requare-
nents set out by the elections council and may be
disqualified The rightist Saloadoran Popular Perty
(PPS) 1s small, inconspicuous, and strongly opposed to
the Christian Democrats. The Democratic Action (AD)
party isa small, center-right party that was fouuded
last year and so far has not attracted visible signs of
popular support.

The Outlook for the Election Process

22. We believe that the 28 March elections will take
place on schedule. Though a sudden shift in the
balance of power between the military and guerilla
forces or a military coup could result in cancellation or
postponement of the vote, neither appears likely
Military leaders-—notably junta Vice President Gutier-
rez and Defense Minister Garcia—continue to jet
behind the scenes, but there is broad consensus in the
military that it and the country ere most likeh to
benefit from the elections. Even the mast cynical and
aggressive mililary leaders who favor D'Aubuissan’s
approeches or other rightwing methods seem to recng-
nize that the legitimacy and ultimate survivability of
the military institution are best served by opening the
political system to a civilian government that has
international support and legitimacy.

23. Though some guerrilla leaders ets are
concerned that large-scale violence aver the next two
weeks could be counterproductive, major assaults in
various parts of the country undoubtedly will be
mounted. The guerrillas will probably try to orches-
trate their campaigns so that they build momeaten

~~ abdachieve maximum effectiveness on election week-

f SEEDY

OIE TB eee I RS Rs >

he Meiners gSDsens Sew ta nee eee

| liens

Dice president of the electians council Bustamante

etd will be oa hasther that geal chance that

sentog waverument and military leaders and perhaps
even foreni representatives and obseners awd be
tarveted for assassination The guerillas plan ta attack
mnililary CUE pOsts take over towns, uiterdict mayor
todds and lines ob communication. and sbetage the
ecanomiic gifrastructure “Phey may place bah priority
aneltorts to knock out electrical power in jarge areas
al the Increased cooperation among the
insurgent factions and continuing support from Cuba
and Nicaragua —which are also determined to) dis
credit the elections—have increased the potential of

the extreme left

country

24° Ef violence is widespread and well eoordinated
it could severely affect turnout: aod undermine the
legitimacy of the electoral process. Much wall depend
on how eflectively the military can defend critical
installations, dines of communication, and voting
places. On balance, however, we beheve that. the
insurgents are incapable of seizing and holding simul-
taneously a large number of small towns or ever a
major city, and that a basic shift in the military
balance is unlikely during the election penod More-
aver, even amid considerable violence on election day
it is possible that Salvadorans will react indignantly —
as voters in other Latin American countries have in
similar circumstances—and vote in lange numbers.
That possibility is perhaps buoyed by the unique
resiliency and resourcefulness in the Selvadoran na-
tional character, which could prove even more formi-
dable than the threats and assaults of the far left.

The Outlook for a One-Party Majority

25. It appeass al present unlikely that any of the
three major parties will emerge with an outright
majority in the assembly after 24 March, and thus
control the new government, though the Christian
Democrats are likely to win the largest number of
seats A victory by them would constitute a strong
public affirmation of their political arategy which
combines reforms, opposition to the extreme night, and
determination to defeat the extreme left. In addition-e~
victory by Duarte’s party probably would result in
increased support for it and a new government from
international Christian Democratic parties and groups,
labor organizations, and Latin American governments. i

St fromeally a commending stefors by any ol the
three major parties could create more peoblerns Chan ul
AC hiistian
example, could exacerbate strains between the party

wold solve DPemocratie landshde, for
and sare miltary leaders General Garena and other
leaching comercatise atficers would be highly con
cerned that a strong Christian Democratic assernibly
would launch constitutional and other reforms that
they could not aceept tndeed, a landslide victory
would probably cause some party leaders to push
agaressively for Ccommunitanan” and other reforms
they have long advocated Under such crreumstances,
the chance of a coup by conservative miliary officers
would unceease significantly HE Duarte’s party wins a
landslide, there as even a small chance that) such

atheers would try to mount a coup immediately

27) Aowin by D’Aubuisson’s ARENA party would
he even more destabilizing Most Christian Democrats,
General Gutierrez, and many others from the political
center and democratic left: would go into hiding or
exile, many of them Iterally fearing for their lives
The Cathohe Church hierarchy would be greatly
concerned about the likelihood of greater waves of
counterterrorist violence, and prelates would speak out
despite their fears that they would become targets of
assassination. International opinion would be resound-
ingly negative, and El Salvador would become even
more isolated than it has been. For the United States,
and other strong supporters such as Venezuela, such an
outcome would be a repudiation of their backing for
peaceful political evolution and for human rights. US
positions elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbe-
an prohably would also be damaged. If D’Aubuisson
actually carried out policies like thase he has advocat-
ed, his government would be likely soon to face a
much more powerful guerrilla challenge, openly sup-
ported by a number of foreign governments.

The Outlook for a Coalition Government

28) Even the Christian Democrats: own early and
optimistic election forecasts had them winning only
about 35 seats, and since then party leaders have
become increasingly concerned that support has di-
minished. Thus, they may now be considering coali-
tion possibilities in the event they fail to win a
majority in the assembly. If they miss by only a seat or
lwo, the Chrfttian Democrats could probably strike a

a

deal with andividhial PON ot ather representatio: Tf
Duarte needs more than afew additional cates ta tecne
awmaority, however, his only likely renaming alterna
live would be to form a coalition wath the PON) de
might have to negotiate with PON leaders even as
ARENA was also trying to woo them Though many
PON Jeaders distrust the Christian Democrats owe
heheve that under most circumstances they coule. be
persuaded that a government dominated by DAutaas
son would be calamitous

29° There tsa chance, nonetheless, that an AREN 4S
PCN coalition could emerge, particularly if D'Auburs
son's party were to win a plurality Despite efforts by
PCN leaders to transform the party's image, the rank
and file are probably deeply conservative D'Aubuts-
son might be able to suborn some PCN leaders and
elected assembly delegates through intimidation or
promises of large financial payoffs The prospects for
such a coalition and the implications for relations with
the United States and other countries would be much
the same as those discussed in paragraph 27

30. A Christian Democratic-PCN coalition after 28
March would be one of the most stabillzing posuble
outcomes of what will, after all, be an interim govern-
ment. It would probably enjoy the hieeer suppart
from within the military, and would considerably
broaden the legitimacy of the present military—Chris-
tian Democratic alliance. Even some of D'Aubuisson's
partisans would probably be persuaded to cooperate
with such a government once the heat of the campaign
had passed. Such an alliance would be vulnerable to
more extreme propaganda attacks from the far left
because the PCN is associated with the conservative,
military-dominated governments of the 1960s and
1970s. Nonetheless, if the election process is widely
seen as legitimate and honest, such a government
would @robably stand a good chance of maintaining
broad international support. For their part, most of the
Christian Democratic leaders would probably have
few qualms about forming @ coalition with the PCN if
it were the only means of their staying in power,
though they would have to tone down and even

Pe wr wee ks

Hoandon sane of then: pet prestanis \ few boos
probably vacduchie: quite ierniber Starales be 4

would be dikely to be forces autor sal leave

The Qutlawk for the Military

AL Despite the reservations of many top ae ors
including General Garena, Che malitacy as lik ta
Continue supporting democrat processes as lone as its
cntical interests are not threatened The om ccary
would, however, move swaltl to prevent ans sna]
lenge by a cuvilian government to its corporate iascaty
and prerogatives Virtually all officers beliew tor
Instance, thal they collectively should retain the ~yht
ta choose their own leaders, to remain unde: the
command of a uniformed defense minister, asd to
Inaintam control over decisions relating to irernal
secunty and defense Under most circumstances. ur
thermore, nearly all military leaders would seea to
evercise a velo over negotiations between a cousan
government and the guerrillas A strong majorzty of
commanders could also be expected to try to coarain
what they consider excessive reformist zeal bk the
elected assembly, especially if a left-of-center maority
emerges. In addition, military leaders will seek to
uphold their influence over time by supporting the
candidacies for high office of retired colleagues and by
collaborating wilh conservative and wealthy exiles

32. Through its 50 years in power the Salvadoran
military has been nationalistic and mstitutionalh mde-
pendent. Unlike the military castes in neighbaring
countries, it never came under the strong influearce of
the United States, nor did it of any other elements in
El Salvador ever have to deal -with invadmg or
occupying US forces. Those unusual attributes of
autonomy and nationalism, combined with the milj-
lary’s willingness since 1979 to work with left-of-
center civilian politicians, indicate that it is a strong
institution. Unlike many other, more dependerm mili-
lary forces in less developed countries, it is probably
ane that is capable of surviving and working aver the
long term for constructive political and economic
change in El Salvador

a ttn oil
