West Europe - Problems of Verifying Biological Weapons Conventioned Reviewed
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000100164, dated 3 August 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000100164).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FOR OFFIC
20 WEST

sermans. It is dawning on these experts above all
the ans are asking themselves increasinglfpent
questions t their republic's real sovggseffity, or in
other words, abd eir national f ing determined
by foreign powers. L spj airman of the U.S.
Congressional Armed mittee, realized: “If
the Germans wey vereignty, we
would havgaetentirely different NATO.”

Whith would not be the worst that could happen.

Problems of Verifying Biological Weapons
Convention Reviewed

$2002430 Baden-Baden VIERTELJAHRESSC. HIRIFT
FUER SICHERHEIT UND FRIEDEN in German
Vol 7, No 2, pp 94-98—FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Article by Oliver Thraenert: “On the Problem Complex
of Verifying the Biological-Toxin Weapons Conven-
tion’: first paragraph is boxed item}

{Text} Oliver Thraenert has been a scientific staff
member of the Security and Disarmament Study Group
in the Friedrich Ebert Foundation Research Institute in
Bonn since 1986. He studied political science, modern
history, Evangelical religion pedagogy. and sociology at
the Brunswick Technical University and eared his PhD
in political science there in 1986. His published works
deal with questions of East-West relations and problems
of arms control,

1. Introduction

The press reported in October 1988 that Iran’s supreme
military commander, President of Parliament Hashemi
Rafsanjani, expressed the view that {ran should equip
itself with biological and chemical weapons in order to
counter the possible use of such weapons by Iraq. He
maintained that biological and chemical weapons are the
little fellow’s atomic bombs and can be made easily.’

Just how urgent it is to conclude an agreement on a
worldwide ban on chemical weapons, to prevent further
developments and the use of such warfare agents, became
clear last but not least as a result of the employment of
chemical warfare agents in the Gulf War. But what about
the biological weapons that Rafsanjani touched upon?
What does that mean to begin with? What are the arms
control agreements that-exist regarding biological weapons
and, above all, what problems arise in monitoring compli-
ance with these agreements?

2. What Are Biological Warfare Agents?

According to the | July 1969 report by the UN sceretary-
general on chemical and biological weapons, biological
warfare agents are “living organisms of all kinds or
infectious substances which are obtained from them and
which are intended to cause disease or death in man,
animals, or plants, and, moreover, their effect is based
on their ability to proliferate in the attacked persons,
animals, or plants’.* The organisms involved here can
be pathogenic bacteria, viruses, rickettsiae, or fungi.

FOR OFFI

EUROPE

AL USE ONLY

USE ONLY

JPRS-PAC-89-011-5.
20 September £99

Besides. biological warfare agents also include toxtns—
poisonous substances of organic origin, such as snake or
scorpion poisons—even though they are made synthetl-
cally, something that is becoming increasingly possible
today. Not included among biological warfare agents,
however, are chemical agents with a toxic effect which
do not come from any living organism but which are of -
a purely synthetic nature. This involves chemical war-
fare agents.

Biological warfare agents can be absorbed via the respira-
tory organs, via contaminated food and drink, or through
the skin, as a result of insect bites. In the case of biological
warfare, the viruses can be sprayed in aerosol form from
aircraft, or they can be spread via host animals, above all,
insects. Viruses, which are to be used as biological warfare
agents, should be suitable for storage, for being released in
the aerosol form, for causing a sickness with the shortest
possible incubation time, and they should be highly infec-
tious and highly virulent. Moreover, the enemy should not
be able successfully to employ any simple antidotes, such
as antibiotics; but the attacker should have the capability
of protecting his own troops and population through
inoculation.

The military establishment might be particularly inter-
ested in toxins because some of them, such as botulinum
toxin, ricin, or saxitoxin, are considerably more poisonous
than the most highly poisonous chemical warfare agents,
such as the nerve agents VX, sarin, soman, and tabun.* Of
course, botulinum toxin, for example, might, because of its
molecular structure. not be absorbed via the skin, in
contrast to nerve agents, so that wearing respiratory masks
would already offer sufficient protection.

3. The Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention

The 1525 Geneva protocol outlawed the wartime use of
asphyxiating, poisonous, or other gases, as well as bacte-
riological (biological) methods of warfare. Nevertheless,
almost all big powers participating in World War I
developed biological warfare agents. Between 1940 and
1944, Japan attacked at least 11 Chinese cities with
viruses, such as anthrax, cholera, typhus, and plague.”

President Richard Nixon provided decisive impetus for
outlawing biological warfare agents when, in November
1969, he announced the unilateral renunciation of this
type of weapon by the United States. The comprehensive
research programs, which had been carried out after World
War It, had produced the assessment that the militacy
usefulness of biological warfare agents was very poor,

For example, comprehensive studies had been carried
out concerning the possibilities of spreading aerosols in
big cities. For this purpose, among other things, a sham
biological attack was launched against the city of New
York in 1966, using nonpathogenic Microorganisars.
The idea was to find out how easily one could content.
nate a city by releasing bacteria in the subway ventilation
shafts.

Date; oy ee

Vong

Approved for Relzase,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS-TAC-89-011-L
20 September 1989

Most of the ré&earch work was done in Fort Detrick.
Maryland, where as many as 700 scientific personnel
were employed from time to time. A plant for breeding
viruses was erected in Pine Bluff, Arkansas. The Dugway
Proving Grounds had been used by the military estab-
lishment since 1953 to test biological ammunition. In
1969, President Nixon ordered a thorough review of
these programs. The result was the finding that biological
warfare agents could not be used in a militarily mean-
ingful manner because your own troops and population
could not be adequately protected against them.>

The Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention, which was
signed on [0 April 1972, contains in Article [a ban on
the development, production, storage, and miscella-
neous acquisition of microbiological or other biological
agents and toxins of types and in quantities that are not
justified for prevention, protection, or other peaceful
purposes. Moreover, weapons, equipment, or other
resources suitable for the use of such agents and toxins
for hostile purposes were also banned. According to
Article IV, the treaty states themselves are to see to
compliance with this ban in their sovereign territory.

The convention's verification provisions are extremely
weakly developed. The contracting states pledge to con-
sult each other and to cooperate with each other to
guarantee the implementation of the convention. Every
treaty state is granted the possibility of complaining to
the United Nations Security Council and each con-
tracting state pledges to permit an investigation to clarify
treaty violation charges.°®

In other words, the convention does not spell out
detailed verification rules. The risks connected with that
appeared to be calculable at that time because biological
warfare agents, in contrast to chemical warfare agents,
hardly promised any military options. Moreover,
research for peaceful and protection purposes was
expressly permitted. As James F. Leonard, the head of
the American negotiating delegation at that tme,
explained during a congressional hearing in May 1988, it
was clear from the very beginning that there are no
objective criteria whatsoever when it comes to being able
to distinguish between research for peaceful and protec-
tion purposes, on the one hand, and research for offen-
sive purposes, on the other hand. According to Leonard,
this risk would have to be accepted because one cannot
forbid states to develop vaccines against biological war-
fare agents. Moreover, many potential biological warfare
agents presumably appear as viruses in a natural manner
and this is why mankind must study them and improve
its possibilities of handling them.’

4. Did the Soviet Union Violate the Convention?

The problems which can arise in connection with mon-
itoring compliance with the convention can be illus-
trated by two treaty violation charges which the United
States made against the Soviet Union.

In October 1979, a Soviet emigre periodical published in
the Federal Republic reported for the first time that an

WEST EUROPE 27

anthrax epidemic had taken place in the city of Sverdlovsk
in the Urals, in the spring of that same year; this epidemic
reportedly could be traced back to an explosion in an
institute where work was being done on biological warfare
agents. During the first monitoring conference on the
Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention in March 1980, the
American delegation officially asked the Soviet delegation
to clarify this case. The Sovict reply was that this was a
natural anthrax epidemic that had been triggered by the
sale of contaminated meat on the black market.

The Defense Intelligence Agency of the United States
Defense Department, however, following this Soviet expla-
nation, advocated the view that this was an explosion in a
laboratory. According to the intelligence experts, this was
indicated by the massive use of military personne! in
fighting the epidemic as well as the spraying of the decon-
tamination agents by aircraft. The Soviet Union did not
take any further steps to refute these charges and so it was
the word of one side against that of the other.

Nevertheless, there were a series of indications that
supported the Soviet version from the very beginning.
To be sure, according to subsequently published Soviet
data, the “Department for Military Epidemiology of the
Defense Ministry Research Institute for Microbiology”
was indeed in Sverdlovsk. But that department did not
have a highly safe laboratory because it was not working
with pathogenic microorganisms. Western scientists
found that anthrax had indeed appeared in the Sverd-
lovsk area as a natural epidemic in recent times. In July
1979, two persons had been sentenced by a local district
court for selling meat contaminated with anthrax.

But the decisive question is whether the epidemic
involved lung anthrax as a result of the inhalation of the
viruses, or whether this was intestinal anthrax resulting
from the ingestion of infected food. These two forms of
sickness differ from cach other above all by the fact that
lung anthrax causes death in infected persons after 1-3
days, whereas this process takes considerably longer tn
the case of intestinal anthrax. But because neither of the
infected individuals—in whom the disease took a lethal
course—dicd after 3 days, it would scem that this was a
case of intestinal anthrax. This again supports the Sovict
version of events.

But even if this had been a case of lung anthrax, caused by
an explosion in a laboratory, this would still not be proof of
a violation of the Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention.
The degree to which the epidemic was spread could be
clarified by the United States just as little as could the
question of whether a small quantity of viruses was dis-
seminated very effectively or whether a large quantity was
spread around in a very ineffective fashion. Storing small
quantities of viruses, however, is certainly permitted when
they are intended to serve for research on defensive
purposes, such as development of vaccines.

In April 1988, a Soviet delegation headed by Deputy
Health Minister Burgasov. travelling in’ the United
States, provided detailed information on this meident.

FOR OFFICYAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL YSE ONLY

28 WEST EUROPE

Accordingly, contaminated meat was sold on the black
market and that meat had come from animals that had
been fed fodder that was contaminated with anthrax.
That triggered the epidemic. The Soviets, among other
things, also submitted autopsy photos of some of the

victims and their explanations were judged to be pre-
sumably correct by United States experts.*

The second American charge against the Soviet Union
concerned the alleged use of a toxin—called “Yellow
Rain"-in Laos. The origin of this assertion consisted of
reports from refugees who had told the American embassy
in Bangkok about corresponding events. They also brought
samples of the substance on leaves, some of which were
investigated at the University of Minnesota. Accordingly,
the samples indeed contained mycotoxins. Thereupon,
United States Secretary of State Haig declared on 13 Sep-
tember 1981, during a speech in Berlin, that there was now
clear evidence as to toxic warfare in Southeast Asia.

A group of American scientists who took up the case,
however, became increasingly doubtful regarding the tena-
bility of this thesis. At first, they were able to prove that the
samples brought by the refugees consisted mostly of secreta
from bees. At that time the behavior of certain varieties of
wild bees in Southeast Asia had not yet been explored. In
March 1984 Thomas Seely, and apiary expert, was able to
show that there are wild bee colonies there which undertake
purification excursions at such great altitudes that one could
not see them. In the process, they release pollen which
greatly resembles “Yellow Rain.” Second, it was possible to
prove that the mycotoxins, which were found in the samples
in Minnesota, also appear naturally in Southeast Asia,
specifically as mold products. For example, a study was
made of the blood of a group of Asians who had not been in
the area in which “Yellow Rain” had reportedly fallen. 11
was possible to prove traces of mycotoxins, But this, on the
other hand, was never accomplished in persons who had
been exposed to “Ycllow Rain.”

Finally, an investigating team, which had been sent to
Southeast Asia by the Reagan Administration, found
that the renewed questioning of the “eyewitnesses” to
the spread of “Yellow Rain” revealed that those wit-
nesses turned out to be highly doubtful. For example,
one man who had earlier maintained that he had seen the
“Yellow Rain” with his own eyes said that he gotten his
information from a third person.°

It must be kept in mind that there were considerable
analytical problems in both cases. Both charges could not be
refuted 100 percent, but there is a high degree of plausibility
that they are irrelevant. This was also indicated, last but not
least, by the fact that neither the Carter nor the Reagan
administrations lodged a complaint with the United
Nations Security Council as would have been possible
according to the terms of the Biological-Toxin Weapons
Convention.

5. Defensive or Offensive Research?

One may well question today whether the preraise, which
applied when the Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention

FOR OFFIC!

JPRS-TAC-89-011-L
20 September 1989

was signed, is still valid: according to that premise.
biological warfare agents can hardly be used in a mili-
tarily meaningful fashion. It has been above all gene
engineering that has promised new possibilities. Viruses
can be bred via mass production, their structure can be
altered, and their aggressiveness can be boosted. New
vaccines can be produced with the help of gene manip-
ulation, and bacteria can be rendered resistant to antibi-
otics. Toxins can be produced by genetically repro-
grammed bacteria. It even appears possible to implant
data about the production of toxins in the microorgan-
isms that are familiar to the human organism, such as,
for example, the bacteria coli. This means that we could,
for example, have the option of using a very effective
virus against which the enemy has no antidote, but
against which are our own troops can be protected in
advance by vaccination.'°

In the United States, expenditures on defensive research
in the field of biological warfare rose from $15.5 million
in 1981 to $90 million in 1986. According to informa-
tion supplied by the Defense Department, research
projects were ongoing in February 1988 in 19 govern-
ment laboratories, in 50 nongovernmental laboratories
and institutions, and in more than 85 colleges and
universities.!' All projects reportedly are intended only
for defensive purposes, such as the exploration of viruses
and the development of vaccines. The necessity for these
projects was justified by the government in terms of the
existence of an offensive Soviet rescarch program.

But the decisive problem is that—as James F. Leonard
confirmed—there are no objective criteria when it comes
to distinguishing between offensive and defensive cri-
teria, There is only the subjective criterion of offensive
or defensive intentions.

Thus we see that the development of vaccines presup-
poses a precise knowledge of the corresponding virus.
One can follow this up clearly now for example in
connection with AIDS research. But this also means that
one must have the virus. Besides, vaccines often consist
of weakened viruses which are administered so that the
organism can then develop antibodies, In addition there
is the fact that, in the age of advancing knowledge in the
field of gene enginecring, precautions must be taken
against conceivable viruses. If, for example, a state
should decide to go for biological warfare, then it is to be
expected that it will employ a gene-manipulated virus:
for example, viruses whose external structure has been
altered and which are not recognized by the human
immune system as “enemies.” But this again means that
it is necessary to explore the offensive possibilities in
order to able to develop countermeasures. Finally, the
development of vaccines and their possible adniiimistra-
tion itself cannot be clearly marked as a defensive
measure because it could be interpreted by other states as
a preparation for biological warfare.

During the May 1988 congressional hearings in the
United States—which involved a biological warfare

USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIA

JPRS-TAC-89-011-L
20 September 1989

agent testing program planned by the United States
Army for the purpose of pushing defensive research—
experts again and again pointed out that this kind of
procedure could not be distinguished from an offensive
biological warfare program. It is of course entirely logical
that one must explore the way in which biological
warfare agents work under field conditions in order to be
able to develop corresponding countermeasures, but this
at the same time means that viruses, which are consid-
ered to be potential biological warfare agents, must be
present in a certain volume. '?

At this point, we can clearly detect another problem. Very
small quantities of viruses or toxins could already be mili-
tarily relevant. Besides, bacteria in corresponding nutrient
solutions or viruses in symbiosis with other cells could
multiply very rapidly. On-site inspections in laboratories,
which are carried out only very sporadically, thus would be
of little help. To that extent, effective verification of the ban
on biological warfare agents is much more difficult than in
the case of chemical warfare agents. Nevertheless, on-site
inspections, above all in high-security laboratories in which
work is being done witn pathogenic bacteria and viruses as
well as toxins could be meaningful because they would offer
a certain deterrent effect. But this presupposes that all
corresponding laboratories can be covered. Because high-
security laboratories must have special ventilation exhaust
shafts, reconnaissance satellites could have a supporting
effect here. Less risk-conscious countries of course could
also have the pertinent work done in other laboratories.

Simple solutions to the verification problem—such as a ban
on reportedly defensive research projects—cannot be
expected. Of course, one might ask oneself why, for
example, the West German Armed Forces want to develop
vaccines against such exotic diseases as Venezuelan equine
encephalitis, which just about never tum up in European
latitudes, but which would be of interest to biological
warfare. Moreover, it is questionable how corresponding
vaccinations are to be administered to military personnel or
even to the population in case of war. But, first of all, such
diseases appear outside of Europe entirely, and one cannot
institute a worldwide ban on developing countermeasures
against them. For example, in 1977-78, Rift-Valley fever
broke out in Egypt and only the Pentagon had a vaccine
which it made available to particularly endangered persons.
Second, basic research—such as the exploration of the group
of alpha viruses, which includes the virus of Venezuelan
equine encephalitis—cannot be banned from general micro-
biological and medical research.

6. Second Monitoring Conference on Biological-Toxin
Weapons Convention

A series of confidence-building measures were approved
at the second monitoring conference on the Biological-
Toxin Weapons Convention, which was held between 8
and 26 September 1986:

—Exchange of data on research installations and high-
security laboratories in which work is done for defen-
sive purposes regarding biological warfare;

FOR OFFI

SE ONLY

WEST EUROPE 29

—Exchange of information on the spread of infections
and similar events that deviate from normal processes;

—Promotion of exchange of publications whose results
are directly connected to the convention;

—Support of contacts between scientists who are con-
cerned with biological research.'*

The disadvantage of these measures consists above all in
the fact that they are not binding under international
law. By the way, far from all of the countries that signed
the Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention participate in
these measures. For example, in the Autumn of 1988,
there was an informational conference staged by the
Defense Science Duty Station in Munster concerning the
latter's facilities; however, few countries turned up for
this event and those of the Warsaw Pact, for example,
did not show up at all. Nevertheless, efforts to be more
open in this connection will improve the verification of
the ban on biological warfare agents. For example, in
1987 scientists from nine countries, including the Chi-
nese People’s Republic, Japan, and Senegal, were given
advanced training in Fort Detrick, Maryland, where a
large part of the American research effort takes place.
The first scientists from the Soviet Union are expected
by the end of 1988.'* As a result of such limited steps,
the countries could try to convince cach other that they
do not have the intention of operating an offensive
biological research program.

When it comes to banning biological warfare agents, one
can say that 100-percent-effective verification will be
possible just as little as in the case of all other arms
control or disarmament measures. A certain risk will
always be there. Even if, on the basis of progress in the
field of genetic engineering, this type of weapon might
again be of interest to the military establishment, one
should not dramatize the dangers that could result from
this because the military usefulness of biological warfare
agents has not been clarified. On the other hand, it must
be kept in mind that, if a convention banning chemical
warfare agents is signed, which would contain far-
reaching verification rules such as on-site inspection, the
verification measures for the Biological-Toxin Weapons
Convention should also be improved. Because other-
wise, there might be loopholes which might make it
possible to get around a chemical weapons convention.
For example, chemical warfare agents could be substi-
tuted by the secret production of toxins. Most of the 40
member states of the Geneva Disarmament Conference,
however, appear to try to work toward the coverage of
toxins both in a future CW [chemical weapons] conven-
tion and in a future BW [biological weapons] conven-
tion. Nevertheless, there will always be verification gaps
here because on-site inspections would be doubtful in
attempts to verity the ban on biological wartare agents.
First of all, the quantities that are possibly of milttary
relevance are much smaller here than in the case of
chemical warfare agents, and viruses could multiply toa
short time. Besides, such inspections would have to be

AL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL

30 -WEST EUROPE

capable of being performed in almost all research instal-
lations where work is being done with microorganisms.

The improvement of verification measures should be
discussed at the next monitoring conference of the
Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention, which is sched-
uled for no later than 1991, The issue of whether and
how on-site inspections could contribute to strength-
ening the Biological-Toxin Weapons Convention should
be investigated here.

The first prerequisite for improving verification capabil-
ities would be the obligation on the part of all signatory
states to list laboratories with a high safety standard in
which permitted biological research efforts, which are
directly connected with the BW Convention, take place.
The Federal Republic—applying the previously men-
tioned, nonobligatory, confidence-building measures—
listed the following facilities:

The Defense Science Duty Station for NBC (nuclear.
biological, and chemical] protection of the West German
Armed Forces in Munster,

The Federal Research Institute for Virus Diseases of
animals in Tuebingen:

The Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Diseases in
Hamburg;

The Institute of Microbiology of the Academy of Med-
ical Services of the West German Armed Forces in
Munich.'*

Similar to the inspections agreed upon in connection with
the KVAE (Conference on Confidence-Building and Dis-
armament in Europe) in 1986, each member country
would have to declare itself ready to permit a certain
number of on-site inspections per year at short notice. of
course, even that would not enable us to achieve 100-
percent effective verification for the above-mentioned
reasons; but potential treaty violators could probably be
deterred much better than before. Of course, here again we
would be stuck with a clear problem: Some of the potential
BW countries, such as Iraq for example, so far have not
even signed or ratified the BW Convention.

Footnotes
1, Cf., SUDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG, 21! October 1988.

2. Chemical and Bacteriological (biological) Weapons
and the Effects of Their Possible Use—Report of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, date | July
1969, Bonn-51, Vienna, Zuerich (German translation),
1969, p 15.

3. Cf, The Table in Erhard Geissler, Karlheinz Lohs,
“The Changing Status of Toxin Weapons,” in: Erhard
Geissler (editor), Biological and Toxin Weapons Today,
Stockholm 1986, pp 36-55, specifically p 41.

ONLY

JPRS-TAC-89-011-1.
20 September 1989

4. Cf. Arthur Westing “The Danger of Biological War-
fare,” in: Werner Dosch, Peter Herrlich (editors), “Aech-
tung der Giftwaffen. Naturwissenschaftler warnen vor
chemischen und biologischen Waffen,” [Banning Poison
Weapons—Natural Scientists Warn Against Chemical
and Biological Weapons], Frankfurt/M-65., 1985, pp
73-89, specifically p 75f. ;

5. Survey Studies on American BW Research Efforts
during the 1950's and 1960's are as follows: Robert
Harris, Jeremy Paxman, “A Higher Form of Killing—
The Secret History of Biological and Chemical Weap-
ons,” Duesseldorf, Vienna, 1983; Robin Clarke, “Silent
Weapons—Chemical and Biological Warfare,” Vienna,
Hamburg, 1969: John Cookson, Judith Nottingham, “A
Survey of Chemical and Biological Warfare," London,
Sidney, 1969; Seymour Hersh, “Chemical and Biological
Warfare, American's Hidden Arsenal,” Indianapolis,
New York, Kansas City 1968.

6. The treaty is printed in: Heinrich Siegler, Dokumen-
tation zur Abruestung und Sicherheit (Documentation
on Disarmament and Security], Vol. 1X, 1971, Bonn,
Vienna, Zurich 1972, pp 253-258.

7. Cf., Statement of James F. Leonard, (retired) chief
negotiator, Biological Weapons Convention (1972), in:
Biological Warfare Testing, Hearing before the Subcom-
mittee on Arms Control, International Security and
Science of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment of the Com-
mittee on Interior and Insular Affairs and the Subcom-
mittee on Military Installations and Facilities of the
Committee on Armed Services, House of Representa-
tives, One Hundredth Congress, second Session, May 3,
198%. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington
1988, pp 70-74.

8. Cf, Elisa D. Harris, CBW Arms Control: A Regime
Under Attack?, ins ARMS CONTROL TODAY, Sep-
tember 1986, pp 8-13; Reinhard Kaiser, “Federal
Republic and Biological Weapons,” International Police
Institute, Working Paper No. 5, June 1988, Wuppertal,
pp 8-!1.

9. Cf. Julian Robinson, Jeanne Guillemin, Matthew
Mescison, Yellow Rain: The Story Collapses, in: FOR-
EIGN POLICY No 68 (Fall 1987), pp 100-117: cf, On
both charges also: Elisa D. Harris, Sverdlowsk and Yellow
Rain. Two Cases of Soviet Noncompliance?, in: INTER-
NATIONAL SECURITY, Spring 1987, pp 41-95.

10. Cf., Oliver Thraenert, “Biologische Kampfstotle-
Ruestungsdynamik im Reagenzglas?” {Biological War-
fare Agents—Armament Dynamics in the Test Tube? ),
Bonn, Friedrich Ebert Foundation, June 1988, pp 17-21.

11. Cf, Jonathan Tucker, Gene Wars, in: FOREIGN
POLICY No 57 (Winter 1984/85), pp 58-79. Statement
of Jeremy Rifkin, president of the Foundation on Eco-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL stony
JPRS-TAC-89-011-L

20 September 1989 WEST EUROPE 31

nomic Trends, in: Biological Warfare Testing, loc. cit. pp 14. Cf., Fighting Dirty: Quest for Way to Block Biolog-
75-91. ical Weapons Is Itself Called a Threat, in: WALL
STREET JOURNAL, 19 September 1988.

pare a oe eae ot Renee eee ibid., pp 57-69: 15. Cf., Federal Republic of Germany: Report in Accor-

‘ ” TAS dance with the Final Declaration of the Second Review

Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the

13. Cf., Josef Goldblat, The Review of the Biological Prohibition of the Development, Production, and Stock-

Weapons Convention, in: SIPRI YEARBOOK 1987, piling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxic Weapons
New York 1987, pp 409-422. and on Their Destruction, Geneva, 10 October 1987.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
