El Salvador: the Fmln After the November 1989 Offensive - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049257, dated 5 January 1990.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049257).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

AAT Tatettipen e Apert y

Waashingnn 1 2075

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
26 January 1990
El; Salvador: The FMLN After the November 1989 Offensive

Summary

The Marxist Farabundo Marti National Liberation
Front (FMLN) failed to spark a popular insurrection or
inflict a crippling blow on the Salvadoran armed forces
with its November 1989 offensive, but it did achieve
some notable political gajns. The intensity and
duration of the fighting probably has caused many
Salvadorans--particularly the elite, who previously
were more insulated from the war--to question the
government's ability to provide for their most basic
requirement: security. The FMLN leadership. although
still divided on the utility of negotiations in the
wake of the offensive, probably believes its
demonstration of military capabilities will raise
doubts internationally about San Salvador's ability to
win the war and will translate into greater leverage
over the government in any future talks. The rebels
also have benefitted from apparent Army complicity in
the Jesuit murders, which have damaged San Salvador's
credibility and could threaten critical foreign support
if the guilty are not brought to justice.

Militarily, the FMLN emerged from the offensive
weakened but not defeated, and apparently has kept many
of its regular forces intact. A number of factors--

This me andum was prepared by
Office of African and La

APProved for Release :
NOV 1993

Incduding Che absence of the antic dpated popular
insurrection, heavy casualties, and shortages of focd
and medicine--have fAurt insurgent morale and
contributed to increased desertions. Moreover, the
Army's current thrust into rebel strongholds will
further hinder FMLN military plans in the near-term.
Nonetheless, the insurgents apparently are reevaluating
their strategy in light of their political gains, and
they retain sufficient forces and arms to maintain
military pressure on the government and periodically
grab International attention. They are most likely to
try to do this through economic sabotage,
assassinations, smallscale raids, and harassment rather
than another all-out offensive on the same scale as
their November effort.

ts FW & ww ft

FMLN Objectives and Motives

Evidence co indicates the rebel
offensive that beg jor undertaking that

involved months of preparation, including expanding the support
infrastructure in the capita], pre-positioning large quantities
of munitions, and intensive tecruiting. Although the FMLN
Claimed the offensive was provoked by the death of a leftist
labor leader in a 31 October bombing, we believe the operation
was an important component of the insurgents’ long-term strategy
to seize political power, either directly or by forcing the
government to make sweeping and destabilizing concessions. Their
November action was consistent with the atrategic vision outlined
in which predicted
that ern cal developments
would make 1988-89 the optimum time for pressing an all-out
military offensive and inciting a popular insurrection.

the FMLN believed clandestine
political organizing, propaganda activities, and low-risk
military operations would generate increased antigovernment
sentiment and popular support for an insurrection--to be sparked
by the offensive--that would topple the government. i

The FMLN's decision to launch the offensive probably also
was motivated by concerns about its declining military and
political atanding. Steady pressure by government forces on
rebel bases during the past year resulted in heavy insurgent
casualties. The insurgents’ “election offensive" in March 1989--
coordinated attacks on military and civilian targets and
intensive propagandizing intended to disrupt balloting--was an
abject failure, as voters turned out en masse despite rebel calls
for a boycott. In addition, the government's rejection of

*

rnsurgent proposals during peace talks Jasnt ot
hardened the resolve of some commanders to proceed

attack plan. By late Getober both the FPL and the ERP--the two

dominant FMLN factions--were ready to abandon the talks and

Rebel leaders also probably felt some urgency to boost the
FMLN's image abroad. They almost certainly viewed the sweeping
changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe as a harb r_of
eroding international support for their cause. Indeed,

that Moscow recently had presse

to curtail military activities and seek a negotiated settlement

Despite rebel claims that the offensive was a tactic to gain
leverage in future negotiations with the government, there are
numerous indications that the FMLN leadership--at least
initially--envisioned it as an extraordinary operation that would
topple the government. Unlike most insurgent "offensives," which
generally consist of coordinated harassment of military targets
and economic sabotage, the November action was noteworthy for its
scope, intensity, and audacity... The zsebels' principal focus was
the capital, but they also initiated heavy fighting throughout
much of the country, including the departments of Santa Ana, San
Miguel, and Usulutan. The FMEN employed the majority of its
manpower, drawing down forces in ita northern bases and
maintaining little, if any, effective reserve. Already having
intensified forced conscription during the months prior to the
offensive, the insurgents further awelled their ranks by
impressing civilians once the fighting was underway, (a

PETER, In addition, they pressed some me a)

their urban front groups into combat.

Chronology of the Offensive

The offensive began on 11 November, when some 2,000-2,300
rebels launched coordinated attacks, principally in the capital.
Attempts to assassinate President Criatiani, Vice President
Merino, and the president and vice president of the Legislative
Assembly all failed. Similar efforts to kil} the military
leadership had been preempted a few days earlier when police
raided an FMLN safehouse in San Salvador and arrested the
plotters. the insurgents also planned
to overrun several key military units--the main Air Force base at
ITlopango Airfield, the Jst, 2nd, 3rd, and 6th Infantry Brigades,
the Military Engineers Detachment, and the Arce and Atonal
Immediate-Reaction Infantry Battalions--during the initial phase
of the offensive. Although fighting around, some of these bases
was intense, none was captured or destroyed.

3

aa

a]

The pace of the faghtind slowed When the insurgents withdrew
Into working class Neighborhoods in harthern and eastern San
Salvador soan after the oftensive began.

indicate the FMLN leadership expected working ass Salvadorans
to rise up and support them. The rebels forced some residents to
help them dig in, but many civilians tled during lulls in the
fighting. The insurgents’ move into the densely populated
suburbs also permitted them to use the civilian population ag a
shield against the government's superior firepower, but the Army,
relying principally on Infantry forces, succeeded in ousting the

bold, unexpected actions, such as the seizure of the Sheraton

reside. A US diplomat was temporarily taken hostage and the
residence of a senior US official wae destroyed. PY]

inhibited by exaggerated reparta of rebel reinforcements--a
concern bolstered by the discovery that Managua had shipped SA-7
SUurface-to-air missiles to the FMLN--and fixated on the strategic
Significance of the c y defensive,

US

battalions against the massed inaurgents. This campaign has not
to date resulted in any dramatic gains, but has forced many
insurgents back into hiding and continues to disrupt their plans.

Results of the Offensive

The rebels' clearest victory was in the war of perceptions.
They demonstrated a military prowess that has boosted their

government has been ineffective and encouraging additional
international Pressure on San Salvador to make concessions during
future negotiations. ;

Government ineptitude and the rebels' own superior
Propaganda network helped the FMLN in its battle to shape
domestic and international] opinion. Initjal public and
international reaction to the offensive was largely negative
towards the FMLN. Archbishop Rivera y Damas condemned the

attacks, tor example, and announ ed his skeptyersm tewards rebel]
‘alls for dialoque. When the government clums{ ly attempted to

' ;
censor information about the otfensive, however, the FMLN's radio

broadcasts became a key source of information for many
Salvadorana. As the fighting dragged on, familiar FMLN
Propaganda themea--most notably charges of indiscriminate bombing
by the Air Force--acquired greater currency. While

indicates these allegations were greatly exaggerated,
the LN recognized the potency of these charges and, according
to the defense attache, rebels were observed after some aerial
attacks moving bodies to the target areas and spraying buildings

with machinegun fire to simulate the effects of indiscriminate
strafing. ae

The murder of the six Jesuit prieste and twa women on
16 November marked a critical turning point in international
perceptions of the offensive. Attention, particularly in
Washington and other foreign capitals, shifted from the
insurgent-initiated violence to the murders, which evoked
memories of the rampant human rights abuses of the early 1980s
and cast the government as ineffectual at best, and, at worst,
openly repressive. Insurgent Propaganda was able to capitalize
further on charges of government repression as a result of
searches and arrests directed at churches or re] (2) groupes in
San Salvador suspected of supporting the FMLN.

In addition, the offensive altered domeatic perceptions
about the government's credibility and authority. The rebels'
seeming ability to operate with impunity throughout the capital
no doubt shook the faith of many Salvadorans--particularly those
directly affected by the fighting--in the government's ability to
provide for their security. Such a lack of confidence will not
only contribute to elite emigration, capital flight. low
investment, and other practical problems, but in the long run

also could » undermine the democratic process and
hinder efforts to build a political consensus. aa

Despite these gains, the FMLN also suffered some important
political and military setbacks. Salvadorans' failure to rise up
in a popular insurrection or to voluntarily support the rebels in
any significant numbers indicates the FMLN’s popular support is

not broad enough to pose a serious political challenge to the
government. The exposure of many urban front group members--both

by participating in combat and through information provided by
muerte has, for the time being, crippled the
& political apparatus in the capital. The insurgents

emerged from the offensive weakened by heavy casualties--the
Salvadoran Army claims some 1,600 rebels killed and over 1,000
wounded, compared to about 500 killed and 1,300 wounded for the
government--as well as poor morale and desertjons.

a

ey

The FMLN's mi] tary Losses May be offset somewhat by othe:
factors, however. Most casualties appear to have been poorly-
trained urban commandos and new recruits rather than regular
Insurgent forces, and renewed forced recruitment already has
helped offset these losses, In

addition, the insurgents appear to have sufficient arms and
munitions to continue operations, and,
Havana has agreed to increase supply shipments

Outlook

leadership recognizes the potential for exploiting its political
gains and appears already to have reevaluated its strategy. In
the next few months, the insurgents probably will emphasize

ambushes, harassment, and assassinations. Rebel success in
asBassinating a key official--such as President Cristiani or
Chief of Staff Ponce--could dramatically weaken public confidence
7 — government and promote greater political instability.

While a second largescale offensive cannot be ruled out,
most rebel commanders

Talks are unlikely to yield tangible results until one side
either alters its key objective
concessions--both unlikely developments in the near term,
view. There is no evidence to indicate
