Electronic Surveillance Legislation
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096937, dated 2 April 1975.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096937).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Areiqr] ploy “Yy ple1s9 wo Adosoioyg

MEMORANDUM eens 2 A024

SUBJECT: Electronic Surveillance Legislation

1. Over a dozen bills have been introduced in Congress to date
aimed at restricting electronic surveillance conducted on national security
grounds. Although impelled by concern for the Fourth Amendment rights of
American citizens, the major bills in this area (S. 743, H.R. 141, H.R. 214)
are characterized by a heavy-handed approach which poses a serious threat
to the exploitation of foreign SIGINT. sources, both within the United States
and overseas. (Signals intelligence subsumes communications intelligence
and electronic intelligence.) ?

2. The 1968 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act (18 U.S.C.
2510, et seq.) established certain procedures which require the Government
to obtain a court order issued on probable cause prior to conducting wire or
oral communication interception in the investigation of certain offenses. In
section 2511(3) of that Act, Congress specifically disavows any limitation on
the constitutional powers of the President in national security matters and
recognizes that the President has inherent constitutional authority to engage
in certain foreign intelligence activities:

(n)othing contained in this chapter or in
section 605 of the Communications Act of
1934 shall limit the constitutional power of

the President ... to obtain foreign intelli-
gence information deemed essential to the
security of the United States, or to protect

national security information apainst foreign

intelligence activities. (emphasis added)

The emphasized language implicitly recognizes that foreign intelligence
surveillances may be distinguished from national security surveillances
aimed at the discovery and prosecution of criminal conspiracies and activity.

3. In reliance on these Presidential powers and congressional
recognition thereof, foreign intelligence signal and communication interceptions
may be conducted within the United States without judicial warrant.

a ea
z 4 a! “a
fd ¢
[x e\
Les =l
y Ww
\e es

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
15 OCT 1996

Aieiqry] ploy “y presen wor Adosojoyg:

4. Sentiment that the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 2511(3) (quoted above)
are incompatible with Fourth Amendment rights has spawned a Senate bil] and
over a dozen House bills (some of these identical) aimed at closing what the
sponsors view as "the national security loophole" in current surveillance laws.
A distinctive approach to national security surveillance is taking shape which
would prohibit the use of warrantless surveillance for any reason whatsoever,
treating national security surveillance under a single rubric, without distin-
guishing between gathering foreign intelligence on the one hand, and national
security surveillances aimed at the discovery and prosecution of criminality,
on the other.

(a) S. 743 by Senators Nelson and Kennedy would amend

18 U.S.C. 2510, et seq., as follows: First, repeal 18 U.S.C.
2511(3) thereby withdrawing whatever congressional recognition
that section gave the foreign intelligence surveillance powers of
the President. Second, prohibit intercepting the communications
of an American citizen or alien admitted for permanent residence
until a prior judicial warrant is obtained issued on probable cause
that a specific crime, e.g., espionage, has been or is about’to be
committed. Third, prohibit intercepting the communication of a
foreign power or its agent until a prior judicial warrant is obtained
by establishing probable cause (a) that such interception is
necessary to protect the national defense (note narrower standard
than national security); (b) that the interception will be consistent
with the international obligations of the United States; and (c) that
the target is a foreign power or foreign agent. (A foreign agent is
defined as any person, not an American citizen or alien lawfully .
admitted for permanent residence, whose activities are intended
to serve the interests of a foreign power and to undermine the
national defense. Each application for such an interception would
be made to the D. C. Federal District Court on personal and written
authorization of the President and would provide detailed informa-
tion on the target, the purposes and justification of the interception .)
Upon court approval, only the FBI would be authorized to intercept
the communication. Fourth, require that every American citizen
targetted be informed of the specifics of the surveillance within a
month of the last authorized interception. (This disclosure could
be postponed if the Government satisfies the court that the target
is engaged in a continuing criminal enterprise or that disclosure
would endanger national security interests. A foreign power or -
its agent need not be informed of interceptions.) Fifth, require the
Attorney General to report to the Congress, at least quarterly, the
details of each interception undertaken on national security
grounds, to be filed with the Senate Foreign Relations and
Judiciary Committees and the House International Relations and
Judiciary Committees.

; =

° —.

Areiqry] ploy “y pyesay wooly Adosojoyg

(b) H. R. 141 by Representative Kastenmeier, Chairman of
the House Subcommittee on Courts, Civil Liberties, and the
Administration of Justice, which has legislative jurisdiction for
surveillance, is similar to the above bill. It would repeal
18 U.S.C. 2511(3) and amend Title 18 to permit communications
interception in national security cases only under court order
issued on probable cause that an individual has committed one of
several enumerated offenses or is engaged in activities intended to
serve the interests of a foreign principal and to undermine the
national security. (From the language of the bill, it could be
argued that the foreign agent's activities would have to constitute
a criminal offense before a warrant could be issued.) The bill
does not mention the communications of a foreign power.

Each application for an interception would have to be authorized
by the Attorney General and made to a Federal judge of com-
petent jurisdiction. The targetted individual would be informed
of the surveillance within ninety days. The President, Attorney
General, and all Government agencies would be required to
supply Congress, through the Senate Judiciary and Foreign
Relations Committees and the House Judiciary and International
Relations Committees, any information regarding any interception
applied for.

(c) H. R. 214 by Mr. Mosher and seven identical bills
co-sponsored by over 70 Congressmen from both parties, would
prohibit any interception of communications, surreptitious entry,
mail-opening, or the procuring and inspection of records of
telephone, bank, credit, medical, or other business or private
transactions of any individual without court order issued on
probable cause that a crime has been committed. Like S. 743
and H. R. 141, reviewed above, H.R. 214 would repeal 18 U.S.C.
2511(3). Unlike the above bills, H.R. 214 does not provide for non-
law enforcement surveillance. It would also strike out pro-
visions for summary procedures for intercepting communications
during emergencies and would require that detailed information
on each application for a communication interception be reported
to the House and Senate Judiciary Committees.

5. Intelligence Community Interests: These bills, through

imposing judiciary administration over all surveillance, would impair existing
responsibility to conduct electronic surveillance in gathering foreign positive
intelligence, which now reaches wholly domestic communications, those both
transmitted and received within the United States; wholly foreign communications
those both transmitted and received abroad; and transnational communications,
international communications received in or transmitted from the United States.

>

z

.

Arelqr] p1o.j “y pyetay wos Ados0j0yg

SIGINT provides a broad range of foreign intelligence ranging from early

warning indicators to the most mundane information. The importance of any

single intercept or series of interceptions cannot be anticipated in advance;
therefore, the probable cause standard and the proposed requirements of
"particularity" are inappropriate in connection with this method of foreign intelli-
gence collection. (Furthermore, the House bills would impair existing responsibility
for using other intelligence gathering techniques against foreign subjects within the
United States, e.g., medicepts, photo surveillance, etc.)

6. Effect on Intelligence Community Interests: The bills reviewed above
would severely restrict domestic communications interception for foreign intelligence
gathering purposes; raise serious questions respecting authority to intercept
transnational communications; and would even raise questions concerning the
foreign intelligence community's authority to conduct electronic surveillance aby-oad
free from judicial intrusion or other conditions. (Moreover, the House bills

would restrict the use of other intelligence gathering techniques against foreign
targets within the United States.)

(a) Domestic Electronic Surveillance: An operation
mounted against a foreign target within the United States to
gather foreign positive intelligence would apparently not meet the
court test unless the specific message targetted involved an anti-
cipated, demonstrable and direct threat to the national defenge.
S. 743 explicitly confers interception authority to the FBI alone.
It also explicitly raises the issue of the consistency of surveillance
with international obligations, e.g., the Vienna Convention, and
thus challenges the position taken by the State Department that no

current international obligation precludes targetting foreign
facilities within the United States.

(b) Transnational Electronic Surveillance: Proposed
legislation would apparently subject the interception of trans-
national communications from a situs within the United States to
the probable cause standard. It could also provide grounds for
arguing that interceptions of transnational communications from

facilities outside the United States would be subject to the same
standard.

(c) Foreign Electronic Surveillance: The bills
reviewed above are broadly written and the prohibitions are not
expressly limited to the territory of the United States. While the
reach of this legislation should be subject to the built-in limitation
that the authority of a federal court to issue warrants is confined
to its territorial limits, repeal of 18 U.S.C. 2511(3) and the
articulation of probable cause standards for foreign intelligence
gathering activities could have a grave impact on overseas
intelligence collection by bringing into play a body of exclusionary
rule case law (developed in ruling on the admissability in a
Federal criminal trial of evidence obtained overseas by electronic
surveillance). Suffice it, here, to say that this could result in

z

- -
oo

wea

on

Areiqr] pio “y pyeszay wos Adosoj0yg

subjecting overseas foreign intelligence surveillance to the proposed
probable cause standards as a test of the "reasonableness" required
by Fourth Amendment protections. Moreover, this legislation could
raise complex questions in situations where an element of the inter-
ception process falls within the jurisdiction of the federal court, e.g.,
the physical presence of the surveillance device. Even if these bills
would not directly affect authority to conduct foreign electronic
surveillance, they could ultimately weaken it by raising the
opportunity to argue that this authority rests only on three
bases~~assertion of inherent Presidential intelligence-gathering
powers, congressional recognition and judicial acceptance. Repeal.
of 18 U.S.C. 2511(3) may be viewed as weakening the arguinent that
Congress has recognized foreign intelligence gathering authority
inherent in the President and delegated to his Executive branch agents.

Bae ae Summary:

~-Proposed legislation would repeal 18 U.S.C. 2511(3) and would
impose judicial administration of a "probable cause" standard over foreign intelli-
gence electronic surveillance. At the very least, this would restrict communications
interceptions against foreign targets within the United States to situations
involving an anticipated, demonstrable and direct threat to the national defense.
Also, this would probably subject the interception of transnational communica-
tions, from either an overseas or domestic situs, to the same judicial standards.
Finally, this would raise difficult questions concerning the ability of CIA, NSA,
and the service cryptologic agencies to conduct electronic surveillance overseas
against foreign targets without conforming to the standards of Fourth Amendment
"reasonableness" articulated in this legislation. In sum, enactment of proposed
legislation would severely restrict the collection and processing of foreign
SIGINT and would seriously impair the production of all-source intelligence.

--By repealing 18 U.S.C. 2511(3) and by introjecting the judiciary
into the field of foreign intelligence gathering, proposed legislation raises a
constitutional challenge insofar as it purports to withdraw sanction of and
place limitations on the President's inherent power to conduct foreign
surveillance, This infringement could undermine the Executive sources of
authority upon which the intelligence community depends. To be sure, the
proposed requirement of prior judicial authorization of foreign intelligence
surveillances is altogether impractical. But the fundamental constitutional
objection is that it purports to share Executive authority with judicial officers
having no expertise in or responsibility for national security or foreign.
affairs. The necessity of a foreign intelligence surveillance is simply
inappropriate for judicial resolution. It is a matter committed to the Executive
branch by the Constitution and an area for which there are no judicially
manageable standards. An arrangement by which federal judges decide
what foreign intelligence the President may have in his conduct of forei gn
fat la

..

ak
ae?

2

‘,
AY
3 we
5 i a
me st
te ce:
2 et
ar

ar
‘

Areiqry] pio “y presao Woy kdo20\0yg

relations is incompatible with the Chief Executive's inherent foreign
intelligence gathering powers. Since this Presidential authority is
constitutional in nature and stems from a fundamental separation of
governmental powers, a Congressional attempt to require its sharin g
with the judiciary would certainly lead to protracted constitutional
litigation. Moreover, Congress implicitly authorized the use of elec-
tronic surveillance in foreign intelligence activities and this legislation
would circumscribe the very functions which Congress intended the
Agency to perform.
