Feasibility of Japanese Rearmament in Association with the United States
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010668, dated 5 March 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010668).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LIBRARY
AP eaeeveres

RES

ECRETARY FIL

ee

Y_S,. IR

PARR
Papers of

HARRY S, TRUMAN
FPRESIDENT'S §

ee

Sea

oe

4 Gti

a
42ST

ne cede et,
eo

+

ae

.
- at,

.
. “

Appr
Date

_~s
Bre

Bf. . ‘
; if “oe,
1 an On ae it iva
“yl @ fy ‘Pe oh.
zs oN soe 2 5,
. - ‘ ‘
re i rg i
Lot

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

FEASIBILITY OF JAPANESE REARMAMENT IN
ASSOCIATION WITH THE UNITED STATES

NIE-19
Published 20 April 195)

Tne intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,

the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-

ticipated in the preparation of this estimate. All members

of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 17 April.

oe wee

FEASIBILITY OF JAPANESE REARMAMENT IN
ASSOCIATION WITH THE UNITED STATES

THE PROBLEM

hu assess the feasibility of rearming Japan in association with the US and its allies,
the capability of Japan for effecting such rearmament, and the Soviet reaction thereto.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Japan’s value to the Eastern or West-
ern bloc rests on its industrial potential,
its trained manpower, and its strategic
_ Jocation with respect to the Asiatic main-
land and to US defense outposts in the

-... western Pacific.

2. Japan has sufficient manpower and in-
dustrial facilities to enable it, within a
few years, to assume a large and growing

impeded by widespread war-weariness,
fears of a resurgence of militarism, and
concern over economic hardships. A le-
gal obstacle, the importance of which
cannot be accurately estimated at this
time, is the constitutional prohibition
against the maintenance of armed forces
(see Appendix A). The Japanese Gov-

ernment would undoubtedly use popular

reluctance to rearm, as well as the consti-

share cf its own military defense pro-~

vided: (a) enough raw materials includ-
ing those in scarce supply were made
available; and (b) the US furnished in-
terim military assistance and training.
. Japan also has the economic capability to
assume a major share of the costs of re-
armament, and, if Japan were to do 0,
the coller costs to the US would probably
not exceed current levels of US support to
the Japanese economy.

3. We believe that if Japan were accorded
sovereignty under a treaty of peace, and
if the US provided military protection and
economic support, the Japanese Govern-
ment would move toward reconstituting
its armed forces in strength sufficient to
defend Japan and could gain adequate
popular support for this program. For
some time however, progress would be

tutional difficulty, as bargaining points
in negotiations for US military and eco-
nomic aid. —

4. Although the non-Communist coun-
tries with major interests in the Far East
have varying degrees of apprehension
about the remilitarization of Japan, the
present governments in these countries
are reconciled to the necessity of Japanese
defensive rearmament. Australia and
New Zealand, however, would press for the
simultaneous development of mutual se-
curity arrangements with the US par-
ticipating.

5. The Kremlin and the Chinese Commu-
nist regime will continue to try to pre-
vent the conclusion of a Japanese peace
treaty to which they are not a party and
will try to frustrate, or at least to delay

Pe a, ee eed sae
.

and limit Japanese rearmament by
bringing propaganda and diplomatic
pressure to bear on Japan, the US, and
other non-Communist countries .

6. The USSR would refuse to recognize
the validity of a US-sponsored treaty be-
tween Japan and the non-Communist
powers but would not consider it to be suf-
ficiently important in itself to justify di-
rect military action. Soviet concern over
Japan centers not in the treaty issue as
such, but in Japanese rearmament.

7. We do not believe that Japanese re-
armament in itself would set off a general
war between the USSR and the US. UW,
however, the Kremlin were to conclude,
in the light of the world power situation,
that the rearmament of Japan and its
alignment with the US constituted a
threat to the security of the Soviet bloc,
the USSR would probably resort to mili-
tary action at the time and place most ad-
vantageous to itself.

DISCUSSION

1. Because of the strategic location of Japan,
its industrial capacity, and its large pool of
trained civilian and military manpower,

Japan’s ultimate political alignment will be @

decisive factor in the balance of power in the
Far East. If the Communists controlled
Japan, they could:

a. Safeguard the Communist controlled ter-

ritory in Northeast Asia,

>. Breach the US defense line in the west-
ern Pacific;

c. Strengthen the industrial and military
power of the Soviet bloc, particularly in re-
spect to shipping and sea power-with the Far
East; = 9

d. Facilitate Communist aggression in
South and Southeast Asia, and

e. Free Communist forces for deployment
elsewhere.

If, on the other hand, Japan were to be
rearmed and aligned with the West:

a. The West would benefit from the fact
that the industrial and military resources of

-the nation were retained in friendly hands,

b. Japan would provide a ; otential base for
Western military power in Northeast Asia,

c. The US would be able to protect its de-
fense outposts in the western Pacific, and

d. Other non-Communist countries would
be encouraged in their fight apainst the spread
of Communism.”

Japan's Military Potential

2. Because of its present military impotence,
Japan is vulnerable to military attack by the
USSR, which alone, or together, with Com-
munist China, could initiate & large-scale in-
vasion with no further warning than we now
have. Japan has, however, the potential for
creating forces sufficient to defend itself
against such an invasion or to build up &
large military establishment.

$. Japan has sufficient manpower to create
large ground, naval, and air forces.

a.A Japanese Army of Up to 500,000 men
theoretically could be created within six
months or a year after Japan had agreed to
rearmament, equipment and supplies had be-
come available, and a training program had
begun. Its nucleus would be the 75,000 men
now in the National Police Reserve, who are
receiving US training and equipment. The
remainder of such an army and the further in-
crements would be drawn from & manpower
pool of 15 million men, including approxi-
mately 8 million veterans, theoretically fit for
military service. The basic machinery re-
quired for mobilization still exists, and there
are enough veteran officers of the Imperial
Army at all command and steff levels for
virtually any size of army required.

b. Similarly, there are enough naval and
air force personnel, including technicians, to
man large naval and air establishments.

3
{
BS
z

ae

cone poten AMIN

TOP &

4. There are enough trained workers in Japan
to operate an industrial yuant as large and
productive as that maintained during World
War Il. A large part of this industrial plant,
despite war damage and some removals for
reparations, is intact or usable, or could be re-
stored after relatively minor repairs. Japan
still has facilities for the manufacture of such
ground force munitions as edged weapons,
small arms, mortars, rocket guns, artillery,
light tanks, self-propelled guns, combat vehi-
cles, and ammunition. These facilities could
be rapidly expanded. Most Japanese ship-
yards and naval base facilities are still intact
or usable. The nava) arsenals, while dam-
aged by war action and subsequent repara-

~ tions removals, could be retooled to produce

medium- and small-caliber guns, naval mines,
and torpedoes within @ reatlively short time.
Annual capacity for production of a support-
ing merchant ficet is at present rated at 800,-

000 gross tons of steel vessels. Repair facili-

ties for the largest naval ships are available, |

and construction of small naval vessels could

begin fairly soon. We estimate that within 12 .
-to 18 months, a considerable portion of Japan's

former capacity to produce weapons and am-
munition for-the use of ground and naval
forces could be restored.

~§, Japan at present has no capacity for the

manufacture of aircraft or related equipment.

Reconstruction and tooling up to build cur-

rent US fighter and light bomber types of air-
craft, with US aid and equipment, would re-
quire at least two years of intensive effort. It
would take about four years thereafter to at-

‘tain a potential production capacity per

month of 2,300 aircraft of all types, the World

“War JI peak. Crated aircraft and equipment

from outside sources, however, could be as-

~gembled as rapidly as received.

6. Japan depends upon imports for many of
its most essential raw materials as well as
about 20 percent of its foodstuffs. In the past,
the Northeast Asian mainland and Taiwan
were Japan’s principal sources of foodstuffs,
and the Northeast Asian mainland was the
principal source of its coking coal, a sub-
stantial proportion of its iron ore, and some
of its manganese. South and Southeast Asia
were the sources for most of its manganese,

T

rubber, and tin; nearly one-half of its raw cot-
ton; a considerable proportion of its tron ore,
and some of its foodstuffs and petroleum. The
US was the source of about one-half of Japan's
raw cotton and about two-thirds of ite pe-
troleum.

7. Comparatively little raw material from
Northeast Asia has been available in the past
five years, and Communist China probably
would deny Japan all strategic materials
whenever Japanese rearmament and align-
ment with the West had become evident.
Korea, regardless of the outcome of the pres-
ent conflict, will not be able to export much
food or raw material for some time to come.
Because of the burden of supporting the Chi-
nese Nationalists, Taiwan cannot make food
available in the quantities that it formerly
sentto Japan. South and Southeast Asis can
still contribute significantly toward meeting
Japanese requirements for food and such raw
materials as iron ore, rubber, bauxite, tin, and
cotton, and, to B Jesser degree, petroleum, pro-
vided:

a. The area or a large part of it does not
come under Communist control;

b. Communist forces already in the area
do not serious!y interfere with production in
the principal industries; and

c. Transport of materials is not interdicted.

Nevertheless, substantial quantities of iron
ore, coking coal, cotton, and foodstuffs would
have to be imported in the next few years from
the Western Hemisphere, primarily the US, if
Japanese industrial capacity were to be fully
vtilized. Raw materials in adequate quanti-
ties probably could be made available for
Japanese import, although for some materials
US allocations would probably be necessary.

8. If a substantial rearmament program were
undertaken in Japan, dollar aid would prob-
ably be required. The magnitude of dollar
aid would not have to be excessive, although
it would be increased if there were an unde
diversion of Japanese resources from produc-
tion for export to armaments production.
Western rearmament has substantially ixn-
proved the Japanese balance of payments.
The shortage of manufactured products, par-
ticularly metal products, on world markets,

> atin . 8

ror git

together with the improved balance of pay-
ments position of Japan’s customers, has facil-
itated increased sales of Japanese manufac-
tured goods. Earnings from its exports to-
gether with dollar receipts from pay-as-you-go
arrangements with the US should place Japan
in a fairly favorable balance of payments posi-
tion. In addition, Japan has industrial ca-
pacity and skilled manpower substantially in
excess of that currently employed. Given
svailability of raw materials, Japan probably
would be able to expand its exports and at the
same time support a defensive rearmament
program without 2 cutback in its living stand-
aris and «> 2n annua! dollar cost to the US
approxizaating the magnitude of aid now be-
ing exiei.ded.

Prospects For Japanese Reormament

~ 9. Several basic factors in the Japanese situa-
tion strongly favor, though they do not ensure,
Japan’s rearmament in association with the
US and Japan’s cooperation with the US and
{ts allies in opposing Far Eastern Communism.
Japan’s primary desire today is for an arrange-
ment by which it may regain control of its own

affairs, maintain its national security, and .

achieve an accepted international status. Al-
though Japan would have preferred to assume
a neutral status in world affairs in order to

bargain freely with all powers and thus obtain ~

maximum national advantage in economic

and political matters, events in Korea’ have-~

largely dispelled the illusion that Japan could

remain neutral in the East-West struggle. ~

Assuming a reasonably early end of the occu-
_ pation and continued faith in US military and
economic strength, the Japanese attitude
toward the US is likely to remain favorable
or at least not to become so unfavorable as to
be a major obstacle to cooperation i. the early
“post-treaty years.

‘10. Most Japanese leaders in the government
and two of the three principal political parties
either strongly favor rearmarnent or perceive
that it cannot be avoided. The Japanese pco-
ple as a whole, however, are fearful of direct
involvement in another war, of a lowering of
present living standards, and of a revival of
autocratic and militaristic government. In

government circles there is some concern over
the possibility of a threat to civilian control
if high-ranking officers are returned to influ-
ential positions in # rearmament program.
Many Japanese would find it difficult suddenly
to accept the idea of a rearmed Japan. Jap-
anese youth today lack the psychologica) con-
ditioning and sense of mission common to the
prewar and wartime youth in the armed
services.

11. Against these factors, however, must be
set Japan’s historic fear of Russia, the per-
sistent threat of Soviet aggression, the anti-
Communist tradition of the Japanese people,
their ingrained obedience to authority, their
deep-rooted patriotism, and their nationalism,
a)l of which would impel them to fight in de-
fense of Japan. During the last ten months,
there has been a trend in favor of self-defense.
Given government leadership and the contin-
uing threat of Soviet aggression, this trend is
likely to be accelerated.

12. A Japanese governmental decision to

_ move toward reconstituting Japanese armed

strength would require:
a. A peace treaty, signed at the earliest pos-

sible moment by as many as possible of

Japan’s former enemies, which would restore
Japanese sovereignty.
b. Asecurity arrangement providing for the

- commitment of US military forces to the de-

fense of Japan while Japanese strength was
being developed.

c. Assurance of US economic support.

The extent of popular acceptance of a gov-
ernment decision to rearm would be influenced
by such factors as the disposition of the
Ryukyus and Bonins and the extent to which.
the Japanese people had become convinced
that rearmament would be for their own secu-
rity. Even after a decision to rearm was
taken, however, security arrangements and
questions of economic aid would presumably
be the subject of continuous negotiation as
the Japanese sought to use their strategic im-
portance to the US to exact the greatest possi-
ble concessions from the US.

13. If Japan were fully sovereign and rearmed,
its course would probably be determined
chiefly by opportunistic considerations. Thus,

10 ge ‘

> NAR te 8 oe

ror eres

Japan could be expected to exploit its bar-
gaining position, to expand its sphere of in-
fluence, and to make its own accommodation
to any significant change in the Far Eastern
or international power situation. Basically,
however, it would retain a preference for &
Western rather than 8 Soviet alignment.

World Reactions to Japanese Rearmament

14. A US decision to assist Japanese rearma-
ment would not cause seriously adverse reac-
tions in any non-Communist country with
major interests in the Far East. Australia*
and New Zealand, however, will require US
guarantees against future Japanese military
aggression. These countries, as a result of
their World War II experiences, are reluctant
to see Japan rearmed despite increasing evi-
dence of the threat to their security repre-
sented in the expansion of Communism in the
Far East. They therefore desire safeguards
against both Communist expansionism and
resurgent Japanese militarism. The Western
European nations and the UK accept the nec-
essity and desirability of Japanese rearma-
ment.

15. Because of the deep-rooted Chinese fear of
Japan, a US decision to rearm the Japanese

would tend to reinforce the Sino-Soviet

alliance.

16. The USSR would oppose a US-sponsored ~

treaty between Japan and the non-Communist
powers. Instead, it would insist that the
proper procedure would be for the US, tne
USSR, the UK, France, and Communist China
to draft a treaty for submission to the other
interested parties. The main provisions which
the USSR would insist should be incorporated

in a treaty, all designed to facilitate eventual

Soviet penetration of Japan, would be: (a) im-
mediate evacuation of occupying troops, (>)
“demilitarization” of Japan; and (c) “‘democ-
ratization” of Japan according to Soviet ideas.

*In view of the declared opposition of Australian
Javor leaders to Japanese rearmament, an Austral-
fan Labor Party victory in the forthcoming general
election would reduce the likelihood of obtaining
the agreement of the Australian Government to
Japanese rearmament, even given mutual security
arrangements in the Pacific.

Territorial settlements, the USSR would claim,
would only require ratification of provisions in
the Cairo (1943) and Potsdam (1945) agree-
ments. The effect of this would be to con-
tinue Soviet possession of the Kuriles and
South Sakhalin, establish Chinese Communist
control over Taiwan and the Pescadores, and
return the Ryukyus and Bonins from US con-
trol to Japan. Because the rea) concern of
the USSR is over Japanese rearmament rather
than a treaty, Soviet reaction to the signing
of a US-sponsored treaty would take the form
of a propaganda campaign of accusations that
the US was planning “further aggression”
from Japan, threats of counteraction based on
the Sino-Soviet treaty, and threats of economic
pressure implicit in emphasis on the economic
disaster that would result if Japan cut itselt
off economically from the mainland. By such
propaganda, the USSR would try not only to
prevent or delay a treaty but also to compli-
cate US foreign relations with the non-Com-
munist nations in Asia. If the US should pro-
ceed on the present basis and actually con-
clude a treaty with Japan without Soviet par-
ticipation, the USSR would declare that the
USSR did not recognize its validity and was in
no way bound by any of the treaty provisions.
Nevertheless, the USSR has probably already
discounted the proposed bilateral US-Japanese
arrangements and would not consider the
formalization of these arrangements in a writ-
ten agreement as sufficiently important in
itself to justify direct military action. This
is true primarily because Soviet concern over
Japan centers not in the treaty issue as such
but in Japanese rearmament.

17. The Kremlin would undoubtedy view Jap-
anese rearmament, particularly in conjunc-
tion with US, Western European, and German
rearmament, as a Serious obstacle to attain-
ment of Soviet objectives and ultimately, per-
haps, as part of a cumulative threat to the
security of the USSR. Soviet reaction to Jap-
anese rearmament would be strong, especially
if it reached a Scale that promised to produce
a military force potentially capable of offensive
action. The USSR would probably make dip-
lomatic countermoves comparable to those
elicited by the prospect of West German re-
armament and would attempt to thwart or

Tog MECRET 5

limit Japanese rearmament by propaganda
and other means short of direct military ac-
tion. These would include:

a. Attempting to create further dissension
between the US and its allies over US policy
in Asia;

b. Arousing victims of former Japanese ag-
gression to resentment egainst the US, be-
cause of its role in building up Japan; and

c. Continuing to accuse the US of imperi-
alist designs in Asia and of Geliberate violation
of international agreements.

18. The USSR would also attempt to weaken
Japanese popular will to support the US by
at least:

a. Continuing to make increasingly pointed
references to Sino-Soviet treaty provisions for
joint action by Communist China and the
USSR against renewed Japanese aggression,

and

b. Exploiting Japanese desires for trade
with the mainland, particularly North China
and Manchuris..--

TO

19. If, over a period of time, Soviet leaders
came to the conclusion that they could not
prevent Japanese rearmament by such tac-
tics, they would probably consider further
courses of action. At that time, the Kremlin
undoubtedly would take into consideration the
relative world power situation of the USSR
(including atomic capabilities), particulariy
the extent to which Western European and

rest German rearmament had developed, and
the military situation of the Chinese Commu-
nists, as well as the scale and rate of progress
of Japanese rearmament. We do not believe
that Japanese rearmament in itself would set
off a general war between the US and the
USSR. If, however, the Kremlin were to con-
clude, in the light of the world power situa-
tion, that the rearmament of Japan and its
alignment with the US would shift the world
balance of power sufficiently to constitute &
threat to the security of the Soviet bloc, the
USSR would probably resort to military ~
action. .

Prva Sema)

eee wi ee!

S
¢
e
t
z
ee
4

. APPENDIX A

PROVISIONS OF THE JAPANESE CONSTITUTION PERTINENT TO THE
QUESTION OF REARMAMENT

The following provisions of the Japanese constitution are relevant to the problem of rearm-

ing Japan:

"Chopter Il. - Renunciotion of Wor

Article 9. Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Jap-
anese people forever renounce war as & sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use
of force as means of settling international! disputes.

“In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, a5
well as other war potential, will never be maintained. The right of beliigerency of the state
will not be recognized.”

“Chapter Vi. Judiciory

- Article 81. The Supreme Court is the court of last resort with power to determine the con-
‘ stitutionality of any law, order, regulation or official act.”

"Chopter IX. Amendments

Article 96. Amendinents to this Constitution shall be initiated by the Diet, through a con-
curring vote of two-thirds or more of all the members of each House and shall thereupon
be submitted to the people for ratification, which shall require the affirmative vote of &
majority of all votes cast thereon, at a special referendum or at such election as the Diet
shall specify...”

TO,

ee
