The Soviet Forced Labor System
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000102917, dated 1 January 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000102917).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

UNCLASSIFIED

Central intelligence Agency

Forced labor is at the core of the Soviet penal system and we currently
estimate that it encompasses some 4 million Soviet citizens in its ranks, at
least half of whom are incarcerated in over a thousend heav Liy-secured forced
labor camps ecattered throughout the USSR. Moet of the remainder are parolees
and probatloners--unconfined in the strictest gense, but forced to work,
usually at construction projects far from their homes. Recent trends indicate
an increase in unconfined forced laborers while the muaber of conf ined
prisonera remains about the same as during the lest decade. (v)

Unconfined forced laborers are sentenced (in the case of probationers) or
are released (parolees) to perform mostly low ekill labor on large
construction projects, often in reacte regions where labor is scarce and
incentives for attracting and keeping free leborers are expensive. Thousands
of these unconfined forced laborere, for exanple, were used on construct ion o”
the huge Kama River truck plant (the world's largest) end the Meykal-Asur
Mainline (BAN) railroed. Recent ev ideace--inacluding reports froe the
International Society for Miman Rights--confires the Present use of parolees

and probationers on large domestic pipelines, in perticuler for construction
of compressor stations. (U)

Because of the use of forced laborers in the Pest end because of current
labor shortages in the USSR, it ls idkely that forced laborers will be used on
almost any large construction project ia the USSR, tacluding pipelines such as
the West Siberia-to-Evrope natural ges export line. In addition, because of
their widespread distribut loa, forced labor caape can be found near scet major
construction projects or pipeline routes. for exanple, 9 to 100 camp are
close to the proposed route of the export pipeline (see Map 2). Meavily
secured prisoners could be tapped for work because of their proximity, even
though the probleas of controlling and guarding thea would be difficult. fhe
International Society for Human Rights alleges that this is 80, but we cannot
independently confire their reports. (U)

While large-scale use of forced laborers on the export pipeline is
unlikely because many of the jobs require special skills, some forced labor
will probably be used unless the Soviets depart from their usual practice
because of the exposure the issue has received in the Western media. If
historical precedent is followed, the unskilled forced Jaborers will be used
in construction of compressor stations and eurillary buildings--eost of whica
are in an early stage of construction. (U)

Apcroved fev owas,

UNCLASSIFIED = Gi. 82-20201

UNCLASSIFIED

THE SOVIET FORCED LABOR SYSTEM

Contents

-{

Preface PHSCHCESHEHTHHECHA RHC LEHE EH OCETO HEB ORETHEH EEC HHSEBE

The Soviet Forced Labor Syetamecccrsccccsccccccuce
How Many Forced LADOTOLE?P ccccccccrccccccsceces
Focoed Labor With Confimamentscccrcccccccccces

Payment OF Prl@onerB.cscccscccccccccsscces
Incentives and Penalties. .ccccccscsssesece
Working Conditlone.cccccccccssssccccsccees
Forced Labor Without Conf irmemant.rccccccccecee
Pole of Poroed Labor in the Boornomty.ccccccsece
COMBEFUCEION. cescsececcccnsccesccccesorees
Pipeline Constructions sccoscccsccccccneces
Siberian Gas Expoct Pipeline .scaccscecscas
Marufacturing.cccosecscccsccccsevecccesses
Logg ing Ord Other Activities. cccccccscoces

ond antl andll-exdil vell_and
WWW OOAA Ua WR DH

1. Colme and Sentencing

2. Regimes in Effect in Correctional Labor Facilities
3. Types of Prisons

4. Eligibility for Parole

1. Soviet Union: Porced Labor Camps and Selected Pipelines
2. Soviet Union: Boonamlc Utilization of Prisoners

Figure 1
Sketch of Typical Corrective (Porced) Labor Camp

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

PREFACE

To enable observers of the Soviet Union to better assess the reports of
use of forced labor in the USSR, especially reports of its use on the gas
export pipeline to Western Europe, this study has been prepared on the overall
system of forced labor in the Soviet Union. Various aspects of the system as
outlined in Soviet official documents, such as the The Russian Soviet

Federated Socialist Republic (RSPSR) Criminal Code, are exarained in the light

the accounts by former prisoners and other enigres that have been published in

Western news media about the realities of the systes. ‘The report has been

prepared from a broad arrey of documents, echolarly studies, and other source

materials relating to the subject of the Soviet penal system in general and
forced labor in particular.

° UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFICD

THE SOVIET FORCED LABOR SYSTEM

The Soviet penal system is remarkable for its huge size and its
systematic employment of labor. ‘The labor camps ao vividly described by

Solzhenitsyn are only one element of a system that also includes prisons as
well as a growing cadre of forced labor without confinement. The Soviets have
an ideological commitment to the rehabilitative role of labor in the social
adjustment of the individual, and accordingly refer to the forced labor camps
as “oorrectional® labor colonies.*

Correct ional labor colonies were first established in 1919 on the
Solovetskiy Islands in the White Sea, but until Stalin assumed power the
system grew rather slowly. Stalin's forced labor systea reeched a peak of
perhaps 15 million persons in 1947. After Stalin's death liberal reforns
reduced the camp population, and in 1957 ®.1. Ruiryevtsev, Ceputy Procurator
General of the Soviet Union, asserted that te number had been reduced to
about 800,000 to 900,000, and thet 1 to 2 percent were “politicals.® Toes)
the end of the Mirushchev ere, criminal penalties were toughened, the criss
rate increased, and the camp system began to expand again. Criminal charges
were used increasingly to control political dissidents. Although many of the
old vamps in Siberia and the Far East wore abandoned, others were bullt closer

to population centers.
In addition, an extensive eysteam of forced labor without confinement had

its inception in the early 1960s ard has grown rapidly in scope since then;
the number of non-confined forced laborers now more than equals the number of
thoee confined, and it is continuing to rise. Given the worsening labor

C

UNCLASSIFIED

shortage in parts of the Soviet Union, thie relatively efficient, flexible

method of deriving same econanic benefit fram an increasing crime rate is
likely to continue to grow.

In the Soviet Union nine out of every 10 persons convicted of crimes (see
Appendix 1) more serious than misdemeanors receive sentences that include

forced labor. About half of these sentences also include confinement.
Although approximately half of those sentence’ to confinement are paroled froa
confinement, they continue in the forced labor system until they finish their

teres.

How Many Foroed Laborers?

We currently estimate that some 4 alllion Soviet citizens—ebout 1.5

peroent of the population—are now serving sentences of forced labor.

= About 2 alllion of these are confined, 85 percent in forced labor
canps—-of which there are over 1,100—and the remainder in prisone.

— Approximately 1.5 million, convicted of crimes for wich they could
have received sentences of confinement, have been sentenced instead to
Probation with °caspulsory involvement in labor.* Most of them are
working at construction jobs far from their hones.

—— About 509,000 have been paroled fram confinement but remain obligated
to perfora forced labor for the reminder of their terms. Many of
them also are working at construction sites.

—- In addition an undetermined number are sentenced to “correct ional
tasks* without confinement; they are working at their own jobs for
reduced pay or in more menial jobs for low pay while continuing to
live at home.

Among these forced laborers are diasidents (political prisoners) whose

UNCLASSIFIED

wo

UNCLASSIFIED

numbers may reach as high as 10,000, the figure claimed by Sakharov and
Amesty International. A former Soviet official reports that Ministry of
Internal Affairs (MVD) records listed 10,358 political prisoners at the
beginning of 1977. Aleksandr Gineburg, a prominent political dissident,
estimated that there were 5,000 political prisoners in 1979. Dissidents in
the Soviet Union fall into at least six categories: refuseniks (those refused
permission to leave the USSR), religious nonconformmists, huaan and civil
rights activists, minority nationalists, discontented workers, and Ruseian
nationalists. ‘The higher estimates above probably include some who, in
addition to being dissidents, are accused of crimes of “hooliganign’® and
*"parasitien.®

Forced Labor With Confinement

The Correctional Labor Code of the RSTSR establishes four basic types of
confinement facilities: correctional labor colonies, educational labor
colonies (for juveniles), colony settlonents, and prisons. Lach tyre of
facility is differentiated by the anount of freedam and privileges granted to
the prisoners; the degree of supervision, reginaentation, and restraint to
which they are subjected; the difficulty of their labor; and the conditions
under which they must live and work. ‘The regimes (see Appendix 2) in effect
at prisons are the most harsh; the ones in effect at correctional labor
colonies and educational labor colonies somewhst lees harsh; and the regine at
colony settlements is the mildest in the systen.

The gravity of the offender's crime avd whether or not he is a recidivist
determines in which of the following facilities incarceration will occur.

* Correctional labor colonies constitute the bulk of the traditional

Soviet confinement system where convicts are closely guarded,

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

supervised, and regimented. Labor colonies are enclosed by as many as

six or seven fences and walls with towers un each corner manned by
armed guards (Figure 1). A typical one-story wooden barracks houses a
detachment of 140 to 160 prisoners divided into two sections. ‘The
legal minimum living area per prisoner (2.0 square meters in prisons;
2.5 square meters in carps) ig not much larger then an American-style
twin bed.

Educational labor colonies are correctional institutions for juvenile
criminals aged 14 through 17. Inmates of educational labor colonies
are usually transferred to correctional labor colonies when they reach
age 18. ‘Those who have lees than two years of a sentence remaining
and who seem well on the way to rehabilitation howver, aay be allowed
to remain at the educational labor colony.

Correct lonal labor colony settlements are milder forms of ocnfinement
that were introduced in 1977, Often referred to by prisoners as the
“fifth regime*, these colony settloments are located in areas there
new industries are being built and at other construction sites. Many
regular canpe—eepecially in Kazakhstan, Siber{a, the Far East, and
the Par North—have associated colony settlements. Colony settlements
are the least onerous facilities in the penal system and the ony ones
in which the sexes are not segregated. Por instance, prisoners must
obeerve a curfew ard perform the labor designated for them, but they
may wear ordinary clothing, ard few restrictions are placed on their
private behavior or thelr privileges.

Soviet prieons are urban facilities, most of which have been expanded
and reconstructed since Czarist times, and present the harshest
confinement in the system. All major cities have at least one large

UNCLASSIFIED

ce: UNCLASSIFIED

prison. ‘dajor prisons number about 300 and house some 300,000 inmates

at any one time. Prisons are differentiated by primary function; four
types may be distinguished: penitentiaries, transit prisons,

investigatory prisons and paychiatric prisons (see Appendix 3).

Payment of Prisoners -

Soviet law stipulates that inmates in prisons and labor colonies are to
be paid at least the ainimun wage for their work. Since inwates are not
permitted to keep money in their possession (a rule constantly abused), wages
are credited to the prisoners’ accounts. ‘Theoretically, after deductions for
their upkeep have been made, the balance is credited to their accounts and
paid to them when they depart; however, many prisoners reported)y have no

money when they are released.
Prisoners are allowed as much as 5 rnbles monthly in credit at the prison

or colony comalissary on what are termed °food itens and beeic neceseities.°
Soap, tooth powder, envelopes, postage stamps, tobacco, cigarettes, black
bread, margarine, candy, jam and canned fish are typical commissary items, but
reportedly many of theee are frequently unavailable. ‘There are no
restrictions placed on the amount of money 8 prisoner aay spend on books,
educational supplies, and stationery. ‘The number of letters prisoners may
send and receive and the number of psckages and parcels they may receive are
closely regulated; such privileges are commonly used as a means of enforcing
peiaon discipline.

Incentives ard Penalties

The Correct lonal Labor Code specifies incentives that ‘may be employed to
encourage convicts' good behavior and honest attitude toward work and
training." These incentives include the granting of additional privileges—

. | UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

perhaps permission to spend an extra couple of rubles in the commissary. More

significant measures entail transfer of prison inmates to labor colonies, oc

transfer of inmates of labor colonies of other than special regime to colony
settlements. Such transfers may not take place until at least half the
sentence has been served. ;

The Correctional Labor Code also specifies penalties that “may be applied
to convicts for violating the requirements of the regime.* Not surprisingly,
most of the penalties are mirror images of the incentives: a warning or
reprimand, withdrawal of privileges, and tranafer to harsher conf inesent
conditions. Por major infractions, inaates of both labor camps and prisons
may be put in “punitive isolation.® First offenders are sentenced for as long
as 15 days to a punistment isolation cell, better known as the shiao, oc

cooler.

Working Conditions
The RSFSR Correct ional Labor Code provides guidelines on the general work

conditions of prisoners, while apecific conditions are eatablished by the
prison and colony adainistrators. Work is compulsory, and those who do not
work receive a reduced food ration and no psy. Inmates are required to work
eight hours per day, six days a week. Prisoners who must travel to sork
sites, such as thoee in logging or construction areas, “donate® this extra
time to the state. Most camps work two shifts, from 0600 to 1700 and from
1700 to 0100.

According to many fommer prisoners fron many different camps, violations
of good safety and health practices are common throughout the systea, even
though the Correctional Labor Code stipulates that “convicts' work is
organized ao as to observe labor protection rules and industrial safety

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

measures as established by labor law." At a sawnilling camp in Riga, for

example, serious accidents were reported to occur frequently. Prisoners in
this camp work without helmets, gloves, or safety goggles.

Forced Labor Without Confinement’

Persons sentenced to forced labor without confinement fall in two
categories: those assigned to correctional tasks without confinement, an
administrative penalty that amounts to little aoce than a fine, ard those
sentenced to correctional labor without confinement. Tho latter comprises tv
sub-categories: parolees (also know ase khiaiki*) and probetioners with
compulsory labor.

The penalty of correctional tasks without confinement is meted out to
offenders whoee crimes are deamed not ecrious enough to justify sentences of
confinement. ‘The compulsory tasks may be performed either at the offender's
regular workplace or at same other nearby place so that he may continue to
live at home. ‘he of ferder's pey is docked es such as 20 percent, and the
time epent performing correctional tasks (maxiem sentence: one year) may not
count towards hia job eeniority. The maber of Soviet citizens who receive
such sentences anmwally is difficult to estimate but could number about a half
million, judging fron fragmentary information.

In 1964 the Supreme Soviet of the USSR decreed that certain prisoners
then under confinament could be released—in effect, paroled—fros penal
institutions and sent to construction sites to work out the balance of their

*When the parole program started, most parolees were sent to
construction sites of the chemical industry, which was then
undergoing a major expansion. The prisoners therefore referred
to the program as een eee ye and to the parolees (and,
later, also to the pro fonera) as khimiki--chemists. The tern
khimiya remains in use to this day.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

gentences without confinement. Article 44 of the Criminal Code was amended to

establish eligibility requirements for this program. Thoee not eligible

include prisoners undergoing campulsory treatment for alcoholiaa, drug
addiction, or venereal disease; foreign prisoners, and prisoners “who
systematically or maliciously“ violate the terms of their confinement. All
others were eligible—those confined for the most serious of fenses
(intentional homicide, crimes against the state) after serving three-quarters
of their time, and those serving for leseer offenses after lesser aunts of
time (See Appendix 4).

The MVD serves as a clearing house—a kind of enployment agency—keeping
track on the one hand of requests froa other alnistries for forced laborers,
ard on the other of eligible prisoners who might be paroled to fulfill these
requirements. Periodically (perhaps two or three times a year), groups of
eligible prisoners are freed fram confinement in shat are called “amnesties®
and sent in guarded batches to the forced labor sites. tntil recently,
prisoners convicted of especially dangerous crimes agairoc the state had
little chance of being granted parole. However, demands foc forced laborers

have become eo insistent that even some political prisoners have been
paroled. verall, roughly one-half of all pereons under confinement are now
being paroled before the end of their temas and are serving an average of tuo
years at compulsory labor without confinement. Approximately 500,000 parolees
are currently perforaing forced labor under this system.

In 1970, another decree of the Supreme Soviet author!szed courts to iseus
sentences of “probation with compulsory labor" as an alternative to
“confinement with cospulaory involvement in labor.* i such sentences, the
confinement portion is suspended but the labor portion remains. ‘The new
decree greatly widened the scope of the program of forced labor without

UNCLASSIFIED

®

UNCLASSIFIED

confinement, for now the entire sentence could be ao served. ‘The stated

intent of the decree was to allow courts more latitude in determining the
sentence when they decided that an offender could be reformed without
confinement. Perhaps not coincidentally, however, treating offenders in this
way pemaits the state to extract- maximus econonic benefit from their labor at
minimum cost.
Estimating the number of persons serving sentences of probation with

compulsory involvement in lebor is difficult. In 1973 the Chief Astice of
the Lithuania Supreme Court commented that nearly 20 percent of the court

@entences iseued in Lithuania fell into this category and that this percentage

was rising. A Uxrainian cart layer until 1979 eetinated at least 30 percent
of all criminal court oasee received sentences to compulsory labor. Recent
information suggests that this has riscn to about half of current sentcnces.
Assuming this is correct, and that the average sentence is } to 4 years, there
are now 1.4 million to 1.8 alllion persons on prodetion with compulsory
involvement in labor.

Persons sentenced to correctiona] tests without confinement never leave
home and suffer minimal disruption in their lives, but the parolees and
probationers sentenced to correct iona) labor without confinement may be sent
to large construction sites far from their hoses. when assigned to vork
outside their immediate home aress, parolees are usually transpocted to their
assigned work sites in quarded groups on trains, and if they travel long
distances, they spend several periods in transit prisons en route.
Probationers are usually permitted to make their ou travel arrangemsmts and
travel to their assigned work sites unescorted.

At the work sites the forced laborers live in barracks similar to those
in correctional labor colonies. ‘The facilities are not guarded, but the

UNCLASSIFIED

©

UNCLASSIFIED

convicts must obeerve a daily curfew, normally at 2200 hours. Asa rule a

laborer 's special skills will be utilized as much as possible at the work
site, but there are reports that some laborers are required to perform heavy
manual labor regardless of their skills. ‘They are peid the Soviet minieus
wage for such labor and after paying for room and board (no more than 30
percent) are allowed to keep oc sperd the rest of their money as they wish.
They are pemaitted to eat wherever they wish. It is not unusual for such
convicts, especially probationers, to be granted permission to leave the work
site to visit relatives, conduct personal business, or even to take vacations.
The time spent at forced labor without confinement counts toward

fulfillment of the confinement sentence at the rate of one day for one day.
But if the parolee or probationer violates the terms of his sentence or
camits ae new crime at his work site, he is sent back to the penal institution
fron whence he came (or would have gone, in the case of a probetioner) and
forfeits all of the time apent outslde confinement. Authorities apparently
try to evoid applying this drastic punishecnt to convicts nearing the ends of
their sentences.

Role of Porosd Labor in the Boonosy
Forced laborers engage in nearly all forms of econamic activity. ‘They

constitute about 3 percent of the total Soviet labor force, which now is
estimated at 147 million. In the 1960s, labor force grow’h will be less than
half of what it was in the 19708. Porced labor is thus likely to become a
more laportant means of recieving serious manpower shoctages, particularly in
inhospitable areas, and there is likely to be much greater use of forced
laborers who are not confined. Unconfined forced labor provides a flexible
and inexpensive source of labor for hazardous oc unhealthy duty of for work in

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

remote locations.

Most inmates of prisons, correctional labor colonies, and colony
settlements work full time in a broad variety of economic activities,
including manufacturing, construction, logging and wod processing, mining,
producing building materials, and agriculture (Map 2).

Construction, Under Stalin, forced labor was used heavily in the
development of remote areas of the Par North, Siberia, ard the Par Last.
Cities such as as Nocil'sk, Vockuta, Magnitogorsk, and Magadan were built
largely by forced labor. Major construction projects such as the Baltic-thite
Sea and Volga-Don Canals, es well as parts of the Trans-Siberian and Kotlas-
Vorkuta Railroads, relied heavily upon foroesd labor.

In recent years, more than 100 camps, oc appronimetely 10 percent of the
total, have been associated with construction activities. Construction camps
are scattered throughout the USSR, anet of then in or near cities. ‘The
heaviest concentrations are in Kasakhetan and Central Asia. Tho inmates
usually work at sites throughout the cities in which the caps are located;
hence they are sore visible to the general populace than those in other kinds
of camps. Me source reported watching 40 trucks, cach loaded with 4
Prisoners, drive off daily fram the labor colony at NishnekamsxX to nearby
sites where a petrochenical complex, a large autoactive repeir facility, and a
concrete products plant were under construction. In many large cities
apartment houses, hotels, hospitals, government office buildings, and the like
have been built by convict Labor.

The practice of using forced labor for the clearing and construction work
for entire new towns continues. Examples include Shevchenko, a showplace city
on the Caspian Sea containing a nuclear-powered desalination plant, and tevol,
a petrochemical city in Central Asia near a large deposit of natural gas.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Both cities still contain major concentrations of forced labor.

forced laborers on probation or parole from confinement are being
employed at a multitude of major construction projects throughout the
country. Especially large concentrations of them, nuxbering in the thousands,
have been used in construction of the huge Kama River truck plant (the world's
largest) and the Baykal-Amur Mainline (BAM) railroad. Parolees and
probationers are also employed in industrial production and other econcic
activities, including pipeline construction.

Pipeline Construction. Forced labor has been used e@ an integral part of
pipeline construction work crews in the Uxraine, Razakhetan, and the central
RSFSR. ‘The forced laborers in pipeline construction have come largely fros
parolees and probationers, and have been used in unskilled jobs such as
clearing forests, draining evempe, ard preparing roads. Porced labor come
are usually removed before skilled workers arrive, minimizing contact between
the groups. In some areas, however, unconfined forced laborers heve worked
directly with free workers dolng lowekilled jobs. Parnices are usually
released to a specific work site, for example, a construction site foe a
compressor station, where they must rewin until completion of their
assignment. ‘They often iive in trailers oc barvecks similar to those of other
workers. If local labor is not avellable, construction authorities may appeal
to the chlast executive comittee amd the local ocgans of the MVD tu assign
paroled prisoners to a work site. Peraled prisoners and probationers are not
generally employed in laying pipe, which requires mobile crews. ‘They
reportedly are used in the construction and repair of gas compreesor stations,
service roads, and workers’ housing. Many of these unconfined forced laborers
are young people who have been convicted of petty crimes and are serving

relatively light sentences.
° yincLASsIFIED

(@ ©

UNCLASSIFIED

Siberian Gas Export Pipeline
In view of the past use of unconfined forced laborers and the current

shortage of labor, it seems that some forced labor would be used along the

export pipeline route for compressor station and euxiliary construction unless
the Soviets depart froa their usual practice because of the exposure in the
Western media. There are about 100 heavily secured forced labor camps close
to the proposed route, all of which existed before the start of construction
of the export pipeline. Prisoners in the camps are engaged in a variety of
activities, but they could be tapped for pipeline construction wock if
needed. However, it is more likely that forced laborers will come from the
ranks of parolees and probationers.

Manufacturing. Well over half of the USSA's forced labor camps and
numerous large prisons contain eame type of manufacturing facility. ‘These
institutions associated with manufacturing are most heavily concentrated in
the western USSR, eepecially in the Ukraine. Industrial camps tend to be
larger ard more complex than the other types, and there is a greet diversity
of manufacturing activicies, for example:

— 17 camps in the Mondovekaye ASSR Complex produce a variety of
manufactures including metal products, clothing, clocks, automotive
parts, furniture, and souvenirs;

— 12 Latvian camps produce astal goods, woden furniture and souvenirs,
clothing, footwear, and electrical equipment;

— eight camps in Lithuania produce electrica) sockets and plugs, home
appliances, clothing, plastic and rubber products, and furniture,

— in a Siberian camp near Ulan-Ude, 1,500 prisoners produce furniture,
glass, and clothing.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Typically, the prisoner work force at a manufacturing camp is
supplemented by free laborers, some of them former Prisoners, who may account
for as much as 15 percent of the total. Most of this latter group serve as
foremen, technicians, engineers, and quality control experts.

Logging and Other Activities. About 350 canps are engaged in logging,
sawnilling, and related activities. ‘These Operationg are concentrated in the
Urals, the Nortinest, the \oloe-Vyatke, and the Siberian econcmic regions.
Most logging camps are by nature temporary and crude in construction) they are
abandoned as surrounding areas are depleted of trees. In the past, ebendoned
logging camps were usually replaced by new ones elenhere, Now, however, the
use of forced labor in logging and wood processing seems to be declining, and
relatively few new camps of this type are being constructed.

approximately SO camps are associated with mineral extraction, far (mer
than in former years thon forced labor was extensively used in pining,
cepecially in the Folyma Basin, vhere gold mining and some lead ard coal
mining were carried on by prisoners. Coa] aining wes aleo pursued in
Fazaxhstan and in the Russian North et Vorkuta and on iovaye Jenlye. Todey
coal is still mined by forced laborers at Vorkuta and Naraganda as 1s uraniun
at theltyye Vody in the Ukraine, gold at Jarafshan in Central Asia, iron ore
at Pudnyy, and bauxite at Arkalyk—the last two in Kazakhstan. at Vesalomna,
Estonia, Prisoners work a large limestone deposit.

Camps producing construction materials have in recent years increased
slightly, to about 60, ard are ecattered throughout the UBER. Compe in this
category enjage primarily in producing bricks and blocks used in the

construction industry.
Agricultural camps number about 20 and play a amall and decreasing role
in the Soviet forced labor system. Conditions in agricultural cesps are lees

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

a.
canps are

Caucasus.

UNCLASSIFIED

APPENDIX I

Crime and Sentencing

Crime is a major problem in the Boviet Union, and it appears

to be getting worse. These conclusions are supported by many

sources -- diplomats, businessmen, tourists, eaigre accounts

published in the West, and even Soviet journals and news media.
The most prevalent crimes are hooliganisa and theft of state
and personal property. Juvenile crime is reaching serious
proportions. Alcoholism has reached epidemic proportions and
is blamed for much crime, especially the violent forms. The
murder rate (in 1976, 6 per 190,000 people) is below that in
the US, but much higher than in Western Rurope. The crime rate
{se generally higher in usben ereas than in rural areas, with
the exception of several of the largest cities such as Moscow
and Leningrad, where ex-convicts are denied residence pecnits.
It is highest of all in the cemote cities of Siberia and the
Fac Worth, where many convicts have been forced to resettle

after completing teraus of forced labor.

Crimes that ere categorized as “especially dangerous crimes
against the state® are considered among the sost serious in the
USSR; they includ treason, terrocisa, sadotage, and “anti-
Soviet agitation and propaganda” -- the last an offense with

which political dissidents are often charged. Persons convicted

of such crimes receive some of the harshest punishment the penal

system offers. Legal punishments range from a public expression
of censure or @ small fine to death by shooting. The death
penalty is authorized for some 25 crimes, including a number of

economic offenses. Several hundred executions are carried out

annually.

Crime and punishment in the USSR differ from their nature
in the United States and Western Rucope in several iaportant
respects. There are several kinds of behavior considered
Crimes in the Soviet Union, but not @leewhere. These include
the preparation and distribution of writings critical of the
government or of the communist system, several kinds of
unregistered or unauthorized religious activities, living in
the capital without authorization, departure from the country
without permission, *hooliganiom® and “parasitica. °* Although
prominent political dissidents may be sentenced for “serious
crimes® such as Slandering the Soviet stete, lesser known irdi-
viduals who cun afoul of political and religious restrictions
are often accused of “hooliganien® and “parasitiam.® “*Hooli-
ganisa” is a frequent charge for rowdy of drunken acts, but is
also applied liberally to dissidents. °parasitisa® is a charge
which is often brought against persons -- including dissidents

®

-3-

and "refusniks"® -- who have been fired from their jobs and
prevented from obtaining new employment. Finally, the judiciary
is less independent of the executive in the USSR and has very
little independence in political cases.

In addition, the nature of Soviet society and particularly
the inefficiency of the economy have created a system that, in
order to function, depends heavily on individual free-market
activity, the use of unauthorized channels and methods to
procure necessary supplies for state enterprises, and warious
forms of trading personal favors. Most of these activities are
noainally illegal, but ace so auch part of the system that
fulfillment of the annual economic plans depends on thea. Thus
it is more difficult in the Soviet Union than in the United
States or Western Europe to know whether one is doing one’s job
or committing an illegel act, frequently giving the
adainistration of justice an arbitrary and political

cheracter.

Some of the most comprehensive data were provided by a
former official of the Procurator‘'s office in Moscow who has
published in the West what appear to be official records on
criminal convictions in the USSR: in 1976, Soviet courts
sentenced: 976,000 persona for serious crimes, and another
1,664,355 lesser crimes and aisdemeanors were handled

administratively or by “comrades courts" (see table below).

UNCLASSIFIED

TABLE
USSR Criminal Convictions, 1976

Serious Crimes - Tried by Peoples! Courts No. Sentenced Percent

Hooliganiaa . 235,215 24.1
Crines against persons 168,013 17.2
Theft of state and public property 156,451 16.0
Crimes against personal property 151,934 15.6
Motor vehicle crimes $7,388 10.0
Boonomic crimes 43,653 4.5
Crimes against adainistrative order 38,445 3.9
Malfeasance in office 37,669 3.9
Crimes against justice 13,892 1.4
Other serious crimes 33,430 _3.4
Total serious crines 976,090 100.0

Hinor Crimes (petty Larceny, soonshining, poaching,

hool an, ard others

Randled administratively 879, 265
Reviewed by comrades' courts 805, 070
Total ainor crimes 1,684,335
TOTAL CRIMES 2,660, 425

Source: The official deecribed in the previous paragraph.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

APPENDIX 2

Regimes in Effect in Labor Colonies and Prisons

Correctional Labor Colonies
Correctional labor colonies are by far the dominant forma of incarceration
in the USSR, Four confinement regimes are in effect at correctional labor
colonies; in order of increasing severity they are defined as the general,
intensified, strict, and especial regines.

— general regime: for adult male first offenders who have been
sentenced to confinement for three years or less for preseditated
felonies or for sore than five years for crimes of negligence; and for
all adult female offenders except especially dangerous recidivists,
women whoee death sentences have been commuted, and those who have
committed especially dangerous crimes against the state;

—— intensified regime: for adult male first offenders who have been
sentenced to tems of confinement for sore than three years for
premeditated felonies;

— strict regime: for men and wen who have committed especial ly
dangerous crimes against the state, man who have previously served
sentences of confinement (recidivists), especially dangerous female
recidivists, and women whose death sentences have been commited;

— special regime: for especially dangerous male recidivists and men
whose death sentences have been commuted.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Educational Labor Colonies

These colonies are correctional institutions for juvenile criminals aged
14 through 17. Qnly two regimes are in effect.

— general regime: for male first offenders who have been sentenced to
confinement for three years or less and all females;

— intensified regime: for males who heave previously served sentences of
confinement and first offenders who have been sentenced to confinement
for more than three years,

Prisons

Persons temporarily confined in investigatory and transit prisons live
under a light regime akin to the aildest of the regimes in effect at
correctional labor coloniee. Que criainals serving sentences of confinenert
in penitentiaries live under such harsher conditions.

— general regime: inmates live in communal cells fran which they are
released only to work or to exercise outside, the latter activity
limited to one hour a day. Privileges are very limited.

— strict regime: inmates also live in commnal calls (in special cosee,
in individual cells), but their privileges are sore restricted than
under general regime. Prisoners under the strict regine are hep.
separate from prisoners under general regine.

UNCLASSIFIED

(o — ©

UNCLASSIFIED

APPENDIX 3

Types of Prisons

Prisons in the Soviet Union’are differentiated by primary function; four

types may be distinguished:
— Penitentiaries serve primarily as places of incarceration for

criminals and political prisoners specifically sentenced to temas of
confinement in prison--en exceptional punishment which may be assigned
by the courts only to persons convicted of especially dangerous crinaes
ajainst the state oc certain other grave crimes, ard to persons
@erving in correctional labor colonies who maliciously violate camp
rules. Examples of euch prisons are the ones at Viadiair and
Chistopol', both associated with male political prisoners. ‘The
central prison for women is in Minsk. Prisoners are required to
perform labor full time in industrial facilities in the prison
Complex.

~—- Transit prisons where prisoners are organized into groups foc shipment
to their destinations are located at regiona) transportation hubs such
as Sverdlovek, Novosibirsk, ard Irkutsk. ‘The Correctional Labor Code
limits to 10 days the time a person sentenced to forced labor without
confinement or to exile may be held in any transit prison, but a trip
from the Buropean USSR to the remote regions of Siberia or the Par
Fast may entail several sojourns in transit prisons. According to
some former prisoners the huge facility at Sverdlovek (which is aleo a
penitentiary) can hold thousands of prisoners when, as is common, it
is filled beyond legal capacity.

UNCLASSIFIED

©

UNC ASSIFIFN)

APPENDIX 4

Flig ibility for Parole

In 1964 the Supreme Soviet of the USSR decreed that certain prisoners
then under confinement could be released--in effect, paroled—fron penal
institutions and sent to construction sites to work out the balance of their
sentences without confinement. Article 44 of the Criainal ee mended to
establish eligibility requirements for this progran.

— Not eligible: prisoners undergoing compulsory treatment for
alcoholigm, drug addiction, or venereal disease; foreign prisoners,
ard prisoners °who systematically or maliciously® violate the tems of
their confinement.

— Eligible after serving three-quarters of the confinement sentence:
especially dangerous recidivists) prisoners convicted of especially
Gangerous crimes against the estate: prisoners corwicted of intentional

| homicide under aggreveting clromstances; prisoners whose death
sentences have been commuted.

— Eligible after serving two-thirds of their confinement sentences:
prisoners convicted of certain serious crimes (especially if comaitted
under aggravating circumetances) including counterfeiting, currency
speculation, embezzlement, taking or giving bribes, banditry, robbery,
endangering the life of a policeman, disrupting a penal institution,
hijecking, rape, drug trefficking, ard particularly malicious
hooliganiam,

~~ Eligible after serving half of their sentences: prisoners, other than
thoee listed above, santeiiced to: cont inement for more than 10 years.

a UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

-- Investigatory prisons are used to incarcerate suspects awaiting trial
on serious charges and other persons already sentenced to confinement

in correctional labor colonies who are needed to testify as witnesess
at upcoming trials. Lefortovo Prison in Moscow is an example of such
a prison) the regime in an investigatory prison is less harsh than
that at other prir~ ne.

~—- Psychiatric prisons, otherwise mow as “special psychiatric
hospitals® (SPHs), are used to hold and treat persons who have been
declared criminally insane. (They are to be distinguished from
"ordinary psychiatric hospitals*—OPite—run by the Ministry of
Health.) Some SPiis have been repeatedly associated with maltreatment
of dissidents.

. UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

— Eligible after serving one-third of their sentences: prisoners, other
than thoee listed above sentenced to confinement for not sore than 10
years.

Barente Sea

dame Vemauneeny, sal .
. ol bux? - >

Bar maqt
a

7}

Pa

LLP om
a UaESTY }

t : Chukcns
. . ; See
ARCTIC poeeae
eae \
a. th “neat . ' East Sderan
= . j \ Sea
; lLepteyv
bees oe Sea . :
<. 2 eG F
. . . < 4 = e:
Dreter tart
% . 4
toed ot
4 Dogutnt ,
vekger : ie
aaleasd oan Pee:
i $ Soe af
, Osreotea

—

+

* yy be Seat

b. Living Zone
A. Barracks
8. Mess Hail
C. Support buildings
D. Isolation building
€. Enirence contro! buliding
F. Latrines
G. Outdoor Lecture Area

UW. industrial Zone

This typical corrective (forced) labor camp
may house as many es 1,000 prisoners.
Securty measures may include 6s many as

six Oo seven rows of fencing

the camp. Prisoners in large, diverse industrial camos
such as these may never leave the compound
during their confinement.

HN y a)

ry
