Outlook in Indonesia with Special Reference to West New Guinea
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012248, dated 2 February 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012248).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

te nn SNIEL SSMS
ye LB] LEERARY 572 March 71961
= ~_|Mandatory Review 4): eee

— Case # NLJ

NATIONAL

ap

“te

oo
b

es

?

‘ay

hie,
£

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
‘ DISSEMINATION NOTICE

"1. ‘This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
.is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
- a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
"following officials within their respective departments.

~ a, Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
- = Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army. .
. Assistant Chief of Naval pees (iateligeace) for the Department of
. the Navy

d. ‘Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
*e. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for The Joint Staff
-£.. Director of Intelligence, AEC, forthe Atomic Energy Commission .
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal. Bureau of Investigation -

h. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special See TOE the Department
of Defense .. :

i. Director of NSA for ‘the National Security Agency

j. Assistant. Director for Central’ Reference CIA, for, aes orher Department or.
Agency + ; 2 a

34 zas eam

‘National. ‘Security Counell . — i iva: he
‘Department ‘of State: = : Ee es ot

Department of Defense
tomic Energy aca : ,

Federal ‘Bureau of Investigation

FL

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

: THE PROBLEM fp 65 RE OOS TEES Ve eed eae 2
CONCUUSIONS: 28 nce. 4. e he od ck oe ee Be Se oe ad cate be ee a ae
-DISCUSSION oo! di4°ce do ousal a) ade Ge WO ee ee OD
I. INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT.-....... . wee clea Bee
Il. DOMESTIC POLITICAL TRENDS. ............. 2
A. The Non-Communist Political Parties . 2

B. The Indonesian Communist Party . 3

Ci Phe Army x. g hoge eo 3

D. Prospects ......4..', 5
III. ECONOMIC TRENDS AND OUTLOOK. ........... 5
IV. FOREIGN POLICY TRENDS AND OUTLOOK........ #7

1.3(a)(4)(5)

V. THE WEST NEW GUINEA ISSUE .

SBaRRR bE F er

a

a

OUTLOOK IN INDONESIA WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE
TO WEST NEW GUINEA

THE PROBLEM

To analyze the most significant political and foreign policy trends in Indonesia
and to estimate Indonesian intentions toward West New Guinea over the next year

or so.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The present balance of political forces
in Indonesia is not likely to change dra-
matically during the next year or so:
We believe that Président Sukarno will
continue to be successful in balancing
the army and the Communist Party off
against each other while retaining for
himself the controlling power position.
At the same time, the anti-Communist
stand of the army may be somewhat
eroded as Soviet military aid and train-
ing programs are implemented. In any
event, army efforts will probably not
halt the steady increase of Communist
strength and influence. (Paras. 11-12,
16, 18-19, 21-22, 32)

2. The Indonesian economy will probably
continue its trend of slow decline, despite
Sukarno’s ambitious development plans
and the availability of substantial eco-
nomic assistance from the USSR. The
economic pinch is most acute among the
Communist dominated urban labor force,
but we do not believe that economic con-

L

siderations alone are likely to cause sig-
nificant political repercussions. Indo-
nesia’s trade with the Communist Bloc
will almost certainly increase over its
present level of 12 percent. (Paras.
24-26, 28-29)

3. Sukarno will probably continue to seek
a balance in Indonesian relations with
the major Communist and non-Com-
munist nations. However, the Soviet
effort to capture Sukarno and Indonesia
through personal diplomacy and military
and economic assistance has reached sub-
stantial proportions and appears to be
making significant progress. We believe
that Sukarno’s recent tendency to move
closer to the Bloc is likely to continue.
(Paras. 30-32)

4, The Indonesians will probably continue
to wage a vigorous campaign to assert
sovereignty over West New Guinea but
will probably seek to do so primarily by
political means. They will probably also
at times resort to military threats, patrol

| 1

s

activities, and small unit infiltrations de-
signed to dramatize Indonesian claims.
At the same time, Indonesian frustration
over not reaching their objective, com-

pined with the acquisition of new Soviet
military equipment, will increase progres-
sively the danger of larger scale military
action by Indonesia. (Paras. 36-43)

DISCUSSION

L. INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT

5. President Sukarno has all put won his long-
standing campaign to eliminate Indonesia’s
non-Communist political parties as 4 major

He has concentrated governmental

ower in his own hands and has encouraged @
strong trend to the left in Indonesia’s policies.
The army and the Indonesian Communist
Party are pecoming the only significant power
factors in Indonesian political life, aside from
Sukarno himself who holds the balance be-
tween them. Sukarno has continued to pro-
tect the Indonesian Communists and to use
his influence to increase their prestige and role
in the country’s political life. At the same
time he has been seeking, with considerable
success, to neutralize the political potential
of Army Chief of Staff Nasution and to keep
in check the political power of the army, the
only non-Communist element capable of re-
straining Sukarno oF of curbing the Com-
munists.

6. On the international scene, Sukarno has
tended to draw Indonesia closer to the Bloc.
He has accepted extensive Soviet economic
and military aid and is seeking to close the
rift in relations with the Chinese Communists
which developed over Indonesia’s treatment
of its Overseas Chinese population.

7, Sukarno has initiated a new and forceful
phase in his continuing campaign to gain
recognition of Indonesia’s claim to sovereignty
over West New Guinea and to force out the
Dutch. The USSR is lending both encourage-
ment and active support to his campaign,
thereby bolstering his determination to press

the issue.

jl. DOMESTIC POLITICAL TRENDS

A. The Non-Communist Political Parties

g. Sukarno has long been convinced that a
parliamentary system based upon political
parties—with their rivalries, internal faction-
alism, and lack of organizational strength—
is unsuitable to Indonesia’s needs. Since his
first visit to Communist China in 1956, where
he was much impressed by the political unity
and concentration of effort achieved by the
Communists, he has pursued @ campaign to
concentrate authority at the top level of gov-
ernment, to eliminate Parliament’s ability to
obstruct policy, and to replace political parties
py functional groupings, such as military,
labor, youth, veterans, and peasants. In gen-
eral, the Indonesian military has shared Su-
karno’s disillusionment with the manner in
which the Parliament and political parties
have performed in Indonesia and has backed
his efforts to establish a system which Sukarno
calls “guided democracy.”

9, In 1959, Sukarno and the army forced Par-
liament to accept @ restoration of the 1945
Constitution, which greatly strengthened ex-
ecutive power and confirmed Sukarno’s su-
premacy over the political parties. During
1960, Sukarno moved farther toward his goal.
By decree he promulgated a regulation to

" eliminated 4 number of splinter parties and

required, in effect, that the major ones SUD-
port his policies. The two leading anti-Com-
munist parties—the Socialist and the Mas-
jumi—which nad strongly criticized the Presi-
dent and had resisted his policies were
panned. Deprived of patronage, power, and
legal status, poth are disintegrating rapidly as
political organizations. The two remaining

major non-Communist parties—the National-

A

=

ist Party and the Islamic Scholars (NU)—
have submerged their own policy views, if
any, under Sukarno’s “guided democracy”
and his latest political slogan “USDEK.”'!

10. To consolidate further his position, Su-
karno, by decree, dismissed Parliament in
March 1960, after it had withheld approval
of the 1960 budget for three months. Parlia-
ment was reconstituted in June as an ap-
pointed body including representation of func-
tional groupings approximately equal to that
of the remaining political parties. Clearly
the body’s only purpose is to provide prompt
approval to legislation submitted to it by the
government.

11. At present the fortunes of the non-Com-
munist parties are at an all-time low. They
suffer from serious internal dissensions and
organizational weaknesses. Considering the
strength of the forces arrayed against them—
the Communists, the army, and Sukarno him-
self—it is highly unlikely that any of the non-
Communist parties will be able to play a major
political role or exert any real influence on
the political scene for the foreseeable future. «

B. The Indonesian Communist Party

12. The Indonesian Communist Party (PKI)
is the best-organized, the best-led, and prob-
ably the largest political party in the country.
Its membership is about 1.5 million and if na-
tional elections were held in the near future
it would probably poll more votes than any
other party. Although most of its strength
is still in Java, the party is making some
progress in recruiting and expanding its
organization in the outer islands, particularly
in Sumatra. The party has organized or infil-
trated at all levels a number of nationwide
front and mass organizations, including the
country’s largest and most effective labor
organization, SOBSI, and the peasants’ organ-
ization, BTI. The party also possesses an im-
portant paramilitary potential through its
influence among various veterans groups and
village defense units.

'USDEK is a word coined from the initial letters
of five slogans: “Return to the 1945 Constitu-
tion,” “Indonesian Socialism,” “Guided Democracy,”
“Guided Economy,” and “Indonesian Nationalism.”

L

|

13. The dominant figure in the Indonesian
Communist Party is its 38-year-old chairman,
Aidit, an able organizer and the party’s lead-
ing theorist. The first and second deputy
chairmen, Lukman and Njoto, rank close be-
hind him in influence and power. In the
past there have been policy disagreements
within the top party leadership, but party
unity and effectiveness have not been seriously
impaired. Although the Indonesian delega-
tion, under Lukman, apparently sided with
the Chinese Communist position at the Mos-
cow Conference of 81 Communist Parties in
November, 1960, the party appears to receive
most of its support and external guidance
from Moscow.

14. The Indonesian Communist Party has
prospered for several years by posing as a.
patriotic, nationalistic party rendering strong
support to Sukarno and his policies. Sukarno
sees in the party a large, disciplined group will-
ing and able to give him its political support
and to work to implement his programs. Su-
karno’s order banning the Masjumi and So-
cialist parties has significantly undermined
political opposition to the Communists. The
Communists are now strongly represented in
every important body of the central govern-
ment except the cabinet, and bringing them
into his cabinet appears to be an objective of
many of Sukarno’s political maneuvers.

C. The Army

15. The Indonesian Army (about 240,000
men) has never been a cohesive military organ-
ization fully responsive to the authority of
the central government, and its commanders
have always exercised considerable local au-
tonomy. A major objective of General Nasu-
tion, Army Chief of Staff and more recently
also Minister of National Security, is to trans-
form the Indonesian Army into a modern, pro-

‘fessional, unified force. He has made con-

siderable progress toward this goal.

16. The army, which had always been involved
in politics to some extent, particularly in the
provinces, became a major political factor on
the national scene as the result of the armed
rebellion in the outer islands which began
late in 1957. To cope with the internal se-

fe

‘
rs

f

curity situation Sukarno promulgated mar-
tial law decrees which increased the army’s
responsibility for local administration and
placed supervision of extensive aspects of the
national economy in army hands. The
army’s economic functions were further ex-
panded when it was given responsibility for
managing the extensive Dutch holdings seized
in 1957. Nasution, as Central War Adminis-
trator, was responsible for implementing the
martial law decrees, and he rose rapidly in
political power. Sukarno has now taken over
the Central War Administrator post and has
somewhat reduced martial law controls.
However, the army under Nasution continues
to be the implementing agency exercising
broad political, economic, and administrative
authority.

17. Although the army is far from united on
the Communist issue, it is the only element
in Indonesian society capable of opposing the
expansion of Communist strength and influ-
ence. The army leadership is, in general,
favorably disposed toward the West, and
among army commanders there is increasing
recognition of the Indonesian Communists as
a threat to the army and to their own per-
sonal positions. Consequently, the army and
the Communists have become the major an-
tagonists on the Indonesian political scene.
Sukarno, with his mystical appeal to the In-
donesian masses and his skill in political
manipulation, maintains his position by bal-
ancing one against the other.

18. Sukarno and the army: Sukarno has been
uneasy with the growing political power
and potential of the army and General Nasu-
tion. His suspicions have been encouraged.
by the Communists, leftists, and antiarmy
elements which now dominate his “palace
clique.” Sukarno has been nettled by army
resistance to some of his policies, particularly
his desire to include Communist representa-
tion in his cabinet, and by the intensive cam-
paign against the Indonesian Communist
Party conducted by the army during the sum-
mer and fall of 1960. That campaign has
now lost much of its earlier momentum. It
failed to turn Sukarno against the Commu-
nists and Nasution did not press the campaign

L

in the face of Sukarno’s opposition. While
seeking, unsuccessfully thus far, to turn the
President against the Communists, Nasution’s
anti-Communist efforts have been little more
than rear guard actions which harass and
slow down, but have not halted or reversed,
the steadily growing strength and influence
of the Indonesian Communist Party.

19. Although there are many areas of agree-
ment between the two men, it is clear that
Nasution differs with Sukarno on a number
of fundamental issues. Nasution will prob-
ably continue to resist Sukarno on those issues
which he feels vital to army interests, and
he will seek by army pressures to keep Su-
karno from enlarging the role of the Com-
munists in Indonesia’s national life. How-
ever, Nasution appears to feel a basic sense of
loyalty to Sukarno, and he is probably con-
vinced that Sukarno is necessary to hold the
country together at this stage of Indonesia’s
history. Moreover, Nasution probably esti-
mates that he would not have the necessary
army and public backing for a successful move
to oust Sukarno. Consequently, Nasution
will probably continue his past cautious
tactics in dealing with Sukarno, and he prob-
ably will seek to avoid a confrontation with
Sukarno on any issue which Sukarno clearly
considers important.

20. For his part, Sukarno has moved gradu-
ally to dilute Nasution’s army role by assign-
ing him additional tasks in the government.
He has also restricted Nasution’s area of ma-
neuver by obliging him to become involved
with, and therefore committed to support,
such matters as the reorganization of the leg-
islative branch, an arms purchasing mission
to the USSR, and the West New Guinea cam-
paign. Sukarno almost certainly feels that
he can continue to play off the army and the
Communist Party and to control both. At
present he apparently feels that the internal
palance is threatened more by the army than
by the Communist Party. However, we do
not believe that his efforts to undercut Nasu-
tion and to perpetuate a certain amount of
disunity among army commanders are in-

“tended to weaken the army to such an extent

that it could no longer serve to counterbalance

~

oe AR OR

L

the Communists. What he does desire is to
control and dominate army leadership and
thereby eliminate army restraints on his pol-
icies. He feels no compulsion to control and
dominate the Communist leadership because
the Communists seldom oppose his policies.

21. Nasution and the army: Nasution’s knuck-
ling under to Sukarno’s wishes on a number
of matters—such as reducing the pace and
scope of the army’s anti-Communist campaign
and the banishment of Colonel Sukendro, the
army’s most vociferous political activist—ap-
pears to have caused some restlessness and dis-
satisfaction among some members of Nasu-
tion’s staff. A number of key officers—in-
cluding Vice Chief of Staff Subroto, Deputy
Chief for Operations Jani, Deputy Chief for
Intelligence Magenda, and his assistant Su-
mantri—apparently urged Nasution to take
a more forceful position. Although differ-
ences of opinion over methods and timing in
dealing with Sukarno and the Communists
will continue and may increase at the top
levels of army command, the key officers will
probably continue to follow Nasution’s leader-
ship.

D. Prospects

22. We do not believe that any dramatic
change in the internal political balance of
power is likely over the next year or so. The
respective roles and tactics of Sukarno, the
army, and the Communists will probably re-
main essentially as they now are. The Com-
munists will probably continue to increase
gradually their organizational strength and
their influence in various governmental agen-
cies and advisory bodies. Although Sukarno
_will probably make some changes in his cab-
inet, the Communists will probably not gain
Significant representation in it. Sukarno,
aware of Indonesia’s diverse problems, prob-
ably will not deliberately add to their number
and complexity unnecessarily by insisting
“upon the inclusion of major Communist lead-
ers in the cabinet in the face of resistance
from the army and from a number of still
important non-Communist political leaders.
The Communists, aware of the delicacy of the
issue, will probably not push Sukarno too hard

L

‘their economic lot.

_| :
and settle, temporarily, for a further post-

ponement of the issue or for minor represen-
tation.

23. Sukarno may within the year offer Nasu-
tion the Vice-Presidency in an effort to induce
him to relinquish the Army Chief of Staff
position, such a move being aimed at diluting
Nasution’s influence in the army. Nasution
has already served well beyond the normal
four-year rotation period. Nasution’s amena-
bility to such a move would depend upon how
acceptable his successor would be to Nasution
and his circle of key army leaders. If it ap-
peared to them that Sukarno were attempt-
ing to weaken the army to Communist advan-
tage or to remove them from their positions
of influence and authority, a serious con-
frontation could develop. However, we do
not believe Sukarno is likely to precipitate
such a situation.

Il. ECONOMIC TRENDS AND OUTLOOK

24. About 85 percent of Indonesia’s people
are peasants, and most of these are essentially
subsistence farmers only slightly affected by
the money economy. For the most part
these people are not actively discontented with _
This characteristic of
the Indonesian economy provides it a certain
buoyancy, at a very low level, and has enabled
Indonesia to absorb a remarkable amount of
economic mismanagement and neglect with-
out sharp social or political repercussions.

25. In the politically important urban areas
and among the country’s small industrial
labor force, the economic pinch of low wages
and high prices is more acutely felt, and there
is considerable dissatisfaction. In 1960 prices
rose about 25 percent, and about 30 percent
of the urban labor force was unemployed
or underemployed. The Communist Party,
which dominates organized labor, could mo-
bilize this dissatisfaction and turn it against
the government. However, the party’s hands
are tied to a considerable extent by its present

tactics of supporting Sukarno and by the gov-

ernment decrees against strikes in essential
industries.

_|

26. Although the Indonesian economy showed
some improvement in 1960, owing largely to
high rubber prices, for several years it has

been in slow decline. National production
has been virtually static since 1952 while the
population has been increasing at about two
percent per year. Per capita GNP remains
at about $65-70 per year. Distribution, mar-
ketihg, and taxation remain serious problems,
and there are major intraisland and inter-
island transportation bottlenecks. About 25
percent of the export trade moves through il-
legal channels, cutting into the country’s for-
eign exchange revenue. Most of the economy
is now government controlled and govern-
mental administration is inefficient and often
corrupt. There is an acute shortage of techni-
cal and managerial talent, and a significant
number of the more able economists and ad-

ministrators, for political reasons, are in op-

position to the government.

27. Indonesia is preparing an ambitious eight-
year development plan which presently in-
cludes among its goals an increase of 11.6
percent in the national income by 1969.

_Many important aspects of the program are

still undecided,? and probably will remain so
for some time to come. However, Sukarno
is encouraging very high hopes for the plan
as the vehicle for dramatic economic and po-
litical progress. The nation’s last major de-
velopment program—the five-year plan de-
vised in 1956—failed to get off the ground.
It was a poorly conceived plan and its im-
plementation was complicated by the disrupt-
ing effects of the rebellion in the outer is-
lands and of the nationalization of Dutch
holdings. The present program is also poorly
planned, inadequately financed, and likely to
generate further inflationary pressures. The
economy will probably make some gains under
the eight-year plan as a result of the major
emphasis Sukarno appears determined to
place on it and the possibility of further aid
and assistance from the Bloc. However, the
prospects for significant economic improve-

*For example, there is wide controversy over which
agency is to be assigned responsibility for imple-

menting the plan. The amount of planned invest- —

ment is also undecided, with figures ranging from

$5.3 to $2.6 billion.

ment, at least for the next two or three years,
are poor.

28. Indonesia has serious foreign exchange
problems. Repayment and servicing of its
foreign debts already absorb about 20 per-
cent of Indonesia’s foreign exchange receipts.
This burden will remain heavy for the next
decade. The continuing shortage of foreign
exchange will restrict imports and could cur-
tail Indonesia’s ability to borrow, at least from
non-Bloc sources, for projects under its eight-
year plan.

29. Indonesia is looking to the Communist
Bloc for important contributions to its eco-
nomic and military development, and the Bloc
appears willing to meet most Indonesian re-
quests. Total Bloc loans offered to Indonesia
now amount to about $1,103 million—$593
million for military aid and $510 million for
economic assistance. In 1960 the Bloc ac-
counted for nearly 12 percent of the nation’s
total trade, as against about 8 percent in 1958
and less than 1 percent in 1950. In July 1960
Indonesia and the Soviet Union signed a
three-year trade agreement (1961-1963),
Indonesia’s first such agreement with a Bloc
nation. The Bloc will almost certainly con-
tinue to expand its portion of Indonesia’s for-
eign trade.

30. The Western owned oil industry is an
important source of Indonesia’s foreign ex-
change earnings (26 percent in 1959) and the
Indonesian Government is apparently antic-
ipating major and unrealistic increases in
its revenues from oil exports to help meet its
foreign exchange commitments and to help
finance the eight-year plan. The oil com-
panies are the only major foreign owned in-
dustries which have not yet been taken over
by the Indonesian Government. The govern-
ment has, however, restricted oil company
operations and from time to time put great
pressure upon the companies to increase its
revenues from oil exports. Such pressures
will probably continue and become particu-
larly acute when the government encounters
serious foreign exchange problems in meeting
its loan commitments and financing its devel-
opment plan. It is likely that the Western
owned oil companies will be brought under

a

RRR! baa

ek yA nes Sah EE SATE Bey ROLE!

ed

_
even more stringent controls, and the threat

of nationalization will continue to hang over
them.

IV. FOREIGN POLICY TRENDS AND OUT-
LOOK

31. Since Indonesia became independent in
1949, Sukarno has pursued a foreign policy
based upon nonalignment and friendly rela-
tions—on Indonesian terms—with all nations
except the Netherlands. Sukarno, and most
Indonesian leaders, are convinced of the va-
lidity of their “active independent” foreign
policy, which seeks to keep in balance Indo-
nesia’s relations with the major Communist
and non-Communist nations. They tend to
become resentful when they believe pressures
are being applied to align them with either
side in the East-West conflict. Many Indo-
nesians believe that the West neither under-
stands nor sympathizes with their problems
as an underdeveloped and former colonial
country. They differ with the West concern-
ing the threat posed to théir country’s inde-
pendence by the Communist Bloc. Many of
them also differ with the West as to the na-
ture and extent of the internal Communist
threat.

32. The Soviet effort to capture Sukarno and
Indonesia through military and economic aid,
as well as personal diplomacy, has reached
very substantial proportions and appears to
be making significant progress. The USSR
has made available to Indonesia more aid than
it has to any other non-Communist nation
except the United Arab Republic, and the
terms of the aid agreements are more lenient
than previously given by Moscow. f par-
ticular significance, the army has forthe first
time apparently accepted a sizable amount of
Soviet aid, thereby giving the Soviet Union a
potentially important advantage. The anti-
Communist stand of the army may be some-
what eroded as Soviet military aid and train-
ing programs are implemented. Military
spokemen have made clear their preference
for US-supplied equipment and training, but
they have been disappointed with the amounts

-
[

|

_| 1

of aid they have received from the US and
increasingly outspoken in their criticism of
the delays and red tape involved in receiving
US equipment.

33. Khrushchev assiduously cultivated Su-
karno during the latter’s visits to the USSR
and at the 1960 UN General Assembly ses-
Sion. Particularly important from Sukarno’s
point of view, Khrushchev supports the Indo-
nesian claim to West New Guinea.

4.32) 6)

a

V. THE WEST NEW GUINEA ISSUE #
34. Although the Indonesian leaders, particu-

_ larly Sukarno, consciously and cynically use
the West New Guinea issue to play upon pub-

‘The status of West New Guinea has officially been
disputed since December 1949, when the Republic of
Indonesia achieved independence. At that time the
Netherlands and Indonesia agreed that the status
of West New Guinea would remain unchanged, with
the provision that Dutch-Indonesian negotiations
would be held within one year to determine its final
disposition. Negotiations were held in 1950-1951 and
further negotiations were held in December 1955;
in all cases, however, they ended in failure. In 1951
West New Guinea was listed as “Netherlands New
Guinea” in the revised list of territories of the King-
dom of the Netherlands as it appeared in the Nether-
lands constitution. In 1956 Indonesia formally in-
cluded the “Province of West Irian” in the territories
of the Republic of Indonesia. Indonesia placed the
West New Guinea issue on the UN agenda in 1954,
1955, and twice in 1957. The 1954 and 1957 resolu-
tions were passed by the Political Committee but
failed to obtain the required two-thirds majority in
plenary. Since the failure of the 1957 UN resolu-
tion, no further action has been taken and the issue
remains deadlocked.

2

1.3(a)(4)(5)

—_—_—

lic emotions, most of them genuinely believe
that continuing Dutch control over the terri-
tory is a potential threat to Indonesian se-
curity and that Indonesian independence will
not be complete until West New Guinea is
under Indonesian control. There can be no
doubt that the “liberation of West Irian” is
a major objective of Indonesian foreign policy
and that failure, thus far, to make any real
progress toward that objective is a source of
frustration to most Indonesian leaders. [__

~\in particular, Sukarno and the Com-
munist Party are exploiting for their own
purposes the emotional and nationalistic re-
sponse which the issue arouses among Indo-
nesians. ,

35. Military leaders, including Nasution, have
little choice but to swing into line behind Su-
karno on the West New Guinea issue. Al-
though a number of these leaders may be
more moderate and realistic than Sukarno
on the West New Guinea issue, most of them
echo Sukarno’s views that the Dutch presence
in West New Guinea is a threat to Indonesian
security and an affront to Indonesia’s sov-
ereignty. Some military commanders have
an intensely jingoistic and activist attitude
toward the West New Guinea issue.

36. Indonesia’s growing intransigence on the
West New Guinea issue has been helped along
by encouragement and assurances of support
from the Soviet Union. Bloc interests would
be served by a “colonial” struggle, whether of
a political nature in the UN or of a military
nature in West New Guinea, which arrayed
the Bloc on the side of anticolonialism and
placed the US in the position of having to
choose between remaining neutral or siding
with one of the contestants. Such a situa-
tion would not only tend to increase Indo-

nesian dependence upon the Bloc, but could.

also exacerbate US-Indonesian relations.

37. The Indonesians have organized special
forces for small unit infiltration of West New
Guinea. The purpose of these forces is to
attempt to propagandize -and subvert the
peoples of the area and to organize an anti-
Dutch resistance movement among them.
Although it is easy to put small groups ashore
on West New Guinea, the Indonesians have
had little success in keeping such groups in
being and making them effective. The set-
tlements are widely scattered, and there are
not many promising target groups for sub-
version and organization by the Indonesians.
The Indonesians will probably step up the
tempo of such infiltration operations, but
their prospects for building a significant re-
sistance movement within the near future are

slight. 4.3(a) ( a) (6
88. The indigenous Papuan population, num-
bering approximately 700,000, are a very prim-
itive people. Most of them are probably
reasonably satisfied with the present order of
things. The Papuans in general, and the
hahdful of semieducated ones in particular,
distrust and consider as rivals the people of
Indonesian descent living in West New Guinea.
The more than 10,000 resident Indonesians
are probably the chief target of covert opera-
tions and subversive activities from without.

Le:

1.8(2)(4)(5)

4

39.

1.8(2)(4)(5)

ie

ee

41. Indonesia has the capability to launch a
battalion-sized (1,000 men) amphibious as-
sault operation against West New Guinea in
conjunction with a 500-man airborne assault}
Its capabilities for air and seaborne attack
against West New Guinea are increasing prad-
ually as a result of Soviet aid to the Indonesian
Air Force and Navy. However, the recent
Soviet military aid agreements will not make
a significant impact for a year or more due to
the lag in training Indonesians to operate
and maintain their new equipment, which is
scheduled to begin arriving in quantity in
late 1961 and 1962. The Indonesians now
have the military capability to capture one or
two of the small settlements In western and
southern West New Guinea and meet logisti-
“eal requirements for maintaining at least
minimum supplies. They almost certainly
lack the capability to coordinate and sustain
combined operations of the scale necessary to
seize and hold the main Dutch admin-
istrative and defense center at Biak.[_

7.3(a)(4)(5)

42. For the next year or so the Indonesians
will probably continue to wage their cam-
paign to assert sovereignty over West New
Guinea primarily by political means. The
Indonesian leaders probably do not believe
_ that at present they could obtain a UN deci-
sion which would force the Dutch to relin-

&

Es

_|

4.3(a)(4)(5)

quish their position in West New Guinea.
However, the Indonesian leaders almost cer-
tainly believe that the trend of opinion in
the UN, especially among the Afro-Asian na-
tions, is running strongly in favor of the
Indonesian claim. Indonesian political ef-
forts will probably be designed to increase in-
ternational sympathy for the Indonesian

claim[—_
ea

‘\ss. These efforts will probably be supple-

mented by continued efforts to infiltrate and
subvert West New Guinea, seeking to create
an anti-Dutch movement and to provoke the
Dutch. A military incident, either by acci-
dent or design, could thrust the issue into
international prominence. Such an incident
could grow out of conflicting claims to a num-
ber of small islands off the coast of West New
Guinea which neither side has permanently
administered or garrisoned, or result from a
clash of air or naval patrols.

44, During the past year, the prospects for
serious hostilities over West New Guinea have
increased significantly. Indonesian leaders
have become increasingly impatient, and some
apparently now doubt that Indonesia will be
able to gain control over the disputed area by
peaceful means within what they consider to
be a reasonable time. The reduction in mod-
erating influences on the government and
continued strong moral and material support
from the Communist Bloc favor an increas-
ingly militant stand by Indonesia. Although
we believe that military weakness and the
chance of a settlement through international
intercession will probably restrain Indonesia
from initiating large-scale hostilities over the
next year, Indonesian frustrations in seeking
their objective plus the prospect of new Soviet

_ military equipment will increase progressively _

the danger of larger scale military action by
Indonesia.

1.3(2)(4)(5)

|

1.3(a)(4)(8)

| ee) ta are o

— Aayans)
|
(ie
aa
L
4.31a)AV)
=
LZ

secs: pang ae SOI ir Ragel RONEN AG GEN RWI TA AL MRS SRS SBE, Dg ens ae TaN eS,

aca tang ee MON ae ee AR a rs ca ect an i alge abd pth

1.8(2)(4)(5)
1,3(a){4)(6)

rT

bade ewlat iaallw  ViAbree: Sree va ean a vpncee.gce hn PY ARE TREE TOLER OTE PETE
