Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: 'the Use O
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012297, dated 1 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012297).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 1.3(a)(4)
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

11 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT * MILITARY THOUGHT: "The Use of Surface Vessels

in Modern Naval Warfare", by Rear-Admiral
N. Zvyagin

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which
appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" ("Voyennaya Mysi") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

©, In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilizatdon of

any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

Enclosure 4.3(a)(4)

1,3(a)(4)

4.3{3)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE ° 9.0" 2

cc;

Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U.S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence
Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence

Assistant Director for Research and Reports

4.3fe}(4)

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

ey...

43nd

1.8(8)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT | ; MILITARY THOUGHT: "The Use of Surface Vessels
"En Modern Naval Warfare", by Rear-Admiral

N. Zvyagin
DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"The Use of Surface Vessels in Modern Naval Warfare", written
by Rear-Admiral N. Zvyagin. ~ : 2

This article appeared in the 1961 Second Issue of a special
version of Voyennaya Mysl (Military Thought) which is classified
TOP SECRET by the Soviets and is issued irregularly. It is
distributed only within the Ministry of Defense down to the
level of Army Commander. ;

1.3(a)(4)

"THE USE OF SURFACE VESSELS IN MODERN NAVAL WARFARE"

BY REAR-ADMIRAL N. ZVYAGIN

The important qualitative changes taking place in the armed
forces as a result of their being equipped with the newest combat
weapons have changed the role and place in war not only of the
types of armed forces, but also of the arms of forces and troops.
In our Navy these changes are apparent primarily in that the sub-
marine is becoming the basic striking force of the Navy.1

In this connection, various views are expressed as to the
role and position to be occupied by surface vessels in modern
naval operations. Often opinions are voiced to the effect that
surface vessels have lost their significance, that they will be
useless in a future war, and are therefore not needed by the Mavy.
Thus, there is no apparent need to build new vessels; one can still
use the vessels of various types which still exist as part of the
Navy; later, with the development of submarines, the need for the
use of surface vessels in modern naval operations will fall by the
wayside.

It is a fact that such large ships as battleships, cruisers,
and destroyers, to give them their former designation, have completely
lost all combat value and have no prospects of being used as a naval
striking force. The role of the latter has been given to the sub-
marines; in foreign navies this role will continue to be borne for
some time by aircraft carrier striking large units, although even
aircraft carriers no longer represent the force they used to be in
the not so distant past (this is why the American high command puts
such great emphasis on the development of strike submrines).

But, as is well known, the purpose of surface vessels was not
exclusively to resolve combat missions through the use of large

1. The navies of the large capitalist countries have as their basic
striking force large units of aircraft carriers, consisting of
surface vessels and deck-based aircraft. In the near future the
role of the main striking force will be assigned to the missile-
carrying nuclear submrines, which are being built at an accelerated
pace. The navies of the secondary naval powers are putting greater
emphasis on the development of anti-submrine defense, which consists
of surface vessels and anti-submrine aircraft and helicopters.

4.3(a\(4)

vessels. An important role was played by vessels of other types in
support of the basing and deployment of naval forces, including sub-

marines, in defense of naval communications and of the coastline from
attack by enemy surface vessels, and also in resolving other missions.

Although submarines have become the basic arm of forces, they
cannot always be used without the participation of other arms of
naval forces. Submarines need support in their basing and deployment
and, primarily, mist be defended against enemy submarines. Of all
the currently available forces and resources, special surface ‘vessels
are the most effective solution to these missions. In addition,
there are some missions which in effect cannot be solved at all by
other naval forces without surface vessels.

Therefore, we feel that although surface vessels no longer have
the basic role in the Navy, they still are a very important part of
it.

The missions of surface vessels under modern conditions have
essentially changed. As already stated, in the near future the
pasic striking force of our probable enemy's Navy will be missile-
carrying nuclear submarines. As the number of such submarines
increases, the threat of the infliction of their strikes also increases-
not only against our naval objectives, but against important industrial
centers situated well inside our territory. Fighting against these
enemy forces will be conducted by special submarines of the antisub-
marine defense, aviation, and surface vessels.

For the present, as well as in the near future, the most effective
solution of the mission of combat against enemy nuclear submarines
can be achieved only the complex utilization of all available forces
and means. ‘Tracking facilities at present included in the equipment
of surface vessels allow search and pursuit of enemy submarines to
be conducted with great effectiveness. When surface ships are equipped
with antiaircraft missiles and helicopters, their potential in com-
patting submarines will become even greater. Such an appraisal of the
role of surface vessels in combatting enemy submarines is dependent
on their ability to remain at sea for long periods of time at a con-
siderable distance from land and to reconnoiter large areas of the
sea in short periods of time with the help of helicopters.

The dispersed basing of the naval forces, the use of dispersed

antiatomic combat and transit formations, the constant threat from
eneny aircraft, submarines, and mines all stipulate the need to give

1.3(2)'4)

cover to submarines not only when entering or leaving their bases,
but also to cover their deployment for operations in the open sea.
Such support will take the form of combat with the antisubmarine
submarines of the enemy which are deployed at the points of emergence
of our submarines - in the narrows as well as along their probable
routes to the open sea - and the detection and destruction of mines
along the route of passage. Although the antisubmarine submarines
and aircraft will be able to conduct combat with enemy submarines,
surface vessels will play an important role in this engagement

under cover of antiaircraft missile units of the Navy and the
Antiaircraft Defense of the Country. As far as the danger from mines
is concerned, it will be effectively conducted both now and in the
near future only by surface vessels /part of line missing/... forces
of the Navy, it will be necessary to bring in our missile-equipped
surface vessels to engage with those enemy surface vessels which

are interfering with the deployment of our submarines; for use as
protection for vessels of antisubmrine defense, which are engaged
in searching for enemy submarines at a considerable distance from
shore, and for dealing with the destruction of enemy landing craft
and their support ships.

In a future war a significant role in support of ground troop
operations will be the providing of sea transport of men and materiel,
mounting tactical landing operations and disrupting naval commnications
between the enemy's coastal groupings and his rear bases. For the
solution of these missions it will be necessary to use, along with
other forces, surface vessels of small displacement. Only surface
vessels of various designation will be able to accomplish such
missions as protecting the transport of troops and military equipment,
heavy freight, and troop landings.

It will be up to surface vessels equipped with antiaircraft
missiles to screen convoys and transports from aerial attack during
their passage and in many cases the vessels at their pases.

Surface vessels will have a definite role in the laying of
antisubmarine and antilanding minefields.

Such are the basic missions which require the use of surface
vessels. It is obvious that complete solution of these missions
cannot be accomplished by conventionally armed ships. New classes
of vessels with modern weapons will be required.

The composition of the Navy must include special vessels of two
basic classes for antisubmarine warfare against enemy submarines;

1,3{a)(4)

vessels for short-range operations, and vessels for long-range operation.
Both classes must have modern hdro-acoustical equipment, powerful
antisubmarine weapons, antiaircraft missile weapons, and antisubmarine
helicopters. With such aids they will be able to carry out long-range
searches and destroy enemy submarines.

Special vessels such as trawlers, landing craft, and transports
will be needed for locating and destroying mines, and transport of
landing parties, troops, and equipment.

Vessels equipped with missiles will cover antisubmarine defense
(PLO) vessels against attack by enemy surface vessels, primarily from
carrier-borne hunter-killer groups of PLO forces, and will escort
convoys and landing parties during their ocean passage.

Antiaircraft defense vessels will be needed to screen PLO vessels,
convoys, and landing parties during the sea passage and in many cases
to protect the bases of submarines and other combat vessels against
air attack.

The conditions of the use of surface vessels of various types
at the present time are characterized first of all by the fact that
it became more difficult for them to defend themselves against enemy
air attacks than previously. Aircraft carrying missiles can use _
their weapons against surface vessels from distances of much greater
range than antiaircraft missiles launched from vessels. For this
reason surface vessels have practically lost the capacity to defend
themselves against air attack and are faced with the necessity of

countering airborne missiles of great speeds, equipped with homing
guidance and powerful nuclear charges, and having a high probability
of hits.

Missile-equipped submarines will present, together with aircraft,
& great menace to surface vessels. Missiles launched by these sub-
marines, having the same characteristics as those launched by aircraft,
will be able to strike at surface ships under any weather conditions.
Fitting missiles with nuclear charges significantly increases the
possibility of destroying surface vessels at the time when the vessels
will have only a limited opportunity of defense against this weapon.

A particularly dangerous enemy of present-day surface vessels
are nuclear-powered submarines equipped with long-range homing
torpedoes and missiles capable of carrying nuclear charges. MHuclear
submarines, capable of a high degree of concealment, have a speed
about equip to that of the fast-moving surface vessels. In addition,

aid

4.3(a}(4}

oleae 3

submarines have an advantage over surface vessels in the use of hydro-
acoustics. A surface vessel can be spotted from a submarine at a much
greater range than a submarine froma surface vessel. Because of this,
submarines are able to successfully ettack surface vessels before being
spotted, and can use their weapons more effectively than the surface
vessels under attack by submarines. Nowadays submarines will not
always strive to avoid encounter with surface vessels but will some-
times even attack PLO vessels.

In many cases, the present-day surface vessels will not be able
to emerge victorious from an engagement with submarines. Though if
still capable of carrying out independent combat against conventional
diesel submarines, their capacity to effectively search, pursue, and
destroy, ox sometimes even to escape from nuclear submarines, is
very limited. These circumstances made it necessary to equip surface
vessels with antisubmarine defense helicopters which may help to make
up the deficiencies of surface vessels in their combat against missile-
equipped nuclear submarines.

The potentialities of the mine as a weapon against surface vessels
have also substantially increased. The present day reaction-surfacing
(reaktivno-veplyvayushchiy ) mines are equipped with extremely sensitive
non-contact detonators; these are based on the principle of exploitation
of various physical fields of the vessel,and are adapted for instal-
lation within a wide range of depths. These properties mke for
a considerable increase of the areas considered hazardous for surface
vessels. Conducting combat with mines in a theater of operations will
take much effort and various combat means will have to be used. This
will also limit the possibilities of the use of surface vessels for
the solution of combat missions.

The future saturation of all arma of the naval forces with radio-
electronic devices, will create conditions which make it impossible
for surface vessels to conceal movement, even under the most advan-
tageous weather conditions. Surface vessels can be detected by modern
reconnaissance means at any time of day or night and in any part of
the operational theater, and are subject to strikes by nuclear /missile
weapons whose effectiveness is also independent of the time of day
or night, or of weather conditions.

The threat of enemy use of nuclear weapons forces surface vessels
to sail in dispersed formations. At the same time, due to the
increase in the firing range of submrines, escort vessels mst be
placed at much greater distance from the escorted forces than in the

4.3(2)(4}

paste In order to create the necessary conditions for surface vessels
for their solution of combat missions, it will be necessary to ine

crease considerably the number of escort vessels which will have to

be placed along the increased perimeter of the defended area. Practically
speaking, however, in an overwhelming majority of cases this will be
impossible,

While submarines use cruise missiles against escort vessels and
transports, antisubmarine defense vessels will be able atrbest to use
only their antiaircraft missiles. They will not always be able to take
direct action against the submarine itself.

The use of improved homing devices will effectively increase the
possibilities of destruction of surface vessels by torpedoes launched
from submarines and small surface carriers.

The development of radar and the increase in the maximum effective
range of coastal defense weapons in large measure impedes the approach
by surface vessels, even in a distant approach route to the enemy
coast.e It has becom increasingly difficult to use large vessels in
confined theaters of operation; they can be detected bv the eneny
directly during their departure from their bases. Therefore, in order
to utilize surface vessels effectively for the solution of combat
missions in the enemy's coastal area, particularly in confined theaters
of operations, a set of complex measures for their security will be

required.

All of this complicates to a marked degree the utilization of
surface vessels, and requires a large expenditure of forces for the
support of their operations,

However, surface vessels which have missiles of various types,
and radicelectronic apparatus, increase the combat capabilities of
their individual classes. Today even small vessels equipped with
missiles are capable of combat with large vessels carrying a greater
number of missiles. In addition, the vessels’ armor and other means
of protection against nuclear weapons will have practically no bearing
on the outcome of a combat encounter. This entails the complete re-
jection of a centuries-old principle which maintained that surface
vessels can be used only in combat against similar or “equivalent
strength" (ravnoznachnyy) vessels. Any vessel, although equipped
with the most powerful modern weapons, heavy armor and perfect means
of defense, can be destroyed by even a patrol boat capable of
launching missiles. More than that, vessels of small displacement

1.0{4a)(4),

4.3{a) (4)

which are not easily detected by radar and which, for this reason
can approach a large vessel to within the range of their missiles,
will possess important tactical advantages over the enemy,

The vessies of a striking force equipped with missiles, will
not have to execute a complicated maneuver in order to take and hold
positions adjusted in relation to the enemy, in order to use their
weapons. Approaching and holding the firing position will also
depend to a lesser degree on the relative speeds of the vessels en-
gaged in combat, and their relative disposition.

Equipping vessels with antiaircraft missiles will lessen their
dependence on constant air cover provided by land-based fighter air-
craft, will permit them to resolve missions outside coastal zones of
the PVO and to defend themselves from the means of enemy air attack.
However, the restricted supply of antiaircraft missiles always will
be the reason for the ship's limited time at sea.

In organizing tactical coordination between separate tactical
groups of surface vessels, as well as between vessels and aircraft,
it will not be necessary to mintain the rigidly prescribed dis-
position of tactical groups in ‘relation to each other and to the
chosen grouping of the enemy. In order to inflict a coordinated,
concentrated strike against the enemy, it will be sufficient to have
only the exact target designations and a predetermined sequence in
the use of weapons by the various tactical groups. Therefore there
are wider possibilities of organizing tactical coordination of
surface vessels with aircraft in the solution of combat naval actions,
in which case the control and guidance of the striking groups of
aircraft could be effected from the surface vessels.

The diversity of the missions assigned to surface vessels and
the extensiveness of the areas in which armed combat at sea will
unfold, dictate the necessity of intensive use of surface vessels
throughout the course of the entire war. Furthermore, the intensity
of these military operations will vary. It will be highest during
the initial phase of the war, and also while supporting the de-
ployment of large forces of submarines for operations at sea, and
during their return to bases in the later phases of the war. It
will also be augmented considerable while enemy submarines are in
action against our naval forces and coastal installations.

In this connection it is important to plan surface vessel
operations meticulously and ahead of time and to have the vessels so

1.3{a}{4).

eu

located that they initiate the solution of combat missions inmediately
upon the outbreak of war. This is particularly true for vessels
assigned to operate against enemy missile-carrying submarines and of
missile vessels brought in for protection of operations by PLO vessels.

The distribution of effort, as well as the content of the tasks
being resolved by surface vessels, will depend in large measure on
the nature of the theater of operations and of the anticipated operations
of the enemy.

In open theaters of operations the basic content of combat
operations by surface vessels will be the screening of submarines
during their deployment, and engaging in combat with enemy missile-
carrying submarines. A significant part of the surface vessels' efforts
will be expended in supporting the passage of convoys.

: In confined theaters of operations, surface vessels will perform
a limited number of tasks, the basic ones being the defense of naval
bases and operations against the enemy's lines of communication.

The qualitative composition of surface vessels in a fleet depends
on the nature of the theater of operations. The basic composition
of the fleet's surface vessels operating in open theaters of operations,
will consist of antisubmarine defense vessels with a wide radius of
operation, antiaircraft defense vessels, and missile- vessels. In
confined theaters of operations, precedence will be given to smll
PLO vessels, missile patrol boats and small missile-vessels. 1

Let us now examine the methods of cambat use of surface vessels
in the solution of specific combat missions.

The use of surface vessels to support the depl nt of submarines
as stated above, will be more characteristic of open theaters of operation.
Surface vessels of various types will have an important role in the
solution of this task, especially in their coastal zone, where their
basic efforts will be required to be concentrated on the conduct of
combat with enemy submarines, and on removing the threat of mines
along the routes of deployment of our submarines. Combat operations
of surface vessels will be conducted simultaneously with operations
of antisubmarine aircraft and helicopters, using at the same time
various positional resources of the PLO.

1. For some time, motor-torpedo boats equipped with long-range homing
torpedoes will continue to be of value.

(4)

¢.a(8\(4

The basic classes of vessels brought in for operations in coastal
waters, will be antisubmarine vessels of short operational range which
will be used in tactical coordination with other arms of naval forces,
and ships of antimine defense (PMO).

As the submarines being deployed get further away from their
bases, the composition and the nature of operations of the enemy's
forces in action against our submarines will change and, therefore,
there will also be a change in the composition and operations of
our forces supporting the deployment. In distant theaters of operations,
the basic threat to submarines will come from antisubmarine submrines,
carrier-borne hunter-killer groups (APUG-avianosnaya poiskovo-udarnaya
gruppa) and antisubmarine aircraft of the enemy. In these areas,
in contrast with the coastal zone, it will be necessary to conduct
combat not only with the enemy's submarine and air forces, but also
with his surface vessels - specifically, the APUG. In this connection,
it is imperative to give the antisubmarine hunter-killer groups anti-
aircraft support by assigning a certain number of PVvO vessels to
them, and by bringing in missile vessels to screen the groups.

During the conduct cf combat against enemy antisubmarine defense
forces in the zone of deployment of submarines, the surface vessels
mist operate in tactical groups whose number and composition must be
such as to ensure the solution of the main mission.

Operations of tactical groups of surface vessels in distant areas
are carried out in close coordination with antisubmrine aircraft and
antisubmarine submarines, and are supported by missile-vessels and
attack aircraft, and, whenever necessary, by units of missile troops.

Missile vessels will primarily be used by independent tactical
groups operating in the zone of movement of our submarines, or in
the maneuvering area of our surface force grouping. which is carrying
out search and destruction of the eneny's antisubmarine submarines.

The operations of our antisubmarine vessels supporting the
deployment of submarines will result in the detection, destruction,
or forced withdrawal of the enemy antisubmarine submarines found in
the zone of movement of our submarines to a distance exceeding the
range of their weapons. These operations will be planned according
to the usual tactics of the hunter-killer groups used for the
detection and destruction of the enemy antisubmarine submarines.

In order to limit the possibility of undetected penetration by

1,3(a)}{4).

4.3(a)(4)

enemy antisubmarine submarines into the secure area in order to
attack our submarines, the operations of the vessel hunter-killer
groups will have to be supplemented by specially detailed vessels
which would set up screens of sonar (radiogidro-akusticheskly )
buoys on the borders of the zone under observation. The operation
of these screens, set up at a short distance from the ccast, will
be by antisubmrine aircraft and vessels, as well as by helicopters
based on the coast. At a great distance from our coast, this
operation would be done by some of the helicopters carried by
antisubmarine vessels, as well as by vessels and aircraft. Enemy
submarines detected by the sonar buoys must be attacked and
destroyed by the vessels, aircraft, and helicopters detailed

for operations in that area.

During support of submarine deployment, simultaneously with
the solution of missions of combat against enemy antisubmarine forces,
there will have to be a search for and destruction of mines laid along
the line of passage of the submarines. Trawlers and helicopters
can be used for this purpose. Special groups must be formed from
these, capable of destroying mines in those areas which cannot be
bypassed by the submarines.

The use of surface vessels in combat against enemy missile
submarines will consist of the search and destruction of those
submarines, mainly within the boundaries of the possible firing
positions for submarines approaching the coast to strike targets
situated in the depth of our territory. The use of surface vessels
in the outer zone of antisubmarine defense will be limited because
of the difficulty in the mtter of their support.

Taking into account the disposition of a series of objectives
and the capabilities of eneny missile submarines, one can assume that
the probable areas of their firing positions will be 300-900 miles
(540-1600 kms) from the coast. In these areas, coubat against enemy
submarines will be carried out primarily by long-range antisubmarine
vessels resolving missions in coordination with antisubmarine aire
craft and submarines, utilizing the systems of antisubmarine
surveillance available in the theater of operations.

In open areas, surface vessels can resolve the missions of
location and destruction of enemy submarines only if they use the
data on the initial discovery of these submarines obtained by the
positional resources, air-sraft, and helicopters. The operations of
the antisubmarine vessels must be organized in conjunction with the

operations and disposition of these capabilities.

Unilateral operations by surface vessels in locating enemy missile
submarines in open areas will be extremely ineffective, since missile
submarines, having a hydroacoustical detection system of wider range
than surface vessels and the capability of the same speed, can
avoid any encounters. In addition to this, having weapons with an
effective firing range equal to the range of detection of the surface
vessels, the submarines can destroy them before they themselves are
detected.

In this connection, and considering the present capabilities of
surface vessels in combat with atomic submarines, which maneuver over
wide areas, the former can be counted upon as a real force only if
they operate within a unified system of antisubmarine defense for
a given theater of operations, as one of its components.

Surface vessels can successfully conduct unilateral combat
operations against nuclear submarines when the latter are trying to
break through narrows, when the possibility of dispatching forces
for detection purposes can realistically be expected to meet with
the necessary success, and when the enemy submarines must operate
within a limited area.

Inasmuch as the length of stay at sea of the tactical groups
of vessels of the PLO is insignificant, due to the limited supply of
antiaircraft missiles on their escort vessels, they will for the
' time being be able to go out into distant areas only periodically,
for resolving missions of locating and destroying those enemy missile
submarines which have been detected through other means within the
limits of the sea zone of antisubmarine defense. As antisubmarine
defense vessels are equipped with an increased number of antiaircraft
missiles and as more antiaircraft defense vessels join their ranks,
their use for operations in distant areas for continuous long periods
of time will be increased.

On the whole, the operations of surface vessels far removed fom
their coast will have an important bearing on the general system of
combat with enemy missile submarines. Their use in those areas will
increase significantly the effectiveness of antisubmarine defense,
and will become a substantial addition to the operations of anti-
submarine submarines and antisubmarine defense aircraft.

In the coastal zone (pribrezhnaya zona), small surface vessels

13layi4)

4.3(a)(4}

of PLO will be used to good advantage for locating and destroying
enemy submarines. They will fulfil their missions in coordination
with aircraft of the antisubmarine defense and shore-based helicopters,
and will be supported by a wide-range (razvernvtyy) observation system
consisting of various forms of fixed resources.

Operations of the forces of antisubmarine defense in the near
zone (blizhnaya zona), in polar areas, and at the edge of ice, will
be conducted systematically.

The joint search for enemy submarines by antisubmarine vessels
and helicopters can be carried out within the borders of the ccastal
zone of the PLO by using land-based helicopters. In the Arctic the
range of combined operations by vessels and helicopters can be some=
what increased by setting up helicopter bases on the ice.

It is necessary to use helicopter-carrying vessels for locating
submarines in distant and open water areas. However, since helicopters
have a limited load-lifting capacity and range of operations, they
can be fitted only with equipment for finding submarines within a
comparatively short range from the parent vessels. As for the
destruction of submarines, the solution of this task presents well-
known difficulties for helicopters, since they are incapable of
carrying the necessary torpedoes or bombs. For this reason, it
Will be necessary in the near future to use helicopters together with
antisubmarine vessels which are capable of carrying large supplies
of submarine destruction weapons for long periods of time.

The hunt for enemy submarines can be carried out by groups
of surface vessels with special equipment enabling them to detect
the position of a submarine by the colum of ionized gases at the
moment of launching of the ballistic missile. These vessels mst
have long range antisubmarine missiles in order to be able to destroy
the submarine. The groups of vessels set aside for a hunt by the
method stated will be deployed in the areas assigned to them in
such a way that they can effect an overlap of detection along the
entire zone of possible firing positions of the enemy submarines.
The distance between groups of vessels must be such that a detected
submarine can be destroyed by antisubmarine missiles at any point of
the observed area. The operations of vessels conducting a submarine
hunt based on detection of the column of ionized exhaust gases of the
missiles will be carried on in coordination with shore installations
established for the same purpose.

The hunt for enemy missile submarines by ships of the PLO can

4.8(a)(4)

be carried on with the aid of the fixed hydroacoustical observation
systems or with scnar buoys set out by vessels and aircraft. Surface
vessels, utilizing the informtion on detected submarines.as it comes
in through the fixed hydroacoustical means of detection, can then go
to the area where the submarines have been detected, and locate and
pursue then.

In coastal zone operations, surface vessels can execute the
hunt when called upon on the basis of primary data received from the
fixed hydroacoustical systems of submarine detection. In addition,
surface vessels can be used for patrol searches (kontrolnyy poisk)
of those submarines which have penetrated into the coastal zone.

In solv missions conc the defense of naval communication
lines, surface vessels will be used for the protection of moving
convoys against attacks from submrines, aircraft, surface vessels,
and mines. Various classes of surface vessels will constitute the
basis of naval forces assigned to defend communication lines. This
is due to their ability to stay at sea for long periods of time,
their readiness to repel enemy attacks under difficult weather
conditions and their acceptance of a significant part of the effort
in carrying out antisubmarine, antiaircraft, and antimine defense of
convoys during their sea passage.

Surface vessels assigned for antisubmarine, antiaircraft, and
antimine defense will resolve their missions primarily by the method
of direct defense of the transports.

The antisubmarine defense of the convoys must be so arranged
as to secure their defense from both porpedoes and missile weapons
from submarines.

The antiaircraft defense of the convoys in coastal areas, mist
be effected by the troops of PYO of the Country, aided by vessels
of antiaircraft defense. There will be a special need for the use
of PVO antiaircraft vessels in the next few years for the protection
of convoys moving beyond the areas of PeeRone hey, of the troops
of PVO of the Country.

The convoys will be able to move away from the coast only in
the company of PYO vessels carrying powerful antiaircraft missile
weapons. In this connection, the duration of their movement outside
the zone of responsibility of the troops of PVO of the Country will
depend primarily on the presence of PVO vessels within the composition
of the convoys, and on the number of antiaircraft missiles which can

1,3{3}/4)

be used for repelling air attacks.

In operations beyond the coastal zone of PVO, the PVO vessels
will be included for the most part in the composition of the convoys >
included in the general combat formations with then.

In many cases the PVvo vessels, jointly with other PVO forces and
resources in a common plan, will be used for defense of the basing —
and assembly points of the convoys. Specifically, they can be used
for radar surveillance in a naval sector, as well as for reinforcing
units of troops of PVO of the Country which protect installations
of the Navy. This will permit a considerable increase in the depth
of the PVO points of basing and communication lines within a naval
sector. In newly created basing points where fixed PVO means have
not yet been deployed, PVO vessels might be the only means of

coubatting the enemy in the air.

In open theaters of operations missile vessels will have to
be detailed for screening convoys against possible strikes by enemy
surface vessels, inasmuch as the convoys make their long distance
passages slowly and at a considerable distance from shore. These
vessels can be merged into independent groups. When miti-purpose
missile vessels are used to reinforce the PVO of convoys part of
them can proceed in the same formation with the transports.

In confined theaters of operations, missile vessels will not
_ be used as often for screening the convoys, since this mission can
be resolved for the main part by missile troops and naval aviation.

the use of surface vessels in antimine defense will consist
of the detection and destruction of mines in the areas of bases and
of operations of submarines and surface vessels » 88 well as along
the routes of convoys. Inshore the search for mines will be carried
out by search vessels (korabl-iskatel), jointly with the coastal
and sea-going resources of PMO. In areas far removed from the coast,
this mission can be resolved only by means of vessels.

In their search for mines in coastal areas where the places of
mine-laying are determined by shore-based or floating posts of anti«#
mine detection, the search vessels must move into the places indicated
by these posts, and conduct a search for the mines. The destruction
of the mines located will be done by special vessels guided by the
search vessels.

The use of surface vessels in support of ground troops will

4,3fa}fA),

depend on the missions being performed by the latter. Surface
vessels can be used for landing operations and for the protection of
flanks and certain installations in the rear of a maritime front,
against operations of enemy missile vessels, including patrol boats.

in landing operations the basic mission of surface vessels consists
of the transportation and unloading of heavy equipment in the landing
sector. This mission is resolved by special landing craft whose
operations are supported by missile vessels and vessels of the PLO,
PVO, and PMO. The operations of the PVO vessels have an especially
important role. As they follow the overall route and combat formations
of the landing craft, they give cover from air strikes to the danding
parties during sea passage, during the landing operation, and sub-
sequently, until the deployment of antiaircraft missile units on
shore; they will also protect the actual points of landing.

Missile vessels, especially patrol boats (kater), sill be used
extensively to cover the landing force during their transport at sea ;
from enemy missile vessels. In many cases these vessels can be
merged into detachments of fire support vessels (OKOP - otryad
korabley ognevcy podderzhki) assigned specific targets on shore, in the
interests of the support of the landing operations.

Missile vessels and patrol boats will play an important role in
the resolution of missions for the destruction of coastal communication
iines serving the enemy's maritime groupings of trooper, In addition,
missile vessels can be used for the destruction of enemy surface
vessels supporting ground troops which are situated owside the range
of fire of the coastal, short-range missile complexes.

In resolving missions for the support of troops carrying out a
defensive action on shore, missile vessels, especially patrol boats,
will participate in the destruction of enemy vessels and landing
force transports as they approach the defended coast; they will also
participate in the destruction of the vessels protecting the enemy's
landing operations, above all the PVO and PLO vessels.

The operations of missile vessels covering the troops on shore
who are on the defensive against the enemy strikes from the sea are
carried out in coordination with units of missile troops of the Navy.
They will consist mainly of periodical patrolling by groups of vessels
close inshore in order to detect and destroy enemy missile vessels
attempting to penetrate areas not monitored by units of the missile
troops of the Navy.

=l]6=

4,3(a)(4)

4.diay(4)

eesvece

The use of nuclear/missile weapons has had ita direct effect on
the development of such arms of naval forces as surface vessels.
Having lost their role as the basic naval striking force, :: * min: .
surface vessels have become an integral part of the suppo.t forces
and have retained the capacity to resolve certain other missions.

Equipping surface vessels with cruise and antiaircraft missiles,
with modern means of antisubmarine defense and installing new engines=
steam=-turbine and nuclear-will permit a wider use of surface vessels.
New surface vessels will be able to stay away from their bases for
a long period of time and, operating at a significantly long range
from their coast, they will be able to perform various important combat
missions.

In a future war, the use of surface vessels of various classes
in coordination with other arms of the naval forces will give reliable
support to submarine operations and will result in the more effective
performance of combat missions against missile submarines of the
enemy, as well as a more successful defense of the basing areas of
naval forces.

—F3{a}{4)
