If It's Spies That You're Wondering About-article Gives Glimpse Of
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014786, dated 1 May 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014786).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

)

"If It's Spies That You're Wondering About"

[Unsigned]
Published in US News and World Report,

_..._.New York, 27” June 1960, Pages 70-73"

This article gives.a glimpse of Soviet spy
activities in the United States as gleaned from an
official report made to Congress on June 13, 1960
by the US Department of State.

“The Soviet Union has built the largest of all
intelligence machines and maintains an unparalleled
network of agents throughout the world. The Sovict
~espionage system, with its various interlocking
parts and functions at home and abroad, has been
clearly set forth in the findings of two Royal 2
Commission reports, first in Canada as a result of
the defection in 1945 of Igor GUZENKO, a member of

a Soviet espionage ring, and in 1954 in Australia.
after the defection of Vladimir PETROV, another

- Soviet agent. These Commissions established that at

least three parallel Soviet intelligence networks
opératé in Soviet missions abroad: state security,
the military, and the Party. To these may also be
“added naval and commercial information-gathering

a (992-

\
i . . . CD-248

intelligence networks, Sometimes these elements :
operate under the control and direction of a Soviet —
embassy, On the other hand, many of their operatives,
bearing nominal diplomatic titles and attached to

an embassy, report directly to their respective
headquarters in Noscow, and the embassy has no
control over them. These Soviet intelligence
organizations operating under the cloak of diplomatic
immunity throughout the world might be termed the
"official" agencies and in. turn also recruit local
people and set up additional networks of agents.

One former Soviet-Bloc intelligence officer
has estimated that the office of the Soviet Military
Attache in the United States is able to obtain legally
ninety-five percent of the material for its intelligence
objectives. The following facts illustrate, this |
point:

Purchasing and subscriptions of open publications
and the United States documents?

On 28 December 1944, the Soviet Government
Purchasing Commission in Washington, D.C. ordered
copies of five thousand eight hundred and ten
patents. On the same date the New York office of
this Commission purchased two copies of eighteen
thousand patents. On 1 January 1945 the Soviet
Government Purchasing Commission in Washington again
ordered copies of five thousand three hundred and ,
forty-two different patents. On 12 January 1945
copies of forty-one thousand eight hundred and twelve
patents were ordered. The next order was for
forty-one thousand eight hundred and ten. The
acquisition of copies of patents has been continued
throughout the years, as illustrated by the fact
that in early 1959 Anatoliy G. VASILYEV, an employee
of the office of the Soviet Military Attache,
requested an American to instruct him in the use of the

: os 3! 2 y
( . . .¢ »
‘ : “e .

so-called search room of the United States Patent
Office so that he could locate patents in which he
was interested.

On 10 March 1954 an assistant Soviet Air Attache
purchased "The Pilot's Handbook" for the East and
West Coast of the United States from the United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey of the Department
of Commerce. On 12 March 1954 a chauffeur of the
Soviet Air Attache purchased "The Pilot's Handbook"
for Canada and Alaska. Six days later an Assistant
Soviet Attache ordered "The Pilot's Handbook" for
the Far Bast and Europe. ‘These handbooks contained
diagrams of all of the principal airfields and the
approaches used in landing planes.

In April 1954 Soviet officials stationed in
Washington obtained from the Map Information Office i
of the US Geological Survey, Department of the ;
Interior, topographic maps covering North Carolina,

Michigan, Illinois, Kentucky, and an area within a
fifty-mile radius of Washington, D.C.

During June 1959 the personnel of the Soviet
Military, Naval and Air Attaches’ offices subscribed
to forty-four newspapers and fifty-eight magazines
of a technical, scientific, military, and general-
news nature. The Soviet Embassy has a program of
subscribing to newspapers published at or in the
vicinity of vital United States bases. :

The Soviet Union is in corespondence with chambers
of commerce and industrial facilities throughout
the United States, and by this means obtain voluminous
information regarding transportation systems, major
industries, and so forth.

. Attendance of the US organizations conventions,
by Soviet officials:

Two Soviet.officials attended a Western Electric
convention held in Los Angeles during August 1959.
At this convention, two Soviet officials collected
about two hundred and fifty pounds of literature,..
Thousands of similar documents and publications are
obtained in this country every year by Soviet Bloc
officials stationed here and through Soviet Government-
affiliated agencies such as the Four Continents Book
Corporation and the Tass News Agency.

Reconnaissance trips:

In addition to procurement activities,
"reconnaissance" trips are widely used for intelligence
gathering.

In October and November 1953 Soviet officials
travelled to Minnesota where they purchased fifteen
aerial photographs of Minneapolis and St. Paul. In
Missouri and Texas they obtained aerial maps of
Dallas, Tulsa, Fort Worth, and surrounding areas
adjacent to naval air stations, army eirfields and
air force bases.

In April 1954 they purchased five aerial photographs
of Long Island communities, three photographs of
Boston and Newport, Rhode Island. In May 1954 three
Soviet officials placed an order with a Los Angeles
photographic shop for aerial photographs covering the
Los Angeles area,

Leonid E. PIVNEV, Soviet Assistant Air Attache,
travelled extensively throughout the United States
and obtained commercially available aerial photographs
of various areas of the country. He also requested
a Washington, D.C. photographer to rent an airplane
and took photographs of New York City because such

¢

photographs Were not commercially available. PIVNEV
specificd the scale to be used and the altitude from
which these photographs were to be taken, He
offered $700 for these photographs which obviously
would show vital port areas, industrial facilities
and military installations in. the area,. For this

Peer eee eee ee a Te ee es ee eae

On 19 January 1955 the US State Department
notified the Soviet Embassy that restrictions were
being placed on the acquisition of certain types of
data by Soviet officials in the United States. One
month after the restrictions became effective .
Nikolay I. TROFIMOV, a Soviet official in Mexico,
began negotiations with a resident of the West Coast
of the United States to obtain aerial photographs: of
forty-five major United States cities. Nineteen of
these cities are located near Strategic Air Command
(SAC) bases. The remaining twenty-six are all
strategically located in or near air bases, naval
bases, research or training stations, atomic energy
installations or important industrial facilities.

“TROFIMOV was unsuccessful in these efforts.

Abuse of diplomatic privileges:

Soviet officials abroad very often abuse diplomatic
privileges. In 1937 Hafis SALICH, a naturalized
American employed by the Office of Naval Intelligence
(ONI) in California, met Mikhail N. GORIN, Pacific
Coast manager of Inturist, through a mutual acquaintance.
By advancing SALICH money, GORIN ultimately persuaded
him to furnish ONI reports for which GORIN paid
$1,700. GORIN and SALICH were found guilty of espionage
in 1939.

- In 1941 Anatoliy YAKOVLEV, a Soviet intelligence
agent, arrived in the United States and, under cover

as clerk and later.as Vice Consul in New York,
became the chief organizer of atomic espionage in
‘the eastern United States until his departure in
December 1946. YAKOVLEY worked through Harry GOLD,
an American, who had long been engaged in industrial
espionage for the Soviet Union. GOLD served as
courier for information provided by Klaus FUCHS,

the British atomic scientist, who was later convicted
of espionage by a British court, and subsequently
for David GREFNGLASS, an American machinist. On

8 December 1950 GOLD was sentenced to thirty years’
imprisonment for conspiracy to commit espionage,
Anatoliy YAKOVLEV and Semen SEMENOV, professional
Soviet agents who left the country, were indicted
along with Harry GOLD.

Julius ROSENBERG of New York, a member of the
US Communist Party, engaged initia?ly in industrial .
espionage and later progressed to political and atomic
intelligence. With the help of his wife, Ethel, he
recruited David GREENGLASS, his brother-in-law who
was working at Los Alamos on highly confidential
matters. GREENGLASS, shortly before the first atom
bomb test explosion, transmitted a highly valuable
report to the Soviets. It was not until the confession
of FUCHS in England and Harry GOLD in the United |
States that GREENGLASS's activities were revealed
and he in turn pointed to the ROSENBERGs. ROSENBERG
and his wife were arrested in the summer of 1950.
At the time of their arrest, Abraham BROTHMAN, Miriam
MOSKOWITZ and Morton SOBELL were also uncovered, s
arrested, and tried. The ROSENBERGs were sentenced
to death in March 1951. SOBELL was sentenced to ,
thirty years' imprisonment, David GREENGLASS to
fifteen, Abraham BROTHMAN to seven, and Miriam
MOSKOWITZ to two years! imprisonment.

Kurt PONGER and Otto VERBER, both naturalized
Americans, were recruited by the Soviets to report

CD- 2480

-on US military installations in Europe. They were.
cuncevered by a US counterintelligence agent whom they
had put in touch with Yuriy NOVIKOY, Second Secretary
of the Soviet Embassy. in Washington. PONGER and
VERBER pleaded guilty to espionage charges and in
June 1953 were sentenced to from five to fifteen

oe Fo a8

Recruiting US citizens abroad:

Jack SOBLE and his wife Myra, both naturalized
US citizens of Lithuanian origin, supervised activities
of Soviet agents in the United States and Europe.,
SOBLE assigned agents to recruit US Government
employees stationed abroad to obtain information. on
the following: military equipment and supplies,
atomic bomb stockpiles in the United States, and the
rate of atomic bomb production as Well as photographs
of atomic bunkers in which the bombs were stored.
The SOBLEs were arrested in January 1957. Myra SOBLE
was sentenced to four years' imprisonment and Jack
SOBLE, to-seven years. Associated with them in their
espionage activity was Jacob ALBAM, who like the
SOBLES was a native of Lithuania. In October 1957
he was sentenced to five and half years’ imprisonment.

The Soviets continued their attempt to penetrate
US Government agencies. After the prosecution of,
Judith COPLON, an employee cf the Department of Justice
in early 1950, the Soviets in October of that year
gave an assignment to Boris MORROS, an American
motion picture producer who was cooperating with the
FBI, to revive his acquaintance with a member [unnamed]
of the US Atomic Energy Commission. MORROS was
instructed to obtain compromising. information concerning
this person and particularly to explore the possibility
of placing a secretary in his office who could furnish

information to the Soviets. ‘Earlier, in 1948,

MORROS had been given an assignment to attempt to"
‘obtain information to be used by the Soviets in an
effort to compromise General Lucius CLAY (US Military
Governor in Germany).

In 1954 Soviet teniiwence officers in "Germany
approached’ an Junnamed] American Army officer who
waS soon to be retired. They propositioned him to
work for the Soviet Union after his return to the
United States and set up a schedule for meetings in
New York City. In accordance with the arrangements,
Maksim G. MARTYNOV, Counselor of the Soviet delegation
to the UN Military Staff Committee, carried out a
series of clandestine meetings in New York "with a
person whom he believed to be the Army officer" [no
further details given]. MARTYNOV was declared
persona non grata on 21 February 1955,

Igor A. AMOSOV, a Soviet Assistant Naval Attache,
was declared persona non grata in February 1954 for
attempts to recruit American citizens to obtain
information concerning radar and US naval vessels.

In June 1956 Ivan A. BUBCHIKOV, a Soviet
Assistant Military Attache, was declared persona non
grata for attempting to obtain data regarding radar,
guided missiles, jet fuels, and atomic submarines
from an American businessman who during World War I]
had had extensive contacts with the Soviets on private
and US Government buSiness.

In August 1956 Viktor I. PETROV, a Soviet
translator at the UN, was "separated" from his work
for having recruited an employee of an American
aviation company in order to obtain classified data
regarding United States aircraft.

The Soviet espionage activities described above
were largely engaged in by Soviet so-called official
or legal espionage networks. = ;

Clandestine espionage:

The Soviets also have “unofficial” clandestine
espionage networks controlled by agents sent directly
from Moscow to the United States. Such a case was
that of Colonel Rudolf Ivanovich ABEL, an officer
of Soviet intelligence [the GRU]. ABEL was convicted
by a Federal jury in New York on 25 October 1957,
for conspiring to steal US defense secrets on behalf
of the Soviet Union. On November 1957 ABEL was
sentenced to thirty years in prison and given a fine
of $3,000. ABEL had been exposed by former Lieutenant
Colonel Reino HAYHANEN, thirty-seven, a confessed
ex-Soviet espionage agent who identified ABEL as
the Soviet "resident officer for espionage" in the
US and the person from whom he had received espionage
assignments over a five-year period. ABEL, a veteran
of the Soviet intelligence service, had entered the
United States in 1948 with false documents as
Andrew KAYCTIS, a.US’citizen. He also used the name
Emil GOLDFUS, for which he also had false documents,
and he also hed documents in the name of Martin COLLINS,
During his years in the US and before his exposure,
ABEL used a photographer's studio on Fulton Street
in Brooklyn as a cover for his operations.

"he Soviet Union has large espionage networks
in other Western countries.’ The Klaus FUCHS admission
in 1950 that he had betrayed the free world while-a
srwember of the British atomic energy team is a clear
indication of the nature of Soviet designs on the
information and classified data of the British
Government. The flight behind the Iron Curtain of
the British scientist Dr. Bruno PONTECORVO in 1950 and
also of British diplomats Guy BURGESS and Donald
MACLEAN in 1950 further bear witness to this Soviet
intention.

'

“Most of the cases mentioned in the preceding’
paragraph, although based outside the US, had.
ramifications in the US. For example, the ieoenacied
‘furnished to the Soviets by Dr. Allan NUNN MAY,

who was ‘uncovered by Igor GUZENKO,-had been obtained |
when MAY visited a laboratory in Chicago in 1944,

- Klaus FUCHS had worked,on atomic energy projects

in the US from eary 1944 through Séptember 1945

and had supplied information. to the Soviets while

in the country. British diplomats, BURGESS and:
MACLEAN, had been stationed in the US prior to their
disappearance behind the Iron Curtain.

In recent years some three hundred and sixty
individuals in eleven different countries of the
free world have been convicted of espionage on behalf
of the Soviet Union. During the last’-ten years,
at least forty-seven Soviet officials have been “
exposed and expelled from free world countries.

10
