El Salvador: Little Progress in the Jesuit Murder Case - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049395, dated 1 February 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049395).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a)

El Salvador: Little Progress in the Jesuit Murder Case | OY

The Jesuit murder case is moving slowly forward in El Salvador's

troubled judicial system, but suspiciona that senior military
officers ordered the murders or covered up armed forces
involvement linger. Conflicting evidence, government stalling,
and reluctant military cooperation plaqued the inquiry phase,
which ended in December. Two prosecutors recently resigned from
the case and accused the Attorney General's office of bending to
military pressure and hampering their efforts to conduct a
thorough investigation. We believe judicial maneuverings and
traditional military immunity to civilian authority will continue
to work against a speedy prosecution of the case. Re
Background

Last January, the government arrested six officers and three
enlisted men, one of whom deserted and remains at large, for the
murders in November 1989 of six Jesuit priests, their
housekeeper, and her daughter. The highest-ranking officer
arrested, Colonel Guiileame Alfredo Benavides, belongs to the
powerful military academy class of 1966, or Tandona, whose
members include the Defense Minister and other senior officers.
The arrests came at the end of a broad inveatigation--on a scale

unprecedented in Salvadoran judicial history--with technical help

Approved for Release

NOV 1993

from the US, British, and Spanish Governments. The US-trained
Special Investigative Unit (SIU) conducted a professional and
commendable investigation that received praise from foreign
police expert oon Although poor
coordination among the SIU, the Attorney General's office, and
other agencies initially delayed the investigation, ballistics
tests, handwriting evidence, and statements by military personnel
eventually implicated the suspects.

Last December, Judge Ricardo Zamora, tasked with overseeing the
inquiry, ruled evidence was sufficient to try the suspects. He
charged the nine soldiers with assassination and acts of
terrorism, each charge carrying three to 30-year sentences. A
tenth soldier, arrested in July, was charged with destruction of
evidence. The defense appealed the judge's decision and the case
moved into a pretrial appeals phase during which two judges will
decide whether evidence gathered during the investigation and by
Judge Zamora is sufficient to go to oo iii.
Military Cooperation--Some Bright Spots

Armed forces cooperation with civilian authorities in the Jesuit
investigation, although at times reluctant, has been greater than
in any other human rights case involving the military. Although
officers have rarely participated in the prosecution of
colleagues, many senior officers and officials, including Defense
Minister Ponce--then Chief of Staff--offered testimony. The SIU,
headed by a military officer, focused on the armed forces from
the start of the inquiry and reportedly proceeded without threats

or interference. On some occasions the military was even

Wes ee

pt

compliant; after some criticism from the President's office that

they were not being responsive to the court, the Armed Forces
installed a direct phone line to Judge Zamora from the Defense
Ministry.

Problems in the Investigation

Despite these accommodations, long delays in obtaining evidence
and the government's lack of aggressiveness in investigating the
Case provoked charges by international observers that San

Salvador is not committed to bringing the perpetrators to

justice. po continually put off
asking for evidence and testimony. Pee ee Mant oe

RE <orner Attorney General Colorado--who was replaced in
June by Roberto Mendoza--ordered the Prosecutors assigned to the
case to take no initiatives. At the same tine (i
a -. one in the Attorney General's office was

responsible for managing the case or devising a prosecutorial
Btrategy. Two of the seven prosecutors working on the case
resigned in January 199], accusing the Attorney General's office
of barring them from key testimonies and censoring their
questions to key military witnesses during the final monthe of
the investigation.

Although we have no evidence that any officer threatened the
Judge, he was clearly hesitant to violate the norms of Salvadoran
civil-military relations. Pe pa een, Zamora was
reluctant to make requests of or give specific orders to the SIU-
-headed by Colonel Rivas--arguing that a judge does not give

orders to the military. The two men met only once, in March

sana es,

1990, even though both Played vital rolea in the investigation.

Military cooperation, moreover, has been limited to compliance

with specific requests. The reluctance of officers to volunteer
information, perjury, and the destruction of evidence have fed
suspicions of a coverup at high levels.

-- Judge Zamora jailed several enlisted men on charges of
perjury after they contradicted each other on the witness
stand.

~- The military Honor Commission, appointed in 1989 by
President Cristiani to inveatigate Army involvement in the
murders, accomplished virtually nothing. Members
contradicted themselves in teatimony, some claiming they
submitted a written report to the President while others
Swore a report was never prepared.

-- Military testimony has never established the precise chain
of command between Ponce and Benavides on the night of the
murders and has failed to clarify doubts about a possible
coverup. J some testimony
suggests officers were aware of Benavides’ role in the
murders before his indictment.

~- Some 70 military logbooks were destroyed weeks after the
killings, an estimated 20 of which reportedly may have
given evidence relevant to the case. Lieutenant Yusshy
Mendoza, one of the murder defendants, testified that
Lieutenant Colonel Camilo Hernandez, now a codefendant

charged with destruction of evidence, ordered the burning,

anne

an accusation Hernandez denies. A notebook allegedly kept

by Benavides also disappeared. nn
Senior military commanders have not demanded that soldiers with
knowledge of the case come forward, nor have they taken action
against those who perjured themselves. Furthermore, all
defendants have contracted with the same team of defense
attorneys--who reportedly may be paid by members of the armed
forces--even though several have opposing interests and
contradictory defenses. The arrangement has fueled suspicion
that the defense team may be more concerned with protecting the

armed forces than serving its clients' needs. ae:

The military, proclaiming its full support for the investigation,

Benavides is

has repeatedly denied allegations of a coverup.

the lone conspirator and that he ordered the killings on his own

initiative without prompting from higher authorities.

he snapped under the stress of the November rebel offensive.

Judicial Impediments Expected

Although the case has progressed to the pretrial appeals phase
relatively quickly by Salvadoran standards, Salvadoran law and
the inefficient judicial system will probably add to problems and
delays in prosecuting the case. qe
president of the appeals court, while acknowledging the case
requires special attention, refuses to predict when the process
will be completed. If the case is moved to trial, compiling a

jury will be a lengthy process. In highly sensitive cases,

Jurors, witnesses, and court officials have been subject to

bribery and intimidation. Fear of retaliation could prevent many
from coming to serve. Literacy requirements alao limit the
potential juror poo].

Rules of evidence may make conviction of some BuBpects difficult.
Laws barring codefendant testimony suggest the main evidence
against Benavides, the Btatements of his codefendants that he
ordered them to kill the priests, may be inadmissable. The only

evidence against Hernandez on the ction-of-evidence charge

is also codefendant testimony.
Prospects

Judging by past experience, we believe the case is likely to drag
on for some time. Other prominent cases continue to crawl
through the judicial system, including the murder of six US
citizens at a cafe in 1985, and the murder of 10 peasants in San
Sebastian in 1988. In the latter case, the judge last year
dismissed the charges against 10 soldiers but ordered trial
proceedings--which have yet to begin--against the highest-ranking

officer, a major. as

Further help from the Armed Forces in resolving conflicting

testimony or uncovering new evidence is unlikely. Suspicions of

higher-level involvement, therefore, are likely to linger.

ur

judgment, the military probably believes the Jesuit case no

longer presents any institutional threat as the Armed Forces

retains the ability to contro] its own affairs.
