Memo from Richard Helms to Director, DIA Concerning Military Thought: QuestionN
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012301, dated 3 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012301).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4.3(2)(4)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23, D.C,

20 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "Questionst of the Control
of Missile Units in an Offensive Operation"

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought” ( NYoyennaya Mysl") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander. .

2. In the ‘interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to~know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of

any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
s to the originating office. :

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

a oe . RICHARD HELMS a
some “Enclosure pe ae 4.3(a){4)

By 4.3(a)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 0 JUN 1992 |
— 1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

The Director of Central Intelligence
Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Starr

Assistant Chief ot Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S+ Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence ana Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

4.3(a)(4)

~ 4.3{a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR
SUBJECT ig —— THOUGHT: "Questions of the Control of Missile
Units in an Offensive Operation"

DATE OF INFO:

APPRAISAL
OF CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

ag

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled “Questions
of the Control of Missile Units in an Offensive Operation) written
by Major-General S. Kuznetsov and Major-General A. Tikhomirov”.

This article appeared in the 1960 First Issue of a special version
of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Military Thought).
This journal is published irregularly and is classified TOP SECRET
by the Soviets. The 1960 First Issue was the initial issue of this
publication.

4.3(a)(4

1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

Questions of the Control of Missile Units in an Offensive

eration

Major-General S. Kuznetsov
Major-General A. Tikhantirov

The organization of the control of missile units employing
nuclear warheads continues to remain the subject of special attention
for ccmbined-arms commanders as well as for missile specialists r
(spetsialist-raketchik). A number of articles devoted to this question

have already appeared in Collections of Articles of the Journal "Military
Thought".

As is known, during the critique of the operational-strategic
staff exercise which tock place in the Ukraine in September 1959,
Marshal of the Soviet Union Comrade Grechko noted the shortcomings
uncovered during the exercise in the realm of control of weapons of
mass destruction. In particular, it was pointed out that because the
most expedient forms and methods of control of these means have not
yet been found, the coordination between intelligence organs, the
operational command, and the commanders of the artillery and the air
army on questions concerning the use of nuclear weapons, involves
an intolerable waste of time measured in terms of many (4 to 6) hours.
Similar defects were noted during a number of other exercises. In
connection with this, there is an imperative necessity to find those
methods for the control of weapons utilizing nuclear warheads which
would require the least possible time for the destruction of a
target (from the moment of its detection to the nuclear strike).

At the present time the organization of the control of missile
units and tube artillery employing nuclear ammunition. is reflected
as follows. For the fulfilment of missions in the interests of the
main grouping of army troops, the missile units and units of tube
artillery employing nuclear amumition are brought together in an
army special artillery group (ASAG). In an offensive operation the
arny may be reinforced with missile units allocated for solution of
tasks of tactical (range of fire of not more than 35 km)..as.well as of
operational significance (range of fire up to 300 km). Furthermore,
it can receive an additional 1 to 2 tube artillery divisions employing
nuclear ammunition. Therefore, the composition of the ASAG, as
regards its tactical and technical characteristics as a deliverer of
nuclear warheads, will be exceptionally varied, and this will greatly
impede the achievement of control of this group during preparation

1.3(a)(4)

for and in the course of the operation. Objections to the creation
of the ASAG, in connection with the above-mentioned situation, have
been stated in detail in print. In addition to these, we would also
point out the following.

It is recommended that the ASAG utilize as its staff the staffs
of the artillery divisions of the Reserve of the Supreme High Command
(RVGK)1, which are advancing as reinforcements for the army. Further-
more, the artillery division commnder who is appointed as the commnder
of the ASAG is not relieved of his responsibilities for the activities
of his organic large units, which were transferred to reinforce the;
large units of the army.

The commander of the RVGK artillery division and his staff have
organic means of control which permit the organization of control of
only their own large units. When appointed as commander of the ASAG,
the commander of an RVGK artillery division is cbliged to leave to
his deputy part of the means of control, exercised by the division
headquarters, for ensuring the control of organic large units of the
RVGK artillery division allocated to reinforce the army. As a result,
the ASAG commander and the deputy commander of the RVGK division will
not have sufficient means of control; this will lead to unreliability
of control and, in particular, to loss of time in the transmission
of various orders and commands and in the receipt of information from
below. Therefore, the use of the RVGK artillery division staff in
the capacity of the ASAG staff is, obviously, inexpedient. It will
in no way promote the speed of delivery of nuclear strikes.

We further consider that one of the causes of delay in the
delivery of a nuclear strike on detected, unscheduled targetsis the
unnecessary centralization of the decision of the question of the
allocation of nuclear warheads. Usually this is done in the following
manner. Let us assume that the headquarters of artillery of a front
ag has received a report from an aircraft about a detected target

for example, a "Corporal" launcher). The commander of artillery of
the front (army), not having the means to destroy the target with fire-
power of conventional means, reports this to the troop commander and
requests permission to use missiles with nuclear charges. The troop
commnder, having a very limited reserve of nuclear warheads, will
first determine the possibility of the destruction of this target by

1. Marshal of Artillery S. Varentsov. "Combat Employment of Artillery
in Offensive Operations of an Army and Front. Collection of Articles

of the Journal “Voyennaya Mysl", 1958, No. 5 (43), page 13°.

_ 1.8(a)(4)

Eee 4.3(a\(4)

1.3(a){4)

, 1.8 (a4)

conventional air weapons, and only after this will be give ‘the ap=-
propriate instructions to the artillery or air army commander.

Having received the troop commnder's decision, the artillery
commander gives instructions to the commander of the missile unit
(the ASAG commander) to prepare for a strike on the target with a
nuclear warhead. Then he will have to be provided with the corrected
target coordinates and the order for expenditure of a nuclear warhead.
All these conversations and transmissions of commands waste a con-
siderable amount of time which is quite sufficient for the "Corporal"
launcher to have carried out the firing of a nuclear warhead or to ”
have changed its location site.

The situation becomes even more complicated in the event one
must decide an analogous task in the course of a successfully developing
offensive operation, with high tempos of movement, the absence of a
continuous front, a high dynamic of operations, and unexpected and
sharp changes in the situation. Under these conditions, an imperative
need arises to impart the greatest possible autonomy to large units
in conducting combat operations, which, of course, mist be supported
accordingly. The division commanders will not have time to await
the army commnder's decision regarding the question of destruction
by nuclear weapons of targets presenting an immediate threat to the
division's units. ;

On the basis of the above, the conclusion can be drawn that the
existing rigid centralization in deciding the question of the use of
nuclear warheads against unscheduled targets becomes a factor of a
negative order. In order to shorten decisively the time from the
detection of the target to its destruction by nuclear warheads,
partial decentralization of the use of these warheads is essential.
It can be realized only if the division commanders obtain as rein-
forcement missile units (units of tube artillery employing nuclear
ammmnition) and receive the right to mke decisions regarding
destruction of targets with nuclear ammunition within the limits of
their expenditure established by the army commander.

Which missile units can be used for reinforcement of the divisions?
First of all, of course, units of tactical -missiles-having a -firing
range of up to 35im. Such a range permits the missile support of division
units with one shift of siting area during the course of a day's ad-
vance. In addition, it guarantees firepower maneuver not only with-
in the limits of the entire width of the division's zone of advance,
but also within a considerable part of the zones of advance of
neighboring divisions. This situation provides the commander of

4.3(2)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

artillery of the army, within definite boundaries, with an opportunity
to use the missile units assigned to the division, for fulfilling tasks
of army significance.

1.3(a)(4) |

During preparations for an offensive operation, the combined-arms army

may, count on reinforcement by one regiment of tactical missiles.
This will permit each division of the first echelon of the army to
be strengthened by at least one battalion (divizion) in thé diréction
of its main strike.

As is known, under existing organization missile battalions are
uniform: part of them are armed with missiles having firing range
of up to 20-25 kn, part with a firing range of 30-35 kn. These two

types of missiles have different magnitudes of probable error oteasuanige) ;

and therefore may not be utilized for the execution of all tasks.
Missiles with a range of fire of 20-25 km, having less dispersion, are |
more suitable for the destruction of targets located in the immediate
vicinity of friendly troops. At the same time, the tactical-technical
characteristics of missiles having the maxinam firing range of 35 km
practically exclude the possibility of their use with nuclear charges
against targets which are located in the immediate vicinity of friendly
troops. Therefore it is desirable to reinforce the division with
missile subunits of tactical designation with various tactical-technical
characteristics; this would necessitate battalions of mixed composition.
With regard to the supply of warheads to such a mixed battalion, there
will be no special inconveniences; one workshop can assemble nuclear
charges on these and other missiles of tactical designation.

It is dnexpedient to include missile subunits, assigned to
divisions, in just any artillery group, first of all because of- these
subunits are designated for resolution of only particularly important
tasks, and secondly because they usually have a very limited number
of warheads. Missile subunits must remain-directly subordinate to
the commander of the artillery division.

The commanding officer and staff of a missile regiment (polk),
after its battalions are assigned to divisions, will retain the
functions of ensuring the timely preparation of the battalions for
fulfilment of firing tasks during the period of artillery preparation
and artillery support of the offensive, the control of the combat
activities of the battalions, assistance to them in organizing mete-
orological, ballistic, topographical, and technical support; the
delivery to battalions of warheads having nuclear, conventional, and
chemical charges, and also the control of the maneuver of battalions
during regroupings. In addition, they are the ones who will provide
direction in supplying the battalions with all kinds of materiel

1.3(a)(4)

1.2fa)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

items and repair equipment. Therefore, the headquarters of the
missile regiment will be used during the preparation for and in the

*ceourse of the operation in the same manner as the headquarters of
the artillery breakthrough division of the RVGK.

For the fulfilment of tasks of army significance, the combined-
arms army may be reinforced by several battalions of operational
missiles with a firing range of 150-300 km. These battalions will
comprise that portion of long-range weapons which it is advisable
to leave directly subordinate to the commander of army artillery. |
If the army is reinforced with two or three battalions, then they *
will be under the direction of the commander and staff of the
missile regiment. If, however, the army is reinforced with only one
battalion, then naturally it will be under the direction of the.
commander of the battalion and his staff.

The proposed distribution of missile units and subunits should -
not be regarded as a categorical rejection of the centralization of
their fire control by the commander of artillery of the army.

During the period of artillery preparation of the offensive, it is
advisable to centralize at the army level the use of the subunits and
units employing nuclear weapons, taking into account the tasks which -
are fulfiled by divisions. However, fox this there is no necessity to
withdraw these missile units (subunits) .from the divisions and to
create an ASAG. It will be sufficient if the army artillery commander
will provide the commanders of artillery of divisions with the tasks
which, according to army plan, must be fulfiled by missile units and
subunits with nuclear shells and shells with conventional charges, li.e.,
the centralization of fire control of these units and subunits will
be carried out on the same bases as the centralization of fire control
. of tube and rocket artillery employing shells with conventional and
chemical charges. The centralization of fire control of units and
subunits employing nuclear weapons may also be required during a
breakthrough of the enemy's defense zones"in the course ofan ‘offensive
operation, and in some other instances.

A proposal concerning the creation of front special artillery
groups (FSAG) was expressed in print. We consider this proposal to
be groundless. At the present time the headquarters of- artillery of
a front does not have the possibility of choosing from among its
personnel an artillery staff, with corresponding means of control,
which could head the FSAG. And in this regard there is no necessity
to create such a group. It is doubtful that there can be more than
one or two missile regiments subordinate to a front in the very near
future. These regiments will have a very limited quantity (but very

She a eee 1.3(a)(4}

1.3(a)(4)

ieee 1.3(6)(4

powerful) of nuclear weapons in connection with which the setting-up
of tasks for regiments and the supervision of their fulfilment will
not burden the staff of the front artillery.

In those cases where the front has 3 or 4 missile regiments -
(which apparently, will be a rare exception) the necessity. for the
creation of an FSAG will arise. But only a specially created staff
having the necessary means of control will be able to head such a
front group. Such a staff must arrive to reinforce the front con-
currently with the arrival of the missile regiments.

A few words about reconnaissance. There is no necessity to —
prove the exceptional significance which reconnaissance of the enemy
has for all units employing nuclear weapons. It is obvious. We
wish only to note one circumstance which,to an intense degree, impedes
the employment of nuclear weapons. The fact is that the missile units
and units of tube artillery employing nuclear warheads, do not at the “
present time have the reconnaissance means which would permit them
to conduct reconnaissance of targets for destruction by nuclear weapons
and to maintain control over the results of nuclear strikes. The
front aviation conducts reconnaissance for the missile regiments of
operational designation; this can be considered normal. Reconnaissance
for tactical missile regiments is conducted basically by those means
which belong to the army artillery. These are principally the ground
artillery reconnaissance means, helicopters,and individual artillery
fire-adjusting planes from among the artillery fire-adjusting planes
assigned to the army for the operation.

In an overwhelming majority of cases, the enemy's atamic cannon
and rocket launchers of the “Honest John" and '*Lacrosse™ type my
be detected only by photography from the air. A great deal of time
passes before the data regarding the enemy's atomic cannon (rocket
launchers), after ite processing and after the decision of the army
commander, arrive at the missile battalion (battery) which must
destroy this gun with a nuclear warhead.

The situation is no better as regards the detection of enemy
forces and combat equipment in the course of an offensive. The basic
causes Of this situation appear to be the extremely inadequate number
of artillery fire-adjusting planes which are usudlly assignéd to the
army, and the complete disparity of the tactical-technical character-
istics of existing artillery fire-adjusting planes with contemporary
requirements, and finally, an exceptionally strict centralization of

their use.
~ ae 4.3(a)(A)

1,3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

The strict centralization of the use of artillery fire-adjusting
planes was justified to some extent by the fact that aerial reconnaise
sance was conducted basically in the interests of army artillery groups
and army special artillery groups. However, when missile subunits
are assigned to divisions, the previous procedure for use of artillery
fire-adjusting planes, in accordance with the general army plan,
obviously becomes obsolete. The time has come to provide the large
units with the means of aerial reconnaissance which could also be
used for adjustment of fire of tube artillery and for the reconnais-
sance of the enemy's means of nuclear attack in the tactical depth
of his defense. These means of reconnaissance mist be aircraft with
the appropriate tactical-technical characteristics. The presence of
aerial reconnaissance means within the large units will provide for
a more rapid reaction to detected targets on the part of the large
unit commander,and consequently, will shorten considerably the time
between the moment of the detection of the target and the delivery
of a nuclear strike against it. ,

Considerable significance for the rapid implementation of nuclear
strikes with missiles on unscheduled targets, is attributed to the
correct organization of meteorological support of missile units.

Missiles (raketa) of tactical designation,cas is know, have
solid fuel. Their readiness for launching is determined by the time
necessary for calculations in setting-up the sighting mechanisms,
mounts, checkout, and heating (pogrev) of the explosive mechanism.
With the possession of the most recent meteorological data, ali. the
aforementioned may require up to 15 minutes from the moment the battery
receives the command to open fire to the launching of the missile.

In the absence of the most recent meteorological data, twice as mich
time will be required, since it will be necessary to gather information
regarding atmospheric conditions.and to prepare a meteorological
bulletin.

With the possession of a valid meteorological bulletin and
favorable conditions, not more than 30 to 40 minutes is required in
order to launch a missile of operational designation which is on a
launch pad (puskovoy stol). If the meteorological bulletin is not
current, however, an additional 1 to 13 hours..may .be .required for .the
launching of the pilot balloon (shara-pilot), the processing of the
data obtained, and the compilation of the meteorological bulletin.
Furthermore, approximately an additional 15 minutes will be required

for the preparation of data for setting up the goniometer (uglomer)

and accelerometer (integrator).
My 3

1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

In connection with this, it is expedient to organize metecrologi-
cal support in such a way that the meteorological bulletins arrive
at the missile units and subunits at not less than one-hour intervals.
In such circumstances, the launching of the missile after receipt of
the command may, in the worst case, be carried out not later than
50 to 60 minutes afterward, in the overwhelming mjority of cases —
not later than 35 to 45 minutes afterward.

If there is one field artillery meteorological station (PAMS)
in a missile battalion, the existing organization mentioned abowe is
impossible to achieve because a PAMS can process the launching data ~
from only 6 or 7 pilot-balloons with radiosondes, in a 2h-hour
period. Therefore, it is necessary to increase the capability of
the PAMS of every battalion 2 to 3 times in order to permit the issue
of a meteorological bulletin every hour.

sane, 1.3(a}(4)

4.3{a)(4)
