Situation and Prospects in Haiti
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126956, dated 4 September 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126956).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

c
NIE 86.1-66 £
27 October 1966

LB] LIBRARY .
Mandatory yevan® ee ZS,

ea BMY 5 45132 oe ay 2
Case e ot ij . . —— >

rer

Hd
Document ———

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 86.1-66 .
Situation and Prospects in Haiti

Submited by

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the .
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
27 OCTOBER 1966

Authenticated:

CUTIVE SECRETAR

APPROMER PR BELEASE

Ween

1. This

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy

is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the

following

a.

b,

f
g.
h.

i.

2. This

officials within their respective departments:

Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the

Department of the Army

. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the

Navy

. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air

Force

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
[AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. ,

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

CONTENTS
Page
THE PROBLEM 2.2.00... bcc c eee ce cece. 1
CONCLUSIONS .......0...000..00 cece eee. bbe vue eeteveeseveeeereees l
DISCUSSION 10... ccc cece bec eb bebbbbbbbtee eres 3
I. BACKGROUND 2.0. ccc cece cece. 3
II. THE PRESENT SITUATION ......0000.0000..0.000. 0000 c cece ee ee 4
A. Methods of Rule 2... 0.00 ce ccc cece cee. 4
B. The Opposition ..... 0.00.2. cece cece cece cee eee 5
C. Security Forces .2 00... e cece eee ees 6
D. The Economy .... 0... 0 cnn cect ete e ee cenes 7
il, THE OUTLOOK ..0. ccc ccc ccc cece cece. 7
A. With Duvalier Continuing in Power 0.00.00... ce eee cee eee 7
B. In the Event of Duvalier’s Departure ......20...0.0.0.0 000002000 §

So

SITUATION AND PROSPECTS
IN HAITI

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the situation and outlook in Haiti over the next vear or
so, and to consider what might happen in the event of President
Duvalier’s death. or overthrow.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Duvalier’s position still seems fairly strong, despite the sporadic
plotting and political tension normal in Haitian affairs. We think
the chances are better than even that he will remain in power during
the period of this estimate. If he does, there will be continuing politi-
cal repression and economic stagnation or decline.

B. Duvalier’s overthrow would probably have to be largely an
inside job, with some key members of the security forces—and espe-
cially the Presidential Guard—participating. We doubt that anv
now in a position to organize such a coup has the will or the courage
to attempt it. None of the many small groupings among the divided,
bickering Haitian exiles could succeed in overthrowing Duvalier with-
out decisive help from the US or some other foreign government. The
Haitian dictator might, of course, die suddenly of natural causes,
though he is only 59 and in reasonably good health; assassination is also
a possibility, though he takes unusual precautions.

C. Duvalier’s departure would probably be attended by some acts
of violence in Port-au-Prince and other towns. Whether this violence
was limited and sporadic or became widespread and intensive would
depend in large part on the manner of his going. The danger of
widespread hostilities would probably be greatest in the event Du-
valier were assassinated in public. A coup attempt that failed at the
last minute could produce equally nasty results.

Speer

Boer

D. The most likely successor to Duvalier would be a military junta
which might or might not choose to exercise power behind a civilian
front. Initially at least, such a government would probably not be
stable, and there would likely be maneuvering for power among its

members.

E. The two Communist parties are too small and weak to be able
to contend for power even in a disorderly situation following Duvalier’s
departure. We doubt that outside Communist support—from Castro,
the Soviets, or Haitian Communist exiles—would be forthcoming on a
significant scale. We believe that the Haitian Communists themselves
would see their best chance of gaining influence as coming through
offers of their administrative assistance to new government leadership
rather than through any attempt to seize power ¢ on their own, and we

think they would act accordingly.

F. In a situation where order had completely broken down, the
Organization of American States (OAS) would almost certainly ac-
quiesce in action by the US to evacuate foreign nationals. Any pro-
posal for US or OAS intervention to restore order and establish an
effective government, however, would encounter strong opposition
within the OAS. Any contention that such intervention was necessary
in order to forestall a Communist takeover would be disbelieved by
many OAS members unless the supporting evidence was incontro-
vertible. Whatever the purpose for intervening, the US would face
considerable criticism internationally.

CG. The initial Haitian reaction to the landing of a US force would
probably be favorable, but if a military occupation were at all pro-
longed, opposition would develop. Nevertheless, the problems in
Haiti are such that it might prove more difficult to get a force out than
to put it in, as was the case in 1915.

DISCUSSION

Il. BACKGROUND

1. Haiti is the most backward country in the Western Hemisphere and one
of the most backward in the world.’ Its resources are poor in quality and under-
utilized; population pressure is heavy.” Perhaps 10 percent of the people are
literate in French; the rest are illiterate and speak Creole, a local dialect. Most
Haitians are superstitious as well as uneducated; voodoo beliefs are more
influential than the country’s nominal Catholicism. Standards of health and
sanitation, though somewhat improved with foreign aid, are still abysmally low.
Malnutrition is the rule, not the exception; malaria, tuberculosis, typhoid, para-
sitic infestation, tetanus, and syphilis are widespread. The bulk of the popula-
tion, which subsists by farming small plots of depleted land in the countryside,
is politically apathetic.

2. Ever since Haiti became independent (1804), antagonism between mulat-
toes and blacks has been the most sensitive factor in Haitian politics. The
mulatto elite were very few in number; but, because of their virtual monopoly
of education, their services were indispensable in the administration of the
government and, as a class, they were able to exercise effective control through
behind the scenes manipulations, even after it became normal for the President

to be black.

3. Haiti has never developed an effective electoral process. Political power
has always been acquired and held by military force, overt or latent. Since
Haitian Presidents have seldom, if ever, retired voluntarily, a de facto system
developed whereby a military junta would depose each President at the end of
his constitutional term. His successor would then be selected in back room
consultations and this selection would be formalized by duly constitutional
processes. In 1957, however, this system broke down because each of the
several black leaders who thought himself in line for the Presidency refused to be
passed over. After a period of turmoil and instability, the army conducted
an election which brought Dr. Francois Duvalier to the Presidency for a six-

year term.

4. There is little doubt that the election was rigged, but Duvalier probably
did have at least the passive acceptance of the majority of the peasantry. More-
over he had the enthusiastic support of most of the black elite, who saw his
election as a revolution against mulatto domination. This meant, however, that

‘Statistics concerning Haiti should consequently be treated with reserve; those used in
this paper, though the best available, are approximations.

? The population in 1965 was about 4.6 million—or some 430 per square mile. Except for
Trinidad and Tobago, this is the highest population density in the Hemisphere. Morcover,
only about 10 percent of the Haitians live in the towns, and the density of rural population
is higher than 1,000 per square mile of cultivated land or pasture.

ST

some among the mulattoes immediately began to conspire with the disappointed
black leaders to unseat him. His position was precarious for a time, and it was
partly in reaction to this threat that he took the first steps to transform his regime
into a terroristic personal dictatorship. In the course of time he has eliminated
or forced into exile every actual or suspected opponent, mulatto or black. Ex-
tolling négritude and representing himself as the protector of the black masses
against mulatto domination and exploitation, he has deliberately intensified
racism in Haiti.

Il. THE PRESENT SITUATION

A. Methods of Rule

5. Duvalier, realizing from the outset that the military establishment was the
key to power, proceeded to bring it under control by purging many of its most
capable officers and by building up two counter forces—a civil militia and a
special sort of secret police. The latter, called the Ton Ton Macoutes (Creole
for “bogeymen”), serve as Duvalier’s enforcers and informers. To ensure that
the military behave, Duvalier severely restricts their supplies of ammunition and
their access to heavy arms, keeping the bulk of these in the cellar of the Na-
tional Palace.

6. President Duvalier has not hesitated to solidify his control by taking ad-
vantage of popular superstitions. He has won the support of leading voodoo
priests, and has encouraged the belicf—held by many in Haiti—that he himself
has supernatural powers.

7. The President has made himself both the source of power and the chicf
administrator of the regime. He delegates responsibility only for minor decisions,
but makes it worthwhile for a favored group of government officials and business-
men to cooperate in carrying out his dictates. These “insiders” are not a savory
lot in any case; a few of them have connections with the Communists. Even
for a country which has seldom known honesty in government, Duvalier has set
new records of venality and corruption.

S. In 1961 Duvalier staged elections for a new national legislature, providing
his “National Unity Party” a near monopoly of seats. Subsequently he announced
that since every ballot had carried the caption, “Francois Duvalier, President of
the Republic,” he had been unanimously elected to a second six-year term. In
April 1963, near the end of his constitutional term, he easily broke up the
customary military plot to oust him. Also in 1963 he managed to overcome
several minor invasion attempts by Haitian exiles. In 1964, at the age of 57,
he proclaimed himself President for life.3

9. In recent months Duvalier, apparently hoping to encourage a renewal of
sizable US economic aid, has made a few gestures to give his regime a better

1 Life tenure was customary during the first 65 years of Haitian independence, but fell
into disuse when the last previous President for life faced a firing squad in 1869.

4 Ser

set

image. He has ordered Ton Ton Macoute leaders to be less arbitrary and more
circumspect, and, according to several sources, he has hinted that he might be
willing to give up his life tenure and to hold elections. It is highly unlikely,
however, that he would make any change that would impair his control of the

government.

B. The Opposition

10, Among the few people in Haiti who are politically minded, there is still
latent opposition to Duvalier and his methods of rule. But such opponents are
cowed, nonvocal, and almost entirely unorganized. There are no longer any
significant opposition parties; there is however, an underground social Christian
movement called the Personalistes, and there are two weak Communist parties.

ll. The Personalistes seem to have no strong organization as yet, but may
have 100 or 200 adherents, most of them in Port-au-Prince. The two Communist
parties—the Party of Popular Accord (PEP) and the Popular Party of National
Liberation (PPLN)—constitute the only internal political opposition with any
appreciable degree of training and organization, but lack discipline, are poorly
indoctrinated, and are inclined to compete rather than cooperate with each
other. The two parties may have as many as 500 members, all told, in Haiti
and in exile, and perhaps 2,000 sympathizers, many of them abroad. The PEP
is Moscow-oriented and is the generally recognized Haitian Communist Party.
The PPLN has ties with Cuba, where some of its former leaders are in exile.
Radio Havana, which broadcasts in Creole or French to Haiti tvo hours daily,
has been unsuccessfully exhorting the two parties to unite and build strength
for an “insurrection.” Most exiled Haitian Communists are in Europe or Mexico,
the largest organization (about 150) being in France. There are, however, prob-
ably 70 or 80 exiled Haitian Communists studying in Cuba, the Soviet Union, or
other Communist countries.

12. Most non-Communists forced into exile are now living in New York or
Miami, with smaller groups in Canada, Venezuela, Puerto Rico, and the Domini-
can Republic. There are also considerable numbers of Haitian workers living
in such countries as the Dominican Republic, Cuba, and the Bahamas, but these
people are not politically active. The exiles’ activities have been constantly
hampered by divisiveness, discord, and inability to agree on a common leadership.

13, In the New York exile community 8 or 10 of the leaders have grouped
their small individual followings into an organization called the Haiti Coalition.
It sponsors a half-hour daily shortwave broadcast to Haiti in French and Creole,
which sometimes attacks the excesses of the Duvalier regime, but generally
refrains from inflammatory content. This program has apparently attracted
a sizable audience in Haiti and has caused Duvalier to make repeated protests
to the US. His panicky reaction to two small exile incursions in 1964, which
occupied the security forces for several weeks, also suggests that he regards
the exiles with apprehension. Rumors of exile plans for a new “invasion” in
April 1966 produced a characteristic overreaction by Duvalier in the form of

der

SL

an order to execute summarily all Haitians caught returning to their country
from the Bahamas.

C. Security Forces

14. The regular Haitian Armed Forces (FAd’H) number about 5,000 men.
All officers in key positions were handpicked by Duvalier. Originally a con-
stabulary organized by the US Marines, the FAd’H performs coast guard, border
patrol, immigration, civil aviation, fire and police, and general rural administra-
tive services, in addition to its military duties. (There is no civil police force.)
Ill equipped, poorly trained, and incompetently led, the FAd’H has still had
reasonable success in keeping order, perhaps because it has not had to face up
to any major challenge. On more than one occasion the FAd’H Chief of Staff,
Brigadier General Gérard Constant, has secretly professed willingness to par-
ticipate in a coup movement, but he seems a weak, plodding figure without the
guts for risky action.

15. The largest organization among Haitian security forces is the National
Security Volunteers (VSN), a civil militia of about 7,000 created by Duvalier as
a counterforce to the FAd’H. These are essentially weekend soldiers, adminis-
tratively separate from the regular military, but called upon to assist in keeping
order and in mobilizing popular support for Duvalier. Duvalier handpicked
many of them; their loyalty is directly to him and not necessarily to higher
ranking militia officers. The VSN is badly trained and only about a third of
its members have firearms, but even those armed only with machetes make a

strong impression on the populace.

16. Units of both the FAd’H and the VSN are stationed at the palace under
Duvalier’s direct control. The FAd’H unit is the Presidential Guard consisting
of some 400 men selected specifically for their loyalty. Their commander—at
present Colonel Gracia Jacques, a tough, uneducated former mess sergeant—
has primary responsibility for Duvalier’s safety and is thus in a highly strategic
position. The VSN unit at the palace numbers 200-300 men—also carefully

chosen.

17. Most feared of all are the Ton Ton Macoutes. With no official title or
legal status, they function as “secret police” and may number as many as 1,500.
Save for strong control at the top, theirs is not a cohesive organization. It is
inexpensive for Duvalier to maintain, however, since its members obtain much
of their compensation from shakedowns and extortion. Essentially the Ton Tons
are thugs; some are members, as well, of the Armed Forces or the militia; a few
are also voodoo priests. The Ton Ton Macoutes concentrate on acquiring in-
formation on any internal opposition and on “special assignments’ "—e.g., murder,
assault, and intimidation. Occasionally Duvalier has found it necessary to curb
them temporarily; such restraint has never lasted long. The chief of the Ton
Ton Macoutes, one Luc Desir, handles political interrogation, confinement, and
torture at the National Palace, and is noted for utter brutality and ruthlessness.

6 pal

SRE
D. The Economy

18. The level of living in Haiti, long the lowest in the Western Hemisphere,
has become still worse under the Duvalier regime. Per capita gross national
product (GNP) declined from about $90 in 1955 to about $70 in 1965. (The
average for Latin America as a whole in 1965 was more than $300.)

19. The waste of human and material resources in Haiti stems from a long
history of mismanagement and neglect.* The economic problems are too basic
and severe for any quick solution. Yet Duvalier, far from taking any construc-
tive measures to ameliorate them, has usually pursued policies with the opposite
effect. Investment has been very low, averaging five percent or less of GNP
annually—a rate probably inadequate to maintain the country’s existing stock
of capital. Duvalier’s behavior in relations with the US—and in particular, his
blatant diversion of economic aid funds to his own use—caused the termination
of most US aid in 1962-1963.* And the climate of insecurity and violence in
Haiti has contributed to a sharp drop in tourism, once an important source of
foreign exchange.

20. Haiti’s export earnings, which generate 10 to 12 percent of GNP, have
gradually declined since 1962. Coffee produces about 50 percent of these earn-
ings; sugar and sisal, copper and bauxite, the bulk of the remainder. The de-
crease in export earnings, along with the curtailment of US aid and of income
from tourism, have caused a worsening of Haiti's foreign exchange position and
have forced a reduction of imports. This has had some immediate impact in-
ternally since Haiti has to import all its capital equipment, all its petroleum
products, and much of its industrial raw materials and consumer goods—includ-
ing some basic foodstuffs. On 30 June 1966, the country’s short-term forcign
indebtedness exceeded its foreign exchange reserves by some $6 million.

Ill. THE OUTLOOK

A. With Duvalier Continuing in Power

21. Now 59 years old, Duvalier is in reasonably good health. He appears in
public places only infrequently and then under heavy guard. The cowed state
of most internal opposition, continuing use of informants and enforcers, and the
counterbalancing of security forces all serve to bolster his hold on power. Assas-
sination is an ever-present possibility; he is certainly more hated than many

‘Weather too has typically been a difficult and complicating factor. The heavy rains in
the wet season tend to leach and erode the soil, and the Haitians know and do little in the
way of conservation. Occasionally—as in 1965—there are droughts which seriously reduce
agricultural output. Moreover Haiti is in the hurricane belt and was badly hit in 1963 and
again in 1966.

*US aid at present is limited to a malaria eradication program (US $2.2 million will be
made available for this program in 1966) and a PL-480 Title III food-for-work program,
involving US $1 million in commodities, administered by three American voluntary ayvencics.
Some supplies for disaster relief have also been furnished.

Pe 7

Ps

leaders of government, though harder to get at. The kind of attempt most
likely to succeed in killing or deposing him would be one involving insiders—asso-
ciates of Duvalier whom he continued to trust; further, it would probably need
the participation or connivance of some figures in the security forces, particularly
in the Presidential Guard. We doubt that this sort of plot or conspiracy is now

in process of development.

22. This is not to say that we anticipate a period of tranquillity. As in the
past few years, there will probably be plots and rumors of plots—some internal
to Haiti, some involving exile groups. Duvalier will probably respond to certain
.of these with sharp repressive measures. Thus, while we look for more of the
turmoil and tension which are normal in Haiti, we think these factors are not
likely to cause Duvalier’s downfall for some time to come.

23. As long as Duvalier does remain in power, Haiti’s political, social, and
economic patterns will probably be much like those of the recent past. Duvalier
may, from time to time, make new attempts to clothe his government in more
civilized garb, particularly when an economic pinch makes foreign aid look
especially desirable. But the underlying nature of his repressive, one-man dicta-
torship will almost certainly stay the same. He will continue to provide order
and control to the Haitians—but not much else.

24. Economically, 1967 will be another year of stagnation or decline. Even
before the damage wrought by Hurricane Inez, it appeared that the coffee crop
now being harvested would be below that of 1963-1966 and world market prices
for coffee, as well as for sugar and sisal, are not promising. These factors may
be offset somewhat by a current tendency toward an increase in tourism. To
the extent that they are not, imports will have to be reduced, since Haiti's foreign
exchange and credit position will not permit a trade deficit of any significant
size. A lower level of trade in turn would reduce government revenues—customs
duties being the source of approximately one-third of such revenues—and prob-
ably force some cut in government expenditures.

25. All this is likely to necessitate some further belt-tightening in Haiti and tu
prevent any improvement from present levels of unemployment and underem-
ployment. Those living in Port-au-Prince and the other towns will probably be
affected more than the great majority of Haitians in the countryside. Duvalier
may find it more difficult than usual to pay government employees on time, but
we believe that in one way or another he will find funds for the security forces.
In sum, we believe that these economic conditions will produce further grumbling
and disaffection, but that they are not likely in themselves to provide the impetus

for a coup.

B. In the Event of Duvalier’s Departure °

26. Duvalier’s death, incapacitation, or overthrow probably would be attended
by some acts of violence in Port-au-Prince and in the other sizable towns.

* This section of the Estimate is in response to specific questions posed to us in connection

with contingency planning.

8 spextt

- a
SDR ET

Whether the violence were limited and sporadic or became widespread and
intensive would depend in large part on the manner of his going.”

27. The assassination of Duvalier in public would carry the greatest immediate
danger of provoking a generally violent reaction. Even this probably would not
lead to serious strife in the countryside, but it might cause fighting and blood-
shed in the capital and other towns. Such violence might originate with people
who have suffered at the hands of the VSN and the Ton Ton Muacoutes, and
seek vengeance; or it might occur between elements of the FAd’H, VSN, and
Ton Ton Macoutes. It could conceivably lead to fighting between blacks and
mulattoes, an unequal contest in which the mulattoes might be virtually wiped
out. It could also endanger the 3,500 white foreigners, including some 1,380
Americans, who reside in Haiti.

28. The likelihood of violence would be least if Duvalier died of natural
causes in private, so that the key figures moving to take control might have
time to decide on a provisional leadership before they announced the dictator's
death.

29. The makeup of a successor government would also depend to some degree
on the manner of Duvalier’s going, but it would depend still more on the rela-
tive strengths of the contenders for power. Here individuals would be important
as well as groups, and there is no way of knowing ahead of time how some
of those in strategic positions might act when the showdown came. There are,
however, certain observations which can be made with reasonable confidence
about the possibilities for a successor government.

30. Because all political individuals and groups have been so thoroughly re-
pressed, or (if friendly) so sharply circumscribed by Duvalier, we think that
an individual or combination from the security services is most likely to take
the leading role in a successor regime. Duvalier’s system of countervailing
forces in these services is keyed to his own command and probably could not
long survive him. If the Chief of Staff of the FAd’H were a stronger figure,
the regular military would almost certainly take charge once again. They will
probably be the strongest contender anyway. There are in the FAd’H some
relatively shrewd and courageous figures who might come quickly to the top:
e.g., Col. Daniel Beauvoir of the Army General Staff; Major Jose Borges, one
of the army’s few competent troop commanders, and perhaps Col. Jacques
Laroche, the FAd’H Deputy Chief of Staff. Initially, however, a junta of several
FAd'H officers would be more likely. The members of such a junta might find
it necessary to take in some leaders of the VSN, and even of the Ton Ton
Macoutes, although that would be distasteful to them.

31. A security forces’ junta of this kind might include, as well, a few political

figures who have attained a measure of prominence under the Duvalier adminis-

"A particularly nasty situation might be created if a coup effort failed at the last moment
and Duvalier carried out his frequent threat that he would respond by ordering those loyal
to him to cut down any and all suspected opponents.

sEoneT 9

a

tration. Alternatively, a cabinet member or other administration official might
be used as front man for what would actually be a military government.

32. None of these possible junta governments would be stable from the outset.
A struggle for power within the junta would almost certainly ensue. This could
lead to open violence between the contending factions or to the emergence of
a single dictator.

33. The existing political parties of opposition—Personalistes on the one hand,
Communists on the other—are simply too small and weak to compete for power
even in a disorderly situation following Duvalier’s departure. The Communists’
best chance of gaining influence within a post-Duvalier regime would be in
offering administrative assistance to whatever power group emerged on top.
Such assistance would be in short supply and urgently needed; offers of help
would be likely to be accepted without too particular a security investigation.
Thus the few capable Haitian Communists would have a chance to penetrate
the Haitian bureaucracy and, from that point of vantage, to exercise influence
and to build up their party organizations. We believe that the Haitian Com-
munists themselves would estimate their chances in this way and would pursue
this course, rather than attempt to take over the government.

34. We doubt that either of the Haitian Communist parties would receive
much outside support for an attempt to seize power. The Soviets would prob-
ably counsel PEP leaders to move cautiously and aim for a gradual accretion
of political assets. Fidel Castro, whose connections are with the PPLN, would
probably use Radio Havana broadcasts to exacerbate any political crisis, at the
time of Duvalier’s removal or subsequently. He could put a small invasion
force into Haiti,’ but we think it unlikely that he would take this risk any more
than he dared take a similar risk during the crisis in the Dominican Republic.
He might assist the small number of Haitian political exiles now in Cuba and
the Dominican Republic to return in hopes that they could instill new spirit
among the Haitian Communists so that they might play a more decisive role

at some future time.

35. The exile groups generally are not likely to count for much in the im-
mediate situation after Duvalier. We estimate that none now has the capa-
bility—without foreign help—either to overthrow him or to land a large enough
force quickly after his downfall to determine the nature of the new government
and the course of future events. What the exile groups can do, if there is no

*Cuban air and naval forces have a theoretical capability to put more than 1,000 men
into Haiti by sea, air, or airdrop in a few hours’ time. This assumes no constraint by need
for secrecy or by recognition that US counteraction would probably, at the least, prevent
resupply or support of their force. Several thousand people of Haitian extraction live in
Cuba, but we have no evidence that the Castro regime has tried to create any military or
paramilitary unit from among them.

10 spel

sett

restraint on their activities, is to complicate in many ways the already difficult
task facing a new government.®

36. Because there is such an acute Jack of administrative and technical talent
among Haitians, in Haiti or in exile, there is scant likelihood that the government
which succeeds Duvalier will be much better than the present one. Liberal
parliamentary institutions have never been able to survive in Haiti; Duvalier’s
successors are not likely to have either the will or the ability to establish such
a regime in that country. They will do well to establish an orderly and effective
administration by the authoritarian methods that are customary there. It is
conceivable, however, that a more respectable regime than Duvalier’s could

be set up.

37. Given Haiti's limited ability to absorb capital and foreign technology,
economic and social development would probably remain minimal. Any new
regime would probably continue to view Haiti's needs for foreign assistance
primarily in terms of financial support for the administration and would resist
reforms that would undermine its political control. Nonetheless, the US might
gain some leverage over the situation simply by being able to deal with a new
group which would be seeking US financial aid and political backing.

38. If the situation following Duvalier’s departure became so disorderly as
to require military action to protect and evacuate foreign nationals, the Organiza-
tion of American States (OAS) would almost certainly acquiesce in such action
by the US. Even those OAS members generally opposed to intervention are
likely to go along, recognizing that Haiti is a special case. It would be re-
membered, however, that the US military intervention in Haiti in 1915, for the
stated purpose of protecting lives and property, turned into an 18-year military
occupation. Any proposal for US or OAS intervention to restore order and estab-
lish an effective government would encounter strong opposition within the OAS.
Any contention that such intervention was necessary in order to forestall a Com-
munist takeover would be disbelieved by many OAS members unless the support-
ing evidence was incontrovertible.’

39. In the circumstances postulated, the Haitian townspeople generally would
probably welcome a US military intervention with intense relief, as was the
case in 1915, expecting it to reestablish order and security for themselves. If

* Although the administrative services of returning exiles would be useful to a successor
regime, they would be likely to cause trouble, as a group, by their pretensions to political
or military leadership and their demands for the restoration of expropriated or abandoned
property. Some could cause international complications. One group led by Cuban exile
Masferrer wants to use Haiti as a base for operations against Cuba. Another group seeking
association with Dominican “constitutionalists” in Paris might be disposed to assist them in
operations from Haiti against the Dominican Republic.

The Government of the Dominican Republic would be extremely concerned about any
protracted period of disorder and confusion in Haiti. Elements among the military and on
the political right, if not President Balaguer himself, would be inclined to see the Communist
threat as imminent. Thus the Dominican Government would be likely to press privately
for the landing of a US force in Haiti, and to seek US assurances, as well as more military aid.

SBOKET 1

sp

a military occupation were at all prolonged, however, opposition to it would
develop. Whatever Haitians came to power in such circumstances would be
bitterly denounced by all the disappointed aspirants for office. A continuing
US military presence might be required to sustain the new regime. As in
1915, it would be easier to get into Haiti than to get out.

40. These reactions would be generally limited to the towns and their im-
mediate environs. The remoter peasants would almost certainly remain inert
unless and until something happened to affect them directly and adversely.

41. Much of the international reaction to a landing of US forces in Haiti—
whatever the reason given-—would probably be adverse, particularly that of
countries with neutralist or leftist governments. Even a brief US intervention
to evacuate foreign nationals might face criticism on two counts. First it would
be called a new “imperialist” move, a violation of the Charter of the OAS, and
an unjustified interference in the affairs of a small nation. And second, if the
force departed quickly when the foreigners were out and the Haitians then
went back to chopping at each other, the US would be criticized for saving the
whites and not caring what happened to the Negroes.

12 SBeeey

=
beget.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence or

ganizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and the NSA. ;

Concurring:

Dr. R. J. Smith, for the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Mr. Thomas L. Hughes,

The Director of intelligence and Research, Department of
State

Lt. Gen. Joseph F. Carroll, the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Dr. Louis W. Tordella, for the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

Mr. Howard C. Brown, Jr., the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-

mission and Mr. William O. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

This materia daformation affecting the Ng PDefense of the United States

within the meaning of the espidrttgedawetitie 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation ommewt in any manner Ta"Gtrewaa iherized person is prohibited.

ROUP 1 ”
Excluded om gffomatic
downgedifig and
de MEI MNgtion

SECRET
