The CIA “Family Jewels” (1973 compilation, released 2007)
Central Intelligence Agency, 1973

US Government work — public domain. Declassified 1973 CIA compendium of potentially illegal domestic activities, assembled for DCI Schlesinger; released 2007. Complete.
Transcription source: Internet Archive

================================================================

THE FAMILY JEWELS 


CIA Black Operations 


. MORI DocID: 1451843 


+, HE ων dos r & ` I = | 7 
| ν᾽ DE Му __ 0. Cows mut seer 


E | V ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET > 


power J: dekora 
-Director of Securit 


“EXTENSION | мо. — 


ИШ э 16 May 1973: 


T 
S DATE OFFICER'S ri (Number each comment to show from whom 
zu INITIALS fo whom. Draw o line across column αξία; eoch comment.) 
RECEIVED | FORWARDED 


3 => 


TO: (Officer designotion, room umbel and 
\ building) 


| 


1. Executive Secretary, 
. CIA Management 
Committee. 

2 


- (61) 
(b)(3) 
(b)(5) 
(b)(6) 


APPROVED FOR RELEASE 
DATE: JUN 2007 


| 610 "55595 X SECRET Es! CONFIDENTIAL UE UIN n UNCLASSIFIED 


A e = ο ворення πὰς 


E --»--------.--- зано —— sa ele уны Шыл ыды. алш 


h 


_— m P I  @Q РР РІ 7" 


.MORI DocID: 1451843 


16 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Secretary, 
CIA Management Committee 


SUBJECT ` : "Family Jewels" 


1. The purpose of this memorandum is to 
forward for your personal review summaries of activities 
conducted either by or under the sponsorship of the 
Office of Security in the past which in my opinion con- 
flict with the provisions of the National Security Act 
of 1947. 


2. These activities cover the period from 
March 1959 to date and represent as accurate a record 
as is available in our files. Those activities which. 
took place prior to the date of my appointment as ` 
Director of Security on 1 July 1964 have been developed 
to a certain extent through the recoilection of the 
senior people in this Office who were involved or who 
had knowledge of the activities at the time they 
occurred. i х 7 


3. І have gone back to March 1959 because I 
believe that the activities occurring since that time 
Still have a viable "flap potential" in that many of the 
people involved, both Agency and non-Agency are still 
alive and through their knowledge of the activity repre- 
sent a possible potential threat or embarrassment to the 
Agency. І would be glad to provide clarification or an 
explanation of any of these activities if desired. You 
have my assurance that unless otherwise stated each of 
these activities was approved by higher authority--the 


00002 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Director of Central Intelligence, the Deputy Director 
of Central Intelligence, the Executive Director- 
Comptroller, or the Deputy Director for Support. 


Director of 


Attachments 


00003 


ec el 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


-ν 
Y 


` 00004 | 


pm—————— 2. ον oper iners Ж Лы ка ο. πος эже + de ———————— 5 — 


re TG 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Attachment А 


"FAMILY JEWELS" 


2. Johnny Roselli -- The use of a member of the 
Mafia in an attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro. 


5. Project MOCKINGBIRD -- During the period from 12 
March 1963 to 15 June 1963, this Office 
installed telephone taps on two Washington- 
based newsmen who were suspected of disclosing 
classified information obtained from a variety 
of governmental and congressional sources. 


4. Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko -- A KGB defector who from 
the period 13 August 1965 to 27 October 1967 
was confined in a specially constructed "jail" 
at He was literally confined in a 
ce rs with nothing but a cot in it 
for this period. 


5. Various Surveillance and Support Activities -- 
These are briefly summarized and range from 
the surveillance of newsmen to the provision 
of specialized support of local police officials 
in the Metropolitan area. I believe that. each 
one is self-explanatory and, therefore, no further 
comment is needed here. 


6. Equipment Support to Local Police -- Attached is a 
list provided me by the Director of Logistics 
(he will simply report these items in his 
report) which we have provided local police in 
the Metropolitan D. C. area over the past four 
or five years on indefinite loan. During the 
period when the Agency's installations in this 
area appeared to be a target of dissident elements 


00005 


| ‹ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


EYE ΓΩ 


a conscious decision was made by the Agency to 
utilize the services of local police to.repel 
invaders in case of riot or dissension as 

opposed to utilization of our GSA guards, who 

are not trained in this type of activity. This 
equipment has been issued over the years to 

local police, principally Fairfax and Arlington 
County Police Departments. I do not believe 

that this is totally illegal under the provisions 
of the National Security Act of 1947, but I am in- 
cluding it since І am sure that it would be con-- 
Sidered as such in light of the recent congressional 
fuss over our police training activities. 


7. Audio Countermeasures Support to the United States 


Secret Service 


8. Test of Specialized Equipment in Miami Immediately 


Prior to the Political Convention There 


00006 


mM — S Ó'!ÁÁ'É;BàÓÁ ann ο 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


SECRET 
Eves T 


А ні RRR  .. 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


00003 


| aHIÇK;Iç.IYH$PÉMIZIIÉIIIIGI9€I€II€IÜIÉI€£III€I€I€I%Ix=xq/).  Ë=E0L"!P ж чч 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


sc | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


. РЕ ` + X . 
. * 
` 
Е 
ES 
z 
H A r 
60011 
: | 
! 
г H 
I. EL OM m 


693 


sid 


.MORT DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Johnny Roselli ` 


1. In August 1960, Mr. Richard M.. Bissell 
approached Colonel Sheffield Edwards to determine if 
the Office of Security had assets that may assist in a 
sensitive mission requiring gangster-type action. The 
mission target was Fidel Castro. 


2. Because of its extreme sensitivity,.only a 
small group was made privy to the project. The DCI was 
briefed and gave his approval. : Colonel J. C. King, 
Chief, WH Division, was briefed, but all details were 
deliberately concealed from any of the JMWAVE officials. 
Certain TSD and Communications personnel participated 
in the initial planning “севе, but were not ш: of 
the purpose of the mission. | 


3. Robert А. Maheu, a cleared source of the 
Office of Security, was contacted, briefed generally оп 
the project, and requested to ascertáin if he could | 
develop an entree into the gangster elements as the first 
step toward accomplishing the desired goal. 


4. Mr. Maheu advised that he had met one Johnny 
Roselli on several occásions while visiting Las Vegas. 
He only knew him casually through clients, but was given 
to understand that he was a high-ranking member of the 
"syndicate" and controlled а11 of the ice-making machines 
on the Strip. Maheu reasoned that, if Roselli was in 
fact a member of the clan, he undoubtedly had connections 
leading into the Cuban gambling interests. 


5. Maheu was asked to approach Roselli, who knew 
Maheu as a personal relations executive handling domestic 
and foreign accounts, and tell him that he had recently 
been retained by a client who represented several inter- 
national business firms which were suffering heavy financial. 
losses in Cuba as a result of Castro's action. They were 
convinced that Castro's removal was the answer to their | 


00012 


Же, 


——————————MM—À— .—.. 


M ——————— ÀMááÓ o cc Енн реве C MASKE Ces ισα LU HE ЭЕ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


problem and were willing to pay a price of $150,000 
for its successful accomplishment. It was to be made 
clear to Roselli that the United States Government was 
not, and should not, become aware of this operation. 


6. The pitch was made to Roselli on 14 
September 1960 at the Hilton Plaza Hotel, New York City. 
Mr. James O'Connell, Office of Security, was present 
during this, meeting and was identified to Roselli as an 
employee of Maheu. O'Connell actively served as Roselli's 
contact until May 1962 at which time he phased out due 
to an overseas assignment. His initial reaction was to 
avoid getting involved, but through Maheu's persuasion, 
he agreed to introduce him to a friend, Sam Gold, who 
knew the "Cuban crowd."  Roselli made it clear he did 
not want any money for his part and believed Sam would 
feel the same way. Neither of these individuals were 
ever paid out of Agency funds. 


7. During the week of 25 September, Maheu was 
introduced to Sam who was staying at the Fontainebleau 
Hotel, Miami Beach. Тї was several weeks after his 
meeting with Sam and Joe,.who was identified to him as 
a courier operating between Havana and Miami, that he | 
saw photographs of both of these individuals in the 
Sunday supplemental "Parade." They were identified as 
Momo Salvatore.Giancana and Santos Trafficant, respectively. 
Both were on the list of the Attorney General's ten most- 
wanted men. The former was described as the Chicago 
chieftain of the Cosa Nostra and successor to AI Capone, 
and the latter, the Cosa Nostra boss of Cuban operations. 
Maheu called this office immediately upon ascertaining 
this information. 


8. In discussing the possible methods of 
accomplishing this mission, Sam suggested that they not 
resort to firearms but, if he could be furnished some 
type of potent pill, that could be placed in Castro's food 
or drink, it would be a much more effective operation. 

Sam indicated that he had a prospective nominee in the 
person of Juan Orta, a Cuban official who had been receiving 
kick-back payments from the gambling interests, who still had 
access to Castro, and was in a financial bind. 


00013 


I MORI DocID: 1451843 | 


\ 


9. TSD was requested to produce six pills of 
high lethal content. 


10. Joe delivered the pills to Orta. After 
several weeks of reported attempts, Orta' apparently got 
cold feet and asked out of the assisnment. He suggested 
another candidate who made several attempts without 
Success. , 


11. Joe then indicated that Dr. Anthony Verona, 
one of the principal officers in the Cuban Exile Junta, had 
become disaffected with the apparent ineffectual progress 
of the Junta and was willing to handle the mission through 
his own resources. 


12.. He asked, as a prerequisite to the deal, that 
he be given $10,000 for organizational expenses and requested 
$1,000 worth of communications equipment. 


13. Dr. Verona's potential was never fully 
exploited, as the project was canceled shortiy after the 
Bay of Pigs episode. Verona was advised that the offer 
was withdrawn, and the pills were retrieved. 


14. O£ significant interest was an incident 
which involved a réquest levied by Sam upon Maheu. 


` At the height of the project negotiations, 
Sam expressed concern about his girlfriend, 
Phyllis McGuire, who he learned was getting 
much attention from Dan Rowan while both were 
booked at a Las Vegas night club. Sam asked : | 
Maheu to put a bug in Rowan'S' room to deter- А 
mine the extent of his intimacy with Miss i 
McGuire. .The technician involved in the assign- 
ment was discovered in the process, arrested, 
and taken to the Sheriff's office for questioning. 
He called Maheu and informed him that he had 
been detained by the police. This call was made 
in the' presence of the Sheriff's personnel.. 


Subsequently, the Department of Justice 
announced its intention to prosecute Maheu along 


00014 І 


SECRET 
τὸ ONLY 


——,——k[s OC à A (C QUod ie acc e χε cer 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


with the technician. Оп 7 February 1962; 
the Director of Security briefed the Attorney 
General, Robert Kennedy, on the circumstances 
leading up to Maheu's involvement in the 
wiretap. At our request, prosecution was 
dropped. 


15. In May 1962, Mr. William Harvey took ovér 
as Case Officer, and it is not known by this office 
whether Roselli was used operationally from that point on. 


16. It was subsequently learned from the FBI 
that Roselli had been convicted on six counts involving 
illegal entry into the United States. Our records do not 
reflect the date of conviction, but it is believed to 
have been sometime during November 1967. 


17. On 2 December 1968, Roselli, along with 
four other individuals, was convicted of conspiracy to 
cheat members of the Friars Club of $400,000 in a.rigged 
gin rummy game. 


18. Mr. Harvey reported to the Office of Security 
of his contacts with Roselli during November and December 
1967 and January 1968. It was his belief that Johnny f 
would not seek out the Agency for assistance in the deporta- 
tion proceedings unless he actually faced deportation. 
Roselli expressed confidence that he would win an appeal. 


19. Оп 17 November 1970, Maheu called James 
O'Connell, Roselli's first Case Officer, to advise that 
Maheu's attorney, Ed Morgan, had received a call from a 
Thomas Waddin, Roselli's lawyer, who stated that all. 
avenues of appeal had been exhausted, and his client now 
faces deportation. Waddin indicated that, if someone did 
not intercede on Roselli's behalf, he would make a complete 
expose of his activities with the Agency. 


20. On 18 November 1970, Mr. Helms was briefed 
on the latest development in this case, and it was decided 
that the Agency would not in any way assist Roselli. Maheu 
was so advised of the Agency's position, and he was in 


4 00015 


ooo OO 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


complete agreement with our stand. He further advised 
that he was not concerned about any publicity as it 
affected him personally should Roselli decide to tell 
all. : 


| 21. Subsequently, Roselli or someone on his 
behalf furnished Jack Anderson details of the operation. 
Attached are two Anderson columns dealing with: this 
matter. 


22. The last known residence of Roselli was the 


. Federal Penitentiary in Seattle, Washington. 


Attachments 


00016 


"MORI DocID: 1451843 


І ж | 


` MORI DocID: 1451843 


The Washington Werry-G Zo-Round ES ΚΑΡΠῸΝ о POSI Aerdt г 


0 Aliempis to Kill Castro Luid to CIA 


By Jeck p “tor before the motley invad iate against President | ы wilh secret izysts at 
'ers janded on the island, Their’ nedy. tering Miami Beach hotels 
arrival was expected to touch! To set up the Castro as: V тала midnight powerboat 
‘off a general uprising, which | nation, the CIA enlisted hi 5-:dashes to secret landing spots - 


те Ag v is the story i H th ^ 
pence ο the story of ithe Communist militia would , ё“ i зо iaa OR Vlion the Cuban coast. Grace, Ro. ^ 
‘agent with shadowy contac. i 


Locked in the darkest re: 
icesses of the Central Intelli-! 


Их assassination attempts‘, m isalli's boat was shot out £r 2, 
‚анаіпзі Cuba's Fidel Castro, 1^ 3*9 Mad more troup ie putting ‘who had handled other und-1 "πάρε him. ` br d 
] For 10 years, only a Jew Κεν |0090 Without the charismaticisover assignments forthe Cl V For the first try, the CAE 


people have known ihe terri; Castro to lead them. jout of his Washington publi "urnished Roselli with зресізі { 
dle seeret. They have sworn) After the first attempt | relations oifice. He later’ -ујзоп capsules to slip into! ғ 
inever to talk. Yet we have: ‘failed, five more assassination | ‘moved to Las Vegas to head .‘astro's.food. The poison war ` 
ilearned the details from! ! up billionaire Howard Hughes’ 'i:nposed to take three days іо 
i sot urees whose credentials are (teams were sent fo Cuba. Thei wovada operations. °. By the time Castro died, 
‘bevond Question. ‘last team reportedly made it! Maheu recruited John πει system would throw off ail 
We spoke to John МеСоле. to a rooftop within shooting:sell, a ruggedly handsome: ies of the poison, so he 
| who Headed the CIA at the! distance of Castro before they “Sammbler with contacts In both iyi i'd appear to be the victim 
‘time’ of the assassination at- i were apprehended. This hap-‘ihe American and Cuban un-iof a natural. if mysterious ail- 
tempts. He acknowledged the! pened around the Tast of Feb- derworlds, to arrange the a BSI mes} й I 
idea had been discussed inside Iruary or first of March, 2963. |sassination. The dapper, hawk-| возі arranged with a 


ithe CIA but insisted it hadi Nine months later, Ргезі.:Гасеїй Roselli, formerly mar-.Cubaa related fo one of Cas- ` 
ibeen "rejected immedi-| dent Kennedy was gunned'ried to movie actress June ‘tro’s .ı ig P plant the deadiy ` 
lately.” He vizorously denied'down in Dallas by Lee Harvey i Lang. was a power in the [pellet - the dictator's food. 
:that the СТА had ever partici-lOswald, a fanatic who pre-imovie industry until his con- On Мо ce 13, 1981, Roselli de- 


ipated in any plot on Castro's ‘viously had agitated fpr Cas-|viction with racketeer Willie Ї Пуєгед зе capsules το his con- 


ife. Asked whether the attro in New Orleans and had | Віоїї in a million-dollar Holly-Htact at Σ᾿ ami Beach's glamor- 
itempts could have been made | made a mysterious trip ta thejwood labor shakedown. Thelous Fon a ñebleau Hotel. 
with his knowledge, he re-;Cuban Embassy in Mexico|CIA assigned two of its most] ош f weeks later, just 


ipli ей; “It could not have hap-! City. trusted operatives. Wiliamlabout 4%. дм time for the 
tpened." j Among those privy to the' Harvey and James (Big Jim)iptot to ...- been carried out 
i We have complete confi- CIA conspiracy, there | is still a O'Connell, іо the husn-hush! ta reper: out of Havana said 
idence, however, in ourinaggingsuspicion—unsup-jmurder mission. Using paonyiCastro -ss il But he r2- 
I sources. {ροτιεά by the Warren Com-;names, they accompanied Ro-|coverrd звіоге the Ba; пі Pigs 
3 The plot to knock off Castro [mission's findings—that- Cas-Iselli on trips to Miami to line;invasion -, April 17, IGEL 
vegan ns part-of the Bay of tro became aware uf the U.S. up the assassination teams. i Four m attamats were 


Pigs operation The intent was! rlot upon his Ме and wma’ The full story reads like the made ea 


Bo dimine ihe Cuban dietas how recruited Gawali τῷ teft ssp "ioa James Bond movie, с: ге lie хоче 


D 


00018 š 


"Газ Vegas. now a grav. 6&1 Roselli was so flattered over}the spring ef 1953. по 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Washington Werrs-Go-Round THE WASHINGTON POST 


i . 1 " a К > EI 
, “1 qm, < OFF 
{aliod D ог 


ΡΝ; Robart Maher for. reli! 
Ry duck 1πεζσγερη Mahou, а for. Roseni 


ont, who admiued' capsul 
13 Rad handled пп; гоп 
snments for the cher to es in 


A 
manr pham the i us that h 
cene Адепту" Aaa 
inate Cuha’s CIA, E 
з been Hid vp ¢: the details. Thiet is fal as hich: ee 
d of the Las’ same AMaheu,. in cidentally, whojfles atiempted to 
"ів now involved in a legal bət-Iclose enough to gun 
faced lg e over phantom biliionaire down. 
dashint! tigward Hughes’ Nevada орег- All told, six assas 
veod andiations. ` Ὁ, ltempts were made, 


ту M 


2 
eu 


figure around ї 


JeaFold ir inm e with a rospira-I being asked to perform a se-iout this period, Roselli worked iz 
tory ailm fret mission for the U.S. gov-lunder the. direct supervision 
firent that ne paid ай his;of two secret i 


MEE aut об own jam Harvey 
ure” who š “ME packet and riske 
conceaied * and the assassination teams] Under pressure from the 
Vegas casinos at the Chicazo!on the Cuban coast. iRosell's Reward - [firearms lobby, the Treasury 
underworld.” Í In James Bond fashion, he| The FBI which got wind of: Department has failed to en- 


Roselli has admitted toj held whispered meetings in|the assassination plot, has ‘force a Vital ‘section of the 


asury Secretary io require 
терогіз Е а firearins and 


His name later bc azk- 
Tinta PIN inana? 24 

ип? хей whia TRE bizzest па names te rambling interest ani an dn. down on orzanized | crime.: 
in the Chi 3:0 anc LOS Апге.: liorest in the shrimp business: tried to nail Roselli. The FBI 
[65 underworld. ο Ce-lin. Cuba.” However, the Chi-ldiscovered that his СПісалої 


15 
-α sin the ο 
veloped contacts in the Cuban! caso gangster took no directlbiru: records had been for τ 


yin гігад5 that he wasa | Tun-i Miami Beach hotels with Cu- tried to pump Roselli for in-i1nss federal firearms act 

[ner during rhe Roaring Tver-i tans willing to make ап at-ifarmatioa. But he was sworn 2 ү сме Р 
са Opirating ainas the East!ruapt оп Castro's Не. Once, ito tence by the CIA and vo: TBO law wes passed ай 
Coast, he learned how i0 evadei һе called on Chicago racketito this moment, he hasn't Ότο, 138 murders of Sen. Robert 
[Coast Guard c cutters and бо Sam Сїапсапа to line єр еп it. 5 (зпледу and Dr. Martin Τα. 
^n patrels. ila contact. The confidential | fe isse the Justice De.;ther Ring, It authorizes the 


σα 


τ 


underworld hefore Castro togk; part in the assassination plot. |that his name was really yc. Department has. 

jover the Патапа gam μας са Roselli made тібл nored inis хеу provision, iuc 

jsinos. . : ο dashes to Cuba with his hiredicome da this country from ;5un industry 1 

| He had the risht back- assassins in twin powerbosts.|l:alv as a child. He was con-jit would be 

jground for a hush-hush mis- Once а Cuban patrol ship |victed for failing to register as nightmare. . 

sion that the CIA was різп- turned its guns on his dark. fan alien. і The. federal government n 
As part ої the! oned boat, tere a hole in tha He i would have to compa 


- 


jon, tbe CL tantom ana эп x: 
22 

хен Castro and; solli was f 
Кт БЕЙ 


ies data, has т.е 


> hoat. Ro-'ccn 
t of the аг 
то Other boet, which Fr 
{escaped into the szadows. і 
2 In earlier columns. we 
i ported how the CIA fur 


B 


ο 


: Р a e e ^17 00019 7 ` 


б 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


< 
ü i 
' : 
і 
i & 
- ΄ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


PROJECT MOCKINGBIRD 


Project Mockingbird, a telephone intercept activity, was conducted 
between 12 March 1963 and 15 June 1963, and targeted two Washington- 
based newsmen who, at the time, had been publishing news articles 
based on, and frequently quoting, classified materials of this Agency 
and others, including Top Secret апа Special Intelligence. 


Telephone intercept connections were installed at the newmen's : 
office and at each of their homes, for а total of 5. The connections 
were established with the assistance of a telephone company official 
who responded to а personal request by the Director of Security, Col. 
Sheffield Edwards. Col. Edwards’ authority for the activity was Mr. 
John A. McCone, Director of Central Intelligence. The latter conducted 
the activity in coordination with the Attorney General (Mr. Robert Kennedy), 
the Secretary of Defense (Mr. Robert McNamara), and the Director of 
the Defense.Intelligence Agency (Gen. Joseph Carroll) Та addition to 
Office of Security personnel directly involved in the intercepts and 
research of materials acquired therefrom, only 3. other Agency 
officials are on record as witting of the activity: the Deputy Director 
of Central Intelligence (General Marshall S. Carter), the Inspector - 
General (Lyman Kirkpatrick) and the General Counsel. (Mr. Lawrence 
Houston). ` | 


The intercept activity was particularly productive in identifying con- 
tacts of the newsmen, their method of operation and many of their sources 
of information. For example, it was determined that during the period they 
received data from 13 newsmen, 12 of whom were identified; 12 senators 
and 6 members of Congress, all identified; 21 Congressional staff members, 
of whom 11 were identified; 16 government employees, including a staff 
member of the White House, members of the Vice President's office, an 
Assistant Attorney General, and other well-placed individuals. A number 
of other sources were partially or tentatively identified, but the short span 
of the activity precluded positive identification. It was observed that through 
these contacts the newsmen actually received more classified and official 
data than they could use, and passed some of the stories to other newsmen 
for release, establishing that many "leaks" appearing under other by-lines 
were actually from the sources ої the target newsmen. 


Since the termination of Project Mockingbird, those materials related 


to it which were retained, have been maintained under strict security access 
of two Office ої Security professionals. | жо 5 
02042 


SECR ШШ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


O AAT 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


vt і 


ΜΝ D 
Y З GLY 
SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko 


Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko, an officer of the KGB, 
defected to a representative of this Agency in Geneva, 
Switzerland, on 4 February 1964. The responsibility for 
his exploitation was assigned to the then SR Division of 
the Clandestine Service and he was brought to this country 
on 12 February 1964. After initial interrogation by 
representatives of the SR Division, he was moved to a safe- 
house in Clinton, Maryland, from 4 April 1964 where he 
was confined and interrogated until 13 August 1965 when. 
he was moved to a specially constructed "jail" in a remote 
wooded area а The SR Division was convinced ` 
that he was a dispatched agent but even after a long 
period of hostile interrogation was unable to prove their 
contention and he was confined a| а an effort 
to convince him to "confess." 


This Office together with the Office of General 
Counsel became increasingly concerned with the illegality 
of the Agency's position in handling a defector under 
these conditions for such a long period of time. Strong 
representations were made to the Director (Mr. Helms) by 
this Office, the Office of General Counsel, and the 
Legislative Liaison Counsel, and on 27 October 1967, the 
responsibility for Nosenko's further handling was transferred 
to the Office of Security under the direction of the Deputy 
Director of Central Intelligence, then Admiral Rufus Taylor. 


Nosenko was moved to a comfortable safehouse in 
the Washington area and was interviewed-under friendly, 
sympathetic conditions by his Security Case Officer, Mr. 
Bruce Solie, for more than a year. It soon became 
apparent that Nosenko was bona fide and he was moved to 
more comfortable surroundings with considerable freedom 
of independent movement and has continued to cooperate 
fully with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and this 


Office since that time. Не has proven to be the most 


00023 


осе АНАНАН АЕА нн rr 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


valuable and economical defector this Agency has ever 
had and leads which were ignored by the SR Division were 
explored and have resulted in the arrest and prosecution 


е Currently 1 тпр 
under ап alias; orce from his Russian wife 
and remarried an American citizen. He is happy, relaxed, 
and appreciative of the treatment accorded him and states 
"while I regret my three years of incarceration, I have 
no bitterness and now understand how it could happen." 


` 00024 


i MORI DociD: 1451843 


| нн НИ № 0 || 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


(І. SURVBILLANCES 


During the periods 1-20 February, 12 April-7 May, 
and 9-20 August 1971, a surveillance was conducted of 
а former staff employee, and 
a cuban national with whom 
become professionally and, emo- 
tionally involved. Surveillance was predicated upon 
information that had been seeking from 
employees information in Information Processing Division 


files, and that employees were visiting a photographic ` 
studio operated , . ..-᾽-᾽- Fairfax 
City, Virginia. Іп addition to physi eillance,: I 


one.surreptitious entry of the photographic studio was : 
made, and an attempt to enter the apartment of 
was aborted because of a door lock problem. 


Pursuant to a request from the CI Staff, approved 
by the DCI, surveillances were conducted соо G s 
and her associates at various times from May to September 
1971. i i 
ad long been a source o e ivision an 
ad given information regarding a plot to assassinate 
or kidnap Vice President Agnew and the DCI. Surveil- 
lances included coverage of the activities of Miss King 
during two visits to the United States, technical cover- 
age of debriefings of her by WH Division representatives 
in New York City, and surveillance, including mail cover- 
age, of several American citizens alleged to be part of 
the plot. Although most of the surveillance occurred in 
New York City, surveillance of one of the individuals 
included extensive coverage of a commune in Detroit. 


C. CELOTEX I 


At the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was con- 
ducted of Michael Getler of the Washington Post during 


Lo] 


00026 


LL. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


the periods 6-9 October, 27 October-10 December 1971 


. and on 3 January 1972. In addition to physical sur- 


veillance, an observation post was maintained in the 
Statler Hilton Hotel where observation could be main- 
tained of the building housing his office. The sur- 
veillance was designed to determine Getler's sources 
of classified information of interest to the Agency 
which had appeared in a number of his columns. 


D. CELOTEX II 


At the direction of the DCI, surveillance was con- 
ducted of Jack Anderson and at various times his "leg 
men," Britt Hume, Leslie Whitten, and Joseph Spear, 
from 15 February to 12 April 1972. In addition to the 
physical surveiliance, an observation post was main- 
tained in the Statler Hilton Hotel directly opposite 
Anderson's office. The purpose of this surveillance 
was to attempt to determine Anderson's sources for 
highiy classified Agency information appearing in his 
syndicated columns. 


E. BUTANE 


At: the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was 
conducted on Victor L. Marchetti from 23 March to 
20 April 1972. The purpose of this. surveillance was 
to determine his activities and contacts both with 
Agency employees and other individuals in regard to 
his proposed book and published magazine articles ex- 
posing Agency operations. 


POLICE SUPPORT 


A. During 1969, 1970, and 1971, on several occasions, 
the Intelligence Division of the Metropolitan Police 
Department was provided a communications system to 
monitor major anti-Vietnam war demonstrations in the 
Washington area. This system consisted of a radio 
receiver and an Agent at the Intelligence Division | 
Headquarters and several automobiles from the Washington 
Field Office equipped with radio receivers and trans- 
mitters and manned by two WFO Agents, as well as a 
representative of the Intelligence Division, Metropolitan 
Police Department. The benefit to the Agency was, that: 
the communications over this system were monitored at 
the Headquarters Building to provide instant notice of 
possible actions by the dissidents against. Agency in- 


stallations. 
00027 


В TR Ha 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


B. During the period from 1968 to 1973, several ` 
items of positive audio equipment consisting pri- 
marily of clandestine transmitters and touch-tone 
dial recorders were loaned to the Metropolitan 
Police Department, Fairfax County, Virginia, Police 
Department, Montgomery County, Maryland, Police 
Department, New York City Police Department, and the 
San Francisco, California, Police Departmont. 


| 111. GENERAL SUPPORT 
i A. SRPOINTER 


Since 1953, this office has operated a mail inter- 
cept program of incoming and outgoing Russian mail 
and, at various times, other selective mail at Kennedy 
Airport in New York City. This operation included not 
only the photographing of envelopes but also surrepti- 
tious opening and photographing of selected items of 
mail. The bulk of the take involved matters of inter- 
nal security interest which was disseminated to the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. This program is now 
in a dormant state pénding a decision as to whether 
the operation will.be continued or abolished. 


B. AELADLE 
For several years the Office-of Security has pro- 


vided support to Anatole Golitsyn, a Russian défector of 
interest to the CI Staff. 


C. REDFACE I 


In July 1970, this office made a surreptitious 
entry of an office in Silver Spring, Maryland, occu- 
pied by a former defector working under contract for 
the Agency. This involved by-passing a contact and 


00028 e" 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


sonic alarm system, entering a vault, and entering 
a safe within the vault. The purpose of the opera- 
tion was to determine whether the individual had 

i any unauthorized classified information in his 

! possession. 


D. BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS 


| 

| 

i 

x In January 1971, the Director approved a request 
from the Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous 
Drugs, to provide covert recruitment and security 
clearance support to BNDD. This has been accomplished 
through the medium of a proprietary of the Office of. 
Security known as and operating as 

uppor 

includes covert recruitment, investigation, polygraph, 
medical clearance, and training. It has been divided 
into three phases: (1) A CI operation to place indi- 
viduals in BNDD field offices to monitor_any illegal 
activities of other BNDD employees; (2) 


an ) 
ecruitment of an individual used as ап Agent Бу BNDD 
but actually employed by BNDD, although this fact is 
known only to the Director and Chief Inspector, BNDD. 
In this case, arrangements were made for all pay and 
other employee benefits to come from CIA on a reim- 
bursable basis. 


М ος... 


F. MERRIMAC 


From February 1967 to November or MEN. 
Office of Security proprietary, recruite d 


several Agents for the purpose of covertly monitoring: 


00029 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


HH 

BN 

dissident groups in the Washington area considered 
to be potential threats to Agency personnel and 
installations. One of these Agents so successfully 
penetrated one dissident group that she was turned 
over to the FBI for handling. Іп addition, during 
this period, the Office of Security field offices 
were tasked with collecting available intelligence 
on dissident groups. А11 such information was in- 
cluded in a periodic report distributed to appro- 
priate parts of the Agency and to certain outside 
Government agencies. 


` 00030 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


00031 


2 — i a ww rrrr S S S S S 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MATERIAL REQUISITIONED FROM LOGISTICS 
| BY SECURITY FOR ISSUANCE TO 
| NP LOCAL POLICE 


| m ITM QUANITY 
| Gas Mask M-9 : | | EP 200 
x Gas Mask M-17 | 196 
| Steel Helmet and Liners ` | 231 
Vest and Groin Protector | | М 96 
Vest, Flak М-52 | 34 
Vest, Protective | | 46 
Vest, Grenade | 105 
Execuvest E E 6 
Emergency Flashing Red Light - 22 
#Searchlight, Tear Gas | š 36 
*Chemical Baton 6 1/2" | 56 
*Chemical Baton 12" | | 24 
"*Chemical Baton 26" . 24 
*Mustang 55 Pistol I 6 
'"*Searchlight with Shoulder Strap 36 
*Stun Gun | 3 


*NOTE: Various quantities and types of replacement chemical 
cartridges, loading kits, and batteries were also 
& ordered for asterisk items. 


1451843 


а 
H 
U 
О 
a 
H 
ро 
о 
E» 


—rT[ÑsssvÑ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Audio Countermeasures Support to the 
United States Secret Service 


On 25 July 1968, and at the specific request 
of the United States Secret Service, this Office pro- 
vided two audio countermeasures technicians to the 
United States Secret Service in connection with the 
Democratic National Convention held in Chicago, Illinois. 
This was not an official detail although both men were 
provided with temporary credentials identifying them 
as being affiliated with the United States Secret Service. 


On 15 August 1968, we detailed the same two men 
to the United States Secret Service to cover the 
Republican National Convention in Miami, Florida. On 
both occasions, the team members were debriefed upon, 
their return and it is clear that their activities were 
confined exclusively to sweeping the candidates and 
potential candidates quarters. . 


00034 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


00035 


< 


та 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


15 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Howard Osborn 
; Director o£ Security 


SUBJECT : Identification of Activities with 
Embarrassment Potential for the Agency 


1. In responding on 7 May by memorandum to the DDO's 
request for the identification of any incident which might 
conceivably have an embarrassment potential for the Agency, 

I cited the equipment test which is mentioned in the attached 
memo. The test in question was related to the development of 


3 
were in and out of some four hotels in Miami, with 
radio equipment. This was shortly before the political con- 
ventions, and at least one of the hotels was within a block 
of the convention hall. -> 


` 2. Although this completely. innocent--although sub- 
ject to misconstrual--activity may already have been drawn 
to your attention by your,own staff,-it has occurred to us 
that we should ensure you are awaré of it, given the involve- 
ment of a Security officer, 


Chief, знаю 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 May 1973 


„MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT; [Equipment Test, Miami, Florida, 
August 1971 


The followihg details concerning the axrange- 
ments for Subject tests were provided by. 
during a telephone conversa ion Wi 
e undersigned, ay 1973. 


now retired, formerly assigned to 
for the August 1971 Field 
Security 


arrangements for the test were handled on ре 


ecurity Officer, S 
а @ time. | in daily contact wi 
[Miami the course of his officia 
duties. 
Besse. reluctant to μαμα home 
over an open telephone line to inquire about the specifics 


of the arrangements at this point, and suggested . 
that t Secürity Officer by this time might have 


been transferre ack to Headquarters and be available for 
a direct query. i 


The writer called E ЕЕЫ DIV/D- Security 


Officer, who verified tne Tac a indeed is 


_Stationed at Headquarters, with a current assignment to a 


half ы 
and the visitors by in conjunction with e 


phone connections: 


The aboye details were provided by telephone x ВИ 
e. 


г  _ |] Chief, Division D at 1650 hours this da 


located in| | 
їз available via-the following tele- 


| 


signed 
Distribution: [516 M 


00037. 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


E τ᾽ $ - | ` } ZEE iud 
E кл HE . {IZ ЖА LJ CONE га ΕἼ вет 


і Ñ Он ЛО НИ mee m rt n 


κ... ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


SUBJECT: {Optienal} 

"ЖО — — — CC MM EN ETSIN ا“‎ — 
i і эле боби 
1 
і Director ої Securit =I | 
| — — ne nce 

TO: Meer designation, rs 5 

і building] ΠΡ DATE COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom 
i INITIALS fo whom, Draw a fine ccress column ofter each comment.) 


RECEIVED | FORWARDED 


Ex. Dir. -Compt. 


2 


mA  ——— ——— H mto 


. 00038 


ο” 


| юш. OO "Bose ps INTERNAL [7] UNCLASSIFIED 


------ EUCH " рн. Эля κώνο μμ А С Sian x 


А Л Ц Ка d 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


15 FEB 1072 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director-Comptroller 


SUBJECT : ROSELLI, John 


1. This memorandum is for your information only. 


2. Reference is made to our recent conversation regarding 
the Agency's participation in political assassinations. Attached 
hereto is a memorandum dated 19 November 1970 which was fur- 
nished to Mr. Helms setting forth the circumstances of the Subject's 
activities on behalf of the Agency. Initially Roselli was unwitting 
of Government interest, but as time went on, he suspected that the 
U. S. Government was involved and specifically the СТА. 


. 3. Roselliis presently serving a prison sentence for con- 
Spiracy in a Federal penitentiary in Seattle, Washington and awaits 
deportation upon completion of his current sentence. 


4. 'This Agency was aware that Roselli intended to expose. 
his participation in the plot should we not intervene on his behalf. 
The DCI decided to ignore his threats and take a calculated risk as 
to the consequences that may occur with the disclosure of his story. 
This was subsequently done by Roselli or someone on his behalf fur- 
nishing Jack Anderson details of the incident. Attached hereto are 
two of Anderson's articles dealing with Roselli. Anderson is also 
Editor of the Washington Bureau of the Washington Post, Sunday 
supplemental "Рагаде." 


5. Individuals who were aware of this project were: Messrs. 
Dulles, Bissell, Colonel J. C. King, Colonel Sheffield Edwards, 


00039 


m —sc—— р  ÁÓÀ— б ' ІС: E E S ο 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


William Harvey, and James Ps O'Connell, Also included were 
Robert A. Maheu and his attorneys Edward Р. Morgan and Edward 
Bennett Williams. 


6. On 26 February 1971 arrangements were made with: 
Immigration and Naturalization Service Commissioner Raymond 
Farrell to flag any action that may be taken by his organization 
regarding deportation proceedings against Roselli, On 26 January 
1972 James F. Green, Associate Commissioner for I&NS, advised 
that they were deferring any deportation action for another year 
and would again call it to our attention upon expiration of the 
deferral. 


Director of urity 


Atts 


00040 


—————— o 


— ITL. ы з 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


M 
«и 
тел 
e 
Gr 
par 
с 
J 
` 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director-Coniptroller 


SUBJECT : ROSELLI, John 


l. This mernorandum is for your information only. 

2. Reference is made to our recent conversation regarding 
the Agency's participation in political assassinations. Attached 
hereto is а memorandum dated 19 November 1970 which was fur- 
nished to Mr. Helms setting forth the circumstances of the Subject's 
activities on behalf of the Agency. Initially Roselli was unwitting 
of Government interest, but as time went on, he suspected that the 
U. S. Government was involved and specifically the CIA. 


3. Roselli is presently serving a prison sentence for con- 
Spiracy in a Federal penitentiary in Seattle, Washington and awaits 
deportation upon completion of hia current sentence. 


4. This Agency was aware that Roselli intended to expose 
his participation in the plot should we not intervene on his behalf. 
The DCI decided to ignore his threats and take a calculated risk as 
to the consequences that may occur with the disclosure of his story. 
This was subsequently done by Roselli or someone on his behalf fur- 
nishing Jack Anderson details of the incident. Attached hereto are 
two of Anderson's articles dealing with Roselli. Anderson is also 
Editor of the Vashington Bureau of the Vashington Post, Sunday 
supplemental "Parade." 


5. Individuals who were aware of this project were: Messrs. 
Dulles, Bissell, Colonel J. C. King, Colonel Sheffield Edwards, 


00044 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


William Harvey, and Jarnes P. O'Connell. Also included were ` 
Robert A, Maheu end his attorneys Edward Р. Morgen and Edward 
Bennett Williams. ` 


6. On-26 February 1971 arrangements were made with 
Immigration and Naturalization Service Commissioner Raymond 
Farrell to flag any action that may be taken by his organization 
regarding deportation proceedings egainst Roselli. On 26 Ja nuary 
1972 James F. Green, Associate Commissioner for I& NS, advised 
that they were deferring any deportation action for another year 
and would again call lt to our attention upen expiration of the 
deferral, 20 i 


томат sBorn 
Director of Security 


00042 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— PR 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


RSURJECT `+ ROSELLI, Johnny 


1. This memorandum is for information only. 


2. In August 1960, Mr. Richard M, Bissell approached 
Colonel Sheffield Edwards to determine if the Office of Security 
had assets that may assistin a sensitive mission requiring 
gangster-type action. The mission target was Fidel Castro. 


3. Because of its extreme sensitivity, only a small group і 
was made ргіуу to the project. The DCI was briefed and gave his 1 
approval. Colonel J. С. King, Chief, WH Division, was briefed, 
but all details were deliberately concealed from any of the 
ЈММАУЕ officials. Certain TSC and Commo personnel partici- 
pated in the initial planning stages, but were not witting of the 
purpose of the mission. | і 


4, Robert A. Maheu у ав contacted, briefed generally on 
the project, and requested to ascertain if he could develop an 
entree into the gangster elements as the first step toward accom- 
plishing.the desired goal. 


5. Mr. Maheu advised that he had met one Johnny Roselli 
on several occasions while visiting Las Vegas. He only knew 
him casually through clients, but was given to understand that 
he was a high-ranking member of tbe "syndicate" and controlled 
all of the ice-making machines on the Strip. Maheu reasoned 
that, if Roselli was in fact a member of the clan, he undoubtedly 
had connections leading into the Cuban gambling interests. 


——————————————" 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


6. Maheu was asked to approach Roselli, who knew Mahcu 
as à personal relations executive handling domestic and foreign 
accounts, and tell him that he had recently been retained by а 
client who represented several international business firms 
which were suffering heavy financial losses in Cuba as a result 
of Castro's action. They were convinced that Castro's removal 
was the anewer to their problem and were willing to pay a price 
of $150, 000 for its successful accomplishment. It was to be made 
clear to Roselli that the U. S. Government was not, and should not, 
become aware of this operation. | | 


т. The pitch was made to Roselli on 14 September 1960 at 
the Hilton Plaza Hotel, New York City. His initial reaction was 
to avoid getting involved but, through Maheu's persuasion, he 
agreed to introduce him to a friend, Sam Gold, who knew the 
"Cuban crowd," Roselli made it clear he did not want any money 
for his part and believed Sam would feel the same way. Neither 
of these individuals was ever paid out of Agency funds. B 


8, During the week of 25 September, Maheu was introduced 
to Sam who was staying at the Fontainebleau Hotel, Miami Beach, 
It was several weeks after his meeting with Sam and Joe, who was · 
identified to him as a courier operating between Havana and Miami, 
that he saw photographs of both of these individuals in the Sunday 
supplemental "Parade," They were identified as Momo Salvatore 
Giancana and Santos Trafficant, respectively. Both were on the . 
list of the Attorney General's ten most-wanted men, The former 
was described as the Chicago chieftain of the Cosa Nostra and 
successor to Al Capone, and the latter, the Cosa Nostra boss ої 
Cuban operations. Maheu called this office immediately upon as- 
certaining this information. 


9. Та discussing the possible methods ої accomplishing this 
mission, Sam suggested that they not resort to firearms but, if 
he could be furnished some type of potent pill, that could be 
placed in Castro's food or drink, it would be a much more effective 
operation, Sam indicated that he had a prospective nominee in the 
person of Juan Orta, a Cuban official who had been receiving kick- 
back payments from the gambling interests, who still had access 
to Castro, and was in a financial bind. 


00045 


10. TSD was requested to produce six pills of high lethal 
content, 


11, Joe delivered the pills to Crta. After several weeks 
of reported attempts, Orta apparently got cold fect and asked out 
of the assignment. He suggested another candidate who made ` 
several attempts without success. | 


12, Joe then indicated that Dr. Anthony Verona, one of the 
principal officers in the Cuban Exile Junta, had become disaffected 
with the apparent ineffectual progress of the Junta and wes willing 
to handle the mission through his own resources. 


13. He asked, as a prerequisite to the deal, that he be 
given $10,000 for organizational expenses and requested $1,000 
worth of communications eguipment, 


14, Dr. Verona's potential was never fully exploited, as 
the project was canceled shortly after the Bay of Pigs episode. 
Verona was advised that the offer was withdrawn, and the pills 
were retrieved, I 


15. Of significant interest was an incident which involved 
a request levied by Sam upon Maheu. 


| At the height of the project negotiations, Sam 
expressed concern about his girlfriend, Phyllis McGuire, 
who he learned was getting much attention from Dan 
Rowan while both were booked at a Las Vegas night club. 
Sam asked Maheu to put а bug in Rowan's room to deter- 
mine the extent of his intimacy with Miss McGuire. The 
technician involved in the assignment was discovered in 
the process, arrested, and taken to the Sheriff's office 
for questioning, Не called Maheu and informed him that 
he had been detained by the police. This call was made 
in the presence of the Sheriff's personnel. i 


Subsequently, the Department of Justice an- 
nounced its intention to prosecute Maheu along with 
the technician. On 7 February 1962, the Director of 


00046 | 


— TV... —xFC 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Security briefed the Attorney General, Robert 
Kennedy, on the circumstances leading up to 
Maheu's involvement in the wiretap. At our re- 
quest, prosecution wes dropped. 


16. In May 1962, Mr. William Harvey took over as Case 
Officer, and it is not known by this Office whether Roselli was 
used operationally from that point on. | 


17. It was subsequently learned from the FBI that Roselli 
had been convicted on six counts involving illegal entry into the 
United States. Our records do not reflect the date of conviction, 
but it is believed to have been sometime during November 1967. 


18. On 2 December 1968, Roselli, along with four other 
individuals, was convicted of conspiracy to cheat members of the 


Friars Club of $400,000 in а rigged gin gummy game. 


19. Mr. Harvey reported to the Office of Security of his 


. contacts with Roselli during November and December 1967 and 


January 1968. It was his belief that Johnny would not seek out 

the Agency for assistance in the deportation proceedings unless 

he actually faced deportation. Roselli expressed confidence that 

he would win an appeal. ` " 


20. On 17 November 1970, Maheu called James O'Connell, 
Roselli's first Case Officer, to advise that Maheu's attorney, Ed 
Morgan, had received a call from а Thomas Waddin, Roselli's 
lawyer, who stated tbat all.avenues of appeal had been exhausted, 
and his client now faces deportation. Waddin indicated that, if 
someone did not intercede on Roselli's behalf, he would make 
a complete expose of his activities with the Agency. 


21. On 18 November 1970, you were briefed on the latest 
development in this case, and it was decided that the Agency 
would not in any way assist Roselli, Maheu was so advised of 
the Agency's position, and he was in complete agreement with 
our stand, He further advised that he was not concerned about 


—— 


о —————_— : УМ sÇWArY 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


‚апу publicity as it affected him personally should Roselli decide 


to tell all. He stated he would advise us promptly of any develop- 
ments that he may become aware of in this matter. 


Howard J. Osborn 
Director of Security 


00048 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


625 


"E - TASTIINGTON Monday, san, 18, 197 mw 
hoe VUoctinstoa Mevry.Go.Roxnd THE WASHINGTON POST "en ay, aun. JB, 1 ч 


— F VY” 


Ἢ ΡΠ ону м . - EE A À ' à 
6 Attempts to Kili Castro Laid to CHA, | 


Ey Jack Anderson jlr before the motley invad- iate -against President Ken, complete wth secret (тузі at. 
2 ers landed on the island, Theirjnedy, . ` gilttering Miami Beach hotels ; 
Locked, in the darkest re- 


і arrival was expected to touch} To set up the Castro assassi- jand midnight powerboat } | 
D of the Central ate off a general uprising, which nation, the CIA enlisted Roh. dashes to secret lending spots 7 
ns sienna ee ο ere iat ес 
lagainst Cuba's Fidel Castro, ee Nan du trouble putting jwho had kandied other under-lunder him. e OR 1 
For 10 years, only a few key down without’ the charismatic} cover assignments for the CIA) For the first try, the CIA; z: 
people have known the leri: | Castro to lead them. out of his Washington public | furnished Roselli with special, 
ble secret. They have sworn! After the first attempt relations oifice. Не later} poison capsules {ο slip Into}. 


LI 

never to talk, Yet we havel failed, five more assassination | moved to Las Vegas to head] Castro's food. The poison was i 
learned , the details from] | , sent to Cuba. The | ЗР billionaire Howard Hughes'isupposed to take three days to í 
sources whose credentials are | 22715 were Sent 10 Luba. ¿ne Xevada operations. act. By the time Castro died, i 
‘beyond question, last team reportedly made iti. Maheu recruited John. Ro-!pis system woul€ throw off all i 
Ме spoke to John, McCone, ito, ἃ rooftop within shooting jsell, a ruggedly handsomeltraces of the poison, so he і 


who headed the CIA at the distance οἱ Castro before they [gambler with contacts in both | would appear to be the victim ` 


time ‘of the assassination at-!were apprehended. This hap: Ле American and Cuban un-jof a natural if mysterious ail- є 
tempts. He acknowledged the pened around the last ої Feb.|derworlds, to arrange the аз-| ment, à t 
lidea had been discussed inside [ruary or first of March, 1963, |sassination. The dapper, hawk-| Roselli arranged with -ᾱ-- i 
че CIA .but insisted it had; Nine months later, Presi-jfaced Roselli, formerly mar-iQuban, related to one of Cas. ` : 
ееп "rejected immedi- dent Kennedy was gunnediried to movie actress June |tro's chefs, to plant the deadly ` Р 
(зіву, He vigorously denied (down in Dallas by Lee Harvey Lang, was а power In the pellets in {һе dieiator's food. r 
that the CIA had ever partici-iOswald, a fanatie who pre-jmovie industry until his соп-Ї On March 13, 1961, Roselli de- `. 2, 
pated in any plot on Castro's | viously ‘had agitated ior Cas-|vietion with racketeer Willie |}ivered the capsules to his con- - H 
life, Asked whether the at- tro in New Orleans and had|Bioff in a million-dollar Holly-itact at Miami Beach's glamor- : 
tempts could have been madejmade a mysterious trip to thejwood labor shakedown. Thelous Fontainebleau Hotel. toi 
with his knowledge, he re-|Cuban Embassy in Mexico|CIA assigned two of its most| А couple of weeks later, just a 
plied; "It could not have Һар: | City. trusted operatives, Мат about the right time for the ; . 
pened.” Among those privy to the|Harvey and James (Big Jim) plot to have been carried ou! i} 
We have complete сопії-| CIA conspiracy, there is still a|O'Connell, to the hush-hushia report out of Havana raid £ 
jdence, however, in óourjnaggingsuspicion—unsup-imurder mission. Using phony|Castro was il. But he r? . i. 
sources. ported by the Warren Com- (names, they accompanied Ro-! covered before the Bay of Р: is °, t 
! The plot to knock off Castro : mission's findings—that Cas-|selli on trips to Miami to line | invasion on April 17, 1961. i. 
‘bevan as part of dhe Bay of Пто became aware of the U.S.tup Ше assassination teams. Four more attempts w/.e τν 
{Pigs operation "The intent Was, plot upon his life and seme. The full story reads like the! made on Castro's life, | e 
Чо емо the Cuban dicta low; recruited Oswald ta ital script, ої a James Bond movie, agmi Bel-MeClure &! zeate ео Q` t 
Lr - —— — ا , سے اہ = — س‎ E 
Г 
m 
Н 
: К: 
ie 
Ë 
FE 


.. 


- ify him as “a top Mafia fig-lexpenses out of his own liam Harvey and James (Biz 


| 
| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ф ^ ` 

` The Wassingion Merry:Go-Xtound THE WASHINGTON POST Tuesday, Feb.23,1971 811 

Poe HY а Q F. H F] l Я JL Ji ay n 

1 t: пі (CUT cS А ыр, Q P چ‎ 3 тз" рту р. T: 7: A7 ! і 7 $ 
C GM vtta SET y ЭЕ $t t АР " > í 

| DAL wd Э I блл VE #0244 & UNT E 

i і 

! Бу Jack Anderson obert Maher the CIA payroll 

i E & in us à friend. 


Era 


Dul Ге» 


(he had handled un-ithrough a relative of Castro's UA. LT tee CI 
H Lu .. 1 


. Central 


і : signinents for ihe'chef to plant ia the dictator's e had 
гості aanus inalo Cuba's me ñ is) : M Her 
17691 uted to аз скале Cuba's г He refed. : . Later Baseli 
Fidel Castro 5: { 


teen Pid up dary 


і і 2 aes Une details 7 zi rt hib cese à 
‘in the sick ward Cf the Losisame Maheu, inciden ,who:fies attempted to infiltrate frap.” liarvey: 


Anseies County jail. 


iphony. Roselli had no more to 
ated with that than I had.” 
Ж eset ewvers re paw 
Las Vegas. now a gray. 66-| Roselli was so flattered over ithe spring of 1963. p ee MOLAR ο... m 
year-old inmate with a respira-lheing asked to perform a se-jout this period, Roseili worked! their client, citing опо stories 
tory ailment, cret mission for the U.S. gov.|under the direct supervision! snout his secret CIA service. з 
Confidential FBI files iden-lornment that he paid ай his;oí two secret CIA agents, Wil-j i ` 


Өт 


asi 


i 
Firearms Piss й 

ure".who watched over “the! pocket and risked his neck to! | Е кор rd di E 
concealed interests in LaS:]and the assassination teams! | Under pressure irom ihe 
Vegas casinos of the Chicagolon the Cuban coast. IRosclli's Reward jfirearms lobby, the Treasury 
underworld: ana | In James Bond fashion, he| The FBI which got wind οἱ] Department has failed to en- 
(fi ᾽ Ν᾽ fea held whispered meetinzs in (the assassination plot. has|force a vital section bf the 

riencs that he was а rum run-| Miami Beach hotels with Cu-|tried го pump Roselli for in-11568 federal firearms act. 

ner during the Roaring Twen-! bans willing to make an at-lformation. But he was sworni u, S 

ties. Operating along the Eastltempt on Castro's life. Once, |10 silence by the CIA, and upj 1/29 law was passed after 
Coast, he learned how to evadeihe called on Chicago racketito this moment, ле hasn'tbro-iine murders oi Sen. Robert 
Coast Guard cutters and po-|poss Sam Giancana 10 line upken it. ᾽ {Kennedy and Dr. Martin Lu- 
lice patrols, a contact. The confidential| Meanwhile, the Justice De.ither King, It authorizes the 

llis name later became} fies report that Giancana had |partment, as part-of its crack-] Treasury Secretary to require 

linked with the biggest names | “rambling interest and aa in-idown on organized crime, jill reports of ай firearms and 
{in the Chieazo and Los Ante-lierest in the shrimp business [tried to nail Roselli: The TBI ammunition sales. 2 

les underworlóz. lie also Ge-lin. Cuba." However, the Chi-ldiscovered that nis Chicago] For the two years that the 
veloped contacts in tie Cuban|eazo gangster took no dircct|birth records had been forged,ilaw Las been in force, the 
underworld before Castro took Ipart in the assassination plot. [that his name was really Fi Treasury Department has iz- 


Jim) O'Connell. 


sion that the CIA was plam|iurned its guns on his dark-lan alien. : The federal government, 
ning in 1951. As part of (ће | опса boat. tore a hole in thej Не was also convicted for; "Dich would have to compile 
i Bay of Pits invesion. the СТА bottom and sank the boat Ro-:eonspiracy 12 rig card гше 20 ti Pes data, has lC 
[hoped 10 &naez arf Castro and: ες] was fished out of theiat Los Angeles! exclusive, ὮΙ το spand з 
| water by the other toat, which іГтіамя Си. | SE оп it onu сєзї м 
Neck ` l escaped into the shadows, . Of Resells two CIA asão computers and stati vo man 


Pishka Ἆρο š З т зара Direnem.s flas 
tiska Mec In earlier columns, we те-Їсіатов, Harvey has now retired tain the firearms files. 
Кокай v 


cas recruited for the} ported how the C1A furnished!to Indianapots and O'Connell , 


pm 


UNLAS 


SIFIED 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


alg: uM [] CON ἩΤΙΑΙ. N БЕРЕР 


SUBJECT; (Optional) 


FORM 
3-62 


building) 


010 


IG Staff 


Howard J. Osborn 
Director of Securi DATE 


Hs. 


TO: (Officer designation, room number, ond | 


DATE COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom 
fo whom. Drow o line across column ofter eoch comment.) 
RECEIVED | комара | n 
A ° í А й 


E PREVIQUS 
EDITIONS 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


0 EXTENSION | но, 


17 December 1973 


00051. 


[] CONFIDENTIAL C] use onv. Cl. UNCLASSIFIED. 


μμ —  À RÀ 


a SS Sf ee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


17 December 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Recent Activities of the Watergate Special 
Prosecution Staff 


1. Early in the evening of 10 December 1973, I received 
a telephone call fro em 
who informed the that he, in turn, had received a ca rom 


nteiligence Division, Washington 


торогітал FOLI 


2. It seems that had just spent an hour in 
conversation at his home wi 
in the Washington Metropolitan Police Departnén re] геро 


to him on his interview that afternoon with а Mr. Martin and a Mr. 
Horowitz, prosecutors of the Watergate Special Prosecution Staff. 
had been subpoenaed for his appearance and he indicated 
to that the two prosecutors were principally concerned 
with two matters: : | і 35. 


а. What type of training had the Agency given 
members of the Washington Metropolitan Police 
Department? how long were the courses? and 
how often were they given? 


b. What support did the Agency provide to the 
Washington Metropolitan Police Department during 
demonstrations occurring in the Washington area 
in late 1969 and early 19707 


3. e. that he had been shown a long list of 
names and asked if any of them had been involved either with the 
training given the Washington Metropolitan Police Department or the 
support to the Washington Metropolitan Police Department during the 
demonstrations. d remember only three names on the 
list. They were: 


SEGRET [RR ien 


00052 


1 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. The three individuals named by [n i in fact 
participate in both the training and support during the demonstrations. 
They are only three among others of my special 
support group who were involved in these activities. Of extreme 
sensitivity is the fact that these same individuals were engaged in 
other highly sensitive activities which could cause the Agency severe 
embarrassment if they were surfaced today in the current "Watergate 
climate." 


5. I briefed the Director personally on this development 
and he indicated that if the training and demonstrations surfaced that 
he would simply acknowledge that this had occurred but as he had 
assured members of Congress, we would not engage in this type of 
activity in the future. Не agreed with my suggestion that we have the 
Legislative Counsel brief Congressman Nedzi and Senator Stennis on 
this since they have already been briefed on all activities of this 
nature undertaken by the Agency in the past. I briefed Mr. John 


Warner, Acting General Counsel, and agreed with him that we would 
make no effort to brief members of Шу | E 
and if they are subpoenaed. Mr. Warner or members o£ his Staff will 


then caution them to only answer questions asked and not volunteer 
additional information. I am making a copy of this memorandum available 
to of the Inspector General's Staff at the suggestion 


° of the Inspector General, who I also briefed on this development. 


eo PUR Vener 


Howard J. Osborn 
Director of Security 


“ce: IG Staff Attn:| 


00053 


— s Bue | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


З. RCSD | |] | Co |] «WF sb O 


ROUTING AND 2 ECORD SHEET 


[ SUBJECT: Optional} 
ee due ишш сл 


FROM: 
Howard J. Osborn. J „10 | эв, BMA TT 
. Director of Security P d _ | | ü 2 5 MAY WS 0. 00 


NO. 


n be nd - 
ТО: Олен ο” PME OFFICER'S COMMENTS [Number eoch comment to show from whom 
i ак В INITIALS to, whom, Draw a line ocross column обег each comment.) 
RECEIVED | FORWARDED el š 


1. | Жо `. ` 
Executive Secretary: A Oa x es 
ΕΑ Management Com. ` а pg Ὕγος t 


НОВЕ 


00054 


{47} 


FORM él Ü USE PREVIOUS 
3-52 NS grs 
᾿ REPLACES FORM 10-101 
` FORM NO. iat ως ВЕ ἜΚ 


1 AuG 54 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


a. ctu. =. s ommo را‎ s Me A hi smua umm ee 


"ож ate 


KE τη com Супа. - Bs 


. Howard J. Osborn’ 4f 2: 
Director of Security d 


ТО: (Officer designotion, room number, and Z } DME 
building) . й š 


OFFICER'S 
INITIALS 


COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from T 
to whom. Drow o fine across column after each comment.) 


1. 3 та m Ξ 
| Executive Бетен ey. ies da 
` CIA. Management Com. к 


—^—^—^—^—€——— 


NN: s 


a 610 "058" [x -spener Fl CONFIDENTIAL ΓΊ πω [] UNCLASSIFIED 


meek GG GERE‏ ا 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Secretary, 
- CIA Management Committee 


, SUBJECT , 5 Project TWO-FOLD 


1. This memorandum sets forth а recommendation for your 
approval in paragraph 5. 


2. For the past several years, this office has been support- 
ing the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) by spot- 
ting, assessing, and recruiting personnel to form an internal 
security unit whose primary mission is the detection of corruption 
within the BNDD. Subsequent to the recruitment and training stage, 
the individuals selected are turned over to the Chief Inspector of 
BNDD for operational guidance and handling in their various dom- 
estic assignments. š 


3. Recently, this Agency has extended this activity by 
supporting BNDD in the covert acquisition of individuals who are 
hired as Staff Agents utilized under nonofficial cover and directed 
against the principal international drug traffickers. These indi- 
viduals are true employees of the BNDD and, although all admin- 
istrative details relative to their employment are handled within 
the Agency, they are unaware of any Agency involvement. 


4. Itis felt at this time that a reaffirmation of our support 
to BNDD in Project TWO-FOLD is necessary and desirable. 


5. Therefore, itis recommended that approval be granted 
for the continuation of Project TWO-FOLD as originally approved 
by the Director of Central Intelligence on 12 February 1971. 


PA a | 


Director offSécurity - 


00056 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Project TWO-FOLD 


APPROVED: * 


DISAPPROVED: 


Distribution: 

Orig. - Return to OS 
1-ER ` | 
1 - IG 


* Per Mr. Colby's recommendation and 

' ОСТ concurrence, terminate paragraph 
2 activity and continue paragraph 3 only 
аз the activity pertains to foreign assign- 
ments to collect narcotics intelligence 


‚ abroad. Copy furnished IG. 


en 


I EVANS 
O/ ES 
48 Мау 1373 


00057 


MORI DoCID: 1451843 


LI Xem ctl рр 


“ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET б, 


š i] εφ... ρωσ З | ] ы. лү 


Oe ee РР Р a-‏ نپ سس سے пса ram‏ ہے س ور 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 


EXTENSION NO. 


FROM: 


pe ee, СЕЕ Е E - | й May 1973 


ТО: (Officer designation, room number, and DATE - 
building} л лы NM OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom 
κ ος επ. INITIALS fo whom. Όταν o line across column after eoch comment.) 


00058 - 


i62, 


оо бив KT sPwgr CI CONFIDENTIAL C] Г] UNCLASSIFIED. 


MEM — — r Y 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- 
Е - ` 


| | MEMORANDUM 1 FOR THE RECORD 


| Е І SUBJECT: б ні. Office of Security Survey ` à Sa 


1. Atthe Director's instractión, and with the concurrence " 
of the then DD/P, the Office of Security developed informants in || 
RID to report on the activities of RID employees on whom security ` 
questions Най arisen. , This program, which included upwards of a. 
dozen informants at its peak, has declined to its present level of ... 
three, only one dis whom i is reporting reges on matters of current. 


` interest, P P M αι, es до s= ` 


2. The ee object of Security!s овен б this 2 " 
informant is a female who was employed in RID for a number of | years : 
until she resigned in 1969. Нег resignation coincided with the initiation 
of a security review on her by the Office of Security, but Security does τ 
not know whether the employeg was aware of Ee security review at. 
the time of her πο MA TE TT CUNT e d 


| 
1 


003. Security! 5 Пейер: in 1 this employed w was: ‘occasioned by . 
reports that she had developed an increasingly intimate acquaintance 
with a Cuban national, Reporting by one informant, who was also. 
being developed by. the Cuban, SHEBESLER that the Cuban might hav 
an intelligence interest in the female, ; The same informant also вибо 
| sequently reported that the Cuban had 1 numerous ‘other: contacts among ` i 
`. clerical and secretarial employees of the Agency. . == 


dE 12 РІ 
р. Subsequent t o her πε from the. Agency, t 


capacity. she solicited business among. СТА employees; “especially ps 
.those requiring passport photos. , Recently, she and the Cuban sought 
to employ pur 5 informant in this business On a. part-time basis.. 


O — —n Í narsa 


MORI DocTD: 1451843 


5. Information on the background of the Cuban is fairly extensivë, 
but it is inconclusive. He is known to have been a member of anti- 
Castro organizations in this country. There are also reports that 
his mother was imprisoned in Cuba at one time. "There are other 
episodes in his life that suggest intelligence involvement on his part 
with some hostile service, but this is not yet definitely established. 


6. The Office of Security has had at times a second informant 
in this case. His reporting has tended to confirm reporting by the 


principal informant. 


8. The Office of Security has been running this operation for 
over two years, in an effort to obtain conclusive proof of its intelli- 
gence nature. СІ Staff has been kept informed.. The FBI, which 
was informed of the case at an early stage, has declined to take re- 
sponsibility for it, on grounds that it concerns CIA's internal security. 
As a result, the Office ofSecurity has been inhibited in the actions 
it can take against the. Cuban suspect. On the other hand, Security 
has not taken any action against Agency employees for fear of com- 
promising the operation. 


9. It would appear to me that the Office of Security has dallied 
with this case long enough. Apparently unable through positive measures 
to resolve doubts about the case, O/S has followed the course of watch- | 
ful waiting, hoping the Cuban would take precipitadt action himself that i 
would give us the evidence we seek. In the meantime, our knowledge U 
of the relationship between the Cuban and the several other current 
Agency employees with whom he is known to have contact continues 


000690 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


The possibility that the employee. m SE Division may be passing 
information on CIA's Soviet operations is too great to warrant further 
‘in moving against her. 


00061 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


q Uy 1913 


Memorandum to: The Inspector General 
Subject: Office of Security Survey ¬ Office of Security Support to BNDD 


1. In December 1970 Robert Ingersoll, head of the Bureau of Nar- 
cotics and Dangerous Drugs, asked Mr. Helms if the Agency could give 
him sóme assistance in shoring up the internal integrity of the ЗМІЮ, 
According to Ingersoll, the old Federal Bureau of Narcotics had been 
heavily infiltrated by dishcnest and corrupt elements, who were believed 
to have ties with the narcotics smuggling industry. Ingersoll wanted us 
to Паїр him recruit some thoroughly reliable people who could be used, 
“not only as special agents in his various offices around the country, 
bub also to serve as informants on the other BNDD employees in these 
offices. з 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


JOLawrence 


00063 


i 
i 
i 
1 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


C] (οι. BENTIAL [] SECRET 


T] URCLASSIFIED 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


FROM; EXTENSION - - NO. 
. Howard J. Osborn ты о с оозу - - Us 
Director of Security САТЕ 

TO: (Officer designation, room number, and DATE 


building) OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number eoch comment fo show from whom 
τν RECEIVED INITIALS to whom. Draw а line ocross column ofter each comment.) 


t: Deputy y Director for = potes: 
Management & Services | au 


` 00064 
ADMIN - 


-a ΡΗΤΗ SECRET Ut CONFIDENTIAL RK] RFA, [Г] UNCLASSIFIED. 


ПР ا د‎ i xb کا‎ mo iie NL за змне» ae που ніц a ы ово Feast vtm te i. ater 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


s. 
= B о 
" H T ΠΡ 

ΗΝ ΠΝ 


9 May 1975 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management §. Services 


SUBJECT ` 37 Press Allegations re Use of Agency 
Polygraph 


1. This memorandum is for your information only 
and confirms a report I made to you by telephone earlier 
today. 


2. On 22 July 1971, an article was carried on 
American proposals relative to the SALT talks in The New 
York Times over the by-line of William Beecher. It was 
devastatingly accurate and contained direct quotes from 
a Presidential advisory memorandum the White House had 
sent to Mr. Gerard Smith, Director, Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency, a few days.earlier. The President 
was alleged to be furious with this unauthorized dis- 
closure of classified information and directed a. sweeping 
investigation within the United States Government to 
determine the source of the disclosure. Investigation 
was condncted under the. directgon of, Mr. Egil Krogh and 
Mr. David Young, Staff Assistant#® to Mr. John Ehrlichman, 
Counsel to the President for Domestic Affairs. 


3. On the basis of investigations. conducted by 
State Security and Defense officials, four individuals-- 
one individual in the Department of Defense and three 
individuals in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency-- 
мете tabbed as leading suspects. Мт. Egil Krogh contacted 
me on 26 July 1971 and requested that we arrange to polygraph 
the three suspects in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
and volunteered the information that the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation would be asked to polygraph the. one „ш: 
in the Department of Defense. 


RAL USE ONLY 


00065 


a s=sasssssssssemaGss mau EE E X) 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Bt БО РОГУ ЗУ РО Е ode UM 
Dicto MARV ΣΑ. т. мі bithi 


4. I informed Mr. Krogh that from time to time 
in matters involving the national security the Agency had 
detailed to Mr. б. Marvin Gentile, Director of State 
Security, a polygraph operator and a polygraph machine for 
his use in polygraphing State Department employees who 
were recipients of allegations concerning their loyalty. 
I emphasized that this procedure had the Director's 
approval and that State clearly understood that the examin- 
ation was their total responsibility. I further informed 
him that this was the only way we could undertake to enter- 
tain his request and that even then it would require the 
specific approval of the Director. Mr. Krogh asked me to 
obtain such approval and work out such arrangements with 
Mr. Gentile. 


5. Later that same day, Mr. Krogh called Mr. Gentile 
and inquired as to whether the arrangements had been made. 
Mr. Gentile indicated they had and suggested that the same 
polygraph operator be used to examine the Defense suspect. 
Mr. Krogh informed Mr. Gentile that he considered this an 
excellent idea and that he.would instruct Defense officials 
to make their man available to Mr. Gentile LE a polygraph 
examination. 


The polygraph 
E our men and the 
results of the examinations were forwarded over my signature 
to Mr. Gentile on 29 July 1971. А copy of my covering : 
memorandum is attached. 


© 7. Mr. Murrey Marder, a staff writer for The 
Washin ton Post, in an article dated 3 September 1971, 
stated that a State Department spokesman had acknowledged 
at a news briefing that agents of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation had polygraphed State Department employees 


suspected of leaking information on the SALT talks in 
July. . Mr. John Edgar Hoover, then Director of the Federal 


ADMINISTRE 


Y 00066. 


СЕБЕ ee ES 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Bureau of Investigation, denied this allegation in a 
letter to The Washington Post and said that the polygraph 
examinations had been conducted by another agency. Specu- 
lation centered around the Agency, but after a day or so, 
press speculation in this regard died away. 


: 8. Mr. Marder apparently has never been satisfied 
and has been pressing Mr. Charles Bray, State Department 
spokesman, for confirmation of Agency involvement. Mr. 
Bray learned today that Mr. Marder plans to use a press. 
conference to be held at 2:00 p.m. this afternoon to press 
this point further. Mr. Bray has been given guidance by 
Mr. Gentile to avoid confirmation but if this is impossible 
he will indicate the examinations were conducted by State 
Department Security officials utilizing an operator and 
а machine detailed to the Department for this purpose. I 
do not know whether or not the fact that the government-wide 
investigation was directed by Mr. Egil Krogh is known to 
Mr. Marder but I suspect that it is and that this is the 
reason why the matter has been raised again. Мт. David 
Young was instrumental in pushing my office to conduct an 
internal Agency investigation of this disclosure and the 
.White House was satisfied.that no Agency employee was 
the source. 


Director 


Attachment 


Jis TE ONDY е 


00067 


АОМІНІЬТАА НЕ 


με... r; 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` 00068 


1451843 


i ‘ 
KR] * 
a . - š , 5 
H ' 5 
о. а 
8 са ` B 
- . “ἡ 
tá і 
d + 
© I 
- : . V 
ubi E P. 
. ye k. М t . 
5 f | 5 | t ` 
3 
i E 2 e~t 4} у ; 
Р | μὲ ΔΑ А a а | 
οἱ ἃ RE 2 ted 
uod ET m 
ο αλ "n ti m 
? oS A і n 
UPS ta A u 
τν μι e 
SQ TIN MEN а ‚ 
Ы Жол H М p 4 H 
єї, m H «б ΐ 
CB B 12 
* жы AD na д\ # 
чо ὃν ХО 
Gn п P - 
пом αἱ ] * 
` «ta; й, 2) . 
fe ony P οἱ ES ‘ 
web oe [o as 8 А і 
τ (Y ae Ὁ A - 
4} 
te `, . | 
ХУ А : "1 
it a 
1 «s А 
=r t) 
' zi 5 
— fee 44 
ГА . 
fet * 
Й їз % * 
t) ~ 
o К 
I^ 
et 
г 
РД fe y 
. © : i2 А | 
| σι e wt Αλ 
: s 
. - 
of . I 
А * с 


Сә І :-: | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


5 fune 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General 


SUBJECT : Items in John Clarke Memorandum 
i to the Director of Central Intelligence, 
dated 9 May 1973 


l. Two items in the attached memorandum had not 
previously been reported. The first: "-- Use of CIA funds 
and facilities to for FBI and pro- 
vision of technical equipments 
against a 


2. Ina follow-up meeting with Mr. Clarke, he advised 
that involved here was the use of funds appropriatedfor CIA 
being given to the F BI in cashiers checks for the purpose of 


There was also 
Further, other 


gency help given in 


CIA monies in cashiers checks were given to NSA-who, with 
some ssistance, was working on 
Mr. Clarke said he thoug e only problem 


here was in the use of funds, not in the operation. He thought 
the only source of additional information on this subject was 
Mj — Jet the DDO/CT Staff. | 


3. The second item: "-- Use of CIA funds to help 
State Department defer Presidential representational expenses 
of President Lyndon B. Johnson's trip to Southeast Asia." 


4. Mr. Clarke said the total amount of money requested 
by State Department was $3,000,000 but that the Director would 
not agree to this amount. The Director did supply funds in 
those instances where some operational activity was involved or 
could be inferred, i.e., 


| Mr. Clarke was not sure of the amount of Agency 


OEE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


funds used, He felt that only Colonel White could supply 
additional details. He said Senator Russell and Repre- 
sentative Mahon were advised of this Agency activity but 
asked not to be briefed in detail. 


nsp 


Attachment 


00071 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


9 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


SUBJECT : Per your instructions 


1. Ihave no recollection of specific contacts with the 
Ellsberg case, Watergate, or Young. Dick Helms' instructions 
at the time regarding discussion of Hunt's previous employment 
should be a matter of record. | 


2. Other activities of the Agency which could at some point 
raise public questions should they be exposed and on which Bill 
Colby is fully conversant are: 


-- Cl activity of Dick Ober, рр/о, 


== an investments and 
accumulation of Government capital. 


- Use of CIA funds and facilities to acquire U.S. 
real estate for FBI and provision of technical 


en = не for use against 


-- Use of CIA funds to help State Department defer. e 
Presidential representational expenses of L. B. J. «αγ 
trip to SEA. ; C 


n M. Clarke 


00072 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


5 June 1973 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General 
SUBIECT : Items in John Clarke Memorandum 


to the Director of Central Intelligence, 
dated 9 May 1973 


1. Two items in the attached memorandum had not 
previously been reported. The first: "-- Use of CIA funds 
and facilities to acquire U.S. real estate for FBI and pro- 
vision of technical equipments by NSA or use 

_ against a 


2. In a follow-up meeting with Mr. Clarke, he advised 
that involved here was the use of funds appropriatedfor CIA 
being given to the FBI in cashiers checks for the purpose of 


gency help given in . | Further, other 
CIA monies in cashiers checks were given to NSA who, with 


some assistance, was working v a 
Mr. Clarke said he thoug € only problem 
ere was in the use of funds, not in the operation, He thought | 


the only source of additional information on this subject was 
Mr. Γι م‎ the DDO/CI Staff. 


3. The second item: "-- Use of CIA funds to help 
State Department defer Presidential representational expenses 
of President Lyndon B. Johnson's trip to Southeast Авіа." 


4. Mr. Clarke said the total amount of money requested 
by State Department was $3,000,000 but that the Director would 
not agree to this amount, The Director did supply funds in 


those instances where some operational activity was involved or 
could be inferred, e| | 
[| Mr. Clarke was not sure of the amount of Agency 


——— Í e ος 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


funds used. He felt that only Colonel White could supply 
additional details. He said Senator Russell and Repre- 
sentative Mahon were advised of this Agency activity but 
asked not to he briefed in detail, 


nspector 


Áttachmen t 


ο” μμ  µ-ω QTTI IIT DI n aOoopls uk ÚQ 
| MORI DocID: 1451843 | 


[] JC ASSIFIED ΒΝ i |] CON AA 


—— аз аа емна о а а, 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 


FROM: TTT TTT TTT TTT ΕΜΕΝΑΙΟΝ , 


Director of Finance 
1212 Key Building E 
: 7 May 1973 


TO: (Officer designation, room number, and 
building} ° OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom 


INITIALS to whom. Draw o line across column after each comment) 


RECEIVED 


FORWARDED 
Deputy Director for 
Management & Services 


EE ΗΕ 


ПОРИ ae жэй اا‎ 


——————(———— 


і ге оз» Lane "EE 5 
| se. 610 "8508" P3-sECRET.. [T CONFIDENTIAL [J ΜΕΝΑ, [7] UNCLASSIFIED .. 
—— μμ νομος μυ 


l a —————rnr  Ὃ- 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


< d 
-— 
~ 
E 
νε 
. I 
: i 
z Н 
i 
і 
` 
< 
$ 
? 
* 
3 iR t 
© be 
t 
| n 
| E 
τ 
$. 
м 
w 


K h YÇaàa,p,ÚywéH,hh,lpÇ,ozü<àFYI./W-IIIKOIIII<Éé4 NN ВН 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


0 MAY 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director-of Central Intelligence 


VIA : Deputy Director for Management and Services 
FROM | : Director of Finance 
SUBJECT Є Special Other Government Agency Activities 


Colonel White, Executive Director- 


. 5, Detailees.- The Agency has reimbursable and non” 
reimbursable agreements with the White House, Department of 
Justice, Defense Agencies, etc., based on signed memoranda 
between the Director of Personnel and the various Agencies. 


4. Project TWOFOLD - Reimbursement from Bureau of 
Narcotics ыш Dangerous Drugs for training of BNDD agents by 
а domestic Agency Security proprietary. 


мӣ} 


MORI DocID: 


SUBJECT: Special Other Government Agency Activities 


: 6. Payment to White House - Reimbursement to White 
House as approve y Executive Director-Comptroller for 
$33,655.68 representing cost of postage, Stationery and 
addressing of replies to letters and telegrams received 
by the White House as a result of the President's speech 


on Cambodia in May 1970. 


1451843 


μπιν, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` 07 MAY 1573 


. MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Ceatral Intelligence 


VIA + Deputy Director for Мапаредопі and Services 
FRO : Director of Finances ' | 
SUBIECT : (Special Other Government Agency Activities 


в, [4 -g 2. 
LXOcutiyo фігосчото 


‘3.  Detailees - The Agency has reimbursable and non- 
Teimbursabic agreements with the White Mouse, Departiacat of 
Justice, Defense Agencies, etc., based on signed nezoranda 
between the Director of Personnel and the various Agencies. 


. 


4. Project FHOFOLD - Reimbursement fron Bureau of. 
Narcotics anu Dangerous Drugs for training of BNDD agents by 
а donestic Agency Security proprietary. i j 


Ju Te "i, E" ΝΕ 


CO a i w w S S 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Special Other Government Agency Activities 


6. Payment to White House - Reimbursement to White 
House as approved by Executive Director-Conptroller for 
$33,655.68 representing cost of postage, stationery and 
addressing of replies to letters and telegrams received 
Бу the White House as a result of the President's speech 


on Cambodia in May 1970. 


(signed) Thomas B. Yale 


Thomas B. Yale 
Director of Finance 


SE ; = ч | 00080 


— n. 


Ww ТЕ συ 
| MORI DocID: 1451843 


07 MAY 1973 


HEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intollizence 

VIA. ро Deputy Director for Management and Services 
FROM | : Director of Finance 

SUBJECT ; Special Other Government Agency Activitios 


Colonel White, Executive Director- 


zm 3. Detailees - The Agency has reimbursable and non- 
reimbursable agreements with the White House, Department of 
Justice, Defense Agencies, etc., based ón signed memoranda 

between the Director of'Personnel and the various Agencies. 


4. Project TWOFOLD - Reimbursement from Bureau of 
Narcotics an angerous Drugs for training of BNDD agents by 
a domestic Agency Security proprietary. : 


5. 


Oooo O 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Special Other Government Agency Activities 


L 


6. Payment to White House - Reinbursenent to White 
House as approved by Executive Director-Conptroller for 
$33,655.68 representing cost of postage, stationery and 
addressing of replies to letters and telegrams received 
by the White House as a result of the President's speech 
on Canbodia in May 1970. 


(signed) Thomas B. Yale 


Thomas B. Yale 
Director of Finance 


00082 


і 


epeetan ç amg seem ais ἐν. 


і 
| 


1. 
2. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


By ШЕР ED ` Os Е Ом [] соме чим З чет 
` У ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET - i 
SUBJECT: (Optional) a ES 
aa چ ی ت ی‎ LE 
Deputy Director of Finance D. E _ 
1212 Ке Buildin | | DATE pene -— 
: н 24 May 1973. 


ТО: [Officer designation, room rumba, ond 
building) - 


DATE 


OFFICER'S 
INITIALS 


RECEIVED | FORWARDED 


FORM 


3-42. t 0 d 


COMMENTS (Number each comment lo show from whom 
to whom. 


Drow a line across column offer each comment.) 


————————————————————— 


Attached are pertinent 
documents and papers relating 
to Para 6 of the Director of 
Finance's memo to the DCI 
dated 7 May 1973, Subject: 


"Special Other Government 


Agency Activities" 


Atts 


А sss Án ORE RM ceu DN DR AEN E E E | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


oe, ον. š ——M—— 


FEN 


Mr, Magnusson's phone conversation with Мс. John Brown at approximately 10:20 
on 26 May 1970; 


B: Guess we're back together egatni 

M: Cot more problems? 

B: Yes, don't know now much Watts told you. 

M: I didn't talk to Watts. Think he called Colonel White. 


B: Let me explain background. As a result of the Cambodia speech, we're 
getting relatively inundated with correspondence and normally all of 
this is sent to the Department of State for answering. What we're 
doing -- we're continuing to send all cons | correspondence | to State. 
However, the President made determination | he'd like to answer r support 
over his Signature here and we asked the Department of State to 
Support us on this effort. They're in' & position wnere they can provide 
only limited support at this time. They're committed for $10,000 which 
would кену handle in the агеа of maybe 60, 000 responses. i 

мін кён ел 


M: How many responses altogether counting pros and cons? 
B: The cons are quite & large group that they're handling themselves also. 


M: Are they going to be handling pros too? 


В: 90002 is. Por: .Ppros. They' те doing cons, On pros they can pick up oniy 


M 


looks like аб ‘reseni time we've got over 100, 57000 responses in and 1% 
could go upwards of 150,000 or greater. Looks like we'll need & minimum 
of another $10,000, probably Th area of $15,000, additional. This covers 
cost of printing, j postage and addressing. | 


М: Just printing, postage апа addressing? Not any overtime for апу salaries 
or auything like that? - 


B: . No, the posting of the things we'll do ourselves -- by hand. No problem. 
We're talking about physical costs of job -- cost of stamps, cost of 
envelopes and cards, and cost of having them addressed by outside firm. 
We'll handle putting stamp on, inserting, and sealing and mailing. Only 
talking about cost associated with three aspects of the operation. 


М: Postage, addressing and printing. 


C. . 
B: Yes, reason T asked NSA to see if they could arrange -- depending оп 
how volume goes -- probably another $10,000 to $15,000. 


M: These are just pros? State is handling all cons themselves? 


(continued) 


00084 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


, 


, й і | . 
» еч . E 
a Й . А ν.μ 
`. `“ سر و ف‎ f 
à να” 


Messrs. Magnusson and Brown (continued - Page 2) 


B: Yes, this is just portion of pros we're talking about, My understanding 
&et in touch with you to work out mechanics of how we would handle the 
-billing to make sure it's straight and we do it properly so it fits in 
with your accounting system, 


M: This is only portion of pros. tate doing some too? 
N ui c DLE S SO ы е 
й | | 

В: They're contributing $10,000 to the pros as well as doing all the cons. 
They're picking up quite a load as а result of this. Опе hell of a lot 
of response coming in on this. I 

M: Bound to be. Tell Jou, John, let me give you а call back later today 
if T may. Have to take а look about where T would fit this stuff in. 
Are you going to be in this afternoon? 


B: I'll be around. If I'm not in my office I'll get back to you ав soon 
а5 Т come back. і і 


М: I'll give you a call then. 

B: Can't be real definite -- not sure how we're going to peak out. Not 
Sure what backlog is. I'll check into that so when we talk this 
afternoon I can be little more definite. Probably run into that area, — 
I think. і 

M: Okay, I'll get back in touch with you. 


B: Okay, thank you, Warren. 


` End of Conversation 


MM s | 


(continued) 


Mr. Megnusson's phone conversation with Col. White at 15:40 on 26 May 1970: 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


I talked with John Brown today and it seems like -- as you mentioned -- 
as'a result of Cambodia, inquiries going into White House. The State 
Department is doing all the work on the cons -- there are po and cons. 


The State Department is going to answer all the cons and the President has i 
determined that he wants to answer personally all the pros. However, the  . 
State has agreed to pick up some of those too in the amount of $10,000. i 
That will cover maybe 60,000 of the answers, They estimate there's going 

to be from 100,000 to 150,000 answers that will have to be put out by ` 

the White House. Estimate it's going to cost about $8,000 per 50,000. 

Think it might go to 150,000. $10,000 to $15,000 saci tional which the 

White House will have to pay for. The charges are only going to be for 
printing, postage and addressing by an outside firm. No salaries for 

overtime or anything like that. They're going to lick the stamps in the 

White House, paste the stamps on and insert the message into the envelopes. 

John Brown said he had requested NSC to see if they could arrange, ` 

presumably with us, I guess, for another $10,000 to $15,000 depending on 

volume, He was talking as more or less foregone conclusion we would do 

it. I made no commitment. Told him I'd look into it. 


How would we do this? 


We would do it by asking them to pay amount and then send over 1080 

to us with bill for the postage, bill for the addressing of the envelopes ` 
and bill for the printing accompanying this and we would just send check 
back, They would send short memorandum with it certifying these are the 
charges, "NN 


I think we want to know what we spend our money for but І don't think we 
want the public records to:show that we paid for it. 

What we сап do, Sir -- I can ask them to send over а 1080 with certifica- 
tion that these are the charges for classified services per our conversation, 
and if you're willing to take that we can certainly do it that way. 


Will this be an outside firm? Couldn't we just pay the firm? What would 


. be better? I'm not sure. 


I think a short memo just saying attached 1080 is for charges previously 
agreed to between this Agency and themselves and that's all and then we 
send them check for that. Otherwise, there's ΠῚ chance that an outside 
firm might realize it was us paying for it.. 


I guess it's the best way $6 do it. I'd like to have in our records -- 
nobody else has access to -- exactly what it was for -- all about it; 
their records, which are audited by the General Accounting Office, as 
little as possible. 


00085 


s uuu waaaaaaaaa—srsrr s. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Mr. Magnusson and Col, White (continued - Page 2) 


` M: 


W: 


Think I can talk to them and arrange that so he just sends unclassified 
1080. ` | і 

Go ahead and do it. I'll have to sign off on it, I suppose. You go 
ahead and arrange it in way that will give us full record, As far as 
any recorüs of their's are concerned, I would prefer to have minimum. 


I can write memo and John Browh can refer to this and our phone conversa- 
tion in a memo accompanying the 1080. 


Oxay, go ahead and do it. Put limit on it. When they talked to me they 
said $10,000. 


He said $10,000 to $15,000 because tney're just pouring in. Might run 
above $10,000, T | 


Approximately $10,000 but in no case will it exceed $15,000 -- something 
like that. Okay. | i 


All right, Sir. 


Thank you, Warren. 


End of Conversation 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


з БЕ A τω 
Mr, Magnusson's phone conversation with Mr. John Brown at approximately 17:00 
on 26 May 1970: 
M Think we can go ahead and do this. Have to be careful as to way this 
is documented -- that's the only thing. Would like to suggest that I 
write memo for the record -- kind of co-sign it -- agreeing to amount 


and so forth and the way we do this. Memo would have in it what it's 
for and then you would send us a 1080 for this, referencing this memo 
and our conversation. 


B: You're thinking in terms of reimbursing us again? Wouldn't it be 
better Tor us to have direct charge to you? 


M: No, beeause of public record. In order to have all the things in our 
hands. It wouldn't look good for us to pay the bills direot for this 
sort of. thing. | і 


B It would not? 
M: No, if you people pay the bills ..... 


B; (3nterrupting) Even to pay & large postage fee? Bulk of expense will 
be postage. tos | : | 


M: But we have to document what it's for -- if you people can just pay it, 
' then we'll give you money for it. 


В: What would our memo say? 

M: Say attached is 1080 referencing memo dated such and such. 
B: ‘What does the memo say -- that we're making reference to? 
M: Т'11 write that up and bring over to you. 

B: What, basically, аге we going to say it's about? . 


M: „Have $10,000 with limit of $15,000 and would be for printing of these - 
things and so on. 


B: Just wondering if you have direct billing it seems to me that serves 
purpose of memorandum. ES 


M: The direct billing from, let's вау, the printer, the addressograph 
company or something like that, to us might raise questions outside 
&nd I think powers that be don't want to have fact that we're paying 
for this sort of thing anyplace where it can be dug up. Easiest and 
cleanest way to do this is you people go ahead and pay and we'll 
reimburse you immediately. й 


В: Do we have to have this memo? 


00088 


(continued) 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ыыт 


Messrs, Magnusson and Brown (continued - Page 2) ` 


I'd keep in my safe here, 
Wouldn't it be adequate to send 10807 


Don't forget, you people keep copies of 1080's -- you have to by 
law. 1080 would have to cite what billing is for because of that, 
then that would open up to GAO or somebody else as to who's paying 
for this sort of thing. 


We have to cite what it's for? 

Let's say it's "XYZ Printing Company" and you pay bill. This looks 
like you're paying it. You send us 1080 which says nothing and we 
give you money for this. We ourselves have to have on our records 
what we're paying for for our own auditors which doesn't get outside 
of our Agency. | | 


It's for your internal auditors? It would not get outside? Okay, 
that sounds all right. : 


1'11 draw the memo up and bring it over there and you can see it. 

That sounds good, Warren. 

Would next Monday be all right with that memo? 

Yes, we'll go ahead and order. 

You can get going and so on. 

Don't know what final cost is going to be. Hate to restrict ourselves. 
We figure total cost is going to be around $25,000.. Got over 100,000 
already that are just pro. 200,000 that haven't been analyzed yet. 


Of 200,000 they estimate possibly upwards of 50,000 or 60,000 could 
pertain to Cambodia. Of the backlog of 200,000, 60,000 could be of 


ctype that will be answered in this mailing. Our best estimate would 


be it may run over. 
I've got instructions, John, to indicate in memo that it's for 
approximately $10,000 but not to exceed $15,000. If and when it 


exceeds $15,000, we'll start over again and I'll inquire further as 
to whether we can cover the other -- okay? 


Okay. 


Open to negotiation if it runs higher. 


(continued) 


ηηηνννννννννννννννννναε.'”'.'.'.'.'.'......--...........  . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SETEM ! 
Messrs. Magnusson and Brown (continued ~ Page 3) 
B: T$ may run higher. If 60,000 letters come out being pro, vill take 


_ us to $26,000 or somewhere in that vicinity. 


M: Then I'd have to go back and inquire to see if powers that be will 
cover the otner part. think it's best to wait 'til that happens, 


B: Okay, good enough. 

M: What time Monday? 

B: Why don't you give us call here Monday? My secretary will line it up. 
M: Okay. 


B: Thank you, Warren. 


End of Conversation 


00090 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


wean? ^L EN TPG AUN 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20505 


8 ЈИ 1970 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Reimbursement to the White House for Certain 
mE Printing, Postage and Addressing Expenses 


1. Reference is made to the telephone conversation between 
Mr. John Brown, Staff Secretary, White House, and the undersigned 
concerning the accounting and the reimbursement procedure for 
White House expenditures in connection with the printing, postage 
and addressing of replies to certain mail addressed to the President. 


2. It was estimated amd agreed that these expenditures would 
amount to approximately $10,000, but not exceed $15,000, and the 
request for reimbursement to this Agency would be based upon receipt 
of а memorandum categorizing the expenses.and certifying to their 
validity. The memorandum will also transmit a Standard Form 1081 
-and copies of the vendors’ invoices where applicable. 


3. Upon receipt of the above memorandum, Standard Form 1081 
and copies of vendors' invoices, a U. 8. Government Treasury check  , 
will be drawn and forwarded to the White House. Ἢ 


4 


WARREN D. USSON 
Deputy Director for Liaison and Planning . 
Office of Finance 


00091 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


= 


44 AUG 1873 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Reimbursement to the White House for Certain Printing, 
Postage and Addressing Expenses 


1. On 18 August 1970, the undersigned received а telephone call 
from Mr. John Brown (145-2167) advising that the mailing had been 
heavier than anticipated (increased to 250,000 pieces) and that the 
dollar requirement for subject purpose had increased from $15,000 to 
$25,000. 


2. I apologetically advised Mr. Brown that since our records 
showed that prior approval was limited to $15,000 I would have to 
advise and confirm with my superiors that the increase to $25,000: 
was acceptable, as Т was sure it was. 


3. In the absence of Col. White (on leave), Mr. Bush immediately 
contacted Mr. Clarke, who was not in his office. Оп 19 August, 
Mr. Clarke telephonic pproved the increased level and Mr. Brown 
was duly informed, ; 


Chief, 


00092 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


THE WHITE HOUSE 


WASHINGTON: 


` . September 10, 1970: 


Dear Mr. Magnusson: 


Pursuant to your telephone call to Mr. John Brown regarding the 
breakdown of costs in connection with the mailing of the Acknowledgement 
Cards concerning The President's Speech on The Situation in Southeast 
Asia, the following costs were incurred: I 


Computer Marketing Industries, Inc. $ 12,746.15 
Acknowledgement Cards 3,185.07 
Envelopes . 1,051.20 


Total - | $ 16,982.h2 


Sincerely yours, 


Carson M: Howell 
` Administrative Officer 


Mr. Warren D. Magnusson 

Deputy Director for Liaison and Planning 
ffice of Finance 

Central Intelligence Agency 

Washington, D. C. : 


00093 


3, 


πο... 


— ——! 9 MáÓ—  — ου S S Cr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` ` 
. 
* ار‎ "— + 
K ч Gr; 
1 Ὁ 5ΕΡ 1573 
Qr Ga Ta Me ладу эк ee E + Age 
i. νο АДФ FÓR: “ἐν GL ο’ 42417 
tinm peyer πο. 
το M а Eus ia К 


ТУГА 


ie ee : бедиз Дуго, 
ENS 
а 5. "TS ix 4 4 Е hd.) oW S4. 17.24 á 
le Attached hereto is сас "lois Cub ted ive tho Vnite Hess 


M rv tn 
for miling exponses. | : : 


2. It is requested thst the ov 
coyvoved and certified as 


‘ile office for poyncnt. 


sinal VOCE be noninis 
ἢ г OF Dands ond returned 19 


04 i tale. DIE Τι τ. tur akay q 
Deputy Director for Liniran and Tlnoning 
Office of Кіпопає 


EUN PS 
хойтамоє 
на 


й from Му. Howoll 
utd LO-fept 1270 
ср "1081 (зн ond 2) 


F 


L. 
2.0 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


15 SEP 970 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Planning, Programming and Budgeting 


SUBJECT :: Reimbursement to the White House for Certain 
Printing, Postage and Addressing Expenses 


REFERENCE а Memorandum for the Record; dated 2l August 1970, 
same subject 


1. Attached hereto is accounting submitted from the White House 
for mailing expenses. і 


2. It is requested that the original voucher be administratively 
approved and certified as to the availability of funds and returned to 
this office for payment. 3 а 


WARREN р, MACNUSSON А 
Deputy Director for Liaison and Planning: 1" 
* Office of Finance 


Attachments 


Memo from Mr. Howell : OF or 
dtd 10 Sept 1970  . 
SF 1081 (orig апа 2) 
| 72, hot 20 


00095 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


τ. ἃ, 
` x ; үчкө та керү обыпргпк . 
Ate піно Porm so, 105 ΝΗ foe ГРО εδ : 
EN 1010 i Урлан soU σου ιτ Э.О. Ne... NE 
тр - ΠΗ "n 5Η —— l—— M 
EPIS Or WITHDRAWALS ARD CREDIS 


"Ви, Мо, 


ка ed) -- 


тив οσο) 


any 
ee tun us 
се bilied) (D. O. symbol) . Dis 


You ага authorized to effect the withdrawals and credits indicated below. 


hee) D. ©. syinbol) 


WITHORAW Ἐποτῆ-- . Í| 
DEPARTMENT Deraantwsnr Executive Office of the Presi: 
BEREAU i BUREAU The Wnite House OfTice 
11-01-0001 ` 
Льопевз ÁbDEEBS Washington, D. C. 20500 
лай Sumsary ee μα unm SUMMARY P йо 


REFERENCE APPROPRIATION OR FUND SYUBOL . ` AMOUNT 


[Алкоо | 
Ἴ NE 1100110.001 -> $16,982.. 


` REFERENCE APPROPRIATION OR FUND бумвої. | | Ашот. | 


+ 


ἐν 
om леш | 16962. 


Details of charges or reference to attached supporting documents 
For the printing of Acknowledgment Cards, Envelopes, and to Keypunch names & addr 
and place on magnetic tape and the preparation of heat transfer labels and affixi 
to envelopes, in connection with the acknowledging of mail concerning the’ Preside 
speech on the Situation in Southeast Asia. і "od 


For use of office billed: | А 
I certify funds are avai ας. 


For use of billing office; 


І ній that the items listed herein аге correct апа proper ‘for р: opriation(s) designated. 


τ (Date) . (Authorized administrative or eerily ing ollicer) 
νιν мша гаа 
C/D No. . m, З= ш == = 


tr U- S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1961-607821 


Paid by check No. 


E 
НИ рр i 
£ --- 
15 хе 
Candi ynolo vo 


^ut MM 
‘ ЧОЛА ДА FG 


m 


2. Тиїв disv 


3. ALL бос 


- 
in this office T 


or 


VU 


ον босу 


üt MC 
УСУ 


X PCT 


ic га 


c 


¿ras am 


"ЕЛ 


mens σεν 


КК‏ ی 


t 


є 
wr Pew. 


enaro 


Гыл To эү 


Tle as follows 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEL auus 
«СД 


тім Us nol 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


-. mens 


Hr. John Brown й А 
Staff 5 А і ` 
The White House Office | 
Washingten, D. C. 26500 


Dear Mr. Drown: 


: % 1-- Enclosed is U. 8. Treasury Check No. in the amount 
i y 


ої 516, $82.42 which represents reimburserment o 


Nof | copy enclosed. J This schedule was forwarded to this 


Office by Mr. Carson M. Howell, Administrative Officer, on 


10 September 1970. 


Yours very truly, 


De кол. for visis son and Planning 
š `. Office of Finance 
"auxi eet one Nee 
^s be з . = Coua: πέν ДА ue ος 
й | Й | (алысы. < PULS VA OL 
| Enclosures | ' Aetas atoa PR { 2, бю 
: š * . И ча) Aei Ata „|, mur. Beer’ a 


- à 
em | ! Cet: 70) عه‎ Earn rnb, 2 іш путч 
l . c : E xe nu 
: Roa d AL νε. ышы 


-οἳ 
T ο, 


τα B ^а РОИ А ЈА -{- төм “ΕΞ E 
| Rd «Аса СИ ML 7 
| | Katt رطمم‎ <— “ d- fex 
А 
Ир АСА 
i BALAN EN Ж à D 
| і 00098 RO JV ہارب‎ al + Cw ND 
exor ο 


Я f ros < | 

ELTE Tua. 
LM. f 

"- д a 5 


aan 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


THE WHITE HOUSE 
WASHINGTON 
December 7, 1970 


CONFIDENTIAL 


MEMORANDUM FOR: WARREN MAGNUSON 


We have finally received the cost breakdown for acknowledging 

the mail in connection with the President's Speech on the situation 

in Southeast Asia. By copy of this memorandum I am requesting 

our administrative office to forward that portion of the bill applicable 
to you, ` 


If there are any problems in handling this, please let me know. 


Thank you, 


TIEA 
JOHN R. BROWN ПІ | 


ος: Carson Howell 


00099 , 


ا کو م سے ПРЕ mem жены‏ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Keypunch names, place on magnetic tape 
prepare and affix to envelopes heat ' 
transfer labels, and furnish printout. $7,410.35 


` ` Print acknowledgment Cards 2,244.27 
Print Envelopes. | | | . 728,00 
Postage | - 6,290.64: 

$16,673.26 


aT 


^" че 


ο ра а 


C” C a a a aaa <Ña —n—sssr rr Wi 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Planning, Programming and Budgeting 


SUBJECT * Reimbursement to the White House for Certain 
і Printing, Postage and Addressing Expenses 


REFERENCE : Memorandum for the Record, dated 24 August 1970, 
same subject : 


1. Attached hereto is the second accounting, in the amount of 
$16,673.26, submitted from the White House for mailing expenses, - 
Cueck for the first accounting in the amount of $16,982.42 was 
forwarded to the White House on 2 October 1970. 


2. It is requested that the original voucher be administratively 
approved and certified as to the availability of funds and returned to 
this office for payment, 


Ν 
Deputy Dire 


. GN 
ctor for Liaison Planning 
Office of Finance 


Memo from the White House 
dated 7 Dec 1970 
Memo to D/PPB, transmitting 
155 accounting, dated 15 Sept 70 m eu 
Copy of 185 1081 | 
Memo from the White House 
dated 10 Sept 70 
Memo for the Record dated 2h Aug 70 


Attachments . P OF κ 
SF 1001 (orig & 2 w/att) | : 


00101 


а мн Em ου s= 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


. ь 4 


NUS слот Мб, FARE ро 
Mar pudo ом + М V ο. 2. > : 149994 D. О. №. E 
суне . ` OTR AY Mur ΣΠ . UT 
1041-03-16 oc WITHDRAWALS ARD CREDITS 
і ` fu, №. . 
Du, №. - LUE NINE 
зар Өс) 
- . 303 H 
To ο ον E ee PAID BY 
(Disbursing odicer—odice bilied) (D. O. ετιυδοὶ) 


You are authorized to effect the withdrawals and eredits indiented below. 


--- 209. 
SDursing oec пр once, (D. O. symbol) 


Vesuington, D.C, — | 
m О VYSHORAW FROM 

p MP | DEPARTMENT РУ he ryote > + > d 

ГРАЛТМЕНТ | DEPARTMENT Executive Grice ol the resis 

|. 
Bonzau Buneao Tho White House Gilles 
` 14-01-0901 

Apress ‚ ADDRESS washington, п 

DUnrAU SUMMART 


REFERENCE 


ATTROPRIATION OR FUND SYMBOL AMOUNT APPROPRIATION OR FUND SYAt3OL ‘AMOUNT 


1110110,001 


15,675, 85 


Тотм, D داو‎ 12.20 


Details of charges or reference to attached supporting documents 
For the printing of Acknowledgement Cards, Envelopes and Postage for mailinz, 
and to Keypunch names, place on magnetic tape, prepare and afiàx to envol:»os 
heat transfer labels, and furnish printout, in connection with the .аскпоз1ей; ги, 
of mail concerning the President's Second speech on the Situation in zouvneast ; 


See attached list for breakdown of costs. 


For use of office billed: А 
+ < ify funds аго avoilablo, 


For use of billing office: 


ttam 
Hd 


ERTIFICATE OF OFFICE BILLED 


1 certify that the items listed herein are correct and proper for payment from the appropriation(s) designated. 


p | 
або 6, 147 


(Date) 


Paid by check No... Il l aaa CID Νο............................ dated 


w U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1961-607821 


* 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4 
n 
ооң 
Ц ь аж 
г 
s Y Well ar WIR ud ο ГЕЛЕ quu То ба Pe SSS TT PI 
MEMORANDUM FOR: СТїеї, Certification and лісом Division 
aT pee cee ~ * -— E t. 4 > NE We pe 
SU Ji CY foNeinibursenicnt to The White Pouse 
πε 8 ES Se! 4 Y a4 hock in the ar знань вона A е e qoo 
i. Xt ic сареєруса Lint а CACC d «о GU GOD Оз pU Vij ὃν 0 
3 ү wey, τ 5η” ET тот. уко Te tes = 
drawn payable to the Treasurer of the United States. 
2 X H πο ТС чы. ЖЫК ы و‎ ον ial] DP 
2. This dipoursevacnt is chzzzoc55:0 as follows: 
T te 
3. ALL documentation ccaucernioe this transection is berey ОО in 
` - ий . я L4 - 2.1. » TRUM PG á 
this office for security rcascag and is available to the Agency ats morj. 


4. Please forward the check to зліз office for transmittal tu ta 
appropriate official, 


- 


00103 ` 


ا ا a‏ 


MORT DocID: 1451843 


Mr, John R. Brown ПІ 
Stoff Si cretary 

The White House Office 
Washington, D. C. 20500 


Dear Mr. Drown: 


` Enclosed is U. S “Treasury Check Nel pe the 


amount of $16,673.26 which represents reimbursement of Bureau 


Schedule No. EN enclosed, 


Yours very trul 


irector for Liaison and Pl :nning 
ffice of Finance 


Enclosures 


OF 


:::»»»»»""᾿"ῬὄΘΝΝΝΝΘὋΥῪΟ,,ὡ ΙΙΙ d 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


t і Rey 73 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services 
SUBJECT  . : Special Report 


1. This memorandum is in response to a request to 
provide information on situations or associations that 
might appear to be irregular on the surface. 


per se and to components associated intimately with the immediate 
office of the President such as the Council on International 
Economic Policy and the President's Foreign Intelligence 
Advisory Board. We have furnished secretaries, clerical 
employees and certain professional employees on a reimbursable 
and non-reimbursable basis. At the present time, we have no 
clericals or professionals assigned to the immediate White 
House office, but we do have one young man detailed to their 
Communications Section. There are detailees to PFIAB and CIEP. 
I might point out that we had detailed to the White House as 
late as the fall of 1970 couriers, telephone operators, a 
laborer assigned to the grounds and a graphics man who designed 
invitations for State dinners. By October of 1970, more funds 
were apparently available to run the White House and most of 
our detailees were hired as bona fide White House employees. 
CIA is not the only Agency furnishing the White House with 
detailees. -Levies have been made by this Administration and 
others on Defense and State and other Government entities 

whose employees have Top Secret clearances. 


Professional officers have been and are at the present 
time assigned p the National Security Council and we have seven 
clericals on detail to NSC on a reimbursable basis. і 

In addition to the above, we have technical specialists 


detailed to NSA, an instructor at the National War College and 
security officers detailed to the Department of State to 


юни | 


09105: 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


protect foreign visitors. Recently, | {tes detailed 
to the Secretary of the Treasury alon r other Agency 
employees. We have even, in rare instances, detailed our 
people to Congressional Staffs for short periods of time, 


3. Details to the White House and Government Agencies - 
Discussion: Details to NSC, the White House, NSA and the 
National War College are probably quite defensible. On the other 
hand, there may be those who would question Agency employees 
currently working at the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs 
and Mr. Peter Peterson having an Agency employee as.his 
secretary when he was the Secretary of Commerce (she also made 
a trip with him to Moscow). She is still with him in his 
present assignment but we expect that she will report to NSC for 
a new detail sometime this month. served for 
over ten years as Director of the ice or Public Safety for 
AID. This information has been kept "close to the vest" during 
that entire period of time. Не has been approved for disability 
retirement and is presently on sick leave and will retire 
automatically at the expiration of this leave. 


Bach detail of an Agency employee to the White House or 
other Government agency has been carefully considered and 
approval at a higher level obtained when professionals were 
involved. : 


4. Project TWOFOLD: I believe the support we are 
providing to Project TWOFOLD is ап activity that should be 
reported under your guidelines. Since this is an extremely 
sensitive Project and the Office of Security is reporting on 
it, I will not repeat the details in my memorandum. 


5. Individuals Engaged in Doméstic Activities: In a more 
general sense, Contract Personnel Division prepares and executes 
contracts with individuals engaged by the Agency to carry out 
domestic activities. We also process Staff Agents who are 
domestically assigned. None of these assignments are decided 
in OP. I really have no way of knowing with any degree of | 
certainty what the specific duties of these individuals will be. 


еге TT 


.-- 00106 
УГАА 


А т м Ки 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


iENTIAL 


8. Hunt Requests a Lockpicker: This is a record of 
External Employment Assistance Branch's action on a request 
from Howard Hunt for a lockpicker who might be retiring or 
resigning from the Agency. 


Sometime in the spring of 1972, Frank O'Malley of EEAB 
received a call from Howard Hunt who asked Frank if he had a 
retiree or resignee who was accomplished at picking locks. 
Mr. O'Malley sent him a resume on Thomas Amato who retired 

- 31 July 1971. Mr. O'Malley did not document his ЕБАВ record 
to show the date of this exchange, but | (who 
also works in EEAB) opines that it occurred sometime between 
March and May 1972. я 


All of the above information was reported to the Office 
of Security on 4 October 1972 following the FBI's contact with 
the Agency regarding Howard Hunt. і 


9. Resume Sent to McCord: | | . В, бопітасі 
employee who retired in September > Was à Client of the 
External Employment Assistance Branch in his search for a job 
after retirement. One of the leads given to as 
James McCord's security business.  EEAB sent to 
McCord, but ΓΙ. Мм not hired. | 

In mid-summer LU μμ ο BEAB from 
Chicago. (He had a job ет т e Halifax Security Co., 


a lead provided by EEAB, but until this telephone call he had 


00107 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


not notified EEAB that he had the job and had moved from 

the D.C. area.) Не said he had been. visited by a Special 

Agent of the ЕВІ who κο. his resume had been 
rs, 


found among McCord's pape πε Agent wanted to know if 
NEN any connection with McCord. Lp ue 
iow the resume got to McCord. After the Agent Jeft him 


m— tephoned BEAB. ا‎ j“ ОР and[ — ої 
were notified immediately. m 


атту Б. TISHe 
Director of Personnel 


FIBENTIAE | 00108 - 


р т | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


M A^ + s oA M neam tW ene s Дем s... rnm Mesa tm ‚л i... موی‎ өсө чү тө hn . ο + eS Өш 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


СЕРОТОНИН ο. ar 


| SUBJECT: (o ptional) 


Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of Logistics 


FROM: | : EXTENSION Û NO. 


DATE 


Director of Logistics | 2551 14 MAY 1973 


TO: (Officer designation, room number, ond 


building) OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number each: comment to show from whom 


INITIALS fo. whom. Draw a line across column after each comment.) 


EYES ONLY 


1. 

Deputy Director for Manage- 

_ment and Services 
2. 


Director. of Central 
Intelligence i 


00109.. 


πα С] Беске С] CONFIDENTIAL Г] гону ΓΙ UNCLASSIFIED 


є 


«ο š ης EET ч Жа» m H DE ER س‎ 
ود‎ asa. PaT ш, لیس م‎ s. d adem e te ا‎ ο. ο ο e Q a... لتا‎ ο μαι کیم‎ DAL متاق‎ am 05002. ST ы سما‎ o م‎ ЗОМ, moll B ry مید‎ nee A u. рі 


ο... ο вс и 


MORI росІр: 1451843 


14 MAY 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
THROUGH : Deputy Director for Management and Services 


SUBJECT : Sensitive Activities "Performed by the 
Office of Logistics 


1. This memorandum contains information for the Director 
of Central Intelligence. 


2. This memorandum is submitted pursuant to advice given 
by the Deputy Director for Management and Services on 7 May . 
that Office Directors report on activities, either under their i 
cognizance or otherwise known to them, the nature of which 
could possibly need explanation or justification when viewed 
within the statutory responsibility and authority of the 
Director of Central Intelligence. The responsibilities of the 
Office of Logistics (OL) are such that in all matters herein 
reported, except two, the actions undertaken were at the re- 
quest of another Agency component. We have prepared a brief 
description of each action involved and then have included the 
name of the.sponsoring component. The substantive reason for 
the requests for action by.this Office will have to be deter- 
mined by inquiry to the designated sponsoring component. 


3. Facts pertaining to both actions undertaken at the 
initiative of this Office are as follows: 


00110 


сес о ө rn r rr rr 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics 


SECRET. | 00111 


_——————&—&__[_ == rrr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of. 


following items are pertinent: 


Xu 


Logistics 


'the DD/O, we will not honor any requisition for surveil- 


lance equipment unless it has been approved by the e 
Staff of the DD/O. 


4, Within the. area of contraceel responsibilities, the 


a. In February 1971, Colonel L. K. White, the then 


, Executive Director-Comptroller, called me to attend a 


meeting in his office, also attended by Mr. William Colby. 
Colonel White explained that the Technical Services 
Division (TSD) had been requested to provide assistance 

to the FBI for a sensitive project designated (cur- 
rentiy τ ο - White did no is- 
close the purpose 0 е assistance being provided by TSD 
but did instruct me to assist TSD on purely contractual 
matters. Since the Office of Logistics has no information 
concerning the mission or purpose of Project sub- 
stantive questions concerning the subject shou e 
addressed to TSD. Other procurement actions accomplished 
for the FBI are reported below. Specific. mention. is made, 
however, нин Pecause of the dollar magnitude, ap- ` 
proximately million, -and the complex technical equip- 
ment that has been involved in the undertaking. 


b. The Procurement Division, OL, currently has two 
requisitions in hand from TSD which would involve reim- 
bursable sales to the FBI. One such requisition in the 


-amount of $36, 900 is for two Westinghouse television. 


cameras. The second requisition in the amount of $11,200. 
is for two wide-angle surveillance probes manufactured by 
Bausch and Lomb. No action is being taken on either of 
these requirements pending further instructions which 


- will be sought from the дену Director for нае 


and Services. 


c. Over the years, this Agency has often supported 
other Government agencies from a contractual or materiel 
standpoint. Upon the submission of an officially approved 
request, supported by a transfer of funds, the Agency 
would either enter into "accommodation procurements" for 
the requesting agency or support the requesting agency by 
the issuance of materiel from stock. Such actions are 
legally accomplished under the Economy Act of 1925. This 
Act authorizes one agency to support the needs of, or pro- 
vide a service for, another Government agency when such 


00212 


А Ι,  Ὼ τ , 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics 


action would be more economical and eliminate the need for 
one agency of the Government to duplicate facilities 
readily available from another. А typical example of this 
procedure is purchasing photointerpretation gear for the 
Defense Intelligence Agency element located at NPIC. In 
connection with the current reporting requirement, however, 
I have had our records researched for the past 2 years and 
Attachment 1 reflects those transactions which appear to be 
relevant to the subject of this memorandum, 


d. In connection with the disclosures during the sum- 
mer of 1971 that the Rand Corporation was not properly 
safeguarding classified documents, this Office undertook. 
two acts. I directed the Security Officer from our West 
Coast Procurement Office at the Moffet Naval Air Station 
in California to visit the Rand Corporation and satisfy 
himself that classified material furnished. them by the 
Agency was both properly safeguarded and accounted for. 
His report was affirmative. Оп 25 August 1971, the senior 
Security Officer assigned to this Office forwarded a 
letter to the Rand Corporation stressing and reaffirming 
the procedures Rand must follow in safeguarding classified 
information furnished them by the Agency. Of residual 
interest in this matter, there is summarized the contents + 
of a memorandum of 2 July 1971 to the Executive Director- 
Comptroiler from the DD/I which is in our possession. 


This memorandum reports that FBIS regularly 
disseminated reports to the Rand Corporation 
but that instructions had been issued to cease 
distribution of classified reports. While no 
Other direct dissémination went to Rand, other 
USIB agencies, primarily USAF, were passing 
"many" copies of DD/I products to Rand as au- 
thorized under USIB regulations. The memoran- 
dum aiso states that Rand personnel had 
requested searches and document retrieval from 
the CRS facility. 


5. In connection with action taken for the Office of 
Security, there are three relevant items: 


a. The Printing Services Division, OL, was requested 
by the Office of Security to print a book written by 
Harry J. Murphy, Office of Security. The book was pre- 
pared by Mr. Murphy under a Brookings Institution Federal 


SECRET 00113 


MEN Б ы 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics 


Executive Fellowship. The book is entitled "Where's 

What -- Sources of information for Federal Investigators." 
It 15 а full treatise on the existence of sources of in- 
formation that may be useful to an investigator. The 
book's first printing of 300 copies was made in June 1967. : 
Due to demand, а second printing | of 600 copies was made 

in September 1968. The title page of the book gives 
attribution to Mr. Murphy, Office of Security, Central 
Intelligence Agency, and the Brookings Institution Federal 
Executive Fellowship. The book is classified Confidential, 
and it is our understanding that the distribution was made 
to appropriate agencies of the Federal Government. A copy 
of Mr. Murphy's book can be made available for review if 
desired. | 


Sometime in 1972, a representative of the Law 
Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) requested 
that the Agency give consideration to our publishing, at 
LEAA expense, an unclassified version of this volume. It 
was the intent of LEAA to make broad-scale distribution 
to Police Departments throughout the country. The Director 
of Security and I consulted on this matter and jointly | 
determined that the LEAA request should.not be honored be- : 
cause the Agency should not put itself in the position of . 
publishing law enforcement material for general and un- 
classified purposes, and it would be an abuse of our print- 
ing facilities. : 


b. On 5 January 1971, the Director of Security re- 
quested that I approve his leasing up to eleven motor 
vehicles for use in connection with а special support 
operation which would last approximately 3 months. The 
Director of Security informed me, in his requesting memo- 

.randum of 5 January 1971, that "This support. activity has 
been undertaken at the specific instruction of the Director 
and has his personal approval." The request was approved. 


c. From 1968 to date, the Office of Security has 
requisitioned from this Office a considerable amount of 
materiel which we understand was to be given or loaned by 
them to local Police Departments. In certain cases some 
of this materiel was issued from Agency stocks and, in 
other cases, direct procurement of the materiel was made 
by funds furnished by the Office of Security. А complete 
listing of such materiel is found in Attachment 2. ; 


5 


ΕΕ 00114 


a ED οὗ ο ο ο ο IUE SEEDS 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics 


b. This Office is aware, although it had no cognizance 
nor responsibility, that an apartment was rented in Miami 
Beach, Florida, during the period of the Democratic National 
Convention, 10-14 July 1972, and the Republican National 
Convention, 21-24 August 1972. The apartment was used as 
a meeting place 
in liaison with members of the Secret Service and rendering 


6 
я ο ТРУ NE 
SECRET ` 00445 


COo — ÀÓ uu ——rrFrrrs rr Rr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics й 


‘assistance in connection with the political conventions 
that were being held. WH Division is the cognizant 
operating component on this matter. 


7. The above recitation of facts represents, to the best 
of my knowledge and memory, those matters which appear to be 
relevant to subject tasking given by the Director. 


John F. Blake 
Director of Logistics 


2 Atts | і E 5 


cc:  DD/M&S : E 


00116 


En u aə=sawwəwa wn s rs —rvOO 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


с at € + | 


| 00117 


Requesting 


Office 


05 
TSD 


Date of 
Request 
3/23/72 
5/16/72 
3/23/72 


3/23/72 
3/23/72 
3/23/72 
11/16/72 
4/17/72 


11/18/71 


4/19/72 
12/ 7/72 
10/13/72 


3/26/71 
4/20/73 


Item 


Telephone Analyzer 
Transmitters, Radio Beacon 


Telephone Analyzer 


Telephone Analyzers 


‘Telephone Analyzers 


Telephone Analyzers 
Camera Sets 

Camera Sets 
Actuators, Recorders 
Tessina Cameras 
Camera, Video 


Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance, 
Equivalent of W L 30691 


Tubes, Image, W L 30691 


Cameras, Television 


Quantity 


N 
5 


1,350 
513 
1,350 


1,400 

1,350 

1,375 
656 


Receiving 
U.S. Depart- 
ment or Agency 


BNDD 
BNDD 
White House 


Communications 
Agency 


‘Air Force 


State 
AEC 
FBI 
FBI | 
FBI 
BNDD 
FBI 
FBI 


FBI 
FBI 


:атооа INON 


E£vS8TISTI 


6rr00 


Requesting 
Office 


TSD 
TSD 
. TSD 


TSD 
TSD 
TSD 
TSD 
OL 
os 
OL 


TSD 
TSD 


TSD 


Date of 
Request 


12/14/72 
10/20/72 
10/13/72 


5/26/71 
4/22/71 
4/22/71 


4/22/71 


2/25/71 
1/30/71 
8/12/70 


1/10/73 


6/28/72 


7/26/71. 


Item 
Transmitters, Radio 
Actuators, Recorder 


Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance, 
Equivalent of W L 30691 


Tube, Image, W L 30691 
Transmitters 

Module, Plug-In 

Power Supply - UWP-39A 
Telephone Analyzers 
Telephone Analyzers 


Cable, Special-Purpose 
Electrical 


Ink, Special Formula 
Ink, Special Formula 


Transmitter, Radio Beacon 


Quantity 
3 
25 
1 


مم ير ә‏ 


22 


5,000 ft. 


Unit Cost 


313 
591 
4,69 


4,69 
1,372 
1,247 
568 
1,350 


1,350. 


1,825 


3,700 


728 


.42 


Receiving 
U.S. Depart- 


ment or Agency 
BNDD 


FBI 
FBI 


: FBI 


FBI 

FBI 

FBI 

Treasury 
Treasury 

White House 
Communications 
Agency 
Immigration and 
Naturalization 
Service 
Immigration and 
Naturalization 


Service 


U.S. Forestry 


ЄРӨТСРТ :GISOOG INON 


5 —— ЕЧ— ни 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


|. 00120 


ΗΝ .----- 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MATERIAL REQUISITIONED FROM LOGISTICS 
BY SECURITY FOR ISSUANCE TO 
LOCAL POLICE 


ITEM .᾽ QUANITY ` 
Cas Mask M-9 | 200 Ἢ 
Gas Mask M-17 ΜΙ 196 
Steel Helmet and Liners Й | 251 
Vest апа Groin Protector | 9б 
Vest, Flak M-52 . | 54 
Vest, Protective | 46 
Vest, Grenade 105 
Execuvest | 6 
Emergency Flashing Red Light 22 
*Searchlight, Tear Gas . 56 
*Chemical Baton 6 1/2" | 36 
*Chemical Baton 12" m 24 
*Chemical Baton 26" " 24 
*Mustang 35 Pistol | | б 
*Searchlight with Shoulder Strap 36 
*Stun Gun 3 


*NOTE: Various quantities and types of replacement chemical 
cartridges, loading kits, and batteries were also 
Ordered for asterisk items. 


60121 . 


KR XY Y απ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


14 WAY 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central intelligence 


THROUGH : Deputy Director for Management and Services 
SUBJECT : Sensitive Activities Ferformed by the 
Office of Logistics 


1. This memorandum contains information for the Director 
of Central Intelligence, 


2. This merorandum is submitted pursuant to advice given 
by the Deputy Director for Management and Services оп 7 Нау . 
that Office Directors report on activities, either under their 
cognizance or otherwise known to them, the naturs of which 
could possibly need explanation or justification when viewed 
within the statutory responsibility and authority of tho 
Director of Central Intelligence. The responsibilities of the 
Office of Logistics (01) are such that in 211 matters herein 
reported, except two, the actions undertaken were at the re- 
quest of another Agency component. We have prepared a hrief 
description of each action involved and then have included the 
name of the sponsoring component. The substantive reason for 
the requests for action by this Office will have to be deter- 
nined by inquiry to the designated sponsoring component. 


5. Facts pertaining to both actions undertaken at the 


T 


ve of this Office are as follows: 


Hm. 
a 
we 
сь 
F^ 
я 
the 
Ee 


———————_ i te 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics 


$S ONLY 
SEC 00123 


ИЙ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activitics Performed by the Office of 


Logistics 


-the DD/O, we will not honor any requisition for surveil- 


lance equipment unless it has been approved by the СІ 
Staff of the ΡΠ/Ο. 


4. Within the area of contractual responsibilities, the 


following itens are pertinent: 


a. In February 1971, Colonel L. X. White, the then 
Executive Director-Comptroller, called me to attend a 
meeting in his office, also attended by Mr. William Colby. 
Colonel White explained that the Technical Services 
Division (TSD) had been requested to provide assistance 


to the PBI for a sensitive project designated (cur- 
rently designated EMEN White did not dis- 
close the purpose 0 assistance being provided by TSD 
but did instruct me to assist TSD on purely contractual 
matters. Since the Office of Logistics has no information 
concerning the mission or purpose of «шго 
stantive questions concerning the subject shou е 
addressed to TSD. Other procurement actions accomplished 
for the FBI are reported below. Specific mention is made, 
however, знані о of the dollar magnitude, ap- 
proximately million, and the complex technical equip- 
ment that has been involved in the undertaking. 


b. The Procurement Division, OL, currently has two 
requisitions in hand.from TSD which would involve reim- 
bursabie sales to the FBI. One such requisition in the 
amount of $36,900 is for two Westinghouse television 
cameras, The second requisition in the amount of $11,200 
is for two wide-angle surveillance probes manufactured by 
Bausch and Lomb. No action is being taken on either of 
these requirements pending further instructions which 
will be sought from the Deputy Director for Management 
and Services. я 


C. Over the years, this Agency has often supported 
other Government agencies from а contractual or materiel 
standpoint. Upon the submission of an officially approved 
request, supported by a transfer of funds, the Agency 
would either enter into "accommodation procurements" for 
the requesting agency or support the requesting agency by 
the issuance of materiel from stock. Such actions are 
legaliy accomplished under the Economy Act of 1925. This 
Act authorizes one agency to support the needs of, or pro- 
vide a service for, another Government agency when such 


M оа 


eee ss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


і Bg tthe d 

| EYES δὴ 

SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Perforued by the Office of 
Logistics 


action would be more economical and eliminate the need for 
one agency of the Government to duplicate facilities 
readily available from another. A typical example of this 
procedure is purchasing photointerpretation gear for the 
Defense Intelligence Agency element located at NPIC. In 
connection with the current reporting requirement, however, 
I have had our records researched for the past 2 years and 
Attachment 1 reflects those transactions which appear to be 
relevant to the subject of this memorandum, 


d. In connection with the disclosures during the sum- 
mer of 1971 that the Rand Corporation was not properly 
safeguarding classified documents, this Office undertook 
two acts. 1 directed the Security Officer from our West 
Coast Procurement Office at the Moffet Naval Air Station 
in California to visit the Rand Corporation and satisfy 
himself that classified material furnished them by the 
Agency was both properly safeguarded and accounted for. 
His report was affirmative. On 25 August 1971, the senior 
Security Officer assigned to this Office forwarded a 
letter to the Rand Corporation stressing and reaffirming. 
the procedures Rand must follow in safeguarding classified 
information furnished them by the Agency. .Of residual 
interest in this matter, there is summarized the contents 
of a memorandum of 2 July 1971 to the Executive Director- : 
Comptroller from the DD/I which is in our possession. 


This memorandüm reports that FRIS regularly 
disseminated reports to the Rand Corporation 
but that instructions had been issued to cease 
distribution of classified reports. While no. 
other direct dissemination went to Rand, other 
USIB agencies, primarily USAF, were passing 
"many" copies of DD/I products to Rand as au- 
thorized under USIB regulations. The memoran- 
dum also states that Rand personnel had 
requested searches and document retrieval from 
the CRS facility. 


5. In connection with action taken for the Office of 
Security, there are three relevant itoms: 


a. The Printing Services Division, OL, was requested 
by the Office of Security to print a book written by 
Harry J. Murphy, Office of Security. The book was pre- | 
pared by Mr. Murphy under a Brookings Institution Federal М 


ONLY — 
SEC = | 00125 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


u | en оге} А 
' Р | ` EYES ON 


^ SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 


Logistics 


Executive Fellowship. The book is entitled "Where's 


“What -- Sources of Information for Federal Investigators." 


It is a full treatise on the existence of sources of in- 
formation that may be useful to an investigator. The 
book's first printing of 300 copies was made in June 1967. 
Due to demand, a second printing of 600 copies was made 

in September 1968. The title page,of the book gives 
attribution to Mr. Murphy, Office of Security, Central 
Intelligence Agency, and. the Brookings Institution Federal 
Executive Fellowship. The book is classified Confidential, 
and'it is our understanding that the distribution was made 


‘to appropriate agencies of the Federal Government. А copy 


of Mr. Murphy's book can be made available for review if 
desired. 


 Sometime in 1972, a representative of the Law 

Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) requested 

that the Agency give consideration to our publishing, at 
LEAA expense, an unclassified version of this volume. It 
was the intent of LEAA to make broad-scale distribution 

to Police Departments throughout the country. The Director 
of Security and I consulted on this matter and jointly 
determined that the LEAA request should. not be honored be- | 
cause the Agency should.not put itself in the position of 

publishing law enforcement material for general- and un-- 
classified purposes, and it would be ап abuse of our print- 
ing facilities. | 


з, 


b. Оп 5 January 1971, the Director ої Security re- 
quested that I approve his leasing up to eleven motor 
vehicles for use in connection with a special support 
operation which would last approximately 3 months. The 
Director of Security informed me, in his requesting memo- 
randum of 5 January 1971, that "This support activity has 
been undertaken at the specific instruction of the Director 
and has his personal approval." The request was approved. 


c. From 1968 to date, the Office of Security has κ 
requisitioned from this Office я considerable amount of 
materiel which we understand was to be given or loaned by 
them to local Police Departments. In certain cases some 
of this materiel was issued from Agency stocks and, in 
other cases, direct procurement of the materiel was made 
by funds furnished by the Office of Security. A complete 
listing of such materiel is found in Attachment 2, 


00226 


- m t merma دت‎ wene = 


р Р С .. | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics > 


b. This Office is aware, although it had no cognizance 
nor responsibility, that an apartment was rented in Miami 
Beach, Florida, during the period of the Democratic National 
Convention, 10-14 July 1972, and the Republican National 
Convention, 21-24 August 1972. The apartment was used as. 


in liaison with 


tiem Siga 


Ve v 


а ее БАБИЧ [DE 


— ко, 


ο τακακια 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Sensitive Activities Performed by the Office of 
Logistics Do 


* 


„assistance in connectiom with the political conventions 
that were being held. Wil Division is the cognizant 
operating component on this matter. 


7. The above recitation of facts represents, to the best 


of my knowledge and memory, those matters which appear to be 
relevant to subject tasking given by the Director.. 


n 


Director of Logistics 
2 Atts 


cc: ро/ма5 


00128 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 


i 


: ; 
i D 

- τω ασ е em e ешт _ 

insted ne, ο κ τοπ ISS LIN TOES TIT ЫЕ nipote eme s 


e eset, Wray $ 


00129 


г, 


“ας‏ س میم 


eet 


i 
| 


ONLY 


і Receiving 

i Requesting ` Date o£ š U.S. Depart- 
! Office Request Item Quantity Unit Cost ment or Agency 
і тост ems NER S EE uL ج‎ — : 
05 | 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzer 1 C 1,350 BNDD 
| TSD 5/16/72 Transmitters, Radio Beacon 8 313 BNDD 
| os .3/23/72 Telephone Analyzer 1. 1,350 White House 
| . ` Communications 
i | Agency 
| 05 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers f 15. 1,400 Air Force 
| 05 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers 10 1,350 State 
| : OS | 3/23/72 Telephone Analyzers. ; i 2 1,575 AEC 
| i 
| TSD . 11/16/72 Camera Sets | 20 ` 656 FBI 
i I 
| TSD ` 4/17/72 .. Camera Sets ` | 10 700 FBI 
і : 
| ` TSD 11/18/71 Actuators, Recorders 50 488 FBI 

TSD 4/19/72 Tessina Cameras 3 700 BNDD 

TSD 12/ 7/72 Camera, Video | (1 18,045. FBI 

TSD 10/13/72 Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance, 1 4,639. FBI 

: Equivalent of W L 30691 ; 

; TSD 3/26/71 Tubes, Image, W L 30691 2 4,607 · FBI ! 
і ñ й | 

TSD 4/20/73 Cameras, Television 2 18,300 FBI | 


ΟΕΤΟΟ 


ΕΤΘΤΑΤΤ :GIOOG INON 


| Requesting Date of 


! Office 


i TSD 
| TSD 
| TSD 
| 
| TSD 
TSD 
TSD 
TSD 
' OL 
| 05 


OL. 


TSD 


TSD 


TSD 


TEFOO 


Request 


12/14/72. 


10/20/72 
10/13/72 


5/26/71 
4/22/71 
4/22/71 


4/22/71 


2/25/71 
1/30/71 
8/12/70 


1/10/73 
6/28/72 


7/26/71 


| Item ‘Quantity Unit Cost 

Transmitters, Radio d с |: 313 
Actüators, Recorder 25 591 
Tube, Image, Burn-Resistance, 1 4,639 
Equivaient of W L 30691 ; ; 
Tube, Image, W L 50691 2 4,639 
Transmitters 3 1,372 
Module, Plug-In | E 1,247 
Power Supply - UWP-39A 1 568 
Telephone Analyzers 2 1,350 
Telephone Analyzers ` 22 1,350 
Cable, Special-Purpose. 
Electrical. | 5,000 £t. ‚42 
Ink, Special Formula А 1 lot 1,825 
Ink, Special Formula 1 lot 3,700 

. Transmitter, Radio Beacon 1 728 


Receiviny 
U.S. Depart- 


ment or Agency. 


BNDD 
FBI 
FBI 


FBI 

FBI 

FBI 

FBI 

Treasury 
Treasury 

White Housc 
Communications 
Agency 
Immigration and 
Naturalization 
Service 
Immigration and 
Naturalization 


Service 


U.S. Forestry 


£VSISTI :GIOOQ IYON 


ΕΕ Á———Ó—pán— --щЩ тҥш лнн 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— — M—Ó——M À— e 


Ln 


[Or 


MORI DOocID: 


MATERIAL REQUISITIONED FROM LOGISTICS 


BY SECURITY FOR ISSUANCE TO 


LOCAL POLICE 


ITEM 
Gas Mask M-9 
Gas Mask M-17 
Steel Helmet and anes 
Vest and Groin Protector 
Vest, Flak M-52 
Vest, Protective 
Vest, Grenade 


Execuvest 


- Emergency Flashing Red Light 


*Searchlight; Tear Gas 
*Chemical Baton 6 1/2" 


*Chemical Baton 12" 


. *Chemical Baton 26" 


*Mustang 35 Pistol 


*Searchlight with Shoulder Strap 


*Stun Gun 


*NOTE: Various quantities and t 


QUANITY 


200 
185 
231 

96 


1451843 


ypes of replacement chemical 


cartridges, loading kits, and batteries were also 
ordered for asterisk items. 


H 
і 


Al 


{я 


ү 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Гү шамы ^q GE [l (ΟΝ. SERTIAL ` 
pL deu EL e I во 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


SUBJECT: (Ортага) 


"μερος rw ото s | 


SEC €——————— — per TOTUM te €— کی‎ 
posos. |на © _ ———— 
11 WAY 1973 
TO: {Officer designation, room number, ond DATE Š 
building) OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom 


INITIALS fo whom. Drow a line across column offer eoch comment.) 
RECEIVED FORWARDED 


і. рр/ме5 


г 
| T 
«а 


Ë 
Е 


\ 


сөрү une‏ اا 
for ντε( Sud dst-‏ 
сь dam.) waneng‏ 
ve chat ον. 03С5‏ 
sons em Meke‏ 

Poget, OO 


'9 13 


00134 


| om 610 "08:85 [C] SECRET — С) CONFIDENTIAL: [J] INTERNAL Г] UNCLASSIFIED - 


MEMORANDUM FOR: 


THROUGH 


SUBJECT 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


bo 72 


` 11 МАХ 19 


Director, Central Intelligence Agency 
Deputy Director for Management and Services 


Activities which might be considered sensitive 
issues. - | | 


I have listed below computer processing projects which the Office of 
Joint Computer Support has participated in or is aware of and which 
might be considered sensitive issues. - 


Most Sensitive Projects 


Project Officer Nature ` OJCS 


OJCS 
Project Organization, & of Reason for 
Identification Telephone Project Listing 
HYDRA Richard Ober A specialpro- Type of 
ΟΙ Staff i ject initiated data being 
: by DCI collected. 5 
SANCA 


Machine Type of‏ | ا 
index to data in‏ 


trieval of drug files. 


| security files index. 
ти Information Type of 
storage & re- data in 


related data 
(ORD's project 
OFTEN) 


Sensitive Projects 


UE Computer file Type of 
of drug data. data in 
file. 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


ро 1 
Sensitive Projects (Continued) 
OJCS Project Officer Nature . OJCS 
Project Organization, & of - Reason for 
Identification Telephone  _ Project Listing 


WI ИШ Statistical. . Source of . 
analysis of data, Con- 
psychological tractors are 

BEEN - data. ‘involved : 


with project. 


Sensitivity Unknown, but Pos sibl a Matter for Concern 


Nature of 
data, Tech- 
niques of 
system dis- 
cussed with 
FBI, 


SPYDER Data on. я 
ИШ radio frequen- 
OS cies used for 
[ |] support.of Ín- 
Е Place Monitor- 
ing System, a 
system to identify 


unauthorized 
е transmitters. 
DMVREC : E e File of auto- Nature of 
| mobile license data. | 
numbers. 


File of Agency Nature ої 
applicants who data, 
were not 

hired. 


“Ὁ 
| | 00136 


ннн ин Би 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


pa £9 


Sensitivity Unknown, but Possibly a Matter for Concern (Continued) 


OJCS Project Officer Nature OJCS 
Project Organization, & of Reason for 
Identification Telephone _ Project Listing 


Association 

with the 

named 
organization. 


[ 


چ 
JOHN D, IAMS‏ 
Director of Joint Computer Support‏ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


[1 ш. idR E СТИ [1 Саи _ |] SECT 


3 prow n aae 2 ае tte — feme ims Ὁ rame reae ο اوو وسین‎ ао 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


$i UBJECT: і m чаї) 


FROM: ee SEIS ES [CURE EE 


Director of Communications ==—— 
10 May: 1973 


Hqrs. 


Е 


ТО: (Officer designation, roam number, ond 


building) OFFICERS | COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom 


INITIALS. fo whom. Drew g line across column affer each comment.} 
RECEIVED FORWARDED 


Res s The 
attached 15 in Further 


response to your request. 


00138 


` 


за 610 "δεν [C] SECRET [J CONFIDENTIAL [η UE My Г] UNCLASSIFIED ` 


- - РР HÀ P ος ο ο οὐ”... mm ο”... 


ον να.‏ یر 


TO ντα μα. S oer cern ο, ἐπ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


FRET 
CONFIDENTIAL 


"DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION — . | REGISTRY 


source: OC) | control numaer: SC| | 
DATE OF DOCUMENT: 8 May 1975 _ DATE DOCUMENT RECEIVED: 

COPY NUMBER (S): S LOGGED BY: | 
NUMBER OF PAGES: tW? DOCUMENT NO: _ 4 | 
NUMBER OF ATTACHMENTS: one — — — 


FROM: Special Programs Division, oc DATE: 10 May 73 


: SIGNATURE 
E NNUS 


YÊ 


: (З) Approval REMARKS _ | О ' 
| C] action 2:: vw pr on جب‎ C О "d 
E CJ comment | | 
і = Concurrences 
{ g Information 

| п Direct Reply 

а Preparation of Reply 

1 " Recommendation 
3 [7 Signature 
T а Return 
E ГО Dispatch 
x C] Fite 


MM. | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


—— kaza 


LEAL —À 


що 


8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Summary, Special Programs Division (SPD), 
| Office of Communications, Operational 
Contacts with Other U.S. Government Agencies 


1. Prior to 1969 the OC COMINT intercept unit, 
which was then in Miami, had relatively frequent contact 
` with the Miami bureaus of the FBI and FCC, Miami Police 
and the Miami Beach Police. The staff provided support 
to these activities in monitoring, identification and 

DF of specific illegal agent transmissions conducted by 
foreign nationals and American citizens in the greater 
Miami area. 00 ваная for this support were made 


through the. DDO's 


2. In late September 1972, NSA, through Division D/ 
DDO, requested that the Special Programs Division initiate 
a hearability survey of certain HF long-distance commercial 
telephone circuits between the U.S. and South America. 
The circuits carried: drug related long-distance calls of 
interest to the BNDD and other U.S. agencies. Because of 


the availability of personnel and technical capabilities 

| mere на ες = са 
cepted. Оп 15 January 1973, formal NSA tasking of the 
intercept was instituted. On 30 January 1973, all coverage 


was terninated by Division D because of possible legal 
conplications. ©“ 


.$. The Chief and Deputy Chief, SPD and SPD/Special 
Blectronic Operations Branch have been engaged in informal 
technical liaison with operating components of the FBI . 

for a number of years. Initial contacts and arrangements 
for support of specific activities have been made by the 
Division D/DDO. Support has been provided in the form of 


DOWNG 0 SECRET 
UPON L OF ATTACHMENT 


Ї 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Й БЕИ 2 NE. | "wem 


7 ` 8 May 1973 


exchanges of technical information òn techniques, technical 
assistance and training, and the loan of Agency equipment. 


In the past several ye s been r d to 

sensitive FBI projects and Support. 

has been and is presen ng given to pro susp] 
These projects are described in the attached > 

Sealed envelope. і 

4. An operational test of ап F/DF 
system was conducted п DO апа 
OC-SPD per in the early part oi the summer of 1972. 


A location in Miami Beach, Florida was selected for the 
tests because of similarity to the actual target site and 
environment in Saigon. Receiving antennas were placed on E 
the roof of the hotel being used as the receiving/DF site. 
A hotel employee asked why the materiel was placed on the 
roof. А team member in effect told him that the group 
was an advance security segment for the Democratic National 

- Convention. Мо further questions were asked; the tests. 
were completed and the equipment was returned to the 
Washington area. ë . 8 


Att. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


9 May 1973 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


|. 9 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Organizational Dealings with Activities Inside the 
United States 


o 


1. This MFR records organizational dealings with activities 
inside the United States known to this office. 


2. In September 1972, [ — — requested secure communi- 
cations in the Miami Area wi ocal offices of BNDD 


e communications link was never installe 
advised in April 1973 that there were plans 
underway in Miami to combine various Federal agencies anti- 
drug efforts under a new Justice Department Division, and at 
this time it was not known where the new anti-drug office would 
be. located. 


3. During the Democratic and Republican conventions, 
supported requirements levied by the Secret 
ervice concerning name traces and other intelligence infor- 


mation relating to subversive influences which might affect 
those conventions. rovided some technical advice and 
procedural assistance in establishing a useful means of com- 
municating between the two correspondents. WHD should be able ' 
to provide a detailed resume of activities Ека in this 


matter. 


= Hem £ В. Toes 


nel? 


‘Chief, ке Тез» Staff, OC 


ea. Ab 


143 


μα... 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Σ ` А H я» Τα τ ` А 
ЕЭ ; fug de Ἂν dg om Sea A a Š 5 
= чо жу ἑ 2 - 5 u 3 ` w. 2 і З ИА 
є Da E ^U T Š " ` - 
` va ж * KE з 
* I «8. 
PENS ынк нее сн тое ENO BOTTOM S. 
r kn ~ 
OFFICIAL BOUT ING SLIP 
in o 
А I теч DIRECT REPLY = PREPARE REPLY 
[ef pisearen Ip or 
COMMENT 
. ПТТ 
dq Es Remarks: 
< a ` Bill: 
The attached memorandum identifies 
the funds referred to in Chuck Briggs! 
notes of 13 and 20 January 1972. 
- і я 
А | | FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. 
5 : . с General 
^ ° FORM HO, 237 Use previous editions (40) 
MEL "Since- these noteseare on a toally- separate sensitive subject, . 
pia pu them from this 21е - -- ‘WEC " (Note to C/MPS) , 
; | : | : p 
: : UU S ut uu з. uoti 001448. .- 
+ . * . peu s S pcm к ж a ον 
: Pr Ы ΗΝ mta : 
. x - 


Z eit und 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


29 Мау 1973 . 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General 


SUBJECT 


REFERENCE 


: Mr.Colby!s Request to Inspector General to 
Determine Subject Referred to by Two Notes 
` ina PP/B Memo to DD/M&S 


: D/PPB Memo to DD/M&S dated 23 May 1973, 
Subject: Watergate Principals - Direct or 
Indirect Involvement 


00145 


FORM но, 
1-67 


о 


= = ep ка ревно ο. ο” кё 


— s 
SENDER. WILL CHECK CLASSIF, TION TOP AND BOTTOM 


ACTION — DIRECT REPLY 
APPROVAL 


p 
R 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ECOMMENDATION 


ae 
жи 

FILE г Гатин | 
иш 


CONCURRENCE INFORMATION 


[4 


rde. aoten n ege 


c, ГА 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 
FROM: NAME, ADORESS ANO PHONE МО. 
W. E. Colby 
UNCLASSIFIED | | CONFIDENTIAL 


237 Use previous editions 


SIGHATURE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


2:2 GR P. NN" 5 
pools ud τε: E М 
TE ο μι πι TR 
. . — . „Ж. 
| MEMORANDUM FOR: ( О € 
! , E 27 
| Ü PW d ФА 
| th du LA : 
і A [7 і 
py m | 
| jo m 
i й ` $3 MAY 1973 
| (DATE) 
(i Vue sa VOL mies wav se uit. o tum 
ss * ^ 
\ . 
| . є | , 
| я - 5 
E Ж. кє А 
" á 2 г `. : - , 
осе wu Ὁπ 001427 
an | =. - `: 


pru s 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


———————————— P — nÀ —— κας. 


τοῦ AND БОТТОМ 


хни. | рококо 


OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 


TO МАМЕ AND ADDRESS 


DATE INITIALS 


wee 
Jw E colby (| S23 


ACTION ΜΝ DIRECT EEPLY | — [PREPARE REPLY 
APPROVAL „| DISPATCH RECOMIAENDATION 


| — [COMMENT | [mr | Jama | 
πὲ νε ΜΗ 


ΛΕΟΝ INFORMATION SIGRATURE 


Remarks: 


Sx eves bed ub ber к. 
nt °- (e£ е) к 
(c. e q „Жы КЕ 


А M e&t x^ cop Y cd. oe Do «У 


NEN was Celak о Ὁ ο” чех. СУ 


have ло da Ye. B ОРРІЗ of У 


DCI- ap pre ay gua tere, =. 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 


FROM: NAME, ADORESS AND PHONE NO. 


Charles A. Briggs, D/PPB 5/23/73 


| [| UNCLASSIFIED | | CONFIDENTIAL. | | SECRET 


` FORM NO. 7 {Ие previous editions (40) 
1-67 237 P 
I > 
^ 


w LI --- ` т. 
E ГД 
# ^ . - 
` st TAE . `. ῳ εξ 
i ὃς є. й - 7 
` £ lei 
* ` NE 8 y Е " š 
‚жу a. gs - 
` "я . ج‎ 
` i -. E 4 
. 
E 
X Los 


MM — —9 


μμ... 


: ғ 
дааро te نوی ہہ ہہ س ور ی وہہ سے‎ Р А س‎ P O"a-"nÓ——— o ———— ` 
- - - > ον νου» — ο — DR 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


à L1 ΠΝ AE AE F. Re 


Erecutive Беозміту 
| 2x2, 
23 May 1973 - 


ba- 76 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services | 


SUBJECT: || Watergate Principals ~ Direct or Indirect 
Involvement τὸ 


3. This memorandum responds to the Director's request for 
a report of any involvement in any capacity since ] January 1969 
with Messrs. Hunt, McCord, Liddy, Young, or Krogh. 


2. I have had none with Hunt, Liddy or Young. 


3. My McCord contact was indirect and occurred sometime 
during the late 1960's when I wzs Director, Office of Computer 
Services. I opposed plans for Technical Division, Office of 
Security (under Mr. McCord) to acquire a separate computer for 


its In-Place Monitoring System. f DD/S&T (then ORD) 
was the computor individual wo 7 and, I thirk, would 


have details. А 

4. The Krogh contact also was indirect and involved his 
request, first through OMB, that CIA fund foreign travel on bchalf 
of the Cabinet Coinmittee on International Narcetics Control. Indi- 
vidual phone discussions are noted in the attsched. The Agency 
focal points were and I understand 

as forwarded relevant documentation. Copies of 

memoranda from Messrs. Krogh, Г jana Colby are attached 
also. 


5. I held a staff meeting yesterday to pass the request to 
al OPPB employees. Опе officer who was attending a funeral will 
not be available until tomorrow. | 


О\ьью\сурРЧЁЁг\мнып: үзе (53//2À12) : 
J - р\ьъв ЕАѕе On] 2116 | /5/ Charles A. Briggs 
I - МО ЕС ColpÀ 
Qx1& g р ¬ sqqgreasece 
ріерарлпов: 


Charles А. Briggs 
Director of Planning, 
Programming, and Budgeting 


Attachment | ` . 5 00149 


As stated 


ET 


v 
а —. : 
фора, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


pas 


Attachment 
23 May 1973 
4 Feb 72 Call from Jim Taylor, OMB re "Bud* Krogh and his deputy, 


Walter Minnick, of the Domestic Council who plan foreign 
travel in connection with thelr narcotics interests, Jim was 
alerting us to their intention to ask us for funds for the 
travel. | = 


7 Feb 72 Foliow-up from Taylor: Plan 3-5 trips for 3 individuals-- 
all in FY Τὸ. Cost probably 08. Minnick ready to make 
first trip. ИШИ plugged in, ExDir said OK re Tehran 


visit. 

7 Feb 72 See attached memo from Egil Krogh, Jr. to Bill Colby and 
follow-on memos fom] | (21 Jul 72) and Colby 
(2 Aug 12). 


12(?) May 72 John Hurley, OMB called, mentioning possible Krogh/ 
Minnick attendance at a Latin American (Station Chief?) 
conference on narcotics. He also said Jeff Shepherd, 
White House, was laying on a st with m 


himself, Shepherd and Mark Alger, OMB to Europe. 


23 Jun 72 ο ο... ο on Krogh/Minnick interest 


n getting ‘activities, including large-scale PM, 
on narcotics front. L... [pushing small-scale PP. 


6 Iul 72 | Janea. Notes say only: "Minnick- iurley film. 
We will send." 


2 Aug 72 | [ealed re Colby letter (attached). Said-travel 
orders ready; need money this PM (No record in my 
notes as to who was traveling when, but have faint 
recollection of its being to Mexico City). 


and [C Jeentsesea by | 


1 Nov 72 В slated? all. Again notes are cryptic: | 
| LI race Survey BNDD problems/ 


rico." 


f . τη : 00150 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


. ; і 
à e s dni і EE 
a а š * : | 
з : SEGRE! 


bo 70 


On Mr. Colby's copy only: 


13 Jan 72 ExDir (Colby) said DCI had approved $30K for sensitive 
CS project - no details. 


20 Jan 72 . Reminded ExDir re $32K he said DCI OK'd, 


ο ως 


: . : 20, WASHINGTON 
[ 4 : | ' . February 7, 1972 


— eae 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


e —————— AU 
yo - . THE WHITE HOUSE ^ Εκοεμῖνα Pass | 
| | x ο ΕΒ XT 


MEMORANDUM. FOR BILL COLBY 


SUBJECT: BUDGETARY SUPPORT FOR THE CABINET COMMITTEE 
ON INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL AS 


The Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control was created . i 
Septembéx 7, 1971, by the President to centralize his attack on the in- i 
ternational drug traffic. : - 


` The Committee does not have a separate budget. 


` Salary and administrative support for its small, foll-time staff has been 

provided by the Executive Office of the President. Other expenses are . 
hang з to the constituent agencies end б'ю : 

`- The Bureau of Customs, BNDD, and AID/Otfice о of Public Safety have, . 
provided support to dafas 
The CIA should be e to defray not more ên fifteen thousand i 

τς dollars in overseas travel expenses for Cabinet Committee staff during 
ther remainder of FY-1972. - - i 


Walter C. Minnick, the μας Staff Coordinator, can be contacted 
for further details. . 2 a 


Thank you for your assistance. | 


Qu keg Ly y 4 
a Krogh, Jr. 
Executive Director 
Cabinet Committee on р 
| International Narcotics Control | 
CC: John Ehrlichman й 
Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs 
Mark Alger ` ' Í | | - des ΤΡ 
‘OMB, Chief, General averne Programs Division 


apr @sentative, CCINC Working Group. 


1085 w Cot a 
* ` 
* * t 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Plans | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


did 72-1063 


2 AUG 1972 


ad 5 ount / 
Bors 


SUBJECT: Fiscal Year 1973 жыйн Support for 
š the Cabinet Committee on International 
Narcotics Control (CCINC) 


REFERENCE; Meme to ExDir fem/Cfopp/wancod|aia 


"41 ud 1972; sazne subject 


1. This is in response to the referenced memo regarding 
use of CIA funds to cover travel expenses for the White ense 
сена Committee Staff for Fiscsl Year 1973. 


2. . You ara authorized to obligated a up to $15,050 for the use 


. of the White House Cabinet Committee Staff for cra avel expensas 


during FY 1973. Obligation showd be recorded against the O/DDP 


^, maliotznent and travel orders issued against your own appropriate fan 


number. 


~ 


3, To the extent that you are маза о absorb thia requirement 
within your present allotment, we will have to arrange seme repro- 
gramming later ἴα the year to cover this unbodzeted item. 


43. 


` se г, =, Colby 
Μπας ` "Executive Director-Comptrollor 


o/PPd  jhgz Aug 72 
Distribution: : 
Orig & l - addressee 
l.- ExDir 
l- ER 
_ 1 -PPB Subj (BMS 
1 - O/F 
- Reading 


| [Chrono 


вт сана з 6 


By ормат aminat ud kasaae perm э, © 
* e і . 
* νο. М " š е П $m . 


E des 
πο ζῶο S mmm de RM аміно 


a ener 


mw 


wr . to yong oiiice as. soon es At arrives. 


—_— 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Pp aly s | "m (7 50 FFB ама А 
τ А ae I τ ا‎ σος 
= ткесицу» RO 
" ο 91 July 1912 TP" К 

+$ ` š H 2 ` sow * : ` і EE с ` Ν ` 
^. HEBORANDUN FOR: Executive Director - Сопрігої Jer _ _ ... «| 
` VIA | go x AERE Deputy. Director for- Plans E 
I SUBJECT .: =< Fiscal Year 1973 Budgetary Support for ` 


- the Cabinet Committee on коена 
ANarcosbes Control ΠΠ Se Ree 


- 


Le At our invitation, He. Walter с. Minnick aff о 
‘Member of the ССІНС, is scheduled to attend ап роле баве "E" 
in the Regional Narcotics Seminar раці m V Division MEC 
гол 27-28 EST 19T2, TT Wa E M 

2; ` "Xn T with € es "mma for bravel: 
of White House Cabinet Committee Staff in БУ 1972, it is 

i ` requested that iunds to cover the cost of Hr. Minnick’s 
_ trip be released. ttached herewith is.a сору of а formal - 
` request from Me. Egil Krogh dated 7 February 1972 to Mr. 

William Colby requesting travel funds for the balance of 

FY 1972. Но. Krogh is now preparing a formal request for . 
_ $15,000.00 to cover travel expenses for White House Cabinet 
' Committee staff for FY,1973.° I will forward this request. 


= E 
- 
a .` 


£ 
΄ 


Mh Mas no cetera iab ον 


mrt MESES nas ο 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DD/M&S 73-1809 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management and Services 


SUBJECT : Contacts with Individuals Named in the Watergate Matter 


1. Jam addressing this to you instead of to the Director of Central 
Intelligence since I doubt that the information contained herein is of such 
Significance to warrant his interest and because it has been on record with 
the Agency since July 1972. However,.if you feel that the information is of 
such interest that it should be forwarded to the Director I shall put it in the 
proper format to do so. | 


2. My only contact with anyone named in connection with the 
Watergate and related matters was through ^ ja former 
Agency employee now retired and living in Winterhaven, Florida. In 
December 1971| | | [called me from Florida and advised that he 
wanted to get in touch with Howard Hunt. He said that he did not have Hunt's 
home phone number and that it was probably: unlisted but that since Hunt was a 
former employee, could I contact Hunt and ask him to. givd | асап. 
I had only met Hunt once about 10 years before but І agreed to relay the message. 
I called Howard Hunt at his home and told him (ва jdid not have his 


home phone and requested he call Mr. Hunt thanked me for 
relaying the message and said that he wo call This seemed of 
little consequence to me in December 1971 but in July 1972 of the 


Office of Security contacted me in regard to the ЕВІ investigation of the Watergate 
situation. At that time I informed| | |оғ the telephone call from 


: — з. December 1971. Attached is a copy of a Memorandum for the 
e 


cord prepared by ИШИ: а result of our conversation. 
3. In the summer of 1972 I took my family to Disney World in Florida 
and took that occasion to drop in to е [оа me in 
a private conversation that he had been interviewed three or four times by the 


FBI їп connection with the Watergate affair and he related to me his contact 


00155 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


(2). 


with Howard Hunt. On 19 July 1972 after my return from Florida I reported 
this conversation to the Director of Security and made it a Memorandum for 
the Record. This memorandum was sent to Mr. Colby and a copy of the 
memorandum is attached. 


4. Other than knowing Mr. МеСоха through his employment with 
the Agency and meeting Howard Hunt once in about 1959, I do not know nor 
have J had any contact with any individuals named or knowledge of xelated 
matters now receiving attention in the press. 


AE A X EL T 
Charles W. Kane 
špecial Assistant to the 


` Deputy Director 
for Management and Services 


Atts 


00156 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director- Comptrolle 


Per our. conversation on Monday. 


‘Ho 7 Osborn 20 July 1972 


зання enn mea n m 
LI . 


of Security (DATE) 


FORM NO. REPLACES FORM 10-101 d 
1 AUG 54 10] WHICH МАУ nt USED. - (47) 


вт ыа 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


19 July 1972 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Conversation with НЕ 


1. While on leave visiting Disney World in Florida, І 
dropped in to see who lives in Winterhaven, Florida. 


[ ]retired from the Agency about five years ago on disability due 


to a serious heart condition. Не was with the Office of з for 
about 20 years prior to his retirement, 


2. During a private conversation[ ]told me that he bad 
been interviewed three or four times by the FBI in connection with 
the McCord-Hunt affair. I asked him why he had been interviewed, 
and he told me that in late 1971 he had been contacted by Howard 
Hunt who suggested that he consider an assignment as Security 
Officer for the Republican Party. [ ]visitea Washington in 
January 1972 to discuss the proposed position with Howard Hunt 
who apparently was acting on behalf of the Republican Party.. 
furnished a resume to Hunt and discussed the position with him. 
Ultimately, he decided not to accept the position because he felt 
that his heart condition would not allow him to become involved in 
such activity. 


3. According to| ^ ]|during the meeting with Mr. Hunt 
they discussed some, of the requirements of the job. At that time 


‚ they discussed a need for both a positive and a ¢ounteraudio program 


and a need for a good security system both before and during the 
National Convention. | | jindicated that he sincerely believed that 
the Republican Party did need a security officer and a good security 
programmer but felt that he could not afford to accept the job even. 
though it was a very lucrative offer. Apparently, money was not а 
problem. : 


Т а 00158 


: MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. When [__ ]dectined, he indicated that Mr. Hunt asked 
for any other recommendations he might have. According to 
he told Mr. Hunt that most of the people he knew were still in the 


‘Agency, but he did furnish the name ааб might be 
possibly ready to retire from the Agency. 7 


5. | [informea me that he assumed that the Bureau 
obtained his name due to the resume he furnished Mr. Hunt. He 
said that the Bureau had talked to him on three or four occasions 
and that he had written up about a 40 page statement concerning 
his dealings with Mr. Hunt. When asked about Mr. McCord, 
said that he really did not know McCord that well and declined any. 
knowledge of Mr. McCord's technical capability: 


6. [indicated that he had not been in touch 
with Mr. Hunt since the early part of 1972 and knew nothing of 
the Watergate operation. He stated that he had gained the impres- 
sion from the Bureau interview that the technical devices were being 
removed at the time of the arrest and were not being installed as 
originally reported. 

7. All of the above information was volunteered by 

and I really did not get involved in any discussion on the 

matter other than to comment that I hated to see the Agency's name 
connected with such an incident in any way. The above conversation 
took place during a 10 or 15 minute period and no other discussion 
relating to this incident was held. Itis being reported for the record 
and for information of the Director of Security. 


[ E ae с 


harles W. Kane 


нн ыы 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


17 July 1972 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Charles W. Kane 3 


1. Last week Special Agent Arnold Parham of the FBI con- 
tacted the Acting DD/OS. He asked whether or not the Subjects 
worked for.the Central Intelligence Agency. Previously, requests 

E of this nature were followed up by the FBI with ап interview of the - 
subjects. 


2. Ibriefed Mr. Colby who is the лев s focal point on 
the "Watergate" case and the Acting DD/S of. the FBI i inquiry. 
Mr. Colby suggested that we determine the extent of iavolvement 
and indicated that we advise the Bureau of their employment, 


3. When Agent Parham was again contacted and advised 
of the Subjects! employment with the Agency, he indicated that 


the Bureau does nót wish to interview them. | Bose г 
4 

4. The office of the DD/PS will interview] | | ie JS 4 : 

the same fashion as | маз previously interviewed. ". a 1/24 


5. Icalled Mr. Kane both at his office and his residence 
'and learned that he is in Florida and will return to duty on 17 July. 
I called Mr. Kane this morning to advise him of the inquiry. 


6. Mr. Kane stated that he has no firm conclusion as to 
how the Bureau obtained his name. He stated that he has seen 
Mr. Hunt on only one occasion in 1959. At that time Hunt was 
the Chief of Station] | | The meeting was occasioned 


00160 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


by the fact that Mr. Kane 


Mr. Kane stated further that around 
Christmas time of 1971 he received a call from 

who wanted to get in touch with Mr. Hunt. |. fesked 
Mr. Kane how he could get in touch with him. Mr. Kane obtained 
Mr. Hunt's telephone number through telephone information channels 
whereupon he passed the number on tof sd EL 


7. Mr. Kane stated that he has information that] ] 


has talked to the FBI on several occasions in connection with the 
current investigation and that he surmises that the Bureau may 
have obtained his name from him. 


Deputy Director of Security 


00161 


ee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


gis dé ee ee .. » ον 


E 


++ <. ---- -------.---- -- To — —— ——— À— صمت‎ - 


. | SEN PL WILL CHECK (CASS ISTION чи ОРЕН 
EUSCLASSIFIED |. [оочер | | SECRET 


J 
| | l AM OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 
| зер SERS AN зле SAE [МНА 


ррма5, Has. 


| | ЗЕ — E 


BE ссринин" MENT 
- Р. Дт [| 
NE APPROYAL ши 
COMMENT | Jm | 
|_| 


CONCURRENCE 


DIRECT REPLY ` 


RETURN 


PREPARE REPLY 
DISPATCH B RECOMMENDATION 
|__| SUGHATURE 


Reiunarks:, Al 


4 


š MO. € Et. ч “+ 
ΠΏ IM S704)» + 


00162 ` 


ο. 
ми 
t 
é 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 


es `_ FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. DATE 


| | - Pes | - | 8 May 13 
i wirin pog xesusNTAL | | SECRET 


і том p 237 Use previous editions 


MI 


pof a reeovct 


^em e ————— F e 
` 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


8 May 1973 


΄ E" 


| MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
THROUGH: Deputy Director for Management and Services 


SUBJECT: Involvement in Sensitive Domestic Activities 


і 1. As chief ої thelÜbP Systems Group} prior to 1969, T was involved 
in providing data на support for fhe following Sensitive projects: 


a. êr: Staff. Mr. Richard Ober's program for processing data 


of U.S. "citizens believed to be militants, subversives, terrorists, 
etc, 


on "oe 


Ό.όΕΙ Staffjand Office of Medical Services program, 


for recording Gata on mi and 0.5. physicians 


c. A Systems Group sponsored program of common concern 
. listing travel of U.S. citizens to and from Communist countries. 


2. In the same capacity my staff and I briefed police officers from 
New York State and Chicago at the DCI's request (Admiral Rayborn) on 
data processing techniques related to biographie intelligence (unclassified). 


3. As a member of O/PPB, I have been aware of five programs with 
possibly sensitive domestic overtones. 


a. DDS&T/ORD's contract with Ук ринв 
аз == VIP He and Behavior Prediction 


b. DDS&T/ORD's Project OFTEN which involved the collection 


, of data оп dangerous drugs from U.S. firms. Ibelieve Mr. Helms 
" terminated this program last Fall. 


tà 


yields. 


"e, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DDS&T/ORD's project 


&T/ORD's use of БАТ5-А data to analyze Soviet wheat 


_DDS&T Special Projects Staff - tre] program. 


2 


τ SBGRET/SENSITIVE 0 00164 Р 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


& MAY 1973 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
VIA: Deputy Director for Management and Services 
SUBJECT: Watergate/Ellsberg and Like Matters 


l. No personal involvement, direct or indirect to my knowledge 
on my part ог my staff, with the Watergate or Pentagon papers cases, 
with Young on security regulations or with classified releases to 
RAND. Iwas aware, many years back when in the DDI, that certain 
classified papers were released to RAND from the production 
offices. One staff member, while a member of the 
IC Staff, did have a RAND contact which he is elaborating on 
Separately. 


2. There are some sensitive activities or projects of which 
Iam aware, which are mighty close to the borderline of legality 
in terms of Agency mission, including: 
а. The CI Staff (Ober) project 


c. Ап Office of Security narcotics cover project 


d. А CI Staff funding-channel project with the FBI 


00165 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


3. One of my staff uc NENNEN while in OCI 
was the briefing officer for thé Attorney General, buf can recall 


nothing in his dealing with Mr.^ Mitchell which would have any relevance 
to the current issues, A couple other staff officers are reporting 
separately on some sensitive activities in which they were involved 
prior to coming to this staff. 


Director of Planning, 
Programming, and Budgeting 


00166 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E Qi. ор ας ο Т] LJ і УЕ ONLY 67 LJ wae tinis РУ СУ m^ LJ млл а 


— Í —— س‎ ann. 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 


FROM: EXTENSION NO. 
C.V.S. Roosevelt 
Chairman, TSCC i DATE і 
TO: (Officer designation, ur nd | 
(Officer designolion, room number, є OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom 


INITIALS ‘fo whom. Drow o fine across column ofter eoch comment.) 


building) 


RECEIVED ` | FORWARDED 


FORM 6 0 USE PREVIOUS : | INTERNAL ` 
p ке... 10 "лек". [C] SEEREF——H-EONFEIDENTIAL Г] INTERNAL | 
IE DC PETERET i eaaa ма и شس دتشا ےت‎ EA nip ی‎ йон» м-дын ntan μμ» 


MORI DocID; 1451843 


UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD 


TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE COUNTERMEASURES, COMMITTEE 


OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN 


TSCC-D-386 
8 May 1973. 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


SUBJECT Й Support Furnished to Elements of the Government 
Outside of the Intelligence Community 


The Interagency Audio Surveillance Countermeasures Training 
Center (ITC) was established at the instigation of this Committee and 
opened in late 1968 under the executive management of СТА. The 
need for such а school had been recognized by the National Security 
Council's Technical Subcommittee as far back as 1962 and was re- 
emphasized by the Security Committee of the USIB in their October 
1964 report titled Damage Assessment of the Technical Surveillance 
Penetration of the US Embassy, Moscow.” 


Membership on the TSCC has been confined to agencies and 
departments who are represented on the USIB. From time to time 
other elements of the Government have indicated their concern over 
the audio surveillance threat and asked for membership on the 
Committee, In all cases they have been turned down with the 
suggestion that they take advantage of the TSCC's product either 
through liaison with the security organizations of the Committee's 
members or by nominating students to attend the ІТС. During 
CY-72 the following students were trained at the ITC: 


Central Intelligence Agency 10 
Defense Intelligence Agency 5 
Department of the Air Force . 25 
Department of the Army | 50 
Department of Justice (BNDD) | 4 
Department of the Navy 5 
Department of State 3 


00168 


MORI DocID: 1451643 


Department of Transportation 3 
Internal Revenue Service 3 
National Security Agency 1 
United States Secret Service 6 
White House Communications Agency 2 


117 


The ІТС has furnished training only to employees of the 
agencies and departments of the Federal Government. State and 
local police departments have not been detailed to the ITC. 


Сб 


Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt 
Chairman 


00169 


се елле чө кє 
: MORI DocID: 1451843 


Retirement Information - E. Howard Hunt 


1. Date of retirement: 30 April 1970 
2. System: CIA Retirement and Disability System 
3. Grade and salary at time of retirement: GS-15, Step 8 - $28,226 


4. Creditable civilian service used in computing annuity: 
17 May 1948 to 8 June 1948 . - Economic Cooperation Administration | 
9 June 1948 to 19 February 1949 - State (BCA) | 
8 November 1949 to 30 April 1970 - СТА 


5. Annuity: 
| At retirement - $1,020 per month 
At present - $1,181 per month (which знав cost-of-living 
і ` increases since date of retirement) 
6. At the time of retirement Mr. Hunt did not elect survivorship benefits, 
This meant that upon his death, his ise would not draw a survivorship 
annuity. By letter of 5 April 1971 he raised the question of changing 
his election but, was’ informed by the General Counsel on 6 Мау 1971 that 
this could not be done. Ву letter dated 5 May 1972 Mr. Hunt asked Mr. М 
. Houston to raise with the Director the possibility of being тесей to 
| | duty for a short period of time, after which he could денне again and 
elect survivorship benefits. By letter of 16 May 1972 Mr. Houston advised mE u 
Mr. Hunt that to call him back to duty solely for the purpose of permitting 
him to change survivorship benefits would be in violation of the spirit of 


the CIA Retirement Act. 


00170 . ' 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


22 May 1913 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General 


BiB-4 
| | 
Attached are the reports Bill Colby asked to see: 


J: Restless Youth (September 1968), No. 0613/68, 
Secret/Sensitive/No Foreign Dissem (Copy 78). 


This document was produced in two versions--one 
with the chapter on radical students in America (pages 
25-39) which was sent only to the President, Walt Rostow, 
and Cy Vance (former Deputy Secretary of Defense); the 
other version without the references to the American 
Scene was disseminated to twenty people outside the 
Agency. This document without the material on the 
US was updated in February 1969 and copies were sent 
to the Vice President and Dr. Kissinger. A still more 
abbreviated edition was sent to the Attorney General 


‚їп March 1969. 


2. Black Radicalism in the Caribbean (6 August 1969), 


No. 1839/69, Secret/No Foreign Dissem (Copy 142). 


3. Black Radicalism in the Caribbean--Another Look 


(12 June 1970), No. 0517/70, Secret/No Foreign 
Diisem (Copy 98). 


Please note that these are our record copies. and should 


наа «ον 


be ον λε d. 


f. 


Deputy bium for Intelligence 


004171 


Attachments 


i) 


013329 


HM ===] 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SENOER WILL CH. . CLASSIFICATION 1 TOP AND BOTTOM Ë 


DIRECT REPLY PREPARE REPLY 


ACTION 
DISPATCH RECOMMENDATION 


APPROVAL 


NE 
| [5 
(comment — — | — |rne | RETURN 
| INFORMATION | 


CONCURRENCE 


у ЖШШЕ 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 


FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. | Dar - | 


И FAM pH TUE Use previous der 


— 


nehme wae 


:` س Sit ¿uE‏ ا س ا 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


y С ῃ ` - fyc 
17 Nig REL AUI 1553 
tarm т, м YS ᾱ ο ¿Q Š жа n 5% . ж * a c 4 HET Mi 
SESS CPs Блас оАо of COI Soper on τοσο ας Dissidents 


is sensitive 
ziitood 

p protien 
de notoriety, 
se pursuant to 
‘in his tert 

є», thereby 
ized the paper 
mination to the wenbers of the President's Cabinet 


1. Bisseminnticn to the Cabinet and сац che 
li > - 


vehat 
of оці Gic 
partíoniarly 1 
Wr, Rastev's i 


ум 
M 
2 
£ 
* 


p tho 
Sid tence woui 
n е 


struct 4988, 


а study of stucont radicels in the United біз 
ο ορ ὅσα the Агегсу'ю charter. Wa have sani 


a 


ior cies 
end withis the Intelligence Comaunity by elinirnating alto- 
gether tho chapter which discusses Students for à Democratic 
Socisty (SDS) and by strikinz from th= Prospects section all 
mention of SES. 


з. Ovtsice the Comunity but within the Guyerscucit-- 
че believe tha sasie tent should be Gurtser кейс for 
the purpose of el ininetice even the most casual усїогсьсе 
to tho domestic scene--lest someone inier from such a chence 
reference thet τ oríginsi paper ред contained a section on 
Énmericsn student Tho nineteen country chapters vhich form 
Part II сі Kes η Youth can be Фієсесгікаїсф within the 
Governarnt, provided. that tne controls npproprizto to their 
elessification are observed. То do the editing end reprinting 


[re uired would taxe several days ві lonst. 


3. Release to the scsdemic world or to the public-- 
For the reasons est ibo пе Believe that release of 
the basic test would harm the Agency. The country chapters 
could not be released without first being rewritten to 
eliminate ell classified information. Once this wes done, 


00173 


ο. —— —=— F. — r wr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


cale inforzstion z31rordy &vailstle in the 

б, re is ro lock of covert Lliterrture on tbe 
et stuceut dissent; virtually ever ubli in 
«1 lesst one title on his brent 1 ns s 
zu soles of 5covoirüument, su eni = 
Golfare, heve sponsored rcronrcb a 
pvepuüred io publish th í£incinz пиз 
herd sssinst putlio rej о, 


rr eee 


MORI 
DocID: 145 


{ 
ADDE? perso? 1 Copy 
No μας ὃν gem ‚зой О yea dine 
NU ру pe үвэ%9® 
ү Ж per 29) 
x MT eT 4969 
y τη М yv 
\ г 
NY 
9047? 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Restless Youth 


SEPTEMBER 1968 
` No. 0613/68 


00176 
NENNEN. 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


——MÓÀ ine نرم م سم‎ iy تال نک‎ lett ME ra س‎ - М م‎ n ς 


A os 


$e hab. 
ioe bal oo 


ion TN 


© кр 9 
m Мә ES PAS Oo 
blak Reh, e«t ion 
| νη ES 
ля 
po jou τ 
CD “УГ > b 


003177 


нн о АВ 
| MORI DocID: 1451843 


il May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Research Project on Robert Vesco 


1. On 15 October 1972 Messrs. Breckinridge EE 
‚ in the course of a Survey, were briefed on activitie < залай 
Atlantic/Pacific Division of the Office of Economic Reports, Опе Hiver 
project cited was a query from the Director, apparently at the re- к 
quest of Secretary Shultz, to the effect, "What do we know about 
Vesco," the man then running 105. Two of OER's analysts were assigned 
to the project and, working through the Domestic Contact Service, 
spent a day going over the files of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, There apparently was some contact also with EUR Division 
of the Deputy Directorate for Plans and with the Office of Current 
Intelligence, | | ` 


2, The information above is based on rough notes and obviously 
is sketchy. It is cited now not to suggest any wrongdoing but because 
of the current publicity about Vesco and the probability of continuing 
probes into the subject by the press and the courts. 


Scott D. Breckinridge 


00178 


kw ww ms ww ..ÜY............... MÀ MÁ—M _  — < C UH 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


Director of Central Intelligence 


Please handle in this channel due to classification of sachen: 


WARNING 


This document contains classified information affecting the national 
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage 
laws, US Code, Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits 
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to. 
an unauthorized' person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial 
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any 
foreign government to the detriment of the United States. 


THIS DOCUMENT MUST BE KEPT ІМ COMMUNICATIONS 
INTELLIGENCE CHANNELS AT ALL TIMES | 


It is to be seen only by US personnel especially indoctrinated 
and authorized to receive COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE 
information; its security must be maintained in accordance with 
COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE REGULATIONS. 


No action is to be taken on any COMMUNICATIONS INTELLI- 
GENCE which may be contained herein, regardless of the advantages 
to be gained, unless such action is first approved by the Director 
of Central Intelligence. : 


^ TOP-cESREL.... 90179 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- 8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
FROM : Deputy Director for Intelligence 


SUBJECT : Activities Possibly Outside CIA's 
Legislative Charter 


1. This memorandum responds to your instruction to 
report any activities which might be considered outside CIA's 
. legislative charter. 


2. All Office and Staff chiefs in the Intelligence Directorate 
have reviewed the past and present activities of their components. 
Ihave received responses from all of them, and none reported any 
activities related to either the Watergate affair or the break into 
the offices of Ellsberg's psychiatrist. Although contacts with 
three of the people allegedly implicated in these incidents were 
reported, these contacts were on matters other than the two 
improper activities: 


Hunt: Col. White, Richard Lehman, and I talked 
to Hunt in late 1970 regarding his preparation 
of a recommendation in support of the Agency!s 
nomination of R. Jack Smith for the National 
Civil Service League Award. 


Mitchell; While Mr. Mitchell was Attorney General, 
an OCI officer was assigned the task of 
providing him with daily Ὁ on 

foreign developments. 


00480 


CIA INTERNA EONLY 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


Young: Harry Eisenbeiss ШИШ CRS 
had frequent contacts Wi oung during the 


summer of 1972 in connection with Executive 
Order 11652 and the implementing NSC 
directive, This involved visits by Young 

to CIA to discuss information storage and 
retrieval and several meetings of ап inter- 
agency group dealing with the implementation 
of the Executive Order and directive. 


.3. In accordance with my instructions, several Offices reported 
domestic activities which might appear questionable to outsiders. 
Their responses are attached. Most of these activities are clearly 
within the Agency's charter, but there are a few which could be 
viewed as borderline. 


- DCS accepts information on possible foreign 
involvement in US dissident groups and on the 
narcotics trade when sources refuse to deal 
with the FBI and BNDD directly. 


- DCS, for six months in late 1972 and early 1973, 
was acquiring telephone routing slips on overseas 
calis. | 


-  NPIC and COMIREX review satellite imagery 
from NASA programs to identify photography 
too "sensitive" for public release. ` 


zc 


зыт 00187. 
СТА INTERNATNXUSE ONLY 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- МРІС has examined domestic coverage for special 
purposes such as natural catastrophies and civil 
disturbances. | 


- OCI, in 1967 and 1968, prepared intelligence 
memoranda on possible foreign connections with 
the US anti-war movement and world-wide student 
dissidence (including the SDS) аі the request of 
the White House. | 


- FBIS has on occasion supplied linguists to work 
directly for another agency, e.g., to the FBI to 
iranslate Arabic in Washington. 


- FBIS monitors radio press dispatches and reports 
covered by copyright. These are circulated within 
the Government and stamped "Official Use Only", 

"This has gone on for three decades without problems. 


-. FBIS has monitored and reported on foreign radio 
broadcasts of statements and speeches of US citizens 
such as those by US POWs in Hanoi, Jane Fonda, 
and Ramsey Clarke. 


Deputy Director for Intelligence 


Attachments 


uda ΜΙ 
SESRET 00182 
CIA INTERNAS, USE ONLY 


NEENENNEEEEEEEEEEEIE——————————————M—]—H—'PÁ————————————— 0$ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00183 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


7 May 1973 bó сч 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Intelligence . 


SUBJECT: DCS Domestic Activity 


To the best of my knowledge, ` DCS has not engaged in any * 
activity outside the CIA charter or that could be construed as | 
illegal. Some of the functions that we perform under HR 1-13# 

(i) of providing operational support within the US to all 
elements of CIA and to the USIB-member agencies, however, are 
perhaps borderline or could be construed as illegal if mis- 
interpreted. For example: : 


5, Collect information on possible foreign involvement 
or penetration o£ US dissident groups, but only in a 
passive manner and only when the source has refused 
to pass the information directly to the FBI. 


6. Collect information on the narcotics trade, but again 


опіу іп a passive manner when the source has refused to 
pass the information directly to BNDD or the FBI. 


00184 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: DCS Domestic Activity 


10, Acquire routing slips recording the fact of overseas 
telephone calls between persons in the US and persons 
overseas and telephone calls between two foreign points 
routed through US switchboards, This activity lasted 
for. approximately six months but has ceased. 


| ET pf 
uA A 


й MARS R. MURPHY / / | 
Direcfor, Domestic Contact" Service 


. 00185 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


а — ο 


00486 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


0 
EYES О 


7 Мау 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


VIA : Deputy Director for Intelligence 
FROM : Director of Current Intelligence - 
SUBJECT : Activity Related to Domestic Events 


1. ОСІ provided current. intelligence briefings 
to John Mitchell as Attorney General. With the approval 
of the DCI, this practice began in the pre-inaugural 
period in New York and continued until Mr. Mitchell's 
resignation as Attorney General. The OCI officer 
assigned to this duty had a daily appointment with Mr. 
Mitchell in his office at Justice. 


2. The briefings provided were strictly on foreign 
intelligence, and were a legitimate service for CIA to: 
provide to an official advisor to the President, who sat 
on, among other bodies, the 40 Committee. It must be 
presumed, however, that our man's daily visits were 
known and speculated on elsewhere in Justice. The 
problem comes in the potential press treatment: "СТА 
Officer in Continuous Contact with Mitchell." 


Director of Current Intelligence 


00187 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 
CTA INTERNAL ΠΞΕ. ONLY 
7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
VIA : Deputy Director for Intelligence 


FROM Director of Current Intelligence . 


SUBJECT 


Activity Related to Domestic Events 


1. OCI began following Caribbean black radicalism 
in earnest in 1968. The emphasis of our analysis was on 
black nationalism as a political force in the Caribbean 
and as a threat to the security of the Caribbean states. 
Two DDI memoranda were produced on the subject: "Black 
Radicalism in the Caribbean" (6 August 1969), and "Black 
Radicalism in the Caribbean--Another Look" (12 June 1970). 
In each a single paragraph was devoted to ties with the 
US black power movement; the discussion primarily concerned 
visits of Stokely Carmichael and other US. black power 
activists to the Caribbean and other overt contacts. 


2. In June 1970, Archer Bush of ОСІ was asked to 
write a memorandum with special attention to links be- 
tween black radicalism in the Caribbean and advocates of 
black power in the US. The record is not clear where 
this request originated, but it came through channels 
from the DCL. The paper was to be treated as especially 
sensitive and was to include material provided by the 
Special Operations group of the CI Staff.. The CI Staff 
material was voluminous but did not provide meaningful 
evidence of important links between militant blacks in 
the US and the Caribbean. This, in fact, was one of 
the conclusions of the paper. The memorandum was produced 
in typescript form and given to the DCI. | 2% 


00188 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


3. For several months in the first half of 1968 
the Caribbean Branch wrote periodic typescript memoranda.. 
on Stokely Carmichael's travels abroad during. a period 
when he had dropped out of public view. Our recollection 
is that the memoranda were for internal CIA use only, 
although a copy of one was inadvertently sent to the FBI. 


Director of Current Intelligence 


00489 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ο 
EYES O 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


VIA : Deputy Director for Intelligence 
FROM `: Director of Current Intelligence 
SUBJECT : Activity Related to Domestic Events 


l. In late spring of 1968 Walt Rostow, then 
Special Assistant to the President for National Security. 
Affairs, tasked the DCI with undertaking a survey of 
worldwide student dissidence. Confronted by tjmult at 
campuses like Columbia and mindful of the violence 
accompanying student outbursts at Berlin's Free University: 
and elsewhere, Rostow sought to learn whether youthful 


. dissidence was interconnected: spawned by the same causes; 


financed and hence manipulated by forces or influences 
hostile to the interests of the US and its allies; or likely 
to come under inimical sway to the detriment of US interests. 


2. The paper was prepared | ot ОСІ 
with the assistance of the CA and CI Staffs. “The DDI, 
D/OCI, and net with Rostow to elicit the reasons 
for his or t's concerns and to agree on the 
sources to be examined, the research methods to be followed, 
etc. 


` 3. Written during the summer of 1968, the most 
sensitive version of Restless Youth comprised two sections. 
The first was a philosophical treatment of student unrest, 
its motivation, history and tactics. This section drew 
heavily on overt literature and FBI reporting on Students 
for a Democratic Society and affiliated groups. In a sense, 
the survey of dissent emerged ‘from a shorter (30 page) 
typescript study of SDS and its foreign ties the same 
author had done for Mr. Rostow at the DCI's request in 
December 1967. (We no longer have a copy.) 00130 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


„шшр... 
EYES ON 


4. Because of the paucity of information on foreign 
student movements, it was necessary to focus on SDS which 
. then monopolized the field of student action here and 
abroad. А second section.comprised 19 country chapters-- 
ranging from Argentina to Yugoslavia--and stood by itself 
as a review of foreign student dissidence. š 


5. Because. SDS was а domestic organization, the 
full papex Restless Youth, including the essay on world- 
wide dissent went only to nine readers. A copy may be 
in the Johnson Library. | 


6. Following the paper' s favorable reception by 
the President and Mr. Rostow, the DCI briefed the NSC 
on student dissent. The sensitive version subsequently 
was updated and sent to the White House in February 1969. 


7. The less sensitive text was disseminated in 


September 1968 and then updated and issued again in 
March 1969 and August 1970. 


Director of Current Intelligence 


00331. 


BY ene et rad 


й 
- 
š 
š 
З 
$ 
* С 
= 

- 


MORI DocID: 


WARNING 

This document contains classified information affecting the national 
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage 
laws, US Code, Title 18, Sections 793,794, and 798. The law prohibits 
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to 
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial 
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any 
foreign government to the detriment of the United States. 

THIS DOCUMENT MUST BE KEPT IN COMMUNICATIONS 

INTELLIGENCE CHANNELS AT ALL TIMES 


It is to be seen only by US personnel especially indoctrinated 
and authorized to receive COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE 
information; its security must be maintained in accordance with 
COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE REGULATIONS. 


No action is to be taken on any COMMUNICATIONS INTELLI- 
GENCE which may be contained herein, regardless of the advantages 
to be gained, unless such action is first approved by the Director 
of Central Intelligence. 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| TOF asena | 
| EYES ONLY. 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


ντα . : Deputy Director for Intelligence  .. те 
FROM : Director of Current Intelligence 
SUBJECT : Activity Related to Domestic Events 


1. In late: 1967 ОСІ participated in the preparation 
of several short intelligence memoranda dealing with the - 
foreign connections of US organizations and activists in- 
volved in. the anti-war movement. The main purpose of 
these reports, prepared at the request of the White House, 
was to determine whether any links existed between inter- 
national Communist elements or foreign governments and the 
American peace movement. The conclusion reached was that 
there was some evidence of ad hoc contacts between anti- 
war activists at home and abroad but no evidence of 
direction or formal coordination. 

2. In October 1967 President Johnson expressed 
interest in this subject and ordered a high level inter- 
departmental survey. : In response to his personal request 
to the DCI, Mr. Helms.asked the CI Staff to collect what- 
ever information was available through our own sources and 
through liaison with the FBI and to pass it to OCI, which 
was directed to prepare a memorandum from the DCI to’ ENG 
President. b 


3. A book message requirement was sent to all stations 
to report whatever information was on hand relevant to this 
subject. Although agent reports on Communist front opera- 
tions overseas were of some value, the primary source of 
information on the activities of US activists--and that was 
quite limited--was sensitive intercepts produced by NSA, 
which had been similarly tasked by the White House. 


00293 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. А draft memorandum was jointly prepared by 
OCI and CI Staff and forwarded to the DCI. He passed 
this typescript memo, dated 15 November 1967, to the 
President personally. The White House сору is now in 
the files of President Johnson's papers at the library 
in Austin. 


5. Brief follow-up memoranda were prepared and 
forwarded to the White House on 21 December and 17 
January 1968. | According to our best recollection, no 
further finished intelligence reports on international 
connections of the peace movement were produced. 


Director of Current Intelligence 


00194 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


νο 


00395 


. inter-Agency group to discuss CIA compliance with 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Intelligence ρω 


SUBJECT: Contacts with David Young 


1. In the summer of 1972, I had frequent 
contacts with David Young. He was in this 
building under my control once. These contacts 
related solely to Executive Order 11652 and the 
NSC directive concerned therewith. Young was 
apparently at the time in the process of drafting 
the NSC directive. The visit to the building 
under my control was for a briefing on CRS processes 
for storage and retrieval of documents and is 
apparently reflected in the paragraph of the 2 
directive concerned with the Data Index. I visited 
him in his White House office at least twice in 
the company of an inter-Agency group concerned 
with the Data Index. 


2.. In August of 1972, also 
visited Mr. Young's office of an 


the data index instructions. To the best of my 
knowledge no one in CRS had any contact with 
Mr. Young in his role as a "plumber." 


Director, Central Reference Service 


00196 


am 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: O/DDI 


SUBJECT: . Involvement In Domestic Affair 


l. This memorandum responds to the DDI's 
request for a listing of any questionable 
involvements in domestic affairs. I do not believe 
that CRS is doing anything that a reasonable 
man could construe as improper. 


2. .CRS does, ої course, have several programs 
to acquire still pictures, movies, videotapes 


`3. CRS files do not generally bear on U.S. 
citizens or organizations. The biographie file- 
building criteria specifically excludes U.S. 
nationals unless the person has become of such 
major importance in the political life of a foreign 
country that the file is essential: To my knowledge, 


P y 
о are now U.S. citizens but we 
have no way to separate them; we have files on 


U.S. defectors to Cuba.) 


00197 


p 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: Involvement In Domestic Affairs 


4. The CIA Library has several informal 
snag files intended to aid the librarians in 
answering the kinds of questions that they know 
they will get on a continuing basis. An 
appointments file is a collection of clippings 
on appointed federal officials: who holds what 
job when and what is his background? The extremist 
files are a collection of folders on a variety 
of organizations and a few people with intricate 
organizational links. Any sort of extremism 
is grist for these particular files.: And a few 
persons, e.g., Rap Brown and Eldridge Cleaver, 
have dossiers consisting almost exclusively of 
clippings from public media. These files are 
unclassified and consist mostly of clippings 
from the public press: U.S., foreign, underground, 
scholarly. 


- 5. Т am not aware of any other kind of 
involvement in domestic activities that is not 
related to development of techniques or logistics 
or legitimate training of CRS personnel. 


з 


Director, Central Reference Service 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— s... ....... 


00439 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


IS a 


8 May 1973 


> і : d ‘Leaks of Tack Audersa 


oes In January 1972, NPIC herformed image enhancement techniques on IV 
11 tapes ofa Jack Anderson show. The- purpose was to try to identify | 
і. serial numbers o£ CIA documents in Anderson's possession. The EE 

was. levi. on NPIC through the Office of Security. - 


p πο Poppy. Project 


З NPIC has provided the. Services “of e Pr to assist an intéragency - 
effort to detect poppy cultivation. In addition the Center has τ μα. 

(ou the contractual mechanism in support of the Bureau of Narcotics and 

. 3 Dangerous Drugs for a mit spectral стор study by а private company. .: 


С 3. Reviews of NASA Collected Inage 


NPIC has and continues to conduct eviews of satellite imagery e 
. NASA programs to identify '|sensltive" frames of photography not releasable - 
to the public and to ascertain the intelligence potential of the imagery. 
* This service has.been pro ided for GEMENI and ERTS Peu. and pro- ; 
parations are underway f for review of SHY LAB imagery. : i 


A Peaceful Uses of Satel T Trage 


ΡΝ 


to provide number of looks at domestic 
coverage ze Specs purposes. «Έχει Вхапрі, s include: | А 


En . Los Angeles Earthquake 
- Sierra Snow (flood threat). 
- Current Mississippi Floods 
+ Hurricane Сапліїе! Damage on-the Coast of the Gat ої £ Mexico 
.  - Civil Disturbance] in ре trait, : 
_  - ОЕР U.S, Data Base - 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


| 


ΗΝ 


- n EB 00202 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: DDI 


SUBJECT | : Sensitive Activities 


1. FBIS has been engaged in no activities related to the Ellsberg 
and Watergate cases. : 


2. FBIS operations occasionally extend to the domestic arena. From 
time to time, FBIS linguists are made available to DDO or Office of 
Communications components for special operations (usually abroad) involving 
close-support SIGINT work or translation of audio take. On one occasion 
recently DDO, on behalf of the FBI, requested the services of several 
FBIS linguists skilled in Arabic to work directly..for the FBI on a short- 
term project here in Washington. The arrangements were made by Mr. Oberg 
of the DDO CI Staff. He said the project was very highly classified and 
that FBIS participation was approved by Mr. Colby and the Director.  FBIS 
participation vas approved by the Director of FBIS after a check with 
the ADDI. Other examples of sensitive linguistic support work are help 
in the handling and resettlement of defectors, the recent assignment of 
an employee to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerais Drugs to transcribe 
recordings in a rare Chinese dialect, and the detailing of another 
Chinese linguist on two occasions to assist in the U.S. military training 
of Chinese Nationalist cadets. 


3. Within its responsibility for monitoring press agency trans- 
missions for intelligence information, FBIS publishes and distributes 
some material which falls in a "gray" area of copyright protection, libel, 
and privacy of international communications. Press services controlled 
by national governments and transmitted by radioteletype without 
specific addressees, e.g. the Soviet TASS service and the PRC's NCNA, 
are monitored by FBIS and the material is disseminated without саве 
tion. Тһе legality of this has been affirmed by decisions of the 
Office of General Counsel. 


E _ 


MORI DocID:.1451843 


4. The routine FBIS monitoring of foreign radio broadcasts often 
involves statements or speeches made by 0.5. citizens using those radio 
facilities. Examples are statements made or allegedly made by American 
POW's in Hanoi, by Jane Fonda in Hanoi and by Ramsey Clark in Vietnam. 
At the request of FBI and the Department of Justice, and with the 
approval of the CIA Office of General Counsel, we have on occasion sub- 
mitted transcripts of such broadcasts to the Department of Justice as 
part of that Department's consideration of a possible trial. In such 
cases, we have been required to submit names of FBIS monitors involved, 
presumably because of the possibility they might be required as witnesses. 
(In one case in 1971, an FBIS staff employee was directed to appear as 
an expert witness in the court-martial of a Marine enlisted man charged 
with aiding the enemy in a broadcast from Hanoi.)  FBIS views all this 


‘with misgivings. Monitoring of such broadcasts is incidental and we 


rue attribution of their news to FBIS, and we should not be considered 
policemen maintaining surveillance of traveling Americans. 


Director 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service 


ET - | 00203 


rA о RE موص‎ А w... r s. o th 


FORM 


3-42 


τν, Ὁ UU AAI. I RC ισπ. ЕЕЕ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Director 


Office of Tech 


_ т ὥς 


n 
i 
1 
4 


E 


ΠΕΣ te Ж USE ONLY iy dee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


mr ἐν ko 


H МЫ я 
ш ud iG 


SALOU SOR: Daputy Diicotor ror Оротатісив 


H 
E 


Y. 


SUBJECT: Docuuentatio 1 Suzrort for Use in the 
` United Bia BS 


1. As you are avare this cffice provides document 
support for a variety of covert activities. 


| Specific use is not 


always available to this office and should properly come from 
the requesting office who can provide the details.  U.S. 

alias documentation use in the United States is approved by . 
the Office of Security and normally has the concurrence of 


-Central Cover Staff or FI and.CI Staffs. Requests received 


by this office from outside the Cla ndestine Service are 
approved КА ап | appropriate office of the, DES 


2. A review of this office's зерні support files for 


` the period 1 January 1972 to date indicates that the following 


number. of 0.8. alias document requests were fulfilled for 


"probable use in the United States. The statistics below are 


broken down by requester: 


00205 


mM—————s————— F 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


092065 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


0207 


і MORI DocID: 1451843 


“ми 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ba кк TTT 
P" d Director 
Office of Technical Service 


cc:DD/SET 


`. 00209 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


sub То stow fem shom 
Я 


S T 
ыг ` ` трт 


UM pd 


дк 


4 JUN 197 


3 : : 
p Ху 
ἐσ DPA 


00219 


ΠΠ ο с emos mm nn 


B-NIL a] SERE ELCHE, D sw СО ШЕШ] 


MEN 0 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


287 ма зу 1213 


MEMOR. Заты MOR роб 


чек СТ: «Leancef Tape’ Reader. iBassport Office 


“1971: (December, -I believe) t the Deputy. Director 
fiice, Вера frsentrof State, (Mr.RobertJohrson) 
š e on SE erethat: .office might borrow.a:sraall 
з йу tthe: Dikectom о њаз Passport Offise 

Š о): tomecord a méeting. she hat: ‘scheduled with 

efitatives of.a foreign: Eover ВЕЕ 


d 2. I conveyed this. request to the- oe Chies, a 
and subsequently held severa sions 
πα. ctepreseuteiives of our ffice. It was decided to lean 


geport Office'a: small commercial. recorder. {Norelco 
і Cassette. Racorder; Model 150), which we had i in stock. 


З. А — ως four Training Branch кни 
d Liieliwered:ihetsecorder to Miss Kuishi = 
démonstrated.the recorder's. capabilities 


ks and. instructed her in its use. : She did not seem too pleased at 
thé récording quality; however, the recorder was left with her. 


4. On.this date (21 May 1973) І asked Mr. Johnson to 
.check:.on the status of the recorder. He said it was never used 


. in anyway. I-therefore retrieved it from the.Passport Office 
` and delivered itto Training, Branch | 


کے 


| | | Чи 2 00211 | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


y А 
: ds 
р 
|: 
. ον 
-- 
+ 
r А : 
y 
4 ç 
x У 
D 
. З 
` 
ЕУ > : 
i š 
———Á—— u us Ea Ha es 


ы 7 ` PLIN ` > i ж. ОР , . ЕИ se 
EE την ΤΩΝ юн DOCUMENT CONTROL wi ^ | 
| 


SEC. Οἱ ORIGIN CONTROL NO. 


v й 
E DATE OF poc] DATE REC'D | DATE OUT [SUSPENSE DATE, CROSS REFERENCE OR 
. | POINT OF FILING | 
TO | 
š FROM ` ROUTING | і 
SUBJ. | 
rd `` 


mE |^. 00212 


ΝΟ΄ΠΕΡΙ Υ 


COURIER Νο. ANSWERED 


А 


Pn 
ці 
— μμμ--. 


| 
| 
| 


COo a B——MsáááÓ € 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


9 : 
` um M 


poa y 


` MÉMUNANDUM FOR: ` 


Mr. Colby - ° 


FORM NO. 101 REPLACES FORM 10.101 
T ‘AUG 54 


WHICH MAY BE υδεο; 


MM dM Gg ΕΕ | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


; Guithieb 
Catef, TSD 


1913 . 


` Carl E Dackett 
DDS&T 


t» GTO RSRS [J SECRET [J] CONFIDENTIAL [7] INTERNAL [C] UNCLASSIFIED 


ç 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science & Technolagy... 


SUBIECT : TSD Support to Other Agencies 


l. Technical Services Division! s charter (CSI 1-8) requires 
that it provide technical assistance to bo ii CIA operations and 
other activities as may be directed by the Deputy Director for 
Operations. 


2. Over the years the chief non-CIA recipients of this 
support have been the Department of Defense, the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous 
Drugs, Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department 
of State, United States Postal Service, Secret Service, Agency 
for International Development, and the White House. 


3. While varying widely among the different recipients, these 
services have included training and materials, and in a few in- - ; 
stances participation in the fields of audio and visual surveillance, 
secret writing and related communications, personal protection, 
alias documentation and questioned document examination, disguise, 
concealment devices, electronic beaconry, illicit narcotics detec- 
tion, and counte r-sabotage/terrorism. : 


4. In mostinstances requirements for this support are | 
'received Ьу TSD through higher echelons (Office of the Director' 
or Deputy Director for Operations). Unless the service involved 
is a trivial or continuing one, the request is referred to the 
Foreign Intelligence Staff Departmental Coordination Group for ' 
coordination and approval at the appropriate Agency levels. 
Approval within TSD by the Chief of Operations or Development 
and Engineering and the Chief of TSD or his Deputy also is re- - 
quired. LT 


΄ 


5. The attachment lists the primary services provided to 
the organizations named in Paragraph two. 


| E2 IMPDET 
^ CL BY 059098 


| . SERET 00215 


——————Z_ ὗν... 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


6. Fas 


ance Of {з rorsonalidontity jo nom bo ilen by 
2150 is controlled acco dins io two broad criteria: type of 
roGuosisr:; and type ої docurisctafióon requested. A vaguest 
for denied arca o ou fiom а DDO Avea Di ion 23 
У io 


ars. honored affer proper validation, Free world docu 
may require some ΜΗ ОСО however. 


7. Unless ordered otherwise by higher Agency auihority, 
“no U.S. documentation is issued by T5D Headquarters without. 
prior coordination with the Office of Security and the Central 
Cover Staff. TSD Regional Bases require at least the valida- 
tron of U.S. documentation requests by the COS, or his 
designated representative, of the requesting Station. Because 


it could be used! I no 
U.S. Birth Certinicate 18 1551 X "gy E 


via Central Cover Staff. Backstopped major credit cards are 
issued by Office of Security, not TSD. 


8. Provision of forged documentation to non- DDO requesters, 
whether they be CIA or other Agency requesters, always requires 
approval of non-TSD offices. Support to the military for instance 
would be validated by FI Staff/Departmental Coordination Group 
at Headquarters or by the COS overseas having responsibility for 
coordination of the operation. BNDD requests are coordinated 
with DDO/NARCOG. Requests for documentation of Immigration : 
апа Naturalization Service is coordinated via the Alien Affairs 

` Staff. 


9. Authentication items are issuéd on a loan basis and must 
be returned to TSD or accounted for. After any documentation has 
been issued, TSD retains photographs and records of such support 
until the documentation has been returned to TSD. If the material 
is not returned after a reasonable time, the requester is reminded 
of the outstanding documentation. 


Attachment . ^ Sidney, Gottlieb 
Distribution: Chief 
О & 1 - Addressee,w/att ` Technical Services Division 
` 002416 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Departmer nt. of 1) HL 


λα ESA 7079—75 


Documents, п 


15 
15 and scalsi со enter insurgency acd counter rabota 


заме been furnished to all intuligence elements ої 
of Defense and certain elements of the Special Perens. All requests 
are coordinated with the FI Departmental Coordination Group at ` 
ΤΗ ers and with the Chief of Stations overseas. In turn 

these elements furnished TSD with exernplars of foreign identities 
documents, foreign cachets, foreign intelligence secret writing 
systems, foreign intelligence concealment devices. Selected | | 
aucio requirements have been furnished overseas for CI -type oai d 
cases. | 


Department 


Federal Bureau of Inves Чан on 


At T ‘request of the FBI we cooperate with ie Buscan 
in a few audio surveillance operations against sensitive foreign 
targets i in the: "United States. 


س — 


Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs 


Beàcons, cameras, audio and telephone devices for 
overseas operations, identity documents, car-trailing devices, 
SRAC, flaps and seals and training of selected personnel -- 
responsible for use thereof has been furnished this Bureau. 
All. requirements are sent to DDO/NARCOG for coordination 

` with area divisions and for action by TSD if appropriate. 
Requests overseas are coordinated with the COS or his 
designee before action by TSD is taken. 


Immigration and Naturalization 
CI analyses of foreign passports and visas, guidance in 
. developing tamperproof alien registration cards, pl 
5 асе been furnished the Service. Requests 
а 


re forwarded directly to TSD for coordination within TSD if 
technical, with the FI Departmental Coordination Group if oper- 


ational, 


00217 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Department of Siate 
. Tocheiecal gr oping а new. United 
Stekas Passport, τ «рогів, сабаз поі 
nod personnal le sacdors паха bean 
suoplied the State Departm analyses and 
ми of black letter one ne United States 
broad are mede, Al ts are forwarded 
vision. The 


to £5D for further cc 
foreign passports, 


assports on.a засы basis. 


Department of State £ s 
тсс visas andin te past 


rg 


The Office of Chief Postal Inspector has had selected 
personnel attend basic surveillance photographic courses, has 
been furnished foreign postal information and has been the _ l 


[z] 
recipient of letter bomb analyses, furnished ananassa 
| ltypewritėr analyses. Requirements are coordinated wi 


the DDO and: "DDO/EA. The Post Office has furnished TSD : 
with exemplars of letter bombs and 


We also have 
2nd reinsert 


an arrang ernenr w pra É T C - 
a low volume of certain foreign mail arrivi in the United States. 


Secret Service _ оса 


Gate passes, security passes, passes for Presidential 
campaign, emblems for Presidential vehicles; a secure ID 
photo system have been furnished this Service. Blanket approval 
for graphics support has been granted to the Deputy Director for 
Operations. In each case TSD requests approval from the DDO. 


U. S, Agency for International Development 


We furnish instructors to a USAID-sponsored Technical 
Investigation Course (Counter Terror) at 


00218 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


White 12.66 τ 
Stationery pecial memor 
# E 
5 га been fvrnished th: 


ctor fox Ор з 


Police Respresenting Washington Arlington, Fairfax and 
5 1 : guion, ΑΣ. E ня 
Alexandria ᾿ 


During the period 1968 - 1969 a series of classes 
reflecting basic and surveillance photography, basic audio, 
locks and picks, countersabotage and surreptitious entry 
were given to selected rnembers from the above meniioned 
cities. Overalltraining was approved by the Director of 
Centeral Intelligence and in turn validation was required for 
each course from the Director of Security. 


00219 


________ г Жж + 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


ty 
j 7 ΕΣ cs i] ; ПЕКО 
* in - -- ` 7 - om ae tame - INL x 
qM ο. 


—Ó—— —— AQ 
3 


\ 
— ا‎ ——M | 
Т 


юм 610 “Ease [] SECRET [J] CONFIDENTIAL [J INTERNAL — (7] UNCLASSIFIED 


PEDE 


ees 


USD has had а close x 
the past few ycars. The 
been fully briefed on YSD au 
following are situations where TSD equ 

. involved in operations: 


URTAU OP INVESTIG LA ICN 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


AT TAG 


1 


e SEBÎ E Were 


о — —— n wne—ánr—— ÓHÓ— A 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ἐκ DORE DUM FOR: Chiat, uai 
ATTENTION: Executive Officer 
SUBJECT: Contacts with Domestic Police Organizations 


l. In Dec. ber 1968, July 1969 and December 1970, SDB 
provided basic countersabotage familiarization training for 
selected members of the Washington metropolitan area police 
departments. The training was given at the Fairfax County. 
police pistol and rifle xange. Authorization for the train- 
ing came from DDP and Chief, Office of Security. 


2.. On occasion during the past few years, under the 
auspices of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration of 
the Department of Justice and with the approval of CI Staff 
and. Office of Security, SDB provided training and familiari- 
Zation to police officers of several domestic police 
departments in the uses of the Explosives Residue Detection 
Technique and Trace Metals Detection Technique. These tech- 
nigues had been declassified and are ‘currently available to 
the law enforcement community. The National Bomb Data Center 
publishes periodic. guidance in their uses. 


3. In order to augment the SDB mission n ities. 
in.the field of countersabotage and counterterror, SDB. offi- 
cers have in the past two years visited, under appropriate 
covers, the explosives disposal units of the New York City 
police department, Dade County (Miami) Florida Dept. and the 
Los Angeles Police Dept. Also, in March 1973, two SDB offi- 
cers attended the Explosives and Ordnance Disposal Conference 
in Sacramento, California, sponsored by БЕЛА. When the - 
recent letter bomb menace began in September 1972, our liaison 
with the NYCPD bomb squad paid off in that we had complete in- 
formation on letter bomb construction in hours, enabling the 
Agency to make worldwide disseminatio ithin a da: 


tt E 


1451843 


SH 
aS 
e 
© 
e 


MORI DocID 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Cc 


А. 7-18 October - Burro 
Cresent ой Subje 


l.  Familiarization апа identity of American locks. 
2. Method of manipulation of Ίος 


3. Methods and techniques of conducting Surrepti- 
tious Entry Survey. 


з 


B. 21-29 October - Photo Surveillance 
Content of Subject taught: 


`1. FPamiliarization with cameras: Pentax Spotmatic, 
Leica, Nikon F, Robot and Polaroid. : 


2. Lens, telephoto and wide angle. 

J: Xposure Meter, Tripodé; Bowum, etc. 

4. Film, film. processing and print processing. 
5. Document copy exercises. | | 

6. Night Photography and. night. exercises. 
7. TV Surveillance. 


С. 18-23 November - Audio Surveillance 
Content of Subject taught: 


1. Microphones, wire impedances and line amplifiers. 
` (Shure MC-30, Sennheiser MM-22, RCA - BK - 6B and 
RCA BK-12a all commercially available) 


2. RF commercial transmitter. (Research Products, 
Tracer Inc., Scientific Research Corp.) 


00225 


II. 


IIT. 


ca іЄи СДС --- | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


problem entailed an operatio 
pr our Seres i й 
and peetrot 


al cxercise 
5 t 

Si i 5 4 1 
tious entry, photography апа audio surve 


15 had to 
1 


s ns 
illance. 


2. А11 these safesites, two apartments а НИ 
Г Ἠπᾶ one оп have been 
turned back to Agency Real Estate and nave since then 


been terminated. Formal class instruction was conducted 
at й 


After this first MPD group other police departments . 
personnel trained using the identical safe sites and 
enploying the same subject matter and commercial equip- 
ment as indicated above were taught on the following dates. 
The Fairfax Police Department and Arlington Police Depart- 
ment. Date - 21 October - 10 December 1968. Six officers, 
4 from APD and 2 from FPD. i 


Ia 1969 additional officers from the Metropolitan Police 
Department, Fairfax Police Department and Arlington Police 
Department received identifical training as that stated 


above. .In total 24 police officers were trained in our 
facilities. 


00226 


rom 610 чолов [xj SECRET [Q CONFIDENTIAL O ΠΕΝ, [7] UNCLASSIFIED 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| 
| "onset | 
| 


— 


| 
۹ |a | n E F 
TS | | Er | de Hs wit m A 
ο ОСИУ το ESER [I I po LG n». 


00227 


maaa === —— s 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` 4)80-2328-73 


SUBJECT -- Repeated Survey of ORD for Non- 
Foreign Intelligence Activities 


The. 7 May survey has been repeated aud refined 
with respect to all ORD services or dealings with 
other agencies on domestic, non- foreign matters. In 
addition, this report covers all our activities deal- 
ing with the research end development of intelligence 
equipment for foreign use which has been tested in 
the United States and might have collected domestic 
information. Again, each -member of ORD available 
today was asked either directly or through his super- 
visor to provide the above requested information, 
whether he was dir rectly involved or not. We have 
used all diligence to search our records available 
to us during this: time period to ensure this 15 а 


complete and factual Miste 


ayre- 
Director of Research & Development 


Attachments: 
1 - Contacts with Other 
Government Agencies 
2 - Domestic Tests 


00228 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CONTACTS WITH OTHER U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES WHICH 
COULD OR HAVE RESULTED IN USE OF CIA-DEVELOPED 
TECHNOLOGY IN ADDRESSING DOMESTIC PROBLEMS 


Executive Office of the President 


ORD represents DD/S&T on the R&D Sub-Committee 
. o£ the Cabinet Committee for International Narcotics 
.Control that is concerned with research support o£ 
'the narcotics control prostem. 


(Dr. Leonard Laster, OST) ш 


Office of Telecommunications Policy 


Technical surveillance countermeasures and 
physical security information was exchanged with 


them. 


Bureau of ΠΕ. and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) 


Techniques and equipment for navigation and 
tracking was discussed with BNDD. 


` tapus wave processed to improve their 
1 Led 


ibility. The source of the Тарса was unka 


= | 00228 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ουν 


fall of 1572 


concerning 


‘ 
Lap cay 
UP £L | 
"p" 


USIB Technical Surveillance Countermeasures Committee 


Cone ouis contacts were maintained with the 
intelligence. community regarding technical surveillance 
_countermeasurs and physical security. This exchange 
of information, reports, and equipment has been con- 
ducted under the auspices of USIB TSCC and involves . 
State, FBI. Secret Service, NSA, DIA, Army, AF, and 
Navy. : 73 


State Department. 


Two contracts for development of countermeasures 
techniques were funded jointly with the State Department. 


Е ` ^ 00230 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


oec 


й . Soie of tho oavatoi 234 Qm. 
River арык atory, verted by CIA t Я 
radio nuclide DN ME d detection techniques and 
devices. These Laboratories have used sampling 
techniques developed for СТА to measure CONUS nuclear 


plant releases. 


p. P 


At the request of.AEC Security Officer, Mr. Richard ` | 
Cowan, the walls of the office of the Chairman of the 
AEC (then Mr. Schlesinger) were X-rayed. The operation 


occurred one evening and was an attempt to resolve some 
 anomalles.created by the use of the 


(Mr. Richard Cowan, AEC) 


Law Enforcement Assistance Agency (LEAA) 


Reports and information about the ORD- -developed 
Adhesive: Restraint, Non-Lethal Incapacitation System 
were-made available to Department of Justice, LEAA in 
` August 1972. | If they developed the system, it would ; os 
,be used for civilian crowd and riot control. ' 


(Mr. Les Schubin, LEAA) [ C | 


Technical surveillance countermeasures and physical 
‘security information were exchanged with LEAA. 


| 7 | 09231 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SDBGGCT:  Contiscis Vin : / ies 
Which Сера or Гауе Resulted Ta Use of CIA 
DPovolco,cod Госітої оц) ng P ; 


.Problenu: 


Trcas sury- 

to T 
to lati: SED mne 
in antics pation of ‘the shneat 
enforcement administration. The requ 
was made by the Agenc 
nator. Mr. i the rogu 


detailing through M 


Customs/Treasury Department 


Technical discussions were held with Customs relating 
to detecting illicit nighttime aircraft ا‎ ians over 


the U. S. Mexico: border. - 


Alcohol & Tobacco Tàx Div/IRS 


About five years ago, „assistance was requested in 
domestic- -search of "moonshine" stills шо CIA. infrared 


scanners... This. was turned.down. 


.We.have had numerous discussions with the. Secret 
Service regarding navigation and tracking вери M 
and L. рана 


Secret Service 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


URJECGIT Суллой Agencies 
: tal in Use of ClA- ` 
dressing Domestic 


The 


of metals | | | Were v 


in the detection of 


. 
seurch work in the detecti 


National Institute of Health (NTH) 


“At the request of ORD, ‘OCS assigned а: staff. technician 
to uádertake to write a Computer program for- the. Wisswesser 
‘Line. Notation (WLN) chemical notation method. This work was 
бопе. in — ο with NIH. 


was et frequently with ACDA e in onder 
to ture ORD's BW/CW research еа to` support 


-ACDA ы 


"Technical information relating to ὃς В of 
radio nuclides in the environment was exchanged with 
them. 


(Mr; Charles Weaver, EPA) š г J 


“Environmental РИО Agency CEPA) 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


οτι οὓς ` Conte rs ith Other U. 5. 

{ pu A phich Cc aid or invo Rasul 

> А / . Dawviriav, — а Poe a ei У in. Add 
і оо Proben | : 


ЕРА (cont'd) 
Technical discussion 


s 
-equizment to detect undergvou 
fill have been conducted. 


Federal Bureau of Investigation 


4 
ros ina e Jand 


і | 7. At their request, we described. Imagery Enhancement 

` ^ o techniques germane to removing distortions from some 
photography. they had оп an alleged bank robber. "Request 
for specific support in processing. the imagery. was turned 
`F A SU 
πιο Customs як po ce 


down. [о] 
яз |. | tota1 contact with other agencies 
in terms ot assistance with domestic operations has been 


| ->in the field of audio surveillance: pA anti- 
- - 7 hijacking, or. drugs. 


(Mr. Robert Burhell, SS) SS | 
°“ (Mr. Thomas Allen, FBI) 


(Mr. Martin Pera, Customs) 


ле Service 


| ' NASA ena USDA | | | | 


‘We have an on- 


resources assessments. 
(Mr. William Ruble, USDA) 


© (Mr. Leonard Jaffe, NASA) 
^ (General Smart) 


00234 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


атту associa 


NASA Pid 
uid Se SECRET) 


The Agency is preparing а ру роза Tor an experi- 
mental program to aid in estimating: the Soviet wheat 
кк «А part of the information would be obtained froim 


satellite launched for other announced" d б Ground- 


a 
tru th data will be collected on North A» jierican. rops. 


U.S. Department of Apsicuiturs "end. Bureau of Narcotics " 
and Dangerous Drugs : P 

Р СТА has requested the ашк η: of a two- acre 

plot of opium poppies at a USDA research site in Washington 
"7 state, to be used for tests of ыз recognition of opium 
poppies. . . ; 


Arm Military Polic edeme ТЕО ‘Gordon 
ΚΞ Force, Office οἱ the Inspector General 
«А тшу, Office ої Provost Marshall General ` 


We have exchanged technical ‘surveillance. eountes 
measures and рын security information with them. 


NEM 


s Usd. Army | 
. Rocky Mountain Arsenal, Newport Army Ammunition Plant, 
` . Toelle Ordnance Spot ΕΣ — 


ORD tested — M Smp les £rom testing, 
storage. and production facilities in the U. 5. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


gi Coast Guard 


. About six years ago, CIA infrared. equipment was 
mede available for USCG tests to МИСЛЕ IR as a means 
for night search of life boats. 


(then-Lt. James McIntosh, USCG) š 


San Mateo County Sheriff's Office 


га ` ORD conducted polygraph tests on all applicants. 
. Polygraph security findings were compared with the 
Sheriff's own security findings. 


(Sheriff) 


iE 


A study was made on con-men techniques and assess- 
ment methods in 1967-68. 


(Sheriff) 


| 


00236 


| б 


MORI DocID:: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DOMESTIC. TESTS FOR . 
. AGENCY RESEARCH AND: DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS: 


1. As a êê — BÊ ORD's ا‎ in the 
| research and development of equipment and techniques. 
73 7 for Agency applications in foreign intelligence, we 
conduct experiments and tests in the United States. 
Clearly, the design and development of our intelli- 
gence equipments can be done more economically and 
more securely in this country. Although most of 
"the tests of our R&D equipments are performed in 
.Closed laboratories ог in secure areas simulating 
the foreign environment, some.of the tests and experi- ; 
ments, of necessity, "reveal domestic information. | 


.. А EV АИРИ А surveillance equipment or 
MON С which have at some time or other been 
exposed to domestic.testing is as foliows: | 


а. Laser Probe - About 1967, the laser 
probe developed Бу ORD was tested by TSD in 
Sen Francisco undet very closely controlled 
conditions. ` The ORD- Progett Officer witnessed 
portions "ої the test.. Recordings that were: 
made of laser probe | output were carefully 
controlled.as classified material and it is 
believed that the: tapes. have long since been : 
des stroyed.. : 


+ 


cordings O se pu were 
re destr кауга several 


+, 
(65 


carefully controlled айа 
years ago. ЖЕ 7 


ACUACHAUENaY 2C 


00238: 


a MI A. а i] 
: n 1 ! 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


есе ате patterned, 
atter tne system and, for this reason, < 
limited monitoring to test the operation of 
intercept equipment in the United States is - 
planned... 


Message content 15- "T 
no interest and: not be recorded. pue 
seas testing is planned at a subsequent date. | 
To date;:some domestic testing of this concept | 
has been*carried out at the contractor! 5 plant. 
No recordings have béen made of such data. Ex- - 
tremely. brief tests exercising U.S. and foreign 
telephons’ Pg eus 

ve been carried" out to уегїту Initial . | 
concep s: The duration of testing was less. ; 
than: one-half hour. 


. Other Sensor Testing - Examples of: 
engineering development tests of special: sensors: 
within. thé United States include and. 


n ail ese cases, the data output of such ~ 
testing has been used for engineering develop- 
ment. and the content has been restricted то 
dissemination to those in Government ΗΟ 
with the engineering design. E 


UE Eu 


x Ç x 00239 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


re On ша зику 
аха: ‘being 
pletely. hart 
esult 


ту 
r 
r 


d .Personality Structure of Defectors 
Study - ORD undertook to determine the per- 
Sonality structure of defectors during the. 
period 1966-69. The work primarily involved 
an analysis. of the open literature on- known. 
_defectors. (Ап ancillary effort was concerned 
with a. study of the phenomenon ої defection 
itself,*i.e., leaving one religion for: another, 
or changing one set o£ political beliefs for 
another. The work was conducted: at Stanford. 


University. 


“= Communications Link Loading Study 


ndér carefully controlled conditions, some U. S. - 
microwave communications were recorded and passed 
through the intercept system under, test to prove 
quality of performance. А11 intercept material 
connected with this was destroyed within a few weeks: 
of the time of intercept and the material was never 
"Checked for substantive content. 


Oooo OCO 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


LNORAXDUM FOR: Госоту Director for Science and 
Technology 

х 

SUBJECT ` DO Survey 


of n for Mon 
Intellic 


© 


At 11 a.m. ο, each division and staff chief 
| | as his representative was instructed τὸ query all. of 
his. people and report back By this. afternoon whether 
or mot they had provided апу services or dealt with 
“any: other ag enc cies on domestic, non- fore ign matters. 


The attached list is an invento оту E all ‘items we 


were able to uncover. If addit tional information on. 
any‘ of these topics is desired, we can provide either 


a Verbal or a written report on very short. notice. 


к 


Director of Research & Development 


| Attachment: 
= й As.stated 


NEENENNNEEEEEEEEEEEHE————————————————————————— ЕЕ 


A negative report from ihe знані Sta aff, 


OF audio tapes for BNDD. Source of tapes unknown. 


Wastorpions from some photography. they had on an 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


GUNS prosram УЛАС 


d OER wheat estimate program which may be 


Narcotics--cur forveien activities. ате well known» 


in DDS&T. 


orpv's| _ work was reported to the- FAA about 
three years ago. No action was taken,to cur knowledge. 


a 


Performed intelligibility enhancement | УА 


- At the request of FBI, we described 
перегу Б ncement Techniques ‘germane to: removing. 


alleged bank robber. Request for specific support 
in processing the imagery was turned down. 


i X «5 “Se PT τ - . 7. PT ta eh. 
with ἐραστὴς oporations has been. in th 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


veillance countermeasures, amet па acing, Өт drugs. Speci- 


fically, І participated in TSCC and R&D Subcommittee meetings 


h 


which included technology exc anges and some. equipment ex- 


changes. on.a temporary basis ostensibly for testing or trial. 


I also assisted in х-гауіпе the office walls ої the Chairman 


p of the AEC “(then Mr. Schlesinger). at. the request of Mr. Richard 


Cowan of AEC Security. The operation occured one evening 


. (date unknown). and was an attempt to resolve. some anomalies 


created by the use of the | 


Ofher Persons ое, over the. years eve been: 
Е diss Robert Burnett, Secret Service | 
ме] Martin Рега, U. 5. Customs - 
Mr. Marvin Beasley, DASA 
Mr. Thomas Allen, FBI -. 
| Major Jack Nelson, OSI/USAF 
Major John Langager, ONI/USN 
| Мт ‘Richard Cowan, AEC ` 


00243 


Eo o x ΗΕ Im t. Ua 


.MORI DocID: 1451843 


2 
aC} 
(v 
Q 
rh 
Re 
З 
Же 
м 
$ 
D 
S 
о 
te: 
ej 
3H 
" 
Ps 


й »nysical security. ‘This is an cxchene 


reports and has been conducted under the auspicos of the 


USIB Tachnicsl Survoilla nce Countermeasures Cound шү. 
. і 
State | - Navy 
Aix Force | "o 2 OS Secret. Service і 
Army | | D NSA 
DIA ñ 
FBI 


2. Joint funding of two contracts with State Depart- 
ment (TRW/LLL). Two electret microphones were furnished - 


to. State Department for Pak зво Joint funding of. 
и. | опе contract with NSA (Sandia). Participation in DNA/DOD: 
لی ر‎ — ur - = + Й š _ Y o4 
: | contract (Bureau of Standards). 


3. Other DOD and Government contacts for information 


collection or exchange ‘only.: 


ARPA 
LEAA/Dept. of Justice ` 
DNA/DOD | 
Office Telecommunications вату 

_ Office of Army /Provost Marshal λος x 
Army/Military Police Agency, rt. Gordon ' | 

| Air Force/Office ої the Inspector General | 
2 u "x | Air Force/Electronic Systems pasion В τ 
| | | 00244 


mM — i i uuu 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| zh PW 
end the м 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- Torhni 


equipment sanitary 


land fill. || B ~~ fo 


- Exchenge.of technical information relating to the ' 


development of η. : 


2 7 - CIA has iequested the establishment of a two-acre | 
plot of' opium poppies at a USDA research site in 
Washington state, to be used for tests of photo- 


recognition of opium poppies. p g ' 


- About six years ago, CIA infrared equipment was made 
= available for USCG tests to evaluate IR as a means . 
for night search of life boats. s 


USDA & BNDD 


US COAST GUARD . 


ALCOHOL & TOBACCÓ TAX DIV/IRS 
ASUDHUL & TOBACCO TAX DIV/IRS 


- - About five. years ago assistance was requested in 
domestic search of "moonshine". stills using CIA 
. infrared scanners. This was turned. down. .- 


mE —— "Hs ar 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- Some of the ABC Laboratori 
ora 


support 


developed for 


C 
nuclear plant releases, 


i 

й | 

ὋΝ | 

і 

! 

- i 
: ! 

z: | | 


ü "e LN | 00247 
` ВЕЕТ E Es 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


J. BSüb»5(Cctarle 


ΓΝ 


receive 
ple Detector 
approved by 


Proposals from Aerospace, 
developed for ORD. 


Time: 
D/ORD. 


2. 


3. , Developed Adhesive Restraint, Non-lethal Іпсарасіїафіоп System. 

Reports and information wes made available to Department of Justice, LEAA 
in August 1972, If they developed the System, it would be used Гог. 
civilian crowd and riot control, FEET i 


A а 
i о " 


Pk t O Ὁ ΠΑ gg 
ρα ο Су 
UOS δ RI itt 
Mh ory ad 12 
mabe kyo В 


at t 
Ya ἘΞ 

A. 

On 
ас 

th 


1 
9 


QoS fu 0 n orm EDS: 


UOCE DA Pedant δι m dd з η 
кї АЕО. час oc M Wr ¢ 
N | 
ont 


me 


eee 


+ 


У 


7 


сім κ Ων αι K 5 фол 
.ca de 
4 τ δ лм) 
RPM м ug 


Ç 
4 [X m ry Dod 
Et 0 u Dau їм ict mt d й 1 
κ É Аб FE SW N Ὁ 
rác δ; HUN om ο gg au Н 
ti hà tam m Qu б 
r` OO al р Th ADS gs 43 41 
E : 
E 


00249 


m 
<H 
со 
rd 
ΙΩ 
κ 
rd 
m 
à .9 
H t a 
о о a 
О ο O 
Q fe t 
о 3 
H- 4 fe 
mx. Г А 
ο A E 
= ъз ES 
ч ча 
ч Q 
ДИ b e 
РЕЯ ñ я 
| Ж 
e" га 
2 КЧ © 
. Ὦ 8 
М t ἀφο 
oa 
T μη 
{TO 
ч oc 
Дф 


a 


Σ Tu 
ove tpe in 


pr 
1 
* 


00250 


| MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 | 


Козау 


е 197 
с ο , 
тесе 
геї Sulisrd, Regional Ὁ 3 = dn 
Mr. Joha Би GLa, meg . B B мм cus T 
ENDD im the enhencement of the о нам on the tape recording which "p 
j B E : 2 nf Ф - 2 =e q coe з 
were masked by background music. The results of the p ee wilt nel 
used in а grand jury inves cu tion and роєвібіє follow-on trial. Me. | 
ë 2. ΤΩ SF } К r^ xe ® 
Bullard did not indicate 1 h he head becom me aware of ἐξ. Ж "eiss' S exper Do 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


на s 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 Sion 1913 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science end Technology 


SUBJECT: Е "Теїссоп this mioeniag concerning any OSA 
i activities which є аа put the Agency into an 
embarr assing situation. 


There are no missions which we have flown during the last four 
years bon which.I:can associate the result directly to any activity: 
potentially embarrassing to the Agency. There were а number, of missions 
flown that indirectly have the potential for this embarrassment. Bear in 
mind that once we turn the film over to NPIC or any other agency, we: 
have no control over. Subsequent distribution. | 


2. The τα listed on the attachment are in three categories: 


аг Gategory A: These are missions flown in the U. E 
that are very ‘similar to the potential that you discüssed with me 
5 the ce pt the Santa Barbara oil disaster. 


EV Category, в: The (detection. ap iei. 
грорру grove) isa Separate Category because of the high sensitivity 
pz Lus subject : 5 


EXP NE S Category C: When we were developing. тока. SHAFT, 
In effect, we were 


csnowledge nothing sensitive was picked up, 


in the broad sense. 
this activity could be labeled illegal. еле mh ч 


3. 1 have “specifically looked to see where our U-2's were | 
operating during the Watergate break-in discovery, Democratic National 


` | ^ 00254 . 


ооо — —H— P— Í— —— rr r S SS 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Convcatión and Воро'Яїсап Nath 
occurred inthe Rast snd our oni. 
period was ia the western роті 
Attachment - 1 
As noted above 
СА 
- a 
r 
i 
; 1 
b ww | 
F 


К | |.  . 00255 


9Sz00. 


A s “TASK 


CATEGORY A 


Santa Barbara Oil 
Disaster 


HILLTOP (м) 


Snow Survey fw ivi 


Hurricane. Base 


Linie 


Earthquake Damage 


LAM демо У 


Minneapolis я 


- Kansas City 


__сорәрерве— 
`` BY WHOM/WHEN - ` 


Dept. of Interior, Féb 1969. 


ORD/NASA Earth Resources 
Programs, . Spring/Fall 1969 


Environmental Science Services 
Administration (ESSA), Dept, 
of Commerce thru COMIREX, 


| Spring 1969. 


Office ë Economic Prepared- Ὁ papas, 


ness, Spring 19 70. 


š ‘Self — M! NPIC processed, 


Feb 19 т, 


OSI/AEC Division. Jan - Mar 
1972, 


: Possible use for industrial 


POSSIBLE IMPLICATION ` 


Potential for providing basis ior | 
criminal law suits, Pressure опо | 


oil company to change operation, 


exploitation. Crop production 


control & estimates ZA 


industrial exoioitation. Water 
resource aliocation. 


Political leverage for disaster 
атса funds, | AE d 


Political leverage, Criminal 


negligence suits, Reconstvuction 
. exploitation, 


Environmental applications 
urban planning; exploit iû. 


TO Market. 


ї 


:GISOG INON 


€TF8LISTLI 


TASK - : ` BY WHOM/WHEN POSSIBLE IMPIZCATIO N 


CATEGORY A (continued) 
— continued) 


RIVER BOAT, κ) NRO - iors, April 1973, | ` Political leverage, 
m god б, ` exploitation, civil d 


West Virginia Dam . NRO - Army Corps of : Potentialioz realestate 
Site Coverage . Engineers, Jan/Feb 1973, . exploitation, water contyol, || 


CATEGORY B 


i . BNDD, DDI/ CIA, NPIC, ORD, CIA extension of dope t 
uerto Rico], Multi | Dept. of Agriculture. Fall1972, . ` from SEA to CONUS, 2 


Spectral Sensor techniques to avoid detection of 
ERA RET growth, | 


CATEGORY С 


LONG SHAFT NSA/ CIA COMINT collection, 


εγθταντ :GIOOG IYON 


23700 


ў - N 71 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- contacted all but, two who were on lcave--nsgative 


Parengosky -- negative on those he could contact. Following are 
. i people he could not reach: 


said FMSAC has negative results. 


v 


^. . DDSáT components! submissions. 


` 


C ?Goimmittee,. together with the enclosure from] | | 5 


Los NOTE; Th 


= _веп® to the IG for his information and was not considered a part of the 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


{EMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science & 


πετ CorrespondéticesRecaived by Ghairman Hebe 
Houses Armed Services Committee, Concerning : ` 


forwarded for-your information and such action as you deem. 


nropriaté. З and have been advised 


îs memo dtd 6 June 73:(OLC 73-0635) (роз :259 thru 265) was 2 


Өте IG in response to the Director's. 
"and, therefore, it is believed 
ncluded in the Halperin request.. .. 


. request on "Questionable Activi 
-that these documents should not b 


` 


E : 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ког Science ὃς Technology uL 


СОЧМА СБ ЕЕЕ a i by:Chal rman Hebert, 
-.Houss Armed Services. Soe μι Concerning 


: This-memo dtd 6 June 73. бос 773-0635). (pos 259 thru 265) маз ` 
sent to-the IG for his information, „апа was not considered a part of the 
7 BDS&T components' submissions ~ the. 16 in response -to the Director's - 
request on "Questionable Activities" and, therefore, it is believed ` 


that” these documents аш not be: “included in τ знан зы. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


COMMITTEE 


тр» 


‘PINE 
пото Vie: 
PINION. 
А S URL гаснат, Мох, ` . 
C70 JANR BRIS πα. о Q H sx 
νο + PENT n. a3) MALLOAN, Wee . E В т = “< ἃ 
νο va 77 2 NINZTY-THInO:COSGRESS. 
et ¿2 COAST) HOSFZONIENT; MIAT, ἜΝΙ. š 4 ев. i x 
2 ВАРО aie tienen, . vin ж 
LES AM, MU ER ` 
ROP αν т, САЦ, - 
Мао ышыпл e. . . 
САМО SNES OSA. Doe 
n. FATPBICHGCOHADIASE, COLO. - 


OI ARMED SERVICES 
ton 33:47. 


О HÉSENT; CHAIRMAN’ 


т 


SR “Honorable James В. Schlesinger. 
«Directora. κ. is rt ENG 


-- Centrat Titelligence A 


. Washington, οσα 


is:.correspondense fra 


elm Раси is forwarded “for :i action ` 


CS might bereppropriete. 


incere 


| осе S 
= B a | г. ` Attachment Е š 


mm ———)ssáÓ!—Ts— μυ μυ μυ“ υ“υυ“υ“ουουεὕοὃ«ἃ«“«ἃὂ«ὃἃἄἳ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


с е б ж n rÓr— A —— MÀ нн 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00262 


š 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


SAA megs 


ос ——  —Á s A——— MSS 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI росір: 


1451843 


"agencies. My concern here-is restricted to government 
members ої OBL in speech ‘processing. problems, we are often 
. asked by individuals in: ‘government. for help on various 
several have involved. the: use. ої laboratory resources. 


Drugs (BNDD), Post Office,. "and the Treasury Department. 


-to insure that the processing of the tape was done: entirely. : 
. by. a BNDD employee: even: though it was done in an cu c" 


I——-———— ——M—Á————Ó———— 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


OEL-010-73 . 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Science and 


Tecno ο, 
SUBJECT: ^" : ^ Polic Regarding Assistance to Ai encies 
^ . y 5 я š 
: Outside the Intelligence Community on 
ing Probleas 


Speech Process 


μα; Recent. жыйы toncern over. Agency. affilistions 
with law enforcement activities hes made me wary of offering. 
speech processing assistance to various other government 


activities outside the intelligence community. "Because 
of a scientific community ‘awareness of the expertise of. 


speech problems, The requests are usually informal on.a 
person-to-person basis. While most of these contacts 
involve only ап exchange. of unclassified information; 


: 2 Contacts have. соте from the FBI, АСА у 
General's office, . Bureau ‘of Narcotics апа Dangerous 


Of the above, assistance to BNDD had been specifically- 


sanctioned by Mr. Helms. .In one recent instance where а: 


noisy tape was to be used. in a court case, care was taken” 


laboratory. using Che: (Bener S Coherent Spectrum Shaper . 
апарата | i . й 


C i a w asa wa aaa —rsurrrnrr r 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


GEL-019-73 
ж " 2 


th t 
has fic k1 
«а - - سك‎ + 
there t. t 
the rd t 
af s unt s 
leve; hoe 


Agency goals, Hence we они. bo wi illing to со 
Support other departments on an ad hoc basis, but would: 
appre ciate your guidance re the wisdom of ΟΕ: 5 tavolvem 
in "domestic" activities. й. 


р 


{ = Director of ELINT 
— DD/S§T 


| MORI DOCID: 1451843 


ams mme rrr mente eere РА 


ου E 


$ ` n age => А Й 
es z Seta d š 
D з "om 


—  —— PUR — Á 


T —— — —— M οσοι ο ——Á ( !— — MIU ЛЕ 


LA " PEA  —— i 


ННН 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


τη 


| І Б ‘Against whom ‘do these agents’ we zd on: what; ao they: i — Au x | 
b reporty and to whom? ` | COEM М КЕ 


ae 


4 Get copies, of the reports ‘on "Restless Youth" and black жай îê ê. чай 


[ έως. How is the ονοματα magne tome ter used, on ` whom, and for: what 
purpose? . ; 


“© Get copies of the reports on TOS. ОЗ Ἢ | з Е 
T Why does pos ‘collect information on [е у т jj — 
ι What is done with it? = | 


for ‘whom , and for what — 


: фт is DCS bettine | 
purpose? E 


кока [η i 


E Give пе: а couple of paragraphs on Tofte. k x 


3 Include the submission of FR Division. pe | 


C. "I "сеї the full T on providing alias ascimentation to ‘the ‘Secret di 
| n УР TOE UD К ο К 


' "Why did we pay the costs of the responses. “to letters ceived 
4 η “about the President's: speech on Cambodia ei : 


us | | Supplying peacons ‘to Ambassadors seems lite ‘a goca idea. How : many — 
і  MEMEMMM arc there in use and where? ` .. 


fons is logistics procuring. police-type. equizivent for Local polices pt 
forces? 


n is & telephone. analyzer? 7 


E is it necessary H 4o continue — 


d. 'More on Vesco. Ноу did it get started? . What. зав done? Why was к 
κ... it. puer " | і 


00269 


Co _— —H—"áÓ—mÓ—À" Ó—— ннн 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


E ELI V Lu 
κ... 9% - Es d "s б> Does ὋΝ 


Seref f ated. Ze 


AN p TP % Am d -. 
GTE 


- Bie gt Ф“, 5 A-C- ο δε te ΡΣ | f : folia e | ^: f 
eS- c fee “ є wf Eo VALL ene ае cul ta ey " — 


DDI — 


UM S X DV M суе. (eoe D fle С — re 
e. NS the Cd . bou n à 


єє e ο... 


з m й 

ΤΉΝ ——— — س چ‎ EE AE И ОЕ КИ -- 
і — st 
Σ 
j 
L 
he. 
EI 
s ΤῊ 

E 


t 

і 

| 

- 

i 

i зано ше 
` 

Ë Ж 


. m Aw. x 
> й . 
Н. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


rn 


—T 


— F a 


— АЕС НАДАН ain 


(00. 5 00271 


a ж | 


Р 


MORI DocID: 


- * 


ts met me n «μυ 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ннн — Tem er M νον” — Y (Y s аа م و ا‎ 


Tom - а. 


1 


Lesen, ds Ἐκ κ ο ο. μμ. 


анна 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


e Tg 


D "T πα ση EN pee і ues DUNT 
m αν. hrp wi. бше. | 


=» "n | 
LOT uH rota QUT И το. 5 x 
| | 


е πό 
| 0274 


se й EN SEN за epee eee SE 


M 


: p a 9 sutra "a, o 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| oe Se, 


—— ._ وھ ت و کے نے‎ at ea م می م و ص‎ A ےا مم کار م‎ Р an amma Ht A a eae م ممم‎ Met ач میس‎ μμ RR 


$4 ο... 


с T” a тштштт Н НЧ" l S нини 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- u 
- 8 pe δ. т садә. τ DISS 
Ae eel Yn EP pe het кації, S 3e7 
Ms зн e δια reer Ou Ee 


-— 


Xe. éd EHE 97 IA РЕ | 
Еч = Im, z LEE o p ee. Ved — 
; | кш puris f κα 

eg Pease cu ee qe 
“se Meme, ο. $c 
du gs rnin &c^ ko Teu 4 Беер СЕ 
e | Ти, a 2 po Nu ο TE N 
Í О жу (Ox Maha: * < et, 8... :.. 


ы. μα mo - mod 
3 | й. : CE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


arte 2 Des ти m ‚у ымы. 
x^ Y AMIDA IA 2. > Tom, А. - 
ον L. -- ve PIE 

be (ZS col < μυ... аа es. 

η و‎ | 15 обої PAT Р ` Ma ΓΡ 
(eM б-со: Moos. (v o "n | | 
ahs / Aet, EP Zes P 

o Fen IK. eu «ο. asset ы, 
«ос Pene O. (RR LEM 


Ec a зі ke ы 

) | 2 | 00228 ` 

M | ЕЕ 
DT M de А p | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


πέρ eet сте a n pl 


| мнн 


MORI DocID: 1451843: 


E с el ECL -ᾱ---, 


" t 


і 

і 

і 

і 

і 
5 
| 
i 
| 


5 


- P ы 


FT —n—  w—seam— ——— = лнн 


. MORI DocID: 1451843 


ЛЕО ce me جک‎ А 


* 


ΠΟΘΙ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


H М А 
ee aoe 
9 July 1970. 4 
. -The Divéctór advised the тут Xhát White House staffer Ho ston” 
і and Presidential. Counsellor Pat Moynihan thought well: ої the.. 
к memorandum on "Black Radicalismi in the Caribbean." 
LF юлду 1919. | | 
" Maui briefed On his E yesterday with барше ее Richard. 
Ichorá, - "Chairman of the. -House Internal Security Committee, who had 
asked what we are doing to investigate "security leaks" 'eonnected with 
` press accounts: of Lon Nol's having sold rice to the Communists and 
having engaged in an &ttempted deal with Hanoi. Maury briefed on his 
explanation.of why we are doing nothing, since such i ον are not 
οκ παν, confined to our information. жй w . 
1 September : 1970 NU mE . 
: Maury noted that the Director sent а letter to’ бойагерошал 
i | Moss on. ео On toring practices. : : А 
3 September 1970 | 
. The Director. noted а 1 September memorandum from n Jdhn Bross on. 
3. Daniel Blsperg (sic). He asked the DDS to lift his clearances and 
to make ‘this: fact known in security channels. ï 
: 15 October 1910 5 
DDS Séported. quat. the Weathermen have declared't 
their. fall; offensive and have’ mentioned the Agency & 
bombings and: kidnapping. He briefed on precautionary п 
adopted ‘and: asked senior officers to vary their route.;tó-and from 
work, and to- ‘report any peculiar telephone calls or unusual: events 
around their residence. = 
28. October 1910 
DDP, рой that the FBI desires to check for. “жин 
on all. cryptogram messages: mailed to high Government: officials. 
The messages will then be passed to NSA for exploitation: a -DDP 
requested: thet Agency personnel ‘who receive such шеввадев pass 
them to hi, for transmittal to the FBI. 
E Е! ` Р 
і H К я 
a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


19 November statement that the Black: Panthers are si сед. m 
terrorist: ;organizations. He said. that. we have. : exem а 


| relationship between the.fedayeen and the Black Panthers Я Не. 
vii ed ‘the Director with a memorandum on this topic. -- 


itive Director called attention to the President's 21. 
December . memorandum on "Disclossres of Classified: Information Е 


AES 29 ΜΉ 1970 


JExeGutive Director reminded Executive Commi 


: President's ‘directive: on disclosure of classifies 


: Executive Director, briefed. 'on the results. 
o. meeting. on ‘what the’ Director now needs to do 1: 
-| Presidene's directive on disclosure of classifié ( 
` outline in. the Director! 8 briefing book actions: which: ага to be^ > 
taken, й x5 = соз 


de = 


.,00283. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


СЕ ‘Bross: Bald. “that he. and. Bronson айу wil have. Эшен today with. 

: General Bennett, Director of DIA. ‘The Director “said that ‘he might ask 
. ‘Bross to take along a copy of his letter and guidance on the Disclosures 
E "of: ‘Classified ‘Information and Coordination and ‘Clearance of Official . 

` Statements but that he first wishes to clarify with the Executive 

` тыгар ‘some of ne e in the guidance section. 


ES Janus 1971 . ; і E d ^: £e ES = 2 | 


. Maury Bald: that he anticipates.a number of questions from the 
_Hill on the attached article by Jack Anderson in today's Nastingkon 
конь. "6 Attempts to Kill Castro Leid to CIA." 


5 Houstén related that he will have dines today: with Resistant 
ttorney General Robert C. Mardian to discuss. Director's guide- 
ines ‘on the disclosure of classified information... : 


“Bross ‘related. that Parrott met with бепе ennett to review 
е ‘Director's letter on disclosure of classified information апа 
оч atd that. General Bennett will now discuss it with Deputy Secretary 
Packard, who may in turn review it with Secretary. laird. "he  - 
ἐς jDixector asked to be advised of Secretary Packard's reactions and. 

` {вала that he wants to check the final guidance, with: Secretary: 
‘laird and with someone in the’ White House. before it is issued. 


П/Р c called attention to Jack Anderson! S'column in today's - 
Washington Ru "Castro Stalker Worked For. ‘The rc ; . 


00284. 


. $ July 1971 


PX κο Dee a let been Completed. "nz 


ee RT‏ ا 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


: Carver soled that es La: 
рії nt assist in reproducing: the forty=s 


ad requested: that ‘our printing’ 
volume secret Pentagon study: © 


on Vietnam. for distribution to the press ni othe rs this morning.’ This. 


к “request. was aborted by the President." ee oe Mem chair) 
i лу 1971 | | 
"DD/S said that in the absence ої! m | attended 


ο at the White House yesterday. of the interagency. group which is- 


reviewing classification and declassification policy. The President spent 


. an hour with the group and said that he wants: ... and (6) the revocation 


of all clearances and the retura of all classified material held at Harvard, 


7 Brookings. Rand, and Cal Tech, as well as the withdrawal of Q clearances ` 
“held by the Regents of the University. of California. A brief discussion... ` 
-followéd,"ànd the Executive Director noted that DOD has asked us to provide 
р information on all our contracts with: Rand,. as wellas all clearances held ` | 
"sby;Rand personnel for our purposes... Acting Director asked that we assemble 
Чака. pertaining. to the President's: remarks but that we take no action until 
` the President's guidance has been: confirmed and ‘the DD/S. has provided a 
. memorandum. enit," . | PN 27 „рс in the chair] 


соса ὄψον sapori that ey will σας complete thois detailed review 


- | EL the secret Pentagon papers by 6 July, Hnc 


"Warner: called attention +ë: βοῦς tary ‘Rages request that the press 


A : permit tbe Government to. review in 1 advance o E documents 
s сва the CRM papers," . Du | 


1 


"Carver said that their review. of the secret Pentagon study on ` 


iU YR 1 e 00888 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


OK Rui anm Р, Dt ©, жо 


© arte - E TS NW. ode ср kà 


uet. 2 July 1971 


ο. -. барак said that he will be sending a meeting today called by As: sistant 
: Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Daniel Henkin. He added that he, - 
, assumes it will concern the declassification of some of the secret Pentagon: 
papers and: that, if it does, he yu seek the Director!s advice." (DDCii ‘in chai 


NN 


"At the Executive Director's дн the DD/S. agreed to get together 
, With the DD/S&T and General Counsel to prepare a br тіейпр paper for the 
Director on where we stand with кера to classified rnaterials at Rand 
and emoria to safeguard them. '! à 


i RENE NE. "Maury reported that Congressman Mahon would like to meet with the. 

Í Director on 9 July to discuss the Pentagon papers and various world hot spots 
Carver said that he will prepare а briefing paper for the Director on the 
Pentagon study." s : 


"Carver briefly noted oncern over the 
revelations in the Lansdale ον, which was surfaced’ as pare of 
the Pentagon papers." 


8 July 1971 


p "DD/S reported that a DOD secus: team is going to Santa Monica 
1. = ‚о repossess classified Defense’ materials held at Rand. He suggested that, 


Yu 


Us ' 5. хаЊег than take parallel action, we wend a ‘Security Officer to observe ` . | 
the’ operation ‘and inventory Agency ‘materials in the possession of Rand. 
73 2 wm Хо response to the Director's question he explained that we have seven | 
contracts with Rand; only one is classified, and it is with Rand's Washing-- 
ton office, although some material could have been sént to Santa Monica. . 
The Director concurred and requested а review to determine the essen- | 
tiality of current proposed. contracts with Rand. Houston commented that 
according to DOD General Counsel Buzhardt, DOD is technically under 
instructions to lift the security clearances of Rand contractors but has | 
taken no action. DDCI reported that John Ebr lichman ha had telephoned to : ^ 
advise us that the White House Lii appointing former CLA employee Howard 
-Hunt a asa i security “consultant. .Latér in the meeting the Director asked all 
Executive Committee members to review their lists of consultants to des | 
terrnine whether each i is really needed, n | 


vo "Carver briefed on his — yeste rday with As sistant Secrétary - 

" of Defense for Public Affairs Daniel Henkin and noted that any further 
i. .7. excisions from the text of the secret Pentagon papers must bà provided | 
i ον by Monday. He added that no decision has yet been made on whether. о й 
p^ ^. . ` release to the public the volumes or а version thereof. The Director noted | 
ae that wé should oppose any such course of o E " τ᾿ 00 286. 


LL e _ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


‚536 July 1972 


SS Carver said that 
its eth ` which Houston spent wi 


1 


MORI DocTD: 1451843 


"In response to. thi rector! s question Carver reported tha 
| contained. in the secret Pentagon papers: has. yet 
in ew York Times, “He. &dded, however, that the 

а 1 сору of the. forty-seven volumes 


16 July 1971 


S "Carver reported that T book which General Lansdale TA besa” 
writing for a year and‘a half із now in the hands of the publisher, with some 
minor changes being made in light of revelations resulting from the publica- 
tion'of the secret Pentagon papers. In response to the DD/P's question 
Carver said that he might: be able to arrange for us to read the text t 
зі in the chair) 


πονάς noted that. at White House facea a PFIAB committée- © m=- 
posed of Franklin Lincoln;-Dr. William Baker, ad Frank Pace will und 
take.a damage assessment of the publication of the secret Pentagon” p ip 
. He added that the committee will want to hear from us and spoke of plans. 
for Houston and Carver to о vadartake this task. М 


з 


get.a feel for security ipiacticas in genéral, Executive Director naviséa 
against our getting out front in terms of advising a major DOD contractor 
‘on security. The Director approved and requested that re respond to Mr. 
Marshall's renns st. in xd Y e that the meeting be held in this building QU 


22 July 1971 (the day Howard Hunt came to see General Gusha) 


tu HG arver highlighted his session yesterday wi th NSQ staffer’ sere 


в a ag 
“Young wine is assisting John 3 Ehrlichman. 58.18 eviewing t the s secret. кеше on 
papers," $us ! . 


| Times, "Soviet Move їо Avert WarIs Seen in Pact with India," and said that 


` visit to New Delhi is clearly from highly classified. CS material. "The A-DDP 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


^ 23 July 1971 


пн - š я 5 


і "Carver ighlighted his, Houston's, and ΕΓ] session with the ^ 
^ PFIAB committee, which is undertaking a damage assessment of the publicá- 
|o tion of the secret Pentagon papers. (See Morning Meeting Minutes of 16 July 


e 20-044 


6 August 1971 , 

The Director called attention to the article by Michael Getler in today's . 
Washington Post, "CIA Patrols Into China Said Halted, " and directed (1) 
that Maury write a letter. for his signature to Senator Stennis making it clear 


that Senator Case was briefed on this topic and obviously leaked it; (2) that 
Maury brief Carl March on the background, including the fact that these opera- 


tions were not terminated because of the President's projected trip to Com- > \ 
munist China but because certain aspects of them were previously exposed in ! 
the press; (3) that the Director'/of Security (who was present at the Morning : 


Meeting) get additional background from Maury and see White House staffer- 
David Young; (4) that Goodwin reply to queries by saying that we know nothing 
about this matter; (5) that: Houston and Maury utilize this incident in any 
material prepared for his use in opposing the Cooper bill; and (6) that the 
DDCI brief Dr. Kissinger or General Haig on this matter today. 


** 13 August 1971 ο 


ПАР ПРОРИВ 


Ἴδην εἴ, ae, 


| Knoche calied attention to the article by Tad Szulc in today's New York 4 | 


the material contained therein on the reason for Foreign Minister Gromyko's 


noted.his concern over this breach of security. 


— n 


16 August 1971 й | eos 


A-DDP пока that the article} - 
: i that t rt А " | . 
"Attempted Peo Cori, icle by Tad Szulcin Sunday's New York Times, 


00289 


the classified û ‘assessment upon which Tad Szulc. based his: 131 
| (see Morning Meeting Minutes of 13 August 1971). ο 


" 


| аз sistance in determining "hat four volumes о 


20 Augusti i 97 1. 


and cited. : 


`+ With the Director, and Carver commented that he is ‘opposed to our involve- . 


, the Justice Department!s efforts to prosecute. 


. In the meantime, . ‘Maury noted that he wi 
Е whether. they have онааган consulting 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


19 August 1971. 


Ber Joh in Lea ο ;Xéquest'for our 
fthe secret Pentagon papers 
Senator Gravel reportedly provided to Beacon Press for publication. He т 
noted that: Paul Chretien of OTR is án acquaintance ofthe Senator and may : e 
able to assist. "Carver said that the four volumes probably pertain : кен 
to negotiate a settlement and outlined the sensitive materia containe Fr 
Houston recommended against our involvement in this matter and cue e 
that the Department of Justice query Beacon Press." “Maury vues U e: 
Director instructed. that we do nothing until Maury. consults wit ar | 
MacGregor; Counsel tó the. President: for Legislative and с ' 
Affairs, who is out of town and will not return until the first'of next week. - 
; ill determine from. J ohn Lehman 
the πο of Justice on this 
(ХОБСІ in the chair) 


"Maury briefed on. White House зів 


matter. ! й 


"Maury Said that he called White House staffer John Lehman yesterday 
the Code which would permit the Justice Department: to go after the 
four volumes: ‘of, the secret. Pentagon papers reportédly. given. to Béacon Press. 
Lehman's- reaction was that, since there is an existing ‘policy: preventing the 
use of subpoenas | on this matter, he stil hopes we will assist in determining 
"what Senator Gravel may have given Beacon Press," "The DDCI asked Maury 
not to utilize Paul: Chretien's entree to the Senator without prior consultation 


ment (see Morning. Meeting Minutes of 19 August 1971." .. (DDCI in the chair) 


LH | | 
UPhe | Dirschos reviewed for Houston a conversation is had witha a 


young 3 lawyer who has reviewed the secret Pentagon j papers in- response to | 


According: to this attorney, 


Justice did not cite the appropriate provisions of the ` Code and has αν: 


its case 5 poorly. n 


з a‏ ف 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E 10 ечен iier 1971 


nëton. Post and 
eir, Lin; Sen oT. 
North. Vietnam's 


2 „Ташы: seid: ‘that this is "leak. day" in the чав: 
called: ‘attention “to the following articles: "Мао! 
Apparently Out in Power- Shuffle" by Stanley Kaxnow 
Next Move" by Evans/Novak, and "lin Piso is 'Finished''" by Joseph ` 
Alsop (attached). He noted that, while the article by: ‘Stanley 
Karnow provides good coverage of the topic, it has “a ‘State. Department . 
flavor. He also recalled that on 25 October we disseminated 
information similar to that contained in ‘the Evans/Novak . article.: 

‘He. mentioned that the Alsop article is probably. the most damaging, 
since it includes material 


Tere 


about this problem but advised the A-DDP бо соре with апу adverse: 
reaction: — а noting the large: volume. of ка 
. on: the. po ic&L:situation in Communist HERE. Е е 


n November in 


ae tr response - «a the, Directori 8. question Carver ER dt. ‘some — 
requested. by John Ehrlichman is pending. ‘The Director asked, to, be 
К "9488: in later. гоп. the details. 


| . . 20 Decenber 1951 


| Tegan: said. that Jack Anderson's columü in, today" Б 5 Walhinigton 
З Boats: "Hussein: “Help or I'll Go on а Ghazou';" contains. verbatiin 
“language from:an*ExDis message. from King Hus ће -Ргеѕїаепь 

and аала that. he ds looking into the: distrib ion of this Jiessage. 


| 2B December 297 


. ΑΞ caileà attention to Jack Anderson! 5. pcm in уызбен 5 
. and today's Washington Post (attached). He noted that the 27 December 
. piece. contained material from.three SALT ExDis memcons and added 
. ` that today's column contains quotes from a ‘State: LimDis. cable and 
| ao: TDCSs. А brief discussion followed, the;DDP observing that, - 
`i 4f these security breaches continue, we will ave to limit severely 
X the, distribution of sensitive ν.μ information. 


00291 . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| Janva . 1972 | = P 


- Maury said that чані to Frank slatinshek, n E A 
“edzi will rely on us rather heavily for support. during his hearings à 
-oñ the problem. of classification. and handling. of Government . 
; Information (see Morning Meeting Minutes of 6 January. 1972). The 
. Director encouraged Maury to see Chairman Nedzi next. week, апа 
Houston suggested that the Chairman be provided with ‘the Rehnquist 
oP НИВУ» 


з DDP briefed on work under. way to limit. distribution of reports 
and noted that C/FI is completing a review of 
steps which mig ken'to restrict dissemination of sensitive 


reports from АЛЛ sources. 
` , 


BET Janus: ; 1972 


` Maury’ related that Frank Slatinshek is pressing for e sud 
¿materials pertaining to past efforts ог. studies: related: to the 
“-@lassification and control of information, He added that he and 
Houston will meet with the Director later: day. to discuss the 
2 “availability of the кенин study. Eu 


š 12 January 1972. 


"UU уажуй Briefed’ on his: аа Houston's session with Prank 
: Slatinshek and their provision of a. large. Wolwe of алі on 
` ` past efforts | to develop effective espionage: H. laws. 


T Houston’: noter the President's noninati, P Henry E. Ee 
x Xo become Assistant Attorney- General in charge. of the Ciminal 
85 "Division of the Justice Department. He observed that Ме: Petersen 
2. 7. ћав ‘ееп most helpful to the Agency in: the pha. jersteulariy 
: : „on: the Itkin case. U 


33 J anuary 912. 


E pt Maury. noted. that the draft revision. ae Tee. Order 40501, 
цу .“Seeurity.Classification Procedures," which | 48 being circulated 
, by the .NSD staff for ΠΗ is a follow’ on to the ' study. 


P E. 18 January 1912. 


рр called - ‘attention. to the aris in Addar в New York-Times А 
"Nixon Acts to End Security Leaks." (Excerpt: "Last July, їмо ` 
` members of the White House staff, David R. Young of the National 
+ Security Council and Egil Krogh Jr. of the Domestic Council, were 
. ^ asked to investigate ‘earlier Ipaks апа peeve recurrences.") . 


© 00292 


SU: February 1972 | 
- А/О reported the House. ا‎ пош Committee й for . . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


а finance officer to assist them in work оп .the budget.” He added 
that we have provided such assistance: in: ‘the past, and the: Director 


" interposed no objection. 


T February 1272 


Houston ‘explained that. no action will be taken in the near 


- future with respect to the Hans Tofte case > Since ‘the judgef has 


^7 Post, "New Spy Satellites RIM Planned” 
a Tater 4n the meeting the Director asked’ the DDS to advise the 


been stricken with hepatitis. 


5 February 21972 


DDI noted the article by Michael:G без 162. in Today. 8 μη 
‘Clearer, Instant Pictures." 


Director of Security to undertake an: investigation of this leak of 


e : πα зле DR UD: information and to convene: he ПОВ Ἢ Committee. 


| à February 1972 


Carver ніші his handling ої White’ Hause staffer Sven ας s 


о request to FBIS for material concerning U.S. POW's.. . The Director 


reminded Executive Committee members of.Dr. Kissinger's ‘request 
that any inquiries. from elements of the White. House staff. be reierred 


κε , Зо his staff for conveyance to the Agency. 


Toiston: highlighted the ‘nesting: swith John Ehrlichmán on the NSC 


:.4гаїр Executive Order on security classification. .He noted the 
. related article by Sanford Ungar іп today! 5 з Washington Font, "NSC: 
Е Urges: Stiffer Law On Secrets.".. 


` 16 February 1972 


Lehman noted plans to continue: Briefing Attorney General 
Mitchell, whose resignation is effective 1 March. с” 


Houston related that White. "House. ‘staffer David Young has 
invited him to review another: НИМХМЕМХМИ draft of the new Executive 


'* Order on за classification. νο 


M Se I 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


тн February 1972 `` 


. Houston. said that he "m od Deputy Director of 
Security, recommend the Director: concur.in.the M new Executive 
Order on classification, in light ‘of their undertanding with NSC 
staffer David Young, that some of the features Фе the Executive 
Order may not materialize. A brief diseussion followed and the 
Director asked Houston to review the matter with him. | 


BXMHMYMARMXEYM 
2 March 1972 


Houston reported that the draft Executive Order on classification 
has undergone a few minor changes. He noted Director's letter to John 
Ehrlichwan, dated { December 19T1; with respect to our position on 
PI . problems related to declassification: апа suggested that a copy be 
“A. 7 U ^ provided David Young, NSC staffer. . ‘After а brief discussion, the 
do Director interposed no objection. `` 


й DT . 6 March. 1972 


The Director noted his: ето вано. to the еннен and Independent | 
Office Heads, subject: “Allegations : of Assassinations." He asked 
that it be шеп toned. at Staff. e 


21 March 1972 


The Diter said that: the. President has. seen his 17 πο 
"———À on reducing: disclosures. of classified “intelligence and: 
directed the White House staff to prepare a memorandum urging that ail 
agencles comply with er ахнетовике: procedures. 


° ав матен 1972 


Houston reported that he 15. scheduled to meet with John 
Ehrlichman this morning. 


23 March 1972 


Maury reported that, after checking with Egil Krogh of the 
White House stéff, he has made. arrangements to brief Congressman 
Leser Wolff of New York on the: e role in international 
narcoties зі ον W 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


: - ps. xelated that the: Director of Security has — a reaut AST m 
E j asi the. Secret Service to provide . two technicians іп support of IS 
the Vice ‘President's id to τῶν The Director concurred. 


2 May 1972. 


DDS reported that the. Director ої ‘Security has received a request. 
from the Secret Service for: counteraudio. ‘technicians to support і 
the President's trip to Moschw. ‘The Director concurred. 


` 11 May 1972 


is ^ А Heuston noted рів corréspondenice with White House :staffer 
fit 7 o» David Young pertaining to-our problems. with Executive .Order 11652 x 

8 Й - and added that Mr. Young has. accepted. ‘our position оп about 90 
percent of our ыы | with ше oe draft direttive. 


24 May 1972 


Fo. . Houston explained thet "Bis наа’ былды White House Staffer κ 
η ` David Young's understanding that we will not meet the 1 June салыу ` 
for producing internal Авепсу regulations implementing the NSC. _ | 
ЖАНР directove on Executive Order: 11652. A-brief discussion. ‘followed on. ig 
b" uu 7 the cumbersome bookkeeping, and- declassification authorities which. 
i os may be required. The Director observed that the topic’ was 
Mag ` sufficiently important fori.us;to.be in no great rush to meet а 1 Я 
June deadline and Housto assured him that Mr. Young : understands. з 


6 June 1972 | 


. өнөр explained. px hê. will continue. eH vith the ` А 

` General Counsel in response to Charles Nesson's efforts to serve a’ 
subpoena on him in connection with the Ellsberg case. Не noted the . 
related article by Robert A. Wright in today's New ος Times 5 І 
"Hearing IS Asked In Ellsberg Case." ` | 


T June 1972 , 


Houston noted а. пёр. аг the Justice Department conveying а. 
subpoena directed to ‘Angus’ Thuermer in connection with the Ellsberg 
case. He highlighted the “schedule of documents requested, most of: 
which yere mentioned in; £C otnotes: -to the Pentagon papers. Не noted 

BIER to ask Justice to declare the material irrelevant to the case 


MORI DocID: 1451843: 


. б June 1972 


Houston said dat КЕ ча. w attending a шеше called a MX m 
DOD General Counsel Buzhardt, ‘WHO"Ls recommending that Justice ο. art 
“the case against Daniel PEDES s 


19 June 1972 


The Director noted the.l7 June arrest of James М. McCord and 
four others who were apprehended at the Democratic National Committee.. 
headquarters &t the Watergate. With the Director of Security present. 
to provide biographic details, the Director made it perfectly clear 
that responses to any inquiry with respect to McCord or Howard Hung, 
who may be implicated, mre to.be limited to а statement that they . 
are former employees who. retired in MN August and. April 1970. : 
respectively. The. Director asked that this guidance. be ааваа bid 
via staff meetings «= he. Director asked that any inquiry from other... 
elements of the government be referred.to the Director of беш. 
who is to be the focal/ point. Inquiries from the press are. to be^ 
referred to Mr. Unumb: Who’ may say that- Мебота worked in the Office 
of. Security. The Director noted that we have no responsibility. 
with respect to.an invéstigation except to be responsive to the’. 
EM FBI's request for name traces. It was noted that Howard’ Hunt; 
may have done some work since retirement in connection with the. 
preparation of supporting material for’ some awards. The Executive - ub a 
Director was asked to review this topic and report to the Director. 7 


4 


20 June 1972 


In response to ne Direttori 8. reget the Director of Security’. 
highlighted developments over the past twenty-four. hours with С: Ж. 
. respect to `the McCord/Hunt, et al., situation. He noted that the 
late edition of. the \New-York. Times -carries a different story. by. таа 
Szule than that which appeared in the edition received here | 
` (attached). The Director of Security anticipates some inquiries on: 
Bernard L. Barker's. situation, and it was noted that Mr. Barker |. 
was hired by the. Agency in 1960 and terminated in 1966. The Director | 
complimented Unumb.on:his handling of inquiries and asked that: future : 
inquiries be met. with. a response confined to the fact that, now: „that 
we have acknowledged that: both McCord and Hunt are former Agency. ` ` af 
employees, we know nothing more bout the case апа the caller shoulda PC 
be referred to the. ‘EBL. EI зно | . WT ч 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


20 June 1972 ` 


RUN DDS noted Abt. dna response to State! 8 5 request its cha ° 
who drive the Secretary of State and other senior State officers.. 
will be given a one-day Gefensive driving orientation.at 


B 
‚ 20 June is 
. The Director’ noted: receipt. of а paper on a safehouse in 
Miami which is being made available to the Secret Service in. саса 
of its work in connection with the Republican and Democratic: 
National Conventions. Не asked the ADDP and the DDS to make.it 
absolutely clear | that our cooperation in this 3 
undertaking 15:0 be confined to provision of the safehouse 
that it is not-to, be used as a site for investigations, int 
or “walk-ins' ee ‘ete. The Director added that we will not ‘Loan 
people to the ‘FBI. or: Secret Service in connection with their 
responsibilities at the Conventrons nor will we provide.. equi. ent. 
unique to ‘the ‘Agency. - 


tions, 


21 June. 1972 


In view: ofthe. coverage in today's New York Times and Washington | 
Post, Maury recommended that Chairman Nedzi be. briefed on the McCord 
affair апа that- this briefing include all our information about: the ` 
fithers involved. "The Director asked Maury to touch base with the ` 
‘Director of. Security. and prepare a briefing paper on this topic "for 
his review. Citing the number of distorted rumors about. d 
` matter, the Executive: Director said that during the course the. 
day he hopes, to’ “provide & suggested Headquarters Bulletin Tor. ап 
employees for ihe Director's  weview. 


Ununb noted a όνος of inquiries from the press with respect , 
to the Cuban-Americans involved in the bugging attempt at the . 
Democratic National Committee headquarters and their alleged: . | 
involvement in the Bay of Pigs, etc. The Director asked that. Süch 
inquiries: be net. with ап explanation that we are пої pretend to. be 
кшн on “this matter. 


00297 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


22 June 1918: 


Шаш observed that inquiries on the: MeCord/ming, situation 
seem to be “slackening off. : DE E 


. 23 June 1972 ^. ΄ 


The Director called D/OCI's attention to coverage of the McCord 
affair in the Metro Section of today's Washington Post and asked that 
future issues of the "CIA Operations Center Morning Newspaper 
Highlights" include press items on this topic. eo 0 RTT 


Maury noted that he briefed Chairman Nedzi on the Мебоха/ 
Hunt Situation and on a security case. 


26 June | 1972 


Houston noted the Реп унала Freedonf of Information case. 
he Director endorsed his plans to concur in the CFBI's.release of 


. three ‘photos;..one being of Lee Harvey Oswald, which were: acquired 


in Mexico апа previously furnished to the Warren Commission. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


О “Houston. надана attention to the judge" 8 ring n hé. ТЕШУ 

Ema Russo. case. ‘denying the HMMMMMM defense motion for: ‘an’ videntiary 
hearing; as a result of which the subpoena directed. ‘at ‘CIA. во : | 

suspended. . А Й τ us. Š 


ER July 1972 ^ 


: DDI noted press attention attached to Secretary of Commerce 
Peterson's planned trip to the Soviet Union and observed that 


Peterson's office when о the President for." 

International Economic Affairs, continues to work for. him and.may go . 
to the. Soviet-Union.. She will be in a IWOP stati E “the. : : 

I remainder: of: her tenure with the Secretary. ihe : 


ош к шу 1972 | 


i ots базман. recalled that ме hàve providad some ποτέρα о Senator- 
Pagloton on:Vietnam. The Director said that in time ме will receive 
instructions: from the White House on все Senators McGovern ` 

Ba pm о, D M NE 


κ ` Houston ТТЕР that the Justice ee ТР anxious that 
*- no, ‘Comment be made on the Ellsberg/Russo trial and: that any ` 

Н ^ingüiries: should be referred То the Justice. ως Public ` - 

| i Relations Office. 


| . 2l | duly 1912 


` Roton са that he had called David аку 8 i ΜΗ to 
the fact that the White House (NSC Staff) = not шананы the new 
. с тез . 


: ο TC аж ice to White House. Staffer: John 

gn Lehman, David. Young is of the opinion that Estimates are subject tó 
E declassification after ten years. Houston’ will ‘Bee, Mr. dnd to 
d теша hin out on this topic. "ee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


a 6 лаў 1972 


. The Director. s + + went on to ask thé. ов: for thie αὶ SUE о 
"ofa decision to have of the Office Of Security accompany і 


 .Fred Flott on a White House Survey of the. drug scene ‘in Southeast 


<: Asia. The Director said that in the future hi$.or the DDCI's 


"ov Krogh may call the Direttor to reclama. 
i=" ‘the background of this decision- anā note 
` Al Haig on this. topic. 


` prior. approval will be required in all cases: where . the Agency 
“is asked by the White House or any other element of the Government 
.to.send an Agency officer оп а narcotics-connected mission. 


27 July 1972 


` DDP reported that Cord Meyer advised Bud Krogh of the White 
House staff of our unwillingness to have| | | accompany а new .. 
narcotics Survey team to Southeast Asia „andthe possibility that 
e' Director briefed on 
15 “conversation with 


` X August 1972, 


‚ DDS related that Mr. Of the CI Staff received. а call 
fron the Secret Service requesting our. training film on defensive 
- driving. The Director interposed no to making Bis 

o film available. 


'8 August 1972 B 


. Houston reported that Judge меАга: 
` summary judgment in the Tofte case.. 


ted a motion for 


us 21 August. 1972 


Houston 'noteà & telephone call еш ‘Howard ars wu ‚йй 
that his attorney was with him and had a. question about a friend's 
past affiliation with the Agency. DD/Sec, has . 
reviewed the employment, and Houston reported that he replied 


μον Qlrecthy to Hunf's friend, Mr.| that his ola 
: affiliation should create по problems In: ;connect on "with. his 


` appearance before a grand jury. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


~ ' 22 August 1972 


"Thuermer reported on a call from a Mr. Crewdson of the New York 
Times who said he was "formally requesting" а photograph of Howard 
Hunt. The DDP observed that we are under no obligation to provide 
а photograph, апа Thuermer said he had declined. 


23 August 1972 | | 


DDI noted a letter from the McGovern campaign headquarters ` | 
requesting the FBIS НАМИ daily white book and any recent studies on | 
Southeast Asia. A brief discussion followed and the 1%тег will be 
disregarded. SM 


ll September 1972 


Maury reported on his conversation with Messrs. Plug and Epstein 
of Senator Kennedy's staff in response to the НЯНХМХМ Senator's 18: 


August letter to the Director allegi r contact. 
паші Tor the Record). ΠῚ ` 


Thuermer noted that White House staffer David Young will hold a 
meeting today to brief the press on the implementation of Executive ` 
Order 11652. - 


.21 September 1972 


Warner reported that Marchetti's lawyers have been in touch with. 
Justice in connection with ACLU's filing a secret brief with the 
‘Supreme Court and said that the Office of Security will pick it up 
as а convendience to Justice. XE S RDUM 


E 


А | Warner noted that the Director is Опе of several defendants in мум 
ri . 8 Civil-case filed by Ellsberg and Russo. T 


Unumb Moted а request from the National Observer for biographic 
data on Howard Hunt and Јашев McCord in connection with a story they 


are doing on the Watergate incident. ‘The Director endorsed his 
- having provided only the dates these individuals left the Agency. 


25 September 1972 | 
| The Director noted a call from Assistant Secretary.of State 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` 


`Maury noted his response to а request from CSC General Counsel 

Anthony Mondello, who was reacting to a request for the personnel 
files of those former Agency officers involved in the Watergate 
incident from Senator Kennedy's Subcommittee on Administrative 

` Practices and Procedures. He added that we are exempted from 
related CSC regulations, and the Director endorsed his plan to 
provide only the Gates of their departure from the Agéncy in the 

event the Senator's office calls us on this matter. . 


.3 November 1972 


Houston recalled that last August he reported on а call from 
Howard Hunt and his subsequent. guidance to 
to handle affiliation with the Agency, 


The Director highlighted his conversation with. David Kreslow 
of the Washington Star News and his flat denial of а proposed story 
that the "Agency was asked to report on the Democratic Party which 
led to the Watergate incident and others. The Director noted his, 
plans to issue а statement of denial if such a story,were to appear 
and suggested that Theermer consider drafting one for contingency 
use... ° 5 m : 


15 November 1972 


DDP noted a report from Chief, WH Division that on.9 October а 
. Mr. Harper of the New York Times was working on a story which tries ' 
. to Link the Agency with Cuban emigres, the break-in at the Chilean 
Embassy, action against Daniel Ellsberg, and the Watergate case. 
Thuermer observed that this is the first he has heard about this topic, 
and the DDP concluded that such.a story could have no basis in fact | 
апа 1% would be inadvisable · ‘to uy to straighten out Mr. Harper. 


20 November 1972 


рут called attention is Jack Anderson! 5 волий in today's 
Washington Post and the quotes contained therein from an Agency 
report on а famous singer. ‘The Director highlighted his brief 
conversation with Jack Anderson and explained that the Director 
of Security is looking into this matter. 


00302 ` 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


22 November 1972. 


Warner РЕР that em to Assistant kons General й 
Непту Petersen, U.S. Attorney Earl Silbert has several questions on ts 
the Watergate case. The Director indicate he will review this 
matter later. 


Li 


‚12 December 1972 


Thuermer noted an inguiry from Dave Burnham of the New York 
Times, who appears to be writing а story on the twelve New York 
Police officers who were briefed by the Agency on information 
processing. А brief discussion followed, апа Thuermer will advise 
Burnham that we have occasionally provided briefings at the request 
of various police organizations, but theSe are exceptional cases. 


13 December 1972. 


The Director noted the article љу Thomas B. Ross in yesterday's . 
Evening Star-News, "New Watergate Démension?," апа the impression 
left therein that the Agency was involved in the Watergate incident 
because a passport bearing ‘the. name Edward Hamilton was found on 
Frank Sturgis. Any inquiries from the press or elsewhere are to be 
met with a "this is nonsense” reply. The Executive Director noted work 
under way to identify the ΕΕΣ, of the passport story. 


29 December 2912 EL 

Ununib reported that. Seymour Hersh of the New York Times, who 
is preparing а story on the Watergate incident, had asked if 
Martinez had been ешр1оуей ‘by the Agency. Acting DCI recommended 
that the Agency not assist Mr. Hersh's efforts. 


а Ӯ c ql cx desc ВО 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


10 January 1973 


_ Maury related ‘that we will be on firm MÀ in інно: to: 
Congressman Koch if we indicate that our assistance to the NY City . 
Police Dept. was not training but а briefing on an essentially 

“unclassified basis undertaken in response to the suggestion of a 
consultant to the N.Y.P.D. Thuermer reminded those concerned that 


12 J anuary 1973 


15 January 1913 


Maury noted “press. stories that. Watergate defendant Martinez: f | 
was on the Agency pay roll until 17 June and anticipated some . ᾿᾿ 
inquiry on this topic. The DDP endorsed his view that М Whereas 
Martinez was intermittently used as a.source to report on Cuban 
exile matéers, this relationship should cause no serious difficulty. 


17 J: апшагу 1973 


Тһе Director. called attention to the article by James Reston: 
"The Watergate Spies' contained in the New York Times, and wondered. 
и 


how Reston.got the errogeous impression that Hunt was ae wi 
Operational head of the СТА? ѕ Cuban Bay ої Pigs wel dm : 


: 18 January 1973 


Maury reported that when he and Dave Blee, Chief/SB, saw : ` 
Chairman Nedzi with respect to the Chairman's forthcoming trip: o. 
Finland, Leningrad, .Sofi@ and A&lens, Chairman Nedzi briefed on. 
his November conversation with New York Times correspondent Seymour’ 
Hersh. Maury went. on to highlight the several topics and allegations 
Hersh claims he has with respect to Agency activities, 
particularly allegations that we are engaged in extensive donosite; 
operations. ‘Maury will circulate a memorandum on the information: 
Hersh claims he has. `The. Director explained that we should assemble 
‚а senior team to meet with Chairman Nedzi and clearly outline what ме ` 

ао and до not do in the United States. The Executive Director. 
called attention to his 29 February 1912 memorandum to the deputies, 
‘Subject: Allegations. of Agency involvement in the US, and suggested. 
that it might serve as an ἘΠΕ for materiàl = be covered ae 
Chairman Nedzi. : 


` 00304 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


18 айналу 1973 


Maury noted that in resporise to Tom Korologts' (Special Assistent . 
iMM to the President for.legislative Affairs (Senate)) request Гог: 
materials on instances where classified information had been leaked 
to the press, he assembled a paper on this topic and provided it with. 
a note. than an examination of most.leaks reveals that yH the White 
House and Executive Branch are the guilty parties. 


19 January 1973 


Maury reported that Chairman Nedzi would like the Full 
Subcommittee on Intelligence Operations to hear a presentation by 
us on Agency activitity in the United States sometime in mid-February. 
The Director noted. that his decision of yesterday to turn out a Senior 
team for this briefing stands. 


22 January 1973 


General Walters noted Howard Hunt's appearance on television 
last night.  Thuermer will obtain a transcript of the program, and the 
Executive Director noted his concern over Hurfft's suggestion that he is 
no longer bound by his ἜΠΗ agreement. d. og 


із January 1973 


Executive Director noted that the termdnal secrecy agreement 
which Howard Hunt signed said. that he will be acknowledzed as ап 
Agency employee. His- assdtion that he is not bound by the agreement 
because we did in fact acknowledge his M LEM here is therefore 
ill-advised. 


“The Director noted a call from Elliot Richardson asking ‘about 
some information that Seymour Hersh has developed to the effect that 
- HEW automatically provides the Agency.with travel orders on its 
. = ‘employees and that this agreement was made in Secretary Ribicopf's 
time. The DDI will determine what this is about and advise. 


oh January 1913. 


Maury noted that he met with Coumadin Koch on our ‘mintnal 
assistance in briefing the New York City pOlice officers. The: ; 
Congressman would like something in writing on this, which Muy will 
prepare and. sign. 


00305 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E ο 1913 


<Thuermer noted advice. from a former Agency aimoye tha ITIN 
Bagno Hersh has been assigned full time to the Watergate story, but 
in the meantime, Mr. Hersh claims he nas evidence of Agency interest . i 
in an arsenal in the Midwest, а map-making facility in Vermont, and 
in Camp азу, 


. 26 January 1973: 


The Director noted he has’ advised the Director of raining of 
Mrs. Lyndon Johnson's request for Marie Chiarodo to handle the 
large volume of mail she has received. 


DDE reported that he has been unable to turn up any information 
which would lead Seymour Hersh to allege that we have a ἘΠΕ 
facility in Vermont. 


30 January 1913 


Thuermer OT that the Virginia Gazette seems. to be 
persisting in its efforts to embarrass Cap? Peary and has been in touch 
with Victor Marchetti and Patrick McGarvey, who have tended to confirm 
allegations that the Phoenix program was supported by contract assassins. 


n February 1973 


Maury noted that Mr. Helms is appearing before the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee this morning on police training, КМИ 
ITT, and the Watergate incident. He also noted that he has 
solicited the support: of Senators Humphrey, McGee, and Scott бо 
make appropriate public statements following Mr. Helms! appearance. 


Mary &dvised that in response to Chairman Holifield's 
investigation of Agency training pf policemen, he will meet with 
Herbert Roback, Counsel of the House Government Operations . 
Committee, to explain our briefing of various police departments. 


са February 1913 


The- Director noted his scheduled meeting tomorrow with 
Defense Secretary Richardson and asked Executive Committee members 
to give him.a note on any item they, wish bim to raise with the 
Secretary. Candidates ате... Secretary Richardsons! earlier 
concerns with respect to HEW providing the Agency with travel plans 
_of officers going. to Communist Bloc countries. On the latter item 
the DDI explained that since Secretary Ri£hardson's inquiry to Mr. 
Helms (see minutes of 23 Jan 73), а survey had been undertaken and 
reviewed. with HEW, which had no problems with these old arrangements 
but is shifting the point of pickup to its public. piraira staff 
where such information is available to anyone. 


00306 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


B Februar as E 


агу noted. the statement by Senator - Fulight КОО Mr; ` 
Helms" appearance yesterday before the Senate Foregin Relations 
Committee in which the Sentator expressed his Opposition to: the whole 
concept of. the Agency getting involved with the police even in an 
innocuous way.. Maury added that he will see Chairman Holifield's 
staff assistant Herbert Roback today. Maury said that a stement had 
been transmitted to the White House yesterday for John Ehrlichman's 
possible use. (attached). The Director asked that.a contingency 
document be prepared along the lines that we will continue to comply 
with the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 2968 which 
approves of.our assistance to various police forces when ЕМЫНМММ 
authorized Љу. the Justice Department. In response to the.DDI's 
suggestions, ‘the DDS will review what assistance to. police. forces 
had been given. prior.to 1968 end advise. 


Maury ei Si in the РЕЯ judgment that: it Τα $upossible 
to keep all-congressional elements happy and that we face а period 
of increased’ Criticism from this quarter which must be met with 
firm assurances. that what we are being criticized for is fully 
authorized and justified. Unless the facts justify such a ‘statement, 
we would be well advised to terminate ‘the activity in questions 


Maury левая that we are obligated to sit: dowa with. 
Chairman, .Nedzi and review what we do and don't do in {πε 10. 8. (see 
Moming Minutes of ШММ 18 and 19 January). The Director: 
concurred, `, ‘The DDI suggested that we undertake an: in-house review 
ої what 12. is-we are doing within the U. 8. and. ΕΕ and і 
eliminate the’ marginal 


9 February 1913 


. Maury. ваза he spent an hour yesterday with Congressman Holifield 
and they decided to have their respective staffs work on a letter for 
Holifield to send to the Director suggesting restrictive, but not 
prohibitive, guidlines regarding such activities in tHe future. 


. Maury. noted Chairman Nedzi's current concerns about ‘this topic and | 


sara. the proposed ШЫМЫ letter may ан, his worries. 


jh February 1973 


Thuermex noted advice from Hicholas ieee of Newsweek that. 
a "soft story" ‘is floating around Newsweek on the? ‘general topic of . 
political espionage and ex-CIA agents. Mr. Horrock asked what 


.constraints we have-On former employees.. A. lengthy discussion 


followed, noting in particular that the only. legal..constraint ΜΙ. 

imposed is thé terminal secrecy agreement as reinforced by the MMMMM a 

cows din- the Marchetti case. Other than this, there are no constraint 

excépt moral ones. Termer will advise Horrick that thousands of 

employees have. gone through CIA, and it is а matter of pe E" 
that oni а handful have deported themselves improper ye 

x id ч 00307 . 


۰ OO но НО j] 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


15 February..1973 | 
νιν ‘Maury added that he went over (with Nedzi) Seymour 
Hersh's charges with respect to the Agency апа our position on each. 


DDI recalled our obligation to Brief Chairman Nedzi on Agency 
activities in. the US. 


20 February 1973 


Maury related that Herb HH Roback of Senator HOMifielà's staff 
is being asked. by David Burnham of the New York Times for the names 
Of those city police departments we have briefed in the past. The i 
DDS called attantion to our obligation to clear with these police Оң 
departments any mention of their having been briefed. In response i 
to the Director's suggestion that the Agency issue a press. release 
on this topic, a lengthy discussion followed and the Director 
asked the DDS-to report to him on what our understanding with. 
various police departments has been prior to our.agreement to 
brief same. He also asked that editorial comment оп any past 
.Agency briefing.of the press or press releases be assembled.and 
explained. that in principle we should from time to time бехе it known 
that we are part of the U.S. Government. | 


23 February 1913; 


| Maury noted that Herb Roback Qf Senator Dunes staff and 
Chatman Nedzi have concurred in a letter for the Director's 
с Bignature which will indicate that we will undertake training ої 
. U.S. pblice"only for the most compelling reasons." Aorief ` 
. discussion followed and the Director observed that it is important 
for us ‘to часын what we do апа then advise the. Hill accordingly. | 


| BL February 1913 . 


The Director noted a call from.Senator Jackson, who asked him 
-to meet with Senator McClellan sometime next week with regard to 
m Congressman Holifield's inquiry. ince imn. Agency training of U. я 
: police: departments. : | gees . i ` 


1 March 1973 


<<<. Maury related that former Director Richard Helms. has. been 

` asked by Senator Fulbright to reappear before the Senate Foreign . 
Relations Committee. Maury said that Mr. Helms would probably be 

-querie on the Watergate incident, Agency training of police, and 

„ITT and went on to describe Mr. Helms! anticipated. reponse., 


00308 


"1 March 1973 


. concern but has provided cover for one or two officers OVesseas. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Maury reported that Congressman" Holifield's staff is anxiously 
awaiting а letter from the Director in response to the Congressman's 
Written inquiry on police training. The Director noted plens to 
foward it. : і | 


2 March 197 3 


. Maury highlighted yesterday's LIG meeting at the White House. 
and his recommendation that we not provide examples of Congressional 
leaks of classified information for White House use in reacting Eos 
Congressional criticism of the Administration's "indiscretions.' 

The DDS advised that the Office of Security is keeping а reasonably 
complete record of obvious leaks of "ΕΞ information in 


` the press and eisewhere. 


2 March 1973 


Maury highlighted the statement Congressman Holifielà will 
introduce into the Congressional Record today on Agency briefing 
of.U.S. pBlice forces. He also noted a related news release that 
will be issued by the Congressman's office.. 


6 March 1973 


Maury highlighted Congressman Koch's reaction to our'esponse to 


- Congressman Holifield's letter concerning police training, as reported 


in today's press. ΜΑΙΡΥ noted that Congressman Koch plans to ask 


САО for a ruling on this matter, and the Director suggested that 


мі provide. some guidance. to Comptroller. General.Elmer Staats. 


The Director noted vies that Hugh Sidey of Time magazine 


' plans to write & story alleging that Howard Hunt was employed by а 


cover organization, ig., Robert В. Mullen Company, when he left 
the Agency. Colby noted that this company is a completely private 


The Director asked Thuermer to be us ο to conte with any 
inquiries when the story appears. 


00309 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


. 9 March 1973 


Washington Post, "Analyzing the CIA's Analysts," which erroneously 
refers to Sam Adams as a former employee. later in tne meeting, κ 
Houston explained why the allegation that the Agency has tried to 
muzzle Adams is false. He went on to brief on 

communications with Justice and the fact that 

Adams! material was not exculpatory. In response to the Director's 
question, the DDI reported that Mr. Adams has not been placed on 
probation. The Director found this unsatisfactory. 


DDI called attention to Joseph Alsop's article in today's | x 


Houston explained the legal implications of the subpoena 
served on Thermer for documents related to the Ellsberg case and 
&dvised that the Director may have to claim executive privilege. 


15 March 1973 


Houston said that the judge squashed the subpoena served on 
Thuermer (see Morning Minutes of 7 March). 


00310 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Included in this folder are miscellaneous items, including the 


Кл 


Chuck Briggs' submission, including support of the Committee on narcotics 


Review of Minutes of Morning Meetings 


Agency funding of heroin study. 


Tom Parrott's involvement with David Young 


Cary's memo on briefing of Special. Subcommittee on Intelligence 
Of House Armed Services Committee (this relates to the McCord 
letters to the Agency) 


Broe's report of his and Colby's meeting with Nedzi 


00311 


иинин 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 
e of Disguise Materials and Alias Documentation Within the U.S. 


i 
— š νε | NEC w ББ 
building] OFFICER'S ea (Number each comment to show from whom 


FORWARDEO INITIALS om. Draw a line across column after each comment.) 
po 

Taspector General 

ча cli $ Svr 


eMe + 


Ф 
c 


й opum 


FORM 610 "sous = SECRET ра CONFIDENTIAL E INTERNAL g UNCLASSIFIED 


MORI росІр:. 1451843 


ΠΕ ET μα 1 | | ` 
48 JUN 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General 


SUBJECT . 3 Use of Disguise Materials and Alias Documentation 
Within the U.S. 


REFERENCE - : Memo dtd 30 May 73 to DIR fil cor prorat DS 
Issuance of Disguise Materials tor Probable Use 
Within U.S. or It's Territories 


1. The Associate Ey Î Director for Operations has asked 
that we give you a detailed report of the actual use that the Office 
of Training has made within the U.S. of all disguise materials and 
alias documentation we have obtained for our staff members and students. 


2. Disguise Materials. 


.OTR has obtained oan OTS disguise materials - including 

glasses » Wigs, mustaches, and special shoes to increase height - for 

` 12 staff insttuctors at the Domestic Training Station. The purpose of 
these materials is to increase the difficulty that students in the Basic. 
Operations Course and Advanced Operations Course will have in recognizing 
instructors during problems and exercises conducted ο... 
DIS, Exercises include surveillance, countersurvei 5 passes, 
and dead drop problems in which instructors monitor student activity. 
These exercises are run under carefully controlled conditions only in 
areas where adequate liaison exists with local authorities to avoid any 
flap should difficulty arise during an exercise. 


00313 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


The sole use of disguise materials by these instructors 
has been or will be in support of the training exercise noted above. 
At no time have the materials been used for other purposes. 


3. Alias Documents 
U.S. alias documents consisting primarily of business and 


social cards, but also including drivers! licenses and social securi 
cards, have been used for more tlian a year by students 


if required, 
comprehensive exercise, 


г rom the students and returned to OTS. Again, 
these documents are used only under carefully controlled conditions in an 
environment here adequate liaison with local authorities exists 
to contain any flap; and the documents-are used only for the purposes stated. 


4. A thorough canvass of all elements of OTR discloses no other 
instance in recent years in which we have used disguise materials or alias 
documentation within the U.S. or obtained such materials for that purpose. 


irector of Training 
cc: ADDO 


л с н и ————Z———— TT hFTnVrr 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


|  4ORANDUM FOR: 


Neue Ёа 


FORM ко. 101 REPLACES FORM 10- 101 


1 AUG 54 WHICH MAY BE USED. nid 


“NAL 


d UNCLASSIFIED μη 


п 


TO: (Officer designation, room number, and 
building) 


6 
Return to O/IG 
ἘΞΗ 


за" 610 tug 


SECRET 


C] CONFI «TIAL 
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


ΣΗ1Β)ΕΟΤ: (Optional) 


OFFICER'S 
INITIALS 


[7 CONFIDENTIAL 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


[] SECRET 


Z0 June 1973 


COMMENTS (Number eoch comment Jo show from whom 


fo whom. Drow o line across column aker each comment.) 


Г μα, «πι 


ниг AcCtEIEN 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


i τς > : рр/0 24388 


20 June 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: John Dean Allegations to Newsweek Magazine 


1. Mr. William Jorden, the Latin American referent 
on Dr, Kissinger's Staff, called today in reference to State 
cable Мо. 112189, dated 11 June (attached). Не said that he 
had specific reference to paragraph 2 of that cable and would 
like to have "everything and anything we know" on that subject 
in the Agency. 


2. The undersigned indicated to Mr. Jorden that he 
had checked out the allegation that some low level White House 
officials had considered assassinating Torrijos when the story 
first appeared in Newsweek and, despite checking outside WH 
Division also, could find no-one in the Agency who could 
recollect or find anything relating to such a plan on the part 
of any portion of U.S. officialdom. I told him that I felt sure 
that nothing of this nature had come to WH Division's attention 
because for the period in question I had been Deputy Chief of 
WH Division and had heard nothing about any such plan. Mr. 
Jorden asked if the Agency knew anything about Howard Hunt 
` having had а team in Mexico "before the mission was aborted". 
and 1 indicated that аз far as I knew, the Agency had no infor- 
mation on Hunt being in Mexico on such à mission. Ialso 
indicated, however, they could have been and the Agency might 
well not know it simply because he could have used an alias and 
he is ап American citizen, which is outside the Agency's 
province and really the FBI's business. I suggested that it 
might be best if he checked the FBI on that particular angle, 
Subsequently I checked with Mr. William V. Broe, the IG 


and Mr, John Horton, recently returned 7 


mE | B 
й S 


00317 


MORI Ῥος]1ῦ: 1451843 


CRET- 


and both indicated that they had not run across any information 
concerning this latter allegation of Hunt and a team in Mexico 
on à mission related to Panama. 


3. It was apparent that Mr. Jorden was under some 
pressure to refute these allegations and was casting about in 
all directions to make as certain of his ground as he possibly 
could before he tried to do so. 


Attachment: 
Ав Stated Above 


| BT | 00318 
CRET. | š 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Tg pu jode ἢ Es чайна Жай но μα =f = εν | a 
προ ADMIN INTERN : 


Sa i ae 
366383 - Pd ооо “PAGE й1- BL. 4 x o з, “NE BETIS LL. 


` ror 1143262 sun 73 


RUEATIB- К cvi 
R UUUUU. zoc STATE жено, оз ο 
RUESVA RULPALJ. x. ia oi 
RUE HC #2189, 1621322. э. 
^R UUUUU ZzH З 
111312Z.JUN 73 -. "NT PACA . 
SECSTATE HASHDC 5. 
RUESVA/AMEMBASSY. PANAMA: "YuMEDIATE 2592 


FO PULPALJ/PANCANAL IMMEDIATE... оо Жоел Ἢ 
LP A. /USSOUTHCON IHMEDIATE Ἢ LEN: es 
cLi STATE. 112189. ! E PE, "NET ΝΠ 
о. 11652: ΝΛΑ EST Я eM 
65: PFOR,. PN Е MN 
BJECT: ALLEGATIONS. MADE SY JOHN. DEAN πο NEWSHE EEK HÃGAZINE TT 
THE FOLLOWING IS EXCERPTED FROM.A FRONT PAGE ARTICLE ΡΕ; 


ON TODAY'S NEW YORK ΤΙΜΕΣ WHICH. REPORTS ОМ. ALLEGATIONS” ae τω ο. 
DE BY JOHN DEAN TO NEWSWEEK MAGAZINE, dC ME οσο. 


M 


"SOME UL OHSLEVELT. WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS CONSIDERED AS 


dE j 
SSINATING PANAMA'S RULER OHAR TORRIJOS, BECAUSE THEY veg Es > 
SPECTED THE INVOLVEMENT OF HIGH PANAMANIAN AUTHORITIES IN ἐξ 
ROIN TRAFFIC AND BECAUSE THEY FELT THE GOVERNHENT НАРО c. Àj 
=N UNCOOPERATIVE ABOUT. RENEGOTIATING THE PANAMA CANALI: Th , 
ΞΑΤΥ, E, HOWARD HUNT..JR;». A LEADER OF THE WATERGATE ` Bi. F -| 
RGLARS, НАР A TEAM IN MEXICO "BEFORE THE MISSION WAS. di ня? Ë 
0i RTEDs © NEWSWEEK” SAID." .. об . y | ; 
: | cy a x 
v Те Sf fes | 
ese в Г TEM m») Tatar c. E 
: 00319 


dz. my d 


1-67 


м на, 


а 


| [Ds  . | 


Er INFORMATION 


‘FOLD HERE TO RETURN το SEN 
FROM: 


NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE МО. 


δὲ previous editions 


237 


RE 
[ mr: [7 АК 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


x 
' 
zt 
E 
| 
i η 
= 
n 
x 
ah зу й 
š >” 
і z 


| YT l a Җө r rm muCaFnaF 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


$ e. س س‎ 
Ы - 
a 
а g чо nde στο 
τ ў ; 
У 
= Ф 
e x 
+ سی‎ 

А 


ο... 
(DATE) ~ 
00 | 


FORM NO, 


πε. 10! REPLACES FORM 10-101 


WHICH MAY BE USED. 


{47} 


E 


kak was acie Waa э 


п 
і 
ἐν 
1 


a 


"E 


( 


MORI DocID: 


a Ch :] μμ. Ρ р h In. p τος I BENE evidence has turned up 
Í ⁄ NU [ ! that members of the team tha 
` Р d ean rea Б ns UZZ e broke into the Watergate were 


А My й і . I 15 £ . око i in п entries 
O k, я ерт t -althou hints that some o 
" i a erg ate nues Lig ators ; them poe have participated 

GM ss : Ë have come, from the authorities 
EE LT Я : in Florida. . : 3 
M. By MICHAEL C. JENSEN First reports about a break- 
One unsolved puzzle that! The next break-in was said] at the Chilean Embassy be- 


Watergate investigators arei й ἡ n "ed gan to circulate in Miami a 
studying is the identity of in [por st th tun aer Se I| week Or so after the Watergate 
‘truders who broke into the! apartment in Manhattan of 1д- break-in of June 17, 1972, and 
offices and residences of: vier Urrutia, | resident. of thei there was speculation that the 
Chilean diplomats in Washing-| Chilean De elo ment Corpora; two might have been related. 

р pora- hat link never has been 


& © 


1 7 3 E at м 
sos sew fon and New York at least four: поп and a close-economic ай- Ê! 


-times from April, 1971 to May, viser to Chile's : proved, and some investigators 
' э vise president, Dr.| som прах 
i --- . 7 Salvador Allende Gossens. . doubt that it.exists. 
Four. break-ins against ‘Chile Pistol Stolen ` One explanation offered for 
- ans took place in the 14 months istol Stolen the Chilean break-in was’ that| 


immediately | preceding the Mr. Urrutia told the police if any Cuban-Americans partici 
break-in at the Democrats’ thal а .25-caliber Bernardellj pated, as was the case in the: 
Watergate headquarters last pistol had been stolen, How- Watergate, they might have 
June. They also occurred at a ever, a fur coat in a closet been looking for documents 
time when the Chilean Govern- was reportedly untouched, Gov-, that would indicate collusion] 
ment was negotiating with the ernment papers were. said (o^ between the Chilean and Castro 
International Telephone and have been disturbed, and chew- | governments. - 
Telegraph Corporation overiing gum was edged into the | Shortly after the specula- 
compensation for Chile's take- apartments lock, a familiar | tion began in Miami. Chilean! 
over of the huge conglomerate'sj practice of professional intrud-; officials acknowledged the 
telephone subsidiary. ers that gives them time to break-in and reported it ta the! 
Because of far more sensa-| escape if they are surprised] city police, who started an ine 
tional disclosures, Watergate in-| during the course of an entry.| vestigation that has been in- 
vestigators have not actively} The third reported break-in} conclusive, 
pursued the Chilean case in| took place on Feb. 10, 1975, - Earlier this month, a Cuban: 
recent wecks, beyond asking a| investigators said, at the New| named Felipe de Diego was 
question or two. about the] York residence on East 46th} interrogated’ by State Altorney 
Jreak-ins during interrogations Street of Victor Rioseco, Гог-| Richard E. Gerstein in Florida 


- of the Watergate burglars. merly a Chitcan official at the! regarding participation . in the 


. However, Senate investigat-| United Nations, A radio and aj break-in at the offices of Dr. 
crs have informed both the! television set were reportedly} Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist 
Senate Watergate committee] taken and papers disturbed. {in Los Angeles. — -- Й ; 
and the Watergate prosecutors} ‘The fourth and most pub-| He and his attorney indicat- 
in Washington about the details} licized break-in took place over; ed that, if granted immunity, 
of the four break-ins at the} the weekend of May 13, 1972, | Mr. de Diego might shed new' 
offices and residences of thel at the Chilean Embassy in|light on other surreptitious op- 
Chileans. Washington. Files of Ше Am-|{erations in Washington, Inves- 
$ Occurred in New York bassador and his first ѕесге-| tigalors in Miami later indicat- 
| tary, Fernando Bachelet, werejed that these operations might 


. Furthermore, a member of the} reportedly rifled and two-ra-|include’ the Chilean break-in 


` special intelligence unit of {hel dios taken. E or break-ins. . 
New York Police Department| Chilean officials have been: EM 
was said to have concluded| ordered by their Government’ ` 
that the three break-ins that Οὐ-| пог to discuss the matter, buti 
curred in Manhattan were no| ssurces close to the case said! 
routine burglaries. And investi-| that the former Chilean Am-l 
gators in Washington said that! bassador, Orlando Letelier, had! 
the four break-ins had followed! confirmed that the Washington! 
similar patterns. . intruders apparently were seek-i 

They were apparentiy done} ing sensitive Government docu- 

by professionals, with a few| ments. des 
: B om qh atni В ae ΝΗ 
items taken to make the break-l Speculation by Investigators 


. .ins appear to be burglaries, in- 


vestipators said, Other valuable, - Capitol Hill investigators 
items were left behind, how-| have speculated that the in-| - 
ever, and sensitive papers were) truders might have been seek- 
disturbed, possibly in tbe; ing evidence of links between| 
course of being photographed. | Cuba and Chile, or looking for 
Investigators ` Teconstruct the! Politically sensitive: documents 
break-ins as follows: relating to the take-over by 
Then, first known break-in oc-| Chile of LT.T. properties. 
-curred on the afiernoon of 
‘pril 5, 1971 at the Manhattan 
esidence on Lexington Ave- 
nue of Humberto Diaz-Casa- 
nueva, Chile's Ambassador to 
the United Nations.: The Am- 
bassador reportedly told the . А 
police that the intruders had 


and а nair of haats and аги 


1451843 


stolen such iems as a hair-dryer | ` E 00 dedo 


` 


_ у ці 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E Um = . 
faction: | [musgr nem | 
Jj ime 

[| ἘΝΕΒΆΜΑΤΙΝ | 


to LH (hg startling : "but something you 
perhaps ‘should be aware of. .- 


p FROM; 
WNVBroe, IG, 2EDÀ _ 


` LUT usersssmisp T 7 


m = FORM но. 237 | is көше: 


SECRET 


Ц 1... ....... ннн ο 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


з 25 Mey 19787 


gence ο οσα This- о be: 
t ni in effect. : Pick-up of 30 bags of tr, 


f б considerat 


MIL" ёё 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DOCUMENT DESCRIPT 
3URCE. 


Doc. NO. 


ATTENTION: This. form: vii ‘be placed ow og of and знані to ὅσων : qn Secret dos ment. ΜΉΝ by. thie. Center ареною Agency . 
ог classified Top Secret. within the CIA and will remain attcchet to the document until such time as it is doungraced, дедг ec, ог 
, transmitted outside of ОГА.- Access: ,Seeret. nattetaiso limited to Toimecret Control pefs@frmetl- and tto. ως РН whose ogicial - 
. du Feist to the" m fer. Top Secre 'ontrot Ойсет: who. receive. and/or- release the attached. Ton Secrét: matariat wilt, sign this- form. | 


fit shall. 


DISPÁTCHEO: (ours TES 


BY ШЕТУ 


— a J 


з 
РН 


зач 


ME} 


“SUBJECT ^ ^ ` Μῆρμλος ل‎ 3 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| 30 May 1973 Ν 


NDUM FOR: :Mr. William E. Colby 


ici Call Ag your attention the attached sensitive annexes to our 


-betause.of. the high degree of resentment we 


. 1972. report: of survey of EUR! "Division; You have:seen them before, 
but a frésh:look at. them might be in ordé 
developments, 


rin the 1% ht of Current 


€ recent revelations about the activities 
valuation Committee are getting close to. our , 
. We are particularly:c cerned about MECHA OS ET. 
Ç id among: апу AE. 


| Agency: c mi эдш, at their being απ. ЩО των init. И + 
"M ; ім ` A 
! 
£ 
' RN os fore eeu: Foie) о 
TS: 1852; 87 1272. 9 Nov 72 - EL LS 
[TS 185228/12/3, 9 Nov та a ` 


- 


ractar of 


-E-$0 


-ᾱ- =, 
сухо 


Deputy D: Dira 
1 for. Ment: 
Regn 7-1 25 205 oe s 


Secu 


ri 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"і" тег 27 ton 


А І: LLL ULL a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


6 JUN 1973. ` 


ΡΝ А 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy. Director for Management and Services. ` 
FROM 7 Director of secur Tey: | Е 
SUBJECT : i рума Requirements = Watergate, Incident. 


1. This memorandum is for information only. 


i Ze In July. 1971, the New York Times featured án. 
article under the by- -line of William Beecher which: > ` 
contained an exposition.of the then current. status o£ `: 

' the Strategic Arms Limitation. Talks (SALT). It was : Us 
evident from this delineation of these talks that. p 
William Beecher had obtained the information from: һыу” 
classified U.S. Government documents or from a. “person . ог. 
persons having. had access to: ‘such documents. я 


: 3. In this regard, Mr. Bgil E. Krogh, Jr o£. the. 
"White House ‘telephonically contacted the Director:of 
Security. of this Agency and.requested that this Agency 
provide a polygraph examiner to conduct polygraph tests ` 
on' four Department of State. employees. In conjunction. 5 
with Mr, 6. Marvin Gentile,. Deputy: Assistant Secretàry 
for Sécurity,. Department of State, this Office arranged 
. for a polygraph examiner to conduct these examinations. 
but with no CIA involvement to be acknowledged. In ^. 
other words, this Office loaned the polygraph: examiner . 
to the. ‘Department of State and the кары examinations 
were conducted for Mr. G. Marvin Gentile. | ος 


А p 4. This. Office in 1970, requested рови» чо have 
disguise kits. issued to. approximately fourteen people. 
The. disguise kits. were never issued for operational 


75 | | e оозёв B 


πουν ο ο ο Ван q p. awan 


льну pah EA rae Mo A a MR d M + 


' А |. MORI DocID: 1451843 


purposes, but they were issued for practice Surveillance `- 


to. train local field office personnel. in their use, 


its, four were returned to 


isgu the Office of 
Technical Services. : 

" . 5, in regard to other activities that this Office ` 
has conducted domestically, the following two' projects: 
are. submitted: ' = день es і d 


A. ` Project WESTPOINTER: In September 1969, 
February. 1970, May 1970, and October 1971, а: ` 
. project, similar to Project SRPOINTER, was . | 
і conducted by the Office of Security, East Asia: -- 
| Division, and the Office of Technical ‘Services in ^ 
- the San Francisco, California, area. The target : 
ενας mail бо the. United States from Mainland China. 


. аше Office of Security - 
employee; who will retire e ive 29 Juné 1975, had a 
chance meeting with Mr. James W. McCord, Jr. on 24 Мау (по — 
1973 near the Senate Office Building. : According to. Mr. 
the substance of the. chance meeting was an exchange . 
OF ant ries. m E VEM τῳ 


Director of Security. 


s 00329 ^7 


* 


Т 
CEPRET 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Eos ` Bote ae З N 
EN pod z "s 
f x c a E. | ec = „ож - 
з Е 
"Page 1 0 ` 503 and other student асі бань groups SS т. 
ἘΣ produced in December 1967 at Walt Aosta! s: Yequest-á ο... 
| 30-peze typescript study of the SDS and its токе ties. : 
Г In the summer οὗ 1958 CCI ο πο. at. Rots reau 1est-- 
es а paper on Restless πο The first, and most sensitive section, 
was а yailosoonical treatment of student un rest, its motivation, 
7 39А avs ‘History, and-tacties. “It draw heavily on overs literature and 


TRI reporting on SDS and affiliated groups. The second section 
comprised 19 chapters on foreign atuds nt dissidence.. 


Fases 11 2 12 Black radicalism 


‚ OCI began following Caribbean black radicalism in earnest in 
1968. “wo papers were produced оп the subject, опе in August 1969 
and the other in June 1970. й "s 


ОСІ was asked in. June 1970 to write a memo with special: 
. attention to links between black radicalism in the Caribbean and 
`. advocates of black power in the US. The memo was’ produced. in 
typescript and given to the DCI. E Б 


сот їй 1968- wrote partode typescript menos on Stokely 
Carmichael's travels abroad during а period when ‘he aas dropped . 
from public view. - : , - 


H 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- 
` 


‘Page 23 . ‘Prohibition against COME? vs. US citizens 
“En September 1972 Сотто · io conduct nearability 


tests of certain HF long-distance comercial. telephone circuit 
` between the US and South Azmərica. The circuits carried drug- 
related traffic 


e tests were successiul. гә астсічхі су 
‚ж. was terminated сп an 73 following OGC льно that tze; 
= ` * 


й Ме conduct ап intercept Operation ial [targeted 
on radio telephone conversa ا‎ | 


е intercants Contain a 
ons. prs ten. involving = US 


EM 


2 
Tem e mmber of мох lated conversati 


ол Testing dn the US of O22-developed electronic collection 
systems occasionally result in the collection of domestic telephones 
.eonversations. When the test ts are s codd А the cei 
pz material is destroyed. 


чо μια ecntciens toh bid завів, in the Miami ` area in 
August 1 T gear intended for use against a Soviet agent in 
-South Vietnam. While wholly innocuous, the tests ргесесед the 


.. holding of the conventions there and could . be, construed as 
| being somehow περα, tó: them. 


Pa та February 1972 CIA asked an oficial of AT&T Гог copies ої 
telephone call.slips relating to US-Chima calls. The. overaticn 
. lasted for three or four months and then dried up. CGC stated its 
mu belief? that the collection of these slips did not. violate the 
І Communications Act since ην ἡ was; шоб involved. і 


й Page 29 “Mail coverage 


2 А й Since 1953, СТА has operated а mail intercept program of 
| 17.1 dneoming and outgoing Russian,mail and, at various times, other 
| . `. Selected mail at Kennedy Airport in New York City.. This progran 
eno 1720. VÀB now dormant pending decision on whether, to continue or to 
"E „abolish 1%. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ES PEL 
hip with the FBI avez. 
the разі few years. | The TBI is the only organization that has 
“Suet, been fully.briefedsonfTSD; &udió^techniques"and equipr&ent. Tha" 
following are situations where ЙТ5ГІ equipment and guidance ware 1 
си involved іп operations: ~ A аы ЗИЯ ωώ σπα NES 
i 
a 


. 
! 

i oe 
П 


0 


IL pe — مامه اسک‎ ча 


ta t эры аме, eQ s. 


a 
e oooh" © 


б б б ө б б ч б n r rrrrFrri 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


.. 
πο без 


ES = Ж yel 


(S) TSD has furnished: equipment items which. constate ae 


ү к τες am. 0n-the-shelf capability to engage in photo and - = 2» | 
Eu M з & ος +: audio Surveillance operations which might not be < 


ام بو ον,‏ 


τε ' known to the Agency.” "In one case itis Enown that ο a É 
o cr. relatively unsoptis! rated device was used against :. 
i і E a domestic target? ``. τον ᾱ- чо ας ee 
і - τι αὐ ών. Lour. оо | 
i ë i 
" : е Kt 
| : Ü "s i 
i * Р 2 ^ - x: 
š: B * =. ш a" 
А a Ν 
Ж. = Ν . 


CC i uunaenÀorÓÓsaW==—IIrIs i 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


7 


E 


ao chin M D а 


heres memana PRO 


«В 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


asxedvin June, 1970 to write a memo with special. 
inksibetween black radicalism .in- the Caribbean: 
r in the US. The memo vas produced in 


"poe 


Darmicha2l!s ττ 


Ке de hee c 


fron public view 


n. 


`... 


тр вано E 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


vM gut РЫ, 


cO zh 


uis — H 
Testing in the US ої C22-devsiopsd electronic collection 
зуабеса occasionzily rasult in the collection of dossszic TT | 
conversations. "inen tha tests are completa, thé imtercepted . . ` bs 


naterial:is ‚де stroyed. = ἃ | і τ᾽ E E | 


nicians conducted tests, n 
" г intended Гог use agains Г 
S/waolly innocuous, the і : 
islons trare and сипа бе А : 
ow. related: to then. і 
ха: February. 3912 СТА asked ап official of AT&T for copies OZ a 
telephone call slips relating to US-Chica calls. The overstisn - T 
Я las ted for three. or.Zour months, end then dried up. CGC stated its m. 
i belief that. the collection of these slips did not violate the r 
| Cosnunications.A Act. Since: eavesdropping was not involved." : : 
з 
в 5 ` 


Per mec yes 4.» 


І 
руз 


А 
4 


| 0771: 00337 


r "u gens jh mm Y 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


d ecuir 


+ 
[5 


equipment 


niques ап 


h 


uly b 


‚ foilowin 


£ 
ES 


_ been. 


gar 


+ 


νυ ome 


a  ...μῳὰ,α..”η᾽᾽.᾽”᾽."."} 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


і 
E 
i 
ΠΠ PAN "e (С) TSD has furnished equipment items which constitute 
_ | ‘an on-the-sheli capability to engage in photo and ` i | 
Е audio surveillance operations which might not be . ΕΙ 
known to the Agency.. In one case it is known thata 
NE | I "n I KE ñ N r. 
' E E коз . ` ` relatively unsophisticated device was used against s 
: I y ; š . - 
a domestic target, Ux 
й wo a d ا‎ "E. 
- 3 : А 
ν 
+ 
б ` Ы * 
* 
š a 
$ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


case, and 


£z 
= 


ape and: transcribed; 


n 


T 
ing Colty of this: 


* 42 
tu р 4 ec 
9 a Шо озду, fi. το 
бі £4 ün о» Re 
3 mni 


> 


rs 


“a mote on’ the. pepe 


TX 
A -- 
p 
= 
3. 


E 
н 
5 


з. 

ή 
з 
on 


N 


е 


оп 
We 
h 


a 
2g 
зп 


2 
a 


as kasedo 
h 
à 


ned Evans; s 


ріу-фо 


t τ tb 
s "1 

ec f К 2 
Н (2 „+ 


аг those: 
f. phe 


sin 


o x 
c 
Е: 
o8 “2. 
. d w. ©. 
à o VR хо 
"us. V. 
а ; N 
чо тощо өс Ἑν o В. 
; К п о і f D 5 
п 8 єбє a δ `Q 
їм 2 ro E fa Й Я ye . 
О эң m c м Ho О : 
la o e a ^E LS 7 
Pho кош р 8: -A 
re Бон © g Pre ae 
ος 7U αν їз А 
o 4 D w T ee š 
5 “5 "бо : ὦ” 45. i 
τὸ 9 τῳ a У \ 
EP 5 š А 
хо Ὁ сы "E 
j ^ | .. 
CX B 
ἃ. ; 
x 
+ Ν . 
EN 


C — a i 5 r a ——————rsNIra 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


à 


——— 


ACTION 
AUCROYA 


COMMENT | 
ÉOHECAREHCE 


RECT REPLY 


oH o | 


ы 


UOR ATION 


ος ыы но ا‎ 


ee 


San. senza Sheer ер nolaa" 7 


{ος сем од 15 `. 
: A De wae leo. С 


δν 


s p pereat ens pos loce. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


^ 237 Us. previous editions = 


A FORM νο, 


BN арнын a a E GG OG RN 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Direcior's request for 


since 1 Tenuiry 1969 


‘er Krogh. 


2. I aum had none with Hunt, ΠΣ or Young. 

3. My McCord contact was indirect and: occurred sónetim 
during the late 1960's when I was Director, Office of Computer 
Services. I opposed plans for Technical Division, Office сі 
Security (under Mr. McCord) to acquire а separate computer for 


its In-Place’ Monitoring Systez ا‎ DD/S&T (then ORD) 
was the computer τ... working with ID end, I think, would: 


hove det telis. 


4 


The Krogh.contact also was indirect and involved his 


request, first through OMB, that CIA fund forcign travel on behalf: 


of the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control. Indi- 
vidual phone discussions are noted in the attached.: The Agency 


focal points were Meere | I understand 
has forwarded relevant documentation. Copics of . 


паз. from Messrs. Krogh, R Colby are. attached 


"also š 


5. I held a staff meeting yesterday to pass the request to 
al] OPPB employees. One officer who was amadas а funeral will 
not be available until tomorrow. : 


Charles А. ‘Briggs 
Director of Planning, 
Programming, апа: ri 


ONXEBENCVERIBESVIT En: 2206 $37i72.13) is 
J - λος EAs? QUIA LHe | /s/ Charles A. Briggs 
I ° E' СООЗ. і чо UE 
1 


Ca; Е 
‚ре ирлиоцш: 


- 


Attachment | | . | Шш ç кы 00344 


As stated 


. )əÉ  KVLEI$I3HII£I H IYIÉ 4IIII£III€III<IOIOIIIIIIT WZ u 2 > S ОО 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"m 
ngercoucs 


- 


y tmt - с mc fp» ЗОЗ η 
ο Flan 3-5 trips fer 3 individusis-- 


probably Si0K. Minnick ready to make 


7 Feb τα | See attache ` nemo from Egil Krogh, fr. to Bill Colby and 
follow-on memos тл Jul 72) and Colby 
(2 Aug 72). | - к La і 

120) мау 18 Jubs Hurley, OMB called, mentionin зр poss : ibl e Erogh/ 


.  . Minnick attendance at à Latin Атдогісап (Station Chief?) 
Xo conference on narcotics. Me also said Jeff She herd, 
.: White House, wes laying on a yas with for 

. himself, ана ond Mark Alger, оче to e 


23 Jun 72 ` | ба" on Krogh/ мек interest 


in getting СА activities, including large-scale PM, 


2 та? E і та Notes say only: "Minnick-Hurley filn. 
` Me will send." RM 


2 Aug. 727 ГО þara re Colby letter (attached) (7 Said travel 


orders ready; need money this PM (No récord in ray 
notes as to who wus traveling when, but have faint 
recollection of its being to Mexico City). 

and Ben Evans contacted by 


Again notes. are cryptic: 
Survey ENDD problems/ 


Related? 


1 Nov 72 


SEGRE. . у 00345 


CC l a af. 


MORI росїр: 1451843 


ба Mr. Colby'!s сору only: 


13 Jan 72 ExDir: (Colby) said DCI had approved $30K for sensitive 


CS project = но dails. - 


`20 Jan 72.  HiSünded ExDir re $32K ke said DCI OK'd. 


ALT 


r ЧЧ à sai 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


EC gt CEEMORAN DUM FOR BIL L COLBY ο, о re ME pU ca C мы 
Si HER © Т: pons 
The Eabinet Солго : 1 ses crented 
I | Septerbar : 7, 1971, Ly the President to c ack on the jn- 
ES i ternational drug іх aftie. 
The сы does not have a separate budget. 
Hi ‚ Salary апа administrat ative. support for its EAM. full-time Staff has been 
`... provided by the Executive Office of the President, : : Other. expens es. are 
i Being. charged t to > the constituent agencies nd departm с : De. 
| n ства ва of Gastos З BNDD, and Шбс ο of, Public Saf ety have . > 
| ; provided. е to date. τ. : m | ; 
The CIA. ‘should του prepar red to defray, not more than’ ве teen thousand. 
^ donar š in overseas travel e for ба abinet: Ki ce staff during 
ке» of PY Poe. πο.” і uU TN 
D. Walt ter. ©: Minnick, the: Committee! 8 Staff Goordinstór, can be contacted 
E for further peer š і ar deem, мл к а и 


ae 


Thank, E е your assistance. 


а се 


. Cabinet Committee ох 
M Intérnati onal Narcotics Control 


ee Ὅς бб John Ehtlichman : : SL | 
в ci. 7 Assistant to the President for Doinestie ‘Affairs, 
нетто з Mak Alaer : AS Pu 
і ο. _ ΟΜΕΡ Chief, b НО Government Programs Division 


ло مہ‎ ae o RR паю т 


ТТ  ÀáM—— ннн 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00 YZL You kre authorized | do 5 dbligated up tos 515, 050 for use 
«ої the White House Cabinet Committee. Staff for sraval оао 
during БУ 1973, Obligation shoold be recorded against the O/DDP 
#lisiment and travel ordera issue against your wn appropriates fan 
number, | Е 


3, Те fe extent that you are жы 86 E зо this клк ы 
within your present allotment, we ye will have to arranse some терго-. 
gramming Inter in the yaar to cover this anbud gejed ionn 


А 


We. X. Соу 
GExecuniyve Director-Coinptzollór 


O/PPB 

Distribution: т. 
|. Orig &.1- addressee | 

(5 . l- ExDir 

iod 1-а . ES 
PES P4 - PPB Subj eus 
ГО. 

- . Reading ` 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


НАНО 4 ES 


ex eX. Ak our invitatio on , МР. Yalt ber [um Mi 
d the CCINC, їѕ `5 chéduled to attend and ра - 
gi net Narco bic cs: Seminar. Sponsored by WH Division 


О 


on `27-28 


a. Tn accordance with procedure t ee PR 

| of. White House Cebinet Committee Stare in n EY ο. it 

"EST. requested that Funds to. cover the cost of Mr. Minnie : Ee 

TT trip be released, | Attached herewith is.a copy of a formal zu 
request from Мэ; Egil Krogh. dated ` d February 1972 to ed TAE 

Willian Colby requ esting travel funds for the balance of 


soi c ORY 1972. Πο. Krogh is nog. ;preparing a formal request for. ИИ 
; $15, 000.00 to cover travel’ expenses for White House Cabinet.. s ote 


Committee staff for РУ, καν I will 
to your Office: a5 soon’ 85 Ato er rives. 


forward Mas request. n 


DocID: 1451843 


аҚШ s Ц с, к 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


з Орос: CAMERA that 7 дб Ehrlchman had σος o'advise: 
us ‘that the. White House is éppotnting š former CIA extiployee ночаза mi d 
Hunt as а 8 бен сопел phus ue 


“Another account pr tlie Morning Meeting of this dat reader З г > 


` It was: ane аена that Howard Hunt fce Ее nathed зво : 
` consultant to the White House, General Cushman’ told Ehrlichmàn = 
that 1 Mz: Hunt would have full Wa ο frora CIA. ` 


Cents 


ay o 


(Me лау 1911 fo эл: 
Touro BET "n 
which Houston a penk wt 


22 day 1971 (the day Howard Hunt camo to see General 1 Cookman) on 


| ΙΙ. тот Й 2 "Carver highlighted hi his session б шу with NSC ‘Staffer б 
| NE 50 7 Dawid Young, who is assisting John Ehrlichman i in reviewing the. 
secret о papers S» i 


| ; | 18 Азда 1971 


A-DDP sated date bas ας οτε tó White. House staffer ‘David: E { i 
Young on the results of the Deputy Director of Security’ s' survey of --. 
tho se who saw the classified assessment pons which Tad Szulc based ` 
his 13 з August ἃ truci : агзы 


to be filled in later on the details. 


18. January 1972 


DDL galled ο μη to the ав in today's в Ww York Times, i 
"Nixon Acts to End Security Leaks," (Excemt from the article: ^ ^. 
"Last July, two members of the White House staff, David В. Young . 

of the National Security Council and Egil Krogh; ‘Trep. of. the Domestic. 
Council, were asked to investigate. e leaks and prevent recur Ds 
rénces. um ы 


em eee — ome 87 


“зе, 26 езу 1972 


ПЕ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


B Febr чату 191 


ο ррі б the ‘article by Michael. Getler in today's Washington. 
` ;Post,. New Spy Satellites Planned for Clearer,” Instant Pictures. Hoc sss 
“Later іп the meeting the Director asked the DDS to advise the- | 
E Director of Security to undertake an investigation. of this leak of 
“CEOL- related information and to convene the USIB Security Ἔ 
Committee. - Su DRE А 


"pz Kissinger! 5 request that any inquiries from elements of the 
White. House: staff be referred to his staff for. Conveyance to the 
, Agency. ea xe gy "T 


"Lehman noted plans to continue briefing Attorney C General 


` Mitchell, whose απ is effective 1 March. 


n March 197. 


EE The Bi noted his КРЕ ы to T Deputies "n x 
р * Тидёрепдеш Office Hea `5, subject: "Allegations. of Ax ssassinations. H 
“He asked that it be mentioned at Staff мы x _ 


А 1 March 1o 


phe Director said that the Presiden a seen his її, 

L о; memorandum оп reducing disclosures of classified. 
| intelligence. and: directed the White House staff. to prepare a б З 
memorandum urging that all а comply ` with рош dis- | 
closure μον Ü 


8 June 1972 


| Heaton said that he will be зверни а meeting чайні" 
Си рор General Counsel Buzhardt, wao is ΓΕ that. 
Justice. ор" сав саѕе вава: Daniel Ellsberg. ; E 


εν sss Τῷ ,.... 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


`. The бо noted the 17 June вної ‘of James We месоза. n: 
“Ê four others who were apprehended at the Democratic National Com 
^ mittee headquarters at the Watergate, With the Director of Security: 
UMP present to provide biographic details, the Director made it perfectly 
clear that responses to any. inquiry with respect to McCord or Howa 
na Hunt, who may be: implicated, are to be limited to a statement that 
. they are former employees who: retired in August and April 1970 re 
_ spectively, The Director asked that this guidarice be disseminated š 
ЮЛ E via staff meetings, The Director asked that any inquiry from other . 
. | 177 elements of the government bo referred to the Director of Security . 
(7^ who ів to be the focal point. Inquiries from the préss are to be re- 
οτος, , ferred to Mr, Unumb who may say that McCord worked. in the Office. 
` of Security. The Director noted that wè have no responsibility. with 225 
respect to an investigation except to be responsive to the FBI's re- 7 
quest for name traces. It was notéd that Howard Hunt may have done с 
. 80me work since retirement in connection with the preparation of . · | 
VR supporting material for some awards. : The Executive Director was Í 
E завкей to review thie topic and Er to the Director, oe 


x 29 June 1972 


S "In response to the Director's 8 тешен, rv Director of Security 
ee? Highlighted developments over the past twenty-four hours with respect: ; 
to the McCord/Hunt, et -1., situation. He noted that the late edition ©. 
TREE! . ої the New York Times carries a different story by Tad Szulc than = 
that which appeared in the edition received here. ‘The Director of DESORI 
Security ariticipates some inquiries on Bernard L.. Barker's situation, - Dv 
and it was noted that Mr. Barker was hired by the Agency in 1960 and z: 
terminated in 1966. ‘The Director complimented Unumb on his handling 
of inquiries and asked that future inquiries be met with а response : 
confined to the fact that, now that we have acknowledged that both - 
McCord aud Hunt.are former Agency employees, we know nothing . 
more about the.case. and the caller should be referred to the FBI as 
ο : : i ; : 


20 June 1972 ` 


Tha litector noted receipt ofa paper ona safehouse in Miami 
which ів being made available to the Secret Service in support of ` 
its work in connection with the Republican and Democratic National 
Conventions. He &sked the Bu and the DDS to make it и 


Uu 
MÀ 


aaaea‏ سی م مس ر مو اه ای موا ت ییا م 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Бе used. as. a: Sette dur investigations, interrogatio 


й ete. ‘The Director. added that we. will not loan people. to thé FBI or 
^" Secret Service in connection with: their responsibilities at the - 


Ё 21 June Ju une E 


P RA view of the coverage in 1 today? s: “Ме York Times ad. 
й "Washington Post; Maury recommended that Chairman Nedzi be 
_, briefed on the McCord affair and that this briefing include all 
2 our information: about the others’ ‘involved. . The Director asked | 
y ‘Maury to touch base with the Director of Security and prepare . 
E. kefing- 'p&pezson this topic, for his. reyiew. Citing the ‘number 
"ої distorted rumors, about this matter, the Executive Director 
./' said that during the course of the day he hopes to provide a - 
suggested Headquarters Биени. for all μείω for the _ 
| Director! 8 review. a a ж 


`. Unumb- nofed a number ої inquiries feon the press with. 
` respect to the Cuban-Americans. involved i in the bugging attempt 
at the Democratic National Committee headquarters and their 
; alleged involvement in the Bay. of: ‘Pigs, etc.. The Director asked 
that such inquiries be met with an explanation that we are not. 
ὩΣ prepared to be каиа оп Шик matter... "m 17 


` 23 June 1972. | o c pA е. 
"Maury noted that "+ briefed Chairman Nedzi оп the McCord/ 
m Hunt situation. о E ecd a" 
Р | 21 August 1972 1972 ` | : 


s . Houston noted a μις Сап. fron неза Hunt wh 
лаана that his attorney was with him and had а question ' 


- “about а. friend's past affiliation with the Agency. pes 
ΓΙ DD/Sec,fhas reviewed the employment, and Hoüston reporte 
“that he replied directly to Hunt's friend, Mr. 


thatthis old affiliation should create no problems. in connection 
with his appearance before a gena jury. : 


18 October 1972 


; Maury noted his response tó a request from CSC General: 
+ Counsel Anthony Mondello, who was reacting to а request for the 
. personnel files of those former Agency officers involved in the .. 


is mot to Ё 
walk-ins, ; 


E" Gonventions nor will we. provee equipment m to me А gency. 


7 00358 


~ Administrative Practices and Procedures. Не added that we: 
сате: exempted: from related CSC regulations, and the Director 


о 3 November 92 


EP of. the Washington Star News and his flat denial of a proposed: 
`. story that the Agency was. asked to report on the Democratic. 
. Party which led to the Watergate incident and others. The ` 


`. а story were to appear: and: suggested that Thuermer consider 
.15 November 272. 


October а Mr. Harper ofthe New York Times was working on a. 
Т. story which tries to link the Agency with Cuban emigres, the. 
-break-in at the Chilean Embassy, action against Daniel Ellsberg 
: and the Watergate éase..:Thuermer observed that this is the first 
‘he has heard about this topic, and the DDP concluded that such а 


се November 1972. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ї 


Watergate. iShcident. ‘from Senator. Kennedy 5 Subcommittee’ on’ 


endorsed his: Le to provide опіу the ега of their ао 


matter, ` 


: Thè Director highlighted his. oneal with Dayid ποῖον. 


H 


Director noted his plans to issue.a statement of denial if E 


drafting one for Enea κ...» 


~~! 


DDP nora 2 ар. Жш Chief, WH Division that on 9. 


story would have no basis in fact and it would be advisable to. й 
ЕД to ώς out Mrs Ege : + 


Marne "on dat ebi to Assistant Attorney General ` | 
Henry Peterson, U. 8. Attorney Earl Silbert has several questions i 
on the Watergate case, The Director indicated he will review this: 
matter later. i: с ол M Da Жы 


A a 


€ —  MÁÀ——ÀÀ———  _ 


d$ -Décember 1972 


. and the impression left therein that the Agency was involved 
. "in the Watergate incident because a passport bearing the name 
s ‘Edward Hamilton was found on Frank Sturgis. .Any i du 
." from the press ог. elsewhere аге to be met with a "this 16. 
© nonsense’? Yeply.- The Executive Director noted work under | 
τ Ж to СЕУ the genesis of the ΠΕΡΕΣ peu : 


ві Januar 1973 ROCCO 


P 18. January 1973 


і correspondent Seymour Hersh. Maury went on to highlight: the 


-randum on the information Hersh claims he has. The Director 


` the United States. 


| 19 January 1973 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


πὲς Bier noted die article by Tioman B. Rss in: 
EM Бур s Evening Star-News, "New Watergate Dimensión? 


me - ου. КЕН А 
Meg % š . wo. 


EU noted, press ates that Watergate defendant" 
Martinez was on thé Agency payroll until l7 June and anticipated : з? 
some inquiry on this topic. The DDP endorsed his view that, ` 
whereas Martinez was intermittently used as, Source to report `` ` 


хе Е on Cuban exile вони d relationship sud cause no. serious s =. 
P λα, 7 : ам к^ 


° Maury. répo і ed ibat: „ша һе апа Dave Blee, Chief] SB, “paw: 
Chairman Nedzi with respect to the Chairman's forthcoming trip 
to Finland, Leningrad, Sofia, and Athens, Chairman Nédzi ie z 
briefed on his November conversation with New York Times. 


several topics and allegations Hersh claims he has with respect `` 
to Agency activities, particularly allegations that we are engaged ` 
án extensive domestic operations. Maury will circulate a,miemo-' Ñ 


explained that-we should assemble a senior team to meet with - 
Chairman Nedzi and пані outline what we an and do not d in 


Macey μας. that Chairman Nedzi would like he ‘full 


- ‘Subcommittee’ on Intelligence Operations to hear a presentation’. 


by us on Agency activity in the Unitec States sometime in mid- 2 
February.:-The Director noted that his decision of m : 
to turn out а senior team ΕΠΣ this briefing pru 


i ΓΟ і 


d $i program,: &nd the Executive Director noted his concern | over 
` Hunt's و‎ that he 1 is no longes bound = his.sécrecy 
ске 


p 23 μον lois: 


. φοράς. Relations. Committee this morning ой police training, Сечи 


на ан Nedzi and review what we do and don't до in the U. 8.. 


;an in-house review-of what it is we are doing j the с 5. and 
| Mord sue RATED UE the шакша" : 


| 14 Fetroary 1973 ` 


Я topic of роне ο. and ех- СТА кашк 


a mT‏ ف ففف 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E Сепега1 Walters noted Howard Hunt's. appearance on а tele- 
vision last. night.” Thuermer will obtain a ‘transcript of the : 


> Exdcutive dor aotea that the terminal. secrecy agreement | 


m which Howard Hunt signed said that he will be acknowledged ag ап-.. 
Agency employee. · “His assertion that he-is not bound by thé agree- ^. . 

E ment because we did in fact acknowledge his караучы Here is. м | 
-therefore паву ва : ПТ 


7 Esbroary 1973 


Maury noted. that Mr. Helms is appearing оз ος deni. Ж. 


ІТТ; ànd the Watergate incident. He also noted that he has ` 
solicited. the support of Senators Humphrey, McGee, and Scott ` 
to make appropriate poo statements ах Mr. x» 
карен as, кораш š 


8 February 1973 


` Maury τας. τα that; we are obligated to sit M with | 


egt 


The Director concurred. The DDI suggested that we undertake. 


ώς». noted advice from Nicholas Horrock of моб E x. 
that a "soft, story" is floating around Newsweek on the ‚Женева, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"Maury ‘related ‘that Gone Director Richard Helms: has been ` | 


v 5 asked. by Senator Fulbright to reappear before the Sénaté ‘Foreign -` 


"Relations Committee. Maury said that Mr. Helms would probably. 
. ` be ‘queried on the Watergate incident, Agency training.of police, : й 
й end Τον went on to EERE Mr. Нени! | anticipated τ ae 


E j March: 1973. 


. 5 4 Зо highlighted vedo 8: ыс ЖЕ at the White = 
| House; and his” recommendation that.we not provide examples of 
| Congres sional leaks of classified information for White House 


аве in reacting to Congressional criticism of the Administration's: 


"indiscretions." The DDS advised that the Office of Security is- 
‘keeping а reásonably complete record of obvious ον ΘῈ intelii- 
e information, in the press and elsewhere, f PU ER 


| E мы: 1973 


η The тїй безе noted adds that Hogh Sidey of- Time: qnagarine E 
| -plans to write a story alleging that Howard Hunt was: employed . 
Буга cover organization, i.e., Robert В. Mullen, ‘Company, when 
“he left the Agency. Colby noted that this company is a. completely: - 
ú private concern but has provided cover for one or two officers. `: 
‘overseas, Тһе Director asked Thuermer to be prepared to e 
with any inquiries when the story. appears. Q ἃς 


(Signed) mine | 


William vV.. ‘roe 
"x de Gen al 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


€ S 


Ооа: June 1970). J 
of the GS’ быз 
d other countries for 
přes to: maké. its. point. J edi- а ‘to do anything on the 
705 cta whole project TT was tarned ovei"to CA. 


- τα worked, under ГО 0 Jesservisien| — | left--in Boston). 


“Thereafter 00610906 in August 1970, becáuse we had done so much work 
‘we published a separate paper "Student Unrest m i pH of the 
ΙΤ studies 


~ | 


gays, gent me a. верх paper; 
ke to see. again'. "(not a 


Whitman says Latimer 
ває paper was 
ανα but κα 


| ‘Per Kissinger had told Lati 5 
- «І sent it back with some nice words on. it 
direct quote);..WV.B-said he had the DD 

has се of both оер. His record, sugg 


'em/30.May 73 


ДТ от 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


00360 


22d E "ume Is] SECRET [] CONFIDENTIAL... USE OHLY J. UNCLASSIFIED 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ГАУ OP. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


" i E ce РЕНІ ОР Б 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


m À 


am | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


D——— A 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 


m 
E 


P 0B 


M ———————————'ÓÓÓÓÀÓ—— τν πο 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


K, ———————ÀÀMÁ > 7 = у= г 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


5 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID:.1451843 


"E 
Ie 

Ue 
e. 


MORI DOCID: 


1451843 


uim 
gent 
Laver. 
κο 
HE 
ΠΩ 
m 
` ae ampi st 
id -κν = 
awry h 
2 te Yeru” 


ikree 
1 Ë р - : й 

таев, бе зано eed. Осе rU CE p АРУ бы, Lene Z i š 
pulled SUE fron the д E 

сті photographed the 
ord one 


ur ros 
while 


last 


m 


age 
ziv. 


raise pot De 0488. 277 ; af, his сыт 


ee amg fx seniors ves Perte PA BUDE 
` eetivities were ÎR someway bj РУ federal officinis - +, 
дане raa red werz.Semote] .« Investigation +007202 


"^ Wen Leader Mike Mina kssviedpe that pond ca ur CE LP E 
, fêla (Dlonk), Senate Foreigal  iound the быт із the murki“ s M US - 


т М 


Relators Commitee Cbiirccn| сі Mariner ΣΕΤ явив waj c | Е mE o. 
J, Willlam Fulbright AD-Ark | . pared at Gam! International g 7 mb 
nd Sen. Frank. Church (Ὁ агро го" ы ; 


:ídaxko) This source siso rid) 1 Assistant U.S. Attorney Бап E š. κος 
that Bel Lincwitz former U.S.| J. Silent declined to say I XN i - 
зтдризабог to 158 Organizstion} — whiher Martinez diary would 777 ο νην, ЖАШЫ: 
at hmergan Bites VO topti be introduced 27 evidence. ἐπ... MM So ql 
under tI saypi ansa. ¿tha ΙΕ trial, which, o š , coge 
OS Kahle Newsday vis able toi CPF} Мову. 520.000 ` š š e M ` 
-eonfirm some οἱ the source's . De Diegc, 43, iz a rest еме) "E i : 
giziemeats through officials saleman who was | etzpiayed] -. ko S4 . ` 
close із the investigation. abi- in Siiami rer! esiste office Е ο... 
урні s concerning the sum ef Demre L. Barker, ore} ^ , ë 
‘welll of 'Fezatora neither) сої tha Waierezie defendants . e 
σου]ὰ bw sonfrmed nor denied. ре Diego, whe was granted] . | . 


“Tha reren Gelencants in thel immunity by the grand. jury 
Watergate case go оп trial Mom| Investigating the cast, sald“ he 
ёву да the U.S. District Court] told the grend Jury ала e| 00 AE 
Sere C | FBI thet he had come te Washed o ` i 
т. also has been jearned that: ington ам Мау with Pico snd 


e Federal zutkoriiss rave: the four Watergate defendants я" 
tracked down.and questionedi from the Miami area (Barker, Ë SUR lo ж.т, 


two men who hid been involved). Martinez, Frank Sturgic and 


in Washington with the Water- 
“gate group but who had noti 
been caught at the. Democratic: 
‘headquarters seene June 11:1 


Virgilio R. Gonzales). He zaidi ' 
that he believed he and hir ^ 


"friends were waiting to see' 


someone irom the government - 


1451843 


MORI DocID 


ΓΦ the 
144 0 f£ 


£ 


ат 


оп 


= 


ia У 


il 
нн 


` 


it 


3 


МОКІ DocID: 1451843 


Tous = οι 
Lih 
H 
i 
4 
p i 
p 
NE 
Το 
| 
| 
am 
H 
i 
1 
poe 
i. 
Pc 
d Bot ` me ` MARC 
, 7 | [IN «уборі а 2 for : -— 
НЕ, узы Š 
! SECRET 
FOAN M2, Use pravions editians „с бо 
po XE P | | 
- τ = ~ I 
Р B 
EE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


staf director Jerry y "Lev я. DA η] i 
| ported: "A si 2 115 8159 1 

хсеНепї contacts in t the (were, assembled for _ opera. 
ош the jt! ions, only one or perha ps two 
at [сез knew who bed re. 
SS and was. iinaneing tha} 


+ 


а 


1 


us το "tha Cor 
eviason Wrote, “rhat it was 
y and convicted not routing. 7 i 

te felon E. a “Valuable o: ea es: 


itrust Ee. 
ston Post το-] 


о 
t 
1, 
~ 


TE 


су 


m 


Чыны 
eenwhile, Ё waro. deserto ed in me mers 
αἱ memo over to ITT ror: S “similar clean break й 
tlex хрегі5 to try to o discredit. ` «Ро Footnote: Jerry τα, 

| iused το fence, On his 


nen 
3 
= 


Hunt, acting 2s the co 
recor for the... . team?” ha dim 


τ 


ted att me Watergate.” 
d “that the ca 
semorehéuial S 


we 
£ n 

t 

ma Ut 


` T 
it had delivered it tot sie 5 
5 ide John Dean αι for any purpose. .. 
was the White House, i 


геп recruited, thin 
3 pizced ‘werê doing a patriotic thing to 


and hot ese interest я ім wasnt 
2 of forma avout jis pr ir 
(tions over.the fate cf its in-itors oath, п 
|vestme nt in the Chilean Tels -jtest hat he Ead" А 
iphone Company.. The mem-jtur memo over to e and dolls. untrue.” 
ers of the team may havel dire said ITT had nevez hirer 
} 


Ῥ- κα 

er es 
м 
- 


4 


"E 


ο 


ο”. 


——— — 


—A———————— 


за 
^ 
- 


te 


D 


і > 


——————— ---- ác 


i 
D | ou. 
+ 


| 
| 
| 


ἘΝ 


- Pod x5. 


1-67 


Remarks: 


1 
H 
і 
' 
Й 


FROM: N 


UNCLASSIFIED 


k ; I deaf 
FAT. Use prazioys ections 
287 e 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN το SENDER . 
AME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. ^ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CONFIDENTIAL 


юке Р PY 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ти 
Тала "Фора 


18. WITNESS 


Е wA 


22. DETAILS OF OF INCIDENT [BRIEFLY DESCRIBE INCIDENT. CONTINUE ABIYE ITEMS 75 MECESSARY iN INDICATING ITE ME 


| * Abe proximately 1330 hours, Mondzy, May cr 
'. п ds uM i s 
` рапсегу of Chile,-1736 Massachusetts fven nue, N.W., sometime bets N мало on: 


etime between 160 


DATE DATE 


32. АРРАОУНО 9 


_ Pricey, Kay. 13, 1972, and сп 0855 hours this date. 
y 
Fi 
Tha. undersien: iened. ras advised by Mr. Hernan (MMI). Nevary ; ] 
|: ofthe Embassy of Chile, that the Chancery of Chile was б а end all. the offices. 
"7 were ransacked. At this t tire the method of entry or itens taken is unknovn. 
ч ` Kr. - Navarro: advises inse he ill contact the Foreign Kissiens Division-Vatch Command 
23. PHOTOS й 
D YES 
24. SUSPECT: "AND/OR ARRESTED PERSONS. IDENTIFY БҮ HAME, ADDRESS, SEX, RACE, SOSIAL SECURITY NUMBER, 008, EYES, ETC. x 
LAST NAME - I ρα š FIRST “MIDDLE 5, ADDRESS Ë 
HII RACE SEX HEIGHT WEIGHT HAIR . ,£YES DATE GF BIRTH SOCIAL SECURITY НО. RATIONALITY 
LAST NAME | i FIRST MIDDLE ; i 
e ^ і й ki : - i 
шы д 
42) ҢАСЕ в SEX HEIGHT WEICHT HAIR EYES ` p DATE OF BIRTH Е. . SOCIAL SECURITY КО. š EATICNALITY 
de | L E | NEM 
25. ARREST РО 125. ARREST HO. 9. KOK 
| = 30. INCIDENT STATUS po Е > POM 
| | АЛДУ OPEN. wx CLOSED en "^ -. C. Ü UNFOUNDED ` O. D) CLEARED BY ARREST 


05-15-72 


CIAL (SIGHATURED l 
HOUR Mil Wav 
1500 hrs.l. 


06:16 
ce tain Pete N. Hanthos 1505 г 
і Η͂ ЗА. Ц555-10 CASE НО. ` 


N/A C03% 


оК. pr» HOUR 
Biter г ΖΝ, 8 


n Stevens E. Butler 


HOUR 


Ma 


ed 


= MORI DocID: 1451843 


ram EE 


| ο, Y ese. EN 
SAS SSS VEHI WOPO pruv2vln 


і Б ` - 
| А . - ' 
|, ; . I 
. | 
: . ~ Е > m - і 
i . Е . # E : 
1 с m - š * . © | 
* v C - . 
* ` ` - 
- А " ` - | 
м | 
: š ς Ë τοι 
м : πο. 
> £ z = й + 0 s Е, —— 
Е t й Γη £ Е = ο ` * я ї f ` 
jam (; η. i ` | 4 m £ # 
8, SUSPECT AND/OR ARRESTED PERSONS: IDENTIFY ВУ HAME, ADDRESS, SEX, RACE, SOCIAL SECURITY HUMBER, 508, EYES, ETC.- М / 
и | | ТАА 
—— = —=— n 
5 LAST КАМЕ | Ds. FIRST | . 7. MIDDLE} ADDRESS 7 Pe 
(01) DUM à аж "ow СУТ. : په‎ ` 


. WEIGHT ΔΓ KAIR | 


RACE | ° SEK | „HEIGHT | 


EYES | БАТЕ OF BIRTH] + SOCIAL, SECURITY νο. RATIONALI 


LAST НАМЕ | MIDDLE | ADDRESS l 
| m, š ` 
RACE |  .szx.] HEIGHT] =. WEIGHT | HAR | . eves | . DATE OF BIRTH | :SOCIAL SECURITY HO. .NATIONALI 
8. ARREST PO | 10. ARREST νο. | ПЁ ARREST OFFICER ARAME, ἃ BADGE чол. zi 13. HOUR 
; 44. CURRENT CASE DISPOSTION | I 15. USSS-ID CASE Να. 
„мна j M erosen“ | ЄГїйнкойнркр | |. o, їсьсанғо ву ARREST | . 
. ae | . нив. N/A 
16. FINAL CASE DISPOSITION і T - ES 
OPEN 93 a 

6 orficza(si ICRATURE) ye 18. DATE | 18. APPROVED [STGNATURE & TITLE) , . |20. DATE 
; ety, є бога ET ABR m & οὓς М\ mam . б 
“raat Stevens E. Butler“ 05-15-72 ‘Captain Pete N. Kanthos 105225 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


POM 


4I COS. 


адм τοσο cf Desks, 
* 
‘ z 
` 
to. с 
τ К Ы - - ж Ч - m 
8 * : E . г De δ.“ . | Š - — n: T " 
jem Oh i А N ` Ое š : 7 » . > ` m ps 
8. SUSPEC олон ARRESTED PERSONS. IDENTIFY BY Y HAME, ADDRESS, SEX, RACE, SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER, DOB, EYES, ETC." |. c N/A 
: : * LAST КАМЕ L й . FIRST 1.2.7. "ABORÉSS ; : ΕΗ 
MUN i OW ὦ я . Ë 


RACE | SEX | HEIGHT] WEIGHT | HAR} EYES | DATE OF BIRTH] , „SOCIAL SECURITY κα, 7 ‘NATIONALITY 


| sores | 


Й RACE | SEX. HEIGHT). WEIGHT 1 ЗНА, |. EYES | . DATE CF BIRTH Û : (SOCIAL SECURITY ЧО. Ὃ. RATIONALITY 


ARRE 12. DATE 


ST GFFICER (НАМЕ ὁ BADGE NO.) і 


13. HOUR 


8. ARREST PD 10. ARREST ко. | 


Seats 
14.'CURRENT CASE DISPOSTION | . τς. USSS-IO CASE NO... 
„=н } | = „оз і | ἐἙλυκεούνοεο \ 5. Ετιελκεο ΕΥ ARREST i z N/A 24 


16. FINAL CASE DISPOSITION | | E μα | Ў к aa 
w. εν. . 00898. - 
18. DATE] 


iG eT 79 l 19. UE UN TITLE) 
WT ce ey Aaa 
05-15-7 


20. DATE 


ος -15- 


ergeant Stevens E, Butler 


3 НЕМ 


WAIL ERO). ^S. сф 0 < uA / 2 AEN? [215 5/7 


t 
i | 
2. и 25 2^4 суб Er Сге 0 з зі "р 1 ` o 
2 | EL LA RE οσο πο еш иш 
> E | 
15. 5 


rizht, Weight, Eyes, Heir, Chathiag ete.) 
га if arrested) 


lame, Address, Sex, Раса 


IDENTIFY SUSPECTS BY NUMBER б 
IF ARRESTED GIVE ARREST NUDE? 


Wc 
У 
© 
О 
pa 2 
Лв 
UN 
oS 
m: 
τ 
τν 
sd 
E 
5 


26. MATURE OF INJURIES AND LOCATION ON GN BODY "Έτ. HOSPITALIZED - Y 
A ies EUN Lon : 
28. TRANSPORTED БҮ. | : UIS Ξ155. TREATED BY 
озь 
30. ТҮРЕ GF PROPERTY TAKEN | 31. LOSS VALUE 32, TRADEMARKS, ACTIONS CR CONVERSATION Of CK.SUSPECT .: 
pU PAM EE j. AI : 
33. EXACT LOCATION ОР . : Pa 34. POINT OF ENTRY 35. VE EIIE TROM TAR NO. STATE, YEARS AND MAKE `, 
A Je de AMA. P CWA ` OCCURRED КЕР: EM ES 
36. €1) CONTIN JATIONS OF ABOVE ITEMS DIATE ТЕМ RULES) ІХ IDE МАНТЛА ἘΗΣΡΞΟΤΒ AS OL 
NARRATIVE: ° LINED ASOVE. (2) BRIEFLY DESCRIBE INCIDENT AND 7 ACTIOR TAKEN. (3) DESCRISE, EVIDENCE A 
ae . e PROPERTY INDICATE DISPOSITION AND DESCRIBE ALL PROPERTY INVOLVED, USE CONT ΙΝΟΑΤΙΟΝ r 


PORT IF MORE. SPACE IS NEEDED. .RECORD YALUE OF LOSS ESTIMATED BY VICTIM.” 


T / At ors EDETE 7 Z uns ΘΕ ID, LLF7 du oss; 


py го га Te Za ἐς Sw OFS Le. por CoA rel and akt VIA 
Δ, DUM , ¿222225 зу AT This 


жы» “Ἔ š P = - ` 

! ά R Se Z mS c лие, 

1 й : N й й 8 

ῃ 2 ` — PE М е. С" . 

i Wf LAG 5 wy Sceve | ME. E 5 

ү 

і š | 

|! OFF μα,» AT 45 32: PCS 

1 > й N 

| й a .. " OFFICE USE ONLY 

| - nu T. T. NUMBER - ` | DATE & TIME THIS REPORT- — |37. DATE/TIME TYPE NO, |38. REPRODUCE NO. 

! PA E | SIS-R и, > οτος... 
39. REPORTING OFFICER UNIT а BADGE NO. | 40. STATUS (Check One) OJ UNFOUNDED 41. UNIT REFERRED TO 42. UCR DISFOSITIC 
2 ufa ria, А Z 952 SJG PX OPEN I1CLOSED Q SUSPENDED : й о x 
43. SECOND OFFICER UNIT & BADGE NO. 44. SUPERVISOR APPROYING * 45. REVIEWER D А NC 


60, DOWNIE ια / P2 00379 


- PD 251 REVISED 3⁄71 κ : ΜΕΤΗΩΠΡΩΙΙΤδΝ POLICE NEPEPTIRSNT WACUIMAGTON neo ιν. р e 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Edu 


f 
Ç . 
£# £ ` 


є 


UNCLASSIFIED 154 


Фе r a ΠΝ 
p о FILE - ! 
PAGE Øi SANTIA 02473 1623012 ME р. 
72 | τν 
ACTION ARA#=16 i v 


inFO. ОСТеСі 55-14 срв-б2  5У-23 0555-00 NSC«18. СТАЕ йй 
ο05Ε-64  INR«G6 . NSAEwg2 F«03 В8С-21 USIAe12 ,PRSeel. 


RR“!  /070 Ἡ Ν᾽ 
: " were ee о © е з “ % s = 9 = > ” от» 216973 
п yee2enzZ MAY 72 ` 

FH ΑΜΕΙΙΡΑΞΞΥ SANTIAGO | 

το SECSTATE WASHOC 1238 


ΝΑΣ SANTIAGO 2473 BE. - 


c 


гыра UNAUTEORIÉED ENTRY INTO CHILEAN EMBASSY: FONMIN. STATEMENT ` 
e δι Se C ME 
SANTIAGD ange tol | f ὧν 


рю FOLLOWING IS OUR INFORMAL TRANSLATION OF STATEMENT, (UNNECESSARY 
"або OMITTED! ΕΟΝΗΙΝ ÜNDERSECRE"ARY PALMA GAVE PRESS EVENING 
MAY 151 самоті, CHILEAN AMBASSADOR IN US HAS INFORMED THiS 
"wINIST4Y THAT OVER WEEKEND CHANCERY OF EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON 
WAS E! TE3ED. ILLEGALLY. (VIOLADA) ВУ UNKNOWN INDIVIDUALS WHO PRJ- 
οξέος: ТО FORCE СРЕМ DESKS AND KARDEXES OF EMBASSY'S POLITICAL 
AFFAIRS OFFICEe .- * as στο | 

GC HER CHANCERY OFFICES» IN ADDITION? WERE ENTERED ILLEGALLY 
ALBEIT ON LESSER SCALE» PRELIMINARY iNVESTIGATION DISCLOSED ак» 
μόναι OF DOCUMENTS» BOOKS: RADIOS, ETC AS RESULT THESE SERIOUS 
ACTS; CHILEAN ΑΜΒ TO US ADVISED STATE DEPT WHICH EXPRESSED 
SITS DEEP REGRET' AT WHAT HAD ОССУВЕО» . ΗΝ 

THIS AFTERNOON. UNDERSECRETARY CALLED IN US AMBASSADOR 
τὸ EXPRESS GOC'S CONCERN ABOUT SECURITY OF ITS DIPLOMATIC 
MYSSIGN IN US» REQUESTING RAPID AND RIGORCUS INVESTIGATION AS. 
кёл. AS ESTABLISHMENT. OF POLICE GUARD TO PREVENT REALIZATION ОЁ 
THESE‘ LAMENT#3LE, ABUSES IDESMANES]9 - . V pO 

"rOR TTS PART OUR GOVT HAS ADOPTED MEASURES TO SAFEGUARD 
THESEZURITY OF OUR COMMUNICATIONS AND OBLIGATORY INVESTIGATION 


(SURARIO) HAS BEEN ORDERED» υΝΟΤΕ. 


scs 
efT.. €, 


pe VIRTUALLY ALL SANTIAGO DAILIES THIS MORNING CARRY TEXT OR 
FAITHFUL SUMMARIES PALMA STATEMENT WITHOUT COMMENT OR FANCIFUL 


e . 7 


"ie °" CUNCLASSTEIED 
M d т з ab > `... 


= ш Š 5» * з ПРЕ πὶ 
* а k жы 
хай Я < a as 


27225 00380 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


σου IN . i . M . E 


і. з 


emt, = T : E Е à | "c 2: p "T 
RO Department of 3800 TELEGRAM 
T БЫШ, А T : 28 


PAGE ος 


ugani ERES 


COMMUN 
NETWORK 
p ITT 


r £ 


‘DAVIS 


H 
H 


UNCLASSIFIED 


1623712 | 


SANTIA 02473 e 
ss FRONT ‘PAGE? 


HOWEVER», ΕΥ 


кр NT LA TERCERA» 
DEPENDE QUNCEMENT AGA 


ος E eo 
STORY BANNEREY ACR 


1610 AND, INDE": 
MEUS LAST EVENING Ran AN 


expose POSTER* 


govT TY 
INST BACKDROP 


At meen 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


PAGE οἱ SANTIA 22957 4523267 ` $3 | 
Ж й £ 
B _ RU 3t 
ACTI^N ARAWTA | AE i ii 
Inpo 0ст-21  CP3-02  8Y-03 USRS-"3 cl&r-82 DODE-AF INR-P6 3 


кадет Pea pge. ЧЕТА-12 
" 


SET? ы | : | 
P 7 μιν... 60685831 ` 
pM AVEMBASRY SANTIAGO ` : | 
ТО GECSTATE 4ASHDC 1218 


зас IDE N T I A L SANTIAGO 2450. 


гонет ο THORIZED ENTE DOS EMBASSY 


ре реРЕРОЧ MINISTRY спа-858ПРЕТАЄХ PALMA age ED ΜΕ ТО CALL ON 
HIM TODAY AT 5237 Pits 7.8 З JUST, READ ΑΡ STARY FROM WACHINGTON 
ABOUT UMAUTHORIZSE Fe ORY істо CHILEAN EMBASSY =. AND KNE" WHAT TO 
EXPECT. РА МА EMPHAS! осо Tha’ AMBASSADOR tS OFFICE SHOWER SIGNS 

OF HAVING: BESN CAREFULLY SEA CHED FOR PAPERS WHILE VALUARLES HAD 
NOT ЗЕЕ“ -TOUCHED.HE SAID CHILEAN GOVERNMENT ASSUMED МОТТУЄ | 
HAD SEEN POLITICAL. FROM HIS OWN RECENT EXPER TENCE IN WASHINGTON? 
PALMS SAID, HE KNEW PROTECTION GIVE. CHILEAN EMBASSY WAS LESS 
EFFECTIVE THAN IT MIGHT BE a: НЕ SATO CHILEAN GOVERNMENT MADE. 
“SPECTAL BFFORTS TO PROTECT у.б: OFFICES AND RESIDENCES ІМ SANTIAGO е 
IN PART BECAUSE ^F DELICACY OF OUR RELATIONS u AND HE THOUGHT USG 
SHOULD ALSO STRIVE YO GIVE CHILEAN OFFICES AND HOMES BETTER THAN . 
RUN-^F -THE-MILL aROTECTIONs PALMA ASSURED ME THAT GIC HES W^ - 
"pFSISF THAT. THIS INCIDENT BE MAGNIFIED» IN:FACT» НЕ AP?CARER. 
SLIGHTLY TAKEN ABACK WHEN 1 MENTIONED THAT INCIDENT WAS ALREADY 
ον PHESS SERVICE WIRES. з 


2. 1 FXPRESSED PEGRET THAT IMCIDENT HAD OCCURRED AND THANKED. 
d L i03 PROTECTION UsSe OFFICES АЗЕ RECEIVING, {CARABINERSS 
BROKE Ὁ» DEMONSTRATION IN FRANT OF CONSULATE A FEW HOURS АЗП, | 
Т SAID 1 WOULD PASS ON GOL RFOUFST FOR INCREASED PROTECTION. 


H5 


"2 STATE 24655 ARRIVED A FEW MOMENTS AGO. PALMA MADE | 
MENTION OF PROPERTY DAMAGE QR THEFT OF RADIO» 


\DAVIS . : s E Е 


рве. Bough М5С-10 «ВЗВАЙІ T. 


% 


| Le CHILEAN "rs NCÓUNS VALDES. PHONED DEPT {FISHER HORNING. 


^^ YHBEDIATEEY NOTIFIED: APPROPRIATE AUTHORITIES THROUGH. - 
- PROTOGOL AND. SY - CHANNELS а AND- DEPTOFF CGIRDLERF МЕБІТЕР | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


FORH-DS:38B40CRY - -- Е 
I ‘DBNLSS | 2529037 HAY. та. | ROGERS. --, 


e. ` D 


LIMITED OFFICIAL USE. 


_ ARA/BC/CELGIRDLER 
5/45/72, EXT. 20575 11. 
|.ARA/BCTJUFISHER o 


_S/CPR: =HDAVES - 


O IMMEDIATE SS, o | SANTIAGO ` M 
Sued? cHELEAN CHANCERY 


-MAY 25 Το. REPORT THAT UPON. ARRIVAL SAME MORNING THEY 
DIS COVERED. PERSON OR: PERSONS UNKNOWN HAD ENTERED CHANCERY - 
+ LAPP ARENTLY 7 "SATURDAY 7 ‘NIGHT, OR. SUNDAT. NIGHTI-AND.HAD SEARCHED ~ 
` “SEVERAL. OFFICES AND: TAKEN SOME. RADIOS AND BOOKS. | DEPT. 


` CHANCERY TO,EXPRESS CONCERN AND REGRET. с р 7 


ба DURING VISIT, ane. LETELIER AND EMBOFFS DISMISSED - 
ROBBERY . AS POSSIBLE MOTIVE- STATING IT IMPOSSIBLE CON- 

|. CEIVE THAT FOREIGN CHANCERY LOGICAL TARGET FOR STRAIGHT. 
ROBBERY. AND CONCLUDING THAT REAL PURPOSE HAS SEARCH FOR- 


XUNSPECIFIEDI DOCUMENTS- WHILE TERNING INCIDENT YDISAGREE— 
ASLE”. THEY MADE NO HINT OF. OR REFERENCE TO. y ος 
PROTEST OR LLAFN FOR PROPERTY ΠΡ i FO 
` -. E і P : TELEK - 
tx QQEC 
es : я " . a. © 8 Р 
ντ xvm Depi- ULTIMA 
DOCUMENT AS REFERRED -TO SATE ερ [ M QE 00383 
UNE AES СОР ПРИС Е Е НИ E OFFICIAL, ni Й 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


. MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ` | CE ü : 


SUBJECT: Chilean Embassy Break In on 15 May. 1972 


1. On 24 May 1973 I telephoned Mr. James konman, 
` General Crime Section, Department of Justice and asked if he | 
| had. any information as to criminal prosecution. of persons involved 
Am a break in at the Chilean Embassy n Washington, D.C. on 
| 15 May 1972. Mr. Robinson stated he had по knowledge of this but 
suggested that it would be better.to check with’ Мү. С. Marvin Gentile, 
ы ΠΡΟ Assistant Secretary for: Security artment of State, and 
the Secret Service since they had.respon ies for the Executive 
г Protective Service (EPS). I telephoned: ‘Mr. Gentile and he identi- 
` fied. two State Department cables relative: ‘to. the incident; one from 
E | the embas sy in Santiago to the Department,” No. 2450, dated: 
EN 1215 May 1972, Subject: Unauthorized “Entry Outlining. the Protest 
` of the Chilean Government presente o. the American Embas sy, 
τ and the State Венажнава: reply іо: 5 tiago, No. 084655, dated 
715 May 1972.: Mr. Gentile also. idei ied:-the: EPS report of: : 
_ investigation and suggested that I: б І сору: from the Secret Service. 
~I then. called — Secret: Se£vice. and he had his liaison 


man deliver me a copy of the EPS: egent of ΡΘΗ | 


| 2. Оп 25 May 1973 І E ева a cili from FBI Agent. ` 
n ыле сыа 
. &telephone call from Mr. James.Robinson relative to my inquiry 


` about prosecution. indicated that the FBI Washington. 
‘Field Office had re opolitan Police Department (MPD) 
-on 24 May and reviewed the repor: Νο. 248-424 filed with the 3rd 
"District, MPD. which states that аз сваі in: occurred at the Chilean 

Embassy between 5:00 and 8:00 a.ni. on 15 May 1972. | 


` 00384 _ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| Reported loss. at that time consist “four am/fm radios | 

WE апа one electric razor. The polic nvestigation identified 

бл Î. 171 “gome latent fingerprints but no identification of those prints 

| was made.: Since the reported losé^was under $5,000 and there 
was no evidence of a crossing of state boundries, the FBI did B 

` not make an investigation of the incident. The MPD reported 

that there had been no prosecution апа no suspect was identified. 


M X General C 


: сс: Legislative. Counsel: Wr x 
m . Inspector General 

i 

ы. ἡ 

IE . d „+ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


E 
i 
a * = DN 
"x ) i ҮЗ, ER 
2. $5 ^ - 
Ung TG te ini VI 124 


ge i 
Я ΠῊ 
т 
£ 
^ πος 
ціа 
at 
i£ 7 
w У 
А ne 
^ te 
| + 
є ms 
і 
. 


Vallt Eicor 


eft crer frie SDB's TSD (now OTS) interviews. 

Nemes revealed in Of füce of. Security report = — 

| Retiring Tune 1973, еч to. Мебогд for job 
HECO offered part біме work (still employed) 


= | —— 


Leciured for MeCord at Font. Jun Celle Planed to work. 


Vented to reise tend for мебора 


ΠΣ 


Where do we stand with: 
| | Steve Kuhn ) 7 Fez | 
| А Solis) Were to have been interviewed 
) 


ГА 


Paul балас) | | ! I 


I think WWB has ‘interviewed following: 


- 


“John BFE j 


Whose names appear ii my notes to see 


2 : і ха à ind ) 
Cord Meyer ) А | 
әв 00386 


ο РЕ 


| и . wo | Bs E D. ‚ Breckinsiag 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


26 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR. THE RECORD: 


E ECT: DDI "Trap" Є on Leake of Narcotics Intelligence 


„1. In material provided by the DDI on contacté with certain ° 
persons on the White House Staff, there is a 9 September 1972 
memorandum from Mr. Helms to Dr. Kissinger relating the 
identification of a leak to. the press as having been in the BNDD. 
The memorandum states in part: ! 


of CIA Intelligence Memoranda: (IM) on narcotics 
. could be identified." 


3. This course-of action was at the initiative of the Diréctóràáte 
of Intelligence, without consultation with persons elsewhere in the 
government, except in reporting the results to Dr, Kissinger. It 
represents a welleconceived attempt to target ona possible source 
of leaks. We doubt-that:it would be susceptible to misunderstanding 
if exposed to public: ‘lew, but the fact is that it was something ὁ 
attempt to trap someone, and it was a part of the general attempt: Жо: 
seal off а leak similár to those leading to the "plumbing"! Oper σι» 
Because of the latter’ consideration it is noted for the, record, 


«s e sli 


i 


» . 
——P-NÀ --  . . — € € € MÀ а н 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` ' 
к n t мм 
τε sers 
ες, ο. cel 
, т 
€ nd 
س‎ эз € To ГА п 
> лет fon: My. побу 


eu 


co} 


‘on enr 


a p га D ar κο νο ST کک‎ 
Tap 15: An explanation cf the magnesite ter used Гог 
making caraiographs. ` 


Tab 17: „Ап XG-initiated follow-up ol... id 


was nerely noted on page 1T of the original sensitive 
summary. ` € ` 


Tab 10; Two iQ-lnitiaited follow-ups on items that were 


included in:tne initial Directorate нени but were too 
fregnentary for: inclusion in our ogiginal summary. I 


тар 19: E couple 
uir 


ly new item that surfaced in 
the course oF our inou 8. 


ie 
ie 
The tabs are not "— in any logical crer, because we 
chose to place the bulkier items on the bottom of the file to 
make for easier handling of it. The following is a breakdown of 
the tabs by initiator of follow-up. (Both you end Neüzi asked: 
for а follow-up on the item in Teb 2. ) з 


Dolby-inttiated nia ted | IG-initieted New submission 


2 17 29- 
і 18 - 


Όλο ON AVW у ы 
[5 н 
хл го 


= 


William V. Έτος 
Inspector General. 


| | τες 00388 


PEE‏ کید اب 


ШШ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


=. .. » 
m 1. «З 
3 $ 2.1 aan М. ' 
«5 ї eh . à 25 +: Rte т", το ta 
е ЗЕЕ шск A. TA e 

MORE. τ Ta ru «МО ГЪ η 
MTS 
i d ER 


ою 
uae 
ox Пав 2333078 
сло 
oia 


DDES 


DDI 


DISSE Er. EXeckinridpa 


421 material is to bs read by COB Хобїеу» 


It is requested thet material be carded оя 3 х 5 cards for . 
future possible use, It should show (1) the nase of the exployea 
in upper lef hand corner, (2) папо of person being reported on Ὃ 
(e.g. Hunt, McCord, еїсед (3) event reported, if significant,and 
the word "rontine' if not significant, (4) identifying referenca  - 
io memo in which information is recerded, ` S" 


If an event reported in this material із siginficant, please . 
report it Immediately for handling (either a emu or something 
Connected with Watergate and associated events) . у 7 EP 

Flease raise any questions that occur as you get into tho =. . 
material, Especially, as you get ideas as work progresses, pleaso 
put them forward, . RS 


AXES 


kr. و‎ 


"ION 


(S. AA (Gae sasha | Ἐν. ра TRE E 


^ 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


“> 
А АШ . i i 
. оф 
+ 1 
. + 
- А 
Ф { 
š B . Í 
з . d 
à. n 
є * Fr 9 й 
А $ 
H . 
. ` 
. , i ` | 
- { LEE 
ی‎ t 


`n a. hem conti es ate 


. — 


таро 


چ 


i 


Tac 
. a 


Ἔν 


e 
4 


omo 


E 


. 
. * k * 
" 
` " 
. . 
τ 5 - 
є ` 
. Ы . 
И ^ 
. 
5 К 
E s 
А Кы f 
I K” 
| ` та 
. 5 Ы T | 
* + 1 


idge 


inr 


k 


Brec 


D 


š | © 8 
| “g 
Β | BOR 
9 ELI! 
m Ын. - 
ER © жж Ἢ Ἂς κα Р ЗИ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"- = | «os ^ 25 May 1973 
. MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Broe ιν 
SUBJECT | og Reported Agency Fundirg of Heroin Study ` ` Ert 
= ΙΙ p 1, ‘ORD, in reporting 'association of employees with Egil 
E Krogh і in connection with the government narcotics program, ας 
referred to an Agency funding action on 30 June 1972 whereby. ^ ` С" 
$37, 500 was transferred to OST (the Office of Science and Tech- 2 
nology under the Executive) from ORD's budget. The money was 
to fund a study proposed by IDA (I am told this is the Institute for 
Defense Analysis), and was approved by the DDI, ADD/S&T, 


T м... for the DDS, and Mr. oe: as Executive Direcfor- — . 
тар roller.. š . . E а » EU Cue dox με t m - 


с 2. 1 judge this to be a proper ana normal ee within’ 
.the government in connection with a high priority government 
. . program on narcotics, I recommend that this not be reportes as 
. ай action eubject ο external criticism. A CEN 


E 


S. D. Breckinridge 


: 00393 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


21 Я К ο ο. 
E p 
| | N 
Ж Gu EARS Он | B 
x hes $ LYSIS shay LCE 
SATE: eer 2 4 ay. a ui 
td 5024 
RLF su e. a 
STRIBUTION: 
DUI . | ше. 
т 821155 i AE Баш 
DCI/IC (CIA) | | EI 
DDI WASHINGTON (CUPI) >- CIA OFFICIALS TESTIFIED WEDNESDAY THEY FORGOT à 
00/465 TO TELL CONGRESS OR THE AGENCY" 5 DIRECTOR, JABES SUHLESINGER, ABQUT `. 
DRO (2 AHONYsOUS WARWNIRGS THEY RECEIVED TH iAT. TRE VHITE HOUSE was TRYING TO 
ops/T PIN BLAME ON THE AGENCY FOR THE WATERGATE SCARDAL. 
D/OCI f REP. LUCIEN NEDZI, D-WICH., CALLED THREE OFFICIALS OF.THE CIA TO ; ` 
ONE EXPLAIN WHY THE LETTERS -- WHICH HAVE BEEN THACED TO WATERGATE Bm 
OSR CONSPIRATOR JAMES mCCORD “= DID NOT SURFACE UNTIL Two DAYS AGO. =ч. 
OSI (2 "ONE OF THE REASONS THEY GAVE Was ΤΗΣ FAMILIAR ᾿ i FORGOT,'" NEDZI DAS 


Ch/Ops SAID. "THEY ALSO SAID II WAS А WATTER OF TURNING 11 OVER 10. SOREORE 
DB ELSE AND ASSUMING HE WOULD PASS IT GN.” 
INDICO THE SIX LETTERS -~ ONE OF THEN SIGNED "JIY" AND THE OTHERS 
оро/ро ANONYMOUS -~ WERE SENT TO FORMER CIA DIRECTOR RICHARD HELMS BETWEEN 
p JULY 1972 AND LAST JANUARY. 
Á z BEDZI SAID IT HAD BEEN "PRETTY | DEFINITELY ESTABLISHED" THAT 
OSD ACCORD, A FORMER CIA AGENT, WAS THE AUTHOR OF ALL THE LETTERS, NEDZI й 
mea VECLINED TO SAY WHAT WAS IN THEM, BUT КЕР, WILLIAM BRAY, R-IND., SAIDA й 
fe THEY WERE "CONFUSED" AND “DISJOINTED” WARNINGS THAT THE WHITE HOUSE 3 
wh WAS TRYING ТО MAKE THE WATERGATE BREAK-IN AS A CIA PLOT. Ee 
eur BOTH NEDZI AND BRAY SAID THERE WAS NO EVIDENCE THAT CIA WAS IN ANY | 
| 
Н 


T me 


> 


WAY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE WATERGATE BREAK- IN, 
TESTIFYING AT THE SESSION WERE PAUL GAYNOR, HOWARD OSBORNE AND 
inuermer WILLIAM BRAUX, TOP CIA OFFICIALS WHO НАЙ CUSTODY OF THE RCCORD 
-egco LETTERS AT VARIOUS STAGES AFTER ТНЕУ WERE ЗЕЙТ.. 
fouston NEDZI INITIALLY SPELLED BRAUX'S NAME AS BROE AND SAID HE DID NOT 
Jsborne KNOW IF IT WAS THE SAME МАМ WHO TOLD THE SENATE COMMITTEE ABOUT 
мое, MEETINGS НЕ НАР WITH ITT PRESIDENT HAROLD GENEEN TO πορείας ΤΗΕ | 
‘aynor CREATION OF INTERNAL ECONOMIC STRIFE IN CHILE, 
. HPI 05-24 95:12 PED ` 


Comment: 


00392 | m 
М. These comments represent the initial and tentative reaction of 
the Office of Current Intelligence to the attached ttem from the 
news services. 


Qe LL at tay ποπ —M—M— ل ا‎ mE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


chr УР НА tore y re rele wear tee м‏ د 
їз‏ 
H‏ 


Q OMS τς ασε ря A - 


зало 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` — اسم چچ‎ -e 


' 
: 


« «їх 


— سل‎ a r e 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


©) 

De 

e 
E 


Lom несы, oce 


ШЕ, 


t 


` in order that we might make а temporary stayback burn copy. At that - E 
‘time, Latimer said he had a call in to Broe to report that when Torn (1 


“some calls кош David mE 


| program of the previous day end that it was based.on a report that. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


" 


бас » at 
Specific: 


SUBJECT: 


We met with Tom Latimer this morning to get from him the only "= 
existing copy of the sensitive attachment to our family jewels. report” 


Parrott was DCI duty: ‘officer some рше in Бекер: 1972 he received ' 


"I called Parigtt's. home: (FE 7-3512) 5 at 0925. ‘The. person 
answering, presumably Mrs. Parrott, gave me his telephone, hutmber А 
аё the Environmental Protection Agency (755- 0533). .1 called Parrott; ы 
there and told him that I would like to meet with him to debrief him: aS 
on the substance of calis he received from the White House when: he 
was DCI duty officér in September 1972. ` Tom ‘said he would’ ba happy | 
to meet with me but that he saw.no reason why he could not give me 
me ο ως over the telephones А : 


. Tom зебейной а сап from David Young at about midday ‘on а. 
очам Young.was calling about that morning's program by. Dan’ 
Rather in which Rather included material from a classified report. fe 
Young wanted to come out to the headquarters building to-see Parrott. - 
Parrott started chasing it down, Не spoke with Bruce Clarke’ "Who had 
the DDI duty, ^ It turned out that Rather's comment was ‘made ‘on: ‘his i 


came out of George Carver's.shop. The report was distributed in ^ 


„only seven or eight copies, and only two 9t them had вове. outside the i 


ΓΈ ^ both | to Kis umen 


Ro p Т6 trying to find thé build ag and did nota rive until ο 
about one. Ву then, Parrott had identified the Carver report and had . 
а copy of the distribution list. Young was shaken upon discovéring.- 


that the only external distribution was to Kiss singer. He у WAS, extremely - 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


а 


S^ s L . m px Sometime. inter ‘Parrott "T the transcript m the Ràther broadcast. ^ u 
3 " Rather's comments bore only a remote connection to the content ofthe. _ : 
рос ` ` Garver report. Parrott cannot now recall specifically what the Caryer 
report concerned.: Rather did imply criticism of the President i in his | 
к broadcast, and ‘this may have been the basis of Young! 8 concern, E "Оа £s і 
й " Monday, Parrott got in touch with Carver, and the two of thém met -> ` 

| -with Helms and briefed him on the episode. This is the last Parrott 
heard of it. : Parrott commentéd that he had no other contacts with’: 


anyone хага involved: with Watergate or related "ied 


I 


— n, Don 


—€— 


n 


I called ME и He said at he then had a memg in fhe mill, 
which will 1 reach i us но the course of the day. Š 


` 


Sopp ποπ... 


i^y 


e Orts that she had tradet the: duty wit 

hinks that Parrott wrote a memo 
i e episode, - but he wo ave kept only a chrono copy; ad’ his ` 
“chrono files were destroyed when he left. ica bas no idea what заре. 
` have happened to the езин . | 


τ... 


# 


` — Í... Ñ ل‎ ЗАРИ 


ne 


ο ме a ο 


«ато еВ, К Pra et 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


12. 


© MEMORANDO MEOR THE RECORD 


mh SUBJECT: br 


` Was not: кер 
level. А Атап ў 
E "Present from the staff were: 
і Frank Slatin sha, Chief Counsel | 
a и зё 


treed ee дө, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


AR 


lative Coün&el' 


e legt, 


PERLE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


23 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR ΤΗΣ RECORD 


On this date Mr, William E. Colby and the writer held a 
meeting with Congressman Lucien N. Nedzi. The reason for the 
meeting was to review with the Congressman material sent us by 
the Directorates describing the Agency activities that had flap 
potential, 


, At the outset, Mr. Colby advised that the Director had issued 
instructions to each directorate to come forward with descriptions 
of activities (especially involved in the domestic scene) that had flap 


potential. In addition, in a memorandum to all employees of the CIA, Ἢ 
. the Director had instructed all exnployees to report to him any 


activities the Agency was conducting that they construed as outside 
the Agency charter. Congressman Nedzi кынашып а copy of this 


- Agency notice be αν to him. 


Ре 


Тһе full report, including the sensitive section, was discussed 
with the Congressman item-by-item and in most cases he actually 
read the text. This took two hours.and the Congressman followed 
the material with great care. 


With regard. to the item concerning Mr. McCord's letters to the. | 


Agency іп July and December 1972 and January 1973, he expressed ` 
astonishment that the materiel took so long to be surfaced and when 


‘surfaced took so long to get to the Director. He was very outspoken 


in піз criticism of the people involved. 


I will not try to set forth all his reactions to the material, which 
I believe be found sobering, but I will set out hereinafter the items in 
which he showed special interest: 


а. Alien documentation furnished to the Secret Service. | 
He desired more information concerning the reason why 
issued, the use, and how controlled, 


01 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ne 
з Мә 
» 
— 


b. Financial support to the White House in connectim 
with the replies to letters and telegrams as a result of the 
President's speech on Cambodia in 1970, Не requested 
more information on this subject. | 


c. Beacons furnished Ambassadors. Не was interested 
in the number issued to Ambassadors and the position the State 
Department took on the use of these beacons. He was interested 
if the Department of State was pushing this program, аз he 


PES „а believed they should be. | "n "E 


d. Logistics! acquisition of police equipment. Не 
questioned whether LEAA, Department of Justice, should 
not be doing tbis rather than the Agency. 


e. He noted Logistics furnished telephone analysers: and 
desired te know what they were and how used. 


f. 


g. OER's crash project concerning Robert L. Vesco 
requested by the DCI. ‘The Congressman was interested m who Ἢ 
outside the Agency instigated the project and why was it stopped. ` 


h. Several ORD projects indicated research done without 
knowledge of the host system or on unwitting subjects. He waa 
of the opinion that this was risky and recommended it be Ë 
terminated. He stated he would like to see a directive go out. 
to the researchers concerning these practices: 


i. John Dean's request re Investors Overseas Service. 
He reviewed the six reports that had been furnished. Не noted, 
however, that the item stated "there were multiple channels 
to the Agency from the White House" and кеен MOREE 
concerning these channels. - 


j- Alien passports. Mr. Colby advised that he planned 
to review this whole subject and the Congressman agreed with 
the need to do so. : 


00402 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


The Congressman noted that in connection with John McCone's 
consultative role with the Agency the Director had stated some time 
in the past that he planned to take action regarding individuals in this . 
category, The Congressman requested a report on what had been done. 


Му. Nedzi asked Mr. Colby if the Agency had considered how  . 
much of the information just reviewed with him could be made public. 
и Mr. Colby stated this had not been done yet, and spoke to the question 
«Ам Фф. of souxces, methods, and the:impact оке institüflon. The Gengress- -sw 
man stated that in the current climate he felt it was necessary to open 
. up more information to help clear the air. Mr. Colby stated the Agency 
would give the matter deep consideration, and added he had been think- 
. ing of a general statement along these lines to be used at his confirmation . 
hearing. 


The meeting ended at 12 o'clock noon. 


(Signed) William V. Brog 


William V. Broe 
Inspector General 


Distribution: 
Director of Central Intelligence 
Mr. Colby 
Office of Legislative Counsel 


NOTE: The above listeď items, except for item j, are being pursued 
by the Office of the Inspector General, 


00403 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


H 
3 r * > 1 ` 
% ` ` š Н 1 M 
` ` + Σεν 
à B^" w^. ` 1. s 1 wot FE 
tol гої : 
ADU $ 
$5 ο σος 


06404 

25 Хау 1975 

=“ DATE) 
Directo (DATE) . 


REPLACES FORM 10-101 { 
WHICH MAY ЭЕ USED. 


FORM NO. ү 
a ^ue за 10! 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SPATE GP vi CINTA 


зе 


CIEN Y UB SALREAX, to-wit: 


deposes and says as follows: | E 


І an the Director of Security of 


i. 
Intelligence Agency. 
2: The purpose of this statenent is to record, 


"со the best of my knowledge and recollection, circunstahces 


о 
і А 
involved in the receipt of a series of unsigned correspon- 


dence received by the Agency during the period from 1 Aiigust 
1972 to 7 January 1975. The significance of these otters 
is that by their content and by the handwriting on two of А 
them, they are believed to have been written by James М. 
McCord, Jr., one of the defendants in the Watergate trial. 
12 -οἳ 3. My first involyenent in this matter occurred 
on the 2nd or 3rd of August 1972 when an envelope addrebsed - 
to Mr. Helms, then Director of the Central Intelligence 
Rooney; with no return address, and postmarked 30 July 1972 
was routed to my desk from the Director's office as a routine 


piece of "crank mail". The envelope contained a carbon copy 


of a typewritten letter signed "Jim" with the nane in the“ 


salutary address excised ~ "Dear' ", After disnissing 
the letter as а piece of crank maii, I had second thoughts 
and recognized the handwriting on the envelope and the 
signature "Jin" on the letter as being similar to that of 
Mr. McCord, who formerly worked for me as a security officar 


before his rotirement from the Agency. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1 
e 
M. 
T» . ç $ dos s 
1. Γρ ЫЕ ? Z ра p і isa Fase A Ὁ 
R 3 1 ids D TN * Αν pean s £ š 
LE. nd fold hia ΕΠΑΕ elubcush I was not peshe sty: 
* T б .. ге TIT А "dle S. 
Коз" сы geunkiy sure thek rbe Duit hea hoo sook by 


a PONO 
збо DLL d, 


hia vet Y “elt vary δες ορ That the ина Le Lai.ssd 208 
sone reflection, decided that he would like to have'a Ίσσα] 
epinion on tho matter and summoned Mr. Lawconco Houston, 
General Counsel of the Agency, to his office and had s à 
ead the letter. After he had finished reading the letter 
the ensuing discussion, to the best of my recollection, 
centered about whether.the Agency had any legal obligation 
to forward the letter to the Justice Department or the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation. Both Mr. Helms and Mr. а 
decided that there ‘Was no such obligation and I was сода та 
hold the letter in а secure file in my office and take. no 
fuxther action on it. Mr. Helms instructed me to restrict 
knowlodge of the existence of the letter to an залі 
minimum number of people. | 

. 5, The next envelope received was addressed to 
: Mr. Paul Gaynor, а staff chief in my office and a нео 
close friend of Mr. MNcCord's, on or about the 23rd of 
December 1972. The next envolope received was addressed 
to Mr. Саупог!5 residence and was undated but postnarkod 
27 December 1072. The two envelopes contained one or nore 
unsigned typewritten pioces of correspondence which appeared 


to relate to Mr. McCord's involvement in the Wate rgate. "affair", 


Both of these letters were handcarried bya me оса, Elizabeth 


` 40 0406 


: | MORI DocID: 1451843 


` ", 
P. 1 
; 
os 
а А n 
+ 
3 з i ες άρον З δρ. Rows "E Ite Ne =. ж. afe я 
nor zl пикш ху Po Me. T ые, бай SEE ыз U rlvidnor і 
ро zi z 


b И oe 
зу мохо xoturned id us pgrsosally Буріїєв. Donlovy, 


` +, 


м feta joa a the «rcg зе cao yi!o wish the TTS eq cum. 
6.  Susscqantily, ол 22 Daronbor 3972 and on hy 


mol onvyolopes 


4 January 1973 and б Jusuaxy 13735, 
nasigazd буро dics MOlleBpodcunRCco vero хосріуей 
by Mr. Gaynor at his residence and promptly delivered to 

ne for review and subsequent inclusion in the secure file. 
X aid not bring thyse to the immediate attention of Hir. Πα]χι5 
but a week of. 50 later dolivered to him a folder with ail 
copies of the letters we bad received. As I recall, ny 
roquost to him vas for guidance as to what action should - 
be taken with regard to them in the light of his йвратбзга 
from the Agency incident to his nomination аз United States 
Ambassador-designata to Iran. After reviewing them, he 
informed me that he did not see any. reason to take any action 

at that time, but asked that I show them to Mr. Houston 
and if Mr. Houston had no objection, I vas to retain them 
in а securo file and take no action with rogard to tkem.. 
As I recall, Mr. Houston was out of town at the tine and : ` 
it was ‘several days before I had an opportunity to give 
"him the folder. with the copies of the letters in it for , 
‘review. After reviewing them, he informed me that he had ` s 

no objection to the instructions Mr. Helms had given me ій 

I so informed Hrs. Elizabeth Dunlevy, secretary to Mr. Helms. 

7. On 14 May 1973, Mr. Willian Broe, Inspector 

General of the Agency, and his Deputy, Mr. Kenneth Greer, 

met with me in my office in connection with an investigation Р 

they were undertaking at the direction of Mr. Schlesinger 


to dotermino if anyone in the Agency had any contact with 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


^ n ᾿ 
И 
Т 
We. ο tian $us E ж чату сү Ye. Meg 
See st w Eu c араб ῥα tle "o tps XY 76.216 Тед "Ле, 
то the гово пі лу Me Tog, дд $22 fa the MELOY leak bean 
λος Ub uw ме РО Φον αμ i£ 5E gent : 2 
tho wiiention of my ofilco. Ï told them gust Ме. Puul taynar 
Impl eon m cinco Бүгө} ції tr. Fee pits bat thet f vss satislicd, 
айат into.sisglng nin, chat ho hei pot siea or to 
Mr. McCord since the Watergate incident. (I subsequently 


determined from Mr. Gaynor that he has not seen or talked 


to Mr. McCord since his retirement from the Аавоасу on 31 August 
1970.) I also told them that a Mr. Leo Rosenbaum, an Сарібувв 
of tho Agency, had зані. an appointment with me to discuss 
the fsasibility of contributing to Mr. McCord's defense, fund 
and that I thought I had convinced him that this would be 
inimical. to the best interests of hinself, the Agency and 
hr, McCord. I also stated that Mr. Rosenbaum had calici ne 
several weeks ago to say' that he was well known as a close δ 
friend of Mr. McCord's and might be called to testify at the | | 
current Senate Hearings. I advised him to seek gnidande 
in this regard from the Office o£ General Counsel. I.do not 
know that he did so. I then remembered the envelopes and 
correspondence purportedly originated by Mr. McCord. Í briefed 
Mr. Broe and.Mr. Greer on the circumstances invoived іп the 
receipt and subsequent handling of them and made a copy: of 
each of them and delivered them to Mr..Broe the next day. 
I also gave a copy, at thé same time, to пу immediate supervisor, 
Hr. ilarold Brownman. | | E | 

8. А few days after this, I was contacted by 
Mr. John Greaney, Office of the General Counsel ої the" 
Agency, who asked me about any official or unofficial £ontacts 


anyone in the Agency had had with Mr. McCord. I mentioned 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


* 
« 


: z * es e ^ aM 
Tad ete Ἀτεστ A SAP Qa. ο. Дози ho onc 


° TM а Ж ате fa οἳ лелер 
Load uv. Leuven а HouslLew ia 2135 caged. 


Вот. τμ "νον са NM 
TM 
Ded 2.23: ο бир arca з ΚΑΛᾺΣ evesialniuu 2.39 суб. ©, ү 
Му. Greaney iíudicuted ‘that he would recomasnd gustan 
Ἔξ Play be rita касі а τα T3 Peed tpg "оте acot cd 


‘On this sans date; I was instructed by Mr. James В. Schlesinger, 
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, to participate 
in certain Congressional briefings on this matter zad tb 
prepare this affidavit. 
9. Up to the i4th of Нау 1973 when І in fo raad. 


Mr. Broe and Mr. Greer of the envelopes and their cones, | 


the only persons мю of the existence of thon, 


in addition, to me, were: Mr. Helas, Mrs. Elisabeth Dunievy, 


- 


΄ 


his. secretary, Mr. Houston, Mr. Paul Gaynor of пу stafê, ` . . 
Miss Kathryn Aldridge, my secretary who prepared the file, 


Mr. Loo J. Dunn, my Bxecutive Officer, knew of the fir 


envelope and correspondence but not of subsequent envelopes. 


rei 


10. The only other matter pertinent to this | 
particular matter was the fact that an intermittent ѕойтсе 
.of this Office, who was a close personal friend of Mr. PMcCord!s 
us relayed^ to Mr. Gaynor and his staf ΞΕ certain information 
concerning the personal situation of He, and. Mrs. McCord during 
and after the time he was in jail and since he has been 
released on bond. This source has been utilized by this office . 
for many yoars and by my direction, no effort was nadéfto solicit 
information from him about Mr. McCord and the information provided 


was done so purely gratuitously.. 


gta | 


— sborn 


` Subscribed and sworn to before we, a Notary Public, ik and for the 
County of Fairfax, State of Virginia, this #3 day ої! 2 . 
My commission expires аа ИА х7 (35; _... Ф 8 

. » 00409 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


had t ge Ὁ 

narcotics matiers for the o ME knew y asy and was prot залу | 

етно dies with Ifunt, At that same time Lou Conein was w cring 

at ihe White Morse and ан to meet Conein. [t is 
understanding that 


tunt may have РЕЧЕ 
to Conein. : 
| ول‎ 


ed as to what would be the best procedure, 


that we should interview 


concerning 
Télations with Liddy, Hunt, and Conein, and that this office 
would do so. А 
‘ Wil Broe 
i Ins neral 
efe 7 . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1 "TO 


23 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: All Employees 


SUBJECT : Agency Involyement in the Watergate Case 


2 Я б зе * - š 
"S EL SES ~ Meu 5 EL 


l. The leadership of the Agency continues to make a deter- 
mined effort to investigate all.aspects of Agency involvement with 
the "Watergate" case or any of those persons connected with it. 
The results of these investigations have been given to the appro- 
priate legislative, executive, and judicial elements of the Govern- 
ment investigating these matters. Each employee has been asked 
and is directed to report to the Director any knowledge he or she 
has of the Watergate affair and related matters, any persons con- 
nected with it, or any other illegal activity in which they believe 
the Agency was involved in any way. 


2. In consonance with the foregoing, anyone who has had 
any connection or contact with individuals on the attached list, or 
anyone in their offices or anyone purporting to act for them or 
acting pursuant to their authority, should report these contacts 
fully. Activities of these and other individuals include not only the 
Watergate affair, but any investigative work on the Pentagon Papers/ 
Ellsberg case and any contacts relating to the Executive Branch and 
White House efforts to locate and stem leaks of classified informa- 
tion to the press starting as early as July 1970. 


3. Any work done by anyone in tbe Agency on any of these 
subjects, or any knowledge related thereto, should be reported to 
the IG through the appropriate Deputy Director, or directly and 
personally to the Director. | | 


Е n u8aaags uw a ———rrrnF rr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 PRE Neh LY INTERNAL tise d ; 


4, Itis imperative that every piece of information 
bearing on these matters be reported immediately for evaluation 
by the senior management of the Agency. The public interest 
requires that all information Бе produced and reported to our 
“gover sightscommittees,(on a classified basisjif necessary) so ‚ Аю 
that the Agency's actual role will Ье clarified with respect to І 
various charges and speculation. 


CIA Mana gement Committee - 
Attachment : 


APPROVED 


me {ΘΝ 


Director 


00 Ἡ fo... 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Attachment. 


Н. В. Haldeman 

John D. Ehrlichman 

John Dean 

Egil Krogh 

David Young : " : ` 

EF Howard Hiit Ode Cute злиті sss spite ‚ πᾷ 
С. Gordon Liddy E. ч 7 : і 
James W. McCord 

Charles W. Colson 

John J. Caulfield 

Eugenio Rolando Martinez Careaga 

Juan Rigoberto Ruiz Villegas 

Bernard L. Barker 

Virgilio Gonzales _ 

Frank Anthony Sturgis 


004 b 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


etn / 


MEMORANDUM ТО — з  Fxdoutive Üéerr&tary 
CEA Management Committee 


SUBJECT 


г» 


Loan of Television System to Secret Servico 
for Usa at Demovratic and Republican National 
Conventions in 1972 E 


Perd 


Ίο The attachodjsunvary reports tho loan of telovisim 
equipment by the Арен ta the Secret Ferries for use during the 
Democratic and Republican National Conventions last year. The 
equipment was for use in helicopter aerial surveillance, primarily Ie 
crowd control. The assumption is that it was used for that purpose, 
The equipment was recovered in November 1972, 

2, The transaction seems a straightforvard arrangement, 
related to the legal responsibility of the Secret Bervicos 
However, the fact that the Agency probidad the equipment for usa 
ina domestic political situation could be presented in a different 
light, | 


00412 


« , into a.behavioral drug. Conversations with Can Duckett | g 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM TO : Executive Secretary 
CIA Management Committee 


SUBJECT Ф Drug Testing Program 
1. The attached summary from ORD describes research 


indicate that the reported drug was part of a larger program | 
in which | 
Kiras the Agency had relations with commercial drug manufacturers, 
vhereky they passed on drugs rejected because of unfavorable side 
effects. The drugs vate soreened with the use of ADP equipment, 
and those selected for experimentation were tested + | 
sing monkeys and mice. Materials . 

n£/further interest, as demonstrated by this testing, were then 
tested at Edgewood, using voluntser members of the Armad Forces. 

2. The program was terminated last fall, The computer program 
remains in the machine, its final disposition not yet having beon 
decided, | 


3. Carl Duckett emphasizes that the program was considered 


, ав defensive, in the senses that wo would be able to recognize 


certain behavior if similar пабогіаїз were used against Americans, 


WVB 


00413 


"MEMORANDUM FOR: ` Deputy Director for Science and 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


срп 


ORD-2550-'73 


23 May 1973 


Technology 


SUBJECT: ORD Involvement in Domestic Affairs 


In surveying all of the people within the Office of Research 
and Development in search of specific contact or knowledge of · 
Messrs. Hunt, Krogh, Young, and Liddy, an additional incident 
in which ORD supplied equipment for domestic use was uncovered, 
It is attached. I have also provided the additional information you 
requested on Project] | | | | рад Project 


Ayr 
Director of Research and Development 


Attachments: 
As stated 


04 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DEM (ce 


- . 98 May 1973 2 
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD | 27 


~ 


SUBJECT; General: The Family Jewels “xercise 
Specific: Meeting with Colby This Date 


YR. «Broe and EN... with Mr. Colby at 1115 hours today. Colby E 
asked that ve provide him with fuller information on the following 
items: | . * 
D in БА DIVISION Project What-do-these.agents do 
D іп. the States?-—What Sort or reéporting- anü—te-whom?- ~ 
p pL “Gebconies of OCI's reports on-'Reeskess-Xouth' апа Black Radiea3m—- 
| — Get detathe- TEF wee 
| DOG! —susiects- CART . БЕ 
5+ Т T 1 HORE 


рр i i m Deaf on τος 


р ws whom? For what purpose? . 
P κκ Ισ | 


Give Colby-a-eepy of ТЕ Dtvtston's-eontribu&tonz 


سے 


| : 00415 


eA. gerere 


ror 


B “ي‎ 


Away. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


EMPL ΟΥ ий 
BULLETIN 


No. 359 f 21 May 1975 


DICI STATEMENT ABOUT ΤΗΕ. МАТЕКСАТЕ CASE 


The following statement was made by Lieutenant Genere] Vernon A. Walters 


during a recent appearance before a Congressional Committee. 


On 23 June 1972 I was ordered by a phone message from my office 
to be at the White House at about 1300 with Director Helms. I had 
lunch with "a Helms and we went to Mr. Ehrlichman's office at the 


` White Hous Present were Me, Ehrlichsan, Sn. Налет, SD. Helles 


and ανά As I recall it, Mr. Haldeman said that the Watergate 
incident was causing trouble and was being exploited by the opposi- 
tion. It had been decided at the White House that I коа go to 
Acting Fal Director Gray and tell his thet nas that tho five gir ΠΕΟΣ 
were arrested, furcner enquiries into the Mexican as pects ps this 
matter might jeopardize some of the CIA's covert activities in that 
area. An appointment was made for me to see Mr.-Gray at 1430 that 


.Same day. I went over and told nia thet I nad been directed by top 


White House officials to tell him that further investicaticn into the - 
Hexican aspects cf the Watergate episode might jeopardize some of the 
Agencv's covert actions in that area. Не said that he understood the 
agrebient between the FBI and the Agency regarding their.sources but. 
that this vas а complicated case. Ha wouid not violate the адгевлеїй 
with CIA regarding sources. On my return to the Agency i checked to 
see whether there was any danger in the Agency's covert sources ff 

the Mexican part of the investigation continued and ascertained that 
no one believed that this was the case. Mo one had any knowledge of 
the plan to bug the Democratic National Comittee. 


On June 26 the Counsel to the President John Dean E, ‘me and 
asked me ta come and see him about the matter I had discussed with, 
Haldeman and Ehrlichman. Не said I could check with Ehrlichman and 
I did. He said I could talk to Dean 50 I went to Dean's office at 
1145 on June 26. 


I informed Osan that I had checked carefully to sas whether 
there was any jeopardy to the Agency's sources by a further ines 
gation of the Mexican sources of thie pitt rad bad Teen] thi А 
попа, Lean rhaa a3kod wnether ою CEA zh have tiskaa pont in 


VEA GS qoe Mum Базан qase 


з 


Watergate episode without my knowing it. I said that this was not 


00416 


tm 


Cw 


‘turned into а multi-megaton explosion". 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


«Qs 


possible. I knew that the Agency had had no part in the operation 
against the Democratic National Committee. 1 therefore could not 
say that further investigation would jeopardize Agency sources. І 
felt that someone had bungled badly and that the responsible parties 
Should be fired. He asked whether there was not soma way in which 
the Agency might.have been involved. I said that I had checked with 
Director Helms and was convinced it was not. Any attempt to stifle 
this investigation would destroy the effectiveness of the Agency and 
the. ERI and моцу е з aveva üisserv!cs to the Prasivent. Y mould 
μον ate we ο i ν.μ s. 


НЕЧ 


τα 
‘ es we 
teks Mut o E 


Pega fies? 


Tha following day I saw Dean again in his office at his K 


Mia 
yur 


squest 

He again reviewed the Watergate Case saying that some witnesses were 
ra 

n 


` 


getting scared and were "wobbling". T 5514 that no matter how scared 


they got, they could not involve CIA because it was not involved i 
the bugging of the Watergate. He then asked if tha CIA could not 
furnish bail and pay the suspects' salaries while they were in jail, 


A mead nandi ue O ЖЮ. Же ма m 
using covert actien funis for this ρηγοῦτα. 


I replied that this was out of the question, It would implicate 
the Agency in something in which it was not implicated. Any such 
action Бу the Agency would imply an order from the highest level and 
bP id uO L8 а perly to cay such σι εν wodié De a grave dis- 
service to the President ard the country and would destroy the CIA:s 
credibility with the Corgress and tne people, I would resign rather 
than do this and, if окозуай to do it, Τον] esk to sea te Prosidani 
to explain the reasons for my refusal. rurthertiore, when the Agency 
ex zedld funds in the U.5., we had 53 vagare Chis со сла Gversigat 
Committees of the Agency in Congress. He was much taken aback by this 
and agreed that risks of tmolicating the CIA and FSI in this matter 
would be enormous. I said that what was now Z nadeSy] sepe] could 
озсома a mortal one. What was now a “conventional expiosion could be 

I again advised him to fire 
the responsible parties.. 


Again Dean sent for me on t 
office at 1130 that day. Ha eng 
more about CIA involvement. I renlíe t Блага was no involvament 
of the Agency in the bugging of the # ite, He then asked wiether 
i had any ideas and I said that I had none which could be helpful. 
Perhaps the Cubans who were anti-Castro might have had a hand in it 
but the CIA did not. - 


" ΜῊ Η E 


ба July 5 I ресеїузб a call oriz sctisg Dirac 
saying thet he could nat stres opts Tus Rud ugue gs 
aspects of this matter unless he had a formal letter fp 


nf CY" «ee sot ἀπο v 


and I saw him at nis 


я 
. hathar I nad learned anything 
a 


ч " š . ^ "nr ` . x` tr کے‎ 
А x т.е 
f. сз bap omie oF o αν “ἘΠ 


с $ NOME Seat «εκ n "e 
wo |ы ne . M oO ENG 321315 oan ds 


mon 
стіни 
«ὁ M s 


лом 


0 


———————————— << ж i i 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


nen 


as 


I told him that I could not tall him that further investigation 
would jeopardize the Agency's covert sources. I had checked on this 
and it was not so. I had ascertained that General Cushman had initially 
authorized the issuance of some equipment to Howard Hunt without knowirg 
its purpose other than it was, as I understood it, to shut off "leaks", 
This was long before the Watergate bugging. Since then I had carefully 
checked and there was no other involvement of any sort by the CIA in the 
να, against the Watergate, I. said, 8 I felt.that attempts,t^ 
cavar this uc op Ro oi ta Ти: [Ion ye gh a ure 


= 4 ` 


tp oe " 


чу ὦ © y Н 
pi Quid he ES HT а 
TENA, D s . | w ятла и 
Tiley τον οἱ at e 250 ne τοῦ wes prepared £o res)55Ó oa tnis 
issue. Р gave Gray а list of the eauinment the Agency had givon Hua 


and the account of our dealings with the former CIA employees up to the 
termination of their employment with the Agency long before the Hatercite 
episode.. 


I saw Gray again on the 12th of July and gave him one additional 
memorandum regarding the contect ΤΙ Hunt. We ravigvad tha пагар 
reiterating the position ws nad take ev IGUSTY. i said csat I nad tet 
Dean that the best solution woulc be to {1ге those responsible. Gray said 
he had made the same recommendation. Once again we agreed „чи anythina 
that might damage the integrity of the FBI and CIA would be a grave dis- 


Be fe «раза б ОЕ УЕ —— 
SEPY ETA to bhas ryasident and te TIQQSASCBU. 


a С 


In February 1973 shortly after Dr. Schlesingar became Director j 
tcid him of my conversations ‘with Haldeman, Ehrlichman and Dean. In 


- February Dean called Dr. Schlesinger to see 1? the Agency could get 


back from the FBI the material it hot sent to the dustica Сагагитомо 
concerning our contact with Hunt. Dr. Schlesinger and I agreed that 
this could not be done, I attempted to contact Dean but he was in 
Florida. On his return I saw Dean at his office on February 2] and tcd 
him thet we could пої ask the РО: for спе material back. Taat would опту 
serve to implicate the CIA and I could not and would not do it. I had 
seen Acting FBI Director Gray that merning and told him of Dean's request 
and our refusal. He agreed saying that he could not do such a thing. 
Since that date I have had no further contact with Dean. The above 
in 


represents my Wa dts of what occurred ane the dates are checked 
my apoointment book. 


DISTRIBUTION: ALL EMPLOYEES 


00417 


-- τ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
WASHINGTON, Ю.С, 20505 


OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 


‚ 9.May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR ALL CIA EMPLOYEES 7 12 


° 1. Recent press reports outline in detail certain alleged CIA 
activities with respect to Mr. Howard Hunt and other parties. The 


. presently known facts behind these stories are those stated in the 


attached draft of a statement I will be making to the Senate Committee 
on Appropriations on 9 May. As can be seen, the Agency provided 
limited assistance in response to a request by senior officials. The 
Agency has cooperated with and made available to the appropriate law 
enforcement bodies information about these activities and will con- 
tinue to do so. 


`2. All CIA employees should understand my attitude on this 
type of issue. I shall do everything in my power to confine CIA 
activities to those which fall within a strict interpretation of its 
legislative charter. І take this position because I am determined 
that the law shall be respected and because this is the best way to 
foster the legitimate and necessary contributions we in CIA can make 
to the national security of the United States. 


3. І am taking several actions to implement this objective: 


- I have ordered all the senior operating officials of this 
Agency to report to me immediately on any activities now 
going on, or that have gone on in the past, which might 
be construed to be outside the legislative charter of this 
Agency. 


- I hereby direct every person presently employed by 
CIA to report to me on any such activities of which he 
has knowledge. I invite all ex-employees to do the same. 
Anyone who has such information should call my secretary 
(extension 6363) and say that he wishes to talk to me 
about "activities outside CIA's charter." 


00418 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| "E eis 


4, Το ensure that A 


" : , 
gency activities are proper in the future, 
I hereby promulgate the following Standing order for al] CIA employees: 
Any CIA employee who believes thàt he has received | 
instructions which in 


any way appear inconsi stent 
with the CIA legislati | i bL к 
Di rector of Central intelli die^ 7 πα. 


eR tg 


James R. Schlesinger 
Director 


Co 4) £o. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DCI STATEMENT 
BEFORE 


SENATE APPROPRIATIONS SUBCOMMITTEE 
ON INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS 


9 HAY 1973 


00413 


_——————_L— ss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


OPENING STATEMENT 


| Mr. Chairmam, I am here to discuss the өн лє wbich have.arisen 
over CIA's real and alleged role in events that occurred in 1971 and 1972. | 
I have opened a detailed investigation into the precise nature of that role. 
m can report to you on what,Agency records, now being intensively reviewed, 
reveal at this juncture. ο. I do not yet know that I have all the 
facts in the matter. Nonetheless, I am pleased to present to you such facts 
as are now available, and I will certainly provide you with any further 
details as they come to my attention. 

Let me start.with the Agency's relationship with Mr. Howard Hunt, 
whose testimony has recently been made public. Mr. Hunt was a staff 
employee of the Agency from 8 November 1949 to 30 April 1970. At that time 
na retired from the Agency. He performed one editorial job of writing up ' 
a recommendation for an award for one of our officers. in November 1970. 

He was not paid for these services, although the Agency placed the sums of 
$200.00 and $50.00 in two Kar EDE Gein a kipas for the service performed. 

In early July 1971, General, Cushman, then the Deputy Director of 
Central Intelligence, received a telephone call from the White House. He 
was informed that Mr. Hunt had become a consultant on security affairs for 
the White House, ἀπά a request vas made that Mr. Hunt receive assistance 
from the Agency. The minutes of the Agency Morning Meeting of 8 July 1971 
indicate that the DDCI (General Cushman) reported a call by John Ehrlichman 
stating that Howard Hunt had been appointed а White House security consultant. 

On 22 July 1977 Mr. Hunt visited General Cushmanat the CIA building. 
According to the records, Hr. Hunt stated that he had been charged with a 


highly sensitive mission by tne White House to visit and elicit information 


00420 


у > ])—ÀÁ]—M7MM—— ÀM á— oO, 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


dis 


from an individual whose ideology he was not entirely sure of, and for that . ` 
purpose he said he was asked to come to the Agency to see if he could get 
two things: identification documents in alias and some degree of physical 


disguise, for a one-time operation. Не stressed that he wanted the matter 


“ye n : . κ. it 


> supa 


to be held as closely as possible and that he would like to meet the Agency 

people in an Agency safehouse. Agency records indicate that, in.the Coupes 

of the conversation, Mr. Hunt referred to Mr. Ehrlichman by name and General 

Cushman acknowledged an earlier call from Mr. Ehrlichman to ηδη. The 
ш Committee may desire to query General Саттай whose knowledge would not 
come from such secondary sources. 
| бепега1 Cushman directed the appropriate technical service of the 
Agency to be of assistance to Mr. Hunt, based on the above request. Оп 
23 July 1971 Hr. Hunt was given alias documents, including a Social Security 
| " card, driver's license, and several association membership cards, in the 
name of "Edward Joseph Warren" similar to material he had been furnished 
foi operational use while he had been an Agency employee, under the name 
of "Edward V. Hamilton." The same day Mr. Hunt was also given disguise 
materials (a wig, glasses, and a speech alteration device). 

. By calling an unlisted telephone number given him, Mr. Hunt arranged 
several additional meetings with Agency technical officers, the datas of which 
cannot be provided with precision. In these, he requested and was provided . 
a commercial tape recorder (in a typewriter case) and a commercial Tessina 
camera disguised in a tobacco pouch. Не also brought in a then-unidentified 
associate (later identified from press photos as Mr. G. Gordon Liddy) and 
secured for him a disguise (wig and glasses) and alias documents in the name 


.of "George F. Leonard." 


001 AO o- 


NR ] |] Éeaeees a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


de 


з : | The Agency~technical officers met. these requests despite the absence 
of the procedura] steps and approvals normally required by Agency regulations, . 
However, they became increasingly concerned at the escalation of Mr. Hunt's 
requests for. assistance. These finally included.a request from Mr. Hunt to 
be met on the morning of 27 August 1971, upon his return from California, 
to have a film developed and returned to bim. This was done the same day. 
"Не also asked for a New York mail address and telephone-answering service 
for operational use. 

The technical officers raised. their concern with senior officers, 
who noted the possibility that these activities could involve the Agency in 
operations outside its proper functions. As a result, again according to 
Agency records, General Cushman telephoned Mr. Ehrlichman at the White House 


on 27 August 1971 and explained that further such assistance could not be 


given. Mr. Ehrlichman agreed. The request for mail address and telephone 
answering service was not honored. On 31 August 1971, Mr. Hunt contacted 

the technical officers again, requesting a credit card,-but this vas refused. 
Mr.-Hunt had also made a request on 18 August 1971 for the assignment of | 
а secretary he had known during his Agency career. This was also refused. The 
earlier-furnished alias documents and other material were not recovered, however,. 
except for the Tessina camera which was returned on 27 August as unsuitable. 

Since the end of August 1971, the Technical Services. Division has had no 

further asscchation with Mr. Hunt. Аз a point of reference, I would note 

that the break-in of the office of Mr. Ellsberg's psychiatrist took place 


on or about 3 September 1971. 


00421 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CEN 


The Agency Sutlined the above events to Mr. Patrick Gray, Acting 
Director of the FBI, in letters dated Sand 7 July 1972, and a meeting on 
28 July 1972. А series of questions were asked the Agency on 11 October 1972 
by Mpe Earl Silbert, Principal Assistant United States Attorney for the 
District of Columbia. On 24 October 1972, Attorney General Kleindienst and 
‘Assistant Attorney General Petersen reviewed the 5 and 7 July transmittals 
together with additional, more detailed-but undated materials, that had ‘been 
provided to Acting FBI Director Gray on 18 October 1972. The Agency is. | 
aware that this material was reviewed on 27 November 1972 by Mr. Silbert, who 
asked additional quéstions on that date as well as on 29 November 1972. 
Written responses to the foregoing questions were provided on 13 December 1972. 
Ап additional, submission was made to the Assistant Attorney General Petersen 
on 21 December 1972. This material was discussed at a meeting held with 
Assistant Attorney General Petersen and Mr. Silbert on 22 December 1972. 
ATI of the foregoing materials can be made available to the Committee if it 
so desires. | | | 

As a separate matter, which was not known by those who-prepared the 
‘material for the Department of Justice in the fall of last year, the Office 
of Medical Services of the Agency prepared and forwarded to the White House 
two indirect personality assessments of Mr. Daniel Ellsberg. The Agency has 
had a program of producing, on a selective basis, such assessments or studies 
on foreign leaders for many years. In July 1971 Mr. Helms, then Director, 
instructed Agency officers to work with Mr. David Young of the White House 


Staff relative to security leaks in the intelligence community. 


OOHA) о. 


| K ммм ы ыо о ы=_ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Mr. Young requested a study on Mr. ETlsberg in the latter part of 
July 1971, which Agency activity was apparently approved by Mr. Helms. 
At that time, Mr. Young supplied raw material consisting principally of 
newspaper and magazine articles together with some State Department and 
Justice Department papers. The first assessment delivered to the White House 
dated 9 August 1971, was judged insufficient. As a result, there were 
several meetings between Dr. Malloy, Mr. Hunt, and Mr. Liddy, in which 
classified information of. the Justice and State Departments was introduced. 
One such meeting occurred ай 12 August 1971. Additional material was 
transmitted by Mr. Hunt on 12 October, and another meeting was held on 
27 October. These meetings led to a second version of the assessment, 
dated 9 Movember 1971. This document was delivered to the Executive Office 
by Dr.-Halloy on 12 November 1971. Agency records indicate that Mr. Helms 
had prey iguisty опат са бей with Mr. Young indicating he had read both 
reports. | 

| Y, another contact "about October 1971," an Agency officer arranged 

to provide Mr. Hunt certain unclassified materials from CIA files relative 
to a 1954 French case of leakage of Government documents. These were 
delivered to his office at the White House. 

In closing, I would.like to stress several conclusions of my ' 
investigation so far: 


a. CIA had no awareness of the details of Mr. Hunt's 


activities. The Agency's impression was that Mr: Hunt was engaged 
in an activity related to identifying and closing off the security 
leaks that were so much a preoccupation of the Government at the time. 


00422 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


b. The Agency clearly was insufficiently cautious in the 
initiation of its assistance to Mr. Hunt. Later, when the nature of 
Mr. Hunt's requests for assistance began to Indicate a possible active 
involvement by the Agency in activities beyond its charter, the 
Agency terminated the relationship and refüsed further assistance. 

c. The preparation of a profile an an American citizen under 
these circumstances lies beyond the normal activity of the Agency. 

It shall not be repeated -- and I have so instructed the staff. “This 
shall be made a part of the regulations governing such activities. 

d. As Director, I have called for a review ої all Agency 
activities and the termination of any which might be cuneidered 
| — its legitimate charter. In addition to requesting this 
review from my subordinates, I have directed each employee and invited 
each ex-employee to submit to me any cases which they may question. 

. I am determined that the Agency will not engage in activities outside 
. of its gharter but will concentrate its energies on its important 


intelligence mission. 


Φ04θ9ο- 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


nati Ran a aT eat дА Aat aaa D Bold ДЕА А-ы ο Же Bo Ie MAN e De ممت‎ ο ου σας А.А, RAS 
сти 


` 8 May 1975 


DCI: 


Va sat — ЧС A AREA poii e M AB aen 


τ.μ 


Sy Hersh's provocative teaser for the day: 
"I have information that Cushman 


knew exactly what he was okaying when he 
‘gave approval to assist Hunt..." 


attentioned Sy H. again to the 
(Statement χο had given to the Times already, 
ππα toj im I "noted" what he had to say 


today. : 


ARR 


He has calls in for you, Houston, 


and Colby. 
AMT 
ces, 00б 


ox o 
Na š Colby 


e See ue t CH ntn una rs m то w. a 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Tien emere ya eeu Sane tens temi erm Am s. ον 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


брам e "o eM 
у Р p d 


.RESPONSE TO PRESS INQUIRIES CONCERNING MR. HUNT'S ` 


- 


GRAND JURY TESTIMONY 


| THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY HAD NO 
ADVANCE NOTICE OF ANY SORT WHATSOEVER OF THE 
` BREAK IN BY MR. HUNT OF THE OFFICE OF MR. 
ELLSBERG'S PSYCHIATRIST OR OF THE WATERGATE 
INCIDENT; THE NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF THESE TWO 
EVENTS WERE THE FIRST NOTICE TO ANYONE IN THE | 
AGENCY; ALL AGENCY INFORMATION ON GJ R CONTACTS 
WIIH ANY PERSONS INVOLVED IN THESE INCIDENTS HAS 
BEEN REPORTED FULLY TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; 
AND AS INVESTIGATION OF THESE MATTERS IS IN THE HANDS 
OF THE COURTS AND THE GRAND JURY, ALL INQUIRIES 


: SHOULD BE DIRECTED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, 


00424 


O ч 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1913 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Secretary, CIA Management Committee 


SUBJECT: Potentially азынын Agency Activities 


The Office of the ices tenai has records on the 
following sensitive subjects that either have been or might in 
the’ future be the source of embarrassment to the Agency. 


The report of the Board of Inauiry in the case of Hans Tofte. 
The Tofte affair was fully exposed in public, of course, but 
the report itself is closely held within the Agency. This 
office was designated as the-custodian of the report, and we 
have the only surviving copy. 


An annex to the Inspector General's report of survey of the , 
Technical Services Division done in 1953. The annex deals 
with experiments in influencing human behavior through the 
administration of mind or БЕ ВОВЕД ВИ &ltering drugs to 
unwitting subjects. 


An Inspector General report of Жолын дан of allegations 
that the Agency was instrumental in bringing about the 
assassination of President Diem. The allegations were 
detexmined to be without foundation. 


An Inspector General report of investigation of allegations 
that the Agency was instrumental in bringing about the 
assassination of President Trujillo. The investigation 
disclosed quite extensive Agency involvement with the 
plotters. 


An Inspector General report of investigation of allegations 
that the Agency conspired to assassinate Fidel Castro. The 
story first appeared in Drew Pearson's column and has since 
appeared in Jack Anderson's column. While the columns 
contained many factual errors, the allegations are basically 
true. 


00425 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Page 1 ` SDS and other student activist groups 


OCI produced in December 1967 at Walt Rostow's request & 
30-page typescript study of the SDS and its foreign ties. 


In the sumer of 1968 OCI produced--again at Rostow's request-- 
& paper on Restless Youth. The first, and most sensitive section, 
` "Зав a philosophical treatment of student unrest, its motiyation, 
history, and tactics, It drew heavily on overt literature’ and 
FBI reporting on SDS and affiliated groups. The second section 
comprised 19 chapters on foreign student dissidence. 


Pages ll & 12 Black radicalism 


ОСІ began following Caribbean black radicalism in earnest in 
1968. Two papers were produced on the subject, oné in August 1969 
and the other in June 1970. 


ОСІ was asked in June 1970 to write a memo with special 
attention to links between black radicalism in the Caribbean and 
advocates of black power in the US. ‘The memo was produced in 
ксл апа given to the DCI. 


OCI in 1968 wrote periodic typescript memos on Stokely `: 
Carmichael's travels abroad during а period when he had dropped 
from public view. 


00426 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


i 


πο μυ μμ CREER te ее тин .. 1... 


` πο ite 
of А 
ч а . 
- ` 
" 
^ a 
+ 
ә. x 
LI 
. 


Page 23 Prohibition against COMINT vs. US citizens 


zm ‘In Septeiiber m. to cohduct hearability 

p“ tests of certain НЕ long= ercial telephone circuits . 
between the US and South America. The circuits carried drug- . 
related traffic. 


SSES were Successiul. в ac У 
was tern on ап T3 following ОСС determination that they: 


were illegal. чи ын; 


Ме conduct an intercept operation. in 
` "on radio telephone conversations 


Testing Í in the US ої брався. KE collection 
systems occnslonzlly result in the collection of domestic telephone . 
conversations. When the tests are complete, the ін 
material is destroyed. 


CIA ehnicááns conducted tests in the Маші area in 
August Of DF gear intended for use against а Soviet agent in 
South Vietnam. While wholly innocuous, the tests preceded the 
holding of the conventions there and could be construed as 

, being somehow related to them. 


In February 1972 CIA asked. an official of AT&T for copies of 
telephone call slips relating to US-Chima calls. The operation - 
. lasted for three or four months and then dried up. CGC stated its 
belief that the collection of these slips did not violate the 
Coumunicauions fict since eavesdropping was not involved, 


Page 29 ` ` Mail coverage ‚ К | р 


Since 1953, CIA has operated a mail νον program of ` 
-incoming and outgoing Russian mail and, at various times, other 
Selected mail at Kennedy Airport in New York City. ‘This program 
is now dormant pending decision on whether to continue or to 
abolish Lt. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. W. E. Colby . 
Executive Secretary, CIA Management Committee 


FROM я : Director, National Estimates 


SUBJECT Comments on Proposed DCI Statement (Hunt Case) 


Since you are aware that I have no facts bearing on the case, I 
take it that you asked for comment from the following point of view: 
will the proposed statement be well received by the committee? 


The main questions in the committee's mind will be: Did CIA 
‘cooperate wittingly in activities which were both illegal and outside its 
chaxter? Or did it only respond supinely to higher authority even though 
it had some reason for suspecting illegal conduct? 


Tactically, I think there would be advantage in coming to grips ` 
frankly with these questions in the statement itself, The text in its 
present form could be taken as a minimum factual response which doesn't 
quite get at the heaxt of the matter. Ithink it preferable, in the interest 
of the Agency's reputation on the Hill, to proceed to candor directly rather 
‘than to be drawn to it by subsequent questioning. 


Key follow-up questions which can be anticipated would include 
~ „the following: à ` 


Why is there no record of the initial Ehxlichman- Cushman contact? 


If Cushman recorded the conversation with Hunt, was he not already 
suspicious of the latter's purpose апа why didn't he ask? Ata 
minimum, could he not have inquired whether "the individual whose 
ideology we aren't entirely sure of" was an American citizen? 


00428. 


, Statement, То do so voluntarily would make more persuasive the assurances 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


When Cushman told Ehrlichman on 27 August 1971 that CIA was 
suspending support to Hunt, має it only on the ground that the 
latter had become "too demanding"? το 


Why was the personality study on Ellsberg provided when it 
was obvious that this action transgressed the Agency's charter? 


Obviously most questions which will be raised can only be answered 
Бу Helms and Cushman personally. Nevertheless, I think the DCI would be 
well advised to provide a candid evaluation of these proceedings in his initial 


Ше Committee will want that nothing of the sort will be done under his 
direction of the Agency. : | 


wee 
x 


00429 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ж — DEER EO Mg fox? "s 
і os aos . ve "EX. 


i bid j Tan NUN EP t xl е ET 


ux 


ГУ €—Ó _ S£ КЫ ιν fr 
x НАУ 1973 , 


MEMORANDUM FOR ALL CIA EMPLOYEES 


pape | | 


1. Recent press reports implicate СТА in certain 1Чера , 
activities allegedly committed in the United States. Without going 
into the details of these allegations. I can assure you that І intend 
to cooperate fully with the various law E and Congressional 


investigations of these matters. 


2.. All CIA employees. should understand my attitude toward 
matters of this sort. I shall do everything in my power to confine 
CIA activities to those which fall within the strictest interpretation 
of its legislative charter. І take this position because I am determined 
that the law shall be respected and because this is the best — to 
foster the legitimate and necessary contributions we in CIA can make 


to the national security of the United States. 


3. I am taking several actions to implement this objective: ` 
- Ihave ordered all the senior operating officials of 
this Agency to report to me immediately on any 
activities now going on, or that have gone on in the 
past, which might be construed by reasonable people 


to be outside the legislative charter of this Agency. 


00430 


MORÍ DocID: 1451843 


— CA PERE BSE ere 


a 


Y hereby order every person presently employed by 


CIA to report to me directly on any such activities 


of which he has knowledge. I invite all ex-employees 


to do the same. - Anyone who has such information shall 
call my secretary (extension 6363) and say that he wishes 
to talk to me about "questionable CIA activities", 


І intend to name a highly respected person from outside 


‚ the Government to review, investigate, and prepare 


reports for me on any apparent violations of the CIA 


legislative charter which are brought to his attention 


or may be uncovered on his own initiative. I shall give 


this person complete and unrestricted access to all 


records and persons in the Agency. 


4. То insure that Agency activities are proper in the future : I 


hereby promulgate the following standing order for all СТА employees: 


Any CIA employee who believes that he has 
received instructions which in апу way appear 
inconsistent with the CIA legislative charter shall 


inform the Director of Central Intelligence immediately. 


James R. Schlesinger 
Director 


00431. 


— —— — 


— ———ÀÀ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Retirement Information - E. Howard Hunt 


1. Date of retirement: 30 April 1970 
2. System: CIA Retirement and Disability System 
3. Grade and salary at time of retirement: 65-15, Step 8 - $28,226 


4. Creditable civilian service used in computing annuity: 
17 May 1948 to 8 June 1948 | - Economic Cooperation Administration 
9 June 1948 to 19 February 1949 - State (ЕСА) 
8 November 1949 to 30 April 1970 - CIA 


5. Annuity: 

At retirement - $1,020 per month 

At present - $1,181 per month (which includes cost-of-living 

increases since date of retirement) 

6. At the time of retirement Mr. Hunt did not elect survivorship benefits. 
This meant that upon his death, his wife would not draw a survivorship 
atuity. By letter of 5 April 1971 he raised the question of changing 
his election but was informed by the General Counsel on 6 May 1971 that 
| ‘this Could not be done. By letter dated 5 May 1972 Mr. Hunt asked Mr. ` 
Houston.to raise with the Director the possibility of being recalled to 
duty for a short period of time, after which he could retire again and 
elect survivorship benefits. By letter of 16 May 1972 Mr. Houston advised 
Mr. Hunt that to call him back to duty solely for the purpose of permitting 
him to change survivorship benefits would be in violation of the spirit of 


the CIA Retirement Act. 


00432. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| [шт | {Р 
[APPROVAL j | DISPATCH | 
COMMENT | PUES f RETURN |] 

Г [INFORMATION 


“Attached in: chronological order is that 
which MAG has produced and papers related 
to Management's reac. оп thereto on MAG's 
concern re domestic activities, It is provided 
for your review and comment to Mr. Colby. 
This is our file copy and I would hope it could 
be retrieved if required. 


FOLD HERE τό HETURN TO SENDER es 


FROM: NAME. ADDHEŠS AND PHONE NO. DATE . 
uU. 


O/ES/ CIA MC/Ben Evans 
| | 


18Маут3 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| - DIARY NOTES ` 
Executive Director-Comptroller ЗРО" 4 January 1972 


1. I met with the outgoing and incoming MAG Cochairmen, We 

discussed a number of topics but concentrated particularly on their 

two most recent memoranda-concerning domestic activities. I ex- 

pressed slight irritation with their second memorandum, which is a 

Shotgun approach to the problem, and asked them to be specific if 

they have anything in mind. I said I understand they have heard that 

we sent а surveillance team to the Democratic National Convention. 
πετ... that-he made this statement because an Office 

of Security employee reported in his presence that he personally was 

а member of a team which went to the Convention.” (I subsequently | 

raised this with Howard Osborn, who after investigating reported back 

that the Secret Service asked us for two technicians during the Demo- 

cratic National Convention. These technicians were formally detailed 

to the Secret Service and went to Chicago, where they did RF monitor- 

ing under the supervision of the Secret Service. The Secret Service 

apparently calls RF monitoring "audio surveillance, ' and it seems that, 

during the discussion which took place at the Senior Seminar, those who 

heard this assumed that "surveillance" meant actual surveillance of the 

candidates, when actually the meeting rooms were being checked to 

ensure they had not been bugged. I have reported all this to the Director 

and shall discuss it with MAG when I have dinner with them on 11 January. ) 


ο ченеш ‚ны, +‏ ر ورد س 


А А ` 
— сс. . e s= ο ο РР م‎ ЕР с ч a - 


——— 99 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


23 December 1971 


MEMORANDUM FOR: The Executive Director-Comptroller 
SUBJECT ||| : CIA's Domestic Activities | 


REFERENCE : MAG Memoranda on same subject dated 
: March 1971 and November 1971 


As requested, MAG met with the DDP on 21 December and 
discussed with him the referenced memoranda on CIA's covert 
domestic activities. Our exchange consisted primarily of ' 
the DDP responding to the MAG memoranda as they related to. 
activities of the Clandestine Service alone. The DDP made 
it clear that he spoke only for his Service. Since MAG's 
initial concern over covert domestic activities extended to, 
while not being restricted to, the Clandestine Service, 
it recommends that the referenced memoranda be also brought 
to the attention of appropriate senior officials in other 
Agency components. 


з - 


`“ The Management. Advisory Group 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Li UntiAaisiricu $ ι ) USE ONLY | ΠΝ وارلا‎ δέ ادما‎ ὁ νο» € m 
| | ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


‚ SUBJECT: (Optional) 


| Ек: 22 Dec 71 


| OFFICER'S COMMENTS. {Number each согатепі to show from whom 
INITIALS fo whem, a line ccross mn offer each comment} 


TO: [Officer designotioa, room number, ond. 
building) 


Executive’ Director 


- = 
> е N 


pue soue Е Г] HIERNA ΓΙ UNCLASSIFIED. 


ο ے یری‎ ου  — 


ον ο PPP‏ سے 


РР ο _ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 
` ug БУЕ 
, орд | | рур E14 
t» 4 ` s . 


21 December 1971 


* 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director-Comptroller 


SUBJECT: Meeting with MAG Group 


t 

1, Imet with the MAG group this morning for little over 
an hour, and I set forth as candidly as possible those counter- 
intelligence and counterespionage responsibilities of ours overseas 
which make it mandatory for us occasionally to take an interest in 
American citizens overseas. I explained the requirements placed 
onus by the Department of Justice for overseas checks, and also 
the fact that our normal overseas operations against Soviets and 
others some times produce leads to Americans in conspiratorial 
contact with our Communist targets. 

2. Iwas asked about our having sent Agency representatives 
to the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968 and I 
explained that I never hearu of such a thing and did not believe it. 
I pointed out that, as they knew, the press had reported fully on the 
Agency participation at the beginning of the sky marshalling program 
and I assumed they saw nothing wrong with this. They agreed. I 
also pointed out that, at President Kennedy's funeral, with scores 
of important foreign personalities here, the Agency lent some assistance 
to the Secret Service, and here again the group understood that this 
was а legitimate function, 


3. The group made it clear that their concern was over the 
Agency image if the general public were aware that some of our 
activities, wherever they took place, were targeted against Blacks, 
I said that we did not target against Americans of any color in this 
country, and that the Clandestine Service was color blind when it 
came to carrying out its overseas CI responsibilities and it would 
continue to be 50. 


— a s + 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. ` Y agreed that the Director should be asked to speak a 
, little more fully and clearly on whether we "target against American 
citizens" so that there is no ambiguity. 


5. Itold the group that we must expect all kinds of irrespon- 
8ible accusations in the press, such as the one in the January 1972 
issue of RAMPARTS magazine in which Bob Kiley and Drex Godfrey, ` 
itis suggested, are still in the employ of CIA working on a CIA 
plan to improve police organizations in this country. I said that this 
was palpably false as anyone who knows Kiley and Godfrey would ` 
understand, The group mentioned Dick Ober's unit and said that 
there was a lot of scuttlebutt that the purpose of this unit was to keep 
book on Black Power adherent& 1 denied this saying that our interest 
| was as І had explained it previously. 


6. Ido not know whetker this is а fair assumption, but 
Dick Ober's machine program is not handled in the Clandestine Service 
and it is possible that someone is misreading and misinterpreting the 
: intent of Ober's program from fragmentary bits and pieces that may ` 
be discernible from the handling of the machine program, I do not 
state this as a fact because I have not examined it that closely. 

7. I told the group that I had offered to enlighten it candidly 
on what we do so that they x ?vid at least have the facts and I said 
that I assume you would take it from here; 


Thomas H, Karamessines 
"Deputy Director for Plans 


- 


s —<—— ee —»  « ὁ 


росс — a Uns = ссни 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


: . πρ z£ 


^ 


MEMORANDUM FUR: The Director 


THROUGH: ` ` She Executive Director-Comptroller 

SUBJECT: CIA's Domestic Activities 

REFERENCE: MAG Memorandum, "CIA's Domestic Activities," 
March 1971 . 


1. ОМАС is seriously concerned about possible reper- 
cussions which may arise as the result of CIA's covert 


. domestic activities. .Public revelation that CIA has become 


involved in collecting information on U,S, citizens would 
likely redound to the Agency's ‘discredit and jeopardize 


“overall Agency programs. 


2. MAG first expressed its concern'about CIA's covert 
domestic activities in a memo for the DCE, transmitted 
through .the Executive Director-Comptroller in the Spring 
of 1971 (Attachment A). MAG‘*sS concern has increased 
recently because of such articles as Vic Marchetti's UPI 
interview (Attachment В). and the 10 October New York Times 
article concerning rupture of FBI-CIA relations--(Attachment. 
C). Both hint at extremely sensitive Agency involvement in 
domestic activities. Additionally, ‘the DCI.addresses to 
the American Society of Newspaper Editors (Attachment D) 


. and to the CIA Annual Awards ceremony (Attachment E) make 


rather categorical denials of Agency covert targeting on 
U.S. citizens. Agency employees aware of the various 
sensitive operations in question know that there is. 
qualifying language explaining CIA involvement. However, 
MAG believes that in the event of an expose, such esoteric 


“qualifiers will be lost on the American public and that 


there is probably nothing the Agency could say to alleviate . 
а negative reaction from Congress and the 0,8. pubiic. It 
is MAG's fear that such a negative reaction could seriously 
damage our Congressional relations, éffect our work against 
priority foreign targets and have significant impact on the 
viability of CIA. 


id 
y 


3. There are indications that the Agency, in responding 
to CE/CI requirements, is collecting information on selected 


06433 


м 


вот ой 
ο Lon Б 
ἕλη. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


0.5. citizens both at home and abroad, In operational areas 


which are highly sensitive and potentially explosive (e.g., 

domestic radical or racial groups) this Agency must carefully 
weigh the needs and pressures for collecting and maintaining 
this information against the risk and impact of revelation ` 


` should the operation become compromised or public knowledge. 


We therefore urge that all domestic collection and action 
programs be severely reviewed so that only those be continued 
which are ої the highest priority and which absolutely саппої 
be undertaken by domestic agencies. CIA should not take on 
requirements of this type by default. 


4. Not all of the members of MAG are privy to CIA's 
direct or indirect involvement in domestic activities. Those 
who are aware probably know only parts of the whole picture. 
But our increasing concern and our intense interest in 
maximizing the Agency's ability to do its proper job, impel 
us to bring our serious apprehensions to your attention. 


. ‘SHE MANAGEMENT ADVISORY GROUP 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Attachments B, C, Dand E . 


‘Attachment 3 - Vic Marchetti's UPI Interview, from U. S. News | 
and World Report, ctober : 


š “Fearing. today. that the CIA may already have begun 
'going against the enemy within’, the. United. States as they 
may. conceive it--that 15, dissident student groups and 
civil-rights organizations..." 


"Because the men of the Agency are superpatriots, he 
said, it is only natural for them to view violent protest 
and dissidence as a major threat to the nation... The inbred 
CIA reaction, he said, would be to launch a clandestine 

‘operation to infiltrate dissident groups. 


That, said Marchetti, may already have started to 
happen. 


І don't have very much to go on,' he said.  'Just bits 
and pieces that indicate the U.S. intelligence community is 
already targeting on groups in this country that they.feel to 
be subyersive. — — ЕН 


"І know this was being discussed in the halls of the CIA, 
and that there were а l^t of people who felt this should be 
done. ' Pr и 


- 


Attachment C - New York Times, 10 October, -FBI-CIA Relations:' 


.M"Information generally exchanged between the FBI. and the 
CIA might concern such subjects as officers of the Black . 
Panther party traveling overseas...and American American youngsters 
cutting sugar cane in Cuba." 


Attachment D ~ DCI Address to the Anierican Society of Newspaper 
Wada tore: о о ENTER 


di tors; 


"And may I emphasize at this point that the statute 
Specifically forbids the Central Intelligence Agency to have 
any police, subpoena, or law-enforcement powers, or any 
domestic sesurity functions. I can assure you that except 
for the normal responsibilities for protecting the physical 
security or our own personnel, our facilities, and our 
classified information, we do not have any such powers and 
function; we have never sought any; ve do not exercise any. 
In short, we do not target on American citizens," 


— ————— Á— A ΡΟ”. 


———  —. + n E μμ 
A . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ñ Ups \ 


Attachment E - DCI Address to CIA Annual Awards Ceremony: 


"І gave a talk to the American Society of Newspaper 
Editors last winter, as you know, and I did it for only one 


.purpose. "Тпаї was to try and put in the record a few of these 


denials that we've all wanted to see put in the public record 
for some time. And you can rely on those denials. They're 
true, and you can use that as any text that you may need to 
demonstrate that we're. not in the drug traffic, and that 
we're not trying to do espionage on American citizens in the 


nited States. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— 


— 6. 


asav es m ...... οὐ 
. 


| ισα ρα! FOR: Tho Director || а „е 


ЛСТ 


- interests of tho Unito€ States. 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGESCT 


Honagonone Advisor; Orcus 


i 


THROUGE : Tho Ezeoubivo Director uu qu K 
| p 
5. CIA DoussGic Activities | 2 ΜΝ.” 


. MAG is concerned that CLA avoid Involvororo $n the сотгопі 
expose ої the domestic intalliconcs eettviStes of the Aray and 


Other federal agencies. We bolitero that there cro СТА 


activities similer to thosa τοι unor serstiny waich could 
свого great enbarrasorsnt to the Agoney beecase thoy aprear to 
excead the: scopy? of the CIA chorte>. Exespe for bar Apgonoy'n 


ur лаг CE/CI responsioilitios, KAG opposas апу Agoray 


activity which could be constórcod es фахерсой uapoinot aay рого 
son who enjoys the protection of tha US Censtisugicn << | 
whether or not he reoides in the Uatted States. Encoot inc 


: those cases clearly roletca to notional security, ro us i 


citizen should ba tho cbjcet οὗ CIA oporaticna. Wo poetics 

thet on occasion tho Agency wil) develop taforzetion aroni 

sona citizen who is angose iu Í inimical to tuo 

Such informacion chovia quickly 
Те tund over to the propor em S Of povornuxono Lor fur- 
ther action, even 1$ it mens that coxotirog an ogcontially 
home~orlentad agency may τα askoa to porom 1n о l$uitod ор- 
erational capacit ty ovosscas, ME. 


If we do not purdue sen а cource, ond doy tho public 


С and the Congress will com: to hove grave Gowbss about cux volo 


in government, an мау νο ον rogtrlot cur ability ta рог 


‚ fort those tanks зл сазієтод бо CIA. 


SECRET SENET 


mo: —— a υπο σον 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Intelligence 
i Deputy Director for Plans . 
eputy Director for Stpport 
Deputy Director for Science and Technology 
Heads of Independent Officas 


(For Distribution to Offics/Divisien Chief и 
Lavel Only) Е 
2 TNT 
SUBI ECT | 2 GLA Activities in the United States 


і. From tima to time same of our employees expressa concern over Я 
various allegations or rumors of CIA activites in ths United States. The 
attached memorandum is designed to clarify this subjact so that nugar- 
visora can authoritatively reply to any employees indicating such concern. 
it is a staternent of tha facts of the situation. ЇЇ Incidents or activities ars 
reported waich appear to conflict with this statement, they should 1 be ra- 
ported to appropriata.senior authority for resolution (ог corr ection if un- 
э ашна activities. tight have occurred).. - 7 


| 2. Becauss of the possible sensitivity of this description of the 
Agency's methodology, this memorandum is not being given the usual braad 
circulation of the "FYI -- Alisgations and Answers” series. Office and 
Division Chiefs ara urged, however, to usa it to inform Branch Chiefs so 
that its points can be readily available to supervisors to react to expres~ 
sions of employee concern. ` ο... 


"IT | Is! W. E, Су 


W. E, Colby. 
xscutive нове Comptroller 
Attachment | . 
wead | | - | 
Distribution: І v S^ as 
"O - DDI no 0777 FENDA ` 
l- Each Other Adressas: i | | ο we d 
DDP DÐ/DCI/IC A/DCI (Thuermer} 
DDS D/PPB SAVA | 
DDS2T ONE . USIB Secretary : б 
OGC OLC . IG 00444 


1 TD 1 We ГУ = 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ALLEGATION: 


In а variety of ways it has been alleged that CIA is working within 
the United States, with particular attention to.extremist groups. 


FACTS: . 

1. Section 102 of the National Security Act of 1947, subparagraph 
D3, states, "Tha Agency shall have no police, subpoena, law-enfor cement 
powers, or internal E iic functions, 


In his speech to tha American Society of Newspaper нів оп 
14 April 1971, ка Director stated: 


UI can a'ssure you that ехсарі for the normal responsibilities’ 
for protecting tha physical security of our own personnel, our 
facilities, and our classified information, we do not have any 
such powers and functions; we hava never sought any; we do not 
exercise any. In short, wa do пої target оп American citizens, 


` In the Director's "State of the Agancy" ‘Speech t ta emp] loyees on 
17 συ 1971, he said: | I f " В 


"I gave a talk to the American Saciaty of Newspaper Editors 
last winter, aa you know, and I did it for only one purpose. That 
was to try and put in the record a few of these denials that we'va 
all wanted to see put in the public record for some time. And 
you can rely on those denials, They're true, and you can use 
that as any text that you may need to demonstrate that we're not 
in the drug traffic, and that we're not trying to do espionage on ` 
American citizens in the United States, and we're not tapping 
telephone lines, and that we're not doing a lot of other things 
which we're accused of doing. One of the things that tends to 
perpetuate soma of these silly ideas ara jokes that ara made 
about them, particularly about domestic espionage. Although 
the jokes have no basis in fact they nevertheless give us a nama 
which we don't deserve, I don't say that that makes all that much 

ifference, but it does make some difference,’ and this tends to 
spill over, so І would lika to suggest that if you have it in your 
hearts to do-so that you speak up when the occasion arises and 
try and set the facts straight." 


+ ee neon, 


| 00445 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


΄ ει .. ë 


- 


мч. 


2. . From time to time some employses hava been concerned that 
Agency activities might conflict with these statements. They can be Ы 
assured that Agency activities do not. For clarification, some activities 
which may hava bean subject to misunderstanding are sted as follows: 


a, Domestic Contacts. "Tho Domestic Contact Service 
establishes discrest but overt raleatonshipa with American pri- 
νοῖς citizens, commercial, academies and other organizations . 
and resident aliens for the purposes of collecting on a voluntary 
basis foreign intelligence information or soliciting their coopera- 
Чоп in assisting the Agency to perform its mission overseas. з 
Records of the iàdividuals and organizations cooperating with the 
Ageucy are maintained as a necessary practical element of this . 3 
procesas . . - i 


b. Security Investigations, Security investigations are con- 
ducted on prospective employees, contractors, and consultants,. 
and on security problems which arise, These investigations in- 
volve a wide range of investigative procedures, including neighbor- 
hood inquiries, checks with other Government agencies, review of 
credit reports, and interviews with former employers and business ` 
associates. This is essential to assure that our personnel possess 
a high degree of personai integrity, sense of responsibility, and 
competence and to protect classified information and sensitive in- 
telligence sources and methods. The resulting files аха held sep- 
arately by the Office of Security and are not merged with othar 
Agency files. | . ΠΠ і 


жо ewe. 


` 


c, Forsign Resources, On some occasions, foreign citizens 
οὔ interest to CIA are contacted and recruited in America for work 
abroad. The purpose of this activity is entirely restricted to tha 
Agency's foreign operations, .. 

d. Recruitnent. CIA recruiters maintain a wide variety of 
contacts within tha United States, assisting individuals interested 
in employment with CIA to learn more about it and to join its em- 
ployse force, U ` 


e. Contracting. In the course of CIA business and operations, | 
a number of contracts for procurement, ressarch, or analysia are 
mada with a variety of U.S. companies and individuals. This in zo 
way constitutas operations in the U.S. but rather secures the assist- 
ance of these groups ia carrying out the CIA mission against foreign 


targets, 


00446 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


м 


f. Operationa. "The 1967 Katzenbach Comznittse report was 
approved by the Director in March 1957 and is-binding on any of 
our relations with American organizations today. It specifically 
probibits covert financial assistance or support, direct or indirect, 
to any U.S. educational or private voluntary organization. Any 
relationship or operation the Agency has with an American organi- 
zation must be and is within these guidelines, 

g. Details or Loans. On rare occasions, details of technically 
qualided CIA personnel, technical advice, or loans of CIA equis- 
ment haya been mada available to other U,S. agencies at their 
requast ta assist them ta carry out their responsibilities. An 
example is the skymarshal program, in which some CIA personnal 
were temporarily detailed to the FAA in order.to assist in a rapid 
initiation of that program, Such personnel and equipment are under 
the operational control of the receiving agency. Assistance of thia 
nature in no way constitutes an assumption of responsibility ого 
authority by CIA for the program, 


h, Counterintelligence acd Drugs. To carry out its responsi- 
bilities for comterintelligance, CIA is interested in the activities 


of foreign nations or intelligence services aimed at the U.S. To 

the extent that these activities lie outside the U.S., including activ- 
ities aimed at the U.S. utilizing U.S. citizens or others, they fall 
within CIA's reaponsibilitias. Responsibility for coveraga of the 
activities within the U.S. lies with the FBI, as an internal security 
function. CIA's responsibility and authority are limited to tha foreign 
intelligence aspect of the problem, and any action of a law enforce- 
ment or internal security nature lies with the FBI or local police 

- forces, (CIA's assistance tothe U.S. Government program against 
narcotics and drugs is handled in the same fashion.) 


i. Operational Support. To support CIA operations, erranges- 
ments are made with various U.S. business or other entities to 
provide cover or other support for CIA personnel or activities 
abroad, This can include proprielaries formed or controlled by ' 
CIA. While these may exist within the U.S., their purpose is to. 
conduct or support operations abroad, 


і. Defectors. As provided by lewji СГА oddasidaally resettles 
in the U.S. defectors and other foreign individuals of operational 
interest. This resettlement may involve a new identity, relocation, 
employment, etc. Although this activity takes place in this country, 
its purpose is the support of operations abroad. 


-ᾱ- 00447 


9 


ημας ασ d — DENTAL з SECRET 
pou πᾷ ον 2x 
a OFFICIAL ROUTING SLiP 
Li 9 
TO NAME AND ADDRESS INITIALS 
|| mac co-chairmen || 
1 
4 
| GM 
| 5 ` 
s MK 


ον — ` | [DiRzcr περ. | [prepare вірі | 
APPROVAL μα | [RECOMMENDATION | 
| |соннето ΙΓ΄ [rug Û Ra O 1 
η ος |. 1 анғоямапон [| |да | 


Remarks: 


For MAG review and return. Please 


L do not reproduce, 


FOLD HERE TOR го 
FROM: NAME, ADURESS АМ 


O/ Executive Director==x====—=— 
UNCLASSIFIED | | 
у à iot iti : 4 (40) 
юч но, 237 Usa previous editions А 


D 
- P — on — ο 


MORI DocTD: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


το... 
gere κῶς ΤῈ 23:223 2 
Bo sas 8- 


VweMORANDUM FOR : Deputy Director tor inteligence 
Deputy Di: 


Daputy Dirac 
Deputy Dirse 
General Counsel 
Inspector General 
Assistant to the Director 


Legation of Agency Involvement in the U.S. 


їл 
c 
GJ 
bz 
19 
a 
кі 
L... 
- 


* . - 

L, ` Tha Management Advisory Group, among others, has: 
reported on the concerns of some employses that the Agency is yul- 
nerabls to the charge of having an oparational interest in U.S. citizens 
or organizations in violation of tha National Security Асі, Attached 
is my bast understanding of the facts. 11 itis in error or incompleta, 
1 ask that you елаз know orally or in writiag. | - С 

2. Ihave drafted ths attached with two purposes in mind: First; 
ας a basis for some type of issnanca that would advise the command 
line and senior supervisors of policy and ἕλετο and, second, as а future 
issue of "FYI ~~ Allegations and Answera." I look forward to your 
comment in tha not-too-distant futura before it is formally distributed.- 


m 


W. E. Colby 
. Executive Dirsctor-Comptroller 


А +кзсргледл} 
Of Sx] HEvans 


Distribution: 
O-DDI | | | | 
1 - Bach other addressee ος καῖ, 
(Ф т Di “ула *. e V. yee 7 
- ExDir . . . . | 
1 - ER | NC Jie awd 

ЕЈР S A ec 

. | DA (AQ М VAR C 


----------- | - 00449 


А a TE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` Е . з I 
ΠΠ. xX XI =~ ALLOQGATIONS AND ANSWERS 


обоа States, with particular attention to extremis 


ALT 


о 
axample was in the Quicksilver Times of Z0 January 1 


є 

р. 

се 

pei 

д. 

В 

m 

з 
5 š 

. Q 
— ——— — 5 


1,  Saction 102 of tha National Security Act of 1947, subparagraph D3, і 
states, "Таз Agency shall have no police, subpoena, law-enforcement Р ! 
powers, or internal security functions." | 

In his speech to the American Soclety of Newspaper Editors.on 14 April ; 
1971, tha Director statad: : | 


"I can assure you that except for the normal responsibilities 
for protecting the physical security of our own personnel, our 
‘facilities, and our classified information, we do not have any such 
powers and functions; wo hava never sought any; we do not exercise 
any. In short, we do not target on Amarican citizens." 


ae 


in the Director's "State of the Agency" Speech to employees оп 17 Sap- 
tember 1971, he said: s "ge 


T. 


"I gave a talk to the American Society of Newspaper Editors · . 
last winter, as you know, and I did it for only опа purpose, That . 
was to try and put in the record a few of thess denials that we've 
all wanted to see put in the public record for some time. And you 
can rely on those denials, They're true; and you cen uae that аз 
any text that you may need to demonstrate that we're not in tha drug 
traffic, and that we're not trying to do espionage on Amarican citi- 
zens in the United States, and we're not tapping telephone lines, 
and that we're not doing a lot of other things which we're accused 
of doing, Опе of the things that tends to perpetuate some of thase 


“COMMENT: Tha two gentlemen cited ara former CLA employees. 
азу пог the organizations with which they ars currently associated 
haya any operational connection with the Agancy. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


nave sche 


2. From time to time some employees hav 


curity Act and the 


τ 
Agency activities might conflict with the Nationa 
czency!s statements, They can ba assured that Agency activities do not, 
ification, somg activities which raay have been subject to mis- 
understanding are listed as follows: | 


ους 
ri 

n 
ка 
з 

ri 


а) Security Investi ations. Security in wastigations are conducted . 


on prospective employees, contractors, and consultants, They in- 
volve neighborhood а on the background of " езе individuals, 
This is essential to meat the security requirements of the Agency. 
Tha resulting information is held in separate security office files 


and not merged in other Agency files. - 


8 ὃ 


b) Domestic Contacts. On an overt bas is the Domestic Conca act 
Service makes visits to American private citi izens, firms, and cthar 
Organizations, soliciting transmission to the Government of infarma- 
tion they have learned abroad, The purpose and content of the infor- 
mation are restricted to foreign intelligence, i.e., intelligence on 
developments abroad. The records ofthe firms and individuals as 

. sources are maintained as a purely practical element of this collec- 
tion process, ` 


c) Foreign Resources. A varicty of foreign citizens ОЁ interest 
to CIA visit oz on occasion reside in America, Occasionally they axe 
contacted and recruited for work abroad in the course of travels to 

heir πμ оно or for continuing collaboration with the Agency in 


their homeland after their return from the U.S. The purpose of this 
activity is entirely restricted to the collection of foreiga intelligence. 


s maintain a wi ide 
tacts within the United States endeavoring to assist i 
Be e 


d) Recruitment. СТА recruiter 
e 
ested in eraployraent with CIA to learn more about it 


eraployce force. 


Ба - 00451 


MORI Росію: 1451843 


. t 
> 
el Sontracting, In the course 


~ 


і CIA business and 959 аха пн 
7 


о 
d 
{1 
fv 
o 
v 
cer 
e 
Ф 
о 
tv 
за 
[αἱ 


tiena, The 1967 Katzenbach Committees report waa 
Кз -υ- 
approved by the Director in March 1957 and ia binding on any of our 


ations with American organizations today. It soecilically prohibits 
= 


£ 
о 
Ú 
[t 
i 
19 


t financial assistance ох support, direct ox indirect, to any U.S. 
tional or private voluntary organization. Any relationship or 
operation tha Agency has with an American organization must ba and - 


is within these guidelines, 


2d GIA parsonrel or loans of CIA equipment have 1 bean made to 
ise Ἡ J, S. agencias to assist in the carrying out of their resvonsibili-. 
ties, Anes sample is the skymarshal program to which some СІА 
personnal were detailed in order to assist in a rapid initiatiox ої that. 
program. Assistance of this nature in no way constitutes an assump- 
tion of responsibility or authority by CIA far tha program. 


©. ° 
8) Details oz Loans. On rare occasions, details of technically. 
fis 


h). Counterintelligenc .. To carry out its responsibilitias for 
couaterintalligancs, CIA is interested in the activities of foreign na- 
tions or intelligence services aimed at the Ы, 5, - To the extent that 


the activities lis outside the U.S,, including activities aimed at the 


U.S. utilizing U.S. citizens or others, it falls within CiA!a resson- 


siollities,  Responsii bility for coveraga of tha activities within the 
U, 3. lias with the FSI, as it involves an internal security function. 


CIA!s EERIE and authority are limited to tha foreign inteli- 


gence aspect of the problem and any action of а law enforcement or 
internal security rature lies with the PBI or local police forces, 


.Dsfectors. Аз provided by law, CIA occasionally resetilas 


213) ^ 
inthe U.S. datectors and other foreign individuals of operational 
interast, This resettlament may involve their assumption of a new 
identity, location of employment, etc. Although this activity takes 


glace in this country, 115 рогроза is the support af operations abroad. 


MORI DocID:.1451843 


j} Gover, Аза pax} oi CIA operations abroad, arrangements 


vita a mmber ої U.S. : 

36 i individuals abroad, is can incluce business entitis 
controusd by СТА, or рхоогіагагіза. While they may exist within 
eir purpose із to conduci or supp 


P 
ei 
t 
" 
ї 
t 
С. 

о У 
т 


ort operations abroad, 


οἷ i 
5 


i 


Es P 
font. * DN 

a % š В 
` 

; 


mena us were erm ТЕ АГ ا‎ lu mcm. ttem acero В 


£ 
Y š 
Н : hp 
р К 
H "ES t£ 
H . Е 7 . 
: Ee з 
Ë А 
^ 
і 
t * :. 
m я 
ΓΩ жг “Βα 
" : 
, £ H 
e.a tte dl 
-— ο ως 


PPT a А tmm 
P 


qe 


пу 


am rm 
`. 


(^ ΟΪΑ-- 


` The, Central ihtelligence Agen- 
Cy always insists its men aren't in- ` 
wolved in domestic police work.But in. 
Chicago CIA agents have been working 
with the PBE aad-Tresury, men in en . 
effort to pin Ehe bank bozbings on 
radical groups. " .. 
Heretofore, clandestine CIA police, 


Work within the US was centered around 
counter espionage efforts aimed at the 


Soviet Κο. οί nmaiatzins'secret bases 
in ail mujer US cities.The agency also 
Каз training canps in Virginia and 
the Carolinas.These ave naskel a5 reg- 
ular riiirtarys basss.Snooks are 
trained For duty at Willianshece,¥a. 
Tao years ago CIA ezployess were 


bers οἳ the Chicana 


T 


πορη σος 1 qh in 


MORI DocID: 


VL SO ИГЕ А لمل حل اء‎ 


- 20 Jaa 1972 


— 
7 στ rs TT 


Ge Ge» Sa 
. Ф = б 
B. PT Rp 
P; еа Vut i . А 
- " neren ی‎ EE a 
М νος» eel 


Š Wai Bars ` 
Summam ns T 
ΟΠ ΗΝ. . 
D. ΜΕΣΟ ΕΝ с 


tiis 
HM 


ΠΩ 


d иин 
š TDI З 
iMi T xw Ы i τ | 
ИНИ | 
ійзивийютиє | 
"wa 


CIA Eacdquartars in Virginia ; 


They met there with-Helas, were 


" е ` оь г ж 7 е. Pay x4 η b 
ARR ДУ ЧИРК AERA ας PREPARARE 


1451843 


^ 


. 
D 
rj 


` t 


Mut NO 


n 
+ 


. 
x 


M oe 
эл 


" 
«,[3 
E 
EFIE 


EE 


. 
i 
ος 
ΠΗ 


δν м 


* wee үз 
اعات ا‎ 


police. Both personel shifts а 


show around, and taken to the secret cited by agency people to bolst 
training camps. That was the beginning Fronts in the US, thistime, mov 


of rumors within the agency that the 
CIA had been given the go ahead to 


into was given a new title recs 
naking him head of all intellig 


move into domestic police ‘operations, “ond presumably providing hin wi 
While everyone denied it, the theory ‘legitimate interest in intarnat 
was that the, CIA vas told to get the operations. Вик such suggestion 


radicals, А 

+ Two recent persoanel changes 
іпссеавсф speculation. Cae. involved 
resignation ої Haoln's special assis- 
tant, Robert Хіїілу. Kiley handled the 
student operations through National 
Student Association facades. He res" | 
cently turned up as associate director 
of the Police Foundation, a new group 
Launched with a 530 million Ford 
Foundation grant. The moncy is meant 
to be used 


° 
i 


to improve local police. 

The second personnel shife involved 

Drexel Godfrey, wko баз Read of the - 

CIA's Office cf Current Inteiligence. 2 
Ho guit this higü ronking job, tumed 

ug in che nerco arvau OF the 

Harrisburg, 

ας τος now 


= s= εν 


144-1 


: ‘bitterly denied all around. 


C a i am wa ——nrrÑpTrr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
East Asia Division ` Placing Agents in Leftist Milieu - 
| Cleared with FBI 


Central Cover Staff Statistics on Alias Documentation and 
Other Cover Support 


European Division Research on Vesco Case 
Soviet Bloc Division Relations with FBI and Local Police 
NARCOG Support to Law κε тене Agencies 
Including Information on American Citizens - 
Division D . International Telephone Links 
Foreign Intelligence Security and Exchange Commission and 
Staff Vesco Case 
Counterintelligence Agency Funds Made Available to FBI | 
Staff — 


* Vesco Case 


^ Intelligence Evaluation Committee and Staff i 


^, MHCHAOS | . ! 
CI/Police Group: International Police Academy 
Foreign Resources Locations, Recruitments, Use Alias 
Division. | Documents : 


00455 


SEER 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


DN N бох 


—à m РУ: ^ ПЕРЕНОС ene - 


| hair 


NAME AND ADDRESS DATE | INITIALS 


Mr. William E. Colby і 


iiic bi ο πο ы шм 


гр 


IGNATURE 


ха 
e 
= 
= 
m 
ж 
- 
| 
= 
т 
t^ if 
m 
په‎ 
= 
= 
I 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 
FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. 
. съ э Eien | 1973 
UNCLASSE СОКЕ; fie | SECRET 
FORM ΝΘ. 237 Use НОНЕ Ка BOF 7 В € MÀ M M ЧОМе ως 


1-62 


ο...» eS E ET 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


є ELLE T 


n 1 7 | 


: oF b 
. DT ος > i ° ‘rae б 4 
АТФ Ly μα М Ë κ k a 
- 


l June 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. William E. Colby 


SUBJECT: | Special Activities 


l. Following our recent conversation, I have 
searched my memory and Mr. McCone's files for examples 
of activities which to hostile observers or to someone 
without complete knowledge and with a special kind of 
motivation could be interpreted as examples of activities 
exceeding CIA's charter. 


2. First, as we discussed, on 7 March 1962, 
DCI McCone, under pressure from Attorney General Robert 
F. Kennedy, agreed to tap the telephones of columnists 
Robert S. Allen and Paul Scott in an effort to identify 
their sources for classified information which was appear- 
ing in their columns. Because the primary source appeared 
to be іп the Department of Defense, МеСопе ordered me 
personally to brief General Joe Carroll, Director of DIA, 
orally, which I did. I understand more complete information. 
on this operation is available from the Director of Security. 
I, personally, managed to avoid gaining any knowledge of 
what precise actions were taken, what information was gained, 
what was done with it, and when' the operation was terminated. 


3. 


(I prr po an ву fe Pru 7 
HUE vi IU ыш. vile «2 , Ἄνροετ ου 1007789 
= an Гы tie YS B EE 
Tox ныл κ атут" 


00457 | 


aw 
y 
- 
= 
, 4 
— tt Q 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— ү 


2 


4. Although certain activities never got beyond 
the planning stage, there are, I believe, three examples 


Of such planning which could be subject to ο tl 


involved 


a paramilitary strike agains 
[emel Outside the United : 
Qisennower was briefed on such planning. A third, which 


assumes a new significance today, involved a proposal by 
Angleton and Helms for a greatly increased intelligence 
collection effort against foreign installations in this 
country. This planning also involved a scheme for selected 


00458 


ЧС 7Ї, M d 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


exposure of KGB activities and counteractions against the й і 
Soviet intelligence service: The reasons are still unclear ] 
to me as to why the FBI chose to brief the PFIAB to the 

effect that CIA was planning to wiretap extensively and : 
indiscriminately in this country, to greatly increase 

the Agency representation in the Moscow Embassy, and 

generally to use KGB-type tactics, also extensively and 
indiscriminately. This led to a heated excbange between і 
DCI McCone and Mr. Belmont of the FBI, one such meeting ' 
taking place in the presence of the Attorney General. 

It is clear that the FBI was opposed to any such proposal 

then, as now, and the plan never went forward. 


5. During the period when Des FitzGerald was in 
charge of the Cuban Task Force, DCI McCone's office 
. learned, quite by accident, that FitzGerald had secured 
the cooperation of several prominent US business firms 
in denying économic items to Cuba. There was no question 
but that the businessmen were glad to cooperate, but know- 
ledge of this operation had to be rather widespread. 


І 
- ау at a meeting of 
the 303 Committee, it was πο. fe the offers of 
American business could not be accepted, it being neither 

a- secure way nor an honorable way of doing such business. . 
This declaration of policy at this time bears on the recent 
‘ITT hearings, but I am not surprised that McCone has 
forgotten thathe helped to set the precedent of refusing 

to accept such collaboration between the Agency's operations 
and private business. 


7. At the direction of Attorney General Robert 
Kennedy and with the explicit approval of President Kennedy, 
McCone injected the Agency, and particularly Cord Meyer, 


00459 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


" e "ἡ a m й 
л p Ki. Ё i Viae uset b Ë м Мк. 


Yl 
H DA 
ES 


into the US labor situation, and particularly to try 

to ameliorate the quarrel between George Meany and 
Walter Reuther.. Cord Meyer steered a very skillful 
course in this connection, but the Agency could be 
vulnerable to charges that we went behind Meany's back, 
or were somehow consorting with Reuther against Meany's 
wishes. 


8. There are three examples of using Agency 
funds which I know to be controversial. One was the 
expenditure of money under Project MOSES in securing 
the release of Cuban Brigade prisoners. Details of 
this Operation are best known to Larry Houston, Mike 
Miskorsky, George MacManus, and James Smith. Second, 
as you weli know, when Lou Conein received his summons 
to report to the Joint General Staff Headquarters on 
1 November 1963 a large amount of cash went with him. 
My impression is that the accounting for this and its 
use has never been very frank or complete. Third, at 
one of the early Special Group meetings attended by 
McCone he took strong exception to proposals to spend 
Agency funds to improve the economic viability of West 
Berlin, and for an investment program in Mali. His 
general position was that such expenditures were not 
within the Agency's charter, and that he would allow 
Such spending only on the direct personal request of 
the Secretary of State or the Secretary of Defense, or 
the White House. . 


9. I raise these issues of funding because I 
remember the Ágency's being severely criticized by the 
-House Appropriations Subcommittee for having spent $3,000 
for stamps in connection with a program to buy tractors 
to secure the release of prisoners from Cuba. 


10. Under the heading of old business, I know that 
any one who has worked in the Director's office has worried 
about the fact that conversations within the offices and 
over the telephones were transcribed. During McCone's 


00460 


— — e — — MÀ НН 


ME E rYn T 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


; 
сеча "E seat poU m4 рет | 


tenure, there were microphones in his regular office, 

his inner office, his dining room, his office in East 
Building, and his study at his residence on White Haven 
Street. I do not know who would be willing to raise such 
an issue, but knowledge of such operations tends to 
Spread, and certainly the Agency is vulnerable on this 
‘score. 


11. Also under the heading of old business, 


hortly after the Cuban missile crisis, there was 
a disposition in Washington to reexamine the Bay of Pigs, 
and the fact that several' Alabama National Air Guard 
officers lost their lives in the Bay of Pigs was surfaced 
with surprisingly little excitement at the time. 


12. During my stint on the 7th floor there was 
a special arrangement with the Office of Communications 
whereby the Director's office gained access to поп-СІА 
traffic. This surfaced briefly at one point shortly after 
Admiral Rayborn became DCI. Не had visited the Signal 
Center and removed a copy of a telegram from the Embassy 
in the Dominican Republic for Under Secretary George Ball, 
Eyes Only. Не returned to his office and proceeded to 
discuss this telegram with George Ball who was naturally 
quite curious as to how Rayborn knew about it, and also as 
to how Rayborn had it in his possession before Ball did. 
Ben Read in the Secretary of State's office and I spent 
several weeks putting this one to. rest. 


13. Finally, DCI- McCone, as you and I well know, 
operated on a very lofty plane, and I think certain of 
his activities could be misunderstood. One example was 
his decision in July of 1964 to have Aristotle Onassis and 
Maria Callas flown from Rome to Athens on Air Force KC 135. . 
Their arrival in Athens in this airplane attracted the 
attention of the local press and in due course Mr. John 


r= = 2. £F— 


Tun 


men 


ij oe] Fog Ws mM t 


зарано алсы р ВО 
ЕВ ij Wisk vuk В Й у ix 


ΣΤ 


ου πο, p: QE 


ха GUAE | "i 00461 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Hightower, Chief of the Associated Press Bureau for 
Washington, came to see me to ask about the propriety 
Of this action. 


14. 


А 15. МсСопе dealt quite extensively with newsmen 
in Washington. In fact, they gave him a gift and a 
luncheon when he left Washington, which is perhaps 
indicative of the press's relations with him. However, 
in the case of the Ross and Wise book, The Invisible 
Government, he did try to bring pressure on the publisher 
and the authors to change things. They did not change 
a comma, and I doubt that this old saw willever sing 
again. 


16. 


17. The above listing is uneven, but I have a 
sinking feeling that discipline has broken down, and that 
allegations from any quarter which cast these things in 

the wrong light would receive great publicity and attention, 
and no amount of denial would ever set the record straight. 
If I may be of any assistance in tracking down further 
details, I am of course at your disposal, but I would point 


—Ó———— MÀ M ә... 


š Ἔ is 
: e Sur act? 
Eba BF NU OR В ἐν a 


00462 


——À 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


out that I was very much in the position of the 
enlisted man who knew that the commissioned officers 
were aware of these activities and better able to 
judge their propriety and possible impact ог misinter- 
pretation. 


LT 


ЫЙЫ 


"UT ИШ 


00463 


-— m 


νη 


in order procure the appropriate vehicle, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1 
February 1972 


- 
- Y 


NA PA ПЕН 


ie: 
. ` orm om ` Í ù 
š t. 
š ` ЫН . ma . H 
/ weet AS , ` کی‎ = o mund οὐ 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD: 


In November 1962 Mr, L Mr. Lyman 
Kirkpetrick thot he hed, at one time, been directed by Mr. Richard 
Bissell to assume responsibility for a project involving the assass~ 


ination of Patrice Lum ba, then Premier, Republic of Congo, 
According tol Poison наз to have been the vehicle ès he _ 
made reference to hav ng been instructed to see "Dr. Sidney Gottlieb. 


У | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


BALTIMORE ГЛЕЄ AMERICAN - 
12 APR 19/3 


he СЕА а and Allend 


7 


;. The current imbroglio over the role that ` Shoula we protect democratic. (or even un- 
the Central Intelligence Agency à айі the li: democratic) nations from totalitarian inva- 
ternational Telephone запа Telegraph Co. sion or subversion? Should we utilize our- 
played (or considered playing) in trying to, ` foreign aid to nourish democratic political 
block. the, election of Chilean President Ali", . development --- аз is provided in the Fraser 

as-its tantalizing and perplexing as-- . Amendment: 10° the: foreign aid “bill — oF 
pects. W as the CIA’s cash balance so low it <` should we "lake а strictly hands-off ар-, 
needed a million dollars from ҮГЕТ? Did the’. . "proach? і 
СГА and IT&T really think they could pull +., -It as-at this point that the IT&T fracas 
off some of the stunts contemplated without, - ¿comes «back into focus, and as ileological . 
the word getting oùt and working massively- .. “shambles: occurs, Let us suppose for а mo- 


ia favor. of Aliende? But underlying this’. "ment that the Chase Manhattan Bank, influ- 
brawl are a Series of very difficult question А . enced Бу. the World Council of Churches and 
of principle, to say nothing of definition, 7 ἣν л black militants, decided ta provide а condult 
First’ of alf, ‘what constitutes- Атегісай: 10 black:liberation movements in South Afri- ` 

(public or private) intervention in the jnter+--, Ca, using its.business connections to provide.: eats 
nal’ affairs of -another state? Obviously," - arms and other: aid to the revolutionaries, , Си 

. Sponsoring a- revolution (as Teddy "Roosevelt L ‘Would this Бе. a: "Бай" thing? Was й a 

` did to breal Panama loose from Colombia); "bad" thing when the CIA, using a business ` 

is at one pole. Bur between'sponsoring reva- : -.Cover, shipped -into Santo: Domingo Au me ten Domingo the . rd 


lutions and totally eliminating any Americ: , 


z weapons used to ‘Kill the brutal dictator ТИС the brutal dictator iru- 
сап activity outsjde of.the United States," ^ НО? (1 don't know haw he feels about it р шо. пок he feels арш иш ον 
“there is a long line ori the spucirum, а line N ‚Чаў; DuC. Tor me Dominican statesman 
` “that gets fugner and fuzzier the furthér you  sluan Bosch thought that Intervention was 
ро. Joi. WE greatest thing since the discovery ог. + 

. Moreover, even doing nothing can bé боп-: , America.) - - 
strued as. intervention: „Egy at’: S Presi ident ih У What this comes down 10 is that interven- , 
Nasser throught that Secretary Dulles re. `lión is а "good" thing when you happen to 
їизаї to help finance «he Aswan Dam was ay ` favor the cause involved, but is ivicked and 
form of. intervention, and some years ago." immoral. if you disapprove of the goals. А. 
‘six confee-producing mations in Latin Ameri-: ` ^ "perléctly human response; but hardly one on - 


ca, protested to the Organization ої Ameri- `. Which sound pubiic policy can be formulat- 
can States that our refusal to "hg coffee. гей Της thought of -Y&T losing its Chilean 
prices jniervened in their infernal affairs. `. assets doesnot bring tears 10 my eyes ог 

І would argue that the very existence of - lead me to, wish we still had а supply of gui- 
the United States as the-most powerful na- boats in stock. Capitalism. Pm told, involves 
iion in the world automatically intervenes'in | .. taking risks, and the carporation may in the 


the affairs of every other state. Nasser and . end be reimbursed bv a federal agency set 
the coffee producers weré right: Inaction an up to pr ovide insurance for ‘such contingen- 
our part can have as great an impact as ac- cies. | 
tion. To take a vivid instance, if we had not Хо, what bothers me is the wholly ad hac = 
shipped military equipment 10 Britain be- reaction of the Senate committee investigat- i і 
„iore Pearl Harbor, the war for Europese could.- ing the matter. We’ would be far better’ 
;have been lost. `. Served by Sen. Church and his colleagues if 
£ If we accept that proposition, the futile they spent less time being outraged ‘and a 
. argument over whether we should intervene little ‘more trying to formuiate general 
“automatically goes by the boards. Then we guidelines, guidelines which would appiy to 
turn to the hard one: To what ends should South America and South Africa, to the just 
wel _ (publicly: and privately) intervene? ‘and the unjust alike, however defined. ` 


00465 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


`L] UNCLASSIFIED e | [] CONFI .ATIAL [] SECRET 
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


SUBJECT: (Оріїопої) 


ТО: (Officer designation, room number, and 


building) DATE '| OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number soch comment fo show from whom 


INITIALS. tò whom. Drow o line ocross column aller each comment.) 
RECEIVED. | FORWARDED 


pp 
KENNT 


Hol 


Ὅτε abe» was 
foewevied by 0 ut 
νι a «late els «дич 
се. у АЕ 
Kame Ха Summ Er 
Ve dido wk Rf 

rt been, 
δ. ہہ‎ ЗА at Ue 
мА Camme AI 33 
Vua ` . 
P y. Re Ves ου. Wwe. 
daak Мел KI 
přece ЬА— SUH 
марія relatet. 
+. Chileon 400и 


re νάπος 


66 x Мом waker 


C» 6101559 Г] SECRET T] CONFIDENTIAL [J INTERNAL ΓΙ UNCLASSIFIED 


n 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- Mod. d 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: BobertL. Vesco 


| 

| : 1. `On 31 July 1972|G/wuD]was contacted by Mr. Jorden, 

Latin American referent at the NSC, by telephone in order to 
determine if[BKHERALD! had any information on Vesco. Mr. 

Jorden was advised that a check would be made. A file review un- 

i. covered {C/WH: called Mr. 

| Jorden (31 July 1872) and informe m of the iollowing: 


` 


i | : ` a) Vesco was down to us as head ої IOS , had re- 
cently visited Costa Rica and expressed a desire to settle there. 
In addition, it was known that Vesco 


нь 


-ϱ) {C/WHD/. also advised Mr. знав that Vesco had 
come to the atteniion -— μιὰ fhey were aware that 
he was President of the International Control Corporation of Fair- 


field, N.J. (Subsequently, as advised that the 
NSC was making inquiries SCO. ` 


esy ome meme mte ae 


orase o 


т sss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ЗЇ ЇЇ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


L.N Vl EU 
Ру δι . - 


ος »»:::ὝΝΘΘνΘ', І Хм ЕНЕНЕ ЕЕЕ σα ST 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"` H rd 
: : E الد‎ ot 
ao „ ` 1 tun Ж 
е : 
_ — 
^ ~3- 
H 
i 
' 
— 
5 
: 
4 
+ 
͵ 
+ 
£ 
"m 
--- 
С 
i 
! А 
і 
; : 
І 
i 
1 -- 2 - 
| s 
i \ 
t тк 3 
t é 
سس‎ — — ^ 
== — — — 
== = E == — لے‎ шы 
E ج‎ 
—— пат — 
== === KT P 
— 
— _ s= = 
ك‎ 1 
= — — pee H 
n prec — rom — ——— 1 
t 1 
- s= ER سس‎ — 2 I 
== EE 
— E ттт rre =e — 7 
= — ---- — 


"Ὃν г 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


-T_Septanbe 1973 | 
DATE 


CHAMBERLAIN” 


— | 


A эзме of ъ зу 
to- Vu- 2545 


мем 
Study E ~pered М муе с 
sad моо Ма ehe 


cel 5 eb by Уро. 
DD MES aA DODSST Uv 
Qo масо гало му. ; 


RETURN TO: SDA. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


TEMA‏ — ہے 


21 AUG 1973 
і 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence | 
FROM : Inspector General 
SUBJECT + Use anā Control of Disguise end Alias Documents 


Action Requested: 


l. The attached report resulted from our general inquiries 
into Watergate-related issues and contains recommendations in 
paragraph 9 for your approval. 


Background: А T 


2. In the course of collecting information on various activi- 
ties of the Agency with flap potential, we received а number of 
reports on issuance and use of disguise and alias documentation. 
The Executive Secretary, CIA Management Committee noted on the face 
of the summary submitted by the Office ої Technical Services (075) 
on materials issued by it that it would be interesting to check the 
reports of other components to see if they matched with OTS issu- 
ences. In fact, OTS is not the only component to issue alias 
documentetion, and the review was broadened to include the other 
issuing components and their procedures for controlling the 
materials. The attached report summarizes the findings. - 


na > amberlal 
inspector General 


Attachment 
As Stated Above 


APPROVED: (USCA. _. _ рате: 24 AUG 1973 


DISAPPROVED: DATE: = 


| 00473 


Issuing Responsibilities and Procedures 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


USE AND COHTROL OF DISGUISE AND ALIAS DOCUMENTS 


General 


1. The policy, responsibilities, end procedures concerning 
U.S. documentation issued to authenticate a false identity used ' 
in the Directorate of Operations are set forth in €SI (now DOT) 
210-) dated 23 August 1972. This instruction, a revision of 
CSI 220-7 dated 12 Msy 1959, represents ап extensive upgrading in 
the definition of responsibilities end in establishing procedures 
ensuring that each reouest has the approval of a designated senior 
official in the component. The current instruction, furthermore, 
requires that each request be routed through Cover and Conmercial 
Staff, Official Cover Branch (CCS/OCB) for concurrence, which, in 
effect, makes CCS/OCB the one component retaining complete records 
and details of every request. There are no other reguletions 
applying to this subject, but it currently is observed by all 
components. | | ` 


И 2. Three major components аге responsible for issuing alias. 
documentation and/or @isguise. The specific responsibilities аге: 


this office issues non-backstoppe ocuments in 
ias which are used exclusively for flash identification 
purposes. Birth certificates in alias are considered to be 
а special document and require a uniguely prescribed approval 
procedure and control. ‘This Branch also responds to requests 
for disguises. .. 


ا 
issues river's licenses W. ich are iu ACES LOL‏ 


as fully backstopped investigative credentials 


00474 


аач 


— 11 sss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


3. А11 requests to any of the above three components for 
alias documentation or disguise must be by memorandum end must be 
signed by one of two authorized officers designated by the reouest- 
ing component. The instruction requires that this &pproval author- 
ity be confined to the chief of the division or staff, or to a 
senior operations officer specifically designated by the division 
or staff chief to exercise this function. The request is routed 
through CCS/OCB for concurrence et which time the requesting 
Signature is verified as being on the approved list and all of the 
documents requested are recorded in the OCB file. All requests for. 
Gocuments to be used in CONUS are then routed to Office of Security, 
Operational Support Division, Special Activities Branch for approval 
and then are forwarded to the component which is to issue the dócu- 
ments. Tssuing components are required to maintain controls on 
accountability and establish conditions for use of documents that 
they issue. OTS is developing a new computerized system which is 
scheduled to become operational in November 1973. Every six months 
each component will be given a complete listing of all documentation 
and disguises issued to them and they will be required to either 
Justify the continued retention of the documents or return them. 


Component Controls 


h. There is no established procedure prescribing how each 
component is to control the documents issued to it. The instruc- 
tions do require, however, that the documents will be handled as 
controlled documents from th. time of issue until their ultimate 
disposition. The general practice is to maintain a record of ali 
documents received within the component, but to issue the documents 
to the appropriste officers who assume responsibility for handling 
them properly. There is no evidence of periodic spot checking. At 
least one area division of the Directorate of Operations follows a 


| procedure which requires that the documents be retained in the front 


office until needed for an operation, being returned after the 
operation is completed. On the surface this may appear to be a 
strict control, but in actuality the documents are retained in 


individual packages for each senior officer, and are never inspected . 


before they are issued nor after they are returned; in effect, no 
record accountability by the officer is required. 


Ultimate Document Retrieval 


5. Every бра using alias documents is now required to 
process through CCS as part of his exit-out process for either 
resignation or retirement. It is at this time that he is given 
а list of all alias documentation issued to him and is requested 
to return all such documents. If there are any of these documents 


00475 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


vhich he is usable to produce, the employee must subiit а signed 
written statement describing, to the best of his ability, the. con- 
ditions under which the document or documents vcre either lost or 
destroyed. The controls that now exist were not in operation when 
Howard Hunt was an employee, which may explain how he vas able to 
retain documents issued in the 1960s. Nor do these controls apply 
effectively to non-employees over whom the Agency has no control. 
Most disguise material -- other than documents -- is regarded as 
perishable end non-sensitive and 075 is not too concerned if 
disguise material is not returned. 


6. A new computerized system is being readied called CENBAD 
(Central Badge and Credential System). Initially this system will 
include all of the issuances of the badge office, CCS, Central 
Processing and the motor pool. .The system will provide a monthly 
listing to these four components of all credentials issued and 
could be used to request outstanding credentials at the time of 
checkout. Аз a follow-up the system will provide a weekly creden- 
tial status of all employees who have separated but for whom CENBAD 
still shows outstanding credentials. 


Conclusions 

T. Since the issüance of DOI 240-4 there has been a very 
definite irprovement in the controls exercised over alias documen- 
tation. Ry requiring that every request be routed through CCS/OCB 
for concurrence, a very com ste file of all alias documents issued 
has been compiled. The probability is slight that an Agency employee 
could resign or retire without having been queried about all the 
alias documents which had béen issued to him. ‘This procedure, while 
currentiy observed in the Agency, has no standing as a general re- 
quirement and exists only as an administrative instruction in one 
of the Agency's directorates. 


8. The OTS computerized system, when operational, should tend 
to reduce the number of outstanding documents since a justification 
every six months will be required for their retention. The CENBAD 
system will not only make the CCS/OCB control even more effective 
by mechanizing the up-to-date listing but in the rare instences 
when an officer might depart without turning in his documents, 
.CENBAD will provide this data weekly to allow for a follow-up. 


— =... 


€ 


mE uuu w ———rI 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Recommendations: 


8. That an Agency Headquarters Regulation 


be issued Tormalizing the requirement for a 
central Agency control over issuance, account- 
ability and recovery of alias documentation. 


b. That each component designate an alias 
documentation control officer who would retain 


` ell documents, issuing them only for specific 


operations and institute а policy of signed 
receipts and return of documents upon the com- 
pletion of the operation. 


" 


ПР F e ent 


κενή οσο mÀ мө: 


j 
A 
: 


15. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


«1 UNCLASSIFIED O, ЯНА, _ Г} CONF NTIAL | Ë] SECRET 


cnr 
ROUTING, AND R ECORD D SHEET 


SUBJECT: (Optional) S 


` й b E DM `: a 5 — Za 
. ACTVITIES OF POSSIBLE ‘INTEREST, TO T 


—— T, 


FROM: EXTENSION | NO. 


DATE OFFICER'S COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom 
INITIALS. to whom.. Draw o line across column offer each comment.) 


[5 


5 
š 
я 
| Е 
о 
>, 
Nm 
сл 
S 
ч 
~ 
το 
« Í. 
τὸ 


TO: (Officer desi 


gnotion, room number, ond 
building) : Ñ 


(2106 Баар Ф 
с they 7 rdc ea^ m " 


Fete Ua, κόρα and £ 


... 


o 
e 
2 
کے‎ 
Ф 
o Ὁ 
2 
Ф. 


тр се 7 
ΠΝ 
ΗΝ 

FS 

D 

š 


Nee was alse rs onte 
ba CRYDQT διά Salted t» | 
Mm, of VES. 


we 
H 
uF 


š * 

à 
ج‎ ^+ ы S 
— z 
d 


Є 
кез 


<. 10 "ERR F] SECRET CONFIDENTIAL [J MY 


[] UNCLASSIFIED 


ο کا چ‎ n 


ΣΤ ^ Ae tee Р ЕС М 


— + *% + a... 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


|202 ied 292| 


24 May 1973 
\ us i n 
SUBJECT: Activities of Possible Interest to the ` 


Director 


l. А few years ago NEN Pranch was asked to 
support a test program and feasibility study being conducted 
by DD/S&T/ORD. 


project conclu ranch уаз given permission 
by DD/SGT/ORD to fetal ra and TV image transmission 


system for further -. | 


2. In early June 1972 DD/S&T/ORD, who 
had been the Project Office mis TV data link 
system, phoned the[ ^ ^ ]Branch. Не stated that the U.S. 
Secret Service had a requirement for this TV camera and data 
Jlink system. It was our understanding that the amera would 
be carried in a helicopter and would be used for crowd sur- 
veillance during. the Democratic and Republican Conventions 
at Miami Beach, Florida. Mr Sked that we make the 
equipment available for the period desired by the Secret 
Service and indicated that the equipment would be returned to 

` us when no longer needed. On 19 June 1972, Mr. Michael T. 
Casey, accompanied by Mr. isited o pick up the 
equipment. Mr. Casey of t Service was not made 
witting of the fact that s an Agency facility. І | 


3. On 13 November 1972, the equipment, as a result of 


a phone call from was picked up at Secret Service 
Headquarters by A few of the system's 


І 
. 00475 x 


ah 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


components were missing when it was returned. These components 
were the handle, tripod and electrical adapter. Later the 
missing components were returned to us. by the Secret Service. 


4. A few months ago, ме jene: me about this 
equipment and said that S&T wo to get the equipment 
off its books since none of it would be needed in the.future 
by S&T. Не offered to transfer the equipment at no cost to 
ranch. А short time later the necessary paper 
ormed to reflect the receipt of this equipment 
Branch inventory. ` 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


- 
ҮС A eere РЕ 


ia 


LATE. За 


East Asia Division 


— — rp — MÀ 


i 
—— ПРИРО L. 


00481 


_—u _ чыын 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


—SBGREI.SENSITIVE . 


SUBJECT: | | 
Project| [ο a Headquarters initiated program 


which has as its fundamental objective the long term manipu- 


lations of selected agent assets operating against EA Division 
difficult targets in the leftist and communist milieu in various 
parts of the world. Although targetted overseas these agents are 
_often exposed to and directed against American radical, leftist, 
and communist targets to gain a practical knowledge of the leftwing, 
radical, communist world. There is à possibility that an asset 
might become suspect and be accused of beius um employee of the 
Agency or the Bureau; or it might happen some asset would, for 

some reason, become dssenchanted with his role and expose-his 
Agency relationship and his activities, with resultant embar- 


rassment. To minimize potential problems, therefore, each 


kept informed on a regular basis. 


ITIVE 


00482 


| 
case is cleared with the ЕВІ and through CI/SO the Bureau is 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


2 


uo 


тет 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Subjects Cover Support 


‘Bill: 


1. In addition to the matters listed in the CCS memorandum on 


cos Cover Support Within the United States the following bigoted cases 
should be noted:: 


cations that either of these cases might create 


to the 


cover situation of the personnel in [In 


7 May 1973 


00484 


ee tt Tu W — a‏ س m ОР m σία‏ افا 


problems, As: I оза you on 5 March 1973 a I don't feel the same way ο ατα 


n 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ot On 


ROUTH'G AND RECORD SHEET 


—————— — کے‎ «ээ ——— ——— ο + t — o —— ο 


donaassipED [J НА, ^ 17] CON, ENTIAL — qM] πεσε 


=- mannaa —M — 


ET 
Alias Pis, atts 


“EXTENSION. [ ме 7 


^" 6 NAY 1973 


--..- — — F. ... 


TO: (Officer designation, t.om e nes, and 


η 7-71 COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from w? 


to whom, Draw a line ocross column after eoch «c. «nest. 


А 
Mr. Colby, 


2, ; 
PEZ 2 
Ye 
3 I | ` i 
4. 7 .. 


“eames, 


| 
м 
| 
і 
BEN | 


x | 


— "ne vim: 


P . 
E] 


13. 


| -- 
k 4 
. 


— —M M M مت‎ — .. 


- 
N 
*t 
! 
. 


wo 010 UT = بوبه‎ ZEUG [7] UHCLASSIFIE2 


LAE gy oL. 


| 
E | 
| 00485 


mmEEM——nán— i — a< Ú< ———————  rrrrrc Tn. αμα 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: | | _ Alias Passports 


—— аа 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


боо»Т | 
bo-10 


| 8 May 1973 


ME MORANUUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations: 


SUBJECT: Alias Passports - 


Chief, Central Cover Staff 


00487 


SE 


я 1 ИГ 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


uh мичен кыш τη USL ον . 8 і 


سے ————————— ——— 


bd ME MEM. | ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


— مسد‎ -— —À tem —— —— M س‎ — —— — LU 0 


SLUT Ор al) ` 
| | С д aids. 


un ΚΚ ` EXTENSION NO. n 
M. Ben .. 
DATE * ET 
NE =; NE 1 Ὁ AY ста 


TO: (Отсег designation, гост number, ond DATE ... 
bvilding) 5 OFFICER'S COMMENTS [Number eoch comman! to show From 
ΕΞ INITIALS. to whom, Draw о line across column after each cor. 
RECEIVED FORWARDED 


a З —— ا‎ se 
"9 а - ----------- — 
"3 -— 


© 


š |] | 


Р 


σ] 


τ [use omy С URCLASSIF 


Ee ا‎ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


„тт "a ғ . πο a L 


η : | 7 May 1973 (Revised) 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT ` : CCS Cover Support Provided Within 
. , the United States š 


U . 1, Thé following specific information regarding dom- 
: Í estic cover support provided by Central Cover Staff is 
submitted im response to your request; 


Ai Aliases Used in Conjunction with Documenta- 
tion. ` —. ze і | 


The above figures are based on the CCS record- 


NOTE: 
keeping system initiated in April 1972. 


MORI росїр: 1451843 


c. Alias U.S. Birth Certificates. 


d. Alias Credit Cards. 


NN 


CSEREF—— > 00499 


οι μυ... sss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00491 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


sd 


00492 س сор‏ 
اما 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1. Support to BNDD Activities. 


2. The following general information pertains to 
domestic cover support activities outside the purview of 
CCS: ; 


a. Alias 0.5. drivers licenses 


b. Alias CIÀ credentials ; 


оби 


ЕТ 00493 


MORI DocID: 1451843 
г | 


7 May 1973 (Revised) 


- 


SUBJECT : CCS Cover Support Provided Within 
; the United States 


l. The following specific information regarding dom- 
estic cover support provided by Central Cover Staff is 
submitted in response to your request: 


a. Aliases Used in Conjunction with Documenta- 
tion. Lc dL CC CC CC MUS C 


NOTE: The above figures are based on the CCS record- 
keeping system initiated in April 1972. 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations: 


E | RET | 00494 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


‚ с. Alias U.S, Birth Certificates. 


d. Alias Credit Cards. 


ERTL 00495 


С ЫН ЛӨЛҮ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ө. Alias Social Security Cards. 


— 44 = 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ERL | 00497 


M TV. -- 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1. Support to BNDD Activities. 


2, The following general information pertains to 
domestic cover support activities outside the purview of 
CCS: . 


a. Alias 0.5. drivers licenses 


| | | Chief, Central Cover Staff 
-5- 


Sku 005 ^ 00498 


ee н 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


í ^ t vs д! f. à I 1 


CSI 240-4 


COVER 


“CLANDESTINE SERV 
23 August 1972 


INSTRUCTION 240-4 


Е ALIAS 0.5. DOCUMENTATION 


" А 
——————————————á»———2»' 
oo - 
—— ت‎ M ө 
& (Ww а жа А rare. : 
< < — میم‎ КР ΠΡ 
— — n تی‎ 


2e: s P: 


аж me —— ——— ——— < е 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CSI 240-4 
CLANDESTINE SERVICE i s COVER 
INSTRUCTION 240-4 i I 23 August 1972 


CLANDESTINE SERVICE 
INSTRUCTION 240-4 


скот 


МОЕТ DocID: 1451843 


^ 


CSI 240-4 


COVER 
93 August 1972 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


j 
. on 
CSI 240-4 
CLANDESTINE SERVICE i COVER 
23 August 1972 


INSTRUCTION 240-4 


ΚΝ 
mm 
NZ 
Thomas H. Karamessines 
Deputy Director for Plans - _ 
\ 8 
ل‎ 


Ë - A cM marras ve --- “з л 


LLLA PUN TA جد‎ 


MÀ M M я прут п — 
mun 


CSI 240-4 
Attachment 1 


MORI DocID: 1451843 
93 August 1972 


MORI 


SEC 


CSI 240-4 


Attachment 1 
23 August 1972 


DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` D E Q | | зуб Ps T 


CSI NO. 220-7 


| C CLANDESTINE SERVICES TECHNICAL SUPPORT 
INSTRUCTION NO. 220-7 12 May 1959 


i ` U. S. DOCUMENTATION | — | 
IN CLANDESTINE SERVICES OPERATION 


O | 


CLANDESTINE SERVICES 
INSTRUCTION NO. 220-7 


MORI DocID: 


! 
CSI NO. 220-7 


TECHNICAL SUPPORT 
12 May 1959 


1451843 


au 


— 


———— n .—.... 


Q 


G Oo 


O 


MORT DocID: 1451843 


Q CSI МО, 220-7 


'CLANDESTINE SERVICES TECHNICAL SUPPORT 


INSTRUCTION NO, 220-7 ts 12 May 1959 


RICHARD M, BISSELL, JR. 
Deputy Dírector 
(Plans) ` 


Released by: 
Richard Helms 
Chief of Operations 


00507 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SEGRE 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT : COS Cover Support Provided Within. 
the United States 


l. The following specific information regarding dom- 
estic cover support provided by Central Cover Staff is 
submitted in response to your request: : 

за, Aliases Used in Conjunction with Documenta- 


00508 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


о "EET 


Ho) чеш чш жна n Y  —n yyN F n MÀ —————————————————— 


00509 


ор 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4 


SECRET 


00511 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| х 1. Other Special Arrangements. 
(1) Alias U.S. drivers licenses 
| 
і 
і 


а „т 00512 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


(5) Alias CIA credentials 


Chief, Central Cover Staff 


C SEGRET _ 00513 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CORPORATE COVER 


MORI DocID: 1451843 | 


SEORET, 


DEVISED FACILITIES COVER 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


PROPRIETARY ENTITY COVER 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


ὃν 
n 
e 
о 


—— MM — 9 є 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT : Research Project on Robert L. Vesco 


1. In mid-October 1972 
Office of Economic Research aske 


participate in a mes2ting with a number of OER officers. 
During the necting, [ з |explained that the 
Director of Central Intelligence had levied a crash 


project on Dr. Edward Proctor, the Deputy Director for 
Intelligence, to produce a paper on international financier 
Robert L. Vesco. Since the Director had specifically 
requested contributions from the field тиннин eked 


our Division to help in procuring them. 


2, We thereupon cabled various questions suggested by 
OER ol err amer t asked for replies by 
19 Octo answers were turned over to OER in- 


memorandum form. "In In the case of a brief reference in one of | 
the field messages s to an earlier high~level American 
intercession on behalf of Mr. Vesco, we asked Mr. Helms 
through his secretary whether this was relevant, information. 
The response, again, xeceived through the secretary, was that 
it was not relevant. ; 


e 


,. 3. Soon after our memoranda had been submitted, 


ЕЕ жиынынын С the Director wanted 
everyone to forget the Vesco project. This was communicated 
to.all DDP Headquarters personnel who had had a hand in the 

project or had been made aware of it. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. We never had any indication as to the reason for e ге 
ог the purpose of the project. 


5. We understand that OER has rec 
memorandum on this matter for the DCI. 


uM B. Roosevelt 


Chief, European Division 


ently written a 


“Soviet Bloc Division 


Ed 
5 
lito E RN e SE 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 
00520 


a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


уд ЧУ 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: Items for Possible Use in Briefing 
the DCI 


+ 


1. This Memorandum is submitted in order to 
identify to you for possible briefing of the 
Director activities which in certain contexts could 
be construed as delicate or inappropriate. 


2. At the request of the Director of Security, 


from approxim -October 1972 to mid-January 
1975 safesite as made available to the 
U.S. Marshal’ r use aS a secure residence 


by an Assistant U.S. Attorney who reportedly was 
under threat of assassination by organized criminal 
elements, 


5. Since late 1972 CIA has taken part in seven 
FBI training courses at Quantico, Virginia in 
response to requests from the FBI. We have shared 
with them through lectures and discussions lessons 
we have learned which are relevant to their counter- 
espionage responsibilities. 


00521 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


6. Аз a means of sharing more fully our operational 
experience we have invited three ЕВІ officers to be 
students in our Course from.14 to 25 


May 1973. 


7. The Soviet defector Yuriy NOSENKO was 
confined at a CIA facility from April 1964 to 
September 1967 while efforts were being made to 
establish whether he was a bóna fide defector. 
Although his'present attitude toward the Agency is 
quite satisfactory, the possibility exists that the 
press could cause undesirable publicity if it were 
to uncover the story. 


a n 
Chief 
Soviet Bloc Division 


00522 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00524 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


? Mat 1+73 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: CIA Narcotics Activities Having 
Domestic Implications 


1. This memorandum is in response to your request 
for a review of activities and relationships that might 
have domestic implications. 


2. We occasionally report on the activities of 
American citizens involved in narcotics trafficking 
abroad. This information is normally. disseminated to 
U.S. law enforcement agencies and other recipients of 
our reports. We also occasionally request U.S. law 
enforcement agencies for name traces. on U.S. citizens: 
who are known or suspected to be involved.in narcotics 
trafficking abroad. 


: [ 00525 
00524 | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 at 173 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: CIA Narcotics Activities Having 
Domestic Implications 


1. This memorandum is in response to your request: 
for a review of activities and relationships that might 


have domestic implications. 


2. We occasionally report оп the activities of 
American citizens involved in narcotics trafficking 
abroad. This information is normally disseminated to 
U.S. law enforcement agencies and other recipients of 
our reports. We also occasionally request U.S. law 
enforcement agencies for name traces on U.S. citizens 
who are known or suspected to be involved in narcotics 


trafficking abroad. 


'5, We have occasionally received requests fo 
alias documentation for U.S. narcotics law enforcement 


«мі 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


officials working abroad on foreign narcotics investi- 


gations, The present method of handling such requests. 
is for us to request the approval of the Deputy Director 
for Operations prior to asking the Technical Services 
Division to comply. We insist on knowing the true 
identity of the persons to use such documentation and 
limit them to staff officers of the U.S. 1aw enforcement 
agencies. We also require that we know the purpose 

and intended use of the documents. Finally, we require. 
receipts from the headquarters of the agency involved 
and the individual, and also require these documents to 
be returned to us for destruction after they have ful- 
filled their use. We have turned down requests from 
BNDD for alias documentation for domestic use. There 
are some indications in the files that there have been 
requests from BNDD for domestic documentation in con- 
nection with their domestic investigations. These . 
predate NARCOG, and we are unable to determine how these 
requests were handled. 9 


6. We periodically receive requests for technical 
assistance in the form of photographic and audio devices 
or guidance for use of such items by U.S. law enforcement 
agencies in connection with their foreign investigations 
of illicit narcotics activities. Ме require these 
agencies to adhere to the same procedures we require 
in our own operations. From time-to-time we have honored 
these requests and have provided sterile equipment when 
the requests have been properly presented апа approved. 
Our records show evidence that several such requests 
were made prior to.the existence of NARCOG in connection 
with narcotics law enforcement investigations in the 
United States. Ме are unable to determine whether. the 
requests were fulfilled. 


iet, NARCOG 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


at 


MORI: DocID: 1451843 


е і .) TÒR SECRET 


CRET Ө 
CONFQENTIAL "РІЗНЕ 
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION ` ` REGISTRY 
source: C| Biv. DdD. CONTROL NUMBER: 
DATE OF DOCUMENT: 4 475. DATE DOCUMENT RECEIVED: 54519 
COPY NUMBER (5): Роб D - LOGGED BY: 


NUMBER OF PAGES: δὲ _ DOCUMENT N 
NUMBER OF ATTACHMENTS: , Nene- 


FROM: Division D/CIB 


Heddqpuarte 


TO 
OFFICE 
| |spectbr General Roos 
Inspectbr General Room 
ELI 


LI Approval REMARKS 
а Action 

L1 Comment 

П Concurrences 

L1 Information 

Г] Direct Reply 

t Preparation of Reply 
П Recommendation 


[1 Signature — ^ REPE NEU 2 АРЕНЕ —— s, : 
ΙΝ Return == , \ 
E Dispatch : п | = 
[7 Fite oi 
| fe- CONFIDENTIAL a 4 
(| SECRET - гу ошу. 00528 
TOP SECRET : - 


πο ὔ ο EUREN naa κ. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


29 May 1973 


~ o 


amm 


RET 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


00530 


29 Nay 1973 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


NOKAT 


ОО | DD TI | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


wm 


29 May 1973 
| 
; 


TOP=SEC 
Εκ ONLY... 
00532 


σον ray рому CEP στ Does 
ο ωμά λος BES AS AR DRE UT 


зв 
S 
К 
с 
Eod 
m 
x 
5 
xi 
я, 


Επ ποπ σσ ORA CAM 
LAE KR tt ete e ae TRE UP ETRAS 


erm dt 
SET hs; 


. NUMBER OF ATTACHMENTS: 


EM SEE ήν NIE 


DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION 


SOURCE: _ ` 
DATE OF DOCUMENT: — 
COPY NUMBER(S): ___ 
NUMBER OF PAGES: 


FROM: 


DOCUMENT NO: 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


REGISTRY 


CONTROL NUMBER: EN RES 
DATE DOCUMENT RECEIVED: | .. n — 
LOGGED BY: = 


DATE: 
Chief, Division D - 7B44 Hqs - neal | 7 May 1975 


το |. 
OFFICE AME 


Approval 

Action 

Comment 
Concurrences 
Information 

Direct Reply 
Preparation of Reply 
Recommendation 
Signature 

Return 


Dispatch 


и шини D ши ш ш OI OI CJ 


File 


REMARKS 


*QNFIDENTIAL. 


_————___ © шш = 


MORT DocID: 1451843 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 
FROM : Chief, Division D 


SUBJECT : Potentially Embarrassing Activities 
Conducted .by Division D 


REFERENCE : Your staff meeting, 7 May 1973 


1. There is one instance of an activity by Division D, 
with which you are already familiar, which the Agency General 
Counsel has ruled to be barred to this Agency by statute: the 
collection of international commercial 
radio tele een several Latin American 
cities and New York, aimed at the interception of drug-related 
communications, The background on this is briefly as follows: 


P er as Division D would take over the 
coverage, and on 12 ELOISE 1972 we agreed to do so. On 
14 October a team of intercept operators from the 
began the coverage experimen n 
te to say that the test results. were 
good, and that it was hoped this coverage could continue. 


Because a question had arisen within Division D as to 
the legality of this activity, a query was addressed to the 
General Counsel on this score (Attachment A hereto). With the 
receipt of his reply (Attachment B), the intercept activity 
was immediately terminated. There has béen a subsequent series 
of exchanges between Division D and the General Counsel as to 
the legality of radio intercepts made outside the U.S,, but 
with one terminal being in the U.S., and the General Counsel 


00534. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


has ruled that such intercept is also in violation of CIA's 
Statutory responsibilities. . : 


2. We are carrying out at present one intercept activity 
which falls within this technical limitation--i.e., of having 
one terminal in the U.S. 


arge number of totally unrelated conversations, the oper- 
ators do intercept other traffic, frequently involving U.S, 
citizens--for example, BNDD staffers talking to their agents. 
I have described this situation to the General Counsel, and 
his informal judgment was that, as long as the primary pur- 
pose of the coverage is a foreign target, this is acceptable. 
He suggests, however, that it might be desirable to inform 
the Attorney General of the occasional incidental intercept 
of the conversations of U.S. citizens, and thus legalize this 
activity. We will pursue this with Mr, Houston, 


4. An incident which was entirely innocent but is cer- 
tainly subject to misinterpretation has to do with an equip- 
ment test run by CIA[ | " technicians in Miami in August 
1971. At that time we were working jointly to develop short- 
range agent DF equipment for use against a Soviet agent in 


South Vietnam. and 
a field test was agreed upon. e Miàmi area was Chosen, and 
a team consisting of Division D, Commo, ersonnel went 


to Miami during the second week of August. ontact was made 
with a Detective Sergeant eee г. the Miami Beach Police 
Department, and tests were four different hotels, опе 
a block away from the Miami Beach Auditorium and Convention 
Hall, A desk clerk in this hotel volunteered the comment that 
the team was part of the official security checking process of 
all hotels prior to the convention. (The Secret Service had 
already been checking for possible sniper sites.) As the team's 
report notes, "The cover for the use of the hotel is a natural." 


00535 


— L o 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SEDE 


| — s 


5, Another subject worthy of mention is the following: 


phone call slips per- 

-Όπιπα calls. These were then obtained regu- 
larly by Domestic Contact Service in New York, pouched to 
DCS Washington, and turned over to Division D "for passage 
to FE/China Operations, The DDP was apprised of this activity 
by Division D in March 1972, and on 28 April 1972 Division D 
told DCS to forward the calli slips to CI Staff, Mr. Richard 
Ober. Soon thereafter, the source of these slips dried up, 
and they have ceased to come to Mr. Ober. In an advisory 
ло, the Office of General Counsel stated its belief that 
the collection of these slips did not violate the Communica- 
tions Act, inasmuch as they are a part of a normal record- 
keeping function of the telephone company, which does not 
in any way involve eavesdropping. 


Atts: 


А, J ue 26 Jan 73 
B. 0 memo to DivD 29 Jan 73 


5 00536 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


26 January 1975 


MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel. 


SUSJECT + Intercept of Communications in 


3 . 

i 1. CIA is intercepting at our communications site| | 
igh frequency, international radio tele” 
phone calls originating n Мем York and being 
broadcast to South Aner f directed to Hew York 

alls throvga 


from South America. Some calls are relay с 
terminating there. The 


New York but not originating or 
calis involve both U. S. citizens and foreign nationals. 


he fora о 


Or arug 
CIA fin t 


3. I would appreciate your very early views as to 

where this intercept activity falls with respect to Ú. S. Там. 
Even if it is legal or we can secure the necessary autnoriza- 
tions, it seems to me there is extra flap potential associatec 
with reports going into the BNDD mechanism, particularly : 
since they may vell become the basis for executive action. N 


+ —— ΗΝ 


Signed), 


Distribution: i 
Orig & 1:- Addressee 


. MEMORANDUM ΞΌΒ-. Acting Chief, Division D 


the interception of any wire or oral communication a crime 


— 111... o 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


lE : 2 
С ¢ 
- Соруї ої 2 
} 
' | 
29 January 1973 ` | 


i 
1 
› 
H 


SUBJECT: Intercept of Communica tions in the U. S. 


REF ERENCE: 26 Jan 73 Memo for GC fr AC/Division D, 
Same Subject 


v 


1. In referent you request our views as to the leg 
aspects of а radio telephone intercept activitv carried опа 
our communications site 


b 


2. The basic law is contained in section 605 o£ the 
* 


Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 605, which prohibits 


tion of the sender and also prohibits divulging the substance 
thereof to any person. Chapter 119 of Title 18, U.S.C., makes 


punishable by $10,000 or five years' imprisonment, ox both. 
There are two а to these prohibitions: 


a. The first provides for application through 
the Department of justice to a Federal court for a 
court order authorizing such interception for specific 
purposes in connection with law-eniercement cuties. 
Since this Agency is prohibited by statute from any 
police or law-enforcement activities, ος we 
cannot operate undet this exception. ^" | ом 


b. The other exception is contained i 


n 
of Title 18, U.S. C., at subsection (3) This еа 
that the prohibition cited abore on interception 


00538 


a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


limit the constit 
such rncasures а 
attack, to кою 
Sasa? to ue 


t > 
_ overthrow Бу ον ox б r unlawful means or against any 


MT Ger clear and présent danger to thé structure ox existence 17 


of the Government. 


scriba in your memorandum 


ly. 
Ru. 


Goes not appear to fall within any of these categories and since its 
ultimate destination is BNDD, it appears to be collection for law- 
enforcement purposes, which as noted above is barred to this Agency 


by statute. 


2. For your information, in most cases where there isa 
criminal prosecution for violation of the narcotics laws, the Depart- 
ment of Justice queries us as to whether we have engaged in any 
interception in connection with the defendants. If a case should 
involve the interception being made it would 
be deemed to be unauthorized and in mU secution 
would have to be dropped by the Government. Itis our view, there- 
fore, that such interception should be carried on by appropriate 
law-enforcement agencies in accordance with the authority of С. 
chapter 119 of Title 18, U. S. C. 


: LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON 
General Ceunsel . і 


Di stribut tion: 
Copy 1 -Addressee š : м se E © 
Сору 2-Сепегаї Counsel i7 oT ` ` e 


00539 | 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


^ 


EIER heed 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SE ET 


7 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR; Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: Item for the List of Delicate Matters 


The Securities and Exchange Commission has asked CIA to provide 
information on any foreign connections with organized crime in the 
United States. The record indicates that Mr, David Young, of the 
White House Staff, asked Mr. Colby to set up a contact for Mr, 

T. C. Barreaux, of SEC. Mr. Barreaux discussed the matter with Mr. 
Paul V. Walsh, of DDI, and on 4 April 1973, Mr. Barreaux and Mr. 
Timmeny came to a meeting at CIA with Mr. Lawrence Houston (General 
Counsel) Chief, FI Staff, DDO). 


Since that meeting, we have received no specific requirements 
from Mr, Barreaux, but have provided him with one piece of infor- 
mation involving a banking transaction of.a [ — associate of 
Robert Vesco. 


ie 
Foreign Intelligence Staff 


00541 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


p 


e. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Xd БЕСИ А z 
et tus HEC 1 « 4 


DA N με я Dd e 
-SE R WILL CHECK CLASSIFICATION TOP AN JTTOM 


СҮТ Unetassirien | | CONFIDENTIAL | | SECRET 


- '. OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 


Wb 


το NAME AND ADDRESS DATE 


Inspector General NN 
h E ἐν Ë 
pede" J 


ΠΕ 


τα 
я 

A 

а Ue 
£ 
ж 

`" 

= 

& 
* 

A 


x= 
ER 
же з 


6 3 ος d ты dox 
У 
= [faction [  [pmecr REPLY — | — | PREPARE REPLY - ` 
LAPPROYAL ___. | — |DISPATCH — — | —— RECOMMENDATION 
Ed 
ma 


` 


4 


RETURN - api 
SIGNATURE 


^ 00543: 


xe i: Q 10 DATE 
οσο. ο. 
τς А T T CR | SECRET 

. "у з FORM XQ igus editions -. «0 
F ди но. 237 | Use previous editions ο... 
- А 
ur i А 
и" Ἂς к 
* R = i 


| MORI DocID: 1451843 


15 May 1973 


` " Executlyg Веру 
* 
Dear Bini, | = | 


approximately 20 months, іле ry was with the Staff І was led to believe 
that one or their "Groups on the ground floor, Was involved in T 
domestic Operations, І believe their target (s) were minority group (s), І 
The Chief and Peputy Chief of the Group at that time were Dick Ober and 
espectively, One of their Case Officers, 
Spent over 50% of his tine TDY within the United States, It wag пу under. 
standing they reported only to the White House and to Diek Helms, Other 
nembers of the Staff, including myself, hag limited 8coBss to the 
area, only when necessary and escorted at all times, Perhaps you Were or m 


аге now aware Of what the Operations are, However, I believe f would be 


remiss in not responding to the book cable (407190), And Perhaps their 


launched Someone into Vietnam while you and Were there, І 
believe this was Without the knowledge ог approva] of Ohief, (if I 
Tecall, the Case Officer was І mention ihe latter only 
because of the following: When they learned that as being reassigned ` 
from Saigon фо Chief, Operations, FE, they also learned that Ї наз а friend 
ої and from the same area As : result they cautioned 
This т did not do, ` К 


me not to discuss зпу of their operations With 


Sincere] 


| ' MORI DocID: 1451843 


| à мы АЁ | © Sc ыў, 


“TRANSMITTAL MANIFEST : 
ΓΙ No. 446603 


FROM š 


[mno] — |, oEscmeTION | ЕЕ | 
TS-ONLY envelope under Separate From | CC C m response _ | 
IM cover for Chief, BKHERALD . to DIRECTOR hO7190 (BOOK CABLE) ` 


Ml 


00545 


FORM 12:36 ust PREVIOUS EDITION | і | | 0342) 


- ° 


Que st 


D————————À. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMOR..DUM FOR: Mr, Colby 


Attached is the material we requested of Di 
Ober: і I I 


"m 


А. Ten Reports, Subj: Foreign Support for 
Activities Planned to Disrupt or Harass the 
Republican National Convention 


'B.. Five Reports, Subj: Foreign Support ‘fo: 
Activities, Planned to Disrupt or Harasg the | 
Democratic National Convention | 

C. Two Memoranda re Agency support- to 
Secret Service for Democratic and Republican 
Conventions : 


Ober advises that the only American we report 
on to the IEC is Rennie Davi (14 May 73) 


FORM NO. 101 REPLACES FORM 10- 103 
1 AUG 54 WHICH MAY BE USED, 


μεν 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CONFIDENTIAL 


OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 


DUGE: 


[DIRECT REPLY | _ [PREPARE REPLY __ | 
| DISPATCH |_| RECOMMENDATION — | 
KE... | 
| INFORMATION — | — {SIGNATURE | 


ACTION А 


APPROYAL 


COMMENT 


Remarks: 


: : e a Mr. Broe: 


Dick Ober has been advised that this package 
is being sent to you. Since knowledge of the 
existence of this Committee has been strictly 
limited, I've asked that it be delivered to you 
unopened. Although it has an ER number on it, 
it bas not been sent through that office -- I gave 
them only the day, subject, and originator. 


00547 


: FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 


BEES May т: 


| J] CONFIDENTIAL . 


"s E 
Hite нні 


— aaa enh mm emeret m y τπτ n mni s com mon ° 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


2 ΠΤ 
J SE OHLY MEINER alg у, 


“ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


ου СН — ww e 


[3 ий гр 


лым | — —— Р: e 


|е зис; (Ορ. ολο 


“FROM: Ἢ ~ Е EXTENSION | NO, 
А САТЕ 
Richard Ober ши 
| — Linn 
| ap | emes 
FORWARDED 


— MA mot ы 


14 Мау 1973 ` 


ا - — ——— 


TO: (Officer зак room number, and 
building) 


COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom 
fo whom. Oraw а line across column aftar each comment] 


Mr. Evans 


— v“ = ee ee 


Attached are; 


1. Ba ground note on the 
ommittee per your request 
of this morning. 
5 


2. Copies of memoranda con- 
cerning Agency support to 
Secret Service (7 April and. 
23 June 1972). 


EYES ONLY 


μα Χο op АУУ у 


Any с о tes es 
δυο SEMEN. Rue 


а-н 


00548 


61 0 US pet IONS [= А о ІНТЕЗЧАЇ 


. USE OHLY [] UNCLASSIFIE:: 


Р —— 


рутин 


мое 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| | С. P | 


14 MAY 1573 


De -2« 


рдічої11у 


“SUBJECT: Intelligence Evaluation Committee and Staff 


1. ‘Background: Formed December 1970 to produce 
fully-evaluated national domestic intelligence studies, 
including studies on demonstrations, subversion, extremism 
and terrorism. Membership: Department of Justice. (Chair- 
man); Federal Bureau of Investigation; Department of 
Defense; Secret Service; National Security Agency; Central 


- Intelligence Agency; and as necessary répreséntatives of 


other Departments or Agencies (following have partici- . 

pated: Treasury and State). Staff: IES, Executive 

Director John Dougherty and later Bernard Wells supplied 

by Department of Justice with title of Special: Assistant 

to the Attorney General reporting to the Assistant Attorney 
General for Internal Security Robert Mardian and later , 


William Olson.  IES has received requirements directl 
White House. The White House Πας. insisted that the 
existence of this Committee be kept secret. Awareness 
of its existence within this Agency has been limited to 


DCT, DDO (DDP),]C/ClXand four officers of this office. б. 


2. CIA Participation: Contributions on foreign 
aspects (by memorandum with no Agency letterhead or at- 
tribution). Contributions occasionally inciude foreign ' 
intelligence provided by FBI and NSA. The Chief of the | 
Special Operations Group serves as the Agency representa- 
tive on the Intelligence Evaluation Committee Staff and 
as the alternate to the Agency representative on the . Я 
Committee (who is the(Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff). N 


3. Special Report: The Unauthorized Disclosure. 
of Classified Information, November 1971. This study 
was initiated in July 1971 by the White House as a con- І 
sequence of the President's concern about the release 
of the Pentagon Papers by Daniel Ellsberg: Both Robert ` 
Mardian and G. Gordon Liddy initially involved in tasking 
the IES to produce this evaluation. Drafting done by IES 
Staff members from Justice and FBI. Only Agency partici- 
pation was editori view. .. 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


4. Republican National Convention (21-24 August 

à 1972): At the request of the White House, a series of 
estimates was prepared.by the IES on "Potential Dis- . 
ruptions at the 1972 Republican National Convention, [te y 
Miami Beach, Florida." .The Agency provided from B 
February through August 1972 periodic contributions for 
these estimates concerning foreign support for activi- 
ties planned to disrupt or harass the Republican 
National Convention (copies attached). 


S. Democratic National Convention (10-13 July 
1972): At the request of the White House, a series of 
estimates was prepared by the IES on "Potential Disrup- δι " 
tions at the 1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami + 
Beach, Florida." The Agency provided between March and 
July 1972 contributions on foreign support for activi- | 
ties planned to disrupt or harass the Democratic 
National Convention (copies attached). | 


------ —À ° 


rm - 


ч ore 


Attachments:  a/s 


; 


а. 


" — ساد‎ ато ewe € 


tr m 


лт —ч—=— = НИ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| 


TE Pirat 


00551 


ДИ 1... ww 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"E . № Su 
23 FEB 1972 


SUBJECT: Foreign Support For Activities Planned to Disrupt 
>». or Harass the Republican National Convention й 


; 1. There are only limited indications thus far of 
foreign efforts to inspire, support or take advantage of 
activities designed to disrupt or harass the National 
Convention of the Republican Party in San Diego, 21-23 
August 1972. . 


' 2. Some American participants at the Soviet-controlled 
World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the Peoples of Pa 
Indochina, held 11-13 February 1972 in Paris/Versailles, 
attempted unsuccessfully to include a call for international 
demonstrations to take place at the time of the Republican 
National Convention. A representative of the San Diego 
Convention Coalition (SDCC), one of the domestic action 
groups targetting on the Republican Convention, requested 
the American Delegations' Steering Committee at the World’ 
Assembly to include a specific call for international 
. Support of activities against the Republican convention 
. in their proposal to the Action Commission of the World 

Assembly. This request, however, was dropped as too 
divisive by the Steering Committee, despite initial indica- 
tions that the proposal would be taken to the floor of 

the Assembly. . 


^ 


3. John LENNON, a British subject, has provided 

financial support to Project "YES", which in turn paid 

«.the travel expenses to the World Assembly of a representa- 
tive of leading antiwar activist Rennie DAVIS. (DAVIS! repre- 
sentative is tentatively planning to assist in preparations 
for disruptive actions at the San Diego Convention.) : 
Project "YES" is an adjunct to another LENNON-supported pro- 
ject, the Election Year Strategy Information Center (EYSIC), 
of which Rennie DAVIS is a key leader, which was set up to 
direct New Left protest activities at the Republican 
National Convention. In Paris Rennie DAVIS' representative : 
to the World Assembly met at least once with officials of 
the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam; 
it is not known if the Republican National Cœnvention was 
discussed. 


΄ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4. The SDCC is planning. for foreign support for its 
harassment of the Republican convention. A working draft 

plan of the SDCC includes proposals for (a) the use of a 

special television network to broadcast video-taped messages +, 
from other countries, including coverage of sympathetic 
demonstrations elsewhere; and (b) broadcasts over public - 
address systems of live telephone calis from, the Vietnamese 

in Paris and from the Communist Chinese and others at the 

United Nations. 


00553 


ο. — AEN | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Count | 
beo -27 


ων. EURO g 1 MAR i372 


Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 


or Harass the Republican National Convention 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION: 


; . Indications remain limited, thus far, of foreign efforts 

i a inspire, support or take advantage of activities designed 

| to disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Republican 

і . Party in San Diego, 21-23 August 1972. The concept of coordinated 

| -  &nternational support for domestic activities in the United 
States was generally endorsed at the recent World Assembly for 

| Peace and Independence of the Peoples of Indochina; however, the 
Conference issued no specific call for international support of 

disruptive actions at the American national por cal conventions. 


BACKGROUND: 


i At the Soviet-controlled World-Assembly for Peace and 
Independence of the Peoples of IndocCtrina, held in Versailles 
from 10-13 February 1972, there was mention of American plans 
for demonstrations at both the Republican and Democratic 
National Conventions. The final draft resolution from the 
Conference's "Action Commission" contains an appendix submitted |. 
by American delegates whose goal was to secure, global coordination 
. for domestic actions in the United States. It calls for inter- 
^ s ` national support to six weeks of domestic antiwar actions and 
: demonstrations, from 1 April to 15 May 1972, and concludes with 
the statement: "This campaign will lead up to the Democratic 
|. __ Рагу. Сопуепііоп at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican | 
апу Convention in San Diego on August 21, 1972. i" \ 


\, 
The final "Resolution of the Paris World Assembly for the = 
го —Péate and Independence of. the Indochinese People" of 13 February 
і 1972, drafted by the "Political Commission". states: 


| mS "In the United States particularly, the protest against 

Qmd the war is voiced more and more strongly, under various 

| forms, such as draft evasions, desertions, resistance, demon- 

`“ — T sStrations which now affect even the soldiers. The Assembly 

calls for support to these progressive and antiwar forces in 

-- the United States, and asks the governments to grant asylum 
to deserters and to support their right to repatriation. 
All together, the peoples of the world will efficiently help 

* 


to inpóse on the U.S. Government the restoration of peace, 
and independence and freedom in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia." 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


——— 


` 


DEVELOPMENTS: 


The San Diego Convention Coalition (SDCC), one of the 


. domestic action groups targetting on the Republican Con- 
‘vention, is planning, in addition to demonstrations, for a 


"large exposition in the campsights (sic) called Expose 72, 
Which with movies, exhibits, displays will portray the struggles 
of people all over the world." Plans for activities at 


. Expose 72 are believed to include (a) the use of a special 


television network to broadcast video-taped messages from 

other countries, including coverage of sympathetic demon- 
strations elsewhere; and (b) broadcasts over public address 
systems of live telephone calls from the Vietnamese in Paris 

and from the Communist Chinese and others at the United Nations. 
in addition, the SDCC has suggested that, in order to "outflank 
NIXON domestically and internationally," international opposition 
can be expressed "by obtaining the authority of other countries 
and liberation movements to carry their flags in SDCC demon- ; 
strations." > g ; . 


э. 
жу, 


—————  — 
E] 


— ы ы ы чячячяч ] 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


. 2.4. APR 1972 
Count Í 


Foreign Support: for Activities Planned to Disrupt bo 42 
or Harass the Republican National Convention 


+ 


SUMMARY: 


There is little-new evidence of foreign plans or efforts 
to inspire, support, or take advantage of actions designed to 
disrupt or harass the Republican National Convention in San 
Diego, 21 to 23. August 1972. The Students for a Democratic 
Society, in joining the ranks of domestic groups, planning 
actions at the Republican Convention, has adopted a proposal 
to cooperate with Mexican workers and students in a demonstra- 


‘tion in Tijuana, Mexico, during the Convention. The San Diego 


Convention Coalition (SDCC), another domestic group targetting 
on the Convention, has received a letter,of solidarity from 

the North Vietnamese. The letter is of interest as an indica- 
tion of North Vietnamese contact with the SDCC; such contact 
will be required for the SDCC to implement its earlier-reported 


plans for broadcasts over public address systems during the , 


Convention of live telephone calls from.the Vietnamese in ! 
Рагіз. | | "ауы. | 


DEVELOPMENTS: 


At its recent convention in садово. Massachusetts, | 
held 30 March to 2 April 1972, the Students for a Democratic 


` .Society (SDS) adopted a proposal to hold demonstrations at 


the San Diego-Tijuana border during the Republican National 


"Convention. The proposal included a call for SDS to cooperate 


ga 


with Mexican workers and students in an action to occur during 
a fiesta in Tijuana, where Convention delegates will be 
entertained. И š 


The North Vietnamese have given their endorsement to ` 
the San Diego Convention Coalition (SDCC) in the form of a 
letter from the Vietnam Committee for Solidarity with the 
American People (VCSWAP), a quasi-official organ of the 
North Vietnamese Government. The letter, which has been 
circulated by the SDCC and is dated 27 January 1972, 
‘expresses "great delight" with the formation of the SDCC, 
and conveys the Committee's "best wishes of militant soli- 
darity and friendship." The VCSWAP requests that the SDCC 
write often and "send us materials you have." 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


> ZU | Г Cte T 


f 
Ἴ ро Φε | 
1 23 MAY 197 
'1 | | E id - 
A - as ` Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 
ἫΝ С the n PES National Convention ποῦ 
Yt (te) " " жо ον 
SUMMARY: | 

b Indications remain: limited of foreign plans or attempts 
і "о inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designed 


to disrupt ог harass the Republican National Convention in 


|! ll.l.uMiami, Florida, 21-23 Au 


uL sr 


. Disarmament and Peace (ICDP) has 
distributed a a ο. ιο Calendar" of activities 
a in the United States against the war based on & submission j 
| TT - by the Peoples' Coalition for -Peace and Justice (PCPJ). р 
I: The calendar includes actions ‘planned in connection with i 
ü - the Republican Convention. 
| | 
1 


‚ DEVELOPMENTS : | Ж NE ; 


The International Confederation for Disarmament and ` 
μας ος a British-based antiwar organization and one of the 
|: ze more prominent member organizations of the Stockholm Con- 

ference, has attached a "Spring Offensive Calendar" to the 
~ „April-May 1972 issue of its regular international publica- 
tion Vietnam Internatiónal. The calendar had been furnished 
.by the People's Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and 
" included the following entry: 
| 


1 August 21-23 Republican Convention, San Diego. 

р. Demonstrations organized by the Зап А 
Diego Convention Coalition, Вох 8267, 
San иеш, Са. 92103. 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 


| 
| ` 
L PCPJ calendar urges demonstrations 
с. es not specifical] 
1 n with the Republican Convention. 
| , i 
| Us 
i 
і A et 
Г Í a. 
і 
| Е 
Е ! 
Heec ; 
i 
. 


ur m 
шал 


————— PÓPÓ( o « 
š τ 
' : 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— -- очна м 


14 JUN 1972 


pus ur "IE Й a ص‎ Fm - Count 


Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 5 
or Harass the Republican National Convention ӧ-3‹ 


. SUMMARY: 


The only new indication of foreign plans or efforts 
to inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designed 
to disrupt or harass the Republican National Convention in 
Miami, Florida, 21-23 August.1972, is an expression of 
interest by a member of the North. Vietnamese Delegation to 
the Paris Peace Talks in the plans of the major antiwar 
organizations in the United States for demonstrations in 
connection with the political conventions; ‘Of both major 
parties. ; . : 


DEVELOPMENTS: 


In mid-May 1972, a member. of the North Vietnamese / 
Delegation to the Paris Реасе -Talks invited a visitor to 
contact him again when the visitor returned from an imminent : 
trip to the United States. The North Vietnamese official 
gave the visitor the New York City addresses of the People's 
Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and the National i 
Peace Action Coalition (NPAC), and asked the visitor to 
inquire at their offices regarding their plans for demonstra- 
tions during the coming sümmer.  The.North Vietnamese 
official stated that he was.especially interested in plans 
for actions in connection with the Democratic and Republican 

а National Conventions. κ 


"лаг 
е 


eT trem mne пути PIER 
«т, =: 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


i £ 
2 o Tee ЧЕ ре ΝΤ Ша 
dz 2 + да кла Чур пет toe e ЛҮ utm EAR «би a AVAIT Spe о 
m n ον ο ade, ma MuR 
` Foreign Support for Activities PEanaed ' "to “Disrupt 
i or Harass the Republican National Convention 
і "E" n 
| There are no additional indications of any substantial 
| ‘foreign plans or efforts to inspire, support, or take advan- 
і | tage of activities designed to disrupt or harass the National 
| το. «Сопуепіїоп of the Republican Party in dic Florida, 21-24 
| Я aS 1972. š 
t у й 
| . | к A ә | Mo US 2 
ы BP I 
! 
νο 
po 
| ج‎ чыыр. = WOE eee wate Бенета, 


— 


"participate in activities in connection with the Convention. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


пс: | E -Coant 


26 JUL 1972 


" роз 3/ 
Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt | 
or Harass the Republican National Convent n 


- 
- 


SUMMARY: 

New indications of foreign plans or efforts to inspire, 
support, influence, or exploit activities designed to dis- 
rupt or harass the Republican National Convention in Miami, 
Florida, 21-24 August 1972, consist of the following: A 
leader of the People's Coalition for Peace and Justice 
(PCPJ) has stated that demonstrations will be organized to 
take place at United States and allied military installa- 
tions abroad during the period immediately Before and during 
the Republican Convention. The PCPJ leader also stated that 
representatives of the Stockholm Conference'on Vietnam will 


"The Anti-War Union (AWU), a domestic organization which has 
been active in planning demonstrations in connection with the | 
Republican National Convention,-has,sent a delegation to. M 
Paris, France, to meet with officials of the Democratic Repub-: 
lic of Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary Govern- 
ment of South Vietnam (PRG). Мо information is presently ` 
available, however, indicating that actions at the Republican ! 
Convention have been discussed at these meetings . | 


: ‘DEVELOPMENTS: 


- 


In an early July 1972 meeting with prominent members of 
.foreign antiwar organizations, a representative of the People's 
"Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ), who occupies an impor-: 
tant position within that organization, discussed the plans М 
of the PCPJ in connection with the upcoming election campaign $ 
in the United States. The PCPJ representative stated that 
during the. period 14-23 August, a "Peoples Campaign Against 
Bombing" would be waged in U.S. cities involved in the manu- 
facture and shipping of materials for use in Vietnam, and 
that similar actions will be organized at United States and 
allied military installations abroad. The PCPJ representa- 
tive further stated that "dramatic demonstrations" in protest 


- 


. 00564 


ΝΟΣ ΠΩ 


νων: 'ΥΎΎ)ΎΎΠὂΘθ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


of the bombing in Vietnam аге being organized by the "Repub- | 
{ lican Party National Convention Coalition" to occur оп ; ; 
21 August 1972. In an apparent reference to the 21 August | 
actions, the PCPJ leader added that representatives of the 
Stockholm Conference on Vietnam will speak on the subject of 
. the alleged American bombing of dikes in North Vietnam. 
| - (Comment: We have no present information concerning plans of 
Stockholm Conference representatives to travel to the United 
States during the Republican National Convention; nor do we 
have any additional information concerning plans of Stockholm 
Conference representatives to participate in activities con- 
nected with the Republican Convention.) 


The Απεῖ- War Union (AWU), a domestic group engaged in 
organizing counter-activities at the Republican National Con- 
vention, has sponsored the travel of a delegation of activists 
ta Paris, France, to meet with officials of the Democratic 

| NM Republic of North Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolu- 
. tionary Government of South Vietnam (PRG). An advance party 
* has already met with DRV and PRG representatives to discuss 
the agenda for meetings with the full AWU delegation. Although 
no information is presently avaiiable indicating that actions | 
at the Republican Convention have been discussed or are sched- | 
uled to be discussed at meetings between the AWU delegation  : | 
and the DRV/PRG officials, it is known that members of the AWU i 
advance party have asked for advice from the PRG officials і 
regarding the stance the AWU should take on certain questions' 
relating to the presidential elections. It is also known 
1 . that the DRV officials have questioned the AWU advance party | 
тд. ‘about the political mood in the United States. Опе of the  . | 
к AWU delegation members has stated that upon their return to | 
the United States about 26 July 1972, sone of the members | | 
` №11] speak at rallies, over the radio, and on television, ` : 
.to "educate the American people about the consequences of Ac ! 
‘voting for Nixon, and the need to end the'war and defeat - ` | 
Nixon." The delegation member added that the demonstrations NE. 
at- the Republican Convention will be "unique." 


М ] dud 


| ΗΝ pg ne ae xx= ganar, mee mam 
MORET αμ eae EOM oo enint 


п. 


m 


ΣΦ 


| ` Point Plan offered by the PRG. The Americans, too, for the most part, 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| | | E i 2 AUG 1972 


| | Au байт | 
Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt D° -3 J 
, or Harass the Republican National Convention Ν | 


SUMMARY: z 


There are no new indications of specific foreign plans or efforts to 
inspire, support, influence, or exploit activities designed to disrupt or 
harass the Republican National Convention in Miami, Florida, 21-24 August 


` 1972. Although meetings have been held recently in Paris, France, between 


American antiwar activists and representatives of the Democratic Republic 
of North Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary Government of 
South Vietnam (PRG), currently available information indicates that the 


. DRV/PRG officials made no efforts to encourage or give guidance to the 


American participants with respect to the upcoming Republican National , 
Convention. Private discussions, separate from the meetings with the entire / 
Amsrican delegation, were conducted by, both the DRV and the PRG officials; 
.at present, we have no information regarding the substance of these private 
exchanges. А second group of activists, considered more important than 
the first delegation, is scheduled to travel to Paris on or about 1 August. 1972 = 
for further consultations with the PRG and DRV representatives, : 


E: 


` DEVELOPMENTS: 


Ë In recent meetings in Paris, France, with members of an American 
delegation sponsored by the Anti-War Union (AWU), representatives of 

the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) and the Provisional Revolutionary ` 
Government of South: Vietnam (PRG) were very guarded with respect to dis- X 
cussing activities at the Republican National Convention. Although the Vietnam~ 
ese repeatedly questioned the Americans concerning the mood of the antiwar 
movement in the United States, they made no direct reference to the Repub- 
lican Convention, except for one instance wlien PRG Deputy Chief Nguyen 

Van TIEN accused President Nixon of using the private апа public sessions 

of the Paris peace talks as "propaganda for the Republican Convention." 

TIEN then urged the Americans to promote and propagandize the Seven 


"refrained from discussing the Convention, other than to estimate that demon- i 
‘strators will number about 10,000 at the Convention. - 
. 00563 


Qau. JT и ] 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Following their meeting on 22 July 1972 with the AWU delegation, 
the PRG officials held additional talks with sub-groups of the delegation. 
Additionally, at least one of the American participants was invited by 
the DRV officials to return for further discussions. At present, there 
із no information available concerning the substance of these private 
| exchanges. й 


. n8 


т 


. ΤΑ second, more important delegation of Americans connected with 
` the Anti-War Union is scheduled to travel to Paris circa 1 August 1972 
for further consultation with DRV and PRG representatives, This second 
group is scheduled to be led by Rennie DAVIS, founder and leader of the ` 
. AWU. This will be DAVIS' second trip to Paris within recent months for. 
discussions with DRV and PRG representatives. Upop his return from 
his first trip, DAVIS publicly stated that the AWU would demonstrate at 
Fo x s both the Democratic and the Republican Convention, but that the AWU's 
OO ; chief target would be the Republican Convention. 


D" x 


© а re E Í š 
7 $us бо MES MEN t 
: š : 
і ΠΝ , 
` - i 
. і : 
ES - ч = = ΄ 
B НЕ: i 
* J з А 
£u s 
` 
¿ t 
x πο. 8 е ` N 
. А : 
s š 
M * .. 
і 9 
“; А пе 


,—— — A. 


"a ——— aan 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- Cou «tl 
Dò- 33 
Foreign Support for Activities Planned іо Disrupt | 
, ‚ or Нагаѕ5 the Republican National Convention 


There are no new indications, as.of this date, of foreign plans 
or efforts to inspire, support, or take advantage of activities designed 
to disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Republican Party 
in Miami, Florida, 21-24 August 1972. 


1 


a. 


9 AUG 1972 


—o n 1711...  —uss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


16 AUG 1972 


p Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 
or Harass the Republican National Convention 


. There are no new indications, as of this date, of 
foreign plans or efforts to inspire, support, or take 
£dvantage of activities designed to disrupt or harass 
the National Convention of the Republican Party. in 
Miami, Florida, 21-24 August 1972. 


x 
x 
| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


TU he М : 
у 
1 


€(——————————Á 


—Á—— w as o ... a .. 


— 


ї 
v3 š 


Aom sr 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


s МАЯ 1972 


ә бої ¢ 


Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 
Or Harass the Democratic National Convention 


- 


© SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION: 


There are no direct indications thus far of foreign 
efforts to inspire, support or take advantage of activities 
designed to disrupt or harass the National Convention of 
the Democratic Party in Miami, 10-13 July 1972. The concept: 


. ої coordinated international support for domestic activities 


in the United States was generally endorsed at the recent 
World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the Peoples 

of Indochina; however, the Conference i5sued no specific 
call for international support of disruptive actions at the 
Anerican national репси conventions. 


BACKGROUND: зу ы iw E 


Sepa, sha 
Ate the. Soviet-controlled World Assess for Peace 


"алі Independence of the Peoples' of Indochina, held in 


Versailles from 10-13 February 1972, there was mention of' 
American plans for demonstrations at both the Republican р 
and Democratic National Conventions. The final draft 


. resolution from. the conference's "Action Commission" con- 


tains an appendix submitted by American delegates whose 
goal was to secure global coordination for domestic actions 


in the United States. It calls for international support 


to six weeks of domestic antiwar actions. апа demonstrations, 
from 1 April to 15 May 1972, and concludes with the state- 


ment: -"This campaign will lead up to thé Democratic Party N 


Convention at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican ' 
Party Convention’ in. San Diego on August 21, 1972." 


The final "Resolution of the Paris World Resen bîy 
for the Peace and Independence of the Indochinese People" 
of 13 February 1972, drafted by the "Political Commission" 
states: 


"In the United ‘States particularly, the protest 
against the war is voiced more and more strongly, 


| 


mE —!— F 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


.. σφ. prs ὑπ οκ. ¢ - 9. ^ 
ча ї 
: Y 
. ttt тезата. "ео. DR Lib .. +» .. > a... s. о› . beacon a об 
' η under various forms, such as draft evasions; 
desertions, resistance, demonstrations which 
now affect even the soldiers. The Assembly 
ais calls for support to these progressive and 
ro... antiwar forces in the United States, and asks . 
. the governments to grant asylum to deserters ` š 
Do uvae 27. ГА and to support their right to repatriation. a 
; = 7727 All together, the peoples of the World will | 
| UID qo xo efficiently help to impose on the U.S. Govern- 
c+." ды Went the*restoration of peace, independence 
177 7 and freedom in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia," 
* LI г 5-8 k А . š 
boe. i gens :3 s | а i ; М 
1 κ. " - : 
i F vs ы P : E ' E 
x n А ч. i A NN з | Й 
! x : = É ο & 2 
H a UE rere fe ` li : 
са» 
| | : τ 
| | 7 
LI И «У it & x \ 
= Ыы м 1 - z \ 
" Й і 
: : і 
1 
` | 
- ` > t ς x 
› 5 τ ΄ 7, 
> È 
pP ae 
` d ‚ 
" MÀ === e. 
. 00569 
E E A ENS oic diac pa prem armes nme 
ТТ e 


ж ЩҖҖ s 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"ECT TE Count- 
T =: : ws ot . PE А -36 


ате Support for Activities Planned to P 
` or Harass the Democratic National Convention 


SUMMARY : 


New indications of reim efforts or КЕ 9 to inspire, 
support,.influence, or exploit actions designed to disrupt 
or harass the Democratic National Convention in Miami, 10-13 
` July 1972, are limited to a reiteration by a member of the 
Secretariat of the Stockholm Conference on Vietnam оба 
statement previously issued by the World Assembly for Peace 
and Independence of the Peoples of Indochina. The Assembly's 
'pronouncement generally endorsed the concept of international 
support to a campaign of anti-Vietnam War^activities in the 
United States leading up to the Democratic and Republican 
Conventions, but made no specific call for support of dis- 
ruptive actions at the conventions themselves. 


D "i . 
m —— A... . 
4 


| i DEVELOPMENTS: . μα... ` Í 


The World Assembly for Peace and Independence of the 
Peoples of Indochina, of which the Stockholm Conference was V. 
a major organizer, had earlier enunciated a similar statement’, 
іп an appendix to the final draft resolution: of the Assembly's 
"Action Commission." The appendix/ called for international 
support to six weeks of domestic antiwar actions and demon- 
. я strations, from 1 April to 15 May 1972, and concluded with 

` 'the statement: "This campaign will lead up to the Democratic 
Party Convention at Miami on July 9, 1972, and the Republican 
Party Convention in San Diego on August 21, 1972." 


00570 


—— 2 ` -----" 5 
рожа κο ο ο. Í τῇ ο. ЕЕ — ας 1 
А S + ері =; прута у ul THp ο s?) — | 
і А 2 * А хоя з a = r1 I ae i E ο zs TI т 

ч z : у з з? x "X: - 


0 
` Ἡ эз. Р Й я ي‎ Ifa : & M Ей 
i - t і es - 3 = ' 


[Son А 


E т, 
نے‎ OE 


A — a r `. 


+ 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


i 2 3 MAY 1972 


HS | — ΟΕ 
bo-37 


foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 
-or Harass the Democratic National Convention 


SUMMARY: 


Indications remain Tinê têd of foreign plans or attempts 
to inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designed 
to disrupt ог harass the Democratic National Convention in 

= uly 1972. 


The British-based Interna- 
tiona onfederation for Disarmament and: Peace (ICDP) has 

distributed a "Spring Offensive Calendar" of activities 
in the United States against the war based on a submission r 
by the Peoples' Coalition for Peace and Justice .(PCPJ). і 


. The calendar includes actions p]apned in connection with ! 


the Democratic Convention. 


- 


DEVELOPMENTS: EP ἫΝ 


The International Confederation for Disarmament and ` 
Peace, a British-based antiwar organization and one of the 
more prominent member organizations of the Stockholm Con-. 
ference, has attached a "Spring Offensive Calendar" to thê ` 
April -May 1972 issue of its regular international publica- 
tion Vietnam International. The calendar had been furnished 
by the Peopie's Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and 
included the following entry: 

July | 9 - 12 Democratic Convention, Miami Beach. 
Demonstrations organised by Florida 
People' 5 Coalition, Box 17521, Tampa, ' 
Florida 33612. 


RELEASE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


* 
т 


А S The ICDP commentary on the PCPJ | 
І calendar urges demo ions 
in Support of some of the dates listed but iu UE 


чә... 
) call for actions in connection with the Democratic Convention 
zu i ^ T e 
| s "m - 
- р i 
| ΤΗ т. x Ё 
i * PN I Е i 
| Tte А i 
| M 
1 
1 
` ` 
| 
: 4 
| \ 
و“‎ à \ 
і І 
|| 
! i | 
{ : E "9 ~ 
| : 
E У 
1 Pt e 


+ 


x 


— t «up μμ 
κ κ ορ πας Mum T 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Ko Мы бк .. 1. 
x ж -- 54 
| | om. o... 7? JUN 1972 

on ^ I E г ` > > <. 

- . Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 

І au й or Harass the Democratic National Convention 

x | SUMMARY: | E у D ET 


| 
The only new indication of foreign plans or efforts 
to inspire, support, influence, or exploit actions designed 
А to disrupt or harass the Democratic National Convention in 

` Miami, Florida, 10-13 July 1972, is an expression of interest 

` by a member of the North Vietnamese Delegation to the Paris 
Peace Talks in the plans of the major antiwar organizations 
-in the United States for demonstrations in connection with 
the political conventions of both major parties. 


DEVELOPMENTS: 


In mid-May 1972, a member of the North Vietnamese Dele-- 
, gation to the Paris Peace TalK5"invited a visitor to contact 
him again when the visitor returned from an imminent trip 
to the United States. The North Vietnamese official gave 
the visitor the New York City addresses of the People's 
"Coalition for Peace and Justice (PCPJ) and the National 
Peace Action Coalition (NPAC), and asked the visitor to 
inquire at their offices regarding their plans for demon- 
Strations during the coming summer. The North Vietnamese 
-official stated that' he was especially interested in plans 
for actions in connection with the Democratic and National 
Conventions. | E š 


- 
. 


^ 


le A re 


tt — 


LLL E ERE EET 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


`. А Е mw +` ea o’ , 
Κ΄ TD 
μμ... mem Ó > | > 
: | 21 JUN 1972 
m Е жа .. -. 2 = š Фо ` 
"^ "n . 
вот ee MT c omn us seres 


Foreign Support for Activities Planned to Disrupt 
or Harass the Democratic National Convention 
There are no additional indications, as of this daté, of foreign plans 
or efforts to inspire, Support, or take advantage of activities designed to 
disrupt or harass the National Convention of the Democratic Party in Miami, 
Florida, 10-13 July 1972. : : 


t 


+ - 
à 
; 
š 
k 
H 
! ` 
е 
і 
š . 
t 
i , 
- Li 
- 
| 
t 
- > ' 
— “aioe š 2 ! 
4 £i . 
4 Es 
e 00574 
کا‎ ess € tee «μα m — Y 4. — я hee M —— A0 


——Ñ 1111 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


LEER ERREUR 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


vee t Ye ae 
7 7 " T | ( 3 = ) fi |; z se Й ^t 
. Ы 3: == 
i I JUN А d 
i 231572 t 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director/Comptroller 
` VIA — +4 Acting Deputy Director for Plans 


oe 


Agency Support to the U.S. Secret, Service’ 

(0555) for National Pemocratic (10-14 July 

1972) and National Republican (21-24 August 
1972) Conventions ° 


SUBJECT 


| 1. This neworandua is for the information of the Executive 
- Director/Cozptroller. 


2. Authorization for CIA supnort to the U.S. Secret Service 
for the Democratic aud Republican National Conventions is con- 
tained in a acnorandua of 7 Anril 1972 from Chief, CI Staff το 
the PCI which was concurred in by the ADD? and approved by the 
PCI on 10 April 1272 (copy attached). 7 


met with the ''ianmi 
1558 headquarters to 


5. On 13 Зогії 1272 the 
USSS representative and Мт. 
discuss preliminary planning КӨ 
0555 prior to and during subtcet Toure 


. LiCS. НЫ 17 Anril 1972 
tho and met with (т. it Headouarters 
to implenent the Preliminary plenning ux ποπ in iani and 


to determine the extent of Headquarters support required by the 
0555. | ` - і 


4. The basic agreenent rutually concurred їп by the 1555 
and licadquarters representatives provided that: 


а, [ee 77 conduct name traces on 
all Cuba; the USSS, і 


b. CIA Headquarters would conduct name traces on 
all other foreiga born persons of interest to the 5555. 


C. CIA would keep the USSS informed of any events 
in the Caribbean and Latin American arcas that would 
have any bearing on the USSS protective mission during 
the convention periods. This would include briefings 
on Cuba and Cuban policies toward the United States and 
On activities of Cuban intellicence operations which 
could affect the security of the conventions. 


` 


00576 . 


« 


I ` 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


d. Coveraze of Latin American exile groups in the 
United States would be the responsibility of the FRI 
since CIA had coased the extensive coverage formerly 
targeted against these groups since lt was now considered 

4;;.Bn internal security function. - 


has arranged the rental of a safencusc 
about five minutes from convention ccnter which will provide a 
securo and nearby meeting site for ISSS and Agency personnel., 
This safchouse will be available just prior to and during both 
conventions. А Headauarters officer will ΤΟΥ to “Miami prior to 
the conventions and remain until- the conventions adjcurn to | 
assist in providing the sapport descritted in paragraph 
four above. ; 


7. Station УХН/Міазі is in daily contact with the USSS in 
Miami, utilizing JNFALCON as a weetine site when necessary. The 
location of Station WH/Miami (JU'UCO?^A) bas not been revealed to 
the 0555. (JMCOSRA is located some distance fron JHFALCON,) | 
Additionally, the liami Security Field Office maintains normal 
liaison with the local 0555 Міапі unit. 


8. ть о }адетзталаз that no personnel will be present 
at the conv l, that they will not rrovide any cquipnent 
unique to the Agency, nor will it provide the use of any other 
facilities other than the safehouse described in paragraph six, 


00577 


ντο ο. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


js | (^ Πε... FA 


.- Хе Р ΄ 


2, 
<`" 
Pu 


9. A copy of this neno Seine sent "m d 
NENNEN το insure that the is fully conve KITI 

т lines and basic ас "BT with the Secret. Service, 
and has all of the infornation agreed upon in Headquarters. 


΄ 
` 


514 


"n Theodore G, Shackley 
: Chief 
Western Hemisphere Division 


Attachment 


Distribution: 


Orig & 1 - Exec. Dir/Comptroller 


= Acting npo 


_— ددع ت — 


NNNHN 
1 


pon 


00578 


зе 


BEEN LAS ABMS s 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ча 
oe 


LA; z «2 j 


. s s 7 77 Apr BR 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 
VIA: Deputy Director for Plahs 


SUBJECT: CIA Support to the Seerct Service 
3 for the Democratic National 
. t M Convention in Miami, Florida 
ΝΠ; July 9 - 15, 1972 


1. This memorandum describes the support which 


` the Secret Service has requested from CIA with голага 


to the Democratic liational Convention. It is rec- | 
ommended tnat the Agency furnish the support outlined 5 


in paragrapn 3 of tnis memorandum and your approval 
.is requested. 


2. By memorandum 1-30-610.53 of 30 March 
(attached as reference), tne Secret Service Баз 
requested a meeting with appropriate Agency officers 1 
to discuss the Asency's support to tne Secret Lervice 


prior to and during the Democratic National Convention. 
The Secret Service plans to Send an agent to sani on 
ll April to commence preparations for tne convention 


_ and wishes to have the meet Ang witn Agency Heaüquarters 


officers prior to the agents departure Гог Нігті. 


3. ` While details зебоваїні the type of support N 
Which the Secret Service will request or the Azency 
will not be. known until there has been -a meeting 
with the Secret Service. on this matter, it is evident 
from the Secret service memorandum and from our 
experience in supporting tne Secret Service at the 


‘Republican Convention in Miami in 1968 that the 
Secret Service desires: 


A) Briefings on Cuba and Cuban policy 
towards the United States. Counterintelligence 
information on Cuban operations against the 
United States wnicn could affect the security 
of the convention. 


iT y £ s. 


ΕΕ ——e€— À— = нинин 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


B) Briefings on Cuban exile acvivities У 
1 an the United States, 3 
“CF Мана checks on hotel and convention 


enployces; nare checks on those persons in 
i the Hiami area whom the Secret Service 


considers a threat to its protective mission, 
E D) А watchlist ог persons w 
і "ud 


i | considers а potential threat to t 
i т Š of the convention. . 


і. © O LE Liaison with a desigrated M. 
і s Гог tne ОШГОО5$е of con-uct ng 
T . name checks against files з. 


| кы other files available 


Нод the Agency 
he Security 


| 4, Agency Support tc the Socret Service for 5 
l ` ` converfion will be centralized at ücadauarters an- 
і Will be controllec py lieaaq 
under the general Subervision of 
Serve as the coordinator of 


uarters. [Cnier, | 
-he/CI Sta will С | 
this support. ; 


ames Angleton 
Chief, CI Starr 


1 Attachment ai 


ес: ΡΡΟΙ 


CCLOP Lor Plans 


r : . The recommendation contained 
- . in aragraph 1 1: @Lorovec: 
o 2 we 


> i f \ λα Алл ДАЛАА AA 
direct ~ ог Centrai inzoll 


igenc: 
. T y APR 4972 
| А : E й — - مس‎ — μι 


ТАА T 00 


МОВІ DocID: 1451843 


v ° ç 3 VN ; UH 
«йо РН — eg dms 
TUR, ' THE D./ARYMENT OF THE TREASURY 
“wy! А . 
ё UNITZD STATES SECRZT SERVICE 


нери ‚ 


' AM | 1-30-610,53 
Dater: March 30, 1972 


` BY LISON 


Central Intelitgence A 


| 
τ Š ATIN: Mr 
М 2 . WE ο xe DIR C R 
| PEOR А JAMES J. ROWLEY ІКЕСТОЇ | " 
SIDES 


.Democratic National Convention - 
. Miami, Florida - зу 9-15, 1972 


In view of our Hedponsibiiseies regarding the protection 
of Prosidential candidates, we havea-initiated security 
preparations for спе Democratic National Convention, 
which will pe held in Miami, Florida, between Juiy 9-15, 
1972. 


We request a meeting as soon as possible between representa- 
tives of our Intelligence Division end your agency to 
discuss intelligence support prior to and during the 
Democratic National Convention, We are specifically 
interested in discussing the appropriate channels for 
routing name checks ої notel and convention empioyees, 
as well as other individuals of protective interest to 
this Service. We anticipate there will be several 
thousand names to be checked. We would also like to 
discuss the current Cuban situation, particularly any 
rears reia tionships between pro-Cuban groups in the 
ar : since we consider these 
groepe sS po. a potant πει threat το our protectiva miasion, 


SEEN | . | | а 
` б τς | 00581 


n-— a "ss—nóó— Àw—  —— eee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 May 1973 
SUBJECT: Request for Information on Sensitive Activities 


You will recall that in Fiscal Years 1971 and 1972, 
I believe, Agency funds were made available to the ЕВІ. 
These funds may still be possibly held in a special 
account for that use. This is one of the areas where 
TSD has been very much involved. Chuck Briggs would 
have the details as this jas handled through the Executive 
Director's office and of course Angleton would have 


additional information. 


э qd. 
t at "s же LI 


Edward L. Sherman 
Chief 
Missions and Programs Staff 


ПЕНИЕ M pg—— F 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1973 
MEMORANDUM FOR : Deputy Director for Operations : 
SUBJECT : Areas of Possible Embarrassment 


to the Agency 


1. Sometime in the spring or early summer of 1971, Mr, John 
Dean levied the requirement on the Agency for information relating to 
the Investors Overseas Service (IOS). The original request was 
non-specific but it gradually emerged that Dean was concerned with 
the possible adverse publicity that might develop regarding the 
President's nephew, who was employed by IOS, ‘ 


2. There were multiple channels from the White House to the 
Agency on this subject: 


a, Presumably Haldeman and/or Ehrlichman to Director 
Helms. I 


b. Someone (unnamed) in the White House to the DDCI, 
General Cushman (see attached telephone conversation). 
Note that Ehrlichman is mentioned, and 


c. John Dean to the CI Staff. These various channels 
were sorted out in time and six reports were passed by 
the CI Staff to Mr. Fred Fielding for Mr. John Dean. 


3, The telephone call of General Cushman's is of interest since 
it gives the flavor of White House concern, it took several days to 
uncover the fact that the White House interest centered on the involve- 
ment of the President's nephew with IOS and possible adverse publicity. 
The reports submitted to Dean's office were routine-in nature and were 
coordinated with the DCI. After a few months, interest in this sub- 
ject died down and we did not pursue it further. 


4, Please return the attachments when they have served your ` 
purpose, 


FORET | 00583. 


ш === Eee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


à 5. Ialso include a short note on the Intelligence Evaluation 
Committee and Staff prepared by Richard Ober. The original 
meetings were held in the office of John Dean at the White House 
and the principal sparkplug for this group activity was the then 
Assistant Attorney General for Internal Security, Robert Mardjan 
and then later his assistant, William Olsen, It is noted that Mr. 
Mardian is now appearing before the Grand Jury and'it is always — 
possible that he might draw in the Agency. 


6. Before appointing Ober to the IES Staff as the Agency 
representative, I had attended various inter-agency meetings pre- 
sided over by Mardian, І expressed the view to Director Helms 
that Mardian would require very careful handling due to his inex- 
perience. Furthermore, Mardian was deeply involved in the split 
between Bill Sullivan and Mr. Hoover. Ona confidential basis 
one or two senior FBI officials stated that Sullivan was secretly 
passing files to Mardian without Mr. Hoover's permission, This. 
was one of the important reasons why Sullivan was dismissed from 
the, Bureau. 


ως 


Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff 


Attachments (5) 


SES Hi | 00584 


De 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Bob, how are you. 
ррсі: Just fine; I just talked to Jack Sherwood and he suggested I give you 


a ias ; 


+ Жэ πο. 
ма — * d 


I ον appreciate it. I asked Jack to call you. I spoke to Rose yesterday, 
‚апа told her "I bad a little project here for John Ehrlichman and I need very 
discreet assistance from the Company, and 1 should. like to touch base with 
Dans I met him at Jack Sherwood's, w : 


<. ttm mm š ; 


DDCIL That's right. 


νυ. 


That's right and beyond that I would like to і establish a relationship because 
from time to time we have a few needs in your area. Let me tell you what we ` 
need to know here. Your Agency would be the only one to help. I have checked 
with the Bureau, Bob, and they have nothing on this fellow. Just а mere name 
check but it apparently bas some significance, of course. Ray Finkelstein; 
born in Belgium about 1940; moved to Brazil about age.12 with his family. 

This might Фе helpful. He now is working with one Gilbert Straub, apparently 
Straub is hooked up with that Kornfeld outfit: IOS. .We havea need to know what 
Finkelstein is all about. 

DDCI: We will do our best, of course; we have some counterintelligence files 
which sonietimes turn up people but ordinarily, of course, we don't surveil 

any Americans but this fellow might have come to our notice. 

He may not be an American, just a | European Jew; that is the problem, the 
Bureau has come up with zero. ` 


ae mese 


- —— ےا ی سے що‏ 


DDCI: Do you know where he is physically located? ` ux. 


mr 


He dnd be in Geneva; Straub is apparently in Geneva. 


id μυ... 
- en x 


DDCI: Well, let me get on this and I will get back tó you. 


— 


H 

! 

| cate personal ao ignmert lo 
- [keep the President's herp δ 
"Гуде brother, Donald, ent of 

| 


yas: Pasfon Dr 


Мел, 


| The 3 


Пу Jack Aaderaon | 
President Ne van has given 
aide John Kiril aan a deli. 


hat water. 

Donald Nixon has n weak 
ness for falieninz foods and 
сахучнопоу. He lrird to satisfy 
hath appelites in the 1950s hy 
horrowinr $205,000 from bil. 
lionaire Howard Hughcs to ор. 
crate а restaurant chain, the 
Home of the Nixonburger, in 
Southern California. 

Two months after the Joan 
was made, some ef Hughes 
fap assistanis sat down with 


| Donald to survey the chaos of 


his accounts. Noah Dietrich, 
who then directed the day-to- 
day. eperallons of Hughes’ em- 
pire, complained that Danald 
had zone through the money 
withoul paying off important 
creditors. 

Rut it was too Jate. Donald's 
restaurants went bankrupt, 
and the Nixonburger was lost 
(о mankind, 

The story of the $205,000 
loan leaked out during Rich- 
ard Nixon's 1900 campaign for 
fhe presidency, causing him 
political pain, 

М one time, Donald incor- 
porated himself and began sel- 
Jing shares to citizens who 
might have an Interest In his 
bload ine, Ehrlichman ον. 
plained “ently to Donald that 
stich ventures could embarrass 
his brother and that, for hls 
brother's sake, he should 


сй. = ш | 


heres бол подіє 


avoid deals that night геПегі 
unfavornhly оп the President, 
Nol long aflerward, Donald 


hegan dickering wlth John 
Dill, р Boston manufacturer of 
plays eund equipment, who 
wanled the government to 
consider installing his proil- 
vets in urban riot areas, IHH 
told us Donald merely wanted 
19 he the company’s West 
Coast representative, and did 
nol want to ри Ча the fix for 
federal money. But Eich- 
man quiclly vetoed the proj- 
есі, and the President's 
brother wrote to Hilt saying 
he was no longer interested 
in the company. 


[No Langer Adviser 
Donald also male сопіасі З 
with Elmer Stone а Jawyer for 
the Ryan Aeronautical Com- 
pany, But in deference tà his 
brother, Donald took Silone 
(hrough the guarded White 
Mouse rales to sce Ehrich- 
man. Afterward, a spokesman 
for Ryan  Acronautical cx- 
plained that the pair had Just 
dropped by to let it be known 
that Stone was no longer псі- 
ing ns Donald's legal adviser. 
When Donald finally joined 
the Marriolt Corparallon in 
January, 1970, Ehrlichman 
summoned J. Willard Marriott 
and his son, Bill, to the While 
House for an audience with 
the President. Marriott had 
been chairman of the Nixon 
inaugural and is trusted: by 
the President. і 
Delicately, the President 
asked the Marrlolis to Keep 


MORI 


Tne WASHINGTON POST Wednesday, Feb. 16,1972 


ius an Й, ye gorr. His Brother 


his brother out of trouble. "I 
want [o be sure that Don has 
во dealings мій) the Inderal 
government, said the Presl- 
dent. "I want to be sure that 
Dan js ncyer asked to do any- 
thing that would embarrass 
this office," 7 
Then Ше President added nS 
an aflerthought: "Don is thel 
besl salesman in the Nixon 
family." N 
The Marrlolts agreed to 
watch over Donald, and they 
have scrupulously kept him 
away from Washington. There 
has been only one awkward in- 
cident. Donald flew to Greece 
as one of the three-man team 
thal offtred:Marriott’s airline- 
catering service to Aristotle 
Onassis’ Olympic Airlines. 


Greeks Bearing Gifts 


The Greeks, whose mililaryj 


government is unpopular in 
the U.S, rolled out the red 
carpet for the President's 
brother. Tom Pappas, a big 
Republican money raiser with 
oil interests in. Greece, threw 
a lavish dinner for Donald in 
Alhcns and invited members 
of the Greek military junta. 
Aml Onassis, the husband ої 
the widow of the man who de- 
feated Richard Nixon for Pres- 
ident in 1960, sent long- 
stemmed roses to _ Donald's 
hotel room. 

Washington whispers that 
Donald used his White ilousc 
Influcnee to get catering con- 
tracts for Marriott with Amer- 
ican Airlines and TWA, we 


DocID: 1451843 


D7 


have established, are siricthy 
untrue, 
Ehrlichman ils rave Dean- 


alda aon, Donald, Jr, a Per. 
ture before the bay went to 
Switzerland last summer ta 
work Гог Internallonal Cen- 
trols, The company has now 
transferred young Nixon to 
the Bahamas, 

ilis father, talking to a few 
visitors, including my assaciaie 
George Clifford, considered that 
Donald, Jr., 
a disappointment to the fam- 
ily. Hc had been off in tne 
mountains associating with Бір, 
pies before the overseas job 
was arranged, 

The boy had said he was 
going to work for Investors 
Overseas Service, which has 
been in financia) difficully. 

“I told him not to say that,” 
said Donald, a note of exatper- 
alion in his voice. "If {hal ‘gers 
around, he’s going to bein а 
Jot of trouble. I told him he 
was to say he was роїп to 
work far International Con: 
trols. JOS and Inlernationat 
Controls are’ allicd companics, 
but he's not supposed {о say 
he's working for ‘JOS. You 
know what would happen if 
that got around. 

“That dumb so-and-so,” Dón- 
ald said of his son. "John Ehre, 
Центап talked to him for a 
couple of hours and told him 
io behave himself over there. 
You know, he told bim he was 
the President's nephew and 
couldn't do anything to embar- 
rass the President.” 


^ o 1372, Dell-MeClura Byndicate 


| X mI f 


е Mit 


Ш 


— δη] -Όπρο- 


D J ill} 
Jut 


t 


IN 


ч aminn س وی عه‎ ы Ж eam ee ee 


N ri 


00585 


ΓΓῺ 
а 
[ч | 


was something of. 


мо mine pent > سض سب‎ - -su 


2 
Li 


me 


On Vesc 


By JAMES R. POLK 
Star-News 5008 Writer 

Edward C. Nixon, brother 
of the President, is keeping 
his silence in the face of 
court testimony that he 
played a role in arranging a 
$200,003 campaign contribu- 
tion in cash from a financier 
асс. of fraud, 

"Хо comment that js rese 

worlhy, Thank you. Good- 
bye," Nixon said when final- 
ly reached yesterday at his 
Unlisted telephone number 
in Edmonds, Wash., afler a 
week of calls. Then he hung 
up. 
А New Jersey campaign 
official, Harry L. Scars, has 
testificd he was told tho 
Nixon brother made a call 
to Washington to confirm that 
the donation by .financier 
Robert L. Vesco was wanted 
in cash, 


Sears sald under oath hs 


was present when the 42- 
year-old Nixon arrived at 


Раре 


` . P 


"ta С ANT ec 


каст ge ce 
t =m TU: 


‘Nixon | Kin 
co Cash 


Р 
Vesco's business Бейне 


nna --- 


= 
“> e Fy 


n Saud 


ters in Fairfield, N.J., ailer 
a helicopter flight. from New 


` York City, Hows yer, Scars 


said he didn't stay” for the 
eelinz among Nisen, Vesco 
and business “associates, 

The Securities and Ἐκ. 
change Com:nission hes filed 
a civil suit agzinst Vesco ас» 
cusinz him of a $2 million 
fraud in In2tip;; Ga assets of 
his Sx Ёз-баг ей IS, Ltd., 
mütnal fund a start ч. 

Edward Nixon, тю Searg 
said is а furıner diz cies of a 
Vesco согарагу, js Hie zcond 
member of the I? ή ης 
family to ba lined to tha 
financier. Donald A. Nixon, 
a son of the Frosiċcnt’s othor 
brother, is Vesco's nersonal 
administrative assistant, usu- 
ally besed in Nassau, age Ba- 
hamas, 

The SEC probe has indi- 
cated the £260,660 cash dona- 
tion came p" om funds at Ves- 
co's Bahamas Commonwealth 


Г 


ЖОЛ 1 


Of ><. δ. 


n 
(S Called | РЕЧТЕ 


MORI DocID: 


++ tex τς, ee r= 


SE MENG menn sea, 


m 


EDWARD C. NIXON ` 
Bank in азап, The monty 
was [flown to Washington 
April 10, although the Mixen 
campaign failed ta report the 


donation under the new dis- ' 


closure law. 

A federal court hearing із 
scheduled Monday in New 
York City on the SEC's bid 
for nn injunction anpninst vio- 
lation of sccurilles laws. 
Scars" testimony came in a 
pretrial deposition in Ше 


SEC E 
лоб 


ana NP 


"nnl? 


1451843 


m= 


Pre 
his їх 
the } 
scarcl 
proble 
ing fo- 
value t 

A Y 
said th 
sion 0 
Treasu* 
Shultz, . 
man A 
agemon 
Hoy As. 
bert. Sh 
Ecouomi 
tendo І 
rane ef 

Hie ο 
ејоѕе da 
buffing 
week in i 
тат! 
to new 1 
currenci- 
Frankfu 
and "Tv! 
day to 
ferver. 

Nixor 


| 


woo 


THE WALL STREE 


T JOURNAL, Friday, May 4 
3 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


1973 5 


mom Ὃν ὁ Ὁ πλω, 


| === 


| V 

| Vesco Arrest Warrant 
і Issued by Federal Judge 
кач . 

For Grand Jury Inquiry 


Financier Hasn't, Been in the U.S. 
For Months; His Lawyer Fears 
Panel Will Produce Indictment 


| Ву u Waru, STREET JornxAL Staff Reporter 
mt YORK — Federal Judze Edmund L, 
j û 6Inieri issued а warrant for the arrest οἵ em- 


, butted New Jersey financier Robert L. Vesco. | 


in order to bring him as witness before a grand 
ESAE d ΘΉΚΗ his activities, Mr. i 
| Dd. as been out of the U.S. for several 
No criminal charges ^ 
| against Mr. Vesco. But the US. TS 
fice, which requested the bench warrant re- 
viously had asked the judge to find Mr. Vosco 
In contempt of court for falling to heed a sub- 
poena ordering him to appear before the grand 
Jury. The government tried to Serve the sub. 
poena on April 15 in Nassau, Bahama Islands 
The grand jury із Understood to be investi- 
gating the circumstances of Mr. Vesco's $250,- 
000 in contributions to President Nixon's 2072 
reclection campaign. At the time, the Securi- 
Nes and Exchange Commission Was conducting 
& well publicized inquiry into Mr. Vesvo’s busi- 
ness affairs, The SEC file ahuge civil suit 
against him and 41 other күйү чый, on | 
Nov, 27. The Nixon finance committee EN 


anmo mureaa a 


Mr. Vesco's contributions to him on Jan. 31. 
Mr. Vesvo's attorney, Edward Bennett Wil- 


l'une. told the judge yesterday he hid reason 


to believe that Mr. Vesco would be indicted by 
the grand jury, Mr. Willams said that if forced 
lo appear, Mr, Мезсо would invoke his constitu- 
tional privilezo against self-incrimination, un- 


cution. Mr. Williams added that ine U.S 
í a Б .S. Attor- 
ncy's office had already replicd to him that it 


less he were granted immunity against prose- 
wouldn't offer immunity, 


Mr. Williams, who earlier had asked the 
judge to dismiss the contempt application on 
technical grounds, sald the circumstances 
didn't call for Mr. Vesco's arrest, 

After the court was adjourned, Mr. Williams 
declined to discuss reports that the 3i-year-old 
Mr. Vesco intended to renounce his U.S. cit- 
zenship, even though the айогпеу at an earlier 
hearing had said he would raise the question of 
citizenship. Ts 

James W. Rayhill, an assistant U.S. attor- 
ney, brought the matter up in court, saying the 


"| government had information that Mr. Vesco 


was "currently attempting to renounce his U.S. | 
cilizenship in Costa Rica," where he Jast year 
took up legal residence. It's understood that 


"Mr. Rayhil wasn't referring to a disclosure 
“mage late Wednesday by Costa Rica's presi- 


dent, Jose Figueres. 
President Figueres, on & two-day visit to 


| this country, said that Mr. Vesco in an audi- 


ence two or three weeks ago formally an- 
nounved his intention to renounce U.S. citizen- 
ship. 

In Washington, the State Department said 
Mr. Vesco hes told Costa Rican authorities that 
he already has renounced American citizenship 
before two notaries, with his lawyer's help. 
However, the U.S. Embassy in Costa Rica con- 
tended that didn't count, because it wasn't 


i| done before a consular officer. The State De- 
*] partment’s legal experts are checking to deter- 


mine whether that view js correct. 
The 17.5. has а 1922 extradition treaty with 


Costa Rica, covering 21 crimes, including rob- 


bery, forgery, embezzlement, and fraud. The 
U.S. considers its 1931 extradition treaty with 
Britain to apply to the Bahamas, but it isn’t 
"вісаг whether the Bahamas agrees. The British 
treaty covers such crimes as fraud and misre- 
presentation, but the warrant issued yesterday 
for a grand-jury appearance isn’t a matter for 
which extradition is possible. 

Mr. Vesco has a home and family in Boon- 
ton, N.J., but has bases of opcrations in Nassau 
and in San Jose, Costa Rica. Government pros- 
ecutors declined to comment when asked what 
steps they would take to have Mr. Vesco ar | 
rested if he were located in either of those, 
countries. . E 

The SEC's civil suit accuses Mr, Vesco of! 
directing the "Чодіїпд"" of 5221 million in assets! 
of four foreign mutual funds managed by 1.0.5.; 
Ltd. Mr. Vesco formerly headed both 1.Ο.8. | 
and International Controls Согр., of Fairficld,: 
N.J. Н 


00588 


` 


(шч ass но 


pe K — a —Ó————MáááÓ ae 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


7 MAY 1973 


SUBJECT: Intelligence Evaluation Committee and Staff 


1. Background: Formed December 1970. Membership: 

Department of Justice (Chairman); FBI (active staff par- 
Ы ticipation agreed to only in Мау 1971); Department of 

Defense; Secret Service; National Security Agency; CIA 
and any necessary representatives of other Departments 
or Agencies. (Following have participated: Treasury, 
State.) Staff: IES Executive Director John Dougherty 
and later Bernard Wells supplied by Department of Justice 
‘with title of Special Assistant to the Attorney General 
in reporting through the Assistant Attorney General for 
Internal Security Robert Mardian and later William Olsen. 
IES has received requirements directly from and delivered 
reports directly to John Dean of tbe White House. 


2. CIA Participation: (Contributions ‘on foreign 
aspects (by memorandum with no agéncy letterhead or at- 
tribution). Contributions occasionally include foreign 
intelligence provided by FBI and NSA. А 


— Í 


3. Special Report: The Unauthorized Disclosure 
of Classified Information, November 1971. Initiated July 
1971 by the White House as a consequence of the Presi- 
dent's concern about,the release of the Pentagon Papers 
by Daniel Ellsberg. Both Robert Mardian and G. Gordon 
Liddy initially involved in tasking the IES to produce 
this evaluation. Drafting done’ by IES Staff members 
from Justice and FBI. Only agency participation was 
editorial review. і з 


(Table of contents attached). 


„оз 


а ннан аа 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Introduction 


Problems Relating to the Disclosure 
of Classified Information 


Executive Orders and Related Directives 


Effectiveness of Existing Security: , «. 


Regulations. αμ Ὃν 


Lessons of the "Pentagon Papers" 


Conclusions and Recommendations 


TT 


MORI. DocID: 1451843 


l Page 


13 
18 ` 


31 


00590 


sa = πεν mmm Ὃν as n .- 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


sense | Count |‏ | ا 
Doy‏ | 


5 Mes 73 


SUBJECT: The /MHCHAOS Program 


j 1. The MECHAOS program is a.worldwide program for 
clandestine collection abroad of information on foreign 
efforts to support/encourage/exploit/manipulate domestic 
U.S. extremism, especially by Cuba, Communist China, 
North Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Korea and the 
Arab fedayeen. 


2 The (НЙснАо5 program has not and is not conduct- 
ing efforts domestically for internal domestic collection 
purposes. Agency efforts are foreign. Foreign- -oriented 
activity in the United States has been of two types: 


a. Selected FBI domestic sources who travel 
abroad in connection with their extremist activity 
and/or affiliations to make contact with hostile 
foreign powers or with foreign extremist groups 
have been briefed and debriefed by Headquarters 
officers. The briefing has included appropriate 
operational guidance, including defensive advice. ' 


b. Americans with existing extremist creden- 
tials have been assessed, recruited, tested and 
dispatched abroad for PCS assignments as contract 
agents, primarily sources offered for such use by 
the FBI. When abroad they collect information re- 
sponsive to ΙΜΗΓΗΑΟΣς program requirements, as well 
as other Agency requirements. They are thus used 
primarily for targeting against Cubans, Chinese Com- . `. 
munists, the North Vietnamese, etc., as their back-. 
ground and their particular access permits. It 
should be noted that the aspect' of the 

project of th a Division)is 
the JMHCHAOS PROGRAM. 


| 
| 
1 
í 
| 


'3. As indicated earlier, [MHCHAOS is a foreign pro- 
gram, conducted overseas, except for the limited activity 
{ described above. The program is and has been managed so 
i as to achieve the maximum feasible utilization of exist- 


` ing resources of the Operations Directorate... No assets 
e Lr -—— 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


have been recuited and run exclusively for the [icnaos 
program. Instead, emphasis has been placed on the exploi- 
tation of new and old Agency assets who have a by-product 
capability or a concurrent capability for provision of 
information responsive to the program's requirements. 

This has involved the provision of custom-tailored 'collec- 
tion requirements and operational guidance. This collec- 
tion program is viewed as an integral part of the recruit- 
ment and collection programs of lChina—Operations;—¥ietnam 
0 1 a і 5 е rvision-opera- 
tjons and Korean -Branch-operatiuns, | Agents who have ап 
American "Movement" background or who have. known connec- 
tions with the American "Movement" are usoful as access 
agents to obtain biographic and personality data, to dis- 
cern possible vulnerabilities and susceptibilities, and 

to develop operationally exploitable relationships with 
recruitment targets of the above programs. These assets 
are of interest to our targets because of their connec- 
tions with and/or knowledge of the American "Movement," 
Over the course of theJMHCHAOS program, there have been 
approximately 20 important areas of operational interest, 


Which at the present time have'"béen reduced to about ten: 
| Paris, 


Stockholm, Brussels, Dar Es Salaam, Conakry, Algiers, | 


Mexico City, Santiago, Ottawa and Hong Kong. ο — T, 


` 


4. The /MHICHAOS program also utilizes audio opera- f 
tions, two of which have been implementeä to cover tar- : 
gets of special interest. ` ` 


00592 


e Ü—PÓÓ—ÁÀ—M—  —MÀ——À __ € _ 4 4 4 4 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


S. . фийснлоз reporting from abroad relating to the 
program originates in two ways: Individuals who are noted 
in contact with Cubans, the Chinese Communists, etc., and 
who appear to have extremist connections, interests or 
background are reported upon, ‘Other individuals are re- 
ported upon in response Το: specific Headquarters require- 
ments received from the FBI because such individuals are 
of active investigatory security interest to the FBI. 


. All cable and dispatch traffic related tọ „the 
биўснлб$ program is sent via restricted channels. (It is 
.not processed by either the Cable Secretariat or the In- 
formation Services Diosc The control and retriev- 
ability of information obtained, including information 
received from the ЕВІ, is the responsibility of the Spe- 
cial Operations Group. - 


7. Information responsive to specific FBI require- 
ments is disseminated to the FBI via special controlled 
dissemination channels, i.e., by restricted handling cable 

Е traffic от via special pouch and specially numbered blind 
! memoranda. 


8. Information of particular significance, when со1- « 
lected, has been disseminated by special memorandum over ' 
the signature of the Director of Central Intelligence to 
the White House (Dr. Kissinger and John Dean), as well as' 
to the Attorney General, the Secretary of State and the. 
Director of the FBI. 


EFT 


πα 


"a 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


eus 
"т М, 


"TTOd/ID 


ID зо 


“dno 


SENDER WILL CHECK CLA 
UNCLASSIFIED | | 


[actu о |_ Говест REPLY | 
| approvat — ПИ [DISPATCH 

(comment — — | Jm | 
[concurrence || INFORMATION | 


Remarks: " - 


Sam: . 


Attached are the following: 
l-background paper on TIC £7 
2-comments on facts and statistics 


$:comments on AID by Mr. Schlesinger 
1963 (which Mr. Colby might find 
ix : of interest) 


FROM: NAME, ADDRESS 


| | UNCLASSIFIED T F CONFIDENTIAL T | SECRET | 
"M. 237. = ес 


i 
ὶ 
: 
і 
H 
i 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


3 SUBJECT : Counter Intelligence Staff, 
3 Police Group Activities ` 


E 1. Counter Intelligence Staff, Police Group (CI/PG) 
is responsible for Staff coordination within the Office 
of the Deputy Director for Operations for activities and 
programs involving assistance to foreign police/security 

3 forces for the purpose of exploiting such activities and 

E programs for intelligence purposes. 


ere 


EC 2. CI/PG maintains liaison with the Office of Public 
E Safety, Agency for International Development (OPS/AID) 

and its training facility, the International Police Academy 
ТРА). CI/PG also administers and supervises Project 


In addition, PG coordinates a Jo ا‎ 
Central Intelligence Agency] | 


29 - echnica vestigations Course. CI/PG provides guidance 
Я and counsel to the Area Divisions in matters pertaining 

- to police/security functions and activities. Specific 

24 details of these functions are as follows: 


LIAISON WITH OPS/AID 


ie CI/PG liaison with OPS/AID and IPA is conducted on a 
КЕ | daily basis and consists principally of: 


A. exchange of information on IPA participants, some 
of whom later attend courses 


B. arranging for inclusion of Agency sponsored partici- 
| pants in IPA/OPS/AID training programs, 


: C: arranging for IPA/OPS/AID briefings and tours for 
: foreign police/security representatives sponsored 
| XR | by CIA Area Divisions 00597 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


* зас rik Se تکیت‎ N 
— 
P і 
ΕΝ 
EE 
deo 


E. providing general information pertaining to 
police/security organizations, activities, equip- 
ment, and personalities requested by Agency 
operating components, 


ce πο te وه‎ 


φάνε. 


F. coordinating the Agency's participation in the. 
Technical Investigations Course designed to 
familiarize the trainees with the technique 
required to properly investigate terrorist 
activities wherein explosivés have been utilized, 


ETE gots + κω", 


i H. 


PROJECT 


engaged principa in training forei 
police/security personnel under ree аА 
| | and selling police/sec y equipment to foreign 


police/security personnel and organizations. also 
provides special training programs and briefings to 

foreign police/securit personnel of interest to Agency 
operating divisions. 


Recently has 
acquire e capability of providing training to foreign 
police/security personnel in VIP protective security 
for Chiefs of State. | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- 3 - 
COMMENT 
WI not maintain direct contact or liaison _.` 
witn any τὰν enforcement organization, local or federal, “~~ 
at home or abroad. When the need arises, such contact is 


sometimes made on our behalf by | | 
at home and abroad bécause о e nature of its activities 


(training of foreign police/security personnel at home 
and abroad), and its Public Safety programs around the 
world. с. such contacts at home - local апа 


federal because its personnel are personally 


acquainted with law enforcement officers throughout the 
United States. Members of the оре ee °] 
ин "Beeren as guest z 


1 utions as the U.S. Park Police, IPA, the U.S. 
Secret Service, and the U.S. Treasury Enforcement Division. 


3. In addition to the liaison mentioned in the 
previous paragraph, the Agency maintains liaison in varying 
degrees with foreign police/security organizations through 
its field stations. The existence and extent thereof, 
however, is a decision to be made by the Area Division, 
and is not the responsibility of ε.α 


4, 


Mitrione, who was murdere upamaros. Pan Mitrione, 
an experienced and respected law enforcement officer, was 

a bona fide OPS/AID officer assigned to the AID mission 

in Uruguay, and was never a CIA employee or agent. 


й ΜΗΝ 
Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff 


00599 


` š ГЕР 
раї 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


“i SR geo 

e | Ὁ" BRM O ^ 
| <4 Morea 
rk Sgn c 
X- MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations | 


*" -SUBJECT : Joint CIA/USAID Terrorist (Technical) 
Investigations Course £7 (English language) 
CI Staff's.Project 


1. This effort is a joint CIA/USAID training program 

for foreign police/security personnel. The initial phase 

' of the training will be conducted at the International / 
Police Academy (IPA), Washington, D.C. during the period 
2-27 April 1975. The following subject matter is covered 
in this phase of the training: investigative techniques, 
collection and preservation of evidence, records, files, 
and reporting, gathering of information on terrorist 
groups and their activities, a student seminar devoted 
to discussions on terrorist and other hostile activities 
currently existing in their respective countries, etc. 
This phase of the training is concluded by a two day 
orientation by the Bomb Squad of the Dade County Police 
Department in Florida. 


2. The second phase of this training will be conducted 


during 39 April - 25 Мау 1975. 
technicians Iu I—-—-— — о 
The objective of thi aining is to 


develop individual student technical capability to real- 
istically conduct ihvestigations into knovn or suspected 
incidents of sabotage/terrorist bombings by: 


а. Providing trainees with basic knowledge «in the 
uses of commercial and military demolitions and 
. incendiaries as they may Ре. applied in terrorism 
22. `, and industrial sabotage operations, 


b. Introducing the trainees to commercially available 

° materials and home laboratory techniques, likely. i 
to be used in thé-manufacture of explosives and : 
incendiaries by terrorists or saboteurs. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


c. Familiarizing the trainees with the Concept 
of target analysis and operational planning 
that я sabotcur or terrorist must enploy. 


d. Introducing the trainees to booby trapping 
devices and techniques giving practical 
experience with both manufacturod and 
improvised devices through actual fabrication. 
Emphasize the necessity of alertness for 
detecting and countering booby traps placed 
by saboteurs or terrorists. 


ο. Conducting several field exercises to give 
each trainee the opportunity for detecting 4 
‘and neutralizing various explosive and 
‘incendiary devices likely to be used by 
terrorists or saboteurs, including letter 
bombs, packages, attache cases, etc. 


f. Conducting several investigative field 
. exercises of explosive incidents to alert 
the trainee to the need for and manner in 
which to colloct, identify, and preserve 
legally adnisable evidence for ο, 
action. 


з 


3. The program provides the traineos with ample | 
opportunity to develop basic familiarity and use. proficiently 
through handling, preparan and applying the various 
explosive charges, incendiary agents, terrorist devices 
and sabotage techniques. USAID, International Police 
Acadeny (IPA) ^as receivod reports from forcer foreign 
police/security personnel who participated in the program 
indicating that they were called upon to utilize the skills 
they acquired through this training in the handling of 
explosive devices in their respective country, Attached is 
a latter from a participant in TIC #6 
stating that he deactivated a letter bom 


avicc 
sent to the ^ Embassy in|. . | 


4. Subject course will have 26 participants from ten 
(19) foreign countries. Nine (9) are financed by AID, 
eight'(8) by CIA and nine (9) hy thoir own governments. 


00601 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


' S. Separate end of course reports will be prepared by 


' r ` USAID and CIA, TSD ретѕоппе14 
| James Angleton 
a Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff 


00602 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


*" FACTS AND STATISTICS 


AID/OPS TRAIN [NING 


AID/OPS, International Police Academy sponsors some 
seven hundred (700) foreign police officers for training 
in the tmited States each year. These officers are selected 
fro ed countries. ; 


trains some 3 
law enforcement. 


During FY 1973] 50001468 two of our field š 
stations by providi ining in- VIP protective security 
for personnel. 0 


AID/OPS-CIA TRAINING 


During FY 1973 two joint USAID/OPS/CIA Technical Investi- 
‘gations training programs were conducted for foreign 
police/security ‘personnel representing countries. The 
purpose of the training is to-develop ifidividual student 
technical capability to realistically conduct investigations 
into known or suspected incidents of sabotage/terrorist 
bombing or other activities. 


NATIONAL SECURITY 


Political, Military, and Economic 


Strategies in the Decade Ahead 


А Edited by 


David M. Abshire апа Richard V. Allen 


Introduction by 


Admiral Arleigh Burke, Director 


THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC STUDIES. 
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY .. 


Published for the 
HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR, REVOLUTION i 


А . PES 


AND PEACE А 


. by 
FREDERICK A. PRAEGER, Publisher 
New York • London - 


[UN 


MORI Росію: 1451843 


. 


. Strategic Leverage trom’ Aid ‘and Trade "6 


. 


—JAMES R. SCHLESINGER 


Summary : 
г zy. PI “SR 


The analysis of this’ paper résts on the assumption that 

American policy-makers should not be so concerned with the 
pursuit of hard-to-obiain ideological objectives that they exhaust 
the power potential implicit in trade and aid- relationships. 
Rather the trade and aid programs should be managed so. as to 
preserve an environment in which pressures can be brought to 
bear to serve the national interest at a later, and perhaps more 
critical, date. This emphasis on power considerations implies 
both (a) that the assistance program cannot be based primarily 
on humanitarian or idealistic goals, and (b) that economic ties 
with other nations should not be severed sinuply because of our 
disapproval of other social systems, including those based on 
communism. Though typically publie opinion vastly overstates 
the strategic leverage that can be gained through economic 
` weapons, this leverage is still not negligible. One can argue that 
.fn the past the United States-has failed to take advantage of 
the power potential implicit in aid and trade through its failure 
to develop concepts and mechanisms of deterrence in ways akin 
to what has been done in the military field. Much of the 
difficulty may be ascribed 10 a failuré to develop sanctions, 
which discourage actions unfavorable to. our interests, as well 
as incentives, which encourage cooperation. No system of - | 
deterrence can exclusively stress the carrot and ignore the stick. 


More is being demanded of the aid program than it can 
reasonably achieve. Assuming that the primary emphasis of the 
сій program is іо encourage social and economie development 
rather than to-elicit direct support for American foreign policy 


687 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


JAMES В, SCHLESINGER 


objectives, it із argued that we should attempt to develop stable 
social and political conditions фу strengthening the "legitimacy" 
of the dercloping social order in the eyes of the respective 
publics—rather than attempting to строгі the trappings of 
American democracy. 


` Technological change, the easy availability of substitutes, and 

the lengthy period for adjustment ina prolonged struggle hare 
all reduced the impact of the "supply effect" which was at one 
time the main weapon of economic warfare. If the economic 
weapons’ oft strategy are to be at all effective under today's 
conditions, the "influence effect" must rise correspondingly: in 
ётрогіапсе. This implies that we should be in а position to 
threaten іо do damage to other economics through the curtail- 
ment of access to Western markets. In order to keep this threat 
an ever-present one, we must, however, continue to trade in 
tdlume with other countries, including Communist ones. Рагіїс- 
золу in dealing with the underdeveloped nations the potential 
effectiveness of such threats may prove to be considerable, 


ond IE 


POEM 


А tum 

IA pay 

inus uet 
és 


e 


pt 


A^ AS 


SY 


te NE ые ο 


EA 


Чу 
CEP 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


JAMES R. SCHLESINGER ©. 


696 hH 


One final consideration—it would be unwise to use potentia] 
weapons of this sort for niggling purposes. The balance of pay- 
ments has been troublesome and js properly an object of concern 
in Washington, but surely it is not a first-order consideration 
in our relations with the underdeveloped nations. Suggestions 
have been bruited about that we should make use of the aid 
program io force recipients to buy from us in ways that go 
beyond tied aid. Under the best of circumstances, our bargaining 
power is limited, and shooting away strategic ammunition for so 
paltry an economic goal would seem tó reflect a poor sense of 
proportion, К 
Aid 

Within an over-all framework designed to discourage hostile 
or predatory attitudes toward the West, the aid program may 
seek to foster the maximum rate of economic and social progress. 
In the basie policy of AID, the Kennedy Administration has, 
explicitly adopted this goal. As.has been indicated there are 
costs to this decision, Outsiders are not likely to be much liked 
even under the best of circumstances, which hardly apply to the 
underdeveloped countries, and their intervention in whatever 
direction will in the long run excite antagonism based on real 
or fancied wrongs. Nevertheless, the basic decision has been 
made, Let us examine in what way we may proceed so that the 
good effects clearly outweigh the ill effects, 

There are two initial postulates: (1) our bargaining. power 
will be limited, and (2) American notions of social reform and 
of equity are neither necessarily applicable in the underdeveloped 
lands, nor need we assume ‘that those whose cooperation wé 
must win will find them appealing. These postulates are inter- 
related. Jointly they imply that we cannot press forward on 
all fronts to create a society in which а good American democrat 
will feel at home, but must instead concentrate our energies on 
those social changes which will spur economic growth even if 
the immediate results aré more consistent with the cultural 
genius of the peoples invelved rather than our own tastes. We 
ought not expect them to make the same choices as we would, 
or, if they make the same choices, to achieve in a ten-year period 
what it took us eighty years to achieve, Finally, in reaching 
judgments on social processes in other lands, we cannot apply 


: What are our own—or, in reality, higher— standards of purity. 


Аз outsiders, we will be unable to perceive the socia] function 
of behavior which is superficially corrupt, and will tend to lump 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


& + ` 


> LEVERAGE FRON AID AND TRADE 697 


it together with that which is purely parasilical, With respect 
to our qwn history, retrospectively we have come to find merit 
in what once were regarded as the disreputable procedures of 
an organization like Tammany Hall in that it provided a kind 
of social security and a welcome for the newly arrived .im- 
migrant. We are accustomed tothe daily dangling of new post 
offices, good committee assignments, and bridges over creeks in 
the outback before wavering Congressmen, and warm approval 
i$ given, for its fine sense of political realism, to whatever ad- 
ministration is doing the dangling by those who agree with its 
goals. Toward similar procedures abroad we are inclined to 
take а simple mutktáking^attitude. We look askance at {πα΄ 
higgling of the political market-—with a naiveté that would do 
credit both to missionaries and old-style political reformers, If 
we hope to achieve a fair measure of success, we shall have to 

. Sharpen our critical faculties and learn to distinguish between 
unappetizing social devices which are functional and those which 
are simple barriers to progress. 


The statement of objectives by AID is a very ambitious one. 
The purposes of the assistance Program include stimulation 
"ої self-help, encouragement of progressive forces, and achieve- 
ment of governments based on consent, which recognize the 
dignity. and worth of individuals who are expected to participate 
in determining the nation's goals.. No doubt, a statement of 
aspirations is in large part window dressing, but the criteria 
by which sel£-help is moving toward social and politica! progress 
are more specific: a more equitable distribution of income, a 
more equitable tax system with increased yields, expanded wel- 
fare programs, increased political participation and civil liberties, * 
and so on. Several points may be made regarding the objectives: 
first, there are too many; second, they are to some extent in- 
consistent; and third, they ignore the real resources available. š. 


There is, in the first place, the long-perceived clash between 
economic progress, on the one hand, and the combined goals of 
equitable distribution of income, immediate. improvement in 
living standards, and security on the other. This underlying 
conflict spills over into a tension between rapid economic pro- 
gress and the introduction of democratic processes. On this ' 
issue there appears to have been a revolution in informed 
opinion in the United States during the past five years. During .. 
the late fifties, it had become almost an axiom that authoritarian, 
if not totalitarian, governments had innate advantages in guid- 
ing economies toward rapid growth, The prevailing view was 


PEE she ς 


MORI DocID: 


JAMES R. SCHLESINGER 


based, no doubt, on an assessment of the record of thé Soviet 
regime, and an exaggeraled notion of how much the Chinese 
"Great Leap Forward" would accomplish. Perhaps the earlier 
"pessimism" regarding the relative performance polential of 
"free" and "controlled" economies was overdone, but have we 
not gone too far in the now prevailing "optimism" that any clash 
between economic progress and the democratié institutions which 
jnsure-the dominance of the voz populi is minimal? 

The average cilizen—particularly when he is ill-housed, ill- 
clothed, ill-fed, and ill-educated—seems most likely to be in- 
terested in the here and now, A government which is responsive . 
to the desires of the public will continualy be tempted to 
Mortgage the future for the present. The "abstinence" or 
"waiting" which classical and neoclassical economics state to 
le necessary ingredients in economic progress will be hard to 
require, as will be the incentive schemes (and the accompanying 
conspieuous consumption) which are likely to strike the average 
voter as inequitable. We may recall that the Perón regime was 
(and still may be?) the most popular regime in recent Latin 
American history. Or we may observe the economic consequences 
ої Brazilian democracy, and have our doubts. The inflow of 
American resources may be able to make showpieces out of 
several small, recently-democratized nations like the Dominican 
Republic, but we ought not assume either that democracy assists 
in economic development, or that the Dominican example is 
widely applicable. This is not to say that some judicious 

` prodding in the direction of democracy may not be a wise policy, 
but it must be judicions, and cannot be based on the assumption 
that democracy necessarily fosters the political stability essential 
to growth. š 

One of the criteria by which self-help can be judged as justify- 
ing additional aid is an improvement in the savings ratio. Some 
students of the aid program would put major emphasis on 

. changes in the savings ratio in that it provides a relatively 
objective standard by which an improvement in economic. per- 


formance can be judged.* If we apply an objective standard, 
complaints about the distribution of aid and subjectivity in the 


* Charles Wolf, Jr. of RAND has been attempting бо develop an econo- 
metric model which will provide an objective measure of the performance 
of aid recipients jn terms of self-help. The criteriai is the savings ratio. 
In (he^model the attempt is made to eliminate the influence of other 
variables, such as per capita income, income distribution, and degree of 
Urbanization, which account for a досі deal of the observed variation in 
the savings ratio as between nations and between different periods of πια. 


1451843 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


MM бүбү с гч °° ° ee 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


8 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: Foreign Resources Division Operational 
Activities with Possible Flap Potential 
REFERENCE: ` - FR Memorandum, |] dated 7 May 


1973, same subject 


м 


l. The answers to your questions are as follows: 
а. Question: Do we recruit Americans? 


Answer: Yes, we recruit Americans to be 
used as upport assets and access agents, 
These Americans are used for spotting.and assess- 
ment purposes only and do not perform any recruit- 
ments. | 


b. Question: Do we use alias documents on 
Americans in course of operations? 


Answer: Yes, we do use alias documents when 


recruiting American support assets. The great 
majority of these recruitments are done in alias. 
All recruitments of foreign targets are done in alias, 


c. Question: What disciplinary controls do we ИЕ i 
have over alias documents? | 


Answer: We maintain a current list in FR Division ` 
Headquarters of.the alias documents is sued to each Base. 


р 5 | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


/2/ 


More importantly, each Base Chief is responsible 
for supervising and maintaining control over the 
alias documents used by the case officers on his 
Base. Ξ 


d. Question: 
ny clearances or pro 11010154 


— 


2. If you have further questions, please let me know. 


Acting Chie 
Foreign Resources Division 


00612 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


10 d "EON [] com ENTIAL — Γ] Sener 
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET | С 


SUBJECT Ом SS ФАХ TA ΠΝ 


wass ! ATE 
visio w 7 May: 1973 


TO: S | bm number, ond ` DATE 
building) | “OFFICER'S Page Alia [Number each comment to show from «hom 
minats to whom. Drow a line ocross column offer each comment.) 
RECEIVED | FORWARDED 
1 сираи а Е 
EA/DDO . 
mi [D RTII TDIR F 
ا ی‎ Эйн a АРХ РАН = ل‎ Ln m ті - ; 
22? 
: | 
Н F NS Я Π п 1 η 
3. DDO tay 1 ΜΡ 4 
117 eis Gd Md | 
— m ا‎ [n aw: ood I 
P І і 
4 لا‎ | 
E - + 
Conversation with} | FR Div| ( ef | і 
5, I 


He indicated that the introductory andl. closing paragraphs 
- —— —of-this-memo-coutd be-relgease e о form shown. 
D 
981. 


δ 
d pe anuar} 15, ry 13, P3 
m (E — í Р 


΄ 


if? . Í 
б БРО И. 


-—: 


ΝΑΙ i 


xa 610 Mimon [] SECRET ^ Г) CONFIDENTIAL 


[l ww O 


` asama w ese o 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


e 


7 Мау 1973 DY SÎ 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations 


SUBJECT: {Foreign Resources División) Operational. 
. Activities with Possible Flap Potential 


1, At thr risk of stating the obvious, almost all of the operational ` 


activities carried on bySFR Division|  . run the 


that unauthorized disclosure could create embarrassment to the 


risk 
Agency. 


We have accepted this as a condition precedent'and have proceeded with 
our operational activities in the most professional manner possible under | 
the circumstances. "There are certain rather unusual activities in which 


‘FR Division has participated and/or is participating’ that contain 


some- 


what greater possibility for embarrassment if discovered. I have listed 
these below, not necessarily in order of embarrassment potential: 


a. ЕЕ. а fairly considerable 
amount of support to Dr. Kissinger in his contacts with the 


Chinese. This support was authorized by Mr. Karamessines , 
and Mr. Helms. Thus far there has been no problem other’ 


than the inordinate amount of time spent a س‎ 
personnel, not to mention the fairly sizeable amount o 


money that has been expended in support of these efforts. 


M 


QATAR TOA 
— ES 3 


< peruse : 


Exempt 


6)0) (839) 


00614 


——— 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


Je esteri eo ete ove 


ipm х wee S 
ч ` 


с. Alias Documentation: Clearly, FR Division does 
the great majority of its operational work by having its case 
officers utilize alias documents. All recruitments are done 
in alias. Thus, the alias documentation is a prerequisite 
for effective operations Furthermore, 
our case officers have utilized fully backstopped alias credit 
cards for renting automobiles, motel rooms, hotel rooms 
for operational meetings, etc. These credit cards are back- 
stopped by accounts in alias which are promptly paid at the 
appropriate time. I see no problem in the continued use of 
alias documentation and moreover, I feel it is absolutely 
essential to continue using alias documentation wherever and 


"whenever possible. 


Ja 


` 
πω 
pee 006 
p" mpm nmm ОТ a 4t. : 
۶ с; НР aon ` 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


/3/ 


2; Summarizing the above, I believe that all of the activities 
outlined are clearly within the acceptable risk frame. 


The 
other activities, although clearly involving some degree of risk are 
necessary and valuable and in my opinion should be continued, 


E 


cting 18 
Foreign Resources Division 


وہ سس — — 


C a a i a  0,=wa  |ruƏ, <Ésa————x T 


MORI DocID: 1451843 
pO SEC ЕТ 


‚ DRAFT OUTLINE FOR DDO BRIEFING. 


E. Statement of Organization and Functions 


‘Il. Official T/O 


III." * Location of Field Units 


IV. Cover 

V. Targets 

ML | Methodology 
VIL. Budget 
VIII. Coordination 


A. Internal 


ОВ, External 


X. Statistics: 


A. , Recruitments 
B. General Support Assets 


C. Positive Intelligence Reporting 


RN v.a ελλ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


s B ДЖЕ T 


FOREIGN RESOURCES DIVISION 


I. Statement of Organization and. Functions 


S E CNET 


í о س ي‎ o c ar] 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SECRET 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


M^ alc 


S E T 00620 


— € — --- 


mm У ө - -Єөө=©=© nc 


MORI БосТО: 1451843 


S E CRE T 


РЕ LATET 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


——wssrs—xswsnrcrr ww, 


MORT DocID: 1451843 


ua 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` ——— w—Óe—M————gá— ЦЙЙЙМКЧЧщЧ`З нш 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


H 
i 


(MMC mc 


MORI DocID: 


DN — — -- 


1451843 


5 


Е 


C 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| 00627 


ст 


——<tF Cm —ƏTƏ ача ου 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


00628 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"Табата і 


τηηννννννννννννννννννν.......,,.,.......'.:”:” ” ” τ τ  - 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


— —— —— ---.- e 9—À— X ns 


m——— )sá—Tam—M чт ык чыын 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


S E СТ 


00631 


MORI DociD: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 


1451843 


PUTET ды 


. è 
-ame .. .. 


... arum t ope 


san εφ. 


X 


II 


MORI DocTD: 1451843 


6 JUN 19/3 


MEMORANDUM. FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 5“ 


THROUGH : Executive Secretary, CIA Management Committee 


Alleged CIA Involvement in the Ballou Case 


SUBJECT | : 
1. By memorandum dated 25 May 1973, I informed you of the 

results of an interview of Mr. [whe reported that 
ο... employee of the Office of Security, had 
-stated during a cussion period at Advanced Intelligence Seminar 
No. 6 in September 1971 that the Office of Security had been involved 

. in the "Ballou case." (The residence of Mr. Ballou, an antique рий 
collector in Silver Spring, Maryland, was ràided oh 7 June 1971 by 
Montgomery County Police and Federal law enforcement officers. 
When the officers, dressed in civilian clothes, forced their way into 
the house, Ballou picked up an antique pistol. The officers opened , 
fire and seriously wounded Ballou. He was hospitalized for-several 
months and was left partially paralyzed. I believe he is now suing 
over the incident. ). I 


2. We interviewed .-. other employees who 
attended the Seminar, and the Director of Security to determine just 
what was said at the Seminar and the extent of any Agency involvement 
in the Ballou case. We find that participants in the Seminar were 
encouraged to discuss the details of their work and associated problems. 
Mr. entioned an assignment he had been on with the U.S. 


i Е E. at the 1968 National Conventions and his Haison activities 
with the Montgomery County Police. А 


3, ИШИН, that in-discussing the latter &ubject hé .- 
related a conversation he had with Inspector ا‎ of the Mónt- ` 
gomery County Police, sometime in June 1971 after the Ballou incident 
‘had been rep: rtéd in the newspapers. According to the. - 


` police inspector had thanked hirh for some amplifying equi e 
Agency had given to the Montgomery County Police and remarked that 


E © | | , 00634 


RARI 2 у, б 


LT 


. from Ballou to a friend in which Ballou outlined plans to "kill a сор." 
. The police then staged a raid to forestall Ballou's plan, and it was | 


„ө ө nl le 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


this equipment had probably — a policeman? s life. The inspector 
commented that the account of the Ballou incident appearing in the 
press was not the whole story, With the aid of the equipment the: ‘| 
Agency had provided, the police had intercepted a telephone call 


- 


during this raid that Ballou was shot, 


4, ИШИН that he has no other knowledge of the Ballou 
case, excep Ww: he has read in the newspapers, and that he has 
not had any other conversations about the case with any members of 


the Montgomery County Police. We learned nothing from our inquiries 
that would indicate any other Agency involvement in the Ballou case. ` 


5. The following are related excerpts from the "Family Jewels" 
submission of the Director of Security on 16 May 1973: - 


During the period from 1968 to 1973, severalitems of 
positivé audio equipment consisting primarily of clandestine 
- transmitters and touch-tone dial recorders were loaned to 
the Metropolitan Police Department; Fairfax County, Virginia, 
Police Department; Montgomery County, Maryland, Police 
Department; New York City Police Department; and the San 
Francisco, California, Police Department. Ë 


On 25 July 1968, and at the specific request of the | ` 
United States Secret Service, this Office provided two audio 
countermeasures technicians to the United States Secret Service 
in connection with the Democratic National Convention held in 
‘Chicago, Illinois. This was not an official detail although 
both men were provided with temporary credentials identifying 
them as being affiliated with the United States Secret Service. 


On 15 August 1968, we detailed the same two men to the 
7 United States Secret Service to cover the Republican National 
Convention in Miami, Florida. On both occasions, the team 
members were debriefed upon their return and it is clear that 
their activities were confined exclusively to sweeping the 
` candidates! and potential candidates! quarters. 


{gga} mo705-- Y Brog 


T Wiliam V. Broe 
| Inspector General 
οι Je June 1973) - ; d 
Dist 1 ° A : 
Orig & 1 - Addressee š 00635 


1- ExecSec/ CIA MC. 


— trad 


E ہس‎ o ———À— 0s 


C — l a i aÀÍəp uui—uuu——rns—sav  Ὃ 


MORI DocID: 


MEMORA: JM FOR: The Record 2. 


Mr. F. b, Bishop is following up per para 7 
of IG memo to DCI dtd 25 May - 


cm/31 May 


00636 
(DATE) 


FORM NO, 101 REPLACES FORM 10- 101 
I Aug 54 U WHICH MAY BE USED. {47} 


- 


rr 
М 


1451843 


pS 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


- r n Де -A F> 


D. UNCLASSIFIED IT Ἧι 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 


25 May 1973 


COMMENTS [Number each comment to show from dom 
to whom. Drow a line across column altar each comment) 


ΝῊ куу, ποτ 
TAA МАУС л MeGiinity, 


Inspector General 


TO: (Officer designation, room number, and 
building) 


"Mes Wm. E. Colby 


Š 
š 
š 
8 
o 


v 
کے‎ 
Q 
A 
S 
v. 

м 
` 
ü 


p Director 


ТЕ Γ t 
4) 
-L 


[||] 
. 


ΓΙ INTERNAL Г] UNCLASSIFIED 


— ЕЕ ЕЕ. 


E a ET‏ ا ا 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


h . TERH JISE On 


25 May 1973 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


THROUGH : Mr. William E. Colby 


referred to this office as having attempted to contact the Director 


concerning "activities outside the Agency." I attempted to contact. 
ا‎ 21 and 22 May, but he was on leave. On 23 May і 
е stated Пе wanted to check а portion of his information and asked 


if he could come to my office on 24 May. 


rA 
in October 


3. dvised that in August 1971 he attended the 
Advanced Intelligence Seminar, Оп the-first evening of the seminar 
the students had a "getting acquainted” session where each one 


ave a brief description of his duties. One of the students, لا‎ 
ни the Office of Security, however, carried on 
er the session Was over and expanded on the briefing he had given. 


He claimed that CIA was cooperating with the Montgomery County 
Police, stating that the Office of Security gavé electronic and other 
support to that organization. 


4. He further indicated that the Office of Security had been 
involved in the "Ballou сазе". escribed the Ballou case 
as follows: The residence of Mr. Ballou, an antique gun collector 

" in Silver Spring, Maryland, was raided on 7 June 1971 by the Mont- 
gomery County Police and some Federal law enforcement officers. 
After the officers, dressed in civilian clothes, had forced their way 
into the house Ballou picked up an antique pistol. The officers 
immediately opened fire and wounded Ballou seriously. He spent 
a long time in the hospital and is partly paralyzed at the present time. 


00638 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


His case was given much publicity in the Washington Post at the 
time. There was additional publicity in the last several months 
when Ballou instigated a lawsuit against the raiding officers. 


5 EM аеыаеа another student, 


. NEM who was assigned to IAS, as a friend of 
= е state ἵμα uso seemed to know the specifics of the ou 


case, 

6. I CC MEM told him this was just the type 
of information we wanted to receive so that it can be investigated 
and appropriate action taken if the information is borne out. 


- 7. This office will follow up on this allegation and advise 
the Director concerning our findings. 


Inspector General 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ма | 


| called the Pirector oW VB 

16 May a : re "activities outside the 

. Agency". I told him Director was out of the 

E: office, but we would return his call. Mr. 
Lo denies back that day and said he was 
» “going to Fubini lecture and would call us 


2 back. Не never did call back. Mr. Colby 
4 said to turn over to Mr. d | 
00640 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ο ΗΕ I 


SECRET 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Т 


00642 


VÀ — 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Cj usdassirip 0 FY “Επ. epus їй πε j 


ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET | 


М o DATE 
22 May 1973 . 
TO: {Officer designation, room number, ond [ эз | 
building} OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom 


INITIALS fo whom, Drow ο line ocross column after each comment.) 
1. 
Mr. Wm. E. Colby 5733 در‎ 
2. 
The Director 


2 


SUBJECT: (Optional) 


FROM: 


Inspector General 


Š 
š 
E x 
o 


T 
М 


s> 
T 


4. а 
К E 


юм 610 ΣΕ [] INTERNAL [] UNCLASSIFIED 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


22 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


THROUGH : Mr. William E, κ. CH 


. Mr. Colby advised me that] nme | 
had called the Office of the Director in line wit e Director 
memorandum to all employees dated 9 May 1973, requesting all 


employees to report activities which might be construed to be out- 
side the legislative charter of the Agency. 


μας. employed as a GS-5 clerk in the 
Cable тат: join e Agency in September 1967 and 
worked in the Office of Security for 3-1/2 years before transferring 
to the Cable Secretariat іп 1970. 


While in the Office of Security he was assigned to a support 
desk, SD3, The primary function of this desk was to 
During his assignment 
supported a project entitled SRPOINTER-: 
described the project as follows. The 
Office of Security had a unit at the JFK Inter- 
national Airport that photographed mail going to Soviet Bloc countries. 
This work was done by Agency staff employees. The mail was placed 
in bags by the regular Post Office employees and stacked. After 
their departure for the night, the Agency employees would open the 
mail and photograph it. Both incoming and outgoing mail, including 
postcards, were photographed. А watch list was maintained and 
priority was given to the names listed, but generally all mail was 
processed. 


The results of the operation were sent to Washington Headquarters 
where they were handled by ^ He would receive a teletype 
advising him of the registry number and the number of items. He 
would check to see if the number of items received was corrett and 
route the material to the appropriate offices. Generally about 1/4 of 


00644 


Ç = > 7 


e E a O‏ ا ا ا 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


с 


the material was separated into bundles bound with rubber bands. 
This portion was sent to TSD for technical processing. The remain- 
ing material was sent to the CI Staff, 


About twice a month the CI Staff would add names to or delete 
names from the list. BENI ss send the changes in the list to 
the field office. The watch list was made up primarily of 

ho were in the United States. When 
в ty in 1970, the project was still activ 


нет |, in no way emotional ог belligerent. Не 
presented the facts quickly and clearly and said he had no other 
information. He stated he would have come forward with the informa- 


tion sooner but he had only recently had time to read the Director!s 
memorandum, The writer thanked him for his interest. 


Man ld 
V. Broe 
Inspector General 


Seb 00645. 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


- ~ MEN з 
( чь “е 
. " f 
8 JUN 1973 
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence I 
THROUGH : Executive Secretary, CIA Management Committee 


SUBJECT : Alleged CIA Involvement in the Ballou Case 


l, By memorandum dated 25 May 1973, І informed you of the 
results of an interview of ορ... reported that 
Ма aasan an employee of the ОПісе of Security, had 
stated during a discussion period at Advanced Intelligence Seminar 
No. 6 in September 1971 that the Office of Security had been involved 
. in the "Ballou case. '! (The residence of Mr. Ballou, an antique gun 
collector in Silver Spring, Maryland, was raided on 7 June 1971 by 
Montgomery County Police and Federallaw enforcement officers. 
When the officers, dressed in civilian clothes, forced their way into 
the house, Ballou picked up an antique pistol. The oíficers opened 
fire and seriously wounded Ballou. He was hospitalized for several 
months and was left partially paralyzed. I believe he is now suing 
over the incident.) š 


2. We interviewed ме] nnum other employees who 
attended the Seminar, and the Director of Security to determine just 
what was said at the Seminar and the extent of any Agency involvement 


in the Ballou case. We find that participants in.the Seminar were 


encouraged to discuss the details of their work and associated problems. 
Mr. киш С an assignment he had been on with the U. S. 


_ Secret Service at the 1968 National Conventions and his liaison activities 
with the Montgomery County Police. 


3. πρ... that in discussing the latter subject he 
related а conversalion he had with τ. the Mont- 
gomery County Police, sometime in June 1971 after the Ballou incident 


had been repcrted m the newspapers. According | MEN. 
had thanked him for some amplifying equipment the 


Agency had given to the Montgomery County Police and remarked that 


іі бе . 00646 


ΕΕΤΤ ΞΕ 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ιδ 


this equipment had probably saved a policeman's life. The inspector 
coromented that the account of the Ballou incident appearing in the 
press was not the whole story. With the aid of the equipment the 
Agency had provided, the police had intercepted a telephone call 
from Ballou to а friend in which Ballou outlined plans to "kill a сор." 
The police then staged a raid to forestall Ballou's plan, and it was 
during this raid that Ballou was shot. 


4, ا‎ that he has no other knowledge of the Ballou 
case, except for what he has read in the newspapers, and that he has 
not had any other conversations about the case with any members of 


the Montgomery County Police. We learned nothing from our inquiries 
that would indicate any other Agency involvement in the Ballou case. š 


s 


5, The following are related excerpts from the "Family deweke 
submission of the Director of Security on 16 May 1973: 


During the period from 1968 to 1973, several items of 
positive audio equipment consisting primerily of clandestine 
transmitters and touch-tone dial recorders were loaned to 
the Metropolitan Police Department; Каїгіах County, Virginia, 
Police Department; Montgomery County, Marylend, Police 
Department; New York City Police Department; and the San 
Francisco, California, Police Department, 


On 25 July 1968, айа at the specific request of the ` 
United States Secret Service, this Office provided two audio 
countermeasures tecbnicians to the United States Secret Service 
in connection with the Democratic National Convention held in 
"Chicago, Illinois. "This was not an official detail although 
both men were provided with temporary credentials identifying 
` them as being affiliated with the United States Secret Service. 


On 15 August 1968, we detailed the same two men to the 
United States Secret Service to cover the Republican National 
Convention in Miami, Florida. On both occasions, the team 
mernbers were debriefed upon their return and it is clear that 
their activities were confined exclusively to sweeping the 
' candidates! and potential candidates! quarters. 


(253232? T077?-— МО Bros 


αἱ William У. Broe 


: Inspector General 
ою] | (6 June 1973) - 
Distribution: \ 


Orig & 1 - Addressee Я -2 


з P-a-Ca-l(7TA Qu 7 008071 


m — a i a i ?5nsa aa ÀÓÉ A 


MORI DocTD: 1451843 


- | E а 


- + * 
E : Do "ες, i š І 
Suus ^4 June 1973 
й 
Date 


BROE Follow-up interview re ”- 


xxx to see DCI. 


FROM: ` FPBishop ш 


ве і 
RETURN TO:2File.on Interviews held on behalf of DCI re Watergate/Jewels I 


00648 


s А . Ex 5 соч... νην Š ; 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


η. μη 


- ν.μ τ E ^ Ж; οἷν tas 
* . oe ا‎ το» s а - ` E E 
stu š ERES «о ` š š 


LED MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD. `... Lr geo y $C s 
POS NS SUBJECT: ‘Interview e 


1. On 31 May 1973 I questioned [ about what he 
had said at the Advanced Intelligence Seminar No. 6 and the extent 
and nature of the relations he had had with the Montgomery County 
Police, He said that he and others had been encouraged to discuss 

« their work and the problems related thereto with other Seminar 
members and told that what they said would be "non-attributable, " 
In this context he had discussed the Office of Security's relatiogs 
with local Police Forces including the Police Force in Montgemery 
County. He said he mentioned the "Ballou Case'' as an example 
of how the Montgomery County Police had used equipment provided 
by the Agency in their work, but denied that he had said or implied 
that the Agency was "involved" in the Ballou case. Не said that he 
had: also related to the other Seminar members the fact that the 
Agency had provided assistance to the Secret Service in connection 
with the protection of the President and Vice President and that he 
and others hád been detailed to work with thé Secret Service on 
counter-audio activities at the 1968 Democratic National Convention 
in Chicago and the Republican National Convention in Miami. I 

| а Еа was оп the Chicago detail, if he was 
‘detailed to protect the Vice President. He said that he was detailed 
to Tom Kelly, Deputy Chief of the Secret Service and worked in 
effect as а member of the Secret Service under Mr. Kelly. 


2. I questioned] | as to whether his relations with 
. the Montgomery County Police was training oriented, equipment 
oriented, or if he had engaged in any operations or activities with 
the police. He said his relations with the Police had been entirely 
equipment oriented and had been limited to the Chief of Police and 
one or two senior Inspectors. The extent of assistance given con- 
sisted of the Agency providing the Police with surplus technical 


00649 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


equipment which was of no further use to the Agency, and 
briefing them as to its use. He said he would not define these 
briefings as training, but admitted that it might be so construed. 


3, sss. that his only knowledge of the "Ballou 
Case", except what he had read in the papers, came from one 
telephone conversation he had with Inspector Й the 
Montgomery County Police sometime after accounts of the Ballou 
shooting had appeared іп the press. He said the Inspector called 
to thank him for some amplifying equipment the Agency had given 
the Police and mentioned that it had probably saved the life of a 
policeman. He said that the Inspector explained to him that the 
account of the incident appearing in the press was not the whole 
story, that with the aid of the equipment the Agency had provided 
the Police had been able to intercept a telephone call from Ballou 
to a friend in which Ballou had outlined plans to "kill a cop ." 
The Police had then staged a raid to forestall Ballou's plan and it 
was during this raid that Ballou was shot. e 
that he had had no other conversations with the Montgomery 
County Police on that subject. He said he had mentioned it at 
the Seminar as an example of the sensitivity involved in the 
Agency!s dealings with domestic Police Forces. He said he 
recalled that there was quite a bit of discussion and argument 
by the Seminar members about the propriety of the Agency assist- 
ing local police forces and working with the Secret Service' in the . 
U.S., but that he did not recall any extensive discussion about the 


Ballou Case and that at no time had he said that the Agency was 

directly involved. as. he remembered that κα. 

[eme particularly concerned about the Agency olve- 

-ment in domestic activities and that sometime later, around 
January or February 1972, [ _ larkea to Colonel White about his 
concern and Colonel White in turn talked to the Director of Security. 
Since that date he said, he has not had any further direct contact 
with the Montgomery County Police, based upon orders of the 
Director of Security. 


че ra a i e на Im 


Inspector 


00650 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


C 


31 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Interview with ΑΚ pee of Security 


E 1. On 31 May 1973 I questioned masa what he . 

. had said at the Advanced Intelligence Seminar n nd the extent 
апа nature of the relations he had had with the Montgomery County 
Police. He said that he and others had been encouraged to discuss 
their work and the problems related thereto with other Seminar 
members and told that what they said would be "non-attributable," 
In this context he had discussed the Office of Security's relations 
with local Police Forces including the Police Force in Montgomery 
County. He said he mentioned the "Ballou Case" as an example 
of how the Montgomery County Police had used equipment provided 
by the Agency in their work, but denied that he had said or implied 

-- that the Agency was "Involved'' in the Ballou case; He said that he 

had also related to the other Seminar members the fact that the 
Agency had provided assistance to the Secret Service in connection 
with the protection of the President and Vice President and that he 
and others had been detailed to work with the Secret Service on 

Е counter-audio activities at the 1968 Democratic National Convention 


in Chicago and the Republican National Convention in Miami, I . 
eked eho was on the Chicago detail, if he was 
detailed to protect the Vice President. He said that he was detalled 


to Tom Kelly, Deputy Chief of the Secret Service and worked in 
effoct as a member of the Secret Service under Mr. Kelly. 


2. I questioned ШШШ; to whether his relations with 
the Montgomery County Police wàs training oriented, equipment 
` orlented, or if he had engaged in any operations or activities with 
the police. He said his relations with the Police had been entirely 
equipment oriented and had been limited to the Chief of Políce and 
one or two senior Inspectors. The extent of assistance given con- 


sisted of the Agency providing the Police with surplus technical 


00651 


ο ο шыг re, 


ня |‏ س 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


briefing them as to its use. He said he would not define these 
briefings as training, but admitted that it might be so construed. 


3. | þau that his only knowledge of the "Ballou 
Case", except what he had read in the papers, came from one 
telephone conversation he had with Inspector σας the 
Montgomery County Police sometime after accounts of the Ballou 
shooting had appeared in the press. He said the Inspector called 
to thank him for some amplifying equipment the Agency had given 
the Police and mentioned that it had probably saved the life of a 
policeman. He said that the Inspector explained to hlm that the 
account of the incident appearing in the press was not the whole 
story, that with the aid of the equipment the Agency had provided 
the Police had been able to intercept a telephone call from Ballou 
to а friend in which Ballou had outlined plang to "kill a сору.” 
The Police had then staged a raid to forestall Ballou's plan and it 
was during this raid that Ballou was shot. μήκος 
that he had had no other conversations with the Montgomery 
County Police on that subject, He said he had mentioned it at 
the Seminar as an example of the sensitivity involved in the 
Agency!s dealings with domestic Police Forces. Не said he 
recalled that there was quite a bit of discussion ànd argument 
by the Seminar members about the propriety of the Agency assist- 
ing local police forces and working with the Secret Service in the 
U.S., but that he did not recall any extensive discussion about the 
Ballou Case and that at no time had he said that the Agency was 
directly involved. said he remembered jud ЗИ 
RE gas P ncerned about the Agency's involve- 
- men omestic activities and that sometime later, around 
‘January or February 1972, talked to Colonel White about his 
concern and Colonel White in turn talked to the Director of Security. 
Since that date, he said, he has not had any further direct contact 
with the Montgomery County Police, based upon orders of the 
Director of Security. à 


equipment which was of no further use to the Agency, and 


F. P. Bishop 
Inspector 


00652 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


31 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Interview "шити. 


1. said he ipsc ЕНН Li 
about the Office of Security's liaison with the Police Forces in ` 


the Metropolitan Area and that the Ballou case was mentioned, 
He also recalled that had mentioned that the Agency 
had provided assistance to the Secret Service in connection with 
surveillance work against radical groups at the 1968 Democratic 
National Convention in Chicago.. He said that he could not re- 
member exactly e S l] but he did reca1l that 
there was considerable discussion and debate among the class 
members about the propriety of the Agency engaging in such 


activities. 


2. Later in January or February 1972, at a time when 
Mentum... Chairman of the Management Advisory Group 
, Бе said he discussed these matters, and questioned the 
extent to which the Agency should become involved in domestic 
intelligence activities, with Colonel White and later with Mr. 
Colby. The MAG also raised the general problem in a couple of 
their papers, but without citing specific detailed-examples. Не 


said he understood that Colonel White had taken the matter up 
with the Director of Security and that some changes had been 


made as a result. 
Orig - File ΜΝ; 


00653 


ca a YI Z REIS SSS PSS ST 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


"M 29 May 1973 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD | 


SUBJECT: Possible Agency Involvement in Outside Activities 


on Basis of Information. Provided й 1] 


On 29 May 1973 I talked to Mr. who 


was a classmate ої and at the Advanced 
Intelligence Seminar No. 6 held on ptember 1971. Mr. 

Baid that each student was asked to describe and talk about his wor 

in the Agency and he recalled that Mr. had talked about the 
Office of Security's liaison with, and a given to and received 


from, the Police Departments in the Washington Metropolitan area. 

He said he could not recall specifically what was said, but to the best of. 
his memory Mr. we. training given to either the Prince 
George's or Mont County Police concerning surveillance methods 
and electronic techniques. He said that he did not recall any discussion 
of the "Ballou case" and that he had no knowledge of that case other 

than what he had read in the newspapers. 


00654 


ud 


š MORI DocID: 1451843 


οσα 532705. .-— >. ЫГ С <` 
νο Well: -3 ih цолга Lsporne, 


Statenznts concerning remarks race t ` 


-Cvenced Intellizsnce Seninsr По, ó dcrinrz the period 7-25 
Sept, 1971. ie. Osbcimə szig tct fect tha ihe C2Zico o7 Z. с. сарі 


hed rel: tions sit’: the local pclice forces in the Letrocolitien 


5 ` 


shington ires hid been Tenozted to the DOT in ite тек Javells 
-emo dated 16 izy 1973, but thot he hzd no Imouledse o? the Zellou 
Sese and had not previously heard of zur -Сопоу іпусфуєгепі in or 


ссппосіїоп слі, baa сгѕе, 


Ле συ estes th t Z ~a сле nd t Tt: tolr. спе pet 
uhet К-сы T coud fron in, but thet bo also invented їс bk to 
ix, [ h ter hinself, Ге reared id: p ut - & vei 


Sood briefer κοῦ inclined to be over-expansive at tines and tilk 


to ruch, 


eee ada woe давен s £ Anl gne 
Athen ΡΥ ΠΗ, : 

E ра Αα; alind desde uates Шш Anan. 2 ag 

Мы o δεν DH zoe Asad Ro a. όν қ ко, 

: 229 A D "АК А ОО dr (5 gu © Z. 

Mur PER 

He ωρα... τα az. Z £ Fea sif 

Я с. e bod fon гом e 7 يه‎ ZZ, Mt, AT οι 


. CR Ld ως j^ У EEN 
© лю 00655 | 


————————_E_ Ce 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


-25 May 1973 


t 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 


THROUGH : Mr. William E. Colby 


1. On 17 May the name JEMEN, 
referred to this office as having attempted to contact the Director 


concerning "activities outside the Agency." I attempted to contact 
on 21 and 22 May, but he was on leave, On 23 May 
e stated he wanted to check a portion of his information and asked 
if he could come to my office on 24 May. 


2. came into the Agency as a ТОТ 


1n October an y ssigned 
to the Soviet/EE Section. He has a very strong personnel file. 


3. сови that in August 1971 he attended the 
Advanced Intelligence Seminar. Оп the first evening of the seminar 
the students had a "getting acquainted" session where each one 
gave a brief description of his duties. One of the onia BRUN 

of the Office of Security, however, carried on 
ession was over and expanded оп the briefing he.had given. 
He claimed that CIA was cooperating with the Montgomery County 
Police, stating that the Office of Security gave electronic and other 
support to that organization. 


4. He further indicated that the Office of Security had been 
` Involved in the "Ballou саве". described the Ballou case 

as follows: The residence of Mr. Ballou, an antique gun collector 
in Silver Spring, Maryland, was raided on 7 June 1971 by the Mont- 
gomery County Police and some Federal law enforcement officers. 
After the officers, dressed in civilian clothes, had forced their way 
into the house Ballou picked up an antique pistol. The officers 
immediately opened fire and wounded Ballou seriously. He spent 
a long time in the hospital and is partly paralyzed at the present time. 


00656 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


το... 7 "б 


AM ἔς ‚= 


His case was given much publicity in the Washington Post at the 
time, There was additional publicity in the last several months 
when Ballou instigated a lawsuit against the raiding officers. 


6. I thanked] о ја told him this was just the type 
. of information we wanted to receive so that it can be investigated 
: and appropriate action taken if the information is borne out. 


7. This office will follow up on this allegation and advise 
` {һе Director concerning our findings. 


William V. Broe 
Inspector General 


00657 


—————————___ ss 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


° ADVAN Y INTELLIGENCE SEMHINAR м. Й 5 
: m 2 -RS Sak ?/ Й 
List of Students i 
Р š of Tar LT 


Name. ERN . Office Room No. Extension 


- | ` 00658 


-----5π: ---- ----τ-- dC σε ده‎ ee ry oon mimo non р y, eA 
Та - ` D 


FORM ΝΟ, 101 REPLACES FORM 10-101 
1 AUG 54 


MORI DocID: 


МЕМОВАНЬОМ FOR: Укиє 


Охх inal ° το his 
Erte Mudd Ὃν. Chancboslar, 
ὃν Mv. Cot, . Wa mada Gy 


CQ 95 and — vetvrad the 
оха g" to 


AN ULO wc چچ‎ 


(DATE) 


006 


(4?) 
WHICH MAY BE USED, 


1451843 


| 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


Sa . = ^ 9 


; 5317 Briley Place, М. М, 
' Washington, D. C. 20016 
29 February 1972 ` 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer 
Editor-at-Large 

Parade Magazine 

140 N. Hamilton Drive 

` Bevorly Hills, California 90211 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


Thank you for your letter of February 7, 1972, and its 

` kind words about me. As you can imagine, your challenge set 
me to work to meet it. Аз a result I can say, under oath if 
need be, that CIA has never carried out a political assassination, 
nor has it induced, employed or suggested one which occurred, 
Whether this fully meets your challenge, I cannot say (it takes 
two to tango), but it is a long way from the original statement in 
Mr. Scott's column that CIA "uses political assassination as a 
weapon." Perhaps lam too sensitive, but I would hope you could 
set the record straight for your readers. | 


Sincerely, 


W. E. Colby 


ET LAE 


[m м 
(£ зь 


00660 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ої Μπ ΠΠ“ 


Parade Publications, ас, + OL 3-2073 
140 N. Hamilton Drive 
Beverly Hills, Calif. 90211 


PARADE 


LLOYD SHEARER 
Editer-sł-Largs 


February 7, 1972 


Mr. М.Е. Colby 
5317 Briley Pl. 
Washington, D.C. 20016 


Dear Mr. Colby¥ 


Thank you for your kind and informative Letter. of 
January 11 concerning Operation Phoenix. 
£ don't want to get into a running word-battle with 


you on the subject of political assassination in Indo-China 


or the role of CIA and other of our agencies in Operation 


Phoenix. 


i am Б wondering АГ you would care to say flatly 
— the CIA has never used political assassination in 


Indo-China or elsewhere and has never induced, employed, or 


suggested to others that such tactics or devices be employed. 


If you will make that flat statement under oath, I will 


not only apologize, I will tango with Dick Helms in 


Garfinckel's largest show window at 14th and F--providing, | 


of course, Mrs. Helms gives her permission. 


Again, I thank you for your interest and commend you 
for the really outstanding service you have rendered the 
й r 


country. You are indeed one of Helms! finest. 


| Не vectfye 
? ond P Se (4f. 
. : LEO D SHEARER 00661 


4l 


MM. 


Meth 


MB a E a SEES 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


SENDER WILL CHECK CLAS “CATION ТОР AND BOTTOM 


UNCLASSIFIE VUNFIDENTIAL ` É 4 


OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 


NAME AND ADDRESS 
— 


. 
prese — 9 
s 


P 
RICO 
RETU 


COMMENT i ΕἸΠΗ͂ 
CONCURRENCE SIGHATURE 


ТЕН 
É 


UNCLASSIFIED CONFIDENTIAL 


E ΗΝ 237 Use previous editions 


: 1451843 


MORI DocID 


Ы T= Zx τος ATES 
140 North Hamilton Driva 
Beverly Hills, Calif. . 


Mr. W. E. Colby 

COLBY, KOMER & HELMS 

5317 Briley Place, М.И, 
_Washinzton p.c. 20016 


IE! 


аһ aon anvas , 


D ЇЇ! παπα 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


T AT d - e 


й .- » [ 
4 B + ` 


PARADE Parade Publications, Ine. + OL 3-2072 
I 2 | 140 N. Hamilton Drive 
LLOYD SHEARER 


Beverly Hitis, Calif. 90211 
Editor-at-Large | ' 


April 30, 1972 


Dear General Colby: 


"(1) Thank you for your article, "Should Lesbians Be 
Allowed To Play Professional Football?" I found it іпіхієціпо, 
and we plan to run it іл a future issue under your ια of 


course. 


(2) Thank you for arranging а tanao with me and Dick 
Helms of Her Majesty's Tel Aviv Rifles. Even At Villiams, 


Dick was. one of the creat tango-artists of our time. Carfinkels,! 


| 
| 


Woodrop-Lathrop, even Y pM fact,any place and time of 
your choosing is O.K. with me | 


` (3) One sad note! WALL you tell Aneus we cannot use 
his new car bumper sticker: LICK DICK in "72, because it is 
open to misinterpretation. In addition, ws try to remain 
politically neutral. - . x 


(+) As to your willinzness to say under oath that the 
CIA has never been party to political assassination, I, of 
late, have been travelling a good deal. In the course of my 
travels I happened to encounter Oler Penkovsky--not your 
Olez---but Penkovsky, a bartender in Cleveland,-Ohio. 

Penkovsky told me thav you signeda secrecy arreement, Fora 

270, witnessed by Victor І. Marchetti. Under the terms of 

this arreement you are pledged to eternal silence concerninr 
CIA activities. Unless you have a special Papal áíspensation--- 

the kind ziven Allen Dulles and Lyman Kirkpatrick,Jr., it seems. 

to me you are lip-sealed. 


Perhaps this does not apply to hearines before 
the Senate Foreign Relations Counittee or the prestigious 
Council ο: Foreign Relations. If this is so, please let me 
know; and we will take it from there. 


(5).I will be in Washinzton shortly staying at the 
home of Jack Anderson out in Silver Spring. Perhaps we can 
meet there for & small summit. I will have with me several 
former Green Beret members wno want to discuss with you 
the subject of CIA imposters in South Vietnam, who lied to 


them and me, too. 


Let me hear frun you. ALL, the best, 
һ 00664 


' . 1 


A А ` | { Р i | ү” 


MORI DocID: 


QU 


Y 


1451843 


5317 Briley Place, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 20016 


29 February 1972 
i 


Mr. Lioyd Shearer: 
Editor-at-Large 

Parade Magazine 

140 М. Hamilton Drive 

Beverly Hills, California 90211 


Dear Mr. Shearert 


Thank you for your Ictter of February 7, 1972, and its 


kind words about me. As you can imagine, your challenge set 


me to work to meet it, Asa result I can say, under oath if 


need be, that CIA has never carried out a political assassination, 
nor has it induced, employed or suggested one which occurred, 
Whether this fully meets your challenge, Y cannot say (it takes 
two to tango), but it is a long way from the original statement in 


Mr. Scott's column that CIA "uses political assassination as 


a 


weapon."' Perhaps lam too sensitive, but I would hope you could 


Bet the record straight for your readers. 


Sincerely, 


[7s] W. E. Colby, 


W. E, Colby 


, 


WH AS 


00665 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


: , N | 1 Z22- 22⁄⁄ 1 


>+ 


Съ ТЕР, СА RS Parade Publications, те. + OL 3-2073 
τ Bs 140 М.Натійоп Drive 


1L0YD SHEARER Beverly Hills, Calif. $0211 


Editor-at-Large 


February 7, 1972 


Mr. W.E. Colby 
5317 Briley РІ. 
Washington, D.C. 20016 


Dear Mr. Colby! 


Thank you for your kind апа informative letter of 
‘January 11 concerning Operation Phoenix. 

I don't want to get into a running word-battle with 
you on the subject of political assassination in Indo-China 
or the role of CIA and other of our agencies in Operation 
Phoenix. 

I am Just wondering àf you would care to say flatly 
that the CIA has never used political ο των in 
Indo-China or elsewhere and has never induced, employed, or 
SUES êê to others that such tactics or devices be employed. 

If you will make that flat statement under oath, I will 
not only apologize, I will tango with Dick Helms in | 
Garfinekel's largest show window at 14th and кеша, 
of course, Mrs. Helms gives her permission. 

Agein, I thank you for your interest and commend you 
for the really outstanding service you have rendered 'the 


country. You are indeed one of Helms! finest. н 


KNEES бай _ 


LLO A SHEARER 
I 00666 


αν , m a ` τ, Й + C κ. 


MORI DOCID: 1451843 


` 
... 
+ 


КА 


5317 Brlley Place 
Washington, D. C. 20015 
January 11, 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer 

Editor at Large 

Parade Magazine | eq da 
733 Third Avenue - 

New York, New York 10017 


Dear Mr, Shearer: 


In your isnue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality Parade 
responses stated that CIA "ruses political assassination ao а weapon” end 
that Operation Phoenix "тип by the CIA established a new high for У. 5. 
political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I bave held responsible positions 
in CLA for many years and was also (during detached service from СІЛ) re- 
sponsible for U. 5. support to Operation Phoenix, I believe Iam uniquely. 
qualified to testify (as I have in public session under oath to Senate and House 
Committees) that: E 


а. CIA does nct and has not used political assassination as a 
weapon. ; 


b. Opezation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by tha Govern- 
ment of Vietnam, with the support of the CORDS element of tho U, 8. 
Military Assistance Command in coordination with several U. 5. 
agencies including CIA.- ` 


с. Operation Phoenix is not and was not a program of acsasaina- 
tion, It countered the Viet Cong apparatus attempting to overthrow 
the Government of Vietnam Бу targetting its leaders. Wherever pos- 
sible, these were apprehended or invited to defect, but a substantial 
number were killed in firefights during military operations or re- 
sisting capture. There is a vast difference in kind, not merely in, 
degree, between these combat casualties, (even including the few 
abuses which occurred) and the victims of the Viet Cong's systematic 
campaign of terrorism to which Mr, Scott quite accuratcly referred, 


In order to clarify this important questicai to the millions of concerned 
Americans who read Parade, I should appreciate your publishing this letter. 


Sincerely, ۴ 


Ів W. E. Colby 


W. E. Colby - 
WECiblp . ` 


` Distribution: . . 00667 
Orig - Addresree 1 - ER l- ExDir 1 - Mr. Thuermer 


1 - William Sullivan of Stafe (via SAVA - 12 Jan) 1 - Colonel Farnham !OSn/IS^ 


MEN 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


x = . ES . 
` Ы τ 


5317 Briley Place 
Washington, D, C. 20016 
January 11, 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer | P 

Editor at Large : і i | Die 
Parade Magazine ° 

733 Third Avenue 

New York, New York 10017 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality Parade 
responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as a weapon” and 
that Operation Phoenix ''run by the CIA established a new high for 0. 5. 
political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held responsible positions 
in CIA for many years and was also (during detached service from CIA) re- 
sponsible for О, S, support to Operation Phoenix, I believe I am uniquely 
qualified to testify (as I have in public session under oath to Senate and House 
Committees) that: 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination as a 
weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the Govern- 
ment ої Vietnaxn, with the support of the CORDS element of the U. 5. 
Military Assistance Command in coordination with several U. 5, 
agencies including CIA, Ë 


c. Operation Phoenix is not and was not a program of assassina- 

tion. It countered the Viet Cong apparatus attempting to overthrow 

‚ the Government of Victnam by targetting its leaders. Wherever pos- 
8ible, these were apprehended or invited to defect, but a substantial 
number were killed in firefights during military operations or re- 
sisting capture. There is a vast difference in kind, not merely in 
degree, between these combat casualties (even including the few 
abuses which occurred) and the victims of the Viet Cong's systematic 
campaign of terrorism to which Mr. Scott quite accurately referred. 


In order to clarify this important question to the millions of concerned 
Americans who read Parade, I should appreciate your publishing thig letter. 


Sincerely, 4 


- "o — w. E. Colby 


00668 


. (quesied, VOtume oi 


ч « 
e + Q. four years apo actress 
| Hedy Llamar had а man 

š | hamed Donald Blyth jailed 
i for attempted rape. Не 
š chimed at the lime that 
πο Hedy had invited him to 


share her hed. What ever 


- 
1 з 
з, 


' 
` 


| но happened to that сазеў— . 
? D.L., Lubbock, Тех. 

ЛЯ 0 Cpairman for the Los Angeles 

: ` the charge and sued Hedy 


5 ` g that she had willingly ac- 

- veral weeks ago Miss Lamart 
urt to answer Blyth’s charges, 
dered her to pay him $15,000 
lenouncing him as a rapist. 


aid of girls and marriage?t— 
C. 
* Фу too engrossed in his work. 


ч 77 Hope and does he still fool ` 
_ Chicago, Il. | 
n in Eltham, England, on July 
it his zest for living it up. 


. sanis one with whom you can 
: Ἔα.’ Who said that?—Lovise 
IE il, ` 


уп wear lifts in his shoes? And 
T eth Taylor, rule the roost?— 
, ale, Ariz. ' - 

lifts to make him taller. 


Yes, 


on v hots in the family. Of the two | 


of К jer and more responsible. M is 
a yl < p scripts they do, which may 
Us Sof recent flops. ` 


. 


- tesldent, DANIEL D. KINLEY 
- er, CAMPBELL GEESLIN 
з, ΣΤ. ΜΙΙΚΟΗΝ 


Us, з, DEMETRIA TAYLOR 
I BEUMCNTHAL, OPAL GINN 


` I Vietcong infrastructure. Operation Phoenix run by 


editor, JESS GORKIN 
senior editor, DAVID PALEY 


τε ìssociate editors, LINDA GUTSTEIN, HERBERT KUPFERBERG, MARTIN MARGULIES, JOHN С. ROGERS 
art associate, AL TROIANI $ 

t assistants, MARY HODOROWSXI, SUZANNE CURLEY, DORIS SCHDPTMAN . 

fashion, VIRGINIA POPE 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


п руса зако» реон воран 


"ρολο να 
ї . 


a E sear е 
ACTOR ERNEST BORGNINE WITH HIS FOURTH WIFE. 

О. How many times has actor Ernest Borgnine been _ 
married, and is he а wile-bealer?—E.T.R., Springfield, 
Mass. . ` 
А. Borgnine has been married four times, His last? 
wife, Donna, has charged him with beating her, ds 
seeking a divorce. й 


. Q. Is there any agency of the U.S. Government whish 
has been authorized to include political assassination , 
in its practices?—M., Wilson, Austin, Tex. 

А. The one U.S. agency which uses political assassi- 
nation as a weapon is the Central Intelligence 
Agency. Many of its men їп Vietnam have assassi- 
nated civillan Communists in an effort to destroy the 


the CIA established a new high for U.S. political 
assassinations in Vietnam, largely in response to 
enemy terrorist tactics which also include assassina- 
tion, kidnapping, terrorism of all sorts. 


Q. Does Richard Nixon 
have his own private goll 

` course at Key Biscayne?— 
Emma Reynolds, Orlando, 
Fla. . ; 
A. Not at Key Biscayne. Не 
‘owns а six-hole pitch-and- 
putt course on his San 

Clemente, Calif, estate. 


Q. How long docs it take 
radioactive fallout from 
_Chinese nuclear tesis to 
teach the US.?— Mark 
Cheseboro, Barstow, Calif, 
A. Approximately three 
days depending on the 
wind. 


` 


publisher, WARREN J. REYNOLDS | 


- 


cartoon editor, LAWRENCE LARIAR 


pa t€ ÍvYWw 


MORI DocID: 


- Е 1 


5317 Briley Place 
Washington, D. C. 20016 
January ll, 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer 

Editor at Large T" 
Parade Magazine Ti ag. 
733 Third Avenue 

New York, New York 10017 i 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality Parade 
responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as a weapon" and 
that Operation Phoenix "run by the CIA established a new high fox U. S. 
political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held responsible positions 
in CIA for many years and was also (during detached service from CIA) re- 
sponsible for U. S. support to Operation Phoenix, I believe 1 am uniquely. 


qualified to testify (as I have in public session under oath to Senate and House 


Committees) that: 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination as a 
weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the Govern- 
ment of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element of the U. S. 
Military Assistance Сопипалад in coordination with several U. 5. 
agencies including CIA, | | 


- 


c. Operation Phoenix is not and was not а program of assassina- 
tion. It countered the Viet Cong а IPS to overthrow jl 
бам the Government of Vietnam By Gppiehcbathg ο jzmifech) ne its leaders. e 
"Senee9—L4hese were killed in firefights during ышы operations or 
Ad resisting capture. There is a vast difference in kind, not merely in 
= degree, between these combat casualties (even including the few 
Es abuses which occurred) and the victims of the Viet Cong!s systematic 


т campaign of terrorism to which Mr. Scott quite accurately referred. 


20 In order to clarify this important questicn to the millions of concerned 
Americans who read Parade, I should appreciate your publishing this letter. 


Sincerely, 


A maa red 
W. =. Colby 


00670 


А сої 
WU 


1451843 


x 
x 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


бас, { r u di D | cT d _ 


- ы 


«У 


5317 Briley Place 
Washington, D. C. 20016 
January 10, 1972 . 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer 
Editor at Large 
Parade Magazine 
733 Third Avenue 

. New York, New York 10017 


E SH " 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personalit 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as a 
weapon" and that Operation Phoenix "run by the CIA established a new 
high for U. S. political as sassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held 
responsible positions in CIA for many years and was also (during de- 
tached service from CIA) responsible for U. S. support to Operation 
Phoenix, I believe I am uniquely qualified to testify (as I have in public ` 
session under oath to Senate and House Committees) that: 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination as 
a weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the 
Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element 
of the U. S. Military Assistance Command in coordination with 
several U. S. agencies including CIA. 


c. ` Operation, Phoenix is not and was not a program of 
assassination.büt rather endeavozes-to counter the Viet Cong 
apparatus leading-the attempt to overthrow the Government ої 
Vietnam by apprehending or defecting its members.’ Some of 
these were killed in firefights during military operations or re- 

. sisting capture. There isa vast difference in kind, not merely ~~ 

| degree, between these combat casualties (even including Yu esc dieta 

κορν aczasional. e and few. abusos and the victims of the Viet ` | 

^" Cong's systematic campaign of terrorism roionred-to-by-Mr.5coth : 

a b. εκ. δε ως "Ον 

In order to clarify this important question to the millions of con- /, 

cerned Americans who might-bemisled by Mr. Scott's-column; І should k 
appreciate your publishing this letter. MEL II IM 


κ᾽ τε 
. 


ES 
H 
i 

—. 


23 


gcc 


/ Sincerely, 


у а ge W. E. Colby 00671 


MORI росІр:` 1451843 


t 


«м 
, 


y Ὁ й ` κ і 
ее. S sss А 
5 SENDER WILL CHECK CLA, ‘CATION TOP AND BOTTOM 
| | UNCLASSIFIED | | cCoNFIDENTIA. | | SECRET 


OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP 


Colonel White 


ACTION | | |оівєст mv } | 
APPROVAL ISPATCH | — [RECOMHENDATION 


CONNERT [ me О eren 
CONCURRENCE | Гінеряматюн | |siGnATURE 


emarks: 


= 


Mr. Colby asked that the attached be sent 
to you for comments, . E 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO 
FRO!: NAME, AZZRESS AND PHONE NO. DATE 


' O/ExDir 


| J UNCLASSIFIED | Го Р CONFIDENTIAL | | 5 


FORM NO, Use previous editions 
er 237 iin 


———— - -- —— 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


| C ` m . š ( 5 
р : 75317 Briley Place 
Washington, D. C. 20016 
10 January 1972 


Mr, Lloyd Shearer | | . 
Editor at Large 
Parade Magazine 


133 Third Avenue ‘ - 


New York, New York 10017 


c 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as а 
weapon'' and that Operation Phoenix "хип by the CIA established а new 
high for U, 5. political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held 
responsible positions in CIA for many years and was also (during de- 
tached service from CIA) responsible for U. S. support to Operation 
Phoenix, I believe I arn uniquely qualified to testify (as I have in public · 
‘session under oath to Senate and House Committees) that: | 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination a8 
а weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the 
Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element 
of the U. S. Military Assistance Command. ` 

c. Operation Phoenix is not а program of assassination. \ 

Members of the Viet Cong apparatus were killed in thc course 

of military operations or resisting police arrest. There is a 

vast difference in kind, not merely degree, between these (even 

including occasional -- and few -- abuses) znd the Viet Cong!a 

conscious campaign of terrorism referred to by Mr. Scott. 

In order to clarifythis important question to the millions of con- 
cerned Americans who might be misled by Mr. Scott's column, I should 
appreciate your publisbing this letter. - ` 


| Sincerely, 


W. E. Colby | 


00673 


sjel- k 
ο 


ACTION r 
APPROVAL 
COMMENT 
CONCURRENCE 


Remarks: 


noon. 


` SENDER WILL CHECK CLAS “CATION TOP AND BOTTOM 
| "|^ UNCLASSIFIED VUNFIDENTIAL 


OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP ` 
NAME AND ADDRESS 


Mr. George Carver 


Mr. Colby asked that the attached be sent 
to you for comments. If possible, we should 
appreciate receiving your response this after- 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ο. ma ` чає ++ яш. - 


εἶν. 


SECHET 


INITIALS 


| DIRECT REPLY — | [PREPARE REPLY __ | 
| DISPATCH — — | | RECOMMENDANON — | 
πε ἐν | 
| INFORMATION | РО |еснативе | 


Е 
ñ 


2 "ο 


FROM: 


1-67 


NAME, ADDRESS ANO PHONE NO 


O/Executive Director 


| | UNCLASSIFIED 


розм NO, 237 Use previous editions 


DATE 


0 Jan 72 


бтрт | | SECRET | 


` 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


fa Tos ДР] ИЕ 
. ΜΚ "m ` J ο” 
| 5317 Briley Place 


Washington, D. C. 20016 
10 January 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Sheare 
Editor at Large 
Parade Magazine 
733 Third Avenue 
Мем York, New York 10017 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses politival assassination as a 
weapon" aad that Operation Phoenix ' 
high for U. S. politicalassassination 


of the U, S. Military / Baie anes oinmand +, Toots — 


“kesme US Oa ty خلسم‎ DEM 
ogram of assassination 


„бл з Operation Phoenix із not a p 
Members ot μμ ενα were killed in the-eous 
c.c "ema 


during sot military operations or as چە‎ There is 


Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element , wb 


— 
m : 


vast difference in kind, not mer ely'degiee,. between thes 
including occasional -- and few -- abuses) and the/Viet Coh 
(бело bie  sonsciees campaign of terrorism referred to by Mr. Scptt. 


even 
g's 


S 
: In order to clarify this important question to 


cerned Americans who might be misled by 
appreciate your publishing this letter. 


millions of con- 
Scott's column, I should 


Sincerely, ee 
w. E. Colby 


1 
yick | 


MORI DocID: 1451843 
4 


- + d » 


$- LI A 2 
MON T баранця айы елына " . H ñ Я 
ιο ποὺ ма ο . манти Myr τὸν rom em RR И 
' 
А 
* + 


эзе. 


ІВ does nok ач Йо hever Φε 
psutton ^92 Окер apaytd (v 


: ΜΝ operubron. he of tt» Pepes hed 
| ° ` 
є erst bunt τὲ «о, rt Bleu εν Mr. Sels 


T 
5 
CY . | ` 


t نر‎ "Perses IM Рез T У а. cals ny 


roo оч feos εἰν eva ος batsotver 1 fu the 
| - ane = 
і 
| = 
| ! | | 
Е | | с. O tru oa P hota ny D тей ок Ne vr he 


` 14 

Pers v. Por of ogsa ff `a DL А : TETTE 
raw: Jusel fer Ενε f truck ου perre 
А ζοννευΜτοξ o е 
ВЕЕ wo arch Бак бео he e aeta verte! 
|? | Соо eli fe Hye ache hy ef ο] of 
| C o posta L; == pan іван, Ps ee o «t| erv lea 
ТЛЕ == w {ο фо vt Comt Mtaseore o & 
` 

Ines pons ἡ ПКУ foe cs pru wnt Uaritew Касей) 
ot Tu (Апе Ενας Common Ё Puy Cor мол" 
ie fert te overthray Pye Govern mta Р {7 forte 
| 


lof Garms. Τι Members ° £ f bke Comi D 


(Porky heer | osel ap pets P? M xL vir 


t 
t 
5 


pus Cotes Y vaina riy te P t £ и 
“МЕ ofmest Cs vo vind Гу Corey ems ouy 00676 
' {чч Meer ІТ eu ort wsve ПУ 


. 
------------ 


-———— — 


ὶ 
MORI DocID: 1451843 


с "E Ue. 


میا —À — MÀ — ^ € e — À‏ ب س م 


gue rdiet e an come? IM s terb E 
eed uel Vut» S nit өлү odit pk fo 

‘ones $ party en ог, рео het, P 
Lo ^а Usus enfe «оме, 
μήν oF Ct fW, members of Fue 

ust Com, Spe have OU PO) y 

i ttu wall Pa Flue: caure of me bboy 

o pereki or wll run Ev) po (ite arint, 
Fher е, eae hewtvey ο. Pwk 
{хехе їм км, hak merely hp rte, боа 
M epos НА» Ei from orm tel camla F 
Cs uta Мед») осені ond ftw- Φώς. 
jo-$uJu ) ew Be VE Co ng U (ο) ο ον 
ун А cay Palys of Perro cise 45 arn 
| e^ e wee Non. Сом 1х ом М re Lorre Ae ty 


qne. Seb: 


| 
i 
І 
| 
i 
| 
| 
' 
| 
! 


00672 


сє 


LL EU EE E НН ЫЕНЕН ОНЕР 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


ж м کہ مد‎ ——— ---- s رنہ‎ — —3À3 


+. 


[ , - GENDES WILL CHECK CLAS 


ICATION TOP AND BOTTOM 


ACTIO! | Τοιβεοτ REPLY | J PREPARE REPLY 
FPROVAL |__| DISPATCH | [RECOMMENDATION 


A 
COMMENT | imt | [RETURN 
CONCURPENCE | 0 liwronmariou.— | — | SIGHATURE 


= 


emarks: 


Mr. Colby asked that the attached be sent 
to you for comments. If possible, we should 
appreciate your response this afternoon, 


m а d NATED Ege Um) —F 
Эчак Ju ونی‎ et — 5 pnm OTS ή... 


су 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENCER 


FROM: МАМЕ, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO. DATE 


O/Executive Director «| 


|. | UNCLASSIFIED ] Γ-τυπττοτιτττπῖ. | 


юам NO. 237 Use previous editions 


SECRET 


(40) 


۹ 


n eRe eee 


— r... ντο οὐ e 


ο ο. m -— Q. 


` MORI DocID: 1451843 


xo к, Ка Е . g | ου leti 

7 | | 2 5317 Briley Place ^. 
| Washington, D. C. 20016 

10 January 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer . 

Editor at Large . 

Parade Magazine | ; | | 
733 Third Avenue ` ; d 
New York, New York 10017 .: 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality | 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as a 
weapon" and that Operation Phoenix "тип by the CIA established a new 
high for Ὁ. 5. political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held 
xesponsible positions in CIA for many years and was also (during de- 
_ tached service from CIA) responsible for U. 5. support to Operation 
۹ Phoenix, 1 believe I am [uniquety]quatitied to testify (as I have in public ` 
session under oath to Senate and House Committees) that: 


- 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination as 


а weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the , e ed 
Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS el 
‚ of the U. 5. Military Assistance Command. UT 


"ес. Operation Phoenix is not a program of assassination. 
Members of the Viet Cong apparatus were killed in the course 
of military operations or resisting police arrest. There.isa |. Э) 
vast difference in kind, not merely degree, between these/(even 
including occasional -- and few -- abuses) and the Viet Cong's 
conscious campaign of terrorism referred to by Mr. Scott. 


yi 


In order to clarify this important question to the millions of con- 
cerned Americans who might be misled by Mr. Scott's column, I should 
appreciate your publishing this letter. | 


ΝΗ M. τα " "y aud Sincerely, | 
аы ыыы ы жш ы . з 

ο ζω, аа 
— daos M. AC ба, крб. | 
NA MEN Qut efe M Es 
CIA? 2 ` 


W. E. Colby 


00679 


— — —— 


Mr. Houston 


"Му. Warner 


І have asked 


ΝΡ». р 
over and AS s comments 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


CC | 


—— - нее y 
[A 


3 


Laman ass 


DENDER WILL. CHECK CLA! 


ч 


СО 


General/Counsel 


AFPROYAL 
COMMENT ` 
CONCURRERCE 


lemarks: 


went 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


; P 
- А E r 7 
А Уз 


ICATION TOP AND BOTTOM : 


| 


DiRECT REPLY й 
DISPATCH : 
: : 


ΙΗΕΟΒΜΑΤΙΟΝ 


Mr. Colby asked that the attached be sent 


to you fox comments. 


If possible, we should: 
appreciate your response this afternoon. 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER 
FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE МО. 


Use previous editions 


ΣΣ 


y! 


p — o 


—— — 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


5317 Briley Place 


КАЈ 


Washington, D. C. 20016 


10 January 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer | P" 
Editor at Large - . 
Parade Magazine s ο 


7733 Third Avenue 


New York, New York 10017 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses political.assassination as a 
weapon" and that Operation Phoenix "run by the CIA established a new 
high for U. S. political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held 
responsible positions in CIA for many years and was also (during de- 
tached service from CIA) responsible for U. 5. support to Operation 
‘Phoenix, I believe I arn uniquely qualified to testify (as I have in public ` 
session under oath to Senate and House Committees) that; | 


a. CIA does not and has not used political assassination as 
a weapon. 


b. Operation Phoe ix was run not by the CIA but by the 
Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element. 
-of the U. S. VÀ Assistance Command, u ёге М taoi по 

с.. кыбы ы Phoenix is not à program of assassination. . 
Members of the Viet Cong apparatus were killed in the course 
of military operations or resisting police arrest. Thereisa 
vast difference in kind, not merely degree, between these (even 
including occasional -- and few -- abuses) and the Vict Cong's 
conscious campaign of terrorism referred to by Mr. Scott. 


In order to clarify this important question to thc millions of con- 
cerned Americans who might be misled by Mr. Scott's column, 1 I should 
appreciate your publishing this letter. 


Sincerely, 


` 


W. E. Colby 


00682 


اس مومت M‏ 


MORT DocID: 


SENDER WILL CHECK CL. FICATION TOP AND BOTTOM 


79 


PREFARE REPLY 
RECGIAMENDATION 
RETVAN 


JCONCURREKCE | | | JGNATURE 


Remarks: 


Mr. Colby asked that the attached be sent 
to you for comm.ats, If possible, we should 
appreciate receiving your response this after-. 
noon, 


FOLD HERE TO RETURN YO SENDER 
FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AHD PHONE NO. 


O/Executive Director 


UNCLASSIFIED 
FORM WO. 937 Use previous edilions 


1-67 


ha 


1451843 


MORI DocID: 


д^. 


> == 


The noted phrases should, in my opinion, 


be cut out, YEE They are the kind that lead to the 
italticizsd "Editor's Note" at the end-of the letter 
which rebuts the whole @ point being made by 


the letter writer, 


"Rdsisting ро "се arrest " will get 
you, with the press, nothing but snide gnicking 
cracks... and as we're Pestis not going to x win 
too much in cuch a short letter anyway, why not skip 
tthe occassional abuses bit, | 


Them's my thots, ¬ 


AMT 


1451843 


00684 


fe ee St 


μ.μ” + 


чі 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


4 s b317 Briley Place 


Washington, D. C. 2: 75 


10 January 1972 


Mr. Lloyd Shearer Р 
Editor at Large | 
Parade Magazine 

733 Third Avenue "S 

New York, New York 10017 


Dear Mr. Shearer: 


In your issue of January 9th, one of Walter Scott's Personality 
Parade responses stated that CIA "uses political assassination as a 
weapon" and that Operation Phoenix "run by the CIA established a new 
high for U. S. political assassinations in Vietnam." Since I have held 
responsible positions in CIA for many years and was also (during de- 
tached service from CIA) responsible for U. 5. support to Operation 
Phoenix, 1 believe I am uniquely qualified to testify (as I have in public ` 
session under oath to Senate and House Committees) tbat: 


a. CIA does not and has not used political as sassination аз 
a weapon. 


b. Operation Phoenix was run not by the CIA but by the 
Government of Vietnam with the support of the CORDS element 
of the U. S. Military Assistance Command. 

` E 

c. Operation Phoenix is not a program of assassination. 
Members of the Viet Cong apparatus were killed in the course 
of military operations Ex-xesisting:policc'arzejí;t There isa 
vast difference in kind, not merely degree, between these [evens 
dnoludingsoacasional.--and.fewa-- abuses] and the Viet Cong's 
conscious campaign of terrorism referred to by Mr. Scott. 


In oxder to clarify this important question to the millions of con- 
cerned Americans who might be misled by Mr. Scott's column, I should 


appreciate your publishing this letter. 


мс | Sincerely, 


W. E. Colby 


2 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 . 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


BN PRA E Ba 1 ΄ 


Ker ο. a bl MAC 


(У 
"E E 
| Е yit 
Й P 
і Же. 


= ë . 
. 
' 
— 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


5 ` 
۰ ` 
Qa. H 


б Са MN E 
ШАШ БЕГ 
ў | 


ANRI? 


MORI DocID: 1451843 


` поваа
