The Outlook for Iran
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028285, dated 4 January 1957.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028285).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NATIONAL IMTELLIGENCE EST:

re tildes | PF ede Aaa a 7 em 2
wets A el. fae i?

Sehniged By res

RoCload OF CENTRAL DtTeLioeeece
ence orcaaretions 6 coated in te
ha a Cuntg@aisciyence dgoney
ie Dereon oO}
Cand Phe foing Stor.

rae fo sone Ny
promectaven ef ic
hed ike aigihger 3

Mita 2
wiate, 2a army, dh Py

INTZLLIGENS Ph

an 23 fanuary 657
aleQilivente, Devecta
vefiigesas, Gegart

aon COAMITIVE
cS the Srecial Seite,
Mi ates oe efsicg,
™, : “f cay

BP. the Joint e
wea 03 the Lae,

: :
ufap Stet caien, 2a:

ro2e@ uf Cage feet dievon.

pe tp matt
riP Ciyseete

¥ E ?. fhe alae

. the

-_

=

te

oe
Pe .
® .
“Sf >

oe ee

THE PROBLEM

To estimate probuoble
intw Years.

trends in Tran

's stability and orientation aver the nex’

CONCLUSIONS

1, We belHeve that over the next lew years
The nresent regime in Tran can rely yoon
at Metre a sa Etre and the support of the
acided tore3s to maintain itself in power.
aoa its ability to govern efectively
for a pericd bevond the next iwo years
or 30 ‘will depend greatiy upon the extent
to which current plans for economic de-
ve opment are carried out ana the prog-
vs. tie ge in social and poucieal refornis.
siuhid ii for be alle lo shew signifennt
nrogre:s vicng these Hues, the urban
classes are lixely to becunie increasingly
restive. In such an event, the pesivion
af the nowarcny Might ve eadangezed,
wwe ile uhon bas tenatified hinsell

Lael eit toe govecnmnnt a) putt en.

2. So long as the Shah retains control.
Tran will almost Sala seek to identify
its interests with the US and the anti-
Comninist se of the Middie East.
Hiowever, the continuation of such a
course depends heavily on US support of
Tran and the maintenance of US prestige
in the Middle East.

8%. The succession to the throne is aot
clearty esteblished. and the death or in-
capacity of the Shan would nrobably open
uo a period of factional disturbances and
a suruzsie for power. The ouicome of
such 2 situation would depend largely on
whether the anir.ed forces remained unit-
ed ana on what leacer or leaders they

du, p0rted.

DISC SESION

+. Tae Shah of Tran. thisugh his increasing
divest intervention in government and with
the support of many of the traditional power
elements — senior army officers. iandlords.
and wealthy merchants — has had a substan-
tial measure of success in restoring the posi-
tion and authority of his government since
the overthrow of Mossadeq in 1953. The Tu-
chk (Communist) Party and extreme nation-
alist opposision groups as exaniplified bs the

followers of Dr. Mossadeg have been regressed
and offer no immediate threat to internal
security.) Ou production and revenues are
increasing steadily under the basic agreement
reaciied with the Consortium in i034. The

‘Since the spring of 1953 the Iranian security
forees have disrupted the Tudeh organization
atrueture tO sueh an extent that ts presert
evfpabilities for ¢fecuve political and subversive

necivity are extremely low,

Se nf de Te

Ey SP aes

mes

ate af. - eign Eh
ae Sy aes “aroway

tiesig alli Oy ft:

une gOUaYts
LoWhe pyees lals vow b yelet
SOUS ECmscrshay, 3NG open ¢ risism os the

1

soverneht hos Been Virudaiy suvnced.

3. In this situation. the Shan hes een ale
16 wivsue roreign policies consistent wil his
wu cio af Iran's national interests and zen-

to tsaridel t@ Utose vi the US and oe
“toon Ta: Sher and als ROVEIMIBD bald

isyar Ala have Deon eoacet ned pre
: i fonse againet Sovieu Cxpans!
it nmmktiacns ii Tran and thea Middle #23.
, devsloging Ig.is cenno:n.e strength, and

eto etur Tats grescge in interna-

. -," av
on ce ns arta acl
ware TRS Us skdbtyet
3 Af a Wee yt = a
We tab den. OeD adie BORE mite

wad from the WS. Bou pup-

ately they have endorsed Pits.-
Tigsnhower's preposais of 8 Janvary i937
ry the Middle Ecst. Despite tue ta-
scanning toward meutiniity and anti-
aeeetl eoang caitnin the equntry, and dc-
suid D2 unwillingness to previde vrior uddi-
tigzal aia and security sommitments as a
ged era que, iran icined the Baghdad Pact
in Ovtober 1955 and itus since played an active
ric in its affairs. With the settlement of
he ol) dispute in i354. and the reduction in
noinsh abaivy to indvence afairs in Tran, the
fondling heave Welcomed te restoration of re-
‘ali nshins With the UX. particulacty in the
eonimercind fletd,

G. Tran ans nok become directly invelved fa
trab rivalries of in the rationalist, anticolo-
rial cnencuvers of the Afro-Asiaa Bloc. De-
sublie svmpaihs for Tayp? during the
a. pustdivies. the government hes ree
‘af sco) towards Nasser. Concern wer
; eoveaent of oi) irae probar.? maved an
iaportant vole in Tren’s vontitued ifentifica-
4.91 its miterests with the West oa tiie Sucz

.
ayiid

&

a.
elite

woah § tl wuceaeThal Fes “4b warnings te-

CULE Gas

. PAA

st

we sined ine n mh.
tian in i@f4. Up une ihe presect iraican
Bscai vear< expenditures had vee! viging at 3

*
4
‘av than the expanding $

The resulting Gomes stv) ALguS.

Simpeoct

bn ihe. ooteiny nad it not been ior additional
imiaris financed oF iS budgetary assistance
~ecumniing to pbout S150 milion. “Duc te
be event eticeation of pert cf the oil reve.
se cg tha ordinary budget ana che orobabl:
igo in OU Dereys ton. Bout $30 m.l-
af Oy revenucs is likely to be avaitasic
for Lie oytnary tudgy in sca vi the next
ive Teanian ascal years." This and the ms.ng
trend o: other government revenues snould
permit the yuvernment to sche “with, its ordi-
nary budget requirements without further US
sudgetars supperit. Eowever. Iran is nov
gecking end will demost certainly continue
to see: US inudzetacy support. Oves the
course of the Second Seven-Year Pinn ¢1950-
1922) oi) revenues. Which are estimated to
reach an annual level eguivalent 50 $237 mil-
lion * by eariy 16°9, will provably be acequote
to cover Ine requirements of the Plan Organi-
zation. During the nest t¥O fears. However,
Iran will provably have 10 depana cr leans
fonm sucty sources @3 the Excort-Import Sans
aad the IBRD if its ambitious development
schocule is to be met.

9. Although a major share (€6 percent in
1956 and 1957, and 75-80 percent in thie next

eghe feontan Sseabond calendar vear sevinsan
tarch,

si) revenues cineluding foxes and other stipu-
lated parunwmish ec $93 riitlion in 1925. will
prebably total $150 milion for 1856. acd may
reach $200 railiica in 19357

‘Conmertlum gaymenis to team are in steTdng.
Urcer i secret UN TrAIMALD CONVETEELY aE res
wayene ad percent af the sterling aapmenis eT
souertipic ing dguats. ;

sme, Qfarts 4a Tey chavs been pruned.
gorninid is tracings

yuaumiag and on

aetoyties goo a ifeg? propertion of them
hoo fea for orafiyets Gevoad tae « seas cr
i. oad mun:

wt. TaehationL.
. oemboencahigsii  dyaniie “he face that
wt qanrana olan) is vat a yet and very un
UE LE ans. oie or: of what 4n Iran's a

glopment play oughs to contain, it tug

a

jie in cena

ppm. ata GAY

Was uF
shat are cy

te Flan Tye. ugaizon. due £o ie

on exargeraicd expeclation of what the ou
can ac be nae me kes toneairically
rrolacts of
: Tehran and

rr
une cals aa ne ee tela ay the ext

wu nregress on ‘a “num! set Of coreign firms
eo whom it ag comracted out many of ihe
oroiects. Whether it will be successiu: will
depend in large measure on the zupport that
the Plen Organization gives thes? Arms.

1G. The Iranian military and security forees.
“umbering some 1€8. 2009 eMicers and men. are
mrasannly “Draanized, equipped. and steployed
pronariy for internal security duties. and
shace forces are clearly strong enough to deal
Wich Suny prospective antermas opangic on. -
Ts murges ef 1854-1926 effectively re duced a
Go0 gevius Tudeh infiltration anion uPicd

PA phy wy. Have Gab evade Lac Teh. ey
ae Pete ST Ty a tp nt rete 8
yt a cAncdeiecie of ae thins forest OF

@ 13.700 oT ars ard
rs i dome, ts well
views Ve verve

2000. nnd 6 all alr fer
men And ha = “3E%0 2 oe
asi frontier & 376. re

set de cg

el cere
at 7 as
Fume.
arate lp currently aasnized fig mone Uehk*
inianiry Civisions, thre Ugat anne red divicuans.
ai¢@ five incepondent Urigades. The Air fores has
a total of 30 airerart, irelucing @ T22 jets ane
18 rats. The navy consists cf two patrol escoris.
on eat. cniawae ahaser, One® Yarnt. 1 pairab ¥s-
sels, And tree aman service ‘ursit.

real ven WEE
: te Sey COeett
ale SYM Chet “0 the aaner a type of Tas
m. Sut they woult Be anlikeiy £5 inh
stare qty Laovemient ogeinat the regis.
tovaity ¢F “ine emir carpa to the mons:
~sould de ungerta im tae even
ov incapacity of the Suh.
M1. The Shah has accenwd US cecommenc.-
liens for a s€0rgarizasunm and redeploy: ne
cf Bis aproy waieh are cenignec tO imeresit

yor the feats

eemoat effectiveness and inignt prcHce IMC
en ability fpr conducting a Hmuted dalaving

actin afong iran’s northern frontier. der-
rver. improvement in the 4 abiity of the iranian
aur ened forces vo tank? ony utiful sontribu.
ten to local or rocianal defonze will acinnst
certainty be stow and dificult to realize be-
ens. of the generaily low level cf morale
among ine pucth: Dei d conseripts. the lack of
technical eemretence and military experience.
and the prevalence of cecruoticn. Moreover,
the implementation of this program will prod-
abiv be porzible only on the | 24313 of continu.
ing US military advice and an increase in US
aid over current leveis

. Tyan’s present orientation derends heavily
ef mn the shah's personzi leadership, contin-
ned US support, and the achievement of
intemal bnprevements guricieat to increase
saapdenee in tie re.ime and pravent a re-
talon to exieme naevonaliz: President
os ennawer’s proposals 9° 5 January 1957 will
prebabsy €7.2 Tranian pressure for a US secu.
is yo cemimunent a gainst an uttacn by the

yat rine cui “ill now satisty the Shah's
pier cr suestantial US military eid. In
vans} vesent posture of open alignment with
thy. West. tae Shak will thus excect ou noeaa

TS aid and suppers, including asteulish-
ment ef a modern armed force. Yi he shceuld
be substantially cisappeinted in this e- bens

tion, if the Baghdad Pact should collenze, er
if US prestige “should suffer serious blows in
hea plddle Fast, the Shah might feel com-

sete! 10 ac opt a neutral position and io: make
accor: sodations ta the CESP and the internal

is
yy

git Pee SEW OY
. ooaigivattalhe loepou. ins tham
Li, Tatermally glia yovermivent oto
cegres3 ia “eas IY “ihn tame
eatses of ciscortent taar gave
“he ultranationelists ana Communists in Ue
Mosideq era, Despite tie inereascd direct-

wane aieteey aad sorruption in the severn-
roeni : aehinery. and some of his own mancu-
yars have added to the debilitating a:aios-
phere of intrigue and factianalism amonys
responsible offeials. Tue Shah's erforts to
encemrage jana yeiormi and to satisfy wice-
nersent ascivations for land ov ner-
tnd chachern owecedition faa: tne
Set Dat tte stad bean mace

oyisyances of the

a merita

veg hte

‘ wy 2 ee
af La eed ead

UDuAat ACW tes.

id. Largely as a vesslt ei inese factors, he
regime has becn casuceesstul in developing 3
ihoucts af napular supoort ena on fact
Sooo! crowmeb an hh. resard since
ooops TSS3. Peruiar hapes that the
sosagohation of Tae Saah’s authority and the
solution ci the cil dispute would provide a
sclid bacis fer sconamic and secial progress
nave given way 19 a genersl sense of rrust1a-
en. The Ala government has besome the
epiret of word-of-inceth criticism Dy all class-
wy of the Iranian puviic because of is sup-
pression of ivi, liberties. its apparent indif-
foronee to popular Grievances. and the pre-
oceupaticn of ite isacing figure “ith matters
oi persona) advantage. This criticism has
eome ine asingly to mvoive whe Ehah, whose
fait cvention in day-io-dar government oera-
‘jets has deprived hin ef come ov nis prestige
a ‘national syinbol azece the solticnd strug:
gir. Although erifie:sra af the regime is
stron zest AMCHZ intelleciugis and reform ele-

rienis. who especially resent troly jacx of

ee

3, portanity te express their views openly, It

ej
o

baviuaing

eae E

s +s.

iateal WIE Sime,
inereasingly Sina such Cri.
and wil! have to tase steps to saiiery dt if n>
is te avuid an internal ersis dangerous wo the
Monaccay.

1h. The Shah is at the moment in Erm von-
trol o: the situation, and volitical activiy
largely revolves about the efforts of various
interests and personalities to gain vis Tavar.
Despite the existence of widesoread grumbling
and evnicism about the government. thers is
tittle disposition by any epoosition groups to
ehoilenge the status quo 2s long as the Shah
cin eifectively command the loyalty ef the
armed forees. Nevertheiess. untess greater
progress in economic devsiorment. especially
Moat benciting the urcan classes. and general
modernization of the social and political struc-
ture is made in the nent few years, the gcv-
ernment's ability to maintain internal stabili-
is Hkeiy to become increasingly uepencent
vil UNiL-errupted Maintenancs of strong po-
ice controls. Becaus2 of the Armness of these
controls tnd because of the Shah’s assump-
tion of responsibility sor government policy.
future oppesition and reform movements are
likely ty include him us a targes and to taxe
ova more revotutionar? casi than in the past.
The Tudeh Party — which continues to exist
covertly — has the potential to exploit such
conditions and will almost certainly attempt
to icin forces with other oppesition elements.

ce

16. The succession to the throne {s net clear-
iy astablished, and the death cr inespacity of
the Shah ‘vould probabiy open up a period of
factional disturbances and a strugcls for pow-
ey, The outcome of suck a situation would
depend largely on whether the armed forces
remained united andon what leader or leaders
fey supported, :
