Communist Capabilities in Indochina
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022775, dated 2 April 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022775).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~POP-GEGHET

TIT. STUDY RY THR CENTRAL UNTOMLTSESCK AGENCY.
COMMURIST CAPABILU?IE. Ti LNDOCHINA
(NIB LO-3-049

Table of Contents
EULE
Trangmittal Memorandum
The Problems cesaeesasaancesnseeseraeeverer sand narsesaang 1

ASSUMPCIONS aascaeer ne nonnaneesenesenesnnsenneensecnas 4

I. Capabilities of Viet Minh Forces Supported In-
directv by the Chinese Commuinists.curcresesnee 2
A. Viet Minn Ground Force Capabilities..... 2
B. Viet Minh Air Cupabilities, .essassssenes 3
C. Viet Minh Naval Capabilities..ssecssseee 1
D. Commmist Political Warfare Capabilities 4+

Il. Capabilities of Chinese Communist and Viet Minh

Fore Ss sea wah a ee nw ee ear ee eee eR OE 6
‘A. Chinese Ground Force Capabilities in :
Tndochind sweseervasenvesenecentneeraee b

B. Chinese Communist Air Capabilities in

THOIG CHINA s.6 shah as i aie eek See RS 8
C. Communist Chinese Naval Capabilities.... 9
D. Commmist Political Warfare Capabilities 11

Table I - Viet Minh Troop Strengths and Dispositions

Table II =- Troops Strengths and Dispositions Chinese
Communist Ground Forces

Table Ii] - Air Order of Battle in Communist China

- Table IV ~ Chinese Communist Naval Forces

«BGR SECNRSY

CENTRAL INTELLI GERACE

MENGRANDIM FOR THE EXECUTIVE SFORETARY

THE WATIONAL SexCuRITY COUNCIL

TRU 8

AGENCE

25 Fey 1954

SUMTECT: TIE 10.3-54, "Commmiss Capabilitice in Indochina

1, Tho sttashed optimate of Camuist Copobilitisa
in Indoshins is subaittied in response to your nemorendcua of

18 Mey.

2, Tota echimeto vas ecraucred in by dhe members of

ths TAC on 25 lMerr,

fef

RQERT ANGI, JR.
Uoputy Direstor/Intalligsnes

Declassifiod by OPP DA i
date Ao? Cr F&A.

WATIOWAL IN@GELLIGEUCE BBTTINATE

CONMUGIST CAPABILITIES IN ..vOCHLR

(Mveace . Copy)

Big 10-3-54

Approved 25 May 1954

fhe Intelligesce Advisory Comittee concurred in this
entinete on 25 Mey 1954. The ASC acd FEL ebotainsd,
the pubjact bring outeide of thair juriedietion.

Whe following meaker organizations of the Intelligenca
Advisovy Comltice participe ted with the Central Intel-
ligense Agency in the preperation of this cetimata: {he
dotelligencs orgimizations of the Doportscute of State,
tha Army, the Ravy, the Atv Foree, eni The Joint Stat.

CENPRAL LETBSLLIGERCE AGERCY

OR al mit oe 25 = as

mR GL SE ee

CRAYVRAL INWNTELLIGRUACEHR AGEUCY

kK
on
BIE 16-3-54; COMMUNIST CAPABILITIBS DY YEDOCHINA
TE PACoLEN e
r es
Ho estimate Communist eapsbilities to oppose an intervention .
of US eruad forees in Indochina employing either:

3. Viet Minh militery foreeo supported infiireetly by :

Communist China; or "s

>. Chinage Comnmiat and Viet Minh forces.

ASSUSPPTICHR

1. he US hes intervene’ during 1954 with grows, sea, end

sir forees in Indochina,

-, 2, US forcen ora opposed by either (a) Viet Fish forcaa alone,
receiving indixreet Chinese Commnist ald; or (t) Chinese Carzmmniat
nna Viet Minh foresa, receiving Soviet support gmorally along the

liner of suth support in Korsa.

we

wae Teer VS oata OT) G2my

a
Po

epeongy ctticn uve dircescd

Mi

OF BPEL TY

foreaz Tad Law yckue of anvatetuin,; guersiile

ra
re

con Yic

eooowe vheovciows Indechius ead of mivating cShoeks or Gauntcr-

aes ulem ao epee ere \ 7 Bae pte ln re ‘ ada eae 7 - Ten:
artneke by foqiules forge: wp te ef: dicistens ta otreusta in Korba ira

tin mike en initial

Teiashios;. It, om tha

sae " ee iets ale “ra St. ae ra mapyit Bel ns 3 Lee Pon se na 5 a Bee
fectoton te cyolé Lax meenenla poettionol Warvaion, saa we ak be Gonne
hee 4 mtn map ype te ep eed 7 sfobyr tpn Pa paby es tas seg?

Bie of pranwbly masest.d ep wed lin oivitir. Such a cave ponld

geechly dmerance he clbeiticrel enpeeta of tha war oi @ Liza Gorecn.

eapcbility of tuo Viet lint vonda Pen sarogs

re. ar PTancene pend aot aaa ee on
Chinese Cormavhet villipcnese af eepae

hive Go LY.

Ydoan of ecuromifecbion Terisac fyoa Gitns dato the Balt. cae. of

Trios CLM Ie} OOO Go oo POO QO0 coach

ae

we dm affiition se the prcaanl 209

M0 ouvhin forws. Poudre, I4

Be ye DE ” vote, “TE eat
fe velikely cuby Yioo t.

uh cewbeh tosgan would emprud Doswin an

LAG

par

oun L8G, 00) over prawn) otreogsh.

on

Laeger

3. Tnobrotuction of “voluntecs” Cainonc Cotmiaibt Torccu Ca
gusyrlllos oy a3 ccapoments of Viet tinh units conldé iosrense Viet
Tinh canzkilities up to the limit of loglutic gupport, bus it is

mitikely that the pretense ¢f now: “nterrestion could be mrinteined ir

sigemble punbers of Chinnce Comavulct pertenagi vers ceniltied.

B. Viet llinh Air Capcbiiiices

ada oe

bh. ‘be Viet Minh do not now porueas on ais yorce.

5. a the Viet Mink-hel’ svees thar ore onprosins aly nins
cirflelds with 4,000 to 5,000 feo minveys prescutly unacevieceble -
bus hich, within « perto& of a work to ten dsys, could ts @svclopcl
So take MEG-15 cpesctiony. Thara can 20 cirviolés vith eniviye

rerming fron 2,699 to 3,000 fect waica, with varying desr3ac of

dmorevowent, voald be owiteble for liatiscu aohreroty anf posetoly lijyscs
trainposs erhivity. Many of than: cirflelis would ta severally ra-
eorteted in ube during wet waathos due to Tlocéing. In oldition,

nowy ais@ielés aviteblo fer HIG-15 operations might ta canveructe

within 30 dsya. Axedisbtiiny of sivflelés would mot pose a lint-
teaion to bin oprretion of cm adv fovea of consider gle site within
“SAagpina after e uoelk to ton daya of biga pricrity contincticn
activity, tha Viet Mink co not mow ponsess the capinllity to oparet:

cueh co Teves. Eowever, the Chirsia Commminte hove the erpsbility

of $rcinirg Vist Mink pilots ead vepport poracanel end of providing

ay

= BORE SeHe

thom vith clrevaft and equipment. Ve heve no firm evidence thet this

eopebility in now being oworcined.

Ci Sol atte cal Sia

6. Viet Minh hove the follovwlog nmeval cepatilities: #eiver
mining, river ambush, end gebotaca im porta and naval fecilities-
They also have eo coneldersble ourber of native Jjunks vbhich could be
‘preared into service to moet logistic demands or to take edvantage of

wilitery onjortunities.

ve Tie Colnese Comuumiste exye copsble of training Viet Minh
foreng in nevel warfare, ent providing then with vivar erd conatal

nfipes end nineloyoers.
RB. Ceossunist Political Worfare Canshilities

8. The Commmists would have the cepebility of opposing US
intervention by eppenis to pationzlism among the Indochirere popuia-
tion ead by Genouneing VS intervention ar an operation decsisned to

perpetuate colonialian. These cepebllitica would wary not only in
reelection to tha military prograss of tha war but ole. to the extent
thot the US ection appearcé ta the Indothinese to gusrante) their

inécpsricnea.

DE Cdatett

9. Vvor wlthoub apocivice political susurnnces, Ime eGiate and
lorge-teele puctennes by WS area would almost cartcinly reduce Coia-
muniat political enxpabilltien to cuvvert em intintéasts the Trriochiseas
poeple end to use them for in vtalliganc? end logletic purposes. In
eidition, sigus of Viet Minh deYecs would probobly tmerarsingly en-
courage defecticns from the Vist Mink. IF US cived succesces vere
acenmnenied by political morsnres vbich puerantced Inficehinsse inie-
panéence, Viet Minh political warfare espebilities would be further
wedcede Viet Mink metiegsiist enpaad youll be diminisheé, aml there

world prohubly be concidersble and dnerearing Gefecbions fron the

Viet Monn. ne devclopmoetn vould aleo reduce Vist Hink capabilities

to aondeet poevrilla end terveric “4 activities.

10. Coumenict political wurtere capzbilities to Ynfechina vould
rouxin substentinl if US-ellied amu dig not quickiy give eyvidécucn
thet they could bring the wer to » victorious clese within a short
time, ona Lf the Infiochinese vere not comyrineet thet theix ipiependonea
veo oceuresd. We believe, morcovar, thet eves in tha cvent of Lerpea-
necle US m’ Ultery eaccuseca, accompanied by a gpmuina comdiection 1a
Tefeshine thet indepemienca wou asaurad, the kan-corc Ccrusmists
of ‘kno Viet Mish, probably supported from Chirs, would for a long
Lipa petair conntooatial capshilities for querrilla Bctivity an sub-

yeroion.

col OP“BRGREL

Inept ge

a et a id de

tI. OAPABILICIES OF SAIM.SS COLTASE ALD VEER Mish P38

A. Chinese Groat Porea Conthliitiod in mgoznizal!

lL. If the Chinece Commmists deciac to ecomit, Korean comboi-
trained forcer, they have evaiisble 13 deesteas! widen ceorved in Korto
and are noy in Chine. Kim of these units aru at present atationcd
in northeset Chins an4 four in east Chine. Tt ta estinsted thst the
most @istent of there, in the northeast, couLl be redapicyad to the
Indochina terdger in 17 to 2 days and the nearest could be recaployed
im 10 to VW) dears. The Ghincas Commmists sre capcele of redaploying
five of thease armies to the border in 30 daya after & dacision to ao
so han bsea mide. If the Chinese Comrmmumists dacide not to cornit
Koreen corbat-treined forces, there are two monies in seuthoeet Chirs,
elements of valeh can cropa the Indochina hovder plecensel in four or
five Geys or ebich can be ecemitiad in a ecordinated action in 10 te
12 days. Redeployment of five eisitionel non-Korzen treined armies
could te accomplished in 14 to 24 Gaye. Tt ia possible, elso, thas

tharge eapebllities migut be exarciceé prior to US intervention.

e
Q
kK
e
5
Ht
fe

e/ Chinese Coaurmist orden uould probobly bo ebout 36,000 in atrangsh,
een camposca of thre: infantry &iviclons, on artillery regiment,
ent @ truck regiment of ayproximitely hoo trucks. Each of these
proies vosld be approdustely equivalent to a US Givisiou in terns
of mthed of employuent ani effectivencus. It ic prebrale that tyo
artillery divisters voubll clio be euploye’, euch ccasisting of &
regimrt of 36 [Sma or 7ésma howltcera or division guct, & regicont
of 36 105mm,  regiuant of 36 122cmu, anf 3 battulioa of AAA (xg).

-6-

*ULOP“SEGREL

FQreorory

of comncdestion withla Caim. if mot
‘the Lintting fector upon the nusber of Chinese Commuist troona waich
yald te wmored to the Indochina border end supplied within Infoechtus.
Toe chief liniting feetor upon tho emmloyment of Chinese Comamist
Yorceo in Indochinsg in the empacity of the Jincs of comrunteoticn
within Indochine. For coroct opereticas, each exmy would require
gpproximcely Lill ehovt tonsa per day of all clesses of cupplices
ile esech ertillery division uovlé require epproxinatoly 42 chort
‘tens Golly. Ca this becic, the cmeimom nuvkor ef Chinas: Couzmumist
unite Unien tha present ec gues of lines of comzatniecation in Imis-
eine fron the China border to the Belts vopienm would curport, in

supa, i9 cpnprocisctecly
Pa he. ~

yy
s)
’
f

3
a
| ead
rt
ii
©
E >

cdaition te pracsnt Vortomint
seven ores sul tvo metilicsy @ivicons. Thin, the toenl mrice ot

oummiot conat Poreeo witch could be supported over present dimes of

go

couminiention in Indochine is cpproximately 500,000 to 600,000.

mict forces to the Inio-

13. Aker redepleyinut of Chinese Co

ovdar, it ds embinctes thas, €urlag the dry reason, ther cond

im
iF
ee
ee]
fa
er

roiel, tha Tinne.-Noiphowy toca Wit Loafing unite in eevea days efter
ercebing tee barday, could. hount a cooniinsted attack wlta chonut four
aysios ty weal eters initial uplia eros the bariexr, anil could build
up tes tess Gore: Por coamliniwiss celicn of rovea avatars end we
ercillory divicieas Your woelna sfsex eyvogsing thea berdcr. Letce-ccale

onerations couth of the Red River Dolta exea would requir: uve of tos

AL OP “DEO

» F

par

SGR.ESGRET

vail dino to the couth, ena honea aro depepdcnt von Cenmnist
ecpture of Hanoi oz4d o eration of the rathmy from Hanoi southvard.
Tf the Commmtota cons utilise thie line to support optraticn2, the
entire forte coulfi be cupported Iegistically to Scigoa- If the roil
line could not be utiltezed, the foree which coulé 59 supported world

be retucedi to shout three or four armies. During the rainy scnson

trooy rovezsats will ba slowed, logistic support mide more difficult,
cud the sesge end magnitude oF coordinated teebical operaticns ecn-
gidevably roduccd. If the Chingsa Commmists enter InGechina coring
the reiny cousen, thoy probobly could not Gupport mora thon four oroles
er4 tuo artillery divisions wier Inrge-scele offensive eorkot ecn=
@itions, tatlding to the total of ceven amiss end tye criiliery
@ivioions ot the next dry eccson. During the dry seasen, Comraniet
China vowed be capcble of employing light ead motiua ten: in sori

preoured wmite in the Tonkin Dalta.

B. Chin

L
e Comsmict Aix Capobilitics in Indochina”

Wh. Operating from bases in Cains, the Chinzce Comrmatats
have en entiented «capability to intorvens tredietely vith en sir
force consisting of TO jet ci LO pinton Mghtera cepable of operating

estnet tereeto in northern Infocniza, and a foree of 10 woediue picteon
3 P

sovborp eupabls of operationn ngalnust targete anyebor?: La Indochinn.

Saree

4} Sea Beble ITT.

~ & -

HPOP*SAGREL

~ whe SG Tall

Tn cidition, tha Chineca Coumnist Adr Fores haa about 650 jet

fightera end 120 jet light borbera. Current airfield repacity in
south China would permit the Chinese Communiats to deploy ebout 250

of thace jot fighters ond jet UWeht borbers immsiictely to engrent

the force oparnting egsinst Imdoehina. Although this movement could

be completed in 2: to 8 hours, the ecale of operation of this force

might be restricted inititslly by a shortage cf rupplies. Hecessary _
lopietic support eculd b2 provided if the Chinese Commateats unfer-

tock to etockpllie eviation cupplics at tha necessary airfields prior

to US dotervention. If they 614 not, we believe that puppliea in

veo

auentitics necessary £0 cupport cugteined oparations could te made

evaileble within a week to 10 dsyn.

25, #Gditdons] eugnentetion of thin forca vould roguire repcir
of eristing airfields or construction of new alrfiehin within rence
oF Indochina. Hevever, within a period of 10 to 30 days, the capscity
of guch cirfielés coul@ ba no imerenzed thet the size of thin force
ovgecntotion would depend Lergnly on air defcnue requipcocote elee-

vhovre.

tt
GC. Comrpnist Chines: oval Cenmbilitics

16. Tho Chinene Cemzunincts nro lslioradt to have the following

novo watts in south China, costly 1a the Centon orga: on frigate,

-9- i

POD AT

akan

Meee guiboate, tix-cigas motos torpedo banta, four motor gunboats
or minesweeyays, 14-16 lending chipm end creft, and eix-eight euxi-
Jiorion. Tr efdition, there ore nunerove river ond connst.al patrol
eraft, end cu estimate? 1,000 notorized junks in the area south or

Cantos.

17. Too Chiacee Commmists coulé umlertehe river cd coastal
nining, Luited minesvceplng, era the transport of supplies by sai-
yaaa ao junks. Also, & abort het). axmnibioun iift, utilizing scvere)
thou juke and semyeas now ia the South Chains Seg constal eres,

could be wwovided om rolatively short notice.

18. Indications hove boom xeeeiyeé reeently of the pucesncte
o? tro o: Fore cubmarines in ths uf of Tonkin. Gabarelna pstrois
would progant a considerable threat to naval Yorces operating in
thig exea. Ib is pousible that the USSR vould provide the Chinea.

Commantots with @ limited moucher of subnarinos to be operated by

Soviet ercus or under the guidanea of Bovigt sdivicerr.

*
19. hile tho Caineoe naval siv Yorca ig etill in its forma~
tiva phase, it bes ao Lintind espeility of supporting cui facn eon at
operations by mine laycug ani by whtacke ca mrrchort eiigping asl

novel vwonsecls.

-~ 10 -

YUP. GLGuS Eh

cpr SOR Bae rea

22 MAP SL Gre
Dd. Cosmriet Foliticel Warture Cancbilitica
COR BE POLE ee ee ee

29. Commrist political varfers capebtlities im tha cesc ot

Chinese tntexrvertion vould vary in relation to the coms of ta2
wer. LP the Cowmmists suffercd defoats, there vould bs numecous
Viet Mink defections ond « conssguent weakening of tho Vict Hiab
regime, poeticularly if the Indochiners: wore eonvinesd that foreicn
rule vas at en end. Morsever, tho appearance in Infochina cf large
mumore of Chinzae would probebly revive the tro¢itionn— Tudochinaie
ecmity for tha Chiness. Ccru:nist eee ov o prolowced ntrurceia
in vaich neither oide eppenred to kava prospacts of vietory, woud.
eakence Comumint politiesl varfare caysbllitie:. However, evon if
the Comuniot forcen in Iniochina were cxushed completely, the
Commmizts vould continug to bere a potential for infiltration acd
guerrilla werfare, particulerly co long as a strong Coumunict regim

existed in China.

“TOP “SHEET sy

ie i at TL

_— Pe yet ok ARSE Re,

YALLS 3

Win? MIM TiO SPRET ESD AND LIGHOGETIONS

Stre cut ha

Regular ard Regiomsl Ferces
People's Arotd Militia

nr

Diaperad ude

Wye wee
fatty Wie team

Bevtweru Pau

eeutes baat

cénteral Yds tras

Bowth Veta

Sota lace end vigboalile

Neen PAR at DN, AT

Pah xd

ty begualiy bist

UP obeptoraat The

SO, COO Mo litia

ai

TRIPS STRINGTAS AD DISFOUGTTIONS CERISE COS OTS AGUNG
FERCRS
Bo Strenithe
Total regularea: 2,02] 000 (Si Armlea of 196 Diviutoxe ™
whieh are by type. 140 Trf.,
5 frwi., = Bore., b3 hegte., _
35 Bose -- t deve, 24 Arta.)
be Dieporitienst/ ef
Korea 12 Armies (652,009)
Northeast Thton  & Arifee (OTS, QUct .
Worty Chane % Artes (260,000) T-
Northweet Chins > Acaies (164,000; es
Pee0% China 2D Aradea [EG 006 |
Sroutral South
China  BpraAce -— f Sepe idve- fu ,ce 001
Smithers t Toina S Armiag -- 3 Sep. Disa. PLE a
Uniceated RX Army, Spec. Unite, oey3 do Thy (152 Co)
u/ Figuree éo not incluge eatimates 1,000,000 Fublic Security troupe
which are full-time, iightiy-equipped troops diepoaed throught
China for the purposs oF maiutetnuing fotermsl and tarda aacurity..
2/ In the four acuthern previncer of Yunoan, Keeichow, Feareat, aod
Kwangtung fismly eccepted Chinese Comminiet militery atrenmyt? 18
6 armies and P artillery diviriocne. Tt de possfide wnat there
are an additiennl © armie2 emi 3 separate infantry divistons dn the
ere, There are only © annies confirms’ imines I civisioa wal an .
an army headquarters which sre in Keangturg) located within oy
miles of the Todochina bordes, In addition, the 44b artillery
‘nideion ia located at Xumming. The only other tracpe believe
tiuobe in eitter Yusnan ur Kwenged Proviueee vitnin vie Bao ut de
scyder gongs are @ Publge Geocurfiv divistone ard vo To tere a bate
Poblie Security regdmanis. Tea asmi¢e curmantl thew. Sue

SCORE Rade,

VABLE 1}

Located also maale be da the acre cart Ling ate af thaea -:
cannot bs deLermlur amt theo vert qeopstvas Ge wht tea get.

Veet 2b)

AIR ORPRR OF BAITLE IM COiMaicy CRELA

Lau a Ls
Ter

AGTUAL TOCLE

( GREK COLSNEIST ALR
FoRcE (CCAF)

Pigniar
att
Fieton
pevger- ret
Lipnt Hortear
Jat

fintan

>
ie
*
ny
Oo
\
Lf
ae

[20
17¢
des
Lee

Sak
5
RES)

Fert ite bosbar QO
Pract port

> cou

im 119

TOEAL 1 yg iro ST WBS 8.959 1,500.

CATES? CO@TAURISE HAVAL
ALR FORE (CONAT,

Pieton Fighteasy &O
aet Light PS a
Fistoa Lick . Borshes

wn ne ne no teen nr ne ene
whew py ip EO loo
eer ee Pe eee te ee ee ethieees SA A Al al Sects hed cert ol pasa tes

8 BP ATR FORCE, MLNS
hy wD GY-MARCAUREA ASD
POR? ARTAUR-DALBUZ AREA
(SAZ )

Pighvutr :
set 60 Sf) OY SEX)
Piston 2 3) eh aD

Light Bower (ret) / Jap 7a Lit 70

Syenwwpors

Reconnsiasence
Jeu yO 10 30

Fistoa . Se eh LS pate ct toe ha ott ee oe _ iG ___ te
8) ox ‘

TOTAL =

rag me em Pr nt

Foowsote on next pene.
Shap BECAME

hee CTR Be

Zonk 1 is definsd as that part of Sowth Chine within hIG-15
couket ranges, about 400 miles of the northern periphery of
Indochine.

Zone 2 is decigneteda es ell of Chins beyond the limits of Zone
1, but exclusive of the Rorthesst Administretive Arsa end the
TnnerFiongolta Autonomous Region; i.e-, roughly e11 of China
propor beyond Zone 1.

Zons 3 tneludes tha Northeast Administration Area en’ the
Innar Monyolia Autonomous Ares. es

EO Pa BERR
LT

TAELE IV

CHUREGE TOMAR ES NGYAL RGGTES

* -
Naval Vesroted’

1 Light Cruiser

17 Frigate/punboats

 Ustar Gonkeats

3 Old irsabosts
0-50 Mater Terpude Boats

Vf harer Gunboata
u5 (or nore) Amphibious vessels of ail kinds
11 for more) Arciliarisa

Naval Air

i

S : Z
total Flan Strenctn ep

TOR. Ke tae,
165 BO
hD Piston Pighter lie
ho Jet Light bomber 10
LD Piston Light Benber 30

Tote Uaval Fergonne) Strength « 61.200

ee pe ST EEA Rc I rm tae ary ln el ES]

Pong Yinnt cruiser is tasicved to ba poncruperntionsl, ii
acck&tion #9 the vases ls lier, the COW hoa fro 250 te 300 avs
netor funks and district patzel ciaft. Tt is known that sire? 1,508)
Chinese porgunnel jiava unierpone guimarine trainin: and om: ez-fordet
submaring, passibly ef the "medium rarge” type, is fn Cnintse haste
an Treingiads

2 /See Tahle IIT.
