Yoga Meetings-second Phase - July-august in London
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012406, dated 3 June 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012406).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

=
F

t

|

eater cananetnonanaict Barer
A
> .
.
«
‘
&
2

H 1%
Je de = ete hus

iy. {Gn jitey

Tn Cat TR aint ar oil,

LOGA arrived alone, without delegation, in London in the morning
© of 18 July at about 09.45 hours. His arrival could not be apotted since
he did not travel via the ARROFLOT TUSINK Jet directly from MOSCOW which
normally arrives at 10.30 houra. He arrived on an carlier plane.

Upon arrival YOGA contacted TAMRY and told him that the Soviet Brbaasy

had booked him a room at the Kensington Close Club. Upon receiving this
information from TARRY, KIKE booked a room at the same hotel and John
Collins offered the use of his flat as a meeting place. TARY informed
subject that he should meet MIKE at a rendegvous point amy from the hotel
at which point MIKE picked aubject up and dove him to the vicinity of the
meeting place. Subject arrived with MIO at 20.2 hours on duly 18th.
Spon entering, mibject greeted the other three officers individally

and stated that all ms well and normal. He also mentioned that his wife
cried because she could not aooonpany him to LONDON and that he had
brought sane MOSO0W vodka for us but MIKE told him not to go back to his
room to get it at this time,

en ere a

26 5: Next time I wish you would control the vise appoications

1 better, The entire deletion submitted vims to the British office
on 11 July and the vieas came too late for us to take the plare for which
we had tickets. Juat-before we rere to go and while waiting to get our
delayed vies, KHRUCNCHEV reviewed the declamtion of the Councll of
Hintsters of the 0.5.5.8. which ms made on 1 July. This declaration
authorised forty to fifty selected industriniiats and scientists to go
to LONDOM during the time that the Soviet Rxhibition was in progrese and
actimlly forty-four including myself were selected to go, but all of
these trips were cancelled when KHRUSICIRV reviewed the Peclamtion,
lave you not seen the Declaration? 1 photographed 1t. GG; Not yet bee
cause it is now being developed, S$: Oh, I see, I will tell you about
it.

3e S: I have received a nice little room but I thought you would
be staying at the Mout Royal and ye would be there. G: It is better
to be here, since you have no legend to go constantly to the Mount Royal
Hotel, Ss If I had received my vies on time I would have cane here
alone and would have met you on Saturday 15th July. G: why did not
yor people quibmit the request for a visa a day nooner? S: You were
not correctly informed. Your secretary in your View Office received a
request for vies fron our Mintatry of Foreign Affairs on the 11th July.
This inoluded a request for my viea and ten other persons. 2 That
is not correct. I knom that he received 1¢ on the 13th, §: Sven ao

i did you not get my cable on the 11th? Then you could have ob@oked on

; the viene Hz ve received the request for a vies on Thurnday afternoon

{ the U3th. And it would have been unusual to grant a vim enrlier since

| no-one gets a visa in less thon forty-eight hours. x Gr Nevertheless, it
would have attrnoted undesirmble attention,

de 8: Well anyway, RNRUSICIEY revised his Declamtion, I will
tell you about it because it is on four frames of film,

5e G: How long are you. planning to atay? S: I have been
authorised to stay for three weks. 6; #hether the delegation cane or
not?) 53 Yea, either way. I received my view on the 15th and my
Plane was due to fly on the 15th, but I could not fly out when I got the
Vira. The Kmbaray beginea work nt 1000 hours and I got my visa about
14.00 hours. ."N: That is right. The visa ms granted only in the
evening on Friday.

Ge St ere is my authorimation for ecning here from the CN. T. Ke
(StbJject presented the Gocunent, requested that it be photorpraphed and
returned to him. We pointed out that this document ws for the entire
delegation of jnich he vas to be the head. He pointed out tat it vs

}

i

|

|

X 81 The group reqmated visas,
{

/signeds..ss

not just I alone,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 LMAR 1992

~

|

t
‘

Ns?

sh ti ee = 2 >
| signed by SAMARIN who wie the Deputy Chief of the Camiittes and that. the

iv

+i / . -
“ach : 2 an
ea A : ‘

new Cawnittee Chief we RUDNEV who had replaced KHRUNICHEV,’ ALEKSENKO
also signed the doounent, another Deputy of RUDREV). :

7s G: And who has replaced that biggest chap? S:- RUDNEV,
Lieutenant General, Engineer of the Technival, Sexvios (Inzhensr Tekhnicheskaj
_Slushby), An Eleotronia expert, who has been ocoupled ail the tine with
defence technigus [oboronnaya tekhnika]; about 54. years old, energetic,

not all. that bright, he replaced KHRUNIGHEY. G; Le you think that

will be better for you? 8: Noe KHRUNICHEV was more intelligent.
KARUNICHRV was better for work. But for m - wall, yesterday he called

me it and saides.ewoll, I'l] tell you in detail ina mamnts Well, he

eet ms the task, vinich wo are to do together, before our matting, ny dear
friends, that's all. Well, I didn't think I would oan “"

Be 3: L thought toeday that the film would be ready, because it
is very important. It in very important. G; It will be, it wil) bee
Thia evening. 3; I've already mamged to gst into uch a:laniart
[Xdadovku}., You can judge it by the materisl. It ia the Intent, the

deh ene rtenetonn

very latest views for 1960 and 1961 on military dootring, on mttern
cogarding the utdiisation of tanks, the flest, the Air Foros, the dootrine
in generale Gy; fhey will bring it to us temndght. 8: and this is
where I photographed, first of all, KERUSHCHEV’s decres, 86 i'm checking
the doounents, I handed all of them over to you. So I want to relate

the most recent eventaere and it could have turned out so that we would
not have been together go~day! Now let us analyae what wi’are to do

in the future, 3

through, and. era - an the lst of July a dearse

individuals inmoluding cur om people’. I said: “German Mikxhaiiovich -
what branghes of industry shall we take? He said: “take qhaniatry,

take light industry, mytallurgists, maohine constructors [mgghino-straitele)]
and take the people who have alveady been in Mngland, so thet ane abould
ne able to get a viea for them quicker, and there is already an exit

permit on record for them in the Gentz], Comaittes siiich pokes ats nose
into everything; 4% will let them through fastex, it will al be quite
Legal and correct". Andi, togdher with my own poople quickly prepared

these groupds

@ 3; We sent an application to the Central Caaniitee ~ puddenly

Contxal Caanittee starta holding up You see, wa got the ordes on

the 4th, and it was signed on the lat. You wil) read 1¢ on the developed.
film today, with KHRUSHCHEV's signature, there it is wittom: “paragraph i:
woee8QG0nEd PATOLICHEV and his wife fox twelve dayae ++, paragraph 2 theres

I don't remenber it for the mamentee.+.-paragmrh 5; that ds what I told

i you about ~ it is entrusted to our Coand.ttec.»....paragrags 4; PATOLICHEV

| 45 allocated 9,000 "foreign ourronay roubles'....paragmaph 53 ene edt C480
tha Exhibition is visited by Madiillan and Queen Elisabeth the Seoond,
preacnts should be given then to 7 e
by the Soviet Aubassadat. (signed) KHRUSHCHEV, Exeoutive of AfLfaixae

a

thing. Time to leave approaches ~ I've alveady ~ that is, a note ves
sent to the Minietry of Foreign Affairs regarding my firat group - I wie

| se

ssh seuial be eg: 4a ee tach Ase as Soe ey because

. again organise
St (the decree) was signed on,the txt, but ms only gat it on the 4th, ant,

by the way, on the KHEML telephone. On the telephone, ani this
decree reached us later, when RUDNEV signad it om i aa tees
you we hear! about 1¢ on the Ath,"

20. "pila ad ete loe' © ity stand tus Vesa Agnes aka ck
thing I thought, because you didn't give a vwiea - I; would have left for .
here to prepare the programms for them, ori to Hell with then} Let then

Oe ee er 80 then on

V/

Seana ee Aretesesi

Momlay they said the third paregreph had been revoked, Why had it been

revoked? Yor two reasons: firstly a very strong lspteesion was created by

the Tartar who defected fran the ballet while in Frame, a , strong
impression, Ha was secretary of his Party organisation, . YR eee
should know - Searetary of his Party organisation, te maa ees ashy

)
persuade KOZLOV to reoomider erm thle and it was: gevoked,. While I'd
oe ee Wy penspert hat bsen brought tq ms, since the
decision had been given m6. a

2. 8s I want to - « here 4s « cumming, intelligent ‘gancourre = I cam to
» Wao saw me off this morning. I travelled with his wife and daughter,
He saw me off this morning, Ina auit like yours, only he had a star, |
But his wife ari daughter are here in Louion, now. Thay com as tourists
for twelve days, six in Lowion ani six in other towns, Tomorrow I shall be
waying for them ~ I'22 tell you more about it ister, .I shan't be buying
it - we shall be buying it, for SEROV. (Laughs), So X came in and said:
"Comrade Head of the Army, I was presented by the Caunittee with the |
leadership of the Camittes, singe Pg know that I am also a GRU worker
Se ee ee ee a oe ee

travel three or four times to the Capitalist countries. If you are
recognised after having worked as a militexy attache ani Chief Assistant in
Turkey, wo shall put you up for a prolonged mission, We shall see how the
attituie of the Americans, British and French will be ad you after oe
wore a military type, but now are a civijian.” :

Bee rn ee en
Committee of the Party, and they gave me permission, “Out of the entize 44
people only I was given permission, They said: ‘Let Him gol" Why?
Because the Central Comittee knows that I work both in the Comittee ani I
Tees lune foe se as cov ta eect Ws Geode. wlan pre
t wig ve we got not to oppo not go
I discussed this to begin with with Geneva SUELIKOY, asd then with General
MALIK, » you make this gecay, eng oot Hoe does the
Committee want to sand you, or not?

230 8: I went to this ALEKSENKO, this ds ALRKaENKO'= and to this
SAMARIN = SAMARIN 4s the Second Deputy, he 1a Deputy Queireen
Ag hehe SR gr eprtecn tte thay have two Deputies now, ALEKSENKO
SAMARIN, I sad; "With respect to the Comittee Jin, considering that
che Jourmay of the Delegation fea been cancelled, can J be of any use?”
"Yes, of course, you oan prepare, - Within these groups there was a group
of metallurgists, it will cams to you there, we shell epply for visas;
one of them is TIKHONOV. TIKHONOV 4s deputy of ZASYADKO, and ZASYADKO is
the Chairman of the GosikenosSoviet of the U.5.5.Rs (Government Eoondmio
Counell of the U.S.5.8,). Wille TIKHONOV is a metallurkist. He wuits to
come here for a month or a month and a half with a grovp, to visit a
number of your big metallurgic firma, They should comp for ten days - each

si eeeieg tenn g waneiine
eT ALLEN figmend the fizm, roa, that

oe ee . ,

ee ae Tos tee MAN ead MGERIDR arts ae AI De et Se Ot
the group of peg tile: when Lt. arrives, ua to wr amend, tote the
Anbagaadoy jeoesecicis TERHGHOV du 8

&.

53e Gs MILOVIDOY 4p to go an wal acti eet:
Sheveh thems with EIRROTY "BO Gin exibition ol ce win Ea
afregh then, th PIXHONOV,

eS

ini: perk
Moscow at the Exhibition, Here I've got webtten neat! TARUTTUNGY Nikolay
Bagaratovioh ~ this is also.a masher of the Delagation of TIKHONOV. At
prepared | ocnaist

present, 90 far, & group hes been ar heaiepeggt pero thia

| tiolay Bagratorich 1s at. precces tS tion Dis ate
‘within our Comal ttee. We He is alse comings:

pn ar a fz cooriencs with tts Georgy of omatting of
people. | e

Mee. St I was well instructed in photography. Perhaps there axe som flaws.
But I am oross with ay cemove, the of my }inoxes, whan I photograph at
But Tt ree ne Goth frame, dt goes very atiffiy, it pulls, So thet 7
ask you « in my notes here - ‘you sea the notation - itvite « photographic
sek J eetor, I Weve several questions for bin, Gt We We will do this. a

st Now, as vegerds this group of TIKIONOV's, 4% will axrive here to
- or rethar, we shall ask for visas, end whether you grant tham or not
is your affairs T think that he should be grented to yisit some fir,
Pompe I will tha one camnot tell, TIKHONOY's attitule to me is very
pleasante ly atock was reieed by CVISHIANT, ms sway to you by my daughter =
my beloved Joved only om, ena her mother - “that when I lef$ from here I presented
GVISHIANI's wife with save marvellous scent, powler, dipstick, a packet of
cards end several packets of ataarerteae I gave a to evexyone, I

-5-

celoulated that I had given presents to the valus of alsut £60 ~ £100,

And when I travelled this time - even RUDNEV told me to bring him batteries
of 42 volts, ‘hese are the Soviet leaders for you in tyue form) I shell
apeak to you later in more detail about this, :

36.6 G: How ebout Ooteber ani your possibilities for coming? S: As regards
October, it's like this: I've just been very cumming. We already applied to
the Central Comittee with a proposal ~ I sent it, the third quarter - 1
passed on via the ledy what specialists were being planned, Well - dh 1
work correctly with this lady, or not? Hy (in Bnglish) You stayed a littis
pit teo long with her. Ss; Exouse me, I also am a cloves man, It's
to eit, give and vanish, It is impeossibic. the lady is sitting, rein is
approechings A prem, She is holding all three chilaven, She is again
dressed ih the same brow suede jaoket, so that I shoul’ alseys recognise hor,
set rein is approaching, I on purpose waited
ee ae that as people an possible should leave, The

It

$
g

i in
square it's empty. The rein wes approacaing, I thoughts let the first drops
fall, then I'l] approach here os ‘

37. 3: (Goes on to describe contact, says lady had ‘ne ox
not there the following Sunday, the 9th, although he would have had
for ber, aa GVISHIANI had alyeady informed him on July 4th that he
ordered to Losdan, and he could have passed this message on via the girl;
he goes on to may that she had understood hin despite Ais bad English, only
WERRIVAN Goes not understand him! He will improve his English, He goes on
to say thet the British need not have feared the interyantion of the Militia,
ans he, 8, has his red bods, ani would have ¢

sous", would have let the gir? go ani then be himself discussed the matter
with the Militlamen, The British are

over there he knows what to do. Goos
prem ard 3 children, and that he noted that all was well).

3G, «St And. how could I know that all was well? You ould only inform mo
of this by wireless in a week's tine, Now that you have passed in the
message to ma the fact that the carbon was wrong, I read the whole thing
oorreotly, yoo? G: Yes, yes, it was perfect, 8; Without errors, And
Saturday, the day before yesterday, you sent ms the asme

On Saturday I again reosived 44 groupe = whet for? What do I rood it far?
Gs; Because .. 83 I don't widerstands G: Of courses you wierstan’, Just
think, Every Saturday ani Suniay during the course of @ mmth this is being

.
Le
¢

-

give sent to/you the chance to listen whenever pest for you.’ 8: Ari do you think
that

messages are sent). St (Goes on to explain that he hag made sone three

again receiving of 44 groups twice,
Beverts to his ootact with the erd cells her « heroine - she was most
natural, didn't even start, Saye it was quite correct gni natural thet he

patent chaps cam for a visit, 6 of thamy a furrier onme for s visit, about
whom I wrote to you. I aleo got acquainted with some other American, And
nowone invites mas And I'm the daputy head of a section - there was the

°

= 40 =

wife, three children, FURTSEVA was there, RUDNEV was there, ami I ws there
toa, So I go to the Canatian Mebasay. As regards the American ani British
Embassies ~ I'm quite clear about it now. Peng nee nea
evelop gredually,

bOe As vegeris the lady, we've finished that. I request that she takes
up her position in future further away fram populous places, G: Now that
you know her, the matter is quite different. H: Now that she is in England,
you oan meet her here in a short while, 5S: Now I have an idea - I would
ask you to analyse this matter anid solwe it saientifically, Why should

Eubasay, say
that I could become officially asqueinted with her at the reosption? Then
I gould moet her quite openly in the street, as I would come up to
Anbassador Smith, if I saw him in the street, for a chat, never mind if
Ey DE AOS ee Sees Sees oan ee
arronged).

in Gs sists eestbcead phal Ga aeue Bia Whe ae Waban eae as
S.'s notebook Bs: ee zt

you
three sheets lying behind it are the carbons, three in s row, G: No, nOceces
they were the ascoan, fourth and sixth, S: f ddantt wrlerstand thate cess
When I asked for a large sheet like that, you gave it to me to begin with,
and them you withdrew it. You told me: there is the cover,
then there is a black sheet, an insertion, the first three shoets after

carbons, Gt sess the real carbons were the 201, 4th anxt 6th sheets. The
tat, 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 20 on are not carbons, 8: dnd is this so?
Oe eee ee ares Oe eee redio: you did
not write with that one, the first; take the following ore, because I knew
that your No,2 was a carbon, 3: When I got home 1°11 reearrange them ao
that I have the carbons one after the other, so I don't six thea up
(Thay go on repeating the same thing over again). I copied from there, but

Oppo:
for you then, x kopt it ~ and all the rest I've destroyed, (Referring to
the slip of paper with notes which he gave us),
Sn eae

G: But what was it? 8: There were; all the conventional

phe for mynelf, as I didn't remove
a rocket

it, That I kept, I
hase of all the tens of sheets ~ almost a Imanired sheets ~ that Z
copied "hy my own harvi', ‘iets T ‘eau tat aha, oodeuens 5

43. S: Yes ~ how 41d my docwsents case cut - rage tcbon cic Dace aaa
seared » why had I

i
.
:

regarding BEKRENEV's lecture? BEKRENSY* »
G: Yes, very excejleont. 8: I photogrephed the_secom lecturs,
film, wound it to the dots, started taking out the file, at that mment
ers

|
:
|

marvel
G: Excellent. 3S: It was the year 59. The thing is,

. > get into that
larder = Ge Where did you get 4t fran? 9: Pro GRU, Ali GRU,
Fa &3 Mow please weite an article for me because Iam very busy, ani then

I'm too tired to write arything for the Soviet Regime. When I received

an article? S: Quite simply, we receive masses of open military journals
from you, from the British, from the French. I finished two Academies. For
the third time I am today on a mission to a foreign camtry, if I want to be
olever, if I ama military strategic intelligence offiger, if I absorb like
a sponge everything that goes on here, I read, if I woyk - I am not working
on that at present, I should be able to do this but now I have enough

other work for the present for the Comittee, for GRU, ‘and our besio work <

Ceylon, 7
Se St By the wy, how was that list, oot, or not = of the agent
me there

aia
our Information Directorate (headed by) XARINEVSKIT Idautenant-General,
who received a promotion - aid you get the report abous so many Generals
being promoted? G: We received it. -

Nuc a: May should on intelligent officer aot ait dom, drum general

gato se Td, -12-

*

St We have tons of military journals from all countries, G: That is

important, if you oan say that such exist and you used it as source material,

S: Well, we must come to an agreement during these 21 days, G: If an item of

interest is found they may order you to produce the source,

&7. Se Well, to begin with I shall review it, I shall wite it all dom
es in sy working note~book, I shall think it over, dan't worzy ~

umerstanis, I shall put in that to whioh I could have had access, Ani we do

have access, through our intelligence, through secret Qiterature which we

oviling - ; t dom ani witte! Think, githear everything}
Gather it - on the subject of tanks, on artillery, om general views <
infantry, and so ani so, ani so on - aviation - navy esl - it would be
logical, there is a lot of material, I would ask you to do this, ani if I
get into print with 1t once = ani you'll get this article; - if it is printed
in a journal "ll say “What is this?” IJ am on this trip right now -
t consider me to be intelligent for their use. Why do they still keep m
apite of my father? You don't know anything about ay father, do you?

: No, But I will inform you if I fini out.

48, S: They know that I oen work, thay taught me, a fool,
years, Thay sey I have initiative, as gifted, quick an the
expect a return from me, Ani if there is no retum, then
“That means he is slipping, he no longer has a future. *

E

z

:

;

5

i

i

rf

*a8

eh
Be:

al

h9e G: Will you have access any more to rooketa? 8: I shell have, I

shell have, Yes, I was promised « I spoke with VARENTAOV - I said: “Sergey

Sergeevioh, I want to write somthing about anti-tank artillery, like for
<~instence the type which the Anerioans have. *

SX St By the wy, gentleam, this thing of yours is working, isn’t it,
ft because it is very important to have this recorded, I ghall just touch on it,
{later I will go into detail, :

, 51. S: In connection with these events in Germany, Berlin, our Comanl
ng must pay special attention to anti-tank defence, Special attention, Why?
Because two tenk armies - aruies, that means cons t of reginents,

tanks, So that our task be to bring ow anti-tank artillery
ate of perfection now, ani to have anti-tank forces in ench

ur
e”

Grit

o{j«

536 There is a battle going on at present between the Gomaniers of the

:*

later, of which there are more ani of which there are

» 00 far, G: But do you think there is perhaps this teniong -

55. 8: Tell me, this oarbon which I brought, the one I worked on, can
something be got out of it with the help of ultie-violet rays? G: Ho,

56. S: I got your vedio message, every word of it, Was it exactly as

ef :
FE “3
i u
Eat
Er i 48
ey
fr WELT
ft tell
ae Fath
eet
i 18
te

i
4
4
f
E
:
4
:

Hs Yes, we got that. 8: I am just
ny waterial, It is so good that Mr, KENNEDY and

ahecking to ase that you received ail

L
i
E
E
GE
a
oy
A:
5
|

Ginter f.
a Jom, Go

a to
or do VARENTSOY and others share this view? fr Ee ie 6 serere) view 7
gur_ situation at is rotten, Thay don't KHROSHCHEV, thay °
and

don't raat the iat

tary strength, They
hurting his own cause ent thet he talks too much about Soviet military
accomplishments in his effort to frighten the Western leaders.

unprepared for this,
62. St Now, what new developments took place since I last reported?
KHRUSHCHEY is

preasing the Central Comittee of the Cammmist

at the respective produgtion omntres for whick they a ponstb
hey are, for example, at such cities as GORKT which should be intens
Near GORKI is « town onlled SORMOVO, At this place there are

65. 81 What ere they doing militarily? My ol4 frien’ Mershal VAWENTSOV
is oomstently travelling to the countries of Peoples’ Democracies, Just
prior to my departure to cans here the extensive memeuvres in Bulgaria
were completed, Here is the way mancsurres are now a=niucted, In every

tank army and in every field aruy, that is mostly an infantry formtion, =.

one Division from the D.D.R. is The exeraiges are conducted
Fiat an large souls formnticcs are trazned bus fully participating end

- 15

ii
£ PE i 244s af
“4, 8 rine HIP Ht
333 ay. at 3 libs : sa 3
3 Asay Saas p23 5 easel | ij
hy aT ata ese i Tar i
wl niall ie atl tt
: : Deasddassgss Bayt
4 il TH Be al ee pt Ue ie a

bie ae at i uf et eta
Pr tame y He TERETE ial og sbbee taht 7°
abitast. i ; es i ih ff ate ib
ane ae nud ta fy Hala it
a it 4 pid ya BE 323. ‘iil as
taps da a tgik 3 eat aes an ye "gig i343 H
Ht LEE Laie i 3 la 5 bE da EEL |
5 He aT Ree tt 8333 gi; EE caer
Saas Bese 4 ig: atta 3 cine cage “i $4 : 3
Bia i. af a: Hine iH abt oe oer as
itu Ll a ap paged
sais “b i i ff E i i

“aboal fea!

fio pert /\ rockets which are now unier MOSKALENKO, I wrote this up for yous ard there
: . will be some twolve Directorates in this new cambined Readquarters which
_ will be all wrler VARENTSOV. He will also be in charge of PRRKHUSHKOVO
Changes I told you about, This has been given to VARENTSOV even though the Minister
dislikes him ant mary Marshale are envious of him, Quite frankly, though
: I have a great personal regard for him, he is not « deep thinker anf hes
educational limitationa, However, he is one of the best artillery men and
2 they want him to be in charge of both tactionl ani strategic rockets,

68, St to GC; You will give me a plus for this, I just remenbered that I

fowsd a classified article by your friend Lieut.Gen, KOCHETKOV, It deals
with the oreation of an operational directorate in O.R.U. I remenber last

meetings L waa not very carvinoing in my explanation of this directorate.

(8. misread title of article which actually spoke of the eliminations of
ineffictenay in operational intelligence andi military intelligeme, ari not

on the creation of an operational directorate), In addition there are a

- Manber of other very important articles bere inoluling thoes by JANBNTSOY

{ end OINTSOV anf other prominent military leaders, I am very that

: : the photography came out clearly, Hi This is a special issue of articles
Ageeent in VORNNAYA MYSL, Are these more secret than the ortinary iesues?
8: This in ebsolutely Top Secret and 1 will now find the sheet om which the
[ Qlassifioation is clearly inficated, (8, continues for some time to examine

( end to remark upon the artioles which he had photographed).

af @) S: Publications of a Top Secret nature previously issued by the
ous branches of service are no longer haniled in that manner, They are
now incorporated in a group of articles ani published in a Top Secret

hicsseck . Special iasus of YORNNAXA MYSL and in VORNNYY VESINIK, I have photographed

Me & number Of these articles in toto and thoes were the ones which seemed to

Stet ee me most important. If you will examine the table of contents please tell me

ee Jal eee what others you wish photographed in their order of priority. (8. read all
of the article titles ani list of authors ani emphasised that these

fh bee taney articles reflected the ourrent thinking ari military dostrine of the Soviet

Armye He also noted that enquiries or remarka conoerning any of these
articles must beedimitted direotly te the editor of the publication only
through olassified control channels), vowaa. ¢

request that you have all this translsted and turn the material
; Over to your military conmanders since the mubstence of these articles is of
Keetuds significant current importance, fven the word rocket 1s used here, not the
has Fy pes (?) camouflage word asserbly of same kind or other and you will also note that

P ck 4 pes there are now types of rockets with their designations described here,

P la fret ars What I to do with all of the materials that I heve passed to you
ia to re-examine them after you have processed them and have prepared a list
of questions requiring clarification, At the aame time I will be able to

“ oheck the quality of my own photography,

Pekisai Ti, Gt What did you say that the position of General POZOVNYY was who
aa pate ws with you when VARENTSOV mode his statement? S: He was the former
— thos Yt -  — pemty to VARENTSOV for political matters, Now Deputy to BIRYUZOV.

fire,

xX 2) (8 insisted on showing an artiole which inolwied military estimates
the NATO Powers! military weapons to indicate what their intelligence

Aro _ was able to proluce, While reading 5, emphaaised that he spotted three new
I7° -—~S rookets, the Re30, R-170 ami the R-300, remrking that the R-300
ae . | Cesignation was equated to the rarige of 300 kilometres, 3, also referred
to tables of Western powers, specifically U.S. rocket capabilities for a
| given sector of ocanbet operations, The numbers of available rocket wapons

of various calibres and the rate of fire was iniioated, 58, stated that
these tablen should be ohecked for acouraqy and if Soviet information was
correct then deliherate # should be introduced in order to offset
A ent Soviet caloulations of MOZh Wathen tion. expectanay/, 8, also mentioned
eos! that antiemissile missiles end their inclusion in a co-ordinated radar
search net were described in ons of the articles),

Ss

S

tv

Bo @- 7
—
af pn G ain

{Ce fe Led

fy bate

fa t doncdign

3 .
° FB teogiye y

id fhanS,

-i7e-

Te Gt By the way how much time do you have available today? 8: We «¢412
have time to work yet. @: We are concerned about your pattern of life here,
Do you have to report to anyones? 5: No, I am living all aloe in a smi
meat room and I have not geen any other Sovietsthere, As you see from ny
documents I am my ow ohief and I oan develop my business relations here
the acting Resident during the absence on leave of the
have to report to him, I heave been assigned my own
misaions which I will attempt to fulfil end you may help me to fulfil san
of them, All I need to do is to com back with a record of
accomplished my missions for both O.R.U. and the GN.TKRe I have not
told you about the G.F.U. missions but I will do #0 later and with your help
T think T can accomplish all my missions,

The 8: The information I obtained on my last trip was favourably received,
even though they did not use MERRIMAN I don't oare, I saw GENRRALOY reeently
while he was in MOSCOW, He told me that he hed oalled MERRIMAN but could
not reach him ani when he @44 reach him MERRIMAN told him that he was busy,
Possibly you gave MERRIMAN instructions that he should not go to a meeting.
He MERPIMAN says that he has never heard anything from them, G: Did
GRNERALOY actually speak to MENRIMAN? S: He was told hy MERRIMAN that he
was too buay, but why could he not have turned over the materials he
promised me that he would get? These were Just the overt materials that we
had al] agreed he would get for me ani pass them through GEY*RALOY,
Hs Simply beoause MERNIMAN has not heard anything from GENERALOV at all,
5: We shouldn't use such old men, He said in mY présence in unmistakable
Fngliah that even 1 could wierstamt that he would get these materials for me,
G3 The point is METRIMAN seye that no-one has onlled him on the phone,

- St GENERALOV told me he called, G: One thing is clear, either MERRIMAN 4s
® liar or GENVRALOV fe a liar, 8S: Let's check into thie beonuse I received
oredit for having tuned a men over for eantact, but how they wee him after
that I coulin't omre lesa,

75 G: Your present situation is now olenrer but there will be days when
you have to mike an appearance samwhere, possibly to visit PAYLOV or go to
the Rmbasay, arvl sometimes thie could be in the evening, 8: Yes, ani on
some days we will have to work diring the daytime, On certain days I should
be in my room in the evening and on other days I should meet with 8oviets,

Lomion, for example while I was on my way to see YYNNWE I ran into VOROHIN,
In MOSOOW he was the chief of a NAPRA R in Strategic Intelligence wiier
General SOKOLOV, Tomorrow I will meet him ot nine o*alock and we will have
a talk, G: Is he here on a mission? 8; Yea, he has his own mission ani

at the exhibition, G: Did he come as a menbér of a deleration from
Lt.Col, ROGOY's to which you belong? 8: No, he ws sent here on a special
assignment imiopeniently,

Tb. G: Let me contime now with questions on BERLIN sc we can cover this
mbjeot, St Very well,

Cp G: This is an important question, What 4a the degree of confidence
VARENTSOY and other high ranking Soviet military officers regarding the

readines& of Soviet forces to mest the conse 88 Of KIRUSHCHEV's BERLIN
poliay? That is, if physloal realstance Aeve ope? S: That 4s a very
importent question, If we consider today’s situation the Soviet Army is not
ready for any widespread wor, VARENTSOY said there ig no confidence that
our forces are prepared, I even wrote you this ani VARENTSOY aaid
specifioslly that in going forwant this way we are prooseding to a definite
risk, Ye are preparing our troops ant training them to be re for ary
eventuality, but at this time there is no confidence Sha they ake prepared
Gs Did VARENTSOV say that? St Yes, he said that, They are trying to
establish this emfidence, the Central Connittee menbere, the various
manbera and the Ministers are all at the production centres to develop the
heeded equipment preparein-se and the Marshals and Usnerais are constantly
with troops to develop their combat efficienay, As an example, during the

pence as in ODESSA Military District look at how mary Generals perished
Te,

Ok Te ane 2 1Bs

r
|

s

bf
=
"
o
t

*

: G: How do they regard the military feasibility of containing
Beye military conflict withnthe DDR? &: This is a purely adventuristic
~ Canwept. They plan to block all roads of access through the D.D.R. to
Toento BERLIN with tank forces, Of course the first echelon of forces will be
Ce Merd: Fast Cermn troops and back of them in a efecnd echelon @itpport role will be
Soviet troops. As soon as this barrier is emahed then additioml re.
inforcing treopa will be brought up. The entire plan involves Comandimted
fi action on the part of Kast Geran and ‘oviet troops. The thinking is that
trong  4£ these reinforeed troops can strongly repuise the Angloaimerioan, French
am vest Germn forces then these will a@imndon further conflict and negotiate
with the Rast Germn Government in order to obtain transit to BERLIN, Further
conflict will then be avoided and the goviet thinking is that the Western
powers will be afraid of further conflict. The Soviet estimtes are that
the West German Amy is not prepared for conflict and specifioally they
are considered to be 8054 of strength in equipment and munporer.

my

(tate, G9) G3; What sources are there to whom you attribute this thorgsh t7
ae “My wources are Sergei Sergeievich and, write down, KUPINe KUPIN is now
Iu pur the Conmnder of artillery ina tank amy inthe DDR. Mr Did you see
i him at VARENTHOV's? 6S: Yes, I did and he has just arrived in MOSCOW and
he will be the artillery commnder of the M)SO0W Military District, replacing
Mote.) General POLKOVNIK of Artillery LIKhAChEV who is being retired and, as I told
hi. hak) YOu before, KUPDN's nephew GONCHARKY ds mrried to YERIINA, VALENTSOV' s
"""; @eughter, G; So they are relatives. 8; XUPIN bas not received this
Culy inky position yet but the Central Comittee has already approved it. Hin
; headquarters will be right near my house and he will visit me and I hope
to be able to get muoh good informtion from him
\: a
eee (€) Gt = Do you think that the coviet forcen are ready for general
lear wr and wnt is the estimate of Soviet officers thit such a mr may
ote c Sate G@Velop out of the BFRLIN situation? 8: They do not rant an atomic mr
re but local atanio strikes are possible since they my they have what to spit
x with, but in sao far as covering important military centres or concentmtion

bec?

points they do not ave the ormbility and for this reason KHRQUSHOIEY is

ck
V/ fighting for peace.
oer far,) G: Therefore what would you say about the position of the
preparedness of Soviet forces for molear wir? 5: They are not ready.
KHRUSIICHBV' s statements about this are all bluff, mut he is preparing as

ON Granth fant as possible. Certain evidences are to be seen. Near where I live are
Cr kos offices of the RAYVUYENKOMAT who belong to the sation and mitilisation
se Direotorte and they are beginning to re-emmine discharged ofricers. “This
Megs Ts is specifimlly restrioted to engineer officers of ali categories and other

tetas oly teghnical officers such as Sigral Corps men, ote. “In dther words, the local
military officérs have received an order from the min organimtion and
modilisntion directorate of Gener] Staff to re-examine all disor raed
technical officers and to place them on active duty.

{ nal

(CD Ge = there 444 VARFNTSOV himself acquire his informntion on the
Ject? Waa it fron official docunents or from meetings within the Mint atry?
Lifter, | 8: He got that from the 3 Military Couned] where KURUSTICHRV alte
| as Chainmn and the active voloés are ummily KOZIOV and MIKOYAN. The

other menbers of the Praesidium are silent. These three ars pressing and

demnding that the Germn question be regolved by aigning the D.0.R, Pence
Treaty and that this mtter can not be put off any longer becuse the 0.5.5.2.
ey) be in a laughable position before the whole world.

@ S; The DPR is nothing, they are only A waaml, they my that
fo mot do this now the future genermtions will not forgive us beonuse

Uae Cl

SNe ve have talked so much about signing this and Gid not do it. At this time
eg they feel a certain amount of military strength, although this is far from
Wh tote having the oapability of covering all military targets with atamio weapons.

The reasoning in simply this, to strike one sharp blow, let a little bicod
flow and the Americans and British will be frightened and withdrnw, This

is what he is bunking on, but if he received a severe camber blow then mybe
he would sing another tune, at the same time you know what a bad morale

"hoe bot protege the Soviet Army and pomuiation have. This you know fron other eources

not only from me,

POOVNTL told mes a, Would KHRUGIGHEY be removed? 31 No. They could
Pra Rane have sencved him a hundred times before thie. First of all 4 would be a
him,

sm@condly ; Ate to 2G LLMs
te Ute l ‘| | BOZLOV 4s af Little consequence and there are no People like MOTOIOV and

Moet. Toman Gy In other worta he will just pull his horns in but wild sti11
— Fermin the chief, 8: Yess

e-tance of these artioles because none of them contain any foolishness
or flippant mterial, The authors are of such stature that any article

have tremendous » power. You mut increrse yar antietank weapons
significantly Qs well as tutld Up your om tank forces,
os ( } Gt tho t up the conversation on the BRRLIN aitution when
THe ou ware with VARENTagy> S$: I will telz you emotly how it happened.
fe ku Although I was burnin: with desire to acs ebout this 4t actimliy happened

Cermny?® "jie paid "Yes, this Will be later when we sepa ted
from the ladies together with Porovnyy and myself he spoke of it freely himseir

innocently sid "Serget Sergeievioh, 1 at 6 from the vi
coma ond a tether do you Ghink we wile the Peace Treay with Kast
done a:
4

view regarding what the Weatern powers will do? 8: IZ awn
tell you exactly whnt he told POZOVNYY and myself, Ae even cursed and snid
"Ve are defin: Ltely evbariing Oa risky action", He mentioned that
KIRUSHOURV is prepered to reinforce the original olash with considemble re-

inforcenents by tank forces, But he does not want the var to spread firther, .

GQ: What is the Opinion of VARENTSOV, that is does he agree with
| URIBE?
\ ae

He realises thatthe NATO powers have strong nuclear carmbilities, but he is

relying on the assimption thas they would not use nuclear Weapons in the first

hacdit 9 | phases of such a conflict. If MIM irsio Ry had such. capabilitdes his goncept

ty | Mould be to launch an all-out anit | But_he does not have
sa aha thie and I have heard this view expreased mny s ty mry officers on the

eee,

Geneml Staff, The People do not want to fight for anything in fast Cexnmny.

and are constantly being Visits by leadera and the attitude is why

| In addition, we are subsd dint frican peoplés
do two things at onee?

awe
i i Vv. oe.& DPOLor Sant 13 : r’
‘Ip | muppart and to exenmrs orders an they have ne choice tit to a6 ity $f they

Proobe. ; ;

|

i Tenenber

i Chief Marshal and was oriticising RIRUGHOHAY here and there, Now at his

. party since he has become a Chier Marshal he raised his flags and offersd a
[  teast to the health of Hikita Sergelevich, I fel} baok, I mised my glass,
c but what the hell woulda 7 drink to him for? f thought of you and drank

| to your health. Now, of course, VARENTIOV in Leased with him and is

favourably Gigposed towirds RARUSHOIKY,

a) ae
‘ fa] S$: But everyone knows how KHRUBUCHEy is lying when he rays that
~7"Ve caught up with imerioa in milk peduction and in meat when for meat

ie x)
they are slaughtering rabbite and horses.

nea qemecetng™

: De Ny 00s And who ma there when the actual ceremony took piace?

Qo. 9 If he oan reconstruct in detail how it all happoned,....tho else we

Yr’ there with you = just POZOVNYY and his wife? 5; E will tell you again.
After he had received his pramotion, a whole month and a lalf elapsed before
we could ocongratulnte him as he was absent from MOnCOW, let alone give hin

Grafs the oustomry toists. And he hinelf felt that he must have a party with

fe his close friends, ani also invited Col. General ZIMNOV, The Chief of GAU -

but he wma awry in LENINGRAD at the time and ws not there with his wife,

sf Therefore what happened was that one day Flaterim Karpowm mng up my wife,
C I myself not being at home but in my office at the tims, and left a mesmge
~j-— saying that he should keep Sunday free as we mint you to come

to lunch with us at the dacha that day?

pi gtormen Ge fly The same messnge-order wea given to POZOVNYY through Tyan
Alekseevra, hin wife. fia care... by the my he has been given a ZIM again
as a Chieftarshal, whereas before he has aseosnot a Volgr..onct a Chaiknces
no, wait a minute only that Yarsial hae a Chaikneesno, & AIMeoee VARENTIOV
We hasn't got a Chaika. Only the Hinieter, The deputy-+Hintster ani the Chief
of General Staff mmve a Chain. ecSKROV hasn't got a Chaika either, he hs
a 7IM Bocesek have all the mmbers of these mrs...The message went on to
aoe say: "the ear will call for you . then you will drive
' over to SOKOL to pick up the POZOVNYYs". And this is what we did.
i POZOVNYY and his wife, myself ond my wife, VAVERTSOV and his wife, their
; daughters Yerlem and little Natasha and my daughter Galys.

(G.) §, ‘ifter the mal wea over, they left the table, the children

: fiftean years old. 4ecussion begen on wmriour mtters, we dmnk, he
alno made & Gomplimentary tonst to me; and so we drank...but it ms all
a question of feminine psychology, you understand, the waren do not want nar.
Ro my wife anked ” devioh, but will + d ~ now?"
And he replied "Yes, it will be signe The subject was dropped then,
however, ‘fter we had drunk some more, we got up fran the table. We md -
drunk well, vodka, cogmao, wine... and then we returned to the Genmn
problem, this time on my initiative, taking advantage of the lead which ny
wife had achieved on her own...I hadn't asked her to do ao.eothis is of
course only a detail, but again perhnps an important one...and he went on to
speak as I have already reported to you. GG; fihen wea this? S:; On
Sunday June 25.

936 G: Rut did POZVNYY have any opinions on this? S: Yes, he did.
POZOVNYY actually saw me off the day before yesterday. I gave hima
present of my spectacles which WINNE bought for me when I wis over in
Birmingham, as he had no apectacles. ‘ve said goodbye and as I me going on
this trip I invited him to a meal at a restawant. Well, after we had
eaten we had a little chat. He also swears at KHRUSIIOHEY, he swears at
him a lot in fact, for his adventuristic poliay. He actully meets mn,
genemls since he sits with BIAYUZOV, the Caamnder of therV0 of the land.
Hie expresned mny opinions, both his ow and those of other people.

~AY

é Q: Hut for what reason do these other criticize KIRUSICHEV?

ny” 6They are swearing at KHROUSICHNV because he 4s raking such a row when

everything is yet far fron ready and he my result in starting such a con-

flagmtion and we will get such a kick in the mnts that blood will flow fran
Our psopleses} This is why they are swenring at him) After all, the
generals are taking a wider view of things, more expecially as POAOYNYY himself
& political chief, a politienl worker in the Soviet Army.

Ge Of course, he couldn't have told you such things in

Pat ENTSOV'’s presence, S: of course not, but I mast tell you hovever that
POFOVNYY Ime often enough spolren toe VARENTAOV in this vein, and often

VARSNTSOV agreed with hin even, On various aspects and warloun problems.

These are various details for which I can vouoh [sien for) in my own blood!

I om open a vein ox an astory, which ever you please, Anymy gentlemen,
tere can be no doubts whateoever on this, otherwise we will find it very

difficult to work together or to apree.

a i Ls
‘e . ; 21
r -?7]1 «

96. G:; But do you consider this my be a dangerous situstion for
_ : KHRUSUCHEY, doe. if things came to a mgnative aitustion do you think the top brass
7 \& . will begin to shout that he had dmgged them into the mess? A: Yea, they

alt ; Omid. @: And even remove him [KRTUSIONWI? 5: Yes, they could remove
Vay him. Or altermtively, they could leave him - if they feel that the Anglo~

Ww" Amerioan Bloc is peally premred to hit out not once but severn] times kick

(¥ ye S in the teeth in lomliszed areas and even wrn us thet thay are prepared
ae | to go outside the loolined areas and hit un on a wider sonle aven ~ then

i+ KHPUSHONRV may postpone hia fixed time limit. “hat will happen will be that

| ULLAPICHT will say something, KHPUSIICHRY will support him, some dogm will
be found and once agninip will my “O.X. we'll talk about 1t Inter « anymy
truth is on our sidel" Something of thie nature my take place.

(GP 8: But there is a fim point I wuld like to mke, even thowh
is olenr to you, and it is my duty to point out as a high ranking officer
ecg? of the General Staff that if this time we eome dom from our positions and
Ca deo not show firmness, then KIMUSICHIV's position will be very very much
> strengthened. All the peoples of the world will believe in him more nnd more
spe and he will dictate his will in mny other queations alse. I mynelf am
ae agninst that we (the vest) should be the first to erbark on wide scale con-
Gy flict as this would be an error from the paint of view of world opinion and
also we would be doing tlds without proper preparedness, If it is decided to
g0 ahead then one should ge full ateam ahead determined on a total destruction
~ a6 I have already told you in ipril/May, If not, then show -
to kick him in the teeth ones or twice so an to stop him short! Or
altermtively to prepare oneself on such a wide amle, that he will sse that
before he can even start anything he will have suffered complete ruimtion.

Gy Rut do you consider that this represents VARENTSOV's orm
PSTaon:2 feclings or did he get this view from some sort of conf erense?

8: This is not result of a conference but purely beonuse VARET! SOV knows
the truth of the mtter.  VARPNTSNV knows how mny rockets there are available,
VAREHTSOV knows what there is new. YARENTSOV knows what is possible and
whit is note VARENTSOV knows the sum total of what we have available, what
is available now and what the potential is for the future. | VAIENTSOV bases
himself ona true knowledge of our actml truthful psition as it in fot is
and not what they are alymys mying it im. Although they my know just as
well what VARENTSOV knows. ‘8 fer os I know VARRNTSOV and as I see the
situition and which as a responsible person I must report to my Government,
High Commnd and to you (since I am now talicing to you as living responsible
persons), VATENTSOV bases his evnluction of the situation on the knowledge of
the actual true facts of our position.

ie), Gz Nut does he more or less support KIPUSHCHEV in thie’ or

_\Y6s he think thatecsss? 8: No, he does not support him and these are

| YARENTSOV's wordes "We are going ahead at great rink" [iden m risk]:
He (VARNNTSOV) is taking inte consldermfion thé ractwl reality of the
situation and it my well be possible tht VANTIV' ss views gaincide with

~~ the views held by ROTMISTROY, ZNAWOV, NOROCIKIN and GRECHKD, fa did not

detail this so. I oannot quote Him, but the wy I get the impression, judging
him as an experienced person, I wild my to you that if VARFNTSOV imew that
he had awailable 19,000 atomic minsiles of various yields, he wrild mve
said “Oh, that ia a&fficient for us to cover the bases in Turkey, Iman, in the
North ete." Rut VARRUTSOV knows well thet mwh da not the ones, that he
has not gét these avilable, tmt they are just only still in the stage of

_ manufacture, still in the stage of plaming,  VARENTSOV knows vhat he has

i available and he knows that a blow oould be struak ~ but could this blow be

Ve

{tan

bARy hey bed of"

taken to its logical conclusion? This is wat VARENTSOV is not sure of,
he has doubts because he has not get all this awilnble,

g

: fio0.) G; Do you think your Intellinence orgna have sufficient data

Swe ' NaueGur mr propredness eto.? Are they really in a position to ewluate our
TaTk strength? Or are they only relying on Western intentions? 9: This 4s an

(wisifork excellent queation. Here the point of view of the chiefs of Intelligence,

as well as tint of my colleagues in Intelligence and myself Is that we have

exmct knowledge of the true military position (of the #est), in certain

*7 bee ah ' respects. We have, for examplé, Bxnot Imowledge an regards the status of F.R.@.

tip Blryet new$

oe en eee,

- 22 «

\, : .
“i witlitary strength Here, Intelligenve has obtained omat informtion.
, , Strategic Intelligence, through ite special L1Logal agencies and other means,
per | hia obtained knovledge of the Location of all wilnemble places in the system
, | of defence and wirepreparednéan. Although thone dats are not complete, there
Adie" | are certain sources of information which strengthen MMUsICTy ant, his
wes Covernment In thely views. His policies are therefore not entirely based
‘on simple."ngkal' stvo" (arrogance)!  XURUSHOUEV bases himself on real
factors of whish he des not Know all the detaiin and on this he bases all
his Insolence and Cimnens. .

(yd?

“ O, With respect to the intentions of the est, as far os BERLIN
j foncored, can the Intellégence Organs give FRUSHCIRV pny positive data?
‘8; Yes, but not fully. It can recort to RIMNSIC™Y that it ia inom
exactly that the F.2.0. militury wilts are of 80% strength in mnpover and
equipment. Thin is the figure given by Intelligence ~ 607, not 70% or 75%
but 84 Therefors, judges for yourselves! Does this look as though Soviet
Intelligence has got emat data which it supplizs to KUPUSHCHEV, ar does
Soviet Intelligence mislead him with the infone tion they provide? thie is
for you to check and to decide. And another thing: Intelligence inform tion
is provided not only by Stmtegia Intelligence Organs, hut aleo by the
Intelligence Organs of all Socialist countries. I must tell you thet on
any day that I went into G.1.0. in Gorkl Atreet, every time without fail
I would meet there some representative or other of a country from the Socialist
camp: whether in uniform or in ofvilian clothes, but I could see porfeatly
well 4¢ vas a foreigners.» a Hungarian, Poumnian, or Pulgirisn, every
single time, all the time, there they were, vith their brief-oses and assigned -
carse Heonuse ans result of the WARSAW Agreement, a constant, serious,
Antenaive and wideespread preparstion is taking plece and a tight control
has been introdused to unify pattern of training and joint operations. Not
a day passed without my running into one of these chamoters, milking in or
out of all the various Direetomtes., Therefore the Motu] situstion is
revenled. in all ite exactitude, but T would add thet it is not conplete nor
is it in any great depth. Yor instance the Intelligence supplied by Caecho-
slovakia and Bulgaria dg moh more exact that the informa tion supplied by
; the Rungurdans. Thar informettion ia supplied in more detaLl and, on checking,
\ proved to be more correct. Hecnuse all intelligence wundek SeROV da doe
—— ordimted and all dxta is put together and evnimted. :

. Gy | ave you notiaed thut there is an intensifying in the tasks

' Noseto Intelligence in comection with RURLIN’ 5: Yew, x must tell
you that for instance the Soviet Mission in Vest DEULIN is composed entirely
out of officers of Strategic Intelligence. | For instance, Lts Col. Petr
GORKIOV pho wan at the Aondemy with me, weboth finished in 1953. Tie is
not therp now actually, he is on leave in MOSCOW. © Resertly we wont together
to the restaurant ‘Amgvif and he told me how the Americans had stopped him |
aeveral times. You know they wear Joviet uniform, hey are not in civilian
clothes, this is the Soviet Military Mission in “Nest BERLIN, so, he told me»
how the Amerioans stopped him and told hims "You are in the wrong sone"
and GOREIOV replies: "Gentlemen, open the mp ami look at it, I have perfect
ripht to be here, in these partioular streets". But the Amerdcans insist
"Ho, you are not in your gene” and they surrounded him, hut he showed fiomess
and after looking at the mp, it turned out that CONELOV ms in his rights
after all and had not infringed any rogulations which would allow him to
bo accused of provocation, But such provocations do happen and they
(the Soviet Mission) are working there nov Tull steam ahead. They are all
fron the ‘trateric Intelligence.

» OB. Gs De they busy themselves with determining the mood of the

' people and all that? 8: Yes, all that. “hat I would like to point out is
that » in our actions, there muat be an clement of acber and conscious
preparntion, our actions must show aasurance /confidunos and, on top of that,
we must algo introduce into our actions a slight element af adventuriam so
that we could drum it into his skull and disorientate him(KHNUSIONSV). Fer
instance, you bring ina tank Negiment, but it should be announced to be a
whole Division. jell, let Intelligence senrch like mad to find the other
Regiments of the Division ~ where can they be. Hut let all the Soviet peaple
know, let all the peoplen-sigmtoricn of the WANSAW Pact realize that the
Americans, English, French and Germans of the F.P.G. are ready to mast
seriously and stand firm against thin provosation regarding Went BERLIN and the

intention to subjugate Weat BERLIN » that is aa clear as black on white.

Let it be clear tit (the vest) will stand firm and ave progmred to strike
a blow of destruction, but they do not wint to be the first to atrlke, so
that all the peoples should seu who is the veal aggressor and who is the
defender of truth}

Wha Gs ut Ld you not anther from your brother officerna in tho DDR.
that thsy have bean given new misslona and they find conditions of work there
more diffioult now and tht they hawe mre tasks to fulfill eto. 4; Yes,
I did disouss this matter. Conditions of work were alvuys difficult there,
their task is: to find cut omactly what the Americans, English and French
are doing. ‘hat is their mat active task, the one that is drummtd into
their slaills daily and on which definkte results are dennndsd. Not only
| ' dereried but they are under constant pressure for results. All sorts of
: dnformtion is demnied: what new units ha:s appeared and whore, wnt are
Zo their mumbers and designotion, wit type of units « whether artillery,
enginoering or Air Ferates
is) 195. G; Low about the popular views and reactions? 5, Thay are also
inmynly Ledng stufied. i oan also give you the views of FADOROV and the views cf
KIGTOANIL~OV. You know, KHOROSHLLOV, not VUROSHLLOV, but KHOROMILLOV Jurij «

rang ; he mlao stadied at the KILV Artillery School where I did, but he finkshed
te ; a year before me. I finished in 1939 and he in 1938.  aftor that he we
ok | Instrustor under ODLTSOV at the “ondeny and later he commnded a Brigade
Exar Stan} of convention] Artillery. Mow he isthief of Staff under KUPIN who is the
}

present Artillery Commndor of a Tank Amy, but .UPIN is leaving; KHOROSHILOV
howsver, will remin €.0.5. of srtillery of the Tank Amy. I eawhimin |

, MOSCOW recently, we had a moal at restaurant ‘DINAMO', he invited me; he

has his own MOSKVICH car, he came to aollect me. And hia views are as

j aon : follows = this in wiat ho told me; they are going to shoot us down,

(es , Keak

2 Seine coe

these Gonmns of ours, like mrtridges, if we do not take up a olroular

| Ghee powLtion wo that we Gould pulveries everybody”. And thene are

; exactly the views held by FUDeROV. “AWG I was Very glad that these tr
colonels should have such confidence in me, and they know ms well, sinee

| 1937 RNOROSTIITOV knows me and FEDRROV also has known me for mny years and
respects mo, and loves mo asa friend, om fautlies met often, And

| FRDOROV told me that in September we begin tos miss omoution of (Soviet)
farnilics from the G.D.8. in expectation x whatever my happen next, and

s | FoUGROV should know because he has hia wife Shurochkn there ehildren

fin. 4s | & boy anda girl; the boy goes to sehool 15 lcm. away from shore FUDOROV's

— brigade is located (Comment WISSHIPSL), sohool is in NAUGER ].

ee ee 16. +3 Do they consider that in « protracted conflict the D,D.R.
ue" Corces will run amy, over to the fest? S: This is a second point. The
Fai first thing they spoke to me about mais the attitude of the ordimry (fast)

- Germans = the civiliins, not the anny - and this mood is bad. As regrds
er the amnies of the D.D.R., they expressed a very low opinion of ite organisation
: _and its commnder « what the hell is his mme - (they consider) he isa a very
| medioore person ( Canmnding Geneml DDR. foreses). As regards the D.DR.
officers, they said "We are not sure of them, thay can turn either way".
Ag reynrds the ordinary soldier, they didn't expreas any definite opinionand
, I didn’t ask. But this mn, the General canmmnding D.D.2. forees, I've
forgotten hie name, but he is sucha fool. ie see him on mnoecuvres anid
he shows no ddep thinking, no wise or larjseosamle vision, he is very
superficial and medicore. But the min thing in that they (the Soviets) are
afraid of the ordimsy Germn citizens, they just hate the covlets. They
{ will shoot them dom like partridges as soon as ws go out into the ficld of
‘battle, we will (have to) take up all nround defence and fight both the
F.R.G.'s and the D.D.8% Cenmgns who will have run over to desert.

Prey | 107 Gy; And what if the Poles too rose up and attacked aginst the
lines of commmications? S: God grant that this will happen.

S: Now wontlemen { would like you to read this extremely important

pra diathess

| us but I photographed the replica MINUSUCHEV edd he gave no that Mr. KRINEDY
and our leaders could check and see what FHRUSICURY reports tothe Commatiat
Party not only of the U.S.8.R. but all the Communist parties of the world,

- 2h =

because you will see at the beginning of this report a top secret order
to pass tho contents ~ in confidence = and verbally < to CASTND, te the

oh

a secretaries of the Commrint parties of Italy eto. That is to my the
al respective Soviet Anbeusndor will summon TUGLIATTI for instance and will
read the contents out to him. fou will see, there is an sxoeptiomlly

ue) interesting introductory note there, giving instructions how to pass on
ur the contents of this to the Communist party leadere in the U.G5.5.R., the

reyioml socretaries, because this letter is not to be seen by all
members indLecriminately, and how to pasa on the contents to the Communist
\ (seoretaries) of the sister parties in the rest of the worlds end /
semrately for Comrade CASTRU.s.sIhe soviet Ambassadors in the respective
countries, will sumon these people and pars on to them verbally the
contentsesese [¢ is a: most interesting introdustory note, please
transinte it and pass it on to our leaders.cecoit is mut interesting
for them to see how all thie is done. And this contains not only ali
QNUSHUTEV' s so-called statements, but also his concluding remrk to
KSMIEDY; "Mate KGGNRDY, inform MacLuLAN, fi GAUL and \DANAUER that
if they do not algn on our conditions, there will be var!" at least that
is what ho tells the Purty he sid to KENNEDY, but perhaps it wmsn't
quite adeseand that is the interesting thingees 4 tremendous political
arwlysis should be mie and you and 1 are doing a great jo here... T
beg you to paas it on to your Governments at OOS. eee6(Subsect then
remarks how impressed he was with the fixm answers given by KSNNADY to
KINTRICHEV, and gosa on to read out extracts from the doarment in
question)eeseZhis will bring to light the real state of affaires and the
-mttitude of the 0.6. 0.2.9.0, and KHINUSHOHEY towards this mtter....that
is to aay: propmwands, agresssiveness and firmnessesseit is most
—_— inportant that KENNSIY ahowld know thise ses
f

Ft artes erm

Cb») G: ahen do the autum aanoeuvres take place in the U.S.5.R. =
‘sen they for instance give a definite military chameter to thin autrrun' 6
leeds nansouvres, to give the impression of a type of mobilisation for instances...
° In view of the BERLIN situation? 8: No such demonstrative mmoetvres
take place waich are in fact a cover up for san sort of planed mbili-«
zation as it fe considered that everything is conducted in such absolute
_ sonspiratorial secrecy and all is so successfully congealed, that no extra
precautions Gre necesmary to dondea] ‘an actinl ‘nbLlisation....they just
ie mobLlisel ~ Far instance, a review is now aking pee recent dienisaals..ees
aes and it ia just following its courses cect » you know @
Gyicathors it and a few otheruess.. Manocuvres ere not organised so as to conceal
Ae"! aotual mobilisation, Ge On the oontnry...in order to impress the Weet
u2 that you hve sugh and such forces. 91 IT understand. ‘There are no
longer spring, summer, autum manoeuvres, now we have only one type of

— ba aa

nauiovusves = both inside thé U.5.5.R. and in the “Peoples Demoormclen, oam-

po nes foes

Uined minoouvres inoluding one tavinton From UM, per ang and these —
manosuvres will continu, out théy are no Longer split into apring, autum,
winter, or garrisan training - they are working in accordance with a cour

| bat training plan. ot ey ee

La ddaeg 8; vhe malleup is prooreding according te age. — AIRUMUEV
flee. i t
t tz deans ak ae an nt mmc 9
petenead \ plenty.” We take it far granted tit everytiuing that in done in iy Bee Re
dis done under cover and in titis ose the mnoeuvres are not a cover for
mobilizations

te we Gh) G; Pub when the alana in sounded, when the HiRLIN situntion

Me ghar | ones acute, will this affeat all the Wali pant aismtories? S: Yes.
wh | gimltaneously. ‘They want to do all this as soon au the 22nd (Party)
Congress finished ite work The Conyross will take place in October.

Gt %hat is the opinion of prominent officers in the Soviet

7 gre Union with regard to a possible revolt in soy the GOR, Poland or Hurgary?
\ek 7 5S: £ oan pive you an exot answer to this question. such things sre not
= yy expected. No plans have bem made for this. shen hostilities begin, if
aie ra the situation da inuvourble when the active elannts go into action, then

&

ae the mission is accomplished. If things becan: difficult the reinfurcenenta

_- - 25 «

will join in the fight, and the alleged reason will he, say, for the
uni fiction of Cermny, ete. This is the napect in which this problem
js seon heres G: Io moan if the-ver evpands. i: Then plans ein be
brought into being which jad been propred by your Intelligence and your
Comand, And the worst situation for te Goviet imy in that the DUR
enlisted men will defect an somn ns action starta. hen you put a

| pistol to soneone'’s head hefl1 keep quiet. Thay only really expect
inlividual actions, and thera won't be any large seals ones.

(852 Gy Yhat do you think would mpyen if the leading echelons
the Went Army world be vest German troops? Do you think Cemans
would shoot at fellow Germns? §: Po not count on the GIR antes
refusing to fire on the FAC ones. They will fire. ‘oviets don't
count on nll Cenmns who are under arms, the QUP officers and men
fighting the Jest Sormens, that 4s why a certain amount of purgeing
is going on, but they nre certain that the entire CDR Army will not Jay
down their arma whon ordared to fire on the llestern armics. 4: ‘hose
opinion is this in addition to yours. 3,  RHUROSHINOV's FEpoRoV's,
7s BUBAPOV''s and XUPIN's.  KUPIN de vory pleased that he te being transferred
fram GR to MOSOOW, Military Mstrict, and so is hia wife.

f oy Ss: VARENTSOV knows a. lot, perhaps he doesn't tell it all,

i when he voices his opinion he takes all he kos into considemtion

, Wie opinion is that the time 1s not right for astion I've told you
wy this 1s his opinion.

|
| Gs) G: But af they really want an extended. mr to break out,
) wie t

are the main steps they would take, other than in the Rerlin altustion?

i339 BHPUSHCHEV' s Goverment of adventurers and his GE) consider in
;suoh a onae, mins destruction by the firing of rockets, This is in
j View of the fact that the Internal aitmtion TWIT not etand up to exe
thn tan tended military operations, morale will not atand up to then, desertions
tealrmctinn wl start in order to save life, an a result of personal dlemtisfsction,

(au priser | Low standard of living. ‘o the plen is to slam you with rookets for
9

c its om. They are relying on mas destruction for which they are actively
". jpreparing, There is sucha plan. fave I mde mjeelf clear?

z G3; Ife xeport along the line of “nt you have just told us

| wal sent to us appeared in the “eatem press, whit would be the Soviet

. people's renction? 93 They wou) mover got to men about 1t. ALL
the 2oviet Press is under the Control ot’ the Central Canmittes. for
re example Mre RMLs Aeolarations were only published in full in the
: mypeine "Abread" [Za rubeshom], which hos a very limited ciroulation,
I rend it, as I have aoveass to all miblications. Only exoerpts were
published in the daily press. It wen very fine article well thought
oxt and 1f our people rend it they would see things as they really are.
| However, they only see Pravda, Isvestin and others of a real yellow Prease’
Ww 73 Cy That about Government officials’ Uow would they reaot
what you have caddand .iven une oo: If Lt reached all the wrtous
; branches of the Administration it would, undoubtedly, oreate a very
| strong impression. Rut believe x, certain papers, mrked with a red
Classification don't reach even party district heads.  AIl they are fed

- =e.

ois "PPAVDA® and "Zevasria',

——s %, hat would happen if we did ameh through their ton forces
' Bleokiny access to Perlinas you suggested? 8: They woulda double
~ .° | strength in that area, and then wo would have to double ours, slapping
‘Xp’, them in the teeth onos again. 0; ‘nl then they will retreat? oS: Yems
5 | “%o our problem is to burn their tanks out and place ow’ there,

i *3 ‘hay do they have to cover the road approaches $o31M IN
; We ovict forces? If thoy signa treaty they oun use the Cerwan forces.

-

- 26 «

S: Hecause GOR is not strong enough. However, the Soviet Amy will be
the second support echelon and this fact will be known to the enemye A
German regiment my be backed up by a Soviet Division. G: So the
very first unite will be GIR units? Ss; Yes. CGermna but reinforced
by Soviets.

+8) G: How will they control the air corridors? With Cermman or
oviet alremuft? 38; with German and dovict attrerart 9 Mostly Sovict

"pines the Germns have very few. However, joint action is planned.

21. G: W411 they shoot dom the vestern atrernft which < Be Yea,
will shoot them down. They are mking preparations for this, with
fighters and A.A. weapons.

: (He Gi Does VARRNTSOV think this too? 8; Yes. ‘fter all I

|

the Head of GQ, I am continuing the amlysis which Serged
Sergeevioh has mid in reply to your serious and very dstailed questions.
I have tried to tell you all from this source, You oan cheek it by
other sources.

cy, G: Tam he said anything about V-75 4n oormection with ABIN?
: As Z have already told you V675 is a tested rockst which oan be
found everywhere, even in the Berlin area, It is produssd in large
quantities, That is a proven weapon in which they believes, I am sure
this weapon is already in Germanys

2he Gs: 80 in apite of the fact thet Sergei Sergeevioh anys that the
y is ready for signing your oninion is that RHRUSHONEY may NOT

sign it if enough pressure is brought to bear? St Yea, KHRUSHCHEV
knows that he had mly deficiencies. we have been witnesses before now
of KHRUSHCHRV retreating or reming new dates, or just shutting up. I
want to repeat once again. Let us take the situation: The GIR have
set out their blosking forces the second line is formed from Soviet tanks
and artillery, we break through, they send reinforcements into the
breach, but they will stiok to the same limited area, The covet forces
will not extend the fighting area, We must be prepared for then taking
& grble and expanding the conflict but according to the plan in force
now, they will not expand the conflict, They will, howsver, increase
forces continmlly in that area until they are overwhelmed. 80 we
must hive enough fapes to mUppress them

| G: Do you st411 consider, in spite of the fact well known

you and the Soviet Government that the min strength Western forces
are minly strategic and not tactical, that is locally, in the European
Theatres, do you still think it 4s necessary or advisable to mke a show
of forve specifically in Europe? %: Yea, show atrength on Cermn
territory. This is WARENTSOV' s opinion also; that it will all have a
localized charncter atLyeessurly several flare-ups, ssverel battles in
the sone of comminiotionse..What he VARENTSOV maanes by sone of conmmnt-
cations and what I mean by zone of Commnieations is, say ~ along the
highways and railronds leading to Neriin.

(Las.) G: And what do the Soviet Government consider will be the key
alefs for defence on the part of the ‘eatif the latter decide to hang

on to BERLIN to the bitter ena? s; They expect the following: a

rapid completion of re-amning of the FTG and also increase the strength

of their forces in Europe, both in mnbera and armaments, And this is
what they fear} The publication by Mre KENNEDY of the 3 milliard
inoreame in the defence budget created a very strong impression. Bravo,
good for him! That kicked them in the teeth! They are donvinoed that
these 3 milifarde ars going to he approved, although the Soviet High
Cormand are convinsed that there are also some other asoret military funds
at the Gispoml of the armed forces (of the U.S.) after all these exist

in the Soviet Army and the USSNeesethey are therefore convinced that ate
although they said 3 million, they will have nt their dispoml not 3

but 6 or even 9 milliards...«They are afraid..eand already they are

beginning to scratch their hends.

oo 127. ': What ms the impression as a result of the French moving

sion back from ifrioa to Europe? 5: A great nolse was raised
everywhere that this is an obvious preparation to interfere with the
signature of the agreement and so oneessMany more wimilar preparatory
moves must take place so that the 'syloch® « adventurer, that he will
view it in the broad sense of thingsext not as a mleulation for a
purely smll operation of local importance only but in its genera?
widespread wir aspectese. If he will receive pevernl nore kleks fn
the teeth like these announcements he will be faced with the following
Gilenm: either let things calm down and accept the fact that the
West is so well premred tint £¢ could mow over to a general deatruction...
and he will certainly do so beonuse he himaelf fa not ready to answer
(hit) tack in full! Suppose he will send a bonber over theese islands
where are now (U.K. ) and a rocket into Amarion, and thia will not be a
direct hit, |"ne budet pritsel'no”) he knows perfectly well that all the
strategic airforce (af the West) armed with rockets is hanging fire
over the UNSReeehe knows that very well and he is keeping it in mind,
but he my out low: I've got the same! But he haen't got the ame -
that's just it8 G: And Sergei Sergesvich knows this too? §: And
Sergei Sergeevich knows this and enya: We are going ona ganble.

128; - Gs And they won't be ready in Novenber either? 4: No, after
all how magh i= there left till Noverber? Of course, it won't be ready,
Rut the order has been given to reinfores everything already availiable,
to train, to complete equipping with armments, correct (faults) to

' maintain everything on a wr-footing.

CR with his Government are not only one single dneident [" styohkn” J
' in this Germn corridor (Arwa) but severnl incidents... that is to aay
he will build up the attack in the hope that he will break up the
advancing forces of NATO fn thin area. Ne will for instance send cut
and deploy there sy one tank army < we (the West) destroy it. te
(KIMUSHOHEY) will at once send out another one = he has another eshelores.
I have already told you how muy armies he his; how mny armies there
are in the CDR, Crechoslovmkia, on our Soviet territory (Soviet Union)
in Poland ete. tanks ete....which I beg you to pass om and treat with
due importance and considerntion...This is not a bluff, these are not
match-boxes those are tanks moving rapidly on caterpillars and firing!
If these are knocked out, he will reploce than with others, saying "I
will mke them ghoke in this cormidori" shereas we must do everything
in our power to make him choke instead! ie will then be freed with the
dilemm: wat to do next? Is it wrth going further or not? And since
he has not got the strength to fight out on a general wide-spread front,
he will have to pipe down. Or altermtively if he finds out through
Intelligence sources that there will be endless forces throw in to
replace the ones he knocks out, then he will stop at the very beginning
and will not mrry on the the signing of the qgreement. These are the
possibilities.

Gx, G: Do you think it possible that the sovieta my attempt to

rvs’ us falee and misleading informtion through Intelligence ounnels?

St Oh yes you mean dex. Yes, this is being done constantly. There is
such a specific oategory of activity. Specifically they my spread
rumours that the forces of the D.D.R. are larger than actually ani that
they are all in conimt readiness and tha UIBNICI has been raking
aucoessful and popular visits, they oan lie about the status of the mast
Cemmn soldiers momle,.

. ye Gy Are they actimlly Going this now? %; Yea, and they will
; inwe to do this. @: Do you know of any speoifie operations now in
\ progrese? For example, iniorm tion given to a double agent recruited by
the Soviets or through any high level penetration they my have?

(@ This is all done ona planned basin and is controlled by one
eedquarters. This is known to GREGIKD who is even related to KARUSHOHEY
and he consults with him on these political mtters, but I don’t know

of any specific example. .

(132), & Do you know of any high level penetrations in Western
governments who co-operate with RHRUSHOHEV and on whom he my depend on

“dn ‘making RERLIN policy? St Yea, there are, all the Secretaries of
foreign Communixzt Parties in capitalistic: countries. These should be
strangled, but very little 1s done about them

(133. ) Qy ZL mean non-Communist persons who ars prominent? 8: I
peor, about Cyrus baton and I reper ted to you about him. As this

sntral Committes letter shows the addressees are all Conmunist Party
secretaries and others favourable to KHRUS/ONEYV. I cannot understand
why these Comminists are not eliminated, they did this once before in
furkey. As a menber of the free world now I realise that ny governments
are wise, but I mist be a complete fool since it is totmlly dnoomprehensible
to mo why persons like CASTRO and TOOQLIATL and tho other Comrmiste in
the West are not elimimted since they are av¥loudly cresting a Fifth
Colum As persons these individuls are nothing, but they do influence
masses of people. At one time ATTATIRK shot the Communists and in
later yeara, NASSER and KASGEM also threw them out, why can't we Go

the same?

oa
Asn.) (subject continues to criticize the humnitarian and liberal
i Ywwforn mtions for not wiping out all Communists within their reach,
\_oxaing his arguments on the very letter from the Central Conmittes which
appeals for Communist support throughout the world.  Hubject stressed

Subject partioularly emphasised the danger that CASTRO my influence
other [atin American peoples appearing as a Latin-type LANIN)

135. (Following a few sinutes intermission subject waid)"We have
agreed that I give you all and we will goin all our forces and possi-
bilities for ow work. You and I have been working together for leas
than a year, in fact we have been working together since only 20th April".
Cy Yes. 3S: a few months, a very few months. Let us look at the
results. We, with your help, under your direction, with my possibilities,
which I do not exernte, we brought to light a series of new questions
of a political chameter - dealing with Central Committea of U.S. 5.Re ,

we touched upon rany subjects related to the GITK which deals with
technical intellipencessesis it mov clear to us. I've told you how -
the delegations aro made up, you read that representatives of KCB and

GRU are included. Ye have brought to light military questions, We
consider our tasks to have been carried out. Oh, but thie is only the
beginning, "Is 5 per cent".

136. 83 If we amlyse everything: concrete questions, material
available, inform tion, some of wirich possibly needs checking + tint is
the law, froma daleatie point of viow, we also are learning a sort

of dialectics but a type different from the Marx kind, we have given
each other a lot. :

137. S: We already have the moral right to my tht for same of the
questions we now have a new view, we have certain mterial which can’t

be thrown out, mtorial axtraoted fran our common amle of opinions,
understanding oonvers:tions, wiahes, and actions. That is to my tint

I consider that our wrk is aimed at a target, it is mnyenided, it’has not
got a marrow, one-ridsd aspect.

1386 3: ALL right we haven't got to the bottem of sone things,

but we'll get there. sverything can't be done at once. This is the
first road we are staniiing on, I gmrantee that the conditions of any |
sudfen aggression which my be planned will be immediately commrnicated to

our 1.Q. (Kommndovanie], complete with facts. What these facts are
going to be I will let you know, when I discover them. That ia one

of the principal taska. 6G: Of course. 8; And so when we discover
a series of new, basio facts there is one thing I amafmid af, I am
afraid tint we won't be able to carry through to the end and get the
facts to our organiestions, to our authorities, so that thay could draw
new, practical conclustons.

139 5S: I would like to be wrong. Take for example that letter
and introduction, One must understand tht CASTRO is not only going to
read 1t far informtion. There is lot we don't know, and we my never
know, beoause my hand oarrying the MINOX cannot reach that far, neither
can ow eyes reach that far. This mist be developed however, If this
much is given to CASTRO, and we know that millions are being given him,
then he is involved aleo in other things. ‘vhat conclusion oan we
draw from this? Rlirdmte him, at least stop him from éeveloping more
followrs. That is were we are going to lose unnscesmrily if we do
not do this. How can we achieve this. I do not know how mary more
Central Committees letters I will have to open. f{ will open everything
that passes through my hands. You are helping m in my search, ty
giving me material assistance. I am now able to take people to
restaumants, I buy people drinks. I give presents. Nverybody is
Ploaned. People ask me to get them things. RUDIN himself ins asked
me to get him three sets of Intteriecs, but has he given me monsy?

ZBu are going to buy them, you are going to spend £5 ~ £10. Then
/for people have asked me to get cameras, rings/and so on fe fo all this
cameras burt we discover only this and tht. I want deep aonclusions to be

drawn - don't expect to suddenly uncover somthing, just like spreading

out a carpet. ,

Gy #hat mkes you think that we are not doing thie? 9: It
t being done. @: You don't consider that it is possible tomorrow
morning to ast on your stiggeation since there are oonsidermmtions of a
tactical nature, a queation of timings 8: You oan kill me but I
cannct see wit are your tactical considemtions in the matter of
CAST2Oe Why do you keep CASTRO on? Gz CASTRO will fall. Steps
are being taken and at the proper time.

> S: One day! With this "one day, sometime” we miss the bus.
__ right mment is a factor, Surely you ain't fly thousands of

+ kilometres to see me, in order to my _ Fou axe our friend". I
know Tam your friend, I am pleased to ses you. You are pleased to
woe mee I can't give you all the secrets of Gi], all the mps, all
the plans « I oan't get near them. There are domments which a Marahal
reads and signs for, and if he mints to reeread them he has to sign for
them again. So they know that Maratnl so and so read this doounent
five times. Ne one else can see these doounents. And I don't see
us recruiting a Marshale ‘Take VAReNTSOV « once he has bedume a chief
Marshal, he begins to like KHRUTICHEV, you cin’? get anyshere near hin
That's the way people act. He is well off fimrolally, he has power,
ho weers badges of rank, he his a car, he has followers, he ths a suite,
he has a guard, a dacha, » "long live KIRUSHCIEV"! <Andwhois |
KHRUSHCHEV? = VARENTSOY used to say that KHRUSICHEV de a fool and an
adventurer, and now he drinks his health, I mised my gles what on
one do, but I didn’t drink to him. I swear to you that he ms thinking
aa we do tut since he has started wearing the enormous USER coat of arms ~ .
Atte all over. Amnisamn. You can't explain everybody's actions.

(i2) 31 You my laugh at me and call mea braggard, but I take
ot upon myself bemuse I feel I oan doa lot. I have so far given
you very little, but no mtter how much I oan give you I ean't give
“fo you everything, And you won't have in every Directornte. One
must fact the truth. You must hove a brooder view. Yor this far-sighted
\ men exist. YTheee wise, farenighted people should be mre decisive. That
is the wish of a strategic officer, menber of GHQ staff of one of the
branches of GHW of USSR. G: I asaure you this is being done. 5: No,

not at the mment. G: You can't almys have the results put in
front of yous Ss We should either work aooording to such a method that
they (our HQ) beldeve us. Or else we just get together and drink wine.
Sy ¥e have such sources at our dispose), and, they can't be carried
through to their lozioal conclusion. that is what I am afrnid of.

God forbid, God forbid. Now take Mr. HAROLD. TI love him very madh.

I think of him every my, aa I do of you, I swear, I think of you

(of hin) many times during the day. hen I go te bed at night I wonter
what he is doing, whether he 4a thinking of me. L listen to the radio <-
163ecce0 ANA tondny Mr» HAROLD Looked at this material and mid

"4 gollection of artioles, noteworthy abstract articles" but they are
not, they are the views of (IQ of the USSR,

Gi.3.) iy de only develeped then to-day. fe have just received them
S ve will sort this out among ourselves, but the high-ups, that Lord
who sent me a mesaage, which I prise grently, he my say "this is not
what we want’. This Le what I am afraid of. @: Do not worry about
this. You are mlued ani the mterial as well. 8; This da our firat
meetings we are just getting organised with the elwcidation of «
nunber of questions, new mterial, and I just ranted to tell you wint
was bothering me. Gs: You don't have to worryatall. St All these
things won't atop ms. . Our contract is to fight. (G1 explains subject's
worries in English). G1: You have the dmuatience of youth, : I am
not a young mn, look at my grey hairs. You remember I told you if we
don't risk all ow: diamonds, gold and valunbles we will be destroyed;
if we risk them our wealth will be tripled, %e are taking teo long
to get atarted. 8: I swear to you « believe me, as a strategio officer,
these first steps of firm declarations, of a firm position, talon by
Mr. Madlillan, Mr. Kennedy, that excellent fellow de Gaulle and Ademuer,
who is also a good chap, have alrendy brought into play a new slenent.
Perhaps the best thing to do is to declare you have mare than you have,
Why should thie bald devil get amywith everything, sverybody listens
to him, he lies = and perhaps nt is the right my to act. ‘inf all
we do is my, "better don't do anything".

Gx) CG; On this aubject, could you tell me, hew can we misinform
etinid dsvil. Perimps his intelligence people do not have ail the
factae St His Intelligence Service is not all powerful. G1 How can

we get {alse informtion throug: to him? 5s Do a Little and menify
it five timen. I, repent prepare tanke, antiotank defence, Lrorense your
forces, Do it on the meale of a diviaion ani my you've got an Army
Corps. And disaiminate this informaiton along all channele, press
conference, and all the rest. (Say to him): "You dirty seu so you
now declare that you will sign without ua, after being our ally during
the war, after we have fed you, we have supplied you with weapons, with
transport. All your artiliery, #11 ealibres, would have been sunk in
mid had we not supplied the transport. And now you wilifully want

% smelion up Berlin". I assure you that this is just the firat step,
he will swallow Berlin. Tell him "for this behaviour we ars going to
slap your face’. This will make him stop and think. G; Usn we do
anything about this along Intelligence lines? 5: Of course. And you
must work from all sidea.

U5. G, What ia the Sth Directorate, ORV, doing about this?

5S; Setting up their agenoy networks Lagenture fe. Fave you read that
letter of mine? All this in still going on, all agenay netvorks mve
been activated ant are in direct contact. This is being done everywhere,
dnoluding the coyrtries of the far Kast. Gy With regard to the BARLIN
question, have "thiar"(GRU Sth Directorates) agents not become active ted.
%; Yes, all branches. ‘The taska have already been aliom ted.

146. Br now, before I forget. SUD'IN has gore on leave. — fe has
been mie a fenersil. And by the wy he wis an Air force solonel, but
has now become an infantry General. He ms preparing to go to Turkey,
then he uned the following subterfuge. tHe seid his wife ms 412 = he
didn't wnt to go to Turkey. So they said to him “you scoundrel, we

« 31 @

mde you a Generml as yo were going to do an important job. You were
acing to set up an iliegal residentura using agents from other countries,
not the Turks, there might be Swedes there, Bulg-rians, ete." This
enbarrasesed him and he went off on leave. Before he left ~ I handed
the papers (SUDIN's) in to General POZOVNNY yectertay, he asked me to
get him a nylon shirt, neck measurement 43 om. - I wave him the paver

to get it re-typed ona special form foe VARENTSOV to sign, and ome it
has been signed POZOVNYY will keep it until my return to USSR, = SUD! In

Gr J.dsten, through what channels and what actually should

say in orfer for 4¢ te sow like the truth to KMUSHOHEV? thts
dsinformtion about forces, eto. : The best way weld be t
Presa, Radio, and throuwh those people who we have doubled and who work for
KIMUSHOMRV © he believes them.G: And the important thing in to get
across that there are more forves etc, . §: Yes, that wheave seerst
informtion, nurbers assigned, atone missile lamciers latomye pushki ].
STRAUSS has the right approach to this prchlem Je have sot to envisage
the situstion in such a way tht should the necessity aries we wuld
give atom war-heads to ANSMAUER, You orn sey "We Hadn't want to give
it him, but if you (KHROSHCHEY) are going to take one-sided action you
force us to do it",

U8. Qy How you are going to my a number of visits to your
Embassy here, Are there people in the Residentura or the Evbasay, among
the HM personnel, who you think could have reliable informtion on the
BERLIN question? Perhaps they have received special instructions, or
pextaps they could tell that in the event of worsened relations 4t hed
been decided to send fewer delegations, either to England or to other
NATO cowrtries, or pertnpa they have cut down on the murber of families
allowed to aecompany Fabassy offtoials. Do you think there aould be
such indiontions? 3; Yeas, there oan be awh dmvifoations, They
should be witched, and amlyaed,

V9. St Would 1¢ be norm for you to ak "What do you think about

the BERLIN question? How will it react on you here in England?" 4; Yes,

of course I could disovas this mtter. PAVLOV has eaid that he would

like me to visit his hare.  I'11 tell yriabout it. Aotunlly, PAVLOV

when he wis leaving, for "naland asked for a transfer out of here and thay

vant to mike me a Counsellor for Techical SoLenve here and Deputy Nealdent

to LEV, Then recall him ina year and mke me the Resident for Sngiand,

This is the Gey plan, but the Central Comnittes will my “And whe is

father?” “The Mther is a Vhite officer who fought against the Soviet

Government and his son sould finish that Goverment off", Kmetly

that the son is in sotual fret doing. (Taughs). G20 haw complete

faith inte, I ewer. That time I returned I went to SOLID, Nead

of Cadres Mi-ectomte, I gave him two fountain pens, the most expensive

purse I bought here at farrods, oards and a bottle of scent. He aatd
this is exbarrassing” and I replied "Why entmrrasaing, they

BAve me these gifts, believe me the firms I vidted mda “(trues name )

our present to you", what am I te do with all this let?" "Well, in

that case, thank you very mush".

15). S: The money that the U.8&. and British Novermment give me

I do not spend on myself only, G: Did you mive VARSNTSOV a present?
3: He'll get one, Thin te the easiest ef things, (5: goes on to
deseribe a table lighter, amped like a rocket, wiiedh he saw in a shop
thie moming, He also winte a battery elestrie rasor, which he intends
raving hi as a birthdey present on 15th “eptenber, when VARENTSOV
wL11 be .

a$1. Hs Worft you be on leave at that time?

. . = 326
Ay I intend postponing my leave, as Kkaterina Karpowrn has said to me
-}- the Inst tims they were at the villa the artists have already

been booked and you'll be the mijor domo".  (subjegt then goes on to

suggest that they find a bottle of wine prodwed in the year VARENTSOV

was born and tmke him a sft of it. This ploy had enormous sucess

when used by the Counsellor in CANADA, GOTUNOV who sent a similar eift ;
to Gennadij Vaail'evieh ALBKSETK) (or ALEKSERHAD), RUDIN's Deputy).  RuowEva

152. Subject then goes on to aay that "The Chief Haralalt gets, in
new currendy, 2,50) (roubles) a month, Last trip when POZOVNIY heard
— that was onoe again Flying to the big islands” he left a Neoasage

for him “not to forget old soldiers”, ao subjeot brought him back a
number of gifts for himself and his wife, “They kissed me. In apite
of the fact that he is a righ mn, he hae savings emounting to hundreds
of thoumnds in old currency, he adores presenta’. Everyone going
abroad brings presents. .

153 3S: Now, I think I've told you everything about the GYTK
Comittee. There is nothing more on the Comnittee. CG; Yen, but

here is something important about BERLIN, could you find out nhether
special tasks ave heen given either to the Resident or to someone

else in your Frbasay here? Have instrustions been given on wnt aetion

in to be taken should the aitustion there detericente, What intelligence
taake to be undertaken in Angland with regard to the herlin question

have they been given? 9; That ia clear. I am sure there is something,
T am sure VORONIN did not come Just by change, he has sone kind of
mission; he is the Head [Nechalnik Napravientya] of a Direstion,

Lie G3 We would also like to knew the persoral opiniona of

Pmbassy ataff, if they dare voice a persoral opinion, particularly if

they disagree with KHRUSHCHRV, 5: I think I ean fini out about the cee
instructions received, but not the opinions and thoughts of the colony, .

It would look suspicious for "A VORCOW man sent on a pedagogic miasion"

to try ani find out people's opinions,

2 G: If you mike notes do it very innocvsusly. (7; explains

TEE’ very safe wy of ming notes, then noes egein on to desoribe his

\eeting with the womn and her children and the clever wy in witch he
aoted. He also miyggests that as he 4s Head of Department he could
quite mmfely be invited to the British Frbaesy. He has already been
invited by the Amerioans, at the time when the Patent Deloption vieited
the USSR). Gy After you mt her at an Entasay reveption officially
there would be a loazioal legend for greeting her in tam ister,

156. (S: suggests that there be no meéting the following day as

he has a lot of wrk to do and mut meet his People. This would also -
give the other people time to study the mterinl awilable, «-ollows
argument about how a suit should be Dought for subject. He requests a
dark grey mit for next Gy. Me agrees to get one for him at Simpsons.
Also whether or not a dental plate could be rade for him, since his
Moscow dentist in very 412.

157. Subject was shown the map of Landon to orient him. Subject
shows list of people he knows in England, Kx ort Manager of HAWKER
SIDDELEY » BELLINGER, HILOVIDOV has given him his card. He has a

book for subject. 2252X whan subject met at the Fair in LONDON, Mubjeat
then cheoks over list of Goounsnta he had brought with him and ws to
hand over.

158. The next meeting was ret for the afternoon of 20 duly , VINE

would relay exact time. Subject then refers to SOMKARNO's vist? to

MOSOOW and says that the Soviets hed given him a lot of arms and money

as they really want to hit the Dutoh hr, The oitumtion there is very
serious and an attack ony start this year. <“ubject will give further detaila

later. oo

oy, Subject left at 0100 hours 19 July 1961.
