Probable Political Developments in the West German Situation During 19522
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096667, dated 2 January 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096667).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COPY “NO.

| NIE~57
Published 12° February 1952

eas e ; 5, UR es
Approve biae mee etsd pS). 3
7 Date ; ; 1

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

“G

This document tentains informa
- tional defense of the United S
of the Espionage Act, 50 U.S.
Its transmission or the rev:

WARNING

affecting the na-
's within the meaning
Z, 31 and 32, as amended.
J4tion of its contents in any
‘person is prohibited by law.

N

manner to an unautho

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Fur-
ther dissemination elsewnere in the department to other offices which require the in-
formation for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a.

sr Q* 8 Qo oS

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-
ment of State

. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-

partment or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-
rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Atomic Energy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Staff

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Researcn and Development Board
Munitions Board

SECURITY INFORMATION

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
WEST GERMAN SITUATION DURING 1952

NIE-57

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State.
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force. and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the prep-
aration of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on 11 Feb-
ruary 1952. See, however, footnotes of the Departments of
State and the Air Force to paragraphs 8, 23-24, and 33.

PROBABLE - POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

IN THE WEST
GERMAN SITUATION DURING 1952

THE PROBLEM

To estimate probable political developments in the West German situation during
1952, with particular reference to the likelihood of the conclusion, ratification, and
putting into effect of agreements to rearm West Germany and integrate it with the

West.

ASSUMPTION

That there is no general war in this period.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The Adenauer Government will prob-
ably remain in power during 1952.

2. The gravity of the issues which remain
to be settled. together with the disturbed
State of opinion in France as well as in
West Germany, make the outcome of the
present negotiations between West Ger-
many and the West uncertain.

3. However, while the Adenauer Govern-
ment will continue to demand virtually
complete equality and sovereignty as the
price of completing the “contractual”
agreement with the Western occupying
powers and the agreement to enter a
European Defense Community (EDC),
we believe it highly unlikely that Aden-
auer will permit the negotiations :o lapse.

4. We believe that, if the Saar issue can
be deferred by some formula which will
save face for both France and West Ger-
many, the Adenauer Government will
sign the contractual and EDC agree-
ments, provided:

a. that any restrictions on West Ger-
man military production are to be self-
imposed or, if contained in the EDC
agreement, are applicable. at least in
form, to other EDC members;

o. that West Germany is not explicitly
charged with the costs of maintaining US
and UK forces in West Germany (hither-
to charged to West Germany as occupa-
tion costs).

d. In signing the agreements, Adenauer
will undoubtedly expect that West Ger-
many will be immediately linked with
NATO through EDC and will be uitimate-
ly admitted to membership in NATO, and
that West Germany will receive substan-
tial US economic aid.

6. On balance, we believe the West Ger-
man government will ratify the EDC and
contractual agreements.

7. In the unlikely event that the Bun-

destag failed to ratify these agreements,
or in the event that the Constitutional

SS 1

Court rendered an adverse decision on
the constitutionality of rearmament leg-
islatior. and the Bundestag failed to pass
the necessary amendments to the Con-
stitution, the West German government
would almost certainly be politically un-
able to reopen negotiations with the West
on integration and rearmament during
1952.

8. New Soviet and/or East German over-
tures for the unification of Germany
might delay completion and ratification
of agreements for integration and re-
armament, but probably not beyond the
end of 1952.*

9. It is unlikely that the present tactics
of the USSR with regard to Berlin can
seriously affect the integration of West
Germany with the West. Stronger Soviet
action against the Western position in
Berlin. or Soviet threats to take action
against West Germany, would be unlike-
ly to have an adverse effect on the West
German attitude toward rearmament and

integration with the West.

10. Under any circumstances it is ex-
tremely unlikely that rearmament can
get under way ir. 1952 on any substantial
scale.

DISCUSSION

The Present Situation

11. The integration of West Germany with
the West is dependent upon the solution to
three interrelated problems, now in various
stages of progress as follows:

a. The Schuman Plan for coal and steel.
The Treaty implementing this Plan was
signed in April 1951. It has been ratified
by West Germany and approved by the Neth-
erlands lower house, the Belgian Senate, and
the French Assembly. Italy and Luxembourg
have as yet taken no steps toward ratification.

b. The European Defense Community
(EDC). the out-growth of the Pleven Plan.
Discussion of a draft treaty to create this
Community is proceeding, with the objective
of agreement on the main lines of the treaty
by the time of the NAT Council meeting at
Lisbor. :n February 1952.

« The Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of

State. does not concur in this conclusion, but in-
stead oelieves that it is unlikely that any Soviet or
East German unity propaganda moves could ma-
terialis delay the West German rearmament pro-
cram or the integration of West Germany with the
West.

It is the view of the Director of Intelligence.
USAF. that a Soviet withdrawal from East Germany
could delay West German rearmament for an ex-
tended period.

ec. A “contractual” relationship between
West Germany and the Western occupying
powers. Preliminary agreement was an-
nounced on 24 November 1951, but difficult
issues remain to be settled.

12. The USSR is exploiting the issue of Ger-
man unification intensively, largely in order
to delay or prevent the integration of West
Germany with the West. Overtures by the
Satellite East German government and coun-
ter-proposals by the West Germans and by
the Western occupying powers have culminat-
ed in the UN resolution for a Commission
to examine whether conditions in the two
parts of Germany are now such as to permit
free elections. The East German government
has denied the competency of the UN to act
on what it declares to be a problem for the
Germans and for the four occupying powers.
However, it is almost certain that the USSR
will aim to keep the issue alive in one way
or another as long as possible.

Balance of Political Forces Within
Germany on the Issues of

Integration And Unification

13. The Adenauer Government probably can-
not be overthrown at least until the 1953
elections. The provisions of the West Ger-

eee

Ser T 3

man Constitution do not permit the dismissal
of a Chancellor unless the successor govern-
ment already possesses a parliamentary ma-
jority. It does not appear likely that any
group opposed to Adenauer could obtain such
a majority.

14. The Adenauer Government has commit-
ted itself to integration with the West. Aden-
auer’s Christian Democratic party maintains
that the efforts for German unification must
not prejudice or delay West German integra-
tion with the West. This position is generally
shared by the other members of the Adenauer
coalition, the conservative Free Democratic
Party and the German Party, but these parties
are somewhat less willing than Adenauer to
make concessions in the negotiations with the
West.

15. Among non-political groups, the Govern-
ment’s position is generally supported by the
Catholics. who are largely concentrated in
West Germany. So far. it has also been sup-
ported by the expanding veterans groups.
These veterans groups, however, are particul-
arlv sensitive about equality for a German
military contingent. and there does exist a
minority which opposes integration.

16. The chief political opposition to Aden-
auer’s program continues to come from the
Social Democratic Party, led and controlled
by Kurt Schumacher. While the Social Demo-
crats are not opposed to rearmament in prin-
ciple. this party asserts that integration with
the West and West German rearmament at
this time would expose West Germany to the
danger of attack from the East, before any
West German military contingents could be-
come effective and without any compensating
assurance of effective Western support.
Furthermore. they maintain that rearmament
cannot be carried out without a constitutional
amendment. The Social Democrats also as-
sert that integration would close the door to
unification. It is unlikely that the Social
Democratic position will undergo any ma-
terial change before the elections of 1953 or
that the Social Democrats will cooperate with
the government in 1952 to promote German
integration with the West. Generally aligned

with the Social Democrats on the issues of re-
armament and integration, though for wholly
different reasons, are the Communist Party
and the neo-Nazi Socialist Reich Party. The
latter has no parliamentary representation
but has shown significant strength in recent
local elections.

17. In general, West German Protestants
have a strong interest in German unification,
in large part because the Evangelical Church
has great strength in East Germany. A mi-
nority wing of this Church, led by Pastor
Niemoller, denounces integration and rearma-
ment. The titular head of the Evangelical
Church. Bishop Dibelius, who probably
speaks for the majority of that Church, favors
moves to unite West Germany with the other
Western European states, but declares him-
self unwilling to advocate rearmament or to
agitate against it.

18. The Refugee Party, as well as the indus-
trialists and trade unions, cannot be included
in either camp. The refugees are strongly
anti-Communist and may go along on re-
armament. However, their dominant con-
cern is the union of East and West Germany
and the recovery of the lost territories, and
they will be inclined to follow the political
leaders who seem most likely to achieve these
objectives. Most industrialists favor integra-
tion with the West and with some misgivings
accept the Schuman Plan. However, a sub-
stantial number fear that integration may
prevent long-run restoration of their histori-
cally important trade with the East and that
compensating markets will not be opened
to them in the West. Trade unions in general,
and particularly the Trade Union Federation
were initially favorable to union with the
West. The unions have been to some extent
estranged from the government on domestic
issues and of late have tended to lean more
to the Social Democratic position. Nonethe-
less. even those industrialists and trade union-
ists who do not support Adenauer on integra-
tion with the West are unwilling to accept
unification on the terms so far offered by
East Germany.

19. Based on the above positions, the par-
liamentary balance on integration and re-

=e

ament issues during the next year will
“glepend primarily on the solidarity of the
-Christian Democrats and of the government
coalition. (The Christian Democrats have
143 seats, and the three coalition parties to-
gether 218 seats out of a total of 402 seats in
the Bundestag.) Although there has been
some internal friction among the Christian
Democrats, they are likely to hold together
on integration and rearmament issues. While
there may be some defections from the smaller
coalition parties, these should be offset by
votes from splinter parties, so that on any
issue requiring a majority vote the govern-
ment could probably win, even against the
solid opposition of the Social Democrats (130
seats) and the other opposition parties.

20. In his negotiations with the Western-
Powers, Adenauer must consider, in addition
to the present parliamentary balance, the
trend of party strength and public opinion,
and varticularly whether by concessions he
might jeopardize his coalition’s chances in
the elections scheduled for September 1953.
Recent local elections have produced sub-
stantial gains for the Social Democrats and
have resulted in the emergence of the neo-
Nazi Socialist Reich Party. It is estimated
that if elections were held at the present time
the Social Democrats would emerge decidedly
the largest party and the Socialist Reich
Party would get as much as seven percent of
the vote. The recent Social Democratic gains
appear to have been due in part to that party’s
attacks on Adenauer for his willingness to
make concessions in negotiating with the
West. as well as to dissatisfaction with intern-
al German conditions.

21. In general. public opinion in West Ger-
many has swung away from the passive. ‘‘ohne
mich” (count me out) attitude toward re-
armament prevalent in late 1950 and early
1451, and polls indicate that half or more of
the West German people now accept rearma-
ment. This evolution is due largely to the
revival of German self-confidence. stimulated
in part by the remarkable economic recovery
of the country. and in part by increasing
awareness of the key position which West Ger-
many occupies in the defense of the West.

Se 4

While this pride makes West Germans more
willing to rearm, it also causes them to insist
more strenuously on equality and sovereignty.
Therefore, Adenauer must recognize that if
he does not secure virtually complete equality
and sovereignty in his negotiations with the
West, his party may not only lose the 1953
elections but suffer lasting political damage.

22. In summary, then, the balance of political
forces is at present highly precarious. Aden-
auer must move very carefully in the interest
not only of ratification of integration arrange-
ments, but also of the survival in 1953 of his
party and even of a center government.

Possible Effect on The Balance of Political
Forces Within West Germany of:

Continued Unification Overtures By
East Germany or The USSR:*

23. As indicated above. none of the major
parties in West Germany (the Communists
aside) would support German unification on
terms so far offered by East Germany or the
USSR. Only proposals clearly providing for
free all-German elections under international
sup “vision would remove the objections of
the overwhelming majority of West Germans.
East Germany may offer terms which appear
to approach those demanded by the West
Germans. However the East German pro-
posals would probably, in the end, prove un-
satisfactory to the West Germans. It is un-
likely, therefore, that the unification cam-
paign can permanently block West German
integration with the West.

24. However, a unification proposal which
seemed to guarantee free all-German elec-
tions under international supervision might
delay integration, particularly if the Social
Democrats should make partisan use of such

*With respect to paragraphs 23 and 24, the Special
Assistant. Intelligence. Department of State, be-
lieves it unlikely that any Soviet or East German
unity propaganda moves could materially delay the
West German rearmament program or the integra-
tion of West Germany with the West.

It is the view of the Director of Intelligence,
USAF, that a Soviet withdrawal from East Germany
could delay West German rearmament for an ex-
tended period.

ae

an East German or Soviet unification pro-
posal. Hitherto the Social Democrats, while
continuing their public agitation for unifica-
tion, have assisted the Adenauer Government
in framing the West German replies rebuffing
specific East German unification proposals.
As the critical stages of integration — and the
1953 elections — approach, there will be in-
creasing temptation for the Social Democrats
to exploit the German craving for unity to
the fullest extent.

Other Soviet Actions or Threats:

25. It is unlikely that the present tactics of
the USSR with regard to Berlin can seriously
affect the integration of West Germany with
the West. Stronger Soviet action against the
Western position in Berlin, or Soviet threats
to take action against West Germany, would
be unlikely to have an adverse effect on the
West German attitude toward rearmament
and integration with the West.

Developments in The Contractual

And European Defense Community
Negotiations:

26. The contractual negotiations between
West Germany and the Western occupying
powers are not yet completed, and difficult
issues remain to be solved. Even in the pre-
liminary agreement on general principles, an-
nounced on 24 November 1951, there are a
number c: provisions that are unsatisfactory
to the Social Democrats and other groups in
West Germany.

27. The Eurcpean Defense Community (EDC)
negotiations continue, but are still encounter-
ing serious difficulties. From the West Ger-
man standpoint the most serious issue is
that of “equality.” This issue is complicated
by the insistence of the Western occupying
powers on restrictions on West German mili-
tary production.

"8. Also involved in both the EDC and con-
tractual negotiations are serious issues of the
amount and form of the West German fi-
nancial contribution to EDC and/or NATO.
Moreover. the West German demand for mem-
bership in NATO is becoming more emphatic.
Finally, the furor aroused when the French

representative in the Saar was given the rank
of Ambassador shows clearly the disturbed
temper of West German opinion.

29. While these negotiations continue, occu-
pation restrictions remain in force and are a
source of friction. Although the West Ger-
mans recognize that the presence of Western
occupation troops contributes to their secur-
ity, the irritations resulting from the presence
of these troops and from even the limited use
of present occupation powers stiffen the de-
termination of the West Germans to obtain
equality and sovereignty.

30. The gravity of the issues which remain to
be settled in both the contractual and EDC
negotiations, together with the disturbed state
of opinion in France as well as in West Ger-
many, make the outcome of the negotiations
between West Germany and the West uncer-
tain. Moreover, the outcome might be vitally
affected by developments in the NATO or-
ganization, such as those resulting from
French budgetary difficulties, not directly re-
lated to these negotiations.

Probable Political Developments
During 1952

31. However, while the Adenauer Government
will continue to demand virtually complete
equality and sovereignty as the price of com-
pleting the “contractual” agreement with the
Western occupying powers and the agreement
to enter EDC, we believe it highly unlikely
that Adenauer will permit the negotiations to
lapse. His party and coalition are publicly
commited to rearmament and to integration
with the West, and he almost certainly hopes
that prior to the elections of 1953 he can
convince the people of West Germany that
the results justified his policy. Therefore, he
will probably seek to avoid the collapse of
negotiations over such issues as the Saar or
admission of West Germany to NATO.

32. We believe that, if the Saar issue can be
deferred by some formula which will save
face for both France and West Germany, the
Adenauer Government will sign the contrac-
tual and EDC agreements, provided:

reed

a ae 6

a. that any restrictions on West German
military production are to be self-imposed or,
if contained in the EDC agreement, are ap-
plicable, at least in form, to other EDC mem-
bers;

b. that West Germany is not explicitly
charged with the costs of maintaining US and
UK forces in West Germany (hitherto charg-
ed to West Germany as occupation costs).

In signing the agreements, Adenauer will
undoubtedly expect that West Germany will
be immediately linked with NATO through
EDC and will be ultimately admitted to mem-
bership in NATO, and that West Germany
will receive substantial US economic aid.

33. If the major agreements are completed
on the terms indicated, we believe the Aden-
auer Government will probably be able to ob-
tain a majority in the Bundestag for their
ratification. However. ratification is likely to
come only after an intensive campaign to win
the support of West German public opinion.
Ratification could be further delayed by adroit
East German unification-proposals, especially
if the unification issue is used for partisan
purposes by the Social Democrats. We donot
believe that these delays would carry ratifica-
tion beyond the end of 1952.*

«4s noted earlier, the Special Assistant, Intelli-
gence, Department of State, believes it unlikely that
any Soviet or East German unity propaganda moves
could materially delay the West German rearma-
ment program or the integration of West Germany
with the West.

It is the view of the Director of Intelligence,
USAF, that a Soviet withdrawal from East Germany
could delay West German rearmament for an ex-
tended period.

34. Under any circumstances, it is extremely
unlikely that rearmament can get under way
in 1952 on any substantial scale. While plans
can be completed before ratification, enabling
legislation would be required to carry out
rearmament. The Social Democrats would
almost certainly force the issue of the con-
stitutionality of legislation to implement the
rearmament program and possibly even of
the EDC agreement itself. Opinion in US
official circles and in the Adenauer Govern-
ment is divided as to whether the Constitu-
tional Court would hold part of this legisla-
tion or the agreement unconstitutional. Al-
most certainly the laws would not be put into
effect during the deliberations of the Court.
Hence, a substantial delay in the implementa-
tion of the rearmament program is almost
inevitable. If the Court found an essential
part or all of the rearmament legislation un-
constitutional, the Adenauer Government
would be compelled to seek one or more con-
stitutional amendments. The passage of
such amendments would require a two-thirds
vote of both houses, which could almost cer-
tainly not be obtained in the Bundestag.

35. In the unlikely event that the Bundestag
fails to ratify the contractual and EDC agree-
ments or in the event that the Constitutional
Court renders an adverse decision on the con-
stitutional issues and the Bundestag fails to
pass the necessary amendments to the Con-
stitution, the West German Government
would almost certainly be politically unable to
reopen negotiations with the West on in-
tegration and rearmament during 1952.
