Studies in Intelligence Vol 26 no 2 Summer 1982 - the Oxcart Story
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000047389, dated 4 June 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000047389).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE OXCART STORY

One spring day in 1962 a test pilot named Louis Schalk,
employed by the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, took off in an
aircraft the likes of which had never been seen hefore. As
casual observer would have been startled by the appearance of
this vehicle; he would perhaps have noticed especially its
extremely long, slim, shape, its two enormous jet engines, its
long, sharp, projecting nose, and its swept-back wings which
appeared far too short to support the fuselage in flight. He
might well have realized that this was a revolutionary airplane;
he could not have known that it would be able to fly at three
times the speed of sound for more than 3,000 miles without
refueling, or that toward the end of its flight, when fuel began
to run low, it could cruise at over 90,000 feet. Still less
would he have known of the equipment it was to carry, or of the
formidable problems attending its design and construction.

There was, of course, no casual observer present. The
aircraft had been designed and built for reconnaissance; it was
projected as a successor to the U-2. Its development had been
carried out in profound secrecy. Despite the numerous
designers, engineers, skilled and unskilled workers,
administrators, and others who had been involved in the affair,
no authentic accounts, and indeed scarcely any accounts at all,
had leaked.

The official designation of the aircraft was A-12. By a
sort of inspired perversity, however, it came to be called
OXCART, a code word also applied to the program under which it
was developed. The secrecy in which it was so long shrouded has
lifted a bit, and the purpose of this article is to give some
account of the inception, development, operation, and untimely
demise of this remarkable airplane. The OXCART no longer flies,
but it left a legacy of technological achievement which points
the way to new projects. And it became the progenitor of a
Similar reconnaissance vehicle called the SR-71, whose existence
is well known to press and public.

The U-2 dated from 1954, when its development began under
the direction of a group headed by Richard M. Bissell of CIA.
In June 1956, the aircraft became operational, but officials
predicted that its useful lifetime over the USSR could hardly be
much more than 18 months or two years. Its first flights over
Soviet territory revealed that the air defense warning system
not only detected but tracked it quite accurately. Yet it
remained a unique and invaluable source of intelligence
information for almost four years, until on 1 May 1960, Francis
Gary Powers was shot down near Sverdlovsk.

odes my Jnletligerce Vel: 1G, No 2, Summnpr V9 Bae

Meanwhile, even as the U-2 commenced its active career,
efforts were under way to make it less vulnerable. The hope was
to reduce the vehicle's radar cross-section, so that it would
become less susceptible to detection. New developments in
radar-absorbing materials were tried out and achieved
considerable success, though not enough to solve the problem.
Various far-out designs were explored, most of them seeking to
create an aircraft capable of flying at extremely high
altitudes, though still at relatively slow speed. None of them
proved practicable.

Eventually, in the fall of 1957, Bissell arranged with a
contractor for a job of operations analysis to determine how far
the probability of shooting down an airplane varied respectively
with the plane's speed, altitude, and radar cross~section. This
analysis demonstrated that supersonic speed greatly reduced the —
chances of detection by radar. The probability of being shot
down was not of course reduced to zero, but it was evident that
the supersonic line of approach was worth serious consideration.
Therefore, from this time on, attention focussed increasingly on
the possibility of building a vehicle which could fly at
extremely high speeds as well as at great altitudes, and which
would also incorporate the best that could be attained in
radar-—absorbing capabilities. Lockheed Aircraft Corporation and
Convair Division of General Dynamics were informed of the
general requirement, and their designers set to work on the
problem without as yet receiving any contract or funds from the
government. From the fall of 1957 to late 1958 these designers
constantly refined and adapted their respective schemes.

Bissell realized that development and production of such an
aircraft would be exceedingly expensive, and that in the early
stages at least it would be doubtful whether the project could
Succeed. To secure the necessary funds for such a program, high
officials would have to receive the best and most authoritative
presentation of whatever prospects might unfold. .
Accordingly, he got together a panel consisting of two
distinguished authorities on aerodynamics and one physicist,
with E. M. Land of the Polaroid Corporation as chairman.

Between 1957 and 1959 this panel met about

six times, usually in Land's office in Cambridge. Lockheed and
Convair designers attended during parts of the sessions. So
also did the Assistant Secretaries of the Air Force and Navy
concerned with research and development, together with one or
two of their technical advisors. One useful consequence of the
participation of service representatives was that bureaucratic
and jurisdictional feuds were reduced virtually to nil.
Throughout the program both Air Force and Navy gave valuable
assistance and cooperation.

As the months went by, the general outlines of what might
be done took shape in the minds of those concerned. Late in
November 1958, the members of the panel held a crucial meeting.
They agreed that it now appeared feasible to build an aircraft
of such speed and altitude as to be very difficult to track by
radar. They recommended that the President be asked to approve
in principle a further prosecution of the project, and to make
funds available for further studies and tests. The President
and his Scientific Advisor, Dr. James Killian, were already
aware of what was going on, and when CIA officials went to them
with the recommendation of the panel they received a favorable
hearing. The President gave his approval. ' Lockheed and Convair
were then asked to submit definite proposals, funds were made
available to them, and the project took on the code name GUSTO.

Less than a year later the two proposals were essentially
complete, and on 20 July 1959, the President was again briefed.
This time he gave final approval, which Signified that the
program could get fully under way.

The next major step was to choose between the Lockheed and
Convair designs. On 20 August 1959, specifications of the two
Proposals were submitted to a joint DOD/USAF/CIA selection panel:

Lockheed Convair
Speed Mach 3.2 Mach 3.2
Range (total) 4,120 n.m. 4,000 n.m.
Range (at altitude) 3,800 n.m. 3,400 n.m.
Dimensions
Length 102 ft. 79.5 £t.
Span 57 £t. 56.0 ft.
Gross Weight 110,000 Ibs. 101,700 ibs.
Fuel Weight 64,600 lbs. 62,000 lbs.
First Flight 22 months 22 months

The Lockheed design was selected, Project GUSTO terminated,
and the program to develop a new U-~2 follow-on aircraft was
named OXCART. On 3 September 1959, CIA authorized Lockheed to
proceed with antiradar studies, aerodynamic structural tests,
and engineering designs, and on 30 January 1960 gave the green
light to produce 12 aircraft.

Pratt and Whitney Division of United Aircraft Corporation
had been involved in discussions of the project, and undertook
to develop the propulsion system. Their J-58 engine, which was
to be used in the A-12, had been Sponsored originally by the US
Navy for its own purposes, and was to be capable of a speed of

Mach 3.0. Navy interest in the development was diminishing,
however, and the Secretary of Defense had decided to withdraw
from the program at the end of 1959. CIA's requirement was that
the engine and airframe be further developed and optimized for a
speed of Mach 3.2. The new contract called for initial assembly
of three advanced experimental engines for durability and
reliability testing, and provision of three engines for
experimental flight testing in early 1961. ‘’

Lockheed's designer was Clarence L. (Kelly) Johnson,
creator of the U-2, and he called his new vehicle not A-12 but
A-ll. Its design exhibited many innovations. Supersonic
airplanes, however, involve a multitude of extremely difficult
design problems. Their payload-range performance is highly
sensitive to engine weight, structural weight, fuel consumption,
and aerodynamic efficiency. Small mistakes in predicting these
values can lead to large errors in performance. Models of the
A-11l were tested and retested, adjusted and readjusted, during
thousands of hours in the wind tunnel. Johnson was confident of
his design, but no one could Say positively whether the bird
would fly, still less whether it would fulfill the extremely
demanding requirements laid down for it.

To make the drawings and test the model was one thing; to
build the aircraft was another. The most numerous problems
arose from the simple fact that in flying through the atmosphere
at its designed speed the skin of the aircraft would be
subjected to a temperature of more than 550 degrees Fahrenheit.
For one thing, no metal hitherto commonly used in aircraft
production would stand this temperature, and those which would
do so were for the most part too heavy to be suitable for the
purpose in hand.

During the design phase Lockheed evaluated many materials
and finally chose an alloy of titanium B120, characterized by
great strength, relatively light weight, and good resistance to
high temperatures. Titanium was also scarce and very costly.
Methods for milling it and controlling the quality of the
product were not fully developed. Of the early deliveries from
Titanium Metals Corporation some 80 percent had to be rejected,
and it was not until 1961, when a delegation from headquarters
visited the officials of that company, informed them of the
objectives and high priority of the OXCART program, that the
problems were solved.

But this only solved an initial problem. One of the
virtues of titanium was its exceeding hardness, but this very
virtue gave rise to immense difficulties in machining and
Shaping the material. Drills which worked well on aluminum soon
broke into pieces; new ones had to be devised. Assembly-line
production was impossible; each of the small OXCART fleet was,

so to speak, turned out by hand. The cost of the program
mounted well above original estimates, and it soon began to run
behind schedule. One after another, however, the problems were
solved, and their solution constituted the greatest single
technological achievement of the entire enterprise. Henceforth
it became practicable, if expensive, to build aircraft out of
titanium. .

Since every additional pound of weight was critical,
adequate insulation was out of the question. The inside of the
aircraft would be like a moderately hot oven. The pilot would
have to wear a kind of space suit, with its’own cooling
apparatus, pressure control, oxygen supply,’ and other
necessities for survival. The fuel tanks, which constituted by
far the greater part of the aircraft, would heat up to about 350
degrees, so that special fuel had to be supplied and the tanks
themselves rendered inert with nitrogen. Lubricating oil was
formulated for operation at 600 degrees F., and contained a
diluent in order to remain fluid at operation below 40 degrees.
Insulation on the plane's intricate wiring soon became brittle
and useless. During the lifetime of the OXCART no better
insulation was found; the wiring and related connectors had to
be given’ special attention and handling at great cost in labor
and time.

Then there was the unique problem of the camera window.
The OXCART was to carry a delicate and highly sophisticated
camera, which would look out through a quartz glass window. The
effectiveness of the whole system depended upon achieving
complete freedom from optical distortion despite the great heat
to which the window would be subjected. Thus the question was
not simply one of providing equipment with resistance to high
temperature, but of assuring that there should be no unevenness
of temperature throughout the area of the window. It took three
years and two million dollars to arrive at a satisfactory
solution. The program scored one of its most remarkable
successes when the quartz glass was successfully fused to its
metal frame by an unprecedented process involving the use of
high frequency sound waves.

Another major problem of different nature was to achieve
the low radar cross-section desired. The airframe areas giving
the greatest radar return were the vertical stabilizers, the
engine inlet, and the forward side of the engine nacelles.
Research in ferrites, high-temperature absorbing materials and
high-temperature plastic structures was undertaken to find
methods to reduce the return. Eventually the vertical tail
section fins were constructed from a kind of laminated “plastic"
material--the first time that such a material had been used for
an important part of an aircraft's structure. With such changes
in structural materials, the A-1l was redesignated A-12, and as
such has never been publicly disclosed.

To test the effectiveness of antiradar devices a
small-scale model is inadequate; only a full-size mock-up will
do. Lockheed accordingly built one of these, and as early as
November 1959, transported it in a Specially designed trailer
truck over hundreds of miles of highway from the Burbank Plant
to the test area. Here it was hoisted to the top of a pylon and
looked at from various angles by radar. Tests dnd adjustments
went on for a year and a half before the results were deemed
Satisfactory. In the course of the process it was found
desirable to attach some sizable metallic constructions on each
side of the fuselage, and Kelly Johnson worried a good deal
about the effect of these protuberances on’his design. In
flight tests, however, it later developed that they imparted a
useful aerodynamic lift to the vehicle, and years afterward
Lockheed's design for a supersonic transport
embodied similar structures.

Pilots for the OXCART would obviously have to be of quite
extraordinary competence, not only because of the unprecedented
performance of the aircraft itself, but also because of the
particular qualities needed in men who were to fly intelligence
missions. Brigadier General Don Flickinger of the Air Force,
was designated to draw up the criteria for selection, with
advice from Kelly Johnson and from CIA Headquarters. Pilots had
to be qualified in the latest high performance fighters,
emotionally stable, and well motivated. They were to be between
25 and 40 years of age, and the size of the A-12 cockpit
prescribed that they be under six feet tall and under 175 pounds
in weight.

One thing to be decided in the earliest stages of the
program was where to base and test the aircraft. Lockheed
clearly could not do the business at Burbank, where the aircraft
were being built, if for no other reason that its runway was too
short. The ideal location ought to be remote from metropolitan
areas; well away from civil and military airways to preclude
observation; easily accessible by air; blessed with good weather
the year round; capable of accommodating large numbers of
personnel; equipped with fuel storage facilities; fairly close
to an Air Force installation; and possessing at least an 8,000
foot runway. There was no such place to be found.

Ten Air Force bases programmed for closure were considered,
but none provided the necessary security and annual operating
costs at most of them would be unacceptable. Edwards Air Force
Base in California seemed a more likely candidate, but in the
end it also was passed over. Instead, a very secluded site was
finally picked. It was deficient in personnel accommodations
and POL storage, and its long-unused runway was inadequate, but
security was good, or could be made so, and a moderate

construction program could provide sufficient facilities.
Lockheed estimated what would be needed in such respects as
monthly fuel consumption, hangars and shop space, housing for
personnel, and runway specifications. Armed with the list

of major requirements, Headquarters came up with a construction
and engineering plan.

Construction began in earnest in September ‘1960, and ,
continued on a double-shift schedule until mid-1964. One of the
most urgent tasks was to build the runway, which according to
initial estimates of A-12 requirements must be 8,500 feet long.
The existing asphalt runway was 5,000 feet long and incapable of
supporting the weight of the A-12. The new one was built
between 7 September and 15 November and involved pouring over
25,000 yards of concrete. Another major problem was to provide
some 500,000 gallons of PF-1 aircraft fuel per month. Neither
storage facilities nor means of transporting fuel existed.

After considering airlift, pipeline, and truck transport, it was
decided that the last-named was the most economical, and could
be made feasible by resurfacing no more than eighteen miles of
highway leading into the base.

Three surplus Navy hangars were obtained, dismantled, and
erected on the north side of the base. Over 100 surplus Navy
housing buildings were transported to the base and made ready
for occupancy. By early 1962 a fuel tank farm was ready, with a
capacity of 1,320,000 gallons. Warehousing and shop space was
begun and repairs made to older buildings. All this, together
with the many other facilities that had to be provided, took a
long time to complete. Meanwhile, however, the really essential
facilities were ready in time for the forecast delivery date of
Aircraft No. 1 in August 1961.

The facilities were ready, but the aircraft were not.
Originally promised for delivery at the end of May 1961, the
date first slipped to August, largely because of Lockheed's
difficulties in procuring and fabricating titanium. Moreover,
Pratt & Whitney found unexpectedly great trouble in bringing the

~58 engine up to OXCART requirements. In March 1961, Kelly
Johnson notified Headquarters: :

“Schedules are in jeopardy on two fronts. One is the
assembly of the wing and the other is in satisfactory
development of the engine. Our evaluation shows that each
of these programs is from three to four months behind the
current schedule.“

To this Bissell replied:

“I have learned of your expected additional delay in first
flight from 30 August to 1 December 1961. This news is
extremely shocking on top of our previous slippage from May
to August and my understanding as of our meeting

19 December that the titanium extrusion problems were
essentially overcome. I trust this is the ‘last of such
disappointments short of a severe earthquake in Burbank."

Realizing that delays were causing the cost of the program
to soar, Headquarters decided to place a top-level aeronautical
engineer in residence at Lockheed to monitor the program and
submit progress reports.

Delays nevertheless persisted. On 11 September, Pratt &
Whitney informed Lockheed of their continuing difficulties with
the J-58 engine in terms of weight, delivery, and performance.
Completion date for Aircraft No. 1 by now had slipped to
22 December 1961, and the first flight to 27 February 1962.
Even on this last date the J-58 would not be ready, and it was
therefore decided that a Pratt & Whitney J-75 engine, designed
for the F-105 and flown in the U-2, should be used for early
flights. The engine, along with other components, could be
fitted to the A-12 airframe, and it could power the aircraft
Safely to altitudes up to 50,000 feet and at speeds up to Mach
1.6.

When this decision had been made, final preparations were
begun for the testing phase. Support aircraft began arriving in
the spring of 1962. These included eight F-101's for training,
two T-33's for proficiency flying, a C-130 for cargo transport,
a U-3A for administrative purposes, a helicopter for search and
rescue, and a Cessna-180 for liaison use. In addition, Lockheed
provided an F-104 to act as chase aircraft during the A-12
flight test period.

Meanwhile in January 1962, an agreement was reached with
the Civil Aeronautics Board that expanded the restricted
airspace in the vicinity of the test area. Certain CAB air
traffic controllers were cleared for the OXCART Project; their
function was to insure that aircraft did not violate the order.
The North American Air Defense Command established procedures to
prevent their radar stations from reporting the appearance of
high performance aircraft on their radar scopes.

Refueling concepts required prepositioning of vast
quantities of fuel at certain points outside the United States.
Special tank farms were programmed in California, Eielson AFB
Alaska, and at strategic locations overseas. Since the A-12
used specially refined low vapor pressure fuel, these tank farms

*

were reserved exclusively for use by the OXCART Program. Very
small detachments of technicians at these locations maintained
the fuel storage facility and arranged for periodic quality
control fuel tests.

At the Lockheed Burbank plant, Aircraft No. l (serially
numbered 121) received its final tests and checkout during
January and February 1962, and was partially disassembled for
shipment to the site. It became clear very early in OXCARt
planning that because of security problems and the inadequate
runway, the A-12 could not fly from Burbank. Movement of the
full-scale radar test model had been successfully accomplished
in November 1959, as described above. A thorough survey of the
route in June 1961, ascertained the hazards and problems of
moving the actual aircraft, and showed that a package measuring
35 feet wide and 105 feet long could be transported without
major difficulty. Obstructing road signs had to be removed,
trees trimmed, and some roadsides leveled. Appropriate
arrangements were made with police authorities and local
officials to accomplish the safe transport of the aircraft. The
entire fuselage, minus wings, was crated, covered, and loaded
on the special-design trailer, which cost about $100,000. On 26
February 1962, it departed Burbank, and arrived at the base
according to plan.

First Flights

Upon arrival reassembly of the aircraft and installation of
the J-75 engines began. Soon it was found that aircraft tank
sealing compounds had failed to adhere to the metals, and when
fuel was put into the tanks numerous leaks occurred. It was
necessary to strip the tanks of the faulty sealing compounds and
reline them with new materials. Thus occurred one more
unexpected and exasperating delay in the program.

Finally, on 26 April 1962, Aircraft 121 was ready. On that
day, in accordance with Kelly Johnson's custom, Louis Schalk
took it for an unofficial, unannounced, maiden flight lasting
some 40 minutes. As in all maiden flights minor problems were
detected, but it took only four more days to ready the aircraft
for its first official flight.

On 30 April 1962, just under one year later than originally
planned, the A-12 officially lifted her wheels from the runway.
Piloted again by Louis Schalk, it took off at 170 knots, with a
gross weight of 72,000 pounds, and climbed to 30,000 feet. Top
Speed was 340 knots and the flight lasted 59 minutes. The pilot
reported that the aircraft responded well and was extremely
stable. Kelly Johnson declared it to be the smoothest official
first flight of any aircraft he had designed or tested. The
aircraft broke the sound barrier on its second official flight,
4 May 1962, reaching Mach 1.1. Again, only minor problems were
reported.

With these flights accomplished, jubilation was the order
of the day. The new Director of Central Intelligence, Mr. John
McCone, sent a telegram of congratulation to Kelly Johnson. A
critical phase had been triumphantly passed, but there remained
the long, difficult, and sometimes discouraging process of
working the aircraft up to full operational performance.

Aircraft No. 122 arrived at base on 26 June, and spent
three months in radar testing before engine installations ‘and
final assembly. Aircraft No. 123 arrived in August and flew in
October. Aircraft No. 124, a two-seated version intended for
use in training project pilots, was delivered in November. It
was to be powered by the J-58 engines, but delivery delays and a
desire to begin pilot training prompted a decision to install
the smaller J-75's. The trainer flew initially in January
1963. The fifth aircraft, No. 125, arrived at the area on
17 December. :

Meanwhile the OXCART program received a shot in the arm
from the Cuban missile crisis. U-2's had been maintaining a
regular reconnaissance vigil over the island, and it was on one
of these missions in October that the presence of offensive
missiles was discovered. Overflights thereafter became more
frequent, but on 27 October a U-2, flown by a Strategic Air
Force pilot on a SAC-directed mission, was shot down by a
surface-to-air missile. This raised the dismaying possibility
that continued manned, high-altitude surveillance of Cuba might
become out of the question. The OXCART program suddenly assumed
greater significance than ever, and its achievement of
operational status became one of the highest national priorities.

At the end of 1962 there were two A-12 aircraft engaged in
flight tests. A speed of Mach 2.16 and altitude of 60,000 feet
had been achieved. Progress was still slow, however, because of
delays in the delivery of engines and shortcomings in the
performance of those delivered. One of the two test aircraft
was still flying with two J-~75 engines, and the other with one
J-75 and one J-58. It had long since become clear that Pratt &
Whitney had been too optimistic in their forecast; the problem
of developing the J~58 up to OXCART specifications had proved a
good deal more recalcitrant than expected. Mr. McCone judged
the situation to be truly serious, and on 3 December he wrote to
the President of United Aircraft
Corporation:

“I have been advised that J-58 engine deliveries have been
delayed again due to engine control production

problems..... By the end of the year it appears we will have
barely enough J-58 engines to support the flight test
program adequately..... Furthermore, due to various engine

difficulties we have not yet reached design speed and
altitude. Engine thrust and fuel consumption deficiencies
at present prevent sustained flight at design conditions
which is so necessary to complete development."

10

By the end of January 1963, ten engines were available, and
the first flight with two of them installed occurred on
15 January. Thenceforth all A-12 aircraft were fitted with
their intended propulsion system. Flight testing accelerated
and contractor personnel went to a three-shift work day.

With each succeeding step into a high Mach *tregime ney
problems presented themselves. The worst of all these 7
difficulties--indeed one of the most formidable in the entire
history of the program--was revealed when flight testing moved
into speeds between Mach 2.4 and 2.8, and the aircraft
experienced such severe roughness as to make its operation
virtually out of the question. The trouble was diagnosed as
being in the air inlet system, which with its controls admitted
air to the engine. At the higher speeds the flow of air was
uneven, and the engine therefore could not function properly.
Only after a long period of experimentation, often highly
frustrating and irritating, was a solution reached. This
further postponed the day when the A-12 could be declared
Operationally ready.

Among more mundane troubles was the discovery that various
nuts, bolts, clamps, and other debris of the manufacturing
process had not been cleared away, and upon engine run up or
take off were sucked into the engine. The engine parts were
machined to such close tolerances that they could be ruined in
this fashion. Obviously the fault was due to sheer
carelessness. Inspection procedures were revised, and it was
also found prudent at Burbank to hoist the engine nacelles into
the air, rock them back and forth, listen for loose objects, and
then remove them by hand.

On 24 May 1963, while on a routine training flight, one of
the detachment pilots recognized an erroneous and confusing air
speed indication and decided to eject from the aircraft, which
crashed 14 miles south of Wendover, Utah. The pilot was
unhurt. The wreckage was recovered in two days, and persons at
the scene were identified and requested to sign secrecy
agreements. All A-12 aircraft were grounded for a week during
investigation of the accident. A plugged pilot static tube in
icing conditions turned out to be responsible for the faulty
cockpit instrument indications--it was not something which would
hold things up for long.

Loss of this aircraft nevertheless precipitated a policy
problem which had been troubling the Agency for some time. With
the growing number of A-12's, how much longer could the project
remain secret? The program had gone through development,
construction, and a year of flight testing without attracting
public attention. There was also a realization that the
technological data would be extremely valuable in connection

il

*

with feasibility studies for the SST. Finally, there was a
growing awareness in the higher reaches of the aircraft industry
that something new and remarkable was going on. Rumors spread,
and gossip flew about. Commercial airline crews Sighted the
OXCART in flight. The editor of Aviation Week indicated his
knowledge of developments at Burbank. The secrecy was thinning
out. os

z)
The President’s Announcement ,

In spite of all this, 1963 went by without any public
revelation. President Johnson was brought up to date on the
project a week after taking office, and directed that a paper be
prepared for an announcement in the spring of 1964. Then at his
press conference on 24 February 1964, he read a statement of
which the first paragraph was as follows: .

The United States has successfully developed an advanced
experimental jet aircraft, the A-ll, which has been tested
in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles per hour and
at altitudes in excess of 70,000 feet. The performance of
the A-1l far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the
world today. The development of this aircraft has been
made possible by major advances in aircraft technology of
great significance for both military and commercial
applications. Several A-1l aircraft are now being flight
tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The
existence of this program is being disclosed today to
permit the orderly exploitation of this advance technology
in our military and commercial program."

The President went on to mention the "mastery of the metallurgy
and fabrication of titanium metal" which has been achieved, gave
credit to Lockheed and to Pratt & Whitney, remarked that
appropriate members of the Senate and House had been kept fully
informed, and prescribed that the detailed performance of the
A-11 would be kept strictly classified.

The President's reference to the “A-11" was of course
deliberate. “A-11" had been the original design designation for
the all-metal aircraft first proposed by Lockheed; subsequently
it became the design designation for the Air Force YF-12A
interceptor which differed from its parent mainly in that it
carried a second man for launching air-to-air missiles. To |
preserve the distinction between the A-1l and the A-12 Security
had briefed practically all witting personnel in government and
industry on the impending announcement. OXCART secrecy
continued in effect. There was considerable speculation about
an Agency role in the A-11 development, but it was never
acknowledged by the government. News headlines ranged from “US
has dozen A-1l jets already flying" to “Secret of Sizzling new
plane probably history's best kept."

12

The President also said that “the A-1l aircraft now at
Edwards Air Force Base are undergoing extensive tests to
determine their capabilities as long-range interceptors." It
was true that the Air Force in October 1960, had contracted for
three interceptor versions of the A-12, and they were by this
time available. But at the moment when the President spoke,
there were no A-ll's at Edwards and there never tad been. zi
Project officials had known that the public announcement was
about to be made, but they had not been told exactly when.
Caught by surprise, they hastily flew two Air Force YF-12A's to
Edwards to support the President's statement. So rushed was
this operation, so speedily were the aircraft put into hangars
upon arrival, that heat from them activated the hangar sprinkler
System, dousing the reception team which awaited them.

Thenceforth, while the OXCART continued its secret career
at its own site, the A-1l1 performed at Edwards Air Force Base in
a considerable glare of publicity. Pictures of the aircraft
appeared in the press, correspondents could look at it and
marvel, stories could be written. Virtually no details were
made available, but the technical journals nevertheless had a
field day. The unclassified Air Force and Space Digest, for
example, published a long article in its issue of April 1964,
commencing: “The official pictures and statements tell very
little about the A-1l. But the technical literature from open
sources, when carefully interpreted, tells a good deal about
what it could and, more importantly, what it could not be.
Here's the story..... "

Going Operational

Three years and seven months after first flight in April
1962 the OXCART was declared ready for operational use at design
specifications. The period thus devoted to flight tests was
remarkably short, considering the new fields of aircraft
performance which were being explored. As each higher Mach
number was reached exhaustive tests were carried out in
accordance with standard procedures to ensure that the aircraft
functioned properly and safely. Defects were corrected and
improvements made. All concerned gained experience with the
particular characteristics and idiosyncrasies of the vehicle.

The aircraft inlet and related control continued for a long
time to present the most troublesome and refractory problem.
Numerous attempts failed to find a remedy, even though a special
task force concentrated on the task. For a time there was
something approaching despair, and the solution when finally
achieved was greeted with enormous relief. After all, not every
experimental aircraft of advanced performance has survived its
flight testing period. The possibility existed that OXCART also
would fail, despite the great cost and effort expended upon it.

13

The main burden of test flights fell upon Lockheed pilots,
and some of the aircraft that became available at the site were
reserved for the most advanced testing. At the same time,
however, the detachment pilots were receiving training and
familiarizing themselves with the new vehicle. In the course of
doing so, they contributed a good Many suggestions for
improvements, and their own numerous flights shortened the, time
required for the test program as a whole. Indeed, one feature
of OXCART development was this intimate collaboration between
designer, test pilots, operational pilots, and CIA officials,
all of whom worked together with great effectiveness.

A few dates and figures will serve to mark the progress of
events. By the end of 1963 there had been 573 flights totalling
765 hours. Nine aircraft were in the inventory. On 20 July
1963 test aircraft flew for the first time at Mach 3; in
November Mach 3.2 (the design speed) was reached. The longest
sustained flight at design conditions. occurred on 3 February
1964; it lasted for ten minutes at Mach 3.2. By the end of 1964
there had been 1,160 flights, totalling 1,616 hours. Eleven
aircraft were then available, four of them reserved for testing
and seven assigned to the operational detachment.

The record may be put in another way. Mach 2 was reached
after six months of flying; Mach 3 after 15 months. ‘Two years
after the first flight the aircraft had flown a total of 38
hours at Mach 2, three hours at Mach 2.6, and less than one hour
at Mach 3. After three years, Mach 2 time had increased to 60
hours, Mach 2.6 time to 33 hours, and Mach 3 time to nine hours;
all Mach 3 time, however, was by test aircraft, and detachment
aircraft were still restricted to Mach 2.9.

As may be seen from the figures, most flights were of short
duration, averaging little more than an hour each. Primarily
this was because longer flights were unnecessary at this stage
of testing. It was also true, however, that the less seen of
OXCART the better, and short flights helped to preserve the
secrecy of the proceedings. Yet it was virtually impossible for
an aircraft of such dimensions and capabilities to remain
inconspicuous. At its full speed OXCART had a turning radius of
no less than 86 miles. There was no question of staying close
to the airfield; its shortest possible flights took it over a
very large expanse of territory.

The first long-range, high-speed flight occurred on
27 January 1965, when one of the test aircraft flew for an hour
and forty minutes, with an hour and fifteen minutes above Mach
3.1. Its total range was 2,580 nautical miles, with altitudes
between 75,600 and 80,000 feet.

14

Two more aircraft were lost during this phase of the
program. On 9 July 1964 Aircraft No. 133 was making its final
approach to the runway when at altitude of 500 feet and airspeed
of 200 knots it began a smooth steady roll to the left.
Lockheed test pilot Bill Parks could not overcome the roll. At
about a 45 degree bank angle and 200 foot altitude he ejected.
As he swung down to the vertical in the parachut® his feet,
touched the ground, for what must have been one of the narrower
escapes in the perilous history of test piloting. The primary
cause of the accident was that the servo for the right outboard
roll and pitch control froze. No news of the accident filtered
out.

On 28 December 1965 Aircraft No. 126 crashed immediately
after take-off and was totally destroyed. The detachment pilot
ejected safely at an altitude of 150 feet. The accident
investigation board determined that a flight line electrician
had improperly connected the yaw and pitch gyros--had in effect
reversed the controls. This time Mr. McCone directed the Office
of Security to conduct an investigation into the possibility of
Sabotage. While nothing of the sort was discovered, there were
indications of negligence, as the manufacturer of the gyro had
earlier warned of the possibility that the mechanism could be
connected in reverse. No action had been taken, however, even
by such an elementary precaution as painting the contacts
different colors. Again there was no publicity connected with
the accident.

The year 1965 saw the test site reach the high point of
activity. Completion of construction brought it to full
physical size. All detachment pilots were Mach 3.0 qualified.
Site population reached over 1,800. Contractors were working
three shifts a day. Lockheed Constellations made daily flights
between the factory at Burbank and the site. And officials were
considering how and when and where to use OXCART in its
appointed role.

Targeting the OX

By early 1964 Project Headquarters began planning for the
contingency of flights over Cuba under a program designated
SKYLARK. Bill Parks' accident in early July held this program
up for a time, but on 5 August it was directed that SKYLARK
achieve emergency operational readiness by 5 November. This
involved preparing a small detachment which should be able to do
the job over Cuba, though at Something less than the full design
Capability of the OXCART. The goal was to operate at Mach 2.8
and 80,000 feet altitude.

15

In order to meet the deadline set, camera performance would
have to be validated, pilots qualified for Mach 2.8 flight, and
coordination with supporting elements arranged. Only one of
several equipments for electronic countermeasures (ECM) would be
ready by November, and a senior intra-governmental group,
including representation from the President's Scientific Advisor
Committee, examined the problem of operating over Cuba without
the full complement of defensive systems. This panel decided
that the first few overflights could safely be conducted without
them, but the ECM would be necessary thereafter. The delivery
schedule of ECM equipment was compatible with this course of
action.

After considerable modifications to aircraft, the
detachment simulated Cuban missions on training flights, and a
limited emergency SKYLARK Capability was announced. With two
weeks notice the OXCART detachment could accomplish a Cuban
overflight, though with fewer ready aircraft and pilots than had
been planned.

During the following weeks the detachment concentrated on
developing SKYLARK into a sustained capability, with five ready
pilots and five operational aircraft. The main tasks were to
determine aircraft range and fuel consumption, attain repeatable
reliable operation, finish pilot training, prepare a family of
SKYLARK missions, and coordinate routes with North American Air
Defense, Continental Air Defense, and the Federal Aviation
Authority. All this was accomplished without substantially
hindering the main task of working up OXCART to full design
Capability. We may anticipate the story, however, by remarking
that despite all this preparation the OXCART was never used over
Cuba. U-2's proved adequate, and the A-12 was reserved for more
critical situations.

In 1965 a more critical situation did indeed emerge in
Asia, and interest in using the aircraft there began to be
manifest. The Director of the Office of Special Activities
briefed senior officials on a scheme which had been drawn up for
Operations in the Far East. The project was called BLACK
SHIELD, and it called for the OXCART to operate out of the
Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa. In the first phase, three
aircraft would stage to Okinawa for 60-day periods, twice a
year, with about 225 personnel involved. After this was in good
order, BLACK SHIELD would advance to the point of maintaining a
permanent detachment at Kadena. Secretary Vance made $3.7
million available to be spent in providing support facilities on
the island, which were to be available by early fall of 1965.

16

Meanwhile the Communists began to deploy surface-to-air
missiles around Hanoi, thereby threatening our current military
reconnaissance capabilities. Secretary McNamara called this to
the attention of the Under Secretary of the Air Force on 3 June
1965, and inquired about the practicability of substituting
OXCART aircraft for U-2's. He was told that BLACK SHIELD could
operate over Vietnam as soon as adequate aircraft performance
was achieved. 23 "

With deployment overseas thus apparently impending in the
fall, the detachment went into the final stages of its program
for validating the reliability of aircraft and aircraft
systems. It set out to demonstrate complete systems reliability
at Mach 3.05 and at 2,300 nautical miles range, with penetration
altitude of 76,000 feet. A demonstrated capability for three
aerial refuelings was also part of the validation process.

By this time the OXCART was well along in performance. The
inlet, camera, hydraulic, navigation, and flight control systems
all demonstrated acceptable reliability. Nevertheless, as
longer flights were conducted at high speeds and high
temperatures, new problems came to the surface, the most serious
being with the electrical wiring system. Wiring connectors and
components had to withstand temperatures of more than 800
degrees Fahrenheit, together with structural flexing, vibration,
and shock. Continuing malfunctions in the inlet controls,
communications equipment, ECM systems, and cockpit instruments
were in many cases attributable to wiring failures. There was
also disturbing evidence that careless handling was contributing
to electrical connector failures. Difficulties persisted in the
sealing of fuel tanks. What with one thing and another,
officials soon began to fear that the scheduled date for BLACK
SHIELD readiness would not be met. Prompt corrective action on
the part of Lockheed was in order. The quality of maintenance
needed drastic improvement. The responsibility for delivering
an aircraft system with acceptable reliability to meet an
operational commitment lay in Lockheed's hands.

In this uncomfortable situation, OSA's Deputy for
Technology went to the Lockheed plant to see Kelly Johnson on
3 August 1965. A frank discussion ensued on the measures
necessary to insure that BLACK SHIELD commitments would be met,
and Johnson concluded that he himself spend full time at the
site in order to get the job done expeditiously. Lockheed
President Daniel Haughton offered the full support of the
corporation, and Johnson began duty at the site next day. His
firm and effective management got Project BLACK SHIELD back on
schedule.

Four primary BLACK SHIELD aircraft were selected and final
validation flights conducted. During these tests the OXCART

17

+

achieved a maximum speed of Mach 3.29, altitude of 90,000 feet,
and sustained flight time above Mach 3.2 of one hour and
fourteen minutes. The maximum endurance flight lasted six hours
and twenty minutes. The last stage was reached on 20 November
1965, and two days later Kelly Johnson wrote Headquarters:

“Overall, my considered opinion is that the aircraft can be
successfully deployed for the BLACK SHIELD ‘mission with
what I would consider to be at least as low a degree of
risk as in the early U-2 deployment days. Actually,
considering our performance level of more than four times
the U-2 speed and three miles more Operating altitude, it
is probably much less risky than our first U-2

deployments. I think the time has come when the bird
should leave its nest."

An impressive demonstration of the OXCART's capability
occurred on 21 December 1966 when Lockheed test Pilot Bill Parks
flew 10,198 statue miles in six hours. This flight established
a record unapproachable by any other aircraft.

With the readiness of the aircraft confirmed, a formal
proposal was made that OXCART be deployed to the Far East.
After examining the matter, the proposal was not approved. It
was agreed, however, that short of actually moving aircraft to
Kadena all steps should be taken to develop and maintain a quick
reaction capability, ready to deploy within a 2i-day period at
any time after 1 January 1966. There the matter remained, for
more than a year. During 1966 there were frequent renewals of
the request for authorization to deploy OXCART to Okinawa and
conduct reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam. All were
turned down.

Meanwhile, of course, flight testing and crew proficiency
training continued. There was plenty of time to improve mission
plans and flight tactics, as well as to prepare the forward area
at Kadena. New plans shortened deployment time from the 21 days
first specified. Personnel and cargo were to be airlifted to
Kadena the day deployment was approved. On the fifth day the
first OXCART would depart and travel the 6,673 miles in five
hours and 34 minutes. The second would go on the seventh and
third on the ninth day. The first two would be ready for an
emergency mission on the eleventh day, and for a normal mission
on the fifteenth day.

BLACK SHIELD

About May of 1967 prospects for deployment took a new
turn. A good deal of apprehension was evident in Washington
about the possibility that the Communists might introduce
surface-to-surface missiles into North Vietnam, and concern was
aggravated by doubts as to whether we could detect such a

18

development if it occurred. The President asked for a proposal
on the matter and once again CIA Suggested that the OXCART be
used. Its camera was far superior to the U-2 and its
vulnerability was far less. The State and Defense members of
the Committee decided to re-examine the requirement and the
political risks involved. While they were engaged in their
deliberations, the Director of Central Intelligence, Mr. Helms,
submitted another formal proposal to deploy the ‘OXCART. Jn
addition, he raised the matter at President Johnson's “Tuesday
lunch" on 16 May, and received the President's approval to
“go." Walt Rostow later in the day formally conveyed the
President's decision, and the BLACK SHIELD deployment plan was
forthwith put into effect.

On 17 May airlift to Kadena began. On 22 May the first
A-12 (Serial No. 131) flew nonstop to Kadena in six hours and
six minutes. Aircraft No. 127 departed on 24 May and arrived at
Kadena five hours and 55 minutes later. The third, No. 129,
left according to plan on 26 May 1967 and proceeded normally
until in the vicinity of Wake Island the pilot experienced
difficulties with the inertial navigation and communications
Systems. Under the circumstances, he decided to make a
precautionary landing at Wake Island. The prepositioned
emergency recovery team secured the aircraft without incident
and the flight to Kadena resumed next day.

On 29 May 1967, the unit at Kadena was ready to fly an
Operational mission. Two hundred and sixty personnel had
deployed to the BLACK SHIELD facility. Except for hangars,
which were a month short of completion, everything was in shape
for sustained operations. Next day the detachment was alerted
for a mission on 31 May, and the moment arrived which would see
the culmination of ten years of effort, worry, and cost. As
fate would have it, on the morning of the 31st heavy rain fell
at Kadena. Since weather over the target area was clear,
preparations continued in hopes that the local weather would
clear. When the time for take-off approached, the OXCART, which
had never operated in heavy rain, taxied to the runway, and took
off while the rain continued.

The first BLACK SHIELD mission followed one flight line
over North Vietnam and one over the Demilitarized Zone. It
lasted three hours and 39 minutes, and the cruise legs were
flown at Mach 3.1. Results were satisfactory. Seventy of the
190 known SAM sites in North Vietnam were photographed, as were
nine other priority targets. There were no radar Signals
detected, indicating that the first mission had gone completely
unnoticed.

19

Fifteen BLACK SHIELD missions were alerted during the
period from 31 May to 15 August 1967. Seven of the fifteen were
flown and of these four detected radar tracking signals, but no
hostile action was taken against any of them. By mid-July it
had been determined with a high degree of confidence that there
were no surface-to-surface missiles in North Vietnam.

*

Operations and maintenance at Kadena began with the receipt
of alert notification. Both a primary aircraft and pilot and a
backup aircraft and pilot were selected. The aircraft were
given thorough inspection and ser- vicing, all systems were
checked, and the cameras loaded into the aircraft. Pilots
received a detailed route briefing in the early evening prior to
the day of flight. On the morning of the flight a final
briefing occurred, at which time the condition of the aircraft
and its systems was reported, last-minute weather forecasts
reviewed, and other relevant intelligence communicated, together
with any amendments or changes in the flight plan. Two hours
prior to take-off the primary pilot had a medical examination,
got into his suit, and was taken to the aircraft. If any
malfunctions developed on the primary aircraft, the back-up
could execute the mission one hour later.

A typical route profile for a BLACK SHIELD mission over
North Vietnam included a refueling shortly after takeoff, south
of Okinawa, the planned photographic pass or passes, withdrawal
to a second aerial refueling in the Thailand area, and return to
Kadena. So great was the OXCART's speed that it spent only
12 1/2 minutes over North Vietnam in a typical “single pass"
mission, or a total of 21 1/2 minutes on two passes.

Once landed back at Kadena, the camera film was removed
from the aircraft, boxed, and sent by special plane to the
processing facilities. By late summer an Air Force Center in
Japan carried out the processing in order to place the
photointelligence in the hands of American commanders in Vietnam
within 24 hours of completion of a BLACK SHIELD mission.

Between 16 August and 31 December 1967, twenty-six missions
were alerted. Fifteen were flown. On 17 September one SAM site
traced the vehicle with its acquisition radar but was
unsuccessful with its Fan Song guidance radar. On 28 October a
North Vietnamese SAM site for the first time launched a single,
albeit unsuccessful, missile at the OXCART. Photography from
this mission documented the event with photographs of missile
smoke above the SAM firing site, and with Pictures of the
missile and of its contrail. Electronic countermeasures
equipment appeared to perform well against the missile firing.

20

During the flight of 30 October 1967, two sites prepared to
launch missiles but neither did. During the second pass at
least six missiles were fired at the OXCART, each confirmed by
missile vapor trails on mission photography. The pilot saw
these vapor trails and witnessed three missile detonations.
Post-flight inspection of the aircraft revealed that a piece of
metal had penetrated the lower right wing fillet area and lodged
against the Support structure of the wing tank. The fragment
was not a warhead pellet but may have been a part of the debris
from one of the missile detonations observed by the pilot.

The SR-71

In late 1962, the Air Force ordered a fleet of A-li's from
Lockheed, which upon being finished as two-seated reconnaissance
aircraft would be named SR-71. The first flight was made in
December 1964 and the SR-71 became operation itn 1967. The fact
that these aircraft were ordered eased the path of OXCART
development, since it meant that the financial burden was shared
with the Air Force, and the cost per aircraft was somewhat
reduced by Producing greater numbers. In the longer run,
however, the existence of SR-71 spelled the doom of OXCART.

Ending

In spite of all the efforts to save the program, the
Secretary of Defense on 16 May 1968 reaffirmed the original
decision to terminate the OXCART Program and store the
aircraft. This decision was confirmed by the President on
21 May 1968 during his weekly luncheon meeting with his
Principal advisers.

Early in March 1968, USAF SR-71 aircraft began to arrive at
Kadena to take over the BLACK SHIELD commitment, and by gradual
Stages the A-12 was placed on standby to back up the SR-71.
Project Headquarters selected 8 June 1968 as the earliest
possible date to begin redeployment, and in the meantime flights
of A-12 aircraft were to be limited to those essential for
maintaining flying Safety and pilot proficiency. After BLACK
SHIELD aircraft arrived in the US they would proceed to
storage. Those already at base were placed in storage by 7 June.

Postscript
In summary: the OXCART Program lasted just over ten years,
from its inception in 1957 through first flights in 1962 to

termination in 1968. During this period a total of 22
Operational missions had been flown over hostile territory.

21

Lockheed produced 15 OXCARTS, three YF-12-A's, and 31
SR-7l's. Five OXCARTs were lost in accidents; two pilots were
killed, and two had narrow escapes. In addition, two F-101
chase planes were lost with their Air Force pilots during
OXCART's testing phase.

The main objective of the program--to create a
reconnaissance aircraft of unprecedented speed, fange, and,
altitude capability--was triumphantly achieved. It may well be,
however, that the most important aspects of the effort lay in
its by-products--the notable advances in aerodynamic design,
engine performance, cameras, electronic countermeasures, pilot
life support systems, antiradar devices, and above all in
milling, machining, and shaping titanium. Altogether it was a
pioneering accomplishment.

22
