Gary Powers ReportT on Conclusion of Powers Trial-us Reaction to Sentence)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022367, dated 1 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022367).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

“brink of ware ce

4
ny tr

REPORT Ot

CONCLUSION GF POKES TRIAL

7 o

Budenks Sreec

re

teacon, Soviet Hom: Gervice, Augs 19, 1965, 0922 GMT-aL

{Spoesh for the Prosetution by USGR Procurster Genaral Rudenko, et the Srials ‘+g

(Text) Comrade judges: I come te meke

Se

the speach for the srdésecution

at fits triai in fuil conseiousness of its imsense significance. The.
present trial of the Americun spy-pilot, Fowers, exposes a crime =. +:
". perpetrated not only personally by the aceused Powers. It aie fully:
reveals the criminal, aggressive actions oF ruling circles of +:

United

States, the true inspireara and organizers of monstrous avines dirested

aginst the peace and the cecurity of the peoples.

"Tt bas ‘béen ‘shown once’ more at ‘this trial thes the reactionary fornes

os the United Stetes, in the Struggie against tha forces of peace, have
not shrunk from using any methods and have criminally vielated +e ,
eleientary. norms of internaticnnl law and the rational severe:

ofier states in order to pursue the benkrust policy

Lotte

Birt the peoples of the world remecte> vary well the

horrors of World os):

War iT. The Gdviet peeple took the mein welsht of “she Hrtyerite

aggrecsicn on themselves. Om fielés of battle that
unprecedected scalo and farocity, they defended and

Were of an
succeeded in

defending, with perseverence and courage, the honor, freeton, ahd

of this struggle of the Soviet Foople aud its armed

’ Historywill never forget te7  L

_Andsperdence of the hemelana.and saved the freedom-loving peovle fren
the dread peril. of feseist auslavement, The world

followed the couse
forces with admirstion.

Ve, ‘vill remember forever the touns“and villages rated, the tears of
the wives, childs n, and mothers, and thy unhetrd-ot-sufferings. of 2 Rpithett

the horrors of & world war. The fiom determination

 militons and ‘tens of willions of people who fell victi: to the fascist
barbarisin. We remember all this so as never to ellow a revetit

Lon of
of the Soviet people,

“the doviet Government, and ite head, Niktta Sergsyevich Kuushehey to

Brevent 4 new war expresses the willef all progressive mankind, cf all the

catson people of the. glone,

Appro 4
Coe ies

4S9.

a BBB = USSR TEMPSUHATTGNT APFATES”
Aug. 22, 1960 °

Les of all ecumtries follow ith €eep satisfaction
BS : of the Soviet Government for an-
tension and the prevention of the threat of a
; of conditions for the peacefrl coexistence of
a : states with dit tess + social systens. ‘ihe Soviet Union is unewervingly ore:
3 defending the cauce of -neace cna submitted to the United Nations —
pian for universal and complete diesrnamaxt which inciu the Gestruction
o2 all neane for pursuit of 4 rocket or macleir war. ah

8
a
23 fy @:
ae

Consistently persuing @ peace-loving policy, the Soviet Government

bas uniisteraliy rod auced the fae Torves ef tre :

third. In the Soviet co country, the great seven-year plan of peaceTul
coustructian is being succes oe fulfilled, The Soviet people, who
ars building a communist society, are engaged io pencerul creative work
and hate war.:

raling circles of the United sta a are mictaiess a
Spent policy. These reactionary, eesressive civecle
wliltary bases on the territories of rany soceteles who are partic: ee
in JATO, They constantly keep planes in the alr with loads of atom and
nydrogen borbs and declare their intention to resume unde. ground tests
of mucleer weepons, They have entered into a conspiracy with the
Ajeqauer revanchist government about arming the Burdesy ‘
weapons » and stubbornly oppose measures on universal dis saires ar3 eae ‘and the
destruction of tocket and nuclear weapons. Pe

i=
Ha
hee
a
ct
Hy o
a

on

triving to maintein their policy of wir brinimanship, the
tireles of the United. Stetes ere walking the road of dangerous provocations, -

The piretical, aggressive raid of defendant Powers on May 1, 1960,
was Just such @ provaction,.

Comrade judges, when from the rostrum of the USSR Supreme Soviet session
the head of the Soviet Gdverngent announced the aggressive intrusion of
the. Auerican military Lockheed U-2 plane into the airspace of the
Soviet Union, the whole world 4ms steken by the treachery of leading
U.. statesmen. ‘The peoples of the world branded with shane these
provocative, insiduous actions ofthe American ruling circles, It ds
common knowledge that aces the aggressive intrusion of the plane into |.
the confines of the & + Uoion was announced there cane a whole serles
of mendacious, yl be contradictory statements and assertions fron
the leading statesmen of the United States,

r

rere

ae

SOWA APPLISS

ee,

hey cried to present all sorte of caonowitg ging and
to conces. eis trug aims from the yorla aod ;
EA saan g she whole world in their deiit seraie 4

Seenkower VYiee President Ninan m, and
statempis of a kind unprec

aes act aan ime the vio tis

were Ca: reted DoT On Sica lll

is tnctrnction 1F @ the President himself and that :
: —.  Rhey fra the ¢ of the United Stetes.
. Thus was the mask of ionocence » behind which the government of the
: io = “eh . . ,
i United States vainly tried to avoid reaponeTpiliry pefore American aod

£ ‘ he had Jecided to prevent the holding of the conference, A decisive
oe sea factor in the determination of thie position was the U-2 incident which
; ee “took plate two weeks before the conference. met

ae

#
4

plic opinion, torn off. Sthiving to avert the bress
conference, the chatiman of the UGSR Counci} of MA S
sikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, sgeahing at. & preiieinary conference
heade of governments of the four powers in Paris on May i6 this year,
stated that in spite of the provocative actious of the government of

the United States, the Soviet Union censidered it posstble to take part
in this conference on condition that the governuent of whe United States
conden the unbeard-of provocation that had bean permitved against the
Soviet - foion, apologize, baie tee the oul ipenses

aa President Eisenhower rejected these fair and legitimte demands of.

the Soviet Union. By this very fact, the goverment of the United
States one metrated to the whole world its reai dncvention of using tbe

- - provocative intrusion of the U-2 aircraft into the confines cf tLe
Soviet Union as a pretext for sabotaging the sumiit converence, oF -
throwing the world once agein into a state of cola war, of evacerbating-

. tension in internatinual deca. and of freezing the great powers!"

aioe ence on disarvanent...

Tous was the sunmit conferenge torpedoed by the government of the United
States. “This was so oovious that even certain euinent U.S. etatesaes —
were forced to admit that the slimit conference nad bean saboteged by
the gcveirment of the United States, ere I am reverring to whe vory
well-lmown speech by the Chadrnan of the Senate Foreig Affaire Committee,
Pulbrigut, on the results of the investigation inte the events tHat ied -
to tae | breakdown of the eumiit conference.

This g qaite clear that the U-2 4 ineddent and gur attitude woward it vers
the direct reasons for the failure of the conferseroe, Tn this connection,
it.is quite cut of place to argue that when Khrushchev arrived in Paria.

re

fa ee

; everybody’ the ¢riminal methods to which they resort, ne’ ae

want Sencerous end agerecsivea cowrse the

2 not. pang aetna wo its provocative actions
: ving true to its ea oD War:

ie ae avant a
oak

peek ed, as is
ae Puere wave, las lee, assurance’
He -_

¢ flights into ‘ton conPines of the -

of the Big 4 oftiniense oe U.S. spy p
Soviet Union.

Cemrade judges, the present trial.has attracted the attention of millions
of people the world over... The case of the exposed Americen spy pilot, -
Francis Jary ‘Pow ers, has produced such @ sharp and aagry veaction fron
Soviet people i all peacesble Peoples because the emmorure of one of the
ught red-handed and beoy = during |
nage flight on May L in the area of Sverdiovsk, was, at
tine, an exposure of the reactionary governing circles of the
United States whe have made the atete policy of thei country a celeulete2
policy of: treachery, provocation, and espionage, a polices of war

ira a for the sake of the interests of the capitalist monopoliss.

agents pas oe a intelligence,

ib

These reac Lonary: politica al eis voles } who nave prociaired |
Antimidation, a position of strength policy emong the h

principlss af the United States, aii.whe organized
intrusioa of the military place into the Soviet Union, heve

a direc % threat to all era

The oriminal actions of the accused Povers, by reason of their own
significance and by reason of thé dire consejuences Vhich they have
alresdy' br rought and, moreovergstould have BuOucEe, go far beyond the
framevork of the usual criminal offense, It is not only the Soviet Union,
ageingst which the criminal ené+cachments were directly gimed, tut all
mankind that is interested in a aorrect appraisal of these actions and
the at doptien ef all peaespte measives te oucre ot. in el e suture

Tha eiz S Sanecanebe of this eases th nBeouAahise cated: in the -preLimiz nary
investigation end at the open trial, the whole. course of the bandit Tligh
of Powers’ plane overs the territory of the Soviet Unicn, eeanot bot brine
every Dan of common sense, who otrives to preserve peace on earth, to
eonclusions on the aggressive aius ef the policy of the United States,
on the violation by the American brasshats of all the comuonly:
recognized nerms of international lav, and on the criminal violation of
the national sévereignty of other states.

a

+
£
3

aa o 7 - BG 5

the tack of the court in thig aase cannot se
nueeine Tacts relevant to the acte with which
etly cherced and which were carried out by iin
“Of ecumse, as in every crimine! case, you, comrade Judges,

accordance. with the low, are obliged to mae an Saeco:
iiable evidence vith a view 7

Full, and preci ve evalustion or elt BS

ectablighing the truth ané obtaining an ansver to the guceeice of what. orine ¢

ig containes in the arbieus of the ene, sed Pavers .

2 be ef significance not oniy for the

doom

But a verdict in this case wi
personal Pate of the accused Povers. A verdict of the ecurt, ba:
materia> provided in the “preliminery and court investi gationg, WALL once

'- again convine ingly expose to the whele world the crininal and aggressive

policy of ruling eireles of the United States, Cnere is no doubt Shat your
verdict will play ite wert in the struggle of the forces of peace

the forces cof aggression, in the struggle whieh is extending more and
throughout ou planet and on the issue on whieh the future of nanicind
depends, ;

Permit me new to pese on to the actual circumstances of the case with an
anaiysis of the extensive evidence which, put together, not only exposes
the accused and the crimes cosmitted by him but alto e:peses ‘th
Organizers and insvirers of these crimés. ‘The criainas actiens ¢
Povers heave been fully established by evidence whieh it is senoeainie

either to refute or te sheke. The fact alene taut the American militery
epy plane wes brought down on Mac 1 by Soviet rocket uresops in the ares of
Sverdiovel and the very presence in the dock of the spy pilot of this
shot-doim U.S. airerart, Powers, here in Moscow, is irr efut table acd
convincing proof, ‘The charges apaihst the defendant are now fully founded
ou extensive and objective evidence., Defendant Powers ntuself uniers tarnds
this. He has, therefcre, nade no attempt. to auure his guilt of the
crines he has comsi tted. aa

Comrade judges, you Inow of the evidence given by Powers at the

Preliminary examination and ae the court examination vhen explaining the
marks made on the route maps, ‘He spoke in deta4l about the tasks which were

» put wo him by the. commander of espicnage detactment 10-10, U.S..Ain Force.

Cclonel Shelton, in pointing ¢ut the places to which he ee to pay
particular attertion to obtain information about rocket bases and other
especially important defense objecta of the Soviet inion. Tu has been
established that this jetachment was based at the Incirlik Airbase in

Turkey, and it was in penne detachment that the accused Povers served in his

capacity as apy.

C
_ 7 ci 7
--€01ld himsel? te Areriesy intelligance

_ thE service of monopolist capital,

UR: RATIONAL AFRa Th
! Tye
Aug. GR, L960

The piratical ageressive flight on ley 1, 1500, wes the lest in Fowerst ;
espionage curear, whieh he bagen @s far beck 23 1959 when he signed a =
te j :

_
“et contract in the 0,8. capital, Weal
4 7

:

to powers that bis duties would include thet of re king.

Banee Plignts slong the frontiers of the Govieb Jndon ead elise
Tormaice of other speeiel missions, It wes from precisely this

coment that P g became @ regular spy pilot, prepared te commit aay

rime in the name of the interests of tha American brass Bats whe erecin |

You remember, comrade judges, the deposition of the accusad Fovers which
he gave inthe prelininery investigetiow end bere in cours on the
Preperation for Tlights in Uf ateorsre &$ the les Vezes etomic firing
rangs (poli: oj in the Heveda desert and the training in the use of —
special feconnaissance apparatus, ‘te charge of this trairing woe ;
folensi (Ferryi) who headed (word indistinct) the 10-10 subunit. Colonel
Ferkias?}, Major (Kodja?)}, end the recruited sry pilots were trained in .
fiying the U-2 spy planes by representatives of the Leckhesd compeny, which
produced ‘these aircraft, and aiso by militery pilots. : ‘

Bere is 9 vivid example.of the erimingl consploey of @ rajor American.
capitalist compeny, of en esplonage and reconneissance centyer, and of the
militery of America, During their treining 911 recruited pilots were given
false surnames for purposes of concealment, Fowers wes koown by the

nene of Palmer, :

in the sutunmn of igs6 the personnel of the 10«10 anit were moved to the
Americén Turkish air force tase in Incirlik, near the town of Adena ic
Turkey, where the formation of this unit tock place and from where 1¢

had to engege in direct espiomize activity. It wis from bere that Povers
and other pilots of the 10-10 pnit started to mke systematic fligats

for reconnaissance purposes akong“the frontiers of the Soviet Union with
Turkey, Tran, and Afghanistan, erm elso ig the ares of the Bleck Sea,

using special reconneissance equipment for th purpose. Fowers said
in evidence that Colonel (Perry?) tola pilots of the 10-10 uit that: they -
would also make flights aver the territory of the Soviet Union.

Then Powers tastifie?d thet since 1956 4 Lerge number of flights hve

been carrie’ out along the borders of the Soviet Union for >econneissance
purposes. | I consider, bowers stated, thal thet constituted the principe.
work of our unit. _

Ps

a ene ete

Oo ae

ene

ed Mee ie op ttle S eoees
_* FBG “USSR TUTERNATTONAL APFATRE
fag, 82, LEO ;

Anousily I flew several timéds sicue the

Yorkey, Ivan, and Afghanistan. luring 1

were gurcied gut over the Black Seg; T carri yin

1937 there were @ tc 3 of these flights, in. 9-10 to

15, and during four wenthe in 1960 boar 2. carried cut
ay tet Und " the

Wy
OS
3

p

a

t = izfleid and Zlew to the tok ef Van on
thé shore of the Leke wlth the seme neme, taen ‘we get cur course for
Teberan, the capitel of Iran, agd after Tiying over Teharer wa fley
‘He Seay Tren I usvally
Tlev south of the town of Meshad, crossed the Iranian-Afyren border
and then flew aleng the Afghan-Seviet border. Not fer frog the
eastern borser of Fekistan a turn wes mede and the sens route was use
to retura to the Incirlik airfield, later we turned earlier after
penetrating roughly 200 miles into the territery of Afghabisten.

o
ot
3
we
QO
rh
ba]
8
«

a
n
i
i
Hn
a

Sach 4s the ‘testimony ofithe defendant Powers on his espiosage activitics
prior to the flight on May 21,1960, Turing chis interrogation as '
defendant, Powers confessed that in accordance with the eoubract vaich
he signed with the U.S. CIA, he was a pilot of a special aerial unit
whose work it was to collect informetion about radio stations and :
tédar instellations in operation om the ter: tory of the Soviet Unica
and else shout rocyst sites,

Specisi espionage mission. For this they were treined under the so-calle

There is na Goubt thet the ageressive intrusion inte the denth of the
Serritory of the Soviet Unioa.on May 1, 1960, was planned by

U.S, intelligence & long time ago. As far back ns io August 1956 Powers
received the asaignmect to téke a U-2 atrcraft from the Incirlik tase

to Podee, the very same airbasecin Norway where he was to have

ended his May 1 flight. On nis “way there Powers flev over bhe route
Athens~Brinsiel (Itely)~Rome—-Prankfart-Stavenger (Norvay)-Bodoe.

Hers he was expected by Colonel {Birley?}, the new ccoander of the
10-10 detwchment who ooonptel this posh +311 1999, and a large group

of servicing personnel. .

al ee ee

7

ot

ar

purpose

6 of the: 15

arte in rer airaceeec Powers st ‘aw Zyom the

fe to the Anerican aircease in the area of Wiesbaden, Veet
Gameny, trom Woere be tock @ U-2 aircrart te the U.S. Air Force hase in
Pisttebure, New York. ; a ;

* ‘ones more that seplonege 0-2 airerary were baaed
iman territery and carried] out flights from there. Adensuer's
goverment, however, did not even find it necessary, es di
e 25 who are participants of HATO, te file a protest on this matter
to the U.S, Governmerit.- Moreover, Che, ncellor Adecauer hastened to be the

Piret to exprese his approval of thy criminal aggressive spy Flights
of the U-2 aircraft. oF eourse, no Gther statements could have been
expected fron this ASL LOVEE of Hitler. :
Cnpryiog out! aspionage: flig gists; Bauehs and his
vinlated the soverelanty of other tountrias. U-2
various countries dragged by tha United States in
er venetonre™ policy, whe permitted theix sirbeses to be used for U.S.
military airecaft to lena. and take off. With even greater insolence
Powers and other spy pilots viclated the sovereignty of neutral countries,
in particulses Afghanistan, uzing their tecumical superiority , for this

over

Buch was the cevelopnent of Powers’ egpionae career. up to April 27, 1960,

‘when the coomander of the reconadissancd unit, Coldnel Shelttm cal lied 4

priefing of the personnel and ordered Powers and another pliot and u large
party of servicing personnel to Tiy cn the same day to the base et
Peshawar in Pakistan, where they arrived in a military transport

aircraft, the U-2 sireraft being delivered somewhat later. A detailed
tectinony was given on this by defendaot Powers during the pret iminary
investigation. P
Cn May af “2960,- early in the meaning oe was Qvakened as he had been
many times bef>re during trainjng under the “flights schedule slert."
This time, however, Powers was7given a mpec Vel mission, for which he had”
been trained for several years, This mission provided for earcying out a
reconnaissance flight, over the territory of the Soviet Union for the
purpose of collecting important information about military and industriel
chjects.. The route of the flight was frna tha Peshawar base in. -'

Pakistan, over ee territory ef Afghanistan, sousiderable oan of the

territory of tae ie USSR, aod ended nt the Eodoe base in Nome

Permit ne to es directly to Powers testimony. This is what re himself
testsfied concerning the mission vhich he had been given oy Colonel
Shelton: After a few minutes the colonel brought the meps and showed then
to me. He told x me ‘that oe route of my flight had been marked on the mapr.

' a we ey

igh
8

estes

ow

ay tae

“me a silver dcller which held a pin. The colonel tola we that there was

- BBG - USSR INTHSGATIONAL AFTATES

700 GY Brap.
bad aeveral airfields, Be algo ;
-geé & pad for launching guided miseiies.” a
amy map. In adeition the Colonel ahewed me & place
vion “there should be somethiog,” tat whet exeetly he

Uwhese in hig 12
‘did not know. I also marked thet place, I wos, testifies Powers, to
follow 4 route which was marked on the map with a red and biue pencil and

ra)

&% points indicated on the gap IT was to switch on and of f the required

TE

switches fox the eduipment.

Teis is Towers’ own description of the espionage targets fo
of information shout particularly imsortant defense ard inde
in the Soviet Union which he bad been given before the flight
Rut the instructions received oy Fowers and the means put at
to fulfill she espionage intagion vere not conPined te this.

Powers testified further: The colonel told ua that he had prepared
bundies of Soviet money and gold coins in wage something harpehed to me.
fhe bundles were put inte the pockets of uy flying suit. He alse showed

no danger of any kind, for the USSR did not heve eireraft or rockets which
could reach the altitude of my flight. If, oowever, aomething happened and”
I wes arrested ang tortured and could new stand up to it, T woald have |

the opportunity of committing suicide with the eid of this pin whi
contained poison,

Tous having bought Francis Powers for dollars, and baving made nim an
accomplice cf dirty crimes, tha JS, intelligence service hed elvisaged ;
beforehand the possibility of its agents’ failure, and, striving te
keep from being exposed, suggested to him the inevitability of suicide
shold he Tind himself alive orf Soviet territory. :

Herg it is, the bezstiy misanthropic morality ef Mr. Dulles and compe

to count the life of a man serving the dollar, thst green devil~-as :

nothing. It should te mentioned that the U.S, intelligence service intended

te cover up the traces of the cringe not only ty supplying such 3 pin to

Powers . Powers! testimony, material evidence, the conclusions of the

experts show that the Lockbeed U-2 in which Powere left on Ais espionage

Flight was @ upecial militery reconnaissance plane and was equipped with

@ special device for the pilot to blow up the plane in dase of a forced land-

ing on the territory of the USSR. . ; , ,
. oo :

Pn re

#

An explosive device was glso installed im the tepe recorder intended for

we SS the recordixg of signals of Soviet radar stations.

Acuer Powers received his last orders. and instructions, he took.off fron
Peshawar airfield, geined an altitude of £C,CCO meters, flew over
frghanistan, and intruded into the eirepace of the Soviet Union. ‘Povers
Blended gailéy te having Plam over Sovie+ territory and to switehing on...
and off, according te the places marked on his fl ight route, the aspropriste
levers of the special equipment instelled in bis airplane. “here were
“in ali. Pive Bich evitehes, ALL the reconngissance equipment on poard the

 Baghe Yorked normally and smoothly: in addition, Powers enexged during | -

' the flight in visual ‘observetions, ertertig the results on tre flight

” 4s is koown, Powers' plane crossed the state frontiers of the USSR at”
ss Prom

C536 Moscow time to the southeast of Kirovevad, Tadanik SSR, enc
thet moment until he was ‘shot dom by Seviet rocket troops in the

Everdiovsh area he was udder constant observation by antiatrerarm unite - |

_ Of the USSR. . Uhe whale nature of Povers' JLight. pointed. -to-iks.. - + Shes
provocative and aggressive aims. ‘The pilot rlew the plane at ea altitude
Of 20,00G meters, an altdiude et which no civil airplane flies. ‘The
route of the plane lay over large industrial centers and important defense
sbjects of the Soviet Unien, dince this vas an intentional iat.uston

WES

vhto Soviet airspace with hogtile agerecsive dius, the. Sovigt, Govergaent, .....,

-<" Issued the’ drder 6° shost down the plane and at 6855 (As recezved) Powers’
Plane wae shot down with the very first rociet at a height of 20,500 meters.
in the Sverdlovsk area, more than 2,000 kilometers fron the point vhere

‘be arosted the frontier of the Soviet Union.

. Powers testified that while in flight at a height of 64,00C feet in the
Sverdlovsk area; that ig'at a height exceeding 20,000 meters, he eaw an

_ Grange flare, after which his plane*tegen to fall.’ During bia fall he

| WAS pressed against the instruments panel and could no$ make use of the

' Sjecting device. He released tha canopy of the cabin, unhitched his
harness, and climbed out of the plane through the top. The parachute
ened automatically. Many pecple Gere direct witnesses of Lae
exploeion which tort place at @ great height, after which remanta of 8
plane fell to earth and 6 parachute appeared in the sky. j

Comrade judges, the participants in the capture of the Americana spy

Were exenined in court and tneir evidence ig stili fresh in your menory.
“Soviet people, boundlessly loyal'te their motherland, having this tine,
a5 Slvays, shown inherent vigilaace, detained the spy plist Powers ;
After bis landing by pasachute, took his noiseless pistel specially built
for villainous midexs, and rendered the spy harniess. . ‘

fac fe

% in ep
Dub souas +

“SEEDE os pe

wits,

t2 the

hose

“SSS fhe dol

Ris ex
Organs. ex

TMWZineg or

#86811 trons S4iyj
TAG OE OF 9

o t
zr eine Milica
5 A epg eve hin Pemissicn
rg 88S OF the SE, Mp Foree, Reganiing thie
2 Fevers tectirieg. Tntofar ag” Ao Petscnal Telationshi
Ps) Nasa, i believe that this Aocume:¢ Was Given pr as ‘Over +
the res} Bits op the 10-19 Tetons asance unit.

NATIONAL AZPAIRS qe4

have and they were Shervn

Pours,

+.

t is also known from the teetincny of Powers thet the lu-10 unit ip
rid 1960 inspected by none other that.tne chief of staff of the

5, Air Force,' Gen  tsomes White, in whese honor 8 sp Sas receptioa
= it was aeeleaties tee :

sbip ch gf

dic

ef
ag

as

the analysis of the
data already given? “The material of tha oi sent trish eonvine.ngly -
shows thet deahite all the ettempta of the U.S. military to gut ¢ fe
Quick on changing: act in Aller Dulles! veuwieville snov, she reas har =

of the 10-10 unit, in which the defendant Fovers served, and other
Fimilar unite, is sufficiently clear. - Regarding the special task o
ite activities, this unit was nothing but sn organ Spe eiLibery
intelligence,

so no doubt thet Powers! plane wes a military place
sent with eggrecsive espionage aims over
of the USSR while Povers continued io resvin, regarding

There is e
especially.

the airs pace | 2 ;

the charactar of hie activities, a military pilot fulfilling tre

duties of a military intelligence agent and spy. Povers himself

adeite that he was @ civilian pilot in the serviee of the U.S, Air Force.
To actugl.fact, ‘this is nothing else than a apy-hybrid, the child of

the CIA and the military iotelligence of ‘the U.S. Aix Force, disguised

by the Pigieaf of NASA.

The espionage | Pree of Powers! ffignt over Soviet territory are
i ee by ail circumstances mf the case, including the testimony

f£ the defendert and extensive-meimriel evidesce. I must especially
suutaatce tna the statements I maationed earlier made by legding U.S.
statesmen, in which they samitted tefore the whole world that espionage
and violation cf the sovereignty of other countries is state policy
of the United ftates, in the light of Powers’ criminal case st present
under exami nation, attain 4 procedural significance atd are @ part
of the legal evidence, hy this evidence, that is ty statements made
by the above - mentioned statesnen themselves, it is fully establishes
that the U.S. Government vas thé inspirer and organizer of the arimnes
equmitted by the defendant Powers, end others like hin. There is every
reason to consider the above-mestioced statesments us indisputasle
evidence in the present case.

_The qaterieal evidences

. S5R's, south Urals to Sverdlovek with a ture toward Kirov, then in the

TONAL AFFAIRS

ry

Ore Lling coagider it

n ription ¢ extens: tdence in this
oF the examination of this mat i evidence and its
de by experta in ¢ variety of fields, unbies 3a

in a iaaed ai. the dienesal of the state prosec ;

oar a. confirm the indietaeut put forward aget
EOW intentional aggresgive nature and the espionage aims of
Pow nal mission, The material evidence Fas exhibited for popiie
wie  Seriet people and over 20,500 foreigners ners given the

tne aggressive

raonsliy examine this Visual proof urmecking a8
eireles who organized Pomers' pirstle fight.

ed, pasta of the aiveraft i.

At the place where the Lockheed 0-2 aireraft crdct
poustiy 20 squers kil

its equipment were: found seattered Over an erea oF
Amore them were: The frout part of the fuselege vita foulkhesd?) and

ore

ees

a:

cabin with equipment, a turbojet engine, the plene's teil, and other (perce
These itemg were perts of 4 simrie-geat,
reconnaissance aircraft of the American Lookhieed fits,
inspection carried ov
in the United States towk a hand in deyeloning the U-2

potas

hich altitude ‘subsonic, U-8 tyne
Tha result of an
t on individeal parts have shown that numerous firms
apy pidse and that
cty of the U.S. faverirment, The aircraft’
F#istinet}, The padte-tecnnicsh
aleti-Paskard Company ami
ernia. Thia apparatus,

ii vebongs

on marks showing that it

th

to the t,8. Departnent of Defense. This is particularly lapertar” The

refutation of the néndacious assertion that the U-2 airers* 2h

and not a military aircraft, The instruments, commun strical

snd radar equipmens were alae made by various Americ: as

sonfirmed by appronriate plawies and Labels. The * i. fitted cut with,
: 3 by

a special remote control explosive eharge, mode:
tre {name of firm Indisiinct -
' _

The jacoéetion of the spécial maps, photor7sphic films, and other materiel
and conclusions of experts testily to a ce#Liberate and previously prepared
flight of the U-2 alveraft for recommaigsganca-espionage purposes, Tnie

ts confirmed by a special eodified map bearing the TLignt reate of the
gireraft “hienh hag been recovered: Fron the Pakigtan eres, Pashewar
airfield, im a northwesterly direction, over the Tadzhik, Uzbek, Kagekt |. . a

ae

White Sea ares, croeging the egatermn part of Eola Peninsnia end along it.

north coast into Norwegian territory. <¢

fe oe
ERO
Koch of a yy

ta
oO

aft! eavipment

Meterial evidence establishes beyond a deubt the ight of the

U,d. aiteraft over USSR territory wes premediteted. As emerges frea

the conclugion of the experts, the map of she fligat anc calculations
pato Ft s

of navigation ae hay Vere prepared om the ground

z the pilot khew where he was. He sys
Light by pispointicg positions and stri
ng to the peevichsly gaven Hote.

3
ws
el
fr
m
ee

Turibe the

ng the Plight over USSR territory, the pilot entered information
a intelligence nature on the men. OF particular interest as proof
exposing tie espicnage purpose of the U-2 aircraft flight is the
pote grapbit equipment of the aircraft, and the impediate vesuits

of the phobogrant iia reconnaissance cerried out by defender Bo
Suring the flight over the territory of the.Sovist Union.
experts established thet the serial camera, model 73-B,
on the U-2 aircraft is e special reconnaissance uerial ce
for photographing a strip of territory from greet heights.
used in the’ aerial camera is a special kind of photograeh
intended for purveses of serial photographic reconnsizsen
and phokogrspHid objects while fiytog ¢ at great heights.

The pilot photographed the territory of the Soviet Usion for intellig.

purposes. The examination oftthe davelopad fila aud Loa ean .

prints fron it helped establigh that the photograpued locality is a

ie af the Soviet Unionm: The serisl photographs coutein
otelligencé information regardigg industrial aad military nbjects

of fhe UESR. The mgnetophone and mastic tape discovered in the

area of thz' aircraft crash ere batted to expert investigation;

60 vas an optic instrument; all in their ture important muberial

evidence of the espionage perneses of the U-2 givrerafs flight.

An exam innk ion ef the tape recorder Bho that fu had @ speci
-explusive device for its destruction. It was established daring
examination by the experts that part of the tage was ia a good
condition apd completely presetved, After tha decodiog of the
recording, it was found that the recewled signals belonged to
radar stetiong on the ground within the radar system of the Soviet

so Union's anbiaireraft defense.

r

PTT
Peres

is part ef the ragioetechniss. res et
sireraft, Experts nave established that +
apes aer ter
ee! re hy
Lie aft

ce
i

an Aner
ver distance
% seorutiny. The ebsedce
on the U- craft ia another pisce of

: f
sence indiiating that the organigers of the agEressive intrusion toot
measures to sonceal the piratical flicht of the 0-2 plane and to avert the

possibility of ite discovery over USSA tervitery. - ;

#, T have elready mentioned tha
> explosive device te insura the -
rritor

e cacin, Among several other in: t

inseription “explesion"” {varyv). Thus, the pilot was folly
informed of the presence on the plane of a apecial explosive device and

the weys to coe it. The explosive charge found in the wreckage of the U-2
is important material proof of the aggressive espionage alma of the flight.”

T have already mentioned in my speech the polson needle weaken from the
aecused Powirs,' If the miseion given te Powers had not been criminal,
Fowers' bosses woula not have equipped him with a lethel needle, It has
been established by examination asd the toxlcological investigation of the
needle taken fron the sceused Powers that tHere wes a substance, on the
point of the needle which, judging from its effect on animals, in tosi¢
Smountg and physical qualitigs, can be put in the eurara group, the
Strongest and fastest of all known poisons,

Taking into. corsideration its bigh degree of toxicity the experts came to
She conclusion that a man would suffer instantanecus death if pricked by
this 'eedle, The examination of the noiselags pistol taken fron Powers
established that it is a semiautomatic LO-round pistol of the newest tyre,
intended for shopting a% live taryete. Tegather with the pistol 205
rounds of ammunition for it seve found,

5 ee

‘ tl <i

i :
' ; : eS
| us ie 7 £5 1 - USSR INTERUATIONAL APFAIR3
fug. 22, 1960

fan

one wlusion that thi

cmd pied

TORS A

in me foviet Tninan,

Comrade judges, evaliating the gravity of the crimes connttted by Forers

we Cennot for one minute forget that he directly fulfilled such spreially :
Gangeroues and oriminel tasks which were en immediate threat to eaneral ow Tas
peace and could result in a terrible catastrophy for mankind. The aggressive, «+
intentionel.- nature of the flight of the plane piloted by Fowera rag
completely cbvidus from the moment he crossed the frontiers of the Soviet
Union and begen to penetrate into tne depths of Soviet territory, flying
at @ tremendous height over important dsrenes end induotrial objects.

find, obviously, nobody could determine from thé ground whether this enemy
Plané was or not carrying @ lethal icad, having unceremoniously and ;
insolently intruded Into Soviet airepace, Thus, it is quite obvious

that in eireunstan @s when gone states have nuclear weapons and the means
of delivery to the target with near lightning spead, the aggressive act
ferpetrated by the United States on May 1, 1960, against the Soviet Unios
belongs te erimes jecpardiging the security of 411 mankind and could result ety
in most ‘serious consequences for the entire wor.d,

The prevent oase uncovers the criminal violation by the U.S, ruling cireles
of the generally recognized standards of international lav, In thia
ccnnestion, I cousidér it essential to consider in the prosecuting smeech
Some questiong of international law which have a direct relationship to

the erime of the devendant Powers and his masters,

i} . ie
An indisputable principle of interational law, which hag never bean
contested by anyone, {¢ the Principle of complete and extlusive sovereignty
of a state over its cm territory, tneluding all the airspace over is. ‘This
Propesition has been laid dows hoth ik a number of international conventions ~
and in the internal, legislation of practically all states, ineluding the
Uaited States and the Soviet Union,

The Soviet Government hag more than once made Protests concerning the illegal
violation of. Soviet airspace by U.S. planes, and it has warned the U.S,
Government of Lis responsibility for the gravest consequeneeg witeh ay
fellow upun such viozationa, Gowever, the U.S, Goverrment did not react

to these protegta, and true to character, has continued its cold war policy
and the gross violation of the sovereignty of other states.

7 a Sr Governages 4 vovernnent In .
USSR as saan * DrOtege cence
4

: feta. 176
ereial airgitcnne of
i Ss od

S0Veret pn +

o

teyarut

t

rat tye

ee

But the principic of complete and exclusive Ate
aver the (airapace?} above its territory is : Boece teat it
YT been unreservedly recomiszed™by Arret interag
is what the shove -mantio reat

ination ‘of au sonventi

ces it is enough to goneluds
gad principle ov Iintermaticna

esd ef7) state personi ifies the sove ereiguty
of bis one It is quite inadmissible for one head of
enercach upon. the sovareigmty of snother state, and it is
adwigsibie for him to assert. hie right to do sa. It is no
to imagine a different sobztiong of this question. Tt is ¢
reasonagle minded people, and not only ta speci: us in in

lev, that the principle of national sovereignty and a state's control
of the airspace over its territory, like the principle of national
sovereignty in g@encyai, is the basis for normal relations between states
RM peacetime. There pe be no. doubts on the matter. The way the
practice of international law solves the question of the conduct of
guilty states in cages similar te the amoressive intrusion of the

U-2 StTPiane is equally not devoid of interest.

Vne Britieh professcr Optenheim, in his treatise on international lew,
published in 1945 by the Moscow Publishing Sousa for Foreign Literature,
points cut that if persons in offielal pusitiens or military and navel
armed forces of a state commit actions illegal from an international
point of view, that estate must, first of all, refuse toe recegnin: such
acts and must "repudiate ‘them, expressing ita regret or even Sy aetesis
to the government of the state which has suffered. Second, losses
must be indemnified if a deman®*for indemiification is lodged And
finally, the violators of the gar oust be punished in accordance wita
the circumstances of ‘he case~-pages 335, 333.
=

% is understandable, however, that he who. raises crime to the status
of calculated stata policy conaciously runs the risk of being caught
redhanded during the time that the crime is bein 16 committed. He aise
recommices the position of strength nolicy as the highest principle

of stave policy: He, without a twinge of conscience, does not reckon
with tne generally accepted internavioual pr see which has found

its expression. in the high principles of international lav, and
substitutes arbitrariness and lawleasness for iaw.

ape ss

" Feconnalssancs planes is a congiderably @réater danger. Everyone

“keep airborn aquadrocse of boat

TRORAL

ae Wwnether on ley
e os! srwise the 3

ional

pl Gerg of the U.A. Government,
a craft rhe Vash eiravecs
par u-2 a on co ty”
bec) oe

hae of thet

Teese bandit actions refleet the old extablie? of the

United States of & talancing on the brink of war, was earrisd

on for many years vy the former secretary of state Jonn Foster Dulles,

and which has b 2 irelessly varmed up by the Pent tagon champions of

war. In hie boox : ‘Dulles wrote; "Lf ever in the near

future I* appear : anger of war has passed, that will be the
epee of abe ‘very ager Ne-bugeiena editica, 1250, page oes

. a

Tt seens to ‘me necessary to examine the question of whether the

S101 even one airplane inte the boundaries of another country
> ogure asion. There ig every reagou to ecme to ths
: he intrusion of a foreign plane, like the intruaic
of the U-2 be piane, is undoubtedly an act of aggression. ‘Mtbout a
aouot, in coutenporary circumstances the intrusion into the ai Dp
of any state by even one eager Zens catastrophic conseq

The experience of World War 11 <siiovs that flights of reconnaissance
Blanes usually preceded an aiz"ettack. IF this was the esse during
‘Worid War IT, then under present Monditions the appearence of similer

knows - ~and responsible military leaders oF a United States have more
than once stave] it for all to neer--that the Usived States always

e053 on duty carrying atomic and hydrogen
bombs. Thus the appearance over Soviet territory of even one
recopnaissunce Plane tan always. pe the foreminner of an air actack.
Bot even when squadrons of bomber planes are not folowing the
reconnaissance plane immediately, the Tlight of such a plane and the
seri2l photograph and reconnaissance of the cudar system of she
antiaireraft, Aefense of the USSR carsiet out by it.are integral
elements or aa air attack. é :

aly.

by defense oar)

The Aner-scan
3

it obnerughivanist |

thet 2 Ruseian in charge of the detection system (sinte

interpreted pliot Povers' flighs as an attack and presses the button for

@ retalistory blow, Ina few hours; those who pad survived would nave
found ives in Bell, when will ve et last understand that eesiodace,’
counteraspionarze, and other idiotic ‘things of this type are part and parozl

of the dead past,

of government, of the four powars in Geneva five years age, on July 23, 195°,
‘tov sound blesphencua,. ,

‘atesuen of the United States vould not be Joath to dover up theie”
J , Sggressive actions by allegedly peaceful intedtions, However, ei.
_ Know the price, of the sincerity of such Statements. As is imown, the road -

$i 23 paved with such good intentions, The words + ered by Ue
tresident Eisenhower at the concluding ‘session of the conference of heads

ake oy

>

i oheve-come t6 Geneva because I think thet mankind ig

28 Ot
chixsting to be rid of wer and the rumers of war, I have cone here becaure

vo have always believed in ‘the decétit feelings and edumonsahes of thé people

that inhabit our world. Tonight I an returning heue with an unsserving
confidence in this » and with a prayer that the hopes of mankind will in tins

_ be realized. Th
of wilitery espionage and arizinal violation of the sovereigniy of other.
States corfirmed by bia was in operation, right from the start of the vortr

Se solemn words vere pronounced at a tine when the Brogan

of the goveranent of President Diseniover.

Comrade. jutives,

‘the statements by tte President, Vice President, and

secretary of state of the United States, mentioned by me, eaphasized thet
ithe flight of the U-2 plane on Hey 1, 1960, and other  insvances of the
intrusion of Anerican planes into USSR airspace, which took place previously.

did not pursue
measures.) «= *

aggressive aims, but, it was alleged, vere defensive

The Anerican aggressors, these fev initetors of Hitler, tried to justify”
their provecetive poliey by saying. that they are pursuing it, allegedly, .

With a view to

averting the sc-calBed danger of the threat of canmunisn,

‘but this- ie not a new argument, if you will pardon the expression.

it bears a striking resemblance.to the ‘armaments in) the arsenal of the

Hitlerites and
trial the Japan

a8

the major Japan

- leaders’ of Japs

the Japenese militarists, Jt is known thet at the Toxys

fea war criminals tried to cover up their criminal activities
ures. The internatianal militery tritunal in Tokye, tryiag.
Soe War criminals, pointed out in its sentence that the...

n RiWays tried to jus tify their aggressive military adventures

by declaring that they were defensive--"Gne International Trial of the

1950, pace 236.

., Main Japenese ar. Criminals,,* UBSR Academy af fejances Piblishing House, -—

te

-deyn ry tee

Comrade jedces, Tt

Shelton ruded that eeeen or Norvay were best, but Norviay the mora desirable.

So of
to hy reSesr
aM @ypoged ia
erg. The U0. prosecutor,

She mata German war orininals
ars were ak UP

Mantes of conga

many Fe

Rov U.S. etateenen are
os conmurnisn thar
canplete failure,

Question thet is -
iavy. In the ease

64, m Lhe agerasaive,

&. aiveratt over ¢ the serritory Gf the USSR, and spe ;
made by Povers in +24 U.2, eculd not have taken place if states lying close —

to the UBGR, in this case Ti aid Horvwey, had net made thetic

territory available toe the American Behaees, The mariniun long- mee
capacity of the U-2 vould not have pertsed Rt fo operate direeth “Et
us. ¢ ory, This ery zocupivs, was at
the Ine Air Base Povers' plane get out on its p eal
Tt sigat ae Peshawar ia Ps THe Blane wie to findsi, ice 7:
and jand at the Norvegian base at Bodeoe. The accused, Pavers, test be

n the

thet hen the Ued planes were maxing their rencnnaissance flights
frontiers of the Soviet Union, the air basea at Meshkhet and Tehran in
Ivan were indicated as energency sir bases. thoing the ley 1 flight,
Powars could have used any air base th Norway, Pakistan, aod Tran as

eher gency dancing Disees. Re could alse have landed at the airbase at
Scdanylee in Finland. Colonel Shelton, however, warned him that this was
a pocr airbase and ‘that he shouff use it only in the event of an extocane
emergency, since tha % vould at be better than landine somewhere in -

Seviet terri ve ~

Tf one is to apprais: all these 0: ireunis tane
tenting on o mplicity, then ome ougirs to vi
of Povers those who organized and inspired anas oPSp en

a

actesscries ooviously contrinuted

ea +o ‘the aaundesion of
provision of neans and the renova of Lindrances

a

Sdeprata

~ EB Ea al. UBS TISURMWITONAL APParag
: Ae x Aus. 22, 1950

The Sovieb Goverment has on more t}
Eovernoants ap

Ris pe ke wee
avowk the J,

U.S. hilitary tases ay their terr

NOW well-founded thase Warnings of

- internetion

However, peace-lovinz Pecples thre:
Do ohber nore

Peace cn earth and averting the thre.

At present whe correlation of Porses

perti Gil people of good Vili, all peace-loving
the ora

black 7

Bor agereseten,

The lerai qualiticaticn ‘or ‘the crine,

Ccorade gudgzes, F an now #Oing over te

actions anerininating
defenéant Poverg is acgised
1955 by the U.S, GIA, hé carried
Soviet Union, which is an
the U.3. Goverment,
U.S. Govertmens and
Puts into effect the shove-nenti

expression

wm Oe decass
ow etturiries Linked be nilitery blo
Rger created for these eomiries by th.
asory. The prese
the
URG BGGe@SE.Ve manehating

aizeles, whe éeo n

2

acute acd burning Problem thin the problem of preserving
at of a new catastrophic war.

the defendant Poyers.

OF the following: Having been recruited dr

toned aggressive policy,
« Teconnaissance plane inte the airspace of .the

a

G

rel]
Lay
‘

an Ef
os
is s
cy
ot

Boviet foverurent Ware,

met i
ot disdain weve
i

14a in the rare of

g tinue the dangercus Practice of brinkeanshi

wut the whele world at Present hey

in the world ie such that peace

marmtind, can restrain

Alc, seting as one man, inflict a povertui reout? to the
& a2 Powe) :

the legal evaluation of the

gainst
wed by
with the knowledge cf the

Powers,

on the instructions of Anerican intelligence, vhion
zi =

intruded in a ssecia?

Strategic neture concerning
a >

the radei- netvork, ad other Wery important defense

woith is a state and military secret,

of the Soviet Union, He flev over
He photographed a mumber ‘OF above
eduinuent, ag
other data of
are envisace-
responsibility for a stste trine.

2 2,Q00 kilometers ints Soviet territory.

welk gs Tecorded Signals of radar Stations, and
an eSpiconhege nature; These “actions by the defen
in article two of the lay of the USSR on-crininal :
Each point in this formulation of the
existing evidence in the ease

else collented
ant, Povers,

“ner fioned objects vith the help of special.

charrce is Pully es tablished by all

uy

As @ state prose

‘article twa of the above-mentioned la

ae

Acecrding to erticle two of the thove wientioned lew, espionage is

considered @s the theZt or collection with the aim of handing over to
a foreign stete or forsigh intelligence or their agency deta wich is
& state or military score tT, G8 well as the handing over or enliection

4
4
as the insbroctions ‘of foreign intelidigence of other deta to be used for
purpopes hermful oo the doterests of the :

cutor, I have no deubt thet tvery sign of this crias
is present in the actions of defandent Powers The fact thet Powers ~
has been siatling or collecting Informetion constituting state or military
seerets has been established beyond dcubt, There is no nead to dwell
upon the question as the whethér the antcrmtion eoucernine militery end
acopomic installations of the Soviet Union, its airfields, radia Location
network, and others, which Powars collected during his agmreseive flight
on May 1, 1960 over the territery of the Soviet Union, conatitutes a
state o¢ nilitery secrets. Informoticn of this zind ie regorded in any
coustry as a guarded state end military secret. a

There is else no doubt that the afm of sclle-ting this infcrne tion by
Powers was to hand it over to a foreign stave. ALL the circumstances
were estebiished with utmost completeness and clarity at the preliminery
snd court keorings, end the defendant, Powers. himself dces not deny
thet he collected that information on direst orders from the American
intelligence service acting in coaformity wich the program senctioned
by the ,5, Government, ; : ;

There is aldo in evidence another element of the orice aovered by
; w: That is the fact thetb the
erime has teen carried out by @ foreigner.

From the point of view of Soviet erimto#l lev, Power's espionage guilt
has been proved beyond a dott, but J vould like to stress thet under

-the legisletion of the United States es well hed the actions of

defendant Powers taken placa lm the United Stetesiend hed trey been
directed sgsinst the United Stabes, they would slso’ have bean regarded
7s espionage: end wokld have entailed severe mintshment, I am referring
to the legel code of the United States lasued in 1958 and published ic
Weshingtoy tn 1959, volume Wy seation 18, chapter 37, under the heading -
“Espionage and Censorship."

The law of the United States states that every persen whe enters, pepe-
trates, fliss over, or by any other means receives defense Informetion
which my ba used to the detriment of the United States or to the adven-
tage of any foreign state is to be held responsible for the crime of
esplongge.s This lew established a vast liat of espionage objectives.

~ BB di SOR INTEREAb IAG p ARFAIRS
Auge 22, 1960

Anonr then ere mentioned, Yor instance, ‘decks, causig, Teilveys, factories, : e
nines, bulldines, offices, reseerch. Leboratoris §3 4nd so on, Any Skebtehas | —
photographs, Deg’ tives, ‘Grewings + Plahs, TADS, acdais 7 8 notag or aytaln
that 4s cOmmectead with nations? defensa are i tas
ives oe SSplonayes mo 7 ae

ic
8lzo listed fncng the shies

Ths; the lew op ‘the Uaiteg States, with the wtagst Shoraughinags, erovides .
for Criminal reg Cneiuiliiv op the siz btest intrin, ment of the Security a
os Pons: : bad Beisn : ae
Of the Tad ted States; ; ” : : : :

Why, if they. have sq Strict # mccedure in thet

foling strcles unwilling to teke inte Sccount sintiss pr
in the i=’ oy countries by other Stetes? Ww do ‘they intenticnelty,
insoleacily, 2nd crasely Granple Underlect laws issued py other’ states

14 the interests oY their Security
: ‘ : z . : ‘ ®
SSodaot fowers has Coumitted g Seve crime 4galost our country, He

é

mst be tried with al2 the severity or lew of the Soviet stéte, dust
_ 6 any other Country vwoulg do, - : :

fhe PPSescation TD must again
‘86rious Consequences Which Povergt
THuking. While Fowerg'

Sirspace of our territory, nobody could know What Purthe
@ctions he could heraig Bod what dathal freight he wag Carrying,

intelligence, 13 not a slaple SPY, but a 5
erininal, All the Sections. taken by Po

He cowsttted hts Crimes not just in *) wy which a3 generally dangerous,"

of heavies: responsibility, but ia

Quences cannes be ™SSstred in the Ging
in defining the Severity of 9 crdiag, . '

a ee

Sa

dare et

Moscow, Soviet Bane sérvtce, Aug. 19, 1960, 2743 ome

Fs saa

28. SSSR TMVSPNATIOVAL AFFAIRS
Auge 22, 1960

Such is the true face of tefondant Pevers. If nis ere had tried to

atart @ new world war, 14 would be Powers’, nurtured and educated in
the so-called “free world," who would te ready to be the first to
Srop atom and bydromen bombs oa peasefol soil, a8 was done by etetier.
hy who dropped the first atom bombs on the peaceful inhabitant

2 the defens: elses sities of Hiveoshina and Nagasaki,

Comrade judges, the aggressive spy flight which defencant Francis Gacy

Powers emoerked on tt the direction of. WE, ‘ruling circles, dn s U-2 - - «
aircraft on the early morning of May i, 1950, from the Peshawar Adlrbuse |
was interrupted by en accurate hit of @ Sowlet rocket. The hour ic : Ber
drawing nearer when the criminal will hear the tourt's sentence. bay a
your sentence be a serious warning to all those who pursue en egaressive-
policy, criminally trample underfect the generally recogrized norms of
international law and the soverefanty of states, and who proclaim that

the cold ver and esrlonage pelicy fs their state por tey May this

Sentence Ziso be a serious werning to the other Powers! who, at the

Girsetive of their bosses, would try te. undermine te upuse of peace:

and would attack -the hone, Gignity, and inviolability of the great USSR.

Comrad te Judges, in efitraing to the full the state indictment in the
Powers case in accordance with article two of the USSR Law on Criminal
Responsibility for Crimes Agcinst the Stete, TY have every right to ask
the court to apply, to. defendant Powers. an excepticnal messure of Bg
Punishnent, But, texing the sincere repentance for his crime “wadeh
Powers displayed before the. Soviet court Into account, I do not insist
on the death sentence and ask the court to sentence defendant Fovers

- to 15 yeeara SADTASCAOERE Ss

“Relatives vied

vosew?, TASS, Radtotetetype in Russfan to Europe, Aug. 195 1960,
1720 GML :

(Text) Moscows-Seon after tie ETonouncement of the sentence, the father,
mothes, sister, wife, and mothéx-in-law of Frencis Powers had 3
meeting with him ir, the building whera the’ eet took place. The
meeting lasted one hour and 15. minutes... - :

Powers? Sentence

a

{Text} We trans = ‘the Poukeneg of the otlitery collegium of the USS

Supreme Court in the erimingl caca of the U5, spy-pilot. Frencis Gary
Povers. Sf ga ,

t

- BS 26 - USSR IPTERNATIONAL APTATRS
bugs 82, 1960

fn the neme of the Union of Soviet Soatalist Republics, the military
collegium of tha USSR Supreme Court, consisting of the Presiding judge,
chairman of the military cOllegium, Lieutenant General of ; ustica
| Eorlsoglebskiy, and pecpie's esgeasors. Major Generet of Artillery
Yorotyev and Major General of Aviation @akherov; io the presence a2 the
Stcretery, Me jaz of ietretive Service Afaneeyey; with the pertictoa.
tion of the state prosecutor, prosecutor general of the USSR, active
State Qounctler of Justice Rudenkos; and of the defense, meuher |
he Moscow city collegium of lavyers, Grimey, in an open court
feesion in the city of Moseow om Aug. 17 to 19, 1950, studied the case ay
for the charge egainst citizen of the United States of Amerina, Powers, he
Feegels Gary, bern 1929, native of the town of Bourdyne, Kentucky state,
of higher education, pilot of the special recennaissaace 16-10 uals of the
Centrel Intelligence Agency of the United States of America, accordiag
ta article 2 of the lew of the USSR concerming crigingl responsibility

for state erimes.'

Tt is established by the meterials of the casa studied by the court .
' session that on My 2, 1960, at 0536 Moscow tine, a military ur ft

of antiaircraft defense of the Soviet Velon in the area ef Kirovebad, |

Tadzhik SSR, detected at a height of 20,000 meters, not acceseible to an
. alrerart of civi_lavistion, an usknows aircraft which had violased@ the

state frontiers of the USER. Military units of antiairerars cefense of ;

the country viellantly followed tha mevetents of the aircraft, which flew
over major industrial centers and important defense objectives, and

only when the viclatiag atreraft hed penetrated inte the confines of

the Soviet Union by 2,000 kilometers and whey the ill intentionad

nature of this flight, fraught with the (threat?} of thermoauclear

Weapens with disastroug consequences to the cause of universal peace,

became quite obvious, at the order of the Soviet Government, 9 bevtery

of antiairerart rockets at 0855 hours shot down the aggressor airerart
in the grea of the city of Svemdicves.

The pilot of the’ airerart ejectha himself with @ parachute and at the
Roment of-landing was detained, Te. questioning, he named himpel? as
Fowers, Francis Gary, citizen of the United States of America, By en
inspection of the icegments of the fallen aircraft it was established
that an atreraft of U.S. production, especially destaned for Plight
at great heighta and fitted with various apearatus to falfiiL spy-
reconnelssance assignments, had been shot dow,

: In this connectior, pllot Powers vas arrested and was brought ta :
erininal Tesponsitility, accused of esplooage against the Soviet Uston,

De ye

eg siace

- BBS? L- OuSn |

6 POUPE Session det aodagt Powers faVS Jetaiiag
Sepicnare acpiviest ané the Circumstances Ziniad with h
the firsnace op the USSR on May d, 1980.

Th 1980 Povars enrk
air Fores #eancL,
tag Militar: pent
by the Central Int
PRItioular pecs,

After bOnt Lud ing
Diteligens ney, 4 : a
Bonth, for #splonage. apy activities, He undervent 3 2cial training
SIG WES Sent to an intelligence aviation unis usder the cade

BUBtioned at the U.S. Turkish base Ineirliy- pear the tow: of fdans, Turkey,

<q
rT
rf
#
am
i
&
to
(3
he
o
a
rh

Fi

in

3

B
BE

@ ¢

ef
A
p
i 5 taba eas

The court has Sehabli shee ‘shat tha LOT ue

S Tepresanted a Special
tombinesion ey fillitary ang civilian intelitgence Sérvices of the United
States ang its Purpose wag Spying on tha USSR with the aid of reronnai ssance
Planes sen+ into 6oviet Birspace , Since 2256, Powars On orders from :
the commander of the 1o-19 unit, iaas S¥stera@tically carried out sp flights a
alone the VESR borders With Turkey, 5 Sy 8nd Afghanistan. in tty i9sé, :
Povers extended his Secret contact With che. Centyal Totelitvence Agency
: of the United States for two Years, and in January AS&3 for another year,
it has been established fron the documents of the case and from the
testinony, by the defendant that the erininal intrusion inte the Sovtet
Union's Sirsvace Carried orb by Powers on lay 1, igs WAS Carefully
Prepared weil in advance. ; :

On 4Er. 27, iste Powers, with the caumander of tha 10.16 unit, U.s,
Colscnel Shelton, and &@ group of technicians appointed to py epare the-

U-2 plane ror flight, flew on a U.S. Air Forse Srenesport plane fron .

Incirlik base tg Peshawar Sirfiela 42/7 Pekistan. on Apr. 30 another Pict
brougts the ‘y.p. Plane from Turkey te this airfield; int iS plane Powers

: Gs d

During the night of May 1, 1360, Colonet Sheltoa ordered Povers to
Tly over Sovtes Union territory at a height of 29,000 meters along the
route Peshawar . the Aral 2 arr Lah Kirov -axthanged sk Mores, and
ith Powarg tecarse acquainted with
aS far back ag i55G, Flying over Sevier iand, Powers, on Shelton's
orders, et cerain points Was to fwitch on Speclal ite truments + Ling
aerial bhotographs ang Fegistering tha signals of radio docation stations
of the USER six sefensges, Powars was to Bay special attention to two

Doints--2t one of them the U.5, intelligence Service expected to fing

launching sites for rockets; and &t the S€cond, a Particularly inbortant
" defense object (obyelta}. ios Be

se ae 8S

2 “off from Peshatvar’ 4
Povers flew territory and ove
i Oovict Union Blong the ordered Toute. Aparté fra
1s cont hed by the u.s, flight chart wick the rout
he wivigeter of the 20-20 unit, Hejor (Dulac?) ang
2 submitted te the Sart, and notes bir Powers
POF Gurortant Us i defense ¢ites seen ty bie,

Duving the entire = ight up to the marent the Sireratt w
PoOvErs oneratea Suecial intel ligeucae apparatus, took pho}
importans defense cdieats: recordings of the Signdéis
installations of the countey'y antiairaraft defenses,
the developuest of the aerial phote Tilm, which had teeg
estedlished that the seoused Payaig phetogra 5} this
industrisi and military chjecte ;
cthmunies tion roads, railway
dines, airfields
Tlerous photo taken by the. det :
_ bight of disposal of the »
is Supreme Court, gate it Possible to define the
indus trial enterprises, the desivn of railway bridges, she
0%, adrcraft.on the airfields, the peculiarities ang eee |
“equipnens, FPovers recorded og a@ tare recorder the Signel#¥
location stations in the USSR,- vith the aim te discover aif
antisivrorart defense systen, : .

ta the experts: pinion, the information getherea by defeng.
during bts Slight on May 1 © Soviet airspace 1
military secret 9 pecially Brotected by§:
testified befsre plane was equipped]
devices desiguea the event of a fod
in Sovie flight on Nay 1, 3
i t was. essertial td

7

of, Volenel Shelton gave hin a special poiscned $.
© Poisoned pin, Powers had tazen from hin whe!
Vent pistel with cartridces, a ‘nire, fishing §
+2 Fubber beat, a topographical map of the Boviet li:
or Lighting a Lire and Signalling, and flashlight, compas
foed concéntrates, medicines, 7,500 tubles in Soviet money
following valuables: gold coins, rings, and
Povers testified, were to bribe Sovie

landing by the U-2 on US&R territory,

The sien of the militer CLiszium of the uss LDTEme - Sane studied. :
other evidence whic imme t plone foam on Mey 1, 1950 4
by 8 Soviet rocket t ey despite the fact :
that netional identification marke were sbsar, experts, on the bacie of
.& study of the remants cr the plane an@ the meat in ats cunchlided thet

this plane was a {sonic ee Tecounsissanace ai r & type

greducid oy the. ha ri

if
“e

the

id i
vericus US, 4
the turbo jet
machinery fer cen the aoe ecunieay equipment by ae a dard 7
and Generel £ Moreover, there w identification marks showin

ar
thet the sqvipment aga #9 the hha se cDecattnent of the Untted States,
@ material evidence was endant, and Fowers ecknowledged *"
as sae e to the 0-2 he, Powers, on May 1, 1960.

On the identity paper saxon f from the secused and presented Im the case,
bearing the number AF 1282069 in the name of Powers, Franeis Gary, there”
is the emblem of the U.S. Defense Department and the inscription ;
"Department of Befenge a the United States." Thus, tne fact thet the
U~2 Lockheed reconnaissance plane of the United Stetes, and defenéant
Powers was @ secret aoene of the Central Intelligence Agency of
United States, hag been quite definitely estebiisned during the court's
sitting. : :

Powers was the docile executor of the perfiddous designs of the U.S,
Central Intelligence Agency, carried out with the cengent of the US.
Government, By his own admiseion Powers was sware of the fact that, by
intruding upon the eirspecs of the USSR, he was infringing on the state
sovereignty of the Soviet Unicn and was flying over th latter's
territory for the purpose of espionage, the main aim of which was to
Gistover and record the location of rocket launshing sites.

The witnesses interrogated by the court, Surin, Cheremisin, Chuchekin,
Asabin, said in testimony thet they observed the fall of an airplane in the
area of the towm of Sverdlovsk and Sthe moment of landing of @ parachutist
whom taney detained and disarmed, Tue man detained proved to be Powers. °
In examining the ease aecnet Powers, the military collesiur of the USsk
Suprem Court nas remembered the fact that the intrusion of the U.S.
recomaissance plane Tepresents 2 oriminal violation of the generaliy
admitted principle of imtersationel law which establishes the exclusive
sovereignty of each atate over the airspace putending above the territcry

of that ohare.

Lain es é : oni

~ BS 3G - USGR

wh ooe
tae

pe it
5

y
w

1
ot
a
we

peoples, ith the .
dee certain stetes, heaving ato

+3

W Have the oppertunit uy te

to a military reeonneiscans *
aireotly preceeded = military attack, Thet daage> was

@ situstion in which ‘the United States, as U.3. general

maiinteins patrolling ‘airborne bombers with hyorce een bens

ready to drop a emt. | on predetermined targets in the oet Union.

fo the United Stutes,
ars, Was a tareat to
éloof the military ecllezium of
hat through the, aggressive
o the eirspace ‘of the Soviet
ing designs of the  .
tes, aimed at incressing

5a]

Under these send tiiiens, ‘the aggressive ag
arried crt on May i, 1986 by defender %& Bowe
VErsal peaat. “tre evicence at the éispo
; the Suprene Court dees not leave any doubt
intrusion of the reconnaissance airplane ir
Qnion, defendant Powers was oervying out fa
reactionary ruling cireles of the United St
international tension,

ah &

wo We

soe Nikita Sergeyevieh Khrushchev, the head of the Soviet Governzent
the sessicn of the USSR Supreme Soviet of May 3, reported that 2
bier hed been shot down over USSR territory, the U.S. State
Department admitted thet it was quite possible that a U.S. plane had
violated the USGR border, yet i4 tried to deceive world public opinion.
For this end the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and
the State Department issued a muddled staterént about an accidental
departure of the U-2 plane, which had ellegedly been engaged in
research, from ite curse, See
Tn hi fined speech at the USSR dipreme Soviet session of May 7
Comrade Nikita Serge yevich Khrus tener, unmesked the mesdactous
nature of these claims. Then US. feaders, President Eisenhower
¥iec President Nixcn and State Sccretary Herter, admitted thet
espionage flights of 1.5, aircraft wer Soviet territory are-part of
the caleuleted polley af toe United Siates, Thus, the U.S, leaders
proclaimed that violations of thi sovereignty of other states ang
espionage aga ins them were the he SeERE state policy of the United

_ States, ; ; abs aes

mn

AES eee as.
Pt a

*

eas

a)

sis

of

EYCSaNAT IO?

MoAb ASTy

armed ther

ho

‘
fe
‘Gt

oH
a
hiss
Ft
Tt

i

‘Lerritory oF
Proved that th

Pakistan, ang Norway.

having beuna Torkey

CEO Bet tone

200 their
‘
oad

ices in Sagara ssion

After exGninin

@ the evidence’ of
the conclusions of the axperts
and Witacasos) the SBeechs
the }

dence’ ena
Sing the Statetents of the defendant
& Gace by the «

<
tate prosesutar aad counsel far
Snee 86 wll as the finaly Satenent oF ths @eTendant, the oilitary
boo.) COR Festi of the sce Suprese Court cOnaiders it €Stéblished thugs
: Sadant Powers has, for a leng Lime, been Bn active seorss QséLct of she
7 u.38. Cestral Tatelliigence Agency ana Kas carried out espionage tas
For that Szensy Cirectes Bzsinet the USSR; and that Oa Mey i, C
with the Rnowledge of the U.S. Governnen
- U.S, hlitary gos

£ and ia a» Specially
Sspionace ag
help of spect radio, technical,
‘ information of gre @i¢ immortance Scnstituting state and military
ie cf the Sovies State, thereby couns : u
ticle 2 of the

erime ag éefines
USSR law of cCriming] Posponsibllity for eriges
: the state, ; w
2 ae ; 2
At the Same tine, “8ving assesseg 412 -the circumstances
hand in Accordance with their

f6G Of the case in
mutual relationship, and Considering the
incere repentance

sincere admission’ of guiit msde ty Powers 4nd fis s
over his actions. : 2 fron the ‘princinies Of steialist huranian
articles 319 ang 320 af the RSFSR criminat eode, the

‘giun of the USSR Supreme mrt has Sentenced Francis sary Powers,”
O28 the basis of artiale 2 a2 the USSR lay on eriminal reas

Por arines ageinst Ehe atate, to deprivation

uith inpriss:

Pons bility
cf freedom for 1G years,
mment curing the First 3 yeérs,

Pee See a

+

ct
: 4 hs
dhe | ae

PET nfe ah

t
*
.
*
*
4
at

Ee Fee
EE

. rectly responsibie 7

- BB fe - USSR TAILANALTONAL APPATHS
Aug. 22, 106

7 ; & account of the p:
1960. The material evidence wali be one on
and valuables taxen fron Safe to be cons?

mete With arti¢lie mene asae alcielss als; ot
the sentenced

borisugistskiy, presiding judge; Vorobeyey and
us, GOVERNMENT REACTION TO SENTENCE

White House Statement ‘Unconviacing

Moscow, Tass, Radioteletype in Russian to Europe, Aug. 19, 1960, 1830 GM~--L

he Hhite House hes puolished
6 by the wilitery 2913
Pilot Powers,

There is mot a ‘word in this statement sbout the responsibility of the U.5.
Governuent and the President personeliy, with whose Knowledge end apprvval
such operations as the esplovcage flights of U-2@ aircraft were carricd out,
ror Powers’fate. But there is no shortage in the statement of expressions
of regret at the “severity” of the centeace passed on Powars, abthoug!
consideration of the severity of the crire committed by Powers, the

a

Rentence is being justly assessed everywhere as very Lleniznat.
Tnere is pi unconvincing ring to the White House statement's eipressions
m chose

rast
of sympathy for members
or

*,

¢

of Powers! fant ily since they come fror

the jot that has befallen the Amo=rican sp;.
Presifent Eisenhower Rypeoer{tical

Moscow, soviet North American ea Zevice in Englich, #ug. 20, 1960, 2300 OMP—1,

(Anat city. gan Comment } - , : “

{ Text.) ifs ite House. Press Tacretary Janes dagerty weathered newamen on Aug. 22 |
to read inem & special statement by President Eisenhawer on the spy trial
in Moscow. The Fresident regretted the severe sentence and expressed hie
synapthy with the family of Francis Powers, the condemned spy pilot. -

TAS eee mp ae

a.

Now when the v2 flis

des |

hoy, 8
Powors Wes
4

Fi
in
m5

i
iD
bey
i

3 ct
L
G
et
pay
Mt

i
oi
a
ar
rot

She syupnth

a 3 leaders have begun

to masquerade as huueniterians, shedding tears sver the fate of the man
whe carried Gut their sordid werk for thes. Neither President Fiserhover,
however, nor anyone else cen slic ZB mud at the equity whe trimageness

of Soviet Gustice. The rest of the world can see if the sentence neted
out ta Powers: is PEeay. humans. :
British meaber of sarliament Konni Zillias i$, whe avtended toe Moscow trial,

%
teid we thet anyone under similar charges in the United Stetes would have :
been sentenced to compar ably wore severe punishuent. President Bisenhover.
knows that, <neugh he sheds crosudile tears over Povers, Nanse ‘Life dantt -
worth @ cént either'te the President or te en wont @lse in his administration.

(> + U8, Rulers Pilorted

Moscow, Soviet Hoe Service, Aug. 1, 1960. 1930 GMtT.-r

(Text) President Eisenhower even put aside his coll clubs in order to

weve his arms better and ery cut about the sentence of the Soviet tourt.
The President of the United States did net take it hard when he save ‘
the order for the infamous intrusion across the Soviet torder, when he

sent his spy pilot into the peaceful skies of the Soviet lend. He bad

no regrets in givicd his provocative order and creating a threat to peace -
and the lives of millions of pecple. :

TMd President Eiseshover want Pearets when he was caught: Pedshanded ‘while
causing the failure of the conference of heads of governiient? Ke is.
sorry about the severity of the sentence of the Soviet court. What hypocrisy!
Did the bigwigs ia Washington think that the Soviet Peopie would slap.
che backs of those who scoff s% the security of their homeland? A vain hone.
|
The Powers trial exposed the rulerg of the United States as the enemies
of peace. These have been the days of their shame. The White House
regrets. We also regret that those who sent Powers. were not in the dock
with him. Well, they were not there, but even in absentia they have been
pillorica in front of the whole world. i
i.

ies

Sate TT

PAS fe tae ae, oe

=.

ations

&

.

Bam et

- BR gE - wish Ir

u
hug. 22, 1960

State Leparinent Forbide Comment
Meseoy, CASE, Dictation -in Rusgiad to Provincial Pres, Aug. 19, 1966,
1128 SED--L (URCLASSIF TED) Pe oO : .

Yesbingtos ~-ather the clumsy attemmt oy the U.S. Air Force
ca) ae sore Aistribute the masked versios “eonces Ling th
ctivity of the American 10-10 detacwent in whit

iashinecton haa decided te Keep strictly elient e@bout Povers*
indicating the aggressive schemes of his. wasters. As- 2

UPL reports ‘that the U.S. State Departnent hss “forbida jen a
of all i a eedies and MepaTtneote to comment public ay on ; “,
Power! 8 oes ial, Jom: :

The oegarizers of the aggressive provocations sgaiust the Soviet .

Union are cbvicusly displeesed at the fact that Powers did sot texe

the polocn with which they provided him. There may te eome weople, . .
significantly writes correspondent (Taylor?) ef. the Washington DAILY NEWS,
wao would have liked it if Fowers would have voreferted not to live end

to have taken his place do the Seviet court ard have told SEE wnole

world the story of the U-2 aircraft. :

Power's rasters coutitue to assert the absurd fabrication that Pruvers
was conditioned and thet therefore his evidence is not valid. In thia”
matter, they ara tot even deterred by the fach that President Bisenhower
has virtually refused to support this fabrication. UPI says thai certelis

“ancoymeys officials, though put out by the Presidest's stetement,

nevertheless, go on saying that there ia alleged evidence to disprove
the view that Fowers was not subjected to conditicaing.

OTHER COMMENT ON TRIAL AND SERIENCE

a U8. bry Advocotes EeGeo Nota
Moseou, goviet Eurcypeas Service in English, Aug. 20, os L315 GMi- +L
(UMCLESS FIND ) :

: a

{Boris Stolpovekiy Commentary}

(fext} The Fouers trial im Moscow hes ended. President Fiaenhower |
has alreany bed cause to regret its cutccwe and with reason too. -
Ap unbiased court not only established the guilt of the spy pilot.
Powers, who received the punishnent he rightly deserved, out
documentary proof-was provided of the criminal policy of she United

States, a policy of total mapioniee and aggression, of which Powers

was the es . ae .

|e

an

bs

Oe Ge

.

AS eee a =

- RE 35 - SSR IDGTERNAT
Aug. 22, “LEU

biecs pege haa beea inscxs ved in the history of American policy.
‘serve to ramiud everyoue for 6 #88 time that aggrecsi ive gsetlone
tee soviet Unien ent in extosure and inevitable failure. .

0
re)
ey
a

Ver edvi Z and
Age: amo 2 thing, The Paris pane T LEBSRATICON
reported yesterday that it was learged from au Anericen source unat
the Pemtagon, with the acpreval of the White House, ie preparing new
: re Rekiags provide for the resumption of the spy tiights
rritory on a tew besis. A special Joint group, whieh
i a of staff and the leaders of the Intell
heen sei un to handle bhe matter.

for eriminal action ageines the USSRT It

In the future, agecrding to the Feutagos's :

will be carried cut fro we U.S, aircraft carriers

operatisg in neutral waters, In addition, the Fentagon and Alien
Dulles! asency have asked certaiu civil sirereft ccmpanieas which heve
permission to make ordiusry flights to the USSR te take oo soard special
equingent for photcgraphing certein objectives. The Pentegos aad
Dulles" agency have alsa considered the question of drawing ioce their
aggressive affeirs the governments of the United States’ ellie: ip the
various Silitery blecs. This is aot enly for the purpose of gloved
espionage, cut also, according to the WALL STREET JOURUAL, to forte
these countries to shera the respoosibility.

The U,8. plans for epying, #8 you see, are very big, and both the .
Pentagon and the Allen Dulles’ agency bave lost ell secse of reality.
They gees to have Boe nothing from the failure of the Powers
missida and the RB-L7 flight; «wr perheps they think thek if @ sry
plane tekes off from au aircraft cerrier operating in neutral waters
the criminal will evade retalfation; or perhaps they berber the

‘ {liueion: thet the civil camouf lage will save the sir pirates ond

Washineton from exposure.

i}
- agoressive act fgean tht USSR, camouflaged or aii sbteos? lead

ré hopeless. One can soy without hesitation that the JSR will

Fenty to any eerie Bore in the same way gs in tne Fouers
ease. It wili shoot down the aggressors and put the spotiiaht on then.

te) tenuate aed Mew ee Babi.

cTeteomed. ME ot ash tibet

patent

sat aie!

i

eG ceva ag oe

?

re

an See

.
‘

sentence,

_ grounds, but

Vashington Deaders Heckle

rho

Moscou, Soviet North American gerviees in Begli

23c

\Nikolay Ardreyey commenter: oa the Bowers Triat

RO LNTERSAT ONAL
Aug. #2, 1960

(Text) The three day trial of airman Powers was enoducted with

Scrupulous observance of the official praced.
Witnesses were warned that they vere Liable to prosecution under

inal The interpreters transleted
ity they would bear for

ised's merther

lav for giving false witness.
every Russian word about the responsicil
knowingly recdering a false translations
tongue. :

Toterpreters

aoa

As the crosg-examination aba expert evidence established more acd .
more of the circumstances of Francis Bowars' crime, it becave inerersingly
vident that the accused deserved the suprane punishuent. This impressioa
Was shared by all present in the hell.
condemned to death for hig acts of espionags wag exprassed in the Uri ted
States itself. Mrs. Elearex Roosevelt, for instance, in her nevspape
article of Aug, 18, recdégnised such a possibility. However, even the
brosecutor, taking into consideration Powers! sincere regret, did not_
insist on applying the death penalty but asked the
Sentenced to. iS years! deprivation of literty. The court, however,
fros humaniterian cousiderations, sentenced the accused to only 10
years! deprivation of liberty. :

The opinion thet Povers might be

@ should be

In wy opinion, the fact that such @ mild sentence was given ‘weg largely
due to Powers! defending counsel} Mikhail Grinev. In bis questions tc
Bowers and in his persuasive sp@ech for the defense, the advocate was
able to present facts to the sdvantage of the secused, Tas years?
deprivation cf Liberty is merely the minimum senfence laid down by
the relevant clauses of the Soviet law oo crioinal responsiblity for
orimes against the state, . mr :
Nevertheless, people were to be found in the pnited States who hed
the temerity to declare that the court had given Powers a very hare)
Fresident Eisenhower vas one of them and Vice President
Yixog another. ' President Eisenhower declared that the United States
would do all it could to secure a reduction.of Francis Powers! sentence,
The U.3, Presijent would seem to také this position on humenitarian
such humanitarianism is very far frem sincere.

a TT
THERE

2o, nooo

sred thet espiongxe
oterious

ighs
de Ti
were sending } jevertheless, tbe ey seat

Zam sheotutely convinced that Powers’ chief2 ma
assumoti ‘that in the event of es “evash oy of the plane being brought
down by a goviet rocket, both the plane aod tha pilos would have
been destroyed. without leavi ing a trace, Just auch @ conviction that
there wers' co clues would explain the initisl false secountse of the
U-2 given py Washington te hie they said that the flight over
Soviet territory was accidental and that the pliot had fost

SCLSCLOUS TESS +

Fat
ic

Realising the probabil of a fatal ovteome, they nevertheless
unhesitebingty sent Powers on his espiosage mission. So when they
ere now publicly expressing their sorrow at the sad fate of poor
fraucis Powerg this sorrew is mere hypocrisy. The Washington tes
would have experienced absolutely no sorrow but would have been
extremely pPleaged if the Soviet rocket had sent the place and Powers
. with if up in smoke. It would certainly have been mich mere converieat
for BRED : : ue

i
wW

“¥
re

ea

a _ But the fate of the airman is) after all, the fate of an- individual
husan being, whersas his crint was an ack which affected not only
his own fate. As the pragecutor,-Romen Rudenko, poluted out at
the trial in his spcech for the prosecution, in Power's criminal
acts, denger was involved for-millions and millions of people. During
the crose examination, the prosecutor pointed out that when Powers
presse@ the levers of the espionage instruments he might just as
easily havé oressed a lever releasing an atomic bomb over the USSR.
Yes, I might, Fovers egrecd. but he added, in on sitempt to justify

y

‘ ‘himself, that the U-2 vlene was not suitable for carrying atom bombs.
im i ‘
& eo However; 2% is @ifficult to say what type of a plane whick is- ‘flying :
f. ee. at a height of 68, OOO feet is and what loed it hag on ‘board. Consequently,
4 joe _ othe jacuralon of a war plane into our sirspace might be taken az a
e wilitary attack an@ the necessary means put into setion te deliver
: a countertlow., That the USSR possesces such meacs no one in the world
: now doubts. The leaders of the United States were quite aware ia what

: manner the Soviet military suthorities might react to the incursion

: of a ¥.3, plane inte the USSR. Su21 they sent Pusere with Instructions

to cross | "over our country in the U-2.

ee wo
Sad 2 oS
ans 2 a . .
r, ; i;
v e .

2 fs eae By eT ee IR A tie

CoE, eee He ote

ere
lions:

Le

The leader
Going thus 2
who would be toudemned to death in the event of the catastr:
in the age io which wé 1

Poverst Plight and b

ae an pen ta as Pa
wie PISsen dis fo

of the United Gtates, in full kxowledge of whet they w
v i3

‘
ht the world t. the brink of war, Consequeat
calls AUMALSnGES On the part of the Wosbiagten autho:
are hypocriar fron beginning end, Humenitarianism dezands rejection ¢
war aS a aeang of settling Glapytes, & refusal to carry cut aggressive
acts against other countries. ,

arabe

overs wes a pawn. It may be that he did not think about the dangerous
acupequences of hig acte, but the recklessness of those people in
Washington whe sent Povers on his esplonege Plight wes of a monstrous natiy

Powers Tregted Fairly

_Moscow,. Soviet European Service in Norvegian, Aug. 20, 1960, 1630 G@--L
(UNCLASSIPINE) :
(Sumery) Editor Finn Gustaveen of the paper CRIEMIERING attended the

Fowers trial, ‘In an interview, he expressed susprise et the .imilarity
between Norvegian trials and the Russian one. He felt Powers hed been
fairly treated. Asked his opinion avout the fact that Powers bed
instructions to land if necessary oo an airfield in Finland o* Sweden ani
had intended te lani at the airfield in Bodoe, Gustaveen replied that .
this mabter wis very recent, and he had ect really studied it+

Gustavsen ‘said: "Wheat is pretty obvicus 4s thet if he bad lended in

_ Sweden or Finland he would sot have beea met by xepresentatives of the

esplonage section. to which Foyers belonged, Sweden and Finland rum their

eirfields completely independently, not Like Norway, where unfortunately

the Americans are allowed to have a certain cootre] over the airfieidse

“Tf he had landed in Sweden or“Finlaad, it would have come to light that

This is a most regrettable fact."

he bed heen over the Soviet Uniodon an espionage azeignment and the whole
world would heve mown about the matter,

“If, on the other hand, he had landed at Bodce » this would have teken

place in the greatest secrecy, The Amerleens would have met Lim st the

Bodce airfield, Vhe. aircraft would have been placed in a special

hangar--as was dont in 1958 when Powers was at Bodee Airflela--ané the

world end the Nerwegian pecple would not have known anything about the 3
way in which the Americans misuse the rights they have on Norwegian airfield: .
The difference, between Norway's position and that of Sweden and ;
Finland is that Sweden and Finland decide abowk their eirfields and are

. In full contrel of what happens there, while the Norvegian authorities,

as We have realized, are aot in complete control of their airfields,
