El Salvador: Progress and Problems on Human Rights - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049244, dated 1 May 1987.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049244).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

so ee

Central intelliperee Aperi y

‘ .
. !
Somer /
Washingjon 2 C 20508

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
8 JUNE 1987

El Salvador: Progress and Problems on Human Rights ee

Summary

GREED toa tcates that El Salvador has made
consider e progress in improving human rights since President
Duarte was inaugurated in 1984. Official government links to
rightwing death squads have ended, and political killings have
decreased dramatically. Neve eless, same problems remain,
including a corrupt and inefficient judiciary, continuing abuses
by lower-ranking soldiers and police, and the failure to
prosecute high-ranking of ws for human rights violations in
the years prior to 1984.

eres data indicates that most terrorism against

civi 1 Salvador now is being carried out by the
insurgents and that most guerrilla allegations of government
abuses are unfounded. Lack of evidence to support insurgent
claims--and the guerrillas' own tarnished human rights record--
will continue to hamper their efforts to undermine San Salvador's
international credibility. There is little likelihood the
government @ill make significant progress in reforming the
judiciary or prosecuting former officers suspected of human
rights violations during the remainder of the Duarte
administration.

This memorandum was prepared b African
Latin Analysis.

Approved for Release
NOV 1993

angie

t * *

During the 1970s and early 1980s, government human rights
violations were responsible for driving many moderates into the
insurgency, and the guerrillas effectively used the issues of
repression and abuse to undercut San Salvador's legitimacy.
Since President Duarte came to power, the insurgents have tried
to maintain the pressure through constant allegations--mostly
unsubstantiated--of atrocities and abuses. These efforts are
intended to mobilize international opinion against the war in El
Salvador and--optimally--end US assistance to the government.
Nevertheless, the querrillas have had declining success with the
tactic because of the marked progress the Duarte administration
has made in cleaning up its human rights record.

Although the a: rebels now are guilty of
most human rights abuses, ée Insurgents have deflected attention
from their activities through the use of human rights front
groups and sympathizers that deliberately distort and manipulate
information. Guerrilla defectors from these fronts have publicly
identified such groups as the Human Rights Committee for El
Salvador (CDHES) and the Committee of Mothers of the Disappeared
(Co-Madres) as staffed and advised by insurgents. A former
member of Co-Madres has cited the head of the Salvadoran
Archdiocese Office of Human Rights and Legal Aid (Tutela Legal)--
whose human rights statistics are widely cited by governments and
international organizations such as Amnesty International and
Americas Watch-- ing involved in channeling funds to the
guerrillas.

CEE indicates these groups fabricate stories of
human rights abuses and attribute them to the government. For
example, the guerrillas have falsely alleged indiscriminate
bombing and aistreatment of the population when the government
has mounted its military sweep operations in rural areas. Of 50
“death squad" killings alleged by Tutela Legal for the last half
of 1985 only three were directly linked by to
rightwing extremists. The remainder were e criminal murders
(10), probable political murders by unknown assailants (18), or
unverifiable incidents (19). In 1984, analysis of
Tutela Legal's methodology determined it was using military
reports of guerrillas killed and converting them to civilians
killed by the Army--a practice that was temporarily halted after

complaints, but had resumed by January 1986. The UN
Special Rapporteur for E] Salvador reported in 1986 that Tutela
Legal's methodology is based on presumptian,.not facts, and that
it counts ah Civilians even when they often are

guerrillas.

qui.

Government Record Improves ...

AS part of its efforts to demonstrate concern on the issue
of human rights, the government has. allowed humanitarian interest
groups--including the International Red Cross, Amnesty
International, and Americas Watch--freedom to operate inside the
country. Even human rights groups with links to the insurgents
are allowed to organize actively, issue statements, and mount
antigovernment demonstrations. With the exception of the
guerrilla fronts--which focus entirely on alleged government
abuses and seldom comment on rebel atrocities--most human rights
groups and the responsible press agree that the government has
made progress in ending its abuses.

Among President Duarte's first initiatives after assuming
office in 1984 was a campaign to ensure appropriate behavior by
security officials. Scars ia crane eis earavvererrrs eran eR
Duarte ordered the elimination of all official government ties to
the rightwing death squads and appointed trusted, reform-minded
officers to head the security services. In addition, he moved to
purge human rights violators and to indoctrinate police and
military officers. that police units that
were notorious for their tle Oo the extremists have been
abolished and that strict rules for handling and interrogating
prisoners have been imposed. figures indicate that
political murders declined fram 5, in 1983 to 261 in 1986.
Moreover, between June 1985 and May 1986, 1,806 police officers
were dismissed for crimes or unethical behavior, and 201 were
remanded to civilian courts for punishment. In an effort to
prevent future violations, the security services late last year
began a 26-week course during which every police employee
received 48 hours of instruction on human rights from the Red

Cross, the Catholic Church, and the government human rights
commission.

The government continues to seek measures that will further
humanize the treatment of prisoners. that
Duarte is seeking antiterrorist legislation Gislative
Assembly to replace the lapsed state of emergency and Decree 50
that allow prisoners to be held and interrogated for 15 days
before being charged with a crime. At present, the police--
operating under a transitional law--are required to charge or
release prisoners after 72 hours. Despite some grumbling, the
military and security services have agreed to abide by these
civilian-imposed rules. On 7 May, the President submitted
legislation that would provide amnesty for 600 of 800 prisoners
held under Decree 50, excluding only guerrilfa combatants,
foreigners, and those charged with terrorism. In addition, the
proposed law would release all prisoners awaiting trial for
crimes punishable by less than three years imprisonment.

By almost any account, the reform measures have had their
intended effect, The International Red Cross has told
that the human rights situation under Duarte is
much improved. It reports the police and the Army have taken
steps to minimize the abuse of prisoners and that only 15 to 20
percent of prisoners interviewed voice complaints. In October
1986, the UN Special Rapporteur for Bl] Salvador reported a steady
decline in politically motivated murders since 1984 and the
absence of links between death squads and senior military
officers. Canada restored bilateral aid to El Salvador as early
as 1984 in recognition of the government's improving human rights
record, and other critics of San Salvador, such as Australia,
have admitted that Duarte's efforts have borne fruit. Finally,
the government has continued to respect the rights of free
Speech, press, association, and assembly despite the ongoing
civil war. qa

- . . But Some Problems Remain

Despite the improvements, some ab the security
services and armed forces continue. that
some prisoners have been deprived of sleep, threatened, and

forced to exercise during prolonged interrogation. Occasional
allegations of rape, electric stieck, and beatings that leave no
marks are made by some prisoners and human rights groups, but
seldom can be verified. In addition, there are periodic non-
combat killings of civilians attributed generally to low-rankin
soldiers involved in personal vendettas or criminal activity. =

The fact that no senior officer has been convicted of a
human rights violation also tarnishes the country's reputation.
An incompetent and corrupt judiciary, officer cronyism, and fear
of Army retaliation by juries have iohibited the civilians from
vigorously pursuing longstanding cases of abuse. We believe
Duarte may hate decided to overlook violations that occurred
prior to his inauguration as a tradeoff to ensure good civil-
military relations and the military's continued willingness to
abide by the human rights norms established by the civilian
government. Qa

The Insurgent Record

As the government's human rights performance has improved,
guerrilla violence against the civilian population has increased.
We believe this trend has developed in part from narrowed
insurgent battlefield options as a result of fifiproved Army
performance that has nearly halved guerrilla combatant strength
since 1983. The guerrillas seem to have calculated that their
increased use of terror tactics would go largely unnoticed by the
international press while demonstrating at home the continued
inability of the government to control rebel activities. eee.

pe eg

Cae |: up to 60 percent of political
killings are noW committed by the guerrillas. Many victims are

killed on the highways during periodic, week-long travel bans.
During one ban in December 1986, for instance, four civilian
coffee pickers were summarily executed by the guerrillas,
probably as part of the insurgents' continuing efforts to disrupt
the coffee harvest. .

Most killings seem, however, to be directed at peasants who

refuse to collaborate with the guerrillas or are suspected of
informing on them. sc ccrerseee cisceenesion, WO four
civilians--including two ren--were murder in December 1986

because they had distant relatives in the Army.
over the past year indicate the re 5

or the execution of civilians who refuse to join
indicate insurgent

ma ain sites
the insurgency.
groups maintain lists of c lack of

cooperation. indicated late

last year that o action regularly executes

insurgents it believes to he unreliable. es
aan: guerrillas also have turned to

indis nate Mining of roads and farmlands intended to

intimidate the civilian population. Contact land mines killed 31
noncombatant civilians and children in 1984, 55 in 1985, and 53
during the first half of 1986. From January through July 1986,
172 civilians--many of them children--lost limbs to mines. The
UN Special Rapporteur for El Salvador has concluded that the

overwhelming majority of these mines had been placed by the
insurgents.

Net Assessment

The guerrillas have not been able to document significant
government atrocities since the election of Duarte in 1984, and
we believe they have begun to lose credibility, particularly as
their own record has been increasingly tarnished. The insurgents
undoubtedly will continue to accuse the government of abuses,
particularly during large military sweeps. These campaigns are
intended to mobilize international opinion against San Salvador
and to pressure it to end such operations. Nevertheless,
continued evidence of restraint by the Army in the field,
combined with an absence of evidence of atrocities committed by

a forces, will continue tdé erode the rebel position. Ga

Recent actions by Duarte have underscored his commitment to
continued progress on human rights in the’mt@st of a difficult
wartime situation. Nevertheless, Duarte's preoccupation with the
war and his reliance on the military for political support are
likely to preclude progress in the near term on cleaning up the
judiciary or prosecuting officers involved in past abuses. In

mezeesney

1989, however, the terms of al] the conservative Supreme Court
member s~--appointed by rightwing parties prior to Duarte's
election--expire. If Duarte's Christian Democratic Party wins
the presidentia ear, we believe these judges--
a key obstacle to judicial

?
,

ape
