Memo from Richard Helms to Director, DIA Concerning Military Thought: Nuclear//
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012302, dated 3 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012302).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2S
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 77 tL 4.3(a)\4)
WASHINGTON 28, D.c,

27 DEC i261

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "Nuclear/Missile Armament
and Some Principles of Military Doctrine",
by Major-General of the Engineering-Technical”
Service M. Goryainov

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the -
Journal "Military Thought" Cicrenmeaa Mysl") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Coumander.

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of

any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

‘FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

Enclosure

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 0 JUN 1982

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

Original:

ces

4.3{ayl4)

The Director of Central Intelligence
Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Starr

Assistant Chief ot Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. 8v Air Force

Assistant Chief of Starr for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

-— an 4.3(a)(4)

4.3(0)(4)

ied

" 4.3(a)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT yen THOUGHT: “Nuclear/Missile Armament
and Some Principles of Military Doctrine",

by Major-General of the Engineering-Technical
Service M. Goryainov

DATE OF INFO: 1960

APPRAISAL OF s
CONTENT : Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"Nuclear/Missile Armament and Some Principles of Military
Doctrine", written by Major-General of the Enginéeering~
Technical Service M. Goryainov.

This article appeared in the 1960 Second Issue of a special
version of the Soviet military journal Yoyennaya Mysl (MLLL ary
., Thought). .., ; guiarly and is
é : classified TO. ge ge Matas

my Wate!

Se

_ “equipment. .

1.3(a)(4)

Nuclear/Missile Armament and Some Principles
of

Military Doctrine
by

‘Major-General ¢ of the Engineering-Technical Service

yt
f

M. Goryainov

Universal recognition of the enormous and even
decisive significance of nuclear/missile armament, :
as experience shows, does not exclude various opinions
nor even radical divergencies in the evaluation of
its influence on armed combat. Divergence of views
on the principles of preparing for and conducting
modern war, as well as on the structure of the armed
forces naturally follows from this.

\

In the history of the development of armed forces
there are many known instances when new equipment |
(tekhnika);"despite its universal recognition, continued =
to be underestimated for along ‘time;and did not‘find =~
its true place in the army. In addition, obsolescent
equipment was over-evaluated for a prolonged period of

time, thus holding back understanding of the new

tT

Something of the sort is taking place right now in
the introduction of the newest types of armament and
in the clarification of their role in warfare. A
great number of works and official and non-official
studies have been published in many countries, in
which the new weapons are evaluated and conjectures
are made on their use and on the necessary reorganiza-
tion of armies.

4.3(a)(4

4.3(a)(4)

In this literature it is quite clearly shown
that the agonizing process. of reorganization is still
. far from. being completed even in rough form, and that
there. is still insufficient clarity regarding the
decisive problems.

Judging by the special literature, everything
which is being accomplished in the area of restructur-
ing and reorganization of forces, particularly of
ground troops, thus far conforms well with existing,
old military doctrines, principles and views on
the conduct of battles, of operations and of the war
as a whole. Questions regarding the duration of war,
its sweep, the enlistment of human masses into the
armed forces and the role of the economic potential de
are all examined in the light of old military theories.

In specific terms, this is expressed in the fact
that the new weaponry is for the most part considered
as a means of considerably increasing the firepower
of the army; therefore, there is basically nothing
new from the organizational point of view. A new
technical means of combat has appeared —- a new arm of
troops is created, as was the case with aircraft,
tanks, and still earlier, with artillery. The old _
arms of troops are modernized as muchas possible and
"assimilate" nuclear charges. and missile Arm
continue to consist of the usual arms of ‘troops:
(modernized, of course) - plus missile troops.

\

XY
new means of armament which is now taking place can ~
be characterized as follows: proceeding from the —
experience of the past and taking into consideration
the achievements of the present, armies are adapting
nuclear/missile armament to the established views
on the preparation and conduct of war.

In other words, the process of assimilating the

This is a natural process - blessed by the ages -
of an empirical approach to the solution of little-
explored problems. Such an approach, which is the

~ 4,3(a)(4)

only possible and normal one for the military science
of capitalist countries, is completely unacceptable

to the armies of the socialist countries, the
military science of which is built on Marxist-Leninist
teachings on war. Obviously, we must go faster and
further both in the theory of using nuclear/missile
weapons and in their production.

However, as is known, there are substantial gaps -
in our military-theoretical thought - ",..in a number
of problems we have not shown the necessary creativity,
.. scientific. boldness and daring, and we have long
marked time". .
What, in our view, are the reasons why our military-~.
theoretical thought lags behind the practical problem
.of organizing the army?

The first reason, an organizational-methodological
one, lies in the fact that the indispensable minimum
of tactical-technical information about the new means -
not only ours but also the Americans' - reaches the
organizations which carry on military-technical work
in extremely scanty amounts. This leads to insufficient
understanding of and under-evaluation of nuc lear/missile
weapons. Together with this, certain technical perfections 7
and modernizations of old typés of weapons”are: more ae
widely known and lead to. their over-evaluation under
contemporary conditions. eae ges hae

The next reason is more complex. ‘We received our
initial information on nuclear means of warfare. from

American sources. These broadly showed the properties.
of low-yield nuclear weapons. As far as their
potentialities in a full-scale war are concerned, low-

yield nuclear weapons (and medium-yield bombs as well)

1. From the speech by R. Ya. Malinovskiy at the All-
Army Conference of Secretaries of Primary Party
Organizations.

1.3(a)(4).

1,3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

¢

are primarily operational and operational-tactical \
weapons. In our view, they are legitimately ;
considered as a means of increasing troop firepower,
and the use of them conforms well with previous
principles of conducting war. Our own military thought
has also lingered more than was necessary on the
analysis of the potentialities of low-yield nuclear
bombs and, in fact, has not approached the study of
the potentialities of powerful, multi-megaton nuclear
bombs.

It is clear to all that even 20 kt nuclear charges ©
with missiles call for tremendous changes in the
conduct of war and for fundamental changes in the
conduct of battles and operations. But the question of:
what changes follow from the use of intercontinental
missiles with charges of 2-5 mgt and even more,
remains little-explored to the present time. The
first widely published positions on these questions
were expressed by N.S. Khrushchev and R. Ya. Malinovskiy
in speeches at the January session of the Supreme Soviet
of the USSR and later in an address by R. Ya. Malinovskiy
to the All-Army Conference of Secretaries of Local Party
Organizations. In the light of these widely known
statements, we consider it necessary to dwell on some
_of the characteristics of. highly powerful nuclear .bombs .
with. TNT. ‘equivalents. in millions of tong (mgt). co
We know fron publications of the ‘existence of
bombs with a force in TNT equivalents of 1, = 3, 5, 10
and 20 million tons.

a ip wintite:

Calculations ‘can be found in American reference
books of the combat effects of bombs of 40,50, and
100 million t. In order to be able to imagine the
military significance of such means of destruction,
we will touch in passing on the potentialities of
destruction and annihilation of megaton bombs, about
which some materials have been published.

1.3(a}(4)

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4}

Below is Table 1, which shows the combat effectiveness of
megaton bombs in relation to their yield (area is in sq. kn.).

Characteristics

Yield in. TNT .. . Shock wave Radioactive contamination
equiv. (thousand | partially - of terrain

tons ) destr.
up to 500rjup to 3004 up app.100r

‘e.1,000

TABLE 1

: 2,000
9,000/sic/] ¢.5,000
“1,300 ¢.10,000

3,200 c.20,000

Note: 1. The table was compiled on the basis of foreign
materials.

2. Exposure to a dose. of 500r causes death in more
than 50 percent of cases; radiation of up to
300r ~ death of up to 15 percent; the rest lose
combat effectiveness for a number of months;
dases of 100r cause nausea and vomiting in up
to 10 percent of the cases and partial loss of
combat effectiveness in the rest.

— 1.3(a)(4)
eee

-6-

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

It can be seen from the Table that megaton bombs
raise thousands and tens of thousands of cubic
kilometers of radioactive dust into the atmosphere.
This dust settles back to earth quite quickly,
contaminating thousands, and tens of thousands of
square kilometers with a lethal concentration and
hundreds of thousands of square kilometers with a
combat concentration (boyevaya kontsentratsiya) .

The flash (svetovoye izlucheniye) and the shock -
wave are devastating only at the moment of action,

but the radiological factor of megaton bombs is
hundreds of times more important.

As is well known, various shelters protect well ‘
against the shock wave and the flash. No shelters
can - in practical terms ~ protect troops from the
radioactive substances of megaton bombs, the action
of which lasts for many days and weeks, and extends
over tremendous areas.

Table 1 shows convincingly that radioactive
contamination of terrain by megaton bombs can become ‘
the principal factor of combat. .

Let us examine more fully the radiological
action of a 20 mgt bomb on the basis of. testi

carried out, by the Americans.

cr

In March 1954, on the atoll of Bikini, in the
Pacific Ocean, a bomb was exploded with a TNT
equivalent of about 15-20 million t. During the
explosion, from 30 million t. to 100 million t. of
various radioactive particles of earth were thrown
into the atmosphere (for 1 t of conventionally
exploded TNT, 1.5 - 5 t of earth is not so very much).

As was reported in publications, as a result of
radioactive fallout as early as 36 hours after the
blast, the cumulative dosage of radioactive contamina-
tion in an area of 15 thousand sq. km. reached 900 r,
and in an area of approximately 26 thousand sq. ke.
it reached 670 r.

ae 4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

In an operational situation, 26 thousand sq. km.
can be considered as the territory occupied by a-
front (an area 250-300 km. wide and 80-100 km. deep).
We imagine that with the correct exploitation of
meteorological conditions, the covering of the
territory of a front with the radioactive products
of the explosion of one 20 mgt bomb would not only
lower the combat effectiveness of the troops of
the front, but would also necessitate their Fs
abandoning a significant portion of, if not the whole
of that territory.

If, as a result of meteorological conditions, the
radioactive products of. the explosion have the possibility
of spreading to an even greater area, then it turns out |
that in an area of 120-130 thousand sq. km. the level ©

of radiation will be about 200 r,.and in an area of

200 thousand sq. km. about 100 r.

Perhaps the figures cited here are only the
product of theoretical calculations not based on
actual testing. Unfortunately not. Preparing for
the testing of thermonuclear bombs, the Americans
declared a danger zone in the Pacific Ocean of
130 thousand sq. km. before 1 March 1954. But as is
known, Japanese fishermen-of the vessel. \Fukuryu maru'’,
which was 145 km.’ fromthe point of detonation
inhabitants. of the Marshs :

personnel on the atoll of Rungelap, “a distance of ©:

250 miles (about 400 km.) ‘from the epicenter, all
suffered as a result of the. explosion of 1, March 1954, —

alts

These facts forced the Americans during the repeat
tests on 19 March and 22 May to extend the danger zone
to 780 thousand sq. km., that is, by six times. Japan-
ese expeditionary vessels which were at sea from May
to July established that contamination of water took
place in an area bounded by 10° to 18° North Latitude

1. These figures were taken from the book, “Nuclear
Weapons and Foreign Policy".

ae 1.3(a)(4)

-8-

_1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

and 150° to 175° East Longitude, that is, an area
of 1,560 thousand sq. km. Two months after the
last explosion, the radioactivity of the water at
a distance of 1,920 km. from the island of Bikini
still exceeded by 20 times the maximum permissible
dose for drinking water.

If one takes into consideration the fact that
such. countries as West Germany and England are about ”
250 thousand sq. km. in area, the meaning of the
residual radiation of one 20 mgt bomb blast becomes
clear from all points of view. Bylot

In our view, it. should be absolutely clear from -
the above that nuclear bombs of great yield are
above all a means of  adiologicat contamination of
vast areas with all the resulting consequences.

As was already stated, however, a bomb of 20 mgt
ig not maximal. If it is found to be advisable,
50 and 100 mgt bombs may be employed.

Before proceeding to further discussion it should
be pointed out that usually the characteristics of
shock wave and flash are given for optimum conditions.

This cannot. be said for.radiological contamination of...
terrain: It'i8 known that ‘surface bursts increase the
radiological potentialities of bombs, while‘air bursts ©

decrease them. Nevertheless, test studies indicate
that usually 25 to 50 percent of the high-energy
particles fall out in the areas of the burst, and the
rest, penetrating the high layers of the atmosphere,
fall out during the course of many years and cannot
have any significance for military purposes. :

This means that from the military point- of--view
megaton bombs can be even more effective (by 2-3 times)
if optimum conditions for the burst are established
from the radiological point of view. In order to do
this, it is necessary first of all to know the most
advisable heights for bursts. Apparently contact
bursts of megaton bombs with a certain digging-in to

the earth will permit the raising into the air of)
more radioactive particles, and in such a case

more of these will fall out in the area of the burst
and. fewer will escape into the stratosphere. Besides
this, the chemical composition of the ground and

soils of the blast areas can also exert a great
influence on increasing the effectiveness of the blast
products. Such elements as sodium, iron, silicon,

and others can substantially increase the radioactive
mass of particles which are raised into the air.

A firm knowledge of local meteorological conditions in
possible strike areas becomes of enormous significance
to the proper use of powerful bombs. These conditions
should be studied well in advance, and materials should
be systematically amassed in such amounts that they

would permit a good prediction of the meteorological
conditions at any given time.

Let us examine the problem of employing powerful

eae tears in operational-tactical one ee
— oe eel

What does radioactive contamination of areas mean
to combat formations of troops? As an example, let
us examine the effect of bomb strikes in areas which
are occupied by conpat formations of troops on ihe

assem > 7 2 ES (Table 2)

“Table 2 shows’ that neeiene hosate will cause ©.
death by radioactive contamination for large. masses of
people dispersed over tremendous areas in the course of
a few hours after the bursts. A division which occupies
200 sq. km..is liquidated with one l-mgt bomb; 4-5
divisions, occupying an area of up to 2,400 Sq. km. , will
lose their combat significance with the strike of two
or three l-mgt bombs or of one or two 2-mgt bombs, during
which a large percentage of the personnel may die and
the rest will have to be immediately evacuated; a field
army (in the USA - up to 350 thousand men) can be
liquidated.as a military organism with two 10-mgt bombs.
At the same time, in addition to contamination, from
4 to 10 percent of the territory (hundreds and thousands
of square kilometers) would be devastated by the shock
waves and by fires from the flash.

eee 1.3(a)(4)

x
o
er
%
we

*STepIORME sono sigara MOTT Pe{ONI78V0D FT STINE FUL (z,

*sdoory jo Soy youroy
qeupete parpnbax you st ISN z-T wey, a70U Jo qUoTeATNbS UP UTA squog jo om “aia SoTqey sy} worl uses oq nw Sy (T *SaLON

UOTS TATA

TeoEp PIO
oor
=
ea
woyayaol

a a) -* Led
“4 LA & »
ers £
E » e w
2
2
rd

ececaestece| Saxod

Teoszyso

v

bali}
AIEUTT TK

2% FIGV
: *esuezep UT sdoox, Jo suOT}WMIOS yEquOO

£q patdnd0o swarw UT SUOPZEIGUSDUOD TROTATIO PUR TeIe) JO UOTIBUTWEIOD eATIOwOTpET syeBIO 07 papsed sqIOG JO La 7yureg

-1.3(a)4)

3(a)(4),

Approximately the same results would be obtained
if the combat formations of troops on the offense
were examined.

Analysis of the data in the Table from the point
of view of effective use of nuclear bombs shows that
bombs of large yield are more advantageous than
Tlow-yield bombs, both from a combat and from an

-economic..point ofr view.

Let us examine an example. In order to force
the enemy troops to abandon an area of 2,400 sq. kn.,
it is necessary to carry out 240 strikes with bombs
of 20 kt yield in the course of a few hours. To
launch such a number of missiles in a few hours, |
it would be necessary to use up to ten troop missile
organizations each with 1,500-2,000 men and with
300-400 vehicles of all types. Working under combat
conditions, everything else being equal, such a
troop organization will suffer losses proportional
to the amount of its personnel and equipment.

The same area can be destroyed with only 2 or
3 bombs of 1 mgt or with 1 bomb of 2 mgt. This wiil
be carried out /one or two words missing/ times faster
and, under equivalent. conditions, | with losses. Smaller _.
to the degree that’ the. “numberof people” “involved” oe
fewer and to the degree that they were ‘in ian an
positions for less times

It must also be noted that the production of 240
bombs of 20 kt is apparently considerably more —
expensive than 2 or 3 bombs of 1 mgt.

Does this mean that small-yield bombs are completely
unnecessary? No. If bombs of megaton yield, correctly
used, are capable of deciding the fates of nations
and the over-all outcome of the war, then kiloton
bombs will be completely effective for.the destruction
and elimination of individual targets, for the most part
the delivery vehicles (nositel) of nuclear/missile

1.3(a)(4)

-1Q—

1,3(a)(4)

weapons, individual bases, and launching pads.
Kiloton bombs will also be needed in operations with
strategic goals, particularly when it is necessary
to avoid unnecessary victins.

The existing concept that the primary form of
using nuclear/missile weapons is the operational-
tactical form arose in the army from earlier
doctrine on warfare. This form narrows the technical’
possibilities of nuclear weapons, leads to an in-
efficient decrease in the yield of nuclear weapons
and ultimately makes it necessary to have mass
quantities of small-yield nuclear weapons, and hence
a large number of ground troop missile units, the
effective use of which becomes in itself problematical, .

Even today there is a widespread opinion that a
nuclear/missile weapon is fabulously expensive, that °.
the basic raw materials used in its construction are
obtained with great difficulty and in small quantities.
This leads to the conclusion that the economic factor
does not permit giving this weapon a sufficiently mass
character. In this connection we will briefly examine
the following two questions: the understanding of mass.
ovost) as applied to nuc lear, missile

_ What do we méan by’ mass quantity as concerns
missiles and nuclear equipment? This question has
fundamental significance in the evaluation of the role
of new means of warfare and in the understanding of
the nature and peculiarities of nuclear/missile war-
fare. Nuclear means of warfare are so immensely power-
ful that a comparatively small number of them can
already be considered mass.

If 100-200 atomic bombs can create a turning point
in a battle and assure victory, then this number can
be considered as mass for a specific goal. If, in
order to win a world war, 300-400 thermonuclear bombs
are sufficient, then this quantity will also be
considered sufficiently mass.

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

Therefore, "mass quantity" should be understood
not as just any large quantity, but as that quantity
which satisfies the requirement or need for it to
a definite degree. From this point of view as
regards nuclear/missile armaments the concept |
"mass quantity” will mean that quantity which permits
the quality of Individual means of armament to be
manifested in a decisive manner...

Manizeste m2 agecisive manner. 5

In light of this, the numbers of bombs mentioned
above may be considered as "mass" for all practical
_ purposes.

From the speech of Marshal of the Soviet Union se
Comrade R. Ya. Malinovskiy it follows that 100 a
2-mgt bombs will turn a territory of up to 500,000

sq. km. into a desert. To inflict utter defeat on

a state or states, it is, of course, unnecessary to
completely destroy everything. It is important to
destroy the important residential centers whose areas
comprise not even ten but only a few percentage points

of the over-all territory. It follows that the
aforementioned 100 bombs are capable of demoralizing
the resistance of a state which occupies not 500,000
sq. km. but a great deal more, for example, all the_
West European’ NATO allies.”:.In this sense,.100.2-mgt ©.
bombs is a sufficiently mass quantity, since the’ 272":
problem of defeating the enemy in Western Europe is |
solved with this number,

As a result of exercises in the USA during which
strikes were delivered against 50 out of 170 typical
city areas, it was calculated that these strikes by
powerful bombs threatened to liquidate 25 percent ” —
of the entire population, up to 50 -pércent of the
means of transportation and up to 60 _ percent” of
American industrial enterprises. By analogy with
these figures, it follows that 100-120 20-mgt bombs
can incapacitate no less than three-fourths of the
industry and more than 50 ‘percent of the population
of the USA.

Popa

1.3(a}(4}

Therefore, 100-120 20-mgt or 100-150 2-mgt bombs
are the quantity which, if used correctly, will

decide the outcome of the war.*+ With this figure we.
exhaust the understanding of mass quantity for bombs
of given yields. To use this quantity of powerful
bombs we evidently need a small number of strategic
missile troop units.

The situation is different as concerns low-yield .
_bombs . In ‘radiological effect, the above-mentioned ;
number of powerful bombs is equivalent to 100-135 thousand
20-kt bombs. It follows that in the case of such
bombs, if the principal aims of the war are to be

gained primarily by the use of low-yield bombs, the concept
of mass quantity will be defined in many teus of

thougands.

Now, regarding the cost of nuclear bombs. In
1954-1955 the production of one kilogram of basic
nuclear material (uranium 235) cost about 20 thousand
dollars. The total cost of a kilogram of natural
uranium was about 100 dollars and a kilogram of heavy
water, 65 dollars. ‘ Based on these prices of raw
materials and on the special features of the production
of the first nuclear bombs, it was established that one
20-mgt bomb cost about 100 million dollars... In recent
years, important research was conducted:on the use of
natural uranium together with its isotopes.-and othe
fissionable materials in nuclear bombs , which’ would»
permit lowering the cost of the bomb to 2-10 million |
dollars. . ee Te 4 oe

In technical literature for the years 1958-1959
there is information to the effect that the cost of
nuclear materials, and along with them, the cost of
the weapons themselves had significantly decreased.

1. It appears that the liquidation of nuclear/missile
bases requires a certain number of kiloton bombs of
eoeperst Len ees yield /two or three words missing/...
atmosphere...

—

aa 1.3(a){4)

S165

3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

This gives a basis for supposing that by 1960 the
cost of nuclear bombs is within the limits of

from several hundred thousand dollars for low-yield
bombs to several million dollars for megaton bombs.
In 1959 it was reported that a nuclear charge of
3-mgt yield for the Atlas missile is valued at

2-3 million dollars.

- This cost is large, in itself, but in comparison
with tanks which come to hundreds of thousand and
airplanes which cost millions, some of them even
tens of millions of dollars, nuclear weapons are
comparatively cheap, particularly if the military
effectiveness of the two is compared.

From the above it follows that the budgetary
capabilities of the largest countries permit the
accumulation of nuclear weapons in mass quantities.
As concerns missiles there is obviously no doubt that
at the present time the status of industry, the
availability of processed special materials, the
construction-technical level of missiles and guidance
instruments permit the organization of mass. production
of all types of missiles, pone POS OR CONE NORLRS:

Judging by ‘the foreign. press;: the. or
in series: ‘production’ is” ‘placed | ‘at’ 2.8-5 mill:
for intercontinental, 1.2-1.5° million dollars for:
strategic, and several hundred thousand dollars for
operational-tactical missiles.

All that has been said above about the. ffect -
of megaton bombs, about economic and productive On
capabilities, permits us to come to the conclusion
that the nuclear/missile weapon has become (or can
become) a mass weapon, and its destructive, and in
particular its wadiclogionl charseteristics, are
actually capable of creating conditions in which
the fundamental object of the war -— the destruction of
the enemy — can be accomplished technically in a short {
period of time and without overtaxing the economy of f
poweriu ndustrial countries.

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4y

We believe that a view of contemporary warfare,
of prevailing military doctrine and of the: principles
of organization of the armed forces must differ
radically from views of war, not only of the pre-
atomic period, but also of a war in which the operational-
tactical use of low-yield nuclear/missile weapons plays
the leading role. Proceeding from this, we will
examine the following questions:

- the time limits (limit of duration) of a nuclear/ ;
missile war;

- the nature of the course of the initial period of
war and the tasks of the armed forces in a nuclear/
missile war;

- the principles of the organization of the armed —
forces.

The time limits of a nuclear/missile war. The
history of mankind recalls wars of various durations,
up to hundred-year wars. The duration of wars
depends principally on'the sharpness of the contradictions
and the economic and technical capabilities of the
warring sides. The question of the permissible time
limits of a war had no decisive significance in the

the thought of the eoeeipilite of monstrous — eee
and mass annihilation of people never arose.

The question is posed differently. today. | It ee
clear from the above-mentioned considerations ‘that if
the number of nuclear weapons sufficient to liquidate
human life on earth has not yet been created, it can
be created in the immediate future. In this connection,
the most destructive factor is radioactive contamination.

However, the process of radioactive poisoning of
‘the atmosphere and the earth's surface cannot be

—

-~1L7-

1.3(a)(4)

of factors, namely:

1.3(a)(4)

instantaneous. This process can take place in a
certain span of time. Consequently, the time span
from the moment of the beginning of a nuclear world
war to the moment of the poisoning of the atmosphere
of the globe (or a given zone of it) with a concentra-
tion of radioactive substances dangerous to human Live
on ear can be calle C) e g of a War.

The ultimate limit of a war depends on a series

rt
f

- the scientifically determined limit of concentration |
or radioactive substances in the atmosphere;

- the quantity and quality of the nuclear devices
detonated;

- the intensity of the nuclear bursts;

- the height of the bursts and their distribution over
the surface of the globe, and on certain other factors.

We will not examine the above-mentioned factors in
detail. For the goals of this work it is important to

show that the scientific solution of the question of
the tine iinits of ee is o absolute. necessity’.
Obviously, ‘the ‘pasic polation. ‘of ‘this’ ques on “85 "\>
depends on the definition of the maximum permissible ‘
dose of atmospheric contamination. Kissinger's book, _°.
“Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy", states thata .
doubling of the natural dose is required to eliminate
all life, which can be achieved in the northern. 7°." ~
hemisphere by 300-800 50-mgt bombs or 750-2,000. | #

20-mgt bombs. This number of bombs can evidently be
built by even one state.

What conclusion should be drawn from the arguments
on the time limits of a nuclear/missile war, if such a
war is thrust on us? There can be only one. The main
decisive phase of the war, defined as the complete

~18-

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

paralyzation of the enemy's nuclear strength, must
be achieved in the shortest possible time; this must
be much shorter than the time necessary to create a
dangerous radioactive concentration, The technical
possibilities for such a solution are evidently
available.

‘A protracted nuclear/missile war with a decision
in favor of one side is excluded because such a war
on the strength of military logic, as past experience
teaches, must be waged with Increasi severity and *
with the use of ever more powerful ant ever more
numerous destructive nuclear weapons. The result of

such a course of war would ‘be equally disastrous for
all warring sides. ——

A decision in favor of one side depends on aXe \
readiness and ability to finish the war in the j
shortest possible time. A great deal has been said
in our press recently concerning the fact that even
the bourgeois military ideologists reject the theory
of a short-term nuclear-missile war. Such statements have,
in fact, been made in the West. But this cannot
serve as a serious argument in favor of a apeoronsed
nuclear/missile war.

Prior to the appearance of nuclear armaments ,
representatives of Western. Leary eee created

about blitzkrieg. EC
military doctrine was based on this. Such piitnersege
were particularly alluring against countries with -
inadequately developed industry or with comparatively
small territory. Capitalism was deeply interested in
such an approach to war because an extended war ©
accompanied by arming of the masses in our time would
very probably lead to revolutions. The experience

of two world wars has already shown that both wars
were. prolonged and protracted. The principal reason
for this phenomenon could be formulated thus: comparative
equality of forces, means and potential capabilities of
the warring sides in the course of a certain segment of
time under conditions of comparatively weak means of
warfare (destruction).

1.3{a)(4)

a~19—

4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

Is there anything new in this question of nuclear/
missile weapons? Evidently, yes. The material base
for a war lasting for years may not even exist,
considering contemporary means of destruction, which
substantially (by a large factor) exceed the means of
creation.

How are these new conditions reflected in the
interests and the ideology of the warring classes?

First of all, one must keep in mind that no
normal man can be interested in the destruction of
mankind, The matter is different, however, from
the point of view of the ruling classes who are
disappearing from the scene of history. —

History has shown more than once that a dying \
class, a dying social order, gives birth to theories :
snd dogmas of human destruction characterized by
the phrases “apres moi le deluge" and "better be
atomized than communized". For reactionary forces,
doomed to perish by dint of historical hopelessness, :
a long war (like any other war) is not contraindicated, :
the more so since preparation for such a war is
economically advantageous for certain monopolistic
circles. : :

”" preparation’

more costly tha
capitalists many times higher i

and in the monopolistic power of certain groups. But
from the point of view of the cost of the military
machine and its combat effectiveness, the nuclear/missile
weapon is the cheapest and a short nuclear/missile war

is relatively the most economical in expenditures on

the forces of destruction, And if the nuclear/missile

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

weapon, in reducing the duration of war, reduces the
incomes of the monopolies, then the pertinent groups

of monopolists will, of course, be for a long war.

Therefore, as a result of economic reasons and
partly because of the aspirations of groups connected
with military production to preserve the commanding
position which they hold in the economy of a country
like the USA, the theory of an extended war receives
wide. circulation. This theory ties in well with the -
necessity of keeping colonial and economically weakly
developed countries under the threat of war and even
to thrust wars upon then.

The interests of the progressive breed. of the
world dictate a different approach. The material
prerequisties for the victory of the socialist world
over the capitalist world by peaceful means have
already been created. Consequently the progressive N
forces are keenly interested in avoiding war. But
if war becomes inevitable, the new world, naturally,
must strive to keep war losses to a minimum and ,
consequently should do all possible to keep the
war short and, in any case, to finish the decisive f
phase of the war prior to substantial atmospheric :
conta seetson over as areas ;

g:
we Btaxt from the “proposition that the ‘leading
capitalist states are preparing for a nuclear world
war, in. which they. will strive for a decisive result
at all costs. ‘In technical times, such a ‘decision
means the inevitable use of the most powerful nuclear
and other weapons against which the other side must
use no less powerful destructive weapons within
certain time limits to gain the victory.

Before the age of nuclear/missile armaments it
was considered that the direct manifestation of war
was armed conflict between two opposing armies of

-21-

1.3{ay

1.3(a)(4}

peoples, of states, or of social classes. Contemporary
technical means of warfare, as N. 8. Khrushchev pointed
out, dictate a different concept of the physical

process of war itself. For a number of economically
powerful and heavily populated states which are,

however, small in territorial size, the war can end

in their complete defeat and even destruction before

the main part of the armed forces of these countries

can enter into action. For the USA, the situation is x
somewhat different. The disruption of their potentialies:
for resistance will require more time and weapons and,
obviously, it will be difficult to avoid some strikes
from their side. In these circumstances, strikes \

in the enemy's industrial rear, and on his political ;
and administrative centers acquire an overwhelming
significance. Powerful strikes, capable of disrupting.
(or liquidating) the economy and the organized control

of the country and the army, will naturally undermine

the base of military activity and the existence of the
armed forces.

Concurrently, strikes must be made on the necessary
number of strategically active (or potentially active)
targets (bases, launching pads, naval vessels) from
which the enemy can launch nuclear weapons at our
economic and political cénters. “in these cases, the
strikes could be made with bombs of lower.yields...  .. ...
Given the selection of the appropriate’ bomb yields (0:
' and their technically correct use, it is possible” © ~~
to indicate tentatively the quantity of nuclear
weapons required. We realize that defining our views
on just this point in concrete terms can be’ most
vulnerable for a number of reasons. But the importance
of the problem demands this concrete definition, it
requires a point of departure. In our opinion, even
a mistake of 2-3 times in this case should not be
embarrassing; it is important to show the possible
nature of the process based on actual material.

Analysis of data published in foreign literature
indicates that for a world war about 200 bombs from
1-2 mgt to 15-20 mgt and about 600-900 bombs from

a

-22-—

4.3(a){4)

1.3(a)(4)

10 to 30 kt (for strikes on nuclear weapons targets,
if ther are 300 as is reported in the press) are
needed,

strikes are not many for a world war and all these’
deliberations may appear to be unfounded. However,

it should be remembered that a similar number of

strikes (chiefly by hydrogen bombs of the type | :
detonated at Bikini) is capable of creating radio- * /
active contamination (higher than 600 r) of an area {
of about 2 million sq. km. and contamination of over f:
50 r of an area of about 20 million sq. km. (This {
does not allow for the enemy's detonations of |
nuclear weapons.) Moreover, hundreds of thousands

of kilometers will be devastated by shock waves and
flash radiation. This fact necessitates a very
careful approach to the use of megaton bombs in
general, and particularly in Europe, where population
density is extraordinarily high. .

It would seem that a total of 1,000-1,100 aa

Apparently, however, the use of nuc lear/missile . \
weapons under technically optimum conditions may not .,
require such a quantity of megaton bombs for va
destruction of the NATO bloc.

Therefore; it appears. that just .a few

powerful nuclear bursts will be. the primary:
decisive factors affecting the outcome of ‘the: war” ”
and that they will be made in the first hours and |
days of the war. It follows that the initial. period

of a war becomes its decisive period, the period in —
which the armed forces solve the primary technical: — .
problem of the war - to liquidate the enemy's 0). - |
capability to use nuclear/missile weapons o undermine
his will <0 Fight and to weaken decisively his. forces

and means.

1. If enemy atomic targets are greater in number, or
if these targets are specially concealed, then the
number of small-yield bombs can be increased somewhat.
Such an increase on the radiational situation in the
world .../two or three words missing /.

1.3(a)(4)

The second period of war, undoubtedly protracted
in time, will evidently consist of liquidating the
resistance of military organisms still extant, of
rendering immediate all-round aid to victims and of
reconstructing the economies and state systems of
the appropriate countries.

In this period, considering the scale of destruction,
reconstruction work will require extended and enormous
efforts by the socialist countries and the enlistment .
of..large masses of peoples, possibly numbering in the
millions. 7

It appears that during this period, the principal.
role will be played by the ground troops, aviation, ~~
and navy. . - er ae

One can proceed from a different concept, according
to which the primary tasks of a future world war will .
be resolved by ground armies on fronts in coordination
with strategic missile troops, aviation, and the navy;
to achieve victory it is necessary to destroy the
enemy's armies and to occupy his territory; strikes _
by the strategic missile troops deep in the enemy rear
will play an important but subsidiary role. This would
mean that we underestimate the potential of powerful

troops and a multi-milli

—

-24-

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

This is a cautious concept calculated to finish
the war in the shortest possible time, but if
unsuccessful in this, to be prepared to wage an
extended war with the maximum efforts of all the
forces and means of the country and of coalitions
of countries.

Past experience teaches us that at the beginning
ofall great wars, the opponents seriously over~
estimated their own strength and underestimated the ,
eneny's strength. Moreover, not a single war ever
went the way it was planned.

It is possible that in the course of a war a.
situation can arise in which the strategic missile
troops of both sides will turn out, for various
technical reasons, to be not entirely reliable,
that they will only partially fulfill their tasks,
and that the decisive effect will not be achieved.
In this instance, during the time period necessary for ;
the restoration of the combat capability of the strategic
missile troops for the Eurasian war sector, the role of
the ground troops and of aviation will become decisive.
The role of the navy will also increase, particularly
that of gubmarines. From this point of view, the
third concept appears to be the most acceptable,
despite the fact that it leads to a substantial
increase in the burden of.expenditures prior..to,the
beginning of war and presupposes an even sharper fee
increase with the initiation of war. et, =

At the same time, if war is thrust upon us, Wwe
must be so prepared that the strategic missile troops
can send sufficiently powerful strikes in the first
minutes to paralyze the enemy countries and armies
and to deprive him of his nuclear/missile weapons.
The operations of the other types of troops during
the initial period of war must be coordinated with the
operations of the strategic missile troops and be
subordinate to them. .. -

paons bok

1.3{aj(4

-25-

1.3(a){4)

4.3(a)(4)

From all that has been said it is obvious that
the nuclear/missile weapon is primary and decisive
in the present period fo time; for this reason the a
strategic missile troops have become the primary "
and decisive type of troops, with all the consequences \
ensuing from this fact. The situation is somewhat \
different as concerns the quantitative side of the :
question. The primary and decisive type of troops
need not be and indeed will not be the most numerous :’
The ground troops and the PYO troops sates be more

. numerous. se
eT SE
The new means of warfare, as was said jeaniiec: ™

bring upon the scene other types of troop formations - ~
medical-sanitation and reconstruction formations - .
whith trave-every reason to be mass formations, and a
to be formed and undergo training on territorial
principles. In our opinion this question requires aa
very profound investigation. ’

Until the recent past, ground troops were
legitimately considered as the primary type of armed
forces, since they carried out the principal tasks
of war, which amounted to the total defeat of the
enemy's armed forces and the taking of his territory.
Now, when the forms of war are changing. and. ts
principal tasks will evidently. not be decide x
fronts ‘in direct engagements of opposing “armies , but:
rather in the interiors of countries, the “ground troops
cannot carry out the principal task of war pndependently :

In addition to the usyal resources of ‘combat materiel,
the ground troops have missile equipment with a limited
radius of operation. With these means of ‘armanent, the
ground troops can neither withstand the strikes of
strategic missile troops nor protect the country from
these strikes. At the same time, the ground troops
must be regarded as forces which, together with the
air forces are capable of assuring victory in all
circumstances.

a

~26-

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

Taking into account the see elwaaes that megaton
bombs may be used on the battlefield, it is necessary
to make an all-round evaluation of the existing
organization and the current combat formations of

ground troops and of their suitability for nuclear;
missile war.

As history teaches, the combat formations of
troops and the corresponding organization of troops
change form depending on the means of combat, and
primarily on the decisive means, firepower. The
more effective the fire means of war, the more profound
the changes. Right up to the appearance of nuclear/
missile weapons, to the degree of the strength of
fire, combat formations have grown more and more
deeply.../two or three words missing/.

The tendency to thin out military formations
has increased in the past five years under the
influence of nuclear/missile operational-tactical
weapons, but contemporary organization of troops
(preserved from the pre-atomic period) and under-_ .~
evaluation of the new conditions of conducting war ”
fetter and retard this tendency.

It appears that combat formations of ground troops
can become sufficiently vital and combat ready through
fulfillment of the following conditions:- oe

-~ increasing the combat independence (sgtonoiky) of
all organizational levels (zveno) of troops, and
particularly of the lower - the tactical ones;

- increasing the firepower of tactical elements of
units and large units;

- substantial increase in the speed of moving of
troops;

-~ a sharp thinning out of personnel and equipment
in combat formations.

1.3{a)(4)

~27—

1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

Increasing the combat independence of all levels
(zveno) of the troop organism is possible by
weakening or eliminating the mutual dependence in
combat (but not cooperation) between organizational
elements (yedinitsa) of troops. The principles of
standardization of the means of combat and auxiliary
equipment, of organizational autonomy and of a
broad independence in carrying out combat missions,
must underlie army structure from the primary cells |
(yacheyka) through all eucesed ns levels. :

Organizationally, it appears advisable to create
units (chast) composed of interchangeable, uniform,
primary” tactical elements -(yedinitsa). The creation
of regiments of ground troops composed of elements which
have high firepower, are completely mobile, tactically: —
independent, and low in personnel composition, and
which in case of loss can be easily replaced by similar
ones, must have a positive effect on the viability of
combat formations.

An increase in speed of movement can be achieved
by full mechanization of troops, which would increase
this speed by several times in cross-country, as well
as in road, movements. Movements of large combat
groups of ground troops by aircraft must become common —
and be. Pagdoccitern 28: the. Shee broadest dimeng ions .

Existing military doctrines are beste on the follow-
ing basic principles:

- a country's entire economy and the country as a
whole prepare for war beforehand;

- calculations are based on a protracted war and

on mass armies which will enlist the greatest possible
number of the healthy male and female population;

-28~

1.3(8)(4)

4.3(a\(4)

- victory or defeat in war is decided on fronts of
opposing armies; the strength of armies is determined
in the final analysis by the viability and power of
the rear;

- the theaters of military operations are studied from
the standpoint of the decisive significance of frontal
combat of armies, and in this connection, plans for
achieving war aims are worked out which take into
account the factors of time, space, forces and means; ..
the capabilities of enenies and allies are studied ‘
in this same manner;

- “military operations are based on principles of
seizure of the initiative, concentration of maximum
forces and weapons on the main axis, on the selection

of the most advantageous time for initiation of — _
operations and for delivery of the main strike;

~- the achievement of the basic goals of war absolutely
presupposes the total defeat or destruction of armies
and the seizure of the most important parts or all of
the enemy's territory.

In light of the new quality of nuclearsmissile
armament it can be said that the above-listed principles
of contemporary military doctrine are subject to
radical review. Some of the ‘principles’ will. lose their.
significance entirely, others will take on. “a ‘different
content.

New doctrines must be built on the basis of the
potentialities of mass nuclear/missile and radio-
electronic means of warfare. Their principles must
reflect a new approach, a new understanding of the
dimensions of time, space, destructive forces, and
forces of resistance.

The new military doctrines must proceed primarily
from the principal and decisive role of nucleary.
missile strategic weapons in war, and, consequently,
from the principal and decisive role of the type of
troops armed with these means of combat.

4.3{a)(4)

-29—

1.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

Basic principles of the new doctrine could include
the following propositions:

- the contemporary power of the forces of destruction
is immeasurably greater than that of the forces of
creation;

- the nuclear/missile weapon is a mass type of \
weapon, is relatively economical, and, from the ©
combat point of view, it is the most effective; . -

- the range of nuclear/missile weapons ensures
their reaching any point on the globe; in this

connection, their accuracy satisfies practical

requirements; e

- the theater of military operations is the entire
globe; ;

- the primary task of the armed forces in war (from
our point of view) should not be the seizure of
territories, but of depriving the enemy of the
possibility of using nuclear/missile weapons; in

case of necessity, temporary occupation is permissible;

on a nuclear/missile war must be short-lived; its
_ (agtive phase can be measured in days or weeks;

set EY tee ee
MO RE Ye

the time limits of a war must be determined by | —.
7 the power of the nuclear weapons, and the intensity
“. and number of bursts which will not cause a dangerous
’ gaturation of the atmosphere and of the surface of
the globe or the expanse of our country, or allied
and non-combatant countries, with radioactive substances.

In our opinion, investigation of the questions
connected with the elaboration of military doctrines
and a discussion of them within definite limits must
be considered the most vital necessity for contemporary
military thought. It is in this light that the
present article offers itself as a means of posing the
question. Moreover, it seems to us that the time has
come not only to exchange views on these questions
through articles in journals, but also to cooperate in
every way in the creation of fuller works.

1.3(a}(4)

~30-
