The New Look of the Ongania Administration
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014135, dated 3 May 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014135).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

My Ce
ae fi

LB] LIBRARY
Mandatory Review
Case # NLJ 13-12.
Document #_ ec’

SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM

BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES

The New Look of the Ongania Administration

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
MARCH 1994 ne

28 June 1967
No. 4-67

WARNING

This document contains information affecting the national
defense of the United States, within the meaning of Tithe
18, sections 703 and 7H4. of the US Code, as amended.
Its transmission or revelation of its cantents to ar re-
ceipt by an unauthorized person is prohibited hy law.

ae
bec inry PHOe Atta IC
, Pann NG. Au
2 DECLARETRICATION ‘

eget:

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

28 June 1967

SFECTAL MEMORANDUM NO. 4~67
SUBJECT: The New Look of the Ongania Administration*

SUMMARY

7A recent montha the administration of Gen. Juan Carlos
Ongania (Ret.) has made an impressive start on resolution of
some of Argentina's most difficult political and economic prob-
lems. After an inauspicious beginning, Ongania has undertaken
@ program of economic reform which ie already winning both in-
ternational and domestic respect. He has responded to public
criticism, improved his cabinet, and now has a highly-skilled
Group of econamic advisers. The dimetiaions of the problems
still ahead are large, and for many there can be no quick or
Painless solutions. But there are grounds for hope in the fact
that Argentina, after three dacades of floundering, now has a
reform-minded government, both determined to govern and possess-
ing the power to do so.

eee H HH

teeter et Ee
* This memorandum has been prepared golely by CIA. It has been
- aoordinated with the Office of Current Intelligence, the Office
of Research and Reports, and the Clandestine Services.

GROUP 1
Exeluded from automatic
downgrading and

Set declassification

I. BACKGROUND

Economic Probl.ams

1. For several decades Argentina has failed to achieve a
rate of economic growth commensurate with ita natural and
human resources.* Since the removal of Peron in late 1955,
Gross National Product (GNP) has increased at an average annual
rate of less than 3 percent. Over the last five years (1962-1966),
despite record harvests that spurred the economy to a growth rate
of 8 percent in two Successive yeara, the average annual rate for
the Period as a whole was only 1.7 percent -- about the same as
the rate of population increase. The general stagnation of the
economy has been accompanied by strong inflationary pressures,
deriving mainly from large budget deficits caused by falling
revenues and the subsidies required by ducreasingly inefficient
state enterprises -- notably the railroads. Since 1961, annual
cost of living and wage increases have averaged 27 and 31 percent

respectively,

a

* Argentina has an extensive and fertile agricultural area and
a sizable industrial base, Its homogeneous population is one
of the world's hest fed and clothed and the literacy rate is
high (some 90%),

em

2. Domestic economic problema have also been reflected in
the external sector. Rising requirements for industrial imports,
diminishing agricultural exports, and periodic flights of capital
have produced large balance-of-payments deficits. Those deficits
were financed by the accumulation of a heavy foreign debt and by
the reduction of foreign exchange reserves to perilously low
levels.* The restrictions on imports required to maintain foreign
payments in recent years, in turn, have speeded the inflation and

inhibited economic growth.
Political Problems

3. Politically, Argentina haa not yet recovered from the
decade of Peron (1946-1955). Many Argentines attribute virtuelly
all thelr country's troubles to the deleterious effect of his
dictatorship, but no government since his overthrow has been able
to achieve any consensus on national goals and programs, and em-~
body both the power and the will to govern. The Permistas are

still the most unified political force in the country; with some

TS A ga TED SPOR ESS SPAS

* Total foreign indebtedness reached $3.2 billion in 1963 and was
gradually reduced to $2.7 billion by the end of 1966. Gross
foreign reserves, however, continued to hover about the $200
million mark -- sufficient to cover only two months! imports --
until the devaluation in March 1967.

9S

eer

35°40 percent of the electorate they would probably win any

freely conducted national election and such important provincial
elections as those of Buenos Aires and Cordoba. The central
feature of Argentine politica since 1955 has been merely negative:
the refusal of the military establishment to permit the Peronistas
to recover effective political power. Meanwhile the economic and
political problems of Argentina have piled up, and caused each
successive government to flounder more ineffectually. Finally,

in late June 1966, when the Illia administration was still
struggling to get its budget for calendar and fiscal 1966 past

an cbatreperous Congress, the military intervened.

Ii. THE PRESENT ADMINISTRATION

4, Character of the Ongania Governnent. The Ongenie govern~

ment is a dictatorship whose ultimate source of power is the
collective leadership of the Army. Although it has preempted all
executive and legislative powers on the national and provincial
levels, it has used them with restraint. The press and the judicia)
syatem function freely, and political opponents can criticize
official policies and actions. Ongania and his military supporters

appear determined, however, to retain power far as long as required

~4.

Sra

Sen

to carry out their plans for the modernization of Argentina.
Thus far Ongania has shown little interest in restructuring the
country's political parties. Nor has he tried to create an
official party to provide a facade of consatitutionalism for his

virtual monopoly of political power.
Performance

5« The Ongania administration started badly, with a
heavy-handed effort to control disorders in the national univer-
sities. Police forces overreacted to provocation by university
students, and many liberal as well as radical professors resigned,
depleting some faculties of the National University of Buenos Aires.
Many of these faculty members have not returned. Later actions by
the government proved to be more sensible and successful: the
universities are now functioning under regulations which bar poli-
tical activity from the university buildings and grounds, give the
faculties control over university administration and policy, and
limit the role of students in university councils to that of ob-
servers, The extra-territorial status of the universities has
been removed, and requirements for retaining student status have

been tightened.

«
OU yy

6. Perontsem still dominates the labor movement. When
Onganie afsumed power, however, the Peronist-controlled General
Confederation of Labor (COT) had aplit into two main factions,
one of which continues to be subservient to Peron himself. ‘The
leaders of the other group maintain only a nominal loyalty to
Peron apparently believing that he will never return to poyer.
The administration has profited from this aplit and it has
further weakened labor resiatance by granting wage and other
benefits to those unions which cooperate with it. On the other
hand, the administration has dealt firmly with recalcitrant
unions by employing police and military ferces to contain illegal
strikes, by taking over control of key unions and freezing their
funds, and by dismissing or refusing to reemploy striking union
members and leaders. Thus far, these tactics have kept the
unions off balance and without an issue strong enough to bring

the workers out into the streets against the government.

7 It ie clear that the Ongania government assumed office
with no clear idea how to go about stabilizing and modernizing
the economy as promised, and ita initial months were spent trying
to decide upon the most effective path to follow. There were

successful moves against some obvious targets for change such as

Serr

gina -2-T

the inefficient and costly port aystem, the sugar problem in
Tucuman province, and drawing up new work rules for the rail-
roads. But little progress had been made by the end of 1966
dn solving basic economic problems, and inflationary pressures
were stronger than before the revolution. At that point (late
December), Onganta faced up to the need to change economists.
He installed a new minister of Economy and Labor, Dr. Adalbert
Krieger Vasena, an internationally respected economist who we
believe ineisted upon and received carte blanche to devise

economic reforms,

8. Within three months, Tn. Krieger's new economic team
drew up a broad and complex program for financial stabilization
and economic development and moved quickly to introduce a wide
variety of necessary -- and often unpopular -- reforms. In
March of 1967 almost all restrictiona on international payments
and transfers were lifted. At the same time the peso was de-
valued by 4o percent in an attempt -- at least lnitially suc-
cessful -- to reverse the flight of capital, encourage the
development of new exports, and attract foreign investment. The
gevernment also has taken the initiative of a@iscusaing with the

United States an agreement to guarantee investments, has signed

seat

Seer

new settlements with petroleum companies whose contracts had
been annulled by the Illia administration, and has drawn up a
code of lews encouraging foreign participation in the exploita-
tion of petroleum and other mineral resources. Legislation has
also been iagued to stimulate domostic investment by providing
tax benefits for investment in both industry and agriculture,
revising the land tenure system, and liberalizing credit re-

quirements for importa of capital equipment .*

9. The goverrment, moreover, has taken atrong measures in
both the public and private sectors to combat the chronic infla-
tion. These involve reduction of the budget deficit, freezing
wages of public and private employees, and limiting the opera-
tional deficita of the public enterprises. A drive for greater
efficiency throughout the government haa been launched and, while
large scale diamissals are being avoided, the government is pre-
paring to transfer 150,000 surplus workers into more productive

employment. To discourage the inflationary mentality of producers

* That the government already has succeeded to an impressive
degree in increasing investor confidence 1a evident in the
rejuvenation of the Buenos Aires bolea, where after years
of inactivity stock sales have zoomed end government bond
issues have been widely oversubacribed.

aT

and retailers, the government has threatened the use of price
ceilings, the freeing of specific importa, and other methods of
forcing reduced costs and increased efficiency, and has enacted
& price control lew involving particularly stiff penalties. The
recent decision by the leaders of the business comnunity to
collaborate in a "voluntary" price control program indicates
thet they do take the government's stabilization efforts seri-
ously.

Relations with the United States

10. The sharp contrast between the alacrity with which the
US recognized the Castello Branco government in Brazil and the
delay in recognizing the Onganta goverrment raised the hackles
of some of the more nationalist members of the new administration
in Argentina. Ongania, however, did not react to that delay, or
to unfriendly reporting by the US preas, by whipping up nation-
alist fervor, Instead, his administration has been reasonably
cooperative with the US; has stressed its anti-Communist orlenta-
tion; and, at the same time, has made it clear that its policies

in any field will be made in Argentina by Argentines.

ll. It is easy enough for Ongania to understand the general

US preference for constitutional governments brought to power in

“9

OE

Pa

freely contested elections. Indeed it was he, as Commander~in-~
Chief of the Army, who held off military pressures against the
Illia administration for some two yeara -~ as long as he thought
there was still any chance that it could accomplish even a few
constructive ateps toward the modernization of Argentina. But

the reality of political life in Argentina hae repeatedly demon-
strated the inability of elected governments to achieve the
modernization of the country. Ongania has suppressed much poli-
tical activity but has shown more reapect for civil liberties --
not connected with elections -- than have some constitutional
governments in Argentina and elsewhere in Latin America. Thus

far, he has benefitted from widespread disillusionment in
Argentina with the traditional political parties and their leaders,
and there has been no effective political opposition to his govern-

ment.

ITI. PROSPECTS

12. When the Ongenia adminiatration took power Argentina's
prospects appeared bleak indeed. But the demonstrated ability of
that military dictatorship to respond to constructive criticism

ia now one of the hopeful aspects of the Argentine situation.

- 10 «

tt

Se

Moreover its courage in taking the politically unpopular actions
necessary to implement its stabilization programs appears to
have won the confidence of important elements of the country 's
business and financial community and of foreign observers as
well.* When the present situation is compared with that of a
year ago, we believe it is clear that a corner haa been turned
and that the government is now making noteworthy progress on

the task confronting it.

13. Ongania's further progress will also depend heavily
upon maintaining the support of key military leaders and keeping
control over organized labor. Although the basic antagonism
between leaders of the anti-Peronist military and of Peronist
labor makes the administration's relationship with each of these
elements a very tricky one, Ongania can algo use that antagonism
to his advantage. Thus labor recalcitrance, late last year and
early this year, brought a closing of ranks in the military behind

Ongania. While indications of personal rivalry among ambitious

re
* In recent weeks the Ongania administration has received $125
- million from the International Monetary Fund, $75 million
from the US Treasury Stabilization Fund, and two loans of
$100 million each from Turepean and US banks, both of which
were oversubscribed.

sil.

Dee

peat

military leaders persist, they have diminished sharply since
Ongania began to take action on basic economic problems and
shoved that, et least in the short run, be could deal effec-
tively with labor.

14. This is not to say that an end to Argentina's prolonged
time of troubles is at hand. Much still needs to be done in the
economic sphere, and there are key factors such as weather end
world market pricea which are beyond Ongania's control. At the
same time the administration must maintain ita successful
record in dealing with the military leadership and organized
dabor. For it is in these delicate fields of military and labor
relations that there is still the greatest danger of some slip

up by the administration which could lead to its undoing.

15. The combination of continued strong military support,
control over organized labor, bumper harvests, and favorable
world market prices may all fall neatly into place. In that
event the chances would be excellent for Ongania staying the
course and restoring the Argentine economy to reasonable levels
of performance. ‘there is, however, no realistic way of toting
up the odds on auch a combination. And there is still the
danger that aa a result of miscalculation by the administration

& nal

poet

or the opposition Ongania and his military supporters might
become much more authoritarian in their treatment of the
opposition. Nevertheless, we conclude that under the present
government there is more reason to be optimiatic, as to both
the short and longer-run future of Argentina, than there has
been at any other time in the last three decades of Argentine
history.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES
/

a eee pie Pieaeoe:

SHERMAN KENT
Chairman

-13-
