Costs to Czechoslovakia, and to the Warsaw Pact Powers, of Actions Taken Agains
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126873, dated 4 August 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126873).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

{andatory Review
2 NEL A190 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
~ Case Directorate of Intelligence
Document # Ath. 19 September 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

Costs to Czechoslovakia,
and to the Warsaw Pact Powers,

. en nme”
of Actions Taken Against the Czechoslovak Economy

Summary

~The costs of the Warsaw Pact action against
the Czechoslovak economy* are estimated as follows:

a. In Czechoslovakia the main physical
damage was to roads and transport facilities from
heavy military traffic, which will cost some $300
million to repair. Czechoslovakia has lost about
30,000 refugees. Economic activity was interrupted
for only a few days (21-24 August) and had returned
almost to normal in two weeks, but production losses
amounted to several hundred million dollars. Export
losses to Western countries were $27 million in
August, and there were additional hard currency
losses from the halting of tourism. The output of
the Czech economy in the third quarter of 1968 may
be slightly below the 1967 level, but the fourth
quarter and the year as a whole will still show
some economic growth.

b. To the USSR there will be some increase in
the burden of economic relations with Czechoslovakia
above that planned for 1969. Terms of trade are,
on the whole, unfavorable to the USSR. The Soviets
probably will refuse to pay the reparations for war
damages which have been asked for by the Czechs.

.The USSR may well offer ruble credits, however, and
a small hard currency loan is possible to ease Czech
balance-of-payments difficulties. There will be

* Apart from the cost of mobrltizing and moving the
forces involved, which is estimated in, "Military

Costs of the Warsaw Paet Invasion of Czechoslovakia."

APPROVED FOR RELEASE COSESSMIaT

2 0 NOV 1997

deciassiiicatlon

some indirect losses to the USSR as a.result of the
unwillingness of key Western powers -- particularly
the United States -- to furnish the USSR with ad-

_ vanced Western technology, such as the third-
generation computer package which was under negotia-
tion at the-time of the invasion.

c. The costs to the economies of the Warsaw
Pact powers are.small. There have been losses from
the disorganization of international transport and
trade’ and a dropoff-in tourism.. The closing of the.
-Czech border held up movements. not only to that
country but also the normal north-south transit
through Czechoslovakia. Transportation bottlenecks
were more serious than usual, and losses undoubtedly
were larger than usual. from spoilage of perishable
goods and interruptions in production. These

losses may be detectable in the monthly statistics
of these countries but will have no perceptible
effect on their economic growth for the year. The
crisis will involve some loss of hard currency from
tourism this fall and perhaps next year as well.

The effect on overall trade with the West -- except
that of Czechoslovakia -- is likely to be slight.

In summary, Czechoslovakia has been hurt far
less in every respect than was Hungary in 1956.
The fighting in Hungary in October and November
1956 caused property losses that:were estimated as
high as $1 billion. Hungary lost 185,000 of its
citizens who fled the country. Industry and trans-
port were still operating far below capacity in
the late winter of 1957, three months after the
revolt had been crushed. Total output dropped in
the last quarter of 1956 to less than one-half the
1955 level, and output for the whole year was down
9 percent. Thus Czechoslovakia does not need and
probably will not get large-scale aid from the
USSR and other Warsaw Pact countries. These
countries have resumed deliveries to Czechoslovakia
and doubtless will tolerate some: lags in Czech
shipments.

Te

C  cOSemageer —(

Initial Cost to Czechoslovakia
a ES

Czechoslovakia has suffered substantial losses
from the Soviet armed intervention in August.
Transportation was hard hit. Heavy military traffic
did extensive damage to road surfaces and other
transport facilities, estimated to be about $300
million -- the main property damage done to the.
‘economy. During the first four days after Soviet
forces entered Czechoslovakia (21-24 August),

. Municipal traffic almost stopped, and rail trans-
‘port ground to a halt as a result of the closing
of border crossing. points to commercial traffic.
All other aspects of economic life were affected
in turn -- the supply of fresh produce, meat and
dairy products, and bread to the population;
‘shipments of essential raw materials; deliveries
on export contracts; and personal movement, includ-
ing travel to and from work.. Between 26 and
28 August, transport services recovered rapidly.
The reinstitution of almost normal transport .
services led to rapid improvements throughout the
economy. By then, production losses had mounted
to several hundred million dollars. An official
estimate put the loss in output during the first
week of the occupation at $250. million. It is not
clear whether the figure simply is the sum of
losses reported by enterprises, or whether double
counting has been netted out -- probably the.
former. In any case, losses in the second week
were much smaller. The loss in output during the
first two weeks represented not more: than 14 per-
cent of the national product for one year (esti-
mated at $25 billion for 1967). -As a result of
these losses and continued supply difficulties,
output in the third quarter as a whole will probably
drop below the 1967 level. In addition, there :,.
' were losses in exports during August amounting to
$58 million, of which $27 million. were losses in
exports to Western countries. .In time, however,
these losses will be recovered. But the foreign
exchange lost as a result of the shutdown of
_tourism'and the temporary stopping of rail traffic
across the country, as well as terminated civil air
flights, cannot be recovered and added a few million
dollars more damage to the Czech economy.

COSsHsax TIAL

C cONespmaeemr —(

Prospects for Czechoslovakia

Full recovery will take some time. One Czech
estimate holds that future losses.would be. ‘several
times the initial loss. This estimate seems un-
duly pessimistic. On the assumption that the
political situation is stabilized, output in the
fourth quarter should recover to a level at or
above. that of 1967. On 31 August the Czechs esti-
mated that industry already was operating. at about
93 percent of the “normal rate," and that ‘sales
were at 91 percent: of normal, reflecting mainly
lags in imports and other supplies, which may not
be entirely overcome even now. During the. “August
events" the flow of Soviet oil through the “Friend-
ship" pipeline apparently continued without inter-
ruption. Rail shipments from the USSR were held
up, however, as from other sources, including
supplies of iron ore, nonferrous metals, cotton and
wool, hides and skins, and coking coal. .Since

* 31 August, Soviet deliveries in all probability
have returned to normal. In/ecent negotiations
the Soviet government has confirmed and extended
previous agreements for increasing. deliveries in
1969 -- including 1.6 million tons of grain (an
increase of 300,000 tons over 1968) and 9.3 million
tons of crude oil (an increase of 500,000 tons) --
as well as supplying large quantities of iron ore
pellets and natural gas. Deliveries from other
Eastern European countries should soon return to
normal, if they have not already done so. Shipments
from the West, particularly overseas countries,
could be held up for some time, pending the clarifi-
cation of existing agreements.

To the extent that supplies permit, the Czech
regime is determined to make up arrears in produc-
tion. "Dubcek shifts" are being worked on
‘Saturdays and Sundays for this purpose. The workers
seem to be cooperating, and the extra hours will
doubtless help. Output will very: likely rise soon
to the levels of last spring and early summer.
Waste, however, is likely to be greater than usual
as a result of general continued confusion .on
policies and plans, especially with reference to
economic reform and trade with the West.

There are strong indications that the Czech
‘economy will be linked even more closely than at

CONPSeReCIAT

( GOseseecrar™  ¢
present with the USSR and the other Warsaw Pact
countries. These indications include the report
that Czechoslovakia's trade with the USSR will in-
crease by 10 percent in 1969, as against a projected
increase of 4 percent mentioned before the Soviet
takeover. One of the main Soviet objections to the
ideas of Professor Ota Sik, who recently sent his
' resignation (from Yugoslavia) as Deputy Premier,
was his insistence on the need to put the economy
-under the "discipline of the market." As Sik had
- been explaining to the people, growth had been
maintained mainly through expanding the output of
obsolete goods, most of which were then used --
directly through investment and indirectly through.
trade with the Communist world -- to.make possible
the output of more obsolete goods, of which the
same uses must be made. In the best of ‘circum-
stances, it would have been hard.to excape from
this trap. Under a policy of closer collaboration
with the USSR and the other CEMA countries, escape
' is out of the question. , . ;

In this sense, there is good reason for pés-
simism regarding the future. Substantial political
freedom and a good deal of outside help, from East
and West alike, are conditions of making basic.
changes in the economic system that has ruined
Czechoslovakia's competitive position in the Euro-
pean market. These conditions obviously are not
likely to be fulfilled in the near future.

at ‘the same time, the USSR has a strong interest
in making the Czech economy work smoothly, as shown
by the agreement to increase trade with Czechoslo-
vakia substantially in 1969. Additional aid does
not appear necessary to bring about rapid recovery.
The Soviet government may well reward a submissive
regime with some additional support, but almost = *
certainly not with the large loan of hard currency °
($500 million, more or less) requested earlier this
year.

Cost to the USSR

The costs to the USSR of intervening in Czecho-
slovakia (apart from those connected with mobilizing
and moving troops) are small. Soviet deliveries to
Czechoslovakia in the near future are not likely to
be greater and might be somewhat less than those

- 5 -

_CoeHsEcIAT

provided in the annual trade agreement, depending
on the ability of the Czech economy.to absorb them.
The Czechs, for their part, will probably come
close to making up arrears in deliveries to the
USSR. This task has been given a' high priority.
Czech-Soviet trade in 1969, as indicated, will be
somewhat greater than planned earlier, and this
will. mean some loss to the USSR because of its
unfavorable terms of trade with Czechoslovakia.

Czechoslovakia has asked the Soviet government

to pay reparations for the property losses caused
by. Soviet troops. In addition to the damage to

roads and to transportation equipment, the troops
destroyed or damaged communications equipment and
requisitioned some supplies. It seems likely that
the Soviet government will refuse to accept liability
for this damage, running well over $300 million, on
the ground that it was all the fault of the Czechs
themselves. . a

At some point, however, the USSR may offer long-
term credits to Czechoslovakia, as a gesture of
socialist support. But the Czechs do not need addi-
tional drawing rights on clearing account with the
USSR, which already owes Czechoslovakia more than
°$100 million on current account (apart from a large
indebtedness on capital account arising out of Czech
deliveries in lieu of investment in the Soviet oil
industry). The Czechs undoubtedly could draw up a
bill of Soviet goods that they would be glad to buy
with their credit balance, and perhaps the Soviet
government will accede to some such request.

In addition, Czechoslovakia will doubtless renew
its request for a hard currency loan, partly to deal
with the balance-of-payments difficulties and partly
to finance machinery imports from the West. The
USSR, however, is not in a positio to offer a large
hard currency loan -- certainly nothing on the order
of $500 million, which had been talked about earlier.

Finally, the USSR stands to lose something in
its economic relations with the West as a result of
hostile public reaction. Trade relations probably
will be little affected. But negotiations which
_were under way for purchasing advanced Western equip-
ment could be affected, particularly as a result of
reluctance on the part of the United States and the

CONBEDESTIAL

( Qymeeagr (

United Kingdom to export third-generation computer
technology to the USSR at this time.

Costs to Other Eastern European Countries

In addition to expenses related directly to
military involvement, the Eastern European countries
incurred some indirect costs -- and inconvenience --
following the disruption of traffic through. Czecho--
‘slovakia. Some of the north-south trade that’ nor-:
mally transits Czechoslovakia had to be re-routed
_ through West Germany and Austria and had to be paid
‘for in hard currency. In-1967, this north-south
trade accounted for less than 14 percent of Polish
and East German foreign trade, and for Hungary and
Bulgaria, 18 and-12 percent of their trade, respec-
‘tively. Nonrecoverable damage could have resulted -
where perishable commodities were shipped and could
not have been re-routed on short notice. Although
'East Germany exports through Czechoslovakia little.
in the way.of perishable goods, Poland, Hungary,
and Bulgaria ship substantial amounts. Fotr Poland,
most of this trade is in coal and other nonperish-
ables. On the other hand, a good share of Bulgaria's
‘and Hungary's exports to northern countries: are
highly perishable. In all, the losses may run to
several million dollars.

Poland, Hungary, and Bulgaria may also lose some “ ~—~-—~-
of their profitable Western tourism. Eastern Europe, ee
however, affords the Western Europeans an inexpensive
vacation, and they will probably be back in force
next year. The losses represent some fraction of
this year! s summer and fall business. East German
tourism is dependent primarily on West Germans.
visiting with families and visitors to trade fairs;
there is little likelihood that these will decline.

There are no prospects for economic ‘sanctions
against Eastern European countries by major Western
countries engaged in East-West trade. The fact of
armed intervention in Czechoslovakia has caused
bearish talk in East-West trade circles, and it was
reported that during the week of the invasion busi-
ness contacts were curtailed somewhat. But the
mood is not optimistic. The main worry seems to be
that further liberalization of COCOM restrictions
may be delayed.

CONES BSTTLAL_

os

( cONewmmermar  (

Hungary in 1956 Compared with Czechoslovakia

in 1968

Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia immediately
suggests comparison with the Soviet intervention in
Hungary in 1956. In each case, the Soviet leader-
ship, after wavering, forcibly restrained an Eastern .
European country from seeking independence in foreign
affairs and political freedom at home. The two cases
are nevertheless quite different. In Hungary,

Soviet troops put down a popular revolt, with major
disruptions to civil life. In Czechoslovakia, there
has been practically no outright resistance to the
Soviet troops that entered the country on 20 August,
and civil order has not broken down.:

-The consequences of Soviet intervention differ
accordingly. Soviet intervention in Hungary re-
sulted in more than 20,000 casualties, a good deal
of damage to property, the emigration of many

‘skilled people, and the partial paralysis of the

economy for several months. Property damage did
little to reduce output, although it included damage
to mines and railroad rolling stock. The loss of
workers was more serious. Some 185,000 people (or

2 percent of the population) left Hungary from

October 1956 through March 1957. ‘They included

a high proportion of skilled industrial workers,
who could ill be spared, even though they were
replaced from the farms by mid-1957. Moreover,
many workers that did not emigrate, including large
numbers of coal miners, abandoned their jobs in
protest against Soviet intervention. Many strikes
occurrec, and labor discipline was generally poor.
The peasants began redistributing the land of col-
lective farms to individuals.

The lack of fuel and power resulting from sharp
declines in production, the loss of skilled workers,
the hostility of the labor force, and interruptions
to transport and foreign trade dropped industrial
output as a whole to less than one-half of capacity
in the last quarter of 1956. Exports for the
quarter dropped to one-seventh, and imports almost.
to one-fourth of the expected amounts. An official
estimate put total losses as of the end of 1956 at
about one-fourth of the national product. The loss
was thus roughly $1.5 billion, of which about two-
thirds represented damage to property and about
one-third represented forgone production.

- 8. _.

Economic recovery came during 1957, but slowly
‘and only with substantial help from the. USSR and
other Communist countries. Output during the first
nine months of 1957 was helow the. 1956 level,
although . there was steady imprevement, ' The exten-
sion of some $300 million’ in commodity credits by
the USSR and Eastern European countries permitted
Hungary in 1957 to run an import surplus with. the
Communist world amounting to some $200 million in .
_ commodity” trade,. together. with the usual deficit

a in transport services. Hungary also received hard

currency loans of $50 million from the USSR and
$25 million from Communist China. ;

' The contrast with the present economic situa-
tion and prospects of Czechoslovakia is striking.

Economic activity in Czechoslovakia was interrupted. -

for only a few days by the entry of Soviet troops,
the main property loss was damage to road surfaces,
and workers soon returned to. their jobs, ‘even put-
ting in extra shifts to try to make up arrears in
production. ;

~ 9 ~
