Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible Us/gvn Courses of Actions
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000024389, dated 5 September 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000024389).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ot

NTELLIGEN
In by Ye. 4:
ELUGENCE i

NI

TES |

mt

a
es
YY)

v:

‘ato att
: -*
Lal ye

a)

ans

oF
. *.
. Conevrre

TOR
ED STA

* DIREC
UNITE

woe rage

tis,

ade Tied
nae m8
at a” “

-9*

eyes

+s

ag RM sttobquig ht!

se

a oF . id
, . . e ew ne ee ee ae an ae ele el ee eee Be ee

eof 185762

CEETRAL INTELLIGEBCE AGERCTY
Q Octoter 196%

SUBJECT: SNIE 10-3-64: PROBABLE COMMUNIST PSACTIONS TO CERTAIN POSSIBLE US/OVE
COURSES OF ACTION : :

BCOPE BOTE

The courses of action addressed in Section B have beeu given to the futel-
ifgence commnity for the purpose of thiz estimate and are not meant to represent
the full range of options open to the U3. &t shovld also be noted that the Laver
4a confined to consideration of Communist reactions and does not discuss possible

yeactions in the rest of the world.

A. BACKGROUND! THE COMMUNIST VIS¥ OF THE SITUATION IN DHDOCHIBA
a .

%. The Commnist povers most Girectly concerned, 1.2, Borth Vietnan and
Commniet China, nnfoubtedly feel that present trende in Bouth Vietnam are much
in thejr favor. They anticipate that 68 politica). vacuum is forming vhich they

eof

-%

= GROUP 1
oa Excluded from automatic

downgrading and

Geclessificaticn

rr

ee a ee i
hy ; o

a,
~

can probebly soon e402 with @ "neutraliet” coalition government dominated by
pro-Commund st elements. They see @ teaporary gtalemate in Lece, tut = their
view this is strictly a seconiary theater in which trenis will become nore
favorable for then a8 600n as Gouth Vietnam falls their way; in the neantine
¢heir major concerts in Lece is to keep the corridor anf the areas bordering Bort

Vietnam and China in Communist hands.

2. Fer these reasons, they are willing for the time being to eccept the
face situation about ae it is. Both there and fn South Vietnam they wish to
gvoid actions which might rick altering the present apperently fevoredle course
of their campaign to yndermine the governnent of of Gouth Vietne= (GvE). While
they will geek to exploit end encourage the deterioreting situation in Saigon,
they poobably will avoid actions that vould in their view unduly increase the —
ehances of @ major US gesponse ageinst Korth Vietnan (DRY) or Commnist China-
We are almost certain that both Hanot ani Peiping are ancious pot to decane
anvolved in the kind of var in vhich the greet weight of superior US weaponry
could be brought against then. Bven $f Hanoi and Peiping estimated that the Ui
would rot wee nuclear veapons against them, they could pot de oure of this. 4
of the present, however, both Hanoi an4 Peiping eppesr willing to peretat in

suppor of the Viet Cong, even to the extent of yieking limited US petaliatsoe
ageinet Forth Vietnan, probebly on the calculation that victory 16 hear in the
Gouth and that they could through political counterection prevent prolonged

or expended US attacks in the Korth. .

. - as
a

wee

Pe ih ee

Mie
a]

Fol Fiat)

a ae
a)

'§. The Limited US response to the Tonkin ( Gulf incident of 5 Angust,

followed by eesurances that US iutentions vere erecifically limite’, prodebly .
Jessened Comurist pear of an oarly najor move by the 1S to bring the var to the
Borth. On the other hand, natural caution plus their Ztsological bias makes the
Communists highly suspicious of the US. Both Hanof and Peiping have indicated
gerious concern over the possibility that the US will eventually cerry the var to
the Worth -- a danger which they probably think becomes more Zikely as the situ-

etion in the South deteriorates «- and both have taken defensive meagures to

meet this contingency.

bh, In the face of new US pressures against the ORV, further actions by
Fano and Peiping vould be based to @ consideredle extent on thefy estinate of
US intentions, f.e., whether the US was actually determined to incresse tts

pressures a8 neceesary- Gheir estimates on thie point are probably uncertain, -

but ve believe that fear of provoking Bevere measures by the US vould lead ttes

to temper their responses with a good deal of caution.

5S. On the otuer hand, it is possible that at anytine Banoi epi Peiping ©
would come to believe that the situation in South Vietnam hed becoma 8o fragile
that ap all-out Viet Cong effort, aided by increased infiltration of personnel,
would topple the anti-Commniet GVN before the US could take any major action ©
against the North. We believe tl. the Communists are not likely to ettenpt

taie fin the immediate future because they are not yet certain enough of their

.

| capability to ochleve @ quick decision by such means and probably consider the
risks of major US retaliation too greet. Whether or not they make guch en ail
‘out effort, hosever, they will contime to work for the establichnent of what
has been their longetaniing goal == & neutralist coalition government éoninated

by Commniste which would destroy the basis of the US position.

6. he USER fa probebly wneasy sdout the situation in Indochina for
geveral reasons, the most important being @ realization that it might escalate
to general war. if tensions increased, we believe that the Soviet interest

would be to contein oF reduce @ crisise .
B. erEecrric COURSES AND RESPONSES

Category I: |

7 We do not pelieve that the North Vietnamese yould initinte etiecks om

 strol destroyers unless @ close approach to shore (at the least, &

Senetration of the Conmunist-clained 12-mile sintt if :
led them to belleve the destroyers were esas with a5

wttack. , However, Hanoi's éesire to keep track of these vessels could acciden-

telly ised to Bev dnucidents.

&. If for some reason the mey a4a go after the US destroyers and the US
retaliated with eir strikes, subsequent Communist reactions vould depend ct

Least in pert wpon the severity of the strikes. if the strikes were confined

© eho

to Forth Vietnam and to targetn associated with the Commnist attacks, as werv
those of 5 August, Communiet maction would probably be Limited to (x) DEV selt-
defense with fighters, enti-sircreft, ond emall arms, (bv) political maneuvers
end propaganda by Comuniet elenents throughout the world, (c) additional
Communist Chinese logistic support to the DRY, gncluding possibly the intro-
duction of more aircraft into Borth Vietnen.

9. If the US retaliatory strikes hit critical DRV targets not directly
associated with the provocation, but vere prompt and of ehort duration, we
believe the DRV response would be ebout as described in pere. &. If, on the
otber hand, US attacks on nonaseociated targets were heavier and gustained,
then we believe the reactions of Hanoi and Petping vould be about ‘es described

in para. 15.

a

$0. We think 4t most unlikely that the Chinese Coumuniste vould éeliber-“"~
atrole; but they could become inatvertently (b) 3

t

ately become involved vith
Snvolved in an ection stag foci a DRV-US patrol engagement. If eo, and if the
US retalietion wee confined to Coinese Commmict targets directly eraoctate =
with the engagement, the Commniet military response would again probably be
Linitgl to defensive action. It must be acted, hovever, that en ettack by the

Us against bases in Commnist China, vhether provoked unintentionally or ,
deliberately by the Chinese, would introduce a new factor in the Boutheacst Asian
pituation, 4.e., @ direct confrontation of US-Chineee forces. In such case, the

Chines? Communists might feel odligated to play e more direct role in the US/TEV
conflict. On the {nternational diplomatic front widespres’ fear of @ major inte:
pational war would ensdle the Ccamunists to etir up substantial pressures against

the U6.

Category Iii: Air action and/or ground cpere<1ons ecainst inf iitret ion-
associated targets 4n the Lao yanbandte. :

42. Commnist response to US/OVN air ection against the infiitretion-

associated targets in the panhandle vould probably be confined to (2) sone
improvement in passive and AAA defense in the area (b} political and propagenia

responses, and (c) Viet Cong sabotage and ground reids directed against the
US/OVN eir bases. We do not believe that they would leunch afr attacks on these
oir ee because of their very Limited capabilities and the fear of provoking

gir retaliation on their own bases. Kes

yuma cm

o . eo.

. + . 2 * 2
e a wae eee ee ee ete ee ee Oe -

43. The reaction to GV or US/GVE ground action against the panhandle
{nfiltretion route would Gepend largely upon the magnitude and duration of the
Getion. At the lover end of the scale, @ emall bit-and-cm yeid with @ Linited
objective would probebly evoke little more than an attempt to improve PL/DRV
capabilities for early detection and ambush of sinilar future efforts. On the
other hand, actions penetrating 6 considerable distance vhich threatened PL/DRV
pee of infiltration routes and bases would probably drav eaditional Commnist
forces into the area. We believe it unlikely that the DRV would initiate any a
large-scale egeression in Lace oF GVN, although sane eAditions to or redeploy-
ments of PAVN forces in Iace might occurs It 4s aleo possible that the Com-
muniets would counter by seizing gach vuinerebdle targets in southern Lece a8
Attopeu and Sarevance.

Category IV: A systematic pettern of gredually intensifying 0s/oVE
ettacke against targets in the DRV iteelf, including those
associated with gnfiltration routes end military and economic
targets. These attacks on the DRV would not include the nse
of nuclear weapons or US ground forces in organized US combat
units. This progras would be combined vith directly commni-
cated essurances that US objectives were confined to eligi«
nating outside Communist support and guidance of the Viet Cong
and Pathet Leo insurrections.

rk. ‘hie category corresponds closely to the latter stages of the courses

(or “essumptions") which formed the bésis for SNIE 50-2-64, "Probable Con-
sequences of Certain US Actions with Respect to Vietnam and Lace,” dated 25 May

1964. Bince the prblication ef that SNIE the GVN position in Bouth Vietnam has

-T- Tn

| Me ee Ey
pees

**

aie js
:

a 1
whey

ae ‘ea a

Bae a Fae

uh a,

denial hate peryengee:
ae

er ied

aA eae”
.

4"
:

tent Ma

"se

deteriorated, the Tonkin Qulf incidents have occurrec, anf Communist Coins has
furnished Worth Vietnam with additional support. In eddition, Aivisions within

the Cowmmist camp have increased.

15. With the initial phase of US attacks on targets within the DRY which
were not directly connected with retaliation, Hanoi and Feiping would probably
con:lude that the US had embarked on @ aystematic pa** iD of attacks on DRY
pilitary-related targeta. At this point we believe they would probably attempt
to dissuade the US by a mixture of moves, dneluding some epparent concessions to
US wishes, efforts to mobilize international opinion against the US, and actions
designed to underline Communist deteamination. Hanoi would probably direct the
Viet Cong to lewch no dramatic pew attacke and might direct them to reduce
temporarily the tenpo and eize of their attacks. To mobilite international

- Preasure against the US, Commnist and leftist propeganda facilities would

attack US “war mednese” and stress the danger that US actions might bring om
World War ITI. Hanoi would probebly make an all out propaganda and diplomatic
@rive for negotistions and, to this end, there might be private hinte of same
willingness to eccomodate US/OVR views. Hanoi and Peiping would increase their
threats of counteractions and both would probebly undertake force deployments
Besigded 40 add to the credibility of these threats, though we doubt that the
DRY would ettempt any overt invasion of Lace or South Vietnam. Banoi would
certainly appeal for Chinese Communist defensive assistance, (redars, anti-
aircraft artillery, additional combat aircraft, patrol craft, end technical

*
-

. 1
sf Soe :
2 * ro.

ro. -8a

.
st as
“yl a
Ee ig

sonnel) which Peiping vould probably supply. We doubt that Hanoi vould request

nese Commniet ground troops et this juncture. However, Hanoi would explett
ers of Chinese Pyolunteers,” and, to this end, might publicize arrivals oe
nese advisors. Hanoi would also appeal to the foviets. The USSR would make
ehalf of the DRV, and perhaps consent to
almost certainly teke steps to insure

of Boviet support.

paganda and political efforts op b

nish some military equipment, but would
t Hanoi and Feiping were kept. cware of the limits

16. If, decpite Communiet efforts, the US attacks contimed, Hanoi’s leaders

(la have to ask themselves whether it was not better to suspend their support
Viet Cong iilitery action
rial sector of their econamy- fn the belie?

Litery facilities and the industr
it the tide has set almost irreversibly in the!: fevor in South Vietnam, they

ght calculate thet the Viet Cong could stop its
ing and renew the gnsurrection successfully at @ later date. Their judgznent

er might be reinforced by the Cainese Communist concern over
Te DAV might con-

rether than suffer the destruction of their major

pilitary attacks for the éine

this matt
coming involv
der this a reasovable pric

el in a conflict with US air and navel pover.
se to pay in order to reduce the Likelihood of
ey would then press for @ negotiated cease-

waging YS attacks on the IRV. Tb
ire fa the Bouth and try to promote an
neir ends. However, they would pot be prepared to
agreeing 40 effective international inspect

international conference to pursue
meke ary meaningful came .

essions such 49 fon of infiitretioca

utes.

ial Leta en lle Sent

eee ee a ae ee ae nee eee ner rer

, aq. co the other hant, in a test of wills with the US, the Comuntete Bight

: ceoark on a bolt course, feeling that the prize to be woo ty eli-out etischt ©
. Bouth Vietnen outweighed any damage to be suffered from continued US attacks
i the IRV. They might feel that exy benefits to be gained by buying tine would be

-~entum et @ tine when victory appesred near, bw -

more than offeet by a loss of &
@ loss of face with the VC, and by the consequent beletering of US/GVE morale.

: Ranoi would have in mind that concessions unter such circumstances night only
ee invite the US to resume strikes wpon any yenewel of Viet Cong pilitary ectivity.
carry on the fight and proceed to send its ovn armed

and South Vietnan. Hanoi might assume that the

‘eet 2 vs aoe
es te so ."

fn this cace the PRY vould
forces on a large scale to Lace
us vould be unvilling to unterteke @ major
could ultimately be Gefeated by the methods whi

ground war, or that if it wes, it
ch were guccessful against the

- ae
oma
yews

ao vawk ha aes
* 4
oes

a
rage

French.
esible escalation wo
would choose.

ue
ai
+ ete,

168. Ine situation {involving 6o many levels of po
agment a8 to vhich course the DRY leaders
ew thst they would choose the comervative course

ee ey So
fa eg ws

pe ee
T
an

are See AS

ee: Sed poe oF
Lae wAdereey - ma 5371,"

cannot maks @ confident ju
On balance, we incline to the vi

-

cutlined in pare. 16, largely om the grounis that they would consider that they

e tine in return for avoiding grest
risk of uncontrollable further

were not giving up much more than 6 Jittl
physi damage £0 their country and eacaping the

3

+
iets
a

e aboiepee ae Past

oe wes.

‘,

id aty
ane beads
pet Chaat
a
’
'

ae
Pe lean ed 7

escalation. There is eubstantiel danger, hiwever, that the IRV might choose she

more aggressive course discussed in pere- Ds a Frag

19. If the DRV should choose the more aggressive course, the question of
Communist Chinese Jatervertion vould arise. At thie stage, Feiping would probebly
gake ite threats of intervention stronger anf more specific. If it had not
already done 80, St would almost certainly deploy large forces to areas boar
Vietnam and lacs. Peiping might commit units of its alr force to defensive
action over Horth Vietnam at thie point, tit in view of the magnitude of US air
and naval superiority we doubt that Peiping vould do ~ ERovever, Hanoi ani
Peiping would probably introduce limited mmbers of Chinese Communist ground
forces as “volunteers,” both to prepare for further escalation and to make clear
Peiping’s comnitment to aesist the Borth Vietnamese. It is also possible,
though unlikely, that unacknowledged Chinese Communist unite would make deep
éncursions into Laos and perhaps even into Thailand and Burns.

£0. We believe that Commmist China would be very reluctant to become
@irectly involved in the fighting dn Intochina lest this be taken by the US
as a cause for major retaliation against the Chinese mainland. In our view, the
Chincsd{Camuniste would not be dieposed to engage openly with US forces unless
they felt it was necessary in order to prevent destruction of the Commrani st regine

Fhe Director of Intelligence ani Research, Departaent of Btate, delleves
that the DRV vould fina the arguments in paragraph 17 more percussive andi
would choose that course, considering that at this juncture it hai optimum

vocation as well a6 international ecceptance for overt retaliatico in |

South Vietname
+ eil- :

“OB.

+
Sf eee -

se one

fn Borth Vietnam. We therefore believe there would not be bigh risk of the.
introduction of large-scale Chinese ground force combet unite unless major tafe
ground unite bad moved to occupy areas Of the DEV or Commnist-held territory So
northern Laos, or possibly, the Chinese had committed their air and had subse-
quently suffered attecks on CCAF bases in China. Bevertheless, anes io elvays
a chance that Peiping might so intervene either for reasons that poem frretional
to us or because 4t miscalculated the objectives of US moves in the ares. Com-
munist China's capability for conducting ground war in adjacent arees of
southeast Asia is formidable.

21. As the escalation progressed, the USSR would be increasingly concerned
to bring an end to the crisis. It would provably make plain to Banof and Pelping
that they could lock for no substantial Soviet support. The Soviets would geek
to eugnent international pressures on the US to bring it to the conference table.
To this end they might offer hinte of intervention, but we belfeve that they |
would refrain from military actions dn the area and would not take the occasion
to provoke @ crisis with the US elsevbere. ar rr
C. GeareRAt CONSEQUENCES —

22. Even - US actions along the lines described above in Category IV
clearly giccassed in halting outside support for the Piet Cong effort, the prin-
efpal eaccomplichment would not de a solution to the larger problen of South Vietoan,

°

but rather the buying of time in which to continue US efforts to establish @

_viedle regine in the South anf to deal with indigenous Viet Cong insurgency. :

oi? -
