The Chilean Situation and Prospects
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013614, dated 4 September 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013614).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NIE 94-63
“3 October 1963

}

ww

LB] LIBRARY

Mandatory Review
Case # NLJ_93-57

Document #_ fe

(NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 94-63

~ The Chilean Situation and Prospects

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

3 OCTOBER 1963

Approved for Release
Date ag

The fallowing intelligence organizations participated i in the preparation of
this estimate: = é

"The Central Intelligence Agcy aad “the ‘infelligence ‘organlzattons “of the “Depart” , ee 7
‘ ‘ments “of State, Defense, the Army, the. ne ‘the Air shee and NSA. ete

Director of intelligence “and Research, Department of State —
"Director, Defense Intelligence Agency a
“Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, ‘Department c at the Army =
Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the New

se

sin pe . Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF

me “Director of the Notional secur Agency: Peasy

oo pe “Abstaining oc a
~ The Atomic ‘Energy ‘Commission Recreventciive. to “the ‘USIB, ‘and ‘the Assistant ans
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their

oe . -

~ jurisdiction.

" WARNING

ational Defense of the United States
; Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
y manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information affe
within the meaning of the espio
mission or revelation of whi

SrOur a

Excluded franca
dows ‘and
1 Feation

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 94-63

The Chilean Situation and Prospects

que.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM .......... Hoop Oututhoreg ates Qe isa eaer ays alates Hates pepees 1
CONCLUSIONS ..... 1. ee tte enee ies
I. THE SOCIAL BACKGROUND ........--.. 5c rece e eee eeees 3

Il. THE POLITICAL TRADITION AND TREND ................ 4.
Ill. THE 1964 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION ............-----+-5- ve
IV. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION .-.. 1.1... eee eee 8
V. FOREIGN RELATIONS .........-. 255s e ec eens 13
VI. CONTINGENT POLITICAL PROSPECTS ...............--. 14

ANNEX A: Political Organizations and Pressure Groups .... 17
ANNEX B: The Armed Forces and Internal Security ........ 23

THE CHILEAN SITUATION
AND PROSPECTS

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the situation and prospects in Chile with par-
ticular reference to the September 1964 presidential election.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Chile has a longstanding tradition of respect for constitu-
tional order and civil liberties. It has accomplished a consider-
able political evolution by electoral means. Its human and ma-
terial resources are adequate to provide a decent living for its
rapidly growing population. Nevertheless, for half the popula-
tion real wages have been declining since 1950, and a large
portion of the population is ill-housed, ill-clothed, and ill-fed.
(Paras. 1-6, 17, 18)

B. Consequently increasing popular dissatisfaction has been
expressed in a steadily leftward political trend. In the presi-
dential election of 1958, Salvador Allende, the nominee of FRAP,*
failed of election because a minor candidate diverted: from him
a small part of the leftist vote. These election returns raised
apprehension that the 1964 presidential election might bring
to power a government under strong Communist influence, if
not control. (Para. 7)

C. Subsequent congressional and municipal elections have
shown that the leftward trend in Chile is continuing, but that
the present beneficiary of this trend is not FRAP, but rather
the Christian Democratic Party. This hitherto minor left-center
grouping is attracting the votes of frustrated reformists who
see little hope in the traditional political parties and are an-
tagonized by the communistic tendency of FRAP. (Para. 9)

*Frente de Accién Popular, a coalition of the Communist and Socialist parties.

Gi: 1

—

D. The outcome of the 1964 presidential election cannot be
predicted a year in advance. The political situation is extremely
fluid. Allende’s candidacy now appears less dangerous than in
1958. The campaign of Duran, the candidate of the coalition
of the traditional parties, has failed to gather momentum. On
present showing, Frei, the Christian Democratic candidate, ap-
pears to be the leading contender. (Paras. 10-16, 36)

E. If Duran should be elected, the Chilean government’s
policies and performance would remain much as they have been
under Alessandri. The government would profess reformist pur-
poses, but the effectiveness of its reform measures would be
limited by its need to placate various vested interests. Frei would
strive to transform the economic and social structure of Chile,
but he would be resisted by the vested interests. (Paras. 8, 37-38)

F. If, through the defeat of Allende, the Communists and
Allende Socialists should be frustrated in their once-lively ex-
pectation of achieving power by electoral means, the Chilean
Communists probably would not turn at once to revolutionary
violence. The Carabineros and the military would almost cer-
tainly be able to cope with any attempt at either urban or rural
insurgency. The Communists would prefer to preserve their
present legal status and bide their time, trusting that conserva-
tive political influences will continue to prevent effective social
reform and that the cumulative frustrations and resentments
of the masses will eventually bring them to power. (Paras. 42-44)

Il. THE SOCIAL BACKGROUND

1. Chile’s rapidly growing population now numbers about eight
million. Racially and culturally, it is one of the most homogeneous in
Latin America.* About 95 percent of the population are at least nomi-
nally Roman Catholic. About 80 percent of the adult population are
literate. Three-fourths of the people live in the central one-third of
the country, a fertile area with a climate like that of California. (See
map.) About 60 percent live in urban communities. Almost all par-
ticipate in the money economy.

2. Chilean national unity is impaired, however, by strong class dis-
tinctions. The upper class—large landholders, and commercial and
industrial magnates—conforms to the pattern of conspicuous consump-
tion familiar elsewhere in Latin America. It is able to maintain this
style of living in part through the avoidance of direct taxes. These
magnates have had to share political power with a rapidly growing
middle class, one of the largest in Latin America, now about 40 percent
of the population. Within this middle class there are divergencies of
interest between independent professional and business men on the
one hand and white collar employees on the other. These politically
effective social elements have defended and promoted their respective
interests without much regard for the generally deplorable lot of the
lower class.

3. Chile’s regressive tax system and chronic inflation have borne
heavily upon the lower class—and, to a lesser degree, upon the white
collar employees of the lower middle class. Since 1950 the real wages
of unskilled and unorganized workers have declined. Although some
organized workers, such as the employees of the US mining companies,
live relatively well, an estimated half of all industrial workers are ill-fed
and ill-housed. The employment and housing problems are rendered
increasingly acute by the high rate of population growth (2.5 percent
per annum) and by the migration of peasants to town in search of
economic and social betterment.

*The Chilenos (90 percent of the population) are of predominantly Spanish
stock, but, except in the upper class, most have some Indian admixture. The only
considerable group of unassimilated Indians are the Araucanians of south-central
Chile, who were not finally subdued until 1887. In the same general area there
is also a considerable native-born community of German origin and culture.

ae: 3

Il, THE POLITICAL TRADITION AND TREND *

4. Chile has a longstanding tradition of respect for constitutional
order and civil liberties. Resort to force in politics has been rare.’
Election results are normally accepted. Consequently, it has been
possible to accomplish a significant political evolution by electoral
means. In contrast to the executive domination characteristic of most
Latin American countries, in Chile the legislative and judicial powers
are respected and effective. A highly competent national constabulary,
the Carabineros, is normally able to maintain law and order without
the intervention of the military.’

5. The upper class monopoly of political power was broken by the
presidential election of 1920, but the political predominance of the
middle class was not consolidated until the period 1938-52. In the
elections of 1938, 1942, and 1946, the largely middle class Radical
Party won the Presidency with the support of the Communists and
sometimes with that of the Socialists as well. This period of Radical
administration illustrates the Chilean adage, “Elect with the left, rule
with the right.” Once elected, Radical Presidents usually followed
moderate policies and often appointed conservatives to cabinet positions.
The Radicals enlisted conservative support for their program of rapid
industrialization by tacit agreement not to press for agrarian reform.
The Communists received three cabinet positions as a reward for their
support in the election of 1946, but, when the Party proceeded to foment
industrial and agrarian unrest, the Radicals combined with conserva~
tives to pass legislation outlawing it. In general, as upper middle class
Radicals have prospered, politically and economically, their interests
have come to coincide with those of the upper class.

6. The Radicals’ program of rapid industrialization failed to live up
to expectations, and the distortions which it introduced into the economy
resulted in uncontrolled inflation. Consequent popular distress and
dissatisfaction defeated the Radical candidate in the presidential election
of 1952. The winner of that election was a nationalistic and demagogic
“strongman” without party affiliation, General Carlos Ibanez del
Campo.‘ The voters who elected him evidently desired a strong patron
who would enforce order and relieve distress without reference to any
ideology. During Ib4fiez’ administration, however, real wages con-

?For a description of the principal Chilean political organizations and pressure
groups, see Annex A.

*This generalization is not true for the period 1924-38, which was marked by
disturbances attributable to economic dislocations and to the strains inherent
in the transition from upper class to middle class political predominance.

*¥or a summary description of the Chilean armed forces, see Annex B.

‘Although the legal proprieties were observed, Ibdfiez had ruled Chile as vir-
tually a military dictator, 1926-31, first as Minister of War, then as elected
President.

4 Pail

—_

tinued to decline and unemployment became a serious problem. In
their disillusionment and despair, lower class voters began to turn to
the ideological left for salvation.

7. Leftist candidates won a majority of the popular vote in the presi-
dential election of 1958. Salvador Allende, the Socialist candidate of
a leftist coalition including the Communists,’ failed of election be-
cause a minor candidate diverted from him a small part of the leftist
vote. This fortuitous circumstance permitted the conservative candi-
date, Jorge Alessandri,? to win the Presidency. Nevertheless, the 1958
election returns foreshadowed the possibility that a coalition including
the Communists might come to power by electoral means in 1964.

8. In the face of this threat, and in keeping with his campaign
promises, Alessandri has striven to increase production, reduce un-
employment, curtail inflation, and carry out moderate agrarian and
tax reforms. To obtain needed congressional support, he took Radicals
into his cabinet; they stipulated that sufficient reforms must be under-
taken to provide a good record for a Radical candidate to run on in
the presidential election of 1964. The administration’s reform program,

THE COMPOSITION OF THE CHILEAN CONGRESS

NOTE: 20 Senate seats, distributed as shown in parentheses below, and all
Chamber seats will be subject to election in March 1965.

Party Senate Chamber
Conservative 2... 2c cee eee eee cence 4 (2) 17
Biberal. cccnecaseoitevies a eedioe e2eM Figs bs. ein oO 10 (5) 28
RACICAL - sriscccac erste Perenid a ae ee le Pee ee oe 13 (7) 39
Christian Democratic ...........-....-4+4 4(1) 23
National Democratic ............--.--++- —_—— : . . 1
Socialist: . .cscecyoe. Oboe eee ees 7 (3) 12
People’s Vanguard ............+-2.-+-055 od _
Communist ..........-c. cece eee eee eee 4— 16
Independent ............---- ee ee eee eee ee 2 (2) . _
45 (20) 147

however, has been hindered and watered down by the resistance within
the government coalition, whose controlling members are not by nature
enthusiasts for reform. Although some progressive measures have been
adopted, the administration has not accomplished enough to arrest
the leftward trend in Chilean politics.’

1The Frente de Accién Popular (FRAP). See Annex A.

2 Although the candidate of the Conservative and Liberal parties (see Annex A),
Alessandri had a good reformist name. His Liberal father had been Chile’s out-
standing proponent of reform, twice elected to the Presidency (1920-25, and
1932-38) with Radical support.

*°The resignation of the Radical cabinet members in September 1963 will reduce
the pressure for reform within the Alessandri administration. Although the
Radicals remain disposed to support further reforms, not much more is likely
to be accomplished before the 1964 election.

oe 5

—

9. The congressional election in 1961 and the municipal elections in
early 1963 have shown that the leftward trend in Chile is continuing.
The municipal elections show also, however, that at present the principal
beneficiary of this trend is not FRAP, but the Christian Democratic
Party (PDC). In the Chilean political spectrum, this reformist offshoot

Party Electoral Strength, 1961 and 1963

1961 Congres- 1963
sional Elections + Municipal Elections *
Democratic Front (FD) Percent Percent
Radicals (PR) .......... 296,704 22.0 427 842 21.60
Liberals (PL) .......... 221,361 16.5 259,683 13.11
Conservatives (PUC) .... 197,151 14.7 225,075 11.36
Democrats (PD) ........ —_ _— 19,409 1.00
Totals: 4:05 )3.0hete26 715,216 53.2 932,009 47.07
Popular Action Front (FRAP)
Communists (PCCh) .... 157,451 11.7 254,178 12.83
Socialists (PS) ......... _ 149,420 111 224,071 11.32
National Democrats
(PADENA) ........... 95,282 V1 101,427 5.12
People’s National
Vanguard (VNP) ..... — — 3,101 15
Totals .............- 402,153 29.9 582,777 29.42
Christian Democrats (PDC) 213,559 16.5 452,848 22.86

Independents ..........20.5 —_ — 12,759 65

'The Democratic Front was not yet operative in the 1961 elections but the totals
of the parties now comprising it are listed together for comparison with the
1963 totals.

2In Chile, as elsewhere, municipal elections are normally dominated by local
factors. In 1963, however, the national party organizations fought them on
national political issues, as a demonstration of party strength in anticipation of
the 1964 presidential contest. The estimate of a strong trend toward the PDC
does not depend solely on these 1963 returns, but is confirmed by other current
indications.

of the Conservative Party stands generally to the left of the Radical
Party, but it is explicitly anti-Communist. Its present emergence as
the strongest single party in Chile has coincided with a decline in the
voting strength of the Conservative and Liberal parties, and also of
PADENA,? the non-Marxist member of FRAP. The PDC is increasingly
attracting the votes of frustrated reformists who see little hope in the
traditional parties and are antagonized by the communistic tendency
of FRAP. This trend is likely to continue, and to make the Christian
Democratic Party a formidable contender in the presidential election
of 1964.

3 partido Democrdtica Nacional. See Annex A.

lil. THE 1964 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

10. Although the 1964 presidential election, to be held in September,
is still a year off, the three principal candidates have already been
designated. They are Senator Julio Durdn Neuman, a Radical, for the
Democratic Front (a coalition of the traditional political parties) ;
Senator Salvador Allende Gossens, a Socialist, for the Popular Action
Front (FRAP); and Senator Eduardo Frei Montalva for the Christian
Democrats. A minor candidate, independent rightist Jorge Prat Echau-
rren, is also in the race.

11. Durdn, 45, is a wealthy lawyer and financier. His nomination
was dictated by the inner circle which controls the machinery of the
Democratic Front parties. Although his platform professes reformist
purposes, he is hardly credible as a champion of reform. For this
reason, he has little appeal for independent voters, or for the reform-
minded elements of the Democratic Front parties. Moreover, many
of the Conservatives, an explicitly Catholic party, may be alienated by
the fact that he was once a Mason. For these reasons, many voters
who would otherwise have supported the Democratic Front are likely
to switch to the other candidates.

12. Disgruntled elements within the Democratic Front now privately
contend that Duran cannot win and that President Alessandri should
be substituted for him as the Front’s presidential candidate. The trouble
with this proposal is that the constitution does not allow an incumbent
President to succeed himself. To amend this provision in the midst
of a presidential campaign would antagonize many voters. Even if
the substitute were not Alessandri, but, for example, the generally popu-
lar former President Gabriel Gonzalez Videla, the displacement of Duran
would antagonize his supporters and might destroy the Front. It could
split the conservative vote between two rival candidates, ensuring the
defeat of both. In addition, because the Communists hate and fear
Gonzalez Videla, who outlawed them in 1948, they might decide to
support Frei covertly if Gonzalez Videla became the Democratic Front
candidate. For these reasons, and for lack of an adequate substitute
candidate, the party managers are presently disposed to stick with
Duran.

13. Allende, 55, is running for the third time as the nominee of FRAP.
Originally a moderate Socialist, Allende, as a candidate, has adopted a
strongly pro-Castro and pro-Soviet line. Some of his Socialist followers
are more vehemently revolutionary than are the Communists. (The
Communists’ present policy, called the via pacifica, is to pursue their
ends by strictly political means, with special care to avoid the sup-
pression which they suffered from 1948 to 1958.) Allende’s identifica-

BS 7

ehhh...

tion with Castroism and communism is likely to antagonize some in-
dependent voters and to cause further defections from FRAP. Already
most members of PADENA have broken away, two groups declaring
themselves for Frei and another for Duran. On the other hand, Allende
is an established political figure with considerable personal prestige, a
factor not involved in the municipal elections. Moreover, he may
gain the support of leftist Radicals unwilling to support either Duran,
a plutocrat, or Frei, a Catholic.

14. Frei, 52, a well-known and attractive personality, is certain to
benefit from the existing disarray within the Democratic and Popular
Action fronts. Although his party won only 23 percent of the vote in
the municipal elections, as compared with 29 percent for the FRAP
parties and 47 percent for the parties of the Democratic Front, the tide
appears to be running strongly in his favor. He will probably outrun
Allende in the presidential election. He may even be able to surpass
the vote which the Conservative, Liberal, and Radical party machines
will be able to deliver for Duran.

15. Prat, 45, is a strong rightist without organized party support. He
is likely to attract votes which would otherwise have gone to Duran, or
to Frei. Prat recognizes that he might thus bring about the election
of Allende; he says that, if this result seems likely, he will withdraw his
candidacy. In that event he would probably throw his support to Frei,
since he supported the PDC in the municipal elections.

16. The Chilean constitution provides that, if no presidential candidate
receives a majority of the popular vote, the Congress (the Senate and
Chamber in joint session) shall choose between the two leading con-
tenders. This choice normally devolves upon Congress, as it almost
certainly will in 1964. Hitherto, Congress has always chosen the candi-
date with the greater popular vote. The present Congress, which will
hold office until the congressional election in 1965, is composed of 111
representatives of the Democratic Front, 52 representatives of FRAP,
27 Christian Democrats, and two independents. It would almost cer-
tainly prefer Duran, but would probably elect Frei if he were to lead
in the popular vote. It would not be likely to elect Allende unless he
were to lead the poll by a clear margin.

IV. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

17. Chile’s political future will depend to a very considerable extent
upon the ability of its economy to increase output and productivity and
thereby to provide adequate levels of living for the rapidly expanding
population. Chile’s basic resources are adequate for this purpose, but
only if they are more rationally utilized, and if there is a more equitable

8 Ci:

eee:

distribution of the national income. Since the war Chile’s economic
growth has lagged behind much of the rest of Latin America. Between
1950 and 1960, GNP increased by an average of 3.5 percent per year, but
this represented only about a 1 percent increase per capita. Neverthe-
less, the real wages of urban blue collar and rural workers declined over
the same period. These workers and their families make up somewhat
more than half of the Chilean population.

18. Chile’s extensive natural resources include the world’s largest
known deposits of nitrates and medium-grade copper ore, and large de-
posits of high-grade iron ore. The country has sizable deposits of
medium and low grade coal, but lacks coking coal. A large but little
exploited hydroelectric power potential exists near the largest con-
centration of population. Petroleum reserves in the South are prob-
ably adequate to meet domestic requirements. The amount of arable
land, if properly utilized, is more than adequate for Chilean needs. The
country has extensive forests, and its rich fishery resources have barely
been tapped. The largely homogeneous population and a relatively
well-developed educational system provide human resources that -are
also considerably above the Latin American mean.

19. Many of Chile’s economic problems stem from the shortcomings
of its agriculture. A large proportion of the best Chilean agricultural
land is organized in large holdings; much of it has been underutilized.
At the other end of the scale there are many tiny properties inadequate
to provide more than a bare subsistence living. Agriculture as a whole
has suffered from technical backwardness, inadequate investment, and
poorly developed distribution and marketing facilities. As late as the
early 1940s Chile was a net exporter of agricultural commodities, but
now it must spend an increasing share of its foreign exchange earnings
on agricultural imports, over half of which consists of foodstuffs that
could be produced domestically. While agriculture accounts for only
12 percent of GNP, it employs about 30 percent of the country’s labor
force. Thus labor productivity is low and the cash income of the rural
laborer is substantially below the national average. Between 1950 and
1960 agricultural production grew at an average rate of 1.8 percent,
less than the annual average population growth of 2.5 percent.

20. Industrial development has had the solicitous attention of succes-
sive Chilean Governments for most of the present century, and has since
1938 received the principal emphasis in Chilean economic policy. The
objective has been to provide employment opportunities for workers who
could no longer be absorbed in agriculture, and to help conserve foreign
exchange. Industry was assisted in various ways, including high tariffs,
easy credit, and exchange policies favoring imports of raw materials and
foodstuffs for the expanding industrial labor force. Favoritism for in-

ui: 9

=

dustry intensified the urban-rural imbalance and increased pressures
from other sectors of the Chilean economy. Neglected agricultural
interests, penalized by low farm prices, fought to maintain their relative
freedom from taxes. Lacking incentives for investment in farm pro-
duction, large landholders increasingly clung to unproductive estates
primarily as a hedge against inflation. Organized labor secured periodic
wage adjustments to compensate for steady rises in the cost of living—
due in large part to increased food costs. As a consequence, industry
was allowed to raise its prices to re-establish working capital and profit
levels reduced by increased wage bills. The result of this combination
of the drive for industrialization and concessions to pressure groups has
been unbalanced growth, declining productivity, and inflation that has
ranged from 15 to as high as 80 percent per annum.

21. There has been a considerable growth in industry since the war
and it now accounts for over one-quarter of GNP and provides 75 percent
of Chile’s consumer goods. Industry has not, however, realized the
hopes originally held out for it. It is heavily dependent upon imported
capital equipment and raw materials, and, far from relieving the balance
of payments, has been a continuing burden upon it. Because much of
Chilean industry is monopolistic and inefficient, it is handicapped in
competing for foreign markets, and inflates the internal price structure.
The limited size of the domestic market, so long as it is coupled with
depressed living standards for nearly half the population, makes it
difficult for industry to achieve economies of scale. In these circum-
stances Chilean industry has virtually exhausted the opportunities
for substituting its own products for imported consumer goods and lacks
the capital and know-how to compete with imported heavy industrial
products. Industry has not been able to absorb more than a fraction
of the annual additions to the labor force.

22. The inability of industry and agriculture to provide employment
opportunities for the growing labor force has led to the development
of a large service sector, which accounts for over 50 percent of GNP
and about one-third of the labor force. Commercial activities make
substantial contributions to GNP, but the balance of the service sector—
particularly government and personal services—has become a reservoir
for surplus labor and is highly inefficient. Successive national gov-
ernments, committed to a policy of full employment and extensive wel-
fare services, have increased public expenditures to support a growing
bureaucracy and other service sector activities. Although underemploy-
ment as well as unemployment have been reduced by the upturn of the
economy since 1960, both persist as serious basic problems.

23. Inflation has been a major Chilean problem since the last century.
It became particularly acute after World War II, despite recurrent ef-
forts by the government since 1956 to curb it. The expanding role of
the government in the economy has been a major cause of inflation as

10 a

revenues, largely dependent on foreign trade, have failed to keep pace
with the rising level of government expenditures. Inflation has been
fed by easy credit policies and the success of politically influential
groups in repeatedly securing relaxation and subsequent abandonment
of stabilization programs. Other basic causes of inflation have been
the slow growth of Chilean agriculture, a long term worsening of the
terms of trade over the past 25 years, and an official policy of annual
wage increases to offset rises in living costs. In the year ending 1 July
1963, the cost of living index rose 45 percent, and even sharper rises
have occurred during the past decade.

24. The persistent balance of payments problem has been aggravated
rather than aided by efforts to protect both agriculture and industry
and by substantial flights of capital. As a result Chile has not been
able to accumulate a sizable foreign exchange reserve to cushion the
impact of sharp variations in earnings from mineral exports, which
provide over 85 percent of export income. Despite continued expansion
in the output of the mining sector, net deficit on current account totalled
$186 million in 1960 and $225 million in 1961. In 1962 the Alessandri
administration was able to reduce the deficit to $115 million by imposing
severe restrictions on imports and by devaluing the escudo in October.
Large-scale foreign financial assistance has been necessary, however, to
prevent a serious curtailment of economic activity. The US, the prin-
cipal source of outside assistance, has committed some $570 million
since 1958 in support of the present administration’s programs.

25. Foreign private investment by Europeans and Japanese is in-
creasing, but US direct private investment (est. $800 million) accounts
for 70 percent of all foreign investment in Chile. The US investment
is located principally in mining and public utilities, activities in which
foreign capital is particularly vulnerable to political attack in Latin
America. Because the mining industry is isolated from the main stream
of Chilean life—located in geographically remote areas and employing
relatively few workers—it has made little contribution to local tech-
nology or the modernization of business outlooks and management.
These companies are threatened by proposals for nationalization and
are subjected to discriminatory treatment such as the new tax boosts
which, in 1961, caused the two big US copper companies to postpone
plans for large new investments to expand production.

26. The Alessandri administration announced in 1960 a 10-year de-
velopment plan which would need to be supported by an estimated $8
billion investment, including $1.3 billion of foreign capital. The plan
envisages an overall annual growth in GNP of 5.5 percent through in-
creased investment in various fields with particular emphasis upon
economic infrastructure—roads, ports, power, irrigation, and housing.
The plan has been criticized for its failure to address itself to the basic

me 11

ee

problems of rural-urban imbalance, to take much cognizance of Chile’s
increasingly urgent social problems, and to provide for the self-help
measures called for under the Alliance for Progress.

27. Chilean efforts, since October 1962 to carry out a new stabilization
plan essential to the 10-year plan’s success are being supported by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the US has provided financial
assistance for both programs. Much of the substantial aid Chile has
received from other official Western sources has also been committed
during the Alessandri administration.2 However, Chile still faces a
major problem in financing its development program because of its lim-
ited ability to service additional external borrowings on conventional
terms. At present over one-quarter of the country’s free exchange
earnings go to service existing convertible currency obligations, esti-
mated at close to $1 billion. Debt service will take $110 million in
1963 and $109 million in 1964, and is manageable only because much
of the new external assistance coming from AID and IDB is on “soft”
terms.

28. Under urging from the foreign sources of needed credits and
from domestic advocates of reform, the Alessandri administration has
initiated agrarian and tax reform proposals, in accordance with the
Alliance for Progress, some of which have been passed while other por-
tions continue to face serious congressional opposition. The administra-
tion has made considerable progress in housing and school construc-
tion, which has had a salutary social effect but does nothing to produce
needed foreign exchange. It has not been able to correct the underuse
of land, which would increase productivity and improve Chile’s pay-
ment situation. Although a modest agrarian reform law has been
passed, its implementation has been impeded by the political power
of the large landholders.

29. At present, the Chilean economy looks healthy, with sales, ‘em-
ployment, mining, construction, and agricultural output at high levels.
This stems principally from the large budgetary and balance of pay-
ments support from the IMF, Ex-Im Bank, and IDB, and developmental
assistance made available by the Alliance for Progress. At the same
time, the political-economic obstacles to growth and stability still per-
sist. Any government coming to power will have to contend with the

*The IMF standby agreement allows drawings up to $40 million in balance of
payments aid during 1963. The US aid includes a $35 million program support
loan from AID; a $15 million balance of credits payment from the Export-Import
Bank; and a $10 million exchange agreement with the US Treasury Department.

“This includes a loan of over $50 million for the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB); loans of $97 million from the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (IBRD); International Development Association (IDA) loans
of $19 million; and Development Assistance Commission (DAC) country assistance
of $173 million.

12 ais

vested interests which control agriculture, finance, and industry. These
interests have successfully resisted much of the present government’s
attempts at structural economic reform, and it can be expected to fight
strongly any more far-reaching encroachments on their traditional
privileges. Elements of the Right have come to realize that inflation
will not generate lasting economic growth and that some rationalization
of the country’s economic structure is necessary. Nevertheless, the con-
servatives continue to dispute with one another and the rest of the
population how far and how fast the reforms which would achieve this
rationalization should be implemented. The present government can
be expected to pursue sufficiently disciplined fiscal-monetary policies,
and a token rate of reform enactment, to qualify for continued US and
IMF support. But after September 1964, the direction the economy
will take will depend heavily upon the ideology of the new President,
and his success—or lack of success—in pushing through economic and
social reforms.

V. FOREIGN RELATIONS

30. Successive Chilean administrations, including Alessandri’s, have
in general sought to maintain close and cooperative relations with the
US, the major source of new investment capital and the country’s most
important single trading partner. Underlying this general policy, how-
ever, there is a widespread nationalistic concern to assert Chile’s dignity
and independence in foreign relations. This nationalistic sentiment
finds expression in a tendency to criticize US policies and actions, and to
pursue divergent policies on particular occasions.

31. Many factors contribute to Chile’s nationalistic sensitivity and its
anti-US manifestations. The Communists, of course, and many Social-
ists also, do their utmost to foment and exploit such sentiments ex-
pressly in order to impair US-Chilean relations. They attack as Yankee
economic imperialism not only such targets as the US mining com-
panies, but also the Alliance for Progress. But economic nationalism
is also characteristic of the Chilean middle and upper classes. The
latter, in addition, resent the self-help and reformist terms of the Alli-
ance for Progress. There is a widespread tendency to consider that
Chile’s economic difficulties result from US control of copper mining,
Chile’s major export industry.

32. The status of the US-owned copper mining companies is likely
to continue to cause serious difficulties in US-Chilean relations. The
Chilean economy depends heavily on the export earnings of these copper
mines. Their development has been beneficial to Chile, and particu-
larly to their Chilean employees, as well as profitable to the investors.
Nevertheless, there is agreement across the entire political spectrum,
from Communists to Conservatives, that the copper companies should
be made to contribute more to Chile. The question is how to derive

, a 13

more income and employment from the industry. Moderates recognize
that the companies already pay more taxes and labor benefits than any
other enterprise in the country. Moreover, they know that punitive
measures only discourage new company investment that is needed to
support Chile’s Ten-Year Plan of Development. Only the most radical
elements favor outright nationalization, for which Chile would not be
able to pay promptly, if at all, thus jeopardizing its international credit.
An approach which has considerable support would be to “Chileanize”
the companies by insisting on 1) incorporation under Chilean law with
Chilean capital participation; 2) use of more Chilean managers and
top-echelon technicians; 3) greater government control over copper
production and sales; and 4) an increase in the amount of copper refined
in Chile.

33. Although Chile gave prompt and unequivocal support to the US
during the missile base crisis of October 1962, it is one of the five Latin
American countries that still maintain diplomatic relations with Cuba.
The Alessandri administration defends this position on juridical grounds.
Its chief reason appears to be fear of the strength shown by the pro-
Castro FRAP in the presidential election of 1958 and a desire not to
inject such an emotional issue into the election of 1964. It has also
found it beneficial to exchange Chilean agricultural products for Cuban
sugar.

34. Chile maintains diplomatic relations with only one other Com-
munist country, Yugoslavia, but permits the USSR, Poland, Czechoslo-
vakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Communist China to maintain small
commercial or cultural (propaganda) missions in Chile. This per-
mission reflects the official and popular view that Chile must develop
new trade wherever it can. There is a persistent popular belief that the
Communist countries could absorb far larger amounts of Chilean copper.
Despite the best efforts of these missions, however, Chile’s trade with
Communist countries so far remains negligible.

35. Chile’s territorial aggrandizement at the expense of Bolivia and
Peru during the War of the Pacific (1879-1883) leaves a residue of under-
lying tension in Chile’s relations with those countries. It is this factor
which has rendered so intractable Chile’s dispute with Bolivia over the
waters of the Rio Lauca. Chile’s relations with Argentina are normally
cordial, despite a minor unresolved boundary dispute.

Vi. CONTINGENT POLITICAL PROSPECTS

36. The outcome of the 1964 presidential election cannot be predicted
a year in advance. The political situation is extremely fluid, with dis-
satisfaction rife within both the Democratic Front and the Popular
Action Front, and with an apparent trend toward the Christian Demo-
crats, who, however, start from behind. The electoral campaign, as it
develops, may produce further political fragmentation and realignments,

14 ST

or may produce a rallying effect. In these circumstances, we shall
briefly consider post-election prospects in contingent terms.

37. If Duran should be elected to the Presidency in 1964, the Chilean
Government’s policies and performance would remain much as they
have been under Alessandri, but without the benefit of Alessandri’s
personal prestige and sincerity. The administration would profess
reformist purposes, but its reform measures would be watered down by
its need to placate various vested interests. It would be interested in
economic development, and any accomplishments on that line might
produce some social amelioration.

38. If Frei should be elected to the Presidency, he would be dependent,
at least initially, on the cooperation of a Congress not under his control.
It is likely, however, that the same trend which had brought him to the
Presidency would give him a sympathetic Congress in 1965. There is
no doubt that Frei would strive to transform the social structure of
Chile through the constitutional enactment of a far-reaching agrarian
reform and a steeply progressive income tax, and through increased
government planning and participation in the economy. Frei would
be generally sympathetic toward the self help and social goals of the
Alliance for Progress, but selective with respect to the participation of
foreign private capital in Chilean economic development. He would
move toward the “Chileanization” of the US-owned mining companies.
In all this he would, of course, be strongly resisted by the affected
vested interests.

39. If Allende were to be elected, he would face a hostile majority in
Congress, at least until the congressional election in 1965. In return for
patronage, however, some Radicals might be induced to collaborate with
him in Congress. The Christian Democrats also might support him
on some issues.

40. In office, Allende would be likely to moderate his extremism, at
least initially, in order to obtain Radical and PDC support and also to
avoid provoking a military reaction. The military commitment to a non-
political role is not unconditional, as was demonstrated during the tur-
bulent years, 1924-1932. If Allende should impatiently attempt to
override Congress, the military would almost certainly intervene to
preserve constitutional order. If he should too abruptly seek to impose
his personal control on the military establishment, there might also be
a reaction. Otherwise, the military and the Carabineros would be likely
to support the duly elected regime.

41. Despite the tactical moderation indicated above, an Allende ad-
ministration would be strongly nationalistic and therefore, in effect,
anti-US. It would, of course, endeavor to gain control of Congress in
the 1965 election and move administratively to gain secure control of

wee 15

ex. z

the armed forces as soon as practicable. It would seek to consolidate
leftist and nationalist support by presenting a program of radical social
reform and economic statism, and by increasing demands on the US
copper mining countries and other foreign interests. In this it could
count on the sympathy of some Radical and Christian Democratic
elements. In the name of the independent foreign policy, it would
also seek to expand relations with Cuba and other Communist countries.

42. If, through the defeat of Allende, the Communists and Allende
Socialists should be frustrated in their once-lively expectation of achiev-
ing power by electoral means, they might consider abandoning the via
pacifica and seek to foment a proletarian revolution in Chile. The odds
are against their doing so. Despite peasant grievances, there is at
present no significant potential for rural insurgency in Chile. The
landlords and the Carabineros have the rural situation under close con-
trol. There is greater danger of a revolutionary explosion in the slums
of the urban proletariat, but this too could almost certainly be controlled
by the Carabineros and the military.

43. In these circumstances, the Chilean Communists’ post-election
strategy would probably be to preserve their legal status and bide their
time, trusting that conservative political influences would continue to
prevent effective social reform and that the cumulative frustrations and
resentments of the masses would eventually enable them to come to
power, by election or by revolution. In the meantime, the Communists
would, of course, continue their efforts to exacerbate social tensions in
Chile and to disrupt US-Chilean relations.

44, It is hardly likely that any Democratic Front administration could
satisfy the rising popular demand for social reform. The political
effect of increasing popular dissatisfaction could be a continuation of
the current trend toward the Christian Democratic Party, with PDC
gains in the congressional elections of 1965 and 1969 and the election
of a Christian Democratic president in 1970. It is equally possible,
however, that the increasingly embittered lower classes would turn to
the far-left for leadership, as the Communist hope and expect they will.

16 gg

ANNEX A
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS AND PRESSURE GROUPS

I], POLITICAL PARTIES AND COALITIONS

A. The Democratic Front (Frente Democrdtica—FD)

1. The Democratic Front, composed of Chile’s three traditional parties,
the Conservatives, the Liberals, and the Radicals, was formally organized
in October 1962, in order to regularize the existing informal collaboration
of those parties in support of the Alessandri administration and to
present a single joint candidate in the 1964 presidential election. These
traditional parties, originally formed to contend against each other,
have common interests in opposition to the rising new parties of the
Left and realize that they must combine to have any hope of coping with
the leftward trend in Chilean politics. Because Radical participation
was indispensable, the Conservatives and Liberals had to agree to sup-
port a Radical candidate in 1964.

2. Despite this community of interest, there are tensions and con-
flicts within the Front, not only among the three constituent parties, but
also within them. These tensions have been accentuated by the with-
drawal of the Radicals from the cabinet in September 1963.

3. The Conservative Party (Partido Conservador Unido—PCU) rep-
resents primarily the landed aristocrats who ruled the republic in its
earliest years and still exercise great social and political influence, no
matter what party is in power. They determine party policy. The
party’s voting strength is provided by their tenants. It polled 11 percent
of the vote in the 1963 municipal elections. Every member of the party
is required to be a practicing Catholic.

4, The Liberal Party (Partido Liberal—PL) was founded in 1842 by
aristocratic youths who were inspired by the tenets of contemporary
French liberalism and desired to modernize Chile in those terms. It
has come to represent primarily the well-established commercial, in-
dustrial, and banking interests, upper middle class professional men, and
some substantial landholders. The party polled 13 percent of the vote
in the 1963 elections.

5. The Radical Party (Partido Radical—PR) was founded in 1862 by
dissident Liberals advocating more radical political reforms. It became
primarily the political vehicle of the rising middle class, although it
includes also some elements of organized labor. It has developed the
-most pervasive party organization in Chile, with particular strength

Se: 7

elas...

in the small towns, and was for years the largest single party in the
country. It is still a close second, with 22 percent of the vote in the
1963 municipal elections.

6. Despite its elaborate organization, the Radical Party is no longer
a cohesive political grouping. It is led by a right-wing minority which
controls the party machinery, but the bulk of the membership are
centrists and there is a small but vigorous left wing. The center and
left-wing Radicals are uncomfortable in coalition with the Conservatives
and Liberals, but so far the party organization has held the Party
together and there have been no important defections.

7. Inasmuch as most Radical party functionaries are not independ-
ently wealthy, as are most Conservatives and Liberals, access to patron-
age is vital to the party. This consideration contributed to the party’s
decision to collaborate with the Liberal-Conservative Alessandri admin-
istration. The same consideration would move it toward accommodation
with any other party in power-—with the Christian Democrats, for
example, or even with FRAP. Already there are some indications of
Radical collaboration with FRAP to stop the Christian Democrats.

B. The Popular Action Front (Frente de Accién Popular—FRAP)

8. The Socialist Worker Party was organized in 1912 as a means of
proletarian protest against the status quo. From it are derived both the
Communist Party and Socialist Party. These parties participated with
the Radicals in forming the first Popular Front (1938-1941). They
formed the Popular Action Front in 1951, primarily as a device which
would permit the outlawed Communist Party to continue political
activity, to the advantage of Socialist candidates. A more recent
adherent to the Front is the National Democratic Party (PADENA),
formed in 1960.

9. The Popular Action Front, composed mainly of extremist elements,
is far from harmonious. Although the Socialist party leadership, often
seems more militantly revolutionary than the Communists, many
Socialists have serious misgivings about close association with the Com-
munists, on both ideological and practical political grounds, and con-
flicts between the two elements occasionally flare up. The National
Democrats, a radical, but non-Marxist, middle class party, have had even
greater misgivings about political association with the Socialists and
Communists.

10. The Communist Party (Partido Comunista de Chile-—PCCH) was
organized in 1922 as a branch of the Third International. The party was
severely suppressed during the Ibafiez dictatorship (1926-1931), reached
the peak of its political influence in the 1946 coalition with the Radicals,
and was again outlawed, 1948-1958. It has since regained strength, and

r eal

with 20 members in Congress it is probably the most influential Com-
munist party in South America.

11. The contrast between the political success which the party has
enjoyed when pursuing popular front tactics and the suppression which
it has suffered whenever it turned to subversive agitation and violence
has led the PCCh to adopt a policy called the via pacifica—the pursuit of
revolutionary ends by peaceful political means. The party’s overriding
concern appears to be to retain its present legal status. It has refused
to send members to Cuba for guerrilla warfare training, as the Socialists
have done. It strongly supports the Soviet line in the Sino-Soviet
controversy.

12. The Communist party leadership is of middle class origin; the
party draws its support chiefly from industrial labor and lower middle
class elements. There are estimated to be about 30,000 disciplined party
members. The party polled 254,000 votes in the 1963 elections, nearly
13 percent of the total vote. It was the only party except the Christian
Democrats to make a perceptible gain in strength.

13. The Socialist Party (Partido Socialista—PS) is an amalgamation
of socialist splinter groups formed in 1933 following suppression during
the Ibafiez dictatorship. The party is beset by strident factionalism.
One leader, Salvador Allende, the presidential candidate, is outspokenly
pro-Soviet and pro-Castro; another, Rail Ampuero, the party secretary,
is unenthusiastic about Castro and frequently critical of the USSR. The
party membership and political support are drawn from the same
elements as the Communists’; there is latent competition between the
two parties on this account. Separation of the Socialists from the Com-
munists would isolate the latter and reduce Communist capabilities.
The Socialists polled 11 percent of the vote in the 1963 elections.

14, The National Democratic Party (Partido Democrdtico Nacional—
PADENA), organized in 1960, is an agglomeration of radical middle
class elements that had supported Ibafiez for the presidency in 1952.
PADENA’s bitter opposition to the traditional political parties brought
it into the Popular Action Front, but its members feel increasingly un-
comfortable in company with the Allende Socialists and the Commu-
nists, especially considering the party’s losses in the 1963 elections, in
which it polled only 5 percent of the vote. Since then most of the
party’s members have defected. Others may follow suit, or the party
as a whole may withdraw from FRAP.

C. The Christian Democrats (Partido Demécrata Cristiano—PDC)

15. In 1938 some young Conservatives, having failed to persuade their
elders to adopt a more progressive program based on the papal social
encyclicals, splintered off to form a Catholic party with some appeal
to organized labor. In 1949, other Conservatives, inspired by the con-

19

temporary Christian Democratic movement in Europe, also broke away.
The appeal of this second group was primarily to middle class Catholics.
The Christian Democratic Party was formed by the fusion of these
two movements in 1957.

16. The new party occupies the middle ground between the conserv-
atism of the traditional parties on the right and the extremism of FRAP
on the left. It is a credibly reformist party, but within a Christian and
democratic context. Its phenomenal growth in recent years demon-
strates the strong attraction of this position to independent, reform-
minded voters who see little hope in the traditional parties and are
repelled by the communistic tendency of FRAP. In the 1963 election
the PDC polled 453,000 votes (23 percent), to become the largest single
party in Chile. This trend is likely to continue as the party exerts a
strong attraction, not only on independent voters, but also on the reform-
minded elements of the traditional parties and the more moderate ele-
ments in FRAP.

17. The PDC’s program calls for a revolutionary transformation of
Chilean society, to be accomplished through constitutional processes.
It advocates a more far-reaching agrarian reform than that proposed
by the Alessandri administration, a redistribution of weaith through
a steeply progressive income tax, and increased government planning
and participation in the economy. It welcomed the Alliance for Progress
with enthusiasm, but is cool toward US emphasis on the role of private
capital. As do all other Chilean parties, it prefers intergovernmental
financial assistance to foreign private investment. The PDC does not
advocate nationalization of the US-owned copper mining companies,
but calls for their eventual ‘“Chileanization,” beginning with local re-
fining of all Chilean copper and more government participation in the
determination of copper sales policies.

Il. OTHER ORGANIZATIONS EXERTING POLITICAL INFLUENCE

18. Economic Interests. No matter what political party was in power,
vested economic interests have continued to exert powerful political
influence through personal relationships and through representative
organizations,

a. The National Agricultural Society, founded in 1838, is composed
by large land holders. It is by law represented on the boards of direc-
tors of such public institutions as the Central Bank, the Production
Development Corporation, and the National Labor Relations Board. The
Society includes Liberals as well as Conservatives, inasmuch as success
in business is customarily demonstrated by the purchase of a landed
estate. Its influence is exerted against any change in the pattern of
land tenure or any significant increase in land taxes.

20 Re.

ie

b. The Central Chamber of Commerce, organized in 1958, is pre-
dominantly Liberal in political coloration. It opposes state interven-
tion in the economy, resists wage increases as inflationary, and advo-
cates increased production as the cure for inflation. It is less influential
than the Agricultural Society because there is not a united front among
business groups regarding economic policies.

c. The Society for Industrial Development, organized in 1883, advo-
cates state intervention in the economy to protect domestic industries
and to encourage foreign private investments not competitive with local
interests. It includes Radicals as well as Liberals and was a powerful
influence behind the Radical program of rapid industrialization, 1938—
1952.

19. Organized Labor. The Chilean movement is not a strong political
pressure group. Only about 500,000 workers (20 percent of the labor
force) are organized. Furthermore, the law discriminates between white
collar and blue collar unions, imposing restrictions on the latter. The
white collar unions have gained substantial benefits for their members
through their association with the Radical Party. They have not been
concerned with the interests of manual laborers. Lack of savings and
the prevalence of unemployment have reduced the militancy of the
workers in recent years and their willingness to heed a strike call.

20. The political affiliations of most industrial labor unions have
been a hindrance to labor unity and effectiveness as a pressure group.
Union leadership is more often used to serve party purposes than to
advance the economic interests of the members. In consequence, the
members are increasingly unresponsive to the leadership. For example,
the Communists have captured “control” of the principal Chilean labor
confederation, CUTCh,! but some members have refused to respond to
Communist orders to strike. Nevertheless, the Communists are able to
make political propaganda purportedly in the name of Chilean labor.

21. Student Organizations. All of the major political parties have
formally organized youth groups; many current political leaders first
achieved prominence as heads of university student associations. The
oldest and most important of these is the student federation at the
University of Chile (FECh),? which was long controlled by Radicals or
Communists. In 1955 the Christian Democrats wrested control of the
FECh from the Communists. Since then they have gradually gained
control of the student federations at Chile’s seven other universities.
While PDC-led student organizations occasionally criticize US policies,
the strong anti-US animus which prevailed under Communist leader-
ship is no longer evident. The prevalence of PDC influence among the

‘Central Unica de Trabajadores de Chile, ostensibly representing 400,000 or-

ganized workers.
* Federacion de Estudiantes de Chile.

; el 21

students has been an important factor in the support which the party
has received from new voters in recent years.

22. The Church. Historically, the close identification of the Roman
Catholic Church with the Conservative Party has provoked a considerable
anticlerical reaction among Liberals and Radicals, not to mention So-
cialists and Communists. Church and State were finally separated in
Chile in 1925. Nevertheless, the Church retains a pervasive influence
in Chilean society.

23. In September 1962 a revolutionary change in the attitude of the
Church in Chile was marked by the issuance of a pastoral letter in which
the hierarchy, led by Cardinal Silva Henriquez, cited the poverty and
distress of the lower classes, charged the propertied classes with large
responsibility for these conditions, and called for a genuine reform of
the social structure. The pastoral letter may not convert many mag-
nates, but it has tended to restore the credit of the Church among the
general population and it may have had considerable bearing on the
striking success of the Christian Democratic Party in the 1963 municipal
elections.

24. Although the PDC is no longer an exclusively Catholic party (as
are the Conservatives), it now has the support of an estimated 80 per-
cent of the Catholic clergy. This clerical support may tend to alienate
some potential recruits of Liberal, Radical, and Socialist antecedents,
but on the whole it will probably prove to be advantageous.

22 _ oe

wee

ANNEX B

THE ARMED FORCES AND INTERNAL SECURITY

1. The Chilean military forces are distinguished in Latin America
for a proud military tradition dating from the War of the Pacific (1879-
1883) and for continuing high discipline, morale, and military efficiency.
Their equipment, however, is in serious need of modernization. The
armed forces which they watch with particular sensitivity, as a standard
of comparison, are those of Peru and Argentina. To avoid the costs of
rearmament, in view of the urgent requirements of economic develop-

ment, the Chilean government occasionally proposes an arms limitation_
agreement under OAS auspices, but such proposals have met with no
response.

2. The Chilean Army numbers 26,000 men; the Navy, 13,500; and the
Air Force, 7,300. Primary responsibility for the maintenance of public
order and internal security is assigned to the Carabineros, a national
constabulary numbering 23,000 men.

3. The Carabineros are a highly professional force. They thoroughly
patrol the country and are generally respected by the people: the de-
velopment of any insurgency would be unlikely to escape their notice
and counteraction. Although fairly well equipped with small arms,
they are somewhat hampered by a lack of adequate transportation and
communications equipment.

4. Normally, the Carabineros have been able to cope with threats to
public order and internal security. If and when situations arise re-
quiring the intervention of the military, the Army assumes command.
Although there is some inter-service jealousy between the Army and the
Carabineros, their cooperation on such occasions has been reasonably
good.

5. The rank and file of the Army is composed of conscripts, but on
entrance into service they are carefully screened for reliability. Recent
and planned US-sponsored equipment and training programs are de-
signed to improve the Army’s counterinsurgency capability. In the Air
Force, a fighter-bomber and a helicopter unit have received similar spe-
cialized training.

6. The Chilean military forces are proud of their role as the ultimate
guardians of constitutional order and their corollary tradition of non-
intervention in politics in support of party interests. They would almost
certainly uphold the authority of any duly elected government, unless,

a= 7 23

in their judgment, the government itself had moved to subvert the
established constitutional order. It is notable, however, that they did
overthrow the constitutional government in 1924, in circumstances in-
volving a radical departure from the previously long-established political

norm and a general economic collapse. Military intervention in politics
can happen in Chile, though not without strong provocation.

24 Pe

Antofagasta P*

.
7 ucuman’

apes A

SAN

epcion
Conce? ;

g os i
\

CHILE

w——~eteme International boundary
National capita!
Selected railroad

Selected road

®

“aie

400 Miles ,
\ San
BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION 18 =

200
Oe%
MOT NECKSSARILY AUTHORITATIVE *ic

400 Kilometers

© 100 200

37919 6-63

FALKLAND ISLANDS
(U.K) .
(Claimed by Argentina)

GRANDE DE
a pet FUEGO

fe
7
nd Chile)

COR Claimed
+ + Argentina a
An

LA

&

%

PARAGUAY

ai yalparaiso @

SANS

CHILE

Minerals and Population
PRINCIPAL MINES

Copper & tron

= Coal WT Petroleum Re .
PRINCIPAL PLANTS ae FALKLAND ISLANDS

"2 Steel mill & Nitrate processing t imedev  exentina)

POPULATION DENSITY 1 BES
Persons per square mile Bran é : GE >

O-10 20-30 31-40 41-60 94.5 200-400

Based on preliminary figures, 1962 census
400 Miles

Saar ENS SESS a

100 200 400 Kilometers SOUND Any) nubaceanTation’io : , NEP Claimed bY hited
NOT NECESRARILY AUTHORITATIVE “aqgentina and Cpl

. o
78 2
x

37920 6-63

‘is for the Information and use of the t ‘Tecipient, ant. and of persons
. 6 aR 48
need be know basis. Additional | essen ial ition.
: | Rae phd phen

ve

1. This Semen a was disseminated by, th the Coniral Infellgoncs “Agency. { -
ns “under t his’ {jurisdiction 6 on a”
“may be authorized by the.

a. Director et “inasllge nce nd “Resear

. Assistant ae of Staff ewan ae “of the “Army,
Department ‘of the “Army Ss a S
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Oper tions | Intell

isla Rae

oy - ox

e. ‘Assistant Chiet of Staff intelligence fe as Department of the Air
"Force | =: ae ES. ee)

fe Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic. Energy Commission -

Be Dy ME ot hee Ro

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the’! Federal, B 1B Bureau “of Inve stigation

dea poeta

“Agency ~

"2. This rave may bs retcined: estroyed. by burning in Gccordancs with

applicable security regulations, or ‘retired to the Central iellaeoes. anency by .

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

s; the overseas recipients may retain
te this period, the estimate should

S
CONTROL SSEM

CONTROLII DISSEM
