Probable Developments in Indochina Through MID-1952
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008005, dated 1 February 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008005).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

349
ene copy woh
a : 3 - ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,ONE
SECURITY INFORMATION
oe : : i 2909 ©

‘NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE. ESTIMATE.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN INDOCHINA
THROUGH MID-1952

, NEE-35/1
. ' 3 March 1952

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY —.

a ¥
SS die Declassified w_OSR 37S

_ date_A NOV 1975 Seer

fee ete eee enema tenntealtenn enn tales cantante i cet aienmmmn ena igmit® eA han 1 neem,
Y . . ci A cit '- -
he oe 5 t 3
. ; '
\ . +4
| {
;
| |
to. : 5 \
} : . 1
1
i WARNING |
j ‘This document ce! fon attscting the na~ |
} tonal devenso of the races withia the meaning |
# 3 of the Explonage Act, § gel 2hd 82, Ss emendcd. !
| Its transmission oF 5 . :
t mancer 0 an U :
a eae
4 i
H :
|
i
ae .
°
.)

.
| |

See eee Sam tin: eae en arene ee aren ge enant e geele = et Ac ne

|
|
|
|
i

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Fur-

ther dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the in- .

formation for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

«, Special Assistant to
ment of State

the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

e, Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d, Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

h, Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-

partment or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations,

or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-

rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CYA,

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources. Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Alr Force
Atomic Energy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Statt

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Board’
Munitions Board i

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient

_ Gesignated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Fur-
ther dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the in-
formation for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a.. Special Assistant to.the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-
ment of State ‘

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army’
¢. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy ;
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force ; I
e. Assistant to the Director, FBY, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
J. Director of Intelligence, ALC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

» 9 Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

h. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De- ‘ ; . |
partment or Agency ,

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with — -
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar- %
rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. {

I
|
{
t

| DISTRIBUTION:
t Office of the President
4 National Securlty Council
{ National Security Resources Board
Department of State
i Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army : : ;
Department of the Navy : 4
Department of the Air Force
Atomic Energy Commission
Joint Chiefs of Staff
\ Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Bowrd
| Munitions Board
3
t
i
j

ae Seen terete eA enna t PPE cemeine ey anne eve meee ye cuemupiomy sasenis neon

SECURITY INFORMATION

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN INDOCHINA
THROUGH MID-1952

NUE-35/1

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the prep-
aration of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on 29 Fcb-
ruary 1952. See, however, footnotes to paragraphs 4 and 23.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS iN INDOCHINA THROUGH
: MID-1952

THE PROBLEM

To estimate probable developments in Indochina through mid-1952 with par-

ticular emphasis on probable Chinese Communist courses of action in that area.

CONCLUSIONS

1. We believe that the French will con-
tinue their war effort in Indochina dur-
ing the period of this estimate. However,
while insisting upon the protection of
French interests, the «‘rench will attempt
to limit their commitments in Indo-
china by demanding additional US finan-
cial assistance and by seeking commit-
ments for US-UK military support in the
Gefense of Indochina.

2. The present critical financial situation.
of France is causing the French Govern-
ment increasing concern over France’s
ability to maintain its position in Indo-
china and to support simultaneously its
presently projected military effort in
Europe. We believe that the reflections of
this concern will give rise to misgivings in
Vietnam regarding France's intentions
toward Indochina and accordingly will

’ have an adverse effect upon Vietnamese

morale. We believe that this concern will
not affect the French effort in Indochina
during the period of this estimate, but
may at a later date adversely influence

_ France’s will to continue resistance in

Indochina.

8. Indeper:dent of operations in Korea,
the Chinese Communists have the capa-

bility to commit and logistically support

‘approximately 150,000 troops in Indo-

china. This force could probably cause
the present Franco-Vietnamese forces to
evacuate Tonkin before effective assist-
ance could be made available to them.

4. We believe, however, that the Chinese
Communists will not intervene in force

’ in Indochina, during the period of this

estimate.”
5. We believe that the Chinese Commu-

_ nists will gradually expand the scale and

nature of their present assistance to the
Viet Minh and may in addition introduce
Chinese Communist “volunteer” troops
in small numbers. We believe that in
pursuit of this policy they will stop short
of any degree of assistance which they
estimate might provoke major Western
counteraction against the mainland of
China, cs

*It is the view of the Assistant Chief of Staff,
G-2, Intelligence, Department of the Army, that
this sentence should read as follows: “Although the
inereased Chinese Communist capabilities in South
China suggest preparations for an invasion of In-
dochina, present evidence does not necessarily in-

dicate that such an invasion Js hnminent; Le. with- .

in the period of this estimate.”

Pare
‘ea.

.

EPR rte eerie 2 san ene renee re re ie tg np TET CE RT ERLE EAA EC RE PORTO ER EE OC PME A PRETEEN CCEA RN TREN Oe te PEP YARESE t

ts
*

fs eRe Cas cmaime, Wiehe ce Sas ere deena “Seoe ns een a5

.
6. Through mid-1952, the prollabt’ out-

look in Indochina is one of grodviat de-_

terioration of the Franco-Vietnamese
military position. We belicve that the
Viet Minh will make some territorial
gains, but will not score a decisive victory
during the period of this estimate.

7. The longer term outlook is for con-
tinued improvement in the combat effec-

“1

Sian , 2

tiveness of the Viet Minhandan increased
Viet Minh pressure against the Franco-
Vietnamese defenses. Unless present
trends are reversed, this growing pres-
sure, coupled with the difficulties which

‘France may continue to face in support-

ing major military efforts in both Europe
and Indochina, may jead to an eventual
French withdrawal from Indochina.

DISCUSSION |

The Current Situation

8. Since the publication of NIN-35: “Prob-
able Developments in Indochina During the
Remainder of 1951” dated 7 August 1951, the
French extended their Red River delta perim-
eter around Hanoi and Haiphong westward

’ to Hoa Binh, but heavy Viet Minh attacks

over a period of two months coupled with
harassing action by Viet Minh units which
had infiltrated the Delta, have resulted in
French withdrawal from the Hoe Binh sector.
(See Map No. 1.) In the Hanoi-Haiphong
delta area, 115,000 Franco-Vietnamese regular
troops currently confront an estimated 90,000
Viet Minh regular troops. Elsewhere in Indo-
china, guerrilla-type warfare continues and
the Viet Minh still control northern Tonkin,
major portions of the Annam coast and parts
of Cochinchina, Cambodia, and Laos, (See
Map No. 2.) :

9, There has been a great improvement in the;
vigor, coordination, and effectiveness of recent,
Viet Minh attacks along the French perimeter
in Tonkin. The Viet Minh have mounted a
sustained frontal attack in the western delta
area, and elsewhere in the delta have infil-
trated one division and major elements of
another behind the Franco-Vietnamese posl-
tions in the central and southern parts of the:
delta where they are now conducting harassé
ing operations and pose a threat to the Hanoi-
Haiphong line of communications. There has
deen a noticeable increase in Viet Minh anti-
aircraft capability in recent months. Al-
though the Viet Minh have suffercd heavy

casualties, they continue to attack-and ‘have
forced the French to commit alinost all of
their Tonkin reserves to the operations along
the western edge of the delta and against Viet
Minh units which have infiltrated elsewhere.

ve

10, This increased capability reflects a con- '

siderable increase in Chinese Communist ad-
visory, training, and logistic assistance to the
Viet Minh. While there is no conclusive evi-
dence that Chinese personne), either in units
or as individuals, are serving with Viet Minh
combat units, there are an estimated 15,000
Communist Chinese with the Viet Minh ser-
ving in technical, advisory, and garrison ca-
pacities. There has been a continuing im-
provement of transportation routes and facili-
ties from South China into Indochina. Chi-

nese Communist logistic assistance to the Viet.

Minh via these routes is at an all time high,
while stockpiles on both sides of the border
are believed to be in excess of Viet Minh re-
quirements for present operations.

41, Although French losses have been heavy,
the combat effectiveness of the French forces

remains high. The combat effectiveness of |

the Associated States’ forces is for the most
part not yet adequate to fit them for incepend-
ent combat operations. These forces are
primarily performing static defense roles, but
some units have conducted themselves cred-
itably with the French in offensive operations.
US MDAP aid has been of critical importance
to the regular French forces during recent
operations. Although the attrition rate in
French equipment is high, MDAP logistic
assistance is compensating for these losses.

RECRERERE,

¢ 2
: 7
12. There has been little significant... cliange } ;
in the political situation within Vietnam, the
most important of the Associated States, since
the publication of NIE-35, and the factors
discussed in NIG-35 which mit the develop-
ment of a strong Vietnamese government still

apply. The death of General de Lattre has -

had aa adverse effect upon Vietnamese morale
as have the suspicions of the Vietnamese that
the French mzy be weakening in their de-
termimation and ability to defend Indochina.

13. We believe that the spirits of the Viet '
Minh leaders have been raised by the recent -
death of General de Lattre, the expanded scale
of Chinese Communist assistance, the debili-

: tating effect which the sustained Viet Minh

offensive has had upon the French, the re-
occupation of Hoa Binh by the Viet Minh and
their discernment of a weakening Franco-
Vietnamese will to resist. The consolidation
of Communist control within the Viet Minh
area continues and has effectively countered
internal opposition. The food shortage is be-
ing alleviated by rice gained from within the
French perimeter. There is no evidence of
serious friction between the Viet Minh and the
Chinese Communists.

Viet Minh And Franco-Vietnamese
Capabilities And Probable Courses
Of Action

14. We believe that the Viet Minh will prob-:
ably be able to continue to infiltrate the
French lines in Tonkin, but will be unable to
achieve a decisive victory during the period
of this estimate. However, the over-all come -
bat effectiveness of the Viet Minh will almost ,
certainly continue to improve and the Viet :
Minh will probably be able to launch a series :
of ‘harassing attacks on French positions in,
Tonkin. Elsewhere in Indochina, the Viet
Minh will inerease their terrorist and guerrilla
tactics.

15. The French Government is increasingly
concerned over France’s ability to maintain
its position in Indochina. There is a growing
oficial feeling in France that it cannot si-
multancously support presently projected
Military efforts in both Europe and Asia with-
Out greater US aid. The French now estimate

that, with present US aid, the maximum 1952
military budget that is politically and eco-
nomically possible will fall several hundred
million dollars short of their projected re-
quirements for NATO and Indochina together.
The French, if forced to choose between
Europe and Indochina, would view their Indo-
china commitment as of lesser importance,
but the necessity for such a decision is ‘un-
likely to arise during the period under review.
Moreover, there has been a growing feeling
that the distant and costly Indochinese war
Offers few rewards even if won. This feeling
is increasing political pressure for some allevi-
ation of the French burden in Indochina. The
various approaches by which France is seck-
ing to achieve such alleviation of the burden
are: (a) by insisting that much of the finan-
cial burden for the defense of Indochina be
shifted to the US; (b) by seeking a US-UK
commitment to participate in the defense of
Indochina in the event of more active Chinese
Communist intervention; or possibly (c) by
including the issue of Indochina within the
context of any general Far East settlement

which might arise out of Korean negotiations.

Should these approachés prove unsuccessful,

the French would seriously consider with- ;

drawal from Indochina.

16. Within the period under review: however,
we believe that a French military withdrawal
from Indochina is unlikely despite the increas-
ingly difficult financial situation which has
caused isolated demands in Parliament for 2
withdrawal. Strong factors still hold the
French to their present commitments. These
include: (a) the intangible but powerful fac-
tor of prestige; (b) the knowledge that with-
drawal from Indochina would have repercus-
sions elsewhere in the French Union; (c) the

concern over the fate of French nationals and .

investments in Indochina; and (d) the offi-
cial feeling that no settlement with the Viet
Minh or with Communist China could be
achieved that would preserve any French in-
terests in Indochina.

17. Within Indochina, we believe that there _ ,
will be no improvement during the period of 5
this estimate in the morale or the political -
Strength of the Vietnamese. ‘The efforts of |

ta

i
q
$
H
H

i 23 se ae 3 met RN TE A I wen

eng verte AEDT EE NE ARIE EID AONE LCC TE I

the French and the Bao Dai regime to resist
Cormmunist pressure will continue to be view-
ed apathetically by 2 people who do not. rec-
ognize much of a personal stake in the war
effort and apparently mistrust French motives
more than they recognize any danger from
the Communists. This mistrust of French
motives would be further heightened in the
event that the French should be impelled to
take military measures to subdue growing
“third force” movements which are opposed
to both the Viet Minh and the French.

Chinese Communist Capabilities And
Probable Courses OF Action

28. The Communist Bloc continues to view
Indochina as a key to its desired goal, that
of eventual Communist control over alk South-
east Asia. The immediate importance of In-
dochina to Moscow and Peiping lies in the
fact that the existence of a Communist-spon-
sored Viet Minh compels France to divert
much of its financial and military resources
to Indochina, prevents the Associated States
from gaining generally recognized interna-
tional status, and hinders the establishment
of a stable non-Communist state on China’s
border. The potential importance of Indo-
china to Moscow and Peiping is great: the fall
of Indochina, would be a psychological vic-
tory of the first magnitude for the Communist
Bloc, would undermine the determination of
the governments and peoples of Burma and
Thailand to resist Communist aggression,
would facsiitate further Communist conquests
in Southeast Asia, would hinder the “encircle-
ment” of Communist China by non-Commu-
nist states, would provide the Communist Bloc
with control of additional sources of food and
strategic materials, and would deny to the
West the strategic position and the resources
of Indochina.

19. Transportation facilities from South Chi-
na into Indochina continue to be improved,
and there have been numerous indications of
Chinese Communist troop buildup and stock-
piling along the Indochina border. These de-
velopments increase the capabilities of the
Chinese Communists either to invade Indo-
china in foree or to give military assistance
to the Viet Minh. .

q

20. If the Chinese Communists should decide
to intervene directly in Indochina, they have
an estimated 300,000 troops available in South

- China for such an invasion. We believe that

of this number they could actually commit
and support logistically 150,000 troops inde-
pendent of operations in Korea. Logistic and
transportation difficulties would restrict the
operations of these troops to 4 series of Nmited
offensives, between which time would be need-
ed for replenishment of supplies and repair
of transportation facilities. An jntensitication
of the Korean hostilities would probably sub-
stantially reduce the flow of supplies for In-

‘dochina unless the Soviets undertook to re-

plenish the Chinese Communist stocks. Such
Soviet aid would be probable in the event of

Chinese Communist commitment of forces in -

Indochina. It may be assumed that the in-
fantry components of the Chinese Communist
troops south of the Yangtze are adequately

equipped with norma) infantry light weapons -

and that their training is sufficient to attempt
an invasion, An armistice in Korea would in-
crease the number of Chinese Communist
troops and the logistic support that could be
made available for operations in Inddchina;
transportation deficiencies would still be a
limiting factor, however, although the level of

logistic support could be, raised somewhat by .

use of the facilities of the Chinese Communist
Air Force. .

21. ‘These Chinese Communist troops, added

to those of the Viet Minh, would probably be

able to force the French and the Vietnamese

troops to evacuate Tonkin before any effec-

tive assistance could be brought to bear. The

Chinese Communists are unlikely to commit:
jet aircraft to Indochina, so long as hostilities

in Korea continue. However, the CCAR, em-

ploying only piston-type aircraft, would prob-

ably, with surprise, have the capability to

neutralize the French Air Forces in

An armistice in Korea would of course vastly

increase this capability. iss

22. The Chinese Communists might risk an
invasion of Indochina in any one of a number
of circumstances: in order to counter an an-.
ticipated blow by the West and/or the Chinese
Nationalists; as a diversionary attack in the

event of a general Far Eastern or global war;
if the Communists believed that the West in-
tended to attack Communist China regardless
of the latter’s policies in Southeast Asia; or
in the event that Communist leadership
should decide that a potential shift in western
policies might create a serious threat to Com-
munist China that could not be countered
through present Communist strategy.

23. We believe, however, that the Chinese’
Communists will not invade Indochina during
the period of this estimate.* Although the in-
creased Chinese Communist capabilities in
South China suggest preparations for an in-
vasion of Indochina, present evidence does not
necessarily indicate that such an invasion is

- imminent. Other considerations, further-
more, militate against a direct intervention by
the Chinese Communists:

a. Present Communist strategy is bringing ‘
considerable success in Indochina, may weak- !
en, the determination and ability of both the :
Vietnamese and the French to continue re- ;
sistance, and may provide the Communists ;
with a potential tool for aggravating autier-
ences among the Western Powers.

b. Recent western moves have sina
made world Communist leadership aware that
the West, and in particular the US, may ex-
pand the war in Asia to the Chinese mainland _
should Communist China invade Indochina. -
Any such awareness is probably somewhat off-
set by Communist recognition of divided opin-
jons in the West as to the merits and timing
of such retaliation. On balance, however, con-
cern that the war in Asia might be expanded

and that drastic retaliatory action might be .

taken against the mainland of China is prob-
ably sufficient to be a major factor dissuading
the Chinese Comrounists from openly inter-
vening in force in Indochina.

* The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Intelifgence, -
Department of the Army, prefers that this first sen-
tence be deleted. See footnote to paragraph 4 on
page 1.

c. Despite the importance of Indochina dis-
cussed above, it is unlikely that its present
economic and strategic importance to Peiping

and Moscow is great enough to dictate a large-

scale Chinese Communist invasion with 2 pos-
sible risk of initiating general war.

24, We believe that the Chinese Communists
will, short of open intervention, gradually ex-
pand the scale and nature of their present
assistance to the Vieb Minh. Even assuming
continuing heavy commitments in Korea, the
Chinese Communists will face no forbidding
difficulty in increasing the present level of
technical and logistic assistance to the Viet.
Minh. Logistical support will probably con-
sist primarily of such items as light arms
and ammunition, vehicles, some field and anti-
aircraft artillery, and communication and

‘medical equipment.
25, The Chinese. Communists will also con- |

tinue to commit technical and advisory per-
sonnel to the Viet Minh and may introduce
Chinese “volunteer” troops. We do not be-
lieve, however, that the Communists, during
the period of this estimate, will commit “vol-
unteers” in nuxnbers that would assure a de-
cisive military victory for the Vieb Minh or

that they believe would result in major West-

ern counteraction against mainiand China.

26. Consequently, through mid-1952 the prob-
able outlook in Indgchina is. one of gradual
deterioration of the Franco-Vietnamese mili-
tary position. We believe that the Viet Minh
will make some territorial gains, but will not
score a decisive victory during the ie Penn of
this estimate.

27. The longer term outlook is for continued
improvement in the combat effectiveness of
the Viet Minh and an increased Viet Minh
pressure against the Franco-Vietnamese de- |

’ fenses. Unless present trends are reversed, |

this growing pressure, coupled with the diffi-
culties which France may continue to face in
supporting major military efforts in both
Europe and Indochina, may lead to an!
eventual French withdrawal from Indochina.

N.

TA Rag ea

5

fs 3 wtMtting 7
= we sen nes et
: Bien Phu Riihetd tots Lean

pe ole a INVOCHINA=CHINA
ee ee BORDER AREA

af exsecsceuveese French Perime
v ; oN Areas of mayor

2 Road (tuck)
mmeemeeem Rood (truck, condition not knows)
comunsmenm Road (cart
oereemte Roitrord
+ ote pe wee
se mest mae
20 40
rr

INDOCHINA
24 FEBRUARY 1952

* Viet Mintsheté area
French garrison post
French air base
French delence line

Railroad

2:7,490.009
an a a on

03049 GD 120 Kiomelee

42232 252

SECURITY INFORMATION
