Reactions to a Certain US Course of Action in Southeast Asia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014185, dated 5 August 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014185).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a . g p f

SNIE 10-10-65

CONTROLLED Sse SENSITIVE 10 September 1965
TS 0038806 14

LE} LIERARY i
Mandatory Review
Case # NY] (mbavael

Document # } : 4

weenga rp Steg ete be Bled

7 SPECIAL
nw NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 10-10-65

- Reactions to a Certain US Course of
| Action in Southeast Asia
|

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in by the

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf N
10 SEPTEMBER 1965 ;

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

AUGUST 1994

CONTROLLED Bice SENSHIVE N° 1

wo SECREL/SENSITIVE

The following intelligence organizations Participated in the preparation of
this estimate:
The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant to the
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
jurisdiction,

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

/SENSITIVE

E

AMEE Oy a Te ne

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 10-10-65 ~

Reactions to a Certain US Course of
Action in Southeast Asia

REACTIONS TO A CERTAIN US COURSE
OF ACTION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate Communist and other reactions to the use of US forces
to establish a barrier across Communist supply lines in the Lao pan-

handle.
ASSUMPTION

A US force of three divisions moves into Laos along Route 9 from
Thailand and South Vietnam to seize and hold terrain along the Route
with the purpose of blocking Communist troop and supply movements.

DISCUSSION

1. The international reaction to the US action would be generally unfavorable,
particularly if the action were not undertaken at the request of Premier Souvanna
Phouma. We believe, however, that the chances are less than even that Sou-
vanna could be persuaded to make such a request. He would recognize that
the US action would be a clear and conspicuous violation of the 1962 Geneva
accords upon which the legitimacy of his government rests. He would see
few advantages to Laos and many dangers in such a deployment. He would
fear that Laos would become a major battleground for the powers involved in
Vietnam, that the Communists would retaliate against his forces in other parts
of Laos, and that the Chinese Communists might occupy the northern provinces.
Souvanna has approved of US escalation of air activity, and he would probably
prefer to see this course fully exploited, including the destruction of Hanoi,
before considering involvement of Laos in a US-Communist ground war.

2. If the US pressed for a Lao Government request in the face of Souvanna’s
opposition, he might be led to resign and return to France, as he has so often
threatened to do. While most other Lao leaders, including the King, would
be likely to share Souvanna’s misgivings, Souvanna could probably be removed
by a coalition of conservative forces. Under such circumstances, however, any
successor government would be seen by most of the world as a US puppet.

3. If Souvanna could be persuaded to call for the US divisions, his assent
would almost certainly be conditioned on explicit US guarantees of protection
against DRV and Chinese counteraction in northern and central Laos. He
might not request immediate deployment of US forces into these areas, lest this
precipitate the very attacks he wished to prevent, but he would almost certainly
demand some tangible evidence that substantial US forces would indeed be
available quickly if needed. This would be equally true of any successor
government.

4, The Thai would be concerned about having such a large foreign presence
in their country as the assumed action implies, but their major concern would
be that the action might bring Communist, particularly Chinese, attacks against
Thailand.We believe that the Thai would cooperate with the US plan if given
specific commitments on defense measures to protect Thailand in such a con-
tingency. The Thai leaders would also almost certainly seek a substantial
increase in US aid. At least sporadic sabotage efforts against the lines of com-
munication across Thailand to the Route 9 region of Laos would be likely,
and their protection would require a fairly large-scale Thai or US effort.
In short, the US would almost certainly be called on to provide substantial
forces, in Thailand as in Laos, over and above those which would be required
to seal off the Communist supply route through Laos.

5. In Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk’s fear of US-supported attacks from South
Vietnam or Laos would probably be increased. He would vociferously con-
demn the US action and would probably reiterate in some form his demands
for international guarantees of his borders. At the same time, however, he
would probably be impressed with this new evidence of US determination
not to be driven out of Southeast Asia. Until he had some clearer view of
the outcome of the US effort, he would probably be reluctant to see any @x-
pansion in the use of Cambodia as a supply route and safe-haven for Communist
forces in Vietnam.

6. The North Vietnamese would almost certainly learn that a major US opera-
tion was being planned; they already seem to suspect that something of the
sort may be under consideration. As US intentions became clearer, Hanoi and
the Pathet Lao would seek to discourage Souvanna’s concurrence and to deter
the US action by propaganda and by actions designed to demonstrate their
ability to threaten areas about which the Lao and Thai governments are sensitive,
e.g., by troop movements in the north and central areas. At the same time they
would send some reinforcements into southern Laos and attempt to stockpile
supplies. As the dimensions of the US build-up in northeast Thailand became
more apparent, Hanoi might undertake limited offensives to bring PL/PAVN
forces close to the Mekong along the Thai frontier. All this would be accom-
panied by a vigorous propaganda campaign designed to heighten fears in Laos
and abroad of an ever-expanding conflict.

SENSITIVE

7. Once the US operation was under way, the North Vietnamese might choose
to engage US forces at specific points where the PL/PAVN units would have
local advantage, but the normal pattern probably would be vigorous harassment
and ambush. Though the PL/PAVN would probably exert strong pressures
in north and central Laos, we believe the chances are less than even that they
would launch a major counter-offensive against the US forces in the south.
For at least some time, the Communists would be likely to feel that they could
maintain the insurrection in South Vietnam, even if the US interdiction reduced
the levels of activity. Hanoi and the Pathet Lao would call for condemnation
of the US action under the Geneva agreement. The North Vietnamese might
set up a rival Lao “government of National Union,” particularly if Souvanna
were no longer in power. They would at least withdraw their diplomatic repre-
sentation ‘from Vientiane, have the Pathet Lao sever all contacts with the Lao
government, and threaten to renounce the Geneva agreements.

8. Even after the US forces had occupied the length of Route 9, we believe
that the North Vietnamese would continue efforts to infiltrate some cadres
through Laos. At the same time, Hanoi would increase its reliance on sea routes
directly to South Vietnam or via Cambodia, at least for arms, equipment, and
supplies. If the US effort, including not only the action assumed here but
other actions against Communist lines of communications, succeeded in seriously
restricting the supply of men and materiel to the insurrection in South Vietnam,
the North Vietnamese would have to decide whether to reduce sharplv the
level of that insurrection, to seek a respite through political means, or to attempt
to break the blockade through military action against the US forces in Laos
or elsewhere. Which course they would choose would depend on a number
of circumstances of the moment, such as conditions in North Vietnam, Chinese
pressures, Hanoi’s reading of the US domestic situation, and, probably most
important, the strength of the VC and the state of its morale.

9. The Chinese Communists, as well as the DRV, have been anticipating US:
intervention in the corridor and have already made propaganda attacks and
threats aimed at blocking such action, including private warnings that they
might have to send troops into Laos if the US commitment in Vietnam were
greatly increased. We believe, however, that so long as the US forces had
not crossed the Laotian frontier in strength, Peking probably would not for its
part send Chinese combat forces in any strength into Laos, although it might
order threatening troop movements along the border. It might also increase its
assistance to the Pathet Lao in northern Laos by introducing some specialized
personnel to support the PL/PAVN. At a minimum, Peking would increase its
propaganda attacks and threats of intervention, and step up aid and commit-
ments of support to the DRV.

10. However, once the US had crossed into southern Laos in force, the
Chinese Communists almost certainly would counter in the northwest by supply-
ing personnel and equipment to augment Communist capabilities there and

SBECRELSENSITIVE :

Se
OP SECRET/SENSITIVE

expand Communist control into areas close to the Thai border.! This would
be designed to facilitate infiltration of Thailand, to intimidate Lao and Thai
leaders, and to raise international and domestic pressures on the US Govern-
ment to avoid expanding the war.

11. As long as the Chinese Communist leaders estimated that the US forces
would remain in the Route 9 area of south Laos, large-scale intervention by
Chinese forces would be unlikely. However, an imminent Communist move
against north Laos would lead the Lao government to demand US forces for
protection of this area. If the US responded by introducing US ground forces
into northern Laos—e.g., the royal capital at Luang Prabang—this would in
itself sharply increase the risk of Chinese entry.

12. The principal Soviet reactions would be political. In the initial stages
of the US deployment, Moscow would probably use its position as Geneva
co-chairman to reinforce other diplomatic and propaganda efforts to block the
US action or cause abandonment of the project. Moscow almost certainly
would like to see another international conference on Laos. However, its
actions would be strongly influenced by the course of events and by the posi-
tions of Hanoi and Peking. For example, if Hanoi and Peking recognized a
Communist-dominated government in Laos, Moscow would probably do so as
well. At some stage, the USSR might renounce its role as co-chairman, on the
grounds that the US had destroyed the 1962 Geneva agreements.

13. On the military plane, the Soviets would avoid a direct commitment of
forces, but they might provide logistical and material support to Commu-
nist operations in Laos as they did in 1961. This would require Peking’s
cooperation, however, and the US action in Laos would probably not cause the
Chinese to drop their opposition to any significant Soviet role in Indochina.

14, US-Soviet tensions would sharpen, both because the Soviets would be
under heavy pressure from the Asian Communists, and because the Soviets
would regard the US action as a repudiation of agreements worked out with
the USSR in 1961 and 1962. The Soviets might increase their own defense
spending and even abrogate some US-Soviet agreements or understandings. We
doubt that the USSR would retaliate against the US in Berlin simply as a
response to the US action in Laos. Some carefully controlled harassments in
Berlin are, of course, possible in any case.

15. The British, too, would be faced with difficult problems. As one of the
two co-chairmen of the Geneva conference on Laos, the UK would find it
somewhat awkward, though of course not impossible, to support US violation
of the accords. Furthermore, US policy in Vietnam is not popular with the
British public, and a major extension of the Vietnam conflict into Laos would
excite considerable opposition. Prime Minister Wilson would be under severe

* The Director of Intelligence and Research believes that the estimate should state specifically
that “personnel” probably would include some regular Chinese Communist combat units, since
“personnel” can be interpreted as meaning only limited numbers of specialized cadre.

SECRETASENSITIVE

attack from his own left wing and from much of the public and press. Never-
theless, he would not want openly to oppose the US on this issue. Although
he might be restrained from strong public support, he would probably give
private assurances and try to avoid public criticism of the US action.

16. France would see the US action as a major extension of erroneous US —
policy in Vietnam, and would strongly condemn it. Even if the action had the
blessing of Souvanna’s government, the French reactions would be severely
negative; in this case, Paris might cut off its remaining economic aid and political
support for Souvanna’s regime. If another regime had replaced Souvanna’s,
it would be condemned by France, almost as strongly as by the Communist
powers, as a US puppet. We do not believe, however, that France would
initiate action against the US in the UN, and we cannot see much that France
could do to make its opposition felt practically.

17, The reaction of other members of the world community would generally
follow predictable lines (e.g., approval from Taipei and condemnation from
Djakarta), with an increased amount of unfavorable reaction. If the action
had Souvanna’s support, reactions would be somewhat less unfavorable than
otherwise. The success of the US action would also have an important effect
on world reactions; if the three divisions did not result in a speedy and pro-
nounced lessening of hostilities in South Vietnam, criticisms would be harsher
and endorsements less enthusiastic. Even though Hanoi and Peking have cate-
gorically denied that the UN has any jurisdiction in the Vietnam conflict,
sympathizers might move for a UN condemnation of the US action. The likeli-
hood of such an effort would be greater, of course, if the US action were taken
over Souvanna’s opposition.

oe

*Muong Luong

Houei Sai

+
La tei ang

Prabang

| Muang: g a A O S

IENTIANE

Go or~

Nong Khai

uang Phitsanulok

Le

EF

uyen’
Ba Quang
INS
oa
a

Lang So
‘Thai Neuyen
N| AVM

YN

wKHanoi
aiphongs°&

Dien Bien
Phu

Samneua®

%e,

Pak Sane

ogy Ss
Khammouane\,,
\
5 \

\Séponet— y
anes
Savannakher

on
anony

T H AILSA N D

Muang Nakhon Sawan

Nakhon
Ratchasima

pe rachin Buri

Ae a

Ubon
chathani\

at Warin
Chamraps

Dicasak 2)

0 eet #8 ean em

H
Ra
{

peengron
Chachoengsao

ipivep
Songkhram *

sisophion

‘ Battamibang
ae

GULF OF SIAM

INDOCHINA

National capital

International boundary

Railroad

Road
190

150 Kilometers

50 100

52235 9-65

oe
oe 2
Ee

150 Miles

Pursat

: ao »
yuville "‘Svay/Ri
2' Ag >
aS
: x
{
DAO PHU QUOC
(Vietnam) ~

ae:

Quan , :
phones _. CON SON
; @

"sa NAMES AND SOUNDARY REPRESENTATION
ARE NOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air

Force : eS

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i, Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. é

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
[IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be classified:
SECRET

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

CONTROLLED missein seNMAVE

CONTROLTED Bisse /SENGHNVE
