Situation in Panama
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126964, dated 2 January 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126964).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LBj LESRARY
Mandatory Review

Case # NLT_FS13>
Document #2

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE -

Intelligence Memorandum

Situation in Panama

Spel, ..,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE . 3 January 1967
10 Nov 1997 No. 0620/67

qu
. . 3.4(5)(1)(5)

e
7 ‘
contains information affectipe
ftedaStates, withinffie meaning of Title
Code, as amended.
ents tO Or re-
a

4 ;

tel? 3 ET
——l 1Ste)
: : 3.4(5)(1)(8)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
3 January 1967

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM
Situation in Panama
Summary

US-Panamanian relations are approaching a new
and crucial stage. Maneuvering for the 1968 presiden-
tial elections already has started in Panama, and the
canal treaty negotiations with the US are the major
issue. As political activity picks up during the next
few months, President Robles will be under increasing
pressure to reach a canal settlement early enough to
submit it for ratification by a special session of the
National Assembly before its regular session begins on
1 October 1967. At stake are the political fortunes
of the oligarchical parties which make up his coalition.
To protect the interests of these parties Robles needs
an accord to strengthen their chances of competing
with the popular Arnulfo Arias, leader of the Panamen-
ista Party. Panama's elite families will go to almost
any extreme to prevent Arias' victory. If the negotia-
tions break down or reach a serious impasse, the Robles
government will probably try to protect itself by lay-
ing the blame on the US.

NOTE: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
It was prepared by the Office of Current Intel-
ligence and coordinated with the Office of
National Estimates and with the Clandestine

—_ Services.

For more detailed information, see Intelligence
Memorandum "Factors of Instability in Panama,"
issued by CIA's Directorate of Intelligence on
6 September 1966.

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(q)

1. Robles.
3.4(b)(1){6)

has thus far been friendly and cooperative in his re-
lations with the US, and this attitude will probably
continue as long as he feels the negotiations are
progressing satisfactorily. Robles cannot, however,
always control some of the more unscrupulous poli-
ticians in his coalition. As elections approach,
these men will be tempted more and more to adopt a
nationalistic stance and exert pressure on the US

to speed up the negotiations.

2. The most recent example of this occurred
in early December after a minor incident at the US-
leased Rio Hato training area. A Panamanian com-
mercial aircraft made an emergency landing at the
Site and the pilot alleged that he was "detained" by
US personnel. Panama City news media, largely owned
or controlled by government officials and members
of the oligarchy, termed the incident a violation of
Panamanian sovereignty and unleashed an emotional,
anti-US clamor which quickly evolved into criticism
of the US role in the treaty talks. One paper, gen-
erally considered Robles' own mouthpiece, went so far
as to question US good faith in the negotiations.
Most media portrayed administration leaders as taking
a new, vigilant, and forcefully patriotic stance in
relations with the US.

3. After US officials in Panama expressed
concern over the growing emotional atmosphere to Robles
and Foreign Minister Eleta, the pressure campaign grad-
ually subsided. It was too late, however, to erase
the initial image of a US violation of Panamanian sov~
ereignty created in the minds of the public. The Rio
Hato affair undoubtedly added more substance to the
basic Panamanian nationalism which increasingly resents
the US presence in the country. Extremist-led student
groups have already staged some "sovereignty'' demon-
strations, and more can be expected with the approach
this month of the anniversary of the riots of 1964.
While government security forces probably will be able
to control demonstrations during 9-11 January, there
is always the danger that an incident could erupt

~2-

‘ 4 . ‘ 3.4(D)(1)(8)

SPORET

into a new round of rioting. Some leaders of Panama's
small, fragmented Communist movement are making plans
for agitation over the anniversary period, and, as a
result of the Rio Hato affair, there is perhaps more

tension this year than last.

4. Most Panama City news media, perhaps with an
eye on the anniversary, have reverted to a calm, opti-
mistic tone regarding the negotiations. The television
station owned by Foreign Minister Eleta is stressing
the "desirable pace" of the canal talks and urging the
public to avoid any "fruitless excesses" which would
retard them. The pitch of the media also reflects
the renewed confidence of Robles and his aides re-
garding prospects for reaching a canal settlement with
the US in 1967. On 20 December Foreign Minister Eleta
gave the National Assembly a secret briefing on prog-
ress in the treaty talks. The reaction to the briefing
was reportedly sufficiently favorable that the nego-
tiators believe the government will be able to obtain
ratification of a canal treaty.

Foreign Minister
Eleta was scheduled to arrive in the US on 31 December
to accelerate the negotiations in hopes of meeting
his mid-1967 target for concluding the talks.

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

6. One member of the Panamanian negotiating
team, Diogenes de la Rosa, seriously doubts that an
agreement can be reached in 1967 and warns against
speculation about timing. De la Rosa recently told
a source believed to be reliable that, after a draft
treaty is signed, Robles should allow the public to
discuss it and "blow off steam" for at least six months
before attempting ratification: - ‘Some’ Panamanian ;

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(5)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

officials, noting Robles". lack of popular support,

his dependence on a tenuous coalition in the assembly,
and the approaching political campaign, believe it
advisable to defer efforts to conclude a settlement
until after the 1968 elections in Panama and in the
US. ee

7. Robles, however, is firmly convinced that his
government now has the political strength to obtain
ratification as long as the draft treaty is a "good"
one, i.e., that it is in keeping with longstanding
Panamanian aspirations: Most of Robles’ policies during
his 26 months in office have aimed at holding his
coalition together in anticipation of the ratification
process. In recent months his bloc in the 42-seat
assembly has picked up two additional deputies, giv-
ing the administration 29 votes to 13 for the opposi-
tion. The government also has a comfortable margin
On all assembly committees. It is not clear, ap- °
parently even within the government, whether the canal
treaty will require only a simple majority or a two-
thirds majority in the assembly since the constitution
is vague on the exact procedure to be followed. Even
if a two-thirds approval is needed, Robles" paper
strength would be sufficient. The President, however,
cannot always count on his deputies to vote with the
administration. Furthermore, legislators will have
their ears attuned to the tenor of public opinion
when a treaty is submitted. ©. : ,

8. A treaty draft will have to be "sold" to the
Panamanian public before it goes to the assembly. The
government coalition has most of the news media in
hand and if there is time to wage an intensive propa-
ganda campaign the ground may be cut from under Arias.
Action by the assembly will depend greatly on the mood
prevailing in Panama City, since the assembly is no-
toriously susceptible to public pressure. In 1947
it rejected an agreement to grant a 20-year extension
of US rights to 13 military bases when an extremist-
led mob of 10,000 threatened to storm the assembly
building.

9.

1.5(e)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

10.
Most observers believe the Robles government

has lost considerable support in the past two years
and is further weakened by the scramble among the
elite families who will be seeking power in 1968.
It is far from certain that these powerful vested
interest groups will be able to unite behind one
candidate or, even if they do, that they can keep
Arias from winning in 1968.

ll. Arias is still a key and uncertain factor
on the Panamanian political scene.

He is convinced that he is
destined to solve Panama's problems. Charging that
the oligarchy fraudulently deprived him of the presi-
dency in 1964, Arias has vowed to call his supporters
into the streets to oppose any treaty, regardless
of content, negotiated by the "illegitimate" Robles
government. Arias is the most popular political
figure in Panama, especially among the urban lower
classes. Few observers doubt his ability to lead
his followers into the streets on an emotional issue
and seriously threaten the Robles government. The
timing of such a move could be linked with disturb-
ances already under way, with an assessment by Arias
that Robles was about to reach a canal settlement
with the US, or with an effort on Arias' part to ex-
ploit unfavorable provisions of a "draft treaty."

12. Just how far Arias is in fact willing to go
‘to block a canal agreement is anybody's guess. He
does not appear to have made up his mind on any spe-
cific course of action. If Robles signs a treaty but
does not submit it for ratification, Arias may decide
to run in the 1968 elections in the hope of defeating

the government candidate on the treaty issue. _

1:5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(¢)
3.4()(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(6)(1)(6)

1.5(c}(a)
3.4(D)(1)(8)

1.5(0)()
3.4(b)(1)(8)

1.5(e){d)
3.4(5)(1)(6)

EM petted
wert eke
7

“4.5(e)(d)
3.4(5)(1)(6)

1.5(c){d)
: , — on 3.4(5)(1)(6)
the other hand, Arias is convinced that the oligarchy
will never allow him to win an election, and, at 66
years of age, he probably has one more chance at the

“presidency and a secure placé in. Panamanian? history.

18. While constantly attacking the government,

‘Arias has carefully avoided any direct criticism of

the US. Through intermediaries he has indicated to
US officials that he is prepared, once in power, to
settle the canal issue. Some observers believe that
Arias' sentiments toward the US have "mellowed" with
age, and that he is the only political figure in
Panama with enough popular support to feel he can

“risk the concessions necessary to get US acquiescence

in a canal accord.

14. It would not be out of character for Arias,
however, to assume a recalcitrant attitude toward the
US once he came to power.

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(5)(1)(8)

1.5(e)(d)
3.4(5)(1)(6)
