Stability of East Germany in the Berlin Crisis
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000046770, dated 2 July 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000046770).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

3 irs es ET nae

risa Bh ais

es DEBT
r Pippa, pee BE § ice

pee a i wand s Bees
i d

hae hina tr

2

Approved for Release
Cale DEG 1993

ieee wi Bima al Line Socdieace hun ata ate 5 me a pee: peters

STABILITY OF EAST GERMANY IN THE BERLIN CRISIS

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the ability of the East German regime: (a) to maintain domestic
order and stability in the period of tension, and possible later very much sharpened
crisis, arising out of the Berlin problem, and (b) to employ its military forces against
Western forces under the same circumstances.

SCOPE NOTE

The Berlin crisis is clearly imposing heavy
strain on the East German political sys-
tem. Our purpose in this paper is to
examine the political effect on that sys-
tem of an intensification of circumstances
already present in the situation. These
are: (a) the East Germans have, with the
decree of 13 August, set up tight controls
along the borders of West Berlin; (b) the
USSR appears to be moving definitely

toward unilateral action on the Berlin
problem; (c) the US is continuing to dis-
play firmness, is taking preparatory mili-
tary measures, and is engaging in a vig-
orous political campaign against Soviet
and East German contentions regarding
Germany; and (d) in consequence an
atmosphere of sharp crisis is developing
which is understood to carry serious risk
of war.

THE ESTIMATE

Elements of Stability and Instability in East
Germany

1. After more than a decade of existence, the
“German Democratic Republic” has serious
continuing problems of popular support. It
has failed to overcome anti-Soviet and anti-
Communist sentiments and to engage the
national feelings of the population. It has
had to suffer constant comparison with an-
other, more attractive and successful Ger-

man state and to combat the Western influ-
ence which radiates from West Berlin. Al-
though subsistence has long ceased to be a
problem, the East German consumer still en-
counters numerous spot shortages and exas-
perating inefficiencies. The East German
must endure encroachments upon his per-
sonal liberties and his privacy as the regime
proceeds with its campaign to politicize all
aspects of social life. The ruling Socialist

ae :

PN be eR Yi eae eee

meer 2

Unity Party (SED) and its leader, Walter
Ulbricht, continue to be viewed with con-
tempt by the vast majority of the people.

2. Despite these formidable obstacles, the re-
gime has—except for the single episode of
16-17 June 1953—succeeded in maintaining
essential stability. Chief among the sources
of stability is the political and military he-
gemony of the USSR, which is given sub-
stance by the presence of about 350,000 So-
viet troops in East Germany. Memory of
the Soviet readiness to use its military power
to suppress the popular uprising in East
Germany itself in 1953, and in Hungary in
1956—and the inability of the West to pre-
vent this suppression—is a powerful damper
on any inclination to express disaffection by
open action. The East German security ap-
paratus has increased in effectiveness since
1953 and is a further deterrent. Moreover,
there are many who either have built up a
vested interest in the present order or have
such roots in the soil and ties to home that
they are willing to accommodate themselves.
For those who could not make this accom-
modation, flight to the West has provided a
substitute for antiregime activity and was,
until 13 August, relatively easy.

3. Open expressions of discontent by the peas-
antry recently have become more frequent.
Last year’s sudden collectivization was
deeply resented, and continuing pressure to
consolidate the new collective farm system
is provoking many expressions of outspoken
hostility in the countryside. Restlessness
now approaches unrest. But despite ma-
lingering, threats to leave collectives, and
some incendiarism and slaughtering of live-
stock, the regime shows no sign of reversing
its agricultural policies. In general, we be-
lieve that while the peasantry will remain
Sullen, its reactions will probably not exceed
the bounds of disconnected local incidents,
in part because the rural environment does
not favor mass actions of resistance.

4. The regime has accorded the industrial
workers a favored role because they are a
semiorganized force concentrated in urban
areas and therefore are the group which

could most easily generate general unrest in
the population. By combining coercion and
incentives the regime has over the years
gained some degree of cooperation from the
workers. In recent months, the introduc-
tion of highly unpopular labor regulations
has aroused the open expression of griev-
ances. But by and large we believe that dis-
Satisfaction of the workers has not reached
a@ point at which a direct challenge to the
regime is imminent.

5. Discontent among the intellectuals, stu-
dents, and professionals is widespread, but
leads mainly to the individual solutions of
careerism, flight, or accommodation. In the
case of doctors and dentists, engineers,
teachers, and others with key skills much
needed by the regime, special dispensations
given to offset dissatisfaction have met with
little success. Regime efforts to capture the
lovalty of youth have been almost entirely
fruitless, and young people, including many
with professional training, have constituted
a relatively high proportion of the refugee
flow.

6. Over recent weeks the situation in East
Germany has been marked by a gradual in-
crease of tension in the population. A
Shortage of consumer goods has been aggra-
vated by the effects of last year’s sudden
agricultural collectivization; economic plans
have had to be scaled down; and regime pro-
nouncements on economic matters have
dampened popular expectations that living
conditions would soon improve. Even more
Significant have been the political uncer-
tainties aroused by the Berlin crisis, and by
increasing concern that the escape hatch
provided by West Berlin would be closed.
The outflow of refugees again rose rapidly
in July 1961, reaching over 30,000, one of
the highest months on record. Finally, with
the decree of 13 August, the possibility of
flight has been drastically curtailed. On
the whole, we still believe that at the pres-
ent moment a major eruption is unlikely.
However, the chances of local disturbances
are rising, and under certain circumstances
these could develop into general manifesta-
tions.

ea. 3

Future Possibilities for Antiregime Action

7. In circumstances of greatly heightened
tension, the people of East Germany will be
subjected to still greater strains. On the
one hand, the appearance of an imminent
East-West showdown might have the effect
of persuading the East Germans that, with
the outcome soon to be determined by the
great powers, their best course was to await
this result and meanwhile to avoid exposing
themselves by overt antiregime actions.
Against this consideration, it must be re-
called that in previous circumstances—East
Germany in 1953, Hungary in 1956—the
buildup of hopes and fears led to popular
actions which, by sober calculation, could
only be regarded as irrational.

8. It will always be possible that sponta-
neous incidents of violence, arising perhaps
out of some very minor and local dispute,
may spread into an outbreak of consider-
able extent and magnitude. Such develop-
ments are essentially unpredictable. They
would become more likely if there were any
sudden appearance, in the statements or
policies of the regime, of contradictions or un-
certainties which suggested to the populace
that the SED’s confidence in its control was
faltering. Moreover, the general Western
posture as it appeared to the East Germans
would be of critical importance; if this pos-
ture seemed to suggest that antiregime
actions would be materially supported, the
more volatile elements of the population
would be more inclined to undertake such
actions. On balance, we believe that, barring
such a combination of circumstances, spon-
taneous antiregime activities are not likely
to exceed passive work slowdowns and pos-
sibly local demonstrations of indiscipline and
opposition.

9. If the West attempted to stimulate dis-
sidence under conditions of greatly height-
ened tension, we believe that there would
be a response. But the scale of it would de-
pend significantly upon whether the East
Germans believed that the West was deter-
mined to bring about a drastic change, or
that they were merely being used by the
West to score a propaganda gain and would

then be left at the mercies of the Communist
authorities. Short of active East-West com-
bat, we believe that few East Germans would
respond to appeals to engage in risky and
violent actions, but some would probably be
willing to undertake small-scale sabotage.
There would probably be a larger response to
appeals to undertake passive resistance, such
as mass absenteeism, but its scale would de-
pend upon the popular state of mind at any
given moment. If passive resistance became
widespread, there would also be danger of
touching off violence.

10. So long as spontaneous or Western solic-
ited actions were isolated and on a small
scale we believe that the East German se-
curity forces would be effective in suppress-
ing them. A close check on disaffection is
maintained by the secret police and its wide-
spread network of informers. The milita-
rized security forces which are also main-
tained were not deemed sufficiently reliable
to be used in the front line of repression in
June 1953, but they have since been built
up into a selectively recruited, carefully
trained and well equipped force of some
15,000 Alert Police and 35,000 Frontier
Police. However, serious disaffection and in-
fectiveness within the East German security
forces would probably occur in the event of
a widespread uprising.

Effect of Allied Military Action

11. If the Berlin crisis reached the point
where a Western military force was dis-
patched to secure the access routes to the
city, and clashed with East German and pos-

_sibly also with Soviet forces, a drastically

new element of instability would enter the
picture. So long as Western action was
avowedly and in fact directed to the limited
objective of assuring access and the West
sought to discourage the East Germans from
action, they would probably not rise up.
Moreover, the population would probably re-
gard the outcome as likely to be determined
quickly, and would therefore wish to refrain
from committing itself prematurely. None-
theless, the situation would be precarious
and could be upset by any one of many pos-

mas 4

sible developments, or even by mere con-
fusion and false reports.

12. If Western-Soviet/East German fighting
should spread into parts of East Germany
well away from the autobahn, this would
appear to many as the beginning of the lib-
eration of the country, and the chances of
a general uprising would greatly increase.
If there were actual Western appeals for
action, there would probably be a wide re-
sponse. The reliability and effectiveness of
the East German security and military forces
would decline rapidly in areas where they
were not backed up by superior Soviet mili-
tary forces, especially if the military fortunes
of the Communist forces vis-a-vis those of
the West seemed in doubt or in jeopardy.

East German Military Capabilities

13. The East German Army is one of the best
equipped of the Eastern European Satellite
armies; its most important deficiency is in
heavy artillery. Its size has remained fairly
constant, at 75,000 men, organized in four
motorized rifie and two tank divisions similar
to the most modern Soviet ones. In training
exercises, the East German Army has in the
last few years displayed a high standard. In
recent years, an extensive reserve program
has been developed, and there are now about
250,000 trained reserves. Mobilization might
raise the army to a total of 10 divisions within
30 days, though this would require Soviet
logistic support and supply of weapons and
munitions.

14. The East German Army is the only Satel-
lite force not based on conscription. There is
some pressure, and consequent resentment,
in recruitment, but local SED boards pass on
all recruits, and political selectivity gives the
army a somewhat higher loyalty to the regime
than that of the population as a whole. The
loyalty of the officer corps and NCO cadre is
probably higher than that of the enlisted men.
We believe that these factors, together with
the German tradition of discipline and sub-
mission to military authority, would make the
army a relatively reliable force in most cir-
cumstances, despite the widespread discon-
tent in East Germany.

15. In the event of a major Allied military
effort to secure the access route to Berlin, the
Soviets would see considerable political ad-
vantage in having East German forces oppose
the Allied forces, at least at the outset. The
East Germans would be favored by a number
of local tactical advantages, including a de-
fensive position. We believe that in such a
limited action the East German Army would
not prove unreliable or unwilling to fight and
would initially give a good account of itself.

16. While the East German Army could in-
dependently conduct a brief containing action,
if an extended campaign evolved it would re-
quire Soviet logistical and combat support,
particularly air cover. In any case, the Soviet
forces would from the outset be deployed to
back up the East Germans. They have con-
ducted combined training exercises, and in
a limited Allied-Soviet nonnuclear war in
East Germany, the East German divisions
would probably be integrated with Soviet field
forces. The performance of the troops in such
a case would probably be determined largely
by the circumstances and fortunes of the con-
flict, but major disaffection or surrenders
would probably not occur unless serious re-
verses were suffered by the Soviet forces.
Their performance might be adversely affected
if they had to face West German troops. If,
during the course of an Allied conflict in East
Germany, the population of the country rose
up in serious disorders or revolted, the relia-
bility of the army would become highly ques-
tionable. Reliability of the East German
Army would probably be very low if Soviet
troops had to be used against the East Ger-
man population, or if uprisings coincided with
Allied successes in the field.

17. The East German Air Force has about 185
fighters, of which 150 are MIG~-17’s and only
24 are limited all-weather interceptors. These
forces are not now deployed for maximum
effectiveness against the Western air cor-
ridors, but they could operate to harass these
corridors. The general air defense system of
the country is under Soviet control, but the
East Germans man a portion of the radar net
in the country and 4 of the 12 surface-to-air
