The Current Disarray in Zanzibar
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126864, dated 1 November 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126864).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence Memorandum

”
THE CURRENT DISARRAY IN ZANZIBAR
Sgetbt
- 8
No. 2256/68
2 December 1968
APPROVED POR RELEASE

NOV 1.8 1997

This document contaits { nation affecting the national
defense of the United us, Within the meaning of Title
18, sections 793 an 4, of the US Code. as amended.
Its transmission evelation of its contents to or re-
ceipt by an oin warized person is prohibited by law.

GR
excitcoco
TOA

bac

SE T

No Fo gn Dissem

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
2 December 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The Current Disarray in Zanzibar
9

Summary

Since the formation of the United Republic of
Tanzania in 1964, the island of Zanzibar has been
a thorny problem for President Nyerere.

On 20 November, an unprecedented, surprise mili-
tary exercise on Zanzibar spawned rumors of another
coup on that trouble-riddled island. Mainland Tan-
zanian police quietly and efficiently seized control
of the town of Zanzibar and were soon reinforced by
Zanzibar Army units. Although it was only a prac-
tice alert, President Nyerere may have approved it
as a show of force to bolster the position of Abeid
Karume, Zanzibar's uneducated, nationalist President,
against the island's perennial plotters and pro-
Communist hoodlums.

Nyerere has been gradually gaining control over
the island's foreign affairs and--only recently--
over the Communist-trained army, but he has always
been reluctant to intervene in Zanzibar's internal
affairs. In the past year, however, the economic
situation there has deteriorated further because of
corruption and gross mismanagement. Karume has re-
acted to rising discontent by tightening security,

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.

It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence
and coordinated with the Office of Economte Research,
the Offtee of National Estimates, and the Clandestine
Services.

No Forej issem

ae its
No Fo n Dissem

Making arbitrary arrests, and issuing decrees that
_impinge on Dar es Salaam's. prerogatives. Nyerere,
increasingly critical of Karume's leadership, may
have decided that he must soon assert his constitu-
tional authority to bring the situation under con-
trol.

Zanzibar's close ties with Peking are growing
more extensive as the Chinese become increasingly
involved in the island's economy, public services,
and military affairs. There has been a correspond-
ingly sharp decline in the Fast Germans'! influence
in all areas except in the security police, while
their mentors, the Soviets, have remained relatively
inactive except for military advice and support.

No Foreg Dissem

ET

TANZANIA
| SU o\s N

Stake

a .
\Ructair

SOMALI

Ne
y
of . . ‘
REPUBLIC .

REPUBLIC (

4
Luke Edware
os

q
| DEMOCRATIC

Qe THE — - stan
OF THE — Victoria # a NAIRCAT
Pree ¥ S
“. SR: AN
Lac Kieue ZF} RWANDA | eo
cy Rae hie ied ay o6}
mA Qe we haat foe Ned pr)
CONGO " Pay =
ins vas
a

f INDIAN OCEAN

a

( |
*~ : Zanzibac

. a
248 FR saan =
3 S4LaaM

ZAMBIA

AO hae
" SOT a
‘ dete
os ‘
a . a MILED
‘ EET nnn ee
m
Pi
\

-
A,

SEGRE T

No Fo gn Dissem

Background

i. The unionof Tanganyika and Zanzibar-~known
as Panzania--hastily arranged in April 1964, has
never been consummated. The Zanzibaris have stub-
bornly resisted any real integration of the island's
administration with that of the mainland, and for
President Nyerere this uphill struggle has been a
continual source of personal frustration. Far from
coming under control of the more moderate Tanganyi-
kans, Zanzibar has continued to be a center from
which radical, pro-Communist influences radiate.

2. In Zanzibar itself, the union has never
been popular, and it was only Tanganyika's steam-
roller tactics that forced the issue. Mainland
leaders convinced Zanzibar's President Karume, now
also first vice president of Tanzania, that union
with Tanganyika was the only way to prevent the then
foreign minister A. M. Babu and his pro-Chinese
Arabs from gaining complete control of the new
African government. Karume, despite strong opposi-
tion from radical labor and youth elements, ob-
tained Zanzibar's ratification of the agreement
even though only one third of the island's govern-
ing Revolutionary Council voted in its favor. Karume
and the council had earlier come to power in the
aftermath of the bloody revolution of January 1964
that overthrew the sultan's Arab government. The
council has never sought a formal mandate, and in-
deed, few of the 32 members would be returned in a
popular election.

3. It soon became evident that Karume had
viewed the union as a marriage of equals, whereas
the mainlanders thought that Zanzibar, with its
300,000 people, would become an integral part of
Tanzania, which has a population of some 12 million.
During the ensuing years, the Zanzibaris have re-
mained uncooperative, making it quite clear that
they intend to run their own affairs. Nyerere has
gradually gained control over most of the island's
foreign relations, although in some dealings, such
as those with East Germany, Dar es Salaam appears
to have little say. The islanders still control
their own entry and exit procedures. Since December

No Forei issem

SERET

No Fo gn Dissem

1967, when Zanzibar reluctantly joined the East
African Community, services such as income tax col-
lection, post, and telegraph have been integrated
with the rest of East Africa. At that time, dis-
agreement over import procedures kept the island's
customs house closed for several months, while goods
awaiting clearance piled up.

4. Karume allows Dar es Salaam just enough
authority on Zanzibar~-particularly through the main-
land police. unit--to ensure that the “wild men" of
the Revolutionary Council do not get the upper hand
completely. Most council members are either rabid
radicals--some Communist--trained--or uneducated gun-
slingers who roam the island arresting "plotters"
and confiscating property at random. Virtually all
of them are in the pay of one of more Communist coun-
tries. Karume has never really come to grips with
the long-term problem of what to do with these men.
In his relations with the council he seems to have
been following a policy of proceeding slowly and
avoiding trouble at almost any cost. He may also see
in the council a useful defense against the “imperial-
ist" ambitions of the mainland Africans.

5. Heretofore, Karume's popularity with local
Africans and the backing of the security forces have
enabled him to balance the various factions within
the council and to maintain his own position. In the
past year, however, his grip has appeared to be slip-
ping in the face of rising popular discontent. The
military exercise of 20 November may have been de-
signed to bolster his position against would-be plotters.
His power is still very much dependent on the support
of the council, which is itself divided by personal
rivalries and foreign subsidies. Karume has exhibited
a growing sense of insecurity and has been appealing
to the council for unity. Recent reports that arms
and explosives have been stolen from government store-
houses have undoubtedly added to his uneasiness. He
apparently suspects the East Germans of supporting
plots against his rule, a factor that would help ex-
plain their tenuous position on Zanzibar at present.

S T

No Fo gn Dissem

Communist Economic Aid
ae SS CONOMLS ALG

6. The Communists got a fast start on Zanzibar.
Prior to independence, both Moscow and Peking had
been cultivating and training Zanzibaris, many of
whom later gained influential positions in the revolu-
tionary government. While London and Washington were
holding back recognition of the new African govern-
ment in early 1964, the Soviets, Chinese, and East
Germans were quick. to offer aid and moral support.
A grateful Karume welcomed them warmly. Western in-
fluence fell rapidly as British civil servants left
the island and their places were filled with Zanzi-
baris and Communist advisers. The recent closing of
the Israeli and Ghanaian consulates has further re-
duced the non-Communist presence. Today, only a hand-~
ful of Westerners remain, including those in the
small US and French consulates. The sole US aid
project involves the construction and equipping of a
small, but effective, technical school.

7. The $21 million in economic aid offered by
Communist countries to Zanzibar is relatively high
On a per capita basis. Communist China and East Ger-
many have been the major donors, both vying for a
leading role. The Chinese aid program has been some-
what more successful than the East German one, but
neither has had much impact on the Zanzibar economy.
This is mainly attributable to the severely limited
human and natural resources of the islands, rather
than to the nature of the Communist aid.

8. Most Chinese economic development assistance
was provided for under a $14 million, interest-free
loan offered in June 1964, of which some $6 million
has been drawn down. Chinese projects include con-
struction of a state farm, a leather and shoe factory,
an agricultural implement repair facility, a small
pharmaceutical plant, a sports stadium, an expansion
of the Zanzibar airport, and a planned hospital on
the neighboring island of Pemba. The Chinese have
also undertaken well-drilling projects and irrigation
and rice-growing schemes, and have provided commodi-
ties whose sale covers the local costs of Chinese
development projects. Within the framework of tech-
nical assistance, Peking has supplied some 25 doctors
and medical assistants, five or six technician/

Sy Suse

No Fo gn Dissem

instructors for the government printing facility

. and broadcasting station, as well as mechanics and
engineers. There are approximately 400 Chinese on
.the islands.

9. East German aid promised to Zanzibar totals
$7 million, of which about $5 million has been drawn
down. The principal projects involve a $1.4-million
housing scheme, an ill-fated fisheries program, and
the construction of two dairies. East Germany has
extended more technical assistance to Zanzibar than
to any other country. This includes some 45 teachers,
nine medical personnel, and various advisers to gov-
ernment ministries. As of April 1968, there were
206 East Germans on the islands, but their total has
probably fallen to about 150. As far as Zanzibar's
economic development is concerned, Moscow has seemed
content to let the East Germans carry the ball. The
Soviets have provided no significant economic aid,
although they have begun to work slowly on a few
feasibility studies such as a railroad requested by
the Zanzibaris. There are about 85 Soviets in Zan-
Zibar, including three teachers, 19 military-associated
personnel, and the officers who man the island's two
coastal steamers--both of which ran aground last year.

10. The Chinese have worked assiduously at un-
dercutting the East Germans, and over the past year
senior Zanzibari officials, including Karume, have
become increasingly dissatisfied and disillusioned
with East German aid projects. The officials complain
that German equipment is overpriced and not suited
to Zanzibar's needs; some materials have been returned.
Most of the projects financed by East Germany have
been plagued with difficulties because of poor plan-
ning, and progress has been very slow. Only in the
special security detachment have the East Germans built
themselves a relatively sure position of influence.

The Chinese have gradually become the dominant force
because of their well-managed, relatively-inexpensive
aid, their ability to live frugally and work hard, and
their extensive and well-financed contacts-~-both overt
and covert--with many influential Zanzibaris. The
East Germans are handicapped by their higher living
Standards and a greater racial identity with European

colonialists.

-6-

No Forej Dissem
ET

S ET

No Fo gn Dissem

11. The record of the Chinese is not completely |
-untarnished, however, despite their impressive progress.
The shoe factory is operating well below Capacity be-
cause of a shortage of hides, and the rice-planting
scheme seems to be faring poorly. Their trade goods
often have been ill chosen, and are generally of in-
ferior quality. Nevertheless, the Chinese are likely
to continue successfully to play the part of effec-
tive, disinterested participants in Zanzibar's develop-
ment, and the East Germans will probably continue to
suffer by comparison.

Communist Military Aid
ae

12. In the field of military aid, both Moscow
and Peking have been active since 1964. They each
operate separate training camps in the outskirts of
the town of Zanzibar, and each provides arms for the
ever-expanding, 3,000-man army. There appears to be
some division of responsibility, with the 17 Chinese
advisers teaching small arms and guerrilla warfare
and the Soviets dealing with the heavier weapons such
aS antiaircraft and field pieces. The Zanzibaris
recently refused a shipment of Soviet arms and armored
personnel carriers because they were reconditioned,
unlike the new Chinese material. The Soviets are
building a new military base on the site of an aban-
doned British airstrip at Ubago in the center of Zan-
zibar Island. The Chinese have taken over the former
US Project Mercury tracking station at Tunguu, where
they are training 800 new Zanzibari recruits. In
the past, some Zanzibari military men have gone to
China for training or for short visits, but most seem
to go to the USSR when extensive training is required.
East Germany has provided six patrol boats and is
building naval barracks.

13. Ever since 1964, island Military units have
remained independent of mainland control, even though
Dar es Salaam pays their salaries and expenses. The
first attempt at integration in 1964 resulted in the
recall of the island soldiers after they looted the
mainland town in which they had been stationed. Their
discipline and capabilities have improved considerably
since then, however, and within the past year mainland
commanders have begun to gain some influence. The

-~7-

No Foreg Dissem
S ET

S ET

No Fo gn Dissem

Zanzibar forces are now being reorganized according
to a table of organization drawn up in Dar es Salaam
with the aid of Canadian advisers. The military
exercise of 20 November was the first joint opera-
tion involving both mainlanders and islanders, but
more are planned.

14. Camps on Zanzibar have been used occasionally
for training Mozambique nationalists and other "free-
dom fighters," but this activity is believed to have
been small by comparison with similar programs on the
mainland. A number of Cuban instructors involved
briefly at one of the island camps were withdrawn at
Zanzibar's request, and the only Cubans now remain-
ing are two doctors on Pemba.

Economic Chaos
Sete FNaos ©

15. Four years of Communist aid and economic
advice, combined with Zanzibari mismanagement, have
brought economic stagnation and financial chaos.

The People's Bank of Zanzibar has defaulted on pay-
ments due to the Bank of Tanzania, and the government-
owned export-import corporation has run out of funds.

The island's basic problems stem from government ef-
forts to control all aspects of the economy and to
replace Asian workers and merchants with less-experienced
Africans. For example, the take-over of the retail-
trade network has led to chaotic conditions with short-
ages in many basic consumer goods.

16. Agricultural production declined when for-
merly Arab-owned clove estates were parceled out
among Africans in three-acre lots. Cloves account
for 75 percent of Zanzibar's export earnings and
about 25 percent of government revenues. Government:
diversification efforts have encountered resistance
from farmers, who prefer the easy task of picking
cloves from established trees rather than the more
arduous work associated with planting new crops.

Popular Unrest

17. For the Arabs and Asians, life has been
made miserable since the revolution, but in the past
year discontent has also risen among the Africans

5S ET

No Fo gn Dissem

as the economy has deteriorated. Unrest has been
-further stimulated in rural areas by heavy~handed
implementation of land distribution, resettlement,
and forced-labor schemes. Zanzibaris increasingly
blame Karume for the extensive corruption and ris-
ing unemployment. He has reacted to the growing
dissidence by tightening security and railing about
"plotters" who are sabotaging the economy. His
latest scapegoat is the long-established community
of Comorians from the French Comoro Islands, which
he has labeled a security threat. Karume announced
earlier this month that most of the more than 3,000
Comorians have ceased to be citizens of Tanzania,
and those with important positions would lose their
jobs immediately. Nyerere has subsequently dis-
missed one union minister of Comorian descent. Karume
has employed similar trumped-up charges in the past
to dispose of his political rivals.

Outlook

18. Nyerere has become increasingly critical
of Karume's leadership, but still appears to support
him for lack ofa reasonable alternative. He has al-
ways been reluctant to intervene in the island's in-
ternal affairs for fear of jeopardizing the tenuous
ties that bind the union. Sooner or later he will
probably have to do something about Zanzibar, however.
The speed and tight security of last week's show of
force must certainly have impressed the island's
unruly elements and may have given Nyerere confidence
that he can eventually assert his constitutional au-
thority. Even if he does decide to move in this
direction, however, the Chinese are likely to remain
influential in Zanzibar for the foreseeable future,

No Forei ssem
S T
