Memo from Richard Helms to Acting Director Central Intelligence Concerning Mili
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012355, dated 4 May 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012355).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

IRONBARK

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

1.3(ay4}

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 238, D. Cc.

43

i iN Cot
wT Se iow hO Tt

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Acting Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT . t MILITARY THOUGHT (TOP SECRET): "The "FALLEX-6o"

Maneuvers of the Armed Forces of the NATO _
Aggressive Bloc", by Colonel-General 8. Ivanov

_ 1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which
appeared in the, TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" (iwovenneya Mysi") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander. .

2. For convenience of reference by USIB agencies, the
codeword IRONBARK has been assigned to this series of TOP SECRET
. CSDB reports containing documentary Soviet material. The word
IRONBARK is classified CONFIDENTIAL and is to be used only among
persons authorized to read and handle this material. ;

3. In the interests of protecting our source, IRONBARK
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
‘Request for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office. ; oe =

4‘ Lid 1,3{a)(4)

Richard Helms
Deputy Director (Plans)

Enclosure 4.3fa)(4)
| 1,3fa}(4

3 0 JUN 1992

 4.3(a)(4)

Original: The Acting Director of Central Intelligence

ec: The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

The Director for Intelligence,
The Joint Staff

The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
U. S. Air Force

The Director, National Security Agency

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Research

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports
Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Director, National Photographic Interpretation Center

{RONBARK

4.a(av4)

Pe | 4.3(a)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR

MILITARY THOUGHT (TOP SECRET): "The 'FALLEX-60"
Maneuvers of the Armed Forces of the NATO
Aggressive Bloc", by Colonel-General S. Ivanov

SUBJECT

DATE OF INFO: October 1961

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"The "FALLEX-60" Maneuvers of the Armed Forces of the NATO
Aggressive Bloc", written by Colonel-General 8. Ivanov.

This article appeared in the 1961 Fourth Issue of a special
version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Milit
Thought). This journal is published irregularly and is classified
TOP SECRET by the Soviets. The 1961 Fourth Issue went to press
on 20 October 1961.

Headquarters Comment:

Ivanoy's article on Exercise "SIDE 1.3fa)(4)
STEP" was disseminated By eh

Headquarters Comment: "Military Thought” is published by the
USSR Ministry of Defense in three versions, classified RESTRICTED,
SECRET, and TOP SECRET. The RESTRICTED version is issued monthly
ané has: existed sinée 1937. The SECRET version is issued irregflarly.
By the end of 1961, 61 issues had been published, 6 of them dur 1961.
The TOP SECRET version was initiated in early 1960 and is also issued

irregularly.
in 3

coe

4.3(a)(4)

The "FALLEX~60" Maneuvers of the
re euvers of the

Armed Forces of the NATO Aggressive Bloc
EE AN Seo ressive Bloc

by Colonel-General S. Ivanov

From 20 September through 1 October 1960 maneuvers
were held by the armed forces of the NATO aggressive
bloc under the provisional name of “FALLEX-60"., They
embraced the territory of Europe, North Africa, the
Central, Northern and Eastern Atlantic, the Baltic, North,
and Mediterranean Seas, and also the territory of the
USA and Canada.

Taking part in the maneuvers were the command elements
and staffs of all the combined armed forces of NATO in
Europe, the Atlantic, and the Mediterranean Theater of
Military Operations, the command elements and staffs of
formations and large units of ground troops, air forces.-:.
and naval forces, aviation units of combined and national
air forces, warBhips, ships, and land-based aircraft,
ground and airborne troops, missile units, and atomic
artillery - in all about 200 staffs, up to 5000 aircraft,
580 warships and ships and more than 200,000 men of the
combined armed forces of the bloc. In addition there
were involved in the maneuvers the general staffs and
staffs of the branches of the armed forces, the command
elements and staffs of air defense troops and territoryal -
troops, the central directorates or departments of the
ministries of internal affairs, transport, economics,
communications, health, etc, of all the member nations
of NATO, with the exception of Portugal and Iceland,

At the beginning of the maneuvers the armed forces
of all the NATO member’ nations were brought to heightened
combat readiness, as were all their organs of military
leadership and a considerable number of civilian departments.
These maneuvers pursued not only military, but also political,
goals.

As is well known, reactionary circles in the USA and
some other imperialist countries, frightened by the possibility
of the establishment of a lasting peace, were striving

ee 1.3ta))

4.3/a)i4)

feverishly in 1960 to increase international tension,
together with the arms race and preparation for a new war.
The ruling circles of the USA committed openly aggressive
acts against the Soviet Union in the form of the incursion
into our air space of reconnaissance airplanes, and disrupted
the Paris Summit Conference and the work of the Committee on
Disarmament. The American imperialists, together with their
partners in the bloc, organized intervention against the
Congo and Laos, and tried by force to stifle the Hevoretton
in Cuba.

All these actions of the reactionary powers, which
were dangerous for the cause of peace, received a decisive
setback on the part of the Soviet Union and other peace-
loving countries; the aggressive plans of the imperialists
were disrupted. By the autumn of 1960 the Eisenhower
administration was in a position of international isolation.
In this situation the Soviet Union made the proposal to
hold the XVth Session of the General Assembly of the UN -,
with the participation of the heads of state, to settle
the most important problems for the strengthening of peace.

The ruling circles of the USA and other imperialist
nations adopted measures for keeping N.S. Khrushchev and
the heads of government of the other Socialist nations
out of the General Assembly and for hindering the discussion
tn the UN of the unresolved international problems. Among
the measures designed to attain these ends were the "FPALLEX-60"
maneuvers.

The maneuvers, since nearly all the member-nations of
NATO took part in them, also had the goal of demonstrating
the strength and "unity of the free world" as a defense
“against the threats of Communism". This was considered
all the more important under existing conditions when
growing contradictions were gradually eating away the
aggressive bloc. The "FALLEX-60" maneuvers must therefore
be assessed as one of the major provocations of the aggressive
imperialist powers, in pursuit of definite political goals -
to enflame the world situation and aggravate international
relations. But the provocation failed: the XVth General
Assembly of the UN took place with the participation of the.
heads of government of the :majority of the nations of the
world. The tireless activity of N.S. Khrushchev. at the

says)

a

1.3(a)(4}

session was crowned with notable success, N.S. Khrushchev _
advanced important proposals on the questions of disarmament,

the liquidation of colonialism, changes in the structure

of the leading organs of the UN and on other topics, directed
toward the strengthening of peace. All these proposals

met with the support of many nations and the warm approbation
of the progressive forces of the world.

The military goals of the maneuvers were to check the
preparedness of the command elements of the headquarters,
the national organs and the combined armed forces of NATO
(principally of aviation, the navy and missile units) for
carrying on joint operations, especially nuclear, in the
initial period of a war, and also to check how far the
operational-strategic plans which had been developed
correspond to reality-, and thereby to increase the overall
combat readiness of their armed forces. In the maneuvers
there were worked out in essence all types of modern
operations: offensive and defensive operations of: air
forces, missile units, ground troops, and the navy.

The "FALLEX-60" maneuvers consisted of approximately
20 exercises, conducted under an overall concept and agaifst
the background of the situation determined by the political
goals outlined above. The concept of the maneuvers consisted
of exhibiting itself as the "victim of aggression", of
launching a "counterblow"” against the enemy with nuclear
weapons, of gaining nuclear superiority and supremacy in
the air, and thereby creating conditions for the seizure
of the strategic initiative and for the ground forces
to pass to the counteroffensive, and thus to destroy the
-opposing forces of the "aggressor". Under this concept
the goal was pursued of concealing the real plans of the
NATO leaders, which are based essentially on an offensive
doctrine, a pre-emptive strike and direct attack on the
nations of the Socialist Camp.

The "FALLEX-60" maneuvers were two-sided. On one
side was "Blue", the armed forces of NATO, and on the
other was "Orange" the armed forces of the Warsaw Pact
nations. The maneuvers were divided into two stages:
in the first stage were worked out the first operations
of all branches of the armed forces under the conditions
of the initial period of war, as planned in peacetime;
in the second stage were worked out the subsequent operations
of this period, on the basis of the conditions which develop

ee 4.3fa)(4

1.3(a)l4)

4.3(a) (4)

during the course of a war after it has begun.

The initial situation preceding military operations

was a lengthy period of worsening relations between the
member nations of NATO and the member nations of the

Warsaw Pact. From February on, both sides were carrying

out secret preparations for war. At the end of August “

the NATO countries secretly began partial mobilization,

and transferred French divisions from Africa to Europe.

From 6 September the movement of naval forces from bases

in the US to the northeast part of the Atlantic began.

Five days before the beginning of military operations

(16 September) the "military alert" signal was given,

the NATO striking fleet was formed, the forces of anti-
submarine defense were deployed in the Atlantic, and
tactical aviation was transferred to bases in’ Norway and
Greece (one squadron in each). Ten hours and thirty minutes
before the start of military operations, a simple alert

was declared. From this moment all the armed forces of

the bloc began to be brought to complete combat readiness.
In 15 minutes almost all aircraft were in the air and the
missile units and atomic artillery were brought to readiness
for the use of nuclear weapons. At 0519 hours on 21 September
the general alert was given - the beginning of military
operations,

A similar buildup of the situation before the beginning
of a war has been a feature of other exercises held earlier,
among them "MAXIMUM TENSION" and "SIDE STEP". However, in
past exercises for bringing the armed forces to complete
combat readiness it took up to two days, while in the
“FALLEX-60" maneuvers 10 hours and 30 minutes were spent.
This could be achieved because the striking forces (missile
units and aviation) were already at combat readiness in
peacetime, while the ground forces were at half strength
and had a corresponding quantity of ammunition and items
of equipment in the hands of the troops.

In the first stage of the maneuvers, nuclear strikes
were launched against "Orange" with strategic and operational-
tactical means, i.e., in the terminology of NATO, a nuclear
offensive took place, which lasted about seven days. This
constituted the main component of the first stage. The
ground troops conducted operations with the purpose of
supporting the nuclear attack (defensive operations) and

ea 1.A(a)(4)

1,3fa)(4)

4.3(8}(4)

got ready to go over to the counteroffensive. The navy also
participated in the nuclear attack, and conducted operations
to destroy the "Orange" naval forces and to protect the sea
and ocean lines of communication.

The principal exercise of the first stage was Exercise
"FLASH BACK-1". in the course of which were worked out
problems of nuclear attack and the conduct of operations
by groupings of ground troops and air forces in the European
theaters of military operations (cf. Fig. 1). For this
there were deployed:

--in the Central European Theater of Military Operations-
the Northern Army Group, consisting of four army corps (12
divisions); the Central Army Group, consisting of the
Seventh Army (US),.and “the First Army (France), comprising
six army corps in all (13 divisions); the Second and Fourth
Combined Tactical Aviation Commands and the Third Air Army
(US), comprising in all 2342 aircraft of tactical aviation
and 200 aircraft of strategic aviation; 60 intermediate
range "Thor" missile launchers; 30 "Mace"and "Matador"
cruise missile (krylataya raketa) launchers; and 45 battalions
of tactical missiles and atomic artillery;

--in the Southern European Theater of Military Operations-
an Italian army group, consisting of two armies (four army
corps and separate large units, 12 divisions in all) and
a missile command (five "Corporal" and "Honest John" battalions);
the First Greek Army, consisting of three army corps (10
divisions) and two "Honest John" battalions; the First Turkish
Army, consisting of three army corps (nine divisions) and
two "Honest John" battalions; the Fifth and Sixth Tactical
Aviation Commands and the British Mediterranean air forces
0226 aircraft in all and the US Sixth Strike Fleet.

The concept and course of the maneuvers confirm the
previously held view that the NATO command considers the
Central European Theater of Military Operations as the theater
of paramount importance. It is here that the main forces
of the bloc are deployed, the overwhelming part of the means
of mass destruction are used and the solution of the basic
tasks of a future war is contemplated. For this reason the
NATO command has devoted great attention to the preparation

26%

4.3fa\la)

of this theater and has created in it the necessary supplies
of materiel for the conduct of a war. In the plans of NATO

the Southern European Theater and, even more'sa, the Northern
European Theater, occupy a secondary place.

The "FALLEX~60" maneuvers show once more that the
aggressive bloc of imperialistic nations base all their
calculations for the attainment of the goals of a future
war on the mass use of nuclear weapons. In these maneuvers,
as in others, the basis for the operations of the various
branches of armed forces was the so-called nuclear attack.

It was carried out with the goal of gaining nuclear superiority
and seizing the strategic initiative from the first days of

the war. In the course of this attack the following tasks

were worked out: destruction of the enemy's nuclear weapons
and means for employing them (aircraft and missiles);
disruption of a possible "Orange" attack; destruction of
groupings of ground troops; disorganization of troop control;
interdiction of the approach march of reserves by creating
obstruction zones; and destruction of communication routes.

The first nuclear strikes (in NATO terminology the
counterstrike) were launched 14 minutes after the beginning
of a war supposedly unleashed by "Orange". However, 15
minutes before the start of the war, almost 411 the tactical
and strategic aircraft were airborne, and the missile units
and nuclear artillery had been brought to complete readiness,
Therefore, part of the “Orange'"nuclear strikes were launched
against vacant places. In this way the NATO leaders wished
to show that their intelligence has the most precise information.

For the launching of the nuclear strikes the following
were involved: 200 strategic bombers (approximately); 820
aircraft of tactical and carrier aviation (approximately
50 percent’ of the tactical bombers and fighter-bombers are
delivery aircraft for nuclear weapons); 60 "Thor" intermediate
range missile launchers, which were being used in exercises
for the first time; 30 "Mace" and "Matador" cruise missile
(samolet-snaryad) launchers; and 55 battalions of tactical
missiles and atomic artillery. ;

All tasks of the nuclear attack, according to the
calculations of the NATO command, were fulfilled in 60 hours.
It should be noted that in past exercises the fulfilment
of such tasks took 72 hours. The depth of the strikes
reached 1000 km and more, According to incomplete data

3fa)(4)

1 3fa)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

there were launched in all approximately 1660 nuclear strikes,
including more than 210 in the Northern European Theater,

about 1100 in the Central European Theater and 350 in the
Southern European Theater. In comparison with earlier exercises
an increase can be noted in the number of nuclear strikes,
especially in the first twenty-four hours.

More than 2000 aircraft actually took part in flights.
The light bombers launched strikes one at a time at intervals
of 15 to 20 minutes. The enemy antiair defense was breached
at high altitudes. For training purposes they made the run
over the objectives not less than twice from various directions.
Fighters launched nuclear strikes from altitudes of from
11,200 to 11,800 meters, either singly or in pairs, and to
a depth of 600 km and more, The flight to the targets was
accomplished at medium and low altitudes. Great attention
was devoted to the launching of nuclear strikes with the
aid of surface radar systems to direct fighters to the
target from great altitudes and at distances up to 260 km.

The strategic aviation of the US, intended for the
conduct of the "Counter Actims'' operations and the strategic
aviation of Great Britain did not actually participate in
the flights. The subunits of American strategic bombers
were in a state of increased combat readiness at air’ bases
in Great Britain, Spain and Morocco. From the American
bases located in Great Britain nine bombers in all actually
sortied. The flight course passed over the Bay of Biscay,
Spain, the Balearic Islands, Sardinia and France. The flight
was carried out by groups of three aircraft each at altitudes
of 9,000 to 10,000 meters and with 30-minute intervals
between groups and one-minute intervals between aircraft
in a group. The aircraft approached the targets by different
routes, and released their bombs from altitudes of 11,000
to 11,500 meters. Each crew was assigned one basic and
two or three alternate targets. ;

Special attention was paid in the maneuvers to the
problems of the organization and support of the nuclear
attack. According to calculations of the NATO command
the basic goals of the nuclear attack for the déstruction
of the enemy's groupings and his military-economic potential
were attained. The operations of strategic aviation and

aay 4.3(a)(4)

-8-

Blay(ay

of the "Thor" missile units were declared to be especially
effective.

It is obvious that the nuclear strikes planned by the
NATO command can cause enormous damage to our country and
armed forces unless measures are adopted to disrupt these
strikes. The possibilities for disrupting such strikes are
quite real. The main body of delivery vehicles for nuclear
weapons consists basically of strategic, tactical and
carrier aircraft, as well as cruise missiles. It has once
again been confirmed that up to this time the USA and its
allies are considerably behind the USSR in the development
of missiles, especially those of strategic import.

Inasmuch as the basic means of nuclear attack is
aviation, it is not difficult to reach the conclusion
that it is necessary to combat it in the air with PVO
forces and also to destroy it on the airfields.

In the first stage of the maneuvers the ground troops
worked on problems of defense with the aim of screening
the areas where the nuclear means are based and of holding ©
the line for the subsequent offensive.

The main forces in the Central European Theater
were deployed on the line Hamburg, Bremen, Felsberg,
Bamberg, Regensburg, east of Munich, at a distance of 50
to 130 km from the borders of the GDR and Czechoslovakia.
The screening forces and reconnaissance were operating
forward... The majority of the divisions were linearly
deployed on the main line. In reserve were four divisions
in all (out of 25). On the average a division was allotted
23 km in the sector of the Northern Army Group and 35 ka
in the sector of the Central Army Group. The-main task
assigned to the troops of the first echelon was to hold
the forward line for at least 48 hours, i.e,, the time
the NATO command calculates is needed for accomplishing
the main tasks of the nuclear attack.

During the course of the defensive engagement, groupings
of ground troops were created for the subsequent transition
to the attack along the main axes, For the Northern Army
Group these groupings in the zones of the offensive comprised

1.3/ayfa)

1.3fa){aj

1.3(a}(4}

West German and British army corps, and for the Central

Army Group, the Third West German Army Corps and the Seventh
US Army Corps. The reserves moving up from the rear area :
were intended for use in the offensive. It is clear that

the NATO command hopes that in the course of the nuclear
attack the enemy will sustain such destruction that the
ground troops will be able to go over to the attack along
these axes,

The defense of Turkey and Greece was organized along
the international boundaries.

In this exercise, "Orange" had taken the offensive
along all axes from the first days of the war. The rules
of the course of combat operations were so drawn that, in
the first three days in- the Central European Theater, "Orange"
achieved quite insignificant success. Only on individual
axes were they able to drive a wedge 25 to 35 km into the
‘forward line of the NATO troops. By the end of D plus 7
"Orange" had pressed back the NATO troops to a depth of ,
200 km, and their average rate of advance was 10 to 20 ka
per day. Here the "Orange" attack was checked.

In the Balkans the "Orange" forces advanced 60 to 120 km
in the first three days, and were forced to go over to the
defensive. Here the average rate of advance reached 25 to
35 km per day.

In the opinion of the directors of the exercise,
by D plus 8 "Orange" suffered considerable losses:
in aviation 80 to 85 percent; , in personnel 30 to 60 percent...
NATO troop casualties in comparison with those of "Oxange"
were manifestly lower. Not one of their divisions was put’
out of action, and up to the eighth day of the war their
troops retained a highér combat effectiveness than those
of "Orange". The troops of both sides conducted combat
operations with their large units, taking into account
losses from nuclear strikes. It should be noted that in
the course of defensive operations provision was made for
maneuvering by forces and weapons and for the launching
by them of counterattacks.

Thus the exercise "FLASH BACK-1'" shows that the NATO

command counts on the mass use of nuclear weapons in the
first days of a war to disrupt the enemy attack, to preserve

Seay 1.3{ay(4)

1.3(a)(4)

their own forces, and to ensure that they will be able to
go over to a determined offensive following the nuclear
strikes.

Combat operations in ground theaters were played out
in a similar way even in earlier exercises, particularly
exercise "SIDE STEP" (1959). It is obvious that such a
version of combat operations has been foreseen in NATO plans.

There are weaknesses in this plan, which must be taken
into account. All calculations of the NATO command are
based on the use of nuclear weapons. If the nuclear strikes
can be disrupted or weakened to a significant degree at
the beginning of a war (and such a possibility exists),
then favorable conditions will be created for carrying out
an attack with decisive” goais. In the screening zone the
NATO troops will not be able to offer any serious opposition
to the attacking large units. NATO groupings on the main
line can be crushed by nuclear strikes even before the
attacking troops reach them. In the troop formations on
this line there will be gaps measured in hundreds of
kilometers. The "patchwork" composition of the divisions
(made up of the troops of various nations) also does not
contribute to the steadfastness of the troops. If all this
is considered, then the conclusion is inevitable that the
optimism of the NATO command, as revealed by the "FALLEX-60"
maneuvers, is, putting it mildly, ill-founded.

Deserving of serious attention is the naval Exercise
“SWORD THRUST-1", which was carried out in the first stage
of the maneuvers by the forces of the US and British strike
fleet in the Norwegian Sea. Here there were deployed the
US Second Fleet and a British fleet, which were composed
of four strike carriers, one heavy carrier for antisubmarine
defense (PLO), two cruisers armed with missiles, two light
cruisers, 12 submarines (including two atom-powered submarines),
and 300 carrier aircraft. The fleet began to move into this
area on 6 September. Two days before the beginning of
military operations, the operational buildup of the fleet
was complete, and in seven hours it occupied a maneuvering
area in the central portion of the Norwegian Sea, from
which it was supposed to launch nuclear strikes.

The fleet was to launch nuclear strikes against 183
targets. Carrier aircraft completed one sortie per day,

mae | 1,3(a)(4)

1

1.3(a)y(Ay —

1.3(a}(4}

and launched strikes to a depth of up to 1100 miles. The
strikes were launched mainly by single aircraft and in
daylight hours. The plan of nuclear strikes was fulfilled,
according to calculations of the leadership of the exercise,
in 36 hours. This is a very important circumstance. In
past exercises it usually took 72 hours. The decrease in
the time for launching the planned nuclear strikes was
attained by increasing the quantity of means used for

this purpose and in maximum exertion of them. It is evident
that the NATO command considers that carrier aviation can
operate more successfully even in comparison with tactical
aviation. No special differences in the methods of operations
of deck~based attack aircraft in comparison with strategic
and tactical aviation were noted in this exercise.

The formation of the naval forces in the maneuvering
area deserves notice. The fleet consisted of two operational
strike groups: the American (two strike carriers with 160
aircraft) and the British (two strike carriers with 100
aircraft), which were drawn up at a distance of 45 to 90
miles from each other. In the center of each group were
located the strike carriers, with intervals of 20 to 60
miles. Around the strike carriers at a distance of up to
60 miles were located the forces of the antisubmarine and
antiair defense. Air cover was provided by deck-based
fighters, which patrolled in the air in two tiers, with
groups of two aircraft each, and with the groups at intervals
of 15 to 60 miles from one another. At a distance of 120
to 150 miles the aircraft, submarines, and destroyers of
the radar patrol were operating.

Thus, two operational groups of the fleet were located
in an area measuring approximately 100 x 200 miles, or, if
we include the elements of the radar patrol, 165 x 270 miles.
This area was saturated with a large number of warships of
various types. The forces of the Sixth Fleet, operating
in the Mediterranean Sea, had approximately the same formation.
in the maneuvering area. In fact this fleet was drawn up
somewhat more compactly.

In the formation of the forces of the NATO strike
fleet in the maneuver area there were a number of weaknesses,
which must be noted in order to organize measures for combating
them. [If the radar patrol elements are destroyed or neutralized,
then the local security forces will not be able to defend the

4. 3fajt4)

-12-

1.3(a)(4)

sw

Strike carriers successfully from strikes by long-range
bombers armed with the K-10 or, especially, the K-20, or
from submarines armed with the new missiles. The operational
groups are in the maneuvering area for 36 hours, which
facilitates combat against them. It is important only to
make a prompt determination of the maneuver area in order
to establish the position of the attack carriers in the
combat formation and to ensure the guiding to them of our
own strike forces. One must also take into account the
vulnerability of attack aviation to modern means of antiair
defense. In a word, there are substantial possibilities
for disrupting nuclear strikes launched by the forces of
the carrier fleet of the NATO bloc. After fulfilling the
task, the fleet withdrew to the Iceland area to take on
supplies. The vulnerability of the strike fleet is
increased even more during this passage, and especially

in the area where supplies are taken on.

These are the most important exercises of the first

stage of the "FALLEX-60" maneuvers.

* * *

The situation created for the start of the second stage
of the maneuvers is marked by a broadening of the scope
of military operations. Austria has been occupied (supposedly
by "“Orange"). Yugoslavia has suffered an attack by "Orange"
and has entered the war on the side of NATO. Spain is ready
to enter the war. The situation has become aggravated in
North Africa, the Middle East and Indochina, and on the
border of the Chinese People's Republic and Nepal. Thus,
according to NATO calculations, a new world war must break
out. The directors of the maneuvers strove in every way
to shift the entire responsibility for the broadening of
military operations onto the Socialist nations. But behind
this clumsy camouflage it is not difficult to see the true
aggressive plans of the imperialists for fanning the flame
of world war. Even at the very beginning of the war they
did not hesitate to violate Austria's neutrality. The
maneuvers show that in case of war the NATO command intends
to use Yugoslavia on their side. The aggressive imperialist
circles consider that even at the beginning of a war they
will succeed in spreading military operations to Africa,
the Near and Middle East and to Southeast Asia,so as to
revitalize or strengthen their domination in these areas.

A 18fay(a)

A135

1 2laV4)

In the course of the games at the beginning of the
second stage, which corresponded to the eleventh day of
war, both sides had suffered considerable losses, and there
had been formed large zones of destruction and high levels
of radioactive contamination. The NATO armed forces, however,
maintained nuclear superiority and achieved supremacy in
the air, mainly with carrier aviation. As for the "Orange"
forces, their attack was broken up and their stocks of
nuclear weapons were exhausted (or else they were holding
them back). The NATO troops therefore went over to the
counterattack. This constituted the main feature of the
second stage of the "FALLEX-60" maneuvers.

Exercises "FLASH BACK-2" and'HOLDFAST" were held in
order to work out problems of the counterattack (cf. Fig. 2).
The NATO troops went over to the counterattack in the
Central European Theater and in the Balkans. In Italy the
defensive operations continued.

Reliance on nuclear weapons as the basic means of
conducting a war was also reflected during the second stage
of the maneuvers. At the beginning of the counterattack,
an additional allocation of nuclear weapons was provided
for, especially for the troops operating in the Central
European Theater. Support of the ground troops was switched
over to the carrier strike large unit employing its nuclear
weapons. Provision was made for nuclear preparations for —
the counterattack, for the destruction of the enemy's remaining
nuclear and air potential, and for the creation of obstacles
on his lines of communications, with the goal of interdicting
the moving up of reserves and delivery of material. These
were the tasks set for the direct support of the attacking
troops by nuclear strikes.

There is some information on the reinforcement of the
groupings of ground troops in the Central European Theater.
At the beginning of the counterattack here there was an
additional deployment of 10 divisions: three French
divisions were transferred from Africa, one division was
transferred from Great Britain, four divisions were mobilized |
in France, and one division each in Belgium and Holland.

The main goal of the counterattack was to complete the
defeat of the enemy's troop groupings in the theaters, to

a 1-8fayi4)

S14.

1 3(ayA)

1.3(a}(4}

restore the position on the front and to create conditions
for the seizure of the GDR, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary
and for the transfer of military operations to the territory
of the USSR. The plan made provision for the launching of
strikes by groupings of ground troops to a considerable
depth. In the area of the Northern Army Group the basic
mission was carried out by West German and British army
corps, and in the area of the Central Army Group by American
and West German army corps. The main forces were concentrated
on the Berlin and Dresden axes. On the Balkan Peninsula

the main strike was carried out by the Turkish army.

The troops went over to the counterattack on the Balkan
Peninsula on the eleventh day of the war, and in the Central
European Theater on the thirteenth day of the war.

In the course of the exercise the counterattack in
the Central European Theater was completely "successful".
By 1400 hours on the fifteenth day the position along
the whole front had already been restored, and the NATO
troops were advancing at a rate of 70 km per day (we should
remember that the “Orange" forces had advanced at a rate
‘of 10 to 20 km per day). An invasion of the territory
of the GDR was further contemplated, but this was not played
out in the exercises.

The counterattack in the Balkans likewise developed
"successfully". The First Turkish Army advanced at a
rate of 35 km and the First Greek Army at 25 to 30 km, per
day. In the area of Alexandropolis an enphintoue landing
was played out (two divisions).

Among the groupings of ground troops in the Central
European Theater the first place in number of divisions
involved belonged to the Federal German Republic. This
démonstrates the ever-growing role of West Germany in
NATO. Also in partial testimony to this is the fact that
in the maneuvers there was created a West German armed
-forces high command, which, in comparison with the other
participants in the exercises, tried to occupy a more
independent position from the NATO command.

The leadership of the Bundeswehr strove during the
maneuvers to have the FRG troops operate on the main axes,

am OO)

-~15—

1, 3(ayAa)

and in this they were successful. In comparison with past
exercises the West German command in the "FALLEX-60"
maneuvers exerted a considerably greater influence on the
adoption of solutions for the operation, in the selection
of targets for nuclear strikes, and on the direction of
troops in the course of military operations. As an example,
one West German army corps was assigned the task of securing
the flanks of the NATO armed forces from the direction of
the Bavarian-Czech and Austrian borders. The Bundeswehr
command did not agree with this task. It employed the main
forces of the corps for an attack on the main axis, and

for covering the flanks of the whole grouping it allotted
only a part of the forces. We must note that the American
command did not oppose such pretensions of the West German
revanchigts, but encouraged them in every way.

The Bundeswehr general staff in its conclusions on

_the maneuvers emphasized above ail that the FRG troops

ought to be used on the axis of. the main strike of the

NATO combined armed forces, and for this reason in comparison
with the other allies, they should be best supplied with
personnel and material-~-technical means.

The Bundeswehr general staff does not rely on the ability
of the USA to support NATO troops. with the necessary materiel
means in the course of a war, and therefore raises the
question of advance creation of stockpiles in peacetime.

With this goal the FRG has created in Western Europe its

own bases, and also wishes to transform them in advance

into its rear area in case of war. In the conclusions on

the maneuvers it was also mentioned that the headquarters
involved in the exercises were cumbersome and insufficiently
mobile, that the means of automation, the television apparatus
and other technical means of control were not suitable for
field conditions. Obviously, the West German military will
adopt measures to eliminate this important, in their opinion,
shortcoming. : 2

The Bundeswehr leaders also note that the military
preparedness of the FRG is inadequate, that its military
potential is still low and that there has still not been
created in the FRG either the moral or the economic or
legal prerequisites which would permit the Bundeswehr to
"defend" itself, along with the troops of the other member
nations of NATO which are located on the territory of West
Germany. It is clear that what is meant is the activation

SaEED 4,3a)fA)

-~16-

1, 3fay(4)

of the military preparations of the West German revanchists,
the strengthening of the Bundeswehr and its transformation
into the basic striking force of NATO, which would furnish
them at any favorable moment with the possibility of realizing
their predatory plans which are directed against the Socialist
countries. These plans and actions of the West German
revanchists demand the most acute attention from our side.

The naval Exercise "SWORD THRUST-2" was conducted with
the goal of working out the support by carrier strike large
units of the operations of ground troops in the Central
European Theater. The NATO command obviously considers
that tactical aviation at the present time may sustain
heavy losses, as a result of which it is not in a position
to give effective support to the operations of ground troops.
Carrier aviation, on the other hand, can maintain its combat
effectiveness, and therefore it is advisable to switch to
it for the support of ground troops during military operations.

In the Bay of Biscay was deployed the large operational
strike unit which had accomplished the maneuver from the
Norwegian Sea. This large unit consisted of two strike
carriers, a heavy carrier for antisubmarine defense, two
cruisers armed with missiles, four submarines and more than
150 aircraft. During the course of the counterattack the
carrier large unit played out 155 nuclear strikes in the
Central European Theater.

* * *

In addition to those mentioned, a considerable number
of other exercises were conducted in the course of the
"FALLEX-60"" maneuvers,

On the Jutland Peninsula there took place a two-sided
troop exercise, 'SSTUBBORN DEFENSE". On the defending side
were two divisions (FRG and Denmark) and on the attacking
side a British division and parachute brigade. Simultaneously
with these, exercise "BONE DRY" was conducted.in the Baltic
Sea to work out the combat operations of the navy of the
FRG and Denmark for cooperation with ground troops in an
actual amphibious landing in the area of the straits of the

Baltic Sea.
ae *slaya)

<17=

1 3fayay

At the same time two exercises were conducted on the
territory of Norway and in the northeast section of the
Norwegian Sea ("COOL TIME" and "SWORD THRUST-2") with the
participation of Norwegian troops and a British carrier
strike large unit. In these exercises were worked out
antilanding defense and support of srOURC troops by a
carrier strike large unit.

Exercise "BLUE sein enicn was conducted in the
area of Iceland and the Faeroe and Shetland Islands, is
deserving of serious attention. Its main goal was to
work out antisubmarine defense. Involved in the exercise
were 17 submarines and 50 coastal-based antisubmarine
aircraft. These forces operated along an antisubmarine
line with a depth of.350 to 400 miles with the: mission
of preventing "Orange" submarines from breaking out
into the Atlantic Ocean. In the center of the line,
deployed in positions, were eight antisubmarine submarines.
For the aviation patrol zones were designated, in which
three to five aircraft operated continuously. Each aircraft
was in the air an average of 10 to 12 hours.

A considerable number of exercises were held to work
out the protection of naval lines of communication:
exercise "FIRST and SECOND WATCH" in the area of the
English Channel, the Central Atlantic and the Bay of
Biscay; "TIGER GRIS 1]: and 2" in the southern part of
the North Sea; "PROTECTION 1 and 2" in the Mediterranean;
"BALLAST" and "COFFERDAM" in the area of the Azores and
the Straitsof Gibraltar. In the first stage of these
exercises were worked out the dispersal of ships and
warships, and their evacuation together with the withdrawal
of a considerable number of ships to bases on the US coast.
‘In the second stage ‘problems were worked out of guaranteeing
naval lines of communication and of escorting convoys and
Single ships. Up to 40 convoys were actually. conducted,
each convoy consisting of two to four ships plus security
forces. Considerable naval and air forces were involved
in securing lines of communication. All these exercises
demonstrate that the NATO command attaches great significance
to the protection of its sea lines of communication,
especially in the Central and Eastern Atlantic and in the
area of ‘the: English Channel and the Straitsof Gibraltar.

F aes

1,.3{a)(4)

-18-

1.3fa)(a)

Simultaneously with the "FALLEX-60" maneuvers, and
against their operational-strategic background, the US
Air Force carried out two exercises for strategic aviation
and for the combined air defense command of the North
American continent under the provisional code names
"SEPTEMBER-1" and "GREAT EFFORTS".

In the first exercise, which was conducted in the
continental USA from 20 to 23 September, operations were
worked out for strategic aviation in the first air operation
of the initial period of a war, in cooperation with the
nuclear attack of the NATO armed forces. According to the
concept of the exercise, strikes were launched against
rear area objectives of our country.

The second exercise with the participation of this
type of aviation took place in the northern and Arctic
areas of the USA and Canada from 28 to 30 September, i.e.,
at the beginning of the counterattack in the Central European
and Southern European Theaters. As a result of the operation
the strategic aviation inflicted great damage on the "Orange"
forces, but exact data on this have not been brought out.
The directors of the maneuvers are in agreement that the
military command of the US did not have precise information
on the results of the strikes of strategic aviation.
Despite this it was acknowledged that it was necessary to
carry out a further operation involving the launching of
nuclear strikes against rear area "Orange" objectives by
the forces of strategic aviation.

* * *

A brief analysis of the "FALLEX-60" maneuvers pernits
us to draw the following basic conclusions.

The "FALLEX-60" maneuvers were a vast training measure
of the aggressive NATO bloc, in which were worked out
problems of the conduct of war by the bloc against the
USSR and other Socialist countries. Essentially all the
armed forces of the NATO bloc, all the organs of military
control, and a considerable number of civilian agencies
were brought to increased combat readiness for the organization

of the maneuvers.
Be 1.3fa)(4)

~19-

1.3(a)(4)

The maneuvers were conducted under a single strategic
concept, they embraced all the main theaters of military
operations, and envisaged employing the forces and means
at the disposal of the bloc with a strongly centralized
leadership. In the maneuvers as a whole were worked out
the basic problems of conducting military operations on
a strategic scale. Actually participating in them were
considerable forces of aviation, the navy, ground troops
and the forces and means of antiair defense, all of which
supported the working out of the methods of conducting
military operations and of the problems of cooperatinn
of the various arms of forces of the NATO member nations.
All this testifies to the fact that the NATO military
leadership is striving to find the most effective methods
for preparing their armed forces and organs of control and
for increasing their combat readiness in order to achieve
definite superiority of the NATO armed forces over the
armed forces of the Socialist nations. This must not be
underestimated.

The maneuvers testify above all to the fact that the
NATO command is ready to begin a war with the forces which
have already been formed in peacetime, in order in this way
to camouflage a sudden attack on the Soviet Union and the
other countries of the Socialist Camp. In addition, the
NATO leadership, as before, is relying on a powerful strike
with nuclear weapons in order to create superiority in
forces and means and to seize the strategic initiative
from the very beginning of military operations.

The maneuvers also demonstrated that the basic
strategic and operational-—-tactical tasks will be accomplished
by all the previously existing branches of the armed forces
and arms of troops. From this it follows that modern war
requires mass armies.

Despite the large scale of the maneuvers, they did
not introduce anything essentially new to the theory of
the military art of the imperialist powers. The maneuvers
were only a confirmation of earlier established views on
the conduct of war. Such an important problem as the
creation of superiority of forces is solved by an old method -
by increasing the number and power of fire strikes. The
fact that aviation constituted the main striking force in

IK 25 1, 3ia}(A)

~20—-

1.3(a)(4)

S(ay(4y

the maneuvers did not permit a full exposition as to how
they will solve the problem of cooperation between missile
units and aviation.

A typical feature of the maneuvers was an increase in
the tempo of the offensive, which can be explained by the
mass use of nuclear weapons. ~

For this reason the conduct of the so-called nuclear
offensive is deserving of very acute attention, as carried
out by the forces of strategic, tactical, and carrier
aviation and by missile units.

Despite the use by the directors of the maneuvers of
such terms as "counterblow", "defense", "counterattack",
etc., documents on the maneuvers show distinctly that
the military doctrine of the NATO bloc has an aggressive,
offensive character and that the bloc command are supporters
of the pre-emptive strike.

GeeSeE 1.3fa}(4)

-21-

1.3(2)(4)
