whey / ie Ae
ye SOS


FROJECT SUN STREAK


WARNING NOTICE: INTELLIGENCE SOURCES GND METHODS INVOLVED
‘


FROJECT NUMBER: a7& SESSION NUMBER: O1

DATE OF SESSIGNs: 26 Jan @S NATE GF REPORT: 26 Jan Gea
START s 1208 END s 1410

METHODOLOGY : Ailw AY VIEWER IDENTIFIER: O79


1. (S/NEYSK)- MISSION: Conduct a utility assessment to
determine the feasibility. reliability and applicability of AW in
the SUN STREGE program. The target personality was Terry Waite.
See attache L/S at Enclosure 1.

ce Se eee
2. <*S7NF7SD VIEWER TASKING: Reply to Essential Elements of
Intaormation (EEI) regarding target personality.
oi (S/NMF SSE) COMMENT S#4 Session was conducted under ideal


conditions in the CRY room. It became quite apparent that O79
was in fact utilizing a pen to “automatic write" in a form of
channeling. The source of the data activity was described and
identified as "George." There was some confusion during the
first few 10 of 12 minutes of the session. The last 30 to 40
minutes of the session were astoundingly accurate. Nated that
both the monitor or O79 were at liberty to call frequent breaks.
The specificity of the targeting appeared to facilitate the
session. Viewer O79 was encouraged mot to declare AOL, not to
question the data, nor interpret the data, but simply to receive
tee transmit the data. George indicated an ability to work in
present, past and future times and indicated a willingness to "do
search".

4. tS7NF7SES The personality was described as a "humanitarian"
who had ,actdmplished -sdmething™ on behalf of the "Americans." He
was involved in Special project involving freedom" he was a man
of high ideals. He had formulated: and was continuing to
formulate. plans despite his somewhat pRecarrous:situation. He
was currently ‘“hiddens' through no fault of this awn; he was
docateds.ineardry: and humid: climat@ where dark skin people lived.
Ha was in the .Middle East, and specifically in @Beirdat, Lebanon.
an. old+strea@t, an “alley"“where a purple cloth hung as a veil. A
cross bearing gold and white stones was also visible (ENCL2). He
Was being usedaas aypoliticalzlever. He will not break. There
Will be gtalk and evidence af negotiations in d@aysl2@6e. And,


barring the unforeseen, he will be cettrhéd2tasneutraiatencitony


|
}


SRI j


pate +


in August 19689 with two other hostages whose release he is
cirrently negotiating even while under captivity. Fersonalities
mane was spelled aut in responege to monitor ’s request Cin an
effart to determine whether or mot this could literally be
accomplished). see ENCL 2% The target personality was moved,
however, he was mot currently located in the "“sutskirts" as many
peaple seemed to believe. In an effort to specifically identify
the current lecation of the target personality, O79 was
instructed to place an "X" and told to indicate = kilometers
(south) of Beirut as the location. (See ENCL 4). See the
Washington Fost'’s article on the target personality.


Fern Gauvin


Target personality was Terry Waite
Source of data was "George."


HANDLE VIA SEEET CHANNELS ONLY


aes CRN
CLASSIFIED BY: DIA (DT)


DECLASSIFY: OADR


EZ tee alee — Ty,
call war OF A __

ohaw fo tet | .

vi I

peel 6 real ali <a wT Le


Baum a
ung od
AV2. ull ey Gi Oe Gf COE
Ce Fonnadd de:
gor 1p Crececel


Vile ee x
- ractadh Abe O


os


Oo Pltun ber
pret “Godt
rat ful [ eedele
Linby peor
bem tact


WY ry ~ ANtined ante cert p11 aelumn,


—=


ated foleyocech teak _ ~- co


: — (Lipide |
| Lptalir |
Qe ABVHAMMT aes
YAM Fiat |

My and ClembLeg
Bath Ahir “aan — :
Base foul |

—yupt bad |
Peedi tr be PET a baw


wen e § LLP
fe std wily lay vole 2


7 fur Ye. td. a - On
"Gaede alec 2Cfe — al


__ Shia Oo
“MN Eure bon Caw lx. teal)


‘ » ye


an up fake UWVer ILGStages


ran Ve toed Deal for German Captive, Militia Offic cial Says


, the custody of Iranian Revolution-
_ ary Guards to preyent Lebanese
” groups, families or interlocutors
from reaching agreements that are
not strictly beneficial to [ran, ac-
cording to Druze and Shiite Moslem
_aaffitia sources. °

%. “In the final week of December,
the sources said, Iran stepped in at
the last minute and thwarted


By Nora Boustany _

Special to The Washington Post +
Sena nnh a
EIRUT, Jan. 19—Church of:
land envoy Terry Waite, who
kidnaped one year ago, and oth-
estern hostages are now in the
ds of Iranian Revolutionary 7%,
rds based here, and the Tehran
ernment has banned further i in-,
rement by Lebanese groups in
negotiations for their release,
birding to a senior Shiite militia -


ial. “The envoy in

aite and some of the 23 other ~

gn hostages are believed to charg e of the

beeen seized by pro-Iranian

em fundamentalists here. But ‘negotiations left t fe or
Bonn and that was

the. end of it.”


sources said the captors were
ed three weeks ago after Teh-
ecided to halt: any more med-
in the hostage crisis by local
emen and armed groups, ac-
ig to the Moslem militia offi- rt 7
chances for a possible release of
official, usually well-in- West . German hostage
o its operatives in Beirut, oe Terry Anderson. -
that all future handling of Sf aa A deal had been set ta, free
re affairs would be carried out NGrdes i in exchange for TWA hijack-
n states—that is, between ‘ing suspect Mohammed Ali Ha-
nd the governments of the madei, a ransom of $3 million and
Yes. ‘ : proof to the captors that 17 Shiite
we the start of the year, most
captives have been held in
. pus a ud


~s


—a Shiite militia source :


Rudolf ©
fad on Tehran’s latest direc- .~Cordes’ and American journalist


activists held in Kuwait on bombing °
charges were still alive and in good |


health, according to the sources,
Anderson, the Beirut bureau chief
of The Associated Press, was re-
portedly next in line to be released,
the sources added,

On learning about the deal to free
Cordes, Iran contacted its men here
and said there would be no deal un-
less Bonn supplied it with material
for manufacturing chemical .weap-
ons, arms and other technology.


“The envoy in charge of the nego- . & =


tiations left for Bonn and that was
the end of it,”
said.

Cordes, 53, . a representative for
the Frankfurt-based Hoechst chem-
icals company, was abducted by
gunmen on the road to Beirut In-
ternational Airport on Jan, 17 last
year, a few days after arriving in
Lebanon. -


Three days later, Waite, 48, dis-
- appeared after leaving his Druze


bodyguards outside the offices of.a
Shiite Lebanese doctor before head-:
ing for a meeting with the captors
of two Americans, .
Druze chieftain Walid Jumblatt
said in an interview last weekend -


’ that he was still trying to find out


whether it was Possible, to Telease
Waite. : :
Since his kidnaping one year ago, -.
Waite has been accused by his pure
les ~\
Ne


the militia source


TERRY WAITE
... kidnaped a year ago


ported captors to have been woi
ing for the U.S. government, ¢
spite denials by Washington and |
Waite’s employer Archbishop
Canterbury Robert Runcie.

To those who remember him
the Riviera Hotel where he staye.
Waite was a strange mixture of


‘humanitarian and a risk-taker wh


seemed bound to get into trouble.

“He wanted to show off, takin
walks along the Corniche ... an
parading in convoys of cars bristlin;
with guns. He was really saying, ‘
am Terry Waite. If you want me
you know where I am, coming anc
. going,’ ” recalled the manager of <
seafront hotel.


_—_ _


2 LCL


ENCLOSURE tf TQ REFORT OF 979 RE 8728 DTD 28 JAN 88.


~--The Washington Fost article on Terry Waite dated 20 January
1966 was retrieved from the Utility Assessment dated 26 Jan 88.


~~-Attention was to the 4th para G was teld to read the article
and stopped at the appropriate para. Highlighting in yellaw was
used tao mark the para.


-~--Rudolt Cardes (man cited ion para) is with Terry Waite - He
receives us also. He will be released after the first part of
June and go home . He (Cordes will provide information that will
help the US in the negotiations.


~--In reply ta G’s query it as determined that Terry Anderson,
quieter than all af them (Waite or Cordes?) will be the last to
be released in August. He will tbe the last to be released (Terry
Waite is to be released in August).
