The Shah's Increasing Assurance
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028305, dated 2 April 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028305).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Oy
me, 7 CeiA)
\a

SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM

NATIONAL ESTIMATES

The Shah’s Increasing Assurance

Approval a Release Nar ae
Date

= ; Ne, 9-48

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGERCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

* ~

7 May 1968

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NC. 9-68

SUBJECT: The Shah's Increasing Assurance*®

SUMMARY

During the past decade the Shah has energed as a selfs
confident potentate, determined to assert his and Tran'a pre-
rogatives agninst all comers. In the economic field be will
continue to press the consortium of Western of1 companies
vigorously for vast amounts of revemue to fund Iran's economic
advance, but eventually mutual doterest in maintaining o11
production will probably lead beth parties to an acceptable
cuspromise. Abroad, his determination to extend bis fofluence
in the Persian Gulf as the British depart is likely to maintsia
continuing tension in bis relations with Scudi Arabia. As in the
past, the Shah will seek arms support from the US, and his
increasing feeling of independence will make for occusional
friction between the two countries, though the Shah will continue
to value his association with the US.

ae 7

Cay 3)

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

+ nat CMS ee ae come gee,

Pee ee

Ee

Sc ae Be re FR te

cMie aera MS
a eee

‘E ietecee

1. During the past decade the Shah bas dramatically

strengthened the position of the monarchy in Tran. Top governe
ment figures sho had, or who espired to, am independent power
base have been cut down. Parliasent, too, has been trensformed
from a body representing the interests of landlords to one whose
members mre nonentities owing thelr position exclusively to his
favor. At the same time, the Shah has undercut the already

fragmented opposition by carrying out econcemic and social reforns

-4t bas favored. Moreover, his economic and military desis with

the USSR bave won bim recognition at home as the foremost defender
of Iran's national interest and as the personification of Tranian

independence in the international sphere.

2. In scoring these achievements, the Shah has often acted
against US advice. As a result, be attributes his considerable
success largely to the correctoess of his policies and to hia own
skili in political maneuver, This belief has transformed the Shab
from 4 timorous, titular mooarch into a selfconfident potentate,
determined to assert his and Iran’s prerogatives against all comers.
This was symbolized by the elaborate coronation which the Shab

staged in October 1967.

3. Th Shah's design for Iran is based on economic rather

than political development. The original empnrasis placed oo

rural uplift by the so-called "White Revolution"# in 19€2 has

lately been supplanted by a fccus on industry as well as

dofrastructure projects »+ especially dams and transportation

facilities. The distribution of land called for in the Shah's

reform program has been essentially completed; he 4s now content °

to leave the more difficult task of dacreasing egricultural

productivity to the technicians who have come iocreasingly to

staff the important positions in the bureaucracy. The Shah sees

rapid industrialization as essential sot only to increase pros-

perity and national well-being, but also to provide en outlet for
the energies of educated Iranians whe might otherwise prove
troublesome for the regime. Over the long term this will probably
not provide a satisfactory substitute for greater political partici-
pation, but for some time to come the unrest of earlier days seems
under control.

3 fhe nace given to the Shah's six-point program of land reform,
profit sharing for workers, eradication of illiteracy, electoral
reform, natiocalization of forests, and the sale of government
enterprises. It was subsequently broadened to include the Health
Corps, the Develooment Corps, the village court system, nationsli~

zation cf water resources, regional development, end a program
to increase administrative efficiency in government.

~ 36

nai

fe adicaphed wags ek Spee nS eels Ring lala doe tas . - . ee te. oe. ea ee ee ag

h. Te carry out these economic projects the Stah has sought,

and is receiving, some help from foreign quarters for these pro=
jects. But as many of these endeavors will not yield early returns,
Iranian industry will require continuing large dnputs of foreign
capital for some time to come. Tran’s rapidly rising oil revenue

4s the mcst procising source for this capital, and the Shah is
determined that Iran get as much as possible. Indeed, the doubling
of ofl revenues in the past five years has been largely responsible
for reinvigorating the non-petroleum sectors of Iran's economy.

The Iranian government has pledged to devote about 80 percent of
its oll income to economic development. The Shah is now demanding
that the consortium of Western o11 companies increase their liftings
to guarantee Iran a Abed Theone of $5.9 billion ever the next

five years -- @ gun which would mean an average irerease in reveoue
of 15-20 percent a year, The companies have resisted his demands,
refusing to promise a total income of more than about $4.5 billion
over the five year pericd, After pressing the companies vigorously
to meet his terms, the Shah recently accepted procuction levels

for the year 1966 which would produce revenues of about $40 nillios

less than the $865 million he originally sought.

ee

me eee cee

5. Although the Shah bas backed down somewhet in his innediate
demands, the desue is far from settled. Negotiations are scheduled
to resume in October 1958 regarding production for 1369. At this -
time the gap between the Shah's desires and the companies’ offers
will be far greater than in the mast. The Shab’s prestige is
visibly engaged in this bargainicg process «« the announcement of
the 1968 settlement was couched in ambiguous terms to conceal the
Shah's retreat -- and he will no doubt press the companies even
more than in the past. The companies would prefer to expand pro-
duction of cheaper oi] in other countries and they too, are
reluctant to give in. But both parties find oi1 production in
Iran profitable and at bottom neither side wishes to precipitate
a break. Thus, after ong caravs out negotiations and growing
acrimony the parties are in the end likely to find an acceptable

compromise.

& The Shah's foreign policy is dased on assertion of Iranian
independence; he wants to appear less publicly lined up with the
West, although he has no interest ion abandoning bis basic Western
orientation. On the other band, he is no longer greatly worried
about the Soviet threat and he recognizes the political and economic

benefits of improving relations with the USSR. He has, therefore,

concluded economic deals with the Soviets, principelly an exchange

of over $1 billion of natural gas for a steel mill and other dtens,
He has even purchased military equipment, including some weapors
though not of advanced types, from the USSR under a $110 million
agreement and might buy more if be cannot get what he wants fron
the Weet on favorable terns. Nevertheless, dt will be difficult
for the USSR to translate this into political influence, aad the
Sheh is likely to react strongly if the Soviets appear to be
interfering in Iran's domestic affairs or otherwise threatening

his interests.

7. As his fear of the USSA bas receded, the Shah has come
increasingly to focus his concern on Seniened affairs. Since the
UK's announcement of ite dntention to leave the Persian Gulf by
1971, he has been particularly interested in that area. Ion keeping
with his nationalist pretensions, the Sbah is determined pot to
permit any cutside power to play an influential role in the Gulf
after the British leave, UAR withdrawal from Yemen and the
resounding Egyptian defeat in the June war with Tsrael have made
the Shah somewhat less fearful of Nasser's ability to foment
treubles in the Guif. Nonetheless, he still regards Arad nationelisn

as a threat to his position. He therefore feels iepelied to expand

eee aa

onmmminy

Pee ere a ee

his influence ever the ezerging states on the Arabian Peninsula,
gang .

and bis aspirations may have been stimulated ty bis confidence

that no country in the Persian Guif can rateh Iran's power.

8. The Shah's ambitions in the Guif are disturbing Fis
relations with Scudi Arabia end the smaller states of the area.
While the Shab probably bas no perious designs on the western
littoral of the Gulf, he is dnsistent on pressing maxicum ¢laizs
to undersea Oil deposits. He hed initgalled an agreement with
Saudi Arabia defining a median dine in the Gulf, but it there-
after developed that the area on the Seudd side has large oil
reserves. Rence be has recently repudiated the agreement, and
some of his Lieutenants +« though perbeps without his knowledge ae,
or consent *« went 60 far ws to seize an Aramco rig woich was
attempting to drill in tris disputed area. The Shah, however,
has stated that he will sot resort to such forceful tactics in

the future.

9. Nonetheless, he has created new controversy by raising
heretofore largely dormant claims to Behrein; he is e1so pressing
the British to cede the tiny islands of Tunb and Abu Musa at the
mouth of the Persian Gulf -- beld by the Trucial Shaikhdars of

Ras si-Khaima and Sharja. His demands for Behreirc are probably

- J»

ewe

advanced as a bargaining counter in his campaign to increase his
share of the Fersian Gulf seabed, but he may be more serious about
the other islands. Yet even though the parties recognize the
desirability of an early settlesent of the issues between then,
they are not likely even to begin serious negotiations for some
time. Both King Faisal of Saudi Arabia and the Shah are reluctant
to appear to be backing down by taking the first step toward
talks. In this situation, the Shah and Faisal will remaic at

loggerbeads and tension in the area is likely ta continue.

10. The Shah's military policy has also complicated bis
relations with the US. Iran has for the past geveral years been
pressing to purchase substantial quantities of modern weapons,
originally on the grounds that they were needed to protect against
Nasser; the Iranians now claim thet these arns are peguired to
{osure stability in the Gulf area. Indeed, it was US refusal
to extend credit for thie equipment in 1966 that provoked the Shah
to conclude a $110 million arms purchase egreement with the USSR.
The Shah is now demending from the US a commitment for $600 million
in military credit sales to Iran cver the next five years to buy
paval creft as well as advanced aircraft and ground force equipment.

He has threatened to turn to other foreign suppliers +~ facluding

« 8 »

BT NE TREE Tn ret pn meme ge Da mm mee a nmr meme pe ec emete mae  ne veep rete

a eeesemeesreerreeermmernaammmmmererremnercrercaermeammmee mama cra Te laa oe

ia ia

the USSR -= if the US 1s unwilling to accommodate his demands;

Tran has ample resources of foreign exchange to make gocd this
threat without any serious effect on its econumie development

pace.

ll. The Shak would probably be willing to accept « US
commitment for somewhat less than his total demands, as long as
ho major categories of equipment were excluded entirely from the
eerethenk. Qn the other hand, he would have little ecmpunctics
is seeking equipment fron European sources to make up any short-
fall ia US supply. He might even increase his purchases from
the USSR, though more likely of relatively unsophisticated arms
than of advanced weapons systems. in any ¢veot, the prebles of
arms will be a recurring sees The Shah's increasing feeling of
independence will make for occasional friction between the two
countries, though be will continue to value his association with
the US for a variety of reasons, including its use as an offset

to Soviet influence.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES:

(b\3)
