The Liberation Movements of Southern Africa
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011831, dated 5 October 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011831).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ta ae ae = = ad
paneer RR EM

3 NIE.-¥0-1-67 fey
24 November 1967, | _
7
nae Havel ‘
: NATIONAL INTELLIGE ENCE ESTIMATE sys :
NUMBER 70-1-67

7 LBJ LIBRARY _ Rants Sy
(Supersedes SNIE 71-64 Mandatory Review. 2

Supplements NIE 60/70-65) Case # NLJ_ 39-93! BE

. Pecument 4 —t.

”

a

| isch iain ilnenamied: cee |

: :
tee RO | Nie nn 4) ON TINE NA CRO ety eS Tn UR YY TEAL, YS
i : \
i i : !
: 1
: i H t

i 7 4.
: /
< 1
:
i
i
Se i
Suemited | ———— 2

oe
|
|
Southern Africa |

_ Concurred in by the ee a re oe
_UNITED” “STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD ne Re ge ce eee

As indicated. overlook .

24. Novembar1 1967.

aa satienlt

itd masitbcise

a anclanaiciaa cachiilde

soe ay tn ota hepa orm Met i ani nal
dN ES AOS

a aa

OTP nas oe i

. “ Woe i:

)
eos

5
Feantt > Sead
Feo i

aed

me

ee ere ae aE ee OS

oat ee

te ee,

~

aS : | | : j : ns pares Abbas 4 rf ‘ o ae : :
eA ILAD dante meee OD lA me the, BON RA ORLY, Hale aed ME Nl CA Rath hay CQsom CAMA comhes labs fe hog nes y QR cALNAII Oy akie eh SAA MAT Zan DORMS NAT 0d Aleks patie’
: a ae :

CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM ....... 2.20.00 cee beet tn tebe nee es 1

CONCLUSIONS 00. 00. oc cece ce nee eee 1

DISCUSSION sean fda coy Ase te USE AD CAC E: hl tahoe ial fies Lo Neat at farmed 3

I. INTRODUCTION —oo oe... ee Bh EO are eae Seek a Tas ee ame |

IL. THE WHITE REGIMES .<.....0.cccceccccccceeeceeveeeeeneeeueees 4

A. General... ee ae re ee ee rae ear ree 4

B. Angola and Mozambique’ tess Wideie ate th ahehalets 4 corae ut nape ane eran ate aaa 4

C. South Africa‘and South-West Africa Jose eaten ahi ok tol an ah bee ie ts 5

.D. Southern Rhodesia ......-- enter YE ated ceria ava 6
Ill. THE LIBERATION GROUPS 710.2220. cee ee eee y

IV. EXTERNAL AID 20000. e oe ec ene 9

A. General 0 ee eet ene nes 9

B. The Role of African States 0 TTT eee eee 9

Cc. Communist Support 2 er ree cepaap aac eeseeeresenseeerees 18

D. Role of the West =

V. PROSPECTS AND IMPLICATIONS

i mycin tegen eobik

THE LIBERATION MOVEMENTS ——

OF SOUTHERN AFRICA a

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the character and prospects of the movements, com- eh

monly called liberation movements, that seck to end white minority _
rule in Southern Africa, their relations with other African states and
with Communist countries, and the implications for the US.

CONCLUSIONS ———

A. The liberation novements which are attempting to depose the
white-regimes of Angola, Mozambique, Southern Rhodesia, South
Africa, and South-West Africa stand little chance of significant prog-..
ress through 1970, and probably for some considerable time there-

after.. Most of the liberation groups will probably continue to sufer

the disabilities, especially the lack of broad indigenous support, that

so far have limited their efforts. But even with greater success in
recruitment, none of the liberation groups is likely to expand its
insurgency_opcrations sufficiently to shake the determination of the =...
white regimes to resist all challenges to their domination of affairs.

B. The liberation cause has broad support among African states,
and many of these believe that the US ‘and the other great powers
should take action that would tenninate white rule in Souther Africa. oo
‘The continued frustration of the liberation movements, therefore, will —- --—-——
complicate US_ relations. with African states and also US. efforts
to gamer African support at the UN. -But US relations with the--~~---—
African states are influenced by a number of factors and the impact
of its positions with respect to Southern Africa will vary. The libera-
tion issue alone will have the greatest impact on US relations with
Tanzania and Zambia, states that border on the white dominated
areas, are engaged in operational support of liberation forces, and
fear retaliation by the white regimes.

gerne ansnetsen MMA AMARC REEN IT HEM at te

— _C.. The USSR, Communist China, and Cuba seek to expand their

influence in Africa by. providing limited, yet much-appreciated, mili-

____tary and finaricial assistance to the liberation groups. If the capacity srtibens
of these groups to use aid effectively were to grow, the Communist 2 cn cc

states would probably provide increased assistance, but. it is highly
unlikely that the USSR or China would engagé in direct military

_ intervention.

DISCUSSION

1. INTRODUCTION |
1, Despite the remarkable’ proliferation of independent black African states

_ over the past decade, most of Southern Africa still is ruted by white minority -

regimes. Angola and Mozambique, Overseas Provinces cf Portugual, are ruled
directly from Lisbon in all important matters. Angola has a population of over
five rnillion, with some 250,000 Europeans, Mozambique, over seven million, with
_ only 150,000 Europeans. Southern Rhodesia, a self-governing colony which de-
clared its independence of the UK in 1965, bas a white community. of 240,000 in

_a population of about 4.5 million. Some 3.5 million whites dominate. affairs in

the Republic of South Africa, though the population also includes 13 million
blacks and over two million Asians and racially mixed peoples. South-West
Africa (SWA), Tuled by South Africa since its was mandated by the League of
Nations in 1920, contains less than 100,000 whites and more than 500,000 blacks.

2. In each of the white-controlled areas, political activity by nonwhites is -

severely restricted. Asa result, organized groups of blacks and other ponwhites

are seeking through use of force to depose the white regimes and “liberate” their.

homelands, So far, however, these liberation movements have been’ relatively

ineffective. Liberation groups in Angola and Mozambique have sustained active. _

insurgencies since 1961 and 1964, respectively, but these have been contained by

Portuguese military forces largely within unimportant border areas. The would-

be liberators of Rhodesia and SWA have managed po more than sporadic and

ineffective terrorism within their homelands. In recent _years South Africa's. ros

liberation grovps, unsuccessful in occasional attempts to infiltrate terrorist bands _

into the Republic, have conducted only trifling clandestine political activities.
3. Thus, we are concerned in this estimate mainly with the implications for

the US of the frustration of Southern Africa’s liberation movements. Despite the

limited capabilities of presently active groups, the liberation cause is an important __

political issue with most of the black and Arab states of Africa. Indeed, it is the 7

one issue on which African states can generally agree and, therefore, is usually

the central theme at meetings of the Organization of African Unity” (QUA)F eS

"The goverments and political groups most vociferous in their support of the cause
are critical of the reluctance of the US to commit its influence and power to rid

their continent of white rulers. At the same time the white governments in South-_

em Africa are critical of the: generalized political support the US lends to the
liberation cause, whose leaders they condemn 8
Communist countries seek to take advantage of US embarrassment on this issue
and to expand their influence in Africa by providing limited, yet much-appreciated,
military and financial assistance to the liberation groups.

li. THE WHITE REGIMES
A. General

4. The white regimes of Southern Africa are determined to retain their domina-
tion of affairs and to resist, to destroy if possible, the liberation forces. Individ-
ually, they bring impressive resources to these: tasks: their superior security
forces and their ability——through intimidation, selective rewards, and manipula-
tion of tribal rivalries--to undenmine the appeal of the liberation movements.
- Some important differences in interests and policies stand ia the way of close
relations among the white regimes. —The Portuguese and, lo some extent, the
Rhodesians, are wary of the superior power of the South Africans in the area.
The South Africans and the Portuguese are critical of each other's racial practices
and cautious about identifying themselves too closely or openly with the -still
“illegal” Rhodesian regime. Yet, as the threat from the liberation movements has
persisted and as insurgent groups from more than one country have occasionally ,
acted in concert, the white regimes bave stepped up their cooperation in intelli-

ence matters and border patrols. Recently the South Africans indicated that
they would send military forces, if asked, to help defend their white neighbors
against black revolutionaries*

B. Angola’ and Mozambique

5. Angola and Mozambique have’ been Portuguese possessions for over 450
years; Lisbon considers them an integral part of Portugal and is determined not
to lose them. . Powerful political interests in the metropole profit considerably ”
from the Overseas Provinces, but the predominant motivations of the Salazar.
regime probably are political, religious," and = psychological. Prime~ Minister
Salazar and his staunch supporters in the military establishment, the oligarchy,
and the Church apparently believe that retention of the African empire is essential
for the preservation of Portuguese nationhood. Without it, they argue, the small -2.--:2-acse. ce
and otherwise insignificant Iberian state would lose its sense of national purpose.

‘They often express this purpose as a Missao Civilizadore—an obligationto pro

mote in Africa a Christian, anti-Communist, inuitiracial society.

6. The bulk of the Portuguese population is inaudible on Salazar’s African policy,
as on most political matters; yet the morale of the soldiers called upon to fight for
the preservation of the African empire is generally good. In the past, there have
been stirrings of separatism among the European communities of Angola and
Mozainbique, but these have been largely stilled by the advent of black rebellion.

and the consequent dependence on Portugal for military protection. Besides,
ubiquitous police controls repress antimetropole as well as anti-Sala::ar activities
among whites and nonwhites alike.—-

he South African Government reacted to the Avgust 1967 incursions across the Zarnbia-
Rhodesia border of combined groups of South African and Rhodesian guerrillas, nearly all of
whom were quickly killed or captured. South Africa dispatched to Rhodesia several police
helicopters and a force of about 150 men to help patrol the border.

4

7. Until the outbreak of the rebellion in Angola in 1961, Portugal had largely
_ neglected the development of Angola and Mozambique. Since then it has paid

considerably greater attention te the economic interests and general welfare of
the population, both white and black. Portuguese Jaw admits no discrimination
_on the basis of race; traditionally, Portuguese attitudes toward nonwhites have

been remarkably tolerant by the standards of the neighboring white-ruled coun-
tries. Educated blacks and mulattoes who support the political system can hold
prominent governmental positions and rise high socially. Yet the vast majority
of blacks in Portuguese Africa have little opportunity to obtain education or to
achieve economic and social advancement.

been expanding briskly in recent years, though with increasingly evident in-—~——_—~
Rationary strains.

C. South. Africa ond South-West Africa

10. South Africa’s society is based on the unqualified supremacy of its white-
community in all matters. The overwhelming concern of the whites and the
principal charge to their government is to protect this supremacy from any
challenge by the nonwhite majority. The policy of the ruling National Party
for preservation of the Republic's “way of life” is apartheid or separate develop-
ment, under which a great volume of restrictions and controls, the stern and the
petty, is systematically imposed on the nonwhites, The whites claim that any
significant concession to the other racial communities would inevitably lead to

=

the disintegration of the domestic peace and prosperity that benefit all races.
Thus, the great bulk of the white community supports apartheid, though some
would apply it more leniently for humanitarian or practical purposes.°

11. Most ‘nonwhites resign themselves to the government's repressive policies,
though resentment of white rule and of particular governmental policies prob-
ably is widespread, at least in urban areas. In-any case, there have been very
few manifestations of organized resistance to white rule within the Republic

in recent years. This is in good measufe testimony to the population’s respect
for South Africa’s large, well-equipped, and well-trained security forces. The

-29000-man National Police, including its effective Security Branch, is the first

line of defense for internal security. It is backed up by an army of about 15,000

and various trained reserves of over 100,000. Blacks make up approximately

one-half of the police force, but carry no frearms in the course of their duties.
12. SWA. SWA, in effect, is ruled as an integral part of South Africa. The

South Africans regard their control of the territory as vital to the Republic's’

security and have resisted all efforts of black African’ states, through the UN,
to force thera to relinquish control? By-and-large the white community of SWA
is content to let Pretoria run territorial affairs. Most of the blacks apparently
also are politically apathetic or cowed. Most of their chiefs cooperate with the

govenment, except in the case_o

white rule. The South-West Africa Peoples Organization (SWAPO) has_a oe tat dee 5

following of several thousand among the Ovambo, the largest tribe and consti-

tating about half the population. It is permitted to exist as a political party, .

but its operations have been severely curtailed, Many of its younger members
are critical of both the chiefs and the government.—A-sinall mincrity of SWAPO

adherents advocate the use of violence to achicve independence, During 1966-.....

1967, small bands of SWAPO guerrillas, after receiving military training in Tan-

zania, infiltrated SWA, received some support from the local population, and
mounted a short-lived guerrilla campaign. The South African Government has

responded by strengthening its police forces in SWA, introducing tougher security. .

laws, and arresting a large number of suspected dissidents, some 40 of whom
now are being tried for terrorism.——— .

D. Southern Rhodesia ~

13. The regime of Prime Minister Ian Smith declared Rhodesia’s independence

in November 1965 to forestall any UK attempt to undermine white domination -.

of affairs. The attitudes of the European community on” white supremacy have
been less doctrinaire and the controls exercised over the blacks less harsh than
in South Africa. ‘This partly reflects an accommodation to UK pressures during
the prerebellion period; thus, the small percentage of blacks who meet educa-

*For a more detailed discussion of racial policies in South Africa, see NIE 73-67, “South
Africa,” dated 4 May 1967, SECRET.

® See SNIE 70-2-66, “Probable Developments Following the UN General Assembly Resolution
to Terminate the South-West Africa Mandate,” dated L December 1966, SECRET.

tional and property qualifications can vote, and aboul a quarter of the seats in
Parliament are in effect allocated to the blacks, It also reflects the small size of
the white population and the impracticality of rigid segregation. Nonetheless,
even before the rebellion the Rhodesian regime had banned black nationalist
political parties and detained their leaders. The subsequent militancy of the

" prohibited organizations and the regime's concern about security in urban areas

have since led to tighter restrictive measures. There have been some recent
moves, moreover, to imitate South African racial laws.

14. Most of Rhodesia’s black population resides in rural areas, where it shows
little interest in national politics and continued respect for the authority of village

and tribal chiefs. The chiefs are semiofficial appointees cf the government and

mostly accept its policies. Indeed, the regime has been upgrading their prestige
and training, partly as a reward for loyalty and partly to enable them to withstand

> the competition from bberation leaders for the allegiance of the village popula-
tion. So far the rural blacks, whether from loyalty or fear, have mostly sided with -.——
the white regime, at least to the extent of informing security officials of the.

movements of guerrillas. 8 =

15. With the help of black informers, urban as well as rural, Rhodesia’s
security forces have proved highly effective in ferretting out dissidents and com-
bating guerrilla infiltrators. These forces include 6,000 police, an army of 3,000,
and trained reserves of 30,000.- Blacks make up most of the police force and
have served with distinction in occasional combat against liberatién groups.

So far, neither the security forces nor the white civilian population bas suf--
fered many casualties at the hands of insurgents The cost of preserving white -
supremacy must of course also include the economic losses brought about by -

the sanctions instituted against the regime, first by the UK~and then by. the _._..
UN. A sharp decline_of exports has somewhat depressed the general level of
economic activity. But the white community has suffered no privation and its ~~

political support for the Smith regime has, if anything, increased.

il. THE LIBERATION GROUPS

16. Because of the clandestine character of the liberation organizations it is
difGcult to estimate the size of their active membership, much less the extent of
their indigenous support. Yet none appears to have more than several thousand

active members or to enjoy broad popular support in_its homeland... The. __

Mozambique Liberation Front (FRELIMO) probably is the largest single
organization, with some 5,000 to 7,000 active members. The three feuding

Angolan groups together probably have about the same number. The Rhodesian |.

liberation groups probably count their active members only in the hundreds,
most of them outside the country. The South African groups probably also count
their active members in the hundreds, inchoding both potential insurger': and
scattered long-time political exiles. —The Rhodesian and South African organiza-
tions are outgrowths of formerly legal political parties. ‘They undoubtedly have
many supporters within the respective countries who are rigidly suppressed

by the security apparatus and play little or no active tole. (For brief descriptions
of the major liberation organizations of Southern Africa, sce Annex.)

7, Most liberation groups have considerable diffeulty in recruiting members

within their homelands. Many of the recruits are enticed abroad with promises
of education or employment, only reluctantly taking up the insurgency training
then thrust upon them. Others are picked up from destitute refugee com-
munities in nearby countries. ‘Tightened security measures make it difficult
for any recruits in Rhodesia, South Africa, and SWA to leave their countries.
The largest Mozambique and Angola groups have had success in recruiting from
certain bellicose border tribes, now, as ever, at odds with the government, The
backbone of FRELIMO’s fighting force comes from the Makonde tribesmen who
live on both sides of the Mozambique-Tanzania border. The Bakongo, who
straddle the Angola-Congo (Kinshasa) border, make up the great bulk of ‘the

active membership of the Kinshasa-based Angolan Revolutionary Government’... 7

in Exile (GRAF).
18. The limited appeal of thé Liberation groups is partly due to the personal

limitations of their current leaders. Experience in political organization is at

a premium: the nationalist movements are of relatively recent origin, except for

South Africa's African National Congress (ANC), which dates back some 50 years. --

In Rhcdesia and South Africa, the best-known leaders and many middle-ranking

cadres are in jail or under detention. — Presently active leaders tend to lack politi
cal stature among the blacks back home. Usually well-educated and cosmo-"
politan by local standards, they tend to be somewhat estranged from the predomi-

nantly parochial and unsophisticated blacks of Southern Africa.
19. Similarly, their political message is usually lost on the home population.

‘They present themselves and their organizations as the future guiding force --

of a nation occupying the territory now ruled by the white regime. Except
ia the case of the relatively more sophisticated South African blacks, the native
populations think mostly in terms of village and tribe. The concept of fighting
and dying for a state—whether called Rhodesia or Zimbabure—is largely foreign
to them. ‘Thus, the very neglect of education and rural development, which

is a major indictment made against the white regimes by liberation groups, is a ..
serious obstacle to the laters’ efforts to mobilize popular support for their cause.

20. What is more, the national outlook claimed by liberation leaders is usually
belied by the bitter factionalism among competing groups. Potential supporters

are often repelled by the intractability and nastiness of the competition. - Te is ~

particularly rank in Angola, where rival groups periodically engage each other in
armed combat. The differences between organizations secking to liberate the
sane country at times reftect age-old antagonisms between tribal groups and at
times cultural antagonicms (urban mulattoes or intellectuals versus tribally-
oriented blacks). But personal rivalries are usually central to the inability of
the would-be liberators to stick together or at least cooperate. Each leader sees
himself as the “Jomo Kenyatta” of his country and refuses to share power or
accept collective discipline.

8

_ 21, In sum, the often widespread negative feelings. of the blacks of Southern

Africa toward the white regimes are not autoyatically translated into positive

allegiance to the liberation cause, much Jess to a particular liberation group.
Especially to the blacks in the bush, the liberation movements are often unknown,
distant, or even alien, as in cases where they are identified with hostile tribes.

‘Popular antagonisms toward the liberation groups also arise from the violence. --.

they wreak in their areas of operation or the retaliation they evoke from govern-
ment security forces. - Finally, when not indifferent or hostile to the liberation

"groups, many blacks remain inactive simply because of their conviction that no

liberation group now has a real chance for success against the power of the
whites.

IV. EXTERNAL AID . os ose °

A. General ;

32. Because of the imposing strength of the white regimes and the difficulties
of the liberation moveinents in arousing indigenous support, they are vitally
dependent upon external assistance. The Gnancial and material aid they get
from independent African states, from Communist countries, and from various
Western sources sustains their political and diplomatic activities. The training

and staging facilities provided by the black states that border on the white ruled.

areas and the arms and advanced training provided by the Communists, and to
a lesser extent by North African states, are indispensable to their insurgency
efforts. ;

B. The Role of African States
23, Nearly all the African states, black and Arab, champion the liberation cause

at the UN, in such forums as the Afro-Asian Peoples Solidarity Organization, and -

sn bilateral relations with the US and other world powers. Nearly all give verbal
support to the OAU’s African Liberation Cominittee (ALC), which was formed
to provide political and financial backing for the insurgency efforts of the libera-
tion groups. The annual budget of the ALC has run to about $2 million in recent
years, assessed against 36 OAU thember states roughly on the basis of popula-

\
7k
H
H

tion. Total payments, however, have come to only one-half of annual assess- ae

ments and a number of Countries have made no payments. The delinquent mem-.

bers claim preoccupation with domestic problems or disgust with the factionalism
and slow progress of the liberation groups. Some of these countries contribute
directly to individual liberation groups, thereby encouraging the divisions they
lament.

24.

oo acrmmmacepunenagaraanngsgeees emer onigrara esran ta ONO LAE A was
sec “ran ANSE RT NCGS ch OAS R

ba Peer tnd

as
Prererinnr en

winner] i Tb batiatie
Lid *

|
|
Aroq ney PRAEAYAA, | |
|
|
|

yOINAY NUZHLNOS

om

os ay
a bp on y
nae.

a ¢
" : ” SiMe eee
} acai Sei
: a | ‘\, '
/ 1) gemene sey
i H onmneoM)

Ave state
con mayen!

(eng apenas”

|
|
|
vwonsy | ae
LSIM*HLNOS ‘ | !
| ee
. ii
; |
a |
|
a i
20 ae !

eat
MONE Hs
sui ae
squng- ies i
~ onendas !
ROT Oe:
ASfovivin

sqeney
i oS
[nied
onunlon vs; f
+,
feyoouna ve di
* we ’ I
pemepena  t :
ea at | 5 | aT) oS i
g) '

raseng-o8q0" Ae ;
Soni poWOD er oN, oe BY {
: —_ 4 .

iy oem”

vain
‘,

a[vorery —~——~,

wuevatw
apueey

“| ‘

| weaejeg 96 40a)

, i ‘ 8 we:
bors : oueke cies
_toarsee dt! } ‘4 ; smogenny j Rien esas
; : So eoeyeuny, wed nponrewwied
PADIUET PAD, ‘

awe *
i Sennen te eae f fast ie
ig " May i Al
at AeA
‘: \

Prireyers
a OONOD 4
i. BML sO i NOLONNY,
. H oinenese . : cosy
- A wOMIne
No: DILvEDONsO : oslo. \ awed snoy
‘ as a
\ i - * : een)
4 peenrer i ‘ one ne, as gwol OYt
; f
cond
of greene, fo gees
hi ie” 1
‘wrivnos | VAN / ‘ pag ee sis 1a1 De
oeaenen H yy rp awa ‘
4 { " ;
F

=o

ro
awh

95. Tanzania currently shoulders the major burden of support. President

Julius Nyerere is personally dedicated to the liberation cause; besides, his cour- -
try never has had significant economic ties with the white states of Southem ~~

Afvica. Dar es Salaam serves as headquarters of the ALC. FRELIMO and two
competing South African groups maintain their exile headquarters there and
nearly all groups have political representatives. Tanzania provides the most
extensive training facilitics for African insurgents, with Chinese as well as Tan-
zanian instructors. Itvalso_is the major entrepot for Communist arms for the
liberation groups and the embarkation point for trips to Coffiinunist countrics in

quest of subventions or paramilitary training. -Though Nyerere keeps an eye
on the movernent of weapons within Tanzania, he apparently has few qualms ..
about acting as host to the black rebels and their Chinese tutors. He is much -

more concerned with the threat of Portuguese retaliation against the staging bases

3G)
(4) (s)

of FRELIMO in southera Tanzania. So far the Portuguese have been remarke on

ably tolerant of Tanzania's activities in behalf of hostile’ inilitary forees- ~~~

21. Zainbia, which touches four of the five white-ruled areas, is potentially ;

the mest important border state for the military operations of the liberation
rnovernents, President Kenneth Kaunda is personally dedicated to the libera-
tion cause, but Zambia's acute econoinic dependence on Rhodesia and Portu-
guese Africa has inade him circumspect. He has lent support to competing
movements, including the tvo Rhodesian groups, which have headquarters in
Lusaka and the two groups operating against the eastern region of Angola. In

12

the past he has permitted intermittent border crossings by guerrilla groups,
but prohibited paramilitary training and the use of Zambia as a sanctuary for
staging hit-and-run raids, He did, however, permit the recent infiltrations into
Rhodesia by Rhodesian and South African guerrillas. This may indicate a will-
ingness to take greater risks on behalf of liberation efforts; it already has evoked

“threats of economic and military retaliation from Rhodesia and South Africa.

_ 28. Aside from the border countries, several other African states from time
to time have given direct support to the insurgency efforts of the liberation
forces. Ghana prior to the downfall of Nkrumah and Algeria before the over-
thraw of Ben Bella were inportant-centers for-guerrilla training and supplies

_of weapons. Early in 1967 Algeria showed an interest in resuming a major

role in the liberation cause; but so far there has been litle evidence of an in-
crease in activities. Egypt, Tunisia, and Morocco also provide arms and train-

* ing assistance, though on a minor scale. Guinea, which now devotes ‘its atten-

tion to the insurgency carnpaign against Portuguese Guinea, at one time succored
Angolan liberationists.,

C. Communist Support

29. The USSR, China, and Cuba are the major sources of military equipment
for the kberation movements. All three countries provide paramilitary train-
ing in their home counties, and the latter two also dispatch instructors, China
for the training facilities in Tanzania and Cuba for those in Congo (Brazzaville).
The East European Communist States contribute weapons and sponsor training,
mainly as an adjunct of Soviet assistance programs. Communist countries also

are an important source of financial assistance to the liberation cause and for-

rniscellaneous help, ‘such as medical services and academic scholarships. Finally,

the Communist countries champion the liberation cause in international forums,---—-————-— : -

though the Sovicts in particular have avoided commitments that would involve
them in direct military action. - = “

50. For the Communist countries, assistance to the liberation movements __

represents a low-cost, low-risk investment intended to undermine the Western

position in Africa and_ to bolster thcir_own. prospects for immediate and. long-.
term influence.—They are unencumbered by political pr economic tes with the —..
white-ruled states, so they suffer no losses -by antagonizing them. . Actual ex-_.. |

peaditures on behalf of the liberation movements are small. Yet, inexpensive
as they are, the aid programs gain the Communists a degree of acceptance among

liberation leaders and among African nationalists generally that tends to offset -

African criticism of heavyhanded Communist political ventures elsewhere on the

“Data on the amounts of Communist aid are sketchy. Military supplies are mostly surplus
stores of small arms, ammunition, and Beld equipment. These are often distributed indirectly
through the governments of Tanzania and Congo (Brazzaville). Financial help from all
Comuunist sources probably does not exceed $500,000 per year. The number of Southern
Africans received by the Communist countries for paramilitary training probably ranges from
20) to 300 per year.

13

cia

continent (e.g., in Ghana under Nkrumah ).— Some Africans charge, however, that
Communist assistance, particularly the competition for influence between the USSR
__ and China, exacerbates factionalist tendencies among the liberation groups.

31. USSR. The Soviet practice generally has been to cultivate ties with the

_.- ]iberation group they regard as most promising from each white-ruled country,

to back it exclusively, and to be fairly generous with offerings of military equip-
ment. Soviet-backed groups include FRELIMO, MPLA, ANC, SWAPO, and
the Zimbabwe African Peoples Union (ZAPU) of Rhodesia. | The MPLA con-
sistently espouses a pro-Communist line, while the ANC has close ties with the
outlawed South African Communist Party and FRELIMO has Communists among
its second-level leaders. Except for the MPLA, however, the groups have not
manifested a strong affinity for Communist ideas. They desperately need mili-
tary and financial assistance and the USSR has proved to be a reliable source,

32. China. The Chinese appear to follow a seatter-gun approach in extending

aid. They mostly avoid continuing obligations to a single group, apparently nine ta lat

preferring to review the results of each individual infusion on the military and |
litical activities of the recipient. At Gmes they have: assisted Soviet-backed
groups; at times, their rivals; at times, both simultancously. They apparently
hope that strenuous indoctrination of trainees in China will influence various
groups to adopt a pro-Chinese line, at once anti-Western and anti-Soviet. They

apparently attach a high priority to the funding and manning of training fa-

cilities in Tanzania, which principally benefit FRELIMO. Here, they seém
not to have overemphasized indoctrination, but seek to win the respect of,
‘Tanzanians and trainees through their professional competence. :

33. Cuba. ‘The Castro regime at present gives major aid to only one libera-
tion group in Southern Africa: the Soviet-backed MPLA. Perhaps in an attempt
to prove that Cuba is a worldwide leader of anti-imperialist revolutions, Castros

aid has been particularly bold. _ Cubans probably have participated in guerrilla ,

forays and Castro once offered 1,200 Cuban volunteers to any African_revolu-

tionary proup. There were no takers.

D. Role of the West

3A. With the exception of the MPLA, the kberation groups seek material
and political assistance from Western sources, in part to avoid too close an
identification with Communist patrons. Most African states urge the Western
governments to support the liberation movements.To the disappointincnt of
the Africans, material assistance from the West has been much less significant
than Communist aid. Public and private sources in the US, the UK, and other
Westera countries have provided funds, scholarships, and medical and welfare
aid for political exiles and refugees from white-ruled countries. But Western
sources have extended almost no military assistance.

35, Liberation groups and their African champions are also disgruntled over
the ineffectiveness of Western political and diplomatic action on behalf of

14

Hl
eres voghnerna is Mita DTS Ta . 7
re re east ta ed Ae i dan ies Somes Wd EEF

their cause. ‘They welcome US and other Western condemnations of minority
rule and racial discrimination in Southern Africa, but ‘they almost certainly
believe that these actions fall far short of what the West could do. UK pres-
sures against the Sinith regime in Rhodesia are considered inadequate and in-
sincere; and the US and the UK are rebuked as apostles of restraint at the UN
in such matters as bringing South Africa to heel on control of SWA. ° Both are
also denounced, often bitterly, for permitting indirect support of the South
African regime through private investments and trade. Finally, the US in
particular and NATO nations in general are indicted for their military aid to

Portugal, which, the Africans claim, helps the Portuguese to sustain their control
of Angola and Mozambique. .

¥. PROSPECTS AND IMPLICATIONS

36. We believe that the liberation movements stand little chance of significant
progress toward deposing any of the white regimes of Southern Africa through
1970, and probably for some considerable time thereafter. ‘The key to the matter,
in our view, is the will and ability of the white regimes to pay the military and
economic costs necessary to resist the insurgency efforts of the nonwhites. Most
of the liberation movements will probably continue to suffer for some time
the disabilities that so far have limited their efforts, particularly the inability

to attract broad indigenous support. But even with greater success in recruite:---

ment, and the higher level of external support which would probably follow

from that, no liberation group is likely to expand its operations sufficiently ©

to raise the costs of white resistance to an intolerable level.

37. Portuguese Africa. For at least the next several years, nothing short of
a civil war or social revolution ‘in Portugal would be likely to undermine the.

determination of Salazar (age 78) or any likely successor to retain possession _

of Angola and Mozambique. The success so far in containing the insurgencies, -

the improving economic prospects of the two Provinces, and the dire internal
troubles of such independent ‘black states as Congo (Kinshasa) and Nigeria -
appear to be reinforcing Portuguese convictions that their course in Africasis--- + oe

the best one for whites and nonwhites alike. —

38,-Rhodesia. We see no early prospect of liberation groups being able to
sustain insurgency operations within Rhodesia. Even if they were to,

the Rhodesian security forces would contain the guerrillas in sparsely populated —

border areas, much the way the Portuguese have done with FRELIMO.” In
a future political settlement with the UK, the Rhodesian whites might pledge

a gradual increase in the political role of blacks, Such an arrangement would _

probably not satisfy liberation leaders. In the absence of a settlement with -
the UK; however, the whites will probably complete their break by declaring
Rhodesia a Republic some time during the next year or two. Such a course.
would probably be accompanied by inore stringent restrictions against the black
population and might produce outbreaks of disorder in urban areas, The lib-
eration forces would probably be unable to exploit these and security forces
would alnost certainly maintain control.

15

we believe —-—_- ~~

eon all NS esti
BescitttbictAA tia anmaiRS toe se e'n eect seene snes pains TT

’

___tive chiefs and diminish the political appeal of SWAPO. Opposition to white

__regimes over the next several years. The South African Government, in the

39. South Africa and SWA.

. ~ lt Republic might also witness from time to time
incidents of racial violence; but liberation groups would probably not be in
a position to prolong them and security forces would probably restore order
swiftly.” The South African regime has annouriced plans to create Bantustans
or homelands in SWA for the Ovarnbos and other. tribes, with some degree of

internal self-rule. ‘This is partly intended to bolster the prestige of the conserva-

|

eo RUBE Aaah EET

rule, however, will probably continue, and the South Africans if necessary will
-employ stiffer security measures.

40, We expect still closer cooperation in security matters among the white

wake of its reaction to the ANC incursions into Rhodesia, will probably be re-
sponsive, at least for some time, to Khodesian or Portuguese requests for se-'
curity assistance, whether or not South African rebels are immediately involved,
Moreover, regularization, one way or another, of the status of the Rhodesian
regime would probably produce closer. political and economic ties between

Salisbury and Pretoria, while planned South African participation in develop-
ment projects in Angola and Mozambique will draw the Portuguese and South
Africans somewhat closer.

41. The liberation movements, despite these dismal prospects, will almost cer-

tainly persist in their efforts, and some of them will probably achieve significant...
increases in membership over time.~Next to the question of recruitment, the
actual level of insurgency operations will probably depend most heavily on the
extent of support by the border states.” We see very little prospect of sus-
‘tained operational assistance from Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, and Malawi.
Even if a radical regime were to replace one of the present cautious ones and
were to initiate such help, pressures from the white ‘states sould force it to _
change its course or would soon undermine its tenure.— Tanzania and Congo
(Brazzaville) will almost certainly remain steadfast in their-operational backing
of FRELIMO and MPLA. The course of Congo (Kinshasa) is likely to fluctuate
with the strength and inclination of the regime in power and the degree of
pressure exerted by the Portuguese. Whatever pressures the Portuguese may
exert, however, Kinshasa will probably be unable to exercise consistent control
over Angolan rebels operating from its territory.

42. Zambia is likely to temper activism with prudence. Kaunda and his
associates, frustrated at Rhodesia’s continued survival and at their own vul-
nerability to pressure from the white regimes, are likely intermittently to give
freer rein to Zambia-based insurgents. But because Zambia's acute economic ~-------
dependence on Rhodesia and Portuguese Africa will continue for some years,
the Kaunda government will- probably. retrench its support to the insurgents
whenever economic retaliation appears imminent,

16

43, The liberation cause will continue to be an issue with broad appeal in
Africa. The OAU summit meeting in Kinshasa in September 1967, impressed
by the ANC-ZAPU incursions into Rhodesia, pledged to contribute $2 million
ta the ALC for still another year. Many states, as in the past, will probably
be fess enthusiastic about supporting gucrrilla operations by the time payments
‘fall due, however. Diplomatic support-of the cause will, in contrast, remain
_ steadfast. Indeed, the continued failure of the insurgency efforts of the libera-
tion groups and the almost certain unwillingness and inability of independent
African states to commit their own military forces to the struggle will probably
produce intensified efforts to induce the great powers to exert effective pressure
on the white regimes. In all likelihood, the Africans will not be satisfied by
the response.

44. The continued frustration of the liberation movements wilf complicate
YS bilateral relations with African states and embarrass our efforts to garner
African support at the UN. But US relations with the African states sare in-
fluenced by a pumber, of factors and the impact of its positions with respect
to Southem Africa will -vary.— With some _countries, particularly the border
states of Tanzania and Zambia, the bberation question already is central in their
foreign policy and will probably grow in importance. Some other countries

(eg., Ethiopia, Ghana) put such value on their close relations with the US 2c

that they usually v i} tolerate our stand on the liberation question whenever it-
varies with their own. Meanwhile, so many formidable problems stand in the
way of harmonious US zelations with such radical governments as Congo (Brazza-
ville) and the UAR that. positions taken by the US regarding Southern Africa
are not likely to make much difference.

45. Though virtually all African governments repeatedly proclaim their sup-

port for the liberation struggle, a good number, including most of the former _~

French colonies, become actively involved in the issue only when under prés--
sure from their more committed African colleagues. ‘These governments are

preoccupied ‘with enormous problems of national development and face no ~~

urgent domestic demand for action on liberation. Many of them look to the

US as a potential if not actual source of economic aid and development capital

and as an important trading partner.” -Théy would wish to continue beneficial
ties even when they disagreed with particular US policies on Southern Africa.

If, however, Africans generally were to-come to believe that the US was in-

different to the liberation cause, the bberation issue would become much more

important; it could become of primary importance in US-African relations if -
the Africans caine to believe that the US was actually seeking to perpetuate

white minority rule. :

46. The Communist states will continue to exploit their opportunities in the ~
liberation issue. ‘The USSR and Cuba would probably grant increased assistance
to any of the groups they support which deioastrates a capacity to absorb
more aid. We think it highly unlikely, however, that the Soviets would answer
a call for direct military intervention against a white regime, either unilaterally

V7

4
i

4

$

i

i

i

x

j
aay
i

t

pa jn ite

fons nen tent he ae apme i ba

_ OF through a UN-sponsored joint venture. The Chinese probably view their
growing economic assistance to Tanzania and Zambia and their support for

_ liberation groups as related opportunitics. Although the Chinese would prob-

“ably be willing to increase the scope of their aid to these groups, they would
be highly unlikely to engage in direct military intervention against a white regime.

ANNEX 000

LIBERATION.GROUPS OF SOUTHERN AFRICA

ANGOLA
- 1, GRAE. The Angolan Revolutionary Government in Exile, thé largest of
the Angolan movements, is an outgrowth of political groups formed in the mid-
1950's and partly responsible for the start of the insurgency in 1961. GBAE is...
dominated by Holden Robeito and draws the. great bulk of its active members
from his fellow Bakongo tribesmen. Most of its external support is from mod-

erate African states, Congo (Kinshasa) serves as political headquarters and——__.....

as the training and staging base for GRAE insurgents. Guerrilla groups have

been persistently active in northwest Angola since 1961. Over the past year en

GRAE has also engaged in sporadic guerrilla ‘incursions along the central and
eastern sectors of the Congo-Angola border. Sotaes a
2. MPLA. The svialler Popular Movement for the: Liberation of Angola was

organized in the mid-1950's by urban blacks and mulattoes and has taken part,

in the insurgency since 1961. ~ It is led by Agostinho Neto and based in Congo
(Brazzaville), where it gets training from Cuban instructors. It espouses a

pro-Communist line and draws most of its financial and military assistance from —-----—-— oahn dee

the USSR. Its guerrilla activities in northwest Angola and the Cabinda enclave
are insubstantial. In 1966 it began to operate from Zambia against eastern -
Angola with somewhat greater effect... —-

3. UNITA. ‘The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola was
formed in 1966 by Jonas Savimbi, a defector from GRAE. It has a small core
of trained guerrillas and has gained the support, through tribal affinity and

inticidation, of a number of villages in eastern Angola. Zambia ‘recently forced —. ———--...-

Savimbi to move his headquarters from Lusaka to Tanzania. This, together
with a persistent shortage of weapons, will probably Limit UNITA’s effectiveness
for some time. UNITA has received minor Chinese military and financial aid.

MOZAMBIQUE-———— >

1. FRELIMO. The Mozambique Liberation Front springs from . dissident
groups organized in the early 1960's and began its insurgency in 1964. It is
led by Eduardo Mondlane. Most of its 5,000 to 7,000 active members are from
the Makonde tribe of northern Mozambique, the area of its guerrilla operations.

19

seasencimmneineep evasion SSE

Madeike es

FRELIMO has headquarters in Tanzania, the staging base for its guerrilla in-

cursions. It receives most of its external financial aid from African sources.

_The USSR and China both provide military assistance. FRELIMO guerrilla
operations have grown increasingly proficient, but the Portuguese have nonethe-
less contained them mostly within border areas near. Tanzania.

2, COREMO. The Mozambique Revolutionary Committee split off from
FRELIMO in 1964.-- Zambia-based, it sporadically ventures into western Mozam-
_ bique for political activity and occasionally for guerrilla raids. Led by Paulo

Gumane, it has at the most 100 to 200 members and receives a sporadic flow
_ of sinall-scale assistance from China.

RHODESIA

1. ZAPU. The Zimbabwe African Peoples Union, successor to earlier nation-
alist parties, was formed in 1961 and banned in 1962... Its best known leaders,

including Joshua Nkomo, and many members are under detention. It probably ~~
has 500 or so active members, mostly in exile and led by James Chikerema. . .
Political headquarters are in Zambia, which perinits border crossings by guerrillas, —......

but not the use of its territory as a sanctuary or staging base. Most military
training takes place in Tanzania. Most. of its financial support comes from
African states: the bulk of its military equipment, from the USSR. Nearly all

the insurgents who pass into Rhodesia are killed, captured, or desert the cause.” -

The ZAPU organization within Rhodesia has been crippled by infiltrations and
arrests by security forces. - —--- ee ee ae

2. ZANU. The Zimbabwe African National Union was formed in 1963, with
the defection of a group of urban intellectuals from ZAPU... ZANU was banned
in 1964 and its leaders, including Ndabaninge Sithole, arrested. It now is led

by Herbert Chitepo and probably is smaller than ZAPU, with which it competes ~ >>

bitterly, It too is based in Zambia and receives the bulk of its military training

in Tanzania. China has supplied small amounts of military and financial aid. ~~

Similar to ZAPU, ZANU’s efforts at. terrorism ‘and ‘political activity within
Rhodesia have been ineffective. ;

SOUTH_AFRICA

1, ANC. The African National Congress was organized in 1912 and banned
in 1960. Many experienced leaders and members are under detention. Oliver
Tambo now is its President. The ANC is closely associated with the banned
South African Communist Party. Most of its financial aid is from the Com-
rounist Party of the UK and from the USSR; the latter probably provides the
bulk of its military equipment. ‘The ANC has headquarters in Tanzania. Io

20

addition to several hundred political exiles scattered throughout the world, it
probably has a hundred or so trained guerrillas, Occasional attempts to in-
filtrate South Africa have been unsuccessful. Its political organization within
the Republic is weak and infiltrated by government agents.

- 2. PAC. The Pan-African Congress split off froin the ANC in 1959, because
of dissatisfaction with the latter’s multiracial character and the extent of Com-
“+ raunist influence. It was banned in 1960, with many leaders and members
placed under detention. The PAC is wracked by factionalism and probably
has no more than 100 or so active members, nearly all in exile. Political head.

quarters are in Tanzania. ~ China has provided limited financial and military aid.

SOUTH-WEST AFRICA -+__

ry

1, SWAPO. The South-West Africa Peoples Organization, formed in 1959,”

_ operates as a legal party, with perhaps several thousand active members, mostly
from the Ovambo, the largest tribe. A minority of SWAPO members, perhaps

200 pr so, advocate use of Violefice:” Led by Sam Nujoma, these have head-

quarters in Tanzania and receive financial help from a variety of African sources.

The USSR provides both monetary and military aid. During 1966-1967, SWAPO

guerrilla bands infiltrated SWA, received some local support, and conducted a_.

short-lived guerrilla campaign. This Icd to a stern crackdown by the South
African Government, and no new incidents have been reported over the past
several months.

2. SWANU, The South-West Africa National Union is one of several in--22= . <==
substantial liberation groups formed by dissident Herero tribesmen. _ It has_ ___

headquarters in Tanzania but only a minuscule membership.

21

patsspee sees

a Mtg we

pte

ete men WT eas ot FRI NS o Ee Aloe pee MB ate ae RS
