CIA Comments on Proposed Handling of the Recommendations of the Report to the P
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098319, dated 5 January 1957.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098319).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee

q)

=

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

JAN 25 1957

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
SUBJECT : CIA Comments on Proposed Handling of the Recommendations
of the Report to the President by the President's Board

of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
‘dated December 20, 1956

Herewith are the CIA comments, a as above, as requested

in your memorandum of January 17, 1957.

%

APPROVED POR RELEASE pwn’ | o
JUN 17 1997 ie

Tyg

~ 1067

me VLIS-2 Doed P [5 EF/3

us

/

ropatber | JAN 25, 1957

. CIA COMMENTS ON
PROPOSED HANDLING OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT BY THE PRESIDENT'S BOARD
OF CONSULTANTS ON FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
dated December 20, 1956

We do not believe that drastic changes in the structure of our national
intelligence organizetion are required to make progress toward some of
the objectives we outline below. We do suggest that the Director of
Central Intelligence be encouraged to exercise a more comprehensive and
positive coordinating responsibility and we feel that he can do this
within the intent of existing laws. If directed and supported by you in
discharging this responsibility, the Director of Central Intelligence can
accomplish much in the direction of integration, reduction of duplication,
and coordination within the national intelligence effort without change
in present statute or organization.

Suggested handling: Approve, and refer to the Director or Central
Intelligence for action.

CIA Comment: Concur.

To insure the proper functioning of the Intelligence Community and to
guarantee proper coordination with the military in times of war, we
suggest that a realistic appraisal of the Community's organization and
responsibilities be undertaken at once. This should be undertaken
directly by the Director of Central Intelligence, and he should report
his appraisal and recommendations to the Board of Consultants on Foreign
Intelligence Activities.

Suggested handling: Approve, end refer to the Director of Central
Intelligence for action.

CIA Comment: In concurring it is our understanding that the entire
paregraph relates to the functioning of the intelligence
community in times of war. In preparing the above-mentioned
report the Director of Central Intelligence would as a
matter of course consult with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and

the heads of the service intelligence egencies.

TOM RET MR NLOS5-2 Dor Dd
p 27

Tonge

We urge that action be expedited to bring the National Intelligence
War Plans to the highest feasible state of readiness and that a
realistic war-gaming of them begin as soon as practicable.

Suggested handling: Approve, and refer to the Intelligence Advisory
pene ~ .~ 2 Tee eam a pasa aaa ere
Committee for action.

CIA Comment: It is our understanding that the term ‘National Intelligence
War Plans" refers to “planning for intelligence activities in time {
of war't and we suggest this change be made.

We also suggest that the proposed handling be changed to:
"Approve, and refer to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director
of Central Intelligence for action."

This revised suggested handling is praoosed since we believe
that it is the responsibility of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
Director of Central Intelligence to plan for intelligence activities
in time of war; this planning may differ depending upon whether
these activities are carried out in or outside of theaters in which
Americen Forces are engeged in active combat operations. For
example, we consider that:

a) over-all intelligence planning should be conducted /
by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation

with the Joint Chiefs of Staff;

b) intelligence requirements for support to Military

War Planners by CIA should be developed by the Joint Chiefs

of Staff in consultation with the Director of Central

Intelligence ;

c) planning for those intelligence activities to be
conducted by Military elements should be the function of

the Joint Chiefs of Staff;

ees

fe adial MR WL 95-2 Doe 2
p: 30F7

s*

oe,

a) planning for those intelligence activities conducted
py Central Intelligence Agency elements, whether or not in or
through theaters of war, should be the function of the Director

of Central Intelligence and coordinated with the Joint Chiefs of

Staff as appropriate.
e) war-gaming of activities planned under both b) and c)
above should be conducted under the direction of the Joint Chiefs

of Staff in consultation with the Director of Central Intelligence.

With regard to the integration of the Intelligence Community, we are
convinced that a strong centralized direction, under which the resources
of the various elements would de brought closer together, would do much
to strengthen our national intelligence effort and to contain its cost.
We therefore recommend that action be taken toward this end, both
through the National Security Council and the Director of Central
Intelligence.

Suggested handling: Approve, and refer to the Director of Central
Intelligence for action together with 1 above.

CIA Comment: Concur.

With regard to clandestine operations, we urge that present practices

be regularized to insure that in all appropriate instances these
projects (1) receive the benefit of proper joint staffing and formalized
approval, and (2) that both the Stete and Defense Departments be kept
abreast of the develorments of these projects on @ need-to-know basis
and, or course, under tightly guarded security procedures.

Suggested handling: Refer to the representatives designated under
NSC 5412/2 for study, consulting with their principals, and
report thereon to the President.

CIA Comment: Concur.

-~3-

XY
TOgMPRRET me wt oS Es

8-a.

TAP RET

We feel that a definite need exists for the coordination of the
tunattributed" programs of the United States Information Agency and

of the Central Intelligence Agency, particularly in the field of
propeganda, and we urge that action toward this end be initiated at
once. It is our opinion that such action could well begin with 4
review of the actual practices which have grown up under the "Principles
to Assure Coordination of Gray Activities" enumerated by the Operations
Coordinating Board on 24 October 1953.

Suggested handling: Refer to the Director, United States Information
Agency, and the Director of Central Intelligence for study and
report thereon to the National Security Council.

CIA Comment: Concur.

To give proper high-level direction to Communications Intelligence
Activities and to insure that their tremendous capabilities can be
exploited to the fullest, we believe that they should have the direct
management attention of a single Assistant Secretary of Defense. We
therefore suggest that one be designated for that purpose. *

Suggested handling: Refer to the Secretary of Defense as Executive
Agent and the Director of Central Intelligence as Chairman, USCIB,
under NSCID No. 9, for study and report thereon to the President.

CIA Comment: Concur.

We suggest that you lend your prestige to the recruitment of personnel
Co +tjy ME ss progras, at your request,
might possibly be managed by the Science Advisory Committee of the
Office of Defense Mobilization; or by the Weapons System Evaluation

Group of the Department of Defense.

Suggested handling: Refer to the Director of Central Intelligence as
Chairman, USCIB, to prepare, for consideration by the
(Secretaries of State and Defense) in consulta-
tion with the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization, and the
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommendations to the President
as to the best channel and method for recruiting such personnel.

CIA Comment: As we understand it, there are two points to this

recommendation; first, a successful mobilization of the best

available talent to attack the problem of ee
Ts 2: second, to use this talent to search out the

most promising lines of research and development. In view of the

-k- :
WLd5-2 VooY
TORT me p. Sof 7

1.5(eHG) -
3.4(b)(1)@)
(FeCkeT)

1.5(¢)(g)
3.4(b)(1)@)

SECLAT )

1.5¢c)(
ane)

(secee7)

<

f° ae | or TOp@OCRET

a) fact that the Department of Defense is Executive Agent of the
Government for. the production of COMINT information (NSCID No. 9),

and that the National Security Agency with the approval of USCIB

: has been developing a program ror eae with th , iC 3,4(b}(1) ()
WH cron: referred to in recommendation 8-a. above, we suggest Getderi)

-

that the handling be as follows: "Refer to the Secretary of Defense ;
in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Chairman of USCIB,
the Director of the National Security Agency and the Director,
Office of Defense Mobilization for report promptly to the President.
This report should deal with the two recommendations required;
namely, (1) who should be recruited and how; and (2) what body in
the executive branch should supervise the development of the

most promising lines of research and development."

8-b. We strongly support efforts now undertaken by the Department of Defense

to develop

Suggested hendling: Approve, and refer to the Secretary of Defense j
for action.

CIA Comment: We concur, but suggest the substitution of the word

"material" for “information".

9. We recommend that the Netional Security Council review their Intelli-
gence Directives and substitute a more coherent, consolidated Directive
or set of Directives for the conduct of our intelligence activities
under today's conditions.

Suggested handling: Approve, and refer to the Intelligence Advisory
Comittee for review of all NSCID's and for eerly submission to
the National Security Council (through the NSC Planning Board )
of recommended revisions.

eee
NL
MR VL95-2 Doe
Tog@heT p-6 yi? =

10.

(

ce TOE SAURET |

CIA Comment: We concur in the reference to the Intelligence Advisory
Committee for review of all NSCID's, and recommend that the revised
Directives be submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence to /

the National Security Council.

To relieve the Director of Central Intelligence of the many management
responsibilities he is presently called upon to discharge as Head of
the Central Intelligence Agency, we suggest that he be provided with
a Chief of Staff or Executive Director who would act as his "Executive
Vice President". This assistance would thereby enable him to direct
his efforts more toward the integration, reduction of duplication,

and coordination that is necessary within the national intelligence
effort.

Suggested handling: Refer to the Director of Central Intelligence for
recommendation to the President as to the best method of
accomplishing the purpose of this recommendation.

CIA Comment: Concur.

eae mR WL 75-2 Doc2d

TOR QOPRET pred
