The Situation in Hong Kong
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096493, dated 1 May 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096493).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DIRE€TORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence Memorandum

The Situation in Hong Kong

SPR.

11 July 196
No. 1366/61

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
23 DEC 1996

nd Use Only
sem Abroad/Controlle LSsem

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
1l July 1967

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The Situation in Hong Kong

Summary

The border clash on 8 July during which five
policemen were killed in an exchange of small arms
fire with Communist militia makes it clear that the
Chinese authorities intend to keep the Hong Kong is-
sue hot. -Peking's official treatment of the in-
cident thus far, however, does not indicate that the
Chinese Communists are aiming for a showdown with
the British at this time. There will probably be
more trouble during the weeks ahead. Riots and vio-~
lent demonstrations inside the Colony appear almost
certain and there may be additional border incidents.
Given the state of confusion within the Chinese Com-~
munist leadership and the pressures generated in the
Capital, at the provincial level, and within the Com-
munist. apparatus in Hong Kong by the latest phase of
the "cultural revolution," these could get out of
hand and escalate: into a direct confrontation over
the status of the Colony. The pattern of events dur-
ing the past several months suggests, however, that
Peking is operating on a longer range plan calculated
to erode the position of the Hong Kong authorities
and thus prepare the ground for an effort by the lo-
cal Communist apparatus to assume de facto control
over Hong Kong in a year or so-~on the pattern of
the Macao takeover last winter. The resolute stand
taken thus far by the British, the demonstrated ef-
fectiveness of control measures adopted by the Hong

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence
and coordinated with the Office of Economic Research.

m Abroad/Controlled Dj
“No Foreign i Ba nd Use Only

No For ssem/Backgr

flesem Abrosd -Controlle

Kong authorities, and the lack of "revolutionary"
enthusiasm shown by the general population in the
Colony, seem unlikely to encourage Peking to move
more quickly. The Chinese Communists can be ex-
pected to continue--and perhaps to increase--their
support of local opposition in Hong Kong but prob-
ably will refrain from actions involving the risk
of war, or even moves which would disrupt the Colony
to such an extent that Peking was denied the vital
foreign exchange earned there--approximately one
third of China's total earnings in 1966.

aoe

I i m Abroad/Controlled Di
tas No-Foreign Ba Use Only

issem Abroad/Controlle

Background

l. The present troubles in Hong Kong can be
traced back to a shift in Communist tactics with re-
spect to the Colony which apparently was adopted
around the beginning of this year. Prior to that
time the Communist apparatus in Hong Kong had been
relatively circumspect. Instructions issued in Jan-
uary 1967 by a senior official who had returned
from a visit to China the preceding month changed
this line. He ordered increased exploitation of
industrial disputes in order to indoctrinate the
workers with "Maoist thought” and stated specifically
that the objective of the new program was to further
the “anti-British struggle."

2. There was an increase in industrial unrest
during the late winter and early spring, but the
British authorities sought to avoid trouble by stand-
ing clear of the disputes and leaving them to be
settled by labor-management bargaining. On 6 May,
however, violence broke out during a factory strike
which required police intervention. The Communist
press-~first in Hong Kong and then on the mainland--
reacted with charges that the Hong Kong Government
had committed “atrocities" and demanded that those
responsible be punished.

3. The initial propaganda attack was followed
by three days of Communist-inspired rioting which
began on ll May. On 15 May Peking took formal cog-
nizance of the situation by delivering a Foreign
Ministry statement to the British chargé demanding
that workers arrested in Hong Kong be released, that
those responsible for the arrests be punished, that
apologies and compensation be offered, and that a
guarantee be provided against any similar incident
in the future. A campaign of harassment against Brit-
ish diplomatic personnel in China began at this time.
Massive demonstrations were staged outside the Brit-
ish Embassy. The British Consulate in Shanghai was
forced to close and the officers there were roughly
handled by Red Guard hoodlums.

=

m-Abroad/Controlled Dis
--No Foreign se Only

The Initiative for the Pisorders

4. It is still not clear whether the strike
violence on 6 May and the ensuing riots in the Colony
were the result of local Communist initiative or were
specifically ordered by Peking. The nine-day delay
between the incident on 6 May and the Foreign Ministry
statement on 15 May suggests, however, that the cam-
paign originated in Hong Kong. The leaders of the
local apparatus almost certainly felt under consid-
erable pressure to demonstrate their militancy--in
view of the current demands of the "cultural revolu-
tion"~~and may have decided that the time was ripe
to launch a major campaign based on what appear to
have been very general instructions to take a harder
line in exploiting labor unrest.

5. It 1s possible that the local leaders over-
estimated their own capabilities, underestimated the
ability of the British to resist pressure, and pre-
sented an optimistic picture to Peking which secured
official endorsement and direct involvement of the
Chinese Communist regime in support of their plans.
Foreign Ministry officials in the capital had been
under heavy extremist pressure for months and might
therefore have been inclined to put “politics in
command" over their normal caution.

The British Reaction and its Effects

6. Undoubtedly encouraged py the Foreign Min-
istry statement, the Hong Kong apparatus launched a
series of "Red Guard” type demonstrations and en-
couraged strikes designed to cripple public services
and promote mass disorder. The Hong Kong Government
was Operating on the assumption that Peking did not
untend to seize the Colony and that in this situa-
tion 1t had much to gain and little to lose by re-
fusing to give an inch. London refused to reply to
the Chinese Foreign Ministry demands and issued a
statement supporting the Hong Kong authorities. The
Hong Kong police stood firm and generally were able
to maintain order while employing a minimum of force.

<li =.

7. Failure of the efforts of local Communists
to intimidate the British began to sap their morale
and a number of them expressed disappointment over
the support they were receiving from Peking. | ;

on 23 May a number of senior officials 1.5(c)(d)

in the Hong Kong apparatus revealed growing dis- 3.4(b)(1)(6)
couragement. They attributed the resolute stand
taken by the British to a "reasonable" judgment that
China did not wish to take over Hong Kong at that
time. They were reported to believe that Peking
did not entirely agree with efforts by the local ap-
paratus to "escalate" the confrontation and pri-
vately admitted that the British were following a
clever policy in suppressing the demonstrations with-
out creating a host of martyrs--in contrast to the
mistakes made by the Portuguese in Macao.

8. By the end of May the Colony had returned
to relative calm despite sporadic: harassment strikes
inspired by the Communists and financed in part by
Peking through front organizations. Communist of-
ficials in Hong Kong began at this point to sav that
the struggle against the British could take as long
as two years. This situation continued throughout
most of June. A “general strike" was called on 24 June

4.5(c)(d)
~ 3,4(b)(1)(6)

the effort had been a failure.
the call for a general strike
had been "wishful thinking” because "the masses were
difficult to mobilize."

Peking's Actions

9. Communist China made a number of gestures
in support of the Hong Kong Communists at this time,
‘but they were little more than token encouragement.
On 25 June, the day following the abortive general
strike, Peking halted deliveries of water to Hong
Kong. This was clearly intended to harass the Brit-
ish and to remind them of their dependence on main-
land water supplies. The Chinese took this step
only after they had delivered all the water they had
contracted to supply under the existing agreement,
however, and at a time of year when the water situation

ee

No Dissgn_Abroad/Contzol led Dissem
nee “ “No Foreign sagu/Ragkasanee Te Only

em/Backgr se Only

No For
4 ssem Abroad/Controlled Dl

aL

in the Colony 1s normally not critical. Peking is
not obligated to sell more water to Hong Kong until
October and has ignored a British request--prob-
ably designed to probe Chinese intentions--for addi-
tional supplies at this time.

10. On 26 June the British chargé was summoned
to the Foreign Ministry and given a note protesting
alleged overflights of Chinese territory and charg-
ing the British with “bloody persecution" in sup-
pressing the Hong Kong general strike. The Chinese note
once again called for immediate fulfillment of the
demands made on 15 May but contained no time limit
for compliance. The chargé reported that his meet-
ing with the Foreign Ministry official was conducted
in "very low key," and commented that the note ap-
peared mainly designed to divert attention from the
failure of the general strike.

ll. The Hong Kong Communists called a four-
day "food strike" on 29 June and Peking cooperated
by banning shipment of meat and produce to the Colony
from the mainland. The strike proved to be inef-
fective--85 percent of the vendors were back in: busi-
ness by the fourth day--and the ban on food shipments
was ended when the strike collapsed on 3 July. Con-
tinuation of the ban for a long period would have
worked a hardship on the predominately Chinese pop-
ulation of the Colony and Peking was apparently un-
willing to do this--or to lose the foreign exchange
earnings involved--once the ineffectiveness of the
effort by the local organization had been demonstrated.

Current Chinese Attitude

12. The Chinese Communists probably believe
that they have committed themselves too far to per-
mit a complete disengagement from the Hong Kong is~
sue and Peking probably believes it necessary to
provide sufficient political and financial support
to maintain pressure and agitation at roughly the
present level. tt seems likely, however, that Chinese
Communist actions will in the main be determined by
the effectiveness of the Hong Kong apparatus in secur=
ing support from the local population. An editorial

=Ge

: Abroad/Controlled Di
No Foreign Use Only

in People's Daily on 5 July emphasized the role of
the local Communist organization in continuing the
strugaqle. The editorial asserted that the "worker's
strike" is the principal weapon in the battle
against the British at present and declared that the
Hong Kong workers, the “main force," must do a good -
job in uniting the population behind them.

Recent Incidents

13. If the clash on 8 July at the border vil-
lage of Sha Tau Kok in the Hong Kong New Territories
was ordered by Peking, it should probably be inter-
preted in this context~-as a move to keep the pres-
sure on and to encourage the local Communist organ-
ization. The village straddles the frontier--
which runs along its main street--and provides an
excellent arena for hit-and~run raids in a war of
nerves. On 8 July a mob of demonstrators, some of
them armed, came over from Communist territory.
Police attempting to eject them were fired upon.
Five officers were killed and more than eleven were
wounded in the unequal exchange which ensued--police
revolvers end carbines against infantry weapons in
the hands of Communist milita.

14. The incident was almost certainly premedi-
tated and the fact that five Chinese army officers
were ooserved inspecting the area following a smaller
demonstration which took place two days earlier sug-
gests, that the Communists planned for a fire-fight.
During the five hours while the clash was in progress,
a Chinese army battalion was-moved u lecemeal to

the frontier.

4.5(c)(d)
3,4(b)(1)(6)

- Information which has subse-
quently become available raises the possibility that
the Sna Tau Kok fire-fight was planned and executed
by local hot-heads or perhaps by a provincial faction
with an ax to grind. Peking may have learned of the
clash only after the fact. Senior Communist officials

a

Abroad/Controlle

No Foreign ound Use Only

Use Only

issem Abroad/Controlled

in Hong Kong were apparently taken by surprise, and
it seems likely that they would have been forewarned
if the fighting had been part of acentrally controlled
campaign.

15. The British chargé delivered a protest to
the Foreign Ministry on 9 July and got the impression
during his meeting with Vice Minister Lo Keui-po that
the Chinese had been caught off base by the incident.
Lo appeared embarrassed when the chargé quoted accounts
-from the Communist press in Hong Kong admitting that
Chinese militia had crossed the border and fired on
Hong Kong police. The chargé reports that Lo was ill
at ease throughout the interview and he believes the
Chinese fully realized the seriousness of the incident
and were on the defensive.

16. In any event Peking's official treatment of
the clash does not indicate an intention to build on
the incident. The Foreign Ministry note delivered to
the British chargé on 9 July blamed the Hong Kong
authorities and called on the British to apologize,
to punish those responsible, to pay compensation, and
to guarantee that no similar incidents would occur
in the future. The note was not so strongly worded
as some earlier Chinese statements on Hong Kong, con-
tained no threat of reprisal, and did not set a dead-
line for compliance with Peking’s demands.

17. On 9 July Communist zealots in Hong Kong
provoked a riot in which one policeman and a number of
demonstrators were killed. More of the same is prob-
ably in prospect. Communist-controlled schools in the
Colony are reported to be planning to keep students on
hand during the summer vacation to take part in anti-
government activity. It seems unlikely, however, that
Peking intends at this time to go much beyond support
of this kind of activity, possibly accompanied by
recurrent harassment along the frontier. Escalation
of Chinese military threats to Hong Kong would involve
the risk of war, which could develop into a conflict
with the US. Use of economic sanctions at Peking’s
disposal--cutting off water supplies and stopping food
shipments--would inflict further damage on the Commu-
nist position with the Hong Kong population and could
result in the loss of vital foreign exchange earned
through trade with the Colony.

~8-

io) road/Controlled pj
-No Foreign D1 Ba Use Only

China's Financial Interests

18. Hong Kong is Communist China's largest
Single export market. It is also China's most im-
portant single source of foreign exchange. Last

year the Chinese Communists earned over $550 million
in Hong Kong trade, approximately one third of their
total earnings of foreign exchange. Chinese exchange
earnings from Hong Kong have increased rapidly, al-
most doubling in the last five years and are still
growing. Almost all of this would be lost if Peking
took over the Colony, and a significant proportion
would go by the board if the Chinese Communists took
action short of seizure, which in effect would put
Hong Kong out of business. Some direct sales to the
Colony would continue but there would be a marked
decline in foreign exchange earnings which would be

a serious blow to Peking. The Chinese are obliged

to buy some kinds of specialized scientific and
technical-equipment abroad as well as ordinary ma-
chinery and chemical fertilizer. A major item of
expenditure for the last six years has been for the
purchase of grain to meet the requirements of China's
expanding population. Peking spent $375 million in
foreign exchange during 1966 to buy grain.

-9-

: Abroad/Controlled Dj
_ No Foreign m/Bac Use Only
