Basic DeletedD) Document #1
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135825, dated 3 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135825).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

3B

10 February 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR: C/P

SUBJECT : Basic({_ J Document #1

I. As a result of two months organization, planning, and
assessment, certain solid patterns for future (_ ‘Jaction have
been formulated. As a measure for solidifying the vast, muitiheaded
planning and support movements to be completed within the next two
months it is felt necessary to set up this basic _]document,
major changes to which will be recorded as subsequent basic documents.

TI. OPeRaTIONAL PLANNING
A, General

1. The basic key to all operational planning is the
realization that the strength of our movement is going to
be from within the target country rather than being in the
nature of an "invasion" from without. Certain shock troops
will be utilized; however, mainly as a psychological factor,
consolidation center, and aid to logistical support.

2. The reasoning behind the tactical planning is the
realization that ADAM is the key area of resisStance_or
support to our movement. Comparatively trained, well-
equipped, well organized troops and Guardia Civil are
centered here, in addition to its geographical, tovographical,
and psychological position.

3. There are nine key points of resistance with which
we must cope: Adam, Bond, Ceasar, Doc, Eddie, Frank, Goss,
Hank, Ike. Their significance and strength and capabilities
of opposition will be brought out in discussion on each
incividauel target.

he C is vorking towards self-assurance of positive
control of each of the key ereas of resistance prior to tne
overt move nereinafter:referred:.to as D-day.

5. Fositive control as mentioned above wili be accomplished
by one of or a combinatior of the following methods:

a. Seizure by an inner organization, organized by
a local commander from his own personnel plus defections
gained through Psychological Warfare persuasion.

b. Seizure by shock troops launched from staging
areas outside the target country with definite support
missions being performed by a similar inner organization
as mentioned in 5.a. abow.

c. An inner organization capable of neutralizing
and nullifying the positive reaction of a key point of
resistance until success at other key areas is attained
and consolidated; then inner support missions to the aid
of the consolidated far ces, .

dg. Blocking strong resistance points from’ the entire
action by organizing partisan groups in strategic areas
and by strategic placement of specially trained sab-teams.

6. No overt move will be made until KUBARK self-assurance
of capability of control of ADAM by one of the first three
methods is attained.

7. Defected army personnel capable of influencing units
will be the main source of Psychological Warfare for defections
within the key areas of resistance to produce organized assets
for [ activities.

8. Defected and influenced and sympathetic civilian
organizations wil. be utilized in support funetions.

9. Ail planning will be based on the aim to allow
defection, allow capitulation and sympathetic action before
and during activities.

10. Preparations will slant towaras the capability to
imvlement the three plans:

a. Plan ABLii: Preparation for and seizure of control
of target country.

b. Plan BAKKER: Consolidation and prevention of
counter-movement.

ce. Plan CHARLIE: Contingency plans for seizure
of control to include alternate and emergency actions
at each key area,

B. Organization for Plan ABLE, GENERAL: With full cognizance
of the present vague knowledge by all concerned of the exact status
of our real or imagined assets, the following cautious inner
organization is to occur at each key point:

1. Military:

a. CALLIGERIS is to confer with{ land Staff
to determine each local garrison military figure considered
most leyal, most uncontaminated by past experiences, etc.
This man hereinafter designated Area Leader will be cleared
by KUBARK facilities and his name placed on a watch-list
of C/S WSBURNT for continual observation.

b. CALLIGERIS will confer with his staff to produce
for investigation a proven local citizen (hereinafter
designated Contact M) nearby each garrison who is to
provide safehouse and contact with the selected mklitary
figure. NOTE: Submission of the identities above
personages is to occur prior to 1 March. ‘

c. From the staging area for the particular key
area (see Para , Preparation) a training graduate
hereinafter designated Organizer, will be launched black
to contact the Contact M. (This Organizer will have
received clearance along with other trainees and will be
established on the appropriate watch list.)

d. From the safety of Contact M facilities, the
Organizer will inform the Area Leader:

(1) The movement is continuing, but with a
cautious realization that large portions of
former assets have been blown or disaffected.or
contaminated.

(2) He is to study his garrison situation and
recruit:

(a) One man as his executive who will
be responsible for the mechanics of inner
organization, leaving the Area Leader comparatively
inactive from an opposition-eye standpoint.

(b) One man as a cutout-contact to the
incoming resident radio operator (See para
Commo ) .

{c) One man as a cut-out courier to the
Contact M for the garrison.

(3) He is to instruct the Executive (and Later
direct the organizational operations of the xec)
he is to investigate cautiously and exemine and
submit to him for approval for recruitment:

-~3-

(a) One man who is in the best position
to organize within the commo system an organi-
zation capable of controlling or negating
commo on Signal.

(b) One man who is in pest position to
organize within the garrisons air facilities
an organization capable of negating the air
arm through defection of pilots and/or mechanics,
destruction of fuel and planes, assassination of
pilots, etc.

(c) One man who is in position to and
capable of organizing for special missions to
4nclude destruction of critical supplies and
transportation facilities, crippling of weapons
and aumo and armored facilities, raider groups
within the garrison, etc.

e. The appropriate clandestine-techniques instructions
will be passed by the Organizer to the frea Leader for
passing to each recruited person.

f. The Organizer will withdraw to the staging-area
headquarters once instructions have been passed to the
Area Leader. From that point the Organizer should be the
staff head to CALLIGERIS for the inner organization prior
to D-day. He should utilize a recruited courier wia
Contact M and set up alternate and emergency commo to
the Area Leader which does not require utilization of
Contact M. NOTE: Area Leader and groups will be
identified by the crpto denoting that target.

2, Partisan organization among civilian pooulace

surrounding each garrison:

Be Organization mechanics of approach will be
similar to the organization within the garrison discussed
above. The initial contact by Organizer within the
garrison vicinity, hereinafter called Contact CG, will
thereafter provide the cutout between the key area
civilian, hereinafter designated Partisan Leader, and
the staging area courier to staging area headquarters.

b. The Partisan leader will be instructed to
recruit an Executive whose function would be similar
to the Area Leader's Exec. The Partisan Leader's Exec
would examine, recruit, and instruct heads for each of
the following compar tmented partisan groups:

(1) Yommo

(2) Of

(3) Reception Party for incoming Materiel Kits

(1,) Betion leader, to head demo and raider
teams, later to be assigned srea@ Leader support
missions by CALLIGERIS yia Partisan Leader.

diosle bes

NOTE: Partisan Leaders will be identified by
the crypto denoting the target and the letter P.

3. Special Partisan groups strategically organized:
In certain areas already spotted and others which will develop
along with the situation, there will be a need for partisan
organization with harassment, retardation,and diversionary
~ @uties. These will be designated hereinafter by cryptos
key town with the area to be organized followed by the

letter P.

TRAINING

A. There are two training sites at present in KHFLUSH.

i.[ }:

a. The training site SARANAC (field crypto EL ANGEL)
js located approximately [L "], KMFLUSH.
Tt as on an isolated farm owned by[ ]-

b. At present twenty-seven men are in the process
of completing a sabotage course designed to produce ten
sab instructors, seventeen couriers, staging area personnel,
transport-couriers for runring arms, etc. This class is
known as "A" cless. These men are being exposed to some
clandestine—technique subjects such as: Resistance to
Interrogation (2 hrs.), Right Movement (10 brg.),
Clandestine Comm (6 hbrs.). Also included are classroom
and line firing range work on the following: 7.62 Soviet
Rifle, Qum Luger vistok, 7.62 Degtyarev LMG, 9mm SMG,
German concussion grenade, Canadian frag grenade. Class
and range work on the following rounds out the course:

1) Crimping and capping
2) Handling and placing charges
3) Electric and non-electric detonation
4) Arson
5) Field expedients

6) Planning charges
7) Planning operations
8) Use improvised shaped charge
9) Use napalm blocks as incendiaries.

Wood, concrete, and rail work are being stressed. Covering

a sab target with fire is being stressed in the planving
course.

ce, 1) On graduation (approximately 5 March) the
ten top class members are to be utilized at an
isolated area within SARANAC to train twenty other
recruits row being gathered (as of this date, six
of the new class has been recruited). This class of
twenty will be known as nc" class and will each be
assigned a specific mission and will recruit a team
to accomplish the mission. It is expected these
teams will be launched just prior to D-day in order
to be in position at their assigned targets on call.
The team will be launched from the steging area
assigned to the target.

2) The remaining seventeen will be assigned
missions of support as needed by( sland
CALLIGERIS to implement plans,

d. 1) On completion "A" class aporoximately

5 March, "B" class commences. "B" class is for the
purpose of training thirty leaders and specialists
and CALLIGERIS is assembling his top caliber
personnel including his staff and shock troop
leaders or execs. or & ie

2) Graduates are to ve assessed by Chief of
Personnel, Camp Commander, and ( 7
and CALLIGERIS will determine assigimenus uu. vompletion
of assessment.

3) Assignment will be to the following jobs:

a) 4 staff men - to return to CALLIGERIS
to provide [ =] guidance
b) 2 assassination specialists - to
retrain and replan the launching of present
"K" team personnel as well as instruction of
"K" team personnel now located within WSBURNT.
c) 8 shock troop leaders and execs - 6-to
be returned and assigned leadership to Bond
Frank, and Hank; 2 to be launched just prior
to D-day to Goss to provide direction to
garrison and defections gained there.
d) 16 organizers - to be launched from
Staging sites to the targets and areas of

orger.ization for instructional and coordination
functions. “2

4) The course to be followed is basically
C 1, with stress on Partisan-type highly mobile
light traveling well-equipped small, compact units
employing irregular warfare tactics. Stress in
tactics is on right work. However, certain
clandestine techniques, agent handling, employment
of tools of resistance, etc. have been included.

2) Principles of Resistance (2 hrs)

b) Nature of Vlandestine Activities (2 hrs)
c) Clendestine orgenization (2 hrs)

d) Clandestine comm (6 hrs)

e) Safe sites (1 hr)

f) Personal contacts (2 hrs)

g) Resistance to Interrcgation (2 hrs)

h) Selection of members (2 hrs)

i) Investigative techniques (2 hrs)

j) Use of drops and cutouts (2 hrs)

k) Cover concept (2 hrs)

1) Recruiting (2 hrs)

m) Testing (2 hrs)

n) Caching (4 hrs)

o) Employment Political Warfare (2 hrs)

p) Nature of Active Opposition (2 hrs)

q) Organizational Plarring (2 hrs)

r) Employment Pscyhological Warfare (2 hrs)
s) Defection (2 hrs)

t) Principles Partisan Warfare (2 hrs)

u) Weapons (including range) (68 hrs)

vy). Map Reading (28 hrs)

w) Cover and Concealment (4 hrs)

x) Individual Movement (8 hrs) .

y) Sanitation and First Aid (4 hrs)

z) Observation and Reporting (4 hrs)
aa) Drop “one Selection and Hawking (10 hrs)
bb) Survival Practices (4 hrs) ,
ec) Assassination (8 hrs)
dd) Sabotage (mostly theoretical piannigg) (16:
ee) Hand to Hand Combat (daily)

ff) Sentry Eliminetion (4 hrs)
#2) Probs Leadership and Command (4 hrs)
bh) Partisan Tactics (4 hrs)
ji) Terrain Use (4 hrs)

jj) Partisans on the Move and Bivouvac (8 hrs)
kk) Night Control (10 hrs)
11) Unit Fire techniques (2 hrs)
mm) tra and Inter Unit Commo (2 hrs)
nn) Intelligence Gathering and Evaluation (2 hr
oo) Ambush (20 hrs)
pp) Raid (30 hrs) —

qq) Night Practice (96 hrs) ~~

TOTAL HOURS 387

Field work will be emphasized over class room work.
Total length class seven weeks.

e, On completion of "B" class, six jumomasters wiil
be trained. It is estimated if necessary { ‘\has the
necessary background to provide sufficient training.
However, if possible, the present airborne specialist,

c¢ will be placed at SARANAC disposal
for this treining period. On graduation these men would
stand by at an intermediate arva in SARANAC until
transported to FJHOPLFUL under complete darkness to reside
in complete isolation under PBPRIME supervision in the
poondocks near Field.

f. Tnree and one half tons of sterile training
equipment are on hand at SARANAC, having arrived by
black flight.

2. KUCLUB

a. Prior to the recent disclosures in WSBURNT of
KMFLUSH participation, the KUCLUB training and equipment
was situated at a point [ _] EMFLUSH.
At the time of writing, tne gear is unaer the supervision
KMFLUSH [ J KUCLUB Activities in [

uJ. No new site has been assigned_and the situation
is in a state of flux awaitingL “]'s reaction to
recent developments. At present the biographical data
on four prospective trainees has been submitted as
against the committed number of twenty.

b. When the above situation is settled it is
expected the class will graduate tvelve RRO's, two
FCP radios, and six TRO's, Length of training is
expected to be approximately two and a half months,
indicating a graduation date of a croximately l May
at present situation reading.

VI. logistics

A. The totel list of operational equipment being gathered
at ROBALO is as follows:
1. Soviet rifles 2,960
2. Submachine guns, Madsen 1,480
© -3. Pistols 545
4. Frag. grenades é 6,000
5. Conc, grenades 6,000
6. 7.62 ammunition 1,000}000 rds.
7. Qmm ammunition 540,000 rds.
8. O12 : 530 pts.
9, Piano wire, high C 1,590 ft.
10. Rags 530
ll. LIMGts, w/earry case & 3 drums ea, 200
12, Napalm mix 1006 lbs.
13. ‘THT 4,500 lbs.
14. Non-electric caps 3,720"
15. Pocket knives 650
16, Pliers, small 650
17. Shaped charges 1,100
18. Friction tape 1,050 ris.
19. Time fuse 4,000 ft.
20, Matches, waterproofed 650 bxs.
21. Blasting machines 10
22. Electric caps 400
23. Firing wire 3,000 ft.
24. RS-1 (agent nen aneasees) 25
25. Ration kits, emergency 1,650

(continued next page)

26. Medical kits 1,650

27. GI watches 25
28. GI compasses 25
29. Compasses (indigenous) 225
30. Binoculars 30 pr.
31. Canteens 2,000

32. Solothern, 20m, anti-tank
33. Mortar tubes

= 34. 20mm armr-piercing, anti-tank 3
35. 20um, high explosive, anti-tank 3
36. Mortar ammnition 1

10

50
OOO rds.
000 rds,

,»000 rds.
37. 22 cal. rifles w/silencers 21
38. 22 cal. ammo, hollow point long
rifle 1,000
39. Cargo chutes and harnesses and
bundling equipment 50
40. Burial packing equipment (gunny .
sack, tar, ropes, etc.) 250 lbs.

41. Instruction sheets
a. Utility Napalm and Shaped
charges 550
b. Crimping and fusing instructionsl1000
c. Utility medical and ration kits 1650

B. Headquarters légistical support is now gathering the
materiel for approx 26 February Black Flight. The total tonnage
expected is 30. Logistical Support PBSUCCESS is responsible for
coordination of loading and security matters concerning gathering
of materiel, Security is furnishing a man for guidance. AMD
has been briefed on the tonnage and cubage and deadlines and
destination and nature of security invokved. AMD-Logistical
Support coordination now being worked out between the two
groups involved. aa

C. On 15 February , { ‘and an experienced caching
man on TDY from Training Section will arrive at ROBALO for
survey of storage and packing facilities, and detailed briefing
of 1 /. JROBALO to augment pouched pouched general briefing.

On 20 February an experienced Airborne packer will arrive

ROBALO for surveying facilities on TDY 90 days. Between

20 February and 25 February approximately 10 cleared labor

personnel will arrive ROBALO for 90 days TDY. lis: to

set up packing procedure, orally and with written instructions

brief the packing team and working party, and generally assure

the working efficiency of the packing group prior to his

departure. On departure ROBALO,C ‘Jwill designate a

chief of the packing party to be responsible to { ,
“j, ROBALO throughout packing operations.

essing and lodging facilities will be made available by

{. JROBALO with understanding if necessary the packing team

will subsist in tents and on field rations drawn from the Army.

a

ene!

D. ‘The packing will be executed in three categories. In
each category an inspection table will be set up at ROBALO for
inspection of each item and preparation for combat-readiness
(light coat of oil on all weapons) prior to packaging. In the
first category all bundles have been reduced to 65 lbs. or less
so that where necessary single persons could transport the
bundles. The category is comprised of those items for pre-d—day
transport to jmner WSBURNT forces. The packing will be made
waterproof through sterile gunny sack and tar covering with
oiled paper inner covering. The packs will include carrying
straps for transportability. £11 kits should conform, when
possible, to the 11" x li" x 30" dimensions desirablé:, The
packs, and weights, and mumbers to be packed are as follows:

1. A Kit (Partisan) (Each kit in 2 units,

Wt. 40# ea.) TOTAL Reqd
a. 2 rifles
b. 2 SMG, 2 MAGS/SMG ?

c. Frag grenades 8

ad. Concussion grenades 8
e. 600 7.62 ammo

f. 150 rds 9:.mm

g. oil
h, rags
i. wire
2, A-L Kit (Partisan) Wt. &5# TOTAL 36
a. 10 pistols .
b. 20 clips
3. B Kit (Partisan) Wt. 65# TOTAL 50

a. 2 IMG w/6 drums & 2 carrying cases
b. 1000 rds 7.62 ammo

a. oil
d. rags
e. wire
4. © Kit (Demolition) Wt. 50# TOTAL 200

a. Each C Kit contains 5 small units,
each small unit is packed for individual
hardling. Each small unit of 190 of the
C Kits contains

1. 1# block of napalm

2. 34 INT

3. 3 non-electric caps

4. 1 pocket knife

5. l utility pliers

6, 1 roll friction tape

‘7. 1 box waterproofed matches
8, 31 fuse

Four small units of the remaining 10 C Kits are the same
as above while the 5th small unit is comerted to electric
demolition by substituting 1 blasting machine, 300 feet
firing wire, and 5 electric caps for the standard caps
and fuse of other units. These special units should be
marked with the letter E for identification. Each small
unit contains a letter of instructions in Spanish on
napalm. One small unit of each C Kit contains 2 shaped
charges and a letter of instructions. This small unit

is marked S.

5. D Kit (Resident Radio Operators ) Wt. 65# TOTAL 10
a, 1 RS-l receiver-transmitter w/spare parts
b. 1 Sm pistol w/l clip
c. 50 rds 9nm ammo
ad. 2 emergency food and medical kits
e. 1 GI watch
f. 1 GI compass
E. The number of kits designated for delivery to each staging
area, the marking to designate the target destination, and the

expected airport of delivery for transfer ROBALO-to-staging area
is as follows:

1. For staging area #1, probable field for dispersion

DIFROGS :
a. A Kits marked G-A TOTAL 150
b. A-l Kits marked G-A-1 " eae
ec. 8B Kits marked G-B " 12
d. C Kits marked GC " 65
e. D Kits marked GD " _2
2. For staging area #2, probable field for dispersion
WSHOOFS :
a. A Kits marked BA _ TOTAL 120
b, Al Kits marked B-A-1 " _LO
ce B-Kits marked B-B " 12
d. O-Kits marked B-C a 32.
e. D-Kits marked B-D " _i
3, For staging area #3, probable field for dispersion
a. A Kits marked Q-A TOTAL _80
bo <A-l Kits marked Q-A-1 " 3
c. B-Kits marked Q-B " _10
d. C-Kits marked Q-C " 50.
e. D-Kits marked Q-D n _3

*

4. For staging area #4, probable field for dispersion
DTFROGS: ;

a. A Kits marked J-A TOTAL

20
b. A-1 Kits marked O
c. 8B Kits marked J-B " 3
dad. C Kits marked J-C " 15
e. D Kits marked J-D " a

5. For staging area #5, probable field for dispersion
WSHOOFS =.

a, A Kits marked C-A TOTAL 100
b. A-1l Kits marked C-A-1 " _10
c. B Kits marked C-B " _z0
d. C Kits marked C-C . 20
e. D Kits marked C-D " i

6. For staging area #6* probable field for dispersion

DTFROGS : «
a. A Kits marked Z-A TOTAL _10
b. A-1 Kits ° _0O
c. B Kits marked Z-B " _3
d. cC Kits marked ZC " 5
e. D Kits marked Z-D " i

Attachment A this report identifies the targets to be operated against
from each above numbered staging site. Attachment A should be filed
separately.

F. The movement of the materiel within this category from
DTROBALO to the field nearest the target staging areas is tentatively
te be by black flights from DTROBALO field. Coordination between
dispatching point at ROBALO and reception point in WSHOOFS and
DIFROGS will be executed between Yor appointed assistant)
and | AL ‘]will be physically present in the. vicinity
of reception field and in liaison with CALLIGERIS during this
phase. Communications between[ Jand ( should be
instantaneous and will be coordinated through cable facilities
offered byL . me Janda Janal J and

-] CALLIGERIS has four large trucks and is prepared to

have them on standby to shuttle from staging field to staging
area.

G. AMD has been alerted as to the general nature of the
entire PBSUCCESS logistical program as proposed. AMD was informed
as to the unapproved, tentative nature of this first preparatory
conference,
1. Coordination is now underway between AMD and PBBBUCESS
Support Office, Headquarters on 25 February black flight from
Andrews Field to C \Field. Approval has been granted.
Supplies are to be in position ready for pickup by 0900
24. February. AMD liaison to Andrews will point out the spot
for temporary storage and will provide guards and tarpaulins.

~5-

AMD will furnish planes and pilots and arrange proper liaison
West_Palm Beach and Panama airfields. The planes will be

[ _ and the flight will be covered by normal[ base to

[ Jbase procedures.

a. Security is providing emergency cover story
and backstop necessary.

b. Logistical Support, PBSUCCESS, Headquarters ;
is stockpiling the necessary equipment and has assured
this project of capability of making the deadline,

2. AMD made a preliminary staff study of the proposed
movement by Black Flight of Category 1 equipment ROBALO to
reception fields DIFROGS and WSHOOFS, The following views
were stated in a resultant conference with C[  ], PBSUCCESS:

a. Pending receipt of approval byf Jria
c/L Joperations, AMD would keep in mind proposed
PBSUCCESS movement but would devote no further effort
which detracts from operations in other fields.

b. AMD was given the ctibage and weight “to be
transported this movement. .

c. AMD was notified as to peculiar sensitiveness
of this project and connecting operations, It was
agreed that an officer from Security Division should be
assigned to provide emergency cover and backstop for
pilots and plane.

d, Two C-47's or C-46's would be utilized. The
procurement of these planes would be difficult but not
insurmountable if authorized in time.

e. The date set tentatively for this operation
was 1 through 15 March. A cable to DIR requesting
pass to AMD sets an alternate date of 15 March — 1 fpril.

' See para. CALLIGERIS Assignments for purposes delay.

f£. AMD suggested that an air-operations officer should
be assigned TDY to control probable plane-maintanance
problems, conduct pilot-—briefings, plan details of each
flight, etc. AMD's function as a staff and not operations
group necessitates their maintaining an advisory capacity
and providing high level contacts which set up all
machinery for black flight. The experienced air operations
officer who will implement the planning has been assigned

EDY to the project. His initial duty will be that of

furnishing liaison with AMD, following complete briefing

by [ - PBSUCCESS. His subsequent duties will be
physical presence LINCOLN-ROBALO-HEADQUARTERS as

PBSUCCESS Air Operations Officer for planning and

coordination purposes.

& LL. ‘|pilots are being considered as the most
feasible, both from the value of their experience and
the security standpoint.

-~6-

3. To sum it up, AMD has the general requirements,
complete stockpiling is underway in that the 25 February
flight is designed to pring the ROSALO stockplle to
completeness and the flight is approved, packing teams
are recruited, are being briefed, and are due to depart
within the next two weeks.

Qe [ “] DTROBALO has been briefed generally by
dispatch and has been requested to furnish care for
packing teams, He has been notified that the teams
are-prepared to live under field conditions if the
1 April closing-down of regular ROBALO functions pose
a problem which could be solved through drawing arny
tentage and field rations. A request for utilization
of his trucking facilities was also included to verify
his verbal offer of same in January.

' b. The approval for this 6ategory II set of black
flights is necessary in order to plan further than
above. In order for AMD to locate planes and “pilots
and clear same, and in order for Air Operations Officer
to implement same, and in order for security to build
proper cover, approval to proceed is required soonest.

H. On arrival at the DTFROGS field nearest the staging areas
in that country, CALLIGERIS' trucks, using cleared drivers, will
truck the equirment to its marked destination. From each staging

area separate operations will be run to the recipient underground
of the target area.

1. Area #1: By concealment in CALLIGERIS' personnel
owned vehicles, which up to the point of the recent white
paper were not searched on crossing the border. CALLIGERIS
will run test cases with present vehicles to find the amoung
of search or surveillance such vehicles are subject to.
CALLIGERIS is also instructed to cause vehicles now’ in the
target country to come into the vicinity of the staging
area and return to target country to determine the amoung
of search or surveillance the vehicle becomes subject to.

In cases where it cen be arranged so that the vehicle of

the target country is similar to specially rigged CALLIGERIS
vehicles at the staging area, a license-plate swap should
suffice so that the Category I kits can be concealed. The
kits are al]. designed to fit an 11" x 11" x 30" space
similar te the space being provided by shifting the rear
seats of CALLIGERIS' cars.

2. Area #2 will have a primary method of entry to the
target country of Category I equipment of hand carrying to
the recipient underground by transport courier personnel
working out of the staging area, traveling black (see
details on Staging Area #2 para). Transport irom the

te ae

staging area at Jack to a position of launching at Kent will
be necessary along the Jack-Kent highway under cover of
darkness due to the offset position of this particular staging
area, Either available trucks or acquisitioned vehicles will
be utilized for this duty. If the acquisition of vehicles
proves a security problem, mules will be utilized and the
courier-transport personnel will become a five man team,
the load being broken down after approach as far as vicinity
~of Larry via miles. Travel will be only at night due to the.
heavily Commmist infested nature of the staging country
between the staging area and the crossing point. Larry will
be used as an inner staging base for supplying inner forces
at Bond by stockpiling at Larry for distribution by Larry
personnel as well as use by Larry personnel.

3. Area #3 is for service of Ceasar, Doc, and Eddie.
Due to the distances involved, the three indicated designations
are to be serviced in Category I under present plarming by the
use of CALLIGERIS' present automotive facilities after test
runs are made and recipient are established. In addition,
operations from within the target country.will be mounted to
cause CALLIGERIS-controlled transportation to logically
leave target country and reenter with materiel.

7 Area #4 will employ the transport-courier method
for Category I and will service inner organizations Mike
and Frank (see details on Staging Area #4).

5, Area #5 will employ ‘a similar method to Area #3
for Category I.

6. Area #% equipment will be moved to road's end at
approximately Jack and further transported to the area via
mule-train which CALLIGLURTS has been authorized to purchase.
The movement of Category I equipment to the recipient under-
ground organizations at Nick and Hank will be by black-
courier—trensport personnel in operations mounted from
steging area #6 in the vicinity of Jack.

i, Category 2 equipment includes that equipment to be carried
oy shock troops and specialists who enter the target country just
prior to D-day for semi-overt and overt actions tied in with D-day.
The movement of Category 2 equipment from ROBADO to the selected
fields nearest the respective staging sites is due to commence
approximately 26 March immediately on the heels of the movement
of Category I. The breakdown of the Category 2 equipment will be
made at ROBALO and the marking of all Category 2 eguioment will be
as follows: free #2 marked XB

free #4 merked xJI
Area #6 marked X44.

-~ S-+

Total equipment Category 2 due
as follows:

Total
Item Area 2
Soviet rifles 300
Submachine guns, Madsen 150
Pistols 15
Frag. grenades 460
Cone, grenades 250
7.62 ammunition 105,000
Onmm ammunition 60 ,000
IMG's,w/carry case
& 3 drums each 15
Napalm mix 5
TNT 100
Non-electric caps , 50
“haped charges 150
Time fuse 125
Matches, waterproofed 150
Blasting machines 2
Electric caps 10
Wiring wire 650
RS-1 (agent rec/transmitter 3
Ration kits, emergency 400
Medical kits 400
GI watches 3
GI compasses 3
Compasses (indigenous) 50
Binoculars ; 5
Canteens 500
Solothern, 20mm, anti-tank 2
Mortar tubes 12

20mm armor-piercing, anti-tank 600
20m, high explosive,anti-tank 600

Mortar ammunition 240
22 cal. rifles w/silencers 0
22 cal. ammo, hollow point

long rifles @)

Instruction sheets
a, Utdlity Napalm and Shaped

Charges 10
b. Crimping anda fusing

instructions 10
e, Utility medical and ration

kits 10

Total
Area 4

325
155

15

470

250
140,000
70 5000

10

10

shipment to the respective areas is

Total
Area 6

625

a. The shipment is expected to furnish the gear
necessary to provide self-sufficient shock troops and
specialists, independent on logistical support throughout
ten days continuous overt action, yet enable the men and
units to maintain mobility and firepower at the same time.

(See para , T/equipment and organization.)

b. The gear will remain in constant state of readiness
and repair at the staging areas, preferably under the
responsibility of an assigned graduate of Glass A training
not otherwise employed until issued to the men for use.

J. Category 3 equipment is being prepared for resupply by
overflight during plan Able and Baker operations where necessary y
-plan Charlie operations in the event emergency situations call for
implementation of plan Charlie.

1. Preparations include bundling into the bundles
described below and tying to EX-9 cargo chutes. (The described
chute is government-sterile chute being produced on contract by
a U.S. firm, and is suitable for carrying a 3007 + load)

2, The below described bundles are being bundles in
straw-cushioned burlap bundles 5

a. Bundle A Total 50, each approximately 250#
(1) 10 rifles
(2) 5 SMG w/2 mags/weapon
(3) 1 IMG w/3 pans/weapon
(4) 3000 rds 7.62 ammo
(5) 1000 rds 9mm ammo
(6) 20 frag. grenades
(7) 2# TNT
(8) lo' fuse.
(9) 1 pair pliers
(16) 1 roll tape
(11) 1 knife
(12) 5 non-electric caps

b. Bundle B Total 5, each approximately T5#
(4) 12 Rs radio-receiver-transmitter w/spare parts
(2) 1 pistol w/l clip
(3) 50 rds 9mm ammo
(4) 2 ration and medical kits
(5) 1 GI watch
(6) 1 GI compass

ec. Bundle C Total 25, each approximately 200#
(1) 2O°-rifies
(2) 5 SG w/2 mags/wpn
(3) 10 frag. grenades
(4) 3000 rds 7.62 ammo
(5) 1000 rds 9mm ammo

-i0-

3. Distribution of the Category 3 equipment will be
governed by the recuirements on and shortly following D-day.

a. From H-hour on until canceled all tactical
radios and the base Station will go on open circuit,

b. The shock troop staff and leaders and organizers
now in training are receiving resupply requests, require-
ments, DZ location ete. in the curriculae).

“¢. Resupply requests will go trom team to base
Station to AMARDO to FJHOPEFi, — LINCOLN Simultaneously.
Preparations to fly wili be implemented at ROBALO,
authorization to fly being issued from LINCOLN.

d. The feasability of stationing a project Air
Ops -( ]- logistics Team at FIHOPEFUL during this
period is being considered. If considered feassble

request handled, consequently eliminating chances of
garbling,

e. Daylight resupply is being considered pending
Headquarters! approval. AMD assurance of daylight flight
preference has been issued following an Air-OB terrain
and situation Study by amp,

Soa

ATTACHMENT A 10 waAIC[  —DocuMENT #1:

1. Site Number 1 Adam, Ike
2. Site Number 2 Bond
3. Site Number 3 Ceasar, Doc, Eddie

4. Site Number 4 Frank
5. Site Number 5 Goss

6. Site Number 6 Hank

"|pocument #2:

ATTACHMsNT B TO BASIC [

Wield Cryptos:

1. Adan

ATTACHMENT C TO Basic [ 7} DOCUMENT #1:

True Identities:
1. Guatemala City
2. Puerto Barrios
3. Quezaltenango .

4. Mazatenango

5. Quiche

6. tutiaps

7. Coban . .
8 Zacapa .

9. San Jose

10. Florida, Honduras |

11. Carias Viejas, Honduras
12. Entre Rios, Guatemala
13. Ascuncion Mita

14. Gualan )
