The Current Situation in Italy DiscussesS Strategic Importance of Preventing It
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000009589, dated 5 September 1947.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000009589).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

« .
oN

UATI

std
mn
tea)

Sia tel ra nent F
rn eam

NT

R

C

Paes
CU

2
fe

: ty: " 3 Sid
Tho Nite’ . nyt ea
cha 3 :

rare
ied

he

ris) .

1 MSL deem
18 do, i

ta as

Harry S. Truman
Papers of Harry S. Truman E
President's Secretaryis File)...

2

Le pt wpe el
eer é walt

ORE 47 _

10 October 1947

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ITALY = 2

“ “a Phe Strategic Importance of Italy. 2

It is of vital strategic importance to prevent Italy from falling under Communist _
control. Such a development would have demoralizing effect throughout Western ~--— 13
Europe, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East. In particular, it would greatly facili- ‘
tate Communist penetration in France, Spain, and North Africa. Militarily, the avalla- -——-
bility to the U. 8. 8. R. of bases in Sicily and southern Italy would pose a direct threat
to the security of communications through the Mediterranean. Italy, however, is of
relatively little direct value to the United States, The present and prospective politi-
cal, economic, and military weakness of the country is such as to render it a strategic
liability rather than an asset, except insofar as its territory constitutes a potential base
of operations.

2. The Economie Situation.

Italy is normally dependent on imports for substantial amounts of foodstuffs, most
Of its industrial raw materials, and about 90 percent of its coal and petroleum. UItl-

eee

4
ae
Rar
a
4
4
a
as
ay

33 mately, Italy can become self-sustaining only through a general European economic
recovery which would permit the resumption of normal international trade. Mean-
eS while Italy can look only to the United States for the provision of imports imperatively

3 necessary to prevent an impending economic (and political) collapse. For such ald to
= be effective, however, it is essential that the Italian Government adopt and ee a
i more realistic and vigorous economic program.
ae At present Italian agricultural and Industrial production have leveled off at some
eu 75 per cent of the prewar volume. Tand transportation also has been restored to
approximately the same relative level as industrial production. The merchant marine,
Sy normally an important source of foreign exchange, has been restored to about 67 percent -
es of its prewar tonnage. This measure of recovery has been possible, however, only by |
cS reason of very substantial financial and material ald from the United States. Given the
a4 necessary materials and competent economic direction, a further restortion of industrial ;
- production is possible. Without sustained importation, however, the existing produc- --
oe tion will collapse.

Despite the need for products which Italy might supply, no group of European
countries Is presently in @ position to provide in exchange adequate amounts of the _
materials which Italy requires to sustain production or the dollar exchange required to

i. | lie arate

obtain such materials elsewhere. Great Britain, for example, Imports Italian fruits and
§ vegetables, but cannot pay for them with either coal or dollars. The Italian peice
t ment’s dollar resources are now exhausted. To maintain essential imports of wheat,
$s coal, and other materials in short world supply, the Italian Government must call auier

the United States for both dollar credits and favorable allocations.

an
re

Note: This papcr has been coordinated with the intelligence nas of the Department
’ of State, Army, Navy and Air Forces, ee ek ee we

iS NTA a a Re 8
Swi et AOA

+

ir
a

. “Even at the present level of economic recovery, the great majority of the Italian
_people are enduring privations comparable to those experienced during the war. Some
_ two million remain unemployed. Those employed are generally unable to satisfy their
wants by reason of great inequalities of income distribution, the scarcity of goods, and

the rampant inflation of prices. The Government has failed to curd either the inflation ~

__ or the flourishing black market whereby those having the means are able to enjoy

plenty in the midst of general want. It anticipates a budgetary deficit of $00 billion -

lire in 1947-48, despite an extraordinary capital levy and the abandonment of subsidies
intended to hold down the price of bread.

‘phis situation, already conducive to agitation and unrest, would be rendered intol- ”

erable by a cessation of essential imports. The ensuing unemployment and hunger
would be politically explosive. Even if essential imports are assured, it will still be
imperative that the Government take effective action to halt inflation, curb the black
~ market, discourage hoarding, and husband dollar exchange.

3. The Political Situation.

The present Italian Government Ss essentially Christian Democratic, although it
_ §ncludes also certain independent moderates. It lacks working-class representation.
_ Jt ds generally supported by the Rightist parties in the Constituent Assembly, but has

_. been severely criticized by the moderate as well as the extreme Left.

In the election of June 1946 the Christian Democratic Party received impressive
popular support, winning a large plurality of seats in the Assembly, although not &
majority. Its strength was derived from its middle-of-the road position, free of either
Fascist or Marxist taint, the implicit support of the Catholic Church, and its evident
ability to deal on favorable terms with the Allied authorities. Subsequently it lost public
confidence through the ineffectiveness of its efforts to cope with acute economic dis-
locations and through its coalition with the Communists. Since its break with the
Socialists and Communists the Party has regained prestige. Its leadership still does
not inspire great confidence, but is nevertheless regarded by most non-Teftists as pref-
erable to the alternatives. Its strengths are essentially the same as a year ago: its

centrist position, the support of the Church, and above all the presumption that through

it there is best hope of obtaining U. 8. ald for Italy.
The principal opposition consists of the Communist Party and its satellite, the Nenni
(left-wing) Socialists. Theit combined popular strength is probably somewhat less
than, but approximately comparable to, that of the Christian Democrats. After the
1946 election the Communists, by astute and aggressive tactics, gained greatly in pres-
tige and influence at the expense of the Christian Democrats. Since their expulsion
from the Government they have lost ground, essentially because of new hope of economic
betterment through the European recovery program and of increasing realization that
the Communists’ primary loyalty is to the U.S. 8. BR. rather than to the Italian people.
Recently the Communists have sought to exert pressure through their control of labor
unions, but thus far this effort has failed in its effect for lack of sustained labor support.

Between the principal political antagonists are the Saragat (right-wing) Socialists, _
who withdrew from the Nennt-contralled Socialist Party rather than follow the Com- ¢

munist Party line. The admittance of this group to the Government would tend to

*

a as
‘aed

. BOE _ “TAT TON ene NN TT eI ony
y ia i A as A a ta: fea iad sve ae a pone

an NEN pe a plo Ba its
i a at tt rane eae el tel Na

mitigate its Rightist orfentation and to relieve it of the valid charge that it lacks any
working-class representation.
The principal organized political force to the right of the Christian Democrats - -

Consists of two neo-Fascist groups, the Common Man Front and its more radical offshoot,

the National Movement for Soclal Democracy. Although the aggregate strength of
these groups has increased considerably during the past year, their effectiveness has

recently been impaired by the indicated split. Both groups are anti-Communist and
disposed to support a Western orientation.

Thus the existing Government is sustafned less by public confidence than by the

absence of any presently acceptable alternative. For the time being, hope of eventual ~~

betterment weighs more heavily In the scales than does existing dissatisfaction, Should
hope dwindle and despair increase, the balance would shift.

4. The Military Situation.

The U.S. and British forces remaining in Italy must be withdrawn by mid-December,

The Italian armed forces are limited by treaty to an over-all strength of 300,000
men. For economic reasons, their actual strength has been maintained at no more
than 270,000. They are loyal to the Government, and generally anti-Communist in

sentiment. Their training is generally good, and their morale has recently improved.
_ Their weapons and equipment, however, are generally obsolescent, poorly maintained, ~

and insufficient in quantity, particularly with respect to heavy weapons and aircraft,
Without the support of an armaments industry, they are dependent upon U. 8. and
British surplus stocks.

The Italian armed forces are Incapable of major military operations. They are

considered to be generally capable of maintaining internal order, but would be hard

pressed if required stulteneously to defend the frontier and to suppress internal in- |— .

surrection,
5. Probable Developments.

The stability of the existing Government depends primarily on its ability to obtain | .

adequate economie support from the United States. Given interim ald sufficient to
avert acute distress during the winter, it should be able to maintain its position until
the general elections in April.

The Communists and Nenni Socialists will continue thelr vigorous effort to intensify
existing difficulties and dissatisfactions with the purpose of thoroughly discrediting the
existing Government or compelling it to readmit them to membership. If economic
collapse should occur in default of adequate Interim ald, an extremist government
would probably accede to power. There is at present no sound basis for prediction as
to whether this government would be Communist or Rightist, but the current hea
appears to be away from the Communists and favorable to the Right.

Assuroing that the present Government survives the winter, the outcome of the ;
April elections will depend not only on the results of interim ajd, but also on the pros- ’.

pects for the success of the European recovery program. Favorable developments in
this regard would operate to the decided advantage of the Goverament. Adverse devel-

opments and the consequent disillusionment would enhance the Possibility of 8 | Com es
munist electoral victory. : , ee ee

Armed insurrection is a continuing Communist capability; the threat of insur-_. .
rection will be exploited to the full to intimidate both the Government and the electorate.
It is probable, however, that the Communists’ overriding mission {s to preserve and
develop thelr organization for use in creating and exploiting a “revolutionary situation.”
Insurrection, while there remained a fair chance of accession to power by legal or quast-

Wi GSB ea gs pip dete be glee cep gor ig

legal means, or in circumstances which gave no promise of early decisive success, would =

“be prejudicial to this mission and is therefore unlikely.

If the Communists were to resort to force, their effort would be pence throughout
Ttaly, with a view to taking over the entire country. Their capabilities are greatest
- in the north, however, where they played a major role in partisan resistance ducing the
war and still maintain an effective partisan organization. There, too, the proximity of
~ Yugoslavia affords thera some prospect of support and would facilitate the maintenance
of guerrilla operations similar to those In northern Greece. The opportunity is by no
means so favorable as that in Greece, however, for the frontier is much narrower in
proportion to the depth of the area concerned and the interior is for the most part open

~ country, tending to prevent the consolidation of guerrilla contro).
- he Italian armed forces could probably cope successfully with any Communist
insurrection which lacked general popular rupport, provided that the threat of Yugoslav

intervention on a major scale were effectively neutralized.

6. The Situation in Trieste.

Order has been restored in the Free Territory of Trieste, but the underlying tensions
remain. Awkward as the existing situation may be, with a joint U.S.-British occupa-
tion of the northern part of the Territory, including the city, and a unilateral Yugoslav
occupation of the remainder, greater political ferment must be expected on the appoint-
ment of a United Nations governor, when elections must be held and the struggle of
Italian and Yugoslav citizens for control will find expression in open political conflict.

Trieste can prosper only if it can regain its former position as the principal Adriatic
port for the Danube Basin. It is probable, however, that insofar as this commerce Is
Communist controlicd, it will be diverted to Flume. At present traffic through Trieste
is negligible and unemploymentishigh. The clash of nationalisms within the Territory
is likely to be aggravated by the consequences of economic stagnation.

Yugoslavia is determincd upon the ultimate acquisition of Trieste, and to this end
will exert every effort to keep the area in constant turmoil, to prevent its economic
recovery, and generally to render ineffectual its International administration, iooking
toward the creation of a situation favorable for a Yugoslav-Communist assumption of
de facto control,

Trieste retains a symbolic significance for Italians which causes them to regard its
fate with great intensity of feeling. Although the Italian Government Is likely to take
a less aggressive part than that of Yugoslavia in the struggle for control of the elty, the
Italian people will regard the resistance of thelr compatriots to Yugoslav atsorption
with great sympathy and the Government will be compel to act to defend Italian
rights there.

Constant tension in Trieste will not only embitter Italo-Yugoslav relations, but will
also tend to direct the resentment of patriotic Italians toward the Italian Communist
