Short Term Political Prospects in Panama
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126957, dated 2 November 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126957).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 223-3

LptY wel ie
S SNIE a165 J
- aa CONTROTLER DISSEM 21 December 1965
co eb Qo \-PAN |
ee aa Q p f
Ne

r
SPECIAL Figt

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE a

_ | NUMBER 84-65

Short Term Political Prospects in Panama

oo | 7 _ Submitted by
a Acting DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

21 DECEMBER 1965

Authenticated:

ECUTIVE SECRETARY, U

iC NCV 1997.

. Bree Ee wt ee coe
: .s ae 3 .
ere eaten Nae oe et a a een a ee ek ee

poe

The following intelligence organizations participated i in the preparation of
this estimate: ;
The Central intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and the NSA. PO
Concurring: ; Ls
Dr. R. Jack Smith, for Deputy Director of Central Intelligence a
Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of
State . oe ;
Lieutenant General Joseph F. Carroll, USAF, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Dr. Louis W. Tordella, for Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining: _
Mr. Howard C. Brown, Jr., Assistant General Manager for Administration, Atomic
Energy Commission, and Mr. William C. Sullivan, Assistant Director, Federal

Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

mission or reygberti a7 in n any manner to an undo

d ROU automatic
gftting and
dpGlassifcavgn

Seer

SHORT TERM
POLITICAL PROSPECTS
IN PANAMA

THE PROBLEM

To examine the political prospects in Panama over the next six
months or so, and to evaluate likely successors if President Robles
were to be removed.

CONCLUSION

The Robles administration will probably survive the period of this
estimate. If it does not, the likely alternative governments—either
a less popular oligarchic grouping or the unpredictable, demagogic
Arnulfo Arias—would almost certainly be more difficult in dealings
with the US and probably no more successful than Robles in accom-
plishing needed reforms in Panama.

DISCUSSION
I. BACKGROUND

1, Most Panamanians feel that the US has special obligations to Panama.
The Canal and the Canal Zone have long dominated Panamanian politics, the
Panamanian economy, and US-Panamanian relations.'!. The country’s elite
groups, in particular, have benefited from the US-Panamanian_ relationship.
Nevertheless, they have not scrupled to make political capital from nationalistic
resentment of US control of the Canal and the Canal Zone and to blame glaring
inequities in living standards on US “exploitation.” The oligarchy’s control of

‘Panama occupies some 29,000 square miles, only 30 percent of which is arable land. Its
population outside the Canal Zone is over 1.2 million, with.an annual rate of increase of
about 3.2 percent. About 25 percent live in the terminal cities of the Canal: over 250,000
in Panama City and 65,000 in Colon. The Panamanian population is 70 percent mixed,
14 percent Negro, 9 percent white, and 7 percent Indian and other. The literacy rate is
about 80 percent. While the per capita income is relatively high (USS470), it conceals
an extremely uneven distribution of income. The country’s most important economic resource
is the Canal. The main exports are refined petroleum products, bananas, and shrimp.

pol

the information media, the political parties, and much of the economy has enabled
it to contain pressures for social] and economic reforms. In recent years, how-
ever, the resentment of the Panamanian masses has been exploited by Castroites,
Communists, ultranationalists, and the ambitious Arnulfo Arias. Twice ousted
from the presidency, Arias is laying the groundwork for a return to power by
arousing the masses against the oligarchy.

Il. PRESENT SITUATION

The Robles Administration

2. President Marco Robles assumed office in October 1964 under inauspicious
circumstances. As the candidate of an eight-party coalition, he secured only
41 percent of the vote in the May 1964 election (according to the official count).
defeating Arnulfo Arias by less than 10,000 votes. Robles was able to scrape
together a slim majority in the National Assembly by forming a tenuous coalition
with parties that had opposed him in the election. Having promised to under-
take extensive economic and social reforms, he was confronted with an empty
treasury, a budget deficit, serious unemployment, and other fiscal and economic
difficulties. Robles also undertook to fulfill his campaign promise to obtain from

the US a settlement of the Canal issue acceptable to Panamanians.

3. During his nearly 15 months in office Robles has made some progress on
the problems he inherited. Unlike his predecessor, he has acted promptly and
effectively to control threats to public order. Considering the realities of Pana-
manian politics, his appointments to public office have generally been good. As
a result there has been some improvement in administration over the perform-
ance of his predecessor. Robles has also taken steps to balance the budget and
to initiate social and economic programs, including a basic tax reform to provide
the necessary funds. His conduct in negotiations with the US has been marked
by a reasonable attitude and apparent confidence that Panama will be able to
obtain an acceptable settlement. The US has demonstrated its support for
Robles diplomatically, as well as with financial and technical aid.

4. The oligarchy, however, had closed ranks behind Robles only to ensure
its retention of power and privileges. It soon began to oppose him on specific
issues. His tax reform, for example, was considerably watered down in the
National Assembly. At the same time, Robles’ modest attempts at reform have
won for him little if any new support from the lower classes, particularly in the
key urban arcas, Panama City and Colon. Thus far, he has countered vigorously
opposition criticism of his handling of the negotiations with the US.

The Opposition

5. Panamanian political parties, by and large, are ineffective, personalistic, and
relatively short-lived. That of Arnulfo Arias is the Panameiiista Party (PP),
which is the largest and best organized Panamanian party. As its candidate,
Arias secured 38 percent of the votes in the official count of the 1964 presiden-
tial election. The PP elected 12 of the 42 members of the National Assembly.

2 nS: <a

SEORET

(Robles’ eight-party coalition clected 18, eight of them from his own Liberal
Party). Of special significance was Arias’ ability to outdraw all opponents in
Panama City and Colén.

6. Arias, charging fraud and intimidation, has refused to accept Robles’ elec-
tion. He maintains that Robles will be unable to resolve the problems confront-
ing him and will fall; “the people,” Arias claims, will then call him to power.
In various ways Arias has been trying to speed Robles’ downfall. He has been
careful, however, not to engage in direct personal criticism of the US. Nor has
Arias sent his followers into the street, probably because he is not yet ready to
challenge the administration’s security forces and is confident that time is on

his side.

7. The Communist Party in Panama, called the Party of the People (PdP), is
illegal. It has perhaps 500 members, including some 250 party activists. There
is also a rival, pro-Peking, Movement for Reformist Unity (MUR), which may
have from 60 to 100 members.2. There is not only competition and conflict be-
tween the PdP and MUR, but also considerable factional conflict within each.
Neither has been able to organize either a substantial popular following or a
disciplined subversive movement." Both exert, however, a significant influence
on anti-US student and nationalist groups. Despite past rebuffs, the PdP prob-
ably still hopes to induce the Panameiiistas to enter into a popular front with it.
The Communists’ ability to seize the leadership of the mob in disorderly situa-
tions created by others was clearly demonstrated during the January 1964 riots.

Security Forces

8. The Guardia Nacional, Panama's only uniformed security force, numbers
about 4,000 men. It is a disciplined and fairly competent organization, loyal
to its long-time commander, Colonel Bolivar Vallarino. Under the Robles ad-
ministration, which has called it promptly into action as required, the Guardia
has shown its ability to control civil disorders. In the event of prolonged and
widespread disturbances, however, it would probably need substantial outside
assistance to maintain control. Vallarino, who has strongly supported the Robles
government, has substantial political and economic influence and is closely allicd
with the oligarchy.

9. There is also a 250-man Department of National Investigations (DENI),
analogous to the FBI, which is responsible to the Ministry of the Presidency.
It works closely with the Guardia, but its investigative capabilities are limited,
particularly outside of Panama City and Colon.

* The pro-Castro VAN (Vanguard of National Action), which was conspicuously active
in the January 1964 riots, has apparently dissolved. Some members have joined the PdP,
others the MUR. Still others remain unaffiliated.

2Qver 100 Panamanians have received guerrilla and terrorist training in Cuba, the Soviet
Bloc, or Communist China. Most of them were sponsored by VAN, some by the PdP.
However, no coherent subversive organization based on them appears to exist.

oe” 3

; J
Ill. THE OUTLOOK

10. The Robles government is now in a somewhat stronger position than it
was when it took office 15 months ago. This improvement is attributable pri-
marily to Robles’ own demonstration of firmness combined with reasonableness
in coping with successive threats to public order. We foresee, however, no
appreciable further strengthening of his position, at least not until a Canal settle-
ment satisfactory to Panama has been successfully negotiated. Rather, a gradual
weakening of his position is likely pending such a settlement.

11. Already Robles has had some difficulty in controlling critical reactions to
the slow pace of the Canal negotiations and uncertainty regarding the outcome.
The lack of evident progress in negotiations will increase the chances for anti-
government demonstrations on 9-11 January, the second anniversary of the
1964 riots. Extremists will certainly seek to exploit popular emotions on that
occasion and it will take prompt and effective action by the Guardia National to
control the situation. We believe that Robles and Vallarino will act promptly
and firmly, and that the situation will be effectively controlled.

12. We believe that Robles will remain in power during the limited period of
this estimate. Nevertheless, failing evidence of progress toward a satisfactory
canal settlement, his position is likely to weaken gradually, not only on that
account, but also on account of his inability to make good his promises of
economic and social improvement. The two considerations are related, since
some longer term investments in the economy are apparently being held up
pending a settlement of the Canal issue and consequent reassurance regarding
political stability. Moreover, Robles appears to have exhausted his political
capabilities in pushing his tax reform through the National Assembly; no further
reform measures of any significance are likely to be enacted—at least not unless
Robles’ hand is greatly strengthened by a successful outcome of the Canal nego-
tiations. Thus the extremists will continue to find opportunities for subversive
agitation in the continuing dissatisfactions of the urban poor in Panama City

and Colén.

Alternatives to Robles

13. If Robles were to die or to be forced to resign before October 1966, a
highly unstable situation would ensue. According to the Constitution, he would
be temporarily succeeded by Max Delvalle, the First Vice President. However,
several strong members of the cabinet would prefer the Second Vice President,
Raul Arango Navarro, and might contrive to push Delvalle aside. In any case,
the Constitution would require that a presidential election be held within four
months.*

14. Neither Delvalle nor Arango would have as much of a political base as —
Robles now has, nor would either have any appreciable popular support.

‘The Constitution provides that, if the presidency should become vacant during the second
half of the presidential term (in this case after 1 October 1966), the Vice President serves

the balance of the term.

4 sBSaft

—s

Deer

Neither could be expected to take any significant action with respect to either
a Canal settlement or social reform within his brief tenure of office.

15. Unless, the oligarchical parties were able to unite in support of a single
strong candidate, a highly unlikely development, Arnulfo Arias would probably
win the required presidential election by too great a margin to be counted out.
To prevent the election of Arias, certain strong members of the Cabinet, such
as José Bazan, Minister of Government and Justice, Fernando Eleta, Minister of
Foreign Relations, or David Samudio, Minister of Finance and Treasury, might
seek the support of Vallarino in forming a provisional junta. Vallarino would
be reluctant to engage in a coup, but, in these circumstances, could probably
be persuaded to back them in order to keep Arias from the presidency.

16. Such a junta, composed of oligarchs, would be highly unpopular. We
doubt that it could move more rapidly than Robles has on needed reform pro-
grams or that it would be better able to show progress in the negotiations with
the US. Thus it too would be faced by public unrest and probably by more
of it than Robles has had to cope with. The Communists almost certainly would
make new overtures to the Panamenistas, and might have some success. In that
event disorders might become increasingly severe, eventually creating a chaotic
situation of unpredictable outcome.

17. Arnulfo Arias is unlikely to become President of Panama except through
a popular revolution which overwhelmed the Guardia National, a development
which we regard as highly unlikely within the period of this estimate. We can-
not predict what course Arias would follow if he were to become President in
such circumstances, but his regime would tend to be autocratic. His two previ-
ous attempts at governing (1940-1941 and 1949-1951) were aborted as a result
of his abuse of power and Fascist-like tendencies. Arias’s anti-US bias is said
to have mellowed; he is one of the few prominent Panamanians who urged
moderation at the time of the January 1964 riots. However, there is little reason
to believe that he would be as cooperative with the US as Robles has been.
The circumstances which brought him to power would limit his freedom of action.

os

1
ROUNDARY REPRESENTATION IB
MOT MECEBSAMILT, AUTHOMITATIVE

Where omitted, the Conol Zone
bow foitows the 260°

CARIBBEAN

":
aAmcHiPIELAGO"*
DE LAS 9

Y Puerto Paar ; /
\ aie

PANAMA

—-:— International boundary
—— + Internal administrative

boundary
National capital
® Internal administrative capital
Railroad
Road
——— Canal
i?) 25 50 75 Miles

Feats ardor intecnal adminsicarve
devissans are prowencros, exceot

Son Blas which is on intendencia.

25 50 75 Kilometers

39265 3-64

Where omitted, the

soors Conal Zone boundary

CARIBBEAN

THe!

Gotua Loko.
Fort San Lorenzog

Palmas
Bellas,

PANAMA CANAL ZONE

International Panama
doundary Canai

or I Fo
1 cog waved QOS
® wera ae Raviroad rea

ZB Urban area

°

“\qoanrvonne Locna py

Road

PACIFIC

$

Statute Miles
$ 10

Rogmeters

10

OCEAN

reese

39266 3-64

ee cer) Stree ap ae reer e nre re ry cer ota ce

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy -, .

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h.

i.

at

Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with

IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.
4, TETMte~ofathts-tocontentswhersvsedeseporately—tronrmtinerexrsstrerrtchebemclcies

merretanh Remit G Gee php

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
