The Situation in Cuba (0000132646)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132646, dated 2 May 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132646).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

RELEASE IN FULL 1997

Lowe. “ a

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

=! Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

[he following intelligence rganizations participated . inthe .
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency |
and the intelligence’ “organizations. of the Departments. ot
‘State, the Army, the ¢ Navy, the Alr'Force, and The Joint Staff.

“UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

Ree ee

Sse 1
on 14 June 1960: Cone ig iwer €“the Director of Intelii-'
gence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assist-
ant Chief of Naval Operations for Stag, sete Department

ee Higence, USAF;:
el Assista

-

cowenes

pita

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

= ie

Se i Se a is 1 hw ee aE a,

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. “This copy.

: is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments.

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

bp. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army |
c. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, for the Department of .

sb} fe ve) = jig r ® yest OLIUS - Ve i
_ f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission ©
pee Fae a g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation ..

h. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Department
of Defense

a, _ 2 This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
“Security regulations, or returned tothe ‘Central Intelligence Agency by.arra: igement with
the Office of Central Reference, CIA. Cte —
3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should
be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2,
22 June 1953. 7g a Bin aT ~~ «aR ERNIE ,
4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Po
at

WARNING

This material contains information affecting
the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws,
Title 18, USC, ,Secs. 793 and 794,4the trans-
mission or revelation of which-in*any manner
to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law.

fee +

is 7
DISTRIBUTION:
;, White House

ye a 2 ae Te :

National Security Council

aos, «Department of State

= Department of Defense irish as
: Operations Coordinating Board

+ a fstomic Energy:Commission __

f ~aeueRnuRe or Investigations} -

FESS sR nee i en iit MRR, eh eRe Son $e

&
z
i
5
z
.
t

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM. ........-+.-+44--.
CONCLUSIONS .....- 2... 2. ee es
DISCUSSION .

A. Political Situation. . ...

Introduction . . 1... 2... ee eee

Gevernment Leadership and Communism .

The National Agrarian Reform Institute .

The Military . woe

Other Areas of Government .
Propaganda Media .......-.-.
Organized Labor

Opposition .

B. The Economy. .

The Present Situation. .
Economic Prospects . .

C. Foreign Policy
D. The Outlook .

The Regime and the Opposition. . . .
The Communist Role .
Foreign Relations. . ...-+-.+-+-+--

ood 3 anoawawnuwh WwW Ww

BND Sea AGI IHS Met LT EOE III BED TEP SLE, LENIN BE CN,

wpm ae it ee De

SMO RB Me tee

i a RAW AAT REE SAD ELITE

£
i

De
ty
Ys

2.
a
ee!
ae
ta
ee
Be
x
z
%
4
wt
Bs

REY

Diet Oa ia se Ae

Tey AERA al Ada

Fo rman ann ies MO eae Rey

THE SITUATION IN CUBA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate likely developments in the Cuban situation over the next six months,
with particular reference to prospects for Communist domination or control of the

Castro regime.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Fidel Castro has replaced Batista’s mil-
itary dictatorship with a radical-national-
ist one which is deeply and increasingly
influenced by Communists. There is no
longer any prospect of democratic gov-
ernment under his regime. Castro re-
mains the dominant leader of Cuba, and
the revolution continues in large measure
to be an expression of his own unruly and
messianic personality. (Paras. 10-13)

2. Fidel Castro will almost certainly re-
main in power through 1960, unless he
becomes incapacitated to such. an extent
as to be unable to exercise personal lead-
ership. The opposition to his regime,
though growing, is weak and divided and
lacks a dynamic leader. Should Fidel
Castro depart the scene, a crisis probably
would develop in a short time. Raul
Castro and “Che” Guevara would prob-
ably seek to carry on, but disaffected ele-
ments would almost certainly make a bid
for power and there is a better than even
chance that the country would be thrown
into a period of widespread disorders and
bloodshed. (Paras. 25-27, 47-50)

3. The economic situation, although de-
teriorating in some sectors, has improved
in others, and we do not foresee its caus-
ing serious political problems this year.
The outlook for private investments re-
mains poor in view of the ever-present
threat of expropriation and the increas-
ing degree of state direction of the econ-
omy. (Paras. 28-38)

4. We are unable to answer the simplified
question “Is Castro himself a Commu-
nist?” Communists are deeply involved
in the remodeling of Cuba—more so than
in Guatemala in 1954—and the country
has become a base for communism in
Latin America. Clearly Castro regards
the Communists as helpful and reliable
allies in achieving hi& objectives; Com-
munists and their supporters are in posi-
tions of importance throughout the revo-
lutionary government. Given the mutu-
ality of interest between the Castro re-
gime and the Cuban Communists, it is
difficult, and in most respects academic
to try, to distinguish the policy and ac-
tions of the Castro regime from those
which would be expected of a government

heir 1

Behe 2

under actual Communist control in the
present circumstances in Cuba. This sit-
uation will almost certainly persist so
long as Fidel Castro and his associates re-
‘ main in power. Indeed, the outlook is
for Castro’s increased dependence on
Communists and they will continue to be
able to make many decisions and take
many actions without consulting him. If
this trend continues, the Communists will
gain de facto control of the Castro regime,
and are‘ near this point now. (Paras. 9,
14-19, 22-24, 51)

d. For the next six months or so, how-
ever, it appears unlikely that the Com-
munists will have the desire to make a
bid for overt power or the necessary
strength to maintain it. We believe that
the Communists will avoid moves which
would place Cuba demonstrably under the
domination or control of the international
Communist movement within the mean-
ing of the Caracas resolution. (Para. 52)

6. Recognition of additional Bloc govern-
ments, including Communist China, is
likely, and Cuba will probably support the
seating of that country in the UN this
fall. Bloc aid, probably including the pro-
vision of some military equipment, is
likely to grow. The Bloc would almost

*The Director of Intelligence and Research, De-

partment of State would substitute “may be” for
“are.”

certainly continue economic aid to Cuba
and would probably increase the level of
aid if US action, governmental or private,
threatened to affect adversely the Cuban
economy. (Paras. 38, 40-41, 55-56)

7. We foresee no significant change in
Cuban foreign policy over the next six
months or so. Castro will almost cer-
tainly continue his bitter and vociferous
hostility against the US, and accuse both
the US Government and US business in-
terests of attempts to destroy the Cuban
revolution. Through a series of actions
and reactions, this anti-US campaign
might come to involve a demand for US
withdrawal from Guantanamo, a rupture
of diplomatic relations, or danger to the
lives of American citizens in Cuba. He
will almost certainly continue his exten-
sive propaganda and proselytizing activi-
ties in Latin America, seeking thereby to
undermine Western Hemisphere solidar-
ity, to reduce US influence in Latin Amer-
ica, and to replace unfriendly govern-
ments with ones more closely oriented to
his own. He would probably sponsor
armed intervention in the event of the fall
of the Trujillo regime or other favorable
opportunities. Cuba will probably be-
come increasingly isolated and suspect
vis-a-vis the other Latin American and
most African and Asian governments.
(Paras. 39, 42-46, 53-54)

DISCUSSION

A. The Political Situation

8. Introduction. The revolutionary movement
of Fidel Castro began essentially as an indige-
nous Cuban effort dedicated almost solely to
the overthrow of the Batista dictatorship. As
such it had broad popular appeal; it counted
heavily on the support of the middle and
upper classes who saw in Castro the way to
throw off the repression and graft of the Ba-
tista regime. Even though Castro’s plans for
action after victory were not detailed, he ap-
pealed to most Cubans as the man who could
accomplish long overdue social and economic
reforms and a return to constitutional govern-
ment and free elections. In general he offered
a nationalistic program, including land re-
form, expansion of production, reduction of
unemployment, and a better life for the peas-
ant and worker.

9. The Communist party {Popular Socialist
Party—PSP), which had cooperated at various
times with Batista, jumped on the Castro
bandwagon only a few months before the fall
of Batista, when Castro’s success seemed cer-
tain. The Communists saw in the nature
and direction of the revolution a promising
opportunity to advance their cause. Since
then, the Communists have vigorously sup-
ported the Castro regime and have been able
to exert increasing influence within it and on
its policies. At the same time, Castro’s mod-
erate supporters are being expelled or are
abandoning him, and the regime is drawing
its popular support primarily from the peas-
ants and workers.

10. In less than a year and a half Fidel Castro
has drastically changed the traditional pat-
terns of life in Cuba. The Batista military
dictatorship has been replaced by one built
around Castro’s own image. Backed by
the revolutionary army, a newly organized
“people’s militia,’ and the lower income
groups, the regime has consolidated its control
over the various instruments of political power
and influence in Cuba, and has pressed ahead
with a revolutionary program of economic and

Social change. In addition, the Cuban Gov-
ernment has been transformed from a tra-
ditional friend of the US into a center of
virulent anti-Americanism and of support for
international Communist objectives in Latin
America.

11. There is no longer any prospect of demo-
cratic government under Castro. He is in-
creasingly unwilling to tolerate any opposi-
tion. Violations of human rights are increas-
ing; there are perhaps as many political pris-
oners in.Cuba today as at any time in the past.
The press and radio are controlled by the
regime with only minor exceptions.

12. Government Leadership and Communism.
Prime Minister Castro remains the dominant
and undisputed leader of Cuba. Although he
has lost some popular Support in recent
months, his appeal to the unorganized masses,
particularly the peasants, as the symbol of the
revolution is still powerful and unique. No
other figure has emerged with the stature to
challenge him and none of his associates com-
mands any comparable popular support. The
revolution itself continues in large measure
to be an expression of Castro’s own unruly and
messianic personality, deriving its authority
from his presence and much of its momentum
from his driving sense of personal mission.

13. Fidel Castro’s political ideology is highly
eclectic, including a variety of revolutionary
concepts. He is giving an overriding priorjty
to social and economic revolution. He stri-
dently asserts Cuban nationalism, particularly
through attacks on the US and its alleged
domination of Cuba. His program is virtually
indistinguishable from what the local Com-
munists openly advocate, and he is regarded
by international Communist leaders as an ex-
cellent instrument for their purposes.

14. We are unable to answer the simplified
question “Is Castro himself a Communist?”
The Communists have apparently been care-
ful to avoid actions which could be used as
proof that they were dictating the course of

Sa a oo Le ee

eee

o8-6--e 4

the revolution. The PSP as a party does not
participate openly in the government; its lead-
ers generally remain outside the political spot-
light and have taken pains to emphasize their
loyalty to Castro. The latter finds it easy and
useful to accept the assistance and advice of
Communists and regards them as reliable
allies in formulating and carrying out the
measures required to achieve his revolution-
ary goals. Indeed, he and the other leaders
equate anticommunism with counter-revolu-
tion. He has come increasingly to believe that
the Communists and their sympathizers repre-
sent almost the only group which can be
counted on not to desert him as have many of
his original associates, and he is probably con-
fident that he can continue to dominate them.

15. The Communists, for their part, seem to
find this relationship satisfactory. Fidel
Castro’s aims and actions, particularly his
virulent anti-US attitude, are consistent with
their own present objectives. Furthermore,
support of Castro gives them the tactical ad-
vantage of identirying themselves with an
indigenous movement, whose influence and ex-
ample they can hope to exploit throughout
Latin America. Through their assistance to
Castro, and with the active cooperation of his
most influential advisors, Rati Castro and
“Che” Guevara, they have been able to infil-
trate Communists and their supporters into
positions of great importance throughout the
revolutionary government. Communists are
now deeply involved in the remodeling of
Cuba—more so than in Guatemala in 1954—
and the country has in effect become a
base for international communism in Latin
America. There is no strong organized anti-
Communist group; most Cubans probably do
not regard communism as a threat to Castro’s
revolution.

16. The PSP, with a growing membership, now
in excess of 17,000, is the only organized politi-
cal party active in Cuba.? Fidel Castro’s 26th
of July Movement, itself Communist-infil-
trated, lacks most attributes of an organized
party. The Communists have increasingly
come to provide for Fidel Castro the type of

*>Not included are the 13,000 members of the
Juventud Socialista, youth wing of the PSP.

vigorous support which other Latin American
dictatorships have traditionally obtained from
strong military or well-organized personal fol-
lowings. Given the mutuality of interest be-
tween the Castro regime and the Cuban Com-
munists, it is difficult, and in most respects
academic to try, to distinguish the policy and
actions of the Castro regime from those which
would be expected of a government under ac-
tual Communist control in the present circum-
stances in Cuba.

17. While the supporters of the regime prob-
ably are for the most part non-Communists
dedicated to the revolution, almost all mod-
erates have been purged from top positions
in the bureaucracy. The principal agencies
of the government are now controlled by ex-
treme leftists, who are also Castro’s closest ad-
visers. Indeed, Rat Castro, who heads the
revolutionary armed forces and police, Antonio
Nunez Jiménez, Director of the National
Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA), and “Che”
Guevara, President of the National Bank, are
strong pro-Communists, if not actual Com-
munists. All work closely with Communists,
use their positions to facilitate Communist in-
filtration into most sectors of national life,
participate in Communist front activities, and
aid the PSP by persecuting its opponents. All
have furthered closer relations with the Bloc.
Others in the Council of Ministers are leftists,
some with past or present Communist associa-
tions, inclucing the Ministers of Foreign Af-
fairs, Treasury, Labor, Education, and Public
Works. President Dorticés, although only a
figurehead, is likewise a leftist and a former
PSP member. -

18. The National Agrarian Reform Institute.
The major instrument of the revolution is
INRA, whose actions affect all levels of Cuba’s
population of six million. INRA has expanded
from its original function of executing the
agrarian reform program to the point of con-
trolling a Jarge part of agriculture as well as
a considerable part of industry, trade, and in-
vestment. Most of the key officers of INRA
are probably Communists or pro-Communists,
as are others active in administering agrarian
reform in the provinces.

SHCRER—

SECKrET” 5

19. The Military* The armed forces, po-
lice, and investigative agencies have been
thoroughly reorganized by the regime to
strengthen its control over them. Under the
direction of Raul Castro since early 1959, the
effectiveness of these services has been reduced
by a purging of professionals, moderates, and
anti-Communists, and by a series of high level
defections. Furthermore, much of the army
effort has been dissipated in nonmilitary ac-
tivities, and the army’s combat effectiveness is
low, except for guerrilla-type operations. How-
ever, it remains the most effective force in
Cuba for maintaining internal security and
for insuring Castro’s retention of control. The
services are probably in the main loyal to the
regime, but there has as yet been no test of
how they would behave in the event of serious
civil disorder. The Communists have infil-
trated the military both at the officer and the
rank-and-file levels, and play key roles in the
military indoctrination programs, in intelli-
gence and police organs, and among army per-
sonnel working with INRA in the provinces.
Communist penetration is greatest in the
army, where there is a significant number of
high level Communist officers, including the
Inspector General and the Director of Intelli-
gence.

20. The regime has also established a “‘people’s
militia” made up of students, peasants, and
urban and sugar workers, and numbering
some 100,000 of both sexes. It is as yet only
partially armed and for the most part poorly
trained. At present, it could be expected to
contribute to Castro’s control of the urban
areas in event of major disorders and to con-
duct harassing and sabotage operations
against anti-Castro forces. It appears to have
little, if any, effectiveness as an organized
combat force in conventional operations, how-
ever. The establishment of the militia has
caused considerable resentment in the regu-
lar forces.

*The Cuban armed forces consist of an army of
about 35,000, a national police of 7,000, and a navy
of about 5,000. The strength of the air force has
been reduced from about 1,200 to approximately
400 as a result of successive purges.

21. The Castro regime has purchased and re-
ceived large quantities of military equipment
and supplies mostly from Italy and Belgium.*
It has also received from Norway ammunition
which had been ordered by Batista. To date
no Cuba-Bloc arms agreement is known to
have been concluded, but an arms agreement
with Czechoslovakia is probably in the mak-
ing. There are indications that Bloc manu-
factured aircraft may arrive soon. As yet
no foreign military training missions are in
Cuba and we know of no personnel receiving
military training abroad.

22. Other Areas of Government. In its thor-
ough revamping of the government structure,
the Castro-regime has also made the judicial
and educational systems, the foreign service,
welfare institutions, and even local govern-
ments conform to the revolution. Commu-
nists are in strategic positions and have had
particular influence in the education ministry
and at the various levels of public instruc-
tion. Although most university students at
first supported Castro, the majority of the stu-
dent body is probably anti-Communist and
now disillusioned with him. However, the gov-
ernment-controlled University Student Feder-
ation, along with an aggressive Communist
minority, is engaged in a campaign to force
the students into submission.

23. Propaganda Media. With the recent seiz-
ure of the two major opposition newspapers,
there remains in Cuba only one small inde-
pendent newspaper and this one is intimidated
by the regime. Nearly all radio stations are
in fact government-run and the only remain-
ing independent television network is expect
ing official intervention. Communists have
heavily penetrated all propaganda media, and
are disseminating a wealth of party materials
drawing liberally on sources provided by the
Sino-Soviet Bloc. Cuba’s Latin American news
agency, Agencia Prensa Latina, with official

‘A contract with Italy was signed in July 1959
covering such items as 105 mm howitzers, 120 mm
mortars and 3.5 inch rocket launchers, with an esti-
mated value of $2.5 million. A contract was made
with Belgium for 7.62 mm NATO type rifles and am-
munition, with an estimated value of $7 million.

Most of the material under both contracts has been |.

delivered.

26-RL...

Sa we ea onal 6

and probably Bloc financial support, is _the
major press service in Cuba.

24. Organized Lator. Like the government,
the leadership of the labor movement has un-
dergone a systematic purging of moderates
and anti-Communists. A protege of Raul Cas-
tro is Minister of Labor, and his ministry now
has the sole power to negotiate labor contracts
and to hire and fire employees. The leader-
ship in most federations vehemently protested
against Raul Castro’s attempts in November
1959 to place Communists in the executive
body of the national labor organization (CTC).
However, the regime, with Fidel Castro’s per-
sonal intervention, succeeded in installing sev-
eral pro-Communists in key positions, and the
CTC withdrew from the Western Hemisphere’s
non-Communist labor grouping (ORIT). The
longstanding struggle between the Commu-
nists and non-Communists in the labor move-
ment continues. Communists have the sup-
port of only a minority of the rank-and-file in
organized labor. Moreover, organized labor
probably feels that it has benefited less from
the revolution than have the peasants and
unorganized workers. The CTC is far from
being a reliable tool and could cause trouble
for Castro.

25. Opposition. In recent months there have
been increasing signs of opposition within
Cuba to the Castro regime mainly in reaction
to the expansion of Communist influence, the
dictatorial nature and methods of the regime,
and assorted economic grievances. The regime
and its Communist associates are experienc-
ing considerable resistance to the consolida-
tion of their control in the key fields of labor
and student activities. Disillusionment with
the regime has been spreading since mid-1959
within the middle and professional classes,
which for the most part initially hailed the
revolution. Many of Castro’s early close asso-
ciates in the 26th of July Movement have by
now walked out or been jettisoned, and there
are indications that significant numbers of
the armed forces are increasingly restive over
the radical course the revolution is now tak-
ing. Small scale guerrilla activity has reap-
peared in Oriente Province where Castro made

his start. A prominent Catholic bishop,
known for his sympathy for the initial aims of
the revolution, has openly attacked Commu-
nist influence in the regime, while another
important member of the Catholic hierarchy
has attacked the dictatorial methods of the
government.

26. Nevertheless, opposition does not as yet
pose a serious threat to the regime. Except
for the sizable business and propertied inter-
ests, most elements of the community have
either derived some direct benefits from the
regime’s economic measures or been able to
escape their worst effects. The ideal of a “new
Cuba” still has a powerful appeal both for
peasants and workers and for professional and
other intellectual groups. With the old-line
political parties discredited and many of the
propertied class in flight, much of the anti-
Castro activity has until recently come from
adventurers and embittered Batista support-
ers, operating from the Dominican Republic
and the US. Such activity is beneficial to the
Castro regime in that it tends to identify all
opposition with the generally detested Batista
dictatorship. Moreover, the activities in the
US of those closely associated with Batista
lend plausibility to Castro’s anti-American
campaign.

27. The most important of the organized op-
position groups appears to be the Movement
for the Recovery of the Revolution (MRR),
largely made up of former Castro supporters
who feel that he has “stolen” the revolution
and is opening up the way to Communist domi-
nation of Cuba. This organization claimseto
include some 1,000 men in Santiago and nu-
clei scattered throughout Cuba as well as an
exile group in Florida. Also, one of the two
or more guerrilla bands operating in Oriente
Province is connected with the MRR. The
Christian Democratic Movement (MDC), or-
ganized by a Catholic University professor in
late 1959, is demoralized as a result of gov-
ernment repression. In sum, while opposi-
tion is growing, it is still relatively weak and
disorganized. In particular, it thus far ap-
pears to lack a dynamic leader capable of
bringing various groups together and of mak-

PECREL

Serr vi

ing an effective challenge to Fidel Castro for
popular support.®

B. The Economy

28. The Present Situation. Fidel Castro has
drastically reorganized the Cuban economy.
He has embarked upon a program designed to
establish state control over much of the econ-
omy, to redistribute national income and
wealth, and to reorient foreign economic rela-
tions. In the process he is destroying the for-
mer dominant position of the wealthy Cuban
landholding class and of foreign, principally
US, capital. He has further directed the econ-
omy away from the US by expanding eco-
nomic relations with the Communist Bloc as
well as with neutralist and other Western
countries. State controls are administered
chiefly through the Central Planning Board,
which Fidel Castro personally heads, through
Guevara’s National Bank, whose wide powers
have been increased especially in the control
of foreign exchange and credit, and through
INRA.

29. INRA is proceeding rapidly to expropriate
large land holdings. Virtually all remaining
sugar estates are scheduled to be expropriated
after the 1960 harvest. In addition, it has
made extensive use of its power to “intervene”
(to control the management of) the opera-
tions of agricultural enterprises. INRA claims
that its operations already affect more than
half of Cuba’s total farm area. While INRA
has power to establish state-controlled indus-
tries as well as to intervene private industries,
it has, to date, engaged principally in the lat-
ter. It has taken control of a large number

*Recently representatives of the MRR met out-
side Cuba with a number of other anti-Batista Cu-
bans from the old-line Auténtico Party and the
Christian Democratic and Montecristi movements.
They set up a united opposition organization to be
known as the Democratic Revolutionary Front
(Frente Revolucionario Democratico—FRD). The
FRD, whose membership is moderate in political out-
look, is headed by Antonio Varona and has an exec-
utive committee composed of Justo Carrillo Hernan-
dez, Manuel Artime, and Ignacio Rasco. FRD ac-
tivity has not gone beyond the initial organization
stage.

of enterprises, many of which had previously
been forced to curtail or suspend operations
as a result of government inspired labor dis-
putes or other forms of interference. Reliable
statistics on INRA’s activities are not avail-
able, in part because of the informal and hap-
hazard way in which INRA operates and the
unrealistic values it puts upon seized prop-
erty. However, as of May 1960, INRA reported
that it was operating 120 formerly private
companies, which it valued at $250 million,
and that it had established 1,392 production
cooperatives (mostly sugar cane farm coopera-
tives) and 2,000 peoples’ stores. INRA also
engages in the production, purchase, distribu-
tion, and export of certain agricultural com-
modities as well as the import of supplies.

30. The regime’s principal achievements to
date, and probably its most easily attainable
objectives, have been the enforced reduction
of basic living costs and the expropriation of
large properties for the benefit of workers and
peasants. Higher wages and government-en-
forced cuts in the cost of housing and utilities
have increased disposable income for urban
workers. In part because the regime feared
that the breaking up of large estates, espe-
cially sugar lands, would reduce efficiency, it
has generally not distributed land to indi-
vidual farmers as originally promised, but has
transferred it to cooperatives. INRA has
pumped large sums into housing, schools,
roads, and other public services in the cooper-
atives, thereby raising the standard of living
of the peasants affected. Although the gov-
ernment has not fulfilled the glowing promises
it originally made to the peasants, the morale
of the participants in cooperatives appears to
be generally good. Serious discontent with
the government’s economic program is largely
confined to the propertied and professional
sectors.

31. The economy, although going down hill
in some sectors, has improved in others. Real
national income has increased. Agricultural
and industrial output has risen in some cases,
and is generally at a high level. The 1959-
1960 sugar crop was good and sugar sales

—-“fECHRE SE

are up over recent years. The rise in the
real iricome of the workers and peasants has
resulted in greater consumer demand, espe-
cially in low-cost merchandise, and for the
most part domestic retail business is good.
Also, while the inexperience of government
leaders has led to misallocation and waste of
resources, this has been offset to some extent
by a reduction of corruption.

32. The most serious deterioration in the econ-
omy is in the financial sector. Government
revenues as well as expenditures reached new
highs in 1959, but a portion of the record reve-
nues were nonrecurrent items and it is prob-
able that the 1960 budget deficit will exceed
the $115 million deficit of last year, which was
financed chiefly by borrowing from the Na-
tional Bank. Such deficit financing has con-
tributed to an increase in money in circula-
tion. The money supply has expanded by at
least 20 percent since Castro’s takeover, and
the regime is planning extraordinary currency
issues. In addition to larger regular budg-
etary expenditures, the autonomous credit
agencies substantially increased their indebt-
edness, thereby contributing to the rise in the
total public debt to $1,529 million by the end
of 1959, or close to 20 percent in the year.

33. Meanwhile, other sectors of the economy
’ have suffered under Castro. Private invest-
ment has nearly halted as a result of increas-
ing government controls, the revised income
and profits tax structure, a high export tax
on minerals, the gradual freezing of profits,
and the constant threat of intervention or ex-
propriation. Because of forced rent reduc-
tions, private construction has been greatly
reduced. While the high rate of public in-
vestment may offset the drying up of private
investment, it is an increasingly heavy drain
on the government’s resources. Unemploy-
ment, normally high in Cuba, has been re-
duced, but continues to be a serious problem.
Increased consumer demand, coupled with
severe import restrictions and a fall-off in

‘Sugar production normally accounts for 30 per-
cent of Cuba’s national income and provides nearly
80 percent of the total value of exports.

some lines of domestic production, has dras-
tically cut back inventories and caused scarci-
ties in imported consumer goods and some
basic food products. At the same time higher
wages and cuts in housing and utilities costs
are being partially offset by a general price
rise of about 15 percent in low cost consumer
goods, despite some price controls. Wage
earners are also being required to bear an
increasing burden of taxes, union dues, and
forced contributions to official funds, prob-
ably now totaling about 14 percent of wages.

34. The Castro regime inherited dangerously
low foreign exchange reserves from the Ba-
tista dictatorship and in its first year these
declined further as a result of a reduction in
exports and in capital inflow, coupled with a
drying up of the important tourist industry,
which contributed about $60 million to Cuba’s
foreign exchange earnings in 1958. The gov-
ernment’s foreign exchange position has been
further weakened by its considerable expendi-
tures for armaments and for foreign propa-
ganda, travel, and intrigues in Latin America.
With earnings from high sugar exports still
coming in, foreign exchange holdings have
risen from a low of less than $50 million to
over $150 million. However, this figure was
achieved only through extensive import con-
trols, sharp restrictions on the outflow of capi-
tal, and deferment of foreign commercial pay-
ments.

35. Economic Prospects. On the basis of con-
tinued heavy government investment agd
some increases in production, real national in-
come for 1960 will probably surpass last year’s
total. Total exports will probably also in-
crease this year and, depending on the
amounts spent for arms and propaganda, may
be sufficient to prevent a deficit in current
transactions. In any event, the regime will
make maximum use of the credits available
from the USSR and others and will continue
its practice of deferring its international pay-
ments. The government will encounter grow-
ing difficulty in keeping down strong infla-
tionary pressures and worker discontent. The

SC e

pbtinte 9

prospective wage freeze will increase this dis-
content. However, popular belief that revolu-
tionary promises are being fulfilled probably
will enable the regime to enforce some aus-
terity without serious loss of support.

36. The outlook for private investment re-
mains poor. The ever-present threat of ex-
propriation and the increasing degree of state
direction of the economy will greatly discour-
age both domestic and foreign investment.
Foreign firms operating in Cuba will continue
to have serious difficulty in obtaining foreign
exchange for the purchase of necessary im-
ports of raw materials and supplies as well as
for the repatriation of past and future earn-
ings. Processors of imported raw materials
for distribution in Cuba will be under continu-
ing pressure to use and distribute commodi-
ties received from the Bloc and elsewhere un-
der barter agreements, as has already hap-
pened in the case of oil refiners and fertilizer
manufacturers. The threat of expropriation
will hang over the heads of those wishing to
refuse to obey Cuban demands.

37. A drastic US reduction in Cuba’s sugar
quota, which is now just over three million
short tons, or the elimination of the price dif-
ferential favoring Cuba (amounting to about
$125-150 million) would pose a serious threat
to the country’s economy. However, even if
US enabling legislation were passed, such US
sanctions against Cuba’s sugar trade could not
be fully implemented before 1961.

38. Either in response to US economic actions
against Cuba, or to Cuban economic develop-
ment or balance of payments difficulties, the
Soviet Union would be likely to increase its
economic support to Cuba. Such support
could take the form of increased Bloc pur-
chases of Cuban sugar, probably for barter
but possibly for convertible exchange, Soviet
credits against future sugar crops, additional
credit for Soviet capital goods, and increased
technical assistance.

C. Foreign Policy

39. Cuban foreign policy appears to be domi-
nated by Castro’s concept that he is engaged
in a great crusade to liberate Cuba and the
rest of Latin America from domination by
the US and by indigenous reactionary ele-
ments. Castro has thus far refrained from
drastic action which would threaten a com-
plete rupture with the US and has made oc-
casional moves toward temporary abatement
of tensions. Nevertheless, he has directed an
increasing barrage of vituperation against the
US and has also attacked the OAS as well
as a number of Latin American governments
as instruments of US imperialism. Specific
Castro targets have included alleged US co-
lonialism in Puerto Rico, US subjugation of
Panama, and economic exploitation of Latin
America by US business interests. He has
sought thereby to undermine Western Hemi-
sphere solidarity, to reduce US influence in
Latin America, and to replace unfriendly gov-
ernments with ones more closely oriented to
his own.

40. Although Cuba’s foreign policy is officially
one of neutralism—and has been marked by
moves to cultivate the UAR, Indonesia, and
others in the neutralist camp—Castro has
meanwhile moved steadily closer to the Sino-
Soviet Bloc. We have no firm evidence that
there is any policy coordination between Cuba
and Bloc countries. However, Cuba has be-
come a major center for Communist-line prop-
aganda and organizational activities in Latin
America, and the Castro government has
worked closely with the Communist powers
in carrying out its own activities in this field.
The renewal of diplomatie relations with the
USSR and Czechoslovakia? in May 1960 fol-
lowed a period of growing cultural, labor, and
economic contacts marked by Cuban accept-
ance of substantial trade and credit arrange-
ments with the Soviet Union, East Germany,

7Cuban relations with Czechoslovakia were never
officially broken, but were allowed to lapse when
Cuba-Soviet relations were broken in 1952.

—~SHERESE
} |

(Gees 10

Poland and Czechoslovakia* A large number
of Soviet and other Bloc technicians and trade
specialists are arriving in Cuba. Khrushchev
has accepted an invitation to visit Cuba at
an unspecified date.

41. Cuba has not officially recognized Com-
munist China and has no formal commercial
agreement with that country. Cuba has,
however, sold some 130,000 tons of sugar to
Communist China in 1960 and may be ne-
gotiating for the sale of 500,000 tons more.
Cultural relations between the two countries
have increased markedly and Chou En-lai may
have been invited to visit Cuba. Communist
China’s news agency maintains a large branch
in Havana and a Chinese language newspaper
is published there. A Communist China-
Cuban friendship society was established there
recently. Moreover, 2a Communist front or-
ganization oriented toward the comparatively
large and wealthy Chinese community in
Havana has been established with the dual
objective of furthering the interests of the
Chinese People’s Republic and the Cuban
revolution.

42. Fidel Castro’s Latin American policy has
not only sought to enlist official sympathy
and support for Cuba and for such projects
as the proposed conference of underdeveloped
countries, but has also attempted to spread
the revolution. Although the regime’s initial
interest in sponsoring guerrilla invasions of
other Central American and Caribbean coun-

®*The USSR is committed to purchase one million
tons of Cuban sugar annually for the next five years,
and to provide a $100 million line of credit to cover
the costs of capital equipment imports and techni-
cal assistance for new industrial plans to be under-
taken during a five-year period beginning in 1961.
The agreement with the USSR calls for 20 percent
of the USSR’s imports of sugar during 1961-1964 to
be paid for in US dollars and the remainder in ship-
ments of Soviet goods. A one-year trade agreement
concluded with East Germany calls initially for the
barter of 60,000 tons of sugar for German machinery
and small industrial plants. A one-year agreement
with Poland provides the framework for delivery of
Polish industrial goods for Cuban sugar, minerals,
metals, and other raw materials. Czechoslovakia
recently extended a $2) million credit for industrial
development; also a technical assistance agreement
and a five-year trade pact have been concluded by
the two governments.

tries has subsided somewhat—probably as a
result of growing recognition of the difficulties
of carrying out such operations successfully
without undue risk—the effort to export the
revolution by other means has intensified.
Working in cooperation with Communist and
other radical elements and exile groups who
have flocked to Havana, the Castro regime has
organized a wide variety of cultural delega-
tions, Cuba friendship societies, and similar
mechanisms for spreading the Cuban story
and stirring up opposition elements within
other Latin American countries. In many
cases Cuban diplomats, a number of whom
have connections with the PSP and Commu-
nist fronts, have themselves taken an active
role in such propaganda and agitation.

43. Cuban-sponsored or supported interna-
tional conferences of various tront groups have
served as forums for spreading Cuban (and
Communist) propaganda in favor of Castro
and against the US and other targets. A
key supporting element in these activities has
been the Cuban news service Agencia Prensa
Latina, with offices in all but a few Latin
American countries, in Europe, the Middle
East, and the Bloc, and with a constantly
expanding service. Agencia Prensa Latina
distributes considerable material supplied
through Bloc news agencies as well as its
own.

44. These activities have had some effect in
popularizing Castro among the Latin Ameri-
can masses as a symbol of radical reform and
of successful defiance of the US; a vocal pro-
Castro minority exists in most countries.
These elements are not strong enough in
themselves to represent a significant political
force, but in Venezuela and to a lesser extent
in Bolivia, there are important non-Commu-
nist groups attempting te use existing pro-
Castro sentiment for their own ends. Mean-
while, Castro’s extremist policies, at home and
abroad, have alienated many of the moderates
in other Latin American countries who initially
welcomed his overthrow of the Batista regime.

45. Virtually every Latin American govern-
ment now opposes Castro in greater or lesser
degree. Anti-Castro feeling and fear of his
type of revolution are particularly strong

oR

wire 11

among ruling groups in the Caribbean-Central
American area, where blatant Cuban subver-
sive activities have been directed not only
against the old-line dictatorship of the Domini-
_ can Republic but against most of the other
_governments as well. Guatemala recently
broke diplomatic relations with Cuba, Costa
Rica, El] Salvador and Honduras are consid-
ering similar action. Nicaragua has with-
drawn its diplomatic representation from
Cuba and has requested Cuba to take corre-
sponding action. President Betancourt of
Venezuela and other moderate democratic
leaders have become increasingly concerned
about Fidel Castro’s dictatorial methods and
his sympathy for the Communists.

46. Even among those not directly threatened
py the Castro regime’s subversive activities or
those reluctant to pass judgment on his in-
ternal policies, there has been growing a feel-
ing that the regime’s contemptuous attitude
toward the Organization of American States
(OAS) and its flagrant violation of the doc-
trine of nonintervention—coming on top of
its vehement anti-US posture—pose a serious
danger to the inter-American system. Thus
far, however, there has been great reluctance
to take concerted action against Castro for fear
of undermining the concepts of national sover-
eignty and noninterference in the internal
affairs of other countries. Few governments
presently feel that there is sufficient evidence
of Communist domination of Cuba to justify
action under the Caracas resolution. Vene-
zuela and Colombia favor concerted action to
curb Castro but only after the Trujillo dic-
tatorship has been subjected to similar treat-
ment.

D. The Outlook

47. The Regime and the Opposition. Fidel
Castro will almost certainly remain in power
through 1960, unless he becomes incapacitated
to such an extent as to be unable to exercise

*At the 10th Inter-American Conference in 1954,
the American States defined “domination or control
of... any American state by the international Com-
munist movement” as a threat to the hemisphere
which would justify the calling of a meeting of con-
sultation to consider the adoption of appropriate ac-
tion in accordance with existing treaties.

personal leadership. Castro still has a very
substantial reservoir of popular support, and
the regime’s police state methods will probably
be able to keep opposition elements off balance.
As indicated above, we foresee no critical weak-
ening of the economic situation before the end
of the year.

48. Should Fidel Castro depart the scene, a
crisis probably would develop in a short time.
Although Rat Castro, whom the Prime Min-
ister continues to designate as his successor,
and “Che? Guevara would probably seek to
carry on in his stead, disaffected elements
would almost certainly seize upon the situation
to make their bid for power, and there is a
better. than even chance that the country
would be thrown into a period of widespread
disorders and bloodshed.

49. After six months or so, the regime is likely
to face increasing problems. By 1961, infla-
tion and the regime’s failure to fulfill exag-
gerated popular expectations of economic bet-
terment will probably accelerate the erosion of
popular support which has already taken place
in some provincial areas. Discontent with
the increasingly dictatorial nature of the re-
gime will almost certainly continue to grow
within organized labor and student and pro-
fessional circles, especially if encouraged by
the Church and by liberal elements in other
Latin American countries. Although Fidel
Castro will take every opportunity to depict
the opposition as made up of adventurers,
yenal Batista supporters, and other reaction-
aries, the growing number of his original sup-
porters who have turned against him will make
this argument increasingly ineffective. ¢

50. Even if Fidel Castro’s base of popular sup-
port narrows, the regime will continue to have
great advantages over any developing oppo-
sition so long as it controls the instruments of
economic and military power, together with
the radio and press, labor organizations, and
the like. However, if serious and widespread
public disorders were to develop, the reliability
of the military and the “people’s militia” would
be questionable, despite the efforts made thus
far to place dependable men in key positions
and to indoctrinate the rank-and-file.

“3--R-E=

SCRE 12

51. The Communist Role. So long as Fidel
Castro and his associates remain in power, the
Communists and their sympathizers will al-
most certainly continue to play a major role
in formulation and execution of govern-
ment policy—meanwhile enjoying further op-
portunities to extend their own influence both
in and out of the government. The possibility
cannot be excluded that Castro will try to put
brakes on the growth of Communist power in
Cuba or that he will attempt to assume a more
neutral position. However, we believe it ex-
tremely unlikely during the next six months
that he will seek to rid himself of his Commu-
nist and pro-Communist associates, especially
in view of the usefulness to him of their skilis
and organizing ability. Indeed, the outlook
is for increased dependence on them and a con-
tinuance of a situation in which they make
many decisions and take many actions without
consulting him. If this trend continues, the
Communists will gain de facto control of the
Castro regime, and are }° near this point now.

52. For the next six months or so, however, it
appears unlikely that the Communists will
have the desire to make a bid for power on
their own or the necessary strength to main-
tain it. Despite their important gains in the
last year and a half, the Communists still lack
any broad support among the Cuban people
and continue to depend on Fidel Castro to pro-
vide an atmosphere in which they can thrive.
Moreover, they probably will continue to be-
lieve that a bid for open recognition or an at-
tempt to seize power at this stage is both un-
necessary and dangerous, that Castro can be
counted on to support the kind of policies they
advocate, and that an attempt to assert their
own leadership would only expose them to ad-
verse reactions both from Castro and others
in Cuba and throughout the hemisphere. For
these reasons we believe that they will avoid
moves which would place Cuba demonstrably
under the domination or control of the inter-
national Communist movement within the
meaning of the Caracas resolution.

* The Director of Intelligence and Research, De-
partment of State would substitute “may be” for
“are.”

53. Foreign Relations. We foresee no signifi-
cant change in the present pattern of Cuban
foreign policy over the next six months or so.
Fidel Castro will almost certainly continue his
bitter and vociferous hostility against the US,
and accuse both the US Government and US
business interests of attempts to destroy the
Cuban revolution. He will almost certainly
continue to engage in harassment of the base
at Guantanamo. Through a series of actions
and reactions, this anti-US campaign might
come to involve a demand for US withdrawal
from Guantanamo, a rupture of diplomatic re-
lations, or danger to the lives of American
citizens in Cuba.

54. Castro will probably continue his exten-
sive propaganda and proselytizing activities in
Latin America, resorting once again to spon-
soring armed intervention in the event of the
fall of the Trujillo regime or other favorable,
opportunities. Although Fidel Castro will
probably continue his efforts to develop ties
with other underdeveloped countries and to
promote a “third force”—a visit by Tito may
take place in the fall—Cuba will probably be-
come increasingly isolated and suspect vis-a-
vis the other Latin American and most African
and Asian governments.

55. Cuban ties with the Bloc will almost cer-
tainly be strengthened. As Bloc economic
programs go into effect over the months ahead,
the Bloc presence in Cuba will grow. Recog-
nition of additional Bloc governments, includ-
ing that of Communist China, is likely to take
place. Cuba is likely to support the seating of
Communist China in the UN this fall. Al-
though both Fidel Castro and the Kremlin will
probably seek to avoid a situation in which
Cuba gave the appearance of being a Commu-
nist satellite, Castro’s receptivity to Bloc ad-
vice and his interest fn Bloc support seems
likely to grow.

56. For their part, the Communist leaders 0:
the USSR and the Bloc will probably do the
best to prolong the present state of affairs
which not only provides the Communist:
themselves with an important base from whic!
to exert influence in Latin America but als:
enables them to say that they are only helpin;
the forces of Cuban nationalism in thei

SECHREHSE

5
t
}
!

aaah rn dbenmdant qematastanty
Cae

ECR

struggle against imperialism and reaction.
The Bloc will almost certainly continue eco-
nomic aid to Cuba and would probably in-
crease the level of aid in the event that US
action, governmental or private, threatened to
affect adversely the Cuban economy. Espe-
cially if East-West tensions become more

13

acute, the Soviet leaders may make greater
efforts to play up Cuba as a source of irritation
and embarrassment to the US. However, we
continue to believe that they will wish to avoid
actions by themselves or by Fidel Castro which
would provide a plausible basis for overt
US-OAS action against Castro.
