Probable Developments in Laos to July 1956
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008012, dated 2 June 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008012).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

whe Ania at opettkdt yy 2008 Lag niljaa erat aie aabebstitie’s Girt UUimals ebiriziy wh Cunt daider ee eon lies +

Pea eT rrr ees

Whissaieed cok

Woe abe 2 eae aka Hee oe

NAT

i

Fe

NUMBER 63.3-55

(Supersedes portions of NIE 63-7—54 on Laos)

NIE 63.3-55
26 Suly 1955

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN LACS

TO JULY 1956

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Phe jollouing intelligence organizations participated in the
preperetion’of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
aneé the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
Stele, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Steff.

Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMIPTTEer

on 28 July 1955. Concurring were the Special Assistant,
Fnieiligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of
Stasi, G-2, Department of the Army: the Director of Naval
intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAP; and the
Depuly Director for Intelligence, The Joint ‘Staff. The
Aiomic Energy Commission Representative to the Sal, and
dhe Assistant to the Director, Federal Bureau Of Investigation,
abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

Daclassified by_ G48 S374.

COPY NO.
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, ONE

212

PONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

[

Y
x

Notetndeand se Shssnhr eae

od

eens

§
j
|
|

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
i‘... “TMINATION NOTICE -

i. Ehis estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency.

&. Special Assistant to the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G2, for the Department of the Army

c. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

ad, Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

&. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

#. Director of Intelligence, AKC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

8. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-

partment or Agency :

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-

cable security reeulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA,

3. When an estimate is disseminated Overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period noi in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate shoulé
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, er permission should be re-

quested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with TAC-D-69/2, 22
dune 1953.

WARNING
This miwviesial | action affecting
the Na Reaetense nist wed States
withic Chee sh ge laws,
Title 13, USC, Se the trans-
maission orp

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department af State
Department of Defense
Onerations Coordinating Board
Atomic Enersy Commission
Federal Burean of investigation

'

. roe eae eS a ae Pater
ESO A OCTET AA IENRACTEIS et Sm CRANE AR ANA ee MORO Omen Het meh i mip . r > 4

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN LAOS TO JULY 1956'

pL UUN enna act ott ID

THE PROBLEM

To analyze the present strengths and weaknesses of Laos; and to estimate prob-
-able future developments and trends to July 1956.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Laos is a primitive, sparsely populat-
ed kingdom which emerged as a political
and administrative unit only after World
War II. In 1953 Laos realized its inde-
pendence within the French Union. Since
January 1955, the US has provided assist-
ance essential to balance the Laotian
budget and international payments posi-

tion and to maintain its armed forces,

(Paras. 8, 11, 40-43)

2. There is a large measure of unity in
non-Communist political circles in Laos.
Except for the current rice shortage, there
are few pressing economic and social
problems which are readily exploitable by
the Communists. Nevertheless, the coun-
try is in a poor position to deal with the
Communist threat because of popular ap-
athy and rudimentary communications
and transportation, and because of long
dependence on the French for most im-
portant administration and_ security
functions. (Paras. 8, 13, 40)

3. The Pathet Lao, a small group of radi-
cal Lao nationalists taken over and sup-
ported by the “Democratic Republic of

*This estimate supersedes portions of NIE 63~-7-54
on Laos.

aA iene

Vietnam” (DRV), poses the immediate
Communist threat to Laos. At Geneva,
the Pathet Lao was afforded recognition
and was permitted to regroup its forces in
the two northern Lao provinces of Phong
Saly and Sam Neua pending a political
settlement. Since then it has pre-
vented the Lao government from reestab-
lishing administrative control over these
two provinces. The Pathet Lao, with DRV
support, is using the time gained from
prolonged negotiations with the Lao gov-
ernment to strengthen its armed forces
and its political control in the northern
area of Laos. However,the Pathet Lao
military forces, without reinforcement by
DRV units, will probably not develop dur-
ing the period of this estimate the capa-
bility to seize Laos by force. (Paras. 19,
23, 29)

4. Pathet Lao, in its asebbatigns with the
Lao government, will cortinue to seek
participation in a coalition government
for all of Laos. It will probably also con-
tinue its propaganda to have its area and
candidates included in the national elec-
tions scheduled for December 1955. The
Pathet Lao is unlikely to accept any pro-

i

+

ugseay

DTN RTGS RITA URES EER TRS SPOTS SSE SITE EI FG IOS OE TG FR TE ET tie Fai Bo

posal which weakens Hs control of Phong
Saly aad Sam Neua. Unless directed to
do so for reasons of Bloc strategy, the Pa~
thet Lao is unlikely to launch attacks
southward trom its present areas or to in-
iiate general guerrilla warfare through-
ous Laos during the period of this esti-
mate, However, the Pathet Lao possibly
reinforced by infiltrated DRV regulars,
will probably continue its military efforts
to farce fhe small isolated Royal Lao Army

‘garrisons to withdraw from Sam Neua

and Phong Saly. (Para. 30)

5. “che Laotian government will probably
continue efforts to counter the Pathet
Lao by improving Lao military and secu-
rity forces and by seeking to obtain full
support of the major non-Communist

powers. We believe that during the pe-

riod of this estimate, the Lao government
will probabiy continue to exclude signif-
icant Pathet Lao influence in the other
ten provinces. Furthermore, we believe
the major non-Communist political par-
ties will probably win a substantial ma-
jority In the national elections scheduled
jor Decernber 1955. (Paras. 18, 27)

6. The Lao government almost certainly
will not be able to solve the Pathet Lao
problem by force during the period of
this estimate. Daspite its numerical

phe Saat 7s ASIST E WD GUS FTO

*

strength, the Lao Army does net have the
logistic and command capabilities te con-
duct 2 large-scale military operation.
Moreover, the French are unlikely to pro-
vide such support. In any case, in the un-
likely event that the Lao government
should attempt to regain control of the
two northern provinces by force, the DRV
would probably covertly provide military
units sufficient to prevent the ‘destruc-
tion of the Pathet Lao. Although the Lao
government raay be able by covert means
to develop an anti-Communist resistance
effort in Pathet Lao territory, such resist-
ance will probably not weaken Pathet
Lao forces significantly or threaten Com-
munist control of the northern provinces.
(Paras. 31, 38, 45)

7. In the longer run, if the Pathet Lao

is not suppressed by force, the best that
the Lao government can hope to accom-
plish is to increase its military and police
effectiveness and popular support suffi-

' Ciently to prevent the spread of Pathet

Lao influence. The long-range prospects
for achieving this limited objective appear
slightly better than even if Laos receives
timely economic, technical, and military
assistance. The chances would be great-
ly reduced if South Vietnam fell under.
DRV control. (Para. 22)

DISCUSSION

1, INTRODUCTION

8. ‘The Sin.gdom of Laos is an underdeveloped,
wunderpopulated, and primitive country, even
im comparison with other areas in Southeast
Asia. It emerged as a political and adminis-
trative unit only after World War IJ, and its
political andl economic institutions are ex-
tremely rudimeniary. Only a few hundred

French-educated individuals participate in
government and politics, and a large portion
of the population of some 1,500,000 is illiterate,
primitive, and politically apathetic. A sense

of nationalism is limited to the few active. .

leaders, and only respect for the Crown and
general adherence to Buddhism promote a
sembiance of popular identification with the
state.

ease ATMA

REE

OPER SF A SE ST A SE SE 5 A RGSS Deg

7 @

9, Because of its strategic location adjacent

$o the Jong and undefended frontiers of South
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand, Laces has
been an important target for the Communist
forces of the DRY. DRV regular forces con-
usted major operations in Laos dvrir gz the
last Lwo years of the Indochinese war and cre-
ated a Lao Communist movement, the Pathet
ac. Under the terms of the Geneva Agree-
ments, the Pathet Lao was instructed to re-
group its forces in the two northern provinces
of Sam Neua and Phong Saly, but the agree-

“ment acknowledged government sovereignty

in these provinces pending a political settle-

_ iment. However, the Pathet Lao has since

frusizated the gsoverament’s efforts te estab-
ish its contrel over these areas.

10. The Royal Lac government and its forces
are poorly equipped to cope with the Com-

maunist threat to Laos. To retain its inde- .

pendence in the long run, Laos will require
strong diplomatic support, technical, econom-

‘ic, and military assistance, and possibly the

direct support of foreign armed forces.

il. GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS

ii. Following the end of World War TI, the
French consolidated their former holdings in
the area between Cambodia and northwest
Tonkin under the nominal control of the sov-
ereign of Luang Prabang and proclaimed the
existence of the Kingdom of Laos. In 1949, La-
oS Was granted its first measure of independ-

ence, and a constitutional monarchy with a

small elected assembly was established. With
the transfer of French reserved powers to the
Lao government im 1953, Laos was accorded
the status of “complete independence within
the French Union.” At-this time, the Lao
government assumed the responsibility for ali
functions of governraent except command of
ts military forces, which remained part of
the Frenca Union Forces fighting in Indo-
china, However, the Lao government felt that
the Srench at the Geneva Conference failed
$0 defend Lao interests with sufficient vigor.
Since that time, Lacs has sought to limit its
former complete dependence on France for
security by the development of independent
relations with other nations and by encour-

Me aG dg Fs Ah SEA HPA Leh 8 4

aging the withdrawal of some French techni-
cians and advisors.

12. The Crown, with its power to promulgate
the laws and designate the Prime Minister and
Cubinet, plays a dominant role in the govern-
ment. King Sisavang Vong is aged and in-
firm and lives in virtual retirement, but his
powers have heen effectively assumed by the
capable Crown Prince, Savang Vathana. He
is strongly pro-Western and anti-Communist

and has been a principal force in maintaining —

cooperation with the US and France.

13. A large measure of basic political wnity,
attributable in considerable degree to the in-
fluence of the Crown Prince, exisu; among
non-Comraunist factions in Laos. Im 1949
most of the “Free Laos” leaders who had taken
refuge in Thailand in 1946 as a protest against
French rule, made their peace with the Crown
and the French and returned to Laos. In re-
cent years, political divisions, which occasion-
ally have appeared severe, have resulted pri-
marily from personal antagonisms among the
educated, related, ruling families, and not
from basic differences on policy.

14. The present government of Premier Katay
Sasorith, like its predecessors, is a coalition of
the major non-Communist political factions.
Premier Katay is the nominal leader of the
Progressive Party, the faction with the larg-
est number of seats in the National Assembly.
Prince Souvanna Phouma, premier from No-
vernber 1951 to October 1954, is the principal
chalienger to Katay’s leadership within the
Progressive Party. The other principal non-
Communist political grouping represented in
the Cabinet, the newly organized Independent
Party, is lead by Foreion Minister Phouy San-
anikone.

25. The legal non-Communist opposition to
the government is limited to Bong Sovvanna-
vong and his Laos National Union Party which
is represented by four deputies in the 39-mem-
ber National Assembly. Despite his personal
prestige as a member of the influential Sou-
vannavong ‘amily. Bong’s party does not ap-
pear to have any significant support.

16. The political scene is subject to some agi.
tation by the maneuvers of Prince Petsarath,

ee td et Sy OR en na NP cn levi bre obit rye

Q
i

2 IRONS GEEK

g
af

ae
a

eB REELNERS ROTATOR FO OO PTR UTE

a former Free ‘Lao leader siill residing in Thai-
land. Tus shadowy intrigues to gain power

im Laos appear to iavelve some support from _

‘Thai elements. He appears to have little real
influence, but his activities occasionally un-
setiie the highly personal political alliances in

_ Laes. e

a7. Premier Katay's government will probably
remain in office at least until a new assembly
aS convened following mational elections now
Scheduled for December 1955. In prepara-
tion for these elections, Katay and Phouy,
with the encouragement of the Crown Prince,
have formed a “coalition” of their two parties
io order to insure a solid anti-Communist
front and to insure the defeat of any Pathet
Lao member or sympathizer who might stand
for election im the provinces not under Com-
munist control. In the past, political parties
have not played an important part in the po-
litical affairs of Laos, but in the forthcoming
elections they will assume critical importance
im government efforts to hand the Commu-
mists a decisive electorai defeat. Through
such a defeat, the government hopes to dem-
onstrate. particularly to the ICC, both the
absurdity of Pathet Lao claims to a special
status and the government’s right to control
and administer all of Lacs.

48. The government, uniess it regains admin-
istrative control in the two Pathet Lao prov-
inces, probably will net attempt to hold elec-
tions there, and non-Communist candidates
in the remaining ten provinces will probably
win a large majority of seats in the National
Assembiy. However, if the major non-Com-
munist groups fail to cooperate, Communists
or Communist sympathizers may win some
seats. In any event, we believe that the post-
election government will be controlled by a
coalition similar to the present Cabinet group-
ing and that it will follow similar foreign and
domestic volicies. <i

ah, THE PATHET LAO

19, The principal internal threat to the Royal
Lae governments is the Communist-controlied
Pathe’ Lao movement. It began in 1949 as a
splinier of the Free Lacs movement when a

group of the more radical nationalists led by
Prince Souphanouvong joined the Viet Minh
in Tonkin. The Prince was probably motivat-
ed by ambition for the throne and an intense
hatred for the French. Although this Lao “in-
dependence” movement had virtually no popu-
lar support among Laotians, the Viet Minh in-
teprated this sroup into the DRV united front
in 1953 as the “Neo-Lao Itsala Front.” The
executive arm of this front was called the
“Pathet Lao.”

20. When substantial DRV regular forces
entered Laos in 1953 and again im early 194,
they brought with them a small number of
Laotian military units and installed the pre-
fabricated “Resistance Government of Pathet
Lao” in northern Laos. At the Geneva Con-.
ference, the Communists exaggerated Pathet
Lao strength (at that time Pathet Lao forces
numbered about 2,500 poorly armed men) and
won the right for the Pathet Lao forces to re-
group in the¢two northern provinces pending
a “political settlement.” Although at Ge-
neva the Lao government asserted its right
to administer these two provinces and the
conference “took note” of this declaration,
the Pathet Lao has been able to establish
effective control over all Sam?" ua and Phong
Saly, except for several small .. ated pockets
held by some 2,500 regular troops of the Royal
Army. -The Communists have since stub-
bornly maintained this control insisting that
such was the intent of the Geneva accords.
Long political negotiations between the two
sides under the auspices of the International
Control Commission (ICC) for Laos have
produced no settlement.

21, Despite intensive efforts by the Pathet
Lao, assisted by the DRV, to indoctrinate and
propagandize the Lao population of Sam Neua
and Phong Saly, the movement probably has
won few willing adherents and for the present
at least has littie popular suppoit. There

‘ have been reports of widespread confiscation

of land snd property in these two provinces
and of severe measures against loca) officials
accused of being disloyal to the Communists.
The small Communist cadres, which probably
remained behind in some of the other prov-

inces when the Pathet Lao troops regrouped
in the north, have apparently generated little’

popular support for their cause in the other
Lao provinces. The Vietnamese taint as-
sociated with the Pathet Lao movement has
hampered -Communist .efforts because Lao-
tians generally fear and dislike Vietnamese,
Whether Communist or non-Communist.
Moreover, the aggressive tactics of the Com-
munist movement are substantially move

_ alien to the Lao people than to the Vietnam- -
ese. ;

22. Using the respite afforded them by the

Geneva Agreements and by the subsequent
negotiations with the Lao government, the

' Pathet Lao has strengthened its military

forces. With direct Viet Minh aid in equip-
ment and advisory personnel (believed at-
tached to all Pathet units), the Pathet Lao has

- built up an estimated armed strength of

6,000, organized into twelve infantry bat-
talions and one heavy weapons battalion.
Four infantry batialions are. deployed in
Phong Saly ard the remainder in Sam Neua.

23. The effectiveness of these forces has ap-
parently increased in recent months as a re-
sult of intensive training and indoctrination.
However, a shortage of rice, coupled with a
general lack of ideviogical motivation, may
have resulted in poor morale among some of
the units. Moreover, some of the troops are
reportedly forced conscripts from areas which
the Pathet Lao occupied prior to its regroup-
ment in Sam Neua and Phong Saly. .

Government Relations with the Pathet Lao

24. Since the Geneva Conference, Lao govern-
ment relations with the Pathet Lao have been
tense, and on several occasions actual fight-
ing has occurred. Following repeated efforts
by the ICC, a cease-fire was finally concluded
between the two sides on 9 March 1955. How-
ever, sporadic small-scale fighting has con-
tinued around Royal Laotian Army posts in
Sam Neua and Phong Saly, and political neso-
tiations which began in January between the
government and the Pathet Lao are at a
stalemate.

‘Seda

.

mei LUN DANE JUTOUN LID AANT

i

25. Faced with its own military inadequacies?
and with the threat of DRV reinforcement of

the Pathet position if the Reval Luc Army at- _

tempts to assert its control over the two
provinces, the Katay government has sought
by negotiation to reach some compromise
settlement. Although Premier Katay ‘has
probably Secome increasingly aware of the
Communist motivation and allegiance of the
Pathet Lao, he apparently is still willing to
continue negotiations in the hope that if DRV
control of the Pathet Lao can be eliminated
these “wayward brothers” can be brought
back into the fold. Moreover, he probably
hopes that by demonstrating the intransi-
gence of the present Pathet Lao position, the
ICC will be influenced to support the Royal
Lao government. The Pathet Lao’s ultimate
objective is the formation of a coalition gov-
ernment throughout Laos. In the most re-
cent renewal of intermittent political talks
between the government and the Pathet Lao,
the government has finally acceded to Pathet

Lao demands to discuss election procedures —

prior to settlement of the problem of restoring
royal administration in the two provinces.

26. The Lao government has con.  . ed other
methods of regaining control of the two prov-
inces. Plans for covert stimulation of pop-
ular uprisings in the Pathet Lao area have
been made, but numerous Lao leaders, includ-
ing Prime Minister Katay, fear that success
might induce the DRV to intervene, or that
failure might force the Lao government to
commit its regular forces to defend the loyal
partisans. Meanwhile, the government has
appointed two high-ranking military officers
as governors of the two provinces. These of-
ficers, accompanied by lower-level officials,
have now installed themselves in the small
areas of Sam Neua and Phong Saly still oc-
cupied by the Lao government. :

27. We believe that the Lao government will
continue to seek a. resolution of the Pathet. Lao
problem by negotiation, perhaps accompanied
by the covert activation and support of anti-
Pathet Lao guerillas in Sam Neua and Phong
Saly. It is unlikely that the Lao government

' *See paragraphs 32-37,

eine Mean, ch eet

FT ed ORS Fie ea

Le Se SR ee

RAE

SPS

coe

Ors

RTS aR ret RULES

FEARED

JSR. COAL Lb

AT La,

1S SARE ROTA, SES

OF Pag RN

Pe OU SE

wih attempt to seize Sam Neua and Phong:

Saly by force, particularly so long as such a
move is deterred by the presence of the ICC,
is actively discouraged by France and the UK,

. and jacks the tall support of the US.

28. In the absence of direct military action
by the Lao government, the Pathet Lao will
probably tighten its control over Sam Neua
and Phong Saly. The capability of Pathet Lac
security forces will probably be improved,
primarily as a result of DRY material and
advisory assistance. Moreover, sizeable DRV

military units readily available to support the -

Pathet Lao will continue te be stationed on
the Laos-Tonkin border, Elements of these
units might be infiltrated to support the

Pathet Lao if the Communists consider that
their control of the provinces is threatened.

29, ‘The Pathet Lao will probably continue to
seek to develop popular support and guerrilia
hases throughout Laos, and te weaken and
Giscredit the Lao government and its leaders.
Although it will probably have some success
in these efforts, the Pathet Lao almost cer-
tainly will not develop sufficient popular ap-
peal or military strength during the period of
this estimate to gain control of Laos,

2

30. Pathet Lao in its negotiations with the
Lao government, will continue to seek partic-
pation, in some manner, in a coalition gov-
emmment for ail of Laos. It will probably also

continue its propaganda to have its area and

eandidates included in the national elections
scheduled for December 1955. Whe Pathet
Lao will not be willing to accept any proposal
which weakens its conizal of Phong Saly and
Sam Neua. Unless directed to @o so for
veasons of Bloc strategy, the Pathet Lao is
unlikely to launch attacks southward from its
present areas or te Initiate general guerrilla
warfare throughout Leos during the period
of this estimate. However, the Pathet Lao,
possibly reinforced by infiltrated DRV reg-
wlars, will probably continue its milmary ef-
torts to force the small isolated Royal Lao
Army garrisons to withdraw from Sam Nena
and Phong Saly.

31, The Lao government almost certainly will
aot be able to solve the Pathel Lao problem by

.

force during the period of this estimate. In
the unlikely event that the Lao government

‘Should attempt to regain control of the two

northern provinces by force, the DRV would
probably covertly provide military units suf-
ficient to prevent the destruction of tie Pathet
Lao. Although the Lao government may be —
able by covert means to develop an anti-Com-
munist resistance effort in Pathet Lao ter-
ritory, such resistance will probably not weak-
em Pathet Lao forces significantly or threaten
Communist control of the northern prov-
inces. aa

32. In the longer run, if the Pathet Lao is not
suppressed by force, the best that the Lao
government can hope to accomplish is to in-
crease its military and police effectiveness and
popular support sufficiently to prevent the
spread of Pathet Lao influence. The long-
range prospects for achieving this limited
objective appear slightly better than even if
Laos receives timely economic, technical, and
military assistance. However, the chances
would be greatly reduced if South Vietnam
fell under DRY control.

IV. CIVIL AND SECURITY FUNCTIONS

33. In the past, the Lao government has been
faizly effective in maintaining internal secu-
rity and performing the normal functions of
government —- primarily because of the ab-
sence of any basic social or economic dis-
content among the population and because of
the apparent docility and carefree tc:npera-
ment of the Lao peopie. However, the gov-
ernment is poorly equipped to meet the new
tests presented by Communist infiltration and
subversion and by increased independence.
The government has only been partially ef-
fective in exercising the responsibilities pre-
viously held by French officials. The with--
drawal of French personnel is particularly
damaging to the effective adrninistration of
the Interior and Defense ministries, public
works, higher education, public health, and
the treasury.

34. The Lao Army, with a total strencth of
29,000, including 5,000 National Guard, is
poorly trained, logistically weak, and badly
led. The regular forces include 18 infantry

battalions, 1 parachute battalion, 2 armed re-
connaissance companies, and approximately
24 eommantio companies. The embryonic
Laotian alr force dees not have and, during
the period of this estimate, will not develop a
eombal capability.

35. Since the Geneva Agreements, the effec-
tiveness of the army has been considerably re-
duced as 2 result of the partial withdrawal of
French cadres from Lao combat units, and
the general transfer of command authority
and responsinility at ali levels to Loatians.
Tne army is understaffed, and its ability to
plan and execute military operations effec-
tively is directly dependent on the ability and
- Willingness of fhe French military mission to
inflmence and direct such operations..

36. The French Military Advisory Mission to
Laos, whese strength is limited to 1,500 by the
Geneva Agreement, has 2 current strength of
abort 1,150. Approxizeately 80 percent of the
French mission personnel are engaged in posi-

tions involving coramané, and staff functions,

primarily in technical and logistical services.
The feeling of Independence afforded the Lao
Army by the relinguishment of French con-
trol im July 1954 has led to a tendency by Lao
officers to disregard the advice of French ad-
visors and to resent the presence of French
officers Im positions of leadership. A serious
maoraie problem has apparently arisen among
French personnel who find themselves work-
ing In an unfriendly atmosphere. This con-
dition aggravates the weakness of the Lao

34, In addition to the Advisory Mission, the
French are also permittea to maintain a force
oF 3,500 combat troops at two bases in Laos
for the defense of that country. At present
the French have only about 1,000 troops (one
battalion glus necessary service troops) main-
taining one base at Seno in central Laos.
‘fais foree could be readily reinforced by air
to the authorized strength, but even at full
glvength this small contingent could not be
considered an effective deterrent to any strong
javading force.

38, Given Franco-Lao cooperation in plan-

a

ming together with French logistic support of

pind bsi/Uid DANE JUNO LID AE

operations, the Lao Army probably has the
capability either to defend Laos against an
attack by Pathet Lao forces or to attack and
seize the major population and communica-
tion centers in Phong Saly and Sam Neua
provinces. However, the army could not pre-
vent the infiltration of Pathet Lao guerrilla
forces into other areas of Laos, or completely
suppress the Pathet forces in the two north-
erm provinces. If the Pathet:-Lao was sup-
ported by substantial DRV forces, the Lac
Army, even with full support of French fore-
es permitted in Laos by the Geneva Agree-
ments, could not seize Phong Saly and Sam
Neua provinces or defend Laos. —

39. The army will remain totally dependent
on foreign assistance during the period of this
estimate. Progress in increasing the army’s

effectiveness will require an improvement in

relations between French and Lao personnel.
Moreover, the army cannot operate efiectively
unless the French supply sufficient airlift to
transport and supply the units involved in
operations.

V. ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

40. The economy of Laos is essentially sub-
sistent in nature. The small, predominantly
rural population, tsing primitive methods,
normally produces only enough. rice to meet
its minimum requirements. In addition,
small quantities of tin, coffee, and tobacco are
available for export. Transportation and com-
munication facilities In Laos are primitive.
Timber resources remain largely unexploited,
and known mineral resources are small.

41. Total government revenues do not cover
‘even the nonmilitary budget, which currently
amounts to $16,000,000. A chronic deficit al-
so exists in the balance of payment position.
Annual exports amount only to about $2,000,
000, while import requirements for textiles and
other finished goods exceed $10,000,000 each
year. Prior to January 1955, the French pro-
vided sufficient assistance to balance the Lao-

tian budget and international payments po- |

sition, and to equip and support its army.
Since this date, the US has assumed the
French role. At present, the anticipated an-
nual level of foreign aid, mostly provided by

re a Te

f
4
d
i
q

the US, approximates $69,000,000 including
more than 340,000,000 for the military budget.

42. Thera is a current serious shortage of rice
in Laos, estimated at 40,000 metric tons. It
is the result of two successive droughts and
the lingering effects of the Viet Minh inva-
sions of 1953 and 1954. If arrangements for
the triangular Japanese-Thai-US rice deal are
scon completed, ‘Thai rice will be distributed
im Laos to alleviate this shortage.

43, Imports of consumer goods remain at a

‘low level, although some improvements in

Waving and financing facilities have recently
bee. made. In recent trade negotiations with
Thailand, the Laotians gained agreement to
the free transit of goods through Thailand.
Muceover, completion of Thai rail facilities to
link up with the Mekong River ferry near to
Vientiane will establish a route with consid-

erably lower freight costs than the present one .

through Saigon, and will decrease the present
dependence of Laos on the Mekong River
toute for the transpors of its foreign trade.

Vi, FOREIGN RELATIONS

44, “Intil the Geneva Conference, Franco-Lao
relations were in general friendly. Laos was
almost completely dependent on France for
military and economic assistance, and for de-
tense against Viet Minn incursions. More-
over, most of the unfavorable aspects of co-
lonialism did not develop in Laos. Nonethe-
less, there were 2 mumber of Lao leaders who
desired independence for their people. The
collapse of French military cower in Indochi-
na and the US decision, following the Geneva
Conference, to grant assistance directly to
Laos, initially encouraged these nationalists
to seek to reduce French influence radically.
However, at present, Lao nationalist aspira-
tions are tempered by awareness of the im-
portance of the French military, economic,
and cultural contrioution to the country.
‘There are no indications that Laotians desire
to leave the French Union, and one of the
objectives of the Katay government is te
strenginen its friendly relations with France,

“0. Ai the present time, France almost cer-
tainly desires to keep Za0s within the French

Union in order to bolster claims of France to

- great power status and to ensure its participa-

tion in the making of Free World Asian poli-
cies. However, French policy towards Laos,
particularly with respect to the problem posed
by the Pathet Lao, is apparently seriously in-
hibited by a basic aversion to any measures
that would involve greater expense to France
or that would risk the involvement of its
Military forces in renewed hostilities. Con-

. Sequently, it has advised the Lao government

to refrain from using military force to break
Pathet Lao resistance in the two provinces,
and indicated that French troops would not
participate in such an operation.

46. Although limited by the Geneva Agree-
ments restrictions on military training assist-
ance, the US has played a constantly grow-
ing role in Laos, Accordingly, Lao policy on
all basic issues has been considerably influ-
enced by its desire to receive US support.

47. Within the restraints set by US and other
Western influences, Premier Katay, by deal-
ing directly with Communist China and the
DRV at Bandung, has sought to improve his
position vis-a-vis the Pathet Lao and te lessen
the threat of forceful Comraunist action. Pre-
mier Katay has reportedly indicated his ap-
proval of the Chou-Nehru “Five Principles.”
Ai the ‘ns’ance of the Indians and the Com-
munist Chinese at the Bandung Conference,
Katay joined in a declaration with DRV For-

., eign Minister Pham van Dong, upholding

“good neighborly relations” between the two
countries. There is, however, no indication
that Katay intends to adopt a neutral Position
or that he plans to establish formal relations
with the DRV or Communist China. We be-
lieve the Lao government will continue to fol-
low these lines of policy during the period of
this estimate. % 3

43. Laos has followed a policy of maintaining
correct diplomatic relations with all the ma-
jor non-Communist Asia states. Its ties are
closer with the pro-Western Asian nations
than with the neutralist states. Several of
the latter, however — Burma, Ceylon, India,
and Indonesia — have now afforded Lacs ei-

ther de jure or de facto recognition. °

49, ‘The Lao government has sought and

acsieved closer economic and political rela-
dions with ‘Thailand. Although considerable
resentment and suspicion of Thai meddling
ia Lao affairs beclouds to some extent the lat-
ters aliliude toward Thailand, relations be-
tween the two countries have improved. An
economic agreement, favorable to Laos, has
recently been concluded. The Thai govern-
meent has also offered to assist in the trainin
of Lao police. We believe relations between
the jvo countries will continue to improve
during the period of this estimate.

50. Indian-Lao relations have developed
chiefly in the period since the Geneva Con-
ference of 1954, largely under the stimulus

of Indian chairmanship of the ICC. Failure |

to extend de jure recognition to Lao,is due in
part to Pathet Lao control in the vo north-

_ ern provinces and in part to a question of the

legitimacy of the Royal Lao government. Al-
though the Indian government is aware that
the Pathet Lao is supported by the DRY, the
principal factors shaping Indian policy are
a Getermination to avert hostilities and a
desire to maintain an im. “ctiality in keeping
with the Indian position on the ICC. As a
result of Indian attitudes, the political posi-
tion of the Pathet Lao has been strengthened,
the Communists have had time to strengthen
their military forces, and Lao government

-efforts.to establish control over the two north-

ern provinces have been hampered. The
Indian government will probably not change
substantially its present policy toward Laos
during the period of this estimate unless the
Pathet Lao should clearly be the aggressor in
a renewal of hostilities.

ae OR ETE

PORTE SE CAE
