Chinese Communist Capabilites and Intentions with Respect to Taiwan- USSR Korea
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010872, dated 2 March 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010872).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fetes ener: est th cede oe as

| Net g5-20

asdepn mantra ce ticscantiet a Teac

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

; CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES AND
’ INTENTIONS WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN —

“aie aera

NIE.27.
Published 10 April 195)

E|
2
|e
Ry:
i
;
> s i
gore 7.
: «hk | ed
. ye? q a
x0 ' a
‘ wee a
v ! :
ys

The intelligence organizations of the of State,

: the Army, the Navy, the Alr Force, and the Jeint Staff partici-

ie pated in the preparation of this estimate “All members of

of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this esti.

: mate on 5 April 1951, except as noted by the Director of
Intelligence, USAF, on page 4.

RRR aca RE a

cc fouVaRS OF HARRY S. Thiam
s- PapsIDENT'S SECRETARY GE

CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES AND INTENTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN

THE PROBLEM
To estimate Chinese Communist capabilities and intentions with respect to

securing control over Taiwan in 1951.

CONCLUSIONS

1. We believe that the Chinese Commu
nists could not launch a large-scale at

on Taiwan without a major shift of troo
from other parts of China into the coastal
staging areas. We further believe tha
such a redeployment would adversely af.
fect their commitments or operations
Korea and elsewhere.

2. In the absence of US participation in
the defense of Taiwan, the Chinese Com-
munists could, after the necessary rede-
ployment, probably capture Taiwan by a
large-scale invasion. We believe, how-
ever, that, if the US Fleet participates in
the defense of the island, the Chinese
Communists do not have the capability of
launching a successful large-scale inva-
sion on Taiwan without substantial Soviet
assistance. The USSR would probably
estimate that it would incur a substantial
risk of war with the US if it furnished as-
sistance of the type and scale that would
be required to make the operation success-
ful. We do not believe the USSR is likely
to incur this degree of risk solely on ac-
count of the advantage to be gained from
Chinese Communist conquest of Taiwan
in 1951,

3. Although military and logistic difficul-
ties severely limit immediate Chinese
Communist capabilities for a large-scale
invasion, we estimate that the Chinese
Communists currently have the capability
for a limited assault on Taiwan. Such an
assault might be launched in the expecta-
tion of making a landing before the US
Fleet could intervene effectively and of ex-
ploiting whatever potential dissidence
exists on the island.

4. Although there is insufficient iatelli-
gence available at this time to make a pos-
itive prediction, it is estimated that Com-
munist China is not likely to attempt
either a large-scale or limited attack on
Taiwan during 1951 so long as US pulicy
with regard to Taiwan remains un-
changed and the Chinese Communists
continue to be committed in the Korean
war. The likelihood of a Communist in-
vasion attempt would be greatly in-
creased, however, under any of the fol-
lowing circumstances:

@. If the Chinese Communists should
achieve a decisive victory in Korea before
summer or should otherwise be able to dis-
engage themselves from the Korean cam-
paign;

EA “89 egret  o, ee ews

b. If the tactical situation in Korea
made the redeployment of the US Fleet
units in Korean waters unlikely;

c. If the Chinese Communists were con-
zvinced that the Chinese Nationalist Gov-
srmment and its defense forces had be-
some so weakened that they would disin-
egrate after an initial show of Chinese
Jommunist strength;

d. If over-all Communist strategy re-
uired the conquest of Taiwan regardless
f the risks involved.

The Chinese Communists, if they de-
ded to make an assault on Taiwan,
‘ould be most likely to attack in the
wing or summer, when weather and sea
mditions are most favorable. (See
opendix A.)

6. We believe that the courses of action
that Communist China is most likely to
follow during 1951 are: 7
a. Maintain the threat to Taiwan. |
b. Attempt to expand a network for

_ subversive activi.y on Taiwan.

c. Emphasize in domestic propaganda
that US support to the Nationalist Gov-
ernment constitutes aggression against
China.

d. Stimulate international disagree-
ment over the disposition of the area and
international criticism of US support of
the Chiang regime.

e. Exploit the Taiwan issue in connec-
tion with proposals for a peaceful settle-
ment in Korea. ,

f. Perhaps exercise its capability for
capturing the small Nationalist-held is-
lands off the east China coast.

DISCUSSION

tinese Communist Capabilities
t An Assault On Taiwan

The military capabilities of the Chinese
mmunist regime stem almost entirely from
: Strength of its ground corabat forces (field
ces), which at present number about two
ion men. These forces are at present com-
sted roughly as follows:

. An undetermined but certainly large
nber of field force and militia troops are
‘aged in containing dissidents and bandits

the mainland estimated to number
£000.

. At present the Chinese Communists have
roximately 370,000 field force troops en-
ed in the Korean theater of operations and
maintaining a force of 365,000 fleld force
ps in reserve in Manchuria.

The Chinese Communists have azproxi-
ely 200,000 troops <eployed in tiie South
1a area within 250 miles of the Indochina
er.

d. Approximately 385,000 field force troops
are reportedly deployed along the invasion
coast from Shanghai to Canton.

8. A large-scale invasion of Taiwan in 1951
would probably require a major shift of Chi-
nese Communist forces from other parts of
China to maintain the security of southeast
China while the invasion is in process. We
believe it unlikely that the Chinese Commu-
nists could make such additional troops avail-
able without adversely affecting their commit-
ments or operations elsewhere, as noted above.
Such a deployment, if undertaken, would
probably require 90 days to complete.

9. The Chinese Communist Air Force (CCAF)
probably contains at least 1,200 active pilots
and possibly 3,000 pilots in training. The
CCAF is estimated to have available to it ap-
proximately 650 aircraft of jet and piston
fighters, ground attack, light bomber, and
transport types, of which at least 250 are be-
Neved to be under direct Soviet control.
Soviet-type jet aircraft have been reported in
both the Shanghai and Canton areas. The

eae. i

Chinese Communists have sufficient usabie
airfields within effective fighter and light
bomber range of Taiwan. However, since
most CCAF aircraft are located in Manchuria
and elsewhere in northeast China, a major re-
deployment of aircraft would be required be-
fore the Chinese Communists could make a
maximum offensive air effort in the Taiwan
area. Moreover, in the absence of Soviet
logistic support on a large scale, losses due to
combat attrition and maintenance difficulties
would substantially reduce the combat effec-
tiveness of the CCAF within a week of sus-
tained operations.

10. The Chinese Communist Navy, small and
untested, comprises about 80 vessels, the larg-
est being patrol-frigate types. Although there
are reports that the navy may have received
some submarines from the USSR, it is doubt-
ful that there are Chinese crews capable of
manning them.

11. In the event that a major ampviiblous as-
sault were attempted, it probably would re-
quire the use of all the sea-going troop-lift
capacity the Chinese Communists can muster.

a. By using a heterogeneous assortment of
shipping consisting of steamers, motor
Jaunches, motorized junks, and a few armed
landing craft, the Chinese Communists could
probably lift 200,000 troops. However, the
troop capacity of conventional craft, such as
landing craft and coastal steamers, probably
is not more than 60,000.

d. Chinese Communist airlift capacity is
estimated to be sufficient to carry approxt-
mately 3,000 troops during an initial 24-hour
period. According to reports, the Chinese
Communists are training 20,000-25,000 air-
borne troops which are not now in the invasion
coast area.

12. The Chinese Communists would face seri-
ous logistical difficulties in supporting an as-
sault against Taiwan, particularly if it were to
take place while operations in Korea were con-
tinuing. Because of the weakness of their in-
ternal lines of communication, the Commu-
nists would have considerable difficulty in
rapidiy redeploying troops and materiel.
#1 Therefore, prior to an invasion attempt, they
m would be forced to stockpile materiel and de-

“33 PAPERS OF HARRY S. TRY

T'S SECRETARY (owen

~

ploy most of the troops required for the entire
campaign in the vicinity of the outloading
ports to the extent not already accomplished.
The reinforcement and resupply of the assault
forces would require a substantial daily water-
lift and it would be essential for the Commu-
nists to maintain air and sea supremacy in the
Straits.

13. Moreover, 3t would be virtually impossible
for the Chinese Communists to achieve sur-
prise in a large-scale assault, net only because
of the necessity of a substantial advance build-
up, but also because:

c. Even if transportation and storage facili-
ties permitted all necessary troops, shipping,
and supplies to be assembled in the three port
areas adjacent to Taiwan (Swatow, Amoy, and
Foochow), such concentrations would be diffi-
cult to conceal (see Map);

b. In the event that the Communists at-
tempted to coordinate operations from widely
separated points along the coast, there would
be a 24-48 hour differential between the time
of departure of assault forces from more dis-
tant ports (such as Shanghai or Canton) and
that of forces from Amoy or Foochow.

14. The USSR, in addition to giving plan-
ning aid, technical advice, and logistic sup-
port, is in a position to increase substantially
Communist China's capabilities in submarine,
air, and mine warfare.

15. While the military and logistic diffi-
culties outlined in preceding paragraphs limit
severely the Chinese Communist capabilities
for a large-scale invasion of Taiwan without
additional assistance by the USSR, the possi-
bility that the Chinese Communists might at-
tempt a limited attack on the island cannot
be ignored. This attack might be carried out
by a force of up to 60,000 troops car-
ried in available Ignding craft and coastal
steamers that have a dusk-to-dawn radits of
120 miles. The amphibious attack could be
launched in conjunction with a small-scale
airborne operation. The Chinese Commu-
nists might launch such an assault in the ex-
pectation of making a landing before the US
Fleet could intervene effectively and of exploit-
ing whatever potential dissidence may exist on
the island.

A eS ttt

Eve

Nationalist Capabilities to Defend Taiwan

16. The Chinese Nationalist concept of the de-
fense of Taiwan calls for a static perimeter
defense by the infantry with an armored force
centrally located and serving as a mobile re-
serve.

a. Approximately 300,000 Nationalist troops,
mainly infantry, are stationed on Taiwan.
The armored force has an estimated strength
of 30,000 men and 400 light tanks. As a re-
sult of continuous training, better pay and
rations, and, to some extent, improved com-
mand, the present capabilities of the Nation-
alist ground forces are apparently greater
than at the time of the Nationalist defeat on
the mainland. Chiang Kai-shek has made
strong efforts to remove all personnel of ques-
tionable loyalty and has placed political “ad-
visers” in all military units, but the potential
effectiveness of the Nationalist forces is still
impaired by dissension within the High Com-
mand.

b. The Chinese Nationalist Air Force
(CNAF) has a reported over-all] strength of
845 aircraft, of which only 345 are operational.
There are no jet aircraft in the CNAF. In its
present state, the defensive combat capabili-
ties of the CNAF are very low. However, the
CNAF has the organizational structure and
necessary personnel, including 1,700 trained
active pilots, to absorb and utilize additional
equipment to improve its effectiveness as a de-
fensive force. Such additiona] equipment
alone, however, would not be sufficient to en-
able the CNAF to defend the island against
Communist air attacks.

c. The Chinese Nationalist Navy consists of
approximately 150 miscellaneous craft, the
largest of which are seven destroyer-type ves-
sels. About half of the Nationalist fleet is
constantly laid up for repair or overhaul. Al-
though naval personne! are fairly well trained,
the political intrigues of the senior officers de-
tract from the Navy's capabilities.

17. The Chinese Nationalist Government has
taken far-reaching steps to guard against Chi-
nese Communist sabotage on Taiwan through
strict surveillance and drastic methods.
Nevertheless, the Communists appear to have
maintained some underground organization

on the island which might be capable of sabo-
tage of lines of communications and military
installations at the time of an assault. Should
Nationalist troops and officials feel that a
Communist victory on Taiwan were imminent,
many would be susceptible to subversion, and
& movement by separate groups to obtain their
own best terms from the Communist invaders
would probably spread rapidly.

18. In the absence of US participation in the
defense of the island, the Chinese Commu-
nists, after necessary redeployment, probably
could capture Taiwan by large-scale invasion.*
Nationalist naval capabilities to intercept an
invasion fleet are extremely Limited. The
CNAF could not provide adequate defense for
Taiwan against the type of attack the Chinese
Communists could mount. The armored
force, & key element in the defense of the is-
land, probably would have difficulty in fulfill-
ing its mission as a mobile reserve because of
the condition of its equipment and lack of
spare parts. In these circumstances, even
without taking into account the reliability
factor, it is doubtful that the Nationalist
ground forces could successfully defend the
island if the Chinese Communists succeeded in
making large-scale landings.

19. On the other hand, we believe that the
Chinese Nationalists are capable of holding
Taiwan against a determined Chinese Commu-
nist invasion if substantial US naval power
and air power participate promptly in the de-
fense of the island and if the USSR does not
intervene.*

Sino-Soviet Intentions With
Respect to Taiwan

20. Reports continue to be received of am-
phibious training and landing craft construc-
tion on the east coast of mainland China, in-

* he Director of Intelligence, US Air Force, esti-
mates that as long as the Chinese Communists re-
main heavily engaged in Korea, the Chinese Nation-
alists probably are capable of holding Taiwan,
without the direct employment of US forces, against
a determined invasion attempt by the former, pro-
viding the Nationalists are given substantial US aid
now rather than at the cutset of any invasion at-
tempt and that the USSR does not intervene.

ting that Peiping probably has not aban-
2d its plans for an invasion of Taiwan.
mt troop build-ups along the coast oppo-
Taiwan and intensified construction work
earby airfields could indicate preparations
in early assault on Taiwan or on some of
smaller Nationalist-held islands off the
coast (such as Chinmen or Mats which
chinese Communists could capture at will;
may, on the other hand, be merely meas-
of defense against anticipated US-sup-
+d Nationalist landings.

The Chinese Communists consider gain-
sontrol over Tatwan to be of major im-
ace. In Nationalist hands, Taiwan rep-
4s the last major remnant of organized
ance to the Communist regime, a symbo}
tistance, and a source of aid to mainland
fents. The Chinese Communists un-
‘edly believe that Taiwan will eventually
ed as & base for a US-assisted invasion of
orniniand, and they will regard Taiwan
threat to their security until the island
Jer their control. Although the Chinese
aunist leaders are apparently anxious to
ed with the conquest of Taiwan and have
tedly pledged themselves to the “libera-
of the island, recent Chinese propaganda
laced less emphasis on Taiwan and has
mamitted the regime to an early invasion
pt. (See Appendix B)

1e USSR might favor an early Chinese
wwnist conquest of Taiwan in order to
1 the US Pacific lines of defense and ob-
staging area for further Communist of-
2 action to the south. Both the USSR
he Chinese Communists, however, will
aly view the problem of Taiwan not in
on but in relation to the world situation
ally and to the situation in the Far East
ticular. If these larger considerations
them from accepting the risks involved
early assault on Taiwan, a continuation
present impasse still has certain advan-
in that it has a divisive effect on the
m Powers and serves as an additional
point for Chinese Communist anti-
sanism.

long as the US Fleet 1s charged with the
sibility of maintaining the status quo

with respect to Taiwan, therefore, we believe it
unlikely that the Chinese Communists will at-
tempt a large-scale assault on the island un-
less the USSR provides sufficient assistance
to offset the effect of the participation of US
forces in the defense,

The USSR might hope that it could furnish
sufficient aid to insure the success of a Com-
munist assault on Taiwan without precipi-
tating general war. It would realize, never-
theless, that furnishing such aid would involve
a substantial risk of war with the US. It
would probably estimate that it would incur
a substantial risk of war with the US if it
furnished assistance of the type and scale that
‘would be required to make the operation suc-
cessful. Consequently, the USSR would have
to weigh the advantage of a Chinese conquest
of Taiwan against an uncertain degree of risk
of war. We do not believe the USSR is likely
to incur this degree of risk solely on account
of the advantage to be gained from Chinese
Communist conquest of Taiwan in 1951.

24. The likelihood of a Communist invasion
attempt would be greatly increased under any
of the following circumstances:

@. if the Chinese Communists should
achieve a decisive victory in Korea before sum-
mer or should otherwise be able to disengage
themselves therefrom;

bd. If the tactical situation in Korea made
the redeployment of the US Fleet unlikely;

c. If the Chinese Communists were con-
winced that the Chinese Nationalist Govern-
ment and its defense forces had become so
weakened that they would disintegrate after
an initial show of Chinese Communist

4. If over-all Communist strategy required

the conquest of Taiwan regardless of the risks
involved.

a

25. Under present circumstances, however, we
believe that in 1951 the Chinese Communists
are more likely to restrict their activities with
respect to Taiwan to the following:

a. Maintain the threat to Taiwat;

b. Attempt to expand a network for sub-
versive activity on Taiwan;

c. Emphasize in domestic propaganda that
OS support to the Nationalist Government
constitutes aggression against China; ss

Px

d, Etimulate international disagreement
over the disposition of the area and interna-
tional criticism of US support of the Chiang
regime;

e. Exploit the Taiwan issue in connection

with proposals for a peaceful settlement in
Korea. z

}. Perhaps exercise their capability for cap-
turing the small Nationalist-held islands off
the east China coast.

SPDT et meme ea a na ee 7 \

APPENDIX A
WEATHER CONDITIONS IN THE TAIWAN STRAITS

‘We believe the Chinese Communists, if they mer, when weather and sea conditions are
decided to make an assault on Teiwan, would most favorable.
be most likely to attack in the spring or sum-

er A

GENERAL CONDITIONS

PeasIsuiTy OF LARGE-SCALE SEA
OPERATIONS

LT

thru
March

April
thro

June

Strong northeast: monsoons, currents setting south-

_ ‘westerly through the Straits and reaching maxi-
its Se eS le ee ee eee
and January.

Transition period between northeast and south-
west monsoons; variable winds; light and variable
currents setting generally. northeast; high seas
and swells observed 6-10 percent of time in: Apri)
and May. Typhoons may occu in June.

Southwest monsoon, average velocities. low and
calms frequent; sea and surf woderate. Ty-
phoons move from Pacific due west across Talwan
into Chins.

Transitional period between southwest and north-
east monsoon; typhoons may occur, winds are
variable.

Weather unsuitable for large-scale
sea operations.

April and May are best months for
large-scale sea operations; there
is risk of encountering typhoons
in June.

Average - :aditions bey © an .
April sud May, 5.ut danger of
typhoons makes (nis period less
suitable.

ger is over and before strong
northeast monsoon begins may
ot be So Dorey ae eee
operations.

|

sro:

scivale diansiaicreainaeas

ci tant ten sai tab

nc gaan ATS REAL OGT eet asec ENguNRR MR nr ne eeeene OF me te

i

ae

..  PRESTIDENT'S SECRETAS

ewe

. 2 Per
ae . . =
““Rarry S. TRUMA! an : ae

‘paPRS OF HARRY 5S. RYO RLIES

APPENDIX B
RECENT CHINESE PROPAGANDA LINE ON TAIWAN

The Chinese Communists in their domestic
and foreign prcpaganda as well as in UN nego-
tiations have never altered their public pledge
to take Taiwan. Changes heave occurred, how-
ever, in the relative emphasis placed on the
Promised “liberation” and in the timing of
the operation. The 1950 New Year's message
of the Central Committee of the Chinese Com-
munist Party asserted that the 1950 task was
“to berate Taiwan, Hainan Island, and Tibet,
annihilate the last remnant forces of the
Chiang Kai-shek gang, and accomplish the
cause of unifying China, not allowing the ag-
Sressive forces of American fmperialism to.
have any focthold in our territory.” In con-
trast, the various. 1951 New ‘Year's. messages
gave no assurance of any specific action
against Taiwan during the coming year, and,
moreover, subordinated Taiwan, to the more

general Struggle against American “Smperial-.

ism,” particularly in Korea. Although most
recent Peiping broadcasts directed at Taiwan
have stated that the victory on Taiwan: “wil]
not be long deferred,” the principal emphasis
is on appeals to the “people of Taiwan” to
unite for liberation with the “people” on the
mainland and on appeals to Nationalist mili-
tary and political leaders to return home and
Join the “new China” rather than to remain
on Taiwan awaiting extermination. It is
apparent, however, that the failure of. Chi-
nese Communist propaganda to specify a tar-
get date for invading Taiwan is not, by itselr,
proof that such an operation is not.-planned
for 1891.

Propaganda with resvect to Taiwan began
to shift in Hine but not in intensity. immedi-
ately after the outbreak of Korean hostilities.
Without openly stating that action had been
postponed, the presence of US feet units in
Taiwan waters provided an excuse for lack
of an immediate offensive, while major atten-
tion was focused on the aggressive designs of

American imperialism. On 6 July 1950, For-
eign Minister Chou En-lai provided the Com-
munist position in a statement cabled to the
UN Secretary-Genera):

ritory of China. This is not only a histori-
cal fact recognized by the entire world, but

in the name of the Centcal People’s Govern-
ment of the People’s Republic of China, I
declare: Despite any military steps of ob-
struction taken by the United States Gov-
ernment, the Chinese Peoples are irrevoc-
ably determined to liberate Taiwan with-
out fail.”

By September, the Taiwan issue, while never

ignored, had given way in Propaganda to the

alleged American threat to China from Korea.
Taiwan was lowered to the status of a second-
ary springboard from which US forces were
planning to invade China. In urging the
necessity for preparations to resist atteck,
there was an implicit Tecognition of a tempo-
rary postponement of the promised “libera-
tion.” Thus, General Yen Chien-ying, in a
speech at Canton on & October 1950, stated:

“At the same time we must Tealize clearly
that the Chiang bandits, who are cornered
in Taiwan and directly under the command
of the American imperialists, while in no po-
sition to launch a counter-offensive against
the mainland, may stil! despatch their war-
ships and planes to attack our coastal reuints
and our major cities, and to despatch special
agents and stooges to infiltrate into our
inner ranks for sabotage activities. We

7 A RS TE Uc -<t  aenaaReE, A totter se nn

ED ETN te

arch criminal elements, and consolidate se-

curity.”

Taiwan became a part of the persistent
build-up of the theme of “defense” of China,
Which was utilizea to the fullest extent as an
excuse for intervention in Korea. An article
in People’s Ching (186 November 1950) was
typical of the treatment of the Taiwan issue,

part:

“Knowing that thelr Puppet Chiang will fan
at the first well Prepared blow of the People's
Liberation Army, who Will be aided by the
heroic islanders, the American imperialists
have decided that they must drop the mask

further despatch of air and ground units,
military missions and advisors,”

frais such as India and to weaken UN activi.
ties in Korea. Familiar

“Regardless of any military measures of ob-
struction by the United States Government,
and no matter how it may arrogate for its
Purposes the name of the United Nations,
the Chinese People are firmly determined to
recover Taiwan and al) other territories be-
longing to China from the grip of the United
States ageressors, This is the irrevocable
and immovable will of the 475 million people
of China.”

In the various statements, official and un-
official, Telating to cease-fire Proposals, the
Chin

Sao

WRepeeeraer eee

eat Rages

Saas Cat Sane

da wag

ie
e
H

Ra TTP In Fe RE AT AE ROS

polar etn ta sai as oS rita

<
ea) GA SI
4
,
|
i
