Czechoslovakia; the Dubcek Pause
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000095035, dated 4 May 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000095035).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~ etret
LBJ LIBRARY 7
Manda Review i
Case # NEY OUI a
Document #__2
SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM
BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES
CZECHOSLOVAKIA: The Dubcek Pause
et
13 June 1968
APPROVED FOR RELERSE Nene re

oe i

efi Jac

fy

eee Ca de ae wed at ad

7

WARNIN

This document contains informatién
defense of the United States,

18, sections 793 and 7
Its transmission Or F
ceipt by an una

Excl

LUDED FROM AUTOM
‘DOWNGRADING AND

affecting the national
4thin the meaning of Title
f the US Code, as amended.

‘lation of its contents to or re-
orized person is prohibited by law.

GROUP 1
ATIC

DECLASSIPICA TION

S~-E-CoROE-T

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

13 June 1968

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 12-68
*%

SUBJECT: Czechoslovakia: The Dubcek Pause

1. The related crises in internal Czechoslovak politics
and in Soviet-Czechoslovak relations seem to have eased -= at
home, into @& delicate and perhaps temporary domestic equilibrium
and, abroad, into an uneasy truce with Moscow. The regime of
Party leader Dubcek and Premier Cernik has, in effect, promised
that it will control the pace of domestic reform; Moscow has
gained the appearance of Czech compliance; but Prague seems at
the same time to have been able to preserve the essential sub-

stance of its democratic experiment.

a anes

* This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared
by the Office of National Estimates and coordinated with the
office of Current Intelligence.

GROUP I
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

oe

2. ‘The compromise seems to have come about, sequentially,
as a result of strong Soviet pressures, rising Czech concern,
mildly concessionary Czech responses, and, finally, the Soviets'
own anxiety to find some way to avoid direct military interven-
tion. It is true, nonetheless, that if quiescence has been
restored to the relationship, it is by no means assured in-
definitely. An undetermined number of Soviets are currently
engaged in a Warsaw Pact exercise on Czech soil; their presence
serves, at a minimum, 4S an ominous reminder to the Dubcek
regime of Soviet power and of the USSR's continuing interest in
Czech developments. The recently concluded plenum of the
Czechoslovak Central Committee was reassuring to the Soviets
in some respects but not at all in others. Dubcek, in fact, is
working both sides of the street. He is trying to buy off
Moscow with promises of continued Communist authority in Czech=-
oslovakia and unswerving Czech loyalty to the Warsaw Pact. At
the same time, he is seeking to strengthen his domestic position
by pledging at least the gradual growth of democracy at home

and independence abroad.

Prague's Concessions Domestic and Forei

3. Prague yielded to the Soviets on two major foreign
policy issues and on several domestic issues of great concern
to the USSR. First, concerning policy toward Germany, the Czechs
evidently discarded the possibility of an early move toward dip-
Lomatic recognition of West Germany. In addition, they reversed
their recent public opposition to East Germany's claims on the
Berlin access question and began to mate their bitter open

quarrel with the Ulbricht regime.

4. Recent East German moves affecting West German
access to West Berlin may cause the Czechs some considerable
anxiety. A crisis over Berlin would perhaps give the Soviets 2
pretext for insisting that their troops in Czechoslovakia remain
there at least for the duration. Some Soviet military figures
apparently brought up the subject of stationing other Warsaw
Pact forces in Czechoslovakia last month; the Czechs, of course,
refused. But, in the event of renewed trouble over Berlin --
attended by strident Soviet propaganda against West German
"fascists and revanchists” -- Prague might find it difficult
to demand the removal of Pact troops already present on Czech

soil.

2-3-6

s-5AR-E-T

dearer tenn

5. Im any case, as & second concession to the Soviets,
the Czechs had already reaffirmed their military commitment to
the Warsaw Pact. They did so both in word and deed, the latter
by permitting the Pact exercises now under way. This, of course,
was of crucial importance to Moscow. The political significance
of Pact membership is obvious. In Czechoslovakia's cases there
is in the Soviet view some considerable military significance
as well. Geography aside, Czechoslovakia has contributed more
manpower per capita to the forces of the Warsaw Pact than any
other member state, including even the USSR, and by and large
the Czechoslovak soldier is better equipped and better trained
than all the others except his Soviet counterpart. There had
been several indications that all this might change: the Czechs
might hold fewer training exercises, decrease their participa~
tion in joing Pact exercises, shorten conscript terms, lower

overall troop strength, and sharply reduce their military budget.

6. As a third concession to Moscow, the recent Central
Committee plenum reasserted the leading role of the Czechoslovak
Communist Party and implied that Czech political life would not
be subjected to sudden and drastic change. (Even before the

plenum met, the Interior Ministry hed indicated that no new

S-E-C- T

political parties would be allowed to form at this time.) In

a related move, the plenum -- though disposing of Novo --
allowed most of the 40 or so relatively orthodox and pro-Soviet
members of the Committee to retain their membership, at least
for the time being. The plenum also went back on earlier Party
statements and, well aware of Soviet sensitivities on this score,
denied that the new Czechoslovak course was intended to be a

model for other Communist countries and parties.

7.  Dubcek personally dominated the plenum proceedings 5
and this must be comforting to Moscow. Whatever their suspicions
of the man, the Soviets certainly prefer his leadership to some
of the likely alternatives: & party without firm leadership
and direction, threatening to collapse; or & party in the hands
of ultra-liberals susceptible to non-communist and even anti-
commmnist influences. In any case, the Soviets -- though still
apprehensive about the continued influence of these ultra-liberals
in the present regime -- now seem ready to accept that the

Novotny forces probably cannot stage & comeback.

8. Finally, various Czech leaders promised to discourage
anti-Soviet statements in the press. These had in recent weeks

reached surprising proportions , suggesting that Soviet advisers
-5-

S-E-CyR-E-T

were implicated in the death of Masaryk, the purge of Slansky,
and the genesis of Czechoslovakia's present economic problems.
Some articles had doubted whether the USSR had been willing to
help defend Czechoslovakia in 1938 -~- in other words, doubted
whether alliance with the USSR had ever done the Czechs any
“good. But what the Czechs have not yet publicized, what some
members of the regime still implicitly call for, is the chronicle
of moves last winter by Soviet officials, especially the Ambassa~
dor and Warsaw Pact representatives, as they intervened to try
to save Novotny. That the Soviets are not yet satisfied with
the degree of restraint the Czechs have shown and intend to

keep the pressure on is indicated by Moscow's unusual resort

a few days ago to a formal note protesting the anti-Soviet
implications of an article on General Sejna in @ Czech news-

paper.

Prague 's Gains

9°. Clearly the principal instrument Moscow has employed

against Prague during the past several weeks has been the threat

S-E-#R-E-T

of military ivawsabica: The Soviets are still in a good
position to use military force, and it is likely that the Soviets
would prefer to intervene under cover of an exercise. Yet most
signs now indicate that Moscow has decided not to use force, at

least for the time being. The decline of tensions during recent

“weeks and authoritative reports of a new "political understanding

(privately described by diplomats of both countries) are the
best general signs of this. Other specific signs include the
suddenly more cordial attitude toward Prague on the part of the
previously hostile Polish regime and the decline of polemical

innuendoes in the Soviet press.

ne

* The extraordinary number and variety of visiting Soviet
military figures have in themselves constituted ominous
portents: first, Yakubovsky, the Warsaw Pact commender;
then Marshals Moskalenko and Konev attended by about two
dozen Soviet generals; next the Defense Minister, Grechko,
along with the Chief of the Political Administration,
Yepishev, and-the commanders of the Soviet troops poised
around Czech borders; then the chief of staff of the Warsaw
Pact, Kazakov, along with more Soviet military equipment and
personnel than the average Czechoslovak citizen expected or
desired for a "staff" exercise; and probably Yakubovsky
again, since he is scheduled to command the exercise. More
than one of these Soviet officers apparently promised "good
Czechoslovak commmists" the aid of the Soviet army if they
asked for it.

S-E-C/R-E-T

S-E-C-p<f-T

10. The first and most direct "concession" the Dubcek~
Cernik regime extracted from the Soviets appears to be that the
Warsow Pact exercise will be only an exercise. The second direct
gain, related to the first, may have been that the Soviets
agreed that there was no need to permanently station other
“Warsaw Pact forces in Czechoslovakia (an agreement which, in
the Soviet view, might be subject to change in the event of a
flare-up over Berlin). An additional concession may be that
Soviet Warsaw Pact representatives in Prague will be restricted

in their activities and access to Czechoslovak officials.

11. Dubcek has probably benefited indirectly from the
USSR's handling of the crisis. Most Czechs and Slovaks are
likely to hold the Soviets, rather than the leadership of the
Czechoslovak Communist Party, responsible for the fact that
concessions were made. Soviet pressure has been blatant, and
the Soviets’ press tirade against the elder Masaryk greatly
aroused anti-Soviet sentiments among the people at large.
Dubcek and Cernik are probably credited with forestalling
Soviet intervention and staving off the worst of the Soviet
demands. Thus the Czech Party leaders still stand as symbols

of national independence, an image cultivated to good effect

-8.«

a oe

S-E-QfR-E-T

by their counterparts in Romania. Finally, the USSR's military
pressures presumably alarmed the ultra-liberals, along with
everyone else, and this may have led them to ease their pressures
on Dubcek and Cernik for further immediate moves of democratic

reform.

12. The Czech regime my also have gathered additional
sympathy in Eastern Europe for its independent position partly
“aS a consequence of Soviet heavy-handedness. Early in May,
there were plausible reports that Janos Kadar had cautioned the
Soviets ogeinst exerting massive pressure on the Prague government.
Foreign Minister Hajek's hurried trip to Budapest on 22-24 May
evidently produced additional encouragement from Kadar; Hajek
expressed gratitude for "Hungarian understanding for our foreign
and domestic aims" and for "moral sigdare = It is clearly
Prague's hope that Moscow's concern over such attitudes -- both
in Eastern Europe and within the Commmist Parties of Western

Europe -= will help to deter any rash Soviet moves.

* Hungery's apparent moral support of Czechoslovakia was not
an act of simple altruism. Hungary seeks closer relations
- with Western Europe and to free itself from what one
Hungarian writer referred to as "Soviet Russian methods of
economic policy making.” Moreover, Kadar evidently
wants to be a popular national figure in Hungary and some=-
thing of a Danubian statesman.

-9-

S-E- fkca-n

The Soviet Leaders

13. Prague (like Belgrade) seems to be convinced that the
Soviet leaders are divided over how to proceed vis-a-vis
Czechoslovakia -- whether to be tolerant or rigid, whether to
-temporize, hoping for the best, or to move forcefully in order
to forestall the worst. Even before tensions rose in May,
some high Czechoslovak officials felt that the regime in Prague
was counting on such & division to work in its favor. And in
late May Pudlok said publicly:

I have the impression that the official Soviet
lenders .... support the (czechoslovak) Party leader

ship and the government .+-- But even (in the USSR)

there exists a certain aifference in opinions «++. I

think that our task is to truthfully explain the funda-

mentals of the political development and changes in

Czechoslovakia and, at the same time, oppose unfounded

criticisms and doubts.

If the Soviet leadership is in fact divided, Prague has some
added room for maneuver. Dubcek and Cernik may believe (or

hope) that concessionary gestures from Prague will help to

strengthen the position of the moderates in Moscow.

s-aethoes

14. %In fact, little hard information is available on
current moods and mancuvers within the Soviet leadership. There |
are, however, three general theories concerning the impact of

the Czechoslovak crisis on domestic Soviet politics:

ae Soviet leaders reacted without major disagree=
ments or strains on the collective system, banding to-
gether to present & solid front both to the Czechs and to
their om party. (The evidence for this construction is
largely negative, i.e. there is nothing on the public

record to refute it.)

dD. Though the four top Soviet leaders were united
on the Czech issue, there was discontent elsewhere within
the elite. Pressures were brought to bear on these leaders
by those who feared the consequences of 2 "doenothing" policy
and who may, in addition, have seen in this issue an oppor=
*

tunity for personal political gain. (The evidence for this
interpretation is slim, consisting of a few reports of un-
certain reliatiliby. )

oo

* Such pressures could have come, for example, from a stalwart
on the Central Committee (someone like Yegorychev, the man
who criticized the leadership's actions during the June War),
or from a tough old hand in the high command (someone like
Moskaienko, who in fact travelled to Prague and tried to
intimidate the Czechs ).

-lli-

ne

ry

ce. There were splits within the quadrumvirate itself.

Kosygin was opposed to rash action and hopeful of a satisfactory
solution over time. Brezhnev, perhaps urged en by Suslov, came
to favor forceful moves, partly because his earlier efforts to
save the situation (e.g. his interference on behalf of Novotny)
-had obviously failed. Eventually, some sort of compromise was
worked out; Brezhnev was permitted to make a forceful (troop )
move, Kosygin was then allowed to go to Czechoslovakia to try to
arrange a political solution. (The evidence for this kind of
scenario consists chiefly of reports from the Yugoslavs, who
maintain <-- with Czech concurrence == that Kosygin and Brezhnev

were indeed split along lines such as these. )

15. There is no sure way to choose among these various
hypotheses. Degrees and combinations of each are possible;
indeed, we are inclined to think that there was pressure from
below to do something tangible about Czechoslovakia -- perhaps
especially froma concerned military -- and possibly differences
within the top leadership as well. All the Soviet leaders were,
of course, olormed, but some foresaw the need for sudden and
dramatic action; others did not, or were fearful that hasty

moves might only accelerate Czech movement out of the camp and

- }22 «=

SaE-CAR-E-T

seagate

force the Soviets to intervene militarily. Something on the
order of the compromise suggested above was then perhaps arrived
ot. And so far -- with help from Dubcek -- the compromise seems

to be working.

The September Congress and Beyond

16. Dubcek has indicated that a main item on the agenda
of the Party Congress scheduled for September will be the formal
expulsion of his opposition from the Central Committee. With
that done, Dubcek, according to Soviet hopes and perhaps expec-
tations, should begin to act as Gomika did after 1956 by gradually
reimposing firm Party control over public activities. Among
other things, the Soviets will look for signs that the Party
is reinstituting patterns of censorship which were in effect
until January 1968, restoring the Socialist ond Peoples'
(Catholic) parties and the National Assembly to a state of
political irrelevance, and emphasizing democratic centralism

rather than intra-Party democracy.

17. But Soviet hopes may be severely disappointed. Though
his personality and his ideas remain in some respects unclear,

Dubcek does not appear to be a Gomulka, either in temperament

s-r-oien

SE ACE?

or political disposition. He has already shown himself more
tolerant of domestic criticism than Gomulka ever pretended to
be, and many of his political preferences seem distincly un-
orthodox in Communist terms. He believes that Marxist notions
of class conflict have no relevance to his own country, and
“indeed this opparently was one of the major reasons he attacked
Novotny last October. Dubcek and other liberals in the Party,
as indicated at the recently concluded plenum, apparently

wish to mke the National Front a more meaningful organization,

not merely windowdressing for the Communist Party.

18. Dubcek's views presumably are to some extent a re-
flection of the company he keeps. Dubcek was probably re-
sponsible for Zdenek Mlynar's promotion at the plenum to full
party secretary and head of the Party's legal commission. In
these posts Mlynar may continue to advocate some of his own,
far-reaching ideas: e.g., in his words, the establishment of
a "mulitiechamber representative body” similar in function to
the "House of Lords and House of Commons in Britain or the

Congress of the United States."

-~ W.-

S-E-G*R-E-T

19. In addition, Premier Cernik is scheduled to present
draft proposals for a new constitution at the September Congress,
ond many of them will probably displease the Soviets. Cernik
has vigorously called for a "aemocratization of societ * and
seems to belicve that the Czechoslovak government will function
petter if it is insured against "the system of personal power"
and is made more responsive, through such means .a5 regular
press conferences and opinion polls, to the public at large.

. Morcover, Cernik's economic proposals will probably be aimed
at lessening Czechos Lovakia's economic dependence on the USSR,
and more important, will probably reduce Czechoslovakia’s po-
tential military contribution to the Warsaw Pact. He evidently
concluded several years ago thet Czcchoslovekia's disproportionate
emphasis on heavy industry, including defense industry, should
be corrected, Cernik and other economic reformers for some time
waged an unsuccessful campaign against Novotny's inflated
defense budget; now he will surely be able to set a lower figure.
Also, Cernik and the other ministers appear to be drafting serious
proposals aimed ot extensive, if not exhaustive, judicial re-
nebilitation of victims of the Stalinist period in Czechoslovakia.
In any event, the Czechs, not the Soviets, are increasingly likely

to make decisions of this nature.

S-E-CyR-E-T

5-E-9*R-E-T

20. At some stage in the game, as projected here, the
Soviets will, of course, become aware that their earlier hopes
for a.return to anything like the status quo ante in Czcchoslo-
vakia were without foundation. It is the Czech hope that this
realization will have come too late and that the Sovicts'
reactions will be minimal -- limited to words alone. In part
because of this hope, and in part to insure its own survival,
the Czech regime will surely seek to control both the pace and
scope of the process of democratization. Sudden alarm in Moscow
could thus perhaps be forestalled, disagreements within the
Sovict leadership could perhaps be encouraged, and ao pretext
for Soviet intervention -- one good enough to overcome doubts
and fears within the Kremlin, within the other socialist
countries, and within other commmist parties «- could perhaps
be avoided. Ultimately, if Dubcek and Cernik are thus able to
continue to fend off both the Soviets and their potential critics
at home, it is apparently their hope that a genuinely reformed
and significantly freer Czechoslovakia will be able to achieve
real independence within the Bloc and also restore its historic

ties with the West.

- 16 =

sn gloom

21. This road, however, will certainly not be on easy
one. So very mich depends on the uncertain ability of the Dubcek
regime to hold both itself and the Czech people together. For
the ‘iemae. the Czech party -- having probably rid itself of
the threat of a conservative, pro-Novotny revival -- scems to
be essentially united. But the party nevertheless includes the
more or less cautious (and often vague) liberals of Dubcek's
stripe -=- who foresee a continued, though newly benevolent
Communist dominance of all political life -- and the extreme
liberals -- who advocate a return to one form or another of
gemizine parlinmentary democracy. A clash between these groups
may eventually be inevitable. Moreover, given the extraordinary
openess of the press and the growing fecling of political in-
volvement among all sorts of non-commmist elements, public
participation in any such clash is a distinct (and complicating)

possibility.

22. Thus there is a good chance that relations bctween
Prague and Moscow will again become very tense. The Soviet
leaders, or at least most of them, wish to avoid drastic and

costly, military action. Nevertheless, should Dubcek's control

threaten to collapse, or should the Czech regime's policies
become, in Moscow's view, “counterrevolutionary," the Soviets

might once again use their troops to menace the Czech frontier.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES:

IF ua
ABBOT SMITH
Chairman

246%

seg
