UntitledD) re Pakistan Strong Motivatation to Develop Their Nuclear Capability
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107983, dated 3 March 1978.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107983).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

“April 1978

Introduction and Summary

1. Pakistan is strongly motivated to develop at least
a potential nuclear capability, in part for prestige purpose.
but more strongly because it genuinely believes its national
security could ultimately be threatened by India. A decision
made by any subsequent Pakistani leader to gain a nuclear
capability will be strongly suppor!ed by the military sector,
the most important power center in Pakistan, and by the populace
in general. But at present there is no visible sense of urgency

about the matter and a decision to proceed may be postponed for

many years.

2. Pakistan has already undertaken certain actions which
could give it a nuclear pei ont
--it negotiated the purchase from France of a

facility for reprocessing irradiated reactor fuel into
plutonium suitable for weapons. Were this facility, as
originally planned, to be completed (and this becoming
increasing doubtful), and were Pakistan willing to violate
safeguards, this would enable it to obtain the plutonium

needed for a number of nuclear devices.

~-It has established a nuclear device design
organization within the Atomic Energy Commission
specifically charged with ensuring that Pakistan
will be in a position to produce a device if a

final decision is made to do so.

3. Delivery of the reprocessing plants components has
been delayed and may well be altered or even cancelled. If
it is built, the plant can begin to produce plutonium from
irradiated fuel of the KANUPP re2ctor, Pakistan's only
Operating nuclear power unit, at some time in the early 1980s,
possibly as early as 1982. As of April 1978, negotiations
with France over this plant were continuing and may do so for
some time. If the plant is not built, Faksitan may be able
to use manual methods to produce sufficient plutonium for 2
single device in roughly the same time scale, but is unlikely
to do so. It might also try to build a smail, crude re-
processing facility on its own which, when completed, could
quickly produce enough plutonium for several devices. But
the technical skills of the Pakistanis on probably still too
rudimentary to permit any early success in such a venture

over at least the next five years and possibly much longer.

€

4. A Pakistani nuclear design group now appears to be
operating at a relatively tow priority. Even so, it can
probably provide a design for a simple low-yield fission
device by the time plutonium Lecomes available. Thus, if
the opticn is pursued, Pakistan could have a nuclear device
in hand c»:ceivably as early as the first part of the 1980s.
Earrirg an unexpected wirdfall of fissionable Material, a

device earlier than that is unlikely.

5. There are various forms of penalties Pakistan might
susfer were it to go nuclear. One would be the reduction in
nuclear assistance from Western supplier countries, which

woule fucther cripple Islamapad's lagging power program.

6. Probzbly more important, were Pakistan to explode a
device without being able to embark on a weapons program,
such could well lead India--which does have that capability--
to develop nuclear weapons on its own--thereby tilting the
military balance even more strongly against Pakistan.
Acquisition of an effective reprocessing capability is thus

critical in Islamabad's decision making and is likely to

determine whether it goes nuclear or not.

7. Pakistan has announced an ambitious but inflated
nuclear power program with an ultimate goal of self-sufficiency
in electric power. For the foreseeable future, however, it
will be dependent on foreign suppliers even for the operation
of its present, minimal Svoguam> let alone its expansion. Thus
for many years to come Pakistan will face a choice between foregoing
its nuclear device option or foregoing much of its projected

nuclear power plans.

8. Prevent supplies of fuel for the -KANUPP reactor near
Karachi, will be exhausted by the summer of 1978. Fakistan was
Cepeneen: on Canada for xe-supply cf fuel for this reactor
and also for che spare parts and néavy water “which it will
require. These have now all been cutoff by the Canadian
government. The Pakistanis have discovered uranium in the
Western Punjab and apparently can have a fuel fabrication plant
in operation by late 1979. In 1977, 150 tons of uranium were
reported mined and refined there. Islamabad also approached
Niger in an attempt to obtain uranium. It has asked the
People's Republic of China to assist in the fabrication of
the fuel rods and to supplant Canada as a supplier of heavy

water and spare parts. Whether China will be both able and

willing to comply with this request is not known. Even if
it does provide support for the KANUPP reactor the PRC cannot

fulfill Pakistan's long-ranye nuclear power plans.

9. If Pakistan does get a reprocessing plant, it couid
then proceed to develop a nuclear device or even a stockpile
of weapons. There is of course a great difference between
the development and testing of a simple nuclear device and
the development of a nuclear weapons system, which would in-
clude both relatively sophisticated nuclear designs and an
appropriate delivery system. The price of the former in
terms of financial costs and drain on technical resources
would be minimal; the price of the latter would be great by
Pakistani standards--but probaly manageable, particularly
with outside help. The simplest case, a iarge aircraft bomb
design, would probably require at least 2 years from the
date of the demonstration device. In terms of delivery systems
presently available to Pakistan such a weapons could be de-
livered cnly by the obsolescent, highly vulnerable B-57.
Pakistan has no capability for indigenous production or either
aircraft or missiles. Aircraft it might acquire from abroad

»or missiles it might ultimately develop on its own would entail

-5-

development of more sophisticated bombs or warheads which,
while not necessarily beyond Pakistan's capabilities, would
entail great investments in time, technical resources, and

money.

10. If Pakistan acquires significant reprocessing
facilities, and if it can keep the KANUPP reactor operating,

it would eventually be able to produce an ample number of

plutonium already produced by RANUPP~%

will also be available once a reprocessing facility
were acquired. (Reactor-grade plutonium is undesirable for

weapons but could be used.)

the available data points to
a judgment that even a very eeaae Pakistani nuclear device
is probably many years away. A mix of shortcomings in
scientific know how, likely difficulty in acquiring or de-
veloping critical reprocessing facilities capable of producing
usable plutonium, domestic financial problems, fear of an
active Indian response, concern over adverse reactions of

major foreign powers, and a continued uncertain political

atmosphere all increase the odds against Pakistan going
nuclear--perhaps for the next decade or even longer. But
acquisition of a significant reprocessing capability would

change this assessment sharply.
Introduction

12. That the Pakistanis are almost unanimous in their
desire to develop at least a nuclear weapons capability is
a truism. India has exploded a nuclear device and has a
latent capability to develop an arsenal of weapons. Indian
Prime Minister Desai’s renunciations of further testing and
of any weapons program whatsoever have, along with continued
domestic uncertainty and financial,strictures, taken much of
a sense of urgency out of Pakistani's nuclear efforts. But
that country remains essentially both fearful and emulative

of India and, sooner or later, will probably work to equalize

their nuclear programs.

.

Alternatives to a Nuclear Capability

14. A nuclear explosives program is not the only pos-
sibility for countering an India that has exploded a nuclear
device. The Pakistanis have considered alternatives ranging
from major changes in their conventional forces to inter-
national guarantees. None of these alternatives appear very

promising, however.

15. On various occasions Pakistanis have stated that
an Indian nuclear advantage could be offset by stronger con-
ventional forces. In 1967 Bhutto wrote that an effective

militia including all Pakistanis would be an even better

deterrent than Pakistani nuclear weapons. Although some

attempts have been ‘age to build up the milita organizations
and militery reserves since Bhutto came to power, nothing : > ic 4
has been tried on the scale he earlier advocated. The

Pakistanis do not seem interested in pursuing this alternative

now. i .

16. Another alternative would be an increase in the : ale
Size and quality of Pakistan's regular military establishment.
Islamabad is actively seeking military equipment from a variety ce
of sources to modernize and improve its arms inventories.
Principal arms suppliers in recent years have been China, France,
the US and the UK. Domestic arms production still accounts
for a small proportion of total military procurement, and the
Pakistanis are dependent on external sources for the bulk of
their armaments. Pakistan has drawn up an extensive shopping
list, but even if it were able to obtain most of these items, A
they would be insufficient to see Che nanreeaey balance in ~
Pakistan's favor. Financial constraints and sales policies ‘
restrictions, in any case, are likely to hamper large-scale

Pakistani acquisitions. Moreover, whatever gains Pakistan

<7

is able to make are likely to be offset by the ongoing improve-

ment of India's military forces.
Pa

-9-

2 4 : 3 opel Fa FR

17. Nonmilitary alternatives to a nuclear weapons
capability have also bren considered. In 1974, Pakistan
introduced a plan in the us General Assembly for a Souch
Asian Nuclear Weapons Free Zone. The various Pakistani
drafts of this plan called for verification procedures to
prevent the manufacture of nuclear weapons, but allowed for
peaceful nuclear explosions. The Pakistani proposal was
passed by the General Assembly but with all the nuclear
power abstaining, and the resolution, wnich was reintroduced
with minor changes in 1975 and 1976 and again passed, has
not been implemented. In any case, India would not likely

agree =O any strict verif cation procedures.

18. The major purpose of the plan was to embavrass
India. Nevertheless, it probably represents about what the
Pakistanis think they need to counter India. A Pakistani
“peaceful” explosion--even the right to have such an explcsion--
even the right to have such an explosion--would put Pakistan
On a more nearly equal footing with India internationally.
Strict verification would prevent India from going any further

toward nuclear weapons.

-10-

19. Pakistan has also sought nuclear guarantees from
the great powers collectively, and individually from the
uS and China. Given Pakistan's disappointment with such
support in past critical situations, however, any great
power guarantees offered now would have to be ironclad in
order to be an acceptable alternative to a nuclear capability.
The Pakistanis have already made it clear that current in-
ternational guarantees such as UN Security Council Resolution
255 of 1968, which called for immediate action by the nuclear-
weapon members of the Security Council if a nuclear state
attacks a nonuclear state, are inadequate. Islamabad has
attempted, without success thus far, to strengthen this
guarantee by a UN resolution which would call on nuclear
weapons states to give assurances that they would not use

their weapons against nonnuclear states.

The Technical Base: Pakistan's Nuclear Prograr.

20. Pakistan's nuclear program had its beginning with
the establishment of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission
(PAEC) in 1963. Under the Pakistan Ministry of Science and
Technoligy, the commission was geared to basic nuclear
research, the use of radioisotopes, and the eventual cevelop-

ment of nuclear power. In late 1972, the PAEC was placed

-~1l-

directly under the then President Bhutto. When Bhutto sub-
sequently became Prime Minister, the commission was trans-
ferred to his new office. It is now under General Zia, the
Chief Martial Law Administrator (CMLA). The PAEC is made

up of four full-time members under the chairmanship of Munir

Khen.

21. The principal research center of PAEC activities
is the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technolocy
(PINSTECH) at Islamabad, constructed in the late 1960s.

The central element of this research center is a 5 megawatt
(thermal) pool type reactor of American design, similar to
ones in iran, Israel and the US. It is fueled with highly
enriched uranium supplied by the US under safeguards. The
reactor is used for isotope production, neutron physics
experiments and for training reactor technicians. It has

the capability to produce a maximum of 100 grams of plutonium

per year.

22. The only operating power reactor--and the only
source of sizable quantities of plutonium--is at the
Karachi Nuclear Power Plant (KANUPP). This plant has a
CANDU-type, heavy water moderated, natural uranium fueled
reactor built by Canadian General Electric. All of the
fuel and the initial 110 tons of heavy water for this
reactor were supplied by Canada. It went into full
commercial operation in December 1972 and now provides 137
megawatts of electric power, about 25 percent of the power
needs of the city of Karachi. There have been problems
involving corrosion of heat exchangers reaulting in con-
siderable loss of heavy water, and the replenishment of

the heavy water inventory has been'a matter of some concern.

23. Operated at normal ratings, the KANUP?P reactor
should produce about 60 kilograms of reactor-grade plutonium
per year. If it were operated in a mode optimized for
production of weapons grade plutonium--to the detriment of
power production and at the cost of greatly increased fuel
requirement--it could produce between 60 and 120 kilograms
of reactor-grade plutonium are now in the spent fuel rods

that are. awaiting disposition in KANUPP's cooling pond. None

ney

of this plutonium will be available for use in a device until

fuel reprocessing facilities are available.*

24. New fuel for the KANUPP reactor will be required
by the summer of 1978. The fuel was to have been supplied by
Canada but in late December 1976 Canada terminated its nuclear
cooperation program with Pakistan. At about the same time,
Pakistan announced that negotiations had begun with Niger
for the purchase of uranium which is to be fabricated into

fuel possibly by a third country. Niger has told other

prospective uranium buyers that initial shipments could not _f

begin before 1380

If early delivery is possible, and

if fabrication into fuel assemblies can be arranged, Pakistan
will have an immediate alternative to Canadian-supplied uranium

for fuel.

25. When Canada cutoff its aid, the major nuclear facili-
ties in Pakistan had all been turnkey projects--constructed and
commissioned by foreign personnel with little domestic par-
ticipation. Pakistan had depended on Canada for heavy water,

fuel, spare parts and emergency repairs for the KANUPP reactor.

* Reactor-grade plutonium is "dirty plutonium (i.e., with high
Pu-240 content) produced in a power reactor in normal operation.
It can be used in weapons, but is not ideally suited to that
purpose.

on the US for enriched uranium for the PINSTECH research
reactor, and mainly on the US and Western Europe for the

advanced training of nuclear personnel.

but we cannot rule out the possibility that it
will help Pakistan to keep the KANUPP reactor operating.
China has simited experience in the operation of heavy water
reactors and would not be in a position to provide sophisti-
cated CANDU-type equipment (e.g., a refueling machine) if

the need arose. The Pakistani need for heavy water and fuel
rods probably could be met by the Chinese, but the ee rods

would call for some research and development work beforehand.

ot The Pakistanis have long sought an indiginous

supply of uranium.

In 1977, mining activities in the Dera

Ghazi Klan District in western Punjab were reported to have
produced 150 tons of uranium ore. Though this may be of littte

international commercial value, it could ba sufficient to fuel

29. The ability of developing countries to purchase full

fuel cycles without arousing concern among supplier countries,

however, has greatly diminished since the Indian nuclear test.

Time and effort expended on negotiation will be greatly increased

PAKISTAN AND THE CANDU REACTOR FUEL CYCLE

=
Color #2 Color $2  - | Color #3 Color #1
cotta. f= we / “+ /
. Feed . TT ae
SE ‘Material. [> Reactor Heavy, <>
& Uranium Production Wate)
Milling Concentz’a -
= “Fuel =):
Uranium Reprocessing 7
el. /
— - arenarenind - ° =F
. TT ean 7
_ ery ‘> Weapons t
_ . ome! zo: Component : at
a Tr “ | Fabrication_,<"
(Color $ 1) -Facilities Operational 4
(Color #2) Facilities Planned = = . x
mo ee ES. . comm it Se
(Color #3) ~ Facilities Planned, 7
.Purchase Negotiations- Begun >
=. : 7 .

and safeguards will be much stricter than in the past. All
major facilities acquired henceforth by Pakistan will almost
certainly entail safeguard agreements forbidding use of their

products in any nuclear explosive device.

The French Fuel Reprocessing Plant and Alternative Sources

of Plutonium

a

:

fe

?
i

An agreement was finally reached with France in February 1976

oe ti
ie
fe

to supply a safeguarded plant with a design capacity to re-
process 100 tons of fuel per year using the solvent extraction
process. If built, it would be capable of reprocessing

natural uranium (CANDU-type fuel and also the slightly enriched
uranium fuel used in the types of power reactors planned for

future construction. The plant was originally scheduled to

go into operation in the early 1980s,

Frys

31. However, the odds appear to be sharply increasing
that the rclant will not be completed, at least according to
original specifications, in the foreseeable future. The
government of France has shown an increasing reluctance to
build the plant as it was originally designed. Paris has
since suggested either a “"“coprocessing" or “apparent co-
processing" technique which would preduce
’ i mixture of plutonium and
uranium which is not suitable for weapons use. But the
Pakistanis might, in time, be able to develop an additional

{and unsafeguarded) facility which could separate the plutonium

and make it available for nuclear explosions.

32. The present Pakistani martial law administration
has strongly resisted these French suggestions for change.
And it does have some limited leverage over the French. The
reprocessing plant is part of a larger package of French sales
to Pakistan including, besides the reprocessing plant, civilian
and military aircraft, the Chasma nuclear power project, a
truck plant and a color TV system. On the one hand, the
French originally insisted that Islamabad take the entire
peeeeee: on the Stneey. the Pakistanis threaten to cutoff

purchase of everything if the deal for the reprocessing plant

does not go through.

ie

33. The pai seani military rulers would almost certainly
refuse to give up the prospect of getting French military
aircraft, but could well sacrifice such as a color TV system
as a luxury the country cannot now afford. Other French
items would probably be bought or not bought on their individual
merits. And if the French do renege on their reprocessing
plant agreement, they are not likely to be in much of a position

to object to selective elimination of other items in the package.

~

34. The economic justivication for acquiring a reprocessing
Plant has always been questionable even were the reactors for
the Chasma nuclear power project to be built. The reason given
for acquiring the plant is that it will be needed in the late
1980s and that it is cheaper to build it now. The certainty
that Pakistan will be unable to meet its ambitious goals for
nuclear power reactors in the 1980s adds to the argument against

- -

embarking on a reprocessing venture at this time.

35. Although the capacity of the proposed plant is
much larger than would be required to process KANUPP fuel
from normal power operation, it is of an appropriate size
. to handle the KANUPP output if the reactor should be operted
in a manner’to maximize the production of weapons grade
plutonium. This does not necessarily lead to the conclusion

that the reprocessing plant is intended for weapons use but

it is certainly suggestive fo such use.

36. If built, the reprocessing plant is to be under
a trilateral (IAEA-France-Pakistan) safeguard agreement
forbidding the use of the product in making nuclear. ex-
plosives or the transfer of French technology to unsafeguarded
facilities. When negotiations began in 1973, France had in-,
dicated that little or no safeguarding would be required on
the sale but, influenced by the Indian nuclear explosion
and the increased concern on the part of all suppliers about
the spcead of nuclear weapons, Paris re-evaluated its stand
and decided more stringent safeguards were necessary. Pakistan

originally resisted but France held firm on its decision.

37. Both of Pakistan's currently operating reactors
are safeguarded by the IAEA, as is the enriched uranium used
for fabrication into booster rods for the Pakistani KANUPP
(power) reactor and the enriched uranium used in the PINSTECH
(cesearch) reactor. There are, however, loopholes in the
language defining the end use of supplied materials for these
reactors. Specifically, the agreements only prohibit military
uses and do not prohibit all nuclear explosive devices. Con-
ceivably Pakistan could seize on this, as India did, to justify
a "peaceful" nuclear explosion using safeguarded material.
The agreement +ne French and Pakistanis have concluded for
the reprocessing plant, on the other hand, includes language

prohibiting the use of reprocessed material in any nuclear

explosive device. It also includes a prohibition on the

“at

replication of the of the reprocessing facility or any of

its equipment or technology for 20 years.

38. There are major difficulties, however, in safe-
guarding any reprocessing facility. Unlike power or research
reactors, the design of each reprocessing plant is unique,
which necessitates the determination of safeguards specific
to that facility--a time-consuming process that requires
extensive personal inspection. In addition, the IAEA has
never before been called upon to safeguard a reprocessing
plant. Compounding the problem of the plant's design, there-
fore, is the IAEA's general lack of expesience in the area
of reprocessing safeguards. Short of round-the-clock physical
inspection of a reprocessing plant it is questionable whether
safeguarding such a facility is really effective. Because
the time between diversion of plutonium and its conversion
into nuclear weapons could be sharply reduced if a country
were determined to pursue a policy of diversion, nuclear

weapons could already be assembled before an effective inter-

national reaction could be mustered.

39. If Pakistan opts to pursue a series nuclear weapon
program, it will need the French reprocessing plant or some

equivalent. The French believe that the Pakistanis have

-22 -

af

the know-how and enough of the plans and drawings to complete
and operate the plant on their own. Other experts, including
American area, do not think that this is the case, and that

dependence on the French will continue for many years.

40. Such a plant is not the only conceivable source
of plutonium for a single nuclear device test, however.’ The
Paxistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology probably
has a laboratory-scale fuel reprocessing facility. Pakistan
might thus attempt--though this is unlikely (see below)--to
produce sufficient plutonium using manual methods in this or
some similar installation. The facility in question was
designed to produce only grams per day, but with modifications
might serve to produce sufficient plutonium for a single
nuclear device in roughly the same time scale considered for
the reprocessing plant; i.e., at sometime in the first half
of the 1980s. Should this occur, however, Pakistan would

still be many years from developing the reprocessing ability

enabling it to stockpile weapons.

41. Indeed, the authorities in Islamabad are almost
certainly aware that exploding a single device without having
a further stockpile of fissionable material would be an

extremely*dangerous step. However much it would enhance

-~23-

are

ae

Pakistan's prestige in the eyes of Pakistanis, it would also
aiarm the Indians and--in their eyes--invite some kind of
response. By the early 1980s India will have large quantities
of unsafeguarded plutonium and a proven ability to set off

a nuclear explosion. This is not to say that India would
autcmatically embark on A weapons program, largeor small,

but the odds in favor of its doing so would be greatly
enhanced by a Pakistani test. And were India to do so,
Islamabad could not counter with a program of its own-—

thereby enhancing India's strategic superiority even further.

43. Thus the acquisition of facilities wnich would
enable Islamabad quickly to respond to an Inc-_an weapons
program with one of its own becomes an inesca :3ble corollary
of any nuclear explosive plan. As of April 1 °3, French-
Pakistani negotiations as the matter were cor ~inuing, and
could well do so far some time. Were Pakist= <:o be unable
to get the reprocessing plant from France, tr. odds favoring

any sort of explosive program on its part would sharply diminish.

43. For this reason, Islamabad could conceivably apt to
build a small crude reprocessing facility on its own. There
have been Gescriptions in the open literature of such “quick

and dirty" installations. Most if not all the needed materials

-24-

are available on the open rarket. Under optimum conditions

the facility could be built in a few months and could then
produce several kilograms of plutonium a day--enough for
several weapons-~in an extremely brief period. But the
technical skills of the Pakistanis are probably still too
rudimentary to permit any such early success. For at least
the next five years, and possibly much longer, such a facility

will likely remain beyond their reach.
Pakistan's Nuclear Weapon Potential

44. If Pakistan does acquire an ample reprocessing
facility and develops an explosive device, it will probably
undertake eventually to develop and deploy nuclear weapons.
How soon a demonstration nuclear device could be translated
into militarily useful weapons would depend on a host of
variables, including the nature of constraints imposed by
available delivery systems. The simplest case, a low-yield
bomb designed for internal carriage in an aircraft, would
probably require at least two years from the date of a demon-
stration device. If it were designed with both simplicity
and reasonably high nuclear efficiency in mind, such a bomb
would be quite large, probably wéighing thousands of kilograms.

In terms of existing delivery systems it could be delivered

only by Pakistan's relatively slow and vulnerable B-57s.

45. Pakistan will be extremely limited in delivery
capabilities for many years to come. It presently has no
capability for indigenous production of either aircraft or
missiles. si:rcraft it might acquire from abroad or missiles
it might ultimately develop on its own would entail develop-
ment of more sophisticated bombs or warheads which, while

not necessarily beyond Pakistan's capabilities, would entail

great investments in time and money and place great strains

on technical resources.

but it may be reasonably
assumed that Pakistan could not develop a nuclear warhead
Suitable for delivery by a ballistic missile in less than

five years from the date of a demonstration device.

46. If fuel reprocessing facilities are acquired and
if the KANUPP reactor can be kept in operation, Pakistan
should be able eventually to produce enough weapons for its
limited purposes--if it proves it has the technological
capability to do so. If the KANUPP reactor were operated in
a mode to optimize production of weapons-grade plutonium it

could produce between 60 and 120 kilograms per year. ea

likely to materialize in the near future. If the reactor
continues to be operated primarily for power production,
the maximum yearly production would be about 60 kilograms
of reactor-grade plutonium. This material, as well as the
200 or so kilograms of reactor-grade plutonium already ac-
cumulated--enough for 30 to 40 weapons--could also be used
but at the cost of increzsed design complexity and un-

predictability of yield in the resultant weapons.

If the reactor

continues to be operated primarily for power production,

the maximum yearly production would be about 60 kilograms
of reactor-grade plutonium. This material, as well as the
200 or so kilograms of reactor-grade plutonium already ac-

cumulated- ¥-could also be used

but at the cost of increzsed design complexity and un-

predictability of yield in the resultant weapons.

Exemptions: Xe) / b 3)

For the foreseeable future Pakistan will be dependent on

foreign suppliers even for the operation of its present
minimal program, let alone for its expansion. As noted

, above, China may or may not be able and will to supply
sufficient aid to keep the KANUPP reactor in Operation.
China cannot, in any case, fulfill Pakistan's long-range
nuclear power plans. Thus, for many years to come Pakistan
may face a choice between foregoing its nuclear device
option and foregoing much, if not all, of its projected

nuclear power plans.

am mane

Pages: _ S - 392

Bxemptione: (bY Lf bY 3) |
