Capabilities of the Vietnamese Communists for Fighting in South Vietnam OrigiI
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000016878, dated 1 October 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000016878).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TS 186095,
 SNIE ‘14, a 67°
13 November 1967

ae 143 7 Se

Thad,

es

fd Se

Kiang

si

Capabilities ‘of

AS addiented overleat
13 November 1947

Authenticated:

CUT! VE SECRET ARY,

‘

The following tligence organizations porcpced in ‘the preparation of

% ae * “ot Stats. a : a oe “See
us Gen. Joseph F, Carroll, Diraetor: Defense ristiginca perere
eit Gen, Marshall S. Center, the Peeeten aliobal Security Aaeney

| Absining ‘ - a oe:
. car i ane s ‘ :

> Mr. Howard a Ba Ii, the Aaiinant Barer Manager, Atemie Energy. Con

omission and Mr, Willlam ©, Creger, for the Assistant Directer, Federal

Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside ef thelr jurisdiction,

gue iitense of an United States
gue Seer, 793 and 794, ihe trans:

en

TOP SECRET

CONTENTS

ONT PROBLEM! ye cclewa. ke Sate ek op aed baht BE Shab ee Aa yee es 1
INTRODUCTORY NOTE... ih ptacade: iprintcne eran nes Sreteae
CONCLUSIONS... ss—iz¥ta“ ASL Saks: CO SAE Ae
DISCUSSION .. 5. uid Sows Bante ed cea Seioien tee vedas. Ye
I. CAPABILITIES OF NORTH VIETNAM bgnoue? Mos are een. G

A. Manpower aid Mobilization Potential .90000.0...0...0.0:.5 ce. 4
B. The Armed Foreas 0 00000 cette cette tet sesees 6
G, Military Training and Leadership ©0000 os .5. 0 rs art ass 6

i, THE MILITARY SITUATION IN THE SOUTH ..00.....0 .... ... 10

A, Communist Forees 9000000. 0... Ab toneies2tecsagseego. hs AU
B, The Command Strueture . Bit eA ahs Tinlsh yest ones AO
C, Logistien] Support... ee ee ere
D, Communist Manpower in the South 900 20

I, THE OUTLOOK FOR COMMUNIST FORCES ; 23

TS 186035

. ™. Ko-chit mie Se oe —
: a a Ty 2™,, \ i 7
‘ Pru er as p on Ha ys ay :

“Sic Manning. 2
Glan? an Wr a
Om H KON AK A ae sean ae nH gs eae 7 Pa

aS Sa oe a A fLagCal / “Cao Bans of . a
‘ ce a, NNN lot ROTH t ea CHINA
ee \ ? \. NM NoarH. oe Saye a Lang & A -
No 3 thei 4

oy “Phong ‘yrhaa Giao
} i

.

ro)
: yo A JEQT. VI
J e
BURM Ay U As Oleg Blen Ne SA, eA
me Ary) ns fe
; a4 *Muang Luong’ a
te Nam Tha ” areal *

4 fr, Houei Sai Samneua® =

my, cae
Ral at ae Me yan ae val Luang

i
« “(Prabang
8 el ‘
( Si rns Mora Sen eoye a
i
i | aneee ae OF Tung fanghsien ¢+
Nan 12:60)
f a he o> PONKEN {  HAIN@N
bie.
e;, oe Huang Sus, - pol
a oy Ba Yad
=
Nong Kral .
Udon Th as / aeyane ibe
os shana th are Ba ial
‘ Phanam «harm, v) WIN LAH

\, BREGIAL FONE
+ Damilitartead Zane

Khan Kaen

pe ernie "
aS
a ,

i ~chachoenysas ar oe:

fe ee AliM

4

; PRaW Trvat

“INDOCHINA _

veers North Vietnam military
agian boundary

DAQ PHU Quad
CVisinain)

Railroad
mom Road

ISS 5 AR VOSS WO ESE RET POPPE TIER TT SEPP

Ee poewmne

CAPABILITIES OF THE VIETNAMESE
COMMUNISTS FOR FIGHTING IN
SOUTH VIETNAM’

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the capabilities of the Vietnamese Communists to con=
duct military operations in South Vietnam over the next year or so.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Ou earlier understanding of overall Communist capabilites in
Vietnam had, of necessity, to rely heavily on data provided by the
GYN. Much of this turned out to be unreliable, and in many instances
our numerical estimates of Communist forees, other than for the
Regular units, were too low, Our information kas impreved sub-
stantlally in the past year or two, but the unconventional nature of
the war poses difficult intelligence problems, the more so in a soelal
environment where basie data is incomplete and often untrustworthy,

Manpower, for example, is a key element for the Communists but
we lack precise basie data on population size, rates of growth, and
age distribution for both North and South Vietnam, Assessing Com-
munist expabilities also Involves an understanding of the organization
and effectiveness of the various components in the Communist military
and political apparatus in South Vietnam. Much of the evidence on
these components is obtained from a variety of sourees, iInchiding
captured documents, of varying reliability and timeliness, The analysis
of this data, as well as that conceming North Vietnamese support
to the South and all manpower questions requires eoinples method:
ological approaches which cannot rise above the uncertain data taputs.

“Phiv extimate aupormedes NUE 245-60, "North Vietnamese Military Potential for Fighting
in Seuth Vietoam,” dated 7% July 1866, TOP SECHET,

*The figures in this estimate are current as of 1 October 1067,

TS 186038

a

2 TOP SECR DL

Our data and conclusions are therefore subject to continuing review
and revision, especially since capabilities do not remain static. In
this estimate we have concentrated on reaching the best judgments
of the current strength of the Communist forces and, because of
incomplete and unreliable basic data, we have not attempted to recon-
struct Communist strength retrospectively.

Reservations with respect to evidence are explained where appro-
priate in the individual sections of the estimate. The main conclusions
which follow, however, allow for such uncertainties in the supporting
intelligence, represent our best appreciation of the overall situation
as it now stands, and are based on the assumption that there is no
radical change in the scale and nature of the war,

CONCLUSIONS

A. During the past year, Hanoi’s direct control and share of the
burden of the war in South Vietnam has grown substantially, This
trend will continue.

B.. Manpower is a major problem confronting the Communists.
Losses have been increasing and recruitment in South Vietnam is
_ becomingamore difficult. Despite heavy infiltration from North Viet-

: = nam, the strength of the Communist military forees and political
— organizations in South Vietnam declined in the last year.

9

3, The major portion of this deeline has probably been felt at
the lower levels, reflecting a deliberate policy of saerificing these
levels to maintain the structure of political cadres and the strength of
the Regular military forces, In particular the guerrillas, now estimated
to total some 70,000-90,000, have suffered a substantial reduetion
since the estimated peak of about early 1966, Regular force strength,
now estimated at 118,000, has declined only slightly, but Viet Cong
(VC) amits are increasingly dependent upon North Vietnamese
replacements,

PD, Given emrent Communist strategy, and levels of operations,
a major effort will be necessary if the Negular ferces and the guerrillas
are to be maintained at or near present levels, ‘To do so will require
hoth a level of infiltration much higher than that observed fu 1O6T
wal intensive VG recruitment as well, Considering all the relevant
factors, however, we believe there ix a fairly good chance that the

TS 186035 TOR, SECRET

POP"SECRET” 3

overall strength and effectiveness of the military forces and the political
infrastructure will continue to decline.

E. The Communist leadership is already having problems in main-
taining morale and quality. These problems have not yet impaired
overall military effectiveness, but they are likely to become more
difficult.

F. Difficulties in internal distribution will continue to cause local
shortages and interfere with Communist operations from time to time,
But we believe that the Communists will be able to continue to meet
at least their essential supply requirement for the level of forces and
activities in South Vietnam described in this estimate,

C. Communist strategy is to sustain 4 protracted war of attrition
and to persuade the US that it must pull out or settle on Hanoi's
terms. Our judgment is that the Communists still retain adequate
capabilities to support this strategy for at least anuther year. Whether
or not Hanoi does in fact persist with this strategy depends not only
on its capabilities to do so, but on a amber of political and inter
national considerations not treated in this estimate.

TS 186035

= year) is-heing taken: into military service, The war in general and the bombing

DISCUSSION

1. It has become increasingly obvious that Hanoi’s share of the burden of
war in South Vietnam has grown substantially, Infiltration of personnel in 1966,
particularly into the northern provinces, was more than twice that of 1965.
Hanoi’s direct contro] of military and political operations has become more
evident. The supply of weapons from the North has continued, and new
weapons of greater firepower have been introduced, The logistical systems
within North Vietnam and in Laos and Cambodia have been expanded since
1965 to provide a greater flexibility to cope with the effects of air interdiction,
thereby cnabling the Communists to meet higher levels of combat and support
the growth of their forces to at least their present levels,

J, CAPABILITIES OF NORTH VIETNAM

A. Manpower and Mobilization Potential

4, The growing intensity of the war in the South and more than two years
of US air strikes against the North have made manpower an inereasingly im-
portant aspect in estimating Communist capabilities, Sinee mid-1985 the North
Vietnamese Armed Forces have expanded from an estimated 250,000 men to at
Teast 470,000. This expansion includes those troops in Laos and South Vietnam.

& The bulk of the physically Ht draft age elass of 17-year-olds (about 100,000 each

on eal have foreod Hanoi to divert from 500,000 to 600,000 eivilians (men
and women, young and old) to full-time and part-time war-related activities.

3, Nevertheless, i# does not appear that North Vietnam is eneountering insur-
mountable problems in obtaining sufficient able-hodied men te support the war
in South Vietnam, Of North Vietnum’s total population ef over 18 imillien,
about 4 million or so are males hetween 15 and 49, and about half of these are
probably physically fit for military serviee.’ At present, the North Vietnamese
Armed Forces have taken less than one-quarter of the fit males aged 13 to 49
and less than two-fifths of the approximately 1.2 million ft males in the prime
military ages of 17 to 35, Though there is some evidenee of lowering of draft
standards and extending of age limits, it appears that, with a few leeal excep:
tions, Hanoi is sull drafting only those between the ages ef 17 aud 35,

4, The mamber of physically ft males above and beyond the annual inere-
ment af those reaching age Tf and who are not vel in Uhe armed forees is sub-
stantial, “Phe mest obvious souree af manpawer is agreulliee, where there are
almost 3 million men of all ages, and where por capita production is low. There
are also about half a millon men in the service seetor of the ceonainy, including

*'Phese fignies are based aa OS Censns Bipsau eatinates of Nerth Vietai’s papalation,
which de not aecept eutively the figures af North Victuanis 20 coma and auhaeseat
demographic statistics published hyough 1960,

TS 186035

FOP-SECRET 5

170,000 in consumer services; almost half «a million men in industry, over half
of whom are in handicrafts; and some 60,000 male students of military age.

5. There is of course no fixed percentage of these men who can be spared for
military duty. Hanoi has already drawn men from the civilian economy for
military and war-related tasks, replacing them where possible with women.
Taking large additional numbers of men would obviously involve some addi-
tional cests to the civilian economy, but this would be a question of priorities in
Hanoi. Losses in agricultural and industrial production can be made up by im-
ports ic the extent necessary to maintain essential subsistence levels of consump-
tion; consumer services are to some degree expendable and education can be
postponed, Thus we believe that the manpower problem, while growing more
serious, is still manageable in North Viatnam, At a conservative estimate we
believe there are some 100,000 to 200,000 men who could be ealled into military
service, in addition to the annual draft class.

B. The Armed Farces .

6. The North Vietnamese Armed Forces expanded last year and are now
estimated to total about 470,000. Despite better evidence en their strength,
there are still some uncertainties concerning the actual strength of units, the
number of North Vietnamese Army (NVA) troops in Laos, and the size of the
Armed Public Security Forces. The following table should be regarded as a
conservative estimate,

TABLE 1
EBSTIMATED NORTH VIETNAMESE ARMED FORCES
i Getaber 1967

= SUMMARY
Army WE Ae aS Et a a eS Sid. BOGIES Ge eta oe PEM PIES ae a Ree Be Bie ieee Se ae er a ee eS Se ee Ee 447,500
Air Force 2S how 2 eS 2G hoes ep goieger bd BRE So See th ee ee 4 eG he. Ho Sa ae Ae eae ee SERS 4,500
Navy ea a a EE oe Wa Se 8 ee Pe eae priate Spat esac Ge be BS SUSE TSR SA SG RRR Ete ge Bad 9,500
Ammed Public Seeurity Forees 900 5s cee csc t esa r as seseutnesases _ 16,500
TOTA {, Armed Forces ae ae Be ee a Pe ee eee os ae eae aes et eee ek ee ee ee : at 47 1 ,600
North Viemamese Army Breakdown
Out-of-Country
South: VIM: j64ceeceealk da vae erie erseair age eA tate eee Reese OS §4,000
Laos a re ee re vot . . a8 i a Ste ee Ae 2 RR EY AN SS AF SS Sb ee a eae 18,060
TOTAL nstevepber es ays er Bed shel ei atece tae Se teawee Ta OOe
In-Country
Ale Defensa*® .000000...2200505 - ch) akleGce 2p4 erage ses veceeue  POOD
3 a Satta ES ie, ae oe oe it = ea } % t°P SP 4 a ee oh Soa AES Se Se RSS at 113,006
ea eae a SE RES ARES SER 378,500

"This includes only regular anny personnel in AAA units, radas, and SAM battalions. Tt
does not include parttime air defense personnel sueh as militia, oF logistical trsops suppertiig
air defense,

This includes artillery, armor, high command, logistica, engineres, and transportation,

6 TOREEGREL yen

7. If the recruitment of men for replacemeuts and for unit infiltration into
the South should become a critical problem for Hanoi, ag a last resort it could
draw down its standing military establishment in North Vietnam. The number
of troops which could be released for out-of-country duty would be influenced
greatly by Hanoi’s concern to retain a sizable force for defense against a possible
invasion. If, for example, Hanoi should want to keep some 225,000 troops for
the defense of North Vietnam and another 85,000 as a training base and for com-
mand and administration, then some 65,000 additional NVA troops could be
made available for use outside of North Vietnam,

C. Military Training and Leadership

8, Special preinfiltration training of North Vietnamese reeruity has averaged
about 3 months, although increasing numbers of prisoners report training of only
1 month prior to infiltration, There is evidence of a growing deficiency of prop-
erly trained personnel to fill the ranks of squad leaders, platoon sergeants, and
platoon leaders, There are indications that the norinal source of platoon
leaders, the Infantry Officers’ School near Son Tay, has reduced its 2+year
course to 8 months, The bulk of the reserve officers and noncommissioned
officers have been recalled to active duty, The largest single souree of junior
officers is now from battlefield commissions.

BD. Infiltration

®, North Vietnam has the eapability to train 75,000-100,000 men a year fer
infiltration, By shortening current training eyeles or inereasing the number of
units involved in the training of new recruits, this number could be substantially
increased, ‘Training replacements at the rate of 76,000-100,000 annually, however,
would not permit organizing all of them into units and providing them with the
necessary leadership at the same rate, Theoretically, Nerth Vietnam eould train
und form 24-36 infantry regiments (48,000-72,000 men) per year, but at this pace
there would be a considerable reduetion in quality. In any ease, aetual ferma-
tion and training of organized units for infiltration has been well short of this
theoretical capability,

10, During 1066 ut least 55,000 and possibly as many as 86,000 North Vietnain-
ese troops were sent into South Vietnam (see Table 2). Through July 1066, the
bulk of the infltyation was accounted for by the introduction of organized infantry
regiments, ineluding three regiments that moved directly across the DMZ, After
July the pace of infiltration slackened somewhat, and it appeared that the Com:
munist Regular force strueture had reached planned levels. Most of the infiltva-
tion thereafter wax to provide replacements in existing units.

LL, During 1967, however, the tuiroduction of organized units resumed=—six
yegiments thug far--and the flow of individual rephieements has continued. This
snixtare af units aud individual replacements, plus the special situatian along
the PMY, complicates an estimate of total infiltration, Not only is there the
usual Jag in identifying new unity and inflltvation groups. but there is less chanee

TS 744035

TABLE 2
MONTHLY INFILTRATION: 1966-1967 *
(Data as of 30 September 1967)

Accepted Monthly
Confirmed Probable TOTAL = Possible  TOYALS

1S6G6 fan ooo... eee e eae... 4,200 1,800 6,000 3,060 9,000
Feb 000 00... -.... 8,900 2,200 9,100 2,100 11,200
Maro... oe. ELTOO 1,400 13,100 3,600 16,760
Apr... Pen e 100 500 600 600 1,200
Mayo... So eeeee ee... 1,800 500 1,800 3,600 5,400

June ae, oo... 19,300 700 13,000 1,700 14,700

Joly wee. 4,000 700 4,700 4,100 8,800

ANZ eee .. ... 1,800 400 2,200 3,700 5,800
Sept... sejuhogen Raciaiet 1,400 700 2,100 600 2,700

Ole ae) need ens 100 600 700 4,700 5,400

Navy 20) or wicca dst 500 100 600 600 1,200

Dee oo... ee Lei icces 800 600 1,400 2,500 3,800
TOTAL 1960 0.000000. 00... .., 45,100 10,200 85,300 30,800 86,100
1967 Jun oo. a, . . 1,000 800 1,200 3,600 5,400
Feb oo......0.. .......... 4,700 9,000 3,700 1,300 §,000

Mae oo...0000.....sa3702;: 9,600 400 4,000 4,600 8,600

APl 2 aed eect B00 600 4,300 300 4,600

May oo 0.. 0005. csttesaasis, Bf00 1,500 4,300 1,609 5,800

fare ees 5,900 ao 3,300 300 3,600

faly co cieue? Pee eer ees cia 400 400 = 400

AU cc caress 1,100 = 1,100 700 1,800

: ce wee wee = = =

“Infiltration telades only arrivals ia South Vietnam. Statistica for 1967 are subject to
retyoaxtive updating beeaase of the nn receipt of new information. In particular, the
Syures for the last 6 months or so are incomplete, and inadequate te determine trends. These
figuees inclide the following categories:

ACCEPTED: Accepted Confirmed: A coufiemed infiltration unit/group is one which is accepted
in South Vietnam on the basis ef Information provided by a mininwum of two
POW's or returnees from the unit/group, er twe eaptured documents from the
uit, op a combination of personnel and documents,
Accepted Probable: A probable infiltration unit/greup is one which is accepted
in Sauth Vietnam on the basis of information provided by one POW or retumve
trom the unit/group, or a captured document, supported by information from
ather sources which can be evaliated as probably true.

POSSIBLE: A, possible infiltration unit/group is one which may be in South Vietnam on the
basis af Ldormation which can he evaluated as possibly true even theugh ne
POW, returnee, or document is available to verify the reports.

(eRSkeREr TS 186035

8 FOP=SECRET

of capturing personnel or documents from each of the numerous small replace-
ment groups. There is also the problem of the units that suffer casualties in the
DMZ area and return to North Vietnamese territory for replacements, these
latter cannot always be identified as new infiltrators when the units return to South
Vietnamese territory. A similar problem applies to other border areas,

12. Infiltration thus far in 1967 totals about 35,000 in all categories (accepted
and possible). Allowing for the probability that later information will raise
these figures, and extrapolating, it now appears that total infiltration for 1967
will be no more than last year’s and possibly somewhat less, We estimate that
some 65 to 75 percent of the infiltration will probably consist of replacement
personnel for existing units. The remainder will probably include seven to nine
organized regiments which will add to the Conimunist force structure but not
necessarily their total military strength, because losses have resulted in generally
lower unit strengths. There still appears to be no clear-cut seasonal pattern in
infiltration or any significant indication that Hanoi is unwilling to dispatch addi-
tional men and units te South Vietnam,

E. LOCs*

13, Supplies for Communist forces move into South Vietnam by various means,
In North Vietnam, truck, rail, and water transport are used to bring supplies
through Military Region 4 (MR-4), From MR-4, most supplies are trucked
through Laos, although some use of waterways is also made in Laos. Some sup-
... plies move directly across the DMZ, and some are moved by sea, In addition,
some supplies from Cambodia enter South Vietnam direetly while ethers are
routed through Laos,

14, Roads, The Communist logistical roadnet in MR-4 in North Vietnam
and in Laos was improved over the past year. Though the improvements have
increased tonnage eapacities somewhnt, they were intended priinarily to provide
additional flexibility for the system and better year-round movement. One
development was the extension of a new motorable road from Laos dircetly
into the A Shan Valley of South Vietnain, In addition, the administration and
operational control of the LOCs have been hnproved and expanded. The ea-
pacity of the entire system for delivery of supplies to South Viemmam through
Laos continues to be limited by the capneities of the routes in Laes rather than
by those of North Vietnam,

1S, Trucks, We estimate that at the end of 1965 the North Vietnamese had
ap bventory of between 11,000 and 12,000 trucks, ‘Losses from air attack have
been substantial, and North Vietnam has been forced to Increase ity imports
to counter this attrition, Tuports from Kastern ¥ nirpe, the USSR, and China
have enabled North Vietnam: roughly to maintaia the size of its inventory.

16, Maintenance problems have Inereased, aud as many as 30 percent af the
tracks may not be aperable Gna daily basis, ‘There is a luck of well-equipped,

‘See eonterspread map,

TS 184035 POR SESRET

FOP EECRET” 9

properly manned miaintemuce facilities, and the varicty of track iinports has
resulted in a flect of over 30 models from at least seven different countries. POL
imports into North Vietnam during the first half of 1967 have been at record
levels, aad we have had no evidence of any serious POL shortages affecting
the movement of supplies to South Victnam.,

Vi. Waterways The coastal and inland waterway system in North Vietnam
provides a useful supplement to the read and rail system and has been used
extensively, particularly since the start of the US bembing program, Although
the mining of some North Vietnamese waterways has reduced the movement of
Jarge craft, small boat traffic continues. Increasing imports of barges and barge
sections into North Vietnarn and a program of wate way improvement indicate
that the Communists intend to exploit farther the potentialities of these water
routes. In Laos, there has been increased use of small pirogues and imotor-
boats on rivers over the last year, The use of these waterways will probably
continue to inerease,

18, Rail. The North Vietnamese also use the rail ling south of Hanoi for
movement of supplics into MA-4, Despite repeated US air attacks, the North
Vietnamese have been able to construct bypasses and keep sections of the line
serviecuble from Hanoi to Vinh, South of Vinh the rail line is net eperable for
regular rail equipment. The North Vietnamese ean only use light gear, princi
pally tucks with converted wheels, to transport supplies over the remaining
rail segment in this area,

19, lnpuet of Air Attacks. Air attacks in North Vietnam, Laes, and the
DMZ have destroyed trucks, railroud rolling stock, and watereraft, have damaged
the highway and rail systems, and have restrieted the movement of carge and
personnel particularly during daylight heurs, They have ereated construction
problems and delays, eaused interruptions in the flew of men and supplies,
caused a great loss of work-hours, and foreed Nerth Vietnam to tie up large
numbers of people in air defense and in the repair of LOGs, Communist eoun-
termeasures in North Vietnam and Laos have inclided diversification of the
means of transport to include greater use of inland waterways and porter trails,
constnction of alternate roads, and of multiple bypasses at important bridges.
A number of truck parks and vebiele pullofis for quick convey dispersal have
been built. These measures have increased the ability ef the Communists to
cope with the effects of air attacks, although at a considerable cost and effort.
Units and personnel moving to South Vietnam have been foreed to move under
cover of darkness, slowing their mavement and subjecting them ta Oe gars
of the trail for longer periods,

20, Cambodia, "The inportance of Cambedia as a sanctuary and a souree of
apply (principally rice} to the Commnmist war effort is substantial and growing.

h

Recently captured doouments Indicate that some Conmnonist units in Tay

*Por amore detailed discussion of thig subject, see SNE 57-69, “Significance af Cambodia
to the Vietmunese Communist War Eifort,” dated J9 faunary 196%,
the conclusions are stl valid,

¥S 786035

10 TOP SECRET

Province have substantially increased their chee s in Cambadia since March
1966. The movement of supplies in Cambodia to Communist forces along the
border, particularly on the Se San and Tonle Kong Rivers in the northeast and
along Route 110 in Laos, has increased in the past year. Indications are that
Communist units along the Cambodian border have been stockpiling some of
the food and other materials obtained from Cambodia.

21. There is still no good evidence, however, that substantial amounts of
weapons or ammunition are being obtained by the Communists from Cambodian
stocks or through Cambodian ports. On the other hand, there is evidence that
Communist units, particularly in the border area, receive arms and ammunition
from stockpiles maintained on Cambodian territory, These munitions probably
were moved south through Laos. Should infiltration of arms into South Vietnain
through Laos be substantially reduced, Cambodia could be an alternative route
for the Communists.

22. Sea Infiltration. We are unuble to estimate the extent of the infiltration of
supplies by sea inte South Vietnam. We bel eve, however, that such infiltration
has been greatly reduced by US countereflorts, Much of the Communists’ use
of sea routes, at present, ia for the movement of supplies along the South Viet-
namese coast, We believe that when a pressing need exists North Vietnam will
inerease attempts to move some supplies by sea, primarily arms and ammunition,

4 THE MILITARY SITUATION IN THE SOUTH
Ay Communist Forees

23, For the purpose of this estimate, we consider the followng elements of
the Communist organization in South Vietnam: the Regular ferees (NVA and
VC Main and Loeul forees), the administrative serviee units which support them,
the VC guerrilla forces, the political eadres, the self-defense forees, the seeret
self-defense forces, and the “Assault Youth.” The contribution of these diverse

elements to the Cormmunist effort in South Vietnam differs widely in value,
Their capabilities and missions are set forth in the following paragraphs.

24. We believe that, with the exeeption of the Regular forces, we have pre-
viously underestimated the strength of these elements. The Bgures carried in
this estimate for these elements reflect new information and analysis rather than
an tnerease in actual Communist strength. Furthermore, our information on
the strength and organization of the different elements varies widely, For the
Regulus forces it is good; for other components it is much less reliable, less
current, and less detailed. The resnlting uncertainties are explained in the fol:
Jowing paragraphs and are refleeted by the use of ranges ‘i the estimates we
prevent.

25, Regular Ferees, We are reasonably coufident that the Communist Regu:
lar forces in South Vietnam naw total ahant 118,000 traaps who are generally
well-armed (seo Table 3), "Phis strength has fuctuated over the past 12 mouths;
itis new somewhat loss than it was at this Hine last year, During this period,

TS 186035 TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET VW

however, an increasing number of NVA replacements have been introduced into
VC Main force units,
TABLE 3

ESTIMATED STRENGCTIE OF REGULAR COMMUNIST FORCES IN SOUTIL VUSTNAM
(As of £ October 1967)

Type Number Organization
Reguluc NVA Forces 54,000 3 Front Headquarters!

7 Division Headipuarters® ©

26 Regiwents (18 divistonal and 8 separate)
106 Buttulions (76 reginental and 30 separate)

VC Main and Local Forces 64,0004 2 Division Meadeutarters”

11 Regiments (7 divisional and 4 xexarate)
90 Bittalions (34 regimental and 62 separate)
234 Separate Companies

54 Separate Phitoons

TOTAL 118,000

A Front is a military organization designed to perforin taetieal and adininistrative finetions
und to control a number of units ina specifle area, A Front is intentionally flexible, its military
force composition changes ax operational requirements dietate. Vietnamese Commiunist Fronts
currently operating against South Vietnam are the B=3 Front, the DMZ Front, and the North:
ern Front or Subregion (iow called the TrThiea-Hue Military Region), (See imap on
page 17.)

"NVA/VG divisions in South Vietnam are considered as light infantry divisions tailored
specifically for eperation in South Vietnam, ‘These divisiona are highly foat-inabile and are
Hexible in force structure, organization, and strength: They norvally ave composed of three
regiments (of about 1,500-2,000 per reginent) with pete technical and fire support elements.
They Jack wheeled transport and the type of artillery normally assseiated with NVA conventional
divisions,

“In addition to the seven NVA divisiens in South Vietnain, elements of the 34ist division in
North Vietnam have been eanmitted from time te time te operations south ef the DMZ under
control of the DMZ Front,

"This total includes some NVA replacements; see paragraph 56,

26, Administrative Service Units, There is an extensive system for the ad-
ministrative support of both NVA and V@ Regular forces. It operates through:
out Seath Vietnam and extends into Laos and Cambodia as well as the area
immediately north of the DMZ. In South Vietnam it ineludes the military per-
sommel in the staff and service elements (e.g,, medies, ordnance, logistics, ete.)
ecmprising the central, regional, provineial and district military headquarters,
and in rear service technical units of all types directly subordinate to these head-
‘punters, The need for administrative service forees, and henee their sive, varies
widely from provinee to province,

27, We cannot be eonfident of the total size of the adminisivative serviee
forves at any given tine, Information on the enrrent strength of the administra:
tive services at the various echelons is insufllelent to establish a frm estimate,
This force has almost certainly suffered attrition and has probably been drawn

down to provide some combat rephicoments, Morcover, we de not estimate

TOP SECRET TS 186004

aes

KA

LAOS PANHANDLE AREA 7
COMMUNIST ROADNET

{} vie)
0 a9 5Q

EAPANSION OF THE COMMUNIST ROADNET

rommamemnen Roadnet, 1 Jan, 1964

Ly 1A
ales ae Vinh

oa tromewerareamnan ROA TAL aXxtAnsion,
Clad f 1 Sept, 1965
( 8 aN
se re: f iy
NO :

t
ty, roy
\ 3
Don Bat Binh

Mu Gia Boas,

., OY ten
i Dong Hal

\. ED)

Ae

Nan ins ae
_Sépane
Tehepona) £

ae 4 SOUTH,
Han Phone Hue
Mauarig a [=]

AeA TELL NGTE

Ve AALTLAN 0}

4%
ra \

a a? i
thee i

Hatchathant ( Oakes 2

AE PERE MON RRA EAE ORT

C
Ps.

ag Tatton ast USE AEE

;
Oy att en o
se ae A, Siam Pang (
an ae 3 eas a ; } ‘
* ae * \
mu i

SAGER Relate

al ; ;
Slumg Preng

BODLA V4

"1,

% PN coanieesiion
r LINE

75 TOO Miles
a |
100 Kilometers
A 4 1A mevanaenicininninons ROMMEL, 1 Sut reds
‘Wy i
nh
SN \V som rmetidite tne Familie gate ine oH,
, | 1 June 14b6
( ' aA anininaceniooms ROBE er tenet,
ae) 1 dune 1967
Kher os é
CKaut Ne NORTH, : (jy ;
| ed “sel a ;

} ft
Don Gai Bligh |
4 Mu Gia Pare %.

a”

(
’

avannakhet

Ban Raq}

Saravane,

THAILAND

ee
ao

98
Ubea
Raiehathani (

CAM BODTA

; or Heng \

INFILTRATION AND ROAD CAPACITIES

a Athank Hoa
lf mmm ane COMmuriist roadnat
bt atin
\ BON _ Other road
/ .. NOR Personnel infittration

la pen f (by foot)

wee Matorable road capacity (uninterdictad)
in shart tons per day (June 1967)

Dry season —* $00,355 Rainy season CHINA
HAINAN

CA Bens Hol

Nanton pine cae
any de cam Ji ey
\ cThautiak)

Fen Giang

a : Tam te aa

‘soa,

Ubon Ratehathani ==" 2

x

7. 100/04,
attepeu

ne

eal eden

a

Plaikii, agg?

Fhum Troun ,

aia 868

14 FOR. SEGRE b

the size of the administrative service units located outside the boundaries of
South Vietnam which support the forces in the DMZ and the western highlands.
In light of these considerations, we estimate that there are now at least 35,000-
40,000 administrative service persounel in South Vietnam who are performing
essential administrative support functions. In addition, almost anyone under
VC control can be and is impressed into service to perform specific administrative
or support tasks as local conditions require.

28. Guerrillas. The guerrillas provide an essential element of the VO combat
capability. They are organized into squads and platoons which are not neces-
sarily restricted to their home village or hamlct. Typical missions for guerrillas
ure terrorist and sabotage activities, protection of villages and hamlets, provision
of assistance to VC Main and Local force units as well as NVA, and the ereation
of Jocal threats in order to divert allied forces to local security missions,

29, The guerrilla force has been subject to conflicting pressures. On the one
hand, increasing numbers of guerrillas have buen drawn upon to provide replace-
ments for the VC Main and Local forces, because these have suffered heavy
casualties as a result of more intense combat, At the same time, numerous
mptured documents as well as VC propaganda indieate a concern to increase
the guerrilla force substantially. There is evidenee which sugyests that the 7
leadership set very high force goals for the guverillas but had, by mid-1966, fallen
fur short of its aims.

30. Information from captured documents leads ua to believe that we have
previously underestimated the guerrilla strength, Certain Communist deeu-
ments which date from early 1968 assert that ihere were then about 170,000-
180,000 guerrillas, This Agure was almost certainly exaggerated. There is avi-
dence which suggests that the Communists sometimes consider other groups
part of the guerrilla foree and therefore carry a larger number of guerrillas on
their rolls, There is also considerable uncertainty over the aceuraey of VG report

. ing at the lower levels, We believe that guerrilla strength has declined over
the past year or so because of losses, upgrading of some personnel te Main and
Local foree units, and recruiting didfoultios. We are unable te substantiate the
extent to whieh the VC have been able to replace guerilla loses. Considering
all the available evidence and allowing for sorne uncertainties, we estimate that
the current strength of the guerrilla foree is 70,000-90,000,

31, The Political Organization. Presiding over the Communist effort is the
political apparatus, This inelndes the leadership and administration of the
National Liberation fyont (NLP) and the People’s Revolutionary Barty (the
mame noder which the North Vietumese Communist Party operates in South
Vietnam), hoth of which exteud down to the hamlet level. ‘The apparatus not
only nets as a government in VG-controlled areas Iut alse has major responsibil:
ities for maintaining morale and for mobilizing manpower and other resources
in support of the war effort, [ls factions are not primarily military and it is
therofore not inelndvd in the military order of battle, Nevertheless, it does
represent a continuing potential for orginiving and motivating the military
forces. “Through this apparatus the Communists seek to control the people of

TS 186035 TEPER

TOP*SEGRETHO 15

South Vietnam. It is, therefore, a key clesnent which ultimately will have to he
overcome along with the military and guerrilla forces, Its numbers are large—
with a hard core estimated at abont 75,000-85,000—but more important is the
wide geographical extent of its power and the dedication and effectivencss of
its personnel,

32, Other Communist Organizations, ‘Vie Communists make a deliberate
effort to organize most of the people under their control into various work
forees and semimilitary organizations. Among the more significant of these organ-
izations are the self-defense forces, secret self-defense forces, and g groups such as
the “Assault Youth.” Moreover, when occasion demands, almost every able-
bedied person under VC control may be called upon to support the war effort,

. The self-defense force is described by the Communists as a military organi
ne It is clear, however, that its organization and mission differ from that
of villige and hamlet g guerrillas, Self-duferse forces include people of all ages
and a substantial percentage of them are females, They are largely unarined and
only partially trained. ‘The duties of self-defense units inchide the maintenanee
of law and order, the construction of bunkers und strong peints, warning against
the approach of allied forces, and the defense of villages and hamlets in VG-
controlled territory, Self-defense forces do not leave theie home areas, and mem-
bers generally perform thelr duties part-time, Their existence poses an impedi-
ment to allied sweeps and pacifleation, however, and in their defensive rele, they
inflict casualties on allied forces.

34, Another clement, the secret self-defense forees, operates in government:
vontrolled and contested areas, They provide a residual Communist presence
. in such areas and support the Communist effort primarily by clandestine intelli:
genee aetivities,

35, During the past year we have learned more about a VC orgenivation called
“Assault Youth.” They serve full time at district level and above, and they are
organized into companies and platoons. Although some are armed, the Coni-
munists do not consider them a combat foree; their primary mission appears to
be logistical, frequently in battlefield areas, This organization also serves as
a manpower pool and provides a training program for youth whe later go inte
the VG Main and Loeal forees, Little information ig available te indicate the
strength ov distribution of the “Assault Youth.”

56, Our enrrent evidence does net enable us to estimate the present size of
these groups (self-defense, seorct self-defense, the “Assault Youth,” or ather similar
VG organizations) with any measure of confidence. Seme documents snggest
that in early 1966 the agpregate size of the self-defense foree was on the order
of 150,000, ‘This feree and the other groups, however, have unquestionably
ayflened substantial attrition since that time, as well as an appreetable decline
in quality, heeause of losses, eecruiting of some of their members inte the guer

TS 186035

16 WORMRESRETs

rillas or other VC military components and, particularly, the shrinkage in VC
control of populated areas. Though in aggregate numbers these groups are still
large and constitute a part of the overall Communist effort, they are not offensive
military forces. Hence, they are not included in the miitary order of battle total,
Nevertheless, some of their members account for a part of the total Communist
military losses.

37. In sum, the Communist military and political organization is complex, aud
its aggregate numerical size cannot be cstimated with confidence, Moreover,
any such aggregate total would be misleading since it would involve adding
components that have widely different missions and degrees of skill or dedication,
‘The VC/NVA Military Force (Main and Local forces, administrative service
elements and guerrillas) can be meaningfully presented in numerical totaly and,
as indicated above, we estimate that this Militury Force is now at least 223,000-
248,000, It must be recognized, however, that this Military Moree constitutes
but one component of the total Communist orguilzation, Any comprehensive
judgment of Communist capabilities in South Vietnam must embrace the effeetive:
ness of all the elements which comprise that organization, the tolal size of whieh
is of course considerably greater than the figure given for the Military Foree.

B. The Command Structure
$8. ‘Lhe Communists have continued to modify their command apparatus,

and, in particular, Hanoi hay signifleantly increased its diveet control, This is

- most apparent fn the DMZ and central highlands areas where Hanoi inereasingly
~~ bypustes both COSVN and Millewy Region 5 (MR-5) Headquarters. With the
exception: of two VG divisions and one NVA division, all division headquarters
and all the confirmed Fronts are in MR-3 or the DMZ area.’ In addition to the
ereation of the DMZ Front, which is controlled direetly by Hanoi, it appears
almost certain that MB-5 has been divided into three operational areas: The
Tri-Thien-Lue Military Region (formerly the Northern Front or Subregion), the
B-3 or Western Highlands Front, and the remaining coastal provinees of the
rejion,’ ‘There is substantial evidence that Hanoi also exereises direet military
control over the 'Tri-Thien-Hue Military Region and the B-3 Front.

C. Logistical Suppart

30, During the past year captured documents and POW interrogations have
provided a better basis for estimating how much of each class of supplies was
needed and consumed by the Comnnmist forces. Table 4 shows the estimated
total daily Communist requirement in South Vietum for Regular and Adimin-
istrative Servier Forces and that portion of it which comes from external sourees,

40, About ene-quarter of the daily requirement for both 1966 and 1067 was
drawn from sourees outside of South Vietnon, ‘There is a grewing dependence

“The remainder of the command atmctare comitt of pravincial commands aud ef separate
unity, both directly subordinate te the respective VE nulitary reions.

* See map on oppesite page for provinces jnchided ty these areas,

TS 186035

EPR HCCI BCR RES PTFE ACR NOEL MENS YI

seresunnst noni geen ta

SOUTH VIETNAM
REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM

Wa Demniliforixed Zone OCTOBER 1967

a
Mar a
pies

‘Pa Neng

\ CORPS

COMMUNIST (VIET GONG)
-aDemililarized Zone
SR TUTHIEREHUB MA

oily Meathaid Rakeagical

tesco - Corps boundary

le :
somes Brovines boundary

Hue Autonsmous munteipality

BAH 58K,
Aca ourigiod fea Borges)

& 4: Suigen, Cho Len,
Gis Binh Special Secter

Eprcial Regien 18
Military Region bavadsyy
Pravines heundesy

L 18H Ba, Hye Agloaga. on inieipality

wet

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS

18 FOR-GECREL

on external sources, not only for Classes IL and [V (weapons and equipment),
Class V (ammunition), but also for Class I (food). This is partly because of
allied denial efforts and partly a result of the growing proportion of North
Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam, especially since these are gencrally deployed
in food deficit areas, VC guerrilla forces probably require a small amount of
food and ammunition from external sources, but the bulk of their supplies is ob-
tained from local sources within South Vietnam. We have not included guer-
rilla forces in the logistical computations.

TABLE 4
ESTIMATED DAILY LOGISTICAL RESUPPLY REQUINEMENTS FOR NVA AND VG
REGULAR AND ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT FORCES IN SOUTH VIETNAM *
(Ag of 30 Septetrnber L967)

Short Tun Per Day

Class Uixternat ‘Total

PR e6d)" asa ee ii aie CE eect eees, 8840 eee VA EDL)

VW & IV (Weapons, Quartermaster, Engineer, Medienl, Sigil, :

Chemioal, et0.) 0.02 .ccc reece certs eens cree ents G7 23-24

TW (POL) siccetsaesatiai ie rane Corrsssesas Neg Negi,
V (Ammunition)® ......000000¢0ceeeecee cee cect case WO ii

TOTAL. 6 ici gepriensaasas ans speed ae Geile tee Baad 941-218

-* Bawed on 218,000-NVA and VO Main and Loval force treopa, and 35,000-40,000 admin-

istrative aupport troops. Requirements are computed on the basis ef actual strength, whieh
js about 70 percent of full TO@P strengti, In estimating weapons requirements, Insees due

~~ te-eaptare or destruction were considered, as were losses dhe te normal attrition. In additien,

an allowance was made to provide for the reequipping of those forces who are net presently
ecuipped with the new family nf weapons. These requirements, of esurse, will change as
~weapina loses fluetuate aver time. Ammunition rerjuirements are based upon estimates
of actual ammunition expenditures in combat, and may be subject to a eonsie erable margin
af error.

* Includes a 18 pereent factor for spoilage, but does not include replacement of food captured
or destroyed by friendly forees.

One-third of the weight of the extemal yequirement represents a packaging factory twe-
thirds of the weight is avtual ammunition, No packaging factor is included in estimating
internal ammunition vequirenents, The total ammunition requirement does include the
extemal packaging factor,

4), Communist logintical requirements fron external sourees vary considerably
in both amounts and elass in the different areas of South Vietnam, In the nerth-
erm provinces, for example, the requirement is probably higher per soldier than
elsewhere in South Vietnam because the rate of combat there has been higher,
and the troops are predominantly NVA and ure better equipped, In the Hee-
defleit highlands, the external requirement for food is high, On the other hand,
in the Delia. and the Saigon area, Communist troops probably have ne external
requirement for food,

42, While we cannot estimate with coufidence what prapartions of external
logistic resupply requirements are met by the respective routes ie South Viet:

fS 186035

FG Pres R EFI 19

nam, some generalizations can be made about the logistical systems involved.
The road network through the Laotian Panhandle is used primarily to supply
weapons, equipment, and ammunition. A portion of the food requirement for
Communist forces in the northern provinces is infiltrated through or around the
DMZ along with some other supplies. Cambodia is primarily a source for food
(probably over 80 percent of the Communists’ external requirement) and some
items such as medical supplies and radios, Within South Vietnam, the Com
munist. procurement and distribution system is usually organized under the
Communist military regional headquarters.

43, Food Supply, The Communists continue to have problems with food sup-
plies in certain areas, because of local shortages, distribution bottlenceks, aud
the effects of allied military operationg which have increasingly intruded into
Communist base areas and disrupted the supply network, The amount of Com-
munist food supplies captured or destroyed Ly allied forees in 1067 is sub-
stantial, From 1 January through 30 August it amounted to an average of 55
to 75 tons per day, which is more than one-fourth the Communist Regular and
Administrative Forces’ daily reqniement, and greater than their external ie:
quirement, But despite some severe loeal diffleultics, the overall effectiveness
of the Communist milltary forces has not yet been seriously impaired by these
problems, The food requirements for the Communists in many areas are met
from internal sources through taxation, purchase, and eoercion. However, the
Communist military ferees in the DMZ area and in the riee-defleient areag in
the highlands are largely dependent on imports from Nerth Vietnam and Cam-
bodia.

44. On balanee, we believe that food supply problems for the Communists are
likely to beeome more burdensome, and in some areas will impede military
operations, Nevertheless, we do not believe that food shortages will greatly
restrict overall Communist operations in the near future as long aa the Com-
munists have aecess to Cambodian wee.

45, Impact of New and Heavier Weapons, Communist forees in South Viet-
nam have increased thelr mortar, recket, and artillery attacks. Over a year ago,
120 mm mortars and 70 mm and 75 mm howitzers began te be used. Other
types of weapons huve been employed since early 1967, These inelude Chinese
Communists 102 mm reekets, Soviet 122 mm and LO mm reekeis, and RPG-7
antitusk grenade launehers, In addition, the NVA has fired light and medium
artillery into South Vietnam from positions within or nerth ef the DMZ. The
use of these heavier weapsns by the DMZ area has ineveased substantially in
1997, and during periods ef peak fire in September it is estimated that Com:
munist forces in that area were expending mortar, rocket, and artillery aim:
munitiog at 1 rate of close to 4 tons per day.

FOP SECRET TS 186035

20 FOP BEER Fm.

1067, not includiag that fired against ailied forces just sonth of the DMZ aver-
aged less than 1 ton per day, While logistic problems would inhibit increased
use of these heavier weapons throughout South Vietnam on the scale they have
been used near the DMZ, it is likely the Communists will increase their capa-
bilities for mortar, rocket, and artillery attack against selected fixed targets.

47. Hanoi has recently concluded a new agreement with the USSR for military
aid, Jt is possible that Hanoi has sought more sophisticated types of equipment
than those now arriving on the scene. These might include cruise missiles
and tactical rockets which could be used to support North Victnamese opera-
tions in the DMZ area and against US warships.“ A continuing and intensive
wateb has been maintained for any indications of the presence of these of larger
missiles in North Vietnam. So far, no deliveries have been detected,

48. The North Vietnamese already huve some SA-29 in the vielnity of the
DMZ and we think it likely they might 4 nerease the numbers of SA-25 there,
It is also possible, but less likely, that they would deploy $A-2s in Laos, They
would almost certainly not introduce them into South Vietnam. [t is possible
that Hanoi would use aircraft against South Vietnam but we think thie uilikely,
In general, we believe that during the coming months the Soviets will continue
to supply equipment designed to strengthen air and coastal defenses in North
Vietnam and to increase the frepower of both the regular North Vietnamese
forces and the Gommninist forces Aghting in the South,

D. Communist Manpower in the South

49, Communist Losses. Total Communist losses have been rising sharply
over the past 2 years. On the basis of the latest data, we estimate that total
losses for 1967 will amount to about 170,000--an merease of about two-thirds
compared with 1966, The bulk of these losses are killed-in-aetion as reported
from body vount, Our estimate of permanent losses from wounds is based on
evidence indieating that for every 100 killed there would probably he 150
wounded, and that, of these, at least 35 die or are permanently disabled. Ob-
viously, these figures involve a margin for error, but since they cannot take mto
aeconnt all casualties from aly attacks or from artillery fire, or losses from sick:
ness and aceldent, the killed and wounded estimates ure probably net aver
stated,  Pipures for military evturnees and prisoners are firm. But the number
of deserters is an estimate based ona study that suggests there is likely to he
ong penmment desertion for every militry retunee, If the overall totals de
ovr, it ia likely ta be on the low side,

Bor more detailed iafannatian on te types af Wea pny which the Soviets wight supply
the North Vietnamese, and the helihnod of their doing eo, see SNUE 11-11-68, “Soviet Atotudes
and Intentions ‘cowl the Vietnam War," dated 4 May 1967, SECRET. We helieve the
conchisions are still walie,

YS 186035 FesPo Slee RET

FP OREF 2)

‘TABLE 5

ESTIMATED COMMUNIST LOSSES IN SOUTH VIETNAM

1967
1966 (Estimated Total )*

Killed-in-Action 900.0 00002... £ pees htan 55,500 90,006
Permanently Lost from Wounds Lo eee oe = 49,000 31,000
Military Returnees .... 0... tee eee eee. §=23,000 21,000
Prisoners en, ny, Uidtetiet a tere ind 2,500 7,000
Descente: cyrus ceieias abi. 3: od Bee ies oo. cae, 19,000 — 21,000

TOTAL .00.0...... : dite as, fend gate 103,000 ® 170,000 4

*The 1987 estimated totals are the projections of averages of Connnunizt losses during the
first 9 months of 1967,

“These totals include not only losses for Regular and Administrative Service Forces and
gucrrillas, but alse losses for an unknown number of other Communist dlanents such as self
defense, secret self-defense forces, and “Axsault Youth,” ete,

50. A major problem in assessing the significance of these Communist losses
is that we are unable to determine what proportion are suffered by the fighting
forces and what proportion by such clements as the self-defense forces, “Assault
Youth,” conscripted laborers and other civilians caught up in combat areas, What
is clear is that not all of the killed and wounded are members of primary fighting
units (NVA Regular forces, VC Main and Local forees, and guerrillas), Con-
sequently, we cannot estimate the loss to these Communist military forces for
any given year.

SL VO Manpower Inputs, In the faee of these increasingly heavy lesses, the
manpower resources available to the VC and the actual rate of reeruitment are
crities! elements in an estimate of Coimunist eapabilities te continue military
operations. A ealeulatic . of diel geen available tu the VE for recruitment ia
difficult because of the absenee of trustworthy population statisties, But even
if such statisties were fairly accurate, major assumptions have to be made con-
cerning what percentage of able-bodied males are available to the VG reeruit-
mene apparatus in their own areas, in the eontested areas, and in GVN-con-
trolled areas.

52, Bearing in mind these caveats, we estimate that the VE may have access
fo approximately L4 million males between the ages of 15 and 45. From this
tatal, we believe that the VC could reerult fram a manpower peol of some
700,000-800,000 men, though less than half of this total are in VE-controlled areas,

23, itis difflealt to rovoncile this apparently large block of manpower derived
from limited demagraphie data, with the inereasing evidence over the past year
Mining reeruits, One reason for this discrepaney is that
the manpower in VO areas is already subject to other important requirements
which are related to the war effart, such as food production, and some of these
tasks are inereasing, A second reason for VC difficulties is that Josses ef all
ixpes have probably redaevd the real, ax apposed to the thearctical manpower

al VED problems in abt

TS 184034

22 TOPs elicit

available to the VC. The third, and perhaps most important reason is the de-
clining ability of the VC to obtain recruits because of allied forays into con-
tested areas, the mounting flow of refugees out of these areas, aud the likelihood
that individuals are more reluctant to enlist in the VG movement than in 1964-1965
when the Communists appeared to be riding a crest of success.

54. These increasing recruitment problems are least evident in the Regalar
forces and most conspicuous among the guerrillas and self-defense forces, and
have resulted in unfilled recruitment quotas, reduced standards (as to age,
physical condition, and political reliability), and greater employment of women
and youth, They have been particularly severe in areas of intense allied military
pressure, but have not been totally absent elsewhere. Moreover, the Revolu-
tionary Development (RD) program poses a threat to Communist aecess te the
population, and is undoubtedly one of the reasons the VG have dectded to exert
heavy pressure against it,

55, We estimated that during 1966 the VC were probably able to recruit
about 7,000 men per month. A reovaluation of recruitment for eurly 1067, how-
ever, shows that this performance has fallen off. We estimate that the ave rage
monthly reyruitment probably falls within the ranges of 3,000 tu 5,000 men per
month for the Main forces, the Local forces, and the guerrillas, In addition,
however, the VC commonly upgrade personnel from the lower to the higher
echelons of the Communist organization. For example, a Loeal foree unit will
receive replacements from village guerrillas in the area; and these guerrillas in
tarn may be replaced by hamlet guerrillas, self-defense forees, of “Assault
Youth.” Some recent evidence suggests that in IV Gorps, hamlet guerrillas and
barnlet self-defense forces are being consolidated.

of. In any case, a persuasive indication of growing manpower problems for
the VO iv the inereasing mimber of individual NVA soldiers serving as replace:
ments in VO Main forces units, A study jn Jate 1986 of a number of VG units
in TU Corps area indicated that at least 23 pereent of the men in VO Main
foree imits were NVA replacements, and the percentage is probably higher now.
VC units in T and UW Corps probably contain a higher pereentage of NVA per
sonnel, hut we have not found NVA personnel in VG units in the Delta,

57, Quality and Morale, ‘The rapid manpower turuever caused by increasing
casualtios bas lowered the quality of all the VC fighting forces, but it is not vet
apparent that this has sevionsly Impaired their military effeetiveness, ‘The Com-
musts have been foreed to rely more and more en coercion te obtain reeruits,
have made greater use of women to free men far eomhat, and have reduced
their roornitment nd traiving standards. The decline in quality has been wreat:
eit at the lower fovels, where personmiel have repeatedly heen siphoned aff for
higher cehelons, More important, though probably uet se pronomecd, is the
deeline in the quality of the cadross-the ecment ef the YC organization,

58 bean endeavor ta rectify this sitnation the Conmmunists are reserthng fy
several expedients ta avercame weakuesses fy Cheiy political operations. These

TS b8a6035 “FUR SPERE |

“TOP*SEER Ger 23

include intensive reinductrinution sessions and the infusion of North Vietnamese
cadre into the VC organization, Since mid-1966, the VC have also been shifting
some experienced cadre down to the lower levels to improve the quality of
leadership and to eliminate the overdependence of village and hamlct party
chapters on higher echelons. Some administrative reorganizations have also
been instituted in an attempt to strengthen local responsibility and initiative.
The effects of such measures are not yet cvident, but could somewhat improve
VC efficiency at lower levels,

59, Captured documents and evidence from prisoners amply demonstrate that
morale problems are becoming serious and are likely to become worse as the
war continues. But there have been no mass defections, This year’s returnee
rate, a statistical indicator of morale, is well above last yenr’s rate. Captured
documents have repeatedly noted this trend as one of the Connnunists’ saajor
shortcomings. Since the hulk of the returnees come from the lower levels af
the VC structure, the immediate effect of these losses has not been eritical, The
troops continue to Aght well, and the VC infrastructure remains generally strong,
Over vhe longer term, however, such losses not only deprive the Communists
of manpower, but, more important, they erode the base of the VC infrastructure,

il, THE OUTLOOK FOR COMMUNIST FORCES

60. In early 1965, prior to the commitment of sizable UG forees, the Com-
munists apparently expected to administer a knockout blow, After a period of
some uneertainty and hesitation ereated by the US intervention in 1965, and eer-
tain tactical setbacks to the Communist forces, a general political-military strategy
was worked out at the 12th Plenum of the North Vietnamese Communist Party
in December 1965. ‘This spelled out how to fight the war and manage its inter-
. Hational aspects under the altered circumstances,

681. The essence of these deelsions was to maintain sullcient forces in being te
support a prolonged and aggressive war of attrition, Thelr objective in pursuing
this strategy was and is to persuade the US that it cannot win; that it must even-
tually pull out or settle on terms favorable to Munof’s further pursuit of its political
goals, As part of this strategy, the war would be conducted without specifie
timetables: negotiations would be avoided unless from a position of significant
military successes; and an effort would be made to Hmit the risks of an expanded
war in the North or throughout Southeast Asia, This strategy almed at main
tainly a continnous threat by Regular forces, avoiding combat under unifaver:
able conditions, sustaining a high level of guerrilla activity, and undertaking lim
ited abjective offensives when favorable opportunities arise,

62, During 1966 and thus far in 1067, the Communists have apparently adhered
to these hasie deeisions. For example, a new debate arose in Tate 1866 ever the
role of the guerrillas with some offfefals advecating a greater vole for these forces
at the expense of the Main forces, Tis proposition has apparently been rejected
as tantamount te accepting a “strategie” reversal, Nevertheless, ft is clear that
debates over rflitury-politieal tactios are continuing,

TS 186035

24 HOREEERET oe

63. Perhaps the most important problem for Wanoi during the last year has
been how to maintain military pressure in the face of the superior firepower and
mobility of the Allicd forces. Its answer to this problem has been to emphasize
artillery, rocket, and mortar attacks, especially on I Corps, and to develop sub-
stantial threats by large units in border arcas in such a way as to spread thin the
Allied forces, open opportunities for localized “victorics,” and create better condi-
tions for attacks against the RD program. Over the past year the Communists
have used clements of ut Jeast three and possibly four divltones in the DMZ area
plus artillery and some air defense units. Another buildup of Communist forces
has taken place in the highlands along the Cambodian border. Such threats tie
down large US forces in these areas, thereby lessening Allied military pressures
elsewhere.

64. Future Force Levels. Negardless of their previous policy decisions, the
Communists will assess the actual situation as it evolves. ‘Their decisions ag te
force structure. and strengths over the next year will be affected in part by the
level of combat, their casualty rates, the extent of any further buildup of Allied
forces in the South, and the overall impact of the war effort ayninst the North,
Another factor which complicates estimates of future foree struetura and strength
levels is that North Vicetnain retains the eapability to move division sive forces
across the DMZ. Should they exercise this option, then the total foree structure
in South Vietnam could be expanded relatively quickly by Se one or two

~ divisions into Quang ‘Tri Province, Regardless of whether they introduce these
= divisions in the DMZ as we feel the NVA will still try to expand its Regular
' forees in South Vietnam, by the deployment of some new combat infantry regi-

ments. However, this may not result in any net inerease in the munerieal strength
of Regular forces sinew continuing lasses may further reduee the average unit
strength.

65. Taking into consideration the estinuted rates of infiltration, and allowing
for the downward trend in Hi each control by the VC, the risiig Communist
casualties, and VO reeruiting problems, we conelude that the strength of the
Communist military forces and political organizations in South Vietnam declined
in the last year, The major portion of this decline has probably been felt at the
lowest levels, reflecting a deliberate policy of seerificing this level te maintain
the stmeture of political cadres and the strength of the Regular military forces.
Whether this trend will continue is difficult to estimate, ‘There are still important
onknowns and variables involved in measuring total losses against Inputs from
reerniting and Infiltration, Moreover, there are alternative strategies, such as

avaiding combat for prolonger periods, whieh the Communists might adopt to
reduce casualties and conserve their forces. Another option, though less likely,
wonld be for the Commninists deliberately to redyce the steength of the Regular
forces, in order to preserve guerrilla forces and strougthen the political apparatus.

The locale and effectivencay of all allied aperations will alsa have an important
bearing on fature Communist force levels: lasses iy the northern provinces and
western highlands could he rade vp more readily through inflltvation than losses
in the Delta, where the burden is on VO reoritment,

TS T8é085 TQB ectSEr

TSP MORO bere 25

66. In any case, we believe that a major effort will be required to maintain the
Regular forces and guerrillas at or near present levels. ‘To do so will call for
both a level of infiltration much higher than that observed in 1067 and intensive
VC recruitment as well, Considering all the relevant factors, however, we believe
that there is a fairly good chance that the overall strength and cflectiveness of
the military forces and the political infrastructare will continue to decline,

67. Logistical Support. ‘The Communists will continue to have diffleultios with
internal distribution of supplies in South Vietnam that will cause local shortages
and interfere with Communist operations from time to time, Their dependence
on supplies from external sources is growing and coud tuerease further over the
next year, even if their strength dee lines somewhat, Nevertheless, we believe
that the Communists will be able Lo continne to mcet at least their essential sty pply
requirements for the tevel of forces and activities in South Vietnam de wevibed
in this estimate,

68. Future Strategy, The Communists apparently reeognize that the chances
of a complete military victory huve disappeared, and they ain justead at a pre-
tracted war. Their objectives in this phase of the war are te immobilize and
wear down the Allicd military forces. to maintain base areas, expand their po-
litical agitation and control in ‘contested and GVN are eas, and defeat the AD pre-

gram. Jn pursuit of these objectives, their tacties are to combine and coordinate

r

Closely their military operations and political aetivity,

69, Our judgment is that the Communists still retain adequate capabilities te
support this strategy for at least another year, Whether or net Hanoi dovs in
fact persist with this strategy depends not only on its capabilities to do so, but
on a number of politieal and international considerations not treated in this esti-
mate, suchas the state of Sino-Soviet relations, conditions inside China, and
Hanoi’s view of US will and determination, Even if some combination of cir:
cumstanees should make it impossible ar undesirable for Hanoi to continue ene
ploying large conventional forces. the Communists would still have the eapability
to continue some forms of struggle—-though at greatly reduced levels,

78 18403845
