Memo from Richard Helms to Assistant to the Secretary of Defense Concerning ThH
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012287, dated 2 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012287).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY —
; WASHINGTON 25, D. C.

MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
(Special Operations )

SUBJECT (75)"The Missions of the Navy and Methods of
Carrying Them Out", by Admiral V. Platonov
Kei Becond Edition

ee

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"tthe Missions of the Navy and Methods of Csrrying Them Out" by
Admiral V. Platonov which appeared in a special TOP SECRET issue

of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Military Though Js

2. This article was acquired by a Soviet official who has
provided reliable information in the past.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, , PLANS:

Sicvevect lurve a
RICHARD HELMS

Enclosure | 4,3{a)(4)

4.3(0)\4)

4.210)4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 2 0 Ju» 19%

e

cc:

Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Assistant Director for Research and Reports

1,.3(a)(4)

1.8(aj(<

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT : "The Missions of the Navy and Methods of
Carrying Them Out", by Admiral V. Platonov

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE: Reliable Soviet source (B) who has access to this type
of document.

Following is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"The Missions of the Navy and Methods of Carrying Them Out",
written by Admiral Vasiliy I. Platonov.

The article appeared in the 1961 Second Edition of a special
version of Voyennaya Mysl (Military Thought) which is classified
TOP SECRET and is issued irregularly. According to the preface,
this edition contains articles never before published and some
speeches which have been delivered prior to being published in
this form. It is distributed only within the Ministry of Defense
down to the level of Army Commander.

ac

4.2(a)l4)

The Missions of the Navy and The Methods

of Carrying Them Out
by

Admiral V. Platonov

New weapons quite naturally compel a review of the paths of
development of the types of armed forces and the methods of using
these types of armed forces in a war. At present, obsolete combat
equipment and armament is being vigorously forced out by new types
of weapons and military téchnology. Tube artillery on the sea,
bomber aviation, and large surface vessels have irrevocably lost
their former significance. However, all this does not provide any
basis for reducing the missions of our Navy merely to the destruction
of vessels carrying missile-nuclear weapns (raketno-yadernoye oruzhiye)
at sea, as proposed by Colonel General Gastilovich in his article
(Spetsialnyy sbornik statey zhurnala "Voyennaya Mysl", First Edition,
1960).

If we proceed from the fact that a modern war will not be a blitz-
krieg, but will be lengthy in nature, we unavoidably come to the con-
clusion that there will be a wider scale of combat operations by naval
forces. It is necessary to assume that the known forms of combat at
sea will undergo changes, and that new methods of naval operational
art and tactics will be introduced, while accomplishing both the old
and the completely new missions of the Navy.

The destruction of aircraft carrier attack large units (avianosnoye
udarnoye soyedineniye) is one of the most important missions of the
Navy. Since aircraft carriers are for the present still the main
delivery vehicles of enemy missile-nuclear weapons at sea, naturally
they must be sunk first. Unfortunately, the means and methods of
accomplishing such a highly difficult mission are often oversimplified.
It is reckoned that, having decided to put our bases out of operation
or destroy our industrial centers, an enemy aircraft carrier attack
large unit would sail out into the open sea, approach Soviet shores
to the distance of the radius of its aviation, and launch its planes,

4.8(a)l4}

which would deliver the attack. Meanwhile, our submarines, deployed
in advance in the area of operation of the aircraft carriers, and
aided by reconnaissance and attack aviation, would sally forth to the
attack and, using massed actions, would sink the enemy vessels. The
training exercise carried out by the Pacific Fleet in October 1959
was conceived and oversimplified just this artlessly and sketchily.

It should be assumed that even the most untrained fleet will not
act in such a primitive and imprudent manner. Where it is permitted
by the conditions of the theater, the enemy will use, in the first
instance, aviation from his coastal airfields and land missile units
for attacks on objectives of our seacoast. In the areas where air-
craft carrier attack large units will operate, they will use for
their concealment and protection suitable anchorages of bays and
straits, equipped with naval bases. Such possibilities actually exist
in all of our sea theaters. Furthermore, if the situation forces the
enemy to sally forth into the open sea to deliver an attack, the
aircraft carrier attack large unit will see to it that a thorough
search is carried out and the area of its maneuvering is cleared of
enemy submarines.

Consequently, an encounter and battle of our forces at sea with
a freely maneuvering aircraft carrier attack large unit in sight of
our seacoast must be considered unlikely, and the mastering of such
a simple mission must be considered as not achieving training goals.

The matter is even more complicated in remote areas of the
‘ocean, on the lines of communication of the enemy. There, aircraft
carrier attack large units can act solely as protective ferces for
convoys or as antisubmarine (PLO) hunter-killer groups (poiskovo-
udarnaya gruppa). They will persistently hunt our submarines and
attack them first. The strikes of the submarines will have the
character of counterattacks and will follow only after warding off
the active operations by the forces and weapons of the enemy PLO,
after breaking through or bypassing the immediate prctection of
the aircraft carriers. This means that no matter what formations
and combat order the submarines adopt, all of them will be inter-
mingled at the moment of delivering the strike on the main objective.

Thus, combat against aircraft carrier attack large units at

sea is only part, albeit the most difficult part, of the mission
of destroying the ocean communications lines of the enemy.

4.3(a)(4)

Thus, the operational-strategic command-staff training exercise
conducted by several of our fleets in the Atlantic in August 1960,
in which submarines operated similarly against a freely maneuvering
aircraft carrier attack large unit, can be justified, if only as a
first endeavor at breaking out into the ocean.

The complexity of preparing and carrying out operations designed
to destroy aircraft carrier attack large units urgently requires the
correct selection of the main forces for accomplishing this mission.
An over-all appraisal of the various qualities of all of the combat
means of the Navy shows that only submarines, employed in coordination
with aviation, can serve as such forces. And just when it seemed
that this course of action had become potently clear to everyone,
Rear Admiral V. Bogolepov comes out in print with (Spetsialnyy
sbornik statey zhurnala "Voyennaya Mysl", Third Edition, 1960), the
Onfounded assertion that the main force in combating aircraft carrier
attack large units is aviation.

Without burrowing into the details to prove the unsoundness of
this strange conclusion, we point out only that means of combat are
usually chosen not on the basis of their monetary cdst, as Rear Admiral
V. Bogolepov does, but on the basis of their degree of reliability in
accomplishing a mission assigned to the armed forces. It is self-
evident that aviation supplied with missile weapons is a powerful
means of carrying out combat operations at sea. However, it should
be taken into account that before it can carry out combat missions
it must fly to the Atlantic Ocean for 4 look at the enemy. While
aviation is considerably more maneuverable than submarines, it is
inferior to submarines in radius of operation, in concealment of
deployment and approach to the enemy, in endurance or duration of
staying in position, in capability for repeated attacks, in viability,
in potential for self-defense and evasion of enemy attacks, and in
ability to operate irrespective of weather conditons and the time of
day. On the basis of exactly these qualities of firmly insuring
reliable fulfillment of the basic missions of combat at sea, sub-
marines are indeed in the category of the main forces of the Navy.
Naval long-range aviation is the combat assistant to submarine
forces. It protects their operations at sea and coordinates with
them in strikes.

Rear Admiral V. Bogolepov predicts a great future for atomic
aviation in operations at sea. One should not give oneself up to
illusions. Even though it may be too soon to argue about what the
atomic engine will do for the airplane, it is still possible to say

4.3(a}(4)

now with certainty that such a plane will be shot down by the weapons
of antiaircraft defense (PVO) just like all its piston-engine and jet
predecessors. As for new speeds and unlimited radius of operation, it
seems that these factors have been exhausted by pre-atomic piloted
aviation and will be limited in the future not so much by technical
improvements in aircraft engines as by the endurance of the human
organism.

Speaking of the future of aircraft carrier attack large units, it
should be noted that, in general, they have had their day. This is so
as a consequence of the fact that the aircraft carrier has become too
easy a target for missile weapons. Its loss creates a large gap in
the combat formations of the navy. The aviation carried by an aircraft
carrier is easily shot down by surface-to-air (zenitnaya) guided missiles,
and is no longer capable of discovering submarines at sea so long as
they do not appear on the surface. Aircraft carrier attack aviation is
more and more being replaced by missiles, and hunter aircraft by anti-
submarine vessels. Aircraft carriers are clearly being supplanted by
missile-carrying submarines, PLO submarines, and corvettes having good
means of search, antiaircraft missiles, depth charges, and antisubmarine
missiles (protivolodochnaya raketa).

Combat against missile-carrying submarines. The unwieldy
structure of combat formations of aircraft carrier attack forces, the
Great vulnerability of sircraft carriers, the impossibility of concealing
their movement, and the unreliability of aerial attacks against coastal
objectives, is forcing the navies of the NATO countries to shift the
task of operations against the coasts from aircraft carriers to missile-
carrying submarines.

The advantages of missile-carrying submarines over surface air-
craft carriers is so obvious and overwhelming, and the rate of con-
struction of submarines by our potential enemies so serious, that the
danger of missile attacks from under the sea is becoming quite real.
The threat of missile-carrying submarines is marked by the peculiarity
that it concerns not only our naval bases, ports, and seacoast, but
also industrial centers deep inside the country. Therefore, combat
against enemy submarines and their missiles goes beyond the bounds
of the missions and capabilities of the Navy and must be carried out
by both the forces of the fleets and troops of the PVO of the Country.

Many people assume that with the start of a war it will be

sufficient to deliver a strike by intercontinental (mezhkontinentalnaya)
missiles upon the submarine bases. and shipyards of the aggressor in

1.3(a){4)

4.3(a)(4}

order to put an end to his Polaris carriers. However, our enemies

are assuredly considering such a possibility. They are making
preparations to move their submarines out from under a nuclear strike,
deploy them at sea beforehand, and then to repair and supply them at
temporary basing points concealed in unequipped bays or lqcated on
surface or submarine tenders, and at mobile rear area stations mounted
on automotive vehicles. Missile-carrying submarines are capable not
only of delivering the first nuclear strike, but also of continuing
the war until they are all destroyed. .

A careful analysis of our existing methods of combating missile-
carrying submarines shows that their means is not notable for its
originality. In one case these methods proceed from the assumption
that enemy missile carriers (raketonosets) will come into our closed
seas and that then the tactics of destroying them will in no way
differ from the long-known methods of combating the old submarines
operating near the seacoast. Some comrades think that missile-carrying
submarines will approach our coasts from the spacious open sea to a
point within range of their Polaris missiles and open fire upon the
continent. In this case, combating them will differ from the usual
methods of protecting our communications lines only in the degree of
‘remoteness of the operations from bases. Sometimes the combating of
missile-carrying submarines is related to the missions of the
PLO of a protected area of a base, —
the methods of which have not changed from the time of World War IT
(Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna).

Strictly speaking, we do not yet have finalized methods for
‘combating missile-carrying submarines. Even the main forces for
accomplishing this mission have not been defined. Rear Admiral V.
Bogolepov, for example, in analyzing historical experience, tries
to prove that, not only in the past, but also in the forseeable
future, the main force for combating submarines is aviation.

Combat against submarines really has its own history. In Wald
War I, submarines possessed insignificant endurance, causing them to
operate mainly near the seacoast and on the approaches to ports and
bases, where the sea supply routes meet. At that time aviation had
just been born; therefore, the only means of combating the submarine
threat was the surface vessel. The enemy was detected with the naked
eye and sunk by ramming, with artillery shells, and with depth charges.
During World War II, in spite of a sharp increase in their endurance,
submarines continued to travel on the surface, to surface for charging
batteries, and to carry out attacks at periscope depth. In essence

1,312)!4)

1.3(4}

the submarine remained a semi-surface vessel as previously and was
observed visually. This circumstance facilitated the hunting of
submarines by aviation, which, possessing a large apparent horizon
and high maneuverability, soon became the main PLO force, the grave-
digger of submarines.

The modern atomic submarine is another matter. In general, it
can stay below the surface of the water for the entire duration of
an operation. Hidden in the ice of the Arctic, in the fiords of
Norway, or among the islands of the Aegean Sea, atomic submarines
will deliver missile fire on our territory. Possessing underwater
speeds which are not inferior to the speeds of the fastest surface
vessels, they are capable of escaping from the attacks by PLO weapons
at great depths and of evading pursuit. Under these conditions one |
asks what results can be expected of hunter-killer antisubmarine
groups composed of aviation and surface vessels? None. And heli-
copters, with their insignificant radii of operations and their in-
ability to fly over the sea in poor visibility, at night, and in
bad weather, will also be completely useless here.

Antisubmarine submarines armed with the most improved sonar
(gidrolokatsionnaya) and hydroacoustic (gidroakusticheskaya) equip-
ment can be the only real forces for combating missile-carrying
submarines. Underwater sonar search, underwater patrolling, and
underwater patrols and ambushes must become their tactical methods.
Active combating of missile-carrying submarines and all maneuvering
connected with hunting and destroying them must now be carried on
deeply underwater instead of on the surface. There is no other
Way.

Unfortunateiy, our military press has not yet devoted much
attention to working out mathods of combating missile-carrying
submarines. In those few articles in which these problems are
treated, PLO submarines are assigned the limited mission of
detecting the enemy in narrows and at the exits from his bases.

Combat against ocean shipping. Without touching upon the well-
known questions of the importance and significance to the European

countries and to the United States of ocean lines of communications,
we will only point out that this shipping will not cease even after
all the naval bases and commercial ports of the warring nations have
been destroyed by missile-nuclear weapons strikes. The landing of
the Allies in Normandy in June 1944 has already shown in what short
periods of time it is possible to create immense temporary port

4,3(3)(4)

installations from sunken ships. The new capabilities of industry
and construction technology now make it possible in the course of

one night to install towed and self-propelled pontoon wharves on an
unequipped shore, to build artificial harbors, and to carry out
roadstead loading of tankers and dry cargo vessels. Consequently,
the destruction of ports can cause only a temporary delay of shipping
and nothing more. The main burden of the operations for the
destruction of shipping, particularly the destruction of convoys,
must be transferred to the open ocean.

The content of the combat preparedness of the navies of the
countries of the aggressive military blocs shows that in the waging
of combat by our forces against ocean lines of communications, the
first question that should be examined is that of the main strike
and the primary objective of the attacks. If, previously, the main
strike against convoys was directed against cargo transports and
large surface vessels, such a course of action is now unacceptable.
The combat formations of aircraft carrier strike forces have come
to be formed in such a manner that it is impossible for either our
submarines or aviation to approach the transports without a fight.
Not many forces will succeed in circumventing the dense PLO screens
and the circular lines of protection. Therefore, it becomes necessary
to choose the aircraft carriers as the main objective in combat
against enemy shipping. Transports must become the objective of
attacks during the successful development of the operation for the
destruction of convoys. Naturally, the new missile-nuclear weapons
should be used in the main strike and old weapons can be used to
exploit the success of the strike.

One cannot assume that the existing system of convoys will
remain unchanged. As soon as this system ceases to satisfy the
requirements of security and reliability for shipping, it will be
replaced by a new system. What form the protection of transports
on the ocean may take will depend on many factors, but to some
extent World War II has already provided a new structure of convoys.
In the Northern Theater, German transports with little advance
protection moved along the Norwegian coast, covering one side by
staying close to the shore and protecting the other side with an
antisubmarine mine barrier. It must be said that such an unexpected
meagure introduced great difficulties into the operations of our
submeriners. It should be assumed that the complexity of combating
atomic submarines with maneuverable forces will lead to the wide
use against them of fixed means of combat facilities (pozitsionnoye
sredstvo borby) and of jamming of their observation and control

facilities/.

-B-

4.3(a}(4)

One may often hear arguments that the movements of personnel
and urgently needed cargoes will be effected by aircraft, naval
vessels, and even submarines. All this has had its place in the
past, and possibly may have its place in the future, but such ship-
ments can only be incidental in nature. They will neither replace
nor eliminate the need for large-scale use of maritime cargo
transports.

An important and still unresolved problem in combat operations
on the lines of communication is the question of the attacking sub-
marines' obtaining accurate data on the movements of the target.

The gap between the means of target indication, paralyzed to a virtual
standstill, and the technology of submarine construction, which has
moved far forward, existed even earlier and is constantly increasing.
The submarine long ago became capable of firing from underwater, but
in order to obtain firing data it must come to the surface as before
or mist approach submerged to within risky distances of the enemy.
Such use of new large atomic submarines is intolerable. Without
waiting for the time when accurate data on the location of the enemy
may be obtained by means of artificial earth satellites, our
scientific research establishments must take steps at once to
eliminate this lag which was permitted to develop, and achieve an
increase in the distance of underwater observation (nablyudeniye)
and in the accuracy of underwater direction finding (pelengovaniye).

In delivering strikes against enemy convoys, submarines can
use missiles and torpedoes. In attacks against aircraft carriers,
one must obviously give preference to guided missiles, since they
are superior to torpedoes in both range and speed. Even though a
missile salvo from an underwater launching reveals the missile-
carrying submarine, whereas a bearing cannot be taken on the path
of a torpedo, it is necessary none the less to disregard that
advantage of the old, slow-moving weapon.

There is no need to expend missiles against transports, since
one or two ordinary torpedoes are sufficient to sink a merchant
vessel.

An analysis of the conditions of modern naval combat shows
that it will apparently be difficult to find a use for torpedoes
with atomic warheads, including even lang-range torpedoes.

As can be seen, the existing missiles and torpedoes have short-
comings in their use against vessels by submarines. Therefore, it
is necessary to make greater efforts in perfecting 4 submarine missile
(podvodnaya raketa), from which there is every reason to expect hope-
ful results.

Combined operations. The predominately continental character of
our country has aiways determined the relatively unimportant place
which combined operations of the Navy with other types of armed forces
have previously occupied in the wars of the Soviet Union. At the

present time, the situation in this respect is changing.

We shall dwell briefly on the problems of repelling and of de-
barking strategic landing forces and’on the participation of submarines
in delivering strikes against enemy coastal objectives.

The debarking of large landing forces for the purpose of opening
a new combat front or of transferring combat operations to other
continents has been practiced sufficiently often in past wars. As a
rule, debarking operations have succeeded, since the initiative in
the selection of the time, place, and forces belonged to the attackers.
However, the success of the operations of the janding forces on shore .
depended on the quality of preparedness of the forces, the weapons
of the anti-landing defense (protivodesantnaya oborona), and the
ability of the defending side to bring reserves to the area of the
initial attack and to mobilize snternal resources. The latter have
always existed in a country well prepared for war. Thus, the well-
known, successfully initiated Dardanelles landing operation of the
British and French in 1915 was not exploited on shore, and the
brilliantly executed debarking at Normandy in 1944 nearly ended in
_catastrophe when the Germans broke through the front of the Allies
with their tank armies in the Ardennes in December 1944, and that
happened when fascist Germany was barely able to stand on its feet,
only a few months before its downfall! Considering the above, one
must regard the debarking of significant forces by our potential
enemies on the territory of the Soviet Union as unlikely at the
present time.

The possibility and necessity of the debarking of strategic
landing forces by our Navy evolves from the liberating mission
which the Soviet armed forces are called upon to serve. It is naive
to expect that the third world war will be limited to the European
continent, that the liberation of Europe alone will lead to the
downfall of the entire imperialist camp and that it will only be

1. Mayda;

necessary to drop some hydrogen bombs on it with no need to land
troops on the shores of island or transoceanic countries. On the
basis of the experience of World War II, it is known that it s
only possible to deal the final blow to an aggressor in his own
den. Inasmuch as aggression in a modern war is likely to be from
beyond the sea or ocean, it is only possible to reach its nest for
the final blow by means of a naval landing operation. It is natural
to assume that such a landing must be composed of several armies,
that thousands of ships and naval vessels will be needed for its
ianding, supply, and reinforcement, and that it will be necessary
to precede the operation itself by successful operations to achieve
air and sea superiority. But it is certainly necessary to prepare
for such an operation, the more so because recently we have
completely, and without reason, lost interst in the debarking of
landing forces. es
Colonel General A. Gastilovich writes in his article that it
is now scarcely feasible to conceive of a large naval landing force,
since it is possible to destroy it with missile-nuclear weapons while
they are still at their bases and at_sea. Of course, if we expose
our forces to the enemy, he will destroy not only the landing force
but everything else as well. To prevent this from happening, the
forces carry out measures of protection, defense, and forestalling
the enemy in his operations. As in all other naval operations,
modern methods of debarking landing forces take into consideration
the possible employment of missile-nuclear weapons by the enemy.

Not very long ago our submarines, armed with ballistic
(ballisticheskaya) migsiles, participated in strikes by missile
troops of strategic designation against deep enemy objectives.
Now, with the appearance in our armament of intercontinental _
ballistic missiles which can reach any point on earth, missile
submarines have been freed from these missions. It seems to us
that such a step is premature.

It is known that our potential enemies are working on the
interception of ballistic missiles. At the beginning of last year,
the interception of an Honest John missile by a Hawk missile was
demonstrated in the United States; now they are placing some reliance
on the Nike-Zeus and Bloodhound missiles. One must believe that
sooner or later everyone will learn to intercept ballistic missiles.
Then, missiles launched from submarines will have advantages over
intercontinental missiles because of their shorter range and lower
trajectory. It will be more difficult to intercept submarine missiles,

os he

1.3(a}{4)

and their floating launching position (plavayushchiy start) provides
more favorable cond Tetons than do fixed land launching installations
(ustanovka).

The control of naval forces is now going through a crisis.
This was particularly noticeable during the above-mentioned exercise
in the Atlantic. The forces of two fleets participated in the
exercise. The commanders took turns commanding them, not unlike
the consuls of the early period of the Roman Republic. As the fleets
move from north to south, the Commander of the Northern Fleét commands
them as far as the 50th parallel. At this boundary he transfers the
forces to his Baltic colleague, and then observes what is done with
his vessels by the other commander. When the fleets move in the
opposite direction, the change of commanders is repeated. Is it
necessary to prove that this compulsory method is a half measure and
that this is no way to command fleets? If, engaged in battle on the
poundary of 50° North and, under the impact of a new situation, the
forces changed the plans of operation of the large units as mentioned
earlier, what confusion would ensue. Various vessels of the same
large unit would report on their operations to various addresses and
receive contradictory decisions from two staffs. Under these conditions
it is also not quite clear which of the two commanders should bear

the responsibility for the outcome of the entire operation.

The transfer of forces during the course of an operation, and at
a great distance from shore at that, is intolerable. Zonal command
is a remnant, a vestige of habit, left over from the territorial
nature of the missions of the fleets in the recent past. Here is an
attempt to combine new missions and new methods of combat operations,
brought to life by new weapons, with the old forms of organization
of the control organs of the forces. Earlier, when the missions of
our fleets were tied to a limited territory and did not go outside
the bounds of their naval theater, commanders of fleets were able
to cope with the control of both the active operations at sea and
the operations for the defense of bases and the seacoast. They also
directed all of the types of combat and materiel-technical support.
Now, when vessels of the fleet go out into the ocean, abandoning
their bases for a long time, the commander is unable to control both
without detriment, even if he is an absolute genius. The commander
inevitable faces a gloomy prospect; he must either tear himself
away from his theater and bury himself in the control of forces
in the ocean far beyond the bounds of his theater, or transfer his
ocean operations to a neighbor and command the defense of the
theater himself.

The only possible way out of the complicated situation which
has been created is through scrapping old forms of organization.
In fact, such a scrapping has already been noted in places.

Each fleet assigned to operste in an ocean must have two
independent commanders, subordinate to a center. One of these
would be strictly the commander of the fleet, composed of sub-
marines and long-range aviation. The other would be the commander
of the naval district (morskoy voyennyy okrug), composed of. all
remaining forces. He would be responsible for the defense of the
theater and all types of support of the operations of the ocean
fleet.

Of course, the commander of the fleet must be a submariner,
and his submarine command must bear the character of a field staff,
capable of commanding forces at sea from a command post (KP) located
wherever it is advisable according to the situation. In number of
personnel, this staff would be half the size of the present staff
of the submarine forces.

The proposed reform would not only remove our commanders of
fleets from their dual positions but it would also increase the
role of the commanders of submarine forces, who in point of fact
only formally bear such a title at the present time, while in reality
they play a passive role in the carrying out of operations and are
removed from the command of their operational groupings (operativnoye
obedineniye) at sea. In an alert, the commander of submarine forces
usually abandons his command post and the forces subordinate to him
and transfers to the fleet command post (FKP) of the commander of
the fleet. There, he commands nothing. His lot is to be an assistant
and help prepare correct decisions for the staff of the fleet.

It would be appropriate to note here that even the Main Naval
Staff, on which there is not as yet one submariner admiral, is not
free from that ailment. :

The separation of the missions of the fleet into two groups,
and the strict delineation of the functions of the two independent
commanders and their staffs would finally unravel the knot of
contradictions in the command of the forces, and introduce clarity
into its organization. It goes without saying that in this case
the need for the maintenance of a command of submarine forces
disappears. The fleet commander alone, with his staff, would
prepare and carry out operations at sea from start to finish.

 F.8(8)(4)

When the unified efforts of several fleets are needed, a unified
command should be appointed.

Differing opinions give rise to several methods of command for
‘submarines in the ocean. Debatable are the questions of the necessity
of massing forces, the superiority of group operations over individual
operations, the advantages of forcing submarine barriers with large
units over the successive overcoming of the barriers without adhering
to strict formations, and the delivering of strikes by large units in
correct lines or by flexible waves (lava) free from formations.

When submarines did not have nuclear weapons, it was necessary
to hit a battleship or aircraft carrier with eight to ten torpedoes
to sink it. In order to achieve this, it was necessary to mass or
group forces not only for delivering strikes against a large unit
but even for destroying one vessel. The new weapons are capable
of sinking a vessel of any class and displacement with one shot, and
therefore it is no longer necessary to unite the efforts of several
submarines to accomplish such a mission. However, this by no means
excludes the massing of forces.

in spite of the opinion of Rear AdmiralK. Stalbo (Morskoy Sbornik,
No. 1, 1961), when delivering a strike, for example, against an air-
craft carrier large unit, it is necessary to mass forces in order to
attack it from various directions and disperse the attention of the
defense forces of large vessels and their immediate protection.
Massing is also necessary to insure uninterrupted (during short periods
of time) delivery of strikes, from which the enemy will not succeed
in rallying, and his damage and confusion from the first strike can
be exploited by followup strikes. The firing of missile-nuclear
weapons against vessels still must always be aimed.

Obviously, even when massing is necessary, atomic submarines
must not be bound by line formations, correct close order, and
geometrically measured combat arrays. All that is fine for games
on maps. At sea, though, as experience shows, such formations can
be maintained with difficulty only until the encounter with the
enemy, after which the commander of the group (gruppa) or large ;
unit loses control, and the complete independence of the submarire
commanders ensues.

Even with the existence ofideal underwater communications,
there is no need for atomic submarines to maintain squadron
formations, no need for observance of the feeling of fellowship.

aa _ -1he

New underwater speeds of submarines, and the range and accuracy of
missile weapons, permit modern submarines to display more independence,
initiative, and freedom of maneuver than before. Such ideal conditions,
as in the past, such range (poligonnyy) support, as earlier, are not
required now for successful attacks by them. The basis of the
organization of atomic submarines must be waves (lava) or packs (stay),
delivering massed strikes against a detected enemy large unit at an
appointed time or a designated place.

The gathering of submarines in groups or large units during the
stage of deployment, and outside of a battle or operation in general,
does not give them any advantage in self-defense and only increases
non-combat losses. Therefore, it cannot be justified.

Paths of development of forces. If mistakes in the determination
of the main danger and most important missions of the Navy and
miscalculations in the selection of the direction of the main strike
and the main forces were not reflected in the determination of the
paths of development of the Navy, then theoretical arguments of these
matters would not go beyond the framework. of academic discussions.
However, basic mistakes in the orientation of the construction of
vessels have already been permitted once in the Navy; so there is :
cause for sailors to argue, and they should be particularly thoughtful
jin approaching the selection of the paths of development of forces.

New technology and new weapons deservedly raise atomic submarines
to the level of the main forces. With equal success, these submaines
are capable of combating the main enemy nuclear weapons delivery
vehicles (nositel) - the aircraft carrier attack large units - and
of operating against the ocean communications lines and against
objectives on the enemy coast. Therefore, it i& understandable that

‘primary attention has now been given to the construction of exactly
this type of vessel . Considering that the existing danger from
enemy missile-carrying submarines is no less serious than from air-
craft carriers, the bearers of nuclear weapons, it seems to us that
the same degree of attention should also be given to the construction
of PLO submarines. However, that is not how matters stand here.
Judging by information in the naval press (Sbornik statey zhurnala
"Morskoy Sbornik", Special Issue, 1960, page 4), the construction
of this only real means for combating atomic submarines carrying
Polaris missiles is placed in the same rank with the construction
of PVO vessels, landing vessels, and minesweepers.

4 Saja)

Experience shows that in the construction of forces it is
detrimental to be carried away by vessels of narrowly assigned purpose,
guch as, for example, submarine chasers or PVO vessels. The combining
of a number of missions in one vessel noticeably reduces expenditures
for construction. Therefore, it is necessary to strive for good
designs (proyekt) of a universal submarine capable of accomplishing
both attack missions and antisubmrim defense missions, a corvette
with equally powerful PVO and PLO weapons.

The benefits that the combining of missions promises may be
judged by the appearance in our armament of missiles suitable Doth
for attacks against a coast and for firing against vessels. In the
place of two designs of attack submarines, it is now possible to
Limit oneself to one.

The paths of development of the Navy and the degree of partici-
pation of its forces in a modern war will be determined nat only by
the decisive role of missile troops and the continental nature of
the countries of the socialist camp, but also by the geographic
position of the aggressor countries. Studying the composition and
behavior of the members of the NATO military bloc, it is not hard
. to see that they are preparing aggression not only in Europe but
also outside its borders.

In case of defeat, our enemies will evacuate their troops across
the ocean, and, as was already pointed out above, the landing of our
armies on other continents from the sea will be indispensable. It
would seem that such a circumstance should have given rise long ago
to the intensive construction of landing vessels. However, this
did not occur, and in point of fact there are now no landing forces
in the Navy.

The construction of landing equipment is facilitated by the
fact that in peacetime landing vessels can be operated with success
by all civil maritime and river departments, which can order the
construction of these vessels in the quantities needed for defense.
It is sufficient for the fleets to maintain one to two divisions
(diviziya) for combat training.

It should be observed that the fleets prematurely denied them-
selves the services of the naval infantry, whose training for landing
was undeservedly cast aside. The naval infantry were always the
bearers of the heritage of naval landing operations, the arm of forces
which was well trained in the art of those most crucial and dangerous

S16:

1.3(A)(4)

4.3(a}(4)

first assaults .upon the shore. Even now, naval infantry has not
yet lost its importance.

The experience of the work of naval organs of shipbuilding and
armament shows that their - predominately engineering management is
weakened by the lack of managerial personnel with an operational
background, knowing : the nature of war. In the final analysis, the
foundation of shipbuilding and armament lies, not in technology,
but in tactics and operational skill. Therefore, to present to
industry the correct and rigid requirements called for by modern
war, it is necessary to have within the management of the organs
of shipbuilding and armament, admirals who have personally
experienced war in the past and understand well what is required
for a war in the future.
