Conditions and Trends in Latin America Affecting US Security
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010447, dated 5 November 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010447).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ne
aut
Lat

peat | el US SI ECURITY, :

pat © gcet fh an

De ore
4

. Declassified by 000 $8271
eto, a Getover

rr ca

an the foUoiving ‘membar off orpanteations of the InteNigence
: Advleory Committee participated with the Central Inteli-
"gence Agency tn the preparation of tits estimate: The
” ¢nfelligence organizations of the Departments of State,

tae Army, the Novy, ihe Aly Force, and the Joint Stag.

Pe a anembers of the Intelligence Aavisory Committes
Rpdbblers bp Ae estimate on 4 December 1952, :

. oro
ret a . Se teeta fare siaeael Fer

ae
wha ee

A v
Ds la oc Oe &

aaa

“ROME ACTIN BE RR ok 8 AG OREM GH TH

Pg

esto rae

-- CONDITIONS AND TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA
. "AFFECTING US SECURITY’

Rata, segeheoee “THE PROBLEM
"Po identify the factors affecting Latin American political stability and cooper.

‘ation with the United States, and to estimate the trends likely to affect Latin Amer-

‘fean political and military cooperation and the availability of Latin American stra-
tegic resources.

CONCLUSIONS

4, The political instability now evident tagonism toward the United States. ~

fn Latin America results from serious The same nationalism, however, would
disturbance of the traditional social or- — probably. preclude Argentine political
der by new economic and social forces. control over any neighboring state.

This instability is therefore much more. 4 pe Communist threat to US security

fundamental than that which character- nee Pay :
- ged the personal politics of Latin Amer- trav” tne rerers frase : fsoee -
t fica in the past. membership in the area would suggest,
:- 2. ‘The principal political trend in Latin pecause of the ease with which a —,

America is toward nationalistic regimes relatively few Communists, operating

** maintained in-large part by demagogic through various fronts, can exploit the
_ appeal to the depressed masses of the social unrest and Yankeephobla already
_ population, of which the Peron’ regime existing in the non-Communist popula-

in Argentina is an outstanding example. ¢ion. The Communists, as such, have no -

Similar, though not identical, regimes present prospect of gaining control of

 giready exist in Bolivia and Guatemala. gny Latin American state by electoral

= opment in Chile and Ecuador. Peru, ample of how a small Communist minor:

-pext most vulnerable to this trend. ernment and strongly influence {ts
$. The general trend toward radical and policy.
nationalistic regimes in Latin America is — 5. The pressures of social unrest and an

eS le to Peron’s efforts to arouse an- beanie
_ favorable to Peron's eior treme nationalism make it difficult for

_ "apnts estimate relates only to the Latin American = Latin American governments to render

_tepoblics, European colonies in the area are 4y) Oca sions the degree of diplomatic, ."%

7 excluded from consideration.

| Oe 2 en a eae

military, or economic support desired by
the United States. With the exception
of Argentina and Guatemala, they have
been reasonably cooperative in the politi-
_eal sphere. Generally, however, they
have not implemented effectively their
economic and military undertakings.

6. Eventually the trend toward exagger-
ated nationalism, if it continues, will
seriously affect Hemisphere solidarity
__ and US security interests in Latin Amer-
fica. For. the next several years, how-
--ever, change is not likely to be so far
"reaching as to reduce substantially the
“ present degree and scope of Latin Amer-
jean cooperation. In particular, - Latin
__ American strategic raw materials will
continue to be available, although the
-governments concerned will seek to drive
hard bargains in terms of prices and ¢co-
nomic concessions.

7. In the event of global war, the Latin
Americans would more fully appreciate
their community of interest with the
Western Powers and would probabiy
show a greater readiness to meet their
international military and . economic

commitments. The Latin American
armed forces, however, would not be able
to defend critical strategic areas and vital
sea routes against serious enemy attack

without the direct participation of US -

forces, although they would be of value
in supporting roles.
8. The more immediate threat to US

security interests in Latin America, in~

the event of global war, would be Com-
munist capabilities for the sabotage of”

strategic industries. It is unlikely that

a large-scale and widespread program of

sabotage could be sustained, but the sit- -

uation would favor sporadic Communist
successes.

DISCUSSION...

Basic Social Trends

9. In most Latin American countries the old
order of society was dominated by landed

culture, the development of mining, manu-
facturing, and service industries in Latin
America during the past three decades has

_gonsiderably increased the importance of

gentry in alliance with the Church and the “non-agricultural labor and the urben milddle

Army. There was also & small professional

and commercial middle class, but the mass--

of the population was dependent, inarticu-
late, and politically impotent. Within the
ruling group politics was highly personal and
unpredictable, but the social order itself was
stable.

10, In recent years, however, the traditional »

social order has been seriously disturbed, pri-

marily by the accelerated pace of Latin Amer-
-Yean economic development as affected by
- structural changes in the world economy,
secondarily by ideological influences derived
from the world-wide social unrest of the
twentieth century. Although 60 to 70 per-
cent of the population is still engaged In agri-

class. In many important countries the pre- -

ponderance of political power {is shifting to

|
|
|

|
i

politiclans whose strength is derived primari-~ ~

ly from influence over city populations, This
development, still incomplete and ill-defined,

has given rise to political instability more ©

fundamental than that which characterized
the personal politics of the past.

11. In some countries new political leader-

ship arises primarily as an accompaniment *

of industrial and commercial growth. In all

countries its rise has been associated with \* *
a rapid expansion of governmental opera-

an
‘ « 2 Se
Bi me Babe De ce

tions. The leaders of the newly-important *.}

population groups. include functionaries

4

4

‘

staffing government ministries and state-
- Controlled enterprises, military, professional,
and business men, and trade union leaders.
“The majority do not have strong tles to the
“traditional order. The most characteristic
attitude among political leaders of this new
~ type isa strong tendency toward nation-

12. Older social elements and institutions

have adapted themselves with varying de

_” Brees of success to the rise of this new and
- essentially urban political leadership. Intel-

lectuals, who formerly had their spiritual _

home in European cepitals and were at-

o . .
oa x Bie SBOE 3

country fo country. The traditional ¢r-
Ger still persists in Peru, Nicaragua, and the
Dominican Republic, for example. On the
' other hand, Argentina, Bolivia, and Guate-
mals are now controlled by politicians who
base thelr power in large part on leadership
of the depressed masses. This Jatter pat-

tern fs likely to be repeated, with local varias --

tions, in other countries which have not

-. achieved, like Mexico, a relatively high level

of social and political stability.

Basic Economic Trends

15. Latin America has traditionally served

~_tached to the oligarchy by ties of family and 5 & supplier of raw materials and foodstuffs _
patronage, are now predominantly both so- _ to the highly industrialized countries of North .
_ Clalistic and nationalistic in temper. The America and Europe, and has depended on . __
military, nationalistic by tradition, have those countries for nearly all of its require.
_ shown considerable interest in the prospect ~ ments of manufactured Products. The Latin
_ Of industrialization. They are sometimes Americans, however, are no longer willing to -
“neutral toward the old order, or even hostile accept what they describe as a colonial eco-
when alignment with “progressive” forces nomic status. This attitude is accentuated
“Suits their purposes. The various national by their experience during and after two ~
Catholic hierarchies have for the most part World Wars, when, despite large income from
" striven to preserve the traditional social order, exports of raw materials, they were unable
but in a few countries Catholic Iaymen have __ to buy the manufactured goods they wanted. .-
organized Christian socialist parties in an ef- They seek a greater degree of economic inde. _
fort to counter anti-clerical and agnostic tend- pendence and stability through such meas-
encies of the urban population and to divert ures as Protective tariffs, exchange restric. __
the masses from a more radical course. Only tions, export controls, and government-spon-
the landed interests have in general made no sored industrialization. -
effort to accommodate themselves to the new - “16. One aspect of the prevalent economic
situation. nationalism has been a tendency toward the
13. Relations between the masses of the peo- expropriation and nationalization of foreign-
ple and the new, essentially urban, leadership owned utilities and industria] enterprises. i
are much less stable and clear than were This tendency arises from political as well as i
those between the people and the landed - economic motives. Immediately after the -. \
aristocracy. Personal politics and “feudal” war Argentina and Brazil bought out British ‘
Yoyaities are being superseded by the imper- railway interests. Recently, the Bolivian
onal relations of Capital, Labor, and Gov- - Government has nationalized that country’s i
ernment. The aspirations of urban Popula- tin mines. In Chile discussion {s rather in ;
‘tons, especially those of organized labor, are terms of an expropriation of the product of

CIT Cn

often exploited by demagogues and directe
toward objectives incompatible with the de
velopment of stable and moderate govern-
ment. The masses in genera) are poverty
stricken, politically inexperienced, and high-
ly susceptible to demagogic appeals.

14. The degree of disruption produced by the
sclal forces mentioned above varies from

the copper mines through the establishment

_ Of & government monopoly of copper exports,
In Venezuela there is occasional talk of even-
tually expropriating the ol industry, but
there is no indication that the government
contemplates such a policy. A related tend-

ency {fs fllustrated by the unwillingness of .

Brazil to permit the exploitation of oll re-

sources except on terms providing for close shaken. In countries where large-scale pro ~~ |

government control of such operations.

17. Progress in industrialization will be in-
creasingly difficult to sustain in Latin Amer-
fea. Domestic. private investors, seeking

_ quick, high profits, are reluctant to finance
_ long-term development enterprises. Foreign
__ private investment capital for desired indus-
trial expansion has not been forthcoming in _-

effective quantity in the postwar period, in

large part because of the restrictions and

- though agricultural exports. Even @_rela- |

- _ Jarly in the growing of food for domestic use. __

wncertainties engendered by the prevalent
aconomfe nationalism. Industrialization,

therefore, has been to a considerable extent _

financed with public funds, and consequently
its form and direction have often been gov-
erned by political rather than economic con-

_. siderations. Development of new domestic
industries and the basic transportation and _
energy services will probably involve the dl- —-

version of capital and other resources from
Gevelopment of the raw material export sec-
tor of the economy.

18. Latin America’s recent preoccupation
with industrial development to the neglect
of agriculture has adversely affected the
domestic supply of agricultural products as
well as. the earning of forelgn” exchange

grams of industrialization are underway, a
marked slackening of those programs would
produce grave social and politica] problems,

_ The countries most wulnerable in this re-

spect — Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and
Chile--are thoge which could render the

greatest material support to the United States ©
~ in the event of war.

Basic Political Trends

21. The most important political trend in

Latin America is toward the rise of radical
and nationalistic regimes like those in Argen-
tina, Bolivia, and Guatemala. Such regimes

are based in large part on mass support ob-~
tained by promises to relieve the wants and

- fulfill the aspirations of depressed segments
of the population. Recent elections in Chile

‘alistic regimes more likely than their prede-

cessors to develop in this same direction.

and Ecuador have brought to power nation- _

Radical mass movements in Peru and Vene -

guela have been forced underground by rep-
resentatives of the traditional order.
frustration these popular movements are sus-
ceptible of exploitation by imitators - of
Peron's techniques.’ Even in such relatively
‘stable countries as Brazil, Uruguay, and

tively small increase in agricultural invest-

ment could have brought substantial in-

creases in agricultural productivity, particu-

Mexico there are extremist elements of con-
siderable political potential.

22. The mounting pressure for radical] politi-

‘Ularly those governments controlled by the

In their

cal change in Latin America alarms partic- - ---

-of government interference in domestic —

19. Inflation has increased the economic and traditional ruling ‘group, as in Peru and
political strain in Latin America. It has Colombia, and stiffens their resistance to any
jeopardized the levels of living of the laboring substantial change.’ This repressive tendency
classes in urban areas, thereby compelling hinders even moderate change and so renders
the governments to expand costly social wel- more likely the eventual outbreak of revolu-
fare programs. Agriculture in general has tionary violence. In Colombia there fs al-
not benefited from inflation because of the ready a widespread guerrilla resistance to the
increased cust of manufactures and because — regime. - —— -

23. Where power has already passed, as in
Mexico, from the traditional to a new politi.

markets,

~ 20. An economic crists ir, Latin America was — cal leadership, the governments are also hos-

averted only by the rise in prices for Latin tile toward mass movements and toward poll-

» American export commodities following the

outbreak of hostilities in Korea. If the terms

' of trade should seriously deteriorate many

- Latin American economies would be severely —

ticlans secking power on a new wave of revo-
lution. The weakness of these otherwise
stable political machines Hes in their many

“unfulfilled promises to the urban masses,

promises impossible of fulfillment during the
present phase of economic development.
~~ Chile affords a recent example of one such
Hberal and moderate regime which has suc-
_ .eumbed-to this weakness. Only in Mexico Is
. the existing political machine strong enough
- to permit a reasonably confident estimate
= that it would be proof against overthrow by
’ @ demagogic opposition.

24, The military retain considerable political

influence in all Latin American countries. -
" Im those such as the Dominican Republic,

Nicaragua, and Paraguay, where the tradi-
_ fdonal order has not been seriously disturbed
“Dy new social and political ideas, military ~
and national Jeadership are essentially iden-
~~ tical and no conflict between the two is likely
except in terms of a palace revolution. In

a

ene TL ae

Por ts a ed

but has not been superseded, the position and
. future conduct of the military are less clear ..
and predictable. The Venezuelan Army, for

countries where the old order fs under attack, ..

ments should adopt domestic and foreign
policies closely resembling those of Peron,
thelr essential nationalism would preclude
their becoming mere satellites of Argentina.

26. The trend toward radical nationalism in- ~,
Latin America is adverse to US security in- *
terests, for a common expression of such na... -_-
tionalism is Yankeephobdla. This spirit is in
conflict with the idea of hemispheric soli-
darity and cooperation. As expressed in Ar-

__gentine policy, it Involyes withdrawal intoa .._
“third position” of neutrality between, even i
active opposition to, both the US and the jj
USSR. In practical application this policy i
adversely affects only US interests. Peron is
actively endeavoring to induce other Lain
American states to adopt this “third pos-
tion.” He has had no apparent success BO

. far, but the general trend {fs favorable for his
purposes,

“Basic Military Trends

- example, put the liberal Acclin Democrética
into power in 1945, but turned it out again .

Rs ne ile Rc,

4

Army between the old and new orders, in

‘Venezuela and elsewhere, appears due to the
- fact that the new sort pf civilian political -
leaders, while promising to satisfy military
aspirations, also sponsor radical changes in
the social order. Yet even where the Army
has taken direct control, as in Peru and Vene- —
Suela, the resulting governments have been -
sensitive to popular demands for social im- .
provement. Where demagogues gain mess”
support, as in Argentina, or where govern- -
ments are responsive to a relatively broad
ir. and articulate electorate, as in Mexico and
=. Mraguay, the capacity of the military for in-
* - dependent action and their influence upon
“the government tend to Jessen”

25. Peron’s success in Argentina has stimu-
--Jated the existing trend toward demagogic
nd nationalistic regimes in other countries,”

NOAM AE

COME WSL RET LSE igen

a ane
a +

Fata

[

- fostered this trend by giving material or~
moral support to like-minded national] lead-_
ers. The trend, however, is primarily the

| @onsequence of national conditions and aspi-

| tations in each case. Even if other govern- |

three years later. The vacillation of the nance of internal order. Although interna-

“*.. ag in Bolivia, Chile, and Ecuador. Peron has —

CRORE

27. The primary function of Latin American
armed forces has always been the mainte.

tional wars have occurred within the area,
they have been rare and are outside of nor- —

-mmal expectation. Latin American military. -

establishments have never been developed in

- the expectation of having to resist invasion
by a first-class military power without the
support and assistance of some other major

power, :
. 28. The Latin American governments have —
now agreed to a coordinated approach to the
general problem of Hemisphere defense, with
the assignment of tasks to particular states
under an over-all plan and the preparation af
their forces to perform the tasks assigned.
Such planning is proceeding through the ©
agency of the Inter-American Defense Board.
At the same time various Latin American
forces are being modernized and developed
~ wnder US influence. ‘This influence is exerted - -- VE
“through joint US-Mexican and US-Brazilian
~ defense commissions, US military missfonsin | -
“all other Latin ‘American countries except. &
Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic (the
present armed forces of which were estab-
Hshed under US auspices), the training of

©

: ; . . é P

Latin Americans st Service schools in the American government by electora) means.
(Canal Zone and the United States, various bi- Their direct participation in national politics
lateral mutual security agreements, and the is significant only in Guatemala. ;
provision of limited quantities of US military 39. The Communists have had some success“:
"equipment. in their efforts to gain control of Latin Amer- >»
~-" 99. "The major Latin American powers gen- can labor by establishing rellable Commu-- —
erally desire to improve their alr and naval nists in key positions in strategic labor unions
forces and to achleve a reasonable degree of - and in national labor federations. They domi
gelf-sufficlency in ground strength. Unskilled nate completely the international Confedera-
- manpower Is available in adequate numbers, ton of Latin American Workers (CTAL).-In jf
= _ bot these states generally lack the industrial recent years Communist control of labor
> nd financtal resources, the skilled techni- Unions has been somewhat curtailed by gov-
. fans, and the qualified officers to achieve this ernment action, but such action has also af-
“+ goal by their own efforts. Any considerable fected and antegonized non-Communist labor.
improvement and expansion of Latin Amer- leaders. In Chile and Venezuela, for example, ~~
"  fean armed forces will therefore require US- g0vernment restrictions on union activity
+.  gssistance in training and in the provision of ave tended to give Communist and non-Com-
>. ~gailitary equipment. Moreover, even in the Mmunist lebor groups a common sense of per-
2, best circumstances, the Latin Americans — sécution and &@ common cause. Moreover,
©... would never expect to meet attack by a first- even where Communists have been ousted
« lass military power without direct US air from official positions of union control, they -

* and naval support. retain some influence as rank-and-file labor.
a leaders_or_as_officlals in non-Communist __-
:- Communism in Latin America unions. Furthermore, the Communists have _ {

sought influence among the mass of unorgan=~
30. The Commurist threat to US security in- eq workers. Through their influence in

gest, because of the ease with which @  gustries by means of strikes and sabotage. -
relatively few Communists operating behind ~ . eee ‘ge.

labor, intellectual, and other fronts can ex- 88. The Communists have also been success-
" ploit the social unrest and Yankeephobla al- ful in penetrating Latin American educational
_ ready existing in the non-Communist popula. —systemns, intellectual circles, and those patri-
tion. Guatemala is a prime example of how _ Olle organizations formed to give expression
@ small Communist minority can penetratea tothe new spirit cf ultra-nationalism. Inthis =<
Latin American government and strongly in- — Way they seek to instill prejudice in the rising
- fluence its policy. generation, to intensify socialistic and ma-
ae Oia ae oe eter tionalistic tendencles among the intelli- ©
.. 31. During the period 1044-1047 the Stalinist gentsia, to sate patriotic sionals Kee
.. ' Bome $30,000 members and polled an agere- tion to nationalism as will most effectively
~~ gate of sbout @ million votes in various na“ hinder Latin American cooperation with the
tional elections. Since then party raember- - united States.
~~ ~ghip has fallen to about 200,000. Mostofthis | : Sie
: . 4. In the Latin American armed forces, how-
Gecline has occurred in the three most im 7 fara
portant Communist parties, those in Brazil,  ¢Ver, the influence of Communists and Com-
. Chile, and Cuba, each of which has lost about © Munist sympathizers 1s slight. In general, —
~~ half of its members. In many countries the — e officer corps constitutes the strongest op-
Communist Party is now officially suppressed. Position to Communism in Latin America. ig
In none is it an important electoral factor. 35. Since the outbreak of the Korean war the ..- # ie
‘The Communists, as such, have no present USSR has shown a markedly increased inter- * §
prospect of gaining control over any Latin est in Latin America, This increased atten- -

~~ Latin Americans has been kept alive or conflict initial Latin American enthusiasm __

~ — gocial problems reviewed above. Latin Amer- lation... Fear of a global war has been ez-
. __ fcans believe that the US does not appreciate  ploited by Communist and Peronist anti-US

ance which they believe they should have. and the recently negotiated military agree-

.__ aclear test of Latin America’s willingness and

. . $8, More recently, Latin American govern-

eh q

tion has been reflected in the larger volume support the national aspirations of other peo-
of Soviet broadcasts to Latin America, the piles. Finally, since the beginning of 1952,
movements of important Communists, and five Latin American governments —Cuba,
the resolutions of recent Communist-spon- Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile —have
sored conferences. entered into bilateral military assistance

agreements with the US. Two others — Uru-
COOPERATION WITH THE UNITED STATES guay and Brazil—have signed such agree-

Political Cooperation” ments, but have not yet ratified them.
_ $6. Since World Wer TI the inter-American 389. Some considerations tend to counterbal-

aysterm has been subjected fo new strains. ance this record of governmental cooperation.
Isolationist and anti-US gentiment among In the weeks after the opening of the Korean —

strengthened by the political, economic, and. gave way to an attitude of caution and caleu-

the urgency of these problems. Theyinturn ~ propaganda, which stresses the theme that
do not fully understand the demands of the Latin America has nothing to gain and much __
global situation upon US attention and re- _ to lose from embroilment in a world conflict. —.
sources, and resent the failure of the US to” To date, troop contributions for Korea have _
_ give them the financial and military assist- not been forthcoming, except from Colombia, _.

ments have been subjected to severe attacks
by Communist, nationalist, and other enti
‘US elements.

37. The outbreak of hostilities in Korea posed

_ ability to cooperate with the US in support of - Sy PapSei at
UN objectives. Initial enthusiasm was dis-
played in the united support given by Latin — Economic Cooperation
America to the UN decision for action in Ko- _40. The role of Latin America as a supplier of
tea and to the resolution passed in the Council _ strategic raw materials, particularly in time
of the Organization of American States ap- - of war when access to materials in other. sup-
proving this action. The five nations which ply areas may be denied, makes Latin Amer- -— {8
had not yet ratified the Rio Treaty quickly did fcan economic- cooperation vital to US and _
- so. (Guatemala, however, has not as yet de- __ Hemisphere defense. Latin America at pres-
posited its instrument of ratification.) Later, - ent supplies the United States with over thirty .
all but Argentina voted for the UN “Uniting strategic mineral, fiber, and chemical prod-
for Peace” resolution and all supported the re- -— ucts. Its output of copper, petroleum, and -—-
affirmation of inter-American unity which zinc forms an essential complement to US and
came out of the March-April 1951 meeting of Canadian production. The area ts the only |
the American Foreign Ministers. In addition Western Hemisphere source of thirteen essen-
to this political support, Latin America agreed, tlal materials, including tin, cordage fibers,

_ in principle, to increase its output of strategic mica, quartz crystals, and monazite, and it is

raw materials. the principal Hemisphere source of antimony,

_ chromite, manganese, tantalite, and tungsten.

__ments, except those of Argentina and Guate- 7
mala, have given excellent support to the US oe ren ates: ‘Venezuela, Peru, Chile,
on all the important political questions on "
which the US and the USSR were opposed dur- 41. At the 1951 meeting of American Foreign .
_ dng the shcth (1951) sesston of the UN General Ministers the United States obtained from the --
' Assembly. Moreover, they have moved with Latin American nations pledges to Increase _
caution on the issues of Iran, Egypt, Morocco, the production and the allocation to the US
and Tunisia, despite thelr strong desire to of strategic materials fn short supply. The

BiDOREES

4Smplementation of these pledges has not been
as effective as the emergency required. Pro-
duction as a whole has not been expanded
above general postwar levels. The feelings of

~ Latin Americans respecting this form of eco- ~

omic cooperation were displayed at the For-

_ -+4égn Ministers meeting by a request that the

US proposal for increases in the output of
strategic materials be accompanied by assur-

ances of assistance for genera) Latin American

seconomic development. In general, emphasis

~_ aapon their role as producers of raw materials

4
:

‘fs resented by Latin Americans as imputing to
them a “colonial” status.

_ a2. Latin Americans in general do not oppose .

~ the entry of foreign capital for the purpose of
exploiting natural resources, but they are be-
corning increasingly insistent on exercising
-control over the scope and form of such invest-
ment. This insistence stems not only from a

they do not actually need, in US opinion, and
which the US cannot provide, either at all or
in the desired quantities, under present pri-
orities.” Bhipments to Latin America under
this progrem have therefore been small. The —-
inability of Latin Ar-cican governments to
obtain desired US equipment for which they
were willing to puy hes cauged considerable
. resentment and has led to some purchases of
European materiel, to the detriment of arms
standardization.

46. Only the five countries which have en-

tered into bilateral military assistance agree- ~~

ments with the US are eligible for grant aid
under the Mutual Security Act of 1951.

Shipments under this program have only Just
begun. Brazil and Uruguay have signed bi-
lateral agreements, but have not yet ratified
them.” Such an agreement is under negotia- -

‘militant nationalism, but also from the con-___ tion with the Dominican Reoublic. Of the

‘cern of some leaders for conservation of re-
ssources and the desire of all to obtain a maxi-
amum guid pro quo.

43. With respect to trade with Communist-

controlled countries, the great majority of ~
. Latin American nations have promised either —

D geealig or informally to comply with the
 uprovistons of the Battle Act. Nevertheless,

nine countries so far approached, only Mexico ---

has declined to negotiate.

47. Latin America’s low priority in relation —
to Europe with respect to US military aid has
eaused general disappointment and dissatis-
faction in Latin American military and po-
litical circles. Rivalries and mutual sus-
picions among Latin American states have

-some strategic materials, particularly Chilean’
copper, reportedly have been transshipped to

the Soviet Bloc via third parties in Western -

Europe. Latin American officials, however,
have generally been cooperative when ap-

; ,.proached by US officials with instances of lax
. enforcement of trade controls.

_ tMilitery Cooperation .

; <44. The Latin American armed forces are not _

- «&t present capable of providing adequate de-
-"-Janse for the area in the event of war, though

ae

‘they wovkt be of some value in supporting
“roles.

~ 45. All Latin Aviseieay coahtited except Gua-
- temala have esiabiished thelr eligib!lity for
-- reimbursable military ald under the Mutual
‘Defense Aasistance Act of 1949. Most of them
. have submitted requests for such aid. Gen-
erally they wish to purchase the most ed-
vanced types of US equipment, types which

-—. also led to complaints about inequitable treat- _ _.

They
are Cuba, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chilé. ~~

ment in the bestowal of US ald. So far, how-
- ever, these discontents have not. serfously_.
affected Latin American military cooperation
‘with the United States.:

48. Fourteen Latin American countries have

received US Army or Air Force missions, or

both, and nine have received US Navy mis-
_ gions. Generally they have been well satisfied
with the work of these missions, but have not
enade optimum use of them. Argentina, how-
ever, has allowed {ts contracts for Army and
Air Force missions to lapse without renewal.

PROBABLE FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS = =—

General

49. Most Latin American governments will be
under increasing pressure from urban middle
¢lass and Sabor groups to pursue policies almed
both at Increasing and at redistributing the

Peel,
‘

“national income. These polictes will involve Cooperction with the United States fn a

~ a8 @ political factor. Other nations, such as

Sie ei OA I es
é : rye me ee . bes

~~ terial resources for satisfying immediate so-

-ship now in power —the Army in Venezuela — price for cooperation, but any such combina- ---

‘and Peru and the Conservative Party in Co-
_fombla — will act in such a way as to sllay___54. The pressure of exaggerated nationalism

_.. popular disaffection and ensure political already affects the capacity, and at times the

;/* stability. Countries with only limited human willingness, of Latin American governments” ~~

_.. snd physical resources, such as the Dominivan —_to render on all occasions the degree of dip- :

Republic, Nicaragua, and Paraguay, seein lomatic, military, or economic support desired -- |B

- small but purposeful minority. Nevertheless, in a situation short of global =
_ 61. The general trend toward nationalistic W#! the present degree and scope of Latin
. regimes maintained in large part by dema-

- exist in Argentina, Bolivia, and Guatemala,  L@tin American governments wll be under-

' tion of basic industries, especially those now concessions.

aaah oe eyceacuaeet feat Sitvation Short of Global War ,
capabilities of the countries which undertake 83. Both the Communists and the ultra. .
them. Under “hese circumstances Latin nationalists, notably the Peronists, by propa- “ay
America will continue to be a fertile ground ganda and intrigue, will seek to curtail Latin
for demagogues of the ultra-nationalist as well American cooperation with the United States.
as the Communist type. The social, economic, and political conditions
50. The best immediate prospects for a check which have been described will afford them op-

' portunities for anti-US agitation. It is im-
upon the extremist forces of social and eco- robable, however, that the Communists can
nomic change are to be found in countries =P? ; Pe aes 7

ain direct co hi
euch as Mexico, Braz, and Uruguay, where fundret contol ove the poy of ny Lain
Rae ae rere re arave been established ---o+41 sears, or that Argentina can gain political
control over any neighboring country. It is _&
possible that Peron may succeed in aligning ~—- [| . :

cial needs, but it is doubtful that the leader. ter states in a combination to exact a high

Colombia, Venezuela, and Peru, have the ma-

tion would almost certainly be unstable.

firmly set in the traditional social and eco- by the United States. Eventually this trend =
nomic pattern. The example of Guatemala, toward exaggerated nationalism, if it contin. .

however, shows how readily this pattern can ___ ues, will seriously affect Hemisphere solidarity
be radically changed in such countries by a_. and_US security interests in Latin America.

American cooperation with the United States
is likely to remain basically unchanged forthe __

Gogic appeal to the depressed masses may be pat coveral years. Definite commitments by

expected to continue. Such regimes already
and present circumstances favor their devel- taken hesitantly and thelr implementation Jaen
‘ ; will probably be slow. The present avallabil- ue
pment in Chile and Ecuador. Peru, Colom- : gs Seas aoe
; ity of strategic raw materials to meet US re- | Eee
bia, and Venezuela are the states next most utrements will tt but th cet ee
vulnerable to this trend. pera ae erste alate la, Aca ad ues
me - ee - ments concerned will seek to drive hard Ce
$2. In any case, the trend toward nationaliza- bargains in terms of prices and of economic

naa pois cabpigaate not in tteell deny us Cooperation in the Event of Global War
access . pe tegic raw materials — the indus- 65. The outbreak of global war would bring

tries nationalized would still Mave tosell thelr -Gargen to themselves ie the slate arene

products — but the availability of these mate- d .
rials would be affected by political considera- Western Powers. A prtalor readiness tamer i
tions to a greater degree than at present. It their international military and economic
is also likely that production would decline, at commitments would probably follow. Aslong =
Yast temporarily, In nationalized Industries. as the US military position in the Western

a poh °°? . PORE '

Hemisphere remained secure, even Argentina 69. Because of the mutual suspicions of Latin
and Guatemala might be expected to mod- American governments, their Hraited military
. erate their antl-US propaganda and, eventu- resources, and popular sentiment against
ally, to cooperate in defense of the Hemi- service overseas, it is doubtful that any signifi. . §
"sphere. a . cant Latin American force would be avafl |. §
86. The Latin American armed forces would S2!¢ for operations outside of the Western 5
mi +. od Hemisphere. It is possible, however, that 2%
= not be able to defend critica) strategic areas | Be
Braril might be persuaded to provide a divi-
and vital sea routes against serious enemy , .
attack without the dizect participation of US #00, 88 in World War II, and that other coun- 73.’
foes. ‘The tries might provide token contingents. The
. They would, however, be of value in
humber snd effectiveness of such forces as
- . Supporting roles. In genera] they would prob- m! te
PI ee _ Might be made available for such service
ably be adequate to maintain internal order, would be limited by the amount of US aid
to guard against sabotage of strategic indus- available for tral alpplis. and ‘tan:
__trfes and land transportation routes, and to porting then: aining, equipping,
. protect air and naval installations from sabo- . es
_ tage or small-scale raids. 60. The economic dislocations incident to
__ $7. After the outbreak of global war the os tc iefconiinca ea shen
United States could probably obtain anywhere sopmen’ and social programs, would al-
in Lat’ ; _—— most certainly increase interna) tensions and
‘A America, except possibly in Argen- :
tin political instability in Latin America. _ Never-
a, the air and naval facilities necessary for 2 §
theless, with proper inducements, the produce = -
US participation in the defense of strategic tion of strategic materials could prot bly be
areas and sea routes, including consent for the oa as vf
stationing of alr and naval forces at guch ine OS™ i :
stallations. There would, however, be great — 61. In circumstances of global war it is probd-
reluctance, to the point of possible refusal in able that all Latin American governments
some cases, to permit the entry of US ground = would agree to suppress existing overt Com-
forces unless large-scale invasion appeared  munist organizations and would have the ca-
imminent. Latin American governments pacity to do &. The extent to which the ~~
would be even more unwilling foadmittotheilr activities o7 the underground Communist app
territories the forces of other Latin American _ paratus could or would be controlled would oe
states, vary with the determination of the govern-
' 88, In the event of global war Latin American ™eNt, the effectiveness of the local intelligence

governments would generally agree to an ex- oh se. pole — Pee ce ee

pansion of their armed forces, but’ would re eas
quire US assistance in the provision of equip- ieee preivape ice armani .
ment and training and would seek to im erica in lime of global war w

as much of the increased expense as Ate __ that of sabotage fn strategic industries. Al-
on the United States. Expanded Latin Amer. ‘ugh St is unlikely that a large-scale pro —-

< oie gram of sabotage could be sustained through- = --
tean ground forces, US equipped and trained, out the ares, the dispersion and vulnerability

could eventually assume major responsibility of key targets, especially in essential trans-

for the defense of continental areas. It is vn- ~~ portation systems, and the general inade
likely, however, that Latin American air and quacy of police and security forces, would mae |
naval forces could ever relieve the US of the favor sporadic success, especially in the period |; ..
major responsibility for alr and naval defense. — immediately following the outbreak of war. - Res
