Prospects for Political Stability in Venezuela
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013611, dated 3 January 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013611).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NIE 89-64
19 February 1964

LBJ LIBRARY
Mandatory Reem,
Case # NLJ
Document #

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 89-64

Submitted by ig "
DIRECTOR OF “CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
oncurred in in “by ‘the | ote
UNITED STATES “INTELLIGENCE BOARD

5 “indicated” ‘overleaf

2 TERRUARY 1964

“Coneurtings

aes

n the poe of

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 89-64

Prospects for Political Stability
in Venezuela

—

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
WHE PROBLEM 56: ie 6 fancy panic eek awh Ved Mi hs aoe Ge 1
SUMMARY: ..5.2J 4c cele Pei eal dh tiene WL Se eee ee 2 1
CONCLUSIONS: 4.. 21 sek eee acl ea Gh ale Steed, ede Ups hile, 1
DISCUSSION: «ais. cheese keh ne Motes At da Pe hea Se 3

I. INTRODUCTION: THE IMPORTANCE OF VENEZUELA .... 3
II. LEONY’S INHERITANCE: BETANCOURT’S PROBLEMS

AND ACHIEVEMENTS .............. 000.00 cee eee. 3
Political and Social Heritage ..................0-...0.004 3
Military Dissidence ............ 200.00. ee 4
Communist and Castroist Insurgency ................... 5

Il. THE OUTLOOK FOR THE LEONI ADMINISTRATION .... 7

The Inauguration .........0. 00.0. c eee cee eae 7
President: LeONL = 423.4. 2e Mana debs Seed He i Pee eed 8
Political Prospects ............ 0... ees 8
Lineup of Parties in the New Congress.................... 9
Social and Economic Issues ...................... Deceit ttle o 10
Leftist Insurgency: =. .ice ee WS aa Wee es yd 11
Leoni and the Military ..........0... 0... cece eee eee 13
MAP 39113

—_

PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL
STABILITY IN VENEZUELA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the outlook for political stability in Venezuela over
the next two years.

SUMMARY

President-elect Leoni will almost certainly take office without
serious challenge, and will probably enjoy an initial period of
relative political calm. Nonetheless, the problems of creating
and maintaining a viable administration and of coping with
underlying social and economic tensions—together with the like-
_ lihood of further terrorist activities—will almost certainly pro-
duce a series of political crises during the period of this estimate.
The Leoni government probably will survive these crises.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Leoni is an experienced, generally capable political leader;
but his ability to supply vital national leadership during a crisis
is as yet untested. (Para. 15)

B. Leoni’s relations with Congress are likely to start out rela-
tively peacefully. His political opposition will almost certainly
turn more belligerent over time, but we believe he will be able to
maintain control of Congress on key issues through 1965.
(Paras. 16-20)

C. The Communist and Castroist insurgents almost certainly
will be unable to force their way to power during the period of
this estimate, although they will retain a high capability for hit
and run terrorism, including attacks against US personnel and
property. Leoni probably will have to resort at times to extraor-

qf 1

Sa.
dinary measures such as suspension of constitutional guarantees
to contain the insurgency threat within tolerable limits (by
Venezuelan standards), and his timing in initiating these meas-

ures may involve him in difficulties with either Congress or the
military. (Paras. 22-28)

D. The armed forces, the ultimate arbiters of political power
in Venezuela, are generally disposed to support constitutional gov-
ernment for as long as it proves reasonably effective in dealing
with national problems. In any event, the military is anxious to
avoid an arbitrary move against the government which might
alienate a large segment of the population. Thus a military coup
is not likely unless Leoni becomes generally discredited with the
population. Under such circumstances, a military coup would
probably follow a relatively moderate course and offer the leftist
insurgents little opportunity for substantial gains. (Paras.
29-31)

wae

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION: THE IMPORTANCE OF VENEZUELA

1. Raul Leoni is scheduled to succeed Romulo Betancourt as President
of Venezuela in March 1964. Leoni’s success or failure in office will be of
great importance to the US. Venezuela is of strategic importance as the
world’s largest exporter of oil. US capital investment in Venezuela
totals about $3 billion, exceeded only by our investments in Canada and
in the UK. Venezuela, moreover, holds great symbolic value for our
policy in Latin America as a country attempting rapid social and eco-
nomic progress through constitutional democracy. Venezuela remains
a priority target in Communist efforts to promote violent revolution in
Latin America, primarily because Fidel Castro cannot afford to allow
such an important democratic reformist regime to succeed. Venezuela
is also the only Latin American country in which leftist extremists, with
moral and material support from Cuba, have been able to sustain an
impressive level of insurgency.

Il. LEONI’S INHERITANCE: BETANCOURT’S PROBLEMS AND ACHIEVE-
MENTS

2. President Betancourt’s political legacy to his successor is a mixed
one. On the one hand, Betancourt has moved constitutional democracy
an important step forward by the very fact of surviving his legal term
and successfully holding free elections. He also initiated an extensive
program of social and economic reform. Finally, the last few months
have been marked by a subsiding of political tensions, leading to a rela-
tively auspicious environment for the transfer of power. On the other
hand, Leoni will inherit, to one degree or another, the problems which
have created recurrent crises for Betancourt from 1959 to the present:
acute social tensions, limited national experience with representative
government, Communist and Castroist insurgency, and the threat of a
military takeover.

Political and Social Heritage

3. In addition to the direct assaults of leftist extremists and military
dissidents, the Betancourt government has had to withstand harass-
ment by opposition parties, obstruction of its program in Congress, and
widespread popular indifference to the fate of constitutional democracy.
These latter problems are rooted in Venezuela’s lack of experience and
confidence in representative government and in the acute social ten-
sions prevailing in urban areas.

Ges. 3

4. Venezuela has traditionally been ruled by military dictators; its
only previous experience with democratic reformist government (1945-
1948) was-terminated by a military coup which led to the repressive
dictatorship of General Marcos Perez Jimenez (1948-1958). Following
his election in December 1958, Betancourt was able to form a strong
multi-party coalition, because of widespread concern over the threat of
another military intervention. By 1962, however, this coalition had
splintered, and the opposition parties had gained control of the lower
house of Congress. Various opposition parties joined with Communists
and Castroists in a systematic obstruction of government programs,
particularly of measures to control terrorism. The primary objective
was to discredit Betancourt’s Democratic Action party (AD). The politi-
cal opposition apparently had come to fear AD’s domination of the 1963
elections as much as it did the consequences of a military coup. From
time to time the opposition parties threatened to boycott the elections.

5. Thanks largely to its petroleum, Venezuela has the highest per
capita income in Latin America (over $700), and its government is
assured of substantial revenues, much of which the Betancourt admin-
istration has directed into programs to promote the welfare of the poor-
est classes. Nonetheless, one-half of the country’s eight million people
lives under severely depressed conditions. Moreover, because of a large
‘rural-to-urban migration in recent years, much of the country’s eco-
nomically depressed population now lives pressed together in urban
slums, without steady employment or other conventional social ties, and
without much concern for Venezuela and the maintenance of orderly
government. Particularly in Caracas, where lawlessness is prevalent
among the 300,000 slum dwellers, much of the population has regarded
the government and the police—not the terrorists—as its main an-
tagonists.

* Military Dissidence

6. Betancourt has had to contend with rightist military plotting
throughout much of his term. Moreover, of the five garrison rebellions
during 1960-1962, the last two, Carupano and Puerto Cabello, involved
dissident military officers collaborating with leftist extremist civilians.
Betancourt has survived these plots and assaults largely because the
chief military commanders, and through them the bulk of the armed
forces,! have remained loyal to the government. Betancourt, recogniz-
ing the military to be the ultimate arbiters of political power in Vene-
zuela, assiduously cultivated this loyalty. He maintained military per-
quisites at a high level, flattered the military with frequent presidential
attention and praise, and courted the personal friendship of key officers

1The Venezuelan armed forces consist of four separate services with the
following numbers of officers and men: Army—17,800; National Guard (a mili-
tarized constabulary) —12,000; Navy (including Marines)-—5,600; Air Force—2,500.

A waa

wiih,

and garrisons. Most importantly, he maintained exceptionally good
channels of communication between his office and all sectors of the
armed forces as a means of explaining his policies and of monitoring
the moods and anticipating the demands of the military. His efforts
were favored by a growing political moderation among the military,
stemming in part from an increasing professionalism among top officers
and their fear that another military dictatorship would encounter stiff
civilian opposition. At the same time, the military, keenly aware of
Castro’s extermination of the prerevolutionary military establishment
in Cuba, regarded nervously Betancourt’s politically motivated reluc-
tance to crack down on leftist subversive agitation and violence. At
times during 1963 a considerable restiveness spread throughout the mili-
tary establishment.

Communist and Castroist Insurgency

7. Leftist extremists, led by the Venezuelan Communist Party (PCV),
were the major disruptive force during the final years of the Betancourt
administration. The PCV participated in the 1958 election, gaining
160,000 votes and nine seats in Congress. The party was propelled to-
ward “armed struggle” against the government by its impatience with
its limited opportunities to make gains through “political struggle,” by
the example of Castro’s success in Cuba, and by the opportunities for
violent action existing in Venezuela. The Communists found ready
allies for insurgency in other extremist groups, most notably the Move-
ment of the Revolutionary Left (MIR), a pro-Castro faction which split
off from the AD party. They also found allies of convenience among
rightist military dissidents.

8. The leftist extremists work through an organization called the
Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN). The PCV generally
dominates FALN affairs, but undisciplined activists sometimes initiate
terrorist activities on their own. The FALN is well organized and
trained, aggressive and resourceful, but limited in numbers. Although
the PCV and MIR combined probably can count on a political following
in the tens of thousands, we estimate that the FALN has only some
600 to 800 active trained members, including those deployed in rural-
based guerrilla bands. Most members are recruited from among urban
youth, traditionally defiant of authority and extremist in politics.

9. The FALN has been able to obtain most of its funds, small arms, and
explosives in Venezuela, primarily through robberies. Almost certainly,
however, if has received material and financial assistance from Cuba.
Most notably, government forces last November discovered a cache of
small and medium weapons on the Paraguana Peninsula.? In addition,

*Located in northwest Venezuela, the major area of FALN guerrilla activity

[as 5

(see map).

“aa:

more than a hundred FALN members have received paramilitary train-
ing in Cuba and elsewhere in the Communist Bloc. Cuban broadcasts
to Venezuela endorsing the FALN cause and heralding its exploits have
been an important boost to the insurgents’ morale. Castro’s moral and
material assistance was an important factor in the early stages of the
development of the FALN. Although Castro probably can call upon some
elements in Venezuela to step up terrorism whenever it suits his purposes,
at least over the past year the FALN has become an aggressive and
effective terrorist organization that does not appear to need outside
prodding.

10. The leftist extremists have used a variety of tactics in attacking the
Betancourt government. During 1960-1962 they tried to force their way
to power directly, first by means of a series of urban riots and then by a
combination of guerrilla warfare in rural areas and the two garrison
rebellions. These attempts only proved that they lacked sufficient popu-
lar and military support for the purpose. By late 1962, therefore, they
turned to terrorism and sabotage as operations which could be con-
ducted by a relatively few dedicated militants, but which would serve to
discredit and weaken the Betancourt government while building up
their own image and strength. In August 1963, they launched a major
terrorist offensive to disrupt the December elections and provoke a mili-
tary coup, hoping to profit from the resultant disorder and discord.

11. During most of 1963 the FALN was able to strike at a wide variety
of targets, with a good chance of success, and very little risk of casualties
or losses through capture. The police,? handicapped by poor organiza-
tion, inadequate training, low morale, and legal restrictions established
or enforced in reaction to the Perez Jimenez dictatorship, were no match
for the terrorists. The political leaders of the FALN were protected
from arrest by congressional immunity; rank and file members were able
to take advantage of the legal sanctuaries provided by the autonomous
universities and the de facto asylums of the slum districts. Moreover,
even when arrested, terrorists often were able to regain their freedom
through legal technicalities, bribery, or escapes.

12. FALN efforts to disrupt the election through terrorism were
thwarted, however, by the combination of a well-timed government crack-
down, a notable improvement in police performance, and a show of de-
termination by the population not to be intimidated by the terrorists.
Betancourt, using some measures of doubtful constitutionality, moved
to reduce FALN’s disruptive capability, before military restiveness
got out of hand, and after five anti-government candidates had com-
mitted themselves to the presidential race. On 30 September the mili-
tary was called upon to assist in a roundup of known extremists and

* Civilian police forces in Venezuela number nearly 19,000 men. In the Caracas
area, there are five separate civilian forces with a total of over 10,000 men and
a National Guard contingent of 700 men engaged in police duties.

6 wae

suspected terrorists, including those hiding out in slum districts. In
all, some 300 to 400 were jailed, including several PCV and MIR congress-
men. In October, in response to pressure from the government, school
officials closed Caracas’ Central University, which further reduced the
maneuverability of the terrorists. Starting in October, moreover, the
police in Caracas, political nerve center of the country, proved to be
a better match for the terrorists, inflicting more casualties and taking
more prisoners than previously.* The FALN still was able to undertake
a large number of hit-and-run raids, especially outside of Caracas. But
because of accumulated losses in manpower and morale, it was either un-
able or unwilling to mount an impressive last-minute attack. Its re-
peated threats against the voters probably proved counterproductive.
On election day (1 December) the population went to the polls in over-
whelming numbers; FALN attacks were few and ineffectual. Since the
election, the terrorists have been relatively inactive, which is in large
part responsible for the political calm of the final Betancourt months.

Ill. THE OUTLOOK FOR THE LEONI ADMINISTRATION

13. President-elect Leoni will almost certainly take office without seri-
ous challenge, and probably under conditions which promise initially
a continuation of the relative political calm of the post-election period.
Nonetheless, the problems of creating and maintaining a viable admin-
istration and of coping with underlying social and economic tensions—
together with the likelihood of further terrorist activities—-will almost
certainly produce a series of political crises during the period of this
estimate. The Leoni government probably will survive these crises.

The Inauguration

14. In view of the mandate for a constitutional succession implicit in
the dramatic voter turnout for last December’s election and of the dis-
tribution of the vote, an attempt by either the military or the anti-
government parties to prevent Leoni from taking office is highly unlikely.
Leoni, the AD candidate, received 33 percent of the vote in a seven-man
race and held a 370,000 vote margin over his nearest competitor. More-
over, second place fell to Rafael Caldera of the Social Christian party
(COPEI), AD’s coalition partner throughout Betancourt’s term. The
AD and COPEI candidates together commanded 53 percent of the vote;
no anti-government candidate received as much as 20 percent. The
terrorists probably are not ready to undertake a serious attack against
Leoni’s taking office, although they may attempt some acts of violence
to discredit the inauguration.

‘US advice and assistance contributed in large part to the improved per-
formance of the police. Among other things, we were primarily responsible
for the introduction of training in marksmanship and other practical subjects
and the establishment of improved coordination among Caracas’ many and often
competing police agencies.

— 7

eee.

15. Much of the burden for the survival of constitutional democracy
in Venezuela now rests personally with Raul Leoni whose ability in a
crisis is as yet untested. Leoni has been engaged in politics for some
35 of his 58 years: he suffered imprisonment and exile for revolutionary
activities against dictatorships, was a founder along with Betancourt
of the AD party, and has long been the leader of the party’s labor sector.
During Betancourt’s term, Leoni served as president both of the Senate
and of the AD party. He is intelligent, diligent, tenacious, and is con-
sidered a good administrator. On the other hand, he lacks some of
Betancourt’s outstanding political assets, particularly his personal mag-
netism, impressive public manner, and skill at cultivating close rela-
tions with the leaders of other parties, the military, and the business
community. Leoni’s opening moves to win the support, or at least the
tolerance, of these groups have gone well. In this he has benefited from
the good will of Betancourt, who, for example, accompanied him on a
post-election tour of military installations. Leoni, probably for as long
as he solicits it, can continue to count on the support of Betancourt.
Moreover, some of Betancourt’s most experienced ministers and advisers
are ready to serve Leoni. Nonetheless, Leoni’s ability to supply national
leadership and command the respect of key groups on a sustained basis

‘is yet to be proven.

President Leoni

Political Prospects

16. Leoni probably will be able to form a government coalition with
effective control of Congress, and presidential relations with Congress
in general will at least start out much less abrasively than was the case
during Betancourt’s final years, when almost no legislation was passed.
For as long as these conditions persist, they greatly increase the odds
in favor of Leoni’s survival in office, as well as improve the prospects
for national progress in political maturity, economic development, and
social reform.

17. The new Congress meets on 2 March, and negotiations for a coali-
tion now are underway. Leoni’s AD party will hold 46 percent of the
seats in the Senate, but only 36 percent of the total in the Chamber of
Deputies.5 There is a better than even chance that COPEI will join a
coalition under Leoni, which would give him a majority in both houses;
he would also be able to control Congress by forming a coalition with
moderates and moderate leftists elected under various other party ban-
ners. Some of the latter groups may be invited to join AD-COPEI in
a multi-party coalition. In any case, the formation of a coalition is
dependent on the negotiation of a working arrangement involving cer-
tain concessions on the part of AD in terms of positions of prestige and

* For the lineup of parties in the new Congress, see page 9.

8 WEE.

=a:

influence and the control of expenditures. It remains to be seen
whether COPEI or any of the other parties will demand more for solid
support than AD is willing to concede.

LINEUP OF PARTIES IN THE NEW CONGRESS

SENATE CHAMBER
ParTY AND BRIEF DESCRIPTION Seats or DEPUTIES
DEMOCRATIC ACTION (AD) ..............0.005- 23 65
Comparable in policy to European Social Demo-
cratic parties and to the APRA party in Peru.
SOCIAL CHRISTIANS (COPEI) .................. 9 40
Similar in policy to Christian Socialist parties
elsewhere in Latin America and in Europe.
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICAN UNION (URD) .... 7 29
Largely moderate leftists, but contains extreme
leftist members.
USLAR GROUP ......... 0... cece cece e ee eee eees 5 22
Members elected on tickets supporting presi-
dential candidate Arturo Uslar Pietri; mostly
moderates but includes some far rightists.
LARRAZABAL GROUP ............ 0.0: e ec eee 4 16
Members elected on tickets supporting presi-
dential candidate Wolfgang Larrazabal; in-
cludes both moderates and erstwhile extreme
leftists.
OTHER 6 ohh adit tt accctisaes ae eat eas 2 7
(Includes 1 senator and 5 deputies of the so- .
called ARS party which defected from the AD
party in 1962.)

Total. eck srcinsed Gaps a ph ak te PAR ee ane be ee End re 50 179

18. We believe that Leoni’s best guarantee against political isolation
in the midst of a crisis would be to reforge the alliance between AD and
COPEI, in the past the two stoutest defenders of representative govern-
ment. AD and COPEI alone could provide Leoni with formidable popu-
lar backing, especially among labor and peasant groups, as well as with
firm control over Congress. There are no major policy differences be-
tween the two parties, and the top leadership of each apparently is
anxious to renew the coalition. Coalition relations almost certainly
would prove more complicated and strained than in the past, however,
because of COPEI’s surprisingly strong showing in the election, and AD’s
relatively disappointing one. COPEI formerly accepted the position of
junior partner, but now is demanding a major voice in the shaping of
government strategy.

19. On the other hand, a variety of factors is likely to encourage more
peaceful congressional relations, at least initially, no matter what the
composition of the government coalition. For one thing, the election
campaign, which exacerbated party relations throughout 1962-1963, is

eee 9

over; the next election is five years away. For another, both AD and
COPEI increased their representation in Congress, whereas the parties
which led the harassment of Betancourt suffered sharp losses. The PCV
and MIR, which together held up to 24 seats in the old Congress, were
barred from participation in the election. The ARS faction of AD,
whose defection threw control of the old Congress to the opposition,
has been largely eliminated as a political force. The Democratic Re-
publican Union (URD), the leading opposition party in the old Congress,
has been chastened by its poor electoral showing, is moving to purge its
extremist elements, and may be ready to adopt a less obstreperous atti-
tude. Finally, moderates and conservatives will be better represented
in the new Congress: several of the members elected on tickets support-
ing presidential candidates Arturo Uslar Pietri and Wolfgang Larrazabal
will be primarily interested in promoting conditions favorable for
business. ‘ ,

20. The political opposition to Leoni almost certainly will become
more belligerent as his term wears on. The ARS congressmen, several
Castroists elected on the URD ticket, some former members of MIR
elected on Larrazabal’s coattails, and some rightist extremists elected
under Uslar’s banner could provide the makings of a small, but rabble
rousing opposition from the start. Apparently there is little disposition

‘on the part of AD to conciliate URD with government posts as a price
for this party’s cooperation. If excluded from participation in the gov-
ernment, URD would probably become progressively more critical of the
administration and might eventually join with the extremists. Many
congressmen, conservatives and moderates included, retain ambivalent
attitudes toward constitutionalism, and there is a danger that addi-
tional political groupings in time might join in a systematic harass-
ment of the government. Some groups are sure to regard the first
signs of a political crisis as a signal for taking soundings on the pos-
sibilities for a military coup. However, even if COPEI does not join
the coalition it would probably come to Leoni’s support against a threat
to constitutional order.

Social and Economic Issues

21. The Leoni government will probably continue the basic social and
economic policies of the Betancourt government. The Venezuelan
economy will impart a positive thrust to the new administration’s
efforts. There are strong indications that the economy is continuing
to rebound from a recession in 1960-1961 and the period of the estimate
is likely to be one of considerable growth. Business confidence is high
and an expansion of private capital investment will complement the
government’s social welfare and development programs to create many
new jobs. In these circumstances, however, popular expectations will
require of Leoni not only that he continue Betancourt’s social and eco-

10 ae

nomic programs, but that he substantially improve upon their content
and the efficiency with which they are implemented. It is in meeting
popular expectations for substantial improvement and progress in na-
tional programs that Leoni may encounter difficulties. Rapid popula-
tion growth, housing deficiencies, inherent problems in the execution of
an agrarian reform program, and urban tensions aggravated by unem-
_ ployment are problems that can only be alleviated slowly under the best
of conditions.

Leftist Insurgency

22. Leoni probably will take advantage of his initial control of Con-
gress to press for legislation to improve the legal framework for dealing
with terrorism. Laws tightening the criminal codes generally and rais-
ing penalties for specific acts of terrorism stand a good chance of early
enactment. A law defining the obligations.of political parties and pro-
viding for the outlawing of parties espousing terrorism also may pass,
but only after considerable delay because of the sensitivity of all parties
to the general issue, in remembrance of the Perez Jimenez dictatorship.
Leoni almost certainly will lend the full weight of his office to promoting
further improvements in the police. Finally, the extremist political
leaders and terrorists arrested since last September probably will be
detained in prison, at least for extended pre-trial periods.

23. The relative inactivity of the terrorists since the election in large
part reflects their awareness of growing public resentment of extremist
tactics and the preoccupation of the PCV with regrouping its forces
and reassessing its policies. There is some sentiment within the party
for a temporary renunciation of terrorism. We believe, however, that
any retreat from “armed struggle” which does materialize will prove
short-lived. The party would have little to. gain through “political
struggle” until the 1968 elections; it is largely blocked from influence
in trade unions, peasant organizations, and other mass groups with the
exception of students, by the prevailing influence of AD and other mod-
erate left parties. Moreover, the PCV leadership almost certainly would
be unable to restrain for a prolonged period the undisciplined groups
within the FALN, or even the violence-prone youth within its own party.
Should these elements take to the offensive on their own, the PCV prob-
ably would lose whatever political advantages a renunciation of violence
might afford and, more important, would be in danger of losing control
of the FALN. It is likely, therefore, that the FALN, supported by the
PCV, will return to the systematic use of violence during the first year
of Leoni’s term.

24. The Communist and Castroist insurgents almost certainly will
be unable to force their way to power during the period of this estimate.
As in the past, we expect them to employ a variety of means of attack
not only to exploit issues which have weakened the government, but

ees 7

also to create them. If conditions are favorable, they may attempt to
provoke a military coup, in hopes of finding improved opportunities for
gains through insurgency or political action in the post-coup period.
The Leoni government probably will be able to contain the insurgency
threat within tolerable limits (by Venezuelan standards), although
to do so it probably will have to resort at times to such extraordinary
measures as mass arrests and suspension of constitutional guarantees.
If in these instances Leoni were to crack down too soon or too harshly,
his executive decrees might not be backed up by Congress, and a politi-
cal crisis might result; on the other hand, if he were to move too slowly
or ineffectively, the military might intervene to do the job. If, however,
the Leoni regime achieves success in managing the economy and mad-
erating partisan struggles, there will probably develop a national con-
sensus against terrorism. In this case Leoni could move with the
support of both Congress and the military, and the insurgents probably
would suffer losses which would become increasingly difficult for them
to repair.

25. The FALN will retain a high capability for individual hit-and-run
assaults, including attacks against US personnel and property. The
police in Caracas still are relatively inefficient, and in most other cities,
elemental improvements in police operations have not yet taken place.
‘Even against increasingly proficient police, moreover, the terrorists still
would enjoy the advantage of choice of target and time. Judging by
past reactions, the Venezuelan economy, population, and military prob-
ably will be able to tolerate sporadic violence. If, however, the FALN
launches an intensive terrorist offensive, or concentrates its attacks on
sensitive targets such as military personnel, the Leoni government
sooner or later would be forced to order a crackdown. When it does,
the police and military would probably perform at least as well as they
did during the crisis of October-November 1963. -

26. The extremists have had difficulty recently in rousing the Caracas
slum dwellers to demonstrate; even among students, the vanguard of
past riots, there is a growing tendency to avoid actions which might
cause the closing of schools. Nonetheless, should the extremists seize
upon a popular cause, they probably could mount a sizeable riot. The
police and military forces, calling upon past experience and recent im-
provement in capabilities, probably would be able to gain control of any
riot, but possibly not before many casualties had been suffered on all
sides.

27. The leftist extremists may from time to time concentrate more
of their efforts on guerrilla warfare. We estimate that the FALN has
only a few hundred rural guerrillas, operating in Eastern and Western
Venezuela. The military and police, generally with the support of the
rural population, have been able to keep the guerrillas on the defensive
much of the time, although campaigns to root out individual bands

12 es:

have so far been unsuccessful. The FALN probably could increase the
number of guerrillas by transferring urban terrorists. On the other
hand, government antiguerrilla capabilities are likely to increase over
time, with further training and field experience. We believe, therefore,
that for the period of this estimate the guerrillas will be restricted largely
to their current capabilities of sporadic hit-and-run attacks on outlying
communities.

28. The FALN may attempt desperate measures, such as the assassina-
tion of Leoni, to disrupt the government. Venezuela has no vice presi-
dential office. In the event of Leoni’s death, the President of Congress
would serve as interim President of the Republic. Congress would then
be charged with choosing a successor within 30 days, to serve the re-
mainder of Leoni’s term. Should the transition go smoothly, the mili-
tary probably would not intervene, and the cost to the terrorists for
such an act, both in terms of public disfavor and government reprisals,
probably would be great. The FALN also might attempt a direct mili-
tary attack on a key city (there is evidence that the weapons in the
Paraguana arms cache were to be used for such a purpose). Barring
defection to the insurgents of a sizeable part of the armed forces, which
is unlikely, government troops would almost certainly quickly dispose
of a direct attack.

Leoni and the Military

29. The military will continue to be the ultimate arbiter of political
power in Venezuela, and the only force capable of unseating the govern-
ment. We believe that the chief military commanders and the bulk of
the armed forces are disposed to support a constitutional government
for as long as it proves reasonably effective in protecting their interests
and those of the nation. Rightist military plotting probably will con-
tinue as a chronic condition. The rightists within the military ap-
parently lack respected leaders, however; and Leoni probably will enjoy
success with Betancourt’s tactic of dispersing the chief malcontents
through “golden exile” to diplomatic posts. We believe that extreme
leftist officers are few in number and limited in influence; at most, they
would be capable of inciting to rebellion individual garrisons.

30. Leoni almost certainly will continue Betancourt’s policy of stren-
uously courting the loyalty of the military. Although he probably will
be unable to duplicate Betancourt’s skilled personal touch, Leoni can
be counted upon to use many of his predecessor’s tactics, e.g., frequent
strategy meetings with key officers and visits to barracks. The mod-
erates in the military probably have adopted a wait-and-see attitude
toward Leoni personally. Although the success of the elections may
have boosted temporarily their general confidence in representative gov-
ernment, they will reserve judgment until Leoni proves that the system
can work with him at the helm. Thus, the failure of Leoni to gain

i= 13

and retain workable control over Congress, or his manifest inability
to deal with national problems, particularly with leftist insurgency,
would be certain to produce sentiment for a coup among the moderates.

31. A Military Coup. The course and consequences of a military coup
would depend on the particular circumstances. We believe that the
military is anxious to avoid an arbitrary move against the government
which might alienate a large segment of the population. Thus, even
in a period of rising military discontent with civilian government, the
chief military commanders probably would use their influence to avoid
a coup unless Leoni and the AD party became generally discredited and
most of the population appeared ready to support or at least accept
a military intervention. Under such circumstances, an intervention
probably would meet with little organized resistance, prove relatively
moderate in policy, and provide for new elections after a reasonably
short period. The leftist extremists would probably find little oppor-
tunity for substantial gains. On the other hand, if an intervention took
place under circumstances in which AD and possibly other civilian
groups were determined to resist, and the country was faced with a civil
war, the Communists and Castroists might be able to maneuver them-
selves into a more favorable position.

v9 ELIGE

FALL VIMIONANY ATMVEENOUN LON
BM NOILVANEBNAEY AuvONnOE x ~~

aa

SAW 002

peoy
peoyjey ++

leydw2 013031149} 40 Opeysy °
jeydeo jeuoleN C)
Arepunog 014031110} 10 opeysy

Avepunog jeuoyeusayu] ae oe nom

VIFNZANAA

VGINIYL
DiS VLU Vda
ODVEOL ANV CYCINRLL uppunsy ngr~r VARUN >, oo ; Coat
cn ensconant 2 oe

gies is WISNZINAA
2 30 ofd10n
*9 oa a ‘

era) VS NV@dWd@IdIauvo : WNOS _¢°

VOWN3N9

|
VIZVUG

:

~~

NvIno ud;

‘i

Z

{

.
:
oa

‘a,

,
ry

¢
f
e

L
SP

4
re

VNVIOND \.
>)

HSLLIWA ¢7
H %,

VOWNIY5

fF
svROgVAY

O1YOLIY YL

s

Honjua,a opel /}

a
wae paeneey ousng

uppounsy
3

i] —
E]

8 ee
FAS N¥YFYAIAlUVgo i las

&

19-Z4 GEESE

peoy
peoujley

1e}1de2 o12031140} 10 opeysy
jeydes peuoneN
Asepunog 01J0}]149} 40 ope}sy

Arepunog jeuoyeuazuy — ee ae

VIHOAZANAA

ar rf
; arrangement with, the Office. of Centra Re ference

é sified:

_ DISTRIBUTION:

' National Security Council

vt ee a remem sete te eG oe Z

ce s
urning in accordance. with

Pearce wor

ne of the forwarding agency ‘to. retail
June 15: ae ees

ing age cy, or permission should be

1 ie

iecor lance ae ee coins

eT

‘A The ‘title. of this sdbeumeat’

White House

Department of State _..
Department of Defense __
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

CONTRO

ace
Diss

DISSEM
